================================================================================
TOWER OF BABEL LIBRARY
================================================================================
Title: The De Sacramento Altaris of William of Ockham
Creator: William of Ockham (T. Bruce Birch, ed. and trans.)
Translator: T. Bruce Birch (Latin text established and translated)
Edition: Burlington, Iowa: Lutheran Literary Board, 1930
Source: Internet Archive (desacramentoalta0000unse), scan of the 1930 Birch edition
Public domain: Edition/translation published 1930; public domain.
Artifact ID: ockham-de-sacramento-altaris-birch-1930
================================================================================

The
De Sacramento Altaris |
of William of Ockham


Edited by
iS BRU Cr BIRCH. Ph.D, DD;


(Former Harrison Fellow, University of Pennsylvania)


Professor of Philosophy in
Wittenberg College


THE LUTHERAN LITERARY BOARD
BURLINGTON, IOWA
1930


Copyright 1930
by
T. BRUCE BIRCH
SPRINGFIFLD, OHIO


No. 2.26


Be


=


To
My Esteemed Professors


Joun C. RoLFE and Watton Brooxs MCDANIEL


of the University of Pennsylvania, who, by
their encouragement and assistance, have
helped to make this book possible


TABLE OF CONTENTS


PAGE

Porc mn ace oe er ee Oe Vi

RTE OCCE OLUMME ET PC he eae ks v s xi
Plates

I. Facsimile Copy of Inscription. . . . . xvii


II. Facsimile Copy of Balliol Coll. MS. 299 xx
III. Facsimile Copy of Strassburg Text, 1491 xxi


DablesoiTirlesand Chapters c . m. 2 XXXVili
Text of the De Sacramento Altaris. . . . . U
puc nA EM IET I. wel. 292


PREFACE


The object of this edition is to provide a text of

the De Sacramento Altaris of William of Ockham
based on the examination of three manuscripts and
three text editions. It is hoped that this most im-
portant work, which is now easily accessible to
scholars, may lead to a re-examination of the phil-
osophical, psychological, theological, and ecclesiastical
problems of the stirring times of Ockham and his
immediate successors. It is also hoped that this work
may give rise to a renewed and careful study of
Nominalism—its vitality, its influence in re-shaping
philosophical systems, in developing new psychological
procedures and theological doctrines, and in modify-
ing ecclesiastical policies and political theories.
. Literary style and finish have been made secondary
to accuracy of translation. A rather literal transla-
tion may be expected to aid the reader to obtain the
precise thought of the Latin text and to carry along
important shades of meaning of words and of expres-
sions.

The critical apparatus contains the various readings
which may give rise to modifications of the meaning
of a passage.

With few exceptions, for the sake of brevity, the
notes on the text are limited to the citation of various
writers and to the places where references are found.

I am under obligation to Professor John C. Rolfe,
Ph.D., Lit.D., of the University of Pennsylvania, for

vll


Vili PREFACE


instruction and direction in the study of Paleography
and Epigraphy, which have held me to a continued
interest in these subjects.

For assistance and criticism in the preparation of
the Latin text and the English translation, I am in-
debted to Professor Walton Brooks McDaniel, Ph.D.,
of the University of Pennsylvania, whose compre-
hensive knowledge of Latin was placed at my service;
to Dr. Edwin F. Keever, while a graduate student of
Harvard University, who shared with me his knowl-
edge of the philosophy of the period of Ockham and
acquaintance with the Latin abbreviations; and to my
wife, Sarah Caroline Birch, for her knowledge of
Latin abbreviations and of the Latin structure of the
period, and for the untiring service rendered by her
during the entire period of preparation of the text.

For his critical examination of the Latin text, for
many discerning and scholarly suggestions relative to
it, and for his keen, painstaking reading of the proof
of the Latin text, I am indebted to my colleague, Jens
Anderson Ness, Ph.D., Professor of Latin.

For many valuable suggestions and assistance in the
preparation of the bibliography, I am indebted to my
colleague, John O. Evjen, Ph.D., D.D., Professor of
Church History.

For the original suggestion of the need of a readily
accessible and critical edition of Ockham’s De Sacra-
mento Altaris and for continued encouragement to
complete the task, I am indebted to Professor Frank
P. Manhart, D.D., LL.D., Dean of the Theological
Seminary of Susquehanna University.


PREFACE ix


Miss Grace Prince, A.M., the librarian of Witten-
berg College, and William H. Allen, bookseller, Phila-
delphia, have given valued assistance in locating and
securing important books and material.

Acknowledgment should here be made of the uni-
form courtesy and assistance in securing access to the
works of Ockham, rendered by the librarians of many
institutions, including: Balliol College, Merton College;
the Universities of Paris, Rouen, Columbia, Johns
Hopkins, Harvard, Minnesota, Nebraska, Pennsyl-
vania and Yale; Gettysburg Seminary; and the public
libraries of Boston, New York, and Philadelphia.

The librarians of the Universities of Munich and
Venice, and of the Congressional Library of Wash-
ington, D. C., have at various times supplied valuable
data.

Scholars interested in this text will join me in appre-
ciation of the courage, taste, skill manifested by the
Lutheran Literary Board in publishing this work, and
in appreciation of the singular accuracy and care of
its readers and compositors.

For valuable information about the birthplace of
Ockham, the origin of his name, details of his life and
activities, I am greatly indebted to The Rt. Hon. Mary,
Countess of Lovelace, who is the present owner of
Ockham Park.

To President Rees Edgar Tulloss, Ph.D., D.D.,
LL.D., of Wittenberg College, my thanks are due for
encouragement, many necessary and valuable sugges-
tions, and the leisure secured by release from full-time
teaching and various extra-curricular activities.


x PREFACE


As Harrison Scholar, at the University of Pennsyl-
vania, 1905-1906, and as Harrison Fellow, 1906-1908,
I shared in the benefits made possible by the generosity
of the late Dr. Charles C. Harrison, former provost
of the university, who established the George Leib
Harrison Foundation in order to encourage scientific
study and research.

A Latin text and an English translation based upon
the text edition, Strassburg, 1491, were submitted in
1908 as a thesis in partial fulfillment of the require-
ments for the degree of Ph.D., at the University of
Pennsylvania.

T. Bruce Bircu.


Wittenberg College,
Springfield, Ohio,
November 30, 1929.


INTRODUCTION
I. THE AUTHOR, WILLIAM OF OCKHAM


William of Ockham was born late in the thirteenth
century in the village of Ockham in the county of
Surrey. His name, which is spelled in various ways,
was taken from the name of his birthplace which is
spelled Bocheham in Doomsday book. It is, however,
spelled Ockham in an inscription of the year 1483,
which is on an urn in the church at Ockham. Noth-
ing is known of his parents or his early life.

Ockham’s attention was early turned to Merton
College which developed out of the “Domus Scolarium
de Merton," which was established near Ockham at
Malden in Surrey in 1264 “to support twenty scholars
living at Oxford or wherever else a university may
chance to flourish.” In 1274 it was “moved from
Malden to Oxford.”

Ockham was a student at Merton College, Oxford,
most probably from about 1312 to 1320. It is likely
that he then became a member of the Franciscan order;
for he was a Friar Minor.

Ockham received the degree of B.D. at Oxford
after the completion of his thesis on the Sentences of
Peter Lombard. He taught as a bachelor at Oxford
until about 1323. There is no certain proof that he
was a pupil of Duns Scotus, or that he was a student
or a professor at the University of Paris.

It is not certain that he ever received the degree of

xi


xil INTRODUCTION


master or of doctor, for he is generally spoken of as
the “Venerable Inceptor” (an inceptor at Oxford was
one who did not go on toa Master’s degree). However,
the terms, inceptor, expositor, indagator, magister,
professor, and doctor are associated with the name of
Ockham. Ockham is also called: Venerable Preceptor,
Doctor Subtilissimus, Unparalleled Doctor, Doctor
Invincible, Singular Doctor, Author of Nominalism,
and Father of the Nominals.

The academic advancement of Ockham may have
been stopped by his engaging in the controversy con-
cerning evangelical poverty. He was no doubt present
at the chapter of the Franciscans at Perugia in 1322;
though, perhaps, not as Provincial of England, as is
frequently stated. He heard there the famous speech
of Michael de Cesena, the General Minister of the
Franciscan order, which set forth the position of the
order relative to evangelical poverty and developed the
bitter controversy between Cesena and Pope John
XXII. This was the beginning of the revolt of the
whole order, as distinguished from the Spirituals. In
1323, Bonagratia wrote a book against Pope John
XXII, which supported the position of Cesena; but
it was not until 1327 that he stated that Ockham was
present when Cesena spoke against Pope John XXII
in a convention of Friars Minor. But in a letter
in 1323, Pope John instructed the Bishops of Ferrara
and Bologna to inquire about the report that in a
sermon at Bologna Ockham had upheld his conception
of evangelical poverty in opposition to that of the
Pope. If the report was correct, the Bishops were to


INTRODUCTION xiii


send Ockham “to Avignon within a month.” Sullivan
believes that Ockham would never “have opposed the
Pope had that question of evangelical poverty not been
raised.”

In 1327, Pope John XXII issued a bull charging
Ockham with having uttered “many erroneous and
heretical opinions.” DeWulf cites Ehrle as asserting
that the Pope issued this statement relative to Ockham
in 1329 and that “the process had nothing to do with
the case of the Spirituals and the quarrel over evan-
gelical poverty.”

Ockham, Cesena, and Bonagratia did not feel safe
in captivity at Avignon; therefore, on May 25th, 1328,
they fled from Avignon. Ockham arrived at Pisa,
where Louis IV of Bavaria received him. He accom-
panied Louis to his court at Munich in Bavaria.
According to Trithemius, Ockham presented himself
before Louis with these words: “O imperator, defende
me gladio et ego defendam te verbo.” Townsend cites
these words: “Tu me defendas gladio, ego te de-
fendam calamo." On May 28th, Pope John XXII
sent a letter to all the princes and the bishops instruct-
ing them to seize Ockham and to return him for trial.
On June 6th, he issued a bull telling of Ockham’s
escape, cited the heresies of Ockham and excommuni-
cated him. On June 20th, the Pope issued a bull
informing the archbishop of Milan and his associate
bishops that Ockham had been excommunicated. In
1328 or 1329, the Pope sent letters containing like
information to the archbishops in Germany, and the
letter to the archibishop of Cologne was publicly read


xiv INTRODUCTION


in the cathedral on June 30th. On April 21st, 1329,
the Pope published a bull similar to that of June 6th,
1328.

About June 11th, 1329, Ockham was condemned by
the Minorite General Ode and the members of his
order were instructed not to assist him. On April
1st, 1330, the Pope issued a bull instructing all ecclesi-
astics in Germany to seize Ockham. In a letter of
July 31st, the Pope again charged Ockham with heresy,
and submitted the writings of Ockham to certain doc-
tors who found many heresies in them. On January
4th, 1331, John again issued a bull forbidding anyone
to aid Ockham; for he was said to uphold the error
of Marsiglio of Padua, who had been condemned for
stating that “the emperor can depose the pope.”
Ockham and others were summoned to a general coun-
cil to be held on May 10th. The bull and the sum-
mons were to be nailed to the door of the church at
Avignon, and the heresies were to be reviewed even
if the heretics were absent. In 1331, the Minorite
General Geraldus opposed the errors of Ockham.

During 1331 and 1332, Ockham and his associates
took advantage of the unpopularity of the view of
Pope John XXII relative to the Beatific Vision. The
controversy waxed warm. The Pope’s view produced
“a profound sensation in the Church, for it had been
denied. Princes, clergymen, laity urged John to re-
tract. He retracted.” Ockham declared that John
was “wholly ignorant in theology.”

After the death of Pope John XXII, on December
4th, 1334, Ockham continued the controversy relative


INTRODUCTION XV


to the imperial and the papal authority with Pope
Benedict XII and Pope Clement VI. Both popes con-
firmed the excommunication of Emperor Louis. Pope
Benedict confirmed the excommunication of Ockham.
Ockham, however, continued to support Louis until
the death of Louis on October 11th, 1347.

- For about twenty years Ockham lived in the house
of his order in Munich under the protection of Louis,
in whose service Ockham and Marsiglio advocated
political theories which anticipated those of the present.

When the crisis in the affairs of Louis IV arose
in 1338, Ockham more earnestly continued his con-
troversial writings. In July, the electors at Rense
stated that Louis did not need confirmation of his
election as emperor by the Pope. On August 8th,
Louis declared that the action taken by the Pope was
null and he appealed “from the Pope to a general
council.” Ockham wrote a defense of the claims of
Louis and entered into a discussion of the nature of
the authority of the emperor and the Pope.

In 1339, students were warned against the writings
of Ockham, which had become popular. On December
29th, 1340, the University of Paris prohibited his
teachings, and in a letter of May 10th, 1346, Clement
refused to permit the masters and the scholars of the
University of Paris to study the doctrines of Ock-
ham. In 1348, the general chapter of the Augustinian
order prohibited the reading of the works of Ockham
under threat of excommunication.

Before Cesena died in 1342, he is said to have
transferred the seal of his order and his claims to


xvi INTRODUCTION


leadership to Ockham, who became the nominal head
of the order, and after the death of Bonagratia in
1347 he became the undisputed chief of a powerful
minority.

As early as 1343, Clement VI sought a reconciliation
with Ockham and his followers; but Ockham con-
tinued his opposition to the Pope, although Emperor
Charles had made peace with the Pope. It is said
that not until 1349 did he send “back the seal of the
order to the orthodox General Minister" and profess
a desire to become reconciled to the church. Sullivan
states that in letters of November 29th, 1347, and June
8th, 1349, Clement again sought a reconciliation with
Ockham on several conditions. Ockham “was to
promise to believe as the Holy Catholic Church be-
lieved, was to declare heretical the statements that the
Emperor could select, create and depose the pope, to
obey the present pope and his successors, to renounce
the heretical opinions of Louis of Bavaria and Michael
of Cesena and to promise not to give help to the
enemies of the Church. . . . Ockham rejected them
at first and was cited to appear before the papal court.
It is uncertain whether he ever agreed to them or
not... . In 1348, he had already rejected almost the
same demands.” There is no documentary evidence
that Ockham ever accepted the proposal and was ab-
solved. Some writers insist that “he remained an
excommunicated heretic.” It is not generally believed
that he became reconciled to the church before his
death.

There are various opinions regarding the year of


INTRODUCTION xvii


his death and even the place of his burial. It is rea-
sonably safe to believe that Ockham died in the con-
vent of his order at Munich and was buried there.
Earlier writers, and in particular Volumes I and II
of the Analecta Franciscana, state that Ockham died
on April 10, 1347, and was buried in Munich as the
inscription on the tombstone in the Franciscan chapel
at Munich indicates. Leidinger, of the Department
of Manuscripts, Bayerische Staats-Bibliothek, Munich,
states that the St. Francis Church of Munich, in which


Num? I7


A. RETDOCT ISS. P.F.
WILHELMDICTVSO
EX ANGLIA


xviii INTRODUCTION


Ockham was buried, was pulled down in 1803 and
that the tombstone no longer exists. He has, however,
supplied a photographic copy of the inscription cited
which was on the cover of the grave. The copy of the
inscription is preserved in Cod. lat. 1755 I, page 34.
(Monumenta ecclesiae Fratrum Minorum Monachii.)

In view of the document of Clement VI and the tract
of Ockham treating of the election of Charles IV,
recent conclusions lead to the belief that Ockham died
April 10th, 1349, or at least not before the year 1349.
Seeberg says that "some believe that the date of his
death is as late as April, 1350, but 1349 is the most
probable date."


II. The New Text


The new text is based upon the Balliol College, the
Merton College, and the University of Rouen manu-
scripts, and the text editions of c. 1490, Paris; 1491,
Strassburg; 1504, Venice.

The new text is based chiefly upon the Balliol manu-
script and the 1491 text of Strassburg.

The Balliol College MS. 299 contains the entire text
of the De Corpore Christi.

The Merton College MS. 137 is incomplete, ending
with the words: “et per concilia," of Chapter XXXVI.
It is much similar to the Balliol College MS.

The Rouen MS. 561 is quite unlike the other MSS.,
though the substance is much the same. It is a manu-
script of the fifteenth century.

The text printed at Paris about 1490 contains the
entire text of the De Sacramento Altaris. This text


INTRODUCTION xix


is found in the library of the University of Minnesota.

The text printed at Strassburg in 1491 contains the
entire text of the De Sacramento Altaris. This text
is found in the libraries of the following institutions:
the Universities of Columbia, Harvard, Johns Hop-
kins, Pennsylvania, and Yale; and the libraries of the
Andover-Harvard and the Gettysburg Theological
Seminaries.

The text printed at Venice in 1504 contains the
entire text of the De Sacramento Altaris. The text
is found in the library of the University of Nebraska.

Many earlier writers looked for this treatise under
two different titles: De Coena Domini and De Corpore
Christi; but the problem of the title is now settled
by this text.

The original text was based upon the lectures of
Ockham, which were delivered at the University of
Oxford. It was finished after the Epiphany of our
Lord, as stated in the Colophon. No date fixes the
year of its composition.

In preparing the present text, the 1514 edition of
the Corpus Juris Canonici of Gratian was of the
utmost service. This Corpus and the glosses made
it possible to indicate the passages quoted by Ockham.
The 1505 and the 1513 editions of the Sextus Liber
Decretalium of Boniface VIII were also of assistance.

The manuscripts and the previous texts are full of
Latin abbreviations, and for this reason this work has
not been easily accessible to scholars. (Brampton has
just recently published a full Latin text of the De Im-
peratorum et Pontificum Potestate of Ockham.) How


Nes
ote EN
E


Expo a oe
3€ 3 Ate Fe
Y. x


* Tc
E AG CERDOS


Vau sick mS US eS


Reprint of a Photograph of a Page of the Manuscript of the De Corpore Christi
of William of Ockham Which Is Used by the Courtesy of Dr. W. A.
Pickard-Cambridge, Librarian of Balliol College, Oxford, England.


The reprint is a page of the Balliol College MS. 299, Oxford University, England. The
Librarian of Balliol College provided the following quotation from the report of the exami-
nation of the pianu eripi by Dr. H. H. E. Craster of the Bodleian Literary: ‘Balliol MS. 299
is written in two hands which I should date on paleographic grounds about 1340-60. A note
on an end fly-leaf gives evidence that the MS. was certainly written before 1368 and was
then in Oxford, where it has ever since remained. The MS. was certainly written in
England, and the presumption is that it was written at Oxford. An early reader has entered
a few English sentences in the margins. On my dating it is almost if not quite contem-
porary with the Author, who died about 1349.”

"The fly-leaves of the MS. contain four inscriptions recording the name of the former
owner, William De Wilton, who was Chancellor in 1373-5. I fancy that the date of his
death is not known.”

. The reprint shows some of the standard forms of Latin abbreviations in current use dur-
ing the middle of the fourteenth century. It also shows the Latin word-order of the period.


{be ^uiua 7 5uiutum. z ife commedens
zquiomedit. Jrebea? H2ego.z babet.
j.q.i.mulei.PolluinPinguit pant. a
epi quido indigneaccedim7altarc. t
bis alüfg pluribo auctozitatiby cuidenter
oftendifco2p’rpifub fpecie pams realiter
ptineriz quia iliud a pmozdio fidei rpiãe
oibus fidclibo erat pípicuü ideo circa ciuf
ofirmatos nolo diuci’immozart
Aapitulüij. —
GX (ubitantia panis conuerti


ciniti :
35amutein fcr?


q  prnra canonica ccpzeffe tradat.

qp corpus tpi fub fpecie panis eft

fidelity po:rigendü . rame p fubitäna pa
fiie in co»pue rpircaliteroucrtit vcl eraf^
fübftantiat.in canone biblie nó inuenit er
pieffum.fed boc (ancrie patríbo credit ot^
uinitue rcuclatii vl'auctozitatib» biblieot
ligenti z folerti inquífitóc pbati 7 idco ad
ifti vcritatc pbanda auctotítatce fanctoz
parzadduca. Uñ vicit £ufcbPcmiffe/
nas.zbabef or ofc. dif.tj. qz corp’. YJnuili
bilis facerdos vifibiles creaturasin fnb?
ftantiá cozpozie fui c fanguinis verbo fuo
fecreta poteitateoucrüt. Le ubdif. quáta
itat @ cclebzanda brifícia vis divine be
nedictionis opercf.z qd tibi nouit Tipof/
fibileeffenó ocbearg in cpi fubftátia ter
rena t mortalia oucrtü£ — "jt£Zlmb. 2 ba
betur oc ofc.oif.j.panis. Wiranta inquit
vie eft in fcrmoncoiit. vt íncipet effe qó ñ
crat.quanto magis opatozine cft vt fint
erant.z is aliud omutenfz (ic qd.crat pais
ante ofecratd3.iam cft cozp? cpi poft confe
crationé.  jtemertraocfüma tri.2 fi. ca
tbolica.firmiter.vbioicit ^$nno.tij. in có/
cilio generali Una cft fidcliti entuerfat ec
clefia.ectra qua null omino faluaf. $n d
ideidefacerdos cf cfacrificiti ibuo rpus
cuf? corpns 2 fanguis in facramcto altarj
(ub fpecic paris z yini veraciter otínctur.
eräfubftätigris pancin cozp?z vino in fan
quiné.oiuina poteftate. "jtécrtra dece/
lc5.milfaz. Eú marthe.Siranc $ octos
leuauit ad patrécü ad oA dd cranimeant^
m5lasarí reuocanit.pbabili"cffe vidcf ep
tuncocnlos lenauitad parréinceli com
83327 vínüin co:p?x (anguintgpoie oma


f inco?


tanit. Le'quitoaliifes Splurinis fan
tor ? 0octoz auctoritati ofarpfuba
pants yirtutedininarealiez veracit i fub
ftantiá corpis epi tráffubftátiatoucrtitur
feu omuratfincciaugmeto vl'tráfmutati
one fubftatiali cozpis cpt.
, Kapitulii.iti.,

SX fubltitia panis ouertif ín cop? rpi
noindininitarenecianimä.nccifangui/
hé.necin aliqd accídce fubftarie.


Fcoicta conver


P fiofcutráfubftitiario panis ppe
. ,, accipiendo vocabula nó fit tani
Ma rpt.nec imotuinitare. necin aligd acci
dens fabítautie corpis ri .nccin fangui
ncm.fed tm in corpus chritti.guis impro
puetlarge fninendo boc rocabulä cóucr
fio velerafubstatiario. poflct occdi @ pa/
nistranffubttsntiatin anima vcl accidés
corporis cbzifti vcl fanguine, — GX cnim
fubftantia panis in animä xpi vel oiuint/
tatc nó conuertatooc.auctozitaribo prua,
octur.vndcoicit glofa oc confe.oift.5. ft
per capto . Quid érps máducarc “Jn foli
carn¢ panis conucrtitz vinü in fanguíncs
7jté magifter fent&.inlibzo.üg.oifk.rı.licet
inquit fnb verag fpccictotus xpue fumi
tur.taméno fit cöuerfio panis nift in car
nem.nec vinínifiinfanguiné. Lrquibo
aucto?itatibo claret y fubftantia panis crg
in folá carnéconucrtif.nó in otuinitate ve
anima ronale vcl fanguíne rräfubftärist,
ncc per ofequée tn accidés carnisnecanv
me. Sed boc quidé vcz eft mic füumendo
boc vocabuliioucrtif. CIndefciendus
gin lind oucrtit vcl tráffubftátiat fubítà
tia panis . jd nó qnia cotuncti ett alterí.(s
etiam ft ab alte efice fepararü ad pzolario
nem vcrbozü facramctatíü a facerdote fu
po materia oncnientc cum intentione oc
ita poreftatedinina incipit effefub fpecie
panis, Zoniufmoiaüteft caro cpi nb aia
nec fanguis necaliud accidens inberens
carni vcl anime. nà fi cffet ania fcparata a
carne.quatiicungs facerdos ci inrétioe p
ferrz verba facraméralia fupcr materia có
uentetc.nó ibi inciperet cfle aia cbzifti (5 ca
rom. Similieh fanguis effet feparatus
acarne. nõ ibi inciperet cffe fanguis fed ca


rorm.Erideindicid c(Localis accídetíto


Reprint of a Photograph of a Page of the Text Entitled "Tractatus
Venerabilis Inceptoris Guilhelmi Ockham de Sacramento Altaris,"
Which Is Used by the Courtesy of the University of Pennsyl-
vania and of Professor Walton Brooks McDaniel, Ph.D.,
of the Latin Department of the University.


The reprint is a page of the edition which was published with the Quotlibeta


Septem of Ockham at Agrigentum in 1491


The reprint shows some of the standard forms of Latin abbreviations in cur-


rent use during the late fifteenth century.


of the period.


It also shows the Latin word-order


This page was selected because it contains the shortest chapter of the book
and therefore shows the captions of two chapters.


xxii INTRODUCTION


difficult it has been to study the works of Ockham is
seen from the statements which follow.

W. J. Townsend, in The Great Schoolmen of the
Middle Ages, states that "the works of Ockham have
never been collected and published in an uniform edi-
tion. They are very scarce, and are carefully pre-
served in some of the great libraries of Europe. So
difficult are they of access that Brucker, when he
wrote his History of Philosophy, had not seen them,
and even one so widely read as Sir James Mackintosh
had not been able to consult them.”

A. E. Taylor, Edinburgh, Present Day Thinkers and
the New Scholasticism, p. 67, says: “How hard it is,
for example, even to have copies of Duns Scotus or
Ockham at hand. I know very little about Ockham
for this reason. His works are simply not accessible
to me, as I am too busy to go where I could get at
them.”

Martin Grabmann, Munich, Present Day Thinkers
and the New Scholasticism, p. 145, says: “It is a very
welcome fact that historical research is now turning
with greater briskness to the history of Nominalism
and is beginning to draw a faithful picture of this
powerful intellectual movement from the laborious
study of manuscripts difficult to decipher. . . . The
philosophy of Nominalism contains much philosophic
acumen and propounds difficulties which still agitate
philosophic thought.”

IIT. The Latin Problems

The treatise presents many items of interest to the

teachers of Latin: orthography, peculiarities of syn-


INTRODUCTION xxiii


tax, and the contributions of Scholastic Latin to the
Latin vocabulary, especially to Latin and English
philosophical and theological terminology. The Latin
word-order of the first part of the text is that of the
text of 1491. The Latin word-order of the second
part of the text, the De Corpore Christi, is that of
the Balliol MS. of 1340-1360. Differences in the
word-order of the two centuries are quite apparent.


IV. The Influence of Ockham upon Luther


The influence of Ockham upon Luther was most
profound. While in the University of Erfurt, Luther
used Ockham's works as textbooks in philosophy.
Melanchthon, in his Vita Lutheri, states that Luther
"read Occam much and long and preferred his acumen
to that of Thomas and Scotus."

In his Table Talk Luther states that “the Terminists
is the name of a school in the universities to which I
belong. They oppose Thomists, Scotists, and Albert-
inists, and are called also Occamists, from Occam


their founder. . . . Occam is a wise and sensible man,
who endeavored earnestly to amplify and explain the
subject."


Luther, however, criticizes Ockham “as one who
had no knowledge of spiritual temptations.”

Luther refers to him as “Mein Meister Occam”
and “Mein Lieber Meister Occam.”

In the Bekenntniss vom Abendmahl Luther classes
Ockham among the Sophists because of his views, but
states that “he was correct in this matter.”


xxiv INTRODUCTION


Luther says that "they have condemned not only
me, but Occam."

But in a most significant passage in the De Cap-
tivitate Babylonica Ecclesiae, Luther refers to a dis-
cussion of the doctrine of the Real Presence of D'Ailly,
whose view was similar to that of his teacher, Ockham.
Luther states that “formerly, while I was gulping
down the Scholastic theology, the Cardinal of Cambry
(D’Ailly), in Book IV of his Sentences, gave me
occasion to reflect, by contending very acutely that
it would be far more probable, and fewer superfluous
miracles would be required, if it were understood that
true bread and true wine, and not their accidents alone,
were on the altar."

A footnote in the present volume cites a long quota-
tion from the original which shows what Luther read,
and indicates that Ockham and his pupil, D'Ailly, were
in full agreement upon many points. Erdmann, His-
tory of Philosophy, states that D'Ailly set forth “pure
Occamistic teaching."

These few external proofs of Luther's indebted-
ness to Ockham do not compare in value with the
internal evidence as seen in the writings of each. In
Young Luther, Professor Fife has recently shown
Luther's dependence upon Ockham.

A careful comparison of the Bekenntniss vom
Abendmahl, 1528, with this treatise shows that many
passages are similar in each treatise and that many
of the conclusions of both authors are identical in
meaning. The present text makes it possible for the
first time for scholars in general to make a careful esti-


INTRODUCTION XXV


mate of the psychological, philosophical and theo-
logical indebtedness of Luther to Ockham.

Professor R. Seeberg, Berlin, History of Dogma,
states that this tract influenced Luther very greatly,
for it is the theoretical foundation of his doctrine
of the Real Presence.

This new Latin text indicates very clearly that this
tract had the most direct bearing and influence upon
Luther’s views of the doctrine of the Real Presence
and the defense of his position as supported by
psychology and philosophy. No other tract more ably,
simply and practically applies psychology and philoso-
phy to the formulation of theology than this tract of
Ockham, upon which Luther draws so often.

Harnack, History of Dogma, states that Luther
“called in the aid of Occam’s Scholasticism . . . in
order to establish the Christian faith in respect to the
Doctrine of the Real Presence.’ There are many
passages of the tract that deal with the doctrines of
the Communicatio Idiomatum and of the Ubiquity of
the body of Christ, and with circumscriptive and defin-
itive presence in a place, as advocated by Luther.

A study of the present text aids in showing why
Luther was a Nominalist, and how profoundly the
philosophy of Ockham shaped the views of the Re-
formers and of the later philosophers.

Ockham was called the greatest Modernist of his
day.. Luther studied Ockham’s writings, saw his
strength and his weakness, and was thus assisted in
developing his own constructive program which suffi-
ciently blended progress and conservatism.


xxvi INTRODUCTION


V. The Psychology and Philosophy of Ockham


Ockham was an important contributor to the Refor-
mation and a forerunner of later philosophies of Eng-
land and of Protestant Germany. This treatise pro-
vides abundant evidence of his theories.

1. Here is applied his theory of the sign, sense
cognition, intuitive intellectual cognition, and abstract
intellectual cognition, and his dualistic psychology of
sense and of intellect.

2. Here is also seen applied his terministic phi-
losophy, which influenced Luther and other Reformers
in their conceptions of individuality, democracy, and
the functions of faith and reason. They were thus
led to contend against Aristotelian realism, and the
ideas of solidarity and absolutism.

'This text makes clear Ockham's use of vox, nomen,
terminus, intentio, suppositio, substance, subject, quan-
tity, quality, accidents, continuum, time, space, etc.

3. In this treatise Ockham applies the law of Par-
cimony—‘‘Frustra fit per plura, quod potest fieri per
pauciora." Ockham did not believe in multiplying
entities needlessly. This text supports the conclusion
of Thorburn, as found in The Myth of Occam’s Razor.

4. This treatise sets forth Ockham’s view of the
failure of reason, and the need and function of faith.
He shows the relation between reason and faith, but
insists that “God can act according to His arbitrary
pleasure and can do that for good against reason and
experience.”

Sorley, A History of English Philosophy, p. 7, states


INTRODUCTION i


that at the hands of Ockham “the separation between
theology and philosophy, faith and reason, was made
complete. He admitted that there are probably argu-
ments for the existence of God but maintained the
final thesis that whatever transcends experience be-
longs to faith. In this way he broke with Scotism as
well as with Thomism on a fundamental question.”

5. Here is shown Ockham’s exaltation of the Scrip-
tures over the authority of the church. Taylor, The
Medieval Mind, Vol. II, states that “Occam asserted
the verity of the Scriptures unqualifiedly.”

6. Ockham here advocates absolute voluntarism,
“for the will intervenes in the discursive operation of
the understanding.” He “also teaches the most entire
self-determinism of volition.” He “makes the Free
Will of God the sovereign arbiter of moral good and
evil. But if nothing is of itself morally good or evil,
the study of nature can teach us nothing about moral-
ity; intelligence is powerless to instruct us on the
requirements of the Divine Law.”

Human reason of itself can not establish the spir-
ituality or immortality of the soul.

7. Here he sets forth his philosophical views con-
cerning point, line, surface, substance, subject, quan-
tity, continuum, quality, accident, etc., as he uses these
conceptions to justify the various doctrines brought out
in the discussion of the Lord’s Supper.

VI. The Influence of Ockham upon English and Ger-
man Philosophy

1. The repeated uses of Ockham’s Law of Par-
cimony, or of Ockham’s Razor.


xxviii INTRODUCTION


2. He influenced the subsequent political theories,
as seen in the development of the social contract theory
of government, popular sovereignty, and the inalien-
able and indestructible right of freedom.

3. He influenced the development of all subsequent
philosophical and theological thought and is profoundly
influencing present-day thought.

Townsend, The Great Schoolmen of the Middle
Ages, quotes John Selden (born 1584) as stating
"that his works were the best that had been written
in former ages on the Ecclesiastical Power."

Kuno Fischer, History of Modern Philosophy, states
that Ockham's philosophy was a “fore-runner of that
empiricism and sensualism with which modern phi-
losophy began its course in the native country of
Occam."

Townsend affirms that “Occam and Locke join
hands in the adoption of a principle which must lead
to a philosophy of pure sensationalism. . . . He antici-
pated the teaching of Hobbes, Berkeley, Hume, Hart-
ley, and Condillac.” He opened “the way for the
extreme idealism of Berkeley on the one hand and
for the scepticism of Hume on the other. . . . He
taught a doctrine similar to Locke's, which defined
sense and reflection as the sources of all knowledge."

Townsend also states that Ockham “was either the
originator of the celebrated maxim, or enforced it
more than any other Schoolman:—‘There is nothing
in the understanding that was not previously in the
senses.’ . . . Occam's view combined elements which
were medieval, and elements which were adopted by


INTRODUCTION xxix


the Reformation and modern philosophy. . . All
metaphysicians are agreed that William of Occam,
by denying the existence of the species which had
been taught by Aristotle as the direct object of percep-
tion, and which he said interposed between the object
and subject, took the same ground which has con-
ferred immortality upon Reid and the Scotch school
of Philosophy. There is also remarkable similarity,
if not identity of view, between the theory of William
of Occam—that substances can be known only through
their attributes and that therefore substans can never
be known by the understanding, but only by faith,
and the celebrated doctrine of Locke upon the same
subject."

R. L. Poole, Illustrations of the History of Medieval
Thought and Learning, states that "Ockham, in virtue
of his greater conformity to the spirit of his day, not
to speak of his eminence as a philosopher, unequalled
among contemporaries and hardly surpassed by
Thomas Aquinas or John Duns Scotus, handed down
a light which was never suffered to be extinguished,
and which served as a beacon to pioneers of reform
like Wycliffe and Huss. In politics, as well as in
some points of doctrine, Ockham may be greatly
claimed as a precursor of the German reformers of
the sixteenth century.” He “left an unbroken line
of successors until the enduring elements of his aim
found a partial realism in the religious revolution of
the sixteenth century.”

Bishop Turner, the Catholic philosopher, says that
Ockham “has been described as the first Protestant.


XXX INTRODUCTION


And, indeed, he defended in his controversial writings
the principles subsequently invoked by the first re-
formers to justify the encroachments of the secular
power. In philosophy, too, his whole attitude is one
of protest against the prevailing realism, and against
the belief that the study of philosophy can be of mate-
rial aid to theological sciences. In an age when theism
and spiritualism were universally taught as philo-
sophical tenets, he protested, in the name of human
reason, that belief in God and in the spirituality of
the human soul has no foundation except in revela-
tion.”

Numerous references show that Ockham influenced
the philosophy of Locke, Reid, Hamilton, and the
Scotch philosophers.

Michalski, Cracow, asserts that Ockham wrote the
De Sacramento Altaris in order to set forth and de-
fend his new philosophy. Ockham realized that the
then much discussed Lord’s Supper provided the best
opportunity for a pragmatic application of his Nom-
inalistic philosophy in opposition to the Realism of
the day. This treatise clearly states Ockham’s reason
for writing this text.

The pragmatism of C. S. Pierce and the Nominal-
istic pragmatism of William James are based upon
Ockham’s philosophy. The latter states that the
discussion of the Lord’s Supper afforded “the only
pragmatic application of the substance-idea with which
I am acquainted,” and that in this discussion “the
substance-notion breaks into life, then, with tre-
mendous effect.”


INTRODUCTION xxxi


C. Delisle Burns, Aristotelian Society, Vol. XIV,
and Mind, Oct. 1916, states that Ockham “seems to
have had in his philosophy all the prestige of tradi-
tion and all the promise of a new beginning"; “for
the difficulties which were once faced by William of
Ockham still need discussion." He sees "obvious like-
ness between Ockham and Hume." He also says that
"there are interesting parallels to be found between
the ideas of Ockham and Mr. Bertrand Russell; some-
times there is even a close likeness between the actual
sentences of the ninth question in the first book of
Ockham's Quotlibeta and those in Mr. Russell’s Our
Knowledge of the External World. . . . This question
. . . has a close connection with his treatment of
‘magnitude’ in the De Sacramento Altaris."

James Lindsay, The Monist, states that “Occam
had the merit to anticipate Kant" and "Descartes,"
and the "tendencies of modern empiricism," as well
as "modern idealism."

W. M. Thorburn, Mind, July, 1918, states that
Ockham “denies the reality of an Instant of Time,
showing some anticipation of the doctrines associated
with the names of Bergson and William James. . .
Few or no competent critics will question Mansel’s
judgment of Ockham, on page 4 of his Introduction
to the Rudiments of Aldrich: “The ablest writer on
Logic whom the Schools have produced. . . . The
Summa Totius Logicae of Occam is the most valuable
contribution of the Middle Ages to the Logica Docens.
His editor, Mark of Beneventum, said that if the gods
used Logic, it would be the Logic of Occam.’”’


xxxii INTRODUCTION


M. Grabmann says: “Indeed, the basic researches
of P. Duhem confront us with the fact that the
Nominalist school of Ockham . . . is most intimately
connected with the amazing anticipation of the scien-
tific world-picture of a Copernicus and a Galileo. . . .
The Medieval period has given us no scientific discus-
sion and appraisal of William of Ockham, one of the
most influential thinkers of the Middle Ages. ...
Great schools were formed: . . . that of Ockham,
which is a prelude to modern Empiricism."

Pres. J. H. Ryan says: "The student of the history
of medieval philosophy, too, is well aware of the
analysis of the inductive method made by Ockham
and the disciples of his school. Without such prepara-
tory studies the advance of science would certainly
have been delayed for a long period."

J. S. Zybura says: “The precursors of modern
natural science were philosophers of the School of
Ockham."

Dr. Maréchal says: “The modern philosophers who
preceded Kant and followed Duns Scotus and Ock-
ham." (Quoted by Zybura.)

Ockham's discussion of “quantum” and “quanta”
is well worth reading by the advocates of the modern
"quanta theory." Equally interesting to the Neo-
Realists is Ockham's discussion of realities and
qualities.

All of the philosophical views stated above are
developed in the De Sacramento Altaris. Many other
views are likewise discussed in practical fashion; for
all of his subtle skill and wealth of psychological,


INTRODUCTION xxxiii


philosophical, and theological knowledge is shown in
this work as he defends himself from widespread
criticism and the charge of heresy. In this work he
sets forth and defends philosophical views which were
to influence the thinking of the entire world and to
change theological, philosophical, political, social, and
other views of life.


VII. Ockham’s Irony


This treatise has much light to throw upon this
mooted question.

Rettberg, Baur, Lindsay, et al., have expressed their
opinion that Ockham meant to be ironical when he
refers to his belief in the Dogmas of the church.
Rashdall, Erdmann, and Harnack agree with Geisler
when he states “that Occam was really sincere in all
his professions of respect for the Doctrines of the
church.”

R. Seeberg says that “the reader can not escape a
painful impression when the talented author apologizes
for his bold conclusions as harmless intellectual exer-
cises.”

Erdmann states that “this may seem strange to the
Protestant, but to assert that no one could be in earnest
in making such statements is to brand as rascals the
most honest men of the various ages, who have made
like declarations.”

Rashdall asserts that Ockham was “unimpeachably
orthodox on all questions except the authority of the
Papacy and its relation to the Civil Power.”

This treatise, more than any other work of Ockham,

3


XXXIV INTRODUCTION


dispells the charge of irony, for there is at the time he
writes this treatise a ring of sincerity in all of his
declarations of belief in the fundamental doctrines
of the church.


VIII. Ockham and Marsiglio of Padua


It is apparent that a close relationship existed be-
tween Ockham and Marsiglio and that they mutually
influenced the writings of each other. Pope Clement
VI asserts that Ockham profoundly influenced Mar-
siglio in formulating many of his theories relative to
the power and authority of the Pope. If they were not
fellow teachers at the University of Paris, they were
both at the court of Louis IV in Bavaria and were
united in their efforts to defend the emperor during
his controversy with Pope John XXII. Each in com-
mon aided in developing the political ideas which in
dominant fashion shaped the political theories for the
next two hundred years and are still vital in current
political theories. Emerton states that “the distinc-
tion between them is that Ockham was primarily a
philosopher trying to apply his general principles to
human institutions, while Marsiglio was a trained
physician and theologian without, so far as we can
see, a definite philosophical system."

Previté-Orton, The Defensor Pacis of Marsilius,
page xxiii, 1928, states: "Whereas supporters of the
Papacy, and even opponents like Ockham, made prin-
cipal use of the Canon Law, ie. chiefly, though not
wholly, papal decretals, in proving their case, Marsilius,
far more explicitly than Dante before him, expressly


INTRODUCTION XXXV


declines to consider the Canon Law as of any weight
or as providing any evidence whatever, and indeed he
denounces it as a chief abuse contrary to the nature of
the State.”

(Note: Quotations from various sources have been
used rather than subjectively derived conclusions. )


IX. Works of Ockham in This Country
(Known to the author of this text)


1. Centiloquium theologicum M. Guilhelmi de
Ockam; Lugduni, 1495: Univ. of Penna.,
Harvard, Andover-Harvard Theol. Seminary,
Boston Public Library, Peabody Institute
Library, Baltimore.

2. Compendium errorum Iohannis Papae XXII;
Lugduni, 1494: Harvard, Andover-Harvard,
Boston Public Library, Univ. of Penna., Yale,
Nebraska, N. Y. Public Library, Episcopal
Divinity School, Phila.

3. Dialogus inter clericum et militem super dignitate
papali et regia, etc.; Lugduni, 1491: Univ. of
Penna., Harvard, Columbia. 1494: Univ. of

= Penna, Yale, Harvard, Andover-Harvard,
Boston Public Library; c. 1500: Nebraska.

4. A Dialogue betwene a knyght and a clerke con-
cernynge the power spiritual and temporall;
Thomas Berthelet, London, 1559: Harvard.

5. Defensorium (a paupertate Christi) contra
Iohannem XXII; Venice, 1513: Boston Pub-
lic Library, N. Y. Public Library.


xxxvi INTRODUCTION


6. Disputatio inter clericum et militem super potes-
tate praelatis ecclesiae atque principibus ter-
rarum commissa sub forma Dialogi; London,
Thomas Berthelet, 15??: Johns Hopkins,
Harvard.

7. Expositio aurea et admodum utilis super totam
artem veterem edita per venerabilem incep-
torem fratrem Guilhelmum de Occham cum
quaestionibus Alberti parmi de Saxonia.
Impressis prudentisimi uiri Benedicti Hectoris
bononiensis artis impressoriae  solertissimi
Bononiaeque Impressa anno domini, 1496:
Widener Branch of the Phila. Public Li-
brary.

8. Scriptum in primum librum sententiarum;
Argenti, 1483: Univ. of Penna., Johns Hop-
kins, Yale.

9. Letterae F. Michaelis de Cezenae; 1331: Univ.
of Penna, Harvard, Andover-Harvard, Bos-
ton Public Library.

10. Opus XC dierum; Lugduni, 1495: Univ. of
Penna, Yale, Harvard, Andover-Harvard,
Boston Public Library.

11. Philosophia naturalis Guilhelmi Occham ; Romae,
1637: Univ. of Penna.

12. Quaestiones et decisiones in IV libros senten-
tiarum; Lugduni, 1495: Univ. of Penna, Yale,
Harvard, Johns Hopkins, Andover-Harvard,
Boston Public Library, Peabody [Institute
Library, Baltimore.


12:


14.


15:


L7


INTRODUCTION xxxvii


Quotlibeta septem; Argenti, 1491: Univ. of
Penna. Gettysburg Theological Seminary,
Yale, Harvard, Columbia, Johns Hopkins,
Andover-Harvard; c. 1487: Nebraska.

Summaria seu epitomata CXXXIII Capitulorum
operis; Lugduni, 1495: Harvard, Nebraska,
Andover-Harvard.

Summulae in lib. physicorum adsunt; Svardis,
Venice, 1506: Univ. of Penna., Nebraska.


. Tabulae ad diversas huius operis magistri Guil-


helmi de Ockam super quattuor libros senten-
tiarum; Lugduni, 1495: Univ. of Penna,
Harvard, Nebraska, Boston Public Library.

Tractatus logicae: Dudum me frater et amicae
. . . Omnes loycae tractatores . . . Explicit
loici Magistri Guilhelmi Ocham. MS. at the
Univ. of Penna. Text; Paris, 1488: Harvard
Atheneum Library.

Summa totius logicae nuper correcta; Venetizis,
per Lazarum de Svardis, 1508: Harvard
Atheneum Library.


The Table of Titles and Chapters of the
Tract of Venerable Ockham concerning
the Body of Christ
QUESTION
I. Whether a point is an absolute MS really dis-

tinct from a quantity . :

II. Whether a line and a surface are en E
guished from one another and from a body .

III. Whether a body, which is a quantity, is an abso-
lute thing really distinct from a substance

Prologue


CHAPTER
I. What the Catholic doctors discerned by
the senses concerning the d Mc of the
Eucharist
IL. That the body of Chr: is BaF con-
tained under the species of bread

III. That the substance of the bread is con-
verted into the body of Christ :

IV. That the substance of the bread is con-
verted into the body of Christ, not into
the divinity, or the rational soul, or the
blood, or some accident of the substance

V. That the substance of the bread does not
remain after consecration 2

VI. That the body of Christ is not circum-
scribed in a place in the sacrament of
the altar .

VII. That the body of Gan in the er
of the altar is not seen by us with the
bodily eye

VIII. That the accidents ee after conse-
cration are not subjectively! in the body
of Christ


xxxviii


PAGE


PAGE


100


102


TABLE OF TITLES AND CHAPTERS xxxix


CHAPTER


IX.


ALE


XIV.


XV.


XVI.


XVII.


XVIII.


XIX.


That the quantity, which was before
in the substance of the bread, re-
mains .


That the sensible qualities remain


That every extended material substance is
composed of substantial parts really
distinct e AUR ered ey ae

That an absolute thing can be prior by
divine power without a posterior .

That the omnipotence of God can make a
substance without any absolute accident
formally inhering in it

That a substance, which is extended, can
be preserved locally unmoved, although
all of its absolute accidents may be de-
stroyed through divine power .


That a material substance through its in-
trinsic parts is present in the place in
which it is circumscribed .

In which certain arguments are advanced
to prove that the quantity remaining
in the sacrament of the altar is not
really distinct from the qualities re-
ageebbavbaler 4.0 e e e

That any quantity is not an absolute thing
really distinct from substance and that
any quantity is not an absolute thing
really distinct from quality

That all the qualities in the sacrament of
the altar are not one subject of one
quantity . n Ev

That not any quality may be the immediate
subject of a quantity .


PAGE


104
106


107


110


112


115


118


121


124


127


130


xl TABLE OF TITLES AND CHAPTERS


CHAPTER


XX.


XXI.


AIT.


XXIII.


XXIV.


AA V.


XXVI.


XXVII.


XXVIII.


That the quantity remaining is not sub-
jectively in one quality and not in
another : :

In which it is DIETE b nu non of
the Catholic doctors that qualities are
not subjectively in a quantity other than
a substance . :

That a quantity really nce frin a
substance may not be a subject of quali-
ties in the sacrament of the altar, is also
confirmed through the statements of the
philosophers c

That the quantity remaining in te sacra-
ment of the altar is not an absolute thing
really distinct from the qualities remain-
ing in the same sacrament :

That before consecration there was one
quantity, which was not an absolute
thing really distinct from the substance
of the bread

That a substance can be a Gaertn Lone
out any absolute ore el distinct
added to it . :

In which other reasons? are adduced to
prove the same conclusion, which was
stated before; namely, that a substance

can be a quantum without a distinct
quantity added to it. >

That the same conclusion, Men was
stated before, seems to follow from the
statements of adversaries .

That a substance may be a fund
through its substantial parts without
every quantity which is called a thing
really distinct from substance and
quality


PAGE


132


134


141


143


144


146


151


157


160


TABLE OF TITLES AND CHAPTERS


CHAPTER


XXIX.


XXX.


XXXI.


XXXII.


KXXX TIS


XXXIV.


XXXV.


XXXVI.


The same conclusion, which was stated
before, is proved through arguments
taken from the statements of Catholic
doctors


Concerning objections contrary to the pre-
vious statements .


In which replies are posited to the pre-
vious objections .


In which it is shown that both propositions
stand at the same time: some quantity
is not another thing really distinct from
substance and quantity is an accident


It declares how quantity is an accident,
and how it obtains with this, that some
quantity is not a thing distinct from sub-
stance


In what way it must be replied to the
passages of Augustine, introduced be-
fore in Chapter XXX., in the fourth
and the fifth arguments . n e.


How quantity is a category distinct from
quality and substance; notwithstanding
that no quantity may be distinct from
part of a thing, from substance and
quality. In which there is a reply to
the sixth argument showing that cate-
gories are signs predicable of things


That the previous opinion ought not to
be rejected as heretical, contrary to cer-
tain writers who condemn that opinion
as heretical; and through this the
seventh reason, adduced before in Chap-
ter XXX, is explained .


xli


PAGE


166


178


181


193


202


210


215


219


xli TABLE OF TITLES AND CHAPTERS


CHAPTER PAGE
XXXVII. That the previous opinion is not contrary
to experience, and the eighth reason,
cited before in Chapter XXX, is ex-
plained oen 05 pee zZ
XXXVIII. How all lengths are of the same species,
and how some differ in species; and the
ninth reason, adduced in Chapter XXX,
is explained "=O Ven" a: "Pt eee
XXXIX. Concerning a diverse mode of predicating
quantity according to diverse cate-
gories; explaining the tenth reason
posited before in Chapter XXX . . . 233
XL. In what manner diverse quantities can be
subjectively in a substance, since two
bodies may not be able to be naturally
at the same time; and the last reason
istexplainedn n ^ 20 207 MEE
XLI. Concerning the explanation of certain
arguments contrary to the previous
statement! 4 Du INMINENTE
. t Seeberg, Hist. of Doctrines, trans. E. G. Hay, Vol. IL, p. 191: “Sub-
jective-substantively, or objectively: objective-imaginatively. The meaning
of the terms is now just the reverse." Fleming, The Vocabulary of
Philosophy, p. 354: “Subjective is used by Will. Occam to denote that
which exists independent of mind."

Burns, William of Ockham on Universals, Proceedings of the Aris-
totelean Sce New Series, Vol. XIV., 1913-1914, note p. 76: “It is
sufficiently well known that what we call objective was in the medieval
philosophy called subjective."


? Ratio is sometimes translated reason or ground, as seems best, in order
to convey a very definite meaning.


THE TRACT OF THE VENERABLE
INCEPTOR, WILLIAM OF OCKHAM,
CONCERNING THE SACRAMENT
OF THE ALTAR


15


20


25


30


2 THE SACRAMENT OF THE ALTAR


The very renowned tract of the Venerable In-
ceptor, William of Ockham, of England, a very
famous teacher of sacred theology, a most discrim-
inating investigator of realities, of the order of Friars
Minor, concerning the sacrament of the altar and with
special reference to the distinction of point, line, sur-
face, body, quantity, quality, and substance. It begins
aus piciously.


Concerning the conversion of the bread into the
body of Christ, as says a certain gloss on the De
Consecratione, Distinction IL, Chapter, ‘In sacra-
mentorum.’ “There are various opinions. One opin-
ion asserts that that substance, which was bread at
first, afterwards is the flesh and the blood of Christ.
It is argued later in the Chapter, ‘Panis est in altari,’
and in the Chapter, ‘Quia corpus.’ The second opinion
holds that the substance of the bread and of the wine
ceases to be there, and only the accidents remain;
namely, taste, color, and weight, and similar acci-
dents; and under those accidents the body of Christ
begins to be there. The third opinion holds that the
substance of the bread and of the wine remains there,
and that the body of Christ is in the same place and
under the same species. It is argued later in the
Chapter, ‘Ego.’ Each opinion, however, acknowledges
that the body of Christ is there. The second opinion
is More true, as in the margin of the De Summa Trini-
tate, Chapter, ‘Firmiter,’ Una." These are the words
of the gloss.


From this it appears that the substance of the bread
is converted into the body of Christ, so that the sub-
stance of the bread does not remain but only the
accidents remain which were before in the substance


THE SACRAMENT OF THE ALTAR 3


of the bread. And in confirmation of this truth it
is said in the margin of the De Summa Trinitate,
‘Firmiter,’ as the previous gloss asserts: “There is
one universal church of all the faithful, outside of
which no one at all is saved; in which the priest and
the sacrifice are the very same, Jesus Christ, whose
body and blood are truly contained in the sacrament
of the altar under the species of bread and of wine,
since the bread is transubstantiated into body and the
wine into blood by divine power.”


With a view to the exposition of this truth, some
questions must be asked about two points principally,
as is obvious; first, about the entity and the distinction
of those accidents; secondly, concerning the separation
of them from a subject.

Moreover, since it is commonly conceded by all that
color, taste, and sensible qualities of such a kind, are
really distinguished from each other and also from sub-
stance; therefore, since this is conceded, some questions
must be raised about the distinction of these qualities
from quantity, figure, rectitude, and the like; concern-
ing which there is great doubt as to how they may be
distinguished.

And because this consideration pertains not only to
theology but also to philosophy, since it may be the
province of philosophy to come to know the natures of
things and their distinctions; therefore, it is necessary
to investigate what the philosophers have thought of
this matter; and especially the prince of philosophers,
Aristotle, and also what the theologians may say. But
that I may proceed with more regard for logical order,
I shall inquire first concerning the distinction of point,
line, surface, and body; and afterwards of other
matters.


5


15


20


25


30


10


15


20


25


30


4 THE SACRAMENT OF THE ALTAR


QUESTION I


Therefore, I ask, first, whether a point is an abso-
lute thing really distinct from quantity. Which is an-
swered affirmatively; for the terminus of every single
thing is distinguished from that of which it is a ter-
minus. But a point is a terminus of a line; therefore,
it is really distinguished from a line, and consequently
it is for the same reason really distinguished from any
quantity.

On the contrary, every positive thing is substance or
quantity or quality or relation, and so of the other
categories. But a point is not a substance distinct
from quantity, nor a quality distinct from quantity,
nor a relation distinct from quantity, and so of other
respective genera; therefore, a point is not a thing
other than quantity.


Before answering this question and all following
concerning this matter, I make in advance one state-
ment; namely, that whatever I shall say under what-
ever form of words, which can in any mode be
regarded as contrary to whatever has been said in
Sacred Scripture or in the writings of the Saints, or
contrary to the determination and the doctrine of the
Roman Church, or contrary to the opinion of the Doc-
tors approved by the church, I shall not say by affirm-
ing but by quoting precisely in the person of those who
also hold the opinion to be discussed; whether that
opinion be true or false, or Catholic, or heretical, or
erroneous. Whence, if I shall use such words as “I
say,” “It must be said,” and the like; I.desire those
words to be understood not as used by me personally
but as used by those who hold such opinions.


THE SACRAMENT OF THE ALTAR 5


With this understood, I shall proceed thus with
respect to the question proposed. First, I shall show
that a point is not some positive and absolute thing
really distinct from any quantity and especially from
a line. In the second place, I shall posit some reasons
and passages to prove that a point is another thing.
In the third place, I shall reply to these.

First, therefore, I prove that a point is not a thing
other than a line, or any quantity; and in the first
place, through philosophical reasons; in the second
place, through passages of the philosophers; in the
third place, through theological reasons.

According to the first way; I, first, argue osten-
sively thus: if a point be a thing other than quantity,
it is either substance or accident; but a point is not
substance distinct from quantity nor accident distinct
from quantity; therefore, a point is not a thing other
than quantity.

The major premise is known; the minor premise I
prove. And, first, I prove the first part; namely, that
a point is not a substance distinct from quantity; for
every substance is either matter or form or a com-
posite or substance abstracted from matter. But it is
manifest that a point is not matter or form or a com-
posite; nor is it form abstracted from matter, if a
point be indivisible and in no way a quantum, as is
posited by the opponents; therefore, et cetera.

I prove the second part thus; namely, that a point
may not be an indivisible accident distinct from
quantity. In the first place thus: every absolute acci-
dent is placed in any subject adequate to it, so that that
accident is either a whole in a whole subject and in
each part, or a whole in a whole and a part in a part


15


20


25


30


10


20


25


30


6 THE SACRAMENT OF THE ALTAR


or is an indivisible accident having an indivisible sub-
ject, as a spiritual accident is in the rational soul as
if in its primary and adequate subject. But a point
in none of these three modes has or can have any
primary and adequate subject; therefore, the major
premise of that syllogism is obvious through induction
as regards any absolute accident.


The first part of the minor premise is obvious;
namely, that a point does not have any adequate sub-
ject so that there may be a whole in a whole and in
each part. For I take a point terminating the line A,
and let that be called B; and I take another corre-
sponding point, and let it be called C; then I ask
whether B is in A, as if in its adequate subject or in
the subject of itself; and it follows in either way, that
C will be in the same adequate subject for the same
reason.


Then I argue thus: whatever things are in the
same adequate subject, they do not differ either in
situation or in place; but B and C are distinguished
or separate in place and in situation; therefore, they
are not in the same adequate subject. If it be said
that B is not in the whole line A, nor in the subject
of the same line A, but in a part of the same line
or in part of the subject (of the line) ; on the contrary,
if B be not in the whole line as if in an adequate
subject nor in the whole subject of the same line;
then it is in a part as if in an adequate subject. Let
that part be D; then I argue, B is in D as if in an
adequate subject; therefore, for the same reason an-
other point corresponding to the same B, at which D
is terminated out of another part, will be in the same
D as if in an adequate subject, and let that point be


THE SACRAMENT OF THE ALTAR 7


called E. From which it follows that B and E are
in the same adequate subject; and consequently they
are not separate in place and in situation, which is
most manifestly false. So, therefore, there can not
be any point in any divisible quantum, and as if in
its adequate subject, so that a whole may be in a whole
and a whole in each part; not only because two points
of that divisible would not then be separate in situa-
tion, which is false; but also because a point the same
numerically would then be in two situations, which
is false.


If it be said that a point is in some divisible part
but another point does not correspond actually to that
part, it can not correspond to it, because that part can
not be existent per se, but only non-existent to another.


On the contrary; whatever part is designated, God
can of His absolute power separate it from another
part and can preserve it existent per se; therefore,
this part, which is the primary and adequate subject
of a point, God can preserve without another. There-
fore, let it be posited in being, then it will actually
have another point, which will be for the same reason
in that subject as if in its primary subject; for there
is no greater reason that one point terminating a line
may be in that whole line or in that whole subject of
that line than for another point terminating the same
line; and consequently these two points will not be
separate in situation; for those accidents, which are
in the same adequate subject, are not separate in situa-
tion. Moreover, a corresponding point is not merely
potentially in whatever way it is about to be poten-
tially ; therefore, it is in the nature of things and conse-
quently has another primary subject, and this can not

4


20


25


30


10


15


20


25


30


8 THE SACRAMENT OF THE ALTAR


be granted unless a line or a subject of a line termi-
nating at another point; therefore, these two points
are in the same primary subject and consequently
are not separate in situation, which is false. More-
over, if it were in some divisible subject, as if in a
primary subject, then they would not be separate in
situation from another part, nor could it be more
separate from one part than from another.


The second principal part of the minor premise is
thus proved; namely, that a point is not a whole in
a whole subject and a part in a part; for a point would
then be a quantum, and the thesis is established.


The third part of that minor premise; namely, that
it is not in some indivisible as if in its primary and
adequate subject, is obvious; because that indivisible
would be either substance or accident. It is not acci-
dent; for I ask in what genus? And it is obvious that
it can not be conceded to be in a genus other than the
genus ‘substance’.


Similarly, inquiry must be made concerning the sub-
ject of that accident, as about the subject of the point.
Nor is that indivisible a substance; for, if it be a
substance, it is either matter or form or a composite
or a substance abstracted from matter; but it is not
matter, since all matter is divisible; nor is it form; for,
if it be form, it is either form extended and conse-
quently is divisible or it is form non-extended and
consequently is a rational soul; for the rational soul
alone is non-extended; but it is manifest that it is
not a rational soul; therefore, it is manifest that it
is not form which is one part of a composite, nor is
it a composite; and it is manifest that it is not form
abstracted from matter; therefore, it is not some in-


THE SACRAMENT OF THE ALTAR 9


divisible substance, which may be able to be the pri-
mary and adequate subject of a point.


Moreover, if there be in a stone some indivisible
substance which may be able to be the primary and
adequate subject of a point; then I take this substance,
and I ask whether or not it makes one per se with
the matter and the form of the stone. If so, there
would, therefore, be some indivisible substance in a
stone which would be matter or form with respect to
the matter of the stone; for whenever some making
one per se are of diverse grounds in the genus ‘sub-
stance,’ one of these is act, the rest indeed power;
and consequently one is matter and the rest form.

But it is impossible that that indivisible is primary
matter, for primary matter is extended. But if this
indivisible substance does not make one per se with
the matter and the form of the stone, it is surely not
part of the stone and consequently can not be part of
the stone; and consequently can not be part of any
substance.

But every substance, which can not be part of some
substance, is subsistent per se and per se in a genus
and in a species; and consequently this substance would
be subsistent per se and per se in a genus and in a
species, which is false; therefore, it remains that there
is no substance in a stone except matter or form or
a composite; but every such is divisible and possessed
of parts really distinct; therefore, none of them is
indivisible. So, therefore, it is obvious that neither
any indivisible nor any divisible can be a primary
and adequate subject of the same point, if a point be
a certain absolute thing really distinct from every
divisible.


20


25


30


10


20


25


30


10 THE SACRAMENT OF THE ALTAR


If it be said as regards the principle reason, that
the major premise is false; now there are many acci-
dents which are not wholes in a whole and in each
part, nor wholes in wholes and parts in parts, nor are
they indivisible accidents having indivisible subjects
but indivisible accidents having divisible subjects; and
yet they are not in any part but a whole in a whole,
as time is in the whole movement of the whole heaven,
and yet it is not in any part of the movement of any
part of heaven. Similarly, doubleness is a whole in
a whole double, and neither doubleness nor any part
of it is in a part of a double with respect to the same
half. And it seems so of many other accidents, that
they are in a whole; and yet neither they themselves
nor a part of them are in any part of the whole.


But this reply does not suffice. First, because it
accepts the fallacy that there are some indivisible acci-
dents existing at first in some divisible and yet in no
part of it; whence, time is not some absolute accident
really distinct from motion and from permanent
things, existing subjectively in a whole motion and in
no part.


In the second place, this reply does not suffice; for,
if this is granted, the argument still obtains; for a
point is not such an accident. First; because it is
obvious, that no accident existing in any adequate sub-
ject, whether it be a whole in a whole and a whole in
each part or a whole in a whole and yet in no part,
is separate in place and in situation from any accident
existing in the same subject adequate to it; for color
is not separate from the color of the same subject.
Similarly, time, if it be another accident, is not sepa-
rate in situation from some accident in the same


THE SACRAMENT OF THE ALTAR 11


subject adequate to it. Similarly, doubleness is not
separate in situation from some accident existing in
the same subject, as if adequate to it; and so in general
of every accident. It is obvious, that it is not separate
in situation from some accident existing in the same
subject adequate to it. But a point is separate in
situation from each point of that quantum, of which
it is a point; therefore, two points can not be in the
same primary and adequate subject, which however
would be necessary if a point were an indivisible acci-
dent having some divisible for an adequate subject.

In the third place, no accident is separate in sit-
uation from each part of its primary and adequate
subject; as the whiteness of that part A is not sep-
arate in situation from each part of the same A, al-
though it is separate in situation from another part
joining with A.

Similarly, if time or doubleness be an accident re-
ally distinct from a double or motion, it is manifest
that time is not separate in situation from some part
of motion, nor is doubleness separate in situation from
some part of a double; and so of every other accident.
But if each divisible is designated on the ground that
it ought to be considered the primary subject of that
point, it is manifest that this is separate in situation
from another part of this divisible; therefore, that
divisible is not the primary and adequate subject of the
same point.

This reason is confirmed; for, when any accident is
in some primary and adequate subject, it is obvious
by induction that that accident is not more separate
in situation from one part of this subject than from
another. But it is manifest that that point is more


15


20


25


30


20


25


30


12 THE SACRAMENT OF THE ALTAR


separate in situation from one part of that divisible,
whatever divisible is designated, than from another;
therefore, that divisible is not the primary subject of
this point.

From which it is obvious, that a point is not some
absolute accident really distinct from every divisible,
having some divisible for a primary and adequate sub-
ject; namely, that which is a subject in itself or per se
and not through its own part.

Moreover, it can not be conceded that a point con-
necting two halves, in which it is subjectively, is in one
half more than in the other, or, therefore, in both; and
then an accident the same numerically would be in sub-
jects several numerically, which is impossible, or in
neither; and consequently in none subjectively.

If it be said that a point may be in some indivisible
subject, as was mentioned before, this does not obtain,
as was proved before.

And I shall prove it again; since some indivisible
would be in a divisible subject, say, in a stone. Let
that stone be divided in correspondence with that in-
divisible, and I ask, whether that indivisible remains
or does not remain. If it remains; I ask, where it re-
mains, whether with each part, or in one and not in
the other, or separate from both. The first can not be
conceded; for then some substance one numerically
would be in distinct places which do not make one,
which is impossible naturally. The second can not be
conceded; for there is no greater reason that it be in
one part than in another. Similarly, the third can not
be conceded; since then nothing existing per se or in
some other would make one per se; each of which is
obviously false and impossible.


THE SACRAMENT OF THE ALTAR 13


In the second place, I argue principally thus. Every
positive and absolute thing really distinct from every
other thing not making one per se, as if a part with
another thing, is per se in a genus. But a point, if it
be such an indivisible thing, is not a part of any divis-
ible, nor does it make one per se with any other; there-
fore, it will be per se in some category; but this is false,
for then it would be either substance or quantity or
quality or respect, any one of which is false according
to those positing such indivisibles.

The major premise of that syllogism is manifest;
for when there are some things distinct as regards
themselves as wholes, of which neither is part of the
other, there is no greater reason that one of them be
per se in some category than for the other, as is obvi-
ous by induction.

But it is said in reply to this, that a point is not per
se in a genus, but only through reduction; for it is not,
unless a terminus of quantity.

But that reply does not obtain; first, because a line
could not then be per se in the genus ‘quantity,’ since
it may not be unless a terminus of quantity. If it be
said that a line is not only a terminus of quantity but
even a quantity; it is, therefore, per se in a genus. But
a point is not per se a quantity; therefore, it is not per
se in the genus ‘quantity’ but only through reduction.
This does not obtain; for, if a point be such an indi-
visible thing, not only will it be a terminus of quantity,
but it will be one absolute thing really distinct as re-
gards itself as a whole from every other thing, and
consequently will be per se in some category.

This is confirmed; for every thing absolute and per-
manent and one per se, not merely one through aggre-


10


15


20


30


10


20


25


30


14 THE SACRAMENT OF THE ALTAR


gation or order, is per se in some category or is a part
of something existing per se in a category. This is
obvious by induction of every thing, unless you insist
upon the proposition. It is also obvious; for, if that
major premise be denied, every way of proving that
some thing is per se in a genus is destroyed; for thus
of other things I may say, that something is not per se
in a genus because it is the terminus of any substance;
as you say, that a point is not per se in a genus, for it
is the terminus of something existing per se in a genus;
therefore, this is obvious, that everything one per se
is per se in some category or is part of something ex-
isting in a category; but it is obvious by induction that
a point is not a part of something existing per se in
a category; therefore, a point is per se in a category;
which was proved to be false. From which it follows
that a point is not such an indivisible thing.


In the third place, I argue thus. It is impossible
that there may be things infinite actually, distinct as
regards themselves as wholes, and of which none may
be part of another, and which do not make some one.
But if a point were such an indivisible thing, such
would be infinite actually. For example, I take wood.
It is manifest according to those writers that there are
here infinite lines; for there are not just so many so
that there could not be more, and each of them is ter-
minated actually at some point; for otherwise no line
could be terminated actually at some point. And it
is manifest that they are distinguished as regards them-
selves as wholes, if they be indivisibles; nor do they
make one per se, since they may not be parts of any-
thing; therefore, such will be infinite actually, which
is impossible and contrary to all philosophy. There-


THE SACRAMENT OF THE ALTAR 15


fore, it remains that a point is not any such indivisible
thing really distinct from every divisible.

In the fourth place thus: some thing positive and
absolute is not caused through division only of a
continuum. Let, therefore, wood be divided; and I
ask about the terminating points, whether they were
before or not. If they were, it is certain that they will
not be separate in situation; therefore, a point was
immediate to a point; which is false even accord-
ing to those writers. If they were not before and
now are; they are, therefore, generated de novo,
and consequently some absolute thing necessarily
would be generated through division alone, which
is false.


In the fifth place; since they can become continuous
through the union only of parts of water or of another,
whose parts were separate before, some new absolute
thing is not generated nor is an absolute corrupted.
But if a point were such an indivisible thing, when-
ever such parts would become continuous, of necessity
some absolute thing would be corrupted; say, these
two points which before terminated two lines, and a
new thing would be generated; namely, one point con-
necting those two parts. Indeed, it would follow that
infinite, absolute things distinct as regards themselves
as wholes would be corrupted, and infinites would be
generated; as can be deduced through the third prin-
cipal reason previously stated; all of which are impos-
sible, and consequently a point is not such an indivisible
thing.

I prove this same conclusion through theological
reasons. First thus: every absolute thing distinct as
regards itself as a whole from another absolute thing,


10


20


25


30


20


25


30


16 THE SACRAMENT OF THE ALTAR


of which it is not subject nor effect, nor conversely,
God can create without the second thing.


But if a point be such an indivisible thing, it is mani-
fest that a line as regards itself as a whole is distin-
guished from a point; for it is manifest that a line is
not a part of a point, nor is a point a part of a line,
nor again is a line the subject of a point, as was proved
before; and conversely a point is not the subject of a
line. Moreover, a line is not the cause of a point, nor
conversely; as is obvious by a survey of all classes of
causes; therefore, God can of His absolute power
make a line without any point.


Then I ask, whether that line is finite or infinite. If
it be finite and without any point; it is consequently
needless to posit a point to terminate a line, and yet it
is not posited by virtue of another by those who thus
posit it. If, however, that line be not terminated nor
finite, and is in the nature of things per casum; it,
therefore, is infinite, which obviously is manifestly
false; for that line will not by virtue of this be greater,
or longer because that point is separated or destroyed;
therefore, in no mode will there be that infinite, no
matter to what extent all the points may be destroyed.
Moreover, if all the points be destroyed by God, and
the line is saved; I ask whether or not that line is con-
tinuous. If it is, and not through a point, for it is not
per casum; there is, therefore, a continuous line with-
out any point, and consequently a point is needlessly
posited there. If it be not continuous; I ask whether
any part of it be continuous, in which case the pre-
ceding argument applies, or else no part is continuous;
from which it follows that there is some line which is
not composed of continua, which is impossible.


THE SACRAMENT OF THE ALTAR 17


Similarly, that line is continuous or discrete; if con-
tinuous, the thesis is established; if discrete, then each
part is divided into a quantum infinite as regards all its
parts, which is impossible. But this reason proves that
a line is sufficiently continuous and finite through its
proper nature without any other thing added to it; and
consequently, since a point ought not to be posited by
virtue of another, a point is needlessly posited to be
such an indivisible thing.

If it be said that God can not of His absolute power
make a line without a point; on the contrary, when
any absolute thing can through nature be made with-
out many things separately so that it may be without
any of them singly, that thing can be made through
the divine power without all of them joined together
so that none of them may be with it; which is espe-
cially true, when these things as regards themselves as
wholes are really distinct and neither of them is an
effect or an accident of the other; as is the case of the
point and of the line. If the point be such an indivis-
ible thing, (but this line can through nature be with-
out this point and that point and so of others and so
of any,) God can, therefore, make this without any
point; and so the thesis is established.


Moreover, if that, which essentially depends on
something as an effect depends on a cause and an acci-
dent on its subject, can be separated from that through
divine power; much more firmly can God make that,
which does not depend on another either as a whole on
a part or as an accident on its subject or as an effect
on another, without that.


But an accident in the sacrament of the altar de-
pends before the separation on a substance as if on a


15


20


25


30


10


15


20


25


30


18 THE SACRAMENT OF THE ALTAR


cause and on its subject; and yet through divine power
it becomes an accident without a subject; therefore,
much more firmly can the line, which does not depend
on the point either as if on its part or as if on a sub-
ject or as if on its cause, be made without it; and so
the first argument obtains.


That reason is confirmed; for, according to the Phi-
losopher in the second book of the Physics, “Quantity
is per se finite or infinite." But if a quantity were finite
through another thing, as a line is finite through points
as if through another thing, it itself would not be finite
per se but through another. In the sacrament of the
altar a quantity is separated from every substance;
therefore, a line is separated from every subject. Then
I ask about the point terminating that line, whether
or not it is separated from every subject; if so, then
that point and the line do not in any mode make one,
for they are neither one per se nor one through an acci-
dent, since neither may be receptive of the other; and
consequently the line can not otherwise be terminated
through a point, unless as water is terminated by a
solid body; namely, earth or something similar, which
can not correspond to a point.


But if a point may not be without a subject, and it is
manifest that it is not subjectively in a substance; since
it may not be there unless the body of Christ, in which
a point can not be posited; that, therefore, is subjec-
tively in a line, but this is impossible as was proved
before; for if it were subjectively in a line or in some
part of a line, as if in a primary and adequate subject
and not only through a part, as this whiteness is said
to be in Sortes; for it is in one part of Sortes, a point
might be able to be separate in place and in situation


THE SACRAMENT OF THE ALTAR 19


from no part of a subject, say, a line or a part of a line,
as was affirmed before; which is manifestly false, as
was proved before.


By virtue of the previous statements and many oth-
ers, which can be adduced, those positing might say
that nothing is simply indivisible in things through the
creation of all parts really distinct except substances
separate from matter and principally the rational soul
and its accidents; and that a point is not a thing indi-
visible, positive and absolute, really distinct from a
line and every quantity. But they might say that any
thing divisible in itself is formally finite, terminated
and continuous; if it be continuous without any other
thing added to it, it is causally terminated, finite, and
continuous by God and other causes per se placing it
in being, whatever may be those causes; whence this
line without any other thing added to it. Indeed, if
any other thing were destroyed and this line were pre-
served by God, it would truly be finite, terminated and
continuous; and, indeed, since such an indivisible thing
may not be posited by virtue of others, it seems as im-
possible as superfluous to posit that a point is such an
indivisible thing.

And if it is asked: What is a point? Whether it
is a thing divisible or an indivisible? Which must be
answered thus by saying, ‘a point is something’ or ‘a
point is a thing’ or anything else of the kind. Ifa
point stand for something so that it may have precisely
the force of a name and may not embrace as an equiv-
alent one compounded of a noun and a verb, or some-
thing very similar which can represent a supposition
for a verb according to a property of speech; it ought
to be conceded that a point is something and that a


10


20


25


30


20


29


30


20 THE SACRAMENT OF THE ALTAR


point is a thing, and this because it ought to be con-
ceded that a point is a line or a point is a quantity; for
then this name ‘point’ will be equivalent to this ‘a line
of such or such length,’ or ‘a line not farther length-
ened or extended,’ or to some whole compounded of a
noun and a verb with an intervening conjunction or
adverb or this pronoun ‘quae’; according to which it
is pleasing to give diverse definitions expressing some
characteristic of that name ‘point.’ And indeed, as
this predicate ‘a divisible thing’ is predicated of such
a subject and consequently of a composite of an ad-
jective and a substantive, so it is predicated of a
point.

Whence, as some say that this name ‘privation’ is
equivalent in significance to this whole ‘subjectum pri-
vatum’; and by virtue of this, as they concede this,
'subjectum privatum’ is matter; so they concede this,
‘privation’ is matter. So if this name ‘point’ is equiv-
alent in signification to this whole, ‘a line not farther
lengthened’ or to something similar; of which one part
may be a line, and other parts may be some adjectives
or a verb connected with line, this pronoun ‘quae’ in-
tervening, or another similar. As this is conceded, ‘a
line is divisible,’ so this is conceded according to the
virtue of signification, ‘a point is a line,’ ‘a point is di-
visible.” For whatever is true of this name ‘line,’ when
used significatively, is true of this name ‘point’ when
used significatively, and this by speaking according to
the virtue of signification; yet this, notwithstanding
that one proposition, in which this name ‘point’ is sub-
stituted, could be per se; and another, in which this
name ‘line’ is posited, will not be per se, and con-
versely.


THE SACRAMENT OF THE ALTAR 21


Just as whatever is predicated of one of the con-
vertibles, when used significatively, is true of the rest
when used significatively, and yet one of them per se
and not the rest. Whence, this is per se in the first
mode, ‘every man is an animal,’ and not this, ‘every
risible is an animal.” But if this name ‘point’ will be
equivalent in signification to some composite of a noun
or a verb or a conjunction or an adverb and this pro-
noun ‘qui,’ or of a composite of an oblique case and
a verb, which according to a property of common
speech can not express, speaking grammatically, a sup-
position for a verb; consequently, too, any language, in
which it is posited, is not according to a property, but
is figurative speech and can be reduced to a figure
which is called by the grammarians 'hypallage, of
which they say that hypallage is the conversion of cases
or of a construction or sometimes of a whole sentence.


So it ought to be conceded that 'a point is an indivis-
ible thing’ and that ‘a point does not have parts,’ and
anything else of the kind. But those propositions and
similar ones must not be conceded according to a
property of common speech, as proper propositions
must not be disposed of through any grammatical fig-
ure; and consequently in the investigation of reality
it must not be argued from these, unless they are taken
according to the sense which they have according to
the intention of the authors; but they must be conceded
under that sense, which they have from this, that they
are disposed of through the aforesaid figure; for this
reason, namely, that one expression is posited in place
of one form of language or of a composite of many ex-
pressions, and at the same time with this it is necessary
to convert the language by transposing and even by


15


20


25


30


15


20


25


30


22 THE SACRAMENT OF THE ALTAR


changing sometimes one part of the language into an-
other, and sometimes one expression into another, and
a case into a case, or one grammatical accident into
another, or in a similar mode by conversion; that the
sense of this proposition, ‘a point is indivisible,’ may
be this, ‘a line is not farther lengthened,’ of which,
however, each part is divisible; or another similar
sense according as one is pleased to explain the pre-
vious proposition. But the sense of this proposition,
‘a point is divisible,’ may be that or some similar sense;
for whatever part of the line is taken, it is still proper
to take the more remote.


And as it is said of these propositions, so it must
be said of similar propositions; and not only is this
true of this name ‘point’; but it is also true of all ver-
bal names and all names formed from adverbs, con-
junctions, pronouns, prepositions, and in general of all
syncategorematics, and in general of all, which do not
precisely have the virtue of a name; so that they can
not be the extremes of a proposition separated by a
copula without any figure and a property of common
speech. And according to this, all such: ‘action is in
passion,’ ‘motion is in the mobile,’ ‘likeness is in the
similar,’ ‘whiteness is the terminus of motion,’ ‘every
thing is produced through production,’ ‘fire makes
warm by heating,’ and innumerable propositions of a
similar kind, which are found in the statements of the
philosophers and of the Saints and even in Sacred
Scriptures, must be figuratively disposed of through
some grammatical figure. Nor is it inconsistent to
concede that the philosophers and the Saints spoke thus
figuratively, since many such may be found in Sacred
Scripture; not however by accepting the statements of


THE SACRAMENT OF THE ALTAR 23


Sacred Scripture in a spiritual sense but even in a lit-
eral sense.


Indeed, even the popular and common mode of
speaking frequently employs such figurative expres-
sions; as can be proved through the statements of the
grammarians treating of such. Whence, not only the
expression can be transferred from a proper to an im-
proper signification, but even sometimes terms are
given which have no proper signification, such as they
have when first instituted. And as a translation is
made according to the grammarians for a threefold
cause: sometimes for the sake of metre as in the poets;
sometimes for the sake of ornament as in rhetorical
speech; sometimes for the sake of necessity, either
brevity or utility, as in philosophy; and in all of these
ways a translation is made in theology. So the appli-
cation of such names, whether they be abstract or con-
crete, is made for a three-fold cause; namely, for the
sake of metre, ornament, and utility or brevity. Al-
though from the previous causes many errors occasion-
ally originate among the simple minded, who wish to
accept all the statements of the philosophers and of
the Saints according to a property of common speech,
when they must be taken figuratively.


The second principal division. But a certain Doc-
tor argues first thus against the previous statements.
It follows from that opinion that sudden generation,
which is not per se the terminus of a continuum,
will be nothing or at least in nothing; for it does not
have any other positive measure, and so is it of illumi-
nation and of all sudden changes, which are not per se
terminations of motion. And although they can escape
from the changes, which are the terminations of mo-

5


10


15


20


25


30


10


15


20


25


30


24 THE SACRAMENT OF THE ALTAR


tions and happen in an instant, as in nothing, or the
privation of continuity in the privation of continuity;
yet concerning these it seems absurd; for they are not
the terminations of the continuity of some continuum ;
for they are by no means characteristic of any con-
tinuum, either positively or privatively.

Moreover, in the first book of the Posteriores, the
ground of the line is from points; that is, a point falls
within the essential ground of the line, which is called
the ground according to line in the first mode of speak-
ing per se; but no privation pertains per se to the essen-
tial ground of a positive.


In the third place; it follows from the same, that,
if a point is only privation, a line will be only privation
and surface and body; for the terminate is always lim-
ited through a terminant, and a positive does not essen-
tially include privation.

In the fourth place; Aristotle in the Categories
seems to be in opposition to that opinion, where he
says that parts of a line are terminated at a point as
if at a termination; but the terminus is always other
than that which is terminated at itself; therefore, a
point is such an indivisible thing.


In the fifth place; the philosopher in the first book
of the Physics says that ‘an indivisible terminus is not
infinite’; according to this he affirms that a point, be-
cause it is indivisible, is neither finite nor infinite.


In the sixth place; the philosopher in the fourth
book of the Physics, where he proves that place is not
body, says that we do not have one difference of point
and of place; therefore, according to him a point is
something distinct from divisible things.


THE SACRAMENT OF THE ALTAR 25


In the seventh place; according to the philosopher
in the second book of the Physics, he says that “they
touch each other whose extremes are together” ; there-
fore, the two extremes of two lines touching each other
are at the same time; but no two parts of these lines
are at the same time, nor are the lines themselves at
the same time; therefore, besides the lines and their
parts, there are others, which are at the same time,
which can not be unless indivisible points.

In the eighth place; in the fifth and the sixth book
of the Physics he says that those are continuous of
which the extremes are one; therefore, the two ex-
tremes of two halves in one line are one; but it is man-
ifest that neither those halves nor any parts of them
are one; therefore, besides those there are some which
are one.

In the ninth place; the philosopher in the same place
posits, that a line is divisible and a point indivisible, and
this is proved through this, that a line is not composed
of points, nor is any continuum composed of indivis-
ibles; which would be futile unless there could be such
indivisibles other than continua.

In the tenth place; the philosopher says in the same
place that, since however an impartible is indivisible,
it is necessary for a whole to touch, et cetera; from
which it is obvious that he posits some such indivisible.

Innumerable statements of such a character might
be adduced by virtue of which it seems that it may be
in accordance with the intention of the philosopher to
posit such indivisible things really distinct from divis-
ible things.

The third principal division responds to the reasons;
but because another way of solving could appear from


10


20


25


30


15


20


25


30


26 THE SACRAMENT OF THE ALTAR


the solution of the previous statements; I, therefore,
omit those arguments for the sake of brevity, and I
reply to these.

As regards the first; I say that an instant is not
such an absolute thing really distinct from every divis-
ible thing, which can be proved in various ways.


First; because it does not have any primary subject
in which it may be able to be in a primary and ade-
quate subject as if an accident in its subject, as is obvi-
ous inductively.


In the second place; because then God might not be
able to make time to exist, unless he could necessarily
produce infinite things as regards themselves distinct
wholes and corrupt the same.


In the third place; because such things, when pro-
duced, would not be able naturally to be destroyed; for
they could not be destroyed either through the corrup-
tion of their subject or through the absence of their
preserving cause, or through the induction of their
contrary.

In the fourth place; because, if there were such a


thing, it could be in a genus per se, which is manifestly
false.


In the fifth place; because God can preserve at the
same time in the nature of things all things of the same
ground, since they may not repel one another; there-
fore, God could bring it to pass that all past instants
might be now, which however are infinite.


In the sixth place, because God may be able to make
an instant apart from any subject of its own, which is
impossible.


For the sake of brevity I pass by the presentation


THE SACRAMENT OF THE ALTAR 27


of those reasons; but I say that neither change nor
generation is such an indivisible thing. And conse-
quently, therefore, as regards the previous statements
that all such expressions are figurative and metaphori-
cal: ‘an instant is indivisible,’ ‘generation is in an in-
stant,’ ‘sudden change is in an instant,’ ‘generation is
sudden,’ ‘substantial form is a terminus of generation,’
‘to have been changed is a terminus of motion,’ and
any other of the kind; because in all such formal ex-
pressions in place of the other extreme of the proposi-
tion, one name is posited which has not only the force
of a name in signification, but has the force of a noun
and of a verb, or has the force of something composed
of diverse terms, which compounded according to
a property of common speech can not express a sup-
position for a verb, nor be the extreme of a proposition
distinct from the other extreme and a copula.


Whence, so far as this is concerned; it is similar
of such expressions, as it would be if there were one
name put in to signify that which signifies ‘tunc bene,’
say, A; according to a property of common speech
it would not be well said, ‘tunc bene est.’ So it would
not be well said, ‘A is something’; yet there might be
such a saying, ‘A is something’ to be accepted, as if
a metaphorical and figurative expression that might be
equivalent to this, ‘that, which is tunc bene, is some-
thing,’ or any other of a like kind. So I say of such,
‘generation is sudden,’ and of any other of a like kind,
that they are not proper expressions but figurative;
and it is from this, that this name ‘instant’ and this
name ‘generation,’ and any other of a like kind, are
not finite names having finite signification, as if they
signify precisely certain things for which they may


10


20


25


30


10


15


20


25


30


28 THE SACRAMENT OF THE ALTAR


have to substitute, according to the mode in which such
names as ‘angel,’ ‘whiteness,’ ‘blackness,’ ‘heat,’ ‘cold,’
have finite significations; but there are certain deriva-
tives from verbs or other parts of formal speech or
similar to such, which are not instituted, unless for the
sake of metre, or ornament, or for the sake of brevity
of speech.


And, therefore, as many statements in poetry and
in an ornate mode of speaking must not be quoted un-
less they be explained and interpreted; so many state-
ments must not be accepted for the sake of brevity ac-
cording to a property of common speech, but according
to the intention of the authors saying these things, who
spoke figuratively by virtue of the cause stated; and
this, because such were sufficiently well known in their
times, that they were not true according to a property
of common speech, although some later writers have
ignored this.


Whence, I say that this proposition, ‘generation is in
an instant,’ must not be accepted under the meaning
which it signifies, as if one thing may be in another;
as through this proposition, ‘water is in a vase,’ it is
denoted that one thing is in another in a distinct thing;
whence, in distributing through all the modes in which
this proposition ‘in’ is taken equivocally, of which
the philosopher speaks in book four of the Physics, it
is obvious that according to none of those can it be
said that generation is in an instant; but this proposi-
tion, ‘generation is in an instant,’ ought to be accepted
under this meaning, ‘when something is generated, a
part is not generated before a part, but the whole is
generated at the same time’; that this brief proposition,
‘generation is in an instant,’ may be posited for the


THE SACRAMENT OF THE ALTAR 29


sake of brevity in place of that long formal expression,
‘when something is generated, a part is not generated
before a part but the whole at the same time.’
Similarly this proposition, ‘motion is in time,’ ought
not to be accepted under that meaning which it signifies
according to the form of the proposition; namely, that
one thing is in another thing really distinct from it,
but it ought to be accepted under this meaning, ‘when
something is moved, it acquires one part before an-
other, or it acquires one before another without inter-
ruption,’ or under such a meaning, ‘when something
is moved, it acquires or loses one thing after another,
co-existing at the same time with a movable first
acquiring one after another,’ or in some such meaning
as that brief formal expression, ‘motion is in time,’
is posited in place of such a long formal expression or
of some very similar expression. And when it is
said that according to the preceding statements, ‘gen-
eration would be nothing,’ I say that ‘generation is
something’ under this meaning, ‘when something is
generated, one whole form is acquired at the same time
and not a part before a part is added to matter.’
And under a meaning opposed to this, this is false,
‘generation is nothing.’ And if it be said, “generation
is not per se the terminus of a continuum, nor is it
something continuous’; then it is nothing. For every-
thing, which is in these inferiors, is a continuum or
part of a continuum. It must be said that, according
to the virtue of common speech and according to every
property of common speech, that that proposition is
true, ‘everything, which is in these inferiors, is per se
one and a continuum or the terminus of a continuum’ ;
- for the other part is true; namely, “everything one per


10


15


20


25


30


10


15


20


25


30


30 THE SACRAMENT OF THE ALTAR


se in these inferiors is a continuum’; for there is
nothing in these inferiors except a continuum, unless
perchance the rational soul may be included with these
inferiors. And, therefore, if this proposition, ‘genera-
tion is something,’ were true according to a property
of common speech, this would be true according to a
property of common speech, ‘generation is continuous’ ;
but neither is true according to a property of common
speech; and there is a reason why this is not true ac-
cording to a property of common speech, ‘generation
is continuous or the terminus of a continuum.’ Nor
is it true according to the meaning of the authors; for
they understand this, ‘when something is generated,
one part of the form is acquired mediately before an-
other or before something of the same ground was
acquired.’ And, therefore, it must not be imagined
that generation may be something positive or priv-
ative really distinct from every continuum and from
every permanent thing.


On the contrary, according to a property of com-
mon speech, neither of these is true, ‘generation is
something,’ ‘generation is nothing,’ whether generation
is negation or privation; as any one of these is not true
according to a property of common speech, ‘man is
something,’ ‘man is nothing,’ whether negation or pri-
vation; and this by accepting significatively all the
terms; for according to a property of common speech
such an abstract ‘generatio’ ought not any more to be
formed from this verb ‘generari,’ than such an abstract
‘hominitas’ from this accusative case ‘hominem.’ And,
therefore, through a similar mode through which you
might reply to such questions raised about an abstract
corresponding precisely to this accusative case ‘homi-


THE SACRAMENT OF THE ALTAR Sll


nem.’ What may such humanity be? What is human-
ity? Is humanity either something or nothing, or is
it a thing? I reply to such questions; generation is
either something or nothing, and so of others; for
thus even such questions are not proper according to a
property of common speech; but if they ought to be
accepted, they ought to be accepted according to the
good sense of those using. So I say of such, whether
‘generation may be something, and of similar ques-
tions.


And in general, I say proportionately of all abstracts,
which are formed from adverbs, prepositions, verbs,
conjunctions, and in general of syncategorematics and
of other abstracts for which their concretes stand; not
for those for which their concretes stand, as if they
might be able to stand for those for which their own
concretes stand, unless they may equally include in
signification something syncategorematic. Whatever
is conceded of a concrete, ought to be conceded accord-
ing to a property of common speech of an abstract.


And, therefore, as Aristotle concedes this, ‘man
runs’; so he would concede this, ‘humanity runs,’ un-
less humanity may precisely signify form. And so it
may be said that whatever is predicated of any ab-
stract, if it be truly predicated, is predicated of that
per se in the first mode. It must be said that that prop-
osition is simply false. For if that proposition thus
accepted were true, all such would be false: “deity is
seen by the blessed,’ ‘deity is really distinguished from
creatures,’ ‘deity is omnipotent,’ “humanity is in the na-
ture of things,’ ‘humanity is unible with a supposition
for a verb,’ ‘humanity is distinguished from angel,’
and many such; since they may not be per se in the


15


20


25


30


10


20


25


30


32 THE SACRAMENT OF THE ALTAR


first mode; and yet it is manifest that they may be
true and that many of them fall under faith, so that
the opposite are heretical.


Whence, neither among the philosophers nor among
the ancient Saints nor among others, is it found that
they have posited such a distinction between an abstract
and a concrete, as the modernist make. But among
the ancient writers there have been many synonyms
with their concretes, and many abstracts were not nec-
essarily considered according to a property of common
speech; but they could become formed only by virtue
of any of the three causes previously mentioned. And,
therefore, I do not censure the ancients, because they
formed such abstracts for the sake of utility and metre,
or the embellishment of common speech, or brevity.
And this was sufficiently convenient for them, for it
was about a thing sufficiently well known to them; at
least to the wise, especially to Aristotle. And indeed
Aristotle cared less about a mode of speaking; from
which the thing was well known, as is obvious in the
first book of the Physics, that he had moderate solici-
tude about names. And indeed many fall into various
errors by virtue of this, that they accept the passages
of the ancients as they sound according to the letter
and according to a property of common speech, which
intent, however, the ancients have not held.


Consequently, it ought to be said according to the
previous statements that all such propositions are im-
proper ; ‘aditas is something,’ ‘abietas is relation,’ ‘aqui-
etas is respect,’ ‘haectitas is distinct from nature,’ and
so of many such, which are accepted by the modern-
ists. Nor are they to be accepted according to a prop-
erty of common speech any more than if from these


THE SACRAMENT OF THE ALTAR 33


adverbs: ‘dum,’ ‘cum,’ ‘tunc,’ ‘iam,’ and from other
adverbs; and from such conjunctions: ‘si,’ ‘et,’ ‘vel,’
‘at,’ 'quia'; and from others such abstracts may be
formed: “dummitas,’ ‘cummitas,’ ‘tunctitas,’ ‘iammitas,’
'siitas, ‘attitas,’ ‘etitas,’ ‘quiitas.’ And by virtue of
this, such propositions may be formed: ‘dummitas is
something,’ ‘siitas is something,’ ‘velitas is God,’ and
so of others.


As regards the second point, I say that the philos-
opher does not intend that a point falls within the
definition of a line, as if something of the essence of
a line, or as if signifying something of the essence of a
line and distinct from a line. But he intends that in
a definition expressing something characteristic of the
same name ‘line,’ this name ‘point’ is posited, and ac-
cording to the famous definition of a line, whether or
not that be a true definition of a line; which however
is not a true definition except according to the intention
of the one judging correctly of a point and a line. Nor
is it, however, to be understood that a point may be
any privation totally distinct from a line, as men com-
monly imagine; which it is impossible to imagine;
namely, that a point may be something, either a priva-
tive or a positive, distinct as regards itself as a whole,
or not the same as a line. On the contrary, according
to a property of common speech or of signification, it
must not be conceded that it is a positive, nor that it
is a privative.

And if it be said that these are contradictories: ‘a
point is a positive,’ ‘a point is not a positive’; then, ac-
cording to a property of common speech, one is true
and the other is false. I say that, as according to prop-
erty, these are not contradictories: ‘to see a man is


15


20


25


30


15


20


25


30


34 THE SACRAMENT OF THE ALTAR


something,’ ‘to see a man is not something’ ; nor these:
“it does not have farther extension is something,’ ‘it
does not have farther lengthening is not something,’
‘a point is something,’ ‘a point isnot something’; and
this by accepting all the terms significatively. And by
virtue of these neither of them is to be conceded ac-
cording to the virtue of common speech. And this
with the preceding statements may be said according
to that mode of positing of those who say that this
name ‘point’ is equivalent in signification to one aggre-
gate of many expressions, which can not express a
supposition for a verb according to grammatical sci-
ence; and, therefore, no language is proper, in which
it is posited, that in speaking grammatically it may be
substituted with respect to a verb. But if another
mode of positing concerning that, which was stated
before, be held; it must be so conceded that a point is
something positive, and a point is a quantum, and a
line is divisible; for it is equivalent to this: ‘so much
quantum,’ or ‘something is of so much extension,’ and
‘a quantum is divisible,’ and so of others.


As regards the third point, I concede proportion-
ately of a line and of a surface as of a point; whence,
as according to one mode of speaking this must be con-
ceded, ‘a point is divisible,’ so this, ‘a line is a body.’
But according to another mode of speaking, as this is
not proper, ‘a point is something,’ so neither this, ‘a line
is something,’ nor this, ‘a surface is something’; but
each of them is stated figuratively and must be ac-
cepted.


And when it is said that a terminate is defined


through a terminant, it must be said that that proposi-
tion, as it is formed, is false. Whence, it must not be


THE SACRAMENT OF THE ALTAR 35


imagined that there may be some terminate there, and
by virtue of that terminate there may be another ter-
minant distinct from a terminate, whether a privative
or a positive terminating that terminate; but there is
there only a mode of expression of names signifying
the same things in different grammatical modes, as
these two in oblique cases ‘hominis’ and ‘homini’ sig-
nify the same things, yet in entirely diverse grammati-
cal modes.


And there is no inconsistency concerning such
names, if one falls within a definition expressing some-
thing characteristic of another name. For thus this
name ‘entity’ falls within a definition expressing some
characteristic of that name ‘unum, and of that name
‘verum,’ and of that name ‘bonum’; and yet nothing is
signified through one name that may not be signified
through the rest, although it is understood through one
name in an oblique case as well as in a direct case and
through another name not unless in a direct case;
whence, we know through this name ‘verum,’ that there
is as much signified in an oblique case as in a direct
case; for this that we understand, 'entity is knowable
and cognizable by the intellect. But through this name
‘entity’ it is not signified except in a direct case only,
and indeed in the proposition it might be able to be
conceded either properly or figuratively according to a
diverse mode of positing that those names ‘terminant’
and 'terminate' are significative; that 'the same' is
‘terminant’ and ‘the same’ is ‘terminate,’ and ‘the same’
terminates itself; as ‘the same’ understands itself, or
‘the same’ is that which is ‘the same’ to itself. And
when it is said that a positive never includes essentially
a privation, it is obvious; for this must not be con-


5


10


15


20


25


30


10


15


20


25


30


36 THE SACRAMENT OF THE ALTAR


ceded, ‘a point is privation, ‘a surface is privation, and
this according to a property of common speech and
according to the fancy of those who imagine that pri-
vation may be something apart from a thing in any
mode whatever distinct from positive things.

Whence, those arguments are cited or made contrary
to that fancy which imagines, that a point may be
apart from a thing, a certain privation distinct from a
line as regards itself as a whole in every mode imag-
inable. According to which intent that Doctor seems
to reject that opinion in opposition to which he offers
the arguments touched upon before.

But that opinion does not thus posit, nor does it posit
that a point is privation any more than that it is a pos-
itive; although in a definition expressing some charac-
teristic of the same name, one name ‘negative’ or a con-
cept ‘negative’ may necessarily be posited. And, there-
fore, according to the virtue of common speech either
it must be conceded that a point may be an absolute
thing, a quantum and divisible, or that every formal
expression is improper in which this name ‘point’ is
posited for one extreme distinct from the other ex-
treme and from a copula; and no such expression ought
to be accepted according to property but as if stated
figuratively, and the arguments of the Doctors in no
mode proceed contrary to that mode of positing.

As regards the fourth point, which was touched upon
after the arguments of the Doctor, it can be said in va-
rious modes that the philosopher there as well as in the
book of the Physics as also in other places where he
speaks of a point, was speaking according to the fa-
mous opinion according to his custom; because he
adapted himself to the mode of speaking of others,


THE SACRAMENT OF THE ALTAR 37


when he was treating a matter not according to inten-
tion. Whence, concerning his passages touching upon
any matter which he treated not according to intention,
it does not seem that he exercised much care; for he
then frequently spoke as many do; and, therefore,
where he treated such matters according to intention,
he frequently said the opposite; as he says in the book
of the Categories that “genera and species are secon-
dary substances.” But in the seventh book of the
Metaphysics, where he inquires according to intention
whether ‘genus’ and ‘species, generally universals, may
be substances, he decides according to intention that
no universal is a substance; so is it in the propo-
sition.

Nowhere is it found that Aristotle according to in-
tention thoroughly treated that question, whether a
point may be an indivisible thing really distinct from
every divisible thing. Therefore, all his passages,
which affirm that a point is such another thing, must
be explained and interpreted, because either he spoke
as many do or according to that famous opinion or for
the sake of an example or figuratively; or diverse
passages must be explained in different ways, as will
be obvious further on of diverse passages.


Whence, the philosopher in the book of the Catego-
ries does not intend that one absolute thing really dis-
tinct from parts of a line may mutually connect parts
of a line, and by virtue of this a line may be called
continuous; for then a line would not be continuous
through itself or through some of its parts, but through
one thing totally distinct from a line; and it might be
said with the same facility that two pieces of wood
are continuous through one stone. Nor can it any


15


20


25


30


10


15


20


25


30


38 THE SACRAMENT OF THE ALTAR


more be said that a point, if there be such a thing, may
be the terminus of a line than that a stone is the ter-
minus of wood, since the distinction between a line and
a point may be as much or greater than the distinction
between stone and wood.


Nor can it any more be said that a point may be an
accident of a substance existing in a line than that a
stone is in wood. And, therefore, the philosopher un-
derstands through this proposition, ‘parts of a line are
joined at one common terminus,’ this proposition,
‘nothing is intermediate between parts of a line and
they make one per se’; so that two are required for
this, that ‘a line may be continuous’; namely, that
‘nothing may be in situation intermediate between parts
of a line.’ And by virtue of this when one body is in
one situation and another body is in another situation
and between those bodies there is in situation another
intermediate, those two bodies are not continuous.


A second statement is required; namely, that they
make one per se, and by virtue of this the contiguous
are not continuous; and so through this proposition,
‘parts of a line are joined at a point as if at a common
terminus,’ and through similar propositions the phi-
losopher understands that copulative, ‘nothing is inter-
mediate between parts of a line and they themselves
make one line per se.’ And when it is said that a ter-
minus is always distinguished from a terminate; it
must be said that, if this name ‘terminus’ is precisely
substituted for another thing so that it may have pre-
cisely the force of the name ‘category’ in signification,
that it may not be equivalent to any other part of lan-
guage nor to any composite of such a part; and sim-
ilarly this name ‘terminate’; then it might be able to


THE SACRAMENT OF THE ALTAR 39


be conceded that ‘terminus’ is really distinguished from
‘terminate,’ if one be a ‘terminus’ and another a ‘ter-
minate.’ But in taking them thus; this is false, ‘a
point is a terminus,’ and ‘a line is terminated through
a point.’ If those names ‘terminant’ and ‘terminate’
signify differently; then that proposition can be de-
nied or conceded according as one is pleased to express
in various modes the significations of terms.

Yet I say this, that it must not be imagined that a
line may be a certain thing distinct from a thing which
is a terminus or which may be a terminus; but from
this itself, that ‘a line is such a thing and is not farther
lengthened,’ it is said to be terminated there. As when
we say that whiteness is the terminus of whitening
and substantial form is the terminus of generation, it
must not there be imagined that where there is one
thing which may be whitening and generation, and
afterwards or at the same time one other thing which
is whiteness and form; for no contradiction appears
but that God might be able to make form without any
other thing even in a subject; nor does it appear why
that thing ought to be destroyed if it be posited. But
through this proposition, ‘form is the terminus of gen-
eration,’ this ought to be understood, ‘when something
is generated, form is added de novo to pre-existing
matter’; and as it is said of this, so it must be said
proportionately of many other similar propositions.

As regards the fifth and the following point, it can
be said that the philosopher speaks according to the
famous opinion which posits that a point is such an-
other thing, not according to a proper opinion.

As regards the seventh point, I say that this term
‘simul’ is accepted in various ways. Sometimes, ‘simul’

6


10


20


25


30


10


20


25


30


40 THE SACRAMENT OF THE ALTAR


is equivalent to this whole, ‘nothing is intermediate,’
so that it may be the sense of such a proposition, ‘these
are at the same time’; that is, ‘nothing is intermediate
between them.’ And so this must be conceded, ‘those
touch each other whose extremes are at the same time’
under this sense, ‘those touch each other between which
nothing is intermediate.’ Sometimes ‘simul’ is equiv-
alent in signification to this, ‘not to be separate in sit-
uation’; and so no two things, which may be touching
each other in any mode whatever, are at the same time;
nor does the philosopher wish this. But through this
proposition, ‘those touch each other between which
nothing is intermediate, he understands this, as was
said, ‘those touch each other between which nothing
is intermediate,’ and if there could be such indivisibles
in these touching, these would be at the same time; and
this by taking this term “simul’ in the second mode; for
they would not be separate in place nor in situation.
And when it is said that no parts of two lines are
at the same time; it must be said that in accepting
‘simul’ in the second mode it is true, and this is not
required for this, that some touch each other; yet
in accepting ‘simul’ in the first mode parts of a line
are at the same time, for nothing is intermediate be-
tween them.


As regards the eighth point; when it is said that
those are continuous whose extremes are one, it is
manifest that that proposition ought to be explained;
for it is false according to the virtue of common speech
since it involves a contradiction, as that involves a con-
tradiction, ‘more men are one man’; for, if they are
extremes, they are more, and consequently are not one.
Therefore, I say that the understanding of the philos-


THE SACRAMENT OF THE ALTAR 41


opher is this, ‘those are continuous which make one
per se,’ that is, ‘they are not separate,’ or ‘between
which nothing is intermediate.’


As regards the ninth point; when it is said that a
point is indivisible, it must be said that the philosopher
either was speaking according to the famous opinion
or the proposition must be explained, as was stated
before.


When it is said for confirmation that the philoso-
pher proves that no quantum is composed of indivis-
ibles, it must be said that it is true; and that, since it
may be negative, does not infer any such affirmative,
‘something is indivisible.’

And when it is said that it would have been useless
to prove so diffusedly that a continuum is not com-
posed of indivisibles unless there were some such indi-
visibles, it must be said that it is not useless to prove
one conclusion through diverse intermediates, although
it might be able to be proved sufficiently through one
intermediate. Whence, an intermediate was sufficient
to prove that there is no indivisible, but however oth-
ers would not be superfluous, and this especially in that
case; for to prove that nothing is indivisible in these
inferiors can not be accomplished except through sub-
tle reasons, which mathematicians and others less
skilled in metaphysics and logic can not comprehend.
But to prove that a continuum is not composed of in-
divisibles through other intermediates, even if there
were such indivisibles, can be accomplished through
reasons more apparent to mathematicians and to all
others, as will be shown elsewhere; and, therefore, the
reasons are not superfluous.


5


25


30


20


25


30


42 THE SACRAMENT OF THE ALTAR


As regards the tenth point; it can be said just as
about the preceding; for he was speaking according to
the famous opinion.

As regards the principal argument it is obvious, that
this, ‘a point is the terminus of a line,’ is false accord-
ing to the virtue of common speech, yet it is true ac-
cording to the sense that it alleges, as has been said.


QUESTION II


In the second place it is asked, whether a line and
a surface may really be distinguished from each other
and from a body. And it seems that they are; for they
are distinct species of quantity according to the phi-
losopher in the Categories; therefore, they are really
distinguished from each other and from a body.

As regards the opposite; as is the relation of a point
to a line so is the relation of a line to a surface, and
a surface to a body; but a point is not really distinct
from a line, as was proved in the Categories; therefore,
a line is not distinct from a surface nor a surface from
a body, and consequently a line and a surface are not
distinguished from each other or from a body.

With respect to that question, I say that a line and
a surface are not things distinct from each other and
from a body. For that a line may not be distinct from
a surface can be proved through the first, third, and
fourth reasons, and through other theological reasons
through which it is proved that a point is not an indi-
visible thing really distinct from a line; for if a line
were such another thing, it would be in some primary
and adequate subject. Similarly, there would be in-
finite lines, none of which would be a part of another.


THE SACRAMENT OF THE ALTAR 43


Similarly, God might not be able to divide one con-
tinuum unless He could create more absolute things,
and could destroy some absolute things; nor would He
be able to unite, unless He could very similarly corrupt
and produce new things. Similarly, then it does not
seem contradictory that there could be a surface with-
out a line, and consequently there could be a surface
not terminated, and yet it would be of finite length.

But that a surface could be distinct from a body can
be proved through the first theological reason; for
another primary and adequate subject can not be as-
signed to itself, as is evidently clear. Similarly, this
can be proved through the third reason, for there would
be surfaces infinite actually but potentially only finite;
for the extreme surfaces alone of a body are actually;
but the others are not except only potentially.

In opposition to those positing thus; either the parts
of the body are joined to a surface, which is in the na-
ture of things and is existent, or to a surface which
is not in the nature of things but can be. If the first
be granted; then that surface is actually, and conse-
quently there are surfaces infinite actually. If the sec-
ond be conceded, then those parts of a body are not
actually continuous but only potentially; for no parts
are actually continuous through that which is not in
the nature of things.

And then I ask, how that potentiality may be reduced
to actuality; whether when those parts are continuous
or when they are not continuous. Not in the first
mode, for then according to those writers a continuant
surface always is potentially, not actually; nor in the
second mode, for then they are not continuous. But
it may be said that that surface is not indeed said to


10


20


25


30


20


25


30


44 THE SACRAMENT OF THE ALTAR


be potentially; for it is not in the nature of things; but
because it is not separate from a body; as parts are
said to be potentially, not because they are not in the
nature of things, but because they are not separate
from a whole.

On the contrary, this does not suffice. First, be-
cause according to this such an inconsistency follows;
namely, that infinites are in the nature of things of the
same quantity. In the second place, because every-
thing, which is in the nature of things and is not part
of another, is simply actually suitable to itself, but that
surface is in the nature of things and is not a part of
another; therefore, it simply is actually.


In the third place thus; for, as that intermediate
surface is not separate from a body, so neither is the
extreme separate from a body; therefore, as the ex-
treme is actually, so that is actually. Thus, therefore,
it is obvious that, if a surface be a thing other than a
body; this inconsistency follows, that infinites of the
same quantity, of which none is part of another, are
actually.

However, the principal conclusion can be proved
through four and five reasons and through other rea-
sons which follow. For if a surface be a thing as re-
gards itself as a whole distinct from a body, there does
not appear any contradiction that God may make it
without a body, or conversely; and consequently a
body can be without any such surface, and yet it will
be finite and continuous; therefore, a surface is need-
lessly posited.


Similarly, I ask how a surface and a body make one
in the sacrament of the altar; whether they make one
per se or one through accident or one only by aggre-


THE SACRAMENT OF THE ALTAR 45


gation. The first can not be granted; for then a sur-
face would be part of a body or both would be essen-
tial parts of another, which can not be conceded. And
if it be said that a surface, although it may not be a
quantitative part of a body, is however an essential
part of a body; it is not refuted by the philosopher,
although it may be refuted, that a surface may be
a quidditative part of a body.

On the contrary, whenever something is part of an-
other, either it is of the same ground as another part
or it is of another ground. Therefore, if a surface
be a part of a body which is per se one, either it is of
the same ground as another part of a body or it is of
another ground, which also can not be conceded; for,
whenever some parts of diverse grounds make one per
se, one of them is matter or potentiality, and the other
is actuality or form; but potentiality and actuality mak-
ing one per se are never distinguished in place or situa-
tion, as is manifestly obvious; therefore, in no mode
are body and surface potentiality and actuality, and
consequently they do not make one per se.


The second also can not be granted; namely, that a
surface and a body make one by accident; for then one
would be the actuality of another, and consequently
a surface would be subjectively in a body, or con-
versely; each of which is false according to the argu-
ments set forth in the preceding question.

Nor can the third be conceded; namely, that they
make one by aggregation, since it could not then be
affirmed that a surface would otherwise be a terminus
of a body than that a vase is a terminus of water.
Then also no contradiction appears in the statement
that God might be able to make a body in the same


10


15


20


25


30


10


15


20


25


30


46 THE SACRAMENT OF THE ALTAR


place and situation without a surface, as he can make
water in the same place and situation without a vase;
and yet a body would then be an infinite continuum
without any surface; if this is conceded, it is obvious
that such a surface is posited entirely in vain.

Similarly, then before transubstantiation a surface
either would be without a substance or would be in an-
other substance, as if in a primary and adequate sub-
ject, and not in the same substance in which a body is
in a primary and adequate subject; as can be proved
through the arguments set forth in the preceding ques-
tion, and consequently there would be another sub-
stance there besides matter and form in which a body
is posited, which is a quantity subjectively.

From the preceding statements it is obvious, that a
line and a surface are not really distinguished from
each other; and because it was proved that a surface
is not distinguished from a body; therefore, neither
is a line, and consequently they are not really distin-
guished from each other or from a body.

As regards the principal argument, I say that these
concepts ‘line’ and ‘surface’ are distinct, and this suf-
fices for a distinction of species; yet notwithstanding
this, those, which are signified, are not distinct; for
‘place’ and ‘surface’ are thus distinct species, and yet
they are not really distinct; but it suffices that they sig-
nify the same in diverse modes, as the commentator
says in Book IV. of the Metaphysics concerning ‘en-
tity’ and ‘one,’ where he states that ‘entity’ and ‘one’
signify the same, but in diverse modes.

Whence, as such diversity of modes of signifying
the same thing vitiates the predication of one of an-
other, although there may be only two such modes of


THE SACRAMENT OF THE ALTAR 47


signification, namely, ‘case’ and ‘number’; so a diver-
sity of modes of signification suffices for the distinction
of species, no matter how frequently one be truly
predicated of another.

There are many arguments contrary to these which
I pass over for the present; for I have spoken of them
elsewhere in diverse places.


QUESTION III


It is asked in the third place whether a body, which
is a quantity, may be an absolute thing really distinct
from substance. Which is thus proved; for according
to the philosopher in the first book of the Posteriores,
a negative is immediate in which one category is denied
of another, as this is immediate, ‘no substance is a
quantity,’ and consequently a substance is a thing other
than a quantity.

As regards the opposite; a substance has of itself
parts; therefore, it is of itself a quantum; therefore, it
is not a quantum through another thing; and conse-
quently it is not another thing.

Regarding this question; in the first place, I shall
declare one opinion through the mode of narration; in
the second place, through the mode of demonstration;
in the third place, I shall posit the objections against
this opinion and I shall refute them.

Regarding the first, I say that quantity is not an-
other absolute thing really distinct from substance and
quality. But if this name ‘quantity’ be substituted for
another thing and have precisely the force of the name
‘categorematic’ in signification, it ought to be conceded
that any quantity is not substance but quality, so that


10


15


20


25


30


10


15


20


25


30


48 THE SACRAMENT OF THE ALTAR


quantity is predicated particularly of substance as well
as of quality; for any substance is a quantity, and any
quality is a quantity.

But the mode of positing is this: some substance is
simply not divisible into parts of the same ground,
which substance is an angel and a rational soul; but
every other substance is composed of some parts of the
same ground among themselves, although not all parts
may be of the same ground with the whole among
themselves; as also in man some parts are of the same
ground among themselves, although not all the parts
are of the same ground with man; but such as are so
constituted out of their own natures without any thing
added, that they are more, although they are not more
causally out of themselves but through their essential
causes, say, efficient and final; so out of their natures
are they constituted that they are not in the same place
and situation naturally and through created agency,
whatever may be of the absolute divine power. And
indeed from this, that they are produced by whatever
created agency they are produced, they are in a distinct
situation so that one part is separate from another in
situation and is outside another, no matter how much
no other thing may be produced with it; and if there
be another place surrounding the same product, that
product, no matter how much no other thing might
inhere in it, would be circumscriptively in that place,
so that the whole would be in a whole place and a part
in a part; and consequently by this itself it would be a
quantum; since nothing other could be quantity, con-
cerning which there is a question, than a continuous
body per se one or a thing having parts or a part
outside of a part existing circumscriptively in a place,


THE SACRAMENT OF THE ALTAR 49


if there be a place surrounding it. And so the sub-
stance itself through this alone, that it has part outside
of part without any thing advening to it, is a quantum;
and consequently for this, that it may be a quantum,
such another thing is not required. And as it is of
substance that something has such parts, so is it of any
quality, which would be a quantum without any thing
added to it; even if it could be separated from every
other thing and could have part outside of part, and
consequently this quality would not really differ from
this quantity. So, therefore, any quantity is sub-
stance, and any quantity is quality; as any substance
has part outside of part, and any quality has part out-
side of part.

In the second place, I prove this conclusion; namely,
that any substance is quantity, and in the same mode it
can be proved that any quality is quantity; so, namely,
that it may not be another distinct thing.

First in this way: God can of His own absolute
power preserve every absolute thing prior to another
absolute thing, and can destroy a posterior not by
changing that prior thing locally or in situation. There-
fore, if this substance be quantum, say, that stone, God
can of His absolute power preserve that substance and
destroy that posterior thing, which is posited as quan-
tity, not by changing the substance of that stone locally
or in situation, but with the repose of that substance;
for it does not seem necessary, so that the opposite of
this may involve a contradiction, if God wills to pre-
serve that absolute thing prior, that He be compelled
to change it from place to place.

Therefore, let it be posited that that prior thing may
be preserved without local change and that a posterior


10


15


20


25


30


10


15


20


25


30


50 THE SACRAMENT OF THE ALTAR


may be destroyed. Then I ask whether that substance
is circumscriptively in a place or is not circumscrip-
tively ina place. If the first is granted, then that sub-
stance is quantum; therefore, this is some quantity and
this is not another posterior thing; therefore, this,
‘some quantity is without quantity,’ which is false; if
it be not circumscriptively in a place.

On the contrary, I take one part of that substance
and I ask, whether or not it is either definitively or cir-
cumscriptively in the same place in which there is an-
other part. If so, then it has been changed locally, be-
cause it was not before in the same place. If it be not
in the same place, then it is in another and conse-
quently a whole is in a whole place and a part in a part;
and consequently the whole is circumscriptively in a
place, and consequently the whole is a quantum with-
out any other thing added to it.

Whence, it much more restricts the divine power by
saying that God can not preserve a thing prior without
local change of it and destroy a thing posterior, which
however follows according to the contrary opinion,
than to posit that some quantity is substance; if it be
said that that substance does not have parts except
through quantity; and, therefore, when quantity is
destroyed, it does not have part and consequently will
not be in a place circumscriptively but only definitively.

On the contrary, this proposition does not vitiate a
response; for there always follows that inconsistency,
that God of His absolute power can not preserve a
thing prior without local change by destroying the
thing posterior. Moreover, the response embraces a
falsehood; namely, that substance does not have parts
except through quantity, if quantity be another thing.


THE SACRAMENT OF THE ALTAR 51


First; because, if a whole substance is prior to a
whole quantity and the subject of it, so a part of a sub-
stance is prior to a part of a quantity and the subject
of it; therefore, parts of a substance are prior to parts
of a quantity, if quantity is a thing existing subjec-
tively in substance; therefore, substance does not have
parts precisely through another thing advening to it.
Moreover, that, which remains without another, is be-
fore this, but this part of substance is without that
quantity; therefore, it is prior to it, and for the same
reason is prior to another quantity.


If it be said that substance does not have other parts
except parts which are parts of a quantity, so that
these are not substances but are quantities, (on the con-
trary that part of a quantity is in some primary sub-
ject; therefore, either in the same primary subject in
which there is another part of quantity, or in another;
therefore, if in the same, that subject is not extended
through quantity more than the rational soul, which
is a whole in a whole body and a whole in each part;
if it be in another subject, then there are distinct parts
of quantity there say, wood may be divided into two
parts) it is manifest; that each quantity is in some
subject, and not in the same; therefore in distinct, and
consequently either a new substance is caused through
division or these substances, which are of these quan-
tities, were before division; and the proposition is
maintained.

In the second place, I argue thus: it is not more
impossible for God to make 'a thing having parts re-
ally distinct' to coexist with some whole not informing
so that a whole coexists with a whole and a part with
a part, than to make this same thing to coexist with


10


15


20


25


30


10


20


25


30


52 THE SACRAMENT OF THE ALTAR


such a whole informing. But according to those hold-
ing this opinion in common, ‘a substance having parts
really distinct coexists with a whole quantity informing
so that a whole substance is under a whole quantity,’
and ‘a part of a substance is under part of a quantity’ ;
therefore, it is possible for God to bring it to pass that
a whole substance may be coexisting with the same
quantity not informing and part with the whole. This
having been posited, this substance is truly a quantum;
for it truly has part distinct in situation from part, and
a substance is not a quantum through some other
quantity informing; for it is posited that no quantity
of a substance may inform it, but it may only coexist
with it; therefore, it is a quantum through itself; there-
fore, the substance itself is a certain quantity, which
is the thesis.


I posit the confirmation of this ground through the
statements of those holding opposite views; for accord-
ing to them, whatever may be of a respect intrinsically
advening, is said of a respect extrinsically advening,
yet it is true; but God can make extremes without such
a respect; for the respect of inherence, by which quan-
tity inheres in a subject, is a respect extrinsically ad-
vening according to those writers; therefore, God can
make these extremes without such a respect. There-
fore, God may preserve this substance of stone and
that quantity by destroying precisely that respect of
inherence. This having been posited, still this sub-
stance will have the respect of presentiality as regards
this quantity, so that a whole will be present with a
whole and a part with a part; therefore, that sub-
stance has part outside of part, and consequently would
be a quantum and yet without any quantity informing;


THE SACRAMENT OF THE ALTAR 53


therefore, the substance itself is then quantity. Those
two reasons prove that substance is truly quantum
through its substantial parts without any other thing
advening to itself, and consequently that it itself is
quantity.

From which I argue farther that there is not any
other quantity except substance or quality; for that
is needlessly accomplished through more which can be
accomplished through fewer; but all, which can be
saved through such a quantity distinct from substance
and quality, can be saved without it, as is obvious in-
ductively; therefore, such a quantity distinct from
substance and quality must not be posited. It can also
be proved through these two reasons, that quality is
quantity; since this major premise is assumed, that
God for this reason can make quality without quan-
tity, if it be another thing, since it may no more depend
on quantity than on substance. Similarly, if God can
make such quantity, which they posit, without sub-
stance; for the same reason he could make quality
without quantity, since quality no more depends on
quantity than quality on substance. I confirm the pre-
vious arguments.


It is not more inconsistent for a substance having
parts through its own self without every other thing
informing it to be in a divisible place so that a whole
thing may be in a whole place and parts in parts of a
place, than it may be inconsistent for an indivisible
thing without every thing informing it to be in a whole
place and in each part; but an indivisible thing, as an
angel and a rational soul, is a whole in a whole place
and in each part; therefore, it is not inconsistent for a
thing having parts really distinct, of such a kind is


30


10


15


20


25


30


54 THE SACRAMENT OF THE ALTAR


material substance and also many qualities, to be a
whole in a whole place and a part in a part without
every other thing advening. But if this is posited,
such a thing will truly have part outside of part, and
consequently will be quantum without any other thing
advening to it; whence they seem to detract much from
the divine power who say that God of His own abso-
lute power can not bring it to pass that one thing may
be separate from another in situation, unless He cre-
ate one other thing making those things to be separate ;
and they seem to reject the divine omnipotence more
than those who say that a substance having parts is a
quantum without any other thing advening to itself
and is circumscriptively in a place.


Again, the preceding reasons are confirmed. It is
not more inconsistent for a substance composed of
some things really distinct and created to be separate
in situation to be through itself without a thing added
to itself in a place in a mode suitable to itself, than it
is inconsistent for an indivisible substance not having
parts to be in a place in a mode suitable to itself with-
out a thing added to itself. But an angel without any
thing added to itself is in a place definitively; there-
fore, it is not inconsistent for a substance having parts
really distinct to be in a place circumscriptively with-
out any thing added to itself. But nothing is in a place
circumscriptively except a quantum; therefore, a sub-
stance can be a quantum without any thing really
distinct added to it; therefore, such another quantity
is needlessly posited.


Again, it is confirmed; for every thing, which is
present to another thing locally, is present to itself


through itself or through another intrinsic; for it has


THE SACRAMENT OF THE ALTAR 55


not been said that one thing is locally present to an-
other, unless because its end is present there locally. If,
therefore, the substance of a stone be present ina place,
it is present in a place through itself, and consequently
for the same reason parts of a substance are present in
a place through themselves, and consequently the whole
substance is through itself fundamentally and circum-
scriptively in a place; but every thing, which in itself
is circumscriptively in a place, is in itself a quantum;
therefore, substance in itself is quantum and conse-
quently is quantity. The same reason can be applied
concerning quality.


Again, the previous reasons are confirmed; for when
some are created to make one which however can not
make one, of such kind are parts of water and of air
and of many others; for sometimes the same parts
make one per se, sometimes not. If God can make
these to be distinct in place and in situation, when
they do not make one per se without any thing added
to them, God can make these same to be distinct in
place and in situation without any thing added to them,
although they make one per se; for no reason appears
why one more than the rest ought to be denied of the
divine omnipotence. But God can make this air, which
is here, and that air which is at Rome, to be distinct in
place and in situation by destroying all the absolute
accidents in them and without any quantity inhering
in them; therefore, God of His absolute power can
bring it to pass that those two bodies of air may be
united and make one body of air, and yet that they
may be distinct in place and situation without any such
thing advening to them; therefore, that air will have
part outside of part without a thing however added,

7


10


15


20


25


30


10


15


20


25


30


56 THE SACRAMENT OF THE ALTAR


and consequently will be a quantum without such a
thing added; therefore, such an added thing is need-
lessly posited for this, that air may be a quantum.


The previous reasons can be confirmed in many
other ways, which I pass by for the sake of brevity.


In the third place, it is principally argued thus ac-
cording to the Master of the Sentences in Book IV.,
Distinction XII. Accidents of such a kind, taste, color,
weight, and any other of the kind, are without a sub-
ject in the sacrament of the altar. But if quantity
were another thing bearing those qualities, those qual-
ities would not be without a subject, but would be in
a subject; on the contrary the common dictum of the
Doctors could in no mode be able to be verified, and
very incorrectly, as it seems, the determination of the
church that the accidents remain in the sacrament of
the altar without a subject; for thus only one accident
could remain without a subject, and all others would
be in a subject; therefore, a quantity would not be such
a distinct thing, et cetera. And so in carefully consid-
ering the Master and the text with the gloss on the
De Consecratione and the statements of the Saints,
there is not found a passage so apparent that by virtue
of the sacrament of the altar it may be necessary to
posit such another thing intermediate between sub-
stance and qualities, as is this against such an inter-
mediate thing bearing qualities. No mention is made
in all those places of an intermediate quantity nor is
this term even once mentioned, nor does any passage
speak of quantity, whether or not it be, except that
many seem to posit that all the qualities in the sacra-
ment of the altar are not in any subject; whence, the
Master says thus in Book IV., Distinction XIL, A:


THE SACRAMENT OF THE ALTAR 57


“Those accidents, therefore, remain,’ which he enu-
merated before; namely, taste, weight, and any other
of the kind, “subsisting per se at the celebration of
the mystery,” et cetera. However, I do not intend to
say that those who posit such a thing bearing such
accidents, of which the Saints speak and which they
seem to posit without any subject, may be heretical
or erring in the faith or about the sacrament of the
Eucharist; for they were permitted to explain such
passages; nor are all who have uttered a falsehood to
be considered in error. And as they were permitted to
explain such passages of the Doctors approved by the
church, so I shall be permitted not only to explain but
even to refute the statements of the Saints who mu-
tually condemn one another, and in no way were ap-
proved as if authorized by the church.


In the fourth place, I argue thus: no absolute acci-
dent is more simple than its primary and adequate
subject; but, if a quantity were any thing other than
substance and quality, it would be an accident. There-
fore, I ask about its primary and adequate subject,
whether it is matter or form or a composite. It is not
a composite; for a subject would be more composite
than its absolute accident, which seems false; nor is
matter its own subject, because then some absolute
accident would precede form in matter; nor is form its
own primary subject, because then matter, if it were
separated, could not be a quantum, which seems to be
false.


Similarly, dimensions precede form without limits
in matter according to the commentator; therefore,
for the same reason dimensions are limited at first in
matter. That reason is valid, as I think, if this opinion


10


15


20


25


30


10


15


20


25


30


58 THE SACRAMENT OF THE ALTAR


hold which rejects this entity distinct from matter and
form, which some posit.


In the fifth place, I argue thus: according to the
philosopher in the Categories, substance alone is sus-
ceptive of contraries; but quantity is not a substance
according to those writers, and yet it is susceptive of
contraries, which is contrary to Aristotle.


In the sixth place, it is argued thus: when a thing
becomes rare from dense, I ask whether or not there
is there another new quantity; but it is precisely the
same quantity numerically; if it is new there, then
any preceding quantity is corrupted, which seems false.
If a part be new; I ask about the subject of that
quantity, for it is necessary that there be a whole
rarefied substance or a part of it; not the whole be-
cause then the two quantities would be at the same
time, which they deny-who think thus. If a part, the
same argument follows, or that an accident might
travel from subject into subject, as would be able to be
clearly shown; but it is omitted for the sake of brev-
ity. If it be the same quantity, then it coexists in a
larger place now than before without the variation of
an absolute; but this inconsistency is posited of sub-
stance; therefore, such a quantity distinct from quality
and substance is needlessly posited.


Therefore, I say by virtue of those reasons and
many other reasons, physical as well as theological,
that quantity is not a thing really distinct from sub-
stance and quality, but any quantity is really the same
as substance, and any quantity is really the same as
quality; whence, quantity is not, unless ‘a thing having
part outside of part and having part separate from
another in situation,’ or ‘a thing existing circumscrip-


THE SACRAMENT OF THE ALTAR 59


tively in a place,’ if it be something surrounding itself.
And because some substance in itself fundamentally,
although causally by God or other extrinsic causes,
has part outside of part; it is not necessary to posit
another thing bearing one part outside of another part.
But the extrinsic causes of a thing, say, efficient and
final, are sufficient to produce things diverse, one in
one situation and another in another, without any
intermediate thing between them; therefore, the sub-
stance itself is a quantum without any other thing con-
nected with itself or made at the same time with it.


And as I say of substance, so I say proportionately
of any corporeal thing. Nor does that opinion in any
way detract from the sacrament of the altar; but it
avoids many difficulties respecting the sacrament of
the altar, as will be obvious in replying and in object-
ing.

And, therefore, although some modern writers, stim-
ulated perhaps by envy, would censure that opinion
as if erroneous not by arguments but by detractions;
yet the ancient Doctors, although they could not un-
derstand it, did not, however, repudiate it as heretical
respecting faith or character, whose reasons I intend
to cite and to explain. Whence, a certain Doctor ar-
guing against this opinion says thus. This opinion is
contrary to the philosopher, who in the Categories
distinguishes quantity from substance and quality. It
is also contrary to the common opinion of the Doc-
tors. It is also contrary to experience; and when a
corporeal substance is condensed without conversion
of anything into itself, it is effected of a less quantity
without the loss of any part. It is also contrary to
reason, for in diverse subjects differing in species a


10


20


25


30


20


25


30


60 THE SACRAMENT OF THE ALTAR


quantity the same in species seems to be able to be;
for the length, or breadth, or depth in a handful of
air is not other than that ina handful of water. That
they, however, say that the quantity of a quality re-
ally differs from the quantity of a substance and that
it itself is really the same as quality, is contrary to
authority and reason. For the philosopher in the sixth
book of the Physics says that “quality is not quantity
except through accident," which would not be true if
it were properly called quantity. It is argued through
the reasons thus: it is naturally impossible for a body,
which is a quantity, to be at the same time with an-
other body which is a quantity; but quality is at the
same time with substance; therefore, from the previ-
ous opinion it follows that this is impossible, that two
thicknesses or even many more are naturally at the
same time; because for whatever reason whiteness
would have its proper quantity, for the same reason
taste would have its own, and coldness or frigidity
its own, and humidity and dryness, and so of others;
and so not only will the quantity of substance and the
quantity of quality be at the same time, but there would
also be at the same time the thicknesses of several
qualities; therefore, it is obvious that the opinion cited
above implies many inconsistencies. These are the
reasons of that Doctor, which are more apparent than
others. But besides these I add others; first, because
the substance of the bread is not transubstantiated
into the quantity of the body of Christ but only into
the substance of the body of Christ. But if substance
could be quantity, it would have been truly transubstan-
tiated into quantity. It is confirmed; for the quan-
tity of the body of Christ is not in the sacrament of


THE SACRAMENT OF THE ALTAR 61


the altar by the power of conversion but only concomi-
tantly. But if the substance of the body of Christ
were a quantity, the quantity of the body of Christ
would truly be there by the power of conversion.
Moreover, some argue: if substance is quantity, then
since the substance of the bread may not remain in the
sacrament of the altar; therefore, a quantity is not
there, which is contrary to sense and contrary to the
reality of the sacrament. Other reasons can be ad-
duced; but, because the solution of these could be made
clear from the explanations of those already offered,
I, therefore, pass them by.


As regards the first argument of that Doctor, I say
that that opinion is in no mode contrary to the philos-
opher either in the Categories or elsewhere. And
when he says that in the Categories he distinguishes
quantity from substance and quality, I reply that the
philosopher does not intend to distinguish between
substance, quantity and quality; as if they be abso-
lute things really distinct from one another. But he
intends to distinguish between those categories which
signify things, not indeed distinct things but the same
things although in diverse modes, which are not modes,
unless grammatical or logical modes; and indeed al-
though this category ‘quantity’ may be really distinct,
if it be a thing in mind different from other categories,
of which distinction a statement was made elsewhere;
yet it does not signify another thing one per se, unless
that thing be a substance or a quality; and so the dis-
tinction of categories, of which the philosopher speaks,
obtains at the same time with this, that quantity may
not be a thing other than substance and quality; as
according to him ‘place’ and ‘surface’ are not really


20


25


30


10


15


20


25


30


62 THE SACRAMENT OF THE ALTAR


distinguished, and yet they are distinct species of
quantity. For that there may be distinct species of
quantity is obvious through the philosopher in the Cat-
egories. That these species do not imply quantities
distinct from a part of a thing, is obvious; since there
would then be two continuous quantities at the same
time in situation and in place, neither of which would
be created to inform another.


Similarly, according to the philosopher in the Cat-
egories in the chapter on ‘quality’; the same is in di-
verse categories; therefore, categories sometimes sig-
nify the same thing; therefore, notwithstanding that
quantity and substance and quality may be distinct
categories, yet some of them have been able to signify
the same thing, and so it is possible to agree with the
philosopher that quantity is not an absolute thing other
than substance and quality, as resemblance and white
are in diverse categories, whether per se or through
reduction; for the present I do not care, and yet they
signify some thing the same.


Quite similarly I speak of ‘number’ which signifies
no thing one per se, unless that which is under some
species other than that under this common (species)
‘number’; as was proved elsewhere; and yet they are
different species. Similarly, ‘ternary’ and ‘quater-
nary’ are distinct species, and yet no thing one per se
is signified through ‘ternary,’ but that it is or can be
of the same species with another thing signified through
‘quaternary,’ or conversely. And, indeed, as was stated
before, only a diversity of modes of signification suf-
fices to distinguish one concept from another; not that
no thing may be signified absolutely through one, but
that it may be signified by another. So also it is ob-


THE SACRAMENT OF THE ALTAR 63


vious from these two ‘homo’ and ‘homines’; for it is
impossible to grant any thing signified through one
that may not be signified through the rest; yet this is
false, ‘man is species.’ So the identity of significators
through some species or genera obtains with the dis-
tinction of species and of genera; and, as was fre-
quently proved, genera or species are not, unless con-
cepts or names.


As regards the second point; since it is said that that
opinion is contrary to the common opinion of the
Doctors, I reply that, if it be understood through the
Doctors approved by the Roman Church, it is not true.
On the contrary, this can be proved through no pas-
sage of any Doctor approved by the Roman Church.
And if there be found any high-sounding passage of
such a Doctor, this must be sufficiently explained. Nor
is it inconsistent to explain their statements, since many
statements even of the Sacred Page may also be in
need of exposition; for many are not true according
to a property of common speech, but are most true
according to the sense which we ought to have.


Whence, such propositions which the Saviour ut-
tered: “I am the true vine and my Father is the hus-
bandman,” “My doctrine is not mine,” and many of a
like kind, are not true according to the propriety of
common speech; as the blessed Augustine says in a
certain Homily on John: “Although in the sense in
which they were spoken and in which they ought to be
accepted, they may be most true.” And as many
passages of Sacred Scripture must be explained, so
the passages of the Doctors approved by the Roman
Church declaring that quantity may be a thing other
than substance and quality must also be explained. But


20


25


30


10


20


25


30


64 THE SACRAMENT OF THE ALTAR


if through the Doctors they may understand the mod-
ern Doctors who mutually censure each other publicly
and privately and even in their writings, I concede;
but it is not inconsistent to contradict them; for noth-
ing, which they say, must be accepted, except that
which they can prove through clear reason or through
the authority of Sacred Scripture or through a decree
of the church or through the Doctors approved by the
church.


And, therefore, since they can prove in none of the
preceding modes that quantity is a thing other than
substance and quality, although some sophistications
may be able to be adduced for this; I, therefore, do
not hold it as an inconsistency to refute them in this
part; for by what reason they themselves mutually
censure one another, and the latter reprove the former,
I can refute them, when they have for their support
nothing but sophisms or passages wrongly understood ;
nor do I think that I ought to be limited to those con-
trary to the dictate of reason.


On the contrary, I consider it dangerous and rash
to wish to limit any one to the holding captive of his
ability and to the believing of something which reason
dictates to him to be false, unless it may be able to be
drawn from Sacred Scripture or from a decree of the
Roman Church or from the statements of the approved
Doctors. Such is not this, ‘quantity is an absolute
thing other than substance and quality’; whence, I
assert this, that no passage of any philosopher, nor
any natural reason, which I have ever heard or read,
moves me to believe that quantity is an absolute thing
other than substance and quality more than to believe
that flesh is a thing other than God and creature. Yet


THE SACRAMENT OF THE ALTAR 65


if it may be able to be proved that it may be from the
mind of some Saint or Doctor approved by the church,
whom it is not permitted to refute; for his sake I wish
to hold in check my ability and to concede that there
may be a thing other than substance and quality.

As regards the third, I say that it is not contrary
to experience, but rather consonant with experience ;
whence, if he should not have another reason, except
that experience which he adduces, I would concede
that quantity is not such a thing as they themselves
imagine.

Whence, when a corporeal substance is condensed,
I ask whether any part or no part of a quantity is lost.
If no part, and then condensation can be saved; then
for the same reason, although substance may be quan-
tity and no part of substance may be lost, condensation
will have been saved. But if some part of quantity is
lost, I ask about the primary and adequate subject of
the quantity itself, whether it remains without any
quantity, which is contrary to experience, or whether
it has any quantity, and then whether new or pre-
existing. It does not have a new quantity, because for
the same reason another part would have a new quan-
tity, since there may be no greater reason for one than
for another; and consequently the whole substance
would utterly lose the whole pre-existing quantity and
would acquire a new quantity, which is contrary to
experience. Nor does it have a pre-existing (quantity),
since then an accident would change from subject into
subject, which is not consonant with experience.

And so it is obvious that in no way is it contrary to
experience to say, that quantity is not a thing other
than substance and quality.


15


20


25


30


10


15


20


25


30


66 THE SACRAMENT OF THE ALTAR


Therefore, a reply is made to that experience and
by conceding that, when corporeal substance is con-
densed, it itself is effected of a smaller quantity with-
out the loss of any of its part; but not without local
motion of all of its parts.


Whence, through this alone, that all the parts are
so moved locally that they may occupy a smaller place
now than before and one part may be less separate
from another now than before, the whole substance is
condensed, and otherwise a substance is not to be con-
densed. And this is that which the philosopher says
in the Categories, that “that is dense whose parts lie
closer together,” which is not to be understood of the
parts between which there is not an intermediate; for
those can not as regards themselves as wholes lie closer
together; but it must be understood of the parts be-
tween which there are intermediate parts, for those
parts lie closer together in a dense body than they did
in the same body when it was rare. And from this
itself, that all such parts lie closer together whether
they may be under another thing or not; they in them-
selves lie closer together, and that body is more dense
now than before.


Whence, I do not see that condensation and rare-
fication may be able conveniently to be saved, except
by positing that quantity is not a thing other than sub-
stance and quality, and through that mode is easily
saved. And if it be said that the whole substance re-
mains after condensation (but the whole quantity does
not remain; for, if the whole could remain, it follows
that it has as much quantity as there was before) ;
then, that preceding quantity was not itself substance.
It must be said that those who perfectly understand


THE SACRAMENT OF THE ALTAR 67


logic clearly see that all such are sophistic, for such
consequences inferring one of the past from two of
the present are not valid; as frequently two of the
past or of the future do not infer one of the present,
and frequently even one of the past and one of the
present do not infer one of the present. But it would
take too long to tell how it must be argued from such;
therefore, I pass on from this. And I say that this
consequence is not valid: ‘the whole substance remains’
and ‘so much quantity does not remain’; therefore, ‘so
much quantity was not in that whole substance.’ And
quite similarly such consequences are not valid: ‘that
foot of quantity does not remain’ and ‘this substance
remains’; therefore, ‘that substance will not be of the
quantity of a foot’; nor does it infer more; therefore,
that substance was other than a quantity of a foot.
And as it is said of these, so proportionately must it
be said of all of like kind, which are considered demon-
strations by many.


Whence, as it does not follow: ‘making happy is
not.’ It may be posited that “God may make no one
happy, “God is’; therefore, “God was not making
happy.’ Similarly, it does not follow: ‘the dead is
not,’ ‘Christ is’; therefore, ‘Christ is not dead.’ So
it does not follow: ‘so much quantity is not,’ ‘substance
is’; therefore, ‘substance was not so much quantity.’
And so it evidently is obvious that, although such prem-
ises may not infer that of the present, yet they do not
infer that of the past. Nor does it refer quantum to
a mode, whether the terms ‘abstracts’ or ‘concretes’ be
accepted.

And as it is said of these, so proportionately of those
of a ‘possible’; for frequently two of a ‘possible,’ and


10


20


25


30


10


15


20


25


30


68 THE SACRAMENT OF THE ALTAR


even one of an ‘actual’ and another of a ‘possible,’ do
not infer one negative of an ‘actual,’ although they
may infer one of a ‘possible’; and, therefore, such
modes of arguing are not valid. This is possible, ‘this
likeness is not,’ while this appears true, ‘this whiteness
is’; therefore, ‘this whiteness is not this likeness’; al-
though that follows from a ‘possible’; therefore, it is
possible for ‘this whiteness not to be this likeness.’ It
does not follow: it is possible for ‘this whiteness
not to be this likeness’; therefore, ‘this whiteness’ and
‘this likeness’ are not the same thing. So it does not
follow: ‘it is possible for God not to be creating’;
therefore, ‘God’ and ‘creating’ are not the same thing.
But it certainly correctly follows that this is possible,
‘God and creating are not the same’; and this is
true.


Quite similarly is it in the proposition, that because
that substance can remain, although this may not be
true, ‘the whole quantity is’; yet from this it does not
follow that this may be true, ‘this substance’ and ‘so
much quantity’ are not the same thing; but it follows
that it may be possible; and this is true.


And if it be said that this is possible, ‘this substance’
and ‘this quantity’ are not the same thing, if the sub-
stance remains; by virtue of the same reason I say
that this is fully possible, ‘this substance’ and ‘this
quantity’ are not the same thing, so that it can be true,
while this appears true, ‘this substance is’; but it can
not be true, while this appears true, ‘this quantity is.’
Whence, this will then be true by virtue of that
cause of reality, ‘this quantity is not,’ which follows
from this, ‘this substance is not quantum,’ which is
possible.


THE SACRAMENT OF THE ALTAR 69


Another argument will be set forth later. And if it
be said further that it is impossible to pass from a con-
tradictory to a contradictory without entire newness,
(if, therefore, this be at first true, ‘that substance is
of so much quantity’ and afterwards it be false;) there
is need that there be some newness or at least a de-
struction of something old. It must be said that it is
not true; but sometimes local motion alone suffices,
through which it is not necessary for something to be
acquired or destroyed nor yet something old, say, a
place always remaining.


On the contrary; as is shown elsewhere, a place sur-
rounding a movable body can remain and this either
in a whole or ina part. And, therefore, in the propo-
sition regarding this, that the substance itself may be
of a larger quantity or a larger quantity now than be-
fore as in rarefaction, or a smaller quantity now than
before as in condensation, only local motion of all the
parts of this substance suffices without entire newness
of any imaginable thing whatever and without entire
destruction of any thing old whatever.


As regards the fourth point; when it is said that
that opinion is contrary to reason, it must be said that
it is not, but is consonant with reason, as was shown
before. And when it is said that in diverse substances
differing in species it seems to be a quantity the same
in species, it must be said that any quantity, which is
not quality which is in substances diverse in species,
differs in species; whence every quantity of fire, which
is not a quality, differs in species from every quantity
of air which is not a quality; and indeed I concede
that the length of fire, and similarly the depth and the
width, differ in species. And yet notwithstanding this,


15


20


25


30


20


25


30


70 THE SACRAMENT OF THE ALTAR


that the same most particular species could be predi-
cated of them, although not ‘in quid’ and ‘per se’ in
the first mode. Whence, two men and two horses dif-
fer in species, and yet ‘binarius,’ which is a most par-
ticular species, is applied to them. Whence, as it is
not inconsistent that the same may be in diverse cate-
gories, so it is not inconsistent that the same may be
in diverse species of one category, and yet they are in
one most particular species of another category; and,
therefore, it is not inconsistent that the same may be
simply in diverse species of substance, and yet that
they may be in the same most particular species of
quantity. And whenever it is so, then that most par-
ticular species is not predicated of them ‘in quid’ and
‘per se’ in the first mode, and many passages concern-
ing ‘genera’ as well as concerning ‘species’ speak of
them with respect to those of which they are predi-
cated ‘in quid’ and ‘per se’ in the first mode; yet there
are many of no proper noun of any thing nor of a
pronoun signifying some thing which are predicated
‘in quid’ and ‘per se’ in the first mode. Indeed, ac-
cording to the intention of the philosopher relative to
that which is replied in diverse modes to the question
raised concerning an individual of a substance, as
regards this diverse categories are accepted, as was
said elsewhere; and indeed that is false which some
say, that each category has a proper thing of which
it is predicated ‘in quid.’

As regards the fifth point; I say that quantity, which
is quality, is really distinguished from quantity, which
is at least some substance; say, any such, as color, heat,
cold, and any other of the kind; although this may not
be true of figure and of any such. And when it is


THE SACRAMENT OF THE ALTAR 7


said that quality according to the philosopher is not
a quantum except through accident, I say that through
all such propositions in the Categories and in the book
of the Physics and elsewhere, “substance is not a quan-
tum except through accident," and so of quality. Fi-
nite and infinite do not combine with a substance or a
quality or through accident and anything else of the
kind. It means nothing other than that that predicable
‘quantum’ is not predicated of substance and quality
except through accident and not per se in the first
mode. Whence, such is not per se in the first mode;
neither by strictly nor freely accepting per se in the
first mode: ‘substance is quantum,’ ‘quality is quan-
tum,’ ‘man is quantum,’ ‘man is long,’ ‘whiteness is
wide,’ and any other of the kind; since this however
holds that quantity may not be a thing different from
quality and substance. So ‘God’ and ‘creating’ are not
distinct things, and yet this is not per se, ‘creating
is immortal’; as this, ‘God is immortal.’ Similarly,
finite or infinite per se in the second or the first mode
is applied to quantum and not to substance or quality.
And so it appears, since those substantives and predi-
cables, ‘quantity,’ ‘substance,’ ‘quality,’ are distinct;
since this however holds that they do not signify
distinct things, and through that mode the reply must
be made to many passages.


As regards the last point of that Doctor, I say that
in speaking of bodies of diverse grounds of which
one was created to be in the form of another, or of
which each was created to be in the form of a third,
it is not inconsistent for two bodies to exist natu-
rally in the same place; and accident and subject are
so constituted; so also are constituted diverse acci-

8


10


15


20


25


30


10


15


20


25


30


72 THE SACRAMENT OF THE ALTAR


dents which are created to inform the same subject;
so also whiteness and sweetness in milk are consti-
tuted; and, therefore, it ought to be conceded accord-
ing to the virtue of common speech that several bodies
can be at the same time, that is, that several things
existing circumscriptively in this place, and each one of
which has part outside of part, are at the same time;
yet it is inconsistent that two bodies of the same
ground (each of which may be completely in a genus
or in some species of a substance, or that two bodies of
diverse grounds, neither of which was created to be
in the form of another nor both (in the form) of a


third), may be at the same time; and of such bodies


Aristotle speaks and other authors who say that two
bodies can not be at the same time.


As regards other arguments. As regards the first;
when it is said that the substance of the bread is not
transubstantiated into the quantity of the body of
Christ but only into the substance of the body of
Christ, it must be said that according to the virtue of
common speech this must be conceded, ‘the substance
of the bread is transubstantiated into the quantity of
the body of Christ’; nor is the opposite of that found
in the Bible nor in the statements of the Saints nor
in the canonical law, nor in any authorized book;
although it may be found in the writings of some who
are censured by many Catholics and religious writers.
I do not say that they censure them as heretics, but
as those holding false opinions; whence, the subtle
Doctor censures very much the profane and sacred’
writer and all, in whose writings is found the opposite
of that, as regards many opinions. Many Catholic
Doctors also censure the subtle Doctor in many con-


THE SACRAMENT OF THE ALTAR 28


clusions; and, indeed, although a conclusion the oppo-
site of these may be found, it need not make much
difference; for no one is bound to accept their author-
ity, although thanks must be rendered to them, for this
reason that, when they have made false statements,
they have stimulated our abilities, and they have rather
given to us occasions for finding the truth. I say,
therefore, that this must really be conceded, ‘the sub-
stance of the bread is transubstantiated into the body
of Christ which is in heaven.’ Similarly, this must be
conceded according to the virtue of common speech,
‘the substance of the bread is transubstantiated into
the body of Christ which is in heaven locally.’ In the
same mode I say in confirmation that this must be
conceded according to the virtue of common speech,
‘the quantity of the body of Christ is in the sacrament
of the altar by the power of conversion’; as according
to the virtue of common speech this must be conceded,
‘the body of Christ existing in heaven is in the sacra-
ment of the altar by the power of conversion’; and
precisely the opposite is not found in any authorized
writer. But yet no matter how much each of those
may be true according to the virtue of common speech
and according to fact, yet according to the virtue of
common speech both can be false; while this appears
true, ‘the substance of the body of Christ is in the sac-
rament of the altar by the power of conversion’; but
not except in one case, say, if the substance of the body
of Christ should exist nowhere circumscriptively.
Whence, it does not seem to involve a contradiction,
that, when the transubstantiation into the body of
Christ has been accomplished and the body of Christ
remains there under the species of bread, God could


10


15


20


25


30


in


be
e


=
ur


2


©


25


3


©


74 THE SACRAMENT OF THE ALTAR


make the body of Christ to be nowhere locally or cir-
cumscriptively. When this has been done, the priest
might be able to celebrate, and then this would be true
according to the virtue of common speech, ‘the sub-
stance of the body of Christ is under the species of
bread by the power of transubstantiation' ; and then this
would be false, ‘the quantity of the body of Christ is
under the species of that bread,’ and this by virtue of
a false implication; for it would be implied that the
substance of the body of Christ would be a quantum,
which would not be true; for nothing is a quantum
except that whose part is outside of part and whose
part is separate from part. But, since the body of
Christ could be nowhere locally, never could it be able
in that mode to be assigned that one part could be
separate from another part; but wherever it would be,
one part would be in the same situation as another;
and then this would be true, ‘the body of Christ is no-
where circumscriptively’; and for the same reason this
would be true, ‘the body of Christ is nowhere a quan-
tum’; and consequently this would be false, ‘the body
of Christ is a quantity’; and so by virtue of a false
implication this would be false, ‘the quantity of the
body of Christ is in the sacrament of the altar.’ And
so he who would desire to excuse those who say that
the quantity of the body of Christ is not in the sacra-
ment of the altar by the power of conversion, could
say that they say this, because that consequence is not
valid; namely, ‘the substance of the body of Christ
is in the sacrament of the altar by the power of con-
version’; therefore, the quantity of the body of Christ
is in he sacrament of the altar by the power of con-
version; for the antecedent can be true, while the con-


THE SACRAMENT OF THE ALTAR 75


sequent appears false. But this can not happen unless
the substance of the body of Christ nowhere have part
separate from part.


And if it be said contrary to this that, wherever
the quantity of the body of Christ is by the power of
conversion, there the body of Christ is a quantity or
a quantum by the power of conversion. If, therefore,
the quantity of the body of Christ be in the sacra-
ment of the altar by the power of conversion, the body
of Christ is a quantum or quantity in the sacrament of
the altar. But every quantum is circumscriptively in
a place; therefore, the body of Christ is circumscrip-
tively in a place in the sacrament of the altar, which
is heretical; for it could not then be in the whole host
and in each part of the host. It must be said that
that argument alone would be able to move a Catholic
to hold that quantity is not a thing other than sub-
stance and quality, and would be able to be formu-
lated thus: wherever any thing has another thing cre-
ated to designate it, it is true to say that the thing
there is such; as when a body has whiteness, it is true
to say that the body there is white; and so is it of all.
If, therefore, the quantity of the body of Christ be a
thing other than the substance of the body of Christ,
it is not separate from that quantity; for then those
holding this opinion thus say, that the quantity of the
body of Christ is there, although concomitantly; but
whenever there is some quantum there, it truly has part
outside of part and part separate from part; for when-
ever a definition corresponds to something, the defined
corresponds there to the same. Therefore, since this
may be a definition of quantity or of quantum, ‘to have
part outside of part’; if the body of Christ in the sac-


10


15


20


25


30


10


15


20


25


30


76 THE SACRAMENT OF THE ALTAR


rament of the altar be a quantum either concomitantly
or in another mode, it is necessary that the body of
Christ there be ‘having part outside of part, separate
from part,’ which is manifestly false and perilous, and
it does not seem at all safe to concede that the body
of Christ may be a quantum here. And indeed I
say that it must be conceded according to the virtue
of common speech that the body of Christ is not a
quantum in the sacrament of the altar. As according
to the virtue of common speech it must be conceded
that the body of Christ in the sacrament does not have
part outside of part, although the body of Christ may
have part outside of part in heaven, and consequently
may be a quantum in heaven. And if it be said that
this is contradictory to a prior statement, (for it was
said that this is true, ‘the quantity of the body of Christ
is in the sacrament of the altar’; from which it follows
that the body of Christ is a quantum or a quantity in
the sacrament of the altar, which was just denied;) it
must be stated that this is simply true, ‘the quantity
of the body of Christ is in the sacrament of the altar.’
But the former does not infer that; therefore, the body
of Christ is a quantum in the sacrament of the altar;
as this is true according to the virtue of speech, ‘the
body of Christ existing locally in heaven is in the sac-
rament of the altar’; and yet this is false, ‘the body of
Christ is locally existent in the sacrament of the altar.’


Similarly, this is true, ‘the body of Christ existing
in a place is in the sacrament of the altar’; for noth-
ing else is designated through that except that for
which it substitutes this, ‘the whole body of Christ
existing circumscriptively in a place,’ which is not un-
less the body of Christ is in the sacrament of the altar,


THE SACRAMENT OF THE ALTAR TA


which is true; and yet this is false, ‘the body of Christ
is circumscriptively existent in a place in the sacrament
of the altar.’

Similarly, this is true, ‘the body of Christ having
part outside of part is in the sacrament of the altar.’
In the same way, notwithstanding that this may be
true, ‘the quantity of the body of Christ is in the sac-
rament of the altar’; yet this is false according to a
property of common speech, ‘the body of Christ is a
quantum in the sacrament of the altar’; and so, al-
though the quantity of the body of Christ be truly
there, yet the body of Christ is not a quantity there;
as, although the body of Christ having part separate
in situation from part may be there, yet it does not
there have part separate from part.

And that reply is confirmed; for, whenever some
are convertibles, of whatever one term is predicated
the rest is also assumed significatively; and similarly
of whatever one term is predicated, the rest also.
But those are convertibles: ‘a continuous and perma-
nent quantum’ and ‘having part separate in situation
from part,’ and conversely ; therefore, of whatever one
is said, the rest also. If therefore, this be true, ‘the
body of Christ is in the sacrament of the altar having
part separate in situation from part,’ which is man-
ifestly false; for no part is separate in situation from
another in the sacrament of the altar; therefore, this
is false according to a property of common speech,
‘the substance of the body of Christ is a continu-
ous and permanent quantum in the sacrament of the
altar.’

Therefore, I say that the body of Christ is not a
quantum there; for it does not have there part separate


5


10


20


25


30


10


15


20


25


30


78 THE SACRAMENT OF THE ALTAR


from part; but in heaven, as elsewhere, it has part sep-
arate in situation from part, so in heaven it is a quan-
tum. If only the quantity of the body of Christ were
another thing, there would truly be a quantity there;
namely, in the sacrament of the altar; and consequently
the body of Christ would truly be a quantum there,
and consequently would truly have there part separate
from part, and consequently would not be a whole
under a whole host and a whole under each part.


As to the other; when it is said that, if the substance
of the body of Christ were a quantity, then the quan-
tity could not remain in the sacrament of the altar;
so the substance of the bread does not remain there.


It must be said that that argument ought not to be
advanced here, unless because some maliciously pro-
voke some frank statements contrary to the opinion;
as if that opinion could posit, that every quantity
would be substance; and they indeed maliciously pro-
pose this proposition, ‘substance is quantity’ and with-
draw this, “quality is quantity,’ that they may grant
through this an opportunity for the unlearned who pay
no attention to the preceding opinion to understand
and to posit this, “every quantity is a substance’; and
by virtue of a defect in the arguments they carefully
strive to enlist some simple minded folk against the
opinion.

Therefore, I say as regards the argument, that it is
too stupid; for it does not follow, ‘substance is quan-
tity,’ and substance ceases to be there; then some
quantity does not remain there, as substance does not
remain there; as it does not follow, ‘substance is an
entity’; therefore, no entity remains there; as a pre-
existing substance does not remain there.


THE SACRAMENT OF THE ALTAR 79


Whence, I say that one pre-existing quantity remains
in the sacrament of the altar; but quantity does not
remain there, which is substance or which was sub-
stance; but one quantity remains there, which is qual-
ity; for quantity remains there, which is not a thing
other than whiteness.

Similarly, a quantity remains there which is not a
thing other than taste, and so of other quantities. And
I say with the Doctors approved by the church, that
color, taste, weight, that is, gravity, and some qualities
of a like kind, remain there; none of which is a thing
other than a quantity subsisting per se in situation out-
side of every subject by divine power; none of which
is subjectively in another; but each one exists outside
of a subject through the divine power, and they are
preserved at the same time in the same place and sit-
uation through the divine power; and indeed there re-
mains there one quantity having part separate from
part, which never was nor ever will be substance, but
is simply a thing other than substance. And these
arguments concerning that matter may suffice for the
present, for I shall elsewhere treat at length of it.


5


10


15


20


10


15


20


25


The introduction to the tract concerning
the body of Christ begins.


PROLOGUE


Wondrous gifts from the abundance on high, ex-
pended by Him for the redemption of the human race,
place it under an infinite obligation to its glorious Re-
deemer; for the Only-begotten Son of God, after He
had assumed the substance of our frailty in order that
He might redeem us from the servitude of the devil
and restore us to our original liberty and also bring
us at last to our heavenly inheritance, offered Himself
on the altar of the cross as the price for the redemption
of the human race.


Moreover, that a perpetual memorial of so great a
gift might remain among us and also that Christ might
daily be mystically offered as a sacrifice for us who err
daily, He left behind His body in the food and His
blood in the drink to be received by the faithful in the
sacrament of the Eucharist, the unspeakable loftiness
of which is deemed an improper subject for human in-
vestigation; by virtue of which there is need to speak
of this sublime and most excellent sacrament with all
fear and modesty; for with respect to no sacrament
is error more perilous, nor inquiry more laborious, nor
invention more fruitful.


Accordingly, since I am about to examine carefully
some views of this most worthy sacrament, I protest
that I will not assert anything except that which the
Roman Church holds and teaches. Moreover, sub-
jecting and exposing myself to the correction of all
the skilled, orthodox Catholics who are interested, I

80


THE SACRAMENT OF THE ALTAR 81


shall explain the statements of physics which are to be
inserted and whatever statements are in general to be
quoted, which are not authorized by the Roman
Church, with all humility and modesty, that is, not by
rashly approving them but by citing them only for the
sake of practice and of inquiring into the truth.


However, let all men understand that I do not un-
dertake this present little work that I may inflict some
profane novelties of speech upon the ears of the faith-
ful, but that I may show how blamelessly and temper-
ately I have spoken on this most worthy sacrament
when I expressed my opinions.


in


[en


0


15


20


25


CHAPTER I


What the Catholic Doctors discerned by
the senses concerning the reality of the
Eucharist


The Catholic Doctors approved by the Roman
Church, who have written about the sacrament of the
Eucharist, intend to assert this, that the body of Christ
which was born of the Virgin Mary, suffered and was
buried, which also rose from the dead and ascended
into heaven and sits at the right hand of God, the Fa-
ther, and in which the Son of God is about to come to
judge the living and the dead, is really and truly con-
tained under the species of bread. But, although it
may really lie hidden under the species of bread, it
certainly is not seen by us with the bodily eye, but
with the mind the faithful believe that it is concealed
under the species of bread.


And it is also held that the substance of the bread
is transubstantiated, converted, or changed, so that
the substance of the bread does not remain but that
only the accidents existing per se remain without a
subject.

And not only the body of Christ, which is one of
the two parts of the human nature affected by the
transubstantiation of the bread, is really contained un-
der the species of bread; but also the whole Christ,
undivided, perfect God and true man, is at the same
time truly and really contained under the entire host
and under each part; although by a proper assumption
of ‘conversion’ and ‘transubstantiation,’ the substance

82


THE SACRAMENT OF THE ALTAR 82


of the bread may not be converted into divinity or
rational soul or into some accident.

This is also my faith, since this is the Catholic faith.
For whatever the Roman Church explicitly believes,
this alone and nothing else either explicitly or implic-
itly I believe. But how much efficiency and nobility
there may be in implicit faith Innocent sets forth in
a gloss on the De Summa Trinitate et Fide Catholica,
‘Firmiter.’ “Implicit faith," he says, “prevails to such
a degree, as some say, that if any one has this; namely,
that he believes as the church believes; if he is impelled
by natural reason falsely to think that the Father may
be greater or prior to the Son or that the three persons
may be three things mutually separate, he is not a
heretic nor does he sin; provided he does not defend
this error and believes this very statement because he
believes that the church so believes, and substitutes his
opinion for the faith of the church; for although he
may thus wrongly think, yet that faith is not his faith;
on the contrary his own faith is the faith of the
church.”

Therefore, if there be such great efficacy in implicit
faith that it may excuse one ignorantly erring concern-
ing those doctrines which are set forth in the canonical
Scriptures, much more will it excuse the one ignorantly
forming an opinion of something which is found set
forth neither in the canonical Scriptures nor in the
writings of the Doctors approved by the church.


5


10


15


20


25


wn


20


25


CHAPTER II


That the body of Christ is really con-
tained under the species of bread


That the body of Christ is really contained under
the species of bread can not be shown through natural
reason; and, therefore, it is necessary to assent through
faith to a conception of this truth, concerning which
we ought not to be in doubt since it may be well known
to us that the same truth was revealed to the Apostles
through the Only-begotten Son of God; a witness to
which is the most holy Evangelist, Matthew, in Chap-
ter XXVI. “Jesus took bread,” he says, “and blessing,
brake it and gave it to His disciples and said: “Take
and eat; this is my body." To this truth Mark also
bears testimony in Chapter XIV., saying: “While they
were eating, Jesus took bread and blessing, brake it
and gave it to them and said: “Take, this is my
body." With these statements Luke agrees in Chap-
ter XXII., saying: “When He had taken bread, He
gave thanks and brake it and gave it to them, saying:
‘This is my body which is given for you; this do in re-
membrance of me." In John, Chapter VI.; John, the
Evangelist, also records the words of the Saviour as
He points out both the reality and the benefit of that
sacrament: “The bread, which I shall give to you for
the life of the world, is my flesh”; and there follows:
"Except ye will have eaten the flesh of the Son of Man
and will have drunk his blood, ye will not have life in
you. He who eats my flesh and drinks my blood, hath
eternal life" The Apostle Paul similarly says in I.

84


THE SACRAMENT OF THE ALTAR 85


Corinthians XI.: “The Lord Jesus,” he says, “in the
night in which he was betrayed, took bread, and giv-
ing thanks brake it and said: ‘Take and eat; this is
my body which is given for you. Do this in remem-
brance of me." Likewise, in I. Corinthians X., he
says: “The bread which we break, is it not the com-
munion of the body of the Lord?" These are the au-
thors of the canonical. scriptures, who alike affirm that
the body of Christ was truly and really given to the
Apostle under the species of bread and that it was also
enjoined upon the same Apostles by the Saviour that
they should offer the body of Christ under the species
of bread in memory of the passion of the Lord.


With the previously quoted writers of the canonical
Scriptures also agree the eminent Doctors, the Holy
Fathers, the most illustrious expositors of the divine
scriptures, and also those recognized as authorities by
the Roman Church; some of whose passages preserved
in the canonical law must be publicly set forth.


Whence, the blessed Augustine says as quoted in I.,
Question I., ‘Intra ecclesiam. “Within the Catholic
Church,” he says, “in the mystery of the body and the
blood of the Lord, nothing greater is conferred by a
good priest and nothing less by a bad priest.”


Likewise, the blessed Cyprian, the bishop, as quoted
in the De Consecratione, Distinction II., ‘Scriptura.’
He says: “As often as we offer the cup in commemo-
ration of the Lord and His Passion, we do that which
it is well known that the Lord did.”

Likewise, Ambrose as quoted in the De Consecra-
tione, Distinction IL, ‘Ante benedictionem.’ “Before
the blessing,” he says, “a different species is indicated,


5


m


0


m


5


bo


0


w


0


1


tn


e


in


86 THE SACRAMENT OF THE ALTAR


after the blessing the body is designated. Christ is
likewise in that sacrament.”


Likewise, Hieronymus as quoted in the De Consecra-
tione, Distinction II., ‘Nec Moyses.’ “Moses,” he says,
“did not give to you the true bread from heaven, but
the Lord Jesus, feast and guest, the one eating and the
one who is eaten."


Likewise, the blessed Gregory as quoted in I., Ques-
tion L, ‘Multi.’ “We,” he says, “desecrate the bread,
that is, the body of Christ when we approach the altar
unworthily.”


From these and numerous other passages, it is clearly
shown that the body of Christ is really contained under
the species of bread; and because that was clear to all
the faithful from the commencement of the Christian
faith; therefore, as regards the confirmation of this,
I do not wish to delay longer.


CHAPTER III


That the substance of the bread is con-
verted into the body of Christ


Although it is expressly set forth in the canonical
Scriptures that the body of Christ is to be offered to
the faithful under the species of bread, yet that the
substance of the bread is really converted or transub-
stantiated into the body of Christ is not found ex-
pressed in the canon of the Bible; but this doctrine is
believed to have been divinely revealed to the Holy
Fathers, or to have been proved from passages of the
Bible by a diligent and skillful examination; and,
therefore, I shall cite passages of the Holy Fathers to
prove this truth.


Whence, Eusebius Emissenus says as quoted in the
De Consecratione, Distinction II., ‘Quia corpus’: “The
invisible Priest converts visible creatures into the sub-
stance of His body and blood by His word by a secret
power.” And he adds: “And so how many and how
celebrated the benefits the power of the divine blessing
may produce; and that it ought not to be strange or
impossible to you that earthly and mortal objects are
converted into the substance of Christ.”


Likewise, Ambrose as quoted in the De Consecra-
tione, Distinction II., ‘Panis.’ “If,” he says, “there is
such power in the Word of the Lord Jesus, that by a
miracle He may cause that to be which was not; how
much more efficacious is it that those may be which
were and may be changed into another. And so that

87
9


in


a


0


20


2


Un


v


©


88 THE SACRAMENT OF THE ALTAR


which was bread before consecration, is now the body
of Christ after consecration.”


Likewise, in the margin of the De Summa Trini-
tate et Fide Catholica, ‘Firmiter,’ where Innocent III.
says in a general council: “There is one universal
church of believers, outside of which no one at all is
saved; in which Jesus Christ Himself is both priest
and sacrifice, whose body and blood is truly contained
in the sacrament of the altar under the species of bread
and wine, since the bread has been transformed into
body and the wine into blood by divine power."


Likewise, in the margin of the De Celebratione Mis-
sarum, ‘Cum Marthe.’ “If, therefore, He lifted His
eyes to the Father at the time when He called the
soul of Lazarus back to the lifeless body, it seems to
be more probable that He lifted His eyes to the Father
in heaven at the time when He specially changed the
bread and the wine into body and blood."


From these and very many other passages of the
Saints and the Doctors, it is established that the sub-
stance of the bread is really and truly transubstan-
tiated, converted, or changed by divine virtue into the
substance of the body of Christ, yet without any in-
crease or substantial translation of the body of Christ.


CHAPTER IV


That the substance of the bread is con-
verted into the body of Christ, not into
the divinity, or the rational soul, or the
blood, or some accident of the substance


According to a proper acceptation of the term, the
previously mentioned conversion or transubstantiation
of the bread may not be into the soul, or the divinity,
or into an accident of the substance of the body of
Christ, or the blood of Christ, but only into the body of
Christ. Although, by putting an improper and loose
construction upon this term ‘conversion’ or ‘transub-
stantiation’ it might be able to be conceded that the
bread is transubstantiated into the soul or an accident
of the body of Christ, or the blood. For the passages
of the Doctors prove conclusively that the substance
of the bread is not converted into the soul or the divin-
ity of Christ. Whence a gloss on the De Consecra-
tione, Distinction II., above that Chapter, ‘Quid est
Christum manducare?’ says: “The bread is converted
into flesh alone and the wine into blood.”


Likewise, the Master of the Sentences in Book IV.,
Distinction XI.: “Although,” he says, “the entire
Christ may be assumed under both species, yet no con-
version of the bread except into flesh or of wine ex-
cept into blood takes place.”


From these passages it is clear that the substance of
the bread, from which it is converted into flesh alone,
is not transubstantiated into divinity or rational soul
or blood, nor as a consequence into an accident of

89


10


15


20


25


10


15


20


25


30


90 THE SACRAMENT OF THE ALTAR


flesh or soul; but this is certainly true according to a
proper use of this term ‘convertitur.’


From which it must be perceived that the substance
of the bread is especially converted or transubstan-
tiated into that which is not, because it is joined to an-
other; but, even if it were separated from others, it
begins to be so by divine power under the species of the
bread at the utterance of the sacramental words by the
priest, with the obligatory intention, over suitable ma-
terial. But of such is the flesh of Christ, and not the
soul, or the blood, or some accident inhering in flesh
or soul. For, if the soul were separated from the flesh,
no matter how much the priest might with obligatory
intention recite the sacramental words over suitable
material, the soul of Christ would not begin to be
there, but only the flesh.


Similarly, if the blood were separated from the flesh,
the blood would not begin to be there, but only the
flesh. And the judgment is the same with respect to
the accidents of the flesh and the soul. And by virtue
of this the Doctors say that the body of Christ is under
the species of bread by virtue of the sacramental words
and by the power of conversion, and by virtue of this
the substance of the bread is converted into the body
of Christ and not into soul or deity.


If however any one wishes to use the term ‘conver-
sion’ or ‘transubstantiation’ more improperly, that he
may say that the substance of the bread is converted
into all that which at the pronouncing of the sacra-
mental words begins now really to be under the species
of bread, by so using the term it can be conceded that
the substance of the bread is converted into the reason-
able soul of Christ; this is to say, that at the utterance


THE SACRAMENT OF THE ALTAR 91


of the sacramental words the reasonable soul begins to
be under the species of bread. If, however, the sacra-
mental words would have been uttered with the obli-
gatory intention during the three days of the death of
Christ, the reasonable soul would not have been in the
same place; and the reason for this diversity is, because
the intellectual soul was then separated from the body
of Christ to which it is now united.


But if they only wish to contend about a term and
to say that the substance of the bread is converted
into nothing, except that which will begin to be under
the species of bread, even if it were separated from
others, I do not wish to oppose them since the point
is sufficiently obvious.


ux


-


0


20


25


CHAPTER V


That the substance of the bread does not
remain after consecration


The statement must now be considered that this con-
version or transubstantiation does not happen through
this alone, that the body of Christ begins to be under
the species of bread though the substance itself re-
mains; but the substance of the bread is converted into
the body of Christ in such a way, that the substance of
the bread does not remain by divine virtue, but the
body of Christ remains only under the accidents which
were in the substance of the bread before conversion;
yet it is not affected by those accidents, as will be stated
later.


However, it must be noted that, although it may be
found expressed in the New Testament, that the body
of Christ is to be received by the faithful under the
species of bread in memory of the passion of the Lord
and for the remission of their sins; yet it is not there
clearly expressed that the substance of the bread does
not remain. Whence, and in former times there have
been diverse opinions concerning this, as states the
Master of the Sentences in Book IV., Distinction XI.,
and Hostiensis at the top of the page in the margin of
the De Consecratione, and the gloss on the De Conse-
cratione, Distinction II., ‘In sacramentorum,’ and the
gloss in the margin of the De Celebratione Missarum,
‘Cum Marthe.’ Whence they say that there were
three opinions about the conversion of the bread into
the body of Christ. “One opinion asserts that that

92


THE SACRAMENT OF THE ALTAR 93


substance, which was at first bread, afterwards is the
flesh and the blood of Christ. The second opinion
holds that the substance of the bread and the wine
ceases to be there and the accidents only remain;
namely, taste, color, weight, and similar accidents; and
under these accidents the body of Christ begins to be
there. The third opinion holds, that the substance of
the bread and the wine remains there and the body of
Christ is in the same place under the same species.”


The aforesaid Doctors approve the second opinion,
and it seems to be the determination of the Roman
Church. Whence, in the margin of the De Summa
Trinitate et Fide Catholica, ‘Firmiter,’ Innocent says
in a general council: “There is one universal church
of all believers, outside of which no one at all is saved;
in which He is both priest and sacrifice, whose body
and blood are truly contained in the sacrament of the
altar under the species of bread and wine, when the
bread is transubstantiated by divine power into the
body of Christ and the wine into the blood.” See this
passage in the preceding column; namely, in Chapter
III. of this work.


But the Catholics, who agree in their approval of this
second opinion, have diverse opinions concerning the
mode of positing. For some posit, as Saint Thomas,
in Book IV., Distinction XI., Question I., that there
is a contradiction involved in the statement that the
substance of the bread may remain with the body of
Christ which remains sacramentally under the species


15


25


2


wn


e


94 THE SACRAMENT OF THE ALTAR


of bread. And certain posit, as the subtle Doctor, in
Book IV., Distinction XI., Question III., that, al-
though the substance of the bread may not really re-
main with the body of Christ, yet there is no contra-
diction involved in the statement that through divine
power the substance of the bread may be able to remain
with the body of Christ; and, therefore, these concede
and approve the statement that the body of Christ may
be in the sacrament of the altar through a change made
concerning the body of Christ. And without prejudice
to any other this second opinion seems to me more
probable and more in accord with theology, because
it rather exalts the omnipotence of God by detracting
nothing from it, nor does it plainly and expressly im-
ply a contradiction.


However, for the present I refrain from a discus-
sion of these opinions, since I intend, God willing, to
discuss the same more fully on another occasion. How-
ever, I say that the substance of the bread does not
remain, but ceases to be and the body of Christ begins
to be under those species.


CHAPTER VI


That the body of Christ is not circum-
scribed in a place in the sacrament of
the altar


Moreover, although the body of Christ may be
really and truly contained under the species of bread,
yet it is not circumscribed in a place in the sacrament
of the altar. But the entire body of Christ is really
contained under the whole host and under each part of
the host, which is confirmed by the testimony of the
Holy Fathers. Whence, the blessed Jerome is quoted
in the De Consecratione, Distinction IL, ‘Singuli.
“Each individual,” he says, “receives the entire Christ
the Lord, and He is whole in each portion and is not
lessened through each; but He offers Himself entire in
each.” Likewise, the blessed Hilary, the Bishop, is
quoted in the De Consecratione, Distinction IL, ‘Ubi.’
“Where,” he says, “there is a part of the body, there
is also the whole.” From these passages it is clearly
gathered that the whole Christ is in the whole host,
and the whole is in a part; from which it follows that
the body of Christ is not confined or circumscribed in
a place.


But the faithful can be led to believe in the possibil-
ity of this in some other way. For the Christian ought
to say that anything can be accomplished by the divine
virtue, except that which can be clearly proved to in-
volve a contradiction through reasoning from things
known per se, which no one could doubt, and except
that which can not be elicited from Sacred Scripture

95


Un


[e


0


bo


0


10


15


20


25


30


96 THE SACRAMENT OF THE ALTAR


or the Doctors approved by the church. For we ought
not to limit the divine power according to the mode
of natural causes, since the divine power may infi-
nitely exceed the virtue of all creatures.


Nor is experimental knowledge sufficient for saying
that something can not be accomplished by divine vir-
tue, since God might be able to change the entire order
of natural causes. And it may be well known that
He has done many things contrary to the common
course of natural causes. For who ever experimentally
knew of a virgin naturally conceiving without a hus-
band, of two bodies existing at the same time, of the
dead restored to life, of accidents existing without a
subject, and of innumerable other things which, how-
ever, it is well known have been divinely wrought?
Therefore, we ought not to say that some things can
not be done by God, because we do not know by ex-
perience that they are done naturally. Therefore,
since there is evidently no contradiction, which can be
proven through self-evident propositions, involved in
the statement that some substance a whole as regards
itself coexists in two bodies, consequently the same
substance a whole as regards itself coexists in some
body and in each part of it.


I am, on the contrary, certain that it can be proved
through the rules of logic, which are said to serve
zealously all science and knowledge. Having con-
ceded that the same substance a whole as regards it-
self may coexist in two bodies or in one body and in
each part of it, every contradiction can evidently be
avoided; although it may not be clearly proved from
purely natural causes that the antecedent is true. For
a Christian ought not to say that God might not


THE SACRAMENT OF THE ALTAR 97


through His absolute power be able to make some
substance to coexist with something corporeal, so that
the whole may coexist with that whole body and with
each part of it; nor can the opposite be proved. For
we so hold that the rationable soul is a whole in a
whole body and in each part of it; and the opposite can
not be proved through demonstrative reasoning.


Moreover, we similarly hold that an angel is
definitively a whole in any place and in each part of it.
Moreover, by virtue of the same none of the faithful
ought to say that two bodies of the very same identical
species, as well as those of diverse species, may not be
able to exist at the same time in the same place through
divine power. For the Saviour, Jesus Christ, entered
thus into the midst of the disciples when the doors
were closed and came forth into the world from the
closed womb of a virgin and ascended into heaven
with undivided celestial body. If, therefore, no con-
tradiction appears in the statement that two bodies
may exist at the same time in the same place, no con-
tradiction appears in the statement that two parts of
the same body may exist in the same place at the same
time.

From which it is obvious that for a reason equal to
that by which two parts of the body of Christ can
exist in the same place, all the parts of the body of
Christ could coexist at the same time in the same place.
Moreover, from this and the former statement follows
the principal intention. For if it is not impossible
for God, who can do more than we can think or un-
derstand, to bring it to pass that all the parts of the
body of Christ may exist in the same body, and it is
not impossible for Him to place the same whole sub-


10


15


20


25


30


10


15


20


25


30


98 THE SACRAMENT OF THE ALTAR


stance in a whole and to place the whole in each part,
as is obvious of the rational soul and an angel.


It manifestly follows that it is not impossible for
God to bring it to pass that the whole substance of the
body of Christ may coexist with the whole host and
with each part of it, which is the principal thesis. Nor
does this obtain, that the body of Christ has organic
parts really distinct, of which one is not in another,
as a finger is not in a finger; of which, moreover, some
are in one total part and not in another, as the eyes
are not in the hand or in the foot but in the head. For
local separation is not required for a distinction of
organic parts, but a real distinction of material dispo-
sitions. For although the hand, if the same disposi-
tions are retained, might be placed with the eye, so
that both the hand and.eye would be at the same time
in the same place, yet the hand would certainly be a
hand and not an eye, and a man could not see through
the hand but through the eye. And so then the organs
can remain distinct and created to have distinct func-
tions, no matter how much they might not be separate
locally. And, therefore, this must not be denied of
the divine power. But of what kind the diversity of
disposition of the organs may be, whether indeed it
be substantial or accidental, does not concern the pres-
ent discussion.


Similarly, also, although the organs might not be
separate locally, it would not by virtue of this follow
that the hand would be in the foot, or the contrary;
but only that those organs would be at the same time in
the same place, which is not inconsistent with the dis-
position of the organs, as has been shown; since with
even the local inseparability of one part from another


THE SACRAMENT OF THE ALTAR 99


it obtains that one part may be in another as in its
whole, after the manner in which the eye is in the
head, as in a whole; and as with the local inseparabil-
ity of the rational soul from man it obtains that the
rational soul may be a part of man; for the rational s
soul is wholly in the same place in which man is, and
yet it is part of man. So the eye might be able to be

a part of the head and yet be in the same place with
the head. And so the possibility of the existence of
the body of Christ with the whole host and with each 10
part of it is obvious.


However, I assert nothing concerning all of the pre-
vious statements, except that which is consistent with
the doctrine of the Saints; but if any statement should
not be in agreement with their statements, let it be 15
said only for the training of studious minds.


10


15


20


25


CHAPTER VII


That the body of Christ in the sacrament
of the altar is not seen by us with the
bodily eye


Therefore, when at their words the substance of the
bread only ceases to exist, this body of the Lord, which
begins to exist under the species of bread by the divine
power, is not perceived with the bodily eye but by
faith and the understanding. This conclusion is drawn
from passages of the Holy Fathers as well as from
arguments.


Whence, the blessed Augustine says, as quoted in
the De Consecratione, Distinction IL, ‘Nos autem.’
“But we,” he says, “in the species of bread and wine
which we see, behold invisible things, that is, we do
honor to flesh and blood.”


Likewise, the same Augustine in the De Consecra-
tione, Distinction IL, ‘Qui manducant.’ “That which
is seen,” he says, “is the bread and the cup which also
the eyes declare; but that which faith for its instruc-
tion demands, the bread is the body of Christ and
the cup is the blood. These, therefore, are called sac-
raments, because in them one is seen and another is
understood.”


Likewise, Gregory in the De Consecratione, Distinc-
tion IL, ‘Quid sit,’ says thus: “It is a great and dread
mystery," the Lord says, “because one is seen and an-
other is understood.”


Likewise, Hilary as quoted in the De Consecratione,
Distinction IL, ‘Ubi.’ “A visible quantity," he says,
100


N Ze


THE SACRAMENT OF THE ALTAR | 101


“is not to be considered in this mystery, but the virtue
of the sacrament is spiritual.”


It is obvious from these and many other passages
that the body of Christ is not seen in the sacrament of
the altar, but is only understood; although the species
of bread may really be seen.


Moreover, for this conclusion arguments are not
wanting. For that, which is perceived with the bodily
eye in some place, can certainly be known to exist in
the same place without any authority. But no one
without the full authority of the Saviour and of the
Church would hold that the body of Christ is really
contained under the species of bread; therefore, it is
not seen there with the bodily eye.

Likewise, bodily vision is equal in all those equally
disposed; but no unbeliever sees the body of Christ in
the sacrament of the altar with the bodily eye; there-
fore, it remains that no believer perceives with the
bodily eye that the body of Christ is there.


It is likewise manifest that no one perceives there
any sensible quality by any sense whatsoever, unless a
quality of the host. As is obvious, from qualities tan-
gible and perceptible by the sense of taste and from
visible qualities, the body of Christ is not, therefore,
seen in the sacrament of the altar with the bodily eye.


Cn


je


0


m


5


3


©


10


15


20


25


CHAPTER VIII


That the accidents remaining after con-
secration are not subjectively in the
body of Christ


Since little has been previously written about the
existence of the body of Christ under the species of
bread; it remains that some views be set forth con-
cerning the accidents remaining after the consecration
of the substance of the bread.


Let it be shown, first, that those accidents do not
exist subjectively in the body of Christ; which is ob-
vious from this, that contrary qualities in a body are
not at the same time in the body of Christ. More-
over, for the same reason by which the qualities of
one host might exist subjectively in the body of Christ,
the qualities of another host might affect the same body
of Christ. But it is obvious to sense that sometimes
some qualities of diverse hosts are contrary to them-
selves. From which it follows that neither these qual-
ities nor those affect the body of Christ.


Likewise, the body of Christ is not changed anew
to sensible qualities, which might, however, happen if
the accidents of the bread could inform the body of
Christ. This is also confirmed by the passage of the
Master of the Sentences in Book IV., Distinction XII.
“There,” he says, “is no substance except that of the
body and the blood of the Lord which is not affected
by those accidents. For the body of Christ does not
have in itself such form, but such as will appear in the
judgment.”

102


THE SACRAMENT OF THE ALTAR 103


Moreover, those accidents do not affect the sur-
rounding air; for no accident, neither as regards itself
as a whole nor as regards any part of itself, is sepa-
rate in place and situation from its primary subject.
But to the sense it appears that some part of an acci-
dent of the host is separate in place and situation from
the surrounding air and from each part of it; there-
fore, the same accident is not in the air subjectively,
nor for the same reason is any of the others. Like-
wise, an accident never occupies a place other than the
place of its subject, but it is manifest that the host and
the air occupy distinct places; therefore, it is manifest
that accidents are not subjectively in the air.

Moreover, those accidents are not subjectively in
the substance of the bread, because that substance is
not, as was shown previously. Therefore, it remains
that the accidents remain without a subject; which
is confirmed through the Master of the Sentences in
Book IV., Distinction XII., where he says at the be-
ginning: “But if any inquiry is made concerning the
accidents which remain; namely, of the species, ‘taste’
and ‘heaviness,’ in what subject they may be found, it
seems to me to cause these accidents to be without a
subject rather than to be in a subject.”


10


10


15


20


10


20


25


CHAPTER IX


That the quantity, which was before in
the substance of the bread, remains


Moreover, it can be shown by many reasons that
those accidents may be quanta, and that a quantity
may truly remain after consecration.


First thus: according to Innocent III. in the margin
of the De Celebratione Missarum, ‘Cum Marthe,’ a
subtle distinction must be made among three things,
which are distinct in the sacrament; namely, visible
form, reality of the body, and spirtual virtue. The
form is that of bread and wine, the reality is that of
flesh and blood, the virtue is that of unity and charity.
The first is the sacrament, and not the element. The
second is the sacrament and the element. The third is
the element and not the sacrament.


From this it is evidently inferred that the visible
form is really distinct from the body of Christ and
that it is not a quantum from the quantity of the body
of Christ; as it is not visible through some quality vis-
ible in the body of Christ. But it is manifest that that
visible form is a quantum, since it may be long, wide,
and thick; therefore, some quantity besides the quan-
tity of the body of Christ really remains.


In the second place thus: that the quantity of the
visible form is really figurated, but nothing is figurated
without quantity, and does not have the figure of the
body of Christ; therefore, it does not have the quan-
tity of the body of Christ; and consequently there is

104


THE SACRAMENT OF THE ALTAR 105


there some quantity other than the quantity of the
body of Christ.

In the third place thus: some quantity is seen in the
sacrament of the altar with the bodily eye, but neither
Christ nor any accident of Him is seen by us in the
sacrament of the altar with the bodily eye; therefore,
there is there a quantity remaining other than the
quantity of the body of Christ.

In the fourth place thus: all that which is broken
and one part of which is separate from another is a
quantum. But that visible form is broken and one part
of it is separate from another; but the body of Christ
is not thus; therefore, there is there some other quan-
tity besides the quantity of the body of Christ.

For the Evangelist, Matthew, is a witness that the
visible form may really be broken when he says:
“Jesus took bread, blessed it and also brake it." Mark
offers the same testimony. “Blessing it,” he says, “he
brake it.” Which also is obvious according to Luke
and other Holy Fathers, whom it would take too long
to adduce. Moreover, that the body of Christ may not
be broken but may remain entire, the eminent doctor,
the blessed Augustine, says, as quoted in the De Con-
secratione, Distinction II., ‘Qui manducant.’ “Christ,”
he says, “is eaten; though eaten, He lives; because
though slain, He arose; nor, when we eat, do we make
portions of Him.” And he says likewise in the De
Consecratione, Distinction IL, ‘Invitat.’ “Through
parts He is eaten in the sacrament,” he says, “and re-
mains an entire whole in heaven; remains an entire
whole in your heart.” From all these passages it is
gathered that a quantity distinct from the quantity of
the body of Christ remains in the sacrament of the
altar.


15


20


25


30


15


20


25


CHAPTER X
That the sensible qualities remain


Moreover, it is not only well known that a quantity
remains in the Eucharist, but it is also manifest that
sensible qualities subsist in the same place after con-
secration. For nothing is visible without a sensible
quality, but the visible form remains there, and, there-
fore, a sensible quality. Taste is also perceived there,
and whiteness is seen, and the sense of touch also ap-
prehends the tangible qualities. But no sense perceives
any quality of the body of Christ; therefore, the sen-
sible qualities remain, which were before in the sub-
stance of the bread and are now without a subject. As
the Master says in Book IV., Distinction XI.: “The
species of bread and wine is there, as taste. Whence,
one is seen, another is understood.” All the previous
statements might be able to be confirmed by many
other passages; from quoting which I refrain, for I
hasten on to certain statements of physics, upon which
I happened while reading the Sentences.


I have fully investigated the questions concerning
the Eucharist for the sake of thoroughly examining
and explaining them that I may make known to those
not understanding the ‘que’ and the ‘qualia’ and the
‘quomodo,’ and that I have spoken without assertion
and only by quoting for the purpose of exercising the
abilities of the studious. I have undertaken the pres-
ent task because of the misrepresentation of some
critics.


106


CHAPTER XI


That every extended material substance
is composed of substantial parts really
distinct


However, in order that the statements, which are
to be presented, may appear to rest upon a solid and
immovable foundation, an exordium may then be as-
sumed with respect to which no rational person ought
to be in doubt.


Every extended material substance is composed of
substantial parts separate in place or situation. For
wood is not only composed of matter and form, which
are essential parts and of diverse grounds; but it is
also composed of integral parts, of which each is wood.
But it is manifest that these parts, of which each is
wood, are not in the same situation; therefore, they
are separate in situation. And yet wood is truly com-
posed of parts and is not composed of accidents; there-
fore, it is composed of substantial parts separate in
situation.


Again, when wood is divided into two equal parts,
no substance new as regards itself as a whole is gen-
erated; but there are now two substances really dis-
tinct locally; for otherwise, when wood is divided into
halves, the accidents would remain without a subject
in one half; from which, therefore, no substance new
as regards itself as a whole is generated. It is neces-
sary, that those two substances, each of which is a cer-
tain whole after division, were previously making one
whole wood, and were not at the same time in the

107


10


15


20


25


10


20


30


108 THE SACRAMENT OF THE ALTAR


same place; therefore, there were before two parts of
one total wood separate in situation.


Again, one half of the wood can be corrupted, the
other not corrupted; but such a corruption is a sub-
stantial corruption; therefore, some substance, which
was before, is now destroyed. And it is manifest that
some substance, which was before, now remains; there-
fore, there were before two substantial parts of the
same wood composing one wood.


Again, the whiteness existing in the wood is a whole
in some whole and part in part; or there is, therefore,
a whole in some whole substance and part in part, or
there is a whole in some whole accident and part in
part. If the first be granted, the thesis is maintained,
that there is some substance composed of substantial
parts separate in situation, as parts of whiteness are
separate in situation and place. If the second is
granted, it is necessary to give some primary subject to
that accident, so that there may be a whole in a whole
subject and a part in a part. And if, indeed, substance
be such a subject, I accept the thesis; but if an accident
be considered the total subject of that accident; then
I inquire about the subject of that (accident) as about
the former; and it is necessary to continue the pro-
cedure indefinitely, or that there may be some extended
accident having some substance for a primary subject,
which is a whole in a whole substance and a part in a
part, which can not be, unless that substance have sub-
stantial parts separate in situation.


Again, unless wood and any material, extended sub-
stance could universally have real and substantial parts
separate in situation; there could no more be such a
substance really extended than there could a rational


THE SACRAMENT OF THE ALTAR 109


soul. For as a rational soul is a whole in a whole body
and a whole in each part; so any material substance
would be a whole under a whole quantity and a whole
under each part; but that is absurd. It might be able
to be said that there is no similarity, for the soul does
not have parts; therefore, it might be able to be argued
about knowledge and virtue, which have intentional
parts.


Therefore, it remains that an extended material sub-
stance has substantial parts locally separate which are
to such a degree distinguished from one another, that
one part can be destroyed, another not destroyed, and
not only this; but even if they remain, they can be mu-
tually separated and can be certain distinct wholes;
as when wood or stone is divided, those the same nu-
merically, which were before parts, are now wholes
and not parts; yet they are not now other than before.


10


15


10


15


20


25


CHAPTER XII


That an absolute thing can be prior by
divine power without a posterior


To the preceding fundamental principle another
must be joined; namely, that the infinite and incompre-
hensible power of God can make and preserve every
absolute thing prior naturally, without an absolute
thing really distinct as regards itself as a whole, poste-
rior naturally. For since a thing prior naturally to
another may depend less upon and require a thing
posterior less than an effect its essential cause, and
since we manifestly hold that sometimes the divine
power produces, maintains and preserves its effect
without a natural cause, we ought not to doubt but that
God can produce and preserve a thing prior naturally
without a thing posterior.


Again, a thing posterior can not be a cause of a
thing prior. Therefore, if a thing prior can not be
without a thing posterior, this must not be posited, un-
less because a thing posterior is a natural effect natu-
rally following a thing prior; but it is manifest that
divine virtue sometimes has suspended the action of a
created cause, and preserved a cause without an effect.
For who, except God, prevented the fire of the glowing
furnace from consuming the servants of God who were
cast into the midst, and yet the flame of fire slew the
Chaldean attendants. Countless other instances are
found in Sacred Scripture and in the saying of the
Holy Fathers and the acts of the Martyrs.


From all these it is evidently obvious that natural
110


HE SACRAMENT OF THE ALTAR 111


causes are prevented through the virtue of God from
producing their own effects; therefore, no contradic-
tion is involved in the statement that a thing prior


naturally is produced and preserved without a pos-
terior.


Again, an accident depends more upon its subject
than any thing prior by nature upon a posterior. But
so great is the divine power that notwithstanding the
dependence of an accident upon its subject, the acci-
dent will be able to exist and to be preserved through
divine power without any subject; therefore, notwith-
standing by whatever natural sequence of a thing pos-
terior from a prior, the thing prior could be preserved
by divine virtue without a posterior.


Therefore, it must not be denied that by divine
power God might be able to preserve and make any
absolute thing prior naturally without a thing poste-
rior. For so great is the divine power that concerning
His creatures He could do whatever would please Him.
Accordingly, if He make a cause of a natural object,
He is not necessitated to make the effect.


10


15


20


10


15


20


25


CHAPTER XIII


That the omnipotence of God can make
a substance without any absolute acci-
dent formally inhering in it


If the Creator of all, according to the good pleasure
of His will, can make, preserve and maintain a thing
prior without a posterior, there ought to be no doubt
but that the same power may be able to produce and
preserve any substance whatever without any absolute
accident formally inhering in it. For if the virtue of
God preserves and maintains an accident without a
subject, will He not have so much power that He may
preserve and maintain a substance without any acci-
dent? For since a substance may be more perfect and
more actual, approaching also more nearly to divine
subsistence than an accident may be, it may also de-
pend less upon an accident than an accident upon a
substance. But according to reason it may be charac-
teristic of a substance for it to exist per se, but an ac-
cident naturally depends upon another. It also depends
more upon a substance than conversely. No believer,
who believes and holds that the accidents are in the
sacrament of the altar without a subject, ought to
doubt that a substance could by the same virtue subsist
without an accident.


Again, no contradiction appears in the statement
that an absolute thing may exist without all that which
is neither a part of it nor an essential cause of it. But
no accident is a cause nor a part of the substance in
which it inheres; therefore, no contradiction is in-

112


THE SACRAMENT OF THE ALTAR 113


volved in the statement that a substance can subsist
per se without an accident.

Again, it is necessary that everything, which is not
God, if it really have being, be really produced by
God; therefore, if a substance is produced, an acci-
dent could not be, unless God of his own free will had
given being to it. But the divine power is subject to
no creature; therefore, there is no contradiction in the
statement that, if a substance is created, an accident
may not acquire being, if it should be pleasing to God.

Again, if for the being of a substance the being of
an accident may necessarily follow, this can not hap-
pen except by virtue of one of three reasons: either
because an accident is part of a substance and a whole
can not be without its parts; or because a substance is
the effect of an accident and an effect presupposes its
cause; or because a substance is the natural cause of
an accident; and, if a cause is posited, the effect fol-
lows in order. But that an accident may not be part
of a substance is as manifest to the Saints as to the
philosophers. Since it may be known to all that a sub-
stance may be composed of substances and not of ac-
cidents; therefore, no accident could be a part of any
substance.

Nor does it suffice to say, that a substance is an ef-
fect or a cause of an accident; since it was shown be-
fore that the omnipotent God, to whom all creatures
yield perfect obedience, can suspend the action of a
natural cause and preserve an effect without a secon-
dary cause.

From the previous statements, it is especially gath-
ered, that it will not be denied that the omnipotent
God, to whom every word is not impossible, will be


15


20


25


30


10


15


20


25


30


114 THE SACRAMENT OF THE ALTAR


able to preserve a substance without an accident inher-
ing in it; as it is not impossible for Him to preserve
a thing prior without a posterior, which can be con-
firmed thus far by another reason. For the omnip-
otence of God has no less efficacy over all the individ-
uals of some species than created virtue may have over
a single individual of the same species.


Therefore, if created virtue can make this substance
without this accident, if some individual of that species
of accident was designated, could not the infinite power
of God make this substance without any individual
of any species of accident? And for the same reason,
if imperfect created virtue has so much efficacy that
it could preserve some substance without any individ-
ual of some species of accident, will not infinite virtue
have so much efficacy that it may conserve the same
substance without any individual of the whole genus
of that accident?


Therefore, since the sun could preserve wood with-
out any tangible quality, could not God preserve wood
without any color? And if a natural cause; namely,
fire, can preserve water without the cold, will not the
immeasurableness of divine power have strength
enough to preserve water without any tangible qual-
ity? From this it seems probable that since inferior
causes, impotent except with the assistance of divine
power, can preserve and produce a substance without
this and that accident, it will not be impossible for God
to maintain a substance without any accident. And if
it should please God, He could bestow being upon any
substance whatever without any accident; for God has
made many things wonderful and contrary to the com-
mon course of nature.


CHAPTER XIV


That a substance, which is extended, can

be preserved locally unmoved, although

all of its absolute accidents may be
destroyed through divine power


But it is not only not incompatible with the divine
power to produce and preserve a thing prior without a
posterior, and consequently it will be able to sustain
a substance without an accident; but it is also not in-
compatible with the omnipotence of God to produce
and preserve a substance existing under an absolute
accident inhering in it without a local change of sub-
stance and to destroy that accident and to preserve
the substance. For what believer may dare to say, if
God wills to separate or destroy an absolute accident
inhering in a subject without the destruction of the
substance, that He is compelled to transfer the sub-
stance or some part of it from place to place?


For if natural causes expel many absolute accidents
and introduce them into that space though not locally
changed, could not God without the moving of the
substance locally preserve it, and also destroy an abso-
lute accident inhering in it; even, if He should be will-
ing, without the introduction of any other?


Again, God can destroy a thing posterior and sepa-
rate a thing prior from its nature, so that He may per-
mit it to excite the proper motion. Therefore, God can
destroy every accident of that wood and separate the
substance of the wood from its nature, that He may
excite the proper motion. When this has been done,

115


10


15


20


25


15


20


25


30


116 THE SACRAMENT OF THE ALTAR


either this substance of the wood will be locally moved,
and this is the intention; namely, that every absolute
accident inhering in a substance can be destroyed with-
out transference of the substance or any part of it from
place to place; or this substance will be moved locally,
which can not be granted.


From which, this substance is separated from its
own nature. At one time, because it could tranfer
itself in respect to no difference of place; not down-
wards, since it may not have the principle of penetrat-
ing the earth, as neither when it had its own accidents ;
nor can it move itself upwards, as neither before; and
by virtue of the same neither forwards nor backwards;
nor will it be moved by some natural external agent,
as is obvious by induction. At another time, because,
either the whole substance will change the whole place,
which can not be granted, or because the parts of the
substance, which were before separated, come together,
as it were, into one point, which can not be granted;
since there may not be there such a principle of being
moved. And, if there were, there could not be a
stronger reason why they should meet at one point
more than at another; nor could there be any reason
why an intermediate part should be moved to one inter-
mediate point more than to another point near the end.


Again, if while preserving the whole substance of
that wood, God should both destroy all the absolute
accidents of one part and preserve the absolute acci-
dents of the other part, which is not impossible with
God, as neither is it impossible for Him to destroy a
half of the whiteness of one white body and preserve
the other half of the whiteness; and at the same time
while doing this separate the whole substance of wood


THE SACRAMENT OF THE ALTAR 117


from its nature, where would that half of that sub-
stance go? Could that part of the substance, all of
whose accidents were destroyed by a proper virtue,
enter into another part of a substance or separate itself
totally from that part? It is not possible to concede
that any such result might be able to be done by cre-
ated power. Therefore, that part of the substance
separated from its nature will remain locally unmoved;
although God through His omnipotence may remove
all absolute accidents inhering in it by destroying or
even separating them. Therefore, God can preserve
a substance locally unmoved and destroy every abso-
lute accident inhering in it.


Again, every material substance is naturally in a
place either circumscriptively or definitively, especially
if there be a place surrounding it. Therefore, sub-
stance existing by natural accidents is in a place and
is present in a place; and as it is prior naturally to the
accidents themselves, so it is naturally present in the
place itself before its accidents may be present in the
same place. Therefore, no contradiction is involved in
the statement that God may preserve a substance pres-
ent in a place without local translation of any part of
a substance without the presence of accidents at that
place. It is, therefore, established that He, who spake
and all things were made, can by the same virtue pre-
serve a substance immovable locally and destroy or
separate the absolute accidents inhering in it.


15


20


25


10


15


20


25


CHAPTER XV


That a material substance through its in-
trinsic parts is present in the place in
which it is circumscribed


In connection with that which has been shown be-
fore concerning the distinction of substantial parts
separate in situation and composing an extended mate-
rial substance, it must now be shown that an extended
material substance through itself and its parts, which
are substances, is present in the place in which it is
circumscribed, so that through itself as a whole it is
in a whole place and through a part in a part of a
place; for indeed everything, which is present in a
place either through itself or through something else,
to which it is present, is present in that place. There-
fore, since a material substance may be present in a
place circumscribing itself, it is necessary that it be
present in that place either through itself or through
something else, to which it is present; therefore, it is
present in that place. For I do not now speak of
that through which as if through an efficient cause
something is present in a place; as a worm produced
by the sun is present in a place through the sun as if
through an efficient cause; for the sun, as is obvious,
makes the worm to be, so it makes it to be present in
a place; but I speak of that through which something
not separate from a place is present in a place.

If it be conceded that material substance through it-
self and through its substantial parts is present in a
place, that is accomplished which is intended. But if

118


THE SACRAMENT OF THE ALTAR 119


it be said that that material substance, which is ex-
tended, is present in a place through something else
which is neither substance nor part of it, to which the
substance itself is present, say, through some accident
inhering in a substance which is present in a place and
with which the substance itself is present; from this I
deduce the thesis. For when any two things locally
inseparable are present, whatever is present locally
with one of them, through the same is present with
the other of them. Therefore, if an accident of a sub-
stance and of a place be present locally, through that
same through which the substance itself is present with
the accident itself, through the same it will be present
in the place itself. But a substance through itself and
through its parts is present with that accident; there-
fore, it is present in its place through its same parts.


Again, the substance itself is present with that acci-
dent through that which is present in that which is its
own place, so that the whole substance is present with
that whole accident and part with part, as the whole
substance is informed by the whole accident and part
of the substance is informed by part of that accident;
for otherwise either the substance or the accident
would not be extended or be a quantum. Therefore,
either the substance is in the manner already stated
present with that accident or through some accident
intermediate with which the substance itself is present,
and which is present with that accident.


The second proposition can not be conceded; for
concerning that intermediate with which the substance
is present, I raise the question, as before, concerning
the prior accident and the process will be endless, or
it will be established that substance itself through it-


11


10


20


25


30


10


15


20


25


30


120 THE SACRAMENT OF THE ALTAR


self is present with that accident. And so it is neces-
sary to concede that such a substance, which is extended
through itself, is present with that accident ‘quantum,’
so that the whole, locally inseparable, is present in a
whole and a part in a part.


Since this is conceded, I proceed further thus: every
substance (which through itself and through its parts
intrinsic in it is present in some quantum having part
outside of part so that the whole substance is present
with that whole having part outside of part so that the
whole substance is present with that, and its own part
is present with a part of that whole, through itself for-
mally and through parts intrinsic in it,) has part out-
side of part and part distant from part, and every such
is through itself circumscribed in a place surrounding
it. For nothing more is required for this, that some-
thing may be circumscribed in a place through itself,
except that it may have being through itself for-
mally, although it may have causally by another ‘part
separate from part and part distant from part’; there-
fore, a substance is circumscribed in a place by itself
and by parts intrinsic to it.


From this it follows that a substance through itself
and through parts intrinsic to itself is present in a
place. That the accidents are present in a place would
not be in opposition to these statements; for, when
more are not separate locally, they themselves are pres-
ent in the same place. Therefore, since a substance is
not separate locally from its accidents, notwithstanding
that the substance may be present in a place, the acci-
dents themselves were able to be present in the same
place.


CHAPTER XVI


In which certain arguments are advanced

to prove that the quantity remaining in

the sacrament of the altar is not really
distinct from the qualities remaining


In the former statements, certain immovable funda-
ments, as it were, have been examined and in conse-
quence of those statements some reasons must be ad-
duced by virtue of which it might appear to anyone
that the quantity remaining in the sacrament of the
altar is not an absolute thing really distinct from the
qualities remaining with the substance of the body of
Christ, and that before the consecration there preceded
some quantity, which was not an absolute thing really
distinct from the substance of the bread, which does
not remain after the consecration by virtue of this,
that the substance of the bread ceases to be.

However, I repeat through the testimony advanced in
the beginning of this little work that, although I shall
say nothing assertatively except that which the Roman
Church teaches, I am prepared in all things to hold in
check my inclination by virtue of the authority of the
same church and also to believe with the heart and to
confess with the lips the universal truths which the Ro-
man Church expounds or will expound; but others to
be cited only, under whatever form of words I shall
have expressed them, I shall publicly set forth for the
purpose of exercise and of supplying material for
thought.

But before I shall approve the principal thesis, some

121


15


20


25


10


15


20


25


30


122 THE SACRAMENT OF THE ALTAR


fundaments must be premised; namely, that every
thing one per se, whether substantial or accidental, hav-
ing part separate from part or part outside of part, is
a quantum; for every such thing is really extended.
But no thing can really be extended unless it be a quan-
tum. Therefore, whether every quantum be per se
one having part outside of part or part separate from
part or not, makes no difference at all; yet this seems
to be understood by all, that everything per se one
having part outside of part or part separate from part
is truly and really a quantum and is extended.


From which it further follows that, since it may be
possible for something to be a quantum without a
quantity, (and every quantum is either subjectively in
a quantity as if in its subject or is a subject of a quan-
tity or is a thing not distinct from quantity; for it can
not be understood in several modes that something is
a quantum,) it is necessary for that quantum, which
is neither subjectively in a quantity nor is a subject of
a quantity, to be a thing not really distinct from quan-
tity.

From these statements it can be gathered that every-
thing, which is circumscribed in a place, is a quantum;
for everything, which is circumscriptively in a place,
is a whole in a whole place and a part in a part; for
this is to be circumscribed in a place. For by virtue
of this, that an angel is not a whole in a whole place
and part of an angel in a part of a place; by virtue
of this an angel is not in a place circumscriptively.
Therefore, that, which is in a place circumscriptively,
is a whole in a whole and a part in a part. But every
such has part separate from part, as parts of a place
are separate in situation. But that which has part sep-


THE SACRAMENT OF THE ALTAR 123


arate from part is a quantum; therefore, everything
per se one existing in a place circumscriptively is a
quantum; and by virtue of the same it is obvious that
every quantum having part separate from part is cir-
cumscriptively in a place; especially if there be some
place surrounding it. For every such is in a place so
that a whole is in a whole place and a part in a part,
and consequently is circumscriptively in the place.


10


15


20


25


CHAPTER XVII


That any quantity is not an absolute

thing really distinct from substance and

that any quantity is not an absolute thing
really distinct from quality


Since those propositions have been advanced, some
conclusions must now be proved; one of which is, as
it were, common and general; namely, that any quan-
tity is not an absolute thing really distinct from sub-
stance, or that any quantity is not an absolute thing
really distinct from quality. And that I may not ap-
pear to depend upon a proper sense and to deviate from
the patristic definitions, as a fundament I make use of
a passage of the most Holy Father, the illustrious Doc-
tor, John of Damascus, who asserts that the same thing
is of the genus ‘substance’ and of the genus ‘quantity’ ;
which can not be true if every quantity were a thing
really distinct from substance. Whence, says the afore-
said doctor, the venerable Father, John of Damascus:
“Therefore, we say," he says, “since it is possible for the
same thing to be classified as number, according to one
intention under one category and according to another
intention under another category. Indeed, obvious
facts, which were previously mentioned, are classified
under ‘quantum,’ as however mutually having condi-
tion or mutually classed under those which are in rela-
tion to another; for great and small are named in
relation to another. For great is called great in rela-
tion to small, and double in relation to half, and sim-
ilarly the rest. But a body, according to that which is

124


THE SACRAMENT OF THE ALTAR 125


natural, is classified under ‘substance,; but according
to that which is mathematical, that is, measured, under
‘quantum.’ ”


Notice how plainly that Saint asserts that the same
thing is contained under diverse categories because of
a distinction of intentions. He also asserts that the
same thing, as body, may be of the genus ‘substance’
and of the genus ‘quantity.’ For the same body, be-
cause it is a certain natural thing composed of matter
and form, is of the genus ‘substance.’ Moreover, the
same thing, because it has part separate from part, by
virtue of which it can be measured, is of the genus
‘quantity’; which could not be true if every quantity
were a thing really distinct from substance. And as
the same thing, since it is a certain natural thing com-
posed of matter and form, is of the genus ‘substance’ ;
and, since it has part outside of part, is of the genus
‘quantity’; so the same whiteness, since it is a certain
natural thing created to qualify a subject, is of the
genus ‘quality’; and, since the same whiteness is a cer-
tain thing having part outside of part and part sepa-
rate from part by situation, it is of the genus 'quan-
tity.’

And so it is established that in saying that any quan-
tity is not a thing really distinct from substance and
that any quantity is not a thing really distinct from
quality, I do not deviate from the patristic definitions.
Whence, I have never read that any Saint or the Prince
of philosophers, Aristotle, has made a distinction be-
tween ‘quantum’ and ‘quantity’; on the contrary, he
indifferently uses ‘quantum’ and ‘quantity’ as the same.
And I say this, that according to Aristotle it would be
the same to say, ‘quantum is substance’ or ‘quality and


10


15


20


25


30


wn


126 THE SACRAMENT OF THE ALTAR


quantity is substance or quality.’ And, indeed, that
which is commonly said, that Aristotle says in the first
book of the Posteriores, that this negative is immedi-
ate, ‘no substance is quantity,’ is false; for he does not
even remotely make any mention there of substance
or quantity or of other categories.


CHAPTER XVIII


That all the qualities in the sacrament of
the altar are not one subject of one
quantity


Since the former conclusion has been shown, as if
uniform, some special conclusions must now be proved;
one of which is, that all the qualities remaining in the
sacrament of the altar are not one subject of one quan-
tity by virtue of which all those qualities may be called
quanta. Just as a man is called white because he is
the subject of whiteness, or fire is called hot because
it is the subject of heat; for no accident one numeri-
cally can be one per se in a primary as if in an imme-
diate subject in something which is one only through
aggregation, so that that whole accident may be in any
one of them and may not be one part of an accident
in one of them and another part in another; which I
say in order to refute one sophistical cavil; for some
say that sometimes it happens that, when some wood
is placed in water so that one part may be in the air
and the other in the air or outside of the water, the
part existing in the water is converted into stone and
the other part remains wood as before. When this
has been accomplished, they say that any quantity ex-
isting in a whole is one numerically and yet the subject
is not one per se, since one part may be stone and the
other wood. And so any accident one numerically
could be in one subject which is one only through ag-
gregation. But this sophistical cavil, whether it con-
tain the truth or not, is excluded through this which

127


10


20


25


10


15


20


25


30


128 THE SACRAMENT OF THE ALTAR


is accepted, that an accident one numerically can not
be in something one through aggregation, so however
that one part of that accident may not be in one of
them and another in another. For in the instance ad-
vanced one part of that quantity is placed subjectively
in one of those aggregations and another part in an-
other. Therefore, it is obvious that an instance can
not be found contrary to the proposition asserting that
no accident one numerically can be in something one
through aggregation only, and yet that one part may
not be in one of them and another in another. But it
is manifest that these qualities remaining in the sacra-
ment of the altar, if they be one, are not one except
through aggregation. And it is manifest that one part
of that quantity is not subjectively in one of those
qualities and another in another. Therefore, it fol-
lows that all those qualities are not the subject of a
quantity one numerically by virtue of which they are
called quanta.


Again, no accident one numerically can be succes-
sively in diverse primary subjects through the action
of a natural cause. But I consider a primary subject
not that which is a subject of some accident through a
part, as a man is called the subject of whiteness, be-
cause a hand or foot is the subject of whiteness. But
I consider that a primary subject which is the subject
of some accident, and no part of it is the primary and
adequate subject of it. And if a primary subject is
thus accepted, it is manifest that no accident one nu-
merically can be naturally in diverse primary subjects.

If this is conceded, one part of those qualities may
be removed, as it is obvious to sense that it can be
done. Then I ask whether or not the same quantity


THE SACRAMENT OF THE ALTAR 129


remains, which was before. If so, then it follows that
a quantity the same numerically is at first subjectively
in this whole aggregation of prior qualities and after-
wards is not in that, since it does not remain, and yet
is in something; therefore, it is in another, and con-
sequently is in several successively.


If a quantity the same numerically does not remain;
therefore, when whiteness has been destroyed, any one
of the other qualities might change its quantity, which
seems absurd.


Furthermore, if this quantity is one in that aggrega-
tion, either it is a whole in a whole and a whole part
in any part of them or a whole in a whole and one part
in one of them and another part in another of them.
The first can not be conceded; for then an accident the
same numerically would be at the same time in several
subjects, which is false. Nor can the second be con-
ceded; for no part of that quantity can be accepted
which may have more regard for one quality than for
another, since those qualities may in no mode be sep-
arate locally.


From the previous statements it is gathered that,
since an accident may be counted according to the
enumeration of subjects, the qualities can not be dis-
tinct unless the quantities were distinct, if any one of
them be the subject of a quantity.


10


20


25


10


15


20


25


CHAPTER XIX


That not any quality may be the imme-
diate subject of a quantity


Moreover, it is not only impossible that those quali-
ties may be one subject of one quantity; but it is also
impossible to say that any quality is the subject of some
quantity, so that a distinct quality is the subject of a
distinct quantity; for such a plurality of quantities dis-
tinct from qualities is altogether superfluous and is
granted without necessity.


Again, for the same reason before transubstantia-
tion the substance of the bread was a distinct subject
of a quantity distinct from all those quantities whose
subjects after transubstantiation are qualities, which
is incompatible; for it would then follow that a sub-
stance would be a quantum with distinct quantities;
for there would be a quantum with one quantity of
which there would be an immediate subject and there
would be a quantum with other quantities, of which
there would be a mediate subject, because with those
mediating qualities of which there is a subject.


Again, all, whom I have seen who posit that quan-
tity would be a thing other than substance and qual-
ity, hold to the incongruity that two dimensions may
be at the same time. But if a substance be the sub-
ject of one quantity and a quality be the subject of
another quantity, it is necessary to posit that not only
two dimensions may be at the same time, but even that
more than two may be at the same time; from which

130


THE SACRAMENT OF THE ALTAR 131


it follows that those, who talk in this fashion, do not
speak consistently.


Therefore, although according to some it is not in-
consistent to posit that distinct quanta are at the same
time, which are of a different ground or of the same s
ground, making however one; nevertheless it seems im-
possible naturally or through created power that di-
verse quantities of the same species, most especially
those not making a quantity one numerically, are at the
same time. 10


But if each quality could be the subject of a distinct
quantity, those quantities could not make a quantity
one numerically nor could they be distinguished in
species; therefore, they can not be at the same time
in the same place; and so it is manifest that each qual- 15
ity is not the subject of a distinct quantity.


10


15


20


25


CHAPTER XX


That the quantity remaining is not subjec-
tively in one quality and not in another


Moreover, that one quantity only, which may be
subjectively in only one quality and not in another,
may not remain so that the remaining qualities may
not be subjects of that quantity, follows from this;
that, if only one quality could be the subject of that
quantity, the remaining qualities could not be quanti-
ties and could not be subjectively in a quantity, nor
could a quantity be subjectively in them. But it was
stated before that that, which is neither a thing really
distinct from a quantity nor is subjectively in a quan-
tity nor is the subject of a quantity, is not a quantum;
and so the remaining qualities distinct from that qual-
ity, which might be the subject of that quantity, could
not be quanta, which is well known to be false.


Besides, since it may be manifest that all the qual-
ities remaining in the sacrament of the altar are broken
and divided and, when the host is divided, all similar
qualities remain with each part of the host, it can not
be said that one quality is the immediate subject of a
quantity, but each other quality is the mediate sub-
ject of a quantity; and, therefore, each is a quantum,
because in qualities there is subjectively a quantity
mediately or immediately.


This, I say, can not hold; since, if only one quality
could be the subject of a quantity, one would be me-
diate and another immediate. This would not be able
to be true, unless because a quality, which is the im-

132


THE SACRAMENT OF THE ALTAR 133


mediate subject of a quantity, could be subjectively
in that quality which is the mediate subject of a quan-
tity. But this is clearly found to be false, for one
corporeal quality is not a subject of another corporeal
quality; for color is not a subject of taste, nor con-
trariwise. Nor is heat the subject of odor or color;
for then heat would truly and really be white or
black, which is absurd. From this, therefore, it fol-
lows, among other statements, that no concrete of any
quality is predicated of an abstract of another. For
it is manifest that one quality is not the subject of an-
other quality.


This conclusion also obtains by another reason; for
the destruction of an accident follows either mediately
or immediately upon the destruction of a subiect. If,
therefore, one quality could be the subject of another
quality, it would be necessary that, when a quality
is destroyed, which is immediately in the substance as
in a subject, all other qualities would be destroyed.
And so, if a tangible quality could be an immediate
subject of another sensible by another sense and that
of another, and so by continuing in logical order, it
would be necessary that, when the color of any body
changed, the other qualities would be removed.

Therefore, from all the previous statements, it can
evidently be understood that a quantity is not any ac-
cident existing subjectively in a quality, as in a sub-
ject.


10


20


15


20


25


CHAPTER XXI


In which it is proved by the testimony

of the Catholic doctors that qualities are

not subjectively in a quantity other than
a substance


After the previous statements it remains to show
that the qualities remaining in the sacrament of the
altar after consecration are not subjectively in a
quantity, as if in a subject sustaining them. And, in-
deed, this conclusion is to be confirmed by the testi-
mony of the venerable Doctors. Whence, the illustri-
ous Doctor, the Master of the Sentences, says in Book
IV., Distinction XII., in the beginning of the Chapter,
‘Damnamus.’ Whose doctrine a general council, in
the margin of the De Summa Trinitate et Fide Ca-
tholica, ‘Damnamus,’ also approved. “If a question
is raised,” he says, “concerning the accidents which
remain; namely, concerning the species, taste and
heaviness, in what subject they may be found; it seems
clear to me that they exist without a subject rather
than that they are in a subject.”


From which it is obvious that it is in accordance
with the intention of that Doctor, that such qualities,
taste, heaviness, and similar qualities, remaining in the
sacrament of the altar, are not subjectively in some-
thing and consequently are not in a quantity as if in a
subject; because then they would not be without a
subject but in a subject. Nor is it sufficient to say that
he does not intend that those qualities are outside of
the whole subject; but that they may not be in some

134


THE SACRAMENT OF THE ALTAR 135


substance as if in a subject; whence, assigning a rea-
son why those qualities are without a fundament, he
adds, that there is no substance there, except that of
the body and blood of the Lord, which is not affected
by those accidents.


This response, I say, does not suffice because it
never follows, that any accident is without a subject
as long as it subsists in its primary and immediate
subject. But if the qualities remaining after conse-
cration could be in a quantity as in a subject, a quan-
tity would be the immediate subject of them and
consequently, as long as they would subsist in a quan-
tity, they would not be without a subject.

Again, any accident can never be said to be existing
per se, so long as it subsists in its immediate subject.
But according to the same Doctor the qualities remain-
ing in the sacrament of the altar are subsisting per se;
for when he speaks of the qualities of which he spoke
before, that they are without a subject, he says:
“Those accidents, by which the body of Christ having
its form and nature is concealed, remain subsisting
per se at the celebration of the mystery, for the tast-
ing and assent of faith." Therefore, it is apparent
that it is in accordance with the intention of that Doc-
tor that taste and weight and the like, the qualities
remaining in the sacrament of the altar, are subsisting
per se and without any subject. From which it fol-
lows that they do not exist in a quantity, as in a sub-
ject. |
Whence, the aforesaid Doctor adds in the same
place: “Do not be surprised or scoff,” he says, Eit
the accidents there may appear to be broken, since
they may be there without a subject." From this it

12


10


15


20


25


30


10


15


20


25


30


136 THE SACRAMENT OF THE ALTAR


is more wonderful that the accidents exist without a
subject than that they may be broken.


Again, there is no stronger reason that one quality
may be in a quantity as in a subject, than for another
quality; but any quality remaining in the sacrament
of the altar is not in a quantity but in a subject.
Therefore, there is nothing there in a quantity, as if
in a subject. But it is obvious that some quality may
remain after the consecration which may not be in a
quantity as if ina subject. For heaviness is a quality;
for according to it something is called ‘quale’; and yet
the heaviness remaining in the sacrament of the altar
is not in a quantity as in a subject; for, if heaviness
were in something as in a subject, that subject would
truly and really be heavy, as the whole subject, in
which there is whiteness, is white; and the whole sub-
ject, in which there is heat, is warm. But nothing re-
maining in the sacrament of the altar after consecra-
tion is heavy by that heaviness which remains in the
same sacrament; which a certain gloss on the De Con-
secratione, Distinction II., above that chapter, ‘Si per
negligentiam,’ clearly asserts. Whence, objecting to
this that he said that accidents fall to the earth, he
says thus: “But it is likewise objected, since the acci-
dents alone remain there, and accidents do not have
weight, for body alone has weight; how, therefore,
are accidents said to fall, since they may not have
weight.” And solving this objection he says: “Say
that heaviness still remains with other accidents and
yet nothing heavy is there.” From this gloss it is
obvious in part that, although heaviness may remain
with the other accidents after consecration, yet it is
not in some subject which may be able to be called


THE SACRAMENT OF THE ALTAR 137


heavy from that heaviness. And for the same reason
there is not something white there, but whiteness only
is there, and there is nothing white there as heaviness
is there, and nothing is heavy there.


And in the same manner, although taste may be
there, yet there is not there a subject sustaining taste
deriving its name from taste. From which it plainly
follows that quantity is not a subject informed by
those qualities nor deriving its name from them. For
if it were under those qualities, it would truly be heavy,
warm or cold, white, sweet or bitter, which is plainly
contrary to the aforesaid gloss.


Another point can also be drawn from the preceding
gloss; namely, that in the sacrament of the altar there
is not some body having weight. From this it follows
that there is not there a quantity having weight, since
every permanent and continuous quantity may be a line
or a surface or a body. Therefore, if a quantity hav-
ing weight were there, then it would be necessary that
there should be there either a line having weight, or a
surface having weight, or a body having weight. But
it cannot be said that a line or a surface has weight,
and not a body; for the previously mentioned gloss
says that body alone has weight. From this it follows
that, if there were there some quantity having weight,
there would be there a body having weight, which is
denied; therefore, there is there no quantity having
weight. From this it is, furthermore, proper to infer
that no quantity there is the subject of that heaviness,
and by virtue of that it is necessary to say that no
quantity there is the subject of those qualities; but all
those qualities there are subsisting per se by divine
virtue.


10


15


20


25


30


10


15


20


25


30


138 THE SACRAMENT OF THE ALTAR


Again, the Holy Mother Church when celebrating
the sacrament of the body of Christ reads thus: “The
accidents exist without a subject in the same that
faith may have a place, while the invisible concealed
by another species is visibly received, and the senses,
which judge of accidents known to them, are rendered
immune from deception."


From the preceding authorities and very many others
it clearly obtains that not only one accident may
exist without a subject in the sacrament of the altar,
but that accidents exist without a subject, say, all the
qualities of which the senses judge; which would be
true if all the qualities were in a quantity as in a sub-
ject.


Whence, since this may be the opinion of many re-
vered Doctors; namely, the Master of the Sentences,
Hostiensis, Gaufridus, and of many other glossators
upon the decrees and decretals, it seems consistent with
the Catholic faith to say that all the qualities remain-
ing in the sacrament of the altar after consecration
may not be in something, neither in a quantity nor in
anything as in a subject. And it appears that this
may be the opinion of the Doctors; for Hostiensis at
the top of the title of the De Celebratione Missarum,
and Gaufridus in the same title, and the gloss in the
margin of the De Celebratione Missarum, ‘Cum Mar-
thee,’ and the gloss on the De Consecratione, Distinc-
tion II., Chapter, ‘In sacramentorum’, and the Master
of the Sentences in Book IX., Distinction XI., cite
three opinions concerning the conversion of the bread
into the body of Christ. “One,” as they say, “asserts
that that substance, which was bread at first, is after-
wards the flesh and the blood of Christ. The second
opinion holds that the substance of the bread and of


THE SACRAMENT OF THE ALTAR 139


the wine may cease to be there and the accidents only
remain; namely, taste, color, weight, and similar acci-
dents; and by those accidents the body of Christ be-
gins to be there. The third opinion holds that the
substance of the bread and of the wine remains there
and that the body of Christ is in the same place and
under the same species.” The second opinion is ap-
proved by all the previous authorities.

From all these it is obvious that the ancient and
authorized Doctors have posited that only the qualities
remain per se without a subject; and, indeed, they
have not posited that qualities were subjectively in
something.

These, and many, who posit that the qualities re-
maining in the sacrament of the altar are in a quantity
as if in a subject, adduce many passages of the author-
ized Doctors to prove that accidents; namely, qualities,
are without a subject; but they can not, indeed, adduce
one passage of any authorized Doctor to prove that the
qualities in the sacrament of the altar are in a quantity
as in a subject.

Whence, although I have diligently read the entire
tract of the Master of the Sentences concerning the
Eucharist and the entire tract, which is found in the
canonical law concerning the same matter, along with
the glosses, and other Doctors, as Hostiensis, Innocent
and others, yet I have not found that they mention
quantity even by denying it, except in three places;
namely, once in the De Consecratione, Distinction II.,
‘Quia corpus’; where, when speaking to the man re-
ceiving the body of Christ, he says thus: “Continuing
in thy visible stature thou hast invisibly become greater
than thyself without increase of quantity, although you
yourself would also be the same.”


in


15


20


25


30


wn


20


2


[221


140 THE SACRAMENT OF THE ALTAR


Again, the gloss over that chapter of the De Con-
secratione, Distinction IL, ‘Dupliciter’: “It can be
understood, either, according to that form and quantity
which he had on the cross or according to the quan-
tity of the glorified body which seems spiritual; for
it is subject to no sense."

Again, before, in Chapter ‘Ubi,’ Hilary says: “A
visible quantity is not to be considered in this mys-
tery; but the spiritual virtue of the sacrament” ; where
the gloss says: “The quantity must not be so estimated
that the body of Christ may be less under a smaller
quantity and greater in a larger quantity; for, wher-
ever there is a part whether of species or of body, that
is, the foot or the hand, the whole body is."

I do not remember that I have read in very many
places that the Saints or the authorized Doctors, who
discussed the sacrament of the Eucharist, touch upon
any thing about quantity.

But it is mainfest that from the preceding places
that it can neither directly nor indirectly be gathered
that qualities may be in a quantity as if in a subject.
But they expressly say of qualities that they remain
and that they themselves are broken and are used up.

Whence, the gloss above that Chapter of the De
Consecratione, Distinction II., ‘Ego Berengarius, says:
"I not only confess that weight and the other quali-
ties of the sacrament are perceived by the bodily
senses; but I confess that under those broken species
and very much wasted parts the whole and unbroken
body of Christ is, that the whole is eaten, and that
the whole is consumed." Notice that he calls the spe-
cies, qualities, which species, he says, are broken and
worn. Therefore, needlessly would there be posited
any quantity, which would be the subject of them.


CHAPTER XXII


That a quantity really distinct from a

substance may not be a subject of quali-

ties in the sacrament of the altar, is also

confirmed through the statements of the
philosophers


That a quantity really distinct from a substance may
not be a subject of qualities could be confirmed not
only by the testimony of the Holy Fathers but also
of the philosophers. Therefore, let it suffice to adduce
Aristotle, the Prince of philosophers. However, he
says in the Categories that substance alone is suscep-
tive of contraries through a change of itself; and he
says that this is properly characteristic of substance.
But if there could be between substance and qualities
one intermediate quantity differing and sustaining sen-
sual and corporeal qualities, it is manifest that that
quantity would be susceptive of contraries through a
proper change of itself. For that would at one time
be sweet, at another time would be bitter, when it
would support whiteness, when it would support black-
ness, when it would be warm, and when it would be
cold; and so a thing other than a substance would be
susceptive of contraries through a change of itself.


Again, according to the same philosopher alteration
as regards a sensible quality is distinguished from con-
densation and rarefaction to such a degree that, when
any body is rarefied or condensed, it is not necessary
that it lose all its qualities. Therefore, a white body
may become rarefied; and, when this has been done, it

141


10


15


20


10


142 THE SACRAMENT OF THE ALTAR


can not be granted that it may lose the prior whiteness
and may have a new whiteness; for there is here noth-
ing efficient enough that would be able to induce white-
ness into this body. But this can not obtain if quan-
tity be a thing intermediate between substance and
qualities; for, if it be an intermediate thing, it is nec-
essary that a rarefied substance have a new quantity,
as will be said and shown later. But since the newness
of its accident may follow in consequence of the new-
ness of the subject, it is necessary that whiteness
should be new and for the same reason each quality
existing subjectively in that quantity would be new.


CHAPTER XXIII


That the quantity remaining in the sacra-

ment of the altar is not an absolute thing

really distinct from the qualities remain-
ing in the same sacrament


From the preceding statements, it evidently follows
that the quantity remaining in the sacrament of the
altar is not an absolute thing really distinct from the
qualities remaining in the same sacrament. For noth-
ing is a quantum unless it be a subject of a quantity,
either existing in a quantity as in a subject or a thing
not really distinct from a quantity. And it has been
shown that the quality remaining is not a subject of
a quantity and is not subjectively in a quantity. And
it is manifest that the qualities after consecration are
quanta, since they may be long, wide and thick. There-
fore it remains that those qualities may be quanta,
and not through quantity which may be an absolute
thing really distinct from those qualities.

Again, everything having part separate from part
is a quantum. But it is evident that the heaviness re-
maining in the sacrament of the altar has part separate
from part; and it was shown before that that heavi-
ness is not subjectively in a quantity nor is it the sub-
ject of a quantity; therefore, it is a quantum and not
through a quantity, which is an absolute thing other
than that heaviness. And for the same reason any
other quality will be a quantum and not through a
quantity really distinct from it.


143


10


20


10


15


20


25


CHAPTER XXIV


That before consecration there was one

quantity, which was not an absolute thing

really distinct from the substance of
the bread


Since it has been seen that the quantity remaining
in the sacrament of the altar is not an absolute thing
really distinct from the qualities remaining in the same
place, it now remains to adduce some convincing ar-
guments by virtue of which anyone might be able to
see that before consecration there preceded one quan-
tity which was not an absolute thing really distinct
from the substance of the bread, which does not re-
main after consecration, as the substance of the bread
does not remain.


And this could, indeed, be regarded as settled from
the statements in the first and the last Chapters. For
if a quality could be a quantum without a quantity
really distinct, this could not be except by virtue of
this, that a quality has parts really distinct and created
to be separate in situation. But the distinction of parts
of a material substance is as great as is the distinction
of parts of a quality; so also the parts of a substance
are created to be separate in situation, as the parts of
a quality. On the contrary, by nature and by created
virtue, as the parts of a quality can not be without a
substance, so they can not be separate without sep-
aration of substantial parts. If, therefore, qualities
be quanta without a quantity really distinct from qual-
ities, it is necessary to say that a substance alone could

144


THE SACRAMENT OF THE ALTAR 145


be a quantum without an added quantity really distinct,
and that that substance of the bread was a quantum
not through a quantity, which was a thing other than
a substance and consequently was the same. And, in-
deed, as the substance of the bread does not remain,
so that quantity does not remain. Again, the sub-
stance of the bread was not a quantum from a quan-
tity, which was really the same as a quality, and any
quantity really distinct from a quality does not remain
after consecration, as was proved.


Therefore, it is necessary to say that some accident
is corrupted when the body of Christ is consecrated,
which seems to refute the statements of the Holy Fa-
thers, or it is necessary to say that the substance of
the bread was a quantum from a quantity, which is
not a thing really distinct from the substance of the
bread and consequently does not remain, as the sub-
stance of the bread does not remain.


15


20


25


CHAPTER XXV


That a substance can be a quantum with-
out any absolute thing really distinct
added to it


However, that the principal thesis may appear more
obvious, I desire now to prove, besides those former
statements, that a substance can be a quantum with-
out any absolute thing really distinct added to it. For
it was shown before that the divine power can make
and preserve a whole substance without a whole abso-
lute accident inhering in it. It was also proved that,
if it should have pleased the divine will, it is possible
to preserve in the future any substance now extended
and present under its accidents and to separate or de-
stroy or annihilate all the accidents; and the divine
power is not compelled by virtue of this to transfer
a substance from place to place or to change it locally.


From which I deduce such a proposition: that the
divine power can preserve however freely or contin-
gently, this substance, which is now a quantum, un-
moved locally as regards itself as a whole and each
substantial part of it, and it may destroy a whole
quantity really distinct from this substance and inher-
ing in the substance. On the contrary also, and with-
out reason, it seems to curtail the divine power to say
that, if God wills to preserve in being a substance prior
naturally with every accident inhering in it and to de-
stroy an absolute accident inhering in it, it is necessary
for God necessarily to change the substance locally and
to transfer it from one place to another.

146


THE SACRAMENT OF THE ALTAR 147


Since we may also frequently see that a natural
agent destroys any accident of the same subject with-
out the destruction and local change of a subject; it
must not, therefore, be said that it may be impossible
for the divine power, to which all things are completely
subjected, to destroy a whole quantity which is an ab-
solute accident inhering in this wood, without the de-
struction of that wood and without local change of
the same. When this has been done, it is necessary
to say that this substance is a quantum, since it may
have part outside of part, as before; for unless the
parts of that substance could be separate, as before,
there could not be a whole substance in a whole place
and part in part, as before, before the destruction of
the accident; and consequently this substance would
be moved locally, which is contrary to the thesis.

This substance is, therefore, a quantum and it is
posited that no accident, which is an absolute accident,
inheres in it; for according to the thesis every such
is destroyed through the divine power; therefore, this
substance is a quantum without a quantity, which may
be an absolute accident inhering in it.

However, if that event is posited, it can not as yet
be concluded that this substance may remain a quan-
tum; for it is manifest from this statement, this whole
substance is preserved in being through divine power,
that no part of it is corrupted or destroyed; therefore,
the same substantial parts remain which were before.

I ask concerning those parts; whether they are sep-
arate locally in situation; (if this is conceded, the
thesis is maintained, since it may have been proved
before that every thing per se one having parts
separate in place and situation is a quantum;) or


10


20


25


30


10


15


20


25


30


148 THE SACRAMENT OF THE ALTAR


whether these parts are not separate in place and sit-
uation, which can not be granted; for it would follow
from this that they would be changed locally. For if
they are not now separate locally and were formerly
separate locally and one is not converted into another,
since both may truly remain, it is necessary that one
of them be changed locally.


Again, I take one part of that substance, say, A,
and I ask, whether A coexists with that part of the
place with which it previously coexisted, or does not
coexist with that part of the place. If A does coexist
with that part of the place; for the same reason an-
other part of that substance coexists with another
part of the place with which it coexisted before. From
which it follows that the whole substance coexists
with the whole place and part with a whole part; and
consequently, this whole substance has parts separate
from parts in situation; as parts of a place, with which
they coexist, are separate in situation. But if A does
not exist with that part of a place with which it co-
existed before; therefore, that part is changed locally;
for everything, which is present in a thing at first and
remaining afterwards is not present in that place, is
necessarily transferred from place to place; since it
may not be outside a place and so a part would change
the place, which is contrary to the thesis.


Nor is it sufficient to say that this substance is not
in a place unless through a quantity which is an acci-
dent of that substance; and, indeed, when a quantity
is destroyed, that substance is neither in a place nor is
it changed locally; for that is not stated catholicly.
For according to the Holy Fathers and the authorized
Doctors, and it is satisfactory according to the inten-


THE SACRAMENT OF THE ALTAR 149


tion of the canonical scriptures, an angel is in a place
and is transferred from one place to another, in as
much as it may not be a quantum but indivisible lack-
ing all the parts created to be separate locally.


Therefore, it would be much more suitable for a
substance having parts created to be separate locally
to be in a place and to be changed locally, although
it may not have a quantity which may be an absolute
accident really distinct from it and inhering in it. On
the contrary, no matter how much a substance may
be separate from every accident, thus far it will be
in a place unless it were placed outside of the world.
And not only the whole substance will be in a place,
but indeed each part of it will be in a place. And then
I ask about this part A; whether it is in the place in
which it was before, and is held intent, or is in an-
other place and consequently is changed locally, which
is contrary to the thesis.


Nor is it sufficient to say that this substance is not
in a place circumscriptively but definitively; for to say
this is to concede the thesis. For if the prior case is
posited; from this very statement that this substance
is in a place definitively, it will be in a place circum-
scriptively. The reason for this is; because if that
substance is in some place definitively; from this it
follows that A, which is part of that substance, may
be in a place definitively. Then I ask, whether or
not A is in that part of a place definitively. If it be
granted that it is, for the same reason another part
will be in another part definitively; from which it fol-
lows that these parts are separate locally and in situa-
tion. But every whole having parts separate locally
is in a place circumscriptively. Therefore, this whole


10


15


20


25


30


10


15


150 THE SACRAMENT OF THE ALTAR


substance is thus in a place circumscriptively. But if
it be granted that A is not definitively in a place or
in that part of a place in which it was before, either
this is because it is elsewhere definitively and conse-
quently is changed locally, or because it is not any-
where, which can not be conceded, since even an angel
must be placed somewhere; however, if this is granted,
it follows that it is changed locally, from which it is
not definitively nor circumscriptively in the place in
which it was before; and yet in the nature of things
it really remains.


So, therefore, since the divine power may be able
to preserve a substance in the same place and destroy
every accident inhering in it, which is an absolute
accident, there is no contradiction involved in the
statement that a substance may be a quantum without
a quantity, though an accident inhere in it.


CHAPTER XXVI


In which other reasons are adduced to

prove the same conclusion, which was

stated before; namely, that a substance

can be a quantum without a distinct
quantity added to it


Besides the former reason, it can be concluded from
other reasons, that substance can be a quantum with-
out a distinct quantity added to it; for it requires no
less virtue to preserve two substances created to make
and constitute one substance without all the absolute
accidents inhering in it, when they do not make or
constitute one whole substance, than when they consti-
tute one whole substance; as when two bodies of wa-
ter are taken, say, A and B, it requires no less virtue
to preserve A and B in distinct places without all the
absolute accidents inhering in them, when they do not
make one total body of water than when they make
parts of one water. But the omnipotence of God can
separate A and B from all their accidents and preserve
A and B in distinct places; as A here, and B at Rome,
if it pleases Him. For, if the omnipotence of God
could separate the one water at Rome from its every
accident, and another here existing from its every
accident, it is not necessary that God should transfer
that water, which is at Rome, even here, or this water
even to Rome; nor would it be necessary that He
should transfer them to some intermediate place; but
He might be able to preserve that there and this here.
Therefore, with equal facility, if it should please Him,


151
13


10


15


20


10


20


25


30


152 THE SACRAMENT OF THE ALTAR


if A and B should be joined together and constitute
one water, the omnipotence of God might be able to
preserve A and B in distinct parts of a place, although
He could separate A and B from all their absolute
accidents. If this is posited, that total substance would
have parts separate in situation, and A and B would
be their own parts which were separate in situation;
and consequently that total substance would be a quan-
tum and yet without a quantity really distinct from
the substance itself.


The argument is confirmed; for there appears to be
no contradiction to the statement that God might be
able through His infinite power to preserve that sub-
stance and destroy the accidents, as He voluntarily
and freely created the whole water of the ocean under
its accidents. But, if this is posited, God would never
be necessitated to transfer the part of the ocean, which
is in the West, even to the other part, which is in the
East, or the opposite; or to transfer both parts to some
intermediate place. For it does not appear to be in
accord with theological statement that God would be
necessitated to this; therefore, God might be able in
the nature of things to preserve the whole water of
the ocean and destroy every absolute accident inher-
ing in it and yet preserve other waters, which are in
the East and the West, where they were before. If
this is done, that whole water would have parts sepa-
rate without water added to it, and consequently
would be a quantum without a quantity added.


Again, when subject and accident have parts corre-
sponding to themselves so that the distinct parts of
the substance correspond to the distinct parts of the
accident, it requires no less power to preserve the parts


THE SACRAMENT OF THE ALTAR 153


of an accident by destroying the subject without local
change of the accident or some part of it, than to pre-
serve the parts of the substance without local change
by destroying an absolute accident. But a material
substance and an accident are at the same time, so
that the distinct parts of an accident correspond to


the distinct parts of a substance. For one part of an


accident is in another part of a substance; so that dis-
tinct parts of an accident are in distinct parts of a
substance, as is obvious through this which was proved
before; namely, that material substance has substantial
parts separate in situation.


For God can preserve an absolute accident in the
same place and situation by destroying the substance,
as is obvious in the sacrament of the altar; therefore,
there is no contradiction involved in the statement
that God preserves a substance in the same place by
destroying whatever absolute accident inheres in it.
If this is done, that substance will be circumscriptively
in a place, as before, and consequently will be a quan-
tum without a quantity added to it.


Nor is it necessary maliciously to misrepresent by
saying that it is contrary to the faith to say that the
substance of the bread is corrupted in the sacrament
of the altar; for this is not my statement but it is the
statement of the Catholic doctors. Whence, the gloss
says on the De Consecratione, Distinction II., ‘Quia
corpus.’ The gloss above the word ‘convertuntur’
says: “It well states: they are converted or transub-
stantiated, or pass over” (supply: earthly and mortal
things into the substance of Christ) ; “but they do not
become or begin to be; for nothing becomes or begins
to be the body of Christ; yet it can be conceded that


10


15


20


25


30


10


15


20


30


154 THE SACRAMENT OF THE ALTAR


the body of Christ becomes and is formed from the
bread, as a crystal becomes from water, yet it is not
a crystal. But it is safer not to concede this; and
wherever the bread is found, the body of Christ either
becomes or is produced from the bread. It is thus
understood: it becomes, that is, it passes over into the
body of Christ, as later this, ‘Panis’: the body of
Christ either becomes from the bread, that is, it is
under the species of bread, or it lies concealed or be-
gins to be or to lie concealed, where it was not before
consecration; for if the bread should become the body
of Christ, there would be added to it on each single
day something which was not before, and thus it would
be constantly augmented." And the gloss adds: “Do
not understand, therefore, that any augmentation may
be assumed from such conversion, nor in the same
mode in which food is converted into flesh; but there
is corruption there, that is, the substance of the bread
and of the wine ceases to be there, yet there is no
generation.”


Again, the gloss on the De Consecratione, Distinc-
tion II., ‘Ante benedictionem’: “Although the words
may be uttered successively, yet the consecration does
not become successively; but the bread is corrupted
in one instant; namely, in the last instant of the utter-
ance of the words; and, although the bread becomes
the body of Christ, yet the corruption of it is instan-
taneous.”


Again, the gloss in the same distinction of the Chap-
ter, ‘Panis est,’ says that “the substance of the bread
ceases to be in the subvening consecration,” et cetera,
in the same place. Therefore, it is not contrary to the
Catholic faith to say that the substance of the bread


THE SACRAMENT OF THE ALTAR 155


is corrupted or destroyed in the sacrament of the altar.
Therefore, since God may preserve an accident in the
same place by destroying a substance, it is not impos-
sible for Him to preserve a substance in the same
place by corrupting an accident, and thus a substance
will be a quantum without such an accident.


Again, if God could destroy a half of any absolute
accident informing one half of that wood and could
preserve the other half of the accident informing the
other half of that substance, these two parts of the
substance would be separate and yet one of these would
be lacking every accident informing it. From this
it follows that a part of a substance can be separate
from a part of a substance without an accident inform-
ing it, and consequently a substance could be a quan-
tum without a quantity added to it.


Again, it involves no greater contradiction (to say)
that a substance having parts really distinct created
to be separate locally may be without a whole accident
added to it in a whole divisible place, so that the whole
may be in a whole place and a part in a part, than that
some substance lacking every such part may be in
some divisible place so that a whole may be in a whole
place and a whole in each part. But an angel, lacking
every integral part without every absolute accident
added to it, can be a whole in any divisible place and a
whole in each part; therefore, it is not a contradiction
that some substance having parts created to be sep-
arate locally may be a whole in a whole divisible place
and a part in a part without some quantity added to it.
From this it follows that it will be circumscriptively
in a place without a quantity added to it. This reason
is confirmed.


15


20


25


30


10


15


156 THE SACRAMENT OF THE ALTAR


It involves no more of a contradiction that a cor-
poreal substance is in a place in a mode consistent with
itself without any thing added to it than that an incor-
poreal substance is in a place in a mode consistent with
itself without an entire thing added. But the proper
mode of being in a place consistent with a corporeal
substance is to be in a place circumscriptively, as the
proper mode of being in a place consistent with an in--
corporeal substance is to be in a place definitively;
but an incorporeal substance can be in a place defin-
itively without any absolute thing added to it. There-
fore, it involves no contradiction that a corporeal sub-
stance is in a place circumscriptively without an entire
absolute thing added to it; and so there is a quantum
without an entire absolute thing added to it. There-
fore, as it appears, it involves no contradiction that any
substance may be a quantum without every absolute
accident added to it.


CHAPTER XXVII


That the same conclusion, which was
stated before, seems to follow from the
statements of adversaries


Aside from the former reasons, some can be adduced
based partly on the statements of other Catholic doc-
tors who, however, deny the previous conclusion. For
it appears that that proposition follows from the state-
ments of some adversaries, ‘every absolute thing exist-
ing under any absolute accident through information
so that a whole subject may be under a whole accident
and a part under a part,’ can through divine power
coexist with the same without information and this
inherence, as is obvious. For according to many who
say that substance can not be a quantum without an
accident inhering in it, the extrinsic respect advening
to it can be taken from the extremes remaining. And
according to the same the respect of inherence of an
_accident to a subject is an extrinsic advening respect;
therefore, it does not involve a contradiction that a
substance and that thing, which they call quantity, re-
main without respect of such inherence. But if this
is posited, the whole substance coexists with that whole
quantity which is an accident; therefore, as this quan-
tity has part separate from part so that substance will
have part separate from part, and so that substance
is a quantum without a quantity informing it. Nor
can they say that, when a respect of inherence of a
quantity to a substance is removed, the substance will
not be present in the quantity so that the whole may


157


20


25


10


15


20


25


30


158 THE SACRAMENT OF THE ALTAR


be present in the whole quantity and a part in a part.


They can not, I say, thus evade the issue. For ac-
cording to the same the respect of presentiality of a
substance to a quantity is prior to the respect of inher-
ence of a quantity to a substance, and similarly the
respect of presentiality of part of a substance to part
of a quantity is prior to a respect of inherence of part
of a quantity to a part of a substance. This can be
proved through this, that it is impossible that there
may be a respect of inherence of a quantity to a sub-
stance without the respect of presentiality of a quan-
tity to a substance, and consequently without the
respect of presentiality of a substance to a quantity;
for these mutual presentialities are by nature at the
same time according to their principles. But the re-
spect of presentiality can be without the respect of
inherence; for a substance is present or can be in many
which do not inform it nor inhere in it. But according
to these writers a prior can be through divine power
without a posterior; therefore, it involves no contra-
diction that there may be preserved a respect of pre-
sentiality of a whole substance to that whole quantity
which is considered an accident inhering in it, and a
respect of presentiality of a part of a substance to
that part of a quantity without a respect of inherence
of a quantity to a substance and without a respect of
inherence of a part of a quantity to a part of a sub-
stance.


If this is posited, a whole substance is present in a
whole quantity and a part of a substance is present
in a part of a quantity without a respect of inherence;
and consequently without this, that a substance may
be informed by a quantity. And so this substance will


THE SACRAMENT OF THE ALTAR 159


have a part distinct from a part without a quantity
informing it, and consequently there will be a quantum
without a quantity informing it; for no thing per se
one has part outside of part and part separate from
part unless it be a quantum.


Again, the respect of presentiality of a substance in
relation to ‘ubi,’ according to those writers, does not
depend upon the respect of inherence of a quantity to
its subject; for, if the respect of inherence of a quan-
tity to this substance is destroyed, still this substance
could be present in a place, and for the same reason
the respect of presentiality of a part of a substance to
a part of a place does not depend on the respect of
inherence of a part of a quantity to a part of a sub-
stance. And yet according to those writers, every-
thing, which does not depend upon another, can be
preserved through divine power without it.


Therefore, the respect of presentiality of a whole
substance to a whole place and of a part of a substance
to a part of the place could be preserved without the
respect of inherence of a quantity to a substance.
When this is done, a substance will be present in the
whole place and part in a part; and consequently will
be circumscriptively in a place, and yet will not be in-
formed by some quantity which may be an absolute
thing really distinct from a substance; and so a sub-
stance will be a quantum without such a quantity.


10


15


20


25


10


15


20


25


CHAPTER XXVIII


That a substance may be a quantum
through its substantial parts without
every quantity which is called a thing
really distinct from substance and quality


After this it remains to show that not only a sub-
stance can be a quantum without a quantity added to
it, but also that a substance is a quantum through its
substantial parts without every quantity which may be
another absolute thing really distinct from a sub-
stance and a quality.


In the first place it is settled thus: that, which can
be accomplished through fewer, is needlessly accom-
plished through more; for this is a principle which
ought not to be denied, that no plurality ought to be
posited, unless it can be demonstrated through reason
or through experience or through the authority of that
one who can not be deceived or err. But from this a
substance can be a quantum and similarly a quality can
be a quantum without such a quantity distinct from
a substance and a quality. It can be demonstrated
neither through reason nor through experience, that
there may be another such quantity. Neither is this
found expressed by any author who can not err; for
it is not found to have been revealed by God. There-
fore, it is not necessary to posit such a quantity; and
so it would be posited needlessly; for all, which can
be saved through such a thing, can be saved without
it through this, that a substance has substantial parts
really distinct created to be separate locally, which

160


THE SACRAMENT OF THE ALTAR 161


parts of the substance as well as of the qualities,
as they are brought into being, so they become separate
by virtue of an efficient and a final cause. For by the
same virtue by which different parts of a substance
and of qualities proceed from non-being to being, they
also take on being in distinct places. And, indeed, as
nothing is necessarily required aside from an efficient,
formal, final, and material cause; nor is it previously
demanded for this, that a substance and parts of a
substance may be brought from non-being to being;
so nothing aside from the previous causes is necessarily
acquired for this, that one part of a substance be out-
side of another part or separate from another part.
For it appears wonderful that one accident later than
a substance and the parts of it might be able to make
one part of a substance to be outside another part,
and yet the essential causes of a thing would not be
able to make this without such an accident; for such
an accident is not required for a separation of some
things, since two substances may be able to be separate,
even if they were separated from all the accidents.
And such an accident is not required for this, that
some parts which may contribute some whole, since
there may appear to be no reason why parts naturally
prior to every accident can not constitute a whole,
the parts of which were created to be without such an
accident.


From all these statements it is gathered that a quan-
tity of the genus ‘accident’ is neither required for the
local separation of those which are created to consti-
tute one substance; nor required for the constitution
of the whole, since it may be later than the whole, and
so separate parts can constitute another substance with-


10


15


20


25


30


10


20


25


30


162 THE SACRAMENT OF THE ALTAR


out such an accident. From this it is obvious that all
things, which can be saved by the assumption of such
a quantity, can be equally well saved without it. For
it will be so saved that the parts of the substance and
the qualities informing the substance are separate lo-
cally, and that the substance as well as the qualities
are quanta; for they have part outside of part without
such a quantity through this, that essential causes pro-
duce a substantial thing and a quality and produce
parts of a substance and of qualities in distinct places,
as if there be posited such a quantity following a sub-
stance already produced. For who could prevent God
from producing one substance or quality without every
accident distinct from substance and quality; and who
could prevent God from placing one part of that sub-
stance and quality outside of another without the dis-
solution of that substance and quality without another
absolute thing really distinct, if He be able to do this
with such a distinct mediating thing? For this seems
to limit too much the divine power to say that, al-
though one thing having parts really distinct was pro-
duced by God, God could not be able to make them
separate locally, except by giving to them a new thing
or unless He break asunder or destroy the unity of
them.


Again, that a substance may be a quantum through
its substantial parts intrinsic in it, I show thus. That,
which is circumscriptively in a place through its in-
trinsic parts, is a quantum through its intrinsic parts;
for it was shown before that every thing, which is cir-
cumscriptively in a place, is a quantum. But every
material substance is circumscriptively in a place
through its substantial parts; for, as was shown be-


THE SACRAMENT OF THE ALTAR 163


fore, every material substance, which is extended, is
present in a place through its essential parts, so that
a whole substance is present in a whole place, and a
part of a substance is present in a part of a place. But
any such is in a place circumscriptively, and so every
such substance is a quantum through its parts intrinsic
in it.

Nor is it sufficient to say that a substance does not
have parts except through quantity which is a thing
distinct from substance; for a substance does not de-
pend on any accident of its own, and consequently the
parts of a substance do not depend upon the parts of
an accident. Therefore, if quantity may be an accident
of substance, the parts of a substance do not depend
either upon a quantity or upon parts of a quantity;
and so substance does not have parts through quantity.
Which conclusion is confirmed, for a thing has ‘being’
and ‘being distinct through the same; therefore,
through that through which there are parts of a sub-
stance, through that those parts are also distin-
guished. But the parts of a substance are not
through quantity ; therefore, they are not distinguished
through quantity; therefore, substance does not have
parts through quantity, which is a thing other than
substance.


Again, if quantity be a thing other than substance,
then it does not make a part of a substance to be sep-
arate from a part of a substance, unless it be an effi-
cient or final cause. But the causality of an efficient
or final making parts to be separate does not prevent
that thing from being a quantum through its parts
intrinsic to it; for then, since God as an efficient and
final cause may make the parts of any quantity at all


15


20


25


30


164 THE SACRAMENT OF THE ALTAR


to be separate, no quantity could be ‘quantum’ or 'hav-
ing part outside of part’ through its parts.


From this it is obvious that no matter to what ex-
tent one other quantity might be added to that sub-
stance, which has part outside of part, that substance
would still be a quantum through a thing itself and its
intrinsic parts; as parts of a substance are locally sep-
arate from themselves and through nothing else except
through their intrinsic causes, say, efficient and final.


Nor is it sufficient to say that quantity, which is an
accident, is a formal cause by which a substance is


` a quantum, as whiteness is a formal cause why some-


25


30


thing is white. This does not obtain; for it was shown
before that every thing one numerically having part
separate locally or in situation from part is a quantum.
Therefore this, through which a thing is neither one
numerically nor through which parts of a thing are
separate in situation, is not a formal cause why that
thing is a quantum. But a quantity, which is an ac-
cident, is not that formally through which a substance
is one numerically; for through the same a substance
is and is one numerically. But no accident is a formal
cause why its subject is or will not be; therefore, the
formal cause why its subject is one. Nor, indeed, is
quantity a formal cause through which the parts of
substance are separate locally, as something is white
through whiteness; for then as it is impossible that
some may be white without whiteness, whether they
be separate from one another and be certain wholes
existing per se or may be parts constituting some
whole, so it would be impossible that those things,
which are merely separate in situation through quan-
tity, which is an accident, as a body is white through


THE SACRAMENT OF THE ALTAR 165


whiteness, could be separate in situation or in place
without such a quantity; even if they were mutually
separate and were whole quanta not making one whole,
which is false.


For the omnipotence of God may be able at first to
divide a piece of wood into two parts and place one of
them at Rome and the other here, and afterwards sep-
arate them from all their absolute accidents. When
this has been done, they would be separate locally and
yet would not have such a quantity; for they are sep-
arate from that per casum. From which it is obvious
that parts of a substance are not separate through
such a quantity, as a body is white through whiteness.


=


0


10


15


20


25


CHAPTER XXIX


The same conclusion, which was stated

before, is proved through arguments

taken from the statements of Catholic
doctors


In addition to the preceding reasons, some others
must be added, based partly on the statements of other
Catholic doctors, who, however, posit such a quantity
intermediate between substance and quality. For a
certain Doctor, whom I think reputable, says it; for I
have no desire to detract anything from the omnipo-
tence of God since He may be able to do more than we
are able to think or understand, unless I may see that
an evident contradiction follows. For that Doctor,
namely, Scotus, says in Book IV. of the Sentences,
Distinction X., Question IV., that the infinite power
of God might be able to preserve sacramentally the
body of Christ under the species of bread without this,
that it could have being locally and circumscriptively
in heaven or elsewhere. Therefore, let it be posited
that the body of Christ may be sacramentally under the
species and that it may cease to be in heaven locally
and that it may begin to be nowhere locally and cir-
cumscriptively. When this has been done, I ask,
whether this quantity, which was before distinct from
substance and quality, remains or does not remain but
is corrupted. It can not be said that that quantity is
destroyed; for according to those writers in the same
place an absolute is not altered by virtue of a variation
of respective, and consequently an absolute thing is

166


THE SACRAMENT OF THE ALTAR 167


not destroyed by virtue of a variation of respective.
But according to the same writers ‘ubi’ is not in heaven
except as a respect. Therefore, it is not necessary to
posit that some absolute thing may really be destroyed
by virtue of this, that the body of Christ ceases to be
in heaven locally. Therefore, every absolute thing,
which was before, remains, and so that quantity re-
mains; since, therefore, according to them that sub-
stance is a quantum through that quantity, as a body
is white through whiteness.


As it is impossible and involves a contradiction, that
any body may be informed by the whiteness inhering
in it and yet that it may not be white; so it is impos-
sible that that substance may be informed by that quan-
tity inhering in it, unless it be a quantum. Therefore,
it would be necessary to say this, that that body of
Christ would truly and really be a quantum by that
quantity, if the prior case is posited.


But that this ought not to be conceded, I am con-
vinced, first, thus: that, which does not have part sep-
arate from part, is not a quantum. But, if the prior
case is posited, the substance of the body of Christ
does not have part separate from part; for, if so, then
that body would coexist with the species of bread. It
follows that distinct parts of a body coexists with dis-
tinct parts of that species.

It is the proof of consequence; for, if parts of the
body of Christ are separate locally, I take those two
parts, say, A and B. Then I ask concerning A,
whether it coexists with the whole host and with each
part, or whether it coexists with any one part and not
another. If you say that it coexists with the whole
host and with each part; for the same reason B co-

14


10


15


20


25


30


10


20


25


30


168 THE SACRAMENT OF THE ALTAR


exists with the whole host and with each part; and
through position the body of Christ is not elsewhere
than under the species of bread. Therefore, with
whatever one part coexists, with the same another part
also coexists, and consequently they are not distinct
locally. But if you say that A coexists with one part
of the host and not with another, B would then also
coexist with a second part and not with the former,
and so distinct parts of the body of Christ would co-
exist with distinct parts of the species of bread, which
is false; since from that it would follow that not the
whole body of Christ would be in each part of the
host; on the contrary the whole body of Christ would
be in no part of the host. It would also follow that
the body of Christ would be in a place circumscrip-
tively, all of which are false. Therefore, it remains
that, if that case is posited, the body of Christ would
nowhere have part separate from part in situation, nor
would it have part outside of part, and consequently
could not be a quantum, which is the thesis.


But they suggest one response to that and similar
arguments, when they say that position, which is a
difference of quantity, necessarily is in a quantum or
is in a quantum continuous and permanent; and it is
necessary for that to be saved in a thesis, namely,
which speaks of the order of the parts in a whole.


For it is not well understood that something is a
measurable quantum, but that it may be to designate
in a whole the order of this part in relation to another
according to the intervening quantity. But position,
which is posited by certain persons, adds another cat-
egory. For, if the order of the parts in a whole is
presupposed, it further posits an order of parts in re-


THE SACRAMENT OF THE ALTAR 169


lation to place or to parts of a place or locality. This
is certain, that parts are coextended with parts, as a
whole is said at first to be commensurate with the
whole place, in which it has its ‘ubi,’ so that ‘position’
as a category presupposes ‘position’ as a difference of
quantity and specifies ‘ubi.’ And it is possible for God
to separate this position from a quantity remaining in
the first position not only through the negation of
‘ubi, as He would be able to make some body outside
of the universe, and then it could not have this second
position; for it would not have some thing continuous
with whose parts the parts contained would be com-
mensurate. But even if a terminus is posited to that
which is present, a commensuration or coextension
might be able to be made with another body of Christ.
It would be possible for God to save a quantum and
the coexistence of it in relation to another quantum;
and yet without this coexistence of the parts of one in
relation to the parts of another which this second
position says.

These points have been subtly stated, yet no lover of
truth ought to be offended if they are assailed for the
cause of seeking the truth and of training. For, if
they are true, it is profitable to hear objections in or-
der that they may be explained that the truth may thus
be more clearly known. If they are false, it is ex-
pedient that they be refuted. But, that this response
may not be sufficient, it can in the first place be proved
thus: if position, which is a difference of quantity,
indicates the order of parts in a whole and is sufficient
for this, that something may be a quantum; I ask, of
what kind is this order of parts in the whole; whether
it is an order of parts situated so that one part is lower


5


10


15


20


25


30


10


15


20


25


30


170 THE SACRAMENT OF THE ALTAR


and another higher, one part before and another be-
hind, one towards the East, another towards the West;
or is it an order of perfection, for surely one part may
be more perfect and another more imperfect ; or is it
an order of whole and of part, as the eye is part of
the head; or is it an order of causality, and one part is
the cause of another; or is it an order of origin or of
nature; for surely one part prior by nature is produced
and is in the nature of things prior to another. For
in another mode, as it appears, it can be understood
that there may be an order of parts in a whole; if
however an order of parts in a whole which is occa-
sioned through position, which is a difference of
quantity.

Let it be the first order; namely, situal. It is mani-
fest that that order can not be without local separation
of parts, and so there never is any quantum unless
the parts be separate in situation. Since, therefore,
if the first case is posited, the parts of the body of
Christ may not be separate in situation; the body of
Christ will not be a quantum if that is conceded. But
the order of parts in a whole, which is position which
is a difference of quantity, can not be understood by
other modes; for any such order could be so suitable
to the substance of the body of Christ, if the whole
substance of the body of Christ were separate from
an entire quantity, which it is possible for God to do
according to those writers, as when it is joined with
a quantity. For if the whole substance of the body of
Christ is preserved without this, that it be a quantum;
so there would be one part of a substance more perfect
than another, as it now is; for one part is not now
any more a part of another, nor is one part any more


THE SACRAMENT OF THE ALTAR 171


the cause of another when more prior by nature than
another would then be; and so it is obvious that no
order of parts in a whole can be suitable to the parts
of a substance when it is joined with a quantity with-
out its being able to be suitable to them when it is not
conjoined with a quantity aside from that order which
is situal; and so a situal order of parts alone suffices
for this, that something may be a quantum. But such
an order of parts requires local separation of parts,
and consequently nothing is a quantum continuous and
permanent, unless it have parts separate in situation.

Again, every situate quantum is long; but no ‘long’
is without local or situal separation of parts. If, there-
fore, the body of Christ be a quantum when the prior
case is posited, it is necessary that it be long; and con-
sequently one part will be separate from another and
one will be outside of another, and it is not true if the
first case is held.

Again, every quantum is extended, but nothing is
extended, unless one part be separate from another
and be outside of another; for the presence of a thing
in some quantum is not sufficient for extension, for
then the rational soul would be a quantum since it may
coexist and be present in the entire body and in each
part of it. And so it is well known that, if the body
of Christ were a quantum in the sacrament of the altar,
if the first case is held, it would have part outside of
part, since it would truly be extended and so would
have position which indicates the order of parts in a
place.

Again, every finite quantum continuous and perma-
nent has form; but an order of parts in a place is re-
quired for form, if it be present in a place; nor does


15


20


25


30


on


20


3


e


172 THE SACRAMENT OF THE ALTAR


any other order of parts in a whole suffice for form,
which is obvious from this; for it is possible for form
to be changed if a local change alone of parts is made.
For if all the parts of the human body were changed
locally so that the hand, or so that the stomach could
be placed above the head or the feet above the stomach
or any such local change of parts could be made, it is
manifest that the form would be changed; and yet it
could not be unless another order of parts in a place
or some diverse situal position is required. And so
it is manifestly obvious that a situal order of parts is
required for form. Whence, if parts may not be sep-
arate locally, it is manifest that form is not there. For
if God could through His own omnipotence create
anew the substance of wood with all its absolute acci-
dents under the species of bread without this, that it
would be elsewhere locally, which is possible for God
according to those writers; I ask of what form would
that wood be. For no reason can be assigned why it
may be square more than triangular or round, and a
foot of quantity can not be posited any more than two
feet, since it may be able to be rarefied and con-
densed, and sometimes be of a greater quantity and
sometimes of a less quantity. Nor could it be able to
be posited that that wood would be rare or dense, since
it would not be able to be said that the parts would lie
near or not near; although however according to the
opinion of the wise, that may be rare whose parts lie
remote. i


Again, a homogeneous body is truly a quantum and
consequently truly has position which is a difference
of quantity. But it is manifest that there is no order
of homogeneous parts except situal. For, if a situal


THE SACRAMENT OF THE ALTAR 173


order of such parts is circumscribed, no part could be
prior to another nor one part after another, since they
may be entirely of the same ground; therefore, a sit-
ual position is not other than that, which is the order
of parts in a place or which is a situal order of parts,
and is required for this, that something may really be a
quantum. Whence, he, who says that for this, that
something may be a quantum, a certain order of parts
in a whole is sufficient, which is not a situal order of
parts. It is necessary, to indicate of what sort that
order of parts may be; and it appears that no order
could be assigned but that according to those they can
be among the substantial parts, after such a quantity
is circumscribed.


From the previous statements it is gathered that, if
the body of Christ were precisely under the species of
bread sacramentally and nowhere else locally and cir-
cumscriptively, it would not be a quantum by any quan-
tity distinct from substance and quality. If however
everything one numerically, having parts really dis-
tinct, created to be separate locally and created to be
produced by a natural agent in distinct places, be called
a quantum; it can be conceded that, the body of Christ
would be a quantum if that case is posited.


Again, I intend to show through the principles of
those previously mentioned, that material substance is
quantum through its substantial parts. For according
to those writers as a whole substance is prior to a
whole quantity, so the parts of a substance are prior to
the parts of a quantity; therefore, the parts of a sub-
stance are before the parts of a quantity. Then I ask;
whether they are in that prior in the same place or in
distinct places. They are not in the same place, for


15


20


25


30


10


15


20


25


30


174 THE SACRAMENT OF THE ALTAR


they are not more in one place than in another; there-
fore, in that prior they are in distinct places; but a
substance having parts existing in distinct places will
be circumscribed in a place; therefore, a substance in
that prior is circumscribed in a place, and consequently
is a quantum in that prior and so a substance is a quan-
tum through itself and through its intrinsic parts.


Again, everything, which is circumscribed in a place
through itself and through its intrinsic substantial
parts, through that same is a quantum. But a material
substance is circumscribed in a place through itself and
through its intrinsic parts, which is obvious from the
principles of those writers; for according to them there
is not a passive circumscription of location except a
certain respect. But according to those holding such
an opinion, a respect is altered according to a variation
of a fundament which is a terminus. Therefore, since
substance and quantity may really be distinguished, ‘a
passive circumscription, by which substance is circum-
scribed,’ and ‘a passive circumscription by which a
quantity is circumscribed,’ will be distinct; and so a
substance is in a place by one passive circumscription,
and quantity by another; and consequently substance
is fundamentally circumscribed in a place by itself and
its substantial parts and is formally circumscribed in
a place by a proper circumscription. But, when all the
others are circumscribed, these two are sufficient for
this, that something may be quantum; therefore, sub-
stance is a quantum without an absolute quantity re-
ally distinct.


Again, there is one local distance of one part of a
substance from one part of a substance and there is
another distance of one part of a quantity from an-


THE SACRAMENT OF THE ALTAR 175


other part of a quantity; for from this fundament and
terminus are distinct fundaments of one respect and
of another respect according to them. It is necessary
that respects be distinguished, therefore, these dis-
tances are distinguished. But the local distance of
parts constituting any whole can not be without a
quantity ; therefore, since the parts of a substance may
be separate locally before the parts of a quantity, as
they are before; the substance will be a quantum before
that other quantity may be posited in being.


And so from the arguments advanced and from oth-
ers which I omit by virtue of brevity, it would seem
to anyone that there is not a quantity except the extra-
position of parts or the local or situal distance of parts
making one whole for which extraposition, whether
local or situal distance of parts, parts are not required,
except those which are separate, and essential intrin-
sic causes, if they have intrinsic causes, and extrinsic
causes; say, efficient and final; and so consequently
the parts of a substance making one can be separate
in situation and one can be outside of another by vir-
tue of its natural causes.

But quantity, which is an absolute thing other than
substance, is neither an intrinsic nor an extrinsic cause
of those parts; by virtue of which such a quantity is
not required for that extraposition or situal distance
of parts.

Whence, from the principles of many writers it can
be argued thus: respect, fundament, and terminus
suffice for real existence, and extrinsic causes; but ac-
cording to these situal distance of parts or extraposi-
tion of parts of a substance beyond the parts them-
selves does not add a respect, which it does not have,


15


20


25


30


10


15


20


25


30


176 THE SACRAMENT OF THE ALTAR


in place of fundament and terminus, except those parts
of the substance. Therefore, when the parts them-
selves of substance and the extrinsic causes which
make them to be separate are assumed, that respect will
be sufficiently posited. Therefore, if there is required
for that distance of parts of a substance another quan-
tity, which may be a thing other than a substance, that
quantity either will be a fundament or a terminus of
that respect; which can not be granted, as has been
shown before, or it is the extrinsic cause of that
respect, and consequently without it that respect can
be posited. Since whatever God can do by a medi-
ating and extrinsic secondary cause, God can accom-
plish immediately per se; therefore, without any such
distinct quantity that extraposition or situal distance
of substantial parts can be posited. But when the ex-
traposition or local or situal separation of parts is pos-
ited, it is considered quantity; for it is considered
some whole having part outside of part; therefore,
without such a quantity there might be able to be a
quantity; and so a quantity other than a substance and
a quality seems to be entirely superfluous.


And many of the preceding arguments, through
which it was proved that substance can be a quantum
without a quantity other than substance, can be em-
ployed to prove that quantity can be a quantum with-
out another quantity; the discussion of which I pass
over for the sake of brevity.


Yet from the previous arguments it can be deduced
that there is no necessity for positing a quantity other
than substance and quality ; because for this, that sub-
stance as well as quality may be a quantum, it suffices
that substance and qualities be produced by virtue


THE SACRAMENT OF THE ALTAR 177


of essential causes, and that parts of these are pro-
duced in distinct places by virtue of the same causes
without. the production of any other, or that one part
may take on being outside of another. For another
thing does not seem to be required for this, that one
part of a substance or of a quality may take on be-
ing outside of another, unless it be an intrinsic or ex-
trinsic cause of it. But such a quantity can not be
posited as an intrinsic or extrinsic cause of substance
or of quality; and so for this, that one part may be
brought into being outside of another, such a quantity
is not required; therefore, it is needlessly posited.


10


15


20


25


CHAPTER XXX


Concerning objections contrary to the
previous statements


For a fuller explanation of the preceding statement
some objections must be raised. For from various
sources diverse reasons theological as well as philo-
sophical, of which I shall cite a few, are adduced to
prove that every quantity may be a thing other than
substance; for, if they could be solved, the remaining
reasons would easily be refuted. But it is argued thus:
if any quantity could not be an absolute thing other
than a substance, then as the substance of the bread
is converted into the body of Christ, so similarly some
quantity is converted into the body of Christ.

Again, as the bread is converted into the body of
Christ, so the substance of the bread will be converted
into the body of Christ and consequently the quan-
tity of the body of Christ will begin to be under the
species of bread by virtue of the sacrament; from
which it follows that the body of Christ would be a
quantum both locally and circumscriptively in the sac-
rament of the altar by virtue of conversion; which is
false.

Again, if any quantity were not a thing distinct from
substance, a quantity would not remain in the sacra-
ment of the altar, as the substance of the bread does
not remain there, which is false.

Again, no accident is really the same as a substance;
but every quantity is an accident, which is proved to
be in accordance with the intention of the Saints and
the philosophers by their testimony. For the blessed

178


THE SACRAMENT OF THE ALTAR 179


Augustine says in the De Trinitate, Book V., Chapter
V.: “In created and also in changeable things it re-
mains that that, which is not said according to sub-
stance, may be said according to accident; for all are
accidental to those, which can be either lost or dimin-
ished, both magnitudes and qualities; and that which
follows in relation to anything, as friendships, rela-
tionships, services, likenesses, equalities, and if any-
thing else of the kind; both situations and conditions,
both place and times.”

Again, the same writer in the same book in Chap-
ter X.: “In things,” he says, “which are great by
participation of magnitude, to which it is one thing to
be, another to be great; as a great house, a great moun-
tain, a great mind; in these things, therefore, magni-
tude is one thing, that which is great from the same
magnitude is another; and certainly this, which is a
great house, is not magnitude.”

Again, Aristotle posits nine categories as accidents,
among which he enumerates quantity. From all of
these statements it follows that magnitude is an acci-
dent and consequently it is a thing distinct from sub-
stance.

Again, this, which is contrary to the common opin-
ion of the Doctors, is not, therefore, to be received as
if a Catholic opinion. It is also contrary to experi-
ence; for, since a corporeal substance may be divided
without the conversion of anything into that, it is ef-
fected of a less quantity without the loss of any of its
part; which could not be, if quantity were not another
thing really distinct from substance.

Again, in diverse substances differing in species
there is a quantity the same in species; for there is


15


20


25


30


10


20


25


30


180 THE SACRAMENT OF THE ALTAR


not a longitude or a latitude other than species in a
handful of air and of fire; which would not be true if
longitude were not really distinct from substance. It
is also thus shown that no quantity may really be the
same as quality; for according to the philosopher,
quality is not a quantum except through accident; but
if quality were really the same as quantity, then it
would be a quantum per se without addition.


Again, it is naturally impossible for one body,
which is a quantity, to be at the same time with an-
other body which is quantity; for dimensions mutually
expel one another. But quality is at the same time
with a substance. Therefore, if some quantity were
really not distinct from quality and some quantity
were really distinct from substance, two quantities
would naturally be at the same time, and so two solidi-
ties or depths, and two longitudes and two latitudes
would be at the same time; indeed many more than
two; since for whatever reason whiteness would have
its proper quantity, for the same reason taste would
have its own, and heat its own, and humidity its own,
and dryness its own; and thus of others. And so as
many bodies would be long, wide, and thick as there
are qualities at the same time, and so in the sacrament
of the altar there would be many bodies at the same
time. If this is conceded, it is possible to inquire how
those qualities remaining in the sacrament of the altar
remain at the same time, whenever they are moved.
From this none of them is in another as if in a sub-
ject, nor are all in any one subject, if quantity may not
be the only one and the subject of them; so then it is
obvious that by virtue of the preceding and other ar-
guments, it is necessary to posit a quantity differing
from substance and quality.


CHAPTER XXXI


In which replies are posited to the previ-
ous objections


But it now remains to show that all these reasons
do not sufficiently agree that there may be some quan-
tity really distinct from substance and quality.


For when it is first deduced to this inconsistency,
that some quantity is converted into the body of
Christ, it can first be said that the opposite of that is
not found in sacred scripture; for I have never read
either in the Sacred Scriptures or in the canonical law
or in any authorized work that quantity is not con-
verted into the body of Christ. For they make no
mention at all whether a quantity may be converted
into the body of Christ or may not be converted, as
they make no mention whether a quantum may be con-
verted into the body of Christ; although some, whom
one is permitted to contradict because they mutually
‘condemn one another, may assert that a quantity is
not converted into the body of Christ.


In the second place, although it might be found
that a quantity is not converted into the body of
Christ, it would not be necessary to concede that quan-
tity is a thing other than quality and substance; for
the mode of signification might be able to preclude
such a predication, ‘a quantity is converted into the
body of Christ,’ as according to many writers. Al-
though ‘humanity’ may not be a thing really distinct
from ‘man’; yet this could be conceded, ‘man is white,’
and this may be denied, ‘humanity is white’; not be-

181


10


15


20


25


10


15


20


25


30


182 THE SACRAMENT OF THE ALTAR


cause ‘humanity’ may be some thing really distinct
from ‘man,’ but because this name ‘humanity’ and this
name ‘man’ have another mode of signification ; namely,
grammatical or logical. For it ought to be shown
elsewhere how possible it may be that predication may
be false, without a distinction of the things introduced
by virtue of diverse modes of signifying 'gramaticales'
or ‘logicales.’

In the third place, it might be able to be said that no
matter how much this will be conceded, that “a quan-
tity is converted into the body of Christ’; yet this hap-
pens, that this may be true, ‘a quantity is converted
into the body of Christ’; while this appears true, ‘the
substance of the bread is converted into the body of
Christ.’ And frequently those may be denied by writ-
ers, which are through accident; although according
to the virtue of signification they may not be under
obligation to deny them. Wherefore, no matter how
much some quantity may not be a thing really distinct
from the substance of the bread, yet these two stand at
the same time: 'the substance of the bread is converted
into the body of Christ, and ‘no quantity is converted
into the body of Christ.’ Just as according to many
writers and appointed Catholic doctors ‘fundament’
and 'relation' are not distinct things and consequently
‘whiteness’ and ‘likeness’ are not things really distinct;
yet these two stand at the same time: ‘whiteness is,’
and ‘likeness is not.’ But, notwithstanding that some
quantity may not be a thing really distinct from sub-
stance, how can this be true, ‘the substance of the bread
is converted into the body of Christ,’ while this ap-
pears false, ‘quantity is converted into the body of
Christ,’ can be explained thus. Although some quan-


THE SACRAMENT OF THE ALTAR 183


tity may not be a thing other than substance, yet this
name ‘quantity’ connotes that one part is outside of
another or that one part is separate from another part.
But this name ‘substance’ does not connote that one
part is separate in situation from another part; and
by virtue of which I do not see that it involves a con-
tradiction that this may be true, ‘the substance of the
bread is converted into the body of Christ,’ while this
appears false, ‘the substance of the bread having part
outside of part or separate from part is converted into
the body of Christ.’ On the contrary, it can be false,
while another appears true; for it can implicate a fal-
lacy; namely, ‘one part of the bread is separate in sit-
uation from another part.’


Whence, if God, who can make all things, should
make some substance of bread to be somewhere pre-
cisely in that mode, in which the body of Christ is
under the species of bread, so that that substance of
that bread would be nowhere locally or circumscrip-
tively; then this would be true, ‘this thing is substance,’
and this false, ‘this thing is a substance having part
separate from part.’ And so, if God could then con-
vert that substance into the body of Christ, which I
do not think a Christian ought to say could not be
done by God, this would be true, ‘the substance of the
bread is converted into the body of Christ,’ and this is
false by virtue of a false implication, ‘the substance of
the bread having part separate from part in situation
was converted into the body of Christ’; and conse-
quently the opposite of it is true, ‘the substance of the
bread having part separate from part was not converted
into the body of Christ.’ From which this follows, ‘a
quantity is not converted into the body of Christ.’ There-

15


10


20


25


30


10


15


20


25


30


184 THE SACRAMENT OF THE ALTAR


fore, it is obvious that, although this may in a mode
be true, ‘the substance of the bread’ is in a mode ‘the
substance of the bread having part separate from a
part’; yet this could be true, ‘the substance of the
bread is converted into the body of Christ,’ while this
appears false, ‘the substance of the bread having part
separate from part is converted into the body of
Christ’; and consequently while this appears true, ‘the
substance of the bread having part separate from part
is not converted into the body of Christ,’ which nega-
tive could be true, while the first also appears true by
virtue of this cause of reality; namely, ‘the substance
of the bread does not have part separate from part’;
and so it can easily be said that although this may in a
mode be true, ‘some quantity is not a thing distinct
from the substance of the bread’; yet this could be
true, ‘the substance of the bread is converted into the
body of Christ,’ while this appears true, ‘a quantity is
not converted into the body of Christ.” And the whole
cause is; because, although this may be in a way true,
‘the substance is really the same as some quantity’;
yet this could be true, ‘the substance of the bread is
really not the same thing as a quantity’; as, although
this may in a mode be true, ‘the substance of the bread
is a substance having part separate from part’; yet
this could be true, ‘the substance of the bread is not
a substance having part separate from part’; for it
follows from this possible, ‘the substance of the bread
does not have part separate from part,’ even while
this appears true, ‘the substance of the bread is.’
Therefore, it is obvious from the premises that this
name ‘quantity’ connotes something, or permits one to
understand that which is not denoted or permitted to


THE SACRAMENT OF THE ALTAR 185


be perceived through this name ‘substance’; for
this name ‘quantity’ permits one to understand that
that, of which it is predicated, may be ‘having part
separate from part’; but this name ‘substance’ does not
connote either in a proposition or outside a proposition
that that, of which it is verified, may be ‘having part
separate from part.’ And, indeed, no matter how
much this may in a mode be true, ‘substance is quan-
tity’; yet it might be able to be false, even though a
substance remains; as this is in a mode true, ‘the sub-
stance of the bread is a substance having part separate
from part’; and yet, though a substance remains, this
could be false. Just as some say that this name ‘like-
ness’ connotes that two qualities of the same ground
exist at the same time in the nature of things; but
this name ‘whiteness’ does not connote that two quali-
ties exist at the same time in the nature of things, and
yet many Catholics say that ‘whiteness’ and some ‘like-
ness’ are one thing and are not things really distinct;
although this may be able to be true, ‘whiteness is,’
while this appears false, ‘likeness is.’ And, indeed,
although they might concede that this could be true,
‘whiteness’ and ‘likeness,’ are said to be two white-
nesses existing in the nature of things; yet this might
be able to be false, while whiteness remains, ‘whiteness
(is whiteness,’ ‘white) is likeness’; for it would imply
a fallacy, namely, ‘two whitenesses are really outside
of the mind.’

Therefore, it is obvious from the previous state-
ments that, although some quantity may not be a thing
really distinct from the substance of the bread; yet
this could be true, ‘the substance of the bread is con-
verted into the body of Christ,’ though this appears


15


20


25


30


10


20


25


30


186 THE SACRAMENT OF THE ALTAR


false, ‘a quantity is converted into the body of Christ’;
and this by virtue of a diverse mode of signifying or
of consignifying of those two names ‘substance’ and
‘quantity.’

Through this it is obvious that, although it may not
be found expressed in the canon of the Bible, nor in
the canonical law, nor in the writings of the Saints
approved by the Roman Church, that the substance of
the bread is not converted into the quantity of the
body of Christ; for they do not make mention of this;
yet in virtue of the diverse mode of signifying or con-
signifying of these names ‘substance’ and ‘quantity,
this might be able to be verified, ‘the substance of the
bread is converted into the substance of the body of
Christ’; although this would be false, ‘the substance
of the bread is converted into the quantity of the body
of Christ,’ as by virtue of the diverse mode of signi-
fying these names ‘substance’ and ‘quantity,’ this
would be able to be false, ‘substance is quantity,’ al-
though substance and some quantity would not be
things really distinct.


And that this may not even be contrary to the faith
of the church is obvious in a similar case; for many
Catholic doctors say that ‘relation’ is not a thing really
distinct from its ‘fundament.’ For I do not think that
anyone of sane mind, unless he, who alone would wish
to be called a rabbi, wishes to say that all, who hold
that relation is not a thing distinct from its fundament,
are heretics. It is, therefore, not heretical to say that
relation is a thing distinct from its fundament. It is,
therefore, never heretical to say that the substance
of the bread is converted into a relation, even to say
that this is true, ‘the substance of the bread is con-


THE SACRAMENT OF THE ALTAR 187


verted into the body of Christ,’ and this is false, ‘the
substance of the bread is not converted into a relation’ ;
notwithstanding that some relation, say, relation of
dependence itself upon God is not a thing other than
the body of Christ.


And so it is manifestly obvious that the whole truth
concerning the sacrament of the Eucharist can so
easily be saved; although it may be conceded that some
quantity is not a thing really distinct from substance,
as I concede that some relation is not really distinct
from substance, which many Catholics concede. For
it is no more to be found in sacred scripture that a
quantity is not converted into the body of Christ or
that a substance is not converted into the quantity of
the body of Christ, than that a relation is not con-
verted into the body of Christ or that the substance
of the bread is not converted into a relation. And, in-
deed, as it can be posited according to the Catholic
faith that some relation is not a thing really distinct
from the substance of the bread, and some relation is
not a thing really distinct from the substance of the
body of Christ; and then it is necessary to concede
that some relation or some respect is converted into
the body of Christ, and the substance of the bread is
converted into relation as ‘next,’ or it is necessary to
assign some mode of signifying or of consignifying
the diversity of those names ‘substance’ and ‘relation’
by virtue of which some thing can truly be attributed
to one and truly denied of another; and similarly one
of them can truly be attributed to one, and the other
truly denied of the same. So a Catholic can posit that
some quantity is not a thing really distinct from sub-
stance; and then either it is necessary to concede as


10


15


20


25


30


A


10


2


eo


2


Ut


30


188 THE SACRAMENT OF THE ALTAR


if not opposed to the faith, that ‘a quantity is con-
verted into the body of Christ’ and ‘the substance of
the bread is converted into the quantity of the body
of Christ,’ or to assign some diverse mode of signi-
fying those names, ‘substance’ and ‘quantity’; by vir-
tue of which one can be conceded, another can not be
conceded; no matter how much some quantity may
not be a thing other than a substance, which it is easy
to do, as was shown elsewhere.


Nor is this more difficult to do than to show how
some quantity may not be a thing distinct from sub-
stance; and yet that this may be false, ‘quantity is sub-
stance’; but because this pertains more to logic than to
theology, I, therefore, pass on.


With reference to that which is introduced under
the last head in the second argument, it must be said
that this does not follow; namely, that, if some quan-
tity of the body of Christ could begin to be in the sac-
rament of the altar by virtue of the sacrament, then
by virtue of the sacrament the body of Christ could
be a quantum both locally and circumscriptively in a
place in the sacrament of the altar. For as it is not
established according to some writers that ‘the quan-
tity of the body of Christ’ or ‘the body of Christ exist-
ing in a place locally is in the sacrament of the altar’;
therefore, the body of Christ there is a quantum and
is locally in a place. So it does not follow that ‘the
quantity of the body of Christ begins to be in the sac-
rament of the altar by virtue of the sacrament’; there-
fore, by virtue of the sacrament it begins to be there
locally. Whence, whether this be conceded or not,
‘the quantity of the body of Christ begins to be under
the species of bread by the power of conversion’; yet


THE SACRAMENT OF THE ALTAR 18


this I simply deny, ‘the body of Christ is a quantum
under the species of bread by the power of conversion.’
And, indeed, I make this assertion, that the body of
Christ is a quantity or a quantum neither by the power
of conversion nor by the power of the sacrament; as
notwithstanding that this may be true, ‘the body of
Christ having part separate from part,’ say, in heaven,
is there under the species of bread by the power of
conversion; yet this is simply false, ‘the body of Christ
by the power of conversion has part separate from
part under the species of bread.’ Whence, he who
would desire to concede that this would need to be
conceded by virtue of language, ‘some quantity is sub-
stance,’ could easily reply to all the arguments about
this matter by conceding or denying the propositions
and by positing the consequences in place of this name
‘quantitas,’ this whole, ‘a thing having part separate
from part’; since they would then have to say that
these two, ‘quantity continuous and permanent’ and ‘a
thing having part separate from part,’ would be con-
vertibles; in fact, one would be a definition expressing
something of another name, if there could be some
name convertible with this, ‘quantity continuous and
permanent.’ And, therefore, in replying to whatever
proposition or consequence in which this name ‘quan-
tity’ would be posited, it would be necessary to posit
in place of this name this whole ‘a thing having part
separate from part’; and it could be easily seen, if the
proposition or consequence were to be conceded or
denied; and then this proposition would necessarily
be conceded, ‘a quantity is converted into the body of
Christ,’ as this, ‘a thing having part separate from
part is converted into the body of Christ.’ Similarly,


15


20


25


30


10


15


20


25


30


190 THE SACRAMENT OF THE ALTAR


this would necessarily be conceded, ‘the substance of
the bread is converted into a quantity, as this must
be conceded, ‘the substance of the bread is converted
into a thing having part separate from part’; although
this thing may not have part separate from part in
the species of bread; for it is not there locally and
circumscriptively in a place, but is elsewhere.


And I certainly confess that I have never read either
in the canonical law or in the original sources of the
Saints or in decrees of any High Pontiff or in any
general council or in any authorized writing, such a
proposition, ‘quantity is not converted into the body
of Christ,’ ‘the substance of the bread is not converted
into quantity,’ or any similar proposition; although I
seem to posit an opinion contrary to many modern
Doctors who mutually condemn one another, and, in-
deed, their writings are not authoritative; on the con-
trary, many opinions of some have even been con-
demned in the established universities; for they have
presumed to approve such propositions. However, this
is in every mode false, ‘the bread is converted into the
body of Christ, which is a quantity under the species
of bread.’


And if you say; if they concede such propositions,
they have not done this unless influenced by sacred
scripture or at least by some authentic scripture; I reply
that they have said many things for which they did
not have either sacred scripture or any authentic scrip-
ture. I ask from what authentic scripture have they
the statement that the accidents in the sacrament of
the altar do not subsist per se without a subject, and
that all qualities are in a subject. I ask from what
authentic scripture have they the statement that in the


THE SACRAMENT OF THE ALTAR 191


sacrament of the altar there is some subject of pon-
derosity, which is ponderous. Also from what scrip-
ture have they the statement that God can not make
several angels in the same species, that God can not
make a man or an ass without an absolute accident
inhering in it, that a quality can not be without a sub-
ject, that there are not many substantial forms in man,
that the will can will nothing contrary to the judg-
ment of reason; and many such statements, which dis-
agree with authentic statements and reason.

Whence, I ask, are the modern writers inspired, or
what authentic scripture do they have per se for posit-
ing that there is some thing of which God can not be
the cause, that there is some thing which God can not
destroy through His omnipotence, that a dead man is
a man, and innumerable statements which are mani-
festly not in accord with the authentic scriptures.

So then it is easy to see that it is not contrary to
the Christian faith to posit that some quantity is not
a thing really distinct from substance by virtue of
this, that a quantity is then converted into the body of
Christ, and the substance of the bread is converted
into a quantity; so however that it may be converted
into a substance which may be a quantity there.

Nor does it contradict the statement which is after-
ward adduced, that a quantity would not then remain
in the sacrament of the altar; for, although some quan-
tity may pass over, say, that quantity which was not a
thing distinct from the substance of the bread; yet
one other remains, namely, that which is not really
distinct from quality.

Nor does it seem more in conflict with the state-
ments of the Holy Fathers that one quantity, which


15


20


25


30


192 THE SACRAMENT OF THE ALTAR


is not a thing other than a substance, may pass over;
and another, which is not a thing other than a quality,
may remain, than that one relation or respect, which
is not really a thing other than a substance, may pass
5 over; and another relation or another respect, which
is not really a thing other than a substance, may pass
over; and another thing or another respect, which is
not really a thing other than a quality, may remain.
But in what way two quantities can be at the same
10 time will be shown later.


CHAPTER XXXII


In which it is shown that both proposi-

tions stand at the same time; some quan-

tity is not another thing really distinct

from substance, and quantity is an
accident


It now remains to show that any quantity is not an-
other thing really distinct from substance; notwith-
standing that it may be conceded by the philosophers
as well as by the Saints that quantity is an accident
and that quantity is some category other than sub-
stance.

But that I may rest upon a solid foundation, I shall
begin from one distinction of this name ‘accident’
which can be deduced from the words of the venerable
Father Anselm. According to this source this name
‘accident’ can be taken in a three-fold sense; namely,
strictly, liberally, and very liberally.

By taking this term ‘accident’ in the strict sense,
accident signifies thus a thing distinct from substance
and inhering in that thing, namely, substance, and
without which that substance can exist at least through
divine power, so that there is no contradiction involved
in the statement that that substance exists and is not
informed by that accident really distinct.


15


And then an accident is called a thing really ad- 20


venient to another thing and receding from it, or able

to recede without the destruction of that substantial

thing, not making one per se with that to which it

really advenes; which I add by virtue of matter and
193


10


15


20


25


30


194 THE SACRAMENT OF THE ALTAR


substantial form. But such an accident can in no mode
accede to a subject or recede from a subject without
an entire change of that subject. For it is unthink-
able that some subject may now be informed by one
thing really distinct from it and afterwards may not
be informed by that same thing, or conversely; and yet
that it may in no mode be changed. For every thing
really advening to another thing or receding from it
really makes some change about that thing.


But ‘accident,’ when used in the liberal acceptation
of the term, is called everything predicable of some-
thing contingently, which can be successively affirmed
and denied of that by virtue of a real transmutation
of that and not so much by virtue of a real transmu-
tation of another; although it is not always necessary
that it be successively verified and denied of that by
virtue of a transmutation of that; but it can be suc-
cessively affirmed and denied by virtue of the trans-
mutation of another. And so likeness is called an
accident of Sortes; not that likeness may be a certain
thing really distinct from Sortes and from a quality
of Sortes, really informing Sortes or a quality of
Sortes; but because these can be successively verified,
‘Sortes is similar,’ ‘Sortes is not similar’ by virtue of
the transmutation of Sortes. For if Plato be white,
and Sortes black, and afterwards Sortes may become
white and may be transmuted from blackness to white-
ness by virtue of this alone, that Sortes is transmuted
from blackness to whiteness, and Plato may not be
transmuted; this proposition is true, ‘Sortes is not sim-
ilar to Plato’; and afterwards this, ‘Sortes is similar
to Plato’; and so then likeness thus advenes to Sortes
by virtue of the transmutation of Sortes, although it


THE SACRAMENT OF THE ALTAR 195


may be able to happen to him without a transmutation
of Sortes by virtue of a transmutation of Plato. For
from this very fact, that Plato could become black,
and could be transmuted from whiteness to blackness,
while Sortes remains black and not changed; this prop-
osition would be true, ‘Sortes is not similar to Plato,’
and afterwards this. ‘Sortes is similar to Plato.’ And
so it is obvious that this relation ‘likeness’ can advene
to or recede from Sortes through a change of Sortes
and without a change of him. This is said, ‘Sortes
can be similar at first and afterwards is not similar’;
and conversely, both with a change of Sortes and with-
out a change of Sortes. And that is called ‘accident’
when using the term in a liberal sense.

In a very free use of the term, ‘accident’ is called all
that which can be suitable to something at one time
and at another time can not be suitable to it, or might
be able to be suitable to it and not suitable by virtue
of a proper change as well as an inadequate change,
or might not be able to be successively suitable to it
and not be suitable through a proper change but spe-
cially through an inadequate change.

And in thus accepting the term it is not inconsistent
to concede that some accident is suitable to God, for
such an accident occasions no change either actual or
possible in God.

‘Accident’ taken in the first way is most properly
an accident; ‘accident’ taken in the second way is less
properly an accident; but the third way is not prop-
erly an accident. And lest some one may believe that
this distinction procedes from my head, let him read
the venerable Anselm in his Monologium in Chapter
XXV., where he says: “Of all things, surely, which


10


15


20


25


30


10


15


20


25


30


196 THE SACRAMENT OF THE ALTAR


are called accidents, some are understood to be able
to be present or absent not except with some vari-
ation of the participant, as all colors; others are known
not to effect any change at all about that of which
they are said, either by acceding or receding, as certain
relations. For it is, indeed, well known that I am
neither older nor younger nor equal nor like the man
who will be born after the present year; but I shall
undoubtedly, be able to have and to lose all these rela-
tions to him, when he will have been born, without
any change of myself, in proportion as he shall grow,
or will be changed through diverse qualities.


And so it becomes plain, that of those, which are
called accidents, certain to a certain degree bring com-
mutability, but certain by no means impare immuta-
bility. Therefore, as the Supreme Nature in its own
simplicity has never attributed a place to accidents
effecting a change; so it sometimes does not disdain
to say something about those accidents which by no
means resist the supreme immutability; and yet there
is nothing accidental about its essence, whence varia-
bleness itself can be conceived.

Whence, this can also be drawn, that it is susceptible
of no accident. Surely, according to this mode those
accidents, which by acceding or receding make some
change, by this very effect are considered truly to hap-
pen to the thing which they change; so those, which
are deficient by a similar effect, are discovered to be
improperly called accidents.”


From these words the previous distinction can be
deduced. For when he says that there are some acci-
dents, which make some change by acceding or reced-
ing, which are not conceived to be able to be present


THE SACRAMENT OF THE ALTAR 197


and absent except with some variation of the partici-
pant, as all colors, it shows that some accidents, which
produce some change, are things really distinct from
their subjects and inhere in the same. For color is
a certain quality really distinct from substance, and
inherent in it. But through this, which he says, there
are some which either by acceding or receding are
known to effect no change at all about that of which
they are said, as certain relations. It evidently shows
that there is an accident which is not a thing really
distinct from a subject outside advening to that sub-
ject and really receding from that. For it is impossi-
ble that some thing may really and truly inhere and
inform some thing really distinct and afterwards may
not inform it unless that thing be commuted. The
same writer also gives assent to this through this which
he says, that there are some accidents which do not
at all impair immobility.

From this it is obvious that not every accident is
really retained in its subject, for Anselm says that
the Supreme Nature “sometimes does not disdain to
say something about those accidents which by no means
resist the highest immutability; and yet nothing is ac-
cidental about its essence, whence variation itself can
be conceived." For nothing is accidental to that Su-
preme Nature through real inherence and real informa-
tion; and yet Anselm does not deny but concedes that
some accident is suitable to it.

From which, according to the statement of Anselm,
it is obvious that not every accident is really sustained
in a subject; whence, this can also be concluded, that
surely Supreme Nature is susceptible of no accident;
for although some accident may be suitable to God,


15


20


25


30


20


25


30


198 THE SACRAMENT OF THE ALTAR


yet He really sustains none in Himself; and as it is
of an accident, which is suitable to God, which is not
really sustained in God, so an accident, which makes
no change about that of which it is said, is not really
sustained in that subject.


For if it could really be retained in a subject, as if
a distinct thing in a distinct thing, the subject would
necessarily be changed; for it would truly and really
have in itself some thing inhering in itself, to which
it was potentially prior, for it can not be without
any change. For every thing which has at first one
thing and afterwards another, either at first is de-
prived of some thing and afterwards may really be
informed by it, or on the contrary it necessarily passes
rapidly from one thing to another and consequently
is changed; for according to Saint Gregory “to change
is to go from one to another” ; and according to the
philosopher, “to change is to have yourself now
otherwise than before."


Therefore, it is obvious that an accident, which ad-
venes to that, of which it 1s said, without any change,
is not really sustained in a subject; for then the divine
nature would be susceptible of some accident. And,
indeed, when Anselm says that “some accidents make
no change at all by acceding or receding,” he does not
understand that such accidents may really accede as
distinct things to a subject in informing it and may
recede through the destruction or separation of one
thing from another; for when, although Sortes appears
black, Plato becomes white from black, no thing is
separated from Sortes; but then that likeness is said
to recede, by which Sortes was similar to Plato} or
Sortes ceases to be similar to Plato. Whence, for


THE SACRAMENT OF THE ALTAR 199


likeness to accede to Sortes and to recede, is nothing
other than that Sortes sometimes begins to be similar
and sometimes ceases to be similar; and yet by virtue
of this it is not necessary that Sortes receive some
thing into himself or cease to have some thing in him-
self; as God, without the assumption of any thing into
Himself and without the loss of anything existing
in God, sometimes begins to be the justifier of the
sinner and sometimes ceases to be the justifier of the
sinner.


And so it is thus clearly established that it is ac-
cording to the intention of Anselm to posit some acci-
dent which is a thing really distinct from the subject,
really retained in that subject; as color is really re-
tained in a body as a distinct thing in a distinct thing.
But any accident is not a thing really sustained in a
subject but is, indeed, called an accident; for it is con-
tingently predicated of that, even if the constancy of
the subject is posited. And that any of them can ac-
cede and recede through a change of that of which it
is said, and even through an inadequate change, as is
manifestly obvious; for that is obvious of relative
accidents through an inadequate change, which An-
selm says can advene to itself either through this, that
another might increase or will be changed through
diverse qualities. But that any may be able to advene
to myself through a proper change of myself is also
manifest, as was declared of likeness advening to
Sortes. But that some accident may not be able to
advene to that, of which it is said, except through an
inadequate change is obvious through this which pos-
its, that some accident can advene to God, even though
God can in no mode be considered mutable.

16


10


20


25


30


200 THE SACRAMENT OF THE ALTAR


And so it is obvious that this term ‘accident’ can be
accepted in a three-fold sense ; although that, which
can not be suitable to anything except through an in-
adequate change, may improperly be called an accident

5 to it, as Anselm says.


CHAPTER XXXIII


It declares how quantity is an accident,

and how it obtains with this, that some

quantity is not a thing distinct from
substance


Besides the proposed distinction, it must be declared
how quantity is an accident. When this has been
shown, it will be obvious how these obtain at the same
time, ‘some quantity is not a thing really distinct from
substance,’ and ‘quantity is an accident.’ Whence, it
must be known that, as, for instance, not every rela-
tion is an accident in the first mode; for not every re-
lation is a thing really distinct from substance inhering
in it, as many ancient Catholic doctors say and some
modern Catholics agree with them.

And, indeed, not every relation is an accident in the
first mode of accepting the term ‘accident,’ nor even
is every relation an accident in the second mode of
accepting ‘accident’; for some relatives are suitable
to God according to circumstances; sometimes suitable
and sometimes not suitable; but this is not possible
through a change of God, but precisely through a
change of a creature; and yet it is conceded that rela-
tion is an accident and that it is one category of
accident. í

So it can be said of quantity, that not every quan-
tity is a thing really distinct from substance and yet
that a quantity is an accident. For which it must be
understood that not every quantity is a thing really
distinct from a substance inhering in it; as neither is

201


20


25


20


25


30


202 THE SACRAMENT OF THE ALTAR


every thing having part outside of part in situation or
having part separate from part a thing really distinct
from a substance.


And, indeed, as ‘to have part separate from part’ is
not called an accident in the first mode; so not every
quantity is called an accident in the first mode; but ‘to
have part separate from part’ is called an accident in
the second mode. For, if something substantially the
same can at first ‘have part separate from part’ and
afterwards can not ‘have part separate from part’
through a proper change (as some Catholics say. And
it has already been mentioned before, that the body of
Christ has in a mode ‘part separate from part’; for), it
is locally and circumscriptively in heaven; and the
same body though not destroyed can cease to be lo-
cally and circumscriptively and can begin to be sacra-
mentally under the species of bread; and so then it
does not have part separate from part, yet the sub-
stance itself of the body of Christ is not destroyed.
And so, when the same substance has at one time ‘part
separate from part’ through a change of itself, at an-
other time does not have ‘part separate from part,’ it
is an accident; and yet it is not a thing always distinct
and inhering in substance as if a thing really distinct
from a substance; so also quantity is an accident not
in the first mode, but in the second mode. For, al-
though some quality may not now be a thing really
distinct from substance; on the contrary some sub-
stance is really the same as substance, the substance
itself however remaining.


This can manifestly be true, ‘no quantity is really
the same as substance’; for when it is assumed that
God can thus bring it to pass, that it may not have part


THE SACRAMENT OF THE ALTAR 203


separate from part in situation, as in a mode the body
of Christ is under the species of bread; then this is
true, ‘no substance is a quantity’; and some quantity
is then not really the same as substance. So then this
is true, ‘no substance having part separate from part’
is really the same as that substance, for it has that
cause of reality. This substance is not ‘having part
separate from part’ in situation; and so a substance
‘having part separate from part’ in situation can be
called accident, if the term ‘accident’ is accepted in the
second mode; for sometimes this is true, ‘this sub-
stance is substance having part separate from part,’
and sometimes it is not true without the corruption of
that substance; although for this, that those contradic-
tories may be successively verified, there is required a
local change of that substance. So these obtain at the
same time, ‘any quantity is not a thing other than a
substance,’ and ‘quantity is an accident.’ For so many
state, that any relation is not a thing other than a sub-
stance, and yet that relation is an accident.


And this, for these contradictories can be succes-
sively verified by virtue of a change of that substance:
‘this substance is really the same as quantity,’ ‘this
substance is not really the same as quantity.’ But for
the verification of such contradictories nothing is re-
quired except a local change of that substance and no
other. And, therefore, it is necessary that every quan-
tity be some absolute thing really distinct from sub-
stance; and certainly for all such, unless it should
displease those loathing logic, it might be able to be
briefly and easily stated that this is true, ‘quantity is
not a thing really distinct from substance,’ if quantity
be substituted significatively or personally; but this is


un


10


15


20


25


30


10


15


20


204 THE SACRAMENT OF THE ALTAR


true, ‘quantity is an accident,’ if quantity be substi-
tuted simply, and even if it be substituted personally;
for an indefinite is verifiable for one singular. For
thus John of Damascus posits in his Logic in Chapter
XXXIIL, that “number is an accident" and yet he
posits that “number itself is things enumerated.”
Whence, he says under ‘discretion’: “Number is re-
duced to a quantum and language is reduced into num-
ber, but we call these ‘enumerated. " From which it
is gathered that number, since it may be a quantity,
is called an accident; and yet number is itself a thing
enumerated. So we also say that white is an accident
and yet something white is man. Thus we also say
that man and white differ and yet we say that man is
white. Whence, through this mode it can easily and
evidently be shown that, although these two may be
conceded; ‘some quantity is not a thing really distinct
from substance,’ and ‘some quantity is an accident’; it
is not necessary to concede that the same thing may
be substance and accident. Whence all arguments,
which can be offered against these, are sophistical; nor
do they not have any other way of being solved except
through the fallacy of equivocation; for they do not
have another defect.


CHAPTER XXXIV


In what way it must be replied to the

passages of Augustine, introduced before

in Chapter XXX, in the fourth and the
fifth arguments


Having seen how these obtain at the same time:
‘some quantity is not a thing really distinct from sub-
stance,’ and ‘quantity is an accident’; it remains to
show that the opinion of Augustine does not contra-
dict the previous statements; for Augustine does not
intend that magnitudes are accidents really distinct
from substances and inhering in them. For it seems
wonderful that one accident might be able to make
one part to be separate from another and yet God
might not be able to do this, unless He would join
one other thing to the parts of a substance. For when
two distinct things are brought into being, who could
prevent God from making one to be outside another,
although He could join no other thing to them? And
so that whole thing composed of them might be able
to be great, although no other thing would be produced
in it. For the blessed Augustine posits that magnitude
is an accident; for a substance itself can be larger or
smaller through a proper change of substance, accord-
ing to that which can have parts more or less separate,
which can touch without every thing inhering de novo
in the substance itself. For when a substance having
parts separate in act and in situation is produced, those
parts can be still more separate without any added
thing inherent in them, and then that substance is con-

205


15


20


10


20


25


30


206 THE SACRAMENT OF THE ALTAR


sidered larger; because for a substance to be larger i is
nothing other than to have parts more separate in sit-
uation. Moreover, those parts can be less distant by
virtue of an active cause, and then the substance is
also smaller, because for a substance to be smaller is
nothing other than to have parts less separate; and
that this is not surprising, can be shown through a con-
trary opinion. For if quantity be an absolute thing
really distinct from substance and quality, air may be
rarefied; if this is done, either the total preceding
quantity is corrupted or the total preceding quantity is
not corrupted.


It is not possible to grant; first, for in any rarefac-
tion infinite absolute things distinct as regards them-
selves as wholes, not making one numerically, would
then be destroyed. For since there may be an infinite
substance in each continuous time, such infinite quan-
tities would be destroyed in that time in which some-
thing without interruption becomes rarefied; because,
from this, that rarefaction is continuous in each in-
stant, there would be quantity distinct according to
itself as a whole and distinct from a prior and poste-
rior quantity. But it is obvious that they do not make
one numerically; for one does not remain with an-
other.


Nor is it sufficient to say that those quantities have
not been actually, but potentially only. For every
accident really distinct and denominating its subject,
which is not part of another, is actually; but these
continuous quantities now corrupted were of this kind;
therefore, it follows that things infinite actually, dis-
tinct according to themselves as a whole, not making
one, would now be corrupted, which seems sufficiently
absurd.


THE SACRAMENT OF THE ALTAR 207


Nor can an agent even be granted that could de-
stroy one quantity and generate another; for which
reason God would not even be able to preserve one of
those quantities while another is advening. Therefore,
it does not appear reasonable to say, that a whole pre-
ceding quantity is corrupted and a whole new quantity
is generated when air or another body becomes rare-
fied; for then it would follow that all the qualities
would be corrupted no matter how much some body
would become rarefied; for if quantity, which is pos-
ited as a subject of qualities, is corrupted and an ac-
cident itself is destroyed by the destruction of the im-
mediate subject of some accident, it is necessary that
all the immediate qualities inhering in that quantity
be destroyed. But if you wish to say that not the
whole preceding quantity is corrupted but something
remains, now then that specially remains without any
new part, or there is some new part which was not
before. But that there may not be another new part
of quantity which was not before, can not be said;
since that part would not be retained in any subject,
and it is manifest that it is not retained unless in
some part of air or of fire; therefore, either it is
then at the same time with that quantity which pre-
ceded in the same part, or that quantity recedes and
no longer informs that part which it informed before;
and yet it itself is not corrupted.


Since there may be no greater reason that one part
of a preceding quantity is corrupted than another, it
follows that that part of the quantity either remains
without a subject or withdraws from that subject, in
which it was before, to another; each one of these is
unreasonable. Therefore, it remains that in rarefac-


15


20


25


30


15


20


25


30


208 THE SACRAMENT OF THE ALTAR


tion there is not some new part of a quantity but pre-
cisely that which was before; and yet notwithstanding
this that a quantity the same numerically is at first
smaller and afterwards larger; for parts of the same
quantity were at first less separate in situation when
the air was dense; but afterwards are more separate
in situation when the air is rare. And so it is estab-
lished that a thing numerically the same having parts
distinct without any absolute new thing advening to
it can be larger sometimes and sometimes smaller.
And if this be possible of any quantity, there seems to
be nothing inconsistent in conceding this of substance;
for substance itself having parts sometimes becomes
larger, sometimes becomes smaller, without any abso-
lute thing advening to it.


But now Augustine calls everything ‘accident’ which
can or can not be affirmed as true of a thing by virtue
of a change in the object, and which can be affirmed
as true of a thing according to the various modes.
Whence, because the same substance can be larger and
can be smaller, and can be great, which before was not
great, and conversely; and this by virtue of a change
of that substance. By virtue of this Augustine says
that magnitudes are accidents in the second mode, not
in the first; for the same proper substance through a
proper change can be larger sometimes and sometimes
can be smaller without any absolute thing really dis-
tinct added to it. Magnitude is not such an accident
which may be an absolute thing really distinct from a
substance inhering in it.


But, perhaps, you may say: how can a substance
be changed unless some new thing be added to it? I
say that this is the difference between substantial


THE SACRAMENT OF THE ALTAR 209


change, and change which is properly alteration, and
local change; that through the first two some thing
inhering in the changed advenes. But through a local
change it is not necessary that a thing inhering in the
changed may advene to the changed; but it suffices
for it that a thing acquire for itself a place which it
did not have before. Whence, from the very statement
that a thing is in a place quiescent in which it was not
before, but was in another without any other thing
intermediate between the place and the thing placed;
and there is that thing which is changed. And if you
ask: what is it for a thing to be located in a place?
It can easily be said that for a thing to be located in a
place is for no corporeal thing to be intermediate
between a thing placed and a place, so that, when
the things themselves have not been changed locally
from one place to another, there can not be local
motion.


Therefore it is obvious from the previous statements
how it can be safely held that magnitude is an acci-
dent according to the intention of the blessed Au-
- gustine, although magnitude may not be another thing
really distinct from substance inhering in it. For as
Augustine posits that accidents are in relation to “some-
thing,” as “relationships, services, likenesses, equalities
and anything else of the kind”; yet according to many
Catholics relations of this kind are not certain things
really distinct from absolutes. For as the venerable
Anselm posits that many relations are accidents which
however can advene to something without any change,
and consequently are not distinct things inhering in it;
thus also the same Anselm posits that some accident
is suitable to God, and yet no thing really distinct from


10


20


25


30


10


20


25


30


210 THE SACRAMENT OF THE ALTAR


God is retained in Him through real inherence or in-
formation.

Whence, in short, I have never read in any sacred
writer, that he posits that quantity is an accident and is
distinguished from substance any more than that he
posits that ‘ad aliquid’ and ‘relations’ are accidents and
distinct from substance. And, therefore, as according
to many Catholics it is not inconsistent with the state-
ments of the Saints to say that ‘relation’ is not a thing
other than its fundament, so it is not inconsistent with
the Catholic faith to say that some quantity is not an-
other absolute thing really distinct from substance; and
at the same time with this I say, that some quantity is
another absolute thing really distinct from substance;
for some quantity is really the same as quality which
is really distinguished from substance.

Through the previous statements another opinion of
the same blessed Augustine can be posited; for he
does not intend to say that every magnitude may be a
certain absolute thing inhering in substance and really
distinct from it; but he intends to say that one thing is
magnitude, another is that which is great by means of
it in proportion to so much, for the thing itself can
remain, although it may not be great; which can occur
in a two-fold manner.

Whence, it may occur in one mode through conden-
sation; for if a large thing be condensed, so that it
become an object of small quantity, through this alone
that the parts of the substance, which were locally
much separated, become less separate in situation with-
out any new thing having been generated and any old
thing having been destroyed; then the thing is not
great and yet the thing itself remains. And so it is


THE SACRAMENT OF THE ALTAR 211


one thing for a thing to be, and another for a thing to
be great; for a thing can be although it may not be
great.

This can happen in another way through the omnip-
otence of God, if He should bring it to pass; as many
say, that it is impossible for God to bring it to pass,
that a thing formerly great might afterwards come to
be somewhere in that mode in which the body of Christ
is under the species of bread; and yet would be no-
where locally or circumscriptively; for then, because
the thing might not have parts separate in situation,
it would not be great; and so it can be a thing, al-
though it may not be great. And Saint Augustine in-
tends this alone, and thus it is obvious that there is no
statement of the blessed Augustine contrary to the
previous statements.

In another way it can be declared that the blessed
Augustine does not contradict the previous statements,
for the blessed Augustine speaks of magnitude, which
is a relation; for, as for instance, great is relative, a
magnitude is relation. But now according to many
Catholics it is not contrary to the statements of the
Saints, that relation is not another thing really distinct
from an absolute; therefore, it is not contrary to the
Catholic faith to say that magnitude, of which Au-
gustine speaks, is not a thing other than substance;
yet with this it is established that the blessed Augustine
says the truth when he says that magnitude is an ac-
cident, since it is accidentally predicated of a natural
thing; therefore, the blessed Augustine can thus be
explained.

In still another way it can be explained that through
magnitude, by which created things are great, he does


10


15


20


25


30


tn


2


©


25


212 THE SACRAMENT OF THE ALTAR


not understand one absolute accident inhering in cre-
ated things; but through that magnitude he under-
stands an efficient cause making these to be great, of
which there is no doubt that there may be a thing
other than created things, which are great by the par-
ticipation of that magnitude, not indeed through in-
formation but through real dependence upon it; and
that he may hold this opinion, his last words declare,
which he adds there in the De Trinitate, V., Chapter X.
Whence, he says that “that is true magnitude, by which
not only great is a house which is great, and by which,
whatever mountain is great, is great; but also by
which great is whatever else is called great; as that
magnitude may be one thing, another those which are
called great from that magnitude; which magnitude
certainly is primarily great and in a much more ex-
cellent way than those which are great by partaking
of it. But since God is not great by this magnitude
which is not Himself, so that God may be, as it were,
a partaker of it, God is however great; otherwise that
will be magnitude greater than God, but there is not
anything greater than God; therefore, He is great by
this magnitude by which He Himself is the same
magnitude.”


From these words it can be gathered that the blessed
Augustine speaks of magnitude by which created
things are causally great; for however he speaks of
magnitude “by which great is whatever else is called
great,” whether it be a corporeal thing, or it be a spir-
itual thing. Whence, he speaks of the magnitude, as
he premised before, by which a home is great, by
which a mountain is great, by which a mind is great,


THE SACRAMENT OF THE ALTAR 213


which is a spiritual thing, although home and moun-
tain may be corporeal things.

But it is manifest that there is no magnitude inher-
ing in a substance as if in a subject, by which every
other is great, which is called great, whether it be cor-
poreal or it be spiritual. Therefore, he does not speak
of magnitude which inheres in substance; but of mag-
nitude which is the cause of all great things and by
which “great is whatever is called great.” For with-
out it no thing great is by far great. However, be-
cause the blessed Augustine speaks of magnitude,
which is “primarily great and in a much more excel-
lent way than" another, magnitude of such a kind is
not any accident inhering in a substance; for as noth-
ing can be before substance, so nothing can naturally
be great before substance. Then because he speaks
of magnitude which is greater than that which is great
when magnitude is not that which is great, it is estab-
lished that no accident inhering in a substance can be
more than the substance of which it is an accident.

Therefore, it is obvious that the blessed Augustine
speaks of the magnitude which is the cause why other
created things are great. Whence, the blessed Au-
gustine wishes to show in the same place that God is
neither causally nor in any mode great by some mag-
nitude which is not God Himself. But creatures are
great by some magnitude which makes them to be
great; which magnitude is, however, not itself a cre-
ated object, but “is primarily great and in a much
more excellent way than those which are great by par-
ticipation of that magnitude.”

Whence, this term ‘participation’ is often accepted
equivocally in various places by the philosophers as


10


20


25


30


1


On


5


214 THE SACRAMENT OF THE ALTAR


well as by the Saints; yet for the sake of brevity I pass
by the discussion of that mode.

And so it is well known that the blessed Augustine
can be explained in two modes; and all the passages of
the Saints can be explained by the second of those
modes, which passages appear to call out loudly, that
quantity or magnitude is another thing really distinct
from substance and quality; and the expositions can
be proved through the processes of the same Saints
in other places; yet for the present I refrain from dis-
cussing them. Nor is there any inconsistency in ex-
plaining the statements of the Saints, since all the
writers later than they make this statement, although
some may not have the intention of the Saints, and
various writers may think differently of the intention
of them, although neither may be considered heretical.


CHAPTER XXXV


How quantity is a category distinct from

quality and substance; notwithstanding

that no quantity may be distinct from

part of a thing, from substance and qual-

ity. In which there is a reply to the

sixth argument, showing that categories
are signs predicable of things


This must also be considered: how quantity is a
category distinct from quality and substance, notwith-
standing that no quantity may be a thing really dis-
tinct from part of a thing, from substance and quality,
which can be declared in a similar way according to
the statements of many Catholic doctors; for, as has
often been said, relation is a category distinct from
other categories, and yet according to many of them
relation is not another thing distinct from absolute
things; therefore, quantity could be a distinct category,
although no quantity may be another thing really dis-
tinct from quality and substance.

Again, it is not more inconsistent for categories to
be distinguished, although distinct things may not cor-
respond to them, than for species to be distinguished,
which do not have distinct things content under them-
selves; but it sometimes happens that species are di-
verse, although the same thing may be arranged under
those species. Which is proved by the testimony of
John of Damascus, for he says: “Place is a surface of
air”; from which it is obvious that the same thing is
a place and a surface; (yet, notwithstanding this, the


215
i


10


15


20


10


20


25


30


216 THE SACRAMENT OF THE ALTAR


same Doctor posits with others that place and surface
are distinct species of quantity), and also a continuous
quantity and a discrete quantity are distinct species;
yet no thing corresponds to a continuous quantity that
may not correspond to the other; for nothing is con-
tinuous that may not constitute number with another,
according to the intention of the present Doctor.


Again, the same thing is also placed in diverse cate-
gories according to the same Saint, as was asserted
before; therefore, there is no inconsistency that quan-
tity may be a category distinct from quality and sub-
stance, and yet that every quantity may be an absolute
thing really not distinct from substance and quality.
Whence, it must be known that there are no cate-
gories except certain predicables and signs of things,
by virtue of which John of Damascus fittingly says:
“It is necessary to know that there are in all ten cate-
gories; that is, very general genera under which every
word simply stated belongs." Whence, the same Saint
wishes, that every word, which can be called the ex-
treme of a proposition or can be that through which
an answer may be conveniently made to any question
raised through any interrogation whatever, is placed
under some category, and is placed under diverse cat-
egories through which an answer is made to such dis-
tinct questions raised through diverse interrogatives.


Whence, all words, through which an answer is
conveniently made to the question raised concerning
some substance per ‘ubi, are placed in the same genus,
‘ubi’; and all words, through which an answer is con-
veniently made to the question raised per ‘quando,’
are arranged under the genus, ‘quando’; and all words,
through which an answer is made to the question


THE SACRAMENT OF THE ALTAR 217


raised per ‘quale,’ are in the category ‘qualitas’; and
all words through which an answer is made to the
question raised per ‘quantum’ or per ‘quot’ or any
such interrogative which is posited by the grammari-
ans as an interrogative of quantity, are placed in the
genus ‘quantity as.’

And thus it is of other words placed in diverse cat-
egories, unless, per chance, such interrogatives may
fail us, because we have a great dearth of terms. But
not only nouns are placed in diverse categories, but
even verbs and other parts of speech, and sometimes
words composed of diverse parts of speech, as fre-
quently words composed of diverse prepositions and
their cases; by virtue of which the celebrated Doctor
afterwards stated in his Logic in Chapter XXXII. :
“That every word, namely, simple, belongs under
those categories." He further explains, saying: “They
are indeed these: ‘substance’ as stone; ‘quantity’ as
two or three; ‘relation’ as father and son; ‘quality’ as
white and black; 'place' as in Tyre in Damascus, but
this is a manifestation of place; 'time' as yesterday,
tomorrow, but this is a manifestation of time; ‘pos-
session’ as to put on a garment; ‘situation’ as to sit or
to stand; ‘action’ as to burn; ‘passion’ as to be burned."
From this it is gathered that adverbs as ‘yesterday,’
‘tomorrow ; verbs as ‘to burn,’ ‘to be burned’; compos-
ites of prepositions and their cases as ‘in Tyre,’ ‘in
Damascus,’ are contained under one of those cate-
gories. And indeed there are no categories except
certain predicables and signs of things and simple
terms; from which are made combinations true and
false; but simple terms of this kind can be distinct to
such a degree that the predication of one of another is


20


25


30


10


15


20


25


218 THE SACRAMENT OF THE ALTAR


impossible; although no thing one through one is sig-
nified, but that the same thing may be signified by the
rest; as no substantial or accidental thing is signified
through this name ‘angelus’ but that it may be signified
through this name ‘angeli, and conversely. Yet this
is impossible, ‘angelus is angeli,’ and conversely; and
indeed it is not inconsistent to posit that distinct pred-
icables imply the same thing; notwithstanding, there-
fore, that substance, quality, and quantity may be dis-
tinct categories; yet every quantity could be a thing
not really distinct from substance and quality. But it
must be observed that such categories are not only
signs fixed arbitrarily, of whatever kind the words
are; but are also concepts or intentions of the mind
which are signs naturally signifying things; and in-
deed as words can be distinguished, notwithstanding
the identity of the things signified, so concepts or in-
tentions of the mind can be distinguished, although
they do not signify distinct things. And thus these
names ‘substance,’ ‘quality,’ and ‘quantity’ may be dis-
tinct, although the things signified may not be distinct.
Nor are names synonyms by virtue of this; for this
name ‘quantity’ connotes or enables one to understand
something; namely, part of a thing separate in situa-
tion from a part, which is connoted or is able to be
understood neither through this name ‘substance’ nor
through this name ‘quality’; by virtue of which this
could be true, ‘substance as well as quality is’; not-
withstanding that this may be false, ‘quantity is.’


CHAPTER XXXVI


_ That the previous opinion ought not to
be rejected as heretical, contrary to cer-
tain writers who condemn that opinion as
heretical; and through this the seventh
reason, adduced before in Chapter XXX,

is explained


After the previous statements it remains to see and
to show that it is not necessary to reject this opinion
as heretical, although many modern Doctors writing
of that may condemn and oppose it. First, because no
doctor of much reputation condemns this opinion as
heretical, although he may deny it as he may deny
other opinions of theology and of philosophy, which
he does not understand to be true. On the contrary,
a certain Doctor intimates that that opinion is prob-
able; namely, Scotus, in Book IV., Distinction XII.,
Question IL, and he presents a mode of explaining
many arguments which might be offered against it, as
will appear later. Moreover, the same Doctor cites it,
and disapproves of it, as of other opinions of Catholic
theologians, which he believes are false.

Again, although he might oppose this opinion as
heretical, as none of them does, it would not necessa-
rily be settled by their judgment, since it may belong to
the Roman Church alone to determine a question of
faith, as Pope Innocent says in Causa XXIV.,
Quzstione I., Capitulo XII., ‘Quotiens’ “As often,”
he says, “as a ground of faith is under discussion, I
think that all our brothers and our fellow bishops

219


10


15


20


10


15


20


25


30


220 THE SACRAMENT OF THE ALTAR


ought to report only to Peter, that is, to the authority
of his name and position, just as now your love
prompted, that it may be able to be of profit to all the
churches throughout the whole world.” In the same
place a gloss objecting states the opposite of this. The
opposite of this seems to be in the margin of the De
Hereticis, ‘Ad abolendum’: “For there it is intimated
that those must be shunned as heretics, whom the bish-
ops have declared are to be shunned.” Whence, Pope
Lucian says in the same place: “All who, concerning
the sacrament of the body and the blood of our Lord
Jesus Christ or concerning baptism or concerning the
remission of sins through obligatory confession or
concerning matrimony or the rest of the ecclesiastical
sacraments, have not feared to teach or to think
otherwise than the Sacrosanct Roman Church pre-
scribes and observes, and in general whomsoever the
same Roman Church, either each bishop individually
throughout his diocese with a council of clergy, or the
clerical bishops in a vacant See with a council of neigh-
boring bishops, if it will have been necessary, have de-
clared heretics, we condemn with a bond of perpetual
anathema.”


From these words it might be gathered that it per-
tains to the bishops and to the clergy in a vacant See
to determine a question of faith. But the gloss previ-
ously cited replies to that when it states: “That that
must be understood, when they decide any such ques-
tion, which is certain to be heresy; but this when there
is doubt." The argument for this is in the margin of
the De Hereticis, ‘Cum Christus,’ in the gloss.


From which it can be concluded that with respect to
heretics asserting something which is manifestly a


THE SACRAMENT OF THE ALTAR 221


heresy, the bishops can examine and condemn as
heretics those who have confessed or have been con-
victed, who are then to be excommunicated by the au-
thority of the Pope. But it is not allowed them to de-
termine a question raised about some article concerning
which there are opinions among the Catholic sages;
where the gloss before says: “It is one thing to decide
a question raised concerning the faith, which is the
privilege of no one other than the Roman See, as is
here said; it is another thing to discuss it without a
defense, which the Patriarchs and Primates can do.”
And thus they reply to that decree of Pope Clement,
who seems to intimate that it belongs to the bishops to
decide a question of faith, in Distinction LXXX.,
‘In illis where he says as follows: “But in those
states in which formerly their chief priests and also
the chief doctors of the law were among the heathen,
the blessed Peter advised that the primates of the
bishops and also the patriarchs be appointed, who
should consider the causes of the other bishops and
the more important matters of the faith.” Accord-
ing to this authority anyone might believe that it be-
longs to the bishops to decide a question of faith;
which is not true. Whence, the gloss in the same
place replies: “In faith, that is, faithfully,” and that
“a question of faith" must be referred to the Apos-
tolic See, as Causa XVI., Question I., ‘Frater noster’
proves that; and for that reason it says: “But explain
this, ‘in faith, that is, faithfully’ "; either they can dis-
cuss the causes of faith, but they can not proceed to a
decision, or they can distinguish who are those who
doubt; for if they are laymen, it appears that the bish-
ops can decide according to the gloss in the margin


5


15


20


25


30


10


15


20


25


30


222 THE SACRAMENT OF THE ALTAR


of the De Hereticis, ‘Ad abolendum’; and if the clergy,
the Pope; in the margin of the same title, ‘Cum Chris-
tus,’ this gloss.


It is, therefore, obvious that, when there may be a
controversy among theologians concerning some article
as to whether it may agree or disagree with the Chris-
tian faith, it must be referred to the Supreme Pontiff.
For when the office of inquisition of heretical perver-
sity may be at any time entrusted to the unlearned or
inferior teachers, it seems absurd that it belongs to
such an inquisition to decide by proper authority any
difficult and profound question concerning any articles
whatever pertaining to theology, and to condemn as a
heretic any one great and famous in theology and
worthy because of his understanding of life as well as
the office of a doctor of science, and approved by an
established university, if he should contradict its opin-
ion. Therefore, it appears that it must be referred to
the Roman Pontiff, when a question is discussed con-
cerning something which is not expressed in the canon-
ical scriptures and is not determined through the
Roman Church, which we also see is done in modern
times.


Therefore, it must not stand upon the judgment
of any modern writers who condemn the previous
opinion, especially since many Catholic doctors, praise-
worthy because of knowledge and of life, have held
this opinion; and, as I have understood through a re-
lation worthy of faith, a certain great Doctor, the
Archbishop of Lyons, canonized by the Roman
Church, held this opinion and left it in his writings;
whose book containing the aforesaid opinion I have


THE SACRAMENT OF THE ALTAR 223


not, however, seen; but I hope to receive it in a brief
time.


It is also much more permissible to deny the state-
ments of those who mutually condemn one another
and of whom some hold a doctrine suspected and con-
demned by the established universities than the state-
ments of the Holy Fathers before they be approved
by the Apostolic See, which however is permitted,
than the statements of the Holy Fathers after they
may be approved by the Apostolic See. How one may
be obligated to hold with devout faith, Innocent says
in the margin of the De Constitutionibus on that Chap-
ter, ‘Ne innitaris.” “Observe,” he says, “that it is per-
mitted to stand upon the statements of the Holy Fa-
thers or of others acknowledged by the Church.”


And he, who says that which they themselves say,
can not be determinately contradicted, unless they have
retracted the same, as Augustine has retracted many
of his statements, or unless they be corrected by the
Church. If indeed they among themselves have di-
verse opinions, as concerning the assumption of the
body of the blessed Virgin Mary or concerning the
condemnation of Salome, it is permitted to anyone to
say what he pleases; if indeed no diversity is found
among the Saints, it is necessary to observe even to
the smallest iota that which they say, after their little
works are authorized by the Holy Church. But for-
merly, before they were authorized, it was permitted
to hold these opinions or not. Therefore, any one can
not be contradicted, although he may deny the Doctors
not authorized by the Roman Church. Whence, the
presumption of some modern writers must be depre-
ciated, who puffing themselves above themselves, de-


tn


[e


0


w


0


20


25


30


224 THE SACRAMENT OF THE ALTAR


siring that they alone be called rabbi, inspired by envy,
condemning every opinion dissenting from their teach-
ings. Since they do not know how through reason to
refute it as dangerous and heretical, they are inces-
santly rending it to pieces by their dog-like barkings,
not considering that the most Holy Father and the il-
lustrious Doctor, the blessed Augustine, wished thus
to be devoted neither to his own writings nor to those
of other bishops, but that some things in their writ-
ings might be able to be censured by a just judgment
and with no rashness. Whence, Saint Augustine says
as cited in Distinction IX., ‘Noli.’: “Do not,” he says,
“servilely regard my writings as though canonical
scriptures.”

Again, the same writer in the first book of the De
Trinitate in the second Chapter: “I shall not be
ashamed to ask,” he says, “if in any place I am unde-
cided; nor shall I be ashamed to learn, if in any place
I am in error.”


Again, in the same book in Chapter III.: “Indeed
he, who,” he says, “on reading these statements says:
I understand whatever may be said, but it has not been
truly said, asserts, as it pleases, his own opinion, and
refutes mine, if he can. But if he would do this with
charity and truth and would take care to make it
known to me also, if I am still alive, I shall then have
received the most abundant fruit of this my task. But
if it would not be possible for me to know; willingly
and gladly would I be that he should be responsible for
informing them, as he will be able. I, however,
meditate on the law of the Lord, if not day and night,
at least during those moments of time I can,” et cetera.


Again, the same author says, as cited in a letter to


THE SACRAMENT OF THE ALTAR 225


Vincent in the De Constitutionibus, Distinction IX.,
‘Negare’: “I can not deny," he says, “nor ought I,
as in the larger works themselves, so there are many
statements in so many of my smaller works which can
be censured with judgment and with no rashness.”
Again, the same author in Distinction IX., Chapter
‘Ego solus’: “I read others,” he says, “so that no
matter with how much sanctity or with whatever doc-
trine they may prevail, I may not indeed think a thing
true because they themselves think so; but because
they have been able to convince me through other au-
thors or through the canonical or through probable
reasons, that they do not swerve from the truth.”


Again, the same author says of individual baptism,
as cited in Distinction IX., ‘Quis’: “Who may not
know,” he says, “through the letters of the bishops
which either were written after the canon was con-
firmed or will be written, and through, perhaps, the
wiser language of any one more experienced in this
thing, and through the weightier authority and more
acute sagacity and through councils of some of the
bishops, that it is permitted to censure anyone who,
among them, perchance, is diverted from the truth.”


Again, the same author in a letter to Vincent says,
as cited in Distinction IX., ‘Noli frater’: ‘The writ-
ings of the Holy Bishops,” he says, “are not thus read,
as if testimony may be so cited from them, that it may
not be permitted to think the opposite, where, per-
chance, they may thus have been understood other
than the truth demands. We are indeed in this num-
ber, that we may not disdain even to take to ourselves
the saying of the Apostle. And if you are wise in any
other matter, this also God will reveal to you.”


10


15


20


25


30


wn


_
e


m
wn


2


e


25


226 THE SACRAMENT OF THE ALTAR


Again, in a letter to Fortunatus the same Augustine
says, as cited in Distinction IX., ‘Neque quorumlibet :
“We ought,” he says, “not to regard the discussions
of each and every one, even though Catholics and note-
worthy men, as we ought to hold the canonical scrip-
tures, that it may not be allowed to us with the proper
regard which is due those men, to reject and also to
condemn anything in their writings, if we, perchance,
might discover that they should think otherwise than
the truth has it, as understood either by others or by
us with divine help. Such as I am with respect to
the writings of others, such I wish the judges of my
own writings to be.”


According to these authorities and very many others
it evidently can be gathered that it is permitted to cen-
sure and also to condemn the writings of any one be-
fore they may be authorized by the Roman Church.
And indeed although many may hold the opposite of
the opinion proposed, it is not necessary to condemn
this opinion, especially since it may thus concur with
the statements of Saints and Doctors accepted by the
Church. Yet I confess this, that if it could be able to
be shown that it may be from the mind of any Doctor
accepted by the Apostolic See, that quantity is another
absolute thing really distinct from substance and qual-
ity, I am prepared to defend and to hold this, although
I am unwilling by virtue of the dictum of any one of
the plebs, to hold in check my intellect and to affirm
something contrary to a dictate of reason, unless the
Roman Church may teach that this view must be held;
for the authority of the Roman Church is greater than
the whole capacity of human genius.


CHAPTER XXXVII


That the previous opinion is not contrary
to experience, and the eighth reason,
cited before in Chapter XXX, is explained


From the previous arguments it can easily be seen
that it is not contrary to experience to posit that quan-
tity is not a thing other than substance and quality;
for, when substance is divided without the loss of a
part, it is not more necessary for quantity than for
substance to be destroyed. For quantity, as substance,
can be thus divided without the loss of part; for when-
ever wood is divided, it is not necessary for any abso-
lute thing to be destroyed.


It is also possible that a substance, which at first is
of a greater quantity, may become that of a smaller
without the corruption of any absolute thing; which
is obvious in the condensation of a thing. For when
anything is condensed, it is inconsistent to posit that
the whole preceding quantity may be corrupted; there-
fore, it is necessary that some preceding quantity may
remain, or therefore, the whole remains without the
newness of any part; and then a thing becomes a
smaller quantity without the corruption of any abso-
lute thing, and consequently by virtue of this it is not
necessary for quantity to be distinguished from sub-
stance; or the preceding quantity remains so, however,
that some part of the preceding quantity may be cor-
rupted, which can not stand. Because if any part of
a preceding quantity be corrupted, I take that part of
a substance which was at first the primary subject of

227


10


15


20


25


10


20


25


30


228 THE SACRAMENT OF THE ALTAR


that quantity or of that part of the quantity; and I
ask whether it now remains without quantity, which
can not be granted; for then a substance or part of a
substance, which was before a quantum, would natu-
rally not become a quantum, if it itself remains, which
is false and impossible; or it is the subject of some
part of a quantity, and then even of a new part, which
can not be granted; for there is no greater reason
that one part of a condensed may take on a new quan-
tity than another; and so it is necessary that either a
whole substance according to any part of itself or ac-
cording to nature take on a new quantity, or is the
subject of some pre-existing thing, which can not ob-
tain; for then some part of a quantity would pass
from subject into subject, which is impossible through
nature, although God could be able to do this; but
God administers things that He may allow them to
control their own proper movements.


Therefore, according to all the previous statements
it remains that, when some thing is condensed and
becomes a smaller quantity, no absolute thing is lost
or corrupted; but the same thing, which was at first
a greater quantity, is afterwards a smaller quantity
without the entire corruption of an absolute thing
through this, that parts of the same thing were before
more separate in situation than now. And so it is
evidently obvious that by virtue of such an experience
it is not necessary to posit that quantity is an absolute
thing other than quality and substance.


On the contrary, by virtue of experience it is nec-
essary to posit that quantity is not another absolute
thing bearing qualities and really distinct from sub-
stance, of whose substance some part or the whole


THE SACRAMENT OF THE ALTAR 229


may be destroyed, when some substance may be a
quantity smaller than before. For it is obvious through
experience that sometimes some thing becomes a less
quantity, although no part of whiteness or of taste
or of another like quality may be lost. If this is
admitted, I ask whether or not each preceding part
remains now as before. If you say that each part of
the preceding quantity remains, it is necessary to con-
cede that, when a thing becomes a smaller quantity,
no part of the quantity is lost, which is the proposition.


But if you say that some part of the preceding quan-
tity is lost or corrupted, and it is manifest that there
is no greater reason that one part is corrupted than
another; therefore, the whole is corrupted, which is
inconsistent.


Similarly I ask whether the entire preceding quan-
tity be corrupted or only a part. Since, at the destruc-
tion of a primary and immediate subject, there may
follow a destruction of an accident existing in that, it
follows that either the whole whiteness or a part of
it is corrupted whenever any thing is condensed. And
similarly it is necessary to concede this of taste and
of any sensible quality, which is contrary to experi-
ence; and so it is contrary to experience to say that
whenever any substance is condensed or becomes a
smaller quantity, some absolute thing bearing qualities
may be destroyed. And, indeed, it is in harmony
with experience that, when any substance becomes a
smaller quantity through condensation or through an-
other mode without the loss of any part of a substance,
no absolute thing bearing qualities is corrupted, neither
as regards itself as a whole nor as regards its parts;
as it is in agreement with experience that then many


10


15


20


25


30


10


20


25


230 THE SACRAMENT OF THE ALTAR


qualities neither as regards themselves as wholes nor
as regards their parts are destroyed or lost. And in-
deed that substance does not become a smaller quan-
tity through the destruction of any absolute accident,
but through this, that parts of that substance are now
less separate in situation than before; and in the same
mode the parts of extended qualities in this substance
are now less separate than before without the destruc-
tion or loss of any absolute accident at all.


And if you ask in what way substance is now a
quantity smaller than before, if it has lost no thing, it
must be said that this is by virtue of an active cause
which, as it can move some thing locally, so it possible
for parts reciprocally to approach which were before
more separate. And, therefore, for this thing to be a
smaller quantity now than before, is not other than for
the parts of that thing to be less separate locally or in
situation now than before.


Nor is any thing required for these except parts,
which are separate, and an agent effectively causing
them to be separate, together with a final cause. On
the contrary, it appears wonderful that a single cheap
created thing might be able to distend those parts of
a substance; and yet the omnipotence of God might
not be able to make the very same parts of a species to
be separate, unless He should join one such thing dis-
tinct from them.


CHAPTER XXXVIII


How all lengths are of the same species,

and how some differ in species; and the

ninth reason, adduced in Chapter XXX,
is explained


After these statements it must be seen how all
lengths are of the same species; and how some differ
in species. Whence, it must be noticed that, as it was
proved through John of Damascus, the same thing can
be in diverse categories according to one or another
intention. And consequently two things of the same
category can be in diverse categories; for according
to the aforesaid Doctor the same thing is in the genus
‘substance’ according to one intention, and is in the
category ‘quantity’ according to another intention; and
consequently when two such things are accepted, each
of which is classified in the category ‘substance’ and
in the category ‘quantity’ according to one or another
intention; those things are of the same category, be-
cause each is in the category ‘substance,’ and yet they
are in diverse categories according to the illustrious
Doctor and Saint; so it is possible that some things
may be contained under one species and under differ-
ent species, by virtue of which those things, each of
which is ‘length,’ can be contained under this species
of quantity ‘length’; and yet they could have been con-
tained under different species of substance.


Nor is this a greater inconsistency than to concede
that the same things, which are in one category, are
at the same time contained with this under diverse

231

18


15


20


25


15


20


232 THE SACRAMENT OF THE ALTAR


categories. Therefore, it must be conceded that length
of air and length of water are of the same species in
the category ‘quantity’; and yet they are of diverse
species in the genus ‘substance’; as many Catholics
have posited, that diverse relations of the same species
in the genus ‘relation’ are things really not distinct
from the fundaments distinct in a species.


Whence, whiteness, heat, sweetness, blackness, and
such qualities are distinguished in species; and yet all
similitudes, which are not things outside the mind re-
ally distinct from those qualities, are contained under
one species in the genus ‘relation.’ So it can be of
lengths which are not things other than substance and
quality; and yet they are contained under one species
in the genus ‘quantity.’ However, it must be per-
ceived that such distinct species not subordinately
placed are never predicated of any thing or of a pro-
noun indicating that thing extra in quid et per se in
the first mode. And through this many passages of
the philosophers can be explained, which seem to be
contrary to the previous statements, just as is shown
elsewhere.


CHAPTER XXXIX


Concerning a diverse mode of predicating

quantity according to diverse categories,

explaining the tenth reason posited before
in Chapter XXX


After these there must be a discussion of a diverse
mode of predicating quantity according to diverse cat-
egories. Whence, this must be understood, although
‘per se’ be taken in diverse modes in different places
by the philosophers. Whence Aristotle in one place
holds that only the necessary are ‘per se,’ and in an-
other place holds that wood is white ‘per se,’ although
it may however be contingently white; yet one mode
of acceptation suffices for the thesis. ‘Per se’ is taken
in one way when the predicate does not connote or
signify something, but that something similar may be
connoted or may be allowed to be understood through
a subject. And indeed when a subject is purely abso-
lute and connotes nothing and does not enable one to
understand something, and the predicate is connotative
and enables one to understand something else, then
such a proposition is not said to be ‘per se.’ And in
thus accepting ‘per se’ always for this, that the propo-
sition may be ‘per se,’ it is required that the proposition
can not be false with the constancy of the subject; that
is, if ‘to be’ is called ‘to exist’ in relation to a subject
significatively assumed, as it is possible that this may
be true, ‘Sortes is,’ though this appears false,
‘Sortes is a man.’ And, therefore, this consequence
is good: ‘Sortes is,’ therefore, ‘Sortes is a man.’

233


10


20


25


10


20


25


30


234 THE SACRAMENT OF THE ALTAR


And similarly it follows: ‘man is,’ therefore, ‘man is
an animal.’

And in accepting ‘per se’ thus, this is not ‘per se,’
‘quality is a quantum’; nor is that ‘per se’ ‘substance
is a quantum,’ but that, ‘quantity is a quantum’ is
‘per se.’ And the reason for this is according to
the philosopher; for this name ‘quantum’ connotes that
part of a thing is outside of part. But nothing such
connotes or enables one to understand this name ‘qual-
ity,’ nor this name ‘substance’ ; but this name ‘quantity’
thus enables one to understand that part is separate
from part, as this name ‘quantum.’ And by virtue of
this, this is ‘per se,’ ‘quantity is a quantum,’ and no
such is ‘per se,’ ‘substance is a quantum,’ ‘quality is a
quantum,’ ‘whiteness is a quantum, ‘man is a
quantum.’


On the contrary, it is possible that this may be true,
‘quality is,’ while this appears false, “quality is a quan-
tum.’ Similarly it is possible, that this may be true,
‘man is,’ while this appears false, ‘man is a quantum.’
For if the omnipotence of God could preserve the sub-
stance of man present in the same mode in the species
of bread in which He may preserve the body of Christ
present in the subject of the bread, and yet that sub-
stance would be nowhere locally and circumscriptively
and at the same time with this could destroy every
absolute accident existing in man; then this would be
true, ‘man is,’ and this would be false, ‘man is a quan-
tum.’ And in the same mode the omnipotence of God
would preserve any substance and any quantity, no
matter how much any such might be false: this, ‘sub-
stance is a quantum’ ; this, ‘quality is a quantum.’ And
to that extent do the philosophers and the Saints say


THE SACRAMENT OF THE ALTAR 235


that ‘substance is a quantum through accident’; and
similarly, ‘quality is a quantum through accident’; but
this is ‘per se,’ ‘quantity is a quantum’; and likewise
this, ‘length is a quantum’; and so of others. For it is
impossible that this be true, ‘length is,’ while this ap-
pears false, ‘length is a quantum’; and similarly of
others. For it is impossible that this may be true,
‘length is,’ while this appears false, ‘length is a quan-
tum’; and similarly of others. It is impossible that
this may be true, “quantity is,’ while this appears false,
‘quantity is a quantum.’ But it does not follow from
this, therefore, that quantity is an absolute thing other
than substance and quality; but it is shown that this is
possible, “quantity is not the same absolute thing as
substance and quality,’ which I concede to be possible.
And supposing that substance as well as quality be in
the nature of things; as no matter how much this may
be in a way true, ‘a thing having part separate from
part is as much substance as quality’; yet this is possi-
ble, ‘no thing having part separate from part is sub-
stance or quality.’ And if it be said that these are
really distinct, one of which can be without the other ;
but it is possible that substance may be, though quan-
tity does not exist; there substance and quality are
really distinct.


I say that there is a fallacy of a figure of speech in
any such mode of arguing; for this reason, that the
purely absolute is changed into the connotative; as
this, ‘those are really distinct, one of which can be,
while the other does not exist.’ ‘Man’ can be, though
‘musician’ does not exist; therefore, ‘man’ and ‘musi-
cian’ are really distinct. And similarly this, ‘those are
really distinct one of which can be without another.’


15


20


25


30


en


236 THE SACRAMENT OF THE ALTAR


But ‘God’ can be, though ‘making happy’ does not ex-
ist. Because these obtain at the same time; for ‘God
is; and yet ‘making happy is not’; therefore, ‘God’
and ‘making happy’ are really distinct. But in what
mode there is a fallacy of a figure of speech in such a
mode of arguing pertains to logic; and I have spoken
elsewhere of this; therefore, I now pass on for the
sake of brevity.


CHAPTER XL


In what manner diverse quantities can be

subjectively in a substance, since two

bodies may not be able to be naturally at

the same time; and the last reason is
explained


Moreover, in what manner diverse quantities can be
subjectively in a substance, since two natural bodies
can not be at the same time, must now be considered.
Whence, it must be observed that body is accepted in
a two-fold sense. In one way as an individual exist-
ing per se in the genus ‘substance,’ which was not cre-
ated to be part of another existing per se in a genus;
or more universally for all that which can exist natu-
rally per se without this, that it may be part of another
or depending on another, which however is composed
of parts created to be separate in situation; and it is
impossible through nature for two such bodies to be
together. But all authors, who posit that two bodies
can not be at the same time, speak of such a body; and
the previously mentioned gloss speaks of such a body
when it says in speaking naturally that body only has
weight; but such a body is not primary matter nor
substantial form nor any quality.


But in another sense body is taken for all that which


is long, wide, and thick through parts intrinsic to it; :


and thus body is rarely or never accepted. If it be,

however, thus accepted, it is not impossible for two

such bodies, of which one was created to be the form

of the other, to be at the same time; nor is it impos-
237


15


10


20


25


30


238 THE SACRAMENT OF THE ALTAR


sible for many others, which have been created to
inform one subject, to be at the same time. And in-
deed it is not impossible for more such lengths and
more solidities to be at the same time; for it is however
impossible through nature for more solidities, which
can naturally exist, to be at the same time, although
they may not be parts of something nor in others as
in subjects. Solidities of such a kind are not qualities ;
for no quality can exist per se by created virtue al-
though it can by divine virtue. If you say that two
bodies can not be at the same time, this is by virtue
of the repugnance of those dimensions; therefore, no
dimensions can be at the same time.


It must be said that not any dimensions resist being
at the same time; but only the dimensions which can
naturally subsist per se. And such alone can not nat-
urally exist at the same time; but they mutually expel
each other from a place, if they be left to themselves,
although some dimensions can be at the same time
through divine power. But it is not impossible for the
remaining dimensions, which were created to inform
another and one of which can inform another, to be
at the same time.


Nor have I ever read the opposite in sacred scrip-
ture. And if you ask in what manner these dimen-
sions more than others resist that they may not be at
the same time through nature, it suffices for me at
present to reply; because there is no such distinction
of thing, which is plain to me, partly through reason,
partly through experience. For it is easily established
through reason that substance and quality created to
inform it do not have any intermediate and distinct
thing bearing quality.


THE SACRAMENT OF THE ALTAR 239


From which it is obvious that for this, that sub-
stance as well as quality may be extended, it suffices
that it have distinct parts really distant created to be
separate in situation with an active cause which can
effectively produce those parts in distinct places, and
thus cause them to be separate locally and preserve
the same in the same condition. From this it is nec-
essary to confirm, that the parts of the substance are
naturally produced in distinct places by an agent be-
fore they may be informed under some absolute acci-
dent. It is also obvious through experience, that
substance and quality are at the same time in situation;
and it is similarly established through experience that,
when one body exists per se naturally and enters into
some place, some body very similar to it withdraws.


And if you say that it is obvious through similar
experience that a body subsisting per se in the acci-
dents in the sacrament of the altar withdraws, it can
be said that this is either because a preexisting quality
was not created to inform a subject in which it never
was produced, or because that body has very similar
qualities, or because this is by the will of God, willing
that something contrary to the common course of na-
ture may evidently appear to the sense; and this that
we may be entitled to merit; for faith does not have
merit for him for whom human reason provides ex-
periment.


Whence, many Catholics posit there that many
things are done by God alone, that the merit of faith
may not be made of no avail, as reduction of substance,
creation of a new quantity, and any other of the kind.
And concerning this, see Scotus in Book IV., Distinc-
tion XII., Questions IV. and VI. And indeed it can


10


15


20


25


30


10


15


20


25


30


240 THE SACRAMENT OF THE ALTAR


be said with equal facility of all these that God has
ordained that all things apparent to the sense, which
are done about the host when not consecrated, may
also be done about the host when consecrated. And
indeed those, which can not be done by created virtue,
He has arranged to do immediately through Himself.

From the previous statements it can be concluded
how those accidents remain at the same time, although
they may not be in some one subjectively nor one be
the subject of another; for whether this may be able
or not to be done by created virtue, there ought not to
be doubt but that it can be done by divine virtue.

And in the same way whether that heaviness remain-
ing in the sacrament of the altar can or can not move
with itself other qualities with which it is joined, by
created virtue, there is no doubt but that this may
be able to be done by divine virtue. And, therefore,
as certain say that, when the host is moved, the body
of Christ is moved at the same time by God alone, so
that created virtue can not move the body of Christ,
no matter how much the host may be moved. So it
can easily be said that, when heaviness is moved, other
qualities are moved either by created virtue or by
divine virtue. Thus also we can save all transmuta-
tions, which we see are made about the qualities re-
maining in the sacrament of the altar, that those,
which can not be made by created virtue, can be done
by the virtue of God, as many writers posit about many
things.

And so all, which are apparent to the sense, can be
equally saved by positing with the approved ancient
Doctors, that taste, weight, color, and the other qual-
ities of this kind, in the sacrament of the altar are


THE SACRAMENT OF THE ALTAR 241


subsisting per se without a subject; as by positing that
all qualities are in a subject and not subsisting per se,
although in following the ancient writers it may be
reasonable to posit that many changes are done there
by the divine virtue, which are posited by others to be
accomplished by created virtue. Nor do I believe that
anyone ought to be condemned because he attributes
to God that which can not be ascribed to a creature.


wn


10


15


20


25


CHAPTER XLI


Concerning the explanation of certain
arguments contrary to the previous
statement


Contrary to the previous opinion, certain reasons
are adduced which, as I have understood them, I now
wish to review and refute; others I intend to review
and answer more clearly and more fully if they be-
come more fully known to me. But as yet certain
writers argue thus: if some substance and some quan-
tity are really the same; then, wherever that substance
is, there that quantity will be. Therefore, since the
substance of the body of Christ may be in the sacra-
ment of the altar, it follows that the quantity of the
body of Christ will be in the sacrament of the altar.
Whence, it is thus argued, as I have understood:
whenever some are really the same, wherever one of
them is, the remainder will be in the same place. But
according to the previous opinion the substance of the
body of Christ and the quantity of the body of Christ
are really the same; therefore, where one is, the rest
is; and consequently, as the substance of the body of
Christ is in the sacrament of the altar, so the quantity
of the body of Christ would be in the sacrament of the
altar.


Again, it is argued thus: whenever some are really
the same; wherever any one of them is, the remainder
of them is in the same place; but the substance of the
body of Christ and the quantity of the body of Christ
are really the same according to the previous opinions.

242


THE SACRAMENT OF THE ALTAR 243


But the substance of the body of Christ is in the sac-
rament of the altar; and, therefore, a quantity is a
quantum there. by the power of conversion, et ultra;
therefore, the substance of the body of Christ is a
quantity in the sacrament of the altar, et ultra; there-
fore, the substance of the body of Christ is a quantum
in the sacrament of the altar by the power of conver-
sion, et ultra; therefore, the substance of the body
of Christ in the sacrament of the altar is ‘having
part outside of part and part separate from part,’
which is heretical.

As regards the first of these, I concede the last con-
clusion by which it is deduced; namely, that the quan-
tity of the body of Christ is in the sacrament of the
altar.

As regards the second it can be stated variously
without prejudice. In one mode, that the proposition
assumed, namely, this, whenever some, et cetera, are
understood of creatures of which are substance, quan-
tity and quality, is false according to the virtue of
language by virtue of a false implication. For it im-
plies that some may be some, and yet that they may
really be the same, which is impossible; for some crea-
tures are really never some and one; because of this
itself, that there are some, there are many; and if there
be many, they are not really the same. Yet of divine
persons these must be conceded; that there are more
persons and yet that they may be one simple thing.
But this can not be conceded of creatures.

I say that, if that proposition is conceded under a
good meaning, it becomes in another manner a fallacy
of a figure of speech in the form of arguing; from this
which is accepted under ‘one connotative term,’ namely,


10


15


20


25


30


10


20


25


30


244 THE SACRAMENT OF THE ALTAR


‘quantity.’ Whence, as it does not follow, whenever
some are really the same, wherever there is any one of
them, the rest of the others is also in the same place.
But the ‘body of Christ’ and ‘the body of Christ having
part outside of part or part separate from part’ are
really the same; for ‘the body of Christ’ is really ‘hav-
ing part separate from part,’ and some substance is in
the sacrament of the altar the body of Christ; there-
fore some substance in the sacrament of the altar is
the body of Christ ‘having part separate from part’;
or it may be taken in a narrower sense, thus: ‘the body
of Christ’ and ‘existing circumscriptively in a place’
are really the same. And it does not similarly follow:
whenever some are really the same, wherever there is
any one of them, the rest of them is in the same place.
‘The body of Christ’ in the host and ‘existing circum-
scriptively in a place’ are really the same; and some
substance in the sacrament of the altar is the body of
Christ; therefore, some substance in the sacrament of
the altar is ‘existing circumscriptively in a place.’


So also it does not follow: whenever some are
really the same; wherever there is any one of them,
the rest of them is in the same place. But the sub-
stance of the body of Christ and some quantity are
really the same, and some substance in the sacrament
of the altar is the substance of the body of Christ;
therefore, some substance in the sacrament of the altar
is a quantity. Whence, I say that, although this may
be true, ‘the quantity of the body of Christ is in the
sacrament of the altar’; this is however false, ‘the sub-
stance of the body of Christ in the sacrament of the
altar is a quantity’; as, although this may be true, ‘the
body of Christ having part separate from part is in


THE SACRAMENT OF THE ALTAR 245


the sacrament of the altar’; yet this is false, ‘the body
of Christ in the sacrament of the altar is having part
separate from part.’ Similarly, this is true, ‘some sub-
stance circumscribed in a place is in the sacrament of
the altar’; yet this is false, ‘some substance in the sac-
rament of the altar is circumscribed in a place.’ But
perhaps you will say that this response is not so valid;
for it is not however similar in arguing of abstracts
as of concretes. But ‘quantity’ is a certain abstract
having being circumscribed in a place and of this kind
are concretes. And, therefore, although such a mode
of arguing is not valid in accepting under concretes,
yet it is valid in accepting under abstracts; for such
however are false, ‘the body of Christ’ and ‘the body
of Christ having part separate from part’ are really
the same. Similarly, the ‘body of Christ’ and ‘cir-
cumscribed in a place’ are really the same.


But the first of those does not oppose; for the cause,
why there is a fallacy of a figure of speech in such a
mode of reasoning, is not because it is accepted under
the name ‘concrete,’ but because it is accepted under a
‘connotative term.’ But now ‘quantity’ is a 'connota-
tive term,’ as ‘having’ or ‘quantum’ or any such; and
indeed such a mode of arguing fails in accepting un-
der ‘quantity,’ as in accepting under ‘having part dis-
tant’ et cetera, or ‘circumscribed in a place,’ or another
such concrete.


Whence, neither among the philosophers nor among
the Saints it is found that they have made so much
distinction between many concretes and abstracts, as
some modernists do. Whence, I have never found in
any Saint or philosopher that they have made a dis-
tinction between ‘quantity’ and ‘quantum,’ but they


20


25


30


10


15


20


25


30


246 THE SACRAMENT OF THE ALTAR


indifferently posit ‘quantity’ for ‘quantum,’ and con-
versely ; and sometimes the category, which they have
distinguished from the other categories themselves,
they have called ‘quantum,’ and sometimes “quantity,
not distinguishing between these names.


Moreover, the second does not oppose; for it is man-
ifest that this is true, ‘the body of Christ’ and ‘the body
of Christ having part separate from part’ are really
the same; and similarly is any other, and there is the
same proof for all such.


But it is manifestly obvious that this may be true,
‘the body of Christ’ and ‘the body of Christ circum-
scribed in a place’ are really the same; for it follows
that the body of Christ is circumscribed in a place;
therefore, ‘the body of Christ’ is really similar to ‘some
thing which is circumscribed in a place,’ et ultra.
Therefore, ‘something which is really circumscribed
in a place,’ is really the same as ‘the body of Christ,’
et ultra; because these are convertible: ‘circumscribed
in a place’ and ‘that which is circumscribed in a
place’; and it follows that ‘something circumscribed
in a place’ is really the same as ‘the body of Christ’;
therefore, ‘circumscribed in a place’ and ‘the body of
Christ’ are really the same. Thus any such propo-
sition can be proved; whence, all such are true, al-
though one term signifies another which is not signi-
fied through the rest. Notwithstanding this, however
one of those terms can truly be predicated of some-
thing with some determination of a ‘verb,’ of which the
rest however is not predicated with the same determi-
nation. As this is true, ‘risible’ and ‘man’ are really
the same; and yet this is true, ‘Sortes is a man’ per se
in the first mode; and this is false, ‘Sortes is risible’


THE SACRAMENT OF THE ALTAR 247


per se in the first mode. Similarly, this is true, ‘man’
and ‘Son of God’ are really the same; for this ‘man’
in designating the Son of God and ‘Son of God’ are
really the same; and this also is true, ‘He was always
the Son of God, and this is false, ‘He was al-
ways man.’


So is it in the thesis; because this is true, ‘some sub-
stance of the body of Christ’ and ‘some quantity’ are
really the same; and yet this is true, ‘this substance is
the substance of the body of Christ in the sacrament
of the altar’; and this is false, ‘this substance is a
quantity in the sacrament of the altar.’ And as this is
false, ‘the substance of the body of Christ is a quan-
tity in the sacrament of the altar’; so this is false, ‘the
substance of the body of Christ is a quantum in the
sacrament of the altar by the power of conversion.’
And indeed this is false, ‘the substance of the body of
Christ has part separate from part in the sacrament
of the altar’; and so it is obvious that that argument
is not valid; as it does not follow, when some are
really the same, that wherever any one of them is, the
rest of them will be in the same place. ‘Some quan-
tum’ and ‘the body of Christ’ are really the same, and
the substance of the body of Christ is the body of
Christ in the sacrament of the altar; therefore, there
is a quantum in the sacrament of the altar. And if
you say that arguing in concrete and abstract terms is
not similar, I reply that ‘quantum’ is not more con-
crete than ‘quantity’ when for signification; although
it may not terminate in ‘tas,’ as this name ‘quantitas,
may terminate in ‘tas? And so the mode of arguing
fails in accepting under this name ‘quantitas, as in
accepting under this name ‘quantum. And so it is

19


10


15


20


25


30


10


15


20


25


30


248 THE SACRAMENT OF THE ALTAR


obvious that this does not include a sophism contrary
to the previous opinion, although it may fail in the
presence of a fallacy of a figure of speech.


But if certain propositions are accepted as true, a
conclusion can evidently be deduced contrary to this
opinion. Whence, in accepting this proposition, ‘when
some thing informing another is created to designate
this’; wherever that thing has that which is created to
designate this, there is such; as wherever something
has whiteness, everything there is white; and wherever
something informatively has heat, everything there is
warm. Therefore, if quantity be another thing dis-
tinct from the body of Christ, wherever the sub-
stance of the body of Christ has that quantity, there
truly is a quantum. But the body of Christ in the
sacrament of the altar has quantity, for it is not sep-
arated there from quantity; therefore, the body of
Christ is really a quantum in the sacrament of the
altar, et ultra; therefore, the body of Christ has part
separate from part in the sacrament of the altar, which
is heretical. If you say that the body of Christ is a
quantum there, it is not however there in a quanti-
tative mode.


Then I argue against those writers by preserving
their mode of speaking; for I ask about this quanti-
tative mode, whether or not it is a thing distinct from
quantity. It can not be said that it is not a thing other
than quantity; for the principle of them is that, if one
remains and not the rest, they are distinct things; but
quantity remains and a quantitative mode does not
remain; therefore, they are distinct things. But, that
they may not be distinct things, can be proved; for, if
they be distinct things, either one is an absolute thing


THE SACRAMENT OF THE ALTAR 249


or the other respective. It is not absolute; for then
there would be a quality or a quantity or a substance,
any one of which is false; nor is it a relative thing, for
neither fundament nor terminus can be assigned to
itself; nor can it be classified in any of the others, that
is, genera, because not in ‘time’ nor in ‘action’ and in
‘passion,’ nor in the genus ‘relation,’ nor in ‘position,’
nor in ‘possession, nor in ‘place’; from which it might
the more appear that that quantitative mode can be
without any ‘ubi.’ For if God could create some quan-
tum without any other thing, it would truly be a quan-
titative mode and yet without any ‘ubi.’


Besides, it was shown before, that every continuous
and permanent quantum has part separate from part,
as was obvious before through John of Damascus, or
at least these are convertibles: ‘quantum continuous
and permanent,’ and ‘having part separate from part.’


From which I argue thus: it is impossible that
something may be a ‘quantum continuous and perma-
nent’ unless it have part separate from part, and con-
versely; therefore, wherever something is ‘a quantum,
continuous and permanent,’ there it has part separate
from part. Therefore, if the body of Christ be a
quantum in the sacrament of the altar, the body of
Christ will be ‘having part separate from part in the
sacrament of the altar.’ Besides, if the body of Christ
be a quantum in the sacrament of the altar, it is, there-
fore, long, wide and thick; but it is impossible that
something may anywhere be long unless it be extended
there; and it can not be extended anywhere unless it
have there part separate from part. Therefore, if the
body of Christ be a quantum in the sacrament of the
altar, it will have there part separate from part.


5


10


15


20


25


30


10


15


20


25


30


250 THE SACRAMENT OF THE ALTAR


And if you may say that the body of Christ is not
a quantum there; on the contrary, that the body of
Christ has there quantity inhering in itself; it will,
therefore, be a quantum there; as wherever there is
something having whiteness inhering in itself, the
white is there; therefore, it seems to detract from the
reality of the sacrament of the Eucharist to say, that
the body of Christ in the sacrament of the altar has
one quantity or extension inhering in itself; for then
it would be extended there and it would have part
separate from part, which is false. And indeed no
matter how much this might be conceded, ‘the body of
Christ is a quantity’; yet this ought to be utterly de-
nied, ‘the body of Christ is really a quantity in the
sacrament of the altar’; just as this is true, ‘the body of
Christ is really having part separate from part’; yet
this is simply false, ‘the body of Christ in the sacra-
ment of the altar is really having part separate from
part.’


Therefore, the previous opinion stands on this, that
there is no continuous and permanent quantity, unless
parts may be placed outside of themselves, whether the
parts may be separate in situation or those parts may
be parts of a substance or may be parts of qualities.
And indeed, as this is true, ‘the body of Christ having
parts separate in situation is in the sacrament of the
altar’; and yet this is false, ‘the body of Christ has
parts separate in situation in the sacrament of the
altar.’ So, suppose that this could be conceded, ‘a
quantity, which is really the body of Christ, is in the
sacrament of the altar’; yet this must be absolutely de-
nied, ‘the body of Christ is a quantity in the sacra-
ment of the altar’; as this is true, ‘some man, who is


THE SACRAMENT OF THE ALTAR 251


the Son of God, always was God’; yet this is simply
false, ‘the Son of God always was man.’


And so in such it is of much importance to posit
something from a part of a subject and from a part of
a predicate, which is especially true of connotative
names. Such a name is ‘quantity’; for this name
‘quantity’ signifies a thing by signifying that parts of
that thing are separate in situation; by virtue of which
this is true, ‘the quantity of the body of Christ is in
the sacrament of the altar’; yet this is simply false,
‘the body of Christ is a quantity in the sacrament of
the altar.’


It is ended; praise be to God.


COLOPHON


The famous tract concerning the body of Christ,
and especially concerning the distinction of point, line,
surface, body, quantity, quality, and substance, is
ended; edited for all readers on the basis of the
Oxonian lecture of the Venerable Inceptor, Master
William of Ockham, of England, a most profound in-
vestigator of reality, a most learned Professor of
Sacred Theology, of the order of Friars Minor;
printed at Strassburg, A. D. MCCCCXCI; completed
after the Feast of the Epiphany of the Lord.


5


15


20


BIBLIOGRAPHY


ABELARD—Hist. Calamitatum Suarum; Paris, 1616.

Acwius, Romanus Aucus.—Quotlibeta; apud Bonetum Locutel-
lum; Venice, 1504. With it the Theoremata eiusdem de
sacramento corporis Christi, 1504.

ALEXANDER (NarALIsS)—Historia Eccl, VIII; Paris, 1672-86.

ALLIBONE, S. A—A Critical Dictionary of Eng. Lit. and Br. and
Am. Authors; 1854-71.

ALLEN, THomas—A History of the County of Surrey, Vol. IL,
Ockham, 149-151; J. T. Hinton, London, 1831.

ALMAIN, JACQUES—Expositio de suprema Potestate Ecclesiastica
et Laica, Monarchia S. Romani Imperii, 1515.

—Libellus de Auctoritate Ecclesiae; Paris, 1526.

—— Expositio: circa decisiones quaestionum M. G. Ockam, super
postestate summi pontificis; Paris, 1537.

ALVERNUS, GUILIELMUS—Opera Omnia; Paris, 1674, Harvard
Lib. (PhiL, 1670-71).

AMERICAN CHURCH REvVIEW—Vol. XXIV, 1872, pp. 284, 285; on
Occam.

ANALECTA FRANCISCANA SIVE CHRONICA ALIAQUE VARIA Docu-
MENTA AD HiISTORIAM FRATRUM MINORUM SPECTANTIA—
Vols. I-II; Ad Claras Aquas (Quaracchi), Vol. I, 1885;
Vol. II, 1887.

ANSELM, ST.—Proslogium; Monologium, etc.; trans. by Norton
Deane; Chicago, 1926.

AQUINAS, St. T—Summa Theol. IIItia, Pars. qu. LXXVIII,
Art. 4, Note K; Bampton Lect., 1832.

—Summa Theologica, Part III, No. 3; trans. by the Fathers
of the English Dominican Province; pp. 233-468; R. & T.
Washburne, London, 1914.

ARISTOTELIAN Soctety—Proceedings of; New Series, Vol. XIV;
Williams and Norgale, London, 1914.

ARISTOTLE—The Works of Aristotle; Vol. I; trans.; edited by
W. D. Ross; Clarendon Press, Oxford, 1928.

—— The Works of Aristotle, Metaphysica; 2nd ed.; trans. into
English; The Clarendon Press, Oxford, 1928.

—tThe Works of Aristotle; De Caelo, De Generatione et Cor-
ruptione; trans. into English; The Clarendon Press, Ox-
ford, 1922.

——Phisica; Opera Omnia; Basilez, 1538.


252


BIBLIOGRAPHY 253


Ascensıus, Jopocus B.—Dialogus magistri Guillermi de Ockham
doctoris famosissimi, 1494.

ASSENMACHER, JOHANNES—Die Geschichte des Individuations-
prinzips in Der Scholastik; pp. 76-81; Felix Meiner, Leip-
zig, 1926.

AVERROES—Aristotelis'! Omnia Opera, 1573-75 (Univ. of Penna.).

AUGUSTINE, Sr.—On the Trinity; Vol. VII; edited by T. and T.
Clark, Edinburgh, 1873.

— On the Trinity; The Nicene and Post-Nicene Fathers; Vol.
III; The Christian Literature Co., Buffalo, 1887.

BacH, JosepH—Die Dogmengeschichte des Mittelalters, II;
Vienna, 1873-75.

Bacon, R.—Opera Quaedam Hactenus Inedita; Vol. I; edited by
J. S. Brewer; Longmans, London, 1858.

—— Opera Hactenus Inedita Rogeri Baconi Fasc. VIII, IX.
Questiones Supra Libros Quatuor Physicorum Aris-
totelis. Nunc Primum Edidit Ferdinand Delorme Collabor-
ante Robert Steele; Oxonii, 1928.

BAEUMKER, CLEMENS UND HERTLING—Die Europäische Philoso-
phie des Mittelalters; Berlin, 1909.

——Beitráge Zur Geschichte der Philosophie des Mittelalters;
Band XXIIL, Heft 3-4; pp. 138, 154-165; aschendorffsche
Verlagsbuchhandlung, Münster, 1923.

Batn—Occam’s Razor; Oxford, Parker and Co., 1890.

BarpwiN, J. M.—Dictionary of Philosophy and Psychology; 1901.

BALE, Joun— Acta Romanorum Pontificum; p. 356, 1559.

— ]llustrium Maioris Britanniae Scriptorum, hoc est, Angliae,
Cambriae ac Scotiae Summarium ; Ipswich and Wesel, 1548.

BALTHASAR, Kart—Geschichte des Armutesstreites im Franzis-
kanerorden bis zum Konzil von Vienne; aschendorffsche
Verlagsbuchhandlung, Münster, I W., 1911.

BALUZE, STEPHANUS—Miscellanea; ed. J. D. Manse; 4 vols.;
Lucca, 1761-64.

Bampton LECTURES— Lecture VIII, 1832.

BanacH, C. S.—Zur Geschichte des Nominalismus vor Roscellin ;
Vienna, 1866.

BARNCKE, F.—Die Deutchen Universitäten im Mittelalter ; Leipzig,
1857.

Bascuas, C. R.—A Manual of Neo-Scholastic Philos.; Herder &
Co., St. Louis, 1924.

BasHALL, Henry Sr. Joun— The Oak Hamlet; The Village of
Ockham; Elliot Stock, London, 1900.

BaucH, Bruno—Neuere Philosophie bis Kant; Berlin and Leip-
zig, 1919.


254 BIBLIOGRAPHY


BAUMANN, J. J.—Staatslehre des h. Thomas von Aquino; 1873.

Baupry, M. L—Fragments Inconnus de G. D'Occam: Le Trac-
tatus de Principiis Theologiae; Académie des Inscriptions
et Belles-Lettres; pp. 46-55, Comptes Rendus des Séances
de L'Année, Janvier-Mars; A. Picard, ed., Paris, 1927.

Baur, F. C —Drei Abhandlungen zur Geschichte der alten Phil-
osophie und ihres Verhaltnisses zum Christenthum; hrsg.
von Edward Zeller, Leipzig, 1876.

—— Die Christliche Kirche des Mittelalters; Zweite Auflage;
Fues's Verlag, Tubingen, 1869.

——Dogmengeschichte; II, pp. 233 ff.

—De Divisione philosophiae Beitrage Zur Geschichte der
Philosophie des Mittelalters; Vols. I-IV, pt. 2-3.

Baur, Aucusr—Martin Luther: Ein Lebensbild; VIII, p. 394;
Tubingen, 1878.

Baur, Kart—Luther und der Papst. In: Schriften des Vereins
für Reformationsgeschichte; Vol. XXVII, pp. 231-273.

Beeson, C. H.—A Primer of Medieval Latin; Scott, Foresman
and Co., New York, 1925.

BENTHEM, H. L.—Englandischer Kirch und Schülen-Staat; P. S.
Saurmanns, Bremen, 1732.

BERGMANN, E.—Geschichte der deutschen Philosophie, Die
deutsche Mystik; Vol. I; Ferdinand Hirt, Breslau, 1926.

Bernino, DomErico—Historia di Tutte L’Heresie Descritta; Vols.
I-III; Nella Stamperia Baglioni, Venezia, 1717.

Bertranpy—Recherches historiques sur l'origine, l'élection et le
couronnement du pope Jean XXII; Paris, 1854.

Bett, H.—Johannes Scotus Erigena; pp. 8-10; Cambridge, 1925.

BIBLIOGRAPHY OF SCHOLASTIC PHILOSOPHY—-Archiv. f. Gesch. der
Phil.; Vol. X, p. 127 ff., and 247 ff. La Revue Néo-Scholas-
tique; Mai 1902. Revue d’histoire et de littérature reli-
gieuses; Sept-Oct. 1902.

BL, G.—Epitoma et Collectorium, circa quattuor Sent. libros;
lib. III. Commentarius in tertium librum sententiarum ;
cum suo indice; Bonzolam, Brixiae, 1574.

—— Expositio Missae, Lectio XL A. (Harvard).

Sermones Gabrielis Biel.; Haguenaw Henry Grau, 1510.

—Gariel Biel super secundo sententiarum ; Buxheim, Cartusiae.

Bmc, A. H.—A Comparison of the Styles of Gaudentius of
Brescia; The De Sacramentis, and The Didascalia Apos-
tolorum; Yendall and Co., Risca, Mon., 1924.

Branc, E—Traité De Philosophie Scolastique; Tome I, pp. 350-
364, 477; II, p. 151; III, pp. 30-32; Librairie Catholique
Emmanuel Vitte, Paris, 1909.


BIBLIOGRAPHY 255


BrouwT, T.—Glossographia, or a Dictionary Interpreting the
Hard Words; 3rd ed., London, 1670.

Biunt, J. H.—Dictionary of Doctrinal and Historical Theology;
Edinburgh, 1870.

— The Sacrament of Sacramental Ordinance of the Church;
London, 1864.

BruwTscHLI—Geschichte des Allgemeinen Straatsrechts und der
Politik; 1864.

Bömmer H.—Luther in the Light of Recent Research; trans.
by Carl F. Huth, Jr.; The Christian Herald, New York,
1916.

Luther im Lichte der neueren Forschung; 5 Auflage, 1918.

BÖHMER, J. F.—Regesta Imperii: Die Urkunden Kaiser Ludwigs
des Baiern, et al Frankfurt am Main, 1839.

BowirAckE VIII—Sextus Liber Decretalium (with glosses); T.
Kerver for J. Cabiller & J. Petit, Paris, 1505.

——Sexti Decretalium Compilatio per Bonifacium (with glosses) :
Lugduni, Fr. Fradin, 1513.  Clementinis argumentum
Sequentia dare scio. Capita sex supra centum. Leges
absque proemio (with glosses).  Extravagantes XX.
Joannis vigesimisecundi (with glosses).

BONAVENTURA— Opera; Venice, 1756.

Bowen, F.—The Metaphysics of Sir William Hamilton; John
Allyn, Boston, 1887.

Bower, A.—The History of the Popes; Vol. III, pp. 77-88;
Griffith and Simon, Philadelphia, 1845.

Brampton, C. K.—Gulielmi de Ockham Epistola ad Fratres
Minores; Blackwell, Oxford, 1929.

—— The De Imperatorum et Pontificum Potestate of William of
Ockham; The Clarendon Press, Oxford, 1927.

BRANDT, GERARD—History of the Reformation in and about the
Low Countries; London, 1720.

Brett, G. S.—A Hist. of Psychology; Vol. II; Macmillan, New
York, 1921.

Brewer, E. C.—The Political, Social and Literary History of
France; London, 1863.

— Great Central Points of Mediaeval History; London, 1870.

Brewer, J. S—Monumenta Franciscana; Longmans, London,
1858.

— Church History of Britain; 1841.

Bropricx, G. C.—Memorials of Merton College; Oxford, 1885.

——A History of the University of Oxford; London, 1891.


256 BIBLIOGRAPHY


Brucker, J. J.—Historia Critica Philosophiae; Vol. III, pp.
846-7, 870, 901-4, 910-11; Vol. VI, pp. 605-08; Impensis
Haered, Weidemanni et Reichii, Leipzig, 1742-67.

BUDAEIUS, GULIELMUS PARISIEnsIs—Annotationes in Libros Pan-
dectarum ; apud Gryphium, Lyons, 1551.

BuprNskv, ALEXANDER—Die Univ. Paris und Fremde an dersel-
ben im Mittelalter; Berlin, 1876.

BurAEUs—Historia Univ. Parisiensis; Vol. IV; Paris, 1665-73.

Burge, R. B—The Opus Majus of Roger Bacon; Vol. I, II;
trans. by R. B. Burke; Univ. of Penna. Press, Philadelphia,
1928.

Burns, C. D. — William of Ockham on Continuity; Mind, pp.
506-512; Macmillan, Oct., 1916.

—Occam’s Razor; Mind, p. 592; Macmillan, Oct., 1915.

—— William of Ockham on Universals; Proceedings of the Aris-
totelian Society, New Series, Vol. XIV, pp. 76-99; Williams
and Norgate, London, 1914.

Burrows, Montacu—Collectanea; Oxford, 1890.

BusseLr, F. W.—Religious Thought and Heresy in the Middle
Ages; Robert Scott, London, 1918.

Bzovius, A.—Annales Ecclesiastici Defensio Ludovici IV Imp.;
Ann. 1329.

Cambridge Hist. of Eng. Lit, Vol. II; 1908.

CAMDEN, WILLIAM— Britannia, p. 214; Geo. Bishop and J. Nor-
ton, London, 1607.

Canisius—Refutatio Trium Tractatum, Ingolstadt, by Paul Drew
in Vereins für reformations-geschichte; Schriften, V.,
1892-93.

CarrLLL, A.—Dizionario Di Abbreviature Latin ed. Italiane; ed.
II; Ulrico Hoepli, Milan, Italy, 1912.

CARLYLE, R. W. AND A. J.—History of Mediaeval Political
Theory in the West; Vols. L-IV.; Blackwood, London,
1903-1915.

. CATHOLIC ExNcvcr.—Nominalism. :

Cave, GuiLrELMUs— Scriptorum Ecclesiasticorum Historia Lit-
eraria, A Christi Nato, usque ad Seculum XIV, etc.; Vols.
I, II; apud Gabrielem de Tournes et Filios, Geneva, 1720.

Cener, D.—Hist. Générale des Auteurs sacrés et Eccles, Vol.
IX; Vols. I-XXII; Paris, 1729-58.

CHEVALIER, U.—Répertoire Des Sources Historiques Du Moyen
Age, Bio-Bibliographie, Vol. II; Paris, 1907.

Crarx, H. W.—History of English Nonconformity, Vol. I, pp.
25, 39, 75; Chapman & Hall, 1911.


BIBLIOGRAPHY 257


CLARK, V. S.—Studies in the Latin of the Middle Ages and the
Renaissance; Schoolmen, pp. 34, 35.

Codex Iuris noni Pii X Pontificis Maximi; Romae, 1907.

Correy, P.—Epistemology, Vol. I, pp. 284, 32: 329; Longmans
London, 1917,

CorLier, J.—An Ecclesiastical History of Great Britain, Chiefly
of England; Vol. I; London, 1708; new ed., in 9 vols.;


London, 1845.
Copincer, W., A.—Supplement to Hain's Repertorium Bibliogra-
phicum.


Corton, C.—The Grey Friars of Canterbury; pp. 32-33; The
Univ. Press, Manchester, 1924.

Cousin, V.—Course of the History of Modern Philosophy; trans.
by O. W. Wight; Vols. I, II; Vol. II, pp. 31, 37, 89, 296;
D. Appleton & Co., New York, 1852.

—— Manuel de l'histoire de la Philosophie; Vol. I; Paris, 1829.

CREIGHTON, M.— History of the Papacy during the Period of the
Reformation; London, 1882.

CREVIER, J. B. L.—Histoire de l'Université de Paris; Paris, 1761.

Crump, C. G. AND J. E. F.— The Legacy of the Middle Ages; The
Clarendon Press, Oxford, 1926.

CupwortH, R.—The True Intellectual System of the Universe;
Richard Royston, London, 1678.

Cutts, E. L.—Scenes and Characters of the Middle Ages; Vir-
tue & Co., London, 1872.

Cyprian, A.—A Treatis Concerning the Trinity; The Anti-
Nicene Fathers; Vol. V; The Christian Literature Co.,
Buffalo, 1886.

D’Aırıy, P—Quaestiones magistri Petri de Alliaco Cardinalis
cameracensis super primum tertium et quartum senten-
tiarum. Impressae arte et industria Iohannis barbier ex-
pressis honesti viri Iohannis petit. (Univ. of Penna.)

Damascus, Jonn or—Exposition of the Orthodox Faith; Nicene
and Post-Nicene Fathers; Chas. Scribner’s, New York,
1899,

——JDialectica (Logica?); Opera Omnia, Patrologiae Cursus
Completus, Minge, Tom. XCIV, Paris, 1864.

-——Opera; translated into Latin; Basileae, 1559.

Day, E. H.—Saint Francis and The Grey Friars; A. R. Mowbray
& Co., London, 1926.

D’AvsicnE, J. H.—History of the Great Reformation in Europe;
Edinburgh, 1853.

Dean, AMos—The History of Civilization; Albany, New York,
1868.


258 BIBLIOGRAPHY


Dean, D. J.—John Wycliffe, The Morning Star of the Reforma-
tion; London, 1882.

DEAN, SIDNEY N.—Proslogium; Monologium; an Appendix in
Behalf of the Fool by Gaunilon and Cur Deus Homo;
The Open Court Pub. Co., 1926.

De Bury, RicHaAgp—Philobiblon; Föreningen för Bokhandtverk,
Stockholm, 1922.

De Marticné—La scholastique et les traditions franciscaines;
1888.

Denrrte, P. H. anp Franz EnmrE—Archiv. f. Litteratur u.
Kirchengesch. d. Mittelalters; Weidmannische Buchhand-
lung, Berlin, 1885.

—— Die Entstehung der Universitäten des Mittelalters bis 1400;
Weidmannische Buchhandlung, Berlin, 1885.

DENIFLE ET CHATELAIN—Chartularium Universitatis Parisiensis;
Parisiis. Ex Typis Fratrum Delalain Via a Solone Dicta;
Vol. I, 1889; Vol. II, 1891; Vol. III, 1894.

—— Die Schriften ; 1876-80.

—— Quellen zur Gelehrtengeschichte d. Predigerordens in 13 .
Jahrh. Arch. f. Litt. u. Kirchengesch. d. Mittelalters, IL,
p. 165 ff.

DeEsLANDES, M.—Histoire Critique de la Philosophie; Vols. I-IV;
Vol. III, pp. 318, 319; Amsterdam, 1756.

DEWurr, M.—History of Medieval Philosophy; trans. by E. C.
Messinger; Vol. II; Longmans, New York, 1926.

—History of Medieval Philosophy; trans. by Coffey; pp. 171,
176-191, etc.; Longmans, London, 1909.

—Philosophy and Civilization in the Middle Ages; pp. 1, 3, 73,
110; Princeton Univ. Press, 1922.

—Scholasticism Old and New; trans. by Coffey; Longmans,
London, 1910.

——Hist. de la phil. schol. dans les Pays-Bas; Louvain, 1895.

DIECKHOFF, A. W.—Die evangelische Abendmahlslehre in Refor-
ee geschichtlich dargestellt.; Bd. I, Göttingen,
1854.

——(Luther’s) Lehre von der kirchlichen Gewalt; Berlin, 1865.

DIEFFENBACH, L.—Novum Glossarium Latino-Germanicum Me-
diae et Infimae Aetatis.

DretricH von NIEM—De scismate; IT; 3 ed.; Erler, 1890.

DrrrRICH, OrrMAR— Geschichte der Ethik; Vol. III, Mittelalter
bis zur Kirchenreformation; Felix Meiner, Leipzig, 1926.

Dor&te, LEGENDE—Sommaire De l Histoire des frères Mendicans
de l'Ordre de S. Dominique et de S. François; Aux Dépens

de La Compagnie, Amsterdam, 1734.


BIBLIOGRAPHY 259


Dorner, D. A.—Das Verhältnis von Kirche und Staat nach
na ; in Th. St. K, 672 f£; F. A. Perthes, Gotha,

Dorner, I. A.—History of the Development of the Doctrine of
the Person of Christ; Div. II, Vol I; T. Clark, Edin-
burgh, 1862.

—— Theologische Studien und Kritiken; pp. 672-722; Gotha, 1885.

Doucoeur, P.—La théorie de la matière et de la forme chez
Guill. Occam; Revue des sciences philosophiques et théolo-
giques; pp. 21-51; Paris, 1921.

Dove AND FRIEDBERG—Zeitschrift f. Kirchenrecht; Vol. VIII,
60-137.

DRANE, Acusta T.—Christian Schools and Scholars; G. E.
Steckert & Co., 1910.

Dresser, H. W.—A History of Ancient and Medieval Philoso-
phy; Thomas Y. Crowell, New York, 1926.

Du BouLAv, C. E.—Historia Universitatis Parisiensis; Vols. I-
IV; Paris, 1665-73.

Du Canc, C.—Glossarium Manuale ad Scriptores Mediae et
Infimae Latinitatis; 6 vols.; 1840.

DucpALE, WM.—Monasticon Anglicanum; R. Harbin, London,
1718.

DuHEM, P.—Mediaeval Contributions to Modern Civilization;
London, 1921,

Dunninc, W. A.—A History of Political Theories; Macmillan,
New York, 1921.

Du Pin, L. E—Nouvelle Bibliotheque des Auteurs Ecclésias-
tiques; Vols. I-X VI, 1693-1710; Vol. XI, pp. 65, 183; A.
Pralardy Páris, 1700:

DURANDI PETRI LoMBARDI—-Comment. Libri quatuor II, Dist. 3,
qu. 7.

DunANDI A St. PortrAno—Sent. Theol. Petri Lombardi Com-
ment.; Lib. quatuor I, dist. 19, qu. 5; Venetiis, 1517.
Expert, F. A.—Allgemeine Geschichte der Literatur des Mittel-
3 alters im Abendlande; 2 Vols.; Leipzig, 1874-1887, 1889.
Epwarp, LERov— The Philosophy of France; The Philosophical

Review, May, 1907.

EGBERT, J. C.—Introduction to the Study of Latin Inscriptions;
American Book Company, New York, 1896.

EHrLe, F.—Archiv. für Lit. und Kirchengesch. des Mittelalters;
I, p. 509 ff.; 1885.

—— Der Sentenzenkommentar Peter Von Candia; aschendorff-
sche Verlagsbuchhandlung, Münster, 1925.


260 BIBLIOGRAPHY


Eicken, H.—Geschichte der mittelalterlichen Weltanschanung ;
Stuttgart, 1888.

EIsLer, R.—Philosophen-Lexikon; Berlin, 1912.

EICHBERG, WALDEMAR—Untersuchungen uber die Beziehungen
der Erkenntnislehre Spinozas zur Scholastik mit besonderer
Berücksichtigung der Schule Okkams; Robt. Noske, Borna-
Leipzig, 1910.

Emerton, Ep#rarm— The Defensor Pacis of Marsiglio of Padua;
Harvard Theol. Studies, Harvard Univ. Press, 1920.

— Introduction to the Study of the Middle Ages; Ginn & Com-
pany, 1896.

Enpres, J. R—Geschichte der mittelalterlichen Philosophie; J.
Kosel & F. Pusted, Miinchen, 1909.

ErpMANN, J. E—Geschichte d. Philosophie; IV. Vols.; trans. by
W. S. Hough; ed. 2nd; New York, 1891.
Ernst, J. E—The Political Thought of Roger Williams; Univ.
of Washington Publications, p. 40, Vol. VI, No. 1, March,

1927.

ERSH AND GruBER—Dictionary, under Occam.

ENGLISH PRESBYTER—Papers on the Doctrine of the English
Church Concerning the Eucharistic Presence; The Church
of England Book Soc., London.

FALCKENBERG, RICHARD—History of Modern Philosophy; trans.
by A. C. Armstrong, Jr.; Henry Holt & Co., 1897.
FAULKER, J. A.—Ockham, Journal Theol, 9; pp. 359-73; April,

1905.

FEBRE, Lucten—Martin Luther; Dutton & Co., 1929.

FEDERHOFER, FRANZ—Ein Beitrag zur Bibliographie und Biogra-
phie des Wilhelm von Ockham; Philosophisches Jahrbuch
der Górres-Gesellschaft; 38, Band I, Heft, pp. 26-48; Ver-
lag der Fuldaer Achendruckerei, Fulda, 1925.

FELDER, H.—Geschichte d. Wissenschaftl. Studien im Franzis-
kanerorden bis um die Mitte d. 13 Jahrhunderts; Her-
dersche Verlagshandlung, Freiburg im Breisgau, 1904.

FEnET, P.—La faculté de théologie de Paris et ses Docteurs les
plus Célébres; Moyen-Age, Tome I, 1894; II, 1895; III,
1896; IV, 1897; Paris.

Fernow, K. S.—Francesco Petrarca nebst dem Leben des
Dichters, 1818.

FickER, Juttus—Urkunden zur Geschichte des Roemerzuges
Kaiser Ludwig des Baiern; Verlag der Wagner’schen Uni-
versitets-Buchhandlung, Innsbruck, 1865.

FICKER AND HERMELINK—Das Mittelalter (Handbuch der
Kirchengeschichte) ; Zweite Auflage, 1929.


BIBLIOGRAPHY 261


Fire, R. H.—Young Luther; Macmillan, New York, 1928.

Fischer, Kuno—History of Modern Philosophy; trans. by J. P.
Gordy; Scribners, 1887.

Fiscuer, Jos—Die Erkenntnislehre Anselms von Canterbury;
aschendorffsche Verlagsbuchhandlung, Miinster, 1911.
FLEMING, W.—The Vocabulary of Philosophy; from 2nd ed. by

Chas. Krauth; Smith, English & Co., Philadelphia, 1860.

—— The Vocabulary of Philosophy; 3rd ed., by Henry Calder-
wood; Chas. Griffin & Co., London, 1876.

FLEMING, C. T.—Martin Luther and the Real Presence; Crit. R.,
II, p. 249,

Frücer, O.—Die Probleme der Philosophie und ihre Lösungen;
p. 121; Cöthen, Otto Schulze, 1906.

FORCELLINI— Lexicon, Totius Latinitatis Onomasticon ; 1859.

Forster, F.—Ueber die Staatslehre des Mittelalters. Allg. Monats-
schrift für Wissenshaft und Literatur; 1853.

Foxe, JonuN—The Acts and Monuments; 4th ed., Vol. II, pp. 659,
661, 705-6, 710, 727, 791, 912; Vol. III, p. 189; Vol. IV,
p. 260; Religious Tract Society, London, 1684.

—Eccl. Hist.; Vol. II; 1590.

Franck, A.—Guillaume Occam et Les Franciscains du XIV°
Siécle; Réformateurs et publicistes de l'Europe; Moyen
Age; essay on Ockham; pp. 153-200; Michel Levy, Paris,
1864.

FRIEDBERG, EMIL—Corpus Juris Canonici; 2 vols.; Leipzig, 1879-
1881.

—— Die mittelalterlichen Lehren über das Verhältnis von Staat
und Kirche; 1874.

Futter, THom.— The History of the Worthies of English; Thom.
Tegg, London, 1840.

GAIRDNER, JAMES—Roll Series, XI, No. Letters and Papers of
the Reign of Henry VIII, 1355.

GERFEN, Ernest—Baptizein and Eucharist; F. J. Heer & Co.,
Columbus, 1908.

GERSON, JoHANNEs—Opera Omnia (Harvard).

GFRÖRER, A. F.—Allgemeine Kirchengeschichte; Stuttgart, 1844.

GIERKE, O.—Political Theories of the Middle Ages; trans. by
F. W. Maitland; Cambridge Univ., 1900.

Gitson, E.—La Philosophie au Moyen Age; pp. 139, 226, 243-
303; Payot, Paris, 1925.

GIESELER, J. C. L.—Church History, Vol. III; trans. by J. W.
Hull; Harper, New York, 1868.

GLASSBERGER, A.—Chronica, pp. 77, 140, 141, 169; in Analecta
Franciscana, Vol. II.


262 BIBLIOGRAPHY


GoLDAST, MELCHIOR—Collectio constitutionum imperialium (Har-
vard).

—- Politica imperialia.

——Monarchiae S. Romani Imperii; Vols. I, IT, III; Francofurti,
Zunnerum, 1668.

Goope, W.—The Nature of Christ's Presence in the Eucharist;
Vols. I, II; T. Hatchard, London, 1856.

GotwaLp, W. K.—Ecclesiastical Censure at the End of the 15th
Century; The Johns Hopkins Press, Baltimore, 1927.
GRABMANN, MArtin—Mittelalterliches Geistesleben, Abhandlun-
gen zur Geschichte der Scholastik und Mystik; Max Hue-

ber, München, 1926.

—— Thomas Aquinas; His Personality and Thought; Longmans,
New York, 1928.

——Geschichte der Philosophie; III, die Philosophie des Mittel-
alters; De Gruyter & Co., Berlin, 1921.

GRATIANUS, F.—Opus Decretorum; Lucas Antonius de Giunta
Florentinus, Venetius impressit; 1514. (Glosses on the
text.)

Grasse, F.— Trésor de Livres rares; 1859-69.

Graves, F. P.—A Hist. of Education; Middle Ages; Macmillan,
New York, 1914.

Guizor, F—History of the Civilization in Europe; Hurst Co.,
New York.

HacENBACH, K. R.—History of Doctrines; Vol. II; trans. by
H. B. Smith; Sheldon & Co., New York, 1862.

Hain—Repertorium Bibliographicum, sub Ockham (No. II,
936), etc.

HALLAM, Henry—View of the State of Europe during the Mid-
dle Ages; Harper & Bros., New York, 1863.

HAMILTON, Sir WırLıam—Lectures on Metaphysics and Logic;
Gould & Lincoln, Boston, 1901.

Hamren, R. D.—The Scholastic Philosophy; Lecture II, p. 74,
ff.; Bampton Lectures, Oxford, 1833.

Hancock, Dr.—The Propitiatory Oblation in the Holy Eucharist;
London, 1710.

Hardwick, C.—A History of the Christian Church, Middle Age;
4th ed.; Macmillan, London, 1874.

Harnack, A.—Lehrbuch der Dogmengeschichte; Vol. VII, 1894;
oe by Neil Buchanan; Little, Brown & Co., Boston,

Harnack, Tu.—Luther’s Theologie; 1901.

ran K. P.—Medieval Latin; Allyn & Bacon, New York,


BIBLIOGRAPHY 263


Harris, C. R—Duns Scotus; Vol. I, The Place of Duns Scotus
in Medieval Thought; Vol. II, The Philosophical Doc-
trines of Duns Scotus; Oxford, 1927.

Hasxins, C. H.— The Renaissance of the Twelfth Century;
Cambridge, Harvard Univ. Press, 1927.

Hauck, A.—Realencyklopadie für protestantsche Theologie u.
Kirche, 3rd ed.

HaunfAv, B.—Histoire de la Philosophie Scholastique; 2 vols.;
Pagnerre, Paris, 1850.

HEFELE, K.—Konciliengeschichte; Vol. VI; 1867.

HENDERSON, B. W.—Merton College; F. E. Robinson, London,
1899,

Hicxs, Dr—An Answer to Some Things Contained in Dr.
Hicks’ Christian Priesthood (Sacrament) ; Exchange-Ally,
London, 1709.

Hirary or Porrrers—Nicene and Post-Nicene Fathers; Second
Series; Vol. IX; New York, 1879.

Historia Di Tutte L’Heresie Deseritta Da Domenico Bernino;
Vol. III, pp. 413, 482-485, 498, 501 f., 506, 531 £.; Venezia,
1717.

Hörer, P. J—Biographische Studien über Wilhelm Von Ockham
O.F.M.; Archivum Franciscanum Historicum; Vol. II, pp.
211-233; Vol. III, pp. 439-465; Vol. IV, pp. 654-669; Typ.
Collegii S. Bonaventurae Ad Claras Aquas prope Floren-
tiam (Quaracchi Presso Firinze), 1913.

HörLer, H.— Aus Avignon (Aus den Abhandlungen der k. bohm.
Gesellsch. der Wissenschaften. VI, Series I, Band.) ; Druck
von Dr. Eduard Gregr, Prag, 1868.

HorrMAN, C.—Die Lehre der fides implicita; pp. 153 ff; Leipzig,
1903.

HorsERG, L.—Storia Ecclesiastica; Allgemeine Kirchenhistorie,
Vols. I, II; Vol. II, p. 260; in Verlag der Compagniebuch-
handlung, Copenhagen und Leipzig, 1749.

HorzaprrgL, HERIBERT—Handbuch der Geschichte des Franzis-
kanerordens; Herderscher Verlag., Freiburg im Breisgau,
1909.

Horzer—Mitt. d. Inst. f. öst. Geschichtsforschung; XV; 1521.

Horawırz, A.—Sitzungberichte der phil. hist. Klasse d. Kaiserl.
Akademie d. Wissenschaften; LXX, 189 ff.; LX XI, 643
ff.; LXXII, 623; Briefwechsel d. Beatus Rhenanus; Leip-
zig, 1886.

Huser, V. A.—Dié englischen Universitäten; Vol. I; Cassel, 1839.

20


264 BIBLIOGRAPHY


Huco, pe S. Vicrogg—De Sacramento Corporis et Sanguinis
Christi; Patrologiae; Vol CLXXVI, Pars, pp. 402-474;
Minge, 1880.

—— Speculum de Mysteriis Ecclesiae; Patrologiae; Vol. III,
Chapter VII, pp. 355-374; Minge, 1879.

Hunzincer, A. W.—Lutherstudien; Heft I; A. Deichert'sche
Verlagsbuchhandlung Nachf; Leipzig, 1906.

Husık, Isaac—A History of Mediaeval Jewish Philosophy; p.
200; Macmillan, 1916.

Hutton, Epwarp—The Franciscans in England (1224-1538);
Houghton Mifflin Co., New York, 1926.

IRENAEUs—Adv. Haer.; Anti-Nicene Fathers, Vol. I, Book III,
Chap. III.

Iorca, N.—Essai De Synthese De L'Histoire de L'Humanité;
Vol. II; Histoire Du Moyen Age; J. Gamber, Paris, 1927.

James, WM.—Pragmatism; p. 53; pp. 88, 89; Longmans, Green
& Co., New York, 1925.

Janet, Paut—Histoire de la Science Politique; 3rd ed.; Paris,
1887.

Jens, J. W.—Law and Politics in the Middle Ages; London,
1919,


Joannis, Devorus—Institutionum Cononicarum; Liber IV, Vol.
I; H. Dessain, Leodii, 1860.

Jourpain, C.—Histoire de l'Université de Paris; au XVII* et au
XVII? siècle; Paris, 1874.

KauLicH, W.—Geschichte der scholastischen Philosophie; I.
'Theil, Prague, 1863.

Ketter, Lupwic—Die Reformation u. d. Älteren Reformpar-
teien; pp. 327, 388; Leipzig, 1885.

Krever, E. F.—Ockham, The Man Who Set Luther Thinking;
The Lutheran Ch. Rev., Vol. XX, No. 1, Jan, 1901, pp.
49-63; No. 2, April, 1901, pp. 213-232; Vol. XXI, No. 2,
April, 1902, pp. 213-232.

—Ockham’s Razor; Luth. Ch. Rev., Jan. 1905.

Kern, R.—St. Paul's Conception of the Lord's Supper; p. 239;
Luth. Quart, April, 1903.

—On Lord's Supper; trans. by W. A. Snyder; Luth. Quart.,
July, 1903.

Krncrorp, C. L., et al.—Collectanea Franciscana II; Univ. Press,
Manchester, 1922.

Kruce, F.—Etymologisches Wörterbuch der deutchen Sprache;
Strassburg, 1894,

Kneer—Entstehung d. Konzil. Theorie in Röm. Quartalschr.;
Supp. I, 56, 57; 1893.


BIBLIOGRAPHY 265


KoestLin—Life of Luther; trans.; 1893.

Könner, H. O.—Realismus und Nominalismus; in ihrem Einfluss
auf die dogmat. Systeme des Mittelalters; Gotha, 1858.

KROPATSCHECK, F.—Occam und Luther; Beiträge zur Förderung
Christl. Theol, IV ; 1900.

KROPATSCHECK, F.—Das Schriftprinzip der lutherischen Kirche;
Vol. I, pp. 300, 306, 309-326; d. A. Deichertsche Verlag.;
Leipzig, 1904.

KRUMBACHER, C.—Geschichte der byzantinischen Litteratur ;
Munich, 1897.

KucLer, LoTHAR— Der Begriff der Erkenntnis bei Wilhelm von
Ockham; Ein Beitrag zur Geschichte mittelalterlicher
Nöetik; H. Fleishmann, Breslau, 1913.

KUHTMANN, ALFRED— Zur Geschichte des Terminismus ; Wilhelm
v. Occam; pp. 14-37; Quelle and Meyer; Leipzig, 1911.

Kurtz, J. H.— Church History; Vol. II; trans. by John Mac-
pherson; Funk & Wagnalls, 1889.

LANFRANC, B.—De Corpore et Sanguine Domini; Patrologiae;
Vol. CL, pp. 407-422; Minge, Paris, 1880.

LAURIE, S. S.—The Rise and Early Constitutions of Universities;
D. Appleton & Co., New York, 1907.

Lea, H. C—A History of the Inquisition of the Middle Ages,
Vol. III, p. 134; New York, 1888.

Leac, A. F.—The Schools of Medieval England; Methuen &
Co., London, 1915.

LECHLER, Pror.—Johann Wiclif and His English Precursors; trans.
by Prof. Lorimer; The Religious Tract Society, London,
1878.

Leckxy, W. E.—Hist. of European Morals; 3rd ed.; Vol. I, p. 17;
1925.

Lee, S.—Dictionary of National Biography; 1885-1900.

Lecranp—Dictionnaire; Tome VI; Paris, 1747.

Leicuton, J. A.—The Field of Philosophy; 2nd ed.; R. G.
Adams & Co., Columbus, 1919.

Lrramp, J—Collectanea; Vols. I-VI; B. J. White, London, 1774.

Commentarii de scriptoribus Britannicis; Oxford, 1709.

Letonc, P. J.—Bibliothéque de la France; I, 475; Paris ed.,


1768-78.

LeRoy, E.—The Philosophy of France; The Philosophical Rev.,
May, 1907.

Le Roux pe Lacy er TissERAND—Paris et ses Historiens, p. 5;
Paris, 1867.


Lexicon Manuale ad Scriptores Mediae et Infimae Latinitatis;
apud Garnier Fratres et J.-P. Migne, Paris, 1890.


266 BIBLIOGRAPHY


Liber Chronicarum; Nurembergae, Koberger, 1493.
LirrLE, A. G.— The Grey Friars in Oxford; pp. 224-234, etc.;
Clarendon Press, Oxford, 1892.
Grey Friars of London; Chronicle, edited by J. C. Nichols,
XXXV.

LITTLE, A. G., et al.—Collectanea Franciscana; Alberdoniae, Typis
Academicis, 1914.

——Studies in English Franciscan History; Univ. Press, Man-
chester, 1917.

——A Guide to Franciscan Studies; The Macmillan Co., New
York, 1920.

Linpsay, T. M.—A History of the Reformation; Scribner’s Sons,
New York, 1914.

——William of Occam and His Connection with the Reforma-
tion; British Quart. Rev.; Vol. LVI; July, 1872.

——Luther and the Reformation; Good Words, 24; p. 698.

—— Luther and the German Reformation; Rev. The Nation, p.
71, p 153; Aug. 23, 1900:

——Encycl. Britan.; under Occam.

Linpsay, JAMES—The Logic and Metaphysics of Occam; pp.
521-547; The Monist; The Open Court, Vol. XXX, No. 4,
Oct., 1920; Chicago.

— Albertus Magnus as a Philosopher; pp. 620-631; The Hibbert
Journal, Vol. XVI, No. 4, July, 1918.

Loors, F.—Leitfaden zum Studium der Dogmengeschichte; Halle,
1906


LoMBARD, PETER—Sententiarum; Lib. IV. Apud Audoenum
Paruum, in via ad diuum Iacobum sub insigni Lilii aurei;
Paris, 1543.

——Opera Omnia, Patrologiae Cursus Completus Tom. CXCII;
J. P. Minge, Paris, 1880.

Lorenz, O.—Deutschlands Geschichtsquellen im Mittelalter von
der Mitte des dreizehnten bis zur Mitte des vierzehnten
Jahrhunderts; 3rd ed.; Hertz, Berlin, 1887.

Lowe, J. H—Der Kampf zwischen Realisimus und Nominalismus
im Mittelalter; Prague, 1876.

LurHER, Martin—The Sacraments; trans. from Walch ed.; Jos.
Salyards, Newmarket, 1853.

—— The Table-Talk; trans. by William Hazlett; Luth. Pub. Soc.,
Philadelphia.

—— De Captivitate Babylonica Ecclesiae; Opera Latina; Vol. II,

p. 263; Jena, 1581; trans. by Wace and Buchheim.

Sr vom Abenmahl; Vol. XXX, p. 263; ed. Erlangen,


BIBLIOGRAPHY 267


LUTHER, Martin—Luther’s Primary Works; Hodder & Stough-
ton, London, 1896.

Mackinnon, J.—Luther and the Reformation; Vol. I; Long-
mans, New York, 1925.

MACKINTOSH, Sir JaMES—History of Philosophy; 3 vols.; Long-
mans, 1846; The Miscellaneous Works; three volumes in
one; A. Hart, Philadelphia, 1850.

Mac ear, G. F.—Apostles of Medieval Europe; Macmillan, New

York, 1869.

MAITLAND, S. R.—The Dark Ages; London, 1844; 3rd ed.; Lon-

don, 1889.

Mancan, J. J.—Life, Character and Influence of Desiderius

Erasmus of Rotterdam; Macmillan, New York, 1927.

MANHART, F. P.—The Lord's Supper; Holman Lecture; Luth.

Quart., pp. 1-32; Gettysburg, Oct., 1897.

Manse, H.—Artis Logicae Rudimenta; Oxford, 1852.

Manser M.— Ueber Umfang u. Charakter der mittelalterlichen
Scholastik ; 1907.

Marcour—Antheil der Minoriten am Kampf zwischen Ludwig
IV u. P. Johann XXII, b. z. j. 1328. Emmerich, 1874.

Marsus or PapuA—Defensor Pacis; edited by C. W. Previté
Orton, M.A.; Cambridge Univ. Press, 1928.

MARTENE AND DurAnp— Thesaurus Novus Anecdotorum; II,
pp. 692, 719, 829; 1874.

MARTIGNE, DA—La Scholastica e le Tradizioni Francescane;
Prem. Stab. Poligrafico F. Salvati, Foligno, 1890.

Martin, C. F.—The Record Interpretater, Abbreviations; 2nd
ed.; Stevens & Sons, London, 1910.

Marvin, W. T.—The History of European Philosophy; p. 265;
Macmillan, 1917.

MAURICE, C. E—Lives of English Popular Leaders in the Mid-

- dle Ages; Franciscans; London, 1890.

Mavric, F. D.—Moral and Metaphysical Philosophy; Vols. I
and II; Vol. II, pp. 3-37, 115, 121, 131-133; Macmillan &
Co. New York, 1890.

MCCLINTOCK AND StronG—Encyclopedia of Biblical Theology
and Ecc. Lit.; Vol. II; New York, 1883.

McKeon, R.—Selections from Medieval Philosophers; Scribners,
Vol. I, 1929; Vol. II, 1930.

MEGENBERG—Tractatus pro Romana Ecclesia et Pontifice Johanne
XXII contra Wilhelmum Occam.

MELANCHTHON, P.—Historia de vita et actis Lutheri; Vitenberg,
p. 5; 1549. (Univ. of Penna.)

Merton Muniments; The Clarendon Press, Oxford, 1928.


268 BIBLIOGRAPHY


MICHALSKI, Konstanty—Les courants philosophiques à Oxford
et à Paris pendant le XIV* siécle; pp. 59-88; Bulletin Inter-
national de L'Académie Polonaise des Sciences et des Let-
tres; I. Partie; Cracovie, 1922.

MICHELET, M.—The Life of Martin Luther; trans. by G. H.
Smith; D. Appleton & Co., New York, 1846.

Mut, J. S.—System of Logic; Harper & Bros., New York, 1858.

Murman, H. H.—History of Latin Christianity; Vols. VII, VIII;
J. Murray, New York, 1881.

Minerva—Jahrbuch; under Occam.

Minces, P. PARTHENIUS—Geschichte der Franziskaner in Bayern;
Verlag der J. J. Lentner'schen Buchhandlung, München,
1896.

Moret, J.—View of Philosophy in Europe; Pickering, 1846.

MUENSCHER, W.—Elements of Dogmatic History; trans. by Jas.
Murdock, New Haven, 1830.

MÜLLER, KAnr—Kirchengeschichte II.; Tubigen, 1911.

——Der Kampf Ludwigs des Baiern mit der römischen Curie,
Vol. I-II; Verlag der H. Laupp’schen Buchhandlung,
Tubigen, 1879, 1880.

Murer, W.—Een Deventersch Ockham-Handschrift; Het Boek;
pp. 96-101; Martinus Nijhoff, Lange Voorhout 9 Den
Haag; 12 Jaargang No. 3, Maart, 1923.

Muratort, L.—Annali D'Italia; 15 vols.; XXIX, pp. 165, 195,
201, 209, 210-212, 221, 249; Presso gli Eredi Barbiellini
Mercanti di libri, e Stampatori a Pasquino, Roma, 1753.

NEANDER, A.—Church History; 9 vols.; T. Clark, 1847.

—History of Dogma; 2 vols.; Bohn, 1858.

Nicotson, R.—De Guilielmo de Ockham; a MS. written between
the years 1559 and 1664. Also a poem, a MS., De cele-
berrimo Guilelmo de Ockam. The MS. is found in a
book given to Harvard Univ. by Thomas Hollis, between
the years 1664 and 1667; for there are the words written:
accepto 15 Aug., c. 1767.

Noack, Lupwic—Die christliche Mystik nach ihrem geschicht-
lichen Entwickelungsgange im Mittelalter und in der
neuern Zeit dargestellt; Königsberg, 1853.

Occ, F. A—A Source Book of Medieval Hist.; American Book
Co., New York, 1907.

O'Leary, DELAcy— Arabic Thought and Its Place in er
Dutton & Co., London, 1922.

Orcrarr F.— The KS to the Study of St. Thomas; trans. by
J. S. Zybura; B. Herder Book Co., St. Louis, 1925.


BIBLIOGRAPHY 269


Packar, S. R.—Europe and the Church Under Innocent III;
Henry Holt, New York, 1927.

PaErow, L. J.—Guide to the Study of Medieval History; Univ.
of California, 1917.

Parkinson, A.—Collectanea Anglo-Minoritica (Grey Friars) ;
Thomas Smith, London, 1726.

Patton, J.—British History of Papal Claims, Vol. I; 1666-1763.

PELZER, A.—Les 51 articles de Guillaume Occam censurés; pp.
240-270; en Avignon, en 1326; Revue D’Histoire Ecclésias-
tique, Avril-Juillet, 1922; Pierre Smeesters, 1922,

Perry, A. J—J. Trevisa’s Dialogus inter Militem et Clericum;
Oxford Univ. Press, London, 1925.

PETZHOLD, J.—Bibliotheca bibliog.; Leipzig, 1866.

PHıLoLocus— Zeitschrift fiir das klassische Alterthum, Vol. I-
LXIII; Vol. LIII in two parts; Supplement V, 1-9; 72
vols.; 1846-1904; edited by Sentsch; Schneidewin, Crusins
and Hess.

Picavet, F.—Esquisse D'une Histoire Générale et Comparée des
Philosophies Médiévales; Félix Alcan, Paris, 1907.
—Essais sur L'Histoire Générale et Comparée des Théologies

et des Philosophies Médiévales; Félix Alcan, Paris, 1913.

Prormvus—Annead ; IV, 21; 1835.

Poore, R. L.—Index Britanniae Scriptorum ; The Clarendon Press,
Oxford, 1902.

—— Wycliffe and Movements for Reform; Epochs of Church
History; London, 1889.

— On Ockham; Diet. Nat. Biogr.; Vol. XLI, p. 359 sq.; 1895.

— Illustrations of the History of Medieval Thought and
Learning; 2nd ed.; Soc. for Promoting Christian Knowl-
edge, London, 1920.

—— Chronicles and Annals; The Clarendon Press, Oxford, 1926.

PorrHAsrT—Wegweiser durch die Geschichtewerke des euro-
paischen Mittelalters; Bibliography and List of Ockam’s
Controversial Writings; p. 871.

PnawTL, C.—Geschichte der Logik im Abendlande; I-IV; Vol.
II, pp. 327-420; Leipzig, 1855-1867; Gustav Fock, Leipzig,
1927.

—— Der  Universalienstreit im dreizehnten und vierzehnten
Jahrhundert; Sitz.-Ber. der Münchener Akad., 1874.

— Michael Psellus und Petrus Hispanus, eine Rechtfertigung;
Hirzel, Leipzig, 1867.

Precer, W.—In Schriften des Vereins für Reformationsgeschichte ;
Vol. V; 1892-3.


270 BIBLIOGRAPHY


Precer, W.—Ueber die Anfänge des kirchenpolitischen Kampfes
unter Ludwig dem Baier; (Aus den Abhandlungen der k.
bayer. Akademie der Wiss. III, CI, XVI. Bd. II, Abth.) ;
Verlag der k. Akademie, München, 1882.

—— Der kirchenpolitische Kampf unter Ludwig dem Baier und
sein Einfluss auf die öffentliche Meinung in Deutschland.
(Aus den Abhandlungen der k. bayer. Akademie der Wiss.
III, CI, XIV. Bd. I, Abth.) ; München, 1877.

— Geschichte des deut. Mystik im Mittelalter; 3 vols., 1874,
1881, 1893, Vols. I, IL. In der ersten Halfte des XIV
Jahrhunderts.

Presbyter, an English; Papers on the Doctrine of the English
Church, concerning the Eucharistic Presence; The Church
of England Book Society, London.

PrEvıt£-Orton, C. W.—The Defensor Pacis of Marsilius of
Padua; Cambridge, 1928.

RADBERTUS, PAscHAsıus—Liber de Corpore et Sanguine Dimini;
Patrologiae, Minge.

Rasus—Logik und Metaphysik, Occam; p. 169 (U. P.).

Raw», E. K.—Founders of the Middle Ages; Harvard Univ.
Press, Cambridge, 1928.

RASHDALL, H.—The Universities of Europe in the Middle Ages;

Vols. I and II; Clarendon Press, Oxford, 1895.

Friar's Preachers; Oxford.

RAYNALDUS, Orporicus—Annales ecclesiastici ab anno quo desinit
Card. C. Baronius, 1198, usque ad annum 1534-1565, etc.,
continuati. Coloniae Agrippinae, 1864; Lucae, 1750. (Epis-
copal Divinity School, Philadelphia.)

REINWALD, F. H.—Epitome theologiae Christianae; Berlin, 1835.

RETTBERG, F. W.—Occam und Luther; Theologische Studien und
Kritiken; pp. 69-136; F. Perthes, Hamburg, 1839.

ReuscH, F.—Index librorum prohibitorum ; 1886.

REUTHER, H.—Geschichte der religiósen Aufklarung in Mittel-
alter, 2 vols.; Berlin, 1875-77.

RiEzLer, S.—Vatikansiche Akten. z. deut. Ges. in der Zeit Lud-
wigs des Bayern, pp. 5, 66; Innsbruck, 1891.

——Die literarischen Widersacher der Päpste zur Zeit Ludwigs
des Baiers; Duncker and Humbolt, Leipzig, 1874.

RirrEL—Geschichte, Darstellung der Verhältnisse zwischen Kirche
und Staat; 1836.

RirscHL, ALBRECHT—Die christliche Lehre von der Rechtferti-


gung und Versóhnung, I, p., ed. 2; Jahrbücher fur deutsche
Theologie, 1868.


—Fides Implicata; Bonn, 1890.


BIBLIOGRAPHY 277


RITTER, HEINRICH— Geschichte der christlichen Philosophie; Vol.
VIII, pp. 574-604; F. Perthes, Hamberg, 1845.

Roserts, W. D.—Metaphysica of Aristotle; Oxford, 1908.

ROBERTSON, J. C.—History of Christian Church; 3 vols.; J. Murry,
1868.

Rosınson, J. H.—The Pre-Reformation Period; Original Sources
of European History; Vol. III, pp. 1-34, No. 6; Univ. of
Penna., 1912.

Ross, W. D.—Metaphysica of Aristotle; Oxford, 1908.

—— The Works of Aristotle; Oxford, 1928.

RousskLAT—Études sur la Philosophie dans le Moyen Age; Paris,
1840-42.

RUTER, MArTIN—A Concise History of the Christian Church;
Carlton & Porter, New York, 1834.

SAGITTARIUS, CASPAR—Introductio in Historiam Ecclesiasticam ;
Vols. I, IT; J. F. Bielckius, Jena, 1718.

Savicny, F. C. von—Gesch. d. rom. Rechts im Mittelalter; Hei-
delberg, 1816.

SCHAFF, P.—History of the Christian Church; Vols. I-VII; Vol.
I, pp. 691, 719; II, p. 188, ff. ; 1858-1890.

—Schaff-Herzog Encyclopedia of Relig. Knowledge; 1884; 3rd
ed., 1918. i

ScHJELDERUP, H. K.—Hauptlinien der Entwicklung der Philoso-
phie von Mitte des 19. Jahrh. bis zur Gegenwart; Kris-
tiania, 1920.

ScHMALENBACH, H.—Das Mittelalter Sein Begriff und Wesen;
Quelle & Meyer, Leipzig, 1926.

SCHREIBER, W.—IV, Wilhelm von Ockkam; Die politischen und
religiösen Doctrinen unter Ludwig dem Baiern, pp. 59-82;
Druck und Verlag der Jos. Thomann’schen Buckhandlung,
Landshut, 1858.

ScHWAB— Johannes Gerson; Würzburg, 1858.

Scotus, Ioannis Duns— Super Quarto Sententiarum; Lugdun-
ique excusum in edibus Jacobi Myt: sumptu honesti viri
Jacobi. q. Francisci de Giunta, etc.; Lyons, 1520.

—— Opera Omnia XII, edito nova junxta editionem; Wadding,
Minges, P.P.

SEEBERG, R.—Dogmensgeschichte; Vols. I and II; pp. 144-197;
trans. by C. A. Hay; Luth. Pub. Soc., 1905.

— William of Occam. The New Schaff-Herzog Encyclopedia
of Religious Knowledge; Vol VIII, pp. 215, 220; New
York, 1920.

——In Herzog-Haucks Realencyklopädie; Vol. XIV, under
Ockam.


272 BIBLIOGRAPHY


SEEBERG, R.—On the Lord's Supper; Luth. Quart., Oct., 1906.

—— Das Schriftprinzip der luth. Kirche; I, p. 309, ff.; Leipzig,
1904.

— Luther und Luthertum in der neuesten katholischen Beleuch-
tung; Leipzig, 1904.

—— Die Theologie des Iohannes Duns Scotus; Leipzig, 1900.

SEIDENBERG—Die kirchenpolitische Litteratur unter dem Kaiser
Ludwig dem Bayern und die Zunftkämpfe vornehmlich in
Mainz; in: Westdeutsche Zeitschrift für Gesch. u. Kunst;
VI ps 100

Seton, W.—Nicholas Glassberger and His Works (1200-1310) ;
The Univ. Press, Manchester, 1923.

SEYBOLT, R. F.—The Manuale Scholarium; Nominalism at Hei-
delberg; pp. 40-43; Harvard Univ. Press, Cambridge, 1921.

SHatto, M. W.—Lessons in Scholastic Philosophy; The Peter
Reilly Co., Philadelphia, 1923.

SurLpoN, H. C—History of Christian Doctrine; Vol. I; Harper
& Brother, New York, 1886.

SIEBECK, R.—Geschichte der Psychologie; Gotha, 1884.

—— Die Anfänge der neueren Psychol. in d. Scholast., Ztschr. f.
Philos. u. Phil.; Vol. 94, p. 161 ff.; Vol. XCV, p. 245 ff.

—— Occams Erkenntnislehre in ihrer historischen Stellung, im
Archiv. fur Gesch. der Philosophie, Bd. X, p. 317 ff.; Ber-
lin, 1897.

—— Das Unmittelbare in unserer Bestimmung; F. E. B. Mohr,
Tübigen, 1917.

SIGNORILLO, N. —Lexicon Peripateticum, Philosophico-Theologi-
cum; Naples, 1893.

SILBERNAGEL, J.— Wilhelm von Ockam Ansichten über Kirche und
Staat; pp. 423-433; Historisches Jahrbuch; VII, Band.
3. Heft; Herder & Co., München, 1886,

SMITH, A. L.— Church and State in the Middle Ages; Oxford,
1913.

Situ, P.—Erasmus, A Study of his Life, Ideals and Place in
History; Harper & Bros., New York, 1923.

SMITH, P. anp GALLINGER, W. P.—Conversations with Lutker
(Selections from Table-Talk) ; Pilgrim Press, New York,
1915. Luther’s Correspondence and Other Contemporary
Letters; The Luth. Pub. Soc., Philadelphia, 1913.

SMITH AND WAcE—Dictionary of Christian Biography, 1877.

SorRLEY, W. R—A History of English Philosophy; G. P. Put-
nam’s Sons, New York, 191.

STAHELIN—Huldreich Zwingli u. sein Reformationswerk; 1884.


BIBLIOGRAPHY 273


STEvENS, L.—Dict. of Biography; 1703.

—— Essays in Ecclestiastical Biography; 2 vols.; London, 1850.

STÓCKL, A.—Geschichte der Phil. des Mittelalters; Vol. I; trans.
by T. A. Finlay; Longmans, New York, 1914.

STANGE AND DittricH—Vox Latina, lateinisches Lesebuch III;
Dieterich’scher Verlag., Leipzig, 1926.

SULLIVAN, J.—Marsigilo of Padua and William of Ockam; The
American Hist. Rev.; Vol. II, No. 3, pp. 409-426; April,
1897; Vol. II, No. 4, pp. 593-610; July, 1897; New York.

CERE Rep ers sts Assoc, 1902 Vol D pp:
65-81.

—— Eng. Hist. Rev., The Manuscripts and Date of Marsiglio of
Padua’s “Defensor Pacis”; Vol. XX, 1905, pp. 293-307.

TAYLOR, H. O.— The Medieval Mind; Vol. II; Macmillan, New
York, 1911. vr

—— Thought and Expression in the Sixteenth Century; Vol. I,
ays 753, Hl, AUOS re, A, Fler een by AYE 20R 2 Ese
New York, 1920.

TENNEMANN, W. G.—Geschichte der Philosophie; Vol. VIII, p.
866; Paris, 3rd ed.; Barth, Leipzig, 1820.

—— Manuel de L'Histoire de la Philosophie; (trans. by V.
Cousin; Vols. I and II; Vol. I, pp. 382-388; 1829).

—Manuel of Philosophy; trans. by Arthur Johnson; London,
1870.

Tuay, F.—A History of Philosophy; p. 215 ff.; Henry Holt &
Co., New York, 1914.

Tuomas, A.—Extraits des Archives du Vatican pour servir a
VHistoire du Moyen Age in Mélanges d’Archéologie et
d'Histoire de l'École de Rome; pp. 446-452; 1882.

THomAsıus—Historia Contentionis inter Imperium et Sacerdo-
tium; 1722.

Tuompson, E. M.—Handbook of Greek and Latin Paleography ;
D. Appleton & Co., New York, 1892.

Tuomson, J. R—A Dictionary of Philosophy; 2nd ed.; R. F.
Dickinson, London, 1892.

THORBURN, W. M.—Occam’s Razor; Mind; pp. 287, 288; Mac-
millan, April, 1915.

—— The Myth of Occam's Razor; Mind; pp. 345-353; Macmillan
& Co., New York, July, 1918.

THORNDIKE, L.—History of Medieval Europe; Houghton, New
York, 1917.

Tuurot, C.—L'Enseignement dans l'Université de Paris au
Moyen Age; Paris, 1850.


274 BIBLIOGRAPHY


TowNsENp, W. J.—The Great Schoolman of the Middle Ages;
pp. 267-287; G. E. Stechert, 1920.

TRITHEMIUS, JoHANNIS—Primae Partis Opera Historica, Quot-
quot hactenus reperiri potuerunt omnia; Typis Wechelianis
apud Claudium, Francofurti, 1601.

Turner, S.—History of the Middle Ages; Vols. I-III; Long-
mans, 1917.

Turner, W.—History of Philosophy; Ginn & Co., New York,
1903.

TSCHACKERT, P.—Peter von Ailli; Vorwort ix, p. 43; F. A.
Perthes, Gotha, 1877.

Tyrz, Joannis—Lexicon Theologicum ; Cologne, 1619.

UEBERWEG, F.—History of Philosophy; trans. by G. S. Morris;
Vol. I, pp. 460-467; Scribner, Armstrong & Co., New
York, 1875.

UEBERWEG-BAUMGARTNER— Grundriss der Geschichte der Philoso-
phie; Vol. II, pp. 589-607; E. S. Mittler & Son, Berlin, 1915.

ULLMAN, C.—Reformers before the Reformation; trans. by
Robert Menzies; 2 vols.; T. & T. Clark, Edinburgh, 1863.

VAUGHAN, R. A— Hours with the Mystics; 2 vols.; Strahan, 1880.

VAUGHN, E. V.—The Origin and Early Development of the Eng-
lish Universities to the Close of the Thirteenth Century;
Social Science Series (The Univ. of Missouri Studies) ;
Vol. II, No. 2; University of Missouri, August, 1908.

Victor, St. Huco—Opera Omnia De Sacramentis; Vol. II, p.
314f.; Minge, Paris, 1880.

VILLANI, GIOVANNI—Historia; Venice, 1562.

VocEL, A.—Überblick über die Geschichte der Philosophie; Teil.
I, II; F. Brandstetter, Leipzig, 1905.

Wace, Henry, AND BUCHHEIM—Luther’s Primary Works; Hod-
der & Stoughton, London, 1896.

WappınG, L.—Annales Minorum Fratrum; 8 vols.; Lugd., 1625-
1654; Fonseca, Vol. VII, VIII; continued to 1622; Rome,
1731-1886. (Congressional Library.)

——Annales Ordinis Praedicatorum; Rome, 1746.

WaDnINGTON, G.—History of the Church from the Earliest Ages
to the Reformation; Harper & Bros, New York, 1875.

WacENMANN, B.—Under Occam; Real. Encyl, Vol. IV; Leipzig,
1882.

Warcorr, G. D.—Kantian and Lutheran Elements in Ritschl's
Conception of God; XII, p. 121; New York, N.P., 1904.

WALKER, L. J.—Theories of Knowledge; p. 14; Longmans, Green
.& Co., London, 1910.


BIBLIOGRAPHY PS


WATTENBACH, W.—Deutschlands Geschichtsquellen im Mittelalter
bis zur Mitte. d. 13 Jahrh. ; 1904.

WENNER, G. U.—New Light on Luther; The Bible Record; Vol.
IX, No. 8, pp. 339-346; October, 1912.

Western Philos. and Theol. in the Thirteenth Century; Harvard
Theol. Rev., 1918, p. 409; 1923, p. 143.

WERNER, K.—Die Scholastik des späteren Mittelalters; 4 vols.;
1883.

— TĪ, John Dunn Scotus.

—— Die nachscotistische Scholastik ; Wilhelm Braumüller, Vienna,
1883.

——]V, Der Endausgang d. mittelalt. Scholastik: W. Brau-
müller, Vienna, 1883.

——D. Entwicklungsgang des mittelalters; Psychol.; 1876.

Gesch. d. Philos.; VIII; 1845.

WINDELBAND, W.—A History of Philosophy; trans. by J. H.
Tufts; Macmillan, New York, 1895.

WILLMANN—Geschichte des Idealismus; Vol. II, Fathers of the
Church and the Middle Ages; 2nd ed; Brunswick, 1907.

Worr, G.—Quellenkunde der deutschen Reformationsgeschichte ;
I, 74 £.; 1915.

Woop, A.—Historia et Antiquitates Universitatis Oxoniensis ;
IVoINSPEppS60169 Von p: 5 f P: 87; Univ Oxn,
Oxford, 1674.

—History and Antiquities of the University of Oxford; Ox-
ford, Gutch, 1792-1796.

—— Life and Times of Anthony Wood; Antiquary of Oxford;
Clarendon Press, Oxford, 1891-1900.

Woopwarp, G. R—The Political Theories of Martin Luther;
Putman, 1910.

Workman, H. B.—John Wyclif; Vol. I-II; The Clarendon Press,
Oxford, 1926.

WRIGHT, C. H. C.—A History of French Literature, p. 94; 1912.

ZARNCKE, F.—Die deutschen Universitäten im Mittelalter;
Weigel, Leipzig, 1857.

ZYBURA, J. S.—Present-Day Thinkers and The New Scholasti-
cism; B. Herder Book Co., St. Louis, 1926.
