The Odes of Solomon
===================
The Odes of Solomon, edited and translated by J. Rendel Harris (Cambridge, 1909), public domain. The first English edition of the early Christian hymn collection recovered in Syriac, a landmark of New Testament apocrypha scholarship. Scan via Internet Archive.

Hdinburgh University


Library


it


THE ODES AND PSALMS
OF


SOLOMON


CAMBRIDGE UNIVERSITY PRESS
London: FETTER LANE, E.C.
CG. F. CLAY, MANAGER


Evinburgh: 3100, PRINCES STREET
- Berlin: A. ASHER AND CO.
Leipsig: F..A. BROCKHAUS
few Bork: G. P. PUTNAM’S SONS
Bombay and Calcutta: MACMILLAN AND CO., Lrtp.


[Ad Rights reserved |


THE ODES AND PSALMS


OF


“SOLOMON


NOW FIRST PUBLISHED FROM THE


SYRIAC VERSION


BY


J. RENDEL HARKRIS,. M.A.


Hon. D.Litt. (Dubl.), Hon. LL.D. (Haverford), Hon. D.Theol. (Leiden),
Hon. LL.D. (Birmingham), Hon. Fellow of Clare College, Cambridge.


Cambridge :
at the University Press


~ 2 4 a ¢ ” ~ \ NA
TIAHPOYCOE EN TINEYMATI, AAAOYNTEC EdYTOTC YaAMOTC KAI YMNOIC


€ a


‘ > a a vy / a , a
Kal @AATC TINEYMATIKATC, AAONTEC KAl YAAAONTEC TH KAdPAIA YMON TO)


KYPiq@.
Ad Ephes. v. 19.


OY rap é€cTIN H BaciAefa TOY BEOF Bpadcic Kal TrdCIC, AAAA AIKAIOCYNH


kal €ipPHNH Kal Xapd EN TINEYMaATI AfiQ.
Ad Rom, xiv. 17


PREEACE


T is not easy to produce a satisfactory edition of a work
which has come down to us in a single document, especially
when the document itself is late in date, and represents not the
original text, but a version of the same, made by some unknown
hand. Obscurities are sure to exist in a text so scantily attested
and of such an uncertain tradition. In spite, however, of these
inherent difficulties, I hope that the translation and editing of
these new Odes of Solomon (with their associated and already
known Psalms of Solomon) will be satisfactory ; for, although
late in date, the text is very well preserved, and the translation
from the Greek into the Syriac appears to have been carefully
and conscientiously made. If we could come across some more
traces of the newly-recovered work in the writings of the Fathers,
or if, by good hap, we might find the lost Latin or a copy of
the original Greek, much that is obscure in our presentation of
the Odes would disappear. Meanwhile we have done our best
with the material as we found it and as we were able to reinforce
it: our thanks are due to scholarly friends who have assisted us
with their keen revising eyes or their nimble emendating brains,
My learned lady friends Mrs Lewis and Mrs Gibson have given
me much assistance with the proofs: Mr Glover has criticised
obscure passages and inadequate arguments: and Professor
Nestle has made some brilliant suggestions for the betterment of
the text, and traces of his skilled hand may be seen at several
points, of which I note especially Ode 7, 12, Ode 38, 14, Ps. v. 16,
Ps. vii. 4, and Ps. xvii. 31. I think it is very likely that a skilled
Coptic scholar could also do something to improve either the
text or the translation in those Odes which have been transferred


to the text of the Pzstis Sophia.
RENDEL HARRIS.


CHETWYND,
SELLY OAK.
October, 1909.


CONTENTS


INTRODUCTION
TRANSLATION OF THE ODES .
TRANSLATION OF THE PSALMS


Syriac TEXT OF THE ODES AND PSALMS


PAGE


1— 88
89—138


139—154
SY


INTRODUCTION


The present volume contains an important addition to our
knowledge of the literature which immediately anticipates or
directly follows the time of Christ. It contains, on the one
hand, a hitherto unknown version of the Psalms of Solomon,
a collection which has often been studied, from the standpoints
both of the higher and lower criticism, and which is, by common
consent, referred to the middle of the first century B.C. ; and on
the other hand it presents a new collection which I have called,
for the sake of distinction, and in harmony with the references
in ancient writers, by the name of the Odes of Solomon; they
are here edited and translated from a Syriac MS. in my own
possession : and it will probably be no rash prediction to say that
their value and antiquity will be at once recognized by students
and critics, and that they will be assigned, either wholly or in
part, to the first century of the Christian era. The reasons for
this belief will appear presently, but, apart altogether from the
question of a half-century more or less in the dating of a
document, it lies outside controversy that the new Odes are
marked by a vigour and exaltation of spiritual life, and
a mystical insight, to which we can only find parallels in the
most illuminated periods of the history of the Church, They
- differ, in this respect, by the whole breadth of the firmament,
from the extant Psalms of Solomon, with which they are
associated in our MS. In these there is little originality, and
not much hope: the hard experiences through which Jerusalem
passed at the hands of the Romans in the Invasion of Pompey
have left a gloom over the sky even in the moments of temporary
relief and in the time of exultation over the fall of the great
oppressor: what life and light there is may be traced to the


0:8: IT


2 INTRODUCTION


severe morality of the traditional Pharisees, and to the Messianic
hopes for whose development their times of affliction were the
appropriate and necessary nidus; and so far are they from
religious originality in the expression of personal or national
experience, that many of the Psalms in question are little more
than centos and expansions from the canonical Hebrew Psalter.
In the Odes, on the other hand, we have few quotations or
adaptations from previous writings, whether Jewish or Christian;
there is little that can be traced to the Old Testament, almost
nothing that is to be credited to the Gospels or other branches
of the Christian literature. Their radiance is no reflection from
the illumination of other days: their inspiration is first-hand
and immediate; it answers very well to the summary which
Aristides made of the life of the early Christian Church when
he described them as indeed ‘a new people with whom some-
thing Divine is mingled.’ They are thus altogether distinct
from the extant Psalms of Solomon which are bound up with
them in our MS. Whatever we may have to say of these latter
is limited to the interest which arises in the discovery of an
Eastern Version of a book whose Greek text is peculiarly difficult
to edit, and whose original Hebrew text has altogether dis-
appeared. We shall show that the new Syriac version is itself
a translation of the Greek ; we shall point out in what ways, if
any, it serves to the betterment of the Greek text, and whether
it gives any assistance to the detection of the lost Hebrew text.
Our chief interest, however, will be with the Odes. We
shall discuss the quotations and fragments of these which are
found in early Christian writers: we shall try to determine the
limits of time within which the composition of the Odes must
lie, as well as the locality or Church from which they emanate:
we shall try to find out also how they became attached to the
Psalms, and whether they were originally composed in Greek ;
and we shall add a brief commentary and notes to the Odes as
translated. In this way we hope to clear up some perplexities
in the historical tradition, while leaving, no doubt, a number of
unsolved problems to those who shall follow after us.
The MS. from which our texts come is a paper one of quite
The Syriac a late period: its age may be between three and
M3. four hundred years: but as it is imperfect both at
the beginning and ending, and so has lost both its preface and


DESCRIPTION OF MS. 3


colophon, we cannot tell how it was described by the person
who made the copy, nor can we say anything definite about the
date. It has been lying on my shelves for some time, perhaps
for as long as two years, along with a heap of leaves from various
Syriac MSS. written’on paper, which came from the neighbour-
hood of the Tigris. In spite of its relatively late date, the text
is a good one: it is carefully, if somewhat coarsely written, and
is furnished with occasional vowels in the Nestorian manner, to
which there have been added, probably by a later hand, sundry
Greek vowels in the Jacobite manner. As we have said it is
incomplete both at the beginning and the end: we can, however,
make out pretty clearly what the original MS. was like.

The book is arranged in quires of ten leaves: of the first
quire three leaves are missing: these three leaves contained the
first and second Odes and the beginning of the third Ode. The
Odes then run continuously till the fourth quire, where they
stop on the verso of the fourth leaf: thus the Odes occupy
roughly thirty-four leaves. Then the extant Psalms begin:
they occupy the remaining six leaves of the fourth quire (say
six leaves plus), the fifth quire, and the sixth quire, of which the
last leaf is gone, p/us whatever was needed to complete the book
from a seventh quire: and since the extant portion of the Psalms
in our Syriac MS. takes us up to Ps. xvii. 38 there is not much
to add from a seventh quire. Suppose we say that the Psalms
occupied twenty-six leaves, and that four more leaves are
required to complete the text, we have then approximately


Odes = 34 leaves
Psalms = 30 leaves
or Psalms and Odes = 64 leaves.


Now let us turn to the accounts given us by ancient writers

of the extent of the books in question: first of all

oie we know that the 18 Psalms of Solomon once

ae stood in the great Codex Alexandrinus: for in
the index to the MS. we find as follows:


*Atroxadruwis lwdvvov
KrAjpevtos értoToAy a’
KAnpevtos éricton) 2"
opov BiBrAta—
Warpol Lorouesvtos un’.


4 INTRODUCTION


Here the eighteen Psalms stand just outside the accepted
Christian books of the N.T., in the very penumbra of canonicity.
Next turn to the Synopsis Sanctae Scripturae which passes
under the name of Athanasius: here we find as follows, after
the enumeration of the Axdtilegomena of the Old Testament :


ovv éxeivois O€ Kat TadTa HplOunvTat:
MaxkxaBaixa BiBria 5
II rorepaixd
WVarpol cat 0» [l. dal] Loropavtos
Yooavva.


Here we find the Psalms in the company of the Odes, and
forming a part of the disputed writings of the Old Testament:
from the supplementary manner in which they are introduced,
following an unknown book on Egyptian history, we may
perhaps describe their position as the penumbra of uncanon-
icity, or, rather of deuterocanonicity. The Psalms and Odes
are here (say in the sixth century) definitely grouped together.

Next take the Stichometry of Nicephorus, the Patriarch of
Constantinople in the beginning of the ninth century: here we
find as follows :


Three books of Maccabees.

The Wisdom of Solomon.

Ecclesiasticus.

The Psalms and Odes of Solomon, containing 2100
verses (oTiyot Bp’).

Esther.

Judith.

Susanna.

Tobit.


a Sr er


oa ONT


Here we find our two books again grouped together, and
very well placed amongst the Apocrypha of the Old Testament:
they do not seem to have lost any dignity between the sixth
and ninth centuries; and they have been carefully measured,
after the manner of books which are likely to be transcribed
and whose contents must therefore be estimated on some
recognized scale.

In the same connexion we have a list of books which is
found attached to the Questiones et Responsiones of Anastasius


STICHOMETRY OF THE ODES 5


the Sinaite, and is commonly known as the Catalogue of the
Sixty Books. After the sixty canonical books, we have a list
of nine deuterocanonical books, and then a list of twenty-five
definitely apocryphal writings; amongst these last we find


8. Avdrnbis Motcéos.
9. Warpoi Loroudrtos.
10. “Halov drroxaduwis. ete.


Here we cannot be certain whether Psalms means Psalms
and Odes, nor is any estimate made of the extent of the
composition. The book is not in such good company as it is
in the Catalogue of Nicephorus.

Assuming the correctness of the statement that the Odes
and Psalms contain 2100 verses, let us now turn
to the Greek texts of the eighteen Psalms, and see
what the scribes say about their compass. The Vatican MS.
(Cod. R of Gebhardt’s edition of the Psalms) says that the book


contains o71 yv': the Copenhagen MS. (Cod. H) says én a;
and the Paris MS. (Cod. P) says én tpidxovta. Here, as
Gebhardt says, Cod. P has misread A as AN’; so we have two
statements as to the length of the book. One statement says
verses, the other verses of Homer, but since that is what verses
mean in a stichometric reckoning, there is no discrepancy
here except in the numbers. If we imagine that the scribe
of Cod. R has misread the sign for 900, 1%, as , we have
950 verses for R which agrees closely with the reckoning in
Cod. H. Suppose we say then that the 18 Psalms equal 950
verses. But then we are told by Nicephorus that the Psalms
and Odes together make 2100 verses: we have then the ratio of
Odes to Psalms 1150 to 950 or 23 to 19. Our estimate of the
relative lengths in the Syriac was 34 to 30 or 17 to 15. The
former estimate is 1°21 to 1, the latter 1°13 to 1, which is suffi-
ciently exact to make the verification that our new Odes are
those of which Nicephorus and the other Canonists speak.

It will be observed that Nicephorus has divided the Solomonic
literature into two parts, the Canonical books, viz.: Proverbs,
Ecclesiastes and Canticles, and the Antilegomena which include
the Wisdom of Solomon, perhaps Ecclesiasticus, and the Psalms
and Odes of Solomon; that is, there are three canonical books
of Solomon, and at least two sub-canonical books. We put


Stichometry.


6 INTRODUCTION


it in that way, because there is evidence in some quarters
that Ecclesiasticus was also reckoned amongst the books of
Solomon. If, however, it is not so reckoned, we have five books
of Solomon.
Now let us turn to the Cheltenham Stichometry as published
by Mommsen}.
Here we have the Solomonic writings introduced as follows :
Psalmi David CLI. ver. V.
Salomonis ver. V D. .
profetas maiores ver. XVI. CCCLXX. numero III.
This is a little perplexing; at first sight it seems as if the
Cheltenham list had only one book of Solomon,


The five

Solomonic or several books reckoned as one, and that the
Books of : 5

Pear total extent of this book or books is 5500 verses


(reading VD for VD). But, as Preuschen? has
suggested, the real reckoning for Solomon has got into the
next line, and we should read


Salomonis. lib. V. ver. VII. CCCXX.
profetas maiores numero IIII.

If this restoration be correct, we should have the Cheltenham
list in evidence for five books of Solomon, but without any clue
to the identification of the five books, or any means of compari-
son with the stichometry of the Psalms and Odes as given by
Nicephorus.

Now, that Preuschen is correct as regards the numbers may
be seen from the fact that the figure 7320 agrees with the count
which we find in Vulgate MSS? For here we have


Proverbs 1740 verses
Ecclesiastes 800 _,,
Canticles 280 a
Wisdom 1700 *


Ecclesiasticus 2800
Total 7320


This justifies Preuschen’s restoration, and shows that five
books of Solomon were reckoned amongst the Canonical and
deuterocanonical books, but the Psalms and Odes of Solomon

* Mommsen, Zur lateinischen Stichometrie in Hermes, Bd xxi. pp. 142—156.
Cf. Sanday in Studia Biblica, iii. pp. 217-303.

2 Preuschen, Axalecta, p. 138 ff. 3 Sanday, dc. p. 266.


THE ODES AND THE CANON 7


are not amongst the five. For our purposes, therefore, we may
dismiss the Cheltenham catalogue. The date of this catalogue
is soon after A.D. 359, and it is North African in origin: we may
say that at this date the Psalms of Solomon were not recognized
in Carthage. irs

The very same thing follows from the consideration of the
list of Canonical Scriptures contained in the Acts of the
Council of Carthage in 397, for the entry in the list of Canonical
Books,

Salomonis libri quinque

can hardly be referred to any other grouping than that which
we have already described. The tradition of the Church is
steady that there are five books of Solomon. Thus we find in
Innocentius, writing at the beginning of the fifth century,


‘prophetarum libri sexdecim, Salomonis libri quinque,
Psalterium!,


and in Cassiodorus, writing at the end of the fifth century?,


‘Psalterium librum unum; Salomonis libros quinque
z.¢. Proverbia, Sapientiam, Ecclesiasticum, Ecclesiasten,
Canticum Canticorum’;


and so in other places. Isidore, of Seville, in the early part of
the seventh century, divides the five Solomonic writings into
groups of three and two respectively, and explains that the two
which he detaches (Wisdom and Ecclesiasticus) were really the
works of Jesus the son of Sirach, but have been credited to
Solomon on the ground of style®:
‘Duo quoque illi egregii et sanctae institutionis libelli,
Sapientiam dico et alium qui vocatur Ecclesiasticus ;
qui dum dicantur a Jesu filio Sirach editi, tamen propter
quandam eloquii similitudinem Salomonis titulo sunt
praenotati.’

There are no further references that I know of to the
Psalms or Odes of Solomon in the lists of canonical books which
have come down to us, unless there should be a cryptic allusion
to them in the new book of Psalms written for Marcion, which
the Muratorian Canon condemns (Saec. ii.—iii.), or the yadpoi

1 Ad Exsuperium (Galland, B7d/. vol. viii. pp. 561 ff. ).


2 De instit. div. litt. c. xiv.
3 Isidore, De ordine libb. S. Script., .P.L \xxxiii. 155 ff.


8 INTRODUCTION


iSuwtexol which the Council of Laodicea (c. 360 A.D.) prohibits
from being used in the Church?. In the latter case we have the
opinion of John Zonaras in favour of the identification. But
Zonaras in the twelfth century was probably, like ourselves,
engaged in speculation. On the other hand, if we might describe
arpot iSi@rixoi as meaning Psalms of personal experience, the
term would exactly suit our collection of Odes.

Having now proved that we have the two books of Solomonic
Unetandas Psalms and Odes in substantially the same compass
and the Odes. that they were known to the ancient Stichometers,
we now pass on to consider what light is thrown on the matter
by actual quotations from the book of Odes which are extant.
We begin with a passage from Lactantius, which was first
noticed by the learned Whiston. In the Dzvine Institutes
(Bk iv. c. 12) we have the following passage:


‘Salomon ita dicit: Infirmatus est uterus Virginis et
accepit foetum et gravata est, et facta est in multa
miseratione mater virgo.’


And in the Epitome of the Divine Institutes the passage is
introduced by the words Apud Salomonen ita scriptum est; to
this quotation there was added in the MSS. of Lactantius the
words zz Ode undevigesimo® or in Psalmo undevigesimo or in
Psalmo vigesimo. These references to a 19th Psalm or Ode or
to a 20th Psalm betray a knowledge of the book from which the
quotation was taken: on turning to the 19th Ode in our col-
lection we find the very words quoted by Lactantius, the actual
Syriac text being as follows:


edlahss mot CNG
saga rails cvasaia
irate sts <hiahs cmc hama


1 Origen’s Canon, as contained in Euseb. H. Z. vi. 25, has an entry of three
Solomonic books, Proverbs, Ecclesiastes and Canticles ; with regard to this last he
says’ Acpua doudrwr, ob yap ws mapadauBdvovcl twes, "Acuara doudrwy. But this is
only an alternative title which Origen condemns ; it has no suggestion in it of other
Songs or Canticles. Origen is expressly enumerating the twenty-two books of the
Hebrew Canon. The alternative title for Canticles is actually found in the Synopsis
of Chrysostom, in John of Damascus (De fide orthodoxa iv. 17) and elsewhere.

2 Authentick Records, i. 155.

* So in the Cambridge MS. Gg. 4. 24; but in the MS. Kk. 4. 17 of the same
University the reference is wanting.


LACTANTIUS AND THE ODES 9


_ The only discordance is in the first word of the passage,
which is certainly wrong in the Latin’, and very difficult to
interpret in the Syriac. It is clear, however, that Lactantius? is
working from a book of Odes arranged in the same order as
ours: if he had both-Psalms and Odes in his collection, then the
Odes preceded the Psalms. And further, since Lactantius
quotes in Latin, the book was extant in a Latin translation in
his time; for when Lactantius quotes Greek books, as in the
case of the Sibylline verses, he quotes in Greek and does not
offer a translation. From which it appears that by the begin-
ning of the fourth century the Odes of Solomon must have been
translated into Latin*.

Ryle and James in their edition of the eighteen Psalms of
Solomon drew attention, following Whiston, to this passage of
Lactantius, and made the correct inference from it that there
must have been more Solomonic matter at one time accessible
to Christian scholars than the eighteen Psalms. And since the
Ode quoted by Lactantius is undoubtedly Christian, they sug-
gest that the original collection of Psalms of Solomon was
fitted with an Appendix of Odes of Solomon, the added matter
being approximately equal in length to the original collection,
and either Christian or marked by distinctly Christian inter-
polations. So far they were undoubtedly right, as our MS.
incontestably shows. Only our book presents the matter of the
Appendix in a different light: here it is the Odes that have the
first place and the Psalms that are appended ; and possibly this
was also the case with Lactantius’ book of Solomon. We shall
show, presently, that there is reason to believe that the two
books came together in both orders, in different lines of tradition,
and that there was current not only a book of Odes and Psalms
but also a book of Psalms and Odes‘.


1 I am inclined to believe it is simply a mistake for ‘insinuatus.’ Just above
Lactantius says, ‘Descendens itaque de caelo sanctus ille spiritus dei sanctam virginem
cujus utero se znsinuaret elegit.’

2 It is possible that these references to the number of the Psalm may be glosses on
the original text: in that case not Lactantius, but at least two early scribes of
Lactantius, had the book in the order in which we read it.

3 We shall show later that there is some probability that Lactantius has been
influenced by our fourth Ode in a passage of Dzv. Just. iv. 27.

4 Note that the five apocryphal Psalms published by Wright from the Syriac in
Proc. S. Bibl. Arch. for 1887 have nothing to do with our collection,


O. S. 2


IO INTRODUCTION


In the MSS. of Lactantius there is some fluctuation between
the numbers 19 and 20 for the quoted Psalm: an error of this
kind is quite natural; one has only to miss a Psalm in enumerat-
ing or drop a number in counting. If a special motive for the
mistake were to be sought, I should look for it in the Psalm
itself, which is very abrupt and discontinuous at the point where
Lactantius begins to quote. Can it be that two Psalms have
been joined at this point? If so, the fluctuation in the number-
ing would be easily explained. It is not, however, a point of
any great importance.

And now let us pass on to a more interesting question, the
= ied: existence of extracts from the Odes of Solomon in
the Pistis that curious Gnostic book, preserved in the Coptic
Sophia. ;

(or more exactly, Thebaic) language, and known
as the Pistzs Sophia. These extracts will be important, not
only because they give us, in the form of a version, a good deal
of matter that coincides with what we have recovered from the
Syriac, but because they present this matter at an earlier time
than that of Lactantius, from whom our first quotation was made,
and the writer who made these quotations in the latter part of
the third century was not only quoting from the Odes of Solomon,
but from those Odes as forming a part of his accepted Biblical
text. We shall endeavour to make these points clear, and also
to show that in the Biblical text from which the writer quoted
the Odes of Solomon were preceded by the Psalms of Solomon.
If we can establish these points, the antiquity of the Odes will
be made out, for it is on the one hand clear that they are
traditional companions of the Psalms of Solomon for a con-
siderable length of time and on the other hand it is quite
improbable that a book written, say, as late as the end of the
second century, should be a part of the accepted Egyptian
canon in the latter part of the third century. To get into the
canon at all, in any of the great centres of Christian life, a
book must have a measure of antiquity on its side: those
books which secured such canonicity, Clement’s Fpzst/e, or
Barnabas’ fzstle or the Shepherd of Hermas, obtained their
position by the presumption of antiquity, and even then were
not easily rooted in the positions that they acquired, as the history
of the Canon will show. Let us, then, try to establish the points
to which we have referred above: and first with regard to the


THE ODES AND THE PISTIS SOPHIA II


date of the Pzstis Sophia from which the extracts have been
made.

The best investigation into the Pistis Sophia is the one
made by Harnack in Bd vii. of his Texte u. Untersuchungen
in 1891. His treatise is divided into five sections: (i) the
relation of the Pzstis Sophia to the N.T.; (ii) the relation of the
Pistis Sophia to the O.T.; (iii) the biblical exegesis of the
author ; (iv) its general Christian and catholic elements; and
(v) a discussion of the character, origin, time and place of
production of the work in question. Under this last head
Harnack comes to the conclusion that the book is of Egyptian
origin, and that it was written in the second half of the third
century ; that its Gnosticism is Ophite in character, and betrays
an origin in a Syrian rather than an Egyptian school ; #z., it is
an imported Gnosticism developed on Egyptian soil, and that
the actual school from which it emanated can be detected from
allusions made by Epiphanius in his treatise on Heresies. He
tells us of certain Gnostics who had a Gospel according to
Philip, from which he makes a quotation which is quite in the
manner of the Pzstzs Sophia, in which Philip appears as the
principal scribe of the discourses; they had also zz¢er alia, books
called the Longer and Shorter Questions of Mary: and.as a
large part of the Pistis Sophia is taken up with questions
addressed to Jesus by Mary Magdalene and her women friends,
it is natural to regard at least a part of the Pzstzs Sophia (as we
call it) as coinciding with the books spoken of by Epiphanius.
But since Epiphanius gives us an extract from the Longer
Questions which cannot be identified with the Pistis Sophia
(it is in fact, to judge from the extract, an obscene book, though
it has many points of contact with the P2szzs Sophia, which
definitely contradicts its obscenity), we are led to the conclusion
that the Pistis Sophia is identical, either wholly or in part, with
the Shorter Questions of Mary.

In discussing these Gnostic heretics, Epiphanius tells us that
in his early youth he came under their influence in Egypt, and
that he was mercifully preserved from entanglement with them.
He read their books, understood the sense of them, and then,
like the virtuous Joseph from the house of Potiphar, he made
his escape from their seductions and denounced the sect to the


12 INTRODUCTION


bishops of the province, and had the heretics expelled from the
city in which he had met them. (See Epiphanius, Haer. 26,
¢, 17, 18.)

We thus succeed in locating in Egypt a-group, or rather two
related groups of heretics, who may be described as Ophites or
as Sethites (Epiphanius uses several names to describe the
same groups); to one of these bands of Egyptian heretics the
Pistis Sophia may be referred: and we thus get a fairly accurate
idea of the place, time and character of the people to whom the
book must be referred.

It must not be supposed that all of Harnack’s arguments

under these heads are valid. For instance on
arias p. 101 he shows that the Gnostic writer uses an
Pees Egyptian calendar, for he makes Jesus to be trans-

figured before His disciples on the 15th of the
month Tybi, when the moon is full; this suggests the use of
an Egyptian calendar: and then he goes on to say that Egypt
is also betrayed by the fact that the book quotes the Gnostic
Odes of Solomon, which are probably of Egyptian origin, and
allude to the inundation of the Nile. It is instructive to enquire
how the Odes of Solomon came to be suspected of Gnosticism,
and of references to Egyptian events.

Amongst the passages quoted by the Coptic writer from the
Odes of Solomon there is one which can be identified at once
with the sixth Ode in our collection; it describes a great over-
flow or inundation of the water of life, which has for its first
objective point, if not its actual point of departure, the Temple
at Jerusalem, and which flows out over all lands, bringing healing
and strength.

The Psalm is a very beautiful one, and thoroughly Christian.
But because it happens to describe the breaking out of the
waters by the Greek word dzéppoa, which the Coptic has care-
fully transliterated, and because this is a favourite word in the
Pistis Sophia to describe a Gnostic Emanation, it has been
assumed that the Ode was Gnostic and that the illustration of
the efflux was borrowed from the rising waters of the Nile.
In support of this it may be urged that the waters were fought
by a professional class of water-restrainers, and that those who
drank of them were, according to the Coptic, a people who lived


THE ODES NOT GNOSTIC 13


on the dry sand. It might, therefore, be maintained that this
language suited Egypt better than Palestine. It is difficult,
however, to see how Jerusalem comes in, if the scenery of the
Ode is Egyptian, and it would have been better to express the
matter more cautiously, as was done by Ryle and James in
their first attempt on the problem of the Odes. Their lan-
guage was as follows!: ‘Ode iii. (Ze. the third of the quoted
Coptic Odes) is also Christian, and the employment of the term
aToppova seems to stamp it as Gnostic. But we cannot see that
there is anything unmistakably Gnostic in the doctrine. The
imagery employed is that of Ezek. xlvii., and of our Lord’s
words concerning the living water: and the thing described
appears to be the preaching of the Gospel, which no human
effort can avail to hinder, and which brings life and health to
a thirsty heathen world. If our theory of these Odes is correct,
we have here a hymn of the second century at latest, and one
filled with Johannine phraseology and ideas.’

Thus far Ryle and James; and I think we must say that
their judgment is a sound one. There is no reason to take
a7oppova in a Gnostic sense, nor do the remaining Psalms of
our collection encourage the belief in a Gnostic origin: they are
as Gnostic as the New Testament, no more and no less. Of
course I do not mean that the author of the Pzstzs Sophia will
take this colourless view of amoppova. His business is to write
a book dealing with Gnostic philosophy, and with the Effluxes
and Emanations that cause the different strata of the spiritual
world: so he will naturally employ the word azéppoca in his own
sense, and will build a castle of cloudy words upon it. But we
have no reason to follow him in any such architecture nor even to
accept his foundation. Consequently we do not regard Harnack’s
case as made out with regard to the Gnostic character of the
Odes of Solomon. If Gnostics could write such beautiful praises
of God as we have in our recovered volume, we can only say
‘Would God all the Lord’s people were Gnostics!’ But this
they never were nor ever can be in the Valentinian, or Ophite
or Sethian sense. With this deduction from the argument,
Harnack’s general inferences from the Ode which we have been
discussing are so just that we are tempted to examine his
analysis a little more closely.


1 Lc. p. 160.


14 INTRODUCTION


Let us, in view of the importance of the matters at issue,
pete set down a translation of the sixth Ode as it stands
eee in Syriac, and see what Harnack says by way of

interpretation.

‘As the hand moves over the harp, and the’ strings speak,
so speaks in my members the Spirit of the Lord, and I speak
by his love. For he destroys everything foreign, and every-
thing that is bitter: thus it was from the beginning and will be
to the end, that nothing should be His adversary, and nothing
should stand up against Him. The Lord has multiplied the
knowledge of Himself, and is zealous that those things should
be known, which by His Grace have been given to us. And
the praise of His name He gave us: our spirits praise His holy
Spirit.

‘For there went forth a stream and became a river great and —
broad: it flooded and broke up everything, and it brought
[water] to the Temple: and the restrainers of the children of
men were not able to restrain it, nor the arts of those whose
business it is to restrain waters: for it spread over the face of
the whole earth and filled everything; and all the thirsty upon
earth were given to drink of it: and thirst was relieved and
quenched: for from the Most High was the draught given.
Blessed then are the ministers of that draught who are entrusted
with that water of His: they have assuaged the dry lips and
the will that had fainted they have raised up: and souls that
were near departing they have caught back from death; limbs
that had fallen they straightened and set up: they gave
strength for their coming (?) and light to their eyes: for
every one knew them in the Lord and they lived by the water
of life for ever. Hallelujah.’

The first thing that we notice when we transcribe the Ode is
that the passage in the Pzstzs Sophia is only an extract ; nearly
half of the Ode has been neglected. Consequently the word
amoppota, which is supposed to be the key to the character of
the Psalm, is not in its opening sentence at all, but has been
caught up by the Gnostic writer out of the middle of it. It is
certainly not the key-word. The Psalmist (or Odist) is telling
in very beautiful language the power of the Lord and the scope
of His Gospel. There is nothing Gnostic about this living


1 Cf 1 Cor: il. 12,


THE ODES NOT GNOSTIC 15


water: there is not, even, anything Ecclesiastic about it, though
Harnack wished to interpret it of the water of Baptism: one
might as well say the fourth chapter of John’s Gospel was Gnostic
and that when the Lord promised the Samaritan woman the water
of life, he wanted to baptise her! I submit that the interpretation
of the Ode is affected (i) by regarding it in its entirety, (ii) by
regarding it in connexion with the main body of the Odes: and
that when this is done, the supposed Gnosticism of the Ode
vanishes away. Harnack, in fact, did not positively commit
himself on the point, and the greater part of his judgment is
valid: thus on page 43 he says:

‘Das Lied ist ohne Zweifel christlichen Ursprungs und
a ee damit ist auch die christliche Herkunft der vier
pomitte. ibrigen Oden, als zu einer Sammlung gehdrig,

; erwiesen. [I should not go quite so far, nor quite
so fast as that.] Ferner weist die Ode auf Agypten: denn
offenbar hat der Verfasser das Bild der grossen Fluth von der
Uberschwemmung des Nils genommen, der bis iiber die Hauser
steigt, und das durstige Wiistenland trankt. [This, as I have
said, is extremely doubtful: Harnack tries to make it easier by
suggesting that vads should be corrected to Xaos, which would
get rid of the Temple at Jerusalem, but it is not a necessary
emendation. The Temple is, as we shall see elsewhere, very
much in the field of view of the Odists.] Endlich scheint mir
auch der gnostiche Ursprung sehr wahrscheinlich, wenn auch
nicht sicher. [Here Harnack is wisely hesitant.]’

Again on page 45 Harnack sums up the case for the five
Odes incorporated in the Pzstzs Sophia: (i) that the composer
found them in his collection of Old Testament writings ;
(ii) that they are of Gnostic origin: but he adds at once that
the Gnostic character does not stand out clearly, and that the
Christian piety of the Ode is powerfully expressed and not
discoloured by Gnostic language: a statement which is much
strengthened when we read the Ode in its entirety and not
merely the part excerpted in the Pzstzs Sophia.

Further Harnack admits (p. 46) that if the Odes are Gnostic,
their Gnosticism is separated by a deep gulf from that of the
Pistis Sophia; which is certainly a just statement: and that, since
at the time of the composition of the Pzstis Sophia the Odes
must have been of considerable antiquity, we may perhaps refer


16 INTRODUCTION


them to the first half of the second century. With this I have
little fault to find; only I suggest that they may be 50 years
earlier than Harnack’s upper limit!

In order to understand more clearly what the writer of the
nh te Pistis Sophia has been doing with the matter that
Odes in the he has borrowed from the Odes of Solomon, we
SS Sey amidst try to get a better understanding of the
Gnostic book itself. At first sight this is a very repellent task,
for the book appears to be mere useless jargon. Harnack
evidently thought as much when he first began to study it, for
he says:

‘In der That kann man kaum etwas Verwirrteres und
Ermiidenderes lesen als diese mit den Ausgeburten der gnosti-
chen Phantasie bedeckten Blatter, die bei flichtigerem Studium
zum Zwecke der Verbreitung des systematischen Blédsinns ~
geschrieben zu sein scheinen.’

The impression that the writer is busied meh the propaga-
tion of systematic imbecility is certainly the result of a cursory
or preliminary study; but there is method in the madness and
meaning in the aberration, and after a while one begins to pick
up threads of continuity and to see what the writer is aiming at.
And then the underlying Christianity begins to assert itself
through its Gnostic superincumbent weight. Let us see if we
can get at the writer’s argument.

Jesus is sitting with His disciples, male and female, on the
Mount of Olives. It is the twelfth year after the Resurrection; for
eleven years Jesus has been teaching His disciples the mysteries
of the Kingdom of God: at the end of that time He has ascended
to the place of the Prime Mystery (which is the Gnostic expres-
sion for the Supreme God); this ascension took place while
they were sitting with Him on the Mount of Olives. He was
suddenly transfigured before them. A Light-Power, or Glory of
the Supreme Being, descends from the twenty-fourth or highest

1 The same arguments are repeated by Harnack in his Chronologie der altchrist.
Literatur, ii. 193, where he discusses the date of the Pist’s Sophia and the related
Gnostic writings in the Codex Brucianus. Here again he dates the Pés¢ds Sophia in
the second half of the third century, following the lines of his previous investigation.
He remarks again on the use of the Odes of Solomon as an ancient book ranking
with the Old Testament, but says they are of Gnostic origin: ‘Die fiinf Oden
Salomos, die das Buch neben den alt-testamentlichen Psalmen zitiert, sind selbst


gnostichen Ursprungs, und werden doch wie alten Urkunden behandelt. Wir haben
hier also einen Gnostizismus, der iiber einem alteren auferbaut ist.’


THE ODES AND THE PISTIS SOPHIA 17


mystery and surrounds Jesus with splendour. The disciples
were amazed and terrified at the sight. While they gazed on
Him, Jesus ascended into Heaven. After a while Jesus, out of
compassion for their fears, for they thought the end of all things
was at hand, descended again and appeared to the disciples.
He begins to teach them further the secrets of the Kingdom.
He explains to them their own miraculous births, the miraculous
birth of John the Baptist and His own incarnation. He tells
them the story of His ascent through the various heavens and
the orders of spiritual beings, ‘thrones, dominations, princedoms,
virtues, powers. They proceed to interrogate Him on various
points. The company consists of Peter, John, Andrew, Philip,
Thomas, Matthew, James, Bartholomew and Simon the Kanaan-
ite: Mary the Magdalene and Mary the Mother of Jesus, Martha
and Salome are all mentioned. The chief place is given to the
enquiring women, especially to Mary Magdalene, the lowest place
to Simon Peter. Between Mary Magdalene and Peter there is
something like a feud. Peter complains that the women talk
too much and that the men don’t get a chance: and Mary
complains that Peter hates our sex and wants to suppress us.
Jesus mediates gently between them: advises Mary to make
place for the brethren; but when the dispute breaks out again,
Jesus definitely takes the side of the women, and Peter is sup-
pressed. The meaning of this is that there has been a conflict
over the place of women in the ministry of the Church: it is
even possible that the hostility of Peter may imply the attitude
of the Roman Church towards the prophesying woman of the
early centuries. At all events there has been an acute situation
created, which has found its reflection in the Gnostic circles in
which our book was produced.

Jesus answers a number of enquiries as to the worlds through
The sorrows Which He has passed, and then we come to what is
PE Sopkis: the kernel of the first part of the book, the account
of the sorrows of Sophia, or, as she is called in the book, Pzstzs
Sophia. Jesus relates how He found Sophia sitting below the

1 The crisis in the feud between the men and women will be found in P.S. 161.
«Progressa Maria dixit: mi domine, meus vous est voepos omni tempore, ut progrediar
omni vice: dicam solutionem verborum, quae dixit, dA\a timeo Petrum, quod daeider
mihi et odit nostrum genus. Haec de quum locuta esset, dixit ei. primum pvoryptor


unumquemque qui impletus fuerit tvevuare luminis, ut progressus proferat solutionem
horum, quae dico, nullus ckwAvoe.’


Ous: 3


18 INTRODUCTION


thirteenth Aeon. She was mourning over her inability to rise
further. Her path was blocked by fearful forms, named mpoBorai
advdaSods or Emanations of the Self-willed. They and the rulers
of the upper regions prohibit her advance and ascent. One of
them had the face of a lion, half flame and half darkness. They
chase poor Sophia back into Chaos. But in the midst of her
affliction, she sees Jesus passing by, and to Him she addresses
a series of Repentances and Hymns. Jesus relates these suc-
cessively to His disciples. The method of the composition
must now be carefully studied: we shall find the key in the
lock.

Sophia makes her penitence, let us say, from one of the
canonical Psalms. But in using this, she carefully alters every
possible term in a Gnostic sense: instead of God, she says
Prime Mystery or Light of Truth; instead of my adversaries, ©
she says the Emanations of the Self-willed; by a series of
Gnostic Tar.  SUbStitutions of this kind she turns the Psalm
gums in the into a Gnostic Targum, in which you can only
pists Sophia. detect the original by the expressions which re-
main unaltered and -by the general tenor of the confession.
When Jesus has reported to the disciples what Sophia has said,
He turns to the disciples and asks, ‘Who knows what Sophia
said?’ It is a game of guessing. Mary Magdalene or some
other of the company springs forward, begs permission to speak,
and then says, ‘This is what your Light-Power (the Light-Power
is a substitute for the Divine Name) prophesied through David
in the 69th Psalm, or whatever the portion of Scripture may be
that has been selected for disguise. Jesus gives an approbation
and a blessing to the successful guesser. Sometimes, to make
the matter still clearer, the Gnostic Targum is gone over again in
detail with the text and explained sentence by sentence, so that
we have the matter treated three times over: viz. the LXX. text,
the Gnostic Targum, and the detailed commentary upon the
text with the Targum. It is of the utmost importance that the
method of the composition should be clearly grasped: if, this is
understood, the major part of the Pistis Sophia will become
intelligible. To make this quite clear we will transcribe a short
passage: here is an extract from one of the first prayers of
repentance which Sophia utters’:


' P. .S. ed. Schwartze and Petermann, p. 50 of MS.


GNOSTIC TARGUMS ON THE ODES 19


Serva me propter apxyovras, qui oderunt me: nam tu sects
afflictionem meam et cruciatum meum, et fractam meam vim,
quam abstulerunt a me. Sw coram te qui plantarunt me in
haec mala omnia. Xpq iis kata voluntatem tuam. Vis mea
prospicit e medio yaovs atque e medio tenebrarum. L-xspectavi
meam ovfvyov, ut veniens pugnaret pro me, et haud venit.
Atque exspectaveram, ut veniens daret mihi robur, e¢ haud
vepert cam. Et quum quaererem lucem, dederunt mihi cali-
ginem: et cum quaererem meam vim, dederunt mihi ormv.
Nunc igitur, lumen luminum, caliginem et Any duxerunt super
me mpo8orat avOadouvs. Sunto tis insidiae et involvunto eas;
et vetribuas iis, ut cravdadtfwouv, ne veniant in To7ov sui
av@adovs. Manento in tenebris, ne videant lucem. Contemplantor
xaos omni tempore, neve intuentor in altitudinem. Adduc in eas
suam vindictam et apprehendito eas tuum tudicium.

Probably without the aid of the Virgin Mary, who in this
case is the successful guesser, one could have identified the
following verses of the 68th (96th) Psalm:

19. évexa TOV éxOpav pov pdcai pe*

20. ov yap ywooKels TOV dvELdicpoV jou’ Kal THY aloyovnV
fou Kal THY évTpoTHY pov. évavTiov cov TavTes ot OriBovTés
He.

21. dvedsopov TpocedoKnnoev 1 uy mou Kal_Tadaltrwpiay *
Kal wméucwva cudAdAUTOUMEVOY, Kal ovX UmHApEEV, Kal Trapa-
KadovvTa Kal ovx evpov.

22. Kat édowxay eis TO BpOwa mov YoArnV, Kal eis THY Siapav
prov érroticdy pe d€os.

23. yevnOntw  tTpdmela avTav évotiov avTov eis Trayioa:
Kal eis avTaTrobocw Kai eis oKaVdanov.

24. aKoticOntwaay of dpOarpol avTav Tod pr) BrErreLV* Kal
TOV V@TOV avTaY Sia TaVTOS TUYyKapApoV.

25. éxyeov én’ avtovs THY dpyiv cov. Kat 0 Oupos Ths opyhs
gov KaTanaBoe avtous.

Now if we go over the Penitence of Sophia, with these texts
from the Psalms, we shall easily pick up out of the Penitence the
disjecta membra Psalmistae.

I have italicized some of the words, which are either
unchanged or almost unchanged. The rest, as I have said,
is Gnostic Targum. _

The importance of the underlying equivalence of the


20 INTRODUCTION


Targum and text is evident. We are dealing with Biblical
matter; Psalm after Psalm is treated in this way, and some-
times short passages of the Gospels are similarly treated. It is
not even necessary that the discourse be limited to a single
Targum. Sometimes two or three occur of short passages.
For us, however, the important thing is that the Odes of
Solomon are treated just like the Canonical Psalms, with which
they stood in an equal honour in the Bible of the author of the
Pistis Sophia, This position of unassailed honour and un-
doubted confidence marks the antiquity and the prestige of
the Odes of Solomon. And as there is no such thing as a
Gnostic Bible, these Odes cannot be Gnostic Odes, as was at
first surmised.

It is clear, moreover, that in editing the portions of the Odes
which occur in the Pzstis Sophia we shall have to edit the
Targums as well as the texts. We must print the excerpted
matter in double form, and in cases where there is a detailed ~
commentary, in triple form. And in this way we can finally
make a Coptic apparatus to the Syriac text of the Odes.

One curious result will be arrived at almost immediately.
Gena The second of the passages taken from the Odes
first Ode of Solomon by the author of the Pzstzs Sophia is
een definitely stated to be from the nineteenth Qde.
It does not find any place in our collection, Neither does it
agree, except in its opening sentence, with its Targum. On
the other hand the Targum does agree with the fifth of the
Syriac Odes. It is easy to see what has happened. The
Targum was made on the fifth Ode, but when the author
came to transcribe the Ode on which he had been commenting,
he took out of his Psalter another Ode with a similar opening.
This must, then, be one of the missing Odes at the beginning of
our book. And since it is numbered '19, it will be the first of
our collection, and will have followed directly on the eighteen
extant Psalms of Solomon. The Gnostic author had, therefore,
both the Psalms and the Odes in his Bible; and the Psalms
stood before the Odes, and not as in our MS. and perhaps in
Lactantius’ Bible, after the Odes: this is an important dis-
covery, and the study of the text with its Targum has led to
the recovery of part of the missing matter at the beginning of
our MS.


RECOVERY OF FIRST ODE 21


__ To make this clear I transcribe the Targum side by side
with the Syriac text, in order to show their coincidence:


The Hymn of Sophia as contained

in the Gnostic Targum of

the Pistis Sophia, ‘1 25, ITO.

Incepit tuveve vis «idcxpuvys
luminis, quae in codig. ‘Ypvevovca
de meae vi luminis, quae est corona
eius capiti, cecinit vuvov de dicens,
Lumen est corona meo capiti et
haud ero absque ea, ut ne privent
me mpoBodra avOadovs et, guum
motae fuerint dda omnes, ego 8« haud
movebor, et quum perterint meae
tAae omnes, ut maneant in chao,
guas videbunt mpoBorar avOadovs,
ego Se haud peribo, quod \umen est
“mecum, atque etiam ego ero cum
lumine.


The Syriac Odes of Solomon,
Ode 5, ad fin.

For my hope is upon the Lord,
and I will not fear: and because
the Lord is my salvation, I will
not fear: and he is a garland on
my head, and I shall not be moved:
Even if everything should be
shaken, I stand firm, and if all
things visible should perish, I
shall not die: because the Lord
is with me and I am with Him.

Hallelujah.


Remembering the method of composition of the Targum,
there can be no doubt that it is the fifth Ode which is being


commented on.


It is equally clear that the Ode which is set as


the text to the Targum and which is introduced as the 19th
Ode of Solomon does not coincide with it.


It runs as follows!?:


Dominus super caput meum sicut corona, neque ero absque


eo (ea).
germinare fecit.


Plexerunt mihi coronam veritatis, et ramos in me
Nam non similis est coronae aridae quae. non


germinat; sed vivis super caput meum, et germinasti super
caput meum:: fructus tui pleni et perfecti sunt, pleni salute tua.

Clearly this is not the right Psalm, except as regards the
opening sentence. Probably the mistake arose in the first
instance with the Targumist who copied a line out of a wrong
Ode, and thus made the way for copying the whole Ode from a
wrong place. The inference is that we have recovered the
missing first Ode.

It is not uncommon in our book of Odes for the openings to
be similar or to be repeated. The most striking example will
be the short 27th Ode, which appears again almost bodily at the


1 Schmidt’s rendering in Texte u. Untersuch. vii. 2. 37.


Ze, INTRODUCTION


beginning of the 42nd Ode. The coincidences are important,
as suggesting the same hand at different parts of the book.

As our object is not so much the interpretation of the Pzstzs
Sophia, as the elucidation of the Syriac Odes, we
must collect the matter which is quoted from the
Odes in the Pzstzs Sop/ia, in order that the texts may
be compared. It will be convenient to do this in one place, rather
than under the heading of the separate Psalms that may be
quoted. For the text of the Odes, we have two translations,
that of Schwartze-Petermann, and that which is emended from
the original translation (Woide-Miinter) by Schmidt, and is
given in Harnack’s Terte u. Untersuchungen, Bd vii. We may
quote these as S.-P. and W.-M.-S. We print these translations
side by side. It is to be observed that Schmidt did not revise
the Gnostic Targums when correcting the text of the Odes for —
Harnack, no doubt because their importance was not sufficiently
recognized. But he went on to publish a complete translation
into German of the Pzstis Sophia, as well as of other Gnostic
books preserved in Coptic. We shall have to refer to this
enlarged and emended translation, but I do not think it
necessary to give the German text of the quoted and com-
mented Odes in full?


The Odes in
the Pistis
Sophia col-
lected.


ODE 1.
The text is introduced as follows:


Respondens é¢ Maria, mater Jesu, dixit: Mi domine, tua vis
luminis érpopntevce de his verbis olim per Salomonem in eius
decima nona ode et dixit:


S.-P. p.-116.

Dominus super meum caput
sicut corona, neque ero absque eo.
Plexerunt mihi coronam éAyGeuas.
Et fecit tuos xAadovs germinare
in me, quod non tulit coronam
aridam, haud germinantem, éAAa
vivis super meum caput et proger-
minas super me: tui «capo pleni
sunt et perfecti, pleni sunt tua
salute.


W.-M.-S. pp. 37, 38:
Dominus super caput meum
sicut corona, neque ero absque eo
(ea). Plexerunt mihi coronam
veritatis, et ramos tuos in me
germinare fecit. Nam non similis


est coronae aridae, quae non ger-


minat, sed vivis super caput meum,
et germinasti super caput meum:
fructus tui pleni et perfecti sunt,
pleni salute tua.


* There has also been a French edition by Amélineau, which has been employed


by Mead in his English edition of the Pistis Sophia.


But as Amélineau is


THE ODES IN THE PISTIS SOPHIA 23


ODE 5.
The Gnostic Targum on the closing verses of this Ode has
been already given: I repeat it for completeness below: the
Targum on the rest of the Ode, and the text.corresponding to it,


are also found in the Pzstis Sophia, as indicated. The text is
introduced as follows :


Factum de est, quum Jesus finisset dicere haec verba suis
pa@nras, progressa Salome dixit: mi domine, mea vis avayxates
me ad dicendam solutionem verborum, quae dixit muotis codua.


Tua vis érrpo¢nteveev olim per Salomonem dicens:


S.-P. p. 114.

Manifestabo me tibi, domine,
quod tu es meus deus. Nesine me,
domine, amplius, quod tu es mea
éAms : dedisti mihi meum ius gratis
[P tuum iudicium] et servor a te:
labuntor persequentes me, neve
vidento me. Nubes caliginis ob-
tegito eorum oculos atque nebula
depos, esto caligo iis, neve vidento
diem, ut ne prehendant me: esto
impotens eorum consilium, et quae
deliberarunt, veniuntoin eos: medi-
tati sunt consilium neve esto [P
et non factum est] iis. vicerunt
[P et vicerunt] eos validi, et quae
pararunt collapsa sunt infra eos.
Est mea éAmis in domino, et haud
timebo, quod tu es meus deus,
meus cwrnp.


W.-M.-S. p. 37-

Gratias tibi agam, quia tu es
deus meus. Ne relinquas me,
domine, quia tu es spes mea.
Dedisti mihi iudicium gratis, et
liberatus sum a te. Cadant per-
sequentes me, et non videant me.
Nubes fumi tegat oculos eorum et
nebula aeris obtenebret eos, neve
videant diem, ne prehendant me:
consilium eorum fiat inefficax, et
quae consultarunt, veniant super
eos : meditati sunt consilium, neve
succedat illis. Et vicerunt eos
potentes’, et quae praeparaverant
malitiose, descenderunt in eos.
Spes mea est in domino, et non
timebo, quia tu es deus meus,
servator meus.


ODE 5.
The Gnostic Targum. S.-P. p. 113.


Cecinit tuvoyv et clamavit sursum ad me dicens: tuvevow
sursum ad te, lumen, quod volo venire ad te, tuvevow t1b2, lumen,


nam tu es meus servator.


Ne sine me in chao, libera me, lumen


impossible in his paleography, and, I believe, an unsafe guide in other respects, I do


not refer to him.


I am not engaged upon the Pest7s Sophia, except indirectly.


Schmidt’s German edition appeared in 1905 under the auspices of the Prussian
Academy of Sciences, with the title Koptzsch-Gnostische Schriften.
1 Schmidt, ‘Und sie sind besiegt, obwohl sie machtig sind.’


24. INTRODUCTION


altitudinis, xam tu es, cui buvevw. Misisti mihi tuum lumen a te
et servasti me. Duxisti me in tozrous superiores chaus. Colla-
buntor [P delabuntor] igitur in to7rovs inferiores chaus mpoBodae
av0as0ous, quae persequuntur me, neve veniunto in Tomous superiores
ut videant me. Et magna caligo obtegtto eas, et venito ts obscura
caligo; neve vidento me in lumine tuae vis, quam misisti mihi ad
servandam me: wt ne prehendant iterum me; et corum consilium
quod excogitarunt ad auferendam meam vim, ve fiat dlis, et sicut
[P cata modum, quo] dixerunt mihi, auferre meum lumen mihi,
aufer suum quoque loco mei; et dixerunt auferre meum lumen
totum, neque poterant auferre id, quod tua vis luminis est mecum,
propterea quod consilium ceperunt sine tuo statuto, lumen,
propter hoc non potuere auferre lumen meum, quod émiotevoa
lumini, zon timebo, et lumen est meus servator, neque timebo.


SEP ats 120;


‘Yuvevovoa Se meae vi luminis, quae est corona eius capiti,
cecinit duvoy de dicens; Lumen est corona meo capiti, et haud ero
absque ea‘, ut ne privent me rpoBorar avOadous et, guum motae
Juerint trar omnes, ego Se haud movebor, et quum perierint meae
brat omnes, ut maneant in chao, guas videbunt mpoBorat avOadovs,
ego be haud peribo, quod lumen est mecum, atque etiam ego ero cum
lumine.


ODE 6.


The text of this Ode is introduced as follows:

Progressus Petrus dixit: mi domine, de solutione verborum
quae dixisti, tua vis luminis éspopntevce olim per Solomonem
in eius @dacs.


Sian age W.-M.-S. Zc. p. 38.

Egressa amoppo.w facta est Egressa est emanatio et facta
magnum flumen latum: attraxit est magnum flumen dilatatum.
eos omnes, et conversam super Attraxit eos omnes et conversa est
templum haud potuerunt capere -super templum*% Non potuerunt
in clausis et in locis aedificatis, eam capere in locis munitis et
neque potuerunt capere eam texvar aedificatis: neque potuerunt eam
capientium illos. Duxerunt eam capere artes eorum qui §‘inter-
super terram totam, atque pre- cipiunt (aquas). Duxerunt? eam
hendit eos omnes. Biberunt ver- super omnem terram, et ipsa


1 Schmidt, ‘und nicht werde ich von ihm weichen.’
2 Schmidt, ‘gegen den Tempel.’ 3 Schmidt, ‘er wurde...gefiihrt.’


THE ODES IN THE PISTIS SOPHIA 25


santes super arenam  aridam.
Eorum sitis soluta est et ex-
stincta, quum dedissent iis potum
ab excelso. Maxapuoe sunt diaxovor
potus illius, quibus concredita est
aqua domini. Converterunt labia
arida, sumserunt vigorem animi
[P in me] hi, qui erant soluti:
prehenderunt (if. confirmarunt)
Wuxas, eicientes halitum, ut ne
morerentur: erexerunt pedy col-
lapsa: dederunt robur suae zap-
pyovg, atque dederunt lucem suis
oculis, quod isti omnes cognovere


comprehendit eos omnes. — Bib-
erunt qui habitabant in arena
arida: sitis eorum soluta est et
exstincta, cum daretur illis potus
ab Altissimo. Beati sunt diaconi
potus illius, quibus credita est
aqua domini. Converterunt labia,
quae arida erant, accipiebant
gaudium cordis, qui soluti erant :
comprehenderant animas, halitum
inmittentes, ne morerentur. Re-
stituernnt membra quae cecide-
rant, dederunt’ robur parrhesiae
eorum, et Jucem oculis eorum.


se in domino, atque servati sunt
aqua vitae usque ad aeternum.


Nam omnes illi sé cognoverunt in
domino et salvati sunt per aquam
vitae aeternam’.


ODE 6.


The Gnostic Targum. S.-P. pp. 128—130.


Ego igitur et altera vis, exiens a me, necnon ;uyyn quam
accepi a Sabaothe aya@@, venerunt ducentes se invicem, factae
sunt atoppova una luminis, existens lumen quam maxime.
Vocavi Gabrielerh desuper ab aiwovw atque etiam Michaelem
per xeAevow mei patris, primi puotnptov introspicientis, dedi
eis dmoppovay luminis, feci eos descendere in chaos, ut Bon@wor
mote. copia et uti ferrent vires luminis, quas abstulerunt ab ea
mpoBorat avOadovs, ut auferrent eas ab illis et darent motes
copia ; et tempore, quo duxerunt dzoppovay luminis desuper in
chaos, resplenduit quam maxime in chao toto et dzlatata est in
eius [P eorum] rovos omnibus; et quum vidissent magnum
lumen a@zoppoas illius mpoBoras avGadovs, timuerunt super se
invicem, atque doppova illa extraxit iis vires omnes luminis,
quas abstulerunt a motes cogua neque étokpnoav mpoBorau
avladous prehendere amoppovav \uminis illius in chao tenebrarum,
neque prehenderunt cam texvyn avOadovs dominantis in mpoPodas.
Et Gabriel et Michael attulerunt dzroppovav luminis in corpus vAns
mistews codias et iniecerunt in eam lumina eius omnia, quam
[P quae] abstulerunt ab ea, atque accepit lumen totum copa


1 Schmidt, ‘ Wasser ewigen Lebens.’


26 INTRODUCTION


irxns [P+eius]: atque etiam acceperunt lumen eius vires
omnes, quae in ea, hae quae acceperunt suum lumen et cessarunt
indigere luminis; nam acceperunt suum lumen, quod abstulerunt
ab iis, propterea quod dederunt lumen tis a me. Et Michael et
Gabriel, qui Svjxovnoay mihi, duxerunt azoppovav luminis in
chaos daturam iis pvornpea luminis: és concredita est arroppota
luminis: hanc, quam dedi iis, intuli in chaos. Et Michael et
Gabriel non sumserunt quidquam luminis sibi in luminibus
Tiurtews codias, quae abstulerunt a mpoBorars avOadovs. Factum
igitur est, quum azroppova luminis intulisset in moti cogiay suas
vires omnes luminis, quas abstulerunt [P abstulit s. abstulerat]
a mpoBorats av@adous facta est lux tota, atque etiam vires
luminis, quae sunt in mores coda, quas haud abstulerunt
mpoBorat avOadous, hilares redditae sunt iterum et impletae
sunt luminis, et lumina, quae iniecerunt in wuotiv coguar, vivifi-
carunt cwpa eius vAgs, in qua nullum lumen, haec quae peritura
est aut haec quae perit, et constituerunt eius vires omnes, guae
evant solvendae, et dederunt iis vim luminis. Factae sunt iterum,
sicut erant ab initio. Atque etiam exaltatae sunt in aic@noeu
Juminis, et vires omnes luminis coguas cognovere se invicem per
atoppovav luminis, e¢ servatae sunt a lumine aroppotas alius.

i have indicated some of the points where the Ode crops
out: the broad stream of water has been replaced by an dzroppova
of light, and this makes it difficult to follow the sequence of the
Ode, satisfied thirst having been replaced by illumination. But
the detailed commentary which follows will make it all clear.


ODE.
The Detailed Commentary. S.-P. 131—135.


Peter explains the meaning of a prophecy which the wes
luminis had formerly made through Solomon.

Audi igitur, mi domine, proferam verbum in tappno.a cata
modum quo tua vis émpodyntevoe per Solomonem: “ aoppova
egressa facta est magnum flumen latum,” quod est droppora
luminis dilatata est in chao, in tozrovs omnibus zpoSorwy adba-
dous ; atque verbum iterum, quod tua vis dixit per Salomonen,
“attraxit eos omnes, duxit eos super templum,’ quod est hoc,
attraxit vires omnes luminis a mpoBodXais avOadovs quas abstule-


1 Schmidt, ‘und sie nahmen sich eine Lichtkraft u.s.w.’


— 7 we a ee


=


EME CUES IX Tee se worse 27


ant i (A) meee outing, eet eas in rue extn dite


_ tijess cama ju, Dause mye Inn wtipens” yuck toe ext:


Mois wb inwys tau Sat Te ter snggua WER
“LI Li super Sori oms wuewa, 2 tuples 1e8 gmeMts cyte
ne oe: queen dt A Nite Guxiesent cats (F con suger
Avtidiesunt ay <2 wyitonws wtsinys cone sheninit (or Geto
Ot lute, cps Gas tia. tepe vetoes, ope Cert “terest
CE AWHLS De WIC Oe,” YS EL, mE lumen Mee seo
Witiia th Kite Stipe Gur, men dtaherut (te dstalerzaty
Mis Ge athens), ce vefoun euch Gat “ie crud
Mts 0 2 cast yuo nse et: Gus Wes coro
igen bunnis, gu dyssherunt, (F ve. aor desalereot!]
gut tetirae Wit. tases ot) ts wae (P + wx, gust
astvlenuat ab te. type torus were onto (Y= spore) ous
Ct tee ts, “tetera ts potas db caidas cpus tose tt
dhesunt iusen te <x oroypng ‘nasi, quae exit 2 me, prices
marrnpig, 2 wan ston, quo Cx tia VIS: ~ paangunn sat
Suman potus Mis; wast ett wef oven, gusts Ceti: Wiha
Ast, tumayysurres, Caxrvat broppuns linis i Gass,
Ant tan Genus eo sues. Lnhnt iis pasragun Somat
Sis Atti, yuthus comet iia 8h cmuygann ‘anna, aout: ih
Mt tin, Gu CH tua va: “vericrund lin wide gut
tc: Cbd 4 Witte tasd smmserunt ih € buono rus-
tips oS, yank. nye wate  putihass abbabavs, btn, ener wot
ait mit sofas ; wiyue terun vetoum, qu Katt: “axeperunt
wipicat te mt yt swt seth; «aod et roc: Hae Vers omnes
wisi Sits, yas tush drterent apsioras ababnors, ride
practise sunt tigane & waylese Iumsine 2 sue ito Inte,
qed theses €2 in Mas, Et vertu, qucd tus vis Kix:
“wil ficat wil ywygs Cities bitue, wh ne morcrcntss S ous hoe
ot: quuss ietisscnt Suenina i aioTIN cofuay Vivihicarunt cope
Gus Dhays 2 Guo Iweime ue dostdicce pins, hoc, quod at
pottuwum. Atgue terum verbun, quod tua vis Gxt: ~“ox-
Sit tt pike quae Mlopse sum, wal ut ne collabereaters gus
4 Sf @ é ea

9 Sails, “os ache. ite Sheaidt, Sites gesornen woe.


- _
“ a
ae OF 2
<< AA =


28 INTRODUCTION


hoc est: quum intulissent in eam eius lumina, constituere (22.
erexere) eius vires omnes, quae erant dissolvendae ; atque etiam
kata modum, quo tua vis luminis dixit: “dederunt robur earum
mappnowa”; quod hoc est: receperunt iterum illorum lumen
atque factae sunt, sicut fuerunt prius: atque etiam verbum,
quod dixit “dederunt lumen eorum oculis,’ quod hoc est: ac-
ceperunt aioc@now in lumine et cognoverunt aoppoav luminis,
quod pertineat ad altitudinem. Atque etiam verbum, quod
dixit : “zst2 omnes cognoverunt se in domino,’ quod hoc est: vires
omnes miotews codias cognovere se invicem per doppolay
luminis: atque etiam verbum, quod dixit, “servatd sunt aqua vitae
usque ad aeternum,’ quod hoc est: servatae sunt per amroppotav
luminis totius: atque verbum, quod dixit: “attraxit eos omnes
atoppova luminis et attraxit cos super templum?,” quod est: quum
atroppota luminis accepisset lumina omniamuotews cogias,et quum
eripuisset ca a mpoBorats avfasdous, iniecit ea in muotiv coduay,
atque conversa est, exiit a chao, ?ascendit in perfectionem [P vel
“super te”] quod tu es templum*, MHaec est solutio verborum
omnium, quae dixit tua vis luminis per oden Salomonis. Factum
igitur, quum primum pvotnpiov audisset haec verba, quae dixit
Petrus, locutum est ei: edye, waxapsos Petre, haec est solutio
verborum quae dixerunt [ze. dicta sunt].


d


ODE 22.


This Ode is introduced as follows:


Respondens de primum pvornpsov dixit: ceXevo tibi, Mathaee,
ut proferas solutionem dyvov, quem dixit muctis cogia. Respon-
dens Se Mathaeus dixit: de solutione tuvov quem dixit wiatis
cogia tua vis luminis éspodnteveev olim in @8n Salomonis :


S.-P. pp. 155—156.

Qui deduxit me in locis ex-
celsis super caelum, et duxit me
sursum in locis quae in funda-
mento inferiori: qui.abstulit ibi
haec, quae in medio, et docuit me
ea, qui dispersit meos inimicos, et
meos aytidicovs, qui dedit mihi


W.-M.-S. p. 39.

Is, qui duxit me deorsum e
locis altis, coelestibus, et duxit me
in loca, quae in fundamento in-
feriori. Is, qui abstulit ibi haec,


quae in medio sunt, et docuit me


ea. Is, qui dispersit inimicos
meos et adversarios meos. Is,


1 Schmidt, ‘Wasser ewigen Lebens.’
2 Schmidt, ‘riss alles an sich, und zog (?) es itiber den Tempel.’
3-3 Schmidt, ‘und kam iiber Dich, der Du der Tempel bist.’


THE ODES IN THE PISTIS SOPHIA 29


efovovav super vincula ad solyenda
ea, qui érarage , serpentem cum
septem capitibus meis manibus.
Constituit me super eius radicem,
ut evellerem eius oveppa atque tu
eras mecum, adiuvans me, in omni
loco circumdedit me tuum nomen.
Dextra tua  perdidit venenum
huius, qui dicit malum. Tua
manus stravit viam tuis mucrors.
Redemisti eos e radois et trans-
tulisti eos e mediis cadaveribus.
Sumsisti ossa mortua, induisti iis
cwpna et qui haud movent se,
dedisti eis évepyeay vitae. Via
tua facta est perniciei expers,
atque tua facie duxisti [P tua
facies. Duxisti] tuum aiwva in
perniciem, ut dissolverentur omnes
et fierent novi, et uti tuum lumen
sit duplicatum [P fundamentum]


qui dedit mihi potestatem super
vincula ad solvenda ea. Is qui
percussit serpentem septem capita
habentem manibus meis: con-
stituit me super radicem eius, ut
exstinguerem semen eius. Et tu
eras mecum, adsistens mihi. Omni
in loco circumdedit me nomen
tuum. Dextra tua perdidit vene-
num male loquentis. Manus tua
planavit viam fidelibus tuis. Liber-
asti eos e sepulcris et transtulisti
eos e medio cadaverum. Accepis-
ti ossa mortua, induisti lis corpus,
et, qui non movent se, dedisti eis
évepyevav vitae. Via tua facta est
expers perniciel, et etiam facies
tua: duxisti aeona tuum in per-
niciem’ ut dissolverentur omnes
et renovarentur. *Et ut lumen
tuum duplicaretur iis omnibus,’


iis omnibus. Construxisti tuam  superstruxisti divitias tuas super
opulentiam per eos et facti sunt eos, effecti sunt habitaculum
habitaculum sanctum. sanctum *.

ODE 22.


The Gnostic Targum. S.-P. 153—155.


Pergens de adhuc miotis codia, buvevoe rursum ad me
dicens: “tpvevm sursum ad te hoc. Tuo statuto eduxistt me ab
atwove. excelso, qui supra caelum, et deduxisti me ad tompus in-
Jeriores, atque etiam tuo statuto liberasti me e rozross inferioribus,
et per te abstulisti brn ibi, quae est in meis viribus luminis, et vidi
eam, atque Zu dispersisti a me mpoBoras avOaébovs, quae affligebant
me et erant zzzmicz mihi, atque dedisti mihi éEovorav ut solverer
e vinculis mpoBokwv Adamae, et érarakas serpentem basiliscum
cum septem capitibus. Proiecisti [P eiecisti] eum mes manibus,
et constituistt me super eius UdrAnv. Perdidisti eam, ut ne oepya
suum surgeret inde ab hoc tempore, atque fu es qui eras mecum,
dans mihi vim in his omnibus, et tuum lumen ciycumdedit me in

1 Schmidt, ‘Du hast Deinen Aeon iiber das Verderben gefiihrt.’


2-2 Schmidt, ‘und Dein Licht ihnen allen Fundament sei.’
® Schmidt, ‘Du hast Deinen Reichtum auf sie gebaut.’


30 INTRODUCTION


totrous omnibus, et per te reddidisti rpoBoras omnes avOadous
impotentes, quod abstulisti vim sui luminis ab eis e¢ direxiste
meam viam ad educendam me ex chao, et transtulisti me e tenebris
drukats et abstulisti meas vires omnes ab iis, 'quarum lumen
abstulere?. Iniecisti in eas lumen purum, et meis pereoww omni-
bus, quibus nullum lumen, dedisti lumen purum ex lumine
altitudinis, et direxisti viam iis, et lumen tuae faciei factwim mihi
est vita, pernicie vacua. Duxisti me sursum super chaos, locum
(rovrov) chaus et perniciei, ut dissolverentur omnes vrNat, quae in
eo, quae sunt in Tome illo, e¢ utz fiant novae meae vires omnes
tuo lumine, et ¢ tum lumen sit in 11s omnibus. Posuisti lumen
tuae amoppoas in me. Facta sum lumen purgatum.” Hic
iterum est secundus vyvos quem dixit miatis codua.


ODE 22.
The detailed Commentary.


Matthew then goes on to show in detail the parallelism
between the Ode of Solomon and the hymn of the Pzstzs Sophia.


S.-P. pp. 156—160.

Haec, igitur, mi domine, est solutio duvov quem dixit aiotis
copia. Audi igitur, dicam eam ingenue. Verbum quod tua vis
dixit per Solomonem: “guz deduxit me e locis excelsis quae super
caelum, atque etiam duxisti me sursum tn locis, quae in funda-
mento infertort,” ipsum est verbum, quod dixit muotis coda:
vpvev@ sursum ad te hoc. Tuo statuto duxisti me ex hoc aiwvi
excelsg, qui super caelum, et duxisti me in tozrouvs inferiores,
atque etiam servasti me tuo statuto, duxisti me sursum in to7ross
inferioribus. Et verbum, quod tua vis dixit per Solomonem:
“gut abstulit 1bt haec, quae in medio, et docuit me ea,’ ipsum est
verbum, quod dixit wuotis copia: atque etiam per te abstulisti?
vAnv quae in media mea vi, et vidi eam: atque etiam verbum,
quod tua vis dixit per Solomonem: “ guz daspersit meos tnimicos
et meos avtd.Kovs,” ipsum est verbum, quod dixit miertis codua:
et tu es, qui dispersisti a me mpoBoras omnes avOadovs quae
affligebant me, et quae erant inimici mihi; et verbum, quod
tua vis dixit: “gut dedit mihi suam codiav super vincula ad


1-1 Schmidt, ‘deren Licht genommen war.’
? Schmidt, ‘ hast...reinigen lassen.’


THE ODES IN THE PISTIS SOPHIA 31


solvenda ea”: ipsum est verbum, quod dixit muaris codia; [+ et P]
dedit mihi suam codguvayv ut solverer e vinculis rpo8odoy illarum ;
et verbum, quod tua vis dixit : “gui ératake serpentem cum septem
capitibus mets manibus et constituit me super eius radicem," ut
evellerem eius omepua,’ ipsum est verbum, quod dixit muotis
cogia: et ématatas serpentem cum septem capitibus meis mani-
bus et constituisti me super eius dAnv, perdidisti eum, ut ne eius
omepya surgeret inde ab hac hora; et verbum, quod tua vis
dixit: “et tu mecum eras, adiuvabas me,’ ipsum est verbum,
quod dixit muotis cogia: et tu eras mecum, dans vim mihi in
his omnibus ; et verbum quod tua vis dixit: “et tuum nomen
circumdedit me in omni loco,’ ipsum est verbum, quod dixit
mots copia: et tuum lumen circumdedit me in eorum locis
omnibus; et verbum, quod tua vis dixit: “et tua dextera
perdidit venenum huius qui dicit malum,” ipsum est verbum,
quod dixit muctis cogia; et per te factae sunt impotentes
tmpoBorat avladous, quod abstulisti lumen vis suae ab iis; et
verbum, quod tua vis dixit: “twa manus stravit viam tuts
motos, ipsum est verbum, quod dixit miatis copia; direxisti
meam viam ad educendam me e chao, quod émuctevoa tibi ;
et verbum, quod tua vis dixit: “vedemisti eos e tapows et
transtulisti eos e mediis cadaveribus,’ ipsum est verbum, quod
dixit mctis copia: et redemisti me e chao et transtulisti me
e tenebris tAckais quae ipsae sunt mpoforar caliginis, quae in
chao, e quibus suum lumen abstulisti; et verbum, quod tua vis
dixit : “sumsisti ossa mortua, induisti eis cwpa, et hi, qui non
movent se, dedisti tis évepryevav vitae,” ipsum est verbum, quod dixit
mots codia: et abstulisti meas vires omnes, in quibus nullum
lumen, et [om. et P] indidisti eis lumen purum, et meis pereouy
omnibus, in quibus nullum lumen movetur, dedisti eis lumen vitae
tua altitudine; et verbum quod tua vis dixit: “¢ua via facta est
pernicie vacua et tua facies,’ ipsum est verbum, quod dixit muetes
cogua; et direxisti viam [+tuam P] mihi, et lumen tuae faciei facta’
mihi est vita, pernicie vacua; et verbum, quod tua vis dixit:
“duxisti tuum aiwva in perniciem, ut dissolverentur ut fierent novi
omnes,’ ipsum est verbum, quod dixit mortis cogua; *duxisti me,
tuam vim, in chaos et in perniciem?, ut dissolverentur vAas omnes,


1 factum P.
2-2 Schmidt, ‘Du hast mich, Deine Kraft, iiber das Chaos hinaufgefiihrt und iiber


das Verderben.’


32 INTRODUCTION


quae sunt [+ sursum P] in ro7q@ illo, et ut fierent novae meae vires
omnes lumine; et verbum, quod tua vis dixit, “et ¢uum lumen
duplicatum [P. fundamentum] est’ iis omnibus” : ipsum est verbum,
quod dixit muotis copia: et tuum lumen est in iis omnibus: et
verbum quod tua vis luminis dixit per Solomonem: “poswzste
2tuam opulentiam? in eo, et factus est habitaculum sanctum” : ipsum
est verbum, quod dixit muctis codva: firmasti lumen tuae azop-
potas super me, et facta sum lumen purum. Haec igitur, domine
mi, est solutio duvov, quem dixit muotis codua.


ODE 25.
The text of this Ode is introduced as follows:


Respondens 6¢ primum puotnpsov dixit Thomae: xereve tibi,
ut proferas solutionem duvov, quem tpvevoey sursum ad me
musts aodia. Respondens d¢ Thomas dixit: mi domine, de
bev quem dixit meates quod liberata est a chao: tua vis luminis
5) : . * 46 . ° ’
erpopyntevoev olim per Salomonem, filium Davidis, in eius @dazs :


S.-i pe 150:

Servatus sum e vinculis. Fugi
ad te, domine, quod fuisti mihi
dextra servans me, atque servans me
et adiuvans me, ékwAvoas pugnan-
tes contra me, neque apparuerunt,
quod tua facies mecum erat ser-
vans me tua xapirr. Affecta sum
ignominia coram multitudine, atque
proiecerunt me. Fui sicut plum-
bum coram iis. Facta mihi est
vis a te adiuvans me, quod posu-
isti lucernas ad dexteram mihi et
ad sinistram mihi, ut ne quidquam
circa me esset luminis expers.
"Eoxeragas me sub umbra tuae
misericordiae et fui super vestes
pelliceas. Tua dextra exaltavit
me et abstulisti infirmitatem a me:
Factus sum validus tua veritate,
purgatus tua dicaoouvvy. Remoti
sunt a me pugnantes contra me,


-adiuvans me.


W.-M.-S. Zc. p. 39.

Liberatus sum e vinculis. Fugi
ad te, domine: quia fuisti mihi ad
dextram, salvans me. [Et salvans
me] et adiuvans me, prohibuisti
adversarios meos, neque se mani-
festaverunt, quod tua facies mecum
est, liberans me gratia tua. Accepi
contumeliam coram multitudine,
et elecerunt me: fuisicut plumbum
coram iis. Fuit mihi robur per te
Quia posuisti lu-
cernas ad dextram meam et ad
sinistram meam, ne neutra parte
luminis expers essem. Texisti me
sub umbra gratiae tuae et *superavi
vestimenta pellicea®, Dextra tua
exaltavit me, et abstulisti infirmi-
tatem porro a me. Fui corro-
boratus veritate tua, purgatus
iustitia tua. Procul remoti sunt
a me adversarii mei, et iustificatus


1 Schmidt, ‘ist ihnen allen Fundament (geworden).’


2-2 Schmidt, ‘ Deinen Reichthum.’ .


3-3 Schmidt, ‘ich wurde tiberhoben den aus Fellen gemachten Kleidern.’


THE ODES IN THE PISTIS SOPHIA 33


et iustificatus sum tua xpyororntt, sum iustitia tua, quia requies tua
nam tua quies est ad aeternum est in saecula saeculorum.
aeternitatis.


ODE 25:
The Gnostic Ti argum. (S.-P. 148—149.)


Pergens de iterum in sermone primum pvotnpsov dixit
pa@nras: Factum est, quum duxissem muctw cogvay sursum in
chao, exclamavit iterum dicens : “ Servata sum in chao, et soluta e
vincults caliginis. Vent ad te, lumen, quod fuisti lumen ex omni
parte mihi servans me, et adiuvans me. Et rpoBoras avOad0ovus quae
pugnant contra me, éxwdrvoas tuo lumine, e¢ haud potuerunt
adpropinguare miht, quod erat tuum lumen mecum, et servabat me
tua [P me in tua] aropporg luminis, quoniam yap smpoBorau
[P+av@aédovs] affligentes me abstulerunt meam vim a me,
iniecerunt me in orcos (chaos Plur.) nullum lumen habentem.
Fut sicut try gravis coram iis. Atque post haec vis admroppo.as
ventt mihi a te servans me. Splenduit ad sinistram mihi et ad
dextram mihi, et circumdabat me, ex omni parte mihi erat, ut ne
ullum jepos quo fui, essem [P esset] sine lumine, et obtexit [P
obtextsti| me lumine tuae aroppoas et purgasti in me omnes
meas vAas malas, et fut super meas VAas omnes propter tuum
lumen tet tuam azroppovay luminis. Ista exvaltavit me’ et abstulit
me tpoBorats avOadous OrA1Bovaeats me. Atque fui confisa tuo
lumini, nec non lumen purum [P lumini puro] tuae azroppovas,
et remotae sunt a me mpoBorat avOabovs quae affligebant me, et
facta sum lux tua magna vi, quod tu servas omni tempore.


ODE 25.
The detailed Commentary.


Thomas explains that he will interpret openly the words
of the Pistis Sophia, and proceeds to speak év qrappnoia, as
follows:

S.-P. 150—153.

Verbum igitur, quod tua vis luminis dixit per Salomonem:
“ Servatus sum e vinculis. Fugi ad te, domine,” ipsum est
verbum, quod dixit muats copia: soluta sum e vinculis caliginis,


1-1 Schmidt, ‘ und Dein Lichtabfluss ist es, der mich erhdht...hat.’
OLS. 5


34 : INTRODUCTION


veni ad te, domine [P lux]: et verbum, quod dixit tua vis:
“ Fyisti mihi dextra servans me et adiuvans me”, ipsum iterum
est verbum, quod dixit ruotus cogia: factus es lumen ex omni
parte mihi et adiuvans me: et verbum quod tua vis luminis
dixit “éxkwrvoas pugnantes contra me, et haud apparuerunt”
ipsum est verbum, quod dixit wvates copia: et rpoBoras avbadous
quae pugnant contra me, éxwAveas tuo lumine, et haud potuerunt
adpropinquare mihi”: et verbum, quod tua vis dixit, “guod twa
facies mecum erat servans me tua xapits,” ipsum est verbum,
quod dixit musts codia: quod tuum lumen erat mecum ser-
vans me tua dzoppoa luminis: et verbum quod tua vis dixit,
“\contemnor eorum multitudine et protecerunt me,’ ipsum est
verbum, quod dixit muotis cogia; afflixerunt me mpoBforau
av@aéovs et abstulerunt meam vim a me, et contemta sum
coram iis et proiecerunt me in chao expertem luminis. Et
verbum, quod tua vis dixit: “fu secut plumbum coram its,”
ipsum est verbum, quod dixit meatus cogia: quum abstulissent
mea lumina a me, facta sum sicut vA gravis coram iis. Et
verbum, [+ rursus P] quod tua vis dixit, “et facta mthi est vis a
te adiuvans me,” ipsum [+quoque P] est verbum, quod dixit mates
codia: et post haec vis luminis venit mihi a te servans me”: et ver-
bum quod tua vis dixit: “posuzste lucernas ad dextram mthi et
ad sinistram mihi, ut ne quidguam circa me esset luminis expers,”
ipsum est verbum, quod dixit muotis codsa, Tua vis luminis
[P +splenduit] ad dextram mihi et ad sinistram mihi et circum-
dans me ab omni parte, ut ne quidquam circa me esset luminis
expers: et verbum quod tua vis dixit: “éoxerracas me umbra
tuae misericordiae,’ ipsum iterum est verbum, quod dixit muotis
copva: et obtexisti me lumine tuae aoppovas; et verbum quod tua
vis dixit: “*fuz super vestes pelliceas*,’ ipsum iterum est verbum,
quod dixit muatis copia: et eiecerunt a meas vAas omnes malas,
et *elevavi eas* tua lumine; et verbum, quod tua vis dixit per
Salomonem: “tua dextra exaltavit me et abstulit infirmitatem a
me,’ ipsum est verbum, quod dixit muotis cogva : et tua amoppo.a
luminis haec est, quae exaltavit me tuo lumine, et abstulit a me
mpoBoras avdadovs OABovceas-me; et verbum, quod tua vis
dixit: “factus sum validus tua veritate et purgatus tua ducavocvyn,”


“Tt Schmidt, ‘ich wurde verachtet im Angesichte vieler und hinausgestossen.’
2-2 Schmidt, ‘ich wurde iiberhoben der aus Fellen gemachten Kleidern.’
3-3 Schmidt, ‘ich erhob mich iiber sie.’


ORIGINAL LANGUAGE OF THE ODES 36


ipsum est verbum, quod dixit miotis codia: facta sum valida
tuo lumine et sum lumen purgatum tua doppoia: et verbum,
quod tua vis dixit: “vemoti sunt a me pugnantes mecum,’ ipsum
est verbum, quod dixit muetis cogea: remotae sunt a me mpo-
Borat adfadous, hae quae affligebant me, et verbum quod tua
vis luminis dixit per Salomonem: “et custificatus sum tua xpn-
atotntt, guod tua guies est ad aeternum aeternitatis”: ipsum est
verbum, quod dixit miotis copia: servata sum tua ypnotoTnTe
quod tu servas unumquemque. Haec igitur, o mi domine, est
solutio tota wetavovas quam dixit muotis codia quum servata
esset in chao et soluta est e vinculis caliginis.

These, then, are the extracts and comments on the Odes of
Solomon which are contained in the Pistis Sophia.

We will now examine what light they throw on the original
pe form of the text, and we will also enquire as to the
language of language in which the book was originally circulated.
the Odes. “ . :

We begin by comparing the Odes quoted in the
Coptic book with their Syriac equivalents.

The presumption is that the Coptic is a direct translation
from the Greek: the number of Greek words that are embedded
in the Coptic at once suggests this, and it is natural to carry
back these Greek words into the text from which the Coptic is
derived.

A little caution is necessary, for it will be remembered that
Greek words are often used in the Coptic to redeem the
language from its linguistic poverty, and it will also be found
that the Coptic does not always directly transliterate a Greek
word: it sometimes translates by another and more familiar
Greek word. But with some reserve of this kind, the Greek
elements in the text are sufficient evidence that the book was
taken from the Greek to the Egyptian language; and we know
that the Psalms and Odes had a wide circulation amongst
Greek speaking peoples. The Péstzs Sophia, ix which the Odes
are imbedded, dates from the third century, and the author of
the Pistis had, as we have shown, the Odes bound up with his
Canonical Psalter; at the time intimated there was no Coptic
[Thebaic} Bible from which the extracts could have been made;
so we may be sure the Odes were taken from a Greek Bible,
and, with almost equal certainty, that the Pzstis Sophia itself
was a Greek book, Detailed examination leads to the same
result.


36 INTRODUCTION


Suppose we examine the parts of the sixth Ode which we
have preserved both in Coptic and in Syriac: this is the Ode
in which Harnack thought we could detect both Gnostic and
Egyptian elements, the supposed Gnostic feature being the use
of the word déppo.a, and the supposed Egyptian feature being
a sudden inundation, which sweeps over a whole country and
defies professional attempts to regulate it. Near the end of the
Ode is a beautiful passage describing the way in which the
ministers of the water of life have assuaged the thirst of the
world: they have given ease to dry lips, strength to paralysed
wills and weak limbs. Then the writer adds


“Members which had fallen they made straight and set
up. They gave strength for their coming and light to
their eyes.”


There is something awkward about this word ‘coming’: and
when we turn to the Coptic we find


“Restituerunt membra quae ceciderant. Dederunt
robur trappynova eorum et lucem oculis eorum.”


This is almost as unintelligible as the former ; what does he
mean by ‘strength for freedom of speech’? However we have
found out that the Greek behind the Coptic read 7H rrappncia
avtov; and it is not difficult to infer that the Syriac has
rendered a Greek text 77 mapovoia a’tév. Now which of
these is correct? Neither of them makes good sense. But if
we write


Th Tapéce, avTov OF TH Tapadvoet avTav
“they gave them strength for their paralysis,”


we can make the passage intelligible; and explain both the
Coptic and Syriac readings*.

This suggests that the Syriac as well as the Coptic has a
Greek text behind it. We shall examine this point more in
detail presently.

We are not limited to the occurrence of the single Greek
word trappnoia (whether it be the right word or only a corrup-
tion); nor to the favourite word dmdppova which the Pistis
Sophia has caught at, on account of its Gnostic associations.


1 The key to the passage is Is. xxxv. 3=Heb. xii. 12; loxboute.cybedre
mapareduuéva (Is.), and cf. ra wapadehupéva yévara dvopOdoare (Heb.).


GREEK TEXT OF THE ODES hy)


The Syriac tells us that the flood could not be restrained by
the professional restrainers, nor by the arts of those who make
the management of floods their business. The Coptic text
tells us

haud potuerunt capere in clausis et in locis aedificatis, neque
potuerunt capere eam teyvae capientium illos.

Here the Syriac is somewhat at variance from the Coptic,
but it is clear that ‘capere’ stands for the Syriac ‘restrain,
and that teyvas is the Greek word for the Syriac ‘arts of the
restrainers.’

The Gnostic Targum has also worked in reyvas in the
following form:


neque €ToAunoar...... prehendere dzroppovav...... neque
prehenderunt eam reyvy......


Here ‘prehendo’ is the same as ‘capio,’ and stands for the
Syriac ‘restrain.’ Teyvas seems to come from the original
Greek. I should have said that érokwnoav came from the same
source, if it were not that the text and the comment have
‘potuerunt’ in harmony with the Syriac.

Another bit of the original Greek is picked up in the clause
which answers to the Syriac,


‘Blessed are the ministers of that draught.’


Here the Coptic gives us, Maxapsou sunt dcaxovor potus illius,
and the Comment, as well as the Targum, explains that the
ministers are Michael and Gabriel, of d:axovnaoaytes. So that
we can restore the words Maxdpuoi eiow of StdKovor ovror to the
Greek. And so in other cases.

But this raises the question whether the Greek is the last
stage. Were the Odes written in Greek? Or may we say, as
for the eighteen Psalms, that they were translated into Greek
from an original Hebrew? The possibility must at all events be
kept in mind. But we can only advance by slow stages. The
next step should be to confirm the suggestion that the Syriac
has been translated from a Greek base by discussing the case
for the eighteen Psalms.

Here we should naturally expect dependence on the Greek.

For it is now clearly made out, as Ryle and James
fepende onthe Have shown, that the original Hebrew of these
eo _ _ Psalms was done into Greek at a very early period.
For the Greek version of the 11th Psalm is used by the author


The Syriac of


38 INTRODUCTION


of the book of Baruch in his fifth chapter, and this chapter is
quoted at length by Irenaeus. So it would be unreasonable to
put the Greek of the eighteen Psalms later than the middle of
the first century, when it is employed by Baruch writing,
probably, not later than the end of the first century.

So the Greek of these Psalms is available for translation into
Syriac at a very early date; we have to determine from the
evidence before us whether it was so translated from the Greek.
Let us see whether the Syriac confirms any conjectures either
in Greek or in Hebrew that the editors have thought necessary
to the understanding or betterment of the text. It does not
confirm Hilgenfeld’s brilliant suggestion of dpiwy for dpéwy in
Ps. ii. 30: the Syriac has ‘mountains’ and agrees with the Greek
tradition. In Ps. ii. 20 Gebhardt’s emendation of catéoracev to
xateotrdaOn is confirmed by the Syriac mmAdhea, which is
rather a free translation. In Ps. v. 4 Gebhardt conjectures

ov yap AnWerai [Tis] cxIXA Tapa avdpos duvaTod
and the word added is confirmed by the Syriac, which adds
r-x.34> (a son of man, a man): but then the Copenhagen MS.
has oxddrAa a&vOpwros, and the Syriac might just as well be a
translation of this.

In Ps. viii. 3 Hilgenfeld’s emendation

| kai eitra [év] TH Kapdia jou
is not confirmed. by the Syriac, which follows the MSS. in
omitting év.

In Ps, x. 1 Fritzsche made a striking emendation to the first
couplet,

Maxkdpios avnp ob 6 Kiptos éuvncdn év eNEYUO,
Kal €KvKXKOOn amd 0d00 Trovnpas ev dott
by reading éxkwrAvOn for éxuveAwOn.

The Syriac confirms this conjecture, which Gebhardt has
discarded in favour of. a misunderstood Hebrew text. If this is
not a successful emendation on the part of a scribe, the Syriac
at this point takes precedence of the existing Greek texts: but
that does not mean that it is not dependent on a Greek text.

In Ps. xvi. 9 the Greek text


\ ” a a Uy
Ta Eepya TMV XELP@V [LOU KatevOuvov év TOT@ aou


is altered in the Syriac to évomidy cov which seems a better, as
well as an easier reading.


SYRIAC TEXT OF THE PSALMS 39


In Ps. xvii. 16 where Gebhardt has emended

[xaOes Kal ta €Ovn ev tats rédeo1] Tod aOévous advtov
for tovs Gods adtoy of Cod P the Syriac reads ‘the cities of
their gods’ with the rest of the Greek MSS.

In Ps. xvii. 23 Gebhardt emends

€ig TOV KaLpov Ov elXOU GU, 0 DeEds
for the current Greek
els TOV Katpov dv Eldes [tdes, ofdes, ofdas].

The Syriac has dur et, which answers most nearly to
eldes.

This is one of the places where Felix Perles found a trace of
the original Hebrew, which had been corrupted from ny’ to
ny, ze. from ‘thou hast appointed’ to ‘thou hast known.’
Most of the proposed emendations seem to me to be more
ingenious than necessary. The Syriac, at all events, does not
endorse them.

In Ps. xvii. 32 the Syriac renders év érionuw by durcly ,
which throws light on the same expression in Ps. ii. 6, where the
Syriac seems to have left the words untranslated, but there
Felix Perles conjectured that they stood for an original Hebrew


shy. The Syriac seems, while itself following the Greek in
Ps. xvii. 32, to support this restoration of Perles for the Hebrew
in Ps. ii. 6. 2

In Ps. xvii. 37 Gebhardt has added conjecturally the word
Raols in Kal moAXois [Aaois] ov cvvdFes éXmridas els Hu€pav TOdEmov.

The Syriac has ‘and he shall not hope in a multitude for the
day of war, and so does not favour the emendation. So far,
then, as these passages go, there is not much ground for taking
the Syriac outside the grouping of the Greek MSS., and erecting
it into a separate authority. There are one or two passages to
be considered in which the Syriac gives us either an independent
conjecture, or something nearer to the original text.

In Ps. i. 6 the difficult

Kal OUK HvEyKaV

ieetthe. of the MSS. is replaced by Ax2%e riz, and the
he sentence connected with the previous eizray by
omission of the intervening matter, so as to read


‘And they spake what they did not understand’;


40 INTRODUCTION


whether this was arrived at in the first instance by substituting
éyvwoxav for Hveycay is not quite clear: but the whole treatment
of the text is too drastic to allow us to believe that the Syriac is
the original. Another suggestion is that the Syriac translator
read «al ov« éyvev, and took it for a 3rd person plural instead
of a Ist person singular.

In Ps, ii. 29 the difficult


a a if a /
Tod eimely THY UTepnpaviay Tod dpaKovToOsS


appears in the Syriac as asmtoa\ which makes excellent sense,
from whatever quarter it is derived. Perles conjectures that the
original Greek was tazrewvovy: it is just conceivable that the
Syriac might stand for a translation of this.
In Ps. ii. 41 for
evNoyNTOs KUpLOS els TOV aldva évodtrLoy SovAWY avTOD
the Syriac has the equivalent of i706 ‘rév SovAwy avTod, and a
glance at the previous line of the Greek will show that évezruov has
been accidentally borrowed from there, so that we may replace
jir6 Tov On the faith of the Syriac, which at this point establishes
a better Greek text.
In Ps. iv. 25 for
Kal Tapwpytoav tov Oeov: Kal tapodEvvav
eEdpat avTovs ato THS Yhs
the Syriac reads
Kal Tapwpyioav Lata] Tov Oeov
kai mapwpylobn | deawdea | efapar Kré.

Here the translator seems to have taken a slight liberty
with his text, by translating the same word in two different
ways, unless we prefer the explanation that rapw£dvOn stood in
his copy, instead of trapwpyic6n.

In Ps, viii. 23 the clause


aT@decev ApyovTas avTa@v Kal Tata ocopov
év Bourn
has for its last words
ralsas Faads9% A\=a
‘because he is wise in counsel’;


it is, however, only a blunder in the Syriac text itself: read Aaa
for Aven and you have the equivalent of the Greek.


SYRIAC READINGS 41


The same thing has happened in Ps. x. 9, where the Syriac
reads
‘The salvation of the Lord is upon the house of Israel
for an eternal Kingdom’:


a very slight change restores wWhasalsa for dhaale and
gives us the Greek cwdpocdvnv as in Codd. H(R). This must,
in its turn, be corrected to ed¢poodvnv with Codd. J LC.

Here the Syriac follows a corrupt Greek text, and has itself
been corrupted. For more violent changes in the Syriac we
may take the following:

Ps. ti. 37

evAoyel’Te Tov Bedv, of hoBovpevor

TOV KUpLOV év emLoTHMN*

6TL TO Ed€oS KUplov él Tors hoBouvpévous
avuTov peta Kpiparos.

The Syriac reads €y oynpate for év éruotnun: but the
parallelism shows that the Greek is right, and perhaps the
Syriac =aamre should be corrected to rilaas,

In Ps. v. 8 for un Bapuvyns tiv xeipa cov ef nas the Syriac
has

rot) Lag iwahza wl


‘let not thy hand be delayed from us’ ;
which appears to answer to
pn Bpadivys thy xeipd cov ad’ npar,
the error being due to a false transcription of the Greek. For
the correctness of the Greek, we may compare Ps. Sol. ii. 24 and
the Biblical parallels cited by Ryle and James [Judg. i. 35:
iE Same. 6: Ps. xxx (xxxi)-2y
In the difficult passage Ps. xv. 8, 9
Mipos Kai poudaia Kai Oavatos amo Sixaiwy paxpar,
hevEovtas yap ws SiwKdpevor Tohémov aro olor,
the Syriac boldly says in the second clause, that
‘they shall flee as death flees away from life.’
Perles compares Lev. xxvi. 36
kat hevfovtar ws evyovtes amd ToAgmou
which suggests that do has dropped from our text, and gives
the original Hebrew.
O. S. 6


42 INTRODUCTION


‘The Syriac variation is very vivid, but I am afraid it is an
evasion of a difficult text: the parallelism would be spoilt by
saying that ‘death flees from the righteous, as death flees from
life” The Greek seems to be right as it stands, and to mean
‘they shall flee from the saints as fugitives of war [are wont
to flee].’

In Ps. xvii. 11 Gebhardt edits

ovK Hre€noev avTors O Oeds.
éEnpevynoev TO oTéppa avT@V
Kal ovK adjnxev avTav éva.
The Syriac has a series of imperatives, or of futures equivalent to
imperatives : so that we ought to have in the Greek, if that were
the original of the Syriac,
ovK édXenoets avTovs, 0 Geos.
érriaxewov [? é€epevvncov] TO oméppa avTor,
Kal ovk adynoes avtav eva,
and since the MSS. have édenoee and two of them have
é€epevvnoov we may, by the Syriac, bring the Greek into closer
agreement with what must have been its original form.

So far, then, our investigation has not taken us sensibly out
of range of the Greek MSS. There are one or two obscurities
still to be cleared up, but the above are the principal cases. Here
is one microscopic, but significant error. In Psalm v. 16 the
Syriac translator has definitely blundered over the word ov in

Kat ob éotly % édmis éri ce,

ov delcetar ev dopate.
Here he reads the first ov as a negative, and is obliged to
discard the second. Cod. R also reads ov« for the first ov.

We may, then, conclude that the Syriac translator of the
Psalms has worked from a Greek text; and we will presently
try to find out its nearest affinity amongst the existing MSS.

In one or two cases the translator makes very successful
paronomasiae in his translation, such as might almost deceive
the very elect into a belief that he had recovered a play on
words of the original Hebrew.

For example in Ps. xi. 6, 7,

ol Sptpo écxiacay avtois év Th mapode altar,
mav EvNov evwdias avéTetdev avTois 6 OEds.


RELATION OF SYRIAC TO GREEK 43
For the second line the Syriac reads
weal acl WET am ytd <a Jad


As it does not seem possible that «sss can be a direct
translation of avéretXév we are almost obliged to believe that
the writer has introduced a paronomasia: ‘every tree of sweet
breath God caused to breathe upon them. It cannot be
original, for as Perles points out, Baruch read évéresrev (cf.
Bar. v. 8, ray Evrov evdwSias 76 lopand mpootdyparc), and this
can only be a variant of dvérecdev.
Another similar case will be found in Ps. ix. 9


0 Tov éXenuoovynv Onaavpiver Cwiv
avT® Tapa Kupio,
which the Syriac renders by
col parte cies hous hao rasa tX am
ais hal


As this sare eda.m cannot be a Hebrew form of
speech, we are obliged to admit that the play on words is due
to the ingenuity of the translator.

Now let us see whether we can get a rough idea of the place


which the Syriac text of the Psalms of Solomon
Relation of


the Syriac occupies amongst the Greek MSS.
canals The edition of Ryle and James is based upon
a ai four MSS. of which the chief is the very beautiful


Copenhagen MS. But since the other three (at
Paris, Vienna and Moscow respectively) have been shown by
Gebhardt to be derived from the Copenhagen MS., the text of
Ryle and James is reduced to a single authority, for the other
three may be neglected.
To this MS. Gebhardt adds four more, one from the Vatican,
two from Mount Athos, and one from Monte Cassino. We have
thus eight MSS. as follows:


C=Codex Casanatensis 1908.

H =Codex Hauniensis 6: (the Copenhagen MS.).
J =Cod. 555 of the Monastery at Iveron.

L=a MS. in the Monastery of the Laura.


1 Zur Erklirung der Psalmen Salomos, p. 9.


44 INTRODUCTION


M=a Moscow MS.: Library of the Holy Synod 147.
P=Paris Gr. 2991 A.
R= Vatican Gr. 336.
V=Vienna: Theol. Gr. II.
The relations between these eight MSS. Gebhardt reduces
to the following scheme :


<a
9}


Here z is the archetype: y, x, w are uncial MSS., which make
connecting links between the existing texts, and v, # and # are
similar links in the shape of minuscule MSS.

The first thing we notice is that in numbering the Psalms,
H proceeds as follows:


Psal. Sol. 1=a’


oe aah 2= 8

Re ntase renee 3=... thus missing one in the count.
Ree Aas 4=9

satinastiaeene 5=0

te sera atee Ose

SAC aiaey = S~

Rete een Sie =

Hein tereness 9=0' thus missing a numeral:


after which the count is regular.

This error in the numbering of Ps. 5 has led its copy V astray,
which has no number by the first hand, but has a wrong
number & on the margin by a later hand.

Now turn to the Syriac MS.; we have


Psal. Sol. 1=Psalm 43 of the Syriac.


SER ies Bee ep SSAA a ee eee te

5 WIS 3= 2 4S ee

LAA DIA PRGA RERMRE W BP AST  yesorh S cnte
&c. = &c


all the numbers being now one in excess.


GROUPING OF MSS. OF PSALMS 45


It will be seen that the Syriac numeration has gone wrong
very nearly at the same place as Cod. H, and in correcting an
error in one direction, the scribe has made a continuous line
of errors in another direction. This suggests that Syr. and H
are not very widely temoved from one another. Now let us
examine some special readings.

In Ps. i. 3 we have


RL Syr. for ordi}
JH for mrodvy }°


In Ps. i. 4 we have
RJL Syr. against H (dcéA 60x).
In Ps. ii. 1 we have LH Syr. for caréBare
RJ for cee f


this suggests that the Syriac comes on the diagram somewhere
between + and w.
in Ps. 41: 22

ixdvecor, KUpte, TOD BapvverOat yelpa cov

emt “lepovcarnu év éerraywyn éOvav.
Here érraywy7 is clearly right, but some MSS. have araywy7:
the Syriac has it correctly: thus the MSS. divide RJ L and
Syr. against H.

In the same connexion it is somewhat perplexing to find
both R and Syr. in what seems to be a common error, reading
‘Israel’ for ‘Jerusalem.’ One would have expected the same
reading to turn up in J, but perhaps it was corrected by the.
scribe. If Gebhardt’s diagram is correct, it looks as if R and
Syr. might be the original reading and not an error at all.

In Ps. iv. 3 R and the Syriac are together in reading
dpapTorov against JLCH (apapriy).

In Ps, iv. 9 we have

JLCH Syr. (vopov peta d0rov)
against R (povov peta dovrov).

In Ps. viii. 21 the Syriac seems to involve

@ with R against ds of JLCH.

In Ps, viii. 22 Syr. and R are again together in reading éuiavev.

In Ps. xvi. 12 the Syriac omits a clause by homoioteleuton,
in company with L.


46 INTRODUCTION


In Ps. xvii. 8 the Syriac reads a\Aaypwaros with RJ L
against H (d\andaypartos).

In Ps. xvii. 23 the Syriac reads efdes with RJ L against H
and the rest.

These are the most striking of the non-singular readings of
the Syriac, and they show clearly that the version belongs to an
earlier strain of text than Cod. H, and that its place is with the
group R J L, being perhaps intermediate between J and L. The
singular readings and free translations on the part of the Syriac
give us no assistance in regard to the grouping of the MSS.,
and we must leave the matter in the approximate manner
explained above.

It must be clear from the foregoing that we cannot expect
to get any nearer to the original language of the Psalms by
means Of the Syriac. The original Hebrew must be sought in
the emendations to the Greek text made by Wellhausen, Geiger,
Ryle and James, and Perles.

Let us turn in the next place to the Odes, and see whether


flee ysies we can trace their linguistic history. Here we

feet a see have no Greek text extant, but we have the Coptic
€

from the text of certain Odes and there are Greek words

Greek.


embedded; we have also traces of a Latin version,
which we may assume, provisionally, to have been made from
the Greek ; and we have the Syriac version.

In Ode 6, v. 16, we have tried to explain the variation between
a Coptic=appnoia and a Syriac=crapovaia by reference to
a misread Greek word.

We can frequently detect Greek compounds in their awk-
ward Syriac substitutes; for example, in Ode 7, v. 26, ‘ excellent
beauty of the Lord’ is an attempt to render the Greek peyado-
mpémeta. The constantly recurring rias ei, ‘without cor-
ruption, stands for dp@apros and ad@apcia.

A good instance is in Ode 9, v. 3, where the literal rendering


‘His thought is everlasting life,
And without corruption is your perfection’


probably stands for


\ >
kal év apGapcia Td Tédos pdr,


} We may compare with the LXX. of Ps. Ixvii. (Ixviii.) 34 and the Peshitta.


SYRIAC ODES FROM THE GREEK 47


and should therefore be translated,
‘And your end is immortality,’


A somewhat similar case is the frequently repeated Jasass wi
which stands for the Greek aOovos, db@oves'. An interesting
example will be found in Ode 11, v. 6, where we read that ‘speak-
ing waters touched my lips from the fountain of God without
grudging’ (ze. abundantly). In the passage just quoted I was
at first tempted to emend ‘the speaking waters’ to ‘waters of
a flood, but it is clear that this must not be done: the expression
is the same as in Ignatius ad Rom. 7, twp Cav Kat radod»,
which Lightfoot too hastily altered to dv cal ddXOpmevoyv and
thus made a direct Johannine parallel. For ‘talking water’
there are sufficient literary and folk-lore parallels.

Lightfoot quotes from Jortin [Eccl. Hist. i. 356] the reference
to Anacreon II (13),


dadvngpopo.o PoiBov Aadov sriovtes bdwp,


for the expression ‘talking water’ and for the prophetic in-
spiration that was supposed to be produced by drinking it:
but objects to Jortin’s inference that, as there was one of these
‘speaking’ fountains at Daphne, the famous suburb of Antioch,
Ignatius may have borrowed his image from thence. Lightfoot
thinks the reference doubtful, even if the text were correct. It
seems clear, from the language.of the Ode, that the text, about
which Lightfoot hesitated, is correct, and I think we may say
that the Greek text lies behind the Syriac?; as to the inter-
pretation, that may require a little further deliberation.

1 An interesting parallel to this series of translations will be found in Irenaeus
(247) where the Latin text shows a double translation: ‘s¢we invidia largiter donans
hominibus.’

2 Lightfoot was quoting Jortin by way of Jacobson. A reference to Jortin him-
self shows that Lightfoot has not done justice to Jortin, whose statement of the case
for Aadody and against dAddpyevov is admirable. I transcribe a part of it: ‘The
expression, Udwp Aadody, resembles the vocales undae which inspired the Poets and
Prophets.

Statius, Sz/v. i. 11. 6,

Et de Pieriis vocalem fontibus undam.
An oracle of Apollo Delphicus given to Julian, and preserved by Cedrenus :


Eirare 7 Bacire?, xapal mwéce Saidados adda.
Ovxére PoiBos exer kadvBay, ob pdvrida ddgvav,
Ov mayav dadeotcav, amécBero kai Addov Udwp.


FERN TERE e eee eee eee Ee HHH ERE TEE E ESET H EEE THEE OH EERE HEED


In these verses, which, to do them justice, are elegant, Apollo, to raise Julian’s


48 INTRODUCTION


We may now pass on to discuss briefly the question of the
Unity of unity or multiplicity of the authorship of the
Authorship? Psalms, Do they come from a single hand of
are they a collection made up out of various authors extending
over a period of time? It is natural that we should be on-our
guard against a too hasty belief that the whole of a collection
like the present one comes from a single workshop: for we
have before our eyes the example of the traditional authorship
of the Canonical Psalter, where the authors to whom the com-
positions are referred are far too few and where the Psalms are
often referred to periods when it is impossible to believe the
compositions can have been extant.

In the case before us, however, we can apply a number of
tests as to style and matter, and I think it will be evident that
the majority of the Odes do come from a single hand. They .
are so often cast in the same mould, both as regards ideas and
expressions, that we are obliged to recognize kinship in the
separate compositions. Moreover the very elevation of the
thoughts of the Odes is an index of a single personality: even
if we cannot identify him, we are sure that the writer was a rare
spirit, and rare spirits do not agree with multiplied authorship.
When our Odist is at his best, he is certainly one and not many.
A good way to test for unity of authorship is to group together
those Odes which have the same ideas similarly expressed.

For example, we are all familiar with the expression in the
Epistle to the Hebrews (Heb. xiii. 15) in which we are told to
offer to God through Christ the fruit of our lips in a continual


compassion, deplores the silence of his oracles, and of speaking streams. In the first
line read Baothju.
Anacreon xiii., Oi 5€ KAdpou map’ dxOas
Aaprynpipoto Poi Bou
Addov rlovres tdwp
Mepunvores Bodow.’


Then after discussing the passage in Ignatius and its variant readings, he shows
that the Greek Menaeum had both readings, and goes on to say, against Le Clerc,
that ‘the Aadoby JSwp must not be altered; it is sufficiently confirmed by the citations
of Cotelerius in this very note where he is inclined to reject it, and it is more elegant
and proper than Le Clerc imagined.’ References to Antioch and Daphne follow.

Our seventh Ode shows the fitness of the Ignatian expression. It is not necessary
to assume any connexion, either of place or authorship, with the Ignatian letters.

1 A good parallel case would be the modern recovery of the works of the
seventeenth century poet Traherne.


UNITY OF AUTHORSHIP OF ODES 49


sacrifice of praise. This expression is borrowed from Hosea
xiv. 3 according to the Septuagint, or perhaps from the Hebrew
of Is. lvii. 19. The expression is one which is already employed
in the extant Psalms of Solomon, where we find as follows:

ss 0h key: 5


\ \ ’ On
Yarpov Katvov pet @dHs ev evppoavyn Kapsias,
x /
KapTov YeLl€wy €v opydvm Hphocpévwe yAWooNS,
> i / ’ la
aTapynv xEi\€wv aro Kapdias ogias Kal diKatas.


Here the expression has caught the fancy of the Psalmist, who
works it into a parallel between ‘fruits’ and ‘ firstfruits.’

In the Odes it is a very favourite expression, as the following
instances will show :


Ode 8. ‘Let your love be multiplied from the heart
and even to the lips, to bring forth fruit to the Lord,
living fruit, holy fruit, and to talk with watchfulness. in
His light.’

Ode 12. ‘Like the flow of waters flows truth from
my mouth, and my lips show forth His fruit.’

Ode 14. ‘Teach me the Odes of thy truth, that
I may bring forth fruit in thee

Ode 16. ‘His love has nourished my heart, and even
to my lips His fruits He was pouring out.’


The recurrence of the theme ‘the fruit of the lips’ suggests
that this group of Psalms should be credited to a common
author.

The sixteenth Ode from which we just quoted is one of a
group that begins with a similitude, something like those which
we find in the Songs of Degrees in the Canonical Psalter. For
instance we have:


Ode 14. ‘As the eyes of a son to his father, so are
my eyes, O Lord, at all times towards Thee.’


The parallel to this is Ps. cxxiii. 2, ‘As the eyes of servants to

the hands of their masters, and as the eyes of a maid to the

hand of her mistress, so are our eyes to the Lord our God.’
Very similar is Ode 15.


‘As the sun is a joy to them that seek for its day-
break, so is my Joy the Lord, with which we may
O. S. 7


50 INTRODUCTION


compare Ps, cxxix. (cxxx.) 6,‘more than they that watch
for the morning.’


Ode 16 begins something in the same way:


‘As the work of the husbandman is the ploughshare:
and the work of the steersman is the guidance of the
ship: so also my work is the Psalm of the Lord: my
craft and my occupation are in His praises.’


With these three Odes we may probably take Ode 28:


‘As the wings of doves over their nestlings, and the
mouths of their nestlings towards their mouths, so also
are the wings of the Spirit over my heart.’


Suppose we group these four together, viz. 14, 15, 16, 28:
of these we have already 14 and 16 in the group 8, 12, 14, 16: so
the six Odes 8, 12, 14, 15, 16, 28, belong together and have a
common authorship.

Next let us try the association and repetition of ideas: one
of the harshest symbols employed by the Odes is the figure
of milk from the breasts of God: we have the following coin-
cidences :

Ode 8. ‘My own breasts I prepared for them that
they might drink my holy milk and live thereby.’

Ode 14. ‘With thee are my breasts and my delight.’

Ode 19 contains a parallel in extended form in
which .Christ is the cup that contains the milk from the
breasts of the Father.


With this we must probably take


Ode 35. ‘I was carried like a child by its mother
and he gave me milk, the dew of the Lord,’


b


The same connexion between the milk and the dew of the
Lord is found in Ode 4


‘distil thy dews upon us and open the rich fountains
that pour forth milk and honey,’


Here then is a group of Odes, 4, 8, 14, 19, 35, which
appear to belong together: but of these 8 and 14 are in the
previous group, which must now be enlarged to


4; 8, 12, 14, 15, 16, 19, 28, 35.


UNITY OF AUTHORSHIP OF ODES 51


In this way then, we may form the Odes into groups, as
a preliminary test for authorship. Here are some more sug-
gestions for grouping.

In Ode 6 we begin with


“As the hand moves over the harp, and the strings

speak, so speaks in my members the Spirit of the Lord.’

From the use of an opening similitude, it may be suggested
that this belongs with the similitudes in Odes already quoted:


but the actual figure of the hand and the harp recurs: the very
next Ode has


Ode 7. ‘they shall go forth to meet Him and shall
sing to Him with the harp of many notes’:
and this Ode also opens with a similitude.
In Ode 14 we have
‘Open to me the harp of thy Holy Spirit, that with
all its notes I may praise Thee, O Lord,’
In Ode 26
‘His harp is in my hands and the Odes of His rest
shall not be silent.’


These four Odes may be taken together, and attached to the
previous group, which now contains


4,04, 7, Oph 2, 14, 15,010, 10, 20, 28,. 35.
Ode 7 and Ode 10 are connected by the use of a curious
expression, ‘the traces of the Light’; thus


Ode 7. ‘He set over it the traces of His Light.’
Ode 10. ‘The traces of the Light were set upon their
heart.’


Ode 4 and Ode 8 are connected by their reference to the
seal of God which is set on His creatures :


Ode 4. ‘Who is there that shall put on thy grace and
be hurt? For thy seal is known,’
Ode 8. ‘On their faces I set my seal’ &c.


Ode 3 and Ode 8 are connected by the fact that both of
them speak of Christ as (a) the Beloved, (4) the Living One,

Ode 3 and Ode 17 have a common feature in that they speak
of believers as the members of Christ.


EDINBURGH ey LIBRARY


52 INTRODUCTION


Ode 1, 5, 9(?), 17 and 20(?) contain the doctrine of the
crown of life which does not wither.

Odes 17, 21, 40 and 41 speak of the transfiguration of the
face of the believer: e.g.


Ode 17. ‘I received the face and the fashion of a
new person.’

Ode 21. ‘The exultation of-the Lord increased on
my face,’

Ode 40. ‘My face exults with His gladness.’

Ode 41. ‘Let our faces shine in His light.’


We have now, tentatively, grouped together Odes


1, 3545 Seve apes OE) 107 126 I elo al faut,
20C?), 21,1020, 295535, 40,41.

No doubt other coincidences and parallels may be detected:
the net result of this is the recognition that the majority of the
Odes come from a single hand, or if we prefer it, from the same
school. The doubtful member, in my judgment, is Ode 19 which
is far too grotesque to be by the same hand as the other
compositions. It appears to me to be an imitation of the other
Psalms that speak of the breasts of God. It is tritheistic as well
as grotesque. There will be some short Psalms that do not
readily furnish material for identification, but even these short
Odes will sometimes be capable of grouping; thus the figure of
the Cross in prayer is found in Ode 27, and reappears in a
longer composition Ode 42. It is very difficult, however, to
believe that this 42nd Ode belongs to the main body of the
collection. .

Setting aside such small compositions and such as are late or
discordant, I believe it will be found that the internal evidence
will throw nearly all the Odes together, and that those which
are thus grouped will be found to be Christian compositions,
although at first sight many of them might seem to be Jewish,
or not definitely marked one way or the other. Their internal
parallelisms enable us to say with confidence that they are
either Christian or at least Judaeo-Christian compositions.

Several of the longer Odes do not admit of grouping with
the others: amongst these we note


Ode 22, which contains an account of the victory over
the dragon with seven heads.


HISTORICAL ALLUSIONS 53


Ode 23, which records the descent from heaven of
a mysterious letter, inscribed with the name of the
Trinity.

Ode 38, which records the preservation of the writer
from various errors and deceits.

Ode 39, which explains the dangers which attend the
rapid rise of great rivers, and how the believers walk
firmly on their waves, following the footsteps and example
of Christ.

These are also, in all probability, Christian; but the question
of their authorship must be reserved and examined in detail.

We now proceed to examine the historical allusions in the
book of Odes.

The first thing that strikes us is the poverty of historical
Sate _ background compared with that in the extant
allusions in Psalms of Solomon. In these known Psalms it is
ak impossible to miss the historical situation which
provoked them: they were made under the stress of national
exigency, and the troubles stand out from the Psalms with their
dates on them. Pompey is written large over several of the
Psalms, and when Rome is not expressly mentioned it is
distinctly felt. The great dragon of the Psalms of Solomon is
a classified specimen. We can tell him a mile away.

Not only so, but when the history is recognized, the theology
also becomes patent. The Pharisaism of the Psalms is trans-
parently clear, and the Messianism that went with it. So that
it was with justice that some critics labelled the compositions
Psalms of the Pharisees. That does not mean that all these
Psalms are necessarily by one hand nor that all of them are
decidedly marked. Some of them are, in fact, colourless, and
in that sense, dateless: but the collection, as a whole, is
identified, both historically and theologically. The case of the
Odes is very different. If there are any national disasters
behind the songs, they have been lost in the songs. There is
not a sad note, and there is hardly a vindictive note in the whole
collection. And on the theological side, the leading characteristic
is experience, and not dogma: and experience is much harder
to date than dogma, and shows fewer of the weather-marks of
evolution. Sometimes, indeed, the expressions of the Odists
rise to such a height that they catch from the object of their


54 INTRODUCTION


Faith something that is everlasting rather than evolutionary.
It is difficult to date a man who has disclosed the fact that he is
supremely happy and that God has made his face to shine with
the light of heaven. The only way in which we could date such
a phenomenon would be to say that, if he is not an isolated
specimen, the songs must proceed from some time of general
‘spiritual elevation; and since it is historically verifiable, that
the experimental time of the bloom of Church life is the first
age (for one hardly expects to find people generally rejoicing
with ‘an unspeakable and glorified joy, say, in the time of
Constantine), then these hymns or odes must belong to the first
days of the Church: but even that way of dating them is some-
what indefinite.

When we go in search of special historical details, we do not


get a very rich harvest. The most important cases
The proposal


ee found must be carefully examined. The first case is—
another ; 5
Benen! Ode 4, which has a reference to a proposal or


suggestion to change the Sanctuary of God from
Jerusalem to some other position, and it is a noble protest from
a standpoint, which at least in part is a Jewish standpoint,
against the suggestion. The Ode begins as follows:


‘No man, O God, changes thy holy place: and it is
not possible that he should change it and put it in
another place: because he has no power over it: for thy
sanctuary was designed before thou didst make other
places: that which is the elder shall not be altered by
that which is younger than itself?


Now here it is clear that some change in the value of the
Sanctuary at Jerusalem is threatened at the hands of man. The
writer does not mean the same thing as the author of the
seventh of the extant Psalms of Solomon, where he prays God
not to remove His tabernacle from amongst them, lest the enemy
should tread the inheritance of the Sanctuary. It is at the hands
of man that the Sanctuary is threatened, and the writer is
confident that the Lord himself has never changed and never will
change.

His thoughts turn to the origin of the holy place. That
holy place had a pre-existence and a corresponding eternity:
it was a ‘Sanctuary from the beginning.’ Here we are certainly


HISTORICAL ALLUSIONS 55


face to face with Jewish beliefs; the writer of the Ode may be
shown on other grounds to be a Christian, but on this point he
is betrayed as having Jewish sympathies. And his views with
regard to the Temple are not merely Jewish in a general sense,
but highly evolved.

The first theories of ‘the Heavenly Sanctuary appear to have
been almost Platonic in character: there was a pattern in the
mount: according to that pattern or idea the visible thing was
fashioned ; but the idea was eternal, and pre-existent. This
Platonic idea underwent change at the hand of later Rabbins,
who came to teach that the actual Sanctuary had been created
before other things, and had been caught away to Heaven and
disappeared.

Accordingly we find in the Apocalypse of Baruch, c. 4, that
the Lord explains the doctrine of the Sanctuary to the prophet,
in language which depreciates the earthly sanctuary :


‘Dost thou think that this is that city of which I said,
On the palms of my hands have I graven thee? It is not
this building which is now built in your midst: it is that
which will be revealed with Me, that which was prepared
beforehand here from the time when I took counsel to
make Paradise, and showed it to Adam before he sinned,
but when he transgressed the commandment, it was
removed from him, as also Paradise.’


Here, then, we have the view of a first-century writer who is
amazed at the desolation of Zion, and like our Odist, is con-
cerned with the problem of the deserted Sanctuary: he concludes
that it has been caught away, as Paradise was. The real city of
God is that which was made at the beginning; like Paradise,
it was only here temporarily: what is left is not the real thing.

Now our Odist does not go so far in despair as the writer of
the Apocalypse, of whom he may have been a contemporary.
He believes the Sanctuary was made at the very beginning
before other things, but still holds to the belief that Jerusalem
is the Holy City and the Temple the true Sanctuary. He does
not go so far even as the Epistle to the Hebrews, in drawing a
distinction between the tabernacle which the Lord pitched, and
that which was made by man.

His position appears to be very closely that of the great


56 INTRODUCTION


Jewish Rabbis, who taught the pre-existence of the Sanctuary
and its priority to the rest of the works of God, and who do not
appear to have explained this pre-existence according to the
theory of Ideas, for in that case where would the priority have
been of the Temple amongst other works of God? Their method
of teaching can be seen from :


Bereshith Rabbah, 20:


‘Seven things were created before the world: Thorah,
Gehenna, the Paradise of Eden, the Throne of Glory, the
Sanctuary, Repentance and the Name of Messiah.’


Very nearly to the same effect is the dictum of Rabbi Meir
in Pzrge Aboth vi. 10:


‘Five possessions possessed the Holy One, blessed is
He, in His world and they are these: Thorah, one.
possession: Heaven and Earth, one possession: Abraham,
one possession: Israel, one possession; the Sanctuary,
one possession.’


The Scriptural proofs of these statements are important: the
case of the Sanctuary is proved as follows:


‘The Sanctuary, whence is it proved? Because it is
written, “ The place, O Lord, which thou hast made for
thee to dwell in, the Sanctuary, O Lord, which thy
hands have established” (Exod. xv. 17): and it saith,
“And he brought them to the border of his Sanctuary,
even to this mountain, which his right hand had
possessed ””’ (Ps. lxxvili. 54).


That will suffice to show the nature of the Scripture proofs
employed: and it is clear that the same beliefs were in the mind
of the writer of our Ode. The question then arises as to the
situation which provoked his expression of faith.

In the case of the Apocalypse of Baruch, to which we have
referred as a parallel, it is clear that it is the desolation of
Jerusalem by Titus which is the historical background: and it
is some similar situation which is reflected in this fourth Ode.
Only the language in this latter case seems to imply that some
deliberate suggestion or attempt had been made by man to
move the Sanctuary: and against this the writer protests. The
agent who makes or suggests the change cannot be the Roman


HISTORICAL ALLUSIONS 57


conqueror: he might carry away the holy vessels, but that does
not remove the Sanctuary, any more than it was moved in the
days of Nebuchadnezzar. So it must be a suggestion coming
from Jewish or quasi-Jewish quarters. And the difficulty lies in
this: it is hardly possible that in the time of the last Jewish
wars, any body of Jewish believers could have cherished the
thought of a temple anywhere else than at Jerusalem. If the
temple was gone, it was gone back to Heaven and to God: it was
not to be sought elsewhere. It is not easy to believe that in
A.D. 70 or in A.D. 135, under the hand of Titus, or at the time
of Bar Cochba, the Jews would have thought of another temple.

For this reason I suggest that the writer is referring to an
attempt which had been made in earlier days to provide an
alternative Sanctuary to that at Jerusalem.

We know of at least three such attempts to change the
Holy Place; one, the Samaritan temple on Gerizim, another the
Sanctuary at Assouan, whose officials were in friendly relations
with both Jerusalem and Gerizim, the third the temple of Onias
at Leontopolis in Egypt, said to be actually modelled on the
temple at Jerusalem, and designed as a substitute for it. Of
these the Sanctuary on Gerizim was destroyed by John
Hyrcanus in B.c. 128; the Sanctuary at Assouan was wrecked
by the Egyptians, after the retreat of Cambyses ; the temple of
Onias actually outlasted the temple at Jerusalem, and was
destroyed in A.D. 73 by the Roman general Paulinus in con-
sequence of the fears of the Romans that this temple also might
become a rallying point for sedition and revolt. And I have
suggested that it is the destruction of this temple, and not the
Jerusalem temple, that provokes the protest of the fourth Ode.
Unless it can be shown that there is a probability that some one
actually proposed building a new temple, soon after the great
Jewish disasters, elsewhere than at Jerusalem, it seems to me
that this is the likeliest solution: and it furnishes an exact
historical date.

There can be no doubt as to the writer's affection for the
temple at Jerusalem: but he does not wail or lament: he is satis-
fied with the unchangeableness of God and the immutability of
His promises. If he had been a Jew, he could not have displayed
such equanimity: compare, for example, the language of the


oO. S. : 8


58 INTRODUCTION


Apocalypse of Baruch or of Fourth Ezra, to see how the real
Jew would feel. It may be inferred that the writer of the
Ode is a Judaeo-Christian. If his date was not, as I suggest,
soon after A.D. 70, the only other possible date seems to be soon
after. A.Dar35%

The importance of the temple at Leontopolis, in connexion
with the desecration of the temple at Jerusalem by Antiochus
Epiphanes, as a factor in the decentralization of the Jewish
religion, is indicated by Harnack in his History of Dogma.

‘The spread of Judaism in the world, the secularization and
apostasy of the priestly caste, the desecration of the Temple,
the building of the Temple at Leontopolis, the perception
brought about by the spiritualizing of religion in the Empire of
Alexander the Great, that no blood of beast can be a means
of reconciling God—all these circumstances must have been
absolutely dangerous and fatal, both to the local centralization ©
of worship, and to the statutory sacrificial system’,

In view of this luminous statement, it is not difficult to
imagine the resentment of a Palestinian Jew against Leonto-
polis, nor the expression of such resentment in song, when the
oftensive institution had been swept away.

We shall get a good idea of the theological position of the
writer amongst the early Christian sects and schools, if we
contrast his position with (i) that of the Ebionites on the one
hand, and (ii) that of the author of the epistle of Barnabas on the
other. Irenaeus tells us, for example, that the Ebionites per-
severe in the customs of the law and in the Jewish mode of life,
and adore Jerusalem as if it were the house of God*. Without
pressing too closely the language of Irenaeus concerning the
Ebionites, which may be coloured by polemical exaggeration,
there is certainly a common ground between the writer of the
fourth Ode and the Ebionites, in their affectionate religious
attachment to the ancient Sanctuary.

Nowturn to thesixteenth chapter of the very anti-judaic epistle


1 The desecration of the Temple by Pompey in B.c. 63 is not a possible situation;
for no serious interruption of the Temple Worship took place, and therefore no acute
religious problem was provoked. Nor can our Odes be referred to so early a period.
We mis shown that they belong, almost entirely, if not absolutely, to the Christian
period.

? Harnack : /.c. i. 69 note, Eng. trans.

3 Tren. (ed. Mass. 105).


THE UNCHANGEABLE SANCTUARY 59


which passes under the name of Barnabas. Barnabas begins by
telling us that the poor wretches (sc. the Jews) are in error
about the temple, which they take to be a house of God. They
have almost consecrated God in a shrine, as the Gentiles do.
He then quotes prophecies to show the vanity of the Jewish
belief. In the coursé of these quotations he has to explain
Isaiah xlix. 17, ‘Behold those that have destroyed this temple
shall build it again, and affirms that this is actually taking place
at the hands of the Romans, who had wrecked the temple
because the Jews had made war against them. But instead of
drawing the Ebionite conclusion from this (to us) obscure
historical allusion, he flies off to prove that the only real temple
of God is a redeemed soul. It is clear that the writer of the
fourth Ode, while accepting the spiritual saree of life,
would never express himself like Barnabas,

As Dr Taylor says, ‘those who felt with Barnabas would
have looked with disfavour upon the rebuilding of the temple
at Jerusalem.’

There is another way in which we can see that the position
of the writer of the fourth Ode is not that of the normal
Christian of Gentile extraction. One of the commonest exercises
of the early Christian was the demonstration to the orthodox
Jew by means of Testimonies from the Old Testament—that his
religion was no longer acceptable to God. From the traces of
these early collections of Testimonies which have come to light,
it is easy to see that they involved special statements under the
heads ‘that the Jews were to lose Jerusalem,’ and ‘that the old
temple should pass away and a new one take its place.’ The
new temple was to be a spiritual one, but whether the new
temple was Christ or the believer, is not quite clear. The writer
of the fourth Ode is prepared with spiritual interpretations of
the older religion, he spiritualizes the priesthood (if it be the
same hand as wrote Ode 20) and perhaps the rite of circum-
cision (cf. Ode 11), but he is not prepared to say that the Old
Sanctuary was to pass away. His position, therefore, is an
intermediate one, not wholly Gentile, though with strong Gentile
leanings, and, as we said above, much nearer to the doctrine of
the Ebionites than to that of the epistle of Barnabas.


1 Pirge Aboth: ed. ii. p. 153.


60 INTRODUCTION


In connexion with the foregoing argument, it may be
proper to examine the references made in the Odes
Possible wo to the prevalence of wars, and to determine whether
wars which = the writer is speaking of actual wars or only of
spiritual conflicts. When we read the eighteen
Psalms of Solomon, the noise of war is common; we can see
the engines moved up for the siege, we can hear the thud of the
battering rams. These Psalms open in affliction: ‘instead of
peace,’ says the writer, ‘there was heard the sound of war.’
‘Distress and the sound of wars,’ so another Psalm begins,
‘mine ears have heard, the sound of the trumpet, and the noise
of slaughter and destruction.’ .When this writer says war he
means war, and: there is no alternative. But the case is not
so clear in the Odes. The references to war are few, and
obscure,
In Ode 8 we have:


‘The right hand of the Lord is with you, and He is
your helper: and peace was prepared for you, before ever
your war was,’


How shall we explain this allusion? Does it simply mean
Bredestined that the Divine foresight had seen to the end of the
aes man’s spiritual troubles and had designed for him
the happy issue out of them? The objection to this is (i) that
it is somewhat forced; (ii) that the language is evidently ad-
dressed to a community of persons who have passed through
affliction together; and are spoken of as those who have been
despised, whose righteousness has now been exalted. But if it
is addressed to a community, the distresses can hardly be
spiritual: and it is possible, though I should not like to affirm
it positively, that the persons addressed are those Judaeo-
Christians at Pella, who escaped from the siege of Jerusalem
by flight, in harmony with the evangelic precepts.. The Ode
to which we have been referring finds a striking parallel in
Ode 9, where we have as follows:


‘For I announce to you peace, to you His saints : that
none of those who hear may fall in war, and that those
again who have known Him may not perish...... There
have been wars on account of the crown. Put on
the crown in the true covenant of the Lord. And all


WARS SPIRITUAL OR CARNAL? 61


those who have conquered shall be written in His book.
For their book is victory.’


Is this spiritual or carnal warfare? the concluding sentences
sound like the language of the Apocalypse, ‘To him that over-
cometh, and in that case, are spiritual. But the opening
sentences sound like an exemption from actual strife and its
dangers: and this might again be compared with the condition
of the Judaeo-Christians at Pella.

When we turn to Ode 29 we have again allusion to victory
over one’s enemies, and to war made by the word of the Lord.
But as this Ode is definitely Christian, and its language is parallel
to the vigorous expressions of Paul about the casting down of
imaginations and the bringing of every thought into the captivity
of obedience to Christ, we may be sure that the warfare and the
victories are spiritual. Examine the following sentences:


‘From the mouth of death he drew me back, and
I laid my enemies low, and He justified me by His grace:
for I believed in the Lord’s Messiah.’


These are certainly spiritual statements: justification by
grace through faith in Christ is the record of spiritual experi-
ence, and the victories must be interpreted in the same sense:
and so must the following:


‘He gave me the rod of His power:

that I might subdue the imaginations of the peoples:
and the power of the men of might to bring them
low:

to make war by His word,

and to take victory by His power:

And the Lord overthrew my enemy by His word:

and he became like the stubble that the wind carries
away.’


So far, then, as this 29th Ode is concerned, it is a Christian
and a spiritual product, and relates to a warfare that is not
carnal.

We come now to a much more difficult Psalm of conflict,
The fight with the story of a triumph over a dragon with seven
the Dragon. heads.


cf. Ps. cx. 2


cf. 2 Cor.
X. 5


62 INTRODUCTION


In the twenty-second Ode the Lord is praised because


‘He overthrew by my hands the dragon with seven
heads:

Thou hast raised me up over his roots, that I might
destroy his seed:


Thy right hand destroyed his wicked poison, &c. &c.’


Then follows an account of the raising of an army of dead
bodies, something like the scene in Ezekiel’s valley of dry
bones.

The Ode is a striking one and attracted the attention of the
author of the Péstzs Sophia, who found in the dragon with seven
heads one of the Emanations that threatened the upward pro-
gress of Sophia. When Sophia escapes from these Emanations,
she does it to the music-of the ninety-first Psalm, in which it is
promised that the believer shall tread on the lion and the dragon.
And the Pzstzs Sophia says (p. 140):

‘Conculcabat wpoBornv cum facie basilisci serpentis, cuz
septem erant capita; et conculcabat vim cum facie leonis et
cum facie dpaxovtos. Feci muctw copvay manere stantem
super mpoBoAnv avOadovus, quae habet faciem basilisci ser-
pentis, cuz sunt septem capita.


and (p. 147)


‘Atque verbum quod tua vis luminis dixit per
Davidem: meabis super serpentem et basiliscum......
super hos, qui sunt facie serpentis, et super hos, qui
facie basilisci serpentis, guzbus septem sunt capita.


And then the Ode of Solomon is quoted and commented on.
The Pzstis Sophia, therefore, has annexed this dragon with
seven heads and given him a spiritual interpretation. We may
say that the dragon was the cause of the quotation of the Ode.
As far as natural history goes, he is a lay figure. But is this
the original idea? We remember that in the eighteen Psalms
of Solomon, the dragon is palpable and tangible: he is Pompey
himself, and not a spiritual force or opposing influence.

Then there is an even closer parallel to our Ode, in the
almost contemporary twelfth chapter of the Apocalypse; a
dragon with seven heads and ten horns persecutes the woman


THE DRAGON WITH SEVEN HEADS 63


who brings forth the man-child. And the same dragon appears
to be intended in the seventeenth chapter, where it is ridden by
the mystical Babylon that makes war with the saints. The
dragon stands for the power of Antichrist?, exhibited especially
in the adverse action of imperial Rome. This, then, is the nearest
parallel to the situation in our Ode.

Now the situation cannot be reduced to an actual war, as
when Rome subdues Jerusalem under Pompey, for in these wars
Rome always wins: so it must be some other form of conflict,
either the passive resistance and triumph of the saints in times
of persecution, or the conflict between truth and error, which
results in the defeat of heretical teaching.

The Odist refers to the conflict as a personal one carried on
from place to place by himself:


‘Thou hast raised me up over his roots to destroy his
seed: thou wast there and didst help me; and in every
place thy name was blessed by me: thy right hand
destroyed his wicked poison.’


This is the story, not of a persecution, but of a conflict
between truth and error: and the dragon with seven heads
stands, not for a world-power nor an aggressive world-ruler, but
for the Antichrist who is spreading the poison of false doctrine
and must be confuted from city to city. A parallel situation
would be the conflict between Peter and Simon Magus in the
Clementine Homilies. Who this Antichrist is, in the mind of
the writer, or what is the special form of error that is combated,
we have not sufficient information to decide: and for that reason
must leave the historical situation somewhat obscure.

The next Ode to be discussed, in the hope of finding some
points of contact with history, is the twenty-third: and it is the
most difficult of all the Odes to interpret, and quite unlike any
of the other compositions in the series.

After some opening sentences, affirming that Joy, Grace and
=a Love are the marks of the elect of God, we are in-
mysterious formed that a letter was mysteriously sent down
ie from heaven to earth, as if it had been shot from a


1 Thus Irenaeus, in denouncing the Gnostic leaders, such as Simon Magus, and
Carpocrates, calls them expressly the precursors of the dragon, who is by his magic
going to cast down from Heaven the third part of the stars ; that is, Simon and
Carpocrates are rehearsals of the coming Antichrist. See Irenaeus (ed. Mass. 164).


64 INTRODUCTION


bow. People rushed to read it; but it was talismaned by a seal,
which none dared to break. Like the tables of the law, it was
wholly written by the finger of God and the name of the Trinity
was on it.

A mysterious wheel (?) protects the letter from venturesome
or hostile hands. This wheel with the sign upon it went
down to the feet, along with the head. Perplexing as this
language is, it appears to be explained of Christ’s descent into
Hades: for in Ode 42, where there is an account of Christ’s
under-world triumph, we are informed that death cast Him up, and
let go the feet with the head. Christ is the head, and the feet are
those members of His who are imprisoned in Hades. This
explains our statement about the head going down to the feet.
It seems, then, that the mysterious letter has something in it
relating to the Descensus ad Inferos.

We may compare it with the little book in Apoc. v., which
is sealed so that no one can open it, and read it: here there
are seven seals, which are to be broken successively. Another
suggestive parallel would be the letter in the Bardesanian Hymn
of the Soul, which is sent to rouse the King’s Son in Egypt}.

This letter was also talismaned with a powerful seal :

‘This was my letter, sealed with the King’s own seal
on the cover,

Lest it should fall in the hands of the fierce Baby-
lonian Demons.’


It flew rapidly as an eagle:
‘High it flew as the Eagle, King of the birds of the
heaven,


Flew and alighted beside me, and spoke in the speech
of my country.’


Such flying letters are not uncommon in Apocrypha literature:
one such is sent by Baruch to Babylon, and carried by an eagle.
The machinery is not unlike that in our Ode.

We have not, however, succeeded in finding a historical
situation for this Ode and the implied document.

It does not seem to belong. to the main body of the
collection; it may, however, be connected with the forty-


1 See Acts of Thomas for the Hymn, and the translation of it in Burkitt, Zarly
Eastern Christianity.


JEW OR GENTILE? 65


second Ode, and both of them may belong to a later period
than the rest of the book.

We referred above to the suggestions furnished in Ode 22
The deceiver Of a conflict with Antichrist in the form of
andhisPride- some heretical teaching, whose poison was being
widely diffused. This suggestion finds some further confirmation
in Ode 38, where the writer refers to his pursuit of Truth and
the protection which it gave him from the poisons and plagues
of Error. He came across a mysterious Bridegroom and Bride,
who are corrupting the whole world, and giving them to drink
from a cup which, in Circean manner, makes away with their
understanding. The Odist escapes by Divine Grace, and by
his passion for Truth. But who are these that furnish the
blandishments that our writer succeeds in resisting? It cannot
be the language of a mere crusader in favour of celibacy, though
we know there was a strong tendency in the early Church,
especially in the East, to regard all married life as a form of
corruption that was to be avoided. But here a mysterious
Bridegroom and Bride spread a seductive table before the world,
and after they have intoxicated their victims, they forsake
them as soon as they have robbed them of their understanding.
This can hardly be the language of a general hostility to
marriage. And it seems more natural to regard the seducers
in the Ode as real people, who are bewitching the world. One
thinks of ‘thy wife Jezebel’ in Apoc. ii. 20, of Simon Magus,
and his ‘lost sheep’ Helena, or some other of the many Anti-
christs with whom the Church had to contend in the first and
second centuries. The description in the Ode is too shadowy
for a more exact identification.

In one passage in the Odes the writer speaks of himself in
language which suggests that he was by birth
a Gentile, and that he was looked upon by those
to whom he had joined himself with astonishment. The Ode to
which we refer is the forty-first, where in the midst of a noble
strain of Christian exultation and confession of Christ and the
great day that has dawned in Him, we find:

‘Let us exult with the joy of the Lord. All that
see me will be astonished: for I am from another race:
the Father of Truth remembered me,’

The writer is explaining his position in a Christian com-


oO. S. : : 9


Jewor Gentile?


66 INTRODUCTION ~


munity as a Gentile amongst Jews. He explains his faith in
a Saviour who ‘makes alive and does not reject our souls.’

The language suits the first century better than the second,
and the Church in Palestine better than that in Asia Minor,
Greece or Egypt.

In another Ode, Christ Himself makes something like an
Christ receives apology for the reception of the Gentiles. Thus in
Gentiles. Ode 10: j f

‘IT was strengthened and made mighty and ‘took the
world captive...... The Gentiles were gathered together
who were scattered abroad. Axd / was unpolluted by my
LOVE. ..46 They became my people for ever and ever.’


There can be no doubt that this Ode is Messianic, and that,
to put it in the lowest possible terms, it is explanatory of the
coming in of the Gentiles. No such explanation, or, if we prefer .
it, apology, would be natural in Corinth or in Ephesus.. It belongs
farther East, and seems to me to savour, in any case, of the first
century. Certainly the Gentile could not feel himself isolated,
nor have to be apologized for in the great Churches of the West,
nor in the second century, when Gentile bishops began to appear
in Jerusalem itself.

There is another direction in which the writers of the Odes
RueeseEcr show a curious contact with Judaism.

a It is well known that the teaching of the earliest
Christians and of the philosophically minded Jews of the first
century made a special study of the story of creation in the first
chapters of Genesis, which they systematically allegorised. We
have a statement of Anastasius the Sinaite that all the early
Christian exegetes, from Papias onward, interpreted the Hexa-
hemeron, or Six days of Creation, by reference to Christ and the
Church’. And those who did not make this direct mystical
reference, especially the great Alexandrines, followed Philo in
a general allegorisation of the narrative. Many of these ex-
planations, whether Jewish or Christian, are well known. But
there is one case which is more obscure. The clothing of Adam
and Eve with coats of skins at the time of their expulsion from
Paradise was a point that required explanation, and taxed the
ingenuity of Philo himself. In his Questions upon Genesis he
first apologizes for the homely occupation attributed to the Most


1 See Routh, 2ed/. i. 15.


THE COAT OF SKIN 67


High, and argues that at any rate simple leather garb is superior
to purple and fine linen, and then he boldly breaks away from
the literal explanation and says that the coat of skin simply
means the human body, which is the receptacle for the Mind
and the Life which God had already created. ;

Now this interpretation is not confined to Philo’, for there is a
steady stream of Rabbinical opinion which has coloured the
folk-lore of Eastern Europe that Adam had before his fall
a nature clothed in light, like God Himself ‘whose robe is the
light, and that after his fall the light was replaced by the
ordinary integument. It will be interesting to trace this belief,
which agrees with that of Philo so far as to make the coat of
skin to be the human body, and to see whether it has left its
mark on early Christian circles of thought.

The origin of the belief appears to be indicated by a various
reading of the passage, Gen. iii. 21, which is credited to a MS.
belonging at one time to Rabbi Meir?, viz. that instead of


“iy nj3ND=coats of skin
we should read


“NX AYIND = coats of light.
We could then translate the passage, ‘And for Adam and his
wife Jahveh Elohim had made coats of light and had clothed
them. It is quite possible that this may be the origin of the
Rabbinical conceit as to the ‘Light-Body’ of Adam. And
the opinion is strongly reflected upon European folk-lore. It
appears also in Gnostic circles: for we find in the Bardesanian
Hymn of the Soul which is embedded in the Acts of Thomas,
that the Prince who forgets the Imperial Palace whence he
came, in his journey to Egypt to find the Pearl of great price,
had left behind him in the homeland the robe of glory with
which he had been adorned. The account tells us

‘ They took off from me the glittering robe, which in
their affection they had made for me, and the purple toga

which was measured and woven to my stature.’
He puts on the disguise of an Egyptian dress and forgets his
race and his country. When the young Prince comes to himself


1 We find it, for example, in the Encratite Cassianus in the second century,
according to the testimony of Clement of Alexandria (S¢vom. iii. 14), xiT@vas dé
Sepwarivous iyyetrar 6 Kacoraves Ta owpara.

2 So in Midrash Rabboth:

‘In the Thorah of Rabbi Meir they found it written, Coats of light: these
are the garments of the first Adam.’


68 INTRODUCTION


in the far country, he gets possession of the pearl, and promptly
strips off from him the filthy and unclean dress in which he was
clad. On his way home, the robe came to meet him; it fitted
him closely and seemed to be a mirror of himself. It was, in
fact, his double, and had grown, with his growth, during his long
absence.

Prof. Burkitt points out that this Heavenly Robe represents
the Body Celestial, it is ‘our house which is from heaven’ :

‘That which St Paul desired was no fixed “house” or
“habitation” but a Heavenly Form. So here, too, the Robe is no
article of clothing, but a Bright Form. The Syriac word means
The Bright or The Shining thing. It is “ put off” and “put on”
by the Soul?’

Here, then, we have a companion to the belief in the Body of
Light which belonged to Adam before he fell from celestial to
terrestrial life. The two ideas, that of the pre-existent soul that
has to leave heaven for earth, and that of the unfallen creation
of God, whose environment is changed from a coat of light to a
coat of skin, are evidently worked out on parallel lines.

Now it is not difficult to recognise the traces of the clothing
of the Old Adam and the clothing of the original Man, who
is also the New Adam, in the New Testament. We have, for
example, the instruction to put off the Old Man, and to put on
the New Man, or to put on (it is the language of clothing) the
Lord Jesus Christ. But what we want now to examine is
whether there are any similar traces in our Odes. Is there
any doctrine of a Light-Body or of a Skin-Body? Let us see.
For instance, in Ode 25, we have


‘In me there shall be nothing that is not light: and I
was clothed with the covering of Thy Spirit, and I cast
away from me my raiment of skin,


Here we have the very figure of the third chapter of Genesis,
explained in a spiritual manner of the conversion and regenera-
tion of the Soul.


Something similar to this appears in Ode 21,
‘I put off darkness and clothed myself with light.’
Very nearly the same idea is involved in Ode 11,
‘I forsook the folly which is spread over the earth,
and I stripped it off and cast it from me: and the Lord
1 Burkitt, Larly Eastern Christianity, p. 215.


THE COAT OF SKIN 69


renewed me in His raiment (cf. Ps. civ. 2) and possessed

me by His light.’
And notice that this re-creating act of God is immediately
followed by the statement of Paradise Regained: we are
engaged in an allegory of the third chapter of Genesis. I think
it will be admitted that the writer (or writers) of the Odes knew
the allegorical explanation of the coat of skin with which Adam
was clad. If this be conceded, then we must again recognise
that we are moving in Jewish circles, for it is very unlikely that,
at the early date required for our Odes, a Jewish conceit could
have penetrated very far into the Gentile world. The ‘coat of
skin’ is a significant proof of the Jewish or semi-Jewish author-
ship of the Odes’.

This allegorical treatment of the particular case in question
could not have continued very long in use in the Church,
because of the complication with the story of the fig-leaves ; if
the coat of skin is the human body, what are the fig-leaves ?
Evidently the allegory will have over-reached itself. It will
survive, however, in folk-lore and in Gnosticism.

It may, perhaps, be objected that the interpretation of the
coats of skins as equivalent to human bodies might just as well
be Gnostic as Judaeo-Christian. For instance, we have quoted
above the language of Cassian the Gnostic for this very belief.
But we have not only detected the equation of the coat of skin
with the human body; we have also found traces of the belief
in a coat of light which has been lost when the coat of skin was
acquired, and have connected this belief with a various reading,
or a Rabbinical conceit, in the text of Gen. iii. 21. So that,
while it is quite likely that some early forms of Gnosticism
depend directly upon Palestinian teaching, we ought also to
allow that the language of our Odes-on this subject is very near
to the source of the Gnosis, which is very nearly the same thing
as saying that it is not Gnostic. We will illustrate this by


1 For the curious developments of this belief in an original light-body of Adam
which are current in Eastern Europe, we may consult Dahnhardt, Matursagen ii. 225.
The coat of light was held to be of the nature of horn, and this bright integument
fell away when Adam and Eve sinned. All that remains of it is the human nails!

2 We might also have quoted Valentinus, the prince of the Gnostics ; for accord-
ing to Irenaeus’ account of Valentinus’ cosmogony, the Demiurge first fashioned the
évOpwmos xoikés from some invisible and fluid substance, and then clothed him in the
‘coat of skin’ which is 7é aicOyrov capxtoy (cf. Iren. ed. Mass. p. 27).


70 INTRODUCTION


showing another case of allegorisation of the text of Genesis,
which might be claimed as Gnostic, if it were not a recognised
fact that the allegorising of these early chapters of Genesis is
common to all the early Christian fathers.

In Ode 11 we have a beautiful sketch of the recovery of the

lost Paradise, and of the blessedness of those who
Recsingdand are planted in that land (being considered as ‘trees
Hevea of righteousness, the planting of the Lord’) or who
live by the fruit of the trees (being considered as
those who have returned to the privileges of the unfallen Adam).
Incidentally it is stated that such persons ‘have turned from
wickedness to God’s delights, and have turned back the bitter-
ness of the trees from them, when planted in God’s land.’

The metaphor is confused; on the one hand the believers
are the trees, on the other hand they are the denizens of
Paradise, who will have nothing to do with the bitterness of the
trees. Disentangling the similitudes we see that the entry into
Paradise goes along with an avoidance of certain bitter trees or
products of trees. Can we find out what this means ?

_The early interpreters of Genesis had to face a Divine
injunction to eat of every tree in the Garden, with one single
exception of the Tree of Knowledge of Good and Evil. But
this injunction raised the question as to whether all the trees,
herbs and fruits were fit to eat. What about the bitter herbs ?
The answer could only be, either that there were no bitter herbs,
or else that they were to be avoided as uneatable, being made
for some other uses. The author of the Ode to which we refer
evidently takes the latter view: there are bitter herbs, but they
are to be avoided. He does not think them useless, for nothing
is useless in the Paradise of God. Now this doctrine of the
avoidance of the bitter herbs had been credited to our Lord
Himself, in a conversation between Himself and Salome, which
has been preserved for us by Clement of Alexandria from the
Gospel According to the Egyptians. The passage is strongly
Encratite. Salome asks how long death is to rule over men,
and receives the answer that it is as long as women bear
children. ‘ Then, rejoined Salome enquiringly, ‘I did well in not
having any children?’ to which suggestion our Lord replies,
‘Eat every herb, but shun the bitter herb.’ It is certain that
this reply is based upon the language of Genesis, e.g. Gen. i. 29


PARADISE REGAINED 71


‘Behold! I have given you every herb, whose seed is in itself
on the face of the whole earth and all the trees...to you they
shall be for food’: and Gen. ii. g ‘And the Lord God had
brought forth from the ground every tree that was fair to the
sight and pleasant to the taste, &c. It is clear, then, that the
language of Jesus in. the passage cited from the Gospel accord-
ing to the Egyptians, refers to the Garden of Eden. What, then,
is meant by shunning the bitter herb? If we examine the
passage in which Clement of Alexandria discusses the meaning
(Strom. ili. 9), we shall find that he is opposing a school of
Encratites, who said that the bitter herb was marriage.
Clement, himself, who is Anti-encratite will have none of this:
he challenges the opinion and affirms that marriage is not a sin,
nor is there anything bitter about the rearing or producing of
children. So he rejects the Encratite doctrine. In so doing, he
has shown us that the doctrine existed and that it was a wide-
spread interpretation. What shall we say, then, of the writer of
our eleventh Ode? If he says that the saints restored to the life
of Paradise have nothing to do with the bitter trees, must we not
allow that he, too, is allegorising and that he holds Encratite
views with regard to marriage? Such views were wide-spread
in the early Christian Church, and survived in Gnostic circles; as
in the Old Syrian Church, and amongst the followers of Tatian,
but I do not see that they need to be especially labelled Gnostic,
since they spring quite naturally out of the allegorical treatment
of the first chapters of Genesis, or attached themselves easily to
that particular form of interpretation’. at

This case of the ‘bitter herbs’ and the previous one of the
‘coat of skin, are the closest points of contact of primitive
teaching with Gnosticism. I do not see that we need to
definitely attach the Gnostic label.

We shall see presently that the writer of the main body of
the Odes does not keep the Sabbath and gives very early
Christian reason for his neglect of that Jewish duty.

We may now go on to discuss the traces of Christian
Scriptures in our book of Odes, and the dogmatic and eccle-
siastical position of the writer or writers involved.


1 We may compare the Acts of Thomas, where the King’s son and his bride are
persuaded by our Lord to renounce marriage, and ‘ the care of children, the end of
whom is d2¢ter sorrow.’ The bride explains to her mother, ‘I have not had intercourse
with a husband, the end whereof is d¢t¢er repentance.’


72 INTRODUCTION


When we examine the Odes to see how far they are under
Sactst the influence of the Scriptures of the Old Testa-
pcripeuree. ment, we find the problem is quite different from
that which presents itself in the eighteen Psalms. In these the
use of the Old Testament is patent both in language and in
quotation, as one can see by examining the portions of the
Psalms which are printed in uncial type by Ryle and James, in
order to mark the coincidence of language with the Old Testa-
ment. Moreover certain parts of *the prophets, especially the
latter part of Isaiah, have been closely studied and followed:
and it is the recognition of this fact that has suggested to Felix
Perles some of his most attractive emendations through the
supposed original Hebrew’.

But in the case of the Odes we are at a loss: we cannot tell
what Greek lies behind the Syriac, except in a very few cases:
and this makes linguistic identifications difficult and almost
impossible: nor does the examination of the ideas which the
writer expresses lead to a large harvest of coincidences with the
Canonical Psalter or the Hebrew Prophets. Perhaps this is
natural, in view of the originality of the writer, with whom it
was easier to say inspired things than to report them.

When we turn to the New Testament, the result is equally
surprising: the name of the Gospel is not found, nor the name
of Jesus: direct historical references are limited to those events
which are recorded in the Creed, to which we may perhaps add
an oblique allusion to Christ’s power to walk on the waters,
with a possible allusion to the Dove at the Baptism. Not a
single saying of Jesus is directly quoted, though there seem to
be one or two indirect references. For instance Christ’s yoke is
spoken of in Ode 42 (‘my yoke was over those that love
me’) and there is one passage in Ode 22, which looks like a
reflexion from the words ‘on this rock I will build my church’
(Matt. xvi. 18)?: only in this case if coincidence were more
than accidental, the Ode has the substitution of Kingdom for
Church, which suggests for it priority over the Evangelic
language.

Setting aside for the moment the question of the use of
Johannine writings, and of the Apocalypse, we find next to


1 Perles: Zur Erklirung der Psalmen Salomos. Berlin, 1902.
? 1c. ‘That the foundation of everything might be thy rock : and on it thou didst
build thy Kingdom.’ :


NEW TESTAMENT QUOTATIONS 73


nothing from the Pauline Epistles: there is a sentence in
Ode 3,
‘The Lord is zealous that those things should be
known, which by His grace have been given to us,


which may perhaps be an echo of 1 Cor. ii. 12 ‘that we may
know the things which are freely given us of God. We have also
some doubtful references to Rom. viii. 35, 36 in Ode 1 (‘I shall
not be separated from Him’) and Ode 5 (‘If everything should
be shaken, I stand firm’) and Ode 28 (‘The sword shall not
divide me from Him, nor the scimitar’), and there are occasional
allusions to salvation and justification by Divine Grace. There
are also frequent allusions, which have a Pauline ring, to Christ
as the Head, to whom believers are the members. The figure
is worked out so as to include the souls in Hades, who are
Christ’s feet’.

Frequent allusions to a living crown can be illustrated from
I Pet. v.4 and from Jac. 1. 12 and Apoc. ii. 10, but no direct
quotations can be established. They may all run back into
a primitive Logion, ‘I will give thee a crown of life’

The chief coincidences with the Apocalypse are in the title of
‘the Living One’ (Apoc. i. 17) given to Christ (but this was
also at the beginning of the book of Sayings of Jesus”): in some
of the expressions of victory over spiritual enemies, and the
possession of Paradise and its trees, as well as in the allusion to
an opposing dragon with seven heads, and perhaps to the story of
the Sealed Book. It is doubtful if any of these parallelisms can
be pressed to the point of established quotation: the dragon
with seven heads is, perhaps, the best case for an identification :
but it will be remembered that dragons are a common feature
of apocalyptical machinery in the period to which the Odes
must belong.

It is when we come to the Gospel and Epistles of John
that we find the community of ideas to be the most pronounced.
We have clear statements that Christ is the Word, that He is
before the foundation of the world; that He bestows living
water abundantly; that He is the door of everything; that He
stands to His people in the relation of Lover to Beloved: that

1 As in Ode 42.


2 Lc. ‘These are the [wonderful] words which Jesus the Living One spake’:
a form of introduction which is imitated in the Coptic Book of Jeu.


oO. S. Io


74. INTRODUCTION


they love Him because He first loved them (for so we may
interpret the language of Ode 3: ‘I should not have known
how to love the Lord, if He had not loved me’), that their love
to the Christ makes them His friends (Ode 8). These and
similar phrases betray a Johannine atmosphere: but do they
betray the use of the Fourth Gospel? The problem is, on a
wider scale, something like that which arises in the discussion
whether Valentinus the Gnostic used the Fourth Gospel. Hip-
polytus tells us in his Refutation of Heresies (p. 185) that
Valentinus taught that ‘God the Father was all love, but love
is not love where there is no object of love. So the Father
begat two emanations, vods and adAnOea'’ Now is that a case
of the Fourth Gospel or not? The serious critic would hesitate
to affirm it; yet the language is very like that of our third
Ode; and it would probably be wise to hold the judgment
in suspense with regard to the use of the Fourth Gospel in the
Odes, especially when it is so difficult to trace any other Gospel
quotation or incident, or Saying of Jesus. But I think it will
be conceded that we are in a Johannine atmosphere.

One coincidence has been detected between the Odes and the
Ignatian Epistles, in the allusion to ‘talking water’; but there
is no need to assume quotation on either side, the language
being sufficiently explained by the folk-lore of the time.

The net result of these comparisons is to place the collection
of Odes at a very early period in the history of the Christian
Church. One or two of them had already been referred to the
early part of the second century, on account of the almost
canonical use made of them in the Pzstis Sophia. The main
body of the Odes, when studied, takes us in the same direction,
only perhaps somewhat further.

We come now to the question of the underlying doctrines
Dogmaticof Which can be traced in the Odes. We have al-
ST gh ready alluded to Christ’s pre-existence?, to His
pre-eminence in the Church’, and to the spiritual union between
Himself and believers. We have also pointed out some refer-
ences to His yoke, and to the foundation of His Kingdom, and
to His power to walk upon the stormy waters.

1 Ayaan yap, pnow, qv Odos, H d€ aydmn ovk eorw drydryn, ev wh 7 70


dyam @pevov. 2 As in Ode 28, Ode 41, &c.
3 As in Ode 31, Ode 33, &c. + As in Ode 3, Ode 42, &c.


CHRISTOLOGY OF THE ODES 75


One of the strongest expressions with regard to the’ nature of
Christ will be found in Ode 41, where He is called ‘the Son of
the Most High, who appeared in the perfection of His Father,
...the Word that was before-time in Him, the Messiah or Christ
who is truly one, and was known before the foundation of the
world.’ In the words ‘The Christ is truly one, taken in
connexion with the other statements as to His pre-existence,
we have suggestions of controversy, over a division in the
nature of Christ, of which, perhaps, the earliest known trace is
in the first Epistle of John! (wav avedua 5 pr) dporoyel tov
‘Incodv) where the various reading, Aves for su) duoroyel, if not
primitive, is certainly very early. This Ode cannot come from
a Docetic, nor can it easily be referred to an Adoptionist
source”.

An equally pronounced Christology may be detected in
Ode 29 where the writer says,


‘I believed in the Lord’s Messiah,
And it appeared to me that He is the Lord,’


We must not too hastily assume that all these statements
come from one hand, and we must be prepared to find, along
with variety of authorship (if that can be made out), a variety
also of theological definitions. There are some Odes which are
a little hard of explanation on orthodox lines, because they
appear to use Adoptionist language*. But if this suggests
subordination of Christ to the Father, in another Ode it is the
Holy Spirit that is subordinate, for we are told (Ode 24) that
‘the Dove fluttered over the Messiah, because He was her
head‘’ Again in the Ode previously quoted (Ode 36) it
appears to follow that the Holy Spirit was the Mother of
Jesus, which we know to have been a feature of Ebionite belief.
These variations suggest that theology had not fixed her land-
marks nor laid down her definitions. On the other hand, it is
clear that the Odes do not regard Christ as a mere man, but as


1 { John iv. 3.

2 Cf. Novatian, De Trinitate 30. Irenaeus (M. 206 e¢ passe): ‘Non ergo alterum
Filium novit evangelium nisi hunc qui ex Maria est, qui et passus est, sed neque
Christum avolantem ante passionem ab Jesu.’

3 As in Ode 36.

4 In later ages this would be known as the heresy of Macedonius, but the language
here is innocent of heretical intention.


76 INTRODUCTION


a pre-existent being and as the Divine Logos. One Ode has
the doctrine of the Trinity under a grotesque form worthy of
the Middle Ages. But this Ode we are unwilling to class with
the rest of the book.

In regard to the points of early Christian belief which
occur in the Odes, it is clear that the Crucifixion is definitely
alluded to, less clearly the Resurrection ; but what surprises us
is the extraordinary emphasis upon the Virgin Birth and the
Descent into Hades. The former of these is in a state of
evolution beyond the Canonical Gospels: the birth is explained
as painless!, and unexpected: we are on the very verge of the
details which occur in the apocryphal Gospels of the Infancy.

The other Article of the Creed, the Descent into Hades, is
also treated with picturesque detail, very much as in the Gospel
of Nicodemus. Just as in the latter gospel? Hades complains of
the inward pain which he feels and which intimates an ap-
proaching discharge of imprisoned souls, so in Ode 42 we are
told that ‘Hades saw me and was miserable: death cast me up,
and many along with me. But the prayer of the Souls in
Hades is very fine, and has no vulgar suggestions of Jonah and
the Whale about it, such as we find in the byways of Patristic
literature.

It will, perhaps, be said that the advanced state of evolution
of these two dogmas renders it impossible that the collection
should be referred to the end of-the first century*. There is,

1 Here, at all events, we are in the region of folk-lore; the Chinese legend of the
birth and conception of Hou-tsi, the founder of the dynasty of Tchi, runs on the
same line. His mother brought him forth as a tender lamb without effort, without


pain and without pollution. See amongst the Chinese Classics, the Shz-émg Il. ii.1,
which has been Englished as follows :


‘Lo! when her carrying time was done,
Came like a lamb her first-born son,
No pains of labour suffered she—

No hurt, no pain, no injury.’

Cf, Zu. Ps. Matthaet, c. 13 ‘Nulla pollutio sanguinis facta est in nascente, nullus
dolor in parturiente.’ ;

* Tischendorf, Evan. Apocrypha, p. 396 ‘Contremui perterritus pavore, et omnia
officia mea simul mecum conturbata sunt.’

B. H. Cowper, Apoc. Gospels, p. 305 ‘For lo! I see that all I have ever swallowed
are in commotion and my belly is in pain’ (Jonah ii. 2); which is taken from the
Greek Descensus, see Tisch. /.c. p. 327.

° The Descent into Hades is a first century doctrine. Harnack says of it: ‘the
notion of a descensus ad inferna...commended itself on the ground of Old
Testament prediction. In the first century, however, it still remained uncertain,


CHURCH ORDER AND DISCIPLINE TA


however, an alternative suggestion, that the 42nd Ode, for
instance, may be a later product: for it has not been demon-
strated that all the Odes come from the same hand or time.

The organic life of the Church can hardly be detected in the
cee book of Odes. The Church itself is not mentioned,
ae unless. ,it should be in the reference to a Pure

; Virgin in Ode 33 who stands and proclaims the
invitation of the Gospel. The figure of the Pure Virgin is well
known! to have been a common one in the first and second
centuries, and has influenced the New Testament itself. But
the Pure Virgin may equally well be the Divine Wisdom who
stands and calls men?.

There is also the implication of corporate unity in the figure of
the Head and the members’: this may be directly derived from
St Paul. Of Church officials there are only,(a) the writer of Ode 20
who calls himself a Priest of God and defines his priesthood as
any mystic might, as the offering to God of the sacrifice of his
thought, and (0) there are a body of persons engaged in carrying
the water of life to the thirsty, who are called Blessed Ministers
or Blessed Deacons (Ode 6): we may compare the language of
Perpetua concerning ‘Tertius and Pomponius, dlessed deacons who
ministered to us,’ who bribed the gaolers and obtained us relief.
But the writer of the Odes does not necessarily mean anything
so highly evolved as the ministry of the African Church at the
beginning of the third century. His ministers have a commission
to preach the word and are counted happy in so doing.

Of Sacraments the Odes do not seem to know much. The
only directions in which one could look for refer-
ences to Baptism would be (i) the Living Water,
(ii) the allusion to the Seal. Of the former it is unnecessary to
speak. It is frankly impossible that the living water which the
thirsty are invited in the Scriptures to come and take freely can
be any outward affusion: but perhaps something ought to be
said of the Seal, because although, in the New Testament, this


Sacraments.


lying on the borders of those productions of religious fancy which were not at once
able to acquire a right of citizenship in the communities.’ /7/7st. of Dogma, i. 202,
Eng. tr.

1 gg. 2 Cor. xi. 2, and cf. Hegesippus in Euseb. H. Z. iv. 22. In the letter of
the Churches of Lyons and Vienna (c. 12) the Virgin Mother is the Church (kal
éveylvero moAdT Xapa TH mapOévy yunrpl).

2 Cf. Proverbs viii. 1, 2. 3 As in Ode 1, Ode 17, &c.


78 _ INTRODUCTION


is a term used of the gift of the Holy Spirit, it is often employed
in Patristic writers to denote baptism and the baptised (e.g. in
the epitaph of Abercius and elsewhere).

In the Odes we have plenty of reference to seals: we have
the abysses of Hades sealed up with the Lord’s seal in Ode 24:
we have the mysterious Letter from Heaven sealed with a magic
seal in Ode 23; and we have in Ode 4 a statement of the
talismanic power of the Seal of God, which angels as well as
men possess and which all creation knows and fears. And in
Ode 8 the Lord says He has set His seal upon the faces of His
people, just as we have in the Apocalypse (vii. 3, xiv. 1). But
in the Apocalypse, as Dr Swete points out, the seal is not
sacramental. Perhaps it was a taboo-mark of some Jewish
sect.

If there is any scriptural reference in this doctrine of the
Seal, it must be sought in Ezekiel ix., and the ink-mark which
an angelic scribe is told to set on the righteous'. This seal is
alluded to in the extant Psalms of Solomon (Ps. Sol. xv. 6)
where we are told that ‘the sign (onpetov) of God is upon the
righteous for Salvation.’ It is, therefore, a pre-Christian con-
ception. Here Perles very naturally compared Ezekiel ix. 6
and supplied the Haggadic explanation from Shabbath 55°, as
follows :

‘God spake to Gabriel: Go and stamp on the fore-
head of the righteous a mark of ink, that the destroying
angels may have no power over him?: and on the forehead
of the hypocrites a mark of blood, that the destroying
angels may acquire power over them.’


From this talismanic sign (with which the archangels are
here entrusted), there was developed, as is well known, the
doctrine of the talismanic virtue of the sign of the cross in
baptism. But this development (arising out of an interpretation
of the use of the letter Tau as the sign in Ezekiel) is, I think,
later than what we have in the Odes’ There does not seem,
therefore, to be any definite allusion to Baptism. We can see


1 Tn the East it is still common to seal with ink.

? Cf. Ode 4. 7, 8 ‘who is there that shall put on thy grace and be hurt? for thy
seal is known.’

3 We have it in Tert. Adv. Marc. iii. 22 where the letter Tau is explained to be
‘the very form of the Cross which was foretold to be the sign upon our foreheads,’


THE SEAL OF GOD’S OWNERSHIP 79


the later interpretation very clearly in Lactantius, Dzv. Just. iv.
27, who says that the gods cannot approach those in whom
they see the heavenly mark, nor hurt those whom the sign as
an impregnable wall protects, which is very like Ode 4. 7, 8.
Perhaps Lactantius has here a reminiscence of the Ode.

As to the Eucharist, I can find no allusion whatever: there
are no references to the religious use of bread and wine; the
writers of the Odes seem to prefer milk and honey; but these
are not spoken of sacramentally, but mystically and _ alle-
gorically.

The allegorical use of the terms ‘ milk and honey’ is natural
enough in view of the Old Testament descriptions of the Land
of Promise: but it should be remembered that there are traces
of a milk-and-honey sacrament in the early Church. For
example in the Epistle of Barnabas?, we have a question
raised as to the meaning of the milk and honey in the Old
Testament. And after some preliminary allegorising to show
that the believers in Jesus are themselves the good land, he
asks, ‘Why milk and honey?’ And the answer is that ‘the
young child is first quickened with honey and then with milk,’

Probably this refers in the first instance to a folk-lore custom
in connexion with newly-born children, but it seems to have very
early developed into a Christian sacrament for new converts, who
had been born again into the Kingdom of God’.

It does not, however, seem that the milk-and-honey passages
in the Odes will bear the sacramental interpretation. The 19th
Ode, for example, has no suggestion of a recent conversion
about it. The only one where it seems possible to make
connexion with the new-birth is Ode 8, where the Lord says,
‘My own breasts I prepared for them that they might drink my
holy milk and live thereby’; this might perhaps, in view of the
previous reference to the ‘seal upon the faces,’ be interpreted
sacramentally, but it does not seem likely. The baptismal
sacrament, as we have shown, is not milk but milk and honey.


1 “Sed quoniam neque accedere ad eos possunt, in quibus coelestem notam
viderint, nec iis nocere, quos signum immortale munierit, tanquam inexpugnabilis


murus.’
2 GaiOs3
- 3 Besides Barnabas, we may refer to Tertullian, De corona, c. 3 (inde suscepti,
lactis et mellis concordiam praegustamus): Adv. Marc. i. 14: Clem. Alex. Paed, i. 6,
p: 128: Coptic Canons, ii. 46, &c.


80 INTRODUCTION


The only allusion to wine is in the account of the Seducer
in Ode 38, who lays plots for. thé elect and wishes, by an
intoxicating cup, to rob them of their reason. So far as the
enquiry has gone, the Odes are hardly to be quoted in the
history of the Sacraments; they ought, therefore, to belong
to an early period of evolution in the organic life of the Church.

There is still something to be said with regard to the
Thetlost missing portions of our MS. The closing portions
Second Ode. — of the 18 Psalms of Solomon are preserved for us
adequately in the Greek, but the lacuna at the beginning of the
Odes is serious, and involves the whole of the second Ode, and
the beginning of the third Ode.

It. has occurred to me that perhaps a sentence from
this second Ode may be preserved in Clement of Alexandria.
For in his Protrepticus (p. 5) we have the following sentence :—
o O€ éx AaBis, cal mpd -.avTod, 0 Tob Beod Aoyos, AUpay pev Kat
KiOdpay, Ta dapvya dpyava, Urreptoav, Koopov Sé TOVdE, Kat 67 Kal
TOV opuKpov Kocpov Tov avOpwmov, Wuyyy TE Kal THua avTod,
ayia mvevpate appocapevos, Warres TO Ow Sid Tod Torvpevov
dpyavou Kal mpocdde: TOUTM TO dpyave, TO avOpPOT,

Xv yap ef KuOapa Kal avr0s Kal vads émos.

Thus according to Clement the Word of God made music of
its own, earlier than David and upon a loftier instrument than
his harp and lyre; for its music was produced from the
macrocosm of creation and the microcosm of the body and
soul of man: to this instrument of many strings, it sings and
addresses the instrument itself, saying to it:


“Tis thou my harp, and flute and temple art.’


Now this is a quotation from some poetical composition, and
we may infer that it is a fragment of an early Psalm or hymn.
Accordingly Potter notes on it as follows:


‘Christi verba, ut videtur, a sacro hymno citata.’


But if it is a hymn, there are two considerations which
suggest that it came from the Odes of Solomon: first, it is one
of the features of these Odes (often causing no little perplexity)
that the singer makes his Psalm, either wholly or in part, in the
name of Christ: second, the reference to the harp or flute in
describing Christ’s music, and the representation of the mind of
man as an dpyavov todvdwvor is thoroughly in the manner of


IRENAEUS AND THE ODES 8I


the Odes. Thus in Ode 7 believers go forth to meet the Lord
with a harp of many strings: in Ode 14 the writer says:


‘Open to me the harp of thy Holy Spirit,
That with all its notes I may praise Thee,


and the same spiritual music is in the opening of Ode 6,


‘As the hand moves over the harp...
So speaks in my members the Spirit of the Lord.’


Here it is the Spirit that plays upon the human instrument.

So it is quite possible that Clement’s little quotation may be
part of the missing matter of our Odes. To which of them
shall we refer it? The first Ode is already identified, the third
is almost complete, and it is unlikely that Christ should be the
speaker in the opening of the third Ode, when He is not so in
the closing portion. So the suggestion arises that the sentence
comes from the second Ode.

This is a speculation, and must not be taken too seriously, in
view of the insufficiency of the evidence. But it can do no harm
to record it, with the necessary Valeat quantum.

It will, perhaps, be enquired whether the use of the Odes of

Solomon by early writers can be detected in cases
The Odes ' pe
known to where there are no introductory formulae or definite
wane allusions. We have just suggested that a frag-
ment of the second Ode may be preserved in an anonymous
quotation by Clement of Alexandria. Are there any similar
traces to be identified in the early Patristic literature? The
difficulty of making such identifications is well known. We had
a case in the use of ‘talking water’ by Ignatius and by the
writer of the Odes. Such an expression to us in the present
day seems very striking; but a draught from a magical or
medical spring is probably a common folk-lore way of obtaining
inspiration, and need not imply any dependence of one of the
coincident writers upon the other.

Here is a somewhat similar case from Irenaeus, in which
the evidence is rather in the direction of recognising a quota-
tion on the part of that writer from the Odes, Irenaeus
discusses! the question why God made man and why He chose
the fathers and why He called the saints. He begins by the
doctrine that God, for His part, had no need of man: ‘non quasi


1 Lib. Iv. c. xxv. (p. 243, Mass.).


82 INTRODUCTION


indigens hominis, plasmavit Adam.’ This sentiment of the
Divine independence of His works is in our fourth Ode. _ It is,
however, so common an expression in Greek philosophy and
theology, that we should pay no attention to its occurrence in
Irenaeus, if it were not that it is the key-note of the section and
that he returns to it with an added amplification, which is also
found in the fourth Ode. For he says that the less God needs
man, the more man needs God and Hs fellowship:


‘in quantum enim Deus nullius indiget, in tantum homo indiget
Dei communione.’


Here we have the thought of fellowship with God, as the
expression of man’s need, which we have in Ode 4:


‘Thou hast given us thy fellowship:
It was not that thou wast in need of us,
but that we were in need of thee.’


A little lower down Irenaeus returns to the same thought :
God distributed His prophets over the earth to habituate men to
the reception of His Spirit and to fellowship with Himself: ‘He
Himself was in need of no man: but on those that needed Him,
He bestowed FIrs fellowship.

Here we have the same thought, in closely coincident terms ;
and since it is the fundamental thought of the chapter, we
suggest that Irenaeus may be working from a text, and the text
is a verse from the Odes of Solomon. The same sentiments
recur in Bk v.c. ii. in the following form: ‘Nihil enim illi ante
dedimus, neque desiderat aliquid a nobis, quasi indigens: nos
autem indigemus ezus quae est ad cum communtionis: et propterea
benigne effudit semetipsum’; where the last clause may be
compared with what follows in the Ode: ‘Distil thy dews
upon us and open the rich fountains that pour forth milk and
honey.’

There is still, however, something abrupt in the transition
from the discussing of the Holy Place and the Holy People to
the general question of whether God has any need of man
corresponding to the need which man has of God. We may
detect the motion of the writer’s thought in passing from one
subject to the other in the following manner.

From Irenaeus we see that while God has no need of man,
man has need of communion with God. The language is, as we


ANTI-JUDAIC TRACES 83


have shown, so closely parallel to that of our Ode as almost to
amount to a quotation. But at an earlier time than that of
Trenaeus the thought of communion with God was not detached
from the thought of communion by means of a Holy Place, and
by sacrifice offered there.

We get this thought brought out clearly in the prayer of the
priests in 2 Macc. xiv. 15:


‘Thou, O Lord of the universe, who in thyself hast
need of nothing, wast well pleased that a sanctuary of thy
habitation should be set amongst us: so now, O Holy
Lord of all hallowing, keep undefiled for ever this house
that hath been lately cleansed.’


Here the ‘sanctuary of the Divine habitation’ is an earlier
form of the Christian ‘communion with God’ which we find in
Irenaeus. When, therefore, the writer of the Ode, who began
by chanting the inalienable sanctity of the Temple, says that God,
who did not need us, has given us His fellowship, he is still
thinking of the fellowship that is associated with one special
holy place. He cannot think that this form of communion is
abandoned or made void. The opening verses of the Ode make
it clear that this is his key-note. The parallel in the New
Testament is in Paul’s speech before the Areopagus (Acts xvii.
24, 25), ‘God dwelleth not in temples made with hands, neither
is worshipped of men’s hands, as though He needed anything.
Our writer would say, ‘He dwells in a Temple, because we need
Him, And as we have pointed out, the situation is for our
writer Judaeo-Christian.

At the same time we see clearly that the writer is not really

a Jew, though he is in a Judaeo-Christian environ-
The Author ment. We see this in a number of ways, both direct
accept Jewish and indirect. First we had his definite statement

as to his being of a different race, which must
surely mean that he is a proselyte, in the Christian sense, from
among the Gentiles to a community of Judaean origin. Then
we had his peculiar apologetics, in the person of Christ, for
love to the Gentiles. But even more striking is his indirect
argument against the necessity of the maintenance of the
Sabbath. I have drawn attention to this under Ode 16, by
pointing out that the sequence of thought in the words


84 INTRODUCTION


‘He rested from His works:
And created things run in their courses and do their works:
And they know not how to stand and be idle:
And His ‘heavenly’ Hosts are subject to His word’
contain the argument of Justin with Trypho for the non-validity
of the Sabbath, on the ground that

‘the elements, orovyeia (or more exactly, the heavenly

bodies?), do not idle or keep Sabbath.’

And Justin tells Trypho that he learnt this from the very
old man to whom he owed his conversion, who taught him, in
reference to the Sabbath and Circumcision, that he should
remain as he was born. This is very early teaching on the
subject of the leading Jewish practices. It does not necessarily
mean the abandonment of the Sabbath by Jews. Our author
stands where Justin stood, and both of them employ an argument
of the more liberal-minded in the primitive Church. He is no
more a Jew than Justin is.

It will be asked whether he argues against circumcision as
well as against the Sabbath. This is more difficult to answer:
It depends upon the interpretation of the opening sentences
of Ode rl. If our alternative translation is correct, the writer
refers to the work of Divine Grace which he has experienced as
a circumcision of the heart, a figure of speech which is justified
by the Old Testament references to Israel as ‘uncircumcised in
heart and ears?’ and by the Pauline affirmation that ‘we are
the true circumcision, and that ‘he is not a Jew who is one
outwardly, nor is circumcision in the letter, but in the spirit.’
In this sense our writer may be held to affirm that, although not
an Israelite by birth, he is one of the spiritual Israel. And this
would agree exactly with the other statements to which we have
alluded.

We found no allusions by which we could identify the
Gospels used by the Odists.

But if there are no references of a direct character to the
eee. Gospels, and only scanty allusions to the historical
Boseioniedl incidents which make the framework of the Gospels,

there is one indirect reference to an early Apocry-
phal Gospel, which is of the first importance. We have discussed

1 Gal. iv. g.

? Cf. Deut. x. 16, ‘Circumcise your hearts and be not any more stiffnecked.’


USE OF AN APOCRYPHAL GOSPEL 85


under the 24th Ode the question whether the reference of the
Ode is to the Baptism of Jesus or to some other unknown
incident connected with His crucifixion, and have decided that
the allusion to the fluttering of the Dove over the head of the
Messiah must mean the events at the Baptism, although there
was in the context matter which seemed to suggest the descent
into Hades rather than the Baptism. The reason for this con-
clusion lies in the coincidence of the expression of the Odist
with the language employed by Justin Martyr in his dialogue
with Trypho (c. 88). The Syriac of the opening verse is
literally


‘The Dove flew upon [or over] the Messiah’ ;


and this curious phrase answers exactly to the word which
Justin twice uses in his account of the Baptism. The repetition
of the word has long since provoked a suggestion on the part of
the critics that we had here a fragment of Justin’s actual gospel,
and that it was not one of the canonical Gospels, though Justin
himself refers his account to the Apostles of the Lord. And
when it was observed that the same peculiar verb turned up
elsewhere in Greek Patristic accounts of the Baptism, a very
strong case was made out for the use of an actual document
of an apocryphal, or, at all events, of a non-canonical character.

When, therefore, we detect the same expression in the Syriac
text of the Odes, the coincidence is so striking that we are
justified in removing the allusions to the Baptism of Jesus from
the matter credited to the canonical Evangelists, and assigning
it instead to a lost Gospel of a very early date. It will be
convenient to collect? under one view the cases in which it may
reasonably be held that the Greek word ézrimr7jvar is used of the
Descent of the Dove (Justin Martyr: Dzal. 88):


> If > nr , \ a A id \ A
avadbvTos avtod amo Tod datos, ws TEpLaTEpay TO
A aA ’ \ OP ere
dytov wvedpa eTiTTHval é7 avtov éypatray of adaToXot
an rn ne n
avTov TovToUv TOU Xpiarod nov.
Ibid:

. nm 5 Sages \ \ Br pee €
TO TVEDLA OVVY TO GyLoy Kal dia TOS avOpwTrOUS, ws


t > i) a > / > A
Tpoepny, EV ELOEL TEPLOTEPAS ETETTN AUTH.


1 See Resch, Aussercanontische Paralleltexte zu Luc. p. 15.


86 INTRODUCTION


Celsus (v. Origen contra Celsum i. 41):
‘ ‘ .
Novomévo, pyoi, cor Tapa TO “lwavvy [v. |. “lopdavy]
pacpa dpvilos é& aépos Néyers ETUTTHVAL.
Origen (c. Celsum i. 40):
éEjs b€ TovTow amd Tod Kata MarOaiov, raya é Kal
TOV NoLTOV evayyeriov, AaABOY TA Tept THs eTLTTATHS
TO coThp. Barrtilouévw mapa Tod “lwavvov trepiotepas
SvaBarrc.w Bovrertar.
Origen (zz Joan. tom. ii. 11):
4 a n 7 ¢ \ \ > /
étTeE TO TwmaTiK@® EldEeL @oEl TepicTepa eEhiTrTaTaL
MeTa TO AODTPOV aUTO.
Orac. Sib. vii. 64—70:
"A, Supin Koln, Powixorv tratov avdpear,
Ois émepevyouévn Kettar Bnputias adn,
TAnpov, ovx éyvws Tov cov Oedv, bs ToT éNovcev
‘Topdavov év bdatecot, Kal Ertato mvetpa em avTo.
Lapx évdvaauevos, tayus Ertato Ilatpos és olxovus.
To the foregoing coincidences from Greek sources, Resch
adds a number of suspicious coincidences in Latin:
Tett, adv. Valent. c. 27:


‘Super hunc itaque Christum devolasse tunc in baptis-
matis sacramento Jesum per effigiem columbae.’


Hilarius zz Ps. liv. 7:


‘Nam et in columbae specie Spiritus in eum volando
requievit...ut volando requiescat.’
Hilarius 2 Jatt. ii. 6:


‘post aquae lavacrum et de caelestibus portis sanctum
in nos spiritum zzvolare,’


Severi de ritibus baplismi, p. 24, ed. Boderianus (Resch,
Agrapha, p. 363):
‘Et Spiritus sanctitatis in similitudinem columbae
volans descendit mansitque super caput filii,’


These references are not of equal value in the determination
of the language of a primitive account, but taken together, they


CONCLUDING REMARKS 87


certainly make a very strong impression in favour of the belief
in an uncanonical account of the Baptism, and it is to that
account that the first line of Ode 24 must be referred.

But what are we to say of the Spirit singing over the
Messiah? Is this also from the uncanonical source ?

We may sum up the investigation as far as it has gone as
follows : Se

There can be no reasonable doubt of the antiquity of the
recovered Book of Odes. That which seems to be the latest
composition amongst them is attested already by Lactantius.in
the beginning of the fourth century as having the place in the
collection which it occupies in our Manuscript. The portions
of the Odes which have been transcribed by the author of
the Péstis Sophia towards the end of the third century, are
evidently taken from a book which was either canonical
in the writer’s judgment, or not very far removed from
canonicity ; so that it is quite easy to carry the Odes back into
the second century, and those who have studied the extant
fragments of them before the recovery of our Manuscript have,
in fact, referred them to the earlier part of the second century.
Our own investigations have shown that the Odes agree in the
extent of their composition with the statistical data for their
measurement, preserved in the early Stichometries. We have
also shown that they agree in sentiment with the beliefs and
practices of the earliest Ages of the Church. It came out
clearly in the investigation that the writer, while not a Jew, was
a member of a Community of Christians, who were for the most
part of Jewish extraction and beliefs, and the apologetic tone
which is displayed, in the Odes, towards the Gentiles, as a
part of the Christian Church, is only consistent with the very
earliest ages, and with communities like the Palestinian
Churches where Judaism was still in evidence and in control.
We think, therefore, that it will be admitted on all hands, that
the discovery of this collection of Odes and Psalms is not only
valuable for the fact that it presents us, for the first time, with
the Syriac version of the extant Psalms of Solomon, but that
the Syriac text of the Odes of Solomon is in itself a memorial
of the first importance for rightly understanding the beliefs and
experiences of the Primitive Church.

We have expressed our belief that in part, at least, the


88 INTRODUCTION


collection belongs to the last quarter of the first century; but if
it should be objected that this is too early a date, it cannot be
very many years in excess. Even if the writings do not fall
within the actual time of the composition of the books of the
New Testament, they scarcely fall outside the limits of the
same, and we may, therefore, be sure that the Christian Church
of to-day has been enriched by the discovery of a literary
monument of the highest value. Apart, also, from all critical
questions concerned with the little less or little more of a
determined date, or with the ‘Lo! here’ or ‘Lo! there’ of an
assigned locality, we have in our Odes the language of Christian
experience upon the highest levels of the Spiritual Life, and we
should have to go far afield to find such expressions of the
Joy of the Lord as recur in almost every one of these Spiritual
Songs.

We have no means of knowing who it was that in the first
instance ascribed them to Solomon, nor have we any clue at
present to their actual authorship, but we may be sure that
whatever Solomon did, or did not, in the composing of Odes,
with which he has been credited to the number of one thousand
and five, according to the insistent accuracy of the Jewish
Chronicler, we may say of these new-found compositions, that
not even Solomon at his very best could have been spiritually
arrayed like one of these.


ODE 1. (Pistis Sophia 116.)


™The Lord is on my head like a crown, and I shall not be
without Him’. ? They wove for me a crown of truth, and it
caused thy branches to bud in me. % For it is not like a withered
crown which buddeth not: but thou livest upon my head, and
thou hast blossomed upon my head. * Thy fruits are full-grown
and perfect, they are full of thy salvation.


OpE 1. This Ode is not in our Syriac text, but in the Coptic version
of the Pistis Sophia, where it is said to be the r9th Ode. I have identified
it with the missing first Ode of our collection, on the supposition that
in the collection of Solomonic Psalms known to the author of the Péstis
Sophia, the eighteen Psalms of Solomon stood first, and not, as in the
Syriac collection, in the last place. The question is discussed, more at
length, under Ode 5. ‘The argument of the Psalm is that God is the
crown of the soul, whose supreme experience is the knowledge of His
truth. This crown is of the amarant variety; it fadeth not away. On
the contrary, it buds and blossoms and is full of immortal fruit. The
similitude is not uncommon in the book of Odes to which we have
placed this Psalm as an introduction.


ODE 2. (Dees?.)


ODE 3. (Priora desunt.)


Ee» io 34 I put on: 2And his members are with him. And
on them do I hang, and He loves me: ? for I should not have
known how to love the Lord, if He had not loved me. * For
who is able to distinguish love, except the one that is loved.
5] love the Beloved,and my soul loves Him: ®and where His rest is,
there also am I; 7and I shall be no stranger, for with the Lord Most
High and Merciful there is no grudging. ®I have been united


1 Or it.


gO THE ODES OF SOLOMON


“to Him™, because I shall find love to the Beloved, 9 and because
I shall love Him that is the Son, that I may be a son?; 1 for
he that is joined. to Him that is immortal, will also himself
become immortal; “and he who is accepted in the Living One’,
will become living’, 1This is the Spirit of the Lord, which
doth not lie, which teacheth the sons of men to know His ways.
13Be wise and understanding and vigilant. Hallelujah.


OpE 3. This Psalm, of which the first verses have disappeared
along with the leaves that contained the first two Psalms, is evidently a
Christian product ; the author is a mystic with a doctrine, or rather an
experience, of union with the Son. With him his whole nature has
become mingled, as water is mixed with wine. In Pauline language,
he has been joined to the Lord, and has become one spirit with Him’.
In Johannine language, because the Beloved lives, he himself lives also®.
He has, at least in hope and faith, attained immortality through union
with the Living One. The name here given to Christ is very ancient,
it has been detected by the Revisers of the English New Testament in
the Apocalypse (‘I am the Living One’)’, and it is found in the
opening sentences of the Sayings of Jesus, recovered in recent years
from Egypt: (‘these are the words...... which Jesus the Living One
spake etc.’)

Other Johannine touches are the doctrine that ‘we love Him
because He first loved us®.’ For the Psalmist tells us that ‘he should
not have known how to love the Lord if the Lord had not loved him.’

It would be a mistake to suppose that we have here any direct
quotations or that the language necessarily involves acquaintance with
the text of the New Testament. In translating the Syriac, I have not
tried to distinguish the two words for love which are used: even if it
could be inferred that the Greek had used ayardé and ¢.Ad, as in the
21st chapter of John’s Gospel, it would be a mistake to indicate this in
the translation by a subtlety which is now exploded. For the Syriac
makes no such distinction, nor need we imagine it in the original
Aramaic spoken by Jesus. When the Syriac translators turn back our
Lord’s words in John xiv. 21, ‘He it is that loveth me, and he that
loveth me shall be loved of my Father,’ although the Greek word is
consistently dyad, they use both the available Syriac words, without
distinction, and where they do not distinguish we have no call to
over-refinement.


1 Mingled with (as water with wine) ; cf. 1 Cor. vi. 17.

2 Or the Son. * The MS. has ‘in life,’ Cf. Apoc. i. 17,
4 Or the living One.

: 1 Cor. vint7s 8 John xiv. 19.


Apoc. i. 17. 8 1 John iv, 19.


THE ODES OF SOLOMON gI


ODE 4.


™No man, O my God, changeth thy holy place; 2and it is not
[possible] that he should change it and put it in another place:
because he hath no power over it: ?for thy sanctuary thou hast
designed before thou didst make [other] places: 4that which is
the elder shall not -be altered by those that are younger than
itself, °Thou hast given thy heart, O Lord, to thy believers:
never wilt thou fail, nor be without fruits: ®for one hour of thy
Faith is more precious than all days and years. 7For who is
there that shall put on thy grace, and be hurt? ®For thy seal
is known: and thy creatures know it: and thy [heavenly] hosts
possess it: and the elect archangels are clad with it. ®Thou hast
given us thy fellowship: it was not that thou wast in need of us:
but that we are in need of thee: ‘distil thy dews upon us and
open thy rich fountains that pour forth to us milk and honey:
"for there is no repentance with thee that thou shouldest repent
of anything that thou hast promised: 'and the end was revealed
before thee: for what thou gavest, thou gavest freely: 'so that
thou mayest not draw them back and take them again: “for
all was revealed before thee as God, and ordered from the
beginning before thee: and thou, O God, hast made all things.
Hallelujah.


OvE 4. This Psalm is one of the most important in the whole
collection, on account of the historical allusion with which it commences.
The reference to an unsuccessful attempt to alter the site of the
Sanctuary of the Lord can only be explained by some unknown
movement to carry on the Jewish worship outside the desolated and
proscribed sanctuary, or by the closing of the Jewish temple at
Leontopolis in Egypt, which was, perhaps, itself in the first instance
built under the pressure of the situation which resulted in the
desecration of the temple at Jerusalem by Antiochus Epiphanes. As
the latter explanation leans on fact, rather than on hypothesis, we may
accept it provisionally as the real interpretation of our Psalm, which is
thus dated soon after a.p. 73 when the temple of Onias was closed and
dismantled by the Romans. The writer of the Psalm, if not of Jewish
origin is, at least, Jewish in sympathy: he holds the Jewish belief
that the Sanctuary at Jerusalem was older than the world in which it
stood ; it was, according to Rabbinic teaching, prior to all other created
things: thus we find in Bereshith Rabbah that ‘seven things were
created before the world, Thorah, Gehenna, the Garden of Eden, the


Q2 THE ODES OF SOLOMON


Throne of Glory, the Sanctuary, Repentance and the name of Messiah.’
The proofs of these pre-existent creations can easily be made from the
Scriptures: ¢g. ‘the Lord God had planted a garden in Eden from
afore-time’ (Gen. ii. 8), and so on. The matter is discussed with some
detail in Pirge Aboth vi. 10 ‘Five possessions possessed the Holy
One, blessed is He, in His world: and these are they: Thorah, one
possession ; Heaven and Earth, one possession ; Abraham, one posses-
sion: Israel, one possession ; the Samctwary, One POSSESSION i... 01100000000
... The Sanctuary: whence [is it proved]? Because it is written, The
place, O Lord, which thou hast made for thee to dwell in, the Sanctuary,
O Lord, which thy hands have established (Exod. xv. 17): and it saith,
And He brought them to the border of His sanctuary, even to this
mountain, which His right hand had possessed (Ps. Ixxviii. 54).’ This
Rabbinical belief has affected the mind of our Psalmist, who comments
upon the fall of the Egyptian temple unsympathetically, and evidently
has his heart set amongst the ruins of the Sanctuary at Jerusalem. He
does not think the covenant between God and the people of Israel is
disannulled ; all God’s promises are irrevocable ; His gifts and callings
are without repentance on His part. But there are no lamentations on
the part of the writer over the ruins of Jerusalem; the temple which is
in his thoughts has not developed a wailing-place. God has sealed His
own people with the marks of His ownership. All creation, and both
worlds, recognise this seal. And He is able to pour out blessings on His
chosen, comparable to the dew of heaven, and the milk and honey of
the earth. If we please, we may definitely call it a Judaeo-Christian
Psalm: and it might very well have been composed by one of the
refugees at Pella. It is not easy to see how it could have been written
outside Palestine, nor by a purely Jewish hand.

There are no Scripture references; perhaps the nearest parallel is
Rom. xi. 29 (‘the gifts and calling of God are without repentance,’
aperapedyra).

The thought that God does not need us, but we need God, is a
common religious expression in this period, and is found constantly in
Greek literature. We may compare the Apology of Aristides, c. 1, and
Irenaeus (ed. Mass. 244) ‘ipse quidem nullius indigens: his vero qui
indigent eius, suam praebens communionem,’ which is very near
indeed to the language of our Ode, and may almost be taken as a
quotation. The opposite sentiment can be illustrated from Schiller :

‘Freudlos war der grosse Weltenmeister,
Fiihlte Mangel, darum schuf er Geister,
Sel’ge Spiegel seiner Seligkeit.’

Clement of Rome, Zf. i. ad Cor., c. 52, takes an intermediate posi-

tion: ‘The Lord needs nothing...except-our praise.’


1 So Jerome: a principio.


THE ODES OF SOLOMON 93


ODE «5.


"I will give thanks unto thee, O Lord, because I love thee;
20 most High, thou wilt not forsake me’, for thou art my hope:
freely I have received thy grace, I shall live thereby: 4my
persecutors will come? and not see me: 5a cloud of darkness
shall fall ‘on! their eyes ; and an air of thick gloom shall darken
them: Sand they shall have no light to see: that they may not
take hold upon me. 7Let their counsel become thick darkness’,
and what they have cunningly devised, let it return upon their
own heads: ®for they have devised a counsel, and it did not
succeed*: they have prepared themselves for evil’, and were
found to be empty. For my hope is upon the Lord, and I will
not fear, and because the Lord is my salvation®, I will not fear:
and He is as a garland on my head and I shall not be moved ;
even if everything should be shaken, I stand firm; “and if
all things visible should perish, I shall not die: because the
Lord is with me and I am with Him, Hallelujah.


OvE 5. The interest of this Psalm lies in the fact that at this point
we begin to strike the region of coincidences with the Gnostic book,
known as the /istis Sophia. ‘The Ode has been used, apparently,
in the composition of two Odes or Prophecies of Solomon, quoted
respectively by Salome and the Virgin.

Salome recites nearly the whole of the Ode, with some slight
variations and expansions: and it is possible that one or two clauses
may be missing in the Syriac and may be capable of restoration from
the Coptic.

The remaining portion of the Ode before us appears, at first sight,
from the parallelism of the first sentence, to be the same as what is
given in the Pistis Sophia as the recitation of the Virgin from the roth
Ode of Solomon. And this ascription and numbering led Ryle and
James astray, to identify the matter in question with the sentences about
the Virgin quoted by Lactantius’, as from the 19th Ode of Solomon.


1 Oy, as in the Coptic, do not thou forsake me.

2 Or, as in the Coptic, let my persecutors come, etc.

3 Copt. weakness. 4 Zit. and it became not to them.

5 Zit. evilly, as in the Coptic, which expands as follows: Z¢ vicerunt eos fotentes et
quae paraverant malitiose, descenderunt in eos. Cf. the German of Schmidt: ‘ Und
sie sind besiegt, obwohl sie miichtig sind, und was sie boswillig (kaxés) bereitet haben,
ist auf sie herabgefallen.’

_ 6 Copt. quia tu es deus meus, salvator meus.

7 Psalms of Solomon, p. 160. ‘Ode ii. [of the Coptic Odes] should be another

fragment of that quoted by Lactantius, the 19th Ode. Here alone is a number


94 THE ODES OF SOLOMON


We have, however, shown elsewhere that Lactantius’ quotation is really
in our 19th Ode, so that Lactantius does not appear in the discussion,
having been found in another quarter. And we have suggested that
the supposed r9th Ode of the Coptic writer is the first of our collection,
and that it followed on the eighteen Psalms of Solomon. The mistake
can be traced, by comparing, in the P%stis Sophia, the text and the
Gnostic comment upon it; it will be found that a wrong Ode has been
copied out for the text of the Gnostic comment, in consequence of two
Odes, the first and the fifth, having some similar sentences. The
difference can be exhibited thus:


Coptic Ode 19
[=our Ode 1]

‘The Lord is on my _ head
like a crown, and I shall not be
separated from Him: a crown of
truth has been woven for me: my
branches were planted in me: for
they did not bear a crown that
was dried up, and without a shoot:


Syriac Ode 5.


‘He is like a crown on my
head and I shall not be moved.
Even if everything should be
shaken, I stand firm: and if all
things visible should perish, I
shall not die: because the Lord
is with me and I am with Him.’


but thou livest upon my head:
and thou growest upon me: thy
fruits are full and perfect: they
are filled with thy salvation.’


The comment upon the foregoing Coptic Ode follows the text of
the Syriac Ode, by an unconscious error of the writer who mistook one
hymn for the other.

It is clear, then, that the Coptic 19th Ode and the Syriac 5th Ode
are two different Odes, as we have explained above. We thus recover
the missing first Ode of our collection.

Whether this fifth Ode is Christian or not, does not appear decisively
at the first reading. It opens in a rather Jewish strain of praise,
accompanied by prayer for the discomfiture of enemies. If there is a
definite Christian feature, perhaps it is the garland upon the singer’s
head, which appears in several other Odes. In the 17th Ode, for
example, we get the same figure, and here the theme is the praise of
the Messiah for His triumph over Hades. This must, of course, be
Christian.

The crown is a crown of life, that is a living crown or garland: and
this meaning is carefully brought out in the Coptic Ode, which explains
that the crown does not wither, but (like Aaron’s rod), it buds and
bears fruit. We have similar allusions and explanations to the crown


given. The Virgin, be it noted, is the reciter here, and the Virgin is the subject of
Lactantius’ quotation.’ é


THE ODES OF SOLOMON 95


of life in the New Testament, as in r Pet. v. 4 ‘a crown of glory, or
glorious crown, which does not fade away.’ The close of the Ode is a
noble expression of trust in the Lord, amidst adverse circumstances,
which one instinctively compares with the close of the eighth chapter
of the Epistle to the Romans. It may be regarded as a Christian
composition, on account of its affinity with other Odes that are certainly
Christian, as well as on account of its intrinsic spiritual value.


ODE 6.


‘As the hand moves over the harp, and the strings speak,
?so speaks in my members the Spirit of the Lord, and I speak
by His love. *For He destroys what is foreign, and every-
thing that is bitter': *for thus it was from the beginning and
will be to the end, that nothing should be His adversary, and
nothing should stand up against Him. 5The Lord has multi-
plied the knowledge of Himself, and is zealous that these things
should be known, which by His grace have been given to us’.
SAnd the praise of His name He gave us?: our spirits praise
His holy Spirit. 7’For there went forth a stream and became
a river great and broad; ®for it flooded and broke up every-
thing and it brought [water] to the Temple*: 9and the restrainers
of the children of men were not able to restrain it, nor the arts
of those whose business it is to restrain waters; 'for it spread
over the face of the whole earth, and filled everything: °and all
the thirsty upon earth were given to drink of it®; “and thirst
was relieved and quenched: for from the Most High the draught
was given. ‘Blessed then are the ministers of that draught
who are entrusted with that water of His: they have assuaged
the dry lips*, and the will that had fainted they have raised up ;
4and souls that were near departing they have caught back
from death*: and limbs that had fallen they straightened and
set up: they gave strength for their feebleness’ and light to
their eyes: for everyone knew them in the Lord, and they
lived by the water of life® for ever. Hallelujah.

1 Cod. and everything is of the Lord. eee TeCore tin 12s

3 Uit. His praise He gave us to His name.

4 7.¢. the temple at Jerusalem. Schmidt: wandte sich gegen den Tempel.

5-5 Schmidt: es tranken, die sich auf dem trockene Sande befinden. Cf.Is. xxxv. 1.

6-6 Schmidt: Herzensfreude haben empfangen die Entkrafteten. Sie haben


Seelen erfasst, indem sie den Hauch hineinstiessen, dass sie nicht stiirben.
7 Cod. ex errore ‘for their coming.’ 8 dit. by living water.


96 THE ODES OF SOLOMON


Ope 6. In this Psalm again we are fortunate in having a large part
of the Coptic text preserved to us: and, as is common in Coptic texts,
some Greek words have been also preserved by it. But this very
circumstance has led Ryle and James to a wrong supposition as to the
existence of Gnostic elements in the Psalm. They recognize that it is
a Christian Psalm but suggest, hesitatingly, that the use of the word
améppo.. may stamp it as Gnostic. It is quite unnecessary to pay this
little tribute to Gnosticism. . Neither here nor anywhere else is there
anything definitely Gnostic in the book. And Ryle and James are
right in saying, ‘we cannot see that there is anything unmistakeably
Gnostic in the doctrine.’ They are also clearly right in saying that
what is described in the Psalm is ‘the preaching of the Gospel which
no human effort can avail to hinder.’ We must also recognize a
reference to the waters in Ezekiel which go forth from the temple. But
there is a suggestive difference in our Psalm from the parable in
Ezekiel: in the Syriac text the stream appears to rise elsewhere than in
the temple, and part of its function is to water the temple. It is a river
deep and broad before it reaches the temple. If this be what is
intended, then the restrainers who build dykes to keep waters out or
cisterns to keep them in are very likely the Temple officials themselves,
who were often hard put to it to hinder the propaganda of the new
religion within the limits of the Holy Place.

The writer is exultant in his universalism; the stream of living
water has gone out into all the earth: thirsty souls everywhere have
been refreshed by it: dying souls have been revived’.

The writer is as universal as St Paul. But he is not so detached
from Judaism as not to know that the living water was connected with
the temple. Perhaps, then, he is a Judaeo-Christian of an enlightened
type. Ryle and James suggest for him a date not later than the
second century, and intimate the presence of Johannine phraseology
and ideas. We think the date is too late; the Johannine features do
not appear to us to be directly due to the Gospel: if such a long
composition had been under Johannine influence, it would have
betrayed its ancestry more definitely. Neither here nor elsewhere does
it seem possible definitely to convict the Psalms of having borrowed
from St John. On the other hand there is one expression which
recalls a sentence in 1 Cor., where the writer says that God-is zealous
‘that those things should be known, which have been given us by His
grace’: this is very like 1 Cor. ii. 12, ‘that we may know the things
that have been freely given us of God.’ Whether the coincidence


1 Harnack, who has missed the meaning of this hymn, calls it a Gnostic baptismal
hymn (Hist. of Dogma, i. 207 note). It is not Gnostic and it has nothing to do with
baptism.


THE ODES OF SOLOMON 97


should be pressed will depend to some extent upon the existence of
further and similar echoes of New Testament speech.

Near the close of the Psalm the Greek word zappyota occurs in the
Coptic ; but the Syriac ‘coming’ suggests rapovota. appyoia, as the
fistis Sophia shows, is one of the words which the Coptic transliterates:
sO we must retain it, or else find a Greek word which may be misread
either as tappyoia or zapovoia. We have suggested that mapadvos is
the right word. This is confirmed by the preceding clause, ‘Members
that had fallen they straightened and set up.’ Here the Coptic has
erexere for the two Syriac words which we render by ‘straightened and
set up.’ The Syriac has been translating a compound verb by two
simple verbs; and the original was evidently dvwpOwcav. We may now
compare Is. xxxv. 3 and Heb. xii. 12; especially note ra rapadeAvpéva
yovara avopfwcare. We now see the meaning of the words which
follow, ‘they gave strength to their paralysis’; it is a reflexion from
icxvoare, yovara mapaeAvpeva. The correctness of the reference
to Isaiah may be further seen from the following words ‘and light to
their eyes,’ which are a reflexion from ‘then shall the eyes of the blind
be opened.’ It is clear then that the writer is working from Isaiah
and not from Hebrews: and in that case the aeppova of which the
Pistis Sophia makes so much is the stream of water which, in the
prophecy, makes glad the wilderness and the solitary place. We can now
explain the variation between the Syriac and Coptic inv. 10. The‘dry
sand’ is the épyuos dupaoa of Is. xxxv. 1, and the Syriac should be “ all
upon the thirsty land drank of it.’


ODE 7.


1As the impulse of anger against evil, so is the impulse of
joy over what is lovely, and brings in of its fruits without re-
straint: my joy is the Lord and my impulse is toward Him!: this
is my excellent path: @for I have a helper, the Lord. *He hath
caused me to know Himself, without grudging, by His simplicity:
the greatness of His kindness hath humbled me. *°He became
like me, in order that I might receive Him: ®He was reckoned
like myself? in order that I might put Him on; 7and I trembled
not when I saw Him: because He is my salvation*: Slike my
nature He became that I might learn Him and like my form, that
I might not turn back from Him: ®the Father of knowledge is
the word of knowledge: He who created wisdom is wiser than
His works: “and He who created me when yet I was not knew


1 Zt. my running: cf. Cant. i..3. 2 Jit, in likeness as myself.
. 3 Gt. mercy: cf. Luke ii. 30 (Pesh.).
O. S. 13


98 THE ODES OF SOLOMON


what I should do when I came into being: ‘wherefore He
pitied me in His abundant grace: and granted me to ask from
Him and to receive from His sacrifice!: because He it is that
is incorrupt, the fulness of the ages and the Father of them.

14He hath given Him to be seen of them that are His, in
order that they may recognize Him that made them: and that
they might not suppose that they came of themselves?: ‘for
He hath appointed to knowledge its way, He hath widened it
and extended it; and brought it to all perfection; “and set
over it the traces of His light, and it goeth from the beginning
even to the end. ‘For by Him it was wrought, and it was
resting in the Son, and for its salvation He will take hold of
everything: and the Most High shall be known in His Saints,
to announce to those that have songs of the coming of the
Lord ; ?°that they may go forth to meet Him, and may sing to
Him with joy and with the harp of many tones?*: ?'the seers
shall come before Him and they shall be seen before Him,
22and they shall praise the Lord for His love: because He is
near and beholdeth, 22and hatred shall be taken from the earth,
and along with jealousy it shall be drowned: *4for ignorance
hath been destroyed, because the knowledge of the Lord hath
arrived. ?°They who make songs shall sing the grace of the
Lord Most High; ?6and they shall bring their songs, and their
heart shall be like the day: and like the excellent beauty* of
the Lord their pleasant song: ?7and there shall neither be any
thing that breathes without knowledge, nor any that is dumb:
?8for He hath given a mouth to His creation, to open the voice
of the mouth towards Him, to praise Him: ?8confess ye His
power, and show forth His grace. Hallelujah.

Oper 7. In this Psalm the writer dilates joyfully® on the theme of
the Incarnation ; and the combination of lowliness and wisdom that are
involved therein. The condescension of Christ to human form is not
only a sympathetic approach to human conditions, it is a divine
welcome. He says ‘Come unto me’ by coming unto us. ‘Like
my nature He became that I might learn of Him.’

1 Gk. Ovolas: Nestle conjectures ovelas: cf. Clem. Zp. ii. ad Cor. i. AOéAnoev éx


Tod wh dvros elvar juas: and the verse of the Ode that precedes, ‘when I came into
being.’ Also Ode 8. 16.

2) Pswes.3% 3 Zit, voices.

4 Gk. weyadorpémreca as in Ps, Ixvii. (Ixviii.) 34.

® The opening sentence about the ‘impulse against evil’ may be illustrated from
Clem, Alex. Paed. i. 8, p. 140 drerau T@ ayadG, 7 pice dya0ds éorw, } Mucotrovnpla,


THE ODES OF SOLOMON 99


But the incarnate Messiah is still the maker and sustainer of all
things, in whom all things consist. The knowledge of this revelation
produces praise and expectation, praise for those who sing His advent,
expectation for those who look for His triumphant rule among men.
All evil is to pass away, and all hate. The saints who sing are already
exulting in the new life which He has bestowed upon them’,

For the argument with which the Ode opens we may compare
Lactantius, de Div. Znsé. iv. 26: ‘is, qui humilis advenerat, ut humilibus
et infimis opem ferret, et omnibus spem salutis ostenderet, eo genere
afficiendus fuit, quo humiles et infimi solent, ne quis esset omnino, qui
eum non posset imitari.’


ODE 8.


‘Open ye, open ye your hearts to the exultation of the Lord;
2and let your love be multiplied from the heart and even to the
lips, $to bring forth fruit to the Lord, living fruit), holy "fruit?;
and to talk with watchfulness in His light. *Rise up, and
stand erect, ye who sometime were brought low: Stell forth ye
who were in silence, that your mouth hath been opened. ®Ye,
therefore, that were despised, be henceforth lifted up, because
your righteousness hath been exalted. 7For the right hand of
the Lord is with you: and He is your helper: 8and peace was
prepared for you; before ever your war was. °%Hear the word
of truth, and receive the knowledge of the Most High. 'Your
flesh has not known what I am saying to you: neither have
your hearts? known what I am showing to you. "Keep my
secret®, ye who are kept by it: keep my faith, ye who are
kept by it. And understand my knowledge, ye who know me
in truth. Love me with affection, ye who love: for I do not
turn away my face from them that are mine; ‘for I know them,
and before they came into being I took knowledge of them, and
on their faces I set my seal: 7] fashioned their members: my
own breasts I prepared for them that they might drink my holy
milk and live thereby. ‘I took pleasure in them and am not
ashamed of them: ‘for my workmanship are they and the

1 The combination of ‘seérs’ and ‘singers’ is peculiar, and belongs to a very
early period in Church History ; it would be best illustrated by the saints in the begin-
ning of Luke’s Gospel, who were looking for redemption in Jerusalem, if we could
imagine that peculiar religious society continued and extended.


2 The MS. by an error of transcription reads, ‘your raiment.’
3 Clem. Hom. xix. 20; and Clem. Alex. Strom. v. 10, apparently from a lost Gospel.


(Salk


Ixiv. 4.


100 THE ODES OF SOLOMON


stréngth of my thoughts: ?°who then shall rise up against my
handiwork, or who is there that is not subject to them?
21T willed and fashioned mind and heart: and they are mine,
and by my own-right hand I set my elect ones: ?2and if my
righteousness had not been before them?......... and they shall
not be deprived of my name, for it is with them. 2% Ask, and
abound and abide in the love of the Lord, ?4"and” ye beloved
ones in the Beloved: those who are kept, in Him that liveth:
25and they that are saved in Him that was saved; and ye
shall be found incorrupt in all ages to the name of your
Father. Hallelujah.


Ope 8. This Psalm again is Johannine in many of its ideas and
expressions. But, even when this is conceded, it is difficult to prove a
direct dependence on the Fourth Gospel.

The Psalm is, like a number of others, marked by a sudden transi-
tion of personality from the Psalmist or Prophet to the Lord Himself:
after the writer has addressed those who have been lifted up out of
affliction and have found peace after war, he suddenly in prophetic
manner, cries out, ‘Hear the word of the Lord,’ ‘Receive the heavenly
knowledge,’ and then proceeds to speak in the person of the Lord.
The same abrupt transitions are found in the canonical Psalter, and
they appear to have characterized the Montanist inspirations. It will
be remembered that Montanus describes his own spiritual exaltation in
the words: ‘Behold! the man is as a lyre, and I sweep over him as the
plectrum. The man sleeps and I wake. Behold! it is the Lord, who
estranges the souls of men from themselves, and gives men souls.’
The same address by the Lord in the first person is in the utterance of
Maximilla, the Montanist prophetess, who said, ‘I am chased as a
wolf from the midst of the flock. I am no wolf; I am word, and spirit,
and power.’ ;

The language of Montanus finds a close parallel in the opening of
the sixth Psalm, where the writer says, ‘As the hand moves over the
harp, and the strings speak, so speaks in my members the Spirit of the
Lord.’ This might easily be claimed as a Montanist utterance, and I can
imagine that on account of these and similar sayings, the whole Psalter
might be claimed as a Montanist product. But the sentiments are
simply Christian, on a high experimental plane; and we must not
forget that one of the chief characteristics of Montanism is its attempt
to perpetuate the life of the primitive Church. Towards the end of the
Psalm the prophet returns abruptly to speech in his own name. There
seems to be some breach of continuity in the discourse, as. well


1 Something missing.


THE ODES OF SOLOMON 101


as a change of personality, and I have suggested that a sentence has
dropped in the Syriac text.

I do not know whether the allusion to an actual war, from which the
saints have emerged or escaped, is to be taken literally. If it be a
literal, and not a spiritual reference, the choice will lie between the
Jewish war under Titus or that under Hadrian; in either case we
should be in Judaeo-Christian circles. It is, however, quite possible
that the ‘war’ and the ‘peace’ refer only to spiritual experiences. |

The injunction in v. 11 to keep the Lord’s secret (uvoryptov éot)
is frequently quoted in the Fathers. A striking instance will be found
in Lactantius, Drv. Znstit, vii. 26: ‘nos defendere hanc [doctrinam]
publice atque asserere non solemus, Deo jubente, ut quieti ac silentes
arcanum ejus in abdito atque intra nostram conscientiam teneamus...
abscondi enim tegigue mysterium quam fidelissime oportet, maxime a nobis,
gui nomen fidet gerimus.’ The last sentence is very like the language
of the Ode, ‘Keep my secret ye who are kept by it.’ These Patristic
quotations may be traced ultimately to a variant translation of
Isaiah xxiv. 16, which has crept into some texts of the LXX from the
Hexapla of Origen. But there are a number of cases where the citation
is not directly from Isaiah, but from a saying of our Lord in an
uncanonical Gospel. Thus in Clem. Alex. Strom. v. 10 we have od
yap Pbovay, dyoi, tapyyyeArev 6 Kipios ev Tit edayyediw* pvoTypiov emidv
€uol Kal TOs viois TOU olkov pov. Again in Clem. Hom. xix. 20 we have,
peuvnucba Tov Kuplov nuav Kai diWacKadrov, ws évtehAopevos elmev ypiV:
Ta pvoTypia éuol Kal Tots viots pov pudagate. It seems that the Odist
has been working from the same source as Clement of Alexandria and
the Clementine Homilist: and if this be the case, the un-canonical
Gospel of which he makes use is very likely the same which we shall
find quoted in the 24th Ode.


ODE 9.


1Open your ears and I will speak to you. Give me your
souls that I may also give you my soul; ?the word of the Lord
and His good pleasures, the holy thought which He has devised
concerning his Messiah. %For in the will of the Lord is your
salvation’, and His thought is everlasting life; and your end
is immortality, *Be enriched in God the Father, and
receive the thought of the Most High. ®Be strong and bels. lii. 7.
redeemed by His grace. For I announce to you peace, to you cf. Ps.
His saints; 7that none of those who hear may fall in war, and **¥: 9.
those again who have known Him may not perish, and that
those who receive may not be ashamed. ®An everlasting crown


1 fit, life. 2 Or, and without corruption is your perfection. :


102 THE ODES OF SOLOMON


for ever is Truth. Blessed are they who set it on their heads:
9a stone of great price is it; and there have been wars on
account of the-crown. 1And righteousness hath taken it and
hath given it to you. "Put on the crown in the true covenant
of the Lord. 12And all those who have conquered shall be
written in His book. ‘For their book is victory which is yours.
And she, (Victory) sees you before her and wills that you shall
be saved. Hallelujah.


OvE 9. This Psalm is, from a historical point of view, somewhat
colourless. The only definite points are the allusions to the Lord’s
Messiah, or Christ: and a promise of peace and deliverance from war,
which is made to the saints. Of the first of these allusions, we may say
that while it makes the Psalm a Messianic one, this does not mean that
it is not Christian. The promise of everlasting life which follows must
be the holy thought of God concerning the Christ. And this seems to
definitely mark out the Psalm as Christian.

What then are we to say of the wars and victory to which the Psalm
refers ; are they spiritual or are they outward, or a mixture of both?
We shall have the same problem before us in other Psalms. From the
fact that Victory is personified and writes a book, with which we may
compare Apoc. ili. 5 (‘He that overcometh shall be clothed in white
raiment, and I will not blot out his name from the book of life’), we
may perhaps conclude that the Victory spoken of is a spiritual one.
This is in harmony with the references to redemption by grace and to
the will of Victory that the saints should be saved. These are Christian
expressions. On the other hand the promise that none of those who
obey the Lord’s word shall fall in war might have been very strikingly
illustrated in the case of the Christians who escaped to Pella. But
even then the Psalm is a Christian one, and it remains an open question
whether outward allusions may not have been coupled with inward
victories.

The alternative rendering for the third verse suggests that the Syriac
words answer to a Greek sentence, kat év apOapata 1d rédos tpav.


ODE 1o.


'The Lord hath directed my mouth by His word: and He
hath opened my heart by His light: And He hath caused to
dwell in me His deathless life; 2and gave me that I might
speak the fruit of His peace: %to convert the souls of them who
are willing to come to Him: and to lead captive a good captivity
for freedom. 41 was strengthened and made mighty and took


THE ODES OF SOLOMON 103


the world captive; Sand it became to me for the praise of the
Most High, and of God my Father. ®And the Gentiles! were
gathered together who were scattered abroad. 7And I was
unpolluted by my love ‘for them’, because they confessed me in
high places: and the traces of the light were set upon their
heart: Sand they walked in life and were saved and became my
people for ever and ever. Hallelujah.


Ove ro. In this vigorous little Psalm Christ must Himself be
accounted the speaker through the mouth of His prophet; unless we
should prefer to say that any of the opening sentences are spoken in
the Psalmist’s own name, and that after them there is an abrupt
alteration of personality, such as we have already referred to. It is
certain, however, that the one who gathers the peoples together by his
love must be the Messiah: ‘(unto him shall the gathering of the
peoples be’).’ And it can be no psalmist or prophet who declares
that the Gentiles became his people for ever and ever. The one who
goes forth to lead captivity captive is again the Christ: we have in the
New Testament (Eph. iv. 8) the Messianic interpretation of Ps. Ixviii. 18,
‘He ascended up on high, he led captivity captive’; and the same
explanation underlies the Ode before us. The Ode is, therefore, a
Christian one: and its soteriology is universal in character. But we are
still in the region where apologetic is necessary for the reception of the
Gentiles, and where it does not suffice to quote a verse of the Old
Testament and say that such reception was foretold. In our Ode
Christ explains that the reception of the Gentiles has not polluted Him.
Such language does not belong to the Hellenic world, nor, we think,
to the second century. But it is quite natural in a Judaeo-Christian
community in Palestine in the first century.

The fact that prophets spoke in the person of God or of Christ was
a common observation with the early fathers: a good illustration may
be seen in Justin’s Apology*, where Justin explains that the opening
sentences of Isaiah (‘The ox knoweth his owner...but my people doth
not consider’) are a case of the kind; and then goes on to explain that
the words ‘all day long I have stretched out my hands’ are to be
understood of the prophet speaking in the person of Christ. In the
canonical Psalms also the same feature was easily traced, and those
who composed the early books of Testimonies against the Jews con-
stantly point out that the real speaker is not the prophet, but One
whom he impersonates. It is inevitable that this impersonation should
cause difficulties of interpretation, due to the obscurity of personality

1 Christ has accepted the Gentiles.


2 Gen. xlix. 10.
Asn 3773s


‘104 THE ODES OF SOLOMON


involved in the different parts of the prophecy or psalm. And we must
not be surprised if we sometimes find it hard to tell in the text of our
Odes who is to be regarded as the speaker.


ODE? iri,"


1My heart was cloven! and its flower appeared; and grace
sprang up init: and it brought forth fruit to the Lord, ?for the
Most High clave ‘my heart’? by His Holy Spirit and searched
my affection towards Him?: and filled me with His love. *And
His opening‘ of me became my Salvation; and I ran in His
way in His peace, even in the way of truth: *from the be-
ginning and even to the end I acquired His knowledge: Sand
I was established upon the rock of truth, where He had set me
up: Sand speaking waters® touched my lips from the fountain
of the Lord without grudging: 7and I drank and was inebriated
with the living water that doth not die; and ®my inebriation
was not one without knowledge, but I forsook vanity and turned
to the Most High my God, and 9I was enriched by His bounty,
and I forsook the folly which is diffused over the earth; and
I stripped it off and cast it from me: and the Lord renewed
me in His raiment*, and possessed me by His light, and from
above He gave me rest in incorruption; “and I became like the
land which blossoms and rejoices in its fruits: and the Lord
was like the Sun shining on the face of the land; He lightened
my eyes, and my face received the dew; and my nostrils’
enjoyed the pleasant odour of the Lord; “and He carried me
to His Paradise; where is the abundance of the pleasure of the
Lord; and I worshipped the Lord on account of His glory;
and I said, Blessed, O Lord, are they who are planted in thy
land! and those who have a place in thy Paradise; and they
grow by the fruits of thy trees. And they have changed from
darkness to light. ‘Behold! all thy servants are fair, who do
good works, and turn away from wickedness to the pleasantness
that is thine: and they have turned back the bitterness of the
trees from them, when they were planted in thy land; and


1 Or, circumcised. 2 Zit. clave me or circumcised me.
3 Zit. revealed my reins: cf. Sap. Sol. i-6+ Ps. vii. g : Ps. xii. (Ixi.) 2: Apoc. ii. 23.
4 Or, circumcision. 5 Cf. Ignatius ad Rom. 7 VSwp fSv kal Aadody,


"Gp. Ps."cive 2. 7 Zit. my breathing.


THE ODES OF SOLOMON 105


everything became like a relic of thyself, and a memorial for
ever of thy faithful works. _2°For there is abundant room in thy
Paradise, and nothing is useless! therein; 2" am altogether
filled with fruit; glory be to thee, O God, the delight of
Paradise for ever. Hallelujah.


OpEr1. This lovely Psalm is altogether personal and experimental:
the writer describes the visitations of Divine Grace, which he calls the
cutting open? of his heart, and his establishment upon the rock of
eternal truth. He is renewed by these visitations, as if he had been
newly clad in light and had already reached the eternal rest. He
becomes like a land that drinks in the dew of heaven, and brings forth
fruit to God. He finds himself at last in the Paradise of God and
amongst the fragrant trees of a new creation. He breaks out into
exultant praise of the good things which God has prepared for them
that love him.

There are no Scriptural references in the Psalm that can be claimed
as quotations, however closely the language approximates to that of the
ancient Scriptures. Perhaps the nearest parallel would be the promise
in Apoc. ii. 7, that the one who overcomes, shall eat of the tree of life,
which is in the midst of the Paradise of God.


OpRar2:


1He hath filled me with words of truth; that I may speak
the same; 2and like the flow of waters flows truth from my
mouth, and my lips show forth His fruit. ®And He has caused
His knowledge to abound in me, because the mouth of the
Lord is the true Word, and the door of His light; *and the
Most High hath given it to His worlds, [worlds] which are the
interpreters of His own beauty, and the repeaters of His praise,
and the confessors of His counsel, and the heralds of His
thought, and the chasteners of His servants’, *For the
swiftness of the Word‘ is inexpressible, and like its expression
is its swiftness and force; Sand its course knows no limit.
Never doth it fail, but it stands sure, and it knows not descent
nor the way of it. 7For as its work is, so is its end: for it is
light and the dawning of thought; 8and by it the worlds® talk
one to the. other; and in the Word there were those that were


1 Or idle=dpyés. 2 perhaps the circumcising.
3 Or, works, 4 Cf. Sap. Sol. vii. 24. 5 Or possibly, the aeons.


O. S. 14


106 THE ODES OF SOLOMON


silent; 9and from it came love and concord; and they spake
one to the other whatever was theirs ; and they were penetrated
by the Word; and they knew Him who made them, because
they were in concord ; for the mouth of the Most High spake
to them; and His explanation ran by means of it: “for the
dwelling-place of the Word is man: and its truth is Love.
12Blessed are they who by means thereof have understood
everything, and have known the Lord in His truth. Hallelujah.


Ope 12. This Psalm rises to a high level of spiritual thoughts, but
for that very reason its language is occasionally obscure. The writer
describes his own inspiration and how his heart and lips become filled
with the words of God. Here, as elsewhere, God’s fruit is found in the
lips of the faithful, and we are often reminded in these Psalms of the
expression which is borrowed in Heb. xiii. 15, from the prophet Hosea,
about offering to God the ‘fruit of lips that confess to His name.’
From the general thought of the words of God, the writer rises to the
abstract idea of the Word of God, or Logos, which is the totality of
God’s revelation and which interpenetrates all things, so that even
things that are silent find their speech in it. But especially this Word,
which is both truth and love, finds its dwelling-place in man. Happy
are they that have come to know Him. Here, perhaps, we are nearer
to Gnostic ideas, such as the doctrine of the Word and the Silence,
than in any other part of the Psalter: yet there is nothing that can
fairly be called Gnostic. We are also very close to the doctrine of the
Logos as we have it in John, where the Logos becomes flesh and dwells
amongst us: but it is not the Johannine thought of the Incarnation
that is imitated or reproduced. The dwelling of the Logos with man is
personal and not collective; and we cannot infer from this Psalm a
direct statement of the doctrine of Incarnation, for the writer does not
go beyond Inspiration; but his thought is noble, even if, as we have
said, it is sometimes obscure, at least in a translation.


OD has


"Behold! the Lord is our mirror': open the eyes and see
them in Him: and learn the manner of your face: 2and tell forth
praises to His spirit: and wipe off the filth from your face: and
love His holiness, and clothe yourselves therewith: Sand be
without stain at all times before Him. Hallelujah.


Cf. Clem. Alex. Paed. i. 9, p. 172 Td ecorrpoy 7G aloxp@ od Kaxdv, bre Seckvver
atrov of6s éorw. Cp. Jac. i. 24,


THE ODES OF SOLOMON 107


ODE 13. This strange little Psalm is an exhortation to holiness:
we are to behold the Lord in the beauty of His holiness, but we are
also to see ourselves reflected in God as in a mirror; then we shall
behold our natural face in an unexpected glass and know what manner
of men we are: and in that glass we shall cleanse the dirt from off our
faces, and attain to purity. We are reminded of St Paul’s statement
that we behold, as in a mirror, the glory of our Lord and are transfigured
into the same image; though here the thought is not as high as in
Corinthians, wherevholiness is found by the Vision of God rather than
by the scrutiny of ourselves.

We may also in this connexion refer to a remarkable passage which
is found in a tract falsely ascribed to Cyprian, and known as De
Montibus Sina et Sion. We are reminded in this passage first that
Christ is the Unspotted Mirror of the Father, as is said of Wisdom in
the book called the Wisdom of Solomon’. Hence the Father and
the Son see one another by reflexion, The writer then continues as
follows :

‘And even we who believe in Him see Christ in us as in a mirror,
as He Himself instructs and advises us in the Epistle of His disciple
John to the people: ‘See me in yourselves, in the same way as any one
of you sees himself in water or in a mirror’; and so he confirmed the
saying of Solomon about Himself, that ‘he is the unspotted mirror of
the Father.’”

Here we have the doctrine of dual vision in a mirror, as though the
mirror saw the observer as well as the observer the mirror; in this way
the Father sees himself in the Son and the Son sees himself in the
Father: and then we are told of something said by John, speaking in
the person of Christ, in a lost epistle, that we are to see Christ in
ourselves as in a glass. This is something like the doctrine of our
Psalm that we are to see ourselves in Christ. If we could really be
sure of the correctness of the reference of the supposed Cyprianic tract
to St John, we should have more confidence in saying that here also
we are in the region of Johannine ideas: but, even in that case, there
would seem to be no question of direct quotation from canonical
Johannine writings®.


1 Sap. Sol. vii. 26.
2 The passage in Ps.-Cyprian is so curious, that for convenience I transcribe the


Latin: De Mont. Sina et Sion 13: ‘Ita inuenimus ipsum Saluatorem per Salomonem
speculum inmaculatum patris esse dictum, eo quod sanctus spiritus Dei filius
geminatum se uideat, pater in filio et filius in patre, utrosque se in se uident: ideo
speculus inmaculatus. Nam et nos qui illi credimus Christum in nobis tanquam in
speculo uidemus, ipso nos instruente et monente in epistula Iohannis discipuli sui ad
populum: “ita me in uobis uidete, quomodo quis uestrum se uidet in aquam aut in
speculum,” et confirmauit Salomonicum dictum de se dicentem, ‘‘quis est speculus
inmaculatus patris.’’’


108 THE ODES OF SOLOMON


ODE 14.


1As the eyes! of a son to his father, so are my eyes, O Lord,
at all times towards thee. For with thee are my consolations
(Zt. breasts) and-my delight. Turn not away thy mercies
from me, O Lord: and take not thy kindness from me.
4Stretch out to me, O Lord, at all times thy right hand: and
be my guide? even unto the end, according to thy good pleasure.
5Tet me be well-pleasing* before thee, because of thy glory and
because of thy name: Let me be preserved from evil, and let
thy meekness, O Lord, abide with me, and the fruits of thy love.
7Teach me the Psalms of thy truth, that I may bring forth fruit
in thee: 8and open to me the harp of thy Holy Spirit, that
with all its notes I may praise thee,O Lord. %And according
to the multitude of thy tender mercies, so thou shalt give to me ;
and hasten to grant our petitions; and thou art able for all our
needs. Hallelujah.


OpE 14. In this Psalm the canonical Psalter is somewhat more
closely imitated than is generally the case with our collection. The
opening sentences recall Ps. cxxiil. 2, ‘As the eyes of servants to the
hands of their masters, and as the eyes of a maid to the hand of her
mistress, so are our eyes to the Lord our God.’ The prayer that the
Lord will be ‘my guide even to the end,’ recalls Ps. xlviii. 14, ‘This
God is our God for ever and ever: he will be our guide even unto
death.’ But the Psalm is by no means a cento from the canonical
Psalter, even though it does not contain anything that could, at the first
reading, be definitely labelled as Christian.


ODE ts.


TAs thé sun is the joy to them that seek for its daybreak‘,
so is my joy the Lord; because He is my Sun and His rays
have lifted me up’; and His light hath dispelled all darkness
from my face. In Him I have acquired eyes and have seen
His holy day: tears have become mine and I have heard His
truth. ®The thought of knowledge hath been mine, and I have
been delighted by means of it. ©The way of error I have left,


‘ Fe bes
Ps. cxxiii. 2. lush edkaitrny iyi


8 =ebapeoretv, walk before God, as Enoch, Gen. v. 2getous ack: Peshitta.


BR C@fOPsh xxx Os 5 Or, made me rise up.


THE ODES OF SOLOMON 109


and have walked towards Him and have received salvation from
‘Him, without grudging. 7And according to His bounty He
hath given to me, and according to His excellent beauty! He
hath made me. 81 have put on incorruption through His name:
and have put off corruption by His grace. ®Death hath been
destroyed before my face: and Sheol hath been abolished by my
word: and there hath gone up deathless life in the Lord’s land,
“Nand it hath been made known to His faithful ones, and hath
been given without stint to all those that trust in Him.
Hallelujah:


_ Overs. This beautiful Psalm, like so many others in the collection,
opens with a similitude: these openings are characteristic of the book,
and betray a single writer. This does not mean that they do not
sometimes imitate the opening of the Canonical Psalms. In the present
case the 130th Psalm seems to have furnished the key-note, viz. the
watchers for the morning. It is an experimental Psalm of the first order:
the Sun has risen upon the soul of the writer. Eyes, ears. and heart
have all been opened. Salvation has been realized: the comeliness of
the Lord has been put upon him: death has lost its terrors, the grave
its power.

There is one passage which is either obscure, incorrect or extravagant
where the writer says that ‘Sheol has been abolished by my word.’
Unless there has been a transition of personality, this seems extravagant,
and invites the correction ‘has been abolished at His word.’ In any
case, I think the Psalm is a Christian one, though the positive or
dogmatic identifications are not forthcoming, apart from the victory
over death and the grave.


ODE 16.


TAs the work of the husbandman is the ae Nie irs and
the work of the steersman is the guidance? of the ship: ?so also
my work is the Psalm of the Lord: my craft and my occupation
are in His praises*: *because His love hath nourished my heart,
and even to my lips His fruits He poured out. *For my love is
the Lord, and therefore I will sing unto Him: 5for I am made
strong in His praise, and I have faith in Him. ®I will open my
mouth and His spirit will utter in me 7the glory of the Lord


P= Gk, al shia
2 ft. traction.
3 Zt, In His praises is my craft and in His praises my occupation, _


18 fe) THE ODES OF SOLOMON


and His beauty; the work of His hands and the operation of
His fingers: ®the multitude of His mercies and the strength of
His word. ®For the word of the Lord searches out! all things,
both the invisible and that which reveals His thought ; for the
eye sees His works, and the ear hears His thought, "He spread
out the earth and He settled the waters in the sea: He
measured the heavens and fixed the stars: and He established
the creation and set it up: and He rested from His works:
4and created things run in their courses, and do their works:
and they know not how to stand and be idle?; and His
Theavenly’ hosts are subject to His word. ‘The treasure-
chamber of the light is the Sun, and the treasury of the dark-
ness is the night: and He made the Sun for the day that it may
be bright, but night brings darkness over the face of the land;
and their alterations one to the other speak* the beauty of the
Lord: and there is nothing that is without the Lord; for He
was before any thing came into being: and the worlds were
Cf. Heb. made by His word, and by the thought of His heart. Glory
es and honour‘to His name. Hallelujah.


OpvE 16. This Psalm is, in its closing sentences, specifically Christian,
and it is clearly from the same author as those that have immediately
preceded. The theme is the beauty of God’s creation; especially the
writer considers the heavens which are the works of God’s fingers, he
contemplates the ‘spacious firmament on high.’ We frequently catch
refrains from the story of Creation. But curiously the writer appears to
avoid the mention of the moon: instead of saying that God appointed
the sun to rule the day and the moon to rule the night, he says that
‘the treasure of the light is the sun, and the treasure of the darkness is
—the night’: and he tries to work out this broken parallel by a further
statement about the offices of the sun and the darkness. It would be,
perhaps, too much to assume that he had some reason for neglecting
the moon: but the omission is curious. The Psalm is certainly a
beautiful one, especially in its opening verses. These find an appropriate
parallel in Clement of Alexandria, who tells us*: ‘We do not force
the horse to plough nor the bull to hunt, but we allure each species of
animal to the craft that suits it. So we also invite man to the vision of
the open heaven, and to the knowledge of God, because he is of
celestial birth...... Plough, indeed, if ploughman thou be, but know


1 Or, searches out: everything, the invisible and the revealed, (is) his thought.


2 Justin, Dial. 22. 3 Cod. complete ; du¢ read AN mtn
4 Clem. Alex. Protrepi. p. 80.


THE ODES OF SOLOMON III


God while thou ploughest: sail, if thou love to voyage the seas, but
make thy appeal to the steersman on high.’

The opening verses of this Ode find also a close parallel to Stoic
thought in one of its loftiest expressions ; for, according to Epictetus,
the praise of God is the greatest of occupations : ‘Seeing that most of
you are blinded, should there not be some one to fill this place, and sing
the hymn to God on, behalf of all men?...Were Ia nightingale, I should
do after the manner of a nightingale. Were I a swan, I should do after
the manner of a swan. But now, since I am a reasonable being, 7 must
sing to God ; that is my proper work: 1 do it, nor will I desert this my
post, as long as it is granted to me to hold it: and unto you I call to
join in this self-same hymn’ (Epictetus, Discourses, i. 16). Iam almost
tempted to believe that our Odist knew this saying of Epictetus, and
had Christianised it. It may well have been a popular religious
quotation in the latter part of the first century. Stoicism and Christi-
anity were, as is well-known, very near neighbours ; and this passage is
one of the finest of Epictetus’ sayings’.

On examining the Ode more closely we detect an unmistakeable
case of anti-Judaic polemic. The writer after describing the beauty of
creation and the Lord’s rest from His works, goes on to say something
which shows that he does not mean to deduce the Jewish Sabbath from
the statements in Genesis. ‘Created things run in their courses, and
do their works and know not how to stand or be idle.’ Suppose we turn
to Justin’s Dialogue with Trypho, c. 22, where Justin is arguing with
Trypho for the non-necessity of circumcision and the Sabbath: ‘I will
declare to you and to those who may wish to become proselytes,’ says
Justin, ‘a divine word which I heard from the old man to whom I owe
my conversion. He said, “you observe that the heavenly bodies do
not idle nor keep sabbath’. Remain, therefore, as you were born, do
not keep sabbath nor practise circumcision.”’

It is clear, then, that the 16th Ode means to say that the Sabbath is
not kept by the Heavenly bodies; and as it goes on to say ‘and the
[Heavenly] hosts are subject to His word,’ it follows that God is
regulating the motions of the worlds on the Sabbath days as well as on
the week-days: a point which Justin expressly makes in c. 29, ‘God
undertakes the regulation of the world on this day, exactly as on other
days*.’

The writer then is a Christian of the type of Justin Martyr, who

1 T. R. Glover (Conflict of Religions, p. 165) refers to this saying of Epictetus and
remarks that ‘Stoicism was never essentially musical. Epictetus announces a hymn
to Zeus, but he never starts the tune.’ Certainly the language of the Ode is much
loftier and more musical than that of Epictetus.

2 Le. Ta croxeia ovK apye ovde caBBarife.


36 Oeds thy adbray diolkyow Tod Kbcpov spuolws Kal ev tadrn TH huepa wemolnrac
xaOdmep év tals dats amdoas.


112 THE ODES OF SOLOMON


accepts the Gospel without the obligation of the Law, and makes a
quiet intimation of the position which he takes towards the stricter
Judaism. But we notice, further, that the argument which underlies
his verse is older than Justin Martyr; it is contained in the reply of the
ancient Christian whom Justin consulted on the question of sabbath
and circumcision; he calls it a Divine Word or Oracle (@etov Adyor).
It may, then, have come from some early Christian handbook ; but,
whether this be the case or not, it is a dictum of the first century ; for
the very old man who talked with Justin was not inventing a solution
for immediate perplexities, but giving him a rule which prevailed in the
Church to which he belonged.

So it seems clear that the Ode is really Christian, and that its
Christianity is of a very early type, to judge from the arguments
involved in it.


ODE (17:


1] was crowned by my God: my crown is living: 2and I
was justified in my Lord: my incorruptible salvation is He.
3T was loosed from vanity, and I was not condemned: “*the
choking bonds were cut off by her! hands: I received the face
and the fashion ‘of a new person: and I walked in it and was
saved; Sand the thought of truth led me on. And I walked
after it and did not wander: Sand all that have seen me were
amazed: and I was regarded by them as a strange person:
7and He who knew and brought me up is the Most High in all
His perfection. And He glorified me by His kindness,. and
raised my thought to the height of 'His' truth. ®And from
thence He gave me the way of His precepts? and I opened the
doors that were closed, 9and brake in pieces the bars of iron;
but- my iron melted and dissolved before me; ‘nothing ap-
peared closed to me: because I was the door of everything.
"And I went over all my bondmen to loose them ; that I might
not leave any man bound or binding: and I imparted my
knowledge without grudging: and my prayer was in my love:
13and I sowed my fruits in hearts, and transformed them into
myself: and they received my blessing and lived; “and they
were gathered to m* and were saved; because they were to me
as mv own members and I was their head. Glory to thee our
head} the Lord Messiah. Hallelujah.


" Query his? 2 Zit, steps.


oy


THE ODES OF SOLOMON 113


Ove 17. This Psalm is one that we alluded to above in connexion
with ‘the crown of life’ that has been put upon the writer’s head.
That it is a Christian Psalm is evident: the Messiah or Christ is
definitely referred to, and he is spoken of as being to believers in the
relation of the head to the members. But we have again in this Psalm
the peculiar change of personality: this time it comes so imperceptibly
that we might be tempted to doubt the reality of the transition, if it
were not for the abruptness of the return from it at the close of the
Psalm. The breaking of the bars of iron must surely refer to the
Messiah : it need not be an allusion to the descent into Hades ; for the
problem of liberation of souls is stated in general terms: all men are to
be free ; there is to be no more one that binds and one that is bound.
The transformation of believers into Christ’s nature is also referred
to; ‘I transformed them into myself...... they became my own members.’


ODE 18.


‘My heart was lifted up in the love of the Most High and
was enlarged: that I might praise Him for His! name’s sake.
?My members were strengthened that they might not fall from
His strength. %Sicknesses removed from my body, and it stood
to the Lord by His will. For His Kingdom is true. 4O Lord,
for the sake of them that are deficient do not remove thy word
from me! 5Neither for the sake of their works do thou restrain
from me thy perfection! Let not the luminary be conquered
by the darkness; nor let truth flee away from falsehood.
7Thou wilt appoint me to victory; our Salvation is thy
right hand? And thou wilt receive men from all quarters,
Sand thou wilt preserve whosoever is held in evils: 9Thou art
my God. *Falsehood and death* are not in thy mouth: 1for
thy will is perfection; and vanity thou knowest not, “nor does
it know thee. 'And error thou knowest not, neither does it
know thee. “And ignorance appeared like a blind man‘; and
like the foam of the sea, and they supposed of that vain thing
that it was something great; ‘and they too came in likeness of
it and became vain; and those have understood who have
known and meditated; and they have not been corrupt in
their imagination; for such were in the mind of the Lord;
%8and they mocked at them that were walking in error; and

1 Cod. my. 2 Or, To Victory may thy right hand bring our Salvation.


8-3 Lerhaps Falsehood and the like.
4 Or by a slight change, And I appeared like a blind man without knowledge.


0. S. 15


II4 THE ODES OF SOLOMON


they spake truth from the inspiration which the Most High
breathed into them; Praise and great comeliness! to His name.
Hallelujah.


Ove 18. The writer of this Psalm speaks as a prophet, who has
known the Divine visitation, and has felt its effect both on mind and
body, in the dispelling of error and the healing of disease. He prays
for a continuance of the heavenly gift for the sake of the needy people
to whom he gives his message. He has evidently been regarded by
them as a light and foolish person, whose talk is like the foam on the
wave of the sea. But there are others who are inspired like himself,
and who mock at the unbelievers for their stupidity and ignorance. We
catch the echo of some serious controversy upon religious matters, but
the subject of the dispute is unknown. There are no definitely
Christian features in the Psalm.


ODE 10:


1A cup of milk was offered to me: and I drank it in the
sweetness of the delight of the Lord. ?The Son is the cup, and
He who was milked is the Father: and the Holy Spirit milked
Him: because His breasts were full, and it was necessary for
Him that His milk should be ‘sufficiently released; 4and the
Holy Spirit opened His? bosom and mingled the milk from the
two breasts of the Father; and gave the mixture to the world
without their knowing: Sand they who receive in its fulness are the
ones on the right hand. ®[The Spirit]? opened the womb of the
Virgin and she received conception and brought forth; and the
Virgin became a Mother with many mercies; 7and she travailed
and brought forth a Son, without incurring pain; 8and because
she was not sufficiently prepared‘, and she had not sought a
midwife, (for He brought her to bear), she brought forth, as if
she were a man, of her own will; 9and she brought Him forth
openly, and acquired Him with great dignity, and loved Him
in His swaddling clothes®, and guarded Him kindly, and showed
Him in Majesty. Hallelujah.


ODE 19. Fantastic as this Psalm is, it might at first sight have been
discarded as being out of harmony with the lofty spiritual tone of the


1 Gk. peyadompéreca. 2 MS. her bosom.

® Lact. Div. Instit. iv. 12; Epit. Div. Instit. c. 44. The original Greek was
perhaps évexoAmicOy (=Aram. 53).

4 perhaps: and because there was not (pain) she was sufficient.


® Reading Charan for <imian,


THE ODES OF SOLOMON 115


rest of the collection. But it happens to be attested by Lactantius, and
in the MSS. of his Divine Institutes we have not only a quotation from
the Psalm in regard to the painless delivery of the Blessed Virgin, but
we have also the number of the Psalm given, either as 19 or 20. So it
was found in the collection known to Lactantius.

The harshness of the opening figure with regard to the bosom of
the Father does not necessarily detach it from the rest of the collection ;
for we have had already allusion to the breasts of God. Thus in
Psalm 8, the Lord’is represented as saying: ‘My own breasts I
prepared for them that they might drink my holy milk and live thereby.’
The eighth and the nineteenth of our Psalms appear therefore to be
connected together by a common authorship.. For the figure of the
breasts of God in the literature of the early Church we may refer to
Clement of Alexandria who, in the Paedagogus (lib. 1. c. 6, p. 124), has
a long discussion of the milk with which Christ’s babes are nourished.
Our nourishment, he says, is the Divine Word, it is ‘the milk of the
Father, by which only the babes are fed.’ Through the Word ‘we
have believed in God, to whose care-allaying breast we have fled.’ And
again (p. 125) ‘to the babes, who seek for the Word, the breasts of the
Father’s kindness supply the milk’ (rots fyrodou vyriouw tov Adyov at
matpikat THs iiavOpwrias Pyrat xopyyoto. 7d yadda). So Clement
comes very near to the figurative language of the Ode, without its
crudity of expression. The harshness of the figures employed and the
tritheistic character of the theology may be paralleled in writers of the
middle ages, whose repute in the Church is very wide. For is it not
St Bernard who expounds the Evangelic statement that the beloved
disciple leaned on Jesus’ breast in the words ‘hausit de sinu Unigeniti
quod de paterno hauserat ille’? but if John imbibed from the breast of
the Only-begotten what He had imbibed in like manner from the
Father, we can only say that a very lofty theology is presented in a very
harsh metaphor; but we cannot dismiss St Bernard as unworthy of
further notice. And if it comes to tritheism, with which all the
Christian Ages are more or less discoloured, where shall we find it
more pronounced than in John Tauler’s great sermon on the coming of
the Bridegroom, where God the Father presides over the nuptials of
Christ and the Church, and where the Holy Spirit acts as cup-bearer at
the feast: a representation which is not so very remote from what we
have in our Psalm, when wine has been substituted for milk. But I am
afraid the matter is past apologetic. Further than this, we must admit
that it is in many ways perplexing: the doctrine seems too highly
evolved to allow us to reckon the Psalm to the same period of
production as the rest of the book. When the writer speaks of milk
from the two breasts of God, he evidently means the two covenants, or
testaments. But that exegesis implies that the writer is no Marcionite


116 THE ODES OF SOLOMON


rejecting an old covenant in the interests of a new, or else he wishes
us to understand that he is no Jew, clinging to an old covenant to
the neglect of the new covenant. And he seems to imply that the
Christians whom he represents are distinguished from some other body
of believers by being on the right hand of Christ. Is it the Jews from
whom he wishes to be distinguished or is it the Marcionites? The Ode
must be, at the earliest, a product of the second century. It is
conceivable that the allusion to the Cup of Milk may cover an early
Milk-Eucharist.. Wine is nowhere mentioned in the religious language
of our Psalter.

Turn in the next place to the account of the Virgin Birth, which
follows the parable of the cup of milk, and can almost be detached
as a separate composition. It certainly presents the miraculous
conception and birth in a form which has already undergone
considerable development: that the birth was painless was a very
early corollary to the statement that it was supernatural; in the
commentary of Ephrem on the Gospel there was a statement that ‘it
was indecent that she who had been a habitation of the Spirit should
bring forth with pains and curses!’; and this must have been a very
early reflection upon the statement of the Virgin Birth. But our writer
goes much further than that: he dispenses with the usual aids to
child-birth, and introduces details for which we find parallels in the
Apocryphal Gospels of the Infancy. And it is frankly impossible that
the doctrine of the Miraculous Birth should have become so highly
evolved in the first century. So that the doubts raised by the first part
of the Psalm are reinforced by a study of its latter half. As far then
as this Psalm is concerned, it seems as if we must refer it to a later date
than the majority of those which we have been discussing. We detected
something like polemical tendency in the first half of the composition,
as if the writer turned aside to rebuke either Jews or Marcionites: if
we might assume tendency in the latter half, it must be directed against
persons who did not believe in the Virgin Birth. Palestine and
especially trans-Jordanic Palestine would furnish opponents of all the
classes mentioned; so that, if we should be obliged to depress the date
to the second century, we have no reason to remove the composition
to another locality than that which has already been suggested.


ODE 20.


'T am a priest of the Lord, and to Him I do priestly service:
and to Him I offer the sacrifice of His thought. ?For His
thought is not like "the thought of the world nor "the thought of 7


1 J. R. Harris, Ephrem on the Gospel, p. 31.


THE ODES OF SOLOMON 117


the flesh, nor like them that work carnally. ®The sacrifice of
the Lord is righteousness, and purity of heart and lips. *Present
your reins before Him blamelessly: and let not thy heart do
violence to heart, nor thy soul to soul. ®Thou shalt not acquire
a stranger by “the price of thy silver™, neither shalt thou seek
to devour thy neighbour?, neither shalt thou deprive him of the
covering of his ndkedness?: 7But put on the grace of the Lord
without stint; and come into His Paradise and make thee a
garland from its tree, and put it on thy head and be glad; and
recline on His rest, and glory shall go before thee, 9and thou shalt
receive of His kindness and of His grace; and thou shalt be
flourishing* in truth in the praise of His holiness. Praise and
honour be to His name. Hallelujah.


OpE 20. This Psalm is a mixture of ethics and of mysticism, of
the golden rule and of the tree of life. The writer, whether Jew or
Christian, is wholly detached from external ritual; he calls himself a
priest of God, but explains that this means the thinking of God’s
thought, and that the sacrifice he offers is the pure heart and life. He
might be an Essene, one of that strange company who did not frequent
the temple because they had purer sacrifices of their own. He drops a
few ethical maxims, such as we find in the Pentateuch, protests against
the owning of slaves (another Essene tenet) and against taking the
neighbour’s garment in pledge. Then he leaves morals and is away in
search of the honey-dew and milk of Paradise. There glory waits the
soul that enters into the Divine rest.

It is a beautiful Psalm, but one could not say of it, taken by itself,
that it was necessarily Christian; though its affinities are with Psalms
that are definitely Christian. or the sacrifices which the good man
offers to God we may compare Lactantius, Div. Jnstit. vi. 25 ‘ Donum
est integritas animi; sacrificium, laus et hymnus: si enim Deus non
videtur, ergo iis rebus coli debet, quae non videntur. Nulla igitur
alia religio est vera, nisi quae virtute et justitia constat.’


ODE 21.


1My arms I lifted up to the Most High, even to the grace of

the Lord: because He had cast off my bonds from me: and my

Helper had lifted me up to His Grace and to His Salvation: ?and

I put off darkness and clothed myself with light, and my soul

acquired a body® free from sorrow or affliction or pains, *And
1 J correct the Syriac, which is faulty.


2 Cf. Exod. xxii. 24. 3 Exod. xxii. 26, 4 hit, fat.
5 Zt. there became members to my soul, etc.


118 THE ODES OF SOLOMON


increasingly helpful to me was the thought of the Lord, and His
fellowship.in incorruption: Sand I was lifted up in His light; and
I served before Him, and I became near to Him, praising and
confessing Him ; ?my heart ran over and was found in my mouth:
and it arose upon my lips; and the exultation of the Lord in-
creased on my face, and His praise likewise. Hallelujah.


OpvE 21. This Psalm is short, and somewhat obscure. The reason
for this lies in the fact that the writer is assuming a mystical explanation
of the ‘coats of skin’ in the third chapter of Genesis, which are held to
represent the ordinary human body which has replaced a body originally
clad in light. See Ode 25 where the same idea of the acquisition
of a Light-Body, and of its freedom from pain is more definitely ex-
pressed. It is impossible to decide definitely from the reading of the
Psalm whether it is Christian or Jewish: if he was a Christian, he
was a very joyous Christian; if he was a Jew, he knew the salvation of
Israel that comes out of Zion, and had the dew of Heaven upon his
vineyard.


ODE 22.


1He who brought me down from on high, also brought me
up from the regions below; and He who gathers together the
things that are betwixt is He also who cast me down: *He who
scattered my enemies and my adversaries: *He who gave me
authority over bonds that I might loose them; 5He that over-
threw by my hands the dragon with seven heads!: and thou
hast set me over his roots that I might destroy his seed. ®Thou
wast there and didst help me, and in every place thy name was
blessed by me. 7Thy right hand destroyed his wicked poison ;
and thy hand levelled the way for those who believe in thee:
Sand thou didst choose them from the graves and didst separate
them from the dead. Thou didst take dead bones and didst
cover them with bodies; they were motionless, and thou didst
give ‘them’ energy for life. "Thy way was without corruption,
and thy face brought thy world to corruption: that everything
might be dissolved?, and then renewed, '2and that the foundation
for everything might be thy rock*: and on it thou didst build
thy Kingdom ; and thou wast the dwelling-place of the saints.
Hallelujah.


Cf. Apoc. xii, 3: and Pistis Sophia: see Introd. pp. 61—63.
2 Cf. 2 Pet. iii, 11. 3 Cf. Matt. xvi. 18.


THE ODES OF SOLOMON 119


ODE 22: In this Psalm we seem to be nearer to the known Psalter
of Solomon than elsewhere. There is a pointed reference to a dragon
with seven heads whose seed is to be destroyed, and whose wicked
poison has found its antidote in the Divine power. We think at once
of the description of Pompey as the great dragon in the second of the
published Psalms of Solomon. But dragons generally are difficult to
identify. Who, for instance, is the dragon in Ps. Ixxiii. (Ixxiv.) 14 whose
heads are broken? Is it Tiamat the Babylonian cosmic monster or the
Leviathan whom the faithful are to eat in the last day, or is it a real
person? In Ezekiel xxix. 3 it is Pharaoh of Egypt that is called the
great dragon in the midst of the waters, but it might not be so easy to
say which Pharaoh: any political monster may be a beast or a dragon:
so in the present case we have to hunt around among the fallen gods to
find him. There has evidently been a great slaughter of Jews for the
writer uses the imagery of the Valley of Dry Bones in Ezekiel, in order to
show that God can raise up His people from the gates of death: the ruin
of all things becomes the occasion for a new Kingdom founded upon
the rock.

The Psalm is one of those which are transferred to the pages of the
Pistis Sophia where it is recited by Matthew from an Ode of Solomon.
It is suggested by Ryle and James that the opening sentences are of a
Gnostic character, from the allusion to things above and things below
and things between. But the whole tenor of our Psalms is foreign to
Gnosticism, and I do not see any reason to introduce it as a factor in
the interpretation. If the Psalm is really the expression of some person
triumphing over a fallen tyrant, or of Israel personified in such a
situation, we have to search the political crises for such a time of trial
and recovery. It is not easy to find the solution. The Hadrianic
wars are too late, and they were followed by no recovery on the part of
the Jews in Palestine. Antiochus Epiphanes is too early, in every
respect. The next cases to examine are those of Pompey and Titus.
Pompey is already known as the dragon, and the destruction of the
dragon is historical. ‘Titus on the other hand is a triumphant dragon
without a subsequent collapse: nor does there seem to be in his case a
sufficient recovery of Judaism to justify the triumphant language of the
Psalm. The statement that God levelled the way for those who believe
in Him seems to imply a return from exile, in greater or less degree ;
but this also is not easy to justify from a historical point of view. We
leave the question for the present unsolved, under a general sense that
the situation described is one of the many collisions between the Jews
and the Roman power. If this is the wrong direction in which to look,
we should have to try the Descensus ad Lnferos.

There is, however, nothing definitely Christian about the Psalm,
except that it is found in the company of Christian Psalms. It seems
to be a Jewish product, or at least the work of a Judaeo-Christian.


120 THE ODES OF SOLOMON


ODE


‘Joy is of the saints! and who shall put it on, but they
alone? ?Grace is of the elect! and who shall receive it
except those who trust in it from the beginning? *%Love is of
the elect! And who shall put it on except those who have
possessed it from the beginning? *4Walk ye in the knowledge
of the Most High without grudging: to His exultation and to the
perfection of His knowledge. 5And His thought was like a
letter ; His will descended from on high, and it was sent like an
arrow which is violently shot from the bow: Sand many hands
rushed to the letter to seize it and to take and read it: 7and it
escaped their fingers and they were affrighted at it and at the
seal that was upon it. ® Because it was not permitted to them to
loose its seal: for the power that was over the seal was greater
than they. °%But those who saw it went after the letter that they
might know where it would be loosed, and who should read it and
who should hear it. ‘But a wheel received it and came over it:
“and there was with it a sign of the Kingdom and of the Govern-
ment: '2and every thing which tried to move the wheel it mowed
and cut down: and it gathered the multitude of adversaries,
and covered the rivers and crossed over and rooted up many
forests and made a broad path. “The head went down to the
feet, for down to the feet ran the wheel, and that which was a
sign upon it. ‘The letter was one of command, for there were
included? in it all districts; and there was seen at its head, the
head which was revealed, even the Son of Truth from the Most
High Father, and He inherited and took possession of every-
thing. And the thought of the many was brought to nought,
‘®and all the apostates hasted and fled away. And those who
persecuted and were enraged became extinct.

And the letter was a great volume?, which was wholly
written by the finger of God: 2°and the name of the Father was
on it, and of the Son and of the Holy Spirit, to rule for ever and
ever. Hallelujah,


ObE 23. This is the most difficult of all the Psalms in the collection,
and I have almost despaired of being able to explain it. It describes
the descent from heaven of a sealed document, with a message from


1 Zit. gathered. 2 Or tablet.


THE ODES OF SOLOMON [20


God in it. The description is something like that of the little sealed
book in the Apocalypse, which no one can open, except the triumphant
Lamb?. If the allusion in the Apocalypse is to some previous document
which the author has incorporated, perhaps the same thing may be true
here. Some book may have been published, claiming Divine Authority.
What can it have been? A Gospel? An Apocalypse? It appeared
suddenly, unexpectedly, and met with Opposition rather than with
universal acceptance. It came from the head and it went down to the
feet. If we may usé the language of a later Psalm in which the saints
in Hades are called the feet of Christ, we should say that the mysterious
little book conveyed a message to those below from one above, and that
it interpreted the region below to include the invisible world. Was the
little book then a ‘ Descensus ad Inferos’? It is impossible to decide
with certainty. It contained some pronounced statement concerning
the Trinity, for we are expressly told that it had the name of Father,
Son and Holy Ghost upon it. When any one writes in cipher, about a
document which itself appears to have been written in cipher, for that is
the natural meaning of a sealed book, we ought not to be surprised if it
is not quite obvious, two thousand years later, what the writer meant or
what he was referring to.


ODE 24.


'The Dove fluttered over the Messiah, because He was her
head ; and she sang over Him and her voice was heard: 2and
the inhabitants were afraid and the sojourners were moved:
°the birds dropped their wings, and all creeping things died in
their holes: and the abysses were opened which had been
hidden; and they cried to the Lord like women in travail:
“and no food was given to them, because it did not belong to
them’; Sand they sealed up the abysses with the seal of the
Lord. And they perished, in the thought, those that had
existed from ancient times; ®for they were corrupt from the
beginning; and the end of their corruption was life*: 7and
every one of them that was imperfect perished: for it was not
possible to give ‘them’ a word that they might remain: ®%and
the Lord destroyed the imaginations of all them that had not
the truth with them. °%For they who in their hearts were lifted
up were deficient in wisdom, and so they were rejected, because


1 Another parallel would be the letter sent from the home-land in Bardesanes’
Lymn of the Soul in the Acts of Thomas.

2 Or perhaps, Because that which was non-existent belonged to them.

% Or, was the life of all; and whatever of them, etc.


Ons, 16


122 THE ODES OF SOLOMON


the truth was not with them. 1For the Lord disclosed His way,
and spread abroad His grace: and those who understood it,
know His holiness. Hallelujah.


OpE 24. The Psalm opens with a reference to the Baptism of the
Lord, when the Holy Spirit descended in the form of a Dove on the
head of the Messiah. The occasion was one of great dread to all
created things, man and beast and creeping things shared the terror.
The abysses, personified as living creatures, cried out in pain. They
were sealed up and ended, as belonging to the order of non-existent
things. Men also whose hearts were proud were rejected, when the way
of the Lord was revealed and His holiness known.

In this Psalm with its reference to the abysses, and the things which
are not and are brought to nought, we seem to be nearer to the world of
Gnostic ideas: but it would be difficult to say that any of the catch-
words or peculiar terms of Gnosticism are here. If we are right in
referring the Psalm to the Baptism of the Lord, we are only furnishing
one more proof of the extraordinary prominence given to that event in
the early Church, for which it was the beginning of the Gospel: and
we need not be surprised that the event should be treated in many ways,
both theological and hymnological.

If it is not the Baptism that is alluded to, it must be the Crucifixion,
and in that case we must assume an unknown incident connected with
the Crucifixion, comparable with the appearance of the Dove at the
Baptism. In that case the plaint of the abysses is another allusion to
the descent into Hades.

But there is a special reason why I feel sure that the Baptism must
be the incident to which reference is made: I think we can say that a
written Gospel has here been employed, but not a Canonical Gospel.
It will be remembered that Justin Martyr in his Dialogue with Trypho,
c. 88, takes his account of the Baptism from a source which is either
uncanonical : or, if canonical, is interpolated. When Jesus went down
into the water, a fire was kindled in the Jordan, and when He came up
from the water, the Holy Spirit, like a dove, fluttered upon Him (ému-
TrTjval er avrov ws TepirtEepay TO &y.ov wvedpa): and Justin says expressly
that this was recorded by the Apostles of our Christ (éypaypav oi
ardarodo avrod rovrov Tod Xpictod yudv). This ‘fluttering down’ of
the dove is very near indeed to the language of our Ode.

It is well-known that the account of the Baptism by Justin has been
the centre of serious controversy, on account of the apocryphal
expansions of the narrative, especially the reference to the Fire which
appeared at the Jordan: and it has been argued, reasonably enough,
that Justin cannot have used our Canonical Gospels, or at least must
have used an uncanonical Gospel with them. The same difficulty turns


THE ODES OF SOLOMON 123


up in the descent of the Dove, for the word émurr#vat, which recurs in
Justin, must come from the written source which the author is using.
A reference to Resch, Aussercanonische Parallele zu Luc. p. 15, will show
the wide diffusion of the account from which Justin is working’. The
word ézurrjvax can be traced in Celsus and in Origen and in the seventh
book of Sibyllines, as well as in a number of Latin authors. The
inference, therefore, is that a very early written Gospel is responsible for
the detail: and it is this early Gospel that has been employed by the
writer of the Ode. We conclude, then, that the reference is to the
Baptism and that it is taken from a lost primitive Gospel.

There is, however, a possible suggestion that the Psalm may refer to
the Descent into Hades, and to the Baptism, as events happening in
close connexion. I mean that it is not out of the region of reasonable
criticism to suggest that in the earliest times the Baptism of Christ was
the occasion of His triumph over Hades. We find suspicious hints of
this in the Descensus ad Inferos. Thus in c. xx? we have a statement
made by Seth concerning his father. Adam that he will receive the oil of
healing from Paradise in the last days: ‘veniet enim amantissimus dei
filius de caelis in mundum, et baptizabitur a Johanne in Jordane
flumine, et /nc recipiet pater tuus Adam de hoc oleo misericordiae et
omnes credentes in eum.’

And in c. xxi we find Jesus talking to John the Baptist concerning
his Descent into Hades: ‘Ego Johannes vocem patris de caelo super
eum intonantem audivi et proclamantem, Hic est filius meus dilectus, in
quo mihi bene complacuit. Lgo ab eo responsum accepi quia tipse
descensurus esset ad inferos.’

Here are two curious references connecting the Baptism and the
Descent into Hades. And the question arises whether this 24th Ode
may not look in the same direction. The evidence is, of course,
inadequate, but the statement of the case may perhaps lead to the
discovery of fresh evidence in the same direction.


ODE 25.


1IT was rescued from my bonds and unto thee, my God,
I fled: for thou art the right hand of my Salvation and my
helper. Thou hast restrained those that rise up against me,
4and I shall see him no more: because thy face was with me,
which saved me by thy grace. *But I was despised and
rejected in the eyes of many: and I was in their eyes like lead’,


1 See Introd. pp. 84, 85.
2 Tischendorf, Av. Afoc. p. 425.
3 Cf. Sap. Sol. ii. 16 els KlBdndov édoyloOnuer aire.


124 THE ODES OF SOLOMON


Sand strength was mine from thyself and help. 7Thou didst
set me a lamp! at my right hand and at my left: and in me
there shall be nothing that is not bright?: and I was clothed
with the covering of thy Spirit, and thou didst remove from me
my raiment of skin’; 9for thy right hand lifted me up and
removed sickness from me: and I became mighty in the truth,
and holy by thy righteousness; and all my adversaries were
afraid of me; “and I became admirable by the name of the
Lord, and was justified by His gentleness, and His rest is for
ever and ever. Hallelujah.


Ope 25. In this Psalm we are back again in the region of personal
experience, and there is no allusion to any definite historical event.
The writer, whether Christian or Jew, has been brought out of spiritual
bondage into liberty: he has had to face contempt and scorn, but the
Lord has filled him with brightness and covered him with beauty, and
given him health of mind and body: his enemies have turned back,
and his portion is with the justified saints of the Most High. It is
possible that this Psalm may be meant to express the experience of the
Messiah, emerging from His conflicts into victory: in that case it need
not be the Christian conception of the Messiah, but it might con-
ceivably be such a human representation as we find in the Psalms of
the Pharisees (¢g. Ps. 17, which is our Ps. 60). . But our collection, as
to its first. block of Psalms, is certainly of a later period than the
Pharisee Psalms, so we ought to hesitate before ascribing the same
Messianic ideas to the two parts of the hymnal. For the allusion to
the ‘coat of skin,’ see Introd. pp. 66—70, and cf. Ode 21.


ODE 26.


"I poured out praise to the Lord, for Iam His: and I will
speak His holy song, for my heart is with Him. %For His harp
is in my hands, and the Odes of His rest shall not be silent.
41 will cry unto Him from my whole heart: I will praise and
exalt Him with all my members. 5For from the east and even
to the west is His praise: Sand from the south and even to the
north is the confession of Him: 7and from ‘the top of the hills
to their utmost bound is His perfection. ®Who can write the
Psalms of the Lord, or who read them ? 8or who can train his

SPS .CXxxilery. 2 fit. light.


3 Cp. Clem, Alex. Paed. i. 6, p. 117 Tis kaxlas éxdvodpevor Tov xir@va and Gen.
ili. 21.


THE ODES OF SOLOMON 125


soul for life, that his soul may be saved, or who can rest on
the Most High, so that with his mouth he may speak? Who
is able to interpret the wonders of the Lord? ‘For he who
could interpret would be dissolved and would become that
which is interpreted’. ‘For it suffices to know and to rest?:
for in rest the singers stand, “like a river which has an
abundant fountain,.and flows to the help of them that seek it’,
Hallelujah. ,


OvE 26. This beautiful song of praise recounts the goodness and
greatness of the Lord. All within the writer magnifies the great Name,
but all within is insufficient to tell out what waits to be told. His
praise is widespread to the utmost bound of earth and beyond the
bound of the everlasting hills. The creature cannot express God’s
praise perfectly ; if he could, he would be no longer a creature: he
would be the Word, and not the interpreter of the Word. So it suffices
to know and to rest, while at our feet the river of grace rolls on, an
unchanging flood:


Labitur et labetur in omne volubilis aevum.


It is impossible to say whether the Psalm, as detached from the
rest of the collection, is Jewish or Christian.


ODE ‘27.


1T stretched out my hands and sanctified the Lord: ?for the
extension of my hands is His sign: %and my expansion is the
upright tree (or cross).


OpE 27. This tiny Psalm is Christian, and is based upon the early
Christian fondness for finding the Cross everywhere in the outward
world: in the handle of the labourer’s plough, in the mast and yards of
the seaman’s ship ; and in the human body, when the man stands erect
in the act of prayer with outstretched arms. There can, therefore, be
no doubt that this is a Christian Psalm, and the figurative language
which it employs is characteristic of the second century and not
unknown in the first century. Justin Martyr, for example, sees the


pA Cf. Lactantius, Dév. Zust. praef.: ‘there would be no difference between God
and man, if human thought could reach to the counsels and arrangements of that
eternal Majesty.’ ,
~ 2 Cf. Clem. Alex. Paed. i. 6 (p. 115) bore } mev yrGous ev TO hwrlopart* 7d dé
mépas Ths yvucews, 7] avdmavors.
3 Cf. Lactantius, Div. Just. iv. 30 ‘Si quis aquam vitae cupiat haurire, non ad

detritos lacus deferatur, qui non habent venam, sed uberrimum Dei noverit fontem, quo
irrigatus perenni luce potiatur.’


126 THE ODES OF SOLOMON


Cross, in the outspread arms of Moses in the battle against Amalek ;
but so does Barnabas also: and the same thought is involved in the
conclusion of the Teaching of the Apostles, where an outspread cross
in the sky is one of the signs of the Advent and answers to the Sign of
the Son of Man in Matthew. So it is very likely that the figure in our
Psalm is one of the oldest forms of Christian symbolic teaching. We
shall find it used again in the 42nd Psalm which may, therefore, be by
the same hand as the present one: otherwise it would be an imitation
of it.

Those who care to have a Gnostic example of the use of this wide-
spread Christian figure, will find one in Schmidt, Undekanntes
altgnostisches Werk (\.c. p. 336): “Die Haare seines Gesichtes sind
die Zahl der ausseren Welten, und die Ausbreitung seiner Hande ist
die Offenbarung des Kreuzes.”


ODE 28.


1As the wings of doves over their nestlings; and the mouth
of their nestlings towards their mouths, ?so also are the wings of
the Spirit over my heart: ?my heart is delighted and exults:
like the babe who exults! in the womb of his mother?: 41
believed ; therefore I was at rest; for faithful is He in whom
I have believed: 5 He has richly blessed me and my head is with
Him: and the sword shall not divide me from Him, nor the
scimitar; ®for I am ready before destruction comes: and I have
been set on His immortal* pinions: 7and immortal life will come
forth and give me to drink, and from that life is the spirit within
me, and it cannot die, for it lives. ®They who saw me marvelled
at me, because I was persecuted, and they supposed that I was
swallowed up: for I seemed to them as one of the lost; 9and my
oppression became my salvation; and I was their reprobation
because there was no zeal in me‘; ‘because I did good to
every man | was hated, "and they came round me like mad
dogs*, who ignorantly attack their masters, 'for their thought
is corrupt and their understanding perverted. ‘But I was
carrying water in my right hand‘, and their bitterness I endured
by my sweetness; “and I did not perish, for I was not their
brother nor was my birth like theirs, and they sought for my

1 Oy, leaps. * Cf. Lukes 41.
3 Zit. pinions without corruption.


4 perhaps because I was not a Zealot. > Ps. xxii. 16.
8 query “that I might put out their flame.’


THE ODES OF SOLOMON 127


death and did not find it: for I was older than the memorial of
them ; and vainly did they make attack upon me? and those
who, without reward, came after me*: they sought to destroy
the memorial of him who was before them: "for the thought of
the Most High cannot be anticipated: and His heart is superior
to all wisdom. Hallelujah.


ObE 28. This exquisite Psalm has the music in it of the ‘Quis
separabit ?’ of Romans viii. Nor sword nor scimitar divide the believer
from the Lord. In some respects the Psalm appears to be Messianic
in a Christian sense, for the writer concludes his exulting strain over
enemies who had come round him like mad dogs and had left him for
dead, with the remark that it was not possible for them to blot out the
memory of one who existed before them, and who was of a different
birth from theirs. He also speaks of their attacks as having been
directed against his followers as well as himself. Perhaps, then, the
writer is speaking, in these verses, as if in the person of Christ.


ODE 209.


'The Lord is my hope: in Him I shall not be confounded.
2For according to His praise He made me, and according to
His goodness He gave unto me: %and according to His mercies
He exalted me: and according to His excellent beauty He
set me on high: *and brought me up out of the depths of
Sheol: and from the mouth of death He drew me: Sand I laid
my enémies low, and He justified me by His grace. 6For
I believed in the Lord’s Messiah*: and it appeared to me that
He is the Lord; 7and He showed him‘ His sign: and He led
me by His light, and gave me the rod of His power; 8that
I might subdue the imaginations of the peoples; and the power
of the men of might to bring them low: 9to make war by His
word, and to take victory by His power. 1' And the Lord over-
threw my enemy by His word; and he became like the stubble
which the wind carries away; "and I gave praise to the Most
High because He exalted "me’ His servant and the son of His
handmaid. Hallelujah.

ODE 29. Some one wrote this Psalm, who was a follower of the
Christ and had recognised Him to be the Lord. Out of great conflicts


1 the margin suggests, slaughtering me.
2 Or, who came after me. To no purpose they sought, etc.
3 Or, Christ. 4 query me?


128 THE ODES OF SOLOMON


he had been brought into the place of victory: his enemies had become
like the straw before the wind: he has passed through deep distresses,
which he speaks of figuratively as the pains of Sheol and the gates of
death. But for the reference to the Lordship of the Messiah and to
faith in Him, we might have imagined this Psalm to belong to the
ancient Psalter: we shall be justified in regarding it as a. Judaeo-
Christian composition.


ODE 30.


1Fill ye waters for yourselves from the living fountain of the
Lord, for it is opened to you: 2and come all ye thirsty, and
take the draught; and rest by the fountain of the Lord. ?For
fair it is and pure and gives rest to the soul; Much more
pleasant are its waters than honey; *and the honeycomb of
bees is not to be compared with it. 5For it flows forth from the
lips of the Lord, and from the heart of the Lord is its name.
SAnd it came infinitely and invisibly: and until it was set!
in the midst they did not know it: 7blessed are they who have
drunk therefrom and have found rest thereby. Hallelujah.


OpbE 30. The Psalm is an invitation to the thirsty, somewhat in
the manner of Isaiah lv. The water of life, which here is explained to
be the teaching of the Lord, is flowing from an open fountain, whose
waters, to use the language of the rgth Psalm in the canonical Psalter, are
‘sweeter than honey and the honeycomb.’ The Ode is not so far removed
from Old Testament thought and expression that we can positively call
it a Christian composition. The writer is fond of the similitude of
honey and the honeycomb: we find it, for instance, again in our
fortieth Ode, where we have it for the opening similitude :

‘Like the honey that drops from the comb of the bees...... so is my
hope on thee, O God.’

But this Psalm, also, appears, at first sight, to be destitute of
specific Christian colouring.

The fountain, however, whose waters come without limit, and
invisibly, corresponds to the unexpected appearance of Christ and
Christ’s teaching in the world, when there stood in the midst One
whom they knew not.


ODE-31.


'The abysses were dissolved before the Lord: and darkness
was destroyed by His appearance: error went astray and


1 fit, given.


THE ODES OF SOLOMON 129


perished at His hand: and folly gave no path to walk in, and
was submerged by the truth of the Lord. ?He opened His mouth
and spake grace and joy: and He spake a new song of praise to
His,.name: and He lifted up His voice to the Most High, and
offered to Him the sons that were with Him!. 5And His face
was justified, for thus His holy Father had given to Him. ®Come
forth, ye that have been afflicted and receive joy, and possess
your souls by His grace; and take to you immortal life. 7And
they made me a debtor when I rose up, me who had not been a
debtor?: and they divided my spoil, though nothing was due to
them. ®But I endured and held my peace and was silent’, as if
not moved by them. 9%But I stood unshaken like a firm rock
which is beaten by the waves and endures. ‘And I bore their
bitterness for humility’s sake: “in order that I might redeem
my people, and inherit it, and that I might not make void my
promises to the fathers‘, to whom I promised the salvation of
their seed. Hallelujah.


OpE 31. The Psalm is Messianic, and records how the Christ
fulfilled the promises which, in a pre-existent state, He had made to the
fathers. He has closed the abysses and banished error and vanity.
With a new song in His mouth, He appears before God with the children
whom God has given Him. His similitude is the rock against which the
waves had beaten in vain. It stands firm, whether the waves advance
or retire. Here Christian speech comes near to the language of the
Stoics. One thinks of Marcus Aurelius, and his advice to ‘be like the
promontory against which the waves continually break, but it stands
firm and tames the fury of the water around it®’ One thinks also of
Ignatius, and his advice ‘to stand steady like the beaten anvil’.’ For
the opening sentences about the destroying of the abysses, we must
compare the language of the 24th Psalm of our collection, where the
abysses cry out in pain at the time of the Baptism of the Lord. These
Psalms are by the same Christian hand.


ODE 32.


1To the blessed there is joy from their hearts, and light from
Him that dwells in them: ?and words from the Truth, who was


1 Zt, in His hands. Cf. Is. viii. 18; Heb. ii. 13. 2 2 Cor. v. 21.
307 Pet. 11-23. 4 Rom. xv. 8; Luke i. 55.
5 Medit. Vv. 49. 8 ad Polyc. 3.


O. S. 17


130 THE ODES OF SOLOMON


self-originate!: for He is strengthened by the holy power of
the Most High: and He is unperturbed for ever and ever.
Hallelujah.


OvE 32. Joy, Light, Inspiration, Strength and Calmness belong to
the believer through Him that dwells within.


ODE 33.


1Again Grace ran and forsook corruption, and came down in
Him to bring it to nought; 2and He destroyed perdition from
before Him, and devastated all its order; %and He stood on
a lofty summit? and uttered His voice from one end of the
earth to the other: 4and drew to Him all those who obeyed
Him ; and there did not appear as it were an evil person, but
there arose a perfect virgin* who was proclaiming and calling
and saying, ®O ye sons of men‘, return ye, and ye daughters of
men, live ye: 7and forsake the ways of that corruption and
draw near unto me, and I will enter in to you, and will bring
you forth from perdition, 8and make you wise in the ways of
truth: you shall not be destroyed nor perish: %hear ye me and be
redeemed. For the grace of God I am telling among you: and
by my means you shall be redeemed and become blessed. I
am your judge; and they who have put me on shall not be
injured: but they shall possess the new world that is incorrupt:
"my chosen ones walk in me, and my ways I will make known
to them that seek me, and I will make them trust in my name.
Hallelujah.


ODE 33. Apparently this Psalm is Messianic, though Christ is not
named. He must be the one that rises from the dead and sends forth
his triumphant voice to the ends of the earth. A virgin also stands and
proclaims, who must be either the Divine Wisdom (the language is
very like that of the eighth chapter of Proverbs) or the Church®. She
promises salvation by Divine Grace and immortality in a new world to
those that walk in her ways.


Gk. avroguyjs, as in the oracular reply to the enquiry as to the Divine Nature,
avropuys, ddldaKros, dunrwp, dotrupédixros. See Lact. De Div. Inst. i. 7.

2 Prov. viii. 2. 3 Prov. viii. 1. 4 Prov. viii. 4.

° Cf. Clem. Alex. Paed. i. 6 (p. 123) wla 58 udvn yiverau rnp Tap0évos *Exkdn-
clay éuol dlrov avrny kadetv. See also Introd. p. 77.


THE ODES OF SOLOMON 131


ODE 34.


"No way is hard where there is a simple heart. 2Nor is
there any wound where the thoughts are upright: @nor is there
any storm in the depth of the illuminated thought: +where one
is surrounded by every beautiful place, there is nothing that is
divided, the likeness of what is below: He is the one that is
above; for everything is above: what is below is nothing
but the imagination of those that are without knowledge.
SGrace has been revealed for your salvation. Believe and live
and be saved. Hallelujah.


OpvE 34. All the hard things are easy, where the soul itself is right :
no storms invade the hidden place of communion with God. Evil itself
becomes unreal, and that which is beneath exists not before that which
is above.


ODE 35.


'The dew of the Lord in quietness He distilled upon me:
2and the cloud of peace He caused to rise over my head, which
guarded me continually; it was to me for salvation: every-
thing was shaken and they were affrighted ; 4and there came
forth from them a smoke and a judgment; and I was keeping quiet
in the order of the Lord: 5more than shelter was He to me,
and more than foundation. And I was carried like a child by
his mother: and He gave me milk, the dew of the Lord: 7and
I grew great by His bounty, and rested in His perfection, and
I spread out my hands in the lifting up of my soul: and I was
made right with the Most High, and I was redeemed with Him.
Hallelujah.


OpE 35. The dew lies on the branch of the man that sings this
Psalm: Divine Peace guards him like a sheltering cloud. The Lord is
his sure defence in the day of evil. Mother’s arms are his place and
mother’s milk his portion. ‘No cradled child more softly lies than I:
Come soon, eternity.’


ODE 36.


1J rested on the Spirit of the Lord: and ‘the Spirit’ raised
me on high: 2and made me stand on my feet in the height of
the Lord, before His perfection and His glory, while I was


Ee: THE ODES OF SOLOMON


praising "Him” by the composition of His songs. The Spirit’
brought me forth before the face of the Lord: and, although
a son of man, I~was named the Illuminate, the Son of God:
4while I praised amongst the praising ones, and great was
I amongst the mighty ones. 5For according to the greatness
of the Most High, so He made me: and like His own newness
He renewed me; and He anointed me from His own perfection:
Sand I became one of His neighbours; and my mouth was
opened, like a cloud of dew; 7and my heart poured out as it
were a gushing stream of righteousness, 8and my access ‘to
Him”? was in peace; and I was established by the spirit of His
government. Hallelujah.


OvE 36. This is a perplexing Psalm, from a theological point of
view. It is almost impossible to determine whether the Psalmist is
speaking in his own’name, or in that of the Messiah; or whether it is
an alternation of one with the other. It seems almost a necessity, when
the Holy Spirit is spoken of as a Mother, that the offspring should be
the Son of God: and that such was the theology of certain early
believers we know from the fragment of the Ebionite Gospel, in which
Christ speaks of being taken by the hair of His head by His mother, the
Holy Spirit, and carried to Mount Tabor. If this be the right
interpretation, then the Illuminated Son of God is Christ. But the
latter part of the Psalm seems to be in too low a strain for this
interpretation: to be one of those who are near to God is certainly not
orthodox theology, though it may conceivably be Adoptionist : and the
heart that pours out righteousness and makes its offering in peace
seems rather to be the language that describes one of the pious in
Israel.


ODE.37.


'T stretched out my hands to my Lord: and to the Most High
I raised my voice: and I spake with the lips of my heart ; and
He heard me, when my voice reached Him?: ? His answer came
to me, and gave me the fruits of my labours; 4and it gave me
rest by the Grace of the Lord. Hallelujah.


Ove 37. A colourless Psalm, something like one of the shorter
and more elementary Psalms of the Hebrew Psalter. The writer has
cried to God: his prayer has been heard: his heart has appealed,
and an answer has come. His work has been followed by Divine
blessing.


1 Or perhaps, my offering. ? Zit. fell to Him.


THE ODES OF SOLOMON 133


ODE 38.


"I went up to the light of truth as if into a chariot: 2and the
Truth took me and led me: and carried me across pits and gulleys;
and from the rocks and the waves it preserved me: and it became
to me an instrument of Salvation : and set me on the arms of im-
mortal life: and ft went with me and made me rest, and suffered
me not to wander, because it was the Truth; 5and I ran no risk,
because I walked with Him; ®and I did not make an error in
anything because I obeyed the Truth. 7’For Error flees away
from it, and meets it not: but the Truth proceeds in the right
path, and ®whatever I did not know, it made clear to me, all the
poisons of error, and the plagues which announce the fear of
death: %and I saw the destroyer of destruction, when the bride who
is corrupted is adorned ; and the bridegroom who corrupts and
is corrupted ; and I asked the Truth, ‘Who are these?’; and
He said to me, This is the deceiver and the error: “and they are
alike in the beloved and in his bride: and they lead astray and
corrupt the "whole’ world: 'and they invite many to the
banquet, '?and give them to drink of the wine of their intoxi-
cation, and remove? their wisdom and knowledge, and ‘so they"
make them without intelligence; and then they leave them ;
and then these go about like madmen corrupting: seeing
that they are without heart, nor do they seek for it. And
I was made wise so as not to fall into the hands of the Deceiver ;
and I rejoiced in myself because the Truth went with me, and
I was established and lived and was redeemed, “and my
foundations were laid on the hand of the Lord: because He
established me. For He set the root and watered it and fixed
it and blessed it; and its fruits are for ever. ‘It struck deep
and sprung up and spread out, and was full and enlarged ;
20and the Lord alone was glorified in His planting and in His
husbandry: by His care and by the blessing of His lips, 7'by
the beautiful planting of His right-hand?: and by the discovery
of His planting, and by the thought of His mind. Hallelujah.


Ove 38. The Psalm opens with a beautiful description of the
power of the truth over those that surrender to it. Truth becomes to


2 Joh. 7.


them guidance in all difficult and rough and dangerous places. But a


1 Zit. they vomit up. 2 Tsi/lx. ar.


134 THE ODES OF SOLOMON


the Psalm is not merely a Psalm of the Truth, it is a Psalm concerning
Truth and Error. They appear to stand like Christ and Antichrist.
We are tempted to believe that the writer had at one time been brought
face to face with some special outbreak of erroneous teaching, one of
the many Antichrists of the first century. There are some things which
suggest Simon Magus and his Helena, who went about to mislead the
faithful. It is, however, useless to try and define the situation more
closely. Whatever form the attractions of Truth and Error took to the
Psalmist, he tells us that he escaped the Circean blandishments, and
sailed past the Sirens. His foundations were in the holy mountain ;
his growth was in God and of God. God planted, God watered, God
gave the increase. The Father was the husbandman.


ODE 39.


'Great rivers are the power of the Lord!: ?and they carry
headlong those who despise Him: and entangle their paths:
3and they sweep away their fords, and catch their bodies and
destroy their lives. *For they are more swift than lightning
and more rapid, and those who cross them in faith are not
moved ; 5and those who walk on them without blemish shall
not be afraid. For the sign in them is the Lord; and the sign
is the way of those who cross in the name of the Lord: 7put on,
therefore, the name of the Most High, and know Him: and you
shall cross without danger, for the rivers will be subject to you.
8The Lord has bridged them by His word; and He walked
and crossed them on foot?: 9and His footsteps stand “firm” on
the water, and are not injured; they are as firm as a tree that is
truly set up. 1 And the waves were lifted up on this side and
on that, but the footsteps of our Lord Messiah stand firm and
are not obliterated and are not defaced. “And a way has been
appointed for those who cross after Him and for those who


perfect the course of faith in Him and worship His name’.
Hallelujah.


ODE 39. When I first read this Psalm I thought that we had
another historical landmark, in the allusion to some great accident
connected with the sudden rise of one of the great Oriental rivers. But
upon reflection, I have come to the conclusion that the writer is
speaking of disasters generally, under the natural figure of a rising and


1 Tsaiah xliii. 2.
2 Matt. xiv. 25. 3 Cf. Matt. xiv. 28.


THE ODES OF SOLOMON 135


rushing river. In such times of flood the unbelievers find no footing
and are swept away: believers on the other hand walk the waters like
their Lord and with their Lord. Perhaps there is a reference to
Isaiah xliii. 2, ‘When thou passest through the waters I will be with
thee.’ The same promise appears to be quoted in Psalms of Solomon
vi. 5, ‘When he passeth through rivers, yea, through the surge of the
sea, he is not affrighted.’ Their feet stand firm where His feet had
stood unmoved. Here the background of the teaching is the account
of our Lord’s walking on the sea of Galilee. The reference is valuable’,
for we have hardly any other allusion to events recorded in the Gospel,
beyond the Birth, Baptism and Crucifixion, to which we have already
referred. The paucity of parallels to the New Testament in the new
Psalter should be one of the strongest reasons for believing that, as
regards the major part of the collection, we are dealing with very
early material.


ODE 40.


‘As the honey distils from the comb of the bees, 2and the
milk flows from the woman that loves her children?; so also is
my hope on Thee, my God. *As the fountain gushes out its
water, °so my heart gushes out the praise of the Lord and my
lips utter praise to Him, and my tongue His psalms. ®And my
face exults with His gladness,.and my spirit exults in His love,
and my soul shines in Him: 7and reverence confides in Him;
and redemption in Him stands assured: 8and His abundance is
immortal life, and those who participate in it are incorrupt.
Hallelujah.


, ODE 40. An exquisite Psalm from what St Bernard would call the
‘anima sitiens Deum.’ Praise flows out of his life and from his lips as
honey drops from the comb or milk from the breast. God’s gladness
makes his face without to shine, and his soul within to be radiant. If
mortality is not quite swallowed up of life, it is irradiated by it. There
is assurance of faith and the confident hope of immortality.


ODE 41.


1AIl the Lord’s children will praise Him, and will collect the
truth of His faith, *And His children shall be known to Him.


1 Moreover, if Peter’s walking on the sea is involved in the reference of the Odist,
it is not Mark’s gospel that is being quoted, nor any of the canonical four except
Matthew.

2 Cf. Clem. Alex. Paed. i. 6 (p. 119) pirocrépyous rnydfouca pacrots.


136 THE ODES OF SOLOMON


Therefore we will sing in His love: we live in the Lord by His
grace: and life we receive in His Messiah: *for a great day has
shined upon us: and marvellous is He who has given us of
His glory. 5Let us, therefore, all of us unite together in the
name of the Lord, and let us honour Him in His goodness,
Sand let our faces shine in His light: and let our hearts
meditate in His love by night and by day. 7Let us exult with
the joy of the Lord. ®AII those will be astonished that see me.
For from another race am I: 9for the Father of truth remembered
me: He who possessed me from the beginning : for His bounty
begat me, and the thought of His heart: “and His Word is with
us in all our way ; '#the Saviour who makes alive and does not
reject our souls: the man who was humbled, and exalted by
His own righteousness, “the Son of the Most High appeared in
the perfection of His father; and light dawned from the Word
that was beforetime in Him; ‘the Messiah is truly one’; and
He was known before the foundation of the world, “that He
might save souls for ever by the truth of His name: a new song
arises? from those who love Him. Hallelujah.


Oper 41. This Psalm, again, is Messianic, but certainly not in the
prophetic sense. The writer knows that the Son of God is come.
The glorious day of which prophets spoke has dawned: the dayspring
from on high has become the noontide glory. Christ who was
humbled is now exalted ; the Word, who existed before the foundation
of the world, has appeared. ‘The language finds its nearest parallel in
the Johannine theology.

It is not, at first sight, quite clear what the writer means by being
sprung from another race”. Is it that he is of Gentile origin and
persuaded to dwell in the tents of Shem? That would agree well with
the general Palestinian origin of the Psalms. In that case he has become
sufficiently Hebraized to sing Zion’s songs in a Zionite manner: and to
praise God night and day, where a Gentile would naturally have done
it by day and night. :


ODE 42.


'T stretched out my hands and approached my Lord: 2for the
stretching of my hands is His sign: %my expansion is the
outspread tree which was set up on the way of the Righteous
One. *And I? became of no account to those who did not


1 Cf. Ign. ad Magn. 7 eis éorw "Inoots Xpiorés.
2 But see Introd. pp. 65, 66. 3 Christ speaks.


THE ODES OF SOLOMON 137


take hold of me; and I shall be with those who love me. . 5 All
my persecutors are dead; and they sought after me who
supposed that I was alive: Sand I rose up and am with them;
and I will speak by their mouths. '7For they have despised
those who persecuted them; ®and I lifted up over them the
yoke of my love; °%like the arm of the bridegroom over the
bride, so was my yoke! over those that know me: “and as the
couch that is spread in the house of the *"bridegroom and bride™,
12so is my love over those that believe in me. 1%And I was not
rejected though I was reckoned to be so. “I did not perish,
though they devised ‘it’ against me. ‘Sheol saw me and was
made miserable: death cast me up and many along with me.
71? had gall and bitterness‘, and I went down with him to the
utmost of his depth: and the feet and the head he let go, for
they were not able to endure my face: "and I made a con-
gregation of living men amongst his dead men, and I spake
with them by living lips: ?0because my word shall not be void:
2tand those who had died ran towards me: and they cried and
said, Son of God, have pity on us, and do with us according to
thy kindness, ?2and bring us out from the bonds of darkness:
and open to us the door by which we shall come out to
thee. ?%For we see that our death has not touched thee.
24Tet us also be redeemed with thee: for thou art our
Redeemer. #®And I heard their voice; and my name was
heard over their heads: ?Sfor they are free men and they are
mine. Hallelujah.


OvE 42. This Psalm concludes the collection of Odes ascribed to
Solomon: what follows is the extant book of Solomonic Psalms. The
collection up to the present point is marked in each case with a final
Hallelujah. The remaining Psalms, with one accidental exception, are
not marked this way. So we may add the editorial remark at the
end of this Psalm, that ‘the Odes of Solomon, the Son of David, are
ended.’

The concluding Psalm is Christian and Messianic: its main theme
is the descent of Christ into Hades in order to liberate the imprisoned
souls of the fathers: and it should be read along with the extant
apocryphal books that deal with this subject.


1 Matt. xi. 29. 2-2 fit. bridegrooms. 5 Cod, He.
4 Cf. Descensus ad Inferos 4 ‘They crucified him, and gave him gall and
vinegar to drink. Be ready, therefore, to hold him firmly when he cometh.’


O, S. 18


138 THE ODES OF SOLOMON


Almost the whole of the Psalm is ex ore Christi: the writer begins,
as in the short 29th Ode, with the statement that his lifted hands make
the figure of the Cross of the Righteous One. But he soon diverges
into the harrowing of hell. The imprisoned souls cry out for release to
Him over whom death, which binds them, has no power. A congregation
of saints is gathered in the place of the dead. They become Christ’s
free men. Incidentally an expression is used of their relation to the
Lord which appears to be employed elsewhere: they are called, not
the members, but the feet of the Lord. Hades disgorges both the
head and the feet: the head is, of course, Christ; and the feet are the
saints of old time’.

The Psalm is too highly evolved, in its imaginary treatment of the
Descent into Hell, to be reckoned as belonging to the same period as
the main body of the collection. Still it cannot be very much later, for
its mystical language is in close agreement with many of the most
beautiful of the Psalms before us: and the union of Christ with the
Church, under the figure of the Bridegroom and the Bride, is expressed
with great beauty. Incidentally the textual critic will find something
suggestive for his New Testament apparatus. The writer speaks of ‘the
couch that is spread in the house of the bridegrooms,’ marking the
plural by dots in the usual Syriac manner: it is evident that he means
‘in the house of the bridegroom and the bride.’ Perhaps, then, the
curious Western reading of Matt. xxv. 1, ‘went out to meet the
bridegroom and the bride,’ may be due to a more accurate interpretation
of an Aramaic original than what we find in the received and edited
texts.


1 Cf. Ode 23.


PSALM 43=PSALMS OF SOLOMON _1.


I cried unto the Lord, when I was in affliction at my end;
and to God when sinners set upon me: ?for suddenly there was
heard before me the sound of war: for He will hear me, because
I am filled with righteousness: and I reckoned in my heart that
I was filled with righteousness: in the day that I became rich
and was with the multitude of my children. *Their wealth,
however, has been given to the whole earth: and their glory as
far as the ends of the earth. °They were lifted up as high as the
stars : and they said, speaking without knowledge.... 7 For their
sins were in secret, and I knew them not: 8and their wickedness
exceeded that of the nations that had been before them: and
they defiled the sanctuary of the Lord with pollution.


PSALM 44=PSALMS OF SOLOMON 2.


1In the insolence of the sinful man, he cast down with
battering rams! the strong walls and thou didst not restrain him.
2And the Gentile foreigners went up on thy altar, and were
trampling on it with their shoes in their insolence. %For the
children of Jerusalem had polluted the Holy House of the Lord:
and they were profaning the offerings *to God? with wickedness.
4Wherefore He said, Remove them, cast them away from me.
5 And He did not establish with them the beauty of His glory: it
was rejected before the Lord : and they were utterly torn in pieces.
6Her sons and her daughters were in bitter captivity: and on
their neck was put the sealed yoke of the Gentiles : 7according
to their sins, so He dealt with them: for He suffered them to
pass into the hand of him that was stronger than they: ®for He
turned away His face from His mercy: young men and old men


1 7t. great beams. 2-2 fit. of God.


140 THE PSALMS OF SOLOMON


and their children together : °because they also had worked evil
together, that they might not hearken unto me: ‘and the heaven
was mightily angered, and the earth rejected them: "because
none in the earth had done therein like their doings: and that
the earth may know all thy righteous judgments, O God. They
set up the sons of Jerusalem for mockery within her, in the place of
harlots ; and every one that transgressed’, was transgressing as if
before the sun: while they made sport in their villainies. For as
they were used to do, in the face of the sun they made a show
of their villainies. And the daughters of Jerusalem were
polluted according to thy judgments ‘for they had polluted
themselves in lustful intercourse. My belly and my bowels are
pained over these things. ‘But I will justify thee, O Lord, in
the uprightness of my heart; because in thy judgments is thy
righteousness, O God. 1 For thou dost reward sinful men accord-
ing to their deeds: and according to their wicked and bitter sins,
%Thou didst disclose their sins, in order that Thy judgment
might be known: "and Thou didst blot out their remembrance
from the earth. God is a judge and righteous, and accepteth no
man’s person. ?°For the Gentiles reproached Jerusalem, in their
wickedness, and her beauty was cut off from the throne of His?
glory. *'And she was covered with sackcloth instead of
beauteous raiment: and there was a rope on her head instead
of a crown. ?#She cast off from her the dazzling? glory which
God had put upon her: ?%and in contempt her beauty was cast
away on the ground. ?+And I beheld and I besought the face
of the Lord, and I said: Enough! Thou hast made thy hand
heavy, O Lord, upon Israel, by the bringing in of the Gentiles:
?5for they have mocked and not pitied, in anger; 26and in
reproach they are consumed, unless thou, O Lord, shalt restrain
them in thy wrath. ?/For it was not in zeal that they did ‘this,
but in the lust of the soul: ?8that they might pour out their
wrath upon us in plundering us. But thou, O Lord, delay not to
recompense them upon their own heads: ?9to cast down the pride
of the dragon to contempt. %°And I delayed not until the Lord
showed me his insolence smitten on the mountains of Egypt : and
despised more than him that is least on land and on sea: ®"and his
body coming on the waves in much contempt, and none to bury


1 Or, passed by. 2 Gk. her.
3 Gk. her diadem of glory.


THE PSALMS OF SOLOMON 141


Thim’, %?Because He had rejected him with scorn. For he did
not consider thatheisaman. And his end shall not be esteemed.
83 For he said ; I will be lord of land and sea: and he knew not
that the Lord is God, great and mighty and powerful, °+and He
is King over Heaven and over Earth: and He judges kingdoms
and princes, 95> He who raiseth me up in glory and layeth low?
the proud in contémpt, not temporal but eternal; because they
knew Him not’.

86 And now, behold, ye great ones of the earth, the judgment
of the Lord, for He is a righteous King, and judges what is under
the whole heaven. %7Bless ye the Lord, ye who fear the Lord
reverently : for the mercies of the Lord are on them that fear
Him with judgment, *8to separate between the righteous and the
sinful, and to reward the sinful for ever according to their deeds:
38and to be gracious to the righteous after their oppression
by sinners: and to reward the sinful for what he has done that
is right: *4°because the Lord is kind to those that call upon Him
in patience, to do according to His mercy to His saints: to cause
them to stand before Him at all times in strength. *'Blessed is
the Lord for ever by His servants.


PSALM 45=PSALMS OF SOLOMON 3.


‘Why sleepest thou, my soul, and dost not bless the Lord?
2Sing a new song to God and keep vigil in-His watch. For a
psalm is good ‘to sing’? to God out of a good heart. *The
righteous will ever make mention of the Lord: in confession and
in righteousness are the judgments of the Lord. *The righteous
will never neglect?, when he is chastened by the Lord: because
his will is always before the Lord. 5The righteous stumbles and
justifies God : he falls and I wait? what the Lord will do to him.
And he looks to see from whence his salvation comes. €The
stability of the righteous is from God their Saviour: for in the
house of the righteous there does not lodge sin upon sin:
7because He always visits the house of the righteous to remove
the sins of his transgressions. ®And He delivers his soul, in
whatever he has sinned without knowledge, by fasting and by
humiliation: and the Lord purifies every holy man and his house.


1 Gk. xowulfwy and so Syr.
2 =Gk. ddvywpioer: cf. Prov. iii. 11; Heb. xii. 5. 3 Read, ‘and he waits.’


142 THE PSALMS OF SOLOMON


9But the sinner stumbleth and curseth his own life, and the day
in which he was born: and the birth-pangs of his mother; and
he adds sin upon sin to his life: he falls, and because his fall is
grievous, he rises not again: "for the destruction of the sinner is
for ever: and He will not remember him when He visits the
righteous: 'this is the portion of sinners for ever. But those
who fear the Lord shall rise to eternal life: and their life shall
be in the light of the Lord, and he will not fail any more.
[ Hallelujah*.]


PSALM 46 (47)=PSALMS OF SOLOMON 4.


1Why sittest thou, O wicked man, in the congregation of the
righteous: and thy heart is far removed from God; and by thy
wickedness thou provokest to anger the God of Israel, ?exceed-
ingly by thy words, and exceedingly by thy "outward" signs,
more than all men? He who is severe in his words in his con-
demnation of sinners in judgment, ?and his hand is the first to
be on him, as though ‘he acted’ in zeal: and he is guilty himself
of all kinds of sinful crimes: 4his eyes are upon every woman
immodestly : and his tongue lies when he answers with oaths.
5In the night and in the darkness, as if he were not seen by the
eyes of man, he talketh with every woman in the cunning of
wickedness: ®and he is quick to go into every house with joy,
as if he had no wickedness. *7God shall remove those who
judge with respect of persons: but He lives with the upright, in
the corruption of his body and in the poverty of his life. %God
will disclose the deeds of those who are men-pleasers: in scorn
and derision are his works: %and let the saints justify the judgment
of their God, when the wicked shall be removed from before the
righteous: the accepter of persons who talks law with guile,
“and his eyes are on a house, quietly like a serpent, to dispel
the wisdom of each one by words of villainy: his words are
with an evil intent, with a view to the working of the lust of the
wicked: and he does not remove until he has scattered in
bereavement, and has desolated the house because of his sinful
lust. ‘And he supposes in his words that there is none that
sees and judges: and he is filled with this sinfulness ; and his


} This is an addition by the scribe, under the influence of the Odes of Solomon,
which he has been copying.


THE PSALMS OF SOLOMON 143


eyes are on another house to devastate it with words of prodi-
gality: and his soul is, like Sheol, never satisfied. ‘For all
these things, let "his portion™, O Lord, be before thee in
dishonour ; let his going out be with groans and his coming in
with curses: in pains, and in poverty and in destitution, O
Lord, let his life be: let his sleep be in anguish and his waking
in vexation: "let sleep be removed from his eyelids by night :
let him fall from ‘every work of his hands in dishonour; %and
let him enter his house empty-handed: and let his house be
destitute of everything that can satisfy his soul: 2°and from his
offspring let not one draw near unto him: "let the flesh of the
hypocrites be scattered by wild beasts; and the bones of the wicked
be before the sun in dishonour: ??let the ravens pick out the eyes
of those who are men-pleasers: ?%because they have laid waste
many houses of men in dishonour: and have scattered them in
lust: 74and they remembered not God ; nor feared God in all
these things ; 75and they provoked God, and he was angered to
destroy them from the earth ; because with crafty intent they had
played the hypocrite with innocent souls. ?@Blessed are they
that fear the Lord in their innocency: ?7and the Lord will save
them from all the cunning and wicked men% ?®May God
destroy all them that work fraud with pride®: for a strong judge
is the Lord our God in righteousness; ?%let thy mercy, O Lord,
be upon all them that love thee.


PSALM 47 (48)=PSALMS OF SOLOMON 5.


10 Lord my God, I will praise thy name with exultation,
amongst those that know thy righteous judgments. ?For thou
art gracious and merciful, and the place of refuge of the poor.
3When I cry unto thee, be not thou silent unto me. *For one
does not take spoil from the strong man: ®or who shall take
ought from what thou hast made, unless thou give it him?
SBecause he is man, and his portion is before thee in the
balance: and he shall not add ought to better it apart from thy
judgment, O God. 7In our afflictions we call thee to our help:
and thou hast not turned away our petition: for thou art our
God. #®Delay not thou thy hand from us: lest we be strengthened


1 Syr. let him. 2 Gk. dd mwayrds oxavdddov mapavduou.
3 Lit. excess.


144 THE PSALMS OF SOLOMON


to sin: and turn not away thy face from us, lest we remove
away from thee: but to thee we will come: for if I should
be hungry, O Lord, unto thee will I cry, O God: and thou
wilt bestow. "For the fowl and the fish thou dost feed.
When thou givest rain in the desert to cause the grass to
spring up, to prepare food in the wilderness for every living
thing, and if they shall be hungry, unto thee will they lift
up their faces: kings and rulers and peoples thou dost
provide for, O God: and the hope of the poor and the
miserable, who is it except thyself, O Lord: “and thou wilt
answer him, because thou art kind and gentle: and thou wilt
satisfy his soul by, opening thy hand in mercy. ‘For the
kindness of a man is with parsimony; to-day and to-morrow ;
and if it should be that he repeats his gift and does not grumble,
well!” that is a wonder! ‘®But thy bounty is plenteous in
kindness and in wealth; and there is no expectation towards
thee that He will be sparing in gifts’. 17 For over all the earth is
thy mercy, O Lord, in kindness. Blessed is the man whom the
Lord shall remember in poverty: for that a man should exceed
his measure means that he will sin. Sufficient is a low estate
with righteousness?: ?°for those that fear the Lord are pleased
with good things: and thy grace is on Israel in thy Kingdom:
"!blessed be the glory of the Lord, for He is our King.


PSALM 48 (49)= PSALMS OF SOLOMON 6.


‘Blessed is the man whose heart is prepared to call upon the
name of the Lord: ?and when he shall remember the name of
the Lord, he will be saved. *His ways are directed from before
the Lord: and the works of his hands are preserved by his God:
“and ‘in’ the evil vision of the night his soul shall not be moved,
because he is His: Sand his soul shall not be affrighted in the
passing through the rivers, and in the tumult of the seas. For
he rose from his sleep and praised the name of the Lord, 7and
in the quiet of his heart he sang psalms to the name of the
Lord: and he made request from the face of the Lord con-
cerning all his house: ®and the Lord hears the prayer of every

The Gk. 06 éorw émi ce has been misread as od éorw xreé.

? The Syriac has omitted a sentence of the Greek by a common transcriptional


error. Add ‘and herein is the blessing of the Lord that a man be satisfied in
righteousness".


THE PSALMS OF SOLOMON 145


one that is in his fear, and every petition of the soul that trusts
in him; and the Lord fulfils it. ®Blessed is he who doeth mercy
upon them that love Him in truth.


PSALM*50 (49) = PSALMS OF SOLOMON 7.


‘Remove not thy tabernacle from us, O Lord, lest those
rise up against us who hate us without a cause: 2for thou hast
put them away, O God, that their foot may not tread the
inheritance of thy sanctuary. ®Thou in thy good pleasure
chasten me and deliver us not over to the Gentiles. For if
thou shouldest send death, it is thou who givest it command
against us; Sfor thou art the Merciful One, and wilt not be
angry so as to consume us utterly. ®For because of thy Name
that encamps amongst us, mercies shall be upon us: and the
Gentiles shall not be able to prevail against us, 7for thou art our
strength: and we will call upon thee and thou wilt answer us:
®for thou wilt be gracious to the seed of Israel, for ever, and
thou wilt not forget him?: ®thou wilt establish us in the time of
thy help, to show favour to the house of Jacob, in the day that is
prepared for them.


PSALM 51 (50)=PSALMS OF SOLOMON 8.


'Distress and the sound of war mine ears have heard, the
sound of the trumpet, and the noise of slaughter and destruction:
?the sound of much people like a mighty and frequent wind:
like the tempest of fire which comes over the wilderness. %And
I said to my heart: where will he judge him? 4I heard a sound
in Jerusalem, the Holy City; 5the bonds of my loins were
loosed at the report?: and my knees trembled, and my bones
were moved like flax. 7And I said, They will make straight
their paths in righteousness and I remembered the judgments
of the Lord, from the creation of the heaven and the earth: and
I justified God in all His judgments from the beginning’, ®But
God laid bare their sins before the sun: and to all the earth
was made known the righteous judgments of the Lord. 9For in

1 The Syriac has dropped the sentence: ‘and we are under thy yoke for ever, and


under the scourge of thy chastening.’
2 Gk. aads: and my heart was afraid. 3 fit. from eternity.


0. S. 19


146 THE PSALMS OF SOLOMON


secret places of the earth were they doing evil; the son had
connexion with the mother and the father with the daughter:
Nand all of them committed adultery with their neighbours’
wives: and they made solemn covenants amongst themselves
concerning these things: '#they were plundering the House of
God’s Holiness, as if there was none to inherit and to deliver.
13 And they were treading His sanctuary in all their pollutions,
and in the time? of their separation they polluted the sacrifices,
as common meat: “and they left no sins which they did not
commit, and even worse than the Gentiles. ‘For this cause
God mingled for them a spirit of error, and caused them to
drink a living cup for drunkenness: He brought him from the
other side of the world, the one that afflicts grievously: “and he
decrees war against Jerusalem and against her land: ‘and the
judges of the land met him with joy: and they said to him: thy
path shall be ordered, come, enter in peace. ‘They levelled
the lofty paths? for his entering: they opened the doors against
Jerusalem: and they crowned the walls. ?°And he entered like
a father into the house of his children, in peace: and he set his
feet 'there™ in great firmness: 7'and they took possession of the
towers and the walls of Jerusalem. ??For God brought him in
assurance against their error: *%and they destroyed their
princes because he was cunning in counsel: and they poured
out the blood of the dwellers in Jerusalem like the water of
uncleanness: ?4and he carried off their sons and daughters, who
had been "born’ in pollution, and had wrought their pollution
even as also their fathers had done. ?®And Jerusalem defiled
even those things that were consecrated to the name of God:
27and God was justified in His judgments upon the nations of
the earth, ?8and the saints of God were as innocent lambs
in their midst. #%God is to be praised who judges all the
earth in His righteousness. %°Behold, O God, thou hast shown
us ‘thy judgments™ in thy righteousness, ®tand our eyes have
seen thy judgments, O God: and we have justified thy name
that is honoured for ever.

82For thou art a God of righteousness: who judgest Israel
with chastening. °%Turn thy mercy towards us and be
gracious to us: **and gather the dispersion of Israel, in mercy


1 Xt. blood. 2 Jet. paths of elevation.
3 Cod. om.


THE PSALMS OF SOLOMON 147


and in kindness: *5for thy faithfulness is with us: and we are
stiff-necked, and thou art our chastener: ®6do not desert us,
O our God! lest the Gentiles should swallow us up, as though
there were none to deliver: 87and thou art our God from the
beginning, and upon thee is our hope, O Lord: ®8%and we will
not depart from thee, for thy judgments are good; ?%upon us
and upon our children is thy good will for ever, O Lord God,
our Saviour, and we shall not be shaken again, for ever. 4°The
Lord is to be praised for His judgments by the mouth of His
saints: and blessed is Israel from the Lord for evermore.


PSALM 52 (51)= PSALMS OF SOLOMON g.


™When Israel went forth into captivity to a strange land,
because they departed from the Lord their Saviour: 2then were
they cast out from the inheritance that God gave them:
amongst all the Gentiles was the dispersion of Israel, according
to the word of God, *that thou mightest be justified, O God, in
thy righteousness over our wickedness: 4for thou art a just
Judge over all the peoples of the earth. ®For there will not be
hidden from thy knowledge any one who doeth wickedness :
Sand the righteousnesses of thy upright ones, O Lord, are
before thee. And where shall a man be hidden from thy
knowledge, O God? 7For we work by free-will and the choice
of our own souls to do either good or evil by the work of our
hands: ®8and in thy righteousnesses thou dost visit the children
of men. 2%For he who does righteousness lays up a treasure of
life with the Lord: and he who does wickedness incurs judgment
upon his soul in perdition.

10For His judgments are in righteousness upon every man and
his house. "For with whom wilt thou deal graciously, O God,
unless with them that call upon the Lord? ‘For he purifies
the sins of the soul by confession, because shame is on us and
our faces because of all these things. For to whom will He
remit sins except to those that have sinned? ‘For the
righteous thou dost bless, and dost not reprove them for any of
their sins; for thy grace is on those that hdve sinned when they
have repented. ‘And, now, thou art our God: and we are
thy people whom thou hast loved: behold and have mercy, O
God of Israel ; for thine are we: remove not thy compassions


148 THE PSALMS OF SOLOMON


from us, lest the Gentiles should set upon us: for thou hast
chosen the seed of Abraham rather than all the Gentiles, and
thou hast put on us thy Name, O Lord: and thou wilt not
remove for ever. 1Thou didst surely covenant with our fathers
concerning us: and we hope in thee, in the repentance of our
souls. 2°The mercies over the house of Israel are of the Lord,
now and evermore.


PSALM 53 (52)= PSALMS OF SOLOMON IO.


1Blessed is the man whom God remembers with reproof:
and He has restrained him from the way of.evil by stripes: so as
_ to be purified from his sin, that he may not abound ‘therein’.
2For he who prepares his loins for beating shall also be purified :
for He is good to those that receive His chastening. %For the
way of the righteous is straight, and His chastisement does not
turn it aside. *For the face’ of the Lord is upon them that *
love Him in truth, and the Lord will remember His servants in
mercy. 5For the testimony is in the law of the everlasting
covenant: the testimony of the Lord is in the ways of the
children of men, by "His’ visitations. SRighteous and upright
is our God in all His judgments: and Israel will praise the name
of the Lord with joy. 7And the saints shall give thanks in
the congregation of the people: and on the poor the Lord will
have mercy, in the gladness of Israel. ®For God is kind and
merciful for ever: and the congregations of Israel shall praise
the name of the Lord: °for of the Lord is the salvation upon the
house of Israel, unto the everlasting kingdom?


PSALM 54 (53)= PSALMS OF SOLOMON 11.


'Blow ye ‘the trumpet’ in Zion, the certain trumpet of the
saints : ?proclaim in Jerusalem the voice of the heralds, because
God is merciful to Israel in His visitation. Stand up on high?,
Jerusalem, and behold thy children, who are all being gathered
from the East and the West by the Lord: 4and from the North
they come to the joy of their God: and from the far-away
islands God gathereth them. 5Lofty mountains has He humbled


1 Gk. mercy (@e0s). 2 Gk. gladness, edppootvnv.
3 Baruch c. 5, 5—8.


THE PSALMS OF SOLOMON 149


and made plain before them; and the hills fled away before their
entrance: Sthe cedar! gave shelter to them as they passed by:
and every tree of sweet odour God made to breathe? upon them:
7in order that Israel might pass by in the visitation of the glory
of their God. ®O Jerusalem, put on the garments of thy glory ;
and make ready thy robe of holiness. For God speaks good
things to Israel, now and ever. ®May the Lord do what He
hath spoken concerning Israel: and concerning Jerusalem: may
the Lord raise up Israel in the name of His glory. May the
mercies of the Lord be upon Israel, now and evermore.


PSALM 55 (54) = PSALMS OF SOLOMON 12.


1O Lord, save my soul from the perverse and wicked man
and from the whispering and transgressing tongue, that speaks
lies and deceit. *For in the response of his words is the
tongue of the transgressor*: for he shows like one whose deeds
are fair, and kindles fire among the people. For his sojourning
is to fill* (set fire to) houses by his lying talk: for the trees of
his delight he will cut down with the flame *of his tongue™ that
does lawlessly. He has destroyed the houses of the trans-
gressors by war: *and the slandering® lips God has removed
from the innocent, the lips of transgressors: and the bones of
the slanderer shall be scattered far from those who fear the
Lord. ‘5By flaming fire He will destroy the slanderous tongue
from among the upright, and their houses. ®And the Lord
shall preserve the soul of the righteous who hateth them that are
evil: And the Lord shall establish the man that makes peace in
the house of the Lord. 7Of the Lord is salvation upon Israel
His servant for ever: and the sinners shall perish together from
before the face of the Lord: and the saints of the Lord shall
inherit the promises of the Lord.


PSALM 56 (55)=PSALMS OF SOLOMON 13.


1The right hand of the Lord has covered us: the right hand
of the Lord has spared us: ?and the arm of the Lord has saved


1 Gk, ol dpupol, the groves. 2 Gk. dvéretiev, caused to rise.
3 The Greek of this passage is obscure.

4 The translator read éumdjoa for éumpjoa.

5-5 Cod. om. 6 Tit. whispering.


150 THE PSALMS OF SOLOMON


me from the spear that goes through and from famine and the
pestilence of sinners. %Evil beasts ran upon them: and with
their teeth were tearing their flesh ; and with their jaw-teeth were
breaking their bones. But us the Lord has delivered from all these
things. *But the wicked man was troubled on account of his
transgression: lest he should be broken along with the evil men.
5 Because dread is the fall of the wicked : but to the righteous not
one of these things shall be reckoned. 6For one cannot compare
the chastening of the righteous who have ‘sinned’ ignorantly
with the overthrow of evil men who sin !knowingly. 7For the
righteous is chastened? so that the sinner will not exult over him.
8For the righteous will inherit Him as His beloved son’; and his
chastening is like that of the first-born: 9for the Righteous One
will spare His saints, and their transgressions He will blot out by
His chastisement. For the life of the righteous is for ever.
10But sinners shall be cast into perdition: and their memorial
shall no more be found. “But upon the saints shall be the
mercy of the Lord. He will cherish all them that fear Him.


PSALM 57 (56)= PSALMS OF SOLOMON 14.


'The Lord is faithful to them that love Him in truth: even to
them that abide His chastening: to them who walk in righteous-
ness in His commandments: He has given us the Law for our
life: ?and the saints of the Lord shall live thereby for ever.
The Paradise of the Lord, the trees of life, are His saints: ?and
the planting of them is sure for ever; nor shall they be rooted
up all the days of the heaven. For the portion of the Lord and
His inheritance is Israel. 4Not so are the sinners and evil men,
those who have loved a day in the participation of sin: for in
the brevity of wickedness is their lust; Sand they did not
remember God ; that the ways of the children of men are open
before Him continually: and the secrets* of the heart He knoweth
before they come to pass: ®therefore their inheritance is Sheol,
and Perdition and Darkness: and in the day of mercy upon the
righteous they shall not be found. 7For the saints of the Lord
shall inherit life in delight,


i) Or perhaps: For the righteous is chastened secretly. (See Ryle and James,
ad loc.) :


2 Corr. ‘He will cause the righteous to inherit Him.’ 3 Ut. secret places.


THE PSALMS OF SOLOMON I51


PSALM 58 (57)= PSALMS OF SOLOMON 15.


‘In my affliction I called on the name of the Lord, and for
my help I called on the God of Jacob: and I was delivered,
because thou, O God, art the hope and the refuge of the poor.
?For who that is strong will praise thee in truth? and what is
the strength of a man, except that he should praise thy name?
3A new song with the voice in the delight of the heart: the
fruit of the lips with the instrument attuned to the tongue: the
firstfruit of the lips from a heart that is holy and just. *He
that doeth these things shall never be moved by evil: the flame
of fire and the anger of sinners shall not touch them, 5when it
goeth forth against the sinners from before the Most High to
root up all the roots of sinners: ®because the sign of the Lord
is upon the righteous for their salvation: ‘death and the
spear and famine shall remove from the righteous; for they
shall flee from them, as death flees from life: ®but they shall
pursue after the wicked and catch them: and those who do evil
shall not escape from the judgment of the Lord: °for they will
get before them like skilled warriors: for the sign of destruction
is upon their faces. ‘And the inheritance of sinners is Perdition
and Darkness: and their iniquity shall pursue them down to the
lower hell. “And their inheritance shall not be found by their
children: for their sins shall lay waste the houses of sinners:
12and sinners shall perish for ever in the day of the Lord’s
judgment: when God visits the earth with His judgment. And
upon those who fear the Lord there shall be mercy therein ; and
they shall live in the compassion of our God: and sinners shall
perish unto eternity’.


PSALM 59 (58)=PSALMS OF SOLOMON 16.


1When my soul declined a little from the Lord, I had almost
been in the lapses of the sleep of destruction; and when I was
far away from the Lord, my soul had almost been poured out
to death, hard by the gates of Sheol along with the sinners:
3and when my soul declined from the God of Israel, unless the
Lord had helped me by His mercy which is for ever—! *He


1 Zt. the time of eternity.


152 THE PSALMS OF SOLOMON


pricked me, like the spur of the horseman, according to His
watchfulness: my Saviour and Helper at all times is He: He
saved me: 5] will praise thee, O God, because thou hast helped
me with thy salvation: and hast not reckoned me with sinners
for destruction. Withdraw not thy mercy from me, O God:
and let not the remembrance of thee remove from my heart until
I die: 7save me, O Lord, from the wicked sinful woman, and from
every wicked woman who sets traps for the simple: 8and let not
the beauty of a wicked woman lead me astray, nor any sin that
is, 9and establish the work of my hands before thee: and
preserve my walk in the remembrance of thee. My tongue
and my lips in words of truth do thou establish: anger and
unreasonable passion do thou remove from me: "grumbling and
little-mindedness in affliction do thou remove from me: for if I
shall sin when thou hast chastened me, it is for repentance:
but by thy good-will establish my soul: and when thou shalt
strengthen my soul, whatever has been given shall be sufficient
for me: "for if thou strengthenest me not, who can endure thy .
chastening in poverty ? “for a soul shall be reproved in his flesh
and by the affliction of poverty: and when a righteous man
shall endure these things, mercy shall be upon him from the Lord.


PSALM 60 (59)= PSALMS OF SOLOMON 17.


'O Lord, thou art our King, now and for ever: for in thee,
O God, our soul shall glory. 2And what is the life of man
upon the earth? for according to his time, so also is his hope.
’But we hope on God our Saviour: for the stronghold of our
God is for ever according to mercy: “And the Kingdom of our
God is over the Gentiles for ever with judgment. 5Thou, O
Lord, didst choose David for king over Israel: and thou didst
swear to him concerning his seed, that their kingdom should not
be removed from before thee. But for our sins sinners rose up
against us: and they set upon us, and removed me far away :
they to whom thou gavest no command have taken by violence,
7and have not glorified thy honourable name with praises: and
they have set up a kingdom instead of that which was their pride.
®They laid waste the throne of David in exultation of their
change’. But thou wilt overthrow them, and wilt remove their


| yeading &\dryuaros.


THE PSALMS OF SOLOMON 153


seed from the earth: even °when there shall rise up against them
a man that was a stranger to our race. ‘According to their
sins, thou wilt reward them, O God: and it shall befall them
according to their works. “And thou wilt not have mercy upon
them, O God. Command their seed, and do not leave a single
one of them. ‘The Lord is faithful in all His judgments which
He has done upon the earth. The wicked man? has devastated
our land, so that«there is none to dwell therein. They have
destroyed both young and old and their children together. In
the splendour of his wrath he sent them away to the West, and
the princes of the land to mockery without sparing. In his
foreign way the enemy eéxults, and his heart is alien from out
God. ‘And Jerusalem did all things? according as the Gentiles
did in their cities to their gods. And the children of the
covenant took hold of them in the midst of the mingled Gentiles:
and there was none amongst them that did mercy and truth in
Jerusalem. ‘They that love the assemblies of the saints fled
away from them: and they flew like sparrows who fly from
their nests: and they were wandering in the wilderness, in
order to save their soul from evil: and precious: in their
eyes was the sojourning with them of any soul that was saved
from them. ?°QOver all the earth they were scattered by the
wicked. Therefore were the heavens restrained that they should
not send down rain upon the earth, 7‘and the everlasting
fountains were restrained, both the abysses, and from the lofty
mountains: because there was none among them who did
righteousness and judgment; from their ruler to the lowest of
them they were sinning in everything. ??The king was in trans-
gression, and the judge in wrath, and the people in sin.
23 Behold, O Lord, and raise up to them their king, the Son of
David, according to the time which thou seest, O God: and let
Him reign over Israel thy servant, 24and strengthen Him with
power that He may humble the sinful rulers: ?°and may purify
Jerusalem from the Gentiles who trample her down to destruc-
tion, 2®so as to destroy the wicked from my inheritance: and to
break their pride like a potter’s vessel: to break with a rod of
iron all their firmness: ?7to destroy the sinful Gentiles with the
word of His mouth: at His rebuke the Gentiles shall flee from
before His face: and to confute sinners by the word of their


1 Gk. dvopos, not dvepos. 2 Gk.=<doa érolnoev “Lepovoadju.


oO. S. 20


154 THE PSALMS OF SOLOMON


heart: 28that He may gather together a holy people that shall
exult in righteousness: and may judge the tribes of the people
whom the Lord His God sanctified : ?8and He shall not any more
suffer sin to lodge amongst them; and no more shall dwell
amongst them the man that knoweth evil. ®°For He knoweth
them that they are all the children of God, and He shall divide
them according to their tribes upon the earth : S'and the sojourner
and the foreigner shall not dwell with them : for He will judge
the Gentiles and the peoples in the wisdom of His righteousness :
32and He shall possess a people from among the Gentiles: and
they shall serve Him under His yoke: and they shall praise the
Lord openly over all the earth: %and He shall purify Jerusalem
in holiness, as it was of old time: ®*that the Gentiles may come
from the ends of the earth to behold His glory: bringing her sons
with them as an honourable gift ; those who were scattered from
her,*5and to see the glory of the Lord wherewith He hath glorified
her: and He the righteous king, taught of God, is over them: ?and
there is no wicked person in His days amongst them, because they .
are all righteous, and their king is the Lord Messiah: °7for He
will not trust on horsemen nor on chariot ; nor on the bow: nor
shall He multiply to himself gold and silver for war: nor shall He
rely on a multitude in the day of war: ®for the Lord ;


(Caetera desunt.)


ERRATA
a, 1.6 for <mah read <amh
1.8 for <ixxa read <uxa


a,
A, 1. 3 from end, for <At% read <i
p- ~ 1 4 for aheas read Shes


p. SS, 16 for camilyp read Lamian\y


p. ss. Add to note *: ‘which seems to answer to x4’


p ase, L 1 for hss read wis


A] PSALMS OF SOLOMON [17


are Kcimsaz asszsal .,hadhts —) wilds asxsamn\*
c_amitiaz! mis md etas r\ars pezcal twa A uw
Ants Maras oad divas wlds oan arsazal?
cdlmas readool aiassala" .,7dare pao a sass
hans tashzs” aco zero sas piss .. amals
wah la” .mcaled ot waa San hSit ._ania
toss sah la sc amhus whale shashs sax
A\yso HA, aie a2 oda sar WAX Lamhus
a ambaizs ean Alara oles 2 ard iis J _amlas
M\m* c_acoms qass cl staan wohaha xin
rania? .mbhansmisa Chmass Chama Scams ows
pMadAsawa .ootad dash ,mamlasy .sosary (a Sas
miziac\ curasiaos sinc mias ducal imi
Casa A re sasas aden! oasznisay Herd <hazra>
Jia joo pda aA” .mhwaarh ciwsl sins
1 atm Mhwaara cpesnlas Zcais ainshws aT)
woal re ) ois doom wala ama .cale ears
~omlar Wer c amhus mdimais las dula% <acals
tat is A\ 37 ot <r ~_amal=aa roe ayo)
Ow odes As wha .wtaad As ela wumam Is tam
As jam la .total ortwa sms ml Xm cl
CAIEIA TAQ ate totes Ma cide
Caetera desunt

t Gk. Urdoracw. Cf. Ps. xv. 7. u vid. sup. Ps. xvi. 14.

v Gk. 0b dpyyyoerat. * The translator read éru as dru.

y Gk. Aaots eOvarv.

2-2 The Gk. is dépovres ddpa rods eéyobevyxsras viods abrfs. The Syriac


seems to render a Gk. é{wo@evras, which is a better reading, though perhaps
it may be a conjecture.


17| PSALMS OF SOLOMON ai


la rataal sins nila otal eos War’
am ,tsai mala .asalss Imshem chtaain® . 0239
MmaAL AT Yer oletar® danas waslaa™® 2 mlx
a aml aam prea? 2 amcale\! ~ amdiisms oras
—ambus cam dala \als savas dus sosduas ois
pli a amis atx oalejacts” W<Tna Smet sadn
Petar <td o ver’ AstAQ .itwes Shrais aam pret
(2 e_acaxa) atanl .<jorm25 ,0M" psa? -ecaaio oA
mrzaix mhashah® Camariss ham cosa za
a AMIIAS Wam SLI clas” < amim ham otha
ih wads ls amr awhhed cimllss .wlds
radah A arsdhdra vals pal Sadana oI Ay
wehanes tasx . ams wan duals Wn oti ial pa
a _ Acad’ < amsjaxy\ MAINA. AMILst A Lata
easy tasP asta ,madun lass calm .pecalhss Aas
~_amalsal acl TO Mt st0973 woulis> rasa
Aa isan wool’ bie tent Mists .ssarn minal
lass Sanit waza liso ,casntwa4 Aras Ase t00s
aszocl® ml pret sas miziarc\ enad33a"25


k The translator read éroincev [— év] “lepovoadjp and omits doa.

! Reading rots Geots or rods Peovs with JLH for which Gebhardt con-
jectured tod ofévovs.

m This agrees with Gebhardt’s reading ov« jv év abrots 6 rowdy év ‘Tepov-
cahyp. éeos Kal ddnevav. The Gk. MSS. vary between 6 roudv ev péow év
avrois év and o rowdy év avrois év peow. May it not, however, be the case that
the Syr. ~amkus stands for é péow év adrois? For 44% the MS. has
tz. (?). n The translator has referred érAavdvro to the sparrows.

° For rapouxias Wvyy the translator read wapoixia wuyns. Cf. note? on
previous page. P Gk, év areBeig.

4 Gk. «des (JL). Gebhardt conjectures «tAov. ¥ = Gk, xadapicat.

s Gk. adds év codia, év dixarvoovvy: probably by an eye-error to v. 31.


cw) PSALMS OF SOLOMON [17


PSALM 17 (= Ps. 60).
roca ey as A\sa .@yalsla zm als am duc cto?
As zi ior ,main? © air’ ama? 221 stoked
er piss mtam® AS Siag aX ct wer CLIN
coals CAINWAS NT A\\= (Data wale As pe tam
woasas As plsl wales mthaslmat .tmsits sals\
Aupgos As also wank dua roto bind otiurs
mus A \shh hs oasis ds ml dus. dura
pis amma readies pis amo es pecal sama ® <_ambaalst
aams wuhas caml dsoa hs Casa .tanwina
whasia anwa whsarho cto ward Asar7 ila
WisSA25 WANT cawiarA as twr’? cammay ale
KAMAN atha .c aid Aanod! par dura < amalsaza®
po STA TAA cams pans sa09 LIX =
coal OW wapah —_dcr.sca\.ss ie plan Wado tz
aaoals jasth? lat 2 amare wer’ waml sadhzha
yw la Camis saad ela wamsiy sand! wold’
sie As sansa ,maiuixn wamlas cut paeca_sa 7
<“al\ alas als sodunr sis a hi’ clas eye
tax mats) ctaars4 oWawakc’ samiisa cdma


@ Gk. «is tov aidva kat éru= Heb. spt ooys. For the Syriac rendering
v. supra, PS. ix. 20 etc.


b Gk. 6 xpdvos Laas. © Cod. mim=. d Gk. Bacidevoy adrod
and-so in v. 7. ° Gk. GAddyparos but the Copenhagen MS. éAaddyparos.
£ Gk. + 6 Beds. & Gk. €Xejoers or Lenora.


h The Gk. is é&npedvqce...xal otk adijxev...which the Syr. has turned into
imperatives. The meaning of 2am is obscure.

i The Gk. is év dpyfj xaAXous abrod, for which the Syr. has read éy xdéAXet
épyns avrod.


16] - PSALMS OF SOLOMON re)


sth aaX As vhaml .xar ham warewhs Alo
ates cole? te exa duatde 10.03 ada mx Sans
id tos? wlsix ,mamein wins cots wl alk
Aq ~=t Aas y3i2ss00 .007a .cohausl Rumams hast
rela. JaaAD ~WAIAN A\ =o ws cal “ wWran> . plasn®
eT) esa asth lo ayo rales mx! phar
wwhaml <oors »al ee eae 5 NS) la role
whduw As aa oWheas While po Kot punata?
whdurs mpaazn ~sqrae wha? wgarl! wilzasy hus
sR NAS podio? [. bars? woe da wl an whlar
rilsas ,hdawa jix\% “wsinars 2 ae) phalaa ate has
win avin Kevhloo wtha® whmwa wat oar <I
BA wo ae ayie alors Iza hatasial mahi
Vix Whores Get ses? whasdl dust aa clio
amadis 7b oe) ma jams .sxaih Lash et FAQ .>ZAI
hort tam aim stlioh wl UX orn AY
rivlarsa motmas ‘ras’. aahh 38% .Wvhaiammas
»oals . aac salons rinet) Jasms a0 .coharamss
oT) eset

b Gk. kupéov Oeod. © Cod. pine, ¢ Cod. bis ja™.

© Gk. 6 eds. £ Gk. adpova. & Gk. draryoarw pe.

h A paraphrase for kal ravrds vroKeipévov amd dpaptias avwdedors.

i = évwmv cov for Gk. év rorw cov.

k-k A literal rendering of adoyov.

I-1 A literal rendering of édAvyonyia.

m The translator has omitted the difficult line [év rd éA€yxeoOar] Woxnv ev
xeupt campias avtod: 7 Soxysacia oov; but perhaps ev 7@ eA€yxeoGau is latent in


—ashh, for in Ps. xvii. 27 he renders kai éXéyfou by asansala. I have
added the word = to make the text clear.


a PSALMS OF SOLOMON [16


carts neal rain CAS izations clan aima4
Minss hades Wid owals wmwaas los wha»
oma rasan etal oo whades chant tizls podem
rodusmizy .Kéxa> ) mis\ sasthdu wl pico nasa \a°
pass ha <_acal wists WA wldasn MIQata ja
a amizts® Jamia jossal oto? pro oa ales ds
wioiaal toss As tots? AX oodie’s Wn? wldas
A079 oo Aoet osm oa misdaad Mscata WA wham
a ASN .tie! so ham? Stix wer camis te\
las eras placa oOIw eaatma welds ths en
Moto WA sAh were aetAT cist pd sani: <i
cama As inoes woes Mm? 2 air amos
wamlasa .sazea aso eiler . amsdhiaa!
a ambtasa? wedded Sarzl was Cai’ aan
Miia . adte TA wamimbe 3 < acinl wakes wl
walsl stor mars mas ile —arsia oils
plots gla Asa cas Mae! wel tacos show
MahAisawt=> e_Awria .as <Swt saan) at en

emlsds ras _asorts ilwa 2 lwae


b Gk. kvupiov. © Gk. trdcracw, cf. Ps. xvii. 26. 4 Gk. Oeod.

© Perhaps <ahas, ie. Gk. Aoumds. The MSS. have [dd] Atuwod which
Gebhardt emended to azo zrodéuov.

f Probably an error for say. 8 Gk. rod Gc0d airav.


PSALM 16 (= Ps, 59).
daam ram \slo ax iat = Auls 293 dussmw ya?!


TN rats ps hhowte saa? laser whins whats
(a :


@ The translation of the difficult opening verses is somewhat paraphrastic,
but the Greek can be seen through the Syriac.


O. S. G


14, 15] PSALMS OF SOLOMON 33073


ow mo ls\ Mastin te e Omi .hartm> rhs
wah wads rela anor 2 asaathdu ren reads 2°
SatIT »MAMIDI ~ 900A) on rates ASU o_acai tox

Ast ,malor amis As


PSALM 14 (= Ps. 57).

~_arcal VLD on peasy plat ae oa (was cra. 7
whassi> psalms aml .mbharta te tamsay
Mat ;MAswwa 2 spanaal a PMs Mwmam) .,mainodas
wiies Malik Mut omorta wals\ ms a Aerts
mela .wils\ <item? —amdhs ua3 CaS AMaduMs
etsar mdass bs ass whoa, o ama -_otax du
Ic weldua rales wasa lat Lucia mbhah pa
= mahayas1> sons wisans wma. Aas
amas tars vole atanhe wihasd cama Wdadws7
realy randiha .stlas ,mamas par lS zine sins
Naz aambias cam Vim 2 ann; pax oe Fy
el rosa Mitet C#AAsaDa .CAArwO KR DXWo
as es Oda Soty Ti ,masme”? < awahzs

| TAWAAD

4 Gk. éppilomévy.
PSALM 15 (=Ps. 58).

molel dato winasla cots mm dots lars!
maasams <mAX dusa cjaws Wb? hoiadeo .sansen
eto bt “ mrai® payer HX ars wale’ am duc


a—a Gk. ef py eLoporoyynoacbar cot év adyGeia.


Te) PSALMS OF SOLOMON [13


Kaisha 2rtimasa ,wS4 rhadwm .sasadh o roa
Wiain> tm palsoaa pla —) ixzeslooy eS ot\
e amahsa! est Mahzasl carl soca Combes
eodaa .cldsl wuims ooisa’ zak cats th0°
aw mtan? ost buns ols ans vt. st
ike warssia® ols) osas Livia. As Sistas
atDT »MAMwA .atmN ,MQaw pI ED . Awan

astcan ,maialam sadbir


& Gk. adds év azopia. h Gk. omits. i Gk. yovxuov. k Gk. omits.


PSALM 13 (=Ps. 56).
MaLi1a? pals dioay ratoor catasos < duama ator cassis 7
mahama waiasa pa alosan wat (BP AOTA rato
pmizso .Wwhris whan —ocmals Loin a are eae
eAmamIX aam . een Mhastsa < amiss ,am Adis
aT pat Sathdet ato .otd peoals pos et a
A\jmaS .tlas ws inhdu? coolss mhsitazn Lm
plo gaa ae gx tooth orlasa whlaam jc xaos
relax osm Wharton wa ls A\mn® stohmoh® wl
BaX_ Wath? whamsr!? uldss Saami whan
snashireaa® MNS elas ol waar eis hw oom
ware mhartma .staset opal ers remany VANES
mambhstaza ,mdsw ds osm? wasis Wn? jaan


@ i.e. Gk. doeBys as in Codd. and not evoeBys as Wellhausen conjectured.
> Perhaps for Sahu (= Gk. cuprapadrnup9y). © Cod. wtmoohh
¢ =Gk. év repioroAy ? © Syr. begins verse here. £ Gk. vovOernce.
& Gk. 0 kvpuos.


12] PSALMS OF SOLOMON an


OW nin whowwt TAK p20. amm~le’s coharsal
BEX whoaita® cam lara wan mai tials .cvmle
Asa .cam piad aa —ooals AM, wri’? <_acals= «=0
Syn orl cam) sie! sums easiness
<_ammlws Mhedaarhs Matsams Aucpoe. tsI7
rliwore sala sahwanrhs wins alziaw’ pzalhn?
mzm? Nicol chal ila wales A\so .sadazsroa
Asa wSapwios As Msn panme eote ans? emitala
mhsaarhs mmr Aepesl tm jun lean’

foals\a xm! lacie Is stor ,mazed


© Gk. of dpvpou. d Gk. dvéredev, (= Syr. ~usind ?).
ee Gk. eis rév aidva «al érx = Heb. yy ody ut supra.
ff Gk. as in note &,


PSALM “12 ‘(=Ps, 55.)
pra .rtlasa asso TaX es pzat Be ratsa!
lara ehalys Mss oan tara wizuls <azi
masa jax wtaXs caizl ,madun olson AK raaam?
Aas s KIAI AwamA .NAS WALA ac~ yews TaAX_ Wass
s\o® lta iis who cleo)? TX ator
WaAS apa’ etwas tasa Matas! mmwass maliw
pein .Whzols whadms! wotes wma is ,taan


a The Syriac translator has had difficulty, as every one else, with this
passage: but it seems clear that he had a text very near to the Gk. dozep év
Aad rip dvdrov kaAdovny airod. It seems natural to correct this to domep év
Gdw rip dvdrrov kahdwny with the Copenhagen MS. But the Syr. is clear for
Aad, and it suggests kaAdovyy atrod by the clause which it prefixes (taRx9),

b i.e. éuaAnoas (H) for éumpjoa (RJ LC). © Gk. éxxdyau,

d—-d Gk, ey dAoyt rapavopov ? € Gk. ovyxéau. f Cod. <hakima


racy PSALMS OF SOLOMON _ [10, It


PSALM ie t(Errs. 753):


soalaa? vdhaimas=* wale atarhen ial »masal!
cin mdules ~n Quanhsal .casXas ohrass Seta’ En
wéanda Adc waXal ee oho tA am? .Xoh
taX_ 00 Wesths vhost alaows plartl “UX am al
cohiet4 .mhastm mi w\ham la .ostty mwtaw’
tandsa otizs ml aassl warm Ls Soto ta
mdm taX. Shaimms .<sa»to »marasA <atm
Mri sina Chetots atm mhairme osnls\x suo
fymaisx . amas “mle tha ag asm? Wa trams
W930) amwa? Wharws <ato4 cmz\ wars licioa
mawans <atms mey <aims dso Smaan Whass
salsl wold tmAsetsA aq jaatmsq A\ =? Aare tomes
wX_aco rater? .agcan cazaxk pec Nato Whedisa

salska whaalsal? Sawtous cous As Mistaa


a Cod. <hasmm=n. Gk. & eheypo.

1. ékwAv6y as suggested by Fritzsche, for éxvxkdkw6y of the MSS.
© Gk. adds 6 xvptos. 4 Gk. 76 éAeos (= aay, cf. 145),

© Gk. 0 kvpuos nuor.


low


aad


Gk. éy kpivacw avrod and adds eis tov aidva. 8 Gk. o beds.


h Perhaps we should read <hasal=> answering to the Gk. cwdpocvrny.


PSALM 11 (= Ps. 54)
mizias ata? .zison Whaat? eitaD em eS ato!
carjwams Macias Is wale ots Amn eijamns clo
po wins at palin siwa ats miziac’ »sa.3


peaies rastX eat otatca poe ew amla? uxiaca ots
@ Gk. onpacias. > Gk. eiodraé (= Heb. aon p


a


9) PSALMS OF SOLOMON Bs)


CS acamiai ee BA, ezdhdes chs Wd wes wasn
Mota Me cths Gr rchanma® las sain ca ds
ole wdusith oo minic ezhd carla -wasane
rhral, sasmi\ pas rhasaXsa Wwhoiews TA perad’
dar ts weddaaeartsa® ies Waas5 oxhrisa
rte rast wWhsuew whan tais eX am? xis
maxQ33 it os am lax gaia ama atm hal al
emduna picts As As whaasas HX_? mains”? WsorK>
etes cam oc ee mle ols HX aml”
Amn orharams eézaiy cals WX cars”? eatcal
tX_arsal™ ule wamla Ls parla lia whdhass
MX osal® a\ a3 ploal aw cle .rvca\as paax

dass’ alex asa ds aml din wast ela wtan
dur’ rzcma” cadur anda’ eo ales ale As
mml< meta jie .hasec’s dam ae psa cole’ am
rly as pease asih el pis ean Aaa Actos
oxi das durs Lm” sams pels sant
ose pis deawa™® sams sams ga eds misn’s
dso suas? wisi eons wich ela coisa
pxaut mdhaasds we tetas ~wa als ~ has
mxm! Actes cdus Ls owt wai eats”


alsio


b Gk. adds xupiov. © Gk. adds év eEayopiass,
d Gk, eiduveis. © Gk. xpyordrys. f Cod. amha
& Gk. om. h i.e. ov Katatavces, as in Cod. R.


i Gk. eis tov aidva cat éru= Heb. ty) poy.


Aon PSALMS OF SOLOMON [9


eo Oem AWA rc amharsal, oras0™3 charsals
mox\ aam pero irl Aad viniac deicala”
Ses Saas jmanis wml sania! .poales
comhus Smimh iad ver’ coalies ,mamia®
mhammis Ae ola ows1 Komi am waz 79
Aalst aias ,t9057 patches ow a dads oar’ dur ea
om duns A\m? .asalsl tom nae roma ioral
hans Aaewtml bow’ cress chaos Kaic
Apter mtnas pina wana et als wdroar3
pero piwa sas Wdhaiswas Ams vhasslsa mis
o alin pi mh eA dur psant dura alae
alr’ dura? .otdn duals wor’ emasas paslas salsa
wi wa atca tae am ate umta ex dur
pela Ana pis 9 sea Ain pals A\= win Aiets
sathdu fd sada pDatr wale cats ‘solsl ace
MAST MAAS ,MALAS Mat am warm? solsl\

wals\ atm —) Mita am toatt


m Cod. a==0 1 Gk. éufavay, (not as in Cod. R éuiaver).
° Cod. om. 76 Kpipa cov.


PSALM 9 (= Ps. 52).
Qosie vA .Wdstaar Mi) Maars Liewim om aa!
east» hadht oo asaher? < amnata <atm ea
Autos otaas wam Sasa . amlas .cmic® ~acal
hacen cole onmhs Lim? woles mila ae
a amls (so ass Sain am duns \\=n4 wpa dass
es Gkumiatos


8] PSALMS OF SOLOMON an


worl’ er SINS cols on smansa J amlas wale\
»maisT Nie colal sada zm pars ams tas\ 4
®aam plas Mates PQ Chak) on? osm ato
aac PAG mats AN Sora oe. mL pS!
a Amhus aso < amstas £1 aam eX aamlsa!
.aam ails wales mznas dus” aloo As f rnin
calas misasa? aam pemerals .ptSa dts dgulsy aa wer
eo) eta rssSa arcsal, whuimaan rsaasa . amharsal,
ome a deo aras eis mls anar cla” wresal,
nua .whashs sat cal ~_aca\ A c<im A\=n35
Gatas eax aml sda ovhasatl aw? rtioos sas

Asa wiziaw As oto are neh! dartizo ola MISS
ml aqme Whore CNIS Cais ,asiwa® omic
chetaw asaza® wales Sas wh Aetar rio hd!
allaa salztaw As Math anha .mdailsmal watas
muora .xalzs ,maisa wdual cor cans Asa” .casiaz
C22 TALA calito OneCart SILLS ALN GF
As wasahks :mashunw® coles Lm mbsiars
macsx Am! . amsizst arsarco% - amhaiss\on
win ere malztads caiasass ear asrwa |rtalms


aams e_aim . amtisza ._amuain Asawa .Shastws


4 Cod. ex errore ~OTH3IS>. ¢ Gk. adds év rapopyopo.
f Gk. adds pera opxov. & Gk. 70 Ovovaarnpiov Kupiov.
h Gk. oivov axparov. i Gk. érevxry,


k Cod. aMmatu
I Gk. cal ravta codov év Bovdg. This requires that we correct \\=>


to Massa F


fo an) PSALMS OF SOLOMON [7, 8


PSALM 7 (=Ps.50):

gis . amas msalan role an asth el!
ls ole Cain hawin? Wen? .doo  artios® ale
rLsAt WLe = dus ALAADA hahts « amlXi szarh
sna’ dur .wham iazh WX 4 .sasasl pralsd ria
wre Wah ela iasawiss am duns Wa ols ol

cam) . A> <tr Lapsay ter Meo5 oo hhatsaXeals
sls arzadhel wsosas sawazs lao sont pis
-piadr dura mral toi wa? jira 4 am buna ‘N=
“yank <a mals\ Aiwqons asi sash durn a
mal sanssr mdual sal ate Misi> piohdh’?


cami ahasax don
@ Cod. . aartison > Cod. fava
© Cod. ex errore msm, cf. Gk. ob évreAy aire epi yuov.
4 Gk. vrepacmotys. ,
¢ The Syriac has dropped the following sentence: kal ymets vd Cvyov cov
[eis] Tov aidva Kal paorvya Toaid<ias cov. f Cod. pod


PSALM 8 (=Ps. 51).
MzX To <3tor elo ..3ac »ssay Sotor isa ra clare?
wat Wor hate woosn wis? arora rion
As Raden tao; Wisls we WaaXwa whiners
lot .mal won sa aar’s pall dtewo3 c<to1
ret TAs ,thewas where Churm salziacs hasa
mans ver PAW_asssdhdieva® PALF satasa. kas —
hpasdiea swhamars .amhe tac oe tha anima?
Rama .stra aman astode 3 Cert .otsar® ,mais
@ Cod. <=>452 b Syr. om. PoByOn 7 Kapdia pov. © Gk. Beod.


oO. S. F


6] PSALMS OF SOLOMON >)


arate wX rai cla 17 ivhsmams wasn wala
smostarhis czatal ,masalh® whaasrls <a
ets thedhs TeX whims? owhaiamms! costo!
amimshr vanes whaiamm™® ena” cal c\sas
Auwim, Js hase habs cston ,malen aX
Qs0c07 Am Matm1 Mawsaana ,o Mast”? 6s lc


als


h Gk. 6eds.

' Gk. cuppetpia avrapxetas. k Gk. 76 pérpuov.

! Syr. omits by omovoréAevrov the words kai év tovtw 4 evoyia Tot Kvpiov
eis TANT MovAV ev duKaLoovry.


PSALM 6 (=Ps. 49).


atr mmzs <toml mal shacor <zatal »oaa.cal?
—) — tha mhstaras .ptady stor cas tard sad?
aadysa%4 .oocal< a ,masie’s sas ethina ot pas
mzaia .am mbar Wyn sth Xl cullors when
mn omihh el eta maragzoo .hatmin tars ?5
tom mals <dwaisa? . tos mz) swara mdr 2 TAX
ola An <tr ,madr 33-5 a ws>a ator cavaxz\
Aaa .dam mdiesss Aas mhass ami sta? . dus
ores og Sitszma om Ktams xa wie


iiize mi paws plac’ Ax izant gain am


a The text is in confusion: we should read hws, and add mss after
pmaihh. The words am alsan \\= are missing in the Greck.

> Cod. <3a=s>

¢ Gk. rod Oeod adrod.

4d Gk. adds Oeod.

© Cod. ex errore: bis a.


AGS PSALMS OF SOLOMON [s


Myon? woah Sod dur’ wo thee sass jane Le = ami
gan cla .wlohas oo Whal mhima Sic tox
spisash urs pelarts7 dole’ wen CA sal aihsdoal
A288 2 ale am burs Moo 2 hass haar Xl dura

an? lad Pet\ssin ptowda els ass a stwahwn
a wral win ws net cla. iar
Add dara wale “toe whal cots fac TeX
Mh na char Sot baw eadila TAX whotal”
whlaacsn ansl=al sams <dunaml <jo15 tim
Ast maal a araas 2 wa? wha Lal ctox5
roth acm dun csasasla isiata calsal3 . amian
dir’ wo ie cai .tzaora iamos miawa von
sad <oams am bis Bs sMAstr hal Sats
mhasil SS . swt oun cal shah A onze) sramdha
QM a CO .tsasIa IAs 60 aAwMAND .zie tor TA
wmrsmamn® Lac coumh cama . dw cla Shel Kadus
riaw tuloe .whasasal whasls Kraut aba ren


4 i.e. way Bpadtyys, the Greek is wy Bapivys, (= mah <1),

> A paraphrase for iva yy bv avayKnv apaptwper.

¢ The Syriac here varies from the Greek (kat édv yn emeotpéeyys ypas, ovx
adefouefa), whether by conjecture or by the tradition of a better text. It
stands for kal yy arootpéwys ad’ nuav, va py apeEdpeba ad cod.

4 Gk. wévytos. Cf. Matt. v. 45.

e A passage of some difficulty. The Syriac supports Ryle and James in
their emendation [onpepoy al] avpiov. And it certainly reads Pedo. But
the emendation is unnecessary: Gebhardt’s text is right or nearly so: év
evdor kal 7 avprov: Omit 7, and translate. ‘Human kindness is scant and of
to-morrow: and if a man repeats a kindness without grumbling, why! ’tis a
marvel.’ f Sic Cod. Lege <Ahassa (= Gk. troda007).

& Misreading Gk. od as ov.


5] PSALMS OF SOLOMON ak


EL oD Maries aan Aan rr) Nas malls >A oo )
mdus tame wamia .adual Nass ,masik i ait saa’?
om@asstoa: ae Kee oak poo” za sams osc da —
RMAILOA .AM > pamin cIms Whois 2 Wd
(rtais | ota m0? ots eo Mzsin mio mldss
Mayo <hS asters Mn éztiinl petALI plana
atarae la (CHATS ,MAIZDA eS IT
ar\Irva’s spools picas ronal (oa alors la .wola\
mhzails Wo tsi oo ai’ asain dasha wall
pmuads aami <hasrcam c<haremo chminh
< amhamumhs at ee plers abled © amsal*
wvldsa woadldas CtBX & e_Aiw pata eatma”
psans As Wale asaw® wldss claxas Ms (2 pntaia
am atm Suze dasns a chatehus c<amall
~ amis As saaeaas mot 2. cam” Whaoes . milk
| pee eee alr

i Cod. ex errore =asm.

k Cod. om. <-\. The translation is a free paraphrase of év povwoe
Greiner yan carom avalon.

! Accidentally omitted in passing from one page to the next.


PSALM 5 (=Ps. 48).


"gated plc dhis> Ret Wein wane sole ats!
manaqs gusa . Sawtsa ams his ave4 oer main
As Ant 1m node wi aS msXir aa3 tiassos
aim acs .ttazs taK oS Wduar zit WA am


Ww PSALMS OF SOLOMON [4


mtscas oiler ado anausal ,adlss czar am
WréiXams aw ama .ulon vere »malis sorcak
wis whew As As ,waiss? dst eR oh
areca eallos whedon andes IAs caizla .hadas
hates whdur Na ws Aisa ,asariss Kpwd wis oa
ac Seen whore roas Nas Asmal Ailoa® whos
MAMS omy planed wale path? . hrs ma duls
whaimassa miter wlsass resth FAS pod raw” pater
ziain\ pe tALI plana -_Oms3SN ronal m\xy8 1, mais
Malet Mate® © anttia? .,manas istiaasa MAwsaAX a
sami? ines) jaro (So sant ae amsthds wa acacal a
fevous As ,mausa™ wlan mas Alam “ics
risas ay aur Shae “Gal sas Mor whalzs
2 Amada Mm> Marass »MATAL ha evhalass
tore ors etd <a .wlass <hXG <islaal
aroha lass whXS ‘= dus Sterca .hamdus
lax Kum »lsadewad re ta iss aise duls risas
whastwas Cisse mhastesl “tw dus As j,mdusa
ramh peols ploas® las wor’ mzar culahoa la
cailssa Whsihs minan Races Wi eD mata ‘ods '2
Wat »>MAIs MIIWAwsD0 Shariammsa Moras!” wh dls


whiz -mathha® mwadhs mhatna Chass dus <_9am3


© Gk. év vroxpioes Cdvras peta. ociwv.

4 The Gk. which has omitted xpivovras carried back the next words to the
previous sentence and left the sentence év wevia xré. without a head.

© Cod. isay £ Gk. adds avépos.


& Gk. évicnoey oxopricat. : h Cod. om.


4] PSALMS OF SOLOMON al


petlas toims otal, eal po wale) tal cass
otras ,maiss <hassso cdurahs otsial J atasd.
Aas. CALA oN ‘mn ota pe Wath ett <acn) re4
Nas vole) emo oom lobbies oat ane (21
aor a7 tama? ost’ cal 3a80 Ratan <a’? Amma,
<_amasata real Jato ce AST TIL? .carstagd cdr.
Mm? ode As whale moins whuas dus UA
cas c\ss\ seems mhas ts. 1 Nasa. taoX
hone cls “bios warms mx) sida? .mbsatans
wade TAX An “asm <otma’® .anasmsa Ma—AG eo,
rasa .,~ainl \\o elas es Asha! .mduala
As rales Amara? cass lasla .mo rledes
spans la mhlaam exon Mea Lair .,maisl cals
taser shoo wanda la .am wish lass WK <ar96
er rebar’ walsl wildss Lamdum yo cam oom
a amsiva .jalsis <inl Jaman atm ea piers

wvsaliant salljdu sah cla .stax mtmais


’
5 droBXérw for aroBdéret. © Kvptos for Beds.
4 An addition by the transcriber, due to reminiscence from the Odes.


PSALM 4 (=Ps. 47°).
a oars wheaas bic sh Saurt bin isl!
Arians coal \ dur’ WW Ulassa ool oo awit?
wwir As a tad seek dace durtadua cr darted?


a Bither the numeration has gone wrong, or a Psalm 46 has been dropped.
The Greek shows that the former must be the correct explanation.
b A marginal note says that one copy reads maw‘.


cal PSALMS OF SOLOMON ke


eA rhiwa oc eid ior arehe HX el ines
PETIA CLIN TID Rameees BX WawB athe
ahliva iersa ot ocoald am wots an cla
Whdalos ona sie dso usar As als asama%
rijconz\ waaasa® wwhwaardhs »\ jun ams .XSaxsia
mana “lsd A\= IS oD misl wih asso? wl
ralson \Y=ma MSE DIT MT NIST cralstal ate Wc2zma%
metal aaies? .pasar cola —) drs dish a WNO .<nsm am
»>MDATIV TN A\ =a CmAwrMo” atm Qs paleoaa aim
wildsa alm dus pals? wisas ,malia Ms woasen
rosary paszalas? <_ amet wo esals\ wash x yasal
wom aman ole Gl atamla whldsy waaan a
swhaitasmss ol petox plac Met ag JaamM>7 A=
rt) Aas ,mamrs poml .,mamel ,matet we rascal

MORAL —Sa mis\ est am page: .MALASS


° The Syriac corresponds exactly to the Greek xoyifev. In spite of
Ryle and James’ advocacy of this difficult word, I think it must be a trans-
lator’s blunder. The Syriac itself suggests the emendation See (and
lowers the proud).

P This looks like a corruption for same (= cis drddeav): but with
the added <A-< it makes good sense. 4 Cod. smaxaa A\s

* Gk. €v érvornuy (read as éri oxjpare?).

‘ The translator has misunderstood or misread the Greek.


PSA LMI3 (= Pauae
rhsaarh? wats ,hatas lo .zas jase wisi!


A\ =o MRA SD jtashhecwo i. 1) mole 8 tun ee


* The translator or scribe has dropped the words Wadare [7S Oa] ro


aiveTo.


2] PSALMS OF $50LOMON aA
cons SA hie o_O 3s ra melasl due stds
stan waaay Wer —_acracaliss duly 3 SSRI <x>
Maen isn wales IX A amizaan dualsa%9
pisiow\ tmsas Ta. ott Wat> om rina
Mhwdarhs waraih =a midar® amademwa < amszais!
As widwsa Wharton Szanl aly cam dumadhe a2!
am wWheaazas as! cam howincw” olla als oz4
As jrhew opaaz Wises! wwoale cals ysins
Atma <tr »made hissa boy ica ic
Whahass cio Is cutm Wie At.canw nin
Wartasa® eiXKais .ame la aston Mh’ otzasaan
sap ncahi cams wretgh ate ba 2 on tle tram”
Mato eX ie onan uke wom cis MN”
et dur reasalsss pis ~_amywQat -_onzia ae ON |
aay !29 cLamrste 42 Air swath .qwah lh wt
sQer Soa dtwahiw la IL AD Miadhy mimoaz
tA Boa tea <a? As ,ssa50 38 COTS ratoo™ ,\
Mad AA ET MTAQAs .rizas Asa exite As soos Mt oD
culos Mb? .tnsr dula rctuXe re mlx: ds


£ We should restore ~amz-a3> which answers to the Greek kararatyce.

& Cod. misma. h-h Gk. pirpay d0éns.

i Cod. ut videtur +M<I> ed. _ * Syr. om. pera pyvioews cai.

1 This answers to the unintelligible Greek rod ciwety, which Geiger
explained as a misunderstanding of 139 in the sense of 121 (to destroy) ;
and which Wellhausen explained by taking 7px? as a late Hebrew form for
sb = 77. Cf. Hos. iv. 7.

m «pos for Geds.

n The Syriac evidently had dpéwv, and not as Hilgenfeld suggested opiwv.


nA PSALMS:.OF SOLOMON ihe


immlws ;mai.zian aam eraalsaa eat say manos
ls a_ Aw ORL AnvIwn® WIS Me Wye” umhalass
a d
prio Aho’ .modwaarhs “tar samme war dats
Manzo china qain® wots ios atera oq
aa Seeks ct) »mals jaw ~amisco too hs)
reo Akins <_acah naw <11aq@ —_acails isis
pe DOA Ta waeare® Omi Zan Wao
rhs A\=o° Sa. AmaiDa awa mall, 9 CIATI99 7
Rmsdro” .assirs win waar? Wain At orm
san tds Mot car dulow caiea odustat cca
' 12 s _
~_acals MIS suahaa ORAL wr casi. yar’ to Aa
Masats jwlztars casia\ azanw 3 Sole Sent a
Wan tas .cam tasn a Nisa ida ole /MAXD
<_amdl\ass OAM pasoto—m TA a SS Assals wien
cumta rxzmz \asal .aam PIAL <M Ars wis
—— Ate esa an miziarcs mhisza sc ambhalas
OID. Aste rallasus poaZs sal, cuicay lis 15
et Wome par an walo (ds panda psawita
17 FS

Moma? ion’ eco 2 WeLetss AN sols maha witha

¢ A double translation to express amopiware...uaxpav.

¢ Here the division of the sentences follows the Greek MS: otk edd3wxev
avtois TO KaAXdos THs S0éNs avTod: eLovdevwbn évuriov Tod Geod. For the
emendation (Hilgenfeld’s) of the passage (ov evdoxd év avrots: 16 KdAXos THs
ddéys adrod [so Syr., not avrjs}) see Gebhardt in loc. The Syriac mh
appears to be a rough translation of evodwxev.

¢ The Syriac has twice aus for cioamaé, the Greek word which is


found in Daniel as the rendering of nana: <iodrag must mean ‘together,’ and


the Syriac must have very nearly restored the original word employed by the
Psalmist.


oO. S. bE


3] PSALMS OF SOLOMON ol


PSALM 1 (= Psalm 43 of MS.).


cole hala .,dutucts delay aa tstso hal dusv?
lo »x0 smh BA wale ya? tales sls azam sa
harshras ohana dulsdes Mm WA plssaz .otos
hoama dhs wa Wham dhalmnhes ee ere
sie calal sod’ Xs amihast .iior WetKams
amethaes .tsin’s cadaml? orn . amhwaazrha
HA w_ acme? lass is atmo wtaadal eos
a woe wamlasa® duam as tl cir’ .aam casas


Bs rhasals Matz clas ariala o Amas3o. hos.


a \\ =» is superfluous, being repeated from the previous clause.

> Reading écyarwy for érxarov.

¢ Here the Syriac has dropped a sentence, corresponding to the Greek
ov py réecoow, kal eévBpicay év Tots ayabois aitur.

4 The Greek here has the difficult, if not unintelligible kat od« nveykar :
the Syriac appears to have read this as kai ov« éyvwxav. We should perhaps
correct asa <n to asa <a


PSALM 2 (= Psalm 44).


Cla Miawis KTAn Wasas> »IX* wlassr mimsazs!
aam prIma Wetha) “sms aza As anlwa? . hula
bus? arma, mlzrior sins WYn3 i Whotmars amin


a je. katéBade. For ats asa read <i35—- 5, with great beams.


b 7a dyva = the Sanctuary.


me ODES OF SOLOMON [42


sal al cata2! ALAA A\s rami winx ANeoe wos
sansa ial: mts pide ata axna .adus . aia
SAAD TAOS oo andra” SR NE was
mls WK pow wha PALI mor Kath as wa
dirs A\= Sa ce pis Aw stad han a >toha
- Ocaret As hhearia* «amis Kasay per acs ..oats ac
rsallas 2 amadur saa. air Wiris piss AS eas.


- 4 Cod., ut videtur, KNsnxs


42] ODES OF SOLOMON A


stands Ser WA] ow) oti’ itor’ toh son
mhasresa sinks tr2X otha” dunis (> stint das
Msemay <a? .wstak las as ohlmat .mals
thao Warde MtaX 3 - hear vlom ela
almarzs stwhe Couto ots! ilar whaoets
ham m> wataima jo whin (2 war Imaia .,maocs
woalss mdumth prs (2 Stadia am aw CTD az?
re wdhae cheaarh .mtars iize wlsl wha or”


emsallas oak peasy paler’


ODE 42.
ISN shay Shen? ota hal dbstadiea sai’ dh za!
metaw As \hdews mara rfe.15 rhralaza 3 4 Ma
aa0mM ptawr it . aiml aszs relx duacmat eat
»2GN7 e_acla aduss .,\ aassas aim hal rama .\
AW hsasa® oi sox Mm ls atams Wain sarssa
pr TX calor? .. amuraas Marea . amms dura
une wpdet mtai . amals dusina® a acak arin
nx pad en ple’ ds stad aaa? owdla As Sadhor min
As oases Maam”? .wohe dus wedi ai PCM u
what .dqohorw rar gulhorw 13 45 paimiscasaa paler’
whasa® duarhva shies Saar sds ard an dso’
ddsaa ool dudes itm le? 2 sas WrtiXala wade’
esta eiita® amas m= wam burs <A ms
djtaNa79 ADRES aptasmml asard cis Amn DIS
hdam> samme dhilma ,mahims <ivs chris


As ODES OF SOLOMON [40, 41


eine lasdne cla ico Ls pais mhasso? ANG
mama rasa? SItzD poh Ws. ore p2cae da ec
ee TI pat dhaava ALN cam praathion
doumhdrvat lsvdho claw alidn la spur’ aio
rdhaloal pralis - aimla .miths pans plare\ we tar


caallao .caxd pera nhaisisa3


ODE 40.


mals rata? .whetacrat whtan oo zor alas ene
am walks ,faw AS Siam? .cmis hast whore 3
»a\ wmy <Miam> .,.mdam SMsaam MaX5 ore onl’
pizla .hwaandh oi pain ,hdawa <atmr1 mhwaarh
eXBIQ .RDAwWD swat Ee Aw -s070° many
dura ms <aoiaaa . dahdhs os Shera? ms <tmi


~_acmilstoasna imhanm win is -_ Amada’ cathasa®


iealla wis», w<\s


ODE.at:


iw ws adrmia .,manat. amis rst o asay!


TW <KA1M A\\=a wmdis oahal a asashia? .mahaim.aa
pelos risa MACAO atm> plus? msds
Max AM cada iA Ton’ <5t tX mas4 msarms
omar As researc pla diac wahzss .ohvaard cade
DIMAS AX 4


—ioasa .mhaals 1MAstNAIA .atasy


gona? amzursa walls moaus ~_draal ~ Amba


Mn a ce bson ple ~_amla ~atard® cstoas eat (=


39] ODES OF SOLOMON res


~ aca te-poaaa 13 wwhadhzsal rv Xoo.\ pe t-00 7 oad
—omahsaas pasha wamhasain cts . adbxis
paar prema iis rls ~_acal pIaAha .. amaiaca
3A -piassa petas® 3a pAtads pam ex eaima am
diva ds deva’s aex nas wy wl ac ical —_am> dul
Sievs Woo pzaak duava  otuaslie siete bles tha tir’
Astadea duswa par Atihewa® wipe was kam
amx Li otto maw As Leechs mmimhaea
‘MAIZA Minka manera tox mS tQ_am™ ..1563
risa »RAQ aera ams ac mis sMaAI~AA
mas ui smarduls <Kstm wohu«a™ .stathe<a
Wha win smanadaws chaiaasa MAAR wD smislaasa
Marsa OAD uN WAAwsA DA .mdactet Whos

wsallas .mdusthas

2 Cod. eam
ODE 309.

smalls po tee plrcla? mMstmr lis iat, hata!
pas taasaa 3 < amhala piotasa —9M.Xst Tho ~pduss
co amhza: alassma samtXa palwa .. amdhiasn
pIass ~_aima siuloa Wwots rs) ee ae Cte, cadets 4
pales waimas 2 asshdu wl rhaimsms sam
~_ams wars A= < asladu wl cman wis a ans
mrix> pIASI .aic7 Meta Swaam WKaca® 1am Kat
a Otas dha .,catasr0 sett cosa Nasco azal’? atc


ce asl poalho hates: cams sa .waiatis is


to ee tana he odisas atm 2 aw trX\$


A ODES OF SOLOMON [3750308


sohaslsassa A viwzsa hte Mdrae wera das
no aS SAL whAda .,MAR2t.0 (te gsacna®
mama® .Whansmt CdamQ wad yal rscay a7 leds


salina .mhatossn “wate diwhera .salz> .>tac


ODE. 37.
lo hie wot hala tm hal sack d\n!
mal silo Jas aa sissaza sais mhdams alia?
wooeat .,lsasa wire s\ smsx . chal wae oasaXy as 3


aalias aah ooh] omhan.s rms20) AN


ODEs 33:
WItL wWeoIa? .Whaatsals ge iter Sima halo?
MUNG caine (0 .BAwa CASA wTaALA .1aduca
main As jisama .wiotaas <irsl .) camo? 41048
pinay ela so wuaira smn Niwot wham “\n Kins
\ wam Sas .am Mam ,maderw tte A\ = sles
mazis fash wiloo .duam wlam mmanr watorisro
la owas) mis wQKoiml ots ml dsmbherws A\=a
CH sth retards wam din pet Ste wal Kan Lit
~amlal Vo eam Wass .ml duoc ans wis passa?
»m  Whaalesr PrPot1 2 aim caXala hash sa raisasan
whal sa duac ci claws milawmla? .whasms
dieza? .Aasdhma Aas K<Kahwa clavhmas wala
whasla rusian aica A Yaa pos a_i san itz
plasma esalsl uslma .mblasa casnus pardon!


34—36] ODES OF SOLOMON aa


ODE 34.
ml ac? lara tals Mar whize eta dul!
mamass “isis wl aw eH Th wharsms “has
o<nar thre da so TAT aan’t whtam “harass
aw asam> .hedls ams mhams .Xalas was ms bul
iw pam dul dsdhl com AS\ Gui. wamba Acts
Salva whaasdh? cams dul wdhass pblrel isha


waallas .asiadea aawa ais _ aaisyaal


ODE 35.
mason resales asa? sls Wie whois atmos mind!
haw injaas3 ..51 das so wihiss homs ..zt een a
data raid w amis waiat .asmidiewa Ma shaw eal
wl ee bas oatoan mms buam li Kika
maw os call verva® sWwhowhs oo tadua sl cam
gustavo? oats oll ale A sma .duam hoa
malams ,uic hha? oilnars hewhdaea mhsmans


sallaa mbhal howdea sim hal hethdirea + pZAIT


ODE 36;
mot phmsina wots away As Kawah!
malnar pio oat mmats rN G As yshasora?
was? cody isadkhs Kaw warm 14 mhsaarha
Reamhin duc zc 1 tAG .<atoay ,cIAaAMS To EA
DIO .WMisdrms Kad warm sat ovals mts Kim


MILA .etomy teX mbhast vers MADIAID Mac


con ODES OF SOLOMON [32, 33


dusohzews wala ohms 24 hals reradazl stor


caalles gc _amsiis cioiaal


ODE 22:


trIs1 am «a <imaia cs amal eo hors misall!


‘=n cas a Sam1 am iw MAK HAA? 2 ams
ac sysar cin AMA .WmeIwt <0 calasa pean


caer esate


ONE N heres
mo hhwia lawl hoaara whassl sah ps dict!
Naya .,mamao — atow\ ssaKa2 .,marsoiwan Wer’
caaX diso ) mio anra sat xt Ax joa? .misah mia
peer’ Ask mhal aXaat .caaadml cosna osins
han WAWS eam mere whe <a cml asmhurn
re sin? aa eotoa Mitams ohtsa\. whlads
els s3 aststae. opens 7 “ped we amhisa addr
pa ew andra aac Sasa \ astohca im
— alasddh cl tina whetars . aamauwa® aso
HX_ mhassl .antadwa »asman? < arowh WA ac’
eaamha _antadhh yaaa aa in elisa males
ei pazaly Jaima hor mic . asia” .isal
wiles WL whaw <m- ain wie «_arllhou
ae pest a_aiml aac’ jhwtara 35 aalo aN


iasalleas AD 6 ON Ashevo


oO. 'S. D


30, 31] ODES OF SOLOMON BEN


ODE 30,

Aor oats as SCxaam qa tases gash als’
wohzs aawa Sc ~ asks aha? .. asl whaden
3510 a~@ wArs A\ 3 water mixaas As asuihheo
MAR emams sk TK Mest Go xa) ssicna
gan Mand ml weak Wl) whsiasrr Wdstnaa!
na rho mn Sata mal (aa .Adi cats mhadew
ras cas pods wosna .xtwha la wsham <i
Ashden mis ashes pire eamsal’” .,masss cl

wrsallas .c>


ODE 31.
ce radar dasha cmdmh cat pro ade’!
ham halaza .mim dsoWo wha) dsl? .mar
whA mass str mii «a dsala whaloo wi
somizl whas chwaarh Abna wharwa chasl, Mina
a d3m <ais ml osteo Soi hal als mica!
mms Miacms Am CRAG TA erica .aam ,mats<o
alasa Oldies 031M anaa® .ixyo yak onal
ris. asl anmwa whack > . aaa: ahta ohare
duam ,durc “An aml .dsao an pana? . wham <\s
cami msshho cl eam as dio aXlaa tai
sath is w~ .dulza hohra dja pr cain?
1 ate ARS Here haat An hss Ae? 2 acai
Lamha dlawa® tama KUN Go esXahoon
Ana ,mashina .scas\ satan Wa .Whaaas A=


NES ODES OF SOLOMON [29


ec get —_acarlawa oA pam eaniaa .sls en
duam sas sailals AN > eam dul mals Alcs
AIM .<Fod elas ~ saiswat hohe chal
xo lnwsar Mo? oc acmsime As alin whan. <lasa
Tasers ad gad IST facet sliwsaa < amdusith
la .,dhralsus das, -_ambhattqala wlazap dha
»hranals TaX_ ck anc c_ amas dsacn «Ax ao dase
yazor Mb .asarc ria ,ham assals <_amhaar
ls aam 0 eat harimstwat ~ acmijaar oa duam
oN amy ataan .-X aam tho (sn pada rca 77
méunth soba ls Wn cassaml ass . acme

alles .rsnas Ja (2 am thus canla .psastmn

a Marg. paca


ODE. 29,
TAX mrsaarah mere? a> hose <\ tam am cat!
Bae wi em AS SLAM mhaal, rane ARAL
pinorat .:mtmt ahasrs hast nersic DTS ATI T
sa Cham1 mamas ~0 laser Canmas —
HA hisasm® .mhasasl=s soma -orlsnl anes
cal ,a907 .atta asams w\ ytwdhr a ovate. casaxtas
moras drlases <ihas A mma .m@tmain sit21a0 Mbt
-aaasasal MtSIKA Minana .saman hares tnsiwa?
mIwa’? .mliss ammal whaaia .odbims “>to yasmnl?
lors; <tax ners. rama .mhiss Kat sasazlsal
cn>TART =n otal wheaarh bsqua™ .«way cal


rsallen .mdhmrs @tala mansl


27, 28] ODES OF SOLOMON aA


.agm oles cualsaz —omdtel cosa Soin et
-peoak MIOT Also aw .xotmon ody shan aim?
aim ak’ .mxas sotadhdhs otinl mora cat3 aim an?
wars ais amas Msary sate As nurddhons
PATh- an AL iso wats mhtamrh wX\ydus
saml wX 203 BAXthh am wWamia othr
ton) M4 hawai> aos HA Mi Asadrdala
pss plan's meainasl\ Wata phe Kxaam ol burns

wesalla imi


ODE 27.
Maw wa <eda7 A\ so? ota dessa yur d\xa!
aallas gota san ,halsxaa3 .,a


ODE 26:
pomQatar sada .ama\ata Ax tds ANY ers:
mosh ..al ds dots aX Or aac? ~acumda hal
dust sass IAS oN lan wr wetna »a\
waa bizams am gemms Wn haaihhe cin Mbn
rilah w\ <5twa .am mahal ;mta0 .1At> aaqass
ocx jap pe aahas Mo tim ci akc .min
~anaia’ vias wis ,wdaias bsuwhdeco sD
3p. Ret Gadus’ ~ amima .janzia wham win ris
lar ataade? .,c0 reer A= coeaml rear cia
Jk dslodes atawa hastens Me .\ acm pres


ramalla? sino’ — tw wer ~ acl durndievs Lm


aN ODES OF SOLOMON [25, 26


ODE 25 [= Pusts Sophia, pp. 148—153].
| Mn? ocak bots wdate Tao —n di tadn?
plrcl dus .bor atsssa intaas pts. duges
Waae tar Ma. mastery ci wsahat .,lasal psuapa
dha hadi Khe > A wam stax am wam AS
es = _Omalas> hsama .WraX@ slr dul hora eer
MAIL! .ITTANA ee (> Manas A wama® tore
PID +5 Kam) a .slsam «20 slude En daw
das Ica Ay dumahs dumadiea® ima cis
Atasrwa «ATI x A\=9 warm <zdal in
Wdhdansips amea Mitr Sdhlas duama™ ..109 MTA
mars <yn® dsdma™ .lasals ~_acls ris alsza
ac .palssals\ casaia ohamamas hormca? atom
wallop
a Cod. ssp


QDE= 26.
Meara? ir’ calssx Im Sat Sheaazh hase!
midus3 .am ohal sails Abo ols Kher wht
chal sXnt. cosa hte ales cla oaiets TX
anc ._amla oa ,masmimina ware a) ola —)
om mlss <heaarh <otssal <mrna BA sansa nd
ya? hanah yop oles usw cmssa cisah caa®


Ode 25, v. 8. Copt. ‘et texisti me sub umbra gratiae tuae et superavi
vestimenta pellicea.’

v. 10. Copt. ‘remoti sunt.’

v. 11. Copt. om.


24] ODES OF SOLOMON a


hhama’? -adardra peQATA ple AaLNAQ .aDtNa rail cosa
wonles MLD Moashan .whsot dasa ATL er


Msaia <“tora .mals worn Sma” dhaiwlmszn


esallas -eralssals\ aalsanl .zraox


ODE 24.
Risa al wam ezin Wb oars As hota ias!
assthara CMiams alsra? mis sambhera wala
ahasa mls Sxwta SX Roar Whota? Shah
pas aama .asmsdrs® avhahe emdmha .milass
wom sod’ lat .. alin tatoo Aa mato
asalas can wamlix kam <n? A\=s avhlasctn
chars ,m> aso otatan manals cmdah pas
unto oa tA alas® .pscal ~ aam ._amsdurs
adem asa? otis eam s;madur’ . amlsaun mlaza
msvha Shel wom duis Ms wom mer jAa°
eamlar .rsar whaiem c<atma® ©. aan vere
Whos oo AX otme? ite samhal tulsa ube
A\= ahora ~_amals aam ptathhar 2 aim
CRVTARM ,Aye Sat Saar” STE ~—amhal ram duals


sohasms arts .cmasrohzes ~aima .mhaaal ,haca


| emmsalias


2 Cod, aamah<a b Cod, sa ut videtur © Cod. Asa


ats ODES OF SOLOMON [23


ODE<22:
am ow Sew eazals arma .<zinox chars!
aw win , Wasa AIA .,09 Maas hans? TAsalo
.ac0 aaa odes .duxsta casks plan dia -_aIM
ta omarinr 2 aim . w Sime .,mazal aima
co aaah isms Nn SSetsm mdhsms aslast .dusmito
ATL Yor Ram oharwmad .ohases calsazia
CISA er Thera oto po de CLAD «
mats hIXL As senita® villas wahzasx chro
pa hetsa? .catamia amma alwml cdhiio
AN? malss hs ea cam ales c_amhsse
HX tls .mmdhe Ktzml Caml cam Ajale reAs
alin? g amin cam wus ahs As wam dunn
Mae - Ast .maartes . aim CIR mths es
en pce SS .oal ssaz aimsa wml KTS alma .wate
camaxn wWam duc Kaeo! cals ham Koha .cohlas
MINAS Ram s.r pasilaa’ chartossara whaalss
ralsanms diss Kc Kawa’ cal amis ml dam WT es
Sate as dias ftasa chaims dima .aam
MY ret hal ext ha wha Ketan’ daraxa
roam wirts yaa ANG dt ANG oo
Masa anadhes Wo asnaas ham WARS coals
AN dies Mmt mia stwhrwa® whathe aml
asia wamila dpa’? wet Sow (2 win isa


— ocala et aetos weiter harem asx dlbsheo


22| ODES OF SOLOMON ws


INO 320085 washer a pal soK7 ml Kc rama
Mhvaarha .reatoan CO eet Arc’ As stea shdaw Is


ODE 22 [= Pistis Sophia, pp. 154—160].

whsheh oo lo amma “main a od hewn am!
pasalsal insn am3 4) sata? whan om yAATIN ama?

cw Sawn eavlax omen act 4,153 lSsa
msaars indl jis Awwr amd |. ai Wtins
dar? oma asacs ,maias As yids .,mazs9t
cam wets mx the Aasa .adhinsa yah daam

tar haazca? whens odio sae diny” .,\
pa air’ duava? oar paiztacasan  galartl  ratar’
Mat\ ham? whim — ai hrida “ins
.aam psathhea clo? iXa samls dataa whim
Weta hom elas “An winl whariass homa
primis c<theuy .wlasl \SN budurw’ ea ad
cals warts pasalal chowh: Kamha”? .hawdua


wvsalles xizox <tosm dus bsama a die duis


a], <ata. Cf. Copt. et docuit me.
b Copt. venenum hujus qui dicit |malum|, * Copt. Zberastz.


Ode 22, v. 12. Here the Coptic texts have gone astray, under the influence
of the Gnosticism in the mind of the writer, who brings in the ‘light’ from the
story of Pistis Sophia. ‘The text of Schwartze is ‘et uti lumen sit duplicatum
iis omnibus’: and the Gnostic Targum is ‘ut tuum lumen sit in iis omnibus.’
But Petermann notes that for ‘duplicatum’ we should read ‘fundamentum.’
This brings the text nearer to the Syriac, which may be taken as correct
in these concluding sentences. The Coptic ‘opulentiam’ for the Syriac
‘kingdom’ is an error which Schmidt has corrected in his German translation.


bo ODES OF SOLOMON [20, 21


ODE 20.

mola .ar’ ae mass am mila shar’ Sotoat Mima’
a’ mX ham cl? .ohareas Sistas cic’ ota
a aim vers law .ohasess ies Mar law cals
300 ham Sats misias? .bartitmes pewlar
imam win wdulda o104 ep mals edhasara
rele wi oe A995 a ogi aN BT.)
clawa “ARENA ars wetaar inh wl5 owas
dumsahl ,masimuh <laca® mariah Asusal ash
sacs ia atm whasal ot ral? .cmimitaan
As yaama® wile’ co thls “i Raa oosr zal naa
wiaha masa As eee tas hea Teer
a0 mMhasiums | Aashad wWhvaanh aoe
sohouse1 c<heanarhs itz . mrha .mhaasl)
rnalles .amz Kiara Mhedaarh


ODE 21.
TALS \\= rotor miisl Wsapal dhseinc sia!
delta? .minzaala caisal wiasso witaina to wa
wezar hal emam s\ aama3 .imas keala <aazy
law salar law wWocta cams hil® aa
wSetoar oharam ham hain burpduat wx
daasa mimais dsathhewo las wis mhaahaza
Mie swarm a ml Kuk ato duama® mda 730


@ Cod. burt


O. S. (e


19] ODES OF SOLOMON As


wWhass\, duc’ ans ela” han Maas so! claws bn"
“aig diate diva "4 al mans oo cl ans We wlew
cals agama’ sass ohasiw versa whan <M) ian
mhann Ss 03M AS ade 1409 KIT osteo
aaa ria!? Aazedea paxrsn plan’ ALA .Anthora
assia® sats adusths aaa AY <_ambhaarsss
all er ee ama’? wWhassls aam paloazes ple An


hasta Whwdardh seta ams 813 edd SO TL


weeallas .msaxl whats


ODE ro.


whasleas mbohinwa »\ stohd Salon <a!
alodies ama ,madum ems tS? atm mhasumss
aula ,mandhs Mm wiztaor1 vat mhalva? Wow
hehat .male shea duroidos Cam Sasha mia®
penand paths mals RXama Kanan. wat moas
a armas .asne th sa rftcolsl wallas hom .tons
dlohss mwta hAX% ast 2 air culmazs pans
asia whlahs Saw hama daha cabs hamia
Myo? cal sed wha is daha dlasa” .rciio
AN wae Sgn cla hom burtosam wam ia
ihsashs dala? uses fal ta me Caasrn
dplia .whaiass? Kawa” oat <rwaris duno

alien hasta duansa .hazumas


a Cod. <\a b Cod. 154085


CR» ODES OF SOLOMON [18


yah pna® wae tte wmatal jaica .mdaszumas
00M gravy LTA dwehaa mhaloon <star si sme
wodea wwht les ps white mligan wlkas devsX\o?
mvhar Ws osu’ tA wA sted’ ease la”? ..s050
~_amls As haan Meat! .duam ,dur’ <a jacalas
www as ypidtl panzew “ln o_O iz jw?
Maaus ,hassa come Min haw hocwa”? -toor’na
alasa 5 rw halaza Ia whaals dstna® . rks
Myr antadrwa jhal azishevo casa sles chatas
zat AS heaarh® 2 amzet ica sain A aams

wsallos .méssazso stn


a Marg. s5acow. © i.e. one copy reads ~%ase< instead of utiue,


ODE 18.


PMAswares dada Kot mSaes wal wathhe!
vale pra wala ds war’ sane aizsde? car us
Myr .mtuse> sim moo ikea en ani’ Simias3
pe Tadasen alr Moo sala att mbhaals jc Shing
lah .amesas Ibn lars ee ys anne
rel are oars «oo ets an wl? wlsas 10

pataa .samdh haa? .whalws oa iis soja
Mave mMhzinsx Psa Mal? daha? athe ds eo dasha
leer wamaas dul mhama whalXa sale dur?
oe as SL Whaniwa a nay rulsaz ,maduc’


@ Cod. saass b—b Cod, AsN\ =


17] ODES OF SOLOMON Ns


ad wha’? mpd s\ duc’ whaiasma .mhsarhs BX
sar .mdbadsa atm mhvsaarh”? sat 5 s\issdha
MATIN ce Kam\2 ORS5 oN rislasa ,maric’s
ma ee otoor TX hin? odloar cizasla
MS TeX ope? .mharam “bAXaa wth wis
sil ,haw am! ohazesal cam iaca .,moris
mada pohra casan whoa? sus Sim ohaca
»MAKas «A am wahheoas .asoca data pada
wlais oo 3as Camsrssa . hot polis whtsa™
ols prashzsa ombaliva A\asala jans\ rE
all <aazer whoe om zn Kimain wham
et dus jaca acs mad zm x sas am
Beth —amlsasa® estes cde As ull caazual
ee tals wsse dulo”? pleas woles bass a
ams Jax pro pm ram ,madurc aaa Ibn aim
heaarh .aals <haremsa aam mblmas salsa”

waallon .msszl Kjora


ODE 17.
otras hare? aw ras rlala .,ealreto er da he?
host «= \ dutherw3? cam clas cis er satad
MAS ica aomadhe point aia sur rela
howara cas hala .ham has MAA KRIST whamia
gush, ila mids dMiea dhtor ites chars
«acl Atshor cama’ Come cammhn aarp. dane


pisara .mulsan milas Mot sDT0 Kam Amt Ama?


a ODES OF SOLOMON [15, 16
oe aie than? .WIro oS yaa wa aren rata
Wa? ah sare ~lis Nass oA wha xno


- dita Shoal smiwa ..) Shh sae sania rrX aso


ssalles < daze poala <u ap dirca


ODE As:

CRAs pasDI pial ac hans xcarx ipa!
sania sxx Asam7 A\=o? LAM Mat hats iam
duio3 80 co ortaam da ctr mimaia «jam
aw s\ jQm4 .wxsrno mma hapa iss mo
hoidihewa has Whazem s\ ham .otiz\ dkssaza
hsoaia mahal dlieo .dhoar hawks <wtac® orcs
>a mbh>man wera? .wontes win mim intiaa
elon ell dal? wasas mbar hast vera oh
Asawa’ cham? .mhasls ciasl hulea mma ms
miins alwa® .,hrisas Mode Jaa AAA IS
.maisacmal assheo! wham win win Sats
omals plida ule so amlal eitwas wks asmdieo

iaallas


ODE 16.
mlaioany massa ..00 Mino <tAws maaan war!
atI AM CIATION j»AAS AW MAM? males OIA
A\ mas war mbhsarhs swlaaa ,hamac’ obsarhs
HMAISA Cam emt ,hdaml essa pall »wth masa


mar Aiscasd coal qa’ ramon OG2 mst taX_ sads4


13, 14] ODES OF SOLOMON 2.


Maharey cata Tah KImMaA: .maaw iam Ere
rhlsas agama .rwl aw alles mo salsa? . mada
Whasara Whasist ham misma? .aam aoshes . aio
ahora? <_acl\ ram durs sons aw dal aw allmaa
Aam AD . AI Fass am\ asxsal SLAKKHA —
Alia .saiss maa ~aml Misr Wn whasazs
Mui i> Sak har WA iar mdbainran mmo
Mic ja>7 ple aamanal? aw sas miiza .ac
weamiles mtizs catml asma osm da asnaher


* Cod. add in marg,


ODES 23.


12D pale Aiwa MS AwhA am atc . data cm’
rhedarh atama? < assdk Camdunm asc’ aala
mhazr5 aAtsta o ania a hss aaza .wsatt


evaalles .ndhal porlas rman cls _amha .nazasala


ODE 14.


Wet sus iam .,maoc\ KiD>a ,maius ea
aa vrais ANaa2 <_ Acs dur’ whol pprias


atch o_*
mamh wla ota sm rh | r\woh wA3 ,o:aaa


mijoama a oan prias to ok Lean’ -Whazum> 57

Bo Tres Wud. As wWahtsl cons 1) .am
ms tah’? Wear. Mma Neier A\=
pal’? soo smainaa . hal anh Sat ears


rs ODES OF SOLOMON [12


maie As zm cw otma’ metas ciata
dmadra iw as FADE TAA . Toa plan 3 ins
cnmtgal wloara’ ator Moums mts jh)
moto AtXwad ats oes CIHALT <A
piri atm eamsalr dima .ohsaarh Sa
Sepa INR e_acal duns ama tee = pike elt
imal Saaz ~ asia Rae: cdusams ssa”
paaoa Wal wads prain par wualia ams eon"
wailins <ttm assawa’® . 1 Whasumal whanus
mrmala cama? wen ee | A> dies mwa. amin
.isascass sass pisly <ataara when Maida nar
Adis. mac ms dula .wsartas Kid TA am {wo
rawas cole “i MeDaL WIS iss rsala aK”!

wsallas olsks wmrtass


ODE TZ:


a NT eg cai A\saes AY owites <saQ ha sled!
MAIA de »hdAwa saa a STL NT as
AG MAKHA Mats camaan A\=s mhsts 2 s\wora3
smanlil <satm moment .oima Matha ox witZ
smhweaaray Saashma miler Whar Mis\ tha
miasisa .mdusths tama .mharam1 <Sisrdma
asda’ eatah els savas aX mhallo® .,masscan
alsa® .@bassiwa mbhalils anc iam aaah verve
mom cic lai maha cla .mhalas caaduc <Aasaw
MAAS Yer? .avtar’ claw modu aa la seta am


10, 11] ODES OF SOLOMON :


ODE. Ic,
wasca .mimais zal shaa .odblmas wats jaa git
vate Wa Meas \ soa? wham <\s ;MICas y>
rarnala mbhal <hesal een palars’a »AZX3 asiasal3
danza dusshien Whibdre4 what hal <duar
wor walesa sims ohsaarhl ,\ amas .zals\
w\ Raa? .aam piiamy sams awaw azide?
mudshhda maim s\ asacs Ibm .5dus ditsal die
asidrwoa sins aalma? < amal As Rtmain hades


camila emaisist AX AAMA


Oi kept:


saxa whan m= hssa mdas swdeva sal WKAR’!
zeto meats stQ teQ stm? catal cinca
A hama? .msay em -rima .,dulda mal wlXa
stats omlrs tetas dlheaia maniaal mdiaw
somsas hams cdetertl Soossa dust oot tins
penodre amr Mao otien san As dtiheras
win <otm1 msaam ~ shaadi asto ils cise
his els ras Sis pm hsata duhiwa? oom»
hao doar Wh whon <\s ham XX) jhasata®
“@hsmams dihsa? alc sata hal huaheo
catusza mhulza ain ds one whaslzl hoaza
pa ecimaiD $plind mantis has Kota? 1s
MwALT LI as duacmat .\asw edn sree’ Asi


ae ODES OF SOLOMON [9


lava dus wala asm San! cs aml mala els
rliwa” SN) dcam ola cass. Ga <amdur’ rlara
Abo ..cax ~ sarwahz ria .,dhranett e_ammras
atm Mhmet>s aana aXw@ra® asa .am e_ammnr
W270 Wayt ams els Jaime Mains Moa
wamlas wassdrh elas ciro® stad ans

allan o Ax05N5 comix cals

4 Cod. oNacowe


ODE 9g.
Ores casas A om sc aal Mora aaa’ asda’
pIdiaa.a atsar say ha? .zar wasl Lae car
BA ase) .casar As avedees here Charen
mAna alsds Wis mdustha c amsdur’ . asain oto
wow cmlds aths4 c asulmasz ,matue was
phasis aswhewo aliuwdhe’S sats odusth alasa
~acalan? MM. ASasa\ ~ asl ols TQ it eed
smarts coh alma ota> . ala xl pais alan


mila? <_adhmas wi —Onmy . Umja ~ ara AN


cal aban calered aamasal, ..maduc cits miss
AY BWA, S>tna .<ams djuo, rwacad ee
az! .mhoms ~asla whansm mhsma® cam wlila
asin gl ws amlaa? ats Kit mtuns wlils
casks 5a haar GK we amsha® mohas -_aphadu


tealles < astahas Made .caasIAD asl Ratwa


O.S, B


8] ODES OF SOLOMON =


memaan lo whaml .obhstal sm FaX_ maa
.ohasal, dasa whasdhlis anac? .ohawazsal .ohal
waalloas


ODE 8.


mMXm307 ator co orl washdal asha aha!
Ira asdusl3 whdaml <srsa wal te _AADay
mMIMALD Whagass allanla wzino Cis c<stsal
Qomx se aim> .asasdrd ~t27 eam amusheoa amast
ahazdhdies a aim® - aamaa shades alle wilzs
eX cause”? < ashanen Keathhe rs asaihdew lian
OI a2aa\ cam AMA .».M .« AAMA Sato
cassie Wamss pro pm mls . asl aalaea®
AMO wsatms mobs alasa <tr; MAKAA army?
~ashaal* wi anc aah Maid FANT AT . AAI~@>S AT.
prpdes waim in ath” wash Id Mauser a
axjra8 .as thd sam shaisam ath’ ms
Roau> piamvat4 .,\ ps SWZ DT 2 aM »>AX.
plea pe ars in’ eee 5 EAC rts cams tA paar’
coams eis pao psa caml rac’ sanexr Lm
an? 2 ain ds al in Wamadeiaa < ain dlihor
—odzs <_ aml dail, pox iinha camimaim dish
~_9m> dual er 1D eo _Ayrc3y ax zero cals
- Amada sas HX lar? cams Kc hod ria
ow osas \acal pao lise aim” .,hdzswcms lisa


4 Cod. ex errore _anzran\


\ ODES OF SOLOMON [7


how whamss® manors Lh shaac’ cams
Mya sendy aa han cho? »mazales Mb . haak
vera wmasaier Mma kam sis vert wpllss Q2ac03
Whxtet MASK? .misn teenie cis Lima hia.
ham jsAs .Wdhmse ton am? chaser am Saha
mas ns owamed <A as s3t91 oma .,maraxs —
ISANY lino plies ac Mba? komm sa duam sain
M\so3 wher po Anor’a mim esos +) oma
ce amaswa sales calmaz las hs madum asa
ANS caw mloss pebortd cpodus mA sos!
es es atas ina . ai’ saan Qa. . asnahzas
Gahan .azaiw meta’ XQ hsm! .cac eamzas
habs mals pwd? walsvaz cola Is cadurca mataca
MX cam htel oss duzis = halma .mimais
TAs MSTA Ama iWjas am .sima .Wam sald
pli ajamcl ..maziza5 Sota sada? orm Js
wana? stm duds Cia jam burs
erator cidunsa whoarws ml Waima mxtacl
wmamso sawhia ite »,mamss salina .,mali
twa am stor Lim mans Kata sara”
ssahhdh ak so aie po Wari smihha
cohuas ol dds AY whom lh XK al dlasdhe
mato ohana etssa pb atm csioon
acm) mds Hera .._amsiamisa . asinia”® rosio
la 2 amdhass atm mhars hast ee samal
wzteot nla whan wha cla wxais at aca


7| ODES OF SOLOMON a


ww As BK WOW? icticn plan cam. .ambharsar
ar Ps aomls ahuro sornsala cla wsin ala
TAA Moet ee wana her’ eamea™ sine das
amx ,mdaizmra~l liam a omasal? ches ood
CAGAD agi 3 .,mam arsmamdeds AIM shiz
paeton whraia™ camo Kam ,txz505 aD oO warns
aam plain resarma’s air’ ature wham a) nasal jaca
Rimaia wamdudartml lis asm. amuioca Deth
ats COI snake rin Aas A\ =a?” < acaras\

ivealles alsin Mie ims aaa


ODE 7.


mint aia wvhalan As whos catat em
wétala mths (sm cointa pa ott Ls Whases
tan swtak’ wana .odal »\jonta aco stm ,hans?
e\n mzas isso toto ») dor TK ina


Atiin mhasums JX mhast mralaxas4 1271.02.59


Ode 6, v. to. The Syriac seems to have abbreviated slightly ; for the
Coptic Targum has ‘biberunt versantes in arena arida,’ and the text has
‘biberunt qui habitabant in arena arida.’

v. 13. The Coptic shows some variation: the comment has ‘acceperunt
vigorem in me hi qui sunt soluti,’ and the text has ‘accipiebant gaudium
cordis, qui soluti erant.’

y. 16. The Syriac has rapovoia where the Coptic has rappyota. Neither
Greek word makes very easy reading. Perhaps the Greek was rapéce: adrav
or mapadvoe atrdv, in which case we translate ‘they received strength for
their paralysed state and light for their [darkened] eyes.’

v. 17. The Syriac ‘lived by,’ answers to the Coptic ‘were saved by’: the
Greek being écv6yoav or éowlovro 616 Tod Vdaros THs Cus.


on ODES OF SOLOMON [6


BrX anzwde® co amizay Ls naams asraudins
aushira turns anhshe’ c aml ham la cdusth
Mona wean cla tam Xam sto AN9 Janet aa
sata am luis ran eas Aware el potad am ats
ie jad iin pasola ssthda woo oxide’ la
SX aml Ch id oped eam torts oral


wmeallen .asan una am ssaN Stn


ODE 6 [=Pistis Sophia, pp. 131—135].
rian? piisazs Misa .thans are rslcass sa
masass ad Absa .<ster cawat ssa1m> esas
a0 etn” wasalsa .taar mam taX_am 32023
As hated wmssa dusts pm eam aX iam
misao sant prim la .lsanws Kam. wa
mhanslos json peasdus ela .xatma mhan Xwor'd
- Rva7® son a.z A a pms ahvsaazrha ven poo. ?
Cima: rama wah MA 2937 whiz czsr0 casts
wiles) dura aura passa dX SIS .ahaa cot
el ara oxime pisos ula ,maclsa asarew lo?


a Cod. stan b Cod. ~pauhdf


Ode 5, v. 8. The Coptic expands the second clause thus: ‘et vicerunt
eos potentes, et quae paraverant malitiose, descenderunt in eos.’

Ode 6, v. 8. I should suggest an emendation to the Syriac, shed for
abu, but it is not borne out by the Coptic, which has in the Targum ‘et
duxit eos super templum,’ and in the text ‘et conversa est super templum.’
‘Duxit’ would answer to the Syriac atue<, but an object to the verb is
wanting.

v. 9. The Coptic text suggests that a line has dropped in the Syriac : the
comment has ‘ haud potuerunt capere eam [loca] clausa neque loca aedificata,’
and the text has ‘non potuerunt eum capere in locis munitis et aedificatis.’


4, 5] ODES OF SOLOMON q


ODE 4.

paudlszia la? le wero Wide alse pare wl!
weablasz ,mals duls Meo itor cides ;mawsumia
Mmzot whothe sasha joo oo dastdhie’ A WErAn 3
atm homsS wis eter Cam oA aledzs el
tra Wis mah la Aaa pahma <\ narsasoasal
aoamls em cihum A harsascon hse tat wav?
al\dua oa amma pal iX aim? .isra Whoa.
hers No Neh cal petsa® .ac mens. werden A\ 8
hom? .al “aaa! pxaal may rari sia ml petasr
petamay pls Ar .,i>0 dur tame1 cam <i danhaz o
wh wes dasa whaa ata 4 £07 pels wai” wisn
mahal whadh aX. dul” .wzsra cals sail cettsa1
ae ham cal\ whiva? dusohuews sas ds Wadd
awha sah Missa whan Koes Xo A5oet K aamA

ram LX calc vere TrX pasa da4 ow
d&sas atm birco ae aa durta ~<a cam ~ohma


wsallas Aa
a Cod, sa


ODE 5 [= /u2stis Sophia, pp. 113—117].
rsa 102 wn an mois Mn sim wn ac cna!
hams ~Lom? am dic jtawr Lhm prearh wl
ware mela .8d0t wadeat im ce’ whansl
lags inca cams “As! lah ecalsass eis
mds saves tama: < aml wam lao air ween
parma ~ amhasth wamh Maasas\7? ..1iarwts


ODE-~1.
[= Pastis Sophia 116 (tr. Schmidt): Texte u. Untersuch. Bd. Vu. pp. 37, 38.]


[Dominus super caput meum sicut corona, neque ero absque
eo. Plexerunt mihi coronam veritatis, et ramos tuos in me germinare
fecit. Nam non similis est coronae aridae quae non germinat ; sed
vivis super caput meum. Et germinasti super caput meum: fructus


tui pleni et perfecti sunt, pleni salute tua.]


ODE 2:
Deest.


ODE 3.
Priora desunt.

wih . amsa <i mahal *,q@assama2 .an pala
otra sastsal duam «55 BA, W@\3 .\ mesa eu
wvdsaet zac sarc aim .\ wan met “Lam ale
mi aawvta: Moet ic aw wasthen am lc
rammed la? die RaW AX msatn “Re AsrwO® 1p 20)
wit atm hal <mms bials = aTha)
Qa esti wares Lbs RAR? Wimwtma
BA_aM”? ots amd ots dol pwins Wm? sat
warms wham Sis am ec diet ls aml sordhsos
away ,;09 xo)? wa) as wal rassr? ama!
a As333 eziiis also vhalrxs mela rato

wtsalles .atarhdea asna amawde3 cobs tak


4 Cod. prima manu ama, sed ipse correxit. > Cod. iusa


LAS


Seen


h
LORY CE,


!


tealernes
OT


Rol


x


sta


ny 2 s at ) \ x> st ™ YF ay
igh
