THE JOURNAL OF FRIAR ODORIC, 1318-1330
Odoric of Pordenone (c. 1286-1331)
From Manuel Komroff, "Contemporaries of Marco Polo" (New York, 1928)
========================================================================
PROVENANCE NOTE (Tower of Babel staging): English text after Manuel Komroff's
1928 anthology "Contemporaries of Marco Polo" (public domain: published 1928;
scan via Internet Archive). Odoric's "Relatio" (his account of 1318-1330) is
complete as printed, ending before the "Travels of Rabbi Benjamin of Tudela".
The great Franciscan travel narrative with its marvels of the East — the
Valley of Death, the pepper forests, the idolaters' rites.
========================================================================

he journal of

FRIAR ODORIC  1 2 18- IS so

FRIAR ODORIC

Odoric is said to have been born in 1286 and at a very early age  took the vows of the Franciscans and joined their convent in Udine.  He soon became eminent for his ascetic sanctity. He lived on bread  and water, went barefoot and alternately wore the haircloth and a  shirt of iron mail. Miracles are ascribed to him long before he began  his wanderings.

In about the year 13 18 Odoric was sent to the East as part of  an extended missionary movement. He reached western India in  about 132 1, and went from there to China, where he remained for  three years.

During the course of his travels he saw the shrine of St. Thomas  near Madras, he sailed in a junk to Sumatra, he visited Java, the  coast of Borneo, he travelled overland in China and visited Fu-chow,  Hang-chow and by way of the Great Canal reached Peking. He  returned overland across Asia, through Tibet, Persia and the land of  the famous Assassins. An Irishman named Friar James was his  companion for a good part of these extensive travels. He died, the  object of popular devotion, in the convent of Udine in January, 133 1.  Soon after his death his fame as saint and traveller spread far and  wide.

He was the first traveller after Marco Polo to describe these far  sections of the world. And more than this, he described many things  which Marco Polo omits: such as the comorant fishing, the long  finger nails of the natives and the binding of women's feet. Sir  John Mandeville (if such a person there ever was) took the substance  of his fraudulent travels directly from these travel records of Friar  Odoric.

THE JOURNAL OF FRIAR ODORIC

C h a f t e r i

HERE BEGINS THE JOURNAL OF FRIAR ODORIC ^ OF THE ORDER  OF THE MINORITES ^ CONCERNING STRANGE THINGS WHICH  HE SAW AMONG THE TARTARS OF THE EAST

Although many stories  and sundry things are reported  by various authors concerning  the customs and conditions of  this world j yet I, Friar Odo-  ric of Friuli, being desirous to  travel unto the foreign and re-  mote countries of the unbeliev-  ers, also saw and heard great  and miraculous things, which  I am able truly to account.

First of all, therefore, sail-  ing from Pera by Constanti-  nople, I arrived at Trebizond. This place is commodiously  situated, being an haven for the Persians and Medes, and  other countries beyond the sea. In this land I beheld with  great delight a very strange spectacle, namely, a certain man  leading about with him more than four thousand partridges.  The man himself walked along the ground, and the par-  tridges flew in the air. These he led to a certain castle called  Zauena, being three days' journey distant from Trebizond.  The partridges were so tame, that when the man desired

to lie down and rest they would all come flocking about him

213

214 CONTEMPORARIES OF MARCO TOLO

like chickens. And so he led them to Trebizond, and to the  palace of the emperor, who took as many of them as he  pleased, and the rest the man carried to the place from  whence he came.

In this city lies the body of Athanasius [who died in  373 A.D.], upon the gate of the city. And then I passed on  further into Great Armenia, to a certain city called Erzerum,  which had been very rich in old time, but now the Tartars  have almost laid it waste. In this city there was abundance  of bread and flesh, and of all other victuals except wine and  fruits. This city also is very cold, and is reported to be  higher than any other city in the world. It has most whole-  some and sweet waters about itj for the veins of the waters  seem to spring and flow from the mighty river of Euphrates,  which is but a day's journey from the city. Also, the said  city stands directly midway to Tauris.

I passed on to a certain mountain called Sobissacalo. In  this country there is the very same mountain whereupon the  Ark of Noah rested. This I would willingly have ascended,  if my company would have waited for me. However, the  people of this country report that no man could ever ascend  the mountain, because they say it pleases not the Most High.

From this country I travelled on further, to Tauris that  great and royal city, which was in old time called Susis. This  city is, for trafiic of merchandise, said to be the chief city  of the world. There is no kind of provision, nor anything  else belonging to merchandise, which is not to be had there  in great abundance. This city stands very well situated, for  to it all the nations of the whole world may resort for traflic.  Concerning this city, the Christians in those parts are of  opinion that the Persian emperor receives more tribute out  of it than the king of France out of all his dominions. Near  to the city there is a salt-hill yielding salt to the cityj and

^

THE JOURNAL OF FRIAR ODORIC 215

of that salt each man may take what pleases him, not paying  aught to any man therefor. In this city live many Chris-  tians of all nations, over whom the Saracens bear rule in all  things.

Then I travelled on further unto a city called Soldaia,  wherein the Persian emperor dwells in the summer season.  But in winter he moves to another city which stands on the  sea [Caspian] and is called Baku. This city is very great  and is a cool place, having good and wholesome waters, to  which also many kinds of merchandise are brought for sale.

Moreover, I travelled with a certain company of caravans  toward Upper India, and after many days' journey, I came  to the city of the three Wise Men [the three Magi] called  Cassan, which is a noble and renowned city, saving that  the Tartars have destroyed a great part of it. It abounds  with bread, wine, and many other commodities. From this  city to Jerusalem, where the three Wise Men were miracu-  lously led, it is fifty days' journey. There are many won-  ders in this city also, which, for brevity's sake, I omit.

From here I departed to a certain city called Geste  [Yezd], from which the Sea of Sand is one day distant. It  is a most wonderful and dangerous thing.

In this city there is abundance of all kinds of victuals,  and especially of figs, raisins, and grapes, more, I suppose,  than in any part of the whole world. This is one of the three  principal cities in all the Persian Empire. Of this city the  Saracens report that no Christian can by any means live there  more than a year.

Then passing many days' journey on forward, I came to  a certain city called Comerum, which was a huge and mighty  city in old time, containing well-nigh fifty miles of walls,  and in times past did great damage to the Romans. In it

2i6 CONTEMPORARIES OF MARCO TOLO

there are stately palaces altogether destitute of inhabitants,  notwithstanding it abounds with great store of provisions.

From here, travelling through many countries, at length  I came to the land of Job named Hus, which is full of all  kinds of victuals, and very pleasantly situated. Near by are  certain mountains having good pastures for cattle. Here  also manna is found in great abundance. Four partridges  are sold for less than a Venetian groat. In this country  there are most comely old men. Here also the men spin  and knit, and not the women. This land borders upon the  north part of Chaldasa.

Chaffer 2

OF THE MANNERS OF THE CHALDMANS ^ AND OF INDIA

Departing from here, I travelled into Chaldsea, which  is a great kingdom, and I passed by the tower of Babel. This  region has a language peculiar to itself, and there are beau-  tiful men, and deformed women. The men of this country  have their hair combed and trimmed like our women, and  they wear golden turbans upon their heads richly set with  pearl, and precious stones. The women are clad in a coarse  smock only reaching to their knees, with long sleeves hang-  ing down to the ground. And they go barefooted, wearing  drawers that reach to the ground. They wear no attire upon  their heads, but their hair hangs dishevelled about their earsj  and there are many other strange things also.

From here I came into the lower India, which the Tartars  overran and wasted. In this country the people eat dates  for the most part. Forty-two pounds are sold for less than  a groat.

I passed further, also many days' journey, to the ocean  sea [Persian Gulf], and the first city where I arrived is

THE JOURNAL OF FRIAR O DORIC 217

called Ormes, being well fortified, and having great store of  merchandise and treasure. So extreme is the heat in this  country, that the privates of men come out of their bodies  and hang down even unto their mid-legs. And, therefore,  the inhabitants of the same place, to preserve their own lives,  do make a certain ointment, and anointing their privy mem-  bers therewith, do tie them up in certain bags fastened to  their bodies, for otherwise they must needs die.

Here also they use a kind of barque or ship called iase  being made only with hemp. And I went on board one of  them, wherein I could not find any iron at all, and in the  space of twenty-eight days I arrived at the city of Tana,  where four of our friars were martyred for the faith of  Christ. This country is well situated, having abundance of  bread and wine, and of other victuals. This kingdom in old  time was very large and under the dominion of King Porus,  who fought a great battle with Alexander the Great. The  people of this country are idolaters worshipping fire, ser-  pents, and trees. Over all this land the Saracens rule, having  taken it by main force, and they themselves are now subject  to King Dili. Here are many kinds of beasts, namely, black  lions in great abundance, and apes also, and monkeys, and  bats as big as doves. Also there are mice as big as our coun-  try dogs, and therefore they are hunted with dogs, because  cats are not able to encounter them. Moreover, in the same  country every man has a bundle of great branches standing  in a water-pot before his door, which bundle is as great as a  pillar, and it will not wither, so long as water is applied.  There are many other novelties and strange things which  would bring great delight to hear tell.

2i8 CONTEMPORARIES OF 3^ARCO TOLO

Chapter^

HOW PEPPER IS HAD ^ AND WHERE IT GROWS

Moreover, that it may be learnt how pepper is had, it is  to be understood that it grows in a certain kingdom where I  myself arrived, being called Malabar, and it is not so plenti-  ful in any other part of the world as it is there. The forest  in which it grows extends for a good eighteen days' journey.  And in this forest there are two cities, one called Flandrina  and the other Cyncilim [Cranganor]. In Flandrina both  Jews and Christians live, between whom there is often con-  tention and war; however, the Christians overcome the Jews  at all times.

In this country pepper is obtained in this manner: First  it grows in leaves like ivy, which they plant near great trees  as we do our vines, and they bring forth pepper in clusters,  as our vines yield grapes. Being ripe, they are of a green  colour, and are gathered as we gather grapes, and then the  grains are laid in the sun to be dried, and being dried are  put into earthen vessels. Thus is pepper made and kept.

Now, in the same wood there are many rivers, containing  great store of crocodiles, and of other serpents, which the  inhabitants burn up with straw and with other dry fuel, and  so they go to gather their pepper without danger.

At the south end of the forests stands the city of Polum-  bum, which abounds with merchandise of all kinds. All the  inhabitants of that country worship a living ox, as their god,  whom the)" put to labour for six years, and in the seventh  year they cause him to rest from all his work, placing him  in a solemn and public place, and calling him a holy beast.  Moreover, they use this foolish ceremony. Every morning  they take two basins, either of silver, or of gold, and with  one they receive the urine of the ox, and with the other his

THE JOURNAL OF FRIAR ODORIC 219

dung. With the urine they wash their face, their eyes, and  all their five senses. Of the dung they put into both their  eyes, then they anoint the balls of their cheeks therewith,  and thirdly their breast. Then they say that they are sancti-  fied for all that day. And as the people do, even so do their  king and queen.

These people worship also a dead idol, which, from the  navel upward, resembles a man, and from the navel down-  ward an ox. The very same idol delivers oracles, and some-  times requires the blood of forty virgins to be given to it.  And, therefore, the men of that region do consecrate their  daughters and their sons to their idols, even as Christians  do their children to some religion or saint in heaven. Like-  wise they sacrifice their sons and their daughters, and many  persons are put to death before the said idol by reason of  that accursed ceremony.

Also many other heinous and abominable villainies do  these brutish beastly people commit, and I saw many strange  things among them which I do not mean here to insert.  Another most vile custom this nation retains. When any  man dies they burn his dead corpse to ashes, and if his wife  survives him, they burn her also, because, say they, she shall  accompany her husband when he is come to a new world.  However, if the wife has children by her husband, she may  if she will, remain still alive with them, without shame or  reproach, but, for the most part, they all of them make  choice to be burnt with their husbands. Now, if the wife  dies before her husband, that law binds not the husband to  such inconvenience, but he may marry another wife.

Likewise, the nation has another strange custom, in that  their women drink wine, but their men do not. Also the  women have the lids and brows of their eyes, and beards  shaven, but their men have not 3 with many other base and

220 CONTEMPORARIES OF MARCO TOLO

filthy fashions which the said women do use contrary to the  nature of their sex. From that kingdom I travelled ten  days* journey to another kingdom called Mobar,^ which con-  tains many cities. Within a certain church of the same coun-  try, the body of St. Thomas the apostle is interred, the very  same church being full of idols j and in fifteen houses round  about this church, there dwell certain priests who are Nes-  torians, that is to say, false, and bad Christians, and schis-  matics.

C h af t e r 4

OF A STRANGE AND UNCOUTH IDOL ^ AND OF CERTAIN CUSTOMS  AND CEREMONIES

In this kingdom of Mobar there is a wonderful strange  idol, being made after the shape and resemblance of a man,  as big as the image of our Christopher, and consisting all  of pure and glittering gold. About the neck of this image  hangs a collar, full of most rich and precious stones, some  of which are of more value than a whole kingdom. The  church containing this idol is all of beaten gold, the roof,  the pavement, and the ceiling of the walls within and with-  out. To this idol the Indians go on pilgrimage, as we do  to St. Peter's. Some go with halters about their necks, some  with their hands bound behind them, some with a knife  sticking in their arm or legj and if, after they remove it, the  flesh of their wounded arm festers, they esteem their limb  to be holy, and think that their god is well pleased with  them.

Near the temple of that idol is a lake made by the hands  of men in an open and common place, where the pilgrims  cast gold, silver, and precious stones, for the honour of the

1 "In this province of Maabar is the body of the glorious martyr, Saint Thomas the  Apostle, who there suffered martyrdom." Marco Polo, p. 295.

THE JOURNAL OF FRIAR O DORIC 221

idol and the repairing of his temple. Therefore when any-  thing is to be adorned or mended, they go to this lake, tak-  ing up the treasure which was cast in. Moreover, at every  yearly feast of the making or repairing of the idol, the king  and queen, with the whole multitude of the people and all  the pilgrims, assemble themselves, and placing the idol in a  most stately and rich chariot, they carry him out of their  temple with songs, and with all kinds of musical harmony.  And a great company of virgins go procession-wise two and  two in file singing before him.

Many pilgrims also put themselves under the chariot  wheels, to the end that their false god may go over them.  All they over whom the chariot rides are crushed in pieces,  and divided in sunder, and slain right out. In doing this,  they think themselves most holy to die in the service of  their god. And by this means every year there die under  the idol more than five hundred persons, whose carcases  are burned, and their ashes are kept for relics, because they  died in that manner for their god.

They have another detestable ceremony. For when any  man offers to die in the service of his false god, his parents  and all his friends assemble themselves together with a con-  sort of musicians, making him a great and solemn feast.  This feast being ended, they hang five sharp knives about  his neck and carry him before the idol, and so soon as he  has arrived he takes one of his knives, crying with a loud  voice: "For the worship of my god do I cut this my flesh."  And then he casts the morsel which is cut, at the face of his  idol. But at the very last wound when he murders him-  self, he utters these words: "Now do I yield myself to death  in the behalf of my god." Being dead, his body is burned,  and is esteemed by all men to be holy.

The king of this region is most rich in gold, silver, and

222 CONTEMPORARIES OF mARCO TOLO

precious stones, and there are the fairest pearls in all the  world.

Travelling from here by the ocean sea fifty days' journey  southward, I came to a certain land named Lammori [Suma-  tra, Marco Polo's Lamori], where, in regard of extreme  heat, the people both men and women go stark-naked from  top to toe. Seeing me apparelled, they scoffed at me, say-  ing that God made Adam and Eve naked. In this country  all women are held in common, so that no man can say, this  is my wife. Also when any of the said women bears a son  or a daughter, she bestows it upon any one that hath con-  sorted with her. Likewise all the land of this region is pos-  sessed in common, so that there is not mine and thine, or  any propriety of possession in the division of lands. How-  ever, every man has his own house.

Man's flesh, if it be fat, is eaten as ordinarily there as beef  in our country. And although the people are most vile, yet  the country is exceedingly good, abounding with all com-  modities, as flesh, corn, rice, silver, gold, wood of aloes,  camphor, and many other things. Merchants coming to this  region for traflic do usually bring with them fat people, sell-  ing them to the inhabitants as we sell hogs, who immedi-  ately kill and eat them.

In this island towards the south there is another kingdom  called Simoltra [Sumatra], where both men and women  mark themselves with red-hot irons in twelve diff^erent spots  on their faces. This nation is at continual war with certain  naked people in another region.

Then I travelled further unto another island called Java,  the compass of which by sea is three thousand miles. The  king of this island has seven other crowned kings under his  jurisdiction. The island is thoroughly inhabited, and is  thought to be one of the principal islands of the whole world.

THE JOURNAL OF FRIAR O DORIC 223

In the same island there grows great plenty of cloves, cam-  phor, and nutmegs, and in a word all kinds of spices are  there to be had, and great abundance of all victuals except  wine.

The king of this land of Java has a most brave and sump-  tuous palace, the most loftily built that ever I saw. It has  most high staircases leading up to the rooms, of silver and  of gold alternately, throughout the whole building. Also  the lower rooms were paved all over with one square plate  of silver, and another of gold. All the walls upon the inner  side were covered over with plates of beaten gold, where-  upon were engraven the pictures of knights, each having  around his head a wreath of gold, adorned with precious  stones. The ceiling of the palace was of pure gold. With  this king of Java the great Khan of Cathay had many con-  flicts in war 5 whom the said king of Java has always over-  come and vanquished.

Chapter 5

OF CERTAIN TREES YIELDING MEAL «* HONEY ^ AND POISON

Near this island is another called Panten, or Tathala-  masin. And the king of the same country has many islands  [the Archipelago] under his dominion. In this land there  are trees yielding meal, honey, and wine, and the most  deadly poison in all the whole world. Against this poison  there is but one remedy, and that is: if any man has taken of  the poison, and would be delivered of the danger thereof,  let him temper the dung of a man in water, and so drink a  good quantity thereof. It expels the poison immediately.

Meal is produced out of trees after this manner. They  are mighty huge trees, and when they are cut with an axe  at the ground, there issues out of the stock a certain liquor

224 CONTEMPORARIES OF MARCO TOLO

like gum, which they take and put into bags made of leaves,  laying them for fifteen days in the sun. At the end of these  fifteen days, when the said liquor is thoroughly parched, it  becomes meal. Then they steep it first in sea water, wash-  ing it afterward with fresh water, and so it is made into a  very good and savoury paste, from which they make either  meat or bread, as they think good. Of this bread I myself  did eat, and it is white outside and somewhat brown within.

By this country is the sea called the Dead Sea [Antarctic],  which runs continually southward, and whoever falls into it  is never seen again. In this country also are found canes  of an incredible length, namely, of sixty paces high or more,  and they are as big as trees. Other canes there are called  cassan, which overspread the earth like grass, and out of  every root of them spring forth certain branches, which run  along the ground almost for the space of a mile. In the said  canes there are found certain stones, one of which, if worn  by a person, he cannot be wounded with any iron. Therefore  the men of this country for the most part carry such stones  with them wherever they go. Many also cause one of the  arms of their children, while they are young, to be lanced,  putting one of these stones into the wound, and closing it up  with the powder of a certain fish, which powder does imme-  diately cure the wound.

And by the virtue of these stones, the people do for the  most part triumph both on sea and land. However, there  is one kind of stratagem which the enemies of this nation,  knowing the virtue of the said stones, do practise against  them: they provide themselves with arrows and weapons  poisoned with the poison of trees, and they carry in their  hands wooden stakes most sharp and hard-pointed, as if they  were iron. Likewise they shoot arrows without iron heads,

THE JOURNAL OF FPJAR O DORIC 225

and so they confound and slay some of their unarmed foes  who trust too securely to the virtue of their stones.

Of these canes called cassan they make sails for their  ships, and little houses, and many other necessaries.

From here after many days' travel, I arrived at another  kingdom called Zampa [Japan], a most beautiful and rich  country, and abounding with all kinds of victuals. The king  had so many wives and concubines that he had three hundred  sons and daughters by them. This king hath ten thousand  and four tame elephants, which are kept even as we keep  droves of oxen, or flocks of sheep in pasture.

C h af t e r 6

OF THE ABUNDANCE OF FISHES ^ WHICH CAST THEMSELVES  UPON THE SHORE

In this country there is one strange thing to be observed.  Many kinds of fishes in those seas come swimming towards  the said country in such abundance that, for a great distance  into the sea, nothing can be seen but the backs of fishes.  They cast themselves upon the shore when they come near  it, and allow men, for the space of three days, to come and  to take as many of them as they please, and then they return  again to the sea. After one kind of fish comes another kind,  offering itself after the same manner, and so in like sort all  other kinds J however, they do this but once in a year. I  demanded of the inhabitants there how, or by what means,  this strange accident could come to pass. They answered,  that fishes were taught, even by nature, to come and to do  homage to their emperor. There are tortoises also as big  as an oven. Many other things I saw which seem incredible,  unless a man should see them with his own eyes.

In this country also dead men are burned, and their wives

2 26 CONTEMPORARIES OF MARCO TOLO

are burned alive with them. The men of the country say  that she goes to accompany him in another world, that he  should take none other wife in marriage.

Moreover I travelled on further by the ocean sea towards  the south, and passed through many countries and islands.  One is called Nicoveran [Nicobar], and it contains in com-  pass two thousand miles, wherein men and women have  dogs' faces, and worship an ox for their godj and therefore  all of them carry the image of an ox of gold or silver upon  their foreheads. The men and women of this country go  all naked, saving that they hang a linen cloth before their  privates. The men of that country are very tall and mighty,  and by reason that they go naked, when they are to make  battle, they carry iron or steel shields before them, which  cover and defend their bodies from top to toe. Whomso-  ever they take in battle they devour, if he is not able to  ransom himself. But if he is able to redeem himself for  money, they let him go free.

Their king wears about his neck three hundred great and  most beautiful pearls, and says every day three hundred  prayers to his god. He wears upon his finger also a stone  called a ruby of a span long, which seems to be a flame of  fire, and therefore when he wears it, no man dares approach  him. They say that there is no other stone in the whole  world of more value than it. Neither could at any time the  great Tartarian emperor of Cathay either by force, money,  or policy obtain it, in spite of the fact that he has done the  utmost of his endeavour for this purpose.

THE JOURNAL OF FRIAR O DORIC ir'j

Chapter 7

OF THE ISLAND OF CEYLON ^ AND OF THE MOUNTAIN WHERE  ADAM MOURNED FOR HIS SON ABEL

I PASSED also by another island called Ceylon, which con-  tains in compass above two thousand miles 5 wherein are an  infinite number of serpents, and great store of lions, bears,  and all kinds of raving wild beasts, and especially elephants.  In this country there is a huge mountain, where, the in-  habitants of that region report, Adam mourned for his son  Abel the space of five hundred years. In the midst of this  mountain there is a most beautiful plain, wherein is a little  lake containing a great amount of water, which the inhabi-  tants report to have come from the tears of Adam and Eve.  However, I proved that to be false, because I saw the water  flow into the lake.

This water is full of horse-leeches, and blood suckers,  and of precious stones alsoj these precious stones the king  takes not for his own use, but once or twice every year he  permits certain poor people to dive under the water for the  stones, and all that they can get he bestows upon them, to  the end that they may pray for his soul. That they may,  with less danger, dive under the water, they take lemons  which they peel, anointing themselves thoroughly with the  juice thereof, and so they may dive naked under the water,  the horse-leeches not being able to hurt them. From this  lake the water runs into the sea, and at a low ebb, the inhabi-  tants dig rubies, diamonds, pearls, and other precious stones  out of the shore. Wherefore it is thought that the king of  this island has greater abundance of precious stones than any  other monarch in the whole earth.

In this island there are all kinds of beasts and fowls, and  the people told me that these beasts would not invade nor

228 CONTEMPORARIES OF mARCO TOLO

hurt any stranger, but only the natural inhabitants. I saw  in this island fowls as big as our country geese, having two  heads,^ and other miraculous things, which I will not here  write of.

Travelling on further toward the south, I arrived at a  certain island called Bodin, which in our language means  unclean. In this island there live most wicked persons, who  devour and eat raw flesh, committing all kinds of unclean-  ness and abominations. For the father eats his son, and the  son his father, the husband his own wife, and the wife her  husband, and this they do in the following manner. If any  man's father be sick, the son straightway goes to the sooth-  sayer, or prognosticating priest, requesting him to demand  of his god, whether his father shall recover of that infirmity  or not. Then both of them go to an idol of gold or of  silver, making their prayers to it in manner following:  "Lord, thou art our god, and thee we do adore, beseeching  thee to resolve us, whether such a man must die, or recover  of such an infirmity or no." Then the devil answers out  of the idol. If he says he shall live, then his son returns  and ministers things necessary to him, till he has attained  his former health. But if he says he shall die, then the  priest goes to him, and putting a cloth to his mouth, stran-  gles him therewith. This being done, he cuts his dead body  into pieces, and all his friends and kinsfolks are invited to  the eating thereof, with music and all kinds of mirth. But  his bones are solemnly buried.

When I found fault with this custom, demanding a rea-  son for it, one of them gave me this answer: "This we do,  lest the worms should eat his flesh, for then his soul should  suffer great torments." I could by no means remove from

1 The Rhinoceros Hombill, a bird with two bills. "How easy here to call Odoric a  liar! but how unjust, when the matter has been explained." Yule in Cathay and the Way  Thither, Vol. II.

THE JOURNAL OF FRIAR ODORIC 229

them this belief. Many other novelties and strange things  there are in this country, which no man would credit, unless  he saw them with his own eyes.

However, I — before almighty God — do here make record  of nothing but of that only of which I am as sure as a man  may be sure. Concerning these islands I inquired of various  well-experienced persons, who all of them, as it were with  one consent, answered me, saying, that this India contained  forty-four hundred islands under it, or within it, in which  islands there are sixty-four crowned kings. And they say,  moreover, that the greater part of those islands are well in-  habited. And here I conclude concerning that part of India.

Chapter 8  OF THE UPPER INDIA ^ AND OF THE PROVINCE OF MANCY

First of all, therefore, having travelled many days' jour-  ney upon the ocean sea toward the east, at length I arrived  at a certain great province called Mancy, being in Latin  named India. Concerning this India I inquired of Chris-  tians, of Saracens, and of idolaters, and of all such as bear  any office under the great Khan. All of them with one con-  sent answered, that this province of Mancy has more than  two thousand great cities within the precincts thereof, and  that it abounds with plenty of victuals, as bread, wine, rice,  flesh, and fish. All the men of this province are craftsmen  and merchants, who, though they be in extreme poverty, so  long as they can help themselves by the labour of their hands,  will never beg alms of any man.

The men of this province are of a fair and comely per-  sonage, but somewhat pale, having their heads shaven but  a little. But the women are the most beautiful under the  sun.

230 CONTEMPORARIES OF 3IARCO TOLO

The first city of India which I came to is called Ceuskalon  [Canton], a day's journey distant from the sea. It stands  upon a river, the water whereof, near the mouth where it  empties itself into the sea, overflows the land for the space  of twelve days' journey. All the inhabitants of this India  are worshippers of idols. The city of Ceuskalon has such a  huge navy belonging to it that no man would believe it un-  less he should see it. In this city I saw three hundred pounds  of good and new ginger sold for less than a groat. There  are the greatest and the fairest geese, and most plenty of  them to be sold in all the whole world, as I suppose. They  are as white as milk [the Guinea goose], and have a bone  upon the crown of their heads as big as an Qgg-, being of the  colour of blood j under their throat they have a skin or bag  hanging down half a foot. They are exceeding fat, and  sold cheaply. Also they have ducks and hens in this country,  each as big as two of ours.

There be monstrous great serpents likewise, which are  taken by the inhabitants and eaten. A solemn feast among  them without serpents is thought nothing of. To be brief,  in this city there are all kinds of victuals in great abundance.

From here I passed by many cities, and at length I came  to a city named Zayton, wherein the Friars Minorites have  two places of abode, to which I transported the bones of  the dead friars, who had suffered martyrdom for the faith  of Christ, as is above mentioned. In this city there is abun-  dance of all kind of victuals and very cheap. The city is as  big as two of Bologna, and in it are many monasteries of  religious persons, all which worship idols. I myself was  in one of those monasteries, and it was told me that there  were in it three thousand religious men, having eleven thou-  sand idols 5 and one of these idols, which seemed to me but  little in regard of the rest, was as big as our Christopher.

THE JOURNAL OF FRIAR O DORIC 231

^ -yy ▼ ▼■ ▼ '

These religious men every day feed their idol gods; where-  upon at a certain time I went to behold the banquet and  indeed those things which they brought to them were good  to eat, and fuming hot, and when the steam ascended up to  their idols they said that their gods were refreshed. How-  beit, all the meat they conveyed away, eating it up them-  selves, and so they fed their dumb gods with the smoke only.

Chapter g  OF THE CITY FUZO

Travelling more eastward, I came unto a city named  Fuzo [Fu-chow], which contains thirty miles in circuit,  wherein are exceeding great and fair cocks, and all their  hens are as white as the very snow, having wool instead of  feathers, like unto sheep/ It is a most stately and beautiful  city and stands upon the sea.

Then I went eighteen days' journey on further, and  passed by many provinces and cities, and in the way I went  over a certain great mountain, upon the one side I beheld all  living creatures to be as black as a coal, and the men and  women on that side differed somewhat in manner of living  from others. On the other side of the said hill every living  thing was snow-white, and the inhabitants in their manner  of living were altogether unlike the others. There, all  married women carry in token that they have husbands, a  great trunk of horn upon their heads.

From here I travelled eighteen days' v journey further,  and came to a certain great river, and entered also a city,  which had a mighty bridge across the river. My host with  whom I sojourned, being desirous to show me some sport,  said to me: "Sir, if you would see any fish being caught, go

^ These birds are called the Fleecy Persian by poultry-fanciers, but the Chinese call then  "velvet-hair fowls."

232 CONTEMPORARIES OF OdARCO TOLO

with me." Then he led me to the bridge, carrying in his  arms with him certain dive-doppers or water-fowls, bound  to perches, and about every one of their necks he tied a  thread, lest they should eat the fish as fast as they took them.  He carried three great baskets with him also. Then he  loosened the dive-doppers from the poles, which presently  went into the water, and within less than the space of one  hour, caught as many fish as filled the three baskets j which  being full, my host untied the threads from about their  necks, and entering the second time into the river they fed  themselves with fish, and being satisfied they returned and  allowed themselves to be bound to their perches as they were  before. And when I did eat of those fish, I thought they  were exceedingly good.

Travelling on for many days, at length I arrived at an-  other city called Canasia [the modern Hang-chow], which  signifies in our language the city of heaven. Never in my  life did I see so great a city. It contains in circuit a hundred  miles. Neither saw I any plot thereof, which was not thor-  oughly inhabited. I saw many houses of ten or twelve  stories high, one above another. It has mighty large suburbs  containing more people than the city itself. Also it has  twelve principal gates j and about the distance of eight miles,  in the highway to every one of these gates stands a city as  big by estimation as Venice, or Padua.

The city of Canasia is situated in waters, or marshes,  which always stand still, neither ebbing nor flowing; how-  ever, it has a defence for the wind like Venice. In this city  there are more than eleven thousand bridges, many of which  I counted and passed over them. Upon every one of these  bridges stand certain watchmen of the city, keeping continual  watch and ward about the city, for the great Khan the Em-  peror of Cathay. The people of this country say, that they

THE JOURNAL OF FRIAR ODORIC 233

have one duty that they must pay their lord. For every  fire one baits o£ tax is paid tribute j and each balls is five  papers like pieces of silk, which are worth one florin and ^  half of our coin. Ten or twelve households have one fire  between them, and so pay tribute but for one fire only. All  those tributary fires amount to the number of eighty-five  thuman, with other four thuman of the Saracens, which  make eighty-nine in all. Each thuman equals ten thousand.  The residue of the people of the city are some of them  Christians, some merchants, and some travellers through the  country, whereupon I marvelled much how such an infinite  number of persons could inhabit and live together. There is  great abundance of victuals in this city, as bread and wine,  and especially of hogs' flesh, with other necessaries.

C h af t e r 10

OF A MONASTERY WHERE MANY STRANGE BEASTS OF MANY  SPECIES DO LIVE UPON A HILL

In the above-mentioned city four of our friars had con-  verted a mighty and rich man to the faith of Christ, at whose  house I continually abode, for as long as I remained in the  city. Who upon a certain time said to me: "Ara," that is  to say, father, "will you go and behold the city?" And I  said, "Yes." Then we embarked, and directed our course  to a certain great monastery; when we arrived, he called a  religious person with whom he was acquainted, saying to  him concerning me: "This Raban Francus," that is to say,  this religious Frenchman, "comes from the western parts  of the world, and is now going to the city of Kanbalu  [Peking] to pray for the life of the great Khan, and there-  fore you must show him some rare thing, that when he  returns to his own country he may speak of this strange

234 CONTEMPORARIES OF mARCO TOLO

sight or novelty seen in the city o£ Canasia." Then the re-  ligious man took two great baskets full of scraps from the  table, and led me into a little walled park, the door of which  he unlocked with his key, and there appeared before us a  pleasant fair green plot, which we entered. In the green  stands a little mount in form of a steeple, replenished with  fragrant herbs, and fine shady trees. And while we stood  there, he took a cymbal, or bell, and rang, as they use to  ring to dinner or bevoir in cloisters, at the sound of which  many creatures of divers kinds came down from the mount,  some like apes, some like cats, some like monkeys, and some  having faces like men. And while I stood beholding of  them, they gathered themselves together about him, to the  number of forty-two hundred of those creatures, putting  themselves in good order, before whom he set a platter, and  gave them the fragments to eat. And when they had eaten  he rang upon his cymbal the second time, and they all re-  turned to their former places. Then, wondering greatly  at the matter, I demanded what kind of creatures those might  be. "They are," said he, "the souls of noble men which we  do here feed, for the love of God who governeth the world j  and as a man was honourable or noble in this life, so his soul  after death, enters into the body of some excellent beast or  other, but the souls of simple and rustic people do possess  the bodies of more vile and brutish creatures." Then I be-  gan to refute that foul belief; but my speech did not at all  prevail with him, for he could not be persuaded that any  soul might remain without a body.

From here I departed unto a certain city named Chilenso  [Nanking], the walls of which were forty miles in circuit.  In this city there are three hundred and sixty bridges of  stone, the fairest that ever I saw; and it is well inhabited,  having a great navy belonging to it, and abounding with all

THE JOURNAL OF FRIAR ODORIC 235

kind of victuals and other commodities. And then I went  to a certain river called Thalay [Ta-kiang], which, where it  is most narrow, is seven miles broad j and it runs through  the midst of the land of pygmies, whose chief city is called  Cathan, and is one of the goodliest cities in the world.  These pygmies are three of my spans high, and they make  larger and better cloth of cotton and silk than any other na-  tion under the sun.

Coasting along by this river, I came unto a certain city  named Janzu [Yamzai], in which there is one house for the  friars of our order, and there are also three churches of  the Nestorians.

This Janzu is a noble and great city, containing forty-  eight thuman of tributary fires, and in it are all kinds of  victuals, and great plenty of such beasts, owls and fish as  Christians do usually live upon. The lord of the same city  has in yearly revenues for salt only, fifty thuman of halts ^  and one halis is worth a florin and a half of our coin. Inso-  much that one thuman of halts amounts to the value of fif-  teen thousand florins. However, the lord favours his peo-  ple in one respect, for sometimes he forgives them freely  two hundred thum^any lest there should be any scarcity or  dearth among them.

There is a custom in this city that when any man is de-  termined to banquet his friends, going about to certain tav-  erns or cooks' houses appointed for the same purpose, he  says to every particular host, you shall have such, and such  of my friends, whom you must entertain in my name, for  so much I will bestow upon the banquet. And by that means  his friends are better feasted than they should have been at  his own home.

Ten miles from this city, about the head of the river of  Thalay, there is a certain other city called Montu, which

236 CONTEMPORARIES OF 34ARCO TOLO

has the greatest navy that I saw in the whole world. All  their ships are as white as snow, and they have banqueting  houses in them, and many other rare things also, which no  man would believe, unless he had seen them with his own  eyes.

Chapter 11

OF THE CITY OF KANBALU

Travelling eight days' journey further by many terri-  tories and cities, at length I came by fresh water to a certain  city named Lencyn, standing upon the river of Karauoran  [Yellow River], which runs through the midst of Cathay,  and does great harm in the country when it overflows the  banks, or breaks the channel. From there passing along the  river eastward, after many days, and the sight of divers  cities, I arrived at a city called Sumakoto [Shan-tung], which  contains more silk than any other city of the world. When  there is great scarcity of silk, forty pounds are sold for less  than eight groats.

In this city there is abundance of merchandise, and of  all kinds of victuals also, as of bread, wine, flesh, fish, with  all choice and delicate spices.

Then travelling on still towards the east by many cities,  I came to the noble and renowned city of Kanbalu,  which is of great antiquity, being situated in the province of  Cathay. This city the Tartars took, and near to it within  the space of half a mile they built another city called Taydo.  The city of Taydo has twelve gates, each of them two miles  distant from another. Also the space lying in the midst be-  tween these two cities is very well and thoroughly inhabited,  so that they make as it were but one city between them.  The whole compass or circuit of both cities together is forty  miles.

THE JOURNAL OF FRIAR ODORIC 237

In this city the great emperor Khan has his principal seat,  and his imperial palace, the walls of which palace contain  four miles in circuit. Near to his palace are many other  palaces and houses of his nobles which belong to his court.  Within the precincts of the imperial palace there is a most  beautiful mount, set and replenished with trees, which is  called the Green Mount, having a most royal and sumptuous  palace standing thereupon, in which, for the most part, the  great Khan resides.

Upon one side of the mount there is a great lake, where-  upon a most stately bridge is built, in which lake is great  abundance of geese, ducks, and all kinds of water-fowls.  In the wood growing upon the mount there is great store of  all birds, and wild beasts. And, therefore, when the great  Khan will solace himself with hunting or hawking, he needs  not so much as once to step forth of his palace. Moreover,  the principal palace, wherein he makes his abode, is very  large, having within it fourteen pillars of gold, and all the  walls are hung with red skins, which are said to be the most  costly skins in all the world. In the midst of the palace  stands a jar of two yards high, which consists of a precious  stone called merdochas [jade] and is wreathed about with  gold, and at each corner is the golden image of a serpent, as  it were, furiously shaking and casting forth his head. This  jar also has a kind of network of pearl wrought about it.  Likewise into the jar wine is conveyed through certain pipes  and conduits, such as is drunk in the emperor's court. Upon  this there- also hang many vessels of gold for those who  desire to drink of the liquor.

In the palace there are many peacocks of gold. When  any Tartar makes a banquet for his lord, if the guests chance  to clap their hands for joy and mirth, the golden peacocks  also will spread abroad their wings, and lift up their trains,

238 CONTEMPORARIES OF MARCO TOLO

and make as if they would dance. This I suppose is done  by art magic or by some secret engine under the ground.

Chapter 12  OF THE GLORY AND MAGNIFICENCE OF THE GREAT KHAN

Moreover, when the great Emperor Khan sits on his  imperial throne of estate, on his left side sits his queen,  or empress, and upon another inferior seat there sit two  other women, which are to accompany the emperor, when  his spouse is absent, but in the lowest place of all, there  sit all the ladies of his kindred. All the married women  wear upon their heads a kind of ornament in shape like  a man's foot, of a cubit and a half in length, and the lower  part of the foot is adorned with cranes' feathers, and is all  over thick set with great and Oriental pearls.

Upon the right hand of the great Khan sits his first-  begotten son and heir apparent to his empire, and under  him sit all the nobles of the blood royal. There are also  four secretaries, which put all things in writing that the  emperor speaks. In his presence likewise stand his barons  and others of his nobility, with great trains of followers after  them, of whom none dare speak so much as one word, unless  they have obtained license of the emperor so to do, except  his jesters and stage -players, who are appointed of purpose  to solace their lord.

Neither dare they attempt to do aught, but only accord-  ing to the pleasure of their emperor. About the palace gate  stand certain barons to keep all men from treading upon the  threshold of the gate.

When it pleases the great Khan to solemnize a feast, he  has about him fourteen thousand barons, carrying wreaths  and little crowns upon their heads, and giving attendance

THE JOURNAL OF FRIAR ODORIC 239

upon their lord, and every one of them wears a garment of  gold and precious stones, which is worth ten thousand florins.  His court is kept in very good order, by governors of tens,  governors of hundreds, and governors of thousands, inso-  much that every one in his place performs his duty, neither  is there any defect to be found.

I, Friar Odoric, was present in person for the space of  three years, and was often at the banquets, for we Minor  Friars have a place of abode appointed out for us in the  emperor's court, and are enjoined to go and bestow our  blessing upon him. And I inquired of certain courtiers con-  cerning the number of persons pertaining to the emperor's  court. They answered me, that of stage-players, musicians,  and such like, there were eighteen thuman at the least, and  that the keepers of dogs, beasts, and fowls were fifteen  thumariy and the physicians for the emperor's body, were  four hundred. The Christians also were eight in number,  together with one Saracen. At my being there, all these  persons had all kinds of necessaries both for apparel and  victuals out of the emperor's court.

Moreover, when he desires to journey from one country  to another, he has four troops of horsemen, one being  appointed to go a day's journey before, and another to come  a day's journey after him, the third to march on his right  hand, and the fourth on his left, in the manner of a cross, he  himself being in the midst. And so every particular troop  have their daily journeys limited to them, to the end they  may provide sufficient victuals without defect.

Now the great Khan himself is carried in manner follow-  ing> He rides in a chariot with two wheels, upon which a  majestic throne is built of the wood of aloe, being adorned  with gold and great pearls, and precious stones, and four  elephants bravely furnished do draw the chariot, before

240 CONTEMPORARIES OF 3dARCO TOLO

which elephants are four great horses richly trapped and  covered to lead the way. Hard by the chariot, on both sides,  are four barons laying hold and attending thereupon, to keep  all persons from approaching their emperor. Upon the  chariot also two milk-white gerfalcons do sit, and seeing any  game which he would take, he lets them fly, and so they take  it, and after this manner does he solace himself as he rides.

Moreover, no man dare come within a stone's cast of the  chariot, but such as are appointed. The number of his own  followers, of his wives' attendants, and of the train of his  first-begotten son and heir apparent, would seem incredible  to any man, unless he had seen it with his own eyes. The  great Khan has divided his empire into twelve parts or prov-  inces, and one of the provinces has two thousand great cities  within its precincts. Whereupon his empire is of that length  and breadth that to whatsoever part thereof he intends his  journey, he has space enough for six months' continual  progress, except his islands which are at the least five  thousand.

C h af t e r i ^

OF CERTAIN INNS OR HOSPITALS APPOINTED FOR TRAVELLERS  THROUGHOUT THE WHOLE EMPIRE

The emperor, so that travellers may have all things  necessary throughout his whole empire, has caused certain  inns to be provided in sundry places upon the highways,  where all things pertaining unto victuals are in a continual  readiness. And when any news happen in any part of his  empire, if he chance to be far absent from that part, his  messengers upon horses or dromedaries ride post to him, and  when they and their beasts are weary, they blow their horn,  and at the noise of it, the next inn likewise provides a horse  and a man who takes the letter of him that is weary, and

THE JOURNAL OF FRIAR O DORIC 241

runs to another inn. And so by many inns, and many posts,  the report, which ordinarily could scarce come in thirty days,  is in one natural day brought to the emperor. Therefore no  happening of any moment can be done in his empire, but  straightway he has intelligence thereof.

Moreover, when the great Khan himself will go hunting,  he uses this custom. Some twenty days' journey from the  city of Kanbalu there is a forest six days' journey in circuit,  in which forest there so many kinds of beasts and birds that  it would sound incredible to report. To this forest, at the end  of every third or fourth year, he resorts with his whole train,  and they all of them together surround the forest, sending  dogs into the same, which by hunting do chase the beasts,  lions and stags, and other creatures, to a most beautiful plain  in the midst of the forest, because all the beasts of the forest  tremble, especially at the cry of the hounds. Then comes  the great Khan himself, being carried upon three elephants,  and shoots five arrows into the whole herd of beasts, and  after him all his barons, and after them the rest of his  courtiers and family do all in like manner discharge their  arrows also, and every man's arrow has a special mark. Then  they all go to the beasts which are slain, suffering the living  beasts to return into the wood that they may have more sport  with them another time, and every man enjoys that beast as  his own wherein he finds his arrow has stuck.

Chapter 14

OF THE FOUR FEASTS WHICH THE GREAT KHAN CELEBRATES  EVERY YEAR IN HIS COURT

Four great feasts in a year does the Emperor Khan cele-  brate 5 namely, the feast of his birth, the feast of his circum-  cision, the feast of his coronation, and the feast of his mar-

242 CONTEMPORARIES OF mARCO TOLO

riage. And to these feasts he invites all his barons, his  stage-players, and all such as are of his kindred. Then the  great Khan sitting on his throne, all his barons present  themselves before him, with wreaths and crowns upon their  heads, being variously attired, for some of them are in  green, namely, the principal; the second are in red, and the  third in yellow, and they hold each man in his hand a little  ivory table of elephant's tooth, and they are girt with golden  girdles half a foot broad, and they stand upon their feet  keeping silence.

About them stand the stage-players or musicians with their  instruments. And in one of the corners of a certain great  palace, all the philosophers or magicians remain for certain  hours, and do attend upon points or characters. When the  time which the philosophers awaited is come, a certain crier  calls out with a loud voice, saying, "Bow yourselves before  your Emperor." With that all the barons fall flat upon the  earth. Then he cries out again: "Arise all." And immedi-  ately they all arise. Likewise the philosophers wait for  another suitable moment, and when it comes, the crier calls  out: "Put your fingers in your ears." And again he cries,  "Pluck them out." Again, at the third point he calls: "Bolt  this meal."

Many other circumstances also do they perform, all which  they say have some certain signification. But neither would  I write them, or give any heed to them, because they are  vain and ridiculous. And when the musicians' hour is come,  then the philosophers say, "Solemnize a feast unto your  lord." With that all of them sound their instruments,  making a great and clamorous noise. And immediately  another cries, "Peace, peace!" And they all cease. Then  come the women musicians and sing sweetly before the  emperor, which music was more delightful to me. After

THE JOURNAL OF FRIAR ODORIC 243

them come in the lions and do their obeisance unto the great  ivhan. Then the jugglers cause golden cups full of wine to  fly up and down in the air, and to apply themselves to men's  mouths that they may drink of them. These and many other  strange things I saw in the court of the great Khan, which no  man would believe unless he had seen them, and therefore  I omit to speak of them.

I was informed also by certain credible persons, of another  miraculous thing, namely, that in a certain kingdom of the  great Khan, wherein stand the mountains called Caspian, the  kingdom's name is Kalor, there grow great melons, which  when ripe do open at the tops, and within them is found a  little beast like a young lamb. I myself have heard reported  that there stand certain trees upon the shore of the Irish Sea,  bearing fruit like a melon, which, at a certain time of the  year do fall into the water, and become birds.

C h a'p t e r 75

OF VARIOUS PROVINCES AND CITIES

After three years I departed out of the empire of Cathay,  travelling fifty days' journey towards the west. And at  length I came to the empire of Prester John, whose princi-  pal city is Kosan, which has many other cities under it.  From there passing many days' travel, I came to a province  called Casan, which is for good commodities one of the  only provinces under the sun, and is very well inhabited,  for when we depart out of the gates of one city we may  behold the gates of another city, as I myself saw in many of  them.

The breadth of the province is fifty days' journey, and the  length about sixty. In it there is great plenty of all victuals,  and especially of chestnuts, and it is one of the twelve prov-

244 CONTEMPORARIES OF MARCO TOLO

inces of the great Khan. Going on further, I came to a  certain kingdom called Tibet, which is in subjection to the  great Khan also, wherein I think there is more bread and  wine than in any other part of the world. The people of this  country do, for the most part, live in tents made of black  felt. Their principal city [Lhasa] is surrounded with fair  and beautiful walls, being built of white and black stones,  which are disposed chequerwise one by another, and curi-  ously put together. Likewise all the highways in this coun-  try are exceedingly well paved. In this city none dare shed  the blood of a man, or of any beast, for the reverence they  bear a certain idol. In this city their Abassi, that is to say,  their Pope, is resident, being the head and prince of all  idolaters, upon whom he bestows and distributes gifts after  his manner, even as our Pope of Rome accounts himself to  be the head of all Christians.

The women of this country wear their hair plaited in over  a hundred tresses, and they have two teeth in their mouths  as long as the tusks of a boar. When a man's father dies  among them, his son assembles together all the priests and  musicians that he can get, saying that he is determined to  honour his father. Then they carry the body to a field, all  his kinsfolk, friends and neighbours accompanying them.  Here the priests with great solemnity cut off the father's  head, giving it to his son, which being done, they divide  the whole body into morsels, and so leave it behind them,  returning home with prayers in the company of the son. So  soon as they are departed, certain vultures, which are accus-  tomed to such banquets, come flying from the mountains,  and carry away all the morsels of flesh j and from thence-  forth a fame is spread abroad that the said party deceased  was holy, because the angels of God carried him into para-  dise. This is the greatest and highest honour that the son

THE JOURNAL OF FRIAR ODORIC 245

can devise to perform for his deceased father. Then the  son takes his father's head and, first cooking it and eating  the flesh, he makes of the skull a drinking cup, from which  himself with all his family and kindred do drink with great  solemnity and mirth, in the remembrance of his dead father.  Many other vile and abominable things does this nation  commit, which I mean not to write, because men neither can  nor will believe, except they should have sight of them.

Chapter 16

OF A CERTAIN RICH MAN ^ WHO IS FED AND NOURISHED BY

FIFTY VIRGINS

While I was in the province of Mancy, I passed by the  palace of a certain famous man, who has fifty virgin damsels  continually attending upon him, feeding him every meal,  as a bird feeds her young ones. Also he has sundry kinds of  meat served at his table, and three dishes of each kind. And  when the virgins feed him, they sing most sweetly. This  man has in yearly revenues thirty thuman of tagars of rice,  every thuman equals ten thousand tagars^ and one tagar  [about 140 pounds] is the burden of an ass. His palace is  two miles in circuit, the pavement is one place of gold, and  another of silver. Near the wall of the palace there is a  mount artificially wrought with gold and silver, whereupon  stand turrets and steeples in miniature and other things for  the amusement and recreation of the great man. And it was  told me that there were four such men in that kingdom.

It is accounted a great grace for the men of that country to  have long nails upon their fingers, and especially upon their  thumbs, which nails they may fold about their hands. But  the grace and beauty of their women is to have small and  slender feet^ and therefore the mothers, when their daugh-

246 CONTEMPORARIES OF MARCO TOLO

ters are young, do bind up their feet, that they may not  grow great.

Travelling on further towards the south, I arrived at a  certain country called Melistorte, which is a very pleasant  and fertile place. And in this country there was a certain  aged man called the Old Man of the Mountain, who round  about two mountains had built a wall to enclose them.  Within this wall there were the fairest and most crystal foun-  tains in the whole world: and about the fountains there were  most beautiful virgins in great number, and goodly horses  also, and in a word, everything that could be devised for  bodily pleasure and delight, and therefore the inhabitants  of the country call the same place by the name of Paradise.  The Old Man, when he saw any proper and valiant young  man, would admit him into his paradise. Moreover, by  certain conduits he makes wine and milk to flow abundantly.  This Old Man when he has a mind to revenge himself or  to slay any king or baron, commands him that is governor of  the said paradise, to bring there one of the youths, permitting  him a while to take his pleasure therein, and then to give  him a certain drug of sufficient force to cast him into such a  slumber as should make him quite void of all sense, and so  being in a profound sleep to convey him out of his paradise j  who being awaked, and seeing himself thrust out of the  paradise would become so sorrowful that he could not in the  world devise what to do, or whither to turn. Then would he  go to the Old Man, beseeching him that he might be ad-  mitted again into his paradise, who says to him: "You cannot  be admitted, unless you will slay such or such a man for my  sake, and if you will give the attempt only, whether you kill  him or no, I will place you again in paradise, that there you  may remain always." Then would the youth without fail  put the same in execution, endeavouring to murder all those

THE JOURNAL OF FRIAR ODORIC 247

against whom the Old Man had conceived any hatred. And  therefore all the kings of the East stood in awe of the Old  Man, and gave him great tribute.

Chapter i y

OF THE DEATH OF THE OLD MAN OF THE MOUNTAIN

When the Tartars had subdued a great part of the world,  they came to the Old Man, and took from him the custody  of his paradise, who being incensed by this, sent abroad  many desperate and resolute persons and caused many of the  Tartar nobles to be slain. The Tartars, seeing this, went  and besieged the city where the Old Man was, took him, and  put him to a most cruel and miserable death.

The friars in that place have this special gift 5 namely,  that by the virtue of the name of Christ, and in the virtue  of his precious blood, which he shed upon the cross for the  salvation of mankind, they do cast forth devils out of them  that are possessed. And because there are many possessed  men in those parts, they are bound and brought ten days'  journey to the friars. When they are freed of the unclean  spirits, they do presently believe in Christ who delivered  them, accounting him for their God, being baptized in his  name, and also delivering immediately to the friars all their  idols, and the idols of their cattle, which are commonly made  of felt or of women's hair. Then the friars kindle a fire in a  public place, where the people resort, that they may see the  false gods of their neighbours burnt, and cast the idols into  the flame, but they jump out of the fire again. Then the  friars sprinkle the fire with holy water, casting the idols into  it the second time, and with that the devils flee in the likeness  of black smoke, and the idols still remain till they are con-  sumed unto ashes. Afterward, this noise and outcry from

248 CONTEMPORARIES OF 34ARC0 TOLO

the devil Is heard in the air: "Behold and see how I am  expelled out of my habitation." And by these means the  friars do baptize great multitudes.

There was another terrible thing which I saw there.  Passing by a certain valley, which is beside a pleasant river,  I saw many dead bodies, and in the valley also I heard divers  sweet sounds and harmonies of music, especially the noise of  citherns. I was greatly amazed. This desert valley is in  length seven or eight miles at the least, into which any one  who enters dies presently, and can by no means pass alive  through it. Moreover, I was tempted to go in, and to see  what it was. At length making my prayers, and recommend-  ing myself to God in the name of Jesus, I entered, and saw  such swarms of dead bodies there as no man would believe  unless he were an eye-witness thereof. At the one side of the  valley in a certain rock, I saw the face of a man, which  beheld me with such a terrible aspect that I thought verily  I should have died in the same place. But always this sen-  tence, "The Word became Flesh, and Dwelt amongst us," I  began to pronounce, making the sign of the cross, and nearer  than seven or eight paces I dared not approach to the face In  the rocks. But I departed and fled to another place in the  valley, ascending up to a little sandy mountain, where looking  round about, I saw nothing but heard the citherns, which  continued sounding and playing by themselves without the  help of musicians. And being upon the top of the mountain,  I found silver there like the scales of fishes in great abun-  dance; and I gathered some into my bosom to show for a  wonder, but my conscience rebuking me, I cast It up. And  so, by God's grace, I departed without danger. And when  the men of the country knew that I was returned out of the  valley alive, they reverenced me, saying that I was baptized  and holy, and that the bodies were men subject to the devils

THE JOURNAL OF FRIAR ODORIC 249

infernal, who used to play upon citherns, to the end they  might allure people to enter, and so murder them. Thus  much concerning those things which I beheld most certainly  with mine eyes, I, Friar Odoric, have here written. Many  strange things also I have of purpose omitted, because men  will not believe them unless they see them.

C h af t e r 18  OF THE HONOUR AND REVERENCE DONE TO THE GREAT KHAN

I WILL report one thing more, which I saw, concerning  the great Khan. It is a usual custom in those parts, that  when the Khan travels through any country, his subjects  kindle fires before their doors, casting spices therein to make  a perfume, that their lord passing by may smell the sweet  odours thereof, and much people come forth to meet him.  Upon a certain time when he was coming towards Kanbalu,  the fame of his approach being published, a bishop of ours,  with certain of our Minorite Friars and myself, went two  days' journey to meet himj and being come close to him, we  put a cross upon wood, I myself having a censer in my hand,  and began to sing with a loud voice: "Vent, creator spiritus"  And as we were singing, he caused us to be called, command-  ing us to come to himj notwithstanding that no man dare  approach within a stone's cast of his chariot, unless he be  called, but such only as keep his chariot. And when we came  near to him, he veiled his hat, or bonnet, being of an inesti-  mable price, doing reverence to the cross. And immediately  I put incense into the censer, and our bishop taking the censer  perfumed him, and gave him his benediction.

Moreover, they that come before the Khan do always  bring some oblation to present to him, observing the ancient  law, "Thou shalt not appear in my presence with an empty

250 CONTEMPORARIES OF MARCO TOLO

hand." And for that reason we carried apples with us, and  offered them in a platter with reverence to him. Taking  out two of them, he did eat some part of one. And then he  signalled to us, that we should go, lest the horse coming on  might injure us. With that we departed from him, and  turned aside, going to certain of his barons, which had been  converted to the faith by friars of our order, being at the  same time in his army. We offered them the apples, and  they received them at our hands with great joy, seeming to  us to be as glad as if we had given them some great gift.

I, Friar Odoric of Friuli, of a certain territory called  Fortius Vahonis, and of the Order of the Minorites, do  testify and bear witness to the Reverend Father Guidotus,  minister of the province of St. Anthony, in the marquisate of  Treviso, in accordance with my vow of obedience, that all  the things herein written, either I saw with mine own eyes,  or heard the same reported by credible and substantial per-  sons. The common report also of the countries where I was,  testifieth those things which I saw, to be true. Many other  things I have omitted, because I beheld them not with mine  own eyes. But from day to day I prepare myself to travel  countries or lands, in which action I dispose myself to die  or to live, as it shall please my God.

All the things above were faithfully taken down in writing  by Friar William de Solanga just as Friar Odoric uttered  them by word of mouth, in the year of our Lord 1330, in  the month of May, and in the place of St. Anthony of  Padua. Neither did he trouble to write them in difficult  Latin or in an eloquent style, but just as Odoric himself told  them, to the end that men might the more easily understand  the things reported.
