Theosophy, Religion and Occult Science
========================================
Henry Steel Olcott (1885) — Olcott's collected lectures — the co-founder's programmatic statement of theosophy's aims. Source: https://archive.org/details/theosophyreligio00olco. Public domain.

ON  THEOSOPHY

THEOSOPHY

RELIGION    AND    OCCULT    SCIENCE

BY

HENRY     S.     OLCOTT

PRESIDENT  OF  THE  THEOSOPHICAL  SOCIETY

WITH    GLOSSARY    OF    EASTERN    WORDS

LONDON
GEORGE    REDWAY

YORK      STREET      COVEN  1"      GARDEN

MDCCCLXXXV

^0  the  ^Icmarji  of
Prof.  WILLIAM  GREGORY,  M.D.,  F.R.S.E.

IN   GRATITUDE   FOR  THE   CLUE   TO   PSYCHOLOGICAL   SCIENCE

FURNISHED   TO   THE   AUTHOR    IN    HIS   WRITINGS

THIS    BOOK   IS    REVERENTLY    DEDICATED

CONTENTS

Forewords      ...        .,,

Theosophy  or  Materialism — which?

England's  Welcome  ...

The  Theosophical  Society  and  its  Aims
The  Common  Foundation  of  all  Religions
Theosophy  :  the  Scientific  Basis  of  Religion
Theosophy  :  its  Friends  and  Enemies

The  Occult  Sciences

Spiritualism  and  Theosophy
India  :  Past,  Present,  and  Future     ..
The  Civilization  that  India  needs
The  Spirit  of  the  Zoroastrian  Religion
The  Life  of  Buddha  and  its  Lessons

PAGE

9

49
8i

ii6

1 66

198

216

257
284

301
349

FOREWORDS.

In  complying  with  the  demand  for  a  London
Edition  of  my  collected  Asiatic  Lectures  and
Addresses,  upon  Theosophlcal  subjects,  a  few
words  of  explanation  will  suffice.  At  the  be-
ginning of  last  year  the  original  edition  was
issued  at  Madras,  in  a  semi-private  form  for  the
instruction  of  members  of  the  Theosophlcal
Society,  by  an  officer  of  the  Madras  Branch  ;
but  every  page  of  the  present  edition  has
passed  through  my  hands,  has  been  carefully
edited,  and  a  large  amount  of  original  matter
has  been  added.  A  number  of  the  lectures  have
been  translated  into  the  vernacular  languages
by  native  scholars,  and  circulated  at  their  own
expense ;  among  them,  the  discourse  upon
the  Zoroastrlan  religion,  of  which  the  ParsI
community  of  Bombay  circulated — If  my
memory  serves  me — twenty  thousand  copies
in  Encrlish  and  Guzeratl.  I  recall  two  In-
cidents  in  connection  with  that  lecture  which

X  FOREWORDS,

give    it    a    special    interest  :    it    led    to    the
organization  of  a  Parsi  Archceological  Society
at  Bombay,  and  was  one  of  the  final  causes
of  the  rupture  of  friendly  relations  between
the  eminent  Aryan  reformer,   the  late  Swami
Dayanand  Saraswati,   and    the   Founders  of
the   Theosophical    Society.     That    lamented
and  illustrious  man  had  been  upon  the  most
intim.ate  terms  with  us,  and  his  great  Indian
Society,  the  Arya  Samaj,  was  regarded  as  the
sister    to    our    own    ororanization.      But    the
Swami  was    a    very    intolerant,    not    to    say
bigoted   Aryan,  and  had  no  mercy  for  those
who  professed  another  religion  than  the  Vedic.
My  lecture  upon  the  faith  of  the   Parsis  was
represented  to  him  as  a  proof  of  my  having
embraced    Zoroastrianism,   and   was   made  a
pretext  to  break  off  our  previously  reciprocal
connection.      Like  many   other    strict   secta-
rians, he  could  not  understand  the  Theoso-
phical spirit  of  conceding    to   the  people  of
all  creeds  the  right  of  enjoying  their  religious
convictions  unmolested,   nor  the  duty  resting
upon  us  to  help  them  to  discover  and  live  up
to  the  highest  ideal  that  their  respective  re-
ligions contain.     We  are  fully  convinced  that

FOREWORDS.  xi

all  religions  are  but  branches  of  one  sole
Truth  ;  and  the  aim  of  our  public  teachings
and  private  discourses  has  always  been  to
force  this  fact  upon  the  attention  of  our
auditors.  In  short,  we  are  not  "  all  things
to  all  men,"  as  has  ungenerously  been  said,
but  the  same  thing  to  all  men — viz.,  Theoso-
phlsts,  who  believe  in  the  essential  Identity
of  all  men,  race,  caste,  and  creed,  to  the  con-
trary notwithstanding.

In  the  several  hundred  discourses  I  have  de-
livered In  India  and  Ceylon,  during  the  last
six  years,  nothing  more  than  a  popular  pre-
sentation of  elementary  facts  has  been  aimed
at.  There  are  metaphysicians  enough  to  en-
lighten, and  confuse,  the  higher  reading
public  ;  but  to  one  who  can  follow  them
through  their  demonstrations  there  are  fifty
who  lack  time,  ability,  or  both.  This,
primarily,  is  my  public  ;  and  I  shall  be
delighted  to  be  the  means  of  awakening
in  some  of  these  the  desire  for  profounder
study  of  problems  so  absorbing.

I  have  ever  been  most  deeply  interested  In
the  future  of  the  young,  who  are  just  now  be-
ginning their  responsible  career.     With  reli-

xn  FOREWORDS,

gious  feeling  stifled  by  our  modern  system  of
education,  they  are  too  often  avowed  agnos-
tics, if  not  crass  materialists.  This  is  lament-
able, the  more  so,  since  it  is  unnecessary.
Materialism  is  unscientific — utterly,  absurdly
so  :  one  need  not  go  far  in  psychological  re-
search to  discover  so  much.  But  the  sciolists
win  not  admit  it,  nor  take  the  least  pains  to
get  at  the  truth.  They  arouse  the  righteous
anger  of  every  student  of  any  branch  of  arch-
aic psychology,  by  their  unworthy  behaviour
towards  this  greatest  of  sciences.  They  vio-
late their  own  canons,  by  limiting  the  range  of
inquiry  to  the  field  of  the  physical  senses,
against  the  protest  of  those  who  have  dis-
covered facts  lying  beyond  it,  and  senses  by
which  they  may  be  observed.  The  existence
of  those  senses  is  the  necessary  corollary  of
the  theory  of  Evolution,  and  the  Esoteric  Phil-
osophy at  once  proves  its  validity,  and  shows
how  they  may  be  fully  developed.  From
experimental  Physics  we  pass  to  axiomatic
Metaphysics,  through  the  experimental  chan-
nel of  transcendental  Physics.  Unless  we
admit  the  unthinkable  proposition  that  there
is  a  fixed  limit  to   Evolution,  it  follows  that

FOREWORDS.  xiii

Western  Science  in  its  full  development  will
ultimately  reach  the  same  conclusion  at  which
Aryan  Philosophy  arrived  ages  ago.  Hence
Theosophy  is  the  complement  both  of  science
and  of  philosophy,  and  as  such  is  entitled  to
the  respectful  examination  of  the  savant  and
the  theologian.

As  it  appears  that  many  of  the  most  com-
mon of  Oriental  terms  are  unknown  here  in
the  West,  except  to  "  old  Indians,"  I  have  by
request  added  a  copious  Glossary,  the  words
for  interpretation  having  been  selected  out  of
the  present  volume  by  that  excellent  English
scholar,  Mr.  Richard  Heme  Shepherd,  who
has  also  prepared,  with  care,  the  excellent
index,  which  adds  largely  to  the  value  of  the
book.

To  avoid  delay,  persons  wishing  to  corres-
pond with  the  author  upon  any  of  the  sub-
jects treated  upon  in  these  discourses  should
address  him  at  the  headquarters  of  the  Theo-
sophlcal  Society,  Adyar,  Madras,  India.

H.  S.  O.

Lonhon,   October^  1S84.

THEOSOPHY  OR   MATERIALISM—

WHICH  ?-^-

Sixty-six  years  ago  Schopenhauer  declared  his
opinion  that  the  greatest  advantage  of  the  nine-
teenth century  over  previous  eras  lay  in  its  access
to  the  Vedas  through  the  Upanishads,  and  pre-
dicted for  the  study  of  Sanskrit  literature  an
influence  upon  intellectual  development  not  in-
ferior to  that  of  the  revival  of  Greek  in  the  fifteenth
century.t  He  spoke  of  "  the  sacred,  primitive
Indian  wisdom  "  as  the  best  preparation  for  his
own  philosophy.  And  it  is  worthy  of  remark  that
the  reputation  of  this  great  thinker  is  culminating
at  a  time  when  his  anticipation,  which  at  the  date
of  publication  must  have  seemed  strange  or  ex-
travagant to  all  but  a  few  far-seeing  scholars,
is  in  course  of  scarcely  doubtful  fulfilment.  A
parallel  similar  to  that  suggested  by  Schopenhauer
has  been  drawn  by  Max  Miiller,  who  has  also
testified  to  the  already  pervading   influence  of  the

*  The  author  thankfully  acknowledges  the  valuable  aid  given
him  in  the  collation  of  materials  for  this  chapter,  by  an  English
friend,  whose  modesty  forbids  the  mention  of  his  name.

t  Preface  to  "The  World  as  Will  and  Representation''  (Ilal-
dane  and  Kemp's  translation).

i6         THEOSOPHY  OR  MA  TERIALISM—  WHICH ?

new  studies.  In  his  Address  to  the  Conoress  of
Orientalists  in  1874,  he  said:  "We  know  what  it
was  for  the  Northern  nations,  the  old  barbarians
of  Europe,  to  be  brought  into  spiritual  contact
with  Greece  and  Rome,  and  to  learn  that  beyond
the  small,  poor  world  in  which  they  had  moved,
there  was  an  older,  richer,  brighter  world,  the
ancient  world  of  Rome  and  Athens,  with  its  arts
and  laws,  its  poetry  and  philosophy,  all  of  which
they  might  call  their  own,  and  make  their  own,  by
claiming  the  heritage  of  the  past.  We  know  how,
from  that  time,  the  Classical  and  Teutonic  spirits
mingled  together,  and  formed  that  stream  of
modern  thought  on  whose  shores  we  ourselves  live
and  move.  A  new  stream  is  now  being  brought
into  the  same  bed,  the  stream  of  Oriental  thought,
and  already  the  colours  of  the  old  stream  show
very  clearly  the  influence  of  that  new  tributary.
Look  at  any  of  the  important  works  published
during  the  last  twenty  years,  not  only  on  language,
but  on  literature,  mythology,  law,  religion,  and
philosophy,  and  you  will  see  on  every  page  the
working  of  a  new  spirit.'*'  *

Recognizing  the  fact  of  this  influence,  we  can
only  estimate  its  probable  development  in  any
direction  by  looking  at  the  intellectual  conditions
prepared  for  it.  The  first  and  most  indispensable
of  these,  in  relation  to  religious  ideas,  is  a  relaxa-
tion of  dogmatic  faith  in  the  recipient  community.
So  long  as  spiritual  intelligence  is  restrained  in  the
*  Chips  from  a  German  Workshop,  vol.  iv.  p.  342.

THEOSOPHY  OR  MATERIALISM—WHICH?        17

hard   capsule  of  any  of  its  formal   systems,  there
can    be    no    assimilation,    and,    therefore,    no   true
influence.     It   is  only  at  that  period  of  ideal  de-
velopment,   when    the    rind    of    an    historical    or
traditional    religion    has    served    its    purpose    of
growth  and   preservation,  and   permits  the  libera-
tion of  its  vital  spirit,  that  the  latter  can  find  itself
in  the  general  atmosphere  of  thought.     Nor  is  this
natural   process   always  recognized  for  what  it  is.
Just  as  in  sensuous  apprehension   the  body  stands
for  the  man,  so  the  same  principle  in  religion  clings
to  its  external   and  familiar  form,  and  sees  in  the
disintegrating  action  of  intellectual  progress  only  a
negative  side  and   an   infidel    tendency.     But   we
may  leave  out  of  account  a  conservatism  which  is
being  visibly  submerged  beneath   the  rising  level
of  intelligence,  and   ask  what  essentially  it  is  that
this   intelligence   demands   for  the  support  of  its
religious  life?

Now,  in  the  first  place,  it  requires  that  this  shall
repose  upon  an  order  of  ideas  not  exposed  to
destructive  invasion.  Beliefs  are  needed  which
shall  not  find  their  origin  and  home  in  ignorance,
to  be  dislodged  from  their  positions  with  every
advance  of  knowledge.  Nor  must  there  be  any
dependence  upon  historical  evidences,  or  risk  from
their  critical  examination.  Further,  the  founda-
tions of  religion  must  be  such  as  cannot  be  im-
paired by  the  comparative  methods  of  study  which
discovery  and  scholarship  have  brought  into  vogue.
The  dogmatic  fabric  of  Christianity,  so  far  as  its

i8         THEOSOPHY  OR  MATERIALISM— WHICH?

basis  must  be  conceived  as  historical,  is  already  in
a  ruinous,  or  highly-precarious  condition.  Any
one  who  questions  this  must,  at  least,  admit
it  to  be  the  opinion  of  many  who  represent  the
progressive  thought  and  Intelligence  of  the  com-
munity, the  classes  upon  which  the  influence  of
science  and  inquiry  is  most  apparent.  Nor  is  this
disposition  at  all  confined  to  those  whose  special
studies  or  mode  of  life  may  be  thought  to  promote
indifference  to  religious  problems.  The  wide  cir-
culation of  such  works  as  "  Ecce  Homo,"
^'  Natural  Religion,"  and  others  of  recent  years,  Is
sufficient  indication  of  public  sympathy  with  the
scepticism  of  thoroughly  reverent  minds.  And
without  quoting  from  the  Innumerable  testimonies
afforded  by  current  literature,  it  will  suffice  to  advert
to  the  perfectly  open  and  unrestrained  manner  in
which  these  questions  are  now  publicly  discussed,
in  contrast  to  the  cautious,  veiled,  and  tentative
treatment  they  received  from  the  sceptical  side  less
than  a  generation  ago.  Our  intellectual  leaders,
indeed,  have  ceased  to  regard  dogmatic  Christianity
as  any  longer  an  open  question  for  modern  thought.
There  is  a  general  assumption  among  them  that
this,  as  much  as  any  other  special  system  of  religion,
exhibits  merely  an  historical  phase  of  mental
development,  and  from  that  point  of  view  alone
retains  an  Interest  for  the  philosophic  mind.  And
turning  from  free-thinkers  to  the  Church  itself,
we  see  much  that  Is  significant  of  the  same  general
tendency.     Not  to  insist  on  a  few  notorious,  and

THEOSOPHY  OR  MATERIALISM—WHICH  '         19

many  other  less  ostentatious  retreats  from  positions
felt  to  be  untenable,  the  most  influential  of  the
clergy  are  seeking  to  spiritualize  the  Christian  doc-
trine, without  openly  offending  the  popular  and
orthodox  apprehension  of  it.  Few  of  them,  pro-
bably, are  explicitly  aware  that  every  advance  in
this  direction,  while  it  extracts  the  essential  and
interior  truth  which  Christianity  possesses  In  com-
mon with  every  religion  worthy  of  the  name,
is  a  suppression  of  Its  distinctive  character.  This
can  only  be  apparent  to  those  who  have  made  a
profound  and  sympathetic  study  of  other  systems  ;
a  study  for  which  the  exclusive  pretensions  of
Christianity  have  allowed  little  encouragement  to
its  official  professors.  The  practical  problem  of  all
religion  being  to  ascertain  the  conditions  of  spiritual
development,  in  proportion  as  our  conceptions  are
freed  from  the  formal,  historical,  and  accidental
elements  peculiar  to  each  system,  will  the  substan-
tial identity  of  all  the  radical  solutions  be  discover-
able. Thus  purified  and  understood,  they  will  be
beyond  the  reach  of  the  disproof  from  positive
knowledge  which  is  sooner  or  later  reserved  for  all
their  temporal  and  external  investiture.  Neverthe-
less, they  will  still  involve  metaphysical  and  trans-
cendental assumptions  ;  though  not  contrary  to
science,  they  will  still  be  non-scientific ;  and,  in  short,
there  will  be  little  to  distinguish  them  from  the  ethical
forms  of  a  hypothetical  philosophy.  That  brings  us  to
the  further  demand  which  modern  intelligence  makes
upon  its  future  religion,  if  it  is  to  have  one  at  al).

20         THE  OS  0  PHY  OR  MA  TERIALISM— WHICH?

If  Mr.  Herbert  Spencer  is  right,  true  religion  is
not  the  solution  of  a  problem,  but  the  statement
and  elevation  of  the  problem  itself  as  inscrutable.*
And  herein  he  finds  the  reconciliation  of  science
and  religion.  Science  and  philosophy  proclaim  the
relativity  of  all  positive  knowledge  ;  but  Iw  that
very  statement  they  affirm  the  existence  of  the
Absolute,  and  concede  to  religion  divested  of  all
particularity  and  definiteness  an  appropriate  and
inexpugnable  sphere.  Although  we  can  say  no-
thing of  the  Reality  transcending  phenomenal  exist-
ence, save  only  that  it  is,  yet  "in  this  assertion  of  a
reality  utterly  inscrutable  in  nature,  Religion  finds
an  assertion  essentially  coinciding  with  her  own.
And  this  consciousness  of  an  Incomprehen-
sible Power,  called  Omnipresent  from  inability
to  assign  its  limits,  is  just  that  consciousness  on
which  religion  dwells."  f

The  result  at  which  this  distinguished  philoso-
pher has  arrived,  as  regards  the  intellectual  possi-
bilities of  religion,  may  thus  be  expressed  in  a
single  sentence.  The  foundation  is  sound,  but  any
superstructure  that  can  conceivably  be  reared  upon
it  must  be  wholly  without  warrant.  To  none  can
be  conceded  even  a  provisional  validity,  for  the
ultimate  good  of  religious  thought  is  not  a  developed
consciousness  of  the  unseen,  but  the  recognition  of
a  perfectly  abstract   mystery."  +     For  human    in-

*  First  Principles — Part  I.  :  "  The  Unknowable."
t  Op.  cil.^  p.  45.

X  "  Through  all  its  successive  phases  the  disappearance  of  those
positive   dogmas  by  which  the    mystery  was  made  unmysterious,

THEOSOPHY  OR  MATERIALISM— WHICH?        21

telUgence,  therefore,  religion  does  not,  and  cannot,
exist,  since  it  is  essentially  the  consciousness  of  the
limits  of  that  intelligence  itself.  The  momentous
questions  in  which  Philosophy  and  Religion  concur
are  here  pronounced  to  be  illegitimate — the  hopeless,
resultless  beating  of  thought  against  its  own
barriers ;  prompted,  indeed,  by  a  consciousness,  but
a  consciousness  which  can  never  be  defined  ;  testi-
fying to  a  truth,  but  a  truth  which  can  never  be
known.

Regarding  Mr.  Herbert  Spencer  as  the  plenipo-
tentiary of  Science  in  its  negotiation  with  Religion,
it  is  certain  that  peace  can  never  be  concluded  on
the  terms  he  offers.  If  he  has  rightly  defined  the
issue,  the  conflict  must  go  on  till  the  race  is
educated  into  Agnosticism,  or  relapses  into  super-
stition.

But  is  the  issue  rightly  defined  ?  Can  we  accept
Mr.  Spencer's  statement  of  the  terms  of  the  pro-
blem? Or  is  it  not  rather  in  the  inadequate  limits  he
assigns  to,  or  assumes  for,  Science  itself  in  the  first
place  ;  and,  secondly,  in  a  similarly  wrong  limita-
tion of  the  true  objects  of  religious  thought ;  and,
thirdly,  in  a  consequently  fallacious  distinction
where  there  is  no  essential  difference,  that  we  find
the  sources  of  insufficiency  and  error  in  his  result  ?

Within  the  space  of  this  essay,  only  a  succinct

has  formed  the  essential  change  delineated  in  religious  history.
And  so  Religion  has  ever  been  approximating  towards  that  coni'
plete  recognition  of  this  mystery"  (the  Absolute)  "which  is  ils
goal  "  (p.  100).

22         THE OSOPH  Y  OR  MA  TERIALISM—  WHICH?

explanation  can  be  given  of  these  suggestions,
which  introduce  us  to  the  whole  subject  of  Eastern
religious  philosophy  in  its  most  important,  yet
least  understood  relation  to  the  question  here
raised.  For  that  question  is  essentially  this  :
whether  there  can  be  a  science  of  those  problems
— a  science  resting,  as  all  science  must  rest,  upon
experience  for  its  verification — an  experience  under
conditions  possible  to  all,  since  they  have  been
actually  realized  by  some.  The  reader  is  here,  at
the  outset,  requested  not  to  make  any  assumptions
concerning  the  nature  and  evidence  of  the  ex-
perience referred  to,  not  to  confound  it  with  a
vague  and  eccentric  mysticism,  or  wdth  conditions
of  which  psychological  pathology  can  give  account.
Nor  must  it  be  supposed  that  an  appeal  is  made
to  the  phenomenal  so-called  "  Spiritualism  "  of
recent  years,  whatever  claims  this  may  have,  in
another  relation  of  the  subject,  to  more  attentive
consideration  than  it  has  hitherto  received.  The
experience  here  spoken  of  is  not  the  alleged  seeing
and  conversing  with  "  spirits,"  but  satisfies  the
scientific  conception  of  experience  in  general.  In
other  words,  the  conditions  of  this  experience  are
defined.  To  say  that  these  conditions  require
much  preparation  and  training  for  their  attain-
ment is  only  to  admit  what  must  be  asserted  in  a
less  degree  of  every  physical  experiment  which
demands  a  scientific  education.  And,  what  is
important  to  observe,  these  conditions  are  just  such
as  religion  has   always   striven  to    affirm,  but  re-

THEOSOPHY  OR  MATERIALISM— WHICH?        23

cUiced  to  exact  and  Intelligible  statement,  and
divested  of  the  pietistic  language  of  an  immature
and  mysterious  consciousness.  This  involves  a
conclusion  the  very  re  vers'",  of  Mr.  Herbert
Spencer's.  The  true  goal  of  religion  is  not  mys-
tery, but  science — a  science  dealing  with  a  strictly
verifiable  order  of  facts,  though  an  order  trans-
cending that  with  which  physical  science,  whose
professors  wrongfully  limit  the  generic  term,  is
concerned.

What  are  the  suppositions  of  Religion  with  which
it  is  assumed  that  "  Science "  can  never  deal  ?
That  there  is  a  world  or  objective  state  beyond
the  cognizance  of  our  physical  senses  ;  that  man  is
a  subject  who,  in  addition  to  his  physical  organism,
has  faculties — it  may  be  undeveloped  at  the  present
stage  of  human  evolution,  or  it  may  be  only  dor-
mant— fitted  to  relate  him  by  immediate  conscious-
ness and  perception  with  that  other  world  ;  *  and
that  physical  disintegration  affects  only  the  mode,
and  not  the  existence,  of  individual  consciousness.
Lastly  and  chiefly,  though  in  connexion  with  the
foregoing  propositions.  Religion  carries  her  account
of  man  yet  higher,  asserting  his  relation  to  a
Principle  which  is  the  source  and  inspiration  of  his
moral  consciousness,  and  which  manifests  itself  in
him  as  the  perpetual  tendency  to  realise  an
Universal  Will  and  Nature,  and  to  subordinate  the
individual  limitation.     These  are  the  fundamental

'■  "  There  is  a  natural  body,  and  there  is  a  spiritual  body  "  (i
Cor.  XV.  44).

24        THE OSOPHY  OR  MA  TERIALISM—  WHICH ?

postulates  of  Religion,  upon  which  have  been  built
all  the  doctrinal  fabrics  of  particular  and  perish-
able creeds.  These  are  the  propositions  which
religious  intelligence  never  can  dispense  with,
which  physical  science  has  not  refuted,  and  which
transcendental  science  affirms.

That  this  transcendentalism  does  not  pretend  to
a  cognition  of  the  Absolute,  and  is  thus  perfectly
consistent  with  the  doctrine  of  the  phenomenality
and  relativity  of  knowledge,  should  be  already
apparent.  What  it  is  opposed  to  is  not  Science,
not  Philosophy,  but  Materialism  ;  and  even  to
Materialism  only  in  the  crude  and  popular  sense  of
that  term.  For  that  we  Western  tyros  know
nothing  of  "  Matter  "  that  entitles  us  to  say  it  can
have  no  other  manifestation  than  in  the  mode
we  call  physical — the  object  of  our  present  senses
— will  be  granted  by  every  philosophical  man  of
science.  The  most  that  can  be  said  is  that  we
have  no  evidence  of  its  existence  in  any  other
mode.  "  After  all,"  says  Professor  Huxley,  "  what
do  we  know  of  this  terrible  '  matter,'  except  as  a
name  for  the  unknown  and  hypothetical  cause  of
states  of  our  own  consciousness  ?  "*  The  material-
ism, if  such  it  can  be  called,  of  our  really  instructed
thinkers,  thus  amounts  only  to  the  proposition  that
the  world  of  our  present  perception,  the  world  as
known  to  physical  science,  is  the  result  of  a  particu-
lar mode  of  action  of  an  unknown  cause.  That
mode   of  action   is   objectively  manifested    in    the

*  "  Lay  Sermons,"  p.  142.

THEOSOPHY  GR  MATERIALISM— WHICH?        25

organism,  or,  as  it  is  called,  the  physical   basis  of
consciousness.     The  possibility  of  a  transcendental
science   is  just   the  possibility  of  other  modes   of
action  of  this   unknown   cause,  resulting  in   other
conditions,  and  therefore  in  another  world,  of  con-
sciousness.     The   constant   misuse   of    the    word
''  supernatural,"  by  which  it  is  made  to  signify  not
only  what  is  altogether  beyond  the  range  of  pheno-
menal existence,  but  also  every  possible  mode  of
such  existence  which  is  not  related  to  our  present
organic  conditions,  ought  to  receive  no  countenance
from  men  of  science.     "  Nature  "   is   co-extensive
with   existence,   and    to    meet   every  reference  to
modes   of  existence,  other  than   under  conditions
known    to    us,  with   the   term    "  supernaturalism,"
is  simply  to  betray  confusion  and  inaccuracy  of  mind.
Yet,    for   this    confusion,   the    absence    of    any
definite   ideas   concerning  the  conditions   of  post-
mortem existence  is   largely   responsible.     On  the
great  question  of  individual  immortality — of  sur-
viving consciousness — Christianity  has  long  ceased
to  offer  any  conceptions  by  which  it  is  thinkable  to
the  modern  intellect.     Some  hypothesis,  at  least,  is
required   by  which  this  truth   may  be   intelligibly
apprehended.     It  is  probable  that  a  single  book  by
two  eminent  men  of  science  has  done  more  to  arrest
the  growing  discredit   into   which   this   belief  was
falling  than  all  the  works  of  past  or  contemporary
thcolosrians.*

*  ((

The  Unseen  Universe,  or  Physical  Speculations  on  a  Fuf.ure
State,"  by  Professors  Balfour  Stewart  and  P.  G.  Tait.     The  public

26         IHEOSOPHY  OR  MATERIALISM— WHICH?

Doubtless,  Religion  proposes  higher  aims  than
the  mere  demonstration  of  conscious  perpetuation.
But  this  is  an  indispensable  pre-supposition,  and  is
an  essential  part  of  that  transcendental  science
which  is  absolutely  wanting  in  the  West,  and  which
the  East  can  supply.

The  foregoing  considerations  are  intended  only
to  clear  the  ground  of  negative  assumptions  and
misconceptions  which  are  constantly  put  forward  in
the  name  of  science.  Until  it  has  been  conceded
that  physical  science  has  nothing  to  object  to  the
possibility  of  transcendental  science,  no  way  can  be
made  in  describing  the  methods  of  the  latter,  or  in
showing  that  it  fulfils  the  conditions,  and  offers  the
results,  demanded  by  human  intelligence  at  the
present  age  for  a  developed  conception  of  religion.

The  whole  purpose  of  Religion  may  be  succinctly
defined  as  the  verification  in  individual  human  con-
sciousness of  metaphysical  and  transcendental
truth.  It  presupposes  that  the  faculties  of  verifica-
tion are  undeveloped.  It  is  of  necessity  a  doctrine
of  evolution.  This  truth,  which  should  come  home
to  the  Western  understanding  at  the  present  time,
is  at  the  foundation  of  religious  philosophy  in  the
East.  But  it  is  not  there  the  abstract  or  ill-defined
statement  which  it  remains  still  in  Christianity  ;  it
is  a  theoretical  and  practical  system  for  all  who
will  study  and  pursue  it.     So  far  is  it  from  being

interest  in  the  application  of  scientific  thought  to  this  subject  is  evi-
denced by  the  fact  that  this  book,  first  published  in  1877,  had
already  reached  its  tenth  edition  in  iSSi.

7'HEOSOPHY  OK  MATERIALISM— WHICH?        27

true  that  the  East  is  the  land  of  metaphor  and
dream,  and  the  West  the  seat  of  practical  intelli-
gence, that  in  all  that  concerns  transcendental
reality  or  religion,  the  very  reverse  is  the  case.
The  right  statement,  however,  is,  that  the  practical
and  scientific  intelligence  of  the  East  has  its  home
in  the  higher  realities,  that  of  the  West  in  the  lower
ones.  And  if  the  religious  spirit  in  the  West  finds
itself  in  a  doubtful  or  opposed  relation  to  what  is
there  alone  recognized  as  science,  that  is  due  to  the
fact  that  its  own  sense  of  the  higher  realities  has
not  attained  to  definite  conceptions,  but  is  still  in
the  undeveloped  state  of  abstract  affirmation,  or  in
the  nebulous  state  of  mysticism.  Herein  consists
the  supreme  importance  of  the  influence  of  Eastern
ideas  upon  the  West  at  the  present  time.  It  is  a
reaction  and  an  exchange.  We  are  giving  to  India
the  knowledge  and  advantage  of  many  practical
things  relating  to  our  lower  needs  and  nature.  In
return  she  offers  us  the  wisdom  acquired  by
thought  and  experience  on  a  higher  plane.  A  few
years  ago,  before  our  own  dogmatic  preconceptions
had  yielded  to  the  action  of  intellectual  solvents,
the  opportunity  would  have  been  premature.  The
belief  that  it  is  so  no  longer  is  the  rationale  and
justification  of  the  Theosophical  Society,  the
character  and  aims  of  which  will  be  partly  apparent
from  the  following  Lectures.

The  secret  which  the  East  has  to  impart  is  the
doctrine  and  conditions  of  evolution  of  the  higher
as  yet  undeveloped  faculties  in  man.     But  are  there

28         THEOSOPHY  OR  MATERIALISM— WHICH i

such  faculties,  such  possibihties  ?  The  answer  to  this
question  appeals  to  that  rudimentary  consciousness
of  them  from  which  religion  arises.  This  witness
of  a  consciousness  not  yet  raised  to  knowledge  is
Faith,  which  is  indeed  "  the  substance  of  things
hoped  for,  and  the  evidence  of  things  not  seen."
To  those  who  may  think  they  have  it  not,  or  that
it  can  be  explained  away,  no  other  conviction  can
be  brought.  Upon  the  recognition  of  it  depends
the  claim  to  attention  of  any  system  professing  to
expound  the  principles  of  Nature  in  its  entirety.
Such  a  system  is  now  in  course  of  publication  for
the  first  time.  The  preparation  for  it  is  in  the  in-
creasing interest  of  Western  culture  in  Eastern
ideas.  Through  the  labours  of  Western  Oriental-
ists, the  abstract  doctrines  of  these  religious  philo-
sophies are  already  more  or  less  clearly  appre-
hended. But  the  developed  doctrines  are  not
accessible  to  the  ordinary  reader,  who,  moreover,
finds  in  the  sacred  writings  as  translated  for  him
much  which  can  be  interpreted  by  no  conceptions
provided  by  Western  thought  and  education.  The
Upanishads,  for  instance,  abound  with  allusions
which  require  an  undiscovered  key  for  their  eluci-
dation. And  so  of  the  Buddhist  writings.  The
existence  of  living  schools  which  are  the  reposi-
tories of  a  more  intimate  knowledge  had  not  been
suspected  till  recently,  and  is  not  yet  admitted  by
our  Orientalists.  The  Theosophical  Society  is  in
communication  with  these,  and  is  actively  employed
in  collecting  the  information  they  will  impart.     Its

THE  OS  0  PHY  OR  3fA  TERIALISM—  WHICH?        29

organ,  The  Theosophist,  is  chiefly  devoted  to  these
teachings.  The  well-known  book  by  Mr.  A.  P.
Sinnett,  "  Esoteric  Buddhism,"  is  perhaps  the  best
general  representation  of  them,  so  far  as  already
understood,  which  could  be  given  to  the  English
public.  Other  books  are  preparing,  and  a  literature
of  Theosophy,  or  the  Esoteric  Philosophy  of  the
ages,  is  steadily  growing.  An  attempt  even  to  sum-
marize the  doctrines  in  question  would  be  beyond
the  scope  of  this  work.  Nor  must  it  be  supposed
that  the  Theosophical  Society,  to  which  the  reader
is  introduced  in  these  Lectures,  requires  subscription
to  any  creed.  Its  Fellows  are  students,  not  co-
religionists in  any  sectarian  sense.  They  are,  how-
ever, associated  by  a  principle,  an  idea — Fraternity
— of  which,  since  it  may  either  be  misconceived,  or
be  regarded  as  quite  impracticable,  something
should  here  be  added.

In  the  closing  chapter  of  Lange's  "  History  of
Materialism,"  it  is  well  said :

*'  One  thing,  however,  is  certain  :  if  the  New  is
to  come  into  existence,  and  the  Old  is  to  disappear,
two  great  things  must  combine — a  world-kindling
ethical  idea  and  a  social  influence  which  is  powerful
enough  to  lift  the  depressed  masses  a  great  step

forward The  victory  over  disintegrating

esfoism  and  the  deadly  chilliness  of  the  heart  will
only  be  won  by  a  great  ideal,  which  appears  amidst
the  wondering  peoples  as  a  '  stranger  from  another
world/  and  by  demanding  the  impossible  un-
hinges the  reality"  (vol.  iii.,  p.  355).

30         THEOSOPHY  OR  MA  TERIALISM—  WHICH  ?

And  again  :

"  Often  already  has  an  epoch  of  Materialism
been  but  the  stillness  before  the  storm,  which
was  to  burst  forth  from  unknown  gulfs,  and  to  give
a  new  shape  to  the  world.  We  lay  aside  the  pen
of  criticism  at  a  moment  when  the  social  question
stirs  all  Europe — a  question  on  whose  wide  domain
all  the  revolutionary  elements  of  science,  of  re-
ligion, and  of  politics,  seem  to  have  found  the
battle-ground  for  a  great  and  decisive  contest.
Whether  this  battle  remains  a  bloodless  conflict  of
minds,  or  whether,  like  an  earthquake,  it  throws
down  the  ruins  of  a  past  epoch  with  thunder  into
the  dust,  and  buries  millions  beneath  its  wreck,
certain  it  is  that  the  new  epoch  will  not  conquer
unless  it  be  under  the  banner  of  a  great  idea
which  sweeps  away  egoism,  and  sets  human  per-
fection in  human  fellowship  as  a  new  aim  in  the
place  of  reckless  toil,  which  looks  only  to  the  per-
sonal gain  "  (  ibid.^  p.  361).

It  is  to  such  an  idea  as  this  that  the  Theoso-
phical  Society  seeks  to  give  a  formal,  if  not  already
a  quite  practical  expression.  It  is  no  new  dis-
covery, certainly,  this  reassertion  of  the  essential
r.nlty  of  the  race,  of  Brotherhood  as  a  principle  to
be  elevated  above  all  accidental  or  historical  dis-
tinctions. It  is,  on  the  contrary,  the  one  vital
ethical  result  out  of  religious  thought.  Is  it  there-
fore a  truism  too  barren  or  abstract  to  form  the
basis  of  practical  association  ?  Is  it  nothing  to  ex-
tricate It  from  the  diversities  of  dogma  in  which  its

rilEOSOPH  V  OR  MA  TERM  LISM—  WHICH  ?        3 1

significance  is  buried,  to  renew  it  in  the  hearts  of
men  and  women  of  all  sects  and  creeds  as  the  vow
and  obligation  of  their  lives?  Is  it  an  objection
that  the  Society  does  not  come  before  the  world
with  a  single,  well-devised  application  of  the  prin-
ciple? Those  who. would  offer  this  as  an  objection
cannot  have  realized  how  much  more  than  abstract
assent  is  implied  in  the  recognition  and  study  of
the  principle  itself  The  conquest  of  selfishness
and  prejudice  in  all  their  forms,  national,  social
sectarian,  political,  private,  is  the  aim  which
grows  in  every  individual  mind  out  of  a  living
sense  of  human  fraternity.  Its  applications  on  the
wider  scale  of  law  and  co-operation  must  be  self-
developed.  They  are  not  to  be  the  fanatical  im-
pulses of  half-educated  "  world-betterers."  They
will  emerge  spontaneously  and  surely  from  the
unity  of  spirit  and  habit  acting  upon  an  intelli-
gent and  well-informed  apprehension  of  the  pro-
blems, and  from  the  subordination  of  self-interest.

Many  practical  problems  which  seem  insoluble
to  individual  thinkers  can  only  find  their  solvent  in
an  altered  disposition  of  mankind.  All  religions
seek  to  effect  this  change  of  disposition  in  the  in-
dividual consciousness.  But  nearly  all  religious
systems  have  preferred  their  specific  and  distinctive
tenets  to  their  true  universal  basis  and  inherent
tendency,  and  have  thus  become  the  most  dis-
cordant of  influences  in  the  world  they  would  re-
o-enerate.  Therefore  it  is  that  the  Theosophical
Society    has    no    room   for   propagandists   of  any

32         THEOSOPHY  OR  MATERTALISM— WHICH?

exclusive  creed.  Its  principle  indeed  requires  that
none  of  its  members  should  even  mentally  assert
the  exclusive  sanctity  of  his  own  religious  denomina-
tion. In  India,  the  Society  has  been  opposed  and
denounced  at  every  turn  by  Christian  mission-
aries ;  and  if  on  its  side  it  has  seemed  to  evince
hostility  to  Christianity,  that  is  because  its  represen-
tatives identify  it  with  those  arrogant  pretensions
v/hich  make  peace,  charity,  and  fraternity  impossible.
If  we  point  out  to  the  natives  of  India  that  the  form
of  Christianity  taught  by  these  zealots  is  becoming
more  and  more  discredited  among  the  best  religious
thinkers  of  the  West  itself,  our  doing  so  belongs
rather  to  our  duty  as  educated  Europeans  than  to
any  polemical  disposition.  The  fact  that  we  number
in  our  ranks,  not  only  many  avowed  Christians,
but  also  some  conspicuous  members  of  the  Chris-
tian clergy,  may  be  referred  to  in  relation  to  a  mis-
understanding from  which  even  some  of  our  own
Fellows  in  England  have  not  been  free.

We  have  spoken  of  the  advocacy  of  the  principle
of  Universal  Brotherhood,  or,  to  avoid  the  charge
of  Utopianism,  of  a  kindly  reciprocity  and  mutual
tolerance  between  men  and  races,  as  a  primary
object  of  the  Theosophical  Society.  We  can"
happily  point  to  the  rapid  extension  of  that
organization  to  various  countries,  and  the  actual
gathering  together  into  the  same  of  many  persons
of  the  most  incongruous  sects,  and  hitherto  anti-
pathetic nationalities,  as  substantial  proof  of  its
practicability.     But  this  is  only  one  out  of  the  three

THEOSOFHY  OR  MA  TERIALISM—  WHICH  ?        33

declared  objects  of  the   Society,  as  the  following
pages  show.     Its  second  object   is  the  promotion
of  the  study  of  Aryan  and  other  Eastern  literature,
religions,  and  sciences.     Schopenhauer  wrote  even
more  wisely  than  he  knew  when  making  his  pro-
phetic utterances  in    18 18.     For,  not  only  are  the
Uplianishads  inestimably  rich  repositories  of  philo-
sophical and  spiritual  thought,  but  also  in  the  great
body  of  Sanskrit,  Pali  and  Zend  literature  is  an  in-
exhaustible mine  of  noble  and  inspiriting  thought.
We  might  despair  of  ever  making  any  important
contributions  to  this  department  of  knowledge,  were
we  dependent  wholly  upon  our  own  labours  ;  for
the  proper  work  of  the  Founders  of  the  Society  is
rather  that  of  organization  than  research.     Having,
however,  the  active  aid  of  many  of  the  most  learned
native  scholars  of  Asia,  and  through  them  access  to
the  rest,  we  feel  confident  that  the  movement  we
are  directing  will  result  in  substantial  gain  to  the
scholar,  the  moralist   and    the   philosopher.     The
Society's  third  declared  object  relates  to  the  investi-
gation of  the  unfamiliar  laws  of  Nature  and  the
faculties  latent  in  man.     An  inordinate  prominence
has  been  given  to  the  psychic  phenomena  produced
by  Madame  Blavatsky,  which,  however  striking  in
themselves,  are  nevertheless  but  a  small   part   of
Theosophy  as  a  great  whole.     To  a  very  limited  ex-
tent these  questions  are  considered  in  the  following
Lectures  ;  but  for  full  details  the  reader  must  be  re-
ferred to  the  literature  of  the  Occult  sciences,  now
being   constantly   enriched    by    new    publications.

34         THKOSOPHY  OR  MATERIALISM— WHICH?

No  amount  of  reading,  however,  will  suffice  for  a
knowledge  of  the  subject;  at  best,  it  gives  but  a
smattering  of  information  as  a  basis  of  beHef.  Nor
can  a  teacher  develop  the  psychic  powers  in  a  way
to  make  them  docile  and  trustworthy  to  the
student's  will.  Psychic  growth  is  the  fruit  of  self-
mastery  ;  the  Initiate  is,  more  than  any  one  else,
"  a  self-made  man  ! "  The  Theosophical  Society
docs  not  make  adepts  :  it  but  hints  at  their  exist-
ence and  points  to  the  path.

ENGLAND'S  WELCOME. '=■

Mr.  Chairman,— On  behalf  of  the  General
Council  of  the  Theosophical  Society,  on  Madame
Blavatsky's  behalf,  and  on  my  own,  I  thank  you  and
this  assemblage  of  colleagues  and  well-wishers  for
your  cordial  welcome.  That  a  company  so  brilliant
and  distinguished  should  have  gathered  here  for  this
kindly  purpose,  is  to  us  most  gratifying  and,  I
may  add,  surprising.  We  have  not  been  accus-
tomed to  such  treatment  at  the  hands  of  the  people
of  our  race,  but  rather  to  its  opposite.  Before
leaving  India,  with  the  recollection  still  vivid  of
the  abuse  and  obloquy  we  had  to  endure  in
that  country,  we  should  not  have  dared  to
anticipate  it.  I  take  this  to  mark  a  new  era  and  a
turning-point  in  our  Society's  history.  All  we
have  ever  asked  is  that  we  might  be  heard  with
patience  by  the  cultured  classes  of  Europe  ;  and
here  I  see  many  representatives  of  British  Science,
Art,  and  Literature,  of  Diplomacy  and  of  Society,
assembled  to  hear  what  we  have  to  say.  There  must
be  a  substantial   power  in  Theosophy,  since  it  has

*  An  Address  delivered  at  Prince's  Hall,  Piccadilly,  London,
July  21,  1S84,  in  response  to  a  greeting  to  the  Founders  of  the
Theosophical  Society  by  the  Pondon  members,  through  the  Pre-
sident of  the  local  Lodge.

36  ENGLAND'S  WELCOME.

become  so  widespread  a  social  movement  In
various  countries  ;  without  the  adventitious  help
of  august  patronage,  of  great  capital,  or  of  fanatical
support.  It  has  become  a  theme  for  discussion  at
hundreds  of  British  hearths,  and,  spreading  from
the  most  thoughtful  to  the  most  frivolous  circles,  is
now  actually  noticed  by  "  Society  "  journals  as  the
fashionable  talk  of  the  day  at  the  tea-tables  of
Belgravia  and  in  the  Holy  Land  of  the  West  End  !
These  "  fashion-writers  "  speak  of  it  as  a  whim  of  the
moment,  to  be  forgotten,  like  the  sun-flower  and
crutch,  for  to-morrow's  caprice.  But  it  vrill  not —
mark  me,  it  will  not — be  forgotten.  The  day's  folly  of
the  drawing-room  Is  ephemeral  as  Its  pleasure ;  but
the  ideas  provoked  by  Theosophy  eat  Into  the  mind,
and  cannot  be  dislodged.  For  they  pertain  to  the
secret  causes  of  joy  and  sorrow,  of  our  future,
of  our  very  existence  Itself,  and  these  cannot  be
dismissed  at  will.  Let  the  jesters  jest  on,  with
their  squibs,  lampoons,  and  comic  poems :  they
are  but  turning  the  mill-stonns  of  Destiny,
which  grind  the  grist  of  the  nation's  thought.

My  gifted  countryman,  Mr.  Moncure  Conway,
said  the  other  day  that  every  idea  must  finally  come
to  this  metropolis  to  be  tested  and  receive  its  mint-
mark.  He  was  right ;  and  we  are  now  bringing
you  the  golden  ore  of  Theosophy,  dug  from  the
long-closed  Intellectual  mines  of  our  Asiatic  pro-
genitors. We  ourselves  put  it  into  the  melting-pots
of  Western  criticism,  and  ask  that  it  may  be  tested,
amalgamated  with   the   purest   silver  of  Western

ENGLAND'S  WELCOME.  37

thought,  and  then  thrown  into  circulation.  We
have  come  to  the  bar  of  British  public  opinion  to
plead  the  cause  of  humanity,  which  sorely  suffers
through  ignorance  of  the  laws  of  spirit,  soul,  and
mind,  as  well  as  those  of  the  body.  We  do  not
pretend  to  leadership  ;  but  we  demand  a  seat  in  the
Council  which  is  deliberating  on  the  master  pro-
blems of  Religion  and  Science.  The  Materialis':,
Positivist,  Agnostic,  and  Secularist,  are  already
there,  in  conspicuous  places,  jostling  the  Ecclesi-
astic;  crushing  religious  sentiment,  undermining
spiritual  aspirations,  blackening  the  sky  of  sunny
Intuition,  robbing  this  reading  and  inquiring
age  of  the  last  vestige  of  belief  in  the  existence  of
man  after  the  death  of  the  body,  and  uncovering
the  black  and  yawning  abyss  of  oblivion  and  ex-
tinction into  which  they  would  have  us  leap.  The
Church  has  anathematised  in  vain  ;  the  sharpest
blades  of  theological  dogmatism  have  broken  like
weak  reeds  upon  the  steely  helms  of  the  Biologist
and  Evolutionist.  The  party  of  Religion  have
been  forced  from  their  stronghold  in  the  human
heart,  and  the  party  of  Materialistic  science  have
usurped  the  conquered  ground.  It  has  come  at
last  to  such  a  point  that  well-read  men  can  hardly  be
induced  to  discuss  whether  the  creed  of  Christendom
is  in  extremis  or  not  ;  regarding  it  as  a  waste  of
time,  since  none  but  the  illiterate  doubt  the  fact.
That  Rubicon,  they  aver,  was  crossed  long  ago.
The  victorious  cohorts  of  Freethought  are  gathering
to  the  trumpet-call  of  Darw^in,  Huxley,  Haeckel.  of

38  ENGLAND'S  WELCOME.

Mill,  Clifford,  Lewes  and  Greg.  They  are  building
temples  to  their  new  god,  Protoplasm,  out  of  the
debris  of  the  world's  old  faiths,  as  the  early  Chris-
tians utilized  the  shrines  of  the  Pagan  deities  to
build  churches.  It  is  the  old,  old  story  of
evolution,  change  and  growth  ;  the  story  that  can
be  read  in  every  sociological  evolution  in  the  history
of  our  race.  Whether  by  voice,  or  book,  or  sword
the  change  is  brought  about,  come  it  always
must.  The  seed-germ  of  the  next  race,  or  civiliza-
tion or  creed,  can  only  germinate  as  the  dry  husk
decays,  within  which  its  potentiality  was  secretly  de-
veloped. The  friends  of  Materialism  hope  that  it
may  be  the  outcome  of  the  destruction  of  Spiritu-
ality. Shall  it  ?  That  is  the  question  put  by  the
Theosophical  Society  to  you,  thinking  men  and
women  of  Europe.  For  the  choice  is  narrowed  to
this  :  either  materialistic  Atheism*  and  Nihilism —
the  conception  of  a  short  life  between  two  blanks —
or  Theosophy.     Say  what  }'ou  may,  laugh  as  you

*  The  use  of  the  expression  "  materialistic  Atheism  "  in  this  con-
nexion has  been  made  the  pretext  by  seme  not  very  friendly  critics
to  charge  me  with  a  belief  in  a  personal  God.  It  will  be  impossible
for  any  one  to  point  to  a  single  sentence  ever  spoken  or  written  by
me  which  would  give  colour  to  such  a  charge.  Upon  a  hundred
public  occasions  I  have  defined  the  "  God  "  of  the  Founders  of  our
Society  to  be  identical  with  the  Universal  Principle — formless,
changeless,  devoid  of  the  attributes  of  personality  and  of  limitation
— which  is  postulated  by  the  highest  metaphysicians  of  Asia.  This  is
made  very  plain  even  in  the  few  Lectures  that  have  been  preserved
out  of  several  hundreds  delivered  in  India  and  Ceylon  to  constitute  the
present  volume.  And  it  is  equally  clear  that,  whatever  may  be  my
personal  views  or  those  of  INIadame  Blavatsky,  no  one  in  our
Society  is  responsible  for  them,  save  ourselves

ENGLAND'S  WELCOME.  39

will,  mock  as  you  choose — that  is  the  issue  of  to-
day. Religion  has  but  one  foundation — Theosophy;
a  Church  built  upon  any  other  is  as  a  house  built
in  the  air.  Let  not  the  Christian  tell  me  that  the
Bible  offers  its  "  scheme  of  salvation  and  its  blessed
promises;"  nor  the  Jew  that  the  inspired  scrolls
of  the  Law  bear  the  divine  messages  of  Sinai  and
the  Prophets  ;  nor  the  Hindu  that  the  sacred  Veda,
if  read  with  faith  and  understanding,  reveals  all  trutli
that  man  is  fit  to  receive,  and  that  the  Upanishads
are  full  of  the  glory  of  spiritual  life.  Let  all  this  be
granted  to  each  ;  yet  these  books  have  no
meaning  to  the  spiritually  blind  eye  of  our  sceptical
generation,  nor  the  words  of  their  most  authoritative
expositors  any  sound  to  the  faith-dulled  ear  of  the
youth  whose  University  has  taught  him  to  believe
nothing  he  sees  or  hears  until  it  is  experimentally
proven.  It  is  absolutely  a  waste  of  time  to
appeal  to  a  sentiment  of  loyal  faith  in  ecclesias-
tical authority  long  since  practically  extinct.  The
only  chance  of  dislodging  Materialism  from  its
fortress  is  to  prove  it  unscientific^  and  Esoteric  Philo-
sophy scientific.  It  is  with  the  hammer  of  science
that  its  idols,  if  they  are  to  be  broken  at  all,  must
be  demolished.  We,  Founders  of  the  Theosophical
Society,  planted  it  upon  that  basic  general  proposi-
tion, as  upon  a  rock  that  can  buffet  the  storms  of
criticism.  And  the  experience  of  nine  years
since  come  and  gone  has  convinced  us  that  we
were  right.  Our  work  has  extended  to  America,
Europe,  Africa,  Asia,  and  Australasia — in  all  which

40  ENGLAND'S  WELCOME.

continents  we  have  now  established  branches  of  the
parent  Society ;  we  have  met  and  discussed  with
many  superior  minds  of  different  nationahties  ;
and  our  conclusion  is  that  if  we  had  the  work  of
founding  our  Society  to  do  over  again,  we  could
not  choose  a  broader,  surer,  safer  basis  of
activity  than  that  which  you  will  find  sketched  out
in  its  three  avowed  or  declared  objects.  Those
three  foundations  -  stones  are  :  to  promote  a
feeling  of  brotherhood  among  men,  regardless  of
race,  creed,  or  colour  ;  to  promote  the  study  of  the
Aryan  and  other  religions,  philosophies,  and
sciences ;  and  to  promote  experimental  research
into  the  hidden  laws  of  Nature  and  the  latent
capabilities  of  man.  The  canons  of  modern  Science
are  equally  the  canons  of  ancient  Oriental  philo-
sophy. If  the  one  rests  upon  fact  so  does  the
other.  Our  Western  college  professors  teach  us  to
take  nothing  upon  faith ;  our  masters  of  the
Eastern  school  do  the  like.  The  motto  written  on
the  title-page  of  your  well-known  journal,  i\^(f?//^;'^,  is:

'*  To  the  solid  ground
Of  Nature  trusts  the  mind  Avhich  builds  for  aye."

Wordsworth.

The  legend  that  heads  our  Society's  journal,  the
T/icosophist/\s'.  "There  is  no  religion  higher  than
Truth."  The  Lord  Buddha,  revered  as  the  greatest
among  adepts  of  the  Occult  science,  when  asked  by
the  Kalama  people  how  they  might  know  which
religion  was  the  truest,  answered  that  they
should  believe  nothing  written  or  spoken,  by  any

EA' GLAND'S  WELCOME.  41

teacher  of  any  epoch,    upon  mere  authority,    but
only  when   the  teaching  harmonized  with  reason,
and  would  stand  the  test  of  examination.     That
is    the    attitude    which    we    likewise   adopt.      If
the     Theosophical     Society    had    come     forward
with    a   claim  of  infallibility  for  its    ideas    or  its
teachers,     discouraging     criticism     and     shirking
inquiry,  it  would  have  been  turned  out  of  court  on
its  first  appearance.     But  since  it  has  spread  from
city  to  city  and  from  land  to  land,  until  it  can  now
count    over  a  hundred   branches,  it  is    clearly  in
accordance  with  the  spirit  of  the  age,  and  meets  a
real  want  of  humanity.      It  has  an  unmistakeable
vitality,  and  has  attained  a  development  that  pre-
sages   a    great    future  for  the  movement.     Month
after  month  fresh  branches  spring  up,  and  new  lines
of  usefulness  open  out.     Four  days  ago  I  organized,
in  the  very  stronghold  of  Presbyterian  intolerance,
the  "  Scottish  Theosophical   Society,"  and   after  a
Lecture  at  Edinburgh  one  of  the  leading  clergymen
of  the  city  took  my  hand  in  brotherly  kindness,
declaring  that  the  sentiments  I  had  just  expressed
to    my   audience    were    identical    with    those    he
was    wont   to   preach    from    his  pulpit.      So,    too,
the    freethinking    journalists    of    Paris    have   de-
clared   our    Society's    cardinal    idea   of    fraternal
concert    between    the     best   thinkers    and    truest
men    of   all   races    for    research   after   the    funda-
mental facts  of  human   existence,  to  be  in  strict
harmony^with  the  principles  of  French  republican-
ism ;    while,    at    the   same   time,    the   reactionary

42  ENGLAND'S  WELCOME.

Ultramontanes  of  the  Royalist  party  have,  in  their
organ,  Le  Defcnseiir,  bidden  us  a  hearty  welcome
as  to  those  who  may  save  France  from  the  moral
decay  brought  about  by  crass  materialism.  Pass-
ing on  to  the  Orient,  you  have  only  to  consult  the
files  of  the  native  press  of  India  and  of  Ceylon,  to
discover  how  enthusiastically  the  masses  of  those
ancient  countries  speak  of  our  Society  and  its
work.  In  these  Western  communities  most  people
regard  us  as  innovators,  trying  to  "  float "  a  new
delusion;  but  throughout  the  East  it  is  accounted  the
chief  merit  of  Theosophy  that  its  teachings  are
but  the  uncoloured  recapitulation  of  the  grand  philo-
sophy taught  to  Egypt  and  Greece  by  their  holy
sages,  and  embalmed  in  their  ancestral  literature.
Seven  years  ago  scarcely  a  Hindu  college  graduate
dared  to  confess  a  feeling  of  respect  for  the  national
religious  philosophy  ;  now  the  imported  Western
scepticism  is  going  out  of  fashion,  and  Indian  and
Sinhalese  youth  are  joining  our  Society,  and
beginning  to  emulate  the  piety,  temperance,
honesty  and  truthfulness  of  their  noble  forefathers.
Within  the  past  twelvemonth  these  cherished  young
colleagues  have  founded,  under  our  auspices,  twenty-
seven  schools  and  colleges  for  Sanskrit  teaching,
have  published  books,  have  founded  Theosophical
journals, and  have  organized  religious  classes  or  Sun-
day schools  in  various  parts  of  the  Indian  Peninsula
and  of  Ceylon.  The  movement  has  spread
to  the  United  States,  despite  the  absence  of  its
Founders,  since    1878,   in    the    East.     Within   the

ENGLAND'S  WELCOME.  43

past  year,  new  branches  have  been  formed,  a  Theo-
sophicaljournalhas  been  started, other  charters  have
been  appHed  for,  a  central  governing  Committee  or
Board  has  been  organized,and  two  delegates  of  note —
one,an  author  and  journalist  attached  to  the  editorial
staff  of  an  influential  New  York  paper,  the  other,  a
man  of  scientific  repute,  and  a  college  professor —
have  come  across  the  Atlantic  to  meet  the  Founders
and  to  arrange  for  future  Theosophical  work  in
America.  Within  the  next  two  days,  I  go  to  Germany
to  hold  a  conference  of  certain  of  the  ablest  philoso-
phical writers  of  the  day,  and  to  launch  the  bark
of  Theosophy  upon  the  deep  sea  of  German  thought.
The  seed  planted  by  Mme.  Blavatsky  and  my-
self at  New  York  in  1875,  when  we  organized
the  Society,  is  fast  growing  into  a  banyan  tree,  whose
roots  are  striking  dow^n  into  the  subsoil  of  human
nature,  and  whose  shade  will  one  day  be  broad  anci
dense  enough  to  shelter  a  multitude  of  students  of
the  Problem  of  Life.  And  let  me  here  candidly
and  gratefully  confess  how  much  of  our  success  in
English-speaking  countries  is  due  to  the  world-
wide circulation  attained  by  The  Occtdt  World  and
Esoteric  Bitddhisin,  those  tw^o  profoundly  interesting
and  valuable  books  of  our  eminent  colleague,  Mr.
A.  P.  Sinnett.  Here,  in  the  land  and  city  of  his
birth,  I  thank  that  loyal  friend  and  true-hearted
Englishman,  whose  courageous  and  unselfish  advo-
cacy of  a  discovered  truth  is — well,  w4iat  one  always
expects  from  an  Englishman  of  that  sort !

As  mine  is  the  task  of  giving  you  a  historical  re-

44  ENGLAND'S  WELCOME.

trospect,  I  must  briefly  note  what  the  Theosophical
Society  has  accomplished  under  each  of  the  three
heads  of  work  it  sets  itself  First,  as  to  the  question
of  forming  the  nucleus  of  a  Brotherhood  of
Humanity.  We  have  effected  much  in  this  direc-
tion ;  much  of  a  visible  and  practical  character.
Upon  our  rolls  are  inscribed  the  names  of  some
thousands  of  men  and  women  who  represent
many  races  and  most  of  the  great  creeds.  Our
Rules  positively  prohibit  the  discussion,  at  our
meetings,  of  questions  likely  to  stir  up  strife
about  religion,  caste,  race,  and  politics.  All  such
discordant  issues  are  left  outside  our  threshold.
We  meet  as  friends,  whose  declared  and  only  pur-
pose is  to  exchange  ideas  and  to  help  each  other  to
get  at  the  truth.  The  wisest  are  our  Theosophical
aristocracy.  The  rich  man  is  not  esteemed  in  our
Society  for  his  wealth,  nor  the  poor  man  despised
for  his  poverty.  The  tie  of  a  common  interior
nature  makes  us  see  and  know  each  other
as  brethren  in  Theosophy.  The  antagonism
of  sex  is  unknown  among  us  :  we  are  not
concerned  as  to  the  relative  supremacy  of  man  or
woman,  the  test  of  excellence  is  the  capacity  of
their  respective  minds  ;  the  brightest  is  the
most  respected,  and  the  highest  place  in  our
esteem  is  occupied  by  the  one  most  devoted
to  the  cause  of  Theosophy,  and  who  best  illus-
trates in  daily  conduct  its  lofty  ideal.  It  was
a  sight  to  behold  with  joy  when,  at  the  celebration
of  the  Society's  eighth  anniversary,  at  Madras  in

ENGLAND'S  WELCOME,  45

December  last,  more  than  one  hundred  delegates —
Christians,  Jews,  Hindus,  Buddhists,  Mussulmans
and  Agnostics — were  gathered  together  from  the
four  quarters  of  the  globe  to  report  the  progress  of
the  movement  in  their  several  countries,  and  to  bring
the  vows  of  fealty  from  their  various  branches.
The  possibility  of  a  practical  confraternity  upon
the  basis  of  mutual  reciprocity  and  kindly  tolerance
was  then  and  there  triumphantly  proved.

We  then  saw  that,  while  it  is  impossible,  save  in
Utopia,  to  hope  for  a  real  brotherly  union  between
nations  or  communities  upon  the  external  side  of
human  nature,  yet  this  may  be  effected  quite  easily
upon  the  plane  of  the  inner  and  nobler  self

Secondly,  as  to  the  study  of  the  ancient  philoso-
phies and  religions.  Here,  too,  great  results  have
been  achieved.  It  would  be  vain  to  search  the  mysti-
cal writings  of  modern  times  for  so  great  a  body  ot
valuable  practical  teaching  upon  these  questions  as
the  still  meagre  and  budding  Theosophical  literature
already  offers.  I  venture  to  say,  for  example,  that
there  can  be  found  in  no  Western  author  so  many
lucid  expositions  of  occult  philosophy  and  meta-
physics as  have  been  given  recently  in  the  Theo-
sophical circles  of  London  and  Paris  by  our
gifted  and  beloved  young  Brahman  colleague,  Mr.
Mohini,  who  sits  beside  me  on  this  platform.  This
lineal  descendant  of  the  Raja  Rammohun  Roy  has
shown  himself  worthy  of  that  grandsire  whose
learning  and  elevated  spirituality  of  character  are
remembered  in  England,  as  well  as  in  India,  to  this

46  ENGLAND'S  WELCOME.

day,  with  deep  affection.  Besides  the  exegetical
works  of  Mr.  Sinnett,  there  is  Madame  Blavatsky's
encyclopaedic  Isis  Unveiled,  now  in  its  seventh
edition,  which  traverses  a  vast  domain  of  science
and  rehgion,  and  there  are  various  pamphlets  by
different  authors,  all  relating  to  the  Asiatic  side  of
the  subject.  On  the  side  of  Esoteric  Christianity
and  the  Hermetic  Doctrine,  the  eloquent  work  of
Dr.  Anna  Kingsford  and  Mr.  Edward  Maitland,
The  Pcj'fect  Waj',  will  be  reckoned  among  the  great
books  of  the  century.  The  TJieosopJiist,  a  monthly
magazine,  issued  at  the  Society's  headquarters  at
Madras,*  and  now  in  its  fifth  volume,  has  among
its  contributors  some  of  the  ablest  educated  Hindus
living,  who  during  the  past  five  years  have  been
expounding  their  national  Sanskrit  literature.

Thirdly,  and  lastly,  as  to  researches  into  the
occult  side  of  Nature  and  of  Man.  What  the
mystical  writers  of  Greece  and  Rome,  of  Germany,
France,  Italy,  and  England,  had  hinted  at  in  this
direction  ;  what  was  figured  in  the  pictographs  of
Egypt,  in  the  sculptures  of  Nineveh  and  of  Central
and  South  America,  in  the  cylinders,  bricks,  and
stones  of  Babylonia  and  of  other  countries ;  what
was  embalmed  though  masked  in  folk-lore,
legend,  saga,  and  national  customs,  has  been
verified  and  corroborated  by  the  individual  re-
searches of  certain  of  our  members.  While  the
Christians    are   sitting   almost    speechless,    unable

*  Mr.  George  Redway,  the  publisher  of  the  present  vokime,  is  the
London  agent.

ENGLAND'S  WELCOME.  47

to  confute  the  dogmatic  assertion  of  the  infidel
biologist,  that  human  consciousness  isimpossibleout-
side  the  physical  organism,  and  that  man  is  extinct
when  it  is  dissolved,  we  Theosophists  have  experi-
mentally proved  its  utter  falsity.  We  have  proved
it  by  projecting  ourselves  out  of  the  body,  with  the
retention  of  full  consciousness  and  volition,  acling
and  observing  as  readily  as  any  of  us  can  do  in  his
fleshy  encasement.  We  liave  proved  that  there
is  an  inner  range  of  percipient  faculties,  more  acute,
and  mAich  more  unerring,  than  "  the  five  gateways  "
of  the  outer  body.  We  have  verified  the  exist-
ence of  two  sublimer  states  of  matter  than  the  form
we  are  told  about  by  our  fashionable  scientific
authorities.  The  "  Unseen  Universe,"  or  subjective
world,  of  Professors  Balfour  Stewart  and  Tait  has
ceased  to  have  for  us  the  aspect  of  a  hypothesis,
for  this  terra  incognita,  this  Polar  circle  of  official
science,  has  been  explored  by  us,  with  the  adepts
of  the  East  as  our  guides  and  teachers.  Some  of
my  colleagues  in  the  Theosophical  Society  so  revere
the  characters  of  these  living  Masters  as  to  think
it  almost  a  crime  that  I  should  profane  their  secret
by  naming  them  to  a  mixed  audience.  But  I
am  imbued  with  the  American,  rather  than  with
the  Oriental  feeling  as  to  such  matters.  I  know
as  a  fact  that  these  grand  men  are  not  to  be  moved
as  to  their  inner  selves  by  anything,  good  or  ill,
that  may  be  said  of  them :  the  reviler's  abuse  but
recoils  upon  himself,  as,  in  the  Eastern  proverb,  the
dust  blows  back  into  the  eyes  of  the  fool  who  throws

48  ENGLAND'S  WELCOME.

it  against  the  wind.  And,  as  an  old  student  of
Psychology,  I  feel  the  enormous  vitality  the  subject
derives  from  the  fact  that  these  Masters  live  as  really
for  us  as  their  predecessors  did  for  Apollonius,
Plato,  and  Pythagoras  ;  that  they  can  be  seen,  and
conversed  with,  as  they  have  been  seen  and  con-
versed with  by  many  among  us  ;  and  that  they
furnish  in  their  own  persons  a  tangible,  actual  ideal
of  a  hitherto  unsuspected  human  perfectibility.
And  so  realising,  I  shall,  until  they  command  me  to
keep  silence,  continue  to  bear  testimony  to  their
existence,  to  their  benevolent  philanthropy,  to  their
angelic  qualities,  mental  and  moral.  To  them,
through  their  agent,  Madame  Blavatsky,  I  owe  the
first  glimpse  of  the  true  light.  By  thenri  I  was
taught  to  detect  its  Sflow  under  the  exoteric  masks
of  the  world's  various  faiths,  and  to  know  it  for
their  silvery  psychic  spark.  They  taught  me  to  see
that  the  colour  of  my  brother  man,  his  dress,  his
formal  creed,  his  social  prejudices,  were  but  the
results  of  his  external  environment,  and  but  tinted,
without  obstructing  the  inner  shining  of  the  im-
mortal Ego:  as  the  cathedral  panes  give  for  the
watcher  outside  their  glowing  hues  to  the  light  that
burns  in  the  chancel  and  along  the  aisles.  To  them
my  life-long  fealty  is  pledged.  My  earnest  hope  -is
that  I  may  not  fail  in  my  duty  ;  my  chief  desire
that,  through  the  extension  of  the  Theosophical
Society,  I  may  succeed  in  causing  hundreds  as
hungry  as  myself  after  spiritual  truth  to  know  of
their  existence  and  partake  of  their  teaching.

THE    THEOSOPHICAL    SOCIETY
AND    ITS    AIMS.^

When  a  new  Society  asks  a  hearing  of  the  world
it  is  sure  to  be  challenged.  The  public  has  that
vested  right,  and  none  but  fools  will  object  to  its
exercise.  Infallibility  is  out  of  fashion,  notwith-
standing the  Roman  conclave  of  July  13th,  1870,
where,  as  the  Syllabus  of  the  Vatican  Council  tells
us,  the  Holy  Ghost  sat  with  the  Bishops  and  judged
with  them.  Men  now-a-days  take  nothing  on  faith  ;
the  era  of  inquiry  and  proof  has  come.

The  Theosophical  Society  expects  no  exemption
from  the  rule  ;  has  asked  none  ;  and  my  presence
before  this  great  audience,  so  soon  after  the  arrival
in  India  of  our  Committee,  shows  our  readiness  to
give  a  reason  for  its  existence.  We  believe  it  was  a
necessary  outgrowth  of  the  century.  I  hope  to
show  you  that  the  hour  demanded  its  coming,  and
that  it  was  not  born  before  its  appointed  time.

Our  society  points  to  four  years  of  activity  as
one  proof  that  there  was  room  for  it  in  the  world.
And   this   activity,  please  observe,  was   not  in   the

*  An  Address  delivered  at  the  Framji  Cowasji  Hall,  Bombay,

23id  March,  1879.
D

So  THE  THEOSOPHICAL  SOCIETY

midst  of  friendly  environments,  with  no  one  to
question  or  oppose,  but  in  the  enemy's  country,  with
foes  all  about,  public  sentiment  hostile,  the  press
scornful  and  relentless,  traitors  working  with  honest
opponents  to  break  up  our  organization  and  neutra-
lize our  labours.  Occupying,  as  most  of  us  did,
positions  of  some  influence,  we  have  had  to  suffer,  in
ways  that  will  suggest  themselves  to  each  of  you,
for  the  privilege  of  free  speech.  While  the  press
has  lampooned  us,  in  writing  and  pictorial  carica-
tures, by  the  clergy  we  have  been  denounced  as  the
children  of  Satan,  doomed  to  eternal  damnation
along  with  the  wretched  "  Heathen."

We  throve  on  opposition.  The  more  we  were
abused,  the  greater  interest  was  created  to  know
what  the  Theosophical  Society  really  was,  how
strong,  and  what  were  its  aims?  These  questions,
which  have  been  put  to  us  in  every  possible  varia-
tion since  our  arrival  here,  we  answered,  without
concealment  or  equivocation,  face  to  face,  eye  to
eye.  We  had  nothing  to  be  ashamed  of,  whether
in  doctrine,  motive,  or  deed,  and  so  we  spoke — and
now  speak — with  the  boldness  of  one  who  loves  the
truth  and  hates  a  lie.

All  this  discussion,  carried  on  for  months,  even
years,  in  journals  of  world-wide  circulation,  drew  to
us  large  nun^bers  of  sympathizers.  Scattered
throughout  America  and  Europe  were  men  and
women  of  intelligence,  influence,  courage,  who  had
long  been  interested  in  the  topics  to  which  we
applied  ourselves,  and  who  needed  only  such  a  ral-

AND  ITS  AIMS.  51

lying-point  as  our  society  offered,  to  combine  their
strength.  So  they  joined  us,  cheering  us  by  their
activity  of  deed  no  less  than  by  their  friendliness
of  word.  A  branch  society  sprang  up  in  England,
under  the  presidency  of  a  barrister  of  the  highest
capabilities,  and  the  conjoint  direction  of  a  Univer-
sity professor,  and  of  medical  and  other  professional
men.  Other  branches  were  formed  in  Russia,
France,  Greece,  and  elsewhere.  One  is  now  form-
ing in  Ceylon.  Our  membership  increased  to  thou-
sands. We  received  as  brothers,  with  equal
cordiality,  Hindus,  Jains,  Parsis,  Buddhists,  Jews,
and  free-thinking  Christians.  At  different  times
the  press  has  described  us  as  specially  represent-
ing each  of  those  sects  ;  a  proof,  certainly,  of  our
strict  impartiality  and  the  general  resemblance  all
these  great  religions  have  to  each  other  at  their
roots.  There  was  room  for  all  upon  our  platform,
and  none  need  jostle  his  neighbour.  What  that
platform  is,  will  be  made  clear  before  I  have  done
speaking.

Believing  it  good  generalship  to  force  the  fight-
ing when  one  feels  sure  of  his  supports,  we  not  only
struck  blow  for  blow  at  our  antagonists,  but  con-
trived more  than  once  to  put  them  on  the  defen-
sive. Often  without  obtruding  ourselves  upon
public  notice,  we  aroused  an  interest  in  everything
related  to  the  East.  Oriental  science,  literature,
chronology,  tradition,  superstitions,  magic  and
spiritualism,  afforded  themes  for  our  allies  to  speak
and    write    upon,    throughout    the    two    parts    of

52  THE  THEOSOPHICAL  SOCIETY

Christendom.  Those  who  have  seen  the  Western
journal  and  periodical  literature  during  the  past
four  or  five  years,  must  have  been  struck  with  the
apparently  sudden  growth  of  a  deep  interest  in
such  matters.  They  will  also  have  noticed  the  in-
creased number  of  books  published  on  Oriental  sub-
jects. How  much  of  that  activityis  traceable  directly
and  indirectly  to  the  Theosophical  Society,  we,  only,
know  who  have  been  in  the  thick  of  the  fighting.

We  have  been  asked,  scores  of  times,  why  our
Society  has  established  as  yet  no  periodical,  nor
issued  any  volumes  of  Reports.  Our  answer  is  that  a
wider  activity  could  be  achieved  by  utilizing  presses
already  established.  We  have  thus  reached  mil-
lions of  readers,  where,  through  any  special  organ
of  our  own,  we  might  only  have  caught  the  eye  and
provoked  the  thought  of  a  few  thousands.  How
many  in  India,  think  you,  have  read  about  the  visit
of  our  Committee  and  its  objects  ?  and  how  many
would  have  done  so  if  we  had  depended  upon  a
journal  of  our  own  ?  Papers  in  English  and  the
several  vernacular  tongues  have  been  sent  us,  and
letters  from  the  extreme  North  and  the  extreme
South  have  come  to  us,  from  those  wdio  have  an
interest  in  our  work.  It  has  been  remarked  at  the
West  that  no  Society  has,  w^ithin  so  short  a  time,
been  talked  about  in  so  many  different  countries
as  ours.  We  gratefully  accept  the  fact  as  proof
that  we  are  welcomed  to  a  standing-room  in  the
arena  of  the  century.

And  now  what  is  the  Theosophical  Society,  and

AND  ITS  AIMS.  53

what  are  its  aims  ?  How  much  appears  upon  the
surface,  and  how  much  is  concealed  ?  What  is  the
plan  of  work  ?  How  is  the  public  to  be  benefited
by  the  Society,  and  is  mutual  co-operation  practic-
able ?  What  attitude  do  we  assume  towards  re-
ligious beliefs,  and  what  ideas,  if  any,  does  the
Society  hold  about  God  and  his  government  ?  Do
we  believe  in  the  immortality  of  the  human  soul,
and,  if  so,  on  what  grounds  ?  What  importance
do  we  attach  to  the  study  of  the  occult  sciences,  so
called?  What  use  has  been  made,  by  many  or  few
of  our  Fellows,  of  any  knowledge  of  those  sciences?
To  what  highest  good  do  we  aspire,  here  or  here-
after ?  What  are  our  ideas  of  the  next  world  ?
These  questions  j^//  have  come  here  to  ask,  /  to
answer.  I  have  copied  them  from  written  docu-
ments, handed  to  me  since  this  address  was  an-
nounced by  the  native  committee.  And  here  are
others  propounded  by  one  who  wishes  to  join  us: —
On  one's  becoming  a  member,  is  any  course  pre-
scribed for  him  to  follow  with  a  view  to  his  con-
tinual progression  and  the  acquisition  of  mastery
over  his  baser  nature  ?  What  constitutes  the  differ-
ence between  the  degrees  in  the  Society  ?  Will
instruction  be  imparted  to  individual  members
or  groups,  on  what  subjects,  and  how  often  ?
Webster  defines  Theosophy  as  "  a  direct  as
distinguished  from  a  revealed  knowledge  of  God,
supposed  to  be  attained  by  extraordinary  illum-
ination, especially  a  direct  insight  into  the  pro-
cesses of  the   Divine  mind   and   the  interior  rela-

54  THE  THEOSOPHTCAL  SOCIETY

tions  of  the  Divine  nature."  How  far  does
this  agree  with  the  doctrines  of  the  Theosophical
Society  ?  Is  a  member  of  the  Arya,  Brahmo,  or
Prarthana  Samaj  debarred  from  joining  it,  or  will
his  joining  affect  his  position  in  relation  to  the
social  rules  and  duties  of  his  caste  ?  How  much
time  would  be  required  to  become  proficient  in  a
degree  ?  Will  any  library  be  established  and  ac-
cessible to  the  Fellows  ?  Will  there  be  social
gatherings  to  discuss  Oriental  philosophy  and
kindred  subjects  ?

We  have  here  seventeen  inquiries,  covering
ground  enough  for  thirty-four  lectures,  but  I  will
attempt  to  cursorily  glance  at  all  in  the  hour
at  my  disposal.  All,  except  those  of  a  strictly
personal  character,  have  been  treated  at  great  length
and  with  signal  ability  by  Mme.  H.  P.  Blavatsky,
Corresponding  Secretary  of  our  Society,  in  her  "  Isis
Unveiled,"  a  work  which  a  well-known  London  jour-
nal. Public  Opinion,  styled  "  a  stupendous  monu-
ment of  human  industry,"  and  which  the  Neiv
Yoi'k  Herald  considered,  "  one  of  the  great  achieve-
ments of  our  century."  Those  who  care  to  really
sound  this  question  of  the  relative  supremacy  of
ancient  and  modern  science  and  religion  can  easily
do  so,  as  the  work  is  to  be  had  of  our  booksellers.

But,  to  begin  with  our  answers,  I  affirm  then
that  everything  essential,  as  regards  principles,
recommendations  and  ideas,  appears  upon  the  sur-
face of  our 'Society,  and  nothing  is  concealed  that
sJionld  be  made  known.     We  do  not  say  one  thing

AND  ITS  AIMS,  55

and  mean  another.  We  have  no  mental  reserva-
tions— we  resort  to  no  equivocations.  What  we
believe,  we  say — always  and  everywhere.  If  we
have  survived  all  the  battles  through  which  we  have
passed ;  if,  after  a  four  years'  struggle  against
obstacles,  in  the  very  heart  and  stronghold  of
Christendom,  we  are  a  strong,  compact,  successful
Society,  daily  increasing  in  influence,  having  daily
accessions  of  able  coadjutors  ;  if,  at  this  juncture,
our  outposts  are  entrenched  in  the  most  widely
separated  countries,  and  garrisoned  by  men  of  the
most  diverse  speech,  complexion,  and  ancestry  ;  if
here,  upon  the  threshold  of  Aryavarta,  we  find  our
hands  clasped  with  fraternal  warmth  by  the  Hindu,
the  Parsi,  the  Jain,  and  the  Buddhist  ;  it  is  because
we  have  not  feared  to  speak  the  truth  at  any  cost.

When  our  Society  was  organised — at  New  York
in  1875 — the  very  first  section  of  the  bye-laws
adopted,  after  fixing  upon  our  corporate  title,
affirmed  that  the  object  of  the  Society  was  to
obtain  knowledge  of  all  the  laws  of  nature.  This
covers  the  whole  range  of  natural  phenomena,  and
everything  that  concerns  mankind  and  his  environ-
ments. The  inaugural  address  of  the  President  was
delivered,  November  17th,  1875,  and  in  it,  after
attempting  a  comparison  of  our  Society  with  the
neoplatonists  and  theurgists  of  ancient  Alexandria,
the  fire -philosophers  of  the  middle  ages,  and  the
ancient  and  modern  spiritualists,  and  finding  no
exact  parallel,  I  said  :  "  We  are  neither  of  these,
but  simply  investigators   of  earnest    purpose  and

56  THE  THEOSOPHICAL  SOCIETY

unbiassed  mind,  who  study  all  things,  prove  all
things,  and  hold  fast  to  that  which  is  good.  We
seek,  inquire,  reject  nothing  without  cause,  accept
nothing  without  proof:  we  are  students,  not
teachers."  Does  not  this  utterance  of  1875  answer
most  of  the  questions  of  1879  ?

The  Society  has  its  secrets,  nevertheless;  but  they
harm  no  one.     Composed,  as  we  are,  of  people  who
live  at  the  two  extremities  of  the  earth,  and  who
speak  different  tongues,  we  have  the  same  necessity
as  Freemasons    for  some  means  of  mutual   identi-
fication, in  special   cases.      These  are  afforded  by
certain    signs    and    tokens    which,    of  course,   are
withheld  from  strangers,  and  are  changed  as  required.
Again,  operating,  as   we  do,  mainly  in    Christian
countries,  in  some  of  which  (as  in  France,  Spain,
and  Russia,  for  instance)  religious  intolerance  pre-
vails,   the   corporate   perpetuity   of    our   branches
would  be  imperilled  by  allowing  our  membership  to
be  known,  and  our  plans  for  religious  and  scientific
agitation  might  be  baffled  by  exposing  them.     Our
existence    threatens     no    Government,    feeds    no
political    cabal,  attacks    no  pillar  of  social    order.
We  do  not   concern   ourselves   in    the   least   with
affairs   of  State,  nor  lay  impious   hands  upon  the
conjugal,  filial,   or  parental    relation.      We  would
not  admit  man  or  woman    who   was  in    rebellion
against  the  existing  laws  or  government  of  his   or
her  country,  or  engaged  in  plots  and  conspiracies
against  the  public  peace  and  safety.     In  New  York
we  expelled  one  of  our  most  active  charter  officers.

AND  ITS  ATMS.  57

an  Englishman — one  of  the  founders  of  the  Society,
in  fact — because  he  allowed  himself  to  be  mixed  up
with  a  gang  of  French  Communist  refugees  in  their
wicked  conspiracies.     Judge  for  yourselves,  there-
fore, how  malicious  and  unfounded  are  the  libels  that
have  been  circulated  in  this  country  as  to  our  being
political  spies,  and,  most  ridiculous  of  all,  Russian
spies !     The  only  Russian  in  our  party  became  a
citizen  of  the  United  States  of  America  last  July,
an    act    unprecedented    among    Russian    women,
and    her   book,    "  Isis  Unveiled,"   already  referred
to,    is  not  allowed    to  cross    the    frontiers.        Nor
would    we    admit    into    our    fellowship    any  one
who    taught  irreverence  to    parents  or  immorality
to  husbands   or  wives.     Nor  have  we   any   room
for  the    drunkard   or   the  debauchee.       If    Theo-
sophy   did    not    make    men    better,    purer,    wiser,
more     useful     to     themselves     and     to     society,
then    this    organisation    of   ours  had    better  never
been    born.        That    it    lives,    and    Is    respected
even     by     those    who    cannot     sympathise    with
its    Ideas,   is   evidence  of  its  beneficent   character.
This    answers    one   of  the    above    questions,  and
I  have    also    shown    you    that   our   plan    of  work
is    to    employ    existing    agencies     to    create    an
interest    in    Eastern    philosophies    and    religions,
and    make     the    Press     our    helper,    even    when
it  fancies  it  is  killing  us  off  with  its  fine  sarcasm  or
abuse.

And  now,  we  are   asked,  what  attitude  do  we
hold  to  religious  beliefs,  and  what  do  we  believe  as

58  THE  THEOSOPHICAL  SOCIETY

to  God  and  his  government?  The  Society,  I  have
already  told  you,  is  no  Propaganda,  formed  to  dis-
seminate fixed  dogmas  ;  therefore,  as  a  society,  it
has  no  creed  to  offer  for  the  world's  acceptance.
It  recognises  the  great  philosophical  principle  that
while  there  is  but  one  Absolute  Truth,  the  differ-
ences among  men  only  mark  their  respective  appre-
hensions of  that  Truth.  It  is  not  for  me  to  say  to
you  what  this  Absolute  Truth  is.  If  I  were  cap-
able of  doing  so,  then  (for  the  first  time  since  the
world  began)  there  would  have  appeared  an  infal-
lible, omniscient  human  mind  upon  earth.  There
is  no  educated  sectarian  so  bigoted  that  when  you
calmly  discuss  with  him  the  bases  of  his  faith,  he
will  not  admit  that  its  Founder  was  not  equal  to
his  one  Supreme  God  in  omniscience  and  other
attributes.  The  Parsi  will  not  claim  it  for  Zoroas-
ter, the  Buddhist  for  Sakya-Muni,  the  Jain  for
Parasnatha,  the  Jew  for  Moses,  the  Mohammedan
for  the  Prophet  of  Islam,  nor  the  Hindu  for  any  of
the  Rishis,  who

"Above  all  fleshly,  worldly  feelings  soared."

Revere  his  spiritual  intermediator  and  teacher  as
either  of  these  may,  he  will  only  claim  that,  in  his
opinion,  more  of  this  Absolute  Truth  flowed  from
Heaven  to  Earth  through  this  particular  channel,
this  minor  god,  if  you  will,  than  through  any  other.
And  to  settle  these  disputes,  all  the  spilt  blood  of
religious  wars  has  been  shed.  Then  why  should
we  accord  to  these  Christian  missionaries  who
have  so  maligned  us  to  you,  that  which  we  refuse  to

AND  ITS  AIMS.

59

other  people  ?  Why  should  we,  as  a  society,  accept
Jesus  rather  than  Vasishta,  Gautama  or  Zoroaster?
Far  be  it  from  me  to  scoff  at  the  simple  faith  of
those  thousands  of  Christians  who  have  pictured  to
themselves  a  Deity  all  love  and  beneficence,  and
who  exemplify  in  their  lives  and  conversation  all
that  is  beautiful  in  human  nature.  The  recollection
of  my  nearest  and  dearest  ones,  and  of  those  others
whom  I  have  known  from  boyhood  up,  in  different
lands  and  various  social  conditions,  would  stop  my
mouth  were  I  so  unjust  and  cruel.  I  myself  come
from  a  line  of  ancestors  who  have  left  behind  them
historical  records  of  their  unselfish  and  courageous
devotion  to  Christianity.  Just  as  I  have  left  my
home  and  business  and  friends,  to  come  to  India
to  search  after  the  Parabrahma  of  primitive  religions,
so,  in  1635,  one  of  my  ancestors  left  his  home  in
England,  to  seek  in  the  savage  wilderness  of  America
that  freedom  to  worship  the  Jewish  Jehovah  which
he  could  not  have  in  England  under  the  Restoration.
But,  as  the  author  of  "Isis"  remarks,  these  people
would  have  been  equally  good  in  any  other  religious
sect ;  they  are  better  than  their  creed  :  goodness,
virtue,  equity,  are  congenital  with  them.

But  when  we  have  shown  in  what  we  do  not  be-
lieve, we  have  to  say  what  is  our  faith.  We  do  be-
lieve in  the  immortality  of  the  human  spirit  * — the
"  we  "  meaning  all  the  representative  Theosophists
whose  minds  have  been  opened  to  me.  In  truth,
there  is  not  much  attraction  in  our  Society  for  these
*  The  seventh  principle  in  man— the  Atma  of  the  Hindus,

6o  THE  THEOSOPHICAL  SOCIETY

who  persistently  deny  this  assumption,  for  what
advantage  is  there  in  studying  all  those  primitive,
sublime  utterances  of  the  Vedas,  the  Zend  Avesta,
the  Tripitikas,  about  the  "  soul"  and  future  life,  if  a
man  is  incapable  of  realizing  the  idea  of  a  spiritual
self  or  an  Universal  Principle  at  all  ?  Let  such  an
one  take  his  balances  and  weigh  and  count  over
and  christen  the  motes  of  Nature's  dust-heap,  and
get  ribbons  for  catching  a  new  bug,  and  titles  for
impaling  a  new  beetle.  He  will  die  happy  in  the
thought  that  his  name,  though  Latinized  or  Hellen-
ized  past  recognition,  will  be  transmitted  to  pos-
terity in  connexion  with  the  solar  refrangibility  of
the  cucumber,  or  some  other  discovery  of  equally
momentous  importance.

The  study  of  occult  science  has  a  twofold  value.
First,  that  of  teaching  us  that  there  is  a  teeming
world  of  Force  within  this  teeming  visible  world
of  Phenomena  ;  and,  second,  in  stimulating  the
student  to  acquire,  by  self-discipline  and  education,
a  knowledge  of  his  psychic  powers  and  the  ability
to  employ  them.  How  appropriate  is  the  term
'  occult  science,"  when  applied  to  the  careful  ob-
servation of  the  phenomena  of  force,  is  apparent
when  we  read  the  confessions  of  scientific  leaders
as  to  the  limitation  of  their  positive  knowledge.
"  We  have  not  succeeded,"  says  Professor  Balfour
Stewart,  "  in  solving  the  problem  as  to  the  nature
of  life,  but  have  only  driven  the  difficulty  into  a
borderland  of  thick  darkness,  into  which  the  light
of  knowledge  ( Western  knowledge,  he  should  say)

AND  ITS  AIMS.  6i

has  not  yet  been  able  to  penetrate."*  Says  Le
Conte,  "  Creation  or  destruction  of  matter,  increase
or  diminution  of  matter,  lies  beyond  the  domain  of
science." f     And  even   Huxley ,J  the   High   Pontiff

regnant  of  materialism,  confesses  " it  is  also,  in

strictness,    true  that  we  know  nothing   about  the
.composition  of  any  body  whatever,  as  it  is."

Did  time  permit,  I  might  cite  to  you  many
similar  utterances  from  the  mouths  of  the  most
worshipped  biologists  and  philosophers  who  happen
at  the  moment  to  have  the  stage  of  notoriety  to
themselves.  You  cannot  open  a  book  on  chemis-
try, physiology,  or  hygiene,  without  stumbling  upon
admissions  that  there  are  fathomless  abysses  in  all
modern  science.  Pere  Felix,  the  great  Catholic
orator  of  France,  taunted  the  Academy  by  saying
that  they  found  an  abyss  even  in  a  grain  of  sand.
Who,  then,  can  tell  us  of  the  nature  of  life,  the
cause  of  its  phenomena,  the  qualities  of  the  inner
man?  Who  guards  the  keys  of  the  secret  chamber,
and  where  do  they  hang  ?  What  dragons  lie  in
the  path  ?  America  cannot  tell  us,  Europe  cannot
— for  we  have  questioned  both.  But  in  the  Western
libraries  we  found  old  books  which  tell  us  that  in
olden  times  there  was  a  class  of  men,  who  had  dis-

*  '*  The  Conservation  of  Energy,"  by  Balfour  Stewart,  LL.D.,
F.R. S.,  Professor  of  Natural  Philosophy  at  the  Owens'  College,
Manchester  (p.  163).

t  "Correlation  of  Vital  with  Chemical  and  Physical  Forces,"
revised  for  Dr.  Stewart's  book,  stipra  (see  page  171).

X  ••On  the  Physical  Basis  of  Life."  By  Thomas  H.  Huxley,
LL.D.,  F.R.S.

62  THE  THEOSOPHICAL  SOCIETY

covered  these  secrets,  had  interrogated  nature  be-
hind her  veil.  These  men  lived  in  the  lands  now
called  Tibet,  India,  Persia,  Chaldea,  Egypt,  and
Greece.  We  find  traces  of  them  even  in  the  frae-
mentary  remains  of  the  sacred  literature  of  Mexico
and  Peru.  And  we  have  been  told  that  this  sacred
science  is  not  extinct,  but  still  survives,  and  is
practised  by  men  who  carefully  guard  their  know-
ledge from  profane  hands.  Some  of  us  have  even
had  the  inestimable  good  fortune  to  meet  with  such
wonder-workers  and  tosee  their  experiments.  So  we
have  come  in  quest  of  the  places  and  opportunity
to  learn  for  our  own  benefit  and  that  of  humanity,
what  occult  law  of  nature  can  be  brought  out  of  Dr.
Stewart's  "borderland  of  darkness  "  into  the  lighted
and  odoriferous  class-rooms  of  Western  Science.

To  what  highest  good  do  we  aspire  ?  What  is
the  highest  good,  but  to  know  something  of  man
and  his  powers,  to  discover  the  best  means  to
benefit  humanity — physically,  morally,  spiritually  ?
To  this  we  aspire :  can  our  interrogator  conceive  of
a  nobler  ambition  ?  In  common  with  all  thinkinsr
people  we  have,  of  course,  our  individual  specula-
tions about  that  infinite  and  awful  something  which
Anglo-Saxons  call  God  ;  but,  as  a  Society,  we  say,
with  Pope —

"  Know,  then,  thyself;  presume  not  God  to  scan  ;
The  proper  study  of  mankind  is  Man."

As  to  our  ideas  of  the  next  world,  the  aid  of
metaphysics  would  have  to  be  invoked  to  answer
the  question.     Suffice  it  that  we  do  not   fancy  the

AND  ITS  AIMS.  63

other  world  to  be  gross  like  this  ;  lighted  by  the
same  solar  vibrations,  filled  with  such  houses,  such
Framji  Cowasji  Halls,  as  ours  !  Most  men  are  apt
to  brutalize  the  next  world  in  trying  to  construct
a  tangible  idea  for  the  mind  to  rest  upon.  The
Heaven  of  Milton,  which,  as  Professor  Huxley  ob-
serves, is  the  one  believed  in  by  Christians  and  not
at  all  that  of  any  Biblical  authority — is  a  place  of
shining  stairs,  golden  pavements,  and  bejewelled
thrones,  on  which,  without  an  inch  of  cushion  to
mitigate  their  metallic  hardness,  the  redeemed  saints
sit  for  ever  and  ever  singing  hymns  to  the  accom-
paniment of  the  harp.  So  the  Moslem  Paradise
teems  with  physical  delights,  and  even  the  "Summer
Land "  of  our  Western  Spiritualists  has  been
sketched,  mapped  out  and  described  by  all  the  re-
cent authorities,  from  Andrew  Jackson  Davis
downward.

Is  it  not  enough  to  conceive  of  a  future  state  of
existence  corresponding  with  the  new  necessities
of  the  monad  that  has  passed  through  and  out  of  the
cycle  of  objective  matter  and  become  a  subjective
entity?  Can  we  not  realise  a  life  apart  from  the  use  of
pots  and  ladles,  easy  chairs  and  mosquito  curtains?
Even  the  Jivan-Mukta,  or  soul  emancipated,  while
living  in  this  world,  loses  all  sense  of  relationship
to  it  and  its  grossness.  How  much  more  perfect
the  contrast,  then,  between  our  narrow  physical  life
and  the  Mukiatma,  or  soul  universalized — the  soul
having  sympathies  with  the  Universal  Good,  True,
Ji:st,  and  being  absorbed  in  Universal  Love  !     Let

64  7HE  THEOSOPHICAL  SOCIETY

us  not  drown  ourselves  in  oceans  of  vague  meta-
physical speculation,  in  trying  to  drag  the  next
sphere  down  to  this,  but  rather  strive  to  elevate
our  present  plane  of  matter,  so  that  one  end  of  it
may  climb  to  some  sort  of  proximity  to  the  higher
realm  of  spirit.

What  an  important  question  is  this  which  heads
the  second  series  that  I  read  to  you  !  How  can  one
be  helped  to  acquire  mastery  over  his  baser  nature?
Mighty  problem  I — how  change  the  brute  into  the
angel  ?  Why  ask  for  the  obvious  answer  to  so
simple  a  question  ?  Does  my  friend  imagine  there
is  more  than  one  way  in  which  it  can  be  done  ?
Can  any  other  but  one's  own  self  effect  this  purifi-
cation, this  splendid  conquest,  in  comparison  with
whose  glory  all  the  greatest  victories  of  war  sink
into  contemptible  insignificance?  There  must  be,
first,  the  belief  that  this  conquest  is  possible  ;  then,
knowledge  of  the  method  ;  then,  practice.  Men
only  passively  animal,  become  brutal  from  ignor-
ance of  the  consequences  of  the  first  downward
step.  So,  too,  they  fail  to  become  god-like  because
of  their  ignorance  of  the  potentiality  of  effort.
Certainly  one  can  never  improve  himself  who  is
satisfied  with  his  present  circumstances.  The  re-
former is  of  necessity  a  discontented  man — discon-
tented with  w^hat  pleases  common  souls  ;  striving
after  something  better.  Self-reform  exacts  the
same  temperament.  A  man  who  thinks  w^ell  of  his
vices,  his  prejudices,  his  superstitions,  his  habits,
his  physical,  mental,  moral  state,  is  in  no  mood  to

AND  ITS  AIMS.  65

begin  to  climb  the  high  ladder  that  reaches  from
the  world  of  his  littleness  to  a  broader  one.  He
had  better  roll  over  in  his  mire,  and  dismiss  Theo-
sophy  with  signs  of  impatience.

Great  results  are  achieved  by  achieving  little
ones  in  turn  ;  great  armies  may  be  beaten  in  detail
by  an  inferior  force ;  constant  dripping  of  little
water-drops  wears  away  the  hardest  rock.  You
and  I  are  so  many  aggregations  of  good  and  bad
qualities.  If  we  wish  to  better  our  characters,  in-
crease our  capabilities,  strengthen  our  will-power,
we  must  begin  with  small  things  and  pass  to  greater
ones.  Friend,  do  you  want  to  control  the  hidden
forces  of  Nature  and  rule  in  her  domain  as  a  kin<7-
consort  ?  Then  begin  with  the  first  pettiness,  the
smallest  flaw  you  can  find  in  yourself,  and  remove
that.  It  may  be  a  mean  vanity,  a  jealousy  of  some
one's  success,  a  strong  predilection  or  a  strong
antipathy  for  some  one  thing,  person,  caste  ;  or  a
supercilious  self-sufficiency  that  prevents  your  form-
ing a  fair  judgment  of  other  men's  countries,  food,
dress,  customs,  or  ideas  ;  or  an  inordinate  fondness
for  something  you  eat,  drink,  or  amuse  yourself
with.  It  matters  not ;  if  it  is  a  blemish,  if  it  stands
in  the  way  of  your  perfect  and  absolute  enfran-
chisement from  the  rule  of  this  sensuous  world,
"  pluck  it  out  and  cast  it  from  thee."  This  done,
you  may  pass  on.

You  understand  now,  do  you  not,  the  meaning
of  the  various  sections  and  degrees  of  our  Theoso-
phical    curriculum  ?     We   welcome    most   heartily

£

66  THE  THEOSOPHICAL  SOCIETY

across  our  threshold  every  man  or  woman,  of  ascer-
tained respectable  character  and  professed  sincerity
of  purpose,  who  wishes  to  study  the  ancient  philo-
sophies. They  are  on  probation.  If  true  The-
osophists  at  bottom,  they  will  show  it  by  deeds  not
words.  If  not,  they  will  soon  go  back  to  their
old  friends  and  surroundings,  apologizing  for  hav-
ino-even  thouMit  of  doing  different  from  themselves.
And  as  one  who  brings  peace-offerings  in  his  hand,
they  will  try  to  do  some  meanness  to  us,  who  only
took  them  at  their  word  and  thought  them  better
than  they  proved  to  be.  I  know  this  is  true,  for
we  have  had  experience — even  in  India.

I  must  here  clear  up  one  point  which  some  pro-
fess to  be  in  doubt  about  after  reading  a  certain
circular  issued  by  our  Society.  That  circular  states
that  for  a  Fellow  to  reach  the  highest  degree  of
our  highest  section,  he  must  have  become  "  freed
from  all  exacting  obligations  to  country,  society,
and  family,"  he  must  adopt  a  life  of  strict  chastity.
I  have  been  asked  whether  no  one  could  become  a
thorough  Theosophist  without  relinquishing  the
marriage  relation.  Now  our  circular  makes  no
such  assertion.  A  man  may  be  a  most  zealous,
useful,  and  respected  Fellow,  and  yet  be  a  patriot,
a  public  official,  and  a  husband.  Our  highest
section  is  composed  of  men  who  have  retired  from
active  life  to  spend  their  remaining  days  in  seclu-
sion, study,  and  spiritual  perfection.  You  have
your  married  priests,  and  your  sanyasis  and  yogis.
So   we   have  our  visible,  active  men,  seen  in  the

AND  ITS  ATAIS.  67

world,  mixed  np  In  its  concerns,  and  a  part  of  it ;
and  we  have  our  unseen,  but  none  the  less  active,
adepts — proficients  in  science,  physical  and  occult
— masters  of  philosophy  and  metaphysics — who
benefit  mankind  without  their  hand  being  ever  so
much  as  suspected.  Though  I  am  ostensibly  Pre-
sident of  the  whole  Theosophical  Society,  yet  I  am
less  than  the  least  of  these  Emancipated  Ones,
and  not  yet  worthy  to  enter  this  highest  section.

It  is  evident  from  the  foregoing  that  there  is
room  in  our  Society  for  all  earnest,  unbigoted
persons  and  groups  of  such  persons  now  working
disunitedly.  Divided,  they  are  comparatively
powerless  to  do  much  ;  united^  they  would  make  a
strength  to  be  felt  by  the  reactionists.  Remember
the  Roman /^j'j'r^i',  my  friends,  and  put  that  emblem
up  over  the  door  of  every  temple.  My  own  country,
the  Great  Republic  of  the  West,  has  this  motto  :
E  Pliiribus  Unuin — one  out  of  many,  one  country
out  of  many  smaller  States.  Just  so  it  might  be
one  National  Samaj  of  Aryavarta,  out  of  a  shoal  of
local  societies.  That  is  the  plan  of  our  Theosophi-
cal Society;  we  have  various  branches,  but  one  cen-
tral guiding  authority,  and  surely  there  are  no
greater  differences  between  you  here  than  there
are  between  the  red,  brown,  black,  yellow  and
white  men  who  call  themselves  Theosophists,  the
w^orld  over.

The  relations  of  a  man  to  his  country  and  his
caste  are,  it  appears  to  me,  quite  distinct  from
his  relations  to  the  study  of  natural  law,  of  philology,

68  THE  THEOSOPHICAL  SOCIETY

of  philosophy,  and  of  esoteric  science.  Your  brown
faces  and  Oriental  costumes  show  me,  even  without
the  fact  that  this  audience  understands  the  language
I  speak,  the  authors  I  cite,  and  the  thoughts  I
utter,  that  education  has  no  caste,  colour,  creed,  or
nativity.  Why,  then,  ask  if  one  must  adopt  a
certain  dress  or  put  himself  in  a  certain  chair,  or
before  a  certain  dish  of  food,  to  study  your  fore-
fathers' philosophy  ?  Here  am  I,  with  a  white  skin,
an  European  dress,  and  a  life-experience  coloured
and  shaped  after  the  notions  of  the  section,  society,
and  class  in  which  my  parents  brought  me  up.
When  I  began  to  ponder  over  this  magnificent
Eastern  philosophy,  I  was  not  told  that  I  must
dress  in  this  way  or  that,  or  refrain  from  doing  this,
that  or  the  other  thing,  not  vitally  injurious, — such  as
the  drinking  of  liquors  and  indulgence  in  sensuality.
I  w^as  simply  shown  the  path,  my  way  was  pointed
out,  and  I  was  left  to  my  own  choice.  Well,  like  all
men  of  the  world,  I  had  certain'  bad  habits,  bad
ways  of  thinking,  foolish  ways  of  living.  I  put  an
inordinate  value  upon  things  really  worthless,
and  undervalued  things  really  important.  I  was
looking  at  things  through  bad  spectacles.  After  a
while,  I  discovered  this  myself,  and,  as  I  was  in
dead  earnest  and  determined  to  succeed  or  die  in
the  attempt,  I  began  to  reform  myself  I  had  been
a  moderate  drinker  of  wines  after  the  Western
fashion ;  I  gave  them  up.  I  had  been  a  frequenter
of  clubs,  theatres,  social  parties,  race-courses,  and
other  places,  wherein  men  of  the  world  vainly  seek

AND  ITS  AIMS.  69

contentment  and  pleasure.  I  gave  them  all  up  ;
not  grudgingly,  not  looking  back  at  them  with
regret,  but  as  one  flings  from  him  some  worthless
plaything  when  its  worthlessness  becomes  known
to  him.  You  will,  perhaps,  pardon  the  employment
of  my  personal  experience  as  the  illustration  of  the
moment,  in  view  of  the  fact  that  it  is  the  only  one
which,  without  breach  of  confidence,  I  can  use  to
answer  the  interrogatory  that  has  been  put  to  me.

If  India  is  to  be  regenerated,  it  must  be  by
Hindus,  who  can  rise  above  their  castes  and  every
other  reactionary  influence,  and  give  good  example
as  well  as  good  advice.  Useless  to  gather  into
Samajes,  and  talk  prettily  of  reform,  and  print
translations  and  commentaries,  if  the  Samajists  are
to  relapse  into  customs  they  abhor  in  their  hearts,
and  observe  ceremonies  that  to  them  are  but  super-
stitions, and  throw  all  their  enlightenment  to  the
dogs.  Useless  for  native  gentlemen  to  sit  at  the
tables  of  Europeans,  in  apparent  cordial  equality,
if  they  have  not  the  moral  courage  to  break  bread
with  them  in  their  own  houses.  Not  of  such  stuff
are  the  saviours  of  nations  made.

But  we  will  pass  on  to  the  next  question.  No
time  can  be  specified  for  the  progress  of  a  Thco-
sophist  from  one  stage  to  another.  Some  would  take
years,  where  others  would  only  require  days,  to  reach
a  given  result.  We  are  asked  if  any  library  will  be
established  by  us  ?  I  hope  and  trust  so.  A  nucleus
already  exists;  which  of  you  will  help  to  build  it  up?
What  rich  native  loves  his  countr)ancn  more  than

70  THE  THEOSOPFIICAL  SOCIETY

money?  Or  is  it  3'our  notion  that  the  Indians
should  do  nothing,  and  the  strangers  all  ?  We  are
willing  to  give  even  our  lives,  if  need  be,  to  this
cause  ;  what  more  will  any  of  you  give  ?

Yes,  there  will  be  social  gatherings  to  discuss  our
congenial  themes.  In  point  of  fact,  there  are  such
already,  for  every  Wednesday  and  Sunday  evening,
since  our  arrival  at  Bombay,  we  have  held  a  sort  of
dttrbar^  or  reception,  at  our  bungalow.  There  we
shall  be  happy  to  see  all — even  spies — who  care  to
see  us,  and  those  who  live  out  of  the  city  can  always
communicate  with  us  by  letter.  Being  people  who
try  to  take  a  practical  view  of  things,  and  dis-
posed to  work  rather  than  talk,  we  have  set  our
minds  to  accomplish  two  things.  We  want  to  per-
suade the  most  learned  native  scholars — such  men,
for  instance,  as  the  distinguished  Sanskrit  Professor
of  Elphinstone  College,  who  occupies  the  chair  of
this  meeting,  and  the  equally  distinguished  Presi-
dent of  the  Pali  and  Sanskrit  College  of  Ceylon,
and  the  eminent  Parsi  scholar,  Mr.  Cama,  who  also
honours  us  with  his  presence — to  translate  into
English  the  most  valuable  portions  of  their  respec-
tive religious  and  scientific  literatures,  so  that  we
may  help  to  circulate  them  in  Western  countries.
At  the  same  time  we  wish  to  aid,  as  best  we  can,
in  the  extension  of  non-sectarian  education  for
native  girls  and  married  women,  which  we  regard
as  the  corner-stone  of  national  greatness,  and  in  the
introduction  of  cheap  and  simple  machines  that  can
be  worked  by  hand  labour  and  that  will   increase

AND  ITS  AIMS.  71

the  comfort  and  prosperity  of  our  adopted  country.
We  have  chosen  this  land  for  our  home,  and  feel  a
desire  to  help  it  and  its  people  in  any  way  practic-
able, however  humble,  without  meddling  with
its  politics,  into  which,  as  American  citizens,
we  have,  as  I  have  remarked,  neither  the  right  nor
inclination  to  intrude.

Let  me,  before  leaving  this  part  of  our  subject,
make  one  point  very  clear.  The  Theosophical
Society  is  no  money-making  body,  nor  has  it  any-
thing to  do,  as  such,  with  financial  affairs.  Its  field
is  religion,  philosophy,  and  science, — not  politics  or
trade.  No  one  connected  with  its  management
receives  a  penny  for  his  services.

And  now,  having  answered,  seriatim,  the  ques-
tions embraced  in  the  list,  I  will  pass  on  to  some
obvious  deductions  that  suggest  themselves,  and
then  conclude.

The  Indian  press  have  remarked  it  as  a  \(tcY
strange  thing  that  Western  people  should  have
come  here  to  learn  instead  of  to'  teach — as  though
there  were  nothing  in  India  worth  the  learning.
This  conveys  a  sad  impression  to  my  mind.  It
makes  me  realize  how  completely  modern  India
ignores  the  achievements  of  ancient  Aryavarta.
It  shows  how  complete  is  the  eclipse  of  Aryan
vv^isdom  when  people  from  the  other  side  of  the  globe
could  know  more  of  the  essence  of  Vedic  philosophy
than  most  of  the  direct  descendants  of  the  Rishis
themselves.  Since  we  landed  on  your  shores  we
have   met   hundreds   of  educated    Hindus,    Parsis,

72  THE  THEOSOPHICAL  SOCIETY

and  men  of  other  sects.  They  have  thronged  our
parlours,  filled  our  compound,  and  gathered  about
us  day  after  day.  Out  of  all  these  we  have  found
few — so  few  that  we  might  almost  reckon  them
upon  the  fingers — who  really  know  what  Aryan,
Zend,  Jain,  and  Buddhistic  philosophies  teach.
There  have  been  scores  able  to  recite  slokas,  and
whole  puranas  and  chapters,  with  accurate  accent
and  rhythm;  but  they  merely  repeated  words  without
understanding :  they  had  not  the  key  to  the
mysteries.  I  have  met  those  who  had  seen  the
marvellous  phenomena  performed  by  ascetics,  and
amply  corroborated  all  the  stories  we  had  heard
and  circulated  through  the  Western  press.  But
scarcely  one  who,  having  known  and  seen  such
thinQs,  had  set  himself  to  work  with  determination
to  learn  the  science  and  explore  the  adytum  of
nature.  In  this  throng  of  visitors  there  was  no  end
of  students  of  Mill,  of  Darwin,  of  Spencer,  of
Huxley,  Tyndall,  Bain,  Schlegel,  Renan,  Burnouf.
Their  minds  were, 'in  some  instances,  whole  arsenals
of  propositions  in  logic,  metaphysics,  mathematics,
and  sophistry — all  the  weapons  which  reason  uses
against  intuition.  They  could  out-wrangle  a  Cam-
bridge double-first,  and

*'  make  the  worse  appear  the  better  reason."

They  had  persuaded  themselves  into  error  against
their  own  inner  consciousness.  We  have  noted,
and  I  repeat  it,  that  a  larger  cluster  of  acute  in-
tellects we  never  encountered  than  this  of  Bombay.
Part  had  become  thorough  materialists.     To  them,

AND  ITS  AIMS,  73

as  to  Balfour  Stewart,  the  Universe  seemed  "a  vast

physical  machine composed  of  atoms,  with

some  sort  of  medium  between  them  as  the  machine."
The  apprehension  of  any  sort  of  a  God  had  died
out,  the  feeling  of  having  in  them  a  soul  had  been
smothered.  With  polite  incredulity  they  have
listened  to  our  tales  of  phenomena  witnessed  by
us,  similar  to  those  described  in  the  biography  of
Sankara  Acharya  and  Sakya  Muni,  sometimes
unable  to  repress  a  smile.  They  seemed  to  come
to  us  more  to  observe  the  lengths  and  depths  to
which  Western  credulity  can  go,  than  to  gather
corroboration  of  the  narratives  contained  in  their
own  sacred  literature.  And,  I  am  sorry  to  say,
some  few,  when  out  of  earshot,  have  made  them-
selves merry  over  our  testimony  to  the  truth  of  the
primitive  philosophies.

Another  class  we  have  met,  with  minds  full  of
misty  speculations  which  prevented  their  having
any  clear  and  defined  views  of  either  of  the  great
questions  of  universal  human  interest.  Drawn
hither  by  the  reveries  of  Swedenborg  and  Davis,  or
thither  by  those  of  Boehmen  and  St.  Martin,  they
had  found  no  sure  ground  upon  which  to  plant
their  feet.

To  us  strangers,  this  has  been  a  most  instructive
study,  and  we  have  tried  to  discover  the  best  means
to  combine  all  this  intellectual  vis^our,  this  learning-,
this  mental  agitation,  upon  one  objective  point.
We  see  in  this  state  of  things  the  promise  of  future
good  results.     Here  is  material  for  a  new  school  of

74  THE  THEOSOPHICAL  ."SOCIETY

Aryan  philosophy  which  only  waits  the  moulding
hand  of  a  master.  We  cannot  yet  hear  his  ap-
proaching footsteps,  but  he  will  come  ;  as  the  man
always  does  come  when  the  hour  of  destiny  strikes.
He  will  come,  not  as  a  disturber  of  the  peace,  but
as  the  expounder  of  principles,  the  instructor  in
philosophy.  He  will  encourage  study,  not  inflame
passion.  He  will  scatter  blessings,  not  sorrow.  So
Zoroaster  came,  so  Goutama,  so  Confucius.  O  for
a  Hindu  great  enough  in  soul,  wise  enough  in
mind,  sublime  enough  in  courage,  to  prepare  the
way  for  the  coming  of  this  needed  Regenerator  !  O
for  one  Indian  of  so  grand  a  mould  that  his  appeals
to  his  countrymen  would  fire  every  heart  with  a
noble  emulation  to  revive  the  glories  of  that  by-
gone time,  when  India  poured  out  her  people  into
the  empty  lap  of  the  West,  and  gave  the  arts  and
sciences,  and  even  language  itself,  to  the  outside
world  !  Are  her  sons  all  sunken  in  selfishness  and
the  soft  ooze  of  little  things?  Has  their  scramble
for  meagre  patronage  deadened  the  noble  pride  of
race,  and  replaced  it  with  an  obsequious  humility
tinged  with  unreasonable  hate  ?  Can  they  not  for-
give their  fellow-countrymen  for  wearing  a  different
style  of  turban  and  having  a  different  line  of  an-
cestors? Is  the  love  of  caste  so  passionate  and
deep  as  to  make  an  object  of  righteous  hatred
every  one  not  in  their  own  social  circle  ?  Ah,
young  men  of  promise,  beloved  brothers  and  com-
panions, objects  of  our  solicitude  and  hopes,  to  see
and   dwell   among  whom  wc   have   crossed    three

AND  ITS  AIMS.  75

oceans  and  threaded  two  seas,  be  Indians /"/'j-^,  and
caste  men  afterwards  if  you  will.     Is  there  not  one
of  you  to  send  the  electric  spark  through  this  inert
mass  and  make  it  quiver  with  emotion  ?     Here  lies
a  mighty  nation,  like  a  giant  benumbed  with  sloth,
and  no  one  to  arouse  its  potential  energies.     Here
lavish   Nature  has  provided  exhaustless   resources,
that  combined  talent  and  applied  knowledge  would
turn    into    fabulous    national    wealth.     Here    rich
mines,  a  fat  soil,  navigable  waters,  forests  of  valu-
able timber,  a  multiplicity  of  natural  products  that
might  be  manufactured  at  home  into  portable  and
profitable  articles  of  commerce.     All  that  is  lacking
is   a  share  of  that  energy  and  foresight  which,  in
two  centuries  and    a  half,   have   transformed    the
United   States   from   a  howling  wilderness   into  a
scene  of  busy   prosperity.     In  vain  the  efforts  of
statesmanship  to  spread  the  blessings  of  education
and  promote  the  industrial    arts,  if  they   are   not
seconded  by  the  patriotic  endeavours  of  enlightened
Young    India.      Are    these    great    Colleges    and
Universities  founded  for  the  sole  purpose  of  turn-
ing  out   placemen   and  dreamers?     Have  schools
been  opened  only  to  help  to  hatch  debating  societies
and  metaphysical  training-clubs,  where  minds  that
should    be  directing  great    economical   enterprises
are  engaged  in  splitting  hairs,  and  voting  whether
-love  is   an  essence  and  man  a  molecule  ?     I  have
observed  with  deep  regret  that  there  is  among  the
youth   of  Bombay  an   eager  desire  for  the  empty
honours  of  University  degrees,  and  no  disposition

76  THE  THEOSOPHICAL  SOCIETY

to  fit  themselves  for  the  management  of  practical
affairs.  There  are  far  too  many  native  barristers
and  doctors,  and  far  too  few  qualified  superinten-
dents of  mills  and  manufactories,  geologists,  metal-
lurgists and  engineers.  There  are  LL.B.'s  in
plenty,  but  of  educated  carpenters,  millers,  sugar-
makers,  and  paper-manufacturers,  none,  or  next  to
none.  The  great  and  crying  want  of  modern  India
to-day  is  a  scientific  school  attached  to  every
College,  such  as  we  have  in  America,  and  in  each
great  centre  of  population  a  school  of  Technology,
with  appropriate  machinery,  where  the  most  im-
proved methods  of  the  principal  handicrafts  could
be  taught  to  intelligent  lads.

Do  not  imagine  that  I  have  the  idle  notion  that
India  can  be  reformed  in  a  day.  This  once  enlight-
ened, monotheistic  and  active  people  have  de-
scended, step  by  step,  in  the  course  of  many  cen-
turies, from  the  level  of  Aryan  activity  to  that  of
idolatrous  lethargy  and  fatalism.  It  will  be  the
work  not  of  years  but  of  generations  to  re-ascend
the  steps  of  national  greatness.  But  there  must  be
a  beginning.  Those  sons  of  Hindustan  who  are
disposed  to  act  rather  than  preach  cannot  commence
a  day  too  soon.  This  /loiir  the  country  needs  your
help.  Leave  your  molecules  to  themselves  ;  put
away  for  a  time  your  speculations  upon  the  descent
of  species,  cease  vain  endeavours  to  count  the
number  of  times  an  atom  may  be  split  in  halves,
and  go  to  work  in  earnest  to  help  yourselves  and
your  Motherland.     The  atoms  in  space  will  evolve

Ah'D  ITS  ALMS.  77

new   worlds  without  you  ;  your  cotuitry  is    growing
weaker  and  poorer  every  day,  and  wants  you.

But  you  lack  capital,  you  say.  Then  unite  into
clubs  and  committees  to  find  out  where  capital  can
be  profitably  employed,  and  spread  the  facts  before
the  Western  nations.  In  London  alone  there  is
lying,  in  bank  vaults,  idle  capital  enough  to
set  every  possible  Indian  industry  on  its  feet.
Those  acute  and  daring  English  merchants  and
capitalists  ransack  the  world  in  search  of  oppor-
tunities to  earn  interest  on  their  surplus  incomes.
Turkish  bonds,  Peruvian  railways,  Egyptian  consols,
Bohemian  glassworks,  American  schemes,  are  all
tried  in  this  hope  of  profit.  What  does  Europe  or
America  know — really  know — of  Indian  resources,
trade,  customs,  business  opportunities  ?  A  mere
handful  of  bankers  and  traders  have  only  such  facts
as  lie  upon  the  surface  of  this  unworked  national
mine.  A  few  military  officers  and  civil  servants
may  have  published  the  records  of  their  casual  ob-
servations. But,  in  comparison  with  what  ought  to
be  known,  and  might  be  made  known  under  a  proper
system  of  general  and  sub-committees,  this  is  as  a
mere  drop  in  the  bucket.  As  to  my  own  country,
which  would  gladly  exchange  commodities  with
India  as  with  any  other  nation,  I  can  speak  by  the
book.  For  my  people,  this  land  is  but  a  geogra-
phical abstraction,  whose  capes,  rivers,  and  chief  cities
are  known  by  name  to  the  schoolboy,  and  straight-
way forgotten,  for  lack  of  subsequent  reminders.
And   yet  I   hear  my   native   brothers  complain    of

78  THE  THEOSOPHICAL  SOCIETY

poverty.  I  hear  of  thousands  of  stahvart  labourers
dying  of  hunger  for  want  of  employment  at  three
pice  per  day.  I  see  Indian  gums,  fibres,  seeds  and
grains,  going  abroad  in  the  raw  state,  and  coming
back  manufactured,  to  be  sold  to  natives  at  large
profit.  I  see  men, as  well-educated, as  strong-minded,
as  capable  to  succeed  in  independent  business,  as  any
young  men  in  New  York,  or  London,  or  Berlin,  de-
meaning themselves  to  throng  the  ante-rooms  of
public  officials  in  search  of  employment,  and  ready
to  fall  upon  each  other's  faces  for  the  sake  of  miser-
able little  clerkships.  This  is  what  we  behold,  at
even  a  first  glance,  in  the  country  of  our  adoption.

I  will  make  no  apology  for  my  plain  speech,  for
I  come  from  a  practical  country,  where  we  have  learnt
that  smooth  speeches  and  culture  and  true  friendship
do  not  always  go  together.  There  is  too  much  talk
here  and  too  little  enterprise;  too  much  suavity  and
not  enough  available  perseverance.  There  is  unmea-
sured ability  to  suffer  and  endure,  but  not  the  master
spirit  which  laughs  at  trouble,  and  rushes  to  meet
adversity  with  the  joy  of  the  athlete  who  hails  the
coming  of  his  adversary  as  the  opportunity,  long
sought,  to  show  his  prowess.

Cast  your  eye  over  the  Western  world  and  see
what  an  intense  activity  pervades  the  whole  scene.
Let  the  picture  unroll  like  a  great  panorama  before
you.  Behold  the  struggles  of  all  those  nations  not
only  to  extend  commerce,  but  also  to  settle  the
weightier  problem  of  religious  truth.  See  Christi-
anity in  America  broken  up  into  innumerable  sects,

AND  ITS  AIMS.  79

and  Science  leading  the  public  far  away  from  the
Church  into  the  dry  pastures  of  Materialism  and
Nihilism.  See  the  clergy  being  stripped  of  the
last  shreds  of  their  influence  and  the  free  secular
press  attaining  predominant  sway.  Look  at  Great
Britain  agitating  the  question  of  disestablishment,
the  Catholics  emancipated  from  the  incubus  of  the
Irish  National  Church,  and  Bradlaugh  preaching
bold  atheism  in  London,  Sunday  after  Sunday.  In
France,  behold  the  revolution  in  politics  that  has
passed  the  reins  of  power  Into  Republican  hands,
and  flung  out  the  Jesuits  from  their  cosy  nest  behind
MacMahon's  chair.  In  Germany,  open  rupture  w^Ith
the  Pope,  and  the  abolishment  of  Ecclesiastical  privi-
leges. In  Russia,  the  red  spectre  of  the  Nihilist
Party,  menacing  both  Church  and  State.  Every-
where, as  it  were,  the  boiling  and  seething  of  a  vast
cauldron — the  conflict  between  Theology  and
Science.

This  conflict,  so  eloquently  described  by  Professor
John  William  Draper,  began  with  the  discovery  of
the  printer's  art,  and  its  progress  has  been  marked
by  a  thousand  victories  for  science.  Born  out  of
the  womb  of  the  Reformation,  she  has  proved  the
benefactress  of  humanity  by  facilitating  interna-
tional intercourse,  developing  national  resources,
surrounding  mankind  with  a  multitude  of  comforts
and  refinements,  and  bringing  education  within  the
reach  of  the  humblest  labourer.  Like  other  great
Oriental  countries,  India  has  not  hitherto  availed
itself  of   these    material    advantages.     The   fault

So  THE  THEOSOPHICAL  SOCIETY

does  not  lie  with  the  masses,  for  they  know
nothing  of  all  that  has  been  going  on  in
the  busy  world.  It  lies  at  the  door  of  the  edu-
cated class  I  have  heretofore  described.  And  yon
are  the  very  men  !  Yon  have  run  through  the  cur-
ricula of  science  and  literature,  and  made  no  practical
application  of  your  acquired  knowledge.  The  sen-
tries of  this  sleeping  nation  neglect  their  duty.

But  as  the  unrestful  ocean  has  its  flux  and  reflux,
so  all  throughout  Nature  the  law  of  periodicity  as-
serts itself  Nations  come  and  go,  slumber  and  re-
awaken. Inactivity  is  of  necessity  limited.  The
soul  of  Aryavarta  keeps  vigil  within  the  dormant
body.  Again  will  her  splendour  shine.  Her
prosperity  will  be  restored.  Her  primitive  philo-
sophy will  once  more  be  interpreted,  and  it  will  teach
both  religion  and  science  to  an  eager  world.  Her
ancient  literature,  though  now  hidden  away  from  the
quest  of  an  unsympathetic  West,  is  not  buried  be-
yond revival.  The  hoof  of  Time,  which  has  stamped
into  dust  the  vestiges  of  many  a  nation,  has  not
obliterated  those  treasures  of  human  thought  and
human  inspiration.  The  youth  of  India  will  shake
off  their  sloth,  and  be  worthy  of  their  sires.  From
every  ruined  temple,  from  every  sculptured  corri-
dor cut  in  the  heart  of  the  mountains,  from  every
secret  viJiara  where  the  custodians  of  the  Sacred
Science  keep  alive  the  torch  of  primitive  wisdom,
comes  a  whispering  voice  which  says  :  "Children,
your  Mother  is  not  dead,  but  only  sleepeth  !  "

THE  COMMON   FOUNDATION  OF
ALL  RELIGIONS.*

Religion,  according  to  Mr.  Herbert  Spencer,  is
"  a  great  (I  should  say  the  greatest)  reahty  and  a
great  truth— nothing  less  than  an  essential  and
indestructible  element  of  human  nature."  He
holds  that  the  religious  institutions  of  the  world
represent  a  genuine  and  universal  feeling  in  the
race,  just  as  really  as  any  other  institutions.  The
accessory  superstitions  which  have  overgrown  and
perverted  the  religious  sentiment  must  not  be  con-
founded with  the  religious  sentiment  itself.  That
this  should  be  done  is  a  mischievous  mistake,  alike  of
religionists  and  anti-religionists.  Science,  in  clear-
ing away  these  excrescences,  brings  us  always
nearer  the  underlying  truth,  and  is  therefore  the
handmaid  and  friend  of  true  religion.  The  sub-
stratum of  truth  is  the  one  broad  plateau  of  rock
upon  which  the  world's  theological  superstructures
are  reared.  It  is — as  the  title  of  our  lecture  puts
it — "  the  common  foundation  of  all  religions."
And  now  what  is  it  ?     What  is  this  rock  ?     It  is

*  A  Lecture  delivered  at  the  Patchiappah's  Hall,  Madras,

26th  April,  1882.
F

82  THE  COMMON  FOUNDATION-

AL conglomerate,  having  more  than  one  element  In  its
composition.  In  the  first  place,  of  necessity,  there  is
the  idea  of  a  part  of  man's  nature  which  is  non-
physical;  next,  the  idea  of  a  post-mortem  continua-
tion of  this  non-physical  part;  third,  that  of  the  ex-
istence of  an  Infinite  Principle  underlying  all  phe-
nomena; fourth,  a  certain  relationship  between  this
Infinite  Principle  and  the  Individual  man.

The  evolution  of  the  grander  from  the  lower
Intellectual  conception  in  this  graded  sequence  is
now  conceded,  alike  by  the  scientist  and  the  theo-
logian. This  evolution  is  accompanied  by  an
elimination  ;  for  in  religion,  as  In  all  other  depart-
ments of  thought,  the  light  cannot  be  seen  until  the
clouds  are  cleared  away.  Primitive  truth  is  the
light,  theologies  are  the  clouds;  and  they  are  clouds
still,  though  they  glitter  with  all  the  hues  of  the
spectrum.  Fetish  worship,  animal  worship,  hero
worship,  ancestor  worship,  nature  worship,  book
worship  ;  polytheism,  monotheism,  theism,  deism,
atheism,  materialism  (which  includes  positivism),
agnosticism  ;  the  blind  adoration  of  the  Idol,  the
blind  adoration  of  the  crucible — these  are  the
alpha  and  omega  of  human  religious  thought,  the
measure  of  relative  spiritual  blindness.

All  these  conceptions  have  passed  through  a
distorting  prism — the  human  mind  ;  and  that  Is  why
they  are  so  Imperfect,  so  incongruous,  so  human.  A
man  can  never  see  the  whole  light  by  looking  from
inside  his  body  outward,  any  more  than  one  can
see  the  clear  daylight  through  a  dust-soiled  window-

OF  ALL  RELLGLONS.  S3

glass,  or  the  stars  through  a  smeared  reflecting  lens.
Why?  Because  the  physical  senses  are  adapted  only
to  the  things  of  a  physical  world,  and  religion  is  a
transcendentalism.  Religious  truth  is  not  a  thing
for  physical  observation,  but  one  for  psychical
intuition.  One  who  has  not  developed  this
psychical  power  can  never  kno7.v  religion  as  a
fact  ;  he  can  only  accept  it  as  a  creed,  or  paint  it
to  himself  as  an  emotional  sentimentality.  Bigotry
is  the  brand  to  put  upon  one;  Dilettantism  that  for
the  other.  Behind  both,  and  equally  challenging
both,  stands  Scepticism.

Man's  religion,  like  himself,  has  its  ages.  First,
proclamation,  propagandism,  martyrdom  ;  second,
conquest,  faith  ;  tJiird,  neglect,  stagnation  ;  fourth,
decadence,  tenacious  formalism  ;  fifth,  hypocrisy ;
sixtJi,  compromise ;  seventh,  decay  and  extinction.
And,  like  the  human  race,  no  religion  passes  as  a
whole  through  these  stages  seriatim.  At  this  very
day,  we  see  the  Australian  sunk  in  the  depths  of
animalism,  the  American  Red  Indian  just  emerging
from  the  Stone  Age,  the  European  in  the  full  flush
of  high  material  civilization.  And  so,  a  glance  at
religious  history  shows  us  the  cropping  up  of  highly
heretical  schools  and  sects  in  every  great  religion,  of
which  each  represents  some  special  departure  from
primitive  orthodoxy,  some  separate  advance  along
the  road  towards  the  final  p:oal  that  we  have
sketched  out.  And  I  also  note,  as  the  physician
observes  the  symptoms  of  his  patient,  that  history
constantly  affords,  in   the  bitter  mutual  hatreds  of

84  THE  COMMON  FOUNDATION

thcse-cliques  and  sects  for  each  other,  the  clearest
proof  that  our  conckision  is  correct,  when  we  say — as
we  said  just  now — that  Rehgion  can  never  be  really
known  by  the  physical  brain  of  the  physical  man.
All  these  hatreds,  bitternesses,  and  cruel  reprisals  of
sect  for  sect,  and  world's  faith  for  world's  faith,
show  that  men  mistake  non-essentials  for  essen-
tials, illusions  for  realities.

We  can  test  this  statement  very  easily.  Look
away  from  this  war  of  theologians  to  the  class  of
men  who  have  developed  their  psychical  powers,  and
what  do  you  see  ?  In  place  of  strife,  peace,  agree-
ment, mutual  tolerance,  brotherly  concord  as  to
the  fundamentals  of  religion.  Whatever  their
exoteric  creed,  they  are  greater  than  and  far  above
it,  and  their  innate  holiness  and  gentleness  of
nature  give  life  and  strength  to  the  church  they
represent;  they  are  the  flowers  of  the  human  tree,
the  brothers  of  all  mankind  ;  for  they  know  what
is  the  lid^t  that  shines  behind  the  clouds  ;  under  the
foundations  of  all  the  churches  they  sec  the  same
rock.  I  ask  those  of  you  who  wish  to  be  con-
\  inced  of  this  fact  to  read  the  Dabistan,  or  School  of
Manners,  by  Mohsan  Fani,  who  records  in  it  his  ob-
servations of  the  sadhus  of  twelve  different  religions,
two  centuries  ago.  "Granting  all  the  premises,"  the
modern  sceptic  will  say,  "can  you  prove  to  me
that  science  has  not  swept  away  all  your  religious
hypotheses  along  with  the  myths,  legends,  super-
stitions, and  other  lumber  ?"  Well,  I  answer,  "  yes."
It  is  exactly  on  that  datum  line  that  the  Theoso-

OF  ALL  RRLLGLONS.  85

phical  Society  Is  building  Itself  up.  Some  people
think  us  opponents  of  science,  but,  on  the  contrary,
we  are  its  warmest  advocates — until  it  begins  to
dogmatize  from  incomplete  known  data  upon  new
facts.  When  it  reaches  that  point  we  challenge  it
and  oppose  it  with  all  our  strength,  such  as  It  may  be,
just  as  we  fight  the  dogmatism  of  theology.  For,
to  our  mind,  it  matters  not  whether  you  blindly
worship  a  fetish,  a  man,  a  book,  or  a  crucible, — It  is
blind  idolatry  all  the  same  ;  and  science  can  be,
and  has  been,  as  cruel  and  remorseless  in  her  way
as  the  Church  ever  was  in  hers.

The  first  step  Is  to  have  an  agreement  as  to  what
the  word  "  science "  means.  I  take  it  to  be  the
collection  and  arrangement  of  observed  facts  about
Nature.  If  that  is  correct,  then  I  protest  against
half  measures ;  I  want  those  observations  to  be
complete,  to  cover  all  Nature,  not  the  half  of  it.
What  sort  of  an  ontology  would  that  be  which,  while
pretending  to  Investigate  the  laws  of  our  being,
took  note  only  of  our  anatomy,  physiology,  and
whatever  relates  to  the  physical  frame  of  man,
leaving  out  all  that  concerns  his  mental  function  ?
Absurd  !  you  would  say ;  but  I  ask  you  whether  it
is  any  more  absurd  to  study  man  In  his  body  with-
out the  mind,  than  to  study  him  In  body  and  mind
while  ignoring  the  trans-corporeal  manifestations
of  his  middle  nature  ?  You  want  me  to  define  what
I  mean  by  this  "  middle  nature  "  and  by  its  "  trans-
cor.poreal  manifestations."  I  will  do  so.  I  start,
then,  with  the  proposition  that  there  is  more  of  a

86  TFIE  COMMON  FOUNDATION

man  than  can  be  burnt  with  fire,  eaten  by  tigers,
drowned  by  water,  chopped  to  pieces  with  knives,
or  rotted  in  the  ground.  The  materiahst  will  deny
this,  but  it  matters  not ;  the  proposition  can  be
proved  as  easily  as  that  he  is  a  man.  They  have
in  Europe  a  science  which  they  call  psychology —
a  misnomer  ;  for  it  is  another  kind  of  ology ; — but  we
will  not  quarrel  about  words.  Well,  when  you  come
to  analyse  the  Western  idea  that  underlies  this
term  of  psychology,  you  will  discover  that  it
relates  only  to  the  normal  and  abnormal  intellectual
manifestations  of  the  brain.  One  class  of  scientists
— especially  among  the  alienists,  or  students  of
insanity — maintain  that  mind  is  a  function  of  the
grey  vesicles  of  the  lobes  of  the  brain  ;  injure  the
brain  by  any  one  of  a  dozen  accidents,  and  sensation
is  cut  off,  thought  ceases,  mind  is  destroyed,  the
thinking,  hence  responsible,  entity  is  extinguished.
All  that  is  left  is  carrion,  and  out  of  this  carrion,
before  the  accident,  sprang  by  magneto-electric
energy  that  which  distinguishes  man  from  the  lowest
animal,  as  the  lotos  springs  from  slimy  mud.  The
opposed  party  affirm  that  the  brain  is  the  organ  of  the
mind,  the  machine  of  its  manifestation,  and  that  the
thinking  something  in  man  thinks  still,  and  still  ex-
ists, even  though  the  brain  be  shattered,  even  though
the  man  die.  The  one  reflects  the  tone  of  material-
ist science,  the  other  the  tone  of  the  Christian
Churches  and  of  the  two  crores  *  of  so-called  modern
spiritualists.      The  materialists  regard  man   as  an

*  An  Indian  numeral—ten  millions.

OF  ALL  RELIGIONS.  87

unity,  a  thinking  machine  ;  the  others  regard  him
as  a  duahty,  a  compound  of  body  and  soul.  There
is  no  ground  for  a  "  middle  nature "  in  either  of
these  schools.  True,  here  and  there,  you  will  find
some  casual  allusion  to  a  third  and  higher  principle
— the  "spirit," — as,  for  instance,  in  the  Christian
New  Testament  (i  Thessalonians,  v.  23),  where
Paul  says,  "  I  pray  God  your  whole  spirit  and  soul
and  body  be  preserved  blameless  unto  the  coming
of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ," — an  expression  which,
however  sound  as  theology,  is  extremely  loose  and
heterodox  as  science.  But  the  whole  drift  of
Christian  teaching,  and  of  teaching  through  or  by
mediums,  favours  the  duality  theory;  the  body  dead,
second  principle  enters  on  a  new  career  of  its  own,
until  it  attains  to  a  postulated  sjunmiun  bonitin  or
sumnimn  maluni  state.  Now,  experienced  observers
of  the  phenomena  of  mediums  have  seen  many
animated  figures,  or  more  or  less  substantial
apparitions  of  deceased  persons,  and  these  they
regard  as  returning  souls  revisiting  the  land  of
the  living.  They  have  no  idea  of  this  middle
nature.  But  the  Hindu  philosophers  make  a  far
deeper  analysis  of  man.  Instead  of  a  single  part,
or  a  duality,  they  affirm  that  there  are  no  fewer
than  seven  well-defined  principles  or  groups  which
go  to  make  up  a  human  being.     These  are : —

(i.)  The  Material  body — Sthulasarira  ;

(2.)  The  Life  Principle — Jiva  ;

(3.)  The  Astral  body — Lingasarira  ;

8S  THE  COMMON  FOUNDATION

(4.)    The  Kaviantpa   (will,    desire),  resulting  as
the  "  Double  " — Alayavintpa  ;

(5.)  The  Physical  Intelligence  (or  Animal  Soul)
— Manas  ;

(6.)  The  Spiritual  Intelligence — Biiddhi  ;

(7.)  The  Divine  Spirit — Atnia.

And  so  minute  is  their  analysis,  each  of  these  prin-
ciples Is  subdivided  into  seven  sub-groups.  Generall}^
speaking,  the  first,  fourth,  and  seventh  principles
mark  the  boundaries  of  the  tripartite  or  trinitarian
man.  And  the  fourth,  which  just  comes  mid-way  be-
tween the  gross  body  {Sthuiasanra)  and  t\\(iAt7na,o\-
divine  and  eternal  principle,  Is  this  middle  nature
of  which  we  have  been  In  search.  Now  the  next  ques-
tion to  be  asked  us  is  whetherthis  fourth  principle,  re-
sulting as  JMayavirupa^  or  the  human  "  double,"  Is
Intelligent  or  non-intelligent,  matter  orspirit;  and  the
next,  whether  Its  existence  can  be  scientifically  ac-
counted for  and  proved.  We  will  take  them  in  order.
In  itself  the  living  man's  double  is  either  a  vapour,  a
mist,  or  a  solid  form,  according  to  Its  relative  state
of  condensation.  Given  outside  the  body  one  set  of
atmospheric,  electric,  magnetic,  telluric,  and  other
conditions,  this  form  may  be  invisible,  yet  capable
of  making  sounds,  or  manifesting  other  signs
of  its  presence ;  given  another  set  of  conditions,
It  may  be  visible,  but  as  a  misty  vapour  ;  given
a  third  set,  it  may  be  condensed  into  per-
fect visibility,  and  even  tangibility.  Volumes
upon    volumes    might    be    filled  with    bare    para-

OF  ALL  RELIGIONS.      ■  89

graph  extracts  of  recorded  instances  of  these
apparitional  visits.  Sometimes  the  form  manifests
inteUigence,  it  speaks  ;  sometimes  it  can  only  show
itself.  I  am  now  speaking  of  the  apparitions  of
dead  persons.  I  have  myself  seen  more  than
five  hundred  such  apparitions  in  America,  where
hundreds  more  saw  them,  and  have  recorded  my  ex-
periences in  the  form  of  a  book,  which  was  gener-
ously praised  by  some  of  the  scientists  of  Europe  as  a
careful  record  of  scientifically  accurate  observations.*
I  only  mention  it  to  satisfy  you  that  this  is  no
question  of  hallucination  or  unsupported  statements.
Well,  then,  we  have  here  the  middle  nature  of  man
acting  outside  of  and  after  the  death  of  the  plwsical
body  ;  though  for  my  part — being  a  believer  in
Asiatic  psychology — I  do  not  believe  that  these
post~inortein  apparitions  are  the  very  man  himself
— the  thinking,  responsible  Ego.  They  are,  I  con-
ceive, but  the  vapoury  image  of  the  deceased —
matter  energized  by  a  residuum  of  the  vital  force
which  is  still  entangled  in  the  lingering  molecules.
Some  call  them  "  elementaries  ;  "  others,  "  shells."
They  are  the  undispersed  phantasms  of  the  dead,
the  apparitional  forms  of  human  beings  in  transit
between  the  states  of  full  objectivity  and  full  sub-
jectivity— 2>.,  between  life  in  this  world  and  life
in  "  Devachan."  But  to  prove  our  proposition
we  must  first  show  that  this  middle  principle,
this  Mayavintpa  or  double,  can  be  separated
from  the  living  body  at  will,  projected  to  a
"*  "  People  from  the  Olhev  World."      New  York,   1S75.

90  THE  COMMON  FOUNDATION

distance,  and  animated  by  the  full  consciousness
of  the  man.  We  have  two  means  of  proving
this — (i)  in  the  concurrent  testimony  of  eye-wit-
nesses as  recorded  in  the  Hterature  of  different
races  ;  and  (2)  in  the  evidence  of  Hving  witnesses.
In  the  Hindu  rehgious  and  philosophical  works
there  are  many  such  testimonies.  Not  to  men-
tion others,  we  may  cite  the  famous  case  of
Sankaracharya,  who  entranced  his  body,  left  it  in
the  custody  of  his  disciples,  entered  the  body  of  a
Rajah  just  deceased,  and  lived  in  it  for  a  number
of  weeks  ;  and  that  of  Agastya,  who  appeared  in
the  heat  of  the  battle  between  Rama  and  Ravana,
while  his  body  was  entranced  in  the  Neilgherries.
This  story  is  given  in  the  Raviayana.  In  Patan-
jali's  Yoga  Sutras  this  phenomenon  is  affirmed  to
be  within  the  power  of  every  Siddha  who  perfects
himself  in  Yoga.  As  to  living  witnesses,  I  am  one
myself,  for  I  have  seen  the  doubles  of  several  men
acting  intelligently  at  great  distances  from  their
bodies,  and  in  this  pamphlet  that  I  hold  in  my  hand,"^
will  be  found  the  certificates  of  no  less  than  nine
reputable  persons — five  Hindus  and  four  Euro-
peans— that  they  have  seen  such  appearances,  on
various  occasions,  within  the  past  two  years.  And
then  we  have  scores  of  similar  attestations  from
credible  persons  living  in  different  parts  of  the
world,  which  are  to  be  read  in  many  European
books  treating  upon  these  subjects.  I  do  not  pre-
tend to  say  that  a  sceptical  public  can  be  expecte

*  "  Hints  on  Esoteric  Theosophy."     By  a  Member  of  the  Theoso
phical  Society.

d

V

OF  ALL  RELIGIONS.  91

to  take  this  mass  of  evidence,  conclusive  as  It  ma}/
be,  without  reserve  ;  the  alleged  phenomenon  so
surpasses  ordinary  human  experience  that  to  believe
its  reality  each  one  must  see  for  himself  I,  how-
ever, do  affirm  that  we  have  here  2.  prima  facia  case
of  probable  verity  made  out ;  for,  under  the  strictest
canons  of  scientific  orthodoxy,  we  cannot  suspect
a  conspiracy  to  exist  among  so  many  individual
witnesses,  who  never  saw  or  heard  of  each  other,
who,  in  fact,  did  not  even  live  In  the  same  generation,
but  whose  testimonies  are  yet  mutually  corrobora-
tive.

But  if  we  have  a  case  of  probable  truth,  the  man
of  science  will  ask  us  what  we  next  demand  of  him.
Do  we  allege  a  natural  and  scientific,  or  a  super-
natural, hence  unscientific,  explanation  for  the  pro-
jection of  the  double  of  the  living,  and  the  appari-
tion of  that  of  the  deceased  man  ?  I  answer,  most
assuredly,  the  former.  I  am  devotee  enough  of
science  to  deny,  with  all  the  emphasis  I  can  give
to  words,  the  fact  that  a  miraculous  phenomenon
ever  took  place,  in  this  or  any  age.  Whatever
has  occurred  must  have  taken  place  within  the
operation  of  natural  law.  To  suppose  otherwise
would  be  equivalent  to  saying  that  there  is  no
permanency  in  the  laws  of  the  universe,  that
they  can  be  set  aside  and  played  with  at  the  caprice
of  an  irresponsible  and  meddlesome  Power.  We
should  be  in  a  universe  going  by  jerks,  started  and
stopped  like  a  clock  that  a  child  is  playing  with
This  supernaturalism  is  the  curse  of  all  creeds,  it

92  THE  COMMON  FOUNDATION

hangs  like  an  Incubus  around  the  neck  of  the  re-
ligious, and  hatches  the  satire  of  the  sceptic  :  it  is
the  dry-rot  that  eats  out  the  heart  of  any  faith  that
builds  upon  it.  This  it  is  which,  carried  in  the
body  of  a  church,  foredooms  it  to  ultimate  destruc-
tion, as  surely  as  the  hidden  cancer  carried  in  the
human  system  will  one  day  kill  it.  And  of  all
epochs  this  nineteenth  century  is  the  worst  in  which
to  come  before  the  public  as  the  champions  of  super-
natural religions.  They  are  going  down  in  every
land,  melting  before  the  laboratory  fires  like  waxen
images.  No,  when  I  stand  forth  as  the  defender
of  Hinduism,  Buddhism  or  Zoroastrianism,  I  wish
it  to  be  understood  that  I  do  not  claim  any  respect
or  tolerance  for  them  outside  the  limits  of  natural
law.  I  believe — nay  I  kiiozu — that  their  foundation
is  a  scientific  one,  and  on  those  conditions  they
inust  stand  or  fall,  so  far  as  I  am  concerned.  I  do
not  say  they  are  in  equally  close  reconciliation  with
science,  but  I  do  say  that  whatever  foundation  they
have,  whether  broad  or  narrow,  long  or  short,  is
and  must  be  a  scientific  one.  And  so,  too,  when  I
ask  you  to  cease  from  making  yourselves  ridiculous
by  denying  the  existence  of  this  middle  nature  in
man,  it  is  because  I  am  persuaded,  as  the  result  of
much  reading  and  a  good  deal  of  personal  experi-
ence, that  the  double,  or  Mayavirupa,  is  a  scientific
fact.

Well,  then,  to  return — is  it  matter  or  something-
else  ?  I  say  familiar  matter  plus  something  else.
And  here  stop  a  moment  to  think  what  matter  is.

OF  ALL  RELLGIONS.  93

Loose  thinkers — among  whom  we  must  class  raw
lads  fresh  from  college,  with  whatever  number  of
degrees — are  too  apt  to  associate  the  idea  of  matter
with  the  properties  of  density,  visibility,  and  tangi-
bility. But  this  is  very  inexcusable.  The  air  we
breathe  is  invisible,  yet  matter, — its  equivalents  of
oxygen,  hydrogen,  nitrogen  and  carbonic  acid
are  each  atomic,  ponderable,  demonstrable,  by
analysis.  Electricity  cannot,  except  under  prepared
conditions,  be  seen  ;  yet  it  is  matter.  The  universal
ether  of  science  no  one  ever  saw ;  yet  it  is  matter
in  a  state  of  extreme  tenuity.  Take  the  familiar
example  of  forms  of  water,  and  see  how  they
rapidly  run  up  the  scale  of  tenuity  until  they  elude
the  clutch  of  science  :  stone-hard  ice,  melted  ice,
condensed  steam,  superheated  and  invisible  steam,
electricity,  and — it  is  gone  out  of  the  world  of  effects
into  the  ^vorld  of  causes  !

Well,  then,  with  this  warning  before  you,  my
cerebrally  superheated  young  friend  of  Madras
University,  pray  do  not  contradict  me  when  I  say
that  the  Hindu  philosophy  of  man  fits  in  with  the
lines  of  modern  science  much  more  snugly  than  that
of  either  the  supernaturalism  of  the  Christian  or  the
materialism  of  the  man  of  science.  As  we  have  seen
the  successive  forms  of  water  running  up  into  the  in-
visible world,  so,  here,  esoteric  Hindu  philosophy
gives  us  a  graduated  series  of  molecular  arrange-
ments in  the  human  economy,  at  one  end  of  which
is  the  concrete  mass  of  the  Sthulasarira^  at  the
other  that  last  sublimation  called  Atnid^  or  spirit.

94  TFIE  COMMON  FOUNDATION

"  But  how  can  all  these  exist  together  in  one  com-
bination ?  is  a  man  like  a  nest  of  boxes  or  baskets
fitted  into  each  other,  or  do  you  mean  to  advance
the  scientific  absurdity  that  two  things  can  simulta-
neously occupy  the  same  space  ?  "  This  is  a  side
question  provoked  by  the  main  one,  but  we  must
dispose  of  it  first  I  will  say,  then,  that,  as  the
thing  has  been  explained  to  me,  each  of  these
several  sets  of  atoms  which  compose  the  seven
parts  of  man,  occupy  the  interstitial  spaces  between
the  next  coarser  set  of  atoms.  The  more  ethereal
elements  in  man  are  focalized  as  to  their  several
energies  in  what  the  Hindus  call  the  Shadachak-
rams,  or  the  six  centres  of  vital  force,  crowned
by  Sahasralam,  in  which  is  located  the  higher
consciousness.  This  supreme  point  is  in  the  crown
of  the  head  :  the  others  are  located  at  the  spleen,
the  umbilicus,  the  heart,  the  root  of  the  throat,
and  the  centre  of  the  frontal  sinus.  The  atoms
of  the  BiiddJii  would  then  pervade  the  interstices
of  the  lianas  ;  those  of  the  Manas  those  of  the
Kaviarupa  ;  those  of  the  latter  those  of  ^\^  Jiva  ;
and  those  of  the  Jiva  hose  of  the  StJnilasarira
And,  as  each  coarser  principle  contains  the  particles
of  all  the  finer  principles  therefore  the  StJiulasarira
may  be  called  the  gross  casket  within  which  the
several  parts  of  the  composite  man  are  contained.
Pervading  and  energizing  all  is  the  Atma,  or  that
incomprehensible  final  energy  which  cannot  be
comprehended  by  the  physical  senses,  and  which  is
described  to  himself  by  the  Brahman,  in  the  Man-

OF  ALL  RELIGIONS.

95

diikyo  Upanishad  hy  saying:  ''Thou  art  not  this,
nor  that,  nor  the  third,  nor  anything-  which  the
mind  can  grasp  with  the  help  of  the  physical  per-
ceptions." Your  popular  Telugu  poet  beautifully
and  allegorically  depicts  this  idea,  in  his  poem
Sitardmd  anjaniyani  (Cosmic  Matter),  where  Sita
— who  is  herself  the  personification  of  Prakriti — is
asked  by  the  daughters  and  wives  of  the  Rishis  to
point  out  her  husband,  but,  through  modesty,  re-
frains. The  ladies  then,  pointing  successively  to  a
number  of  different  men,  ask  each  time,  "  Is  this
thy  husband  ?  "  She  answers  in  the  negative,  but
when  they  point  to  Rama  she  is  silent,  for  she  can-
not even  speak  of  her  heart's  lord  before  strangers.
So,  the  poet  would  have  us  understand,  while  we
may  freely  say  what  Atma  is  not,  when  we  are  re-
quired to  say  what  it  is  we  must  be  silent,  for
words  are  powerless  to  express  the  sublime  idea.

We  have  now  prepared  the  ground  to  answer
both  of  the  questions  put  by  our  imaginary  critic.
The  Mayavirupa,  when  intelligently  projected  be-
yond the  physical  body  by  the  developed  energy
of  an  initiate  of  Occult  Science,  contains  in  it  all
his  Manas  and  Buddhi  (including  the  Chittam  and
Ahankaram—SQnsQ  of  individuality),  i.e.,  his  Physi-
cal Intelligence  and  Spiritual  Intelligence.  The  In-
itiate quits  his  earthly  casket  (in  which  are  left  the
Jiva  and  Lingasarira),  and  for  the  moment  lives,
thinks  and  acts  in  this  Double  of  himself  Its  atomic
condition  being  less  dense  than  that  of  the  corporeal
body,  it  has  enhanced  powers  of  locomotion  and  per-

96  THE  COMMON  FOUND  A 'HON

ception.  Barriers  that  would  stop  the  body — for  ex-
ample, the  walls  of  a  room — cannot  stop  it,  for  its
particles  may  pass  through  the  interstices  of  the
vibrating  gross  matter  composing  the  wall.  It  is  in
the  subjective  world,  and  may  traverse  space  like
thought,  which  is  itself  a  form  of  energy.  Or,
if  he  likes,  the  Initiate  may  simply  project  a  non-
intelligent  image  of  himself  and  make  it  appear
at  the  spot  at  which  he  may  have  focalized  his
thought'''  It  depends  upon  him  whether  the  image
shall  be  but  an  illusionary  form,  or  his  own  self ;  it
may  be  mere  matter,  or  matter  plus  himself  As
to  our  accounting  for  the  middle  nature  of  man
scientifically,  I  have  already  shown  that  we  may  do
this  by  the  collection  of  testimonies,  and  by  per-
sonal observation.  We  may  add  that  further  proof
is  obtainable  by  the  best  and  surest  of  all  methods
— that  of  going  oneself  through  the  necessary  course
of  self-training,  and  projecting  one's  own  double.
For  this  is  no  exclusive  science  reserved  for  a
favoured  few:  it  is  a  true  science  based  upon
natural  law,  and  within  the  reach  of  every  one  who
has  the  requisite  qualifications.  The  humblest
labourer,  if  psychically  competent,  may  lift  the  veil
of  mystery  as  well  as  the  proudest  sovereign  or  the
haughtiest  priest.

But,  it  is   constantly   asked   why  are   not  these
secrets  thrown  open  to   the  world  as  freely  as  the

*  I  have  in  my  possession  a  small  group  in  silver,  given  me  by  a
Buddhist  priest  in  Ceylon,  and  representing  the  debate  between
Lord  Buddha  and  his  projected  "  Double,"  upon  his  Dhamma  (Law),
in  the  presence  of  the  devas,  as  described  in  Buddhistic  Legend.

OF  ALL  RELIGIONS.  97

details  of  chemistiy  or  any  other  branch  of  know-
ledge ?     It  is  a  natural   question  for  a  superficial
reasoner  to  put ;  but   it   is  not  a  sound  one.     The
difference  between   Psychic  and  Physical  sciences
is  that  the  former  can  only  be  learned  by  the  self-
evolution   of  psychical    powers.     No    college  pro-
fessor can   evolve  them   for  you,   nor  any   friend,
fellow-student  or  relative  :  you   must  evolve  them
for   yourself     Can    another   man    learn   music,  or
Sanskrit,  or  the  art   of  painting   or   sculpture  for
you  ?     Can   another  eat,  sleep,  feel  warm  or  cold,
digest  or  breathe,  for  you  ?     Then  why  should  you
expect  him  to  learn  Psychology  for  you?    Anyhow
he  cannot  do  it,  however  much  you  expect  it ;  and
that  is  the  final  answer  to  all  such  questioners.     Nor
is  it  absolutely  certain  that,  even  though  you  should
try  ever  so  much,  you  could  evolve  these  powers  in
3/ourself     Has  every   man   the  capacity  for  Lan-
guages, or  Music,  or  Poetry,  or  Science,  or  Philo-
sophy ?      You  know    that   each   of  these    require
certain  clear  aptitudes,  and  if  you  have  them  not
you  can   never  become  musician,  poet,  scientist,  or
philosopher.     The  branches  of  physical  science  are
difficult  to  master  even  when  you  have  the  natural
capacity;  but  psychical  science  is  more  difficult  than
any  of  them — I  might  almost  say  than  all   com-
bined.    That   is  why  the  Mahatma  has  been  de-
scribed  as  "  the  rare  efflorescence  of  a  generation
of  inquirers"    (Sinnett's    Occult     World,    p.    10 1),
and  in   all  generations   the  true   Sadhu  has  been
reverenced  as  almost  a  superhuman  being.      The

G

98  THE  COMMON  FOUNDATION'

term  applies  to  him  only  in  the  sense  of  his  being
above  the  weaknesses,  the  prejudice  and  the  ignor-
ance of  his  fellow-men.  With  the  most  absurd
blindness  to  the  experience  of  the  race,  we.  Founders
of  the  Theosophical  Society,  are  constantly  being-
asked  to  turn  its  members  into  adepts.  We  must
show  them  the  short  cut  to  the  Himavat,  the  private
passages  to  the  Asramas  in  the  Neilgherries  !
They  are  not  willing  to  work  and  suffer  for  the
getting  of  knowledge,  as  all  have  done  who  have  got
it  heretofore ;  they  must  be  put  into  a  first-class
carriage,  and  taken  straight  behind  the  Veil  of  Isis  !
They  fancy  our  Society  an  improved  sort  of  Miracle
Club,  or  School  of  Magic,  wherein,  for  ten  rupees,  a
man  can  become  a  Mahatma  between  the  morning
bath  and  the  evening  meal !  Such  people  entirely
overlook  the  two  chief  avowed  objects  of  the
Society — the  formation  of  a  nucleus  of  an  Universal
Brotherhood  for  the  research  after  truth  and  the
promotion  of  kind  feelings  between  man  and  man ;
and  the  pursuit  of  the  study  of  ancient  religions,
philosophies,  and  sciences.  They  do  not  appreciate
this  purely  unselfish  part  of  the  Society's  work,
nor  seem  to  think  it  a  noble  and  most  meritorious
thing  to  labour  for  the  enlightenment  and  happiness
of  mankind.  They  have  an  insatiable  curiosity  to
behold  wonders,  seeing  which  they  would  not,  in
many  instances,  be  stimulated  to  search  after  the
hidden  springs  of  wisdom,  but  only  sit  with  open
mouth  and  pendulous  tongue,  to  wonder  how  the
trick  was  done,  and  what  would  be  the  next  one  !

OF  ALL  RELIGLONS.  99

Such  minds  can  get  no  profit  by  joining  the  Theo-
sophical  Society,  and  I  advise  them  to  stay  outside.
We  want  no  such  selfish  triflers.  Ours  is  a  serious,
hard-working,  self-denying  society,  and  we  want
only  men  worthy  to  be  called  men,  and  worthy  of
our  respect.  We  want  men  whose  first  question
will  not  be  "what  good  can  I  get  by  joining  ?  "  but
"what  good  can  I  do  by  joining?  "  Our  work  re-
quires the  services  of  men  who  can  be  satisfied  to
labour  for  the  next  generation,  and  the  succeeding
ones ;  men  who,  seeing  the  lamentable  religious
state  of  the  world — seeing  noble  faiths  debased,
temples,  chifrchcs,  and  holy  shrines,  thronged  by
hypocrites  and  mockers^burn  with  a  desire  to  re-
kindle the  fires  of  spirituality  and  morality  upon
the  polluted  altars,  and  to  bring  the  knowledge  of
the  Rishis  within  the  reach  of  a  sin-burdened  world.
We  want  Hindus  who  can  love  India  with  so  pure
an  affection  that  they  will  count  it  a  joy  and  an
honour  beyond  price  to  work,  and  to  suffer  even,
for  her  sake.  Men  we  want,  who  will  be  able  to
put  aside  for  the  moment  their  puerile  hatreds  of
race,  and  creed,  and  caste,  as  they  put  away  a  soiled
cloth  or  a  worn-out  garment  ;  and,  with  a  loving
heart  and  clean  conscience,  be  ready  to  join  with
every  other  man — be  he  black  or  white,  red  or
yellow,  bond  or  freeman  —  whose  heart  beats
with  love  for  India  and  her  wide-scattered  children
of  many  races  throughout  the  world.  We  welcome
most  those  who  are  ready  to  trample  under  foot
their  selfishness  when  it  comes  in  conflict  with  the

100  THE  COMMON  FOUNDATION

general  good.  We  welcome  the  intelligent  student
of  science,  who  has  such  broad  conceptions  of  his
subject  that  he  considers  it  quite  as  important  to
solve  the  mystery  of  Force  as  to  know  the  atomic
combinations  of  Matter ;  and  feeling  so,  is  not
afraid  or  ashamed  to  take  for  his  teacher  any  one
who  is  competent,  whatever  be  the  colour  of  his
skin.

Now  to  take  our  scientific  argument  one  step
further.  Granted  that  the  existence  of  the  Double
has  been  proven,  and  also  its  projectibility,  how  is
it  projected  ?  By  an  expenditure  of  energy,  of
course.  That  energy  is  the  vital  force  set  in  motion
by  the  will.  The  power  of  concentrating  the  will
for  this  purpose  is  one  that  may  be  natural  or  ac-
quired. There  are  some  persons  who  have  it
naturally  so  strong  in  them  that  they  often  send
their  doubles  to  distant  places,  and  make  them
visible,  though  they  may  never  have  given  a  day's
study  to  the  science  of  Psychology  :  I  have  known
both  men  and  women  of  this  sort.  But  it  is  an
uncommon  power,  and  can  never  be  exercised  at
all  times  except  by  the  true  proficient  in  psycho-
logical science.  The  operations  of  the  brain  in
mechanically  evolving  the  current  of  will-force  have
been  more  or  less  carefully  expounded  by  Bain  and
Maudeseley,  while  Professors  Tait  and  Balfour
Stewart  have,  in  their  Unseen  Universe,  traced  for
us  the  dynamic  effect  of  thought-evolution  into  the
Ether,  or,  as  Hindus  have  called  it  these  thousands
of  }^ears,  the  Akasa.     They  go  so  far  as  to  say  that

OF  ALL  RELLGIONS.  loi

it  Is  not  an  unthinkable  proposition  that  the
evolution  of  thought  In  a  single  human  brain  may
dynamically  affect  a  distant  planet.  In  other
words,  when  a  thought  Is  evolved  a  vibration  of
etheric  particles  is  set  up,  and  this  motion  must
continue  on  indefinitely.  Now  the  Yogi  evolves
such  a  current,  and  turns  It  in  upon  himself  as  a
concentrated  force ;  continuing  the  process  until
the  power  is  sufficient  to  force  his  Double  out  of  its
corporeal  encasement,  and  to  project  it  to  whatso-
ever locality  he  desires.  We  have  thus  shown  the
fact  of  the  Mayavlrupa,  its  capability  to  exist  out-
side the  body,  and  the  energy  which  causes  Its  pro-
jection. I  cannot  go  Into  details  to  elaborate  the
argument,  for  I  can  only  detain  you  an  hour  in  this
tropical  heat.  But  I  trust  at  least  to  have  shown
3^ou  that  I  rely  only  upon  scientific  principles,  and
claim  no  Indulgence  like  the  advocates  of  super-
naturalism.

And  now  is  this  Double — which  is  nothing
but  what  is  commonly  called  the  "  Soul " — im-
mortal ?  No,  it  Is  not.  So  much  of  it  as  is  matter
in  aggregation  must  ultimately  obey  the  law  of
dispersion  which,  in  time,  breaks  up  and  forces  out
of  the  objective  universe  whatever  is  material.  It
is  equally  the  law  of  planetary  as  of  lesser  forms.
As  all  that  is  material  In  a  star  was  primarily  con-
densed from  the  loose  atoms  in  space,  so  all  that  is
material  in  the  human  body,  however  coarse  or
however  fine,  was  primarily  condensed  from  the
chaotic   atoms    In   the   Akasa.      And   to   that  dis-

A  ■«

102  THE  COMMON  FOUNDATION

persed    condition    it    must    return   whenever    the
centripetal  force    that  attracted  it  into  the  human
nucleus   ceases    to   resist  the  centrifugal   force,  or
attraction  of  the  atoms  of  space.     This  brings  us
right  upon  the  problem  of  a  continuity  of  existence
beyond  the  physical  death.     Here  is  the  dividing
line  between   the  world's   religions.     The  dualists
affirm  that  this  soul  goes  to  heavenly  or  infernal
places  to  be  for  ever  blest  or  punished,  according  to
the  deeds  done  in  the  body.     Though  they  do  not
use  the  very  word,  yet  it  is  the  doctrine  of  -  Merit
they  teach.     For  even  those  extremely  unscientific
theologians  who  affirm  that  a  punishing  and  reward-
ing Deity  has  from  all  time  pre-ordained  some  to
be  saved  and  some  to  be  damned,  tell  us  that  the
merit  of  faith  In  a  certain  system  of  morals  and  dis-
cipline, and  a  share  in  the  vicarious  merit  of  another,
are  pre-requisites  to  future  bliss.     We  may  assume
therefore,  that  merit,  or  KARMA,  is  the  corner-stone
of  Religion.    This  is  both  a  logical  and  scientific  pro-
position, for  the  thoughts,  words  and  deeds  of  a
man  are  so  many  causes  which  must  work  out  cor-
responding effects  ;  the  good   ones  can   only  pro-
duce good  effects,  the  bad  ones  only  bad, — unless
opposed    and    neutralized   by    stronger  ones    that
are  good.     I  need   not  go  into  the   metaphysical
analysis  of   what  is    bad   and    what    good.      We
may  pass   it  over  with  the  simple  postulate  that
whatever  has  either  a  debasing  tendency  upon  the
individual,  or  promotes  injustice,  misery,  suffering
ignorance  and  animalism  in  society,  is  essentially

OF  ALL  RELIGIONS.  103

bad,  and  that  what  tends  to  the  contrary  is  good.    I
should  call  that  a  bad  religion  which  taught  that  it
is  meritorious  to  do  evil  that  good  may  come  ;  for
good  can  never  come  out  of  evil  ;  the  evil  tree  pro-
duces not  good  fruit.     A  religion  that  can  only  be
propagated  at  the  point  of  the  sword,  or  upon  the
martyr's  pile,   or  under  instruments   of  torture,  or
by  devastating  countries  and  enslaving  their  popu-
lations, or  by  cunning  stratagems  seducing  ignorant
children   or  adults   away  from   their  families    and
castes  and  ancestral  creeds — is  a  vile  and  devilish
religion,  the  enemy  of  truth,  the  destroyer  of  social
happiness.     If  a  religion  is  not  based  upon  a  lie,
the  fact  can  be  proved,  and  it  can  stand  unshaken,
as  the  rocky  mountain,  against  all  the  assaults  of
sceptics.     A  true   religion  is  not  one  that  runs  to
holes  and   corners,  like  a  naked  leper  to  hide  his
sores,  when  a  bold  critic  casts  his  searching  eye  upon
it  and  asks  for  its  credentials.     If  I  stand  here  to
defend  what  is  good  in   Hinduism,  it  is  because  of
my  full  conviction  that  that  good  exists,  and  that
however    fantastic,  and    even   childish,    some    may
think   its  tangled  overgrowth  of  customs,  legends
and    superstitions,  there   is    the   rock   of  truth,   of
scientific  truth,  below   them  all.     On  that  rock  it
is    destined    to    stand    throuc^h    countless    comincf
generations,  as  it  has  already  stood  through  the  count-
less generations  which  have  professed  that  hoary
Faith,  since  the  Rishis  shot  from  their  Himalayan
heights  the  blazing   light  of  spiritual  truth  over  a
dark  and  ignorant  world.

ro4  THE  C 0 MAW N  FOUNDATION

It  is  most  reasonable  that  you  should  ask  me
what  those  of  you  are  to  do  who  are  not  gifted
with  the  power  to  get  outside  the  illusion-breeding
screen  of  the  body  and  to  acquire  an  intimate  actual
perception  of  "  Divine  "  truth  through  the  developed
psychical  senses.  As  we  have  ourselves  shown
that  all  men  cannot  be  adepts,  what  comfort  do  we
hold  out  to  the  rest  ?  This  involves  a  momentary
glance  at  the  theory  of  re-births.  If  this  little  span
of  human  life  we  are  now  enjoying  be  the  entire
sum  of  human  existence,  if  you  and  I  never  lived
before  and  will  never  live'  again,  then  there  would
be  no  ray  of  hope  to  offer  to  any  mind  that  was
not  capable  of  the  intellectual  suicide  of  blind  faith.
The  doctrine  of  a  vicarious  atonement  for  sin  is  not
merely  unthinkable,  it  is  positively  repulsive  to  one
who  can  take  a  larger  and  more  scientific  view  of
man's  origin  and  destiny  than  that  of  the  dualists.
One  whose  religious  perceptions  rest  upon  the  in-
tuition that  cause  and  effect  are  equal :  that  there
is  a  perfect  and  correspondential  reign  of  Law
throughout  the  universe  :  that  under  any  reason-
able conception  of  eternity,  there  must  always  have
been  at  work  the  same  forces  as  are  now  active —
must  scout  the  assertion  that  this  brief  instant  of
sentient  life  is  our  only  one.  Science  has  traced
us  back  through  an  inconceivably  long  sequence  of
existences — in  the  human,  the  animal,  the  vege-
table, and  the  mineral  kingdoms — to  the  cradle  of
future  sentient  life,  the  Ether  of  space.  Would  a
man  of  science,  then,  make  bold  to  affirm  that  you

OF  ALL  L^ELIGIONS.  105

and  I,  who  represent  a  relatively  high  stage  of
evolution,  came  to  be  what  we  are  without  previous
development  In  other  births,  whether  on  this  earth
or  other  planets  ?  And  If  he  would  not,  he  must,
In  conformity  with  his  own  canons  of  the  conserva-
tion and  correlation  of  energy,  deduce  from  the
whole  analogy  of  nature  that  there  Is  another  life
for  us  beyond  this  life.  The  force  which  evolved
us  cannot  be  expended,  It  must  run  on  In  Its  vibra-
tory line  until  Its  limit  Is  reached.  And  that  limit
the  Hindu  and  the  Buddhist,  the  Jain  and  the
Zoroastrian  adept,  all  define  as  that  abstract  state
which  lies  beyond  the  phenomenal  one  of  Illusions
and  pain.  Whatever  they  may  call  It — whether
Muktl,  or  Nirvana,  or  Light, — It  Is  all  the  same  Idea  :
It  Is  the  outcome  of  the  eternal  Principle  of  energy
after  passing  around  a  cycle  of  correlations  with
matter.  That  final  limit  the  "  Middle  Nature,"  as  a
whole,  never  reaches,  for  It  Is  material  as  to  Its  form,
size,  colour  and  atomic  relations :  if  we  call  It  the
"  Soul,"  therefore,  we  may  say  that  the  "  soul "  is
not  Immortal  ;  for  that  which  Is  material  tends
always  to  resume  Its  primitive  atomic  condition.
And  the  Hindu  Philosopher,  arguing  from  this
premiss,  teaches  that  what  does  escape  out  of
the  phenomenal  world  is  Atmd,  the  SPIRIT.
Thus,  while  from  the  Hindu  standpoint  it  Is
correct  to  say  the  "  soul "  Is  not  immortal,  it
must  also  be  added  that  the  "  spirit,"  Is ;  for,
unlike  the  Soul,  or  Middle  Nature,  Atmd  con-
tains    no     mortal      and     perishable     ingredients,

io6  THE  COMMON  FOUNDATION

but  Is  of  its  essence  both  unchangeable  and
eternal.

The  confusion  of  the  words  "  Soul  "  and  "  Spirit,"
so  common  now,  is  perplexing  and  mischievous  to
the  last  degree.

It  Is  no  argument  to  bring  against  the  Asiatic
theory  of  Palingenesis,  that  we  have  no  remem-
brance of  former  existences.  We  have  forgotten
nineteen-twentieths  of  the  incidents  of  our  present
life.  Memory  plays  us  the  most  prankish  tricks.
Every  one  of  us  can  recollect  some  one  trifling
incident  out  of  a  whole  day's,  month's,  year's,  inci-
dents of  our  earliest  years,  and  one  that  was  in  no
way  important,  nor  apparently  more  calculated
than  the  others  to  impress  Itself  indelibly  upon  the
memory.  Howls  this?  And  If  this  utter  forget-
fulness  of  the  majority  of  our  life-Incidents  Is  no
proof  that  we  did  not  exist  consciously  at  those
times,  then  our  oblivion  of  the  entire  experiences
In  previous  births  is  no  argument  against  the  fact
of  such  previous  births.  Nor,  let  me  hasten  to  add,
are  the  alleged  remembrances  of  previous  births,
affirmed  by  the  modern  school  of  Relncarnationists,
valid  proofs  of  such  births  :  they  may  be — I  do  not
say  they  arc — mere  tricks  of  the  Imagination,  cere-
bral pictures  suggested  by  chance  external  In-
fluences. The  only  question  with  us  Is  whether
In  science  and  logic  It  Is  necessary  for  us  to  postu-
late for  ourselves  a  series  of  births,  somewhere,  at
various  times.  And  this  I  think  must  be  answered
in  the  afflrmatlve."^

*  I   have   explained    in   my   Buddhist    Catechism   the   Buddhist

OF  ALL  P^ELIGIONS.  107

So,  then,  conceding  the  plurality  of  births  emd
coming  back  to  our  argument,  we  see  that  even
though  any  one  of  us  may  not  have  the  capacity
for  acquiring  adeptship  in  this  birth,  it  is  still
a  possibility  to  acquire  it  in  a  succeeding  one.
If  we  make  the  beginning  we  create  a  cause  which
will,  in  due  time,  and  in  proportion  to  its  original
energy,  sooner  or  later  give  us  adeptship,  and  with
it  the  knowledge  of  the  hidden  laws  of  being,  and
of  the  way  to  break  the  shackles  of  matter  and
obtain  Mukti — Emancipation.  And  the  first  step
in  this  beginning  is  to  cleanse  ourselves  from  vicious
desires  and  habits,  to  do  away  with  unreasoning
prejudices,  dogmatism  and  intolerance,  to  try  to
discover  what  is  essentially  fundamental,  and  what
is  non-essential,  in  the  religion  one  professes,  and  to
live  up  to  the  highest  ideal  of  goodness,  intelligence,
and  spiritual-mindedness  that  one  can  extract  from
that  religion  and  from  the  intuitions  of  one's  own
nature.  I  regard  that  man  as  a  mad  iconoclast
who  would  strike  down  any  religion — especially
one  of  the  world's  ancient  religions — without
examining  it  and  giving  it  credit  for  its  intrinsic
truth.  I  call  him  a  vain  enthusiast  who  would
patch  up  a  new  faith  out  of  the  ancient  faiths,
merely  to  have  his  name  in  the  mouths  of  men.  I
call  him  a  foolish  zealot  who  would  expect  to  make

theory  of  the  non-transfer  of  memory  from  birth  to  birtli.
Briefly,  a  memory  of  each  birth  is  evolved  within  that  birth,  and
when  a  person  can  attain  to  the  "  fourth  stage  of  Dhyana,"  or  in-
terior evolution,  he  can  psychically  recall  all  the  series  of  memories
belonging  to  his  consecutive  births.

io8  THE  COMMON  FOUNDATION

all  men  see  truth  as  he  sees  it,  shice  no  two  men
can  even  see  alike  a  simple  tree  or  shrub,  far  less
grasp  metaphysical  propositions  with  the  same
clearness.  As  for  those  who  go  about  the  world
to  propagate  their  peculiar  religious  belief,  without
the  ability  to  show  its  superiority  to  other  beliefs
which  they  would  supplant,  or  to  answer  without
equivocation  the  fair  questions  of  critics — they  are
either  well-meaning  visionaries  or  presumptuous
fools.  But  mad,  or  vain,  or  stupid,  as  either  of
these  may  be,  if  sincere  they  are  personally
entitled  to  the  respect  that  sincerity  always  com-
mands. Unless  the  whole  world  is  ready  to  accept
one  infallible  chief,  and  blindly  adopt  one  creed  as
the  wisest,  the  only  rule  must  ever  be  to  tolerate  in
our  fellow-men  that  infirmity  of  judgment  to  which
we  are  ourselves  always  liable,  and  from  which  we  are
never  wholly  free.  And  that  is  the  declared  policy
and  platform  of  the  Theosophical  Society — as  you
may  see  by  reading  the  pamphlet  containing  its  Rules
and  Bye-Laws.  It  is  the  broad  platform  of  mutual
tolerance  and  universal  brotherhood.

There  must  be  elementary  stages  leading  up  to-
wards adeptship,  you  will  say.  There  are,  and  mod-
ern science  has  laid  out  some  of  them.  I  told  you
that  Psychology  is  the  most  difficult  of  sciences  to
get  to  the  bottom  of,  but  still  Western  research  has
cleared  many  obstacles  from  the  path.  Mesmerism
is  by  far  the  most  necessary  branch  of  study  to  take
up  first.  It  gives  you  (i)  proof  of  the  separability
of  mind  from  conscious  physical  existence ;  a  mes-

OF  ALL  RELIGIONS.  IC9

mcrized  subject  may  show  an  active  intellectual  con-
sciousness and  discrimination  while  his  body  is  not
only  asleep  but  buried  in  so  profound  a  trance  as
to  more  resemble  a  livid  corpse  than  a  living  man  ;
(2)  it  gives  you  proof  of  the  actual  transmissibility
of  thought  from  one  mind  to  another  :  the  mesmeric
operator  can,  without  uttering  a  word  or  giving  a
perceptible  signal,  transmit  to  his  subject  the
thought  in  his  own  mind  ;  (3)  it  easily  proves  the
reality  of  a  power  to  hear  sounds  and  see  things
occurring  at  great  distances,  to  communicate  with
the  thought  of  distant  persons,  to  look  through  walls,
down  into  the  bowels  of  the  earth,  into  the  depths
of  the  ocean,  and  through  all  other  obstructions  to
corporeal  vision  ;  (4)  as  also  of  a  power  to  look  into
the  human  body,  detect  the  seat  and  causes  of
disease  and  prescribe  suitable  remedies,  and  to
impart  health  and  restore  physical  and  mental
vigour  by  the  laying  on  of  the  mesmerist's  hands,  or
by  his  imparting  his  robust  vital  force  to  a  glass  of
water  for  the  patient  to  drink,  or  to  his  wearing
apparel ;  (5)  of  a  power  to  see  the  past  and  even  to
prognosticate  the  future.  These  and  many  more
things  Mesmeric  Science  enables  a  person,  not  an
adept  of  the  higher  Asiatic  Psychology,  to  prove  com-
pletely to  himself  and  to  others.  I  say  this  on  the
authority  of  a  Committee  of  the  Academy  of  France.
And  then,  besides  Mesmerism,  there  are  the  highly
important  branches  of  Psychometry  and  Me-
diumism,and  others  that  to  barely  mention  would  be
beyond  the  scope  of  my  present  lecture.     Each  and

no  THE  COMMON  FOUNDATION

all  help  the  inquirer  towards  the  acquisition  of
*  Divine'  wisdom,  towards  an  intelligent  and  scien-
tific conception  of  the  laws  of  that  "  Eternal  Some-
thing," as  Mr.  Herbert  Spencer  calls  it,  which  you  may
call  God,  or  by  any  other  name  you  like.  Whatever
name  you  may  choose  for  it,  the  knowledge  of  it  is
the  highest  goal  for  human  thought,  and  to  be  in  a
state  of  harmony  with  it  the  noblest,  first  and  most
necessary  aspiration  of  an  intelligent  man.  The
pursuit  of  this  knowledge  is,  in  one  word,  Theo-
SOPHY,  and  the  proper  methods  of  research  consti-
tute Theosophical  Science.

And  thus  in  a  single  sentence  I  have  answered  a
thousand  questions  as  to  what  Theosophy  is,  and
what  the  object  of  theosophical  research.  Most  of
you,  like  the  great  mass  of  Hindus,  have,  until  this
moment,  been  imagining  to  yourselves  that  we  were
come  to  preach  some  new  religion,  to  propagate
some  new  conceit,  to  set  up  some  new  "  New  Dis-
pensation." You  see  now  how  far  you  have  been
from  the  mark,  and  what  popular  injustice  has  been
done  to  us.  Instead  of  preaching  a  new  religion,
we  are  preaching  the  superior  claims  of  the  oldest
religions  in  the  world  to  the  confidence  of  the  pre-
sent generation.  It  is  not  our  poor  Ignorant  selves
that  we  offer  to  you  as  guides  and  gurus,  but  the
venerable  Rishis  of  the  archaic  ages.  It  is  not  an
American  or  a  Russian,  but  a  hoary  Hindu  philoso-
phy that  we  claim  your  allegiance  for.  We  come
not  to  pull  down  and  destroy,  but  to  rebuild,  the

OF  ALL  RELIGIONS.  1 1 1

strong  fabric  of  Asiatic  religion.  We  ask  you  to
help  us  to  set  it  up  again,  not  on  the  shifting  and
treacherous  sands  of  blind  faith,  but  upon  the  rocky
base  of  truth,  and  to  cement  its  separate  stones
together  with  the  strong  cement  of  Modern  Science.
Hinduism  proper  has  nothing  zvhatever  to  fear  from
the  researches  of  Science.  Whatever  of  falsehood
may  have  come  down  to  you  from  previous  genera-
tions we  may  well  dispense  with,  and  when  the  time
comes  for  us  to  see  through  our  present  viaya
(illusions),  we  will  cheerfully  do  so.  "  The  world
was  not  made  in  a  day ;  "  and  we  are  not  such
ignorant  enthusiasts  as  to  dream  that  in  a  day,  or
a  year,  or  a  generation,  long  established  errors  can
be  detected  and  done  away  with.  Let  us  but
always  desire  to  know  the  truth,  and  hold  ourselves
ready  to  speak  for  it,  act  for  it,  die  for  it,  if  necessary,
when  we  may  discover  it.  People  ask  us  what  is
our  religion,  and  how  it  is  possible  for  us  to  be  on
equal  terms  of  friendliness  with  people  of  such  an-
tagonistic faiths.  I  answer  that  what  may  be  our
personal  preference  among  the  world's  religions
has  nothing  to  do  with  the  general  question  of
Theosophy.  We  are  advocating  Theosophy,  as  the
only  method  by  which  one  may  discover  that
Eternal  Something,  not  asking  people  of  another
creed  than  ours  to  take  our  creed  and  throw  aside
their  own.  We  two  Founders  profess  a  religion  of
tolerance,  charity,  kindness,  altruism,  or  love  of  one's
fellows  ;  a  religion  that  does  not  try  to  discover  all
that  is  bad  in  our  neighbour's  creed,  but  all  that  is

112  THE  COMMON  FO  UN  DA  TION

good,  and  to  make  him  live  up  to  the  best  code  of
morals  and  piety  he  can  find  in  it.  We  profess,  in
a  word,  the  religion  that  is  embodied  in  the  golden
rule  of  Confucius,  of  Gautama,  and  of  the  founders
of  nearly  all  the  great  religions,  and  that  is  preserved
for  the  admiration  and  reverence  of  posterity,  in  the
edicts  of  the  good  King  Asoka,  on  the  monoliths
and  rocks  of  Hindustan.  Following  this  simple
creed,  we  find  no  difficulty  whatever  in  living  upon
terms  of  perfect  peace  with  the  adherent  of  any
creed  who  will  meet  us  in  a  reciprocal  spirit.  If  we
have  been  at  war  with  the  pretended  Christians,  it
is  because  they  have  belied  the  teachings  of  him
whom  they  call  their  Master,  and  by  every  vile
and  unworthy  subterfuge  have  tried  to  oppose  the
growth  of  our  influence.  It  is  they  who  war  upon
us,  for  defending  Hinduism  and  the  other  Asiatic
religions,  not  we  who  war  upon  them.  If  they  would
practise  their  own  precepts  we  would  never  use  voice
or  pen  against  them  ;  for  then  they  would  respect  the
religious  feelings  of  the  Hindu,  the  Parsi,  the  Jain,
the  Jew,  the  Buddhist  and  the  Mussulman,  and  de-
serve our  respect  in  return.  But  they  began  with
calumny  instead  of  argument,  and  calumny,  I  fear,  will
be  their  favourite  weapon  to  the  very  end.  In  com-
parison with  the  unmanly  conduct  of  my  countryman
(Rev.  Mr.  Cook)  who  lectured  here  the  other  day,  de-
nouncing the  Vedas  as  filthy  abomination  and  the
Theosophlsts  as  disreputable  adventurers,  how  sweet
and  noble  was  the  behaviour  of  that  Mohammedan
lawyer   who   defended    Raymond    Lully,   when    a

OF  ALL  kEUGiONS.  113

Mussulman  tribunal  was  disposed  to  punish  him
for  trying  to  propagate  his  religion  in  their  city.
"If  you  think  it  a  meritorious  act,  O  Moslems  !
for  a  Mussulman  to  try  to  preach  Islam  among  the
heretics,  why  should  we  be  uncharitable  to  this
Christian,  whose  motive  is  identical  ?  "  I  cannot  re-
member the  exact  words,  but  that  is  the  sense.
The  tender  voice  of  Charity  spoke  by  that  lawyer's
lips,  and  his  words  were  the  echo  of  the  spirit  of
Truth.

Come  then,  old  men  and  young  men  of  Madras,
if  you  call  yourselves  lovers  of  India,  and  would  make
yourselves  worthy  of  the  blessings  of  the  Rishis,
join  hands  and  hearts  with  us  to  carry  on  this  great
work.  We  ask  you  for  no  honours,  no  worldly
benefits  or  rewards,  for  ourselves.  We  do  not  seek
you  for  followers ;  choose  your  proper  leaders  from
among  your  wisest  and  purest  men,  and  we  will
follow  them.  We  do  not  offer  ourselves  as  your
teachers,  for  all  we  can  teach  is  what  we  have  learnt
from  this  Asia  ;  the  Gospel  we  circulate  is  derived
from  the  recluses  of  the  Indian  mountains,  not  from
the  professors  of  the  West.  It  is  for  India  we  plead,
for  the  restoration  of  her  ancient  religion,  for  the
vindication  of  her  ancient  glory,  for  the  maintenance
of  her  greatness  in  science,  in  the  arts,  in  philosophy.
If  any  selfish  consideration  of  sect  or  caste,  or  local
prejudice,  bar  the  way,  put  it  aside,  at  least  until  you
have  done  something  for  the  land  of  your  birth,  for
the  renown  of  your  noble  race.  In  this  great  crowd  I
see  painted  upon  your  foreheads  the  vertical  sect-

H

114  THE  COMMON  2^0  UND  ATI  ON.

marks  of  the  Dwaitis  and  the  Visishtadvaitis,  and
the  horizontal  stripes  of  the  Sivaites.  These  are  the
surface  indications  of  reh'gious  differences  that
have  often  burst  out  in  bitter  words  and  bitter
deeds.  But,  with  another  sense  than  the  eye  of  the
body,  I  see  another  set  of  sect-marks,  indicative  of
far  greater  peril  to  Indian  nationality  and  Indian
spirituality  than  those.  These  marks  are  branded
deep  upon  the  brains  and  hearts  of  some — though,
happily,  not  all — of  your  most  promising  young
men,  the  choicest  children  of  the  sorrowino:  Mother
India,  and  they  are  eating  away  the  sense  of  pride
that  they  belong  to  this  race  and  have  inherited
this  noble  religion.  These  are  the  B.A.,  B.L.,  and
M.A.  brands  that  the  University  over  yonder  has
marked  you  with.  After  three  years  of  intercourse
with  the  Hindu  nation  and  of  identification  with  its
thought,  I  almost  feel  a  shudder  when  some  noble-
browcd  youth  is  presented  to  me  as  a  titled  gradu-
ate. Not  that  I  undervalue  the  importance  of
college  culture,  nor  the  honourable  distinction  one
earns  by  acquiring  University  degrees  ;  but  I  say
that,  if  sucJi  distinctions  can  only  be  had  at  the  cost  of
ones  national  honour  and  of  ones  spiritual  intuitions^
they  are  a  curse  to  the  graduate  and  a  calamity  to
his  country.  I  would  rather  see  a  dirty  Bairagee,
who  has  his  ancestors'  intuitive  belief  in  man's
spiritual  capabilities,  than  the  most  brilliant  gradu-
ate ever  turned  out  of  the  University,  who  has  lost
that  belief.  Let  me  keep  company  with  the  naked
hermit  of  the  jungle  rather  than  with  a  graduate

OF  ALL  RELLGIONS.  115

who,  though  loaded  with  degrees,  has,  by  a  course
of  false  history  and  false  science,  been  made  to  lose
all  faith  in  anything  greater  in  the  universe  than  a
Haeckel  or  a  Comte,  or  In  any  powers  in  himself
higher  than  those  of  procreation,  thought  or  diges-
tion. Call  me  a  Conservative,  if  you  will  ;  I  am
conservative  to  this  extent  that,  until  our  modern
professors  can  show  me  a  philosophy  that  is  un-
assailable ;  a  science  that  Is  self-demonstrative,  that
Is,  axiomatic  ;  a  psychology  that  takes  in  all  psychic
phenomena;  a  new  religion  that  is  all  truth  and  with-
out a  flaw,  I  shall  proclaim  that  which  I  feel,  which
I  know  to  be  the  fact, — viz.,  that  the  Rishis  knew  the
secrets  of  Nature  and  of  Man,  that  there  Is  but  one
common  platform  of  all  religions,  and  that  upon  it
ever  stood  and  now  stand,  in  fraternal  concord  and
amity,  the  hierophants  and  esoteric  initiates  of  the
world's  great  faiths.  That  platform  is  Theosophy.
May  the  blessing  of  its  ancient  Masters  be  upon
our  poor  stricken  India  !

THEOSOPHY,  THE  SCIENTIFIC
BASIS   OF   RELIGION.*

Notwithstanding  the  very  complimentary  terms
kindly  employed  by  my  honoured  friend,  the
Chairman,  in  bespeaking  your  attention  to  the
remarks  I  shall  make,  I  feel  most  keenly  my
incapacity  to  deal  with  our  subject  as  it  deserves.
When  I  face  this  vast  audience,  and  recollect  that
it  represents  the  highest  culture  of  Bengal  ;  when  I
think  that  we  are  met  under  the  very  shadow  ol
Calcutta  University ;  when  I  reflect  that  these
walls  have  resounded  to  the  voices  of  native
orators,  whose  eloquence  can  hardly  be  surpassed
by  the  most  eminent  senators  in  Western  Parlia-
ments and  Congresses,  and  that,  from  the  very  spot
where  I  stand,  you  have  been  addressed  upon  the
most  burning  questions  in  religion  and  politics  by
Kally  Churn  Banner] i,  Lalmohun  Ghose,  Keshub
Chunder  Sen,  Surendra  Nath  Bannerji,  Kristo  Das
Pal,  Sivanath  Sastri,  and  Protap  Chunder  Mozum-
dar, — a  sense  of  personal  inferiority  to  those  great
masters  of  rhetoric  and  logic  oppresses  and  warns
me.  But  I  have  a  message  to  deliver — a  message
of  reproach  in  part,  but  also  one  of  encouragement.
I  may  not  soothe  your  ears    with  the  melody  of

*  A  LecLiue  Delivered  at  the  Town  Hall,  Cakutta,  llh  Aprils  1S82.

BASIS  OF  RELIGION.  1 1 7

your  own  gifted  speakers;  but  I  must  deliver  it,
though  all  of  them  were  here ;  ay,  though  all
the  great  dead  of  the  past  generations,  who  gave
renown  to  the  name  of  Bengal,  were  to  cluster
about  this  platform.  I  would  they  might  do  so  ;
indeed,  I  should  feel  more  sure  of  ^he  moral
regeneration  of  India,  if  those  glorious  ancestors  of
yours  could  but  confront  you  for  one  short  hour.
If  you  could  but  hear  what  they  would  say  of  the
ways  in  which  you  are  maintaining  their  honour
and  sustaining  their  dignity,  I  think  I  should  not
then  need  to  utter  a  single  word  :  one  look  at  the  ex-
pression of  their  faces,  as  their  glance,  of  mingled
reproach  and  displeasure  shot  through  to  the  very
marrow  of  your  being,  would  be  quite  enough.  If
you  want  to  estimate  modern  Bengal,  with  its
foreign  clothes  and  foreign  vices,  at  its  proper
valuation,  put  it  beside  ancient  Bengal.  Call  out
your  pertest  Babu,  who  has  fed  on  Spencer  and
Mill  until  he  fancies  himself  able  to  build  a  new
religion,  or  even  a  new  planet  ;  clothe  him  with  all
his  academic  honours  ;  stuff  his  hands  full  of  his
diplomas;  gather  around  him  all  the  paraphernalia  of
Western  culture,  including  the  spirituous  aids  to  re-
flection. If  we  were  toask  this  B.A. — this  Bad  Aryan
—to  give  to  the  present  audience  his  candid  opinion
of  himself,  he  would  probably  tell  you  that  he  was
the  type  and  the  bemc  ideal  of  Hindu  development
— a  fair  representative  of  what  young  India  might
become  under  the  fertilising  sprinkles  of  the  college
watering-pot.     But  if  we  had  the  power  to  evoke

Ii8  THEOSOFHY,   THE  SCIENTIFIC

the  shades  of  the  great  Menu,  of  Kapila,  Gautama,
Patanjali,  Kanada,  and  Veda  Vyasa  ;  of  Jaimini,
Narada,  Marichi,  Vasishta,  and  other  really  great
Hindus,  and  could  place  them  before  you  on  this
platform,  how  would  our  trousered  B.A.  appear
then  ?  That  is  the  gist  of  the  whole  question.  A
nation  which  has  had  representatives  such  as  those
I  have  named,  need  not  go  to  any  foreign  teachers
for  an  imprimatur  o\  culture.  When  they  can  match
•the  Aryan  Rishis,  then  it  will  be  time  enough  to
look  up  to  them  as  the  gods  of  the  academic
BraJimaloka.  And  that  is  part  of  my  message  to
young  Bengal.

I  know  that  the  first  question  which  arises  in  the
minds  of  my  audience  is,  what  motive  I  have  in
talking  thus.  You  listen  in  surprise  to  hear  a  white
man  speak,  as,  hitherto,  you  have  only  heard  your
orthodox  Hindus  speak.  And  as  you  have  always
observed  that  a  motive  underlies  all  human  action,
you  must  be  asking  yourselves  what  is  my  motive  ?
I  must  therefore  preface  my  discourse  with  some
personal  explanations.

Elsewhere  in  India  it  is  pretty  well  known  how
we  Theosophists  came  here,  and  why.  For  three
years — that  is,  since  February,  1879, — we  have  been
living  under  the  public  eye  at  Bombay,  and  every-
body knows  what  sort  of  people  we  are,  how  we
live,  and  what  we  do.  We  have  lived  down  serious
suspicions  and  calumnies.  I  could  not  give  you  a
better  proof  of  this  than  by  referring  you  to  the
action  of  the  Hindu  and  Parsi  educated  public  the

71. i SIS  OF  RELIGION.  119

other  day  when  a  ranting  missionary  from  my  own
country  Indulged  In  false  and  insulting  remarks
about  us,  In  one  of  his  public  lectures.  The  re-
sponse the  natives  made  showed  most  unmistakeably
that  his  slanders  had  Increased  rather  than  dimin-
ished their  friendliness  for  their  theosophist  friends.
It  will  be  so  here.  Though  this  Is  my  first  visit  to
Calcutta,  It  will  not,  I  trust,  be  the  last.  I  expect
henceforth  to  spend  at  least  two  or  three  months  of
each  year  in  Bengal,  and  you  will  thus  have  ample
opportunity  to  become  acquainted  with  me.  We
are  not  birds  of  passage  ;  we  have  not  come  to
India,  as  Sinbad  did  to  the  Valley  of  Diamonds,  to
pick  up  what  we  can,  and  after  a  time  flit  away.  We
have  not  the  least  intention  of  returning  to  our  own
countries  to  reside.  India  is  our  chosen  home,  the
land  of  our  adoption;  and  the  Hindus  are  our  dearest
friends,  If  not  our  brothers.  We  were  not  driven  out
of  our  Western  homes.  If  we  had  chosen  to  stop
there,  we  should  now  be  enjoying  all  comforts  and
pleasures.  In  my  native  land,  where  the  highest
offices  of  State  are  open  to  all  aspirants,  I  might
even  now,  if  I  should  return,  hold,  as  I  havefor  many
years  before  held,  posts  of  honour  and  importance.
One  of  our  most  influential  New  York  journals,  a
journal  which  circulates  a  lac  and  a  quarter  of
copies  every  week-day,  and  of  its  Sunday  edition
167,000  copies,  asked,  the  other  day,  why  I  should
expatriate  myself,  and  why  I  did  not  return  to  my
own  people  to  teach  them  about  Asiatic  philosophy?
Nor  did  I  leave  America  to  better  my  fortunes.     A

120  THEOSOniY,   THE  SCIENTIFIC

sorry  way  it  v\'ould  be  of  improving  one's  prospects
to  give  up  an  income  of  thousands  of  rupees,  and
devote  every  moment  of  one's  time  to  the  interests
of  a  philanthropic  society,  for  whose  support  I
must  pay  thousands  annually  out  of  my  private
means.  There  are  the  Treasurer's  accounts,
audited  and  certificated  by  the  Council  of  the
Society,  which  show  that  I  am  stating  the  bare
fact.  They  show  that  since  we  began  at  New  York
our  preparations  to  depart  for  India,  Madame
Blavatsky  and  I  have  given  towards  the  expenses
of  our  Society  more  than  Rs.  25,000.  And  since
we  came  we  have  not  asked  a  Hindu,  a  Parsi,  a
Buddhist,  or  any  one  else,  to  give  us  one  solitary
rupee  for  our  private  benefit.  Well,  admitting  all
this  to  be  true,  the  question  will  all  the  more  press
home  upon  you — what  is  our  motive,  why  should
we  take  up  this  life  of  public  drudgery,  move  over
Asia  like  uneasy  ghosts,  expose  ourselves  to  the
darts  of  slander  and  the  stings  of  suspicion  ?  I
shall  tell  you  ;  the  answer  is  simple  enough.  We
follow  an  idea  ;  and  for  it  we  face  obstacles,  dis-
comfort, and  danger,  incur  expense  and  trouble,
resign  as  worthless  what  men  usually  prize,  and
relinquishing  family  and  home,  country  and  friends,
make  a  new  home  in  Asia,  and  seek  friends  and
brethren  among  her  ancient  races.  We  are
covetous ;  yes,  but  it  is  for  knowledge.  We  are
ambitious  ;  yes,  but  only  for  a  place  among  those
who  have  loved  humanit}-,  irrespective  of  caste,
race  and  creed.     We  are   conspirators  \   )'es,    but

BA  SIS  OF  J^  RL  TGI  ON.  1 2 1

only  with  the  good  and  true  souls  who  have  deep
religious  aspirations,  and  who,  deploring  the
darkened  spiritual  state  of  mankind,  would  point
back  to  the  beacons  of  hope  that  the  Ris/iis  of  old
lit  on  the  mountain  peaks  of  Aryan  philosophy.
When  you  come  to  know  us,  you  will  recall  my
present  words,  and  be  ready  to  testify  that  I  told
you  only  the  truth.

But  how  comes  about  this  w^onder  that  we
foreigners  should  feel  so  deep  a  reverence  for
Hindu  philosophy,  and  why  even  then  should  we
have  left  our  country  to  come  here  ?

In  the  year  1874,  Madame  Blavatsky  and  I  met.
I  had  been  a  student  of  practical  psychology  for
nearly  a  quarter  of  a  century.  From  boyhood  no
problem  had  interested  me  so  much  as  the  mystery
of  man,  and  I  had  been  seeking  for  light  upon  it
wherever  it  could  be  found.  To  understand  the
physical  man,  I  had  read  something  of  anatom}-,
physiology  and  chemistry.  To  get  an  insight  into
the  nature  of  mind  and  thought,  I  had  read  the
various  authorities  of  orthodox  science,  and  practi-
cally investigated  the  heterodox  branches  of
phrenology,  physiognomy,  mesmerism  and  psycho-
metry.  To  understand  mesmerism  one  must  have
read  Von  Reichenbach's  "  Researches  on  Magnet-
ism, Electricity,  &c.,  &c.,  in  their  relations  to  the
Vital  Force,"  and  I  venture  to  say  that  no  one  can
possibly  comprehend  the  rationale  of  the  astound-
ing phenomena  of  modern  spiritualism,  who  has
not  prepared  himself  by  a  glance  at  all  the  subjects

122  THE  OS  0  PHY,    THE  SCIENTIFIC

above  enumerated.  So,  then,  this  had  been  my
bent  of  mind  since  boyhood,  and  although  I  ahvays
took  an  active  part  in  all  that  concerned  my
country  and  fellow-countrymen,  and  an  especially
active  one  during  our  late  Civil  War,  yet  my  heart
was  not  set  on  worldly  affairs.  In  the  year  above
mentioned  (1874),  I  was  investigating  a  most  start-
ling case  of  mediumship,  that  of  William  Eddy,  an
uneducated  farmer,  in  whose  house  were  nightly
appearing,  and  often  talking,  the  alleged  spirits  of
dead  persons.  I  will  not  go  into  particulars  just
now,  for  I  have  other  things  to  speak  about ;
perhaps  I  may  make  it  the  subject  of  some  future
discourse.  Suffice  it  that  with  my  own  eyes  I  saw,
within  the  space  of  about  three  months,  some  five
hundred  of  these  apparitions,  under  circumstances
which,  to  my  mind,  excluded  the  possibility  of
trickery  or  fraud.  My  observations  were  com-
municated to  a  New  York  daily  journal  during  the
whole  period,  and  the  facts  excited  the  greatest
wonder.  Madame  Blavatsky  and  I  met  at  this
farm-house,  and  the  similarity  of  our  tastes  for
mystical  research  led  to  an  intimate  acquaintance.
She  soon  proved  to  me  that,  in  comparison  with
even  the  chela  of  an  Indian  Ma/mtnia,  the  authori-
ties I  had  been  accustomed  to  look  up  to  knew
absolutely  nothing.  Little  by  little  she  opened
out  to  me  as  much  of  the  truth  as  my  experiences
had  fitted  me  to  grasp.  Step  by  step- 1  was
forced  to  relinquish  illusory  beliefs,  cherished
for    twenty  years.     And    as    the   light    gradually

BASIS  OF  RELIGION.  123

dawned  on  my  mind,  my  reverence  for  the  unseen
teachers  who  had  instructed  her  grew  apace.  At
the  same  time,  a  deep  and  insatiable  yearning-
possessed  me  to  seek  their  society,  or,  at
least,  to  take  up  my  residence  in  a  land
which  their  presence  glorified,  and  incorporate
myself  with  a  people  whom  their  greatness  en-
nobled. The  time  came  when  I  was  blessed  with
a  visit  from  one  of  these  MaJiatinas  in  my  own
room  at  New  York — a  visit  from  him,  not  in  the
physical  body,  but  in  the  "  double,"  or  Mayavi-
rupa.  When  I  asked  him  to  leave  me  some
tangible  evidence  that  I  had  not  been  the  dupe  of
a  vision,  but  that  he  had  indeed  been  there,  he
removed  from  his  head  the  puggri  he  wore,  and
giving  it  to  me,  vanished  from  my  sight.  That
cloth  I  have  still,  and  in  one  corner  is  marked  in
thread  the  cipher  or  signature  he  always  attaches
to  the  notes  he  writes  to  myself  and  others.  This
visit  and  his  conversation  sent  my  heart  at  one
leap  around  the  globe,  across  oceans  and  continents,
over  sea  and  land,  to  India,  and  from  that  moment
I  had  a  motive  to  live  for,  an  end  to  strive  after.
That  motive  was  to  gain  the  Aryan  wisdom  ;  that
end  to  work  for  its  dissemination.  Thenceforth  I
began  to  count  the  years,  the  months,  the  days,  as
they  passed,  for  they  were  bringing  me  ever  nearer
the  time  when  I  should  drag  my  body  after  the  eager
thought  that  had  so  long  preceded  it.  In  Novem-
ber, 1875,  we  founded  the  Theosophical  Society  as
a  nucleus  around  which  might  gather  all  those  of

124  THEOSOPIIY,    THE  SCIENTIFIC

every  race  and  land,  who  were  in  sympathy  with
our  mode  of  research  ;  and  as  no  such  body  could
have  any  permanence  unless  we  should  eliminate
the  ever  obvious  causes  of  disagreement  among
men — religious  bigotry  and  social  intolerance — we
organised  it  on  the  basis  of  universal  brotherhood.
The  idea  must  have  been  a  good  one,  since  it  has  suc-
ceeded. I  doubt  if  any  society  of  a  cognate  character
has  ever  so  rapidly  increased  as  ours.  We  already
have  branches  in  most  parts  of  the  world,  and  are
fast  overspreading  India  with  our  organizations.
The  branch  I  shall  tomorrow  form  at  Calcutta
will  be  the  twenty-fifth  in  this  country  established
since  February,  1879,  and  by  the  time  I  reach
Bombay  there  will  be  twenty-eight.  But  I  am
getting  ahead  of  my  subject:  let  me  turn.  During
the  three  years  w^ien  I  Avas  waiting  to  come  to
India,  I  had  other  visits  from  the  LlaJiatnias^  and
they  were  not  all  Hindus  or  Cashmeris.  I  know
some  fifteen  in  all,  and  among  them  Copts,
Tibetans,  Chinese,  Japanese,  Siamese,  a  Hun-
garian, and  a  Cypriote.  But,  whatever  they  are,
however  much  they  may  differ  externally  as  to
race,  religion  and  caste,  they  are  in  perfect  agree-
ment as  to  the  fundamentals  of  .occult  science  and
the  scientific  basis  of  religion.

The  long-wished-for  time  came  at  last ;  our
private  affairs  were  settled,  the  New  York  Society
was  placed  in  competent  hands  ;  and  my  colleague
and  I  embarked.  Many  friends  accompanied  us  to
the  vessel  to  say  good-bye,  and  their  waving  hand-

BASIS  OF  RELIGION,  125

kerchiefs,  which  we  watched  as  long  as  we  could  see
them,  were  a  testimony  to  the  exiles  that  they  were
leaving  loving  hearts  behind.  How  thoroughly,  not-
withstanding, I  had  transferred  my  love  to  the  coun-
try of  my  adoption,  you  may  imagine  when  I  tell  you
tliat  as  our  steamer  passed  out  of  the  harbour  to  the
ocean,  I  cast  no  "  longing,  lingering  look  behind."
Though  I  was  leaving  the  native  land  I  had  loved  so
dearly,  and  had  even  risked  my  life  for,  and  never
expected  to  behold  it  again,  I  did  not  even  give  it
the  tribute  of  a  sigh ;  but,  descending  to  my  cabin,
opened  the  map  of  India,  and  sent  my  thought  to
my  Land  of  Promise.  But  when,  after  buffeting  the
storms  of  various  waters,  we  neared  Bombay,  then
far  into  the  night,  alone  I  paced  the  forecastle  to
catch  the  first  glimpse  of  the  beacon-light  that
waited  to  welcome  me  home.  The  passengers  were
fast  asleep,  and  only  the  watch  on  deck  and  myself
were  there  to  see  the  stars  of  the  Indian  sky,  and  the
fire-seething  waves  of  the  Indian  sea.  The  midnight
bells  were  struck,  but  still  the  lighthouse  could  not
be  made  out.  At  last,  at  one  in  the  morning,  the
officer  on  duty,  who  knew  my  anxiety,  relieved  it
by  pointing  to  a  faintly  luminous  speck  at  the
water's  edge,  and  telling  me  that  that  was  Bombay
light.  My  heart  gave  a  throb,  as  perhaps  throbs
the  heart  of  an  old  Hindu  who  has  been  long  away
in  foreign  countries  ;  and  a  feeling  of  joy  and
pleasure  came  across  me  to  think  that  my  journey
was  ended,  and  my  real  life  about  to  begin.  I  had
pictured  to  myself  a  Hindu  nation  homogeneous,

126  THEOSOPHY,    THE  SCIENTIFIC

at  least,  as  regards  spirituality  and  love  of  their
ancestors — one  great  family,  rejoicing  in  the  Aryan
name,  and  with  a  religious  faith  built  upon  the
assurance,  if  not  the  knowledge,  of  theosophical
truth.  Though  I  knew  there  w^ere  religious  sects
and  cliques,  I  thought  that  these  barriers  were
not  high  enough  to  keep  Hindus  apart.  I  had
written  to  Keshub  Babu  to  ask  him  to  join  in  our
work,  and  I  was  ready  to  serve  in  any  subordinate
capacity,  under  and  with  anybody,  no  matter
whom,  in  the  interest  of  India  and  Indians.  I  only
asked  some  little  corner,  however  small,  w^here  I
might  incorporate  myself  with  their  national  life
and  thought  ;  and  as  I  asked  nothing  but  the
privilege  to  learn  and  work,  I  hoped  tobe  taken  at  my
word  and  tobe  viewed  as  a  friend.  But  I  was  not:
the  back  of  the  hand,  not  the  palm,  was  offered  me.
Dogged  by  the  Government  Police  as  suspects,
my  colleague  and  I  were  not  happy  enough  to  find
a  sure  refuge  in  Indian  hearts.  Our  char-
acters were  traduced  by  the  enemies  of
Indian  religion  without  a  protest  from  its
followers  ;  it  seemed,  in  fact,  as  though  we  were
doomed  to  see  every  hope  crushed — every  one  we
had  an  affection  for  turn  his  back  upon  us.  Thus
under  a  black  sky  of  trouble,  we  went  on  for  weary
months  together,  keeping  up  our  courage  by  re-
membering what  goal  we  had  in  view,  and  by
degrees  learning  to  pluck  success  from  the  very
thorn  bush  of  disaster.  We  founded  our  Bombay
Branch,  then  another  and  another ;  we  established

BASIS  OF  RELIGION.  127

our  magazine,  the  TJicosopJdst^  and  made  it  a  suc-
cess ;  we  went  to  Ceylon,  and  were  greeted  with
enthusiasm  ;  and  though  some  who  mistook  us  for
sectarians  have  broken  with  us,  the  third  year  of
our  Indian  work  now  opens  up,  bright  and  full  of
promise.  The  worst,  we  think,  is  over ;  and  every
month,  as  I  remarked  in  a  recent  lecture,  we  are
being  drawn  nearer  and  nearer  to  the  Indian  heart.
I  venture  to  take  thevastnessof  the  present  audience
as  a  proof  of  this  fact,  for  I  cannot  believe  it  is  only
idle  curiosity  that  has  brought  all  of  you  to-
gether. Our  appeals  to  you  to  remember  the
glories  of  Aryavarta  and  strive  to  revive  them,
have  not  fallen  upon  deaf  ears  ;  the  dry  bones  are
stirring  with  the  flutter  of  a  higher  and  nobler
spiritual  life ;  the  echoes  of  sympathy  are  coming
towards  us  from  North  and  South,  from  East
and  West.  Bombay  has  spoken,  the  North-
West  has  spoken.  Madras  has  spoken,  and  there
have  even  been  whispers  from  Bengal,  though  we
have  never,  until  now,  spoken  to  Bengali  audiences.
Away  with  despondency  and  dejection  !  The  morn
is  breaking,  and  if  we  wait  but  a  little  longer,  we
may  see  the  perfect  day.

No  one  feels  more  sensibly  than  I  do  the  anomaly
that  a  white  man  should  be  appealing  to  you  to
study  your  religion.  This  is  work  for  your  learned
Pundits.  But  they  are  silent  ;  and  what  is  to  be
done  ?  I  met  the  greatest  Pundits  of  India  at
Benares,  and,  after  showing  to  them  the  effects  of
Western    culture  upon    the   religious    thought    of

128  THE  OS  0  PHY,    THE  SCIENTIFIC

Young  India,  implored  them  to  rise  to  the  occasion,
and  to  do  their  duty.  As  though  the  voice  of  the
Rishis  were  speaking  by  my  Hps,  I  arraigned  them
at  the  bar  of  their  country,  and  said  that  history
would  not  hold  them  guiltless,  if  the  entire  body  of
our  youth  should  fall  into  materialist  scepticism.
I  begged  that  they  would  at  least  compile  tracts
and  catechisms,  which  should  embody  the  great
principles  of  morality  and  religion,  the  broad  out-
lines of  philosophy  and  spiritual  science  laid
down  in  the  Sastras,  so  that  it  might  be  seen
that  a  Hindu  need  look  nowhere  outside  his  own
literature  for  inspiration  to  noble  deeds  and  noble
living.  The  Pundits  listened,  applauded,  signed
articles  of  union  between  their  Sabha  and  our
Society,  and  then — did  nothing  more.  I  am  wait-
ing on  and  hoping  almost  against  hope  that  from
among  the  greatest  of  your  living  scholars  will
step  forth  a  moral  regenerator  to  lead  you
back  from  your  desultory  wanderings  to  the
solid  ground  of  Hindu  philosophy.  Must  India
call  in  vain  ?  Must  the  empty  voice  give  back  the
hollow  echoes  of  her  appeal  ?  Is  there  not,  even  in
Bengal,  one  Aryan  heart  that  can  be  touched  with
the  fire  from  the  sacred  altars  of  religion  ?  Where
is  the  Brahmin  who  is  able,  like  his  pure  and  holy
forefather,  to  perform  the  AgniJiotra  in  the  true
way,  and  draw  from  the  ambient  sky  the  fire  of
Agni  upon  his  kusa  grass  ?  Where  is  the  Brahmin
who  has  the  same  fire  in  the  hollow  of  his  hand  ?
Alas  !   no   answer    comes.      There  are   thousands

BASIS  OF  RELIGION.  129

of  Brahmins,  but  no  adept  AgniJiotris.  Among
these  swarming  millions,  and  amid  this  teeming
life,  the  aspirant  lor  spiritual  instruction  finds
scarcely  a  single  Guru  who  can  practically  teach
the  Yoga  science.  Hundreds  of  bright  young  men
are  suffering  from  spiritual  starvation.  Can  we
help  them  ?  Is  there  no  hope  to  offer  the  youths
who  have  learnt  to  regard  modern  science  as  the
sole  authority  in  questions  of  a  religious  and
scientific  nature  ?  For  that  is  the  ordeal  that  the
advocates  of  Aryan  philosophy  must  pass.  It  is
useless  to  try  and  cover  it  up,  or  evade  the  alterna-
tive :  either  we  must  prove  Hinduism  to  stand
upon  the  ground  of  science,  or  leave  it  to  its
fate.  I  think  we  can  hold  out  this  hope,  and  can
give  this  assurance.  I  believe  that  modern  research
has  arrived  at  certain  facts  which  help  us  to  under-
stand our  subject  if  we  collate  and  adjust  them  to
each  other.  And  this  brings  us  to  consider  the
second  part  of  our  discourse — an  explanation  of
the  word  Theosophy,  and  its  application  to  the
Yoga  Vidya.

Properly  speaking,  Theosophy  may  be  defined  as
the  knowledge  of  "  Divine "  wisdom.  If  there
were  a  Western  science  of  Psychology,  worthy  of
the  name,  this  would  be  its  crowning  glory  ;  the
seeker  after  knowledge  of  the  "  soul  "  would  end  by
becoming  a  Theosophist.  For  one  can  gain  what
is  called  Divine  wisdom  only  in  one  way — through
the  development  of  the  psychic  powers.  Religion
is  most  strictly  a  personal  affair :  every  man  makes

130  THEOSOPHY,   THE  SCIENTIFIC

his  own  religion  and  his  own  God  :  that  is  to  say,
if  he  has  any  idea  at  all  about  religion  or  God,  they
must  be  his  own,  not  somebody's  else  ideas.
Another  man  can  no  more  think  for  you  in  these
matters,  so  as  to  do  you  any  good,  than  he  can  eat
or  sleep  for  you.  You  may  think  some  man  very
great,  and  be  ready  to  wash  and  garland  and  swing
him  like  an  idol,  and  eat  the  dust  of  his  feet,  and
all  that  sort  of  thing ;  and  you  may  fancy  that  his
commonest  utterances  are  divinely  inspired.  You
may  call  j'ourself  a  Tantrika,  a  Sivaite,  a  Vaish-
nava,  a  Buddhist,  or  whatever  you  please.  But,  after
all,  when  it  comes  to  your  actual  religious  experi-
ence, it  will  be  your  experience,  measured  and
limited  hy  your  own  personal,  psychical  and  theoso-
phical  capacity.  It  is  simply  tyranny  to  try  and
force  a  particular  religion  upon  any  man.  So,  as  I
said  before,  religion  is  something  personal  ■;  and  it
is  also  something  sacred,  something  not  to  be
rudely  interfered  with  and  pried  into.  The  true
moralist  will  exert  his  influence  to  make  his  fellow-
men  live  up  to  the  best  features  of  their  respective
faiths  ;  it  is  the  most  audacious  of  experiments  to
try  and  glue  together  bits  of  a  number  of  good  re-
ligions  into  a  new  mosaic.

I  shall  not  enter  here  into  any  discussion  as  to
what  is  meant  by  the  word  "  Soul."  I  have  my
ideas,  and  they  may  conflict  with  yours.  Call  it
what  you  please,  the  only  radical  point  to  reach  is  the
fact  that  in  the  nature  of  man  there  is  this  depart-
ment which  is  called  psychical,  and  which  is  not  to

BASIS  OF  A' ELI GI ON.  131

be  included  in  the  most  objective,  or  physical  and
mechanical  part  of  the  self.  The  orthodox  psycho-
logist will  not  concede  you  this  point.  He  will  meet
you  at  the  very  threshold  of  the  inquiry,  and  affirm
that  there  is  no  more  of  man  than  is  embraced  in
the  ingenious  mechanism  of  his  body.  The  English
poet,  Pope,  coined  an  expression  to  signify  his
scorn  of  a  man  who  was  devoid  of  great  qualities —
one  who  was

**  Fix'd,  like  a  plant,  to  its  peculiar  spot,
To  draw  nutrition,  propagate  and  rot."

But  if  you  add  to  this  the  intellectual  capacity  as
the  result  of  cerebral  function,  have  we  not  here  the
type  of  the  "  man  "  of  modern  Psychology  ?  What
does  that  science  make  of  the  human  being  but  a
digestive,  locomotive,  procreating,  and  thinking
mechanism  ?  Can  you  find  anything  better  than
this  in  the  philosophy  of  Herbert  Spencer  and  the
entire  a  posteriori  school  ?  I  will  ^\mq  you  a  year
to  pore  over  Mr.  Spencer's  Principles  of  PsycJiology^
or  over  The  Emotions  and  the  Will,  and  The  Senses
and  the  Intellect,  of  Professor  Bain  (whom
some  of  the  greatest  critics  of  our  day  consider  as
the  master  psychologist  of  the  age),  and  then  defy
you  to  find  the  secret  of  true  psychology  ;
or,  if  you  choose,  you  may  con  the  works  of
James  Mill,  Cousin,  Locke,  Kant,  Hobbes,  Hegel,
Fichte,  Huxley,  Haeckel,  John  Stuart  Mill,
Comte,  and  all  the  learned  writers  of  the  kind.
You  will  see  a  good  deal  of  protoplasm,  and  pro-
togen,  and  monads ;  but  you  will  not  discover  the

132  THEOSOPHY,   THE  SCIENTIFIC

nature  of  "  soul  "   in  any  of  them.     After  wading

through  their  heavy  volumes,  you  will  arrive  at  the

conclusion  that  they  are  little  better  than  obscura-

tionists — intellectual   clouds  between  you  and  the

sun  of  spiritual  truth.     You  will  find  some  of  them

light,  fleecy  clouds,  some  so  thin  and  vapoury  as  to

let  through  a  good  deal  of  light  ;  others  black  and

murky  clouds,  bursting  with  suppressed  lightnings.

If  you  go  on  far  enough,  you  will  see  that  these

heavier  intellectual  masses,  like  the  prototypes  in

Nature  with  which  we  are  comparing  them,  will

discharge  their  thunders  at  each  other  as  they  come

into  opposition,  and  then  there  is  a  great  noise  and

heavy  discharge  of  critical  artillery.     But  the  net

result,  after  all  is  over,  and  you   digest  your  notes

and  collect  your  confused  thoughts,  will  be  what  I

said — you  will    have   puzzled   your   brain    with   a

multitude  of  words    and    got    no     clear    idea   of

Psychology.      For   they    confuse    the   intellectual

experiences  of  the  human  brain  with  the  other  and

totally  different   experiences  of  the  real   Psyche  !

And  though  they  wrote  ten  times  as  many  books,

since  they   would  all    be  written    upon    this  false

hypothesis,   they  would   be   no    nearer   the  mark.

These  Western   psychologists   have,  we  may  say,

chopped  man  into  minute  shreds.     There  is  not  an

atom  of  him  (and  by  him  I  mean  their  "  him,"  not

the    complete   man),  not  a   bone,    muscle,    nerve,

cell,  or   ganglion,    that   they   have   not   dissected,

and   fumbled  over,  and   analysed.     He  has  not  a

feeling,  an  emotion,  a  cognition — not  a  single  or

BASIS  OF  RELIGION.  133

complex  intellectual  process — that  they  have  not
pulled  about,  weighed  in  the  scales  of  logic,  tested
with  the  resolvents  of  reason,  ticketed,  and  laid
away  in  the  psychological  herbaria.  But  I  defy
the  whole  of  them,  from  Locke  to  Bastian,  and
their  whole  army  of  followers,  to  show  you  one
single  discovery  that  explains  the  psychic  pheno-
mena whose  occurrence  has  been  observed  in  India
from  the  remotest  ages,  and  the  laws  of  whose
causation  are  explained  in  the  Aryan  Sastras.
The  earnest  seeker  after  Divine  wisdom  —  the
true  Theosophist — will  turn  away  from  western
"  authorities  "  with  a  sense  of  weariness  and  de-
spair. To  express  it  truthfully  in  one  word,  I  must
call  the  soul-science  of  the  Aristotelians  of  the  now
dominant  European  school, subcuticular — skin-deep
— Psychology,  the  psychology  of  what  lies  inside
the  human  skin  !  Their  battles  are  all  foiigJit  tinder
the  epidermis ;  they  understand  the  psychological
effect  of  external  objects  and  phenomena  upon  the
human  mind  ;  but  a  transcuticular  man  is  to  them
a  scientific  absurdity.  Their  man  is  acted  upon
centripetally  by  Nature,  but  does  not  react  centri-
fugally  upon  it.  Asiatic  philosophers  recognize
man  as  comprising  three  groups  or  divisions  of  self-
hoodf  Thtrc  \s,  first,  Sthul  Sharira — the  physical
— the  grosser,  more  material,  objective  and  per-
ceptible ;  second,  Mayavi  Rupa — the  psychical,  or
less  perceptible,  though  still  material ;  tJiird,  the
Atnia — the  spiritual,  or  imperceptible  and  trans-
cendental.    With   a   minuteness   of  analysis   that

134  TIIEOSOPHY,    THE  SCIENTIFIC

matches  that  of  the  European  ps}xhologists,  they
have  again  sub-divided  these  three  groups  into
sub-sections.  But  there  is  this  inestimable  advan-
tage on  their  side,  that  they  prove  their  proposi-
tions experimentally.  When  they  talk  of  a
"  double,"  or  Mayavi  Riipa,  or  Stiks/una  S/iarira,
they  produce  the  thing  itself:  they  sliozu  tJiemsclvcs
to  yoH  ill  their  doubles.  They  will  leave  their
physical  bodies  {StJinl  Sharira)  in  saiiiadJu,  a  state
of  lethargy,  at  some  distant  place,  force  the
"  double  "  out  through  its  pores,  and  to  that  trans-
ferring their  consciousness,  with  all  its  train  of  in-
tellectual and  intuitional  cognitions  and  feelings,
visit  and  make  themselves  visible  to  you.  Fancy
Professor  Bain,  or  Mr.  Mill,  or  I\Ir.  Spencer,  under-
taking to  argue  on  Psychology  with  a  man  in  the
Jllayavi  Riipa  !  \Miere  would  be  then  all  their
"  quips  and  quilibets,"  their  hard  Greek  and  Latin
terms,  their  speculative  h}-potheses  ?  Until  that
moment,  they  would  have  thought  themselves
authorities,  but  now  the  spectres  of  their  books
would  rise  before  them  only  in  reproach.  Their
antecedent  mental  state,  as  contrasted  with  their
present  one,  might  be  likened  to  that  of  a  philo-
sopher who  had  speculated  upon  the  possibility  of
aerolites,  but  of  a  sudden  had  been  hit  hard  by  a
fragment  of  one  tumbling  on  him  from  the  sky.
Or  we  may  take  an  example  even  more  extreme.
Let  us  suppose  that  great  man  and  thinker,  Mr.
Spencer,  sitting  in  his  arm-chair  at  dusk  in  his  library.
He  has  been  writing  the  seventeenth  chapter  of

BASIS  OF  religion:  135

the  second  volume  of  his  Principles  of  Psychology,
and  has  worked  out  the  problem  of  the  "  Completed
Differentiation  of  Subject  and  Object"  to  his  per-
fect satisfaction.     He  has  satisfied  himself  that  the
phase  of  emotion  is  stimulated  by  memories  of  past
experiences  ;     his     hand    has    just    traced    these
words  : — "  Such     components     of     consciousness,
pleasurable  and   painful,  divisible  into  classes  and
sub-classes,    differ    greatly   from    the   components
thus  far  described  ;  being  extremely  vague,  being
unlocalizable  in  space,  and  being  but  indefinitely
localizable  in   time "  (op.  cit.  p.  467).     He  has  de-
scribed to  us  the  effect  produced  upon  his  state  of
quiescence  by  hearing  at  his  back  a  voice  which  he
recognizes  as  the  voice  of  a  friend:  and,  as  he  tells
us,  "  a  wave  of  pleasurable  feeling"  upsets  certain
antecedent  sets  of  "  vivid  states,"  known   to  him  as
the  parts  of  his  body,  a  feeling  of  muscular  tension
is  excited,  "  the  emotion  felt  goes  on  presently  to
initiate  other   muscular   tensions,    and    after  them
special  sounds  " — he  speaks.     And  now,  his  chapter
finished  and   his   pen   thrown  aside,  he  muses.     A
wonderful  phenomenon  occurs — one  that  has  hap-
pened   to    and    been     recorded    by    other    great
scholars.     Out  of  the  reasoning,  analysing,  digestive
machine  that  the  world,    by  visual,  auditive,  and
tactual    observations,    recognize,    as    I\Ir.    Spencer,
oozes  a  whitish  vapour  which  at  first  a  cloud,  con-
denses into  a  man.     It  is  not  only  a  man  but  that
very   man,   I\Ir.   Spencer,  his  actual  counterpart  or
"  double,"   his  Mayavi-nipa.      At  last   it   is    fully

136  THEOSOPIiy,    THE  SCIENTIFIC

formed,  and  in  the  same  degree  as  the  Hght  of  in-
telligence   comes    into    its    eyes,    the    same    light
diminishes  in  the  eyes  of  the  musing  philosopher.
The  synthetic  man,  who  but  just  now  was  building
air-castles  with  walls  and  foundations  of  words,  has
divided  into  two  parts,  and  the  supreme  intellectual
activity,  as  well   as   the  supreme  consciousness  of
selfhood,  is  transferred  to  that  part  which  is  now
outside  the  skin  that  was  the  philosopher's  tiltima
tJmle  but  just  now.     Can  we  not  imagine  what  this
new-born  self  would  say  to  the  heavier  body  before
it  ?     Let  it  speak — "  Here  I  am,  and  there  you  are,
O  man  !     I  am  ego — self ;   you  a  machine.     You
were  my  prison  and  jailer  ;  but  see,  I  have  escaped.
Henceforth  I  leave  you,  I  enter  you,  at  will.     You
cannot  detain  me,  you  cannot  ignore  me,  you  sJiall
not  silence  me.     I   am  the  conscious  entity,  you   a
vegetating    mechanism    of    bones,   and    flesh    and
nerves.     How  now  about  your  emotions  and  will,
your    grey-matter    vesicles    and   your   white-fibre
telegraph   lines?     Come,  philosopher,  rouse  your-
self and  debate  with  me.     I   would  have  you  teach
me  psychology.     You  write  learnedly  about  sub-
ject   and    object.      You   have   cleverly   told   your
readers   that  you  cannot  frame  any  psychological
conception  without  looking  at  internal  co-existences
and  sequences  in  their  adjustments  to  external  co-
existences and  sequences  {pp.  cit.,  i.  p.   133)  :  now
here  we  are — you  there  with  your  thinking  machi-
nery inside,  and  I  here,  with  my  intellectual  powers
outside,   the  physical   ]\Ir.   Spencer.      Come,  since

BASIS  OF  RELIGION.  137

you  are  fond  of  sequences,  follow  me^  if  you  can,  to
the  high  plateau  of  the  Himavat.  There  we  shall
find  men  who  hiozv  Psychology  instead  of  dreaming
about  it ;  men  who  are  the  successors  of  a  thousand
generations  of  Aryan  and  Hindu  sages,  who,  all
this  time,  have  known  what  man  is,  and  what  his
powers  are.  Your  school  of  metaphysics,  not  yet  a
century  old,  is  a  thing  of  yesterday  as  compared
with  the  hoary  science  of  the  Rishis,  the  Arahats,
and  the  Medean  Magi.  In  the  pride  of  your  re-
cently enfranchised  intellects,  you  Western  biolo-
gists and  psychologists  are  trying  to  climb  the  sky
of  occult  science,  wherein  alone  can  be  found  the
truth  about  man  and  nature.  Dull  clod  of  earth,
component  of  ashes  and  gases  and  water,  it  was  I
who  illumined  and  inspired  you  ;  I  who  gave  you
such  intuitions  of  Divine  wisdom  as  you  had,  de-
spite the  incubus  of  your  vaunted  reason  !  I  am
iJie  Spencer,  you  but  my  covering.  You  are  of  the
ground  ;  I  of  the  infinite  and  eternal  essence  of
Nature  ! "  What  can  you  answer — M.A.  of  the
University  of  Calcutta — though  you  glitter  with
medals,  and  are  clothed  in  honours  as  with  a  gar-
ment ?  Theory  is  one '  thing,  fact  another.  Do
you  cling  to  the  theory  of  Germany  or  of  Edinburgh,
when  you  can  learn  the  fact  at  the  asrainanis  of
the  Neilgherries  and  the  Himalayas  ?

Mr.  John  Stuart  Mill  {Dissertations  and  Discus-
sions^ iii.  97)  makes  a  bold  assertion.  He  says: —
"  The  sceptre  of  Psychology  has  decidedly  returned

138  THEOSOPIIY,   THE  SCIENTIFIC

to  this  island  "  (Great  Britain).  Sceptre,  indeed  !
He  talks  as  though  it  were  some  royal  bauble,  like
the  Koh-i-noor,  that  could  be  looted  and  sent  home
by  a  P.  and  O.  Steamer  !  The  sceptre  of  Psycho-
logy is  wielded  on  the  Himavat,  and  no  modern
empiric  can  clutch  that  rod  of  power,  that  staff  of
authority.  The  mesmerist  knows  something  about
Psychology,  the  modern  spiritualist  knows  some-
thing, and  so  does  the  student  of  Psychometry.
Their  knowledge  is  based  upon  experimental  re-
searcli.  They  may  not  be  learned  anatomists,
morphologists,  or  biologists ;  but,  perhaps,  they
have  a  better  idea  of  the  whole  nature  of  man  than
any  of  these.  They  have  seen  one  from  whom  the.
conscious  Ego  had  stepped  out,  and  left  the  bod}^
not  a  dead  thing,  but  living,  W\^  Jiv-Atma,  or  life-
principle,  being  in  it.  The  dull  eye  of  the  body,  in
which  no  intelligence  shines ;  the  listless  apathy
and  muscular  relaxation  ;  the  reduced  temperature
of  flesh  ;  the  stopped  or  fluttering  heart — all  these
have  convinced  them  that  it  is  not  the  bodily  me-
chanism that  is  the  real  man ;  and  this  conviction
becomes  a  certainty  when  one  has  seen  a  body  thus
inert,  and,  at  the  same  time,  seen  the  double  of  the
man  moving  about,  with  full  consciousness,  doing
intelligently  the  acts  of  a  responsible  being,  and  in
every  way  showing  that  the  physical  body  is  but  a
habitable  mechanism,  of  itself  unspiritual,  if  not
altogether  irresponsible.  In  the  ordinary  experi-
ments of  Mesmerism,  when  the  patient  is  thrown
into  the  state  of  ecstasis,  one  usually  observes  that

BASIS  OF  RELIGION.  I39

the  body  has   passed  into  a  state  whose  physical
appearances  closly  resemble  death.     I   have  stood
by  a  person   in  this  death-like  lethargy,  and  found
there  was   neither  pulse,  animal   heat,  nor  breathy
while,  at  the  same  time,  the  inner  self  of  the  ecstatic
was   apparently   soaring   in   the   supernal  spheres,
keenly  alive  to   its   rapturous   experiences.     In    a
book  of  mine  {People  from  the  Other  World),  which
records  my   researches  on  the   Eddy  mediumistic
phenomena,    I    have    described     the     case    of    a
Mrs.    Compton,  whom    I    saw   in    such    a    dead-
alive  condition,  after  one  of  the   most  marvellous
seances  on  record.     Well,  this  something  that  comes
out   of  the   human    body    is,  in   the  judgment  of
occultists,  the  soul-principle — the  responsible  en-
tity, the  part  of  a   man   which,  whether  inside  or
outside   the   body,    is    that    which    acquires    the
certainty  of  Divine  wisdom.     It   is   this   that  be-
comes the  true  Theosophist.     And,  as   this  is   not
restricted   by  the  hard   limits   of  creed,  race,  pre-
judice, caste,  and   other  external   relations,  which
hedge    about  the  material   or    physical  man,   you
will  observe  that  when  this  self  is  thoroughly  freed
from  the  restrictive  environments  of  society,  it  must
be  free  from  our  prejudices,  hatreds  and  antipathies,
of  one  sort  or  another.    This  is  the  part  of  a  man  that
becomes  an  adept,  and  the  very  name  of  MaJiatnia
(great  soul),  that  you  have  called  it  by  for  countless
generations,  shows  how  well  this  has  been  under-
stood in  India.     When  the  Yogi  practises  dharana,
dhyan,  and  samadhi';^  it  is  for  the  purpose  of  getting

*■  Three  stages  of  self-induced  ecstasy  and  trance.

I40  TIIEOSOPHY,   THE  SCIENTIFIC

himself — that  is  his  real  self — disentans^led  from
the  illusions  of  the  bodily  senses,  which  continually
cheat  us  as  to  what  is  real  and  what  unreal.  He
strives  to  evolve  this  astral  self,  and  to  purify  that  to
the  nearest  possible  approximation  of  absolute
spirit.  There  are  four  stages  of  Yoga.  In  the  first,
the  Yogi  begins  to  learn  the  first  forms  of  Yoga^
and  to  fight  his  battle  with  the  animal  nature.  In
the  next,  having  learnt  the  forms,  he  advances
towards  perfect  knowledge.  In  the  third,  the
advance  continues,  and  he  overcomes  all  the
primary  and  subtle  forces — that  is  to  say,  he  van-
quishes the  nature  spirits,  or  elementals,  resident  in
the  four  kingdoms  of  nature  ;  and  neither  fire  can
burn,  water  drown,  earth  crush,  nor  poisonous  air
suffocate,  his  bodily  frame.  He  is  no  longer
dependent  upon  the  limited  powers  of  the  five
senses  for  knowledge  of  surrounding  Nature  ;  he
has  developed  a  spiritual  hearing  that  makes  the
most  distant  and  most  hidden  sounds  audible,
a  sight  that  sweeps  the  area  of  the  whole
solar  system,  and  penetrates  the  most  solid  bodies
along  with  the  hypothetical  ether  of  modern  science;
he  can  make  himself  as  buoyant  as  a  thistle-down,
or  as  heavy  as  the  giant  rock  ;  he  can  subsist  with-
out food  for  inconceivably  long  periods,  and,  if  he
chooses,  can  arrest  the  ordinary  course  of  nature,  and
escape  bodily  death  to  an  inconceivably  protracted
age.  Having  learnt  the  laws  of  natural  forces,  the
causes  of  phenomena,  and  the  sovereign  capabilities
of  the  human  will,  he  may   make  "  miracles  "  his

BASIS  OF  RELIGION.  14T

playthings,  and  do  wonders  that  would  take  the  con-
ceit out  of  even  a  modern  philosopher.  He  can  walk
upon  water,  without  even  wetting  the  soles  of  his
feet ;  or,  sitting  in  dhyan,  can,  by  inward  concentra-
tion, so  change  the  magnetic  polarity  of  his  body
that  it  will  rise  from  the  ground  and  be  self-sus-
pended in  the  air.  Or,  if  he  throws  himself  into
the  fourth  and  deepest  state  of  abstraction,  he
will  then  have  so  withdrawn  the  life-principle  from
the  outer  to  the  inner  surfaces  of  the  body,  that
you  may  tie  him  in  a  sack  and  bury  him  under-
ground for  weeks  together,  and  when  dug  up  and
rubbed  and  handled  in  a  certain  way,  he  will
revive  to  perfect  consciousness.  Your  distin-
guished and  honoured  countryman.  Dr.  Rajend-
ralala  Mittra,  tells  me  that  when  a  boy,  he
saw  the  Sadhu  (ascetic),  whom  some  wood-choppers
found  in  the  Sunderbunds  jungle,  and  brought  up
to  Calcutta.  He  was  found  sitting,  like  a  stiffened
corpse,  with  his  legs  twisted  through  the  roots  of  a
tree.  At  Calcutta  he  unhappily  fell  into  the  hands
of  two  fools,  whose  tipsy  folly — as  I  am  told,  though
I  speak  under  correction^made  them  practically
his  murderers.  Not  able  to  arouse  him  by  shout-
ing, pushing,  and  beating,  they  put  fire  into  his
hand,  and  plunged  him  into  deep  water  in  the
Ganges  with  a  rope  about  his  neck,  as  though  he
were  a  ship's  anchor,  and  twice  kept  him  there
all  night.  They  pried  his  tetanous  jaws  apart,
put  beef  into  his  mouth,  and  poured  brandy
down    his   throat.      Finally    to   prove   their   own

142  THEOSOPHY,  THE  SCIENTIFIC

shamelessness,  and  to  make  their  memory  hateful  for
ever,  this  Hindu  Rajah  and  this  Enghshman  set
upon  the  poor  saint  whose  emaciated  body  had
been  left  by  him,  as  he  thought,  in  the  safe  solitude
of  the  jungle,  where  tigers  and  serpents  would  not
harm  him,  while  his  soul  went  out  in  search  of
Divine  truth,  these  cruel,  impious  beasts  set
upon  him  an  abandoned  creature  of  the  other
sex  to  pollute  him  with  her  unholy  touch  !  Oh  I
shame  upon  such  specimens  of  humanity !  By
their  cruel  violence  they  finally  awoke  the
Sadhu  from  his  lethargy,  and  his  first  utterance
was,  not  a  curse  upon  his  tormentors,  not  a  burst
of  indignant  invective,  but  a  plaintive  and  reproach-
ful cry,  "  O  why,  sirs,  did  you  disturb  me ;  I  had
done  you  no  harm  ?  "  Shortly  after  he  died  from
the  effects  of  the  food-poison  they  had  forced  into
him.

This  happened  some  forty  years  ago.  But  do  you
suppose  Calcutta  is  any  better  now,  or  a  safer  place
for  a  real  Sadhu  to  trust  himself  in  ?  I  think  not  ;
and,  in  my  opinion,  if  any  one  of  }'ou  should  want
to  find  any  better  type  of  Yogi  than  the  painted
impostors  who  perambulate  your  streets,  you  will
have  to  go  far  away  from  the  city  gates  in  search  of
him.

At  Lahore  I  met  the  son  of  a  native  gentleman,
still  residing  in  a  neighbouring  place,  who  was  an
eye-witness  to  the  burial  of  a  Sad/m,  in  the  presence
of  Maharajah  Runjit  Singh — a  case  that  has  be-
come historical.     The  particulars  are  given  by  Sir

BASIS  OF  RELIGION,  143

Claude  Wade,  the  Political  Resident,  in  his  Camp
and  Court  of  Riinjit  Singh,  and  by  Dr.  MacGregor,
then  Residency  Surgeon,  in  his  History  of  the  Sikh
War.  This  Sadhn  was  buried  alive  for  forty  days,  a
perpetual  guard  being  kept,  night  and  day,  over  the
spot.  The  English  officials  saw  him  buried  and
also  exhumed,  and  Dr.  MacGregor  gives  a  profes-
sional diagnosis  of  the  case.  When  uncovered,  the
man's  body  was  shrunken  and  dried  like  a  stick  of
wood  ;  the  tongue,  which  at  the  burial  had  been
turned  back  into  the  throat,  had  become  like  a
piece  of  horn ;  and  eyes,  ears,  and  every  other
orifice  of  the  body,  had  been  stopped  with  plugs  of
ghee  (clarified  butter).  Upon  returning  to  his
external  consciousness,  the  Sadhn  told  them  that
he  had  been  enjoying  the  blissful  society  of  Yogis
and  saints,  and  that  if  the  Maharajah  wished  it,  he
was  quite  ready  to  be  buried  over  again.

There  is — to  say  nothing  of  the  Aryan  and  post-
Aryan  Sastras,  which,  as  you  know,  are  full  of  such
things — a  whole  literature  of  Mysticism  among  the
European  nations,  and  the  annals  of  the  Christian
Church  teem  with  testimonies  of  ecstatics  and
visionaries  who,  escaping  from  the  body  while  alive,
have  penetrated  the  inner  world  and  seen  divine
things.  No  one  can  read  the  mystical  literature  of
the  Christian  and  other  churches  without  beinor
struck  with  the  idea  that  the  visions  of  an  uninitiated
seer  are  invariably  mixed  up  with  his  own  indivi-
duality. His  subjective  prejudices  and  preconcep-
tions give  objective  colour  and  shape  to  the  objects

144  THEOSOPHY,    7 HE  SCIENTIFIC

he  encounters  in  his  supra-physical  life.  The
Christian  sees  the  Heaven  of  his  Apocalypse,  or  his
Milton  ;  the  Parsi,  the  Chinvat  Bridge  of  Souls
guarded  by  the  dread  Maiden  and  her  dogs  ;  the
Mussulman,  the  Gardens  of  the  Blessed,  with  their
houris  and  never-ending  delights.  Swedenborg,
the  Swedish  seer,  who  developed  his  clairvoyance
when  past  the  middle  age,  and  after  he  had
devoted  many  years  to  scientific  pursuits  and
religious  thought,  saw  a  system  of  correspondences
which  explained  and  illuminated,  as  he  imagined,
the  dead-letter  of  the  Bible,  of  whose  divine
authority  he  was  already  convinced.  The  visions
of  my  almost  life-long  friend,  Andrew  Jackson
Davis,  have  a  similarly  subjective  character.

In  all  these  cases,  the  seer  has  not  passed  out  of
the  circle  of  illusion,  he  has  not  yet  come  into  the
fourth  stage  of  Yoga,  as  defined  by  Patanjali.  In
this  fourth  stage  "  the  Yogi,  loses  all  personality
and  all  consciousness  of  separate  existence  ;  all  the
operations  of  intellect  become  extinct,  and  spirit
alone  remains."  The  Moksha  of  the  Hindu  is  this
pure  transcendental  state  indefinitely  prolonged —
an  existence  in  which  all  the  causes  of  sorrow  beine
absent,  there  can  be  no  sorrow ;  and  the  causes  of
illusions  being  left  behind,  there  can  be  no  illusion
but  the  absolute  truth  is  known  in  its  unveiled
splendour.  The  Theosophist  is  a  man  who,  what-
ever be  his  race,  creed,  or  condition,  aspires  to
reach  this  height  of  wisdom  and  beatitude  by  self-
development  ;  and,  therefore,  you  will  see  that  in  a

8AS/S  OF  RELIGION.  145

Theosophlcal  Society  like  that  we  have  founded —
and  which  we  hope  many  of  you  will  join — to  have
one  creed  for  our  members  to  subscribe  to,  or  one
form  of  prayer  for  them  to  adopt,  or  an}^  rules  that
would  interfere  with  their  individual  relations  to
caste,  or  any  other  social  and  external  environment
not  actually  antipathetic  to  Theosophical  research,
would  be  impossible.  You  will  also  infer  that,  de-
spite the  false  statements  or  ignorant  misconceptions
of  many  of  our  critics,  we  are  not  preaching  a  new
religion,  or  founding  a  new  sect,  or  a  new  school
of  philosophy  or  occult  science.  The  Hindu
Sastras,  the  Buddhist  Gathas,  and  the  Zoroastrian
Desatir,  contain  every  essential  idea  that  we  have
ever  propounded,  and  our  constant  theme,  these
past  seven  years,  has  been  that  of  my  present  dis-
course, to  wit,  that  Theosophy  is  the  scientific  and
the  only  firm  basis  of  religion.  We  deny  that
there  is  the  slisj-htest  conflict  between  true  reliG^ion
and  true  science.  We  deny  that  any  religion  can
be  true  that  does  not  rest  upon  scientific  lines,  and
we  affirm  that  the  outcome  of  scientific  research
will  be  to  set  religion  upon  such  an  eternal  founda-
tion, by  breaking  down  the  thick  mystery  of  matter
and  tracing  force  up  into  that  everlasting  and  im-
mutable principle,  called  Motion  by  some.  Spirit
by  some,  and  Farabrahnta  by  the  Vedantists.
Theosophical  research,  therefore,  is  the  prop
and  stay  both  of  religion  and  science  ;  and  by
ignoring  all  those  causes  which  keep  men  apart,
and  arm  brother  against  brother,  it  is  a  promoter  of

146  THEOSOPHY,   THE  SCIENTIFIC

peace  and  harmony  among  men — in  short,  of  Uni-
versal Brotherhood.

A  great  noise  has  ahvays  been  made  about
certain  striking  phenomena  which  have  occurred,
not  only  in  the  presence  of  the  mystics  and  saints
of  different  religious  sects  above  mentioned,  but
also  in  connexion  with  the  Thcosophical  Society.
Minds,  empty  of  healthy  philosophical  thought,
hanker  after  the  marvellous.  Many  such  have
joined  our  Society  in  the  hope  of  seeing  wonders,
and  even  of  obtaining  siddhis  (powers),  without
the  usual  training.  Such  are  always,  of  neces-
sity, foredoomed  to  disappointment.  There  is
no  royal  road  to  Geometry.  The  Occult  Science
may  be  learnt  by  different  methods,  and  by  any
one  who  can  find  a  teacher,  provided  he  has  the
necessary  psycho-physiological  qualifications  in  him-
self. For  this  department  of  research  does  exact
very  peculiar  aptitudes.  Can  you  learn  law,
medicine,  theology,  chemistry,  astronomy,  or  any
other  science  embraced  in  the  college  curriciiliLni,
without  the  special  mental  capacities  that  each
demands  ?  You  know  that  to  be  impossible ;
and  that  even  where  the  mental  capacity  is
not  wanting,  it  takes  time,  patience  and  close
thought  and  application,  to  master  your  sub-
ject. There  is  not  a  professor,  however  emi-
nent, who  does  not  continue  a  student  of  his
specialty  to  the  very  day  of  his  death.  Come,
then,  foolish  man,  do  you  imagine  that  Theo-
sophy,  this  science  of  sciences,  which  unlocks  for

BASIS  OF  RELIGION.  147

you  the  corridors  of  nature  and  ushers  you  Into
the  blazing  splendour  of  absolute  Truth,  is  less
difficult  than  any  of  these  pettier  branches  of
knowledge?  Do  you  think  that  in  a  few  weeks,  or
months  or  years,  you  can  pierce  the  veils  of  the
mysteries,  while  you  are  keeping  on  in  your  round
of  worldly  occupations,  indulging  your  animal  plea-
sures,cow^eringbeforeyoursocIal  prejudices, and  wrap-
ping your  nobler  self  in  the  tainted  body  of  Ignoble
desires  ?  The  mere  seeing  of  phenomena  does  no
good  except  to  a  mind  which  has  already  obtained
a  thorough  understanding  of  philosophy.  This  the
Yogi  knows  so  well  that  he  does  not  allow  himself
to  be  diverted  by  them,  even  when  produced  by
himself,  from  his  ultimate  object  of  reaching  the
fourth  stage  of  Yoga.  Patanjali  says  that  even  in
the  third  stage  the  Yogi  Is  liable  to  be  overcome  ;
and  even  in  the  last,  which  is  sub-divided  into  seven
stages,  he  is  not  wholly  safe  from  the  "  local  gods,"
nor  will  be  so  till  he  has  advanced  beyond  the  fifth
of  these  seven.  In  the  course  of  training,  adopted
among  certain  mystics  of  Tibet,  there  are  seven
stages  of  an  ascending  series,  and  each  of  these  is
sub-divided  into  nine  sub-stages.  But  whatever
the  training,  there  Is  the  same  object — emancipation
from  Illusion  and  attainment  of  Theosophical  know-
ledge. The  untrained  seers  and  religious  ecstatics
we  have  noticed  above,  as  having  visions  of  a
partially  subjective  character,  are  all  beneath  the
fourth  stage  of  Yoga.  Their  delusions  result  from
their  lack  of  training.     They  see  a  spiritual  light

148  THE  OS 0 PHY,   THE  SCIENTIFIC

but  through  a  smoky  glass:  Patanjali's  methods
having  been  unknown  to  them,  they  have  not  de-
veloped their  psychic  powers  by  dharana  and  d/iyan,
that  is,  by  "  restraint  of  the  mind,"  and  "  spiritual
meditation."  Hence,  their  actual  psychic  percep-
tions are  mixed  up  with  their  intellectual  pre-con-
ceptions  ;  as  the  Scripure  has  it — they  "  see  through
a  glass  darkly."

So  we  arrive  at  this  point  at  last.  If  Psychology
is  a  science, — and  Psychology  includes  the  learning
of  divine  wisdom — then  this  search  after  religious
truth  is  the  scientific  basis  of  religion.  Theosophy,
therefore,  is  the  scientific  basis  of  religion,  for  this
research  is  Theosophy.  I  think  this  is  plain  enough,
and  I  cannot  see  how  any  reasonable  man,  of  what-
ever creed  or  sect,  could  put  himself  in  antagonism  to
us.  If  his  sect  or  his  bigotry  is  more  precious  to  him
than  the  learning  of  the  truth,  of  course  we  need
not  areue  with  him.  He  could  not  understand  us,
or,  if  he  could,  he  would  not  admit  it.  Perhaps,  in
his  petulant  dissatisfaction,  he  might  even  accuse
us  of  falsehood.  One  of  these  sect-leaders  said,
the  other  day,  in  a  Calcutta  paper,  that  the  study
of  occultism  and  spiritualism  only  pandered  to
"  vain  curiosity  ; "  that  "  men  will  not  believe  in
God  and  immortality,  but  they  will  believe  in  any
amount  of  spirit-rapping  and  occultism."  I  could
not  offer  you  a  better  example  of  the  spirit  just
described — a  spirit  which  would  have  us  put  aside
science  and  investigation  of  natural  law,  and
blindly  take  on   faith  what  any   would-be    leader

BASJS  OF  RELIGION.  149

chooses  to  tell  us.  ''  The  more  " — says  this  gentle-
man, himself  an  avowed  religious  teacher, — "  a  man
is  found  to  disbelieve  in  the  natural  and  legitimate
objects  of  faith,  the  more  inclined  he  is  to  put  his
trust  in  all  manner  of  magic,  witchcraft,  and
spiritualism."  What  is  the  use  of  arguing  with  a
mind  like  that  ?  The  little  world  of  illusion  in
which  it  lives  is  quite  enough  to  satisfy  its  every
desire  ;  if  it  thinks  it  can  find  emancipation  in  it,  let
it  try.  Of  one  thing  such  people  are  most  certainly
ignorant,  and  that  is  of  the  spirit  of  the  nineteentJi
century.  The  day  of  blind  faith  has  gone  by,
never,  I  hope,  to  return.  If  we  are  to  have  any  re-
ligion— and  every  man  of  moral  feeling  longs  for
some  religious  convictions — it  must  be  one  that  is
in  reconciliation  with  science  and  natural  law.  We
are  no  longer  inclined  to  catch  up  our  religions,
as  though  they  were  made  of  glass,  and  run
for  shelter  behind  the  rampart  of  "  faith,"  every
time  a  Darwin  or  a  Spencer  throws  a  stone  at
them.  The  men  who  desire  to  prohibit  our  look-
ing into  the  mysterious  operations  of  Nature,  are
the  lineal  descendants  of  the  theological  doctors  of
Galileo's  time.  Some  of  these  professors  of  Pisa
and  Padua  behaved  so  absurdly  about  this  theory
of  the  heliocentric  system  that  he  has  held  them
up  to  an  immortality  of  ridicule  in  a  letter  to
Kepler.  "  Oh  !  my  dear  Kepler,"  he  writes,  "  how
I  wish  we  could  have  a  hearty  laugh  together.
Here  at  Padua,  is  the  principal  professor  of
philosophy,  whom  I  have  repeatedly  and  urgently

ISO  THEOSOPHY,   THE  SCIENTIFIC

invited  to  look  at  the  moon  and  planets  through
my  glass,  which  he  pertinaciously  refuses  to  do.
Why  are  you  not  here  ?  What  shouts  of  laughter
we  should  have  at  this  glorious  folly,  and  to  hear
the  philosopher  at  Pisa  labouring  before  the  Grand
Duke  with  logical  arguments  as  if,  with  magic  in-
cantations, to  draw  the  new  planets  out  of  the
sky  !  "  Dr.  James  Esdaile,  from  the  Preface  to
whose  work  on  Natural  and  Mesmeric  Clairvoyance ,
I  copy  this  quotation,  is  the  Residency  Surgeon,
who  (under  the  patronage  of  Lord  Dalhousie,  then
Governor-General  of  India),  established  a  Mesmeric
Hospital  here  at  Calcutta,  in  1846,  at  which
were  performed  painlessly  some  hundreds  of  sur-
gical operations  upon  mesmerised  patients.  His
noble  devotion  to  truth  and  purely  philanthropic
labours  provoked  the  enmity  and  spite  of  his  profes-
sional colleagues.  They  behaved  towards  him  with
the  same  vindictive  malice  as  some  editors,
preachers,  and  laymen  have  shown  to  the  Theoso-
phical  Society.  But  he  kept  on  with  his  work,  despite
all  obstacles,  until  the  use  of  mesmeric  anesthesia  was
superseded  by  the  application  of  chloroform  to
surgery.  Dr.  Esdaile  lived  down  opposition,  and
was  enabled  to  say  in  1852,  as  the  result  of  per-
sonal experience,  that  "  like  the  camomile  plant.
Mesmerism  only  flourishes  the  more  for  being
trodden  upon."  Theosophy  seems  to  enjoy  the
same  vital  elasticity,  for  we  have  just  seen  that
the  unceasing  ardent  opposition  of  the  missionaries
from  my  own'countr\%instead  of  crushing  it  (as  their

BASIS  OF  religion:  151

party   hoped),  has   done   it  a  world  of  good.     A
Christian  himself,  and  without  a  trace  of  infidelity
in  his  opinions,  Dr.  Esdaile  scouts  the  idea  of  the
study   of    Mesmerism    promoting   atJicisni;     and,
though  he  gives  no  sign  of  knowing  the  connexion
of   his    idea   with    Vedantism    or    Yoga,    he    says
that  by  this  research  the  life  of  man  ''  will  pro-
bably be  found   to  be  only  a  modification  of  the
vital  agent  which  pervades  the  Universe."     Thence,
he  says,  we  may  "come  to  understand  the  astound-
ing sympathies  and  affinities  sometimes  developed
between  the  organic  and  inorganic  world,  and  be
led  to  suspect  the  possibility  of  the  finite  mind  of
man  passing  for  a  time  into  relation  with  the  in-
finite, and  thereby  receiving  impressions  otherwise
than  by  the  senses  which  regulate  and  circumscribe
our   knowledge   of     surrounding     nature     in    our
normal  state  of   existence."      These  arc  the  wise
words  of  a  true  philosopher,  and  I  may  add,  a  true
Christian,  in   the  better  sense  of  the  word.     Mes-
merism— a  modern  European  discovery  of  an  old
Asiatic  science — is  the  key  to  the  mystical  phenomena,
of  the  Hindu  Sastras.     Young  gentleman  of  the
University,  remember  this,  and  withhold  }'our  flip-
pant scepticism  about  your  ancestral  faith  until  at
least  you   have   mastered    this    subject.      Yes,   in
Mesmerism  is  balm  for  the  heart  of  the  searcher
after  the  hidden  truth  of  Aryan  philosophy.

Look,  if  you  please,  at  this  engraving.  It  is  from
a  little  work  published  two  years  ago  at  Lahore  bv
Sabhapathy  Swami.     It  represents  the  system  of

152  THEOSOPHY,   THE  SCIENTIFIC

psychic  development,  by  Raj  Yoga.  Here  is  traced
a  series  of  lines  and  circles  upon  the  naked  body  of
a  man  sitting  in  the  posture  of  Padmdsan^  and
practising  Yoga.  The  triple  line  passes  down  the
front  of  the  head  and  body,  making  the  circles  at
certain  points — viz.^  over  the  vomer,  or  nasal  cavity,
the  mouth,  the  root  of  the  throat,  the  heart,  the
umbilicus  and  the  spleen.  The  artist,  to  bring
the  whole  system  into  one  view,  traces  for  us  the
parts  of  the  line  and  circles  that  would  be  out  of
sight,  such  as  that  over  the  lower  end  of  the  spinal
column,  the  line  up  the  spine,  and  over  the  cere-
bellum and  cerebrum,  until  it  unites  with  the  front
line.  This  is  the  line  travelled  by  the  will  of
the  Yogi  in  his  process  of  psychic  development.
He,  as  it  were,  visits  each  of  the  centres  of  vital
force  in  turn,  and  subjugates  them  to  dependence
upon  the  will.  The  circles  are  the  ckakras,  or  cen-
tres of  forces,  and  when  he  has  traversed  the  en-
tire circuit  of  his  corporeal  kingdom,  he  will  have
perfectly  evolved  his  inner  self — disengaged  it
from  its  natural  state  of  commixture  with  the
outer  shell,  or  physical  self  His  next  step  is  to
project  this  "double"  outside  the  body,  trans-
ferring to  it  his  complete  consciousness,  and  then,
having  passed  the  threshold  of  his  carnal  prison-
house,  into  the  world  of  psychic  freedom,  his
powers  of  sight,  hearing,  and  other  senses  are
indefinitely  increased,  and  his  movements  no
longer  trammelled  by  the  obstacles  which  impede
those  of  the  external   man.      Do  not  understand

BASIS  OF  religion;  153

me  as  saying  that  this  is  the  only  method  of
psychic  evokition  ;  there  are  others  than  PatanjaH's,
and  some  better  ones.  The  highest  form  of  Yoga
— to  employ  that  as  a  generic  term — is  one  by
which  there  is  rather  a  moral  than  a  physical  or
semiphysical  training  and  evolution,  and,  as  I  con-
ceive, by  this  process  the  ascetic  sooner  and  more
perfectly  breaks  through  the  wall  of  Maya,  or  illu-
sion, than  he  can  by  Patanjali's  methods.

Perhaps,  some  physiologists  in  this  audience  may
feel  inclined  to  deny  that  consciousness  can  be
thus  transferred  from  the  sensorium  in  the  brain
to  other  parts  of  the  body.  Should  such  be  here,
I  will  ask  them  to  refer  to  the  Zoist,  to  Professor
Weinholt's  Lecture  on  Somnambidism,  to  the
Breslau  Medical  Collections,  to  Dr.  Bertrand's
Treatise  on  Soninanibnlism,  to  Dr.  Petetin's
Electricity  Animale,  to  the  Proceedings  of  the
Philosophical  Society  of  Lausanne,  to  the  Re-
port of  Signori  Corini,  Visconti  and  Mazzacorati,
of  a  case  in  the  Hospital  della  Vita  at  Bologna,  to
Dr.  Esdaile's  and  Professor  William  Gregory's
works.  In  these,  and  in  scores  of  others  I  might
mention,  it  will  be  seen  that  in  certain  morbid  states
•  of  the  nervous  system,  especially  catalepsy  and
hysteria,  the  senses  of  hearing,  sight,  taste  and  touch
are  localized  at  the  pit  of  the  stomach,  the  finger-tips,
the  soles  of  the  feet  and  the  back  of  the  head.  I
do  not  claim  any-  special  weight  for  my  own  tes-
timony, but  still,  as  one  always  likes  to  have  parole
evidence  when  possible,  I  may  tell  you  that  I  have

154  THEOSOPin,   THE  SClENflFIC

seen  examples  of  some  of  those  psycho-physiologi-
cal phenomena.  Not  to  dwell  upon  othrrs,*  I  will
mention  but  a  single  case— that  of  an  American  girl
of  ten  years  old,  the  daughter  of  a  friend  of  mine.
This  charming  little  child  would,  in  her  waking  state,
read  any  book,print  or  writing,!  heldagainst  theback
of  her  head.  The  faculty,  which  she  accidentally
discovered,  left  her  after  a  couple  of  years,  without
apparent  cause.  Now,  if  Nature  thus  spontaneously
offers  us  examples  of  the  higher  mesmeric  and
other  psychic  phenomena,  their  possibility  is  by
Nature  herself  proven.  The  only  remaining  question
is  whether  the  Yogi  or  other  mystic  can,  by  intense
concentration  of  his  will  upon  a  certain  centre  of"
vital  activity,  voluntarily  excite  an  identical  condi-
tion.    And  that  he  can,  I  know  to  a  certainty.

I  have  spoken  of  Baron  von  Reichenbach's  mas-
terly work :  here  it  is.  I  affirm  that  this  record  of
five  years'  experiments  of  an  Austrian  chemist  of
the  first  eminence  contains  in  itself  a  master-key
to  Aryan  psychological  phenomena.  That  Reich-
enbach  probably  never  read  a  single  Sastra,  or
o-ave  himself  one  moment's  concern  about  Patan-
jali,  does  not  in  the  least  detract  from  the  value  of
his  researches.  You  see  the  silvery  nimbus  or  .
£loud  about  the  head  of  the  Yogi  in  Sabhapathy
Swami's  book,  and  here  I  show  you  pictures  of  the

*  A  year  later,  upon  revisiting  Calcutta,  I  had  the  good  fortune
to  witness  a  striking  case  of  the  kind.  A  young  Hindu  married
lady,  suffering  from  hysteria,  was  able  to  read  books  and  distinguish
colours  when  held  to  her  finger-tips,  the  little  toe  and  the  elbow,  and
to  hear  at  the  umbilicus.

BASIS  OF  RELIGION,  155

Hindu  Gods,  Siva  and  Krishna,  with  their  Parvatis,
Radhas,  and  Gopis.  Around  the  head  of  each  is
the  same  aureole.  These  are  not  sketched  after  the
conceptions  of  some  modern  artist  ;  they  represent
the  popular  idea  of  hundreds  and  thousands  of
years  ago.  And  now  I  show  you  a  similar  picture,
by  a  Christian  artist,  of  a  Christian  saint — where  the
same  glory,  and  of  a  transcendent  brightness,  is  de-
picted. In  Buddhist  temples  the  image  of  the  recum-
bent Buddha  lying  in  the  divine  ecstasisjias  a  flam-
ing aureole  of  this  kind  about  the  head  and  body  ;
the  lines  of  colour  not  standing  out  like  spikes,  but
wavy,  like  the  coruscating  splendours  of  the  auroras
of  the  North  and  South  Poles.  In  the  Bactrian
rock-cut  image  of  Zoroaster,  which  is  assumed  to
give,  perhaps,  the  nearest  idea  of  a  personal  like-
ness of  that  splendid  seer,  the  same  idea  of  a  glory
about  the  head  is  carried  out.^"

Now  whence  did  the  Hindu,  the  Buddhist,  the
Parsi,  and  the  Christian,  get  this  impression  that  the
head  of  a  spiritual  leader  must  radiate  lights  ?
Shall  I  surprise  you  vvhen  I  say  that  we  may  find
tlie  answer  in  this  book  of  Reichcnbach  ?  Look
at  this  illustration.  This  figure  B  represents  the
actual  luminous  appearance  of  the  human  head,  as
seen  by  one  of  a  class  of  persons  of  acute  nervous
sensitiveness  with  whose  help  the  author  made  his

*  Later  a  Buddhist  monk  presented  me  with  a  vejy  curious  small
silver  figure  of  Lord  Buddha  in  the  erect  position,  with  the  aureole  re-
presented as  surrounding  him  from  head  to  foot.  And  with  it  is,
moreover,  an  identical  duplicate,  which  represents  the  projected
Double  or  Phantasm  of  that  trreat  teacher.

156  THEOSOPIIY,    THE  SCIENTIFIC

researches.  Repeated  experiments  with  over  fifty
such  subjects  demonstrated  that  the  human  system,
in  common  with  every  animate  and  inanimate
natural  object,  and  with  the  whole  starry  heavens,
is  pervaded  with  a  subtle  aura,  or,  if  you  please,
imponderable  fluid,  wdiich  resembles  magnetism
and  electricity  in  certain  respects,  and  yet  is  analo-
cfous  wath  neither.  He  called  it  Od,  or  Odyle.
This  aura,  while  radiating  in  a  faint  mist  from  all
parts  of  the  body,  is  peculiarly  bright  about  the
head.  These  two  spots  of  light  are  the  eyes,  and
this  third  one  is  the  mouth.  Now  this  picture
represents  the  aura  of  a  young  married  lady  ;  and
we  have  only  to  imagine  to  ourselves — as  we  may
from  all  the  analogies  of  nature — how  this  aura
would  be  intensified  by  enormous  concentration  of
the  wall,  to  comprehend  readily  the  intuition  which
first  suggested  the  artistic  conception  of  the  aureole.
In  fact,  we  find  that  Reichenbach  was  anticipated
by  the  Aryans  in  the  knowledge  of  the  Odic  aura."^
But  all  the  same,  it  should  be  remembered  that  we
mieht  never  have  understood  what  the  nimbus  about
Krishna  means,  but  for  this  Vienna  chemist.

I  must  not  pass  on  towai'ds  my  conclusion
before  showing  you  that  we  can  get  some  instruc-
tion from  Reichenbach  upon  certain  Brahminical
customs  prescribed  by  the  Sastras,  but  which  I
have  not  yet  found  even  one   Brahmin  to  explain.

*  In  the  Atharva  Veda,  a  work  of  enormous  antiquity,  mention  is
made  of  the  existence  of  a  sensitive  aura,  of  a  span's  widtli,  about
the  human  body.

BASIS  OF  RELIGION-.  157  •

You  have  had  two  kinds  of  Brahminlcal  customs
handed  down,  one  primitive  and  essential,  the  other
secondary  and  non-essential ;  customs  and  practices
no  doubt  invented  by  cunning  priests  to  save  pro-
fitable vested  rights,  when  the"  caste  had  begun  to
lose  its  original  spirituality.     When  Brahmins  sit
to  eat,  every  man  is  isolated  from  his  neighbours
at  the   feast.     He  sits  in  the   centre  of  a  square
traced  upon  the  floor,  grandsire,  father   and  son,
brother  and  uncle,  avoiding  contact  with  each  other
quite   as   scrupulously   as   though   they    were    of
different  castes.     If  I  should  handle  a  Brahmin's
brass  platter,  his  lotah  or  other  vessel  for  food   or
drink,  neither  he  nor  any  of  his  caste  would  touch
it,  miuch  less  eat  or  drink  from  it,  until  it  had  been
passed  through  fire :  if  the  utensil  were  of  clay,  it
must  be  broken.     Why  is  this  ?   That  no  affront
is  meant  by  avoidance  of  contact  is  shown  in  the
careful  isolation   of  members  of  the  same  family
from  each  other.     The   explanation,    I    submit,  is
that  every  Brahmin  was  supposed  to  be  an  indi-
vidual evolution   of  psychic  force,  apart  from  all
consideration  of  fam.ily  relationship  ;  if  one  touched
the  other  at  this   particular  time,  when   the  vital
force   was    actively   centred    upon   the   process    of
digestion,  the  psychic  force  was  liable  to  be  drawn
off,  as  a  Leyden  jar  charged  with  electricity  is  dis-
charged   by   touching  it   with   your   hand.       The
Brahmin  of  old  was  an   initiate,  and    his   evolved
psychic  power  was  employed  in  the  agnihotra  and
other  ceremonies.     The  case  of  the  touching  of  the

1-58  THEOSOPHY,   THE  SCIENTIFIC

eating  or  drinking  vessel,  or  the  mat  or  clothing
of  a  Brahmin  by  one  of  another  caste,  of  inferior
psychic  development,  or  the  stepping  of  such  a
person  upon  the  ground,  within  a  certain  prescribed
distance  from  the  sacrificial  spot,  bear  upon  this
question.  In  this  same  plate  of  Reichen-
bach's,  the  figure  F  represents  the  aura,  streaming
from  the  points  of  the  human  hand.  Every
human  being  has  such  an  aura,  and  the  aura
is  peculiar  to  himself  or  herself,  as  to  quality
and  volume.  Now  the  aura  of  a  Brahmin  of  the
ancient  times  was  purified  and  intensified  by  a
peculiar  course  of  religious  training — let  us  say
psychic  training ;  and  if  it  should  be  mixed  with
the  aura  of  a  less  pure,  less  spiritualized  person,  its
strength  would  of  necessity  be  lessened,  its  quality
adulterated.  Reichenbach  tells  us  that  the  Odic
emanation  is  conductible  by  metals,  more  slowly
than  electricity,  but  more  rapidly  than  heat,  and  that
pottery  and  other  clay  vessels  absorb  and  retain  it
for  a  long  while.  Heat  he  found  to  enormously
increase  quantitatively  the  flow  of  Odyle  through  a
metal  conductor.  The  Brahmin,  then,  in  submit-
ting his  odylically-tainted  metallic  vessel  to  the  fire,
is  but  experimentally  carrying  out  the  theory
of  Reichenbach.  I  will  not,  however,  enlarge
upon  a  branch  of  my  subject  which  might  well  be
made  the  theme  of  a  series  of  lectures.  The
gathering  obscurity  of  the  twilight  warns  me  to  be
as  brief  as  thebreadthof  our  theme  and  its  novelty  to
you  permit,  as  also  does  the  fear  that  I  may  have

BASIS  OF  RELIGION.  i59

already  overtaxed  your  patience.  I  iiiiist  avail
myself  of  the  few  remaining  minutes  at  my  dis-
posal to  say  something  more  specific  about  the
Theosophical  Society.

The  Society  has  no  endowment,  its  current
expenses  being  met,  as  far  as  practicable,  out  of  an
Initiation  Fee  often  rupees.  The  deficiency  is  made
good  by  Madame  Blavatsky  and  myself,  out  of  our
private  resources.  Our  printed  rules  define  the
objects  of  our  organization  to  be  : —

I. — To  form  the  nucleus  of  a  Universal
Brotherhood  of  Humanity,  without  distinction  of
race,  creed,  or  colour.

2. — To  promote  the  study  of  Aryan  and
other  Eastern  literature,  religions,  and  sciences,  and
vindicate  its  importance.

3. — To  investigate  the  hidden  mysteries  of
nature  and  the  psychical  powers  in  man.

I  have  touched  upon  these  sufficiently,  I  hope,  to
made  it  clear  that  our  Society  has  not  one  feature
of  sectarianism  in  it ;  that  it  regards  religion  as  a
personal  matter ;  that  its  founders  do  not  believe
that  any  actual  knowledge  can  be  obtained  of
Divine  things  except  through  psychical  develop-
ment ;  that  it  has  not  a  shadow  of  political  char-
acter ;  that  it  is  neither  a  propaganda  nor  a  special
antagonist  of  any  particular  faith  ;  that  its  influence
must  be  in  the  direction  of  piety,  personal  purifica-
tion, unselfishness,  and  patriotism,  in  the  noblest
sense  of  that  much  abused  word.  Finally,  you
must   infer  that  instead  of  undervaluing  Western

i6o  THEOSOPHY,   THE  SCIENTIFIC

culture  and  scientific  research,  we  have  a  thorough
appreciation  of  the  importance  of  both.

The  question  between  you  and  myself  at  this
present  moment  is  whether  you  will  take  an  active
practical  interest  in  our  work,  and  help  us  to  make
Bengal  what  it  ought  to  be,  in  virtue  of  its  tradi-
tions and  its  world-wide  reputation  for  intellectual,
metaphysical,  and  scientific  capacity,  the  centre  of
a  Theosophic  revival  that  shall  thrill  all  India
with  the  promise  of  a  new  spiritual  era.  I  am  not
asking  you  to  draw  the  rusty  sword  of  Luxman
Sen  from  its  scabbard  and  deluge  your  land  in
blood.  It  is  not  war  that  India  wants,  but  peace, — ■
peace  todevelop  her  prostrate  industries;  peace  to  im-
prove her  agriculture,  and  to  re-adjust  her  population
to  her  territory,  drawing  away  the  surplus  where  it
is  overcrowding  the  land,  and  settling  it  in  districts
where  labour  can  find  vacant  land  and  employment ;
peace  to  remove  all  obstructive  barriers,  and  knit
the  races  of  the  Peninsula  into  a  brotherly  and
reciprocally  profitable  union  ;  peace  to  foster  the
love  of  art,  which  was  once  so  high  that  the  land
is  filled  with  monuments  which  excite  the  world's
wonder ;  peace  to  found  Sanskrit  schools  wherever
they  flourished  in  the  olden  time,  so  that  once  more
the  treasures  of  Indian  literature  may  be  known,
and  this  present  foul  reproach  of  ignorance  of  our
Sastras  may  be  removed  ;  and  peace,  that  there
may  be  born  a  generation  of  unselfish  patriots,  in
place  of  the  present  one,  which  I  need  not  describe  :
a    generation    which    will   esteem    it    the    highest

BASIS  OF  RELIGION.  i6i

happiness,  as  well  as  the  highest  honour,  to  forget
self,  and  to  work  for  the  public  good.  Ay,  "  peace
hath  its  victories  as  well  as  war."  I  have  not  come
here  to  ask  you  to  give  us  money,  or  to  erect  great
temples  of  Theosophy,  to  stand  as  laughing-stocks
of  human  vanity  for  the  warning  of  future  genera-
tions. I  am  not  asking  you  to  overturn  the  altars  of
your  faith  to  make  room  for  the  hybrid  erections  of
ignorant  iconoclasts.  I  do  not  ask  you  to  trample
under  the  feet  of  pert  criticism  the  sacred  literature
of  your  forefathers,  and  to  substitute  for  the  majestic
rhythm  and  profound  thought  of  its  slokas,  the
crude  rhapsodies  of  modern  ideologists.  I  am  not
asking  the  educated  among  you  to  put  aside  the
science  your  masters  of  the  College  have  taught
you,  nor  to  tear  up  the  diplomas  which  are  the  certi-
ficates of  your  industry  and  culture.  I  am  not  come
to  tear  down  the  purdahs  behind  which  the  lustful
violence  of  your  conquerors  obliged  you  to  hide
your  beloved  mothers  and  sisters,  wives  and
daughters.  I  am  quite  content  to  leave  time  to  work
its  own  changes,  and  to  the  increasing  good  sense
of  the  Hindus  the  cure  of  all  evils  and  the  extirpa-
tion of  all  abuses.

But  I  stand  here  as  the  unworthy  mouthpiece  of
ancient  India,  to  speak  a  word  of  appeal  on  her
behalf  into  the  ears  of  the  present  generation.
Since  science  has  proved  that  your  race  and  mine
boast  a  common  parentage,  and  that  the  streams  of
Aryan  and  European  civilization  flowed  from  a
single  fount,  I  speak  by  right  of  heritage  for  the

l62  THEOSOPHY,    THE  SCIENTIFIC

claims  of  Aryan  philosophy.  If  you  will  it,  we
may  together  work  in  fraternal  concord,  and  to-
gether snatch  from  the  oblivion  of  neglect  the
science  of  Divine  Truth,  the  Wisdom-Religion  of
archaic  times.  We  care  not  what  may  be  the  name
of  your  Samaj  ;  if  you  are  working  for  India,  we
will  work  with  you.

The  Mahimnastava,  a  hymn  to  Siva,  daily
chanted  by  the  Brahmins  (for  an  English  transla-
tion of  which  I  am  indebted  to  my  venerable  friend,
Babu  Rajnarain  Bose),  expresses  a  sentiment  which
I  should  like  every  modern  Hindu  to  take  to  heart.
It  mirrors  the  spirit  of  our  Society,  and  is  as
follows : —

"  As  the  Ocean  is  the  goal  of  all  rivers,  so  Thou  art  the  ultimate
goal  of  different  paths,  straight  or  devious,  which  men  follow,
according  to  their  different  tastes  and  inclinations."

I  am  asked  how  we  shall  set  about  this  task,
how  to  learn  Occultism  without  teachers,  and
without  text-books  that  we  can  read.  For  just
such  emergencies  as  these  men  always  arise :  we
must  create  the  teachers  and  compile  the  books.
Meanwhile  we  must  turn  to  a  quarter  where  we
need  never  seek  in  vain.  There  is  a  teacher  within
us  who  waits  for  us  to  unlock  his  prison-doors  and
set  him  free.  That  teacher  is  our  veritable  Ego,
our  Inner  Self  We  can  reach  him  by  holy  lives,
abstract  meditations,  and  the  evolution  of  the
powers  of  will.  More  than  one  road  will  lead  us  to
the  Adytum  wherein  he  dwells  ;  for  adeptship  is  of
no  one  creed,  and  is  the  life  of  all  faiths.     Look  at

BASIS  OF  RELIGION,  163

the  prescribed  methods  of  training  under  different
systems,  and  you  will  find  that  while  they  differ  as  to
formulas,  they  resemble  each  other  in  essentials.
First,  the  man  must  be  pure — in  body,  mind  and
aspiration.  Second,  the  place  chosen  must  be  pure—
in  atmosphere  and  surroundings.  It  must  also  be
quiet  and  safe.  Third,  the  diet  must  be  simple,
digestible,  and  taken  in  as  moderate  quantities  as
the  preservation  of  bodily  health  permits.  The
would-be  adept  must  have  physical  stamina,  for
concentration  makes  a  great  drain  upon  vital  force
And  the  experience  of  mediums  shows  that
mediumship,  except  in  the  highest  form  of  mental
impressibility,  is  usually  concomitant  with  a  scrofu-
lous or  phthisical  taint  in  the  blood.  Fourth,  the
motive  must  be  a  noble  and  unselfish  desire  for
Divine  wisdom ;  and,  lastly,  the  practice  must  be
gradual  and  cumulative.  Given  these,  and  one
may  be  sure  of  attaining  his  end — that  of  develop-
ing into  an  adept  Theosophist.

My  task  is  finished,  my  word  spoken.  It  remains
with  you  to  crown  our  effort  with  practical  success,
or  to  suffer  my  voice  to  pass  profitlessly,  in  widen-
ing ripples  of  sound,  out  into  the  ocean  of  air.
Remember  only  that  what  can  be  done  to-day
may  be  impossible  tomorrow.  Neglect  has
brought  Hinduism  to  its  present  pass.  Neglect
has  reduced  the  Brahmin  Pundits  already  to  a  con-
dition little  better  than  that  of  half-starvation  or
genteel  beggary.  If  they  would  not  expose  them-
selves to  the  rude  rebuffs  of  the  bazaar,  and  jostle

i64  THEOSOFHY,   THE  SCIENTIFIC

with  a  crowd  of  painted  impostors,  who  masquerade
as  Sadhtis  to  cheat  the  charitable,  and  secretly  give
loose  rein  to  their  bestial  natures — they  must  seek
Government  employment,  and  convert  themselves
into  clerical  automata.  Their  once  famous  schools
are  now  only  a  memory,  and  their  once  grand  debates
on  philosophy  at  the  courts  of  kings  survive  only
in  legendary  story.  A  wave  of  practicalism  is
sweeping  away  the  last  vestiges  of  Hindu  origin-
ality, engulfing  the  fairest  relics  of  Aryan  greatness,
as  the  muddy  overflow  from  the  crater  Kilauea
swallows  up  the  trees  and  villages  upon  its  slopes.
Nesflect  and  sottish  laziness  have  done  all  this.  A
few  years — or  perhaps  a  few  generations  more — and
the  foreign  boot  will  be  on  every  Hindu  foot,  the
foreign  brandy-bottle  in  every  Hindu  hand, and  what
is  a  thousand  times  worse,  the  foreign  heart  will  be
beating  in  every  Hindu  body,  for  love  of  country
and  religion  will  have  all  died  out.  Are  you  pre-
pared to  face  this  doom  ?  Does  there  yet  burn  in
any  corner  of  your  breast  a  spark  of  that  noble  pride
and  self-respect  that  made  the  Aryan  man  ennoble
by  his  personal  virtues  the  Aryan  name?  If  you
would  arrest  the  tide  of  national  demoralization
that  is  rushing  through  the  brandy-shop  and  the
opium-den,  you  must  set  up  again  the  old  moral
standards,  and  teach  your  children  to  live  up  to
them.  You  can  save  your  nationality  and  regain  your
spiritual-mindedness,  or  you  can  impiously  see  them
swept,  by  the  torrent  of  pretended  "  Progress,"  into
the  Kala  Pani  of  commercial  expediency.     Some

BASIS  OF  RELIGION.  165

of  your  best  men  thought  India  had  already
reached  that  stage,  for  they  wrote  me,  two  years
ago,  from  Bengal,  that  we  Theosophists  had  come
too  late.  India  was  dead,  and  hope  extinguished.
But  I  said  No,  and  I  say  so  now  ;  a  nation  is  never
dead  while  one  single  patriot  son  survives.  For  he
alone,  by  an  extraordinary  moral  grandeur  and
spiritual  insight,  may  re-infuse  the  vanished  life
into  the  decrepit  frame,  and  laying  his  holy  hand
upon  his  mother's  heart,  cause  it  to  beat  again.
No,  Aryavarta,  queen-mother  of  nations,  is  not
dead.  Her  altar-fires  burn  feebler  every  year,  and
the  recollection  of  her  spiritual  triumphs  has  become
a  tradition  of  a  by-gone  time.  Yet  it  is  not  too
late  for  her  children  to  labour  for  her,  and  sacrifice
themselves  for  her  dear  sake.

The  sacrifice  will  not  be  profitless,  the  labour  not
in  vain.  Remember  and  take  heart  from  what  an
English  poet  has  written  : —

*'  Dejected  India,  lift  thy  downcast  eyes,

And  mark  the  hour  whose  steadfast  steps  for  thee
From  Time's  press'd  ranks  brings  on  the  Jubilee."

THEOSOPHY:  ITS  FRIENDS  AND

ENEMIES.*

Complying  with  the  good  custom  of  all  societies
that  are  really  working  for  the  general  good,  though
the  latter  merit  is  denied  us  by  some,  we  now,
a  third  time,  come  before  the  Bombay  public
to  give  an  official  account  of  ourselves.  Our
anniversary  meeting  should  have  been  held  last
November,  and  would,  but  that  we  were  then  far
away  in  the  Punjab,  and  did  not  return  to  Bombay
until  the  last  day  of  the  old  year.  Having  thus
unavoidably  missed  the  usual  time,  we  thought
it  best  to  wait  until  we  could  celebrate  the  anniver-
sary of  the  arrival  of  our  party  in  India.  That
event,  so  important  to  us — I  wish  I  could  add,
possibly  to  the  country,  as  regards  its  future  results
— occurred  on  Sunday,  February  i6th,  1879,  and  I
am  here  to  tell  you  how  it  has  fared  with  us  during
the  two  years  that  have  since  passed.  I  will  do  my
best  to  ...  .

"  nothing  extenuate,  nor  aught  set  down  in  malice."

We  only  ask  that  those  who  love  and  those  who
hate  us,  will  alike  be  governed  by  the  same  feeling
of  moderation.     For,  to  tell  you  the  plain  truth,  we

*  A  Lecture  delivered  at  the  Framji  Cowasji  Institute,  Bombay,

27th  February,  iS8i.

ITS  FRIENDS  AND  ENEMIES.  167

have  suffered  quite  as  much,  if  not  more,  from  the
extravagant  expectations  and  ideas  of  our  friends,
as  from  the  maUce  and  falsehood   of  our  enemies.
The  former  have  rushed  to  as  great  extremes  in  one
direction,  as  the  latter  have  in  another.     We  have
been  kept  quite  as  busy  in  recovering  ground  we  ought
never  to  have  lost,  and  should  never  have  lost   if
our  sympathisers  had  been  reasonable,  as  in  defend-
ing ourselves  and    our  cause  from  the    plots    and
assaults  of  those  who  wished  for  our  defeat.   I  have
tried,  in  many  public  addresses,  to  define  our  exact
responsibility  to  the   Indian  nation.     I  have  done
my  best  to  show  exactly  what  it  had,  and  what  it
had   not,   a  right  to    demand  of  us.       I  have  ex-
plained over  and  over  again,  what  the  Hindus  had
themselves  to   do,   if  they  really  cared   to  snatch
their  nationality  from  the  gulf  of  perdition    into
which  it  has  been  plunging  headlong,  these  many
centuries.     I  have  tried  to  make  Young  India  see
that  there  can  be  no  real  moral  reform   that  does
not  come  from  their  own  united  effort ;  and  that  no
foreigner,  though  he  love  the  conntry  ever  so  much
and  be  ready  to  sacrifice  ever  so   much  for  it,  can
relieve  her  own  sons  of  the  smallest  portion  of  that
duty.  Many  whom  I  see  around  me  in  this  audience
heard  my  first  address  to  the  country,  from  this  same
platform,    on    23rd    March,     1879.      I    ask    these
to  remember  how  earnestly  I  tried  on  that  occasion
to  impress  this  solemn  conviction  upon  the  native
mind.     Among  other  things  I  said  : — "  If  India  is
to  be  regenerated,  it  must  be  by  Hindus,  who  can

i6S  THEOSOPHY,

rise  above  their  castes  and  every  other  reactionary
influence,  and  give  good  example  as  well  as  good
advice.  Useless  to  gather  into  Samajes,  and  talk
prettily  of  reform.  Not  of  such  stuff  are  the
saviours  of  nations  made."  Did  you  hear  me  putting
ourselves  up  as  the  would-be  leaders  of  Hindu  re-
generation, as  exemplars  of  virtue  or  patterns
of  v/isdom  ?  No,  a  thousand  times  no  :  I  said
our  chief  and  sole  desire  was  to  help  India  and  her
people,  "  in  any  way  practicable,  however  humble,*
without  meddling  with  politics,  into  which,  as
foreigners,  we  "had  neither  the  right  nor  inclina-
tion to  intrude."  With  the  cry  of  one  who  sees
danger  hovering  over  those  he  sympathises
with,  and  would  have  them  make  an  effort  to
save  themselves,  I  said : — "  Here  is  material  for  a
new  school  of  Aryan  philosophy  which  only  waits
the  moulding  hand  of  a  master.  We  cannot  yet
hear  his  approaching  footsteps,  but  he  will  come  ;  as
the  man  always  does  come  when  the  hour  of  destiny
strikes.  He  will  come,  not  as  a  disturber  of  the
peace,  but  as  the  expounder  of  principles,  the  in-
structor in  philosophy.  He  will  encourage  study,
not  inflame  passion.  He  will  scatter  blessings,  not
sorrow.  So  Zoroaster  came,  so  Gautama,  so  Con-
fucius. O  for  a  Hindu,  great  enough  in  soul,  wise
enough  in  mind,  sublime  enough  in  courage,  to  pre-
pare the  way  for  the  coming  of  this  needed  Re-
generator !  O  for  one  Indian  of  so  grand  a  mould
that  his  appeals  to  his  countrymen  would  fire  every
heart  with  a  noble  emulation  to  revive  the  glories

ITS  FRIENDS  AND  ENEMIES.  169

of  that  by-gone  time  when  India  poured  out  her
people  into  the  empty  lap  of  the  West,  and  gave
the  arts  and  sciences,  and  even  language  itself,  to
the  outside  world  !  "  And  that  I  foresaw  that  the
work,  even  if  begun  at  once,  must  take  long  to  yield
the  desired  results,  is  shown  in  these  further  re-
marks : — "  Do  not  imagine  that  I  have  the  idle
notion  that  India  can  be  reformed  in  a  day.  This
once  enlightened,  monotheistic  and  active  people
have  descended  step  by  step,  in  the  course  of  many
centuries,  from  the  level  of  Aryan  activity  to  that
of  idolatrous  lethargy  and  fatalism.  It  will  be  the
work  not  of  years  but  of  generations  to  re-ascend
the  steps  of  national  greatness.  But  there  must  be
a  beginning.  Those  sons  of  Hindustan  who  are
disposed  to  act  rather  than  preach,  cannot  com-
mence a  day  too  soon.  This  hour  the  country
needs  your  help."

So,  too,  I  may  refer  you  to  the  address  I  de-
livered, on  November  29th,  at  the  celebration  of
our  fourth  anniversary,  when  I  again  recurred  to  the
subject.  "We  do  not  ask  you  to  be  our  followers,"
I  said,  "but  our  allies.  Our  ambition  is  not  to  be
considered  leaders,  or  teachers ;  not  to  make  money,
or  power  or  fame.  Choose  any  man  here,  of  either
of  the  old  races  represented,  and  show  us  that  he
is  the  right  man  to  lead  in  either  branch  of  this
reformatory  movement,  and  I  will  most  gladly  en-
list as  a  common  soldier  under  him."  But  this  idea
of  the  necessity  for  personal  effort  does  not  seem  to
have  as  yet  impressed  itself  upon  the  public  mind.

170  THEOSOPH\,

Some  would  force  us  to  accept  without  remonstrance
the  imputation  that  we  want  to  push  ourselves  into
the  attitude  of  leaders,  to  ape  the  state  of  Alex-
ander, who — Dryden  tells  us,  in  St.  Cecilia  s  Day —

"Assumes  to  nod,
Affects  the  god,
And  seems  to  shake  the  spheres."

— and  that  if  we  do  not  at  least  attempt  to  lead,  or
to  exhibit  all  the  qualities,  intellectual  and  moral,
of  the  ideal  leader,  we  must  confess  that  we  have
not  made  good  our  claims.  But  again,  for  the
twentieth  time,  I  protest,  and,  in  the  presence  of
this  multitude,  declare  that  the  moral  Regenerator
of  Aryavarta  will  be  no  European,  but  must  be  a
son  of  the  soil,  and  no  one  else  !  It  is  only  too
evident  I  say,  too  sadly  so,  that  a  vague  notion  has
gained  wide  currency  that  we,  Theosophists,  must
straightway  bind  up  all  the  gaping  wounds  in  the
body  of  this  hapless  India,  while  the  Hindus  look
passively  on,  or  consent  to  be  taken  as  derelict  in
duty.  "  What  efforts,"  asks  a  correspondent  of  the
editor  of  a  Bombay  native  paper,  "  have  until  now
been  made  by  this  Society  to  alleviate  the  sufferings
of  the  Aryans,  and  how  have  they  succeeded  ?  "
Does  our  questioner  know  the  meaning  of  words  ?
Did  he,  before  penning  those  lines,  ponder  well
what  relief  of  the  sufferings  of  the  Aryans  involves,
and  what  our  poor  efforts  could  reasonably  be  ex-
pected to  accomplish  in  that  direction  ?  No,  but
like  every  other  man  who  has  sat  down  to  hale  us
before  the   public,  he  dashed   off  the   first   smart

ITS  FJ^IENDS  AND  ENEMIES.  171

phrase  that  came  Into  his  mind,  as  one  shuts  his
eyes  and  fires  his  musket  point-blank  into  a  crowd.
I  can  say  one  thing  in  reply  to  this  gentleman
which  can  be  proved  even  upon  European  testi-
mony, let  alone  the  abundant  evidence  natives  can
furnish,  and  that  is  that  we  have  made  every
effort  in  the  power  of  mortal  men  to  interest  the
paramount  race  in  behalf  of  the  Hindus,  and  to  make
them  respect  Aryan  philosophy  and  science.  To
effect  this  result  we  have  spared  neither  time,
trouble,  nor  the  inconveniences  and  costs  of  travel.
We  have  also  excited  respect  for  Indian  achieve-
ments and  sympathy  with  Indian  thought,  in  the
most  distant  countries.  In  ample  proof  of  this,  I
point  you  to  the  articles  which  have  appeared  in
those  countries,  many  of  which  are  preserved  by  us
in  our  scrap-books  at  Head  Quarters.

But  all  this  is  nothing  in  the  eyes  of  these
drowsy  patriots  !  "  Here  we  are,"  substantially  say
they  who,  perhaps,  never  sacrificed  one  pan-sitpari
for  India,  *'  and  here  are  the  Aryans,  twenty-four
crores  strong.  Here  is  Aryavarta,  stripped  to  the
last  rag,  and  in  the  last  extremes  of  starvation.
Here  are  one-fifth  of  the  people  lying  down  hungry
every  night,  and  rising  hungry  every  morning.
Here  are  fifty  millions  of  wretched  human  beings
fighting  famine  on  a  half  acre  of  land  each.  Here
is  ignorance  holding  a  nation  in  chains,  and  super-
stition gnawing  out  the  last  remnants  of  hope  in
their  hearts.  Here  are  hungry  fathers  breeding
children   by  lakhs  only  to   starve  ;  farmers   eating

172  THE  OS  0  PHY,

the  best  of  their  seed  grain  and  saving  the  worst  ;
giving  their  land  no  fallow  time  for  recuperation  ;
burning  their  manure,  because  the  wood  is  all  cut
away;  here  are  taxes  multiplying,  poverty  increasing,
and  an  educated  class  thinking  of  Government  alone
as  their  employer  ;  here  are  five  hundred  struggling
applicants  for  ten  vacant  places,  at  from  Rs.  40  to
60  per  month,  advertised  by  the  Bombay  Telegraph
Department ;  and  here  are  liquor-shops,  springing
up  like  mushrooms  in  every  large  town.      Come,
Theosophists,  banish  our  sufferings  and  we  will  not
call  you  impostors  or  adventurers  any  more."    This
is  no  exaggeration,  but  the  exact  tone  of  nine-tenths
of  the  criticisms  upon  us  with  which  the  native  press
has  teemed,  and  of  the  public  expectation.     Do  we
not  know  it  ?     Who  should  know  it  better  than  w^e
who  get  almost  every  day  letters  to  this  very  effect
from  the  four  corners  of  India?   And  yet  how  can  we
utter  one  angry  word  in  protest,  when  we  know  that
the  cause  of  all  this  is   in  the  wretchedness  of  a
people,  enwrapped  in  such  a  blackness  of  despair  that
they  clutch  at  even  the  faintest  promise  of  relief    In
their  awful  dejection  they  have  tried  to  cheat  their
hearts  into  the  belief  that,  perhaps,  the  hoped-for  Re-
generator had  come  or  was  just  coming  from  across
the  ocean.     Ay,  and  just  after  my  first  address  was
made,  a  native  paper  said  as   much.     But  it  is  not
so,  it  is  not  so,  I  tell  you.     We  can  only  sorrow  at
our    helplessness   to    give   the    succour   so    much
needed,  and  try  to  spur  to  a  sense  of  their  duty
those  who  alone  could  do  something,  if  they  only

ITS  FIUEA'DS  AND  ENEMIES.  173

would.     And  in  parenthesis  let  me  remark  that  it
would  be  a  good  beginning  if  those  who  have  said
the  sharpest  things  about  what  the  Theosophists
have  not  done,  would,  when    next  writing  to    the
papers,  prove  that  they  had  themselves  set  us  that
pattern  of  unselfish  patriotism  they  would  have  us
imitate  !     Talk  is  cheap,  gentlemen,  and   the  com-
modity is  not  scarce  in  India.     If  words   could   be
coined  into  rupees,  our  young  reformers  would  long
ago  have  restored  the  splendour  of  the  Aryan  epoch,
and  lodged  every  ryot  in  a  marble  bungalow.     Yet
words  are  useful   too,  and   very  necessary  to   India
at  this  particular  juncture.     Words  of  warning,  of
appeal,   of   encouragement ;    glowing    words    that
shall  burn  through  the  thick  crust  of  selfishness  and
reach  the  very  core  of  every  patriot's  heart.     Have
you  read  the  history  of  the  world   and   not  learnt
the  mighty  power  of  the  right  word  spoken  at  the
right   moment?      Speak  then,  every  man  of  you,
but  also  act  ;  speak  and  tell  your  countrymen  that
the  time  for  dreaming  is  past,  the  hour  for  action
has  come.     Let  a  great  shout  go  up,  like  the  voice
of  thunder,  until   the  Himalayas   echo  to  the  cry
from   Cape  Comorin,  that   if  the   nation   is  to   be
saved,  every  one  who  can  give  the  slightest  help
must    nozu   give  it.     Even  the  British  themselves,
with   all   their    might  and   power,  will   be   unable
to    save    the    Indian  people  from  starvation,  per-
haps   annihilation,    unless    India    herself  awaken
to    activity   and  reform,    and    help    them   to   save
her.     You  have  gained  knowledge,  scatter  it  every-

174  THEOSOPHY,

where  ;  for  it  Is  Ignorance  that  has  cursed  Arya-
varta,  and  this  is  the  demon  that  has  buried  his
fangs  in  her  fair  throat.  You  remove  your  shoes
and  reverently  worship  when  you  enter  your  temples
and,  I  tell  you,  you  ought  to  do  the  same  at  every
school-house  door.  For,  if  India  may  be  rescued,
it  is  only  by  the  spread  of  education  in  the  Temples
of  Knowledge.  When  one  shall  see  in  your  coun-
try what  you  can  see  in  America  and  England — a
school  open  wherever  there  are  children  to  be  taught
— then,  ay,  then  indeed,  will  the  sufferings  of  the
Aryans  be  "  alleviated,"  and  India  be  prosperous
and  happy  once  more.  Do  not  trouble  yourselves
about  the  Theosophists  ;  don't  waste  your  time  in
complaining  that  they  have  not  accomplished  the
miracles  you  expected  of  them  :  they  will  do  what
little  they  can — you  may  count  upon  that ;  and
they  will  never  do  any  thing  dishonourable,  or  that
has  to  be  covered  up.  Set  your  own  houses  in
order  ;  live  in  private  up  to  your  public  professions,
— that  is  all  we,  or  any  one  else,  could  ask  :  be  what
you  pretend  to  be.  If  you  are  idol-haters  in  public
meetings,  be  so  when  your  own  family  and  caste
fellows  are  by  too  ;  if  you  are  orthodox  at  heart,
be  manly  enough  to  say  so  to  the  face  of  the  whole
world.  If  you  think  Christianity  the  best  religion,
and  your  reason  is  convinced,  boldly  proclaim  it,
and  take  the  consequences  ;  and  if  you  think  it  the
worst,  say  so  like  men.  If  you  expect  your
neighbour  to  give  in  charity,  or  work  for  the
country's  good,  set  him   the  example.     We  have

ITS  FRIENDS  AND  ENEMIES.  175

had  enough  of  masks  and  hypocrisies,  and  a  moral
coward  every  honest  soul  loathes.     Cannot  every
man  in  this  assemblage  put  his  hand  upon  one  of
these   two-faced    talkers  ?     Are   they    not    in    the
orthodox  sects,  in  the  Arya  Samaj,  the   Prarthana
Samaj,   and   the  Theosophical  Society — yes,  even
in  that,  and  not  only  hypocrites  but  traitors  ?     Do
you  not,  even   while  I  speak,  recall  to   mind   how
the  man  with  two  faces  pretends  to  be  a  reformer,
but  is  not ;  to  favour  child  widows'  remarriage,  and
yet   casts   the  first  stone  at  the  one  who  puts  into
practice  his  very  sentiments,  nay,  will  himself,  if  a
widower,   marry   a   wife   young  enough  to  be  his
grand-daughter's  daughter  ?     Have  you  not  heard
him  abhor  child-marriage,  and   yet  know  that  he
had  had  no  sound  sleep  until  his  own  baby  daughter
was  pledged  and  bound  to  a  boy  husband ;  or  worse
yet,  to  a  man  older  than  himself ;  seen  him  frown
upon  the  costly  ceremonials  of  investiture  with  the
thread,   marriage,    first   pregnancy,    &c.,    and    yet
beggar  himself  and  his  relatives   in   trying  to  vie
with  his  acquaintance  in   empty  display?     These
are  the    men  of  mere  words,    whose    counsel    no
one   respects    or   wants,   because   they   are  hypo-
crites and  poltroons.     But  he  who  preaches  self-
denial  and  practises  it;  he  who  proves  by  his  acts  that
he  means  all   he  says,  ah  !  he  is  a  man  to  listen  to,
let  his  advice  be  ever  so  fanciful  and  impracticable.
For  we  feel  that  he  at  least  is  a  conscientious  man
and  is  acting  up  to  his   best   light,   even    though
strength  often  fail  him  and  he  occasionally  may

176  THEOSOPFIY,

fall  out  of  the  straight  path.  These  are  the  kind
of  men  we  try  to  draw  into  our  Theosophical
Society.  We  never  ask  them  what  their  creed  is,
we  do  not  care :  they  may  worship  the  god  they
see  in  fire  or  the  sun  ;  or  the  divinity  that  for  them
infuses  the  substance  of  a  Sivaic  Lingam  and  ani-
mates its  ultimate  atoms  ;  they  may  search  for  his
glory  at  Mecca  or  Jerusalem  ;  in  the  kabah  or  fire-
temple  ;  at  Benares  or  L'hassa  ;  or  in  the  ocean
depths  or  the  morning  dawn.  Though  they  wash
their  sins  away  in  the  Ganges  or  the  Jordan :  though
they  pray  standing  or  kneeling,  with  forms  of
words  or  the  soundless  aspirations  of  the  inmost
heart — we  care  not.  They  are  sincere,  and  we  hail
them  as  our  brothers.  They  are  searchers  after
truth,  and,  in  the  degree  of  their  spiritual
mindedness,  Theosophists.  What  then  is  Theoso-
phy?  you  will  ask.  I  reply  that  TJicosophia — "  God-
like wisdom  " — for  us  means  "search  after  divine
knowledge,"  the  term  divine  applying,  as  we  see  it,
to  the  divine  nature  of  the  abstract  principle,  not
to  the  quality  of  a  Personal  God.  Many  may  even
be  rejecting  God  as  a  being,  be  piicca  atheists  in
fact,  and  yet  if  they  accept  the  existence  of  divine
or  absolute  wisdom  and  truth,  and  are  honestly  and
sincerely  trying  to  find  it  out  and  live  up  to  that
standard,  they  are  philo-theosophs,  lovers  of  God-
like or  divine  Wisdom  and  Truth ;  the  two  words
being  synonymous,  for  there  can  be  no  absolute
Truth  without  Wisdom,  and  absolute  Wisdom  is
absolute  Truth.     Our  Society  might  have  added  to

ITS  FRIENDS  AND  ENEMIt^S.  m

the  name  "  Thcosophical  "  that  of  "  Philadelphian  "
(from  the  two  words  pJiilos,  loving,  and  adelphos,
brother),  as  it  was  always  meant  to  be  a  society  of
universal  brotherhood  and  for  promoting  brotherly
love  among  all  races — but  there  were  several  re-
ligious societies  of  that  name  already,  as  the  Christ-
adelphians  and  the  Philadelphians.  Knowing  but
of  one  really  divine  manifestation  on  earth —
Humanity  as  taken  collectively,  Humanity  with  its
god-like  intellect,  its  latent  promises  and  spiritual
hopes,  hidden  away  under  a  thick  crust  of  material-
ism and  selfishness — we  know  of  no  better  form  of
worship,  no  higher  cultus  to  the  divine  principle,
than  that  whose  oblations  are  laid  on  the  altar  of
Humanity.  With  our  hands  upon  that  altar  we
must  all  strive  to  call  out  these  divine,  deep,  hidden
intuitions  of  mutual  Help,  Tolerance  and  Love.
By  "divine  "  then  I  mean  that  which  the  common
intuition  of  mankind  conceives  to  be  the  opposite
of  all  that  is  animal,  material,  brutish.  The  know-
ledge one  gains  by  the  help  of  the  physical  senses
is  physical  science.  It  is  the  orderly  classification
of  the  objective  phenomena  of  the  visible  world.
Theosophy,  on  the  contrary,  is  the  discovery  of  the
law  and  order  of  the  inner  world  of  force  or  spirit,
by  the  aid  of  another  set  of  faculties  that  lie  within
the  human  being.  What  creed  the  spiritual  searcher
m.ay  outwardly  held  to,  matters  as  little  as  the
colour  or  shape  of  his  turban  or  scarf;  provided
only  that  he  does  not  let  the  acid  of  his  creed  eat
out  the  precious  substance  of  his  nobler  nature.

178  TIIEOSOPHY,

There  have  been  true  theosophists  in  every  creed ;
true  seers  who  have  Hfted  the  secret  veils  of  Nature
and  penetrated  her  mysteries.  It  may  astonish
you  to  hear  me  say  that  the  most  materiahst
scientists  are  theosophists— ay,  Professors  Huxley
and  Tyndall,  for  instance,  who  have  devoted  their
whole  lives  to  the  search  of  truth  in  hidden  principles,
in  physical  nature,  and  served  humanity  faithfully
and  sincerely.  This  alone  would  make  good  my
proposition,  even  did  we  not  know  that  mankind
are  substantially  the  same  the  world  over.  Have
you  ever  read  the  Dabistan — that  most  instructive
report  by  Mohsan  Fani,  the  learned  Persian  of  the
seventeenth  century,  of  his  observations  of  the
various  holy  men  who  were  his  contemporaries  ?
If  not,  do  so,  and  you  will  find  quoted  the  exultant
language  of  Jellal-Eddin  Rumi,  in  which  he  de-
scribes the  extinction  of  all  human  prejudices  and
passions  that  occurs  when  the  mystic  has  attained
emancipation.  "  O  IMoslems  !  what  is  to  be  done  ?
I  do  not  know  myself;  I  am  neither  Jew,  nor
Christian,  nor  Gheber,  nor  Moslem ;  I  am  not  from
the  East  nor  from  the  West;  nor  from  land  nor
sea ;  neither  from  the  region  of  nature  nor  from
that  of  heaven  ;  not  from  Hind  nor  China  ;  not
from   Bulgaria  nor  Irak  ;  nor  from   the  towns  of

Khorassan I  know  but  him,  Yahu! What

is  the  intent  of  this  speech  ?  Say  it,  O  Shams
Tabrizi !  The  intended  meaning  is  ;  /  am  the  soul
of  the  world!'  The  Mobed  Peshkar  of  Patna,  we
are  told,  "  attained  the  knowledge  of  God  and  him-

ITS  FRIENDS  AND  ENEMIES.  179

self,  and  he  became  eminently  divested  of  prejudice
and  exempted  from  human  Infirmities:  being  totally
unfettered  by  the  bonds  or  chains  of  any  sect  what-
ever, and  studiously  shunning  the  polemic  domains
of  prejudice;  in  short,  the  eulogium  of  one  creed
and  the  abhorrence  of  another,  entered  not  into
his  system."  The  Shaikh  Bahu-ud-din  Muhammed
Amall,  enchanted  by  the  noble  sentiments  of
Kaiviin,  a  Zoroastrlan  sage,  became  his  follower,
and  nobly  exclaims :  "  As  the  splendour  of  the
Almighty  is  in  every  place,  knock  thou  either  at
the  door  of  the  kabah  or  the  portals  of  the  fire-
temple."

The  editors  of  the  Dabistan  say :  "  There  Is
scarcely  a  tenet  to  be  found  In  any  other  creed
which  does  not,  at  least  in  its  germ,  exist  in  the
Hindu  religion."  And  yet  while  thus  showing  an
appreciation  of  a  profound  truth,  they  also  say  that
the  common  state  of  a  Yogi  "  is  that  of  complete
impasslveness  or  torpor ;"  thereby  indicating  that
the  Hindu  search,  through  Yoga,  after  the  very
spiritual  light  and  powers  exemplified  in  the  joyous
cry  of  the  Sufi  Jellal-Eddin,  was  a  thing  they  did
not  appreciate.  And  yet  they  affirm  this  great  truth
that  "in  all  times  and  places,  the  religion  of  the  '  En-
lightened' was  distinguished  from  that  of  the  'Vul-
gar ; '  the  first  as  Interior,  being  the  product  of  uni-
versal reason,  was  everywhere  nearly  uniform  ;  the
second,  as  exterior,  being  composed  of  particular
and  arbitrary  rites  and  ceremonies,  varied  accord-
ing to  the  influence  of  the  climate,  and  the  char-

I  So  THEOSOPHY,

acter,  history,  and  civilization  of  a  people.  But,  in
the  course  of  time,  no  religion  remained  entirely
the  same,  either  in  principle  or  form."  The  core
and  heart  of  all  was  a  like  aspiration  after  spiritual
truth.  This  spiritual  aspiration  for  absolute  know-
ledge is  true  Theosophy,  and  the  word  that  our
Society  brought  to  the  Western  world  was  that  the
acquirement  of  this  knowledge  was  possible  by
self-discipline  and  purification  and  development.
We  first  proclaim  then  the  universal  brotherhood  of
man  and  the  duty  of  all  to  join  in  what  will  pro-
mote the  welfare  of  the  human  race,  especially  those
who  are  weakest  and  most  need  help.  We  do  not
claim  this  as  any  new  doctrine ;  it  has  been  often
enunciated  by  other  societies.  But  we  are  trying
to  make  those  who  accept  it  in  theory,  show  it  in
practice.  Our  plan  has  been  to  interest  groups  of
men  of  different  races  and  religions  to  co-operate
with  each  other  in  this  direction.  We  have  suc-
ceeded to  a  certain  extent — to  an  extent  which  might
surprise  some  who  have  imagined  that  we  were  do-
ing nothing.  I  hear  we  are  accused  of  greatly  ex-
aeeeratinsf  our  numbers.  We  have  members  in  the
two  Americas,  in  Australia  and  the  West  Indies,  in
Siam  and  Burmah,  in  Java,  Holland,  Austria,
Russia,  France,  England,  Scotland,  Ireland,  Ger-
many, Hungary,  Belgium,  Italy,  Cyprus,  Ceylon,
Spain,  Turkey,  Egypt,  Syria,  Greece,  Mexico,  Japan,
and,  here,  in  India.

Thus,  in  ever  widening  circles,  like  the  wavelets
caused  by  a  stone  that  drops  in  water,  runs  on  the

ITS  FRIENDS  AND  ENEMIES.  i8i

impulse  given  to  contemporaneous  thought  by  the
Theosophical  Society.  That  impulse  is  now  so
marked,  and  has  gone  so  far  beyond  any  blunders
in  judgment  we  may  make — so  far  beyond  the
reach  of  anything  we,  Founders  of  the  Society,
could  do  to  check  it,  did  we  even  wish  to  do
so — that  the  established  and  inexorable  law  of  the
diffusion  of  human  thought  would  carry  it  down
the  century  were  we  to  die  tomorrow.  I  have  here
the  photograph  of  a  group  of  some  three  hundred
boys  who  are  regularly  attending  the  school
recently  opened  by  our  branch  Society  at  Galle,  Cey-
lon— one  of  the  five  schools  that  have  sprung  up  in
that  island  as  the  result  of  our  recent  visit.*  Every
boy  is  the  son  of  Buddhist  parents,  and  nearly  all
were  until  now  being  educated  in  missionary  schools,
where  their  minds  were  being  turned  away  from  the
religion  of  their  forefathers.  The  teachers  you  see
here  are  Buddhist  members  of  our  Society,  and  our
noble  colleagues  pay  the  school's  entire  expenses
out  of  their  private  means.  That  no  such  schools
have  been  founded  by  Theosophists  in  India  may
be  accounted  for,  partly  because  Government  is
doing  so  much  for  non-sectarian  education,  but
mainly  because  we  have  not  yet  received  into  our

*  The  attendance  increased  to  five  hundred,  and  this  so  alarmed  the
missionaries  that  they  opened  their  principal  school  as  a  free  school,
offering  to  give  a  first-class  education  gratis.  The  Buddhists  are  so
poor  that  they  availed  themselves  of  the  chance,  and  our  numbers
largely  declined.  When  some  generous  friend  shall  help  them  to
funds,  ours  will  be  made  a  free  school,  and  then  we  shall  have  all  out-
boys  back  again  with  a  rush.

1 82  TBEOSOPHY,

Society    men    with     the     liberality     of    Jamsetji
Jeejibhoy,  Jaggernath  Sunkerseth,  Gokuldas  Tejpal,
or  Cowasji  Jehangir,  though  we  have  one  member
worth  fifteen  lakhs.     And  so  long  as  the  schools
are   but  founded,  it  matters  little  that  we  should
have  the  mere  credit  of  their  establishment.     Our
highest  hope  is  to  arouse  others  to  noble  deeds,  and
to  cause  the  seeds  of  a  great  and  permanent  reform
to  be  scattered.      From    the  first  we   have   been
fortunate  in  attracting  into  our  membership  many
authors,  journalists  and    others   who  address  the
public  or  have  a  hand   in  the  work  of  education.
This  will  explain  to  you  why  our  theosophical  ideas
should  have  so  rapidly  gained  a  world-wide  circula-
tion.    Theosophy,  properly  understood,  has  not  one
feature  calculated  to  excite  the  hostility  of  reason-
able men  of  any  school  of  science  or  religion.     I  will
lay    down    two    cardinal  propositions — (i.)    That,
psychically,  all  men  are  brothers,  all  equally  entitled
to  know  divine  truth,  and,  without  distinction  of  na-
tionality or  faith,  should  join  for  the  general  good  of
humanity  ;  bound  by  a  common  tie  and  common
sympathies.     For  united  effort  not  only  mitigates
the   hardness    of  the   task,   but   produces    tenfold
p-reater  results  in   the   same  time.     One   ant  can
carry  but  a  grain  of  dust  at  once,  but  a  colony  of
ants    labouring   together  can    remove   the   largest
house  in  time.     So  one  man,  unless  endowed  with
extraordinary  advantages,  can  accomplish  compara-
tively little  ;  but  with  co-operation  every  thing  is
possible.     This  help  we  ask,  this  we  have  the  right

ns  FRIEA'DS  AND  ENEMIES.  183

to  expect  ;  and,  as  I  have  shown  you,  we  have  had
it  from  thousands  of  well-wishers  whose  faces  we
have  never  seen  and  never  may  see.  (2.)  My
second  proposition  is  that  every  human  being  has
within  his  own  nature,  in  a  greater  or  less  degree,
certain  sublime  faculties  which,  when  fully
developed,  will  give  him  divine  knowledge.  The
theory  upon  which  almost  all  formalized  religions
rest  is  that  only  a  certain  favoured  class  of  men
have  these  spiritual  capacities,  and  alone  can  be
permitted  to  exercise  them.  But,  as  I  said  before,
there  have  been  "  emancipated  "  or  "illuminated  "
ones  under  all  the  various  religions,  and  the  testi-
mony they  have  brought  back  to  us  from  their
soul-flights  into  the  inner  world  has  essentially
agreed.  We  have  seen  that  when  a  certain  point
of  this  interior  development  is  reached,  the  seer
loses  all  sense  of  his  nationality,  his  theology,  even
of  his  personality.  His  pettiness  becomes  infinitely
expanded,  and,  from  the  consciousness  of  being  a
microscopic  point  as  compared  to  the  whole,  he
feels  that  he  is  in  all,  bounds  all,  is  all.  The  body
he  so  cherished  and  lavished  so  much  care  and
thought  upon  is  now  felt  to  be  a  clog  and  impedi-
ment— if,  indeed,  he  can  cramp  himself  down  to  a
realisation  that  it  exists.  How  beautiful,  how
suggestive,  the  verse  of  the  poet  Hafiz,  where,  in  a
charming  allegory,  he  describes  the  ease  with  which
the  absolute  truth  may  be  attained  when  the  barriers
of  flesh  arc  once  surmounted  : —

1 84  THEOSOPHY,

"  The  perfect  beauty  of  my  beloved  is  not  concealed  by  an  inter-
posing veil ;
O  Hafiz,  iJioii  ai't  the  curtain  of  the  road ;  remove  away."

There  are  no  secrets  of  nature  impenetrable,  he
would  say ;  the  only  obstacle  to  our  gaining  full
knowledge  is  SELF.  This  is  the  coward,  the
traitor,  the  despot,  the  bigot,  the  swinish  sensualist,
the  lump  of  egotism.  This  Self  is  the  serpent
coiled  beneath  the  flowers  of  life.  This  is  that
which  stifles  all  good  and  noble  aspirations,  and
which  makes  the  Rights  of  Man  as  a  whole  ruth-
lessly sacrificed  to  the  base  greed  of  the  individual
man.  Ah !  the  dream  of  Universal  Brotherhood
of  Man,  when  nations  will  cease  to  enslave  nations,
and  the  only  strife  will  be  who  can  best  live  up  to
the  ideal  of  human  perfectibility !  The  bright
vision  mocks  us  even  as  we  gaze  upon  its  splendour,
yet  happy  he  who  has  even  been  so  blessed  as  to
see  it  in  his  dreams.  Theosophy  is  the  enchantress
that  alone  can  conjure  it  up  ;  and  though  hard  be
the  task  and  disheartening  the  delay  in  gaining  the
divine  wisdom,  when  once  gained,  the  sacrifices  of
a  life  seem  no  adequate  price  to  pay  for  its  acquisi-
tion.

Who  are  the  friends  of  this  Theosophy — v.'ho  its
enemies  ?  I  utter  no  paradox  in  saying  that  in  the
cause  of  Theosophy,  as  of  every  other  cause,  those
esteemed  its  friends  are  sometimes  its  worst
enemies,  and  its  would-be  enemies  often  its  best
friends.  For  the  zeal  of  the  former  is  often
inordinate,  and  the   poisoned  darts  of  the   latter

ITS  FRIEjVDS  and  ENEMIES.  185

often  recoil  from  the  polished  shield  of  truth  and
wound  the  one  who  hurled  them.  If  I  frankly
include  myself  in  the  former  category,  I  should  be
acquitted  of  egotism,  and  so  I  do.  My  Cause  is
far  greater  than  my  ability  to  serve  it  effectively,
and  none  knows  so  well  as  I  how  much  and  often
this  sacred  cause  may  have  been  injured  by  the
errors  I  have  myself  committed.  It  is  not  a  ques-
tion to  be  considered  whether  my  motives  have
been  good  ;  for  results  are  the  current  coin  in  the
exchequer  of  moral  justice.  The  Christian  hell,  the
proverb  says,  is  paved  with  good  intentions ;  a
Christian  sect  has  adopted  the  motto  Finis  coronat
opus — the  end  justifies  the  means — and  made  it  the
pretext  for  nameless  and  numberless  crimes  against
humanity.  As  regards  the  moral  accountability  of
the  individual,  the  question  is  whether  he  has  done
all  he  could  with  the  means  at  his  disposal  to
realize  a  worthy  ideal.  If  Theosophy  has  suffered
from  my  blunders,  who  profess  to  be  among  its
most  earnest  advocates,  its  mouth-piece,  so  has  the
progress  of  our  Society  suffered  through  the  inex-
cusable heedlessness  of  our  associated  fellows  and
members  in  holding  such  extravagant  views  of  the
Founders,  and  expecting  them  to  be  above  the
weaknesses  of  mortality.  This  I  have  touched  upon
already,  but  I  revert  to  it  from  a  desire  to  press
home  the  thought  that  a  would-be  friend  may  con-
vert himself  into  a  dangerous  enemy  by  setting  up
the  illusions  of  his  own  fancy,  and  then  growing
indifferent,  if  not  hostile,  when  the  glamour  passes

1 86  THEOSOPHY,

awa}^  "  Are  these  Theosophlsts,"  asks  a  certain
Mr.  Ganpatrao  of  the  editor  of  the  Indu  Prakash,
"in  conduct  like  ordinary  people  of  the  world,  or
like  Tukaram,  and  other  SadJuis  of  ancient  times  ?  "
Now,  if  the  false  report  had  not  spread  that  we
were  like  Sadhns,  our  friend  would  never  have
thought  of  asking  such  a  question.  If  the  gentle-
man is  within  the  sound  of  my  voice,  let  me  answer
that  we  are  nothing  but  ordinary  people,  and  never
pretended  to  be  anything  else.  We  never  asked
people  to  look  upon  us  as  gurus,  or  follow  our  per-
sonal example ;  though  we  have  tried,  as  far  as
our  natural  infirmities  permitted,  to  make  that
example  a  good  one.  What  we  have  said  to  the
Hindus  is,  "  Follow  the  example  of  your  Tukarams
and  your  Harischandras,  of  your  Rishis  and  your
Yogis  ;  follow  them  as  models,  and  not  any
foreigner,  even  though  he  may  think  your  ancestors
fools,  and  not  know  he  is  one  himself  in  saying,  or
even  thinking,  so.  And  we  have  tried  to  make  the
dignity,  the  virtue,  and  the  learning  of  those
ancestors  of  yours  appreciated  by  you,  and  respected
by  the  whole  v/orld."

"  Have  they  conquered  the  six  passions  of  Lust,
Anger,  Greediness,  Vanity,  Avarice,  and  Envy  ? "
he  asks.  Now  it  is  for  those  who  are  best  acquainted
with  our  daily  lives  and  conversation  to  answer  this
question.  I  leave  it  to  them  to  answer  ;  not  alto-
gether now,  but  after  we  are  dead  and  gone,  when
the  truth  shall  shine  out  through  the  clouds  of
partiality,  on  the  one  side,  and  of  prejudice,  on  the

ITS  FRIENDS  AND  ENEMIES.  187

Other.  Some  of  these  vices  we  may,  I  think,  justly
claim  to  be  exonerated  from  having  even  now.
For  no  one  in  India,  even  our  worst  enemy,  would
dare  accuse  us  of  either  lust,  greediness,  avarice,  or
envy.  If  I  were  to  tell  you  we  are  perfectly  free  of
vanity  it  would  perhaps  be  taken  as  the  best  proof
that  we  are  not,  or  remain  for  ever  an  open  question  ,
as  nothing  is  so  difficult  as  to  prove  whether  it  is
personal  Vanity  in  man  or  a  justifiable  Pride  which
is  his  secret  motor.  From  anger  we  certainly  are
not  exempt;  we  have  not  yet  reached  the  stage  where
one  can  suffer  in  silence  and  with  smiles  the  cruel
stripes  of  slander,  the  base  return  of  treachery  and
ingratitude,  the  wilful  perversion  of  our  motives,  the
cowardly  assaults  on  character  by  masked  assassins.
No,  not  perfect  yet — alas  1  not  yet.  But  even  sup-
posing that  we  are  not  to  be  ranked  among  the
"  emancipated  ones,"  though  striving  hard,  does  our
questioner  therefore  give  us  to  understand  that  he  is
not  bound  to  listen  to  our  advice  to  put  aside  his  own
vices  and  take  examplefromthe  virtues  of  Tukaram?
That  is  the  gist  of  the  whole  question  ;  and  this
interrogatory  reflects  the  now  universally  prevalent
tone  of  public  thought — viz.,  that  to  find  some  holy
or  supposed  holy  person,  and  nominally  enroll  one-
self as  his  admirer,  follower,  ©r  pupil,  will  confer
merit  and  secure  vioksha  without  self-sacrifice  or
the  conquest  over  evil  passions.  Not  only  by  word
of  mouth  in  private  conversations,  but  from  many
public  platforms,  and  through  our  journal,  the
Theosophist,  we  have  tried  to  compel  the  public

1 88  THEOSOPHY,

to  think  of  the  great  problem  of  Theosophy,  and
pointed  all  who  would  learn  to  the  ancient  Aryan
sources  of  information.

Mr.  Gunpatrao's  next  question  is,  "  How  far  do
the  Theosophists  keep  up  to  the  standard  of  Brother-
hood ? "  I  will  tell  him  that  he  may  search  ■  the
whole  history  of  our  Society,  and  he  will  find  that
we  have  always  been  on  the  side  of  the  weak  against
the  strong.  We  have,  as  you  have  seen  in  what
has  been  shown  you  respecting  the  spread  of  our
fellowship  to  all  the  quarters  of  the  world,  linked
many,  of  many  nations  and  creeds,  together  with
the  tie  of  mutual  reciprocity  and  tolerance.  "  This
new  Gospel,"  says  a  writer  in  a  London  journal,
"  appears  to  be  now  in  the  ascendancy  among
spiritualists.  Its  immense  value  in  behalf  of  the
well-being  of  mankind  cannot  be  over-estimated.
We  rejoice  to  see  the  Theosophists  in  Hindustan
.  .  really  labouring  towards  this  goal."  "  That
greatproject  of  human  fraternity,"  writesM.  Fauvety,
President  of  the  Paris  Psychological  Society,  "which
you  propose  to  realise  by  means  peculiar  to  your-
selves. .  .  constitutes  the  grandest  and  noblest
tentative  that  has  been  essayed  on  the  road  to
universal  conciliation."  "  Such  a  society  as  yours,"
says  the  venerable  French  metaphysician  Cahagnet,
in  accepting  our  diploma  of  Fellow,  "  has  been  the
dream  of  my  wdiole  life."  Says  the  Pioneer  of
Allahabad — a  paper  which  before  we  came  to  India
and  promulgated  our  views,  was  certainly  never
charged  with  any  specially  weak  tolerance  of  Hin-

ITS  FRIENDS  AND  ENEMIES.  189

duism — "We  have  no  hesitation  in  recognising  the
Theosophical  Society  as  a  beneficent  agency  in
promoting  good  feeling  between  the  two  races  in
this  country,  not  merely  on  account  of  the  ardent
response  it  awakens  from  the  Native  community,
but  also  because  of  the  way  in  which  it  certainly
does  tend  to  give  Europeans  in  India  a  better  kind
of  interest  in  the  country  than  they  had  before."
"No  man,"  remarks  the  Colombo  (Ceylon)  Ex-
iwiiner,  "  who  has  a  firm  faith  in  what  he  believes
is  the  truth,  and  the  excellence  of  his  own  system
of  faith,  can  quarrel  with  the  Theosophists.  .  .  .
They  tell  us  they  have  a  conscientious  mission  to
perform,  and  we  see  them  labouring  earnestly  in
the  discharge  of  their  self-imposed  duties.  .  .  .  the
spirit  of  research  they  are  striving  to  infuse  into
the  torpid  minds  of  our  countrymen  cannot  fail  to
lead  to  good  results."  "  Let  us,"  says  the  noble
President  of  the  Ionian  Theosophical  Society,  of
Corfu  (Greece),  in  his  Inaugural  Address,  "  let  us
place  the  brotherhood  of  nations  as  the  first  of  our
wishes,  and  let  us  hasten  the  coming  of  that  blessed
moment  when  the  whole  of  mankind  will  be  gathered
in  one  fold  and  will  have  but  one  shepherd."  The
Amriia  Bazar  Patrika,  that  fearless  champion  of
Indian  interests,  speaking  of  our  journal,  says
"Since  the  Theosophist  carefully  abstains  from
politics,  and  its  plan  is  one  of  Universal  Brother-
hood, it  should  be  welcomed  by  every  sect  and
people  throughout  the  world.  And  as  it  recognises
the    Aryans    as    the  fathers    of   all   religions    and

190  THEOSOPHY,

sciences,    Hindus   owe    it   their   enthusiastic    sup-
port."

Omitting  personal  matters,  what  remains  is  to
dispose  of  the  question  of  occult  phenomena.  The
IndiL  PrakasJCs  correspondent  wishes  to  know
whether  Madame  Blavatsky  has  produced  real
phenomena;  whether  she  will  do  so  again  ;  and
whether  the  correspondent  himself  may  have  a
special  chance  to  see  them  ?  Now,  as  far  as  human
evidence  will  go,  the  proof  is  apparently  overwhelm-
ing that  at  Simla,  Benares,  and  elsewhere,  strange
things  of  this  nature  did  occur,  and  that  they  were
real  and  not  mere  deceptions.  Tricks,  gentlemen,
are  played  only  by  tricksters — persons  who  have  no
character  to  lose,  and  who  have  an  interested
motive  in  making  their  dupes  believe  their  lies.
You  will  get  no  Court  in  any  civilized  country  in
the  world  to  withhold  from  an  accused  person  of  pre-
vious good  character  the  benefit  of  the  doubt.  And
now  tell  me,  if  you  please,  what  was  Madame  Bla-
vatsky's  interested  motive  in  this  case?  She  is  not
here,  and  I  may  speak  freely  what  I  have  to  say
about  her.  What  was  the  motive?  Money?  She
never  asked  or  received  one  anna's  value  for  any
phenomenon  she  ever  produced  either  in  India  or
elsewhere.  And,  mind  you,  these  phenomena  have
attended  her  for  many  years,  all  over  the  world,  as
she  has  journeyed  to  study  occult  science.  If  it  were
at  all  worth  the  trouble  I  could  occupy  hours  in  read-
ing to  you  reports  of  the  strange  feats  of  this  kind
she  did  in   America  alone,  in  the   presence  of  all

ITS  FRIENDS  AND  ENEMIES.  191

manner  of  people.  I  might  give  you  the  names  and
addresses  of  enough  credible  witnesses — sceptics —
to  prove  her  possession  of  these  powers  to  the  satis-
faction of  any  fair-minded  man.  And  her  vindi-
cation might  be  made  with  the  greatest  ease  by
collecting  the  testimony  of  eye-witnesses  in  India,
who  would  certify  to  facts  more  reraarkable  than
any  that  have  been  reported  in  the  papers.  Well,
then,  if  money  was  not  her  object,  was  it  fame  ?
A  sorry  reward,  indeed,  this  sort  of  fame,  which
makes  her  the  subject  of  the  scurvy  jests  and  pus-
illanimous jeers  of  the  ignorant  and  prejudiced  !
Her  fame  is  already  secured  in  the  authorship  of
his  Unveiled,  one  of  the  most  masterly  reviews  of
ancient  and  modern  Science  and  Theology  ever
written :  a  book  which  one  of  the  best  of  our  con-
temporaneous critics  pronounces  "  one  of  the  re-
markable productions  of  the  century."  Only  here
in  India  has  the  book  had  the  honour  of  being
abused  by  certain  petty  editors.  I  say  "honour,"
for  it  is  an  honour  to  be  abused,  as  it  is  a  disgrace  to
be  praised,  by  such  weathercocks.  Well,  if  neither
money  nor  fame  forced  her  to  invite  such  criticisms,
what  then  ?  Come,  you  who  rake  the  gutters  of
human  nature  for  bits  of  garbage  to  fling  in  decent
people's  faces,  what  is  left  for  you  to  insinuate  ?
She  is  a  woman  ;  strike  her  in  the  good  woman's
most  sensitive  moral  part — her  motive.  Ah,  shame
on  slanderers  !  See  this  great,  generous-hearted
soul,  filled  with  love  for  humanity;  longing  to  throw
lif^ht   into  the  darkened   minds  of  those  who   still

192  THEOSOFHY,

believe  in  miracles,  and  still  clank  the  chains  of
superstition;  devoting  her  life,  sacrificing  the  sweets
of  home,  and  family  and  ease,  and  a  high  social
position,  to  go  about  the  world  in  search  of  truth,
and  spreading  it  so  that  all  may  partake.  Those
who  know  her  best  appreciate  her  abnegation  and
perfect  disinterestedness  ;  and  though  some  who
do-  not  understand  her  motives  may  think — nay
even  take  upon  themselves  to  proclaim  her  accord-
ing to  their  worldly  understanding  a  hallucinated
lunatic — no  one  had  better  venture  to  call  her  an
impostor,  unless,  indeed,  he  is  prepared  to  be  him-
self called  by  some  of  the  most  renowned  men
living  a  vile  slanderer  !  Here  stand  I,  her  witness
and  friend,  I  whom  she  took  out  of  the  ditch  of
worldly  selfishness  and  put  on  the  path  to  divine
truth  and  happiness.  I  am  here  to  tell  you  that  I
should  deserve  to  have  my  tongue  cleave  to  the
roof  of  my  mouth  were  I  to  keep  silence  when  her
motives  are  thus  called  in  question.

She  has  shown  her  phenomena  from  what  I  con-
ceive to  be  the  mistaken  idea  that  when  there  was  no
reasonable  ground  for  suspicion  of  their  genuineness
they  would  be  acknowledged,  and  the  public  would
try  to  learn  as  she  had  learned,  and  then,  whether
materialists  or  religious  bigots,  become  wiser  and
happier.  Noticing  the  impending  visit  to  India  of
Professor  Solavief,  the  "  Herbert  Spencer  of  Russia,"
the  Pioneer  editorially  remarks  : —

"  He  (Prof.  Solavief)  has  been  impressed  with  a  sense  of  the  im-
portance of  Hindu  thought  in  connexion  with  pure  speculation,  by

ITS  FRIENDS  AND  ENEMIES.  193

the  light  thrown  on  this  subject  by  the  Theosophical  Society  and
its  stupidly  maligned,  and  so  far  ill-appreciated  founder,  Madame
Blavatsky.  The  fact  is,  that  while  we  (Englishmen)  in  India  have
been  in  contact  with  the  remains  of  old  native  culture  for  a  hundred
years  without  having  detected  its  significance,  it  has  been  reserved
for  the  indomitable  old  lady  just  mentioned  to  put  an  entirely  new
face  on  Oriental  philosophy.  ...  It  will  probably  surprise
some  heedless  jokers  in  the  press  to  hear  that  already  some  of  the
foremost  European  metaphysicians  in  India  have  acknowledged
this.     .     .     ."

Bitter  experience  has  taught  her  the  truth  that
human  nature  is  too  base  to  be  honest.  Were  I  in
her  place  I  would  never  again — at  least  not  in  India
— thus  fling  myself  as  a  victim  to  be  mangled  by
the  hounds.  There  are  many  who  would  regard  the
Theosophical  Society  as  a  miracle  club,  by  joining
which,  whether  deserving  or  not,  they  ought  to  get
their  fill  of  wonders.  Some,  devoid  of  patriotism
and  the  instinct  of  race  pride,  caring  nothing  for
the  vindication  in  modern  eyes  of  their  ancestral
fame  and  glories,  but  only  eager  for  their  senses  to
be  astonished  by  phenomena,  have  felt  themselves
aggrieved  because  they  have  seen  none.  Madame
Blavatsky  has  been  reviled  by  them  and  through
them,  because  of  their  disappointment.  The  pub-
lished testimony  of  those  who  have  witnessed  the
most  wonderful  things,  has  caused  her  to  be  pounced
upon  by  a  host  of  newspaper  critics,  as  though  she
were  not  a  private  individual  who  never  showed  any-
thing but  to  a  limited  circle  of  friends,  but  a  sort  of
professional  juggler  who  had  cheated  them  out  of
their  money.  But  even  though  they  sawten  thousand
phenomena,  yet  neither  studied  nor  put  forth  indi-

N

194  THEOSOPHY,

vidual  efforts,  they  would  never  reap  the  slightest
benefit.  They  would  never  learn  the  great  truth,
that  while  occult  phenomena  are  possible,  a  miracle
is  an  impossibility  in  nature.  Spiritualism  has  for  the
past  thirty-two  years  been  surfeiting  the  public  with
phenomena  of  the  most  startling  description  :  the
known  laws  of  force  have  been  upset,  matter  has
displayed  qualities  never  suspected  before,  and  even
the  figures,  or  rather  portrait-statues  of  the  dead
have  stalked  in  our  presence,  and  revealed  the
secrets  of  the  shadow  world.  Has  religion  or
philosophy  been  the  gainer  by  all  this  ?  No.
Have  the  mass  of  investigators  been  stimulated  to
nobler  lives  ?  No.  Those  that  were  moral  before
are  for  the  most  part  moral  still,  and  the  bad  con-
tinue bad.  We  are  gorged  with  phenomena,  we
need  philosophy  and  a  sure  path  to  release  us  from
our  pain  and  suffering.  Where  is  this  knowledge
to  be  sought  for?  Here,  in  India ;  and  if  you  will
question  either  one  of  the  hundreds  of  European
visitors  with  whom  Madame  Blavatsky  has  talked
in  different  countries,  you  will  find  that  her  con-
stant vehement  assertion  has  ever  been  that  what
she  knows  she  learned  in  India  and  Tibet,  and  that
for  what  they  taught  her  she  gives  her  love  and  her
life,  If  necessary,  to  promote  the  happiness  of  their
people.

"  But  is  not  your  Society  established  for  the  sole
purpose  of  giving  these  experimental  proofs  of
psychic  power  ? "  some  will  ask.  I  answer,  no  ;
more  phenomena  have  been  shown  to  outsiders  than

ITS  FJ^IENDS  AND  ENEMIES.  795

to  members,  because  every  man  who  joins  us  to
study  occultism,  tacitly  pledges  himself  to  try  to
develop  his  own  latent  psychic  powers.  If  he  does
this  he  is  helped,  if  not  he  is  left  to  wait  until  he
can  decide  to  rouse  himself  to  exertion.  Adeptship
implies  the  highest  success  in  self-evolution,  and
the  lavish  display  of  phenomena  to  beginners  is  as
demoralising  as  overdoses  of  opium  or  brandy.  It
either  kills  effort,  or  excites  a  frenzy  of  supersti-
tious adulation.  Do  you  know  what  we  might
have  done  in  India  by  this  time  as  easily  as  I  can
lift  this  paper  ?  We  might  have  formed  a  new
sect  that  would  now  count  its  tens  of  thousands  of
devotees.  If  we  had  been  vain  and  unprincipled
enough  to  have  given  ourselves  out  as  two  Sadhus
bearing  a  divine  commission  and  preaching  under
inspiration  ;  and  if  Madame  Blavatsky  had  publicly
done  one-fourth  of  the  phenomena  I  have  seen  her
do  in  America,  or  even  in  India,  in  private,  and  the
occurrence  of  which  is  perfectly  attested,  you
would  have  seen  thousands  prostrating  themselves
before  the  flag  of  the  Theosophical  Society,  and
trampling  one  another  to  come  and  embrace  our
feet.  Do  you  doubt  it  ?  You  would  not  if  you
stopped  to  read  our  correspondence,  and  note  the
extravagant  lengths  to  which  the  imagination  of
our  friends  has  carried  them.  I  can  show  any  of
you,  if  you  choose,  a  bundle  of  requests  for  the
miraculous  cure  of  physical  and  mental  ailments,
the  recovery  of  lost  property,  and  other  favours.
And,  lest  my  English  auditors   might  be  disposed

196  IHEOSOPHY,

to  laugh  in  their  sleeves  at  Hindu  credulity,  let  me
warn  them  tha't  some  of  the  most  preposterous  of
these  requests  have  come  from  their  own  com-
munity ;  some  from  persons  so  highly  placed
that  they  have  asked  that  their  names  may  be
withheld  at  all  hazards.  All  this  is  a  saddening
proof  of  the  unspirituality  and  rankling  superstition
of  the  present  age.  Adepts  do  not  show  them-
selves or  their  phenomena  because  there  is  no
public  to  appreciate  them.  It  is  known  that  we
have  affirmed  that  some  of  these  maJiatnias  are  in
relations  with  our  Society,  and  take  an  interest  in
its  welfare.  I  reaffirm  the  statement,  and  at  the
same  time  protest  against  the  daring  supposition
that  for  that  reason  they  are  responsible  for  all  or
any  of  the  mistakes  in  its  management.  Those
faults  are  all  my  own  and  count  against  me.  I
have  realised,  too  late,  that  the  public  who  could  so
basely  treat  a  woman  who  was  but  their  disciple*
could  not  understand  anything  that  might  be  said
about  them.  So,  henceforth,  I  shall  try  to  abstain
from  even  speaking  of  them,  except  to  such  as  are
prepared  and  anxious  for  the  truth.  An  age  that
is  satisfied  with  church  miracles,  mediumist  phe-
nomena, or  the  most  rank  materialism,  without
seeking  further  for  the  hidden  causes,  may  as  well
be  left  to  play  with  its  toys.  The  thoughtful  man
need  ask  for  no  more  wondrous  phenomenon  than  his
own  existence,  no  greater  miracle  than  the  display
of  his  own  splendid  powers.  He  is  surrounded  by
a  world  of  phenomena  scarcely  one  of  which  has

ITS  FRIENDS  AiVD  ENEMIES.  197

he  traced  to  its  ultimate  source.  The  steps  of
science  are  near  the  threshold  of  the  sanctuary ;  her
hand  held  out  to  feel  the  lintels  of  the  door  which
with  her  bandaged  eyes  she  cannot  see.  Mystery
on  mystery  of  the  outer  world  has  been  unearthed,
until  it  almost  seems  as  though  there  were  but  little
left  to  learn.  This  blinded  goddess  of  Materialist
Science  has  but  just  begun  to  dream  that  a  universe
of  vast  extent  may  lie  behind  the  curtain  at  the
door.  She  stands  without,  uncertain,  groping ;  and
across  the  threshold  waits  Theosophy — sweetest  of
all  the  devis  into  which  poetic  fancy  ever  made  a
thought  personified — and  holding  out  her  own
strong  hand  says,  "  Sister  Science,  come !  The
field  is  boundless,  let  us  search  together."

THE  OCCULT  SCIENCES.*

In  the  tenth  chapter  of  his  famous  work,  entitled
All    Enquiry    concerning    Human    Understanding,
Hume  attempts  to   define  the  limits  of  philoso-
phical inquiry.     So  pleased  was  the   author   with
his  work  that  he  has  placed  it  on  record  that  with
the  "  wise  and  learned  " — a  most  necessary  separa-
tion, since  a  man  may  be  wise  without  being  at  all
learned,  while  modern  science  has  introduced  to  us
many  of  her  most  famous  men  who,  through  burst-
ing, like  Jack  Bunsby,  with  learning,  were  far,  very
far  from  wise — this  postulate  of  his  must  be  "  an
everlasting  check  to  all   kinds  of  superstitious  de-
lusions."    For   many  years  this  oracular  utterance
was  unquestioned,  and  Hume's  apothegm  was  laid,
like  a  handkerchief  steeped  in  chloroform,  over  the
mouth  of  every  man  who  attempted  to  discuss  the
phenomena  of  the  invisible  world.     But  a  brave
Englishman  and  man  of  science,  to-wit,  Mr.  Alfred
Russell  Wallace,  F.R.S.,  has  of  late  called  Hume's
infallibility  in  question.     He  finds   two  grave  de-
fects in  that  writer's  proposition  that  "  a  miracle  is  a
violation  of  the  laws  of  Nature  ; "  since  it  assumes,
firstly,  that  we  know  all  the  laws  of  Nature  ;  and
secondly,  that  an  unusual  phenomenon  is  a  miracle.

*  A  Lecture  deliveretl  at  Colombo,  Ceylon,  15th  June,  1880.

THE  OCCULT  SCIENCES.  199

Speaking  deferentially,  is  it  not  after  all  a  piece  of
preposterous  egotism  for  any  living  man  to  say
what  is,  or  rather  what  is  not^  a  law  of  Nature  ?  I
have  enjoyed  the  acquaintance  of  scientists  who
could  actually  repeat  the  names  of  the  several
parts  of  a  cockroach,  and  even  of  a  flea.  Upon  this
rare  accomplishment  they  plumed  themselves  not
a  little,  and  took  on  the  airs  of  men  of  science.
I  talked  with  them  about  the  laws  of  Nature,
and  found  they  thought  they  knew  enough  of
them  to  dogmatize  to  me  about  the  Knowable  and
Unknowable.  I  know  doctors  of  medicine,  even
professors,  adepts  in  physiology  and  able  to  dose
their  patients  without  exceeding  the  conventional
average  of  casualities  good-naturedly  permitted  to
the  profession.  They  have  dogmatized  to  me
about  science  and  the  laws  of  Nature,  although  not
one  of  them  could  tell  me  anything  positive  about
the  life  of  man,  whether  in  the  state  of  ovum,  of
embryo,  of  infant,  of  adult,  or  of  corpse.  The  most
candid  medical  authorities  have  always  frankly
confessed  that  the  human  being  is  a  puzzle  as
yet  unsolved  and  medicine  "scientific  guess-
work." Has  ever  yet  a  surgeon,  as  he  stood  beside
a  subject  on  the  dissecting  table  of  the  amphi-
theatre, dared  to  tell  his  class  that  he  knew  what
life  is,  or  that  his  scalpel  could  cut  away  any  in-
tegumental  veil  so  as  to  lay  bare  the  myster}'  ?
Did  any  modern  botanist  ever  venture  to  explain
that  tremendous  secret  law  which  makes  every
seed   produce   the  plant  or  tree  of  its  own  kind  ?

2CO  THE  OCCULT  SCIENCES,

Mr.  Huxley  and  his  fellow-biologists  have  shown
us  protoplasm — the  gelatinous  substance  which
forms  the  physical  basis  of  life — and  told  us  that
it  is  substantially  identical  in  composition  in
plant  and  animal.  But  they  can  go  no  farther  than
the  microscope  and  spectroscope  will  carry  them.
Do  you  doubt  me  ?  Then  hear  the  mortifying  con-
fession of  Professor  Huxley  himself.  "  In  perfect
strictness,"  he  says,  "  it  is  true  that  we  know
nothing  about  the  composition  of  any  body  what-
ever, as  it  is  !  "  And  yet  what  scientist  is  there
who  has  dogmatized  more  about  the  limitations  of
scientific  inquiry  ?  Do  you  think  that,  because  the
chemists  can  dissolve  for  you  the  human  body  into
its  elementary  gases  and  ashes,  until  what  was  once
a  tall  man  can  be  put  into  an  empty  cigar-box  and
a  large  bottle,  they  can  help  you  any  better  to
understand  what  that  living  man  really  was  ?  Ask
them — I  am  willing  to  let  the  case  rest  upon  their
own  unchallenged  evidence.

Science  ?  Pshaw !  What  is  there  worthy  to
bear  that  imperial  name  so  long  as  its  most  noisy
representatives  cannot  tell  us  the  least  part  of  the
mystery  of  man  or  of  the  nature  which  environs
him  ?  Let  science  explain  to  us  how  the  smallest
blade  of  grass  grows,  or  bridge  over  the  "  abyss  "
which  Father  Felix,  the  great  French  Catholic
orator,  tauntingly  told  the  Academy,  existed  for
it  in  a  grain  of  sand,  and  then  dogmatize  as  much
as  it  likes  about  the  laivs  of  Nature  !  In  common
with   all   heretics,   I  hate  this    presumptuous  pre-

THE  OCCULT  SCIENCES,  201

tcnce  ;  and  as  one  who,  having  studied  psychology
nearly  thirty  years,  has  some  right  to  be  heard,  I
protest  against,  and  utterly  repudiate,  the  least
claim  of  our  modern  science  to  know  all  the  laws  of
Nature,  and  to  say  what  Is,  or  what  Is  not,  possible.
As  for  the  opinions  of  non-scientific  critics,  who
never  Informed  themselves  practically  about  even
one  law  of  Nature,  they  are  not  worth  even  listen-
ing to.  And  yet  what  a  clamour  they  make,  to  be
sure ;  how  the  public  ear  has  been  assailed  by  the
din  of  these  ignorant  and  conceited  criticasters!  It
is  like  being  among  a  crowd  of  stock-brokers  on  the
Exchange.  Every  one  of  the  authorities  is  dogma-
tizing in  his  most  vociferous  and  impressive  manner.
One  would  think  to  read  and  hear  what  all  these
priests,  editors,  authors,  deacons,  elders,  civil  and
military  servants,  lawyers,  merchants,  vestrymen,
and  old  women,  and  their  followers,  admirers,  and
echoing  toadies  have  to  say — that  the  laws  of
i^ature  were  as  familiar  to  them  as  the  alphabet,
and  that  every  one  carried  in  his  pocket  the  com-
bination key  to  the  Chubb  lock  of  the  Universe  !  If
these  people  only  realized  how  foolish  they  really
are  In  rushing  in

"...     where  angels  fear  to  tread,"

they  might  somewhat  abate  their  pretences.  And
if  common  sense  were  as  plentiful  as  conceit,  a
lecture  upon  the  Occult  Sciences  would  be  listened
to  with  a  more  humble  spirit  than,  I  am  afraid,  can
be  counted  upon  In  our  days.

202  THE  OCCULT  SCIENCES.

I  have  tried,  by  simply  calling  your  attention  to
the  confessed  ignorance  of  our  modern  scientists  of
the  nature  of  life,  to  show  you  that  in  fact  all  visible
phenomena  are  occult  or  hidden  from  the  average
inquirer.  The  term  ocailt  has  been  given  to  the
sciences  relating  to  the  mystical  side  of  nature — the
department  of  force  or  spirit.  Open  any  book  on
scieflce,  or  listen  to  any  lecture  or  address  by  a
modern  authority,  and  you  will  see  that  modern
science  limits  its  inquiry  to  the  visible  material  or
physical  universe.  The  combinations  and  correla-
tions of  matter,  under  the  impulse  of  hidden  forces,
are  what  it  studies.  To  facilitate  this  line  of
inquiry,  mechanical  ingenuity  has  lent  the  most
marvellous  assistance.  The  microscope  has  now
been  perfected  so  as  to  reveal  the  tiniest  object  in
the  tiny  world  of  a  drop  of  dew ;  the  telescope
brings  into  its  field  and  focus  glittering  constella-
tions that,  as  Moore  poetically  says —

" stand

Like  winking  sentinels  upon  the  void
Beyond  which  Chaos  dwells  ;  "

the  chemist's  balances  will  weigh  matter  to  the  ten-
thousandth  part  of  a  grain  ;  by  the  spectroscope
the  composition  of  all  things  on  earth  and  suns
and  stars  is  claimed  to  be  demonstrable  in  the  lines
they  make  across  the  spectrum ;  substances  hitherto
supposed  to  be  elements  are  now  proved  to  be  com-
pounds, and  what  we  had  imagined  to  be  compounds
are  found  to  be  elements.  Inch  by  inch,  step  by
step,  physical   science  has   marched,  from   its  old

THE  OCCULT  SCIENCES.  203

prison  In  the  dungeon  of  the  Church  towards  Its
desired  goal — the  verge  of  physical  nature.  It
would  not  be  too  much  to  admit  that  the  verge  has
been  almost  reached,  but  that  Edison's  recent  dis-
coveries of  the  telephone,  the  phonograph,  and  the
electric  light,  and  Crookes's  of  the  existence  and
properties  of  radiant  matter,  seem  to  have  pushed  far-
ther away  the  chasm  that  separates  the  confessedly
knowable  from  the  fancied  unknowable.  The  recent
advances  of  physical  science  tend  to  mitigate  somiC-
what  the  pride  of  our  scientists.  It  is  as  though
whole  domains,  previously  undreamt  of,  were
suddenly  exposed  to  view  as  each  new  eminence
of  knowledge  is  gained;  just  as  the  traveller  sees
lone  reaches  of  country  to  be  traversed  upon  climb-
inp-  to  the  crest  of  the  mountain  that  had  been
shuttlne  him  in  within  a  narrow  horizon.  The  fact
is  that  whether  regarded  from  her  physical  or
dynamical  side,  Nature  is  a  book  with  an  endless
variety  of  subjects  to  be  studied  and  mysteries
to  be  unravelled.  And,  as  regards  science,  there  is
a  thousand  times  more  that  is  occult  than  familiar
and  easy  to  understand.

The  realization  of  this  fact,  both  as  the  result  of
personal  inquiry  and  of  conversation  with  the
learned,  was  one  chief  cause  of  the  foundation  of
the  Theosophlcal  Society.

Now,  it  must  be  agreed  that  while  the  first
necessity  for  the  candid  student  Is  to  discover  the
depth  and  immensity  of  his  own  ignorance,  the
next  is  to  find  out  where  and  how  that  ignorance

204  THE  OCCULT  SCIENCES.

may  be  dispelled.     We  must  first  fit  ourselves  to
become  pupils  and  then  look  about  for  a  teacher.
Where,   in  what   part   of  the  world,  can   there  be
found  men  capable   of  teaching  us  a  part  of  the
mystery  hidden    behind    the    mask   of  the   world
of  matter?     Who  holds  the  secret  of  life?     Who
knows  what  force  is,  and  what  causes  it  to  bring
around  its  countless,  eternal  correlations  with  the
molecules  of  matter?     What  adept   can  unriddle
for  us  the  problem  how  worlds  are  built  and  why  ?
Can  any  one  tell  us  whence  man  came,  whither  he
goes,  what  he  is  ?     What  is  the  secret  of  birth,  of
sleep,  of  thought,  of  memory,  of  death  ?     What  is
that    eternal,    self-existent   principle   by    common
consent   believed   to  be   the  source  of  everything
visible  and  invisible,  and  with  which  man  claims
kinship  ?      We    little   modern    people   have   been
going  about  in  search  after  this  teacher,  with  our
toy  lanterns  in  our  hands,  as  though  it  were  night
instead  of  bright  day.     The  light  of  truth  shines
all  the  while,  but  we,  being  blind,  cannot  see  it.
Does  a  new  authority  proclaim  himself,  we  run  from
all  sides,  but  only  see  a  common  man  with  ban-
daged eyes,  holding  a  pretty  banner  and  blowing
his  own  trumpet.     "  Come,"  he  cries,  "  come,  good
people,  and  listen  to  one  who  knows  the  laws  of
Nature.     Follow  my  lead,  join  my  school,  enter  my
church,  buy  my  nostrum,  and  you  will  be  wise  in
this  world,  and  happy  hereafter  !  "     How  many  of
these  pretenders  there  have  been,  how  they  have
imposed  for  a  while  upon  the  world,  what  mean-

THE  OCCULT  SCIEMCES.  205

nesses  and  cruelties  their  devotees  have  done  in
their  behalf,  and  how  their  shams  and  humbugs  have
ultimately  been  exposed,  the  pages  of  history  show.
There  is  but  one  truth,  and  that  is  to  be  sought  for
in  the  mystical  world  of  man's  interior  nature ;
theosophically,  and  by  the  help  of  the  "  Occult
Sciences."

If  history  has  preserved  for  us  the  record  of
multitudinous  failures  of  materialists  to  read  the
secret  laws  of  Nature,  it  has  also  kept  for  our
instruction  the  stories  of  many  successes  gained  by
Theosophists  in  this  direction.  There  is  no  im-
penetrable mystery  in  Nature  to  the  student  who
knows  how  to  interrogate  her.  If  physical  facts  can
be  observed  by  the  eye  of  the  body,  so  can  spiritual
laws  be  discovered  by  that  interior  perception  of
ours  which  we  call  the  eye  of  the  spirit.  This  per-
ceptive power  inheres  in  the  nature  of  man  ;  it  is
the  godlike  quality  which  makes  him  superior  to
brutes.  What  we  call  seers  and  prophets,  what  the
Buddhists  know  as  arahats  and  the  Aryans  as  true
sanyasis,  are  only  men  who  have  emancipated  their
interior  selves  from  physical  bondage  by  meditation
in  secluded  spots  where  the  foulness  of  average
humanity  could  not  taint  them,  and  where  they
were  nearest  to  the  threshold  of  Nature's  temple  ;
and  by  the  gradual  and  persistent  conquest  of
brutal  desire  after  desire,  taste  after  taste,  weakness
after  weakness,  sense  after  sense,  have  moved
forward  to  the  ultimate  victory  of  spirit.  Jesus  is
said  to  have  gone  thus  apart  to  be  tempted  ;  so  did

2o6  THE  OCCULT  SCIENCES.

Mahomet,  who  spent  one  day  in  every  month  alone
in  a  mountain  cave  ;  so  did  Zoroaster,  who  emerged
from  the  sechision  of  his  mountain  retreat  only  at
the  age  of  forty  ;  so  did  Buddha,  whose  knowledge
of  the  cause  of  pain,  and  discovery  of  the  path  to
Nirvana^  was  obtained  by  solitary  self-struggles  in
desert  places.  Turn  over  the  leaves  of  the  book  of
records,  and  you  will  find  that  every  man  who
really  did  penetrate  the  mysteries  of  life  and  death
got  the  truth  in  solitude  and  in  a  mighty  travail  of
body  and  spirit.  These  were  all  Theosophists —
that  is,  original  searchers  after  spiritual  know-
ledge. What  they  did,  what  they  achieved,  any
other  man  of  equal  qualities  may  attain  to.  And
this  is  the  lesson  taught  by  the  Theosophical
Society.  As  they  wrested  her  secrets  from  the
bosom  of  Nature,  so  would  we.  Buddha  said  we
should  believe  nothing  upon  authority,  not  even
his  own  ;  but  because  our  reason  told  us  the
assertion  was  true.  He  began  by  striding  over
even  the  sacred  Vedas  because  they  were  used  to
prevent  original  theosophical  research ;  castes  he
brushed  aside  as  selfish  monopolies.  His  desire
was  to  fling  wide  open  every  door  to  the  sanctuary  of
Truth.  We  organized  our  Society — as  the  very  first
section  of  our  original  bye-laws  expresses  it — "  for
the  discovery  of  all  the  laws  of  Nature  and  the  dis-
semination of  the  knowledge  of  the  same."  The
known  laws  of  Nature  why  should  we  busy  our-
selves with  ?  The  unknown  or  occult  ones  were  to
be  our  special  province  of  research.     No   one  in

THE  OCCULT  SCIENCES.  207

America,  none  in  Europe,  now  living,  could  help  us,
except  in  special  branches,  such  as  magnetism,
crystal-reading,  psychometry,  and  those  most
striking  phenomena  of  so  -  called  mediumship,
grouped  together  under  the  generic  name  of
modern  spiritualism.  Though  the  Vedas,  the
Puranas,  the  Zend  Avesta,  the  Koran,  and  the
Bible,  teemed  with  allusions  to  the  sayings  and
doings  of  wonder-working  Theosophists,  we  were
told  by  every  one  that  the  power  had  long  since
died  out,  and  the  adepts  vanished  from  the  sight  of
men.  At  the  mere  mention  of  occult  science,  the
modern  biologist  curled  his  lip  In  fine  scorn,  and
the  lay  fool  gave  way  to  senseless  witticisms.

It  was  a  discouraging  prospect,  certainly ;  but  in
this,  as  in  every  other  instance,  the  difficulties  were
more  imaginary  than  real.  We  had  a  clue  given
us  to  the  right  road  by  one  who  had  spent  a  long
lifetime  in  travel,  who  had  found  the  science  to  be
still  extant,  with  its  proficients  and  masters  still
practising  it  as  in  ancient  days.  The  tidings  were
most  encouraging,  as  are  those  of  help  or  succour  to
a  party  of  castaways  on  an  unfriendly  shore.  We
learnt  to  recognize  the  supreme  value  of  the  dis-
coveries of  Paracelsus,  of  Mesmer,  and  of  Baron  von
Reichenbach,  as  the  stepping-stones  to  the  higher
branches  of  occultism.  We  turned  again  to  study
them,  and  the  more  we  studied  the  clearer  insight
did  we  get  into  the  meaning  of  Asiatic  myth  and
fable,  and  the  real  object  and  methods  of  the
ascetic  Theosophists  of  all  ages.    The  words  "body,"

2o8  THE  OCCULT  SCIENCES.

"  soul/'    "  spirit,"    Moksha  and    Nirvana,   acquired
each  a  definite  and  comprehensible  meaning.     We
could  understand  what  the  Yogi  wished  to  express
by  his  uniting  himself  with  Brahma,  and  becoming
Brahma  ;  why  the  biographer  of  Jesus  made  him
say,  "  I  and  the  Father  are  one  ; "  how  Sankara-
charya  and  others  could  display  such  phenomenal
learning  without  having  studied  It  In  books  ;  whence
Zaratusht  acquired  his  profound  spiritual  illumina-
tion ;  and  how  the  Lord  Sakya  Muni,  though  but
a  man  "born  in   the   purple,"  might  nevertheless
become    all-wise    and    all-powerful.      Would    any
hearer   learn   this    secret?     Let   him    study    mes-
merism, and  master  its  methods  until  he  can  plunge
his  subject  Into  so  deep  a  sleep  that  the  body  is
made  to  seem  dead,  and  the  freed  soul  can  be  sent
whithersoever  he  wills,  about  the  earth  or  among  the
stars.     Then  he  will  see  the  separate  reality  of  the
body  and  its  dweller.     Or,  let  him  read  Professor
Denton's  "  Soul  of  Things,"  and  test  the  boundless
resources  of  psychometry ;   a  strange   yet   simple
science  which  enables  us  to  trace  back  through  ages
the  history  of  any  substance  held  in  the  sensitive
psychometer's   hand.     Thus   a   fragment  of  stone
from  Cicero's  house,  or  from  the  Egyptian  pyramids;
a  bit  of  cloth  from  a  mummy's  shroud  ;  or  a  faded
parchment,  letter,  or   painting  ;  or  some  garment
or  other  article  worn  by  a  historic  personage ;  or  a
fragment  of  an  aerolite — give  to  the  psychometer  Im-
pressions,  sometimes    amounting   to    visions   sur-
passingly vivid,  of  the  building,  monument,  mummy,

THE  OCCULT  SCIENCES,  209

writer  or  painter,  of  the  long-dead  personage,  or  of
the  meteoric  orbit  from  which  the  last-named  object
fell.  This  splendid  science,  for  whose  discovery,
in  1840,  the  world  is  indebted  to  Professor
Joseph  R.  Buchanan,  now  a  Fellow  of  our  Society,
has  but  just  begun  to  show  its  capabilities.  But
already  it  has  shown  us  that  in  the  Ahtsa,  or  Ether
of  science,  are  preserved  the  records  of  every  human
experience,  deed  and  word.  No  matter  how  long
forgotten  and  gone  by,  they  are  still  a  record,  and,
according  to  Buchanan's  estimate,  about  four  out  of
every  ten  persons  have  in  greater  or  less  degree
the  psychometrical  power  which  can  read  those  im-
perishable pages  of  the  Book  of  Life.  Taken  by
itself,  either  mesmerism,  or  psychometry,  or  Baron
Reichenbach's  theory  of  Odyle,  or  Odic  force,  is
sufficiently  wonderful.  In  mesmerism  a  sensitive
subject  is  put  by  magnetism  into  the  magnetic
sleep,  during  which  the  body  is  insensible  to
pain,  noise,  or  any  other  disturbing  influence.
The  psychometer,  on  the  contrary,  does  not  sleep,
but  only  sits  or  lies  passively,  holds  the  letter,  frag-
ment of  stone  or  other  object,  in  the  hand  or
against  the  centre  of  the  forehead,  and,  without
knowing  at  all  what  it  is  or  whence  it  came,
describes  what  he  or  she  feels  or  sees.  Of  the  two
methods  of  looking  into  the  invisible  world,  psycho-
metry is  preferable,  for  it  is  not  attended  with  those
risks  of  the  magnetic  slumber,  which  may  arise  from
inexperience  in  the  operator,  or  from  low  physical
vitality  in  the  somnambule.     Baron    Dupotet,   M,

2IO  THE  OCCULT  SCIENCES.

Cahagnet,  Professor  William  Gregory,  and  other
authorities,  tell  us  of  instances  of  the  latter  sort,  in
which  the  sleeper  was  with  difficulty  brought  back  to
earthly  consciousness,  so  transcendently  beautiful
were  the  scenes  that  broke  upon  his  spiritual  vision.
Reichenbach's  discovery— the  result  of  several
years'  experimental  research,  with  the  most  expen-
sive apparatus  and  a  great  variety  of  subjects,  by  one
of  the  most  eminent  chemists  and  physicists  of
modern  times— was  this.  A  hitherto  unsuspected
force  exists  in  Nature,  having,  like  electricity  and
magnetism,  its  positive  and  negative  poles.  It  per-
vades everything  in  the  mineral,  vegetable,  and
animal  kingdoms.  Our  earth  is  charged  with  it  ;
it  is  in  the  stars  ;  and  there  is  a  close  interchange
of  polar  influences  between  us  and  all  the  heavenly
bodies.  Here  I  hold  in  my  hand  a  specimen  of
quartz  crystal,  sent  me  from  the  Gastein  Moun-
tains, by  the  Baroness  von  Vay.  Before  Reich-
enbach's discovery  of  the  Odic  force — as  he  terms

it this  would  have  had  no  special  interest  to  the

geologist,  except  as  a  curious  example  of  imperfect
crystallization.  But  now  it  has  a  definite  value  be-
yond this.  If  I  pass  the  apex,  or  positive  pole,  over
the  wrist  and  palm  of  a  sensitive  person — thus —
he  will  feel  a  sensation  of  warmth  or  cold,  or  the
blowing  of  a  thin,  very  thin  pencil  of  air  over  the
skin.  Some  feel  one  thing,  some  another,  accord-
ing to  the  Odic  condition  of  their  own  bodies.
Speaking  of  this  latter  phenomenon— viz.,  that
the  Odic  polaric  condition  of  our  bodies  is  peculiar

THE  OCCUL  T  SCIENCES.  2 1 1

to  ourselves,  different  from  the  bodies  of  each
other,  different  in  the  right  and  left  sides,  and
different  at  night  and  morning  in  the  same  body —
let  me  ask  you  whether  a  phenomenon  long  noticed,
supposed  by  the  ignorant  to  be  miraculous,  and
yet  constantly  denied  by  those  who  never  saw  it,
may  not  be  classed  as  a  purely  Odic  one.  I  refer
to  the  levitation  of  ascetics  and  saints,  the  risincr
into  the  air  of  their  bodies,  at  moments  when  they
were  deeply  entranced.  Baron  Reichenbach  found
that  the  Odic  sensibility  of  his  best  patients  greatly
varied  in  health  and  disease.  Professor  Perty  of
Geneva,  and  Dr.  Justinus  Korner  tell  us  that  the
bodies  of  certain  hysterical  patients  rose  into  the
air  without  visible  cause,  and  floated  as  light  as  a
feather.  During  the  Salem  witchcraft  horrors,  one
of  the  subjects,  Margaret  Rule,  was  similarly  levi-
tated. Mr.  William  Crookes  recently  published  a
list  of  no  less  than  forty  Catholic  ecstatics  whose
levitation  is  regarded  as  proof  of  their  peculiar
sanctity.  Now,  I  myself,  in  common  with  many
other  modern  observers  of  psychological  pheno-
mena, have  seen  a  person  in  the  full  enjoyment  of
consciousness  raised  into  the  air  by  a  mere
exercise  of  the  will.  This  person  was  an  Asiatic
by  birth,  had  studied  occult  sciences  in  Asia,
and  explains  the  remarkable  phenomena  as  a
simple  example  of  change  of  corporeal  polarity.
You  all  know  the  electrical  law  that  oppositely
electrified  bodies  attract,  and  similarly  electrified
ones  repel  each  other.     We  say  that  we  stand  upon

212  THE  OCCULT  SCIENCES.

the  earth  because  of  the  force  of  gravitation,  with-
out stopping  to  think  how  much  of  the  explanation
is  a  mere  patter  of  words  conveying  no  accurate
idea  to  the  mind.  Suppose  we  say  that  we  cHng  to
the  earth's  surface,  because  the  polarity  of  our  body
is  opposed  to  the  polarity  of  the  spot  of  earth  upon
which  we  stand.  That  would  be  scientifically
correct.  But  how,  if  our  polarity  is  reversed,
whether  by  disease,  or  the  mesmeric  passes  of  a
powerful  magnetiser,  or  the  constant  effort  of  a
trained  self-will  ?  To  classify,  let  one  imagine  one-
self either  a  hysteric  patient,  an  ecstatic,  a  somnam-
bule,  or  an  adept  in  Asiatic  occult  science.  In  either
case,  if  the  polarity  of  the  body  should  be  changed
to  its  opposite  polarity,  and  so  our  electrical,
magnetic,  or  Odic  state  be  made  identical  with  that
of  the  ground  beneath  us,  the  long-known  electro-
polaric  law  would  assert  itself,  and  our  body  would
rise  into  the  air.  It  would  float  as  long  as  these
mutual  polaric  differences  continued,  and  rise  to  a
height  exactly  proportionate  to  their  intensity.  So
much  of  light  is  let  into  the  old  domain  of  Church
"  miracles  "  by  mesmerism  and  the  Od  discovery.

But  our  mountain  crystal  has  another  and  far
more  striking  peculiarity  than  mere  Odic  polarity.
It  is  nothing  apparently  but  a  poor  lump  of  glass,
and  yet  in  its  heart  can  be  seen  strange  mysteries.
There  are  doubtless  a  score  of  persons  in  this  great
audience  who,  if  they  would  sit  in  an  easy  posture
and  a  quiet  place,  and  gaze  into  my  crystal  for  a
few  minutes,  would  see  and  describe  to  me  pictures

THE  OCCULT  SCIENCES,  213

of  people,  scenes  and  places  in  different  countries,  as
well  as  their  own  beautiful  Ceylon.  I  gave  the
crystal  into  the  hand  of  a  lady  who  is  a  natural
clairvoyant,  just  after  I  had  received  it  from
Hungary.  "  I  see,"  she  said,  "  a  large,  handsome
room  in  what  appears  to  be  a  castle.  Through
an  open  window  can  be  seen  a  small  park,  with
smooth,  broad  walks,  trimmed  lawns,  and  trees.  A
noble-looking  lady  stands  at  a  marble-topped  table
doing  up  something  into  a  parcel.  A  man-servant  in
rich  livery  stands  as  though  waiting  for  his  mistress's
orders.  It  is  this  crystal  that  she  is  doing  up,  and
she  puts  it  into  a  brown  box,  something  like  a
small  musical-box."  The  clairvoyant  knew  nothing
about  the  crystal,  but  she  had  given  an  accurate
description  of  the  sender,  of  her  residence,  and  of
the  box  in  which  the  crystal  came  to  me.

Reichenbach's  careful  investigations  prove  that
minerals  have  each  their  own  peculiar  Odic  polarity,
and  this  lets  us  into  an  understanding  of  much  that
the  Asiatic  people  have  said  about  the  magical
properties  of  gems.  You  have  all  heard  of  the
regard  in  which  the  sapphire  has  ever  been  held
for  its  supposed  magical  property  to  assist  somnam-
bulic vision.  "  The  sapphire,"  according  to  a
Buddhist  writer,  "will  open  barred  doors  and
dwellings  (for  the  spirit  of  man) ;  it  produces  a
desire  for  prayer,  and  brings  with  it  more  peace
than  any  other  gem  ;  but  he  who  would  wear  it
must  lead  a  pure  and  holy  life."

Now,  a  series  of  investigations  by  Amoretti  into

214  THE  OCCULT  SCIENCES.

the  electrical  polarity  of  precious  stones  (which  we
find  reported  in  Kieser's  Archia,  vol.  iv.,  p.  62)
resulted  in  proving  that  the  diamond,  the  garnet,
the  amethyst,  are  —  E.,  while  the  sapphire  is  +  E.
Orpheus  tells  how  by  means  of  a  load-stone  a  whole
audience  may  be  affected.  Pythagoras,  whose
knowledge  was  derived  from  India,  pays  a  par-
ticular attention  to  the  colour  and  nature  of
precious  stones  ;  and  Apollonius  of  Tyana,  one  of
the  purest  and  grandest  men  who  ever  lived,
accurately  taught  his  disciples  the  various  occult
properties  of  gems.

Thus  does  scientific  inquiry,  agreeing  with  the
researches  of  the  greatest  philosophers,  the  experi-
ences of  religious  ecstatics,  continually — though,  as
a  rule,  unintentionally — give  us  a  solid  basis  for
studying  occultism.  The  more  of  physical  pheno-
mena we  observe  and  classify,  the  more  is  the
student  of  occult  sciences  and  of  the  ancient
Asiatic  sciences,  philosophies  and  religions  helped.
We  modern  Europeans  have  been  so  blinded  by
the  fumes  of  our  own  conceit  that  we  have  not
been  able  to  look  beyond  our  noses.  We  have
been  boasting  of  our  glorious  enlightenment,  of
our  scientific  discoveries,  of  our  civilization,  of
our  superiority  to  everybody  wdth  a  dark  skin,
and  to  every  nation  east  of  the  Volga  and  the
Red  Sea,  or  south  of  the  Mediterranean,  until
we  have  come  almost  to  believe  that  the  world
was  built  for  the  Anglo-Saxon  race,  and  the  stars
hung   in  the  firmament   to  make  our   bit  of  sky

THE  OCCULT  SCIENCES.  215

pretty.      We    have    even    manufactured,    out     of
Asiatic  materials,  a  religion  to  suit  ourselves,  and
think   it  better  than    any  religion    ever   heard    of
before.       It    is    time    this    childish    vanity    were
done    away    with.      It    is    time    that    we    should
try   to   discover  the  sources  of  modern   ideas,  and
compare  what  we  think  we  know  of  the  laws  of
Nature   with   what  the  Asiatic  people  really    did
know  thousands  of  years   before  Europe  was  in-
habited by  our  barbarian  ancestors,  or  an  European
foot  was  set  upon  the  American  continent.     The
crucibles  of  science  are  heated  red-hot,  and  we  are
melting  in  them  everything  out  of  which  we  think
we  can  get  a  fact.     Suppose  that,  for  a  change,  we
approach  the  Eastern  people  in  a  less  presumptuous
spirit,    and    honestly    confessing    that    v/e    know
nothing  at  all  of  the  beginning  or  end  of  natural
law,  ask  them  to  help  us  to  find  out  what  their  fore-
fathers   knew.     This    has    been  the  policy   of  the
Theosophical  Society,  and  it  has  yielded  valuable
results  already.      Depend  upon    it   there  are  still
"  wise  men  in  the  East,"  and  the  occult  sciences  are
better    worth    studying    than    has    hitherto    been
popularly  supposed.

SPIRITUALISM  AND  THEOSOPHY.^^"

TilIRTEEN  years  ago,  one  of  the  most  eminent
of  modern  American  jurists  —  Cliief  Justice
Edmonds,  of  the  Supreme  Court  of  New  York —
declared  in  a  London  magazine  that  there  were
then  at  least  ten  millions  of  Spiritualists  in  the
United  States.  No  man  was  so  well  qualified
at  that  time  to  express  an  opinion  upon  this
subject,  for  not  only  was  he  in  correspondence
with  persons  in  all  parts  of  the  country,  but
the  noble  virtue  of  the  man,  as  well  as  his
learning,  his  judicial  impartiality  and  conservatism,
made  him  a  most  competent  and  convincing
witness.  And  another  authority,  a  publicist  of
equally  unblemished  private  and  public  reputation
— the  Hon.  Robert  Dale  Owen — while  endorsing
Judge  Edmonds's  estimate,  adds  "f  that  there  are  at
least  an  equal  number  in  the  rest  of  Christendom.
To  avoid  chance  of  exaggeration,  he,  however,
deducts  one-fourth  from  both  calculations,  and  (in
1874)  writes  the  sum-total  of  so-called  Spirit-
ualists at  fifteen  millions.     But  whatever  the  aggre-

*  A  Lecture  delivered  at  the  Rooms  of  the  United  Service  Institu-
tion of  India,  Simla,  7th  October,  18S0.

t  The  Debatable  Land  belivecn  this  World  and  the  Next,  London,
1874,  p.  174.

/

SPIRITUALISM  AND  THE  OS  0  PHY.  217

gate  of  believers  in  the  alleged  present  open  inter-
course between  the  worlds  of  substance  and
shadow,  it  is  a  known  fact  that  the  number
embraces  some  of  the  most  acute  intellects  of  our
day.  It  is  no  question  now  of  the  self-deceptions
of  boors  and  of  hysterical  chambermaids  that  we
have  to  deal  with.  Those  who  would  deny  the
reality  of  these  contemporary  phenomena  must
confront  a  multitude  of  our  most  capable  men  of
science,  who  have  exhausted  the  resources  of  their
profession  to  determine  the  nature  of  the  force  at
work,  and  been  baffled  at  seeking  any  other  ex-
planation than  the  one  of  trans-sepulchral  agency
of  some  kind  or  other.  Beginning  with  Robert
Hare,  the  inventor  of  the  oxy-hydrogen  blow-pipe
and  the  Nestor  of  American  Chemistry,  and  ending
wdth  Herr  Zollner,  Professor  of  Physical  Astronomy
in  Leipzig  University,  the  list  of  these  converted
experimentalists  includes  a  succession  of  adepts  of
physical  science  of  the  highest  professional  rank.
Each  of  them — except,  perhaps,  Zollner,  who
wished  to  verify  his  theory  of  a  fourth  dimension
of  space — began  the  task  of  investigation  with  the
avowed  purpose  of  exposing  the  alleged  fraud,  in
the  interests  of  public  morals  ;  and  each  was  trans-
formed by  the  irresistible  logic  of  facts  into  an
avowed  believer  in  the  reality  of  mediumist
phenomena.

The  apparatuses  devised  by  these  men  of  science
to  test  the  mediumist  power  have  been  in  the
highest  degree  ingenious.     They  have  been  of  four

2i8  SPIRITUALISM  AND  THEOSOPHY.

different  kinds — [a)  machines  to  determine  whether
electrical  or  magnetic  currents  were  operating  ;  {p)
whether  the  movement  of  heavy  articles,  such  as
tables  touched  by  the  medium,  was  caused  by
either  conscious  or  unconscious  muscular  contrac-
tion ;  ic)  whether  intelligent  communications  may
be  received  by  a  sitter  under  circumstances  pre-
cluding any  possible  trickery  by  the  medium  ;  and
id)  what  are  the  conditions  for  the  manifestation
of  this  new  form  of  energy  and  the  extreme  limita-
tions of  its  action?  Of  course,  in  an  hour's  lecture,
I  could  not  describe  a  tenth  part  of  these  machines,
but  I  may  take  two  as  illustrating  two  of  the
above-named  branches  of  research.  The  first
will  be  found  described  in  Professor  Hare's  work.
The  medium  and  inquirer  sit  facing  each  other,
the  medium's  hands  resting  upon  a  bit  of  board  so
hung  and  adjusted  that  whether  he  presses  on  the
board  or  not,  he  merely  moves  that  and  nothing
else.  In  front  of  the  visitor  is  a  dial,  like  a  clock-
face,  around  which  are  arranged  the  letters  of  the
alphabet,  the  ten  numerals,  the  words  "  Yes,"  "  No,"
"  Doubtful,"  and  perhaps  others.  A  pointer  or
hand  connected  with  a  lever,  the  other  end  of
which  is  so  placed  as  to  receive  any  current
flowing  through  the  medium's  system,  but  not  to  be
affected  by  any  mechanical  pressure  he  may  exert
upon  the  hand-rest,  travels  around  the  dial  and
indicates  the  letters  or  words  the  communicating
intelligence  wishes  to  be  noted  down.  The  back  of
the  dial  being  towards  the   medium,  the  latter,  of

SPIRITUALISM  AND  THE  OS  0  PHY,  219

course,  cannot  see  what  the  pointer  is  doing,  and
if  the  inquirer  conceals  the  paper  on  which  he
is  noting  down  the  communication,  cannot  have
even  a  suspicion  of  what  is  being  said.

The  other  contrivance  is  described  and  illustrated
in  the  mono9;raph  entitled,  Researches  in  tJie  PJicno-
vicna  oj  Spiritualising  by  Mr.  William  Crookes,
RR.S.,  editor  of  the  Quarterly  Jottrnal  of  Science,
and  one  of  the  most  successful  experimental
chemists  of  our  day.  A  mahogany  board,  36
inches  long  by  9<J  inches  wide,  and  one  inch  thick,
rests  at  one  end  upon  a  table,  upon  a  strip  cut
to  a  knife  edge  ;  at  the  other  end  it  is  suspended
by  a  spring-balance,  fitted  with  an  automatic
registering  apparatus,  and  hung  from  a  firm
tripod.  On  the  table  end  of  the  board,  and
directly  over  the  fulcrum,  is  placed  a  large  vessel
filled  with  water.  In  this  water  dips,  to  the  depth
of  li  inches  from  the  surface,  a  copper  vessel,  with
bottom  perforated  so  as  to  let  the  water  enter  it ;
which  copper  vessel  is  supported  by  a  fixed  iron
ring,  attached  to  an  iron  stand  that  rests  on
the  floor.  The  medium  is  to  dip  his  hands  in
the  water  in  the  copper  vessel,  and  as  this  is
solidly  supported  by  its  own  stand  and  ring,
and  nowhere  touches  the  glass  vessel  holding  the
water,  you  see  that,  should  there  occur  any
depression  of  the  pointer  on  the  spring-balance  at
the  extreme  end  of  the  board,  it  unmistakeably
indicates  that  a  current  of  force  weighable  in  foot
pounds    is    passing   through  the    medium's    body.

220  SPIRITUALISM  AND  THEOSOFHY.

Well,  both  Dr.  Hare  with  his  apparatus,  and  ]\Ir.
Crookes  with  his,  obtained  the  desired  proof  that
certain  phenomena  of  mediumship  do  occur  with-
out the  interference,  either  honest  or  dishonest,  of
the  medium.  To  the  power  thus  manifested,
Mr.  Crookes,  upon  the  suggestion  of  the  late
Serjeant  Cox,  gave  the  appropriate  name  of
Psychic  Force,  and  as  such  it  will  hereafter  be
designated  in  this  lecture.

I  mention  these  two  mechanical  contrivances
m.erely  to  show  those  who,  perhaps,  have  never
inquired  into  the  matter,  but  have  nevertheless
fallen  into  the  common  error  of  thinking  the  pheno-
mena to  be  all  deceptions,  that  the  utmost  pains
have  been  taken  by  the  cleverest  scientists  to  guard
against  the  possibility  of  fraud  in  the  course  of  their
experiments.  If  ever  there  was  a  fact  of  science
proved,  it  is  that  a  new  and  most  mysterious  force
of  some  kind  has  been  manifesting  itself  since
March,  1848,  when  this  mighty  modern  epiphany
was  ushered  in,  with  a  shower  of  raps,  at  an  obscure
hamlet  in  New  York  State.  Beginning  with  these
percussive  sounds,  it  has  since  displayed  its  energy
in  a  hundred  different  phenomena,  each  inexpli-
cable upon  any  known  hypothesis  of  science,  and
in  almost,  if  not  quite,  every  country  of  the  globe.
To  advocate  its  study,  expound  its  laws,  and  dis-
seminate its  intelligent  manifestations,  hundreds  of
journals  and  books  have  from  time  to  time  been
published  in  different  languages  ;  the  movement
has  its  schools  and  churches  or  meeting-halls,  its

SPIRITUALISM  AND  THE  OS  0  PHY.  221

preachers  and  teachers  ;  and  a  body  of  men  and
women,  numbering  thousands  at  the  least,  are
devoting  their  whole  time  and  vital  strength  to
the  profession  of  medlumshlp.  These  sensitives,
or  "  psychics,"  are  to  be  found  in  every  walk  of
life,  in  the  palaces  of  royalty  as  well  as  the
labourer's  cottage,  and  their  psychical  or  medium-
ist  gifts  are  as  various  as  their  individualities.

What  has  caused  this  world-wide  expansion  of
the  new  movement,  and  reconciled  the  public  to
such  a  vast  sacrifice  of  comfort,  time,  money  and
social  consequence  ?  What  has  spurred  on  so
many  of  the  most  intelligent  people  of  all  lands,
sects  and  races,  to  continue  investigating  ?  What
has  kept  the  faith  alive  in  so  many  millions,
despite  a  multitude  of  sickening  exposures  of  the
rascality  of  mediums,  of  the  demoralizing  tendency
of  ill  -  regulated  mediumship,  and  the  average
puerility  and  frequent  mendaclousness  of  the  com-
munications received  ?  This :  that  a  hope  has
sprung  up  in  the  human  breast  that  at  last  man
may  have  experimental  proof  of  his  survival  after
bodily  death,  and  a  glimpse.  If  not  a  full  revelation,
of  his  future  destiny.  All  these  millions  cling,  like
the  drowning  man  to  his  plank,  to  the  one  hope
that  the  old,  old  questions  of  the  what?  the
whence  ?  the  whither  ?  will  now  be  solved,  once
and  for  all.  Glance  through  the  literature  of
Spiritualism  and  you  will  see  what  joy,  what  con-
solation, what  perfect  rest  and  courage,  these
weird,  often  exasperating  phenomena  of  the  seance-

222  SPIRITUALISM  AND  THEOSOPHY.

room  have  imparted.  Tears  have  ceased  to  flow
from  myriad  eyes  when  the  dead  are  laid  away  out
of  sight,  and  broken  ties  of  love  and  friendship  are
no  longer  regarded  by  these  believers  as  snapped
for  ever.  The  tempest  no  longer  affrights  as  it
did,  and  the  terrors  of  battle  and  pestilence  have
lost  their  greatest  power  for  the  modern  Spiritualist.
The  supposed  intercourse  with  the  dead  and  their
messages  have  sapped  the  infallible  authority  of
dogmatic  theology.  The  Spiritualist,  with  the  eye
of  his  new  faith,  now  sees  the  dim  outlines  of  a
summer  land  where  we  live  and  are  occupied  much
as  upon  earth.  The  tomb,  instead  of  seeming  the
mouth  of  a  void  of  darkness,  has  come  to  look
merely  like  a  sombre  gateway  to  a  country  of  sun-
light brightness  and  never-ending  progression
towards  the  crowning  state  of  perfectibility.  Nay,
so  definite  have  become  the  fancy  pictures  of  this
summer  land,  one  constantly  reads  of  baby-children,
growing  in  spirit  life  to  be  adults  ;  of  colleges  and
academies  for  mortal  guidance,  presided  over  by
the  world's  departed  sages  ;  and  even  of  nuptial
unions  between  living  men  or  women  and  the
denizens  of  the  spirit  world  !  A  case  in  point  is
that  of  the  Rev.  Thomas  Lake  Harris,  founder  of
the  socialist  community  on  Lake  Erie,  who  de-
clares himself  duly  married  to  a  female  spirit,
and  that  a  child  has  blessed  their  union!  Another
case  is  that  of  the  marriage  of  two  spirits  in  pres-
ence of  mortal  witnesses,  by  a  living  clergyman,
which  was    reported  last  year  in    the    Spiritualist

SPIRITUALISM  AND  TIIEOSOPIIY.  223

papers.  A  Mr.  Pierce,  son  of  an  ex-President  of
the  United  States  and  long  since  dead,  is  said  to
have  "  materialized  " — that  is,  made  for  himself  a
visible,  tangible  body,  at  the  house  of  a  certain
American  medium,  and  been  married  by  a  minister
summoned  for  the  occasion,  to  a  lady  spirit  who
died  at  the  very  tender  age  of  seven  months,  and
who,  now  grown  into  a  blooming  psychic  lass,  was
also  materialized  for  the  ceremony  !  The  vows  ex-
changed and  the  blessings  given,  the  happy  couple
sat  at  table  with  invited  friends,  and,  after  drinking
a  toast  or  two,  vanished — dress-coat,  white  gloves,
satin,  lace  and  all — into  thin  air  !  This  you  will
call  the  tomfoolery  of  Spiritualism,  and  you  will  be
right  ;  but,  nevertheless,  it  serves  to  show  hov/
clear  and  definite,  not  to  say  brutally  materialist,
are  the  views  of  the  other  world  order  which  have
replaced  the  old,  vague  dread  that  weighed  us
down  with  gloomy  doubts.  Up  to  a  certain  point,
this  state  of  mind  is  a  decided  gain,  but  I  am  sorry
to  say  Spiritualists  have  passed  that  and  become
dogmatists.  Little  by  little  a  body  of  enthusiasts
is  forming,  who  would  throw  a  halo  of  sanctity
around  the  medium,  and,  by  doing  away  with  test
conditions,  invite  to  the  perpetration  of  gross  frauds.
Mediums  actually  caught  red-handed  in  trickery,
with  their  paraphernalia  of  traps,  false  panels,
wigs  and  puppets  about  them,  have  been  able  to
make  their  dupes  regard  them  as  martyrs  to  the
rage  of  sceptics,  and  the  damning  proofs  of  their
guilt  as  having  been  secretly  supplied  by  the  un-

224  SPIRITUALISM  AND  THEOSOPHY.

believers  themselves  to  strike  a  blow  at  their  holy
cause  !  The  voracious  credulity  of  a  large  body  of
Spiritualists  has  begotten  nine-tenths  of  the  dis-
honest tricks  of  mediums.  As  Mr.  Crookes  truly
observed,  in  his  preliminary  article  in  the  Quarterly
Journal  of  Science,  "  In  the  countless  number  of
recorded  observations  I  have  read,  there  appear  to
be  few  instances  of  meetings  held  for  the  express
purpose  of  getting  the  phenomena  under  test  con-
ditions." Still,  though  this  is  true,  it  is  also  most
certain  that  within  the  past  thirty-two  years  in-
quirers into  the  phenomena  have  been  vouchsafed
thousands  upon  thousands  of  proofs  that  they  occur
under  conditions  quite  independent  of  the  physical
agency  of  the  persons  present,  and  that  intelligence,
sometimes  of  a  striking  character,  is  displayed  in
the  control  of  the  occult  force  or  forces  producing
the  phenomena.  It  is  this  great  reserve  of  test  fact
upon  which  rests,  like  a  rock  upon  its  base,  the  in-
vincible faith  of  the  millions  of  Spiritualists.  This
body  of  individual  experiences  is  the  rampart
behind  which  they  entrench  themselves  whenever
the  outside  world  of  sceptics  looks  to  see  the  whole
"  delusion  "  crumble  under  the  assault  of  some  new
hnna  critic,  or  the  shame  of  the  latest  exposure  of
false  mediumship  or  tricking  mediums.  It  ought
by  this  time  to  have  been  discovered  that  it  is
worse  than  useless  to  try  to  ridicule  away  the
actual  evidence  of  one's  senses,  or  to  make  a  man
who  has  seen  a  heavy  weight  self-lifted  and  sus-
pended in  air,  or  writing  done  without  contact,  or

,     SPIRITUALISM  AND  THEOSOPHY.  225

a  human  form  melt  before  his  eyes,  believe  any
theory  that  all  mediumist  phenomena  are  due
to  "  muscular  contraction,"  "  expectant  attention,"
or  "  unconscious  cerebration."  It  is  because  of
their  attempts  to  do  this  that  men  of  science,  as  a
body,  are  regarded  with  such  compassionate  scorn
by  the  experienced  psychologist.  Mr.  Wallace
tells  us  that,  after  making  careful  inquiry,  he  has
never  found  one  man  who,  after  having  acquired  a
good  personal  knowledge  of  the  chief  phases  of  the
phenomena,  has  afterwards  come  to  disbelieve  in
their  reality.  And  this  is  my  own  experience  also.
Some  have  ceased  to  be  "  Spiritualists  "  and  turned
Catholics,  but  they  have  never  doubted  the  reality
of  the  phenomena.  It  will  be  a  happy  day,  a  day
to  be  hailed  with  joy  by  every  lover  of  true  science,
when  our  modern  professors  shall  rid  themselves  of
the  conceited  idea  that  knowledge  was  born  in  our
days,  and  question  in  a  humble  spirit  the  records  of
archaic  science.

We  have  seen  that  the  existence  of  a  force-
current  has  been  proved  by  the  experiments  of  Dr.
Hare  and  Mr.  Crookes  ;  so  we  need  trouble  our-
selves no  further  with  the  many  crude  conjectures
about  table-moving,  chair-lifting,  and  the  raps,  being
the  result  of  the  muscular  energy  of  the  medium  or
the  visitor,  but  pass  on  to  notice  some  of  the  forms  in
which  this  force  has  displayed  its  dynamic  energies.
These  may  be  separated  into  phenomena  indicating
intelligence  and  conveying  information,  and  purely
physical  manifestations  of  energy.     Of  the  former

225  SPIRITUALISM  AND  THEOSOPHY,

class  the  one  demanding  first  place  is  the  so-called
"  spirit-rap."  By  these  simple  signals  the  whole
modern  movement  called  Spiritualism  was  ushered
in.  These  audible  concussions  vary  in  degree  from
the  sound  of  a  pin-head  ticking  to  that  of  blows  by
a  hammer  or  bludgeon  powerful  enough  to  shatter
a  mahogany  table.  The  current  of  psychic  force
producing  them  seems  to  depend  upon  the  state  of
the  medium's  system,  in  combination  with  the
electric  and  hygrometric  condition  of  the  atmo-
sphere. Should  either  of  these  be  unpropitious,  the
raps,  if  heard  at  all,  are  faint;  with  both  in  harmony,
they  are  loudest  and  most  persistent.  Of  themselves
these  rapping  phenomena  are  sufficiently  wonderful;
but  they  become  a  hundred-fold  more  so  when  we
find  that  through  them  communications  can  be
obtained  from  intelligences  claiming  to  be  our  dead
friends  ;  communications  which  often  disclose
secrets  known  to  no  other  person  present  except
the  inquirer;  and  even,  in  rare  cases,  giving  out
facts  which  no  one  then  in  the  room  was  aware  of,
and  which  had  to  be  verified  later  by  consulting
old  records  or  distant  witnesses.  A  more  beautiful
form  of  the  rap  is  the  sound  of  music,  as  of  a  cut-glass
vessel  struck,  or  a  silver  bell,  heard  either  under  the
medium's  hand  or  in  the  air.  Such  a  phenomenon
has  been  often  noticed  by  the  Rev.  Stainton  Moses,
of  University  College,  London,  in  his  own  house ;
and  Mr.  Alfred  R.  Wallace  describes- it  as  occurring
in  the  presence  of  Miss  Nichol,  now  Mrs.  Volck-
mann,   at  Mr.  Wallace's  own    house.     An   empty

SFIRITUALTSM  AND  THEOSOPHY.  227

wine-glass  was  put  upon  a  table  and  held  by  Miss
Nichol  and  a  Mr.  Humphrey,  to  prevent  any  vibra-
tion. Mr.  Wallace  tells  us  that,  "  after  a  short
interval  of  silence  an  exquisitely  delicate  sound,  as
of  tapping  a  glass,  was  heard,  which  increased  to
clear  silvery  notes  like  the  tinkling  of  a  glass  bell.
These  continued  in  varying  degrees  for  some
minutes,"  &c.  Again,  Mr.  Wallace  says  that  when
a  German  lady  sang  some  of  her  national  songs,
"most  delicate  music,  like  a  fairy  music-box,
accompanied  her  throughout.  .  .  .  This  was  in
the  dark,  but  hands  were  joined  all  the  time."
Several  persons  in  the  present  audience  have
been  permitted  by  Madame  Blavatsky  to  hear
these  dulcet  fairy-bells  tinkle  since  she  came  to
Simla.  But  they  have  heard  them  in  full  light,
without  any  joining  of  hands,  and  in  whatsoever
place  she  chose  to  order  them.  The  phenomenon
is  the  same  as  that  of  Miss  Nichol,  but  the  con-
ditions are  very  different ;  and  of  that  I  shall
have  something  to  say  further  on.

Mr.  Crookes  found  the  force-current  extremely
variable  in  the  same  medium  on  different  days,
and  on  the  same  day,  from  minute  to  minute,
its  flow  was  highly  erratic.  In  his  book  he  gives
a  number  of  cuts  to  illustrate  these  variations,  as
well  as  of  the  ingenious  apparatus  he  employed  to
detect  them.

Among  many  thousands  of  communications  from
the  alleged  spirits  that  have  been  given  to  the  public,
and    for    the    most    part    containing    only   trivial

228  SPIRITUALISM  AND  THEOSOPHY.

messages  about  family  or  other  personal  affairs,  the
details   of  which  were  at   least   known  to  the  in-
quirers, and  which  might  be  attributed  to  thought-
reading,  we  occasionally  come   across    some   that
need  other  explanation.     I  refer  to  those  in  which
the  particulars  mentioned  are  unknown  to  any  one
present  at  the  sitting.     Mr.  Stainton  Moses  records
one  such — a  case  in  which  a  message  was  given
in  London,  purporting  to  come  from  an  old  man
who  had    been  a  soldier  in  America,  in  the   war
of    1 812,   and    to    have   died    there.      No    one    in
London   had    ever   heard   of  such   a  person ;   but
upon  causing  a  search  to  be  made  in  the  records
of  the  American  War  Department  at  Washington,
the  man's  name  was  found,  and  full  corroborative
proofs    of    the    London    message   were    obtained.
Not  having  access  to  books  here,  I  am  obliged  to
quote    from    memory,    but    I    think  you  will  find
my   facts    essentially    correct.      In    another    case,
vouched  for   by   Mr.   J.    M.  Peebles,  that  gentle-
man   received,    either    in     America     or    at    least
far    away    from    England,   a    message    from    an
alleged    spirit   who    said    he    lived    and    died    at
York,  and   that  if  Mr.   Peebles  would   search   the
records  of  that  ancient  city,  the  spirit's  statements
would  be  found  strictly  true.     In  process  of  time
he  did  visit  York  and  searched  old  birth  and  burial
registers,  and  there,  sure  enough,  he  found  just  the
data  he  had  been  promised.

Besides  communicating  by  the  raps,  the  alleged
spirits    have    employed    many   other   devices    to

SPIRITUALISM  AND  THEOSOPHY.  229

impart    intelligence  to    the    living.     Such,    among
others,    is    the    independent   writing   of   messages
upon  paper  laid  on  the  floor  under  a  table  or  in  a
closed  drawer,  between  the  leaves  of  a  closed  book,
or  on   the  ceiling  or  walls,   or  one's  linen  ;  there
being  in  none  of  these  cases  any  human  hand  near.
All  these  phenomena  I  have  seen  in  full  light,  and
under  circumstances   where  trickery  or  deception
was  impossible.     I  have  also  had  satisfactory  ex-
perience  of   the   rare    mediumist   powers    of    Dr.
Henry  Slade,  who,  you  recollect,  was  arrested  on  a
trumped-up   charge  of  dishonesty  in  London,  but
afterwards  gave  Zollner  and  his  brother  savants  of
Leipzig,   Aksakof,  Boutlerof  and   Wagner,   of   St.
Petersburg,  and    the    Grand  Duke  Constantine,  a
series  of  most    complete  tests.     It  was   Madame
Blavatsky  and  myself  who  sent    Dr.   Slade   from
America  to  Europe  in  1876.    A  very  high  personage
having  ordered  a  scientific  investigation  of  Spiritual-
ism, the  Professors  of  the  Imperial  University  of  St.
Petersburg  organized  an  experimental  Committee,
and  we  two  were  specially  requested  by  this  Com-
mittee to  select,  out  of  the  best  American  mediums,
one   whom    we    could    recommend    for    the   test.
After  much  investigation  we  chose  Dr.  Slade,  and
the  necessary  funds  for  his  expenses  having  been
remitted  to  me,  he  was  in  due  time  sent  abroad.
Before  I  would  recommend  him  I  exacted  the  con-
dition that  he  should  place  himself  in  the  hands  of
a  Committee  of  the  Theosophical  Society  for  test-
ing.    I  purposely  selected  as  members  of  that  Com-

230  SPIRITUALISM  AND     THEOSOPHY.  '

mittee  men  Avho  were  either  pronounced  sceptics  or
quite  unacquainted  with  spirituaHst  phenomena.
Slade  was  tested  thoroughly  for  several  weeks,
and  when  the  Committee's  report  *  was  finally
made,  the  following  facts  were  certified  as  having
occurred.  Messages  were  written  inside  double
slates,  sometimes  tied  and  sealed  together,  while
they  either  lay  upon  the  table  in  full  view  of  all,
or  were  laid  upon  the  heads  of  members  of  the
Committee,  or  held  fiat  against  the  under  surface
of  the  table-top,  or  in  a  Committee-man's  hand,
without  the  medium  touching  it.  We  also  saw
detached  hands — that  is,  hands  that  floated  or
darted  through  the  air,  and  had  no  arm  or  body
attached  to  them.  These  hands  would  clutch  at
our  watch-chains,  grasp  our  limbs,  touch  our
hands,  take  the  slates  or  other  objects  from  us
under  the  table,  remove  our  handkerchiefs  from  our
coat-pockets,  &c.  And  all  this,  remember,  in  the
light,  where  every  movement  of  the  medium  could
be  as  plainly  seen  as  one  that  any  present  hearer
might  make  now.

Another  form  of  signalling  is  the  compulsory
writing  of  messages  by  a  medium  whose  arm  and
hand  are  controlled  against  his  volition  by  some
invisible  power.  Not  only  thousands,  but  lakhs  of
pages  have  been  written  in  this  way  ;  some  of  the

*  A  minority  report  was  made  by  a  sint^Ie  person  ;  but  his  pre-
tended explanations  were  so  transparently  absurd  and  unfair  that  he
failed  to  convince  any  of  his  colleagues — even  an  intimate  friend,  a
materialist.

SPIRITUALISM  AND  THE  OS  0  PHY.  231

subject-matter  occasionally  worth  keeping,  but  the
most  part  valueless.  Another  method  Is  the  im-
pression, by  the  unseen  intelligence  upon  the  sensi-
tive brain  of  a  medium,  of  Ideas  and  words  outside
his  own  knowledge,  such  as  foreign  languages,
names  of  deceased  persons,  the  circumstances
of  their  death,  requests  as  to  the  disposal  of  pro-
perty, directions  for  the  recovery  of  lost  docu-
ments or  valuables,  information  about  murders  or
distant  tragedies,  of  which  they  were  the  victims,
diagnoses  of  hidden  diseases  and  suggestions  for
remedies,  &c.  You  will  find  many  examples  of
each  of  these  groups  of  phenomena  on  record  and
well  attested.

A  very  interesting  anecdote  is  related  in  Mr.
Dale  Owen's  Debatable  Landy  about  the  identifica-
tion of  an  old  spinet,  purchased  at  a  Paris  bric-a-
brac  shop,  by  the  grandson  of  the  famous  com-
poser. Bach.  The  details  are  very  curious,  and  you
will  do  well  to  read  them,  though  lack  of  time  pre-
vents my  entering  more  at  length  Into  the  subject
at  present.

But,  of  all  forms  of  Intelligent  communication
from  the  other  world  to  ours,  none  is  to  be  com-
pared for  startling  realism  with  that  of  the  audible
voice.  I  have  heard  these  voices  of  every  volume,
from  the  faintest  whisper  close  to  the  ear,  sound-
ing like  the  sigh  of  a  zephyr  through  the  trees,  to
the  stentorian  roar  that  would  well-nigh  shake
the  room  and  might  have  been  heard  far  away
from   the    house.      I    have   heard    them   speak   to

232  SPIRITUALISM  AND  7 HEOSOPIIV.

me  through  paper  tubes,  through  metal  trumpets,
through  empty  space.  And  in  the  case  of  the
world-famous  medium,  William  Eddy,  the  voices
spoke  in  four  languages,  of  which  the  medium  knew
not  a  word.  Of  the  Eddy  phenomena,  however,  I
shall  have  more  to  say  presently.

One  of  the  prettiest — I  should  say  the  most
charming  of  all,  but  for  the  recollection  of  the
fairy-like  music — of  mediumist  phenomena  is  the
bringing  of  fresh,  dew-begemmed  flowers,  plants  and
vines,  and  of  living  creatures  such  as  birds,  gold-
fish and  butterflies,  into  closed  rooms  while  the
medium  was  in  no  state  to  bring  them  herself.  I
have  myself,  in  friends'  houses,  held  the  hands  of  a
medium,  whom  I  had  first  put  into  a  bag  that  was
fastened  about  her  neck  with  a  sealed  drawing-
string,  and  with  no  confederate  in  the  house,  have
had  the  whole  table  covered  with  flowers  and  plants,
and  birds  came  fluttering  into  my  lap,  goodness
knows  whence.  And  this  with  every  door  and
window  fastened,  and  sealed  with  strips  of  paper
so  that  no  one  could  enter  from  the  outside.  These
phenomena  happened  mostly  in  the  dark,  but  once
I  saw  a  tree-branch  brought  in  the  day  light.  I
was  present  once  at  a  seance  in  America  when  a
gentleman  asked  that  the  "spirits  "  might  bring  him
a  heather-plant  from  the  Scottish  moors,  and  sud-
denly a  heather-plant,  pulled  up  by  the  roots  and
with  the  fresh  soil  clinging  to  them,  was  dropped
on  the  table  directly  in  front  of  him.

A  highly  interesting  example  of  the  non-intelli-

SPIRITUALISM  AND  THE  OS  0  PHY.  233

gent  class  of  phenomena  came  under  my  notice  in
the  course  of  our  search  after  a  medium  to  send
to  Russia.  A  lady  medium,  a  Mrs.  Youngs,  had
a  reputation  for  causing  a  pianoforte  to  rise  from
the  floor  and  sway  in  time  to  her  inlaying  upon  the
instrument.  Madame  Blavatsky  and  myself  went
one  evening  to  see  her,  and  what  happened  was
reported  in  the  New  York  papers  of  the  following
day.  As  she  .sat  at  the  piano  playing,  it  certainly
did  tilt  on  the  two  outer  legs — those  farthest  from
her — and,  with  the  other  two  raised  six  or  eight
inches  from  the  ground,  move  in  time  to  the  music.
Mrs.  Youngs  then  went  to  one  end  of  the  piano,  and,
laying  a  single  finger  against  the  under  side  of  the
case,  lifted  the  tremendous  weight  w^ith  the  greatest
ease.  If  any  of  you  care  to  compute  the  volume  of
psychic  force  exerted,  try  to  lift  one  end  of  a  7J
octave  piano  six  inches  from  the  floor.  To  test  the
reality  of  this  phenomenon  I  had  brought  with  me
a  raw  Qgg,  which  I  held  in  the  palm  of  my  hand  and
pressed  it  lightly  against  the  under  side  of  the  piano
case  at  one  end.  I  then  caused  the  medium  to  lay
the  palm  of  one  of  her  hands  against  the  back  of
mine  that  held  the  egg,  and  told  her  to  command
the  piano  to  rise.  A  moment's  pause  only  ensued,
when,  to  my  surprise,"  our  end  of  the  piano  did
rise  without  so  much  pressure  upon  the  egg  as  to
break  the  shell.  I  think  that  this,  as  a  test  of  the
actuality  of  a  psychic  force,  was  almost  as  conclu-
sive an  experiment  as  the  water-basin  and  spring-
balance  of  Mr.  Crookes.     At  least  it  was  so  to  me ;

234  SPIRITUALISM  AND  THEOSOPIIY.

for  I  can  affirm  that  the  medium  did  not  press  so
much  as  an  ounce  weight  against  the  back  of  my
hand,  and  it  is  quite  certain  that  but  very  few
ounces  of  pressure  would  have  broken  the  thin
shell  of  the  Q.gg.

One  of  the  most  undeniable  manifestations  of  in-
dependent force  is  the  raising  and  rhoving  of  a
heavy  weight,  without  human  contact.  This,  I,  in
common  with  many  other  investigators,  have  wit-
nessed. Sitting  at  a  table  in  the  centre  of  my
own  lighted  drawing-room,  I  have  seen  the  piano
raised  and  moved  a  foot  away  from  the  wall,  and  a
heavy  leathern  arm-chair  run  from  a  distant  corner
towards  and  touch  us,  when  no  one  was  within
a  dozen  feet  of  either.  On  another  occasion
my  late  friend  and  chemical  teacher.  Professor
Mapes,  a  very  corpulent  person,  and  two  other
men,  equally  stout,  were  requested  to  seat  them-
selves on  a  mahogany  dining-table,  and  all  were
raised  from  the  ground,  the  medium  merely  lay-
ing one  hand  on  the  top  of  the  table.  At  Mrs.
Youngs'  house,  on  the  evening  before  noticed,  as
many  persons  as  could  sit  on  the  top  of  the  piano
were  raised  with  the  instrument  while  she  was  play-
ing a  waltz.  The  records  are  full  of  instances  where
rooms,  or  even  whole  houses,  were  caused  by  the
occult  force  to  shake  and  tremble  as  though  a  hur-
ricane were  blowing,  though  the  air  was  quite  still.
And  we  have  the  testimony  of  Lords  Lindsay,
Adare,  Dunraven,  and  other  unimpeachable  wit-
nesses, to  the   fact    of  a    medium's    body    having

SPIRIIUALISM  AND  THEOSOPHY.  235

floated  around  the  room  and  sailed  out  of  a  window,
seventy  feet  from  the  ground,  and  into  another
window.  This  was  in  an  obscure  light ;  but  I  have
seen  in  the  twilight  a  person  raised  out  of  her
chair  until  her  head  was  as  high  as  the  globes  of
the  chandelier,  and  then  gently  lowered  down
again.

You  see  I  am  telling  you  stories  so   wonderful
that  it  is  impossible  for  any  one  to  fully  credit  them
without  the  corroboration  of  personal  experience.
Believe    me,    I     would    not    tell    them    at    all—
for  no  man   desires   to  have  his  word  doubted —
unless  I  knew  perfectly  well  that  such  phenomena
have  been  seen  hundreds  of  times  in  nearly  every
land  under  the   sun,  and   can   be  seen  by  anyone
who  will  give  time  to  the  investigation.     Despite
my    disclaimer,  you    may   think    I    am    taking    it
for  granted  that  you  are  quite  as  well  satisfied  as
myself  of  the  reality  of  the  mediumist  phenomena  ;
but  I  assure  you  that  is  not  the  case.     I  am  alw  ays
keeping  in  mind,  that,  no  matter  what  respect  an
auditor  may  have  for  my  integrity  and  my  intellig-
ence, no  matter  how  plainly  he  may  see  that  I  can
have  no  ulterior  motive  to  deceive   him — yet    he
cannot   believe   without   having   himself    had    the
same  demonstrative  evidences.     He  will — because
he   must— reflect   that   such   things    as    these    are
outside  the   usual   experience  of  men ;    and    that,
as  Hume  puts  it,  it  is  more  reasonable  to  believe
any  man  a  liar  than  that  the  even  course  of  natural
law  should  be  disturbed.     True,  that  assumes  the

236  SPIRITUALISM  AND  THEOSOPHY.

absurd  premiss  that  the  average  man  knows  what
are  the  Hmitatlons  of  natural  law;  but  we  never  con-
sider our  own  opinions  absurd^  no  matter  how
others  may  regard  them.  So  knowing,  as  I  have
just  remarked,  that  what  I  describe  has  been  seen
by  thousands,  and  may  be  seen  by  thousands  more
at  any  time,  I  proceed  with  my  narrative  as  one  who
tells  the  truth  and  fears  no  impeachment.  It  is  a
great  wonder  that  which  we  are  having  shown  us  in
our  days,  and,  apart  from  the  solemn  interest  which
attaches  to  the  problem  whether  or  not  the  dead
are  communing  with  us,  the  scientific  importance
of  these  facts  cannot  be  undervalued.  From  the
first — that  is  to  say,  throughout  my  twenty-eight
years  of  observations — I  have  pursued  my  inquiry
in  this  spirit,  believing  it  to  be  of  prime  impor-
tance to  mankind  to  ascertain  all  that  can  be
learnt  about  man's  powers  and  the  forces  of  nature
about  him.

I  shall  now  relate  briefly  my  adventures  at
the  Eddy  homestead,  in  Vermont.  For  some
years  previous  to  1874,  I  had  taken  no  active  in-
terest in  mediumist  phenomena.  Nothing  sur-
passingly novel  had  been  reported  as  occur-
ring, and  the  intelligence  communicated  through
mediums  was  not  usually  instructive  enough  to  in-
duce one  to  leave  his  books  and  the  company  of
their  great  authors.  But  in  that  year  it  was
rumoured  that  at  a  remote  village,  in  the  valley  of
the  Green  Mountains,  an  illiterate  farmer  and  his
equally  ignorant  brother  were  being  visited  daily

SPIRITUALISM  AND  THEOSOPHY.  237

by  the  "  materialized  "  souls  of  the  departed,  who
could  be  seen,  heard,  and,  in  cases,  touched  by  any
visitor.     This  tempting  novelty    I    determined    to
witness ;    for   it    certainly   transcended   In   Interest
and   Importance   anything    ever  heard   of  In   any
age.     Accordingly,  In  August  of  that  year,  I  pro-
ceeded to  Chittenden,  the  village  In  question,  and,
with  a  single    brief  Intermission  of  ten  days,  re-
mained there  until  the  latter  part  of  October.     I
hope  you  will  believe  that  I  adopted  every  possible
precaution  against  being  befooled  by  village  trick-
ery.    The  room  of  the  ghosts  was  a  large  chamber
occupying  the  whole  upper  floor  of  a  two-storey
wing  of  the  house.     It  was   perhaps   twenty  feet
wide  by  forty  long — I  speak  from  memory.     Below
were  two   rooms,    a  kitchen   and    a  pantry.     The
kitchen   chimney  was   In  the  gable   end,  of  course,
and  passed  through  the  seance  room  to  the  roof
It  projected   Into  the  room   two  feet,  and  at  the
right,  between  It  and  the  side  of  the  house,  was  a
plastered  closet,  with  a  door  next  to  the  chimney.  A
window,  two  feet  square,  had  been  cut  In  the  outer
wall  of  the  closet,  to  admit  air.     Running  across
this  end  of  the  large  room  was  a  narrow  platform,
raised   about  eighteen  inches  from  the  floor,  with
a  step  to  mount  by  at  the  extreme  left,  and  a  hand-
rail or  baluster,  along  the  front  edge  of  the  platform.
Every  evening,  after  the  last  meal,  William  Eddy,
a  stout-built,    square-shouldered,  hard-handed  far-
mer, would  go  upstairs,  hang  a  thick  woollen  shawl
across  the  doorway,  enter  the  closet  and  seat  him-

238  SPIRITUALISM  AND  THEOSOPHY.

self  on  a  low  chair  that  stood  at  the  extreme  end.
The  visitors,  who  sometimes  numbered  forty  of  an
evening,  were  accommodated  on  benches  placed
within  a  few  feet  of  the  platform.  Horatio  Eddy
sat  on  a  chair  in  front,  discoursed  doleful  music
on  a  fiddle,  and  led  the  singing — if  such  it  might  be
called,  without  causing  Mozart  to  turn  in  his  grave  ;
a  feeble  light  was  given  by  a  kerosene  lamp,  placed
on  the  floor  at  the  end  of  the  room  farthest  from
the  platform,  in  an  old  drum  from  which  both  heads
had  been  removed.  Though  the  light  was  certainly
very  dim,  yet  it  sufficed  to  enable  us  to  see  if  any-
one left  his  seat,  and  to  distinguish  through  the
gloom  the  height  and  costumes  of  the  visitors  from
the  other  world.  At  a  first  sitting  this  was  difficult,
but  practice  soon  accustomed  one's  eyes  to  the  con-
ditions.

After  an  interval  of  singing  and  fiddle-scraping,
sometimes  of  five,  sometimes  of  twenty  or  thirty
minutes,  we  would  see  the  shawl  stirred  ;  it  would
be  pushed  aside,  and  out  upon  the  platform  would
step  some  figure.  It  might  be  a  man,  woman,  or
child,  a  decrepit  veteran,  or  a  babe  carried  in  a
woman's  arms.  The  figure  would  have  nothing  at
all  of  the  supernatural  or  ghostly  about  it.  A
stranger  entering  at  the  other  end  of  the  room  would
simply  fancy  that  a  living  mortal  was  standing  there,
ready  to  address  an  audience.  Its  dress  would  be
the  one  it  wore  in  life,  its  face,  hands,  feet,  gestures,
perfectly  natural.  Sometimes  it  would  call  the
name  of  the  living  friend  it  had  come  to  meet.     If

SPIRITUALISM  AND  7HE0S0PHY.  239

it  were  strong,  the  voice  would  be  of  the  natural
tone  ;  if  weak,  the  words  came  in  faint  whispers  ;
if  still  more  feeble,  there  was  no  voice  at  all,  but
the  figure  would  stand  leaning  against  the  chimney
or  hand-rail  while  the  audience  asked  in  turn — ''  Is
it  for  me  ?  "  and  it  either  bowed  its  head  or  caused
raps  to  sound  in  the  wall  when  the  right  one  asked
the  question.  Then  the  anxious  visitor  would  lean
forward  and  scan  the  figure's  appearance  in  the  dim
light,  and  often  we  would  hear  the  joyful  cry,  "  Oh  I
mother,  father,  sister,  brother,  son,  daughter,"  or
what  not,  ''  I  know  you."  Then  the  weird  visitor
would  be  seen  to  bow,  or  stretch  out  its  hands,  and
then,  seeming  to  gather  the  last  strength  that  re-
mained to  it  in  its  evanescent  frame,  glide  into  the
closet  again,  and  drop  the  shawl  before  the  hungry
gaze  of  the  eyes  that  watched  it.  But  sometimes
the  form  would  last  much  longer.  Several  times  I
saw  come  out  of  the  closet  an  aged  lady  clad  in
the  Quaker  costume,  with  lawn  cap  and  kerchief
pinned  across  her  bosom,  grey  dress  and  long  house-
wifely apron,  and  calling  her  son  to  the  platform
seat  herself  in  a  chair  beside  him,  and,  after  kissing
him  fondly,  talk  for  some  minutes  with  him  in  low
tones  about  family  matters.  All  the  while  she
would  be  absently  folding  the  hem  of  her  apron
into  tucks  and  smoothing  them  out  again,  and  so
continuing  the  thing  over  and  over  just  as — her  son
told  me — she  was  in  the  habit  of  doing  while  alive.
More  than  once,  just  as  she  was  ready  to  disappear,
this  gentleman  would  take  her  arm  in  his,  come  to

240  SPIRITUALISM  AND  THEOSOPHY.

the  baluster,  and  say  that  he  was  requested  by  his
old  mother  whom  we  saw  there,  although  she  had
been  dead  many  years,  to  certify  that  it  was  indeed
she  herself  and  no  deception,  and  bid  them  realize
that  man  lives  beyond  the  grave,  and  so  live  here
as  to  ensure  their  happiness  then.

I  will  not  attempt  to  give  you,  in  these  few
minutes  of  our  lecture,' even  the  bare  outline  of  my
observations  during  those  eventful  weeks.  Suffice  it
to  say  that  I  saw  as  many  as  seventeen  of  these
revenants  in  a  single  evening,  and  that  from  first  to
last  I  saw  about  five  hundred.  There  were  a
certain  few  figures  that  seemed  especially  attached
to  the  medium's  sphere  or  influence ;  but  the  rest
were  the  appearances  of  friends  of  the  strangers
who  daily  flocked  to  the  place  from  the  most  distant
localities — some  as  far  away  as  2,000  miles.  There
were  Americans  and  Europeans,  Africans  and
Asiatics,  Red  Indians  of  our  prairies  and  white
people,  each  wearing  his  familiar  dress,  and  some
even  carrying  their  familiar  weapons.  One  evening
the  figure  of  a  Kurd,  a  man  whom  Madame  Blavat-
sky  had  known  in  Kurdistan,  stepped  from  the
closet,  clad  in  his  tall  cap,  high  boots,  and  pictur-
esque clothes.  In  the  shawl  twisted  about  his  waist
were  thrust  a  curved  sword  and  other  small  arms.
His  hands  were  empty,  but,  after  salaaming  my
friend  in  the  native  fashion,  lo!  his  right  hand  held
a  twelve  foot  spear  which  bore  below  the  steel  head
a  tuft  of  feathers.  Now,  supposing  this  farmer
medium  to  have  been  ever  so  much  a  cheat,  whence

SPIRITUALISM  AND  THKOSOPHY,  241

in  that  secluded  hamlet  did  he  procure  this  Kurdish
dress,  the  belt,  the  arms  and  the  spear  at  a  moment's
notice?  Madame  Blavatsky  had  just  arrived  at
Chittenden,  and  neither  I  nor  any  one  else  knew
who  she  was,  nor  whence  she  came.  All  my
experiences  there  were  described  by  me,  first  in  a
series  of  letters  to  a  New  York  journal,  and  after-
wards in  book  form,*  and  I  must  refer  the  curious
to  that  record  for  details,  both  as  to  what  was  seen
and  what  precautions  I  took  against  deception.
Two  suspicions  have  doubtless  occurred  to  your
minds  while  I  have  been  speaking — [a)  that  some
confederate  or  confederates  got  access  to  the
medium  through  the  closet-window,  or  dresses  and
dolls  were  passed  up  to  him  from  below  through  a
trap  or  sliding  panel.  Of  course  they  would  occur
to  any  one  with  the  least  ingenuity  of  thought.
They  occurred  to  me;  and  this  is  what  I  did.  I
procured  a  ladder,  and  on  the  outside  of  the  house
tacked  a  piece  of  mosquito-net  over  the  entire
window,  sash,  frame,  and  all,  sealing  the  tack-heads
with  wax,  and  stamping  each  with  my  signet  ring.
This  effectually  prevented  any  nonsense  from  that
quarter.  And  then  calling  to  my  help  an  architect
and  a  clever  Yankee  Inventor  and  mechanician,
with  those  gentlemen  I  made  a  minute  practical
examination  of  the  chimney,  the  floor,  the  platform,
the  rooms  below,  and  the  lumberloft  overhead.  We
were  all  perfectly  satisfied  that  if  there  was  any
trickery  in  the  case  it  was  done  by  William   Eddy

*  People  fro7)i  the  Other  World,
Q

242  SPIRITUALISM  AND  IHEOSOPHY.

himself  without  confederacy,  and   that  if  he  used
theatrical  dresses  or  properties,  he  must  carry  them
in  with  him.     In  the  little  narrow  hole  of  a  closet
there     was     neither    candle,    mirror,    brush,    wig,
clothes,  water-basin,  towel,  cosmetic,  nor  any  other
of  the  actor's  paraphernalia;  nor,  to  speak  the  truth,
had    the    poor   farmer   the    money   to    buy    such.
He  took  no  fee  for  his   seances,  and   visitors   were
charged  only  a  very  small  sum  for  their  board  and
lodging.    I  have  sat  smoking  with  him  in  his  kitchen
until  it  was  time  for  the  seance  to  begin,  gone  with
him   to  the  upper  chamber,  examined    the   closet
before  he  entered  it,  searched  his  person,  and  then
seen  the  selfsame  wonderful   figures  come  out  as
usual  in  their  various  dresses.     I  think  I  may  claim
to  have  proceeded  cautiously;  for  Mr.  A.  R.  Wallace,
F.R.S.,  quoted  and  eulogised  my  book  in  his  recent
controversy  with  Professor  W.  B.  Carpenter.     Car-
penter himself  sent  to  America  to  inquire  into  my
character  for  veracity,  and  publicly  admitted  it  to
be  unimpeachable.    Professor  Wagner  of  St.  Peters-
burg reviewed  the  work  in  a  special   pamphlet,  in
which  he  affirms  that  I  fulfilled  every  requirement
of  scientific  research,  and  three  European  Psycho-
logical Societies  elected  me  Honorary  Member.     It
should  also  be   noted  that  four  years   of  very  re-
sponsible and  intricate  examinations  on  behalf  of
the  War   Department — during  our  late  American
War,  the  proofs  of  which  service  have  been  shown
by  me  to  the   Indi-an  authorities — qualified   me  to
conduct    this    inquiry   with    at   least    a    tolerable

SPIRITUALISM  AND  THEOSOPHY.  243

certainty  that  I  should  not  be  imposed  upon.  Hav-
ing then  seen  all  that  has  now  been  outlined  to  you
will  you  wonder  that  I  should  have  been  thoroughly
convinced  of  the  reality  of  a  large  group  of  psychic
phenomena,  for  which  science  helplessly  tries  to  offer
some  explanation  ?  And  can  you  be  surprised
that  whatever  man  of  science  has,since  i848,seriously
and  patiently  investigated  modern  Spiritualism,
has  become  a  convert,  no  matter  what  his  religious
belief  or  professional  bias  ?

The  mention  of  religion  leads  me  to  notice  a
certain  fact.  While  the  Protestant  Church  has  in
our  time  ever  resolutely  denied  the  reality  of  such
manifestations  of  occult  agencies,  the  Church  of
Rome  has  always  admitted  them  to  be  true.  In
her  rubrics  there  are  special  forms  of  exorcism,
and  Miss  Laura  Edmonds — the  gifted  daughter  of
the  honoured  American  jurist  above-mentioned,
and  one  of  the  most  remarkable  mediums  of  this
modern  movement,  united  herself  with  the  Catholic
Church — her  confessor,  a  Paulist  Brother  of  New
York,  driving  out  her  obsessing  "  devils  "  in  due
form  after — as  he  told  me — a  terrific  strucfGfle.
Mediumship  was  anathematized  by  the  late  Pope
himself  as  a  dangerous  device  of  the  Evil  One,  and
the  faithful  were  warned  against  the  familiars  of  the
circle,  as  his  agents  for  the  ruin  of  souls.  There  has
appeared  in  France,  within  the  past  few  years,  a
series  of  books  by  the  Chevalier  des  Mousseaux,
highly  applauded  by  the  Catholic  prelates,  especially
designed  to  collate  the  most  striking  proofs  of  the

244  SPIRITUALISM  AND  THEOSOPHY.

demoniac  ^.^^wcy  in  the  phenomena.  They  are  all
valuable  repositories  of  psychic  facts,  one  especially,
Les  Moejirs  et  Pratiques  des  Demons,  which  every
student  of  Occultism  should  read.  The  industrious
author,  of  course,  convinces  no  one  but  Catholics  as
to  his  premisses,  but  his  facts  are  most  welcome  and
suggestive.  Though  there  is  not  a  grain  of  religious
orthodoxy  in  me,  and  though  I  do  not  in  the  least
sympathize  with  the  demoniacal  theory,  yet  I  find,
after  learning  what  I  have  learnt  of  Asiatic  psycho-
logical science,  that  the  Catholics  are  much  nearer
right  in  recognizing  and  warning  against  the  dangers
of  mediumship,  than  the  Protestants  in  blindly  deny-
ing the  reality  of  the  phenomena.  Mediumship  is
a  peril  indeed,  and  the  last  thing  I  should  wish  would
be  to  see  one  in  whom  I  was  interested  become  a
medium.  The  Hindus — who  have  known  these
phenomena  from  time  immemorial — give  the  most
appropriate  name  of  bJiuta  dak,  or  demons'  post,  to
these  unfortunates.  I  do  sincerely  hope  that  sooner
or  later  the  experience  of  India  in  this  matter  will  be
studied,  and  that  if  mediumship  is  to  be  encouraged
at  all,  it  will  be  under  such  protective  restriction
as  the  ancient  Sybils  enjoyed  in  the  temples,
under  the  watchful  care  of  initiated  priests.  This
is  not  the  language  of  a  Spiritualist,  nor  am  I  one.
In  the  reality  of  the  phenomena,  and  the  existence
of  the  psychic  force,  I  do  most  unreservedly  believe;
but  here  my  concurrence  wath  the  Spiritualists  ends.
For  more  than  twenty  years  I  was  of  their  opinion,
and  shared,  with  Mr.  Owen   and  Mr.  Wallace,  the

SPIRITUALISM  AND  THEOSOPHY.  245

conviction  that  the  phenomena  could  not  be  attri-
buted to  any  other  agency  than  that  of  the  departed
ones.  I  could  not  understand  how  the  intelligence
behind  the  manifestations  could  be  otherwise  ac-
counted for,  especially  that  shown  in  such  cases  as
I  have  mentioned,  where  the  facts  related  were  un-
known to  any  one  at  the  seance,  and  only  verified
long  afterwards  in  distant  countries.  But  until
meeting  Madame  Blavatsky  at  the  Eddys',  I  had  not
even  heard  of  Asiatic  Occultism  as  a  science.  The
tales  of  travellers  and  the  stories  of  the  Arabian
Nights  I  set  down  to  fanciful  exaggeration,  and  all
that  was  printed  about  Indian  jugglers,  and  the
powers  of  ascetics,  seemed  but  accounts  of  success-
ful prestidigitations.  I  now  look  back  to  that
meeting  as  the  most  fortunate  event  of  my  life  ;  for
it  made  light  shine  in  all  the  dark  places,  and  sent
me  out  on  a  mission  to  help  to  revive  Aryan  Occult
science,  which  grows  more  absorbingly  interesting
every  day.  It  is  my  happiness  to  not  only  help  to
enlarge  the  boundaries  of  Western  science  by  show-
ing where  the  secrets  of  nature  and  of  man  may  be
experimentally  studied,  and  to  give  Anglo-Indians
a  greater  respect  for  the  subject  nation  they  rule
over,  but  also  to  aid  in  kindling  in  the  bosoms  of
Indian  youths  a  due  reverence  for  their  glorious
ancestry,  and  a  desire  to  imitate  them  in  their  noble
achievements  in  science  and  philosophy.  This,  my
friends,  is  the  sole  cause  of  our  coming  to  India  ;
this  explains  our  affectionate  relations  with  the
people,  our  respect  for  their  real  Yogis.     Each  of

246  SPIRITUALISM  AND  THEOSOPHY.

you  looks  forward  to  the  day  when  you  will  return
to  your  English  home :  our  honrie  is  here,  and  here
we  mean  to  end  our  days.

The  handbills  announce  me  as  the  President  of
the  Theosophical  Society ;  and  you  arc  gathered  here
to  learn  what  Theosophy  is.  and  what  are  its
relations  with  Spiritualism.

Let  me  say,  then,  that  in  the  sense  given  to  it  by
those  who  first  used  it,  the  word  means  divine
wisdom,  or  the  knowledge  of  divine  things.  The
lexicographers  handicap  the  idea  with  the  suggestion
that  it  meant  the  knowledge  of  God,  the  deity
before  their  minds  being  a  personal  one  ;  but  such
was  not  the  intention  of  the  early  Theosophists.
Essentially,  a  Theosophical  Society  is  one  which
favours  man's  original  acquisition  of  knowledge
about  the  hidden  things  of  the  universe,  by  the
education  and  perfecting  of  his  own  latent  powers.
Theosophy  differs  as  widely  from  philosophy  as  it
does  from  theology.  It  has  been  truly  said  that,  in
investigating  tlie  divine  nature  and  attributes,
philosophy  proceeds  entirely  by  the  dialectic
m.ethod,  employing  as  the  basis  of  its  investigation
the  ideas  derived  from  natural  reason ;  theology,
still  employing  the  same  method,  superadds  to  the
principles  of  natural  reason  those  derived  from
authority  and  revelation.  Theosophy,  on  the  con-
trary, professes  to  exclude  all  dialectical  process,
and  to  derive  its  whole  knowledge  of  God  from
direct  intuition  and  contemplation.  This  Theo-
sophy dates  from  the  highest  antiquity  of  v/hich  any

SPIRITUALTSM  AND  THEOSOPHY.  247

records  are  preserved,  and  every  original  founder
of  a  religion  was  a  seeker  after  divine  wisdom
by  the  theosophic  process  of  self- illumination.
Where  do  we  find  in  our  day  the  facilities  for
pursuing  this  glorious  study  ?  Where  are  the
training  schools  worthy  to  be  successors  of  those
of  the  Neo-Platonists  of  Alexandria,  the  Hiero-
phants  of  Egypt,  the  Theodidaktoi  of  Greece,  or
— more  especially — the  Rishis  of  Aryavarta,  noblest
of  all  initiates,  save  only  the  stainless,  the  illumin-
ated Gautama  Buddha  ?

Think  for  a  moment  what  this  theosophical
study  exacts  of  a  man  who  would  really  penetrate
the  mysteries  and  become  a  true  ilhnninatus.  The
lusts  of  the  flesh,  the  pride  of  life,  the  prejudices  of
birth,  race,  creed  (so  far  as  it  creates  dogmatism),
must  all  be  put  aside.  The  body  must  be  made
the  convenience,  instead  of  the  despot,  of  the
higher  self.  The  prison-bars  of  sense  that  incar-
cerate the  man  of  matter  must  be  unlocked,  and
while  living  In  and  being  a  factor  In  the  outer
vv'orld,  the  Theosophist  must  be  able  to  look  into,
enter,  act  in,  and  return  from,  the  innerworld,  fraught
with  divine  truth.  Are  there — were  there  ever —
such  men,  such  demigods  rather  let  us  say  ?  There
were ;  there  are.  The  legends  of  the  past  may
seem  to  us  tinged  with  error,  wild  and  fantastic
even  ;  but,  nevertheless,  such  men  as  these  existed
and  displayed  their  powers,  in  many  countries,  at
various  epochs.  And  nowhere  more  than  in  India,
this    blessed    land    of    the    Sun — now    so    poor,

248  SPIRITUALISM  AND  THEOSOPIIY.

Spiritless,  famished  and  degraded.  This  was  the
home  of  ancient  Theosophy ;  here — upon  these
very  Himalayan  mountains  that  tower  so  high
yonder — lived  and  taught  the  men  who  won  the
prize  of  divine  knowledge ;  whose  wisdom — a
fertilizing  stream — flowed  through  Grecian  and
Egyptian  channels  towards  the  West.  Believe  me
or  not,  as  you  will,  I  am  fully  persuaded  that  there
still  linger  among  these  fastnesses,  out  of  the
poisoned  moral  atmosphere  of  this  nineteenth-
century  social  life,  safe  from  the  blight  and  perse-
cution of  bigotry  and  intolerant  modern  supersti-
tion, safe  from  the  cruel  malice  of  scepticism, — those
who  are  true  Theosophists..  Neither  pessimist  nor
optimist,  I  am  not  satisfied  that  our  race  is  doomed
to  destruction,  present  or  future,  nor  that  the  moral
sense  of  society  can  be  kept  undiminished  without
constant  refreshment  from  the  parent  fount.  That
fount  I  conceive  to  be  Theosophical  study  and  per-
sonal illumination,  and  I  regard  him  as  a  bene-
factor to  his  kind  who  points  out  to  the  sceptical,
the  despairing,  the  world-weary,  the  heart-hungry,
that  the  vanities  of  the  world  do  not  satisfy  the
soul's  aspirations,  and  that  true  happiness  can  only
be  acquired  by  interior  self-development,  purifica-
tion and  enlightenment.  It  is  not  in  accordance
with  the  abstract  principles  of  justice  that  the  world
should  be  left  entirely  without  such  exemplars  of
spiritual  wisdom.  I  do  not  believe  it  ever  was,  or
ever  will  be.

To  him  who  takes  up  this  course  of  effort,  the

SPIRITUALISM  AND  TIIEOSOPHY.  249

phenomena  of  medlumshlp  are  transcendently  Im-
portant, for  they  usher  him  into  the  realm  of  the
Unseen,  and  show  him  some  of  the  weirdest  secrets
of  our  human  nature.  Along  with  mediumship  he
studies  vital  magnetism,  its  laws  and  phenomena,
and  the  Odyle  of  Baron  Reichenbach,  which  to-
gether show  us  the  real  nature  and  polarities  of  this
force,  and  the  fact  that  it  seems  to  be  akin  to  the
one  great  force  pervading  all  Nature.  Further
proof  he  draws  from  Buchanan's  psychometry,  and
from  experiments  with  those  whom  he  finds  to  be
endowed  with  the  psychometrical  faculty.  If  there
are  any  here  to  whom  the  word  is  new,  let  me  ex-
plain that  psychometry  is  a  name  given  by  the
modern  discoverer  to  a  certain  power,  possessed  by
about  one  person  in  four,  to  receive  intuitive  im-
pressions of  the  character  of  the  writer  of  a  letter,
or  the  painter  of  a  picture,  by  direct  contact  with
the  manuscript  or  painting.  We  are  all  of  us  con-
stantly leaving  the  impress  of  our  character  upon
everything  we  touch,  as  the  loadstone  imparts  some
of  its  properties  to  every  needle  it  is  rubbed  against.
A  subtle  something — magnetism,  or  vital  fluid,  or
psychic  force — constantly  exudes  from  us.  We
leave  it  on  the  ground,  and  our  dog  finds  us  ;  on  our
clothing,  and  the  slaver's  blood-hound  sniffs  the
scent  and  tracks  the  poor  runaway  to  his  hiding-
place.  We  saturate  with  it  the  walls  of  our  houses,
and  a  sensitive  psychometer,  upon  entering  our
drawing-room,  can  unerringly  tell,  before  seeing  the
family,  whether  that  is  a  happy  home  or  one  of  strife.

250  SPIRITUALISM  AND  7 HE  OS 0 PHY,

We  are  surrounded  by  it  as  a  sensitive  vapour,  and
when  we  meet  each  other  we  silently  take  in  our
impression  of  our  mutual  congeniality  or  antipathy.
Women  have  this  sense  more  than  men,  and  many
are  the  instances  where  a  wife's  prophetic  intuition,
unheeded  and  ridiculed  by  the  husband  in  the  case
of  some  new  acquaintance,  has  afterwards  been
recalled,  with  regret  that  it  should  have  been  dis-
regarded. Good  psychometers  can  even  take  from
any  fragment  of  inanimate  matter,  such  as  a  bit  of
an  old  building,  or  a  shred  of  an  old  garment,  a
vivid  impression  of  all  the  scenes  of  its  history.
In  its  highest  manifestation  psychometry  becomes
true  clairvoyance,  and,  when  that  soul  sight  is
indeed  opened,  the  eye  within  us  that  never  grows
lustreless  shows  us  the  arcana  of  the  unseen
universe.

Theosophy  shows  the  student  that  evolution  is  a
fact,  but  that  it  has  not  been  partial  and  incomplete,
as  Darwin's  theory  makes  it.  As  there  has  been  an
evolution  in  physical  nature,  the  crown  and  flower
of  which  is  physical  man,  so  there  has  been  a
parallel  evolution  in  the  realm  of  spirit.  The  out-
come of  this  is  the  psychic  or  inner  man  ;  and,  just
as  in  this  visible  nature  about  us  we  see  myriads  of
forms  lower  than  ourselves,  so  the  Theosophist
finds  in  the  te?'ra  incognita  of  the  physicist — the
realm  of  the  "  unknowable " — countless  minor
psychical  types,  with  man  at  the  top  of  the  ascend-
ing series.  Physicists  know  of  the  elements  only
in  their  chemical  or  dynamiic  relations  and  proper-

SPIRITUALISM  AND  THEOSOPHY,  251

ties  ;  but  he  who  has  mastered  the  Occult  Sciences
finds,  dweUing  in  fire,  air,  earth  and  water,  a  sub-
human order  of  beings,  some  inimical,  some  favour-
able to  man.  He  not  only  comes  to  a  knowledge
of  them,  but  also  to  the  power  of  controlling  them.
The  folk-lore  of  the  world  has  embalmed  many
truths  about  this  power,  which  is  none  the  less  a
fact  because  the  modern  biologist  rejects  and  ridi-
cules it.  You  who  come  from  Ireland  or  the  Scot-
tish Highlands  know  that  these  things  exist.  I  do
not  surmise  this ;  I  knozv  it.  I  speak  thus  calmly  and
boldly  about  the  subject,  because  I  have  met  these
proficients  of  Asiatic  Occultism  and  seen  them
exercise  their  power.  This  is  why  I  ceased  to  call
myself  a  Spiritualist  in  1874,  and  why,  in  1875,  I
united  with  others  to  found  a  Theosophical  Society,
to  promote  the  study  of  these  natural  phenomena.
The  most  wonderful  facts  of  mediumship  I  have
seen  produced  at  will,  and  in  full  daylight,  by  one
who  had  learnt  the  secret  sciences  in  India  and
Eg3'pt.  Under  such  circumstances,  I  have  seen
showers  of  roses  made  to  fall  in  a  room  ;  letters  from
people  in  far  countries  to  drop  from  space  into
my  lap  ;  heard  sweet  music,  coming  from  afar  upon
the  air,  grow  louder  and  louder  until  it  was  in  the
room,  and  then  die  away  again,  out  in  the  still
atmosphere,  until  it  was  no  more.  I  have  seen
writing  made  to  appear  upon  paper  and  slates  laid
upon  the  floor,  drawings  upon  the  ceiling  beyond
any  one's  reach,  pictures  upon  paper  without  the
employment  of  pencil  or  colour,  articles  duplicated

252  SPTRITUALISM  AND  THEOSOPHY.

before  my  very  eyes,  a  living  person  instantly  dis-
appear out  of  my  sight,  jet  black  hair  cut  from  a
fair-haired  person's  head.  I  have  had  absent  friends
and  distant  scenes  shown  me  in  a  crystal  ;  and,  in
America,  more  than  a  hundred  times,  upon  opening
letters  upon  various  subjects  comJng  to  me  by  the
common  post,  from  correspondents  in  all  parts
of  the  world,  have  found  inside,  written  in  their  own
familiar  hand,  messages  to  me  from  men  in  India
who  possess  the  Theosophical  knowledge  of  natural
law.  Nay,  upon  one  occasion,  I  even  saw  sum-
moned before  me  as  perfectly  "  materialized "  a
figure  as  any  that  ever  stalked  out  of  William
Eddy's  cabinet  of  marvels.  If  it  is  not  strange  that
the  Spiritualist,  who  sees  mediumist  phenomena,
but  know^s  nothing  of  Occult  science,  should  believe
in  the  intervention  of  spirits  of  the  dead,  is  it  any
stranger  that  I,  after  receiving  so  many  proofs  of
what  the  trained  human  will  can  accomplish,  should
be  a  Theosophist  and  no  longer  a  Spiritualist  ?  I
have  not  even  half  exhausted  the  catalogue  of
proofs  vouchsafed  to  me  during  the  last  five  years
as  to  the  reality  of  Asiatic  psychological  science.
But  I  hope  I  have  enumerated  enough  to  show  you
that  there  are  mysteries  in  India  worth  seeking,  and
men  here  who  are  far  more  acquainted  with  Nature's
Occult  forces  than  either  of  those  much-initialed
gentlemen  who  set  themselves  up  for  professors
and  biologists.

It  will  be  asked  what  evidence  I  offer  that  the
intelligent  phenomena  of  the  mediums  are  not  to

SPIRITUALISM  AND  THEOSOPHY.  253

be  ascribed  to  our  departed  friends.  In  reply,  I
ask  what  uninipeachable  evidence  there  is  that
they  are.  If  it  can  be  shown  that  the  soul  of  the
living  medium  can,  unconsciously  to  his  physical
self,  ooze  out,  and,  by  its  elastic  and  protean  nature,
take  on  the  appearance  of  any  deceased  person
whose  image  it  sees  in  a  visitor's  memory  ;  if  all
the  phenomena  can  be  produced  at  will  by  an
educated  psychologist  ;  if,  in  the  ether  of  science —
the  Akasa  of  the  Hindus,  the  Anima  Mundi  of  the
Theosophists,  the  Astral  Light  of  the  Kabalists —
the  images  of  all  persons  and  events,  and  the  vibra-
tions of  every  sound,  are  eternally  preserved — as
these  Occultists  affirm  and  experimentally  prove —
if  all  this  be  true,  then  why  is  it  necessary  to  call  in
the  spirits  of  the  dead  to  explain  what  may  be
done  by  the  living  ?  So  long  as  no  alternative
theory  was  accessible,  the  Spiritualists  held  im-
pregnable ground  against  materialist  science ;
theirs  was  the  only  possible  way  to  account  for
what  they  saw.  But,  given  the  alternative,  and  •
shown  the  resources  of  psychology  and  the  nature  of
the  unseen  universe,  you  see  the  Spiritualists  are
at  once  thrown  upon  the  defensive,  without  the
ability  to  silence  their  critics.  The  casual  observer
would  say  it  is  impossible,  for  instance,  for  that
aged  Quaker  lady's  figure  to  be  anything  but  her
own  returning  soul — that  her  son  could  not  have
been  mistaken,  and  that,  if  there  were  any  doubt,
otherwise,  her  familiar  knowledge  of  their  family
matters,  and  even  her  old  habit  of  alternately  plait-

254  SPIRITUALISM  AND  THEOSOPHY.

ing  and  smoothing  out  her  lawn  apron,  identify  her
amply.  But  the  figure  did  nothing  and  said  no-
thing that  was  not  fixed  in  the  son's  memory, —
indelibly  stamped  there,  however  long  the  dormant
pictures  might  have  been  obscured  by  fresher
images.  And  the  medium's  body  being  entranced
and  his  active  vitality  transferred  to  his  inner  self,
or  "double,"  that  double  could  make  itself  appear
under  the  guise  of  the  dead  lady,  and  catch  and
comment  UDon  the  familiar  incidents  it  found  in
the  son's  magnetic  atmosphere.  This  will  be  hard
for  you  to  comprehend ;  for  our  Western  scientific
discoveries  have  not  as  yet  crossed  the  threshold  of
this  hidden  world  of  force.  But  progress  is  the  law
of  human  thought,  and  we  are  now  so  near  the
verge  of  the  chasm  that  divides  physical  from
spiritual  science,  that  it  will  not  be  long  before  we
shall  bridge  it.  Let  this  stand  as  a  prophecy ;  if  you
bide  patiently  you  will  see  it  fulfilled.  This,  then,
is  the  present  attitude  of  parties.  The  promulga-
tion of  our  views,  and  of  many  reports  by  eye-
witnesses of  things  done  by  members  of  the
Theosophical  Society,  has  been  causing  great  talk
all  over  the  world.  A  large  number  of  the  most
intelligent  Spiritualists  have  joined  us,  and  are
giving  their  countenance  to  work.  Groups  of  our
sympathizers  have  organized  themselves  into
branches  in  many  different  countries.  Even  here,
in  Simla,  there  has  sprung  up  the  nucleus  of  what
will  be  an  Anglo-Indian  branch.  No  country  in
the   world   affords   so  wide    a  field   as    India    for

SPIRITUALISM  AND  THE  0  SO  PHY.  255

psychological  study.  What  we  Europeans  call
animal  magnetism  has  been  known  here,  and  prac-
tised in  its  highest  perfection,  for  countless  centuries.
The  Hindus  know  equally  well  the  life-principle  in
man,  animal  and  plant.  All  over  India,  if  search
were  but  made,  you  would  find  in  the  possession  of
the  natives  many  facts  that  it  is  most  important  for
Europe  and  America  to  know.  And  you,  gentle-
men of  the  civil  and  military  branches  of  the  public
service,  are  the  proper  persons  to  undertake  the
work,  with  Hindu  help.  Be  just  and  kind  to  them
and  they  will  tell  you  a  thousand  things  which  they
now  keep  as  profound  secrets.  Our  policy  is  one
of  general  conciliation  and  co-operation  for  the
discovery  of  truth.  Some  tale-bearer  has  started
the  report  that  our  Society  is  preaching  a  new
religion.  This  is  false.  The  Society  has  no  more
a  religion  of  its  own  than  the  Asiatic,  the  Geogra-
phical, or  the  Astronomical  Society.  As  those
Societies  have  their  separate  sections,  each  devoted
to  some  speciality  of  research,  so  have  we.  We
take  in  persons  of  all  religions  and  of  every  race,
and  treat  all  with  equal  respect  and  impartiality.
We  have  royal,  noble,  and  plebeian  blood  among
us.  Edison  is  a  member  of  ours,  and  Crookes,  and
Wallace,  and  Camille  Flammarion,  and  Lord  Lind-
say, and  Lane-Fox,  and  Baron  du  Potet,  and  the
octogenarian  Cahagnet,  and  scores  of  men  of
similar  intellectual  calibre.  We  have  but  one
passionate  and  consuming  ambition — that  of  learn-
ing what  man  is,  what  nature  is.     Are  there  any

256  SPIRITUALISM  AND  THEOSOPHY.

here  who  sympathize  with  these  aspirations,  any
who  feel  within  their  hearts  the  glow  of  true  man-
hood— any  who  put  a  higher  value  upon  divine
wisdom  than  upon  the  honours  and  rewards  of  the
lower  life  ?  Come  then,  brother  dreamers,  and  let
us  combine  our  efforts  and  our  good-will.  Let  us
see  if  we  cannot  win  happiness  for  ourselves  in
striving  to  benefit  others.  Let  us  do  what  we  can
to  rescue  from  the  oblivion  of  centuries  that  price-
less knowledge  of  divine  things  which  we  call
TliEOSOrHY.

INDIA:    PAST,    PRESENT,    AND

FUTURE.*

THE   PAST.

When  we  look  over  the  accounts  that  have  been
written  within  our  own  modern  historical  period
about  the  migrations  of  peoples,  the  rise  and  fall  of
empires,  the  characters  of  great  men,  the  relative
progress  of  science,  of  the  arts,  of  literature,  of  phil-
osophy, and  religion ;  and  when  we  see  how  the
positive  assertions  of  one  writer  are  denied  point-
blank  by  another,  and  then  the  facts  of  both  proved
false  by  a  third  who  comes  after  them,  is  it  too  much
to  say  that  history  is,  for  the  most  part,  a  system  of
bold  lying  and  ignorant  mis-statement?  I  think  not.
And  I  am  quite  sure  that  out  of  all  the  historians
who  have  appeared  during  this  epoch  that  I  have
mentioned,  hardly  one  can  be  acquitted,  or  will  be
acquitted  by  posterity,  of  Incompetence  or  of  some-
thing worse.  Of  all  the  untrustworthy  historians,
the  worst  Is  he  who  writes  In  the  Interest  of  some
one  religion  against  the  religions  of  others.  It
would  seem  as  though,  no  matter  what  his  creed,
he  considered  it  a  pious  duty  to  lie  as  much  "as

*  A  Lecture  delivered  at  Amritsar,  29th  October,  iSSo.

R

258        INDIA  :  PAS  T,  PRESENT,  AND  FUTURE.

possible  for  the  glory  of  his  particular  God.  A
similar  blight  is  seen  resting  upon  the  consciences
of  political  historians,  though  not  so  fatally ;  for  if
their  party  interests  are  but  cared  for,  they  can
afford  to  be,  in  a  measure,  fair  in  other  directions.
It  seems  impossible,  therefore,  to  gather  any  idea
of  either  Egyptian,  Greek,  Roman,  Assyrian,
European,  or  American  history  without  reading  all
the  historians  together  and  extracting  the  truth  out
of  the  clash  and  conflict  of  error.

It  will  not  be  required  that  I  should  give,  in  the
very  short  time  for  which  I  shall  detain  you,
either  a  list  of  the  historians  or  specimen  extracts
from  their  works,  upon  which  I  have  based  an
opinion  shared  by  many  of  the  ablest  com-
mentators. Suffice  it  to  say  that  the  European
historiographers  have  never  had  until  within  a  very
recent  period — hardly  more  than  a  century —
any  materials  for  writing  even  the  most  meagre
outline  of  Aryan  history.  Until  Sir  William
Jones  and  his  compeers,  and  the  Frenchman
Burnouf,  led  the  way  into  the  splendid  garden  of
Sanskrit  literature ;  until  the  astonished  eyes
of  the  West  saw  its  glorious  flowers  of  poesy,
its  fruits  of  metaphysics  and  of  philosophy,  its
crystalline  rivulets  of  science,  its  magnificent
structures  of  philology ;  no  one  dreamed  that
the  world  had  had  any  history  worth  speaking  of
before  the  times  of  the  Greek  and  Roman  civil-
izations. Western  ideas  of  Egyptian,  Persian,
Babylonian,  Chinese,  and  Indian    achievements —

INDIA  :  PAST,  PRESENT,  AND  FUTURE.       259

physical,  Intellectual,  and  moral — were  as  hazy
as  a  fog.  Like  the  wayfarer  who  tries,  with  the
help  of  the  street  gas-lamps  and  the  lanterns  of
his  servants,  to  pick  his  way  through  London
streets,  when  one  of  those  dense  fogs  of  theirs  turns
noon  into  dark  night,  the  historians  were  groping
after  facts  through  the  mists  of  their  own  ignor-
ance and  religious  prejudice.  You  may  look
through  any  great  library  you  please,  and  you  will
find  there  whole  shelves  of  authors  who  have  tried
their  best  to  prove  that  everything  has  happened
within  the  last  6,000  years.  You  will  see  some  not
ashamed  or  afraid  to  say  that  Asia  derived  her  re-
ligious ideas,  her  industries,  and  her  very  language,
from  the  Jews  or  early  Christians;  you  can  find  books
which  try  to  prove  that  Sanskrit  is  a  derivative  from
the  Hebrew.  You  can  also  read  arguments  from
Christian  writers  to  show  that  the  parental  resem-
blance of  Hindu  mythology  to  Biblical  stories  is  due
to  the  fact  that  St.  Thomas,  one  of  the  alleged  dis-
ciples of  Jesus,  came  to  India  and  preached  his  re-
ligion here !  The  theory  that  Aryavarta  was  the
cradle  of  European  civilization,  the  Aryans  the  pro-
genitors of  the  Western  peoples,  and  their  literature
the  source  and  spring  of  all  Western  religions  and
philosophies,  is  comparatively  a  thing  of  yesterday.
Professor  Max  Miiller  and  a  few  other  Sanskritists  of
our  generation  have  been  bringing  about  this  change
in  Western  ideas.  Let  us  hope  that  before  many
more  years  roll  by,  we  may  know  the  whole
truth    about   Aryan    civihzation,    and    that    your

26o       INDIA'.  PAS  7    PRESENT,  AND  FUTURE,

ancestors  (and  ours)  will  be  honoured  according  to
their  deserts.  The  pride  of  the  modern  world  may
receive  a  shock  ;  but  the  ancients  will  be  vindicated,
and  the  cause  of  truth  advanced.

The  fact  will  then  appear,  far  more  distinctly
than  even  now,  that  long  before  the  first  page  of
the  Bible  was  written,  generations  before  the  Jews
had  a  nationality  to  boast  of,  before  the  foundations
of  Babylon  were  laid,  or  the  first  stone  of  the
Egyptian  pyramids  had  been  hewn  —  which,
according  to  Bunsen  and  Boeckh,  must  have
been  more  than  5,700  years  B.C. — the  Aryans
were  enjoying  a  splendid  civilization,  and  had  per-
fected a  grammar  and  language  with  which  none
other  can  compare.  If  asked  to  prove  my  words,
I  may  do  so  by  propounding  a  question.  To  what
age  of  the  world's  history  must  the  beginnings  of
the  Egyptian  State,  the  monarchy  of  Mena,  the
founder  of  Egypt,  be  carried  back  ?  Those  most
interested  in  the  solution  of  this  problem  hesitate
even  as  to  the  duration  of  IManetho's  dynasties —
from  Mena  to  the  last  Pharaoh — the  most  eminent
modern  Egyptologists  not  daring  to  assign  it  a
more  recent  period  than  between  5,000  and  6,000
years  B.C.  And  what  do  they  find  on  the  very
threshold  of  Egyptian  history,  further  back  than
which  Western  history  cannot  penetrate?  They  find
a  State  of  the  most  marvellous  civilization,  a  State
already  so  advanced  that  in  contemplating  it  one
has  to  repeat  with  Renan,  "  one  feels  giddy  at  the
very  idea  {on  est pris  de  vertlge),''  and  with  Brugsch,

INDIA  :  PAST,  PRESENT,  AND  FUTURE.        261

*'  there  are  no  ages  of  stone,  bronze  and  iron  in
Egypt.  .  .  .  We  must  openly  acknowledge
the  fact  that,  up  to  this  time  at  least,  Egypt  throws
scorn  upon  these  assumed  periods."  And  now,
Egyptian  history  and  civilization  being  the  most
ancient  we  have,  and  this  history  picturing  to  us,
nearly  8,000  years  ago,  a  people  already  highly
civilized,  not  in  the  material  sense  alone,  as  Brugsch
tells  us,  but  in  social  and  political  order,  morality
and  religion,  the  next  question  would  be  why  we
should  say  that  India  and  not  Egypt  is  the  older?
My  reason  may  seem  at  first  sight  paradoxical ;
yet,  nevertheless,  I  answer — because  nothing  is
knoivn  of  India,  8,000  years  ago.  When  I  say
nothing  is  known,  I  mean  known  by  its,  the  Western
nations,  for  the  Brahmins  have  their  own  chronology,
and  no  one  has  the  means  of  proving  that  their
calculations  are  exaggerated.  But  we  Europeans
know  nothing,  or  at  least  have  known  nothing
of  it  until  now  ;  but  have  good  reason  to  more
than  suspect  that  India,  8,000  years  ago,  sent
a  colony  of  emigrants  who  carried  their  arts  and
high  civilization  into  what  is  now  known  to  us  as
Egypt.  This  is  what  Brugsch  Bey,  the  most
modern  as  well  as  the  most  trusted  Egyptologist
and  antiquarian,  says  on  the  origin  of  the  old
Egyptians.  Regarding  these  as  a  branch  of  the
Caucasian  family,  having  close  affinity  with  the
Indo-Germanic  races,  he  insists  that  they  "migrated
from  Asia,  long  before  historic  memory,  and  crossed
that  bridge  of  nations,  the  Isthmus  of  Suez,  to  find

262        INDIA  :  PAST,  PRESENT,  AND  FUTURE.

a  new  fatherland  on  the  Banks  of  the  Nile.  .  .  ."
The  Egyptians  came,  according  to  their  own  records,
from  a  mysterious  land  (now  shown  to  lie  on  the
shore  of  the  Indian  Ocean),  the  sacred  Punt ;  the
original  home  of  their  gods — who  followed  thence
after  their  people,  who  had  abandoned  them,  to  the
valley  of  the  Nile,  led  by  Amon,  Hor,  and  Hathor.
This  region  was  the  Egyptian  "  Land  of  the  Gods  "
— Pa-NUTER,  in  old  Egyptian — or  Holy-land,  and
now  proved  beyond  any  doubt  to  have  been  quite
a  different  place  than  the  "  Holy  Land  "  of  Sinai.
By  pictorial  and  hieroglyphic  inscriptions  found
(and  interpreted)  on  the  walls  of  the  temple  of  the
Queen  Hashtop,  at  Der-el-bahri,  we  see  that  this
Puiit  can  be  no  other  than  India.  For  many  ages
the  Egyptians  traded  with  their  old  homes,  and
the  reference  here  made  by  them  to  the  names  of
the  Princes,  of  Punt  and  its  fauna  and  flora,  especi-
ally the  nomenclature  of  various  precious  woods  to
be  found  only  in  India,  leave  us  scarcely  room  for
the  smallest  doubt  that  the  old  civilization  of  Egpyt
is  the  direct  outcome  of  that  of  the  still  older  India,
most  probably  of  the  Isle  of  Ceylon,  which  was  in
prehistoric  days  part  and  parcel  of  the  great
Continent,  as  geologists  tell  us.

So  then  we  see  that  thousands  of  years  before  a
single  spark  of  civilization  had  appeared  in  Europe,
before  the  doors  of  a  school  had  been  opened,
those  great  Aryan  progenitors  of  ours  were  learned,
polite,  philosophical,  and  nationally  as  well  as  in-
dividually great.     The   people  were  not,  as  now,

INDIA  :  PA^T,  PRESENT,  AND  FUTURE.        263

irrevocably  walled  in  by  castes ;  they  were  free  to
rise  to  the  highest  social  dignities,  or  sink  to  the
lowest  positions,  according  to  the  inherent  qualities
they  might  possess.

If  there  were  great  philosophers  in  those  days,  so
also  were  there  great  philologists,  physicians,
musical  composers,  sculptors,  poets,  statesmen,
warriors,  architects,  manufacturers,  merchants.  In
the  Chatusashthikala  Nirnaya,  of  Vatsayana,  are
mentioned  sixty-four  different  professions  that  were
followed  in  the  Vedic  period,  a  fact  which  shows  that
not  only  the  actual  comforts,  but  also  the  luxuries
and  amusements,  of  a  civilized  community  were
then  common.  We  have  the  enforced  testimony
of  many  Christian  authors,  whom  certainly  no  one
will  suspect  of  partiality  for  India,  that  neither  in
what  the  West  calls  ancient,  nor  in  modern  times,
have  there  been  produced  such  triumphs  of  the
human  intellect  as  by  the  Aryans.  I  might  fill  a
separate  book  with  extracts  of  this  kind,  but  it  is  un-
necessary just  now.  I  will  cite  only  one  witness —
Mr.  Ward,  a  Baptist  missionary  of  Serampur,  and
author  of  a  well-known  work  on  "  Indian  History,
Literature,  and  Mythology."  "  The  grammars,"  he
says,  "  are  very  numerous,  and  reflect  the  highest
credit  on  the  ingenuity  of  their  authors.  Indeed,
in  philology,  the  Hindus  have  perhaps  excelled
both  the  ancients  (meaning,  no  doubt,  the  Greeks
and  Romans)  and  the  moderns.  Their  dictionaries,"
according  to  him,  "  also  do  the  highest  credit  to
the  Hindu  learned  men,  and  prove  how  highly  the

264        INDIA  :  PAST,  PRESENT,  AND  FUTURE.

Sanskrit  was  cultivated  in  former  periods."  The
Hindu  sages  "did  not  permit  even  the  miUtary
art  to  remain  unexamined  ....  it  is  very-
certain  that  the  Hindu  kings  led  their  own  armies  '
to  the  combat,  and  that  they  were  prepared  for  this
important  employment  by  a  military  education  ;
nor  is  it  less  certain  that  many  of  these  monarchs
were  distinguished  for  the  highest  valour  and  mili-
tary skill."  After  recounting  many  important  facts,
Mr.  Ward  says  :  "  From  the  perusal  of  the  preced-
ing pages  it  will  appear  evident  that  the  Hindu
philosophers  were,  unquestionably,  men  of  deep
erudition,  and  that  they  attracted  universal
homage  and  applause  ;  some  of  them  had  more
than  a  thousand  disciples  or  scholars."  And,  in
concluding  the  fourth  volume  of  his  work,  he
pays  your  ancestors  this  merited  tribute :  "  No
reasonable  person  will  deny  to  the  Hindus  of
former  times  the  praise  of  very  extensive  learning.
The  variety  of  subjects  upon  which  they  wrote
proves  that  almost  every  science  was  cultivated
amonc:  them.  The  manner  also  in  which  thev
treated  these  subjects  proves  that  the  Hindu
learned  men  yielded  the  palm  of  learning  to
scarcely  any  other  of  the  ancients.  The  more
their  philosophical  works  and  law  books  are
studied,  the  more  will  the  inquirer  be  convinced
of  the  depth  of  wisdom  possessed  by  the  authors."

Now,  I  have  been  often  asked  by  those  who
affirm  the  superiority  in  scientific  discovery  of
modern  nations,  whether  the  Ar}'ans  or  their  con-

INDIA  :   PAST,  PRESENT,  AND  EUTURE.        265

temporaries  could  show  anything  so  splendid  as
the  electric  telegraph  and  the  steam-engine.  My
answer  is  that  the  properties  of  steam  are  believed
to  have  been  known  in  those  ancient  days  ;  that
printing  was  used  at  a  period  of  most  remoteantiquity
in  China ;  that  the  Aryans  had,  as  certain  of
their  descendants  now  have,  a  system  of  telegraphy
that  enables  conversation  to  be  carried  on  at  any  dis-
tance, and  requires  neither  poles,  wires,  nor  pots  of
chemicals.  You  wish  to  know  what  that  is  ?  I  will
tell  you,  and  tell  it  to  the  very  beards  of  those
ignorant,  half-educated  people  who  make  fun  of
sacred  things,  and  are  not  ashamed  to  revile  their
forefathers  upon  the  strength  of  some  superficial
smattering  of  English  education  they  have  managed
to  pick  up.  Your  ancient  Yogis  could,  and  all  who
have  acquired  a  certain  proficiency  in  occult  science
can  even  now,  thus  talk  with  each  other.  Some  of
you  may  honestly  doubt  it,  still  it  is  true  ;  as  any
author  who  has  written  on  Yoga,  and  every  one
who  has  practised  it,  from  the  ancient  Rishis  down
to  some  living  Yogis  of  your  day,  will  tell  you.

And  then  the  Aryans — if  we  may  believe  that
good  man,  the  late  Bramachari  Bawa — knew  a
branch  of  science  about  which  the  West  is  now
speculating  much,  but  has  I'earnt  next  to  nothing.
They  could  navigate  the  air,  and  not  only  navigate
but  fight  battles  in  it,  like  so  many  war-eagles
combating  for  the  dominion  of  the  clouds.  To  be
so  perfect  in  aeronautics,  as  he  justly  says,  they
must  have  known  all  the  arts  and  sciences  related

266        INDIA  :  PAST,  PRESENT,  AND  FUTURE.     '

to  that  science,  including  the  strata  and  currents  of
the  atmosphere, their  relative  temperature,  humidity,
and  density,  and  the  specific  gravity  of  the  various
gases.  At  the  Mayasabha, described  in  the  Bharata,
he  tells  us,  were  microscopes,  telescopes,  clocks,
watches,  mechanical  singing-birds,  and  articulating
and  speaking  animals.  The  "Ashta  Vidya " — a
science  of  which  our  modern  professors  have  not
even  an  inkling — enabled  its  proficients  to  com-
pletely destroy  an  invading  army  by  enveloping  it
in  an  atmosphere  of  poisonous  gases,  filled  with
awe-striking,  shadowy  shapes,  and  with  awful
sounds.

The  modern  school  of  Comparative  Philology
traces  the  migration  of  Aryan  civilization  into
Europe  by  a  study  of  modern  languages  in  com-
parison with  the  Sanskrit.  And  we  have  an
equally,  if  not  still  more  striking  means  of
showing  the  outflow  of  Aryan  thought  towards
the  West,  in  the  philosophies  and  religions  of
Babylon,  Egypt,  Greece,  Rome,  and  Northern
Europe.  One  has  only  to  put  side  by  side  the
teachings  of  Pythagoras,  Socrates,  Plato,  Aristotle,
Homer,  Zeno,  Hesiod,  Cicero,  Scaevola,  Varro  and
Virgil,  with  those  of  Veda  Vydsa,  Kapila,  Goutama,
Patanjali,  Kanada,  Jaimini,  Narada,  Panini,  Marichi,
and  many  others  we  might  mention,  to  be  astonished
at  the  identity  of  their  conceptions — an  identity  that
upon  any  other  theory  than  that  of  a  derivation  of
the  younger  philosophical  schools  of  the  West  from
Uie  elder  ones  of  the  East  would  be  simply  miracu-

INDTA  :  PAST,  PRESENT,  AND  FUTURE.        267

lous.  The  human  mind  is  certainly  capable  of  evolv-
ing like  ideas  in  different  ages,  just  as  humanity
produces  for  itself  in  each  generation  the  teachers,
rulers,  warriors  and  artisans  it  needs.  But  that  the
views  of  the  Aryan  sages  should  be  so  identical  with
those  of  the  later  Greek  and  Roman  philosophers  as
to  make  it  seem  that  the  latter  were  to  the  former
like  the  reflection  of  an  object  in  a  mirror  to  the
object  itself,  without  an  actual,  physical  transmis-
sion of  teachers  or  books  from  the  East  to  the
West,  is  opposed  to  common  sense.  And  this
again  corroborates  our  convictions  that  the  old
Egyptians  were  emigrants  from  India.  Nearly  all
the  famous  ancient  philosophers  had  been  to  Egypt
to  learn  her  wisdom^  from  Jewish  Moses  to  Greek
Plato.

And  now  that  we  have  seen — however  imper-
fectly, for  the  theme  is  inexhaustible — what  India
was  in  the  olden  time,  and  what  sort  of  people
she  held,  let  us  move  the  panorama  forward  and
bestow  a  glance  on  the  India  of  our  own  day.

THE  PRESENT.

If  one  who  loves  the  memory  of  the  blessed
Aryavarta  would  not  have  his  heart  filled  with
sorrow,  he  must  not  permit  himself  to  dwell  too
long  on  the  past.  For,  as  the  long  procession  of
great  men  passes  before  his  inner  vision,  as
he  sees  them  surrounded  with  the  golden  light  of
their  majestic  epochs,  if  he  then  turn  to  view  the
spectacle    presented    by   the    India    of    to-day,    it

268        INDIA  :  PAST,  PRESENT,  AND  FUTURE,

it  will  be  hard,  though  he  were  the  most  courageous
of  souls,  to  escape  a  sense  of  crushing  despair.
Where  are  the  sages,  the  warriors,  the  giant
intellects  of  yore  ?  Where  the  happiness,  the  inde-
pendence of  spirit,  the  self-respecting  dignity,  that
made  an  Aryan  feel  himself  fit  to  rule  the  world,
nay,  to  meet  the  very  gods  on  equal  terms  ?
Where  are  the  cunning  artificers  whose  taste  and
skill,  as  exemplified  in  the  meagre  specimens  that
remain,  were  unrivalled  ?  Whither  are  departed
the  Brahmins  in  whose  custody  were  all  the  trea-
sures of  Asiatic  knowledge  ?  Gone — all  gone.  Like
visions  of  the  night,  they  have  departed  into
the  mist  of  time.  A  new  nation  is  being  fabricated
out  of  the  old  material,  in  combination  ivith  innch
alloy.  The  India  of  old  is  a  figment  of  the  imagina-
tion, a  faded  picture  of  the  memory;  the  India  of
to-day  is  a  stern  reality  that  confronts  and  supplicates
us.  The  soil  is  here,  but  its  fatness  is  diminished  ;
the  people  remain,  but,  alas !  how  hungry  and
degenerate  !  India,  stripped  of  her  once  limitless
forests,  that  gave  constant  crops  and  abundant
fertility  by  regulating  the  rainfall,  lies  baking  in
the  blistering  heat,  like  a  naked  valetudinarian  too
helpless  to  move.  The  population  has  multiplied
without  any  corresponding  increase  of  food  supply  ;
until  starvation,  once  the  exception,  has  become
almost  habitual.  The  difference  between  so-called
good  and  so-called  bad  years,  to  at  least  forty  millions
of  toilers,  is  now  only  that  in  the  former  they  are  a
little  less  near  starvation  than  in  the  latter.    Crushed

INDIA  I  PAST,  PRESENT,  AND  FUTURE,      269

in  heart,  deprived  of  all  hope,  denied  the  chances  of
much  bettering  his  condition,  the  poor  ryot,  clad  in
one   little   strip  of  cloth,    lives    on    from   hand  to
mouth  in  humble,  pious  expectation  of  what  to  him
will  be  the  happiest  of  all' hours — the  one  that  shall
usher  him  into  the  other  world.     The  union  of  the
olden   days   is    replaced   by  disunion,  province    is
arrayed  against   province,    race  against  race,   sect
against   sect,   brother   against   brother.     Once  the
names  of  Arya  and  Aryavarta  were  talismans  that
moved  the  heart  of  an  Indian  youth  to  its  depths,
that   sent   the  flush  of  blood  into  his  cheek,  that
caused  his  eye  to  glitter.    Now,  the  demon  of  selfish-
ness sits  athwart  all  noble  impulse  ;  the  struggle  for
life  has  made  men  sycophants,    cowards,   traitors.
The   brow  of  a  once  proud   nation   is  laid  in  the
dust,    and    shame    causes    those   who   revere   her
memory  to  avert   their  gaze   from    the   sickening
spectacle  of  her   fallen  greatness.     Mighty  cities,
once    homes     and    hives    of    population,    centres
of  luxury,   hallowed  repositories    of  religion    and
science,  have  crumbled  into  dust ;  and  either  the
filthy  beast  and  carrion  bird  inhabit  their  desolate
ruins,  or  the  very  recollection  of  their  sites  is  lost.
Now  and  then  the  delving  archaeologist  exhumes
some  fragment  which  serves  to  verify  the  ancient
Aryan  records ;  but  even  then  he  mostly  tries  totwist
their  evidence  into   a  corroboration  of  some  pet
thcoi-y   that   denies    a   greater    antiquity   than    a
handful  of  centuries  to  Indian  civilization.

It  is  not  my  province  to  deal  with  the  political

270        INDIA  :  PAST,  PRESENT,  AND  FUTURE.

interests  involved  in  the  full  consideration  of  our
subject.  Were  I  in  the  least  competent  to
handle  it — which  I  certainly  am  not,  after  the
mere  glimpse  I  have  had  of  the  situation,  and
with  the  tastes  and  habits  of  a  life  opposed  to
dabbling  at  all  in  politics — I  should  nevertheless
abstain.  My  interest  in  India  is  in  her  litera-
ture, her  philosophy,  her  religion,  and  her  science  ;
it  was  to  study  these  I  came  hither.  And  it  is  upon
glancing  at  these  that  I  am  constrained  to  express
my  sorrow  at  finding  things  as  they  are.  The
Brahmins  I  find  engaged  as  clerks  to  Government
and  to  merchants,  and  even  occupied  in  menial
capacities.  Here  and  there  a  learned  man  is  to  be
found  ;  but  the  majority,  receiving  no  encourage-
ment to  devote  their  lives  to  abstract  science  or  to
philosophy,  have  given  up  the  custom  of  their  fore-
fathers, and  their  glory  is  departed.  Some  still
linger  about  the  temples,  and  repeat  their  slokas
and  sastras  in  a  parrot-like  way  ;  take  what  stint  of
dole  a  parsimonious  and  impoverished  public  may
fling  to  them,  and  waylay  the  European  visitor  with
out-stretched  palm  and  the  droning  cry  oi baksheesh!
But  in  their  temples  there  are  no  longer  any  sacred
mysteries,  for  there  are  few  priests  who  have  be-
come initiated,  few  who  even  believe  that  there
are  secrets  of  Nature  that  the  ascetic  can  discover.
The  very  successors  of  Patanjali,  Sankara,  and
Kanada  doubt  if  man  has  a  soul,  or  any  latent
psychic  powers  that  can  be  developed.  And  this
fashionable  scepticism  taints  the  minds  of  all  young

INDIA'.  PAST,  PRESENT,  AND  FUTURE,       271

India.  The  flower  of  Aryan  youth  are  turning
materialists  under  the  influence  of  European  educa-
tion. Hope — the  bright  angel  that  gives  joy  and
courage  to  the  human  intellect — is  dying  out ;  they
have  no  longer  hope  in  the  hereafter,  nor  in  the
splendid  possibilities  of  the  present.  And  with-
out hope,  how  can  there  be  that  cheerful  resigna-
tion under  evils  that  begets  perseverance  and
pluck  ?  We  have  the  authority  of  Sir  Richard
Temple,  late  Governor  of  Bombay,  for  saying
that  "  modern  education  is  shaking  the  Hindu
faith  to  its  very  foundation."  These  are  the
very  words  he  uttered  not  long  ago,  in  a  speech  at
the  University  of  Oxford,  the  pamphlet  report  of
which  I  now  hold  in  my  hand.  And  he  mentions
as  chief  among  the  effects  of  that  change,  the  for-
mation of  the  three  great  "  religious  sects  "  of  the
Brahmo  Samaj,  the  Prarthana  Sam.aj,  and — most
absurdly — the  Theosophical  Society,  which  never
was,  or  pretended  to  be,  a  sect  !  The  Arya
Samaj  he  does  not  so  much  as  mention,  though
the  President  of  the  Bombay  branch — Rao  Ba-
hadur Gopalrao  Hurree  Deshmiukh — is  a  member
of  the  Bombay  Governor's  Council,  and  the  forty
or  fifty  branch  Samajes,  already  founded  by  Daya-
nand  Swami,  include,  perhaps,  as  many  registered
or  affiliated  members  as  the  other  three  societies
together.  Sir  Richard  Temple  tells  the  English
people  that  now  is  the  time  for  them  to  send  out
more  missionaries,  as  young  India  is  ready  to  turn
Christian  as  it  were  in  a  mass  !     Now  I  believe  this

272        INDIA  :  PAST,  PRESENT,  AND  FUTURE.

to  be  a  perfectly  erroneous  supposition.  As  I  see  it,
the  young  Hindus,  outside  the  reformatory
Samajes,  are  losing  their  old  religious  belief,  with-
out gaining,  or  being  ready  to  embrace,  any  other.
They  are  becoming  exactly  like  the  great  mass
of  educated  youth  in  Europe  and  America.  In-
fluenced by  the  same  causes,  they  require  the  same
treatment.  It  is  Science  which  undermined  the
foundations  of  Religion  ;  it  is  Science  which  should
be  compelled  to  erect  the  new  edifice.  As  an  incom-
plete study  of  Nature  has  led  to  materialistic  Athe-
ism,"^ so  a  complete  one  will  lead  the  eager  student
back  to  faith  in  his  inner  and  nobler  self,  and  in  his
spiritual  destiny.  For  there  is  a  circle  of  science
as  of  all  other  things,  and  the  whole  truth  can
only  be  learnt  by  going  all  the  way  round.  This,
I  think,  is  the  strongest  corner  of  the  edifice  of
Theosophy  that  we  are  trying  to  raise.  Other
agitators  come  to  the  young  generation  claiming
authority  for  some  book,  some  religious  observances,
or  some  man  as  a  religious  guide  and  teacher.  We
say,  "  We  interfere  with  no  man's  creed  or  caste  ;
we  preach  no  dogma;  we  offer  no  article  of  faith.  We
point  to  Nature  as  the  most  infallible  of  all  divine
revelations,  and  to  Science  as  the  most  competent
teacher  of  her  mysteries."  But  the  science  we  have
in  mind  is  a  far  wider,  higher,  nobler  science  than
that  of  modern  sciolists.  Our  view  extends
over  the  visible  and  invisible,  the  familiar  and  un-

*  Atheism,    in    the   sense   of    disbelief   of  even    the    Universal
Principle.

INDIA  :  PAST,  PRESENT,  AND  FUTURE.        273

familiar,  the    patent  and  occult   sides    of  Nature.
In   short,  ours   is  the   Aryan   conception   of  what
science  can   and  should  be,  and  we  point   to   the
Aryas  of  antiquity  as  its  masters  and  proficients.
Young  India  is  a  blind  creature  whose  eyes  are  not
yet  open  ;  and  the  nursing  mother  of  its  thought
is  a  bedizened  goddess,  herself  blind  of  one  eye,
whose  name  is  Modern  Science.     There  is  an  old
proverb  that  "in  a  company  of  blind  men,  the  one-
eyed  man  is  a  king,"    and  here  we  see  it  practi-
cally exemplified.     Our  Western  instructors  know
just  enough  to  spoil  our  spirituality,  but  not  enough
to  prove  to  us  what  man  really  is.     They  can  draw
young    India   away    from    her    old    religion,   but
only    to   plunge    her  into    the    swamp    of  doubt.
They  can  show  us  the  ingenious  mechanism  of  our
vital  machinery,  the  composition  of  our  digesting
fluids,  the  proportion  of  fluids   and  solids  in  our
frame.     But  Atina  is  an  unscientific  postulate,  and
Psychology  a  species  of  poetry,  in  their  eyes.     Shall
v/e  then  say  that  modern  education  is  an  unmixed
blessing  to  India  ?     Look  at  our  Indian  youth  and
answer.     Sir  Richard  Temple  is  right  in  saying  that
the  foundations  of  their  faith  are  .shaken.     Shaken,
indeed,  they  are  ;  but  he  does  not  seem  to  perceive
the  proper  remedy.      It  is  not  theological    Chris-
tianity, which  itself  is  tottering  before  the  merciless
assaults  of  the  liberal  minds  within  its  own  house-
hold.     It    is    pre-eminently    uncongenial    to   the
Hindu    mind.      No    imported    faith   will    furnish

a    panacea    for    the    spiritual     disease    spreading

s

274       INDTA  :  PAST,  PRESENT,  AND  FUTURE.

on   all   sides.     What   is  needed  is  that  the  Vedas
shall  be  once  more  restored  to  their  ancient  hold
upon  the  Indian  mind.     Not  that  they  should  be
accepted  as  a  mere   dead   letter.     Not  that   they
should  inspire  a  merely  tacit  reverence,  but  an  in-
telligent appreciation  of  their  intrinsic  merits.     It
must  be  proven,  not  simply  asserted,  that  the  Vedas
are  the  fountain  and  source  of  all  religions,  that  they
contain  the  indications  of  a  science  that  embraces
and  explains  all  sciences.     To  whom  shall  we  look
for  this  vindication  of  their  majesty?     To  whom
but  to  those  who  unite  in  themselves  at  once  the
advantages  of  modern  critical   culture  and  famili-
arity with  the  Sanskrit  literature;  and,  most  im-
portant of  all,  the  knowledge  of  the  hidden  mean-
ing  of  the  Vedic  allegory  and  symbolism  ?     For
the   inspired    Vedas    are  often   hidden    under  the
visible  writing,  and  nestle  between   the  lines  ;   at
least  so  I  have  been  told   by  those  who    profess
to  know   the  truth.     It  is   ignorance  of  this  fact,
and  the  taking  of  the  Vedas  in   their  dead-letter
sense,  that  has  driven  thousands  of  the  brightest
intellects    into   infidelity.     Comparative   philology
will  not  supply  us  with  our  interpretation  ;  it  can
only  show  the  dead-letter  meaning  of  the  dead-letter
text.      An    esteemed     Fellow   of    our    Society  —
Shankar  Pandurang  Pandit — is    doing  this  literal
translation   work    at    Bombay,  while  many  others
are  busily  tracing  the  several  streams  of  Western
ideas    back    to    their  parent  spring  in  the  Vedas.
But  modern  India  needs  to    be  instructed  in  the

INDIA  :  PAST,  PRESENT,  AND  EUTURE.        275

vieaning  of  the  Vedic  authors ;  so  that  this  age
may  acquire  for  itself  the  perfect  certitude  that  in
those  far  distant  as^es  science  was  so  well  under-
stood  as  to  leave  no  necessity  for  us  to  cast  aside
as  rubbish  that  Book  of  Books,  at  the  behest  of
modern  self-styled  "authorities"  in  science.  An
Indian  civilization  resting  upon  the  Vedas,  and
other  old  national  works,  is  like  a  strong  castle
built  upon  rocks :  an  Indian  civilization  resting
upon  Western  religious  ideas — patched  with  im-
ported ideas  fitted  only  to  the  local  traditions  and
environments  of  their  respective  birthplaces — is  but
a  rickety  house  of  cards  that  the  first  blast  of
stern  experience  may  cause  to  topple  over.  We
certainly  cannot  expect  to  see,  under  the  totally
different  conditions  of  modern  times,  an  exact
reproduction  of  Aryan  development ;  but  we  can
count  upon  the  new  development  having  a  strictly
national  character.  Whoever  is  a  true  friend  of
India  will  make  himself  recognized  by  his  desire  to
nationalize  her  modern  progress  ;  her  enemy  is  he
who  advocates  the  denationalization  of  her  arts,
industries,  lines  of  thought,  and  aspirations.  There
are  men  of  both  sorts  among  the  class  who  have
received  the  priceless  blessing  of  education — and,  I
am  sorry  to  say,  there  are  hundreds,  if  not  thousands,
who  are  setting  the  pernicious  example  of  aping
Western  ways  that  are  good  only  for  Western  people,
and  of  imitating  Western  vices  that  are  good  for  no
people,  among  which  is  the  excessive  use  of  spiritu-
ous liquors.    I  see  also  everywhere  a  set  of  rich  syco-

276       INDTA  :  FAST,  PRESENT,  AND  FUTURE.

phants  who  humbly  bow  the  knee  to  every
European  they  meet  in  the  hope  of  rcco^^nition
and  reward.  These  poor  fools  do  not  realize  that
a  people  intensely  manly,  independent  and  self-
respecting  like  the  English,  can  only  feel  contempt
for  those  who  cast  aside  their  own  dignity  and  self-
respect.  Nor  are  they  so  dull  as  not  to  detect,
under  all  this  mask  of  servile  politeness,  the  con-
cealed scowl  of  hatred,  and,  under  this  fawning  and
cringing,  the  mean  lust  after  titles  and  decorations.
An  Englishman  honours  a  brave  foe,  and  scorns  a
sneaking  hypocrite.  Before  India  can  hope  to
make  the  first  recuperative  step  up  the  long  slope
down  which  she  has  been  for  many  centuries
descending,  her  youth  must  learn  the  lesson  that
true  manhood  is  based  upon  self-respect.  And
they  must  learn  once  more  to  speak  the  truth.
There  was  a  time  when  a  Hindu's  word  pledged  to
another  man,  no  matter  whether  Hindu  or  stranger,
was  sacredly  kept.  English  gentlemen  have  told
me  more  than  once  that  thirty  years  ago  one  mJght
have  left  a  lakh  of  rupees,  uncounted,  with  a  native
banker  without  taking  a  receipt,  and  be  sure  of  not
being  wronged  out  of  a  single  pie.  Could  that  be
done  safely  now  ?  Friends  of  mine — native  gentle-
men connected  with  the  judicial  establishment —
have  told  me,  some  with  moistening  eyes,  that
lying  and  perjury  had  of  late  grown  so  common
that  magistrates  could  scarcely  believe  a  word  of
the  testimony  offered  by  either  side  unless  corro-
borated.    The  moral  tone  of  the   legal  profession

INDIA  :  PAST,  PRESENT,  AND  FUTURE.        277

has  been  perceptibly  raised,  but  the  mendacity  of
the  general  public  has  reached  a  low  level.  Do
you  think  a  national  resuscitation  can  be  even
dreamt  of  with  such  a  bottomless  depth  of  moral
rottenness  to  lay  its  foundations  upon  ?  Many  of
the  best  friends  of  Aryavarta  have  confessed  all
these  things  to  me,  and  in  accents  of  despair  fore-
told the  speedy  ruin  of  everything.  Some,  the
other  day,  went  so  far  as  to  say  that  in  all  the
North- West  and  Punjab — to  say  nothing  of  other
provinces — six  men  of  the  true  patriot-hero  mould
could  not  be  found.  This  is  not  my  opinion.
Some  of  you  may  recall  that  in  all  my  addresses  to
the  Indian  public  I  have  taken  a  hopeful  view  of  the
situation.  I  do  not  wish  to  deceive  myself,  or  to
•  deceive  others  ;  for  I  hope  to  live  and  die  in  this  land
and  amiong  this  people.  I  rest  my  judgment  of
Indian  evolution  upon  the  whole  course  of  Aryan
evolution,  not  upon  a  fragmentary  particle  of  it.
The  new  environment  is  evolving  a  new  India
which,  in  three  chief  respects,  is  the  complete
antithesis  of  the  older  one.  Old  India — and,  in
fact,  even  modern  India,  that,  let  us  say,  of  the
eighteenth  century — was  (i)  Asiatic  to  the  core;
(2)  it  had  more  land  than  cultivators  ;  and  (3)  its
soil  was  unexhausted.  But  the  brand-new  India
of  to-day,  suckling  of  Manchester,  Birmingham,
and  Sheffield,  and  hunting-ground  of  the  shikarri
and  the  missionary,  is  putting  on  European  clothes,
and  thinking  along  European  lines  ;  its  land  is
overcrowded  ;   its  soil  deteriorating  at  a  rapid  rate

278       INDIA  :  PAST,  PRESENT,  AND  FUTURE.

towards  actual  sterility.  It  needs  no  prophet  to  fore-
cast what  all  this  involves.  If  "  fertile  France,"  as
Dr.  Hunter  calls  it,*  is  crowded,  with  i8o  people
to  the  square  mile ;  and  fair,  green  Ireland  so
over-populated,  with  169  persons  to  the  square
mile,  that  she  pours  her  emigrants  into  America  by-
millions  ;  if  the  people  of  England  when  they  exceed
200  to  the  square  mile,  gain  their  food  only  by
employing  themselves  in  manufactures,  mines,  and
city  industries — what  must  we  think  of  hapless
India's  lot  ?  Throughout  British  India  the  aver-
age population  is  243  persons  to  the  square  mile,
and  there  are  portions — as,  for  instance,  in  thirteen
districts  of  Northern  India,  equal  in  size  to
Ireland — where  the  land  has  to  support  an  average
of  680  persons  to  the  square  mile,  or  more  than  one
person  to  each  acre  !  The  Famine  Commissioners
report  that  in  Bengal  twenty-four  millions  of  human
beings  are  trying  to  live  on  the  produce  of  fifteen
million  acres,  or  little  more  than  half  an  acre  apiece.
"  The  Indian  soil,"  as  Dr.  Hunter  says,  "  cannot
support  that  struggle."  And  what  then  —  is  it
asked  ?  Well,  death  to  crores  :  that  is  the  grinning
skull  behind  the  gold  cloth  and  glitter  of  these
pageants  ;  such  are  the  terrible  words  traced  in  the
invisible  ink  of  Fate  between  the  lines  of  these
college  diplomas.  This  state  of  things  is  the  result
of  definite  causes,  and  in  their  turn  these  effects
become  causes  of  fresh  results  far  ahead.     From

*  England's  Work  In  India.     By  W.  W.  Hunter,  CLE.,  LL.D.,
London,  1881.

INDIA  :  PAST,  PRESENT,  AND  FUTURE.        279

the  experience  of  the  past  we  may  always  prognos-
ticate what  is  Hkely  to  come.  And  this  brings  us
to  the  third  and  last  branch  of  the  subject.

THE  FUTURE.

Who  shall  raise  the  curtain  that  now  hangs  in
black  heavy  folds  before  the  TO-BE  ?  Only  the
eye  of  the  perfect  seer  can  penetrate  the  secrets  of
the  coming  ages.  The  true  Yogi  of  old  could  fore-
tell events  because  he  had  acquired  the  power  to
pass  at  will  into  the  spiritual  universe,  and  in
that  condition  Past  and  Future  are  merged  into
one  conscious  Present ;  as  to  an  observer  who
stands  at  the  centre  of  a  circle,  every  point  in
the  circumference  is  equi-distant.  But  the  true
Yogis  are  now  few,  and  if  any  are  to  be  met  among
us,  they  are  hiding  themselves,  more  and  more
carefully  every  day,  from  the  sight  of  men.  We
must  then  proceed  by  the  deductive,  since  we  may
not  by  the  intuitive,  process.  And  as  we  are
helped  by  comparative  philology  to  theorize  upon
the  origin  and  destiny  of  language,  so,  by  the  study
of  comparative  history,  we  may  at  least  get  some
idea  of  the  probable  outcome  of  the  social  forces
we  see  at  work  in  the  India  of  to-day.  Through
this  glass,  then,  I  see  the  country,  after  having
reached  the  predestined  lowest  level  of  adversity —
predestined,  I  mean,  by  the  universal  cyclic  law
which  controls  the  destinies  of  nations,  as  the  law
of  gravitation  controls  the  orbits  of  the  planets — I

28o       INDIA  :  PAST,  PRESENT,  AND  FUTURE.

see  her  rising  again.  Action  and  reaction — the
sway  of  the  pendulum  of  human  events — follow  each
other.  Nations,  however  splendid  and  powerful,
are  stamped  out,  under  the  iron  heel  of  reactive
destiny,  if  their  inherent  vitality  be  weak.  But
when  it  is  strong,  then,  indeed,  may  we  behold  the
majestic  spectacle  of  a  nation  reviving  from  its  very
ashes,  and  starting  afresh  on  the  road  to  greatness.
To  which  category  shall  we  assign  India  ?  I  know
not  what  others  may  think,  but  for  my  part  I  do
most  firmly  believe  in  her  future.  If  she  had  been
weak  of  vitality  she  would  have  been  obliterated
by  various  causes  ;  nay,  if  she  had  not  had  an  in-
herent giant  strength,  her  own  vices  would  have
destroyed  her  before  now.  She  has  survived
everything,  and  she  will  live  to  renew  her  strength.
Her  best  sons  are  afforded  not  only  oppor-
tunities for  education,  but  also  of  training,  in
hundreds  of  offices,  in  practical  statesmanship,
under  the  greatest  nation  of  administrators  of
modern  times  —  not  even  America  excepted.
European  education  is  creating  a  new  caste  which  is
to  guide  the  nation  up  the  hill.  And  as  the  Aryan
of  former  times  was  the  very  prince  of  philosophers,
so  it  is  in  the  order  of  nature  that  his  descendant
should  become  in  time  one  of  the  ablest  of  states-
men. Already  broader  and  higher  spheres  of  use-
fulness are  opening  before  him,  partly  as  the  result
of  his  own  importunities,  partly  because  of  the
greater  economy  of  administration  that  his  admis-
sion   to   the   higher   preferments   seems   likely  to

INDIA  :  PAST,  PRESENT,  AND  FUTURE.        281

offer.  We  are,  perhaps,  at  the  threshold  of  a  new
era  of  Indian  clvihzation,  an  era  of  enormous
development  The  bad  crisis  may  be  postponed,
perhaps  almost  averted,  by  the  aid  of  liberal
science.  If  the  present  peaceful  and  stable  order
of  things  should  continue — and  surely  such  should
be  the  sincere  prayer  of  every  one  who  wishes
well  to  India,  for  change  would  mean  a  plunge
back  into  chaos — we  shall  see  the  barriers  gradually
melt  away  that  have  kept  the  peoples  apart.
Gradually  they  are  realizing  that,  however  distant
the  Punjab  may  be  from  Travancore,  or  Cutch
from  Bengal,  the  people  are  yet  brothers,  children
of  the  same  mother.  When  this  conviction  shall
once  possess  the  whole  body  of  these  twenty-
four  crores,  then  will  the  renascence  of  this
nation  have  indeed  arrived.  And  then,  with  all
the  modern  improvements  in  arts,  sciences,  and
manufactures,  superadded  to  abundant  labour  ;
schools  thronged  with  eager  students  ;  the  know-
ledge of  the  Aryans  unearthed  from  the  dust
of  ages  ;  the  Vedas  reverenced  and  appreciated
by  the  whole  educated  class,  who  are  now  co-
quetting with  Infidelity,  with  Atheism,  with
sciolistic  Science — with  everything  that  is  cal-
culated to  despiritualize  and  denationalize  them  ;
with  Sanskrit  teachers  well  supported  and  honoured
as  in  former  days  ;  with  the  most  distant  districts
bound  together  by  a  network  of  railways  and  other
public  works  ;  with  the  mineral  and  agricultural
resources  of  the  country  fully  developed  ;  with  the

282       INDIA  :  PAST,  PRESENT,  AND  FUTURE.

pressure  of  population  adjusted  to  the  capacities
of  the  several  districts  ;  with  the  last  chains  of
superstition  broken,  and  the  eyes  unbandaged  that
have  been  so  long  withheld  from  seeing  the  truth,
— the  day  of  Aryan  regeneration  will  have  fully
dawned.  Then  once  more  shall  Aryavarta  give
birth  to  sons  so  good  as  to  provoke  the  admiring
homage  of  the  world.  When  shall  we  see  this
glorious  day  ?  When  shall  India  take  the  proud
place  she  might  assume  in  the  family  of  nations  ?
Ah  !  when  ?  The  oracle  is  silent ;  the  book  of
destiny  none  have  read.  It  may  be  only  after  a
century  or  centuries  ;  it  cannot  be  soon,  for  the
pendulum  swings  slowly,  and  on  the  dial  of  Fate
the  hours  are  marked  by  cycles  and  epochs,  not  by
hours  or  single  generations.  Enough  for  us  the
present  hour  ;  for  out  of  the  present  comes  the
future,  and  the  things  we  do  and  those  we  leave
undone  weave  the  warp  and  wind  the  woof  of  our
destinies.  We  are  masters  of  causes,  but  slaves
of  their  results.  Take  this  truth  to  heart,
and  remember  that  whatever  your  faith  —  If
you  have  any  faith  at  all  In  man's  survival  after
death — whether,  as  Hindus,  you  believe  in  Karma,
or,  as  Buddhists,  you  believe  in  Prishna,  you  can-
not escape  the  responsibility  of  your  acts.  What
you  do  that  is  good  or  bad,  and  what  you  might
do  but  leave  undone,  will  equally  be  placed  to  your
account  by  the  Law  of  Compensation.  The  lesson
of  the  hour  is  that  every  Indian  mother  should
recall  to  the  child  at  her  knee  the  glories  of  the

INDIA  :  PAST,  PRESENT,  AND  FUTURE.        2S

o

past,  that  every  son  of  the  soil  should  keep  green
the  memory  of  his  ancestors,  and  that  each  should
do  what  he  can,  in  every  way  and  always,
to  deserve  and  to  dignify  the  name  of  an
Aryan.

THE    CIVILIZATION    THAT    INDIA

NEEDS.*

In  reflecting  upon  a  choice  of  subjects  upon  which
to  address  you,  it  seems  to  me  that  our  time  would
be  most  profitably  spent  in  examining  the  modern
dogma,  that  "  the  true  test  of  the  civilization  of  a
nation  must  be  measured  by  its  progress  in  science."
I  shall  consider  it  in  its  relation  to  Asiatic,  especially
Indian,  needs  and  standards.  My  discourse  will
not  be  exhaustive,  not  even  approximately  so.  I
am  not  going  to  attempt  an  oration  or  an  exegesis.
I  shall  only  say  a  few  words  upon  a  subject  so  pro-
found and  exhaustless  that  one  would  scarcely  be
able  to  consider  its  lengths  and  breadths  without
writing  a  volume,  or  perhaps  a  score  of  volumes.  For,
to  know  what  progress  really  is,  and  what  are  the
absolute  canons  of  civilization,  one  must  trace  back
the  intellectual  achievements  of  mankind  to  the
remotest  past ;  and  that,  too,  with  a  clue  that  only
the  Asiatic  people  can  place  in  our  possession.  If
Europe  really  wishes  to  estimate  the  rush  of  civiliza-
tion, she  must  not  take  her  datum  line  from  the
mental,  spiritual,  and  moral  degradation  of  her  own

*A  Lecture  delivered  at  Tuticoiin,  22nd  Cctober^  iSSi.

THE  CIVILIZATION  THAT  INDIA  NEEDS.      2S5

Middle  Ages,  but  from  the  epochs  of  Indian  and
Mongoh'an  greatness.  The  advancement  Europe
has  experienced  in  popular  intelligence,  in  religious
enfranchisement,  and  in  the  multiplication  of  aids
to  physical  comfort ;  and  the  phenomenal  leap
made  by  my  own  country  of  America,  within  one
century,  to  the  topmost  rank  of  national  power —
these  are  well  calculated  to  make  her  accept  the
above-stated  scientific  dogma  without  a  thought  of
protest.  The  quoted  words  are  those  of  Sir  John
Lubbock,  and  I  take  them  from  the  report  in
Nature  (No.  618,  vol.  24)  of  his  presidential  address
to  the  members  of  the  British  Association  for  the
Advancement  of  Science,  on  the  31st  of  August,
1 88 1 — an  address  that  will  figure  in  history.  The
occasion  was  the  fiftieth  anniversary  meeting  of  the
Association,  and  the  President  properly,  and  most
ably  and  lucidly,  reviewed  the  progress  of  science
during  this  wonderful  half-century.  How  vast  has
been  the  increase  of  knowledge  about  physical
nature,  and  what  vistas  it  opens  out,  I  need  not
particularize  before  so  intelligent  a  Hindu  audience
as  the  present.  You,  who  have  had  the  benefit  of
a  modern  education,  know  that  most  branches
of  physical  science  have  been  revolutionized,  and
many  positively  created,  within  the  past  half-
century.  Biology,  the  science  of  living  organiza-
tions ;  Surgery  ;  Archaeology  ;  Comparative
Philology;  Anthropology;  Geology;  Palaeontology;
Geography;  Astronomy;  Optics;  Physics,  including
the    Kinetic    theory   of  gases ;    the   properties    of

286      THE  CIVILIZATION  THAT  INDIA  NEEDS.

matter  and  the  conservation  of  energy ;  Photo-
graphy ;  Electricity  and  Magnetism,  and  their
correlations  ;  Mathematics,  as  applied  to  scientific
problems;  Chemistry;  Mechanical  Science,  includ-
ing the  processes  for  utilizing  metals  ;  Economic
Science  and  Statistics  ; — the  development  of  these
is  the  splendid  triumph  of  the  intellectual  activity
of  the  Western  world,  since  the  year  1830,  Sir
John  Lubbock  counts  it  all  up  in  the  following
words :  "  Summing  up  the  principal  results  which
have  been  attained  in  the  last  half-century,  we  may
mention  (over  and  above  the  accumulation  of  facts)
the  theory  of  evolution,  the  antiquity  of  man,  and
the  far  greater  antiquity  of  the  world  itself;  the
correlation  of  physical  forces,  and  the  conservation
of  energy ;  spectrum  analysis  and  its  application  to
celestial  physics;  the  higher  algebra  and  the  modern
geometry;  lastly,  the  innumerable  applications  of
science  to  practical  life — as,  for  instance,  in  photo-
graphy, the  locomotive  engine,  the  electric  telegraph,
the  spectroscope,  and  most  recently,  the  electric
light  and  the  telephone."  Truly,  if  we  compare  the
Europe  and  America  of  to-day  with  what  they  were
five  centuries,  or  even  one  century  ago,  we  see  good
reason  for  the  shout  of  exultation  v\dth  which  the
progress  of  the  Western  nations  is  celebrated.
And  we  can  quite  understand  why  the  learned  and
respected  President  of  the  British  Association
should  have  laid  down  the  dogma  already  noted  in
my  opening  remarks.  An  educated  Hindu  would
be  the  last  to  dissent  from  his  position  that   there

THE  CIVILIZATION  THAT  INDIA  NEEDS,      2S7

are  no  probable  limits  to  the  power  of  the  human
mind,  to  solve  all  the  ultimate  problems  of  natural
law.  When,  by  the  help  of  the  spectroscope,  we
have  been  enabled  to  discover  the  very  composition
of  the  stars  of  heaven,  who  shall  dare  to  fix  a  limit
to  the  capacity  of  man  to  unravel  the  mysteries  of
the  universe  around  him  ?

But  you  must  remember  that  we  have  been
speaking  of  the  progress  of  physical  science ;  and
that  after  that  has  done  its  best,  after  its  proficients
have  pushed  their  researches  to  the  very  verge  of
objective  nature,  though  not  one  secret  of  the
phenomenal  world  is  left  uncovered,  there  is  another
and  a  far  more  important  domain  of  knowledge  still
left  to  explore.  At  that  outermost  verge  yawns  an
abyss  that  separates  it  from  the  Unknown,  and,  as
scientific  men  call  it,  the  Unknowable.  Why  do
they  not  enter  this  boundless  department  of
Nature  ?  Why,  in  all  this  hurry-skurry  of  the
biologists  after  knowledge,  have  they  not  solved
the  old  problem  of  the  why,  the  whence,  the
whither  of  Man  ?  Is  it  not  because  their  methods
are  faulty,  and  their  canons  of  science  too  narrow  ?
Firstly,  they  have  been  overshadowed  throughout
their  investigations  by  the  dark  and  menacing
influence  of  a  Christian  theology  ignorant  of  Christ;
and  secondly,  they  have  been  hampered  by  their
ignorant  disdain  for  the  claims  of  Asiatic  Occult-
ism, whose  adepts  alone  can  tell  them  how  they
may  learn  the  secret  laws  of  Nature  and  of  man.
Read  the  summary  of  scientific  progress  made  by

2S8      THE  CIVILIZATION  THAT  INDIA  NEEDS.

Professor  Draper,  in  that  splendid  work  of  his,  en-
titled "The  Conflict  between  Religion  and  Science,"
if  you  would  see  how  Theology  has  fought  that
progress  inch  by  inch.  O,  the  black  and  bloody
record  !  Bow  your  heads  in  reverence,  friends  of
human  progress,  to  the  martyrs  of  science  who
have  battled  for  the  truth.  And  -  when  you  go
through  so-called  Christian  countries,  as  I  have
gone,  and  see  how  that  once  haughty  and  all-
powerful  Church  Is  crumbling,  let  your  hearts
throb  with  gratitude  for  the  long  array  of  daring
scientists  who  have  dissected  her  pretensions,
unmasked  her  false  doctrines,  shivered  the  bloody
sword  of  her  authority,  and  left  her  what  she  now
is,  a  dying  superstition,  the  last  vestiges  of  whose
authority  are  passing  away.  Do  you  think  I  am
speaking  in  prejudice  or  passion  ?  Alas  !  no,  my
friends  and  brothers  ;  I  am  but  giving  voice  to  the
facts  of  history,  and  every  unprejudiced  man  among
you  may  verify  them  If  he  chooses.  Professor
Huxley,  who,  without  the  least  apparent  sympathy
for  Asiatic  thought,  or  knowledge  of  its  ancient
occult  science,  is  yet  unconsciously  one  of  the
greatest  allies  of  both,  in  doing  what  he  can  to
advance  science  in  spite  of  theology,  says  : — "  The
myths  of  Paganism  are  dead  as  Osiris  or  Zeus,  and
the  man  who  should  revive  them,  iji  opposition  to
the  knozvledge  of  our  time,  would  be  justly  laughed  to
scorn  ;  but  the  coeval  imaginations  current  among
the  rude  inhabitants  of  Palestine,  recorded  by
writers  whose  very  name  and  age  are  admitted  by

THE  CIVILIZATION  THAT  INDIA  NEEDS.      289

every  scholar  to  be  unknown,  have  unfortunately
not  yet  shared  their  fate ;  but,  even  at  this  day,  are
regarded  by  nine-tenths  of  the  civilized  world  as  the
authoritative  standard  of  fact  and  the  criterion  of
the  justice  of  scientific  conclusions,  in  all  that
relates  to  the  origin  of  things,  and  among  them,  of
species.  In  this  nineteenth  century,  as  at  the  dawn
of  modern  physical  science,  the  cosmogony  of  the
semi-barbarous  Hebrew  is  the  inaibns  of  the  pJiiloso-
pher  and  the  opprobrmm  of  the  orthodox.  Who  shall
number  the  patient  and  earnest  seekers  after  truth,
from  the  days  of  Galileo  until  now,  whose  lives
have  been  embittered  and  their  good  name  blasted
by  the  mistaken  zeal  of  Bibliolaters  ?  Who  shall
count  the  host  of  w^eaker  men  whose  sense  of  truth
has  been  destroyed  in  the  effort  to  harmonize  im-
possibilities— whose  life  has  been  wasted  in  the
attempt  to  force  the  generous  new  wine  of  science
into  the  old  bottles  of  Judaism,  compelled  by  the
outcry  of  the  stronger  party  ?  "  Hail  !  Huxley,
man  of  the  Iron  Age  !

And  how  w^ell  he  says  again  : — "  It  is  true  that  if
philosophers  have  suffered,  their  cause  has  been
amply  avenged.  Extinguished  theologians  lie
about  the  cradle  of  every  science.  (Christian)
orthodoxy  is  the  Bourbon  of  the  world  of  thought.
It  learns  not,  neither  can  it  forget;  and,  though  at
present  bewildered  and  afraid  to  move,  it  is  as
willing  as  ever  to  insist  that  the  first  chapter  of
Genesis  contains  the  beginning  and  the  end  of
sound    science  ;    and    to    visit,    with    such    petty

T

290      THE  CIVILIZATION  THAT  INDIA  NEEDS.

thunderbolts  as  its  half-paralyzed  hands  can  hurl,
those  who  refuse  to  degrade  nature  to  the  level  of
primitive  Judaism."  These  are  the  brave  utter-
ances of  one  of  the  most  respected  among
European  scientists ;  and  he  expresses  the  opinion
of  an  overwhelming  majority  of  his  colleagues.
None  know  better  than  we,  humble  founders  of  the
Theosophical  Society,  tQ  what  depths  of  meanness
and  to  what  extremes  of  malice  Christian  bigots
can  go,  to  impede  the  progress  of  free-thought.  For
the  last  six  years  we  have  been  pursued  with  their
calumnies  against  our  good  names.  All  the  news-
papers in  India  and  Ceylon  that  could  be  controlled
or  influenced  by  these  enemies  of  truth,  have  been
trying  their  best  to  embitter  o?ir  lives.  Where
falsehood  has  failed  and  slander  recoiled  upon
them,  they  have  employed  the  stinging  whips  of
ridicule :  and  what  has  been  our  offence  ?  Simply
that  we  have  preached  universal  religious  tolerance,
that  we  have  stood  up  for  the  dignity  and  majesty
of  ancient  Asiatic  science  and  philosophy,  and  have
implored  the  degenerate  sons  of  a  glorious  ancestry
to  be  ^vorthy  of  the  great  names  they  bear.  It  is
these  insatiate  enemies  that  have  set  police  spies  to
track  our  footsteps  throughout  India  ;  that  have
charged  us  with  being  adventurers ;  that  have  circu-
lated numberless  lies  about  us;  that  have  forged
letters  we  never  wrote.  Clergymen,  from  their  pul-
pits ;  editors,  from  their  desks;  catechists,  at  the  street
corners  ;  even  bishops  and  other  high  dignitaries  of
the  Church,  have  tried  to  weaken  our  influence  and

THE  CIVILIZATION  THAT  INDIA  NEEDS.      291

to  stop  our  mouths.  But  as  we  have  stood  for  the
truth,  so  has  the  truth  stood  by  us  ;  and  day  by  day
our  vindication  has  been  growing  more  perfect.  An
honest  life  is  its  own  best  shield.  It  has  served  us
in  India  and  Ceylon ;  and  not  only  have  the
Government  of  India  called  off  their  detectives,  but
at  Simla,  the  summer  capital  of  India,  we  have  just
organized  a  Branch — the  Simla  Eclectic  Theoso-
phical  Society — almost  entirely  composed  of  Anglo-
Indians.  As  for  Ceylon,  the  Colonial  Secretary  has
refused  all  applications  to  the  Government  to
molest  us,  and  has  opened  the  prison-doors  for  me
to  lecture  to  the  Buddhist  convicts.

So,  as  you  see,  my  first  proposition  —  that
scientific  inquiry  has  been  impeded  by  the
bigots  of  Christian  theology — is  made  out.  We
will  now  consider  the  second.  The  disdain
felt  for  the  ancient  occultists  is  well  ex-
pressed by  Professor  Huxley  in  the  passage  above
quoted.  He  who  would  dare  to  revive  the  old
pagan  myths  must  expect  to  be  "  laughed  to  scorn."
Physical  science  has  dissected  them,  found  no
"  Kinetic  energy "  in  that  "  gas,"  could  not  test
them  by  the  spectroscope,  and  so  they  must  have
been  sheer  nonsense  !  But  we  say  they  were  not  >
and,  having  not  only  studied  those  myths  under
teachers  who  could  interpret  them,  but  having  also
learnt  from  those  who  could  experimentally  de-
monstrate the  truth  of  their  assertions,  what  the
ancient  myth-makers  of  India  knew  of  science,  we
"  laugh    to    scorn  "   the    whole    school    of  modern

292      THE  CIVILIZA  TION  THA  T  INDIA  NEEDS.

scientists,  who  know  so  much  in  one  direction  and
so  httle  in  another.     Sir  John  Lubbock  quotes  ap-
provingly in  his  address  the  opinion  of  Bagehot  that
the  ancients  "  had  no  conception  of  progress  ;  they
did  not  so  much  as  reject  the  idea :  they  did  not
even  entertain  it."     This  is  the  very  key  to  my  pre-
sent discourse.     I  want  you  to  reahze  what  should
be  called  real  "  progress,"  and  why  the  ancients —
your  forefathers — "  did  not  even  entertain  "  the  idea
of  what  the  modern  scientists  regard  as  progress.
And  to  comprehend  this  question,  we  must    first
understand  what  man  is,  and  what  the  highest  point
of  progress  or  improvement  to  which  he  may  attain.
If  you  will  run  your  eye  over  the  list  of  sciences
noted  by  the  President  of  the  British  Association,
you  will  see  that  nearly  all  of  them  bear  upon  the
material   comfort,  or   educational  development,  of
the  physical   man,   and   his   understanding  of  the
physical  facts  of  the  world  he  lives  in.     Thousands
of  the  most  startling  of  modern  inventions  are  to
aid    the   Western    populations    against    rigour    of
climate    and    infertility    of    soil,   to    facilitate    the
transport  of  passengers  and  merchandize  and  the
transmission    of  intelligence,    and    to   gratify   the
appetites  and  passions  of  our  baser  nature.     It  has
been    one    mad    struggle   of    physical    man    with
natural  obstacles  ;  the  chief  objects,  the  multiplica-
tion of  wealth,  of  power,  of  means  of  physical  grati-
fication.    Some  people  call   this   "progress;"  but
what   sort  of  progress  is  it  that  arms  the  lower
against  the  higher  part  of  man's  self?    The  Christian

THE  CIVILIZATION  THAT  INDIA  NEEDS.      293

Bible  puts  it  thus  : — ''  What  shall  it  profit  a  man
if  he  shall  gain  the  whole  world,  and  lose  his  own
soul  ? "  [Mark  viii.  36.]  The  words  are  not  like
mine,  but  the  idea  is  the  same.  There  is  a  kind  of
"  progress "  that  leads  to  moral  debasement  and
spiritual  death.  I  put  it  to  you,  Hindus,  whether
you  have  not  become  familiar  with  it  since  you  took
to  wearing  European  shoes,  and  to  drinking  that
strong  stuff  that  comes  in  corked  bottles,  and  is
drunk  with  soda-water  out  of  a  big  tumbler?

What  has  become  of  Religion  in  this  half-century
of  turmoil?  How  fares  it  with  man's  better  nature?
is  it  purer,  nobler,  than  it  was  when  your  ancestors
were  satisfied  with  their  myths,  and  not  troubling
themselves  about  progress  ?  The  moderns  have
grown  wise  indeed,  if  the  acme  of  wisdom  be  to
know  why  birds,  and  bugs,  and  animals  are  striped,
or  spotted,  are  of  this  colour  or  shape,  or  of  the
other ;  why  the  sky  is  blue,  water  will  not  run  up
hill,  stars  wheel  around  their  centres  of  attraction,
and  electricity  leaps  from  cloud  to  cloud.  But  if,  as
the  ancients  held,  the  highest  wisdom  be  to  know
the  secret  causes  for  all  objective  phenomena,  and
the  extent  to  which  all  our  human  faculties  can  be
developed,  then  these  scientists  are  but  busy  ants,
living  within  a  microscopic  hillock  of  great  Nature.
Their  boasted  progress  is,  from  this  ancient  point
of  view,  but  the  beginning  of  true  knowledge,  at
the  wrong  end,  and  all  their  troublesome  activity
but  vanity  and  vexation  of  spirit.  Is  Civilization
measured   by  the  progress  of  Science  ?     What  is

294      THE  CIVILIZATION  THAT  INDIA  NEEDS.

Civilization  ?  Is  it  the  perfecting  of  deadly
weapons  for  the  better  killing  of  man  by  man  ?
Is  it  the  wholesale  debasement  of  a  people  by  en-
couraging the  consumption  of  opium  and  strong
drinks  ?  Is  it  the  falsification  of  articles  of  food
and  clothing  to  cheat  the  unwary  ?  Is  it  the  lower-
ing of  the  standard  of  truthfulness  to  the  point
where  perjury  is  at  a  premium,  and  man  has
almost  lost  all  confidence  in  his  fellow-man  ?  Is
it  the  extinction  of  the  intuitive  faculties,  and
the  stifling  of  the  religious  sentiment?  Are  these
the  marks  of  Civilization  ?  Then,  indeed,  do  they
abound,  and  marvellously  has  the  world  progressed,
within  the  last  half-century.  But  the  true  moralist,
I  opine,  would  call  these  the  proufs  of  retrogression.
If  he  were  candid,  and  could  be  brought  to  read
what  the  ancient  Hindus  had  reall}'  discovered,  and
what  was  their  lofty  standard  of  enlightenment,  he
would  have  to  confess  that  we  moderns  make  but  a
sorry  show  in  comparison  with  them.  They  may
not  have  had  railways  and  spectroscopes,  but  they
had  grand  notions  of  what  constitutes  an  ideal  man,
and  the  vestiges  of  their  civil  polity  that  remain
to  us  show  that  society  was  well  organized,  that
private  rights  were  protected,  and  the  domestic
virtues  cultivated.  I  am  not  speaking  of  the  epochs
intermediate  between  their  time  and  our  own,  but
about  the  real  ancients,  the  progenitors  alike  of  the
modern  Hindu  and  the  modern  European.  The
biologist  of  our  day  is  using  his  lenses  and  scalpel —
for  what  purpose  ?     To  discover  the  secret  laws  of

THE  CIVTLIZA  TION  THA  T  INDIA  NEEDS.      295

life,  is  It  not?  Well,  the  ancient  philosopher  knew
these,  thousands  of  years  ago  ;  so  where  is  the  pro-
gress we  are  wont  to  boast  of?  The  modern
engineer  builds  bridges  and  railways,  and  great
ships,  to  carry  us  from  countrj^  to  country.  But  the
ancient  mystic  could,  as  quick  as  thought,  project
his  inner  self  to  any  place  he  pleased,  however  dis-
tant, and  see  and  be  seen  there.  Which  is  the
greater  proof  of  "  progress  " — to  have  one's  body
carried  In  a  wooden  carriage,  over  iron  rails,  at  the
rate  of  sixty  miles  an  hour,  or  by  the  force  of  an
iron  will,  aided  by  a  profound  knowledge  of  the
forces  of  Nature,  to  go  In  one's  Double  around  the
earth,  through  the  pathless  Akasa,  in  the  twinkling
of  an  eye?  Or  take  chemistry  as  an  example.
We  will  say  nothing  about  the  science  having  been
entirely  recreated  since  1830,  when  the  radical
theory  of  Berzelius  was  In  vogue  :  let  that  pass.
We  will  take  the  science  as  it  stands  now;  and
what  is  its  characteristic  ?  Uncertainty,  assuredly.
Great  discoveries  have  been  made,  but  the  lacimce,
or  gaps,  between  the  chemist  and  a  full  knowledge
of  the  laws  of  Nature,  are  still  confessedly  as  great
as  ever ;  for  each  new  discovery  is  but  another
eminence  from  which  the  experimentalist  sees  the
horizon  ever  receding.  Chemistry  can  expel  life
and  disintegrate  atoms;  it  can  by  synthesis  rebuild
inert  matter.  But  it  cannot  recall  the  parted  life
that  is  once  gone.  It  can  separate  the  rose-leaf
into  atoms,  but  It  cannot  mould  them  again  into  a
rose-leaf,  nor  restore  its  vanished  perfume.     And

296      THE  CIVILIZATION  THAT  INDIA  NEEDS.

yet,  by  the  creative  power  of  their  trained  will,
the  ancient  occultists  could  make  roses  fall  in
showers,  from  out  of  the  empty  air,  upon  the  heads
of  sceptics,  or  fill  the  room  with  waves  of  any  per-
fume they  might  ask  for.  Nay,  those  who  have
studied  their  science  have  done  the  like  in  our  own
days,  and  before  our  own  eyes.  Can  any  member
of  the  British  Association,  with  his  imperfect
methods,  show  us  any  one  of  the  phenomena  of  the
SiddJiis,  described  in  the  Shrimad  Bhagavata : —
AimuLh,  Mahiind,  Laghimd,  Prapii,  Prakdshyama,
Ishiia,  Vashiidy  and  the  eighth  which  enables  one
to  attain  his  every  wish  ?  Can  he  display  any
knowledge  of  the  Buddhist  Iddhiwiddhindna
science,  by  producing  the  wonders  of  either  the
Lmikika  or  Lokothra  ?  When  he  can  do  any  of
these  things,  and  vie  w^ith  either  the  Indian  Rishi
or  the  Buddhist  Arhdt,  then  let  him  dogmatize  to
us  about  "  progress,"  and  indulge  in  his  witticisms
against  the  "ancients."  Until  then  we  will  return
him  laughter  for  laughter,  scorn  for  scorn.

Progress,  you  will  perceive,  is  a  relative  term.
What  may  be  wonderful  advancement  to  one
people,  may  be  quite  the  opposite  to  another.  And
as  for  civilization,  I  consider  we  are  only  justified
in  applying  the  name  to  that  state  of  society  in
which  intellectual  enlightenment  is  attended  by
the  highest  moral  development,  and  where  the
rights  of  the  individual,  and  the  welfare  of  the
people  as  a  whole,  are  equally  and  fully  realized.
I  cannot   call    any   country   civilized   which,   like

THE  CIVILIZATION  THAT  INDIA  NEEDS.      297

England  or  America,  spends  five  times  as  much
for  spirituous  drink  as  for  religious  and  secular
education.  I  call  that  a  barbarous,  not  a  civilized
power  which  derives  a  large  proportion  of  its  in-
come from  the  encouragement  of  opium-smoking
and  of  arrack  and  whiskey-drinking.  I  give  the
same  name  to  a  nation  which,  in  spite  of  the  teach-
ings of  Economic  Science  and  the  dictates  of  reli-
gion and  morality,  plunges  into  wars  of  conquest,
that  it  may  make  new  markets,  among  weaker
peoples,  for  its  wares  and  merchandise.  That  a
different  theory  of  civilization  prevails  serves  but
to  show  the  utter  perversion  of  the  moral  sense
which  "  modern  progress  "  has  brought  about.

But  may  we  not  even  ask  Sir  John  Lubbock  and
his  colleagues  how  they  have  discovered  what  the
ancients  did  or  did  not  know  of  even  physical
science  ?  In  another  lecture  {India  :  Past,  Present,
and  Fntnre)  I  noted  the  fact  that  there  were  ex-
hibited at  the  ]\lahasabha,  described  in  the  BJiarata,
certain  wonderful  specimens  of  mechanical  in-
genuity and  technical  skill.  The  fourteenth  chapter
of  the  first  volume  of  Madame  Blavatsky's  Isis
Unveiled,  abounds  with  illustrations  of  the  profound
knowledge  possessed  by  ancient  Egypt,  Phoenicia,
Cambodia,  India  and  other  countries,  of  the  arts
and  sciences.  If  occasion  required,  I  might  show
you,  by  chapter  and  verse,  that  some  of  the  very
latest  discoveries  of  modern  science  are  but  re-
discoveries of  things  known  to  the  ancients,  but
long  lost  to  mankind.     The  more  I  study,  the  more

298      THE  CTVTLIZA  TTON  TIT  A  T  INDIA  NEEDS.

is  the  truth  of  the  arxlent  doctrnie  of  cycles  made
clear  to  my  mind.  As  the  stars  of  heaven  move  in
their  orbits  around  their  central  suns,  so  does  hu-
manity seem  ever  circling  about  the  Sun  of  Truth  ;
now  illuminated,  now  in  eclipse  ;  in  one  epoch  re-
splendent with  light  and  civilization,  in  another
under  the  shadow  of  ignorance  and  in  the  night  of
moral  and  spiritual  degradation.  Four  times  have
the  islands  now  forming  the  Kingdom  of  Great
Britain  and  Ireland  dipped  beneath  the  ocean,  and,
after  intervals  to  be  calculated  only  by  the  arith-
methic  of  geological  time,  been  raised  again  and
repeopled  *  There  was  a  time  when  the  Himalayas,
as  well  as  the  Pyrenees,  the  Alps  and  the  Andes,
were  under  water,  and  the  ocean  rolled  where  they
now  rear  their  towering  crests.  How  vain  is  it,
then,  for  people  to  pretend  to  say  what  the  ancients
did  not  know,  and  what  is  "  new  under  the  sun  !  "
You  do  not  find  the  Hindus  or  Chinese  making  such
a  mistake  ;  their  records,  on  the  contrary,  show
that  their  ancestors  possessed  far  more  wisdom  than
their  descendants,  and  the  Chinese  reverence  for
them  is  so  strong  as  to  take  the  form  of  religious
worship.  I  should  not  need  to  go,  as  I  am  going,
all  over  India  and  Ceylon,  to  implore  you,  Asiatic
men  of  to-day,  not  to  dishonour  yourselves  by
sneering  at  your  "  ignorant  ancestors,"  if  you  had
ever  studied  the  literature  they  left  behind  them.
It  is  your  blind  ignorance  that  makes  you  guilty  of
this  sacrilege.     Your  education  has  been  prescribed

*  Huxley  :  Lay  Sermons,  p.  215,

7 HE  CIVILIZATION  THAT  INDIA  NEEDS,      299

by  the  men  of  "  progress."  They  have  taught  you
a  Httle  Latin,  less  Greek,  some  patches  of  what
they  call  History,  such  Logic  and  Philosophy  as
they  have  scraped  out  of  the  dry  bones  of  the
ancient  philosophers,  and  a  terrible  amount  of  mis-
leading physical  science.  And,  with  your  heads
crammed  with  such  poor  stuff,  you  assume  airs  and
"  laugh  to  scorn  "  the  benighted  beings  who  founded
the  six  schools  of  Indian  Philosophy,  and  the  Rishis
and  Yogis  who  were  able  to  range  unfettered
through  all  Cosmos  !  Ay,  and  to  divest  your-
selves of  the  least  tinge  of  suspicion  that  such  ad-
vanced minds  as  yours  could  sympathise  with  the
"  degrading  superstitions  "  of  your  nation,  you  vie
with  each  other  in  efforts  to  lay  your  pride  of  race,
your  intellectual  manhood,  your  self-respect,  in
the  dirt,  for  the  hob-nailed  shoes  of  "  progress  "  to
stamp  upon.     Shame  on  such  Asiatics  !

What  the  best  friends  of  India  and  Ceylon  most
ardently  desire  is  to  see  their  young  men  cling  to
all  that  is  good  of  the  olden  times,  while  grasping  all
that  is  useful  of  the  modern  epoch.  That  is  the
civilization  which  India  needs.  There  are  certain
abstract  moral  doctrines,  never  new  and  never  old,
that  are  the  property  of  our  race.  The  best
maxims  that  Jesus  taught  were'  taught  by  others,
ages  before  his  time — if  he  had  ever  a  time,  which
some  declare  a  doubtful  question.  So  we  must  not
measure  civilization  by  the  evolution  of  moral  codes,
but  by  the  national  living  up  to  them.  Christen-
dom has  as  fine  a  moral  code  as  could  be  wished  for  :

3CO      THE  CI VI LIZA  7 ION  THA  T  INDIA  NEEDS.

but  she  shows  her  real  principles  in  her  Krupp  and
Armstrong  guns  and  whiskey  distilleries,  in  her
opium  ships,  sophisticated  merchandise,  prurient
amusements,  licentiousness  and  political  dishonesty.
Christendom  we  may  almost  say,  is  morally  rotten
and  spiritually  paralysed.  If  interested  mission-
aries tell  you  otherwise,  do  not  believe  them  upon
assertion:  go  through  Christian  countries  and  see  for
yourselves.  Or,  if  you  will  not  or  cannot  go,  then
get  the  proper  books  and  read.  And  when  you  have
seen,  or  read,  and  the  horrid  truth  bursts  upon  you  ;
when  you  have  lifted  the  pretty  mask  of  this  smil-
ing goddess  of  Progress,  and  seen  the  spiritual
rottenness  behind  it,  then,  O,  young  men  of  sacred
India,  heirs  of  great  renown,  turn  to  the  history  of
your  own  land.  Read,  and  be  satisfied  that  it  is
better  to  be  good  than  learned  ;  to  be  pure-minded
and  spiritual  than  rich  ;  to  be  ignorant  as  a  ryot,
with  his  virtue,  than  intelligent  as  a  Parisian  de-
bauchee, with  his  vices  ;  to  be  a  heathen  Hindu
practising  the  moralities  of  the  Rishis  than  a  pro-
gressed and  civilized  European  trampling  under
foot  all  the  laws  that  conduce  to  human  happiness
and  to  true  progress.

THE  SPIRIT  OF  THE
ZOROASTRIAN    RELIGION.*

With  great  diffidence  I  have  accepted  your  in-
vitation to  address  the  Parsis  upon  the  theme  of
the  present  discourse.  The  subject  is  so  noble,  its
Hterature  is  so  rich,  its  ramifications  are  so  numerous,
that  no  Hving  man  could  possibly  do  it  full  justice
in  a  single  lecture.  Happy,  indeed,  shall  I  be,  if  I
succeed  in  communicating  to  one  or  two  of  the
learned  Parsi  scholars  who  honour  me  with  their
presence,  some  of  the  deep  interest  which  I  have
had  for  years  in  the  esoteric  meaning  of  the
Mazdiaznian  faith.  My  hope  is  to  attract  your  at-
tention to  the  only  line  of  research  which  can  lead
you  towards  the  truth.  That  line  was  traced  by
Zoroaster,  and  followed  by  the  Magi,  the  Mobeds
and  the  Dasturs  of  old.  Those  great  men  have
transmitted  their  thoughts  to  posterity  under  the
safe  cover  of  an  external  ritual.  They  have
masked  them  under  a  symbolism  and  ceremonies,
that  guard  their  mighty  secrets  from  the  prying
curiosity  of  the  vulgar  crowd,  but  that  hide  nothing

*  A  Lecture  delivered  at  the  To\\'n  Hall,  Bombay,  I4tli  February,
1S82.

302  THE  SPIRIT  OF  THE

from  those  who  deserve  to  know  all.  Do  not  mis-
understand me.  I  am  not  pretending  that  /  know
all,  or  nearly  all  :  at  best  I  have  had  but  a
glimpse  of  the  reality.  But  even  that  little  Is  quite
enough  to  convince  me  that,  within  the  husk  of
your  modern  religion,  there  Is  the  shining  soul  of
the  old  faith  that  came  to  Zaratusht  In  his  Persian
home,  and  once  Illuminated  the  whole  trans-
Himalayan  world.  Children  of  Iran,  heirs  of
the  Chaldean  lore;  you  who  so  loved  your  re-
ligion that  neither  the  sword  of  Omar,  nor  the  de-
lights ot  home,  nor  the  yearning  of  our  common
humanity  to  live  among  the  memories  of  our
ancestors,  could  make  you  deny  It  ;  you
who,  for  the  sake  of  conscience,  fled  from
your  native  land  and  erected  an  altar  for
the  symbolical  Sacred  Fire  in  foreign  coun-
tries, more  hospitable  than  yours  had  become ;
you,  men  of  intelligence,  of  an  ancient  character
for  probity,  of  enterprise  In  all  good  works — you
are  the  only  ones  to  lift  the  dark  veil  of  this
modern  ParsIIsm,  and  let  the  "  Hidden  Splendour  "
again  blaze  forth.  Mine  Is  but  the  office  of  the
friendly  wayfarer  who  points  you  to  the  mouth  of
the  private  road  that  leads  through  your  own
domain.  I  am  not,  if  you  please,  a  man,  but  only
a  voice.  I  need  not  even  appeal  to  you  to  strip
away  the  foreign  excrescences  that,  during  twelve
centuries  of  residence  among  strangers,  have
fastened  themselves  upon  primitive  Zoroastrianism
nor  recite  to  you  its  simple  yet  ail-sufficient  code

ZOROASTRIAN  RELIGWA^.  303

of  morality,  and  ask  you  to  live  up  to  It  more
closely.  This  work  has  already  been  undertaken  by
Intelligent  and  public-spirited  members  of  your
own  community.  But  I  am  to  show  you  that  your
religion  Is  In  agreement  with  the  most  recent  dis-
coveries of  modern  science,  and  that  the  freshest
graduate  from  Elphlnstone  College  has  no  cause  to
blush  for  the  "  Ignorance  "  of  Zaratusht !  And  I
am  to  prove  to  you  that  your  faith  rests  upon  the
rock  of  truth,  the  living  rock  of  Occult  Science,
upon  which  the  initiated  progenitors  of  mankind
built  every  one  of  the  religions  that  have  since
swayed  the  thoughts  and  stimulated  the  aspirations
of  a  hundred  generations  of  worshippers.  Let
others  trace  back  the  history  of  Zoroastrlanism  to
and  beyond  the  time  of  the  Bactrian  King  VIs-
tasp  ;  and  reconcile  the  quarrels  of  Aristotle,
Hermippus,  Clemens  Alexandrinus,  Polyhlstor,
and  other  ancient  as  well  as  modern  critics,  as
to  when  Zaratusht  lived,  and  where  was  his  birth-
place :  these  are  non-essentials.  It  is  of  far  less
moment  to  know  where  and  of  what  parentage  a
religious  reformer  was  born,  than  to  be  sure  of
what  he  taught  and  whether  his  teaching  Is  calcu-
lated to  bless  mankind.  Plotlnus,  the  philo-
sopher, so  well  knew  this  that  he  would  not  tell,
even  to  Porphyry,  his  pupil  and  literary  bio-
grapher, what  was  his  native  country,  what  his  real
name,  or  his  parentage.  As  regards  Zaratusht  one
thing  is  affirmed,  viz.,  that  about  six  centuries
B.C.  one  man  of  that  name  lived — whether  or  not

304  THE  SPIRIT  OF  I  HE

several  others  preceded  him,  as  some  respectable
authorities  affirm — and  that  the  religion  he
preached,  whether  new  or  old,  was  of  so  noble  a
character,  that  it  indelibly  stamped  its  impress
upon  the  then  chief  school  of  Western  philosophy,
that  of  Greece.*     It  is  also,   as  I  believe,  certain

*  In  the  oldest  Iranian  book  called  the  "Desatir" — a  collection
of  the  teachings  of  the  fourteen  oldest  Iranian  prophets  (to  make  the
number  fifteen  and  include,  among  them,  Sirakendesh,  or
*'  Secander,"  is  a  grave  error,  as  may  be  proved  on  the  authority  of
Zaratusht  himself  in  that  book) — Zaratusht  stands  thirteenth  in  the
list.  The  fact  is  significant.  Respecting  the  period  of  Zoroaster
the  First,  or  his  personality,  there  is  no  trustworthy  information
given  by  Western  scholars ;  their  authorities  conflict  in  the
most  perplexing  manner.  Indeed  among  the  many  discor-
dant notices  I  find  the  earliest  Greek  classic  writers,  who  tell  us
that  Zaratusht  lived  from  6oo  to  5,000  years  before  the  Trojan  war,
or  6,000  years  before  Plato.  Again  it  is  declared  by  Berosus,  the
Chaldean  priest,  that  Zoroaster  was  the  founderof  an  Indian  dynasty  in
Babylon  2200  B.C.  ;  while  the  later  native  traditions  inform  us  that
he  was  the  son  of  Purushaspa,  and  a  contemporary  of  Gustaspa,  the
father  of  Darius,  which  would  bring  him  within  600  B.C.  Lastly,
it  is  asserted  by  Bunsen  that  he  was  born  at  Bactria  before  the
emigration  of  the  Bactrians  to  the  Indus,  which  took  place,  as  the
learned  Egyptologist  shows  us,  3784  B.C.  Among  this  host  of
contradictions,  what  conclusion  can  one  come  to  ?  Evidently,  there
is  but  one  hypothesis  left  :  and  that  is  that  they  are  all  wrong,  the
reason  for  it  beins:  the  one  I  find  in  the  secret  traditions  of  the
esoteric  doctrine — namely,  that  there  were  several  teachers  of  that
name.  Neither  Plato  nor  Aristotle,  so  accurate  in  their  statements,
is  likely  to  have  transformed  200  years  into  6,000.  As  to  the
generally  accepted  native  tradition,  which  makes  the  great  prophet
a  contemporary  of  Darius'  father,  it  is  absurd  on  the  very
face  of  it.  Though  the  error  is  too  palpable  to  need  any  elaborate
confutation,  I  may  say  a  few  words  in  regard  to  it.  The  latest  re
searches  show  that  the  Persian  inscriptions  point  to  Vistasp  as  the
last  of  the  line  of  Kaianian  princes  who  ruled  in  Bactria,  while  the
Assyrian  conquest  of  that  countiy  took  place  in  1200  B.C.  Now
this  alone  would  prove  that  Zoroaster  lived  twelve  or  thirteen  hun-

ZOROASTRIAISf  RELIGION.  305

that  this  man  was  an  initiate  in  the  sacred
Mysteries,  or  to  put  it  differently — that  he  had,  by
a  certain  course  of  mystical  study,  penetrated  all
the  hidden  mysteries  of  man's  nature  and  of  the
world  about  him.  Zoroaster  is  bv  the  Greek
writers  often  called  the  Assyrian  "  Nazaret."
This  term  comes  from  the  word  Nazar  or  Nazir —
set  apart,  separated.  The  Nazars  were  a  very
ancient  sect  of  adepts,  existing  ages  before  Christ.
They  are  described  as  "  physicians,  healers  of  the
sick  by  the  imposition  of  the  hands,"  and  as
initiated  into  the  Mysteries  (see  treatise  Nazir  in
the  Talmud).      The     Jews     returning    from     the

dred  years  B.C.,  instead  of  the  600  assigned  to  him  ;  and  thus  that
he  could  not  have  been  a  contemporary  of  Darius  Hystaspes,  whose
father  was  so  carelessly  and  for  such  a  length  of  time  confounded  in
this  connexion  Vv'ith  the  Vistasp  who  flourished  six  centuries  earlier.
If  we  add  to  this  the  historical  discrepancy  between  the  statement  of
Amniianus  Marcelinus — which  makes  Darius  crush  the  Magi  and
introduce  the  worship  of  Ahurmazda — and  the  inscription  on  the
tomb  of  that  king  which  states  that  he  was  "  teacher  and  hierophant
of  Magianism  ;  "  and  that  other  no  less  significant  and  very  impor-
tant fact  that  the  Zoroastrian  Avesta  shows  no  signs  of  the  knowledge
of  its  writer  or  writers  of  either  the  Medes,  the  Persians,  or  the
Assyrians,  the  ancient  books  of  the  Parsis  remaining  silent  upon  and
showing  no  acquaintance  with  any  of  the  nations  that  are
known  to  have  dwelt  in  or  near  the  Western  parts  of  Iran — the  date,
600  B.C. — accepted  as  the  period  in  which  the  prophet  is  alleged
to  have  flourished,  becomes  absolutely  impossible.

It  is  therefore  safe  to  come  to  the  following  conclusions  : — (i.)
That  there  were  several  (in  all  seve^t,  say  the  Secret  Records,)  AJnirti-
asiers,  or  spiritual  teachers,  of  Ahurmazda,  an  office  corrupted  later
into  Gtirii-asters  and  Ziirii-asters  from  "  Zera-Ishtar,"  the  title  of
the  Chaldean  or  Magian  priests  ;  and  (2)  that  the  last  of  them  was
Zaratusht  of  the  Desaiir^  the  thirteenth  of  the  prophets,  and  the
seventh  of  that  name.     It  was  he  who  was  the  contemporary  of

U

3o6  THE  SPIRIT  OF  THE

Babylonian  captivity  were  thoroughly  imbued  v/ith
Zoroastrian  and  Magian  ideas  ;  their  forefathers
had  agreed  with  the  Sabeans  in  the  Bactric  wor-
ship, the  adoration  of  the  Sun,  Moon,  and  Five
Planets,  the  Sabaoth  and  realms  of  light.  In
Babylon  they  had  learned  to  worship  the  Seven -
Rayed  God.  And  so  we  find  running  all  through-
out the  Christian  as  well  as  the  Jewish  Scriptures,
the  septenary  system,  which  culminates  in  the
Book  of  Revelation  (the  final  pamphlet  of  the  Bible)
in  the  Heptaktis,  and  a  prophecy  of  the  coming  of
the  Persian  Sosiosh,  under  the  figure  of  the  Chris-
tian Messiah,  riding,  like  the  former,  upon  a  white

Vislasp,  the  last  of  the  Kaianian  princes,  and  the  compiler  of
Vendldad,  the  Commentaries  upon  which  are  lost,  there  remaining
now  but  the  dead  letter.  Some  of  the  facts  given  in  the  Secret
Records,  though  to  the  exact  scholar  merely  traditional,  are  very
interesting.  They  are  to  the  effect  that  there  exists  a  certain  hollow
rock,  full  of  tablets,  in  a  gigantic  cave  bearing  the  name  of  the
Zaratushta,  under  his  Magian  appellation,  and  that  the  tablets  may
yet  be  rescued  some  day.  This  cave,  with  its  rock  and  tablets  and
its  many  inscriptions  on  the  walls,  is  situated  at  the  summit  of  one  of
the  peaks  of  the  Thian  Shan  mountains  far  beyond  their  junction
with  the  Belor  Tagh,  somewhere  along  their  Eastern  course.  One
of  the  half-pictorial  and  half-written  prophecies  and  teachings  at-
tributed to  Zaratusht  himself,  relates  to  that  deluge  which  has  trans-
formed an  inland  sea  into  the  dreary  desert  called  Shamo  or  Gobi
Desert.  The  esoteric  key  to  the  mysterious  creeds  flippantly  called,
at  one  time,  the  Sabian  or  Planetary  Religion,  at  another,  the
Solar  or  Fire  \Yorship,  "  hangs  in  that  cave,"  says  the  legend.  In
it  the  great  Prophet  is  represented  with  a  golden  star  on  his  heart
and  as  belonging  to  that  race  of  Ante-diluvian  giants  mentioned  in
the  sacred  books  of  both  the  Chaldeans  and  the  Jews.  It  matters
little  whether  this  hypothesis  be  accepted  or  rejected.  Since  the
rejection  of  it  would  not  make  the  otlicr  more  trustworthy,  it  was
as  well  to  mention  it,

ZOROASTRIAN  RELIGWN.  307

horse.  By  the  Jewish  sect  of  the  Pharisees,  whose
great  teacher  was  Hillel,  the  whole  angelology  and
symbolism  of  the  Zoroastrians  were  accepted,  and
infused  into  Jewish  thought  ;  and  their  Hebrew
Kabala,  or  secret  book  of  Occult  Wisdom,  was  the
offspring  of  the  Chaldean  Kabala.  This  deathless
work  is  the  receptacle  of  all  the  ancient  lore  of
Chaldea,  Persia,  Media,  Bactria,  and  the  pre-Iran-
ian  period.  The  name  by  wdilch  its  students  in
the  secret  lodges  of  the  Jewish  Pharisees  (or  Phat-
sis)  were  known  was  Kabirini — from  Kabeiri,  the
Mystery  Gods  of  Assyria.  Zoroastrianism  and
Magianism  proper  were,  then,  the  chief  source  both
of  esoteric  Judaism  and  of  esoteric  Christianity.
But  not  only  has  this  subtle  spirit  left  the  latter  re-
ligion, under  the  pressure  of  worldllness  and  scepti-
cal inquiry  :  it  also  long  ago  left  Judaism.  The
modern  Hebrews  are  not  Kabalists  but  Talmudlsts,
holding  to  the  later  interpretations  of  the  Mosaic
canon  :  only  here  and  there  can  we  now  find  a
real  Kabalist,  who  knows  what  is  the  true  religion
of  his  people  and  whence  it  was  derived.

The  real  history  of  Zoroaster  and  his  religion  has
never  been  w^rltten.  The  Parsis  have  lost  the  key,
as  the  Jews  and  Christians  have  lost  that  of  their
respective  faiths,  and  as  I  find  the  Southern  Bud-
dhists have  lost  that  of  theirs.  Not  to  the  living
pandits  or  priests  of  either  of  those  religions  can
the  laity  look  for  light.  They  can  only  quote  the
opinions  of  ancient  Greek  and  Roman,  or  modern
German,  French  or  English  wTiters.     This  very  day

3o8  THE  SPIRIT  OF  THE

nearly  all  that  your  most  enlightened  scholars
know  about  your  religion  is  what  they  have  col-
lated from  European  sources,  and  that  is  almost
exclusively  about  its  literature  and  external  forms.
And  see  what  ridiculous  mistakes  some  of  those
authorities  make  at  times!  Prideaux,  treating
of  the  Sad-der,  says  that  Zaratusht  preached
incest  ;  that  "  nothing  of  this  nature  is  unlawful,  a
man  may  not  only  marry  his  sister  or  his  daughter^
but  even  his  mother T  {Ancient  Universal  History,
iv.  296).  He  quotes  no  Zend  authority,  nothing
written  by  a  Parsi,  but  only  Jewish  and  Christian
authorities,  such  as  Philo,  Tertullian,  and  Clemens
Alexandrinus.  Eutychius,  a  priest  and  archimand-
rite at  Constantinople,  writes,  in  the  fifth  century,
on  Zoroastrianism  as  follows  :  "  Nimrod  beheld  a
fire  rising  out  of  the  earth  and  he  worshipped  it,
and  from  that  time  forth  the  Magi  worshipped  fire.
And  he  appointed  a  man  named  Ardeshan  to  be
the  priest  and  servant  of  the  Fire.  The  Devil
shortly  after  that  spoke  out  of  the  midst  of  the  fire
(as  did  Jehovah  to  Moses?)  saying  '  No  man  can
serve  the  Fire  or  learn  Truth  in  my  Religion,  un-
less first  he  shall  commit  incest  with  his  mother,
sister,  and  daughter  !  He  did  as  Jie  zvas  eomnianded ;
and  fromthattimethe  priests  of  theMagianspractised
incest ;  but  Ardeshan  was  the  first  inventor  of  that
doctrine."  I  quote  this  as  a  sample  of  the  wretched
stuff  that  has  always  been  written  against  the  Zor-
oastrian  religion  by  its  enemies.  The  above  words
are  simply  the  dead  letter   mistranslation   of  the

ZOROASTRIAN  RELIGION.  309

secret  doctrine,  of  which  portions  are  to  be  found
in  certain  rare  old  MSS.  possessed  by  the  Armen-
ians at  Etchmiadzine,  the  oldest  monastery  in
Russian  Caucasus.  They  are  known  as  the  Mes-
robian  MSS.  Should  the  Bombay  Parsis  show  any
real  general  interest  in  the  rehabilitation  of  their
religion,  I  think  I  may  promise  them  the  gratu-
itous furtherance  and  assistance  of  Madame
Blavatsky,  whose  friend  of  thirty-seven  years'  stand-
ing. Prince  Dondoukoff  Korsakoff,  has  just  noti-
fied her  of  his  appointment  by  the  Czar  as  Viceroy
of  the  Caucasus.

In  one  of  these  old  MSS.,  then,  it  is  said  of  the
Initiate,  or  Magus,  "  He  who  would  penetrate  the
secrets  of  (sacred)  Fire,  and  unite  with  it  [as  the
Yogi  '  unites  himself  with  the  Universal  Soul  ']
must  first  unite  himself  soul  and  body  to  the
Earth,  his  mother^  to  Humanity,  his  sister^  and  to
Science,  his  daugJiterr  Quite  a  different  thing,
you  perceive,  from  the  abhorrent  precept  ascribed
to  the  Founder  of  your  Mazdiasnian  faith.

A  curious  and  sad  thing,  indeed,  it  is  to  see
how  completely  the  old  life  has  gone  out  of
Zoroastrianism.  Originally  a  highly  spiritual
faith — I  know  of  none  more  so — and  represented
by  sages  and  adepts  of  the  highest  rank  among  in-
itiates, it  has  shrunk  into  a  purely  exoteric  creed  ;
full  of  ritualist  practices  not  understood,  taught
by  a  numerous  body  of  priests  as  a  rule  ignorant
of  the  first  elements  of  spiritual  philosophy  ;  re-
presented in  prayers  of  which  not  one  word  has  a

3IO  THE  SPIRIT  OF  THE

meaning  to  those  who  recite  them  daily  :  the  shriv-
elled shell  that  once  held  a  radiant  soul.  Yet  all
that  Zoroastrianism  ever  was  it  might  be  made
again.  The  light  still  shines,  though  in  darkness,
enclosed  in  the  clay  vessel  of  materialism.  Whose
shall  be  the  holy  hand  to  break  the  jar  of  clay  and
let  the  hidden  glory  be  seen  ?  Where  is  the
Mobed  *  who  shall  -in  our  day  and  generation  rise
to  the  ancient  dignity  of  his  profession,  and  redeem
it  from  a  degradation  so  deep  as  to  compel
even  a  Parsi  author  (Dosabhoy  Framjee,  in
his  able  work  on  The  Parsees,  8ic.,  p.  277)  to  say  they
"  recite  parrot-like  all  the  chapters  requiring  to  be
repeated  on  occasions  of  religious  ceremonies.  .  .  .
Ignorant  and  unlearned  as  these  priests  are,  they
do  not  and  cannot  command  the  respect  of  the
laity."  ..."  The  position  of  the  so-called  spiritual
guides  has  fallen  into  contempt ; "  and  to  add
that  some  priests  have  "  given  up  a  profession
which  has  ceased  to  be  honourable  and  ....  be-
come contractors  for  constructing  railroads  in  the
Bombay  Presidency."  Some  of  the  present  Das-
turs  "  are  intelligent  and  well-informed  men,  pos-
sessing a  considerable  knowledge  of  their  religion  ;

*  Not  before  he  learns  the  true  meaning  of  his  own  name,  and
strives  once  more  to  become  worthy  of  it.  How  many  among  the
modern  priests  know  that  their  title  of  Mobed  or  ''  A/oghed,"  comei
from  Mao^,  a  word  used  by  the  prophet  Jeremiah  to  designate  a
Babylonian  Initiate,  which,  in  its  turn,  is  an  abbreviation  of  Mag-
insiah — the  great  and  wise?  "  Maghistom  "  was  once  the  title  of
Zoroaster's  highest  disciples,  and  the  synonym  of  wisdom.  Speak-
ing of  them  Cicero  says  :  Sapioitiuni  et  doctoru/?i  genus  magoruni
habebattir  in  Pcrsis.

ZOROASTRTAN'  RELIGION:  311

but   the    mass    of  the    priesthood   are   profoundly
ignorant  of  its  first  principles."     {^Ibid.  p.  279.)

I  ask  you,  men  of  practical  sense,  what  is   the
certain  fate  of  a  religion  that  has  descended  so  low
that  its  priests  are  regarded  by  the  Behedin  as  fit
only  to  be  employed  in  menial    services,  such  as
bringing  things  to  you  from  the  bazaar,  and  doing
household  jobs  of  work  ?    Do  you  suppose  that  such
a  dried  corpse  will  be  left  long  above  ground  by  the
fresh  and  critical  minds  you  are  educating  at  college?
Nay,  do  you  not  see  how  they  are  already  treating  it;
how  they  abstain  from  visiting  your  temples ;  how
sullenly  they  "  make  kusti,"  and  go  through  their
other  daily  ceremonies  ;  how  they  avoid  as  much
as  possible  every  attention  to  the  prescribed  ordi-
nances ;  how  they  are  gathering  in  clubs  to  drink
"  pegs,"  and    play   cards ;   how   they   are   defiling
themselves  by  evil  associations,  smoking  in  secret,*
and  some  even  openly,  and  prating  glibly  the  most
sceptical  sophistries  they  have  read  in  European
books,  written  by  deluded  modern  theorists  ?     Yes,
— the  cloud  gathers   over  the  fire  altar,  the  once
fragrant  wood   of  Truth    is  wet  with   the  deadly
dews  of  doubt,  a  pestilential  vapour  fills  the  Atash
Behnim,  and  unless  some  Regenerator  be  raised  up
among  you,  the  name  of  Zaratusht    may,  before
many   generations,  be  known  only  as  that  of  the
Founder  of  an  extinct  faith.

In  his  Preface  to  the  translation  of  the  Vcndidad

*  No  true  Parsi  smokes,  as  it  is  regarded  as  a  profanation  of  the
sacred  symbol  Fire,

312  THE  SPIRIT  OF  THE

Tvol.  iv.  of  The  Sacred  Books  of  the  East,  edited  by
Professor  Max  Miiller),  the  learned  Dr.  Darme-
steter  says  :  "  The  key  to  the  Avesta  is  not  the
Pahlavi,  but  the  Vedas.  The  Avesta  and  the
Vedas  are  two  echoes  of  one  and  the  same  voice,
the  reflex  of  one  and  the  same  thought :  the  Vedas,
therefore,  are  both  the  best  lexicon  and  the  best
commentary  to  the  Avesta  "  (p.  xxvi.).  This  he  de-
fines as  the  extreme  view  of  the  Vedic  scholars,
and  while  personally  he  does  not  subscribe  to  them
entirely,  he  yet  holds  that  we  cannot  perfectly  com-
prehend the  Avesta  without  utilising  the  discover-
ies of  the  Vedic  pandits.  But  neither  Darmeste-
ter,  nor  Anquetil  Duperron,  nor  Haug,  nor  Spiegel,
nor  Sir  William  Jones,  nor  Rapp  (whose  work  has
been  so  perfectly  translated  into  English  by  the
eminent  Parsi  scholar,  K.  R.  Cama),  nor  Roth,  nor  any
philological  critic  whose  works  I  have  come  across
has  named  the  true  key  to  Zaratushta 's  doctrine.
For  it,  we  must  not  search  among  the  dry  bones  of
words.  No,  it  hangs  within  the  door  of  the  Kabala
— the  Chaldean  secret  volume,  where  under  the
mask  of  symbols  and  misleading  phrases,  it  is  kept
for  the  use  of  the  pure  searcher  after  arcane  know-
ledge. The  entire  system  of  ceremonial  purifica-
tions, which  in  itself  is  so  perfect  that  a  modern
Parsi — a  friend  of  mine — has  remarked  that  Zoro-
aster was  the  best  of  Health  Officers,  is,  as  it  seems
to  me,  typical  of  the  moral  purification  required  of
him  who  would  either,  while  living,  attain  the
Magian's  knowledge  of  the  hidden  laws  of  Nature

ZOROASTRIAN  RELIGION.  313

and  his  power  to  wield  them  for  good  purposes,  or,
after  a  well-ordered  life,  attain  by  degrees  to  the
state  of  spiritual  beatitude,  called  Moksha  by  the
Hindus  and  Nirvana  by  the  Buddhists.  The  de-
filements by  touch  of  various  objects  that  you  arc
warned  against,  are  not  visible  defilements,  like  that
of  the  person  by  contact  with  filth,  but  psychic  de-
filements, through  the  influence  of  their  bad  mag-
netic aura — a  subtle  influence  proceeding  from
certain  living  organisms  and  inert  substances —
which  is  antipathetic  to  development  as  an  adept.
If  you  will  compare  your  books  with  the  Yoga
Sutras  of  the  Hindus,  and  the  Tripitikas  of  the
Buddhists,  you  will  see  that  each  exact  for  the
student  and  practitioner  of  Occult  Science,  a  place,
an  atmosphere,  and  surroundings  that  are  perfectly
pure.  Thus  the  Magus  (or  Yozdathraigur),  the
Yogi  and  the  Arahat,  all  retire,  either  to  the  inner-
most or  topmost  chambers  of  a  temple,  where  no
stranger  is  permitted  to  enter  (bringing  his  impure
magnetism  with  him),  to  the  heart  of  a  forest,  a
secluded  cave,  or  a  mountain  height.  In  the  tower  of
Belus  at  Babylon,  virgin  seeresses  gazed  into  mag-
ical mirrors  and  aerolites,  to  see  their  prophetic
visions  ;  the  Yogi  retires  to  his  subterranean  gup/ia,
or  to  the  jungle  fastnesses  ;  and  the  Chinese  books
tell  us  that  the  "  Great  Teachers "  of  the  sacred
doctrine  dwell  in  the  "  Snowy  Range  of  the  Hima-
vat"  The  books  alleged  to  have  been  inspired  by
God,  or  by  him  or  his  angels  delivered  to  man,
have  always,  I  believe,  been  delivered  on  moun-

314  THE  SPIRIT  OF  THE

tains.  Zaratusht  got  the  Avesta  on  Ushidarinna,
a  mountain  by  the  river  Daraga  (Vendidad  xHx.)  ;
Moses  received  the  tables  of  the  Law  on  Mount
Sinai  (Exodus  xxxiv.) ;  the  Koran  was  given
to  Mahommed  on  Mount  Hara  ;  and  the
Hindu  Rishis  lived  in  the  Himalayas.  Sakya
Muni  left  no  inspired  books ;  but,  although
he  received  the  illumination  of  the  Buddhaship  in
the  plains,  under  a  Bo-tree,  he  had  prepared  him-
self by  years  of  austerities  in  the  mountains  near
Rajagriha.  The  obstructive  power  of  foul  human,
animal,  vegetable,  and  even  mineral  auras  or  mag-
netisms, has  always  been  understood  by  occult
students,  from  the  remotest  times.  This  is  the  true
reason  why  none  but  initiated  and  consecrated
priests  have  ever  been  allowed  to  step  within  the
precincts  of  the  holiest  places.  The  custom  is  not
at  all  the  offspring  of  any  feeling  of  selfish  exclu-
siveness,  but  based  upon  known  psycho-physiologi-
cal laws.  Even  the  modern  spiritualists  and  mes-
merists know  this ;  and  the  latter,  at  least,  care-
fully avoid  "  mixing  magnetisms,"  which  always
hurts  a  sensitive  subject.  All  Nature  is  a  compound
of  conflicting,  and  therefore  of  counterbalancing  and
equilibrating  forces.  Without  this  there  could  be  no
such  thing  as  stability.  Is  it  not  the  contest  of  the
centrifugal  and  centripetal  attractions  that  keeps
cur  earth,  and  every  other  orb  of  heaven,  re-
volving in  its  orbit  ?  The  law  of  the  Universe  is  a
distinct  Dualism  while  the  creative  energy  is  at
work,   and   of  a  compound   Unism   when  at  rest.

ZOR OASIRIAN  RELIGION:  3 1 5

And  the  personification  of  these  opposing  powers
by  Zaratusht  was  but  the  perfectly  scientific  and
philosophical  statement  of  a  profound  truth.  The
secret  laws  of  this  war  of  forces  are  taught  in  the
Chaldean  Kabala.  Every  neophyte  who  sets  him-
self to  study  for  initiation  is  taught  these  secrets,'
and  he  is  made  to  prove  them  by  his  own  experi-
ments, step  by  step,  as  his  powers  and  knowledge
increase.  Zoroastrianism  has  two  sides — the  open,
or  patent,  and  the  concealed,  or  secret.  Born  out
of  the  mind  of  a  Bactrian  seer,  it  partakes  of  the
nature  of  the  primitive  Iranian  national  religion  and
of  the  clear  spirituality  that  was  poured  into  it,
from  the  source  of  all  truth,  through  the  superb
lens  of  Zoroaster's  mind.

The  Parsis  have  been  charged  with  being  wor-
shippers of  the  visible  fire.  This  is  wholly  false.
They  face  the  fire,  as  also  they  do  the  sun  and  the
sea,  because  in  these  they  picture  to  themselves  the
Hidden  Light  of  Lights,  source  of  all  Life,  to  which
they  give  the  name  of  Hormazd.  How  well  and
how  beautifully  is  this  expressed  in  the  writings  of
Robert  Fludd,  an  English  mystic  of  the  seventeenth
century  (see  ]\Ir.  Hargrave  Jennings's  Rosicj^ucians^
p.  69  et  seq)  :  "  Regard  Fire,  then,  with  other  eyes
than  with  those  soul-less,  incurious  ones  with  which
thou  hast  looked  upon  it  as  the  most  ordinary
thing.  Thou  hast  forgotten  what  it  is — or  rather
thou  hast  never  known.  Chemists  are  silent  about
it.  Philosophers  talk  of  it  as  anatomists  dis-
course  of  the   constitution    (or   the  parts)   of   the

3i6  THE  SPIRIT  OF  THE

human  body.  It  is  made  for  man  and  this
world,  and  it  is  greatly  like  him — that  is,  mean
they  would  add.  But  is  this  all  ?  Is  this  the
sum  of  that  casketed  lamp  of  the  human  body  ?
— thine  own  body,  thou  unthinking  world's  machine
— thou  man  !  Or,  in  the  fabric  of  this  clay  lamp
[what  a  beautiful  simile!]  burnetii  there  not  a
Light  ?  Describe  that,  ye  Doctors  of  Physics  !
Note  the  goings  of  the  Fire.  Think  that  this
thing  is  bound  up  in  matter  chains.  Think
that  He  is  outside  of  all  things,  and  deep  in  the  in-
side of  all  things  ;  and  that  thou  and  thy  world  are
only  the  tiling  between  ;  and  that  outside  and  inside
are  both  identical,  couldst  thou  understand  the
supernatural  truths  !  Reverence  Fire  (for  its  mean-
ing) and  tremble  at  it.  Avert  the  face  from
it,  as  the  Magi  turned,  dreading,  and  (as  the
Symbol)  bowed  askance.  Wonder  no  longer
then,  if,  rejected  so  long  as  an  idolatry,  the
ancient  Persians,  and  their  Masters,  the  Magi — con-
cluding that  they  saw  '  All '  in  this  supernaturally
magnificent  element — fell  down  and  worshipped  it ;
making  of  it  the  visible  representation  of  the  very
truest,  but  yet,  in  man's  speculation,  and  in  his  phil-
osophies— nay,  in  his  commonest  reason — impos-
sible God."

And,  mind  you,  this  is  the  language,  not  of  a
Parsi  or  one  of  your  faith,  but  of  an  English  scholar
who  followed  the  shining  path  marked  out  by  the
Chaldean  Magi,  and  obtained,  like  them,  the  true
meaning  of  your  Mysteries.     Occult  Science  is  the

ZOR  OAS  TRTAN  RELIGION.  3 1 7

vindication  of  Zoroastrianisni,  and  there  is  none
other.  Modern  physical  Science  is  herself  blind  to
spiritual  laws  and  spiritual  phenomena.  She  can-
not guide,  being  herself  in  need  of  a  helping  hand —
the  hand  of  the  Occultist  and  the  Hierophant
Chaldean  sage.

Have  you  thought  zvhy  the  Fire  is  kept  ever
burning  on  your  altars  ?  Why  may  not  the
priest  suffer  it  to  go  out  and  re-kindle  it  again
each  morning  ?  Ah  !  there  is  a  great  secret  hidden.
And  why  must  the  flames  of  one  thousand  different
fires  be  collected — from  the  smithy,  the  burning-
kiln,  the  funeral  pyre,  the  goldsmith's  furnace,  and
every  other  imaginable  source  ?  Because  this
spiritual  element  of  Fire  pervades  all  nature,  is
its  life  and  soul,  is  the  cause  of  the  motion  of  its
molecules  which  produces  the  phenomenon  of
physical  heat.  And  the  fires  from  all  these  thou-
sand hearths  are  collected,  like  so  many  fragments
of  the  universal  life,  into  one  sacrificial  blaze  which
shall  be  as  perfectly  as  possible  the  complete  and
collective  type  of  the  light  of  Hormazd.  Observe
the  precautions  taken  to  gather  only  the  spirit  or
cjuintessence,  as  it  were,  of  these  separate  flames.
The  priest  takes  not  the  crude  coals  from  the  var-
ious hearths  and  furnaces  and  pits ;  but  at  each
flame  he  lights  a  bit  of  sulphur,  a  ball  of  cotton,  or
some  other  inflammable  substance  ;  from  this  sec-
ondary blaze  he  ignites  a  second  quantity  of  fuel  ;
from  this  a  third  ;  from  the  third  a  fourth,  and  so
on  :  taking  in  some  cases  a  ninth,  in  others  a  twcn-

3i8  THE  SPIRIT  OF  THE

tieth  flame,  until  the  first  grossness  of  the  defile-
ment of  the  fire  in  the  base  use  to  which  it  was  put
has  been  purged,  and  only  the  purest  essence  re-
mains. Then  only,  is  it  fit  to  be  placed  upon  the
altar  of  Hormazd.  And  even  then  the  flame  is  not
ready  to  be  the  type  of  that  Eternal  Brightness  ;  it
is  as  yet  but  a  body  of  earthly  flame,  a  body  which
lacks  its  noblest  soul.  When  your  forefathers
gathered  at  Sanjan  to  light  the  fire  for  the  Indian
exiles,  the  great  Dastur  Darab,  who  had  come  with
them  from  Persia,  gathered  his  people  and  the
strangers  of  the  country  about  him  in  the  jungle.
Upon  a  stone  block  the  dried  sandal-wood  was  laid.
Four  priests  stood  at  the  four  cardinal  points.  The
Gathas  are  intoned,  the  priests  bow  their  faces  in
reverential  awe.  The  Dastur  raises  his  eyes  to  hea-
ven, he  recites  the  mystical  words  of  power  ;  lo  !
the  fire  from  the  upper  world  of  space  descends,
and  with  its  silvery  tongues  laps  round  the  fragrant
wood,  which  bursts  into  a  blaze.  This  is  the  mis-
sing spirit  evoked  by  the  adept  Prometheus.  When
tJiis  is  added  to  the  thousand  other  dancing  flames
the  Symbol  is  perfected,  and  the  face  of  Hormazd
shines  before  his  worshippers.  Lighted  thus  at
Sanjan,  that  historic  fire  has  been  kept  alive  for
more  than  seven  hundred  years,  and  until  another
Darab  appears  among  you  to  draw  the  flame  of  the
ambient  ether  upon  your  altar,  let  it  be  fed  con-
tinuously.

This  ancient  art  of  drawing"  fire  from  heaven  was
taught  in  the  Samothracian  and  Kabeiric  mysteries.

ZOROASTRIAN  RELIGIO.V.  319

Numa  who  Introduced  the  Vestal  mysteries  Into
Rome,  thus  kindled  a  fire  Vv^hlch  was  under  the  care
of  consecrated  Vestal  Virgins,  whose  duty  It  was,
under  penalty  of  death  for  neglect,  constantly  to
maintain  It.  It  was,  as  Schwelgger  shows,  the
Hermes  fire,  the  Elmes  fire  of  the  ancient  Germans,
the  lightning  of  Cybele  ;  the  torch  of  Apollo ;  the
fire  of  Pan's  altar  ;  the  fire-flame  of  Pluto's  helm  ;
the  Inextinguishable  fire  In  the  temple  of  the  Gre-
cian Athene,  on  the  Acropolis  of  Athens,  and  the
mystical  fires  of  many  different  worships  and  sym-
bols. The  Occult  Science,  of  which  I  spoke,  was
shared  by  the  Initiates  of  the  Sacred  Science  all
over  the  ancient  world.  The  knowledge  was  first
gained  In  Chaldea,  and  was  thence  spread  througli
Greece  to  more  Western  and  Northern  countries.
Even  to-day  the  P'lre-Cult  survives  among  the  rude
Indian  tribes  of  Arizona — a  far  Western  portion
of  America.  Major  Calhoun,  of  the  U.  S.  Army,
who  commanded  a  surveying  party  sent  out  by
our  Government,  told  me,  that  In  that  remote
corner  of  the  world,  and  among  those  rude  people,
he  found  them  keeping  alight  their  Sacred  P'Ire  In
their  teocalis^  or  holy  enclosures.  Every  morning
their  priests  go  out,  dressed  in  the  sacerdotal  robes
of  their  forefathers,  to  salute  the  rising  sun.  In  the
hope  that  Montezuma,  their  promised  Redeemer
and  Liberator,  will  appear.  The  time  of  his  com-
ing is  not  foretold,  but  from  generation  to  genera-
tion they  wait,  and  pray,  and  hope.

In    her   his    Unveiled,    Madame   Blavatsky  has

320  THE  SPIRIT  OF  THE

shown  US  that  this  heavenly  fire,  however  and  when-
ever manifested,  is  a  correlation  of  the  Akasa,  and
that  the  art  of  the  Magician  and  the  Priest  enables
one  to  develop  and  attract  it  down.  But  to  do
this  you  must  be  absolutely  pure — in  body,  in
thought,  in  deed.  And  these  are  the  three  pillars
upon  which  Zaratusht  erected  the  stately  edifice  of
his  religion.  I  have  always  considered  it  as  a  great
test  of  the  merit  of  any  religion  that  its  essence  can
be  compressed  into  a  few  words  that  a  child  can
understand.  Buddhism,  with  its  noble  comprehen-
siveness, was  distilled  by  its  Founder  into  seven
words  ;  Zoroastrianism  is  reduced  to  three — Hoin-
7ite,  Hukhate,  Viirushte.^

A  Parsi  gentleman,  with  whom  I  was  conversing
the  other  day,  explained  the  fact  of  your  having  no
wonder-working  priests  at  present,  by  saying  that
none  living  was  pure  enough.  He  was  right,  and
until  you  can  find  such  a  pure  celebrant,  your  re-
.ligion  will  never  be  again  reanimated.  An  impure
man  who  attempts  the  magical  ceremonies  is  liable
to  be  made  mad  or  destroyed.  This  is  a  scientific
necessity.  The  law  of  nature  is,  you  know,  that
action  and  reaction  are  equal.  If,  therefore,  the
operator  in  the  M)'steries  propels  from  himself  a
current  of  will-power  directed  against  a  certain  ob-
ject, and — either  because  of  feebleness  of  will,  or
deviation  caused  by  impure  motives — he  misses  his
mark,  his  current  rebounds  from  the  whole  body  of
the  Akasa  (as  the  ball  rebounds  from  the  wall  against

*  Good  Thoughts,  Good  Words,  Good  Deeds,

ZOROASTRIAN  RELIGION:  321

which  It  is  thrown  to  the  thrower's  hand)  and  reacts
upon  himself.  We  are  told  that  they  who  did  not
know  how  to  manage  the  miraculous  fire  in  the
Vestal  and  Kabeiric  mysteries  "  were  destroyed  by
it,  and  were  punished  by  the  Gods  "  (Ennemoser.
Hist,  of  Magic,  ii.  32).  Pliny  relates  {Histor.  Nat.
xxviii.,  2)  that  Tullus  Hostilius  had  sought  from
the  books  of  Numa  "  Jovem  devocare  a  coelo  ;"  but
as  he  did  not  correctly  follow  the  rules  of  Numa,
he  was  struck  by  the  lightning.  This  same  rule
applies  equally  to  the  attempt  to  use  the  Black
Art  unskilfully.  The  old  English  proverb  says,
"  Curses,  like  fowls,  come  home  to  roost."  He  who
would  use  the  powers  of  Sorcery,  or  Black  Magic,
is  sure  to  be  destroyed  by  them  first  or  last.  The
old  fables  about  sorcerers  being  carried  off  by  the
mocking  "  devils  "  whom,  for  a  time,  they  had  em-
ployed to  gratify  their  unlawful  desires,  are  all
based  upon  fact.  And,  in  Zoroastrianism,  the  Parsi
is  as  carefully  taught  to  eschew  and  fight  against
the  powers  of  Ahriman,  or  the  Evil  Spirits  of  Dark-
ness, as  to  cultivate  intimacy  with  and  win  the  pro-
tecting favour  of  the  Ameshaspentas  and  Yazatas
— the  personified  good  principles  of  Nature.  You
will  not  find  any  of  your  European  authorities
speaking  of  these  personifications  with  decent  re-
spect, any  more  than  of  the  nature-gods  of  the
Aryans.  To  their  minds  these  are  but  the  childish
fancies  of  a  florid  Persian  or  Aryan  imagination,
begotten  in  the  infancy  of  our  race.  Eor  a  good
reason  too;  not  one  of  these  spectacled  pandits  has

322  THE  SPIRIT  OF  THE

the  least  practical  reason  to  believe  that  there  are
such  good  and  evil  powers  warring  about  us.  But
I  am  not  afraid  to  say  to  them  all  in  my  individual,
not  official,  capacity,  that  I  do  believe  in  them  ;
nay,  that  I  actually  know  they  exist.  And  this  is
why  you  hear  me,  a  Western  man  taught  in  a
Western  University  and  nursed  on  the  traditions  of
modern  civilization,  say  that  Zaratushta  knew  more
about  nature  than  Tyndall  does,  more  about  the
laws  of  Force  than  Balfour  Stewart,  more  about  the
origin  of  species  than  Darwin  or  Haeckel,  more
about  the  human  mind  and  its  potentialities  than
Maudesley  or  Bain.  And  so  did  Buddha,  and  some
other  ancient  proficients  in  Occult  Science.  Pshaw  !
Young  man  of  Bombay  University,  when  you
have  taken  your  degree,  and  learnt  all  your  pro-
fessors can  teach  you,  go  to  the  hermit  and  the  re-
cluse of  the  jungle  and  ask  Jiim  to  prove  to  you
where  to  begin  your  real  study  of  the  world  into
which  you  have  been  born  !  Your  professors  can
make  you  learned  but  not  wise,  can  teach  you  about
the  shell  of  Nature,  but  those  silent  and  despised
unravellers  of  the  tangled  web  of  existence  can
evoke  for  you  the  soul  that  lurks  within  that  sheath.
Three  centuries  before  Christ  the  united  kingdom
of  Persia  and  Media  exercised  a  dominion  extend-
ing over  an  area  of  three  or  four  millions  of  square
miles,  and  had  a  population  of  several  hundred
millions  of  people.  And  do  you  mean  to  tell  me
that  the  Zoroastrian  religion  could  have  dominated
the  minds  of  this  enormous  mass  of  people — nearly

ZOROASTRTAN  RELIGION.  323

twice  the  present  population  of  India — and  could
have  also  swayed  the  religious  thought  of  the  cul-
tured Greeks  and  Romans,  if  it  had  not  had  a
spiritual  life  in  it  that  its  poor  remnant  of  to-day
completely  lacks  ?  I  tell  you  that  if  you  could  put
that  ancient  life  back  into  it,  and  if  you  had  your
Darabs  and  your  Abads  to  show  this  ignorant  age
the  proof  of  the  reality  of  the  old  Chaldean  wisdom,
you  would  spread  your  religion  all  over  the  world.
For  the  age  is  spiritually  dying  for  want  of  some
religion  that  can  show  just  such  signs,  and  for  lack
of  them  two  crores  of  intelligent  Western  people
have  become  Spiritualists  and  are  following  the
lead  of  mediums.  And  not  only  your  religion  is
soulless  :  Hinduism  is  so,  Southern  Buddhism  is
so,  Judaism  and  Christianity  are  so  likewise.  We
see  following  the  missionaries  none  of  the  "  signs  "
that  Jesus  said  should  follow  those  who  were  really
his  disciples  :  they  neither  raise  the  dead,  nor  heal
the  sick,  nor  give  sight  to  the  blind,  nor  cast  out
devils,  nor  dare  they  drink  any  deadly  thing  in  the
faith  that  it  will  not  harm  them.  There  are  a  few^
true  wonder-workers  in  our  time,  but  they  are
among  the  Lamaists  of  Tibet,  the  Copts  of  Egypt,
the  Sufis  and  Dervishes  of  Arabia  and  other  Mahom-
medan  countries.  The  great  body  of  the  people,
in  all  countries,  are  become  so  sensual,  so  avaricious,
so  materialistic  and  faithless,  that  their  moral  at-
mosphere is  like  a  pestilential  wind  to  the  Yozda-
thraigur  (those  adepts  whom  we  have  made  known
to  India  under  the  name  of  Mahatmas).

324  THE  SPIRIT  OF  THE

It

The  meaning  of  your  Haoma  you  doubtless
know.  In  the  ninth  Yaqna  of  the  Avesta,  Haoma
is  spoken  of  both  as  a  god — a  Yazata — and  the
plant,  or  the  juice  of  the  plant,  which  is  under  his
especial  protection,  and  so  is  the  Soma  of  the
" Aitareya  Brdviana''

"  At  the  time  of  the  morning-dawn  came

1.  Haoma  to  Zarathustra.

2.  As  he  was   purifying  the   fire  and   reciting

the  Gathas.

3.  Zarathustra  asked  him :     Who,  O  man,  art

thou  ?

4.  Thou,  who  appearest  to   me   as  the  most

beautiful  in  the  whole  corporeal  world,
endued  with  thine  own  life,  majestic  and
immortal  ?

5.  Then  answered   me  Haoma,  the  pure,  who

is  far  from  death.

6.  Ask  me,  thou  pure  one,  make    me  ready  for

food."

Thus,  in  the  same  line,  Is  Haoma  spoken  of  in
his  personified  form  and  as  a  plant  to  be  prepared
for  food.

Further  on  he  is  described  as

52.  "Victorious,  golden,  with  moist  stalks."

This  Is  the  sacred  Soma  of  the  Aryans — by  them
also  elevated  into  a  deity.  This  is  that  wondrous
juice  which  lifted  the  mind  of  him  who  quaffed  it
to  the  splendours   of  the  higher  heavens,  and  made

ZOROAS  TRIA N  RELIGION.  325

him  commune  with  the  gods.  It  was  not  stupify-
ing  hke  opium,  nor  maddening  like  the  Indian
hemp,  but  exhilarating,  illuminating,  the  begetter
of  divine  visions.  It  was  given  to  the  candidate  in
the  ]\Iysteries,  and  drunk  with  solemn  ceremony
by  the  Hierophant.  Its  ancient  use  is  still  kept  in
your  memories  by  the  Mobed's  drinking,  in  the
YaQna  ceremony,  a  decoction  of  dried  Haoma  stalks,
that  have  been  pounded  with  bits  of  pomegranate
root  in  a  mortar,  and  afterwards  had  water  thrice
poured  over  them.

The  Baresma  twigs— among  you  represented  by
a  bunch  of  brass  wires  ! — are  a  reminiscence  of  the
divining-rods  anciently  used  by  all  practitioners  of
ceremonial  magic.  The  rod  or  staff  was  also  given
to  the  fabled  gods  of  Mythology.  In  the  fifth  book
of  the  Odyssey,  Jupiter,  in  the  council  of  the  gods,
bids  Hermes  go  upon  a  certain  mission,  and  the
verse  says —

"  Forth  sped  he,

Then  taking  his  staff,  with  which  he  the  eye-
lids of  mortals

Closes  at  will,  and  the  sleeper  at  will,  re-
awakens."

The  rod  of  Hermes  w^as  a  magic  staff;  so  was
that  of  ^sculapaios,  the  healing  wand  that  had
power  over  disease.  The  Bible  has  many  references
to  the  magic  rod,  notably,  in  the  story  of  the  con-
test of  Moses  with  the  Egyptian  Magicians  in  the
presence  of  Pharaoh,  in  that  of  the  magical  budding

326  THE  SPIRIT  OF  THE

of  Aaron's  rod,  the  laying  of  Elisha's  staff  on  the
face  of  the  dead  Shunamlte  boy,  &c.  The  Hindu
gossein  of  our  day  carries  with  him  a  bamboo  rod
having  seven  knots  or  joints,  that  has  been  given
to  him  by  his  Guru  and  contains  the  concentrated
magnetic  will-power  of  the  Guru.  All  magic-rods
should  be  hollow,  that  the  magnetic  power  may  be
stored  in  them.  In  the  Yagna  II.,  note  that  the
Priest,  holding  the  Baresma  rods  in  his  hand,  re-
peats constantly  the  words  "  I  wish  " — properly,  I
^vill — so  and  so.  By  the  ceremony  of  consecration  of
the  sacred  twigs  a  magical  power  had  been  imparted
to  them,  and  with  the  help  of  this  to  fortify  his  own
will-force,  the  celebrant  seeks  the  attainment  of  his
several  good  desires,  the  heavenly  Fire,  the  good
spirits,  all  good  influences  throughout  the  several
Kingdoms  of  Nature,  and  the  law  or  Word.  In
the  middle  ages  of  Europe,  divining-rods  were  in
general  use,  not  only  to  discover  subterranean
waters  and  springs,  and  veins  of  metal,  but  also
fuo-itive  thieves  and  murderers.     I  could  devote  an

o

entire  lecture  to  this  subject  and  prove  to  you  that
this  phenomenon  is  a  strictly  scientific  one.  In  Mr.
Baring  Gould's  Curious  Myths  of  the  Middle  Ages
will  be  found  highly  interesting  accounts  of  these
trials  of  the  mystical  power  of  the  rods,  which  time
forbids  my  quoting.  At  this  day  the  rods  are  em-
ployed to  discover  springs,  and  the  Cornish  miners
carry  sprigs  of  hazel  or  other  wood  in  their  caps.
The  author  of  the  above  work,  while  ascribing  the
strange  results  he  is  obliged  to  record  principally

ZOROAS'IKIAN  RELIGION.  327

to  the  imagination,  is  }'et  constrained  to  add  that
"  the  powers  of  Nature  are  so  mysterious  and  in-
scrutable that  we  must  be  cautious  in  hmiting  them,
under  abnormal  conditions,  to  the  ordinary  laws  of
experience."  And  in  this  he  is  supported  by  the
experience  of  many  generations  of  witnesses,  in
many  different  countries.

We  have  mentioned  the  invocation  of  the  divine
Word  or  Name  in  the  Yaqna.  All  the  ancient
authorities  affirm  that  there  is  a  certain  Word  of
Power  by  pronouncing  which  the  adept  subjugates
all  the  forces  of  Nature  to  his  will.  It  is  men-
tioned by  many  writers.  One  of  the  latest  is  the
author  of  a  book  called  Rabbi  JesJiua,  who,  speaking
of  Jesus,  says,  "  He  had  perhaps  endeavoured  to
employ  magic  arts,  and  to  bewitch  the  council  by
invocation  of  the  Name  through  which  all  incanta-
tions were  rendered  effective"  (p.  143).  Among
the  Aryans  the  Agnihotra  priest  used  to  prepare
the  sacrificial  wood  and,  upon  reciting  the  appro-
priate Mantra,  the  heavenly  fire  of  Agni  would
descend  and  kindle  it.  In  the  Avesta,  Zaratusht
smites  the  fiends  with  the  spiritual  power  of  the
Word  (Darmesteter,  Ixxvii.).  It  represents  him  as
a  saint-militant,  repelling  force  by  force.  In  Far-
gard  XL,  Zarathustra  asks  Ahura  Mazda  how  he
shall  purge  the  house,  the  fire,  the  water,  the  earth,
the  cow,  the  tree,  the  faithful  man  and  woman,
the  stars,  the  moon,  the  sun,  the  boundless
light,  and  all  good  things  ?  Ahura  Mazda
answers  : —

328  THE  SPIRIT  OF  THE

"  Thus  shalt  thou  chant  the  cleansing  words  and
the  house  shall  be  clean,  clean  shall  be  the
fire,  &c.,  &c.

"  So  thou  shalt  say  these  fiend-smiting  and
most-healing  words,  thou  shalt  chant  the
Ahura  Vairya  five  times,  &c.'^

Then  are  given  various  words  to  employ  foi
different  acts  of  cleansing.  But  tJie  WORD,  the
one  most  potent — the  name  which,  so  says  Proclus
in  his  treatise  upon  the  Chaldean  Oracles  — "  rushes
into  the  infinite  worlds,"  is  not  written  there.*  Nor
can  it  be  written,  nor  is  it  ever  pronounced  above
the  breath,  nor,  indeed,  is  its  nature  known  except
to  the  highest  initiates.  The  efficacy  of  all  words
used  as  charms  and  spells  lies  in  what  the  Aryans
call  the  Vach,  a  certain  latent  power  resident  in
Akasa.  Physically,  we  may  describe  it  as  the
power  to  set  up  certain  measured  vibrations,  not
in  the  grosser  atmospheric  particles  whose  undula-
tions beget  light,  sound,  heat  and  electricity,  but
in  the  latent  spiritual  principle  or  Force — about
the  nature  of  which  modern  Science  knows  scarcety
anything.  No  words  whatever  have  the  slightest
efficacy  unless  uttered  by  one  who  is  perfectly  free
from  all  weakening  doubt  or  hesitancy,  who  is  for  the
moment  wholly  absorbed  in  the  thought  of  utter-
ing them,  and  who  has  a  cultivated  power  of  will  which
makes  him  send  out   from  himself  a  conquering

*  Though  properly  the  WORD  or  the  NAME  is  neither  a  word  nor
a  name,  in  the  sense  in  which  we  use  either  expression.

ZOROASTRIAN  RELIGION.  329

impulse.  Spoken  prayer  is,  in  fact,  an  incantation,
and  when  spoken  by  the  "  heart,"  as  well  as  by  the
lips,  has  a  power  to  attract  good  and  repel  bad
influences.  But  to  patter  off  prayers  so  many
times  a  day  while  your  thoughts  are  roving  over
your  landed  estates,  fumbling  your  money-bags,
or  straying  away  among  any  other  worldly
things,  is  mere  waste  of  breath.  The  Scrip-
ture says,  "the  prayer  of  the  righteous  availeth
much."  There  is  the  case  of  George  Miiller,
of  Bath,  who  for  thirty  years  has  supported  the
entire  expenses  of  his  Orphanage  —  now  a  very
large  institution  of  charity — by  the  voluntary  gifts
of  unknown  passers-by  at  the  door,  who  drop  into
his  charity-boxes  tJie  exact  sum  he  prays  for  \.o  meet
the  day's  necessities.  History  does  not  contain  a
more  curious  or  striking  example  than  this.  This
man  prays  with  such  faith  and  fervency,  his  motives
are  so  pure,  his  labours  so  beneficent,  that  he  at-
tracts to  him  all  the  good  influences  of  Nature,
although  he  knows  neither  the  "  Ahura  Vairyal'
nor  the  Aryan  Mantras^  nor  the  Buddhist  Pirit.
Use  what  words  you  may,  if  the  heart  be  clean,
the  thought  intense,  the  will  concentrated,
and  the  powers  of  Nature  will  come  at  your
bidding  and  be  your  slaves.  Says  the  Dabistan
(p.  2)  :—

"  Having  the  heart  in  the  body  full  of  thy  re-
membrance, the  novice,  as  well  as  the
adept,  in  conteviplation

330  THE  SPIRIT  OF  THE

"  Becomes  a  supreme  king  of  beatitude,  and
the  throne  of  the  kingdom  of  gladness.

"  Whatever  road  I  took,  it  joined  the  street
which  leads  to  Thee  ;

"  The  desire  to  know  thy  being  is  also  the  life
of  the  meditators  ;

"  He  who  found  that  there  Is  nothing  but
Thee,  has  found  Thee,  has  found  \X\^  final
knowledge  ;

'•'  The  Mobed  is  the  teacher  of  thy  truth,  and
the  world  a  school."

But  this  Mobed  was  not  a  mere  errand-runner,
or  perfunctory  droner  of  Gathas,  understanding
no  word  he  was  saying,  but  a  real  Mobed.
So  high  an  ideal  of  human  perfectibility  had  he  to
live  up  to,  that  Cambyses  is  said  to  have  commanded
the  execution  of  a  priest  who  had  allowed  himself
to  be  bribed,  and  had  his  skin  stretched  over  the
chair  in  which  his  son  and  successor  sat  in  his
judicial  capacity  {Hist,  Magic,  i.,  2).  "Mobed"  Is
derived  from  Mogbed — from  the  Persian  Mog,  and
means  a  true  priest.  Ennemoser  truly  says  that
the  renowned  wisdom  of  the  Magi  in  Persia,  Media,
and  the  neighbouring  countries,  "  contained  also
the  secret  teachings  of  philosophy  and  the  sciences,
which  were  only  comaiunicated  to  priests,  who
were  regarded  as  mediators  between  God  and  man,
and  as  such,  and  on  account  of  their  knozvledge,  were
highly    respected"     {Ibid).       The    priests    OF    A

ZOROASTRIAN  RELIGION.  331

PEOPLE  ARE  EXACTLY  WHAT  THE  PEOPLE  RE-
QUIRE THEM  TO  13E.  Remember  that,  friends,  and
blame  yourselves  only  for  the  state  of  religion
among  you.  You  have  just  what  you  are  entitled  to.
If  you  yourselves  were  purer,  more  spiritually-
minded,  more  religious,  your  priesthood  would  be
so  too.  You  are  merchants,  not  idolators,  but — as
Prof.  Monier  Williams  pithily  remarks  in  the
Nineteenth  Century  (March,  1881) — worshippers  of
the  solid  rupee.  The  genuine  Parsi,  he  says,
"  turns  with  disgust  from  the  hideous  idolatry
practised  by  his  Hindu  fellow-subjects.  He  offers
no  homage  to  blocks  of  wood  and  stone,  to  mon-
strous many-headed  images,  grotesque  symbols  of
good  luck,  or  four-armed  deities  of  fortune.  But
he  bows  down  before  the  silver  image  which
Victoria,  the  Empress  of  India,  has  set  up  in  her
Indian  dominions."

And  this,  according  to  Zoroastrianism,  is  a  crime
as  great.  In  his  ecstatic  vision  of  the  symbolical
scenes  shown  him  by  the  angel  Seroshizad,  for  the
warning  and  encouragement  of  his  people,  Ardai
Viraf,  the  purest  of  Magian  priests  at  the  court  of
Ardeshir  Babagan,  saw  the  pitiable  state  to  which
the  soul  of  a  covetous  money-hoarder  is  reduced
after  death.  The  poor  wretch — penniless,  since  he
could  take  not  a  dlrein  with  him — his  heart  buried
with  his  savagely-loved  treasures,  his  once  pure
nature  corrupted  and  deformed,  moved  the  seer  to
profoundest  pity.  "  I  saw  it,"  says  he,  "  creep
along  in  fear  and  trembling,  and  presently  a  wind

332  THE  SPIRIT  OF  THE

came  sweeping  along,  laden  with  the  most  pesti-
lential vapours,  even  as  it  were  from  the  boundaries
of  hell.  In  the  midst  of  this  wind  ap-
peared a  form  of  the  most  demoniacal  appear-
ance." The  terrified  soul  attempts  to  escape,
but  in  vain  ;  the  awful,  vengeful  shape  by  voice
and  power  roots  him  to  the  spot.  He  inquires  in
trembling  accents  whom  it  may  be,  and  is  an-
swered, "  I  am  your  genius  [that  is,  his  spiritual
counterpart  and  now  his  mastering  destiny],  and
have  become  thus  deformed  by  your  crimes  (whilst
you  were  innocent,  I  was  handsome).  You
have  laid  in  no  provisions  for  this  long  journey  ;
you  were  rich,  but  did  no  good  with  your
riches  ;  and  not  only  did  no  good  yourself,
but  prevented,  by  your  evil  example,  those  whose
inclinations  led  them  to  do  good ;  and  you  have
often  mentally  said,  '  When  is  the  day  of  judgment  ?
To  me  it  will  never  arrive'"  {Ardai  Viraf  NaineJi^
by  Capt.  J.  A.  Pope,  p.  56).  Say  it  is  a  vision,  if
you  will ;  nevertheless  it  mirrors  an  awful  truth.
The  w^orship  of  the  silver  image  of  Victoria  on  the
rupee  is  even  more  degrading  than  the  Hindu's
worship  of  Ganesha  or  Hari ;  for  he,  at  least,  is
animated  by  a  pious  thought,  whereas  the  greedy
money-getter  is  but  defiling  himself  with  the  filth
of  selfishness.

The  Parsi  community  is  already  half-way  along
the  road  to  apostasy.  The  fiery  enthusiasm  is  gone
that  made  your  forefathers  abandon  everything  they
prized  rather  than  repudiate  their  faith  ;  that  sup-

ZOROASTRlAiY  RELIGION.  333

ported  them  during  a  whole  century  in  the  sterile
mountains  of  Khorasan  or  the  out-lying  deserts  ;
that  comforted  them  in  their  exile  at  Sanjan,  and
gave  them  hope  after  the  battle  with  their  here-
ditary enemy  Aluf  Khan.  Formerly,  it  was  Re-
ligion first  and  the  Rupee  last ;  now  it  is  the  Rupee
first,  and  everything  else  after.  See,  I,  a  stranger,
point  wath  one  finger  to  your  palatial  bungalows,
your  gorgeous  equipages,  your  ostentatious
annual  squandering  of  twelve  lakhs  of  money  at
festivals  ;  with  the  other  to  your  comparatively
paltry  subscriptions  for  the  study  and  resuscitation
of  your  religion.  The  proverb  says,  "  Figures
cannot  lie,"  and  in  this  instance  they  do  not.  If  I
wanted  the  best  test  to  apply  to  your  real  religious
zeal,  I  should  look  at  the  sum  of  your  expenditure
for  vain  show  and  sensual  enjoyment,  as  compared
with  what  you  do  for  the  maintenance  of  your  re-
ligion in  its  purity,  and  at  the  sort  of  conduct  you
tolerate  in  your  priests.  That  is  the  mirror  which
impartial  justice  holds  up  before  you  ;  behold  your
own  image,  and  converse  with  conscience  in  your
private  moments.  What  but  conscience  is  personi-
fied in  the  "  maid,  of  divine  beauty  or  fiendish
ugliness,"  according  as  the  soul  that  approaches
the  Chinvad  bridge  was  good  or  bad  in  life  ?
(  YasJit.  xxii.)

She,  "  the  well-shapen,  strong,  and  tall-formed
maid,  with  the  dogs  at  her  sides,  one  who
can  distinguish,  and  is  of  high  7in-
derstandijig^'  {Avesta,  Fargard  xix.)?

334  THE  SPIRIT  OF  THE

You  have  asked  me  to  tell  you  about  the  spirit
of  3"our  religion.  I  have  only  the  truth  to  tell —
the  exact  truth,  without  fear  or  favour.  And  I
repeat,  you  have  already  set  money  in  the  niche  of
faith  ;  it  only  remains  for  you  to  throw  the  latter
out  of  doors.  For  hypocrisy  will  not  last  for  ever.
Men  weary  of  paying  even  lip-service  to  a  religion
they  no  longer  respect.  You  may  deceive  your-
selves ;  you  cannot  deceive  that  maiden  at  the
bridge.  Let  three  or  four  more  generations  of
sceptics  be  passed  through  the  educational  mint  of
the  College  ;  let  the  teaching  of  your  religion  be
nep^lected  as  it  now  is  ;  and  the  time  will  have
come  when  it  will  be  only  the  occasional  brave
heart  that  will  dare  call  himself  a  Mazdiasnian.
Let  that  stand  as  a  prophecy  if  you  choose  ;  as
a  prophecy  based  upon  the  experience  of  the
human  race.  A  black  page  will  it  be  indeed,  in
the  record  of  events,  when  the  last  vestige
of  the  once  splendid  faith  of  Zarathushta  shall  be
blotted  from  it,  the  last  spark  of  the  heavenly  fire
that  shone  from  the  Chaldean  watch-towers  of  the
sages  be  extinguished.  And  the  more  so,  if
that  last  extinction  shall  be  caused,  not  by  the
sword  of  tyranny,  nor  by  the  crafty  scheming  of
civil  administrators,  but  by  the  soulless  worldliness
of  its  own  hereditary  custodians  ;  those  to  whom
the  licfhted  torch  had  been  handed  down  throuc^h
the  ages,  and  who  dropped  it  into  the  quenching
black  waters  of  materialism.

Time  fails  me  to  enter  into  detailed  explanation

ZOKOASTKIAN  RELIGION.  335

of  the  Zoroastrian  symbols,  as  perhaps  I  might  ;
though  I  certainly  am  not  able  to  do  the  subject
full  justice.     The  siidra  and  ktisti^  with  which  you
invest  your  children  at  the  age  of  six  years  and
three  months   have,    of  course,   a  magical   signifi-
cance.    They    pass    through    the    hands    of    the
Dastur,  who,   as   we  have  seen,   was  formerly  an
initiate,    and  he  imparted  to  them  magnetic  pro-
perties which  converted  them  into  talismans  against
evil  influences.     After  that  a  set  formula  of  prayers
and   incantations    is    regularly   prescribed    for  the
whole   life.     The   wearers'   thoughts    are    directed
towards   the    talismanic    objects    constantly,    and
when     faith     is     present,     their     will-power,     or
magnetic  aura,  is  at  such  times  infused  into  them.
This  is  the  secret  of  all  talismans  ;  the  object  worn,
whatever   it   may  be,    need   have    no   innate  pro-
tective property ;  for  that  can  be  given  to  any  rag,
stone,  or  scrap  of  paper,  by  an  adept.     Those  of
you  who  have  read  the  Christian  Bible  will  remem-
ber  that    from    the   body   of    Paul,    the   Apostle,
"were    brought   unto   the    sick   handkerchiefs    or
aprons,  and  the  diseases  departed  from  them,  and
tJie  evil  spirits  ivent  ottt  of  them''  (Acts  xix.   12).
In  the  Ormazd-Yasht  of  the  KJiordaJi-Avesta  (25),
it  is  written  "  by  day  and  night,  standing  or  sitting,
girt  with  the  Aiwyaonhana  {kiLsti)  or  drawing  off
the  Aiwyfionhana,

*  A  gauzy  muslin  shirt,  and  a  peculiar  holy  thread,  made  of  fine
wool  woven  by  the  wives  of  Parsi  priests  with  certain  invocatory
charms.

336  THE  SPIRIT  OF  THE

"  Going  forwards  out  of  the  house,  going  forwards
out  of  the  confederacy,  going  forwards  out
of  the  region,  coming  into  a  region,

"  Such  a  man  the  points  of  the  Drukhs-souled,
proceeding  from  Aeshma,  will  not  injure  in
that  day  or  that  night,  not  the  slings,  not
the  arrows,  not  knives,  not  clubs ;  the  mis-
siles will  not  penetrate  (and)  he  be  in-
jured" (Hang's  Avesta^  p.  24,  KJiordah-
Avesta,  Eng.  ed.  of  1864).

Similar  protective  talismans  are  given  by  every
adept  to  each  new  pupil.

The  use  oi  Nirang^  for  libations  and  ablutions  is
a  survival  of  very  ancient — probably  pre-Iranian —
mythic  conceptions.  There  is  nothing  in  the  fluid
itself  of  a  disinfectant  or  purificatory  character,  but
a  magical  property  is  given  to  it  by  ceremonial
magical  formulas,  as  a  glass  of  common  water  may
be  converted  into  a  valuable  medicine  by  a  mes-
merizer  holding  it  in  the  left  hand  and  mak-
ing circular  passes  over  it  with  the  right.  The
subject  is  treated  in  Darmesteter  s  Introduction  to
the  Vcndidad  (Ixxxviii.)  "  The  storm  floods  that
cleanse  the  sky  of  the  dark  flends  in  it  were
described  in  a  class  of  myths  as  the  urine  of  a
eisrantic  animal  in  the  heavens.  As  the  floods
from  the  bull  above  drive  away  the  fiend  from  the
god,  so  they  do  from  man  here  below^,  they  make
him  '  free  fi'om  the  death-demon'  {frdnasit),  and  the

*  Pvuified  urine  of  the-  cow.

ZOROASTRIAN  RELIGION.  337

death-fiend  flees  away  hellwards,  pursued  by  the
fiend  -  smiting  spell  :  '  Perish  thou,  O  Dru^ !
never  more  to  give  over  to  Death  the  Hving  world
of  the  good  spirit !  '"  It  may  be  that  there  is  a
more  valid  reason  for  the  use  of  Nirang,  but  I
have  not  yet  discovered  it.  That  an  occult  pro-
perty is  imparted  to  the  fluid  by  the  ceremonial  is
clear  ;  since,  if  it  be  exposed  to  certain  influences
not  in  themselves  putrefactive,  it  will  speedily  be-
come putrid  ;  while,  on  the  other  hand,  it  may  be
kept  for  years  in  a  fresh  condition  without  the
admixture  of  antiseptic  substances,  and  notwith-
standing its  occasional  exposure  to  the  air,  if
certain  ceremonial  rules  be  followed.  (Of  course
I  have  this  from  Parsi  friends,  and  not  from  my
own  observation :  I  would  not  express  an  un-
qualified opinion  before  investigating  the  subject.)
I  recommend  some  Parsi  chemist  to  analyse  speci-
mens of  different  ages,  especially  to  determine  the
relative  qualities  of  nitrogenous  constituents.

When  Professor  Monier  Williams  vents  his
Oxonian  scorn  upon  the  ceremonies  of  the  Parsis,  he
only  provokes  the  smile  of  such  as  have
looked  deeper  than  he  into  the  meaning  of  ancient
symbolism.  "  Here  and  there,"  says  he,  "  lofty
conceptions  of  the  Deity,  deep  philosophical
thoughts,  and  a  pure  morality,  are  discoverable  in
the  Avesta,  like  green  spots  in  the  desert ;  but  they
are  more  than  netitralised  by  the  silly  puerilities  and
degrading  super stitioiLS  ideas  which  crop  up  as
plentifully  in  its  pages  as  thorns  and  thistles  in  a

338  THE  SPIRIT  OF  THE

wilderness  of  sand."  {^Nineteenth  Century^  January,
1 88 1,  p.  176.)  Mr.  Joseph  Cook,  the  other  day  in  this
hall,  said  something  to  the  same  effect.  The  good
portions  of  the  Vedas  were  so  few  as  compared
with  the  trashy  residuum,  that  he  likened  them  to
the  fabled  jewel  -in  the  head  of  a  filthy  toad  !  It  is
really  very  condescending  of  these  white  pandits  to
admit  that  there  is  anything  whatever  except
rottenness  and  puerility  in  the  old  religions  !

In  w^iat  has  been  said  I  have,  you  must  remem-
ber, been  speaking  from  the  standpoint  of  a  Parsi.
I  have  tried  to  sink  my  personality  and  my  per-
sonal religious  preferences  for  the  moment,  and  to
put  myself  in  your  place.  That  is  the  cardinal  policy
of  the  Theosophical  Society.  It  has  itself  no
sectarian  basis,  but  its  motto  is  the  Universal
Brotherhood  of  man.  It  was  organized  to  bring
to  light  the  long-buried  truths  of  not  one,  but  all
the  world's  archaic  religions.  Its  members  are  of  all
respectable  castes,  all  faiths  and  races.  Many  in-
telligent Parsis  are  amonq-  them.  For  their  sake
and  for  that  of  their  co-religionists,  this  lecture  has
been  given.  I  have  tried  most  earnestly  to  induce
one  of  them,  or  some  other  Parsi,  to  come  forward
and  show  you  that  no  religion  has  profounder
spiritual  truths  concealed  under  its  familiar
mask  than  yours.  That  I  am  the  incom-
petent though  willing  spokesman  for  the  ancient
Yozdathraigurs  is  your  fault,  not  mine.  If  I  have
spoken  truth,  if  I  have  suggested  new  thoughts,
if    I     have    given    any     encouragement    to     the

ZOK OASTRIA N  RELIGION.  339

pious,  or  pleasure   to   the   learned,   my   reward   is
ample.

"  ZatJui  aJiu  Sahyo  : — The  riches  of  Vohumano
shall  be  given  to  him  who  works  in  this  world  for
Mazda,"  is  the  promise  of  the  Avesta  (Fargard
xxi.).  Bear  it  in  mind,  ye  Mazdiasnians,
and  remember  the  maiden  and  her  dogs  by  the
Chinvat  Bridge.  I  say  this  especially  to  my  Parsi
brothers  in  our  Society ;  for  I  have  the  right  to
speak  to  them  as  an  elder  to  a  junior.  As  Parsis
they  have  a  paramount  duty  to  their  co-religionists,
who  are  retrograding  morally  for  want  of  the  pure
light.  As  Theosophists,  their  interest  embraces
all  their  fellow-men  of  whatever  creed.  For  we
read  in  one  of  the  most  valuable  of  all  books  for  the
thoughtful  Parsi — the  Dabistan,  or  School  of
Maimers :

"  The  world  is  a  book  full  of  knowledge  and  of

justice,
The  binder  of  which  book  is  Destiny,  and  the

binding  the  beginning  and  the  end  ;
The  future  of  it  is  the  law,  and  the  leaves  are  the

religious  persuasions.     *     *  "

For  three  years  we  have  been  preaching  this  idea
of  mutual  toleration  and  Universal  Brotherhood
here  in  Bombay.  Some  have  listened,  but  more
have  turned  a  deaf  ear.  Nay,  they  have  done
worse — they  have  spread  lies  and  calumnies  about
us,  until  we  were  made  to  appear  to  you  in  false
light.     But  the  tide  is  turning  at  last,  and  public

340  THE  SPIRIT  OF  THE

sympathy  is  slowly  setting-in  in  our  favour.  It  has
been  a  dark  night  for  us  ;  it  is  now  sunrise.  If  you
can  see  a  good  motive  behind  us,  an  honest
purpose  to  do  good  by  spreading  truth,  will  you  not
join  us  as  you  have  joined  other  societies,  and  help  to
make  us  strong  ?  We  can  perhaps  be  of  service  in
aiding  you  to  learn  something  more  than  you  know
about  the  spirit  of  Zoroastrianism.  As  I  said
before,  there  are  many  important  secrets  to  be  ex-
tracted from  ancient  MSS.  in  Armenia.  Perhaps
they  may  be  got  at  if  you  will  join  together  and
send  some  thoroughly  competent  Parsi  scholars  to
make  the  search,  in  co-operation  with  the  Tiflis
Archaeological  Society.  See  how  the  Christians
have  organised  a  Palestine  Exploration  Society,  to
search  for  anything  in  the  shape  of  proof  that  can
be  found  to  corroborate  their  Bible.  For  years
they  have  kept  engineers  and  archaeologists  at
work.  Is  your  religion  less  important  to  you  ?  Or
do  you  mean  to  sit  on  your  guineas  until  the  last  old
MS.  has  been  burned  to  kindle  Armenian  fires,  or
torn  to  wrap  medicines  and  sweets  in,  as  I  have  often
seen  Bibles  utilised  in  India  and  Ceylon  by  heathen
borahs  ?  One  of  our  members  (see  TheosopJiist  for
July,  1881)  wxnt  over  the  most  important  ground  a
few  months  ago.  At  the  monastery  of  Soorb
Ovanness  in  Armenia  there  were  in  1877  three
superannuated  priests;  of  these  but  one  now  remains.
The  "  library  of  books  and  old  manuscripts  heaped
up  as  waste  paper  in  every  corner  of  the  pillar-cells,
tempting  no  Kurd,  are  scattered  over  the  rooms."

ZOROASTRIAN  RELIGION.  341

And  he  adds  that  "for  the  consideration  of  a
dagger  and  a  few  silver  abazes,  I  got  several  pre-
cious manuscripts  from  him," — the  old  priest.
Now  does  not  this  suggest  to  you  that  through
the  friendly  intermediation  of  our  Society,  and  the
help  of  Madame  Blavatsky,  you  may  be  able  to
secure  exceptional  advantages  in  the  matter  of
archaeological  and  philological  research  connected
with  Zoroastrianism  ?  We  do  not  ask  you  to  join
us  for  our  benefit,  but  for  your  own.  I  have
thrown  out  the  idea ;  act  upon  it  or  not  as  you
choose.*  Beaten  with  Parsi  children's  shoes  oueht
that  Parsi  to  be  who  next  gives  a  gaudy  nautch  or
wedding  tainasha,  unless  he  has  previously  sub-
scribed as  liberally  as  his  means  allow  towards  a
fund  for  the  promotion  of  his  religion.

At  the  fifth  annual  meeting  (in  September  last)
of  the  Archaeological  Society  of  Tiflis,  Caucasus,  a
very  valuable  report  was  made  by  Count  Ouvarof,
the  Nestor  of  Russian  archaeologists  and  Founder
of  the  Society,  upon  recent  explorations  and
discoveries  in  the  districts  formerly  inhabited  by
the  Mazdiasnians.  This  Caucasian  Viceroyalty
was  once  the  heart  of  ancient  Parsiism.  It  includes
Armenia,  Derbent,  Osetya,  and  the  land  of  the
Khabardines,  besides  other  countries  that  should
be  explored  by  your  agents.     Among  the  curious

*  The  suggestion  was  taken  up,  and  shortly  after  a  Parsi  Archaeo-
logical Society  was  organized  at  Bombay.  But  the  wealthy  class
have  not  as  yet  subscribed  funds,  and  nothing  practical  has  hitherto
been  accomplished.

342  THE  SPIRIT  OF  THE

facts  brought  to  light,  it  was  discovered  that  the  old
Mazdiasnians  had  two  kinds  of  burial  structures — one
for  use  in  hot  weather, the  other  for  the  winter  season.
They  found  proofs  that  your  faith  was  not  less  than
1 1,000  years  old:  which  bears  rather  hard  upon  those
authors  (among  them  your  own  countryman,  Dosab-
hoy  Framjee)  who  date  its  birth  from  the  time  of
the  appearance,  in  the  sixth  century  B.C.,  of  a  certain
Zarathushta  at  the  court  of  Darius  Hystaspes  !
The  learned  Count  Ouvarof  says  that  the  Ossetines,
a  warlike  mountain  tribe  of  half  Christianized
Mahommedans,  formerly  Mazdiasnians,  to  this  day
bring  a  dog  to  look  at  the  corpse  before  sepulture.
In  Tibet,  too,  towards  the  Northern  border,  the
corpse  is  exposed  to  the  view  of  a  dog  and  a  djak
— a  bird  of  prey,  perhaps  of  the  vulture  species.
Throughout  Tibet  the  corpses  of  all  but  Lamas  of
the  higher  grades  are  given  to  be  eaten  by  a  breed
of  sacred  dogs  bred  for  the  purpose.  The  Lamas
above  referred  to  are  either  burned,  or  embalmed
and  entombed  in  a  sitting  posture.  I  have  been
unable  to  learn  from  any  Parsi,  even  from
the  most  intelligent  I  have  consulted,  the  ex-
planation of  this  ancient  custom  of  exposing  the
corpse  to  inspection  by  dogs.  Upon  inquiry  in
another  direction,  however,  I  am  told  that  its  orig-
inal purpose  was  to  show  the  dog  that  here  was
food  for  him,  and  that  immediately  after  seeing  it,
the  animal  would  rush  off  to  its  fellows  and  bring
a  whole  pack  to  share  in  the  repast.  His  instinct
(or  should  we  rather  say  his  mesmeric  sensitive-

ZOROASTRIAN  RELIGION.  343

ness?)  told  him  when  life  had  actually  quitted  the  ca-
daver. This  seems  to  me  a  very  clear  and  sensible
explanation  of  a  long- veiled  practice.  Moreover,
I  read  in  Mr.  K.  R.  Cama's  translation  of  Prof.
Duncker's  GeschicJite  des  Altertnuts,  that  in  the
time  of  Agathias,  the  Persians  carried  their  dead
outside  the  gates  of  a  town  and  exposed  them  to
be  eaten  by  dogs  and  birds ;  regarding  it  as  a
clear  proof  that  the  deceased  had  led  an  impure
life  if  the  corpse  were  not  directly  consumed.  What
more  likely,  then,  than  that  the  relatives  showed
the  corpse  to  the  one  or  two  dogs  at  the  house,  so
that  by  the  time  the  procession  should  reach  the
place  of  exposure,  the  pack  would  be  there  ready
to  complete  their  work  ?  As  for  the  theory  that
the  glance  of  a  dog  frightens  away  the  Drukhs-
NaQU,  it  appears  to  be  a  mere  hypothesis.  In  the
Secret  Doctrine  it  is  taught  that  the  most  lethal
current  in  the  ether  of  space  {Akasd)  sets  in  from
the  North.  This  is  the  current  of  terrestrial  mag-
netism. Experience  has  also  warned  mesmeric
practitioners  to  make  their  subject  sit  with  the  back
to  the  North  and  the  feet  towards  the  South.  The
Hindus  lay  their  dead  in  the  same  direction.
Baron  Reichenbach  also  discovered  that  his  odylic
sensitives  could  not  sleep  East  and  West,  but  would
instinctively  turn  North  and  South,  even  when
their  beds  had  been  purposely  placed  in  the  trans-
verse way.  In  occult  Science  the  North  is  the
habitat  of  the  worst  "  elemental  spirits  "  (a  very
clumsy  name  for  the  occult  forces  of  nature),  and

344  THE  SPIRIT  OF  THE

in  Eliphas  Levi's  books  {Dogj?ie  et  Ritjiel  de  la
Hajite  Magie,  and  others)  are  given  instructions  to
guard  against  their  irruption.  If  a  corpse  be  tra-
versed by  this  boreal  current,  the  latter  takes  up
certain  psychically  bad  influences,  which,  if  ab-
sorbed by  the  living  who  are  sensitive  to  them,  have
a  very  evil  effect.  The  Drukhs-Na^u  is  this  boreal
current,  and  contains  in  itself  a  number  of  varieties
of  malignant  influences.  This,  I  am  told,  is  the
Secret  Doctrine.

In  commencing,  I  reminded  you  that  this  subject  of
the  spirit  of  Zoroastrianism  is  limitless.  In  con-
sulting my  authorities  I  have  been  perplexed  to
choose  from  the  abundance  of  material,  rather  than
troubled  by  any  lack  of  it.  There  are  a  few  more
facts  that  I  should  like  to  mention  before  closing.

Abul  Pharaj,  in  the  Book  of  Dynasties  (p.  54),
states  that  Zarathusht  taught  the  Persians  the
manifestation  of  the  Wisdom  (the  Lord's  Anointed
Son,  or  Logos,  the  Persian  "  Honover.")  This  is
the  living  manifested  word  of  Deific  Wisdom.  He
predicted  that  a  Virgin  should  conceive  immacul-
ately, and  that  at  the  birth  of  that  future  messenger
a  six-pointed  star  would  appear,  and  shine  at  noon-
day. In  its  centre  would  appear  the  figure  of  a
Virgin.  This  six-pointed  star  you  see  engraved
on  the  seal  of  the  Theosophical  Society.  In  the
Kabala  the  Virgin  is  the  Astral  Light  or  Akasa,
and  the  six-pointed  star  the  emblem  of  the  Macro-
cosm. The  Logos,  or  Sosiosh,  to  be  born,  means
the  secret  knowledge  or  science  which  reveals  the

ZOROASTRIAN  kELIGION.  345

"  Wisdom  of  God."  Into  the  hand  of  the  prophet
messenger  Zarathusht  were  deUvered  many  gifts.
When  filling  the  censer  with  fire  from  the  sacred
altar,  as  the  Mobed  did  in  ancient  days,  the  act
was  symbolical  of  imparting  to  tJie  w  or s  J  uppers  the
knowledge  of  divine  truth.  In  the  '  Gital  Krishna
informs  Arjuna  that  God  is  in  the  fire  of  the  altar.
*'  I  am  the  Fire;  I  am  the  Victim."  The  Flamens,
or  Etruscan  priests,  were  so  called  because  they
were  supposed  to  be  illuminated  by  the  tongues  of
Fire  (Holy  Ghost)  and  the  Christians  took  the  hint
(^Acts  ii.)  The  scarlet  robe  of  the  Roman  Catholic
cardinal  symbolises  the  heavenly  Fire.  In  an
ancient  Irish  MS.  Zarathusht  is  called  Airgiod-
Lamk,  or  he  of  the  Golden  Hand,* — the  hand  which
received  and  scattered  celestial  Fire  (Ousley's
Oriental  Collections,  i.,  303).  He  is  also  called
Mogh  Nuadhat,  the  Magus  of  the  New  Ordinance,
or  dispensation.  Zarathusht  was  one  of  the  first
reformers  who  taught  to  the  people  a  portion  of
that  which  he  had  learned  at  his  initiation,  viz.,  the
six  periods,  or  Gdkambdrs,  in  the  successive  evolu-
tion of  the  world.  The  first  is  Alidyiizeram,  that
in  which  the  heavenly  canopy  was  formed ;  the
second  Mid-yirshCin,  in  which  the  collected  moisture
formed  the  steamy  clouds  from  which  the  waters
were  finally   precipitated  ;  the  third,   Piti-shahim,

*  I  have  a  copy  of  an  excellent  chromolithograph,  recently  pub-
lislied  at  Bombay,  representing  Zoroaster  as  standing  upon  a  double
star,  his  head  encircled  with  starry  rays,  his  hand  holding  a  seven-
ipinted  bamboo  and  fire  coming  from  his  hand.

346  THE  SPIRIT  OF  THE

when  the  earths  became  consolidated  out  of  primeval
cosmic  atoms ;  the  fourth,  lyaseram,  in  which  earth
gave  birth  to  vegetation ;  the  fifth,  Midiyarim,  when
the  latter  slowly  evoluted,into  animal  life;  the  sixth,
Haniespiia-inidan,  when  the  lower  animals  cul-
minated in  man.  The  seventh  period — to  come
at  the  end  of  a  certain  cycle — is  prefigured  in
the  promised  coming  of  the  Persian  Messiah,
seated  on  a  horse  ;  i.e.  the  sun  of  our  solar  system
will  be  extinguished  and  the  "  Pralaya,"  will  begin.
In  the  Christian  Apocalypse  of  St.  John  you  will
find  the  Persian  symbolical  prophecy  closely  copied ;
and  the  Aryan  Hindu  awaits  the  coming  of  his
Kalki  Avatar  when  the  celestial  White  Horse  will
come  in  the  heavens,  bestridden  by  Vishnu.  The
horses  of  the  sun  figure  in  all  other  religions.

There  exists  among  the  Persian  Parsis  a  volume
older  than  the  present  Zoroastrian  writings.  Its
title  is  Gjavidan  Chrad,  or  Eternal  Wisdom.  It  is
a  work  on  the  practical  philosophy  of  Magic,  with
natural  explanations.  Hyde  mentions  it  in  his
preface  to  the  Religio  Vetenun  Fersannn.  The
four  Zoroastrian  Ages  are  the  four  races  of  men —
the  Black,  the  Russet,  the  Yellow,  the  White.  The
four  castes  of  Manu  are  alleged  to  have  typified
this,  and  the  Chinese  show  the  same  idea  in  their
four  orders  of  priests  clothed  in  black,  red,  yellow,
and  white  robes.  St.  John  sees  these  same  colours
in  the  symbolic  horses  of  his  Revelation.  Speaking
of  Zoroaster,  whom  he  admits  to  have  possessed
all   sciences    and  philosophy    then  known  to  the

ZOROASTKIAN  RELIGION,  347

world,  Mr,  Oliver  gives  an  account  of  the  cave
temple  of  which  so  m^uch  is  said  in  Zoroastrian
literature.  "Zoroaster,"  he  writes,  "retired  to  a
ch'adar  cave  or  grotto  in  the  mountains  of  Bokhara
which  he  ornamented  with  a  profusion  of  symbolical
and  astronomical  decorations,  consecrating  it  to
Methr-Az.  Here  the  sun  was  represented  by
a  splendid  gem,  in  a  conspicuous  part  of  the
roof;  and  the  four  ages  of  the  world  were
represented  by  so  many  globes  of  gold,  silver,
brass  and  iron."     {History  of  Initiation^  p.  9.)

And  now  I  ask  you,  as  a  final  word,  if  the  crisis
has  not  arrived  when  every  man  of  you  is  called
upon,  by  all  he  holds  sacred,  to  be  up  and  doing.
Shall  the  voice  of  the  Chaldean  Fathers,  which
whispers  to  you  across  the  ages,  be  heard  in  vain  ?
Shall  the  example  of  Zarathusht  and  Mathan  be
forgotten  ?  Must  the  memory  of  your  hero  fore-
fathers be  dishonoured  ?  Shall  there  never  more
arise  among  you  a  Darab  Dastur,  to  draw  down  the
celestial  flame  from  the  azure  vault  upon  your
temple  altar?  Is  the  favour  of  Ahura-Mazda  no
longer  a  boon  precious  enough  to  strive  for  and
deserve?  The  Hindu  pilgrims  to  the  temple-shrine
of  Jotir  Math  at  Badrinath,  affirm  that  some,  more
favoured  than  the  rest,  have  sometimes  seen  far
up  amid  the  snow  and  ice  of  Mount  Dhavalagiri —
a  Himalayan  peak — the  venerable  figures  of  Ma-
hatmas — perhaps  of  Rishis — who  keep  their  watch
and  ward  over  the  slumbering  Aryan  faith,  and  await
the  hour  of  its  resuscitation.     So  too — our  travelling

348     SPIRIT  OF  THE  ZOROASTRIAN  REIIGION.

brother  in  Armenia  writes — there  is  a  cave  up  near
the  crest  of  Allah-Dag,  where  at  each  setting  of
the  sun,  appears  at  the  cave's  mouth  a  stately  figure,
holding  a  book  of  records  in  his  hand.  The  people
say  that  this  is  Mathan,  last  of  the  great  Magian
priests,  whose  body  died  some  sixteen  centuries
ago.  His  anxious  shade  watches  from  thence  the
fate  of  Zoroaster's  faith.  And  shall  he  stand  in
vain  ?  Is  he  to  see  that  faith  die  out  for  want  of
spiritual  refreshment  ?  Ye  sons  of  Sohrab  and  of
Rustam,  rouse  yourselves  !  Awake  before  it  be  too
late  !     The  Hour  is  here  :  where  are  the  MEN  ?

THE   LIFE  OF   BUDDHA  AND   ITS

LESSONS/'^

The  thoughtful   student,  in  scanning  the  rehgious
history  of  the  human  race,  has  one  fact  continually
forced  upon  his  notice,  viz.,  that  there  is  an  invari-
able tendency  to  deify  whomsoever  shows  himself
superior  to  the  weakness  of  our  common  humanity.
Look   where  we  will,  we  find  the  saint-like  man
exalted   into   a  divine  personage   and  worshipped
as   a    god.      Though  perhaps    misunderstood,    re-
viled and  even  persecuted  while  living,  the  apothe-
osis is  almost   sure  to   come  after  death  ;  and  the
victim  of  yesterday's  mob,  raised  to  the  state  of  an
intercessor  in  heaven,  is  besought  with  prayers  and
tears,  and  placatory  penances,  to  mediate  with  God
for  the  pardon  of  human  sin.     This  is  a  mean  and
vile  trait  of  human  nature, — the  proof  of  ignorance,
selfishness,    brutal    cowardice     and     superstitious
materialism.     It    shows   the  base    instinct  to    put
down  and  destroy  whatever  or  whoever  makes  men
feel  their  own  imperfections  ;  with  the  alternative
of  ignoring  and  denying  these  very  imperfections

*  A  Lecture  delivered  at  the  Kandy  Town  Hall,    Ceylon,    nth
June,  1880.

350     THE  LIFE  OF  BUDDHA  AND  ITS  LESSONS.

by  turning  into  gods  men  who  have  merely  spirit-
ualized their  natures,  so  that  it  may  be  supposed
they  were  heavenly  incarnations  and  not  mortal
like  other  men.

This  process  of  eitheinerization^  as  it  is  called,  or
the  making  of  men  into  gods  and  gods  into  men,
sometimes,  though  more  rarely,  begins  during  the
life  of  a  hero,  but  usually  after  death.  The  true
history  of  his  life  is  gradually  amplified  and  de-
corated with  fanciful  incidents,  to  fit  it  to  the  new
character  posthumously  accorded  to  him.  Omens
and  portents  are  now  made  to  attend  his
earthly  avatar  ;  his  precocity  is  described  as  super-
human ;  as  a  babe  or  lisping  child  he  silences  the
wisest  logicians  by  his  divine  knowledge  ;  miracles
he  produces,  as  other  boys  do  soap-bubbles ;  the
terrible  energies  of  nature  are  his  playthings  ;  the
gods,  angels  and  demons  are  his  habitual  attend-
ants ;  the  sun,  moon,  and  all  the  starry  host  wheel
around  his  cradle  in  joyful  measures,  the  earth
thrills  with  joy  at  having  borne  such  a  prodigy  ;
and  at  his  last  hour  of  mortal  life  the  whole  uni-
verse shakes  with  conflicting  emotions.

Why  need  I  use  the  few  minutes  at  my  dis-
posal to  marshal  before  you  the  various  personages
of  whom  these  fables  have  been  written  ?  Let  it
suffice  to  recall  the  interesting  fact  to  your  notice,
and  invite  you  to  compare  the  respective  biogra-
phies of  the  Brahminical  Krishna,  the  Persian
Zoroaster,  the  Egyptian  Hermes,  the  Indian  Gaut-
ama, and  the  canonical,  especially  the  apocryphal,

THE  LIFE  OF  BUDDHA  AND  FFS  LESSONS.     351

Jesus.  Taking  Krishna  or  Zoroaster,  as  you  please
as  the  most  ancient,  and  coming  down  the  chrono-
logical line  of  descent,  you  will  find  them  all  made
after  the  same  pattern.  The  real  personage  is  all
covered  up  and  concealed  under  the  embroidered
veils  of  the  romancer  and  the  enthusiastic  historio-
grapher. What  is  surprising  to  me  is  that  this
tendency  to  exaggeration  and  hyperbole  is  not
more  commonly  allowed  for  by  those  who  in  our
day  attempt  to  discuss  and  to  compare  religions.
We  are  constantly  and  painfully  reminded  that  the
prejudice  of  inimical  critics,  on  the  one  hand,  and
the  furious  bigotry  of  devotees,  on  the  other,  blind
men  to  fact  and  probability,  and  lead  to  gross  in-
justice. Let  me  take  as  ^n  example  the  mythical
biographies  of  Jesus.  At  the  time  when  the  Coun-
cil of  Nice  was  convened  for  settling  the  quarrels  of
certain  bishops  and  for  the  purpose  of  examining
into  the  canonicity  of  the  300  more  or  less  apocry-
phal gospels,  that  were  being  read  in  the  Christian
churches  as  inspired  writings,  the  history  of  the  life
of  Christ  had  reached  the  height  of  absurd  myth.
We  may  see  some  specimens  in  the  extant  books
of  the  apocryphal  New  Testament ;  but  most  of
them  are  now  lost.  What  have  been  retained  in
the  present  canon  may  doubtless  be  regarded  as  the
least  objectionable.  And  yet,  we  must  not  hastily
adopt  even  this  conclusion  ;  for,  *  you  know  that
Sabina,  Bishop  of  Heraclea,  himself  speaking  of
the  Council  of  Nice,  affirms  that  "  except  Constan-
tine   and    Sabinus,    Bishop    of   Pamphilus,   these

352     THE  LIFE  OF  BUDDHA  AND  ITS  LESSoNS.

bishops  were  a  set  of  illiterate,  simple  creatures
that  understood  nothing  ;  "  which  is  as  though  he
had  said  they  were  a  pack  of  fools.  And  Pappus,
in  his  Syiiodicon  to  that  Council  of  Nice,  lets  us  into
the  secret  that  the  canon  was  not  decided  by  a
careful  comparison  of  the  several  gospels  before
them,  but  by  a  lottery.  Having,  he  tells  us,  "  pro-
^miscuously  put  all  the  books  that  were  referred  to
the  Council  for  determination  under  a  communion-
table in  a  church,  they  (the  bishops)  besought  the
Lord  that  the  inspired  writings  might  get  up  on
the  table,  while  the  spurious  writings  remained  un-
derneath, and  it  happened  accordingly^  But  letting
all  this  pass  as  possibly  spurious  history,  and
looking  only  to  what  is  contained  in  the
present  canon,  we  see  the  same  tendency  to
compel  all  nature  to  attest  the  divinity  of  the
writer's  hero.  At  the  nativity  a  star  leaves  its  orbit
and  leads  the  Persian  astrologers  to  the  divine
babe,  and  angels  come  and  converse  with  shepherds,
and  a  whole  train  of  like  celestial  phenomena
occur  at  various  stages  of  his  earthly  career;  which
closes  am.id  earthquakes,  a  pall  of  darkness  over  the
whole  scene,  a  supernatural  war  of  the  elements,
the  opening  of  graves  and  walking  about  of  their
tenants,  and  other  appalling  wonders.  Now,  if
the  candid  Buddhist  concedes  that  the  real  history
of  Gautama  is  embellished  by  like  absurd  exagger-
ations, and  if  we  can  find  their  duplicates  in  the
biographies  of  Zoroaster,  Sankaracharya  and  other
real  personages  of  antiquity,  have  we  not  the  right

THE  LTFE  OF  BUDDHA  AND  ITS  LESSONS.     353

to  conclude  that  the  true  history  of  the  Founder  of
Christianity,  if  at  this  late  day  it  were  possible  to
write  it,  would  be  very  different  from  the  narratives
that  pass  current  ?  We  must  not  forget  that  Jeru-
salem was  at  that  time  a  Roman,  just  as  Ceylon  is
now  a  British  dependency,  and  that  the  silence  of
contemporary  Roman  historians  about  any  such
violent  disturbances  of  the  equilibrium  of  nature  is
deeply  significant

I  have  cited  this  example  for  the  sole  and  simple
purpose  of  bringing  home  to  the  non-Buddhistic
portion  of  my  audience  the  conviction  that,
in  considering  the  life  of  Sakya  Muni  and  the
lessons  it  teaches,  they  must  not  make  his  followers
of  to-day  responsible  for  any  extravagant  exuber-
ance of  past  biographers.  The  doctrine  of  Buddha
and  its  effects  are  to  be  judged  quite  apart  from
the  man,  just  as  the  doctrine  ascribed  to  Jesus  and
its  effects  are  to  be  considered  quite  irrespectively
of  his  personal  history.  And — as  I  trust  to  have
shown — the  actual  doings  and  sayings  of  every
founder  of  a  faith  or  school  of  philosophy,  must
be  sought  for  under  a  heap  of  tinsel  and  rubbish
contributed  by  successive  generations  of  followers.

Approaching  the  question  of  the  hour  in  this
spirit  of  precaution,  what  do  we  find  are  the  pro-
babilities respecting  the  life  of  Sakya  Muni?  Who
was  he  ?  When  and  how  did  he  live  ?
What  did  he  teach  ?  A  most  careful  comparison
of  authorities  and  analysis  of  evidence  establishes,

I  think,  the  following  data  :

z

354      THE  LIFE  OF  BUDDHA  AND  ITS  LESSONS.

1.  He  was  the  son  of  a  king.

2.  He  lived  between  six  and  seven  centuries
before  Christ.

3.  He  resigned  his  royal  state  and  went  to
live  in  the  jungle,  and  among  the  lowest  and
most  unhappy  classes,  so  as  to  learn  the
secret  of  human  pain  and  misery  by  per-
sonal experience  ;  tested  every  known  aus-
terity of  the  Hindu  ascetics  and  excelled
them  all  in  his  power  of  endurance  ;  sounded
every  depth  of  woe  in  search  of  the  means
to  alleviate  it  ;  and  at  last  came  out  vic-
torious, and  showed  the  world  the  way  to
salvation.

4.  What  he  taught  may  be  summed  up  in  a
few  words,  as  the  perfume  of  many  roses
may  be  distilled  into  a  few  drops  of  attar.
Everything  in  the  world  of  matter  is  unreal :
the  only  reality  is  the  world  of  spirit.  Eman-
cipate yourself  from  the  tyranny  of  the
former ;  strive  to  attain  the  latter.  The
Rev.  Samuel  Beal,  in  his  Cantena  of  Buddhist
Scriptures  front  the  Chinese,  puts  it  differ-
ently. ''  The  idea  underlying  the  Buddhist
religious  system  is,"  he  says,  "  simply  this  :
*  All  is  vanity,'  Earth  is  a  show,  and  Heaven
is  a  vain  reward."  Primitive  Buddhism
was  engrossed,  absorbed, by  one  thought — the
vanity  of  finite  existence,  the  priceless  value
of  the  one  condition  of  Eternal  Rest.

If  I  have  the  temerity  to  prefer  my  own  defini-

THE  LIFE  OF  BUDDHA  AND  ITS  LESSON"^,     355

tion  of  the  spirit  of  Buddha's  doctrine,  it  is  because
it  appears  to  me  all  the  misconceptions  of  it  have
arisen  from  failure  to  understand  his  idea  of  what  is
real  and  what  unreal,  what  worth  longing  and
striving  for,  and  what  not.  From  this  misconcep-
tion have  arisen  all  the  unfounded  charges  that
Buddhism  is  an  "  atheistical  " — that  is  to  say,  a
grossly  materialistic,  nihilistic,  negative,  vice-
breeding  religion.  Buddhism  denies  the  existence
of  a  personal  God — true  ;  denies  the  immortality
of  the  soul,* — true  ;  holds  out  no  promise  of  a
future,  unbroken  existence  in  heaven — true  ;  there-
fore— well,  therefore,  and  notwithstanding  all  this,
its  teaching  is  neither  what  may  be  properly
called  atheistical,  nihilistic,  negative,  nor  provo-
cative to  vice.  I  will  try  to  make  my  meaning
plain,  and  the  advancement  of  modern  scientific
research  helps  me  in  this  direction.  Science
divides  the  universe  for  us  into  two  elements —
matter  and  force  ;  accounting  for  every  pheno-
menon by  their  combinations,  and  making  both
eternal  and  obedient  to  eternal  immutable  law.
The  speculations  of  men  of  science  have  carried
them  to  the  outermost  verge  of  the  physical
universe.  Behind  them  lie  not  only  a  thousand
brilliant  triumphs  by  which  a  part  of  Nature's
secrets  have  been  wrung  from  her,  but  also  more
thousands  of  failures  to  fathom  her  deep  mysteries,
They  have  proved  thought  material,  since  it  is  the
evolution  of  the  gray  tissue  of  the  brain,  and  a
*  The  Astral  Man— not  the  seventh  principle  in  man.

356     THE  LIFE  OF  BUDDHA  AND  ITS  LESSONS.

recent  German  experimentalist,  Professor  Dr.  Jager,
claims  to  have  proved  that  man's  soul  Is  "  a  volatile
odoriferous  principle,  capable  of  solution  In  glycer-
ine."    Psychogen  is  the  name  he  gives  to  it,  and  his
experiments  show  that  it  is  present  not  merely  in
the  body  as  a  whole,  but  in  every  Individual  cell,  in
the  ovum,  and  even   in   the  ultimate  elements  of
protoplasm.     I  need  hardly  say  to  so  intelligent  an
audience  as  this  that  these  highly  interesting  ex-
periments of  Dr.  Jiiger  are  corroborated  by  many
facts,   both  physiological   and  psychological,  that
have  been  always  noticed  among  all  nations— facts
which  are  woven  into  popular  proverbs,    legends,
folk-lore,  fables,  mythologies   and  theologies,  the
world  over.     Now  if  thought  is  matter  and  soul  is
matter,  then  Buddha,  in  recognizing  the  imperma-
nence  of  sensual  enjoyment  or  experience  of  any
kind,  and  the  instability  of  every  material  form,  the
human    soul*    included,    uttered    a    profound  and
scientific  truth.     And,  since  the  very  Idea  of  grati-
fication  or  suftering   is  inseparable   from    that  of
material   being — absolute    SPIRIT  alone  being  re-
garded by  common  consent  as  perfect,  changeless,
and  Eternal— therefore,   in   teaching   the  doctrine
that  conquest  of  the  material  self,  with  all  its  lusts,
desires,  loves,  hopes,  ambitions  and  hates,  frees  one
from  pain,  and  leads  to  Nirvana,  the  state  of  Perfect
Rest,  he  preached  the  rest  of  an  untlnged,  untainted
existence  in  the  Spirit.     Though  the  soul  be  com-
posed  of  the   finest  conceivable  substance,  yet  if
*  The  Astral  Man  ;  not  the  seventh  principle  in  man.

THE  LIFE  OF  BUDDHA  AND  ITS  LESSONS.     357

substance  at  all — as  Dr.  Jiiger  seems  able  to  prove,
and  as  ages  of  human  intercourse,  with  the  weird
phantoms  of  the  shadow-world  imply — it  must  in
time  perish.  What  remains  is  that  changeless  part
of  man  which  most  philosophers  call  Spirit,  and
Nirvana  is  its  necessary  condition  of  existence.
The  only  dispute  between  Buddhist  authorities  is
whether  this  Nirvanic  existence  is  attended  with
individual  consciousness,  or  whether  the  individual
is  merged  into  the  whole,  as  the  extinguished
flame  is  lost  in  the  ocean  of  air.  But  there  are
those  who  say  that  the  flame  has  not  been  anni-
hilated by  extinction.  It  has  only  passed
out  of  the  visible  world  of  matter  into  the  invisible
world  of  spirit,  where  it  still  exists,  and  will  ever
exist,  as  a  bright  reality.  Such  thinkers  can  under-
stand Buddha's  doctrine,  and,  while  agreeing  with
him  that  the  soul  is  not  immortal,  would  spurn  the
charge  of  materialistic  nihilism  if  brought  against
either  that  sublime  teacher  or  against  themselves.

The  history  of  Sakya  Muni's  life  is  the  strongest
bulwark  of  his  religion.  As  long  as  the  human
heart  is  capable  of  being  touched  by  tales  of  heroic
self-sacrifice,  accompanied  by  purity  and  celestial
benevolence  of  motive,  it  will  cherish  his  memory.
Why  go  into  the  particulars  of  that  noble
life  ?  You  all  remember  that  he  was  the  son  of  the
king  of  Kapilavastu — a  mighty  sovereign  whose
opulence  enabled  him  to  give  the  heir  of  his  house
every  luxury  a  voluptuous  imagination  could
desire — and  that  the  future  Buddha  was  not  allowed

358     THE  LIFE  OF  BUDDHA  AND  ITS  LESSONS.

even  to  know,  much  less  to  observe,  the  miseries  of
ordinary  existence.  How  beautifully  Mr.  Edwin
Arnold  has  depicted,  in  his  *'  Light  of  Asia,"  the
luxury  and  languor  of  that  Indian  court,

"  Where  love  was  gaoler  and  delights  its  bars."
We  are  told  that

"  The  king  commanded  that  within  those  walls

No  mention  should  be  made  of  death  or  age,
Sorrow  or  pain  or  sickness.

And  every  dawn  the  dying  rose  was  pluck'd,
The  dead  leaves  hid,  all  evil  sights  removed  :

For  said  the  king,  '  If  he  shall  pass  his  youth
Far  from  such  things  as  move  to  wistfulness

And  brooding  on  the  empty  eggs  of  thought,
The  shadow  of  this  fate,  too  vast  for  man,

May  fade,  bee-like,  and  I  shall  see  him  grow
To  that  great  stature  of  fair  sovereignty.

When  he  shall  rule  all  lands — if  he  will  tulc—
The  king  of  kings  and  glory  of  his  time."

You  know  how  vain  were  all  the  precautions
taken  by  the  father  to  prevent  the  fulfilment  of  the
prophecy  that  his  beloved  son  would  be  the  coming
Buddha.  Though  all  suggestions  of  death  were
banished  from  the  royal  palace,  though  the  city
was  bedecked  with  flowers  and  gay  flags,  and  every
painful  object  removed  from  sight  when  the  young
Prince  Siddartha  visited  the  city,  yet  the  decrees  of
destiny  were  not  to  be  baffled  :  the  "  voices  of  the
spirits,"  the  "  wandering  winds,"  and  the  Devas
whispered  the  truth  of  human  sorrows  into  his
listening  ear,  and,  when  the  appointed  hour  arrived,
the  Suddha  Devas  threw  the  spell  of  slumber  over
the     household,    steeped     the    sentinels    in     pro-

THE  LIFE  OF  BUDDIIA  AND  ITS  LESSONS.     359

found  lethargy  (as  the  angel  did  the  gaolers
in  Peter's  prison),  rolled  back  the  triple  gates
of  bronze,  strewed  the  red  mohra  flowers
thickly  beneath  his  horse's  feet  to  muffle  every
sound,  and  he  was  free.  Free?  Yes,  to  resign  every
earthly  comfort,  every  sensuous  enjoyment,  the
sweets  of  royal  power,  the  homage  of  a  court,  the
delights  of  domestic  life  ;  gems,  the  glitter  of  gold  :
rich  stuffs,  rich  foods,  soft  beds ;  the  songs  of
trained  musicians,  and  of  birds  kept  prisoners  in
gay  cages  ;  the  murmur  of  perfumed  waters  plash-
ing in  marble  basins  ;  the  delicious  shade  of  trees
in  gardens  where  art  had  contrived  to  make  nature
even  lovelier  than  herself  He  leaps  from  his
saddle  when  at  a  safe  distance  from  the  palace,
flings  the  jewelled  rein  to  his  faithful  groom,
Channa,  cuts  off  his  flowing  locks,  gives  his  rich
costume  to  a  hunter  in  exchange  for  his  own,
plunges  into  the  jungle,  and  is  free  !

"  To  tread  its  paths  with  patient,  stainless  feet,

Making  its  dusty  bed,  its  loneliest  wastes,
My  dwelling,  and  its  meanest  things  my  mates  :

Clad  in  no  prouder  garb  than  outcasts  wear,
Fed  with  no  meals  save  what  the  charitable

Give  of  their  will,  shelter'd  by  no  more  pomp
Than  the  dim  cave  lends  or  the  jungle-bush.

This  will  I  do  because  the  woful  cry
Of  life  and  all  flesh  living  cometh  up

Into  my  ears,  and  all  my  soul  is  full
Of  pity  for  the  sickness  of  this  world  ;

Which  I  will  heal,  if  healing  may  be  found
By  uttermost  renouncing  and  strong  strife."

Thus  masterfully  does  Mr.  Arnold  depict  the  setin

36o     THE  LIFE  OF  BUDDHA  A  AD  ITS  LESSONS.

ment  which  provoked  this  great  renunciator.  The
testimony  of  thousands  of  millions  who,  during
the  last  twenty-five  centuries,  have  professed  the
Buddhist  religion,  proves  that  the  secret  of  human
misery  was  at  last  solved  by  this  divine  self-
sacrifice,  and  the  true  path  to  Nirvana  opened.

The  joy  that  he  brought  to  the  hearts  of  others
Buddha  first  tasted  himself.  He  found  that  the
pleasures  of  the  eye,  the  ear,  the  taste,  touch  and
smell,  are  fleeting  and  deceptive  ;  that  he  who  gives
value  to  them  brings  only  disappointment  and
bitter  sorrow  upon  himself  The  social  difference
between  men,  he  found,  was  equally  arbitrary  and
illusory :  caste  bred  hatred  and  selfishness  ;  riches
strife,  envy  and  malice.  So,  in  founding  his  faith,
he  laid  the  bottom  of  its  foundation-stones  upon  all
this  worldly  dirt,  and  its  dome  in  the  clear  serenity
of  the  world  of  spirit.  He  who  can  mount  to  a
clear  conception  of  Nirvana  will  find  his  thought
far  away  above  the  common  joys  and  sorrows  of
petty  men.  As  to  one  who  ascends  to  the  top  of
the  Chimborazo,  or  the  Himalayan  crags,  and
sees  men  on  the  earth's  surface  crawling  to
and  fro  like  ants,  so  small  do  bigots  and
sectarians  appear  to  him.  The  mountain  climber
has  under  his  feet  the  very  clouds  from  whose  sun-
painted  shapes  the  poet  has  figured  to  himself  the
golden  streets  and  glittering  domes  of  the  materi-
alist heaven  of  a  personal  God.  Below  him  are
all  the  various  objects  out  of  which  the  world's
pantheons  have  been  manufactured;  around,  above,

THE  LJFE  OF  BUDDHA  AND  ITS  LESSONS.     361

— immensity.  And  so  also,  far  down  the  ascend-
ing plane  of  thought  that  leads  from  earth
towards  the  Infinite,  the  philosophic  Buddhist
descries,  at  different  plateaux,  the  heavens  and
hells,  the  gods  and  demons,  of  the  materialist
creed-builders.

What  are  the  lessons  to  be  derived  from  the  Hfe
and  teachings  of  this  heroic  prince  of  Kapilavastu  ?
Lessons  of  gratitude  and  benevolence  ;  lessons  of
tolerance  for  the  clashing  opinions  of  men  who  live,
move,  and  have  their  being,  think  and  aspire,  only
in  a  material  world.  Lessons  of  a  common
tie  of  brotherhood  among  all  men  ;  lessons  of
manly  self-reliance,  of  an  equanimous  breasting  of
whatsoever  of  good  or  ill  may  happen.  Lessons  of
the  meanness  of  the  rewards,  the  pettiness  of  the
misfortunes,  of  a  shifting  world  of  illusions.  Lessons
of  the  necessity  for  avoiding  every  species  of  evil
thought,  word,  and  deed,  of  doing,  speaking,
and  thinking  everything  that  is  good ;  and  of
bringing  the  mind  into  subjection,  so  that  these
may  be  accomplished  without  selfish  motive  or
vanity.  Lessons  of  self-purification  and  com-
munion, by  which  the  illusoriness  of  externals  and
the  value  of  internals  are  understood.

Well  might  St.  Hilaire  burst  into  the  panegyric
that  Buddha  "  is  the  perfect  model  of  all  the  virtues
he  preaches  :  his  life  has  not  a  stain  upon
it."  Well  might  the  sober  critic,  Max  Miiller,  pro-
nounce his  moral  code  "  one  of  the  most  perfect
which  the  world  has   ever   known."     No  wonder

362     THE  LIFE  OF  BUDDHA  AND  ITS  LESSONS.

that,  in  contemplating  that  gentle  life,  Mr.  Edwin
Arnold  should  have  found  his  personality  "the
highest,  gentlest,  holiest,  and  most  beneficent
in  the  history  of  thought,"  and  been  moved  to  write
his  splendid  verses.  It  is  twenty-five  hundred
years  since  humanity  put  forth  such  a  "flower;"  who
knows  when  such  an  one  appeared  before  ?

Gautama  Buddha  Sakya  Muni  has  ennobled  the
whole  human  race.  His  fame  is  our  common  in-
heritance. His  Law  is  the  law  of  Justice,  providing
for  every  good  thought,  word,  and  deed  its  fair
reward ;  for  every  evil  one  its  proper  punishment
His  Law  is  in  harmony  with  the  voices  of  nature,
and  the  evident  equilibrium  of  the  universe.  It
yields  nothing  to  importunities  or  threats,  can  be
neither  coaxed  nor  bribed  by  offerings  to  abate  or
alter  one  jot  or  tittle  of  its  inexorable  course.  Am
I  told  that  Buddhist  laymen  are  leading  lives  the  re-
verse of  Baddistic  ;  that  they  display  vanity  in  their
worship  and  ostentation  in  their  alms-giving  ;  that
they  are  fostering  sects  as  bitterly  as  Hindus  ?  So
much  the  worse  for  the  laymen  ;  there  is  the  ex-
ample of  Buddha  and  his  Law.  Am  I  told  that
Buddhist  priests  are  ignorant,  idle  fosterers  of  super-
stitions grafted  on  their  religion  by  foreign  kings  ?
So  much  the  worse  for  the  priests  :  the  life  of
their  Divine  Master  shames  them,  and  shows  their
unworthiness  to  wear  his  yellow  robe  or  carry
his  beggar-bowl.  There  is  the  Law  immutable,
menacing  ;  it  will  find  out  and  punish  them.

But    what   shall    we  say    to   those   of    another

THE  LIFE  OF  BUDDHA  AND  ITS  LESSONS.     363

cast  of  character — the  humble-minded,  charitable,
tolerant,  religiously  aspiring  hearts  among  the  laity,
and  the  unselfish,  pure,  c.nd  learned  of  the  priests
who  know  the  precepts  and  keep  them  ?  The  Law
will  find  them  out  also ;  and  when  the  book  of
each  life  is  written  up  and  the  balance  struck,  every
good  thought  or  deed  will  be  found  entered  in  its
proper  place.  Not  one  blessing  that  ever  followed
them  from  grateful  lips  throughout  their  earthly
pilgrimage  will  have  been  lost  ;  each  will  help  to
ease  their  way  as  they  move  from  stage  to  stage  of
being

**Unto  Nirvana  where  the  Silence  h'ves,"

FINIS.

GLOSSARY.

By  particular  request,  the  following  interpretations  of  Eastern  words,  used
throughout  the  foregoing  Lectures,  are  given.  I  should  have  thought  that  many
of  them  were  already  familiar  enough  to  the  ordinary  reader  to  obviate  the
necessity  for  their  insertion  here.     But  it  seems  not.

Abiil  Pharaj.  A  Persian,
author  of  the  "  Book  of  Dynas-
ties."

Agastya.  An  ancient  sage  ol
Southern  India,  much  revered
throughout  tlie  country.

Apii.  Fire,  and  its  personified
principle,  in  Hindu  mythology.

Agnihotra.  A  mystic  cere-
monial, performed  by  the  Vedic
Brahmans,  with  the  object  of
developing  the  mystic  fire  latent
in  Akasd.

Agnihotri.  One  who  performs
the  ceremony  of  Agnihotra.

Ahankaram.     Personality;

egoism.

Ahriman.  The  Evil  Principle
of  the  Universe.

Ahura  Vairya.  The  funda-
mental Parsee  prayer,  or  confes-
sion of  faith.

Ahzirmazihi,  or  Ahnra  Mazda.
The  Good  Principle  of  the  Uni-
verse (see  also  Hormazd).

AJmruasters.  An  ancient
Persian  word,  meaning  "spirit-
ual teachers."

Ah'giod  Lamh  (literally,  he  of
the  golden  hand).  The  name  by
which  Zoroaster  is  referred  to  in
an  Irish  MS.

Aitareya Brdhviana.   A  sacred

book  ot  the  Brahmans,  dealing
with   their  rituals.

Aiwydonhana.  A  waist-band
worn  by  Zoroastrians.

Akdsa.  The  subtle  supersensu-
ous  matter  pervading  all  space.
In  one  aspect  it  is  identical  with
the  ^ther  of  Science.

Alexandria,  Neo-Platonists  of.
See  N'eo-Platonist'i.

Allah-Dag.  A  mountain  in
Central  Asia.

Aluf  Khan.  The  Moham-
medan Chief  who  signally  de-
feated the  Parsis  and  disjicrsed
them  from  their  home  in  Persia.

A  jneshaspenfas.  The  first  seven
angels.

Af/irita  Bazar  Patrika.  A
Calcutta  native  journal.

Aniritsar.  The  sacred  city  of
the  Sikhs,  in  the  Punjab.

A  nima.  The  power :;  f  psychics
of  increasing  their  weight.

Arahats  (literally,  the  worthy
ones).  The  initiated  holy  men  of
the  Buddhist  and  Jain  faiths.

Ardai  Viraf.  The  purest  of
Magian  priests  at  the  Court  of
King  Ardeshir  Babaganof  Persia.

Ardai  Viraf  Naineh.  A  Per-
sian book  containing  an  account
of  Ardai  Viraf.

\6b

GLOSSARY.

Ardeshan.  According  to  Euty-
chius,  the  first  priest  of  the
Sacred  Fire,  appointed  by
Nimrod.

Ardeshir  Bahagan.  The  first
prince  of  the  Sassanian  dynasty.

^r/?a/(literally  "the worthy").
A  Buddhist  or  Jain  sage  (see
also  Arahais).

Arjiin.  One  of  the  five
brothers,  called  Pandavas,  the
heroes  of  the  celebrated  epic
Mahahharat.

Aryan,  Pertaining  to  the
Aryas,  or  ancient  Brahmanical
invaders  of  India,

Aryan  Occult  Science.  The
ancient  Aryans  appear  to  have
had  a  complete  science  of  the
subjective  side  of  nature,  as  well
as  an  esoteric  philosophy  based
upon  it.

Aryaii  Philosophy.  The  an-
cient Aryas  not  only  evolved  the
Sanskrit  language — the  most  per-
fect known — but  also  developed
six  major  schools  of  Philosophy,
and  many  minor  ones.

Aryas.  The  higher  castes
among  the  Hindus.

Arya  Samaj.  A  society
founded,  ten  years  ago,  by  the
late  Dayanand  Saraswati,  for
the  restoration  of  the  Vedic
doctrines  and  ceremonials.

Ajyavarla.  Theancientname
of  Northern  India,  where  the
Brahmanical  invaders  first
settled.

Ashfa  Vidya.  The  eight
branches  of  study.

Asiatic  Occnliistn.  {See Aryan
Occult  Science. )

Asoha,  King.  A  celebrated
conqueror,  monarch  of  a  large
portion  of  India,  who  is  called
"the  Constantine  of  Buddhism."
Temp,  circa  250  B.C.

Asrama,  or  Asra/nam.  The
hermitage  of  Indian  recluses.

Atash  Bchrdm.  The  Zoroas-
trian  "  fire-temple,"  or  place  of
worship.

Atharva  Veda.  One  of  the
four  most  ancient  and  revered
books  of  the  Aryas.  It  is  sup-
posed by  some  Western  Orien-
talists to  be  mere  '*  theological
twaddle,"  but  is  in  fact  a  most
valuable  key  to  Esoteric  phi-
losophy.

Atma.  The  spirit,  the  Aug  ?
eides.

Attar.  A  perfume,  otto  of
roses.

Avatar.  The  incarnation  of  a
god,  so  called  among  the
Hindus.

Avesta.  The  sacred  books  of
the  Zoroastrians.

Babu.  A  title  or  prefix  of
honour  current  in  Bengal  ;  the
equivalent  of  "Master,"  Mon-
sieur^ Iderr,  etc.

Bactric  Worship.  Nature  wor-
ship practised  in  Central  Asia.

Badrinath.     A  Hindu  god.

Bairagee.  A  member  of  a  cer-
tain order  of  religious  mendicants
in  India.

Baksheesh.  A  gratuUy  or  alms ;
sometimes  a  bribe.

Bamboo.  A  kind  of  Indian
cane.

Bares  ma  Twigs  ^  or  Rods.
Parsi  divining  rods.

Behedin.  A  layman,  one  not  a
hereditary  priest.

Belor  Tagh.  A  mountain  in
Central  India.

Benares.  The  most  renowned
and  sacred  city  of  India,  situ-
ate on  the  banks  of  the  river
Ganges.  It  contains  a  great
number  of  splendid  ancient
temples  and  palaces.

Berosus.     A  Chaldean  Priest.

Bharat,  Bharata.  A  name  for
India.

GLOSSARY.

367

Bhuia  ddk  (literally  ' '  Demon's
Post  ").  The  equivalent  o(  what
we  call  a  "  Spiiitual  Medium."

Bokhara.  An  important  city
in  Tartary.

Borahs.  A  small  Moham-
medan sect,  a  sub-section  of  the
Shiahs,  well-known  for  their  com-
mercial shrewdness.

Bo-tree.  The  Indian  banyan
tree  {Fiais  Religiosa).  'I'he  his-
torical tree  under  which  Buddha
attained  spiritual  knowledge.

Brahma.  The  Hindu  Deity
which  personifies  the  active
cosmic  evolutionary  energy.

Brahmaloka.  The  highest
sphere  of  existence  where  forms
obtain.

Brahman,  or  Brahmin.  The
highest  caste  in  India.  (The
former  spelling  more  nearly  re-
presents the  sound  of  the  word
in  Sanskrit.)

Brahminical  Customs.  Social
and  religious  observances  pre-
scribed for  the  caste  of  Brahmans.

Brahmo  Samaj.  A  Hindu
Theistic  Society,  founded  about
fifty  years  since  by  the  late  Raja
Ram  Mohun  Roy ;  whose  ob-
ject was  to  restore  the  pristine
purity  of  the  Hindu  religion.

Bramachari  Bazoa.  A  Brah-
man ascetic  of  Central  India.

Buddha.  The  founder  of
Buddhism.  He  was  a  royal
prince,  by  name  Siddharlha,
son  of  Suddhorana,  king  of
the  Sakyas,  an  Aryan  tribe.

Buddhaship.  The  state  ^of
being  a  Buddha,  or  spiritually
enlightened.

Biiddhi.     The  spiritual  ego.
Buddhism.     The  moral  philo-
sophy taught  by  Buddha.

Buddhist.     One   who  accepts
the  moral  philosophy  of  Buddha.
Btingalozu.   The  com  mon  name
in  India  for  a  dwelling-house.

Cambodia.  One  of  the  coun-
tries forming  the  Eastern
Peninsula,  between  China  and
India.

Cambyses.     A  Median  King.

Cashmiris.  Inhabitants  of
Cashmere.

Castes.  Social  divisions,  or
groups,  among  the  Hindus.
The  four  principal  or  primitive
ones  are  those  of  priests,
soldiers  (including  nobility),
merchants  and  labourers.

Chakras.  Centres.  In  the
body,  centres  of  psychic  energy.

Channa.  The  servant  of
Buddha,  who  brought  back  to
the  king  his  father  the  news  of
his  great  Renunciation.

Chatusashthikala  Nirnaya.  A
treatise  descriptive  of  the  sixty-
four  arts  known  in  ancient
India.

Cheia.  A  pupil  of  an  adept  in
Occultism.

Chi?nborazo.  A  volcano  iu
South  America.

Chinvat  or  Chinvad  bridge  of
souls.  The  bridge  which  leads
souls  from  this  to  the  other
world  {Arabic).

Chittaui.     The  mind.

Cojijucius.  A  Chinese  philo-
sopher.

Crore.     Ten  millions.
Cutch.     A  province  of  West-
ern India.

'' Dabistan,''  or  School cf  Man-
ners. A  Persian  work  of  the
seventeenth  century  by  Mohsan
Fani.  (An  English  translation  is
procurable.)

Darab.  A  priest,  one  of  the
most  distinguished  of  the  Indian
Piirsis  (see  Dastur  Larab).

Daraga.  A  river  in  ancient
Persia.

Darius.  A  king  of  ancient
Persia.

i68

GZ0SSy1/^V.

Dtviiis  llyslaspcs.  A  Persian
monarch,  supposed  to  be  the
contemporary  of  Zoroaster.

Dastiir.  A  high  priest  of  the
Zoroastrians.

Dasttir  Darab.  One  of  the
most  distinguished  of  the  Indian
Parsi  priests  (see  Darab).

Derbent.     A  province   in   the
Caucasian  Viceroyalty  of  Russia.
Dervishes  of  Arabia.    A  sect  of
Mohammedan  ascetics  and  mys-
tics,

Desatir.  An  ancient  mystical
scripture  of  the  Parsi  religion.

DevacJian  (pronounced  Deva-
khdn).     The  conscious  after-life.
Devas.      Gods.

Devis.  From  the  Sanskrit  word
Div,  to  shine  :  the  Bright  Ones
— Elemental  Spirits,  Fairies,
Sylphs,  Dryads,  &c.

Dhmnvia.  Religious  law
{Pali).

Dharana.  Holding  a  subject
in  mind  steadfastly.

Dhavalagiri,  Mount.  One  of
the  important  peaks  of  the  Hima-
layas.

Dhydna,  or  Dhyan.  Abstract
contemplation.

Driikhs-Naai.  The  personifi-
cation in  Zoroastrianism  of  a  ma-
lignant current  of  boreal  mag-
netism.

Durbar.  The  state  reception  or
"  drawing-room  "  of  an  Indian
Prince  or  magnate.

Dzvaitas.  Dualists;  those  who
believe  in  the  distinctness  of  the
human  spirit  and  the  universal
spirit.

Eutychius.  A  priest  and  archi-
mandrite at  Constantinople,  who
wrote  on  Zoroastrianism.

Fargard.   A  ch  apter  of  a  book .
Fetish.    An  object  of  supersti-
tious adoration  ;  as,  for  instance,

an  ugly  image,  or  stock,  among
ignorant  African  tribes.

Framji  Gowasji  Hall.  One  of
the  largest  public  buildings  in
Bombay.

Franasti.  Thedemon  of  death,
mentioned  in  the  Vemiidad,  a
sacred  book  of  the  Parsis.

Gdharnhdrs.  The  five  days  at
the  end  of  the  Parsi  year,  also
other  days  of  feasting  in  different
seasons.

Ganesha.  The  Hindu  god  of
learning.

Ganges.  The  most  sacred  river
of  India.

Gathas.  Portions  of  the  Budd-
hist Scriptures.

Gautama  Buddha.  One  of  the
names  by  which  the  Founder  of
Buddhism  is  known.
Ghee.  Clarified  butter.
"  Gita,^^ ox Bhagavadgit-a.  An
episode  of  the  Mahabharata^  a
sacred  book  of  the  Brahmans.

Gjaviddn  Chrad  (literally,
eternal  wisdom).  Name  of  a
book  of  that  description.

Gobi,  Dese?t  of.  The  same  as
Shatno,  q.v.

Gopis.  Milk  maids,  with  whom
the  god  Krishna  is  represented
in  the  Hindu  mythology  to  have
been  in  love.  The  fable  is  in-
terpreted to  mean  the  correla-
tion of  force  (spirit)  and  matter.
Gossain.  A  Vaishnava  priest.
Goutaj?ia,  or  Gautama,  (See
Gaiitama  Buddha.)

Gupha.      A  cave   or    subter-
ranean resort  of  a  Yogi,  for  medi-
tation and  psychic  development.
Gurti.     Spiritual  preceptor.
Guru-asters  (vide  Zu7'u-asters).
Gustaspa.      Supposed    to    be
identical  with  Darius  Hystaspes.

Hafiz.      The  greatest    among
the  mystical  poets  of  Persia.

GLOSSARY.

369

Haines  pi  la  -  in  Ida  n .  A  m  on  g
the  Parsis,  the  period  during
which  the  lower  animals  began  to
evolve  into  men.

Haonia.  Among  the  Parsis,  a
god,  and  also  a  plant.

Hara,  Mount,  Where  Mo-
hammed is  said  to  have  received
the  Koran.

Hari.  A  name  of  Krishna  or
Vishnu.

Harischandra.  An  Indian
king  mentioned  in  the  Rama-
yana.

Heplaktis.  A  seven-rayed  god
of  the  Pythagoreans  and  Kaba-
lists ;  a  concrete  symbolization
of  the  solar  spcclriiin.

Hermes.  The  greatest  of  the
Egyptian  teachers  of  the  Eso-
teric doctrine.

Himalayas.  The  Himala-
yan Mountains,  which  sep-
arate India  from  Tibet,  are
not  only  the  highest  in  the
world,  but  also  most  connected
with  the  earliest  histories  of  our
race.  Exoterically,  their  highest
peaks  were  represented  as  in
connection  with  the  heavens  of
Aryan  mythology.

Hi?navdt.  Another  name  for
the  Himalayas.

Hindu.  Black  ;  a  name  said
to  have  been  contemptuously
applied  to  the  natives  of  India  I
by  their  Mohammedan  con-  [
querors.  j

Hinduism.     Used  here  in  the   ,
sense  of  any  orthodox  school  of
Hindu  religion.

Hindu  I  hilosopJiy.  There  are
six  principal  ancient  schools  of
philosophy  in  India,  with  num-
erous derived  ones.  For  par-
ticulars, see  Encylopcedia  Bri-
fannica,  or  the  Morks  of  Pro-
fessor Max  Midler,  Monier
Williams  and  others.

Hindustan,  The  country  [siati)

2  A

of  the  Hindus  ;  the  Indian  pen-
insula.

Hoinute.  "  Good  thoughts  ;  "
one  of  the  three  fundamental
Zoroastrian  commandments.

^^ Honover."  The  fundamental
Zoroastrian  Confession  of  Faith
and  Prayer.

Hormazd.  The  Eternal  Prin-
ciple of  Good  (see  also  Ahiir-
uiazda).

Hickhate.     **  Good  words."

Iddhizoiddhindna.  The  science
of  spiritual  development.

IndianHeuip.  An  intoxicating
smoking  mixture  prepared  from
the  stalk  of  Canabis  Indiea.

Indian  Jugglers.  In  India  these
form  a  separate  and  one  of  the
lowest  castes.  Some  of  their
feats  are  astounding  for  dexterity,
others  inexplicable,  except  upon
the  theory  of  some  knowledge
of  the  elements  of  Occult  Science.

Indu  Prakash.  A  Bombay
native  journal.

Indus.  The  principal  river  in
the  Punjab.

Iran.    Persia.

Iranian.     Persian.         [faith.

Islam.      The     Mohammedan

lyaseram.  The  period  of  the
evolution  of  the  vegetable  king-
dom on  earth,  so  called  among
Parsis.

Jaimini.  Expounder  of  the
whole  system  of  Brahmanical
rituals.

Jain.    A  religioussectin India,
closely  related  to  the  Buddhists.
They  affu-m  that  Buddha  wasa
pupil  of  one  of  their  sages.

Jiva.     Life  ;  a  living  being.

Jivan-Mukta.  The  realization
during  life  of  the  complete  union
of  one's  spirit  (Sanskrit:  atma)
with  the  Universal  Spirit.

Ji7'-Atm.a.    The  human  spirit.

Jotir  Math  (literally,  the  tern-

370

GLOSSARY.

pie  of  light).    A  celebrated  shrine
in  ihe  Himalayas.
Jiuigle.     An  Indian  forest.

Kdbah.  The  black  cubical
stone  of  Mohammed  at  Mecca.

Kahalists.  Jewish  doctors  or
adepts,  who  interpret  the  hidden
meaning  of  the  Scriptures  with
the  help  of  the  symbolical  Ka-
bala  (unwritten  tradition),  and
explain  the  real,  or  non -symboli-
cal one  by  these  means.  The
Tanaim  (B.C.  3  cent.)  were  the
first  Jewish  Kabalists  so  far  as
recorded.  But  the  Jewish  Ka-
bala  was  derived  from  the  much
earlier  and  more  perfect  Chal-
dean one.  Both  contain,  under
puzzling  symbols,  the  Esoteric
doctrine  recently  revived  by  the
Theosophical  Society.

Kabciric.  Pertaining  to  the
mystery  gods,  symbolizing  the
initiations  among  the  Samothra-
cians,  Assyrians,  (S:c.

Kabirim.  The  name  given  to
the  students  of  Kabala  in  the
secret  lodges  of  the  Pharisees.

Kaianian.  The  second  great
royal  dynasty  of  ancient  Persia.

KalaPani.  Black  waters;  the
sea.  Brahmans  are  forbidden  by
their  religion  to  cross  the  ocean.

Kalki  Avatar.  The  Messiah  of
the  Hindus  ;  the  last  incarnation
o^  Vishnu,  to  appear  at  the  end
of  the  present  cycle.

Kajuarnpa.  The  principle  of
will  in  man.

Kanada.  The  Founder  of  the
(Indian)  system  of  Atomic  Philo-
sophy, Vaisesikha,  similar  to  the
Heraclitan  Philosophy  of  Greece.

Kapila.  The  founder  of  one  of
the  six  principal  systems  of  In-
dian philosophy,  viz.,  the  San-
khya.

Kapilavastu^  Prince  of,  Gau-
tama Buddha.

Karma.  The  law  of  ethical
causation  :  "whatsoever  a  man
soweth,  that  shall  he  also
reap."

Khabardincs.  A  tribe  of
Caucasians.

KJwrasan,  Mountains  of.  In
Persia.

Khordah  -  Avesta  (literally,
"the  small  Avesta").  One  of  the
Sacred  Books  of  the  Parsis.

Kilauea.  An  enormous  vol-
cano in  the  Hawaian  Islands.

Koran.  The  Mohammedan
book  of  faith,  said  to  have  been
dictated  to  Mahommed  by  the
angel  Gabriel.

Krishna.  A  Hindu  god,  per-
sonifying the  spirit.

Ktirdistan.  The  country  of  the
Kurds.

Kiii-ds.  Warlike tribesof East-
ern Turkey  and  Persia  ;  nomin-
ally, Mohammedans  of  the  sect
of  Omar,  but  holding  to  rites
and  doctrines  almost  entirely
Magian.  Some  tribes  practise
mysterious  nocturnal  rites  of
lunar  worship,  and  in  each  tribe
is  at  least  one  old  man,  or  "holy
being,"  who  is  said  to  know  the
past  and  to  read  the  future.

Kiisa.  A  kind  of  Indian  grass
used  in  religious  ceremonies.

Kusti.  The  sacred  thread  worn
by  the  Parsis.

Laghimd.  The  psychic  power
of  lessening  the  weight  of  the
body  at  will.

Lakh,  or  lac.  One  hundred
thousand.

Laniaists  of  Tibet.  The  Budd-
hists of  Tibet.

Lamas.  Buddhist  monks  of
Tibet.

Laukiha.  Psycho-physiologi-
cal powers  developed  by  the  use
of  drugs  and  other  physiological
means.

GLOSSARY.

371

Lirigasarira.  The  double  or
astral  body.

Lokothra.  Psycliic  powers  ac-
companying spiritual  develop-
ment.

LotaJi.     A  brass  gol)let.

Lux?/ian  Sen.  The  last  Hindu
king  of  Bengal.

Mag.  A  word  used  by  the  pro-
])het  JereiTjjjah  to  designate  a
Babylonian  Initiate.

Maghistom .  Once  the  title  of
Zoroaster's  highest  disciple,
synonym  of  wisdom.

Magi.  Fire  -  worshippers  ;
really  the  great  magicians  or
wisdom-philosophers  of  old.

Magian.  Pertaining  to  the
Magi  or  Adepts  of  ancient  India.

Magianism.  ' '  Fi re- worship ; "
really  wisdom-religion.

Magus.  A  sage,  so-called  in
ancient  Persia.

Maharajah.  The  great  king  ;
also  a  title  of  honour.

Alahatma  (literally,  "  a  great
soul  ").    An  adept  in  Occultism.

Mahimnastava,  A  hymn  of
praise.

Mahojnet,  or  Mohammed.  The
founder  of  Islam.

Manas.  The  mind,  the  person-
ality, the  intellect.

Alandickyo  Upanishad.  One  of
the  ten  principal  Upanishads^  or
prose  supplements  of  the  metrical
Vedas,  the  most  sacred  book  of
the  Brahmans.

Mane/ho,  dynasties  of.  His-
tory of  Egyptian  kings  according
to  Manetho,  high  priest  of
Ileliopolis.

Mantra.     Incantation.

Manu.  The  great  Hindu  law-
giver (see  Mcmi).

Marichi.  One  of  the  seven
great  sages  of  India.

Mathatn.     Temple.

Mdya.      Illusion    which  pro-

duces the  diverse  manifestations
of  the  one  Reality.

Maya  Sabha.  The  palace  of
the  Pandavas,  built  by  Maya.

Mayaviriipa.  The  "  Double,"
*'  doppelganger  ' — "  perisprit."

Alazdiaznian.  Zoroastrian  ;
literally,  worshipping  God.

Medean  Magi.  Tlie  adepts  of
Occult  Science  among  the  anci-
ent Medes.  They  were  ac-
quainted with  the  secret  doctrine
taught  in  the  Kabala.

Media.  Greek  name  for  a  part
of  Persia.

Me7i2i.  The  great  Indian  legis-
lator ;  the  alleged  author  of  the
national  code  of  laws  (see  Manu).

IMidiyariin.  The  period  dur-
ing which  animal  life  was  evol-
ved ;  so-called  in  Zoroastrianism.

Mid])iizcram.  In  the  sacred
books  of  the  Parsis  a  period
of  evolution,  during  which  the
heavenly  canopy  is  said  to  have
been  formed.

Mid-yirshan.  In  the  Parsi
religion  the  period  of  evolution
during  which  clouds  were  formed.

Mobed.   TheZoroastrian  priest.

Mog.  A  Persian  word,  from
which  Magus,  a  true  priest,  is
derived.

Mogbed.  A  high  priest  of  the
Parsis,  or  fire-worshippers.

Mogh  Nnadhat.  A  name  for
Zoroaster  in  an  Irish  MS.

Mohsan  Fani.  T  h  e  a  u  t  h  or  of  a
Persian  work  called  "Dabistan,"
written  about  two  centuries
ago.

A/oksha.  Emancipation  from
conditioned  existence.

Moslem.  Poetical  abbreviated
form  of  Mussulman  ;  a  follower
of  Mohammed.

Muktdima  (literally,  a  liberated
spirit).  Theindivicfualityinman,
when  it  has  escaped  from  the
bonds  of  illusion,

372

GLOSSARY.

Mitld'i.    Salvation,  z'.^.,  release
from  conditioned  existence.
Mussulman.     (See  Moslem.)

Narada.    A  great  Indian  sage.

Natitch.  An  Indian  dance,  per-
formed by  professional  female
dancers.

Nazar,  or  Nazir.  Set  apart,
separated.

Nazar s.  A  very  ancient  sect  of
adepts,  existing  ages  before
Christ.

Nazaret.  Assyrian  Greek
name  for  Zoroaster.

Neilrherries.  or  Nil^iris.  The
"  Blue  INIountains."  A  range  of
hills  in  the  INIadras  Presidency
with  which  many  traditions  of
ancient  sages  and  wonder-workers
are  connected.

Neo-Platonists  of  Alexandria.
Followers  of  a  school  of  philo-
sophy founded  by  Ammonius
Saccas,  which  was  highly  altruis-
tic and  catholic.  It  recognized
the  existence  of  some  portion  of
divine  or  spiritual  truth  in  every
form  of  religion,  and  left  a  deep
impress  upon  early  Christianity.

Niraug.  The  liquid  with  which
the  Parsis  wash  their  faces  every
morning.

Nirvana.  Beatitude,  vioksha
{q.v.).  The  state  of  abstract,
spiritual  existence.

Nii~i'anic.  Pertaining  to  Nir-
vana, the  Buddhist  name  for  the
final  beatitude.

Omar.  The-second  Khali  fell  of
the  Mohammedans.

Ormazd-  Yacht.  A  part  of  the
Khordeh-Avesia  ;  a  prayer.

Osetya.  A  province  in  the
Caucasian  Viceroyalty  of  Russia.

Osiris.  The  Egyptian  sun  -god.

Padmdsan.  A  posture  practised
by  some  Indian  mystics.  It
consists  in  sitting,  with  the  legs

crossed  one  over  the  other,  and
tl]e  body  straight.

Pahlavi.  An  ancient  language
of  the  Zoroastrians.

Pali.  The  language  in  which
the  principal  scriptures  of  the
Buddhists  are  written.

Palingenesis.  Thebeginningof
the  period  of  Cosmic  activity ;
also  re-birth.

Pandit.     A  learned  Brahman.

Pdnini.  The  greatest  of  San-
skrit grammarians.

Parabrahvia.  The  supreme
principle  in  Nature.

Parasnatha.  One  of  the  great
teachers  of  the  Jain  sects.

Parsiism.  The  religion  of  the
Parsis,  Zoroastrianism.

Parsis.  Followers  of  the
ancient  Persian  faith  ;  fire-wor-
shippers.

Parvad.  In  Hindu  mythology
the  goddess  represeniing  Cosmic
Energy.

Patanjali.  The  author  of
Yoga  Philosophy.

Pice.  A  small  Indian  copper
coin,  worth  a  little  over  an
English  farthing.

Piti-shahim.  According  to  the
Parsis,  the  period  during  which
the  earth  became  consolidated
out  of  primeval  cosmic  atoms.

Prakriti.  Nature,  Cosmic
matter.

Pralaya.  Theperiod  of  Cosmic
rest.

Prarthana  SamaJ.  A  Theistic
Society  of  Bombay.

Prc-Iranian.  Anterior  to  the
Iranians  or  Persians.

Piicca.  Ripe,  permanent.  A
pucca  house  is  one  built  of  good
bricks  and  mortar,  or  other  per»
manent  material.

Puggri.     A  turban.

Pundit.  A  Brahman  learned  in
Sanskrit.

Ptoijah.     The    northernmost

GLOSSARY.

373

province  of  British  India,  and  in-
habited by  the  most  \varhl<e  races.

fjiranas  (literally,  the  old
writings).  A  collection  of  Brah-
manical  writings,  mostly  of  a
mythical  character,  the  least
authoritative  of  all.

Purdahs.  Screens  or  curtains
hanging  before  the  entrance  to
the  women's  apartments.

Pttrushas'pa.  The  father  of
Zoroaster,  according  to  the
native  traditions.

Radha.  The  queen  among  the
Gopis,  who  are  said  to  have
been  in  love  with  Krishna.

Rajagriha.  An  ancient  city  in
Behar,  where  Buddha  preached.

Rajah,  King  ;  also  a  title  of
nobility.

Rama.  The  celebrated  King  of
ancient  India,  the  hero  of  the
great  epic,  named  Ramayan.

Ramayana.  A  magnificent
Indian  epic  poem.

Ravana.  King  of  Ceylon,  and
slain  by  Rama.

Rislii  (literally,  a  revealer).  A
holy  sage.

Rupee.  An  Indian  silver  coin,
equivalent  to  about  is.  8d.  of
English  money.

Riistani.  A  hero  of  the  ancient
Parsis,  immortalised  by  Firdusi
in  the  Shdh-Ndjiieh.

Ryot.  A  peasant  cultivator,  or
tiller  of  the  soil.

Sahaoih.      Victory  {HebreTo).

Sa/'eans.  Worshippers  of  the
heavenly  bodies.

Sabha.     A  Society.

Sabian,  or  Planetary  Religion.
The  worship  of  the  heavenly
bodies.

Sad-der.  Literally,  a  hundred
doors.

Sadhxi.     A  holy  man.

Sahcysradalci'ii,    One  of  the  six

centres  of  psychic  energy  in  the
human  body.

Sakya  Mitni.  The  Holy
Teacher  of  the  Aryan  tribe  of
the  Sakyas.  One  of  the  appella-
tions of  Gautama  Buddha.

Samadki.     Ecstatic  trance.

Saviaj.     A  Society.

Sa?)iajist.  A  member  of  the
Arya  Samaj.

Saviothracian.  Pertaining  to
Samothrace.

Sanjdn.  The  place  where  the
fugitive  Persians,  persecuted  by
Omar,  found  shelter  in  India.

Sankara  Acharya,  ox Sankara-
charya.  The  author  of  the  Ved-
anta  School  of  Philosophy,  that
which  denies  the  personality  of  the
Divine  Principle,  and  affirms  its
unity  with  the  spirit  of  man.

Sanskrit  (literally,  \k\Q polished
dialect).  The  classical  language
of  the  ancient  Aryans  ;  the  most
copious,  noble  and  scientifically
constructed  language  in  the
world.  Its  literary  treasures  are
incalculably  precious.

Sanyasis,  A  Sansla-it  word,
meaning  a  class  of  Hindu  ascetics
whose  minds  are  steadfastly  fixed
upon  the  Supreme  Truth.

Sastras.  The  sacred  writings  of
the  Hindus.

Sec  an  der.  Alexander  the
Great.

Sera}}iptir.  A  city  in  Bengal  on
the. banks  of  the  Ganges.

Serosliizad.  An  angel  in  the
Zoroastrian  hierarchy  supposed
to  correspond  to  Gabriel.

Shadachakranis.  The  six  cen-
tres of  force  in  the  human
body.

Shauio,  desert  of.     In  Tibet.

Shi  karri.     A  hunter.

ShriniadBhagavata.  The  prin-
cipal religious  book  of  the
Vaishnava.

Siddha.   One  who  has  obtained

374

GLOSSARY.

psychic  powers  by  proficiency  in
the  Occult  vScience.

Siddhis.  Extraordinary  powers
obtained  by  spiritual  develop-
ment.

Sikh  War.  The  war  for  the  con-
quest of  the  Kingdom  of  Runjit
Singh,  the  powerful  monarch  of
the  Sikhs,  popularly  styled  "The
Lion  of  the  Punjab."  The  Koh-
i-noor  diamond  belonged  to  him.

Simla.  A  Sanatorium  and  hill-
station  in  the  foot-hills  of  the
Himalayas  ;  the  official  summer
residence  of  the  Viceroy  of
India.

Sita.  The  wife  of  Rama  in
Hindu  Mythology,  and  the  per-
sonification of  Cosmic  Matter.
As  Rama  personifies  Spirit,  their
loving  relationship  typifies  the
correlation  of  Force  and  Matter.

Siva.  One  of  the  Hindu  gods ;
with  Brahma  and  Vishnu  he
forms  the  Tritmcrti,  or  Trinity.

Sivaic  Lingam.  The*  phallic
representation  of  the  Hindu  god,
Siva.

Sivaite.    A  worshipper  of  Siva.

Skandha.  The  impermanent
elements  which  constitute  a  man.

Slokas.    vStanzas.

Sohrab.  Son  of  Rustam,  the
great  Persian  hero  (see  Rtis-
tavi).

Solar  or  Fire  Worship.  The
religion  of  the  Parsis,  popularly
so-called.

Soma.  A  mystic  drink,  men-
tioned in  the  Vedas.

Soorb  Ovanness.  A  monastery
in  Armenia.

Sosiosh.  The  coming  Messiah
of  the  Zoroastrians.

Sthulasarira,  or  SthitlSharij-a.
The  gross  physical  body.

Stiddha  Devas.  The  highest  or
purest  gods.

Siidra.  The  lowest  caste  among
the  Hindus,

Stijis.  A  practically  Pantheistic
sect  of  the  jNIohammedans,  be-
lieving in  the  ultimate  "  one-
ness "  with  God.

Suksh?na  Sharira.  The  subtile
body  ;  the  double.

Sutras.    Aphorisms.

Talisj?ian.     A  charm.

Talmud.  Jewish  commentaries
on  the  Bible.

Talmudists.  Students  of  the
Talmud,  or  Rabbinical  com-
mentaries on  the  Jewish  Scrip-
tures.

Tamasha.      Show,  display.

Tantrika.  Worshippers  of  the
Indian  goddess  Sakti,  who  typi-
fies Force.

Telugu.  Alanguage  spoken  in
Southern  India.

Teocalis.  Holy  enclosures  of
the  Arizona  Indians.

Theodidaktoi  of  Greece.  The
God-taught  philosophers  ;  a
school  which  sought  a  know-
ledge of  divine  things  by  the
self-development  of  the  latent
spiritual  faculties.

Thian  Shan  mountains.  In
Central  Asia.

Tibet,  mystics  of.  A  class  of
adepts  of  Esoteric  Science  among
the  highest  grade  of  Buddhist
ascetics.  They  are  identical
with  the  Hindu  Mahatmas.

Tiflis.  The  capital  of  Georgia.

Travancore.  A  province  in
Southern  India.

Tripitikas.  The  sacred  books
of  the  Buddhists.

Tukaram.  A  religious  poet
who  flourished  in  the  Bombay
Presidency,  and  attained  great
popularity.

Turban.  A  cloth  wrapped
about  the  head  as  a  covering,  in-
stead of  a  hat  or  cap.

Tiiticorin.  The  most  Southern
Indian  sea-port.

GLOSSARY,

375

Ushidannna.  The  mountain
on  which  Zoroaster  is  said  to
have  obtained  his  sacred  Scrip-
tures.

Vach.  The  Logos,  the  mystic
word.

Vaishnava.  Worshippers  of
Vishnu.

Vasishta.   Agreat  Indian  sage.

Vatsavana,  A  sage  of  ancient
India.

Vedaiitists,  Followers  of  the
Vedanta,  a  system  of  Indian
ideahstic  philosophy.

Vedas.  The  most  authoritative
of  the  Hindu  Scriptures.

Veda  Vyasa.  The  celebrated
Rishiwho  collected  and  arranged
the  Vedas  in  their  present  form.

Vedic.  Pertaining  to  the  Veda,
or  four  oldest  sacred  books  of
the  Aryans,  viz.,  Rig,  Yajur,
Sama,  and  Atharva.  They  are
considered  as  having  been  di-
rectly revealed  to  the  Rishis,  or
Aryan  sages,  by  Brahma.

Vendidad.  One  of  the  Zoroas-
trian  sacred  books.

Vihara.  A  Buddhist  monas-
tery.

Vishnu.  The  second  member
of  the  Hindu  Trinity — the  prin-
ciple of  preservation.

Visishtadvaitis.  An  Indian  re-
ligious sect  who  believe  in  salva-
tion by  grace.

Vistdsp.     A  Bactrian  King.
Vomer.     The  nasal  cavity.
Vurushte.    ' '  Good  deeds ;"  the
third    great     commandment    of
Zoroaster.

Yapia.     A  sacred  Zoroastrian
Book.

Yasht.     A  part  of  the  Parsi

Prayer  -  book  —  the  Khordeh
Avesta.  There  are  several  of
them.

YathCi  aim  Yahy6.  The  funda-
mental Zoroastrian  prayer  and
confession  of  faith.

Yazata.  The  angels  inferior  to
the  Amshaspanos.

Yazaias.  The  personified  good
principles  of  Nature.

Yoga.  The  science  and  art  of
spiritual  development.

Yoga  Sulras.  The  parts  of  the
Yoga  Philosophy.

Yoga  Vidya.  The  science  of
Yoga  ;  the  practical  method  of
uniting  one's  own  spirit  with  the
Universal  Spirit  or  Principle.

Yogi.  Amystic  who  is  develop-
ing himself  spiritually  according
to  the  system  laid  down  in
Patanjali's  Yoga  Philosophy.

Yozdathraigur.  The  same  as
Magus,  an  adept  of  ancient
Persia.

ZaratiisJii,  or  ZaratJmstra.  A
Persian  form  of  the  name  Zoro-
aster.

Zend.  The  sacred  language  of
ancient  Persia.

Zend  Avesta.  Thesacred  Scrip-
ture of  the  Parsis,  or  fire-wor-
shippers.

''Zera-Lshtar."  The  title  of  the
Chaldean  or  Magian  priests.

Zoroaster.  The  Prophet  of  the
Parsis.

Zoroastrian.  Pertaining  to  the
religion  of  Zoroaster.

Zoroastrianism.  The  religion
of  the  Parsis,  commonly  called
Fire-worshippers.

Ziirii-aste>  s.  The  prophets  of
the  Parsis.

INDEX.

Absolute  Truth,  58

Abul  Pharaj,  his  Book  of  Dynas-
ties, quoted,  344

Adepts,  139,  163,  212

Aeronautics,  perfection  of  the
Aryans  in,  265

Agni,  fire  of,  T28

Agnihotra,  the,  128,  157

Ahankaram,  95

Akasa,  the,  100,  loi,  209,  295

Alexandria,  Neo-platonists  and
Theurgists  of,  55

Amoretti,  investigations  by,  213

Amrita  Bazar  Pairika,  the  fear-
less champion  of  Indian  in-
terests, 189

Apparitions,  89,  122

Apollonius  of  Tyana,  on  the
occult  properties  of  gems,  214

Arabian  Nights,  the,  245

Arnold,  Edwin,  his  Light  of
Asia,   quoted,  35S,  359,  362,

Aryan  philosophy,  xiii.,  74,  129,

151,  162,  168,  171
Aryan  wisdom,  71,  123
Arya  Samaj,  x.,  54,  175,  271
Aryavarta,  55,  67,  71,  80,   127,

165,  170,  171,  267
"Ashta  Vidya,"  266
Asoka,  King,  edicts  of,  112
Asramas,  private  passages  to,  98
Astral  self,  140
Atharva  Veda,  156
Atheism,  272
Atma,  59,  '^'S>,  93,  94,  95,  105,

I33>  273
Aura,  the,  156,  313,  314

Bach,  the  composer,  231

'   Bagehot,  Walter,  on  the  ancients

and  "progress,"  292
Bain,  Professor,  100,  131
Bairagee,  dirty,  114
Beal,   Rev.   Samuel,  his  Catena

of  Buddhist  Scriptures,  quoted ,

354.

Berzelius,  theory  of,  295

Bible,  the,  325

Biology,  285

]>lack  Art,  the,  321

Blavatsky,  Madame,  psychic
phenomena  produced  by,  -^t^',
355  385  43  ;  her  J  sis  Unveiled^
46,  48,  54,  57;  becomes  an
American  citizen,  57;  quoted,
59  :  munificence  of,  120  ;  the
author's  first  meeting  witli,
121,  122,  159,  190-195,  227.
229,  233,  240,  241,  245,  297,

309>  319,  341
Boeckh,  260

Boehmen,  Jacob,  73

Bombay,  addresses  delivered  at,

49

Bombay,  approach  to,  125

Bombay,  youth  of,  75

Bradlaugh,  Mr.,  79

Brahmaloka,  118

Brahminical  customs,  156-157

Brahmo  Samaj,  54,  271

Bramachari  Bawa,  265

Brugsch  Bey,  on  the  origin  of
the  old  Egyptians,  261

Buchanan,  Professor,  his  discov-
ery of  the  psychometer,  209,
249

Buddha,  Lord,  his  answer  to  the
Kalama  people,  40;  debate
between    and    jiis    projected

78

INDEX.

"Double,"  96;  recumbent
image  of,  155  ;  his  retirement
to  desert  places,  206  ;  his  life
and  its  lessons,  349-363

Buddhi,  '^%^  94,  95

Budd/iisl  Catechism,  106

Buddhist,  the,  58

Bunsen,  260

Burnouf,  258

Cahagnet,  the  French  meta-
physician, his  tribute  to  the
Theosophical  Society,  18S ;
210,  255

Calcutta,  first  visit  to,  119

Calhoun,  Major,  on  the  survival
of  the  Fire- Cult  among  the
Indian  tribes  of  Arizona,  319

Cama,  K.  R.,  the  eminent  Parsi
scholar,  70,  343

Camomile  plant,  the,  150

Carpenter,  Professor  W.  B.,  242

Caste,  74-75

Ceylon,  213,  262

Ceylon,  Branch  Society  at,  51

Charms  and  spells,  328

"  Chatusashthikala  Nirnaya,"
263

Chemistry,  limitations  of,  295

Chela,  122

Chinvat  Bridge  of  Souls,    144,

339

Chittam,  95

Chittenden,  a  village  in  Ver-
mont, the  scene  of  the  Eddy
]:)henomena,  237,  241

Christadelphians,  the,  177

Christianity,  dogmatic  fabric  of,
17-19

Christianity,  in  America,  78

Chubb  lock  of  the  Universe,  201

Cicero,  house  of,  208

Civilisation,  measure  and  marks
of,  293-294

Clairvoyance,  144,  213,  250

Communist  refugees,  conspir-
acies of,  57

Comparative  philology,  266,
274

Compton,  Mrs.,  case  of,  139

Comte,  115

Confucius,  74,  112,  168

Conway,  Mr.  Moncure  D.,  saying
of,  36

Cook,  Mr.  Joseph,  unmanly
conduct  of,  112,  338

Cosmogony,  Hebrew,  289

Cox,    Serjeant,    his    phrase    of    ^
"  Psycliic  Force,"  220

Crookes,  Mr.  William,  discover-
ies of,  203,  211;  his  Researches
in  the  Phenomena  ofSpirit7ial-
ism,  219,  220,  224,  225,  227  ;
a  member  of  the  Theosophical
Society,  255

Crystal-reading,  207,  210,  212-
213,  252

D'abistAN,  or  School  of  Man-
ners, 84,  178,  179;  one  of  the
most  valuable  of  books  for  the
thoughtful  Parsi,  339

Dalhousie,  Lord,  Governor-
General  of  India,  150

Darmesteter,  Dr.,  his  Introduc-
tion to  the  Vendidad,  quoted,
312,  327;  336

Darwin,  his  theory  of  evolution,
250

P)astur  Darab,  318

Davis,  Andrew  Jackson,  63,  73,
144

Defense iir,  Le,  Parisian  organ
of  the  Ultramontane  party,  its
friendly  attitude  towards  the
Theosophical  Society,  42

Demoniac  agency,  244

Denton,  Professor,  his  Sozil  of
Ihings,  208

Dervishes,  323

Desatir,  the,  145,  304

Desmousseaux,  Chevalier,  series
of  books  by,  243

Devachan,  89

Devils,  321

Dharana,  139,  148

Dhyana,  fourth  stage  of,  107,
139,  141,  148

Dickens,  Charles,  his  Jack
Btmsby,  198

INDEX,

179

Disestablishment,  79
Divining-rods,  325,  329
Dondoukoff  Korsakoff',    Prince,
Viceroy     of    the     Caucasus,

309
Dosabhoy  Framjee,  his  work  on

The  Par  sees,  quoted,  310,  342
"Double,"  the,  92,  95,  96,  100,

loi,  123,  135,  152,  254,  295
Draper,  Professor,  79,  his  Con-
Jiict     between     Religion     and

Science,  288
Dryden,  quoted,  170
Dualists,   their  belief  regarding

the  soul,  87,  102,  T04
Duncker,  Prof,  his  Geschichte des

AlterthiDHs,  343
Dupotet,  Baron,  209,  255
Dwaitas,  the,  114

Eastern  philosophy,  68
Ecce  Homo,  18
Ecstatics,  212,  214
Eddy,  Horatio,  238
Eddy,     William,     the     famous
medium,   122,  139,  232,  236-
242
Edinburgh,  41

Edison,    discoveries   of,  203 ;  a
member  of  the  Theosophical
Society,  255
Edmonds,  Chief  Justice,  on  the
number  of  American  spiritual-
ists, 216
Edmonds,  Miss  Laura,  243
Ego,  the,  48,  89,  136,  138,  162
Egypt,  antiquity  of,  260-261
Egypt,  Hierophants  of,  247
Egyptian  pyramids,  the,  208,  260
Electric  light,  203
Electricity,  93

Elphinstone  College,  70,  303
Ennemoser's  History  of  Magic^

quoted,  321,  330
Esdaile,  Dr.  James,  his  Natural
and  Mesmeric    Clairvoyance,
quoted,  149,  150,  15 1
Esoteric  Buddhism,  29,  43
Etchmiadzine,     monastery     of,

309

Ether,  100
Euhemerization,  350
Eutychius,    on    Zoroastrianism,

308
Exorcism,  special  forms  of,  243

Fasces,  Roman,  67

Fauvety,  M.,  on  human  frater-
nity, 188

F61ix  P6re,  his  taunt  to  the
Academic,  61,  200

Finis  coronal  opus,  1S5

Fire-philosophers,  55

Fire-worship,  308,  315

Flammarion,  Camille,  255

Fludd,  Robert,  on  Fire,  315-316

Folk-lore,  251

Force,  60,  100

Framji  Cowasji  Hall,  Bombay

49' 63  ,    .        r       o

France,  79  ;  population  ot,  27b

Freemasons,  their  means  of
mutual  identification,  56

French  Communist  refugees,
conspiracies  of,  57

Galileo,  149,  289
Ganpatrao,   Mr.,  editor    of  the

hidti  Prakash,  his  asperations

of  the  Theosophists,  186,  188
Gathas,  the,  145
Gautama,  59,  74,  112,  168,  247
Gems,  214
Geometry,  146
Germany,    rupture  of  wi^h    the

Pope,  79
God,  38,  62,  73,  no
Gould,     Baring,     his     Cniious

Myths  of  the  ^Middle  Ages,  326.
Gray,  quoted,  125
Gregory,  Professor  William,  210

Haeckel,  115
Hafiz,  quoted,  183-184
Haldane  and  Kemp's  translation

of  Schopenhauer,  15
Hare,    Robert,    the    Nestor    of

American     Chemistry,     217,

218,  220

INDEX.

Harris,  Rev.  Thon^as  Lake,  ex-   \

periences  of,  222
Hashtop,  Queen,  temple  of,  262
Hebrew  Cosmogony,  289
Hermes,  rod  of,  325
Hermetic  doctrine,  the,  46
Hierophants  of  Egypt,  247
Himavat,  short  cut  to,  98
'Hindu,  58

Hinduism,  what  is  good  in,  103
Hints  oil  Esoteric  1  heosophy^  90
Hume,  David,  his  Enquijy  con-
cerning Htiman    Understand-
ing, 198;  argument  of,  235
Hunter,  Dr.,  his  England's  Work

in  India,  quoted,  278
Huxley,  Professor,  his  Lay
Sermons,  quoted,  24  ;  his
Physical  Basis  of  Life
quoted,  61,  ^t^,  200;  quoted,
288,  2S9,  291  ;  his  Lay  Ser-
mons, quoted,  298

Illumination,  247,  314

Illusion,  153

Immortality,  individual,  25,  59

Incantation,  329,  335

India,  49  ;  industry  and  re-
sources of,  77;  products  of,  78

India,'Past,  Present,  and  Future,
257-283

Indian  Press,  its  attitude  towards
the  Theosophical  Society,  71

Infallibility,  out  of  fashion,  49

Initiate,  the,  96,  157

Ireland,  over-populated,  27S

Irish  National  Church,  disestab-
lishment of,  79

Isis  Unveiled,  54,  57,  59,   191,

297,  319
Islam,  58

J  ACER,    Dr.,    experiments    of,

35<J-357
Jain,  the,  58

Jennings,     Mr.     Hargrave,    his  j

Kosicrucidns,  quoted,  315  I

Jesuits,  expulsion  of  from  France,   '

79  '

esus,  59;    temptation  of,   205,    |

20S ;  his  best  maxims  taught
by  others,  299;  suspected  of
employing  magic  arts,  327  ;
mythical  biographies  of,  351,

353

Jews,  58

Jiva,  %-],  94,  95

Jivan-Miikta,  or  soul  emanci-
pated, 63

Jiv-Atma,  or  life  principle,  the,
138

Jones,  Sir  William,  258,  312.

Kabala,  the  Chaldean  sacred
^volume,  312,  315

Kabeiric  mysteries,  318,  321

Kaiviin,  aZoroastrian  sage,  179

Kamarupa,  88,  94

Karma,  or  merit,  the  corner-
stone of  Religion,  102

Kepler,  149

Keshub  Babu  Chunder  Sen,  116,
126

Kilauea,  crater  of,  164

Kinetic  theory  of  gases,  285,
291

Kingsford,  Anna,  The  Perfect
Way,  46

Koh-i-noor  diamond,  the,  138,

374
Koran,  the,  207
Korner,  Dr.  Justinus,  211
Krishna,  156,  350,  351
Kurd,  appearance  of  a,  240-241

Lane-Fox,  Mr.,  255

Lange's    History    of  Material'

ism,  quoted,  29,  30
Le  Conte,  quoted,  61
Levi,    Eliphas,    his    Dogme    et

Rituel  de  la  Hatite  Magie,  &c. ,

344
Levitation,  211

Leyden   jar,    how    discharged,

.^57
Life-principle,  the,  138
Lindsay,  Lord,  234,  255
Lingasarira,  87,  95
Loadstone,  powos  of,  214
London,  idle  capital  in,  77

INDEX.

581

Lubbock,  Sir  John,  his  address
to  the  British  Association,
285,  286,  292,  297

LuUy,  Raymond,  112-I13

Luxman  Sen,  160

MacGreCxOR,  Dr.,  his  History
of  the  Sikh  War,  143

MacMahon,  Marshal,  79

Magianism,  312

Magic,  149,  325

Magnetism,  207

Mahatmas,  description  of  97,
98  ;  the  author  receives  visits
from,  123,  124,  139,  196

Mahiijinastava,  The,  quoted,
162

Mahomet,  206

Maitland,  Edward,  The  Perfect
Way,  46

Man,  132,  133

Manas,  88,  94,  95

Mandiikyo  Upanishad,  95

Manetho,  dynasties  of,  260

Mapes,  Professor,  234

Materiahsm,  unscientific,  xii.

Matter,  our  Western  ignorance
of,  24

Maudsley,  Henry,  100

Mayavirupa,  %'^,  89,  92,95,  lOl,
123,  133,  134,  135

Mediumism,  109

Mediumship,  peril  of,  244

Mena,  monarchy  of,  260

Merit,  or  Karma,  the  corner-
stone of  Religion,  102

Mesmer,  207

Mesmerism,  a  necessary  branch
of  study,  108  ;  ordinary  ex-
periments, 138,  150-151

Mexico  and  Peru,  sacred  litera-
ture of,  62

Mill,  John  Stuart,  his  Disserta-
tions and  Discussions,  quoted,

137-138
Milton,  the  Heaven  of,  63,  144
Miracles,  Hume  on,  198
Miraculous      phenomena,      im-
possibility of,  91
Missionaries,  Christian,  58

Mohini,  Mr.,  45

Mohsan  Fani,  84,  1 78

Moksha,  144,  187,  313

Montezuma,  319

Moore,  Thomas,  quoted,  202

Moses,  58,  267,  308

Moses,  Rev.  Stninton,  226,  22S

Moslem  Paradise,  63

Mozart,  238

Muktatma,  or  soul  universalized,

Mukti,    or    emancipation,    T05,

107
Milller,    George,     "the    Lord's

Dealings  with,"   329
Milller,  Max,  15  ;  his  Chips  from

a  German  Workshop,  quoted,

16,  259,  312  ;  on  the  Buddhist

moral  code,  361
Mysticism,  literature  of,  143

"Nature,"  motto  of  the  journal
so-called,  40 ;  report  of  an
address  taken  from,  285

Nazars,  the,  305

Neilgherries,  the,  98

Neo-Platonists    of    Alexandria,

55.  247
Nihilist  party  in  Russia,  79

Nirvana,    105,    206,   313,    356,

357,  3<JO,  363
Numa,  319,  321

Occult  Sciences,  the,  60,  198
Od,   or   Odyle,    156,   158,   209-

212,  249
Odic  aura,  156
Oliver,  Rev.  George,  his  History

of  Initiation,  quoted,  347
Omar,  sword  of,  302
Ontology,  85
Oriental  philosophy,  54
Orpheus,  on  the  loadstone,  214
Ossetines,     the,     their     curious

custom  of  sepulture,  342
Ouvarof,   Count,  the  Nestor  of

Russian    archaeologists,    341,

342
Owen,  Robert  Dale,  216,  231

382

INDEX.

Palestine  Exploration  Society,

340

Palingene:-iis,  Asiatic  theory  of,
106

Parabrahma,  59,  145

Paracelsus,  207

Parasnatha,  58,  331

Parsi  Archeeological  Society  at
Pjombay,  x.

Parsi,  the,  58,  331.

Patanjaii,  his  Yoga  Sjilras,  90,
144,  147,  148,  153,  154

Peebles,  Mr.  J.  M.,  his  researches
at  York,  228

People  from  the  other  Woi'ld,  89,
139,  241,  242

Perty,  Professor,  21 1

Philadelphian,  a  name  that  might
have  been  adopted  by  the
Theosophical  Society,  177

Phonograph,  the,  203

Pierce,  Mr.,  223

Pius  IX.,  Pope,  anathematizes
mediumship,  243

Plato,  267

Pliny,  quoted,  321

Plotinus,  the  philosopher,  why
he  refused  to  reveal  his  birth-
place and  parentage,  303

Pope,  Alexander,  quoted,  62,
131,  201

Porphyi'y,  the  pupil  and  liter-
ary    biographer  of    Plotinus,

Prarthana  Samaj,  54,  175,  271
Prayer,  efficacy  of,  329
Precious  stones,  214
Prideaux,  his  Ancient  Universal

History^  quoted,  308
Printing,  discovery  of,  79
Prognostication,  power  of,  109
Progress,  real  and  false,  292-297  ;

a  relative  term,  296  ;  mask  of

removed,  300
Psychic  phenomena,  146,  147
Psychology,  48,   86,    loS,    129  ;

sceptre  of,  137,  148,  273
Psychometry,     109,     138,    208,

209,  249
pundits,  the,  attitudeof,  127,  128

Puranas,  the,  207
Pythagoras,   on  precious  stones,
214

Raja  Rammohun  Roy,  45
Rajendralala    Mittra,    Dr.,    his

story  of  a  Sadhu,  141
Raniayana,  story  in  the,  90
Rammohun  Roy,  45
Raymond  Lully,  112- 1 13
Reformation,  the,  79
Reichenbach,  Baron  von,  his  Re  •

searches  on  Magnetism,    121,

154,  155^158,  207  ;  -209,  210,

211,  213,  249,  343
Reincarnationists,  modern  school

of,  106
Religion,  81

Renan,  Ernest,  quoted^  260
Rishis,    the,    58,    71,    99,    103,

no,  113,  115,   118,  121,  128,

247, 265

Roman /rzjr^j,  67
Rule,  Margaret,  levitation of,  21 1
Runjit  Singh,  142,  143
Russia,  56,  57,  79.

Saehapathy      Swami,      work

published  by,  151,  154
Sadhu,  story  of  a,    141  ;  burial

of  a,  142-143;  pretended,  164
Sahasradalam,^94
Sakya-Muni,  58,  73, 208,  314,353
Salem  witchcraft  horrors,  211
Samadhi,  139

Sankara  Acharya,  73,  90,  208
Sanskrit  literature,  study  of,  15,

258,  274
Sapphire,  the,  supposed  magical

property  of,  213
Sastras,  the,  128,  133,  143,  145,

151,  156,  160
Schopenhauer,    Arthur,    on    the

Vedas  and  Upanishads,  15, 33
Schweigger,  quoted,  319
Science,  79
Stances,  139
Self,  the  serpent  coiled  beneath

the  flowers  of  life,  184.
Sensuality,  68

INDEX.

-^.8

j"j

Shadadiakrams,  94

Shakespeare,  quoted,  166

Shankar  Pandurang  Pandit,  his
translation  of  the  Vedas,  274

Simla,  291

Sinbad,  in  the  Valley  of  Dia-
monds, 119

Sinnett,  Mr.  Alfred  Percy,  his
Esoteric  Biiddhisui,  29  ;  and
Occult  World,  43,  46,  97

**  Sitarama  Anjaniyam  (Cosmic
matter),"  95

Slade,  Dr.  Henry,  his  rare
mediumist  powers,  229;  falsely
charged  with  dishonesty,  229-
230

Solavief,  Professor,  the  "  Her-
bert Spencer  of  Russia,"  192

Somnambules,  212

Sorcery,  321

"Soul,"  meaning  of  the  word,
130

Soul-principle,  the,  139

Spencer,  Herbert,  on  Religion,
20,  21,  23,  81,  iro,  131,  134,

Spirit-rapping,  148,  220,225,226

Spiritualism,    22 ;    literature  of,

221

Spiritualists,  ancient  and  modern,

55
Stewart,  Professor  Balfour,   his

Unseen  Universe,  25,  47,  100;

his   Conservation   of  Energy^

quoted,  60-61,  62,  73

Sthulasarira,  87,  88,  93,  94,  133,

134

Supernaturalism,  the  curse  of  all

creeds,  91
Swami     Dayanand     Saraswati,

the  eminent  Aryan  reformer,  x
Swedenborg,  73,  144
Syllabus  of  the  Vatican  Council,

49

Table-moving,  225
Tait,    Peter    Guthrie,    his    Un-
seen Universe,  25,  47,  100
Talismans,  secret  of,  335
Talmud,  the,  305

Technology,  schools  of,  76
Telephone,  the,  203
Temple,    Sir    Richard,    on    the
decay  of  the  Hindu  faith,  271,

273.

Theodidaktoi  of  Greece,  247

Theosophical  Society,  27-29  ;  a
primary  object  of,  32,  41  ;
its  raison  d'etre,  49  ;  its  aims,
50;  progress  of,  51-52;  its
platform,  plans,  and  prospects,
53-56  ;  arcana  of,  56 ;  its
organisation  and  constitution,
55-57  ;  its  attitude  towards
religious  belief?,  57-59;  recep-
tious  at  Bombay,  70 ;  not  a
money-making  body,  71 ;  its
attitufle  towards  science,  85,
98-99  ;  declared  policy  and.
platform  of,  108  ;  foundation
of,  123,  145,  146  :  rules  and
regulations  of,  159,  175,  181  ;
not  a  miracle  club,  193,  195,
203,  215,  338

Theosophist,  The,  29  ;  motto  of,
40,  46,  126-127,  187,  189-190,
340

Theosophy,  defined  by  Webster,
53  ;  purposes  to  make  men
better,  57  ;  proper  definition
of,  129,  148,  176,  177,  180,
184,  185,  197,  256

Theurgists,  55

Thought-reading,  228

Thought,  transmissibility  of,
109

Tibet,  mystics  of,  147

Training  in  Occult  Science,  146,

I47»  i<^3
Trance,  90,   109
Tripitikas,  the,  60
Truth,  absolute,  58
Tukaram,  186,  187

United  States  of  America,  67,

75,  7^,  n
Unity,  67

Universal  Brotherhood,  146, 18^]^

189
University  degrees,  75

3§4

INDEX.

Upanishads,  the,  15,  28,  33,  39

Vasishta,  59

Vatican  Council,  syllabus  of,  49

Vatsavana,  263

Vedantism,  151

Vedantists,  the,  145

Vedas,  the,  39  ;  sublime  utter-
ances of,  60,  112,  206,  274

Vcdic  philosophy,  71

Vedic  religion,  x

Vestal  mysteries,  Roman,  319,
321

Visishtadvaitis,  114

Vital  force,  imparted  by  the
mesmerist,  109

Von  Vay,  Baroness,  210

Wade,  Sir  Claude,  his  Camp
and  Court  of  Ruiijil   SiiKjh,

143

V>\igncr,  Professor,  of  St.  Peters-
burg, his  review  of  People
frovi  the  other  JVorld^  10^2.

Wallace,  Alfred  Russell,  on
Hume's  theory  of  miracles,
198 ;  on  spiritualist  pheno-
mena, 225-227,  242  ;  a  mem-
ber of  the  Theosophical
Society,  255

Ward,  Mr.,  his  work  on  Indian

History,  Literature,  and  My-
thology, quoted,  263-264

Webster,  his  definition  of ' '  Theo-
sophy."  53

Williams,  Prof.  Monier,  article
in  the  N'inctcenth  Century
quoted,  331,  337-33S

Witchcraft,  149

Wordsworth,  quoted,  40

Yoga,  90;  science  of,  129  ;  four
stages  of,   140,  147,  151,

153,  179,  265
Yoga  Vidya,  129
Yogi,  the,   loi,   139,    147,

154,  179,  265,  279
Youngs,    Mrs.,   raises   a  piano-
forte from  the  floor,  233,  234

152,

152,

Zaratusht,  20S,  302,  303, 304

Zcndavesla,  60,  207

ZoUner,  Fr.,  217,  229

Zoroaster,  58,  59,  74  ;  Bactrian
rock-cut  image  of,  155,  168,
206,  301  ;  real  history  of  never
written,  307,  et  sapius  seqq ,

Zoroastrian  Religion,  spirit  of  the,
301-348  _

Zoroastrianisin,    x.,    302,
the  old  life  gone  out  of,  309

iPZ',

S.  COWAN  &  CO..  STRATU.MORE  PRINTING  WOK.KS,  1  ERTK,

15  York  Street,  Covent  Garden,
London,  December  1888.

Mr    Redway's    Publications

New  and  Forthcoming  Works

hi  Crozvit  Svo,  Cloth^  ^s.  6d.

Practical    Heraldry ;

Or,  an  Epitome  of  English  Armory.

SHOWING

How,  AND  BY  Whom  Arms  may  be  Borne  or  Acquired,

How  Pedigrees  may  be  Traced,  or  Family

Histories  Ascertained.

By    CHARLES    WORTHY,    Esq.,

Formerly  of  H.M.  82nd  Regiment,  and  sometime  Principal  Assistant  to  the

late  Somerset  Herald  ;  Author  of  "Devonshire  Parishes,"  &c.,  &c.

With  124  Illustrations  from  Designs  by  the  Author.

Introductory.— Science  of  Heraldry,  Coats  of  Arms,  Varieties  of  Arms,  Partition  Lines,
Tinctures,  Furs,  Ordinaries,  &c.,  &c.— Common  Charges,  Lions  and  other  Beasts,  Heraldic
Monsters,  &c.,  &c.— Miscellaneous  Objects  Alphabetically  arranged.— Technical  Terms
used  in  Heraldry.— The  Rules  of  Blazon.— The  Marshalling  of  Arms,  Hatchments,  &c.,  &c.
—Crests,  Mottoes,  Helmets,  Mantlings,  Supporters,  and  Coronets.— The  Rules  of  Preced-
ence.—Peers,  Baronets,  Knights,  Esquires,  Gentlemen.— Advice  to  Pedigree  Hunters,  How
to  Trace  a  Pedigree,  Parochial  Registers,  Public  Documents,  Probate  Court,  Fees,  &c.,
&c.— The  College  of  Arms,  Officers  of  Arms,  Heraldic  Records,  Heraldic  Fees,  Grants  of
Arms,  Change  of  Name. — Liveries,  with  some  Remarks  upon  Cockades,  and  those  who  are
entitled  to  use  them.— General  Remarks,  Drawing  and  Illuminating,  Taxes  in  respect  of
Arms.

2  Vols.  Demy  Sz'o,  Cloth,  25^-.

Philosophy    of    Mysticism

{PHILOSOPHIE  DER  MYSTJK).

By    DR    carl    DU    PREL.

Translated  from  the  German  by  C.  C.  Massey.

i2?)io,  Cloth^  \s.

The  Grammar  of  Palmistry.

By     KATHARINE     ST.     HILL.
With    Eighteen   Illustrations.

Contents  :— On  the  Outline  and  Mounts— On  the  Lines— On  the  Palm  of  the  Hand  and
Lesser  Lines— On  Signs  of  Illness,  Temper,  and  on  Special  Qualities— On  Reading  the
Hands  {Examples)— T\i&  Hands  of  Distinguished  Persons— Glossary  of  Terms.

In  demy  Zvo,  Cloth ^  \os.  6d.

The  Indian  Religions ;

Or,  Results  of  the  Mysterious  Buddhism.

Concerning  that  also  which  is  to  be  understood  in  the

Divinity  of  Fire.

By  HARGRAVE  JENNINGS,

AUTHOR  OF   THE    "  ROSICRUCIANS,    THEIR    RITES    AND    MYSTERIES,"   ETC.

Demy  Svo,  Cloth  extra,  *js.  dd.

Bacon,   Shakespeare,   and  the

Rosicrucians.

By    W.     F.     C.    wigs  ton.

With  Two  Plates.

Contents  : — Chapter  I. — John  Heydon — The  Rosicrucian  Apologist — His  Family — And
Character — Identity  of  Bacon's  "  New  Atlantis  "  with  Heydon's  "Land  of  the  Rosicrucians"
— Bacon's  Hand  to  be  traced  in  the  famous  Rosicrucian  Manifestoes — Discovery  of  his
Initials  among  the  Members  of  the  Fraternity — Proofs  that  the  antedating  of  the  Origins  of
the  Rosicrucian  Brotherhood  was  a  Splendid  Fraud.  Chapter  II. — The  Prophecy  of  Para-
celsus— A  Stage  Player  one  of  the  greatest  impostors  of  his  age,  probably  Shakespeare
— Description  of  the  Rosicrucian  Manifestoes — Lord  Bacon  as  Chancellor  of  Parnassus
— Meeting  of  the  Rosicrucians  in  1646  at  Warrington,  at  a  Lodge,  in  order  to  carry
out  Lord  Bacon's  Ideas — Adoption  of  his  Two  Pillars — Origins  of  Modern  Masonry
in  England,  as  modified  Rosicrucianism  —  Bacon's  oral  Method  of  Transmission  —
His  Familiarity  with  the  Mysteries.  Chapter  III. —  The  Tempest — Islands  of  Souls  or
Spirits — Avalon — "  The  green  grass  Island  of  Apples  " — Identified  with  Prospero's  Island —
Avalon  identified  with  Atlantis — Virgil's  Mysteries  refound  in  The  Tempest — Sirens  and
the  Sea — Meaning  of  the  word  Tempest,  as  allied  to  Creation.  Chapter  IV. —  Vcmis^  and
Adojiis — Key  or  Myth  Centre  of  the  Rosicrucian  Emblem  the  Crucified  Rose — Meaning  of
the  Adonis  Myth — Its  Solar  Origin — The  Rose  Emblem  for  Adonis — The  Hermetic  Crystal
and  Rosewater — The  Crucified  Truth — Light,  Life,  and  Logos — As  the  Crucified  Rose —
The  Secret  of  Immortality  derived  from  the  Conservation  of  Energy — The  Phoenix  and  the
Palm  Tree — The  Rose  Cross  the  last  Degree  in  Masonry — The  Paradise  of  Dante — The
Rose  Dante's  Divine  Word  or  Logos.  Chapter  V. — Freemasonry — St  Albans,  the  Home  of
Lord  Bacon,  and  the  Origins  of  Freemasonry  in  England — Allusions  to  St  Albans  in  the  Plays
— Arms  of  St  Albans,  a  St  Andrew's  Cross — Johann  Valentin  Andreas— His  Arms  also,  a  St
Andrew's  Cross — Curious  Facts  connected  with  the  Publication  of  the  Rosicrucian  Manifestoes
— Andreas,  the  supposed  Author  of  the  "  Fama,"  denies  all  connection  with  the  Fraternity —
Antiquity  of  Masonic  Records  in  Architecture.  ChapterVI. — Hermetic  and  Masonic  Origins
in  the  Plays — The  Phoenicians,  the  Transmitters  of  the  Hermetic  and_  Masonic  Gnosis —
Reference  to  Carthage,  Dido,  and  ^neas  in  The  Tempest — The  Phoenicians  and  Tyrians
alluded  to  by  Bacon  in  the  "  New  Atlantis" — Pericles  laid  at  Tyre  and  Ephesus — Rosalind,
the  Great  Diana,  or  Nature  Goddess  of  the  Ephesians,  etc.,  etc.

Problems  of  the  Hidden  Life.

Being  Essays  on  the  Ethics  of  Spiritual  Evolution.

By  pilgrim.

Price  IS.

A  Hancibook  of  Cartomancy,

Fortune-Telling,  and  Occult  Divination.

Founded  on  the  Traditions  of  Magical  Seership  and
ON  THE  Doctrines  of  Superior  Influence.

With  the  Addition  of  Cagliostro's  Mystic  Alphabet  of

the  Magi  and  the  Revolutions  of  the

Golden  Wheel.

By     grand     orient.

Sapiens  doininahitiir  astris.

About  500//.,  Dejuy  Svo,  C/of/i,  price  \^s.

Marriage  and    Kinship    among
Primitive  Peoples.

A  Study  of  Sexual  Morality.

By  C.  STAN  I  land  WAKE,

author  of  "serpent  worship,"  etc.

Contents  : — Preface.  Introduction — Sexual  Morality.  Chapter  I.  Primeval  Man.
II.  Suppo.sed  Promiscuity.  III.  Primitive  Law  of  Marriage.  IV.  Group  Marriage.  V.
Polyandry.  VI.  Polygyny.  VII.  Monandry.  VIII.  The  Rule  of  Descent.  IX.  Kin-
ship through  Females.  X.  Kinship  through  Males.  XL  Marriage  by  Capture.  XII.
Monogamy.

Demy  Zvo^  pp.  315,  Cloth,  \os.  6d,

Lives   of

Alchemy stical  Philosophers.

Based  on  Materials  Collected  in  18 15,  and  Supplemented

BY  Recent  Researches.

With  a  Philosophical  Demonstration  of  the  True  Principles  of
THE  Magnum  Opus,  or  Great  Work  of  Alchemical  Re-Cox-

STRUCTION,  AND  SOME  ACCOUNT  OF  THE  SPIRITUAL  CHEMISTRY.

By   ARTHUR    EDWARD    WAITE.

To    WHICH    IS    ADDED   A   BIBLIOGRAPHY   OF   AlCHEMY   AND

Hermetic  Philosophy.

Lives  of  the  Alchemists  : — Geber— Rhasis — Alfarabi — Avicenna — Morien — Albertus
Magnus — Thomas  Aquinas — Roger  Bacon — Alain  of  Lisle — Raymond  Lully — Arnold  De
Villanova — Jean  De  Meung — The  Monk  Ferarius — Pope  John  XXII. — Nicholas  Flamel —
Peter  Bono — Johannes  De  Rupecissa — Basil  Valentine — Isaac  of  Holland — Bernard
Trevisan — John  Fontaine — Thomas  Norton — Thomas  Dalton — Sir  George  Ripley — Picus
De  Mirandola — Paracelsus — Denis  Zachaire — Berigard  of  Pisa — Thomas  Charnock —
Giovanni  Braccesco — Leonardi  Fioravanti — John  Dee — Henry  Khunrath — Michael  Maier —
Jacob  Bohme — J.  B.  Van  Helmoiit — Butler — jean  D'Espagnet — Alexander  Sethon —
Michael  Sendivogius  —  Gustenhover — Busardier — Anonymous  Adept  —  Albert  Belin —
Eirenaeus  Philalethes — Pierre  Jean  Fabre — John  Frederick  Helvetius — Guiseppe  Francesco
Borri — John  Heydon — Lascaris — Delisle — John  Hermann  Obereit — Travels,  Adventures,
and  Imprisonments  of  Joseph  Balsamo.

2  Vols.  Demy  Zvo,  pp.  791,  ClotJi,  price  2is.

The  White  King  ;

Or,  Charles  the  First,

AND  THE

Men  and  Women,  Life  and  Manners,  Literature  and  Art
OF  England  in  the  First  Half  of  the  17TH  Century.

By  W.  H.  DAVENPORT  ADAMS.

Contents  of  Vol.  I.:— Personal  History  of  Charles  I.— Some  of  the  Royal  Children  :
Princess  Elizabeth,  Duke  of  Gloucester,  Princess  Mary,  and  Henrietta,  Duchess  of  Orleans
—The  Court  of  Charles  I. :  Philip,  Earl  of  Pembroke,  The  Countess  of  Carlisle,  Sir
Kenelm  Digby — A  King's  Favourite :  George  Villiers,  Duke  of  Buckingham — Notes —
A  Moderate  Statesman  :  Lucius  Cary,  Lord  Falkland — An  Absolute  Statesman  :  The
Earl  of  Strafford— A  Philosopher  of  the  Reign  of  Charles  I. :  Edward,  Lord  Herbert  of
Cherbury— Glimpses  of  Life  and  Manners  :  The  Strafford  Letters— Appendix— Notes  and
Corrections — Index  to  Vol.  I.  Contents  of  Vol.  II.  : — Three  Noble  Ladies  :  Margaret,
Duchess  of  Newcastle,  Lady  Anne  Fanshawe,  Mrs  Hutchinson— The  Arts  in  England
during  the  Reign  of  Charles  I. :  i.  Music;  2.  The  Drama;  3.  Painting  and  Architecture-
Literature  in  the  Reign  of  Charles  I. :  i.  The  Courtly  Poets  ;  2.  The  Serious  Poets — Men
of  Letters  in  the  Reign  of  Charles  I.— Appendix— Notes  and  Corrections— Index  to  Vol.  II.

Second  Edition.     Crotvn  %vo,  Cloth^  price  6j.

Dreams   and  Dream-Stories.

By  anna    bonus    KINGSFORD,

m.d.  of  paris;   president  of  the   hermetic  society;   author  of
"the  perfect  way  in  diet,"  etc.,  etc.  ;   and  part  author

OF  "the  perfect  WAY;    OR,  THE  FINDING  OF  CHRIST."

Edited  by  Edward  Maitland.

Demy  Zvo^  about  500//.,  2>s.  6d.

Christian  Science  Healing,

Its  Principles  and  Practice,  with  full  Explanations

for  Home  Students.

By    FRANCES    LORD,

co-translator  OF  FROBEL's    "mother's  SONGS,  GAMES  AND  STORIES."

Contents: — The  Twelve  Lectures  which  usually  constitute  "A  Course  of  Instruction  in
Christian  Science" — A  Simple  Plan  for  Treatment  (also  arranged  for  use  during  six  days)
— General  Directions  on  Healing — The  Healer's  Self-Training — Teaching — Books — Ought
Christian  Science  Work  ever  to  be  paid  for? — Home-Healing  (Character  and  Conduct) —
Circumstances — Children  and  Education — A  simple  Account  of  the  Doctrine  of  Karma  or
Re-incarnation — A  short  Abstract  of  the  Bhagavad  Gita.

Demy  %vo^  pp.  xi.  mid  272,  Cloth.,  'js.  6d.

Gilds,

Their  Origin,  Constitution,  Objects,  and  Later

History.

By  THE  Late  CORNELIUS  WALFORD,  F.LA.,  F.S.S.,
F.R.H.S.,  Barrister- AT- Law.

Contains  a  Geographical  Survey  of  the  Gilds  of  Berks,  Cambridge,  Derby,  Devon,
Gloucester,  Hants,  Hereford,  Kent,  Lancashire,  Lincoln,  IMiddlesex,  Norfolk,  Northum-
berland, Oxford,  Salop,  Somerset,  Warwick,  Yorks.

Cro7vn  'ivo,  Cloth ^  ^s.

The  Influence  of  the  Stars.

A    Treatise    on    Astrology,    Chiromancy,    and

Physiognomy.

By  ROSA  BAUGHAN.

to  which  is  added  a  treatise  on  the  astrological
Significance  of  Moles  on  the  Human  Body.

Illustrated  with  a  Facsimile  of  the  Mystical  Wheel  of

Pythagoras.

REDWAY'S  ESOTERIC  SERIES.      VOL  I.

Small  ^t^o^  White  Cloth,  \os.  6d.

The  Magical  Writings  of
Thomas  Vaughan.

{EUGENIUS  PHILALETHES.)

A  Verbatim  Reprint  of  his   First  Four   Treatises  :

Anthroposophia  Theomagica,   Anima  Magica

Abscondita,  Magia  Adamica,   The

True  Ccelum  Terr^.

With  the  Latin  Passages  Translated  into  English,  and  with  a

Biographical  Preface  and  Essay  on  the  Esoteric

Literature  of  Western  ChristendOxM.

By    ARTHUR    EDWARD    WAITE.

Crown  4^0,  Cloth^  Leather  Back,  Gilt  Top,  2$s.
THE  ORIGINAL  WORK  ON  PRACTICAL  MAGIC.

The  Key  of  Solomon  the  King.

{CLAVICULA  SALOMONIS)

Now  FIRST  Translated  and  Edited  from  Ancient  MSS.

IN  THE  British  Museum,

By  S.  LIDDELL  MACGREGOR  MATHERS.

AUTHOR  OF  "THE  KABBALAH  UNVEILED,"  "THE  TAROT,"  ETC.

This  celebrated  Ancient  Magical  work,  the  foundation  and  fountain  head  of
much  of  the  Ceremonial  :\Iagic  of  the  Mediaeval  Occultists,  has  never  before
been  printed  in  English,  nor  yet,  in  its  present  form,  in  any  other  langtiage,
but  has  remained  buried  and  inaccessible  to  the  general  public  for  centuries.
It  is  true  that  in  the  seventeenth  century,  a  very  curtailed  and  incomplete
copy  was  printed  in  France,  but  that  was  far  from  being  a  reliable  reproduc-
tion, owing  to  the  paucity  of  the  matter  therein  contained,  the  erroneous
drawing  of  the  Fentacles  and  Talismans,  and  the  difficulty  experienced  at
that  time  in  obtaining  reliable  MSS.  wherewith  to  collate  it.  There  is  a
small  work  published  in  Italy  bearing  the  title  of  the  "Clavicola  dl  Salomone
Ridotta,"  but  it  is  a  very  different  book  to  this,  and  is  little  better  than  a
collection  of  superstitious  charms  and  receipts  of  Black  Magic,  besides  bearing
a  suspicious  resemblance  both  to  the  "  Grimorium  Verum,"  and  the  "Grim-

oire  of  Honorius."  ,  ,   ^,    .    .  •        •■      ..t-

Among  other  authors  both  Eliphas  L6vi  and  Christian  mention  the  Key
of  Solomon  "  as  a  work  of  high  authority,  and  the  former  especially  refers  to

it  repeatedly.  ,      ,  /-      ^  r-

The  Key  of  Solomon  gives  full,  clear,  and  concise  instructions  for  latis-
manic  and  Ceremonial  Magic,  as  zuell  as  for  perfortning  various  Evocations  ;
and  it  is  therefore  invaluable  to  any  student  who  zvishes  to  make  himself
acqua  inted  with  the  practical  part  of  Occultism .

Besides  Seals,  Sigils,  and  Magical  Diagrams,  nearly  50  Fentacles  or  Talis-
mans are  given  in  the  Plates.

LONDON:    GEORGE    RED  WAY.

1 5  York  Street,  Covent  Garden,
London,  December  1888.

Mr  Redway's  Publications

Recent    Works

Croivn  2)V0,  pp.  viii.  and  446,  Cloth  extra^  'js.  6d.

The   Real    History    of   the
Rosicrucians.

Founded  on  their  Own  Manifestoes,  and  on  Facts
AND  Documents  Collected  from  the  Writ-
ings of  Initiated  Brethren.

By  ARTHUR  EDWARD  WAITE.
With  Illustrations.

Contents: — Mystical  Philosophy_  in  Germany — The  Universal  Reformation— Fan- a
Fraternitatis — Confession  of  Rosicrucian  Fraternitj' — Marriage  of  Christian  Rosencreutz —
Rosicrucianism,  Alchemy,  and  Magic — The  Case  of  Johann  Valentin  Andreas— Progress  of
Rosicrucianism  in  Germany — Rosicrucian  Apologists:  Michael  Maier,  Robert  Fludd,
Thomas  Vaughan,  John  Heydon — Rosicrucianism  in  France— Rosicrucians  and  Freemasons
— Modern  Rosicrucian  Societies,  &c.

"We  desire  to  speak  of  Mr  Waite's  work  with  the  greatest  respect  on  the
points  of  honesty,  impartiaUty,  and  sound  scholarship.  Mr  Waite  has  given,
for  the  first  time,  the  documents  with  which  Rosicrucianism  has  been  con-
nected in  extenso. " — Literary  World.

"There  is  something  mysterious  and  fascinating  about  the  history  of  the
Virgin  Fraternity  of  the  Rose." — Saturday  Review.

"A  curious  and  interesting  story  of  the  doings  of  a  mysterious  association
in  times  when  people  were  more  ready  to  believe  in  supernatural  phenomena
than  the  highly-educated,  matter-of-fact  people  of  to-day." — Morning  Post.

"...  The  work  not  only  of  a  refined  scholar,  but  of  A  man  who  knows
WHAT  HE  IS  writing  ABOUT,  and  that  is  a  great  deal  more  than  can  be
said  for  other  books  on  the  same  topic.  .  .  .  Much  that  he  has  to  tell  us
has  the  double  merit  of  being  not  only  true,  but  n^-w.^^John  Bull.

"  Mr  Waite's  book  on  '  Rosicrucianism '  is  a  perfect  contrast  to  the  one
which  we  noticed  a  month  or  two  back.  The  latter  is  a  farrago  of  ill-digested
learning  and  groundless  fancies,  while  the  former  is,  at  all  events,  an  honest
attempt  to  discover  the  truth  about  the  Society  of  the  Rosy  Cross.  .  .  .  The
study  of  '  Occultism '  is  so  popular  just  now  that  all  books  bearing  on  such
topics  are  eagerly  read  ;  and  it  is  a  comfort  to  find  one  writer  who  is  not
ashamed  to  confess  his  ignorance  after  telling  us  all  he  can  discover." — West-
7ninster  Review.

"Mr  Waite  is  A  great  authority  on  esoteric  science  and  its  literature.
Those  who  have  read  his  extremely  interesting  work  upon  the  writings  of
Eliphas  Levi,  the  modern  magician,  will  expect  in  his  '  History  of  the
Rosicrucians '  a  treatise  of  more  than  ephemeral  importance,  and  they  will
not  be  disappointed.   .   ,  ." — Morning  Post.

"  Some  of  the  most  interesting  chapters  in  the  book  are  devoted  to  an
account  of  the  four  great  apologists  for  Rosicrucianism  :  Robert  Fludd,
Michael   Maier,    Thomas  Vaughan,    and  John    Heydon.       Each   of    these

chapters  contains  much  curious  matter,  very  metaphysical  and  very  transcen-
dental, but  worth  being  studied  by  those  who  appreciate  the  influence  which
the  many  forms  of  occultism  have  exercised  upon  civilisation." — St  James's
Gazette.

"  To  many  readers  the  most  fascinating  pages  in  '  The  Real  History  of  the
Rosicrucians '  will  be  those  in  which  the  author  reprints  Foxcroft's  1690
translation  of  The  Chymical  Wedding  of  Christian  Rosencreittz,  which  had
originally  appeared  in  German  in  1616.  This  strange  romance  is  full
OF  WONDERFUL  THINGS." — Saturday  Review.

"We  would  recommend  Mr  Waite's  very  painstaking  volume  to  all  who
may  be  desirous  to  get  to  the  back  of  the  Rosicrucian  mystery.  ...  So
much  nonsense  has  been  talked  and  written  about  this  imaginary  order  that
it  is  quite  refreshing  to  find  a  writer  competent  and  willing  to  reduce  ^the
legend  to  its  true  proportions,  and  show  how  and  when  it  had  its  origin." —
Kno7vledge,

"  We  have  rarely  seen  a  work  of  this  description  that  was  so  free  from  all
attempts  at  the  distortion  of  facts  to  dovetail  with  a  preconceived  ....  His
style  is  perspicuous.  .  .  .  The  most  interesting  portions  of  the  book  are  those
where  the  author  is  wilUng  to  speak  himself.  ...  To  those  students  of
occultism,  whose  palates,  undebauched  by  the  intellectual  hashish  of  the
rhapsodies  of  mysticism  and  the  jargon  of  the  Kabala,  can  still  appreciate  a
plain  historical  statement  of  facts,  we  gladly  commend  the  \iooV.''— Nature.

"  '  The  Real  History  of  the  Rosicrucians '  is  a  very  learned  book  that  will
be  read  with  deep  interest  by  every  one  who  has  the  slightest  knowledge  of
the  subject. " — Cou7't  Journal.

"Mr  Waite's  painstaking  and  well  written  book  is  one  to  be
THANKFUL  FOR.  .  .  .  The  subjcct  has  too  long  (and  never  more  than  at  the
present)  been  the  property  of  pseudo-learned  mystery-mongers.  .  .  .  But
scant  justice  can  be  done  to  a  book  like  Mr  Waite's  in  a  short  notice  such
as  this,  and  therefore  all  that  remains  possible  is  to  draw  the  attention  of
all  interested  in  such  literature  to  the  careful  chapters  on  the  English  mystics
— Fludd,  Vaughan,  and  Heydon— and  to  emphasise  the  estimate  with  which
we  commenced." — Majichester  Examiner.

"There  was  need  of  a  clear  and  reliable  book  on  the  subject.  This  need
Mr  Waite  has  supplied.  He  is  a  cultured  writer,  and  has  mastered  the
entire  literature  of  his  subject,  the  most  of  which  is  in  the  German  language.
His  'Real  History'  cannot  fail  to  interest  any  curious  reader.  .  .  .  The
author  is  not  a  Freemason,  and  speaks  slightingly  of  our  fraternity ;  but  he
has  undoubtedly  produced  the  most  reliable  book  which  has  yet  appeared
in  the  English  language  on  Rosicrucianism,  and  it  will  deservedly  attract
the  attention  of  all  scholars  and  curious  readers  who  are  interested  in  the
subject." — Keystone  (New  York).

"  Mr  Waite  has  done  an  excellent  service  in  reprinting  in  this  handsome
volume  translations  of  the  chief  documents  bearing  on  the  secrets  of  the  Rosy
Cross." — Literary  f^^rA/ (Boston).

"  Mr  Waite  is  not  a  trader  upon  the  ignorance  and  curiosity  of  readers.
...  His  own  book  is  simply  the  result  of  conscientious  researches,  whereby
he  succeeded  in  discovering  several  unknown  tracts  and  manuscripts  in  the
library  of  the  British  Museum ;  and  these,  with  other  important  and  avail-
able facts  and  documents,  ...  he  now  publishes,  summarised  or  in  extenso,
according  to  their  value,  and  thus  offers  for  the  first  time  in  the  literature  of
the  subject,  the  Rosicrucians  represented  by  themselves."— iV/z/a-
delphia  Press.

B

3  vols.  Crown  %vo,  Cloth,  6s.  per  vol,,  sold  separately.

Dreamland    and    Ghostland ;

An   Original    Collection   of  Tales  and  Warnings
from  the  Borderland  of  Substance  and  Shadow.

Embracing  Remarkable  Dreams,  Presentiments,  and  Coin-
cidences, Records  of  Singular  Personal  Experience
BY  VARIOUS  Writers,  Startling  Stories  from  Individual
AND  P'amily  History,  Mysterious  Hints  from  the  Lips
OF  Living  Narrators,  and  Psychological  Studies,
Grave  and  Gay.

"  It  is  a  remarkable  fact  that  men  and  women  do  like  ghost  stories.  They
enjoy  being  thrilled,  and  many  of  them  read  with  avidity  tales  which  deal
with  things  out  of  the  ordinary  physical  ken.     In  THESE  three  volumes

THEY  may  sup  FULL  OF  THESE  DELIGHTS." — Scotsman.

"There  is  plenty  of  amusing  reading  of  this  sort  to  be  found  in  these
volumes,  both  for  believers  and  disbelievers  in  the  supernatural." — Court
Journal.

"  Volumes  which  will  test  the  credulity  of  the  reader  to  the  utmost,  and
the  commencement  of  one  of  the  stories  might  very  well  have  served  for  the
motto  for  the  whole  collection  :  '  It  is  almost  useless  to  tell  you  the  story,
because  I  know  you  will  not  believe  it.'  We  do  not  say  for  a  moment  that
we  disbelieve  all  the  stories  told  here." — Court  Circnlar.

"  The  psychological  student  would  be  wise  to  exercise  a  certain  amount  of
caution.  The  general  reader  who  likes  ghost-stories  and  dream-stories  for
their  own  sake,  in  the  straightforward  old  fashion,  will  find  plenty  of  enter-
tainment in  these  three  volumes,  and,  thanks  to  the  variety  of  sources  from
which  the  contents  are  drawn,  no  sort  of  monotony. " — Graphic.

"The  great  novelty  of  the  work  is  that  the  author  has  so  arranged  and
trimmed  the  chain  of  narratives  as  to  make  them  read  like  a  three  volume
novel.  ...  In  truth,  it  is  a  novel  in  which  the  characters  tell  their  own
stories  in  their  own  way,  and  in  their  own  language.  "•  — C/^r/j'/zizw  Union.
"  Should  be  specially  relished  these  winter  nights." — The  World.
"  Stories  of  the  weird  and  eerie  complexion  which  so  many  like  to  cultivate
of  a  winter's  night." — Globe.

"There  is  nothing  that  is  in  any  way  unhealthy  in  character.  Those,
therefore,  who  have  a  taste  for  the  mysterious  and  the  curious  will  find  in
'  Dreamland  and  Ghostland  '  A  real  treat.  The  narratives  are  at  once
both  grave  and  gay,  with  touches  of  strangeness  as  to  miraculous  incidents
and  supernatural  occurrences.  But  from  first  to  last  there  is  a  rationalism  as
well  as  a  piquancy  in  the  records  that  make  them  instructive  reading.  Indeed,
we  believe  that  there  is  not  a  better  work  of  its  kind,  so  varied,  so
enchanting,  and  so  well  edited  ;  or  one  that  may  be  read  with  such  profit."
— Christian  Union.

Large  Crozvn  8vo,  the  Cover  emblazoned  and  floriated  7vith  Stars  and
Serpents  and  Sunflowers,  and  the  Arms  of  France  and  of  Navarre.

Gilt  top,  \os.  6d.

The  Fortunate  Lovers.

Twenty-seven  Novels  of  the  Queen  of  Navarre.

Translated  From  the  Original  French  by
ARTHUR   MACHEN.

Edited  and  selected  from  the  "  Heptameron,"  with

Notes,  Pedigrees,  and  an  Introduction,  by

A.  MARY  F.  ROBINSON.

With  Original  Etching  by  G.  P.  Jacomb  Hood.

"  After  Boccaccio's,  these  stories  are  perhaps  the  best  of  their  kind."—

Scotsman.

"  Miss  Robinson's  notes,  and  more  especially  her  ably  written  introduction,
which  is  practically  a  biography  of  Margaret  of  Angouleme,  will  enable
readers  to  appreciate  the  'personalities'  in  the  stories  more  keenly  than
would  otherwise  be  possible." — Scotsmait.

"These  tales  of  old-world  gallantry  cruelly  depict  certain  phases  of  the
life  of  an  age  as  brilliant  as  it  was  corrupt,  and  must  ever  prove  attractive  to
the  antiquarian  and  the  scholar.  Mr  Machen  well  preserves  the  incisive  and
quaint  tone  of  the  original  text." — Morning  Post.

"A  REALLY  charming  WORK  OF  ART  AND  OF  LITERATURE."— ^///^W^W?/^.

"Super-realistic  as  the  love-stories  now  and  then  are,  according  to  our
notions  of  modesty,  they  have,  one  and  all,  a  wholesome  moral,  and  go  far
to  throw  light  on  an  interesting  period  in  the  history  of  France.  Handsomely
bound  and  'got  up,'  and  furnished  with  a  charming  etching  by  Mr  Jacomb
Hood  as  frontispiece,  the  volume  may  well  be  recommended  to  all  readers,
and  particularly  to  all  students  of  history." — Pall  Mall  Gazette.

"The  '  Heptameron '  is  itself,  and  independent  of  externals,  an  exceedingly
pretty  book,  ...  a  book  of  interesting  and  rather  puzzling  authorship,  and
lastly,  one  which  strikes  the  key-note  of  a  certain  time  better  almost  than  any
other  single  work." — Athemeum.

"No  reader  can  resist  the  charm  of  these  old-world  stories.  .  .  .  Miss
Robinson  has  exercised  a  sound  and  judicious  discretion  .  .  .  without  sacri-
ficing too  much  of  the  large  utterance  and  the  rich  aroma  of  the  originals."—
Daily  News.

"The  book  may  be  recommended  to  all  who  wish  to  understand  that
singular  mixture  of  piety  and  voluptuousness  which  distinguishes  the  French
Renaissance." — AthencBtwi.

"  The  book  is  not  quite  one  for  indiscriminate  presentation,  but  it  is  exceed-
ingly well  done,  and  is  beautifully  printed  and  bound." — Glasgotv  Herald.

"  We  owe  her  [Miss  Robinson]  thanks  for  having  put  in  a  worthy  form

before  a  new  public  a  w  ork  to  a  great  extent  forgotten,  and  most  assuredly
not  deserving  forgetfulness." — Athenaiim.

"Nothing  can  be  better  than  the  introductory  chapter,  and  the  notes  and
genealogical  tables  show  that  care  for  minute  accuracy  which  is  the  fashion
of  the  present  day,  and  a  very  good  fashion  too." — Westminster  Review.

"  A  book  that  people  who  like  to  saunter  along  the  by-paths  of  history
will  revel  in.  As,  at  the  present  time,  there  are  thousands  of  people  who
only  care  to  read  the  gossip  and  scandal  in  'society  journals,'  so  there  are
readers  of  history  who  chiefly  delight  in  the  gossip  and  scandal  of  bygone
days.  From  such  people  '  The  Fortunate  Lovers '  is  certain  to  meet  with  a
hearty  welcome,  while  even  the  more  serious  students  of  history  will  ri>e
from  its  perusal  with  a  fuller  and  better  knowledge  of  the  times  it  deals
with." — Literary  World.

"Many  of  the  stories  are  not  particularly  edifying.  .  .  .  Has  a  distinct
value  as  a  contribution  to  historical  literature." — Court  Circtdar.

Crown  Sz'^,  pp.  viii.  and  260,  Cloth  gilt,  6s.

Charles    Dickens    and    the

Stage.

A   Record   of   his   Connection   with   the   Drama  as

Playwright  and  Critic.

By  T.  EDGAR  PEMBERTON.

With  New  Portraits,  in  Character,  of  Miss  Jennie  Lee,
Mr  Irving,  and  Mr  Toole.

Contents  : — The  Stage  in  his  Novels — Dickens  as  a  Dramatist — Dickens  as  an  Actor —
Adaptations  and  Impersonations — The  Stage  in  his  Speeches — The  Stage  in  his  Letter^ —
Dickens  as  a  Dramatic  Critic.

"The  book  is  readable,  as  anything  about  Dickens  is  sure  to  be."—
Scots  f nan.

"A  charming  v.'ORK.  Mr  Pemberton  has  spared  no  pains  to  look  up  all
sorts  of  details,  and  has  added  a  full  and  excellent  index." — Birmingliam

Post.

"  He  has  done  his  work  so  completely  that  he  has  left  little  or  nothing  for
anyone  who  should  desire  to  follow  in  his  steps." — Literary  World.

"  Brimful  of  anecdote  and  reminiscences  of  a  generation  now  passing
away,  the  book  is  stimulating  as  well  as  useful." — Publisher' s  Circular.

"  An  example  of  book-making  that  will  not  be  viewed  with  disfavour  by
lovers  of  Dickens.  .  .  .  The  book  shows  diligent  research  in  many
directions. " — Saturday  Review.

Croivn  Zvo,  pp.  xiv.  and  360,  Cloth,  Js.  6it.

Posthumous    Humanity ;

A  Study  of  Phantoms.

By  ADOLPHE  D'ASSIER,
member  of  the  bordeaux  academy  of  science.

Translated  and  Annotated  by  Henry  S.  Olcott,  President
OF  the  Theosophical  Society.

Contents  : — Facts  Establishing  the  Existence  of  the  Posthumous  Personality  in  Man-
Its  V^arious  Modes  of  Manifestation — Facts  Establishing  the  Existence  of  a  Second
Personality  in  the  Living  Man— Its  Various  Modes  of  Manifestation — Facts  Establishing-
the  Existence  of  the  Personality  in  Animals,  and  concerning  a  Posthumous  Animalitj'—
Fluidic  Form  of  Vegetables— Fluidic  Form  of  Gross  Bodies— Character  of  the  Posthumous
Being — Its  Physical  Constitution — Its  Aversion  to  Light — Its  Reservoir  of  Living  Force —
Its  Ballistic—The  Nervous  Fluid— Electric  Animals— Electric  Persons — Electric  Plants —
The  Mesmeric  Ether  and  the  Personality  which  it  Engenders — The  Somnambule — The
Sleep-talker — The  Seer— The  Turning-table — The  Talking-table— The  Medium— IMiracles
of  the  Ecstatics — Prodigy  of  Magic— The  Incubus — The  Obsessing  Spirit— Causes  of  the
Rarity  of  the  Living  Phantom— Causes  of  the  Rarity  of  the  Trans-sepulchral  Phantom-
Resemblance  of  the  Spiritistic  Phenomena  to  the  Phenomena  of  the  Posthumous  Order^
Lycanthropy — Glance  at  the  Fauna  of  the  Shades — Their  Pre-occupations — How  thej-
Prolong  their  Existence — The  Posthumous  Vampire.

Truth  says  : — "If  you  care  for  Gi-iosT  stories,  duly  accredited,  ex-
cellently told,  and  scientifically  explained,  you  should  read  the
translation  by  Colonel  Olcott  of  M.  Adolphe  d'Assier's  'Posthumous
Humanity,'  a  study  of  phantoms.  There  is  no  dogmatism  so  dogged  and
offensive  as  that  of  the  professed  sceptic — of  the  scientific  sceptic  especially —
who  ex  vi  termini  ought  to  keep  the  doors  of  his  mind  hospitably  open  ;  and
it  is  refreshing,  therefore,  to  find  such  scientists  as  Wallace,  Crookes,  and  M.
d'Assier,  who  is  a  Positivist,  in  the  ranks  of  the  Psychical  Research  host.
For  my  own  part,  though  I  have  attended  the  seance  of  a  celebrated  London
medium,  and  there  convinced  myself  beyond  all  doubt  of  his  imposture,  I  no
more  think  that  the  detection  of  a  medium  fraud  disposes  of  the  whole
question  of  ghosts,  &c.,  than  that  the  detection  of  an  atheist  priest  disposes
of  the  whole  question  of  Christianity.  Whatever  view  you  take  of  this  con-
troversy, however,  I  can  promise  you  that  you  will  find  the  book  interesting
at  least  if  not  convincing. "

"This  collection  of  hopeless  trash  .  .  .  Col.  Olcott's  notes  are  beneath
contempt  ...  a  more  piteous  literary  exhibition  than  the  entire  volume  has
rarely  come  under  our  notice." — Knowledge  [?J.

"  An  interesting  and  suggestive  volume." — Nezv  York  Tribune.

"The  book  is  written  with  evident  sincerity." — Litei'ary  World.

"  There  is  no  end  to  the  wonderful  stories  in  this  book." — Court  Circular.

"The   book   may  be  recommended  to  the  attention  of  the  marines."

Scotsman.

"  A  book  which  will  be  found  very  fascinating  by  all  except  those  person^

who  have  neither  interest  nor  belief  for  anything  but  what  they  can  under-
stand . ' ' — Manchester  Exatimier.

"  The  subject  is  treated  brilliantly,  entertainingly,  and  scientifi-
cally."— New  York  Com.  Advertiser,

"  Though  this  is  a  good  deal  to  say,  Mr  George  Red  way  has  hardly
published  a  more  curious  book." — Glasgow  Herald.

*'The  ghostly  will  find  much  comfort  in  the  book." — Saturday  Review,

*'  The  book  has  an  interest  as  evidence  of  that  study  of  the  occult  which  is
again  becoming  in  a  certain  degree  fashionable." — Manchester  Guardian.

Demy  %vo,  pp.  xiv.  and  307,  Cloth,  'js.  6d.

The  Life,  Times,  and  Writings
of  Thomas  Cranmer,  D.D.,

The  First  Reforming  Archbishop  of  Canterbury.

.       By  CHARLES  HASTINGS  COLLETTE.
Dedicated  to  Edward  White,  93RD  Archbishop  of  Canterbury.

Contents  : — Cranmer  at  the  University  of  Cambridge — Cranmer's  Participation  in  the
Proceedings  of  the  Divorce  of  Henry  VIII.  from  Catherine — His  Second  Marriage  as  a
Priest — His  Oaths  on  Consecration  as  an  Archbishop — The  Fate  of  Anne  Boleyn  :  Henry's
Marriages  with  Jane  Seymour,  Anne  of  Cleves.  Catherine  Howard,  and  Catherine  Parr,
and  Cranmer's  alleged  Participation  in  these  Acts — Henry  VIII.'s  Political  and  Social
Reforms  under  Cranmer's  alleged  Guidance — Persecutions,  and  Cranmer's  alleged  Par-
ticipation in  them — The  Progress  of  the  Reformation  under  Henry  VIII.  and  Edward  VL
— Cranmer's  Fall  and  Martyrdom — His  alleged  Recantations — His  Writings — John  Fox,
the  Martyrologist — The  Beatification  of  Bishop  Fisher,  the  Chancellor  More,  and  others,
as  Martyrs.

"Mr  Collette  brings  to  his  task  both  breadth  and  depth  of  knowledge,
and  a  desire  to  be  scrupulously  free  from  prejudice." — Globe.  "  He  is
animated  by  an  anti-Papal  spirit.  .  .  .  nevertheless,  his  book  is  readable."
— Scotsman.  "No  future  student  can  afford  to  neglect  his  work." — British
and  Colonial  Printer.  "His  book  deserves  to  be  read,  and  his  pleadings
should  be  well  considered." — Anglican  Church  Alagazine.  "  He  has  stated
HIS  evidence  with  a  fulness  and  fairness  beyond  CAVIL." — Daily
News.  "  Mr  Collette  avoids  bitterness  in  his  defence,  and  does  not  scruple
to  blame  Cranmer  when  he  thinks  blame  is  deserved." — Glasgow  Herald.
"On  the  whole,  we  think  that  we  have  in  this  book  a  just  and  impartial
character  of  Cranmer." — Record.  "This  book  is  a  valuable  contribution  to
the  literature  concerning  a  period  which  to  the  lover  of  religious  liberty  is
of  the  deepest  interest.  ...  it  is  a  work  of  research  of  learning,  of  sound
and  generally  of  impartial  judgment," — Rock.

Post  8vo,  -cuitJi  Plates^  pp.  viii.  and  359,  Cloth  gilt,  10s.  6d.
KABBALA  DENUDATA,

The    Kabbalah    Unveiled.

Containing  the  Following  Books  of  the  Zohar  : —

1.  The  Book  of  Concealed  Mystery.

2.  The  Greater  Holy  Assembly.

3.  The  Lesser  Holy  Assembly.

Translated  into  English  from  the  Latin  Version  of

Knorr  Von  Rosenroth,  and  Collated  with  the

Original  Chaldee  and  Hebrew  Text,

By  S.  L.  MACGREGOR  MATHERS.

The  Bible,  which  has  been  probably  more  misconstrued  than  any  other
book  ever  written,  contains  numberless  obscure  and  mysterious  passages
which  are  utterly  unintelligible  without  some  key  wherewith  to  unlock  their
meaning.      That  key  is  given  in  the  Kabbala.

"A  translation  which  leaves  nothing  to  be  desired." — Saturday
Review.

*'  Mr  Mathers  has  done  his  work  with  critical  closeness  and  care,  and  has
presented  us  with  a  book  which  will  probably  be  welcomed  by  many  students.
In  printing  and  binding  the  volume  is  all  that  could  be  desired,  and  the
diagrams  are  very  carefully  drawn,  and  are  calculated  to  be  very  useful  to  all
who  are  interested  in  the  subject." — Nonconfoi'inist.

"We  may  add  that  it  is  worthy  of  perusal  by  all  who,  as  students  of
psychology,  care  to  trace  the  struggles  of  the  human  mind,  and  to  note  its
passage  from  animalism  through  mysticism  to  the  clearness  of  logical  light."
— Knozoledge.

"  Mr  Mathers  is  certainly  a  great  Kabbalist,  if  not  the  greatest  of  our
time." — AtheiKTuni.

The  Kabbalah  is  described  by  Dr  Ginsburg  as  "  a  system  of  religious
philosophy,  or  more  properly  of  theosophy,  which  has  not  only  exercised  for
hundreds  of  years  an  extraordinary  influence  on  the  mental  development  of
so  shrewd  a  people  as  the  Jews,  but  has  captivated  the  minds  of  some  of  the
greatest  thinkers  in  Christendom  in  the  1 6th  and  17th  centuries."  He  adds
that  "it  claims  the  greatest  attention  of  both  the  philosopher

AND  theologian."

Crotvn  ^to,  wrapper,  \s.
JOURNAL  OF  THE   WAGNER  SOCIETY.

The  Meister.

Edited  by  W.  ASHTON  ELLIS.

Contains  translations  from  the  literary  works  of  Richard  Wagner;  extracts  from
letters  that  have  passed  between  the  Poet-Composer  and  other  men  who  have  left  their
mark  upon  the  art  life  of  the  day ;  original  articles  and  essays  explanatory  of  the  inner
meaning  of  Wagners  dramas;  articles  upon  kindred  topics  of  aesthetics,  metaphysics,  or
social  questions— in  this  category,  reference  to  the  works  of  Liszt  and  Schopenhauer  will
naturally  take  a  prominent  position;  notes  upon  the  course  of  events  in  Europe  and
America  bearing  upon  Wagner's  dramas,  &c.,  &c.

In  Crown  Svo,  pp.  2S6,  Cloth  extra,  5^.

A    SouPs    Comedy.

By  ARTHUR  EDWARD  WAITE.

A  tragedy  in  its  ancient  and  legitimate  sense,  depicts  the  triumph  of  destiny
over  man;  the  comedy,  or  story  with  a  happy  ending,  represents  the  triumph
of  man  over  destiny.  It  is  in  this  sense  that  the  spiritual  history  of  Jasper
Cartwright  is  called  a  Soul's  Comedy.

The  Literary  World  says  : — "Mr  Waite  is  possessed  of  genuine  inspira-
tion that  lifts  his  work  above  the  mass  of  wares  sent  forth  every  year  to  the
world  as  poetry.  The  presence  of  an  over  subtle  mysticism,  and  even  of  an
occasional  tinge  of  almost  Rosicrucian  darkness,  will  not  prevent  lovers  of
poetry  from  enjoying  the  many  passages  in  his  play  as  remarkable  for  power
of  thought  as  for  beauty  of  expression.  Mr  Waite's  sympathy  with  Nature,
and  his  descriptive  powers  are  likewise  of  a  high  order."

The  Graphic  says  : — "  Some  time  has  elapsed  since  we  paid  a  sincere  tri-
bute to  the  many  beauties  of  '  Israfel,'  and  we  are  not  sorry  to  meet  with
another  work  from  the  same  pen  in 'A  Soul's  Comedy.'  ....  It  may  suffice
to  say  in  general  that  the  poem,  cast  in  a  quasi-dramatic  form,  is  a  very  noble
one,  though  painful  to  a  degree.  The  main  idea  of  Jasper's  origin  is  so
horrible  in  its  pathetic  tragedy  as  to  raise  reminiscences  of  Ford's  masterpiece,
and  the  after-episode  of  Mary  Blake  is  little  less  distressing  ;  but  out  of  these
seemingly  unpromising  materials  Mr  Waite  has  evolved  a  tale  of  human  sor-
row, struggle,  and  final  triumph,  such  as  must  appeal  to  the  heart  of  every
true  man.  .  .  .  The  poetry  rises  at  times  to  unusual  heights,  as,  for
instance,  in  the  description  of  Mary's  death  (p.  31),  the  benediction  in  the
monastery  chapel,  Austin  Blake's  prologue  to  the  third  part,  or,  best  of  all,

the  scene  where  Jasper  resigns  Gertrude  to  his  friend Jasper's  prose

fairy  tale  is  delightful,  though  not,  it  may  be,  suited  to  all  comprehensions.
.  .  .  Taken  altogether,  this  is  a  true  and  worthy  poem."

^to,  pp.  27i   Cloth  extra, 1$.  6d.      The  woodcuts  coloiired  by  hand,  55.
Issue  limited  to  400  copies  plain  and  60  coloured.

The  Dance  of  Death,

In  Painting  and  in  Print,

By   T.  TYNDALL    WILDRIDGE.

With  Woodcuts.

Probably  few  subjects  have  excited  more  conjecture  or  given  rise  to  more
mistakes  than  the  "  Dance  of  Death."  The  earliest  painting  of  the  Dance  is
said  to  be  that  at  Basel  in  143 1.  The  first  printed  edition  was  published  about
1485.  The  blocks  illustrating  Mr  Wildridge's  work  are  a  series  found  in  a
northern  printing  office  many  years  ago.  They  seem  to  be  of  considerable
age,  and  are  somewhat  close  copies  of  Holbein's  designs  so  far  as  they  go,
but  in  which  of  the  hundred  editions  they  originally  appeared  has  not  to  the
present  been  ascertained.

Fcap.  Svo,  pp.  40,  Cloth  limp,  \s.  6d.

Light    on    the    Path.

A  Treatise  written  for  the  Personal  Use  of  Those  who

ARE  Ignorant  of  the  Eastern  Wisdom,  and  who

Desire  to  Enter  within  its  Influence.

Written  down  bv^  M.  C,
fellow  of  the  theosophical  society.

"  So  far  as  we  can  gather  from  the  mystic  language  in  which  it  is  couched,
'  Light  on  the  Path  '  is  intended  to  guide  the  footsteps  of  those  who  have  dis-
carded the  forms  of  religion  while  retaining  the  moral  principle  to  its  fullest
extent.  It  is  in  harmony  with  much  that  was  said  by  Socrates  and  Plato,
although  the  author  does  not  use  the  phraseology  of  those  philosophers,  but
rather  the  language  of  Buddhism,  easily  understood  by  esoteric  Buddhists,
but  difficult  to  grasp  by  those  without  the  pale.  '  Light  on  the  Path  '  may,  we
think,  be  said  to  be  the  only  attempt  in  this  language  and  in  this
CENTURY  to  PUT  PRACTICAL  OCCULTISM  INTO  WORDS  ;  and  it  may  be  added,
by  way  of  further  explanation,  that  the  character  of  Gautama  Buddha,  as
shown  in  Sir  Edwin  Arnolds'  '  Light  of  Asia,'  is  the  perfect  type  of  the  be-
ing who  has  reached  the  threshold  of  Divinity  by  this  road.  That  it  has
reached  a  third  edition  speaks  favourably  for  this  mtiltiim  in  parvo  of  the
science  of  occultism  ;  and  '  M.  C  may  be  expected  to  gather  fresh  laurels  in
future. " — Saturday  Revietv.

2)2?)io,  pp.  Co,  Cloth  gilt,  \s,  6d.;  %uith  pack  of ']%  Tarot  Cards,  ^s.
FORTUNE    TELLING    CARDS.

The    Tarot ;

Its  Occult  Signification,  Use  in  Fortune  Telling,
and  Method  of  Play,  &c.

By  S.   L.   MACGREGOR  MATHERS.

"The  designs  of  the  twenty-one  trump  cards  are  extremely  singular  ;  in
order  to  give  some  idea  of  the  manner  in  which  Mr  Mather  uses  them  in
fortune -telling  it  is  necessary  to  mention  them  in  detail,  together  with  the
general  significance  which  he  attaches  to  each  of  them.  The  would-be  carto-
mancer  may  then  draw  his  own  particular  conclusions,  and  he  will  find  con-
siderable latitude  for  framing  them  in  accordance  with  his  predilections.  It
should  further  be  mentioned  that  each  of  the  cards  when  reversed  conveys
a  meaning  the  contrary  of  its  primary  signification.  No.  I  is  the  Bateleur  or
Juggler.  The  Juggler  symbolizes  Will.  2.  The  High  Priestess,  or  female
Pope,  represents  Science,  Wisdom,  or  Knowledge.  3.  The  Empress,  is  the
symbol  of  Action  or  Initiative.  4.  The  Emperor,  represents  Realization  or
Development.  5.  The  Heirophant  or  Pope,  is  the  symbol  of  Mercy  and
Beneficence.  6.  The  Lovers,  signify  Wise  Disposition  and  Trials  sur-
mounted. 7.  The  Chariot,  represents  Triumph,  Victory  over  Obstacles.  8.
Themis  or  Justice,  symbolizes  Equilibrium  and  Justice.  9.  The  Hermit,
denotes  Prudence.  10.  The  Wheel  of  Fortune,  represents  Fortune,  good  or
bad.  II.  Fortitude,  symbolizes  Power  or  Might.  12.  The  Hanged  Man
— a  man  suspended  head  downwards  by  one  leg — means  Devotion,  Self-
Sacrifice.  13.  Death,  signifies  Transformation  or  Change,  14.  Temper-
ance, typifies  Combination.  15.  The  Devil,  is  the  image  of  Fate  or  Fatality.
16.  The  Lightning-stnick  Tower,  called  also  Maison-Dieu,  shows  Ruin,  Dis-
ruption. 17.  The  Star,  is  the  emblem  of  Hope.  18.  The  Moon,  symbolizes
Twilight,  Deception  and  Error.  19.  The  Sun,  signifies  Earthly  Happiness.
20.  The  Last  Judgment,  means  Renewal,  Determination  of  a  matter.  21.
The  Universe,  represents  Completion  and  Reward,  o.  The  Foolish  Man,
signifies  Expiating  or  Wavering.  Separate  meanings,  with  their  respective
converses,  are  also  attached  to  each  of  the  other  cards  in  the  pack,  so  that
when  they  have  been  dealt  out  and  arranged  in  any  of  the  combinations
recommended  by  the  author  for  purposes  of  divination,  THE  INQUIRER  HAS

ONLY   TO    USE  THIS  LITTLE  VOLUME  AS  A  DICTIONARY  IN  ORDER   TO  READ

HIS  FATE." — Sattirday  Reviezv.

Third  Edition,  revised  and  enlarged.
Crozvn  SvOf  etched  Frontispiece  and  Woodcuts,  pp.  324,  Cloth  gilt,  "js.  6d.

Magic,   White    and    Black;

Or,  The   Science   of  Finite  and   Infinite    Life.

Containing  Practical  Hints  for  Students  of  Occultism.
By  FRANZ  HARTMANN,  M.D.

Contents  : — The  Ideal — The  Real  and  the  Unreal — Form — Life — Harmony — Illusion —
Consciousness — Unconsciousness — Transformations — Creation — Light,  &c.

The  Saturday  Review  says: — "In  its  closely-printed  pages  students  of
occultism  will  find  hints,  '  practical '  and  otherwise,  likely  to  be  of  great
service  to  them  in  the  pursuit  of  their  studies  and  researches.  ...  A  book
which  may  properly  have  the  title  of  Magic,  for  if  the  readers  succeed  in
practically  following  its  teaching,  they  will  be  able  to  perform  the  greatest  of
all  magical  feats,  the  spiritual  regeneration  of  Man.  Dr  Hartmann's  book
has  also  gone  into  a  third  edition,  and  has  developed  from  an  insignificant
pamphlet,  '  written  originally  for  the  purpose  of  demonstrating  to  a  few
inexperienced  inquirers  that  the  study  of  the  occult  side  of  nature  was  not
identical  with  the  vile  practices  of  sorcery,'  into  a  compendious  volume,  com-
prising, we  are  willing  to  believe,  the  entire  philosophic  system  of
OCCULTISM.  There  are  abundant  evidences  that  the  science  of  theosophy
has  made  vast  strides  in  public  estimation  of  late  years,  and  that  those
desirous  of  experimenting  in  this  particular,  and  in  many  respects  fascinating,
branch  of  ethics,  have  leaders  whose  teaching  they  can  follow  with  satisfaction
to  themselves."

The  Scotsman  says  : — "Any  one  who  studies  the  work  so  as  to  be  able  to
understand  it,  may  become  as  familiar  with  the  hidden  mysteries  of  nature  as
any  occult  philosopher  ever  was."

Crown  %vo,  pp.  265,  Cloth  extra,  6s,

Lotus :

A  Psychological   Romance.

By  the  Author  of  "  A  New  Marguerite."

"Mystical,  peculiar,  engaging  .  .  .  the  book  has  originality  .  .  .
it  is  a  graceful  story  of  the  sort  which  is  said  to  make  people — some  people
— think,  and  will  be  read  with  mixed  feelings  by  most." — Athenccum.

"  A  fierce  and  passionate  book,  which  illustrates  once  more  the  hold  that
our  subject  has  on  the  popular  imagination.     To  be  read." — Light.

Crown  ?>vo,  pp.  iv.  and  2^6,  Cloth  {Cheap  Edition),  6s.

A  Professor  of  Alchemy

{DENIS  Z AC H AIRE).
By  PERCY  ROSS,

AUTHOR  OF  "A  COMEDY  WITHOUT  LAUGHTER."

"A  clever  story.  .  .  .  The  hero  is  an  alchemist  who  actually  succeeds  in
manufacturing  pure  gold." — Coiu't  Journal.

"  Shadowy  and  dream-like." — Athenceuni.

"An  interesting  and  pathetic  picture." — Literary  World,

"The  story  is  utterly  tragical,  and  is  powerfully  told." — Westminster
Revieiv.

' '  A  vivid  picture  of  those  bad  old  times. " — Knoivledge.

"  Sure  of  a  special  circle  of  readers  with  congenial  tastes." —
Graphic.

"  This  is  a  story  of  love — of  deep,  un(Jying,  refining  love — not  without  sug-
gestions of  Faust.  The  figure  of  Berengaria,  his  wife,  is  a  noble  and  touch-
ing one,  and  her  purity  and  sweetness  stand  out  in  beautiful  relief  from  the
gloom  of  the  alchemist's  laboratory  and  the  horrors  of  the  terrible  Inquisition
into  whose  hands  she  falls.  The  romance  of  the  crucible,  however,  is  not  all
permeated  by  sulphurous  vapours  and  tinged  with  tartarean  smoke.  There  is
often  a  highly  dramatic  element." — Glasgozo  He7-ald.

Fcap.  'S>vo,  pp.  56,  Cloth  limp,  \s.

The  Shakespeare  Classical
Dictionary  ;

Or,   Mythological  Allusions  in  the  Plays  of
Shakespeare  Explained.

For  the  Use  of  Schools  and  Shakespeare  Reading

Societies.

By  H.  M.  SELBY.

"  A  handy  little  work  of  reference  for  readers  and  students  of  Shakespeare."
-School  Board  Chronicle.

"The  book  presents  a  great  deal  of  information  in  a  very  small  compass."
-School  Newspaper.

"Will  be  found  extremely  useful  by  non-classical  students  of  Shakespeare,
,  .  .  and  even  to  the  classical  student  it  will  convey  much  useful  information. "
— Educational  Times.

"  Will  be  greatly  appreciated  in  the  class-room." — Glasgozv Herald.

"Carefully  compiled  from  more  authoritative  books  of  reference." — Scots-
man.

"The  unlearned  reader  is  thus  enabled  to  increase  very  greatly  his  enjoy-
ment of  Shakespeare." — Literary  World.

"  We  have  tested  the  book  by  looking  for  several  of  the  obscurest
mythological  names  mentioned  by  Shakespeare  ;  in  each  case  we  found  the
name  inserted  and  followed  by  a  satisfactory  explanation." — The ScJwolmaster.

Demy  Svo,  pp.  iv.  and  299,  Cloth  gilt,  10s.  6d.

Serpent  Worship,

And  other  Essays,  with  a  Chapter  on  Totemism=

By  C.  STANILAND  WAKE.

Contents:— Rivers  of  Life— Phallism  in  Ancient  Religions— Origin  of  Serpent  Worship—
The  Adamites — The  Descendants  of  Cain — Sacred  Prostitution— Marriage  among  Primitive
Peoples— Marriage  by  Capture— Development  of  the  "'Family" — The  Social  Position  of
Woman  as  affected  by  "Civilization" — Spiritism  and  Modern  Spiritualism — Totems  and
Totemism — Man  and  the  Ape.

*'  The  most  important  of  the  thirteen  essays  discusses  the  origin  of  Serpent
Worship.  Like  other  papers  which  accompany  it,  it  discusses  its  subject  from
a  wide  knowledge  of  the  literature  of  earlv  religions  and  the  allied  themes  of
anthropology  and  primitive  marriage.  .  .  .  The  remaining  essays  are  written

WITH    MUCH    LEARNING   AND    IN   A   CAREFUL  SPIRIT   OF    INQUIRY,  happily

free  from  the  crude  mysticism  with  which  the  discussion  of  these  subjects  has
often  been  mixed  up.  They  may  be  recommended  to  the  attention  of  all
interested  in  anthropology  and  the  history  of  religion  as  interesting  labours
in  this  field  of  research  and  speculation." — Scotsman,  October  31.

"  So  obscure  and  complex  are  these  subjects  that  any  contribution,  how-
ever slight,  to  their  elucidation,  may  be  welcomed.  Mr  Wake's  criticism  of
the  systems  of  others  is  frequently  acute.  .  .  .  Mr  Wake  is  opposed  to  those
who  hold  that  kinship  through  females  and  the  matriarchate  preceded  paternal
kinship  and  the  patriarchal  family,  and  who  connect  the  phenomena  of
exogamy  and  of  totemism  with  the  matriarchal  stage  of  society,  and  with
belief  in  a  definite  kinship  of  man  with  the  remainder  of  the  sensible  universe.
He  looks  upon  female  kinship  as  having  existed  concurrently  with  a  quasi-
patriarchal  system." — Athenceum .

"Able,  and  REMARKAHLY  INTERESTING." — Glasgo%v  Herald.     -

Wrapper,  price  is.

Journal  of  the  Bacon  Society.

Published  Periodically.
Vol.  I.   [Parts  i.  tovi.),pp.  x.  and  2'j'&,  8vo,  cloth,  ds.

The  main  objects  for  which  this  Society  has  been  established  are  : — {a)  To
study  the  works  of  Francis  Baccn,  as  Philosopher,  Lawyer,  Statesman,  and
Poet,  also  his  character,  genius,  and  life,  his  influence  on  his  own  and  suc-
ceeding times,  and  the  tendencies  and  results  of  his  writings  ;  {h)  To
investigate  Bacon's  supposed  authorship  of  certain  works  unacknowledged  by
him,  including  the  Shakespearian  dramas  and  poems.

Fcap.  8vo,  pp.  viii.  and  120,  Cloth,  y.  6d.

A  Wayfarer's  Wallet.

Dominus  Redivivus.

By  henry  G.  HEWLETT,

AUTHOR   OF   "a   SHEAF   OF   VERSES."

"The  title  *  Dominus  Redivivus '  indicates  the  aim  of  the  poem.  .  .  .  The
author  wishes  to  tell  the  stoiy  of  the  actual  Jesus,  and  to  contrast  his  teaching
with  that  of  the  Churches  professing  to  be  Christian.  .  .  .  He  belongs  to
the  great  Church  to  be,  which  will  some  day  include  not  only  the  real  Jesus
as  one  of  its  worshippers,  but  Gautama  and  Socrates,  and  Plato  and  '  every
holy  name  which  blessed  the  past.'  The  work  of  this  Church  is  to  break
down  caste,  to  help  the  poor,  to  sweeten  all  the  life  of  man.  This  is
sufficient,  we  trust,  to  guide  some  readers  to  a  book  interesting  in  itself,  and
probably  destined  to  set  many  a  wavering  mind  on  a  path  at  once  definite
and  right  in  regard  to  Christianity." — The  hiqtiirer.

"A  collection  of  verses  on  various  subjects  and  in  various  styles.  .  .  .
Not  one  but  is  worth  reading  :  all  have  the  melodiousness  and  fluency  of
spontaneity,  the  ring  of  poetry.  .  .  .  '  Dominus  Redivivus,'  by  far  the
largest  poem  in  the  book,  is  a  plea  for  the  Christianity  of  Christ,  in  which
there  is  a  wealth  both  of  poetry  and  thought." — Liverpool  Daily  Post.

"  Mr  Henry  G.  Hewlett's  new  volume  of  verse  .  .  .  has  many  fresh  and
attractive  pieces,  and  not  a  dull  one  among  its  contents.  .  .  .  The  ballads
will  prove  most  widely  attractive.  .  .  .  The  sonnets  .  .  .  show  Mr
Hewlett's  power  of  pithy,  forcible  expression  at  its  best.  The  volume,  as  a
whole,  will  be  read  with  pleasure  from  first  to  last  by  lovers  of  poetry. " —
Scotsman.

Crown  2>i'o,  pp.   viii.   and  632,   Cloih  gilt,    los.   be'.

In  Praise  of  Ale;

Or,   Songs,  Ballads,  Epigrams,  and  Anecdotes

relating  to  Beer,  Malt,  and  Hops.

With  some  curious  particulars  concerning  Ale-wives
AND  Brewers,  Drinking-Clubs  and  Customs.

Collected  and  Arranged  by  W.  T.  MARCH  ANT.

Contents  : — Introductory — History — Carols  and  Wassail  Songs— Church  Ales  and
Observances — Whitsun  Ales— Political — Harvest  Songs — General  Songs — Barley  and
Malt — Hops — Scotch  Ale  Songs — Local  and  Dialect  Songs — Trade  Songs— Oxford  Songs —
Ale  Wives — Brewers — Drinking  Clubs  and  Customs— Royal  and  Noble  Drinkers — Black
Beer — Drinking  Vessels — Warm  Ale — Facts,  Scraps,  and  Ana.

"Mr  Marchant  has  collected  a  vast  amount  of  odd,  amusing,  and  (to  him
that  hath  the  sentiment  of  beer)  suggestive  and  interesting  matter.  His
volume  (we  refuse  to  call  it  a  book)  is  A  volume  to  have.  If  only  as  a
manual  of  quotations,  if  only  as  a  collection  of  songs,  it  is  a  volume  to
HAVE.  We  confess  to  having  read  in  it,  for  the  first  time  in  our  lives,  the
right  and  authentic  text  of  '  A  Cobbler  there  was '  and  '  Why,  Soldiers,
why  ; '  and  to  have  remarked,  as  regards  the  first,  that  our  ancestors  were
very  easily  amused,  and,  as  regards  the  second,  that  it  has  a  curious  at?'  de
famille  with  the  triolet.  These  are  very  far  from  being  Mr  Marchant's  only
finds;  but  that  is  all  the  more  reason  why  we  should  linger  upon  them." —
Saturday  Review.

"A  kind  of  scrap-book,  crowded  with  prose  and  verse  which  is  always
curious  AND  VERY  OFTEN  ENTERTAINING,  and  it  may  be  read  at  random —
beginning  at  the  end,  or  in  the  middle,  or  at  any  page  you  like,  and  reading
either  back  or  forwards — almost  as  easily  as  the  '  Varieties '  column  in  a
popular  weekly  print." — Saturday  Review.

"While,  on  the  one  hand,  the  book  is,  as  nearly  as  possible,  a  complete
collection  of  lyrics  written  about  the  national  beverage,  ...  it  abounds,  on
the  other  hand,  in  particulars  as  to  the  place  which  ale  has  held  in  the
celebration  of  popular  holidays  and  customs.  It  discourses  of  barley-malt
and  hops,  brewers,  drinkers,  drinking  clubs,  drinking  vessels,  and  the  like  ;
and,  in  fact,  approaches  the  subject  from  all  sides,  bringing  together,  in  the
space  of  600  pages,  A  host  of  curious  and  amusing  details." — Globe^
April  9.

"Mr  Marchant  is  a  staunch  believer  in  the  merits  of  good  ale.  In  the
course  of  his  reading  he  has  selected  the  materials  for  a  Bacchanalian  antho-
logy which  MAY  ALWAYS  BE  READ  WITH  AMUSEMENT  AND  PLEASURE.      His

materials  he  has  set  in  a  framework  of  gossiping  dissertation.  Much  curious
information  is  supplied  in  the  various  chapters  on  carols  and  wassail  songs,
church  ales  and  observances,  Whitsun  ales,  harvest  songs,  drinking  clubs  and
customs,  and  other  similar  matters.  At  snug  country  inns  at  which  the
traveller  may  be  called  upon  to  stop  there  should  be,  in  case  of  a  rainy  hour
in  the  day,  or  an  empty  smoke-room  at  night,  a  copy  of  a  book  which  sings
so  loudly  the  praises  of  mine  host  and  his  wares." — A'otes  and  Queries,

"  The  memory  of  John  Barleycorn  is  in  no  danger  of  passing  away  for  lack
of  a  devoted  prophet.  The  many  songs,  poems,  and  pieces  of  prose  written
In  Praise  of  Ale  form  a  fine  garden  for  the  anthologist  to  choose  a  bouquet
from.  .  .  .  It  is  plainly  AN  ORIGINAL  collection,  made  with  diligence
and  good  taste  in  selection.  .  .  .  Mr  Marchant's  anthology  may  be  recom-
mended to  the  curious  as  an  interesting  and  carefully  compiled  collection
of  poetical  and  satirical  pieces  about  beer  in  all  its  brews. " — Scotsman.

"  The  author  has  gone  to  ancient  and  modern  sources  for  his  facts,  and
has  not  contented  himself  with  merely  recording  them,  but  has  woven  them
into  a  readable  history  with  much  skill  and  wit." — American  Bookseller.

"Although  its  chief  aim  is  to  be  amusing,  it  is  sometimes  instructive  as
well.  .  .  .  His  stories  may  at  times  be  a  little  long,  but  they  are  never
broad." — Glasgotv  Herald.

"  What  teetotallers  would  call  A  tippler's  text-book  .  .  .  a  collection
of  songs  and  ballads,  epigrams  and  anecdotes,  which  may  be  called  uniqiceJ'^
— Pall  Mall  Gazette.

"  Beer,  however,  in  conjunction  with  mighty  roast  beef,  according  to  Mr
Marchant,  has  made  England  what  it  is,  and  accordingly  he  writes  his  book
to  show  how  the  English  have  ever  loved  good  ale,  and  how  much  better
that  is  for  them  than  cheap  and  necessarily  inferior  spirits  or  doctored  wines.
Be  that  as  it  may,  we  have  here  a  collection  of  occasional  verse — satires,
epigrams,  humorous  narratives,  trivial  ditties,  and  ballads — VALUABLE  AS
illustrations  of  manners." — Literary  World.

Crown  Sz'i?,  //.  xlii.  aiid  302,  cloth,  ']s.  6d.

Spirit    Revealed.

The  Book  for  the  Age.

The  Nature  of  the  First  Great  Cause,  and  the  Coming  Christ

or  Messiah  ;  The  Approaching  End  of  the  World,  or

the  Consummation  of  the  Age  ;  Life,  Death,  and

Regeneration  ;  The  Religious,  Political,

and  Social  Principles  of  the  Future.

A  REVELATION  OF  THE  LATTER  DAYS,

By  WM.  C.  ELDON  SERJEANT.

This  "  revelation  of  the  latter  days, "  by  a  New  Dispensationist  treats  of
"  The  nature  of  the  First  Great  Cause  and  the  Coming  Christ  or  Messiah"  ;
"  The  Approaching  End  of  the  World  or  the  Consummation  of  the  Age  "  ;
"  Life,  Death,  and  Regeneration";  "  The  Religious,  Political,  and  Social
Principles  of  the  Future";  and  proposes  the  formation  of  "an  universal
association  for  the  establishment  and  support  of  the  Divine  rights  to  which
all  are  entitled."

(,6  pa\;es,  lar:;-e  Sw,   Ctoih  ^ilt,  price  6s.

Lectures  on  Diseases  of  the  Eye.

By  CHARLES  BELL  TAYLOR,  F.R.C.S.  &  M.D.  Edin.,

fellow  of  the  medical  society  of  london  ;  late  president  of  the

parisian  medical  society  ;  consulting  ophthalmic  surgeon  to

the  nottingham  union  hospital;  consulting  ophthalmic

surgeon  to  the  midland  institution  for  the  blind  ;

honorary  surgeon  to  the  nottingham  and

midland  eye  infirmary,  etc.,  etc.

Illustrated  with  Photographs  and  Numerous  Woodcuts.

Contents  :— Lectures  on  Cataract— Squint— Glaucoma— Optico-Ciliary   Neurotomy —
Tlie  Use  and  Abuse  of  Mydriatics— Eye  Troubles  in  General  Practice.

"  The  descriptions  of  the  diseases  mentioned  are  well  given,  and  may  very
advantageously  be  read  by  the  general  practitioner. " — Lancet.

"  To  those  who  wish  to  perfect  themselves  in  ophthalmic  surgery,  the  book
will  be  found  a  really  valuable  help." — Hospital  Gazette.

"A  valuable  course  of  Lectures  calling  for  something  more  than  passing
notice,  an  opinion  which  all  who  read  the  discourses  will  heartily  endorse."
— Asclepiad.

Crown  ?iVo,  pp.  xii.  atid  666,  Cloth,  los.  6d.

Myths,    Scenes,    and   Worthies

of  Somerset.

By  Mrs  E.  BOGER.

Contents  :— Bladud,  King  of  Britain  ;  or,  The  Legend  of  Bath— Joseph  of  Arimathea
and  the  Legend  of  Glastonbury— Watchet,  The  Legend  of  St  Decuman— Porlock  and  St
Dubritius— King  Arthur  in  Somerset— St  Keyna  the  Virgin,  of  Keynsham— Gildas
Badonicus,  called  Gildas  the  Wise,  also  Gildas  the  Querulous— St  Brithwald,  Archbishop
of  Canterbury— King  Ina  in  Somerset,  Ina  and  Aldhelm— St  Cougar  and  Congresbury—
Hun,  the  Leader  of  the  Sumorsaetas,  at  the  Battle  of  Ellandune— King  Alfred  m  Somerset,
and  the  Legend  of  St  Neot— St  Athelm.  Archbishop  of  Canterbury— Wulfhelm,  Archbishop
of  Canterbury— The  Landing  of  the  Danes  at  Watchet— The  1  imes  of  St  Dunstan;  His

Life  and  Legends — Muchelney  Abbey — Ethelgar,  Archbishop  of  Canterbury — Sigeric  or
Siricius,  Archbishop  of  Canterbury — Elfeah,  Elph^ge,  or  Alphege,  Archbishop  of  Canter-
bury— Ethelnoth,  or  Agelnoth,  Archbishop  of  Canterbury — Montacute  and  the  Legend  of
Waitham  Cross — Porlock,  and  Harold  son  of  Godwin — Glastonbury  after  the  Conquest,
Bishop  Thurstan — William  of  Malmesbury,  called  also  "  Somersetanus" — The  Philo-
sophers of  Somerset  in  the  Twelfth  and  Thirteenth  Centuries — The  Rose  of  Cannington  ;
Joan  Clifford,  commonly  called  "Fair  Rosamond" — John  de  Courcy — St  Ulric  the
Recluse,  or  St  Wulfric  the  Hermit — Sir  William  de  Briwere — Woodspring  Priory,  and  the
Murderers  of  Thomas  a  Becket — Richard  of  Ilchester,  or  Richard  Tocklive  or  More —
Halswell  House,  near  Bridgewater — The  Legend  of  the  House  of  Tynte — Witham  Priory
and  St  Hugh  of  Avalon  (in  Burgundy) — William  of  Wrotham — Joceline  Trotman,  of  Wells
— Hugh  Trotman,  of  Wells— Roger  Bacon — Sir  Henry  Bracton,  Lord  Chief  Justice  in  the
Reign  of  Henry  IIL — William  Briwere  (Briewere,  Bruere,  or  Brewer) — Dunster  Castle,
Sir  Reginald  de  Mohun,  Lady  Mohun — Fulke  of  Samford — Sir  John  Hautville  and  Sir
John  St  Loe — Sir  Simon  de  Montacute — The  Evil  Wedding,  Chew  Magna  and  Stanton
Drew — Robert  Burnel — Somerton,  King  John  of  France — Stoke-under-Ham,  Sir
Matthew  Gournay — Bristol  (St  Mary  Redcliffe),  The  Canyges  ;  Chatterton — Thomas  de
Beckyngton — The  Legend  of  Sir  Richard  Whittington — The  Legend  of  the  Abbot  of
Muchelney — Sebastian  Cabot — Taunton  and  its  Story — Giles  Lord  Daubeney  and  the
Cornish  Rebellion,  King  Ina's  Palace  and  South  Petherton — John  Hooper,  The  Marian
Persecution — The  Paulets,  Pawlets,  or  Pouletts,  of  Hinton  St  George — Richard  Edwardes
— Lord  Chief  Justice  Popham — The  Last  Days  of  Glastonbury — William  Barlow  and  the
Times  of  Edward  VL — Robert  Parsons,  or  Persons — Henry  Cuff— Sir  John  Harrington —
The  Wadhams,  Wadham  College,  Oxford  ;  Ilminster,  Merrifield,  Ilton — Samuel  Daniel —
Dr  John  Bull— Thomas  Coryate,  of  Odcombe,  in  Somerset — John  Pym — Sir  Amias  Preston
— Admiral  Blake — William  Prynne— Sir  Ralph,  Lord  Hopton — Ralph  Cudworth— On
Witches,  Mrs  Leakey,  of  Mynehead,  Somerset — John  Locke — Thomas  Ken,  D.D.,  some-
time Bishop  of  Bath  and  Wells — Trent  House,  Charles  IL  and  Colonel  Wyndham — The
Duke  of  Monmouth  in  Somerset — Prince  George  of  Denmark  and  John  Duddleston
of  Bristol — Beau  Nash,  with  some  Account  of  the  Early  History  of  the  City  of  Bath —
Wokey  or  Ockey  Hole,  near  Wells— Captain  St  Loe — The  State  of  the  Church  in  the
Eighteenth  Century,  Mrs  Hannah  and  Mrs  Patty  More  and  Cheddar — Dr  Thomas
Young — Edward  Hawkins,  Provost  of  Oriel  and  Canon  of  Rochester — Charles  Fuge
Lowder — A  Tale  of  Watchet,  The  Death  of  Jane  Capes— Captain  John  Hanning  Speke —
Cheddar  Cheese,  West  Pennard's  Wedding  Present  to  the  Queen,  1839— In  Memoriam,
1811-1833.

"Mrs  Boger  is  to  be  praised  for  her  enthusiasm  and  zeal.  She  is  of
Somerset,  and  she  naturally  thinks  it  the  wonder  of  England,  if  not  of  the
world," — Literary  World.

"  Every  addition  to  the  local  collections  of  the  myths  and  legends  of  our
country  districts  is  to  be  welcomed  when  it  is  as  carefully  made  as  Mrs
Boger's  laboriously  compiled  work,  which  teems  WITH  QUAINT  STORIES,
SOME  OF  WHICH  ARE  EVEN  BEAUTIFUL." — Westminster  RevieziK

"This  is  the  kind  of  book,  we  imagine,  in  which  Thomas  Fuller  would
have  expatiated  with  delight.  Less  topographical  than  his  '  Worthies,'  it
does  what  that  delectable  book  did  not  profess  to  do  ;  it  gives  not  only  an
account  of  the  illustrious  natives,  but  the  legends,  traditions,  historical
episodes,  and  general  memorahilia  which  pertain  to  one  famous  county.  Mrs
Boger's  book  ranges  from  Bladud,  King  of  Britain,  B.C.  900,  to  Arthur
Ilallum,  who  died  in  1833." — Notes  and  Qite?-ies.

"Mrs  Boger  writes  with  such  ability  and  enthusiasm.  The  work  is  one
which  will  have  an  influence  in  limits  far  wider  than  the  borders  of  Somerset,

for   FEW  CAN    READ  IT  WITHOUT    PLEASURE,  AND    NONE  WITHOUT  PROFIT.

...  To  read  her  book  carefully  is  to  master  the  hagiology  of  the  county." —
Morning-  Post.

STANDARD     WORKS

PUBLISHED    BY

GEORGE     REDWAY.

Crown  8vo,  pp.  375,   Cloth ^  'js.  dd.

Theosophy,  Religion,  and
Occult  Science.

By  henry  S.  OLCOTT,
president  of  the  theosophical  society.

With  Glossary  of  Eastern  Woiios.

Contents: — Theosophy  or  Materialism — Which? — The  Theosophical  Society  and  its
Aims — The  Common  Foundation  of  all  Religions — Thesophy :  the  Scientific  Basis  of
Religion — Theosophy  :  its  Friends  and  Enemies — The  Occult  Sciences — Spiritualism  and
I'heosophy — India  :  Past,  Present,  and  Future — The  Civilisation  that  India  needs — The
Spirit  of  the  Zoroastrian  Religion — the  Life  of  Buddha  and  its  Lessons,  &c.

The  Manchester  Examiner  describes  these  lectures  as  "  rich  in  interest
AND  suggestiveness,"  and  says  that  "the  theosophy  expounded  in  this
volume  is  at  once  a  theology,  a  metaphysic,  and  a  sociology,"  and  concludes
a  lengthy  notice  by  stating  that  "  Colonel  Olcott's  volume  deserves,  and  will
repay,  the  study  of  all  readers  for  whom  the  byways  of  speculation  have  an
irresistible  charm."

Demy  8z'o,  pp.  xii.  and  324,   Cloth ^   \os.  6d.

Incidents  in  the  Life  of  Madame

Blavatsky.

Compiled  from  Information  supplied  by  Her
Relatives  and  Friends,

And  Edited  by  A.  P.  SINNETT.

With  a  Portrait  Reproduced  from  an  Original  Painting  bv

Hermann  Schmiechen.

Contents  : — Childhood — Marriage  and  Travel — At  Home  in  Russia,  1858 — Mme.  de
Jelihowskj''s  Narrative — From  Apprenticeship  to  Duty — Residence  in  America — Estab-
lished in  India — A  Visit  to  Europe,  &c.

Truth  says  : — "For  any  credulous  friend  who  revels  in  such  stories  I  can
recommend  'Incidents  in  the  Life  of  Madame  Blavatsky.'  I  read  every
line  of  the  book  with  much  interest."

Theosophists  will  find  both  edification  and  interest  in  the  book.

Post  8vo,  pp.  viii.  and  350,  C/oth  £z/t,  ys.  6d.

The    Blood    Covenant,    a
Primitive    Rite,

And  its    Bearings    on    Scripture.

By    H.    clay   TRUMBULL,    D.D.

Contents  : — The  Prhnitive  Rite  Itself.— {i)  Sources  of  Bible  Study — (2)  An  Ancient
Semitic  Rite — (3)  The  Primitive  Rite  in  Africa — (4)  Traces  of  the  Rite  in  Europe —
(5)  World-wide  Sweep  of  the  Rite,— (6)  Light  from  the  Classics— (7)  The  Bond  of  the
Covenant,— (8)  The  Rite  and  its  Token  in  Egypt— (9)  Other  Gleams  of  the  Rite.
Suggestions  and  Perversions  of  tlte  Rite. — (i)  Sacredness  of  Blood  and  of  the  Heart —
(2)  Vivifying  Power  of  Blood — (3)  A  new  Nature  through  new  Blood — (4)  Life  from
any  Blood,  and  by  a  Touch — (5)  Inspiration  through  Blood— (6)  Inter-communion  through
Blood— (7)  Symbolic  Substitutes  for  Blood — (8)  Blood  Covenant  Involvings.  Indications
of  the  Rite  in  the  Bibie.—if)  Limitations  of  Inquiry— (2)  Primitive  Teachings  of  Blood —

(3)  The  Blood  Covenant  in  Circumcision— (41  The  Blood  Covenant  Tested— (5)  The  Blood
Covenant  and  its  Tokens  in  the  Passover— (6)  The  Blood  Covenant  at  Sinai— (7)  ihe
Blood  Covenant  in  the  Mosaic  Ritual— (8)  The  Primitive  Rite  Illustrated— (9)  Ihe  Blood
Covenant  in  the  Gospels— (10)  The  Blood  Covenant  applied.  Importance  of  this  Kite
strangely  undervalued— Life  in  the  Blood,  in  the  Heart,  in  the  Liver— Transmigration
of  Souls— The  Blood-rite  in  Burmah— Blood-stained  Tree  of  the  Covenant— Blood-
drinking— Covenant  Cutting— Blood-bathing— Blood-ransoming— The  Covenant-reminder
—Hints  of  Blood  Union — Topical  Index — Scriptural  Index.

"An  admirable  .study  of  a  primitive  belief  and  custom — one  of  the  utmost
importance  in  considering  the  growth  of  civilisation.  ...  In  thedetails  of
the  work  will  be  found  much  to  attract  the  attention  of  the  curious.  Its
fundamental  and  essential  value,  however,  is  for  the  student  of  religions  ;  and
all  such  will  be  grateful  to  Dr  Trumbull  for  this  solid,  instructive,  and

ENLIGHTENING  WORK." — Scotstuau.

Post  Svo,  pp.  xiii.  and  220,  Cloth,  \os.  dd.

The  Life

OF

Philippus  Theophrastus,  Bombast  of  Hohenheim,

KNOWN    BY   THE    NAME   OF

Paracelsus.

And    the    Substance    of    his    Teachings    concerning

Cosmology,  Anthropology,  Pneumatology,  Magic

AND  Sorcery,  Medicine,  Alchemy  and

Astrology,    Philosophy

AND    ThEOSOPHY.

Extracted  and  Translated  from  his  Rare  and  Extensive
Works,  and  from  some  Unpublished  Manuscripts,

By    FRANZ    HARTMANN,    M.D.

Contents: — The  Life  of  Paracelsus — Explanation  of  Terms— Cosmologj' — Anthropology
—  Pneumatology — Magic  and  Sorcery —  Medicine — Alchemy  and  Astrology- — Philosophy
and  Theosophy — Appendix.

St  James's  Gazette  describes  this  as  "a  book  which  will  have  some  per-
manent value  to  the  student  of  the  occult,"  and  says  that  "Students
should  be  grateful  for  this  book,  despite  its  setting  of  Theosophical

nonsense."

Crown  8vo,  pp.  x.  and  124,  Parchment,  ds.

The  Raven.

By   EDGAR   ALLAN    POE.
With  Literary  and  Historical  Commentary  by  John  H.  Ingram.

Contents: — Genesis — The  Raven,  with  Variorum  Readings — History — Isadore —
Translations  :  French —  German  —  Hungarian  —  Latin — Fabrications — Parodies — Biblio-
g  raphy —  Index.

"An  interesting  monograph  on  Poe's  famous  poem." — Spectator.

"  There  is  no  more  reliable  authority  on  the  subject  than  Mr
John  H.  Ingram.  Much  curious  information  is  collected  in  his  essay.
The  volume  is  well  printed  and  tastefully  bound  in  spotless  vellum." —
Publishers   Cii'Ctdar.

Crown  8vo.,  pp.  viii.  and  184,  Cloth,  2s.  6d.

Burma  as  it  was,  as  it  is,  and

as  it  will  be.

By  JAMES  GEORGE  SCOTT.
{Shway   Voe.)

Contents: — I.  The  History — Burma  according  to  Native  Theories — Origin  of  the  Bur-
mese— Early  History — First  appearance  of  Europeans  in  Burma — Worrying  our  Repre-
sentatives— War  with  Burma — The  Inevitable  End.  II.  The  Country — Lower  Burma —
Upper  Burma — The  Irrawaddy  to  Mandalay — Mandalay — The  Irrawaddyabove  Mandalay.
III.  The  People — Burmese  Kings — Burmese  Officials — The  Hloat-daw — The  Officers  of
the  Household — Method  of  Appointment  and  Payment — The  People — Their  Faults —
Excellence  as  Buddhists — Doctrine  of  Good  Works — Superstitions — Lucky  and  Unlucky
Days — The  most  Sociable  of  Men — Freedom  of  the  Women — A  Nation  of  Smokers —
Contented  with  British  Rule — Ascendency  of  the  Chinaman  Trade — Hill-tribes — Their
Religion — Hope  for  the  Nomads — The  Kachyens.

The  Saturday  Review  says  : — "  Before  going  to  help  to  govern  them,
Mr  Scott  has  once  more  written  on  the  Burmese  .  .  .  Mr  Scott  claims
to  have  covered  the  whole  ground,  and  as  there  is  nobody  competent  to
criticise  him  except  himself,  we  shall  not  presume  to  say  how  far  he  has
succeeded.  What,  however,  may  be  asserted  with  absolute  confidence  is,
that  he  has  written  A  bright,  readable,  and  useful  book."

Croivn  Svo,  pp.  xxviii.  and  184,  Cloth^  5^.

The  History  of  Tithes,

From  Abraham  to   Queen  Victoria.

By  henry  W.  CLARKE.

Contents  :— The  History  of  Tithes  before  the  Christian  Era— From  the  Christian  Era
to  A.D.  400— From  a.d.  400  to  a.d.  787 — From  a.d.  787  to  a.d.  iooo — From  a.d.  loaoto  a.d.
T215 — From  a.d.  1215  to  the  Dissolution  of  Monasteries — Monasteries — Infeudations —
Exemption  from  Paying  Tithes— The  Dissolution  of  Monasteries — The  Commutation  Act
of  1836,  6  and  7  Will.  IV.,  c.  71— Tithes  in  the  City  and  Liberties  of  London— Redemption
of  Tithe  Rent  Charge— Some  Remarks  on  "A  Defence  of  the  Church  of  England  against
Disestablishment,"  by  the  Earl  of  Selborne.

"An  impartial  and  valuable  array  of  facts  and  figures,  which  should  be  read
by  all  who  ai"e  interested  in  the  solution  of  the  tithe  problem." — Athemcum.

*'The  best  book  of  moderate  size  yet  published  for  the  purpose  of
enabling  an  ordinary  reader  to  thoroughly  understand  the  origin  and  history
of  this  ancient  impost." — Literary  World.

Crown  SvOj  pp.  xl.  and  395,  Cloth  extra,  ']s.  6d.

Essays    in    the    Study    of
Folk-Songs.

By  the  Countess  EVELYN  MARTINENGO-CESARESCO.

Contents  : — The  Inspiration  of  Death  in  Folk-Poetry — Nature  in  Folk-Songs — Armenian
Folk-Songs — Venetian  Folk-Songs — Sicilian  Folk-Songs — Greek  Songs  of  Calabria — Folk-
Songs  of  Provence — The  White  Paternoster — The  Diffusion  of  Ballads — Songs  for  the  Rite
of  May — The  Idea  of  Fate  in  Southern  Traditions — Folk-Lullabies — Folk  Dirges,  &c.

The  Saturday  Review,  concluding  a  page-notice  of  this  book,  sums  it  up  as
"an  admirable  volume,  a  volume  remarkable  for  knowledge,  sympathy,  and
good  taste."

"This  is  a  very  delightful  book,  full  of  information  and
THOUGHTFUL  SUGGESTIONS. " — Standard.

"The  Countess  is,  or  should  be,  a  well-known  authority  among  special
students  of  this  branch  of  literature." — Daily  News.

Large  Paper  Edition,  Royal  ^vo,  pp.  xvi.  and  60,  7^-.  dd.

An    Essay    on    the    Genius    of
George  Cruikshank.

By  WILLIAM  MAKEPEACE  THACKERAY.

Reprinted  Verbatim  from  "  The  Westminster  Review y

Edited  with  a  Prefatory  Note  on  Thackeray  as  an
Artist  and  Art  Critic,  by  W.  E.  Church.

With   Upwards  of  Forty  Illustrations,   including  all  the
Original  Woodcuts,  and  a  new  Portrait  of  Cruikshank

ETCHED    BY   F.    W.    PaILTHORPE.

As  the  original  copy  of  the  Westminster  is  now  excessively  rare,  this
re-issue  will  no  doubt  be  welcomed  by  collectors.  The  new  portrait  of
Cruikshank  by  F.  W.  Pailthorpe  is  a  clear  firm  etching.

Pp.  102,  Cloth  y  2s.  6d.

Pope    Joan

(THE    FEMALE    POPE);

A    Historical    Study.

Translated  from  the  Greek  of  Emmanuel  Rhoidis,

with  Preface  by

CHARLES   HASTINGS  COLLETTE.

Frontispiece  taken  from  the  ancient  MS.  Nuremberg
Chronicle,  preserved  at  Cologne.

*'  The  subject  of  Pope  Joan  will  always  have  its  attractions  for  the  lovers  of
the  curiosities  of  history.  Rhoidis  discusses  the  topic  with  much  learning  and
ingenuity,  and  Mr  Collette's  Introduction  is  full  of  information."' — Globe.

Crown  Svo,  pp.  40,  printed  on  hand-made  paper,  Vellwn  Gilt,  6s.

The  Bibliography  of  Swinburne ;

A   Bibliographical   List,   Arranged   in   Chronological

Order,  of  the  Published  Writings,  in  Verse  and

Prose,  of  Algernon  Charles  Swinburne

(1857-1887).

Only  250  copies  printed.  The  compiler,  writing  on  April  5,  1887,  says:—
*'Born  on  April  5,  1837,  in  the  year  of  Queen  Victoria's  Accession,  of  which
the  whole  nation  is  now  celebrating  the  Jubilee,  Algernon  Charles  Swinburne
to-day  attains  the  jubilee  or  50th  year  of  his  own  life,  and  may  therefore  be
claimed  as  an  essentially  and  exclusively  Victorian  poet."

Indispensable  to  Swinburne  Collectors.

Demj'  Sz>o,  pp.  xxiv.  and  104,  Clot/i  extra,  Js.  6d.

The    Astrologer's    Guide

(ANIMA    ASTROLOGI^) ;

Or,  A  Guide  for  Astrologers.

BEING

The  One  Hundred  and  Forty-Six  Considerations  of
THE  Famous  Astrologer,  Guido  Bonatus,  Trans-
lated FROM  THE  Latin  by  Henry  Coley,

TOGETHER   WITH

The  Choicest  Aphorisms  of  the  Seven  Segments

of  Jerome  Cardan  of  Milan,  Edited  by

William    Lilly    (1675).

Now   FIRST   Republished    from   a   Unique   Copy   of  the
Original  Edition,  with  Notes  and  a  Preface,  by

WM.  C.  ELDON  SERJEANT,
fellow  of  the  theosophical  society.

"  Mr  Serjeant  deserves  the  thanks  of  all  who  are  interested  in  astrology  for
rescuing  this  important  work  from  obUvion.  .  .  .  The  growing  interest  in
mystical  science  will  lead  to  a  revival  of  astrological  study,  and  advanced
students  will  find  this  book  an  indispensable  addition  to  their
libraries.     The  book  is  well  got  up  and  printed." — Theosophist.

idmo^  pp.  xvi.  and  148,  Cloth  extra ^  2s.

Tobacco  Talk  and  Smokers'

Gossip.

An  Amusing  Miscellany  of  Fact  and  Anecdote  Relating

TO  THE  "  Great  Plant  "  in  all  its  Forms  and

Uses,  Including  a  Selection  from

Nicotian   Literature.

Contents  : — A  Tobacco  Parliament — Napoleon's  First  Pipe — A  Dutch  Poet  and
Napoleon's  Snuff-Box — Frederick  the  Great  as  an  Ass— Too  Small  for  Two — A  Smoking
Empress — The  Smoking  Princesses — An  Incident  on  the  G.W.R — Raleigh's  Tobacco  Box —
Bismarck's  Last  Cigar — Bismarck's  Cigar  Story — Moltke's  Pound  of  Snuff^Lord  Brougham
as  a  Smoker — Mazzini's  Sang-froid  as  a  Smoker — Lord  Clarendon  as  a  Smoker — Politics
and  Snuff-Boxes — Penn  and  Tobacco — Tobacco  and  the  Papacy — The  Snuff-MuU  in  the
Scotch  Kirk— Whateley  as  a  Snuff-Taker— The  First  Bishop  who  Smoked— Pigs  and
Smokers — Jesuits'  Snuff — Kemble  Pipes — An  Ingenious  Smoker — Anecdote  of  Dean
Aldrich — Smoking  to  the  Glory  of  God — Professor  Huxley  on  Smoking — Blucher's  Pipe-
Master — Shakespeare  and  Tobacco — Ben  Jonson  on  Tobacco — Lord  Byron  on  Tobacco —
Decamps  and  Horace  Vernet — Milton's  Pipe — Anecdote  of  Sir  Isaac  Newton — Emerson  and
Carlyle — Paley  and  his  Pipe — Jules  Sandeau  on  the  Cigar — The  Pickwick  of  Fleet  Street —
The  Obsequio  of  Havana — The  Social  Pipe  ( Thackerayy—Tx'wiva^h.  of  Tobacco  over  Sack
and  Ale — The  Smoking  Philosopher — Sam  Slick  on  the  Virtues  of  a  Pipe — Smoking  in  1610
— Bulwer-Lytton  on  Tobacco-Smoking — Professor  Sedgwick — St  Pierre  on  the  Effect  of
Tobacco — Ode  to  Tobacco  (C.  6".  Calverley) — Meat  and  Drink  {CJuirles  Kingsley) — The
Meerschaum  {O.  W.  Holmes) — Charles  Kingsley  at  Eversley— Robert  Bums's  Snuff-Box —
Robinson  Crusoe's  Tobacco — Guizot — Victor  Hugo — Mr  Buckle  as  a  Smoker — Carlyle  on
Tobacco — A  Poet's  Pipe  {Baudelaire) — A  Pipe  of  Tobacco — The  Headsman's  Snuff-box —
The  Pipe  and  Snuff-box  {jCmvper) — Anecdote  of  Charles  Lamb — Gibbon  as  a  Snuff-Taker —
Charles  Lamb  as  a  Smoker — Farewell  to  Tobacco  {CJias.  Latnb) — The  Power  of  Smoke
{Thackeray) — Thackeray  as  a  Smoker — Dickens  as  a  Smoker — Chewing  and  Spitting  in
America — Tennyson  as  a  Smoker — A  Smoker's  Opinion  of  Venice — Coleridge's  First  Pipe
— Richard  Porson — Cruikshank  and  Tobacco — Mr  James  Payn — Mr  Swinburne  on
Raleigh — The  Anti-Tobacco  Party — "This  Indian  Weed" — Dr  Abernethy  on  Snuff-Taking
— Abernethy  and  a  Smoking  Patient — Tobacco  and  the  Plague — "The  Greatest  Tobacco
Stopper  in  all  England  " — Dr  Richardson  on  Tobacco — Advice  to  Smokers — Some  Strange
Smokers— The  Etymology  of  Tobacco— The  Snuff  called  "Irish  Blackguard"— A  Snuff-
Maker's  Sign— Mr  Sala's  Cigar- Shop— Death  of  the  "Yard  of  Clay"— A  Prodigious
Smoker — A  Professor  of  Smoking — Tobacco  in  Time  of  War — Ages  attained  by  Great
Smokers— A  Maiden's  Wish — "  Those  Dreadful  Cigars  " — How  to  take  a  Pinch  of  Snuffs
The  Tobacco  Plant — Fate  of  an  Early  Smoker — Adding  Insult  to  Injury — Tom  Brown  on
Smoking — The  Snuff-Taker — Tobacco  in  North  America — National  Characteristics —
Smoking  at  School — Carlyle  on  "  The  Veracities  " — Children's  Pipes — The  Uses  of  Cigar
Ash — An  Inveterate  Smoker — A  Tough  Yarn — Some  French  Smokers — Riddles  for  Smokers
— Cigar  Manufacturing  in  Havana.

"  One  of  the  best  books  of  gossip  we  have  met  for  some  time.  ...  It
is  literally  crammed  full  from  beginning  to  end  of  its  148  pages  with  well-
selected  anecdotes,  poems,  and  excerpts  from  tobacco  literature  and  history. "
— Graphic.

"  The  smoker  should  be  grateful  to  the  compilers  of  this  pretty  little
volume.  .  .  .  No  smoker  should  be  without  it,  and  anti-tobacconists
have  only  to  turn  over  its  leaves  to  be  converted." — Fa//  Mall  Gazette.

"Something  to  please  smokers;  and  non-smokers  may  be  interested  in
tracing  the  effect  of  tobacco — the  fatal,  fragrant  herb — on  our  literature." —
Literaty  World.

Demy  Svo,  pp.  xliii.  and  349,  tvith  Illustrations,   Cloth  extra,    lOs.   6d.

The  Mysteries  of  Magic ;

A  Digest  of  the  Writings  of  Eliphas   Levi.

With  Biographical  and  Critical  Essay
By  ARTHUR  EDWARD  WAITE.

Contents: — Initiatory  Exercises  and  Preparations — Religious  and  Philoso-
I'HiCAL  Problems  and  Hypotheses — The  Hermetic  Axiom,  Faith — The  True  God— '1  he
Christ  of  God — Mysteries  of  the  Logos — The  True  Religion — The  Reason  of  Prodigies,  or
the  Devil  before  Science — Scientific  and  Magical  Theorems — On  Numbers  and  their
Virtues — Theory  of  Will  Power — The  Translucid — The  great  Magic  Agent,  or  the
Mysteries  of  the  Astral  Light — Magic  Equilibrium — The  Magic  Chain — The  great  Magic
Arcanum — The  Doctrine  of  Spiritual  Essences,  or  Kabbalistic  Pneumatics  ;  with
the  Mysteries  of  Evocation,  Necromancy,  and  Black  Magic — Immortality—The
Astral  Body — Unity  and  Solidarity  of  Spirits — The  great  Arcanum  of  Death,  or  Spiritual
Transition,  Hierarchy,  and  Classification  of  Spirits — Fluidic  Phantoms  and  their  Mysteries
— Elementary  Spirits  and  the  Ritual  of  their  Conjuration — Necromancy — Mysteries  of  the
Pentagram  and  other  Pantacles — Magical  Ceremonial  and  Consecration  of  Talismans —
Black  Magic  and  the  Secrets  of  the  Witches — Sabbath — Witchcraft  and  Spells — The  Key
of  Mesmerism — Modern  Spiritualism — The  great  Practical  Secrets  or  Realisations
of  Magical  Science — The  "  Magnum  Opus" — The  Universal  Medicine — Renewed  Youth —
Transformations — Divination — Astrology — The  Tarot,  the  Book  of  Hermes,  or  of  Koth —
Eternal  Life,  or  Profound  Peace — Epilogue — Supplement — The  Kabbalah — Thaumatur-
gical  Experiences  of  Eliphas  Levi — Evocation  of  Apollonius  of  Tyana — Ghosts  in  Paris —
The  Magician  and  the  Medium — Eliphas  Levi  and  the  Sect  of  Eugene  Vintras— The
Magician  and  the  Sorcerer — Secret  History  of  the  Assassination  of  the  Archbishop  of  Paris
— Notes.

"  Of  the  many  remarkable  men  who  have  gained  notoriety  by  their  profici-
ency, real  or  imaginary,  in  the  Black  Arts,  probably  none  presents  a  more
strange  and  irreconcileable  character  than  the  French  magician  Alphonse  Louis
Constant.  .  .  .  Better  known  under  the  Jewish  pseudonym  of  Eliphas
Levi  Zahed,  this  enthusiastic  student  of  forbidden  art  made  some  stir  in
France,  and  even  in  London.  .  .  .  His  WORKS  ON  MAGIC  ARE  THOSE  OF
AN  UNDOUBTED  GENIUS,  and  divulge  a  philosophy  beautiful  in  conception,  if

totally  opposed  to  common  sense  principles There  is  so  great  a  fund

of  learning  and  of  attractive  reasoning  in  these  writings,  that  Mr  Arthur
Edward  Waite  has  published  a  digest  of  them  for  the  benefit  of  English
readers.  This  gentleman  has  not  attempted  a  literal  translation  in  every
case,  but  has  arranged  a  volume  which,  while  reproducing  with  sufficient
accuracy  a  great  portion  of  the  more  interesting  works,  affords  an  excellent
idea  of  the  scope  of  the  entire  literary  remains  of  an  enthusiast  for  whom  he
entertains  a  profound  admiration.  .  .  .  The  reader  may  with  profit  peruse
carefully  the  learned  dissertations  penned  by  M.  Constant  upon  the  Hermetic
art  treated  as  a  religion,  a  philosophy,  and  a  natural  science.  ...  In  view
of  the  remarkable  exhibitions  of  mesmeric  influence  and  thought  reading
which  have  been  recently  given,  it  is  not  improbable  that  the  thoughtful
reader  may  find  a  clue  in  the  writings  of  this  cultured  and  amiable  magician
to  the  secret  of  many  of  the  manifestations  of  witchcraft  that  formerly  struck

wonder  and  terror  into  the  hearts  of  simple  folks.  .  .  ." — The  Morning
Post.

"The  present  single  volume  is  a  digest  of  half-a-dozen  books  enumerated
by  the  present  author  in  a  'biographical  and  critical  essay'  with  which
he  prefaces  his  undertaking.  These  are  the  Dogme  et  Ritual  de  la  Haute
Magie,  the  Histoire  de  la  Magie,  the  Clef  des  Grands  Afysteres,  the
Sorcier  de  Mendon^  the  Philosophie  Occulte,  and  the  Science  des  Esprits.
To  attack  the  whole  series — which,  indeed,  it  might  be  difficult  to  obtain
now  in  a  complete  form — would  be  a  bold  undertaking,  but  Mr  Waite
has  endeavoured  to  give  his  readers  the  essence  of  the  whole  six  books  in  a
relatively  compact  compass.  .  .  .  The  book  before  us  is  encyclopedic
IN  ITS  RANGE,  and  it  would  be  difficult  to  find  a  single  volume  which  is  better
calculated  to  supply  modern  inquiries  with  a  general  conception  of  the  scope
and  purpose  of  the  occult  sciences  at  large.  It  freely  handles,  amongst
others,  the  ghastly  topics  of  witchcraft  and  black  magic,  but  certainly
it  would  be  difficult  to  imagine  any  reader  tempted  to  enter  those  pathways
of  experiment  by  the  picture  of  their  character  and  purpose  that  Eliphas  Levi
supplies.  In  this  way  the  intrepid  old  Kabbalist,  though  never  troubling  his
readers  with  sublime  exhortations  in  the  interests  of  virtue,  writes  under  the
inspiration  of  an  uncompromising  devotion  to  the  loftiest  ideals,  and  all  his
philosophy  '  makes  for  righteousness.'  " — Mr  A.  P.  Sinnett  in  Light.

"We  are  grateful  to  Mr  Waite  for  translating  the  account  of  how  L^vi,  in
a  lone  chamber  in  London,  called  up  the  spirit  of  Apollonius  of  Tyana,
This  very  creepy  composition  is  written  in  quite  the  finest  manner  of  the  late
Lord  Lytton  when  he  was  discoursing  upon  the  occult." — The  Saturday
Review.

Demy  iSmo,  pp.  vi.  and  132,  ivith  Woodctits,  Fancy  Cloth,  \s.

John    Leech,    Artist   and
Humourist.

A    Biographical    Sketch.

By    FRED.    F.    KITTON.

New  Edition,  Revised.

"  In  the  absence  of  a  fuller  biography  we  cordially  welcome  Mr  Kitton's
interesting  little  sketch." — Notes  atid  Queries.

"The  multitudinous  admirers  of  the  famous  artist  will  find  this  touching
monograph  well  worth  careful  reading  and  preservation." — Daily  Chronicle.

"The  very  model  of  what  such  a  memoir  should  be." — Graphic.

4^0,  zvith  Frontispiece,  pp.  xxx.  and  154,  ParcJvnejit,  los.  6d.

THE  HERMETIC    WORKS.

The  Virgin  of  the  World

OF

Hermes  Mercurius  Trismegistus.

Now  FIRST  Rendered  into  English,  with  Essay,
Introductions,  and  Notes,

By  DR  anna  KINGSFORD  and  EDWARD  MAITLAND,

AUTHORS    OF    "THE    PERFECT   WAY."

Published  under  the  auspices  of  the  Hermetic  Society.  Essays  on  "The
Hermetic  Books,"  by  E.  M.,  and  on  "The  Hermetic  System  and  the
Significance  of  its  Present  Revival,"  by  A.  K.  "  The  Virgin  of  the  World  "
is  followed  by  "  Asclepios  on  Initiation,"  the  "  Definitions  of  Asclepios,"
and  the  "  Fragments  of  Hermes."

It  will  be  a  most  interesting  study  for  eveiy  occultist  to  compare  the
doctrines  of  the  ancient  Hermetic  philosophy  with  the  teaching  of  the
Vedantic  and  Buddhist  systems  of  religious  thought.  The  famous  books
OF  Hermes  seem  to  occupy,  with  reference  to  the  Egyptian  religion,  the
same  position  which  the  Upanishads  occupy  in  Aryan  religious  literature." —
Theosophist,  November,  1SS5.

Imperial  16/no,  pp.  16,  zurappei',  printed  on  Whatman'' s  hand-made  paper.
250  copies  only,  each  ntwibered.     ^s.

A  Word  for  the  Navy.

By  ALGERNON  CHARLES  SWINBURNE.

"Mr  Swinburne's  new  patriotic  song,  '  A  Word  for  the  Navy,'  is  as  fiery
in  its  denunciation  of  those  he  believes  to  be  antagonistic  to  the  welfare  of  the
country  as  was  his  lyric  with  which  he  startled  the  readers  of  the  Times  one
mornins:. "  — Athemeiim.

The  publisher  of  this  poem  is  also  the  sole  proprietor  of  the  copyright ;  it  cajinot
therefore  be  ittcluded  in  Mr  Siuinburne^s  collected  ivorks.

4^0,  pp.  121,  Illustrated  zvith  a  number  of  beautiful  Symbolical  Figures,

Parchment  gilt,  price  los.  6d.

ASTROLOGY  THEOLOGIZED.

The  Spiritual  Hermeneutics  of
Astrology  and  Holy  Writ.

Being  a  Treatise  upon  the  Influence  of  the  Stars

ON  Man  and  on  the  Art  of  Ruling  Them  by

the  Law  of  Grace.

{Reprinted from  the  original  of  1 649.)

With   a   Prefatory   Essay   ox   the   True   Method   of
Interpreting  Holy  Scripture,

By   anna    bonus    KINGSFORD.

Illustrated  with  Engravings  on  Wood.

Contents: — What  Astrology  is,  and  what  Theology;  and  how  they  have  reference
one  to  another  —  Concerning  the  Subject  of  Astrology — Of  the  three  parts  of  Man;
Spirit,  Soul,  and  Body,  from  whence  every  one  is  taken,  and  how  one  is  in  the  other —
Of  the  Composition  of  the  Microcosm,  that  is  Man,  from  the  Macrocosm,  the  great  World —
That  all  kind  of  Sciences,  Studies,  Actions,  and  Lives,  flourishing  amongst  Men  on  the
Earth  and  Sea,  do  testify  that  all  Astrology,  that  is,  Natural  Wisdom,  with  all  its  Species,
is  and  is  to  be  really  found  in  every  Man.  And  so  all  things,  whatsoever  Men  act  on
Earth,  are  produced,  moved,  governed,  and  acted  from  the  Inward  Heaven.  And  what
are  the  Stars  which  a  Wise  Man  ought  to  rule.  Touching  a  double  Firmament  and  Star
in  every  Man;  and  that  by  the  Benefit  of  Regeneration  in  the  Exercise  of  the  Sabbath,  a
Man  may  be  transposed  from  a  worse  nature  into  a  better — Touching  the  Distribution  of
all  Astrology  into  the  Seven  Governors  of  the  World,  and  their  Operations  and  Offices,  as
well  in  the  Macrocosm  as  in  the  Microcosm — Touching  the  Astrology  of  Saturn,  of  what
kind  it  is,  and  how  it  ought  to  be  Theologized — A  Specifical  Declaration,  how  the  Astrology
of  Saturn  in  Man  ought  to  be  and  may  be  Theologized.

The  Stjaf?ies^s  Gazette  says  :  —  "  It  is  well  for  Dr  Anna  Kingsford  that  she
was  not  born  into  the  sidereal  world  four  hundred  years  ago.  Had  that  been
her  sorry  fate,  she  would  assuredly  have  been  burned  at  the  stake  for  her
preface  to  '  Astrology  Theologized.'  It  is  a  very  long  preface — more  than
half  the  length  of  the  treatise  it  introduces  ;  it  contains  some  of  the
FINEST  FLOWERS  OF  THEOSOPHICAL  PHILOSOPHY,  and  of  course  makes
very  short  work  of  Christianity."

Cro7vnS>vo,  pp.  ^6,  printed  on  Whatman'' s  Handmade  Paper,  Velhtm  Gilt,  (a.

Hints  to  Collectors

Of  Original  Editions  of  the  Works  of
Charles  Dickens.

By   CHARLES   PLUMPTRE   JOHNSON.

Including  Books,  Plays,  and  Portraits,  there  are  167  items  fully  described.

"  This  is  a  sister  volume  to  the  *  Hints  to  Collectors  of  First  Editions  of
Thackeray,'  which  we  noticed  a  month  or  two  ago.  As  we  are  unable
to  detect  any  slips  in  his  work,  we  must  content  ourselves  with  thanking
him  for  the  correctness  of  his  annotations.  It  is  unnecessary  to  repeat  our
praise  of  the  Q!i^gzxii  format  of  these  books." — Academy.

Cro7vn  Zvo^  pp.  48,  printed  on  Whatman'' s  Handmade  Paper,  Velhim  Gilt,  bs.

Hints  to   Collectors

Of  Original  Editions  of  the  Works  of  William

Makepeace  Thackeray.

By  CHARLES  PLUMPTRE  JOHNSON.

"  .  .  .  .A  guide  to  those  who  are  great  admirers  of  Thackeray,  and  are
collecting  first  editions  of  his  works.  The  dainty  little  volume,  bound
in  parchment  and  printed  on  hand-made  paper,  is  very  concise  and  convenient
in  form  ;  on  each  page  is  an  exact  copy  of  the  title-page  of  the  work
mentioned  thereon,  a  collation  of  pages  and  illustrations,  useful  hints  on  the
differences  in  editions,  with  other  matters  indispensable  to  collectors.
.  .  .  Altogether  it  represents  a  large  amount  of  labour  and  experience." —
Spectator.

LaTge  Crown  %vo^  pp.  xxxii.  and  324,  Cloth  extra.  Gilt  Top,  los.  6d.

Sea  Song  and  River  Rhyme,

From  Chaucer  to  Tennyson.

SELECTED   AND    EDITED    BY

ESTELLE  DAVENPORT  ADAMS.

With  a  New  Poem  by  Algernon  Charles  Swinburne.

With  Twelve  Etchings.

In  general,  the  Songs  and  Poetical  Extracts  are  limited  to  those  which
deal  with  the  Sea  and  Rivers  as  natural  objects,  and  are  either  descriptive  or
reflective.  The  Etchings  are  printed  in  different  colours  ;  the  headpieces  are
also  original.

"The  book  is,  on  the  whole,  otie  of  the  best  of  its  kind  ever  published.'''' —
Glasgozu  Herald.

"The  editor  has  made  the  selection  with  praiseworthy  judgment." —
Morning  Post.

"  Twelve  really  exquisite  and  delicately  executed  etchings  of  sea  and  river-
side accompany  and  complete  THIS  BEAUTIFUL  VOLUME." — Morning  Post.

"A  special  anthology,  delightful  in  itself,  and  possessing  the  added  graces
of  elegant  printing  and  dainty  illustrations." — Scotsman.

"The  volume  is  got  up  in  the  handsomest  style,  and  includes  a  dozen
etchings  of  sea  and  river  scenes,  some  of  which  are  exquisite." — Literary
IVorld.

Croivji  Svo,  pp.  xl.  and  420,  Cloth  extra,  \os.  6d.

The  History  of  the  Forty  Vezirs;

Or,  The  Story  of  the  Forty  Morns  and  Eves.

Written  in  Turkish  by  SHEYKH-ZADA  ;
Done  into  English  by  E.  J.  W.  GIBB,  M.R.A.S.

The  celebrated  Turkish  romance,  translated  from  a  printed  but  undated
text  procured  a  few  years  ago  in  Constantinople.

"A  delightful  addition  to  the  wealth  of  Oriental  stories  available  to
English  readers.  .  .  .  Mr  Gibb  has  considerately  done  everything  to  help
the  reader  to  an  intelligent  appreciation  of  this  charming  book." —
Saturday  Review.

Sir  Richard  F.  Burton  says  : — "  In  my  opinion,  the  version  is  definite
and  final.  The  style  is  light  and  pleasant,  with  the  absolutely  necessary
flavour  of  quaintness  ;  and  the  notes,  though  short  and  few,  are  sufficient  and
satisfactory."

Complete  in  12  Vols.  £'^,  i6s.  6tl.  nett.

The  Antiquarian  Magazine  and

Bibliographer.

Edited   by
KDWARD   WALFORD,  MA.  AND  G.  W.  REDWAY,  F.R.H.S.

This  illustrated  periodical,  highly  esteemed  by  students  of  English
antiquities,  biography,  folk-lore,  bibliography,  numismatics,  genealogy,
&c.,  was  founded  in  1 882  by  Mr  Edward  Walford,  and  completed  in
1887  under  the  editorship  of  Mr  G.  W.  Redway.  Only  some  thirty
COMPLETE  SETS  REMAIN,  and  they  are  offered  at  a  very  moderate  price.

Contents  of  Vols.  XI.  and  XII.: — Domesday  Book  —  Frostiana  —  Some  Kentish
Proverbs — The  Literature  of  Almanacks — "  Madcap  Harry  "  and  Sir  John  Popham —
Tom  Coryate  and  his  Crudities — Notes  on  John  Wilkes  and  Boswell's  Life  of  Johnson —
The  Likeness  of  Christ — The  Life,  Times,  and  Writings  of  Thomas  Fuller — Society  in  the
Elizabethan  Age — Chapters  from  Family  Chests — Collection  of  Parodies — Rarities  in
the  Locker-Lampson  Collection — A  Day  with  the  late  Mr  Edward  Solly — The  Defence
of  England  in  the  i6th  Century — The  Ordinary  from  Mr  Thomas  Jenyn's  Booke
of  Armes — A  Forgotten  Cromwellian  Tomb — Visitation  of  the  Monasteries  in  the  Reign
of  Henry  the  Eighth — The  Rosicrucians — The  Seilliere  Library — A  Lost  Work — Romances
of  Chivalry — Ancient  Legends,  Mystic  Charms,  and  Superstitions  of  Ireland — The  Art  of
the  Old  English  Potter — The  Story  of  the  Spanish  Armada — Books  for  a  Reference  Library
— Myth-Land — Sir  Bevis  of  Hampton — Cromwell  and  the  Saddle  Letter  of  Charles  L  —
Recent  Discoveries  at  Rome — Folk-Lore  of  British  Birds — An  old  Political  Broadside
— Notes  for  Coin  Collectors — Higham  Priory — By-Ways  of  Periodical  Literature — Memoir
of  Captain  Dalton — A  History  of  the  Parish  of  Mortlake,  in  the  County  of  Surrey —
Historic  Towns — Exeter — Traits  and  Stories  of  Ye  01  de  Cheshire  Cheese — The  Pre-
History  of  the  North — The  Vision  of  William  concerning  Piers  the  Plowman — The
Curiosities  of  Ale — The  Books  and  Bookmen  of  Reading — How  to  trace  a  Pedigree —
The  Language  of  the  Law — Words,  Idioms,  &c„  of  the  Vulgar — The  Romans  in
Cumbria — The  Study  of  Coins — An  Un-bowdlerised  Boccaccio — The  Kabbalah — The
House  of  Aldus — Bookselling  in  Little  Britain — Copper-plates  and  Woodcuts  by  the
Bewicks — Excavations  at  Ostia — Sir  Sages  of  Somerset — The  Good  Queen  Bertha — The
popular  Drama  of  the  Pa=t — Relics  of  Astrologic  Idioms — A  Leaf  from  an  Old  Account
Book — The  Romance  of  a  Gibbet — General  Pardons — Thorscross  or  Thurscross(  Yorkshire) —
The  Genesis  of  "  In  Memoriam  " — The  Influence  of  Italian  upon  English  Literature —
The  Trade  Signs  of  Essex — The  Ancient  Cities  of  the  New  World — The  Legendarj'
History  of  the  Cross — History  of  Runcorn — The  Rosicrucians  ;  their  Rites  and  Mysteries —
Old  Glasgow  Families — The  House  of  Aldus — Merlin,  the  Prophet  of  the  Celts — A
facetious  Advertisement — Funeral  Garlands — Bookselling  on  London  Bridge — Millom
Cumberland — A  forgotten  Children's  Book  of  Charles  Dickens — The  Rothschilds;  a
Trilogy  of  the  Life  to  come — The  Beer  of  the  Bible — Story  of  the  Drama  in  Exeter —
By-Ways  of  Periodical  Literature — Reading  Anecdotes — Tennysonian  and  Thackerayan
Rarities — The  Origin  and  History  of  Change  Ringing — More  Vulgar  Words  and  Phrases —
The  popular  Drama  of  the  past — Some  Poems  attributed  to  Byron — The  Marriage  of
Cupid  and  Psyche — Sketches  of  Life  in  Japan — The  first  nine  years  of  the  Bank  of
England — The  Brunswick  Accession — History  of  the  Bassandyne  Bible — Peculiar  Courts —
Vulgar  Etymologies — Nuremburg — Metal  Pan-making  in  England — The  Pews  of  the
Past — Octocentenary  of  the  Death  of  William  the  Conqueror — A  Black  Magician — The
Allegorical  Signification  of  the  Tinctures  in  Heraldry — The  Purpose  of   the  Ages — The

Sieges  of  Pontefract  Castle—A  Life  of  John  Colet — The  History  of  Sport  in  Cheshire —
Tom  Coryat  and  his  Crudities — The  Tarot :  an  Antique  Method  of  Divination — Law
French — The  Pews  of  the  Past— Shropshire  Folk-Lore — The  Printed  Book— St  Mary
Overies  Priory  Church,  Southwark — Some  curious  passages  from  Baker's  Chronicle — The
resting-place  of  Cromwell — A  Library  of  Rarities — Europe  in  the  reign  of  James  the
Sixth — Myths,  Scenes,  and  Worthies  of  Somerset — Herefordshire  Words  and  Phrases —
Chronicles  of  an  Old  Inn — Epitaphs — The  Gnostics  and  their  Remains — Collectanea —
Meetings  of  Learned  Societies — News  and  Notes — Obituary  Memoirs — Correspondence —
Vos  Valete  et  Plaudite.

Large  Demy  Svo,  pp.  xx.  and  268,  Cloth,  \os.  6d.

Sultan  Stork;

And  other  Stories  and  Sketches.

By    WILLIAM     MAKEPEACE     THACKERAY.

(1829-1844.)

Now  First  Collected.

To  WHICH  IS  ADDED  THE  BIBLIOGRAPHY  OF  ThACKERAY,  REVISED

AND  Considerably  Enlarged.

Contains  two  unpublished  letters  of  A.'C.  Swinburne,  Thackeray's  contributions  to  "The
National  Standard,"  ''The  Snob,"  also  "  Dickens  in  France,"  "  Letters  on  the  Fine  Arts,"
"  Elizabeth  Brownrigge  :  A  Tale,""  &c.

"  Thackeray  collectors,  however,  have  only  to  be  told  that  none  of  the

PIECES  NOW  PRINTED  APPEAR  IN  THE  TWO  VOLUMES  RECENTLY  ISSUED  by

Messrs  Smith,  Elder,  &  Co.,  in  order  to  make  them  desire  their  possession.
They  will  also  welcome  the  revision  of  the  Bibliography,  since  it  now
presents  a  complete  list,  arranged  in  chronological  order,  of  Thackeray's
published  writings  in  prose  and  verse,  and  also  of  his  sketches  and  drawings."
— Daily  Chronicle.

"  '  Sultan  Stork'  ....  is  undoubtedly  the  work  of  Mr  Thackeray,  and
is  quite  pretty  and  funny  enough  to  have  found  a  place  in  his  collected
miscellanies.  '  Dickens  in  France '  is  as  good  in  its  way  as  Mr  Thackeray's
analysis  of  Alexander  Dumas '  '  Kean '  in  the  '  Paris  Sketch-Book. '  .  .  .
There  are  other  slight  sketches  in  this  volume  which  are  evidently  by  Mr
Thackeray,  and  several  of  his  obiter  dicta  in  them  are  worth  preserving.  .  .  .
We  do  not  assume  to  fix  Mr  Thackeray's  rank  or  to  appraise  his  merits  as  an
art  critic.  We  only  know  that,  in  our  opinion,  few  of  his  minor  writings  are
so  pleasant  to  read  as  his  shrewd  and  genial  comments  on  modern  painters
and  paintings." — Saturday  Revie^v.

"Admirers  of  Thackeray  may  be  grateful  for  a  Reprint  of
*  SuLTAN  Stork.'" — Athencstwi.

Detiiy  8^'<?,  pp.  viii.  and  6S,  Parchmeni,  ']$.  6</.

Primitive  Symbolism  as
Illustrated  in  Phallic  Worship ;

Or,  The  Reproductive  Principle.

By   HODDER  M.   WESTROPP.
With  an  Introduction  by  General  Forlong.

"  This  work  is  a  viulhim  in  parvo  of  the  growth  and  spread  of  Phallicism,
as  we  commonly  call  the  worship  of  nature  or  fertilizing  powers.  I  felt,  when
solicited  to  enlarge  and  illustrate  it  on  the  sudden  death  of  the  lamented
author,  that  it  would  be  desecration  to  touch  so  complete  a  compendium
by  one  of  the  most  competent  and  soundest  thinkers  who  have
WRITTEN  ON  THIS  WORLD-WIDE  FAITH.  None  knew  better  or  saw  more
clearly  than  Mr  Westropp  that  in  this  oldest  symbolism  and  worship  lay  the
foundations  of  all  the  goodly  systems  we  call  Religions. " — ^J.  G.  R.  Forlong.

"A  well-selected  repertory  of  facts  illustrating  this  subject,  which  should
be  read  by  all  who  are  interested  in  the  study  of  the  growth  of  religions." —
Westmhister  Review.

Fcap.  Svo,  80  pp.,  Vellum,   \os.  6d.

Beauty  and  the  Beast;

Or,  a  Rough  Outside  with  a  Gentle  Heart.

A  Poem.
By  CHARLES  LAMB.

Now  FIRST  Reprinted  from  the  Original  Edition  of  181  i,
WITH  Preface  and  Notes  by  Richard  Herne  Shepherd.

For  three  quarters  of  a  century  this  charming  fragment  of  Lamb's  genius
lay  buried  ;  even  the  author  seems  to  have  forgotten  its  existence,  since
we  find  no  reference,  either  direct  or  indirect,  to  the  little  tale  in  Lamb's
published  correspondence,  or  in  any  of  the  Lamb  books.  The  credit  of  a
discovery  highly  interesting  to  all  lovers  of  Charles  Lamb  is  due  to  the
industry  and  sagacity  of  Mr  John  Pearson,  formerly  of  15  York  Street,
Covent  Garden.

The  publisher  has  now  endeavoured  to  place  the  booklet  beyond  future
chance  of  loss  by  reproducing  one  hundred  copies  for  the  use  of  libraries
and  collectors.

\^mo,  pp.  xxvi.  and  I'j^,  Cloth  extj-a,  2s.

Wellerisms,

From  "  Pickwick  "  and  "  Master  Humphrey's

Clock."

Selected  by  CHARLES  F.  RIDEAL,
And  Edited,  with  an  Introduction,  by  CHARLES  KENT.

Among  the  Contents  are  : — Sam  Weller's  Introduction — Old  Weller  at  Doctor's  Commons —
Sam  on  a  Legal  Case — Self-acting  Ink — Out  with  It — Sam's  Old  White  Hat — Independent
Voters — Proud  o'  the  Title — The  Weller  Philosophy — The  Twopenny  Rope — Job  Trotter's
Tears — Sam's  INIisgivings  as  to  Mr  Pickwick — Clear  the  Way  for  the  Wheelbarrow — Unpack-
ing the  Lunch  Hamper — Battledore  and  Shuttlecock — A  True  Londoner — Spoiling  the  Beadle
— Old  Weller's  Remedy  for  the  Gout — Sam  on  Cabs — Poverty  and  Oysters — Old  Weller  on
Pikes — Sam's  Power  of  Suction — Veller  and  Gammon — Sam  as  Master  of  the  Ceremonies —
Sam  before  Mr  Nupkins — Sam's  Introduction  to  Mary  and  the  Cook — Something  behind  the
Door — Sam  and  Master  Bardell — Good  Wishes  to  Messrs  Dodson  &  Fogg — Sam  and  his
Mother-in-Law — The  Shepherd's  Water  Rates — Stiggins  as  an  Arithmetician — Sam  and  the
Fat  Boy — Compact  and  Comfortable — Apologue  of  the  Fat  Man's  Watch — Medical  Students
— Sam  Subpoenaed — Disappearance  of  the  "  Sausage  "  Maker — Sam  Weller's  Valentine — Old
Weller's  Plot — Tea  Drinking  at  Brick  Lane — The  Soldier's  Evidence  Inadmissible — Sam's
"  Wision"  Limited — A  Friendly  "  Swarry" — The  Killebeate— Sam  and  the  Surly  Groom —
Mr  Pickwick's  Dark  Lantern — The  Little  Dirty-faced  Man — Old'Weller  Inexorable — Away
with  Melancholy — Post  Boys  and  Donkeys — A  Vessel — Old  Weller's  Threat — Sam's  Dis-
missal of  the  Fat  Boy— Is  she  a  "  Widder"?— Bill  Blinder's  Request— The  Watch-box
Boy.

*'....  The  best  sayings  of  the  immortal  Sam  and  his  sportive  parent
are  collected  here.  The  book  may  be  taken  up  for  a  few  minutes  with  the
certainty  of  affording  amusement,  and  it  can  be  carried  away  in  the  pocket.'^
— Literary  World.

"  It  was  a  very  good  idea  .  .  .  the  extracts  are  very  numerous  ,  .  .  here
nothing  is  missed.'' — Glasgoiv  Herald.

Demy  ^vo,  pp.  99,  zuith  Protractor  and  16  plates,  coloured  and  plain.

Cloth  gilt,  Js.  6d.

Geometrical   Psychology ;

Or,  The  Science  of  Representation.

An  Abstract  of  the  Theories  and  Diagrams  of

B.  W.   Betts.

By  LOUISA  S.  COOK.

"His  attempt  seems  to  have  taken  a  similar  direction  to  that  of  George
Boole  in  logic,  with  the  difference  that,  whereas  Boole's  expression  of  the
Laws  of  Thought  is  algebraic,  Betts'  expresses  mind-growth  geometrically;

that  is  to  Eay,  his  growth-formulae  are  expressed  in  numerical  series,  of  which
each  can  be  pictured  to  the  eye  in  a  corresponding  curve.  When  the  series
are  thus  represented,  they  are  found  to  resemble  the  forms  of  leaves  and
flowers." — Alary  Boole,  in  "  Symbolic  Methods  of  Study  ^

The  Pall  Mall  Gazette,  in  a  characteristic  article  entitled,  "  Very  Methodi-
cal Madness,"  allows  that  "  Like  Rosicrucianism,  esoteric  Buddhism,  and
other  forms  of  the  mystically  incomprehensible,  it  seems  to  exercise  a
magnetic  influence  upon  many  minds  by  no  means  as  foolish  as  its  original
inventor's."

"  This  work  is  the  result  of  more  than  twenty  years'  application  to  the  dis-
covery of  a  method  of  representing  human  consciousness  in  its  various  stages  of
development  by  means  of  geometrical  figures  —  it  is,  in  fact,  THE  APPLICATION
OF  MATHEMATICAL  SYMBOLOGY  TO  METAPHYSICS.  This  idea  will  be  new
to  many  of  our  readers  ;  indeed,  so  far  as  we  know,  Mr  Betts  is  the  only
man  who  has  tried  to  work  out  a  coherent  system  of  this  kind,  though  his
work  unfortunately  remains  imperfect." — Theosophist,  June  1887.

%vo,  pp.  32,  Wrapper^  \s.

On   Mesmerism.

By  a.  p.  SINNETT.

Issued  as  a  Transaction  of  the  London  Lodge  of  the  Theosophical  Society,
of  which  Mr  Sinnett  is  President,  this  pamphlet  forms  AN  admirable
INTRODUCTION  to  the  Study  of  Mesmerism.

LONDON:  GEORGE  REDWAY.

\J

1
Date  Due                          i

W  ^^  ''

2

j

1

—4

f)

NS
