People from the Other World
========================================
Henry Steel Olcott (1875) — Olcott's investigation of the Eddy farm manifestations — the book that led to the founding of the Theosophical Society. Source: https://archive.org/details/peoplefromotherw00olco. Public domain.

PEOPLE 

FROM   THE 

Other  World. 

BY    / 

HENRY    S.    OLCOTT, 

PROFUSELY   ILLUSTRATED   BY  ALFRED   KAPPES,   AND   T.   W.   WILLIAMS. 

"  We  have  set  it  down  as  a  law  to  ourselves  to  examine  things  to  the 
bottom,  and  not  to  receive  upon  credit,  or  reject  upon  improbabilities, 
until  there  hath  passed  a  due  examination." — Lord  BACON. 

vi 

ISSUED  BY  SUBSCRIPTION  ONLY,  AND  NOT  FOR  BALK  IN  THE  BOOK-STORES. 
DENTS  OP  ANY  STATES  DESIRINO  A  COPY.  SHOULD  ADDRESS  THE 
PUBLISHERS,  AND  AN  AGENT  WILL  CALL  UPON  THEM. 

_HARTFORD,    CONN.: 
AMERICAN    PUBLISHING    COMPANY, 

1875. 

17 

ft^  V2.S  \ 

Entered  according  to  Act  of  Congress,  in  the  year  1874,  by 

Henry    S.    Olcott. 

In  the  Office  of  the  Librarian  of  Congress  at  Washington,  D.  C. 

The  Author 

DEDICATES     THIS     WORK 
TO 

ALFRED  R.  WALLACE,  F.  R.  S. 

AUTHOR  OF  "THE  THEORY  OF  NATURAL  SELECTION,"  ETC. 
AND  TO 

WILLIAM  CROOKES,  F.  R.  S. 

DISCOVERER    OF   THE   METAL,   THALLIUM, 

To  mark  his  admiration  of  the  moral  courage  they  have  recently 
displayed,  in  the  investigation  of  the  phenomena  called  spiritual : 
a  sentiment  which  he  holds  in  common  with  many  thousands  of  his 
fellow-countrymen. 

PREFACE 

The  volume  which  .is  now  laid  before  the  reader  will 
be  found  divided  into  Two  Parts ;  of  which  the  First  is 
devoted  to  a  detailed  description  of  the  strange  things 
seen,  heard,  and  felt  by  the  author  at  the  Eddy  Home- 
stead, in  the  township  of  Chittenden,  Vermont;  and  the 
Second,  to  a  report  of  a  series  of  original  investigations 
made  by  him  in  the  city  of  Philadelphia,  into  the  alleged 
materializations  of  John  and  Katie  King,  under  test  con- 
ditions ;  to  an  account  of  the  Compton  "  transfiguration  ;" 
and  to  a  copious  Bibliography  of  the  Occult  Sciences. 

It  has  been  no  part  of  the  author's  plan  to  discuss 
modern  Spiritualism  in  its  moral  aspect ;  but,  on  the 
contrary,  to  treat  its  phenomena  only  as  involving  a 
scientific  question  which  presses  upon  us  for  instant 
attention.  It  is  written  neither  as  a  defence  of,  or  attack 
upon  Spiritualism,  or  Spiritualists.  It  is  a  truthful  narra- 
tive of  what  befell  in  the  Eddy  Homestead,  from  the 
latter  part  of  August  to  the  first  week  in  December,  1874. 
It  was  observed,  by  a  leading  New  York  journal,  of  the 
first,  and  by  no  means  the  most  interesting  letter  written 
by  the  author  from  that  place,  that  it  was  "  as  marvelous 
a  story  as  any  to  be  found  in  History."  Its  interest  lay  in  the 
striking  and  highly  sensational  manifestations,  of  alleged 
spiritual  origin,  which  it  described ;  the  equal  of  which 
will  be  found  in  every  chapter  of  this  book. 

Twenty-seven  years  have  elapsed  since  the  Rochester 
rappings  attracted  the  notice  of  the  world,  and  we  are 

PREFACE.  V 

apparently  not  much  nearer  a  scientific  demonstration  of 
their  cause  than  we  were  then.  Such  consideration  as 
men  of  scientific  training  have  bestowed  upon  the  ever- 
varying  forms  of  manifestation,  has  been  mainly  of  a 
desultory  character  ;  and,  while  numerous  converts  to  the 
new  faith  have  been  made  among  this  class,  the  great 
body  of  their  colleagues  have  held  themselves  aloof  from 
the  subject,  as  if  it  were  something  to  be  avoided  as 
subversive  of  the  established,  and  hence  respectable, 
order  of  things. 

As  early  as  1857,  the  Faculty  of  Harvard  University 
pronounced  the  opinion  that  "any  connection  with  spirit- 
ualistic circles,  so  called,  corrupts  the  morals,  and 
degrades  the  intellect ;  "  and  they  even  had  the 
effrontery  to  say  that  they  deemed  it  "  their  solemn 
duty  to  warn  the  community  against  this  contaminating 
influence,  which  surely  tends  to  lessen  the  truth  of  man, 
and  the  purity  of  woman."  (!)  In  1869.  we  find  so  little 
progress  made  that  Mr.  Huxley,  one  of  the  first  scientific 
men  of  England,  writes  to  the  London  Dialectical 
Society  that  he  neither  has  the  time  to  devote  to  art 
investigation  of  the  subject,  nor  does  it  even  interest  him. 
"  The  only  case  of  '  Spiritualism,'  "  says  Mr.  Huxley, 
"  I  ever  had  the  opportunity  of  examining  into  for 
myself,  was  as  gross  an  imposture  as  ever  came  under  my 
notice."  The  average  reader  will,  of  course,  see  the 
syllogism :  Mr.  Huxley  never  saw  but  one  case  of 
'  Spiritualism  ' ;  that  case  proved  a  gross  fraud,  and  no 
Spiritualism  ;  therefore,  Spiritualism  is  a  fraud !  This  is 
given  as  a  fair  specimen  of  the  self-complacent  disdain 
with  which  our  scientific  men  view  the  question  of  the 
day.  The  American  Association  devoted  hours  of  its 
Hartford  meeting,  last  summer,  to  a  discussion  upon  the 
social  habits  of  the  tumble-bug,  and  to  the  important 
fact  that  the  Saraccnia  variolaris  (pitcher-plant)  catches 
bugs  ;  but  the  members  have  no  time  to  waste  in  investi- 
gating the  astounding  phenomenon  of  "materialization," 
the  demonstration  of  whose  verity  would  not  only  prove 
the  immortality  of  the  soul  of  man,  but,  as  the  Scientific 
American  recently  observed  : 

"  If  true,  it  will  become  the  one  grand  event  of  the  world's  his- 
tory ;  it  will  give  an  imperishable  lustre  of  glory  to  the  Nineteenth 
Century.  Its  discoverer  will  have  no  rival  in  renown,  and  his  name 
will  be  written  high  above  any  other.  ...  If  the  pretensions 
of  Spiritualism  have  a  rational  foundation,  no  more  important  work 
has  been  offered  to  men  of  Science  than  their  verification." 

Vi  PREFACE. 

Mr.  Crookes,  after  completing  his  first  series  of  experi- 
ments with  the  medium  Home,  filed  his  papers  with 
Professor  Stokes  and  Professor  Sharpey,  the  two  secre- 
taries of  the  Royal  Society,  June  15th,  1871.  The 
behavior  of  those  gentlemen  was  what  might  have  been 
expected.  The  first  impulse  was  to  rid  themselves  of  it; 
the  second,  to  smother  it.  These  proving  unavailing, 
they  gave  it  the  cold  shoulder  in  a "  Report  on  Mr. 
Crookes'  Paper,"  of  date  August  7th,  1871,  in  which  the 
writer,  Professor  Stokes,  says  : 

"  I  don't  see  much  use  discussing  the  thing  in  the  sections*  crowded 
as  we  already  are  ;  but  if  a  small  number  of  persons  in  whom  the 
public  would  feel  confidence,  choose  to  volunteer  to  act  as  members 
of  a  committee  for  investigating  the  subject,  I  don't  see  any  objec- 
tion to  appointing  such  committee.  /  have  heard  too  much  of  the 
tricks  of  Spiritualists  to  make  me  willing  to  give  my  time  to  such  a 
committee  myself." 

Now  this  is  the  Committee  that  the  author  of  this 
work  had  in  view  when  it  was  begun.  His  aim  has 
been  to  gather  together  into  its  pages,  such  a  number 
of  facts  observed  by  him  at  Chittenden  and  Philadel- 
phia, as  may  induce  a  few  men  '  in  whom  the  public 
would  feel  confidence'  to  volunteer  and  form  a  commit- 
tee to  take  up  a  philosophical  inquiry  into  the 
phenomena,  and  pursue  it  until  the  now  occult  force 
behind  them  shall  be  discovered  and  demonstrated. 
He  is  not  without  hope  that  his  object  will  be  attained, 
for  he  is  in  receipt  of  information  going  to  show  that 
the  subject  is  now  the  burden  of  correspondence 
between  professors  in  certain  universities  The  atten- 
tion of  the  scientific  body  is,  for  the  first  time  in 
twenty  years,  seriously  attracted,  and  we  will  not  have 
long  to  wait  before  the  debates  of  the  American  and 
British  Associations  will  be  devoted  to  worthier 
problems  than  some  that  now  vex  them. 

How  some  of  the  "crowding  in  the  sections"  is 
caused,  may  be  learned  by  any  one  who  will  look  at 
the  Association's  volumes  of  Transactions.  These,  for 
instance,  among  many  others  of  like  commanding 
importance,  will  be  found  in  the  Report  for  1871,  the 
most  recent  volume  at  hand :  A  Paper  "  On  the 
ciliated  condition  of  the  inner  layer  of  the  blastoderm 
in  the  ova  of  birds,"  by  B  .T.  Lonne ;  "The  minute 
anatomy  of  the  stem  of  the  screw  pine  (Pandanus  utilis)," 
by  Prof.  Dyer ;  "  On  the  Essential  oil  of  orange  peel," 
by  Dr.  Wright  and  C.  H.  Piesse ;  "  On  a  fat  woman 

PREFACE.  vil 

exhibiting  in  London,"  by  Sir  D.  Gibb ;  "  On  Conser- 
vation of  bowlders,"  by  E.  Milne-Home;  "On  the 
contents  of  a  hyena's  den,  etc.,"  by  Rev.  W.  S.  Symonds. 

At  the  Hartford  meetingof  our  American  Association, 
besides  the  nonsensical  debates  upon  the  fly-catching 
flower,  and  the  social  habits  of  the  tumble-dung  beetle, 
the  intellects  of  the  members  were  taxed  to  consider  how 
the  lobster  {Homarus  vulgaris, — to  be  entirely  respect- 
ful), casts  its  shell ;  the  nature  of  the  generative 
organs  of  the  shark;  a  new  way  of  illustrating  the 
vibration  of  organ-pipes;  the  wings  of  Pterodactyls; 
a  notice  of  a  pair  of  trap-door  spiders;  how  the  young 
birds  peck  out  of  the  shell ;  and  the  wonderful  fact  that 
a  louse  was  used,  in  the  Dismal  Swamp,  as  a  compass 
by  a  surveying-party ;  that  creature,  or,  at  any  rate,  the 
one  in  the  Swamp,  having  the  habit  of  turning  its  head 
to  the  North,  under  all  circumstances. 

Nice  subjects,  these,  to  be  used  as  excuses  for 
declining  to  observe  and  analyze  the  facts  of  modern 
Spiritualism !  How  much  more  important  to  Science 
to  know  about  lobsters  and  lice,  orange-peel  and  fat 
women,  blastoderms  and  hyenas'  dens,  than  to  explain 
how  the  law  of  gravity  can  be  temporarily  neutralized 
by  some  other,  and  unknown,  force;  how  "death  does 
not  kill  a  man  ;"  how  the  resurrected  spirit  can  reclothe 
itself  with  an  evanescent,  material  form,  by  the  power 
of  its  will  over  the  sublimated  earth-essences,  suspended, 
invisible,  in  the  air ;  and  what  are  the  occult  laws  by 
which  the  pulse  of  this  shadowy  body  can  be  made  to 
beat,  the  lungs  to  respire,  the  lips  to  speak  words 
thought  by  the  mind  within  the  frail  tenement,  which 
waits  only  the  further  exercise  of  its  creator's  will  to 
redissolve  into  the  impalpable  atoms  of  which  it  was, 
a  moment  before,  composed ! 

Much  as  the  author  desires  to  see  this  subject  inquired 
into  by  men  of  scientific  attainments,  he  could  regard 
it  as  only  a  misfortune  if  they  should  set  out  with  a 
disposition  to  prescribe  impossible  conditions.  Before 
they  reach  the  point  where  they  would  have  the  right 
to  dictate  their  own  terms,  it  would  be  necessary  for 
them  to  make  many  observations,  collect  many  data, 
and  inform  themselves  about  many  things  of  which 
they  are  necessarily  ignorant.  They  should  realize  the 
fact,  succintly  stated  by  Mr.  Crookes,  that  Psychology 
is  a  branch  of  science  as  yet  almost  entirely  unexplored, 

Vlll  PREFACE. 

to  the  neglect  of  which  is  to  be  attributed  the  strange 
fact  that  not  only  the  spiritual  phenomena,  but  also  the 
nerve  or  psychic,  force,  as  it  has  been  termed  by  that 
gentleman,  "has  remained  untested,  unexamined  and 
almost  unrecognized." 

Mr.  Alfred  R.  Wallace,  to  whose  eminent  attainments 
as  a  scientific  man  the  British  Association  has  paid  its 
hearty  tribute,  observes,  in  his  pamphlet  entitled  "  A 
defence  of  Modern  Spiritualism,"  that : 

"  The  discussion  in  the  Pall  Mall  Gazette  in  1868,  and  a  consider- 
able private  correspondence,  indicate  that  scientific  men  almost 
invariably  assume  that,  in  this  inquiry,  they  should  be  permitted,  at 
the  very  outset,  to  impose  conditions ;  and  if,  under  such  conditions, 
nothing  happens,  they  consider  it  a  proof  of  imposture  or  delusion. 
But  they  well  know  that,  in  all  other  branches  of  research,  Nature, 
not  they,  determines  the  essential  conditions,  without  a  compliance 
with  which  no  experiment  will  succeed.  These  conditions  have  to 
be  learnt  by  a  patient  questioning  of  Nature,  and  they  are  different 
for  each  branch  of  science.  How  much  more  may  they  be  expected 
to  differ  in  an  inquiry  which  deals  with  subtle  forces  of  the  nature  of 
which  the  physicist  is  wholly  and  absolutely  ignorant !  To  ask  to  be 
allowed  to  deal  with  these  unknown  phenomena  as  he  has  hitherto 
dealt  with  known  phenomena,  is  practically  to  prejudge  the  question, 
since  it  assumes  that  both  are  governed  by  the  same  laws." 

The  researches  of  Professor  Hare,  Judge  Edmonds, 
Mr.  Crookes,  Mr.  Wallace,  Sergeant  Cox,  Dr.  Guppy,  the 
astronomer  Flammarion,  and  many  others,  prove  that 
perfect  test  conditions  are  attainable ;  but,  at  the  same 
time,  they  show  that  the  occult  forces  which  play  a  part 
in  the  production  of  these  phenomena  will  not  subject 
themselves  to  the  same  identical  limitations  as  chemical 
experiments,  or  others  with  which  the  scientific  world  is 
already  familiar.  Each  has  its  own  laws,  and  each 
demands  of  the  student  a  line  of  research  peculiar  to 
itself. 

It  has  already  been  remarked  that  this  work  was  not 
written  from  the  spiritualistic  standpoint.  It  is  intended 
to  show  the  progressive  reflections  of  a  mind  (unbiased, 
of  ordinary  intelligence,  anxious  for  the  truth  at  any  cost 
of  preconceptions  or  prejudices),  which  is  brought  into 
relations  with  a  series  of  unfamiliar  and  striking  phe- 
nomena. It  aims  neither  to  display  the  trained  shrewd- 
ness of  the  juggler,  the  profundity  of  the  scientific 
investigator,  nor  the  acuteness  of  the  police  detective ; 
but  to  reflect  the  careful  and  patient  method  of  the 
average  layman,  whose  sole  object  is  to  get  at  the  facts, 
that  he  may  have  the  means  of  forming  an  opinion  for 

PREFACE.  IX 

himself  upon  matters  for  which  he  finds  no  explanation 
at  the  usual  sources  of  knowledge. 

It  was  the  author's  intention  to  embody  in  Part  II  the 
full  text  of  certain  remarkable  documents,  which  show 
the  attitude  of  affairs  with  respect  to  the  conflict  between 
Religion  and  Science,  as  well  as  the  tone  of  the  public 
press,  in  this  country  and  Europe,  in  its  discussion  of  the 
phenomena  of  spiritualism.  But  the  limits  of  the  volume 
were  reached  sooner  than  expected,  in  the  arrangement 
of  the  original  matter,  and  he  was  forced  to  confine  him- 
self within  narrower  bounds.  Moreover,  just  as  he  was 
completing  the  last  Chapter  of  Part  I,  he  received, 
through  the  Hon.  Robert  Dale  Owen,  an  invitation  from 
the  Holmes'  of  Philadelphia,  to  investigate  their  medium- 
ship  and  the  so  called  "  Katie  King  materializations," 
under  test  conditions;  and  the  importance  of  the  subject, 
with  the  astounding  developments  which  resulted, 
demanded  that  every  remaining  page  of  space  should  be 
devoted  to  it. 

It  is  safe  to  say  that  in  whatever  light  the  Holmes 
affair  is  viewed,  it  must  be  regarded  as  one  of  the  most 
sensational  stories  in  history.  Whether  we  consider  the 
perfectness  of  the  supposed  materialization,  the  circum- 
stances under  which  it  occurred,  the  attendant  phenomena, 
the  scientific  completeness  of  the  tests  given,  or  the 
pretended  exposure  of  the  alleged  fraud,  in  the  interest 
of  Religion  and  good  morals,  it  will  be  hard  to  find  a 
parallel  to  the  case. 

Nor  will  it  escape  the  notice  of  the  intelligent  that  the 
Philadelphia  tests  go  far  towards  corroborating  the  Chit- 
tenden experiences;  for,  if  "  materialization  "  can  occur 
in  one  place  it  may  in  many,  and,  hence,  the  supposition 
that  real  ghosts  were  seen  at  the  Eddy  house  is  made  to 
appear  only  half  as  improbable.  The  cheerful  alacrity 
shown  by  the  Holmes'  to  submit  themselves  to  crucial 
test  conditions,  makes  the  behavior  of  the  Eddy  boys 
appear  in  a  correspondingly  unfavorable  light.  It  was 
alleged,  as  an  excuse  at  Chittenden,  that  the  author's 
magnetism  was  so  positive  and  repellant  to  the  spirits,  as 
to  prevent  their  bearing  his  near  approach  ;  whereas,  the 
fact  appears  to  be  that  they  can  allow  him  to  handle 
them,  to  gaze  into  their  faces  from  a  distance  of  six 
inches,  and  otherwise  to  come  to  closest  quarters,  with- 
out causing  them   the  slightest  inconvenience.     What  a 

X  PREFACE. 

waste  of  golden  opportunity  the  unfriendly  behavior  of 
the  Eddy  boys  has  caused  ! 

And  yet,  if  one  may  judge  from  a  recent  letter  written 
by  Horatio  to  a  mutual  friend,  they  entertain  no  personal 
dislike  to  the  author,  but  were  compelled  to  act  as  they 
did  by  the  "  spirit-bahd  "  controlling  their  circle.  Horatio 
remarks  that,  in  this  matter,  they  were  the  slaves  of  the 
powers  behind  the  phenomena,  who,  having  gotten  them- 
selves into  antagonism  with  the  author,  forced  him  and 
his  brothers  and  sisters  to  share  that  feeling  for  the 
moment. 

The  relation  of  mediums  towards  their  controlling 
spirits  is  perfectly  denned  in  this  letter  from  one  of  the 
most  noted  mediums — they  are  slaves.  While 'under 
control,'  their  own  will  is  set  aside,  and  their  actions, 
their  speech,  and  their  very  consciousness,  are  directed 
by  that  of  another.  They  are  as  helpless  to  do,  or  say, 
or  think,  or  see  what  they  desire,  as  the  subject  of  the 
mesmerist,  whose  body  is  a  mere  machine  governed  by 
a  will  external  to  and  dominant  over  itself.  The 
'materializing  medium'  must  even,  it  appears,  lend 
from  the  more  ethereal  portions  of  his  frame,  some  of 
the  matter  that  goes  to  form  the  evanescent  material- 
ized shapes  of  the  departed.  The  observations  of  Mr. 
Crookes  indicate  that,  in  some  cases  at  least,  an  enor- 
mous exhaustion  of  the  medium's  vital  forces  is  caused 
by  the  exercise  of  his  medianic  function,  and  it  is  one 
of  the  problems  before  us  to  discover  the  extent  and 
cause  of  this  exhaustion,  and  whether  any  system  of 
diet,  exercise,  repose  and  mental  regulation  will  reduce 
it  to  a  minimum  without  interfering  with  the 
phenomena. 

The  seers  of  the  Bible,  the  fakirs  of  India,  the  priests 
of  Isis,  and  the  vestals  of  Rome  fasted  and  prayed,  for 
longer  or  shorter  periods,  before  entering  the  ecstatic 
condition.  Should  our  modern  mediums  do  likewise? 
And  would  fasting  and  prayer  insure  us  against  the 
pranks  and  deceptions  of  poltergeists^  or  the  malice  of 
returning  murderers,  suicides,  and  drunkards? 

Since  the  spiritualistic  movement  has  acquired  such 
force  and  breadth  that  it  cannot  be  stayed,  how  long 
must  we  wait  for  the  wise  men  to  tell  us  how  we  can 
enjoy  the  communion  of  the  saints,  and  escape  the 
assaults  of  the  powers  of  darkness  ?    We  ask  them  for 

PREFACE.  XI 

light,  and  they  give  us  no  response.  Our  homes  are 
seemingly  invaded  by  an  invisible  host  of  good  and 
evil  spirits,  and  we  turn  in  vain  to  scientific  men  for 
instructions  as  to  how  the  one  class  may  be  detained, 
and  the  other  expelled.  They  bend  in  laboratory  and 
study,  over  wriggling  insects  and  squirming  reptiles, 
insensible  of  the  glorified  beings  who  stand  perhaps, 
behind  them,  and  blind  to  the  magnificent  field  of 
research  that  lies  before  them  in  the  direction  of  the 
Inner  World.  They  leave  us  to  grope  our  own  way 
toward  the  Truth,  and  if  we  fall  into  error,  we  have  the 
right  to  hold  them  accountable,  for  they  are  the  custodi- 
ans of  knowledge,  our  teachers,  and  guides.  If  they  do 
not  help  us,  we  must  search  for  ourselves.  We  cannot 
remain  ignorant,  for  we  are  all  urged  on  by : 

"  The  wish  to  know  ; — th'  insatiate  thirst 

That  e'en  by  quenching  is  awaked  ; 
And  that  becomes,  or  blest,  or  curst, 

As  is  the  fount  at  which  't  is  slaked.' 

No.  7  Beekman  Street, 
New  York  City,  January,  1875. 

H.  S.  O. 

CONTENTS. 

CHAPTER  I. 

THE   EDDY   FAMILY. 

Chittenden. — Its  people. — First  impressions. — Self-expose'  of  the 
Eddys. — The  Author's  reception. —  History  of  the  family. — 
The  mother. — Hereditary  witchcraft. — Children  hired  out  as 
mediums. — Cruelties  practised  upon  them. — The  Homestead.     17 

CHAPTER  II. 

THE  EDDYS  AS   PUBLIC  MEDIUMS. 
Cruelty  of  tests  applied. — Horatio's   diary. — Rope-tying. — Rep- 
resentation of  every  phase  of  mediumship. — Wonderful  stories 
of  the  Eddy  family. — Their  present  condition. — Indoor  view.     33 

CHAPTER  III. 

PERSONAL   MATTERS. 
The  Author's  position. — Impertinent  people. — Letters  received. 
— Evidence  of  wide-spread  interest  in  Spiritualism 53 

CHAPTER  IV. 

A  MOONLIGHT   SEANCE. 
Surroundings  of  the  Eddy  Homestead. — Its  visitors. — Honto's 
cave. — An  out-door  seance. — Indian  ghosts. — Santum's  grave. 
— An  Editor's  ghost. — No   footprints  left 57 

CHAPTER  V. 

PORTENTS    AND    MARVELS. 

Trials  of  mediums. — Magnetism  and  mesmerism. —  Universal 
belief  in  spirits. — Ancient  mediums. — Animals  as  mediums. — 
Three  wise  men  at  sea. — Hostility  of  the  church. — The  Phan- 
tom Carriage. — Death  portents. — Other  marvels 68 

CHAPTER  VI. 

WONDERS  IN  THE   EDDY  FAMILY. 
Living  three  lives. — Shadow  of  the  father. — The  lady  on  the 
white   horse. — Story   of   Miranda    Eddy. — Francis  Lightfoot 
Eddy. — A   child's   death  averted. — Records  of  warnings  and 
portents. — The  Spinning   Ghost 89 

CHAPTER  VII. 

A    CHAPTER    OF   FEET   AND    INCHES. 

The  Author  takes  an  observation. — Infallible  investigators. — 
Scientific  skepticism. — Character  of  the  Eddy  phenomena. — 
Spirit-forms. — The  Circle-Room. — Its  inside  and  surroundings. 
— Thorough  examinations 105 

CONTENTS.  xiii 

CHAPTER  VIII. 

MATERIALIZATION. 

Its  history. — Salem  witchcraft. — Immediate  cause  of  the  Eddy 
materializations 121 

CHAPTER  IX. 

THE   FIRST   SEANCE. 

Opening  of  the  circle-room. — The  first  seance. — The  Author's 
visit  — Music  at  seances. — First  ghost,  an  Indian  squaw. — The 
beating  heart. — Indians  and  whites. — Children  and  grown 
persons 130 

CHAPTER  X. 

MANY    THANTOM    VISITORS. 

Bright  Star,  Daybreak,  Santum  and  other  Indian  ghosts. — Spirit 
of  Col.  Reynolds,  of  Utica,  N.  Y.,  brother  and  nephew. — 
Wm.  Brown,  over  6  feet  high. — A  Hartford  family  reunited. 
— Baby  ghosts. — Spirit  dissolves. — Imperfect    materialization.   140 

CHAPTER  XI. 

ARE   THEY    PERSONATIONS  ? 

A  review  of  William  and  his  cabinet. — His  education. — Re- 
examination of  the  cabinet. — Four  hundred  spirits. — A  bogus 
investigator. — A  dealer  in  thunderbolts 154 

•CHAPTER  XII. 

IS   IT   AN    OCCULT   FORCE? 

Closest  investigation  demanded. — Spontaneous  generation. — 
Psychology  and  Mind-reading. —  Many  questions. — A  light- 
circle. —  The  baby-hand. —  Mystery  of  mysteries. — Whence 
comes  the  power  ? 169 

CHAPTER  XIII. 

FULL  OF  STRANGE  THINGS. 

Responsibility  of  Scientists. — A  social  dance. — Little  Charlie. — 
A  German  spirit. — Ten  spirits  measuring  heights — Table  of 
time. — The  malicious  barber. — The  smoking  squaw. — Two 
voices  at  once. — Disappointed  visitors. — Independence  of  the 
Eddys 1 S4 

CHAPTER  XIV. 

THE  DARK-CIRCLE. 

Mayflower's  story. — The  Sailor  ghost. — A  Hurly-burly. — A  strong 
test. — Wonderful  result. — A  musical  performance. — A  Clair- 
voyant's view. — A  multitude   of  spirits 205 

CHAPTER  XV. 

PHILOSOPHICAL   TESTS. 

Ringing  a  table  gong. — Ten  spirits  at  a  seance. — A  light-circle. 
- — Card  writing. — Picture  drawing. — Heights  of  the  spirits. — 
The  scale  test. — Weighing  Honto. — A  spirit's  explanation. — 
Discoverers  ridiculed 225 

XIV  CONTENTS. 

CHAPTER  XVI. 

STARTLING   PHENOMENA. 
A  good  test. — A  spirit  orator. — Strength  of  spirits  tested. — The 
ring  test. — Spirits  welding  copper. — Eccentric  habits  as  tests.  247 

CHAPTER  XVII. 

A  CHAPTER  OF  MARVELS. 
Responsibility  of  the  Author. — Spirit  of  an  Arab. — Five  Indian 
spirits. — Weighing  spirits. — Diagram  of  platform. — Seance  in 
another  room. — Ground-plan  of  this  room. — Thorough  exam- 
ination.— Shawl  manufacturing  by  Honto.—  Spirits  of  woman 
and  child. — Various  spirits. — Mysteries 269 

CHAPTER  XVIII. 

MORE   WONDERS. 
The    Witch   of  the    Mountain. — What   a   lawyer  saw. — A  new 
arrival. —  A    Russian       Lady. —    Russian    ghosts. — Georgian 
and  Canadian  spirits. — Georgian  music. — A  merchant's  letters. 
— Mr.  Peebles'  certificate. — Spirits  dissolve. — More  Arabs.. . .    289 

CHAPTER  XIX. 

GERMANS,   KHOURDS,    AND   HUNGARIANS. 
A  dark-circle. — Letters  from  spirit-children. — A  wounded  hand. 
— A  Khourdish  "  Nouker." — Spear  and  plumes. — Nine  talking 
spirits. — More  shawl  making. — Old  Mr.  Brown 314 

CHAPTER  XX. 

THE  DEAD  ALIVE. 
Spirits. — A  relative  shocked. — A  bogus  Lord  Byron. — An  African 
juggler. —  Wonderful     feats. —  Tape-climbing.  —  The    horned 
jugglers  of  Egypt. — The  maiden  and  lover. — Story  of  a  bull. 
— Wonderful  Eastern  magic 326 

CHAPTER  XXI. 

SPIRITUALISM   VS.   RATIONALISM. 
Forming  opinions. — Popular  anxiety. — Charmed  circles. — Black 
magic  and  white. — Cowardly  Editors. — Spirit  animals 339 

CHAPTER  XXII. 

SPIRITS   AS   CARRIERS. 
Fruits  furnished  by  spirits. — Floral  displays. — Stones  carried. — 
Buckle  from  a  Russian  grave. — Various  spirits 350 

CHAPTER  XXIII. 

TESTS   CONTINUED. 
Honto's  hair  examined. — Bell  and  glass. — No  favors  shown  the 
Author. — What  a  Hartford  man  saw. — Honto  plays  the  organ,  363 

CHAPTER  XXIV. 

PSEUDO-INVESTIGATORS. 
Mayflower. — How  are  these  things  done  ? — Spirit-wreaths. — A 
Dark-circle  explained. — Wiseacres. — Ignorance  and  prejudice 
of  writers. —  Effects  of  investigations. — The  Holmes  phe- 
nomena.— John  Brougham's  views  — The  returned  darling. — 
Value   of  tests. — The  Eddys'  standpoint 374 

CONTENTS.  XV 

CHAPTER  XXV. 

THE   SHAKERS    AS   SPIRITUALISTS. 

What  Mr.  Evans  says. — Manifestations  among  the  Shakers  and 
Mormons. — Degrees  of  Spiritualism. — Oneida  Community's 
report. — Mediums  everywhere 392 

CHAPTER  XXVI. 

SUMMING   UP. 
The  great  conflict. — Science  and   Religion. — Narrative  of  facts. 
— Results. — Uses  of  Spiritualism. — "  Murder  will  out." — Fare- 
well to  Chittenden 406 

PART    II. 

THE    KATIE    KING    AFFAIR. 

THE   COMPTON    TRANSFIGURATION. 

MISCELLANEOUS. 

ILLUSTRATIONS 

Page. 

1  The  Old  Homestead {Frontispiece) 

2  The  Eddy  Brothers 19 

3  The  Mother 25 

4  The  Eddy  Home  (side  and  rear  view) 31 

5  Tests  by  Committees 33 

6  Sufferings  of  Mediums 41 

7  The  Dining  Room 48 

8  Above  and  Below 51 

9  Graves  of  Mus.  Eddy  and  Santum 59 

10  Konto's  Cave 63 

1 1  Indisputable  Materialization 74 

12  The  Phantom  Carriage 81 

13  Hidden  Treasures 85 

-14  Buried  Knife 101 

15  The  Spinning  Ghost '. 103 

16  The  Ci ecle  Room 110 

17  Inside  of  Cabinet 113 

18  View  and  Plan  of  Cabinet 117 

19  Honto  Making  Shawls  and  Blankets 138 

20  The  Reunited  Family 145 

21  Spirit-Form  Dissolving 149 

22  Wm.  Eddy  (full  length  portrait; 156 

23  Tim  Sleeping  Medium 162 

24  Matkrialized  Spiiiits 165 

25  The  Light-Circle 178 

26  Contrast  in  Hands 181 

27  Well-known  Forms 189 

28  The  Smoking  Squaw 195 

29  An  Evening's  Visitors  Grouped 200 

30  Dix  and  Mayflower 207 

31  The  Dark-Circle 212 

32  A  Noted  Medium 215 

33  A  Clair voyant's  View 221 

34  Freaks  of  a  Young  Squaw 227 

35  Spirit  Card-Writing 232 

36  Fac-Simile  of  Spirit-Writing 235 

37  Fac-Simile  of  Spirit- Writing 236 

38  Measure  and  Weight 240 

39  Mrs.  Eddy  Addressing  the  Audience 251 

40  The  Balance  Test 255 

41  The  Ring  Test 261 

42  Comparing  Heights 265 

43  Picture  for  the  Artist 280 

44  Spirit-Forms 285 

45  Witch  and  Caucasian 296 

46  A  Side  Show 300 

47  A  Merchant  and  Nurse 311 

48  Card,  Fao-Simile 317 

49  Card,  Facsimile  318 

50  A  Strange  Visitor 822 

51  A  Spirit  from  Africa 329 

52  Tiie  Buckle  and   Medal 357 

53  Arab.  Russian,  and  Indian 361 

54  A  Musical  Spirit 372 

55  Spirit  Wreaths .  377 

56  Table  and  Glass 381 

57  The  Lost  Darling 388 

58  The  Murdered  Woman  Materialized 421 

PART  I. 

THE   EDDY   MANIFESTATIONS. 

CHAPTER   I 

THE    EDDY    FAMILY. 

SEVEN  miles  north  from  Rutland,  in  a  grassy  valley 
shut  in  by  the  slopes  of  the  Green  Mountains,  lying 
high  above  the  tide-water,  is  the  little  hamlet  of  Chit- 
tenden. There  is  nothing  about  it  worthy  of  notice,  and 
its  sole  claim  to  notoriety  lies  in  the  fact  that  it  is  the 
nearest  post-town  to  the  homestead  farm  of  the  Eddy  fam- 
ily of  spiritual  mediums,  whose  fame  has  spread  over  the 
whole  country.  The  people  of  the  vicinage  are,  apparently 
with  few  exceptions,  plain,  dull,  and  uninteresting,  seem- 
ing to  know  nothing  and  to  care  less  about  the  marvellous 
things  that  are  happening  under  their  very  eyes,  or  even 
the  history  of  their  section.  Inhabiting  a  rugged  country 
which  exacts  much  hard  labor  for  small  pecuniary  returns, 
they  go  the  round  of  their  daily  duty,  and  trouble  them- 
selves about  nothing  except  to  get  the  usual  modicum  of 
food  and  sleep.  Their  rare  occasions  of  enjoyment  are 
the  days  of  the  county  fair,  the  elections,  "  raisings," 
huskings,  and  like  country  assemblages.  Their  religion 
is  intolerant,  their  sect  Methodist ;  within  the  pale  of 
which  body  all  persons  are  good,  without  which  all  are 

17 

1 8  HORATIO  AND    WILLIAM. 

bad.  The  liberalizing  influences  that  in  more  thickly 
settled  localities  have,  for  the  past  ten  or  twenty  years, 
been  leavening  the  whole  religious  world,  seem  to  be 
unfelt  in  this  secluded  region.  Towards  the  heterodox 
these  people  have  no  yearning  bowels  of  compassion. 
Their  weapons  are  both  spiritual  and  carnal ;  and  I  judge 
from  the  sad  story  of  the  Eddy  children  that  these  zealots, 
if  suddenly  driven  out  of  their  beloved  church,  would  feel 
more  at  home  under  the  wing  of  Mahomet  than  elsewhere, 
for  when  prayer  has  failed  of  conversion  they  have  resorted 
to  fire  and  the  lash  to  bring  the  lamb  within  the  fold.  I 
recently  visited  this  place  in  the  interest  of  the  New  York 
Sun,  and  spoke  of  the  relations  between  the  Eddys  and 
their  neighbors  in  the  following  terms : 

"  There  is  nothing  about  the  Eddys  or  their  surroundings  to 
inspire  confidence  on  first  acquaintance.  The  brothers  Horatio  and 
William,  who  are  the  present  mediums,  are  sensitive,  distant,  and 
curt  to  strangers,  look  more  like  hard-working  rough  farmers  than 
prophets  or  priests  of  a  new  dispensation,  have  dark  complexions, 
black  hair  and  eyes,  stiff  joints,  a  clumsy  carriage,  shrink  from 
advances,  and  make  newcomers  feel  ill  at  ease  and  unwelcome. 
*  *  *  They  are  at  feud  with  some  of  their  neighbors,  and  as 
a  rule  not  liked  either  in  Rutland  or  Chittenden.  *  *  * 
They  are  in  fact  under  the  ban  of  a  public  opinion  that  is  not  pre- 
pared or  desirous  to  study  the  phenomena  as  either  scientific  mar- 
vels or  revelations  from  another  world."     *         *         * 

When  I  first  began  to  write  about  these  mediums,  I 
became  convinced  that  they  had  never  done  anything  to 
deserve  the  reprobation  of  their  neighbors,  for  a  number 
of  reports  reflecting  upon  their  character,  upon  being 
sifted,  were  discovered  to  be  untrue.  I  could  see  preju- 
dice so  ill  concealed  by  the  narrators,  and  ignorance  of 
the  domestic   life,  to   say   nothing   of   the   mediumistic 

F      ~ 

20  DISHONEST  MEDIUMS. 

faculty  of  the  members  of  the  family,  so  plainly  revealed, 
that  perhaps  I  went  to  unnecessary  lengths  in  my  defence 
of  their  reputations.  But  since  I  began  the  work  of 
revising  my  matter  for  this  volume,  I  have  met  a  former 
citizen  of  Chittenden,  and  a  man  of  good  character,  now 
a  resident  of  a  distant  city,  who  is  knowing  to  the  fact 
that  some  seven  or  eight  years  ago  two  of  the  Eddys  gave 
an  exhibition,  or  exhibitions,  of  certain  of  the  commoner 
tricks  of  mediums,  themselves  included ;  and  I  was 
furnished  with  the  names  of  witnesses  who  can  corrobo- 
rate the  statement.  It  is  not  surprising,  therefore,  that  a 
simple-minded  people,  prejudiced  against  everything  that 
smacks  of  diabolism,  and  looking  upon  the  Eddy  ghost- 
room  as  a  Chamber  of  Horrors,  should  hastily  adopt  the 
opinion  that  if  they  were  false  in  the  lesser  "  phenomena" 
they  must  be  in  all ;  and  conclude  that  a  family  who 
could  publicly  confess  their  dishonesty,  for  pay,  had  good 
reason  to  adopt  a  forbidding  aspect  to  strangers,  especially 
those  who  would  be  likely  to  discover  the  trickery  which 
furnishes  them  a  support.  I  am  not,  I  am  happy  to  say, 
of  that  class  of  pseudo-investigators  which  rejects  the 
chance  of  finding  truth  in  these  marvels  because  mediums 
occasionally  cheat.  It  has  often,  and  justly,  been  said 
that  the  circulation  of  counterfeit  coin  is  no  proof  that 
the  genuine  does  not  exist,  but  the  reverse ;  and  the  re- 
ports of  most  intelligent  writers  agree  in  the  statement 
that  nearly  all  public  mediums  occasionally  simulate  their 
phenomena  when,  from  any  cause,  they  cannot  produce 
the  real  ones.  Judge  Edmonds  and  Mr.  Robert  Dale 
Owen  both  told  me  some  years  since  that  they  had 
detected  one  of  the  best  physical  mediums  in  the  United 

MEDI UMS  NO  T  FREE  A  GEN  TS.  2 1 

States,  in  trickery,  thus  corroborating  my  own  experience 
with  the  same  person ;  and  a  well-known  artist  in  Hartford 
says  that  he  discovered  Home,  one  of  the  greatest  me- 
diums ever  known,  in  acts  of  deception,  both  before  his 
departure  for  Europe,  and  during  a  subsequent  visit  to 
this  country.  As  to  this  matter  of  the  Eddy  self-expo- 
sures, the  parties  interested  tell  me  that  their  exposure 
was  a  mere  pretense,  resorted  to  for  the  purpose  of  raising 
money  when  they  were  in  a  very  needy  condition.  In  a 
word,  they  cheated  the  public  with  a  sham  exposure  when 
it  would  not  come  to  see  them  in  their  character  of  me- 
diums. There  can  be  but  one  opinion  of  such  behavior 
as  this ;  and,  therefore,  while  my  narrative  will  contain 
all  that  can  be  said  on  behalf  of  the  remarkable  medium- 
ship,  or  apparent  mediumship,  of  these  boys,  the  reader 
will  find  that  I  shall  not  rely  upon  any  of  their  manifes- 
tations that  could  be  imitated  by  them,  in  working  up  my 
conclusions  as  to  the  reality  of  the  phenomena.  Such  a 
course  would  be  a  waste  of  time  and  thought. 

I  separate  the  medium  from  the  man,  considering  him 
beyond  a  certain  point  an  irresponsible  being ;  that  is,  if 
there  is  any  such  thing  as  mediumship.  In  neglecting 
this  I  think  most  investigators  have  hitherto  erred.  If  it 
be  true  that  persons  of  certain  temperaments  i-n  this 
world  may  be  controlled  by  persons  in  the  other,  then  the 
mediums,  being  ccnitrolled,  are  not  free  agents,  but  ma- 
chines. A  person  of  this  kind  may,  therefore,  be  a  very 
bad  man  but  a  very  good  machine.  Furthermore,  if  the 
medium's  actions  while  serving  as  such  are  beyond  his 
control,  he  may,  unless  he  be  entranced,  observe  them 
just    as    any   spectator,   and,    observing,  may    learn    to 

22  MY  RE  CEP  TION  B  Y  THE  EDD  VS. 

imitate,  with  more  or  less  perfection  according  to  his 
natural  intelligence  and  endowments. 

Thus  I  observed  the  Eddys  at  first  in  their  double 
capacity,  and  determined  at  the  outset  not  to  allow  any- 
thing they  might  say  or  do,  or  any  of  their  surroundings, 
uncongenial  with  my  own  tastes  or  habits,  to  bias  my 
verdict  upon  their  claims  as  spiritual  mediums. 

When  I  say  that  my  first  reception  by  the  family  was 
most  inhospitable ;  that  during  my  visit  of  five  days  I 
never  felt  sure  that  at  any  moment  I  might  not  be 
requested  to  leave;  that  I  was  made  to  feel  like  an 
intruder  whose  room  was  preferable  to  his  company; 
that  I  was  struggling  against  all  the  prejudice  one 
naturally  would  feel  against  persons  who  claimed  to 
be  able  to  summon  an  army  of  spirits  from  the  other 
world;  that  I  sat  silent  when  members  of  the  family 
made  ungracious  and  threatening  speeches  against  per- 
sons who  might  misrepresent  them,  clearly  meaning 
me;  that  for  fear  my  mission  might  be  cut  short  and 
my  ability  to  do  my  duty  to  my  employers  destroyed, 
I  breathed  not  a  word  of  my  purpose  to  write  for  the 
newspaper,  and  left  the  place  without  having  had  a 
single  opportunity  to  draw  out  their  side  of  the  story 
from  the  Eddys,  the  public  has  reason  to  admit  that  in 
saying  what  I  did  in  their  favor  I  was  at  least  actuated 
by  no  feelings  of  partiality. 

I  was  glad,  when  my  second  visit  was  so  unexpect- 
edly brought  about,  that  things  were  just  as  they  had 
been  at  the  beginning,  for  I  had  heard  all  the  evil 
stories  in  circulation  and  sifted  them  thoroughly,  and 
was  in  a  condition  of  mind  to  do  justice  to  people  who 

THEIR  ANCESTORS.  23 

had  not  always  acted  so  as  to  make  friends,  had  few 
real  ones,  and  fewer  opportunities  granted  to  lay  their 
pathetic  tale  before  the  world.  It  was  not  because  I 
had  sympathy  with  their  beliefs,  nor  that  their  welfare 
was  a  matter  of  greater  personal  concern  than  that  of 
any  other  decent  people,  but  because,  in  common  with 
every  one  else,  my  good  wishes  went  with  the  weak 
and  oppressed,  and  this  family  had  been  worried  and 
torn  by  the  spirit  of  intolerance,  as  a  sheep  by  wolves. 
Manhood  revolts  at  the  persecutions,  cruelties,  and 
indignities  they  have  been  called  to  suffer  in  conse- 
quence of  the  direful  inheritance  of  mediumship  that 
was  bequeathed  them  in  their  blood — an  inheritance 
that  made  their  childhood  wretched,  and,  until  recently, 
life  itself  a  heavy  burden.  To  explain  my  meaning  I 
will  give  some  particulars  of  the  family  history  as  they 
have  been  communicated  to  me  by  the  surviving 
children. 

Zephaniah  Eddy,  a  farmer  living  at  Weston,  Vt,  mar- 
ried one  Julia  Ann  Macombs,  a  girl  of  Scotch  descent 
who  was  born  in  the  same  town.  She  was  first  cousin 
to  General  Leslie  Combs,  of  Kentucky,  who  changed 
his  name  to  its  present  form,  and  was  distantly  related 
to  a  noble  Scotch  family.  About  the  year  1846  Mr. 
Eddy  sold  his  farm  and  removed  to  the  present  home- 
stead in  the  town  of  Chittenden.  -/Mrs.  Eddy  inherited 
from  her  mother  the  gift  of  "foreseeing,"  as  it  is  called 
among  the  Scotch,  or  more  properly  "clairvoyance," 
for  she  not  only  had  previsions  of  future  events,  but 
also  the  faculty  of  seeing  the  denizens  of  the  mysterious 
world  about  us,  from  whom  she  claimed  to  receive  visits 

24  THE  MOTHER. 

as  commonly  as  though  they  were  ordinary  neighbors. 

Not  only  this,  but  she  could  also  hold  speech  with 
them,  hear  them  address  their  conversation  to  the 
inner  self  within  her,  utter  warnings  of  impending 
calamities,  and  sometimes  bring  tidings  of  joy.  Her 
mother  before  her  possessed  the  same  faculties  in  de- 
gree, and  her  great-great-great-grandmother  was 
actually  tried  and  sentenced  to  death  at  Salem  for 
alleged  "witchcraft"  in  the  dark  days  of  1692,  but 
escaped  to  Scotland  by  the  aid  of  friends  who  rescued 
her  from  jail.  Zephaniah  Eddy  was  a  narrow-minded 
man,  strong  in  his  prejudices,  a  bigoted  religionist,  and 
very  little  educated. 

His  new  wife  instinctively  withheld  from  him  all 
knowledge  of  her  peculiar  psychological  gifts,  and  for 
a  time  after  their  marriage  she  seemed  to  have  lost 
them.  But  they  returned  after  the  birth  of  her  first 
child  stronger  than  ever,  and  from  that  time  until  the 
day  of  her  death  they  were  the  source  of  much  misery. 

Mr.  Eddy  at  first  made  light  of  them,  laughed  at 
her  prognostications,  and  forbade  her  giving  way 
to  what  he  declared  was  the  work  of  the  Evil  One 
himself.  He  resorted  to  prayer  to  abate  the  nuis- 
ance, or,  as  he  styled  it,  to  "  cast  the  devil  out  of  his 
ungodly  wife  and  children,"  and,  that  failing,  to  coer- 
cive measures,  that  proved  equally  inefficacious. 

The  first  child  that  was  born  had  the  father's  tempera- 
ment, but  each  succeeding  one  the  mother's,  and  each,  at 
a  very  tender  age,  developed  her  idiosyncrasies.  Mys- 
terious sounds  were  heard  about  their  cradles,  strange 
voices  called  through  the  rooms  they  were  in,  they 

THE  MOTHER. 

SALEM  WITCHES  OUTDONE.  25 

would  play  by  the  hour  with  beautiful  children,  visible 
only  to  their  eyes  and  the  mother's,  who  brought  them 
flowers  and  pet  animals,  and  romped  with  them ;  and 
once  in  a  while,  after  they  were  tucked  away  in  bed, 
their  little  bodies  would  be  lifted  gently  and  floated 
through  the  air  by  some  mysterious  power.  In  vain 
the  father  stormed  and  threatened  :  the  thing  went  on. 
He  called  his  pious  neighbors  together — Harvey  Pratt, 
Rufus  Sprague,  Sam  Parker,  Sam  Simmons,  Charles 
Powers,  and  Anson  Ladd — and  prayed  and  prayed  that 
this  curse  might  be  removed  from  his  house.  But  the 
devil  was  proof  against  entreaty  and  expostulation,  and 
the  harder  they  prayed  the  wickeder  the  pranks  he 
played.  Then  the  infuriated  parent  resorted  to  blows, 
and,  to  get  the  evil  spirit  out  of  them,  he  beat  these 
little  girls  and  boys  until  he  made  scars  on  their  backs 
that  they  will  carry  to  their  graves.  It  seemed  as  if  the 
man  would  go  crazy  with  rage. 

By  and  by,  things  got  so  bad  that  the  spirits  would 
"  materialize  "  themselves  in  the  room,  right  in  the  father's 
view,  and,  not  being  able  to  handle  them  after  his  usual 
fashion,  his  only  refuge  was  to  leave  the  chamber.  The 
children  could  not  go  to  school,  for  before  long,  raps 
would  be  heard  on  the  desks  and  benches,  and  they 
would  be  driven  out  by  the  teacher,  followed  by  the 
hootings  and  revilings  of  the  scholars.  This,  it  will  be 
remembered,  was  just  what  happened  to  the  children  of 
the  unfortunates  who  were  hung  for  witchcraft  at  Salem, 
the  sins  (?)  of  the  parents  being  cruelly  visited  upon  the 
children. 

One  night,  when  Horatio  was  four  years  old,  a  little 
2 

26  EXORCISING  THE  DEVIL  BY  FIRE. 

creature  covered  with  a  white  fur  suddenly  appeared 
in  the  room  where  he  and  three  of  the  other  children  were 
sleeping,  jumped  upon  their  bed,  sniffed  at  their  faces, 
and  then  began  growing  larger  and  larger  until  it  turned 
into  a  great  luminous  cloud,  that  gradually  shaped  itself 
into  a  human  form.  The  children  screamed,  and  the 
mother  running  in  hastily  with  a  candle,  the  shape  disap- 
peared. So  year  after  year  things  went  on,  full  of  trouble 
and  sorrow  for  all  in  the  unhappy  house.  No  wonder 
that  I  found  them  "curt,"  "repellant,"  and  "sensitive,"' 
and  suspicious  and  calculated  to  arouse  suspicion.  I 
think  I  would  be  likewise  under  like  circumstances. 

Poor  Mrs.  Eddy's  misfortunes  did  not  cease  with  her 
husband's  death  in  i860,  but  followed  her  even  into  her 
grave,  as  she  one  day  in  a  prophetic  vision  told  the 
children  it  would  in  the  exact  manner  in  which  it  hap- 
pened. When  her  death  occurred  (January  1st,  1873)  it 
was  intended  that  she  should  be  buried  by  the  Spiritualists, 
certain  of  whom  had  promised  to  be  present,  but  it  so 
happened  that  they  were  detained  away,  and  two  Metho- 
dist friends  of  the  husband's  acted  as  sole  pall-bearers. 
As  they  were  about  to  lower  the  coffin  into  the  grave 
these  two  worthies  fell  into  dispute  about  a.  lawsuit  that 
they  had  just  had,  and  one,  in  his  eagerness  to  get  at  his 
antagonist,  dropped  his  rope  and  the  poor  lady  was  dumped 
e?id  over  end  into  the  pit,  and  the  coffin  turned  bottom  side 
up. 

One  surprising  instance  of  the  cruelty  begotten  by 
ignorance,  is  afforded  in  the  means  resorted  to  once  to 
bring  William  Eddy  out  of  a  trance.  Pushing,  pinching, 
and  blows  proving  in  vain,  Anson  Ladd,  with  the  father's 

THE  CHILDREN  RENTED  AS  MEDIUMS.  27 

permission,  poured  scalding  hot  water  down  his  back,  and, 
as  a  last  heroic  operation,  put  a  blazing  ember  from  the 
hearth  on  his  head.  But  the  lad  slept  on,  and  the  only 
effect  of  this  cruelty  was  the  great  scar  that  he  has  shown 
me  on  his  crest. 

The  father's  scruples  did  not  interfere  with  his  willing- 
ness to  turn  a  thrifty  penny  by  an  exhibition  of  the  dia- 
bolical gifts  of  his  progeny,  for,  after  the  Rochester 
knockings  of  1847  had  ushered  in  the  new  dispensation 
of  Spiritualism,  he  hired  three  or  four  of  the  children  out 
to  one  showman,  who  took  them  to  nearly  all  the  princi- 
pal cities  of  the  United  States,  and  to  another  who  took 
them  to  London  for  a  brief  season. 

The  children  got  all  the  kicks  and  he  all  the  ha'pence 
in  this  transaction,  and  a  sorry  time  it  was  for  them. 
Passed  through  the  merciless  hands  of  scores  of  "com- 
mittees of  skeptics,"  bound  with  cords  by  "  sailors  of 
seven  years'  experience,"  and  riggers  "accustomed  to  tie 
knots  where  human  life  was  at  risk,"  of  carpenters  with  a 
fancy  for  other  knots  than  those  in  their  boards,  of  inven- 
tors who  knew  all  sorts  of  "ropes"  in  addition  to  their 
particular  steam-engines  or  threshing-machines,  and  such- 
like illuminati,  their  soft  young  metacarpal  bones  were 
squeezed  out  of  shape,  and  their  arms  covered  with  the 
scars  of  melted  wax,  used  to  make  the  assurance  of  the 
bonds  doubly  and  trebly  sure.  These  wrists  and  arms 
are  a  sight  to  see.  Every  girl  and  boy  of  them  has  a 
marked  groove  between  the  ends  of  the  ulna  and  radius 
and  the  articulation  of  the  bones  of  the  hand,  and  every 
one  of  them  is  scarred  by  hot  sealing-wax.  Two  of  the 
girls  showed  me  scars  where  pieces  of  flesh  had  been 

28  MOBBED  AND  SHOT  AT. 

pinched  out  by  handcuffs  used  by  "  committees  " — fools 
who  seem  to  have  been  unable  to  discover  suspected 
fraud  without  resort  to  brutal  violence  on  the  persons  of 
children. 

And  then  the  mobbings  they  have  passed  through !  At 
Lynn,  Mass. ;  South  Danvers;  West  Cleveland,  O.,  where 
William  was  ridden  on  a  rail  and  barely  escaped  a  coat 
of  tar  and  feathers ;  at  Moravia,  N.  Y. ;  at  Waltham, 
Mass.,  where  they  had  to  fly  for  their  lives ;  at  Dunville, 
Canada — in  all  which  places  their  "  cabinet "  (a  simple, 
portable  closet,  in  which  they  sit  for  the  manifestations) 
was  smashed.  They  make  no  account  in  this  catalogue 
of  suffering,  of  the  places  where  they  were  stoned,  hooted 
at,  and  followed  to  their  hotels  by  angry  crowds.  At 
South  Danvers  they  were  fired  upon  by  hidden  assassins, 
and  William  has  the  scar  of  a  bullet  in  his  ankle  and 
Mary  one  in  her  arm  to  show  for  their  picnic  in  that 
tolerant  locality  !  Horatio  carries  his  memento  of  that 
place  in  a  stab  wound  in  his  leg,  and  Lynn  supplied  him 
with  '  the  two  tokens  of  a  scar  on  his  forehead,  where  a 
brick  hit  him,  and  a  broken  finger,  the  third,  on  his  right 
hand. 

Ah !  these  committees  are  often  honorable  gentle- 
men, as  may  be  inferred  from  the  fact  that  once  when 
applying  the  "  flour-test " — the  placing  of  flour  in  the 
medium's  hands  after  his  wrists  are  tied,  to  detect  him  if 
he  disengages  his  hands  and  plays  upon  the  instruments 
himself — aquafortis  was  mixed  in  the  flour,  and  shock- 
ingly burned  Horatio's  fingers;  and  once,  when  the 
musical  instruments,  horns,  &c,  were  rubbed  with  rouge, 
so  that  the  mediums  might  be  betrayed  by  their  discolored 

A  FAIR  INVESTIGA  TION  PREFERRED.  29 

hands  if  they  should  touch  them,  one  of  the  committee, 
pretending  to  make  a  last  examination  of  the  knots, 
rubbed  the  hands  of  both  the  boys  with  rouge.  In  this 
instance,  however,  the  base  trick  availed  nothing,  for, 
aware  of  what  had  been  done,  the  Eddys  called  for  the 
audience  to  look  at  their  hands  before  the  cabinet  doors 
were  closed,  and  the  culprit  was  exposed. 

The  reader  will  understand,  from  what  I  have  said  of 
their  childhood  experiences,  that  these  poor  creatures  had 
little  or  no  educational  advantages,  and  their  numerous 
correspondents  will  not  be  surprised  at  the  illiteracy- 
shown  in  their  letters.  They  will  be  surprised,  on  the  other 
hand,  when  I  say  that  I  have  heard  words  in  six  foreign 
tongues  spoken,  and  conversation  sustained  in  the  same, 
by  rappings  by  some  of  the  phantoms  whose  appearance 
before  me,  during  my  present  visit  to  the  Eddy  home- 
stead, I  shall  describe  in  future  chapters  of  this  true 
story. 

The  Daily  Graphic  was  pleased  to  say  of  a  letter  of 
mine  from  this  place,  that  "  the  story  is  as  marvellous  as 
any  to  be  found  in  history,"  an  opinion  that  was  reiterated 
by  several  of  the  most  respected  journals  in  other  cities.  I 
risk  nothing  in  now  saying  that  what  I  am  about  to  narrate 
is  far  more  extraordinary  in  every  respect,  and  I  expect  to 
tax  the  public  indulgence  as  to  my  veracity  to  the  utmost. 
But  I  shall  at  least  take  good  care  to  be  within  the 
limits  of  the  truth,  so  that  my  story  may  be  verified 
by  any  future  investigator  who  is  willing  to  scan  closely, 
move  cautiously  to  conclusions,  and  "  nothing  extenuate 
nor  aught  set  down  in  malice."  I  went  to  Chittenden 
to  discover  the  truth   as  to  the  "  Eddy  manifestations," 

30  THE  EDD  Y  HOMESTEAD. 

and  as  I  find  things,  so  shall  I   describe  them,  caring 

nothing  how  much  my  own  prejudices  are  affected  by  the 

result. 

The  sketches  that  illustrate  this  chapter  represent 

the  Eddy  homestead  as  viewed  from  the  south-east,* 

rear,  and  north  side.     The  house  is  the  first   frame 

building  erected  in  Chittenden  township,  and  for  many 

years  was  a  wayside  inn.     It  comprises  a  main  building 

and  a  rear  extension,  or  L,  of  two  stories,  of  which  the 

lower  is  divided  into  a  dining-room,  kitchen,  and  small 

cupboard  or  pantry;  and  the  upper,  thrown  into  one 

room,  is  known  as  the  "  circle-room,"  or  among  the 

profane,  as  "  the  ghost  shop."     In  the  rear  view,  the 

kitchen  door  is  seen  at  the  hither  end  of  the  L  part, 

and  the  square  window  in  the  gable-end  gives  light 

into  the  "  cabinet "  or  narrow  closet  in  which  William 

i 

Eddy  sits  when  the  materializations  occur. 

*  See  Frontispiece. 

/JEAR  V'/EW. 

THE  HOMESTEAD,    (REAR   AND   SIDE   VIEW.) 

CHAPTER  II. 

TREATMENT    OF    PUBLIC    MEDIUMS. 

THE  story  of  the  persecutions,  mobbings,  hardships 
and  trials  through  which  the  Eddy  children  were 
obliged  to  pass,  carries  a  moral  with  it,  which 
the  intelligent  reader  can  hardly  have  overlooked.  It 
must  have  been  apparent  that  we  are  not  dealing  with 
the  case  of  charlatans  who  have  recently  taken  to  the 
business  of  trickery  for  the  sake  of  gain,  for  these  girls 
and  boys  seem  to  have  inherited  their  peculiar  temper- 
aments from  their  ancestry,  and  the  phenomena  com- 
mon to  most  genuine  "  mediums"  of  the  present  day, 
attended  them  in  their  very  cradles.  It  will  scarcely 
be  said  that  children  who,  like  Elisha,  were  caught  up 
and  conveyed  from  one  place  to  another,  and  in  whose 
presence  weird  forms  were  materialized  as  they  lay  in 
their  trundle-bed,  were  playing  pranks  to  tax  the  cre- 
dulity of  an  observant  public,  which  was  ignorant  of 
their  very  existence.  It  will  not  be  seriously  urged,  I 
fancy,  against  youth,  whose  bodies  were  scored  with 
the  lash,  cicatrized  by  burning  wax,  by  pinching  man- 
acles, by  the  knife,  the  bullet  and  by  boiling  water, 

33 

34  NO  IND  UCEAIENT  FOR  FRA  UD. 

who  were  starved,  driven  to  the  woods  to  save  their 
lives  from  parental  violence  ;  who  were  forced  to  travel 
year  after  year  and  exhibit  their  occult  powers  for 
others'  gain ;  who  were  mobbed  and  stoned,  shot  at  and 
reviled  ;  who  could  not  get  even  an  ordinary  country- 
school  education  like  other  children,  nor  enjoy  the  com- 
panionship of  boys  and  girls  of  their  own  age; — it 
will  not  be  urged  against  such  as  these  that  they  were 
in  conspiracy  to  deceive,  when  they  had  everything  to 
gain  and  nothing  to  lose  by  abandoning  the  fraud  and 
being  like  other  folk.  The  idea  is  preposterous  ;  and 
we  must  infer  that,  whatever  may  be  the  source  of  the 
phenomena,  they  are  at  least  objective  and  not  subjec- 
tive—  the  result  of  some  external  force,  independent 
of  the  medium's  wishes,  and  manifesting  itself  when 
the  penalty  of  its  manifestation  was  to  subject  the  un- 
fortunates to  bodily  torture  and  mental  anguish. 

We  must  turn  back  to  Fox's  "Book  of  Martyrs"  if 
we  would  catch  the  diabolical  spirit  that  has  been  ex- 
hibited towards  these  men  during  the  fifteen  years  that 
they  travelled  the  country  to  exhibit  their  wonderful 
gifts;  for,  while  our  times  are  not  those  of  the  Eighth 
Harry's  cruel  daughter,  the  feeling  of  intolerance  in 
the  Church  towards  these  latter-day  heretics,  is  substan- 
tially the  same  as  that  which  sent  Ridley  and  Latimer, 
Bradford  and  Cranmer  to  the  stake,  and  caused  Calvin 
to  procure  the  death  of  his  learned  fellow-Protestant, 
Servetus.  This  is  the  first  time  within  my  knowledge, 
that  this  side  of  the  medium  question  has  been  dis- 
cussed, and  in  the  hope  that  the  example  may  be  imi- 
tated, I  will  show  some  of  the  barbarities  inflicted  upon 
these  Eddy  boys  by  "committees." 

PUBLIC  EXHIBITIONS.  35 

To  understand  the  matter,  persons  who  have  never 
attended  a  public  spiritist  exhibition  should  be  told 
what  the  performance  is  like.  In  a  public  hall,  upon 
the  platform,  is  set  tip  a  wardrobe,  or  "  cabinet,"  made 
of  half-inch  walnut,  seven  feet  high,  six  feet  wide,  two 
feet  deep,  and  resting  on  trestles  eighteen  inches  high, 
to  permit  a  full  view  under  the  cabinet  and  satisfy  the 
spectator  that  there  is  no  communication  through  traps 
with  its  interior.  The  front  is  composed  of  three  doors, 
the  side  ones  swinging  to  right  and  left  respectively, 
and  the  centre  one  to  right.  At  each  end  inside  is  a 
narrow  board  seat,  supported  on  cleats,  and  one  of  like 
width  runs  the  width  of  the  cabinet  against  the  back 
wall.  In  the  upper  half  of  the  centre  door  is  a  dia- 
mond-shaped opening,  behind  which  hangs  a  black 
velvet  curtain.  The  mediums  enter,  and,  seating  them- 
selves on  the  end  seats,  are  firmly  bound  hand  and  foot 
by  a  committee  selected  by  the  audience,  the  cords 
being  passed  through  auger-holes  in  the  bench.  Various 
musical  instruments  are  placed  within,  beyond  reach 
of  the  bound  mediums,  and,  the  doors  being  closed,  a 
variety  of  curious  phenomena  occur.  The  instruments 
are  vigorously  played  upon,  loud  percussive  noises  are 
heard,  hands  are  thrust  out  of  the  opening,  and  other 
exhibitions  occur  that  a  strange  force  is  at  work.  The 
cabinet  doors,  self-unbolted,  suddenly  open,  and  the  two 
mediums  are'  discovered  sitting  as  before,  with  not  a 
single  knot  disturbed. 

The  committees  selected  by  vote  of  the  audience, 
usually  embrace  men  who  are  supposed  to  be  unusually 
acute,  such    as  detectives;  skilful  knot-tiers,  such  as 

36  CRUELTIES  OF  COMMITTEES. 

sailors  and  riggers ;  and  those  whose  education  and  in- 
telligence are  likely  to  make  them  competent  to  fathom 
the  philosophical  mystery.  In  looking  over  the  scrap- 
books  of  the  Eddys,  I  find  the  newspapers,  as  a  rule, 
reporting  such  choice  of  committeemen,  and  I  also 
find  there  the  evidences  of  the  unnecessary  cruelties 
practised  in  the  interest  of  "  science,"  "  religion,"  "  fair- 
play,"  and  particularly  of  what  these  gentry  are  pleased 
to  call  "  the  truth." 

The  reader  will  please  observe  that  I  have  not  relied 
upon  the  diaries  or  verbal  statements  of  the  Eddys 
themselves  in  making  these  strictures,  but  solely  upon 
the  testimony  of  the  editorial  descriptions  of  the  whole 
press,  for  the  journals  of  nearly  every  section  are 
represented  in  this  modern  Book  of  Martyrs.  Such 
details  of  the  handcuffings  and  ligatures,  the  blister- 
ings  and  acid  corrosions,  the  torture  of  constrained 
positions,  of  mouth-gags  and  halter-nooses,  as  the 
newspapers  did  not  supply,  I  have  filled  in  after  getting 
the  necessary  explanations  from  the  mediums,  and  the 
drawings  were  made  from  life. 

I  cannot  refrain  from  making  a  single  quotation  from 
Horatio's  diary,  under  date  of  November,  1867,  for  it 
shows  the  patient,  uncomplaining  spirit  that  possessed 
the  poor  farmer-boy  under  his  sufferings.  It  seems  the 
most  appropriate  introduction  I  could  make  to  these 
sketches.  He  says  :  "  This  day  we  suffered  very  much 
by  severe  tying  and  abuse  from  those  who  professed  to  be 
Spiritualists.  But  we  like  martyrs,  bore  our  pain  with 
fortitude.  We  thanked  the  Divine  Power  for  preserving 
us  from  the  gross  treatment  of  our  enemies.     No  mortal 

TESTS    BY    COMMITTEES. 

TESTING  THE  MEDIUMS.  39 

knows  what  brutish  tying  we  submitted  ourselves  to.  It 
would  have  made  mother's  heart  bleed  if  she  had  known 
what  her  children  were  passing  through  in  Canastota." 

How  they  were  treated  by  the  Canastota  committee 
sketch  No.  4  will  show. 

Horatio  was  kept  with  one  hand  tied  to  his  neck  and 
the  other  to  his  manacled  feet  for  three-quarters  of  an 
hour,  the  cord  around  his  neck  being  so  tight  as  to  half 
choke  him. 

The  Little  Falls,  N.  Y.,  investigators  tried  the  pretty 
device  shown  in  sketch  No.  1. 

The  medium  is  tied  to  a  wooden  T  cross,  by  whip-cord 
passing  through  holes  bored  for  the  purpose.  He  was 
kept  so  for  the  space  of  an  hour,  until,  owing  to  the  tight- 
ness of  the  ligatures  at  the  wrists,  the  blood  trickled  from 
under  his  finger-nails. 

Sketch  No.  3  will  recall  a  scene  of  rope-tying,  to  the 
minds  of  the  good  people  of  Albany,  N.  Y.,  who  attended 
a  seance  at  the  house  of  John  McClure ;  a  certain  Doctor 
Perkins  being  the  operator.-  Here  the  medium  is  tied 
down  by  his  fingers  to  the  floor,  the  tapes  being  secured 
to  the  latter  by  tacks,  and  another  tape  leading  to  the 
door-knob.  The  worthy  Doctor  kept  this  patient  in  this 
position  some  two  hours,  and  it  is  not  surprising  that  his 
wrists  were  so  swollen  in  consequence  that  he  was  kept  in 
pain  several  days  thereafter. 

Sketch  No.  2  shows  a  common  device  of  the  wily  com- 
mitteemen of  Moriah,  N.  Y.,  and  numerous  other  places, 
and  the  drawing  requires  no  word  of  comment. 

Moriah,  N.  Y.  (perhaps  I  do  not  get  the  name  just 
right,  but  the  Eddys  cannot  help  me),  is  also  responsible 

40  CRUEL  DEVICES. 

for  the  cheerful  "  bucking  "  antidote,  against  charlatanry, 
seen  in  sketch  No.  6,  in  which  attitude  the  victim  was 
obliged  to  stay  two  mortal  hours,  the  spirits  refusing  to 
manifest  themselves  under  such  disturbed  conditions,  and 
the  committee,  with  astonishing  cruelty,  declaring  they 
would  keep  him  there  until  they  did.  This  happened  at 
the  house  of  Esak  Colvin. 

In  sketch  No.  5  we  have  an  illustration  of  ingenious 
barbarity  worthy  of  the  palmy  days  of  the  Inquisition : 

Two  pairs  of  handcuffs  each,  on  the  wrists  and  ankles, 
a  rope  running  through  the  links  of  each  and  passing  out 
of  the  cabinet  at  top  and  bottom,  and  a  halter-noose 
around  the  neck,  drawn  just  tight  enough  to  choke  without 
quite  strangling,  made  an  applauding  public  feel  secure 
against  "humbug."  Bristol,  Conn,,  richly  deserves  the 
credit  for  this  apparatus,  and  the  additional  statement 
that  it  was  applied  for  the  space  of  nearly  two  and  a  half 
hours. 

Here,  finally,  in  sketch  No.  7,  we  have  an  effectual 
device  to  prevent  the  exercise  of  ventriloquial  powers  in 
imitation  of  spirit-voices,  which  has  been  tried  in  so 
many  places  (not  to  mention  Sing  Sing  and  other  peniten- 
tiary establishments)  that  I  forbear  to  recount  them,  lest 
I  might  weary. 

And  now  let  us  drop  this  disagreeable  part  of  our 
subject. 

It  matters  little  to  me  how  the  skeptical  may  undertake 
to  account  for  these  Chittenden  mysteries — that  concerns 
themselves  alone.  They  may  attribute  them  to  elec- 
tricity, but  if  so,  they  will  have  to  encounter  scientists 
like  Varley,  the  electrician  of  the  Atlantic  cable,  who, 

SUFFKRINGS    OF   MEDIUMS. 

THE  EDDYS  AS  MEDIUMS.  43 

after  testing  them  by  every  electrical  apparatus,  with 
twenty-six  years'  experience  to  guide  him,  declares  that 
that  subtle  agent  has  nothing  whatever  to  do  with  their 
production ;  of  the  late  Professor  Hare,  who  made  the 
same  statement  after  two  years  of  careful  inquiry;  of 
Elliotson,  Puysegur,  Crookes,  Bell,  Collier,  Gully,  the 
French  Academicians,  and  the  London  Dialectical 
Society.  If  they  say  it  is  "  animal  magnetism  "they  must 
face  an  army  of  specialists  who  have  exhausted  every 
endeavor  to  explain  away  the  phenomena  as  coming 
under  this  category.  The  knee-pan,  toe-joint  and  knuckle 
worthies,  as  a  class,  die  a  natural  death  as  soon  as  we  get 
beyond  the  mere  Rochester  rappings  of  1847,  and  I  feel 
confident  that  if  Professors  Huxley  and  Tyndall  would 
spend  a  fortnight  at  Chittenden,  they  would  see  their 
protoplasms  and  such  like  scientific  soothing-syrups  flying 
out  of  the  window  upon  the  entry  of  the  first  material- 
ized ghost  from  William  Eddy's  closet. 

It  is  scarcely  exaggeration  to  say  that  this  family  of 
mediums,  if  we  may  believe  their  story,  is  the  most  re- 
markable as  to  psychological  endowments  of  which  men- 
tion is  made  in  the  history  of  European  races.  Perhaps 
among  the  Chinese,  and  certain  tribes  of  India  (the 
Yogiswaras,  for  instance)  and  of  Egypt,  parallel  cases  may 
be  found,  but  such  have  not  met  my  eye  in  the  course  of 
a  somewhat  extensive  reading  in  this  branch  of  literature. 

The  Eddys  represent  about  every  phase  of  medium- 
ship  and  seership : — rappings;  the  disturbance  of 
material  objects  from  a  state  of  rest ;  painting  in  oil  and 
water-colors  under  influence;  prophecy,  the  speaking  of 
strange  tongues ;  the  healing  gift ;  the  discernment   of 

44  EXPERIENCES  OF  MEDIUMS. 

spirits ;  levitation,  or  the  floating  of  the  body  in  free  air ; 
the  phenomena  of  instrument  playing  and  the  show  of 
hands ;  the  writing  of  messages  on  paper  upborne  in  mid- 
air, by  pencils  held  by  detached  hands  ;  psychometry,  or 
the  reading  of  character  and  view  of  distant  persons 
upon  touching  sealed  letters ;  clairvoyance ;  clair- 
audience,  or  the  hearing  of  spirit-voices;  and,  lastly,  and 
most  miraculous  of  all,  the  production  of  materialized 
phantom  forms,  that  become  visible,  tangible,  and  often 
audible  by  all  persons  present. 

Much  account  has  been  made  of  the  story  told  by  Lord 
Dunraven  and  Lord  Adair  (and,  I  may  mention,  confirmed 
to  me  personally  by  the  latter  gentleman),  of  Mr.  Home's 
having  been  "  floated  "  out  of  one  third-story  window  at 
Ashley  House  and  into  another ;  but  what  will  be  thought 
of  Horatio  Eddy  having  been  carried,  one  summer  night, 
when  he  was  but  six  years  old,  a  distance  of  three  miles 
to  a  mountain  top,  and  left  to  find  his  way  home  next 
day  as  best  he  could  ;  of  his  youngest  brother  Webster, 
when  a  grown  man,  being  carried  out  of  a  window  and 
over  the  top  of  a  house  from  the  presence  of  three  wit- 
nesses (from'  two  of  whom  I  have  the  story),  and  landed 
in  a  ditch  a  quarter  of  a  mile  off;  of  William  being 
carried  to  a  distant  wood  and  kept  there  unconscious  for 
three  days,  and  then  carried  back  -again ;  of  Horatio 
being  "  levitated  "  twenty-six  evenings  in  succession,  in 
Buffalo,  in  the  Lyceum  Hall,  when  fast  bound  in  a  chair, 
and  hung  by  the  back  of  the  chair  to  a  chandelier  hook 
in  the  ceiling,  and  then  safely  lowered  again  to  his  former 
place  on  the  floor  ?  Of  Mary  Eddy  being  raised  to  the 
ceiling  of  Hope  Chapel,  in  New  York  city,  where   she 

THE  AUTHOR'S  Or  IN  IONS.  45 

wrote  her  name  ?  Of  her  little  boy,  Warren,  five  years 
old,  who  is  floated  in  dark-circles,  screaming  to  be  let 
down  all  the  while  ?  Of  a  little  son  of  Stephen  Baird, 
of  Chittenden,  a  neighbor  of  theirs,  who  has  been 
handled  in  the  same  way  ? 

Mr.  Home  is  not  the  only  one  besides  the  Eddys  who 
has  been  thus  transported  through  mid-air,  for,  since 
1347,  authenticated  reports  will  be  found  in  the  books 
of  a  like  thing  happening  to  Edward  Irving,  Margaret 
Rule,  St.  Philip  of  Neri,  St.  Catharine  of  Columbina, 
Loyola,  Savonarola,  Jennie  Lord,  Madame  Hauffe,  and 
many  others  whose  names  I  do  not  at  present  recall, 
and  in  the  absence  of  a  library  cannot  transcribe. 

Does  any  one  care  to  ask  me  what  I  think  ?  I  answer, 
Nothing;  I  watch  and  wrait  and  report,  holding  myself 
open  to  conviction  in  the  spirit  which  the  great  Arago 
describes  in  an  old  article  on  Mesmerism  :  "  The  man 
who,  outside  of  pure  mathematics,  pronounces  the  word 
'  impossible,'  is  wanting  in  prudence." 

I  make  no  apology  for  having  now  devoted  two  pre- 
liminary chapters  to  personal  details  respecting  the 
Eddy  family  history ;  for  the  intelligent  reader,  before 
he  could  give  credence  to  the  miraculous  events  that  I 
shall  describe  as  occurring  in  their  presence,  would  of 
necessity  ask  what  sort  of  people  they  are — whether 
they  were  of  suspicious  antecedents,  whether  they  had 
amassed  a  fortune  by  their  exhibitions,  whether  they  are 
making  money  by  them  now,  or  what  motive  impels 
them  to  continue  in  their  present  public  relation?  I 
stated  above  that  they  travelled  for  the  profit  of  others; 
by  which  I  meant  to  say  that  when  William,  Horatio, 

46  PRESENT  CONDITION  OF  THE  EDDYS. 

and  Mary  were  young  children,  their  father,  having 
failed  to  cowhide  their  demons  out  of  them,  hired  them 
out  to  a  showman  for  four  years,  they  receiving  nothing 
but  their  bare  expenses ;  and  that  at  the  expiration  of 
that  time  they  were  hired  by  various  other  speculators, 
and  during  the  ensuing  eleven  years  received  an  aver- 
age of  under  ten  dollars  a  month  apiece.  I  mean,  fur- 
thermore, to  say  that  their  house  and  farm  would  not 
sell  for  $3,500,  all  told ;  that  they  do  all  their  house- 
work themselves;  that  half  their  visitors  are  poor  and 
sponge  on  them  for  board,  and,  the  other  half  paying 
eight  dollars  per  week,  the  family  have  saved  enough 
to  put  some  necessary  repairs  on  the  house ;  and  finally 
that  they  unite  in  saying  that  the  greatest  good  fortune 
that  could  befall  them  would  be  to  have  their  medium- 
ship  cease,  so  that  they  might  work  like  other  farmers 
and  enjoy  life  like  them.  They  are  the  galley-slaves 
of  the  invisible  powers  back  of  the  "  manifestations," 
who  not  only  obsess  them  at  their  caprice  by  day  while 
about  household  duties,  and  in  the  evening  during  the 
regular  circles,  but  pursue  them  in  the  silent  watches 
of  the  night,  playing  the  pranks  of  the  old-time  polter- 
geists, and  making  it  uncertain  whether  or  no  they  will 
wake  in  bed  or  in  the  crotch  of  some  tree  on  the  sum- 
mit of  an  adjacent  mountain. 

The  sketches  which  accompany  this  chapter  represent 
with  fidelity  the  appearance  of  the  dining-room,  kitchen, 
and  pantry,  or  buttery,  over  which  extends  the  one 
large  room  where  the  nightly  circles  are  held.  They 
are  intended  to  show  that  no  trap-doors  afford  to  con- 
federates the  opportunity  of  communication  from  below. 

KITCHEN,  PANTR  Y  AND  DINING-ROOM.  49 

The  dining-room  communicates  directly  with  a  large 
apartment  in  the  main  part  of  the  house,  now  used 
for  a  general  sitting  and  reception  room,  but  which, 
until  the  new  hall  was  built,  was  the  circle-room.  The 
kitchen  and  pantry  are  side  by  side,  beyond  the  dining- 
r^om,  and  separated  from  it  by  a  lathed  and  plastered 
partition,  with  doors  joining  from  each  into  it.  There 
is  also  a  door  which  gives  communication  from  the 
kitchen  to  the  pantry  through  their  dividing  longitu- 
dinal partition.  The  ceilings  of  kitchen  and  pantry 
are  lathed  and  plastered.  The  kitchen  is  an  odd,  dingy 
little  place  with  smoky  walls  and  a  worn  floor,  but  it 
affords  a  retreat  for  the  family  when  the  house  is 
crowded  with  visitors;  and  such  of  the  latter  .as  at 
such  times  are  privileged  to  sit  with  "  the  boys  "  about 
the  cooking-stove,  and  smoke  a  pipe,  and  chat  upon 
the  day's  topics,  are  regarded  with  much  of  the  same 
envy  as  the  favorite  at  Court,  who  is  passed  by  obse- 
quious lackeys  into  the  presence,  while  the  rest  cool 
their  heels  in  the  corridor. 

I  have  had  my  days  of  favor,  like  the  courtier,  and 
passed  many  a  pleasant  hour  in  this  little  kitchen, 
in  an  atmosphere  so  dense  with  pipe-  smoke  that  we 
could  barely  see  each  other  across  the  room.  I  have 
sung  my  songs  and  told  my  comic  stories,  and  heard 
Horatio  sing  his  songs,  and  William  tell,  in  his  own 
pathetic  way,  of  the  cruelties  he  suffered  in  boyhood, 
and  I  really  fancied  that  by  keeping  on  my  good 
behavior,  I  might  be  allowed  to  do  my  work  pleasantly 
and  thoroughly.     But — however,  I  will  not  anticipate. 

If  the  reader  will  turn  to  the  rear  view  of  the  Eddy 

50  SEARCHES  FOR  ERA  UD. 

homestead,  he  will  observe  in  the  gable  of  the  L  exten- 
sion, just  over  the  square  window  of  William's  cabinet, 
two  other  windows.  These  light  a  cock-loft  over  the 
circle-room.  I  confess  that  it  never  occurred  to  me  to 
go  up  there  and  see  what  sort  of  place  it  might  be,  as 
after  careful  inspection  of  the  room  itself  I  was  satisfied 
that  no  communication  existed  between  the  two ;  but 
one  afternoon  a  lady  visitor,  subject  to  trance  obses- 
sions, and  professing  to  be  influenced  by  a  spirit  at  the 
time,  called  my  attention  to  the  fact  that,  with  all  my 
shrewdness,  I  had  overlooked  this  cock-loft.  Though 
I  could  not  imagine  how  spirit  or  mortal  could  detect 
the  omission  in  th£  pencilled  notes  in  my  pocket  diary, 
I  nevertheless  went  up  a  ladder  in  the  adjoining  vesti- 
bule, and,  creeping  through  ancient  cobwebs,  from 
rafter  to  rafter,  I  saw  that  there  was  nothing  worth 
coming  to  see.  The  mystery  could  not  be  solved 
there. 

ABOVE    AND    BELOW. 

CHAPTER    III. 

/ 

■     PERSONAL    MATTERS. 

take  it  for  granted  that  the  conductors  of  two  of 
the  great  New  York  dailies  would  not  have  succes- 
sively engaged  me  to  investigate  and  describe  the 
phenomena  at  the  Eddy  homestead,  if  they  had  supposed 
me  either  of  unsound  mind,  credulous,  partial,  dishon- 
est, or  incompetent;  and  I,  therefore,  beg  the  numerous 
company  of  correspondents  who  have  addressed  me 
upon  the  subject,  to  spare  themselves  the  trouble,  and 
me  the  annoyance,  of  their  letters. 

"Proffered  advice  stinks,"  sayeth  an  old  Arabian 
proverb  more  notable  for  strength  than  refinement.  I 
know  what  I  am  about,  and  mean  to  tell  just  what  I 
saw  and  how  I  saw  it.  To  the  impertinent  people,  of 
many  localities,  whom  I  never  laid  eyes  upon,  who 
ask  of  me  to  have  secret  writings  read,  lucky  lottery 
numbers  disclosed,  and  to  write  theses  upon  Spiritual- 
ism, to  remove  their  skepticism,  I  have  nothing  to  say 
except  that  their  letters  go  into  the  nearest  grate.  I 
certainly  do  not  care  the  value  of  a  brass  farthing 
what  they  believe  or  disbelieve.     If  I  truthfully  report 

53 

54  A  DOCTOR  IN  TROUBLE. 

the  facts,  each  has  the  same  chance  as  myself  to  make 
his  theory  to  fit  them. 

Imagine  an  Indiana  physician  sending  a  dirty  pack- 
age, stitched  by  a  sewing  machine,  and  coolly  asking 
me,  a  perfect  stranger,  to  furnish  him  the  ammunition 
to  blow  up  either  himself  or  the  Spiritualists,  in  the 
following  terms,  which  I  give  verbatim  : 

I  have  read  all  the  subtile  arguments  of  the  Spiritualistic  profes- 
sors, am  pretty  well  posted  in  all  their  talk  of  "  conditions,"  &c,  &c, 
but  1  want  a  real  material  "sign,"  —  a  test  that  will  be  palpable  and 
beyond  dispute. 

I  hereby  enclose  to  you  a  test  that  "  will  convince  the  Jews,"  if  it 
can  be  unravelled.  Here  are  several  envelopes,  each  fastened  by  a 
diflerent  process,  and  all  of  difterent  shape,  that  cannot  be  opened 
without  my  knowing  it.  In  the  centre  one  are  some  words  written 
in  a  peculiar  manner. 

Now  I  would  like  to  have  this  same  envelope  returned  to  me,  as 
it  is,  and  with  it  also  a  description  of  the  written  words  just  as  they 
are  written.  This  will  convince  me  that  there  is  an  intelligence 
beyond  earthly  intelligence  in  existence,  and  I  shall  find  no  difficulty 
in  ascribing  this  intelligence  to  disembodied  spirits.  If  the  kind 
spirit  will  tell  the  number  of  envelopes  and  describe  each,  —  tell 
from  what  kind  of  a  slip  the  paper  was  cut  upon  which  the  words 
are  written  —  it  would  of  course  make  the  matter  more  interesting. 

*  *  *  *  *  * 

Why  do  I  write  you  ?  I  will  tell  you.  You  appear  to  be  like 
myself,  not  yet  convinced,  yet  interested  enough  to  take  some  trouble 
to  test  the  matter  further. 

*  *  *  *  *  * 

I  am  now  engaged  upon  an  article  on  the  subject  of  Spiritualism, 
in  which  I  shall  explain  —  or  attempt  to  explain  —  the  whole  matter 
under  three  heads  :  First,  Juglary  ;  second,  Superstition  ;  and  third, 
Insanity. 

I  shall  wait  a  reasonable  time  to  hear  from  you  before  I  continue 
it,  as  a  solution  of  this  test  will  spoil  all  my  arguments,  speculations, 
and  sophisms. 

And  a  St.  Louis  person  asking  to  be  told  what  lottery 
ticket  to  buy,  thus : 
*      *      *      Believing,  if  the   manifestations   are  genuine,  that 

A  N  A  NX  JO  US  MA  I  DEN.  5  5 

they  have  the  power  to  foretell  coming  events,  &c,  and  seeing  no 
reasons  why  I  may  not  ask  a  question   through  you   and  this  letter, 
I  would  especially  beg  to  be  informed  of  the  number  that  will  draw 
the  capital  prize  in  the  Louisville  lottery,  next  November. 
Hoping  to  hear  from  you  soon,  I  remain,  sir,  yours  truly. 

Here  is  an  Illinois  damsel  who  seems  to  have  more 
affection  for  the  neighbor  who  visited  the  gypsy  camp 
than  for  Lindley  Murray : 

Being  very  anxious  to  know  something  of  the  future,  thought  I 
would  write  you  and  tell  you  what  I  wanted  to  know,  and  that  if 
you  charged  me  anything,  to  tell  me  so  in  your  answer,  and  I  would 
willingly  pay  you.  Will  you  please  tell  me  what  year  and  day  in 
the  month  myself  and  my  sister  next  oldest  to  me  will  be  married. 
Also  give  us  a  description  of  our  future  husbands  and  what  their 
occupation  will  be  in  life. 

And  will  you  please  tell  me  how  long  it  will  be  before  my  mother 
will  be  married,  she  being  a  widdow  lady.  Also  have  a  half-brother 
who  is  owing  a  debt  in  another  State  ;  would  like  to  know  if  he 
will  ever  pay  that  debt  up. 

Also  there  is  a  gentleman,  near  neighbor,  visited  camp  of  gypsies  ; 
would  like  to  know  if  he  had  his  fortune  told  while  there  ;  also 
please  describe  the  lady  he  will  marry. 

One  more  example  will  suffice.  This  comes  from 
Alabama  : 

I  would  like  to  learn  the  history  or  genealogy  for  my  family.  All 
I  know  is  that  one  of  my  progenitors  was  a  Stewart  [steward?]  in 
some  lord's  family  in  Europe,  and  ran  off  and  married  the  said  lord's 
daughter.  I  don't  know  the  name  of  my  progenitor  (the  given 
name),  or  the  name  of  the  lord  or  his  daughter.  Please  try  to  learn 
what  each  of  their  names  were,  when  married  and  where,  and  where 
the  lord  resided,  the  names  of  his  children  and  grandchildren  down 
to  my  father,  what  my  father's  name  was  and  when  he  died,  in  fact, 
all  that  can  be  gained  in  regard  to  the  genealogy  of  my  family.  If 
you  will  do  so,  I  will  be  under  lasting  obligations  to  you,  although  a 
stranger. 

If,  upon  a  revision  of  my  MSS.  for  this  work,  I  pre- 
serve these  communications  for  permanent  reference,  it 
is  in  the  hope  that  I  may  be  passed  over  by  that  great 

56  CORRESPONDENCE  OF  THE  EDDYS. 

company  of  idle  persons,  who  employ  the  time  that 
hangs  heavy  upon  their  hands  to  persecute  those  of 
their  fellow-men  who  are  temporarily  thrust  before  the 
view  of  the  public.  I  do  not,  for  one  moment,  admit 
the  right  of  those  who  have  never  fitted  themselves  for 
discussing  profound  subjects,  to  intrude  their  crude 
notions  and  inconsequential  personalities  upon  the 
busy  privacy  of  men  engaged  in  the  serious  concerns 
of  life. 

The  Eddys  get  such  letters  as  these  by  the  score, 
often  as  many  as  forty  or  fifty  by  every  mail,  and  I 
might  make  this  volume  more  humorous,  if  not  more 
interesting,  by  quoting  examples  ;  but  I  spare  the 
reader. 

I  have  been  greatly  impressed  by  this  evidence  of  the 
wide  interest  in  the  subject  of  Spiritualism;  as  I  have 
also  of  the  publicity  that  any  novel  or  exciting  story 
gains  by  re-publication  in  the  newspapers.  I  recollect 
that  Bayard  Taylor  told  me  once,  that  at  the  foot  of  the 
Himalayas,  in  a  garrison  library,  he  encountered  some  of 
his  own  works,  and  described  the  deep  impression  then 
made  upon  his  mind  of  the  responsibility  devolving  upon 
a  person  who  writes  for  the  press.  I  trust  I  shall  bear 
the  lesson  in  mind  in  all  that  is  written  for  these  pages. 

CHAPTER  IV. 

MOONLIGHT    MATERIALIZATIONS. 

UDE  and  uninviting  as  is  the  Eddy  house  itself,  its 
surrounding  landscape  is  truly  charming.  Lying  in 
a  valley,  it  affords  from  every  window  the  view  of 
grassy  slopes,  backed  by  mountain  peaks  that  catch  the 
drifting  clouds  on  days  of  storm,  and  on  those  of  sunshine 
take  on  rich  tints  of  purple  and  blue.  Just  back  of  the 
house  stretches  a  bottom  pasture  land,  whose  sod  is  so 
bright  a  green  that  I  have  wished  a  score  of  times  that  one 
of  the  Harts,  or  Smillie,  or  McEntee,  or  some  other  of 
our  landscapists  could  transfer  it  with  its  grazing  herd 
and  noble  background  to  canvas.  The  woods  are  just 
beginning  to  clothe  themselves  in  their  royal  autumn 
hues;  and  from  mountain  foot  to  summit,  crimson  and 
gold  mix  with  the  prevailing  mass  of  green,  like  jewels 
embroidered  on  nature's  robe  of  state.  But  there  appears 
to  be  slight  evidence  that  this  scenery  has  exercised  an 
ennobling  effect  upon  the  inhabitants.  They  are  usually 
a  prosaic  set,  and  I  have  vainly  watched  for  any  respons- 
ive glow  when  I  have  called  their  attention  to  the  natural 
beauties  around  us.     The  Eddys  themselves  form  rather 

57 

5 8  THE  SURROUNDINGS. 

an  exception  to  the  rule.  True,  they  waste  no  enthusiasm 
upon  their  familiar  hills  and  valley,  but  the  tenderness  of 
their  hearts  is  shown  in  the  gathering  of  pet  pigeons, 
dogs,  parrots,  ducks,  and  chickens,  about  them,  and  their 
innate  refinement,  by  the  hours  snatched  from  menial 
toil,  to  water  and  trim  their  plants  and  flowers.  The 
neighboring  graveyard  is  a  neglected  plot  of  weeds,  but 
their  family  enclosure  is  bordered  by  maples,  and  the 
graves  are  tended  by  loving  hands.  The  headstone  over 
poor  Mrs.  Eddy  is  so  characteristic  of  the  altered  view 
of  the  change  called  death  that  a  belief  in  Spiritualism 
begets,  that  I  give  a  sketch  of  it. 

English  visitors  to  this  place  would  find  abundant 
relaxation  in  long  walks  or  mountain  climbing,  but  we 
Americans  avail  ourselves  little  of  the  privilege.  In  the 
depths  of  the  woods  the  black  bear  stills  prowls ;  foxes 
abound  ;  sables,  mink,  raccoons,  hedgehogs,  and  occasion- 
ally panthers,  await  the  pursuit  of  the  hunter;  and 
speckled  trout  throng  the  cold  mountain  streams  to  a 
sufficient  extent  to  afford  sport  to  the  votaries  of  the  rod 
and  fly.  But  the  minds  of  the  people  who  come  from  far 
and  near  to  this  Vermont  homestead,  are  so  bent  upon 
the  pursuit  of  the  marvellous,  that  all  day  long  they  sit 
and  talk  of  last  night's  circle  and  past  wonderful  personal 
experiences,  until  one  fairly  gets  a  surfeit  of  the  subject. 

They  are  a  motley  crowd,  in  sooth.  Ladies  and  gentle- 
men; editors,  lawyers,  divines  and  ex-divines;  inventors, 
architects,  farmers ;  pedlers  of  magnetic  salves  and  myste- 
rious nostrums;  long-haired  men  and  short-haired  women; 
the  "  crowing  hens  "  of  Fowler,  and  the  cackling  cocks, 
their  fitting  mates ;  women  with  an  idea,  and  plenty  of  men 

THE   VISITORS  AT  THE  HOMESTEAD.  61 

and  women  without  any  to  speak  of;  people  of  sense  and 
people  of  nonsense ;  sickly  dreamers  who  prate  of 
"  interiors  '  and  "  conditions  "  and  "  spheres  "  as  intelli- 
gently as  a  learned  pig  or  a  chattering  magpie ;  clair- 
voyants and  "healers,"  real  and  bogus;  phrenologists, 
who  read  bumps  without  feeling  them,  under  "  spirit 
direction";  mediums  for  tipping,  rapping,  and  every 
imaginable  form  of  modern  spiritual  phenomena; 
"  apostles "  with  one  and  two  arms ;  people  from  the 
most  distant  and  widely-separated  localities;  nice,  clever 
people  whom  one  is  glad  to  meet  and  sorry  to  part  from ; 
and  people  who  shed  a  magnetism  as  disagreeable  as 
dirty  water  or  the  perfume  of  the  Fetis-Americanus. 
They  come  and  go,  singly  and  otherwise ;  some  after  a 
day's  stay,  convinced  that  they  have  been  cheated,  but 
the  vast  majority  astounded  and  perplexed  beyond  expres- 
sion by  what  their  eyes  have  seen  and  their  ears  heard. 

Through  all,  the  family  jog  on  in  the  even  tenor  of 
their  unsystematic  way,  receiving  new-comers  with  dis- 
trust, and  letting  life  slide  after  a  happy-go-lucky  fashion. 
Those  who  stay  longest  with  them  have  the  most 
confidence  in  their  mediumship,  for  they  discover  that 
their  external  misanthropy  and  curtness  are  the  outcome 
of  years  of  sorrow  and  injustice,  the  result  of  poor  educa- 
tion and  bad  training.  More  than  any  man  I  ever  met, 
William  Eddy  lives  an  interior  life  ;  and  to  be  in  relation, 
or  supposed  relation,  with  the  people  of  the  Silent  Land, 
seems  as  natural  to  him  as  it  ever  was  to  the  ecstatics  of 
the  early  centuries  or  the  recluses  of  Brahma. 

Among  the  few  favorite  localities  of  the  neighborhood 

are   "  Honto's   cave "  and   Santum's   grave,   of  both   of 
3 

6  2  "HON  TO 'S  CA  VE.n 

which  the  artist  has  supplied  illustrations  from  sketches 
taken  on  the  spot. 

The  term  cave  is  a  misnomer  in  this  instance,  for  the 
rude  apartment  by  which  the  sprightly  squaw's  memory 
will  be  perpetuated  is,  like  the  "Cave"  in  Central  Park, 
formed  by  the  leaning  of  one  great  fragment  of  rock 
against  another.  It  lies  in  dense  shadow  at  the  bottom 
of  a  ravine,  so  shrouded  in  foliage  that  the  cheerful  sun- 
light scarcely  penetrates  the  spot  even  at  high  noon.  A 
clear  mountain  brook  running  through  it  ceaselessly 
awakens  its  tiny  echoes,  and  the  surface  of  its  rocky  walls 
is  scarred  in  so  curious  a  manner  as  to  convey  the 
impression  that  the  furrows  are  the  half-effaced  inscrip- 
tions of  some  pre-historic  people.  A  path,  scarcely  prac- 
ticable for  a  wider  foot  than  that  of  the  chamois  or  the 
mountain  goat,  runs  along  one  of  the  steep  banks,  and 
the  wood  resounds  with   the  bubble   of  the   streamlet. 

The  sketch  of  the  cave  was  drawn  by  Mr.  Kappes 
from  nature,  the  figures  only  being  supplied  from  a 
published  account  of  a  spiritual  seance  held  there  on  the 
24th  of  May  1874,  and  the  descriptions  of  eye-witnesses. 
There  were  present  on  the  occasion  in  question,  among 
others  the  following  persons,  who  may  be  referred  to  in 
corroboration  of  my  story ;  Mr.  Andrew  Beebe,  Ludlow, 
Mass. ;  Charles  Wakefield,  Boston ;  James  Little,  Lake 
George,  N.  Y. ;  Mrs.  Caroline  Goss,  Hudson,  Wisconsin 
(West  Conson,  Horatio  wrote  it,  and  perhaps  "  Hudson  " 
means  Madison) ;  Mary  E.  Jewett  and  Albert  Frost, 
Rutland,  Vt. ;  and  the  Eddy  family. 

The  night  was  warm,  and  a  full  moon  rode  high  in  the 
heavens.  The  company  assembled  at  an  early  hour,  and 
seated  themselves  on  benches,  formed  by  laying  boards 

HONTO'S  CAVE 

INDIAN  GHOSTS.  65 

on  convenient  bowlders.  In  the  arched  mouth  of  the 
cave,  Messrs.  Saley  and  Frost  had  constructed  a  rude 
framework  of  joists,  to  support  a  curtain  of  shawls;  green 
branches  were  piled  in  the  farther  end,  so  as  to  form  a 
backing  ;  and  boards,  loosely  laid  across  the  little  brook, 
made  a  platform  upon  which  the  medium  might  sit  on  a 
camp-stool.  In  composing  his  sketch,  the  artist  has  been 
obliged  to  omit  the  curtain  and  most  of  the  bough  back- 
ing, so  as  to  permit  the  light  to  shine  through,  and  show 
the  arrangement  of  the  platform  and  framing. 

The  spectators  at  this  weird  gathering  sat    silent  for 
awhile,  and  the  stillness  of  the  forest  was  broken  only 
by    the   noise  of  the  brook,    the  chirp    of  insects,    and 
the  rustle  of  the  leaves  as  they  stirred  in  the  warm  wind 
of  spring.     Suddenly  the  curtain  was  pushed  aside,  and 
the  form  of  an  Indian,  fully  accoutred,  came  out,  stepped 
into  the  stream,  and,  stooping,  made  the  motion  of  drink- 
ing some  water  from  his   hand.     All  eyes  were  riveted 
upon  him,  when  some  one  suddenly  exclaimed  :  "  See ! 
— up  there — on  the  rock  !  "  and  high  overhead  appeared 
the  giant  spirit  form  of  Santum  in  bold  relief  against  the 
moonlit  sky.     Presently  an  Indian  squaw  was  seen  upon 
the  verge  of  the  rocky  ledge  to  the  right,  peering  down 
upon  the  startled  group.     Thus,  at  one  time,  three  ghostly 
visitors  were  in  sight,  and  while  the  audience  gazed,  all 
three  disappeared.     Then   successively  appeared  at  the 
cave's  mouth,  Honto,  who  knelt  and  made  as  if  drinking 
from  the  brook,  and  several  other  red  squaws  and  chiefs, 
each  dressed  after  his  or  her  own  fashion,  with  plumes 
and  beads,  and  the  other  braveries  these  simple  aborigines 
love  so  well ;   William  Eddy,  meanwhile,  talking  within 
the  cave  so  as  to  be  heard  by  all. 

66  SANTUM'S  GRAVE. 

A  spirit-voice  presently  called  out  that  they  had  been 
there  long  enough,  and  if  they  would  go  to  the  old  Indian 
camp-ground  hard  by,  more  wonders  would  be  shown 
them.  The  spot  indicated  is  a  level  plateau  not  far  from 
the  Eddy  house,  and  bears  the  traces  of  former  councils 
in  a  circle  of  ancient  hearths,  where,  beneath  the  sod,  are 
to  be  found  the  vestiges  of  fires  long  since  extinguished. 
Great  maples,  beeches,  and  here  and  there  an  oak,  stand 
about  the  camping  ground;  giant  sentinels,  beneath 
whose  shade,  within  the  memory  of  men  now  living,  the 
relics  of  once  powerful  tribes  were  accustomed  to  gather 
from  time  to  time  to  celebrate  their  feasts.  At  one  side 
a  flat  bowlder  set  on  end,  marks  the  spot  where  Santum  t 
(or,  perhaps,  in  view  of  his  frequent  appearance  before 
my  eyes  in  his  spiritual  form,  I  should  say  his  body)" was 
buried.  He  might,  if  one  familiar  with  the  classics  should 
suggest  it,  say  to  me  upon  some  occasion  when  we  should 
meet  in  presence  of  the  right  kind  of  a  medium,  what 
Socrates  did  to  his  friend  Crito,  when  asked  by  the  latter 
where  and  how  they  should  bury  him.  "  Bury  me  in  any 
way  you  please,  if  you  can  catch  me  to  bury.  .  .  .  Say,  rather, 
Crito,  say  if  you  love  me,  where  shall  you  bury  my  body." 

Santum's  tumulus  has  almost-  disappeared  under  the 
wash  of  a  thousand  rains,  and  a  large  maple,  whose 
trunk  at  four  feet  from  the  ground  measures  four  feet 
seven  inches  in  girth,  has  sent  its  roots  into  the  chief- 
tain's dust,  and,  for  aught  1  know,  may  have  incorpo- 
rated it  in  the  cells  and  fibres  of  its  own  heart.  Upon 
the  sketch  will  be  noticed  a  rude  cross  chiselled  in  the 
stone  by  one  of  the  Eddy  boys. 

But,  to  resume  our  story : 

AN  EDITOR  'S  GHOST.  67 

Our  wonder-seekers  having  reached  the  place  indi- 
cated by  the  spirit-voice,  hastily  improvised  a  "  cab- 
inet" by  pinning  some  shawls  around  the  trunks  of 
three  trees,  and  William  entered  it.     After  a  brief  in- 
terval, the  phantom  shape  of  Achsa  Sprague,  a  medium- 
istic  speaker  of  some  note  among  the  Spiritists,  emerged, 
and  in  a  natural  voice,  addressed  her  hearers  upon  the 
one  absorbing  topic  for  about  fifteen  minutes ;  her  form 
and  the  very  play  of  her  features  being  clearly  revealed 
in  the  bright  moonlight.     She  was  followed  by  Mrs. 
Goss'  brother,  who  walked  some  twenty  feet  from  the 
"  cabinet ;  *'  and  next  by  an  Indian,  who  ventured  a  like 
distance  away  from  his  medium,  and  then  swung  him- 
self up  on  the  branch  of  a  tree  and  vanished. 

The  evening's  wonders  closed  with  the  appearance 
of  the  spirit  of  the  late  William  White,  editor  of  the 
Banner  of  Light,  the  principal  organ  to  the  new 
creed.  Mr.  White  was  dressed  in  black  broad-cloth, 
and  had  on  a  white  shirt  with  studs  in  the  bosom, 
whereas  William  wore  his  usual  rough  working  suit, 
and  brown  check  shirt  without  collar  or  cuffs.  In  his 
hand  the  spirit  held  a  copy  of  the  journal  he  once 
edited,  which  he  opened,  and  showed  the  characteristic 
heading  that  the  publication  of  thirty-five  successive 
volumes  has  made  familiar  to  thousands  of  persons. 

The  next  morning  Messrs.  Saley  and  Swift  revisited 
the  cave  to  search  for  foot-prints  in  the  soft  earth,  at 
the  places  where  any  mortal  climbing  the  rocks  would, 
of  necessity,  have  trodden,  but  there  were  none  to  be 
seen.  The  spectres  had  materialized  themselves  on  the  spots 
where  they  had  respectively  been  seen. 

CHAPTER  V. 

PORTENTS    AND    MARVELS. 

IF  a  competent  person  were  to  collect  and  arrange  in 
picturesque  form  all  the  psychological  experiences  of 
the  Eddy  family,  as  related  by  them,  the  result  would 
be  a  book  of  as  romantic  interest  as  the  story  of  Zschokke's 
life.  But  I  hardly  think  that  the  mere  gift  of  clairvoyance, 
to  say  nothing  of  absolute  mediumship  can  be  esteemed 
a  great  personal  blessing.  I  doubt  if  man's  relations  to 
his  own  world  are  not  so  exacting  as  to  make  it  the 
reverse  of  beneficial,  at  least  to  himself,  to  be  in  constant 
and  close  sympathy  with  the  other.  The  visions  of  the 
lucide  are  beatific,  but  do  they  not  make  him  less  satisfied 
to  pursue  his  homely  round  of  duty  upon  re-awakening  ? 
If  one  goes  from  bright  sunshine  into  a  cellar  his  eye 
feels  the  darkness  more  dense  than  it  really  is.  The 
place  has  not  changed  since  he  last  left  it,  only  his  iris  is 
contracted. 

This  question  forces  itself  upbn  the  thoughtful 
observer  at  Chittenden  in  a  peculiar  manner.  Seeing 
and   hearing   so   many  marvels  in  connection  with  this 

family  and  its  history,  the  cut  bono  query  will  intrude  in 

68 

ARE  MEDIUMS  NECESSAR  Y?  69 

spite  of  oneself.  Granted  that  all  these  foreseeings, 
portents,  apparitions,  levitations,  obsessions,  physical  phe- 
nomena, and  materializations  have  occurred,  in  what 
respect  have  they  profited  the  seers  and  mediums  ?  What 
good  have  they  reaped  from  them  ?  And  if  the  answer 
is  none,  then  why  should  they  be  made  the  victims  of 
the  visits  of  good  angels  or  the  pranks  of  evil  spirits  ? 
These  are  questions  easily  asked — any  child  might  ask 
them — but  who  can  answer? 

Except — and  perhaps  this  is  the  true  solution — that  if 
there  is  such  a  thing  as  a  Spirit  World ;  and  that  that 
world  can  get  into  relations  with  us ;  and  that  it  is  the 
complement  and  fruit,  the  outcome  and  essence,  the  last 
distillation  of  all  things  and  forms  and  potencies  that  we 
know  of ;  and  it  is  essential  for  man's  progress  that  he 
should  be  assured  of  immortality — then,  in  such  case, 
people  constituted  like  these  Eddys  are  necessary  to  the 
general  welfare,  and  must  be  content  to  suffer  and  even 
die  in  the  interest  of  the  race.  It  requires  a  rare  eleva- 
tion of  character  to  cheerfully  endure  martyrdom;  and  if 
William  and  Horatio  and  Mary  and  Delia  and  Webster, 
have  grown  sensitive,  fretful,  and  morose  in  the  course  of 
all  these  leaden-footed,  sorrow-burdened  years,  I,  for  one, 
cannot  blame  them.  I  am  just  selfish  enough  to  ask 
Heaven  to  preserve  me  from  the  like  experience ! 

Now  if  any  of  my  valued  friends  among  the  men  of 
science,  here  and  abroad,  should  feel  disposed  to  stop 
reading  just  at  this  point,  because  I  seriously  discuss  these 
psychological  phenomena  as  objective  and  not  subjective, 
it  will  be  a  pity ;  for  if  they  went  to  this  homestead  on  a 
vacation  visit,  and  set  to  work  without  fear  or  favor  to 

70  MAGNETISM  AND  MESMERISM. 

observe,  classify,  analyze,  and  describe  what  they  heard, 
saw,  and  felt,  they,  too,  might  find  themselves  flinging 
their  pre-conceived  notions  behind  the  grate,  and  calling 
things  by  their  righfe  names. 

The  case-hardened  skeptic,  driven  like  me,  from  his 
first  position  of  ascribing  all  these  Eddy  phenomena  to 
trickery,  and  anxious  to  believe  anything  or  everything 
rather  than  admit  them  to  be  spiritualistic,  will  ask  me 
to  try  if  they  are  not  electrical,  magnetic,  mesmeric  or 
odic  in  their  character.  Failing  all  these,  he,  who  prob- 
ably never  before  allowed  the  idea  of  a  personal  devil  to 
be  mentioned  without  rebuke,  may,  as  a  Rutland  editor 
did  the  other  day  in  a  conversation  we  held  together, 
say,  it  is  all  the  work  of  the  Father  of  Lies  himself.  This 
is  good  sound  Catholic  doctrine,  and  an  impregnable 
refuge.  Does  not  Chrysostom  say :  Quod  est  in  terra  in 
terra  maneat,  si  non  a  diabolo  exfossicm  ?  Having  this  in 
view,  did  not  Bishop  Viviers,  in  a  pastoral  letter  published 
in  the  Roman  Catholic  Guardian  in  1868,  remark  :  "  Doubt- 
less there  are  relations  between  the  intelligence  of  men 
and  the  supernatural  world  of  spirits,  *  but 

they  (/.  e.  the  faithful)  should  not  less  certainly  be  con- 
vinced that  these  experiments  are  one  of  the  thousand 
ruses  of  Satan  to  cause  souls  to  perish  ?  " 

Now,  as  to  the  matter  of  electricity,  that,  as  I  have 
before  observed,  has  long  since  been  settled  in  the  negative 
by  Professor  Hare,  Mr.  Varley,  Mr.  Crookes,  and  others ; 
while  the  Committee  of  the  London  Dialectical  Society 
cover  the  whole  ground  by  saying  that :  "  No  philosophi- 
cal explanation  of  them  has  yet  been  arrived  at."  As  to 
animal   magnetism,  the  Society's  sub-committee   No.    2 

UNIVERSAL  BELIEF  IN  SPIRITS.  71 

report  that  they  "  have  not  discovered  any  conditions 
identical  with  those  ordinarily  deemed  necessary  to  the 
production  of  the  so-called  electro-biological  or  mesmeric 
phenomena — but  often  the  reverse."  And  as  to  their 
being  the  product  of  odic  anterior  causes,  the  great  dis- 
coverer of  Od  himself  ought  to  be  good  authority. 

Baron  von  Reichenbach  attended  a  circle  in  London, 
the  striking  incidents  of  which  he  has  described ;  and 
he  adds  that  he  regards  "  the  great  influences  of  Od  upon 
the  human  spirit  as  the  mere  physical  side  of  the  matter 
— the  roots  by  which  it  adheres  firmly  to  the  ground;  " 
and  he  is  thankful  to  see  the  day  when  all  his  former 
discoveries  show  themselves  as  the  portal  through  which 
it  is  possible  for  him  "  to  go  forward  into  the  spiritual 
department."     (Epes  Sargent's  "  Planchette,"  p.  241.) 

Where  will  we  land,  then,  but  in  the  camp  of  the 
enemy — in  the  arms  of  the  Spiritists  ?  Well,  if,  like  Saul 
of  Tarsus,  we  are  to  be  knocked  off  our  high  horses  of 
prejudice  and  unbelief,  and  blinded  by  the  great  new 
light  that  is  to  pour  upon  us  from  the  "gates  ajar,"  let  us 
at  least  console  ourselves  that  we  are  only  getting  back 
to  where  our  ancestors  and  the  ancestors  of  the  whole 
race  stood  from  the  remotest  ages.  The  Hindoo  Vedas, 
Puranas,  Bhagavat-Gita,  and  Ramayanas ;  the  Chinese 
Confucian  writings ;  the  Koran ;  the  discourses  of  the 
Roman  and  Grecian  sages ;  the  Egyptian  records  ;  the 
Persian  Zend-Avesta;  the  Jewish  Kabbala;  and,  lastly, 
the  Christian  Bible,  attest  that  a  belief  in  the  ministration 
of  good  and  evil  spirits  prevailed  among  all  peoples,  in 
all  times.  These  Eddys  hear  spirit-voices  calling  to 
them  in  the  night-watches,  and  I  myself  have  heard  them 
3 

72  /  ANCIENT  MEDIUMS. 

in  the  circle-room  singing,  whispering,  and  delivering  dis- 
courses upon  their  spirit-life.  This  is  strange,  no  doubt, 
and  hard  to  believe,  but  it  is  no  new  experience. 

Herodotus  mentions  an  Egyptian  monarch  who  returned 
to  earth  some  time  after  his  physical  death  and  talked  to 
his  people ;  the  famous  statue  of  Memnon  at  Thebes, 
which  gave  forth  melodious  sounds  when  first  struck  by 
the  sun's  morning  rays,  was  so  haunted  by  the  invisibles, 
that  spirit-voices  and  spirit-music  were  heard  issuing 
from  it  for  ages.  Strabo,  ^Elius  Gallus,  Demetrius,  and 
others  attest  this  fact. 

J.  M.  Peebles,  tells  in  his  scholarly  book,  of  the  man 
Agrippa,  of  the  XVth  Century,  who  was  not  more 
remarkable  for  his  knowledge  of  languages  and  wide 
range  of  scholarship  than  for  his  spiritual  gifts.  When 
at  the  Court  of  John  George,  Elector  of  Saxony,  with 
the  great  Erasmus,  he  was  solicited  to  call  up  the 
spirit  of  Tully.  Arranging  his  audience  (as  these 
Eddys  arrange  theirs),  he  caused  Tully  to  appear  upon 
the  rostrum,  where  he  repeated  his  oration  for  Roscius 
"  with  such  astonishing  animation,  exaltation  of  spirit,  ' 
and  soul-stirring  gestures,  that  all  present,  like  the 
Romans  of  old,  were  ready  to  pronounce  his  client 
innocent  of  every  charge  brought  against  him." 

The  mere  quotation  of  Bible  passages  narrating  the 
visits  of  talking  and  dumb  spirits  to  men,  would  make 
a  chapter  by  itself;  so  I  will  merely  refer  to  a  few  that 
I  find  enumerated  in  a  stray  volume  (Peebles'  "  Seers 
of  the  Ages  " )  loaned  me  from  a  neighboring  house, 
at  the  time  these  lines  were  written.  They  are  :  Gene- 
sis xix.,  i ;  xviii.,  1-2  ;  xxxii.,  xvi.,  7  ;  Ex.  iii.;  1  Kings, 

ANIMALS  AS  MEDIUMS.  75 

xix.,  5  ;  Num.  xxii.,31 ;  1  Sam.  xxviii.,  14;  Jobiv.,  14-17; 
Dan.  ix.,  21;  x.,  9-10;  x.,  18;  viii.,  15-16;  Acts  vii., 
35;  Ezekiel  viii.,  2;  xi.,  1.  I  have  recently  read  over 
again  with  singular  interest,  the  passage  in  1  Samuel, 
above  cited,  as  it  so  well  describes  the  process  of 
"  materialization "  of  which  I  have  seen  so  many- 
examples   at  the  Eddys'. 

The  experiences  of  these  wonderful  Eddys,  duplicate 
those  of  ancient  mediums  to  so  minute  a  degree, 
that  even  their  dumb  animals  have  been  made  to 
speak  after  the  fashion  of  Balaam's  ass.  They  killed, 
a  while  ago,  by  accident,  an  old  goose  which  used 
to  get  under  the  windows,  some  stormy  night  and 
say,  in  sepulchral  tones,  "  God  save  my  poor  gos- 
lings !  "  and  "  Oh,  dear!  what  shall  I  do  ?"  and  some- 
times cry  out  "Murder!"  Horatio  Eddy,  in  telling 
me  this  tough  yarn,  said  that  of  course  he  did  not 
believe  that  the  bird's  organs  of  speech  were  so 
changed  that  it  could  utter  words  like  a  Christian, 
but  that  "  George  Dix "  or  some  other  jovial  spirit 
"  materialized  "  a  voice  close  to  the  creature's  mouth. 
William  Eddy  and  several  other  witnesses  assure  me 
that  the  story  is  no  lie,  they  having  heard  the  voice  not 
once,  but  frequently. 

My  friend,  Richard  A.  Proctor,  in  one  of  his  astro- 
nomical lectures,  told  us  that  so  far  from  the  expanse 
of  heaven  being  the  abode  of  peace  and  quiet,  it  was 
the  scene  of  terrific  commotion  and  violence  —  thus 
destroying  many  pretty  conceits  of  the  poets.  In  like 
manner  our  notions  of  the  future  life  are  rudely  dis- 
turbed by  the  Eddy  phenomena  and  others  of  like 

76       EXPLANA  TIONS  B  Y  PLEA SANT  A  UTHORS. 

character.     It  is  no  longer  a  Valley  of  Shadows  and 

repose,   but   a   busy   scene   of    domestic    occupation; 

while  the    singing  and   talking  phantoms   call    upon 

Longfellow  to  re-write  his  "  Song  of  the  Silent  Land," 

for  it  seems  a  land  of  speech  and  song,    of  music  and 

poetry 

"  O  Land  !     O  Land  ! 

For  all  the  broken-hearted, 

The  mildest  herald  by  our  fate  allotted, 

Beckons,  and  with  inverted  torch  doth  stand 

To  lead  us  with  a  gentle  hand 

Into  the  land  of  the  great  Departed  ; 

Into  the  Silent  Land." 

I  have  to  laugh  when  I  recall  Proctor's  owly  wisdom 
(see  his  "  Borderland  of  Science  ")  in  explaining  away 
all  ghosts,  by  the  discovery  that  the  supposed  shade  of 
a  certain  dear  one  at  his  bedside,  resolved  itself  into  a 
student  gown  and  rowing-belt.  He  is  a  jolly  compan- 
ion and  an  honorable  fellow,  and  if  he  could  stop  at 
Chittenden  one  week  with  me,  I  warrant  he  would  not 
only  take  a  more  cheerful  view  of  the  other  life,  but 
write  a  new  volume  ;  perhaps,  with  the  title  "  Another 
World  than  Ours."  And  my  most  valued  correspond- 
ent, Mr.  Charles  W.  Upham,  author  of  the  noble  work 
on  Salem  Witchcraft,  who  so  complacently  argues 
away  all  supernatural  causes  for  the  phenomena  of 
1692  by  crediting  Tituba,  Ann  Proctor,  and  the  other 
"  Afflicted  Children "  with  a  thaumaturgic  deftness 
that  would  entitle  them  to  rank  with  the  greatest  of 
Chinese  jugglers — how  amazed  would  he  not  be  to  "sit 
beside  me  and  see  not  only  living  materialized  spirits, 
but  even  evanescent  animals  and  flowers  produced  ! 

DISCOMFITURE  OF  A    TRIO.  77 

This  is  a  bad  place  for  materialists  in  general,  and  if 
Tyndall  should  gome  to  this  country  again  he  had  best 
avoid  Chittenden.  We  had  three  of  the  kind  there  with- 
in a  week— a  lawyer,  an  artist,  and  an  inventor.  When 
they  first  came  they  were  as  spry  with  their  arguments. as 
though  fresh  from  the  reading  of  Vogt,  Moleschott,  or 
Feuerbach  ;  denying,  as  Epes  Sargent  expresses  it,  with 
the  asperity  of  partisanship,  all  evidences  of  a  psychical 
nature  in  man,  and  seeming  to  take  it  as  a  personal 
affront  if  credited  with  immortal  souls. 

But  when  these  intelligent  men  sat  evening  after  even- 
ing and  saw  an  average  of  a  dozen  ghosts  a  night  stand 
in  their  presence,  and  show  delight  at  being  recognized 
by  their  personal  friends,  and  actually  heard  some  of 
them  speak  in  clear,  natural  voices,  their  discomfiture  was 
comical  to  behold.  Tied  to  the  anchorage  of  years  of 
skepticism,  unable  to  drift  away  into  the  open  sea  that 
suddenly  lay  before  them— an  Atlantic  of  thought  with 
unknown  countries  beyond  it— their  little  shallops  fell  to 
rocking  and  pitching  them  about,  until  they  seemed  in 
direful  plight.  One,  the  toughest  customer  of  the  three, 
the  inventor,  saw  several  of  his  family  connection  and 
was  converted  from  unbelief;  the  second,  the  lawyer, 
and  a  man  of  fine  intellectual  powers,  departed,  big  with 
essays  against  all  religions,  and  halting  between  two 
opinions ;  the  artist  is  still  thinking. 

It  would  be  amusing,  if  it  were  not  pitiful,  to  see  men 
able  to  put  two  grammatical  sentences  together,  writing 
crude  criticisms  and  propagating  falsehoods  about  the 
Eddy  manifestations,  miles  away  from  the  place.  They 
must  concede   some  shrewdness  and  common-sense  to 

78  HOSTILITY  OF  THE  CHURCH. 

others,  and  conceive  the  possibility  that  it  may  be  as  hard 
to  humbug  me  as  themselves. 

I  have  already  said  that  there  are  things  about  the 
mediums,  their  antecedents,  and  their  phenomena,  to 
arouse  distrust.  But  let  any  fair  man  stay  there  a  week 
or  two,  take  time  to  hear  both  sides  of  every  story,  and 
watch  what  occurs,  and,  my  word  for  it,  he  will  carry  away 
food  for  reflection  to  last  him  the  rest  of  his  natural  life. 

It  is  difficult  to  understand  the  hostility  of  the  Church, 
whose  aggressive  side  is  so  well  shown  in  the  behavior 
of  the  Methodist  neighbors  of  the  Eddys,  to  Spiritism, 
for  is  it  not  its  keenest  and  strongest  weapon  of  offence 
against  the  materialists?  Against  a  class  of  profound 
thinkers,  who  exclude  Faith  and  demand  sensuous  proofs 
of  the  future  existence  of  man,  what  argument  can  be 
adduced  but  the  fact  that  our  friends  actually  re-visit  us 
after  death  and  talk  to  us  face  to  face  ?  Is  not  the  spread 
of  materialism  the  direct  consequence  of  the  exclusion  of 
facts  which,  if  true,  this  modern  Spiritism  has  re-veri- 
fied, from  religious  creeds  and  scientific  consideration  ? 

In  the  early  days  of  the  Church  the  ministration  of 
spirits  was  unhesitatingly  believed  by  the  Fathers,  and 
the  Catholic  body  holds  to  it  to  this  day.  Protestantism 
apparently  made  its  fatal  mistake  when  it  scouted  it, 
and  it  might  have  been  better  for  Calvin  and  Luther  if 
they  had  honestly  confessed  that  their  own  personal 
experiences  in  this  direction  were  something  else  than 
the  work  of  the  devil.  If  modern  Spiritualism  should 
prove  true,  their  followers  would  be  in  the  condition 
well-defined  by  Beattie : 

"  So  fares  the  system-building  sage, 
Who,  plodding  on  from  youth  to  age, 

PHENOMENA  OF  APPARITIONS,  79 

Has  proved  all  other  reasoners  fools, 
And  bound  all  nature  by  his  rules ; 
So  fares  he  in  that  dreadful  hour 
When  injured  Truth  exerts  her  power 
Some  new  phenometton  to  raise, 
Which,  bursting  on  his  frightened  gare, 
From  its  proud  summit  to  the  ground, 
Proves  the  whole  edifice  unsound." 

But  let  us  leave  polemics  to  the  doctors  and  return 
to  our  story. 

Writers  upon  the  subject  that  we  are  now  discussing, 
offer  various  hypotheses  to  account  for  the  production 
of  visible  spectral  forms,  by  the  beings  of  the  other 
world.  Some  contend  that  they  are  created  out  of  the 
subtle  particles  existing  in  the  atmosphere,  and  have  a 
positive,  if  evanescent,  material  existence ;  while  others 
deny  their  actuality  and  attribute  their  being  seen 
to  psychological  control  of  our  natural  senses  of 
sight,  hearing,  and  touch;  in  like  manner  as  the 
mesmerist  obliges  his  patient  to  see,  hear,  taste,  and 
feel  whatsoever  he  may  call  up  in  his  own  mind.  In 
my  opinion,  of  course  supposing  that  the  tales  are  not 
bald  fiction,  the  phenomena  may  be  grouped  into  two 
classes — apparitions  seen  only  by  one  or  more  sensi- 
tives or  lucides,  and  those  visible  to  all  without  regard 
to  their  lucidity;  and  they  should  be  separately 
considered. 

The  experiences  of  the  Eddys  are  of  both  kinds. 
Sometimes  a  phantom  has  been  seen  only  by  the  sick 
or  dying;  sometimes  by  those  in  health,  as  forerun- 
ners of  disaster  impending  over  themselves  or  others; 
and  sometimes  in  the  materialized  condition,  so  that 
everybody  in  the  house,  believers  as  well  as  unbelievers, 

80  THE  PHANTOM  CARRIAGE. 

perceived  them  equally  well.  The  occurrence  illus- 
trated in  the  sketch  of  the  phantom  carriage  was  of 
this  character.  On  a  cold  winter  night,  just  before 
bed-time,  the  family  were  gathered  in  the  sitting- 
room,  when  they  heard  the  noise  of  a  carriage  coming 
rapidly  along  the  road  from  the  northward.  The 
circumstance  was  so  strange,  the  ground  being  covered 
with  snow  which  would  prevent  the  noise  of  wheels 
being  heard,  that  all  went  to  the  front  windows  to 
look.     A  full  moon, 

"  *    *     *     shining  bright  on  the  new-fallen  snow, 
Gave  a  lustre  of  mid-day  to  objects  below ;" 

— and  they  saw  an  old-fashioned,  open  carriage,  drawn 

by  a  pair  of  white  horses  with  plumes  on  their  heads, 

turn  rapidly  into  the  yard  and  stop. 

Rushing  to  the  back  door  and  flinging  it  open, 
there  stood  the  equipage  before  their  astonished  eyes. 
On  the  back  seat  was  a  lady,  dressed  in  Scotch  plaid 
and  furs,  with  a  feather  in  her  bonnet.  She  looked 
kindly  at  them  and  bowed,  but  said  nothing.  On  his 
high  box  sat  the  driver,  a  thistle  cockade  in  his  hat 
and  a  capacious  coat  with  a  standing  collar  muffling 
him  to  his  chin.  Every  buckle  and  trapping  of  the 
harness  was  plainly  revealed  by  the  moonlight,  and 
even  the  ornamental  scroll-work  on  the  coach-panels. 

The  family,  with  characteristic  rustic  bashfulness, 
said  nothing,  waiting  for  the  grand  lady  to  manifest 
her  pleasure.  No  one  doubted  for  an  instant  the  real- 
ity of  what  they  saw,  and  even  the  skeptical  and  hard- 
hearted father  moved  to  the  door  so  as  to  be  ready  to 
do  what  might  be  required  for  the  belated  traveler. 

A  PORTENT  OF  DEATH.  83 

But,  as  all  eyes  were  fixed  upon  her,  she  and  her  equip- 
age began  to  fade.  The  garden  fence  and  other  objects, 
previously  concealed  behind  the  opaque  bodies  of  the 
carriage  and  horses,  began  to  show  through,  and  in  a 
moment  the  whole  thing  vanished  into  the  air,  leaving 
the  spectators  lost  in  amazement.  Old  Mr.  Eddy  at 
once  exclaimed  that  his  wife  and  her  mother  had  been 
up  to  some  of  their  devilish  witchcraft  again  ;  but  they 
knew  that  it  was  a  portent  of  somebody's  death.  The 
boys,  then  only  ten  or  twelve  years  old,  ran  for  the 
lantern  and  searched  all  over  the  road  and  yard  for 
wheel-tracks,  but  their  quest  was  fruitless.  The  phan- 
toms had  disappeared,  without  leaving  the  slightest 
impression  on  the  snow.  Two  months  later  the  grand- 
mother died. 

Although  I  dislike  to  break  the  sequence  of  my  nar- 
rative, I  will  state,  that  in  a  circle  one  night  I  held  a 
conversation  about  this  apparition  with  a  spirit-voice, 
which  informed  me  that  the  phantom  lady  was  a  Scotch 
ancestress  of  Mrs.  Eddy,  who  came  to  warn  them  of 
old  Mrs.  MacComb's  death.  And  since  then,  at  another 
seance,  Mrs.  Eddy  herself  confirmed  the  fact. 

Portents  have  occurred  before  the  death  of  each  mem- 
ber of  the  family,  but  always  entirely  different  in  char- 
acter from  the  predecessors,  and  happening  unexpect- 
edly. Mrs.  Eddy,  the  mother  of  these  children, 
deceased  in  1873  after  a  lingering  illness.  During  the 
whole  time  she  lay  in  bed,  manifestations  of  the  pres- 
ence of  the  departed  were  frequent.  When  the  surviv- 
ing children  were  wearied  out  with  watching,  Mrs. 
Eddy  would  send  them  to  bed  under  the  pretence  that 

84  DEA  TH  OF  MRS.  EDD  Y. 

she  needed  quiet,  and  they,  watching  secretly,  would 
see  their  dead  sister  Miranda's  spirit  in  materialized 
form,  doing  the  necessary  offices  for  the  invalid.  They 
would  hear  her  talking  with  their  motherland  when  it 
was  necessary  to  turn  her,  the  spirit,  with  the  help  of 
other  spirits,  would  do  it. 

One  day,  as  they  sat  at  dinner,  soft  strains  of  music 
came  through  the  open  door,  and  going  outside,  they 
heard  sweet  airs  played  at  the  corner  of  the  house,  by 
an  invisible  harp  and  flute,  the  sound  gradually  reced- 
ing and  dying  away  on  the  air.  A  week  before  she 
breathed  her  last,  her  own  dead  mother,  to  warn  whom 
the  phantom  lady  came  in  her  unsubstantial  coach, 
appeared  in  materialized  form  to  them  all,  bearing  a 
basket  of  white  roses  in  her  hand.  She  told  them  that 
Mrs.  Eddy  would  soon  come  "  over  the  river  "  to  her, 
and  she  was  waiting  to  welcome  her  on  the  farther 
shore.  The  old  lady  wore  the  same  dress  as  in  life  — 
a  brown  woolen  frock,  a  round  calico  cape,  a  check 
apron,  and  a  cap  on  her  head ;  her  scissors  hung  as 
usual  at  her  side,  and  no  detail  was  lacking  to  make 
her  identification  complete.  She  left  a  message  for 
Horatio,  to  the  effect  that  many  years  before,  when 
about  starting  on  a  journey,  she  had  hidden  a  string 
of  gold  beads  in  a  snuff-box  in  the  cellar  wall ;  and 
directed  him  to  find  it  and  give  the  necklace  to  his 
youngest  sister  to  wear  for  her  sake.  Search  was  made, 
off  and  on,  for  several  months,  and  finally  the  box  and 
contents  were  discovered  by  Horatio  behind  a  stone  in 
the  north  side  of  the  cellar  wall.  The  artist  has 
sketched  them,  and  they  accompany  this  chapter. 

C/?.4/voM0T//£tfs  /l/i'r/qs/^ *%?CA. 

*m 

f1 

#%Am\mx  -?: 

! 

%\      f 

! 

m  ■ 

m 

m  iii 

[fll  Jl-tjij! 

Zf.-e/v^/y/^/.^/rs  J/ys/w  <3,;>r. 

HIDDEN    TREASURES. 

I 

THE  SPIRIT'S  PORTRAIT.  87 

Horatio,  just  before  his  mother's  decease,  was  absent 
from  home,  and  at  her  request  was  sent  for.  Delia 
went  to  the  table  and  wrote  the  letter  of  recall ;  and, 
leaving  it  open  while  searching  for  an  envelope  in 
another  room,  she  found  upon  her  return  that  a  post- 
script had  been  added  by  the  spirit  of  Miranda,  and  signed 
with  her  familiar  autograph.  The  good  lady  finally- 
closed  her  eyes  upon  the  scene  of  so  much  misery  and 
suffering ;  but  she  did  not  go  far  away,  for  before  the 
funeral  she  "  materialized  "  in  Delia's  presence,  and 
directed  her  to  remove  the  crape  they  had  hung  on  the 
door,  there  being,  she  said,  occasion  for  rejoicing  rather 
than  for  mourning. 

How  she  looked  on  this  occasion  I  can  perfectly 
understand,  for  I  have  seen  her  "  materialized  "  on 
several  occasions,  and  heard  her  speak,  as  I  will  more 
fully  describe  in  a  future  chapter. 

Mr.  Owen  relates,  at  pages  328  and  329  of  his 
"Debatable  Land,"  three  cases  of  ghostly  wagons  and 
carriages  being  heard  in  England  and  the  United 
States,  but  they  were  not  precursors  of  death.  Neither 
was  the  frightful  apparition,  related  by  Mrs.  Crowe,  in 
her  "  Night  Side  of  Nature,"  page  413,  of  the  horse  and 
cart  at  Haverhill,  Mass.,  with  its  fierce-looking  driver 
and  the  fearful  gray-haired  woman  lashed  to  the  cart, 
writhing  and  struggling  to  get  free. 

Nor  the  "Wild  Troop  of  Rodenstein,"  a  spectral  rob- 
ber band,  that  at  certain  times  swept  along  the  road 
between  the  castles  of  Rodenstein  and  Schnellert ;  invisi- 
ble, but  making  the  ground  shake  and  the  air  resound 
with   the  noise   of  their  phantom  horses  and  carriages, 

88  SPECTRAL  BEASTS. 

and  barking  dogs  and  cracking  whips.  Nor  the  herds  of 
ghostly  beasts,  driven  by  a  spectral  herdsman  accompa- 
nied by  his  long-haired,  black  dog,  that  cross  the  coun- 
try in  another  part  of  Germany. 

These  instances  serve  to  show  that  something,  call  it 
spirits  or  what  we  will,  has  the  power  to  call  into  a 
temporary  but  altogether  deceptive  existence,  the  forms 
of  animals,  carriages  and  men ;  and  my  object  in  refer- 
ring to  them  is  to  divest  the  phantom-carriage  incident, 
in  the  Eddy  family  history,  of  much  of  the  air  of  improb- 
ability that  it  would  have  if  suffered  to  stand  alone 
without  the  citation  of  similar  phenomena  happening 
elsewhere. 

The  discovery  of  the  law  by  which  these  things  can 
be  made  to  occur,  is  among  the  most  interesting  of  the 
results  that  promise  to  reward  the  labors  of  the  scien- 
tific investigator.  When  it  is  demonstrated  how  motion 
can  be  conveyed  to  the  phantasmal  imitations  of  inani- 
mate objects,  like  a  wagon,  and  life  be  temporarily 
imparted  to  the  ghostly  shapes  of  animals,  it  will  evi- 
dently be  necessary  for  us  to  reconstruct  our  present 
beliefs  as  to  the  nature  of  force,  and  the  limits  of  its 
manifestation. 

CHAPTER   VI. 

MORE    PROPHETIC    WARNING. 

Y  narrative,  being  in  fact  a  narrative,  not  a  mere 
report  of  researches  in  the  phenomena  of  Spirit- 
ualism, will   embrace  things  personally  experi- 
enced, and  things  reported  to  me  by  credible  witnesses. 
Thus   three  of  my  chapters  have  told  the  story  of  the 
outer  life  of  the  Eddys,  and,  including  this  one,  two  have 
been  devoted  to  their  inner  life,  which  in  their  case  is 
the  more  pleasant  and  important  of  the  two.     "  In  their 
case  "  did  I  say  ?— why  not  in  every  case?     This  inner 
life,  with  its  hidden  mysteries,  its  undiscovered  laws,  its 
unmeasured    possibilities!       Why,    look    at    the    mere 
matter  of  the  memory.     When   I  was  last  in  England, 
Professor  F.    Crace    Calvert,   F.  R.  S.,  the   well-known 
carbolic-acid  exploiter,  told  me  a  curious  bit  of  personal 
history  that  occurs  to  me  just  at  this  juncture.     He  was 
born  in  England,  but  when  he   had  reached  the  age  of 
eleven,  his  father  took  up  his  residence  in  France,  and  ' 
for  twelve  years  the  boy  never  spoke  or  heard  spoken  a 
work   of   English.     Then    he   married    an    English   girl 
and   returned   home.     At   this   time,   when    he   was   at 

89 

90  LIVING  THREE  LIVES. 

work  with  grammar  and  dictionary  re-learning  his  mother- 
tongue,  of  which  he  had  wholly  lost  the  use,  he  talked 
nothing  but  English  in  his  sleep ;  and  his  wife  says  he 
talked  a  good  deal  of  it. 

Coleridge  mentions  a  somewhat  similar  case  in  his 
"  Biographia  Literaria,"  that  of  an  ignorant  girl,  who 
"  during  a  fever  talked  incessantly  in  Latin,  Greek,  and 
Hebrew;  and  who,  it  was  afterwards  discovered,  had 
lived  with  a  learned  man  who  was  a  great  Hebraist." 
Coleridge  says  of  the  wonderful  power  of  memory,  as 
suggested  by  this  case,  that  "  this,  perchance,  is  the  dread 
book  of  judgment,  in  the  mysterious  hieroglyphics  of  which 
every  idle  word  is  recorded." 

The  Eddys,  we  may  say,  live  three  distinct  lives : — 
one  external;  and  one  conscious  and  one  unconscious 
internal  life  The  first  is  the  common  lot  of  us  all;  in 
the  second  they  see  spiritual  things  while  otherwise  in 
their  normal  condition,  and  remember  what  they  see;  the 
third  is  the  state  of  deep  trance,  into  which  William 
invariably  enters  when  sitting  for  the  "  materializations ; " 
and  into  which  Horatio  and  the  others  fall  when  obsessed 
by  other  spirits  who  communicate  orally  to  their  personal 
friends,  or  when  levitated,  or  when  sitting  for  powerful 
physical  manifestations  in  the  light  or  dark. 

Upon  recovering  from  this  latter  condition,  the  medium 
seems  to  remember  nothing  that  has  befallen  him,  except 
upon  those  rare  occasions  when  William,  like  the  ancient 
Epimenides  and  Corfidius,  has  left  his  body  dead  and 
wandered  in  the  supernal  spheres,  bringing  back  accounts 
of  what  he  had  seen  and  heard  among  the  immortals. 

MYSTERIOUS  SHADOW  OF  MR.  EDDY.  91 

I  am  well  aware  that  the  materialization  of  spirits,  is 
what  the  public  is  most  anxious  to  hear  about,  but  I 
cannot  take  up  that  phase  of  the  subject,  before  at  least 
fkimming  the  surface  of  this  family  history  for  the  other 
marvellous  experiences  to  which  its  members  have  been 
subjected.  It  would  be  like  Columbus  returning  from  his 
gold  hunt  in  the  new  country  with  no  account  of  its 
geography,  fauna,  flora,  or  human  inhabitants.  The 
stories  I  am  recording  were  not  gathered  at  appointed 
sittings,  at  which  the  narrator  might  have  been  tempted 
to  stretch  fancy  to  help  make  literary  sensations ;  but  in 
general  social  conversation,  over  our  pipes  around  the 
evening  fire,  as  the  discussion  of  varied  topics  drew  them 
out.  And  in  every  case  they  have  been  attested  by 
more  than  one  witness.  For  the  present  we  will  occupy 
ourselves  with  more  familiar  phases  of  the  mediumship. 
There  will  be  abundant  opportunity  for  me  to  present  the 
materialization  question  in  its  most  novel  and  interesting 
aspects. 

We  were  upon  the  subject  of  portents  fore-running 
death,  and  in  my  last  chapter  I  described  some  that  befell, 
before  Mrs.  Eddy,  the  mother,  left  this  world  for  the 
other.  About  a  year  before  the  father  died,  he  retired 
one  night,  in  his  usual  health  to  his  sleeping-room  in  the 
L  part,  leaving  the  family  in  the  sitting-room.  In  a  few 
moments  they  were  startled  by  seeing  him,  or  what 
seemed  himself,  standing  in  the  door  leading  into  the 
front  hall,  with  his  outer  clothing  removed.  The  follow- 
ing diagram  will  show  that  it  was  impossible  for  him  to 
have  reached  the  place  without  passing  directly  through 

92 

A  SPIRIT  VISITOR. 

the  room  they  were  in,  and  so  account  for  their  alarm : 

A  is   the   sitting-room ;  B  Mr.  Eddy's  sleeping-room ; 
C  his  bed  ;  D  the  door  where  he  was  seen ;  E  fire-place. 

From  the  room  A  he  could  be  seen  by  the  family  lying  in 
his  bea^  and  yet,  there,  he  or  his  second  self  stood  at  the 
hall-door  !  Mrs.  Eddy  called  to  him  and  he  answered 
from  his  bed,  scolding  them  for  disturbing  him.  The 
silent  figure  was  then  nothing  less  than  his  "  double  "  or 
wraith. 

The  son  James  died  of  diphtheria  in  1862  in  the  north 
room  (marked  F  on  the  diagram).  A  week  before  the 
event  he  asked  his  mother  who  the  lady  was  who  came 
every  day  on  the  white  horse  to  visit  him.  She  thought 
his  mind  wandered,  and  set  to  pacifying  him,  saying  that 
there  was  no  lady  nor  any  white  horse,  and  he  must  not 
disturb  his  mind  with  such  fancies.  He  insisted  that 
there  was  a  lady,  and  that  she  rode  up  every  day  at  a 
certain  hour,  tied  her  horse  to  the  hitching-post  and  came 
and  sat  in  his  room,  waiting,  as  she  said,  for  him  to  come 
with  her.     The  mother  then  said  it  must  be  a  spirit,  but 

RECORD  OF  OTHER  PHANTOMS.  93 

he  declared  that  it  was  no  spirit,  but  a  living  person.  At 
this  very  time  Dr.  Ross,  of  Rutland,  the  attendant  phy- 
sician, prophesied  his  recovery,  but  the  mother  recognized 
the  phantom  rider  as  a  warning,  and  her  fears  were 
justified  a  few  days  later.  The  night  he  died  he  appeared 
to  his  brother  William,  then  a  lad  working  in  the  dairy 
on  Warren  Leland's  farm  in  Westchester  County,  N.  Y., 
and  who  started  for  home  before  the  next  dawn.  He 
reached  the  door  of  his  home  weeping  bitterly,  and 
anticipated  the  evil  tidings  by  saying  he  knew  all  about 
it  and  had  come  home  to  the  funeral. 

How  vividly  this  incident  recalls  the  case  of  the  two 
illustrious  friends,  Michael  Mercatus  and  Marcellinus 
Ficinus,  as  related  by  Baronius : 

After  a  long  discourse  upon  the  immortality  of  the  soul,  they 
mutually  pledged  their  word  that  whoever  should  die  first  would 
appear  to  the  survivor.  Shortly  after,  Mercatus  being  one  morning 
deeply  engaged  in  study,  heard  the  noise  of  a  horse  galloping  in  the 
street,  which  presently  stopped  at  his  door,  and  the  voice  of  Ficinus 
called  to  him,  "Oh,  Michael  !  oh,  Michael  !  vera  sunt  ilia —  those 
things  are  true  ! "  Rushing  to  the  window  and  flinging  open  the 
casement,  he  plainly  saw  his  friend  on  a  white  steed.  He  called 
after  him,  but  without  another  word  he  galloped  out  of  sight. 
Thereupon  he  sent  immediately  to  Florence  to  inquire  concerning 
his  friend's  health,  and  learned  that  he  died  about  that  hour  he 
called  to  him. 

Mrs.  Crowe  tells  of  an  Edinburgh  citizen  who, 
riding  gently  up  Corstcrphine  hill  one  day,  observed 
an  intimate  friend  of  his  own,  on  horseback  also, 
immediately  behind  him.  He  slackened  his  pace  to 
give  him  time  to  come  up,  but  presently  was  amazed 
to  find  no  one  in  sight,  although  there  was  no  side 
road  by  which  his  friend  could  have  departed.  Per- 
plexed in  mind  at  the  strange  circumstance,  he  returned 

94  STOR  Y  OF  MIRANDA  EDD  VS  DEA  TH. 

home  to  find  that  during  his  absence  his  friend  had 
been  killed  by  his  horse  falling  in  Candlemaker's 
Row. 

Again,  a  Yorkshire  farmer's  wife,  away  from  home, 
was  suddenly  seen  to  ride  into  the  farm  yard  on  horse- 
back and  then  disappear,  and  she  was  afterward  found 
to  have  died  at  that  precise  time. 

One  day,  before  Miranda  Eddy's  death,  the  family 
were  sitting  at  dinner,  when  suddenly  a  heavy  bell 
tolled  one,  in  the  air,  right  over  their  heads,  and  the 
reverberations  of  the  peal  died  away  while  they  listened 
for  the  stroke  to  be  repeated.  Miranda  saw  James  and 
Francis  in  the  spirit  and  gave  orders  for  her  own  tomb- 
stone. She  ordered  the  inscription  —  "Not  dead  but 
risen.  Why  seek  ye  the  living  among  the  dead  ?  "  — 
to  be  placed  upon  it.  The  survivors  declare  that  she 
was  the  greatest  medium  in  the  whole  family.  An  old 
woman  of  the  neighborhood,  who  has  the  same  passion 
for  laying  out  corpses  that  a  famous  New  York  thief, 
nicknamed  "  The  Chief  Mourner/'  had  for  attending 
funerals,  was  counting  upon  the  pleasant  job  Miranda 
was  soon  to  furnish  her,  but  the  dying  girl  said  the 
miserable  creature  should  never  close  her  eyes.  She 
made  her  mother  promise  that  no  one  but  she  should 
touch  her  body,  and  then  calmly  awaited  the  end.  As 
the  ebb  of  life  interfered  with  her  breathing,  Mrs. 
Stephen  Baird,  a  friendly  neighbor,  supported  her  in 
her  arms.  The  last  minute  arrived,  the  wrist  was 
pulseless,  and  the  last  gasp  was  being  taken,  when  the 
dead  right  arm  raised  itself,  and  the  dead  hand  dosed  the 
glazed  eyes.     Here  is  Mrs.  Baird's  own  certificate: 

DEA  Til  OF  FRANCIS  LIGIITFOOT  EDD  Y.         95 

Chittenden,  October  5th,  1874.— I  certify  that  I  was  present  on  the 
occasion  of  Miranda  Eddy's  death  ;  that  I  held  her  up  at  the  last 
moment  ;  and  that,  just  at  her  last  gasp,  her  arm  rose  and  her 
right  hand  closed  her  eyes."  Mary  Baird. 

Miranda  wrote  her  own  obituary  verses,  which,  at 

the  family's  request,  I  quote : 

"  There's  a  silence  in  parlor  and  chamber, 

There's  a  sadness  in  every  room  ; 
Tho'  we  know  't  was  the  Father  who  claimed  her,    v 

Yet  everything  's  burdened  with  gloom. 
But  we  will  not  be  comfortless  mourners, 
For  we  know  where  the  angels  have  borne  her, 
And  soon  we  shall  see  her  again." 

Francis  Lightfoot  Eddy  was  Orderly  Sergeant  of 
Company  G,  5th  Vermont  Volunteers,  in  the  late  war. 
He  contracted  a  heavy  cold  in  the  army  that  soon  ran 
into  quick  consumption,  and  the  poor  fellow  came 
home  to  die.  He  lay  sick  three  months,  but  three  days 
before  the  end  approached,  he  wrote  in  the  family 
Bible,  the  exact  day  and  hour  of  his  death.  A  fort- 
night previous  to  this,  the  family  heard  a  wagon  drive 
up  to  the  front  door,  one  evening,  the  latch  lifted  and 
the  button  turned,  and  they  saw  two  soldiers  bring  in 
a  coffin  and  place  it  in  the  entry,  and  then  retire  and 
drive  off  without  saying  a  word.  On  the  coffin  was 
a  plate  with  a  name  upon  it,  which  not  being  able 
to  read  in  the  obscurity,  they  went  for  a  candle ;  but 
upon  its  being  brought,  the  coffin  had  vanished  like 
its  mysterious  bearers.  When  Francis  died  they  sent 
to  Rutland  by  a  neighbor  for  his  coffin,  and  when  that 
was  brought,  it  was  the  counterpart  of  its  spectral 
double,  to  the  very  plate  and  nails. 

Francis  also  dictated  the  style  of  his  tombstone  and 
wished   it   to   bear   the    inscription,    "  passed    into    the 

CjG  A  CHILD  'S  DEA  TH  A  VER  TED. 

world  of  spirits,"  instead  of  the  usual  formula,  "  died." 
He  also  wanted  a  flag  carved  on  the  stone,  surmounted  by 
the  legend;  "  Freedom  at  last."  But  old  Mr.  Eddy  was 
bound  to  have  his  own  way  in  this  as  in  everything  else, 
and  set  up  a  stone  to  suit  himself.  This  enraged  the 
boy's  spirit  so  much  that  he  came  back  in  materialized 
and  unmaterialized  form,  and  annoyed  them  until  they 
replaced  the  obnoxious  marble  with  one  according  with 
his   dying  request. 

In  the  spring  of  1863  the  child  of  Sophia  Eddy,  wife  ot 
Sylvester  Chase,  of  Bennington,  Vt.,  lay  sick  at  the  old 
Eddy  homestead,  of  lung  fever.  Her  death  was  expected 
by  all,  and  Delia  ironed  a  white  dress  and  skirt  for  the 
little  girl  and  laid  them  away  in  the  mother's  trunk.  One 
evening  Horatio  went  out  to  the  penstock  for  water,  and, 
looking  up,  he  saw  his  own  room  in  the  second  story 
lighted  up  and  two  strange  old  women  walking  about, 
shaking  the  invalid's  dresses  and  busying  themselves  in' 
other  preparations,  apparently  for  the  coming  death.  He 
ran  up-stairs,  and,  opening  his  door,  found  a  table  set  in 
the  middle  of  the  floor,  covered  with  a  sheet  taken  from 
the  bed  and  on  it  the  child'  s  clothes,  which  had  been 
removed  from  the  trunk  in  another  room.  The  smoking 
wicks  of  two  candles  showed  the  source  of  the  light  he 
had  observed.  Knowing  by  experience  what  this  sort  of 
thing  meant,  he  came  down  and  told  the  watchers  that 
the  child  would  die,  The  mother  at  once  fell  into  a 
violent  convulsion,  which  ended  in  a  dead  faint.  Mean- 
while Horatio  had  gone  to  the  door  and  stood  watching 
the  re-lighting  of  the  candles  and  the  moving  about  of  the 
ghostly  women,  when,  just  as  Mrs.  Chase  had  fainted,  the 

CORROBORATIVE  TESTIMONY.  97 

light  was  extinguished,  there  was  a  rush  of  invisible  feet 

down  the  stairs  and  into  the  chamber,  and  the  child  soon 

began  to  mend  in  the  arms  of  William,  who  tended  the 

little  one  with  affectionate  care.     They  were  afterwards 

told  that  it  was  fully  expected  that  she  would  die,  and 

spirit  friends  had  gathered  there  to  receive  her,  but  the 

mother's  alarming  condition  induced  them  to  unite  their 

efforts  to  keep  alive  the  flickering  spark  of  life. 

Now,  please  bear  in  mind  that  all  these  portents  have 

had  their  prototypes  in  various  countries  at  various  times. 

The  books  are  full  of  them,  and  unless  we  choose  to  reject 

corroborative  testimony  of  a  character  and  to  a  degree 

that  would  substantiate  any  other  facts  in  any  court  of 

justice,  we  have  no  right  to  whistle  these  psychological 

phenomena  down  the  wind.     If  they  have  occurred  more 

frequently   than   might   be    wished   in   the   presence    of 

illiterate   and    plain   people  who  were   incapacitated    to 

observe  and  study  them  to  the  best  advantage,  it  is  only 

the  louder  call  upon  men  of  science  to  take  up  the  inquiry 

and  set  our  minds  at  rest.     Says    Mr.    Crookes   in  the 

Quarterly  Journal  of  Science  for  July,  1871  : 

"  It  argues  ill  for  the  boasted  freedom  of  opinion  among  scientific 
men,  that  they  have  so  long  refused  to  institute  a  scientific  investiga- 
tion into  the  existence  and  nature  of  facts  asserted  by  so  many  com- 
petent and  credible  witnesses,  and  which  they  are  freely  invited  to 
examine  when  and  where  they  please.  For  my  own  part  I  too  much 
value  the  pursuit  of  truth,  and  the  discovery  of  any  new  fact  in 
nature,  to  avoid  inquiry  because  it  appears  to  clash  with  prevailing 
opinions." 

These  are  noble  words,  and  worthy  of  consideration 

by  every  scientist  who  would  not  be  considered    an 

obstructionist  in  this  time  of  progress.     He  adds  in  the 

same  article: 

98  APA  THY  OF  SCIENTIFIC  MEN. 

"  I  confess  I  am  surprised  and  pained  at  the  timidity  or  apathy 
shown  by  scientific  men  in  reference  to  this  subject.  Some  little 
time  ago,  when  an  opportunity  for  examination  was  first  presented 
to  me,  I  invited  the  co-operation  of  some  scientific  friends  in  a  sys- 
tematic investigation  ;  but  I  soon  found  that  to  obtain  a  scientific 
committee  for  the  investigation  of  this  class  of  facts  was  out  of  the 
question,  and  that  I  must  be  content  to  rely  on  my  own  endeavors, 
aided  by  the  co-operation  from  time  to  time  of  a  few  scientific  and 
learned  friends  who  were  willing  to  join  in  the  inquiry." 

When  Mr.  Crookes  announced  in  1870  his  intention 
to  take  up  this  new  branch  of  scientific  inquiry,  his 
determination  was  applauded  by  the  most  influential 
journals  in  Europe.  "  Now,"  they  said,  "  we  shall  have 
the  facts,  for  now  a  truly  great  student  of  nature  is  set 
about  finding  it  all  out."  But  when  he  found  it  out 
and  announced,  like  the  honest  and  brave  man  he  is, 
that  his  researches  warranted  the  belief  that  spiritual 
intercourse  was  a  demonstrable  truth,  he  was  abused 
and  vilified  to  such  a  degree  as  to  make  it  apparent 
that  what  he  was  expected  to  discover  was  something  that 
would  not  run  counter  to  popular  prejudice. 

I  have  said  that  the  Eddy  portents  have  their  proto- 
types. The  frequency  of  this  class  of  phenomena,  led 
the  German  psychologists  to  adopt  the  doctrine  of  guar- 
dian spirits — "  a  doctrine,"  says  Mrs.  Crowe,  "  which 
has  prevailed  more  or  less  in  all  ages,  and  has  been  con- 
sidered by  many  theologians  to  be  supported  by  the 
Bible." 

The  literal  accuracy  of  the  sketch  of  "  The  Phantom 
Carriage  "  has  been  endorsed  on  three  separate  occa- 
sions since  its  appearance  in  the  Daily  Graphic,  by  what 
claimed  to  be  spirits,  who  addressed  me  in  audible 
voice — one  of  the  three  Mrs.  Eddy  herself— and  all 

GUARDIAN  ANGELS.  99 

three  assert  that  the  apparition  was  sent  by  a  guardian 
spirit.  I  know  the  full  value  of  words,  and  I  mean  to 
say  unequivocally  that  a  woman — a  breathing,  walk- 
ing, palpable  woman,  as  palpable  as  any  other  woman 
in  the  room,  recognized  not  only  by  her  sons  and 
daughters,  but  also  by  neighbors  present,  as  Mrs.  Zeph- 
aniah  Eddy,  deceased  December  29th,  1872 — on  the  even- 
ing of  October  2d,  1874,  walked  out  of  a  cabinet  where 
there  was  only  one  mortal,  and  where,  under  ascer- 
tained circumstances,  only  this  one  man  could  have 
been  at  the  time,  and  spoke  to  me  personally  in  audible 
voice.  And  nineteen  other  persons  saw  her  at  the 
same  time,  and  heard  her  discourse. 

The  records  teem  with  instances  of  warnings  being 
conveyed  by  supernatural  agency,  to  persons  in  temporary 
danger,  as  well  as  to  those  about  to  die.  Among  the  most 
interesting  is  that  of  the  white-robed  child  Immanuel, 
who  attended  Frau  Jung  Stilling  from  1799  to  her  death. 
He  would  forewarn  her  of  dangers,  attended  her  when 
travelling,  and  hovered  near  at  all  times  and  seasons.  He 
addressed  her  in  a  language  of  his  own,  which,  though 
unintelligible  to  others,  she  somehow  understood.  When 
she  asked  the  spirit  to  show  himself  to  her  husband  he 
refused,  alleging  that  to  do  so  would  make  him  ill  and 
cause  his  death.  "  Few  persons,"  he  explained,  "  are  able 
to  see  such  things." 

After  the  death  of  Dante,  it  was  discovered  that  the 
thirteenth  canto  of  the  "  Paradiso  "  was  missing,  and  all 
search  for  it  proved  unavailing.  But  after  some  months 
the  dead  poet  appeared  to  his  son  Pietro  Alighieri,  and 
told  him  that  if   he  removed  a  certain  panel  near   the 

IOO  THE  GHOST  OF  DANTE. 

\ 
window  of  the  room  in  which  the  poem  was  written,  the 

missing  canto  would  be  found.     And  it  was  found,  much 

mildewed,  but  legible. 

The  story  I  told  of  Horatio  Eddy's  finding  his  grand- 
mother's snuff-box  and  gold  necklace,  has  its  counterpart 
in  the  case  of  Madame  von  Militz  (related  by  Mrs.  Crowe), 
who,  being  about  to  sell  her  ancestral  home,  was  instructed 
by  a  voice  to  go  to  the  cellar  and  open  a  certain  part  of 
the  wall.  She  did  so,  and  found  a  goblet  in  which  was  a 
small  gold  ring,  on  which  was  engraven  the  name  Anna 
von  Militz. 

A  Scotch  gentleman,  Avho  was  passing  the  night  in  the 
Manse  of  Strachur,  Argyleshire,  was  visited  during  the 
night  by  an  apparition,  which  said :  "  I  come  to  tell  you 
that  this  day  twelvemonth  you  will  be  with  your  father." 
By  a  most  curious  concatenation  of  circumstances,  he  lost 
his  life  at  the  very  time  indicated,  in  a  storm. 

I  have  mentioned  the  appearance  of  James  Eddy  to  his 
brother  William  at  the  moment  of  his  death,  and  if  I  had 
space,  could  cite  twenty  similar  cases  from  familiar 
authors.  One  will  suffice  for  the  present.  Lord  Bal- 
carres  was  confined  in  the  castle  of  Edinburgh  on  a 
charge  of  Jacobitism,  and  one  night,  saw  his  friend  Vis- 
count Dundee  open  the  curtains  of  his  bed  and  look  in 
upon  him ;  and  then  walk  to  the  mantel-piece,  lean  upon 
it  a  moment,  and  go  out  of  the  room.  At  the  same  hour, 
as  it  subsequently  appeared,  the  Viscount  had  died. 

When  it  is  known  that  William  Eddy  never  had  a 
month's  schooling  in  his  life,  and  that  he  is  almost  illiter- 
ate, it  will  readily  be  imagined  that  he  never  even  heard 
of  Lord  Balcarres. 

THE  SPINNING  GHOST. 

IOI 

The  curious  weapon  of  which 
the  artist  has  furnished  a  sketch 
was  dug  out  of  the  ground, 
from  a  depth  of  four  feet  below 
the  surface,  by  Horatio  Eddy, 
near  Batavia,  N.  Y.,  where  he 
happened  to  be  exhibiting, 
some  years  ago.  His  informa- 
tion as  to  its  locality,  was 
obtained,  he  says,  from  a  spirit. 
The  shape  of  the  weapon,  and 
the  quaint  ornamentation  of 
the  bronze  handle,  will  interest 
the  antiquary. 

The  sketch  of  the  Spinning 
Ghost  tells  the  story  of  a  curi- 
ous family  experience,  attested 
to  me  by  every  member  of  the 
Eddy  connection  that  I  have 
seen.  After  old  Mrs.  Macomb's 
death,  she  was  for  years  in  the 
habit  of  returning  to  the  north 
room  on  the  second  floor  and 
turning  her  spinning-wheel. 
Four  of  the  boys  slept  there, 
and  the  wheel  stood  in  the 
south-east  corner,  behind  the 
door.  The  children  were  great- 
ly frightened  at  first  to  hear 
the  buzz  and  see  no  one,  but 
they  soon  grew  familiar  with 
4* 

-fei 

t'' 

k 

102       SUBSTANTIAL  APPEARANCE  OF  GHOSTS. 

the  thing,  and  finally,  to  be  sure  that  grandmother  would 
awaken  them,  they  hung  a  little  bell  on  the  wheel. 
The  phenomenon,  which  had  frightened  them  at  first  so 
that  they  hid  their  little  faces  beneath  the  bed-covering, 
had  become  a  nightly  diversion.  After  awhile  the  spirit 
materialized  herself,  feebly  at  first  but  stronger  by 
degrees,  until  she  would  come  looking  exactly  as  when 
alive.  The  sketch  represents  the  scene  with  absolute 
accuracy,  and  it  is  worth  while  to  call  attention  to  the 
fact  that,  except  for  the  title,  no  one  would  suspect  that 
the  woman  was  not  of  this  world.  It  was  intended  that 
it  should  be  just  so,  for  I  can  assure  the  reader,  that,  so 
far  from  the  materialized  spirits  who  appear  in  the  Eddy 
"circle-room"  seeming  ghostlike,  they  are  as  substantial 
in  every  respect  as  any  of  us  who  gaze  at  the  weird 
phalanx  of  the  dead-alive. 

L 

\ 

CHAPTER  VII. 

A    CHAPTER    OF    FEET    AND    INCHES. 

I  ASSUME  it  to  be  a  fundamental  principle  that,  in 
making  scientific  researches,  results  must  be  self- 
sufficient  ;  requiring  neither  excuse  nor  charity  of 
construction,  but  carrying  conviction  in  themselves.  To 
deserve  admission  into  the  field  of  science,  they  must, 
be  arrived  at  under  circumstances  that  absolutely  exclude 
the  chance  of  error.  They  must,  moreover,  be  capable 
of  re-production  at  any  time,  under  exactly  the  same 
circumstances,  by  any  capable  scientist,  in  any  part 
of  the  world.  I  admit,  also,  that  in  view  of  the 
multitudinous  liabilities  to  self-deception  by  trusting 
to  the  senses,  their  evidence  should  be  largely  excluded. 
To  think  I  see  a  body  rise  in  opposition  to  the  law  of 
gravity,  as  now  understood,  is  to  the  student  of  science 
no  evidence  that  I  did  see  the  phenomenon.  He  says 
that  it  is  more  reasonable  to  believe  my  eyesight  at  fault, 
or  that,  if  I  did  see  the  body  rise,  trickery  was  involved, 
than  that  the  universal  law  of  gravity  was  disturbed  in 
this  particular  instance.  But  if  the  lifting  of  the  weight 
can  be  indicated  on  an  instrument,  which  having  neither 

i°5 

106  THE  A  UTHOR  'S  POSITION. 

eyes  nor  psychological  idiosyncrasies,  cannot  be  deceived, 
then  a  new  fact  is  gained  for  science,  and  our  whole 
domain  of  knowledge  has  to  be  re-measured. 

Applying  these  rules  to  my  own  case,  in  what  attitude 
do  I  stand  towards  the  scientific  world?  The  answer 
is  readily  given.  The  collector  of  a  few  facts  and  observer 
of  certain  phenomena,  which  others  must  classify  and 
analyze :  the  gatherer  of  a  few  of  the  pebbles  on  the 
strand ;  gazing  over  the  whole  ocean  that  lies  there, 
inviting  the  keel  of  the  bold  and  skillful  navigator ;  but 
which  I  cannot  explore.  As  William  Morton  the  com- 
mon sailor,  pushing  ahead  of  his  companions,  looked  out 
upon  the  Open  Polar  Sea  that  had  been  the  dream  of 
geographical  science  for  ages,  and,  humble  as  he  was, 
pointed  the  way  for  all  future  Arctic  explorers,  so,  I 
trust,  that  in  reporting  what  is  to  be  seen  at  the  Vermont 
House  of  Wonders,  this  outpost  upon  the  borders  of  the 
world  known,  and  gateway  of  the  world  unknown,  I  may 
at  least  lighten  the  labors  of  those  more  learned  and 
scientific  than  I,  who  are  to  come  this  way  with  the  clew 
of  the  labyrinth  in  their  hands. 

If  I  am  so  fortunate  as  to  observe  any  one  thing  so 
carefully  that  it  commands  the  thoughtful  attention  of 
one  trained  investigator,  and  so  ultimately  leads  to  the 
discovery  of  an  occult  force,  I  should  be  most  thankful ; 
while  if  I  should  discover,  or  assist  others  to  prove  the 
Eddy  marvels  to  be  nothing  but  chicane,  the  public  will 
be  the  gainer  and  I  shall  deserve  well  of  it. 

I  am  led  to  make  these  remarks,  by  various  criticisms 
and  suggestions  received  by  me  from  sources  worthy  of 
respect.     It  is  proper  that  I  should   define  my  position 

INFALLIBLE  INVESTIGATORS.  107 

beyond  mistake,  and  declare  that,  if  I  misrepresent  what 
I  see,  hear,  and  feel,  it  will  be  through  lack  of  trained  pow- 
ers of  observation,  and  the  consequent  deception  of  my 
senses,  and  no  other  cause.  Of  course  there  is  danger  of 
this  very  thing,  for  I  am  not  capable  of  doing  the  work 
of  the  man  of  science,  any  more  than  that  of  the  dentist 
or  cabinet-maker.  But  perhaps  I  am  as  competent  as 
the  average  of  laymen,  and  so  we  will  let  it  pass  at  that. 
There  were  one  or  two  pseudo-investigators  at  the 
Eddys'  during  my  visit,  skipping  in  for  a  day  or  so,  and 
skipping  off  again,  ready  to  avow  that  all  of  William's 
"  materialized  spirits  "  were  William  in  disguise,  and  all 
of  Horatio's  surprising  manifestations,  the  easy  tricks  of  a 
travelling  conjuror.  If  one  tells  them  of  babies  being 
carried  in  from  the  cabinet  by  women  ;  of  young  girls 
with  lithe  forms,  yellow  hair,  and  short  stature ;  of  old 
women  and  men  standing  in  full  sight  and  speaking  to 
us  ;  of  half-grown  children  seen,  two  at  a  time,  simulta- 
neously with  another  form ;  of  costumes  of  different 
makes  ;  of  bald  heads,  gray  hair,  black,  shocky  heads  of 
hair,  curly  hair ;  of  ghosts  instantly  recognized  by  friends 
and  ghosts  speaking  audibly  in  a  foreign  language  of 
which  the  medium  is  ignorant — their  equanimity  is  not 
disturbed  for  an  instant.  One  sound  and  sufficient  rule 
is  applied  :  exclude  everything  troublesome,  and  explain 
away  the  rest  as  fraud.  Let  the  world  wag  as  it  will, 
they  are  omniscient  and  infallible ;  and,  with  Sir  Oracle, 
say : 

"When  I  ope  my  mouth,  let  no  dog  bark." 

The  credulity  of  some  scientific  men,  too,  is  bound- 
less— they  would  rather  believe  that  a  baby  could  lift  a 

108  SCIENTIFIC  SKEPTICISM. 

mountain  without  levers,  than  that  a  spirit  could  lift  an 
ounce.  Alfred  Wallace,  of  London,  told  a  friend  of 
mine  that  if  a  new  fact  were  presented  to  Tyndall  he 
would  smell  it,  look  at  it,  taste  it,  turn  it  over,  handle 
it,  bite  it, — and  then  wouldn't  believe.  This  is  an 
extreme  illustration  of  scientific  skepticism,  but  after 
all  it  fairly  illustrates  the  habit  which,  properly  mod- 
erated, protects  the  world  from  false  teaching.  At  the 
same  time  it  must  be  admitted,  that  this  spirit  clogs  the 
wheels  of  Progress,  and  obliges  discoverers  to  win  their 
just  renown  at  the  price  of  suffering  and  persecution. 
The  other  day  a  visitor  at  the  Eddys'  offered  to  bet  me 
$1,000  to  $>ioo  that  he  could  personate  every  one  of  the 
ghosts  he  saw  that  night,  with  a  few  dollars'  worth  of 
stage  properties,  and  do  every  "  trick "  of  Horatio's 
light  circle  after  a  day's  preparation.  All  I  could  say 
was,  that  in  such  case  he  need  not  hunt  for  gold  mines, 
for  he  had  one  in  his  head  and  fingers. 

The  phenomena  publicly  exhibited  at  the  Eddy  home- 
stead are  of  the  following  character :  i.  The  so-called 
materialization  of  spirit-forms,  which  occur  in  a  "  cir- 
cle-room "  in  the  second  story  of  the  L  part  of  the 
house.  2.  The  showing  of  materialized  hands ;  the 
"ring  test ;"  writing  of  names  of  deceased  persons  upon 
cards,  by  detached  hands ;  and  playing  on  instruments 
in  the  light ;  which  usually  happen  in  a  circle  held  at 
the  conclusion  of  the  materialization  circle.  3.  The 
playing  of  musical  instruments;  voices;  the  sound  of 
heavy  dancing ;  the  moving  of  ponderous  bodies  ;  the 
floating  of  musical  instruments  through  the  air ;  the 
noise  of  struggles  and  sword  combats  between  two 

MA  TERIALIZA  TION  OF  SPIRIT-FORMS.  1 1 1 

combatants ;  the  flashing  of  phosphorescent  lights ; 
the  touching  and  patting  of  our  persons  by  supposed 
spirit-hands ;  a  concert  of  musical  instruments,  numer- 
ous enough  to  require  the  aid  of  at  least  four  perform- 
ers ;  solo-playing  on  the  harmonicon,  accordeon,  violin, 
flute,  guitar,  or  concertina ;  the  improvisation  of  rhymes 
by  a  voice,  upon  a  subject  named  by  any  person  present ; 
whistling;  the  imitation  of  a  storm  at  sea,  with  the 
whistling  and  roaring  of  the  gale,  the  force  of  waves, 
the  sucking  pumps,  &c,  &c. — these  in  a  totally  darkened 
room.  All  these  forms  of  manifestation  I  have  seen, 
heard,  or  felt,  and  each  many  times. 

My  first  problem  was  whether  the  manifestations 
were  produced  with  the  help  of  confederates,  and  I  will 
state  the  physical  conditions  surrounding  the  perform- 
ers. The  room  is,  as  I  observed,  in  a  new  extension, 
or  L.  Its  windows  are  13  feet  9  inches  from  the 
ground.  No  ladder  is  owned  on  the  premises.  For 
the  use  of  carpenters  engaged  in  making  some  small 
repairs,  one  was  borrowed  in  the  neighborhood.  There 
is  but  one  door  of  entrance,  and  this  at  the  end  of  the 
room  next  to  the  main  part  of  the  house.  The  room 
is  37  feet  6  inches  long  and  17  feet  wide,  with  a  ceiling 
9  feet  2  inches  high  in  the  centre,  and  6  feet  1 1  inches 
at  the  sides.  At  the  farther  or  west  end  is  the  kitchen 
chimney,  2  feet  7  inches  by  3  feet  4  inches,  in  the  centre 
of  the  gable.  To  the  right  of  the  chimney  is  a  closet 
of  the  same  depth  —  2  feet  7  inches —  and  a  length  of 
7  feet,  with  a  window  in  it,  2  feet  6  inches  from  the 
floor,  and  having  a  2  feet  2  inch  by  2  feet  3  inch  open- 
ing.    The  door  to  the  closet  or  "  cabinet "  (for  this  is 

112  SEALING  THE   WINDOW. 

where  the  medium,  William  H.  Eddy,  sits)  is  5  feet 
9  7-8  inches  high  by  2  feet  wide.  The  ceiling  of  the 
cabinet  at  the  chimney  end  is  7  feet  2  inches,  and  5  feet 
at  the  other  end,  where  the  roof  slopes.  Three  sides 
of  the  closet  are  lath  and  plaster ;  the  fourth  the  solid 
brick  wall  of  the  chimney.  There  are  no  panels  to 
slide,  no  loose  boards  in  the  floor  to  lift.  Every  inch 
is  tight  and  solid.  Outside  the  cabinet  a  platform  as 
long  as  the  width  of  the  room,  and  6  feet  7  inches  wide 
in  its  widest  part,  is  elevated  23  1-4  inches  above  the 
general  floor  level.  Along  its  outer  edge  runs  a  balus- 
trade or  handrail,  2  feet  6  inches  high,  making  the  height 
from  the  floor  of  the  room  to  the  top  of  the  rail,  4  feet 
5  1-4  inches.  The  outside  measurements  of  the  L,  cor- 
respond with  those  of  the  circle-room. 

For  six  months  after  the  hall  was  built,  there  was  no 
window  in  the  cabinet,  but  one  evening  during  the 
excessively  hot  weather  of  last  July,  the  medium 
fainted  upon  coming  out  of  the  stifling  place,  and  the 
window  was  cut  through. 

This  window,  in  consequence  of  insinuations  of  its 
possible  use  for  the  introduction  of  costumes  and  con- 
federates, I  obtained  permission  to  effectually  seal  up, 
which  I  did  by  tacking  a  fine  mosquito  netting  over 
the  frame  outside,  and  sealing  it  with  wax  stamped  with 
my  signet. 

This  precaution  made  no  difference  in  what  occurred 
inside.  I  examined  the  netting  every  day  until  I  left 
the  place,  about  three  weeks  afterward,  and  found  it 
just  as  I  left  it,  with  the  exception  that  one  night  a  vio- 
lent gale  and  rain-storm  made  a  slight  rent,  which  I 

INSIDE  OF  CABINET. 

THE  CIRCLE-ROOM.  115 

immediately  repaired.  Before  this  covering  was  put 
on,  the  window  was  watched  from  the  outside,  during 
a  seance,  and  no  confederacy  was  discovered. 

The  audience  occupy  the  two  benches  and  the  chairs 
shown  on  the  diagram.  The  circles  being  held  by 
night,  such  feeble  illumination  as  there  is,  comes  from 
a  kerosene  lamp  placed  at  the  south  side  of  the  room, 
at  the  point  indicated  in  the  ground  plan.  My  own 
post  of  observation  is  also  shown. 

It  will  be  remembered  that  beneath  the  circle-room 
are  the  dining-room,  a  small  kitchen,  and  smaller 
buttery,  all  of  which  were  illustrated  in  Chapter  II. 
The  ceilings  of  the  rooms  beneath,  are  the  old  lathed 
and  plastered  ceilings  that  have  been  there  for  many 
years.  The  new  story  was  only  added  last  spring, 
before  which  time  the  circles  were  held  in  a  large  sit- 
ting or  reception  room  in  the  main  house.  The  new 
circle-room  floor  is  supported  on  beams  of  6  by  4  inch 
stuff  running  across  the  L,  and  comprises  two  layers 
of  boards;  one  rough,  laid  with  open  joints,  and  the 
upper  one  of  planed,  but  not  tongued  and  grooved, 
lumber.  This  is  the  common  fashion  in  this  section  of 
the  country,  as  I  ascertained  by  examining  a  new 
house  in  course  of  completion  a  short  distance  from 
the  Eddy  homestead,  There  is  no  floor  below  the  plat- 
form floor,  but  the  outer  edge  of  the  platform  rests  upon 
a  stout  timber,  and  its  floor,  laid  like  the  rest  in  two 
layers,  is  nailed  to  transverse  ribs  framed  into  the  cross- 
timber  and  the  outside  plate.  By  going  with  a  candle 
into  the  two  little  dark  pantries  opening  out  from  the 
kitchen  and  buttery  respectively,  the  whole  carpentery 

1 1 6  THORO  UGH  EXAM  IN  A  TIONS. 

of  the  platform  and  cabinet  can  be  easily  seen.     One 
of  the  cuts  gives  a  sectional  view  of  the  same. 

I  have  made  two  careful  examinations  of  this  matter 
—  once  with  the  artist,  and  once  with  a  Massachusetts 
inventor,  who  was  good  enough  to  give  me  the  follow- 
ing certificate  : 

Chittenden,  Vt.,  September  26th,  1874. — The  undersigned,  an 
inventor  of  many  years'  experience,  a  mechanician,  and  the  grantee 
of  twenty-three  patents  by  the  United  States  Government,  hereby 
certifies  that,  at  the  request  of  and  in  company  with  Mr.  H.  S. 
Olcott,  he  has  thoroughly  examined  the  walls,  window,  ceiling  and 
floor  of  William  H.  Eddy's  "  cabinet,"  and  the  floor  of  the  platform 
upon  which  it  opens,  and  that  there  is  no  possible  means  by  which 
confederates  could  be  introduced  into  the  said  cabinet,  except 
through  the  open  door,  in  full  face  of  the  audience  ;  nor  any  place 
where  costumes  or  apparatus  could  be  stowed.  Furthermore,  that 
after  witnessing  numerous  materializations  by  alleged  spirits,  he  is 
perfectly  satisfied  that  the  phenomena,  whatever  maybe  their  origin, 
are  not  produced  by  jugglery,  the  personation  of  characters  by  Wm. 
H.  Eddy,  or  chemical  or  mechanical  device.  As  to  their  being 
spiritual  appearances,  he  has  not  become  perfectly  satisfied,  for  his 
previously  entertained  opinions  as  to  a  future  state,  have  not  been 
of  a  nature  to  allow  him  to  concede  the  possibility  of  visits  by  the 
inhabitants  of  another  world  to  this. 

O.  F.  Morrill,  Chelsea,  Mass. 

A  glance  at  the  ground  plan  of  the  circle-room  will 
show  that,  not  only  can  no  one  get  to  the  medium,  after 
he  goes  into  the  cabinet,  by  entering  the  door  of  the  cir- 
cle-room, without  detection,  but  no  one  can  leave  the 
circle  to  assist.  The  light,  although  very  dim,  is  still 
quite  sufficient  to  make  the  movements  of  every  person 
in  the  room  visible. 

Stress  has  been  laid  upon  the  fact  that  members  of 
the  Eddy  family,  sit  with  the  spectators  and  usually  in 
the  front  row.  But,  in  the  first  place,  there  are  times 
when  neither  of  the  family,  except  William,  is  in  the 

iii'iiTifiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiTrnnirTTTiTriT^inna-HnWftiiitgB 

<$ECr/0/VAL  Y/£yV  OF  CABINET. 

X 

§  s 

§     I      TOTAL  LENGTH  OFROOM 

INCLU0IN6PLArrDRM  57 "€ 

M 

**■*: 

-• 

i. 

-«P, 

3T"€" 

— /<? 

/W- 

■it*'''' 

,«"'Z 

Sf%- 

M 

GfiOOA/0  PIAA/  0/r  THE    C/RCLE  ftOOM  . 

VIEW    AND    PLAN    OF    CABINET. 

THE  BA  TTLE-GKO  UND.  1 1 9 

room ;  secondly,  they  as  often  sit  behind  the  last  bench 
as  on  the  front  one ;  and  in  the  third  place,  it  makes  no 
difference  where  they  sit,  for  no  one  could  move  a  foot 
away  from  his  place  without  being  seen  by  every  one 
else  in  the  room. 

Over  the  circle-room  there  is  nothing  but  an  unfloored 
cock-loft,  in  which  a  man  cannot  stand  upright. 
Between  the  braces,  the  lathing  and  plaster  of  the  ceil- 
ing of  the  room  below  are  exposed  to  view,  and  there 
is  no  sign  of  trap  or  opening.  Moreover,  when  I 
examined  the  place,  the  old  cobwebs  stretched  from 
rafter  to  rafter,  showed  that  no  one  had  preceded  me 
that  way,  for  a  long  time  at  least. 

I  now  claim  that  I  have  demonstrated  the  inaccessi- 
bility of  the  cabinet  to  evil-disposed  persons,  and  so 
eliminated  one  most  important  source  of  deception. 
The  question  is  therefore  narrowed  down  to  the  fol- 
lowing point :  Granted  that  certain  forms,  apparently 
differing  in  sizes,  colors,  costumes,  sex,  and  age,  pre- 
sent themselves  on  the  platform,  they  must  be  either,  (1) 
deceptive  personations  by  one  man,  or  (2)  the  mani- 
festations of  an  occult  force.  There  is  no  escape  from 
the  syllogism.  The  battle  must  be  fought  out  at  that 
cabinet  door.  I  realized  this  the  first  day  I  came ;  I 
realize  it  tenfold  now.  The  weeks  I  spent  there,  were 
weeks  of  as  hard  mental  labor  as  I  ever  gave  to  any 
subject  in  my  whole  life.  I  passed  through  every 
degree  of  incredulity  and  distrust.  I  was  ever  on  the 
watch  lest  I  might  miss  some  new  circumstance  calcu- 
lated to  overturn  my  formed  opinion,  and  ever  ready 
to  confess  myself  a  dupe  of  impostors  if  the  fact  could 

120  LIABILITY  TO  BE  DECEIVED. 

be  demonstrated  to  me.  But  I  finally  reached  the 
same  point  with  Mr.  Morrill  —  that  whatever  might  be 
thought  of  the  cause  of  the  phenomena,  they  were  not 
due  to  charlatanry  or  prestidigitation.  And  yet  better 
men  than  I  have  been  deceived  before,  and  how  am  I 
better  entitled  than  they  to  the  public  confidence,  for  the 
stories  I  tell  ?  Why  should  I  expect  sober-minded  men 
and  women  to  believe  there  is  no  fraud  in  all  this, 
until  they  have  the  same  opportunities  as  myself  to  see 
all  and  ponder  on  all  ?  And  how,  especially,  can  I  ask 
men  of  exact  science,  trained  to  accept  nothing,  abso- 
lutely nothing,  without  full  and  complete  demonstra- 
tion—  mathematical  demonstration?  I  do  not;  and, 
therefore,  my  office  is  to  first  tell  my  tale  as  clearly, 
succinctly,  candidly  as  lies  within  my  power,  and  let  it 
carry  conviction  as  far  as  it  will,  in  its  perfect  integrity 
of  statement. 

CHAPTER  VIII. 

MATERIALIZATION. 

UNQUESTIONABLY  my  first  chapter  about  the 
materialization  of  spirit-forms  at  Chittenden, 
should  be  prefaced  by  some  notice  of  the  chro- 
nology of  this  phase  of  manifestation.  But  with  the 
meagre  facilities  at  my  command  when  the  major  part  of 
this  work  was  written,  I  can  only  glance  at  the  subject. 
A  sparsely  settled  rural  district,  far  removed  from  libraries, 
is  a  bad  place  for  the  collection  of  historical  data,  so  I 
must  mainly  rely  upon  my  memory  of  many  books  read 
in  the  course  of  many  years. 

If  I  were  to  refer  to  ancient  times,  I  might  easily  cite  a 
host  of  instances  of  the  alleged  re-appearance  of  materi- 
alized spirits  upon  the  scene  of  their  pre-mortem  activity. 
I  have  already  alluded  in  former  chapters  to  a  few  of  the 
authors  in  whose  writings  the  diligent  student  may  satisfy 
his  curiosity  upon  the  subject.  It  suffices  to  repeat  that 
the  sacred  writings  of  most  nations,  the  classics,  and  the 
architectural  remains  of  primitive  races,  afford  proofs  that 
the  congenital  aspirations  of  the  human  family  for  immor- 
tal existence,  have  not  gone  hungry  for  lack  of  sustenance. 

121 

122  PROTOPLASMS  vs.   THE  SOUL. 

Our  modern  materialists  may  reason  themselves  into  a 
comfortable  reliance  upon  protoplasms  and  final  mole- 
cules, and  glibly  set  aside  the  claims  of  their  opponents 
by  endowing  pure  matter  with  the  promise  and  potency 
of  every  form  and  quality  of  life ;  but,  after  all,  as  the 
London  Times  truly  says  : 

"  Theology  is  apparently  slain  only  to  revive.  Professor  Tyndall 
does  not  solve,  and  it  is  obvious  that  his  method  cannot  enable  him 
to  solve,  the  riddle  of  the  universe.  There  is,  too,  another  difficulty 
which  he  is  the  first  to  confess.  His  analysis  of  the  world's  histoiy 
leaves  out  one-half  of  man,  and  he  finds  it  impossible  to  deny  to  this 
other  side  of  man's  nature  a  reality  as  absolute  as  that  which  he 
claims  for  his  physical  faculties  and  for  his  understanding.  The 
strain  of  reason  and  the  emotions  of  his  spiritual  nature  will  not 
rest  unrecognized,  and  when  the  end  of  the  professor's  address  is 
reached,  we  echo  his  own  thought  if  we  say,  '  There  are  more  things 
in  heaven  and  earth  than  are  dreamt  of  in  his  philosophy.'  " 

I  venture  to  say,  that  of  those  who  have  given  any  serious 
thought  to  the  subject,  fifty  persons  would  prefer  to  have 
my  researches  end  in  indubitable  proof  that  the  mani- 
festations are  genuine,  to  one  who  would  like  to  have  me 
discover  fraud  beneath  the  surface.  Says  Guizot,  in  his 
"  Meditations  upon  the  Religious  Questions  of  the  Day  "  : 
"  Belief  in  the  supernatural  is  a  fact  natural,  primitive, 
universal,  and  constant  in  the  life  and  history  of  the 
human  race.  Unbelief  in  the  supernatural  begets  mate- 
rialism, materialism  sensuality,  sensuality  social  convul- 
sions, amid  whose  storms  man  again  learns  to  believe  and 
pray." 

The  great  address  of  Tyndall  at  Belfast  opened  with 
the  following  majestic  prelude: 

"  An  impulse  inherent  in  primeval  man  turned  his  thoughts  and 
questionings  betimes  toward  the  sources  of  natural  phenomena. 
The  same  impulse,  inherited  and  intensified,  is  the  spur  of  scientific 
action  to-day.     Determined  by  it,  by  a  process  of  abstraction  from 

PROF.   TYND ALL'S  ADDRESS.  123 

experience,  we  form  physical  theories  which  lie  beyond  the  pale  of 
experience,  but  which  satisfy  the  desire  of  the  mind  to  see  every 
natural  occurrence  resting  upon  a  cause.  In  forming  their  notions 
of  the  origin  of  things,  our  earliest  historic  (and,  doubtless,  we  might 
add,  our  pre-historic)  ancestors  pursued,  as  far  as  their  intelligence 
permitted,  the  same  course.  They  also  fell  back  upon  experience, 
but  with  this  difference — that  the  particular  experiences  which 
furnished  the  weft  and  woof  of  their  theories,  were  drawn,  not  from 
the  study  of  nature,  but  from  what  lay  much  closer  to  them,  the 
observation  of  men.  Their  theories  accordingly  took  an  anthropo- 
morphic form.  To  supersensual  beings,  which,  '  however  potent  and 
invisible,  were  nothing  but  species  of  human  creatures,  perhaps 
raised  from  among  mankind,  and  retaining  all  human  passions  and 
appetites,'  were  handed  over  the  rule  and  governance  of  natural 
phenomena.  Tested  by  observation  and  reflection,  these  early 
notions  failed  in  the  long  run  to  satisfy  the  more  penetrating  intel- 
lects of  our  race.  Far  in  the  depths  of  history  we  find  men  of 
exceptional  power  differentiating  themselves  from  the  crowd,  reject- 
ing these  anthropomorphic  notions,  and  seeking  to  connect  natural 
phenomena  with  their  physical  principles. 

"  But  long  prior  to  these  purer  efforts  of  the  understanding  the 
merchant  had  been  abroad,  and  rendered  the  philosopher  possible  ; 
commerce  had  been  developed,  wealth  amassed,  leisure  for  travel  and 
for  speculation  secured,  while  races  educated  under  different  con- 
ditions, and  therefore  differently  informed  and  endowed,  had  been 
stimulated  and  sharpened  by  mutual  contact.  In  those  regions 
where  the  commercial  aristocracy  of  ancient  Greece  mingled  with 
its  Eastern  neighbors,  the  sciences  were  born,  being  nurtured  and 
developed  by  free-thinking  and  courageous  men.  The  state  of 
things  to  be  displaced,  may  be  gathered  from  a  passage  of  Euripides 
quoted  by  Hume.  'There  is  nothing  in  the  world;  no  glory,  no 
prosperity.  The  gods  toss  all  into  confusion,  mix  everything  with 
its  reverse,  that  all  of  us,  from  our  ignorance  and  uncertainty,  may 
pay  them  the  more  worship  and  reverence.'  Now,  as  science 
demands  the  radical  extirpation  of  caprice  and  the  absolute  reliance 
upon  law  in  nature,  there  grew  with  the  growth  of  scientific  notions, 
a  desire  and  determination  to  sweep  from  the  field  of  theory  this 
mob  of  gods  and  demons,  and  to  place  natural  phenomena  on  a  basis 
more  congruent  with  themselves.  The  problem  which  had  been 
previously  approached  from  above,  was  now  attacked  from  below  ; 
theoretic  effort  passed  from  the  super  to  the  sub-sensible.  It  was 
felt  that  to  construct  the  universe  in  idea,  it  was  necessary  to  have 
some  notion  of  its  constituent  parts — of  what  Lucretius  subsequently 
called  the  '  First  Beginnings.'     Abstracting  again  from  experience, 

124  UNDISCOVERED  FORMS  OF  MATTER. 

the  leaders  of  scientific  speculation  reached  at  length  the  pregnant 
doctrine  of  atoms  and  molecules,  the  latest  developments  of  which 
were  set  forth  with  such  power  and  clearness  at  the  last  meeting 
of  the  British  Association." 

But,  if  I  may  humbly  criticize  one  of  so  lofty  an  intel- 
lect, it  appears  to  me  that  the  course  of  scientific  inquiry 
has  led  our  modern  philosophers  too  far  towards  the 
opposite  extreme  from  that  of  Euripides.  To  disabuse 
the  world  of  the  notion  that  the  powers  of  nature  are  not 
subject  to  the  domination  of  gods  and  demons,  which 
was  a  common  belief  so  late  as  the  XVIIth  Century,  and 
upon  which  the  persecutions  for  witchcraft  were  based,  it 
is  not  necessary  to  deny  the  existence  of  these  invisible 
beings  to  Avhom  the  ancients  applied  the  terms  quoted, 
but  whom  we  classify  as  developed  and  undeveloped 
spirits. 

To  prove  the  potentiality  of  the  ultimate  of  matter,  it 
is  not  necessary  that  we  should  ignore  the  existence  of 
spirit.  To  demonstrate  the  organic  and  inorganic  con- 
stituents of  the  human  body,  does  not  involve  the  denial 
of  the  existence  of  the  soul.  If  Tyndall  and  his  associates 
would  but  once  admit  that  there  may  be  forms  of  matter 
and  essences  so  subtle  as  to  escape  the  test  of  their 
crucibles  and  scales,  they  would  be  at  a  point  whence  a 
whole  new  universe  of  research  would  open  before  them, 
inviting  them  to  reach  out  for  richer  rewards  of  fame  than 
ever  before  repaid  the  study  and  labor  of  philosopher  or 
chemist. 

In  looking  back  to  the  early  days  of  American 
history,  I  cannot  now  recall  any  stories  of  "  materializa- 
tion "  prior  to  the  close  of  the  seventeenth  century,  when 
the   storm  of  fanaticism   arose   that  cost   many  worthy 

SALEM  WITCHCRAFT.  125 

people  their  lives  on  the  charge  of  witchcraft.  In  Mr. 
Upham's  "  History  of  Salem  Witchcraft "  will  be  found 
many  instances  of  persons  being  taken  hold  of  by  visible 
supernatural  forms,  of  persons  being  sat  upon  by  spectres 
while  lying  in  their  beds,  of  animals  suddenly  entering 
rooms  in  a  mysterious  manner  and  as  suddenly  disap- 
pearing, to  say  nothing  of  levitations  (such  as  that  of 
Margaret  Rule),  rappings,  the  throwing  about  of  heavy 
articles,  and  the  hearing  of  spirit-voices  by  many  wit- 
nesses. True,  Mr.  Upham  ascribes  the  whole  thing  to 
trickery,  assuming  that  by  practice  (acquired  in  the  course 
of  a  single  winter  with  the  help  of  a  half-breed  Barbadoes 
slave-woman  !)  a  few  ignorant  girls  had  "  become  wonder- 
ful adepts  in  the  art  of  jugglery,  and  probably  of  ventril- 
oquism ;  "  but  does  this  explanation  satisfy  any  really 
candid  inquirer  ?  Especially,  does  it  satisfy  any  person 
who,  in  the  presence  of  our  modern  mediums,  has  seen 
the  same  things  repeated  ? 

It  was  the  prevalent  belief  among  the  learned  of  all 
professions,  at  the  epoch  in  question,  that  the  North 
American  Indians  v  had  migrated  hither,  by  way  of 
Behrings  Straits,  under  a  compact  with  the  Devil  to 
transfer  allegiance  from  God  to  him ;  receiving  in  return 
certain  occult  powers,  by  which  they  were  enabled,  not 
only  to  injure  their  fellow  men,  but  also  exercise  more  or 
less  control  over  the  elements.  Witches  were  persons 
who  had  entered  into  a  secret  treaty  with  the  Evil  One 
through  his  allies,  the  Indians,  and  Cotton  Mather,  Sam. 
Parris,  and  other  theologians  of  influence  in  the  infant 
colony   inculcated   the   doctrine   that   the   execution  of 

these  unfortunates  would  find  favor  in  the  sight  of  God, 
5 

126  THE  "ROCHESTER  KNOCKINGS." 

and  proportionately  distress  and  cripple  the  power  of 
the  Arch  Enemy  of  mankind. 

The  Salem  witchcraft  tragedies  were  followed  by  such 
a  reaction,  that  tardy  justice  was  done  to  the  families  of 
the  victims  of  the  popular  frenzy,  and  nothing  was  said 
about  supernaturalism — at  least  nothing,  I  think,  that 
aroused  general  interest — until  the  present  dispensation 
was  ushered  in  at  the  little  cabin  of  Michael  Weekman, 
in  1847,  where,  in  the  family  of  John  D.  Fox,  its  then 
lessee,  there  bubbled  up  the  tiny  spring  that  is  now  so 
great  a  river.  The  raps  and  poundings  which  will  always 
be  known  as  the  "  Rochester  Knockings  "  and  forever 
perpetuate  the  memory  of  Kate  and  Margaret  Fox,  were 
followed  by  many  other  and  more  wonderful  forms  of 
manifestation,  such  as  the  lifting  of  heavy  bodies,  the 
phenomenal  increase  and  diminution  of  their  normal 
weight  (the  lightest  articles  acquiring  marvellous  ponder- 
osity and  the  heaviest  equally  notable  levity),  the  ringing 
of  bells,  the  playing  by  unseen  performers  on  instruments, 
and,  finally,  by  the  materialization  of  spirit-hands,  faces, 
and  full  forms. 

At  the  same  time,  however,  that  these  things  were  going 
on  and  the  attention  of  the  civilized  world  was  arrested 
by  them,  similar  phenomena  were  happening  in  other 
private  families.  The  Davenports,  of  Buffalo,  N.  Y., 
were  having  some  slight  premonitions  of  the  future  career 
^  they  were  destined  for,  but  the  physical  manifestations 
did  not  occur  in  their  presence  until  February,  1855.  A 
year  before  this  the  Koons  family,  of  Athens  County, 
Ohio,  had  instrumental  and  vocal  concerts  by  the  spirits, 
and  materialized  hands  wrote  communications. 

INDEPENDENT  MA  TERIALIZA  TION.  1 2 7 

But  the  Eddys  tell  me  that  they  had  been  seeing 
materialized  spirit-forms  from  their  childhood,  and  their 
mother  before  them,  and,  in  the  absence  of  conflicting 
evidence,  I  suppose  that  the  credit  will  have  to  be 
awarded  to  them  of  witnessing  the  first  instances  of  this 
highest  form  of  physical  manifestation,  occurring  in  our 
time.  And  yet,  notwithstanding  this  fact,  and  the 
additional  one,  that  no  family  so  gifted  in  these  rare 
psychological  traits  is  to  be  found  in  history,  their  names 
are  not  even  mentioned  in  Epes  Sargent's  "  Planchette," 
one  of  the  most  scholarly  works  on  Spiritualism  in  our 
language.  It  should  be  remarked,  however,  in  explana- 
tion of  this  fact,  that  Mr.  Sargent  informs  me  that  he 
applied  to  the  Eddys  for  permission  to  visit  their  home, 
and  was  refused  by  Horatio ;  who  probably  answered  his 
letter  in  haste,  not  recognizing  the  name  as  that  of  so  able 
an  author  and  so  enlightened  a  Spiritualist. 

One  evening,  in  March,  1872,  the  Eddy  family  were 
sitting  about  the  fire,  when  an  event  occurred  that 
ushered  in  the  series  of  materializations  that  have  cul- 
minated in  the  public  seances  now  given  nightly. 
William  had  cut  his  foot  very  badly  with  an  axe,  and 
was  confined  to  his  bed  in  an  adjoining  room.  Sud- 
denly, without  warning,  the  grandmother's  spirit  in  full 
materialized  form  appeared  at  the  threshold,  and  gave 
instruction  for  some  salves  to  apply  to  the  wound,  and 
a  cooling  draught  to  abate  the  fever  that  had  set  in; 
after  which  she  disappeared.  Shortly  after  this,  when 
Delia  Eddy  was  engaged  in  reducing  some  maple-sugar 
over  the  kitchen  fire,  the  spirit  of  a  man  of  short 
stature  suddenly  materialized  himself,  frightening  her 

128  "  WHITE  SPIRITS  AND  GRA  V." 

so  that  she  dropped  a  pan  of  sugar  she  was  carrying. 
The  spirits  then  told  the  family  that  William  was  to 
be  developed  as  the  greatest  medium  of  the  age,  and 
that  he  must  no  longer  sit  for  the  instrument-playing 
exhibitions,  as  he  had  been  doing  for  a  number  of 
years,  but  must  go  into  the  cabinet  or  closet  alone  and 
take  no  bells  or  instruments  with  him. 

These  instructions  being  obeyed,  spirit-faces  soon 
began  to  appear,  and  finally  Santum,  the  giant  Winne- 
bago chief,  whom  my  readers  will  recollect  my  men- 
tioning in  connection  with  the  seance  at  Honto's  cave, 
stalked  out  in  full  form.  For  a  long  while  no  other 
spirit  came,  but  finally  they  made  their  appearance. 
"Electa,"  alight-complexioned  squaw,  about  seventeen 
years  of  age,  who  always  brings  her  pet  robin  with  her, 
and  who  forms  one  of  the  spirit-band  who  perform 
instrumental  music  at  the  dark  circles,  (many  of  which 
I  have  attended,  and  which  will  be  described  in  due 
time),  was  among  the  earliest  visitors.  Then  the 
deceased  members  of  their  own  family  appeared  — 
among  them  Miranda,  who  came  hand  in  hand  with  a 
young  man,  named  Griffin  Grinnell,  to  whom  she  had 
been  betrothed.  The  lovers,  parted  for  a  while  by 
death,  were  reunited  beyond  the  grave. 

Francis  and  James,  their  deceased  brothers,  came 
too.  Then,  as  people  began  to  flock  to  the  old  farm- 
house, their  personal  friends  manifested  their  presence, 
the  first,  or  nearly  the  first  (for  the  family  cannot  defi- 
nitely decide  the  point),  being  a  Mrs.  Anny  Barker, 
wife  of  G.  Barker,  of  Hubbellton,  Vt.  One  evening, 
a  young  lady  visitor  saw  the  shade  of  her  father,  the 

A  SriRIT  IN  UNIFORM.  129 

late  Captain  Johnson,  United  States  Navy,  who  came 
in  citizen's  clothes.  The  daughter  mentally  requested 
him  to  appear  to  her  in  his  uniform,  whereupon  he 
retired  for  a  moment  and  then  returned  in  full  naval 
dress,  with  sword  and  epaulettes. 

This  is  one  instance  among  many  of  the  doing  of 
something  by  the  apparitions  in  response  to  mental 
requests  made  by  spectators.  The  thing  has  occurred 
to  me  several  times,  as  will  be  seen  further  on.  It 
should  also  be  noted  that  this  supposed  spirit  re-appeared 
in  the  uniform  of  his  rank,  and  it  is  hardly  credible 
that  William  Eddy,  in  addition  to  all  the  other  costumes 
uninformed  skeptics  imagine  his  wardrobe  to  contain, 
should  have  a  full  assortment  of  army  and  navy  uni- 
forms, for  officers  and  privates. 

What  tender  memories  in  many  minds  cling  about 
this  rude  apartment,  where  so  many  can  say : 

"  Ere  the  evening  lamps  are  lighted, 

And,  like  phantoms  grim  and  tall, 
Shadows  from  the  fitful  fire-light 

Dance  upon  the  parlor  wall  ; 
Then  the  forms  of  the  departed 

Enter  at  the  open  door  ; 
The  beloved,  the  true-hearted, 

Come  to  visit  me  once  more." 

CHAPTER  IX, 

THE   FIRST    SEANCE. 

THE  now  famous  circle-room  was  built  last  Decem- 
ber, and  opened  to  the  public  on  the  evening  of 
January  ist,  1874,  on  which  occasion  the  exercises 
began  with  a  dark-circle,  at  which  the  spirit,  or  what 
is  claimed  to  be  the  spirit,  of  a  sailor,  named  George 
Dix,  made  a  lengthy  dedicatory  address.  He  declared, 
among  other  things,  that  the  apartment  was  to  be  used 
solely  for  spiritual  seances,  with  the  occasional  excep- 
tion of  a  quiet  dance.  After  the  dark-circle,  one  of  the 
usual  kind  for  materializing  was  held,  and  addresses 
and  prayers  were  spoken  by  the  spirits  of  Mrs.  Eddy; 
"Mrs.  Eaton"  (an  old  lady  from  New  York  State,  who 
made  her  first  appearance  here  in  October,  1872,  during 
her  granddaughter's  visit,  and  has  acted  as  assistant 
directress  of  seances  ever  since) ;  a  Mrs.  "Wheeler,  late 
of  Utica;  Doctor  Horton,  also  late  of  Utica,  who 
brought  his  two  baby  children  in  his  arms  and  addressed 
his  widow ;  and  the  elder  of  these  two  children,  little 
Minna,  who  spoke  some  words  of  comfort  to  her  weep- 
ing mother. 

Since  that  eventful  evening,  William  has  held  a  mate- 
130 

WILLIAM  EDD  Y  AND  DA  VID  D.  HOME.         131 

rialization  circle  every  evening,  Sundays  excepted ;  a 
circumstance  that,  in  view  of  the  usual  serious  exhaus- 
tion felt  by  mediums,  is  very  remarkable.  Mr.  Crookes 
says  of  David  Home,  the  famous  medium,  that  the 
psychic  force  by  which  the  phenomena  are  produced,  is 
attended  by  an  expenditure  of  his  vital  force  or  nervous 
energy,  proportionate  to  the  degree  of  its  activity  of 
manifestation.  Its  flow  through  Mr.  Home's  system 
"varies  enormously,"  says  Mr.  Crookes,  "  not  only  from 
week  to  week,  but  from  hour  to  hour ;  on  some  occa- 
sions the  force  is  inappreciable  by  my  tests  for  an  hour 
or  more,  and  then  suddenly  re-appears  in  great  strength." 
He  testifies  to  "  witnessing  the  painful  state  of  nervous 
and  bodily  prostration  in  which  some  of  these  experi- 
ments have  left  Mr.  Home" — to  " seeing  him  lying  in 
an  almost  fainting  condition  on  the  floor,  pale  and 
speechless"  —  and  yet  I,  myself,  having  attended  at 
about  fifty  of  William  Eddy's  materializations,  can  cer- 
tify that,  beyond  a  slight  appearance  of  fatigue  imme- 
diately after  emerging  from  the  cabinet,  he  seems  as 
well  as  usual.  He  goes  about  his  daily  avocations, 
takes  no  rest  to  speak  of,  says  he  has  eaten  nothing  for 
weeks  but  a  little  fruit,  and  yet,  after  as  many  as  eighteen 
ghosts  have  appeared  in  a  single  evening,  his  pulse  is 
regular,  and  he  resumes  the  pipe  that  he  laid  down  at 
the  moment  of  entering  the  circle-room. 

If  his  materializations  were  nothing  but  trickery, 
this  might  easily  be  accounted  for,  but  I  have  satisfied 
myself,  and  hope  to  satisfy  the  public  beyond  reason- 
able doubt,  that  this  is  not  the  case.  A  pseudo-scientist 
has   recently  spent  one  evening  here,  and  is  getting 

132  BOGUS  INVESTIGATORS. 

ready  to  publish  in  a  book  his  conviction  that  both  I  and 
the  hundreds  of  other  lay  spectators  have  been  deceived. 
Has  spent  one  evening,  I  say,  and  nevertheless  writes 
me  that  he  is  convinced,  and  requires  "  no  more 
evidence  to  convince  the  scientific  world,"  that  it  is  all 
fraud.  How  different  from  the  late  Professor  Hare, 
who  devoted  years  to  the  subject  of  spiritual  inter- 
course, and  did  not  give  his  adherence  to  the  doctrine 
until  he  had  completed  a  long  series  of  scientific  tests 
and  experiments ;  and  from  Mr.  Crookes,  one  of  the 
first  scientific  men  in  Great  Britain,  who  spent  three 
years  in  the  inquiry  before  he  avowed  himself  satisfied ! 

I  reached  Chittenden  on  my  present  mission,  September 
17th,  1874,  and  attended  a  circle  the  same  evening.  Out- 
side a  violent  gale  of  wind  was  blowing,  the  clouds  hung 
low,  the  rain  fell,  and  the  atmospheric  conditions  would 
in  almost  any  other  locality  have  been  considered 
unfavorable.  A  company  of  twenty-five  persons  assembled 
in  the  circle-room,  among  them  several  who,  like  myself, 
had  arrived  that  day.  Shortly  after  seven  o'clock  William 
entered  the  cabinet,  and  we  waited  expectantly  for  our 
weird  visitors.  To  promote  harmony  of  feeling  among 
the  persons  present,  vocal  and  instrumental  music  was 
resorted  to,  continuity  of  sound  and  rapidity  of  time 
seeming  to  be  more  necessary  than  quality  of  execution. 

I  will  say  here  that  I  have  failed  to  get  from  Spiritual- 
ists any  very  satisfactory  explanation  of  the  part  that 
music  plays  in  these  manifestations,  and  for  lack  of  a 
better  will  suggest  one  of  my  own.  Pre-supposing  that 
there  is  such  a  thing  in  the  human  system  as  the  force 
mistermed   "magnetic,"    sometimes   "  odic,"   and    more 

THEORY  OF  SriRIT-CONTROL.  133 

recently  "  psychic,"  which  has  its  polarites,  its  positive 
and  negative  qualities  ;  and  that  persons  may  be  classed 
among  the  positives  and  negatives  respectively,  the  effect 
of  music,  by  concentrating  attention  upon  itself,  is  to 
reduce  the  positives  to  passivity,  and  by  nervous  stimula- 
tion exalt  the  negatives  to  something  of  an  equality  of 
condition  with  their  more  forceful  neighbors.  The  result 
is  equilibrium  bet%veen  the  two  extremes,  and  consequent 
receptivity :  then,  going  so  far  as  to  concede  that  there 
are  such  things  as  spirits,  and  that  they  can  exert  an 
appreciable  magnetic,  odic,  psychic  (or  whatever  we 
choose  to  call  it)  influence  upon  us,  it  is  not  difficult  to 
see  that  they  are  placed  in  such  a  positive  attitude  towards 
their  medium  and  his  circle,  as  to  enable  them  to  force 
their  power  upon  us  to  the  degree  of  producing  the  several 
phases  of  manifestations. 

The  logician  will  say,  that  much  is  taken  for  granted  in 
this  proposition,  and  so  I  will  leave  him  to  first  note  the 
features  of  these  phenomena  wherever  occurring,  and 
then  at  his  leisure  construct  a  better  theory  than  mine. 

So  much  for  the  psychological  aspect  of  the  case,  and 
to  this  extent  some  enlightened  Spiritualists  precede  me. 
But  why  should  the  spirits  demand  quick  tunes — jigs, 
waltzes,  reels,  and  compositions  of  like  character,  in 
which  the  constant  repetition  of  the  same  notes  occurs  in 
presto  or  prestissimo  measure  ?  May  the  answer  not  be 
suggested  by  two  of  Professor  Tyndall's  lectures  at  the 
Royal  Institution,  in  one  of  which  he  demonstrated  that 
a  ray  of  light  was  allowed  to  traverse  a  strip  of  glass 
every  time  he  caused  it  to  set  up  a  musical  sound  ;  the 
glass  being  held  in  a  vice,  and  the  light  from  an  electric 
5* 

134  THE  RHYTHM  OF  FLAMES. 

lamp  polarized  upon  it ;  and  in  the  other,  upon  "  The 
Rhythm  of  Flames,"  in  which  he  showed  that  a  flame 
twenty  inches  in  height  would  fall  down  to  eight  on  the 
slightest  tap  on  an  anvil.  It  responded  to  the  tinkle  of  a 
bunch  of  keys  or  a  few  pence  shaken  together,  the  creak- 
ing of  boots,  the  rustling  of  a  silk  dress  or  a  piece  of 
paper;  while  certain  intonations  of  the  voice  threw  it 
into  violent  commotion.  (Epes  Sargent's  "  Planchette," 
p.  379).  If  we  put  ourselves  for  the  purposes  of  this 
inquiry  into  the  position  of  the  Spiritualists,  we  might 
reasonably  demand  that  men  of  science,  investigating  the 
subject,  should  not  overlook  the  fact,  that  much  light  may 
be  gained  upon  the  nature  and  properties  of  this  new 
occult  force,  by  experiments  in  this  direction.  I  have 
heard  this  call  for  rapid  music,  so  often  made,  that  I  have 
come  to  the  conclusion  that  equal,  constant,  and  rapid 
vibrations  of  the  atmosphere,  play  an  important  part  in 
the  production  of  the  phenomenon  of  materialization. 

I  am  also  satisfied  that  careful  experiments  in  the 
matter  of  the  intensity  and  quality  of  the  light  used, 
would  result  in  unexpected  and  great  discoveries.  May 
it  not  be,  that  the  yellow  ray  bears  some  such  relation  to 
spirit-materializations  as  it  does  to  photography? 

Doctor  H.  T.  Child,  of  Philadelphia,  writes  me  that, 
while  he  thinks  that  if  we  understood  this  law,  the  mate- 
rializations might  be  better,  in  his  opinion  it  is  more 
important  to  have  a  good  medium  and  good  circle.  He 
has  known  instances,  where  a  circle  containing  rude  and 
uncongenial  persons,  got  nothing  satisfactory ;  while  one 
following  it,  on  the  same  evening,  obtained  everything 
that  could  be  desired. 

UMKS.  EATON"  AND  "  HON TO."  135 

We  had  not  sat  many  minutes  in  our  first  "  circle  " 
before  a  voice — the  piping  treble  of  an  old  woman — 
addressed  to  us  some  remarks  from  behind  the  curtain 
that  hung  over  the  open  door  of  the  cabinet,  to  the  effect 
that  this  was  a  bad  night  for  manifestations,  and  none  but 
the  strongest  spirits  could  show  themselves.  I  may  as 
well  at  once  admit,  that  this  voice  had  such  peculiarities 
of  accent  and  provincial  expressions,  as  to  excite  the  sus- 
picion that  it  was  William  speaking  in  falsetto.  So  I 
crossed  that  off,  in  my  note-book  as  a  fact  of  no  value  to 
the  Spiritualists ;  but  since  then,  having  seen  the  woman 
herself — Mrs.  Eaton — and  heard  her  address  me  person- 
ally from  a  distance  of  not  more  than  ten  feet,  in  the 
self-same  voice,  I  re-entered  the  fact  and  transcribe  it 
here. 

The  curtain  presently  stirred,  and  the  Indian  woman 
named  Honto,  stepped  on  the  platform.  She  appears 
young,  dark  complexioned,  of  marked  Indian  features, 
lithe  and  springy  in  movement,  full  of  fun,  natural  in 
manner,  and  full  of  inquisitiveness.  She  measures  5  feet 
3  inches  in  height,  against  a  painted  scale  I  had  placed 
beside  the  cabinet  door.  To  William  Eddy  she  bears 
not  the  slightest  resemblance  in  any  particular,  all  asser- 
tions of  any  superficial  observer  to  the  contrary,  notwith- 
standing. I  have  seen  her  about  thirty  times,  and  have 
necessarily  enjoyed  ample  opportunities  to  compare  her 
with  William  in  every  particular.  Nevertheless,  the  first 
two  times  I  saw  her,  I  was  so  deceived  by  the  dull  light 
as  to  fancy  her  the  same  as  William  in  height  and  bulk. 
In  this  circle-room,  one's  eye  must  be  educated,  as  it 
must  at  sea,  to  judge  of  distances,  or  in  a  mountainous 

136  HON  TO '  S*  COSTUMES. 

region,  to  estimate  the  height  and  distance  of  the  various 
peaks.  Let  any  one  try  even  so  simple  an  experiment,  as 
to  judge  how  high  a  man's  hat  will  come  against  the  wall 
when  set  upon  the  floor,  and  some  idea  will  be  attained 
of  the  optical  difficulties  to  be  overcome,  before  one  can 
form  a  correct  impression  of  the  relative  heights  of  the 
spirits  who  present  themselves. 

She  changes  her  dress  frequently,  sometimes  appear- 
ing in  a  dark  skirt  with  light  overdress,  shaped  like  the 
garment  called  a  polonaise  ;  sometimes  with  these  shades 
reversed ;  sometimes  with  light  clothing  throughout  and 
a  sash  around  her  waist,  or  bands  crossed  over  her  bosom ; 
sometimes  with  a  cap,  and  at  others  bareheaded ;  some- 
times with  her  black  hair  a  yard  or  more  in  length,  flowing 
over  her  shoulders,  and  again  with  it  braided  in  a  single 
rope  down  her  back.  A  remarkable  fact  is,  that  at  times 
her  hair  is  very  long,  and  at  others  not  longer  than  the 
artist  has  represented  it  in  the  picture.  I  have  seen  her 
with  what  seemed  to  be  buckskin  leggins,  and  a  short 
dress  reaching  a  little  below  the  knee ;  and  again,  with  high 
moccasins  trimmed  about  the  top  with  what  looked  like 
fur.  Others  tell  me  that  they  have  seen  her  in  a  dress 
upon  which  were  two  rows  of  phosphorescent  buttons 
gleaming  in  the  obscure  light  like  great  diamonds,  that 
ran  from  each  shoulder  in  curved  lines  to  the  bottom  of 
her  skirt,  but  I  have  not  seen  the  costume  myself. 

The  sketch  represents  one  of  the  phenomena  attending 
the  appearance  of  this  spirit-girl,  and  is  what  I  witnessed 
on  the  evening  in  question.  Honto  steps  either  to  the 
wall  or  to  one  of  the  two  persons — Mrs.  R.  Cleveland  and 
Mr.  E.    V.    Pritchard,  of  Albany,  N.  Y.— who   usually 

L 

THE  BE  A  TING  HE  A  RT.  139 

occupy  chairs  on  the  platform,  and  suddenly  produces 
a  knitted  shawl  or  a  long  piece  of  gauzy  fabric,  apparently 
from  the  air  itself,  and  exhibits  it  to  the  audience.  The 
light  in  the  room  is  so  very  bad — about  as  strong  as  that 
in  the  parlor  when  we  sit  before  the  dying  embers  "  'twixt 
the  gloamin'  and  the  mirk  "  before  the  lamps  are  lighted 
— that  it  is  impossible  to  see  the  features  of  Honto  or  the 
pattern  of  her  shawl ;  but  the  sketch  shows  the  latter  as 
it  appeared  to  us.  She  threw  the  slender  fabric  over  the 
railing,  and  so  gave  us  an  opportunity  to  see  that  its 
strands  were  perfectly  opaque.*  .  Then  throwing  it  over 
her  head  as  a  Spanish  woman  wears  her  mantilla,  she 
produced  another,  woolen,  black  and  apparently  striped  ; 
and  then  passed  both  behind  the  curtain. 

Somebody  in  the  audience  then  asked  if  she  would 
allow  Mrs.  Cleveland  to  feel  the  beating  of  her  heart ; 
whereupon  she  opened  her  dress  and  Mrs.  Cleveland  laid 
her  hand  upon  the  bare  flesh.  It  felt  cold  and  moist, 
not  like  that  of  a  living  person.  The  breast  was  a 
woman's,  and  the  heart  beat  feebly  but  rhythmically.  The 
same  pulsation  was  felt  in  the  wrist.  Honto's  hand  was 
hard  and  of  medium  size,  her  fingers  broad  but  not 
stumpy,  its  color  dark — in  a  word,  the  hand  of  an  Indian. 

After  Honto  retired,  various  other  spirits  of  Indians 
and  Whites  (among  the  latter  two  little  children)  appeared 
before  us,  but  I  must  reserve  further  description  for 
another  chapter. 

*  The  platform-railing  has  been  omitted  in  this  and  other  full- 
page  pictures,  because  of  the  in  artistic  effect  of  so  many  straight 
lines,  and  the  additional  fact  that  they  interfere  with  the  view  of  the 
groups.  This  railing  is  a  nuisance,  at  any  rate,  and  should  be 
removed,  Its  only  conceivable  use,  that  I  can  see,  is  to  deter  rude 
spectators  from  rushing  forward  to  grasp  the  phantoms. 

CHAPTER  X. 

MANY    PHANTOM    VISITORS. 

THE  next  materialized  spirit  to  make  its  appear- 
ance after  Honto,  was  that  of  a  dark -faced 
squaw,  who  calls  herself  "  Bright  Star."  She  is 
shapely,  tall,  well-proportioned,  and  of  a  dignified  car- 
riage. She  dresses  in  dark  clothing,  trimmed  with 
bands  of  white  that  look  to  us  like  broad  tape  in  the 
dim  light,  but  that  Mr.  Pritchard  says  are  beads.  On 
her  head  she  wears  a  sort  of  frontlet,  in  the  centre  of 
which  is  a  jewel  or  luminous  spot,  that  gives  out  a 
phosphorescent  gleam,  shining  in  the  obscurity  like  the 
diamond  in  a  rajah's  turban.  I  have  seen  this  spirit  six 
times  to  the  present  writing,  and  she  always  appears 
dressed  alike. 

Next  came  "  Daybreak,"  another  squaw,  dressed  in 
dark  costume,  who  danced  to  the  playing  of  the  violin, 
and  then  suddenly  passed  into  the  cabinet.  As  I  shall 
have  frequent  occasion  to  refer  to  the  dancing  of 
spirits,  especially  Honto,  who  invariably  indulges  in 
this  amusement,  I  may  as  well  say  that  William  Eddy's 

movements  in  the  dance  are  as  different  from  those  of 

140 

SANTUM  THE  INDIAN.  141 

any  of  the  former  as  possible.  Several  times  we  had 
dancing  in  the  hall  for  an  hour  or  so  before  the  organi- 
zation of  the  circle,  and  I  noticed  that  William's 
motions  are  devoid  of  suppleness  and  agility.  Though 
he  thoroughly  enjoys  himself  and  shows  no  reserve,  he 
holds  his  arms  somewhat  akimbo,  his  head  back  and 
to  one  side,  and  his  stomach  projected ;  while  Ilonto's 
body  sways  like  that  of  a  Zingala  or  an  Oriental  almeh 
—  lithe  and  graceful.  William  was  evidently  cut  out 
for  a  great  medium,  but  not  for  a  dancer. 

"  Daybreak "  gone,  then  came  "  Santum,"  whose 
appearance  as  regards  stature  and  bulk  is  calculated  to 
excite  surprise.  He  measures  6  feet  3  inches,  full  half 
a  foot  more  than  the  medium.  His  dress  appears  to  be 
a  hunting-shirt  of  dressed  buckskin,  striped  perpendic- 
ularly and  fringed  at  the  seams,  leggings  of  the  same 
and  fringed  the  same,  a  feather  in  his  head,  and  some- 
times he  wears  a  powder-horn  slung  by  a  belt  across 
his  shoulder.  This  horn  is  a  real  one,  presented  to  the 
spirit  some  time  ago  by  a  visitor,  who  also  gave  Honto 
an  embroidered  cap  that  she  sometimes  wears. 

After  Santum  came  two  other  Indian  men,  and  then 
several  whites  made  their  bow  to  the  audience.  The 
first  of  these  was  William  H.  Reynolds,  late  of  the  shoe- 
manufacturing  firm  of  Reynolds  Brothers,  Utica,  N.  Y. 
During  the  war  he  was  Colonel  of  the  14th  N.  Y. 
Artillery,  attached  to  the  9th  Army  Corps,  and  died 
May  6th,  1874,  of  fever,  contracted  in  the  service.  He 
was  dressed  in  black  and  wore  a  full  beard.  As  well 
as  I  could  distinguish,  he  was  a  square-shouldered, 
gentlemanly  appearing  man.     His  shirt  was  white,  and 

142  THE  REYNOLDS  BROTHERS. 

I  could  see  the  collar  distinctly.  William  Eddy  wore, 
as  he  always  does,  a  brown  checked-gingham  shirt, 
without  collar  or  cuffs. 

This  spirit  was  followed  by  his  brother,  John  E.  Rey- 
nolds, who  died  in  New  York  State,  Nov.  15th,  i860. 
He  wore  a  dark  suit,  and  no  beard  on  his  face  except  a 
moustache.  He  graduated  at  Harvard  University,  but 
I  am  not  informed  as  to  the  year.  His  shoulders 
sloped  quite  differently  from  William's,  and  he  was 
quite  another  looking  person. 

Then  Mr.  George  A.  Reynolds,  the  surviving  brother, 
recognized  his  nephew,  Stephen  R.  Hopkins,  a  lad  of 
fifteen,  with  light,  curly  hair.  Mr.  Reynolds  asked 
''  Mrs.  Eaton,"  the  spirit  directress,  if  she  would  answer 
a  mental  question,  and  her  voice  immediately  replied : 
"  Don't  give  yourself  any  anxiety  about  that ;  you  are 
a  medium  fast  .enough  already  ;"  which,  the  interroga- 
tor informed  me,  was  what  he  desired  to  know. 

We  were  next  favored  with  the  appearance  in  the 
closet-door,  of  the  tall  figure  of  the  late  William  Brown, 
of  York,  Pa.  He  is  the  father  of  Edward  Brown,  who 
married  Delia  Eddy  a  few  months  ago,  and  he  makes 
his  salutation  to  the  audience  nearly  every  evening. 
He  is  six  feet,  one  inch,  in  stature,  has  white  hair,  no 
beard,  and  dresses  in  a  black  suit  of  the  Quaker  cut. 

His  son  sat  in  Mrs.  Andrews'  circle,  at  Moravia,  N. 
Y.,  twice  a  day  for  a  whole  year  without  seeing  any  of 
his  friends,  and  the  same  bad  luck  followed  him  here 
for  four  or  five  weeks,  at  the  expiration  of  which  time 
his  father  presented  himself.  For  a  while  he  could  not 
speak  at  all ;  then  he  uttered  a  few  simple  greetings  in 

WILLIAM  BRO  tVM  143 

a  faint  whisper;  and  at  length  he  conversed  in  a  strong, 
full,  natural  voice,  saying  whatsoever  he  pleased  with 
as  great  ease  apparently,  as  in  life.  Except  at  one 
seance  in  London,  in  1870,  with  a  noted  lady  medium, 
I  had  never  heard  a  spirit-voice  before,  and  confess  that 
I  was  amazed  to  hear  Mr.  Brown's,  issue  from  his  lips 
as  though  a  living  man  stood  before  me  and  not  a  being 
from  the  other  world,  clothed  for  a  brief  moment  in  a 
body  like  my  own.  I  leave  theorists  to  settle  the  vexed 
question,  whether  spirits  actually  employ  the  organs  of 
speech  to  articulate  sounds,  or  by  their  will-power 
cause  certain  vibrations  of  the  air  outside  of  and  inde- 
pendent of  lips,  palate,  and  tongue,  in  imitation  of 
spoken  words.  I  can  only  say  that  after  hearing 
numerous  spirit-addresses  and  conversations,  I  have 
detected  no  difference  in  the  movements  of  the  lips, 
from  those  of  a  living  person. 

Allan  Kardec,  a  French  spiritist  author,  calls  the 
phenomenon  of  spirit-speaking,  pneumatophony,  and 
affirms  it  to  be  the  result  of  the  exercise  of  will-power 
upon  the  invisible  fluids  of  the  atmosphere.  He  says 
(p.  194): 

"  Spirits,  being  able  to  produce  noises  and  rappings,  can  as  well 
make  any  sound  of  nature,  vocal  sounds  imitating  the  human  voice, 
beside  us  or  in  the  air.  From  what  we  know  of  the  nature  of  spirits, 
it  may  be  believed  that  some  of  them  of  an  inferior  order  delude 
themselves,  and  believe  they  speak  as  when  alive.  (See  Revue  Spir- 
He,  February,  1858  :    History  of  the  Ghost  of  Mile.  Clarion.) 

"  It  is  necessary  to  guard  against  taking  for  spirit-voices  all  sounds 
that  have  no  known  cause.  .  .  .  Spirit  or  pneumatophonic  sounds 
have  two  very  distinct  methods  of  being  produced  ;  sometimes  it  is  a 
voice  which  resounds  in  the  soul,  but  while  the  words  may  be  clear 
and  distinct,  there  is  nothing  material  in  them  ;  at  other  times  they 
are  exterior  and  as  distinctly  articulated  as  if  they  came  from  a 
person  at  our  side.     In  whatever  manner  they  may  be  produced, 

144  THE  BABY  GHOSTS. 

the  phenomenon  of  pneumatophony  is  almost   always  spontaneous, 
and  can  be  very  rarely  induced." 

These  are  the  generalizations  of  a  writer  whose 
experience,  wide  as  it  was,  did  not  include  such  wonders 
as  are  common  at  Chittenden.  I  defy  him  or  any  other 
acute  person  to  listen  to  this  spirit  of  Mr.  Brown  and 
detect  any  difference,  either  in  volume  of  sound,  accent, 
or  the  mechanical  process  by  which  it  is  produced, 
between  this  voice  and  that  of  any  living  person  of  equal 
age.  Even  the  pumping  sound  of  re-filling  the  lungs 
with  air  after  the  articulation  of  sentences  is  readily 
noticeable. 

The  phenomena  of  the  evening  concluded  with  the  inci- 
dent which  furnished  the  subject  of  the  accompanying 
sketch  of  "The  Re-united  Family."  A  German  music- 
teacher  of  Hartford,  named  Max  Lenzberg,  and  a  very 
worthy  gentleman,  to  whom  I  am  indebted  for  numerous 
acts  of  courtesy  for  which  I  desire  to  make  acknowledg- 
ment, was  at  Chittenden  with  his  wife  and  daughter.  At 
Mr.  Eddy's  request  he  played  on  the  flute  during  the 
seance,  and  so  occupied  a  chair  in  advance  of  the  front 
row  of  spectators  and  within  a  few  feet  of  the  cabinet. 
After  Mr.  Brown's  disappearance,  the  curtain  was  again 
drawn  aside,  and  we  saw  standing  at  the  threshold,  two 
children.  One  was  a  baby  of  about  one  year,  and  the 
other  a  child  of  twelve  or  thirteen.  Behind  them,  very 
indistinctly,  could  be  observed  the  form  of  an  old  woman, 
who  held  up  the  curtain  with  her  left  hand  and  supported 
the  baby  with  her  right.  Mrs.  Lenzberg,  with  a  mother's 
instinct,  recognized  her  departed  little  ones,  and  with  • 
tender  pathos,  eagerly  asked  in  German  if  they  were  not 

m 

THE  RE-UNION.  147 

hers.  Immediately  there  came  several  loud  responsive 
raps,  and  the  little  Lena,  as  if  drawn  from  her  mother's 
side  by  an  irresistible  power,  crept  forward  and  peered 
at  the  forms  that  stood  just  at  the  edge  of  the  black 
shadows  of  the  cabinet.  There  was  a  moment's  silence 
as  she  strained  her  eyes  in  the  gaze,  and  then  she  said 
joyfully  :  "  Ja  !  Ihr  seid  meine  kleitie  schwestcrn  !  Nicht 
wahr  ? "  There  came  again  responsive  raps,  and  the 
spirit-forms  danced  and  waved  their  arms  as  if  in  glee  at 
the  re-union. 

Some  skeptics  who  have  been  here,  in  their  eagerness 
to  attribute  the  Eddy  phenomena  to  any  other  than 
spiritual  origin,  have  maintained  that  the  baby  forms 
exhibited  are  made  either  of  pillows  or  white  wrappings 
around  William's  legs.  A  sufficient  answer  to  such  asser- 
tions may  be  found  in  the  fact  that  I  have  more  than 
once  seen  babes  in  arms,  nestle  in  the  necks  of  their 
bearers  and  clasp  their  arms  about  their  necks,  and  heard 
those  standing,  like  the  little  Lenzberg  children,  speak.  A 
very  dear  little  girl  whom  I  have  twice  seen  during  my 
visit,  kissed  her  hand  to  me.  This  spirit  at  her  second 
appearance  \yzis  dressed  in  a  short  white  frock,  low- 
necked  and  short-sleeved,  with  a  sash  around  her  waist 
and  ribbons  at  the  shoulders. 

The  picture  of  a  young  girl  with  her  head  and  shoulders 
emerging  from  a  sort  of  fog  or  steamy  vapor,  which  I 
print  in  connection  with  this  chapter,  is  given  because  of 
the  sweetness  of  the  face,  and  of  its  supposed  representa- 
tion of  the  process  of  materialization.  It  was  procured 
by  me  from  Mrs.  Eliza  P.  Morrill,  of  Springfield,  Mass., 

1 48  SP  URIO  US  PI/0  TOGRA PUS. 

whom  I  met  at  the  Eddys',  and  it  is  one  of  Mumler's  so- 
called  '"  spirit-photographs." 

While  I  have  no  confidence  in  this  picture,  or  in  fact, 
in  any  emanating  from  the  same  source,  as  directly  or 
indirectly  of  spiritual  origin,  yet  many  very  worthy  and 
intelligent  people,  including  Mr.  Epes  Sargent,  do,  and 
this  portrait  will  be  regarded  by  such  as  among  the  best 
specimens  of  the  kind. 

In  fact,  with  the  exception  of  the  photographs  taken  in 
London  under  Mr.  Crookes'  own  supervision,  and  under 
test  conditions,  I  have  never  seen  any  of  the  so-called 
spirit-photographs  that  appeared  to  me  genuine.  I  have 
in  my  possession  one  of  those  taken  by  Holmes,  of  Phila- 
delphia, of  a  young  woman  whom  he  is  pleased  to  call 
"  Katie  King ;  "  but,  to  say  nothing  of  the  dissimilarity 
in  likeness  between  this  girl  and  the  original  "  Katie,"  of 
London,  the  picture  seems  to  bear  upon  its  face  intrinsic 
marks  of  fraud. 

If  any  explanation  is  required,  let  the  inquirer  examine 
the  shadow  under  the  alleged  spirit's  chin,  which  was 
evidently  added  with  a  brush  and  ink  after  the  negative 
was  taken.  I  noticed  this  before  I  heard  of  the  bad 
reputation  Holmes  and  his  wife  left  behind  them  in 
England,  and  long  before  the  appearance  of  a  recent 
joint  card  of  their  agent,  Doctor  Child,  and  the  Hon. 
Robert  Dale  Owen  withdrawing  their  previous  indorse- 
ment of  the  good  character  of  these  mediums. 

Mr.  Owen  tells  us,  that  when  the  figure  that  he  supposes 
to  have  been  the  original  and  real  Katie  King,  dissolved 
her  materialized  body  in  Philadelphia,  she  faded  away 
into    thin   vapor   and   gradually   disappeared;    whereas 

LIGHT-HEART,    DISSOLVING. 

DISSOL  VING  SriRITS.  149 

Honto,  in  my  presence  one  evening,  losing  her  power, 
sankf  as  it  were,  into  the  floor  up  to  her  waist,  the  upper 
portion  of  her  body  retaining  its  full  solidity. 

I  have  communications  from  various  persons  attest- 
ing to  the  fact  of  their  seeing  materialized  spirit-forms 
dissolve  in  view  of  the  circle,  at  the  Eddys'.  Among 
the  most  convincing  is  the  following,  from  a  worthy 
gentleman  residing  in  Hartford : 

Hartford,  Conn.,  December  8th,  1874. 
Dear  Sir:  In  reply  to  your  inquiry  as  to  my  seeing  a  spirit-form 
dissolve  outside  the  door  of  William  Eddy's  cabinet,  I  take  pleasure 
in  communicating  the  following  facts : 

'  In  June  last,  I  visited  Chittenden,  in  company  with  my  wife, 
wife's  sister,  Mrs.  Waite,  of  this  city,  and  a  friend  from  Waterbury. 
On  one  evening  during  our  stay,  my  wife's  mother,  a  former  resident 
of  Hartford,  who  deceased  March,  1859,  at  the  age  of  78  years, 
appeared  to  us  in  white  clothing,  looking  so  natural  that  we  recog- 
nized her  instantly.  She  stood  outside  the  cabinet  curtain,  leaned 
her  body  forward,  and  stretched  out  her  arms  to  her  daughter,  as 
though  she  were  longing  to  embrace  her.  Mrs.  Prior  asked  the 
spirit  if  she  could  not  speak  to  us,  and  she  seemed  to  make  a  des- 
perate effort  to  comply.  But  suddenly,  as  if  she  had  exhausted  all 
her  power  of  materialization  in  the  attempt,  her  arms  dropped,  and 
her  form  melted  down  to  the  floor,  and  disappeared  from  our  view. 
The  figure  did  not  dissolve  into  a  mist  and  disperse  laterally,  but 
sank  down  and  disappeared,  as  if  every  particle  comprising  her 
frame  had  suddenly  lost  its  cohesion  with  every  other,  and  the  whole 
fell  into  a  heap  together.  Yours  truly, 

To  Col.  H.  S.  Olcott.  Franklin  Bolles. 

One  evening,  in  July  last,  at  a  circle  at  the  same 
place,  Honto's  form  disappeared  from  sight  in  an 
equally  sudden  and  unaccountable  manner.  The  cir- 
cumstance is  narrated,  in  a  letter  to  me,  by  Mrs.  Doctor 
T.  G.  Horton,  of  Utica,  N.  Y.,  as  follows : 

On  the  evening  in  question,  Honto  came  out  as  usual,  material- 
ized shawls,  to  the  number,  perhaps,  of  half  a  dozen,  then   retired 

1 5 o  UNSA TISFA  CTOR  Y  E  VIDENCE. 

into  the  cabinet,  reappeared,  came  to  the  railing,  stood  there  a 
moment,  and,  to  our  amazement,  began  to  settle  down  to  the  floor 
and  dissolve,  until  all  form  of  a  human  being  disappeared,  and  there 
seemed  nothing  but  a  mass  of  drapery  lying  close  to  the  railing. 
This  also  melted  slowly  away,  and  every  vestige  of  her  was  gone. 
In  about  a  minute  or  two  she  reappeared  from  the  cabinet,  smiling, 
and  seeming  as  if  nothing  had  happened.  She  stood  again  by  the 
railing  and  again  dissolved  as  before.  William  Eddy  was  not  able 
to  give  a  sitting  the  next  day. 

I  may  as  well  add  to  Mrs.  Horton's  narrative,  the 
fact  that  when  I  saw  Honto  dissolve  up  to  her  waist, 
she  was  close  to  the  curtain,  and  pushing  it  aside  with 
her  right  arm,  passed  into  the  cabinet.  Mrs.  Cleveland 
had  been  dancing  with  her  a  moment  before,  and  saw 
her  after  she  had  gone  behind  the  shawl.  She  says 
that  the  spirit-squaw  was  not  more  than  a  foot  and  a 
half  high  when  she  lost  sight  of  her.  It  was  not  two 
minutes  before  she  frisked  out  again  as  lively  as  ever. 

These  several  instances,  happening  in  the  view  of  a 
number  of  respectable  persons,  at  various  times,  offer 
strong  and  mutually  corroborative  proof  of  the  fact, 
that  the  dissolution  of  materialized  spirit-forms,  has 
occurred  in  the  mediumship  of  William  Eddy.  But  I" 
confess,  upon  a  question  of  such  great  moment,  I  am 
not  satisfied  to  take  even  so  much  as  the  above  and 
consider  the  case  proven.  In  my  opinion,  it  is  indis- 
pensable that  the  phenomenon  should  be  repeated 
under  such  strictly  test  conditions  as  to  leave  no  room 
for  more  than  one  opinion. 

Such  conditions  I  should  consider  :  ist.  The  having 
William  Eddy  so  shut  into  the  farther  end  of  his  cabinet, 
by  means  of  a  door  that  should  be  bolted  upon  him, 
that  he  could  not  possibly  come  before  the  audience 

REQUIRED  TESTS.  \$\ 

until  the  experiment  was  concluded,  and  until  after  the 
occurrence  of  the  phenomenon  ;  or,  2d.  The  enclosure 
of  the  alleged  materialized  spirit-form  in  a  cylinder  of. 
cloth,  paper,  or  wire-netting,  which  could  be  fastened 
to  the  floor  so  as  to  effectually  prevent  the  escape  there- 
from of  any  living  person,  and  the  subsequent  dissolu- 
tion and  disappearance  of  the  spirit-body  from  the 
cylinder ;  or,  3d.  The  dissolution  of  the  form  upon  the 
platform,  in  the  view  of  the  audience,  while  its  ankles 
were  fastened  to  the  railing  in  so  secure  a  manner  that 
no  living  person  could  release  himself  or  herself  with- 
out detection  ;  or,  4th.  The  perforation  of  the  alleged 
spirit-form  before  dissolution  by  some  weapon,  in  such 
a  way  that  if  trickery  were  intended,  the  person  would 
be  severely  wounded  and  so  discover  his  fraud.  If 
close  approach  were  permitted,  it  would  be  easy  to 
satisfy  oneself  of  the  reality  of  the  spirit-form  by  clasp- 
ing it  in  one's  arms  and  having  it  dis-matcrialize  itself 
while  thus  held.  Or  one  of  its  hands  might  be  rubbed 
with  croton  oil  or  some  other  blistering  substance,  or 
discolored  with  nitrate  of  silver.  Submission  to  one 
or  all  of  these  crucial  tests  would  settle  this  whole 
question,  once  and  forever. 

No  investigator's  report  of  experiments  made  in  the 
testing  of  spiritualistic  phenomena,  is  worthy  of  a 
moment's  serious  consideration  until  he  proves  that  he 
has  disembarrassed  the  problem  of  the  element  of  con- 
federacy. Until  he  makes  it  appear  that  it  is  impossible 
for  any  secreted  allies  to  come  to  the  assistance  of  the 
medium,  we  may  as  well  spare  our  time  from  profitless 
waste  in  reading  what  he  says,  for  there  is  no  security  for 

152     MA  TERIA  L IZA  TION  NO  T  A  L  IV A  YS  PERFE  C  T. 

the  genuineness  of  anything  he  has  seen.  But  after 
divesting  the  case  of  this  feature,  we  have  only  one 
alternative  to  consider,  viz.  :  Whether  the  "  materializa- 
tions "  are  real,  or  the  figures  merely  personated  by  the 
medium.  This  is  what  I  did  with  William  Eddy's 
cabinet;  what  Mr.  Crookes  did  with  Florence  Cook's,  in 
London ;  and  what  ought  to  have  been  done  with  the 
Holmes'  in  Philadelphia.  Neglect  to  do  this,  brought 
upon  Mr.  Owen  and  Dr.  Child,  the  humiliating  necessity 
to  publish  a  card  that  throws  unnecessary  suspicion  upon 
every  genuine  phenomenon  they  witnessed,  during  the 
past  summer. 

It  appears  that  it  is  not  necessary  that  the  bodies  of  the 
spirits  who  manifest  themselves  in  William's  circle,  should 
be  fully  materialized  in  every  part.  One  evening,  Mrs. 
Cleveland,  a  neighbor,  who  is  generally  requested  to  take 
§,  seat  upon  the  platform,  and  who  is  a  great  favorite  with 
Honto,  was  dancing  with  that  spirit,  and  by  accident 
took  hold  of  her  arm  below  the  shoulder,  when  she  found 
to  her  horror  that  it  was  not  materialized,  and  her  hand 
grasped  only  the  sleeve  of  the  robe.  The  hand  was  a 
solid  hand  attached  to  a  vapory  arm. 

The  spirits  themselves  say  they  have  to  learn  the  art  of 
self-materialization  as  one  would  any  other  art.  At  first 
they  could  only  make  tangible  hands,  as  in  the  cases  of 
the  Davenports,  the  Foxs,  and  others,  including  the 
Eddys.  In  fact,  some  mediums  have  never  got  beyond 
this  stage.  Others,  like  Mrs.  Andrews,  of  Moravia,  N.  Y., 
the  Potts  Brothers,  of  Pennsylvania,  and  Dr.  Slade,  of 
New  York  City,  have  masks  or  full  heads  appear ;  while 
the   most  powerful    mediums,   like   Florence   Coo'k,   of 

JUDICIOUS  CAUTION  OBSERVED.  153 

London,  the  Holmeses,  of  Philadelphia,  (who,  despite 
their  trickery,  are  admitted  by  Messrs.  Crookes,  Sergeant 
Cox,  Owen,  Mrs.  Andrews,  and  others,  to  be  great 
mediums,  under  favoring  conditions,)  and  particularly 
these  wonderful  Eddys,  seem  to  furnish  the  spirits  with 
the  means  of  calling  before  us,  the  materialized  shapes 
of  people  of  every  nation  and  kindred  and  tongue. 

I  say  seem,  although  the  careful  experiments  of  Mr. 
Crookes,  under  test  conditions,  have  apparently  demon- 
strated the  veritable  visitation  of  a  materialized  spirit  to 
the  world  she  left  two  centuries  ago.  The  Philadelphia 
"Katie  King  materializations  "  appear,  at  the  date  of 
this  writing,  to  have  been  wholly,  or  at  least  in  great  part, 
fraudulent;  and  the  forms  I  saw  at  Chittenden,  while 
apparently  defying  any  other  explanation  than  that  they 
are  of  supersensual  origin,  are  still,  as  a  scientific  fact,  to 
be  regarded  as  "  not  proven."  Mr.  Robert  Dale  Owen, 
in  his  recent  card  to  the  public  repudiating  the  Holmes 
manifestations,  considers  the  question  of  materialization 
to  be  fully  demonstrated  by  the  results  attained  by  Mr. 
Crookes  and  myself;  but  I  prefer  to  set  those  of  the 
former  gentleman  by  themselves,  and  far  above  anything 
I  can  offer  as  a  contribution  to  our  present  stock  of 
knowledge,  for  I  had  no  such  chances  as  his  to  verify 
the  phenomena  I  witnessed. 

CHAPTER  XI. 

ARE    THEY    PERSONATIONS? 

HAVING  divested  our  problem  of  the  element  of 
confederacy,  and   made  it   clear   that  the  forms 
presenting  themselves  in  William's  materialization 
circle,  must  be  ascribed  either  to  personations  of  charac- 
ter by  the  medium,  or  the  manifestation  of  an  occult 
force,  the  way  lies  smooth  before  us. 

A  man  to  be  a  successful  personator  must  have  a  cer- 
tain range  of  talents  which  any  theatrical  manager  can 
enumerate  for  us.  He  must:  i.  Be  a  natural  actor; 
2.  Have  professional  training;  3.  Be  of  average  size, 
so  that  attention  may  not  be  attracted  to  any  extreme 
disparity  between  his  own  figure  and  those  of  the  charac- 
ters he  represents ;  4.  Have  access  to  a  theatrical  ward- 
robe, furnished  with  numerous  wigs,  costumes,  shoes,  and 
properties;  5.  Have  time  to  "make  up  his  face,"  where 
fair,  swarthy,  and  black  complexions  are  required ; 
6.  Have  a  good  light  to  dress  by;  7.  Have  room  to 
dress  in ;  8.  Be  supple,  of  a  vivacious  temperament, 
and  accustomed  to  a  great  variety  of  people.  In  addition 
to  these  the  personator  of  the  Eddy  ghosts  would  need 
.      iS4 

WILLIAM   EDDY   IN.  EVERY-DAY   DRESS. 

WILLIAM  AND  HIS  CABINET,  157 

a  knowledge  of  many  languages,  at  least  to  the  extent 
of  being  able  to  hold  brief  conversations. 

I  think  I  have  fairly  stated  the  case.  I  leave  it  to 
Lingard,  or  any  other  "  character-sketch  "  delineator  to 
say,  whether  this  is  so  or  not.  And  now  let  the  intelligent 
reader  cast  his  eyes  upon  the  life-like,  full-length  sketch 
of  the  medium,  William  H.  Eddy,  as  he  appears  every 
day,  all  day,  and,  barring  the  hat,  at  the  moment  of  his 
entrance  into  his  "  cabinet,"  and  say  whether  he  fills  my 
outline  in  any  particular.  He  has  not  one  peculiarity  of 
temperament,  or  physical  organization,  in  common  with 
the  professional  actor.  He  is  clumsy  instead  of  supple ; 
never  acted  on  any  stage  or  privately  in  his  life ;  is  five 
feet  nine  inches  high,  and  weighs  179  pounds;  has  not  a 
shred  of  theatrical  clothing  in  the  house,  nor  a  wig,  nor 
stage  shoes,  nor  properties ;  the  ghosts  appear  after  inter- 
missions of  from  a  half  minute  to  four  and  five  minutes ; 
Indians  succeeding  whites,  or  vice  versa,  men  women,  or 
the  contrary,  and  children  grown  persons,  the  most 
striking  dissimilarities  in  person  being  as  often  after  the 
briefest  as  the  longest  intervals  ;  his  cabinet  is  pitch  dark, 
the  door  is  never  closed,  and  only  a  woolen  shawl  hangs 
before  the  entrance,  through  which  the  gleam  of  even  a 
rushlight  would  show  plainly ;  his  cabinet  measures  two 
feet  in  width  by  seven  in  length  ;  there  is  neither  shelf, 
nor  cupboard,  nor  hanging-closet,  where  properties  could 
be  stored,  and  the  only  window  is  effectually  sealed  up 
with  my  own  signet,  against  all  access  from  without ;  his 
temperament  is  bilious-nervous,  his  movements  slow  and 
devoid  of  springiness,  his  eye  sad  and  introspective; 
household  duties,  such  as  women  ordinarily  engage  in, 

158      HIS  TEMPERAMENTAL  PECULIARITIES. 

occupy  him  to  the  very  time  when  he  begins  his  seances  ; 
he  has  lived  within  himself,  a  simple,  quiet,  suffering  life, 
making  few  intimate  friends,  being  in  the  world  but  not 
of  it;  a  recluse,  in  fact,  by  nature,  who  seems  more 
familiar  with  the  beings  we  call  uncanny,  than  those  who 
jostle  us  in  this  world,  as  we  move  along  towards  our 
common  goal. 

As  for  his  linguistic  accomplishments,  he  speaks 
his  own  mother  tongue  with  a  strong  New  England 
accent  of  the  vowels,  and  knows  nothing  of  any  other. 
Add  to  all  this  that,  after  an  acquaintance  with  him  of 
nearly  two  months,  and  the  opportunity  of  seeing  him 
every  day,  almost  every  hour  of  the  time,  he  gives  me  the 
impression  of  being,  at  least,  at  the  present  time,  a  man 
of  pure  mind  and  heart,  tender  and  truthful,  giving  to 
the  poor  every  spare  dollar  he  earns,  frank  and  open  to 
all,  having  no  vices,  disguises,  concealments,  or  pride, 
hardly  ever  casting  even  a  glance  at  the  busy  world  that 
lies  beyond  his  native  hills,  and  it  must  be  conceded  that 
we  have  before  our  camera  the  unlikeliest  of  all  men  to 
take  rank  among  the  great  impostors  of  history.  I  pray 
the  reader  not  to  fancy  I  am  sketching  a  perfect  man — 
I  mean,  one  whom  we  would  turn  to  for  comfort  and  com- 
panionship in  life.  His  very  temperament  unfits  him  for 
general  acquaintance.  His  childhood  was  one  of  injus- 
tice, oppression,  and  cruel  treatment  from  his  natural 
protector — from  the  father,  who  is  usually  to  his  child  the 
ideal  of  justice  and  benevolence,  the  earthly  embodiment 
of  the  Divine  wisdom  and  patience.  Where  other  boys 
receive  constant  tokens  of  affection  and  indulgence,  he 
got    blows,    revilings,   and    bitter    denunciations.      His 

A  GARDEN  OF  BITTER  FRUITS.  159 

mystic  endowments,  instead  of  proving  a  blessing,  brought 
only  misery  in  their  train ;  and  the  poor  lad,  who  loved 
his  mother  with  the  warmth  of  a  girl's  heart,  was  forced 
to  see  her  subjected  to  the  same  outrageous  rudeness  as 
he  received  himself.  Then  this  father  of  his,  showing 
the  innate  meanness  of  his  petty  soul,  made  traffic  of  the 
very  constitutional  peculiarities  that  he  had  striven  so 
hard  to  flog  out  of  his  children,  and  sent  this  boy  and  his 
brothers  and  sisters  out  with  a  traveling  showman,  to  be 
robbed  and  shot  at  and  ridden  on  rails  ;  half-starved,  ill- 
clothed,  denounced  as  impostors,  tortured  by  skeptical 
committees,  and  by  inconsiderate  Spiritualists,  overdoing 
precaution  in  a  desire  to  inspire  confidence  in  what 
might  be   manifested  in  presence  of  the  young. 

Fancy  a  child  enduring  all  this,  finding  enemies 
instead  of  friends  at  every  step,  knowing  not  whither  to 
turn  for  sympathy  except  to  the  world  of  spirits,  and  to 
that  most  loving  and  sacred  of  all  friends,  his  mother, 
and  who  can  expect  to  find  the  man  of  thirty  affable, 
cool,  unimpressible,  equable,  suave,  and  accessible  like 
other  men?  He  suffers  from  his  enforced  seclusiveness 
all  the  while,  but  it  cannot  be  helped.  Many  hearts 
warm  towards  him,  and  would  show  their  tenderness,  but 
they  come  twenty  years  too  late.  The  seeds  of  distrust 
were  planted  in  boyhood,  Avatered  with  tears,  grafted 
with  sorrow,  and  the  garden  is  choked  with  bitter  fruits. 
He  has  turned  from  man  to  the  animal  kingdom  for  com- 
panionship, and  surrounds  himself  with  pets,  which,  at 
least,  he  thinks,  do  not  repay  his  care  with  deceit. 

"  The  poor  too  often  turn  away  unheard 

From  hearts  that  shut  against  them  with  a  sound 

That  will  be  heard  in  Heaven." 

l6o  7  HE  CABINET  EXAMINED. 

— as  he  turns  away  from  a  society  that  gave  him  the 
cold  shoulder,  and  threw  him  back  upon  himself.  Poor 
fellow !  if  any  envy  his  mediumship,  let  them  come  and 
see  what  it  has  done  for  him,  and  what  theirs  has  done 
for  his  brothers  and  sisters. 

Now  to  return  to  the  cabinet.  The  sketch,  as  I  said, 
represents  William  as  he  appears  when  about  to  enter 
the  dark  closet,  from  which  I  have  seen  emerge  so 
many,  many  different  figures.  Several  times  I  have 
stayed  with  him  in  the  kitchen  until  after  the  circle  was 
formed  up-stairs,  and  he  was  called  to  come.  We 
would  sit  chatting  upon  any  indifferent  subject,  smok- 
ing our  pipes,  and  he  making  no  sort  of  preparation, 
either  in  dress  or  anything  else,  for  the  seance.  Then 
I  have  stepped  into  the  cabinet,  and  seen  that  there  was 
nothing  there  but  the  bare  floor  and  walls,  the  chair 
and  the  cap  and  powder-horn  that  a  visitor  recently 
presented  to  Honto  and  Santum  respectively,  and  that 
they  sometimes,  but  not  often,  wear. 

The  night  of  my  arrival,  the  voice  of  the  spirit,  Mrs. 
Eaton,  called  me  to  bring  a  light  and  see  the  condition 
of  the  medium,  the  instant  that  the  last  shape  retired 
behind  the  curtain.  I  found  everything  as  usual  in  the 
cabinet — no  costumes  scattered  around,  no  signs  of 
dressing  having  been  going  on.  The  window  was 
closed  against  the  admission  of  light,  by  a  small  black 
shawl  and  a  piece  of  horse-blanket  held  against  the 
panes  by  a  bar  of  wood,  cut  to  fit  inside  the  frame. 
The  last  forms  that  had  shown  themselves  were  those 
of  the  two  Lenzberg  children,  clad  in  white,  but, 
although  not  more  than  thirty  seconds  had  elapsed,  no 

THE   SLEEPING  MEDIUM. 

FOUR  HUNDRED  SPIRITS.  163 

white  drapery  was  to  be  seen.  The  medium  was  in  a 
deep  sleep,  his  features  relaxed,  his  breathing  almost 
imperceptible,  his  skin  free  from  moisture,  and  every 
indication  presented,  of  profound  obliviousness  to  exter- 
nal things.  The  glare  of  the  lamp  and  the  noise  of 
my  footsteps,  did  not  awaken  him,  but,  when  I  shook 
him  and  called  him  by  name,  he  opened  his  eyes  and 
regarded  me  with  the  startled  look  of  one  suddenly 
aroused  from  slumber  and  seeing  something  unexpected 
at  his  bed-side. 

I  have  often  seen  persons  come  out  of  both  the  natu- 
ral and  cataleptic  sleep,  and  unhesitatingly  affirm  that 
this  man  was  neither  counterfeiting  nor  in  an  ordinary 
state  of  somnolence.  I  am  fortunately  able  to  convey 
an  idea  of  how  he  looked,  by  reproducing  a  photograph 
taken  one  day  when  he  visited  a  gallery  to  secure  a 
likeness  for  a  friend.  He  had  no  idea  of  anything  hap- 
pening out  of  the  usual  order,  but  hardly  took  his  seat 
before  he  was  entranced,  and  the  photographer  com- 
pleted the  picture  as  it  is.  It  was  secretly  loaned  to 
me,  and  William  will  first  be  apprised  of  the  fact,  by 
seeing  it  in  connection  with  this  chapter. 

I  have  seen,  say,  three  or  four  hundred  different 
materialized  spirits,  or  what  purported  to  be  such,  and 
in  every  imaginable  variety  of  costume.  I  have  seen 
them  of  all  sizes  and  shapes,  of  both  sexes  and  all  ages. 
I  say  seen  them,  because  that  is  just  what  I  mean. 
True,  the  light  has  been  dim  —  very  dim  —  and  I  have 
not  been  able  to  recognize  the  features  of  a  single  face. 
I  could  not  even  swear  to  the  lineaments  of  certain  of 
my  own  personal  friends  who  presented  themselves. 

1 64  ONE  EVENING  INSUFFICIENT. 

But,  for  all  that,  practice  has  so  trained  my  facul- 
ties that  I  am  able  to  distinguish  the  salient  points  of 
difference  between  the  figures.  I  have  no  trouble,  for 
instance,  in  recognizing  the  aged  from  the  young,  the 
dark  from  the  light  or  white-haired,  European  from 
Indian,  Asiatic  and  African  dresses,  marked  contrasts  in 
Stature  and  bulk,  and  especially  whites  from  negroes. 
So,  while  my  testimony  is  worth  nothing  as  regards 
identity  of  faces,  it  is  perfectly  competent  as  to  the  fact 
that  a  multitude  of  apparitions,  totally  different  from 
the  medium,  have  been  presented  for  my  inspection. 
What  go  to  constitute  a  likeness,  are  a  number  of  lines 
about  the  eyes,  nose  and  mouth,  as  thin  as  a  knife- 
blade's  edge,  the  expression  of  eye,  shape  of  features, 
color  and  hair.  These  in  such  a  light  as  this,  are  indis- 
tinguishable, but,  when  a  figure  stands  against  a  white 
wall,  the  various  parts  composing  it,  and  its  costume, 
are  readily  discerned  by  the  trained  eye.  Moreover, 
the  peculiarities  in  appearance  have  been  distinct 
enough  for  our  artist  to  present  the  reader  with  such 
excellent  sketches  of  a  number  of  the  most  familiar 
spirits,  that  they  will  be  recognized  by  hundreds  of 
visitors  at  the  old  farm-house. 

In  my  Sun  letter  of  September  5th,  I  warned  the 
public  against  going  to  Chittenden  for  a  single  even- 
ing, with  the  idea  that  they  would  be  satisfied  with' 
what  they  saw.  It  is  simply  absurd  to  expect  it,  for  the 
light  is  so  poor  that  one  cannot,  with  untrained  eye, 
distinguish  accurately  between  forms  varying  as  much 
as  six  inches  in  height.  One  gentleman  who  came  with 
me,  and  another  of  scientific  reputation,  echoed  my  own 

MATERIALIZED    SPIRITS. 

A    BOGUS  INVESTIGATOR.  167 

suspicion,  that  Honto  was  exactly  like  William  Eddy- 
in  height  and  breadth  of  shoulders ;  whereas  I,  who 
have  now  seen  her  nearly  thirty  times,  and  had  her 
measure  heights  with  living  persons  present,  and  back 
up  against  my  painted  scale  of  feet  and  inches,  posi- 
tively know  that  she  is  just  5  feet  3  inches,  while  Wil- 
liam Eddy  is  5  feet  9  inches.  As  to  breadth  of  shoulder, 
depth  of  chest,  and  apparent  weight,  there  is  no  resem- 
blance between  them. 

As  an  instance  of  the  cavalier  treatment  that  this  sub- 
ject of  Spiritualism,  commonly  receives  at  the  hands  of 
the  scientific  and  pseudo-scientific  class,  I  may  mention 
the  fact  that  one  of  the  latter  kind,  who  recently  visited 
the  Eddy  Homestead,  and  departed  after  attending  a 
single  seance,  fixed  in  his  pre-conceived  opinion  that 
the  whole  affair  was  a  deception,  is  engaged  in  the 
attempt  to  solve  a  certain  medical  problem,  not  of 
primary  importance,  and  has  devoted  years  of  time,  and 
collected  returns  from  hundreds  of  correspondents,  in 
all  parts  of  the  country,  before  he  has  felt  competent 
to  express  an  opinion ;  and  yet,  when  it  comes  to  the 
grandest  problem  of  the  age,  and  all  ages  —  whether 
we  have  immortal  souls  or  die  the  death  of  dogs  —  he 
needs  only  sixty  minutes  of  observation  of  the  most 
startling  phenomena  the  world  ever  saw,  to  "  satisfy  the 
scientific  world,"  that  he  has  simply  witnessed  a  series 
of  personations  by  an  uneducated  farmer,  "with  the 
help  of  three  dollars'  worth  of  costumes  !  " 

The  reader  will  not  require  to  be  reminded  that  I 
have  never  expressed  myself  as  satisfied  with  my  own 
investigations;  but,  on  the  contrary,  have  always 
6* 

1 68  A    TOY   THUNDERBOLT. 

deplored  the  impossibility  of  making  my  experiments 
under  test  conditions.  And  yet  I  have  seen  hundreds 
of  "  spirits "  whose  appearance  I  cannot  account  for, 
and  which  cannot  be  explained  upon  the  theory  of  con- 
federacy, or,  in  my  judgment,  personation.  I  submit, 
therefore,  that  if,  after  such  an  experience  as  this,  I 
confess  the  question  to  be  still  open,  it  becomes  less 
patient  observers,  to  be  modest  enough  not  to  give  us 
ex-cathedra  opinions,  after  such  a  farcical  investigation 
as  that  of  the  person  in  question. 

During  one  of  our  wars  we  had  a  numerous  class  of 
patriots,  who,  while  attending  to  their  engrossing  private 
affairs,  held  themselves  in  readiness  to  exchange  plow- 
share for  sword,  and  take  the  field  at  the  first  alarm  of 
danger.  They  were  known  as  "Minute  Men."  For  the 
first  time  in  my  acquaintance  with  science,  I  have  met 
one  of  its  self-styled  votaries  ready  to  investigate  and 
decide  upon  one  of  the  greatest  of  topics  after  an  hour's 
examination.  He  should  be  forever  known  as  Perpetual 
President  of  the  Society  of  Sixty-Minute  Philosophers  ! 
He  left  Chittenden,  breathing  threatenings  and  slaughter. 
Since  then  we  have  had  his  "  expose  "  but  the  world  still 
moves  on  as  though  the  thunderbolt  had  not  fallen,  and 
he  and  it  will  rot  and  pass  out  of  mind,  and  a  score 
more  of  like  pretentious  expositors  arise,  have  their  brief 
hour,  and  be  lost  to  view,  while  the  phenomena  will  con- 
tinue to  bedevil  the  wits  of  the  scientific  world,  until 
some  Columbus  shall  arise  among  them  to  lead  the  way 
over  the  mysterious  sea,  beyond  which  the  Truth  lies 
hidden. 

CHAPTER  XII. 

IS   IT    AN    OCCULT    FORCE? 

HAVING  tried  to  make  it  appear  reasonably  cer- 
tain that  the  forms  seen  on  the  platform  in  the 
circle-room  are  not  character-personations  by 
William  H.  Eddy,  I  am  prepared  to  consider  the  only 
remaining  alternative— that  they  imply  the  manifestation 
of  some  occult  force,  either  spontaneously  generated  or 
under  the  control  of  intelligence.  Here  we  have  plain 
sailing,  for,  as  students  of  science,  we  ought  to  find  no 
difficulty  in  grappling  with  a  subject  which  submits  itself 
to  analysis  as  freely  as  any  other  within  the  reach  of  our 
faculties.  I  see  no  more  reason  why  we  should  not  be 
able  to  trace  the  phenomena  of  modern  Spiritualism  back 
to  their  source,  than  those  of  heat,  light,  motion,  electricity 
or  chemical  action,  if  we  only  use  the  same  patience  and 
resort  to  like  tests. 

We  should  take  nothing  for  granted,  and  respect  no 
man's  judgment  who   does.     We   should   demand  fromt 
the  Spiritualists  as  broad  a  basis  of  facts  for  our  belief  as 
we  do  from  Huxley  before  receiving  his  theory,  or  from 
Tyndall  if  he  would  have  us  accept  any  of  the  dogmas 

169 

1 70  INVESTIGA  TION  DEMANDED. 

propounded  in  his  Belfast  address.  A  philosophy  that 
shrinks  from  crucial  tests  I  want  none  of.  No  real  inves- 
tigator takes  things  on  faith.  We  should  flout  at  and 
cease  debate  with  the  Spiritualist  who  assumes  to  set  his 
creed  above  all  other  creeds  as  too  sacred  to  be  tried  and 
tested  by  every  appliance  of  reason  and  science.  The 
individual  preferences  or  fears  of  mediums  are  nothing 
to  us,  for  we  are  in  quest  of  the  truth,  and  would  seek  it 
even  at  the  bottom  of  a  well.  We  should  weigh  the 
mediums  and  their  phenomena  in  the  balances,  and 
reject  whatsoever  appears  false.  In  this  spirit,  which  is 
the  very  essence  of  all  scientific  inquiry,  I  have  tried,  as 
far  as  lay  within  my  power,  to  grope  my  way  among  these 
Eddy  apparitions,  and  think  the  ground  grows  firm 
beneath  my  feet.  I  know  that  I  am  only  the  guide 
carrying  the  torch,  and  that  the  master. spirits  are  to  come 
after  me;  but  at  least  I  have  traversed  the  country  and 
tried  to  observe  the  path  so  carefully  as  not  to  lead  my 
betters  into  the  bog  at  either  side. 

Now,  that  a  fair  understanding  may  be  established 
between  my  reader  and  myself  before  I  state  any  more 
things  that  I  have  seen,  let  us  consider  this  question  of 
the  materialized  spirits  being  the  product  of  an  undis- 
covered force.  The  dogma  of  Tyndall  has  not  yet  been 
demonstrated,  either  by  him  or  any  other  man  of  science. 
The  word  "  demonstrate  "  is  used  advisedly ;  for,  while 
it  is  true  that  the  very  recent  experiments  of  Dr.  Bastian, 
F.  R.  S.,  in  England,  and  of  Dr.  Timothy  Lewis,  in 
India,  seem  to  indicate  that  the  thermal  death-point 
of  living  matter  has  been  finally  ascertained,  and  that 
the   flask   experiments  of  the   former   gentleman,  based 

SPONTANEO  US  GENERA  TION.  1 7 1 

upon  this  hypothesis,  make  it  probable  that  the  sponta- 
neous generation  of  Bacteria  germs  has  been  observed, 
yet  the  majority  of  scientists  agree  with  Dr.  Jeffreys- 
Wyman  in  the  opinion  that  the  question  is  still  in  doubt. 

Unless,  therefore,  we  are  ready  to  concede  that  Bastian 
has  settled  the  point  in  dispute,  we  may  safely  say 
that  all  the  efforts  of  the  most  learned  philosophers  of 
France  and  Great  Britain,  have  hitherto  failed  to  show 
spontaneous  generation,  under  conditions  which  abso- 
lutely excluded  the  admission  of  germs  from  the  atmos- 
phere. The  experiments  already  made  may  ultimately 
lead  to  this  result,  but  they  have  not  as  yet ;  and  even  if 
the  indestructibility  and  convertibility  of  force  were 
proven,  the  experimenters  would  still  have  to  account  for 
that  something  behind,  that  "  dynamic,  unseen  agency," 
of  which  it  is  only  the  exponent,  and  which  evolves 
and  directs  the  force  towards  its  multiform  manifestations. 

Alas !  when  they  have  wrested  from  space  the  secret 
laws  under  which  matter  accretes  and  forms  itself  into 
systems  and  worlds,  and  by  which  the  myriad  types  of 
vegetable  and  animal  life  are  evolved,  the  mind  will 
return  weary  from  its  search  after  the  Infinite  Power  that 
established  those  laws  and  holds  them  to  their  appointed 
work. 

Well,  then,  if  the  English  and  French  chemists,  with 
unlimited  control  of  the  best  apparatus,  and  every  other 
help,  have  not  evolved  so  much  as  microscopic  animal 
life,  independent  of  germs  admitted  from  the  atmosphere, 
is  any  one  so  audacious  as  to  say,  that  these  Vermont 
farmers,  without  a  penny's  worth  of  mechanical  or 
chemical  appliances,  have  gained  such  mastery  over  the 

1 7  2  THE  A  UTOMA  TIC  THEOR  V. 

imponderable  fluids  of  the  air,  that  at  their  pleasure,  palpa- 
ble human  forms  can  be  evoked,  to  cheat  the  senses  into 
the  belief  that  they  are  endowed  with  life?  Can  any  one 
dare  to  maintain  that  to  such  evanescent,  self-generated 
forms,  these  conjurors  can  impart  the  faculties  of  hearing, 
speech,  and  sight?  Can  make  them  walk  like  human 
beings,  breathe,  sing,  convey  ideas,  and  sustain  con- 
versations in  divers  foreign  tongues  ?  To  walk  may  be 
automatic,  as  Doctor  Carpenter  attempted  to  show,  in  his 
pamphlet  on  the  unconscious  action  of  the  human  brain, 
and,  if  the  spontaneous  generation  of  the  Eddy  ghosts 
were  conceded,  it  might  be  as  easy  to  allow  them  the 
capability  of  mere  motion ;  but  to  walk  to  a  given  point, 
by  request,  or  to  do  any  other  suggested  thing,  is  not 
automatic,  but  the  evidence  of  motion  guided  by  intelli- 
gence. 

When,  therefore,  these  apparitions  have,  at  my  demand, 
moved  to  the  right  or  left,  or  stepped  forward,  or  taken 
hold  of  some  object,  or  assumed  certain  attitudes,  or 
otherwise  shown  that  they  were  capable  of  not  only  hear- 
ing my  voice,  consenting  to  my  request,  and  doing  the 
desired  thing,  but  also  were  as  able  to  control  their 
individual  movements,  by  the  power  of  their  individual 
will,  as  I  myself,  I  saw  that  all  theories  of  automatous 
action  must  be  abandoned,  and  the  problem  re-cast.  In 
such  case  I  have  to  deal  with  sentient  beings,  and  it 
crowds  me  nearer  and  nearer  to  the  verge,  where  I  must 
either  surrender  or  leap. 

If  we  have  not  to  deal  with  a  question  of  spontaneous 
generation,  are  these  apparitions  the  result  of  some  occult 

PSYCHOLOGY  AND  MIND-READING.  173 

force,  set  in  motion  by  any  human  will  ?  In  other  words, 
has  the  "  medium,"  William  H.  Eddy,  such  power  over 
it,  that  he  can  cheat  mothers  into  the  belief  that  they  see 
their  children,  children  their  parents,  brothers  sisters, 
friends  friends?  And  are  the  apparitions  subjective  or 
objective?  Let  us  see.  If  he  "psychologizes  "  any  par- 
ticular one  of  his  audience,  he  does  all,  for  all  see  the 
same  forms,  hear  them  speak  the  same  words,  and -witness 
them  doing  the  same  actions.  If  they  are  not  phantoms 
of  the  mind,  but  temporarily  solid  and  substantial  shapes, 
created  by  the  medium's  will,  out  of  the  invisible  mole- 
cules floating  in  the  air,  what  does  that  imply  ?  Simply 
that  William  can  not  only  read  our  thoughts,  but  see  the 
pictures  of  our  deceased  friends,  as  they  are  impressed  on 
our  memory,  and  conjure  up  shapes  that  duplicate  them  in 
dress,  appearance,  manners,  and  conversation  :  that  this 
uneducated  man  can  at  will  speak  any  language  he 
chooses,  recall  family  names,  observe  secret  actions  so  as 
to  refer  to  them,  and  without  time  for  preparation,  delude 
visitors  arrived  just  before  the  hour  of  assembly,  with 
the  spectres  of  those  nearest  and  dearest  to  them. 

Is  not  this  absurd  ?  To  believe  such  nonsense  is  far 
more  difficult  than  to  yield  at  discretion,  and  acknowledge 
that  perhaps  the  spirit  world  may  be  a  fact  after  all. 
What  hard  climbing  this  is  to  reach  the  peak  from  which 
the  mind's  eye  may  take  in  the  whole  plain  of  Truth  at  a 
glance !  If  we  could  only  swallow  the  spiritualistic  pill 
at  a  gulp,  how  much  trouble  we  might  be  spared.  For 
their  explanation  is  so  easy;  every  single  phase  of  these 
phenomena  is  so  transparently  simple,  so  in  accordance 
with  law — an  occult  and  as  yet  undiscovered  law,  it  is 

174       THE  IMPORTANCE  OF  INVESTIGATION. 

true,  but  still  law  and  not  chance — that  one  "  finds 
peace   in  believing." 

A  clergyman  asks  me  if  the  world  would  not  demand 
that  the  Spiritualists  should  show  something  of  practical 
benefit  brought  about  by  the  spirits — something  that 
would  add  to  the  world's  wealth.  I  referred  him  to  the 
position  he  took  every  Sunday  of  his  life,  when  he  asked : 
"  If  a  man  gain  the  whole  world  and  lose  his  own  soul, 
what  profiteth  him  ?  "  and  put  it  to  him  as  a  clergyman, 
if  the  proving  of  immortal  existence  were  not  the  most 
priceless  blessing  that  could  be  conferred  upon  the  world 
by  these  modern  wonder-workers.  He  had  not  regarded 
the  matter  from  that  side. 

I  am  glad  to  receive  a  reinforcement  of  my  appeal 
for  scientific  investigation  of  these  so-called  spiritual 
phenomena  from  a  most  unexpected  quarter.  Long 
after  this  chapter,  as  originally  written,  appeared  in  the 
Daily  Graphic,  the  Scientific  American,  a  conservative 
journal,  uses  the  following  language : 

"  In  the  first  place,  then,  we  can  find  no  words  wherewith  to  ade- 
quately express  our  sense  of  the  magnitude  of  its  importance  to 
Science,  if  it  be  true.  Such  words  as  profound,  vast,  stupendous, 
would  need  to  be  strengthened  a  thousand-fold  to  be  fitted  for  such 
a  use.  If  true,  it  will  become  the  one  grand  event  of  the  world's 
history  ;  it  will  give  an  imperishable  lustre  of  glory  to  the  Nineteenth 
Century.  Its  discoverer  will  have  no  rival  in  renown,  and  his  name 
will  be  written  high  above  any  other.  For  spiritualism  involves  a 
stultification  of  what  are  considered  the  most  certain  and  fundamen- 
tal conclusions  of  Science.  It  denies  the  conservation  of  matter  and 
force  ;  it  demands  a  reconstruction  of  our  chemistry  and  physics, 
and  even  our  mathematics.  It  professes  to  create  matter  and  force 
out  of  nothing,  and  to  annihilate  them  when  created.  If  the  pre- 
tensions of  spiritualism  have  a  rational  foundation,  no  more  import- 
ant work  has  been  offered  to  men  of  Science  than  their  verification. 
A  realization  of    the  dreams  of  the  elixir  vita,  the  philosopher's 

THE  FUTURE  FAME  OF  MR.   CROOKES.        175 

Stone,  and  the  perpetual  motion,  is  of  less  importance  to  mankind 
than  the  verification  of  spiritualism. 

But  some  may  say  that  we  exaggerate  the  pretensions  of  spiritual- 
ism, and  that  spiritualists,  in  the  ratio  of  their  intelligence,  make 
claims  which  are  modest  and  moderate  ;  and  perhaps  the  average 
man  says  that,  although  a  great  part  of  spiritualism  is  deception  and 
imposture,  yet  there  is  something  about  it  which  is  new  and  true. 
To  such  we  say  that  if  there  is  any  truth  in  it,  of  interest  to  science, 
however  small,  it  is  worth  while  to  seek  for  it  with  great  diligence 
and  labor  ;  its  discovery  will  surely  bring  an  abundant  reward.  If 
we  positively  knew  that  there  was  contained  in  spiritualism  a  scin- 
tilla of  new  fact  about  matter,  though  it  were  as  the  needle  in  all 
the  hay  stacks,  or  as  the  grain  in  all  the  sands  of  the  sea,  we  would 
not  discourage  the  ambitious  man  of  science  in  his  search  for  it. 

Mr.  Crookes,  as  the  discoverer  of  thallium,  has  achieved  a  great 
eminence  in  science,  and  he  is  now  nobly  employing  his  talent  in 
the  investigation  of  spiritualism,  if  he  find  in  it,  positively,  some- 
thing new  to  science.  He  does  not  need  to  be  told  that,  if  he  really 
discovers  his  psychic  force,  or  any  other  unknown  force,  capable  of 
acting  on  matter,  all  the  future  ages  will  name  him  with  Galvani  and 
Newton.  Finally,  say  we  emphatically,  if  there  be  truth  in  spirit- 
ualism, in  whole  or  in  any  part,  let  it  be  investigated.  But  concern- 
ing such  investigations,  in  view  of  very  serious  harm  which  hereto- 
fore has  often  been  caused  by  shallow  and  superficial  dallyings  with 
the  subject,  we  thoughtfully  and  solemnly  advise  that  no  investiga- 
tion is  worthy  of  the  name  unless  it  is  inspired  by  the  passionless 
common  sense  of  science.  Also,  remember  this :  The  evidence 
required  to  establish  a  fact,  is  proportioned  to  the  improbability  of 
the  fact." 

In  the  farther  discussion  of  his  theme,  the  Editor 
commends  to  the  consideration  of  Mr.  Crookes  and 
myself,  respectively,  resort  to  force  to  solve  the  materi- 
alization problem  ;  but  I  agree  with  that  eminent  Eng- 
lishman, that  it  is  better  to  avoid  resort  to  such  unsci- 
entific methods  as  long  as  possible. 

So  here  we  are  at  length  :  Confederacy,  disproven  ; 
personation,  discredited ;  spontaneous  generation  of 
the  apparitions,  impossible ;  mind-reading  by  the 
medium,  followed  by  his  creation  of  the  shades  of  our 

176  MANY  QUESTIONS. 

deceased  friends,  absurd.  Result:  A  possibility  that, 
by  some  occult  control  over  now  unknown  forces  of 
nature,  beings,  other  than  those  in  the  body  can  mani- 
fest their  presence  to  sight,  touch,  and  hearing.  If 
beings,  what  beings  ?  Those  they  purport  to  be,  or  the 
simulacra  of  such,  formed  and  fashioned  by  tricky 
creatures,  who  are  suffered  to  trifle  with  the  sacredest 
feelings  of  our  hearts  ?  If  spirits,  those  of  persons  who 
have  lived  on  this  earth  ? — or  those  from  other  planets, 
where  the  same  relations  as  ours  of  body  and  mind,  the 
same  laws  of  life  and  death,  do  not  prevail  ?  Who  and 
whence  are  they  ?  Are  they  all  evil,  all  good,  or  partly 
both  ?  Is  there  a  limit  to  their  power  to  interfere  in 
the  affairs  of  men ;  and,  especially,  to  control  those 
sensitives  we  call  mediums  ?  Do  the  things  they  do 
and  the  things  they  teach,  indicate  that  the  law  of  evo- 
lution follows  us  beyond  the  grave,  and  we  may  rise  to 
grand  heights  of  light  and  wisdom  ?  — or  must  we  shun 
them  as  the  angels  of  hell  itself,  let  loose  to  ruin  us  in 
body  and  soul  ?  That  is  the  issue.  That  is  where  we 
stand ;  and  now  the  reader  is  prepared  to  let  me  take 
him  by  the  hand  through  this  maze,  and  with  me,  "try 
the  spirits,  if  they  be  of  God." 

The  illustration  represents  what  happened  on  the 
first  evening  of  my  visit,  after  William's  materialization 
seance  closed.  It  shows  some  of  the  visible  manifesta- 
tions at  Horatio  G.  Eddy's  light-circles.  Thousands 
who  have  attended  the  public  exhibitions  of  the  Daven- 
ports and  other  traveling  mediums,  will  recognize  them 
as  familiar.  I  was  chosen  as  one  of  the  committee,  on 
the  evening  when  the  Davenports  first  appeared  in  the 

A  LIGHT  CIRCLE.  1 79 

Cooper  Institute,  several  years  ago,  and  saw  five  hands 
simultaneously  thrust  out  of  the  aperture  in  the  cab- 
inet-door, and,  grasping  one,  had  my  hand  squeezed  so 
that  I  felt  the  bruise  for  hours.  Instead  of  using  a 
wooden  box,  Horatio  Eddy  hangs  two  shawls  upon  the 
line  that  stretches  from  the  chimney  in  the  circle-room 
to  the  south  wall ;  leaving  an  open  space  between  it 
and  the  ceiling  of  about  two  feet. 

The  one  next  the  chimney,  and  behind  Horatio's 
chair,  is  a  short  one,  and  does  not  reach  the  floor  by 
nearly  three  feet ;  and  therefore,  if  it  were  possible  for 
him  to  execute  tricks  behind  the  other  curtain,  without 
betraying  himself  by  movements  of  his  head,  feet, 
shoulders  and  body,  or  the  disturbance  of  the  shawl,  he 
would  be  favorably  placed  to  do  so.  I  have  watched 
him  closely,  and  have  never  detected  any  such  indica- 
tions of  fraud.  Besides,  it  will  appear  in  the  course  of 
my  narrative  that,  even  if  he  had  had  both  hands  free 
to  do  what  he  chose,  he  could  not  have  done  any  one 
of  several  things  that  I  will  recount. 

The  shawls  merely  form  a  screen,  behind  which  it 
must  be  almost  as  light  as  in  front,  by  reason  of  the 
open  space  between  the  cord  and  ceiling.  A  table  is 
pushed  into  the  corner,  and  on  it  are  laid  the  follow- 
ing :  One  guitar,  one  concertina,  seven  bells  of  various 
sizes,  two  tambourines,  eight  harmonicons  (mostly  dis- 
abled), one  flute,  one  piccolo,  one  flageolet,  one  tin 
ditto,  and  one  triangle.  Horatio  sits  on  a  chair  in  front 
of  the  curtain,  to  the  left,  next  to  him  some  gentleman 
selected  from  the  audience,  and  at  the  right  of  the  latter 
a  lady  similarly  chosen.     I  give  these  positions  as  they 

i  So  THE  BAB  Y-I1AND. 

are  upon  the  platform.  To  the  audience  they  would 
appear  reversed,  Horatio  being  at  the  right  and  the 
lady  at  the  left.  William  Eddy  then  pins  across  the 
breasts  of  the  two  males  a  third  shawl,  attaching  the 
ends  to  the  curtain.  A  bright  light  is  thrown  upon 
the  group  from  a  kerosene  lamp  placed  near  and  turned 
up  high. 

Presently  there  is  a  commotion  among  the  articles  on 
the  table,  and  loud  knocks  resound.  The  bells  ring, 
various  instruments  are  displayed  above  the  curtain ; 
the  guitar  is  played  upon  near  the  ceiling,  beneath  the 
sitters'  chairs,  between  the  chimney  side  and  Horatio's 
chair  to  the  left,  flat  against  the  south  wall,  beyond  the 
lady  sitter  to  the  right,  and  elsewhere  ;  a  familiar  air  is 
played  in  concert  by  a  number  of  instruments ;  bells 
are  rung  singly  and  in  harmony  together,  and  hands  of 
various  sizes  and  tints  dart  into  sight  through  the  aper- 
ture in  the  curtain,  or  show  themselves  above  the  cord. 

On  the  occasion  referred  to,  the  gentleman  sitting 
next  to  Horatio  was  requested,  after  a  while,  to  give 
place  to  a  lady,  who,  when  she  had  taken  her  seat  and 
the  shawl  was  re-adjusted,  was  caressed  by  a  child's 
hand,  a  tiny  little  thing,  that  might  have  belonged  to  a 
girl  of  two  or  three  years.  It  patted  her  cheek,  was 
held  at  the  lips  to  be  kissed,  laid  upon  her  head, 
smoothed  her  hair,  and  when  her  eyes  filled  with  tears, 
wiped  them  away  and  renewed  its  caresses.  The  artist 
has  shown  me,  standing  far  in  advance  of  the  rest  of 
the  circle,  where  it  will  be  noticed  I  had  unobstructed 
view  of  all  that  transpired;  but  when  this  little  hand 
was  thrust  from  another  world  to  cheer  and  encourage 

CON TRA ST  OF  II A ND S. 

I8l 

the  mother,  whose  bosom  it  had  so  often  clasped  in  life, 
I  had  drawn  close  up  in  front,  and  saw  the  very  dimples 
on  it.  1  am,  therefore,  entirely  able  and  ready  to  affirm 
that,  even  if  the  medium  were  an  impostor,  and  had 
wished  to  deceive  his  sitters  with  a  clever  juggle,  he  did 
not  then  nor  could  not,  for  he  could  not  transform  his 
long,  brown,  bony,  sinewy  hand,  and  his  wrist,  muti- 
lated by  the  cruel  tying  of  many  "  committees,"  into 
the  size,  color,  and  shape  of  the  baby-hand  that  was 
materialized  before  my  eyes. 

Let  the  reader  judge.     Here  we  have  front  and  back 

views  of  Horatio's  right  hand,  and  a  view  of  the  baby 
hand  that  I  have  referred  to.  The  peculiar  mutilation 
of  his  wrist  by  the  compression  of  the  small  bones  of 
the  wrist  by  ligatures  when  they  were  soft,  will  be 
observed,  as  well  as  the  long,  slim,  almost  claw-like 

1 82  STRANGE  BUT  TRUE. 

fingers.  Observe  also,  by  reference  to  the  large  pic- 
ture, that,  as  Horatio  sits  at  the  extreme  left  of  the 
three,  he  could  only  use  his  right  hand  for  juggling, 
whereas  the  child-hand  is  a  left  one. 

It  has  been  doubted,  by  certain  persons  who  have 
written  to  the  newspapers,  that  more  than  one  hand  is 
shown  at  once  in  these  light  circles,  but  aside  from  my 
own  observations,  which  prove  the  contrary,  here  we 
have  the  certificate  of  a  clergyman  of  Albany : 

Chittenden,  Oct.  29th,  1874. 

This  is  to  certify  that  at  a  light  circle  which  I  attended  last  even- 
ing at  the  Eddy  homestead,  I  distinctly  saw  three  spirit-hands  dis- 
played at  one  time ;  of  which,  one  was  that  of  a  lady,  a  long,  slim 
hand  as  white  as  marble  ;  a  second,  the  great  hand  of  a  man  with 
the  entire  little  finger  of  the  right  hand  missing  ;  the  third,  another 
man's  hand,  very  white.  HENRY  J.  CLINKER. 

28  Hawk  St.,  Albany,  N.  Y. 

A  call  was  soon  made  for  writing  materials,  and  a 
succession  of  spirit-hands  clutching  the  pen  that  Wil- 
liam offered  them,  and  using  my  note-book  as  a  tablet, 
wrote  names  on  cards  and  threw  them  towards  the 
audience.  Some  were  names  of  the  dead,  some  of  the 
living ;  none,  I  am  satisfied,  familiar  to  the  medium. 

The  performances  of  the  evening  concluded,  at  the 
request  of  a  visitor,  with  a  series  of  imitations  of  the 
boring,  sawing,  and  splitting  of  wood,  the  filing  of  iron, 
and  the  pumping  of  water,  the  sounds  occurring  behind 
the  curtain,  and  all  being  so  true  to  nature  as  to  evoke 
great  applause. 

During  the  entire  sitting,  as  during  each  of  like  char- 
acter, Horatio's  two  hands  are  supposed  to  have  clasped 
the  bared  left  arm  of  the  person  next  him ;  his  eyes 
were  closed,  and,  as  I  said  before,  there  was  neither 

IV II  ESC  E  CAME   THE  POWER?  I  S3 

rustle  of  the  curtain,  nor  movement  of  his  feet,  body, 
or  shoulders.  For  all  the  attention  he  apparently  gave 
to  what  was  going  on  he  might  have  been  in  a  stupor, 
or  enjoying  a  nap  after  a  full  meal. 

Now,  this  experience  offers,  perhaps,  as  favorable  an 
opportunity  as  any  for  the  application  of  the  theory, 
that  no  reliance  should  be  placed  upon  the  evidence  of 
the  senses.  I  either  saw  the  baby-hand,  and  other 
larger  ones,  not  the  medium's,  heard  the  co-incidental 
playing  upon  several  instruments,  and  saw  the  guitar 
played  upon,  not  only  beyond  the  reach  of  Horatio's 
arm,  but  also  flat  against  the  south  wall,  in  a  position 
where  he  could  not  possibly  hold,  much  less  play  upon 
it ;  or  I  did  not. 

If  not,  who  psychologized  my  senses,  and  made  me 
fancy  all  these  things  ?  Not  Horatio,  for  stronger  wills 
than  his  have  vainly  attempted  to  "  magnetize "  me, 
and  he  could  not  do  it,  if  he  tried  ever  so  long.  Who 
then  ?  Nobody  else  in  the  flesh,  for  no  one  else  had 
the  slightest  interest  in  the  success  of  his  circle;  Wil- 
liam and  he  never  interfering  with  each  other.  Shall 
we  say,  then,  some  self-directed,  vagrant  force,  allying 
itself  with  this  medium  ?  Or,  as  a  last  extremity,  shall 
we  say  a  spirit  or  spirits  out  of  the  body,  and  "  let  it  go 
at  that  ?" 

CHAPTER  XIII.  x 

THE    RESPONSIBILITY    OF    SCIENTISTS. 

I  SCARCELY  ever  sit  down  to  write  a  chapter  of  this 
story  of  my  experience  among  the  Chittenden  ghosts 
without  feeling  the  similarity  between  my  mental  state 
and  that  of  one  who  threads  his  way  through  a  strange 
forest  by  night.  At  one  moment  the  traveler  catches  a 
glimpse  of  the  path  under  some  opening  where  the  star- 
light comes  down,  and  anon,  lost  in  obscurity  he  runs 
against  an  obstacle  that  must  be  surmounted  or  skirted ; 
his  senses  are  kept  constantly  on  the  alert  for  foes  of  one 
kind  or  another,  his  eyes  strained  for  pitfalls;  a  vague 
sense  of  danger  besets  him  ;  but  through  all,  his  .courage 
is  sustained  by  the  hope  of  getting  safely  out  of  the  woods, 
and  obtaining  that  security  and  repose  which  shall 
reward  him  for  all  the  difficulties  of  the  journey.  I  am  con- 
tinually oppressed  with  a  consciousness  of  the  possibility 
of  deception  by  the  truant  senses,  to  the  misleading  of 
many  good  people  who  are  obliged  to  depend  upon  their 
vigilance  for  the  formation  of  their  own  opinions.  It  is 
not  that  I  mistrust  these  mediums  more  than  all  mediums, 

but  because,  being  obliged,  so  to  say,  to  do  my  work  at 

184 

MEDIUMS  NOT  RESPONSIBLE.  185 

arm's  length  in  consequence  of  their  peculiar  disposition, 
I  am  kept  forever  on  the  watch. 

How  vast  a  pity  it  is  that  this  matter  of  the  intercourse 
between  the  two  worlds  is  so  tainted  with  falsehood  as 
to  make  such  vigilance  necessary  ;  that  the  observation 
of  its  phenomena  is  so  much  in  the  hands  of  ignorant, 
dishonest,  and  even  dissolute  people ;  that  the  most 
atrocious  fraud  is  often  practised  upon  honest  investiga- 
tors, and  that  the  sacredest  feelings  of  the  heart  are 
trifled  with  for  gain  i  But  the  responsibility  for  all  this 
is  easily  placed.  It  lies  at  the  door  of  those  men  of 
science  who  could  discover  to  us  _the  fundamental  law 
upon  which  these  things  rest,  if  they  would,  but  do  not ; 
so  turning  us  over  to  charlatans  and  enthusiasts  to  be 
deceived  and  misled  until  our  own  dearly  bought  experi- 
ence teaches  us,  and  shames  them  into  tardy  action.  If 
it  is  true  that  most  mediums  will  cheat,  when  their  real 
power  temporarily  leaves  them,  as  it  is,  that  only  makes  it 
all  the  more  necessary  that  competent  investigators 
should  set  to  work  without  loss  of  time  to  discover  the 
rule  by  which  we  might  know  the  false  from  the  true 
phenomena. 

The  pusillanimity  of  the  men  of  the  laboratory  has 
been  as  great  as  the  blind  violence  of  the  clergy.  The 
one  have  not  dared  to  pursue  investigations  that  might 
bring  upon  them  the  censure  of  an  ignorant  public ;  the 
other  have  denounced  as  devilish,  if  not  trivial,  a  series 
of  phenomena  that,  if  true,  will  soon  be  the  last  refuge 
of  the  church  from  the  destructive  engineering  of  the 
sappers  of  science.  If  both  had  joined  forces  twenty- 
seven  years  ago  in  a  patient  and  thorough  investigation 

1 8  6  ST  A  G  AND  HO  UNDS. 

of  these  "  spiritual  "  phenomena,  the  law  of  their  mani- 
festation would  have  been  long  ago  discovered,  and  the 
public  would  have  been  spared,  at  least  the  major  part 
of  the  swindles  and  trickery  by  which  mediums  have 
defrauded  it.  Professor  Robert  Hare,  the  discoverer  of 
the  oxy-hydrogen  blow-pipe,  and  one  of  the  most 
eminent  chemists  of  his  day,  whose  name  I  have  already 
mentioned  in  this  work,  recognized  the  duty  devolving 
upon  him,  and  spent  some  years  in  an  investigation  of 
Spiritualism.  The  result  was  his  conversion  to  the 
belief.  His  colleagues,  instead  of  applauding  his  course 
and  awarding  him  the  credit  he  deserved,  set  to  calling 
him  an  imbecile,  and,  like  a  pack  of  hounds  in  full  cry, 
ran  together  after  the  noble  quarry,  with  a  scent  breast- 
high. 

This  is  what  they  are  doing  now  to  Wallace,  Crookes, 
Varley,  and  the  Continental  philosophers.  This  is  what 
their  prototypes  did  to  Columbus,  Galileo,  Harvey, 
Watt,  Faust,  and  every  other  man  who,  being  of  giant 
character,  could,  so  to  speak,  look  over  the  heads  of  the 
crowd,  and  make  them  feel  their  own  littleness.  Mean 
envy  begets  spite,  and  spite  malice,  and  malice  cruelty. 
Until,  then,  the  scientists  give  a  full  and  fair  investigation 
to  this  subject,  and  proclaim  in  an  authoritative  manner 
the  truth,  we  need  spend  no  time  in  denouncing  mediums 
for  charlatanry.  We  might  as  justly  censure  the  people 
of  a  row  of  tenement-houses  for  piling  the  street  full  of 
garbage,  while  a  competent  Board  of  Health  was  in 
existence,  but  neglecting  its  duty. 

It  has  been  observed  by  frequenters  of  these  "  circles  " 
that  the  appearance  and  behavior  of  Honto   are   good 

A  SOCIAL  DANCE.  187 

indications  of  the  general  character  of  the  manifestations 
for  the  evening ;  if  she  is  active,  the  seance  will  be  a 
good  one  ;  if  not,  the  reverse.  The  plain  deduction  from 
this  is,  of  course,  that  she  and  the  other  spirits  are  alike 
subject  to  the  same  laws  governing  the  occurrence  of 
the  phenomena ;  and  not  as  some  devout  Spiritualists 
suppose,  that  her  condition  reflects  upon  that  of  her 
fellows  by  a  mysterious  exercise  of  her  will  upon  their 
power  of  materialization. 

On  the  second  evening  of  my  visit  Honto  was  the 
first  spirit  to  appear,  and  she  remained  in  sight  nearly  fifteen 
minutes.  Mrs.  Cleveland  and  Mr.  Pritchard  occupied 
their  usual  chairs  at  either  end  of  the  platform,  and 
Honto  danced  with  the  former  in  a  lively  manner,  balanc- 
ing, advancing,  crossing  over,  and  turning  the  old  lady 
as  though  the  whole  delight  of  her  soul  were  in  the 
figures  of  the  dance.  She  would  sway  first  to  one  side 
and  then  the  other,  raise  her  hands  above  her  head,  bend 
backwards  until  her  spine  was  nearly  doubled  upon 
itself,  like  a  carpenter's  rule,  and  fling  herself  about  in  an 
exuberance  of  childish  glee.  Leaving  her  partner,  she 
then  passed  to  the  other  end  of  the  stage,  always  keep- 
ing step  to  the  music,  and  balanced  to  Mr.  Pritchard, 
who,  being  partially  paralyzed,  could  only  take  her 
hands  in  his,  and  humor  her  fancy  by  waving  them  from 
side  to  side  and  up  and  down,  as  her  light  feet  rose  and 
fell.  The  spirit-girl  held  her  face  close  to  each  of  theirs, 
that  they  might  scan  her  features,  and  making  Mrs. 
Cleveland  turn  about,  she  stood  back  against  back  with 
her  to  show  us  her  height.  The  living  woman  measures 
just  five  feet  seven  inches,  and  Honto,  holding  herself  erect, 

1 88  A  PATHETIC  SCENE. 

was  about  half  a  head  shorter.  The  skirt  of  her  dress 
to-night  reached  but  little  below  her  knees,  so  that  I  easily 
assured  myself  that  she  was  no  man  making  himself  short 
by  bending  his  legs. 

The  apparition  of  a  youngish  woman  holding  a  baby 
in  her  arms  followed  immediately  after  Honto's  retire- 
ment, and  caused  an  exhibition  of  tender  pathos.  In 
the  semi-darkness  of  the  room  it  is,  as  I  have  said  before, 
generally  but  not  always  the  case,  that  persons  cannot 
recognize  the  spirits  until  attention  has  been  specially 
drawn  to  them,  when  their  individuality  is  settled  by  the 
general  appearance  of  their  form,  weight,  and  motions, 
in  case  no  words  are  spoken  by  them  to  their  questioning 
friends.  In  this  case  the  usual  query,  "  Is  it  for  me  ?  " 
was  running  along  the  line,  when  a  woman's  voice 
exclaimed  in  an  agonizing  tone,  "  Is  that  my  baby  ?     Is  it 

my ;    is  it  Charlie  ?  "     The   spirit-woman   nodded 

and  smiled  and  held  the  baby  forward  for  recognition. 
There  was  a  sob,  a  wail,  an  outburst  of  maternal  tender- 
ness :  "  My  darling  !  My  angel !  " — and  the  poor  mother 
could  say  no  more,  for  sobs  choked  her  utterance. 

This  scene  was  followed  by  another  of  like  character. 
A  German  Jewess  of  nervous  temperament  sat  beside 
me  on  the  front  bench.  The  curtain  was  pushed  aside, 
and  there  in  the  cabinet's  door  stood  her  daughter  of 
twelve  years,  in  a  white  gown,  and  with  her  black  hair 
brushed  back  from  her  temples.  The  mother,  overcome 
with  joy,  poured  forth  a  volley  of  questions  in  German, 
intermingled  with  ejaculations,  which  the  happy  child 
tried  to  answer  by  rapping  assent  or  dissent  with  her 
knuckles  upon  the  door-post,  and  disappeared  as  her 

WELL-KNOWN    SPIRIT-FORMS. 

A  SCALE  OF  HEIGHTS.  191 

mother  was  ready  to  fall  into  a  swoon  from  excess  of 
emotion. 

Ten  spirits  in  all  showed  themselves,  viz.:    Honto; 

Mrs.  Carpenter,  an  elderly  lady;   Abby ;   the  lady 

and  infant ;  two  children ;  a  German,  named  Abraham 
Alsbach,  who  spoke  German  to  his  sister ;  a  young  lady 
with  long  blonde  hair,  who  wore  a  white  dress  with 
low  neck  and  short  sleeves  and  a  flowing  train — a  very 
pretty  spirit ;  and  an  aged  lady,  the  grandmother  of  a 
person  present. 

On  the  next  evening  the  shapes  of  seven  Indians  and 
five  whites  were  seen,  and  a  majority  of  them  were  so 
obliging  as  to  back  up  to  the  wall  and  allow  themselves 
to  be  measured.  In  the  hopes  of  aiding  my  judgment 
as  to  the  relative  heights  of  the  medium  and  the  sev- 
eral spirits,  I  caused  two  strips  of  white  muslin  to  be 
painted  in  feet  and  inches,  and  tacked  them  on  the 
wall  at  either  side  of  the  cabinet  door.  This  would 
enable  the  eye  to  note  where  the  head  of  each  appari- 
tion reached  at  the  moment  the  spirit  stepped  over  the 
threshold.  The  painter,  however,  made  the  mistake 
of  painting  the  figures  about  a  third  too  small,  and, 
therefore,  while  with  the  fair  light  we  had  the  first 
evening  the  scale  was  used  I  could  see  heights  to  with- 
in a  couple  of  inches,  I  had  to  rely  upon  Mr.  Pritchard 
to  call  off  the  exact  figures.  One  most  important  result 
was,  at  any  rate,  attained  in  settling  beyond  question 
the  fact  that  figures,  able  to  stand  alone  and  walk,  were 
seen,  whose  heights  varied  from  2  feet  1  inch  to  6  feet 
2  3-4  inches.  Of  these  extremes,  one  was  Santum,  the 
Winnebago  spirit,  and  the  other  a  little  white  child, 

192 

A    TIME-TABLE. 

who  leaned  against  the  right-hand  door-post.  I  timed 
the  intervals  between  the  appearance  of  four  of  the 
apparitions,  and  found  them  as  follows: 

From  departure  of 
spirit  of 

Santum — Sex,  male;  height, 
6  feet  2  3-4  inches  ;  dress, 
Indian,  ornamented  with 
stripes  of  embroidery  and 
fringe  of  buckskin  ;  com 
plexion,  dark  copper.. . . 

B- 

R- 

Mrs.  R- 

Swift  Cloud. 

To  arrival  of 
spirit  of 

B —  R .    Sex,  male  ; 

complexion,  white;  hair, 
light  ;  age,  fourteen  ; 
height,  4  feet  9  inches  ; 
dress,  European  (jacket 
and  trousers  dark,  white 
shirt,  black  tie) 

Old  Mrs.   R ,  mother 

of  lady  present  —  Sex, 
female  ;  complexion, 
light  ;  hair,  white  ;  age, 
about  sixty;  dress,  Euro 
pean 

"  Swift  Cloud  "  —  Sex, 
male  ;  complexion,  cop 
per;  hair,  black;  height, 
5  feet  10  inches  ;  dress, 
Indian  (blue  jacket  with 
fringed  sleeves,  brown 
or  gray  hunting-shirt, 
worn  outside,  leggings 
fringed,  and  feather  in 
hair) 

A  child — Sex,  male  ;  age, 
six  ;  height,  — ;  dress, 
European 

Interval  of 
tune. 

M.     S. 

45 

50 

35 

30 

This  was  a  Saturday  night,  and  according  to  rule  no 
circle  was  held  the  following  evening,  but  an  event  of 
serious  import  to  at  least  one  person  occurred  which  is 
worth  recounting.  The  house  being  crowded  with 
visitors,  William  Eddy  had  for  a  bed-fellow  a  Mr.  Car- 
penter, of  Malone,  New  York,  a  gentleman  who 
impressed  me  as  a  person  of  candor  and  intelligence, 
and  who  has  enjoyed  the  advantage  of  much  general 
travel,  as  well  as  a  voyage  around  the  world.  William 
had  shaved  off  his  moustache  during  the  hot  weather, 

THE  MALICIOUS  BARBER.  193 

but  was  now  allowing  it  to  grow,  and  it  had  attained  a 
length  of  perhaps  half  an  inch.  On  Sunday  night  the 
two  retired  and  lay  awake  talking,  when  Mr.  Carpen- 
ter was  afforded  a  first-class  sensation,  which  I  prefer 
him  to  describe  in  his  own  fashion  : 

Chittenden,  Vt.,  Sept.  21st,  1S74. 
Mr.  Okott, 

Dear  Sir:  In  compliance  with  your  request,  I  repeat  the  events 
of  last  night,  as  follows:  1 

After  retiring  to  bed  as  usual,  with  William  Eddy,  we  lay  talking 
for  some  time,  when  he  suddenly  became  silent.  A  shiver  or  slight 
convulsion  seemed  to  run  through  his  body,  and  I  heard  a  voice  say : 
"  Now  I  've  got  you  just  where  I  want  you."  I  asked :  "  Whom  do 
you  mean  ;  do  you  mean  me  ? "  The  voice  replied,  "  No  ;  Mr.  Eddy." 
I  then  asked:  "Who  is  it?  Is  it  Mr.  Morse?"  The  voice  replied, 
"  No,  it's  Asa  Perkins."  Addressing  William  apparently,  the  voice 
continued :  "  I'll  learn  you  not  to  keep  me  around  here  all  day  and 
not  let  me  come.  I'll  put  a  mark  on  you  so  you'll  know  me  when  I 
want  to  come  again."  I  then  heard  the  scraping  of  a  razor,  and  the 
voice  said  :  "  There,  I've  put  a  mark  on  you,  so  I  guess  you'll  know 
me  when  I  want  to  come  again."  I  asked  the  kind  of  a  mark  he 
had  put  on  William.  The  voice  said:  "I've  cut  one  side  of  his 
moustache  off  ;  you  just  feel."  I  felt  his  lip,  and  sure  enough,  one 
side  of  his  moustache  was  gone. 

The  spirit  then  left  and  William  came  to  himself  again.  The 
voice  had  told  me  not  to  tell  William  what  had  been  done,  so  I  said 
nothing. 

In  the  morning  William  discovered  the  trick  when  he  looked  in 
the  glass,  and  was  so  angry  that  he  declared  he  would  go  at  once  to 
New  York  and  take  the  first  vessel  for  Europe,  and  put  himself  in 
such  a  condition  that  neither  spirits  nor  mortals  could  play  tricks  on 
him.     He  was  vexed  at  all  who  saw  him  for  not  telling  of  it  at  once. 

The  razor  with  which  the  shaving  was  done,  lay  on  a  shelf  in  the 
corner  cupboard,  and  to  get  and  use  it,  of  course,  the  spirit  must 
have  materialized  himself.  Henry  Carpenter. 

No  wonder  that  the  medium  was  out  of  temper,  for 
it  foreboded  no  good  to  him  if,  after  resigning  himself 
to  mediumship,  he  should  be  at  the  mercy  of  any  pass- 
ing poltergeist,  and  no  friendly  power  stood  by  to  protect 

194  THE  SMOKING  SQUAW. 

him  from  harm.  He  presented  a  comical  enough 
appearance  with  his  lip  half  shaved,  and  his  indigna- 
tion was  forcibly  expressed  at  all  who  had  suffered  him 
to  go  about  for  an  hour  or  so  looking  like  such  a  fright, 
without  telling  him  of  his  misfortune. 

The  weather  on  Monday  evening  was  favorable,  the 
moon  shining  brightly,  the  temperature  of  the  air  low, 
and  a  hard  frost  beginning.  Eight  spirits  showed  them- 
selves —  four  Indians  and  four  whites.  Honto  came 
first,  and  went  through  her  usual  performance,  "  mate- 
rializing "  shawls,  pieces  of  cloth,  and  white  lace,  and 
dancing.  She  moved  to  the  extreme  south  end  of  the 
platform,  and  stood  there  making  signs  to  Horatio  Eddy 
which  he  did  not  understand.  She  was  just  turning  to 
go  back,  when  Mrs.  Eaton's  shrill  voice,  calling  from 
■within  the  cabinet,  said  :  "  She  wants  to  smoke."  I  filled 
my  own  pipe  and  handed  it  to  Horatio,  who  lighted  it, 
and  gave  it  to  the  squaw  ;  and  then  we  had  the  astonish- 
ing spectacle  of  a  materialized  spirit  from  the  other 
world,  walking  about  and  drawing  such  great  whiffs 
from  a  tobacco-pipe,  that  the  glowing  contents  of  the 
bowl  cast  a  ruddy  glow  upon  her  coppery  features. 
Alas !  for  all  our  poetical  fancies  about  vapory  forms, 
and  snowy  robes,  and  shining  wings,  and  harps  of  gold 
■ —  there  stood  a  smoking  squaw  before  us,  in  feature, 
costume  and  complexion  the  type  of  her  race,  and  with 
no  more  appearance  of  spirituality  about  her  than  any 
of  the  women  in  the  room,  who  sat  there  regarding 
her  with  amazement ! 

Another  squaw  who  appeared  that  evening  was  a 
new-comer,  unknown  to  any  one  present,  but  claiming 

THE   SMOKING    SQUAW. 

TWO   VOICES  AT  ONCE.  197 

to  be  one  of  the  band  influencing  a  medium  visitor. 
She  was  a  very  short  woman,  not  above  five  feet  high, 
and  of  a  very  much  darker  complexion  than  Honto. 
She  wore  a  dress  of  dark  blue  or  black,  apparently  the 
former — trimmed  with  bands  of  large  beads  that  clat- 
tered as  she  walked.  Her  moccasins  and  leggings 
were  also  trimmed  with  them,  and  her  hair  was  very 
long  and  thick,  and  hung  free  down  her  back. 

Mrs.  R saw  her  son  again  to-night,  and  in  reply 

to  her  question  :  "  Are  you  happy,  my  son  ?"  I  heard 
him  distinctly  say:  "I  am,  mother!"  There  was  no 
ventriloquism  by  somebody  within  the  cabinet,  for  I 
dimly  saw  his  lips  move,  and  at  the  same  time  he  made 
a  reassuring  gesture  to  lend  emphasis  to  his  words. 

And  now  will  the  reader  go  back  a  paragraph  and 
note  what  may  have  escaped  his  notice :  That  while 
Honto  was  out  on  the  stage,  a  dozen  feet  distant  from 
the  cabinet,  and  with  her  back  towards  it,  we  were 
addressed  by  another  person  from  within  its  dark 
recess !  It  having  been  demonstrated  that  William  has 
no  confederates,  it  is  in  order  for  the  skeptics  to  choose 
between  the  alternatives  of  admitting  that  Honto  and 
he  are  not  identical,  or  of  accounting  for  the  presence 
of  a  second  person  in  a  place  where  it  was  a  physical 
impossibility  for  any  mortal  to  be. 

Another  circumstance  going  to  prove  the  same  thing 
I  find  I  have  omitted  to  mention,  viz:  Whenever 
Honto  passes  one  of  her  materialized  shawls  or  pieces 
of  cloth  into  the  cabinet,  after  exhibiting  it  to  the  audi- 
ence, it  is  not  thrown  in,  but  handed  to  some  other  person 
behind  the  curtain.  Who  it  is  we  know  not,  for  we 
7* 

198  TWO  SPIRITS  AT  ONE  TIME. 

never  see  the  form,  nor  even  a  hand.  The  action  is  not 
done  in  a  way  to  attract  attention,  for  it  is  so  natural ; 
and  I  suppose  I  must  have  seen  it  a  dozen  times,  before 
I  appreciated  its  importance  as  evidence  in  favor  of  the 
defendant,  which,  of  course,  the  medium  must  be 
regarded  as  being. 

Other  evidence,  and  of  the  best  kind,  going  to  show 
that  the  forms  appearing  upon  the  platform  are  not  the 
medium,  is  afforded  in  the  following  certificate,  which 
has  been  handed  to  me  by  one  of  the  signers.  It  so 
happened  that  the  whole  of  this  party  found  themselves 
together  at  Chittenden  on  a  second  visit,  and  I  was  thus 
enabled  to  procure  their  joint  testimony  as  to  the  inter- 
esting facts  stated : 

Chittenden,  October  21st,  1874. 
We  hereby  certify  that  at  a  circle,  held  on  the  28th  of  April  last, 
in  the  new  hall  at  the  Eddy  homestead,  among  other  things  that 
occurred,  was  the  following,  which  we  regarded  as  very  conclusive 
as  to  the  genuineness  of  the  spirit  materializations  :  "  Santum"  was 
out  on  the  platform,  and  another  Indian  of  almost  as  great  stature 
came  out,  and  the  two  passed  and  re-passed  each  other  as  they  walked 
up  and  down.  The  stranger  chief  retired  first,  and  Santum  followed 
him.  At  the  same  time,  a  conversation  was  being  carried  on  between 
"  George  Dix,"  "  Mayflower,"  old  "  Mr.  Morse,"  and  "  Mrs.  Eaton," 
inside  the  cabinet.     We  recognized  the  familiar  voice  of  each. 

We  had  all  examined  the  cabinet  that  evening,  and  helped  clear 
it  of  some  plaster  and  other  rubbish.  There  was  no  window  in  it 
then.  R.  Hodgson,  M.  D.,  Stoneham,  Mass. 

George  Ralph,  Utica,  N.  Y. 

Sarah  A.  Ehle,  Utica,  N.  Y. 

Cora  C.  Ehle,  Utica,  N.  Y. 

Hermon  Ehle,  Utica,  N.  Y. 

Observe  the  points  covered  in  this  document:  1. 
Two  giant  Indian  spirits  are  seen  at  once,  walking  up 
and  down;   2.  A  conversation  between  four  voices  is 

A  BUSY  SEANCE.  201 

going  on  inside  the  cabinet,  while  the  two  Indians  are 
outside,  in  view ;  3.  There  was  no  window  then  in  the 
cabinet;  this  seance  being  held  in  April,  three  months 
after  the  circle-room  was  built,  and  the  window  not 
being  cut  through  the  wall  until  the  following  July. 

On  the  next  evening  I  saw  more  spirits  than  on  any 
other  single  occasion  but  one,  during  my  whole  visit. 
Seventeen  showed  themselves,  and  all  were  whites. 
There  were  of  babies,  2;  small  children,  3;  women, 
young  and  old,  5  ;  and  adult  males,  7.  The  theory  that 
deceptive  imitations  of  little  children  were  made  by 
wrapping  white  rags  around  one  or  both  the  medium's 
legs,  as  occasion  required,  was  destroyed  by  the  circum- 
stance that  the  smallest  child,  not  a  babe,  I  saw  that 
evening,  bowed  and  curtsied  to  its  mother,  in  reply  to  her 
question  as  to  its  identity. 

Mr.  Pritchard,  who  sat  next  to  me  on  my  right  in  the 
front  row,  was  called  to  the  platform  by  Mrs.  Eaton's 
voice,  and  when  he  reached  there,  his  two  nephews 
William  and  Chester  Packard,  late  of  Albany,  N.  Y., 
came  out  in  turn  to  greet  him ;  the  former  shaking  hands 
with  him,  and  laying  his  left  hand  upon  his  uncle's 
shoulder. 

At  the  close  of  the  evening,  Mrs.  Eaton's  voice, 
addressing  me,  said  that  William  was  being  developed 
for  a  new  and  startling  phase  of  mediumship,  the  nature 
of  which  she  did  not  condescend  to  explain. 

I  have  a  memorandum  among  my  notes  of  this  day, 
that  a  number  of  persons  from  different  localities,  were 
turned  back  upon  applying  for  admission  to  the  farm- 
house ;  and  at  the  risk  of  appearing  over-urgent,  recall 

202  DISAPPOINTMENT. 

attention  to  what  I  have  previously  said  upon  this  subject. 
I  have  seen  respectable  persons  refused,  after  making 
very  long  journeys,  and  assuming  expenses  that  I  am 
sure  they  could  ill-afford,  to  have  the  satisfaction  of  seeing 
their  loved  and  lost  ones.  It  is  a  bitter  disappointment 
in  any  case,  to  have  the  door  shut  in  one's  face  under 
such  circumstances,  but  to  those  whose  hearts  are  bleed- 
ing from  wounds  just  inflicted,  it  must  have  been  agony. 
All  my  sympathies  have  gone  out  to  some  sad-eyed 
women,  whose  wistful  gaze  has  lingered  about  the  door, 
as  the  horses'  heads  were  finally  turned  towards  Rutland. 
I  have  felt  at  such  times  the  desire  for  unlimited  wealth, 
that,  after  proving  the  reality  of  these  phenomena,  I 
might  buy  this  place,  erect  great  buildings,  pension  off 
the  brothers  for  life,  and  throw  open  the  doors  of  a  new 
and  capacious  circle-room  to  all  who  might  come. 

But  what  can  these  boys  do?  Their  ancient  house 
holds  only  a  score  of  strangers,  even  with  close  packing, 
and  they  are  forced  to  establish  rules  of  admission,  and 
stand  by  them.  If  people  will  come  from  Michigan  or 
Minnesota,  from  Kentucky  or  South  Carolina,  without 
assuring  themselves  in  advance  of  bed  and  board,  the 
responsibility  of  exclusion  rests  with  them.  I  have  had 
some  of  my  own  personal  acquaintances  served  so,  and 
did  not  remonstrate.  But  it  would  save  disappointment 
and  trouble  to  all  concerned,  if  some  sort  of  system  were 
inflexibly  maintained.  It  seems  to  me  that  it  would  be  a 
very  easy  matter  for  the  family  to  issue  cards  to  appli- 
cants, good  for  so  many  days  from  and  after  such  a  date. 
As  things  are  mismanaged  at  present,  good,  candid  people 
are  often  refused,  and   penniless   or   deceitful   marplots 

SOME  RULE  NECESSARY.  203 

often  received.  It  will  be  found  in  every  instance,  I 
think,  where  visitors  have  gone  away  dissatisfied  with  the 
genuineness  of  the  manifestations,  that  they  have  stayed 
less  than  a  week,  and  so  had  next  to  no  opportunity  to 
really  see  or  understand  the  phenomena  as  they  are. 

Nearly  every  one  of  the  scurrilous  attacks  that  have 
appeared  in  newspapers,  has  been  written  by  just  such 
superficial  investigators,  and  the  family  owe  it  to  them- 
selves to  take  nobody  for  less  than  one  week.  But  it  is  a 
waste  of  words  to  talk  to  them  about  their  reputations  as 
mediums,  their  duties  to  the  public,  or  their  treatment  of 
visitors.  Their  reply  is,  that  the  house  is  their  home,  they 
invite  none  to  come,  and  they  have  the  right  to  say  whom 
they  will  accept,  and  whom  reject.  As  to  their  reputa- 
tions, they  profess  to  care  nothing  as  to  what  is  said 
concerning  them,  good,  bad,  or  indifferent.  They  are  a 
strange  family,  and  seem  to  reserve  their  worst  treatment 
for  those  who  are  most  desirous  to  befriend  them.  There 
are  exceptions,  but  this  seems  the  rule. 

Another  argument  in  favor  of  the  establishment  of  such 
a  rule  as  that  above  suggested,  is  the  uncertainty  as  to  a 
visitor  seeing  his  friends  in  any  short  stay.  I  have  fre- 
quently known  of  their  being  favored  in  their  first  seance, 
and,  again,  as  often  of  their  seeing  nobody  they  cared 
for,  even  after  waiting  patiently  for  a  week  or  more.  If 
we  could  "  call  up  "  whomsoever  we  chose,  as  Saul  did 
the  shade  of  Samuel,  it  would  be  another  matter,  but 
under  present  conditions  the  visits  of  our  angel  friends 
seem  to  depend  upon  laws  beyond  their  control  or  our 
own. 

For  my  part,  I  confess  that,  in  view  of  the  uncertainty 

204  IDENTITY  OF  MINOR  CONSEQUENCE. 

of  our  being  able  to  demonstrate  their  identity  even 
when  they  do  come,  if  they  come  at  all,  in  consequence 
of  our  ignorance  of  the  limits  to  the  mischievous  power 
of  the  jugglers  of  the  other  world  to  cheat  us  with  coun- 
terfeit presentments  of  our  "  deceased  "  friends,  and  the 
unsatisfied  feeling  that  their  flitting  appearance  before 
our  eyes  leaves  behind,  I  care  less  that  any  individual 
person  should  come,  than  that  any  spirit  at  all  should  be 
able  to  break  down  the  wall  between  the  two  worlds.  In 
short,  if  I  can  be  satisfied  through  these  "  manifestations  " 
of  the  great  basic  fact  of  Immortality,  I  am  satisfied  to 
wait  with  a  cheerful  heart  for  the  coming  of  that  hour, 
common  to  us  all,  when  the  mystery  of  life  will  be  solved, 
and  the  veil  be  drawn  aside  to  let  the  glorious  light 
stream  in. 

CHAPTER    XIV. 

THE    DARK    CIRCLE. 

WILLIAM'S  circle  was  followed  by  one  of  Horatio's 
"  dark-circles,"  in  which  what  occurs,  is  in  a  room 
totally  dark.  The  preparations  for  this  event 
consist  in  hanging  shawls  or  blankets  over  the  four  win- 
dows nearest  the  platform,  to  exclude  even  starlight, 
removing  the  table  with  its  array  of  musical  instruments 
to  a  position  on  the  main  floor  just  in  front  of  the  railing, 
and  tying  Horatio  in  a  chair,  placed  to  the  right  of  the 
table  and  in  front  of  the  spectators.  Upon  the  extinction 
of  the  light,  the  gruff  voice  of  the  sailor-spirit  "  George 
Dix  "  and  the  piping  whisper  of  the  little  girl-spirit  "  May- 
flower "  are  heard  greeting  us,  special  mention  being 
often  made  of  favorite  acquaintances  by  the  curiously 
matched  copartners  in  the  direction  of  these  striking 
seances.  Dix  asserts,  that  he  was  drowned  at  the  wreck 
of  the  Steamship  President,  which  may  or  may  not  be 
true,  but  the  truth  of  which  is  of  no  consequence  in  view 
of  what  he  does  and  causes  to  be  done. 

If  any  over-zealous  inquirer  should  wish  to  verify  the 
fact,  he  can  do  so  by  taking  the  trouble  to  examine  the 

shipping  papers  of  the  crew  of  the  ill-fated  steamship, 

205 

206  MA  YFLO  WER 'S  STOR  V. 

which  will  no  doubt  be  found  in  the  archives  of  the 
Customs  Bureau  of  the  Treasury  Department.  So  far  as 
I  am  personally  concerned,  Dix  might  as  well  call  him- 
self Jack  Cade  or  General  Washington.  More  than  this, 
as  we  are  in  pitchy  darkness,  I  would  not  waste  time  in 
speaking  of  him  at  all,  if  I  thought  the  things  he  does 
could  be  done  by  Horatio  if  he  were  free  to  move  about 
as  much  as  he  liked. 

"Mayflower's  "  story  is  that  she  died  of  fever,  a  century 
ago,  while  a  captive  among  the  Indians  of  the  Maine 
wilderness.  She  was  the  daughter  of  Italian  immigrants, 
who  were  murdered  on  their  "  clearing  "  in  one  of  the 
many  Indian  raids  by  which  the  early  settlers  on  our 
Canadian  frontier  were  so  greatly  harassed.  This  spirit, 
by  some  strange  law  of  spiritual  intercourse  not  satisfac- 
torily explained  to  me,  re-visits  this  world  as  a  child  of 
twelve  years,  and  manifests  juvenile  traits  in  all  that  she 
does.  She  exhibits  the  Italian  talent  for  improvisation, 
hardly  missing  an  opportunity  to  rattle  off  her  verses  upon 
any  subject  named  impromptu  by  any  person  in  the 
audience.  She  is  also  an  accomplished  performer  on 
various  instruments,  which  she  plays  with  rare  power  and 
expression.  Her  nature,  judging  by  her  conversation  and 
acts,  is  simple,  innocent,  and  kindly ;  her  heart  is  warm 
and  sympathetic,  and  her  chief  desire  to  afford  pleasure 
to  those  of  a  refined  disposition  whom  the  fame  of  these 
circles  may  have  attracted  to  the  place.  George  Dix,  on 
the  other  hand,  is  a  manly,  powerful  spirit,  with  a  grip 
like  a  vice,  a  rollicking,  prankish  nature,  and  a  hoarse 
voice,  like  that  of  one  accustomed  to  shout  in  storms 
from  maintop  to  deck. 

*  fiw'wimgm 

s® 

?  ~\\ 

m 

GEORGE  DIX,   THE  SAILOR.  209 

He  is  a  spinner  of  yarns,  not  always  devoid  of  a  coarser 
flavor  than  the  customs  of  mixed  assemblages  permit ;  an 
ingenious  fellow,  who  sings,  plays  well  on  the  violin, 
whistles  like  a  Boehm  flute,  and  to  keep  things  lively,  is 
ready  to  bear  a  hand  at  any  sort  of  work,  from  the  mov- 
ing of  ponderous  objects  and  the  ringing  of  bells,  to  the 
imitation  of  almost  any  sound  produced  by  any  of  the 
mechanic  arts  with  which  he  is  familiar.  Moreover,  he 
is  one  of  your  men  of  knowledge,  and  given  to  the 
unreserved  utterance  of  opinions ;  ready  at  a  moment's 
notice  to  give  you  the  analysis  of  electricity  or  a  poetical 
invocation  to  the  Deity;  just  as,  according  to  Sydney 
Smith,  Lord  John  Russell  was  ready  to  attempt  the  com- 
mand of  the  Channel  Fleet  or  the  operation  for  lithotomy, 
with  equal  alacrity.  But  George  Dix,  or  George  what- 
soever may  be  his  name,  is  a  capital  good  fellow,  who  has 
always  a  hearty  grip  for  an  honest  man,  and  a  heavy  fist 
for  those  who  deserve  to  feel  its  weight.  When  Dr. 
B was  here,  it  was  Dix's  hand  that,  in  Horatio's  light- 
circle,  beat  that  worthy  over  the  head  with  the  guitar, 
causing  his  precipitate  flight  and  striking  terror  into  his 
guilty  soul ;  and  it  was  he  who  one  night  in  a  dark-circle 
pulled  a  man  named  Frost  by  the  legs  out  of  his  chair  to 
the  floor,  with  a  great  bump  that  shook  us  in  our  seats. 
When  I  say  "  grip  "  I  mean  just  that,  for  this  spirit,  in 
addition  to  shaking  hands  with  me  sundry  times,  once 
gave  mc  one  of  the  grips  of  a  Master  Mason,  which  for 
want  of  space,  or  another  sufficient  reason,  I  will  not  now 
describe.     Horatio,  I  may  remark,  is  not  a  Mason. 

Compliments  being  exchanged,  a  medley  performance 
begins.     There  is  a  dance  of  a  pack  of  a  dozen  howling, 

210  A  HURLY-BURLY. 

leaping,  skylarking  Indians,  who  beat  on  the  drums,  rat- 
tle the  tambourines,  blow  the  horns,  ring  the  heavier 
bells,  and  make  a  din  so  hideous  that  one  easily  fancies 
himself  caught  in  the  melee  of  a  dance  of  live  redskins 
about  starting  on  the  war-path.  If  Horatio  were  unbound 
and  using  all  four  of  his  locomotive  and  prehensile  mem- 
bers, he  could  not  imitate  this  dance.  The  creatures 
yell,  and  one  can  hear  their  stamping  on  the  floor  in 
cadence  with  their  rude  music.  The  dance  is  preceded 
by  a  stillness  so  dead  that,  for  any  sound  of  life,  we  might 
fancy  the  room  empty.  A  slow  beating  of  the  time,  a 
few  clangs  of  the  big  dinner-bell,  a  measured  beat  of  the 
tambourine,  and  then  the  time  grows  faster  and  faster, 
until,  in  a  moment,  we  are  in  the  midst  of  the  hurly-burly. 
It  needed  no  stretch  of  imagination  to  see,  even  in  the 
Egyptian  darkness  of  the  hall,  the  wild  figures  circling 
round  and  round,  for  their  demonstrations  were  of  so 
obstreperous  a  character  as  to  frighten  all  but  habitues 
of  the  coolest  temperaments.  As  an  exhibition  of  pure 
brute  force,  if  such  a  term  may  be  applied  to  the  occult 
power  that  produces  it,  this  Indian  dance  probably  is 
unsurpassed  in  the  annals  of  spiritual  manifestations. 

Following  this  episode,  upon  the  evening  in  question, 
came  a  sword-combat,  apparently  between  two  persons, 
for  the  hacking  of  the  two  blades  was,  it  seemed  to  me, 
too  violent  to  be  done  by  one  man  operating  in  the  dark, 
at  the  risk  of  chopping  off  a  finger,  or  mutilating  a  wrist. 
The  play  of  weapons  ended  in  a  sudden  groan,  and  the 
falling  of  a  man's  body  on  the  floor  at  my  feet.  I  cer- 
tainly thought  some  one  had  found  his  quietus,  with  some 
one's  else  bare  bodkin,  but  a  match  being  struck  and  a 

THE  DARK-CIRCLE. 

ANOTHER  TEST.  213 

candle  lighted,  the  medium  was  found  sitting  quietly  in  his 
chair,  with  his  bonds  undisturbed,  and  no  sign  of  perspira- 
tion on  his  skin.  The  floor,  however,  was  littered  with 
musical  instruments  and  bells,  and  the  swords  of  the 
unseen  combatants  were  lying  along  with  them.  The 
scenes  sketched  by  the  artist  in  two  of  the  cuts  give  an 
idea  of  the  appearance  of  the  room,  before  the  extinction 
of  the  candle  and  upon  its  re-lighting. 

The  medium  (or  rather  the  spirit  controlling  him,  for 
he  is  supposed  to  be  in  an  unconscious  state,  and  his 
organs  used  by  a  spirit,  which  may  or  may  not  be  true, 
and  which  I  do  not  regard  as  important  in  the  settlement 
of  our  problem)  then  invited  me  to  take  measures  to 
satisfy  myself  that  the  phenomena  were  genuine.  Accord- 
ingly a  gentleman  present,  Mr.  George  W.  Nichols,  of 
John  H.  Draper  &  Co.,  auctioneers,  New  York  City,  sat 
in  Horatio  Eddy's  lap,  while  I,  drawing  up  my  chair  in 
front  of  him,  placed  my  feet  upon  Horatio's  toes  and  held 
Mr.  Nichols'  hands,  thus  making  it  impossible  that  either 
of  the  three  should  move  without  each  of  the  others 
knowing  it.  Moreover,  Horatio  could  not  move  if  he 
wished,  for  his  hands  were  tightly  bound  to  the  back  of 
his  chair,  and  even  if  he  could  disengage  them,  he  could 
not  move  them  forward  to  touch  us,  or  the  instruments 
scattered  about ;  his  slightest  motion  would  be  instantly 
detected  by  the  man  sitting  on  his  lap.  The  light  was 
again  extinguished  and  a  new  performance  began. 
Hands,  cold,  clammy,  and  firm,  stroked  our  faces,  patted 
our  heads  and  hands,  slapped  me  on  my  back  and  legs, 
and  Mr.  Nichols  on  the  parts  of  his  person  not  leaning 
against  the  medium,  a  pair  of  lips  kissed  my  cheek,  and 

214  WONDERFUL  RESULT. 

two  huge  hands  tickled  me  under  my  arms  at  one  time. 
Then  the  accordeon,  concertina,  and  tambourine  were 
played  all  about  us,  bells  were  rung,  blows  given  on  the 
floor  with  the  swords,  and  the  guitar,  floating  through 
the  air  or  resting  upon  my  head,  played  one  or  more 
familiar  airs.  Meanwhile  every  person  in  the  front  row 
of  the  audience  sat  with  hands  joined,  which  is  the  same 
as  saying,  that  no  one,  even  if  so  disposed,  could  get  to 
us  to  do  what  was  done.  These  manifestations  being 
concluded,  light  was  called  for,  and  we  two  resumed  our 
seats  in  the  "circle."  The  artist's  sketch  shows  our 
relative  positions  during  the  test  sitting. 

The  next  thing  in  order  was  the  improvisation  of 
rhymes  by  Mayflower.  The  dear  child,  who  came  and 
laid  her  little  hand  on  mine  for  an  instant,  allowed  me  to 
name  the  subject,  and  then  reeled  off  a  score  of  limping 
hexameters,  hardly  worth  preservation  as  specimens  of 
poetry,  even  if  I  could  have  had  them  reported  verbatim ; 
but  when  she  breathed  the  words  through  the  stops  of 
the  harmonicon,  with  exquisite  modulation  of  the  sounds, 
her  "  golden  stairs  "  and  "  silver  shores  "  and  "  Heavenly 
fields  "  seemed  almost  to  come  before  us  as  pictures  of  a 
fairy  land. 

Then  George  Dix's  voice  announced  that  "  the  band," 
composed  of  spirits  known  as  Electa,  Honto,  Santum, 
Rosa,  the  Italian  girl,  French  Mary,  Mayflower,  and  him- 
self, would  render  the  piece  called  "The  Storm  at  Sea." 
I  would  have  the  reader  observe  that  I  regard  the  names 
given  to  themselves  by  the  various  spirits,  as  a  matter  of 
the  smallest  possible  account.  I  doubt  very  much  if 
"  Santum  "  or  either  of  the  other  names  are  of  genuine 

MRS.  EMMA  F.  M?CORM(CK.. 

GQL.0W.07T,  NIR.NIGHOLS.ANOMFDIUM/N  DARKCIRGLE, 

A  NOTED  MEDIUM. 

A  MUSICAL  PERFORMANCE.  217 

Indian  origin,  but  that  does  not  trouble  me  as  much  as  to 
know  if  any  spirit  from  the  other  world  is  standing  in  my 
presence.  That  is  the  question  of  questions;  individual 
identities  are  of  trivial  importance  in  comparison  with 
that. 

I  am  no  musical  critic,  and  so  will  give  place  to  a 
competent  hand  to  describe  this  remarkable  performance, 
which  is  given  in  a  majority  of  Horatio's  dark-circles. 
Here  is  what  Mr.  Lenzberg  says,  and  any  one  who  has 
attended  a  circle  at  Chittenden  need  not  be  informed  of 
the  difference  between  this  sort  of  music  and  what 
Horatio  favors  us  with  : 

Henry  S.  Olcott,  Esq., 

Dear  Sir  :  At  your  request  I  state  the  following  facts  : 
I  am  a  musician  by  profession,  and  teach  the  art  in  Hartford,  Ct. 
I  attended  a  dark-circle  at  the  Eddy  house,  last  evening,  at  which 
various  solos,  duos,  trios,  and  concerted  pieces  were  played  by  some 
mysterious  performers.  The  solos  were  upon  the  violin,  guitar,  flute, 
piccolo,  concertina,  and  mouth  harmonicon.  The  two  most  surpris- 
ing features  of  the  performance  were  :  (1),  the  playing  on  a  guitar 
as  it  floated  from  one  side  of  the  room  to  the  other,  through  the  air, 
a  distance  of  at  least  fifteen  feet  (this  was  not  a  mere  strumming  of 
the  strings,  but  a  delicate  and  artistic  playing  of  a  popular  air  in 
pianissimo)  ;  and  (2)  the  execution  of  the  air  of  "  Home,  Sweet 
Home"  on  the  concertina.  The  invisible  performer  managed  to  get 
more  power,  and  at  the  same  time  preserve  as  good  expression  as  any 
person  I  have  ever  heard  handle  the  instrument.  I  noticed  the 
same  striking  feature  as  with  the  guitar  playing,  viz. :  that  the 
musical  sound  was  prolonged,  and  the  swells  maintained,  through 
a  much  greater  space  laterally,  than  any  mortal  performer  could 
cover,  and  at  the  same  time  sustain  the  same  quality  6f  tone.  There 
were  no  sounds  of  footsteps,  and  the  instrument  was  played  so  close 
to  us  that  I  could  feel  the  wind  it  made  as  it  passed  through  the  air. 
I  have  heard  Horatio  Eddy,  the  medium  of  the  dark-circle,  play  on 
the  violin,  and  I  unhesitatingly  say  that  his  style  and  execution  are 
as  totally  different  from  those  of  the  unseen  soloist  as  possible. 

The  concerted  pieces  were  an  imitation  of  a  storm  at  sea,  by  the 
violin,  with  the  accompaniment  of  the  mouth  harmonicon,  tambour- 
ine, concertina,  triangle,  guitar,  and  several  bells.     In  the  storm,  the 

2l8  A  PROFESSOR'S  OPINIONS. 

whistling  of  the  wind  was  made  apparently  by  bowing  on  the  guitar 
with  one  hand,  and  at  the  same  time  by  sliding  the  other  up  and 
down  the  fingerboard,  producing  harmonic  notes.  The  heavy  blow- 
ing of  the  gale  was  imitated  by  a  tremolo  on  the  violin,  accompanied 
by  a  confusion  of  sounds  from  the  other  instruments.  The  shock  of 
waves  against  the  ship  was  forcibly  suggested  by  lifting  a  heavy  table 
and  beating  the  floor  with  its  legs.  There  was  one  sound  that  could 
not  possibly  be  imitated  by  any  instrument,  viz. :  the  pumping  of 
water,  with  the  suck  of  the  piston,  the  gurgle  of  water  in  the  tube, 
and  its  splash,  as  if  running  off  on  deck. 

Throughout  the  whole  entertainment,  the  medium  sat  in  a  chair  in 
front  of  the  spectators,  with  his  wrists  tied  together  and  to  the  back 
of  the  chair,  A  light  was  struck  instantly  after  some  of  the  most 
remarkable  performances,  and  he  was  found  in  the  same  position 
and  tied  in  the  same  manner  as  at  the  first.  The  front  row  of  spec- 
tators kept  hands  joined  from  first  to  last,  there  was  but  one  member 
of  his  family  present  beside  himself,  who  sat  next  but  one  to  me,  and 
I  am  positively  sure  that  she  had  nothing  to  do  with  what  occurred. 
Even  if  she  and  Horatio  had  been  on  the  floor,  it  would  have  been 
impossible  for  both  together  to  do  what  was  done. 

The  above  is  as  careful  and  minute  an  account  of  the  musical  part 
of  last  night's  dark-circle  as  I  can  give,  and  I  am  ready  at  any  time 
to  substantiate  its  truth  by  my  oath  in  a  court  of  justice,  if  called 
upon. 

I  must  tell  you  of  one  thing  that  happened,  as  wonderful  as  any- 
thing above  related.  My  little  daughter,  sitting  at  the  other  end  of 
the  front  row,  asked  the  child-spirit  calling  Jierself  Mayflower,  to 
kiss  me,  and  immediatety  I  received  kisses  upon  my  mouth  and 
cheek  from  a  pair  of  smooth,  soft  lips,  which  certainly  were  not 
Horatio's,  for  he  wears  a  heavy  moustache  and  goatee.  Moreover, 
the  room  was  so  totally  dark  that  no  human  being  could  have  found 
the  places  touched,  without  feeling  for  them  with  his  hands,  which 
was  not  done.  Max  Lenzberg, 

29  Pleasant  Street,  Hartford,  Conn. 

Chittenden,  October  14th,  1874. 

This  is  a  "  dark-circle "  as  it  appears  to  persons 
favored  with  only  the  usual  range  of  senses — a  place 
of  pitchy  darkness,  unillumined  by  the  faintest  speck 
of  light,  except  when  little  balls  of  phosphorescence 
shoot  hither  and  thither  through  the  air,  the  only  senses 
ordinarily  used  being  those  of  hearing  and  feeling. 

A   CLAIRVOYANT S  DESCRIPTION'.  219 

But  how  different  must  it  appear  to  the  inner  sight  of 
the  clairvoyant,  if  we  admit  that  their  descriptions  are 
not  based  upon  the  promptings  of  an  overwrought 
imagination !  I  was  so  fortunate  as  to  meet  at  the 
Eddys'  a  Mrs.  Emma  F.  McCormick,  an  excellent  "  test- 
medium,"  of  Providence,  R.  I.,  who  kindly  gave  me  a 
description  of  the  dark-circle  that  I  will  try  to  put  into 
words,  as,  at  least  to  me,  an  interesting  novelty  in  spir- 
itual literature. 

When  the  light  was  extinguished,  instead  of  the  cav- 
ernous darkness  that  oppressed  our  senses,  the  room 
became  to  the  clairvoyant  suffused  with  a  great  light, 
as  though  a  full  moon  had  suddenly  risen  upon  her 
vision.  The  light  was  steady,  not  flickering.  The 
walls  of  the  apartment,  as  transparent  as  crystal,  dis- 
closed a  multitude  of  spirits  stretching  upward  and 
backward — a  great  host  that  no  man  could  number. 
On  every  side  they  thronged — men,  women,  and  chil- 
dren— and  gazed  at  the  mortals  below  and  the  scene 
that  was  being  enacted  in  their  hearing.  They  were 
all  bathed  in  the  light  that  shone  about  them,  but 
differed  in  glory,  one  from  the  other.  Certain  of  them 
hovered  over  and  about  the  medium,  showering  sparks 
of  light  upon  him  more  brilliant  than  diamonds,  when- 
ever they  approached  him  within  a  certain  distance. 
From  every  side  in  the  air  above  us,  the  light,  concen- 
trated into  a  sort  of  zodiacal  canopy,  formed  a  vortex, 
like  a  water-spout  or  thunder-cloud,  and  then  spread 
out  in  showers  of  sparks,  whose  radius  marked  the 
area  within  which  all  the  "  manifestations  "  occurred. 

Some  spirits  were  clothed  in  gauzy  vapors  of  differing 

220  A  MULTITUDE  OF  SPIRITS. 

brightness  and  colors,  some  bluish,  some  gravish, 
and  some  pure  white,  the  several  tints  indicating  the 
moral  status  of  the  spirits,  pure  white  being  the  highest 
of  all.  Their  countenances  shone  with  a  brightness 
corresponding  with  that  of  their  raiment,  some  like  the 
face  of  Moses  when  he  descended  from  Sinai,  being  so 
glorious  that  it  seemed  as  if  no  mortal  man  could  look 
upon  them. 

Upon  the  floor  of  the  circle  room  the  lucide  saw  a 
spirit-man  with  a  smooth  face,  stern  and  resolute  in 
expression,  who  controlled  and  directed  the  perform- 
ance. When  he  approached  the  rest  fell  back,  as 
though  he  carried  the  power  of  command  in  the  very- 
essence  of  his  nature.  The  Indians  in  the  dance  were 
sometimes  on  the  floor,  sometimes  leaping  high  up  in 
the  air,  and  one  group,  apart  from  the  others,  laid  their 
heads  together  and  intently  regarded  some  object  on 
the  platform,  which,  from  Mrs.  McCormick's  descrip- 
tion of  the  locality,  I  judged  to  be  a  small  spring 
table-gong  that  I  had  procured  that  day,  with  which  to 
try  certain  experiments  that  I  shall  describe  at  the 
proper  time,  but  of  my  possession  of  wrhich  she  was  not 
aware. 

Off  in  one  corner  were  gathered  a  band  of  white  men 
whom  she  thought  were  pirates,  who  had  stealthily 
approached,  and  looked  at  the  medium  as  if  desirous 
of  getting  control  of  him,  but  a  number  of  bright 
spirits,  seeing  their  intention,  clustered  about  him  as 
if  to  shield  him  from  harm.  The  color  of  the  light 
around  these  pirates  was  a  dark  drab,  and  when  the 
body  fell  after  the  sword  combat,  previously  described, 

SURROUNDED  BY  SPIRIT  FRIENDS.  223 

she  seemed  to  see  a  dead  body  carried  off  by  these  com- 
rades, who  were  enveloped  in  a  dense  cloud  of  smoke. 
Mayflower  appeared  a  girl  of  fourteen  or  fifteen,  of  a 
fair  complexion,  dark  hair  and  eyes.  She  looked  as  if  she 
were  encompassed  with  a  rainbow,  and  was  a  bright, 
beautiful  creature,  but  more  attracted  to  the  earth  than 
some  of  the  others  in  the  shining  throng.  The  effect  of 
her  music  upon  the  other  spirits  was  very  marked.  They 
seemed  to  enjoy  it,  and  their  feelings  were  indicated  by 
a  great  increase  in  the  brilliancy  of  the  light  about  them. 

The  members  of  our  circle  of  the  evening  were  each 
attended  by  his  or  her  special  friends,  who  showed  affec- 
tion in  embraces,  loving  appeals,  the  laying  of  crowns 
of  flowers  upon  our  heads,  and  of  emblematic  floral 
devices  of  various  kinds  upon  our  laps.  Some  seemed 
to  her  to  kneel  at  the  knees  of  their  friends,  and  gaze  up 
into  their  faces  with  eager,  hungry  looks,  as  if  they  would 
force  a  sense  of  their  presence  through  the  impenetrable 
walls  of  flesh  in  which  they  were  still  held  captive.  We 
mortals,  like  our  spirit-friends,  were  also  surrounded  by 
our  special  and  peculiar  spheres  of  light,  varying  in 
brilliancy,  color,  and  transparency,  in  degree  with  our 
moral  elevation.  Along  the  united  hands  of  the  front 
rank  ran  a  chain  of  electricity  or  some  other  fluid,  like 
lightning,  reddish-yellow  in  color,  with  bubbles  of  light 
coming  up  here  and  there,  and  then  bursting,  and  the 
even  flow  of  the  stream  interfered  with  and  made  to  zig- 
zag by  the  unequal  personal  magnetic  force  of  the  several 
sitters. 

In  "The  Storm   at   Sea"  she  saw  Pix  holding  what 

seemed  a  bunch  of  reeds,  that  vibrated  as  a  stream  of 
8 

224  -  DIX,  AS  A  MUSICIAN. 

electricity  or  other  bright  fluid  ran  through  them.  When 
he  imitated  the  pumping  of  water,  it  seemed  as  if  he 
forced  two  masses  of  electricity  together,  handling  the 
subtle  agent  as  if  it  were  a  solid  substance.  She  could 
see  him  stretching  out  his  hands  and  gathering  it  from 
the  air  to  condense  and  compact  it,  as  one  might  gather 
light  snow  and  form  the  feathery  flakes  into  a  solid  ball. 
He  was  never  idle,  but  passed  from  one  employment  to 
another  with  indomitable  perseverance,  now  playing  the 
violin,  and  anon  imitating  the  whistling  of  wind  or  the 
swash  of  water,  according  as  the  exigencies  of  the  perform- 
ance seemed  to  demand. 

But,  of  a  sudden,  the  beatific  vision  of  the  clairvoyant 
is  rudely  terminated  by  the  lighting  of  the  smoky  candle, 
whose  feeble  gleam,  struggling  through  the  obscurity  of 
the  room,  replaces  the  noonday  brightness  of  her  opened 
heavens. 

CHAPTER  XV. 

PHILOSOPHICAL    TESTS. 

AMONG  other  tests  that  I  desired  to  apply  to  Honto, 
was  one  to  satisfy  myself  whether  she  possessed 
the  superhuman  power  of  self-levitation.  I  ac- 
cordingly procured  a  small  table-gong,  which  could  be 
rung  by  dropping  a  weight  of  half  an  ounce  upon  the 
handle  from  the  height  of  one  inch,  and  took  it  to  Chit- 
tenden with  me.  One  evening,  when  a  favorable  oppor- 
tunity offered,  I  requested  the  spirit  to  step  upon  the  han- 
dle without  ringing  the  gong,  which  I  had  previously 
placed  on  the  platform  at  a  convenient  point  for  obser- 
vation. She  assented,  but  before  trusting  herself  upon 
the  frail  knob  examined  it  with  characteristic  caution 
and  curiosity.  She  finally  gathered  up  her  skirts,  and, 
placing  the  ball  of  her  right  foot  upon  it,  stepped  up 
and  bore  her  whole  weight  upon  it  without  disturbing 
the  clapper.  The  experiment  was  repeated  twice  at  my 
request.  I  then  asked  her  to  step  on  it  and  cause  the 
bell  to  ring  after  she  stood  fairly  upon  the  knob.  She 
did  so.     Her  success  seemed  to  amuse  her  greatly,  and 

by  clapping  her  hands  and  in  other  ways,  she  testified 

225 

226  HON  TO  AND  THE  GONG. 

her  satisfaction.  She  advanced  her  hand  towards  the 
unfamiliar  object  with  the  caution  that  one  would  feel 
in  laying  hold  of  something  hot,  but  finally  mustered 
courage  to  take  it  up  and  ring  it  over  and  over  again, 
laughing  and  dancing  like  a  child  pleased  with  a  new 
toy.  Her  usual  performance  with  the  shawls  and 
gauzes  then  followed,  and  she  strutted  up  and  down 
the  platform  with  a  long  piece  of  the  latter  material 
wrapped  around  her,  as  though  she  were  a  belle  prom- 
enading in  a  new  mantilla  for  the  public  admiration. 
Just  before  she  was  about  to  bid  us  adieu,  I  asked  her 
to  place  the  gong  on  the  railing  directly  in  front  of  me 
and  ring  it,  so  that  I  might  distinctly  see  her  hand 
pressing  down  the  knob.  She  bowed  compliance,  and 
putting  the  article  where  I  designated,  retired  for  a 
moment  into  the  cabinet,  perhaps  to  gain  strength,  and 
then  returning,  lifted  her  skirt  again,  rang  the  h€i\with 
her  left  foot,  and  ran  out,  kissing  her  hand  to  us.  The 
wire  to  which  the  knob  of  the  gong  is  attached,  is 
about  as  thick  as  a  broom  straw,  and  I  regarded  the 
experiment  as  of  great  importance,  until  I  afterwards 
found  that,  by  stepping  very  cautiously,  and  bearing  on 
very  gradually,  I  could  make  the  knob  sustain  my  own 
weight.  But  I  could  not  ring  the  bell  after  I  stood 
upon  the  knob,  nor  step  on  it  as  briskly  as  she  did, 
without  causing  it  to  sound.  She  was  dressed,  this 
evening,  in  a  new  white  costume  throughout. 

My  reference  to  her  retiring  into  the  cabinet  for  the 
purpose  of  gaining  renewed  strength  from  her  medium, 
recalls  to  mind  an  account  I  saw  in  the  London  Spirit- 
ualist, some  time  ago,  of  an  experience  of  Sir  Charles 

WEAKNESS  OF  MATERIALIZED  FORMS.       229 

Isham,  Bart ,  with  a  famous  materialized  spirit  called 
"  Florence,"  who  appears  in  the  presence  of  Miss 
Showers,  the  medium.  Sir  Charles  was  accompanied 
to  the  house  of  Mrs.  Makdougall  Gregory  by  a  lady, 
whose  description  of  what  occurred  he  quotes  in  pre- 
face to  what  he  has  to  tell  himself.     Says  the  lady  : 

"  Florence,  who  had  seemed  very  willing  to  receive  all  the  other 
members  of  the  circle,  exclaimed  in  a  distressed  and  startled  tone 
when  I  advanced  toward  her :  "  Not  so  near !  not  so  near ! "  and 
then,  as  if  in  pain,  she  added,  "  There  is  something  comes  from  her 
that  hurts  me  —  I  feel  melting  away — I  must  go  back  to  my  medium, 
to  get  more  power  from  my  medium." 

These  last  sentences  were  uttered  in  very  feeble,  faltering  tones, 
and  her  appearance  gave  the  impression  of  one  who  was  fainting 
away,  or  sinking  away.  The  face  was  ghastly  pale,  and  the  eyes 
turned  upwards  so  that  the  white  only  was  visible.  She  withdrew 
behind  the  curtain,  and  I  returned  to  my  seat ;  but  in  a  few  moments 
she  re-appeared,  and  I  was  shortly  afterward  recalled.  Mr.  Gregory 
gave  me  a  rose  to  present  to  the  spirit.  This  time  I  was  allowed  to 
come  nearer,  but  my  presence  still  seemed  to  excite  alarm  and  dis- 
tress, the  spirit  again  exclaiming  :  "  Not  too  near  !"  not  too  near  !" 

She  accepted  the  rose,  however,  without  hesitation,  her  long  atten- 
uated fingers  slowly  and  feebly  closing  round  the  stalk,  as  though 
she  had  very  little  muscular  power. 

She  then  said,  in  a  very  languid,  plaintive  tone,  "  I  must  go  now. 
I  must  go  now." 

It  was  the  same  in  London  with  Mr.  Crookes'  real 
u  Katie  King,"  who  had  to  retire  into  the  cabinet  from 
time  to  time  to  gather  strength. 

Ten  spirits  appeared  this  evening — Honto;  Mrs. 
Pritchard,  an  aged  lady,  who  spoke  to  her  son  and  to 
us  all  in  whispered  tones ;  Miss  Maggie  Brown,  who 
brought  out  her  bouquet  of  flowers,  as  usual ;  Mary 
Staples  and  Clarinda  Tilden,  whose  brother  was  pres- 
ent at  this,  his  second  seance;  Caroline ,  who  held 

a  baby  in  her  arms,  and  at  my  request,  shifted  it  from 

230  ANOTHER  LIGHT-CIRCLE. 

her  left  arm,  where  it  was  badly  seen  against  the  dark 
background  of  the  curtain,  to  her  right,  where  it 
was  well  relieved  against  the  white  wall ;  De  Witt 
Hitchcock,  a  young  man  with  black  moustache ;  Clara 
Arnold,  a  child  of  four  years,  whose  father  instantly 
recognized  her ;  and  Jonathan  Morse,  an  old  man  and 
former  neighbor  of  the  Eddys,  who  addressed  us  in  a 
heavy  bass  voice. 

One  of  Horatio's  light-circles  followed,  at  which  the 
gentleman  and  lady  whose  portraits  were  given  in  the 
illustration  to  a  former  chapter,  sat  beside  the  medium, 
The  usual  manifestations  occurred,  hands  of  various 
sizes  being  distinctly  and  often  shown  in  various  places, 
several  instruments  played  upon  simultaneously,  and 
the  heads  and  backs  of  the  sitters,  including  the  medium, 
patted  and  stroked  by  the  detached  hands.  Let  the 
reader  refer  to  the  picture  above  alluded  to,  which  is 
drawn  to  a  scale,  and  accurately  shows  the  respective 
distances  of  the  sitters  from  each  other,  and  from  the 
various  points  about  them,  and  he  will  see  the  impossi- 
bility of  Horatio's  stroking  his  own  face  and  patting 
his  own  head,  with  his  right  hand  thrust  through  the 
opening  between  the  two  shawls,  without  immediately 
betraying  himself  by  pulling  the  shawl  behind  him  off 
the  cord  that  sustains  it.  I  have  recently  had  a  letter 
from  Mr.  C.  O.  Poole,  a  wealthy  gentleman  residing  at 
Metuchin,  !N\  J.,  about  what  he  saw  at  one  of  these  light- 
circles,  in  company  with  myself  and  about  thirty  other 
persons.     I  make  the  following  extracts : 

"  I  saw  three  hands  appear  at  once  that  night.  You  undoubtedly 
have  it  all  in  your  note-book,  and  I  need  only  say,  that  I  am  ready 

SPIRIT    CARD-WRITING, 

WRITING  ON  CARDS. 

233 

and  willing  to  certify,  and  even  swear  to  the  facts.  *  *  *  * 
.  Among  other  things,  I  saw  the  guitar  rise  above  the  curtain,  at  least 
three  feet  above  Horatio's  head,  and  saw  a  hand  on  it  apparently 
strumming  the  strings.  This,  of  course,  was  not  the  medium's,  for  it 
would  have  been  a  physical  impossibility  for  it  to  have  been  there." 

The  usual  writing  of  the  names  of  deceased  friends 
of  the  spectators  by  spirit-hands,  upon  cards  behind 
and  in  front  of  the  curtain,  was  varied  upon  this  occa- 
sion for  my  particular  benefit.  A  number  of  blank 
cards  were  called  for,  and  handed  by  me  to  one  of  the 
spirit-hands  thrust  through  the  curtain  to  receive  them. 
The  pen  and  inkstand  were  then  passed  through  in  like 
manner,  and  immediately  a  number  of  cards  came 
showering  upon  me,  over  the  top  of  the  curtain  at  a 
point  between  the  gentleman  and  lady  sitters,  and,  as  it 
appeared  to  me,  not  from  the  direction  they  would  start 
from  if  thrown  over  by  Horatio's  liberated  right  hand 
behind  the  curtain.  The  cards  were  all  blank  when  I 
handed  them  in,  and  no  other  cards  were  on  the  table 
at  the  beginning  of  the  seance.  Moreover,  each  of 
those  thrown  at  me  had  something  written  upon  it,  and 
the  ink  was  so  fresh  that  I  laid  them  out  separately 
upon  the  railing  to  dry.  What  was  written  may  be 
seen  by  a  glance  at  fac-similies  numbers  1-6. 

I  expressed  my  satisfaction  at  the  favor  shown  me, 
and  said,  that  the  fac-similes  I  would  give  would  no 
doubt  be  very  interesting  to  the  public ;  whereupon 
there  was  a  general  ringing  of  bells,  strumming  of 
instruments,  and  pounding  upon  the  table,  that  gave  a 
sufficiently  marked  response  to  my  friendly  speech.  The 
next  day,  when  the  artist  and  I  compared  the  cards  with 
the  width  of  a  newspaper  column,  I  thought  it  would  be 
better  to  have  the  names  written  perpendicularly  and  on 

234  A  REMARKABLE  DOCUMENT. 

a  narrower  strip ;  so,  without  saying  anything  to  Horatio, 
I  laid  a  piece  of  thick  paper  on  top  of  a  cupboard  attached 
to  the  wall  of  his  bedroom,  in  the  hope  that  the  ever 
watchful  invisibles,  knowing  my  wish,  would  favor  me 
with  a  corrected  edition  of  their  signs-manual.  The 
next  morning  I  found  the  paper  covered  with  signatures, 
headed  with  some  lines  of  wretched  Latin,  and  topped 
off  with  some  equally  bad  English.  I  give  a  fac-simile 
of  this  remarkable  document,  which  may  possess  a  cer- 
tain interest  in  the  eyes  of  many,  as  probably  the  first 
thing  of  the  kind  that  has  appeared  in  a  newspaper. 

I  am  quite  aware  of  the  fact  that,  as  a  scientific  experi- 
ment, the  procuring  of  the  second  set  of  names  has  no 
value,  for  no  one  was  present  when  it  was  written,  or  can 
affirm  it  was  not  by  the  medium  himself;  so  I  let  that 
pass.  But  what 'shall  be  said  of  the  cards,  written  in  the 
light-circle  before  twenty  people,  Which  bear  so  marked  a 
resemblance  to  them  ?  That  Horatio  could  write  them 
with  his  right  hand  behind  a  thick  curtain  where  he 
could  not  see  the  marks  his  pen  was  making  ?  That  he 
could  draw  a  flying-bird,  a  sketch  of  a  house  with  its 
rear  extension  and  detached  wood-shed  ?  That  he 
could  ornament  names,  written  piecemeal  and  not  with 
a  continuous  pressure  of  the  pen  upon  the  paper,  with 
wreaths?  This  theory  will  hardly  cover  the  prob- 
abilities. 

Immediately  upon  seeing  this  series  of  fac-similes 
re-produced  in  the  Graphic,  (which  was  not  for  several 
weeks  after  the  originals  were  written,  and  after  they  had 
been  forwarded  to  New  York),  I  noticed  the  striking 
similarity  in  the  shape  of  the  letters  with  Horatio  Eddy's 

FAC- SIMILE  OF  SPIRIT-WRITING.  235 

tZerrf*  ^/£ 

aw^^^f 

r-/> 

'm£t 

<?=*&• 

236   FA  C- SIMILE  OF  SPIRIT-  WRITING,  CONTINUED. 

HONTO  IN  HIGH  SPIRITS.  237 

own  manuscript.  Public  attention  was  also  called  to  the 
same  fact  by  a  correspondent  of  the  paper.  The  circum- 
stance is  well  calculated  to  excite  suspicion  of  fraud  on" 
the  part  of  the  medium,  and  I  must  regard  it  as  weighing 
against  him.  But  it  is  far  from  conclusive  proof  of  his 
turpitude  ;  for,  strange  as  the  assertion  may  seem,  I  have 
it  from  credible  authority  that  communications  have 
been  written  in  exact  fac-simile  of  a  medium's  hand- 
writing, in  his  or  her  presence,  when  the  writing  was  not 
done  by  the  medium. 

One  lady  of  high  social  position,  and  not  a  public 
medium,  informs  me  that  on  one  occasion,  when  she  was 
sitting  with  her  sister,  alone,  a  communication  was  writ- 
ten by  an  invisible  power,  upon  a  sheet  of  paper  held  by 
her  against  the  under  side  of  the  table-top ;  the  writing 
so  resembled  her  own  that  she  would  have  been  willing 
to  swear  that  it  was  written  by  her  own  hand,  if  it  had 
been  shown  her  under  any  other  circumstances. 

The  next  evening  found  Honto  in  a  very  lively  mood. 
She  seemed  to  overflow  with  animal  spirits,  running  up 
and  down  the  platform,  dancing,  kicking  up  her  feet,  and 
producing  her  shawls  from  all  sorts  of  unexpected  places. 
Her  hair  to-night  hung  loose  down  her  back  and  was 
unusually  thick.  I  have  previously,  I  believe,  stated 
that  it  varies  from  time  to  time,  not  only  in  the  style  in 
which  it  is  worn,  but  also  in  its  length  and  mass.  This 
evening  its  great  length  and  thickness  were  remarked  by 
a  lady  spectator,  whereupon  Honto  turned  her  back 
towards  us,  and  leaning  back,  let  her  luxuriant  tresses 
hang  over  the  platform  railing.  I  should  judge  that  the 
hair  was  a  yard  and  a  quarter  in  length,  and  it  was  as  black 

238 

HEIGHT  OF  THE  SPIRITS. 

as  jet.  She  shook  her  head  to  straighten  it  out,  and  then 
with  a  sudden  movement  threw  the  whole  mass  over  her  face 
and  held  her  head  down  so  that  it  covered  her  face  and 
bust  like  a  thick  crape  veil.  The  way  she  flung  it 
about  proved  to  one  even  as  inexperienced  as  myself  that 
it  was  no  wig,  for  it  would  have  been  jerked  off  her  head. 

There  being  a  number  of  new  comers  in  the  hall,  she 
stood  beside  Mr.  Pritchard  to  show  her  height  and 
backed  up  against  Mrs.  Cleveland  for  the  same  purpose. 
Finally,  the  light  being  good,  she  planted  herself  against 
my  height-scale,  and  Mr.  Pritchard  laying  his  cane  across 
the  top  of  her  head,  we  saw  that  he  called  the  figures, 
5  feet  3  inches  correctly. 

The  squaw  Bright  Star  and  a  number  of  other  spirits 
also  suffered  themselves  to  be  measured,  the  figures 
being  as  follows : 

Name. 

Honto 

Bright  Star.. 
Swift  Cloud. 
Wm.  Brown. 

Height. 

5  feet   3  inches. 
5  feet  2  1-2  inch. 

5  feet  5  inches. 

6  feet  I  inch. 

Name. 

Santum 

Piqua 

Carrie  Arnold.  . 
An     old     white 

Height. 

6  feet  2  3-4  inch. 
5  feet  3  1-2  inch. 

4  feet. 

5  feet  7  inches. 

On  the  following  evening  I  tried  an  experiment  that  I 
think  is  unprecedented  in  the  history  of  scientific  inquiry. 

It  occurred  to  me,  that  if  the  assertion  of  the  spirits 
that  in  materializing  themselves  they  accreted  matter 
from  the  atmosphere  by  the  operation  of  their  own  will 
were  true,  and  that  the  relative  solidity  of  their  material- 
ization is  under  their  control,  the  thing  might  be  tested 
by  familiar  mechanical  appliances.  I  could  not  conceive 
of  solid  matter  without  weight,  and  I  had  had  too  many 
proofs  of  the  materiality  of  the  visible  spirit-forms  to 
fancy  them  imponderable  and  unsubstantial. 

_ ^i- 

THE  SCALE  TEST.  241 

I  had  not  only  heard  the  shock  of  Honto's  feet  upon 
the  floor  when  she  leaped  over  the  railing  and  when  she 
jumped  high  from  the  floor  in  some  of  her  caperings,. 
but,  both  in  the  dark  and  light  circles,  had  shaken  hands 
with  them,  and  been  touched  and  playfully  struck  many 
times.  To  my  sense  of  touch  they  appeared  as  substan- 
tial as  any  human  being  in  the  flesh,  the  only  difference 
being  in  their  temperature,  which  was  invariably  lower 
than  my  own,  and  the  skin,  which  was  ordinarily  covered 
with  a  clammy  sweat.  To  put  my  theory  to  the  proof, 
I  procured  in  Rutland  one  of  Howe's  Standard  platform 
scales,  the  capacity  and  accuracy  of  which  are  attested 
in  the  following  certificate  : 

Rutland,  Vt.,  October  6th,  1874. 
Henry  S.  Olcott,  Esq., 

Dear  Sir:  I  hereby  certify  that  the  platform  scale  you  procured 
from  me  for  your  weighing  experiments,  was  one  of  Howe's  best 
"  Standards,"  set  true  and  in  perfect  order.  It  will  weigh  from  one 
ounce  to  500  pounds.     Its  own  dead  weight  is  no  pounds. 

Respectfully,  L.  G.  Kingsley. 

I  caused  it  to  be  placed  upon  the  platform,  to  the  right 
of  the  cabinet  door,  and  just  in  front  of  the  chair  in 
which  Mr.  Pritchard  sits.  Being  denied  the  privilege  of 
sitting  there  myself,  in  consequence,  as  I  am  told,  of  my 
being  of  so  positive  a  nature  as  to  affect  and  repel  the 
spirits  (in  which  particular  neither  Mr.  Pritchard  nor 
Mrs.  Cleveland  resemble  me  at  all)  I  had  to  rely  for  my 
experiment  upon  the  gentleman  in  question.  Accord- 
ingly, I  rehearsed  the  operation  with  him  thoroughly, 
until  he  was  able,  in  the  dark,  to  quickly  weigh  a  person 
stepping  upon  the  platform  and  stopping  there  but  a 
moment.  I  supplied  him  with  parlor-matches,  and  after 
some  last  instructions  waited  the  auspicious  moment. 

242  WEIGHING  HONTO. 

When  Honto  came  out  she  saluted  us  as  usual,  and 
then  turned  and  scrutinized  the  strange  machine  with 
Indian-like  hesitancy.  I  told  her  what  was  desired,  and 
she  then  stepped  boldly  upon  the  proper  spot,  and  bent 
forward  to  look  at  the  movements  of  Mr.  Pritchard,  as 
his  hand  moved  the  poise  along  the  beam.  The  balance 
being  attained,  as  we  could  all  plainly  hear  by  the  sound 
of  the  beam  against  the  pad,  she  stepped  off  and  passed 
into  the  cabinet.  A  match  being  struck,  Mr.  Pritchard 
read  the  scale  at  138  pounds,  which  caused  the  audience 
no  surprise,  for,  as  the  reader  will  observe,  by  reference  to 
the  several  pictures  of  Honto  that  appear  in  this  volume, 
she  looks  like  a  woman  who  would  weigh  from  135  to  145 
pounds.  But  the  counter-poise  at  the  end  of  the  beam 
appeared  to  me  too  thin  for  the  100-pound  weight,  and 
upon  lighting  a  second  match  Mr.  Pritchard  found  that 
it  was  only  the  50-pound  weight,  and  consequently  that 
the  squaw  had  only  weighed  88  pounds. 

Honto  now  re-appeared,  and  I  asked  her  to  make  her- 
self lighter.  She  again  mounted  the  platform,  and  this 
time  it  was  found  that  she  weighed  but  58  pounds.  The 
experiment  was  repeated  a  third  time,  and  her  weight 
stood  the  same  as  before — 58  pounds.  The  fourth  time 
the  reading  of  the  beam  showed  65  pounds.  Thus, 
without  any  change  of  clothing,  and  all  within  the  space 
of  ten  minutes,  this  spirit,  who  weighed  at  the  beginning 
at  least  50  pounds  less  than  any  mortal  woman  of  her 
size  and  height  should  weigh,  reduced  her  materiality  to 
the  extent  of  30  pounds,  and,  after  holding  it  there 
several  minutes,  increased  it  7  pounds.  Of  course  it 
would  have  been  infinitely  more  satisfactory  if  I  could 

PRITCHARD  'S  AFFIDA  VI T  OF  RESUL  TS.         243 

have  first  peeped  into  the  dark  cabinet  and  then  managed 
the  scale  myself,  for  in  such  case  I  would  not  have  to 
report,  as  to  a  portion  of  the  facts,  upon  hearsay  testimony  ; 
and  I  leave  to  Mr.  Crookes,  Mr.  Wallace,  and  other 
intelligent  observers,  more  favorably  conditioned  than  I, 
the  task  of  following  up  this  novel  and  suggestive  inquiry. 
Mr.  Pritchard  is  a  reputable  citizen  of  Albany,  N.  Y., 
retired  from  business  in  which  he  accumulated  a  compe- 
tency, and  I  give  his  affidavit  in  corroboration  of  the 
facts  I  have  narrated  : 

MR.  PRITCHARD'S  AFFIDAVIT. 
State  of  Vermont,  County  of  Rutland,  ss.  —  Edward  V.  Pritchard, 
of  the  City  of  Albany,  State  of  New  York,  being  duly  sworn,  deposes 
and  says  that  on  the  evening  of  September  23d  instant,  he  attended 
a  seance  or  circle  at  the  house  of  the  Eddy  family,  in  the  town  of 
Chittenden,  in  the  county  and  State  aforesaid :  that  he  was  invited 
to  occupy  a  chair  on  the  platform  in  a  room  known  as  the  "  circle- 
room,"  where  certain  mysterious  phenomena  known  as  spirit  mate- 
rializations occurred  ;  that  among  other  forms  presenting  themselves 
and  identified  by  persons  in  the  audience  as  the  shapes  of  deceased 
friends  and  relatives,  there  appeared  the  figure  of  an  Indian  woman 
known  as  "  Honto,"  who  approached  so  close  to  deponent  that  he 
distinctly  saw  every  feature  of  her  countenance,  and  her  entire  body; 
that  he  is  well  acquainted  with  William  H.  Eddy,  and  avers  that 
the  said  "  Honto  "  bore  no  resemblance  whatever  to  him  in  any  par- 
ticular. And  deponent  further  says,  that  a  pair  of  platform  scales 
being  previously  placed  convenient  to  his  reach,  the  said  "  Honto  " 
stood  thereupon  four  separate  times  for  deponent  to  weigh  her,  and 
that,  without  having  apparently  changed  her  bulk,  or  divested  her- 
self of  any  portion  of  her  dress,  she  weighed  respectively  SS  pounds, 
58  pounds,  58  pounds,  and  65  pounds  at  the  several  weighings.  And 
deponent  further  says  that,  having  weighed  the  said  William  H.  Eddy 
upon  the  same  scales,  he  finds  his  weight  to  be  179  pounds. 

E.  V.  Pritchard. 
[Subscribed  and  sworn  to  before  me,  this  30th  day  of  September, 
A.  D.  1875  —  H.  F.  Baird,  Justice  of  the  Peace.] 

In  his  famous  first  article  in  the  Quarterly  Journal  of 
Science  for  July,  1870,  Mr.  Crookes,  in  enumerating  the 

244  CROOKES  ON  PROOFS. 

results  that  he  shall  expect  the  Spiritualists  to  help  him 

to   attain,  before   he   can  ask   his  scientific  brethren  to 

investigate  the  phenomena,  says  : 

"  The  Spiritualist  tells  of  bodies  weighing  50  or  100  pounds  being 
lifted  up  into  the  air  without  the  intervention  of  any  known  force ; 
but  the  scientific  chemist  is  accustomed  to  use  a  balance  which  will 
render  sensible  a  weight  so  small  that  it  would  take  10,000  of  them 
to  weigh  one  grain  ;  he  is,  therefore,  justified  in  asking  that  a  power, 
professing  to  be  guided  by  intelligence,  which  will  toss  a  heavy  body 
up  to  the  ceiling,  shall  also  cause  his  delicately  poised  balance  to 
move  under  test  conditions." 

Again,  he  says  in  the  same  article  : 

"  The  first  requisite  is  to  be  sure  of  facts ;  then  to  ascertain  con- 
ditions ;  next,  laws.  Accuracy  and  knowledge  of  detail  stand  fore- 
most among  the  great  aims  of  modern  scientific  men.  No  observations 
are  of  much  use  to  the  student  of  science  unless  they  are  truthful 
and  made  under  test  conditions  ;  and  here  I  find  the  great  mass  of 
spiritualistic  evidence  to  fail.  In  a  subject  which,  perhaps,  more 
than  any  other,  lends  itself  to  trickery  and  deception,  the  precautions 
against  fraud  appear  to  have  been,  in  most  cases,  totally  insufficient, 
owing,  it  would  seem,  to  an  erroneous  idea  that  to  ask  for  such  safe- 
guards was  to  imply  a  suspicion  of  the  honesty  of  some  one  present." 

I  quote  these  sensible  words,  not  to  help  me  in  my 
investigations  at  this  place,  for  my  researches  are  com- 
pleted, but  to  call  the  attention  of  other  investigators  in 
various  other  portions  of  the  country  who  may  happen  to 
read  these  lines,  to  the  true  method  which  should  guide 
their  researches.  The  absolute  ponderosity  of  a  materi- 
alized spirit  has  at  least  been  suggested  by  the  weighing 
experiments  at  Chittenden,  and  it  remains  only  for  those 
who  have  access,  say,  to  such  compliant  and  intelligent 
spirits  as  Mr.  Crookes'  "  Katie  King,"  or  Miss  Showers' 
"  Florence  "  and  "  Lenore,"  to  make  careful  supplemental 
experiments,  under  test  conditions,  and  thus  solve  one 
of  the  most  important  problems  ever  broached  to  the 
scientific  world. 

:      DIX'S  EXPLANATION  OF  THE  PHENOMENA.    245 

I  saw  Honto,  on  one  evening  (October  15th),  melt 
away  as  far  up  as  her  waist,  just  as  she  was  ready  to 
pass  into  the  cabinet ;  once  I  saw  a  long  lance,  with  a 
tapering  steel  head  and  a  tuft  of  drooping  ostrich 
plumes  below  it,  suddenly  materialized,  in  the  hand  of 
a  male  [[spirit ;  once,  one  of  Honto's  knitted  shawls 
instantly  formed,  in  a  pile,  on  the  floor,  before  she  even 
stretched  her  hand  towards  the  place  to  pick  it  up  ;  and 
once  a  little  animal,  like  a  squirrel  or  a  large  rat,  sud-. 
denly  appeared,  walked  about,  and  disappeared  on  the 
platform,  almost  frightening  poor  old  Mrs.  Cleveland 
out  of  her  wits.  If  I  ask  Mr.  Crookes  to  tell  me  by 
what  law  these  things  happen,  he  would  undoubtedly 
answer  :  "  Show  me  fifty  such  cases,  happening  under 
test  conditions,  and  then  we  will  weigh  these  things  on 
our  scales  and  try  to  discover  the  law." 

"  George  Dix,"  the  sailor-spirit,  tried  to  enlighten  me 
upon  the  subject,  one  evening.  He  said  that  man,  in 
his  earth-life,  is  nothing  but  a  materialized  spirit,  a 
living  entity  encased  in  a  covering  of  flesh.  To  keep 
himself  and  this  case  together,  he  must  consume  and 
assimilate  tons  of  the  material  portions  of  animal  and 
vegetable  food.  If  he  stops  the  process  he  becomes 
dematerialized,  or  uncased,  in  a  very  brief  time.  On 
the  other  hand,  spirits  can  do  in  a  moment  what  before 
death  it  took  them  years  to  accomplish  —  materialize  a 
body  to  cover  them.  In  the  atmosphere  they  find  ready 
for  use,  an  inexhaustible  supply  of  the  same  matter  as 
that  which  exists  in  the  animal  and  vegetable,  only  in 
a  diffused  and  sublimated  form  ;  and  by  a  supreme 
creative  effort  of   the  will  they  instantly  collect  the 

246         SCIENTIFIC  DISCOVERIES  RIDICULED. 

scattered  particles  into  such  shapes  as  they  choose. 
What  shall  we  say  to  all  this  ?  That  it  is  silly,  use- 
less even  if  true,  impossible,  unscientific  ?  Lord  Bacon 
sets  it  down  as  a  law  unto  himself,  never  to  "  reject  upon 
improbabilities  until  there  hath  passed  a  due  examina- 
tion ; "  Benjamin  Franklin,  when  asked  in  regard  to 
the  use  of  some  discovery,  retorted  :  "  What's  the  use 
of  a  new-born  baby  ? "  Arago,  the  astronomer,  says 
that  "  he  is  wanting  in  prudence  who,  outside  of  pure 
mathematics,  pronounces  the  word  impossible ;"  forty- 
four  years  after  Harvey  had  announced  his  immortal 
discovery  of  the  circulation  of  the  blood,  a  paper  was 
read  to  the  French  Academy  of  Sciences  to  prove  such 
a  thing  impossible  (see  Owen's  "  Footfalls  on  the 
Boundary  of  Another  World,"  p.  93) ;  and  when  Morse 
asked  Congress  for  an  appropriation  to  make  a  prac- 
tical test  of  his  telegraph,  the  application  was  treated 
with  derision  by  some  wiseacre  statesmen,  as  being  too 
silly  to  be  seriously  entertained.    Who,  then,  except  our 

Dr.  B s,  can  in  the  face  of  such  examples  afford  to 

turn  his  back  upon  any  of  the  phenomena  presented 
for  our  inspection  by  the  class  of  persons  called 
mediums  ?  Who,  I  mean,  that  has  any  reputation  for 
intelligence  and  fairness  to  lose  ? 

CHAPTER  XVI. 

A   STARTLING    PROPHECY. 

ON  the  evening  of  September  26th  last,  a  prophecy- 
was  made  in  a  circle  by  the  spirit  "  Mrs.  Eaton," 
the  fulfillment  of  which  will  mark  an  epoch 
in  the  history  of  modern  Spiritualism.  She  said 
that  on  Sunday,  September  19th,  1875,  in  the  Eddy 
circle-room,  spirits  would  materialize  themselves  in  a 
brightly  lighted  room,  and  deliver  orations  as  in  life, 
with  persons  sitting  all  about  them  on  the  platform. 
In  short,  by  that  time  they  would  have  so  far  overcome 
or  changed  the  conditions  of  the  manifestations,  that 
the  present  annoying  drawbacks  to  a  perfect  investiga- 
tion of  the  phenomena  would  no  longer  exist.  This 
will  be  very  satisfactory  to  those  who  may  follow  after 
me,  but  it  comes  too  late  to  be  of  any  service  to  myself. 
I  have  had  to  feel  my  way  to  a  conclusion  through 
darkened  rooms,  and  at  such  a  physical  distance  from 
the  cabinet  and  its  occupants,  that  I  have  been  like  a 
blind  man  in  a  strange  city.  But,  nevertheless,  as  even 
he  may  fare  on  to  his  journey's  end,  if  he  but  tread 
cautiously  and  make  sure  of  his  foothold  before  ven- 
turing to  take  the  next  step,  so,  in  spite  of  all  difficulties, 

248  A   TEST  SUGGESTED. 

I  feel  as  if,  after  moving  at  snail's  pace  for  two  months, 
the  goal  were  in  sight  at  last. 

Did  ever  a  wiseacre  "  muscular  contraction  "  theorist 
hear  a  spirit  speak  ?  Has  Dr.  Carpenter  ever  known 
of  "  unconscious  cerebration "  imparting  speech  to  a 
re-incarnated  ghost  ?  Did  Sir  William  Hamilton  ever 
know  of  "  Pre-conscious  Activity  of  the  Mind,"  or 
"Latent  Thought"  covering  itself  with  a  corporeal 
shape,  and  give  voice  to  logic  and  rhetoric  ?  If  not, 
what  business  has  either  of  them,  to  say  nothing  of 
the  minnows  who  swim  beside  these  great  whales  in 
the  sea  of  thought,  to  pronounce  ex  cathedra  judgment 
upon  phenomena  of  which  these  Chittenden  marvels 
are  a  part  ?  I  have  heard  a  spirit  talk— yes,  a  score  of 
them,  and  in  eight  different  languages,  of  which  I  under- 
stood three,  so  as  to  know  what  was  said  on  both  sides, 
while  I  have  had  the  others  translated  to  me.  And  on 
the  evening  of  October  2d  I  heard  one  make  a  speech 
of  five  minutes.  That  afternoon,  I  had  accompanied 
the  artist  to  the  graveyard  to  take  a  sketch  of  Mrs. 
Eddy's  grave,  and  as  we  turned  to  come  away  I 
remarked  to  him,  that  it  would  be  a  good  test  of  the 
genuineness  of  these  Eddy  manifestations,  if  the  spirit 
of  Mrs.  Eddy  would  appear  that  night  and  make  some 
allusion  to  our  present  visit.  We  agreed  to  keep  the 
matter  to  ourselves  and  see  what  might  come  of  it. 

We  reached  home  without  meeting  any  person,  and 
even  if  we  had  been  seen,  it  would  naturally  be  supposed 
that  we  had  merely  been  taking  one  of  our  usual  strolls. 
The  evening  came,  and  we  met  in  the  circle-room  at  the 
regular  hour.     The  company  numbered  fourteen,  and 

A  SPIRIT-ORATOR.  249 

nine  spirits  showed  themselves.  The  first  was  old 
William  Brown,  who  spoke  a  few  words  to  his  son ; 
then  a  middle-aged  lady  named  Maria  Ann  Clarke, 
dressed  in  dark  clothing;  then  a  Mrs.  Griswold,  who 
was  murdered  in  Vermont  not  long  ago,  and  who,  upon 
the  occasion  of  a  former  visit  to  this  circle-room,  gave 
all  the  details  of  the  crime  to  an  old  friend  of  hers,  a 
Mr.  Wilkins,  who  was  present.  Then  forth  stepped  Mrs. 
Eddy  herself,  and  stood  there  silent  and  motionless, 
looking  at  the  artist  and  myself,  who  sat  together. 
She  bowed  and  retired,  and  we  exchanged  glances  as" 
though  not  satisfied  with  the  test;  but  immediately  the 
spirit  returned,  and  evidently  addressing  her  discourse 
to  us,  said  :  "  Death,  where  is  thy  sting  ?  Grave,  where 
is  thy  victory  ?"  I  had  expected  her  to  speak  in  the 
whispered  accents  of  old  Mrs.  Pritchard,  Maggie  Brown, 
and  certain  other  lady-spirits,  but  she  pitched  her  voice 
so  high  and  spoke  so  loud,  that  she  might  have  been 
heard  in  the  largest  auditorium  in  New  York  city. 

The  surprise  was  so  great  that  the  unexpected  sound 
thrilled  me  to  the  marrow,  and  I  sat  staring  through 
the  gloom  at  the  woman  as  I  never  did  at  a  speaker 
before  or  since.  She  was  of  a  large  frame,  and  had  the 
ample  figure  that  is  represented  in  the  portrait  pub- 
lished with  a  former  chapter.  She  wore  a  white  waist 
and  dark  skirt.  Her  hair  was  in  ringlets,  as  I  discov- 
ered when  she  bent  forward  in  profile,  in  the  animation 
of  her  discourse.  She  said,  addressing  me :  "  Your 
writings  are  true,  and  be  assured  the  Truth  will  prevail. 
A  thousand  spirits  are  watching  your  every  step,  and 
wishing  you  Godspeed.  They  see  the  rapid  spread  of 
Truth  upon  earth ;  and  they  and  a  countless  host  besides 

250  MRS.  EDDY'S  OPINIONS. 

are  helping  it  on.  Go  on,  my  friend  ;  we  will  welcome 
you  in  gratitude  and  joy  when  you  come  to  the  other 
world,  for  daring  to  tell  the  truth,  and  helping  to  dis- 
seminate it.  I  thank  you  for  your  kindness  to  my  chil- 
dren, who  have  suffered  so  much  and  so  long  for  the 
good  cause."  It  is  needless  to  say  that,  barring  all 
compliments,  I  needed  no  stenographer  to  fix  upon  my 
memory  this  astounding  address,  of  which  I  have  given 
only  a  fragment.  She  spoke  of  her  own  sufferings  and 
trials  upon  earth,  and  denounced  with  bitter  and 
unstinted  anger  all  who  slander  and  persecute  mediums, 
especially  her  own  children.  Her  remarks  showed 
very  clearly  the  deep,  and  hardly  eradicable  impression 
made  upon  her  soul  by  the  treatment  she  received  while 
living  here,  and  the  case  offers  a  subject  for  the  thought- 
ful consideration  of  psychologists. 

As  the  question  of  personal  identity  is  one  of  para- 
mount importance,  at  any  rate  in  a  case  of  this  kind, 
let  me  remark  that  the  figure  was  plainly  that  of  a 
woman,  to  say  nothing  of  the  voice,  which,  while  par- 
taking of  the  strong  Vermont  provincial  accent  of  the 
whole  family,  was  sharp  and  in  a  high  key — the  key  of 
a  female  voice.  Moreover,  the  lady  was  recognized  by 
sundry  of  her  former  acquaintances  in  the  room,  who 
greeted  her ;  in  addition  to  her  children,  of  whom, 
there  were  two  present.  I  have  seen  this  lady  several 
times,  and  heard  her  make  several  speeches.  In  one  of 
these  she  said :  "  I  am  the  mother  of  these  mediums, 
and  they  are  the  children  of  my  body.  I  want  this 
understood.  I  want  it  known  that  this  is  no  fraud,  but 
a  real  exhibition  of  spirit-power  and  spiritual  existence. 

SPIH I T-D  YNA  MICS.  253 

It  is  for  that,  that  I  come  back  to  this  scene  of  my 
earthly  sufferings."  Again,  on  the  evening  of  October 
9th,  confining  her  discourse  to  me,  she  referred  to  a 
conversation  I  had  had  that  day  with  the  artist  about 
certain  subjects  for  illustrations,  and  suggested  her 
death-bed  scene,  where,  she  said,  her  children  in  the 
spirit-world  had  materialized,  and  stood  beside  their 
surviving  brothers  and  sisters,  while  her  own  life  was 
ebbing  away. 

My  attention  was  early  called  to  the  question  of  the 
dynamics  of  these  Eddy  spirit  manifestations,  and 
after  settling  the  matter  of  their  weight,  I  determined 
to  attempt  to  throw  some  light  upon  the  direct  power 
that  the  spirits  could  exert.  The  spring-balance 
occurred  to  me,  as  it  did  to  Mr.  Crookes  (whose  excel- 
lent pamphlet  I  unfortunately  could  not  obtain  until 
some  time  after  my  own  experiments  were  concluded), 

and  I  accordingly  procured   two  of   's  standard 

quality,  of  Mr.  L.  G.  Kingsley,  of  Rutland,  the  house 
that  furnished  me  the  platform-scales,  each  of  a  weigh- 
ing capacity  of  fifty  pounds.  I  wished  to  test  the 
power  of  the  detached  hands  seen  in  Horatio's  light- 
circle,  as  the  demonstration  of  power  by  them  would 
be  a  more  striking  and  satisfactory  test  than  in  the  case 
of  the  fully  materialized  forms,  into  which  the  ques- 
tion of  personation  was  inevitably  more  or  less 
entangled. 

Let  the  reader  refer  to  the  sketch  of  the  light-circle, 
in  the  Xllth  chapter,  and  notice  the  relative  positions  of 
-,„  the  shawl  from  the  railing,  and  also  where  the  spirit- 
hand  is  thrust  through  the  shawl,  and  where  the  feet 

254  POWER  OF  THE  SPIRIT-HAND. 

of  the  sitters  are  aligned.  My  experiment  was  two- 
fold, viz, :  to  ascertain  how  much  the  hands  could  pull 
horizontally,  and  how  much  vertically.  One  of  the 
balances  I  fastened  with  a  stout  cord  to  the  handrail, 
allowing  a  sufficiency  of  cord  to  bring  the  hook  of  the 
balance  within  easy  reach  of  the  spirit-hand ;  this  was 
for  the  horizontal  pull.  The  other  I  attached  to  a 
strong  ring,  made  for  the  purpose,  and  screwed  into  the 
floor,  just  between  the  left  foot  of  the  gentleman  sitter 
and  the  right  foot  of  the  medium.  The  horizontal  pull 
was  tried  on  the  evening  of  September  30th.  The 
audience  numbered  twenty-six  persons.  The  weather 
outside  was  rainy  and  blustering ;  temperature  low  ; 
ten  new  arrivals  that  day ;  and  generally  the  conditions 
would  be  regarded  as  unfavorable.  The  persons  sitting 
beside  Horatio  were  Mr.  Goodsell,  of  Minnesota,  and 
Mr.  Wilkins,  of  Vermont,  whose  addresses  can  be  fur- 
nished if  desired.  Some  instrument-playing  and  card- 
writing  occurred,  and  the  guitar,  tambourine,  and  sev- 
eral bells  were  thrown  over  the  curtain ;  after  which  a 
left  hand  was  thrust  out,  and  by  the  opening  and  clos- 
ing of  the  fingers,  indicated  to  me,  standing  close  by, 
that  they  were  ready  for  my  experiment. 

I  stepped  upon  the  platform  and  handed  the  hook 
to  the  hand,  which  grasped  it,  moved  its  fingers  on  and 
off  the  hook  to  get  a  firm  hold,  as  any  one  naturally 
would,  if  he  were  about  to  exert  his  full  force  in  that 
way,  and  then  easily,  steadily,  and  without  spasmodic  action, 
compressed  the  spring  until  the  pointer  ran  down  to  the  40 
pound  mark.  To  prove  that  the  force  had  not  been 
exhausted,  the  spring  was  held  there  until  I  reached 

L 

PULLING  THE  SPRING-BALANCE.  257 

out  my  hand  to  take  back  the  balance,  and  then  was 
allowed  to  recoil  as  gradually  as  it  had  been  com- 
pressed. Forty  pounds,  therefore,  was  the  measure  of 
the  horizontal  pull.  The  hand  was  the  left  one — large, 
broad,  and  white.  I  stood  within  a  foot  of  it  when  it 
pulled,  and  my  attention  was  attracted  to  a  peculiarity 
which  proved  that  it  did  not  belong  to  Horatio's  body. 
Upon  the  wrist,  at  the  root  of  the  thumb,  there  were  two 
thin  parallel  lines  of  tattooing  in  blue  India  ink.  Horatio 
exclaimed,  while  the  spirit  was  pulling,  that  it  was 
bracing  itself  for  it  by  pressing  the  other  hand 
against  his  (Horatio's)  back ;  and  he  gave  way  to  the 
pressure  and  leaned  slightly  forward,  as  if  this  were 
the  case.  If  he  had  been  pulling,  he  would  naturally 
have  leaned  back,  so  as  to  exert  his  force  against  the 
spring. 

The  vertical  pull  was  made  on  the  evening  of  Octo- 
ber 2d,  when  I  myself  sat  next  to  Horatio  in  the  light- 
circle.  The  hand  to-night  was  the  right  hand  of 
"  George  Dix,"  as  I  recognized  by  its  mutilation  in  the 
loss  of  the  little  finger.  It  has  been  asserted,  upon  the 
barest  suspicion,  that  this  appearance  of  the  loss  of  the 
finger  is  deceptive,  the  medium  having  the  trick  of 
bending  his  down  so  as  to  seem,  but  not  in  reality  to 
be  missing.  My  answer  to  this  is  that  this  experiment 
was  made  with  this  hand  not  more  than  six  inches  from 
my  eyes,  and  with  so  good  a  light  in  the  room  that  I 
could  read  the  small  figures  on  the  dial  with  ease. 
Moreover,  I  noticed  how  the  skin  was  drawn  down 
into  the  cavity  of  the  cicatrix,  when  the  wound  had 
healed.     I,  furthermore,  remarked  that  the  hand  was  as 

258  THE  VERTICAL  PULL. 

white  as  marble,  the  wrist  broad  and  with  no  depression 
where  it  joined  the  hand ;  and  when  the  fingers  clutched 
the  hook  to  pull,  the  inside  was  partially  turned  toward 
me  so  that  I  could  see  the  blue  veins  half  concealed 
beneath  the  fat,  and  the  projection  of  the  tendons  as 
they  contracted  in  the  strain.  The  pull  was  steady,  as 
before,  but  more  powerful,  for  the  whole  50  pounds  was 
indicated  by  the  pointer  on  the  dial.  The  balance  was 
then  relinquished,  and  in  testimony  of  his  satisfaction 
at  the  result,  Dix  slapped  me  heartily  on  the  back  and 
tickled  me  in  the  ribs.  I  said :  "  It  seems  as  if  the 
spirit  could  pull  100  pounds  more,  if  the  apparatus 
would  allow  of  it,"  and  assent  was  given  by  vigorous 
pounding  upon  the  table  behind  me. 

Mr.  Charles  Goodsell's  address  is  Howard  Lake, 
Wright  Co.  Minn  ,  and  he  writes  me  as  follows,  about 
the  light-circle  at  which  the  above  events  occurred : 

"  If  you  recollect,  I  was  sitting  beside  Horatio,  when  you  first  tried 
the  power  of  the  materialized  Hand  which  pulled  the  spring-balance; 
The  indicator  showed  that  it  pulled  forty  pounds.  I  know  that  I 
held  Horatio  by  the  left  hand,  while  his  right  clasped  my  wrist.  I 
am  positive  that  it  was  a  left  hand  that  hooked  the  middle  finger  in. 
to  the  hook  of  the  balance,  and  pulled.  Furthermore,  two  hands 
reached  out  and  patted  me  on  the  head  and  shoulders.  While  my 
hands  were  clasping  Horatio's,  the  iron  ring  was  put  upon  his  left 
arm,  and  slipped  down  on  to  the  back  of  my  left  hand." 

If  I  had  been  in  any  doubt  about  seeing  the  baby- 
hand,  previously  described,  there  was  no  occasion  for 
it  to  continue,  for  on  this  occasion  the  hand  of  a  child 
touched  me  in  the  back,  and  upon  my  mentally  request- 
ing it  to  show  itself,  was  thrust  out  and  patted  me  on 
the  cheek.  It  disappeared,  but  when  I  mentally  asked 
{hat  it  might  be  held  at  my  lips,  it  came  again,  and 

THE  RING  TEST.  259 

remained  there  until  I  could  kiss  it  (for  it  was  said  that 
it  was  the  hand  of  one  who  bore  to  me  the  tenderest 
of  ties).  Several  other  hands,  large  and  small,  women's 
and  men's,  wrote  cards  before  my  eyes,  each  being 
closely  scrutinized  as  it  appeared.  My  senses  were 
wide  awake,  beyond  all  question,  for  this  was  the  first 
opportunity  given  me  to  sit  with  the  medium,  in  a 
whole  month's  sojourn  in  the  house,  and  I  determined 
that  no  detail,  however  slight,  should  be  overlooked. 

I  was  more  than  glad  to  be  able  to  satisfy  myself  wholly 
as  to  the  famous  "  ring  test,"  the  philosophy  of  which 
the  mediums,  the  Spiritualists,  and  the  spirits  themselves 
had  tried  to  explain  to  me.  I  had  seen  the  thing  done 
in  the  light  a  number  of  times,  the  ring  dropping  from 
off  Horatio's  arm,  as  he  sat  before  me  with  his  hands 
bound ;  but  all  this  was  not  entirely  satisfactory  to  one 
who  was  furnishing  to  a  wide  circle  of  readers  the  mate- 
rials for  the  formation  of  belief,  and  whose  duty  was  to 
make  no  mistake.  When  the  ring  test  was  about  to  be 
given,  I  was  requested  by  the  medium  to  take  both  his 
hands  in  mine  and  keep  a  firm  hold.  It  must  be  remem- 
bered that,  up  to  this  moment,  he  had  been  grasping  my 
bared  left  arm  with  his  two  hands.  At  the  beginning  of 
the  seance  his  hands  were  very  cold,  but  I  noticed  that 
they  gradually  grew  warmer,  until,  just  before  the  ring- 
test,  a  shiver  ran  through  his  frame,  a  sudden  chill  passed 
into  them  and  they  became  icy  cold.  I  never  felt  hands 
so  cold  before,  except  upon  a  corpse  that  had  been  laid 
in  ice. 

Our  hands  crossed,  my  right  holding  his  right,  and  his 
left  my  left.     The  iron   ring  used  for  the   experiment 

260  THE  RING  TEST  CONTINUED. 

was  then  exhibited  through  the  shawl  by  another  hand,  so 
that  all  could  see  it,  and  then  dropped  upon  the  floor  at 
my  feet,  striking  it  with  a  metallic  sound,  and  rolling  off 
the  platform.  After  all  who  chose  had  had  an  oppor- 
tunity to  examine  it,  it  was  passed  back,  and  taken  behind 
the  curtain  by  the  detached  hand.  I  then  felt  an  arm  and 
shoulder  pressing  against  my  back,  as  I  sat  touching  the 
edge  of  the  table  behind  me,  and  the  ring,  and  a  cold 
hand  that  held  it  touched  the  bare,  warm  skin  of  my  left 
forearm.  Another  tremendous  shock  ran  through  the 
medium's  body,  and  instantly  the  iron  ring  slid  down 
from  his  arm  over  my  right  wrist  and  hung  there. 
There  was  just  distance  enough  between  our  arms  for 
the  large  ring  to  touch  both  his  and  mine,  and  at  the 
moment  of  the  shock,  it  seemed  to  me  that  the  side  of  the 
ring  next  to  Horatio's,  dissolved  into  a  vapor,  while  the 
one  next  to  mine  remained  solid,  for  it  moved  away  from 
my  skin  directly  through  his  arm,  or  else  opened  so  as  to 
permit  his  to  pass  through  its  own  substance,  and  the 
next  instant  it  dangled  upon  my  wrist. 

This  is  an  astounding  story,  I  know,  but  everything 
happened  just  as  described.  I  neither  relaxed  my  hold 
upon  his  hands  for  an  instant,  nor  lost  sight  of  the  small- 
est detail  of  the  experiment.  I  was  neither  psycholo- 
gized nor  deceived,  and  no  theory  of  "  muscular  contrac- 
tion "  is  sufficient  to  explain  or  cover  the  facts.  The 
explanation  given  to  me  of  the  phenomenon  by  a  spirit 
is  that,  the  medium's  system  being  negative  and  the  sit- 
ter's positive,  a  strong  current  of  a  fluid,  which,  for  lack 
of  a  better  name,  they  call  refined  electricity,  is  sent 
through  from  the   one  to  the  other,   and  as  It  passes 

THE   RING    TEST. 

THE  HARDENING  OP  COPPER.  263 

through  the  intermediate  metal,  being  obliged  to  escape 
at  the  poles,  it  overcomes  the  cohesion  of  the  particles, 
and  the  solid  is  changed  into  a  vapor.  By  suddenly 
reversing  this  process,  the  substance  is  re-solidified,  and 
the  ring  becomes  as  it  was  before.  They  claim  that  they 
have  the  same  control  over  the  cohesion  of  the  particles 
of  our  gross  matter  as  they  have  over  what  we  term  grav- 
ity ;  that  is,  that  by  an  exercise  of  their  own  subtle  power 
they  can  as  readily  dissolve  a  solid  as  they  can  lift  it. 
Let  every  one  do  as  he  likes  with  the  explanation  :  I  give 
it  as  it  was  received. 

I  must  say  that  I  felt  no  shock  whatever  at  any  time, 
but  perhaps,  being  so  positive  as  they  say  I  am,  the  thing 
worked  the  other  way,  and  the  medium  got  a  charge  of 
my  surplus  "magnetism." 

One  night  "  Mayflower  told  me,  as  an  evidence  of  the 
superior  knowledge  of  the  spirits,  that  she  herself  could 
harden  and  weld  copper,  and  make  a  small  machine  that 
would  lift  the  house  we  were  in,  as  easily  as  I  could  my 
hat.  When  I  asked  her  why  she  would  not  impart  some 
of  her  knowledge  for  the  benefit  of  the  world,  her  reply 
was  that,  when  our  men  of  science  got  so  far  progressed 
as  to  lose  their  empty  conceit,  and  discover  that  they 
hardly  knew  the  alphabet  of  science,  and  were  prepared 
to  learn,  these  and  many  more  important  discoveries 
would  reward  them.  We  must  hasten  slowly  on  our  path 
up  the  Parnassian  hill,  learning,  little  by  little,  and  as  the 
child  acquires  by  degrees  to  creep,  walk,  and  run,  all  that 
goes  to  make  up  the  sum  of  human  knowledge. 

There  was  another,  and  unsolicited,  exhibition  of  spirit- 
power  this  evening.     In  the  corner  of  the  recess  behind 

264  CALCULATION  OF  POWER. 

Horatio  stood  an  extra  chair,  which  had  not  been  noticed 
when  the  shawls  were  hung.  During  the  seance  this 
chair  was  lifted  perpendicularly  twice  or  three  times 
directly  behind  Horatio's  head,  so  as  to  show  above  the 
top  of  the  curtain,  and  it  was  at  last  surmised  that  they 
desired  to  have  it  taken  away ;  so  William  Eddy,  who  was 
standing  near  by,  took  it  from  the  invisible  holder.  The 
perpendicular  height  of  the  lift  and  weight  of  the  chair 
being  ascertained,  I  allowed  two  seconds  as  the  time  con- 
sumed in  the  raising,  and  then  made  the  following  calcu- 
lation, to  arrive  at  the  measure  of  force  exerted  : 

Chair  weighed 8  3-4  pounds. 

Perpendicular  height 5  feet  5  inches. 

Time  (estimated) 2  seconds. 

1  horse  power  is  33,000  pounds  lifted  1  foot  in  1  minute ;  conse- 
quently 

8.75  x  30  x  5.16  1,354-5°  33.°°o-:-I.354-50  =  24.36,  or  nearly 
one-quarter  of  a  horse  power. 

Next  to  Honto,  and  old  Mr.  Brown,  the  talking  spirit, 
who  usually  open  and  close  the  seances,  the  spirit  I  have 
most  frequently  seen  is  that  of  the  mother  of  Mr.  Prit- 
chard,  of  Albany ;  who  has  been  recognized  over  and  over 
again,  not  only  by  him,  but  by  his  sister  and  her  grand- 
children, some  of  whom  have  been  invited  to  come  up 
to  the  platform  and  receive  the  old  lady's  embraces  and 
blessings.  She  almost  always  speaks,  sometimes  address- 
ing a  few  sentences  to  the  audience,  but  usually  confining 
her  remarks  to  her  own  friends.  Her  materialization  is, 
all  in  all,  the  most  satisfactory  I  have  ever  seen,  for  there 
have  been  so  many  and  satisfactory  opportunities  to  be 
satisfied  of  her  identity.  Her  son  is  an  elderly  gentle- 
man, whose  height  I  have  verified  as  five  feet  five  inches 
scant.     His  mother  has  frequently  made  him  stand  beside 

XottTO  MdMSR/uph> 

■HoHTOAhM^CUYELMD, 

COMPARING    HEIGHTS. 

IDIOSYNCRASIES  AS  TESTS.  267 

her,  and  then  called  our  attention  to  their  respective 
statures. 

One  night,  I  got  Mr.  Pritchard  to  place  her  back  against 
my  scale,  and  he  reported  her  height  as  just  five  feet ; 
which  I  am  satisfied  is  correct,  as  he  is  almost,  if  not 
quite,  a  full  head  taller.  On  the  evening  of  September 
27th  she  seated  herself  in  a  chair  by  her  son's  side,  and 
held  a  long  private  conversation  with  him  about  a  pro- 
jected visit  of  her  daughter,  Mrs.  Packard,  of  Albany,  to 
Chittenden.  They  were  both  absorbed  in  themselves, 
and  I  noticed  the  old  lady  fingering  her  white  muslin 
apron  in  a  peculiar  manner,  with  both  hands,  pinching  it 
up  little  by  little  into  folds,  until  she  reached  the  bottom 
hem,  and  then,  smoothing  it  out,  beginning  the  same 
trick  again.  Upon  calling  Mr.  Pritchard's  attention  to 
this  after  the  seance,  he  told  me  that  this  was  an  old 
habit  of  his  mother's  in  life,  and  would  serve  to  identify 
her  spirit  to  any  of  her  former  acquaintances.  She  could 
sit  in  this  way,  he  said,  by  the  hour,  while  interested  in 
conversation,  pinching  up  and  smoothing  out  her  apron 
in  an  absent-minded  fashion;  just  as  some  persons  tie 
strings  around  their  fingers,  and  others  tear  paper  into 
bits. 

My  old  chemical  professor  used  to  sit  in  his  laboratory 
and  lecture  to  me,  keeping  the  thread  of  his  thought 
together  by  cutting  foolscap  into  strips,  which  he  would 
proceed  to  roll  into  spills  and  then  toss  away.  A  certain 
other  friend  of  mine,  the  handsome  young  president  of 
a  New  York  insurance  company,  has  the  trick  of  cutting 
up  all  the  envelopes  on  his  desk,  with  a  business-like  air, 
as  though  he  intended  to  put  the  scraps  to  an  important 

268  IMPORTANT  TRIFLES. 

use ;  but  they  are  finally  divided  into  square  bits  and 
litter  the  floor  of  his  office.  If  I  should  see  the  return- 
ing shade  of  either  of  these  persons,  in  a  room  even 
darker  than  the  Eddy  hall,  I  think  I  should  recognize 
them  all  the  easier  by  the  exhibition  of  these  little  habits 
which  were  so  closely  identified  in  my  mind  with  their 
earthly  selves. 

These  unconsidered  trifles  go  farther  towards  proof  of 
the  identity  of  the  appearing  spirits,  than  even  the  pro- 
nunciation of  names,  or  the  giving  of  information  about 
affairs  within  the  knowledge  of  the  sitter.  No  theory  of 
probabilities  appears  broad  enough  to  cover  the  chance 
of  William  Eddy's  perfecting  the  details  of  a  personation 
to  such  minuteness  as  to  imitate  little,  personal  tricks  and 
habits,  too  unimportant  to  be  remarked  by  any  but  those 
who  are  on  the  most  intimate  terms  with  the  one  simu- 
lated, and,  at  the  same  time,  too  trivial  to  be  suggested 
in  advance  of  their  occurrence,  even  to  the  minds  of  such. 

CHAPTER  XVII. 

A   CHAPTER   OF    MARVELS. 

WHILE  the  portions  of  this  narrative  that 
appeared  in  the  Daily  Graphic  were  running 
through  the  columns  of  that  paper,  I  received 
so  many  letters  of  encouragement  from  all  parts  of  the 
country,  from  total  strangers,  and  so  many  kind  things 
were  said,  in  so  many  journals  of  all  classes,  that  as  the 
end  of  that  series  approached,  I  naturally  felt  a  profound 
regret  at  parting  with  my  public. 

This  feeling  is,  I  believe,  common  to  all  authors 
deeply  interested  in  their  work,  and  on  good  terms 
with  their  readers ;  but  when  one  is  discussing  so 
serious  a  matter  as  the  re-appearance  and  re-union  of 
those  who  have  been  parted  by  death,  the  topic  enlists 
the  author's  sympathies  in  a  degree  exceeding  all  others. 
He  feels  that  he  has  the  same  reason  for  getting  at  the 
truth  as  any  one  of  his  readers,  for  one  law  overrules 
all  alike,  and  one  destiny  must  be  shared  in  common. 
These  numerous  tokens  of  regard  that  I  have  received 
have  not  only  stimulated  me  in  the  work  in  hand,  but 
also  afforded  a  marked  proof  of  the  deep  interest  that 

270  RESPONSIBILITY  OF  THE  AUTHOR. 

prevails  in  the  subject  we  have  been  discussing.  I  wish 
from  the  bottom  of  my  heart  that  I  could  give  to  the 
bereaved  ones  who  have  appealed  to  me,  that  consola- 
tion which  they  so  eagerly  crave ;  that  I  could  allay 
their  doubts  and  encourage  their  hopes ;  but  my  whole 
usefulness  as  an  investigator  would  be  destroyed  by 
my  assuming  the  part  of  propagandist. 

When  I  refer  again  to  the  notes  upon  my  table — 
from  mothers  imploring  me  for  comfort  in  affliction 
that  seems  irremediable ;  from  pious  daughters,  mourn- 
ing the  loss  of  parents ;  from  parted  lovers  who  feel  a 
blessed  assurance  that  the  sting  of  death  and  grave's 
victory  will  have  passed  away,  if  I  can  only  demonstrate 
the  genuineness  of  these  phenomena,  a  sense  of  the 
deep  and  heavy  responsibility  resting  upon  me,  to  weigh 
every  apparent  fact,  and  challenge  every  phenomenon, 
until  the  truth  be  discovered,  comes  over  me.    - 

Let  me  illustrate  by  giving  an  extract  from  a  letter 
from  a  stranger  lady,  which  stands  as  the  type  of  a  whole 
class.  Observe  its  tender  feeling,  its  loving  anxiety  of 
tone,  its  reliance  upon  my  opinion  whether  there  is  balm 
in  Gilead  for  the  wounded  heart  within  her  breast : 

"  I  make  no  apology  for  addressing  you,  save  this  :  I  am  a  mother 
mourning  the  loss  of  an  only  child ; — hungering  and  thirsting  for  an 
echo  from  the  voice  that  always  had  a  welcome  for  "Mamma;'  — 
longing  for  the  familiar  touch  of  little  hands  that  have  been  quiet 
for  one  whole  year. 

May  I  ask  if  you  think  the  Eddy  family  would  allow  me  to  visit 
their  place  —  in  fact,  to  become  a  boarder  in  their  house  for  a  week, 
or  perhaps  longer  ? 

And  do  you  think  my  little  girl  could  really  come  to  me  there  i 
It  seems  to  me  that  I  could  be  almost  happy  once  more,  if  I  could 
see,  for  one  brief  moment,  my  little,  brown-haired,  brown-eyed  dar- 
ling, just  as  she  was  before  her  last  illness. 

Dear  Colonel  Olcott,  will  you  not  write  me  how  to  proceed  in  the 

SPIRIT  OF  AN  ARAB.  271 

matter?      I   think   I  can  speak  for  the  whole   army  of  mourning 
mothers.     They  will,  some  day,  '  arise  and  call  you  blessed.'  " 

Poor,  dear  lady !  what  can  I  say  to  such  an  appeal, 
except  that  my  researches  promise  not  to  end  in  dis- 
appointment ;  that  there  is  reason  to  believe  that  it  is 
possible  for  her  to  see  her  child  again ;  that  I  have  seen 
several  other  mothers  weeping  with  joy,  in  the  circle- 
room,  at  the  sight  of  their  beloved  ones,  whom  they 
thought  shut  out  from  their  sight  forever,  by  the  earth 
that  was  packed  above  their  coffin-lids. 

I  know  I  have  never  assumed  the  office  of  teacher, 
and  that  on  the  contrary  I  have  ever  disclaimed  being 
anything  more  than  a  collector  of  facts  and  observer 
of  phenomena — leaving  every  one  to  form  his  or  her 
opinions  as  they  choose ;  but  here  are  scores  of  people 
among  my  correspondents,  representing,  no  doubt, 
hundreds  of  others,  who  rely  upon  my  facts  to  do  that 
very  thing.     So,  I  must  tread  cautiously. 

The  spirits  whose  appearances  have  been  thus  far 
described  were  either  Indians,  or  whites  of  American  or 
European  lineage.  Up  to  the  2d  of  October,  I  had  never 
seen  one  of  any  other  nationality,  but  on  that  evening 
there  appeared  an  Arab,  who  was  an  old  friend  of  a  lady 
well  known  in  magazine  literature  as  "Aunt  Sue."  He 
was  of  short  stature,  slight  and  wiry  build,  and  his  very 
salaam  to  the  lady,  when  recognized,  was  in  marked  con- 
trast with  the  constrained  bows  of  the  Indians,  and  the 
more  or  less  ungraceful  salutations  of  the  whites.  His 
name  is  Yusef.  He  was  dressed  in  a  white  tunic,  gathered 
at  the  waist  by  a  sash,  and  the  skirt  ornamented  with 
three  equidistant  bands  of  red,  of  the  same  width.     On 

272  ASHAMED  OF  HER  NAME. 

his  head  was  the  national  fez,  and  in  his  sash  was  thrust 
a  weapon  of  some  kind,  which  I  could  not  see  distinctly. 
A  number  of  questions  propounded  to  him  were  answered 
by  respectful  bows,  and  his  parting  obeisance  was  of  that 
deferential,  but  at  the  same  time  self-respecting,  character 
that  is  peculiar  to  the  people  of  the  Orient. 

Five  Indians—"  Black  Swan's  Mother,"  "  Bright  Star," 
"Daybreak,"  "White  Feather"  (who  wore  so  long  a 
plume  in  his  hair  that  it  was  bent  by  the  door-casing  as 
he  bowed  his  head  to  pass  through),  and  "  Santum  " — 
had  preceded  him,  following  Mrs.  Eddy,  whose  address  I 
referred  to  in  the  chapter  preceding  this,  and  one,  "  Swift 
Cloud,"  came  after,  so  that  a  most  favorable  opportunity 
was  afforded  to  note  the  contrast  between  his  manners 
and  deportment  and  those  of  our  aborigines.  The  seance 
was  closed,  as  usual,  by  old  Mr.  Brown,  who  had  some 
talk  with  his  son  about  a  new  house  he  was  erecting,  and 
then  departed.  But,  returning  after  a  moment,  he 
addressed  a  woman  present,  who,  it  appeared,  had  come 
under  a  false  name,  and  whose  spirit-daughter  had 
appeared  to  her  the  evening  before,  and  asked :  "  Was 

that  child, ,  your  daughter  ?  "     The  mother  said  it 

was.  "  What  is  her  other  name  ?  "  asked  the  inquisitive 
spirit.  The  woman  hesitated  a  moment,  and  then  faltered 
out  "  Smith."  "Well,"  said  he,  "  I  hope  she  may  never 
feel  as  if  she  had  to  deny  her  name,"  and  was  gone.  This 
thing  happened  several  times  during  my  visit,  so  it  will 
be  as  well  for  persons  who  are  ashamed  to  give  their  right 
names  to  stay  away  from  Chittenden. 

In  the  dark-circle  of  this  same  evening  I  had  another 
volunteer  exhibition  of  spirit-power  that  ought  to  puzzle 

AN  "  EXTRA  STRONG  BA  TTER  Y."  273 

skeptics  less  self-complacent  than  our  muscular-contrac- 
tionists.  My  weighing-scales  were  standing  on  the  plat- 
form, at  the  right  of  the  cabinet,  where  the  experiment 
with  Honto  was  tried.  We  had  had  some  music  from 
Mayflower  and  the  spirit-band  of  unusual  sweetness,  and 
the  little  girl — whom  I  never  can  mention  without  a 
feeling  of  affection,  so  child-like  and  lovable  is  her  nature 
— had  made  a  ludicrous  failure  with  her  rhyming  improv- 
isations upon  "Music,"  "Pictures,"  and  "War  and 
Peace,"  when  Dix  said  that  if  we  would  all  remain  quiet 
for  a  few  minutes  and  the  violinist  would  play  something, 
he  would  try  to  organize  an  extra  strong  "  battery."  His 
directions  were  followed,  and  for  a  while  no  sound  was 
heard  except  the  dolorous  rasp  of  the  instrument.  Little 
Mayflower  passed  along  the  front  row  and  laid  her  guitar 
on  each  one's  lap,  and  presently  we  had  an  Indian  dance 
such  as  I  described  in  a  previous  chapter. 

Then  I  knew,  from  a  rattling  and  banging  of  my  plat- 
form-scale, that  something  new  was  about  to  happen.  It 
was  moved  along  the  whole  length  of  the  platform  with 
such  a  noise  that  I  thought  to  myself  I  would  have  a 
pretty  bill  of  damages  to  pay  the  next  morning,  but  the 
thought  was  hardly  formed  before  George  Dix,  with  a 
laugh,  said  :  "  Don't  worry,  Mr.  Olcott ;  I  won't  hurt 
your  scales ;  "  and  he  fell  to  whistling  and  tugging  at  the 
dead  weight,  like  a  jolly  stevedore  working  among  a  cargo 
of  cotton.  The  scale  reached  the  steps,  and  then  went 
bumping  down  to  the  floor  of  the  room,  and  was  rolled 
to  a  point  near  the  medium's  chair,  where  it  stopped.  We 
heard  some  one  step  upon  the  platform  and  the  beam 
kick  against  the  pad,  as  though  a  heavy  weight  were  on 

274  WEIGHING  DIX  A  ND  MA  YFL  0  WER. 

it.  George  said,  "  I  guess  I'll  see  how  much  I  weigh;  " 
and  then,  after  running  the  poise  along  the  notches  and 
changing  one  counterpoise  weight  for  another,  reported 
163  pounds.  I  asked  him  how  tall  he  was,  and  he 
replied  5  feet  8  inches.  We  then  heard  Mayflower's 
voice,  saying,  "  Now  weigh  me,  George,"  and  his  answer, 
"  All  right :  get  on ;  "  and  another  and  lighter  person  was 
heard  to  mount  the  platform,  and  the  noise  of  weighing, 
with  another  change  of  counterpoise  weights,  was  followed 
by  a  call  for  a  light.  This  being  struck,  Mr.  Poole,  of 
New  Jersey,  and  Mr.  Wilkins,  of  Vermont,  who  had  acted 
as  a  committee  on  our  behalf  to  tie  Horatio,  first  exam- 
ined the  ropes,  and  found  him  just  as  he  had  been  left,  and 
then  stepped  to  the  scale  with  the  candle,  and  announced 
the  beam  as  marking  forty  pounds.  But  the  medium, 
speaking  in  the  voice  of  a  spirit  known  as  "French 
Mary,"  said,  "No;  it  is  thirty-eight  pounds;"  which, 
upon  a  second  and  closer  look,  with  the  candle  held 
nearer,  they  found  to  be  so.  Now,  if  any  one  chooses  to 
say  that  the  medium  knew  the  weight  because  he  had 
handled  it  himself,  it  will  be  necessary  for  him  to  account 
for: 

1.  The  fact  that  after  the  weighing  he  was  bound  as 
tightly  and  identically  the  same  as  he  was  by  the  com- 
mittee before  the  room  was  darkened;  and, 

2.  How,  supposing  that  he  could  unbind  and  re-bind 
himself,  which  I  deny,  he  could  run  the  poise  along  the 
scale-beam  in  a  pitchy  dark  room  to  a  certain  notch, 
and  be  able  to  correct  an  unexpected  error  of  the  com- 
mittee. The  experiment  was  to  me  very  interesting  as 
furnishing  evidence  either  of  the  great  force  at  the 

SEANCE  IN  THE  RECErTION-ROOM. 

275 

command  of  the  spirits,  as  well  as  their  ability  to  see 
in  the  dark,  or,  of  some  one's  being  able,  instantly  upon 
the  lighting  of  the  candle,  to  convey  the  correct  read- 
ing of  the  figures  to  the  mind  of  the  medium.  The 
following  diagram  will  show  the  route  traveled  by  the 
scales  ;  the  entire  distance  was  33  ft.  6  inches. 

The  following  night's  seance  was  to  my  mind  the 
most  satisfactory,  as  a  test,  of  any  held  during  my  visit 

in  one  respect,  viz. :  that  it  proved  that  neither  the  hall 
up-stairs,  nor  the  hollow  platform,  nor  the  cabinet 
floor,  nor  that  mysterious  window,  that  has  so  troubled 
the  souls  of  many  superficial  "skeptics,"  had  anything 
to  do  with  the  manifestations.  Just  before  the  usual 
hour  of  assembly,  finding  the  Eddy  boys  in  an  unusually 
tractable  mood,  I  proposed  that  for  once  we  should 
hold  our  sitting  in  the  reception-room,  where  we  were 
gathered  about  the  stove.  This  being  assented  to  with- 
out hesitancy,  the  old  shawl  that  hangs  over  the  cabinet 
door  was  brought  down,  the  rough  mattress,  and  some 
working  clothes  upon  the  wall  of  a  dark  closet  under 
the  stairs,  were  removed,  and  we  were  ready  to  begin 
the  seance. 

The  reader  will  understand  the  position  of  affairs  by 
glancing  over  the  following  ground-plan  : 

276 

THE  GROUND-PLAN. 

A  is  the  sitting  or  reception  room :  B  is  a  small  dark 
bedroom,  running  under  the  stairs  that  lead  to  the 

[3 

M  0 

second  story ;  C  is  the  front  hall ;  E,  steps  leading  to 
cellar ;  F,  William  Eddy's  bedroom,  opening  only  into 
the  dining-room  (G) ;  H,  the  door  from  sitting-room 
to  dining-room. 

The  room  or  closet  B  measures  9  feet  2  inches  by  5 
feet  3  inches,  with  a  ceiling  8  feet  high — narrow  quar- 
ters for  a  person  to  sleep  in,  and,  with  the  door  shut,  a 
place  that  ought  to  be  fatal  to  any  pair  of  lungs  that 
had  ever  been  accustomed  to  a  breath  of  fresh  air. 
And  yet  this  is  where  "  Joe,"  the  pugnacious  but  musical 
farm-hand,  whom  every  visitor  will  recollect,  takes  his 
nightly  repose.  There  is  no  window  here,  at  any  rate, 
to  awaken  the  suspicions  of  the  wary  psychologist,  or 
demand  of  me  a  covering  of  sealed  mosquito-netting ; 
and  I  conclude  that  if  the  spirits  should  show  them- 
selves there,  the  fact  would  go  a  long  way  towards  mak- 
ing out  my  case. 

THORO  UGH  EXAMINA  TION.  277 

Just  before  the  shawl  was  hung,  William  insisted  on 
my  coming  into  the  den  to  examine  it  in  any  way  I 
pleased,  but  as  I  had  already  breathed  its  fetid  atmos- 
phere on  another  occasion,  when  I  measured  it  and 
sounded  its  walls  and  floor,  I  wished  to  decline.  He 
would  take  no  denial,  however,  and  so,  lamp  in  hand,  I 
went  in  and  made  a  general  survey.  There  was  noth- 
ing to  be  seen  but  the  bare  floor  and  walls;  and,  run- 
ning my  hands  over  William's  clothing  under  the 
laughing  pretext  of  magnetizing  him,  I  enabled  myself 
to  assure  the  reader  that  he  had  nothing  concealed 
about  his  person.  The  shawl-curtain  was  arranged 
and  we  then  took  our  seats  in  an  arc  that  stretched  from 
the  hall-door  to  that  leading  into  the  dining-room.  My 
post  was  in  the  crown  of  the  arc,  right  opposite,  and 
not  more  than  eight  or  nine  feet  from  the  "  cabinet " 
door.  The  lamp  was  placed  on  a  shelf  in  the  chimney, 
at  the  south-east  corner  of  the  room  and  gave  a  very 
fair  light. 

We  had  not  long  to  wait,  for,  after  the  lapse  of  a  very 
few  minutes,  the  shawl  was  lifted  and  out  jumped  Honto, 
as  lively  as  a  squirrel.  She  was  dressed  in  a  light  suit 
throughout,  with  a  scarf  about  her  waist,  and  her  hair 
hanging  loose  down  her  back.  She  stepped  to  the 
dining-room  door,  lifted  the  latch  and  threw  it  open  ;  then 
began  capering  about  in  her  usual  way,  as  if  she  were  in 
fine  spirits.  Shawl  after  shawl  she  twitched  from  old 
Mrs.  Cleveland's  and  Mr.  Pritchard's  feet  and  shoulders  ; 
astonishing  them  as  much  each  time  as  Hermann  does 
the  victim  he  entraps  into  "  assisting  "  him  in  his  magical 
entertainments.     Then  she  stepped  to  the  right  of  the 

278  WONDERFUL  FEATS  OF  HON  TO. 

cabinet  door,  and  stood  just  opposite  me,  looking  intently 

upon  the  floor,  by  the  mop-board.     There  was  nothing  to 

be  seen  at  first  but  the  bare  planks,  but,  presto !  as  I 

watched,  I  suddenly  saw  a  heap  of  something  black,  as 

it  might  be  a  piece  of  a  woman's  dress  or  a  quantity  of 

black  netting.     She  stretched  out  her  hand,  and  daintily 

picked  it  up  with  thumb  and  forefinger,  held  it  open,  and 

it  was  —  one  of  her  shawls  !     Thus,  within  a  few  feet  of 

my  nose,  she  exhibited  the  whole  process  of  materializing 

fabrics,  and  left  me  in  a  very  pleased  mood,  as  may  be 

imagined. 

In  the  report  of  the  London  Dialectical  Society  on 

Spiritualism,  at  page  328,  in  the  testimony  of  Miss  Anna 

Blackwell  before  the  committee,  occurs  the  following : 

Under  the  second  head  (that  is  to  say,  the  command  of  the  spirits 
of  the  "  fluids"  and  "  forces"  that  make  up  the  totality  of  planetary 
existence)  may  be  classed  the  evanescent  appearance  of  hands,  faces, 
birds,  animals,  flowers,  &c,  which  are  produced  by  a  condensation 
out  of  the  atmosphere,  of  the  material  elements  of  these  pseudo- 
formations,  to  which,  by  the  application  of  the  electro-vital  force  in 
modes  not  yet  known  to  us,  spirits  are  able  to  impart  a  temporary 
vitality,  but  which,  having  no  soul,  are  without  consciousness  or  last- 
ing coherence,  and  dissolve  into  their  original  elements  on  the  cessa- 
tion of  the  currents  that  determined  their  formation.     Lady  D 

assures  me  that  a  "  magnificent  white  flower,  as  large  as  a  dinner 
plate,  and  with  long  purple  stamens,"  suddenly  appeared  on  a  chair 
close  beside  her,  one  evening,  as  she  sat  in  her  drawing-room  in  com- 
pany with  Mr.  Home  ;  it  remained  visible  to  them  both  for  about 
two  minutes,  when  "  it  melted  into  the  air." 

At  page  332,  in  describing  the  apparition  of  a  dark- 
haired  man,  who  passed  into  the  solid  wall  in  her  pres- 
ence, she  adds : 

Spirits  say  that  the  compact  matter  of  our  sphere  of  Relation,  is  as 
imperceptible,  for  them,  as  the  fluidic  matter  of  their  sphere  is  for 
us,  and  that  they  only  become  cognizant  of  it,  and  able  to  act  upon 
it,  through  our  minds  and  organisms. 

SUBJECT  FOR  THE  ARTIST.      -  281 

Honto  was  followed  by  old  Mrs.  Pritchard,  who  was 
dressed,  as  usual,  in  her  grayish  frock,  and  white  apron 
and  kerchief,  and  who  had  some  pleasant  words  for  her 
son. 

Then  appeared  a  charming  young  woman  carrying  a 
child,  who  was  recognized  by  her  sister  as  Mrs.  Josephine 
Dow,  late  of  Chittenden  township.  She  died  twenty- 
four  years  ago  at  the  r.ge  of  nineteen. ,  Her  robe  was 
pure  white  and  flowing,  gathered  in  at  the  waist  by  a 
string,  so  that  the  folds  of  the  upper  part  lay  over  it  after 
a  very  classical  fashion.  Her  auburn  hair  fell  in  a  mass 
over  her  shoulders,  and  as  she  stood  there  petting  the 
child,  I  thought  I  had  never  seen  a  prettier  sight  in  all 
my  visit.  She  stepped  back  into  the  cabinet,  whereupon 
the  voice  of  Mrs.  Eaton  said :  "  Mr.  Olcott,  this  is  the 
subject  we  have  selected  for  the  artist's  picture.  The 
spirit  will  now  return  without  the  child,  so  that  Mr.  Kappes 
may  take  a  good  look  at  her  "  —  and  back  she  came, 
alone,  and  stood  at  the  right  of  the  curtain,  with  her 
right  arm  crossed  over  her  waist  and  her  left  hanging  by 
her  side,  looking  the  artist  full  in  the  face.  Mrs.  Eaton 
said  that  the  spirit  came  back  alone  because  it  took  so 
much  extra  power  to  materialize  the  baby,  that  the  spirit 
herself  was  made  too  weak  to  stop  out  long  enough  to 
give  us  a  thorough  view  of  her  own  form.  Blake,  the 
Irish  painter,  used  to  see  spirits  invisible  to  all  other  eyes, 
sitting  to  him  for  their  portraits  in  his  studio  when  he 
was  alone,  but  did  any  one  ever  hear  before  of  a  materi- 
alized spirit  coming  for  the  purpose  to  an  artist,  in  the 
presence  of  a  mixed  company  of  fifteen  persons? 

After  the  "Madonna  and  Child,"  (as  I  felt  like  christening 

282        ENDORSEMENT  OF  OUR  ENGRA  VINGS. 

our  models,)  we  saw  the  spirit  of  William  Packard, 
late  of  Albany,  and  grandson  of  old  Mrs.  Pritchard,  who 
seemed  so  disposed  to  make  friends  with  the  artist  that, 
at  that  gentleman's  request,  he  moved  quite  far  along 
the  wall  to  the  right,  where  his  figure  was  thrown  into 
high  relief  by  the  light-colored  paper  hangings.  His 
face  was  round,  and  he  wore  a  long  black  moustache. 
His  costume  comprised  a  dark  sack-coat  and  dark  panta- 
loons, a  single-breasted  vest,  and  white  shirt  with  collar, 
quite  different  from  William's,  who  wore  his  ordinary 
checked  gingham  shirt,  without  collar  or  cuffs. 

We  were  then  delighted  to  see  the  mysterious  Mrs, 
Eaton  herself,  whose  shrill  voice  we  had  so  often  heard 
issue  from  the  cabinet  up-stairs.  She  was  a  little,  old, 
wrinkled  woman,  in  an  old-fashioned  muslin  mob-cap 
with  a  ribbon  about  the  crown,  a  grayish  dress,  and  a 
check  woolen  shoulder-shawl,  with  its  points  crossed  over 
her  bosom.  She  advanced  two  or  three  feet  from  the 
curtain,  and  looking  at  me,  said  that  she  had  seen  our 
picture  of  "The  Phantom  Carriage,"  and  could  suggest 
no  improvement,  as  it  was  true  to  nature.  I  expressed 
my  pleasure  at  seeing  her  in  person,  hearing  her  speak, 
and  seeing  her  lips  move,  for  it  was  now  unquestionable 
that  the  voice  up-stairs  was  hers  and  not  the  medium's. 
She  said  that  it  was  for  that  very  purpose  she  had  mate- 
rialized herself,  and  that  the  spirit-band  controlling  these 
manifestations  had  desired  the  change  for  that  evening  to 
the  lower  room.  She  and  they  knew  how  anxious  I  was 
for  such  tests  as  would  satisfy  myself  and  the  world,  of 
the  genuineness  of  the  phenomena,  and  desired  to  further 
my  wishes  ;  but  they,  like  ourselves,  were  subject  to  the 

ALMOST  FORCED  INTO  BELIEF.  283 

conditions  around  them,  and  where  a  circle  was  constantly 
changing,  and  never  the  same  two  evenings  in  succession, 
they  could  not  do  all  that  either  I  demanded  or  they 
wished. 

After  her,  came  out  an  old,  gentlemanly-looking  man, 
with  a  fine,  intellectual  head.  His  silver  locks  were 
brushed  from  either  ear  towards  his  crest,  as  if  to  con- 
ceal his  baldness.  He  was  dressed  in  a  well-cut  black 
coat,  buttoned  up  high,  and  pantaloons  to  match.  He 
spoke  in  a  low  voice  in  answer  to  a  question  from  his 
relative  present,  who  afterwards  informed  me  that  he  for- 
merly lived  at  Davenport,  N.  Y.,  where  he  died  thirty- 
nine  years  ago,  at  the  advanced  age  of  eighty-two  years. 

Our  next  visitor  was  Augusta ,  a  child  of  fourteen, 

who  was  clothed  in  a  white  dress,  and  sweetly  smiled  and 
recognized  her  mother,  who  sat  next  to  me. 

The  last  form  to  appear,  was  Jeremiah  McCready,  late 
of  Cayuga  County,  N.  Y.,  whose  materialization  was  very 
strong  and  satisfactory ;  and  this  brought  to  a  close,  a  most 
remarkable  and  satisfactory  evening's  entertainment. 

I  can  hardly  express  the  relief  I  experienced  at  the 
result  of  this  seance.  Convinced  as  I  had  long  been 
of  the  good  faith  of  William  Eddy ;  satisfied  as  my 
reason  was  that  it  was  a  physical  impossibility  for  the 
man  to  simulate  such  a  variety  of  forms — making  him- 
self at  one  moment  a  patriarch  of  eighty  or  a  tottering 
grandmother,  and  the  next,  a  babe  in  arms  or  a  tod- 
dling child  of  three  or  four  years;  now  a  giant  Indian 
chief  or  a  dancing  squaw,  and  anon,  a  roving  spears- 
man  of  the  plain  of  Ararat  or  a  bronze-faced  fellah  from 
the  foot  of  the  Pyramids;  twisting  his  inflexible  tongue 

284  PLASTERED   WALLS  UNAVAILING. 

around  the  gutturals,  nasals,  and  sibilants  of  numerous 
languages,  that  certainly  nobody  outside  of  the  Orien- 
tal Society  or  some  occasional  Dominie  Sampson  had 
mastered;  convinced,  I  say,  as  I  was  upon  all  these 
points — that  ventilating  window,  hollow  platform,  and 
seven-by-two  cabinet  forced  themselves  oftener  than  I 
liked  between  my  mental  vision  and  the  bald  facts. 

I  confess  to  a  feeling  closely  akin  to  astonishment 
when  Honto,  the  self-same  copper-colored  squaw,  the 
pipe-smoking,  shawl-weaving,  dancing,  laughing 
Honto,  stepped  out  and  confronted  me.  It  seemed  that 
it  would  be  next  to  impossible  for  enough  of  the  spirit- 
ual matter-essence  to  filter  through  that  plastered  wall, 
for  these  cunning  electro-platers  to  make  a  covering 
withal  for  their  filmy  shapes.  But  there  she  was,  sure 
enough,  in  full  form — with  no  detail  of  her  dress  lack- 
ing, no  lock  of  her  massive  suit  of  hair  gone  ;  her  fig- 
ure as  plump,  her  motions  as  supple,  her  attitudes  as 
wildly  statuesque  as  ever  before.  When  she  had 
passed  away  from  our  sight,  I  awaited  the  coming  of 
the  next  spirit  with  eager  attention,  for  even  then,  it 
seemed  to  me  that  it  could  not  be  possible  for  another 
to  materialize  itself.  Honto  was  the  familiar  spirit  of 
the  medium,  or  somehow  attached  to  and,  as  it  were, 
enameled  upon  the  family,  so  that  she  could  do  impos- 
sibilities that  no  one  else  from  the  other  world  could. 

But,  in  the  midst  of  my  doubts  and  mistrust,  there 
came  the  gray-white  apparition  of  old  Mrs.  Pritchard, 
the  very  starch  in  her  apron  and  cap  seeming  as  if 
it  were  crisp  from  the  laundry.  Then,  I  think,  the 
conviction    formed  itself  that,  no   matter  how  many 

YusEr.^e^=3TT^ 

SPIRIT-FORMS. 

I 

THE  BABY-CIIOST  UNMISTAKABLE.  287 

"skeptics"  came  battering  against  these  granitic  facts, 
no  matter  what  array  of  "  exposers  "  might  blow  their 
tin-horns  and  penny-trumpets,  that  Jericho  would 
stand.  Then  I  said  to  myself,  that  if  William  Eddy 
were  caught  fifty  times  playing  at  materialization,  with 
"  cork-soles,"  "  ragged-blankets,"  and  up-standing  hair, 
upon  some  evening  when  conditions  were  unpropitious, 
the  genuine  phenomena  of  this  one  seance  could  not 
be  obliterated  from  my  memory. 

One  of  the  most  eminent  scholars  in  this  country, 
and  one  who  has  made  a  study  of  legerdemain,  among 
other  things,  shows  his  ingrained  skepticism  of  all 
spiritualistic  matters  by  insisting,  despite  all  my  careful 
examination  of  thcwalls  and  floor  of  the  cabinets  up 
and  down  stairs,  that  the  figures  are  personations  by 
confederates.  He  tells  me  that  he  waits  patiently  for 
the  exposure  that,  in  his  opinion,  will  surely  come;  as 
surely  as  it  did  in  Philadelphia,  and  as,  he  maintains, 
it  will  in  London.  He  makes  no  more  account  of  Mr. 
Crookes',  and  my  observations,  than  he  did  of  Mr. 
Owen's,  regarding  us  all  as  equally  superficial.  Well, 
I  am  content  to  be  placed  in  the  stocks,  in  such  good 
company. 

In  William's  dark  hole  of  a  cabinet  there  was  not  a 
bit  of  woolen,  silk,  or  cotton  rag,  the  size  of  a  finger- 
stall, nor  a  moccasin  or  string  of  beads ;  not  a  wig 
nor  even  a  stick  of  black  pomade,  much  less  a  wash- 
bowl, water  or  towels ;  and  about  his  person,  as  I  had 
discovered  by  my  innocent  ruse,  there  were  none  of 
these  things;  and  yet  there  had  appeared — but  the 
story  is  already  told  and  I  need  not  repeat. 

28S  MYSTERIES. 

Two  features  of  this  occasion  will  arrest  the  attention 
of  scientific  minds,  viz  :  the  appearance  and  disappear- 
ance of  the  baby,  and  the  instantaneous  formation  of 
Honto  and  shawl.  There  could  be  no  mistake  about 
the  child — no  questions  of  rag-wrapped  legs  or  fondled 
pillows.  The  figure  stood  too  near  me  and  in  too 
good  a  light  to  admit  of  such  deceptions  being 
practised.  It  was  a  living,  moving  child,  which, 
with  its  right  thumb  in  its  mouth,  nestled  its 
little  head  in  the  neck  of  its  bearer,  and  passed 
its  chubby  left  arm  about  her  neck.  For  the  instant 
it  was  as  palpable  and,  no  doubt,  as  material  a 
being  as  any  baby  now  lying  in  its  mother's  arms. 
Made  from  the  imponderable  atoms  floating  in  the 
foul  air  of  that  chamber,  it  was  resolved  into  nothing 
in  an  instant  of  time,  leaving  no  trace  of  its  evanescent 
existence  behind.  And  the  shawl !  in  what  spirit- 
home,  by  what  hearth,  or  under  what  vine-trellised 
porch  (for  Mayflower's  rhymes  teem  with  allusions  to 
her  house  and  garden,  her  pets  and  domestic  compan- 
ions) was  its  yarn  spun,  its  knots  tied,  and  its  strands 
tinted?  Whose  busy  fingers  plied  the  needles,  or 
whose  hand  guided  the  ghostly  loom  by  which  its 
meshes  were  formed?  Mystery  of  mysteries!  What 
CEdipus  can  solve  the  riddle  ?  And  how  long  must  we 
wait  for  an  answer? 

CHAPTER  XVIII. 

SPIRITS    FROM    FAR   CATHAY. 

AMONG  the  spirits  who  frequent  the  Eddy  home- 
stead none  is  more  remarkable  than  an  aged 
woman  who  chooses  to  call  herself  "  The  Witch 
of  the  Mountain."  In  her  personal  appearance  she  bears 
a  marked  resemblance  to  that  massive,  artistic  figure  of 
the  drama,  the  Meg  Merrilles  of  Charlotte  Cushman. 
The  face  is  one  not  easily  forgotten.  Old,  wrinkled,  and 
decrepit  as  she  is — the  latter  so  much  that  she  usually  has 
to  sit  in  a  chair  while  discoursing  to  us — her  black  eye 
gleams  with  intelligence  and  a  fiery  resolution,  and  her 
voice,  although  pitched  in  a  high  falsetto,  has  the  ring  of 
command  in  its  penetrating  tones.  No  thick  layer  of  fat 
covers  her  attenuated  frame,  her  arms  are  almost  as  thin 
as  a  skeleton's,  her  cheeks  hollow,  her  skin  dark  brown 
and  seemingly  dry  as  parchment,  and  her  elfish  locks 
of  gray  hang  beside  a  face  that  would  be  marked 
among  ten  thousand.*  On  the  31st  of  last  August,  I  saw 
William  Eddy  throw  a  dipperful  of  spring  water,  taken 
in  my  presence  from  the  horse-trough,  upon  a  chip  fire 

out  of  doors,  and  it  flashed  up  instantaneously,  as  though 
IO  289        *  See  r age,  296 

290  THE  "WITCH  OF  THE  MOUNTAIN." 

the  embers  had  been  fed  with  oil  or  alcohol.  It  was  this 
spirit  who,  as  alleged,  did  the  trick,  using  the  medium  as 
her  intermediary. 

One  day,  late  in  October,  the  same  experiment  was 
successfully  repeated  in  the  presence  of  several  witnesses. 
I  am  told  that  one  evening  last  winter,  in  the  presence 
of  a  small  circle,  among  whom  was  an  Albany  lawyer 
named  E.  D.  Stronk,  she  called  for  a  jar  of  spring  water, 
and  a  few  pieces  of  charcoal  from  the  wood-stove,  and 
transmuted  the  latter  into  stones,  after  stirring  them  about 
in  the  jar  with  her  fingers,  and  making  the  vessel  appear 
filled  with  liquid  fire.  The  witnesses  and  pebbles  I  have 
seen,  but  not  the  experiment;  so  I  set  that  aside.  On 
the  evening  of  the  same  August  31st,  however,  I  saw  the 
spirit  seat  herself  in  a  chair  on  the  platform,  saw  her  give 
her  silky  hair  into  the  hands  of  Judge  Bacon,  of  St. 
Johnsbury,  Vt.,  Mr.  Stronk,  and  another,  to  feel;  saw 
her  allow  Judge  Bacon  to  pull  out  a  lock  as  a  keepsake ; 
saw  the  hair  in  his  possession  after  the  circle  and  on  the 
next  day;  and  heard  her  speak  to  us  concerning  the 
affairs  of  the  next  world,  for  the  space  of  perhaps  five 
minutes.  She  has  not  been  a  frequent  visitor  of  late,  but 
about  the  23d  of  October  it  was  announced  that  she 
would  appear  immediately  after  the  15th  of  November, 
to  take  charge  of  the  circle  during  the  winter,  and 
that  she  would  perform  a  number  of  startling  chemical 
experiments. 

The  15th  fell  on  Sunday,  and  of  course  there  was  no 
circle.  The  next  evening,  I  made  an  engagement  with  a 
hard-headed  Rutland  skeptic  to  drive  up  there,  but  he 
failed  me  at  the  very  last  moment,  and  I  could  not  reach 

A  LAW  YER  '  S  CER  TIFICA  TE.  291 

Chittenden    in    time.       The    Witch   came   out,  however, 

according  to  announcement,  and  sat  and  discoursed  much 

as  she   did  on    the  occasion   previously   noticed.      Her 

experiment  of  the  evening  consisted  in  the  manufacture 

of  a   number   of  bright  masses  that  seemed    like   large 

crystals,  but   which    shone   Avith   great   brilliancy.      Mr. 

Stronk,    the  Albany   counselor,    happening   there    on    a 

second  visit,  has  given  me  the  following  memorandum : 

Chittenden,  November  19th,  1874. 
This  is  to  certify  that  I  attended  the  seance  at  the  house  of  the 
Eddy  brothers,  on  the  evening  of  the  17th,  when  "  The  Witch  of  the 
Mountain"  appeared,  and  conversed  for  some  minutes.  She  per- 
mitted me,  with  two  others,  to  go  up  to  her  and  look  at  three  sub- 
stances that  may  be  called  spirit-jewels,  which  she  drew  from  her 
bosom  and  showed  to  me.  They  were  unlike  anything  I  ever  beheld, 
and  indescribably  beautiful.  One  was  about  as  large  as  the  bottom 
of  a  tea-saucer,  luminous,  piano  or  concavo-convex,  and  the  surface 
divided  into  squares,  or  perhaps  bosses,  each  of  which  seemed  to 
sparkle  with  a  different  color.  Some  were  like  the  light  of  a  dia- 
mond, some  rosy,  some  golden.  If  I  had  been  allowed  to  handle 
them,  I  might  give  a  more  accurate  description. 

E.  D.  Stronk, 
83  Lancaster  Street,  Albany,  N.  Y. 

The  last  time  I  saw  the  "  Witch  "  was  on  the  evening 

of  the  7th  of  October,  when  she  was  the  first  spirit  to 

emerge  from  the  cabinet.     She  stepped  out  at  the  left 

of  the  curtain,  and  made  some  pretty  severe  strictures 

upon  a  card  signed  "  Skeptic,"  professing  to  be  written 

by  a  neighbor  of  the  Eddys  (which,  in  fact,  it  was  not), 

and  containing  many  falsehoods  about  them   and  their 

doings.     She  then  said  she  had  a  few  words  for  me,  and, 

passing  into  the  cabinet  for  a  moment,  reappeared  at  the 

left  of  the  curtain,  which  brought  her  directly  in  front 

of  my  position.     She  said  that  she  hoped  that  conditions 

would  soon  be  such  that  they  (the  spirits)  would  be  able 

292  PERSONA  L  MA  GNE  TISM  A  PO  WER. 

to  satisfy  me  as  to  experiments ;  that  I  must  be  patient 
and  restrain  my  natural  eagerness  to  probe  things  to  the 
bottom — for  I  rendered  myself  so  intensely  positive  as  to 
throw  the  atmosphere  of  the  circle  into  violent  pertuba- 
tion.  I  could  not  help  recalling  the  letter  of  Professor 
Tyndall  in  reply  to  the  invitation  of  the  Dialectical 
Society's  Committee  to  investigate  the  phenomena  of 
Spiritualism.     He  said : 

"  More  than  a  year  ago,  Mr.  Cromwell  Varley,  who  is,  I  believe, 
one  of  the  greatest  modern  Spiritualists,  did  me  the  favor  to  pay  me 
a  visit,  and  he  then  employed  a  comparison  which,  though  flattering 
to  my  spiritual  strength,  seems  to  mark  me  out  as  unfit  for  spiritual 
investigation.  He  said  that  my  presence  at  a  seance  resembled  that 
of  a  great  magnet  among  a  number  of  small  ones.  I  throw  all  into 
confusion." 

The  Professor  evidently  regarded  the  thing  as  a  joke, 
but  I  do  not,  for  I  think  that  if  any  one  thing  is  self- 
evident,  it  is  that  some  persons  have  greater  power 
than  others  to  affect  the  mental,  moral,  and  nervous 
conditions  of  those  with  whom  they  come  in  contact. 
If  this  were  not  a  fact,  how  could  we  explain  the  "per- 
sonal magnetism"  of  actors,  orators,  lawyers,  clergy- 
men, physicians,  military  and  naval  captains,  and  other 
men  whose  names  will  recur  to  every  one  who  reads 
these  lines. 

What  is  this  insensible  something  that  envelops  us 
like  an  inner  atmosphere,  and  saturates  all  whom  we 
meet  ?  What  subtle  power  made  the  mere  touch  of  an 
Apostle's  robe  efficacious  to  cure  disease,  and  the  lay- 
ing on  of  a  royal  hand  effect  the  same  result?  What 
human  lightning  darting  from  Napoleon's  eye  converted 
every  soldier  into  a  hero  as  it  fell  upon  him  ?  What 
magic  force  turned  the  rout  of  our  own  Shenandoah 

A  NEW  ARRIVAL.  293 

army  into  a  crushing,  victory,  as  the  fiery  little  captain 
galloped  along  the  line  and  swept  the  field  with  a 
glance?  What  potent  spell  lurked  in  the  presence  of 
Florence  Nightingale,  and  made  the  wounded  men  at 
Scutari  better,  if  they  could  barely  kiss  her  shadow  as 
it  flitted  across  their  beds?  And  what  but  this  unseen 
but  all-potent  personal  magnetism,  enables  some  fiends 
in  human  shape  to  draw  maidens,  wives,  and  widows, 
alike,  from  the  path  of  virtue,  to  minister  to  their  awful 
appetites  against  their  own  reason,  moral  training,  and 
the  natural  promptings  of  a  pure  mind  and  a  pre- 
viously unsullied  heart? 

But  I  will  not  dwell  upon  a  subject  on  which,  in  wider 
limits  for  discussion  than  are  now  at  my  command,  I 
would  be  only  too  happy  to  expand.  Suffice  it  to  say 
that,  after  a  good  deal  of  observation  among  the  phe- 
nomena of  animal  magnetism,  odic  force  and  Spiritual- 
ism, I  have  come  to  the  conclusion  that  the  mere 
exclusion  of  a  person  from  a  circle,  or  his  location  in 
any  given  place  in  the  same,  is  neither  prima  facie  evi- 
dence of  intended  trickery,  nor  that  the  superior 
acumen  of  the  individual  as  an  investigator  is  dreaded. 

The  arrival  of  a  Russian  lady  of  distinguished  birth 
and  rare  educational  and  natural  endowments,  on 
the  14th  of  October  (the  very  day  after  a  certain  pseudo- 
investigator,  who  has  since  made  his  "  statement,"  left,) 
was  an  important  event  in  the  history  of  the  Chittenden 
manifestations.  This  lady — Madame  Helen  P.  de  Bla- 
vatsky — has  led  a  very  eventful  life,  traveling  in  most 
of  the  lands  of  the  Orient,  searching  for  antiquities  at 
the  base  of  the  Pyramids,  witnessing  the  mysteries  of 

294  MADAME  DE  BLA  VA  TSKY. 

Hindoo  temples,  and  pushing  with  an  armed  escort  far 
into  the  interior  of  Africa.  The  adventures  she  has 
encountered,  the  strange  people  she  has  seen,  the  perils 
by  sea  and  land  she  has  passed  through,  would  make 
one  of  the  most  romantic  stories  ever  told  by  a  biog- 
rapher. In  the  whole  course  of  my  experience,  I  never 
met  so  interesting  and,  if  I  may  say  it  without  offence, 
eccentric  a  character. 

As  I  am  about  to  describe  some  of  the  spirit-forms 
that  appeared  to  her  at  the  Eddy  homestead,  and  am 
dependent  upon  her  for  a  translation  of  most  of  the 
language  they  spoke,  it  is  important  that  I  should  say 
a  few  words  concerning  her  social  position,  by  way  of 
preface.  The  lady  has  been  so  obliging  as  to  comply 
with  my  request  to  be  furnished  with  some  account  of 
herself,  and  cheerfully  submitted  to  my  inspection 
documentary  proofs  of  her  identity.  Among  others  of 
the  latter,  I   have   seen   familiar   letters   from    Prince 

Ferdinand  W ,  a  relative  of  the  Czar,  Baron  M , 

and  other  noblemen,  a  certified  copy  of  her  father's 
will,  and  her  passports,  which,  as  well  as  the  last  named 
document,  fully  attest  her  rank.  She  is  the  grand- 
daughter, on  the  mother's  side,  of  the  great  General 
Fadeef  and  the  Princess  Helen  Dolgoroukoff,  grand- 
daughter of  the  Prince  Iakoff  Dolgorouky,  the  best 
friend  and  counselor  of  Peter  the  Great.  Her  grand- 
aunt  was  Natalia  Kirilowna,  Princess  Dolgorouky, 
who  was  the  betrothed  of  Peter  II.,  and  would  have 
been  Empress,  had  not  that  unfortunate  Prince  died  on 
the  eve  of  their  intended  marriage.  On  the  father's 
side  she  is  related  to  the  powerful  Kourland  family  of 

ANCESTRY  AND  SOCIAL  POSITION.  297 

the  Hahn-Hahns,  who  trace  their  line  in  unbroken 
descent,  back  to  the  first  Crusades.  Her  father's  father 
was  Lieutenant-General  of  Kourland,  and  his  mother 
found  a  second  husband  in  the  Prince  Nicholas  Vas- 
iltchikofF.  Her  father  was  a  General  on  the  retired 
list,  and  died  at  an  advanced  age,  after  some  sixty  years 
of  service  in  the  army  and  civil  department.  His  high 
rank  is  proven  by  the  fact  of  his  being  in  the  "  Corps 
des  Pages,"  to  which  none  but  the  sons  of  the  highest 
families  are  admitted.  Mme.  de  Blavatsky  herself  was 
married  to  General  de  Blavatsky,  Governor  of  Erivan, 
in  the  Caucasus.* 

It  will  be  seen,  therefore,  from  the  above  recital,  that 
here  we  have  a  lady  of  such  social  position,  as  to  be 
incapable  of  entering  into  a  vulgar  conspiracy  with 
any  pair  of  tricksters,  to  deceive  the  public,  while  her 
education  and  travels  have  necessarily  made  her 
acquainted  with  many  different  languages.  This  is  my 
witness  ;  and  now  to  my  story. 

On  the  14th  of  October  Mme.  de  Blavatsky  reached 
Chittenden,  and  attended  the  seance  that  evening. 
Honto,  as  if  to  give  the  amplest  opportunity  for  the 
artist  and  myself  to  test  the  correctness  of  the  theory 
of  "  personation,"  that  the  "  investigator  "  previously 

*  "  Caucasus  "  is  the  general  name  given  to  the  region  and  the 
chain  of  mountains  which  stretch  between  the  Black  and  Caspian 
seas,  the  mountains  forming  the  boundary  between  Asia  and  Europe. 
The  country  is  divided  into  the  governments  of  Kuban,  Stawropol, 
Terek,  Daghestan,  Zakatol,  Tiflis,  Koutais,  Sukum,  Tchernomore 
(Black  Sea),  Elizabethpol,  Balsa,  and  Eriwan.  The  first  five  lie  on 
the  European  side  of  the  mountains  ;  and  the  last  seven  in  Asia,  and 
include  Circassia,  Abkasia,  Mingrelia,  Imerethia,  Georgia,  Russian 
Armenia,  and  Shirvan. 

298  SPIRI TS  FROM  AFAR. 

alluded  to  had  expounded  to  us,  stood  at  the  right  of 
the  cabinet,  motioning  us  to  observe  her  height,  her 
feet,  the  bead  trimming  on  her  dress,  and  then  unplaited 
her  hair  and  shook  it  out  over  her  shoulders.  Santum 
came,  too,  and  "  Wando  "  and  "  Wasso  ;"  and  then  the 
first  of  the  Russian  lady's  spirit-visitors  made  his 
appearance. 

He  was  a  person  of  middle  height,  well  shaped, 
dressed  in  a  Georgian  (Caucasian)  jacket,  with  loose 
sleeves  and  long  pointed  oversleeves,  an  outer  long 
coat,  baggy  trousers,  leggings  of  yellow  leather,  and 
white  skull-cap,  or  fez,  with  tassel.  She  recognized 
him  at  once  as  Michalko  Guegidze,  late  of  Kiitais, 
Georgia,  a  servant  of  Madame  Witte,  a  relative,  and 
who  waited  upon  Mme.  de  B in  Kiitais. 

He  was  followed  by  the  spirit  of  Abraham  Alsbach, 
who  spoke  some  sentences  in  German  to  his  sister; 
and  he,  in  turn,  by  M.  Zephirin  Boudreau,  late  of  Can- 
ada, the  father  of  a  lady  who  accompanied  Mme.  de 
Blavatsky  to  Chittenden,  and  who,  of  course,  was 
attending  her  first  seance.  She  addressed  her  questions 
to  him  in  French,  he  responding  by  rapping  with  his 
hand  against  the  door-frame,  except  in  one  instance, 
when  he  uttered  the  word  "  Oui."  This  gentleman 
stood  so  that  I  saw  him  in  profile  against  the  white 
wall.  He  had  an  aquiline  nose,  rather  hollow  cheeks, 
prominent  cheek-bones,  and  an  iron-gray  beard  upon 
his  chin.  It  was  a  marked  face,  in  short,  of  the  pure 
Gallic  type,  one  of  the  kind  that  Vergne  calls  "  numis- 
matic faces,"  for  they  seem  as  if  made  expressly  for 
reproduction  upon  coins  and  medals.     In  stature  he 

A   SIDE    SHOW. 

THE  RUSSIAN  LANGUAGE   WRITTEN.         301 

was  tall,  and  in  figure  slim,  and  altogether  had  the  air 
of  a  gentleman. 

A  little  girl  spirit  came  after  him,  and  conversed  by- 
raps  with  her  mother,  who  spoke  in  the  German  lan- 
guage ;  and  this  brought  William's  circle  to  a  close. 

After  that  we  had  a  light  circle — one  of  the  kind  in 
which,  as  the  reader  will  remember,  certain  persons 
assert  that  the  phenomena  are  all  done  by  the  hand  of 
the  medium.  Among  other  things  that  occurred  was, 
the  writing  of  Mme.  de  Blavatsky's  name  upon  a  card, 
by  a  spirit-hand,  in  Russian  script,  which  it  will  scarcely 
be  said  that  Horatio  could  write,  with  both  hands  free. 
Various  detached  hands  were  shown  through  the  aper- 
ture in  the  shawls,  and  among  the  number  that  of  the 
boy  Michalko  himself,  which  the  lady  recognized  by 
some  peculiarity,  as  well  as  by  a  string  of  amber  beads 
wound  around  the  wrist.  Recollect  that  she  had  only 
arrived  that  afternoon,  had  barely  become  acquainted 
with  the  medium,  had  had  no  conversation  whatever 
with  anybody  about  her  former  life,  and  then  say  how 
this  Vermont  farmer  could  have  known  : 

(1)  Of  the  existence  of  Michalko  Guegidze ;  (2)  that 
he  had  any  relations  of  any  kind  with  his  visitor ;  (3) 
that  it  is  a  custom  among  the  Georgian  peasants  to 
wear  a  string  of  amber  beads  upon  their  arms;  and 
then  the  skeptic  will  have  to  account  for  the  possession 
of  so  unusual  a  thing  as  this  kind  of  a  rosary,  by  a 
family  working  a  Green  Mountain  farm. 

It  instantly  occurred  to  me  that  if  this  hand  belonged 
to  the  spirit  I  had  seen  in  William's  circle,  the  spirit 

must  be  attached  to  it  behind  the  curtain  ;  and  that  he 

10* 

302 

LEZGUINKA. 

r-r—f—'=rf-  — \ — j— W^  -P-i ■ — tr-Pf*- 0-0— *-0— =— 

-4— -P-4- 

•P-      -P- 

-# # 

51 

tr 

t—Jte-4. 

f -2 F=F -»-0 — i F=P ^-P=— P 

#_!_ 

2=5= 

-it *-P-i 1 — »«P4—i — i ! — ^ — *-i — ! — <■**-  — *-* — » — 

A U ^^===^H|^=^,g^-bJ-4-4 

£   £  -p-    * £  S         f     | 

.5: — e: 0 # ^ — ^ — v 0- 

2zz==a=t==t====t=t 

-P— P- 

-P P- 

:p=C 

tf 

p 

p 

p  Presto, 

i 

fc 

7>  p  *  ,pv- 

8   ,  'V,_Ji 

=^=^ 

-0-0—0- 

S=== 

:F=p: 

f 

-P — P »-•— » 

:p=P— F 

:P=t 

P" 

P 

P 

P 

i 

^E==f==:f=P 

K  K  K  ff  Da  Capo. 

V^t 

=^ - 

E^?: 

S 

•«-«■  * 

*    *       -P-  -P-  •»-    g         _£--| 

-P    P      i=^=s=s==q p — F — -l-F-P 

^i 

p1 

A  MUSICAL   TEST.  303 

must  be  able  to  prove  his  identity  by  playing  some 
familiar  air;  so  I  whispered  to  Mme.  de  B.,  in  French, 
to  ask  him  in  his  own  language  to  play  such  an  air 
upon  the  strings  of  the  guitar  that  lay  upon  the  table 
behind  there.  She  first  asked  him,  in  Georgian  and 
Russian,  if  he  were  really  Michalko,  and  certain  other 
questions ;  to  which  he  responded  by  sweeping  the 
guitar  strings  once,  or  thrice,  as  he  wished  to  indicate 
'•Yes  or  "No." 

Among  other  things  she  said:  " Ilaparakey  sheni 
tschccrimy  "  (Georgian) — "  Speak  to  me,  my  good  fel- 
low." No  response.  "  Koli  te  to  postoutschi  piatraz 
(Russian) — "  If  it  is  you,  knock  five  times  or  five 
sweeps  of  the  guitar.  Then  she  said :  "  Poegrai 
'  Zezguinka.'  " — "  Play  the  '  Lezguinka' " — a  famous  but  far 
from  melodious  national  air.  He  then  played  the  air 
as  it  is  found  printed  in  this  chapter ;  Mme.  de  B.  hav- 
ing been  so  kind  as,  with  the  assistance  of  Mr.  Lenzberg, 
the  Hartford  music  professor,  to  transcribe  it  for  me. 

This  song  being  finished,  after  repetition  upon  repe- 
tition, she  asked  the  spirit  to  play  another  Caucasian 
song  and  dance  known  as:  "Tiris!  Tiris !  Barbare." 
She  said:  " Sigrai  '  Gourinkou"' — "Play  the  Gouriel 
dance  " — and  straightway  it  was  played  by  the  invisible 
performer  with  great  animation.  My  fellow-spectators 
sat  listening  to  the  strange  sentences  of  the  Russian 
lady,  without  understanding  either  what  she  said,  the 
nationality  of  the  music  that  was  being  played,  or, 
until  it  was  all  over,  the  nature  of  the  important 
test  that  was  being  given  ;  for  I  believe  I  was  the  only 

3°4 

THE  GO  URIEL  DANCE. 

person  present  who  spoke  French,  and  our  conversa- 
tion was  confined  to  that  language. 

The  instruments  upon  which  the  Georgian  musicians 
play  the  two  airs  in  question,  are  the  zourna,  a  curious 
sort  of  bagpipe,  and  the  ichicharda,  or  tschunggourou,  a 
four-stringed  wooden  instrument,  something  like  an 
ancient  mandolin,  if  I  am  not  mistaken — which,  in  the 
matter  of  music  and  musical  instruments,  is  the  most 
likely  thing  in  the  world. 

PERSIAN-CAUCASIAN    SONG. 

:$:    Andante  e  molto  lento. 

■4r-+±>-£ 

EE 

S±fe=£ 

ite 

k±fe=£=£ 

Te    - 

res,     te 

res,  Ba 

rba  -  re 

JSL 

8—1 — 

-F— P 

:8zz£ 

ET   tj     *j    Sj    lJ     l3** 

■I  ,      tfS — h — l»<- 

s=5g=tz: 

#-. 

Bui 

'0— p- 

=&= 

-P—P—F-^ 

Bou    - 

me  -  e  -    -   nda  ma    -    -    al  -  ma  -  le  -  e  -  y  ! 

P=*»- 

n£ 

^=1 

pt 

£ 

Stringendo. 

%J 

EJ 

S 

£=£: 

liiyr 

W— b-^- 

±# 

-£-*- 

^^p^i 

-#— *- 

May  -  ar-mt-n-da 
U* * 

a  -    ba  ■ 

-P-^ 

ze  -  y, 

y-V- 

Boil  -  sso,  men-da     la-  ma- zey, 

•8 —       w—r-0 — i 

1 — ^-ffg— F^-n^ — »  !_rn~.izfczfc 

i 

13    uJ 

B 

piw  presto. 

3 

kt-5-^=:! 

r— N- 

9= 

May  -  ar-m<  li-da 
_      ,f f 

a  -    1  la  ■ 

-»-. 

ff    Da  Capo.  :g: 

m 

— v~*~ 

Bou-sso,  men-da    la  -  ma-zey  ! 
.g-jgl— ^tg-r-^t" — £-r»-»-*-n 

A  REMARKABLE  CORROBORATION.  305 

In  the  Lczguinka  dance  the  movement  is  at  first  slow 
and  measured,  but,  little  by  little,  the  time  quickens, 
until  finally,  as  the  dancers  warm  to  their  work,  they 
abandon  themselves  to  the  excitement  of  the  moment 
with  mad  enthusiasm.  The  effect  upon  the  spectator,  of 
this  monotonous  repetition  of  the  slight  melody  there  is 
in  the  air,  must  be  the  reverse  of  agreeable. 

I  am  fortunately,  in  the  most  unexpected  manner,  put 
in  possession  of  a  conclusive  bit  of  evidence  in  corrob- 
oration of  Madame  de  Blavatsky's  story  of  Michalko's 
identity  as  a  Georgian,  in  two  letters  from  a  merchant  in 
Philadelphia,  which,  in  view  of  their  public  importance, 
I  have  obtained  his  permission  to  publish  verbatim: 

The  first  introduces  the  writer  to  me  in  the  following 
terms : 

Philadelphia,  430  Walnut  St.,  October  29th,  1874. 
Henry  S.  Olcott,  Chittenden,   Ft.,  Eddy  s  Homestead. 

Dear  Sir  :  Though  I  have  not  the  pleasure  of  your  personal 
acquaintance,  I  take  ihe  liberty  of  addressing  to  you  a  few  words, 
knowing  your  name  from  the  Daily  Graphic  correspondence  on 
Eddy's  manifestations,  which  I  read  with  greatest  interest. 

I  learn  from  to-day's  Sun  that  at  Eddy's,  in  presence  of  Mme. 
Blowtskey,  Russian  lady,  a  spirit  of  Michalko  Guegidse  (very  familiar 
name  to  me)  has  materialized  in  Georgian  dress,  has  spoken  Georgian 
language,  danced  Lezguinka,  and  sung  Georgian  National  Air. 

Being  myself  a  native  of  Georgia,  Caucasus,  I  read  these  news 
with  greatest  astonishment  and  surprise,  and  being  not  a  believer  in 
spiritualism,  I  do  not  know  what  to  think  of  these  manifestations. 

I  address  to-day  a  letter  to  Mrs.  Blowtskey,  asking  some  ques- 
tions about  materialized  Georgian,  and  if  she  left  Eddy's  please 
forward  it  to  her,  if  you  know  her  address. 

I  also  earnestly  request  your  corroboration  of  this  astonishing  fact, 
materialized  Georgian,  if  he  really  came  out  from  the  cabinet  in 
Georgian  dress,  and  in  your  presence.  If  that  occurred  in  fact,  and 
if  anybody  will  regard  it,  as  usually,  trickery  and  humbug,  then  I 
will  state  to  you  this:  There  are  in  the  United  States  no  other  Geor- 
gians but  three,  of  whom  I  am  the  one  and  came  first  to  this  country 
three  years  ago.     Two  others  whom  I  know,  came  over  last  year.     I 

306  MR.  BETA  NELLY'S  LETTERS. 

know  they  are  not  in  Vermont  now  and  never  been  there  before  • 
and  I  know  they  do  not  speak  English  at  all.  Besides  us  three,  no 
other  man  speaks  Georgian  language  in  this  country,  and  when  I 
say  this,  I  mean  it  to  be  true  fact.  Hoping  you  will  answer  this 
letter,  I  remain,  yours  respectfully,  M.  C.  Betanelly. 

Upon  receipt  of  this,  I  wrote  to  Mr.  Betanelly,  answer- 
ing his  questions,  giving  the  names  of  other  spirits  that 
appeared  to  Madame  de  Blavatsky,  and  suggesting  that 
it  would  interest  the  public,  if  he  and  his  two  friends 
would  unite  in  a  certificate  that  they  knew  the  persons  in 

life.     Here  is  his  reply  : 

Philadelphia,  November  iSth,  1874. 
Colonel  LI.  S.  Okoit,  Rutland.  Ft., 

Dear  Sir  :  I  am  perfectly  willing  to  give  you  all  information  and 
Certificates  concerning  materialized  Georgian  spirits  at  Eddy's. 
Unfortunately  I  kept  no  correspondence  lately  with  my  Georgian 
friends,  but  I  think  they  are  somewhere  in  New  York  or  out  West, 
but  I  know  they  had  no  personal  acquaintance  of  persons  in  Georgia 
that  materialized  at  Eddy's. 

I  knew  Michalko  when  alive  in  Kiitais,  and  think  could  recollect 
his  face  at  Eddy's  if  I  was  there  at  that  night.  He  was  late  serf  of 
Alex.  Guegidse,  a  Georgian  nobleman,  and  employed  servant  in  Col. 
A.  F.  Witte's  family.  Mr.  Witte  still  lives  in  Kiitais,  and  occupies 
a  position  of  an  engineer  under  Russian  Government. 

I  also  knew  personally  late  General  Faddeyeff,  a  tall  and  old  Gen- 
tleman in  Tiflis,  who  died  several  years  ago.  He  occupied  one  of 
the  highest  rank  in  Tiflis  under  Government,  and  possessed  the 
Cross  of  St.  Ann,  and  other  merits  of  honor  for  his  military  and 
civil  services. 

The  names  of  Hasan-Agha  and  Safas-Ali-Bek  are  also  very 
familiar  to  me. 

"  Lezguinka  "  is  real  National  Georgian  play  and  dance.  "  Tiris, 
tiris,  Barbare,"  is  Georgian  air,  commonly  song  by  lower  classes  and 
paysantry.  "  Tiris  "  in  English  means  "  crys,"  "  to  cry."  "  Bar- 
bare  is  Georgian  feminine  name."  Whole  verse  means  :  Crys,  crys 
Barbare,  &c.  :  this  is  one  verse  of  the  whole  and  long  song,  which 
it  is  not,  I  think,  necessary  for  you  to  describe  or  translate. 

I  send  you  for  curiosity,  a  Georgian  weekly  newspaper,  "  The 
Times"  (Droeda),  published  in  Tiflis,  Caucasus.* 

'    Your  obedient  servant,         M.  C.  Betanelly. 

*See  Page,  474- 

ABUNDANT  TESTS.  307 

Of  course  I  never  heard  either  of  the  Georgian  airs 
before,  and  so  leave  to  Mr.  Betanelly  and  his  compatriots 
in  this  country  to  speak  for  themselves.  I  can  only  say 
that  the  music  printed  in  this  chapter,  is  the  music  I  heard 
played  behind  the  curtain  in  Horatio  G.  Eddy's  light- 
circle  on  the  evening  of  October  14th,  1874;  and  now 
pass  on  to  my  next  point.  After  stating  that  having 
since  made  the  acquaintance  of  Mr.  Betanelly,  he  cor- 
roborates all  that  he  says  in  his  two  letters,  and,  since 
they  were  written,  has  actually  seen  the  face  of  a  Geor- 
gian spirit-friend  at  the  cabinet  window  of  a  certain 
medium. 

Among  the  evidences  of  the  genuineness  of  the  phe- 
nomena furnished  us  on  this  evening,  were  :  The  playing 
on  the  guitar  and  tambourine,  and  the  ringing  of  two 
bells,  all  at  once  ;  the  playing  of  the  guitar  by  Michalko, 
with  the  instrument  held  fiat  against  the  south  wall, 
farthest  away  from  Horatio  ;  the  simultaneous  playing  of 
the  guitar,  at  the  extreme  left,  beyond  Horatio,  with  its 
end  resting  upon  a  chair  in  sight  of  the  audience,  and 
the  patting  of  the  lady-sitter's  head  and  shoulders  by  two 
unseen  hands  ;  and  finally,  the  simultaneous  pressure  of 
three  hands  upon  the  backs  of  Mr.  J.  M.  Peebles  and 
Mrs.  E.  D.  Stronk,  the  gentleman  and  lady  who  sat  with 
the  medium  in  front  of  the  curtain.  Following,  as  this 
seance  did,  immediately  upon  the  pretended  "  exposure  " 
of  the  fraud  of  Horatio,  I  determined,  that  no  chance  to 
discover  trickery  upon  this  particular  evening,  should  be 
neglected  ;  so  I  took  Mr.  Peebles  into  my  confidence, 
and  instructed  him  to  move  his  arm  frequently,  and  turn 
it  so  as  to  present  new  nerve  surfaces  to  the  pressure  of 

308  MR.  PEEBLES'  CERTIFICATE. 

the  medium's  fingers.     That  he  followed  the  suggestion, 
may  be  seen  from  the  following  certificate : 

Colonel  Olcoit : 

My  Dear  Sir:  Granted  the  privilege  of  sitting  in  the  light 
seance,  of  Horatio  Eddy,  to  witness  what  are  demonstrated  spiritual 
manifestations,  I  beg  to  make  the  following  statement : 

Taking  a  seat  forward  of  the  cabinet  to  the  right  of  Mr.  Eddy,  he 
tightly  clasped  with  both  his  hands  my  bare  arm.  This  done,  music 
was  heard  immediately,  and  simultaneously  upon  three  different 
instruments. 

This  was  followed  by  hands  tapping  me  on  the  back  —  on  the 
right  shoulder ;  and  then  they  were  projected  from  behind  the  cur- 
tain, patting  my  face  and  pulling  the  beard.  The  hand  which  I 
both  saw  and  felt  distinctly,  was  cold,  white,  and  delicate,  utterly 
unlike  in  shape  and  appearance,  that  of  Mr.  Eddy's.  And  what  is 
more,  during  this  and  other  manifestations,  I  purposely  moved  my 
arms  in  different  directions,  to  be  certain  that  both  of  Mr.  Eddy's 
hands  were  still  clasping  mine. 

This  hand  and  arm  appearing  the  second  time,  there  was  upon  the 
wrist  amber-colored  beads.  These  I  not  only  saw,  but  I  felt  and 
heard  them  jingle.  Instruments  of  music  were  played  upon  at  a 
distance  beyond  the  medium's  reach,  even  if  his  hands  had  been  at 
liberty.  And  yet,  during  all  of  these  marvels,  if  I  can  trust  my 
senses  in  connection  with  reason  and  consciousness,  his  hands  were 
not  for  a  moment  unclasped  from  mine — neither  were  the  nerves  of 
sensation  so  benumbed  as  to  prevent,  in  the  slightest,  the  usual 
acuteness  of  feeling. 

This  materialized  hand  also  smoothed  my  hair,  rung  bells,  and 
wrote  upon  cards  before  the  eyes  of  both  the  circle  and  myself.  And 
I  am  as  certain  it  was  not  Horatio  Eddy's  hand,  as  I  am  it  was  not 
mine. 

J.  M.  Peebles. 

Mr.  Pebbles  is  well  known  as  an  eloquent  speaker  and 
scholarly  writer  upon  Spiritualism,  but  that  does  not 
imply  that  he  is  either  a  fool  or  a  knave.  He  was  recently 
United  States  Consul  at  Trebizond,  and  is  an  Orientalist, 
a  Fellow  of  the  Anthropological  Society  of  London, 
and  Corresponding  Member  of  the  Royal  Asiatic  Society 
of  India.     In  Part   II   of  this  work,  will  be  found  an 

SPIRITS  DISSOLVING.  309 

interesting  paper  by  him,  describing  some  remarkable 
magical  performances  he  witnessed  in  the  East. 

It  was  upon  the  following  evening  that  I  saw  Honto 
suddenly  sink  away  up  to  her  waist,  just  as  she  was  about 
to  pass  into  the  cabinet.     Three  persons — two  gentlemen 

of  Philadelphia,    Mr.    E and    Mr.    M ,  and    one 

lady,  Miss  E.  S of  Albany — have  written  to  me  con- 
cerning a  similar  phenomenon  which  happened  in  their 
presence,  upon  one  evening,  before  my  visit,  and  subse- 
quently to  the  occurrences  certified  to  in  a  former  chapter. 
I  was  in  hopes  that  they  would  have  consented  to  unite 
in  a  certificate  to  the  fact,  but  all  manifest  great  reluctance 
to  having  their  names  associated  with  Spiritualism  in  a 
public  manner.  I  content  myself,  therefore,  with  saying 
that  they  are  each  of  excellent  character. 

It  is  a  curious  affair,  this  progressive  disintegration  of 
the  "materialized  "  spirit-body!  If  we  can  conceive  of 
the  body  being  made,  by  a  supreme  effort  of  the  spirit's 
will,  from  the  invisible  atoms  of  the  atmosphere,  there  is 
nothing  difficult  in  the  theory  that,  by  a  like  effort,  it 
could  be  destroyed.  In  fact,  it  is  to  be  noticed  that 
most  ghost-stories  relate  how  the  apparition  suddenly 
evaporates,  or  dissolves  back  into  its  original  unsubstan- 
tial elements.  Thus  the  Phantom  Carriage,  of  Chapter 
Vth,  was  seen  to  fade  away  in  the  moonlight,  and  so  faded 
the  White  Lady  of  Avenel  before  the  eyes  of  the  affrighted 
sacristan.  But  here  we  have  Honto  sinking  suddenly 
into  the  solid  floor,  waist-deep ;  and  then,  with  what 
might  be  called  the  stump  of  a  body,  sliding  behind  the 
cabinet  curtain.  The  same  thing  happened  to  Katie 
King  in  the  course  of  Mr.  Crookes'  experiments.     He 

310  HASSAN  AGHA'S  PEBBLES. 

mentions  having  seen  her  sink  away  until  nothing 
remained  but  her  head,  which  appeared  to  rest  upon 
the  carpet  of  the  room. 

Mrs.  Bolles'  mother  fell  to  pieces,  as  though  every 
atom  of  her  form  had  suddenly  lost  its  coherence  with 
every  other  atom.  Why  is  this  ?  How  can  the  discrep- 
ancy be  explained  ?  Has  one  spirit  so  superior  a  power 
over  its  materialized  body  that  it  can  only  be  dissolved 
in  progressive  ascension,  from  heels  to  head,  while  another 
falls  into  fragments,  at  the  instant  it  loses  its  hold  on  a 
single  one  of  the  molecules  of  which  its  evanescent  shape 
is  composed  ?  Ah !  that  is  one  of  the  problems  that 
await  the  philosophical  chemist. 

The  next  evening,  a  new  spirit,  "  Hassan  Agha,"  came 
to  Madame  de  Blavatsky.  He  was  a  wealthy  merchant 
of  Tiflis  whom  she  knew  well.  He  had  a  sneaking  fancy 
for  the  Black  Art,  as  well  as  our  own  mediums,  and 
sometimes  obliged  his  acquaintance  by  divining  for  them 
with  a  set  of  conjuring  stones,  procured  from  Arabia  at  a 
great  price.  His  method  was  to  throw  them  upon  the 
floor,  beside  his  mat,  and  then,  by  the  way  they  fell  into 
groups,  prophesy  the  future  and  read  the  past  for  his 
wondering  visitors.  He  claimed  that  the  stones  possessed 
some  magic  property  by  which  and  the  muttering  of 
certain  Arabic  sentences,  the  inner  sight  of  the  conjuror 
was  opened,  and  all  things  hidden  became  clear. 
Hassan's  dress,  was  a  long  yellowish  coat,  Turkish 
trousers,  a  bishmet,  or  vest  and  a  black  Astrachan  cap, 
pappaha,  covered  with  the  national  bashlik,  or  hood,  with 
its  long  tasseled  ends  thrown  over  each  shoulder. 

Another  of  her  visitors  was  an  old  woman  dressed  in 

MAR  YAH,   THE  NURSE.  313 

the  costume  of  the  Russian  peasant-women,  of  whom  the 
artist  has  given  a  sketch.  She  was  an  old  nurse  in  the 
family,  and  took  charge  of  both  Madame  de  B.  and  her 
sister  in  early  childhood.  She  advanced  towards  the 
lady,  and,  after  making  a  respectful  salutation,  said  some- 
thing to  her  in  her  native  tongue,  of  which  I  could 
distinguish  the  words  "  Michalko  "  and  " Barishnia" 
which  latter  means  "  Miss." 

Hassan  Agha  returned  the  next  evening,  and  not  only 
staid  out  longer  than  before,  but,  after  retiring,  reappeared 
at  our  side  of  the  curtain  so  as  to  give  the  artist  a  good 
look  at  him.  He  spoke  to  Madame  de  B.  this  evening, 
and,  listening  with  close  attention,  I  heard  the  words 
Peshkesh,  Bolshoi  djelha,  and  Backsheesh,  for  the  spelling 
and  translation  of  which  I  am  indebted  to  the  lady.  The 
first  means  "  a  present,"  the  second  and  third  "  a  big 
fortune,"  and  the  last,  which  is  only  too  familiar  to  every 
traveler  in  the  East,  "Money."  "Is  it  forme?"  asked 
Madame  de  B.  "  Abou  "  (for  you)  answered  the  old  man, 
with  a  crracious  salaam. 

CHAPTER  XIX. 

GERMANS,  KHOURDS,  AND  HUNGARIANS. 

WE  had  a  dark-circle  after  William's  materializing 
circle,  in  which  the  child  "  Mayflower  "  demon- 
strated her  ability  to  see  in  the  dark,  as  well  as 
we  do  in  the  light.  Little  Lena  Lenzberg  had  brought 
in  her  pocket  a  hair-switch  which  she  wanted  the  spirit 
to  braid.  After  the  circle  was  formed  and  the  light 
extinguished,  she  laid  it  in  her  lap,  but  had  said  nothing 
of  her  desire  until  suddenly  Mayflower  exclaimed  :  "  Oh ! 
Lena,  what  have  you  got  there  ?  You  want  me  to  braid 
that  hair;  don't  you?  I  will ;  but  why  didn't  you  bring 
the  other  two  there  are  at  home  ?  "  She  crossed  the 
room,  took  the  hair,  braided  it,  and  returned  it  to  Lena's 
lap.  She  then  called  her  to  step  out  on  the  floor  and  see 
which  was  the  taller  of  the  two.     Lena  obeyed,  and  stood 

back  to  back  with  the  spirit,  with  the  following  result : 

( 
Chittenden,  October  19th,  1S74. 
Mr.  Olcott: 

My  name  is  Lena  Lenzberg,  and  I  am  thirteen  years  old.  I  was 
at  the  dark-circle  last  night.  Mayflower  called  me  out  on  the  floor 
and  we  measured  heights.  We  were  exactly  the  same.  I  felt  her 
back  and  head  against  mine,  and  she  kissed  me  after  we  measured. 
(  Lena  Lenzkerg. 

3M 

BACK  TO  BACK  WITH  CORA. 

315 

Lena  is  rather  a  short  girl  for  her  age,  as  will  be  inferred 

by  reading  the  certificate  of  a  dear  little  girl  from  Utica, 

two  years  younger,  with  whom  Mayflower  tried  the  same 

experiment : 

Chittenden,  October  21st,  1874. 
With  my  father's  permission,  I  state  that  my  name  is  Cora  Cecilia 
Ehle,  and  I  am  almost  eleven  years  old.  Papa  says  I  measure  4  feet 
6  1-8  inches,  Last  night,  Mayflower  called  me  "  Birdie,"  and  asked 
me  to  measure  my  height  with  her.  We  stood  with  our  backs 
together,  and  I  was  about  two  inches  taller  than  her.  This  was  in 
a  dark-circle.  Cora  C.  Ehle. 

"  George  Dix,"  of  whose  whistling  accomplishments  I 
have  previously  spoken,  gave  us  a  splendid  display  this 
evening.  He  asked  Mr.  Lenzberg  to  play  on  his  flute 
"  The  Mocking  Bird  "  and  "  Home,  Sweet  Home  "  very 
softly,  which  that  gentleman  did ;  and  Dix  whistled  a 
tremolo  accompaniment  that  equaled  anything  of  the 
kind  I  ever  heard.  It  was  quite  as  good  as  the  bird-calls, 
runs,  and  trills  of  the  old  cigar-seller  at  Evans'  Supper 
Rooms,  in  London,  whom  so  many  hundreds  of  American 
travelers  must  recollect. 

The  next  day  was  cloudy  and  cold,  and  a  storm  was 
clearly  brewing  among  the  mountain  ranges.  It  was  what 
might  be  called  a  fair  temperature  for  manifestations,  and 
we  had  some  good  ones.  Thirty-one  persons  attended 
the  circle,  and  nine  different  spirits  appeared.  Hontowas 
dressed  in  a  white  dress,  with  black  or  dark  overskirt ; 
and  she  seemed  determined  that  we  should  see  more  than 
this,  for  at  one  time  she  came  within  two  feet  of  Mr. 
Lenzberg,  and  lifting  her  skirt  to  her  knees,  displayed  a 
good  deal  of  a  pair  of  white  stockings.  She  had  hand- 
some moccasins  on  her  feet. 

I  noticed  very  closely,  this  evening,  the  vast  difference 

316  A  SPIRIT  SPEAKS  GERMAN. 

between  the  size,  height,  bust,  and  appearance  of  the 
young  lady  spirit,  Maggie  Brown,  and  William  Eddy.  I 
do  not  know  what  called  my  attention  to  her  so  particu- 
larly, but  I  caught  her  figure  and  face  in  profile  in  a 
passably  good  light,  and  these  details  attracted  my  notice. 
When  she  held  up  her  bouquet,  as  usual,  for  her  brother 
to  look  at,  her  round,  white,  womanly  arm  was  brought 
out  into  full  view. 

Abraham  Alsbach's  sister  said  to  him :  "  Willst  du  uns 
zu  haus  besuchen  ?  "  to  which  he  replied  so  distinctly  that 
I  caught  the  sound  of  the  words  :  "  Ja  •  ich  gehe  mit  dir 
nach  haus  morgen" — which  I  undertake  to  say  is  more 
German  than  both  of  the  brothers  together  can  speak. 

Horatio  was  in  one  of  his  ugly  moods,  this  evening, 
which  was,  perhaps,  attributable  in  part  to  a  sound 
berating  that  old  Mr.  Brown,  the  talking  spirit,  gave  him, 
and  everybody  in  general,  at  the  close  of  William's  circle. 
I  have  read  of  "  Katie  King's  "  scolding  visitors  at  the 
London  seances,  but  if  anybody  wants  to  hear  the  thing 
in  perfection  and  pretty  constantly,  let  him  stop  at  Chit- 
tenden a  fortnight,  and  hear  this  venerable  party  express 
his  views  and  intentions  ! 

I  wanted  Horatio  to  allow  me  to  lay  my  hands  lightly 
outside  the  shawl,  over  his  hands,  after  they  had  been 
placed  upon  the  bare  arm  of  the  gentleman-sitter  at  his 
left,  but  he  would  not  do  it,  but  called  up  a  lady  present 
to  hold  them  there,  saying  that  "  one  person's  word 
was  as  good  as  another's."  This  was  only  one  of 
many  such  rebuffs,  so  I  let  it  pass,  noting  it  as  a  suspicious 
circumstance,  and  waiting  for  the  time  when  he  should 
volunteer  to  give  me  this  convincing  proof  of  his  good 

THE  GARABALDIAX'S  II AND. 

317 

behavior.  But  the  time  never  came.  Perhaps,  because 
I  had  not  sufficiently  shown  my  good-feeling  and  fair- 
ness ;  perhaps,  — ,  well,  who  knows  ? 

It  is  fair  that  I  should  say  that  the  lady  reported  that 
he  had  not  removed  either  hand  from  the  gentleman's 
arm.  Moreover,  I  must  add  that  Mme.  de  Blavatsky, 
who  sat  at  the  gentleman's  right,  declared  that  she  felt 
one  hand  on  her  right  shoulder  (the  one  farthest  from  the 
medium),  at  the  same  instant  that  the  gentleman  reported 
one  on  each  of  his  shoulders.  The  guitar,  two  bells,  and 
tambourine  were  played  simultaneously,  and  hands  of 
Various  sizes  were  shown.  Among  these,  one  was  too 
peculiar  to  be  passed  over.  It  was  a  left  hand,  and  upon 
the  lower  bone  of  the  thumb  a  bony  excrescence  was 
growing,  which  Mme.  de  Blavatsky  recognized,  and  said 
was  caused  by  a  gun-shot  wound  in  one  of  Garibaldi's 
battles.  The  hand  grasped  a  broken  sword  that  had  been 
lying  upon  a  table  behind  the  shawl.     It  was  the  hand  of 

'/^^^ 

a  Hungarian  officer,  an  old  friend  of  the  Madame's, 
named  Dgiano  Nallus,  and  a  fac-simile  of  his  own  signa- 
ture, written  by  one  of  his  hands  upon  a  card,  is  here  given. 

318  FA  C- SIMILES. 

Another  signature,  written  for  the  same  lady,  was  that 
of  her  husband's  brother,  J.  de  Blavatsky,  a  fac-simile  of 
which  is  also  given.     She  asked  in  the  Georgian  language 

if  the  spirits  would  not  again  play  for  her  the  Gouriel 
air,  ''  Tiris !  Tiris  !  Barbare ;  "  but  instead,  a  famous 
Garibaldian  march,  called  "  Viva  l'ltalia  "  was  played 
upon  the  guitar.  This  seemed  to  me  a  more  satisfactory 
test  than  the  compliance  with  her  request  would  have 
afforded,  for  it  was  just  barely  possible  that  Horatio 
might  have  inferred  that  she  was  repeating  her  demand 
of  the  former  light-circle,  and,  having  caught  the  air, 
would  have  rendered  it  for  her ;  whereas,  in  this  case, 
entirely  different  music,  connected  with  entirely  different 
associations,  but  eminently  appropriate  to  the  appearance 
of  Dgiano  Nallus,  the  Garibaldian  soldier,  was  unexpect- 
edly rendered. 

It  is  upon  such  tests  as  these,  spontaneously  given,  that 
I  have  based  my  confidence  in  these  Eddy  boys.  Granted 
that  they  may  be  able  to  tie  and  untie  themselves,  "  float " 
instruments,  ring  bells,  and  fool  intelligent  persons  into 
the  belief  that  their  hands  are  on  their  arms  when,  in  fact, 
they  are  in  quite  a  different  place ;  admitting  all  this,  I 
exclude  from  my  case  every  individual  phenomenon  that 
can  be  explained  upon  the  hypothesis  of  trickery,  and 
still,  as  I  conceive,  have  an  abundance  remaining  to  prove 

L 

A  MENTAL   TEST.  319 

their  mediumship.  If  the  "  grand  expositor  "  had  shown 
the  public  a  theory  broad  enough  to  cover  all  the  appear- 
ances in  William's  circle, —  the  talking  children  ;  the 
wrinkled  old  men  and  women  ;  the  young  girls  in  the 
suppleness,  freshness,  and  plumpness  of  youth,  with  their 
white,  bare  arms,  shapely  hands,  and  well-set  heads  ;  the 
diversities  in  height  and  bulk,  so  great  as  to  be  inexpli- 
cable to  any  frequenter  of  the  coulisses  upon  the  theory 
of  personation ;  the  speaking  of  various  languages,  some 
the  most  unusually  known  in  this  country ;  the  changing 
of  complexions  from  white  to  copper,  and  black  to  white; 
the  faces  without  a  sign  of  beard,  while  the  medium  wears 
a  black  moustache  all  the  while ;  these,  and,  further,  the 
exceptional  tests  given  in  Horatio's  light-circle,  and  the 
music-playing  and  other  marvels  of  his  dark-circle,  I 
would  have  only  to  confess  that  my  two  months'  labor 
had  been  wasted,  and  I  was  one  more  of  the  fools  of  the 
senses.  This  is  just  what  I  have  waited  for,  and  what  I 
have  not  discovered.  Until  I  do,  I  stand  upon  my  story 
of  phenomena  observed,  with  the  confidence  of  one 
whose  house  is  built  upon  a  sure  foundation. 

Mme.  de  Blavatsky  and  I,  without  pre-concert,  applied 
the  same  test  to  one  spirit  that  appeared  one  evening.  He 
was  a  great,  stout  Indian  chief,  in  a  red  hunting-shirt,  leg- 
gins,  and  moccasins,  and  the  lady  mentally  asked  him 
to  approach  very  near  to  where  she  sat,  at  the  parlor- 
organ,  close  against  the  railing.  He  did  so,  and  gazing 
into  her  face,  at  not  more  than  two  or  three  feet  distance, 
lifted  up  one  of  his  feet  and  showed  her  the  moccasin 
upon  it.     He  retired  into  the  cabinet,  but  I  fixed  my  wjll 

intently  upon  him,  and   desired   that  he  should  return 
11 

320  SAFAR  A  LI'S  SPIRIT. 

once  more  and  show  himself  to  me  also.  He  raised  the 
curtain  the  next  instant,  came  out,  folded  his  arms,  looked 
at  me,  lifted  his  foot  and  placed  it  on  top  of  the  railing 
with  a  most  defiant  air,  and  then  disappeared  again  from 
our  view. 

The  last  spirit  to  show  himself  on  that  evening,  was 
one  of  the  most  impressive  figures  of  the  whole  four 
hundred  or  so  I  have  seen.  In  185 1  Mme.  de  Blavatsky 
was  passing  the  summer  at  Daratschi-Tchag,  an 
Armenian  place  of  summer  resort  in  the  plain  of  Mount 
Arrarat.  The  name  means  "  The  Valley  of  FlowTers." 
Her  husband,  being  Vice-Governor  of  Erivan,  had 
a  body-guard  of  some  fifty  Khourd  warriors,  among 
whom  one  of  the  strongest  and  bravest,  named  Safar 
Ali  Bek,  Ibrahim  Bek  Ogli,  (the  son  of  Ibrahim)  was 
detailed  as  the  lady's  personal  escort.  He  rode  after 
her  everywhere  on  her  daily  equestrian  excursions,  and 
delighted  to  display  his  unusual  skill  as  a  cavalier.  This 
very  man  walked  out  of  William  Eddy's  cabinet  in  the 
form  of  a  materialized  spirit,  dressed  to  the  minutest 
detail,  as  when  she  last  saw  him  in  Asia.  Madame 
was  playing  the  parlor-organ  that  evening,  and  as  the 
back  of  the  instrument  was  close  against  the  platform, 
it  brought  her  to  within  three  or  four  feet  of  each  of 
the  spirits  as  they  stood  outside  of  the  cabinet. 
There  could  be  no  mistaking  her  old  Khourdish 
"Nouker,"  and  her  recognition  of  him  was  immediate. 
He  came  out  empty-handed;  but  just  as  I  thought  he 
was  about  to  retire  he  bent  forward,  as  if  picking  a 
handful  of  mould  from  the  ground,  made  a  gesture  of 
scattering  it,  and  pressed  his  hand  to  his  bosom, — a 

^===^^--^f=5AFAR-ALI-BEK  A  KONDE  WARgjOfo 
A   STRANGE   VISITOR. 

THE  "NOUA'ER'S"  SPEAK.  323 

gesture  familiar  only  to  the  tribes  of  Kurdistan  ;  then, 
he  suddenly  held  in  his  right  hand  the  most  curious- 
looking  weapon  I  ever  saw.  It  was  a  spear  with  a 
staff  that  might  have  been  a  dozen  feet  in  length  (perhaps 
more,  for  the  butt  seemed  to  extend  into  the  cabinet,) 
and  a  long  steel  head  of  peculiar  shape,  the  base  of 
which  was  surrounded  with  a  ring  of  ostrich  plumes. 
This  weapon,  Mme.  de  B.  tells  me,  is  always  carried 
by  the  Khourdish  horsemen,  who  acquire  a  wonderful 
dexterity  in  handling  it.  One  instant  before,  his  hand 
was  empty ;  the  next,  he  grasps  this  spear,  with  its 
glittering  steel  barb  and  its  wavy  plumes !  Whence 
came  it  ?    From  Chittenden  township,  master  skeptic  ? 

On  the  evening  of  the  20th,  every  one  of  the  nine 
spirits  appearing  spoke  to  us ;  an  unprecedented  circum- 
stance in  my  experience  at  Chittenden.  Mrs.  Pritchard's 
voice  was  clearer  than  usual ;  Maggie  Brown  managed  to 
whisper  a  little ;  Mrs.  Eddy  spoke  in  very  loud  and  clear 
tones,  and  advancing  to  the  venerable  and  excellent  Mr. 
Ralph,  of  Utica,  N.  Y.,  who  sat  upon  the  platform,  knelt 
to  him,  kissed  his  hands  and  thanked  him  for  his  friendli- 
ness to  her  children — the  scene  being  quite  pathetic ; 
old  Mrs.  Cleveland's  mother,  a  very  wrinkled,  white- 
haired  dame,  came  to  her  daughter  for  the  first  time;  a 
little  child  of  a  Mr.  Whittier,  of  Massachusetts,  a  gi"rl  of 
about  four  years,  I  should  judge,  said  "Papa  !  dear  papa  !" 
to  him ;  and  all  seemed  to  conspire  to  assist  the  colloquial 
powers  of  the  visitors  from  beyond  the  dark  river. 

I  never  saw  Honto  in  better  spirits  than  upon  that 
evening.  It  seemed  as  if  she  could  not  do  enough  to 
rid   herself  of   her   superabundant   vitality.       Laying   a 

324  If  ONTO' S  LEAP. 

hand  upon  the  banister-rail,  she  leaped  clear  over  it  to 
the  room  floor ;  and  then  resting  a  toe  upon  the  platform 
edge,  she  leaped  back  again  as  lightly  as  an  athlete. 
Running  down  the  platform,  and  descending  the  steps, 
she  caught  Horatio  by  the  hand  and  dragged  him, 
unwilling,  after  her,  up  to  the  platform ;  then  she  caught 
at  old  Mrs.  Cleveland,  and  placed  her  beside  him ;  and 
then,  off  she  went  to  the  other  end,  for  the  amiable  Mr. 
Ralph,  and  pulled  him  towards  the  others ;  and  then  all 
four,  with  joined  hands,  had  a  merry  dance  together. 

If  any  fancy  that  Honto's  face  is  but  a  mask  covering 
William's  features,  let  them  consult  Mr.  Ralph,  who  has 
had  opportunity  enough  to  scan  it,  dear  knows  !  Her 
affection  for  Aunty  Cleveland  seemed  to  overflow  its 
bounds,  for  when  the  motherly  old  soul  said  how  happy 
she  felt  to  see  her,  the  squaw  threw  her  arms  (this  time 
materialized)  about  her  and  gave  her  a  hearty  hug.  She 
materialized  two  of  her  shawls  at  once,  pulling  one  after 
another  out  of  the  wall,  and  handing  the  two  together  to 
the  unseen  person  within  the  cabinet.  Then  she  made 
us  a  dozen  more  of  all  sizes ;  some  of  which  appearing 
only  as  large  as  a  towel,  grew  longer  and  wider  as  she 
walked  back  from  Mrs.  Cleveland,  who  held  one  end, 
until  she  had  spun  out  of  the  air  a  fabric  at  least  16  feet 
in  length  and  a  yard  and  a  half  in  width. 

Old  Mrs.  Pritchard  not  only  spoke  to  her  son,  but 
when  that  gentleman  introduced  her  to  Mr.  Ralph,  who 
sat  beside  him,  she  shook  hands  with  him  and  addressed 
him  some  words  of  compliment.  She  did  not  even 
neglect  Mrs.  Cleveland,  but  called  her  over  and  greeted 
her  also.     With  the  three  persons  standing  about  her,  she 

MRS.  PRITCIIARD  'S  SPIRIT.  325 

then  turned  to  the  audience,  and  told  us  that  that  was  her 
son  standing  there,  and  she  wanted  us  to  know  the  fact. 
Mr.  Ralph  and  Mrs.  Cleveland,  both  of  whom  scrutinized 
her  closely,  told  me  that  her  face  was  that  of  an  old  lady, 
\\:ry  much  wrinkled,  and  that  her  son  bears  a  strong 
resemblance  to  her. 

They  saw  her  lips  move  when  she  spoke,  noticed  the 
color  of  her  eyes,  the  details  of  her  dress  and  figure,  and 
felt  her  hands  bedewed  with  a  cold  sweat.  These  facts 
are  noteworthy,  inasmuch  as  William's  moustache  was 
well-grown  at  this  time,  and  his  face  was  rough  with  a 
week's  beard  stubble. 

Old  Mr.  Brown  came  out  strong  that  evening,  and  laid 
about  him  with  his  tongue  in  fine  style,  giving  "reporters" 
in  general,  and  myself,  by  innuendo,  in  particular,  a 
famous  dressing  down.  Mrs.  Eaton,  also,  who  had  usually 
been  quite  friendly  towards  me,  was  viperish  to  a  degree. 
I  gave  it  up  as  a  bad  job,  after  that,  concluding  that  it 
was  useless  to  make  any  further  attempts  to  put  myself  on 
good  terms  with  the  band  directing  these  materializations, 
for  the  harder  I  tried  to  be  kind  to  the  mediums,  and 
deferential  and  conciliatory  to  the  spirits,  the  worse  off 
I  was.  The  Shaker  Elder  Evans  seems  to  give  a  pretty 
clear  idea  of  the  situation,  in  his  long  communication  to 
myself  that  will  be  found  elsewhere.  My  influence  must 
have  stirred  up  the  materializes,  like  a  steamer's  paddles 
the  water. 

CHAPTER  XX. 

THE    DEAD     ALIVE. 

THE  moon  shone  brightly  the  next  evening,  and 
everything  out  of  doors  favored  a  good  circle. 
The  air  was  clear  and  cool ;  every  undulation 
of  the  mountain  crests  came  out  sharply  against  the 
sapphire  sky  in  the  glorious  light ;  the  little  stream  in  the 
distance  threaded  the  meadows,  like  silver  set  in  emer- 
alds ;  and,  far  up  the  valley,  a  brilliant  aurora-borealis 
shot  its  trembling  spears  of  ruddy  gold  to  the  zenith, 
from  behind  the  mountain  barrier  that  shut  in  the  horizon. 
A  more  peaceful  scene  I  never  viewed,  and  I  turned  from 
it  with  deep  sadness  to  enter  the  gloomy  circle-room, 
where,  judging  from  what  had  been  going  on  the  few  pre- 
ceding nights,  I  had  every  reason  to  expect  demonstra- 
tions of  ill-temper  and  antagonism  on  the  part  of  both 
the  family  and  their  spirit-guides. 

Ten  spirits  appeared  to  us,  among  them  a  lady — a  cer- 
tain Mrs.  Fullmer,  who  had  only  died  the  Friday  previous. 
The  relative  to  whom  she  came  sat  beside  me,  and  was 
dreadfully  agitated  at  the  thought  that  one  whom  she  had 
seen  buried  only  a  few  days  before,  should  so  soon  have 

326 

A  BOGUS  LORD  BYRON.  327 

"burst  the  cerements  of  the  grave."  Poor  woman  !  she 
was  as  little  in  reality  a  believer  in  the  immortality  of  the 
soul,  as  most  of  her  fellow  church-members ;  who  pour 
their  tears  upon  the  coffin,  instead  of  lifting  the  eyes  of 
their  faith  upward,  to  where  the  disembodied  spirit  hangs 
lovingly  over  them. 

Among  the  forms  to  appear,  was  a  man  with  a  long 
black  beard  and  dark  complexion,  wearing  a  turban,  a 
red  jacket  embroidered  with  black  braid,  and  inside  vest 
of  a  flowered  pattern,  baggy  trousers  of  dark  blue  or 
black,  a  sash  around  his  waist,  made  of  a  twisted  shawl, 
and  black  shoes.  A  person  present,  who  had  been  cod- 
dled into  the  belief  that  he  should  see  Lord  Byron  at  the 
Eddys',  asked  the  spirit  if  he  were  not  the  great  poet, 
and  was  answered  in  the  affirmative  :  the  which  circum- 
stance made  me  recall  a  certain  passage  at  Proverbs 
xxvi,  5.  The  vanity,  ignorance,  and  credulity  of  mortal 
spiritualists  has  been  the  cause  of  what  Mr.  Bagenal  Daly 
would  call  "  a  moighty  sight  of  illigant  lying,"  on  the 
part  of  the  spirits.  It  so  consoles  your  costermonger  to 
think  he  can  "  chaff  "  the  shade  of  Charlemagne  ! 

This  spirit  (who,  I  may  mention  in  passing,  reappeared 
at  my  mental  request  after  he  had  retired,)  had  hardly 
been  gone  an  instant,  when  there  came  a  light-complex- 
ioned,  white-haired  old  man,  a  Mr.  Jonathan  Bartlett, 
taller  than  the  diakka  "  Lord  Byron,"  and  dressed  through- 
out in  an  American  costume.  He  must  have  been  wait- 
ing for  his  predecessor  to  retire,  for  he  almost  passed  him 
at  the  door  ;  and  the  circumstance  was  noted  in  my  book 
as  another  proof  in  favor  of  the  apparitions  being  sorae> 
thing  else  than  personations  by  the  medium. 

328  AN  AFRICAN  JUGGLER  'S  SPIRIT. 

■•  Michalko "  visited  us  again  the  next  evening,  and 
spoke  to  Mme.  de  Blavatsky  in  the  Georgian  tongue  ; 
and,  after  two  or  three  more  forms  had  shown  themselves, 
I  saw  one  of  the  most  singular  creatures  that  ever  excited 
the  wonder  of  a  "circle."  He  was  a  tall,  spare  negro, 
black  as  ink,  and  dressed  in  a  curious  costume,  two 
features  of  which  were  very  conspicuous.  Upon  his 
woolly  head  he  had  a  coiffure,  that  would  make  a  sensa- 
tion on  Broadway.  I  could  see  an  ornamented  fillet,  or 
hand,  and  on  top  of  his  head  four  horns  with  "bent  tips, 
something  like  those  of  the  chamois  or  some  varieties  of 
African  antelope,  such  as  the  oryx.  The  points  of  the 
two  in  front  were  turned  backward,  and  those  of  the  two 
in  rear,  forward,  while  a  brass  or  gilt  ball  hung  suspended 
from  each  tip. 

Mme.  de  Blavatsky  did  not  recognize  him  at  first, 
but  he  stepped  forward  a  pace  or  two,  and  she  then  saw 
before  her  the  chief  of  a  party  of  African  jugglers  whom 
she  encountered  once  in  Upper  Egypt,  at  a  celebration 
of  the  feast  of  "  The  Ramazan."  The  magical  per- 
formances of  his  party  upon  that  occasion,  make  one 
of  the  most  incredible  stories  in  the  history  of  either 
Magic  or  Spiritualism,  and  one  feat  deserves  place  in 
such  a  book  of  weird  experiences  as  this.  Madame  says 
that,  in  full  sight  of  a  multitude,  comprising  several  hun- 
dred Europeans  and  many  thousand  Egyptians  and  Afri- 
cans, the  juggler  came  out  on  a  bare  space  of  ground, 
leading  a  small  boy,  stark-naked,  by  the  hand,  and  carry^ 
ing  a  huge  roll  of  tape  that  might  be  tAvelve  or  eighteen 
inches  wide. 

After  certain  ceremonies,  he  whirled   the  roll   about 

JU6GUR  FROM  CLHTRAL  AFRICA. 

'ACvHSixs-JEU 

SPIRIT   FROM   AFRICA. 

L 

JUGGLERY  IN  UPPER  EGYPT.  331 

his  head  several  times,  and  then  flung  it  straight  up  into 
the  air.  Instead  of  falling  back  to  earth  after  it  had 
ascended  a  short  distance,  it  kept  on  upward,  unwind- 
ing and  unwinding  interminably  from  the  stick,  until  it 
grew  to  be  a  mere  speck,  and  finally  passed  out  of  sight. 
The  juggler  drove  the  pointed  end  of  the  stick  into  the 
ground,  and  then  beckoned  the  boy  to  approach.  Point- 
ing upward,  and  talking  in  a  strange  jargon,  he  seemed 
to  be  ordering  the  little  fellow  to  ascend  the  self-suspended 
tape,  which  by  this  time  stood  straight  and  stiff,  as  if  it 
were  a  board  whose  end  rested  against  some  solid  sup- 
port up  in  mid-air.  The  boy  bowed  compliance,  and 
began  climbing,  using  his  hands  and  feet  as  little  "  All 
Right  "  does  when  climbing  Satsuma's  balance-pole.  The 
boy  went  higher  and  higher  until  he,  too,  seemed  to  pass 
into  the  clouds  and  disappear. 

The  juggler  waited  five  or  ten  minutes,  and  then, 
pretending  to  be  impatient,  shouted  up  to  his  assistant  as 
if  to  order  him  down.  No  answer  was  heard,  and  no  boy 
appeared  ;  so,  finally,  as  if  carried  away  with  rage,  the 
juggler  thrust  a  naked  sword  into  his  breech-clout  (the 
only  garment  upon  his  person),  and  climbed  after  the 
boy.  Up  and  up  and  up,  hand  over  hand,  and  step  by 
step,  he  ascended,  until  the  straining  eyes  of  the  multi- 
tude saw  him  no  more.  There  was  a  moment's  pause, 
and  then  a  wild  shriek  came  down  from  the  sky,  and  a 
bleeding  arm,  as  if  freshly  cut  from  the  boy's  body,  fell 
with  a  horrid  thud  upon  the  ground.  Then  came  another, 
then  the  two  legs,  one  after  the  other,  then  the  dismem- 
bered trunk,  and,  last  of  all,  the  ghastly  head,  every 
part  streaming  with  gore  and  covering  the  ground. 

332  THE  TAPE-CLIMBER. 

A  second  lad  now  stepped  forward,  and,  gathering 
the  mutilated  fragments  of  his  comrade  into  a  heap, 
threw  a  dirty  cloth  over  them  and  retired.  Presently 
the  juggler  was  seen  descending  as  slowly  and  cau- 
tiously as  he  had  ascended.  He  reached  the  ground  at 
last,  with  his  naked  sword  all  dripping  with  blood. 
Paying  no  attention  to  the  remains  of  his  supposed 
victim,  he  went  to  rewinding  his  tape  upon  his  stick, 
his  audience  meanwhile  breaking  out  into  cries  of 
impatience  and  execration.  When  the  tape  was  all 
rewound,  he  wiped  his  sword,  and  then,  deliberately 
stepping  to  the  bloody  heap,  lifted  off  the  ragged  quilt, 
and  up  rose  the  little  tape-climber  as  hearty  as  ever,  and 
bowed  and  smiled  upon  the  amazed  throng  as  though 
dismemberment  were  an  after-breakfast  pastime  to 
which  he  had  been  accustomed  from  infancy. 

I  have  seen  it  stated  in  the  papers  that  the  late 
William  H.  Seward,  ex-Secretary  of  State,  witnessed  a 
similar  feat  in  India,  while  on  his  tour  around  the 
world.  He  saw  a  man  climb  a  bare  pole  sixty  feet 
high,  standing  in  open  air,  and  when  he  reached  the 
top  he  mysteriously  disappeared.  After  a  while  his 
feet  reappeared,  then  his  legs  and  body,  and  then  he 
came  down.  It  is  a  great  pity  that  some  of  our  enter- 
prising publishers  could  not  induce  Mme.  de  Blavatsky 
to  write  6ut  her  memoirs,  for  they  abound  in  such 
marvels  as  these.  And,  be  it  remembered,  the  great 
negro  whom  I  saw  at  Chittenden  was  the  chief  of  the 
very  party  who  performed  the  marvel  of  diablerie  in 
Egypt. 

But,  whoever  he  was,  or  wherever  he  hails  from,  is  it 

A    WONDERFUL  STORY.  $$$ 

possible  that  William  Eddy  could  get  himself  up,  in 
his  two-by-seven  feet,  pitch-dark  cabinet,  to  look  like 
this  strange  creature,  without  lamp,  paint,  looking- 
glass,  soap,  or  water,  and  only  a  small  black  fringed 
shawl  and  piece  of  plaid  horse-blanket,  taken  from 
serving  their  purpose  as  curtains,  to  be  used  as 
costume  ? 

There  are  curious  stories  afloat  in  Egypt  about  the 
powers  of  the  chiefs  of  this  horned  juggler's  tribe,  one 

of  which,  recited  to  me  by  Madame  de  B ,  is  well 

worth  preserving,  as  a  match  to  the  Grecian  mytholog- 
ical fable  of  Europa. 

One  of  them  had  the  reputation  of  being  the 
greatest  sorcerer  ever  known  in  that  country.  By 
conjurations  he  could  evoke  the  shape  of  any  person 
he  chose,  and  make  it  do  his  bidding.  He  was  aided 
by  demons,  or  evil  spirits  of  mighty  power,  who  came 
and  went  at  his  beck  and  call,  as  unquestioningly  as 
the  genii  of  the  ring  and  lamp  did  for  the  audacious 
Aladdin. 

One  day  he  strolled  into  the  village  of  Mis-Massia, 
near  the  river  Nile;  and,  going  from  house  to  house, 
offered  his  services  to  do  any  little  odd-job  of  diablerie 
that  might  be  required.  In  Mis-Massia  was  a  pretty 
maiden,  named  Esma,  who  had  been  abandoned  by  her 
sweetheart,  Zanoni-Bey,  and  who  asked  the  conjurer 
if  he  could  not  force  the  faithless  one  back  to  her  feet. 
He  said  he  could,  if  she  could  only  procure  for  him  a 
lock  of  Zanoni's  hair,  be  it  never  so  small  an  one.  Not 
being  able  to  approach  the  renegade  herself,  she  sent 
her  little  brother,  a  lad  about  twelve  years  of  age,  on 

334  MAIDEN  AND  LOVER. 

the  difficult  mission.  But  he,  finding  his  efforts  likely 
to  prove  unsuccessful,  stepped  into  a  butcher's  yard, 
and  cut  some  hairs  from  the  tail  of  a  black  bull  that 
was  waiting  his  turn  to  be  slaughtered,  and  brought 
them  to  his  sister,  as  taken  from  Zanoni's  head.  The 
deception  was  rendered  possible  from  the  fact  that  the 
lover's  hair  was  very  coarse  and  black,  as  much  Arab 
hair  is. 

Esma,  with  fear  and  trembling,  delivered  the  lock  to 
the  magician,  who  began  his  mystic  rites  in  her  pres- 
ence ;  thus,  at  least,  showing  us  that  he  was  no  genuine 
clairvoyant,  since  he  did  not  discover  the  cheat.  He 
made  his  passes  and  genuflections,  sprinkled  his  pow- 
ders, and  muttered  his  Arabic  charms,  until  the  subser- 
vient powers  of  darkness  manifested  their  presence  by 
shaking  the  house  to  its  foundations,  and  the  air  seemed 
full  of  strange  and  fearful  whisperings.  After  a  few 
more  passes,  the  sorcerer  exclaimed  the  talismanic 
words  which  signify  that  the  spell  is  formed,  and 
handing  the  lock  of  hair  to  the  affrighted  girl,  received 
his  fee,  and  departed. 

Impatiently  she  waited  for  night  to  come,  and  restore 
the  truant  Zanoni  to  her  caresses.  She  decked  herself 
in  her  bravest  attire,  and  watched  the  unprophetic 
hours  pass  by,  until  the  midnight  call  of  the  muezzin 
from  the  neighboring  mosque  betokened  the  fateful 
moment.  Suddenly  there  was  a  noise  like  that  of  dis- 
tant thunder,  the  earth  shook,  the  house-door  flew  open, 
and  there,  upon  the  threshold,  she  beheld  a  tall,  black 
figure  with  horns.  Taking  it  for  the  conjurer  himself, 
she  overwhelmed  him  with  reproaches  for  his  perfidy. 

THE  INFA  TUA  TED  B  ULL.  335 

but  in  another  moment  the  dark  object  disclosed  itself 
as  the  empty  skin  of  a  slaughtered  bull,  standing  erect 
upon  its  hind  legs.  She  shrieked  in  mortal  fright,  but 
in  vain ;  the  monster,  as  if  carried  away  with  a  mad 
frenzy,  precipitated  itself  upon  her,  and  wrapped  her 
in  an  embrace  of  death.  Her  cries  were  heard  and  her 
struggles  witnessed  by  an  old  negro  servant  woman, 
the  only  other  tenant  of  the  house,  who  stood  awhile, 
rooted  to  the  floor  with  terror,  and  then  fell  in  a  dead 
swoon. 

Upon  recovering  her  senses,  the  morning  light  shone 
dimly  into  the  apartment,  and  there  lay  the  poor  Esma, 
dead  and  cold,  enveloped  in  the  bull's  hide.  The  sor- 
cerer had  rehabilitated  the  spirit  of  the  beast,  and 
endowed  it  with  a  mad  affection  for  the  love-lorn 
damsel. 

This   story   was   told   to    Mme.    de   B by  Elias 

Effendi,  a  dignitary  residing  at  Mis-Massia,  who  assured 
her  that  it  was  generally  believed  throughout  all  that 
section  of  country.     The  adventure  occurred  only  about 

a  year  before  Mme.  de  B 's  visit,  and  the  hide  of 

this  African  Europa's  four-legged  swain  was  exhibited 
to  her  in  attestation  of  the  truth  of  the  narrative. 

Mr.  Epes  Sargent  writes  me  from  Boston,  under  date 

of  December  3d,  1874,  as  follows: 

"  By  the  way,  that  curious  story  of  the  feat  witnessed  by  Mme.  de 
Blavatsky,  where  the  African  juggler  throws  up  a  ladder  or  rope  into 
the  sky,  is  paralleled  in  a  story,  which  you  may  find  in  a  record  book 
by  George  Lunt  (Editor  of  the  Boston  Courier),  giving  reminiscences 
of  Newburyport,  and  other  places  in  New  England.  He  relates  an 
incident  of  the  same  kind  (in  some  respects)  as  occurring  somewhere 
in  these  parts,  many  years  ago." 

I  regret  to  say,  that  I  have  not  been  able  to   obtain 

3$6  THE  MA GIC  PAP  YR US. 

access  to  Mr.  Lunt's  book  in  time  to  use  the  extract 
referred  to  by  Mr.  Sargent.  I  cannot  imagine  how 
such  a  thing  could  have  occurred  in  this  country,  unless 
some  vagrant  Egyptian  or  Hindoo  magician  might 
have  wandered  this  way. 

In  his  voluminous  work  entitled  "Des  rapports  de 
l'Homme  avec  le  Demon,"  (Paris  Ed.,  1863,  Vol.  I,  p. 
15,)  M.  Bizouard  tells  us,  upon  the  authority  of  Cha- 
bas'  "  Paphyrus  Magique  Harris,"  that  at  the  highest 
antiquity,  the  arts  of  magic  reached  such  a  pass  that 
spirits  manifested  themselves  in  full  form,  bronze 
statues  were  made  to  move  and  nod,  living  persons 
were  made  out  of  menh  (an  unfamiliar  word.  Perhaps 
it  means  an  image  of  wax  or  clay,  perhaps  a  plant. 
The  tiny  mandragora  demon,  tiot  larger  than  a  small 
doll,  who  attends  upon  the  Egyptian  sorcerers,  is 
formed  out  of  a  withered  plant,  at  a  certain  hour  of  the 
night,  after  certain  incantations) ;  and  the  bodies  of  liv- 
ing persons  were  taken  possession  of  by  evil  spirits, 
who  used  them  as  habitations  as  long  as  they  chose. 
This  obsession  is  identical  with  what  prevailed  in  the 
time  of  Christ,  and  the  expulsion  of  these  demons  by 
him,  finds  its  prototype  in  the  same  power  exercised, 
according  to  these  ancient  Egyptian  papyri,  by  the 
good  divinity  Khons. 

The  ancient  religion  of  Egypt,  which  was  character- 
ized by  magical  practices,  such  as  the  one  related  by 
Madame  Blavatsky,  fell  into  decay  in  the  time  of  Caesar, 
in  consequence  of  the  impoverishment  of  the  country 
by  a  succession  of  internal  and  external  wars,  and  the 
falling   off   in   those    revenues   which   had   supported 

RAISING  THE  DEAD  IN  ROME.  337 

the  priesthood  and  their  temples.  Salverte  tells  us  (in 
his  "Sciences  Occultes:  ou  Essai  sur  la  Magie,"  Paris, 
l856,  3d  Ed.,  p.  165-6)  that  many  priests  of  the  inferior 
orders,  driven  by  necessity,  betook  themselves  to  Rome, 
where,  in  the  public  squares,  for  money,  they  declared 
prophecies,  healed  diseases,  and  evoked  the  apparitions 
of  the  dead. 

Modern  Egyptians  distinguish  two  kinds  of  Magic, 
which  they  term  Er-Roo'hha'-nee  and  Es-See'miya  :  the 
former  is  spiritual  magic,  which  is  believed  to  effect  its 
wonders  by  the  agency  of  angels  and  genii,  and  by  the 
mysterious  virtues  of  certain  names  of  God,  and  other 
supernatural  means;  the  latter  is  natural  and  deceptive 
magic;  which,  it  is  believed  by  the  less  credulous 
among  the  Egyptians,  finds  its  chief  agents  in  certain 
perfumes  and  drugs,  which  affect  the  vision  and  imag- 
ination. (See  Lane's "  Modern  Egyptians,"  2  Vols., 
London,  1837;  which  forms  part  of  the  series  known  as 
*  The  Library  of  Entertaining  Knowledge.")  The  true 
ijiagic  is  divided  into  'il'wee  (or  high),  and  soo/'lee  (or 
*Ow),  the  former  being  a  science  founded  upon  the 
Agency  of  God,  of  His  angels,  and  good  genii,  and  on 
Sther  lawful  mysteries;  to  be  always  employed  for  good 
purposes,  and  only  attained  and  practiced  by  men  of 
probity,  who  by  tradition,  or  from  books,  learn  the 
Barnes  of  those  superhuman  agents,  and  invocations 
ivhich  insure  compliance  with  their  desires.  The 
tpof'lee,  or  bad  magic,  is  believed  to  depend  upon  the 
Agency  of  the  devil  and  evil  spirits,  and  unbelieving 
£enii ;  and  to  be  used  for  bad  purposes,  by  bad  men. 
*To  this  branch,"  says  our  author,  "belongs  the  science 

338  THE  RING  AND  LAMP. 

called,  by  the  Arabs,  es-Sehhr  j  which   is  a  term  they 
give  to  wicked  enchantment." 

The  tape  and  pole  climbing  tricks  above  narrated,  as 
well  as  the  enchantment  by  which  poor  Esma  was 
deprived  of  life,  in  the  suffocating  embrace  of  the 
bull's  hide,  would,  of  course,  be  ascribed  to  the  latter 
branch  of  the  occult  science.  Perhaps,  the  wise  men  of 
America  might  embrace  all  of  William  Eddy's  appari- 
tions within  the  same  category  !  This,  however,  would 
not  be  the  case  in  the  land  of  the  Pharaohs,  for  the 
calling  up  of  the  dead  is  included  in  the  mysteries 
practised  by  the  professors  of  'il'wee.  It  appears  to 
make  some  difference  what  sort  of  spirits  are  evoked, 
and  for  what  purpose.  The  thousand  and  one  stories 
of  Scheherezade  are  filled  with  descriptions  of  all  these 
kinds  of  magic,  and  the  wonderful  things  done  by  the 
exercise  of  the  power  of  mortals  over  genii ;  who  of 
old  were  subject  to  the  dominion  of  Solomon,  and  in 
later  times  are  the  slaves  of  whomsoever  may  wear  the 
mystic  ring,  or  rub  the  rusty  lamp. 

CHAPTER  XXI. 

SPIRITUALISM   AGAINST    RATIONALISM. 

IT  is  remarked  by  Lecky,  in  his  "  History  of  the  rise 
and  influence  of  the  spirit  of  Rationalism  in  Europe," 
that,  after  the  angry  passions  aroused  by  the  Reforma- 
tion had  subsided,  and  a  more  judicial  spirit  was 
awakened,  the  advanced  minds  of  the  Eighteenth  Century 
began  to  view  the  religious  question  with  calmer  judg- 
ment, and  more  philosophical  impartiality.     Says  he  : 

"  It  was  observed  that  every  great  change  of  belief  had  been  pre- 
ceded by  a  great  change  in  the  intellectual  condition  of  Europe,  that 
the  success  of  any  opinion  depended  much  less  upon  the  force  of  its 
arguments,  or  upon  the  ability  of  its  advocates,  than  upon  the  pre- 
disposition of  society  to  receive  it,  and  that  that  predisposition 
resulted  from  the  intellectual  type  of  the  age.  As  men  advance 
from  an  imperfect  to  a  higher  civilization,  they  gradually  sublimate 
and  refine  their  creed.  Their  imaginations  insensibly  detach  them- 
selves from  those  grosser  conceptions  and  doctrines  that  were  formerly 
most  powerful,  and  they  sooner  or  later  reduce  all  their  opinions  into 
conformity  with  the  moral  and  intellectual  standards  which  the  new 
civilization  produces.  Thus,  long  before  the  Reformation,  the 
tendencies  of  the  Reformation  were  manifest.  The  revival  of  Greek 
learning,  the  development  of  art,  the  reaction  against  the  schoolmen, 
had  raised  society  to  an  elevation  in  which  a  more  refined  and  less 
oppressive  creed  was  absolutely  essential  to  its  well-being. 

"  Luther  and  Calvin  only  represented  the  prevailing  wants,  and 
embodied  them  in  a  definite  form.    The  pressure  of  the  general 

340  HOW  OPINIONS  ARE  FORMED. 

intellectual  influences  of  the  time  determines  the  predispositions 
which  ultimately  regulate  the  details  of  belief ;  and  though  all  men 
do  not  yield  to  that  pressure  with  the  same  facility,  all  large  bodies 
are  at  last  controlled." 

Speaking   of  the   method   by   which   persons    usually 

arrive  at  opinions,  in  the  investigation  of  new  facts,  Mr. 

Lecky  observes : 

"  Nothing  can  be  more  certain  to  an  attentive  observer,  than  that 
the  great  majority  even  of  those  who  reason  much  about  their 
opinions,  have  arrived  at  their  conclusions  by  a  process  quite  distinct 
from  reasoning.  They  may  be  perfectly  unconscious  of  the  fact,  but 
the  ascendancy  of  old  associations  is  upon  them,  and,  in  the  over- 
whelming majority  of  cases,  men  of  the  most  various  creeds  conclude 
their  investigations  by  simply  acquiescing  in  the  opinions  they  have 
been  taught.  They  insensibly  judge  all  questions  by  a  mental 
standard  derived  from  education ;  they  proportion  their  attention 
and  sympathies  to  the  degree  in  which  the  facts  and  arguments 
presented  to  them  support  their  foregone  conclusions  ;  and  thus 
speedily  convince  themselves  that  the  arguments  in  behalf  of  their 
hereditary  opinions  are  irresistibly  cogent,  and  the  arguments  against 
them  exceedingly  absurd." 

I  have  quoted  as  much  as  this  from  this  learned 
author,  because  it  seems  to  define  so  satisfactorily  the 
cause  of  the  prevalent  interest  in  Spiritualism,  (especi- 
ally in  the  phase  presented  by  the  Eddy  mediums),  as 
well  as  the  behavior  of  the  churchmen,  the  philosophi- 
cal chemists,  and  the  lay  materialists,  towards  believers 
in  the  phenomena. 

The  progress  of  Rationalism  in  Europe  weakened 
the  influence  of  the  Church,  challenged  the  sources  of 
religious  belief,  and  fostered  scientific  research.  These 
causes,  at  work  for  two  centuries,  have  brought  about 
a  crisis  which  threatens  so  violent  a  reaction  from  our 
old  subserviency  to  ecclesiastical  rule,  that  every 
vestige  of  spirituality  is  likely  to  be  swept  out  of  our 
nature,  and  a  bald  Rationalism  to  take  its  place.    The 

POPULAR  ANXIETY.  341 

masses,  viewing  the  conflict,  seeing  the  impending 
crisis,  and  bewildered  at  the  progress  of  events  that  no 
power  of  theirs  seems  potent  to  control,  turn  with 
deep  anxiety  to  the  spiritual  manifestations,  as  offer- 
ing the  sole  chance  for  successful  resistance  to  the 
encroachments  of  remorseless  scientific  spirit  upon  the 
instinctive  longing  for  and  belief  in  immortality. 

Finally,  the  scientists,  setting  their  opinions  by  the 
rule  of  precedent  and  education,  impatiently  listen  to 
the  narration  of  facts,  which,  contravening  their  pre- 
conceived notions  as  to  the  laws  of  gravity,  of  chemical 
combination,  of  the  conservation  and  correlation  of 
force,  they  regard  as  in  the  highest  degree  absurd. 
Lecky  himself  says,  that  at  present,  nearly  all  educated 
men  receive  an  account  of  a  miracle  taking  place  in 
their  own  day,  "  With  an  absolute  and  even  derisive 
incredulity,  which  dispenses  with  all  examination  of  the 
evidence.  Although  they  may  be  entirely  unable  to 
give  a  satisfactory  explanation  of  some  phenomena 
that  have  taken  place,  they  never  on  that  account 
dream  of  ascribing  them  to  supernatural  agency,  such 
an  hypothesis  being,  as  they  believe,  altogether  beyond 
the  range  of  reasonable  discussion."  Exactly:  but 
what  these  gentlemen  do  not  consider,  and  what  makes 
them  appear  so  ridiculous,  in  the  eyes  of  those  who  are 
brave  enough  to  investigate  these  curious  facts  in  the 
judicial  spirit,  is  that  these  phenomena  that  have  taken 
place  are  at  the  same  time,  not  supernatural,  not 
miracles,  and  not  trickery.  They  happen  according  to 
law  as  does  everything  else,  and  if  the  class  of  men 
referred  to  by  Lecky   do  not  bestir  themselves,  the 

342  THE  CHARMED  CIRCLE. 

credit  of  discovering  that  law,  and  defining  its  forms 
of  manifestation,  will  fall  to  persons  outside  the  charmed 
circle  of  the  Academy. 

A  reasonable  and  philosophical  spiritualistic  belief 
is  as  far  removed  from  the  superstition  of  the  Seven- 
teenth and  Eighteenth  Centuries,  as  it  is  from  the 
degrading  materialism  of  the  last  quarter  of  the  Nine- 
teenth, which  blots  God  out  of  the  Universe,  strips  the 
soul  of  its  aspirations  for  a  higher  existence  beyond 
the  grave,  and  bounds  the  life  of  man  by  the  same 
limits  as  those  within  which  the  beast  of  the  field,  the 
bird  of  the  air,  or  the  fish  of  the  sea  has  its  being. 
I  sought  at  Chittenden  the  material  for  the  formation 
of  such  a  belief,  and  if  I  cannot  say  that  the  Eddy 
manifestations  warrant  it,  it  is  only  because  the  things 
I  saw,  while  apparently  inexplicable  upon  any  other 
than  the  spiritualistic  hypothesis,  were  not  happening 
under  test  conditions,  and  hence  would  not  satisfy  the 
judicial  mind. 

In  looking  back  through  the  history  of  Magic,  Sor- 
cery, and  Witchcraft,  in  all  ages,  it  appears  to  me  that 
most  of  the  confusion  in  regard  to  the  real  nature  of 
the  so-called  diabolical  power,  comes  from  two  causes : 
(i)  The  belief  in  a  personal  Devil,  powerful  enough  to 
cause  rebellion  in  Heaven,  divert  the  allegiance  of  a 
large  portion  of  the  angelic  host,  and  be  constantly  at 
war  with  God ;  thus  affording  to  the  superstitious  a 
satisfactory  ideal  of  an  individualized  Evil  Power, 
which  could  send  its  demons  to  torment,  and  which 
could  be  invoked  by  spells,  and  propitiated  by  incanta- 
tions and  sacrifices.     (2)    The  empiricism  of  scientific 

BLACK  MAGIC,  AND   WHITE.  343 

men,  who  either,  (as  in  the  XVIIth  and  XVIIIth  Cen- 
turies,) yield  to  the  prevalent  anthropomorphic  belief, 
or  (as  at  present)  coolly  deny  the  occult  origin  of 
phenomena  they  are  too  indolent  and  cowardly  to 
examine. 

The  verification  of  these  surprising  facts  of  modern 
Spiritualism,  clearly  does  not  necessitate  a  return  to  the 
ignorant  exorcisms  of  earlier  times  in  Europe,  or  in- 
dorsement of  the  practices  of  modern  "Black  Magic,"  in 
the  countries  of  the  Orient.  It  would  doubtless  result 
in  showing  that,  by  the  establishment  of  favoring  con- 
ditions about  us,  we  might  enjoy  intercourse  with  the 
highest  spirits,  as  well  as  receive  the  visits  of  the  most 
tricky,  ignorant,  or  malicious.  The  Eddy  materializa- 
tions, if  proven  true,  while  unquestionably  the  highest 
form  of  physical  phenomena,  cannot  be  regarded  as 
comparable  to  the  inspirational  state,  in  which  knowl- 
edge, wisdom,  and  thoughts  of  beauty  pour  into  the 
receptive  mind  of  the  seer,  from  the  sources  of  inspira- 
tion, and  take  the  form  of  prophecy  and  poetry.  Such 
men  were  Isaiah,  Ezekiel,  David,  Jeremiah,  and  the 
other  great  Hebrews  of  those  days ;  and  the  difference 
between  them  and  the  Witch  of  Endor  was  just  as 
great,  and  no  other,  than  that  between — say  Swedenborg 
and  William  Eddy ; — the  one,  the  type  of  the  greatest 
possible  spiritual  ecstacy,  the  other,  that  of  the  most 
powerful  physical  mediumship. 

I  have  been  struck  with  the  different  light  in  which 
the  Eddy  manifestations,  and,  in  fact,  the  whole  range 
of  these  modern  phenomena,  are  regarded  by  the  Prot- 
estant and  Roman  Catholic  bodies.    The  former  begin 

344  THE  TWO  CHURCHES. 

by  denying  their  occurrence,  except  as  examples  of 
legerdemain ;  but,  when  confronted  with  some  pecu- 
liarly striking  phenomenon,  either  attribute  it  to  an 
occult  force,  under  control  of  the  medium,  or  circle,  or, 
as  a  last  refuge,  find  a  satisfactory  explanation  in  the 
direct  interposition  of  the  Devil. 

The  Church  of  Rome,  on  the  other  hand,  admits  the 
facts  without  argument,  and  if  they  happen  outside  her 
own  jurisdiction,  passes  them  to  the  credit  of  Satan.  I 
rode  in  the  cars  recently  with  a  very  intelligent  young 
priest,  who  took  this  ground  and  cited  to  me  passage 
after  passage  from  the  Fathers  in  its  support.  He  even 
narrated,  with  evident  interest,  his  own  experience  with 
Planchette,  in  company  with  several  other  priests  and 
sundry  laymen,  upon  which  occasion  the  "  little  plank  " 
answered  mental  questions  framed  in  his  mind  in  Latin, 
in  the  same  language,  and  wrote  Spanish,  Greek,  Latin, 
French,  German,  and  Italian  for  various  persons  in  the 
room ;  the  medium  being  an  ignorant  Irish  girl.  This, 
to  his  mind,  was  a  clear  case  of  diabolism,  and,  instead 
of  testing  the  phenomena  with  scales  or  electrode,  he 
was  for  resorting  to  "bell,  book  and  candle,"  and  a 
copious  use  of  holy-water. 

This  theory  of  diabolism,  might  commend  itself  to  a 
mind  predisposed  to  anthropomorphic  belief,  if  the  mani- 
festations were  always  of  either  a  malicious  or  lying 
character ;  or  mere  exhibitions  of  impish  power  to  startle 
or  amuse,  like  the  magical  feats  of  the  Hindoo,  Egyptian, 
and  Mongolian  sorcerers. 

The  most  devout  Spiritualist  would  scarcely  hesitate  to 
ascribe  to  a  very  low  grade  of  spirits,  such  marvels  as  the 

THE  "  MANDRAGORA."  345 

"  mandragora,"  the  transformations  at  Hindoo  ceremo- 
nials, or  the  tape  and  pole  climbing  feats  described  in 
another  chapter ;  and  he  would  not  complain  of  a  resort 
by  the  priests  to  the  usual  forms  of  exorcism,  set  down  in 
the  books  of  the  Church,  if  such  might  comfort  the 
faithful.  But,  on  the  other  hand,  it  would  seem  to  almost 
any  one  unreasonable  that  a  mother,  seeing  her  resur- 
rected child,  in  form  as  when  alive,  step  out  before  her, 
should  be  asked  to  regard  her  darling  one  as  either  an 
imp  of  Satan,  or  as  brought  to  her  by  devilish  arts.  So, 
too,  it  is  revolting  to  one's  feelings  to  believe  that 
pure  teachings,  conveyed  through  mediums,  are  less 
admirable  than  they  would  be,  if  the  person  giving  them 
voice,  wore  cape  and  stole  and  chasuble. 

"  The  simplest  peasant  who  observes  a  truth, 

And  from  a  fact  deduces  principle, 

Adds  solid  treasure  to  the  public  wealth." 

The  occurrence  of  the  spiritualistic  phenomena  being 
conceded,  the  very  fact  that  this  belief  in  their  diabolic 
origin  still  has  a  hold  upon  the  public  mind,  is  another 
argument  why  the  subject  should  be  thoroughly  investi- 
gated ;  for  it  is  a  reproach  that  in  this  boasted  age  of 
knowledge  and  science,  so  important  a  matter  should  be 
left  to  conjecture.  If  we  are  beset  by  ministers  of  Evil,  it 
is  time  we  learn  how  to  array  against  them  a  better  class 
of  spirits.     It  is  not  manly  to  surrender  at  discretion. 

I  was  talking  the  other  day  with  a  professor  in  a 
denominational  college,  about  the  Eddys,  when,  after 
hearing  fact  after  fact,  and  receding  foot  by  foot  from  his 
original  theory  of  imposture,  he  said  that,  in  his  opinion, 
the  less  Christians  had  to  do  with  such  things  the  better. 
In  other  words,  he  would   retire  within  the  Sanctuary, 

346  CO  WARDL  Y  EDITORS. 

make  the  sign  of  the  Cross,  and  let  the  Devil  go  up  and 
down  among  the  people,  to  entice,  torment,  and  devour ! 

I  have  spoken  of  the  cowardice  of  men  of  science  who 
refuse  to  investigate,  and  content  themselves  with  the 
assumption  of  an  attitude  of  contemptuous  indifference ; 
but  what  shall  be  said  of  Editors,  who  secretly  believe, 
but  openly  denounce  ?  It  is  within  my  personal  knowl- 
edge, that  several  persons  of  this  class,  among  the  most 
influential  in  their  profession,  are  firm  believers  in  the 
reality  of  the  Spiritualistic  phenomena,  and  yet  allow 
the  columns  of  their  journals  to  be  filled  with  articles 
exhibiting  no  less  ignorance  and  malevolence  than 
coarse  wit  and  sarcasm.  In  what  estimation  should 
such  panderers  be  held  by  conscientious  men  ?  It  is 
perhaps  too  much  to  ask  persons  of  weak  moral  char- 
acter to  champion  an  unfashionable  creed  in  advance  of 
its  general  adoption — such  work  is  reserved  for  men  of 
heroic  mould — but  they  might  preserve  silence,  and  not 
debase  themselves,  by  joining  in  the  hue  and  cry  against 
what  they  believe  to  be  the  Truth.  They  might  keep 
their  papers,  and  not  their  influence,  for  sale. 

Among  the  interesting  queries  that  have  been  pro- 
pounded to  me,  during  the  past  three  months,  is  one 
coming  from  the  Secretary  of  a  well-known  religio- 
socialistic  community,  to  the  following  effect : 

"  If  you  could  manage  to  get  a  materialized  spirit  to 
vanish  from  before  your  eyes  in  a  lighted  room,  holding 
in  its  hand  some  small  living  animal,  say  a  canary-bird, 
and  afterwards  re-materialize  it ;  and  if  the  bird  should, 
after  its  resurrection,  hop  about,  sing,  chirp,  etc.,  a  good 
many  people  would  be  bold  enough  to  believe  that  the 

SPIRIT-ANIMALS.  347 

same  thing  could  be  done  with  a  baby.  How  would 
that  affect  ordinary  physical  death  ?" 

My  answer  to  this  is  very  simple.  Firstly,  Chitten- 
den was  no  place  for  me  to  try  philosophical  experi- 
ments, neither  the  Eddys  nor  their  spirit-friends  feeling 
friendly  enough  towards  me  to  grant  me  many  more 
favors  than  other  visitors;  secondly,  I  have  already 
described  the  appearance  of  several  babies,  of  whom 
no  traces  could  be  found  after  the  seance,  and  who, 
therefore,  must  have  disappeared  as  mysteriously  as 
they  came ;  thirdly,  I  saw,  on  the  evening  of  October 
8th,  the  following  thing  occur :  Honto  sprang  out  of 
the  cabinet  soon  after  the  circle  was  formed,  and  danced 
about  the  platform,  like  a  cork  on  rippling  water. 
She  seemed  as  if  enchanted  to  be  in  motion,  and  as 
if  she  had  a  reserve  of  power  sufficient  to  enable  her 
to  do  almost  anything  that  any  living  woman  could. 

After  awhile,  she  went  into  the  cabinet  for  a  moment, 
and,  reappearing,  was  followed  out  by  a  curious  little 
animal  that  hugged  the  floor,  and  waddled  its  short 
legs  along,  in  a  most  comical  fashion.  As  soon  as 
our  first  feeling  of  astonishment  passed  off,  we  fell  to 
laughing  at  this  latest  importation  from  the  spirit- 
world.  But  to  old  Mrs.  Cleveland,  who  was  at  her  end 
of  the  platform,  as  usual,  it  was  no  laughing  matter,  for 
when  Honto  moved  towards  her,  with  the  little  creature 
after  her,  the  good  dame  screamed  with  fright,  gathered 
her  petticoats  about  her  limbs,  and  mounted  upon  her 
chair.  The  spirit-squaw  was  convulsed  with  merri- 
ment, and  the  room  rang  with  our  sympathetic  shouts. 
She  pulled  Mrs.  Cleveland  down,  who  ran  to  the  other 

348  HON  TO 'S  FL  YING  SQUIRREL. 

end  of  the  platform  and  Honto  followed  her  up ;  until 
finally,  in  her  terror,  the  old  lady  clasped  her  arms  about 
the  roguish  squaw,  and  retreated  into  a  corner.  By  this 
time  the  animal  had  disappeared,  and  it  was  a  most 
amusing  thing  to  see  Mrs.  Cleveland  looking  all  about, 
over  the  tops  of  her  spectacles,  as  if  the  dreaded  appari- 
tion had  gone  down  some  crack  in  the  floor.  Her  con- 
fidence restored,  she  moved  towards  her  chair,  but 
Honto,  laughing  with  us  behind  her  back  and  making 
gestures  to  command  our  attention,  touched  and 
caused  her  to  face  about ;  when  suddenly,  under  the 
very  edge  of  her  skirt,  the  creature  reappeared.  This 
was  too  much  for  human  endurance,  and  the  massive 
matron  with  a  despairing  shriek  leaped  down  the  steps, 
and  rejoined  the  circle;  Honto  retreating  into  the 
cabinet,  with  her  pet  at  her  heels.  Upon  inquiry  of 
Mrs.  Eaton,  we  learned  that  this  was  Honto's  tame 
flying  squirrel.  The  same  authority  declared  that  in 
the  spirit-world  people  surround  themselves  with  the 
objects  they  most  loved  on  Earth,  and  among  them 
birds  and  flowers.  I  have  mentioned  this  circumstance 
as  pertinent  to  the  inquiry  propounded  in  the  above 
query,  whether  living  animals  can  be  made  to  disappear 
and  reappear,  in  lighted  rooms  by  spirit-power. 

A  still  more  curious  thing  was  done  in  one  of 
Horatio's  dark-circles  on  the  evening  of  April  25th 
last,  the  nature  of  which  is  explained  in  the  following 
certificate  from  a  physician,  who  was  present. 

Chittenden,  Oct.  21st,  1874. 

I  hereby  certify  that  in  a  dark-circle,  held  on  or  about  the  25th  of 
April  last,  at  the  Eddy  house,  the  following  incident  occurred.  The 
spirit-girl,  Mayflower,  came  running  across  the  room,  her  foot-sleps 

A  DEAD  SPARROW  REVIVED.  349 

being  plainly  audible  by  all,  and  said  to  a  lady  present,  "  Oh  ! 
Mrs.  K.  I  have  caught  a  bird  for  you.  I  am  going  to  make  you  a 
present  of  it.  Hold  your  hands."  A  sparrow  was  then  placed  in 
the  lady's  hands,  who  afterwards  told  me  that  she  felt  both  of  May- 
flower's little  hands  as  she  transferred  the  bird  to  her  own.  After  it 
had  been  examined  by  all  who  wished,  by  lamplight,  the  light  was 
again  extinguished,  and  "George  Dix"  said  to  me,  "Doctor,  I  want 
you  to  take  that  bird."  Having  done  as  requested,  I  was  told  to 
strangle  it,  without  breaking  its  neck,  or  crushing  any  of  the  vital 
organs.  I  pinched  its  neck  until  after  the  heart  had  ceased  to  beat, 
and  it  lay  in  my  palm,  limp  and  lifeless,  I  dropped  it  on  the  floor, 
and  it  made  no  motion.  I  then,  by  request,  placed  it  under  a  glass 
tumbler,  and  covering  it  over  with  a  small  plate,  put  the  tumbler 
on  a  chair  drawn  up  before  me,  so  that  I  could  place  my  feet  upon 
the  rungs.  We  were  requested  to  sing,  but  we  had  not  got  through 
with  more  than  one  verse,  when  George  Dix  called  for  a  light ;  and 
the  bird  was  found  to  be  fluttering  about  and  making  attempts  to 
escape  from  the  tumbler.  It  was  as  lively  as  if  nothing  had  hap- 
pened to  it.  I  must  say  that  the  phenomenon  was  the  more  remark- 
able, as  it  occurred  in  a  room  every  window  and  door  of  which  was 
closed  and  sealed  with  strips  of  paper. 

R.  Hodgson,  M.  D.,  Stoneham,  Mass. 

There  is  but  one  theory,  except  the  spiritualistic  one, 

to  account  for  this  affair,  and  that  is,  that  a  second 

bird   was   substituted    for    the    first    after    the   light 

was  extinguished.     But,  as  the  bird  was  in   a  glass, 

covered  with  a  saucer,  and  this  upon  a  chair  at  Doctor 

Hodgson's  knees,  with  his  feet  resting  upon  the  rungs, 

it  would  seem  rather  difficult  to  do  the  trick  without 

discovery ;  unless,  (and  this  is  what  destroys  the  whole 

value  of  the  manifestation,)  the  first  bird,  and  tumbler 

and   all,   were   quietly  replaced   by  duplicates,  under 

cover  of   the    singing.      Doctor   Hodgson,   however, 

asserts   to   me,    in   the  most  positive  manner,  that  he 

identified   the   bird  by   a   peculiar  disturbance  of  its 

feathers,  caused  by  his  rude  pinching  of  its  tiny  throat. 

CHAPTER  XXII. 

SPIRITS    AS   CARRIERS. 

AT  a  session   of  the   London   Dialectical   Society's 
committee,   held  on   Tuesday,  April  27th,  1869, 
Dr.  Edmunds  in  the  chair,  among  other  witnesses 
examined   was  Mr.  Burns,  who  described  certain  phe- 
nomena that  had  occurred  in  the  presence  of  a  medium 
named  Mrs.  Marshall. 

When  in  London,  in  1870,  I  desired  to  have  a  sitting 
with  Mr.  Home,  but  as  that  celebrated  personage  was 
not  in  the  city,  I  was  advised  that  this  Mrs.  Marshall  was 
considered  the  next  best  medium  in  England.  I  visited 
the  lady  at  her  residence  in  Bennett  street,  St.  James 
street,  Piccadilly,  and  saw  and  heard  such  wonderful 
things,  that  I  am  prepared  to  give  respectful  attention  to 
the  statements  of  Mr.  Burns  and  other  witnesses.  Mr. 
Burns  said  that,  one  night,  a  ripe  peach  was  brought  and 
placed  in  his  wife's  hand  by  an  invisible  power,  and  Mr. 
Thomas  Sherratt  exhibited  a  number  of  specimens  of 
direct  spirit-writing,  executed  at  Mrs.  Marshall's  house 
in  a  fully-lighted  room.  Mrs.  Marshall  told  me  herself 
that  objects  of  various  kinds  were  often  brought  into  her 
circles  by  the  spirits,  and  either  laid  upon  the  table  or  in 
the  hands  or  laps  of  persons  sitting  in  the  circle.    Once, 

REFRESHMENTS  FURNISHED  B  Y  SPIRITS.     35 1 

in  a  darkened  room,  at  a  sitting  in  mid-winter,  a  quantity 
of  grapes  and  other  hot-house  fruit,  estimated  to  weigh 
thirty  or  forty  pounds,  was  piled  up  on  the  table  ;  and 
once  a  spirit-hand  opened  one  of  hers  and  laid  in  her 
palm  several  jewels  of  fine  water.  As  to  flowers  of  every 
description,  they  were  brought  so  often  that  she  could 
not  recall  the  separate  instances. 

At  the  same  session  of  the  same  committee  of  the 
Dialectical  Society,  Miss  Houghton  produced  some  very 
interesting  drawings  done  by  spiritualistic  agency,  and 
stated,  among  other  things,  that,  on  the  20th  of  April, 
1867,  in  the  presence  of  Mrs.  General  Ramsay,  Mrs. 
Gregory,  Mrs.  Cromwell  Varley,  Mrs.  Pearson,  Miss 
Nockolds,  Miss  Wallace,  and  Miss  Nicholl  (now  the  wife 
of  Mr.  Guppy),  she  suddenly  felt  something  on  her  head, 
and  upon  striking  a  light  discovered  that  she  was  crowned 
with  "a  lovely  wreath  of  everlasting  flowers." 

On  the  3d  of  October,  1867,  at  a  circle  composed  of 
eighteen  ladies  and  gentlemen,  among  them  several  of 
distinction,  fruit  of  various  kinds  was  brought.  Says  the 
witness :  "  By  raps  the  spirits  desired  me  to  wish  for  a 
fruit,  and  I  chose  a  banana,  which  they  promised  me, 
and  then  said,  '  Now  all  may  wish,'  which  they  did,  for 
various  fruits,  sometimes  having  their  wishes  negatived, 
but  in  most  instances  agreed  to.  The  fruits  were  then 
brought  in  the  order  in  which  they  had  been  wished  for. 
One  lady  said,  '  Why  do  you  not  ask  for  vegetables ;  an 
onion,  for  instance  ? '  and  even  as  she  said  it  the  onion 
came  into  her  lap.  I  will  give  you  a  list  of  the  things 
brought ;  a  banana,  two  oranges,  a  bunch  of  white  grapes, 
a  bunch    of   black    grapes,  a   cluster   of  filberts,   three 

352  A  FLORAL  DISPLAY. 

walnuts,  about  a  dozen  damsons,  a  slice  of  candied 
pineapple,  three  figs,  two  apples,  an  onion,  a  peach,  some 
almonds,  four  very  large  grapes,  three  dates,  a  potato, 
two  large  pears,  a  pomegranate,  two  crystallized  green- 
gages, a  pile  of  dried  currants,  a  lemon,  and  a  large 
bunch  of  raisins,  which,  as  well  as  the  figs  and  dates, 
were  quite  plump,  as  if  they  had  never  been  packed,  but 
had  been  brought  straight  from  the  drying  ground." 

Signor  Damiami  testified  before  the  same  committee 
that,  at  various  seances  held  in  rooms  with  closed  win- 
dows and  locked  doors,  fresh  flowers  had  been  showered 
on  the  company.  At  Baron  Guldenstubbe's  house  the 
flowers  were  so  numerous  that  they  "  would  have  filled  a 
large  basket,  and  the  fact  they  were  perfectly  fresh  and 
besprinkled  with  dew  *  *  *  would  have  precluded  any, 
the  faintest  suspicion  of  '  crinoline  mystification '  or 
sleight  of  hand."  "  I  must  not  omit  mentioning,"  con- 
tinued the  Signor,  "  that,  on  examining  the  flowers,  some 
of  which  still  remain  in  my  possession  [after  a  lapse  of 
two  years — H.  S.  O.],  we  perceived  that  the  ends  of  the 
stems  presented  a  blackened  and  burnt  appearance.  On 
our  asking  the  reason  of  this,  we  were  told  that  the  elec- 
tricity had  been  the  potent  'nipper'  employed." 

Mr.  Samuel  Guppy,  at  page  371  of  the  Society's  report, 
describes  a  seance  with  the  Spiritual  Society  of  Florence 
(Italy),  at  which  the  question  whether  spirits  could  dis- 
tinguish colors  in  the  dark  was  effectually  answered : 
"  A  noise  was  heard  on  the  table,  and  the  light  showed  a 
heap  of  sugar-plums  of  all  colors  mixed  together — about 
a  handful.  Light  put  out  again ;  Ave  heard  a  rattling, 
lighted  the  candle  and  found  the  sugar-plums  all  assorted 

CARRYING  OF  STONES,  Etc.  353 

in  little  heaps  of  separate  colors."  At  another  seance  of 
the  same  society  some  of  the  most  eminent  Florentine 
literati  being  present,  the  room  was,  at  Mr.  Guppy's 
request,  made  very  warm  by  the  spirits.  First  came  a 
shower  of  fresh  flowers  which  fell  all  about  the  table, 
while  Mrs.  Guppy's  hands  were  held.  The  light  was  put 
out  again,  and  in  ten  minutes  an  awful  crash  was  heard 
on  the  table  as  if  the  chandelier  had  fallen  down.  On 
lighting  the  candle  we  found  a  large  lump  of  ice,  about 
a  foot  in  length  and  one  and  a  half  inches  thick,  which  had 
fallen  on  the  table  with  such  force  that  it  was  broken." 

I  might  quote  many  similar  instances,  going  to  show 
that  the  transportation  of  material  objects,  sometimes 
from  very  remote  places,  is  not  an  uncommon  circum- 
stance in  the  experience  of  those  who  have  investigated 
the  phenomena  of  Spiritualism ;  but  these  will  suffice. 

From  what  has  already  been  related  of  the  Eddy 
mediums  in  my  preceding  chapters,  it  will  occasion  no 
surprise,  when  I  state  that  on  many  occasions,  if  the 
testimony  of  eye-witnesses  maybe  accepted,  objects  have 
been  dropped  on  the  Chittenden  circle-room  floor,  or 
laid  in  the  hands  of  persons  in  attendance.  I  have  seen 
among  other  things,  a  large  stone,  weighing  some  sixty 
pounds,  a  cart-wheel,  two  large  mother-of-pearl  shells,  an 
ear  of  Egyptian  corn  (said  to  have  come  from  a  mummy's 
tomb),  a  specimen  of  a  rare  mineral,  a  gold  vest-chain,  a 
heavy  gold  ring,  two  small  spotted  shells,  a  miniature 
ivory  die  for  a  watch  "  charm,"  a  small  quartz-crystal, 
and  a  cut  white  carnelian  seal-stone — that  were  said  to 
have  been  brought  by  invisible  carriers.  The  crystal  and 
carnelian  were  placed  in  my  own  hand  at  two  different 

354  GREENBACKS  PRODUCED. 

dark-circles,  but  it  happened  in  the  dark  and  so  I  cannot 
vouch  for  their  genuineness,  any  more  than  I  can  for  that 
of  either  of  the  other  articles. 

Horatio  Eddy  tells  me  that  he  has  been  the  frequent 
recipient  of  these  ghostly  attentions.  Once  "  George 
Dix  "  put  a  spotted  snake  on  his  bed  ;  once  he  brought 
him  a  $5  bill  to  give  to  one  Riley  Allen,  a  sick  neighbor; 
once  a  bill  of  like  amount  for  a  Mr.  Barker ;  once  a  sum 
of  money  to  defray  a  child's  funeral  expenses ;  and  once, 
for  himself,  a  silver-mounted  pistol,  the  seven  barrels  of 
which  were  all  loaded  except  one,  which  the  spirit  dis- 
charged himself,  frightening  Horatio  out  of  his  wits  with 
the  idea  that  burglars  were  in  the  room. 

One  gentleman  whom  I  met  at  the  Eddy  homestead, 
told  me  of  an  instance  within  his  own  knowledge,  in 
which  seven  different  communications  were  written,  on  an 
equal  number  of  pieces  of  paper  of  as  many  different 
colors,  and  sewed,  each  with  silk  of  a  color  to  match  the 
paper,  upon  a  child's  pocket-handkerchief.  Strangest  of 
all,  upon  each  paper  was  stitched  a  lock  of  hair,  pur- 
porting to  be  that  of  the  spirit  writing  the  communica- 
tion, and  which  they  alleged  they  brought  from  their  own 
graves.  As  some  of  them  had  been  dead  many  years,  the 
latter  assertion  may  be  taken  for  what  it  is  worth. 

Another  gentleman  visitor  asserts  that,  last  January,  at  * 
his  request,  he  had  brought  to  him  some  new  potatoes, 
which  must  have  come  from  afar,  as  the  snow  lay  deep 
over  the  whole  of  this  northern  country. 

I  am  witness  to  the  fact  that  one  evening  in  October, 
at  a  dark-circle,  a  lady  who  had  brought  as  a  present  for 
"  Mayflower,"  a  picture  of  a  bunch  of  roses,  painted  upon 

GEORGE  RALPH ' S  CER  TIEICA  TE.  355 

a  Bristol  board   sheet  of,  say,  8x12  inches,  had  it  taken 

from  her  hand,  and  after  the  circle  it  could  not  be  found, 

although  I  searched  the  room  thoroughly. 

Citizens  of  Utica  will  recognize  in  the  signature  attached 

to  the  following  document,  the  name  of  one  of  their  most 

estimable  fellow-townsmen,  a  man  of  high  character  for 

probity  and  truthfulness : 

Chittenden,  October  21st,  1874. 
Dear  Sir  :  Please  add  to  what  you  have  already  published,  the 
fact  that,  at  a  circle  held  in  the  lower  sitting-room  of  the  Eddy 
homestead,  on  the  evening  of  August  27th,  1873,  the  doors  and  win- 
dows being  closed  and  sealed,  a  stone  weighing  sixty-four  pounds, 
was  suddenly  dropped  at  my  feet.  I  had  noticed  the  same  stone 
lying  outside  the  house  during  the  day. 

George  Ralph,  Utica,  N.  Y. 
Colonel  Olcott. 

But  I  doubt  if  any  circle  ever  witnessed  a  more  aston- 
ishing spiritual  feat  than  that  which  I  am  about  to  relate. 

The  evening  of  October  24th  was  as  bright  as  day  with 
the  light  of  the  moon,  and,  while  there  was  a  good  deal 
of  moisture  in  the  air,  the  atmospheric  conditions  would, 
I  suppose,  have  been  regarded  as  favorable  for  manifes- 
tations. In  the  dark-circle,  as  soon  as  the  light  was 
extinguished,  "  George  Dix,"  addressing  Mme.  de  Blav- 
atsky,  said :  "  Madame,  I  am  now  about  to  give  you  a 
test  of  the  genuineness  of  the  manifestations  in  this  circle, 
which  I  think  will  satisfy  not  only  you,  but  a  skeptical 
world  beside.  I  shall  place  in  your  hands  the  buckle  of 
a  medal  of  honor  worn  in  life  by  your  brave  father,  and 
buried  with  his  body  in  Russia.  This  has  been  brought 
to  you  by  your  uncle,  whom  you  have  seen  materialized 
this  evening."  Presently  I  heard  the  lady  utter  an  excla- 
mation, and,  a  light  being  struck,  we  all  saw  Mme.  de  B. 

356  BUCKLE  FROM  A  RUSSIAN  GRA  VE. 

holding  in  her  hand  a  silver  buckle  of  a  most  curious 
shape,  which  she  regarded  with  speechless  wonder. 

When  she  recovered  herself  a  little,  she  announced 
that  this  buckle  had,  indeed,  been  worn  by  her  father, 
with  many  other  decorations,  that  she  identified  this  par- 
ticular article  by  the  fact  that  the  point  of  the  pin  had 
been  carelessly  broken  off  by  herself  many  years  ago ; 
and  that,  according  to  universal  custom,  this,  with  all  his 
other  medals  and  crosses,  must  have  been  buried  with 
her  father's  body.  The  medal  to  which  this  buckle 
belongs,  was  one  granted  by  the  late  Czar  to  his  officers, 
after  the  Turkish  campaign  of  1828.  The  medals  were 
distributed  at  Bucharest,  and  a  number  of  the  officers 
had  buckles  similar  to  this  made  by  the  rude  silversmiths 
of  that  city.  Her  father  died  July  15th,  1873,  and  she, 
being  in  this  country,  could  not  attend  his  obsequies.  As 
to  the  authenticity  of  this  present,  so  mysteriously 
received,  she  possessed  ample  proof,  in  a  photographic 
copy  of  her  father's  oil  portrait,  in  which  this  very  buckle 
appears,  attached  to  its  own  ribbon  and  medal. 

It  will  be  imagined  that  I  felt  a  deep  anxiety  to  see 
the  picture  in  question,  and  later,  my  desire  was  gratified. 
In  this  chapter,  I  now  am  able  to  present  to  the  reader 
sketches  of  the  spirit's  present,  and  the  whole  decora- 
tion; the  former  copied  from  life,  the  latter  from  the 
photograph.  Both  are  drawn  larger  than  the  natural 
size,  and  the  inscription  on  the  medal  has  been  furnished 
by  Mme.  de  B.  herself.  Was  there  ever  a  "  manifesta- 
tion "  more  wonderful  than  this  ?  A  token  dug  by 
unknown  means  from  a  father's  grave  and  laid  in  his 
daughter's  hand,  five  thousand   miles   away,  across   an 

M£  SP/RITS  fi/?£S£/fr. 

TMEBVC/UFANDyttftfAl  fftm '7tf£ P0RTRA17* 

THE   KUCKLE   AND    MEDAL. 

TIMING  THE  SPIRITS.  359 

ocean!  A  jewel  from  the  breast  of  a  warrior  sleeping 
his  last  sleep  in  Russian  ground,  sparkling  in  the  candle- 
light in  a  gloomy  apartment  of  a  Vermont  farm-house  ! 
A  precious  present  from  the  tomb  of  her  nearest  and 
best  beloved  of  kin,  to  be  kept  as  a  perpetual  proof  that 
death  can  neither  extinguish  the  ties  of  blood  nor  long 
divide  those  who  were  once  united  and  desire  reunion' 
with  one  another ! 

I  kept  a  minute  of  the  time  in  William's  materializing 
circle  that  evening.  It  began  at  ten  minutes  of  seven, 
p.  m.,  and  closed  at  five  minutes  of  eight.  In  the  inter- 
vening sixty-five  minutes,  eleven  different  spirit-forms 
appeared.  Honto  remained  in  sight  five  minutes,  old  Mr. 
Brown  two  and  a  half  minutes,  Chester  Packard  eighteen 
seconds,  William — his  brother — seventeen  seconds.  The 
intervals  between  the  appearances  of  some  of  the  forms, 
'were  respectively  4  minutes  45  seconds,  3:10,  2:47,  I:I3> 
and  1  minute.  Mrs.  Eddy's  spirit  appeared  and  addressed 
us,  saying  some  friendly  words  to  me  personally,  from 
within  the  cabinet.  Her  last  sentences  grew  fainter  and 
fainter,  as  though  she  were  receding  from  us  farther  and 
farther,  until  her  voice  was  lost  in  the  distance. 

Among  the  most  noticeable  forms  to  present  themselves, 
was  one  who  seemed  to  be  either  a  Hindoo  coolie  or  an 
Arab  athlete.  He  was  dark-skinned,  of  short  stature,  a 
lean,  wiry,  active  form,  with  no  more  superfluous  fat  on 
his  frame  than  has  a  greyhound  in  working  condition. 
The  artist,  writing  to  me  of  him,  says :  "  He  left  a  more 
vivid  impression  on  my  mind  than  any  other  spirit.  I 
can  see  him  now,  perfectly — long,  mere  bone  and  sinew, 
with  a  cat-like  suppleness.     For  dress,  a  closely-fitting 

360  ANOTHER  RUSSIAN  VISITOR. 

vest,  seemingly  cotton,  drawers  tucked  into  what  might 
have  been  socks  or  gaiters,  a  sash  about  his  loins,  and 
upon  his  head  a  dark  red  handkerchief." 

He  came  to  visit  Mme.  de  Blavatsky,  and  made  her  a 
profound  obeisance :  but  she  failed  to  recognize  him. 
Nevertheless,  she  showed  no  such  hesitancy  about  another 
of  her  visitors.  The  curtain  was  lifted,  and  out  stepped 
a  gentleman  of  so  marked  an  appearance  as  to  make  it 
absurd  to  imagine  that  William  Eddy  could  be  attempt- 
ing to  personate  a  character  in  this  instance.  He  was  a 
portly  personage,  with  an  unmistakable  air  of  high  breed- 
ing, dressed  in  an  evening  suit  of  black  cloth,  with  a 
frilled  white  shirt  and  frilled  wristbands.  About  his  neck 
he  wore  the  Greek  cross  of  St.  Anne,  attached  to  its 
appropriate  ribbon.  At  first  Mme.  de  B.  thought  that 
her  father  stood  before  her,  but,  as  the  figure  advanced 
another  step  or  two  towards  her,  thus  bringing  himself  to 
within  five  or  six  feet  of  where  she  sat  the  spirit  greeted 
her  in  the  Russian  language,  and  said  "  Djadja  "  (uncle), 
She  then  recognized  the  familiar  features  of  her  father's 
brother,  to  whom  he  bore  a  very  strong  resemblance  in 
life.  This  was  M.  Gustave  A.  Hahn,  late  President  of 
the  Criminal  Court  at  Grodno,  Russia,  which  dignified 
office  he  held  for  twelve  years.  This  gentleman,  who 
died  in  1861,  must  not  be  confounded  with  his  name- 
sake and  cousin,  Count  Gustave  Hahn,  the  Senator, 
who  is  living  in  St.  Petersburg  at  the  present  moment 

ARAK,    RUSSIAN,    AND    INDIAN. 

CHAPTER  XXIII. 

TESTS   CONTINUED. 

OF  all  Mr.  Crookes'  statements  concerning  his  three 
years'  experiences  with  the  spirit  "  Katie  King," 
none  excited  more  wonder  than  that  about  his 
being  allowed  to  cut  off  a  lock  of  her  hair.  The  very- 
idea  that  so  immaterial  a  thing  as  a  spirit — a  something 
less  substantial  than  the  very  wind  that  blows,  a  breath, 
a  hazy  vapor,  which,  even  when  seen  by  mortal  eye, 
has  seemed  no  more  solid  than  the  mist  of  morning — 
that  this  unsubstantial  nothing  should  not  only  be  able 
to  exert  dynamic  energies,  but  hand  over  to  the  bold 
philosopher  a  ringlet  cut  from  her  own  head,  as  a 
maiden  might  give  a  tress  to  her  lover,  was  on  its  face 
absurd.  But,  nevertheless,  it  was  true,  and  the  same 
favor  has  been  extended  to  several  others,  by  this  and 
other  spirits.  I  have  already  stated  that  I  saw  the 
"  Witch  of  the  Mountain  "  give  one  of  her  grizzly  locks 
to  Judge  Bacon,  and  the  incident  related  above,  in  this 
chapter,  tells  of  seven  different  keepsakes  of  the  same 
kind  being  given  by  the  spirits,  at  one  time,  to  one 
person.  The  artist  in  one  of  his  sketches  represents  old 
Mrs.  Cleveland  in  the  act  of  cutting  a  lock  from  Honto's 

364  UONTO  'S  HAIR  EXAMINED. 

head.  I  know  of  at  least  three  different  persons  to 
whom  Honto  gave  pieces  of  her  own  hair,  a  portion  of 
one  of  which  I  have  now  in  my  possession.  It  is  of  a 
stiff,  wiry  texture,  entirely  free  from  gray,  and  has  been 
fully  identified,  by  an  expert  of  twenty  years'  experi- 
ence in  the  manufacture  of  hair  goods,  as  of  Indian 
origin.     His  affidavit  is  as  follows: 

State  of  Vermont,      ) 
County  of  Rutland,    j     ' 

Henry  Williams,  being  duly  sworn,  deposes  and  says  that  he  is  a 
native  of  New  York  city,  a  hair-worker  by  trade.     That  he  worked 

four  years   for   Raufuss,  of    Chatham  street,  New  York,   the 

largest  hair-manufacturer  in  the  said  city :  and  ten  years  for  Edward 
Phalon,  also  of  the  said  city.  Altogether,  he  has  had  twenty  years 
experience  in  the  manufacture  of  hair,  and  is  so  familiar  with  the 
hair  of  various  kinds  used  in  the  trade,  as  to  be  able  to  detect  the 
nationality  and  quality  of  any  specimen  exhibited  to  him. 

And  deponent,  having  been  allowed  to  examine  a  specimen  of 
hair  shown  him  by  Mr.  H.  S.  Olcott,  and  designated  as  "  No.  I," 
declares  the  same  to  be  of  Indian  origin,  and  from  its  length  and 
quality,  must  have  been  taken  from  the  head  of  a  squaw.  The 
sample  marked  "  No.  2,"  deponent  cut  himself  from  the  head  of  an 
Indian  squaw  in  the  city  of  Albany,  N.  Y.,  on  the  T6th  instant,  at 
the  request  of  said  Olcott,  for  purposes  of  comparison.  Specimen 
"  No.  3,"  deponent  says  is  American  hair.  The  specimen  "  No.  1  " 
he  would  know  anywhere  as  Indian,  and  he  cannot  be  mistaken  as 
to  the  fact.  Henry  Williams. 

Witness :  M.  L.  Salsbury, 

State  of  Vermont,    ) 
County  of  Rutland,  )     ' 

Personally  appeared  Henry  Williams,  of  Rutland,  County  of  Rut- 
land, State  of  Vermont,  to  me  known,  and  made  oath  to  the  above 
affidavit,  this  gth  day  of  December,  1874. 

G.  R.  Bottum,  Notary  Public. 

The  "  Specimen  No.  1  "  referred  to,  is  the  lock  pur- 
porting to  have  been  cut  from  Honto's  head.  "  Speci- 
men No.  2  "  was  cut  by  Mr.  Williams,  at  my  request, 
from  the  head  of  an  Indian  woman,  who  lives,  during 

A  CLAIRVOYANT  INSPECTS  IT.  365 

the  winter  months  in  Albany,  N.  Y.,  and  in  summer 
goes  into  camp  with  her  tribe.  "Specimen  No.  3" 
was  cut  by  me  from  William  Eddy's  head.  I  submitted 
the  first  and  third  specimens  to  the  expert  without 
explanation,  and  his  judgment  was  given  upon  them 
immediately  after  they  came  into  his  hands.  When  he 
pronounced  No.  1  Indian  hair,  I  tried  to  discourage 
the  idea,  by  suggesting  that  it  was  taken  from  some 
old  wig,  or  from  the  forelock  of  a  colt's  head,  but  he 
persisted,  and  said  he  would  make  his  affidavit  to  the 
fact  of  its  real  origin,  in  any  court,  at  any  time. 

I  may  also  mention  the  rather  interesting  circum- 
stance, that,  a  few  days  since,  I  handed  this  Honto  hair 
to  a  boy  clairvoyant,  fourteen  years  of  age,  and  the  son 
of  a  physician,  who  instantly  said :  "  Why,  this  hair 
came  from  a  spirit's  head  !"  I  said:  "  Nonsense !  How 
could  I  get  hair  from  a  spirit's  head?"  to  which  he 
replied:  "I  don't  know;  but  this  did  come  from  a 
spirit ;  and  there  she  is,  in  that  room,  smiling  at  me, 
and  holding  her  hair  out  for  me  to  compare  this  with. 
It's  the  same,  identical  hair."  I  said  :  "  I  see  no  spirit. 
If  she  is  here,  ask  her  name."  The  lad  conversed  with 
great  earnestness  with  the  invisible  presence,  and  finally 
said :  "  Pahontus  ? — Pahotus  ? — what  do  you  say  it  is  ? 
Ah  !  yes — Honto — that's  it.  She  says  it  is  Honto.  She 
gave  it  to  another  man,  and  he  gave  it  to  you."  Now, 
I  had  not  mentioned  a  word  concerning  the  hair  to  the 
boy,  or  any  one  else  in  the  room ;  in  fact,  I  had  never 
exchanged  a  word  with  him  before ;  the  hair  was  in 
my  locket,  and  taken  out  and  handed  to  him  without 
comment.     The   theory  of  mind-reading  is  sufficient, 

366  BELL  RUNG  UNDER  GLASS. 

perhaps,  to  account  for  the  incident;  but  as  it  is 
interesting  in  this   connection,  I  relate  it. 

Another  of  the  series  of  mechanical  experiments 
attempted  by  me  was  suggested  by  Mr.  Crookes'  first 
article  in  his  Quarterly.  He  said:  "The  Spiritualist 
tells  of  rooms  and  houses  being  shaken  even  to  injury 
by  superhuman  power.  The  man  of  science  merely 
asks  for  a  pendulum  to  be  set  vibrating  when  it  is  in  a 
glass-case  and  supported  on  solid  masonry." 

It  occurred  to  me,  that  in  the  absence  of  the  means 
to  try  so  conclusive  an  experiment  as  this,  I  might  at 
least  get  the  spirits  to  ring  a  bell  under  a  glass  cover, 
and  I  was  promised  that  this  should  be  done.  Accord- 
ingly, on  the  evening  of  October  12th,  in  the  light- 
circle  that  followed  William's  materializing  seance,  I 
placed  my  small  table-gong  upon  a  tambourine,  and 
inverted  a  tumbler  over  it.  I  was  not  allowed  to  hold 
the  tambourine  myself,  and  so,  in  my  eyes,  all  value  in 
the  experiment  as  a  scientific  test  was  destroyed. 
William  Eddy  took  my  place,  and  I  was  asked  to  step 
a  little  back.  The  light  was  then  ordered  to  be  lowered, 
and  we  waited  for  some  minutes  in  silence.  At  length 
I  heard  a  faint  sound  as  of  the  bell  struck  inside  the 
tumbler.  It  was  almost  inaudible,  but  still  an  unmis- 
takable sound,  and  while  we  listened  it  was  repeated 
twice  almost  as  feebly.  But  finally  the  little  bell  rang 
out  twice  so  that  all  could  hear  it,  and  all  agreed  that 
the  sound  came  from  within  the  tumbler. 

This  inconclusive  result  of  what  should  have  been 
an  interesting  experiment,  is  of  a  piece  with  many 
things  that  happened  to  me  in  the  course  of  my  long 

MY  POSITION  IN  THE  EDD  Y  TAMIL  Y.      367 

and  wearisome  investigation  at  the  Eddy  house.  So  far 
from  the  importance  of  my  labor  being  recognized, 
and  all  reasonable  facilities  afforded,  I  was  kept  con- 
stantly at  a  distance,  as  though  I  were  an  enemy 
instead  of  an  unprejudiced  observer.  As  to  the  family 
realizing  any  feeling  of  gratitude  for  my  disinterested 
defence  of  their  character  before  the  public,  the  idea 
apparently  never  crossed  their  minds.  On  the  con- 
trary, I  was  constantly  made  to  feel  that  my  toleration 
as  a  member  of  the  household  was  a  favor  for  which  I 
should  be  grateful,  and  all  the  kind  and  polite  treat- 
ment I  could  give  them,  individually  and  collectively, 
scarcely  availed  to  make  them  grant  me  one  favor 
more  than  they  bestowed  upon  any  visitor.  Other 
persons  of  both  sexes,  strangers  to  them,  were  at 
different  times  permitted  to  sit  close  to  the  platform, 
upon  it,  and  within  two  feet  of  the  cabinet  door ;  to 
shake  hands  with  Honto,  to  dance  with  her,  to  look 
into  her  very  eyes,  feel  her  hair,  and  measure  heights 
with  her,  while  I  never  enjoyed  one  of  these  favors.  I 
never  had  a  private  seance  under  test  conditions,  and  a 
dozen  simple  but  crucial  tests,  reflecting  in  nowise 
upon  the  honor  of  the  mediums,  but  calculated  to 
place  them  in  an  honorable  light,  and  satisfy  the  most 
doubting  skeptic  of  the  genuineness  of  the  phenomena, 
were  not  even  mentioned  by  me,  for  fear  that  I  might 
get  my  dismissal  before  my  work  was  done. 

It  was  this  state  of  things  that  kept  me  in  that  gloomy 
house,  amid  such  unpleasant  conditions,  two  months, 
to  get  what  I  might  and  ought  to  have  secured  in  two 
weeks.     I  stayed  and  bore  everything  because,  having 

368  NO  FA  VORS  SHO  WN  ME. 

once  undertaken  to  accomplish  a  given  thing,  it  was  not 
my  nature  to  abandon  the  task  while  life  remained. 

I  have  said  this  much  in  no  spirit  of  complaint,  but 
only  from  a  sense  of  justice  to  all  concerned  ;  to  myself, 
because  the  public  should  know  that  I  have  neither  been 
favored  beyond  others  nor  have  any  personal  preferences 
to  gratify  in  saying  what  has  been  said  in  favor  of  these 
Eddy  boys  ;  to  the  mediums,  because  it  seems  to  me  that 
if  they  were  nothing  but  common  tricksters,  their  first 
impulse,  would  have  been  to  curry  favor  with  me  and  try 
to  influence  the  tone  of  my  writing.  I  have  also  been 
prompted  to  this  explanation,  by  the  fact  that  various 
newspapers  have  given  their  readers  to  understand  that  a 
greater  reliance  might  be  placed  upon  my  story,  from  the 
fact  that  my  intimacy  with  the  Eddys,  and  the  superior 
facilities  granted  me,  put  me,  as  it  were,  inside  the  ring, 
and  I  had  seen,  heard,  and  felt  more  than  any  ordinary 
observer  could  possibly  have  done.  For  what  I  have 
seen,  heard,  or  felt,  I  am  in  nowise  indebted  to  the  favor 
of  the  Eddy  family,  but  simply  to  fair  natural  powers  of 
observation,  supplemented  by  a  sort  of  grim,  bull-dog 
stubbornness,  and  a  determination  to  do  impartial  justice, 
that  kept  me  at  a  post  I  had  once  assumed. 

But  it  affords  me  pleasure  whenever  I  receive  evidence 
from  disinterested  persons  that  is  corroborative  of  the 
genuineness  of  the  Eddy  manifestations.  I  am  more 
than  willing  to  have  my  personal  prejudices  against  the 
brothers,  as  individuals,  overborne  by  proofs  of  their  real 
mediumistic  powers.  Of  such  a  nature,  is  the  following 
certificate  from  a  well-known  architect  of  Hartford,  who 
visited  Chittenden  a  twelvemonth  since : 

WHA  T  A  HARTFORD  MAN  SA  W.  369 

Hartford,  Conn.,  December  24th,  1874. 
Col.  H.  S.  Olcott, 

Dear  Sir — In  answer  to  your  request  for  a  statement  from  me  of 
what  I  saw  at  the  Eddys',  in  Chittenden,  I  have  this  to  say : 

My  first  and  only  visit  to  those  remarkable  mediums,  was  in  the 
fall  of  1873.  I  attended  the  light  and  dark  seances  held  during 
three  evenings.  The  facilities  afforded  me  for  close  and  careful 
investigation  were  unusually  good.  It  was  my  privilege  to  examine 
Wm.  Eddy  on  two  occasions  before  he  entered  the  "  cabinet,"  which 
was  an  old  closet,  off  the  south  room,  down  stairs,  and  under  the 
stairs.  In  my  examination  of  Mr.  Eddy's  person,  just  before  his 
entering  the  closet,  I  went  as  far  as  a  decent  regard  for  propriety 
would  permit.  I  removed  his  coat,  unbuttoned  his  vest,  placed  my 
hands  beneath  the  waistband  of  his  pants,  and  fully  satisfied  myself 
that  all  the  clothing  he  had  about  him  was  his  usual  farm  dress — a 
brown  check  gingham  shirt,  coat,  pants,  and  vest.  Any  person  after 
making  such  an  examination  as  I  did,  could  have  but  one  conclusion, 
and  that,  that  Wm.  Eddy  could  not  possibly  have  concealed  about 
his  person,  the  different  costumes  that  were  afterwards  seen  during 
the  seances.  The  closet  being  examined  before  and  after  the  seance, 
and  nothing  found  but  its  bare  walls,  the  idea  of  trickery  on  the  part 
of  Wm.  Eddy  was  too  silly  to  be  entertained  for  one  moment. 

The  closet  has  been  often  described  by  different  writers.  I  did 
not  measure  it,  but  judge  its  size  to  be  4  by  8  feet.  It  was  evidently 
plastered  when  the  house  was  built,  rather  coarsely  done  (the  marks 
of  the  trowel  being  plainly  seen),  flush  down  with  the  base  boards, 
which  were  perhaps  7  inches  wide.  The  floor  was  the  same  undis- 
turbed old  work,  put  down  when  the  house  was  erected,  To  talk  of 
panels,  traps,  or  possible  openings  where  a  confederate  could  assist, 
is  worse  than  nonsense  ;  nothing  of  the  kind  could  possibly  be  there 
without  being  detected  by  an  experienced  architect  like  myself.  If 
costumes  were  taken  in  there,  it  must  have  been  when  from  fifteen 
to  twenty  individuals  were  looking  at  the  door,  and  as  I  sat  directly 
opposite  and  within  ten  feet  of  it,  I  can  safely  say  that  such  a  thing 
was  impossible.  The  different  costumes  seen  during  the  three 
evenings  of  my  stay,  would  have  filled  a  large  sized  Saratoga  trunk. 
The  first  object  seen  each  night,  and  that  in  less  than  ten  seconds 
after  Wm.  Eddy  had  disappeared  behind  the  shawl  which  hung  over 
the  door,  was  a  clean,  white,  naked  hand  and  arm,  thrust  out  from 
behind  the  shawl.  It  was  evidently  a  lady's  hand  and  arm.  Honto 
made  her  appearance  next,  on  each  evening.  The  second  night  she 
lighted  a  friction  match  which  had  been  placed  in  the  closet  for  her 
use,  and  held  the  blazing  stick  directly  before  her  face  so  that  every 
person  in  the  room  saw  her  Indian  face  with  perfect  distinctness. 

370  CLOSE  OBSERVATION. 

After  retiring  behind  the  shawl,  an  Indian  woman  next  appeared, 
dressed  entirely  different  and  in  the  exact  costume  of  the  squaws  of 
the  St.  Regis  tribe.  This  was  a  striking  and  sudden  change,  and  a 
very  remarkable  incident  withal.  The  dress  was  a  blue  petticoat  or 
underskirt,  with  a  yellow  border  around  the  bottom,  and  a  yellow 
stripe  woven  into  the  cloth,  six  or  seven  inches  above  ;  moccasins, 
leggins,  and  the  usual  tape  windings  around  and  above  the  ankles, 
were  all  to  be  seen.  It  was  not  Honto,  but  some  other  Indian 
maiden.  The  change  of  costume  must  have  been  made  in  less  than 
one  minute,  if  it  was  a  trick.  The  forms  of  men  neatly  dressed  in 
black,  came  out,  with  their  white  linen  bosoms  and  cuffs  plain 
enough  to  be  seen,  to  satisfy  all  that  they  were  not  Wm.  Eddy,  who- 
ever else  they  might  be.  One  person,  nearly  half  a  head  taller  than 
"Wm.  Eddy,  came  out,  and  was  recognized  by  several  people  from 
Rutland.  I  saw  the  features  plainly  of  several  persons,  who,  had  I 
ever  known  them,  I  could  have  recognized  at  once ;  my  position 
being  so  near,  and  being  fortunately  blest  with  good  eyes. 

In  Horatio's  light  seance,  it  was  my  privilege  to  sit  for  the  ring 
test.  I  positively  know  the  ring  was  in  a  gentleman's  hand  in  front 
of  me,  when  I  prepared  for  the  test  by  taking  Horatio's  right  hand 
in  my  right,  and  his  left  hand  in  ?}iy  left  (I  am  particular  about  this, 
for  the  reason  that  I  have  seen  the  performance  differently  described). 
The  gentleman  holding  the  ring  passed  it  up,  and  I  saw,  while  hold- 
ing both  of  Horatio's  hands,  a  hand  above  the  curtain  take  the  ring 
from  the  gentleman,  and  with  a  sudden  shudder  on  the  part  of 
Horatio,  the  ring  flew  from  his  right  arm,  on  to  mine  with  such 
force,  that  it  hurt  me  severely  ,  as  it  struck  the  joint  of  my  thumb  in 
passing  over.  A  guitar  lying  in  my  lap,  the  strings  all  in  sight,  and 
a  lamp  burning  on  the  table  within  three  feet  of  myself,  played  a 
correct  and  lively  accompaniment  to  several  dance  tunes,  whistled 
by  a  party  present.  The  head  of  the  instrument  was  held  by 
Horatio's  muffled  hand;  but  the  strings  were  struck  in  the  usual 
place,  directly  over  the  hole  in  the  body  of  the  instrument.  I  could 
plainly  distinguish  that  as  the  point  of  greatest  vibration,  and  also 
see  flashes  of  electrical  light  on  the  strings. 

I  saw  an  iron  or' steel  ring  fall  from  Horatio's  arm  in  the  broad 
light.  His  arms  were  bound  tightly  behind  his  back.  The  ring 
was  most  assuredly  on  his  arm,  or  else  a  dozen  witnesses  didn't  know 
what  they  saw.  A  sudden  shudder  came  through  him,  but  no  per- 
ceptible motion  of  his  hands  or  arms,  and  the  ring  fell  upon  the 
floor,  and  rolled  some  distance  away.  These  are  a  few  of  the  essen- 
tial points  I  fully  and  distinctly  remember. 

Truly  yours,  S.  W.  Lincoln. 

One  of  the  sketches  upon  the  opposite  page  represents 

HON  TO  PLAYS  THE  ORGAN.  373 

Mme.  de  Blavatsky  playing  the  parlor-organ,  with  Honto 
as  a  spectator  at  very  close  quarters. 

Among  the  latest  and  most  startling  phases  of  the  mani- 
festations, is  the  actual  playing  upon  a  parlor  organ  by 
the  materialized  spirit-girl  Honto,  herself.  The  first 
instance  of  the  kind  occurred  on  the  evening  of  October 
27th.  Mr.  Ralph,  of  Utica,  Mr.  Pritchard,  of  Albany, 
and  old  Mrs.  Cleveland,  were  all  sitting  on  the  platform, 
that  evening,  but  were  requested  to  take  their  seats  among 
the  audience,  and  the  benches  were  ordered  pushed  a 
little  farther  back  than  usual.  Honto  then  reappeared 
(she  had  been  out  before  doing  some  of  her  usual  tricks), 
examined  the  instrument  with  attention,  and,  with  one 
foot  working  the  pedal,  played  a  few  notes.  She  then 
retired  to  the  cabinet,  reappeared,  and,  taking  a  chair  that 
Mr.  Ralph  placed  for  her,  sat  down  and  played  a  wild, 
disconnected  melody  as  an  accompaniment  to  her  voice. 

This  being  her  first  attempt  at  singing,  the  effect  was 
weird  in  the  extreme.  Her  notes  were  harsh,  wailing, 
and  discordant,  and  it  was  almost  enough  to  freeze  one's 
blood  to  hear  it.  She  repeated  this  performance  four 
times  that  evening,  and  it  has  been  a  feature  of  each 
night's  seance  up  to  the  present  time.  On  the  evening 
of  the  21st  instant,  I  saw  her  dance,  play  the  organ,  smoke 
a  cigar,  make  a  lot  of  shawls  and  tissues,  dance  a  jig  with 
Horatio,  take  a  bracelet  from  a  lady  visitor  as  a  present, 
and  heard  her  sing.  Surely,  enough  for  one  spirit  to  do 
at  one  performance  ;  a  leading  woman  in  a  variety  show 
could  hardly  be  asked  for  more ! 

CHAPTER  XXIV. 

PSEUDO-INVESTIGATORS. 

THE  first  time  I  attended  a  dark-circle  at  the  Eddys' 
I  contracted  a  feeling  of  real  affection  for  the  little 
child  spirit  (real  or  imaginary)  known  as  "  May- 
flower." Her  music  was  so  sweet  and  full  of  expression, 
her  poetical  attempts  evinced  so  tender  a  regard  for  the 
beautiful  in  nature,  her  conversation  was  so  child-like 
and  innocent,  she  seemed  actuated  by  so  strong  a  senti- 
ment of  charity  and  broad  compassion  for  all  who  came, 
that  I  could  not  help  loving  her — or,  at  least,  the  ideal 
child  whom  I  pictured  to  myself  as  standing  in  our 
presence  in  the  darkened  chamber. 

I  think  that  a  love  of  children  and  all  their  ways  is 
one  of  the  strongest  traits  of  my  disposition,  and  it  may 
be  well  that  in  this  matter  of  Mayflower's  identity  I 
allowed  myself  to  become  the  willing  dupe  of  my  imagin- 
ation. Possibly  there  is  no  such  creature  as  she,  and  her 
voice,  her  speech,  and  her  sentiments  are  only  parts  of  a 
clever  imposture.  I  have  never  seen  her,  nor  felt  more 
than  her  hand  (or  a  hand  of  the  size  that  I  should 
suppose  such  a  child  as  she  might  have),  and  I  have  no 
proof  to  cite  in  support  of  her  individual  existence, 
beyond   the  certificate  of  the  two  little   girls,  already 

HOW  IS  IT  DONE?  375 

published.  I  have  no  conclusive  evidence  to  offer  a 
scientific  investigator,  that  she  ever  spoke  a  word,  or  drew 
a  breath,  or  took  a  step ;  and  if  my  reason  could  be 
satisfied  upon  certain  points,  I  would  be  ready  to  admit 
that  every  feature  of  these  dark-circles  may  be  a  trick. 

Before  doing  so,  however,  I  should  demand  to  know 
how  one  man,  even  with  both  hands  untied,  and  free  to 
move  about,  could  play  upon  the  violin,  guitar,  con- 
certina, mouth-harmonicon,  triangle,  and  flute,  and  ring 
several  bells,  all  at  the  same  moment;  how  he  could 
imitate  the  whistling  of  the  wind,  the  splash  of  waves, 
the  sucking  of  a  pump,  and  other  sounds,  simultaneously 
with  the  playing  of  music  of  various  instruments ;  how  he 
could  see  to  pick  up  articles  in  the  dark,  to  describe 
things  in  people's  pockets,  and  reach  a  particular  mouth 
or  cheek  to  kiss,  or  a  particular  hand  to  shake,  for  all 
these  things  are  done  in  Horatio  Eddy's  dark-circle. 
And  if  all  these  were  explained,  I  should  still  want  to 
have  the  episode  of  Madame  de  Blavatsky's  father's 
buckle  accounted  for.  I  am  ready  to  concede  that  the 
medium  may  slip  his  hands  out  of  his  bonds  and  go 
about  in  his  stocking  feet  in  the  dark,  strumming  instru- 
ments, pounding  tambourines,  and  touching  people ;  this 
has  been  done  before,  and  exposed  before. 

Some  (a  Boston  friend  of  mine  included),  even  say  that 
they  have  detected  Horatio  himself  at  the  game.  But 
that  explanation  does  not  cover  our  case,  for  it  does  not 
show  how  one  man  can  do  the  work  of  a  half  dozen  men, 
or  accomplish  such  a  miracle  as  that  of  the  buckle 
brought  from  the  Russian  grave.  Nor  does  it  show  how 
the  discordant  fiddle-scraping  and  nasal  singing  of  the 

376  LITTLE  MA  YFLO  WER. 

mediums,  can  be  transformed  into  the  fine  execution  and 
artistic  coloring  of  the  music  of  the  unseen  violinist, 
flutist,  accordeonist,  and  harmonicon  player  of  the  dark- 
circles,  and  the  rich  soprano  and  alto  voices  that  some- 
times issue  from  William's  cabinet. 

Therefore,  until  the  desired  explanation  is  vouchsafed 
by  some  closer  reasoner  than  I,  I  will  leave  Horatio  to 
prowl  about  in  the  dark  and  play  tricks  if  he  will,  and 
hold  to  my  sweet  little  spirit  Mayflower — to  stand  as  an 
ideal  of  what  my  own  children  and  other  people's  chil- 
dren are  like,  in  the  other  and  brighter  world  to  which 
they  have  passed  on  before. 

To  resume,  then:  On  this  first  night,  she  said  to  me, 
that  if  I  would  get  her  some  ribbons,  she  would  make  me 
a  wreath,  such  as  she  had  braided  for  a  lady  visitor,  and 
which  I  had  admired.  On  my  way  to  New  York,  I  procured 
some  ribbons  of  three  colors,  in  Rutland,  and  sent  them 
up  to  Chittenden  to  the  care  of  a  Mr.  Luther  B.  Hunt, 
of  St.  Albans,  a  friend  of  Horatio,  who  was  visiting  at 
the  homestead.  The  parcel  and  my  note,  he  says,  he  put 
in  the  pocket  of  his  coat,  which  hung  in  his  bedroom, 
intending  to  take  the  ribbons  with  him  to  the  next  dark- 
circle,  and  hold  the  little  maid  to  the  fulfillment  of  her 
promise  to  me.  But  the  same  day,  William  being,  as  he 
usually  is,  "under  influence,"  said  :  "Mr.  Hunt,  if  you 
will  go  up-stairs  and  look  in  your  pocket  you  will  find 
something."  Mr.  Hunt  went  and  searched  his  coat,  but 
found  nothing,  and,  returning,  reported  his  ill-luck.  But 
William  said  that  he  had  not  looked  in  the  right  place, 
it  was  in  the  vest-pocket  where  the  articles  were.  And  in 
the  vest-pocket,  sure  enough,  he  found  two  wreaths,  one 

SPIRIT  WREA  TH-BRAIDING. 

377 

of  which  was  for  me,  and  the  other,  for  another  gentleman. 
The  next  evening  there  was  a  dark-circle,  and  May- 
flower, addressing  Mr.  Hunt,  said  that  he  had  overlooked 
the  note  for  me  that  she  had  left  with  the  wreath. 
Another  search  of  the  vest  disclosed  a  tiny  note,  written 
on  a  small  square  of  thin  paper,  and  being  to  the  effect 
that  I  was  her  dear  friend,  and  she  thanked  me  for  my 
kind  expressions,  and  hoped  I  would  keep  the  wreath  to 
remember  her  by.     So,  the  least  I  could  do  was  to  have 

JYREAT/t 

the  artist  make  a  sketch  of  her  present,  that  all  the 
readers  may  see  what  sort  of  braiding  they  do  in  the 
other  world  in  the  present  year  of  grace. 

It  struck  me  a  few  days  afterward  that,  as  Mayflower 
was  in  so  complaisant  a  mood,  she  might  not  be  unwilling 
to  give  me  another  specimen  of  her  skill,  accompanied 
with  something  of  a  test ;  so,  putting  the  wreath  in  my 
pocket,  the  next  time  a  dark-circle  was  to  be  held,  I  said 
nothing  of  my  intention  to  any  one.  After  the  light  was 
extinguished,  and  the  room  was  so  dark  that  one  could 

not  see  a  hand  held  close  to  one's  eyes,  I  took  out  my 
13 

378  THE  LOST  WREATH. 

wreath  and  quietly  laid  it  in  the  lap  of  the  lady  sitting 
beside  me.      Presently  Mayflower's  voice   said :    "  Oh  ! 

Mrs. ,   what   have   you   got   in  your  lap  ?     It's  my 

wreath  !  Mr.  Olcott,  you  want  me  to  braid  it  over  again 
for  you  ?  "  I  said  I  did,  in  another  pattern  and  with  the 
ribbons  passed  through  some  perforated  sea-shells,  such 
as  I  had  heard  she  had  used  a  long  time  before  for 
another  friend  of  hers.  She  replied  that  she  had  no 
shells  with  her  at  the  moment,  but  she  would  get  some 
and  re-braid  my  wreath  and  return  it  to  me  the  next  time 
we  met.  Although  no  one  had  known  of  my  purpose,  and 
the  wreath  had  been  discovered  by  Mayflower  lying  in 
the  lap  of  a  person  who  did  not  know  what  I  had  placed 
there  in  the  dark,  I  thought  it  better  to  make  assurance 
doubly  sure,  so  I  reached  over,  and  taking  the  wreath 
from  the  lap  of  the  lady  on  my  left,  /  dropped  it  on  the 
floor  at  my  right,  where  no  one  but  myself  knew  it  to  be, 
and  no  one  who  could  not  see  in  the  dark  could  discover 
it  to  pick  it  up,  But  when  a  light  was  struck  soon  after, 
the  wreath  was  go?ie.  It  was  returned  to  me  on  the  evening 
of  the  26th  of  September,  under  curious  circumstances. 
There  was  a  great  power  manifested  in  the  dark-circle 
that  evening.  The  Indian  dance  was  given  with  yells 
that  made  some  of  the  timid  ones  shiver  with  apprehen- 
sion, and  the  dancers  stamped  on  the  floor  until  it  seemed 
.as  if  they  must  go  through  into  the  dining-room  below. 
Then  "  George  Dix  "  whistled,  and  played  a  solo  on  the 
fife,  and  gave  us  "  The  Storm  at  Sea ;  "  and  Mayflower 
elicited  unbounded  applause  by  her  accordeon  and  har- 
monicon  playing  with  the  bell  accompaniments,  which 
you  may  be  sure  was  listened  to  in  profound  silence.     I 

A  DARK-CIRCLE  EXPERIENCE.  379 

have  seen  no  such  description  of  this  spirit-music,  as  that 
given  by  Thackeray's  friend,  the  late  Robert  Bell,  in  the 
Cornhill  Magazine  for  August,  i860  He  is  describing  a 
dark-circle  of  Mr.  Home's,  at  which  an  accordeon  was 
played  : 

"We  listened  with  suspended  breath.  The  air  was  wild  and  full 
of  strange  transitions,  with  a  wail  of  pathetic  sweetness  running 
through  it.  The  execution  was  no  less  remarkable  for  its  delicacy, 
than  for  its  power.  When  the  notes  swelled  in  some  of  the  bold 
passages,  the  sound  rolled  through  the  room  with  an  astounding 
reverberation,  then,  gently  subsiding,  sank  into  a  strain  of  divine 
tenderness." 

Mayflower's  playing  is  not  always  alike,  sometimes 
•being  less  sweet  and  expressive  than  others ;  but  I  have 
heard  it  on  occasions  when  the  above  eloquent  descrip- 
tion would  hardly  exaggerate  its  effect  upon  the  audience. 

After  the  concert,  "  George  Dix  "  requested  Joe.  Rugg, 
the  faithful  farmer  of  the  family,  to  strike  a  light  and 
bring  a  small  stand  and  a  glass  of  water.  These  direc- 
tions were  complied  with,  and  the  water  being  placed  upon 
the  stand,  the  light  was  extinguished  again,  and,  for  a 
moment,  we  were  in  total  darkness.  But  soon  the  candle 
was  re-lighted,  and  we  discovered  the  glass  of  water 
inverted  upon  the  stand,  the  water  within  the  glass,  and 
nothing  over  the  mouth  to  keep  it  in.  The  light  was  put 
out  again,  and  when  again  called  for,  the  stand  was  upside 
down  on  the  floor,  and  the  tumbler,  with  its  contents, 
right  side  up,  balanced  upon  the  point  of  one  of  the  legs. 

The  light  was  extinguished  for  the  fourth  time  and 
re-lighted,  and  then  what  should  I  see  but  the  tumbler  on 
the  floor,  at  my  feet,  the  water  all  gone,  and  my  wreath, 
re-braided  and  decorated  with  sea-shells,  inside,  as  dry  as 
a  bone  !    The  artist,  on  page  377,  gives  us  a  sketch  of  the 

380  THE  KNOWING  ONES  AGAIN. 

new  wreath,  and  in  the  series  of  four  small  pictures,  we 
have  the  successive  stages  of  this  manifestation  depicted. 
With  characteristic  irreverence,  I  suggested  that  the  water 
had  disappeared  down  the  medium's  throat,  but  George 
Dix  told  us  that  it  had  been  dissipated  into  a  fine  mist, 
and  was  held  suspended  in  the  atmosphere  of  the  room. 

I  wish  that  some  of  the  wiseacres  who  have  accounted 
for  the  appearance  of  child-forms  in  the  materializing 
circles  of  William  Eddy,  on  the  theory  that  they  were 
pillows,  could  only  have  seen  a  few  of  them  before  show- 
ing their  ignorance  so  painfully.  I  wish  that  my  witty, 
fellow  Lotos  Eater,  the  Hon.  Robert  B.  Roosevelt,  had 
taken  the  trouble  to  visit  Chittenden,  before  putting  him- 
self on  record  as  such  a  hasty  generalizer  upon  the  spirit- 
ualistic phenomena,  as  he  does  in  a  recently  published 
letter  to  The  Daily  Graphic.  Hear  him  talk  about 
William  Eddy  and  these  baby  spirits  : 

"  No  one  feels  like  laughter  at  the  sight  of  the  devoted  wife 
hungering  to  find  in  the'fantastic  figure,  donned  in  dim  twilight  by 
some  sham  medium,  the  beloved  shape  of  her  dead  husband,  or  in 
the  agonized  mother  longing  to  recognize,  in  the  painted  knees  of  a 
charlatan,  exhibited  in  the  same  darkness,  the  rosy  cheeks  of  her 
darling,  gone  from  her  forever.  We  cannot  laugh  at  these  exhibitions 
of  wifely  or  maternal  love,  but  we  should  scorn  and  denounce  the 
impostors  who  make  a  living  by  playing  on  these  noblest  affections 
of  human  nature." 

Painted  knees,  quotha!  William  Eddy's  painted 
knees  !  Why,  can  a  man's  knees  walk  detached,  and 
say  6  Papa  "  and  "  Mamma,"  and  "  I  am  happy,"  and 
throw  kisses  to  us,  and  courtesy,  and  all  that  sort  of 
thing?  Could  they,  even  if  they  were  painted 
"  dunduckety  and  mud-color,  edged  with  sky-blue 
scarlet  ?  "    Can  a  man  of  179  pounds,  and  five  feet  nine 

TABLE  AND   CLASS. 

j       IGNORANCE  AND  PREJUDICE  OF  WRITERS.   383 

inches,  dressed  to  represent  a  young  girl  with  bare 
neck  and  arms,  a  weight  of  120  pounds,  and  a  height  of, 
say,  five  feet  one  inch,  walk  up  and  down  the  stage, 
fondling  his  own  knee  as  if  it  were  a  baby,  and  making 
it  stick  simulated  thumbs  into  an  imaginary  mouth, 
and  pass  false  chubby  arms  around  his  neck,  and  move 
them  about? 

We  had  one  dose,  recently,  from  a  pseudo-investiga- 
tor, in  a  puerile  explanation  of  phenomena  he  never 
saw,  by  the  application  of  a  theory  that  wouldn't  even 
fit  the  few  things  he  did  see.  Let  us  be  spared  a 
repetition.  If  certain  men  of  prominent  social,  political, 
or  professional  standing,  are  asked  what  they  think 
about  "  materialization,"  why  cannot  they  be  honest 
enough  to  say  they  know  nothing  about  it,  and  not 
put  themselves  up  for  the  ridicule  of  those  who  do  ? 

The  discovery  of  apparently  so  gross  a  fraud  as  the 
more  recent  of  the  "  Katie  King  "  materializations,  in 
Philadelphia,  in  the  presence  of  the  Holmes  mediums, 
even  if  real,  does  not  invalidate  one  single  genuine 
phenomenon  of  this  class.  Foolish  Editors,  anxious  to 
disbelieve  the  possibility  of  the  reappearance  of  the 
dead  in  materialized  form,  may  indulge  in  exhibitions 
of  premature  hilarity,  may  announce  the  exposure  of 
"this  latest  and  most  dangerous  humbug,"  and  vote 
the  spiritualistic  delusion  finally  and  effectually  dis- 
posed of,  but  their  ignorance  and  prejudice  plead  in 
their  behalf  for  lenity  of  judgment.  We  had  just  such 
behavior  from  them  in  1847,  when  self-sufficient  wise 
men  explained  away  the  Rochester  rappings  upon  the 
knee-cap  and  toe-joint  theory.     There  is  no  occasion 

384  EFFECT  OF  INVESTIGA  TIONS. 

to  doubt  that  this  recent  jubilation  will  result  in  the 
same  confusion  of  face  to  these  expounders  as  did  the 
other;  and  as  fifty  of  the  same  kind  have,  since  that  time. 

The  phenomena  of  modern  spiritualism  have  agitated 
society  for  more  than  a  quarter  of  a  century,  and  the 
interest  in  the  subject  is  tenfold  greater  to-day  than 
ever  before,  by  the  confession  of  its  bitterest  opponents, 
It  is  not  doubted  by  the  best  informed  investigators, 
that  the  very  persons  whose  trickery  is  claimed  to  have 
been  shown  up,  are  powerful  mediums.  Some  day  we 
will  see  a  new  principle  of  investigation  adopted, 
and  mediums  will  be  judged  as  such,  apart  from  their 
merits  or  demerits  as  individuals.  Then,  skeptics  and 
believers,  alike,  will  neither  be,  on  the  one  hand  elated, 
nor  on  the  other  depressed  by  the  discovery  that  all 
mediums  are  more  or  less  given  to  the  imitation  of  the 
genuine  phenomena  which  occur,  under  favorable 
conditions,  in  their  presence. 

Occupying,  as  I  do,  a  neutral  position  between  the 
two  classes,  I  am  both  surprised  and  amused  to  see 
how  they  are  affected  respectively,  by  each  new  revela- 
tion like  the  one  to  which  I  have  referred  above.  No 
one  should  undertake  the  difficult  work  of  investigating 
this  or  any  other  branch  of  knowledge,  unless  he  is 
able  to  view  the  whole  ground,  note  every  detail 
whether  favorable  or  unfavorable,  and  pursue  his  labors 
with  the  "  passionless  calm  of  science." 

The  ,  above  paragraphs  had  hardly  been  written, 
when  the  post  brought  me  a  letter  from  a  respected 
and  perfectly  trustworthy  correspondent  which  serves 
as  a  commentary  upon  my  remarks   concerning   the 

THE  HOLMES  PHENOMENA.  385 

probable  mediumship  of  the  Holmes'.    Says  the  writer: 

"  I  have  seen,  as  yet,  no  satisfactory  explanation  of  the  phenomena 
which  I  witnessed  (at  the  Holmes  seances,  last  summer.  H.  S.  O.) 
and  'till  I  do,  I  shall  not,  simply  because  I  cannot,  believe  them  to 
have  been  trickery.  Why  do  they  not  tell  us  who  the  John  King 
was,  whom  we  saw  standing  by  Katie's  side,  while  the  mediums  sat  with 
Mr.  Owen  and  myself,  holding  our  hands.  The  levitation  of  the  form 
of  "  Katie,"  which  I  saw,  was  not  simulated  by  getting  upon  a 
"  black  stool."  I  saw  distinctly  the  lower  limbs,  and  white,  bare 
feet,  moving  in  the  air,  as  if  the  form  were  partially  reclining.  Nor 
do  I  in  the  least  believe  that  the  apparent  dissolving  of  the  form 
was  produced  by  "black  cloths."  I  saw  too  much  that  is  not 
yet  accounted  for,  to  make  me  yield  up  my  confidence  in  its 
genuineness." 

At  this  present,  the  Holmeses  are  protesting  their 
veritable  mediumship.  It  is  a  pity  that  some  unbiased 
person  could  not  investigate  the  case  under  proper  test 
conditions.  It  seems  the  more  necessary,  since  in 
addition  to  all  other  sources  of  confusion,  cards  of  a 
very  contradictory  nature,  as  to  the  reality  of  the 
Holmes  phenomena,  from  Dr.  H.  T.  Child,  of  Philadel- 
phia, and  Gen.  F.  J.  Lippitt,  of  Boston,  have  j  ust  appeared 
in  the  Banner  of  Light.  The  latter  gentleman  is  the 
author  of  an  article  in  the  December  Galaxy  entitled 
"  Was  it  Katie  King  ? "  in  which  he  describes  a  number 
of  phenomena  which  appear  impossible  of  simulation. 
Among  these  may  be  mentioned  the  fact  that,  after  the 
face  of  the  supposed  materialized  Katie  King  had  been 
exposed  rather  longer  than  usual,  the  eyes  began  to 
sag,  and  appear  as  if  melting ;  but  upon  the  spirit's 
withdrawing  into  the  cabinet  for  a  minute  or  so,  she 
would  reappear  smiling,  and  with  her  features  per- 
fectly natural  again. 

Because  a  man  has  seen  some  tables  turn,  or  heard  a 

386  JOHN  BROUGHAM'S  VIEWS. 

few  raps,  or  caught  Foster,  or  Home,  or  the  Davenports, 
or  even  one  of  the  Eddys,  sometimes  playing  tricks  when 
.conditions  were  unfavorable  for  genuine  manifestations 
of  the  occult  force,  why  should  he  rush  pell-mell  into  the 
ditch  of  sweeping  conjecture,  and  besmear  such  reputa- 
tion as  he  may  have  for  impartiality,  acumen,  and 
thoroughness  ?  Fifty  or  fifty  thousand  cases  of  medium- 
istic  trickery  do  not  invalidate  a  solitary  genuine  fact. 

Dear  old  John  Brougham  has  turned  the  hose  of  his 
inspired  wrath  upon  the  fire  of  investigation  that  reddens 
the  whole  intellectual  horizon,  and  he  hopes  to  put  it  out 
by  declaring  that :  "  As  for  the  last  new,  childishly 
ridiculous  phase  of  the  prevailing  insanity,  '  materializa- 
tion,' it  is  so  gross  and  manifest  a  cheat,  that  one's 
common  sense  revolts  at  the  villainous  compound  of 
impudence  and  profanity;"  to  discuss  it  seriously  would 
be  a  waste  of  words !  "  I  see  the  dear  old  fellow  now,  at 
whist  in  the  Lotos  Club,  sipping  his  brandy  and  soda, 
and  uttering,  oj-e  rotundo,  this  grandiloquent  diatribe  ! 
But  it  will  not  avail.  People  of  pluck  and  intelligence 
are  not  to  be  diverted  from  their  hunt  after  the  truth,  by 
either  ridicule  or  invective. 

This  is  the  time  of  a  death-struggle  between  Religion 
and  Materialism.  The  gladiators  are  fighting  for  all  they 
hold  dear  in  the  way  of  opinion ;  they  waste  no  words, 
but  grip  each  other,  and  look  into  each  other's  eyes, 
each  watching  and  waiting  for  the  chance  to  hurl  the 
other  into  the  deep  abyss  of  oblivion.  It  is  too  late  to 
try  to  stop  this  issue  ;  it  is  here ;  we  are  in  its  midst ;  and 
that  is  why  people  will  hear  all  that  can  be  said  of  these 
Eddy  "  materializations,"  and  r*r  all  the  minor  phases  of 

THE  RETURNED  DARLING.  389 

this  wonderful  manifestation  from  the  other  world  to  this. 

Now,  if  either  of  my  esteemed  friends,  previously 
mentioned,  had  been  at  Chittenden  on  the  evening  of 
October  1st,  what  would  he  have  seen?  Through  the 
dim  twilight  of  the  circle-room  he  would  have  seen  upon 
the  platform  the  figure  of  a  woman  with  a  child  in  her 
arms.  He  would  have  seen  this  woman  in  white,  step 
forward  to  the  railing,  and  stand  there,  stroking  the 
baby's  head,  looking  towards  a  lady  in  the  audience,  and 
waiting  to  be  addressed.  He  would  have  seen  the  baby 
move  its  head  as  a  living  child  does,  and  the  woman  pat 
it)  and  apparently  smooth  its  soft  hair  as  a  mortal  woman 
would  a  mortal  child's,  to  keep  it  quiet.  He  would  have 
seen  a  group  so  real  that  all  preconceptions  about  painted 
knees  or  painted  anything  else  would  have  left  his  mind 
at  once,  and  he  would  have  sat  there,  as  we  did,  wonder- 
ing whence  these  forms  had  come  and  how  long  they 
would  tarry. 

And  then,  as  the  lady  spectator  caught  the  resemblance 
of  the  figure  to  her  dead  sister,  he  would  have  heard  a 
wail  break  from  that  mother's  heart,  and  her  imploring 
cry  to  be  allowed  to  go  up  and  embrace  the  darling  whom 
she  had  last  seen  in  its  coffin,  and  had  despaired  of  ever 
seeing  again.  If  his  eyes  were  not  by  this  time  moistened 
with  the  tears  of  human  sympathy,  as  John  Brougham's 
certainly  would  have  been,  he  would  then  have  seen  this 
spirit-woman  on  the  platform  kiss  the  babe  in  her  arms 
and  fondle  it,  and  hold  it  out  over  the  railing  towards  its 
mother,  to  give  assurance  that  it  was  in  good  hands,  and 
rejoice  her  heart  with  at  least  the  sight  of  her  child,  if 
she  might  not  take  it  to  her  bosom  and  cover  it  with 
"3* 

390         VALUE  OF  ONE  SATISFACTORY  TEST. 

kisses.  Heavens !  could  a  man  of  refined  feeling  witness 
such  a  scene  as  this,  not  an  uncommon  one  at  the  Eddys', 
and  not  rejoice  with  the  mother  over  the  finding  of  the 
lost  one,  and  grieve  with  her  when,  in  another  moment,  it 
passed  away  from  her  sight  into  that  world  of  shadows 
that  lies  as  a  borderland  between  us  and  eternity  ? 

Such  value  as  these  observations  of  mine  at  Chitten- 
den may  have,  is  largely  due  to  the  fact  that  they  are 
corroborative  of  the  experiments  of  Mr.  Crookes, 
under  strictly  test  conditions.  While  his  results  do 
not  strengthen  mine,  since  the  circumstances  surround- 
ing us  both  were  entirely  different,  and  inferior  in  my 
case  to  his,  yet  mine  do  his ;  for  I  have,  in  all  human 
probability,  witnessed  three  or  four  hundred  appear- 
ances of  spirit-forms,  similar  to  his  "  Katie  King,"  in 
the  solidity  of  their  bodies,  their  physical  movements, 
the  manner  of  their  appearance  and  disappearance,  and 
their  use  of  speech  and  display  of  mental  action.  If  in 
any  one  instance  I  could  have  seen  Honto  disappear 
under  test  conditions,  or,  when  she  was  outside  the 
cabinet,  have  been  allowed  to  see  William  Eddy  inside; 
or  if,  after  lining  the  cabinet  sides,  ceiling,  and  floor, 
with  some  impenetrable  fabric,  and  shutting  William 
in  in  such  a  way  that  he  could  not  possibly  have  walked 
out  without  my  knowing  it,  spirits  had  presented  them- 
selves to  my  view,  then  the  whole  of  the  other  three 
hundred  and  odd  apparitions  would  have  counted  on 
the  credit  side  of  my  balance  sheet,  with  the  Eddy 
mediums. 

In  my  own  mind,  I  am  satisfied  that  no  fraud  was 
perpetrated  by  William,  but  that  is  not  conviction 

A    VIE IV  FROM  THE  EDDYS'  STAND-POINT.     391 

based  upon  the  firm  rock  of  mathematical  demonstra- 
tion. It  is  a  sentiment,  not  an  axiom.  And  yet,  I  do 
not  know  that  I  can  blame  these  boys  for  acting  as  they 
did  towards  me.  I  must  not  judge  them  by  an  arbi- 
trary standard,  such  as  I  would  apply  to  my  own  case. 
I  can  put  myself  in  the  place  of  the  Eddy  family,  and 
see  that  if  a  stranger  whose  habits,  thoughts,  and  ways 
were  utterly  unlike  and  antipodal  to  mine,  were  to 
come,  unasked,  and  plant  himself  as  a  sort  of  sentinel 
to  watch  my  every  movement,  study  my  very  thoughts, 
scrutinize  my  slightest  action,  and  force  me  to  see  him 
on  the  alert,  by  day  and  night,  for  a  long  succession  of 
weeks,  I  should  feel  like  putting  him  out  of  the  win- 
dow, if  he  would  not  use  the  door  the  carpenter  made. 
I  don't  think  that  the  plea  that  it  was  all  for  the  good 
of  the  public,  and  in  the  interest  of  science,  would  make 
it  any  pleasanter  to  reflect  that  he  regarded  me  as  a 
liar  and  cheat,  until  I  had  proved  to  his  satisfaction 
that  I  was  not.  This,  if  I  were  ever  so  honest ;  while, 
if  I  were  only  a  little  and  semi-occasionally  disposed 
to  help  things  along  when  they  lagged,  or  if  the  person 
were  bent  upon  digging  into  the  roots  of  things,  to 
discover  principles  and  laws  of  which  I  knew  little  and 
cared  less,  I  should  wish  him  to  remove,  with  bag  and 
baggage,  and  not  vex  me  or  my  spirit-band  with  isms 
and  ologies,  when  we  were  only  bent  on  producing 
certain  physical  phenomena  for  the  consolation  of  the 
average  Spiritualist. 

CHAPTER  XXV. 

THE    SHAKERS    AS  SPIRITUALISTS. 

THERE  appeared  in  the  New  York  Daily  Graphic, 
of  date  November  24th,  1874,  a  lively  and  inter- 
esting report  of  an  interview  between  one  of  the 
Editors  and  Frederick  W.  Evans,  one  of  the  chief  elders 
of  the  Society  of  Shakers,  at  which  time  strange  assertions 
were  made. 

Among  other  things,  Mr.  Evans  said  that  eleven  years 
before  the  rappings  through  the  mediumship  of  the  Fox 
girls,  similar  and  much  more  striking  phenomena  had  run 
their  course  throughout  the  peaceful  settlements  of  this 
devoted  people.  The  children  were  first  seized  with 
trances,  or  clairvoyant  sleeps,  in  which  they  would  answer 
questions  correctly,  and  display  the  power  of  seeing 
objects  and  persons  without  the  use  of  the  corporeal  eye. 

The  affair  got  bruited  about  among  the  brethren  and 

sisters,  and  the  spirits  first  manifesting  themselves  in  the 

Lebanon  settlement,  passed  on  to  Watervliet,  and  so,  in 

turn,  to  all  the   sixty  communities  of  the   Order.      The 

Shakers  took  the   communications  at  first,  much  a's  the 

world's  people  do  now  ;  believing  the  stories  told  by  the 

392 

THREE  PHASES  OF  SPIRITUALISM. 

393 

invisible  beings,  and  keeping  a  record,  which  was  after- 
wards published  in  sundry  books,  the  titles  of  two  of 
which  were  "  Holy  Wisdom"  and  the  "Sacred  Roll." 

Mr.  Evans  claims  to  have  first  defined  (in  i860,) 
Spiritualism  as  a  science  and  not  a  religion.  He  says 
that  it  should  be  studied  in  the  same  manner  as  Agricul- 
ture, Chemistry,  or  any  other  of  the  physical  sciences. 
He  declared  that  it  ran  through  three  phases  in  his 
Society,  and  the  report  continues  thus : 

"What  are  those?  " 

"  The  first  is  the  '  test  phase.'  In  this,  the  seeker  is  principally 
interested  in  ascertaining  the  reality  of  the  communications  and 
their  genuineness.  We  wish  to  test  the  mediums,  and  inquire 
whether  the  manifestations  are  really  what  they  pretend  to  be." 

"  What  is  the  second  phase  ?  " 

"  The  second  phase  is  the  'judgment  phase.'  In  this,  social  rela- 
tions are  established  between  those  in  and  those  out  of  the  flesh. 
Attachments  were  formed  between  the  spirit-world  and  the  mediums, 
and  the  attachments  began  to  take  the  form  of  criticisms.  The 
spirits  instructed  and  reproved.  The  second  phase  was  a  phase  of 
judgment  on  the  individual  and  on  society.  During  the  whole  of 
this  phase,  we  were  forming  a  relation  with  the  higher  spirits,  and 
they  were  instructing  and  criticising  us.  Then  it  was  that  Spiritual- 
ism began  to  be  a  ministration  of  religion.  That  was  what  caused 
our  people  to  interblend  Religion  and  Spiritualism.  We  attached  an 
infallibility  to  the  manifestations,  similar  to  the  infallibility  which 
the  Christian  world  attaches  to  the  Scriptures.  The  second  phase 
was  a  phase  of  judgment,  for  purging  out  everything  that  was  wrong 
in  the  character  of  the  individual — correcting  faults,  reproving  error, 
and  amending  the  life  and  disposition." 

"  What  do  you  call  the  '  third  phase?'  " 

"  The  '  missionary  phase.'  When  the  second  phase  was  finished, 
and  the  revelations  had  been  received  from  the  highest  spirits,  then 
we  preached  the  truth  to  the  lower  spirits,  We  were  missionaries  to 
the  other  world.  Religion  was  ministered  to  us  by  the  higher  circles 
of  spirits,  and  we  ministered  to  those  who  were  below  us.  Then  it 
was  that  the  work  of  judgment  took  effect  among  those  spirits,  and 
they  would  confess  their  faults  and  the  sins  of  their  lives,  just  as 
though  they  were  in  this  life.  I  have  heard  many  spirits  confess 
their  sins." 

394    MANIFESTA  TIONS  AMONG  THE  SHAKERS. 

"You  are  a  medium,  then  ?" 

"Yea.  All  the  Shakers  are  mediums.  There  is  scarcely  an  excep- 
tion. These  confessions  are  made  to  the  mediums,  and  then  they 
would  repeat  it  aloud.  The  spirits  would  obsess  an  individual,  and 
then  the  confessions  would  be  made." 

"  Do  you  have  any  of  these  manifestations  now?" 

"  Yea.  We  can  have  as  much  of  them  as  we  like.  The  spirits  of 
the  prophets  are  subject  to  the  prophets." 

"  What  kind  of  confessions  were  made  by  the  spirits?  " 

"  Some  of  the  most  interesting  confessions  were  made  by  members 
of  a  tribe  of  Indians.  These  came  and  confessed  their  sins  to  us, 
and  said  they  would  join  our  order.  Then  we  would  appoint  them 
elders  and  elderesses,  and  then  they  would  go  off  to  their  tribe  and 
preach  to  them,  and  the  spirits  of  the  tribe  would  confess  to  them 
and  they  would  become  Shakers.  When  they  had  done  this  they 
would  come  again  to  us,  just  the  same  as  if  they  were  in  the  body. 
For  instance,  one  or  two  elders  might  be  in  the  room  below,  and 
there  would  be  a  knock  at  the  door,  and  the  Indians  would  ask 
whether  they  might  come  in.  Permission  being  given,  a  whole  tribe 
of  Indian  spirits  would  troop  into  the  house,  and  in  a  few  minutes 
you  would  hear  '  whoop '  here  and  '  whoop '  there,  all  over  the 
house." 

"  But  nobody  in  the  rooms  above  had  known  that  the  elders  had 
admitted  the  Indian  spirits  ?  " 

"  Nay.  We  only  knew  it  who  heard  them  ask  permission  to 
enter.  But  in  a  few  minutes  after  permission  was  given,  everybody 
in  the  house  would  be  obsessed.  You  would  hear  the  men  and 
women  talking  as  if  they  were  Indians.  No  theatricals  that  ever 
you  saw  on  earth  were  equal  to  it.  They  would  act  out  what  they 
were  simulating.  They  would  sing  new  songs  entirely  unknown  to 
our  people,  and  sometimes  they  would  sing  in  a  foreign  language 
that  none  of  us  knew.  The  mediums  would  converse  together  as  if 
they  were  Indians,  and  not  as  themselves." 

"  You  never  let  the  outside  world  know  what  was  going  on  ?" 

"  Nay  indeed.  What  took  place  among  us  was  so  wonderful  that 
it  seemed  incredible.  And  if  we  had  published  it  to  the  world,  we 
should  all  have  been  sent  to  Bedlam." 

"  Don't  you  think  that  modern  Spiritualism  is  much  the  same  thing 
as  the  visions  of  monks  and  nuns  in  the  Middle  Ages?  " 

"  Certainly.  That  is  the  proper  explanation  of  them  through  all 
the  ages.  The  visions  of  St.  Theresa  were  merely  spiritualistic 
visions,  just  such  as  we  have  frequently  had  vouchsafed  to  the  mem- 
bers of  our  society." 

"  And  necromancy  and  magic  belong  to  the  same  category  ?  " 

/' 

MR.  EVANS'  FIRM  BELIEF.  395 

"Yea.  That  is,  when  Spiritualism  is  used  for  selfish  ends,  and 
probably  mixed  with  fraud  and  pretence,  like  doctor-craft.  If  you 
editors  of  papers  were  to  turn  your  criticism  upon  doctor-craft,  with 
its  abominable  frauds  and  shams,  and  pretences,  and  poisonous  drugs, 
you  would  be  doing  a  real  service  to  mankind." 

"  Well,  reverting  to  your  spiritual  experiences — how  is  it  that  you 
never  published  them  to  the  world  ?  " 

"  We  have  always  known  that  we  should  have  a  work  to  do  in 
relation  to  Spiritualism,  but  we  did  not  know  when  that  work  would 
begin.  The  manifestations  lasted  seven  years,  then  they  ceased. 
The  spirits  told  us  when  they  left  us,  that  in  a  very  short  time  they 
would  give  manifestations  everywhere,  from  the  palace  to  the  hamlet, 
all  over  the  world.  We  knew  that  we  should  have  to  work  at  the 
appointed  time,  but  we  knew  also,  that  Providence  would  point  out 
to  us  the  way  and  the  method  in  which  we  should  work.  It  was 
"four  years,  before  we  had  any  evidence  of  the  truth  of  what  the 
spirits  had  told  us.  Many  of  us  had  begun  to  doubt ;  we  thought 
that  they  had  deceived  us.  But  when  the  Rochester  manifestations 
began,  then  all  knew  that  they  had  told  us  the  truth.  So  I  and 
another  member  of  the  society  went  off  to  Rochester  to  question 
the  spirits.  I  asked  them  if  this  was  the  work  for  which  we  had  so 
long  been  waiting.  They  told  us  yes !  Immediately  that  we 
entered  the  room,  the  rappings  were  made  on  the  table  and  all 
around  us  in  the  most  remarkable  manner.  The  spirits  manifested 
great  joy  at  our  arrival.  I  saw  that  the  room  was  full  of  spirits. 
Margaret  and  Katherine  Fox  left  everybody  to  come  and  assist  us  in 
our  conversations  with  the  spirits.  We  sat  down  and  held  long  con- 
versations with  them.  We  asked  them  if  the  work  for  which  we  had 
been  so  long  waiting  had  really  commenced.  They  said  '  Yes,  it 
had.'  I  then  asked  them  if  they  would  show  themselves  in  mate- 
rializations. I  asked  them  if  they  would  act  in  the  same  way  upon 
material  elements,  as  they  had  acted  upon  spiritual  elements.  They 
said,  'Yes.' 

"  Then  you  consider  that  the  recent  materializations  are  genuine  ?" 

"Yea,  certainly.  I  visited  the  Eddys  at  their  homestead,  and  I 
am  certain  their  manifestations  are  genuine.  I  was  up  there  about 
three  weeks  ago.  Colonel  Olcott  is  doing  a  good  work  there,  and  I 
will  say  that  he  is  correct  so  far  as  I  was  a  witness  of  what 
occurred." 

"  How  many  Shakers  visited  the  Eddys?" 

"  Myself  and  John  Greaves." 

"  How  long  were  you  there?  " 

"  Three  nights." 

"  How  many  different  apparitions  did  you  see?" 

396  THE  CASE  OF  HENRY  PHELPS. 

"  Between  twenty  and  thirty  men  and  women." 

"  Did  you  or  Mr  Greaves  see  any  spirits  of  relatives?  " 

"We  did  not;  nor  did  we  care  about  seeing  any.  We  were 
perfectly  satisfied  with  the  manifestations  that  we  saw.  There  was 
no  possibility  of  fraud.  As  soon  as  the  manifestations  began, 
the  spirits  called  us  to  the  first  benches.  They  knew  us  imme- 
diate!)'. The  materializations  were  very  pretty.  No  Shaker  spirit 
came  forward." 

"  Did  you  speak  to  the  spirits  yourself?  ,r 

"  Yea,  I  did ;  and  got  answers  from  them.  I  saw  no  person 
that  I  knew  at  all.  I  think  they  were  perfectly  genuine  materiali- 
zations. Even  if  we  had  dectected  actual  fraud  on  the  part  of  the 
Eddys,  I  should  still  be  convinced  that  the  materializations  were 
genuine.  It  is  not  at  all  uncommon  for  the  best  mediums  to 
practise  fraud.  I  detected  a  downright  fraud  on  the  part  of  that 
boy  Henry  Phelps." 

"Ha!  Where  did  those  manifestations  occur?  I  have  heard 
something  of  them." 

"At  Stratford,  Ct.,  about  twenty-five  years  ago.  As  soon  as  I 
heard  of  the  manifestations  I  went  down  and  visited  his  father. 
Stratford  was  a  quiet  little  place  that  was  composed  of  retired 
priests  and  deacons.  Dr.  Phelps  was  a  retired  D.  D.  His  son 
became  a  medium,  and  the  manifestations  broke  out  right  in 
the  middle  of  this  quiet  village.  His  father  told  me  that  it 
would  have  been  better  for  him  if  his  house  had  been  burned  down, 
than  that  these  things  should  have  occurred.  The  spirits  were  so 
eager  after  this  boy  that  they  tore  his  clothes  off  his  back,  and  if 
he  went  into  any  house  in  that  village,  they  pelted  it  with  stones 
and  broke  all  the  windows.  The  father  said,  that  as  soon  as  he 
saw  me  drive  up,  he  was  impressed  that  help  was  come.  I  took 
the  boy  with  me  to  Lebanon,  The  manifestation's  by  spirits 
through  his  mediumship  were  wonderful.  Yet  one  evening  when 
I  was  out  driving  with. him,  he  began  making  raps  in  the  wagon 
with  his  heels.  He  wanted  me  to  believe  that  they  were  spirits. 
I  said, '  Henry,  let  this  be  the  last  time  that  you  attempt  such 
tricks  as  that  with  me  '  " 

"  What  has  become  of  him  now  ?  " 

"  I  really  do  not  know.  I  have  spoken  about  Spiritualism  in 
England.  I  spoke  before  a  great  crowd  of  the  aristocracy,  in  St. 
George's  Hall.  I  told  them  that  Spiritualism  ought  to  be  one  of 
the  elements  of  a  civil  government ;  that  it  would  answer  the 
purposes  of  a  police  in  the  suppression  of  evil,  and  of  an  army  and 
navy  in  the  protection  of  the  nation.  I  said  they  ought  to  at 
once  get  rid  of  their  army  and  navy  and   proclaim   England  a 

SPIRITUALISM  AMONG  THE  MORMONS.        397 

non-resistant  power,  and  then  fall  back  on  Spiritualism  as  a  means 
of  national  defence.     See  what  a  power  I  had  over  them  then." 

"  What  is  your  general  opinion  of  these  multiplied  manifesta- 
tions that  we  hear  of  in  these  days?  " 

"Itis  the  descent  of  Spiritualism  from  the  Shakers  to  the  world. 
We  had  the  manifestations  first  ;  but  we  kept  quiet  about  it,  and 
did  not  let  the  world  know  anything  about  it.  But  the  spirits 
promised  us  that  there  should  come  a  time  of  manifold  spiritual 
revelations  to  the  world,  and  here  they  are.  It  is  infallible  evi- 
dence that  the  world  cannot  gainsay.  Why  even  the  Mormons 
have  had  spiritual  revelations." 

"  You  do  not  mean  to  convey  the  idea  that  the  spiritual  mani- 
festations confirm  the  truth  of  Mormonism  ?  " 

"  Yea,  to  a  certain  extent." 

"Why,  I  should  have  thought  Mormonism  the  very  antipodes  of 
your  belief. ' 

"  Mormcmism  is  much  better  than  your  New  York  Christianity." 

Frederick  W.  Evans  has  filled  too  large  a  place  in  the 
public  view  during  the  past  thirty  years,  to  require  that  I 
should  say  more  concerning  him,  in  this  connection, 
except,  that  he  is  a  man  of  decided  intellectual  power,  a 
skilled  controversialist,  an  enthusiastic  propagandist, 
devoted  to  his  Society,  and  possessed  of  excellent  prac- 
tical administrative  powers.  Seeing  such  a  remarkable 
report  as  the  above,  I  thought  it  would  be  well  to  get  his 
answers  to  certain  questions  touching  the  Eddys,  and 
spiritualistic  matters  in  general,  and  therefore  addressed 
him  a  letter,  his  reply  to  which,  is  as  follows : 

Mt.  Lebanon,  December  1st,  1874. 
H.  S.  Olcott — Respected  Friend  : 

Your  queries  of  the  26th  ult.,  are  at  hand. 

"  1st. — Could  you,  as  a  medium,  see  the  band  of  spirits  controlling 
the  Eddy  manifestations  ;  who  were  they,  and  of  what  moral  and 
intellectual  degree  of  development?" 

Let  me  answer  evasively.  I  think  the  immediate  materializing 
spirits-are  influenced — controlled — by  other  spirits,  in  and  out  of  the 
body.  They  who  plan  the  labor  on  a  farm,  do  not  always  perform 
the  labor.     When  mediums  and  spirits  are  interblended — mixed  up 

398  WHY  INDIAN  SPIRITS  APPEAR. 

— with  the  physical  elements  ;  and  are  not  too  intellectual  or  spiritual- 
minded,  materialization  and  de-materialization  are  most  possible. 

"  2d. — Did  you  see  the  evidences  of  a  fraudulent  intent  and  fraud- 
ulent practices,  in  either  brother  ?     If  so,  which,  and  to  what  extent  ?" 

I  did  not  see  the  least  sign  of  fraud,  nor  did  I  feel  any  during  my 
sojourn.     There  was  no  temptation  to  fraud,  that  I   could  discover. 

"  3d. — Most  mediums,  in  America,  seem  to  be  attended  by  Indian 
"  Guides,"  Why  so?  Because  they  are  now  in  your  initial  stage  of 
development  of  1S40?" 

Because  America  is  the  home  of  the  Indian.  While  in  the  body, 
they  lived  much  in  the  lower  spirit  world.  When  out  of  the  body, 
they  go  not  far  from  the  physical  world  and  their  old  haunts.  They 
are  of,  and  in  the  country — part  and  parcel  of  the  earth,  and  are 
attracted  and  attached  to  the  matter  of  which  earthly  human  beings 
are  compounded.  Also,  the  Indians  have  a  sense  of  having  been 
forced  from  their  homes  and  hunting  grounds  on  earth.  They  have 
a  feeling  of  want,  like  children  whose  earth-life  was  prematurely 
cut  off.  Injustice  has  been  done.  Their  earth-life  is  not  yet  com- 
pleted. They  seek  compensation — may  seek  revenge  on  the  pale- 
faces. This  is  under  a  law  referred  to,  Rev.  vi.,  9,  "  I  saw,  under 
thy  altar,  the  souls  of  them  that  were  slain  for  the  word  of  God  and 
for  the  testimony  that  they  held.  And  they  cried  with  a  loud  voice, 
saying,  How  long,  O  Lord,  holy  and  true,  dost  thou  not  avenge  our 
blood  on  them  that  dwell  upon  the  earth  ?  " 

When  Shakers  labor  with  such  restless  souls,  they  turn  the  edge 
of  their  feelings  from  persons,  to  the  principle  which  produced  the 
wrong.  We  would  make  a  poor  slave  ashamed  of  his,  or  herself,  by 
showing  that  as  did  the  slave-holder,  so  would  do  the  slave,  with  the 
same  powers. 

The  rich  and  poor,  the  victor  and  vanquished,  the  Indian  and 
white,  are,  in  the  sight  of  God,  all  one,  until  faith  and  conscience 
make  a  difference.  Let  civil  governments  understand  that  they  do 
not  diminish  the  number  of  criminals  by  sending  them  to  prisons  to 
instruct  criminals  younger  than  themselves  ;  nor  do  they  get  rid  of 
them  by  capital  punishment. 

"  4th. — Do  you  know  whether  materialized  spirits  intend  to 
address  the  public  themselves  from  the  rostrum,  before  this  epoch 
passes  away  ?     And  when  will  it  pass  away  ?  " 

In  an  article  published  in  the  old  Spiritual  Telegraph,  I  foretold 
that  manifestations  would  yet  be  made  to  whole  villages,  towns  and 
cities.  And  in  a  book  entitled  "  Tests  of  Divine  Revelation,"  re- 
published in  London,  1871,  I  predicted  that  spirits  would  yet  obsess 
persons,  and  that  the  unspiritual  Protestant  sects  would  not  be  able 
to  exorcise  them. 

SEVERAL  QUESTIONS  ANSWERED.  399 

In  Stratford,  Ct.,  Dr.  Phelps  gave  us  the  following  statement : 
"  The  ministers  and  deacons  called  a  meeting  for  the  purpose  of 
exorcising  the  spirits  from  my  boy  and  girl.  When  assembled  in  a 
room,  each  with  a  Bible  in  his  lap,  as  a  talisman,  and  while  praying, 
the  Bibles  were  thrown  by  the  spirits  at  the  heads  of  the  priests  and 
deacons,  until  they  broke  up  the  meeting. 

"  5th. — I  know  a  noble  family  in  Europe,  who  assert  that  for  more 
than  two  centuries  they  have  been  caused  the  direst  calamities,  by  a 
wicked  ancestor's  spirit,  who  leads  them  to  murder,  arson,  pillage, 
incest,  &c.  Can  such  a  fiend  be  reached  by  any  influence  within 
the  control  of  your  society,  and  the  cause  removed  ?  " 

A  society  of  zealous,  primitive  Methodists,  who  could  proselyte 
the  members  of  the  family  on  earth,  would  make  it  easy  for  us  to 
lead  that  wicked  spirit  to  confession  and  repentance. 

"  6th. — Do  the  spirits,  with  you,  feel  interest  enough  in  my  work, 
to  admit  me  to  one  or  more  private  sittings  with  you,  so  that  I  may 
be  furnished  with  important  facts  for  the  book  I  am  about  to  pub- 
lish ?     If  so,  when,  etc.  ?  " 

You  are  welcome  to  visit  us  at  any  time  for  the  why  and  where- 
fore of  our  faith  in  spirits.  If  you  come  seeking  a  sign,  I  cannot 
assure  you  that  any  sign,  save  that  of  a  cross  against  Generation,  will 
be  given.  Nor  yet  do  I  know  that  a  sign  will  not  be  given.  The 
times  are,  as  the  English  would  say,  big  with  coming  events.  If  you 
look  over  my  St.  George's  Hall  lecture  you  will  get  some  idea  how 
I  feel. 

The  Graphic  Editorial  breathes  the  right  spirit.  Robert  Dale  Owen 
and  I  belonged  to  the  same  school — the  Hall  of  Science — in  New 
York,  in  1830.  We  were  both  materialists.  I  related  to  him  the 
spirit-manifestations  which  converted  me  to  Shakerism.  I  corre- 
sponded with  Robert  Owen,  his  father,  and  he  visited  Mt.  Lebanon. 
Should  you  come,  as  per  invitation,  you  may  see  the  whole  corre- 
spondence. 

The  Graphic  Intemieio  was  well  done,  with  some  mistakes. 
"  Shakers  are  all  mediums"  hardly  conveys  a  right  idea.  " Every- 
body in  the  house  was  obsessed,"  should  be  many,  instead  of  all.  "  / 
and  another  member  went  to  Rochester" — it  was  New  York,  where 
the  Fox  girls  were  holding  seances. 

Your  statement  that  the  spirits  at  Chittenden  have  not  fed  you 
philosophy  and  wisdom,  is  somewhat  remarkable.  It  goes  to  con- 
firm our  position,  that,  at  present,  it  takes  all  the  concentrated  power 
of  the  spirits  to  effect  materialization  ;  because  of  general  unbelief, 
induced  by  general  self-indulgence.  Use  should  be  the  law  of  action 
for  all  human  beings. 

If  you  go  to  those  spirits,  seeking,  with  all  your  heart  to  see  some 

400      MORMONS  AND  CHRISTIANS  COMPARED. 

dearly  loved  lost  one,  with  whom  you  had  been  in  intimate  social, 
emotional  relation,  you  will  have  no  difficulty.  But  if  you  go,  as 
evidently  you  have  done,  deeply  exercised  upon  principles,  prying 
into  the  source,  the  philosophy,  the  religion  of  the  manifestations, 
the  Eddys  will  wish  the  Old  Harry  had  you — and  the  spirits  will 
help  them  to  send  you  to  him. 

Spiritualism  went  out  from  this  Order.  I  have  always  supposed 
it  would  return  to  this  Order,  and  that  then  the  manifestations,  con- 
trolled by  a  Christ  spirit,  would  be  attended  with  gifts  of  healing, 
gifts  of  divine  revelation,  &c,  and  the  organization  of  Pentacostal 
Communities,  simultaneous  with  corresponding  changes  in  the  Civil 
Government.     A  new  Heaven  and  a  new  Earth, 

"And  when  will  it  pass  away?" — (4th  question,  last  clause.) 
Never  more.  The  two  worlds  will  become  like  body  and  soul — 
"there  will  be  no  more  sea,"  —  disordered  spiritual  elements, — 
unclean  spirits,  out  of  which  "  The  Beast"  arose.  And  there  will  be 
time  no  more,  for  all  will  be  Eternity. 

When  I  was  at  Eddys,  the  Witch  of  the  Mountain  came,  in  the 
beginning  of  the  seance,  and  delivered  a  beautiful  panegyric  upon 
Shakers  and  Shakerism,  without  naming  them  ;  depicting,  in  glow- 
ing colors,  the  blessedness  of  those  who,  in  earth-life,  conquered 
their  passions,  and  lived  in  physical  and  spiritual  innocence. 

At  the  close  of  the  seance,  Mayjloiver,  the  Little  Spirit,  said, 
"  The  Shakers,  notwithstanding  the  reproaches  cast  upon  them,  are 
the  most  virtuous,  self-denying,  and  holy  people,  upon  the  face  of 
the  earth. 

I  consider  Mormonism  a  revival  of  ancient  Judaism  — the  God — 
Tutelar  Deity,  of  the  Jews,  is  probably  the  controlling  spirit  of 
Mormonism.  He  allowed  polygamy  2,000  years  ago.  Why  not 
now  ? 

But  the  Mormons  have  abolished  poverty  and  prostitution  ;  and 
from  children  and  youth  the  "  Social  Evil." 

Is  not  that  better  than  New  York  and  co-Christianity  ?  And 
would  it  not  be  well  for  Christians  (?)  to  stop  persecuting  Mormons, 
until  there  are  no  poor  —  no  hire  of  harlots — and  those  law  suits 
are  settled  ?  F.  W.  Evans. 

In  1856,  Mr.  Evans  wrote  to  Robert  Owen,  making  the 
same  statement  regarding  the  outbreak  of  spiritualistic 
manifestations  among  the  Shakers,  in  advance  of  their 
appearance  in  the  outside  world.  During  the  sevenyears 
of  the   continuance    of  the   phenomenon,   hundreds   of 

DECREES  OF  SPIRITUALISM.  401 

spiritual  mediums  were  developed  throughout  the 
eighteen  societies.  Says  Mr.  Evans,  in  the  letter 
referred  to  : 

"  In  truth,  all  the  members,  in  a  greater  or  less  degree,  were 
mediums.  So  that  physical  manifestations,  visions,  revelations, 
prophecies,  and  gifts  of  various  kinds,  of  which  numerous  records 
are  kept,  and,  indeed,  divers  operations,  but  all  of  the  same  spirit, 
were  as  common  as  gold  in  California." 

He  says  that  these  spiritual  manifestations  were  of 
three  distinct  degrees.  The  first,  being  for  the  complete 
convincement  of  the  junior  members ;  the  second,  for  the 
work  of  judgment,  the  judging  and  purifying  of  the  whole 
people  by  spiritual  agency;  and  the  third,  for  the  minis- 
tration of  millennial  truths,  to  various  nations,  kindreds, 
tribes  and  people,  in  the  spirit-world,  who  were  hunger- 
ing and  thirsting  after  righteousness.  And  that  spiritual- 
ism in  its  outward  progress  will  go  through  the  same 
three  degrees  in  the  world  at  large,  being  only  yet  in  its 
first  degree  in  the  United  States.  Spiritual  manifesta- 
tions, he  maintained,  were  God's  answer  to  the  hearts' 
cry  of  earnest  men  and  women,  seeking  facts,  not  words, 
in  attestation  of  the  "Word  of  Life."  (See  Howitt's 
"  History  of  the  Supernatural."  Ed.  1863,  London.  Vol. 
II,  p,  194.) 

His  affirmation  of  the  genuineness  of  the  Eddy  mate- 
rializations, it  will  be  seen,  is  unqualified  and  positive. 
He  neither  detected  any  fraud  on  the  part  of  either  of 
the  brothers,  by  his  external  powers  of  observation,  nor 
by  his  internal  function  as  a  seer ;  in  which  particulars 
he  goes  beyond  the  position  I  should  be  willing,  at 
present,  to  assume.  But  I  must  admit  that,  in  my  case, 
I  am   hampered   by  the  exercise  of   only  the   ordinary 

402     TESTIMONY  FAVORABLE   TO  THE  EDDYS. 

faculties,  and  therefore  may  have  contracted  suspicions 
that  time  would  prove  groundless.  If  they  were  not 
mere  suspicions,  unsupported  by  what  I  consider  adequate 
evidence,  I  should  not  hesitate  a  moment  in  stating 
what  they  are.  If  I  withhold  my  unqualified  endorse- 
ment of  the  entire  genuineness  of  their  verity,  in  the 
face  of  such  an  apparently  overwhelming  mass  of  evidence, 
it  would  ill  become  one  who  desires  to  proceed  to  his 
conclusions  with  deliberation,  to  throw  suspicions  into 
the  scales,  which  are  trembling  in  the  effort  to  find  a 
balance. 

The  files  of  many  of  the  leading  secular  newspapers 
furnish  ample  testimony  in  favor  of  the  Eddy  mediums, 
and  very  little  against  them.  Perhaps  I  should  qualify 
by  saying,  very  little  that  is  entitled  to  consideration. 
There  are  many  hasty  accounts  of  single  seances,  either 
by  persons  who  went  to  Chittenden  to  find  support 
for  pre-conceived  prejudices ;  or  by  others,  who  could 
not  see  the  forms  distinctly  enough  in  the  obscurity  of 
the  chamber,  to  distinguish  their  physical  contrasts  with 
each  other,  and  did  not  remain  long  enough  to  so  famil- 
iarize their  eyes  with  the  light,  or  themselves  with  the 
features  of  the  room,  so  that  they  might  judge  of  these 
peculiarities  of  form,  stature  and  bearing,  as  compared 
with  those  of  William  Eddy. 

Strangely  enough,  Mr.  Evans'  views  of  the  genuineness 
of  the  Eddy  materializations,  find  unqualified  endorse- 
ment by  a  sect,  communistic  like  his,  but  its  very  antipode 
in  one  of  the  fundamentals  of  belief,  I  mean  the  so-called 
"  free-love  "  society  called  "  The  Oneida  Community."  A 
committee,  consisting  of  Dr.  T.  R.  Noyes  and  Mr.  F. 

REPORT  TO  ONEIDA  COMMUNITY.  403 

Wayland  Smith,  visited  Chittenden  on  the  2d  of  Novem- 
ber, and  upon  their  return  published  a  report  in  the 
Oneida  Circular,  the  official  journal  of  the  Community, 
which  I  have  the  permission  of  Mr.  Smith  to  use  in  this 
Chapter.  He  charges  me,  however,  to  give  it  as  the 
expression  of  his  individual  opinion  concerning  the  Eddy 
manifestations ;  adding  that  the  Community  are  investi- 
gating Spiritualism  through  their  own  mediums,  and  in 
time  will  give  an  authoritative  opinion  upon  the  subject. 
After  describing  the  committee's  arrival  at  Chittenden, 
their  reception  by  the  Eddys,  and  the  materializations  at 
several  successive  seances,  the  writer  says  : 

"The  third  evening  Ilonto  was  dressed  very  prettily,  having  a 
bright,  phosphorescent  diamond  on  her  forehead,  and  another  in  her 
belt.  The  light  from  these  rose  and  fell  constantly.  Her  skirts 
were  quite  short,  so  that  her  stockings  and  moccasins  were  visible. 
She  played  and  sang,  danced,  and  then  asked  for  a  pipe.  Horatio 
lighted  his  for  her.  She  took  it  and  smoked  vigorously,  so  that  the 
light  from  the  burning  tobacco  reflected  on  her  features,  enabling  me 
to  see  distinctly  her  copper-colored  cheek,  the  bridge  of  her  nose, 
and  the  white  of  her  eye.  She  smoked  and  played  at  the  same  time, 
and  was  so  overcome  with  this  double  intoxication  of  her  senses  that 
she  remained  out  too  long.  She  suddenly  handed  back  the  pipe, 
and  started  rapidly  towards  the  cabinet,  but  just  as  she  reached  the 
curtain,  she  collapsed  into  a  shapeless  heap  on  the  floor,  only  one 
hand  being  distinguishable.  The  curtain  fell  back  over  her,  and  in 
half  a  minute  she  again  appeared,  apparently  as  bright  and  strong  as 
ever. 

"  At  Horatio's  '  light-circle,'  the  tambourine  rattles  ;  the  harmonicas 
sound  ;  the  guitar  is  held  up  in  plain  view  and  thrummed  ;  the  bells 
are  thrown  about ;  hands  of  different  sizes  and  shapes  are  thrust 
through  the  opening  between  the  shawls  and  passed  over  the  faces 
of  the  persons,  sometimes  tweaking  their  beards  with  unpleasant 
force  ;  a  hand  minus  the  little  finger  is  held  up  over  the  top  of  the 
curtain  ;  a  large  black  chair,  which  has  been  placed  near  the  table  in 
the  recess,  is  held  out  horizontally  by  a  strong  hand  which  grasps 
one  leg  ;  the  visible  hands  write  on  cards,  names  and  messages  for 
various  guests,  etc.  At  one  time,  I  saw  the  guitar  held  up  above  the 
curtain  by  its  extreme  head,  the  strings  being  turned  towards  us,  so 

404  RING  TEST  CORROBORA  TED. 

that  I  could  see  their  whole  length,  in  which  position  it  was  vigor- 
ously thrummed,  and  yet,  though  there  was  a  bright  light  shining  on 
it,  I  could  not  see  that  any  thing  touched  the  strings  to  cause  the 
sounds.  All  this  time  the  three  persons  in  front  of  the  curtain  sat 
motionless.  The  supposition  that  it  was  their  hands  which  we  had 
seen,  and  which  had  caused  the  manifestations  I  have  described,  is, 
from  the  nature  of  the  circumstances,  their  position,  etc.,  simply 
absurd." 

The  "  dark-circle  "  phenomena  also  excited  the  wonder 
of  the  Committee.     Says  Mr.  Smith  : 

"  But  the  most  wonderful  thing  was  the  ring  test.  The  candle 
was  lighted,  and  we  saw  that  Horatio  was  securely  tied,  as  at  first. 
Then,  by  his  direction,  an  iron  ring  six  inches  in  diameter  and  of 
three-eighths  inch  metal  was  found  and  placed  on  one  corner  of  the 
table.  Elder  Evans,  who  had  that  day  arrived,  was  then  invited  to 
sit  in  Horatio's  lap  and  see  that  he  did  not  stir.  A  lady  also 
changed  her  position,  so  as  to  sit  in  front  of  the  Elder  and  hold  his 
hands.  Thus  there  could  have  been  no  collusion  or  trickery.  The 
candle  being  now  extinguished,  the  fiddle  sounded  for  a  couple  of 
minutes,  when  the  light  was  again  called  for.  The  match  was  no 
sooner  struck  than  we  saw  the  Elder  still  seated  on  Horatio's  knees, 
Horatio  still  securely  tied.  But  the  iron  ring  was  now  on  Horatio's 
right  arm  above  the  cord,  and  his  coat  had  been  taken  off  and  lay  on 
the  floor  beside  him  !  Then  the  medium  said,  '  Mr.  Frost,  please 
open  the  door  for  two  spirits  who  cannot  get  in.' 

"Mr.  Frost  took  the  candle  and  went  to  the  door.  Returning 
instantly,  he  placed  the  light  on  the  table,  within  two  feet  of  the 
ring  as  it  hung  on  Horatio's  arm.  Then,  while  we  were  all  looking 
directly  at  it,  we  saw  the  ring  drop  to  the  floor  and  roll  away  I 
had  previously  marked  this  ring,  by  scratching  a  bright  spot  on  the 
inside  of  the  weld  with  my  knife.  I  now  picked  it  up,  and  found  it 
to  be  the  same  ring.  When  the  ring  was  put  on,  and  again  when  it 
was  taken  off,  Horatio  Eddy,  the  medium,  underwent  a  violent 
shudder. 

"  I  have  now  brushed  hastily  over  the  main  facts  which  came  under 
our  observation.  I  am  aware  that  Dr.  Beard,  and  many  other  skep- 
tics, are  exerting  themselves  to  prove  that  all  these  phenomena  are 
produced  by  jugglery  and  tricks  cleverly  executed  by  the  Eddy 
brothers.  But  after  studying  the  men  as  carefully  as  possible  during 
the  four  days  we  lived  with  them,  I  cannot  believe  them  dishonest. 
It  would  tax  my  credulity  much  more  severely  to  believe  that  this  is 
jugglery,  than  to  believe  that  it  is  what  they  say  it  is,  the  work  of 

MEDIUMS  E  VER  Y WHERE,  405 ' 

spirits  ;  for  to  believe  that  it  is  jugglery,  is  to  ascribe  to  these  two 
simple  farmers  all  and  more  than  all  the  combined  skill  of  every 
prestidigitator  who  has  ever  visited  us.  The  most  that  the  skeptics 
undertake  to  prove  is,  that  many  of  these  phenomena  might  be  pro- 
duced by  sleight  of  hand  ;  no  one  has  been  able  to  prove  that  any  of 
them  are  so  produced  by  the  Eddys." 

Mr.  Smith  writes  me  that  they  "  have  found  a  very- 
peculiar  medium  in  Syracuse,  N.  Y.,  who  gets  direct 
writing  in  a  good  light,  under  very  satisfactory  conditions," 
and  sends  me  a  printed  report  of  the  visit  made  to  him 
by  the  Communists."     Says  Mr.  S.: 

"  This  medium  is  a  broker,  moves  in  the  best  society,  and  does 
not  allow  his  name  to  be  mentioned  in  this  connection.  I  suppose 
there  are  a  hundred  such  in  the  country,  who  will  come  out  of  their 
shells  by  and  by,  when  Spiritualism  has  become  somewhat  less 
unpopular  with  the  would-be  wise  men  of  the  world." 

Every  investigator,  of  respectable  social  position,  can 
indorse  the  correctness  of  Mr.  Smith's  concluding  remark. 
I,  myself,  have  met  within  the  past  fortnight  in  private 
families,  in  different  cities,  two  lady  mediums,  whose 
Spiritualistic  phenomena  are  of  the  most  wonderful  char- 
acter, equalling  anything  I  ever  read  of,  except  the  mate- 
rializations that  are  now  attracting  so  much  attention. 
When  the  ban  is  removed,  the  world  will  be  astonished 
to  discover  how  many  mediums  were  long  since  devel- 
oped in  the  circles  of  our  best  society. 

14 

CHAPTER  XXVI. 

SUMMING    UP. 

I  THINK  I  occupy,  at  the  end  of  this  series  of  Chap- 
ters, the  only  secure  ground  for  any  person  worthy 
of  a  moment's  thought  as  an  investigator,  and  it  is 
the  one  assumed  by  every  intelligent  physician  in  diag- 
nosing an  obscure  case.  I  have  reasoned  by  exclusion. 
That  is  to  say,  I  reject  everything  that  happens  in  the 
presence  of  these  mediums  which  could  be  accounted  for 
on  the  hypothesis  of  fraud.  The  physician,  placing  him- 
self by  the  bedside  of  his  patient,  first  carefully  notices 
all  the  symptoms,  and  then  proceeds  with  his  diagnosis. 
He  says  to  himself  that  the  trouble  assuredly  is  neither 
such,  or  such,  or  such  a  disease,  nor  is  it  included  in  a 
certain  group  of  diseases  ;  and  so,  telling  off  malady  after 
malady,  he  finally  reaches  either  the  precise  thing  he  is 
looking  for,  or,  at  least,  such  an  approximation  to  the 
truth  as  to  suggest  the  trial  of  a  certain  class  of  remedies, 
until  the  specific  is  found. 

This  is   what   the    investigator   of  these   spiritualistic 
phenomena  should   do.     Given  a  certain  thing  done  in 

his  presence,  he  ought  to  attempt  to  explain  it  as:  (i)  a 

406 

THE  CREA  T  CONFLICT.  407 

trick;  (2)  the  result  of  some  known  cause — such  as  elec- 
tricity, odic  force,  or  the  subtle  influence  that  one  person 
has  over  the  imaginations  of  others;  (3)  these  all  failing, 
then  he  ought  to  observe  closely  enough  to  learn  whether 
some  new,  powerful,  occult  force  is  asserting  itself;  or  (4) 
whether  relations  had  really  been  established  between  the 
world  we  live  in  and  the  world  we  are  tending  to.  Now 
all  this  is  within  the  scope  of  scientific  inquiry;  the 
territory  beyond  belongs  to  the  Church.  It  is  for  Science 
to  observe  the  facts,  deduce  the  law,  and  define  the  con- 
ditions ;  for  Religion  to  follow  the  moral  causes  in  this 
life  to  their  moral  consequences  in  the  next.  This  is  the 
true  middle  ground  upon  which  the  two  contending 
powers  can  compromise  in  the  great  conflict  that  is  upon 
us,  and  the  terrific  nature  of  which  is  so  clearly  defined 
by  Tyndall,  Draper,  and  others.  Says  Professor  John  W. 
Draper  in  his  most  recently  published  paper,  entitled 
"The  Great  Conflict": 

"  Whoever  has  had  an  opportunity  of  becoming  acquainted  with 
the  mental  condition  of  the  intelligent  classes  in  Europe  and  America, 
must  have  perceived  that  there  is  a  great  and  rapidly  increasing 
departure  from  the  public  religious  faith,  and  that,  while  among  the 
frank  this  divergence  is  not  concealed,  there  is  a  far  more  extensive 
and  far  more  dangerous  secession,  private  and  unacknowledged." 

"  So  widespread  and  so  powerful  is  this  secession,  that  it  can  nei- 
ther be  treated  with  contempt  nor  with  punishment.  It  cannot  be 
extinguished  by  derision,  by  vituperation,  or  by  force.  The  time  is 
rapidly  approaching  when  it  will  give  rise  to  serious  political 
results." 

"  Ecclesiastical  spirit  no  longer  inspires  the  policy  of  the  world. 
Military  fervor  in  behalf  of  faith  has  disappeared.  Its  only  souvenirs 
are  the  marble  effigies  of  crusading  knights  reposing  in  their  tombs 
in  the  silent  crypts  of  churches." 

After  noticing  that  the  antagonism  between  Religion 
and    Science   commenced   when   Christianity   began    to 

408  LA  WS  OF  CREA  TION. 

attain  political  power,  and  denning  the  true  cause  of  the 
same  to  be  found  in  the  natural  expansion  of  the  human 
intellect,  through  the  irresistible  advance  of  human  knowl- 
edge warring  against  the  compression  arising  from  tradi- 
tionary faith  and  human  interests,  he  says  : 

"  Can  we  exaggerate  the  importance  of  a  contention  in  which 
every  thoughtful  person  must  take  part,  whether  he  will  or  not?  In 
a  matter  so  solemn  as  that  of  religion,  all  men,  whose  temporal 
interests  are  not  involved  in  existing  institutions,  earnestly  desire  to 
find  the  truth.  They  seek  information  as  to  the  suhjects  in  dispute, 
and  as  to  the  conduct  of  the  disputants." 

What  a  curious  law  of  creation ;  how  beneficent  and 
wise,  that  every  human  want  seems  to  be  provided  for  at 
the  proper  time !  Let  any  one  thing  necessary  for  our 
existence,  comfort,  or  progression  fail,  and  some  substi- 
tute is  found.  When  the  forests  in  Europe  were  in  dan- 
ger of  extinction,  coal  was  discovered ;  when  the  whale 
fishery  failed,  mineral  oil  was  struck  in  Pennsylvania ; 
when  the  discovery  of  the  iron  ores  of  that  region  offered 
us  a  new  source  of  wealth,  the  uses  of  anthracite  coal 
were  first  learned  by  the  accident  of  a  careless  laborer ; 
when  the  progress  of  the  world  demanded  the  overthrow 
of  ecclesiastical  imperialism,  the  printing-press  came  to 
enlighten  mankind.  That  not  only  dispersed  secular 
knowledge  broadcast,  but  proved  the  most  powerful  ally 
of  the  Church  itself,  in  widening  the  boundaries  of  true 
Religion.  So,  also,  when  the  increase  of  population 
called  for  ampler  methods  of  communication  by  sea  and 
land,  steam  offered  itself  as  the  great  desideratum ;  and, 
in  the  progressive  development  of  the  same  need,  the 
electric  telegraph  came  to  unite  all  the  people  of  the 
earth  together  in  a  constant,  heaven-descended  tie. 

In  view  of  all  this,  who  dares  say  that,  at  the  very 

SCIENCE  AND  RELIGION.  409 

instant  of  this  "  great  conflict "  between  Science  and 
Religion,  when  the  latter  is  looking  about  for  better 
weapons  to  meet  the  onslaught  of  her  traditional  foe, 
this  spiritualistic  manifestation  has  not  been  made  ?  If 
there  is  anything  not  beneath  contempt  in  the  phenomena, 
they  are  calculated  to  arrest  the  attention  of  both  antag- 
onists— of  the  Materialists,  because,  if  they  are  real,  their 
position  is  untenable  ;  of  the  Religionists,  because,  in 
their  verity  they  would  find  an  impenetrable  armor  of 
defence  and  an  invincible  sword  of  offence  against  the 
opponents  of  Immortality. 
v    Dr.  Draper  says : 

"  The  attention  of  many  truth-seeking  persons  has  been  so  exclu- 
sively given  to  the  details  of  sectarian  dissensions  that  the  long 
strife,  to  the  history  of  which  these  pages  are  devoted,  is  popularry 
but  little  known." 

And  so  we  may  say  that  the  strife  between  Science  on 
the  one  side,  and  Religion  on  the  other,  has  been  so 
bitter,  deadly,  and  engrossing,  that  neither  side  has  had 
either  the  time  or  disposition  to  notice  the  rise  and  secret 
development  of  modern  Spiritualism,  which,  after  twenty- 
seven  years,  has  now  reached  a  point  where  it  no  longer 
entreats  but  commands  general  attention. 

The  recognition  of  this  fact  is  what  first  prompted  me 
to  attempt  the  investigation  of  the  alleged  spirit  "  mate- 
rializations "  of  the  Eddy  mediums,  and  the  reader  will 
bear  me  out  in  the  statement,  that  all  my  efforts  have 
been  to  interest  American  scientists  in  the  phenomena 
to  such  an  extent  that  they  would  commence  real  investi- 
gations, in  comparison  to  which  these  of  mine  are  but 
child's  play. 

I  am  happy  to  say  that  I  have  succeeded.     I  have  the 

410  INTEREST  IN  SPIRITUALISM. 

best  of  reasons  to  know  that  not  only  one  but  a  dozen 
professors  in  different  colleges  read  all  my  articles,  dis- 
cuss the  facts,  and  are  beginning  to  feel  a  call  to  the 
work.  And  I  am  also  glad  to  know  that  many  clergymen 
— so  many  that  I  would  not  like  to  state  the  number — 
are,  for  the  first  time  in  their  lives,  opening  their  eyes  to 
the  fact  that  "  this  materialization  business  must  be  looked 
into."  Within  a  single  day  of  twenty-four  hours,  I  have 
received  requests  from  three  orthodox  ministers  in  charge 
of  prosperous  congregations,  that  I  would  try  to  have 
them  admitted  to  the  Eddy  circles,  and  one  other  was  at 
Chittenden  a  short  time  ago,  and  voluntarily  wrote  me  a 
certificate  of  what  he  had  seen. 

In  a  certain  place  near  New  York,  I  know  of  a  congre- 
gation of  eight  hundred  persons,  of  whom,  according  to 
the  pastor's  statement,  three  hundred  are  reading  about 
Spiritualism,  and  some  are  beginning  to  hold  circles  in 
their  private  houses.  The  ministers  of  two  of  the  churches 
in  Rutland,  united  with  a  large  number  of  their  most 
influential  fellow-townsmen  in  giving  me  an  invitation  to 
describe,  in  a  public  lecture,  the  things  I  saw  at  the  Eddy 
homestead. 

As  a  final  and  most  conclusive  proof  of  the   general 

interest,  I  need  only  point  to  the  universal  discussion  of 

the  subject  by  the  secular  newspapers.     Says  the  Rutland 

(Vt.)  Globe : 

"  Colonel  Henry  S.  Olcott,  the  commissioner  of  The  Daily  Graphic 
to  investigate  and  report  upon  the  Eddy  "manifestations,"  has  stirred 
up  a  breeze  throughout  the  country.  Before  his  first  letter  from 
Rutland  appeared,  the  subject  of  Spiritualism  had  not  been  even 
mentioned  in  the  secular  papers  since  the  appearance  of  Mr.  Crookes' 
articles  and  Mr.  Alfred  Wallace's  pamphlet  in  England  set  Europe 
agog.     Now  the  New  York  dailies  discuss  the  subject  editorially — 

L 

NARRA  FIVE  OF  FA  CTS.  4 1 1 

nearly  all  have  sent  reporters  to  Chittenden,  and  their  example  has 
been  imitated  by  the  journals  of  Chicago,  Hartford,  Rochester, 
Albany,  and  many  other  cities.  Whatever  may  be  the  truth  about 
the  Eddy  affair,  there  can  be  no  question  that  the  public  mind  is 
very  much  excited  upon  the  question  whether  the  spirits  of  the  dead 
return  to  us  or  not." 

This  from  a  Rutland  paper  which  has  all  along  reflected 
the  bitter  and  disdainful  spirit  of  the  community  in  which 
it  is  published,  is  something  remarkable. 

Now  these  are  results — positive,  tangible  results  ;   and 

I  may  well  turn  to  both  scientists  and  churchmen  and 

quote  Dr.  Draper's  language,  with  the  change  of  a  single 

word,  thus  : 

"So  widespread  and  so  powerful  is  this  (interest),  that  it  can 
neither  be  treated  with  contempt  nor  with  punishment.  It  cannot 
be  extinguished  by  derision,  by  vituperation,  or  by  force." 

It  is  the  bare  narration  of  facts  that  has  accomplished 
so  much.  I  have  confined  myself  almost  exclusively  to 
such  phenomena  as  have  been  witnessed  by  myself  or 
others.  I  have  not  attempted  to  inculcate  any  of  the 
doctrines  of  the  Spiritualists,  as  I  find  them  in  the  works 
of  Mr.  Owen,  Mr.  Sargent,  Mr.  Peebles,  or  other  writers. 
Nor  have  I  attempted  to  elicit  from  the  talking  spirits  of 
the  Eddy  band  their  views  upon  the  laws  of  their  own 
existence  and  communication  with  us.  True,  it  would 
have  been  a  waste  of  time  to  have  made  such  an  attempt, 
for  the  Eddy  circle  is  about  the  most  unpromising  of 
places  for  that  sort  of  thing.  One  goes  there  to  see  phe- 
nomena, not  to  discuss  philosophies.  It  was  sufficient 
for  me  if  I  could  see  one  spirit  materialized  under  such 
conditions  as  precluded  the  possibility  of  self-deception. 
That  fact  was  enough  to  set  the  world  to  thinking,  for  it 
opened  up  a  boundless  realm  for  scientific  discovery  and 

412  RESULTS  OF  THE  INVESTIGATION. 

philosophical  and  religious  inquiry.  Let  us  see  how  far 
we  have  gotten  on  our  way  towards  the  truth. 

In  the  first  place,  it  has  been  proven  that,  after  making 
every  allowance  for  fraud  on  the  part  of  the  mediums — 
for  Horatio's  removing  his  hand  from  his  neighbor's  bare 
arm  in  the  light-circle,  for  his  untying  and  rebinding 
himself  in  the  dark-circle,  and  for  William's  personating 
every  alleged  materialized  spirit  that  approximates  to  his 
own  height  and  bulk — we  have  a  large  balance  of  marvels 
to  account  for. 

We  have  the  writing  of  certain  names  that  the  medium 
had  no  means  of  knowing;  the  exhibition  of  detached 
hands  of  various  sizes  and  colors,  some  deformed  by  acci- 
dental pre-mortem  causes ;  we  have  the  simultaneous 
playing  of  musical  compositions  by  such  a  number  of 
instruments  that  one  or  even  two  men  could  not  have 
done  it ;  we  have  the  playing  of  Georgian  and  Circassian 
and  Italian  music  by  invisible  performers,  in  response  to 
requests  made  in  languages  that  neither  the  medium  nor 
any  other  person  in  the  room,  except  the  asker,  under- 
stood; we  have  the  pulling  of  a  spring-balance  by 
detached  hands  unlike  the  medium's,  one  with  a  finger 
amputated,  and  the  other  with  tattoo  marks  upon  the 
wrist,  which,  in  each  case,  would  prove  that  the  medium 
had  nothing  to  do  with  the  pulling ;  we  have  had  the 
playing  upon  an  instrument  and  the  display  of  hands, 
beyond  the  reach  of  the  medium,  and  when  his  position 
and  movements  were  all  under  easy  scrutiny  ;  we  have 
had  the  passage  of  a  solid  iron  ring  upon  the  arm  of  the 
medium,  and  its  transfer  to  my  own,  with  both  of  the 
medium's  hands  held  by  mine,  and  also  the  dropping 

RESUL  TS  CONTINUED.  4 1 3 

of  the  same  solid  ring  from  the  medium's  arm  to  the 
floor,  in  the  light,  with  a  lamp  standing  within  two  feet 
of  the  medium. 

We  have  had  the  execution  of  airs  upon  various 
musical  instruments  in  concert,  in  a  style  so  utterly 
unlike  the  best  efforts  of  the  medium  as  to  preclude 
the  idea  that  he  could  have  been  the  performer  upon 
either  one  of  them;  we  have  had,  finally,  the  appear- 
ance of  a  multitude  of  figures  emerging  from  a  closet, 
where,  in  the  nature  of  things,  it  was  impossible  that 
any  mortal  person  except  one  man  could  have  been, 
dressed  in  a  great  variety  of  costumes,  and  differing  in 
size,  apparent  weight,  manner,  sex,  age,  and  complexion 
from  that  person — to  make  no  account  of  those  whom 
he  might  have  personated  if  he  had  been  supplied  with 
the  appliances  of  the  actor's  art. 

We  have,  moreover,  and  especially,  seen  some  of 
these  figures  dressed  in  Oriental  costumes  and  speak- 
ing Oriental  languages,  besides  others  who  conversed 
audibly  in  the  modern  tongues  of  Europe.  Of  the 
appearance  of  children  and  even  little  babes  in  arms; 
of  the  appearance  of  two  of  the  former  at  one  and  the 
same  time ;  of  the  speaking  of  words  and  sentences  by 
various  children  I  have  heretofore  given  such  circum- 
stantial accounts,  and  the  substantiation  of  my  state- 
ments is  so  easy,  that  I  cite  the  facts  as  among  the  most 
wonderful  of  the  proofs  accumulated  during  my  pro- 
tracted investigation. 

It  will  not  escape  the  notice  of  the  unprejudiced  and 

intelligent  reader  that  in  the  above  enumeration  I  have 

not  included  one  of  the  things  reported  by  me  which 
14* 

4 1 4  SPIRIT-  WRITINGS. 

admits  of  doubt.  I  have  omitted  a  whole  array  of  so- 
called  "manifestations"  which  might  be  imitated  by  an 
unprincipled  and  clever  medium. 

I  omit  some  things  that  have  been  described  in  this 
series  of  Chapters,  such  as  the  writing  of  names  in 
characters  which  are  suspiciously  like  Horatio  Eddy's 
manuscript ;  the  drawing  of  objects  in  his  light-circle 
and  bed-room  ;  the  bell  test ;  the  weighing  of  Honto, 
which,  nevertheless,  I  regard  as  a  genuine  test ;  the 
making  of  my  two  ribbon  wreaths;  the  bringing  of 
material  substances  into  the  dark-circle,  and  a  great 
many  more  matters,  not  because  in  any  one  case  I 
have  doubts  amounting  to  conviction  that  fraud  was 
attempted  or  consummated,  but  because  there  is,  in  my 
opinion,  enough  left  to  challenge  the  closest  scrutiny, 
and  arouse  the  greatest  wonder,  after  passing  by  every- 
thing about  the  genuineness  of  which  there  can  be  two 
honest  opinions. 

Referring  to  the  spirit-writings,  (so  claimed,)  of  which 
fac-similes  have  been  given,  it  should  be  observed  that 
the  imitation  of  handwriting  in  documents,  instanta- 
neously produced,  is,  like  most  other  phenomena  of 
modern  Spiritualism,  nothing  new.  I  have  found,  in 
Lane's  "  Manners  and  Customs  of  the  Modern  Egyp- 
tians" (Vol.  I,  pp.  362-3.),  an  account  of  the  magical 
performances  of  a  very  celebrated  Sheikh,  named 
Isma'ee'l  Ab'oo  Roo-oo's,  on  the  occasion  of  a  visit  to 
him  by  two  Egyptian  gentlemen,  one  of  whom  was 
known  to,  and  indorsed  by,  the  author.  The  Sheikh 
being  asked  to  show  proof  of  his  skill,  complied. 

One  of  the  visitors  asked  that  coffee  might  be  served 

NO  T  FUL  LY  SA  TI SPIED.  4 1 5 

to  them  in  his  father's  set  of  cups  and  saucers,  which 
he  knew  to  be  at  home,  a  long  distance  off,  In  a  few 
minutes  the  coffee  was  brought,  in  the  identical  cups 
he  had  named,  or  what  appeared  to  be  the  same.  He 
was  next  treated  to  sherbet,  in  his  father's  own  glasses. 
He  then  wrote  a  letter  to  his  father,  and,  giving  it  to 
the  Sheikh,  asked  that  it  might  be  answered.  "  The 
magician  took  the  letter,  placed  it  behind  a  cushion  of 
his  deewa'n  (divan),  and,  a  few  minutes  after,  removing 
the  cushion,  showed  him  that  his  letter  wras  gone,  and 
that  another  was  in  its  place."  The  visitor  opened  and 
read  the  letter,  and  "  found  in  it,  in  a  handwriting 
which,  he  said,  he  could  have  sworn  to  be  that  of  his 
father,  a  complete  answer  to  what  he  had  written,  and 
an  account  of  the  state  of  his  family,  which  he  proved, 
on  his  return  to  Cairo,  to  be  pefectly  true." 

I  now  ask  the  reader  to  refer  to  my  report  of  the 
Katie  King  affair,  in  Part  II,  and  examine  the  fac- 
similes, there  given,  of  the  specimens  of  direct  spirit- 
writing,  obtained  by  me  at  two  different  seances  with  a 
non-professional  lady  medium,  which  seem  to  be  the 
most  curious  and  striking  manifestations  of  the  kind 
on  record.  In  the  light  of  such  facts  as  these  we  may 
well  suspend  judgment  as  to  the  source  of  the  writings 
given  to  me  through  Horatio  Eddy's  mediumship. 

That  I  am  very  far  from  satisfied  with  the  results 
attained  at  Chittenden  is  already  known.  This  arises 
from  the  fact  that  if  barely  a  fair  chance  had  been  given 
me  to  apply  tests  and  prescribe  conditions,  I  would  have 
made  this  work  one  of  the  most  interesting  ever  written 
in  its  array  of  conclusive  experiments.     There  never  was 

4 1 6        THE  IN  VESTIGA  TION  NO  T  FR  UITLESS. 

so  great  an  opportunity  afforded  to  the  investigator  to 
obtain  satisfying  proof  of  the  immortal  existence  of 
human  spirits,  nor  ever  one  so  maliciously  and  ignorantly 
destroyed  by  spirits  or  mortals.  Mr.  Crookes'  investiga- 
tions were  limited  by  the  tests  he  could  apply  to  a  single 
spirit,  or  at  most  one  or  two  more,  while  here  were  nearly 
or  quite  four  hundred  encountered,  nearly  every  one  of 
which  ought,  if  their  appearance  had  been  regulated  by 
intelligent  control,  to  have  aided  in  the  contribution  of 
something  valuable  to  our  store  of  knowledge. 

But  it  is  idle  now  to  deplore  what  cannot  be  mended. 
We  have  gathered  together  enough  to  point  the  men  of 
science  in  the  direction  which  they  should  take.  Enough 
has  been  rescued  from  oblivion  to  show  the  church  the 
importance  of  neglecting  no  longer  the  chance  that  offers 
to  get  proof  palpable  to  sustain  them  in  their  defence 
against  the  assault  of  the  Materialist  and  the  Atheist. 
The  harvest  truly  is  ready,  but  the  laborers  are  few. 

There  being  no  chance  to  fortify  our  philosophy  or 
improve  our  system  of  ethics  by  the  teachings  of  the 
Chittenden  ghosts,  it  will  be  asked,  as  indeed  it  already 
has  been  many  times,  of  what  use  are  these  phenomena? 
What  do  they  promise  to  effect  for  the  welfare  of  man- 
kind ?  It  is  not  my  province  to  answer.  It  suffices  that 
these  are  the  phenomena — permitted  to  occur,  in  the 
providence  of  God,  or  by  procurement  of  the  devil,  as 
you  will — a  positive,  easily  proven  fact. 

It  surely  needs  no  great  discernment  to  see  that  if  they 
are  not  fraudulent  they  demand  instant  investigation. 
And  to  the  further  question,  why,  if  they  are  real  mani- 
festations, they  are  made  in  such  a  place,  among  such 

FUTURE  USES  OF  SPIRITUALISM.  417 

people  and  such  surroundings,  I  simply  reply  that  I  do 
not  know.  In  other  times  it  was  a  cause  of  reproach 
among  the  Pharisees  that  Christ  was  born  in  a  stable 
among  beasts,  and  was  followed  by  disciples  of  base 
birth,  instead  of  seeing  the  light  in  some  stuccoed  palace 
in  the  Jerusalem  Fifth  avenue,  and  having  a  company  of 
perfumed  aristocrats  at  his  heels.  I  leave  it  to  the  straw- 
splitters  to  settle  the  question  to  their  own  satisfaction, 
and  content  myself  with  recording  the  fact  that  the  phe- 
nomena of  Chittenden  are  apparently  real,  at  least  to  a 
certain  extent,  and  they  cannot  be  ignored  any  longer, 
v   And  now  let  me  state  a  few  facts  by  way  of  conclusion. 

I  have  heretofore  confined  my  narrative  to  accounts  of 
the  reunion  of  separated  families  and  the  visits  of  friend- 
ship made  by  the  people  of  the  other  world  to  those  they 
love  in  this.  I  have  reserved  for  my  last  Chapter  an 
incident  that  shows  that  the  time  has  possibly  come  when 
the  trite  adage  "  murder  will  out,"  is  to  have  a  terrible 
significance.  It  is  always  so  much  pleasanter  to  dwell 
upon  the  agreeable  than  the  horrible,  upon  what  attracts 
and  charms  rather  than  upon  that  which  startles  and 
appalls,  that,  I  take  it,  no  further  explanation  will  be 
required  of  the  fact  above  stated.  But  if  any  other 
reason  were  needed  for  the  reservation  of  the  story  of 
the  Griswold  murder  for  the  last  Chapter,  it  may  be  found 
in  my  desire  to  leave  upon  the  minds  of  a  certain  class 
of  readers  a  strong  impression  that,  should  the  investiga- 
tion of  these  spiritual  phenomena  result  in  the  confirmation 
of  their  verity,  a  most  important  source  of  aid  to  the 
cause  of  justice  might  thus  be  discovered  and  availed  of. 

If  materialized  spirits  can  address  audiences,  as  I  have 

41 8  A  FOUL  MURDER. 

heard  them  in  the  Eddy  house,  is  there  any  reason  why, 
after  a  time,  they  may  not  take  the  stand  in  a  court  of 
justice  and  testify  against  their  murderers?  What  a  day 
to  be  remembered  would  that  be  when  the  fictions  of 
Shakspeare's  imagination  should  be  paralleled  by  the 
facts  coming  within  our  personal  experience ;  when  our 
modern  Hamlets,  Banquos,  and  Duncans  would  stalk  into 
the  presence  of  judge  and  jury  and  show  their  bleeding 
wounds  to  the  horror-stricken  assassin. 

Now,  of  course,  this  will  appear  absurd  to  the  great 
majority  of  persons  who  read  this,  and  so  it  would  have 
seemed  to  me  before  I  went  to  Chittenden  and  saw  what 
I  did  there ;  but  what  does  the  reader  say  when  I  tell  him 
that  on  the  evening  of  September  28th  I  saw  the  spirit 
of  a  woman  who  was  murdered  on  the  night  of  Sunday, 
August  27th,  1865,  at  Williston,  Vt.,  by  a  New  York 
rough  named  John  Ward  alias  Jerome  Lavigne,  by  the 
procurement  of  her  son-in-law,  Charles  Potter?  That 
after  her  murder  the  woman  appeared  there  with  all  her 
wounds  upon  her  and  described  the  whole  scene  ?  Does 
that  look  as  if  it  were  quite  so  absurd  to  imagine  that  the 
same  thing  may,  one  day,  be  seen  in  a  court-room,  either 
with  or  without  the  presence  of  a  "  materializing 
medium  ? "  It  is  prophesied  by  the  spirits  at  Eddys' 
that  next  September  they  will  address  the  audience  in 
that  circle-room  in  full  light  and  with  people  sitting  about 
them  upon  the  platform;  why  should  not  an  equal  effort 
be  made  to  deter  from  crime,  and,  if  need  be,  punish  it? 

Mrs.  Sarah  Walker  Griswold,  a  lady  sixty  years  of 
age,  lived  with  her  husband  on  their  farm  in  the  town 
of  Williston,  and  their  adopted  daughter  and  niece  and 

HISTORY  OF  THE  MURDER.  419 

her  husband,  Charles  Potter.  On  the  morning  of  the 
murder  the  Potters,  their  children,  old  Mr.  Griswold, 
and  Potter's  brother  went  to  Canada,  leaving  with  Mrs. 
Griswold  only  a  small  boy,  about  thirteen  years  of  age. 
On  Monday  morning  a  neighbor  went  to  the  house 
and  discovered  the  body  of  Mrs.  Griswold  lying,  half- 
naked,  in  a  calf-pen  some  rods  from  the  house  in  a 
horribly  mutilated  condition. 

The  surgeons  "found  wounds  on  the  left  side  of  the 
head,  fracturing  the  skull,  which  were  undoubtedly 
produced  by  some  blunt  instrument.  On  the  right 
side  of  the  head  were  four  or  five  contusions,  probably 
made  by  the  same  instrument.  There  were  also  several 
stabs  in  the  neck,  one  about  two  inches  in  length,  from 
left  to  right,  and  severing  the  right  external  jugular 
vein.  These  wounds  were  evidently  made  by  some 
sharp-pointed  instrument.  Two  cuts  were  found  on 
the  back  of  the  left  hand,  also  on  the  back  of  the  right 
hand,  and  one  an  inch  and  a  half  deep  on  the  left  side 
of  the  chin,  passing  to  the  right  up  to  the  centre  of  the 
lip.  The  knees  were  badly  bruised  as  was  the  left  side 
of  the  chest." 

In  due  course  of  time  the  murderer  was  tracked  and 
brought  to  justice ;  and  the  guilt  of  Potter  being  brought 
home  to  him,  he  also  fell  into  the  hands  of  the  law. 
The  artist  has  represented,  in  the  picture  accompanying 
this,  the  appearance  of  the  spirit  of  Mrs.  Griswold  when 
she  first  came  to  the  Eddy  circle-room.  When  I  saw 
her  she  presented  a  natural  appearance,  and  was  neatly 
attired  in  a  white  dress.  On  a  previous  occasion  she 
was  seen  by  a  friend  who  knew  her  in  life,  a  Mr.  P.  P. 

420  THE   VICTIM  MA  TERIALIZED. 

Wilkins,  of  Winooski  Falls  (Vt.),  who  writes  me  that: 
"Mrs.  Griswold  materialized  herself  and  I  recognized 
her.  She  grasped  my  hand  and  presented  me  with  a 
flower."  The  motive  prompting  Potter  to  the  murder 
was  a  threat  on  her  part  to  change  her  will  so  as  to  cut 
off  his  wife  and  himself  from  any  share  in  her  property, 
which  she  had  accumulated  in  California  in  the  course 
of  a  long  residence  there. 

The  series  of  cuts  relating  to  Honto,  and  the  one 
introducing  Mrs.  Pritchard  in  a  group  with  her  son,* 
are  designed  to  show  that  I  am  warranted  in  the 
assertion  that  the  exact  height  of  certain  spirits  has 
been  ascertained  by  comparing  them  with  that  of  liv- 
ing persons.  Here  we  have  Mrs.  Pritchard  measuring 
with  her  son,  and  the  spirit  squaw  in  such  close  rela- 
tion to  Horatio  (whose  height  is  5  feet  11  inches),  Mrs. 
Cleveland  (5  feet  7  inches),  Mr.  Pritchard  (5  feet 
5  inches),  and  Mr.  Ralph,  of  Utica,  N.  Y.,  that  even  if 
I  had  never  seen  her  standing  with  her  back  against 
my  scale  affixed  to  the  wall,  at  either  side  of  the  cabinet- 
door,  I  need  have  been  at  no  loss  to  discover  that  she 
bears  no  resemblance  in  this  particular  to  William  Eddy, 
whose  height  (5  feet  9  inches)  and  weight  (179  lbs.) 
have  already  been  stated.  If  more  has  been  said  of  this 
girl  in  these  Chapters  than  of  any  other  single  spirit,  it 
is  because  she  has  been  oftener  seen  and  more  closely 
noticed.  She  holds  the  same  relation  to  the  Eddy 
circles,  in  frequency  and  variety  of  her  appearances 
and  acts,  as  does  Katie  King  to  the  circles  of  Mr.  and 
Mrs.  Holmes,  of  Philadelphia.     It  is  not  true  that  she 

*  See  Page  265. 

FAREWELL   TO  CHITTENDEN.  423 

is  always  the  first  spirit  to  appear,  nor  that  she  appears 
every  evening,  as  the  attentive  reader  will  recollect ; 
but  she  causes  more  of  a  sensation  than  almost  any 
other  of  the  weird  visitors  at  the  Chittenden  seances  by 
the  vivacity  of  her  performances,  her  thorough  enjoy- 
ment of  the  situation,  and  her  great  flow  of  animal 
spirits.  If  it  is  ever  discovered  that  she  and  her 
medium  are  identical,  I  shall  have  to  confess  that  there 
are  possibilities  of  deception  in  the  transformation  of 
personal  appearance  within  the  reach  of  this  Vermont 
farmer,  beyond  anything  I  ever  read  of  since  the  tales 
Qf  the  Yogiswara  and  Peruvian  sorcerers,  and  of  Zilto, 
the  necromancer  of  the  Court  of  King  Wenceslaus,  at 
once  excited  my  wonder  and  aroused  my  skepticism. 

And  now  I  turn  my  face  away  from  Chittenden,  and 
close  the  record  of  my  interesting  experiences  at  that 
place ;  leaving  each  reader  to  digest  the  facts,  and  form 
a  belief  for  himself.  I  doubt  if  three  more  memorable 
months  were  ever  passed  by  any  one ;  and  in  future 
years  I  shall  never  be  able  to  recall  the  secluded  farm- 
house and  its  ghostly  memories,  without  thinking  of 
Tom  Hood's  verse: 

"  And  over  all  there  hung  a  shade  of  fear, 
A  sense  of  mystery  the  spirit  daunted, 
And  said,  as  plain  as  whisper  in  the  ear,    j 
The  place  is  haunted." 

fW 

PART    II. 

THE  KATIE  KING  AFFAIR. 

I  HAVE  stated,  in  the  Preface  to  this  volume,  the 
circumstances  under  which  my  investigation  of  the 
Katie  King  fiasco,  in  the  city  of  Philadelphia,  was 
undertaken.  When  I  expressed  the  hope  (see  Page 
385)  that  some  unbiased  person  would  investigate  the 
case,  under  proper  test  conditions,  it  was  farthest  from  my 
thoughts  that  I  would  be  the  one  selected  for  the  dis- 
agreeable task.  I  had  neither  set  myself  up  as  an 
inquirer  into  the  general  facts  of  Spiritualism,  nor  was 
it  a  part  of  my  plan  to  embrace  any  comprehensive  sur- 
vey of  the  subject  within  the  limits  of  this  work.  The 
Eddy  manifestations  were  my  theme,  and  such  other 
matters  as  I  might  introduce  were  intended  either  to  aid 
in  arriving  at  a  just  opinion  concerning  their  genuine- 
ness, or,  at  the  most,  to  show  how  the  phenomenon  of 
u  materialization,"  was  regarded  by  the  leaders  of  opinion 
in  this  country. 

But,  when  the  Philadelphia  journals  heralded  the  fact 
that  Katie  King  was  no  spirit,  nor  Nelson  Holmes  and 
his  wife  mediums,  I  was  at  once  importuned,  by  many 
respected  correspondents,  to  institute  such  an  inquiry 
into  the  facts  as  might  reveal  the  exact  truth  to  that 
great  body  of  the  public  who  had  relied  implicitly  upon 
the  reports  of  Mr.  Owen  and  General  Lippitt,  and 
adopted  a  belief  in  the  actuality  of  the  so-called 
materializations. 

These  requests  at  last  became  so  numerous  and  so 
425 

426  THE  KA  TIE  KING  AFFAIR. 

urgent  that  I  could  no  longer  doubt  as  to  my  duty  in  the 
premises.    I  was  perfectly  aware  of  the  difficulty  I  should 
experience  in   sifting  the  truth  out  of  the  multitude  of 
conflicting   reports    that   had   reached   the    public    ear 
through  the  newspapers.     I  knew  the  thanklessness  of 
the  task — the  certainty  of  abuse  by  one  party   or  the 
other,  whatever  decision  I  might  give — the  misrepresen- 
tation of  my  motives — the  challenging  of  my  conclusions. 
I  was   only   too   well   assured   that   a   skeptical   public 
would  neither  be  grateful  if  I  should  prove  the  "  materi- 
alizations "  fraudulent,  nor  friendly  if  my  tests   should 
have  an  opposite  result.     I  knew  all  this,  but,  neverthe- 
less, did  not  alter  my  determination,  for  several  reasons. 
In  the  first  place,  I  recollected  the  words  of  M.  Bailly, 
the  great  Frenchman  :  "  In  every  error  there  is  a  kernel 
of  truth  :  let   us   seek  to  detach    that   kernel   from  the 
envelop  that  hides  it  from  our  eyes  " ;  secondly,  I  had 
Mr.  Owen's  own  authority  for  it  that  "  when  a  man  of 
honest  motive,  seeking  only  the  truth,  plainly  and  impar- 
tially narrates  his   experience,  that  which  he  says  usually 
bears  with  it  to  the  upright  mind  an  internal  warrant  of 
sincerity "  (see  his  Footfalls,  p.  55);  and,  finally,  none 
but  moral  cowards  hesitate  to  perform  their  duty,  because 
of  possible  personal  consequences.     So,  on  or  about  the 
27th  of  December,  1874,  I  addressed  a  letter  to  the  Hon. 
Robert  Dale  Owen,  in  which  I  stated  that  if  Mr.  and 
Mrs.  Holmes  were  willing  to  submit  their  mediumship  to 
the  proof,  and  would  agree  to  place  themselves  under 
such  test  conditions  as  I  might  prescribe,  I  would  come 
to  Philadelphia  and  make  the  investigation. 

I  received,  by  return  mail,  a  letter  from  Mr.  Owen,  in 
which  that  most  respected  and  honorable  gentleman  was 
good  enough  to  express  himself  as  follows : 

"I  am  rejoiced  at  your  proposal,  and  shall  always  hold  myself 
your  debtor  for  having  made  it.  Accepted  or  rejected,  proving  or 
disproving  the  materializing  powers  of  the  mediums,  it  can  eventuate 
only  in  good." 

The  letter  covered  the  desired  invitation  from  the 
mediums ;  which  was  in  the  following  language : 

No.  825  Tenth  Street, 
Philadelphia,  December  28th,  1874.    ; 
Dear  Sir  : — 

The  undersigned,  being  willing  to  afford  to  intelligent  and  impar- 
tial investigators  proofs  of  the  reality  of  our  mediumship,  and, 

PREPARING  FOR   IVOR  A'.  427 

especially,  of  the   appearance  of  materialized  spirit-forms  through 

the  same,  and  having  confidence   in  your  ability,  and  disposition  to 

do  equal  justice,  hereby  invite  you  to  attend  our  seances,  and  agree 

to  submit  to  such  reasonable  scientific  test  conditions  as  you  may 

prescribe. 

(Signed.)    Jennie  Holmes, 

for  self,  and  Mr.  Neeson  Holmes,  absent. 

To  Colonel  H.  S.  Olcott. 

Upon  the  29th,  I  notified  Mrs.  Holmes  that  the  invi- 
tation was  accepted;  and,  upon  the  following  Tuesday 
( January  5th),  I  was  in  Philadelphia,  ready  to  begin.  I 
found,  however,  that  Mrs.  Holmes  was  at  her  husband's 
place  in  Vineland,  N.  J.,  where  he  was  lying  very  ill 
with  a  hemorrhage,  and  that  she  would  not  be  in  town 
until  the  following  week.  I  concluded,  therefore,  to 
employ  the  interval  of  time  in  possessing  myself  of  all 
the  attainable  facts  of  the  case,  and,  to  this  end,  sought 
interviews  both  with  the  principal  parties  through  whose 
instrumentality  the  alleged  expose  had  been  made, 
and  with  those  who  still  had  confidence  in  the  honest 
mediumship  of  the  Holmeses. 

I  obtained  from  both  sides  such  documents  as  might 
assist  me  in  arriving  at  a  correct  judgment.  Among 
them  were  original  letters  from  Mr.  Holmes  to  various 
correspondents ;  letters  from  the  pseudo  Katie  King ; 
notes  written  by  the  alleged  spirit  to  Mr.  Owen,  to  Dr. 
Adolph  Fellger,  and  to  Mrs.  R.  K.  Stoddard,  at  various 
times  during  last  Summer,  and  handed  to  them  through 
the  cabinet-window  ;  the  original  manuscript  of  the  com- 
munication supposed  at  the  time  to  have  been  written 
to  Mr.  Owen  by  the  detached  spirit-hand  of  Frederick. 
W.  Robertson,  but  now  alleged  to  be  a  fraud  and  decep- 
tion ;  and,  finally,  files  of  the  Philadelphia  newspapers, 
containing  the  details  of  the  alleged  expose.  I  tried  to 
secure  a  personal  interview  with  the  woman  who  pre- 
tended to  have  personated  Katie  King  and  deceived  the 
public,  but  was  unsuccessful ;  it  being  asserted,  falsely, 
as  I  afterward  discovered,  that  she  was  not  in  town,  nor 
was  her  whereabouts  known. 

That  my  readers  may  understand  the  nature  of  the 
problem  presented  to  me  for  solution,  it  will  be  necessary 
for  me  to  make  a  brief  statement  of  facts. 

"  In  May,  1874,"  according  to  a  pamphlet  issued  by 
Dr.  Henry  T.  Child,  a  Philadelphia  Spiritualist,  "  a  spirit 

428  THE  KA  TIE  KING  AFFAIR. 

was  materialized"  at  the  seances  of  Mr.  Nelson  Holmes 
and  his  wife,  Mrs.  Jennie  Holmes,  "  and  appeared  at  the 
aperture  of  the  cabinet  in  which  Mr.  Holmes  was  sitting, 
who  gave  the  name  of  '  Katie  King.'  Several  other 
spirits  appeared,  some  of  whom  were  recognized."  On 
the  20th  of  the  same  month,  the  author  tells  us,  the 
spirit  of  John  King,  Katie's  father,  also  made  its  appear- 
ance and  was  identified.  Dr.  Child  saw  him,  and  "  con- 
versed with  him  for  some  time."  The  spirit,  moreover, 
expressed  a  wish  that  the  Doctor  would  write  out  a 
correct  account  of  his,  (King's)  earth-life,  from  his  dicta- 
tion. He  informed  him  that  he  had  known  him  (Dr. 
Child),  for  years  "  as  a  writer  and  worker,"  that  his 
guides  had  been  at  first  quite  reluctant  to  have  him, 
(King),  come,  lest  he  should  take  the  Doctor  "  out  of  the 
earth-form,"  but  that  no  harm  should  result  if  the  Doctor 
would  only  set  to  work  to  write  out  the  ex-buccaneer's 
autobiography.  The  result  of  this  colloquy  was,  as  Dr. 
Child  informs  us  in  his  Preface,  that  he  gave  an  hour 
in  private  each  day  to  John  and  Katie,  and  "  received 
from  them  "  the  narratives  embodied  in  the  pamphlet  in 
question. 

It  will  be  observed  that  our  author  unqualifiedly 
asserts  two  facts;  (i)  That  the  materialized  spirits  of  the 
man  John  King,  alias  Sir  Henry  Morgan,  and  the  girl 
Katie  King  appeared  at  the  seances  of  Mr.  and  Mrs. 
Holmes ;  and  (2)  that  the  same  spirits  visited  him 
an  hour  each  day,  and  dictated  the  autobiographical 
narratives  which  compose  the  pamphlet  to  which 
allusion   has   been    made. 

Upon  examination,  these  narratives  prove  to  be  very 
explicit  and  circumstantial  accounts  of  the  earthly 
experiences  of  the  man  and  girl ;  the  manner  of  their 
deaths ;  their  experiences  and  progress  in  the  world  of 
spirits;  and  their  relations  to  the  present  spiritualistic 
movement  upon  our  earth.  They  are  mutually  corrobo- 
rative, and  at  the  same  time,  indorse  the  reality  of  the 
spirit  appearances  in  the  Holmes  cabinet.  To  make 
his  certification  of  their  genuineness  and  importance 
more  emphatic,  Dr.  Child  uses,  in  the  concluding 
paragraph  of  his  Preface,  the  following  language : 

"  These  narratives,  and  especially  the  concluding  one,  enter  quite 
fully  into  an  explanation  of  the  spiritual  manifestations.  The 
statements  are  of  a  profound  character,  and  the  •writer,  as  an  aman- 
ftensis,  asks  for  them  the  most  candid  and  deliberate  consideration." 

KA  TIE 'S  "A  UTOBIOGRAPHY."  429 

At  page  35,  he  introduces  the  narrative  of  Katie 
King,  (the  same  whom  he  tells  us  he  saw  so  often  at 
the  Holmes  seances)  with  the  assertion  that  "  On  the 
fifth  of  June  1874,  Katie  and  her  father  came  to  me  in 
my  office,  and  after  a  brief  conversation,  she  said,  '  I 
am  now  ready  to  begin  my  narrative,'  and  I  wrote  the 
following: 

"  My  Dear  Friend  and  Brother  : — 

I  should  be  very  sorry  if  you  inferred  from  the  manner  in  which 
I  appear  and  speak  to  you  and  other  friends  when  /  am  materialized 
that  that  is  a  criterion  of  my  present  condition  etc." 

Here  we  have  the  positive  assertion,  by  the  Katie 
King  dictating  to  Dr.  Child,  in  his  office,  that  the  Katie 
King  whom  he  had  seen  materialized  at  the  Holmes' 
and  who  had  addressed  him  rudely,  was  none  other  than 
herself;  and  the  public  was  led  by  this  assertion,  as 
well  as  by  interesting  articles  contributed  by  General 
F.  J.  Lippitt,  to  the  Galaxy  Magazine,  of  December, 
1874,  and  by  Mr.  Owen,  to  the  Alla?itic  Monthly,  of 
January  1875,  as  well  as  by  frequent  contributions  by 
the  latter  to  the  newspapers,  to  imagine  that  at  least  the 
Katie  of  the  public  seances  was  really  a  visitor  to  us 
from  the  other  world. 

Such  was  the  general  belief  until  about  the  5th  of 
January  1875,  when  a  card  was  published  by  Mr.  Owen, 
to  the  effect  that  circumstantial  evidence  had  come  to 
his  knowledge  which  made  it  necessary  that  he  should 
withdraw  his  previous  expressions  of  confidence  in  the 
Holmeses.  A  similiar  card  was  issued  by  Dr.  Child, 
who  gave  notice  that,  from  and  after  that  date,  he 
would  have  nothing  more  to  do  with  the  seances  of 
those  mediums.  On  the  15th,  Mr.  Owen  wrote  me  as 
follows : 

"  You  may  have  seen  in  the  Banner  of  Light,  or  quoted  from  it, 
a  brief  note  of  mine  withdrawing  the  assurance  hitherto  given  by 
me  of  confidence  in  the  Holmeses.  An  explanatory  article  from  me 
will  appear  in  the  Banner  of  December  19  (next  Saturday). 

I  believe  they  have  been  latterly  playing  us  false,  which  may  be 
only  supplementing  the  genuine  with  the  spurious ;  but  it  does  cast 
a  doubt  on  last  summer's  manifestations,  so  that  I  shall  probably 
not  use  them  in  my  next  book  on  Spiritualism.  It  is  a  loss ;  but 
you  and  Mr.  Crookes  have  amply  made  it  up." 

I  quote  the  above  because  the  same  in  substance  has 

430  THE  KA  TIE  KING  AFFAIR. 

been  said  by  Mr.  Owen  in  the  public  prints,  and.  these 
paragraphs  succinctly  define  his  position  at  the  time. 
The  promised  explanatory  article  made  its  appearance 
at  the  time  designated,  and  set  forth  that  the  writer 
had  some  reason  to  fear  that  the  spirit  Katie  King  had 
been  personated  by  a  woman  hired  for  the  purpose  by 
Mr.  and  Mrs.  Holmes,  and  that  there  was  more  or  less 
doubt  if  any  of  the  apparent  materializations  had  been 
genuine.  A  long  letter  from  Dr.  Child  was  also  pub- 
lished, taking  the  same  position.  Of  course  the  matter 
at  once  acquired  very  wide  notoriety  ;  the  Philadelphia 
Inquirer,  at  various  times  gave  free  and  detailed  accounts 
of  the  manner  in  which  the  fraud  had  been  perpetrated ; 
and  the  patient  and  credulously  skeptical  public  for  the 
thousandth  time  thanked  the  gods  that  this  spiritualis- 
tic humbug  was  finally,  and  forever  exploded. 

There  was  still  alas !  a  flavor  of  aloes  in  the  sugar 
pill.  The  real  name  of  the  woman  claiming  to  have 
enacted  the  part  of  Katie,  as  well  as  that  of  the  person, 
through  whose  instrumentality  she  had  been  detected 
and  induced  to  expose  the  nefarious  plot,  were  carefully 
concealed. 

On  the  9th  and  nth  of  January,  the  Inquirer  printed 
what  purported  to  be  an  autobiographical  sketch  of 
"  Katie  King,"  duly  attested  by  her  oath,  under  her 
pseudonym,  before  William  B.  Hanna,  Judge  of  the 
Orphans'  Court,  in  the  presence  of  William  W.  Hard- 
ing, L.  Clarke  Davis,  John  G.  Ford,  A.  C.  Lambdin 
M.  D.,  Joseph  Robinson  and  John  J.  McKenna.  At 
this  same  interview:  "the  robes,  coronet,  etc.  used  by 
Katie  King,  by  which  name  she  must  be  known,"  were 
produced  and  identified,  and  in  the  Inquirer  of  the  9th, 
there  appeared,  in  the  editorial  columns,  the  following 
certificate : 

"  I  hereby  certify  that  I  witnessed  the  signing  of  the  above  con- 
fession of  Katie  King,  and  that  it  was  signed,  declared  and  affirmed 
to  be  true  by  the  person  who  appeared  at  the  seances  of  Mr.  and  Mrs. 
Nelson  Holmes,  No.  50  North  Ninth  Street,  and  No.  825  North 
Tenth  Street,  as  the  materialized  spirit  of  Katie  King. 

Henry  T.  Child  M.  D.,  No.  634  Race  St. 

This  certificate  was  given  four  days  after  I  arrived  in 
Philadelphia,  and  had  announced  to  Dr.  Child,  in  per- 
son, that  I  was  about  to  make  a  thorough  investigation 
into  the  facts,  and  into  the  mediumship  of  Mr.  and 

AN  INCOMPETENT  WITNESS.  431 

Mrs.  Holmes,  under  strictly  test  conditions!  It  will 
be  observed  that  its  identification  of  the  unknown 
woman  as  the  supposed  spirit  Katie  King  is  unqualified 
and  precise; — as  much  so,  almost,  as  Dr.  Child's  pre- 
vious certification  of  the  identity  of  the  spirit  of  the 
Holmes  seances,  with  the  spirit  who  dictated  her  auto- 
biography to  him,  in  his  office,  during  the  months  of 
May  and  June,  1874. 

Reading  it  in  connection  with  the  statements  of  the 
pamphlet,  it  is  difficult  to  escape  a  conviction  that  a 
witness  who  could  so  place  himself  on  both  sides  of  a 
case  would  be  turned  out  of  court  as  incompetent.  If 
Mr.  Owen  was  deceived  by  tricksters  into  believing  the 
cunning  wench  of  the  cabinets  a  materialized  spirit,  no 
graver  charge  could  lie  against  him  than  that  of  sur- 
rendering his  caution  too  easily  to  his  credulity ;  but 
with  Dr.  Child  the  case  is  far  different.  He  was  not, 
like  Mr.  Owen,  obliged  to  depend  alone  upon  his 
external  senses  for  the  formation  of  his  convictions, 
for,  as  he  informs  us  in  his  pamphlet,  he  "has  long 
been  subject  to  influences  from  the  interior  world,  and 
having  been  accustomed  to  see  and  hear  spirits,  has 
learned,  etc."  This  inner  sense,  this  unerring  instinct 
of  the  soul,  it  was  that  told  him,  in  the  privacy  of  his 
office,  that  the  real  John  and  real  Katie  were  talking  to 
him,  both  there  and  at  the  Holmes  seances,  and  his 
certification  of  the  fact  gave  force  to  the  public  belief 
that  the  apparitions  were  real. 

That  a  man  so  doubly  sure,  and  a  £eer  so  doubly 
endowed  could,  at  one  moment,  act  as  biographer  for 
a  girl  spirit,  whose  identity  was  made  an  hundredfold 
more  certain  by  weeks  of  familiar  intercourse,  and,  at 
another,  certify  that  the  veiled  woman  exhibiting  her 
tinsel  robes  and  flummery  coronets  before  a  council  of 
editors,  was  the  self-same  phantom,  makes  it  absurd 
to  place  any  weight  upon  his  testimony,  except  as  sup- 
ported by  that  of  others,  or  by  documents  that  have 
not  been  tampered  with.  This,  of  course,  is  said  with 
no  ill-feeling  towards  Dr.  Child,  and  he  himself  must 
have  already  apprehended  the  position  into  which  his 
precipitate  action  has  forced  him  before  the  public. 
His  friends,  who  know  him  best  and  feel  assured  of  his 
personal  integrity,  may  charge  him  only  with  a  shock- 
ing lack  of  discretion;  but  the  outside  world,  who  are 
never  nice  (and  alas  !  too  often  unjust)  in  their  estimate 

432  THE  KA  TIE  KING  AFFAIR. 

of  motives,  are  quite  as  likely  as  not  to  find  their  expla- 
nation for  this  change  of  front  in  the  promise  or 
realization  of  personal  advantage ;  which,  for  aught  I 
can  prove,  may  be  the  very  opposite  of  the  truth. 

While  this  witness  is  upon  the  stand,  one  question 
must  be  asked :  If  the  Katie  autobiography  was  dictated 
by  the  same  person  who  showed  herself  at  Holmes' ; 
and  the  signer  of  the  Hanna  affidavit  is  the  same  woman 
who  appeared  "  as  the  materialized  spirit  of  Katie 
King ;"  and  Eliza  White  was  the  one  who  swore  to  the 
affidavit,  then  it  must  have  been  Eliza  White  who 
dictated  the  Katie  autobiography  to  Dr.  Child ;  or,  no 
autobiography  was  dictated ;  or,  the  spirit-girl  is  a 
reality,  and  Eliza  is  a  liar,  and  Child's  later  certificate 
does  not  convey  the  truth :  which  of  these  is  true  ? 

The  voluminous  document,  so  strongly  certified  by 
the  worthy  Doctor,  demands  a  brief  analysis  at  this 
point.  It  comprises  a  personal  narrative,  and  numerous 
letters  from  Mr.  Holmes  and  one  from  his  wife  to  the 
pseudonymous  Katie  King. 

The  woman  begins  by  stating  that  she  writes  "  this 
narrative  in  the  interest  of  truth,  and  for  no  other  pur- 
pose than  to  expose  the  guilty ;  from  no  prospect  of 
personal  gain,  and  entirely  without  malice  towards 
any  one."  She  tells  us  that  she  "  was  born  on  the  first 
day  of  January,  185 1,  in  Massachusetts,"'  that  she  pro- 
poses to  be  known  by  the  public  only  as  "  Katie  King," 
and  adds :  "  Like  all  others,  I  have,  of  course,  a  real 
name  {sic),  but  the  public  have  no  interest  in  knowing 
what  it  is.  I  was  married  (foolish  girl)  when  I  was 
between  fourteen  and  fifteen  years  of  age.  I  have  one 
child  eight  years  old.  My  husband  died  upward  of  two 
years  ago,  leaving  me  without  any  means  of  support, 
and  through  my  own  exertions  I  have  provided  for 
my  child  and  my  aged  mother." 

She  was  helped  to  a  sum  of  money  by  "  a  very  near 
friend  of  her  mother's,"  and  with  it  set  up  as  a  lodging- 
house-keeper  in  the  city  of  Philadelphia ;  in  which 
capacity  she  received  Mr.  and  Mrs.  Holmes  under  her 
roof  as  tenants,  in  the  month  of  March,  1874.  These 
persons  began  to  give  "  their  pretended  spiritual  mani- 
festations," but  Katie  King  did  not  appear  until  some 
time  afterward.  A  description  of  the  *'  dark  seance  " 
of  Mrs.  Holmes  follows,  in  which  she  asserts  that  the 
speaking  of  spirits  in  audible  voices,  and  the  physical 

THE  CONSPIRACY.  433 

manifestations,  are  to  be  explained  as  trickery  and 
deception.  The  dark  seance  is  followed  by  one  for 
"  materialization,"  in  which  faces  purporting  to  be 
those  of  spirits  are  exhibited  at  the  apertures,  or  win- 
dows of  the  cabinet,  but  which,  our  informant  tells  us, 
are  only  masks  such  as  can  be  purchased  in  the  shops 
for  "  ten  cents  apiece."  "  They  are  placed,"  says  she, 
"  in  the  hands  of  the  medium  and  raised  up  to  the 
aperture,  and  by  him  manipulated  to  suit  surrounding 
circumstances." 

Shortly  after  they  were  settled  in  a  new  house,  in 
Ninth  street,  the  project  of  engaging  this  woman  to 
personate  Katie  King  was  broached  by  Mrs.  Holmes. 
Prefacing  the  confession  with  the  remark  that  it  is 
useless  to  repeat  all  the  conversation  that  passed 
between  them,  although  there  might  be  two  opinions 
upon  that  point,  she  says:  "I  made  up  my  mind  to 
play  the  part  for  a  short  time,  hoping  that  something 
better  would  turn  up  in  my  interest :  in  the  meantime 
I  would  be  earning  my  expenses  and  doing  no  one  any 
harm."  Her  debut  occurred  on  the  evening  of  May 
12th,  her  fair  form  being  clad  in  a  thin,  white  French 
muslin  robe,  fastened  with  a  belt,  a  white  veil  thrown 
over  her  head,  and  her  face  and  arms  being  whitened 
by  a  free  application  of  cosmetic.  The  cabinet  had 
been  duly  constructed  with  a  view  to  this  fraud,  by 
being  placed  in  front  of  a  door  communicating  with 
an  adjacent  bed-room,  and  a  false  panel  was  made  in 
its  rear  wall,  through  which  the  pseudo  "  spirit "  could 
make  her  entrances  and  exits.  The  reader  will  please 
note  this  fact,  for  there  will  be  occasion  to  refer  to  it 
again. 

Everything  worked  to  a  charm.  The  face  of  our 
fair  but  frail  one  was  shown  at  the  aperture  to  an 
admiring  circle,  withdrawn,  shown  again,  some  words 
were  whispered  by  her,  and  "  Materialization  "  was  a 
fixed  fact.  It  became  the  talk  of  the  town,  crowds 
came  to  witness  the  lovely  apparition,  and  money 
flowed  into  the  coffers  of  the  fortunate  showman  who, 
she  gives  us  to  understand  was  none  other  than  Dr. 
Child  himself. 

We  are  let  into  the  secret  of  Mr.  Owen's  appearance 
at  the  seances,  Dr.  Child  transmitting  to  him  an  invi- 
tation from  "  Katie"  to  come  and  see  her;  much  the 
same  as  I,  myself,  was,  at  a  later  day,  invited  to  come. 

434  THE  KA  TIE  KING  AFFAIR. 

He,  like  myself,  was  glad  of  the  opportunity  to  see  a 
spirit,  so  pure  and  gentle,  face  to  face,  and  in  due 
course  moved  to  Philadelphia,  and  was  at  once  addressed 
in  terms  of  filial  tenderness  by  the  fair  ghost,  and 
reciprocated  her  affection.  She  wrote  him  notes,  gave 
him  a  lock  of  her  golden  hair  (cut  from  a  wig),  received 
presents  of  beads,  and  crosses,  and  flowers  from  him, 
and  generally,  used  his  established  reputation  and  ripe 
scholarship  as  a  means  of  profitable  advertisement  for 
her  disgusting  trickery.  Things  went  on  thus  from 
bad  to  worse,  dupes  being  made  by  hundreds,  if  not 
thousands,  and  the  fame  of  the  spirit  spreading  through- 
out the  whole  world,  wherever  books  are  read  and 
newspapers  taken. 

Meanwhile,  remorse  entered  the  soul  of  the  actress 
in  this  comedy  of  shame,  and,  in  her  pitiful  story,  she 
paints  us  a  picture  of  herself  as  she  tossed  on  her  couch 
in  the  still  watches  of  the  night.  "  After  the  first  two 
or  three  nights  my  whole  nature  "  says  she,  "  revolted 
at  the  idea  of  this  gross  deception  *  *  *.  The  interest 
manifested  by  the  people  kept  increasing,  which  only 
aggravated  my  sensitive  nature  {sic).  I  was  often  sick 
at  heart;  I  felt  that  I  was  guilty  of  a  great  crime. 
Night  after  night  was  my  pillow  wet  with  tears ;  the 
heart  would  overflow  with  grief.  I  appeared  to  be 
surrounded  with  a  cloud  of  sorrow  from  which  there 
was  no  escape.  Here  was  my  helpless  little  boy,  and 
frail,  old  mother  looking  to  me  for  bread.  In  my 
troubled  dreams  I  seemed  to  see  their  eyes  riveted  on 
me,  saying,  '  Our  whole  hope  and  dependence  is  on 
you.'"  But  the  theme  is  too  painful ;  let  us  draw  the 
curtain  upon  this  sacred  sorrow  of  the  conscience- 
stricken  woman  !  Poor  widow  !  Sweet  boy  !  Help- 
less old  mother ! 

Success  naturally  made  both  the  mediums  and  their 
ally  bolder,  and  many  pranks  were  played  from  first 
to  last.  Among  these  she  mentions  the  simulated 
fading  away  and  re-forming  of  her  shape,  by  the  help  ot 
black  cloths;  the  appearance  of  an  Indian-squaw  spirit; 
the  apparition  of  the  late  General  Rawlings,  by  some 
scoundrelly  confederate  whose  name  is  suppressed; 
the  writing  of  a  communication  to  Mr.  Owen,  by  the 
detached  hand  of  the  spirit  of  that  famous  divine  Fred- 
erick W.  Robertson;  and,  finally,  the  taking  of  her 
photograph,  in  the  character  of  Katie  King,  by  daylight. 

FIBS  AND  FALSEHOODS.  435 

But  Nemesis  was  on  her  track,  and  her  day  of 
detection  came.  A  gentleman  attendant  at  the  seances, 
whom  she  describes  as  having  "  a  very  mild,  modest 
manner,"  and  whose  name,  in  spite  of  her  attempts  at 
concealment,  has  since  been  declared  in  sundry  news- 
papers to  be  W.  O.  Leslie,  a  railroad  contractor  residing 
in  Philadelphia,  called  at  the  house  one  day,  while  the 
Holmeses  were  taking  their  vacation  in  Blissfield, 
Michigan,  (and  she  was  in  sole  charge  of  the  premises), 
and  interrogated  her.  She  saw  that  he  suspected  her 
identity  with  Katie,  and  she  shuddered;  as,  indeed,  one 
of  so  high-strung  a  temperament  might  be  expected  to 
do.  But  nevertheless  she  lied  to  him,  and  the  mild, 
modest-mannered  man  took  his  leave.  Then  how 
"  mean "  she  felt,  "  for  she  had  told  a  falsehood,  and 
furthermore,  the  gentleman  knew  that  she  had.  If 
any  of  our  readers,"  she  ingenuously  remarks,  "  have 
ever  occupied  the  humiliating  position  of  having  been 
caught  in  telling  a  fib,  and  experienced  the  mental 
suffering  which  follows,  particularly  to  those  who 
have  a  sensitive  disposition,  they  will  know  something 
of  the  experience  of  the  lady  on  this  occasion." 

But  the  gentleman  did  not  press  matters,  and  for  a 
time  she  was  safe. 

The  Holmeses  left  for  the  West  in  July,  and  our 
autobiographer  says  that  by  preconcert  she  followed 
them  on  the  8th  of  September,  reaching  Blissfield  on 
the  12th,  and  appearing  in  her  favorite  character  at  a 
seance  the  same  evening.  Blissfield  being  a  small  vil- 
lage, she  was  confined  to  her  room  constantly  for  fear 
that  she  might  be  recognized,  and  a  weary  time  it  was 
to  her.  After  a  fortnight  had  elapsed  a  circle  was 
held  one  evening  to  accommodate  a  party  from  Adrian, 
and  an  initial  person  named  "Mr.  B"  caught  her  in 
his  arms,  and  came  near  exposing  the  whole  deception. 
But  she  escaped  from  him,  through  a  clever  ruse  of 
Mr.  and  Mrs.  Holmes,  and  this  brought  matters  in  that 
quarter  to  a  close.  She  and  Mrs.  Holmes  left  for  Cold 
Water,  Mich.,  and  gradually  found  their  way  back  to 
Philadelphia,  via  Toledo. 

Tired  and  disgusted  with  the  whole  affair,  she  now 
"called  on  Doctor  Child,"  stated  to  him  that  she  was 
penniless,  asked  him  to  help  her  recover  some  forty 
dollars  the  Holmeses  owed  her,  and  promised  that  "if 
he  would  comply  with  my  request,  /  would  tell  him  all 

436  THE  KA  TIE  KING  AFFAIR. 

about  the  particulars  of  Katie  King,  that  I  was  fully  posted 
in  the  matter,  and  would  tell  him  everything."  But  the 
Doctor  turned  a  deaf  ear  to  her,  which  excited  her 
amazement ;  as  well  it  might. 

She  encountered  Mr.  Holmes  at  the  Doctor's  house, 
and,  a  few  days  subsequently,  entered  into  an  arrange- 
ment with  that  person,  to  write  a  letter  to  the  former 
retracting  what  she  had  said;  for  as  she  remarks 
"Necessity  knows  no  law:  I  had  just  ten  cents  in  my 
pocket."  The  letter  was  dictated  to  her  by  Holmes, 
and  by  her  mailed  to  an  acquaintance  in  Massachusetts, 
to  be  re-mailed  thence  to  Doctor  Child,  and  thus  convey 
to  him  the  impression  that  she  was  far  away  from 
Philadelphia. 

She  no  longer  lived  under  the  same  roof  with  the 
Holmes  family,  and  one  day  was  surprised  by  a  visit 
from  the  "  mild  and  modest "  Mr.  Leslie,  who  taxed 
her  outright  with  having  played  the  part  of  Katie,  and 
offered  her  pecuniary  assistance, — "substantial  aid,"  she 
calls  it;  and  adds  that  he  put  the  question,  "Now 
please  state  to  me  how  much  it  will  take  to  relieve  you 
from  your  present  embarrassment."  This  sort  of  argu- 
ment proved  as  efficacious  as  it  had  before  on  various 
occasions,  when  advanced  by  Holmes;  and,  one  by  one, 
she  produced  the  stock  of  crosses,  beads,  and  jewelry, 
which  she  had  accumulated  in  her  character-part  by 
the  donations  of  admiring  visitors  at  the  seances. 

The  concluding  scene  of  the  comedy  was  soon  played. 
On  the  evening  of  the  5th  of  December,  a  mock  seance 
was  held,  at  which  she  enacted  for  Mr.  Owen,  Dr. 
Child,  and  two  others,  the  "  business  "  of  her  spirit  role, 
and  Mr.  Owen's  card  was  forthwith  given  to  the  public. 
It  is  safe  to  say  that  no  document  connected  with  this 
subject  ever  made  a  greater  sensation.  It  was  a  stag- 
gering blow,  not  only  to  the  great  multitude  of  luke- 
warm investigators,  but  also  to  Mr.  Owen's  warmest 
personal  friends.  These  latter  could  not  forgive  his 
making  so  unqualified  a  recantation  of  all  his  previous 
guarantees  of  the  value  of  his  experiments  with  these 
mediums,  without,  at  least,  devoting  some  time  to 
putting  their  mediumship  to  the  proof,  and  so  discover- 
ing and  separating  the  true  manifestations  from  the 
false. 

I  have  thus  rapidly  sketched  the  story  of  this  woman, 
so  as  to  compress  within  these  few  pages  the  substance 

POINTS.  437 

of  a  statement  which  occupies  thirteen  columns  of  solid 
type  in  the  Inquirer.  The  salient  points  of  her  pre- 
tended revelation  may  be  stated  as  follows : 

(i)  She  says  she  was  born  on  the  first  of  January, 
1851. 

(2)  She  has  a  real  name,  but  the  public  have  no 
interest  in  knowing  it. 

(3)  She  is  a  widow  ;  her  husband  having  died  two 
years  ago. 

(4)  The  mediumship  of  Mr.  and  Mrs.  Holmes  is  a 
gross  misrepresentation  in  toto,  not  only  the  pretended 
"  materializations  "  being  fictitious,  but  also  the  phe- 
nomena which  occur  in  their  dark  seances. 

(5)  As  early  as  May,  1874,  she  began  to  personate 
Katie  King,  in  a  trick  walnut  cabinet,  provided  with 
movable  boards  in  the  back,  by  which  she  entered  it 
from  an  adjoining  bed-chamber. 

(6)  The  notes  given  by  Katie  to  Mr.  Owen  and 
others  were  written  by  her. 

(7)  The  locks  of  hair  given  by  her  to  various  persons 
were  cut  from  a  wig  she  wore. 

(8)  She  was  burdened  by  shame  and  grief  at  the 
deception  she  practiced,  and  the  falsehoods  she  told. 

(9)  She  played  the  parts  of  other  spirits  beside 
Katie,  and  a  confederate  of  hers  appeared  as  General 
Rawlings. 

(10)  The  photograph  sold  by  Dr.  Child  as  that  of 
Katie  King,  was  in  fact  her  own  portrait. 

(11)  She  joined  the  Holmeses  in  Michigan,  and 
there  played  Katie  to  small  but  select  audiences,  and 
was  once  actually  caught  in  the  arms  of  a  skeptical 
investigator. 

(12)  She  offered  to  divulge  the  fraud  to  Dr.  Child, 
if  he  would  pay  her,  or  cause  the  Holmeses  to  pay  her, 
a  sum  of  money. 

(13)  She  resumed  the  criminal  relations  of  conspiracy 
with  Holmes,  and  in  pursuance  thereof  wrote  the  letter 
to  Child  retracting  her  previous  assertions  to  him. 

(14)  She  finally  was  offered  money  by  her  Unknown 
to  expose  the  swindle,  accepted  the  proposition,  and 
gave,  on  the  evening  of  December  5  th,  a  mock  seance. 
It  should  be  stated,  further,  that,  both  at  this  seance, 
and  at  an  interview  with  Mr.  Owen  and  others,  the 
next  day,  she  was  so  closely  veiled  that  no  one  had  a 
glimpse  of  her  features.     "  Katie  was  so   completely 

438  THE  KA  TIE  KING  AFFAIR. 

disguised,"  says  she,  "no  one  would  have  recognized  her 
as  the  same  who  had  personated  the  spirit" 

The  italics  are  mine,  and  are  designed  to  call  atten- 
tion to  a  performance  wholly  in  keeping  with  her 
behavior  throughout  this  affair.  In  the  concealment 
of  her  name ;  the  concealment  of  the  name  of  the  per- 
son designated  in  her  autobiography  as  an  "  amateur 
detective/'  since  asserted  to  be  Mr.  Leslie;  in  the  veil- 
ing of  her  face  at  the  mock-seance  and  subsequent 
interview;  worst  of  all,  in  the  swearing  to  her  affidavit 
under  the  cover  of  an  alias,  we  have  conduct  that  is 
calculated  to  make  us  view  with  the  greatest  suspicion 
both  the  veracity  of  her  statements,  and  the  motives 
actuating  her  to  make  them.  When  we  add  to  this  the 
alleged  fact  of  her  concealment  in  Philadelphia,  while 
pretending  to  be  elsewhere,  at  the  time  of  my  visit, 
and  the  failure  of  my  attempt  to  get  a  sight  of  her, 
such  confidence  as  might  have  been  generously 
accorded  to  the  story  of  a  self-confessed  swindler,  liar 
and  cheat  is  wholly  destroyed. 

A  person  paraded  before  the  public  in  such  a  charac- 
ter as  she  assumes,  must  of  course  expect  to  be  closely 
criticised,  and  have  inquiry  made  into  her  antecedents; 
for  her  reputation  for  truth,  and  her  moral  character 
have  a  most  important  bearing  upon  the  question 
whether  her  tale  shall  be  believed.  The  word  of 
states'  witnesses  is  always  taken  with  great  caution, 
and  few  juries  are  disposed  to  deprive  an  accused  per- 
son of  liberty  or  life  upon  such  testimony,  when 
unsupported. 

I  am  sorry  to  say  that  an  investigation  into  the  per- 
sonal history  of  this  woman  discloses  little  to  her  credit, 
and  much  to  the  contrary.  Her  real  name  is  Eliza 
Trances  White,  but  she  is  said  to  have  passed  under  a 
number  of  aliases,  at  various  times.  Her  family  name  is 
Potter,  and  she  was  born  in  Lee,  Massachusetts,  appar- 
ently long  before  the  date  sworn  to  in  her  pretended 
autobiography.  Her  father,  a  stone-cutter  by  trade, 
moved  to  Canton,  Connecticut,  and  died  there.  Her 
mother  and  the  rest  of  the  family  were  then  thrown  upon 
the  bounty  of  Wilson  B.  White,  commonly  called  "  Bub  " 
White,  and  took  up  their  abode  in  the  town  of  Winsted. 
Eliza  lived  with  White  for  some  ten  or  twelve  years,  and 
bore  him  a  son,  but  I  have  been  unable  to  ascertain 
whether  they  were  married. 

A  BOGUS  WIDOW.  439 

At  the  outbreak  of  the  war,  he  enlisted  in  the  19th 
Connecticut  Volunteers,  a  Heavy  Artillery  regiment,  as 
Drum  Major,  and  Eliza  joined  him  in  the  defences  of 
Washington  City,  where  she  cooked  ior  an  officers'  mess, 
and  worked  so  hard  to  support  herself  as  to  gain  the 
commendation  of  her  husband's  superiors.  After  a  lapse 
of  a  year  and  a  half,  the  regiment  was  ordered  to  the 
front,  and  Eliza  is  reported  to  have  abandoned  herself  to 
a  life  of  immorality  in  Alexandria.  Upon  the  return  of 
the  regiment,  at  the  close  of  the  war,  White  settled  down 
in  Winsted,  and  became  the  proprietor  of  a  low  drink- 
ing-saloon  called  the  "Rock  House."  He  also  traveled 
with  a  "  side-show "  of  natural  curiosities  and  clog- 
dancers  and  ballad-singers,  and  Eliza  took  part  in  both 
dancing  and  singing. 

The  Winsted  Press  says  of  her  : 

"  It  seems  that  Katie  has  been  known  here  as  the  wife  of  Mr. 
Wilson  B.  White.  She  left  him  a  while  since,  Winsted  being  too 
'stoopid'  and  monotonous  for  her  enterprising  spirit,  and,  following 
the  leadings  of  her  own  sweet  will,  tarried  a  while  in  Brooklyn,  then 
in  Manhattan  and  finally  dropped  down  upon  the  city  of  brotherly 
love  as  a  soft,  white,  spiritual  thing,  direct  from  that  other 
*  *  *  city  of  love, 
Where  saints  and  angels  dwell." 

The  Waterbury  American,  another  journal  of  the 
vicinity,  enters  more  into  details,  thus  : 

"  Katie  King  alias  Mrs.  White  also  had  some  experience  in  the 
variety  show  business.  Some  years  ago  her  husband,  familiarly 
known  as  "  Bub  "  White,  gave  a  sort  of  variety  entertainment,  under 
canvas,  on  the  fair  grounds  in  Litchfield,  while  the  annual  county 
cattle-show  was  in  progress.  The  show  consisted  of  a  wild-cat  'as 
ferocious  and  untamable  as  a  South  American  hyena,'  a  singing  boy 
'  with  a  voice  like  the  mocking-bird's,'  and  '  Bub,'  who  was  a  violin 
player,  composed  the  orchestra.  Katie  King  made  her  debut  on  that 
occasion  as  a  serio-comic  vocalist,  and  as  she  was  endowed  with  a 
good  share  of  personal  charms,  and  appeared  in  a  bewitching  cos- 
tume, she  took  immensely,  and  the  country  swains  poured  out  their 
'dime  and  a  half  like  water." 

Disagreement  of  a  serious  nature  finally  occurred 
between  the  pair,  on  account  of  White's  enforced  support 
of  Eliza's  family,  and  the  interference  of  an  intemperate 
son  of  his  in  the  government  of  the  household.  The 
result   was  that,  in   or    about    January,    1874,  she    left 

15* 

44°  THE  KA  TIE  KING  AFFAIR. 

Winsted  with  her  own  child,  a  boy  of  nine  or  ten  years, 
and  has  been  shifting  for  herself  in  Philadelphia  ever 
since.  An  uncle  residing  in  Brooklyn  advanced  her  some 
$600  to  set  herself  up  in  the  lodging-house  business,  and 
her  meeting  with  the  Holmeses  followed  soon  after. 

Her  sworn  statement  that  she  is  a  widow  of  two  years' 
standing,  is  false.  I  have  recently  seen  and  conversed 
with  White  himself.  I  pressed  him  to  inform  me  if  he 
were  ever  married  to  Eliza,  and  he  declined  to  answer, 
remarking  that  "  a  man  was  not  obliged  to  say  anything 
to  criminate  himself."  Her  statement  that  she  is  depend- 
ent upon  her  own  exertions  for  support,  for  herself  and 
son,  he  unhesitatingly  contradicted  ;  for  he  says  he  is 
worth  considerable  property,  and  is  ready  to  provide  for 
her  whenever  she  returns  home  and  agrees  to  behave 
herself.  In  fact,  as  we  walked  together  through  the 
streets  of  the  village,  he  pointed  out  several  tenements 
which  he  said  were  his  property.  Other  persons  corrobo- 
rated this  statement,  and  I  found  that  it  was  generally 
admitted  that  he  was  in  comfortable  circumstances.  He 
has  a  poor  opinion  of  the  woman's  dramatic  talents,  and 
does  not  regard  her  as  competent  to  fill  an  engagement 
in  a  "  variety  theatre." 

Upon  inquiring  of  a  number  of  respectable  citizens  of 
Winsted,  I  found  that  her  reputation  for  morality  was 
not  good,  but  how  much  of  this  is  due  to  prejudice  I 
cannot  say.  Parties  formerly  connected  with  her  hus- 
band's regiment  agree  in  the  statement  that  her  conduct 
in  Alexandria  was  not  that  of  a  virtuous  woman. 

That  her  reputed  husband  is  not  'dead,  as  she  alleges, 
the  following  certificate  will  show : 

[■  Winsted,  Conn.,  Feb.  5th,  1875. 

I  hereby  certify  that  I  am  personally  acquainted  with  a  woman 
named  Eliza  White,  whose  maiden  name  was  Potter  ;  I  also  know 
Wilson  B.  White,  commonly  known  as  "  Bob "  White,  the  reputed 
husband  of  the  said  Eliza ;  I  am  also  acquainted  with  her  sister  who 
is  the  wife  of  James  Adams,  and  also  with  her  brother. 

The  said  Wilson  B.  White  is  now  and  has  been  for  many  years 
a  resident  of  this  town,  but  the  said  Eliza  is  now  in  the  city  of 
Philadelphia,  as  I  am  informed ;  and  is,  or  was  at  last  accounts, 
living  in  the  same  house  with  a  family  of  spiritual  mediums,  whose 
names  I  do  not  know. 

Stephen  W.  Sage, 

Chief  of  Police. 

DAMAGING  TESTIMONY.  441 

While  in  Philadelphia,  I  met  a  gentleman  named  Allen, 
said  to  be  a  Justice  of  the  Peace  at  Vineland,  N.  J.,  and, 
as  I  learn  by  inquiries  made  at  Lee,  Massachusetts,  a 
trustworthy  person,  who  gave  me  much  information  as  to 
Eliza's  early  history,  which,  at  my  request,  he  put  into 
the  form  of  the  following  affidavit : 

"  City  of  Philadelphia,  ) 
State  of  Pennsylvania.  J 

"  Hosea  Allen  of  Landis  Township, 
Cumberland  County  and  State  of  New  Jersey,  a  Justice  of  the  Peace, 
being  duly  sworn  according  to  law  deposes  and  says,  that  he  has  read 
an  article  published  in  the  Philadelphia  Inquirer  of  January  gth  and 
nth,  1875,  entitled,  "Katie  King,"  "Her  full  history  as  related  by 
herself,"  which  article  is  supported  by  the  affidavit  of  "Katie  King,"  in 
which  she  states  she  was  born  on  the  first  day  of  January,  1851,  in 
the  State  of  Massachusetts,  and  that  she,  in  collusion  with  Mr.  Nelson 
Holmes  and  his  wife,  Mrs.  Jennie  Holmes,  did,  at  No.  50  North 
Ninth  Street,  Philadelphia,  during  the  last  Summer,  fraudulently 
personate  a  spirit-form  known  as  "Katie  King,"  from  the  12th  of 
May,  1874,  and  other  alleged  spirit-forms  which  appeared  after  June 
20,  1874,  at  the  seances  given  by  Mr.  and  Mrs.  Holmes,  at  that  place. 
And  deponent  further  says,  that  he  lived  at  Lee,  Berkshire  County, 
Massachusetts,  from  1S38  until  1863,  that  from  1842  until  1857  he 
was  superintendent  of  the  Methodist  Episcopal  Sunday-School  of 
that  town,  that  about  1846,  Eliza  Potter,  (since  married  to  a  man  by 
the  name  of  Wilson  B.  White,)  became  a  pupil  in  that  Sunday-School, 
that  she  was  at  that  time  apparently  about  six  years  old,  and  that  he 
has  every  reason  to  believe  she  cannot  be  under  thirty-five  years, 
that  she  attended  the  school  at  irregular  intervals  for  six  or  seven 
years,  and  continued  to  live  in  the  town  several  years  after  she  left 
the  school ;  that  during  that  time  she  was  a  very  wayward  girl,  and 
caused  her  father  a  great  deal  of  trouble  ;  that  she  was  so  untruthful 
that  those  to  whom  she  spoke  never  knew  when  to  believe  her,  and 
that  her  moral  reputation  in  other  respects,  was  as  bad  as  it  could  be. 
Deponent  further  says  that  in  June  last,  he  visited  Mr.  and  Mrs. 
Holmes  at  No.  50  North  Ninth  Street,  Philadelphia  ;  that  on  entering 
the  sitting-room  on  that  occasion,  he  saw  and  recognized  Eliza 
WThite  (formerly  Eliza  Potter),  who  at  once  recognized  him  and 
called  him  by  name  ;  that  he  remained  at  the  house  two  days,  during 
which  time  he  saw  and  conversed  with  her  frequently,  and  cannot  be 
mistaken  as  to  her  identity.  That  on  the  same  afternoon,  Dr.  Henry 
T.  Child,  assisted  by  a  mechanic  and  himself,  put  up  the  black 
walnut  cabinet  which  was  afterwards  used  at  the  subsequent  seances, 
that  they  only  completed  the  work  a  short  time  before  the  circle  was 

442  THE  KA  TIE  KING  AFFAIR. 

to  meet  on  that  evening  ;  that  he  remembers  distinctly  that  Dr.  Child 
called  his  attention  to  the  fact  that  the  battens  were  being  fastened 
with  forty  screws ;  that  as  the  cabinet  was  then  constructed  in  his 
presence,  it  was  impossible  for  any  one  to  have  entered  it  or  left  it  by 
way  of  the  adjoining  room,  or  in  any  other  manner,  without  being  seen 
by  all  present.  That  just  before  the  circle  commenced  that  evening,  he, 
deponent,  left  his  room  in  the  third  story,  and  in  passing  the  door  of 
the  front  room,  which  is  directly  over  the  circle-room,  he  saw  Mrs. 
White  sitting  in  that  room,  that  frequently  while  the  circle  continued, 
ne  heard  Mrs.  White  distinctly  humming  tunes,  the  front  windows 
of  both  rooms  being  open,  and  he  also  heard  her  walking  about  the 
room.  That  five  or  six  different  faces  appeared  at  the  apertures  of 
the  cabinet ;  also,  several  hands  and  arms  were  thrust  out  of  the 
same  apertures  during  the  seance,  among  which  "Katie  King" 
appeared  several  times.  Thai  the  latter  spoke  in  an  audible  whisper 
from  the  cabinet  several  times ;  that  while  she  was  so  talking,  the 
singing  of  Mrs.  White  in  the  room  above  became  so  annoying  as  to 
cause  remark  by  those  in  the  circle,  and  interfered  with  the  hearing 
of  the  voice  from  the  cabinet,  and  that  he  cannot  be  mistaken  about 
the  voice  humming  or  singing  being  that  of  Mrs.  White.  Deponent 
further  says  that  it  was  impossible  for  Mrs.  White  on  that  occasion 
to  have  personated  "  Katie  King  ;"  and  he  further  says  that  he  asked 
Mrs.  White  during  his  stay  at  the  house,  whether  she  had  attended 
the  seances  at  that  place,  to  which  she  replied,  she  had  attended 
them  but  once,  and  that  she  thought  them  wonderful. 

"  In  Testimony  whereof,  I  hereunto  set  my  hand  and  affix  the 
seal  this  22d  day  of  January,  in  the  year  of  our  Lord  one  thousapd 
eight  hundred  and  seventy-five. 

HOSEA   ALLEN,  Esqr." 
,    "  Sworn  and  subscribed  this  22d  day  of  January,  A.  D.  1875. 

FRANCIS  HOOD,  [Seal] 

Alderman" 

This  witness,  if  unimpeached,  convicts  Eliza  of  more 
perjuries  than  one,  for  he  not  only  challenges  her  age, 
but  also  shows  that,  upon  at  least  one  occasion,  it  must 
have  been  physically  impossible  for  her  to  have  been 
down  stairs  personating  Katie  King,  when,  up  stairs,  in 
the  chamber  overhead,  she  was  making  such  a  racket  as 
to  disturb  the  seance  while  Katie  was  out  of  the  cabinet, 
among  the  spectators.  I  give  this  affidavit  for  what  it  is 
worth,  and  those  who  know  Judge  Allen  better  than  I 
can  decide  what  credence  to  accord  to  his  statements. 
I  should  add  that  Dr.  Child's  friends  deny  emphatically 
that  he  assisted  in  putting  up  the  cabinet ;  and,  on  the 

THE  KATIE  KING  CABINET.  443 

other  hand,  will  say  that  Judge  Allen's  story  of  Mrs. 
White's  being  up  stairs  upon  the  evening  in  question, 
has  been  corroborated  to  me  by  the  statements  of  others 
who  were  present. 

If  the  reader  will  now  refer  back  to  Eliza's  statement 
that  she  began  her  personations  of  Katie  King  in  a  trick 
walnut  cabinet  in  the  Ninth  Street  house,  I  will  venture 
a  few  remarks  upon  that  head. 

In  her  "Autobiography  of  Katie  King,"  she  describes 
the  cabinet  as  being  made  of  dark,  or  walnut  boards 
across  one  corner  of  the  room,  and  illustrates  the  same 
by  a  diagram,  which  it  is  not  worth  while  to  copy  here. 
Now,  it  happens  that  in  his  article  in  the  December 
Galaxy,  General  Lippitt  (a  gentleman  of  the  most  unim- 
peachable honor)  describes  the  cabinet  from  which  he 
saw  Katie   emerge,  as  quite  a  different  affair.     He  says  : 

"  The  cabinet  or  sanctum  in  which  spirits  were  said  to  clothe 
themselves  in  mortal  forms,  consisted  of  the  following  simple 
arrangement :  The  bedroom  door  was  left  open  at  an  angle  of  60 
deg. ;  on  the  opposite  door-post  a  second  door  was  attached,  which 
came  out  to  meet  it  at  the  same  angle  ;  and  when  the  two  doors  thus 
met,  the  recess  formed  was  obviously  an  equilateral  triangle,  just 
large  enough  to  comfortably  contain  the  medium,  Mr.  Holmes, 
seated  in  a  chair.  Whenever  this  little  sanctum  was  to  be  used,  the 
light  was  excluded  from  above  by  a  triangular  piece  of  wood  laid 
across  the  tops  of  the  two  doors.  This  cover  was  lined  on  the 
inside  with  black  cloth,  as  were  also  the  insides  of  the  two  doors. 
The  air  being  thus  shut  out  from  the  little  closet,  the  necessity  of 
the  air  holes  through  the  wood  partition  was  apparent.  Through 
the  one  of  these  two  doors  which  faced  the  spectators,  at  the  height 
of  some  five  feet  from  the  floor,  was  a  circular  aperture  or  window, 
about  ten  inches  in  diameter,  at  which  the  faces  were  to  be  seen. 
A  black  curtain  hung  on  the  inside  of  it,  which  was  drawn  aside 
just  before  a  face  presented  itself. 

The  most  searching  examination  of  this  sanctum,  which  was 
usually  made  by  invitation  just  before  the  sitting  commenced,  both 
on  the  parlor  and  on  the  bedroom  side  of  the  board  partition,  failed 
to  detect  the  slightest  indication  of  any  trap,  wire,  or  other  arrange- 
ment for  the  use  of  machinery  or  for  deception.  The  first  two  or 
three  evenings  I  attended,  I  made  a  careful  examination  myself, 
and  on  one  occasion  jointly  with  a  professional  magician,  a  pupil  of 
Blitz,  who  told  me  he  was  perfectly  satisfied  that  "  there  was  no 
chance  for  any  trick  there." 

444  TIIE  KA  TIE  KING  AFFAIR. 

General  Lippitt,  in.  a  recent  communication  to  the 
Banner  of  Light,  says  that  the  cabinet  Eliza  describes 
was  not  erected  until  the  5th  of  June,  whereas  his  attend- 
ance at  the  seances  occurred  in  the  early  and  middle 
part  of  May.  It  scarcely  needs  an  enumeration  of  the 
wonderful  phenomena  witnessed  by  that  gentleman — 
such  as  the  melting  out  of  Katie's  eyes,  when  she  had 
been  too  long  exposed  to  the  light ;  the  simultaneous 
appearance  of  numerous  little  and  big  hands  at  the 
aperture;  and  the  identification  of  sundry  spirits  by  their 
relatives — to  satisfy  us  that  Eliza's  pretended  revelations 
have  no  bearing  upon  his  experiences. 

I  pass  over,  for  the  present,  the  remaining  points  made 
in  the  so-called  Autobiography,  because  the  best  answer 
to  them  is  to  be  found  in  the  report  of  what  occurred 
during  my  investigation  of  the  Holmes  mediumship. 

I  cannot  too  earnestly  press  upon  my  readers  the 
attitude  I  am  determined  to  maintain  towards  this  whole 
spiritualistic  question.  What  I  am  in  search  of  is  proof 
positive  that  the  partial  or  complete  materialization  of 
spirit-forms  has  occurred,  and  can  occur  again  under 
laws  now  occult.  I  have  not,  nor  will  I  play  the  part  of 
the  monchard,  searching  out  the  immorality  of  mediums 
or  the  trickeries  they  resort  to,  except  in  so  far  as  it  may 
be  necessary,  in  the  one  case,  to  weigh  their  testimony, 
and,  in  the  other,  to  learn  how  their  roguery  may  be 
made  impossible  of  repetition.  It  is  nothing  to  the  cause 
of  Science  that  ninety-nine  times  mediums  have  tricked, 
but  it  is  of  prime  importance  to  it  to  know  that  in  one 
solitary  case  there  has  been  an  exhibition  of  genuine 
materialization.  The  one  grain  of  wheat  outvalues  the 
whole  bin-full  of  chaff,  for  that  grain  may,  some  day,  lead 
to  an  abundant  harvest,  over  the  whole  earth. 

It  will  be  found,  therefore,  that  in  this  particular 
instance,  as  in  that  of  the  Chittenden  manifestations,  I 
will  spend  very  little  time  in  trying  to  discover  whether 
the  mediums  cheated  often  or  seldom,  whether  Eliza 
White  glided  out  of  the  cabinet  frequently  in  Katie's 
costume,  and  whether  the  correspondence  of  Nelson 
Holmes  has  been  tampered  with.  I  assume  here,  as  I 
did  in  Vermont,  that  the  mediums  c.an  cheat,  that  they 
will  cheat  if  necessary,  and  that  they  are  disposed  to 
cheat  if  the  investigator  should  relax  his  vigilance  for  a 
moment.  And  so  presupposing,  it  would  be  the  sheerest 
waste  of  time  for  me  to  search  back  through  the  whole 

A  FA  TAL  DOCUMENT.  445 

American  and  English  career  of  the  Holmeses,  to  dis- 
cover how  often,  if  ever,  they  played  upon  the  public 
credulity. 

But  what  I  went  to  Philadelphia  to  discover,  and  what 
I  mean  to  discuss,  is  whether  Eliza  White's  charge  that 
the  mediumship  of  Mr.  and  Mrs.  Holmes  was  a  sham, 
and  their  materializations  a  wretched  fraud  upon  the 
credulity  of  Mr.  Owen  and  hundreds  of  other  honorable 
and  earnest  persons. 

Our  case  is  now  nearly  disembarrassed  of  irrelevant 
features,  Dr.  Child's  certificate  to  the  identity  of  Eliza 
White  and  Katie  King  having  been  shown  to  be  worthless, 
by  reason  of  his  previous  self-committal  to  the  contrary 
fact ;  and  Eliza's  own  affidavit-narrative  being  inadmis- 
sible in  evidence,  by  reason  of  her  impeachment  by  good 
and  sufficient  witnesses.  Both  she  and  her  indorser 
being  turned  out  of  Court,  the  whole  question  of  the 
existence  of  Katie  and  John  King  is  reopened,  and  we 
must  fall  back  upon  the  facts,  I  have  been  enabled  to 
collect,  under  my  own  test  conditions,  to  ascertain 
whether  Mr.  Owen  and  General  Lippitt  ever  saw  a  real 
spirit-form  in  the  Holmes'  circle-room. 

If  any  further  proof  of  the  utter  worthlessness  of  Eliza's 
statements  concerning  the  part  she  pretended  to  have 
played  in  the  Philadelphia  comedy  were  required,  it  is 
more  than  supplied  in  the  following  document: 

50  N.  9th  St.,  Philadelphia,  Pa.,  18  August,  1874. 
Mr.  and  Mrs.  Holms  : 

Dear  friends  : — I  will  try  and  get  your  things  shipped  by  next 
week.  I  could  not  see  the  furniture  man  to-day  but  will  to-morrow. 
Doctor  Childs  comes  in  here  with  Dr.  Paxson,  Mrs.  Buckwalter,  Mr. 
Leslie,  Mrs.  Childs,  and  they  hold  seances  and  go  on  just  as  though 
they  owend  the  house.  I  don't  think  Childs  is  a  friend  of  yours. 
He  don't  act  like  it.  All  the  time  priying  into  evrything  and  all  he 
cares  for  you  is  to  make  money  off  of  your  mediumship.  The  man 
that  called  the  other  day  has  called  again  yesterday.  His  name  is 
Leslie.  He  said  "  Mrs.  White  are  you  a  medium."  I  told  him  I 
was.  He  said  I  saw  your  advertisement  in  the  Daily  Item  last  June 
but  I  colld  to-day  to  ask  you  if  you  know  anything  about  the 
Holmesses  as  everybody  says  that  it  is  you  that  is  playing  Katie 
King.  Now  you  are  a  poor  woman  and  I  can't  see  why  you  do  it. 
You  look  a  good  deal  like  Katie  King  and  if  you  know  anything  and 
will  tell  me  all  about  it,  several  gentleman  and  myself  well  pay  you 
$1000,  and  stand  by  you  and  guarantee  to  protect  you,  and  we  will 

446  THE  KA  TIE  KING  AFFAIR. 

pay  you  the  money  in  advance.  We  want  to  stop  all  this  spiritual 
business  that  is  going  all  over  the  country  and  we  will  put  the 
Holmesses  down  if  you  will  only  tell  me  and  my  friends  all  you 
know  about  it.  I  told  him  I  did  not  know  anything  about  your 
affairs,  that  if  you  were  not  genuine  mediums  there  was  none.  I  did 
not  see  how  it  could  be  a  humbug  as  the  people  had  tested  the  matter 
in  such  a  way  and  had  published  all  over.  He  said  yes  I  know  all 
that,  but  we  think  you  are  the  one  that  plays  K.  K.  and  if  you  will 
tell  us  we  will  pay  you  and  stand  by  you.  I  told  him  I  could  not 
tell  anything  as  I  didn't  know  anything.  Soon  after  a  man  called 
to  see  me  about  the  same  thing  he  does  business  1210  Market  street. 
I  think  his  name  is  Roberts.  He  came  one  night  to  see  your  seance 
with  a  party  of  young  men  to  tear  the  cabinet  down  and  catch  some- 
body, but  they  had  their  trouble  for  there  pains.  He  is  the  same 
one  that  tried  to  frighten  you  by  sending  a  lawyer  to  get  his  money 
back.  He  talked  a  long  time  but  acted  very  strange.  I  told  him 
same  as  I  did  Leslie.  Now  what  does  all  this  mean  I  wish  you 
would  come  back  to  this  city.  I  think  it  would  be  best  for  you  as  I 
don't  hear  anything  talked  off  but  K.  K.  and  the  Holmesses.  How 
funny  that  everybody  should  think  that  I  am  the  spirit.  How 
absurd.  But  all  this  causes  me  great  trouble  and  I  don't  like  it.  I 
think  I  will  try  and  keep  the  house  a  month.  Mrs.  Hannis,  who 
lives  at  262  Madison  Street,  will  go  in  with  me  I  will  try  my  hand 
with  her  a  month.  Evans  is  at  me  all  the  time  to  know  if  I  will 
take  the  house.  That  $50  you  gave  me  to  live  on  and  to  take  care 
of  your  things  and  ship  them  is  all  gone,  but  I  guess  something  will 
turn  up  to  help  me  out.     Your  friend  Frarfk.     Your  friend 

Eliza  White. 

State  of  Pennsylvania,  ) 
City  of  Philadelphia.     \ 

Nelson  Holmes  and  Jennie  Homies 
being  duly  sworn,  severally  depose  and  say  that  the  above  is  a  true 
copy  of  a  letter  received  by  them  at  Blissfield,  Mich.,  in  the  month 
of  August  last,  from  Mrs.  Eliza  White,  alias  Frank  Stephens  ;  that 
they  have  each  of  them  seen  the  said  White,  alias  Stephens,  write, 
and  that  the  original  document  of  which  the  above  is  a  copy,  is  in 
her  handwriting,  and  the  handwriting  is  identical  with  other  letters 
received  from  the  same  person. 

And  deponents  further  say  that  after  they  returned  from  the  West 
to  Philadelphia  the  said  White,  alias  Stephens,  came  to  see  them  to 
complain  that  Dr.  Henry  T.  Child  had  not  paid  her  for  the  rent  of 
the  house  No.  50  North  9th  St.,  which  deponents  occupied  before 
going  West,  but  which  the  said  White,  alias  Stephens,  took  for  one 

TEMPTATION  AND  TEMPTERS.  447 

month  upon  her  own  responsibility,  but  with  some  expectation  that 
the  said  Child  would  see  the  rent  paid  if  deponents  would  return  to 
the  said  house  ;  and  the  said  White,  failing  to  induce  deponents  to 
agree  to  refund  the  said  rent,  which  indeed  they  were  unable  to  do, 
significantly  remarked  that  a  number  of  gentlemen  of  wealth,  includ- 
ing members  of  the  Young  Men's  Christian  Association,  were  ready 
to  pay  her  a  large  sum  of  money,  and  she  need  not  trouble  them  any 
more. 

In  testimony  whereof  the  said  deponents  have  hereunto  signed 
their  names  this  25th  day  of  January  A.  D.  1S75. 

Nelson  Holmes. 
Jennie  Holmes. 
Sworn  and  Subscribed,  this  25th  day  of  January  A.  D.  1S75. 

Francis  Hood, 

Alderman. 

Here  we  have  our  frail  Eliza  asserting,  in  a  very 
emphatic  fashion,  in  confidential  correspondence  with 
her  ex-lodgers:  (1)  That  she  has  been  tempted  by- 
Mr.  Leslie  in  the  sum  of  $1,000,  and  also  by  a  Mr. 
Roberts  to  confess  that  she  played  Katie  King ;  (2) 
That  she  denied  to  both  of  them  unreservedly  that  she 
had  ever  done  so,  and  asseverated  the  genuine  medium- 
ship  of  the  Holmeses,  but  nevertheless  Mr.  Leslie 
persisted  in  his  suggestions  and  offers;  (3)  That  she 
does  not  understand  what  this  all  means,  and  hopes  the 
Holmeses  will  return  to  Philadelphia,  and  thus  relieve 
her  of  all  this  importunity.  When  we  compare  this 
letter  of  the  iSth  of  August  with  her  letter  from  North 
Cambridge,  Mass.,  to  Dr.  Child,  repudiating  all  knowl- 
edge of  fraud  in  the  Katie  King  affair  (which  she  now 
avers  was  written  by  Holmes'  dictation),  we  have  very 
strong  prima  facie  evidence  that  her  whole  story  of 
having  personated  the  spirit  is  false. 

The  Mr.  Leslie  she  alludes  to  is  no  doubt  the  per- 
son of  that  name  who  finally  engineered  the  expose  of 
December  5th,  for  he  was  a  constant  attendant  at  the 
seances,  and  no  other  Mr.  Leslie  has  been  mentioned 
in  connection  with  this  affair.  Mr.  Roberts  is  a 
nephew  of  Mr.  J.  M.  Roberts,  a  wealthy  gentleman  of 
Burlington,  N.  J.,  and  a  staunch  friend  of  the  Holmeses 
from  first  to  last.  He  informed  me  that  his  nephew 
had  acknowledged  to  him  that  an  officer  of  the 
Young  Men's  Christian  Association  of  Philadelphia, 
called  upon  him  several  times  last  summer,  and  tried 

448  THE  KA  TIE  KING  AFFAIR. 

to  enlist  his  services  to  help  break  down  spiritualism, 
in  general  and  the  Holmeses  in  particular,  but  that  he 
had  declined.  Moreover,  he  has  recently  re-affirmed, 
in  a  letter  to  General  Lippitt,  his  denial,  and  protested 
against  his  being  included  among  the  conspirators.  I 
know  no  more  of  the  facts  of  the  case  than  appears  in 
the  documentary  evidence,  and  leave  it  to  the  parties 
interested  to  fight  it  out  among  themselves.  It  cer- 
tainly will  strike  the  public  as  strange  that  Eliza  White 
should  so  circumstantially  describe  the  visit  and 
importunity  of  Mr.  Roberts,  if  no  such  things  had 
ever  occurred ;  and  the  only  possible  explanation  of  the 
mystery  must  be  sought  either  in  the  personation  of 
Mr.  Roberts  by  some  other  individual,  or  a  deliberate 
falsehood  on  the  part  of  Eliza — a  falsehood  without 
apparent  motive. 

In  the  interest  of  good  morals,  it  is  to  be  hoped  that 
Eliza's  hints  of  the  connection  of  her  tempters  with  the 
Young  Men's  Christian  Association  have  no  warrant 
in  fact ;  for  it  would  be  regarded  as  an  infamous  out- 
rage in  this  day  and  country,  for  any  religious  body 
to  resort  to  bribery  and  the  subornation  of  perjury,  for 
the  purpose  of  crushing  out  any  other  religious  faith. 

There  is  still  other  evidence  going  to  show  that 
Eliza  was  not  always,  if  ever,  Katie  King,  for,  on  the 
very  evening  when  she  was  exploding  the  whole  hum- 
bug, by  giving  a  mock-seance  to  Mr.  Leslie,  Mr.  Owen, 
Doctor  Child  and  another,  the  things  happened  that 
are  related  in  the  following  affidavits :  which,  but  for 
burdening  my  report  with  redundant  testimony,  I 
might  have  had  corroborated  by  numerous  other  affida- 
vits to  the  same  effect. 

State  of  Pennsylvania,  ) 
City  of  Philadelphia.     ) 

W.  H.  Westcott,  being  duly  sworn, 
says  that  he  resides  in  the  city  of  Philadelphia,  State  of  Pennsylvania  ; 
that  on  the  night  of  the  5th  of  December,  1874,  he  in  company  with 
some  fifteen  or  twenty  persons  was  present  at  the  residence  of  Mr. 
and  Mrs.  Holmes,  S25  North  Tenth  street,  where  a  seance  was  being 
held  ;  that  between  the  hours  of  eight  and  ten  o'clock  on  said  night, 
while  Mr.  Holmes  was  in  the  cabinet,  he  saw  issue  from  the  cabinet 
the  spirit-form  of  what  is  known  to  be  "  Katie  King ;"  that  she  first 
came  to  the  aperture,  showed  her  face  several  times,  spoke  to  the 
audience,  was  recognized  by  many  of  those  present,  who  had  seen 
her  on  several  occasions  at  No.  50  North  9th  Street,  and  afterwards 

DOCTOR  FELLGER' S  AFFIDA  VI T.  449 

she  opened  the  door  and  stepped  out  among  the  audience.  This 
she  repeated  three  times  during  the  seance.  And  deponent  says 
that  the  "  Katie  King  "  who  appeared  on  the  said  evening  was  the 
identical  spirit  who  had  shown  herself  during  the  preceding  two 
months  at  the  same  place  through  the  mediumship  of  the  said  Mr. 
and  Mrs.  Holmes. 

In  testimony  whereof  the  deponent  has  hereunto  signed  his  name 
this  25th  day  of  January,  1875. 

Wm.  H.  Westcott. 
Affirmed  and  subscribed,  this  25th  day  of  January,  A.  D.  1875. 

Francis  Hood, 

Alderman. 

State  of  Pennsylvania,  ^ 
City  of  Philadelphia.     \  "' 

Adolphus  Fellger,  M.D.,  being 

sworn,  says  that  he  is  a  practising  physician  in  the  city  of  Philadel- 
phia and  resides  at  Number  154  North  nth  Street ;  that  he  has  read 
the  foregoing  affidavit  and  knows  the  facts  therein  stated  to  be  true, 
he  having  been  present  at  the  seance  described.  And  deponent 
further  says  that  he  has  seen  the  spirit  known  as  "  Katie  King  "  in 
all  perhaps  eighty  times,  is  perfectly  familiar  with  her  features,  and 
cannot  be  mistaken  as  to  the  identity  of  the  Katie  King  who  appeared 
upon  the  evening  of  December  5th,  for,  while  the  said  spirit  scarcely 
ever  appeared  of  exactly  the  same  height  or  features  two  evenings  in 
succession,  her  voice  was  always  the  same,  and  the  expression  of  her 
eyes  and  the  topics  of  her  conversation  enabled  him  to  be  still  more 
certain  of  her  being  the  same  person. 

Ad.  Fellger,  M.D. 
Sworn  and  subscribed  before  me  this  25th  day  of  January,  1S75. 

Wm.  P.  Hibberd, 

Alderman. 

Doctor  Adolf  Fellger,  who  signs  one  of  these  affida- 
vits, is  well-known  and  widely  respected  as  a  physician 
in  Philadelphia.  He  is  beloved  by  all  who  have  been 
so  fortunate  as  to  make  his  acquaintance.  Mr.  Owen 
describes  him,  in  his  letter  to  me  of  December  28th,  as 
"  a  popular  and  highly  esteemed  German  physician  of 
this  city,"  (Philadelphia),  and  his  simple  word  would 
outweigh  a  score  of  affidavits  of  your  Eliza  Whites. 

Again,  I  have  before  me  sundry  letters  written  by 
Mr.  Holmes  to  Eliza  White  and  Doctor  Child  from 
Michigan,  which  speak  of  Katie  King's  having  appeared 
in  their  circles  out  there.  On  the  25th  of  August  he 
writes  to  Dr.  Child  that  they  held  a  seance  on  the  21st, 

450  THE  KATIE  KING  AFFAIR. 

at  which  "  Katie  came  and  showed  herself  splendid," 
while  on  the  28th  he  writes  to  Mrs.  White  instructions 
about  packing  and  shipping  his  furniture  from  Phila- 
delphia. Clearly  Mrs.  White  could  not  be  in  the  latter 
city  occupying  the  house,  and  in  Michigan  playing  the 
part  of  Katie  King  at  one  and  the  same  time.  On 
September  4th,  he  writes  to  Child,  that  "  K.  K.  comes 
to  us  better  than  ever,  but  seems  troubled  about  some- 
thing that  we  can't  find  out.  What  does  she  tell  you  ?  " 
And  Eliza  does  not  pretend,  in  her  affidavit  to  have 
gone  West  before  the  12th  of  September.  Who,  then, 
was  personating  Katie  before  her  arrival? 

The  occurrence  of  the  phenomena  in  Blissfield,  while 
Eliza  was  still  in  Philadelphia  is,  furthermore,  attested 
by  Doctor  Child  himself  in  a  letter  of  Oct  to  the 
Religio-Philosophical  Journal,  of  Chicago,  and  in  this 
same  letter  he  speaks  of  knowing  the  woman,  and  being 
able  to  declare  that  she  was  not  Katie  King. 

It  does  seem  as  if  there  never  was  so  tangled  a  skein 
as  this  to  unravel. 

In  fact,  when  I  review  the  whole  of  the  evidence  in 
this  case — the  assertions  and  counter  assertions  of 
Eliza;  the  contradictions  of  all  her  material  statements 
by  the  Holmeses,  and  their  plausible  explanations  of 
the  suspicious  sentences  in  Mr.  Holmes'  letters  to  her; 
the  circumstantially  minute  descriptions  given  by  Mr. 
Owen  of  things  seen  by  him,  which  no  theory  of 
personation  by  Eliza,  or  any  other  mortal  explains ; 
the  added  testimony  of  General  Lippitt;  the  recent 
confession  of  Mr.  and  Mrs.  Holmes  to  General  Lippitt, 
that  Doctor  Child  procured  Mrs.  White  to  stand  for 
the  photograph  of  Katie  sold  by  him ;  the  fact  that  this 
picture  bears  no  resemblance  to  a  portrait  of  Eliza  in 
my  possession,  which  was  taken  after  the  "  Katie  photo- 
graph ;  "  the  rash  certificate  of  Doctor  Child  as  to  the 
identity  of  Eliza  and  Katie,  after  the  fatal  statements 
in  his  pamphlet,  and  his  astonishing  self-contradictions 
in  his  newspaper  contributions — when  I  consider  all 
these,  I  confess  that  I  am  completely  unable  to  decide 
whether  there  ever  was  such  a  thing  as  a  false  persona- 
tion of  the  spirit  at  all.  Like  the  Comte  de  Gabalis,  I 
am  tempted  to  say;  "In  short  I  could  make  neither 
head  nor  tail  on't."  Nothing  but  a  full  confession 
by  the  Holmeses  to  the  fact,  backed  by  corroborative 
proof,  will  throw  light  upon  the  foggy  subject.     Their 

45  2  THE  KA  TIE  KING  AFFAIR. 

unsupported  assertion  would  not  alone  suffice  to  con- 
vict them,  for  we  have  all  seen  enough  of  mediums  and 
mediumship  to  know  that  "lying  spirits"  may  just  as 
well  now,  as  in  Bible  times,  (See  I  Kings  xxii,  19  to 
23)  control  mediums,  perhaps  even  to  the  denying  of 
crimes  they  have  committed,  and  the  confessing  to 
others  of  which  they  are  wholly  innocent. 

Look  at  this  very  matter  of  the  photograph.  General 
Lippitt  tells  us  in  the  Banner  of  Light,  of  February  6th 
instant,  that  the  Holmeses  confessed  to  him,  on  the  31st 
of  January,  that  Eliza  stood  for  the  Katie  pictures.  Well, 
let  the  reader  judge  for  himself  whether  this  is  so  or  not. 
Here  we  have  a  copy  of  that  photograph,  and,  beside  it, 
one  given  to  me  as  a  portrait  of  Eliza,  and  alleged  to  have 
been  taken  since  the  other  was  published  by  Dr.  Child  : 

Do  they  look  alike  ?  Is  there  any  resemblance  between 
the  two  faces  in  the  breadth  of  jaw-bone,  prominence  of 
cheek-bone,  shape  and  length  of  nose,  curve  of  nostril, 
length  of  lower  jaw,  or  shape  of  head — in  a  word,  in 
either  of  those  salient  features  of  a  head  and  face  which 
emaciation  does  not  alter?  If  I  had  been  permitted  to 
see  the  shrinking  affiant,  I  might  better  judge  of  the 
fidelity  of  the  two  portraits,  or  either,  to  the  original.  As 
it  is,  I  can  only  say  that  the  one  which  the  public  will 
now  see  for  the  first  time,  was  given  to  me  by  one  who  has 
the  best  of  reasons  for  knowing  whether  it  is  good  or  not, 
and  who  assures  me  that  it  is  the  woman  herself.  It  was 
also  identified  by  the  Chief  of  Police,  Mr.  Sage,  and  by 
other  citizens  of  Winsted. 

The  best  we  can  do,  under  the  circumstances,  is  to  put 
the  whole  batch  of  contradictory  testimony  about  this 
entire  case  in  a  pigeon-hole,  and  escape  out  of  this 
quagmire  of  doubt  upon  the  solid  ground  of  fact,  as 
demonstrated  by  the  experiments  and  investigations  to 
which  I  will  now  ask  the  reader's  attention. 

I  reached  Philadelphia,  as  before  observed,  on  the  4th 
of  January,  and  called  upon  Mr.  Leslie,  Doctor  Child, 
Mr.  Owen,  Dr.  Fellger  and  others.  I  took  rooms  at 
the  private  hotel  of  Mrs.  Martin,  in  Girard  Street,  where 
our  friend  Madame  de  Blavatsky,  was  also  quartered. 
My  acquaintance  with  Mme.  de  B.,  begun  under  such 
interesting  circumstances  at  Chittenden,  has  continued, 
and  recently  become  more  intimate  in  consequence  of 
her  having  accepted  the  offer  of  M.  Aksakow  the  eminent 
St.  Petersburgh  publisher,  former  tutor  to  the  Czarowitch, 

A  REMARKABLE  LADY.  453 

to  translate  my  Chittenden  letters  into  the  Russian 
language  for  republication  in  the  capital  of  the  Czar. 

I  gradually  discovered  that  this  lady,  Avhose  brilliant 
accomplishments  and  eminent  virtues  of  character,  no 
ltss  than  her  exalted  social  position,  entitle  her  to  the 
highest  respect,  is  one  of  the  most  remarkable  mediums 
in  the  world"."/  At  the  same  time,  her  mediumship  is 
totally  different  from  that  of  any  other  person  I  ever  met ; 
for,  instead  of  being  controlled  by  spirits  to  do  their  will, 
it  is  she  who  seems  to  control  them  to  do  her  bidding. 
Whatever  may  be  the  secret  by  which  this  power 
has  been  attained,  I  cannot  say,  but  that  she  possesses  it, 
I  have  had  too  many  proofs  to  permit  me  to  doubt  the 
fact.  Many  years  of  her  life  have  been  passed  in 
Oriental  lands,  where  what  we  recognize  as  Spiritualism, 
has  for  years  been  regarded  as  the  mere  rudimental 
developments  of  a  system  which  seems  to  have  established 
such  relations  between  mortals  and  the  immortals  as  to 
enable  certain  of  the  former  to  have  dominion  over 
many  of  the  latter.  I  pass  by  such  of  the  mysteries  of 
the  Egyptian,  Hindoo  and  other  priestly  orders,  as 
may  be  ascribed  to  a  knowledge  of  the  natural  sciences, 
and  refer  to  those  higher  branches  of  that  so-called 
White  Magic,  which  has  been  practised  for  countless 
centuries  by  the  initiated. 

Whether  Mme.  de  B.  has  been  admitted  behind  the 
veil  or  not  can  only  be  surmised,  for  she  is  very  reticent 
upon  the  subject,  but  her  startling  gifts  seem  impossible 
of  explanation  upon  any  other  hypothesis.  She  wears 
upon  her  bosom  the  mystic  jeweled  emblem  of  an 
Eastern  Brotherhood,  and  is  probably  the  only  repre- 
sentative in  this  country  of  this  fraternity,  "who,  (as 
Bulwer  remarks,)  "in  an  earlier  age  boasted  of  secrets  of 
which  the  Philosopher's  Stone  was  but  the  least ;  who  con- 
sidered themselves  the  heirs  of  all  that  the  Chaldeans,  the 
Magi,  the  Gymnosophists,  and  the  Platonists  had  taught ; 
and  who  differed  from  all  the  darker  sons  of  Magic  in 
the  virtue  of  their  lives,  the  purity  of  their  doctrines  and 
their  insisting,  as  the  foundation  of  all  wisdom,  on  the 
subjugation  of  the  senses,  and  the  intensity  of  Religious 
Faith." 

After  knowing  this  remarkable  lady,  and  seeing  the 
wonders  that  occur  in  her  presence  so  constantly  that 
they  actually  excited  at  length  but  a  passing  emotion  of 
surprise,  I  am  almost  tempted  to  believe  that  the  stories 

454  THE  KA  TIE  KING  AFFAIR. 

of  Eastern  fables  are  but  simple  narratives  of  fact;  and 
that  this  very  American  outbreak  of  spiritualistic  phenom- 
ena is  under  the  control  of  an  Order,  which  while  depend- 
ing for  its  results  upon  unseen  agents,  has  its  existence 
upon  Earth  among  men. 

The  occurrence  of  the  phenomena  I  am  about  to 
describe  is  calculated  to  arouse  the  deepest  interest 
in  the  mind  of  every  student  in  Psychology.  They  rob 
the  episode  of  the  buckle  brought  from  the  Russian 
General's  grave  to  his  daughter  in  Chittenden  of  the 
greater  part  of  its  appearance  of  improbability;  and,  taken 
in  connection  with  the  Compton  mysteries,  described 
in  their  appropriate  place  in  this  Part  II,  indicate  that 
we  are  doing  no  violence  to  our  sagacity  to  expect  that 
before  long  we  may  witness  in  our  American  "circles" 
'phases  of  "  manifestations "  worthy  to  be  classed  with 
the  ancient  and  modern  mysteries  of  the  countries  of 
the  Orient. 

The  first  evening  I  spent  in  Philadelphia,  I  had  a  very 
long  conversation  through  rappings  with  what  purported 
to  be  the  spirit  who  calls  himself  "  John  King."  Who- 
ever this  person  may  be,  whether  he  was  the  Buccaneer 
Morgan  or  Pontius  Pilate,  Columbus  or  Zoroaster,  he  has 
been  the  busiest  and  most  powerful  spirit,  or  what  you 
please  to  call  it,  connected  with  this  whole  Modern 
Spiritualism.  In  this  country  and  Europe  we  read  of  his 
physical  feats,  his  audible  speaking,  his  legerdemain,  his 
direct  writing,  his  materializations.  He  was  with  the 
Koons  family  in  Ohio,  the  Davenports  in  N.  Y.,  the 
Williams  in  London,  and  the  mediums  in  France  and 
Germany.  Mme.  de  B.  encountered  him  fourteen  years 
ago  in  Russia  and  Circassia,  talked  with  and  saw  him  in 
Egypt  and  India,  I  met  him  in  London,  in  1870,  and  he 
seems  able  to  converse  in  any  language  with  equal  ease. 
I  have  talked  with  him  in  English,  French,  German, 
Spanish,  and  Latin,  and  have  heard  others  do  the  same 
in  Greek,  Russian,  Italian,  Georgian,  (Caucasus)  and 
Turkish  ;  his  replies  being  always  pertinent  and  satis- 
factory. His  rap  is  peculiar  and  easily  recognizable 
from  others — a  loud,  sharp,  crackling  report.  He  objects 
to  the  application  of  tests,  but  after  refusing  them,  will, 
at  the  most  unexpected  times,  give  such  as  are  much 
more  startling  and  conclusive  than  the  ones  proposed. 
He  has  done  this  with  me,  not  once  merely  but  dozens  of 
times ;  and,  really  it  became  the  most  difficult  thing  in 

JOHN  KING '  S  1)1  SCL  OS  U&ES.  455 

the  world  for  me  to  hesitate  a  moment  longer  in  giving 
up  all  reserve  and  acknowledging  myself  a  Spiritualist 
pur  sang. 

I  went  to  Philadelphia  without  a  theory  as  to  the 
Holmes  imbroglio ;  the  newspaper  accounts  had  been  so 
confusing  that  I  dismissed  the  whole  subject  from  my 
mind,  and  determined  to  start  at  the  very  bottom  and 
build  up  my  belief  by  degrees.  But  at  my  first  interview 
with  "  John  King,"  he  rapped  out  the  whole  secret  history 
of  the  affair,  telling  me  the  parties  concerned  in  the 
pretended  exposure,  their  names,  the  agents  they  em- 
ployed, the  sums  of  money  subscribed,  who  carried  the 
purse,  who  disbursed  the  funds,  and  who  received  the 
spoils.  I  was  amazed  beyond  description,  for  the  infor- 
mation given  was  the  farthest  possible  from  what  seemed 
credible. 

But  each  day's  developments  proved  it  more  and  more 
true,  and  if  I  could  only  have  afforded  to  wait,  I  have 
little  doubt  but  that  documentary  and  parole  evidence 
would  have  been  forthcoming  to  substantiate  the  whole 
story!  As  it  is,  however,  I  will  have  to  leave  it  only  half 
told,  for  the  bloody  experience  of  1692  stands  as  a  warn- 
ing for  all  time  against  relying  wholly  upon  "  spectre 
testimony." 

It  will  be  readily  imagined  that  I  early  demanded  of 
the  supposed  spirit  some  evidence  of  his  supersensual 
existence.  On  the  evening  of  the  6th,  I  said  to  him  : 
"  If  you  are  in  reality  a  spirit,  as  you  pretend,  give  me 
some  exhibition  of  your  power.   Make  for  me,  for  example, 

a  copy  of  the  last  note  from   Eliza  White  to  Mr. that 

I  have  in  the  portfolio  in  my  pocket."  He  made  no 
reply,  but  rattled  on  about  other  matters,  and  did  not 
recur  to  the  subject  that  evening.  On  the  evening  of 
the  8th,  however,  as  we  were  sitting  by  the  table,  Mme. 
de  B.  writing  and  I  reading,  John  rapped  loudly  for 
the  alphabet,  and  spelt  out,  "  Hand  me  your  dictionary, 
under  the  table,  will  you  ?"  Mme.  de  B.  did  as  requested. 
"The  mucilage."  She  handed  the  bottle  down.  "Your 
penknife."  She  passed  that  down  also.  All  was  quiet 
for  a  moment,  when  he  rapped  that  we  should  look.  We 
took  up  the  dictionary  and  lo  !  upon  a  fly-leaf  in  the 
back  part,  we  found  an  exact  copy  of  the  note  I  had 
referred  to  two  evenings  before.  The  portfolio  in  which 
I  carried  it,  with  other  documents  relating  to  the  case,  I 
had  taken  out  of  my  pocket  a  half-hour  before,  and  laid 

16 

456  THE  KATIE  KING  AFFAIR. 

upon  the  mantel-shelf.  With  this  exception,  it  had  not 
been  out^of  my  possession,  and  the  whole  time  it  lay  on 
the  mantel,  it  was  under  my  eye  and  I  sat  within  a  few 
feet  of  it.  It  was  impossible,  therefore,  for  any  trickster 
to  have  secretly  transferred  a  duplicate  to  my  friend's 
dictionary. 

I  crossed  over,  got  the  paper,  and  compared  it,  and 
here  we  have  the  two  in  fac-simile. 

By  placing  the  one  over  the  other,  I  found  that  the 
duplicate  was  not  a  tracing,  for,  while  the  two  fitted 
in  certain  places,  they  would  not  in  others,  and  there 
were  just  such  differences  in  the  formation  of  the  letters 
as  showed  that  the  duplicate  might  have  been  written 
by  the  same  person  as  the  other,  but  at  a  different  time. 

The  reader  will  observe  the  very  quaint  writing  in  the 
foot-note  of  the  duplicate,  signed  "  J.  K."  This  is 
supposed  to  be  John's  own  autograph,  and  another 
example  of  it  will  be  found  on  the  communication  of 
Katie  King  to  myself. 

It  will  be  imagined  that  I  awaited  the  fulfillment  of  his 
promise  the  next  evening  with  great  interest,  not  to  say 
anxiety,  but  I  said  nothing  for  fear  His  Worship  might 
be  induced  to  postpone  the  matter  indefinitely.  Mme. 
de.  B.  and  I  were  alone  this  time,  occupied  as  before, 
when  suddenly  at  John's  demand,  expressed  through  rap- 
pings,  she  took  a  sheet  of  Bristol-board  drawing-paper, 
and  showing  me  that  both  sides  were  perfectly  clean, 
threw  it  under  the  table.  I  glanced  under  the  cloth  to 
see  that  there  was  nothing  there  but  the  one  piece  of 
paper,  which  was  easily  recognizable  by  its  size  and 
shape.  John  rapped  that  I  should  look  at  my  watch,  and 
note  how  long  it  took  him  to  perform  the  experiment. 

Madame  de  B.  went  on  with  her  writing,  and  no  sound 
was  heard  but  the  scratching  of  her  pen  and  the  ticking 
of  my  watch.  When  30  seconds  had  elapsed  John 
rapped  "  Done,"  and  upon  going  beneath  the  table,  and 
seeing  the  paper,  I  made  an  exclamation  of  disappoint- 
ment, for  the  upper  surface  was  blank.  But  as  I  lifted 
the  sheet  from  the  floor  I  saw,  upon  the  face  that  had 
lain  next  to  the  carpet,  a  second  copy  of  the  same 
document. 

The  difference  in  the  formation  of  the  letters  between 
the  original  and  duplicate  is  not  nearly  so  marked  as 
those  between  this  triplicate  and  the  original.  Mr. 
Betanelly   came  in  at  this   moment   and  we   compared 

D  U PLICA  TE  LE  TTER  S.  45  7 

0<s 

THE   ORIGINAL   NOTE. 

ao  r&~  <&y*>  yjc^.  *&*»ty  ^n^^ui 

I  y/i ll  try  ciru>^  a  li^r  fonwrtf  vtf 

7  J/< 

THE   FIRST   COPY. 

45  S  THE  KA  TIB  KING  AFFAI8. 

the  writings  with  the  greatest  care,  only  to  be  more 
and  more  astounded  at  this  fresh  exhibition  of  the 
power   of  our  invisible  ally.     Now  let  the  reader   turn 

^*K-£P£fefr 

Ghx 

yM* 

*.    %***.    &y*.    X_JlL^     cJw~<£i     <&n^V<&£ 

THE  BRISTOL-BOARD   COPY. 

to  the  story  of  the  visit  of  the  two  Egyptian  gentlemen 
to  the  old  Sheikh,  on  page  414,  and  then  to  the  fac- 
similes of  the  writings  done  for  me  by  the  spirits  at 
Chittenden  (which  look  so  suspiciously  like  Horatio 
Eddy's  autograph,)  and  decide  whether  the  mere  fact 
of  such  resemblances  as  all  these,  would  be  any  proof 
positive  that  a  medium  had  been  committing  fraud  if 
he  should  give  us  communications  in  handwriting  very 
much  like  his  own. 

The  portfolio  containing  Eliza  White's  Katie-King- 
pote  and  John's  first  duplicate  was  this  time  in  my 
coat-pocket,  where  it  had  been  constantly  since  the 
preceding  evening.  John  broke  in  upon  our  expressions 
of  surprise  by  rapping  out :  "  Do  you  folks  want  me 
to  commit  forgery  for  you  ?  I  can  bring  you  here  the 
blank  check  of  any  National  Bank,  and  sign  upon  it  the 
name  of  any  President,  Cashier  or  other  official."  I 
thanked  His  Invisible  Highness  kindly  and  declined  the 

A  PHILADELPHIA  PROPHETESS. 

459 

favor,  upon  the  sufficient  ground  that  the  Police  did  not 
believe  in  Spiritualism,  and  I  did  not  care  to  risk  the 
chance  of  convincing  them  in  case  the  forged  papers 
should  be  found  in  my  possession. 

I  devoted  an  idle  hour  this  same  day  to  an  interview 
with  a  very  remarkable  "  impressible  medium,"  named 
Miss  Annie  M.  Bulwer,  to  whom  I  was  recommended  by 
Mr.  Owen  and  Dr.  Child.  I  went  to  her  a  perfect 
stranger,  declined  to  give  my  name,  and  nevertheless, 
was  more  interested  by  what  she  told  me  than  by  anything 
I  ever  got.  in  the  same  length  of  time  from  a  person  of  her 
class.  She  told  me  my  name,  described  the  business 
upon  which  I  had  come  to  Philadelphia,  spoke  of  the 
probable  result  (which,  I  may  say,  has  been  in  great 
measure  verified),  and  favored  me  with  sundry  prophecies, 
two  of  which  I  record  as  a  matter  of  curiosity.  Among 
.other  things  she  said  that  I  would  be  invited  to  England 
before  long,  to  act  with  Messrs.  Wallace,  Crookes,  and 
Varley  in  an  important  matter  connected  with  Spiritual- 
ism, to  arise  in  the  future  ;  and  that  my  present  book 
would  be  translated  into  Russian,  German,  Polish,  and 
other  languages.  Part  of  her  prediction  is  already  in  a 
fair  way  of  being  verified,  for  the  Russian  translation  is 
almost  finished,  and  I  am  informed  that  the  work  is  to  be 
republished  in  German,  at  Leipsic.  I  pray  the  reader's 
indulgence  for  this  digression,  but  so  few  prophecies  from 
these  mediums  are  placed  upon  record  in  advance,  that  I 
thought  there  would  be  no  harm  in  breaking  through  the 
rule 

Mrs.  Holmes  returned  from  Vineland  on  the  nth,  and 
that  evening  I  attended  for  the  first  time  a  seance  at  her 
house.  There  were  present  fifteen  persons-  The  first 
thing  in  order  was  a  "  dark  seance,"  which  I  will  not 
particularly  dwell  upon,  as  I  afterwards  had  the  oppor- 
tunity ot  holding  one  in  my  own  rooms,  under  test 
conditions,  and  will  allude  to  it  in  its  proper  place. 

I  found  the  cabinet  a  triangular,  bottomless  box, 
standing  in  the  corner  of  the  room  before  a  window,  just 
as  described  in  Eliza  White's  story  in  the  papers  ;  but  I 
made  no  remark  about  it  or  any  of  the  arrangements  that 
evening,  as  I  wished  to  see  how  things  were  done. 
Mrs.  Holmes,  of  course,  occupied  the  cabinet  alone,  her 
husband  being  in  the  country.  She  went  in  and  sat  upon 
a  chair,  closed  and  bolted  the  door  from  the  inside,  and 
somebody  outside  started  a  large  music-box  to  playing. 

460  THE  KA  TIE  KING  AFFAIR. 

In  a  few  minutes  the  short,  black  curtain  behind  one  of 
the  apertures  was  drawn  aside,  and  a  man's  head 
appeared,  as  if  floating  in  the  air.  It  was  ghastly  pale,  a 
heavy  black  beard  and  moustache  increasing  the  unnatural 
pallor  by  contrast..  I  went  up  to  the  aperture,  leaned  my 
arm  upon  the  bracket-shelf  beneath  it,  and  gazed  into 
the  face,  which  was  not  twelve  inches  from  me.  A 
more  dreadful  sight  I  had  never  beheld.  The  lower 
portions,  including  the  wavy  silky  beard,  were  perfectly 
formed,  as,  also  was  the  brow ;  but  the  eyes  were  not 
materialized,  and  the  cavities  they  should  have  filled 
were  edged  with  ragged  rims,  as  though  the  face  had 
been  made  of  wax  and  the  eyes  melted  out  by  the 
application  of  a  red-hot  iron.  To  see  the  thing  floating 
in  the  air  as  buoyantly  as  a  cork  in  water,  arid  then  gaze 
at  the  orbless  sockets,  was  calculated  to  test  weak  nerves 
to  the  fullest  extent.  "Well/'  I  said  to  the  head,  "you 
are  a  handsome  young  man,  and  no  mistake  !  Do  you 
think  any  damsel  of  taste  would  fall  in  love  with  such  a 
face  as  that  ?  "  The  lips  smiled,  and  the  head  wagged 
from  side  to  side  to' mark  dissent.  I  asked  many  ques- 
tions, and  was  answered  by  nods  and  shakes,  to  signify 
"Yes"  and  "No."  A  well-formed  masculine  hand, 
matching  in  color  the  ghastly  face,  came  up  and  stroked 
the  beard,  and  motioned  to  me  to  do  likewise.  I  passed 
my  hand  inside,  and  felt  the  beard,  and  found  it  soft,  silky, 
and  as  warm  in  temperature  as  my  own.  But  I  was  not 
satisfied  with  the  seance,  for  the  medium  was  not  under 
test  conditions,  and  the  cabinet  stood  where  it  did  during 
the  time  when  Eliza  White's  pretended  comedy  was 
being  enacted.  Moreover,  I  was  not  satisfied  with  the 
movements  of  the  head — they  were  too  stiff  and  con- 
strained, and  made  me  think  I  had  possibly  been  looking 
at  a  cleverly  made  mask,  or  inflated  rubber  head,  although 
I  had  never  seen  its  like  before. 

The  next  morning  I  procured  some  stout  unbleached 
sheeting,  and  had  a  capacious  bag  made  with  a  draw- 
string at  its  mouth,  It  was  large  enough  to  take  in 
Mrs.  Holmes  up  to  her  neck,  leaving  her  room  enough 
to  be  comfortable.  I  also  went  to  the  house,  and 
myself  moved  the  cabinet  from  its  place  in  the  corner 
to  the  other  side  of  the  room,  against  a  dead-wall. 
Around  its  two  sides  mosquito  netting  was  tacked  to 
prevent  any  possible  admission  of  a  confederate,  through 

THE  HOLMES  CABINET. 

461 

a  movable  panel.  With  a  screw- driver  I  carefully 
tested  every  screw,  and  found  that  instead  of  any  one 
or  two  being  looser  than  the  rest,  (and  so  corroborating 
Eliza's  story  that  she  had  screwed  and  unscrewed 
them  at  every  seance)  each  was  as  solid  in  the  wood  as 
every  other  one.  I  found  that  Mrs.  Holmes  measured 
5  feet  3  inches  in  height,  while  the  lower  edge  of  the 
aperture  was  5  feet  5  inches  from  the  floor.  When  she 
stood  upon  tip-toe,  the  top  of  her  head  was  just  visible 
from  the  outside,  through  the  aperture. 

Here  we  have  a  front-view  and  ground-plan  of  the 
cabinet.     It  is  made  of  imitation  black-walnut,  orna- 

mented in  front  with  mouldings  and  panels  The  two 
sides  of  the  triangle  are  of  matched  pine  boards,  but 
the  furnace  heat  has  shrunken  them  so  that  in  p  aces 
the  tongues  have  slipped  out  of  the  grooves,  and  light 
can  be  seen  through  the  cracks.  The  sketch  shows 
the  mosquito-netting  tacked  around  the  sides : 

Tust  as  Mrs.  Holmes  was  ready  to  enter  the  cabinet, 
I  stopped  her  and  said  that  as  she  had  consented  to 
submit  to  test  conditions,  I  should  now  begin  to  apply 
them,  with  her  permission.  She  assented  ;  whereupon 
I  produced  the  bag,  and  she  got  into  it.  I  secured 
myself  effectually  I  believed,  against  fraud  by  drawing 

462 

THE  KA  TIE  KING  AFFAIR. 

the  mouth  around  her  neck,  just  tight  enough  to 
admit  of  her  breathing,  without  its  choking  her.  I 
then  sealed  the  string,  close  up,  with  sealing-wax,  and 

stamped  it  with  my  ring.  Finally,  I  removed  the  chair 
from  the  cabinet,  and  left  her  to  stand  up. 

I  pushed  the  door  to,  and  it  was  i?7imediately  bolted  on 
the  inside,  the  light  was  made  very  dim,  and  we  awaited 
results.  In  less  than  three  minutes,  a  white  hand 
appeared  at  one  of  the  apertures.  It  had  no  rings 
upon  the  fingers;  Mrs.  Holmes  had  several  on  hers. 
Her  hand  moreover,  is  of  a  very  peculiar  shape,  its 
outlines  being  full  of  curves,  and  the  fingers  long  and 
bony,  with  the  phalanges  strongly  defined.  The  hand 
shown  was  plump,  well-shaped  and  large. 

Then,  after  a  few  minutes  there  came  into  view  a 
partially  materialized  female  face,  much  worse  to  look 
upon  than  the  male  one  of  the  preceding  evening.  I 
could  not  think  of  anything  to  compare  it  with  except 
the  face  of  a  corpse,  half  eaten  by  rats  or  crabs.  It  was 
framed  in  a  drapery  of  white  muslin  stuff,  and,  like  the 
other,  floated  in  the  air,  swimming  towards  the  aperture 

GHA  STL  Y  FA  CES.  463 

now  from  one  side,  and  now  from  the  other,  or  rising 
from  below ;  then  remaining  stationary  for  a  moment 
or  so,  it  gazed  at  us  in  a  stiff,  blank  way,  with  its  eye- 
less sockets,  and  its  half-formed  features,  until  it  was 
enough  to  make  one's  flesh  creep  to  look  at  it.  But  I 
went  up,  stared  at  it  and  talked  with  it  by  means  of  its 
nods  and  shakes,  until  it  was  able  to  tell  me  that  it 
was  the  head  of  Katie  King,  herself,  badly  materialized. 

Its  peculiarities,  aside  from  the  dreadful  ragged- 
ness  of"  its  half  made-up  features,  were  a  preternatural 
narrowness  of  chin  and  forehead,  and  a  marked  red- 
ness of  lips,  as  though  they  were  stained  with  vermilion. 
I  doubt  if  ever  a  late  supper  conjured  a  worse  vision 
out  of  the  realm  of  dreams  to  affright  the  dyspeptic 
withal,  than  this  one;  but  it  was  in  a  measure,  more 
satisfactory  than  a  perfect  visage  would  have  been,  for, 
the  medium  being  helplessly  confined  within  the  bag, 
and  no  possibility  of  confederacy  existing,  it  seemed 
to  show  that  the  face  was  neither  that  of  a  human  being, 
nor  yet  a  mask,  for  such  masks  are  never  made.  It 
came  several  times  within  sight,  and  then  disappeared 
for  the  evening. 

Upon  entering  Mme.  de  B.'s  rooms  this  evening,  I 
found  several  ladies  and  gentlemen  waiting  to  be 
introduced  to  me,  and  they  were  amusing  themselves 
with  some  "mind-reading"  tests  given  by  a  boy 
medium  named  DeWitt  C.  Hough.  One  gentleman 
mentally  requested  that  an  affirmative  answer  to  his 
mental  question  should  be  indicated,  by  the  lad's  lead- 
ing him  across  the  room  and  placing  his,  (the  gentle- 
man's) hand  upon  a  portrait  of  "  John  King,"  in  a  glazed 
frame,  that  hung  upon  the  wall.  This  was  done,  when 
to  our  surprise  it  was  found  that  the  glass  over  the 
little  picture  had  disappeared,  although  it  had  been 
noticed  in  its  usual  place  the  same  day.  This  glass 
was  not  restored  until  nearly  a  week  had  elapsed,  when, 
one  evening,  John  rapped  that  he  wanted  a  very  small 
piece  of  white  paper  passed  under  the  table,  and  pres- 
ently said  that  he  had  brought  the  glass  back  again. 
Sure  enough,  there  it  was,  with  the  small  strip  of 
paper  gummed  on  it,  and  a  line  in  John's  handwriting 
to  the  effect  that  he  had  had  it  away  with  him. 

In  entering  this  circumstance  in  my  note-book,  I 
appended,  by  way  of  pleasantry,  the  slang  expression 
16* 

464  THE  KA  TIE  KING  AFFAIR. 

"  Bully  for  John !  "     It  will  be  seen  further  on  how  he 
returned  the  compliment. 

The  next  morning,  the  13th,  Mr.  Owen,  Mr.  Betanelly 
and  I  went  to  Mrs.  Holmes'  house  without  pre-announce- 
ment  to  hold  a  private  seance.  The  windows  were 
darkened,  Mrs.  Holmes  was  put  into  the  bag,  which  was 
sealed  as  before,  and  the  chair  was  removed.  In  70 
seconds  from  the  time  the  door  was  closed,  a  hand  was 
shown  at  the  aperture.  I  approached  the  window,  and 
laying  my  hand  upon  the  sill,  it  was  patted  by  a  detached 
hand,  which  I  found  soft,  plump,  warm  and  moist.  My 
hand  was  then  gently  pulled  down  inside  the  cabinet  and 
pressed  between  two  hands  and  caressed.  I  asked  that 
I  might  be  allowed  to  feel  the  two  thumbs  at  once,  and 
upon  opening  my  hand  the  two  thumbs  were  laid  between 
my  thumb  and  forefinger,  and  I  pressed  them.  Mr. 
Owen's  hand  was  then  pressed  and  caressed.  Passing 
my  hand  within  again  I  felt  and  stroked  the  man's  beard, 
as  on  the  former  occasion,  and  afterwards  the  turbaned 
top  of  a  head  was  raised  just  up  to  the  aperture,  but  the 
face  was  not  shown.  Finally,  all  three  of  us  laid  a  hand 
each  upon  the  sill,  and  each  was  patted  by  turns. 

These  were  all  of  the  materializations  of  the  seance, 
but  just  before  its  close  a  whispering  voice  addressed  me 
in  German  from  within  the  cabinet,  giving  me  the  name 
"Katrina  Gobe,"  and  saying  that  she  had  died  some 
years  before,  in  Philadelphia.  Mrs.  Holmes  is  said  to  be 
unacquainted  with  any  language  but  English. 

John  King  showed  himself  very  clearly  at  the  evening 
seance,  coming  as  many  as  twenty  times  in  sight,  and 
allowing  a  number  of  people  to  approach  him  and  shake 
hands  or  stroke  his  beard.  I  stood  at  the  aperture  as 
long  as  I  chose.  His  eyes  were  perfectly  formed  to-night, 
and  moved  about,  and  winked  in  a  very  natural  manner. 
He  smiled  at  me,  shook  hands,  and  talked  quite  at  length. 
I  requested  him  to  float  his  head  up  so  high  that  every 
one  could  see  that  it  was  not  possible  for  Mrs.  Holmes 
either  to  be  wearing  a  mask,  or  holding  one  up ;  where- 
upon he  rose  to  the  extreme  top  of  the  window  and 
thrust  his  head  outside,  at  an  elevation  of  6  feet  7  inches 
from  the  floor. 

One  of  the  perplexing  features  of  the  Katie  King  affair 
was  the  supposed  resemblance  between  the  manuscript  of 
Eliza  White  and  that  of  the  notes  given  by  "  Katie  "  to 
Mr.  Robert  Dale  Owen,  Dr.  Fellger  and  others,  at  the 

L 

PRIVATE  SEANCE  FOR  TESTS.  465 

Holmes  seances.  I  determined  to  attempt  at  least  the 
procurement  of  a  communication  to  myself  from  Katie ; 
and  so,  thinking  the  moment  propitious,  I  asked  if  Katie 
would  favor  me.  The  answer  came  in  a  whisper :  "  I'll 
do  it,  Colonel,  if  I  can  get  power  enough.5'  I  then  passed 
through  the  aperture  a  sheet  of  note-paper  that  I  had 
purchased  on  my  way  from  my  lodgings,  and  that  was 
marked  in  a  way  to  effectually  prevent  their  palming  off 
upon  me  a  prepared  communication,  upon  another  sheet, 
as  Eliza  White  avers  Mr.  Owen  was  deceived  in  the 
matter  of  the  Fred.  W.  Robertson  writing.  Whatever 
became  of  my  paper,  it  disappeared,  for,  as  soon  as  the 
seance  was  over,  I  searched  thoroughly  all  about  and  no 
trace  of  it  could  be  found. 

The  next  day  at  2.30  p.  m.,  I  had  a  seance  at  my  own 
rooms.  A  cabinet  was  improvised  out  of  the  short  square 
passage  between  the  sitting  and  bed-room,  and  a  curtain 
of  black  paper-muslin,  with  two  windows  cut  in  it,  and 
short  curtains  hanging  over  them  inside,  so  as  to  be 
raised  or  dropped  at  will,  was  tacked  over  the  sitting- 
room  door. 

Those  present  upon  this  occasion  were  Mme.  de  Bla- 
vatsky,  Hon.  Robert  Dale  Owen,  Dr.  Fellger,  Mr. 
Betanelly,  the  medium  Mrs.  Holmes,  and  myself.  The 
rear  door  of  the  passage  was  sealed  by  Mr.  Owen  with 
strips  of  thin  paper,  after  Mrs.  Holmes  had  been  sealed 
up  in  the  bag.  Mr.  Owen  also  locked  the  bed-room  door 
leading  into  the  passage,  and  put  the  key  into  his  pocket. 
We  then  darkened  the  room  and  took  our  places  close 
to  the  curtain.  In  half  a  minute  hands  were  shown,  and, 
almost  immediately  John  King's  face  appeared  and  was 
thrust  quite  through  the  aperture.  He  was  perfectly 
materialized,  and  came  as  near  being  a  handsome  man  as 
he  ever  did,  I  presume,  and  that  is  quite  near. 

A  voice,  supposed  to  be  Katie's,  spoke  to  us,  and 
calling  up  Mr.  Owen  and  myself,  she,  or,  at  all  events,  a 
female  hand  patted  our  hands.  I  asked  if  she  had 
written  the  communication  to  me  yet,  but  she  said  she 
had  not.  I  then  requested  that  she  would  hand  me  the 
paper  so  that  I  might  show  it  to  Mr.  Owen.  In  a  moment 
it  was  thrust  through  the  aperture,  and  Mr.  Owen  exam- 
ining it  by  the  light,  found  no  writing  except  what  I  had 
written  in  French  in  the  middle  of  the  page.  I  passed 
the  paper  back,  and  it  was  taken  from  my  hand. 

John  King  allowed  Mr.  Owen  to  feel  his  hand  and 

466 

THE  KA  TIE  KING  AFFAIR. 

beard,  and,  altogether,  the  manifestations  were  quite  as 
satisfactory  if  not  more  so  than  any  I  had  thus  far  seen 
at  Mrs.  Holmes'  house.  They  proved  beyond  question 
the  fact  that,  whatever  they  may  be,  they  depend  for 
their  production  neither  upon  false  panels,  nor  trap- 
doors, nor  wire  machinery.  The  seance  terminated 
about  5  o'clock. 

The  public  seance  was  held  at  825  North  Tenth 
Street,  at  8  p.m.,  as  usual.  A  gentleman  present  sug- 
gested that  I  should  tie  Mrs.  Holmes' hands  together 
before  putting  her  into  the  bag,  and  I  did  so ;  but,  to 
tell  the  truth,  I  thought  the  precaution  so  unnecessary 
that  the  tying  was  a  mere  pretence.  I  considered  it 
perfectly  impossible  for  her  to  get  her  hands  outside 
the  bag  to  iise  any  masks,  even  if  she  had  such  con- 
cealed about  her. 

John  King  appeared  as  usual  and  allowed  six  or 
seven  persons,  beside  myself,  to  approach  and  converse 
with  him  or  shake  hands.  As  I  saw  his  head  floating 
free  in  the  air  within  a  few  inches  of  my  eyes,  I  recalled 
Eliza's  assertion  that  the  faces  were  ten-cent  masks 
manipulated  by  the  medium,  and  the  idea  occurred  to 
ask  permission  to  satisfy  myself  in  the  most  conclusive 
way  that  I  was  not  looking  at  a  mechanical  contrivance. 
John  assenting,  I  then  put  my  arm  in,  and  swept  the  air 
in  a  semi-circle  beneath  his  head,  coming  into  contact 
with  neither  stick,  nor  wire,  nor  medium's  arm.  The 
drooping  ends  of  his  white  turban  dragged  over  my 
hand  as  I  withdrew  it.  I  then  requested  him  to  depress 
his  head,  and  passed  my  arm  in  like  manner  as  before, 
completely  over  his  head,  thus  finding  that  it  was  not 
suspended  from  above  by  string  or  wire. 

I  handed  John  my  signet-ring  and  asked  him  to  hold 

it  for  a  moment  so  that  I  might  hereafter  have  it  as  a 
souvenir  of  the  evening's  parley.  One  of  the  ladies 
handed  him  her  ring  also,  for  the  same  purpose.  He 
soon  returned  the  second  ring,  but  said  he  should  keep 

KA  TIE  ' S  LE  TTERS.  467 

mine,  which  I  must  say  I  did  not  fancy,  as  it  was  an 
expensive  intaglio,  and  I  was  not  in  the  mood  of  making 
presents  to  detached  heads  and  hands.  Before  releasing 
Mrs.  Holmes  from  the  bag  at  the  close  of  the  seance,  I 
searched  the  cabinet  in  every  part,  but  my  ring  was 
gone. 

The  voice  of  Katie  called  me  up  to  the  cabinet  after 
I  had  resumed  my  seat,  and  a  hand  passed  out  to  me 
the  sheet  of  paper  I  had  handled  a  few  hours  before. 
The  previously  blank  surface  was  now  covered  with  two 
communications  to  me,  in  a  handwriting  which  seems 
to  be  identical  with  the  Katie  King  notes  of  last 
summer,  addressed  to  Dr.  Fellger  and  Mr.  Owen,  here 
given.     Let  the  reader  judge  for  himself: 

d 

eX_ 

£s4AS^.  A>t^t  T* 

3-^  **V  &JZ  *%*£, 

468 

THE  KA  TIE  KING  AFFAIR. 

xJd&CCK/    Ycd*^   $-&&*" 

TZ 

am, 

d  yteX* 

J$  Ua^M  >^y 

<r 

COyy^ 

Compare  the  handwriting  of  these  with  that  of  the 
paper  received  by  me  from  "  Katie,"  here  given.  That 
in  the  center  square  is  my  own. 

^/A^^-^-£^&&  0*%t-&$ $L 

a*JLi 

/gAJJ,  u**,  j/*^%Z£ 

%ulU  foryw-  Wua-ffrfDv  do  wdK^  ifsgwi&fc 

Such  of  the  persons  present  as  witnessed  the  delivery 
of  the  paper  to  me  then  signed  a  certificate  at  my 
request,  and  the  seance  was  brought  to  a  close. 

THE    WIRE-CAGE  TEST.  469 

A  fresh  surprise  was  in  store  for  me  that  night,  for 
when  I  was  about  retiring,  I  turned  down  the  pillow  to 
put  my  watch  beneath  it,  and  there  lay  my  ring  uninjured. 
Its  weight  is  7^-  pennyweights,  and  the  distance  it  had 
been  transported  was  perhaps  three-fourths  of  a  mile. 

On  Monday  evening,  January  19th,  I  returned  from 
a  short  visit  to  Hartford,  and  attended  the  seance  at 
the  usual  place.  Mr.  Holmes  and  his  wife  were  both 
present  this  evening,  the  former  having  recovered 
sufficiently  from  his  hemorrhages  to  bear  traveling. 
Mrs.  Holmes  went  inside  this  evening,  and  her  husband 
sat  outside.  I  placed  a  guitar  inside  the  cabinet. 
Instantly  after  I  closed  the  door,  a  hand  was  shown  at 
the  aperture.  The  guitar  was  played  upon,  floated 
about,  bumping  against  the  sides  and  roof  of  the  cabi- 
net, and  was  violently  thrust  through  the  aperture. 
,The  face  of  John  King  was  shown,  but  none  other,  and 
nothing  unusual  occurred,  except  a  violent  altercation 
between  some  visitors  and  the  Holmeses,  as  to  whether 
it  was  possible  for  the  former  to  pass  their  hands 
through  the  neck  of  the  bag. 

I  determined  that  there  should  be  no  longer  any 
doubt  upon  this  subject,  so  the  next  evening  I  took 
special  care  in  sealing  the  bag.  I  closed  the  mouth  very 
tight  and  sealed  the  strings  with  wax  to  a  silver  coin 
in  such  a  way  that  any  attempt  to  open  or  loosen  the 
mouth  would  break  the  wax.  I  had  a  friend  present, 
an  eminent  inventor,  who  made  a  thorough  examina- 
tion of  the  bag  and  pronounced  it  impossible  for  any 
trickery  to  be  resorted  to.  I  also  caused  Mrs.  Holmes 
to  drop  her  arms  by  her  side,  and  then  pinned  her 
sleeves  to  the  bag  in  such  a  way  that  she  could 
not  raise  her  hands  more  than  four  inches  from  the 
perpendicular. 

I  had  caused  to  be  attached  to  the  left-hand  aperture, 
at  the  inside,  a  cage  or  basket  of  wire-cloth,  with  an 
arched  crown  and  flat  bottom  ;  intending  to  have  the 
faces  or  hands  show  themselves  within  it,  if  possible. 

Before  closing  the  cabinet-door  I  requested  that  the 
bolt  should  be  "thrown  back  instantly  after  being  shot, 
so  that  I  might  see  if  Mrs.  Holmes  were  moving  from 
her  position  in  the  apex  of  the  triangular  box.  This 
was  done.  I  stood  ready  with  hand  upon  the  latch,  and 
the  moment  the  bolt  was  drawn  I  'pulled  the  door  open, 
and  the  medium  was  standing  motionless  in  her  bag. 

470  THE  KA  TIE  KING  AFFAIR. 

Two  guitars  placed  inside  were  now  played  upon 
simultaneously,  and  pushed  out  of  the  right-hand 
aperture.  Within  one  minute  a  hand  was  shown  at 
the  same  window.  Then  the  curtain  over  the  other 
aperture,  and  within  the  cage,  was  drawn  aside.  How? 
A  hand  was  then  shown  there,  so  that  all  of  the  thirty 
persons  present  saw  it. 

Then  John  King  appeared  at  the  right  window  fre- 
quently, and  sundry  persons,  including  General  Lippitt, 
(who  was  present  for  the  first  time  to  begin  an  investi- 
gation of  the  Holmes  affair,)  my  friend  the  inventor, 
and  others. 

The  wire-basket  appearing  to  be  too  small  to  permit 
of  the  perfect  formation  of  a  head  within  it,  I  had  the 
mechanics  enlarge  it  the  next  day,  by  removing  the  flat 
bottom  and  carrying  the  sides  down  to  the  floor.  I 
also  had  it  permanently  attached  to  the  face  of  the 
cabinet  by  staples  and  wire  ties  that  passed  through 
the  boards  and  were  twisted  and  cut  off  on  the  front 
face.     Here  are  the  certificates  of  the  workmen : 

Philadelphia,  Jan.  19th,  1875. 

This  is  to  certify  that  we  have  attached  to  the  left-hand  aperture 
of  the  cabinet  in  the  parlor  of  825  North  Tenth  Street,  in  this  city, 
a  wire  basket  with  a  flat  bottom  and  curved  sides  and  crown,  the 
meshes  of  which  are  at  a  distance  of  1-3  inch  apart,  or  what  is 
known  in  the  trade  as  "  No.  3  wire-cloth  ; "  that  the  said  basket  is 
permanently  attached  to  the  said  cabinet  by  staples  ;  and  that  it 
would  be  impossible  for  any  person  to  introduce  a  hand,  face,  or  any 
other  thing  of  greater  diameter  than  one-third  of  an  inch,  within 
the  said  basket,  without  removing  it  by  drawing  the  staples  out  of 
the  wood.  W.  L.  Wilson,  Wm.  H.  Fennell, 

With  J.  P.  Fennell,  Wire  Worker,  No.  36  N.  6th  St. 
Philadelphia,  Jan.  20th,  1875. 

I  hereby  certify  that  the  above  described  wire-cage  was  this  day 
altered  by  removing  the  bottom  sheet,  and  extending  the  sides  con- 
tinuously down  to  the  floor,  making  the  whole  height  of  the  cage 
from  floor  to  crown  7  feet  9  inches.  In  my  opinion  it  is  impossible 
to  introduce  a  hand  or  head  within  the  said  cage  without  taking  it 
apart.  The  two  edges  of  the  wire-cloth  sheets  are  now  permanently 
attached  to  the  inner  front  face  of  the  cabinet  by  staples  driven 
home,  and  tie-wires  passing  clear  through  the  boards  and  tied  on 
the  outer  face  of  the  same.  James  P.  Fennell, 

Wire  Worker,  36  N.  6th  St.,  Phil. 

*A   JUGGLER'S  OPINION." 

471 

The  cut  affords  a  very  good  idea  of  the  form,  dimen- 
sions, and  penetrability  of  the  cage. 

We  held  a  seance  at  5  p.m.,  but  it  was 
very  unsatisfactory  to  me,  as,  relying 
upon  the  cage,  I  put  neither  Mrs.  Holmes 
nor  her  husband  in  the  bag,  and  both 
were  inside  the  cabinet  at  the  same  time. 
I  fancied  I  heard  them  working  at  my 
wire  cage  as  if  trying  to  effect  an  open- 
ing, but  they  did  not  succeed,  and  beyond 
the  drawing  of  the  curtain  aside,  noth- 
ing occurred  at  that  aperture.  At  the 
other  John  King  showed  himself,  and 
also  a  female  face,  purporting  to  be 
Katie's,  but  not  satisfactorily  identified. 

At  the  evening  seance,  a  hand  and 
arm  appeared  within  the  basket,  and 
swept  across  the  window  and  back. 
John  King's  head  also  appeared  there, 
rising  from  below  and  dropping  again. 
It  was  not  satisfactory,  however,  for  I 
could  not  understand  why,  if  it  were 
genuine  it  might  not  stay  as  long  and 
show  itself  as  freely  there  as  at  the  other 
window.  I  had  a  very  clever  juggler 
with  me  this  evening,  one  who  is  famous 
as  a  maker  of  mechanical  tricks  for  jugglers.  He  was 
introduced  to  me  by  Mr.  Coleman  Sellers,  the  distin- 
guished engineer,  President  of  the  Franklin  Institute, 
and  the  correspondent  mentioned  by  Mr.  Crookes,  in 
one  of  his  pamphlets,  as  an  ingrained  skeptic.  Mr. 
Harding,  the  amateur  juggler,  thought,  upon  examin- 
ing the  wire-cage  after  the  seance,  that  there  was  one 
spot  sufficiently  unconfined  by  the  staples  to  permit  of 
squeezing  a  hand  through  and  manipulating  a  mask, 
so  the  next  day  I  had  this  attended  to. 

At  the  seance  in  question  two  faces  were  shown  at 
the  right  aperture — John  King's  and  another.  The 
former3  looked  natural,  and  by  drawing  the  curtain 
aside  and  peering  in,  I  saw,  at  one  and  the  same  time, 
John's  head  high  up  to  the  left,  behind  the  door,  and 
Mr.  Holmes  sitting  in  the  chair  before  me.  John's 
head  was,  therefore,  not  a  mask  worn  by  Holmes. 

On  the  21st,  I  had  a  long  consultation  with  another 
juo-gler  of  acknowledged  skill  and  also  a  dealer  in 

THE  WIRE  CAGB. 

472  THE  KA  TIE  KING  AFFAIR. 

jugglers'  apparatus,  Mr.  Yost  by  name,  who  explained 
to  me  the  manner  in  which  he  fancied  that  Mrs.  Holmes 
got  her  hands  out  of  the  bag,  to  work  artificial  faces. 
It  is  to  make  a  slight  rip  or  cut  in  the  hem  covering 
the  draw-string,  and  then  draw  enough  slack  string 
through  inside  to  enable  her  to  slip  out  either  her 
hands,  or  her  whole  bust  if  she  chooses.  This  plan 
requires  that  she  shall  have  one  hand  free  while  the 
bag  is  being  sealed,  so  that  she  can  pull  on  the  slack, 
and  make  me  believe  I  am  sealing  up  the  mouth 
effectually  and  tightly.  The  explanation  did  not  seem 
satisfactory,  but  I  determined  that  no  such  trick  should 
be  played  upon  me  from  that  time  forward,  at  any 
rate. 

We  held  a  test  seance  at  4  o'clock  that  day,  at  which, 
among  others,  Mr.  Owen  and  General  Lippitt  were 
present. 

At  my  last  interview  with  John  King,  at  Mme.  de 
B.'s  rooms,  I  requested  him  to  give  me  a  private  sign 
when  I  should  next  see  him  at  Holmes',  and  he  con- 
sented. He  came  to  the  aperture  at  this  afternoon 
seance,  and  looking  at  me,  he  gave  the  sign  by  turning 
his  head  from  left  to  right  and  back  again  twice  in 
succession.  He  also  gave  to  Mme.  de  B.  a  certain 
sign  known  only  to  themselves. 

A  detached  hand  was  shown  inside  the  cage,  and 
then  we  tried  a  very  interesting  test.  Premising  by 
saying  that  Mr.  Holmes,  like  his  wife,  is  unacquainted 
with  any  foreign  language,  I  fancy  the  reader  will 
share  my  surprise,  when  I  state  that  at  the  request  of 
Mr.  Owen,  Doctor  Fellger,  Mme.  de  B.,  Mr.  Betanelly 
and  myself,  expressed  in  Italian,  German,  Latin,  Rus- 
sian, Greek,  Georgian,  Turkish,  French  and  Spanish, 
this  hand  within  the  wire-cage  gave  signal  after  signal, 
as  many  times  in  each  instance  as  we  severally  indicated 
in  these  various  languages.  The  hand  purported  to  be 
that  of  John  King,  and  hence  I  said  in  another  place 
that  he  seemed  to  understand  every  language,  a  second 
Magliabecchi.  We  were  as  much  astonished  as  Appol- 
lonius  himself  was  in  India,  where,  he  tells  us,  the 
sages  have  the  magical  power  of  understanding  and 
speaking  the  languages  of  those  who  come  to  them 
from  the  most  distant  countries. 

John  also  addressing  me  in  English,  said  he  would 
look  after  one  of  my  sons,  whose  name  is  an  unusual 

CLOSE  SCRUTINY.  473 

one,  and  one  that  certainly  no  person  in  the  room  had 
heard  me  mention. 

Mr.  Owen,  General  Lippitt  and  I  very  carefully 
scrutinized  John's  face  as  it  appeared  at  the  right 
window.  It  seemed  perfectly  natural,  the  eyes  were 
thoroughly  materialized,  and  were  rolled  about  in 
every  direction,  by  request. 

Twenty-seven  persons  were  present  that  evening  at  the 
public  seance.  I  attended  to  the  bag  with  unusual  care, 
making  Mrs.  Holmes  keep  her  hands  by  her  side  con- 
stantly ;  holding  the  mouth  of  the  bag  in  such  a  way  that 
there  could  be  no  slack  ;  pinning  her  sleeves  down  further 
than  usual ;  examining  and  testing  the  string  in  every  way 
after  that ;  and  then  calling  up  every  person  in  the  room 
by  turns  to  see  if  it  were  possible  for  the  captive  medium 
to  get  a  hand  out  to  play  tricks.  I  then  closed  the  door, 
which  as  usual  was  bolted  on  the  inside  by  somebody 
'whose  hands  were  not  sealed  up  in  a  bag,  and  before  I 
could  turn  down  the  gas,  in  the  chandelier  over  my  head, 
a  detached  hand  was  thrust  out  of  the  right  aperture  ! 
John  showed  himself,  and  I  had  a  long  conversation  with 
him  in  French,  he  replying  correctly  by  movements  of 
his  head.  Among  other  things,  I  asked  him  if  it  was  his 
own  voice  that  had  spoken  to  me  in  English  that  after- 
noon about  my  son,  and  he  answered  affirmatively.  He 
allowed  a  number  to  approach,  and  gallantly  kissed  his 
hand  to  several  of  the  ladies.  I  saw  the  movement  of 
his  lips,  and  the  sound  of  the  osculation  was  so  audible 
that  all  in  the  room  could  hear  it.     It  was  no  mask. 

There  was  a  rattling  and  scraping  on  the  wire-cage,  as 
though  something  hard  were  being  drawn  over  the 
meshes,  but  nothing  happened  inside,  except  that  the 
curtain  was  drawn  aside. 

Another  face  beside  John's  appeared,  but  it  was  not 
recognized.  A  number  of  hands  were  also  shown,  of 
different  sizes,  among  them  one  fair,  well-formed,  plump 
hand  of  a  woman,  so  peculiar  in  its  shape  that  I  examined 
Mrs.  Holmes'  hands  after  the  seance,  only  to  again 
observe  the  thin,  long  thumb,  and  peculiar  sickle-shaped 
curve  of  the  outer  edge  of  the  palm. 

The  London  Spiritualist,  of  February  1st,  1873,  con- 
tains a  bit  of  prima-facie  evidence  in  favor  of  Katie  King's 
having  actually  appeared  through  the  mediumship  of  the 
Holmeses.  It  is  a  report  of  a  seance  at  Mrs.  Makdougall 
Gregory's,  21  Green  St.,  Grosvenor  Square,  London,  and 

474  THE  KA  TIE  KING  AFFAIR. 

the  paper  editorially  certifies  to  the  fact  that  "  Katie  King 
showed  herself,  and  two  old  gentlemen,  one  with  a  white 
beard,  and  one  old  lady." 

In  a  previous  number  of  the  same  paper,  Mr.  J.  C.  Lux- 
moore  avers  that  he  saw  at  Mr.  Holmes'  rooms,  at  n 
Old  Quebec  Street,  the  identical  Katie  King  whom  he 
had  seen  three  times  before  at  Hackney  in  the  presence 
of  Florence  Cook. 

Finally,  in  the  paper  called  The  Medium  and  Daybreak, 
a  correspondent  reports,  in  a  card  dated  March  24th,  1873, 
that  he  attended  a  Holmes  seance  "  at  which  many  spirit- 
faces  were  shown,  among  them  that  of  the  elder  Katie 
King,  who  spoke  in  her  usual  whispers,  and  was  very 
palpable  and  distinct." 

I  had  now  been  so  long  in  Philadelphia  without  seeing 
the  full  form  of  Katie  King  that,  despairing  of  her  appear- 
ance, and  having  accomplished  the  main  object  of  my 
experiments — to  test  the  "materializing"  powers  of  the 
mediums,  I  was  growing  impatient  to  depart.  At  an 
afternoon  test  seance,  both  mediums  sat  outside  at  my 
request  for  a  time.  There  were  rappings  inside  the 
cabinet,  and  some  scrapings  upon  the  wire-cage,  but  the 
experiment  was  a  failure,  and  as  no  faces  appeared,  I  sent 
Mr.  Holmes  inside,  and  sealed  him  up  in  a  new  bag  I 
had  had  made,  and  pinned  his  sleeves  to  it.  In  five 
seconds  a  hand  was  shown  at  the  right  window  :  then  two 
hands  were  shown  together,  and  then  John  King  appeared, 
showing  me  his  full  head  and  shoulders. 

At  the  evening  seance,  the  usual  precautions  were 
taken,  and  as  usual  hands  were  shown  and  John  appeared 
and  spoke  to  me.  A  woman's  hand  and  arm  were  thrust 
quite  out  of  the  window,  and  after  an  intermission  of  a 
few  minutes  there  came  a  face  which  struck  me  as  soon 
as  I  saw  it  as  the  Katie  King  of  the  Holmes  photograph. 
If  it  was  not  the  identical  face,  it  at  any  rate  seemed  to 
be,  and  this  impression  was  made  upon  the  mind  of  Gen- 
eral Lippitt,  also.  I  scrutinized  it  very  closely.  The 
face  was  not  smooth  and  well  rounded,  but  seemingly 
roughly  finished.  The  eyebrows  were  straight  and  black; 
the  contour  of  face  oval,  rather  long  and  thin  ;  the  dark 
hair  lay  smooth  upon  the  brow.  A  gauzy  white  material, 
wrapped  around  it,  framed  the  head,  and  made  it  look 
unnatural  and  ghastly. 

Our  test  seance  began  at  4  p.m.  the  next  day.  John, 
and  the   Katie  like  the  photograph   appeared   several 

A  CONUNDRUM.  475 

times.  The  latter  borrowed  General  Lippitt's  pocket- 
knife,  and  cut  off  and  handed  him  a  lock  of  her  hair, 
which,  upon  subsequent  comparison  with  locks  in  the 
possession  of  Mr.  Owen  and  Dr.  Fellger,  was  found  to  be 
identical  in  texture,  and  color — the  latter,  a  peculiar 
glorious  shade  of  golden  brown. 

While  looking  at  this  head  I  saw  something  inside  the 
cabinet  that  I  would  like  to  have  some  one  more  capable 
than  myself  explain :  I  saw  the  Katie  King  head,  with 
the  mouth  of  a  bag  drawn  tightly  about  her  neck  as  the 
bag  was  drawn  about  the  medium's,  and  a  hand,  which 
was  attached  to  an  arm  that  came  from  another  direction, 
took  hold  of  and  fondled  mine.  Now,  one  thing  is  per- 
fectly clear  :  this  hand  and  arm  did  not  belong  to  Mrs. 
Holmes'  body,  for  the  seal  on  the  bag's  mouth  was  found 
unbroken  after  the  seance.  And  again,  if  Mrs.  Holmes 
had  managed  to  get  her  hand  and  arm  out,  what  bag  was 
that  which  I  saw  drawn  tightly  about  the  neck  of  the 
"Katie  King"  there?  for  the  bag  could  not  be  both 
closed  and  open  at  once.  I  leave  the  Philadelphia 
Editors  to  display  their  preternatural  shrewdness  in 
explaining  this  riddle.  I  will  help  them  so  far  as  to  say 
that  the  bag  had  no  false  lining  nor  slack  string;  there 
was  no  duplicate  bag  in  the  cabinet ;  no  confederate  could 
either  have  been  in  there  before  the  seance  or  got  in  at 
any  time  while  it  was  progressing;  and  I  have  not  exag- 
gerated or  falsified  the  fact. 

On  the  evening  of  the  24th,  I  had  the  circle  at  my 
own  lodgings,  a  different  suite  of  rooms  from  that  in 
which  the  former  seance  was  held.  A  cabinet  was 
improvised  in  the  same  manner  as  before,  the  black 
muslin  curtain  with  apertures,  hanging  over  the  front 
door,  and  the  other  door  being  sealed  by  General  Lippitt 
to  prevent  the  admission  of  any  person  or  thing  from 
behind. 

Nine  persons  were  present,  including  the  two  mediums. 
Mrs.  Holmes  was  put  into  the  bag,  and  Mr.  Holmes  sat 
outside  the  cabinet  with  us.  I  completed  the  sealing  of 
the  string,  and  then  began  to  drive  in  a  few  tacks  to  hold 
the  curtain  to  its  place,  but  before  I  could  drive  the 
second  tack,  a  detached  hand  was  thrust  into  view  from 
the  upper  aperture,  quite  a  distance  above  the  medium's 
head. 

John  King  showed  himself  very  distinctly,  and  calling 
up  Mr.    Betanelly   communicated   to   him,    in   his   own 

476  THE  KA  TIE  KING  AFFAIR. 

language  (the  Georgian),  a  secret  that  he  supposed  none 
knew  except  himself.  He  kissed  his  hand  several  times, 
by  request,  and  also  saluted  the  cheek  of  a  lady,  who 
offered  it  for  the  purpose.  I  stood  at  the  aperture  and 
talked  much  with  him,  he  addressing  me  in  a  voice  audi- 
ble to  all,  and  I  not  a  foot  distant  from  his  face.  Katie, 
or  what  purported  to  be  she,  also  showed  herself,  but 
badly  materialized,  her  eyes  being  rot  more  than  half- 
formed.  With  her  permission,  I  thrust  my  arm  through 
to  feel  the  medium,  and  Katie,  whom  I  saw  at  my  right 
as  a  dim,  indistinct  shape,  guided  my  hand  to  the  place 
by  taking  me  by  the  coat  sleeve.  This  was  neces- 
sary, as  the  aperture  was  so  high  that  I  had  to  stand  upon 
tip-toe  to  get  my  arm  through,  and  could  not  look  in 
Mrs.  Holmes'  direction  while  my  arm  was  inside.  I 
repeated  this  experiment  to  make  assurance  doubly  sure, 
and  this  time  carefully  felt  the  medium's  head,  neck, 
shoulders,  and  passed  my  hand  down  her  arm,  which  was 
unmistakably  inside  the  bag,  the  spirit-hand  clutching 
my  sleeve  the  whole  time !  Mrs.  Holmes'  eyes  were 
tightly  closed,  her  face  was  deathly  cold,  and  her  forehead 
covered  with  a  clammy  dew. 

General  Lippitt  was  permitted  to  do  the  same  thing, 
and  has  published  an  account  of  the  seance  in  the  Banner 
of  Light,  of  date  February  6th,  1875.  General  L.  noticed 
in  Katie's  accent  this  evening  certain  dialectic  peculiar- 
ities which  were  associated  in  his  memory  with  the  Katie 
he  had  seen  last  May  in  the  Holmes  seances. 

After  this  satisfactory  experiment,  I  requested  Mr.  and 
Mrs.  Holmes  to  favor  us  with  a  "dark  seance,"  and,  this 
being  agreed  to,  the  nine  persons  in  the  company  drew 
their  chairs  together  and  joined  hands,  Mr.  and  Mrs. 
Holmes  being  separated  from  each  other.  Under  these 
circumstances,  we  were  all  touched  by  invisible  hands, 
myself  often  and  in  various  places,  sometimes  three  or 
four  of  us  were  touched  simultaneously,  a  pair  of  hands 
were  laid  upon  my  head,  a  bunch  of  plumes  was  swept 
across  our  faces,  and  then  a  cloth  of  some  light  fabric, 
and,  finally,  at  Mme,  de  B.'s  order,  some  beautiful  lights 
danced  in  the  air  over  her  head  and  then  disappeared. 
These  phenomena  were  similar  to  what  had  occurred 
almost  every  evening  in  Mrs.  Holmes'  "dark-circles," 
but  in  this  instance  there  was  absolutely  no  possibility 
of  trickery,  and  this  account  will  suffice  for  all. 

The  next  evening  my  last  test  seance  was  held,  and  it 

STARTLING  PHENOMENA.  477 

was  a  very  notable  one.  While  my  experiments  had 
demonstrated  beyond  doubt  the  fact  that  many  phe- 
nomena occur  in  the  presence  of  the  Holmeses,  which 
are  not  due  to  trickery,  yet  I  had  seen  neither  Katie 
King  nor  any  other  spirit,  in  full  form,  and  I  was  not 
entirely  satisfied  with  the  results  of  my  labors.  It  was 
here  that  Mme.  de  B.  brought  her  wonderful  power  to 
the  test.  Summoning  John  King,  she  intimated  her 
will  that  Katie  should  step  out  of  the  cabinet  that  even- 
ing, and  he  wrote  her  with  his  own  hand  a  message  to 
the  effect  that  her  orders  should  "be  obeyed."  This 
communication  is  in  my  possession,  and  General  Lippitt 
has  seen  it. 

A  select  company  of  six  persons,  besides  the  two 
mediums,  met  at  Mr.  Holmes'  residence  at  8  o'clock, 
and  after  taking  the  usual  precautions  against  fraud 
.(including  a  strange  exercise  of  Mme.  de  B.'s  power, 
which  threw  Mrs.  Holmes  into  a  death-like  trance,  and 
so  made  her  perfectly  incapable  of  resorting  to  trickery), 
the  light  was  dimmed,  and  we  sat  in  silence  waiting  for 
the  working  of  the  mystic  spell. 

Phenomenal  disturbances  soon  began  :  raps  were  heard 
all  over  the  cabinet,  various  voices  addressed  us  from 
within  its  recesses,  and  a  detached  hand,  coming  oat  of  the 
right  aperture,  and  gliding  down  the  face  of  the  cabinet, 
clutched  a  small  hand-bell  that  stood  upon  a  table,  and, 
ringing  it  all  the  while,  rose  again  to  the  aperture  and 
disappeared  with  it,  within. 

This  last  manifestation  was  calculated  to  startle  one 
out  of  all  his  preconceived  notions  of  both  anatomy  and 
gravity,  and  it  really  gave  to  the  seance  a  most  uncanny 
aspect.  But  the  crowning  test  was  to  come.  We  heard 
the  bolt  drawn  inside,  and  in  breathless  silence  watched 
the  cabinet  door  swing  slowly  open.  I  sat  within  a  few 
feet  of  the  entrance,  and  plainly  saw  at  the  threshold  a 
short,  thin,  girlish  figure,  clad  in  white  from  crown  to 
sole.  She  stood  there  motionless  for  an  instant,  and 
then  slowly  stepped  forward  a  pace  or  two.  By  the 
obscure  light  we  could  see  that  she  was  shorter  and 
much  more  delicately  built  than  the  medium,  and  her 
dress  with  its  trailing  skirt,  and  the  long  veil  that  com- 
pletely enveloped  her  form,  were  as  crisp  as  though  just 
from  the  hands  of  the  modiste.  Who  she  was  or  what  she 
was,  I  do  not  know,  but  one  thing  I  do  know, — she  was 
not  Jennie  Holmes,  nor  any  puppet  or  confederate  of 

478  THE  KATIE  KING  AFFAIR. 

hers.  And  I  know,  further,  that  M:.\e.  de  B.,  who  sat 
next  to  me,  uttered  one  word  in  a  strange  toi  gue,  and 
the  spectre  immediately  withdrew  a;r  noiselessly  as  she 
had  entered. 

When  the  meeting  broke  up  we  found  Mrs.  Holmes  in 
her  bag,  with  its  unbroken  seals,  and  in  so  deep  a  cata- 
lepsy as  to  alarm  Dr.  Fellger  at  first.  It  was  some 
minutes  before  she  had  either  respiration  or  a  pulse ;  and 
as  she  is  recovering  I  leave  her  and  the  case  with  these 
conclusions : 

(i).  While  it  may  be  possible  that  either  Eliza  White 
or  somebody  else  assisted  the  Holmeses  to  deceive  the 
public,  by  personating  Katie  King,  the  evidence  hitherto 
attainable  does  not  enable  us  to  designate  any  one  of  the 
phenomena  observed  and  described  by  Mr.  Owen  or 
General  Lippitt  as  probably  fraudulent.  The  accuser  of 
the  Holmeses  is  apparently  successfully  impeached ;  and 
her  indorser,  Dr.  Child,  shown  to  be  incompetent  to 
testify. 

The  decision  of  the  moot  question  being,  therefore,  of 
necessity  made  to  depend  upon  the  issue  of  my  own 
course  of  experiments : 

(2).  The  real  mediumship  of  both  Nelson  and  Jennie 
Holmes,  and  "  especially  the  appearance  of  materialized 
spirit-forms  through  the  same,"  seem  to  be  demonstrated. 

(3).  The  Philadelphia  experiments  have  a  most  impor- 
tant bearing  upon  those  of  Mr.  Crookes,  in  London,  and 
of  myself,  at  Chittenden,  Vt.,  and  Havana,  N.  Y. 

(4).  The  very  grave  question  whether  the  visits  and 
behavior  of  spirits  are  within  human  control,  is  forced 
upon  our  attention.  Its  examination,  moreover,  involves 
the  verification  or  rejection,  by  modern  scientific  pro- 
cesses, of  the  Biblical,  historical,  and  traditional  accounts 
of  intercourse  between  man  and  the  angel  world ;  the 
definition  of  the  laws  of  so-called  Magic  and  Sorcery ; 
the  formulae  of  evocation  and  exorcism ;  and  the  moral 
effects  of  this  intercourse  upon  humanity. 

We  cannot  afford  that  another  day  shall  be  lost. 
The  Hour  is  come :  let  the  Man  step  to  the  front. 

l 

THE   COMPTON   TRANSFIGURATION. 

I  DO  not  know  of  any  author  who  has  defi  ned  the  posi- 
tion which  the  student  of  science  occupies  in  our 
day,  better  than  Professor  Huxley  himself.  In  a 
recent  essay,  he  says :  "  The  only  opinion  he  (the 
votary  of  scienc  :)  need  care  about,  if  he  care  for  any — 
and  he  is  all  the  wiser  and  better  if  he  care  for  none — 
is  that  of  about  a  dozen  men,  two  or  three  in  these 
islands  (Great  Britain),  as  many  in  America,  and  half 
a  dozen  on  the  continent.  If  these  think  well  of  his 
work,  his  reputation  is  secure  from  all  the  attacks  of 
all  the  able  editors  of  all  the  "  influential  organs"  put 
together." 

With  such  encouraging  words  as  these  before  me,  I 
shall  proceed  to  tell  the  story  of  my  remarkable 
experience  at  Havana,  N.  Y.,  hoping  at  least  to  deserve 
the  good  opinion  of  their  author,  and  the  dozen  col- 
leagues whom  he  had  in  mind  while  penning  the 
sentences  above  quoted.  If  Mr.  Huxley  is  not  now 
willing  to  follow  the  theory  of  Evolution  to  its  legiti- 
mate conclusions,  and  discover  to  us  man  as  he  exists 
in  the  spirit-world,  there  is  satisfaction  in  knowing 
that  the  time  is  not  far  distant  when  he  will  be  com- 
pelled, by  the  accumulation  of  phenomena  similar  to 
those  hereinafter  described,  to  acknowledge  that  his 
immortality  is  a  demonstrable  scientific  problem. 

At  one  of  my  last  interviews  with  the  alleged  spirit 
John  King,  in  Philadelphia,  he  told  me  that  if  I  would 
go  to  the  village  of  Havana,  Schuyler  County,  New 
York,  I  would  see  a  phase  of  manifestation  entirely 
new   to   this  country,  and   the  precursor  of  a  whole 

17 

480 

THE  COM  ETON  TRANSFIGURATION. 

series  of  unprecedented  interest  and  importance.  In 
short,  he  gave  me  to  understand  that  we  were  about  to 
witness  the  advent  of  the  psychological  mysteries  which, 
for  many  ages,  have  been  confined  to  the  temples  and 
pagodas  of  Egypt  and  Hindostan. 

Acting  upon  this  information  I  found  myself  in  the 
village  designated,  on  the  evening  of  the  29th  of  Jan- 
uary, of  the  present  year  (1875).  The  medium  I  sought 
was  a  poor  woman,  named  Elizabeth  J.  Compton,  liv- 
ing with  a  second  husband,  and  the  mother  of  nine 
children,  of  whom  five   girls  and  one  boy  are  alive. 

MRS.  ELIZABETH  J.   COMPTON. 

Her  maiden  name  was  Houghtenning,  and  she  was 
born  August  16th,  1829.  On  September  3d,  1848,  she 
was  married  to  George  W.  Souls,  in  the  town  of  Bar- 
rington,  Yates  County,  N.  Y.  Her  husband,  Souls, 
was  for  many  years  an  invalid,  and  she  supported  the 
whole  family  by  the  hard  labor  of  washing.  Her 
rounded  shoulders,  angular  frame,  horny  palm,  and 
the  fingers  bent  out  of  shape  by  constant  immersion  in 
the  hot  suds  of  the  wash-tub,  abundantly  corroborate 
the  story  of  her  faithful  exertions  and  honest  toil. 

L 

MRS.  COM r  TON.  4S1 

Coming  of  laboring  people,  marrying  in  her  own 
class,  and  having  the  cares  of  a  large  family  so  soon 
thrust  upon  her,  she  had  no  time  to  obtain  an  educa- 
tion, and  she  can  neither  read  nor  write. 

Like  the  Eddys,  she  inherits  mediumship,  her  pater- 
nal grandmother  and  an  aunt  having  been  known  as 
"witches,"  and  reported  to  possess  the  evil-eye.  Her 
maternal  grandmother,  an  Indian  squaw,  was  brought 
up  among  the  whites,  but  was  not  unfamiliar  with  the 
rude  sorceries  that  prevailed  among  her  people.  Like 
the  case  of  the  Eddys,  also,  the  mechanic  power 
descends  to  her  children.  I  sat  at  a  table  alone  with 
the  youngest,  a  pretty  little  girl  of  five  years,  and  with 
my  hand  laid  upon  her  tiny  little  hands,  the  rappings 
occurred  all  over  the  table.  This  child  is  also  said 
to  be  clairvoyant,  as  well  as  several  of  her  sisters. 

Mrs.  Compton  first  saw  a  spirit  when  a  child  of 
"nine  years,  and  after  that  her  lucidity  was  frequently 
demonstrated.  The  exceedingly  limited  space  at  my 
command  forbids  mention  of  many  instances,  related  to 
me  by  herself,  of  visions,  prophetic  warnings,  and 
encounters  with  spiritual  beings  that  occurred  in  her 
experience.  Suffice  it  to  say  that  they  were  of  a  charac- 
ter similar  to  those  which  have  been  fully  described  in 
this  book  in  connection  with  the  psychological  history 
of  the  members  of  the  Eddy  family. 

.  Her  mediumship  for  physical  phenomena  dates 
from  March  1873,  when  a  neighbor,  calling  in  one 
evening,  proposed  that  they  should  "  form  a  circle  "  in 
the  chamber  where  Mr.  Souls  was  lying  sick.  She 
was  so  little  familiar  with  Spiritualism  that  she  sup- 
posed the  circle  meant  was  the  "  praying-circle  "  of  the 
Methodists,  and  readily  consented.  A  table  was  drawn 
up  near  the  bed,  and,  taking  their  places  at  it,  she  says 
she  was  astonished  to  hear  rappings  under  their  hands, 
and  still  more  so  when  a  communication  was  spelled  out, 
purporting  to  come  from  a  young  man  named  Melville 
Barton,  who  had  been  murdered  a  day  or  two  before, 
and  for  whose  body  search  was  then  being  made.  The 
spirit  described  the  murder,  and  indicated  where  his 
body  would  be  found  ;  which  information  the  next  day 
proved  to  be  true. 

Sittings  of  a  similar  character  were  held  frequently 
after  this,  and  the  rappings  grew  louder  and  louder. 
Mr.  Souls   finally  died,  and   then    he,   too,   began   to 

■■ 

BBE 

482  THE  COM P TON  TRANSFIGURATION. 

manifest  his  presence  in  the  spirit,  One  night  a  slate 
belonging  to  Mr.  Souls  was  lying  upon  a  projecting 
timber  in  the  room,  and  she  heard  the  noise  of  the 
pencil  moving  over  its  surface,  although  no  person 
was  near  it.  Upon  examination,  it  was  discovered 
that  a  communication  had  been  written  upon  the  slate 
by  an  invisible  hand ;  and  after  that  this  form  of  man- 
ifestation was  repeated  very  frequently. 

On  the  evening  of  the  12th  of  February  1874,  her 
present  husband,  Mr.  Compton,  being  at  the  house,  it 
was  proposed  that  they  should  try  to  get  "  materializa- 
tions," and  accordingly  a  blanket  was  tacked  over  a 
door-way  for  the  experiment.  Six  spirit-hands  were 
shown  around  the  edges  of  the  blanket,  and  the  affair 
becoming  known,  the  experiment  was  repeated  in 
many  houses  in  Havana  and  the  adjacent  village  of 
Watkins,  with  uniformly  satisfactory  results.  Before 
long,  the  figure  of  a  spirit-child  appeared,  and  then 
faces  and  busts  of  various  persons  were  shown.  In 
April,  the  spirits  began  to  talk  in  their  own  voices, 
and  flowers  and  other  material  objects  were  displayed. 

On  the  6th  of  September,  a  young  girl,  calling  her- 
self Katie  Brink,  an  Indian  warrior  of  the  Seneca  tribe, 
and  a  squaw  named  "Starlight"  stepped  out  of  the 
improvised  cabinet,  in  full  form.  Since  the  date  men- 
tioned, only  six  different  spirits  have  walked  out,  viz: 
Katie  Brink,  the  Seneca,  Starlight,  Katie  Weaver,  a 
Mrs.  Rhodes  and  the  Rev.  Gardiner  Crum.  No  more 
than  three  have  appeared  upon  any  one  evening,  and 
usually  only  two — Seneca  and  Katie  Brink — are  seen. 

Such  are  the  statements  made  to  me  by  Mrs.  Compton 
and  corroborated  by  other  persons.  I  repeat  them 
without  comment. 

The  seances  are  now  held  in  a  second-story  chamber, 
fifteen  feet  square,  and  devoted  exclusively  to  this  pur- 
pose. Across  one  corner,  a  plastered  partition  has 
been  run,  forming  a  triangular  cupboard,  or  closet, 
just  large  enough  to  admit  of  a  person  sitting  in  the 
apex  of  the  triangle.  There  is  no  window,  trap  or 
outlet,  the  walls  being  all  solid,  and  the  floor  securely 
fastened  down,  with  the  boards  running  under  the 
mop-board,  except  one  which  is  badly  matched ;  but 
this  is  nailed  to  the  joists  by  a  dozen  nails,  and  cannot 
be  pried  up  without  breaking  it  into  pieces.  The 
angles  of  three  rooms  join  directly  underneath   this 

L 

THE  "BRIDE  OF  CORINTH." 

483 

cabinet,  and  the  ceilings  of  all  are  perfectly  solid.  The 
following  sketch  gives  an  idea  of  the  external  appear- 
ance of  the  cabinet. 

It  will  be  observed  that  there  is  no  aperture  in  the 
wall,  but  an  open  space  is  left  by  sawing  off  the  upper 

MRS.   COMPTON'S   CABINET. 

portion  of  the  door ;  across  this  opening  a  curtain  of 
black  muslin  stretches  upon  a  wire  inside  the  frame. 

My  first  seance  with  the  medium  was  on  the  evening 
of  January  30th.  The  spectators,  numbering  a  half- 
dozen  sat  upon  chairs  in  the  room,  about  eight  feet  from 
the  cabinet.  Mrs.  Compton  took  her  seat  on  the  chair 
inside,  the  lamp  in  the  room  was  turned  down  very 
low,  and  for  a  long  time  nothing  interesting  occurred. 
Finally  the  door  opened  and  the  figure  of  an  Indian 
appeared  on  the  threshold,  spoke  to  us,  greeted  me 
cordially,  but  did  not  emerge,  as  he  said  the  medium 
was  in  too  weak  and  prostrated  a  condition  to  afford 
him  the  power  requisite. 

The  following  evening,  the  girl  Katie  Brink  showed 
herself,  and  walked  about,  touching  various  persons, 
patting  their  heads  and  cheeks.  Clad  in  a  flowing  robe 
of  crisp  white  muslin,  her  head  covered  with  a  bride-veil 
that   fell  down  to  her  knees,  gliding  about  with  velvet 

484  THE  CO  MP  TON  TRANSFIGURATION. 

footsteps,  speechless,  and  half-seen  in  the  obscurity,  she 
reminded  me  of  Goethe's  Bride  of  Corinth  : 

"  By  the  waning  lamp's  uncertain  gleaming 
There  he  sees  a  youthful  maiden  stand, 

Robed  in  white,  of  still  and  gentle  seeming, 
On  her  brow  a  black  and  golden  band." 

Passing  from  the  other  spectators,  she  came  to  me, 
sitting  apart  and  with  one  hand  laid  against  the  cabinet 
wall,  and  first  gently  stroking  my  head,  she  sat  upon  my 
knee,  and  passing  an  arm  over  my  shoulder  kissed  me 
upon  my  left  cheek.  Her  weight  seemed  scarcely  as 
much  as  that  of  a  child  of  eight  years,  but  her  arm  felt 
solid  upon  my  shoulder,  and  the  lips  that  caressed  me 
were  as  natural  as  life.  By  pre-arrangement,  I  passed 
into  the  cabinet,  while  the  girl  was  outside,  and  found  no 
medium  there,  although  I  not  only  examined  every  nook, 
but,  the  better  to  assure  myself  that  I  was  not  'psycholo- 
gized,' felt  the  chair,  the  walls  and  all  the  space  about. 

There  could  be  but  one  alternative  here :  Either  the 
'  spirit '  was  no  spirit,  but  the  medium,  or,  the  medium 
had  been  transfigured,  after  the  fashion  of  the  Oriental 
thaumaturgists.  I  determined  to  settle  that  question 
conclusively  before  leaving  town. 

The  next  evening,  having  obtained  Mrs.  Compton's 
cheerful  consent  to  submit  to  my  tests,  I  removed  her 
earrings,  and  seating  her  in  the  chair  in  the  cabinet, 
fastened  her  in  it  bypassing  some  "No.  50"  sewing- 
thread  through  the  perforations  in  her  ears,  and  sealing 
the  ends  to  the  back  of  the  chair,  with  sealing-wax,  which 
I  stamped  with  my  private  signet.  I  then  fastened  the 
chair  to  the  floor,  with  thread  and  wax  in  a  secure 
manner. 

Observe,  in  the  sketch,  how  impossible  it  was  for  her 
to  move  an  inch  from  her  place :  she  could  not  have  been 
more  firmly  fixed  to  her  seat,  if  irons  had  been  passed 
through  her  flesh,  and  riveted  in  the  wood.  A  slight  pull 
would  suffice  to  snap  the  frail  thread,  and  betray  her 
attempt  to  cheat. 

The  persons  present,  beside  myself  and  the  medium, 
were  John  S.  Smith,  and  J.  H.  Hardy,  of  Elmira,  N.  Y  ; 
Mrs.  Florence  Beardsley,  of  London,  Canada;  Benjamin 
Wickes,  of  Havana,  N.  Y;  David  Lee,  of  Washington; 
Mrs.  Margaret  Compton,  of  Havana ;  William  Anderson 
and  friend,  of  Watkins ;  Mr.  Peter  Compton ;  and  two  of 

A   CRUCIAL   TEST. 

435 

the  medium's  little  girls.  All  but  myself  sat  upon  chairs 
placed  in  a  double  row  opposite  the  cabinet  door;  and  I 
took  my  place  near  the  railing  of  the  stairway,  not  more 
than  five  feet  from  the  same.  In  front  of  me  stood  a 
Fairbanks  platform-scale,  which,  in  hope  of  verifying  the 
Chittenden  weighing  experiment,  I  had  procured  for  the 
occasion. 

The  light  being  lowered,  as  is  usual  in  these  seances, 
and  the  cabinet-door  closed,  we  sang  vigorously  for  some 
minutes,  when  across  the  aperture  above  the  door  floated 
a  pair  of  hands,  from  left  to  right,and  then  disappeared. 
Then  came  another  pair  of  larger  size ;  and  then  a  voice, 
(which,  if  not  that  of  the  late  Daniel  Webster,  was  its 

MRS.   COMPTON  SECURED. 

counterpart  in  depth,  sonorousness,  and  fullness  of  tone 
as  I  recall  it  to  memory),  addressed  me,  giving  me  full 
instructions  and  cautions  as  to  how  I  was  to  proceed. 
In  entering  the  cabinet  while  the  spirit  was  outside,  I 
was  at  liberty  to  feel  everywhere,  and  satisfy  myself  that 
the  medium  was  not  there,  but  I  must  be  careful  not  to 
actually  touch  the  chair.  I  might  pass  my  hands  as  near 
it  as  I  chose,  but  actual  contact  with  its  substance  I  was 
requested  to  avoid.  Then,  again,  I  was  to  lay  upon  the 
platform  of  the  scale  a  covering  of  some  kind  so  that  the 

486 

THE  CO  MP  TON  TRANSFIGURATION. 

spirit  need  not  come  into  contact  with  the  wood  or  metal. 
I  promised  compliance,  and  soon  had  the  satisfaction 
to  see  the  white-robed  girl  in  the  open  doorway.  She 
stepped  out,  moved  around,  touched  several  persons,  and 
then  approached  the  scale.  I  sat  ready  with  one  hand 
upon  the  poise  and  the  other  at  the  end  of  the  beam,  and 
as  she  stepped  up,  took  her  weight  without  the  loss  of  a 
second.  She  then  retired  into  the  cabinet;  whereupon, 
lighting  a  parlor-match,  I  read  the  figures.     She  weighed 

WEIGHING  THE   SPIRIT-GIRL. 

only  seventy-seven  lbs.,  although  she  had  not  the  stature 
of  a  child.  Can  the  reader  imagine  my  feelings  as  I  sat 
there  in  the  gloom,  not  more  than  a  foot-and-a-half  from 
a  speechless  and  veiled  figure,  a  supposed  visitor  from 
the  other  world,  who  had  gathered  unto  herself  an  evan- 
escent corporeal  body,  of  which  my  scales  could  now  take 
cognizance,  and  the  next  moment  would  be  dissipated 
into  a  vapor  more  unsubstantial  than  the  electric  fluid 
itself?  This  was,  indeed,  being  face  to  face  with  the 
dead,  or  rather  with  the  quick  who  had  tasted  death,  and 

ORDEAL  BY  WEIGHT.  487 

passed  on  into  an  immortal  life  where  death  is  known  no 
more,  and  the  grave  is  regarded  as  the  birth-bed  of  the 
human  race. 

The  spirit  came  out  again,  and  then  I  entered  the 
cabinet,  looking  carefully  everywhere,  and  feeling 
cautiously  but  thoroughly  all  about,  but,  as  before, 
finding  no  vestige  of  the  medium.  The  chair  was  there, 
but  no  bodily  presence  sat  in  it. 

I  then  asked  the  spirit-girl  to  make  herself  lighter 
if  possible  and  she  stepped  again  upon  my  scales.  As 
rapidly  as  before,  I  got  the  beam  at  poise,  and,  she 
retiring  as  before,  I  read  the  figure— fifty-nine  pounds. 

She  appeared  yet  again,  and  this  time  passed  from 
one  to  another  of  the  spectators,  patting  this  one's 
head,  the  other's  hand,  sitting  upon  Mr.  Hardy's  knee, 
laying  her  hand  gently  upon  my  head,  stroking  my 
cheek,  and  then  mounting  the  scale  for  me  to  make  my 
final  test.  This  time  she  weighed  only  fifty-two  pounds, 
although  from  first  to  last  there  had  been  no  apparent 
alteration  in  her  dress  or  bulk. 

The  scientific  reader  will  now  recall  the  weighing 
of  Honto  by  Mr.  Pritchard,  and  be  pleased  to  see  the 
figures  in  comparison  with  those  above : 

Spirit  "  Honto." 

Spirit  "  Katie  Brink." 

1st  weighing,    1           88  lbs. 
2d          "                      58    " 
3d          "                      58    " 
4th         "                      65    " 

1st  weighing, 

2d 

3d 

77  lbs. 

59    " 

52    •< 

Average,                  67%  lbs. 

Average, 

62%  lbs. 

It  is  quite  unnecessary  to  dwell  upon  the  importance 
of  these  experiments  as  opening  up  a  most  remarkable 
field  of  scientific  inquiry.  It  is  to  be  regretted  that  I 
was  prevented,  (by  the  necessity  of  completing  this 
volume  to  fulfill  publishers'  engagements),  from  pursu- 
ing the  subject;  but  a  beginning  has,  at  least,  been 
made.  I  should  add  that  the  ascertained  stature  of 
Honto  is  5  feet  5  inches;  while  that  of  the  Havana 
spirit,  as  by  actual  measurement,  varied  within  ten 
minutes,  from  4  feet  10^  to  4  feet  8f.  These  measure- 
ments were  not  taken  upon  the  same  evening  as  the 
weighing,  but  at  the  preceding  seance.  Upon  this 
occasion  I  found  Mrs.  Compton's  height  to  be  5ft.  4 
inches,  and  the  Indian  chiefs  5ft.  5f  inches. 

After  the  weighing  "  Katie"  appeared  no  more;  but 
17* 

488  THE  COM P TON  TRANSFIGURATION. 

after  a  few  minutes  had  elapsed  we  were  addressed  in 
the  guttural  base  of  the  Indian  chief,  and  he  showed 
himself  at  the  door.  A  colloquy  ensued  in  the  Indian 
language  between  him  and  Mr.  Hardy,  who  lived  some 
years  among  the  Western  tribes,  and  who  certified  to 
the  reality  of  the  speech  uttered  by  the  spectre  chief. 
The  Seneca  again  could  not  come  out  because  of  alleged 
lack  of  power,  but  before  retiring  he  gave  a  terrific 
war-whoop  that  made  the  rafters  ring  again,  and  then 
a  peace-whoop  as  an  adieu.  This  "  manifestation  " 
alone  would  seem  to  indicate  that  the  poor,  nervously 
fluttering  medium  had  no  part  in  the  appearance  of  at 
least  this  one  spectre. 

After  the  brave's  retirement,  we  had  some  more 
conversation  with  sundry  spirit-voices,  and  then  the 
light  being  turned  up,  various  faces  floated  into  sight 
above  the  door  and  faded  away,  and  then  the  circle 
closed. 

I  went  inside  with  a  lamp,  and  found  .  .  .  the 
medium  just  as  I  left  her  at  the  beginning  of  the  seance, 
with  every  thread  unbroken  and  every  seal  undisturbed! 
She  sat.  there,  with  her  head  leaning  against  the  wall, 
her  flesh  as  pale  and  as  cold  as  marble,  her  eyeballs 
turned  up  beneath  the  lids,  her  forehead  covered  with 
a  death-like  damp,  no  breath  coming  from  her  lungs, 
and  no  pulse  at  her  wrist.  When  every  person  had 
examined  the  threads  and  seals,  I  cut  the  flimsy  bonds 
with  a  pair  of  scissors,  and,  lifting  the  chair  by  its  back 
and  seat,  carried  the  cataleptic  woman  out  into  the 
open  air  of  the  chamber. 

She  lay  thus  inanimate  for  eighteen  minutes;  life 
gradually  coming  back  to  her  body,  until  respiration 
and  pulse  and  the  temperature  of  her   skin  became 

normal I  then  put  her  upon  the  scale.    .... 

She  weighed  one  hundred  and  twenty-one  pounds  I 

BIBLIOGRAPHY 

OF  SPIRITUALISM  AND  THE  OCCULT  SCIENCES. 

Compiled  for  "People  from  the  Other  World"  by  W.  I. 
Fletcher,  Ass't.  Librarian  of  the  Watkinson  Library  of  Reference, 
Hartford,  Conn.,  in  which  library  a  large  proportion  of  the  rare 
books  in  the  early  part  of  the  list  may  be  found. 

It  will  be  noticed  that  in  consequence  of  lack  of  space  the  depart- 
ments of  Astrology,  Mythology,  Folk-Lore,  Speculative  Philosophy, 
Theology  and  many  others  cognate  to  our  subject  have  not  been 
entered.  For  the  same  reason,  I  omit  very  recent  works^  upon 
■Spiritualism. 

BATE. 

B.C. 

475.  Plato 

20.  Plutarch.     . 

A.  D. 

50.  Cicero.     . 
150.  Apuleius,  L. 

(?)    475.  Proclus 

(?)  1300.  Bacon,  R.     . 

1324.  Letlrede,  R.  de.      . 

1450.  Anania,  J.  L.  d' 
(?)  1480.  Institoris,  H. 

1483.  Basin,  B.  C.     . 
(?)  1489.  Molitor,  U. 

1514.  Reuchliuus,  J. 

1517. 
(?)  1520,  Champier,  B.  C.  S.    . 

1521.  Prierio,  S.  dc. 

1531.  Aggrippa  von  Nettesheim 

1544.  Molitor,    U. 

1547.  Ciruelo,  M. 

1553.  Peucer,  C. 

1561.  Coxe.    F. 

1563.  Wier,  J.  ... 

1567.  Cattanl,  F.  da  D.      . 

1570.  Lavater,    L. 

1575.  Hcmmingius.N. 

1578.  Node,  F.  P.  .       . 

1579.  Masse,  P. 

1580.  Bodin,  J. 

1580.  Mengus,  H. 
ir-81.  Anania,  J.  L.  d'. 

1581.  Andreas  Hyperius. 

1583.  Vair,  L.  du. 

1584.  Scott,  Reginald. 

1586.  Loier,  P.  de. 

1587.  Faust. 
1587.  Gyfford.  G.      . 

1589.  Porta,  J.  B. 

1590.  Holland,  H. 

1591.  Binsfeld, P. 
1591.  Godelmann,  J.G. 

1596.  Lodge,  T-. 

1597.  James  VI. 

1598.  Goldschmid,  P- 

1598.  Taillepied,  N. 

1599.  Davies,  Sir  J. 

H.  S.  O. 

TITLE. 

.    De  rebus  divinis  dlalogi. 
Moralia. 

.    De  dlvinatione,  de  fato,  etc. 

De  deo  Socratis. 
.     De  anlma  atque  demonae. 

Miracles  of  art,  nature  and  magiclc. 
.    Proceedings  against,  dame  Kyteler. 

De  magia  et  maleflciis. 
.    Malleus  malencarum. 
.    Tractatus  de  magicis  artibus. 

De  lamiis  et  phitonicis  mulicribus. 
.    De  verbo  miriflco. 

De  arte  cabalistica. 

Magicarum  artium  destructionem. 
.     Strigimagarum  daemonunique  mirandis. 
C.  De  occulta  philosophia. 
.    Hexen  Mysterei. 

Reprovaciones  de  las  superstitlones. 
.    De  praecipuis  divinationum  generibus. 

Detestable  wickedness  of  mag.  sciences. 
.    Die  praestigiis  daemonum. 

Superstizione  dell'  arte  niaglca. 
.    De  spectris,  lemuribus,  etc. 

De  superstitionibus  magicis  vitandis. 
.    Erreur  execrable  desmaiinciers.sorciers. 

De  Timposture  et  tromperie  des  diables. 

•  La  Demonomanie  des  sorciers. 
Flagellum  daemonum. 

•  De  natura  daemonum. 

The  deuils  shewers  of  magical  artcs,  etc. 
.     De  fascino. 

Discovery  of  witchcraft. 
.    Spectres,  visions,  and  apparitions. 

Zauberer  und  Schwartzkunstler. 
.    Subtle  practices  of  deuils. 

Magiae  naturaliB. 
.    Treatise  against  witchcraft. 

De  confessionibus  maleflcorum. 
.    De  magis,  veneflcis  et  lamiis. 

The  deuil  conjured. 
.    Demonology,  in  form  of  a  dialogue. 

Der  hollische  Morpheus. 
.    Psicologie,  ou  l'apparition  des  esprits. 

Nosce  te  ipsum. 

Note.    The  titles  are  arranged  according  to  date  of  publication.    Only  the  first 
edition  of  each  work  is  given,  and  no  account  is  made  of  translations. 

489 

49°  BIBLIOGRAPHY. 

159?.  Del  Rio,  M.  A Disquisitionum  magicarum, 

1600.  Darrell,  J "Vexation  by  the  devil  of  seven  persons. 

1600.  Michaelis,  F.  S Discourse  of  spirits. 

(?)  160m.  Boissard,  J.  J.         .       .       .        De  divinatione,  de  geniis,  etc. 

1601.  Deacon  and  Walker.         .       .    Dialogicall  discourses  of  Devils. 

1601.  Heilbronn,  J.  ...        Daemonomania  pistoriana. 

1602.  Boquet,  H.  ....    Discours  execrable  des  sorciers. 
1610.  Hildebrandt,  W.  Magiae  naturalis. 

1612.  Mason,  J.  .....        The  anatomie  of  sorcerle. 

1613.  Lancre,  P.  de Tableau  des  mauvais  anges  et  demons. 

1613.  Michaelis,  F  .S.       .       .       .        History  of  a  magician. 

1613.  Salkeld,  J.       .  ...  A  treatise  on  angels. 

1617.       "      " A  treatise  of  Paradise. 

1620.  Campanella,  T De  sensu  rerum. 

1626.  Guaccius,  M.  ...  Compendium  maleficarum. 

1627.  Niess,  J Alphabetum  diaboli. 

1639.  Roscetti,  G De  angelis  et  daemonibus. 

1641.  Castrensis,  S.  R.  .       .       .  De  spiritibus. 

1641.  Le  Petit,  C De  spiritibus  creatis  daemonibus,  etc. 

1650.  Vaughn,  T.  ....    Anima  magica  abscondita. 

1651.  "      "         ....        Lumen  delumine;  or,  The  new  mag.  light. 
1651.  Bekker,  B Te  betoouerde  weereld. 

1656.  Grosse,  H Magica  de  spectris  et  apparitionibus. 

1658.  Bromhall Treatise  of  spirits. 

1658.  Perreau,  F Dem.  ou  traite  des  demons  et  sorciers. 

1659.  Relation  of  what  passed  between  John  Dee  and  some  spirits. 

1661.  Praetorius,  J Thesaurus  chiromantise. 

1662.  Glanvil,  J Lux  orien  :  eastern  sages  on  pre-exist. 

1663.  Spencer,  J.           ....  Discourse  concerning  prodigies. 
1666.  Glanvill,  J A  blow  at  modern  Sadducism. 

1670.  Villars,  Abbe  de.         ...    Comte  de  Gab.  ou  ent.  sur  les  scl.  sec. 

1677.  Webster,  J Displaying  of  supposed  witchcraft. 

1678.  Doctrine  of  Devils  the  grand  apostacy  of  these  later  times. 

1680.  Lebenwald,  A Cu.  trakt.  von  des  teufel  in  der  Heb.  Cab. 

1680.  "  "  Damographia,  etc. 

1684.  Bovet.  R Pandemoniun;  or,  the  devil's  cloyster. 

1685.  Angeliere,  B Lux  magica. 

1685.  Sinclair,  G Satan's  invisible  world  discovered. 

1686.  Mather,  I.          ....        Superstitious  customs  in  New  England. 
1689.  Mather,  C Late  memorable  providences. 

1691.  De  Daillon,  M.        ...  Explication  de  la  doctrine  des  demons. 

1692.  Mather,  C Tryals  of  divers  witches  at  Salem. 

1693.  Lebrun,  P L'illusion  des  philosophessur  la  baguette. 

1693.  Mather,  C Wonders  of  the  invisible  world. 

1693.  Mather,  I Further  account  of  tryals  of  witches. 

1693.  Vallemont,  P La  physique  occulte. 

1694.  Burthogge,  R.  .       .       .        Essay  upon  the  nature  of  spirits. 

1696.  Telfair,  A.     .       .       .       ,      .  Acts,  of  spt.  wch.  infested  h.  A.  Mackle. 

1699.  Burthogge,  R.  ...  Of  the  soul  of  the  world. 

1700.  Poupart,  F Sue  l'apparition  des  esprits. 

1703.  Buesching,  G,  ...  De  potentia  diaboli  in  corpora. 

1703.  Reichen,  J Unfug  des  hexenprocessen. 

1705.  Beaumont,  J.  jr.     .       .       .  Treatise  of  spirits,  apparitions,  etc. 

1705.  Goldschmidt,  P Hexen— und  zauber— advocat. 

1710.  Bordelon.L Imaginations  extravagantes  de  M.  Oufle. 

1712.  Naude,  G Apol.  pour  les  personages  de  magie,  etc. 

1712.  Stebbing,  H Case  of  the  Hertfordshire  witchcraft. 

1714.  Meisner,  I De  apparitionibus  daetnonum. 

1715.  Mercklin,  G.  A.       .       .       .  Tractatus  de  incantamentis. 

1715.  Boulton,  B.  ....    History  of  magic,  sorcery,  witchcraft. 

1716.  Reuter,  S.  H.  ...        Das  Reich  des  Teufels. 

1716.  Sturmy,  D The  separate  state  of  souls. 

1718.  Hutchinson,  F.        .      ,       .        Historical  essay  on  witchcraft. 
1718.  Secrets  merveilleux  de  la  magie  du  Petit  Albert. 

1720.  De  Foe,  D Life  and  adven.  of  Duncan  Campbell. 

1721.  Aubrey,  J Miscellanies :  [app.  knocking**,  etc.] 

1722.  Boulton,  R Vindication  of  This]  history  of  magic. 

1726.  Glanvill,  J.         ....        Sadducismus  triumphatis. 

1727.  De  Foe,  D History  and  reality  of  apparitions. 

1727.  "     "    .         ....        System  of  maglck. 

1728.  Du  Lude,  Comte.        .       .       .    Daimonologia;  or,  a  treatise  of  spts. 

1729.  Byler,  H.  Cyan.       .       .       .        Tract,  cab.  chym.  philos.  malleus. 

1732.  Le  Brun,  P Histoire  des  pratiques  superstitieuses. 

1733.  Boyer,— .           ....        Coup  d'oeil  sur  les  convulsions. 
1735.  Gilpin.  R Demonologia  sacra. 

1737.  Montgeron,  L,  B.  C.  de.       .  La  verite  des  miracles. 

1739.  Hauber,  E.  D Bibliotheca  acta  et  scripta  magica. 

1745.  Perronet.V Enquiries  relating  to  spiritual  beings. 

1751.  Calmet,  A Traite  sur  les  apparitions  des  esprits. 

1751.  Lenglet  du  Fresnoy,  N.       .  Traite  sur  les  apparitions. 

1767.  Cauz,  C.  F.  de De  cultibus  magicis. 

1770.  Compleat  wizard;  narratives  of  ghosts,  demons,  and  spectres. 

1775.  Farmer,  H Demoniacks  of  the  New  Testament. 

1775.  Haen,  A.  de De  magi. 

L 

BIBLIOGRAPH  Y.  49 1 

1777.  Worthington,  W.  .      .  The  gospel  demonlacka. 

1779.  Fell,  J.     • Demoniacs. 

1781.  Halle,  J.  S Magle,  oder  zauperkrafte  tier  natur. 

1781.  Mayer,  J.  G.    .  .  Hlstoria  diaboll. 

1784.  Decremps,  M*  ...  La  magle  blanche  devollee. 

1783.  Farmer,  H Wor.  of  hum.  spts.  by  ancient  heathens. 

1790.  Libby,  E Astrology;  or,  ill.  of  occult  sciences. 

1797.  Dedekind,  G.  E.  W.     .       .       ,  Dokinaion; oder  Geister  der  verst.  etc. 

1801.  Barrett,  F.        .  The  magus,  or  celestial  intelligencer. 

1805.  Bentley,  J The  spiritual  telescope. 

1807.  Sharp,  G Case  of  Saul,  and  influence  of  demons. 

1808.  Jung-Stilling,  J.  H.  .       .  Theorie  der  Geisterkunde. 

1813.  Brand,  J.  .       .       .       .  Observations  on  popular  antiquites. 

1813.  Ferriar,  J.       ....  Essay  towards  a  theory  of  apparitions. 

1818.  Garlnet,  J Histoire  de  la  magie  en  France. 

1818.  Horst,  G.  C Damonomagie.    2v. 

1818.  Plaucy,  C.  de.  .  Dlctionnaire  Infernal.    2  v. 

1821.  Horst,  G.  C.    .  .       .       .  Zauberblbliothek.    6.  v. 

1823.  Accredited  ghost  stories,  to  counteract  the  vulgar  belief. 

1823.  Stewart,  W.  G.        ...  Popular  superstitions  of  Highlanders. 

1824.  Hlbbert,  S Philosopny  of  apparitions. 

1825.  Carlyle.W Essay  on  evil  spirits. 

1830.  Horst.  G.  C Deuteros.  oder,  etc.,  der  pneumatologle. 

1830.  Newnham,  W.  ...  Essay  on  superstition. 

1830.  Scott,  Sir  W Letters  on  demonology  and  witchcraft. 

1831.  Demonologiaj  an  expose  of  superstitions ;  by  J.  S.  F. 

1831.  Upham,  C.  W.         .       .       .  Lectures  on  Salem  witchcraft. 

1834.  Godwin,  W Lives  of  the  necromancers. 

1834.  Stilling,  W Der  Zusamm.  der  Lele  mit  Gelsterwelt. 

1835.  Thaumaturgla  ;  or,  elucidations  of  the  marvellous. 

1841.  Mackay,  C Extraordinary  popular  delusions. 

v  1842.  Ennemoser,  J.         ...  Der  magnetismus. 

1843.  Franck,  A La  Kabbale. 

1843.  Scott,  Rev.  Walter.        .      .  Existence  of  evil  spirits  proved. 

1843.  Soldan,  W.  G Geschichte  der  hexenprocesse. 

1845,  Davis,  A.  J Principles  of  nature. 

1845.  Scheible,  J Das  Kloster,  weltlich  und  geistllch. 

1846.  Giraldo,  M.  de.        ...  Hist.  sore,  dev.,  mag.,  vamp.,  etc. 

1846.  Scheible,J Das  Schaltjahr,  welch,  ist  der  teu.  Kalen. 

1847.  Deucly,  W.  C.  ...  Philosophy  of  mystery. 

1849.  Crowe  Mrs.  C Night  side  of  nature :  or,  ghosts,  etc. 

1850.  Burnett,  CM.         ...  The  philosophy  of  spirits. 

1850.  Davis,  A.  J The  great  harmonia.   6  v. 

1851.  Colquhoun,  J.  C.      .       .       .  History  of  magic. 

1851.  Davis,  A.  J. Philosophy  of  spiritual  intercourse. 

1851.  Wright,  T.         ....  Narratives  of  magic,  sorcery,  etc. 

1852.  Elliott,  C.  W Mysteries,  or  glimpses  of  the  supernat. 

1852.  Hammer— Purgstall,  J.        .  Geisterlehre  der  Moslimen. 

1852.  The  spiritual  medium ;  its  nature  illustrated. 

1853.  Beecher,  C.           ....  Keview  of  "spiritual"  manifestations. 
1855.  Capron,  E.  W.          .       .       .  Mod.  spiritualism;  facts  and  fanaticisms. 
1853.  Edmonds,  J.  W.  and  Dexter,  G.  T. Spiritualism. 

1853.  Ghost  stories ;  edited  by  T.  M.  Jarvis. 

1853.  Ross,  J.  H The  spirit-world;  or,  the  caviller  ans. 

1853.  Spirit-rappings  in  England  and  America. 

1853.  Webber,  C.  W Spiritual  vampirism. 

1854.  Brownson.O.  A.       .       .       .  The  spirit-rapper ;  an  autobiography. 
1854.  Apocatastasis,  The;  or,  progress  backwards. 

1854.  Radcliffe,  J.  N.        .       .       .  Fiends,  ghosts,  and  spirits. 

(?)  1855.  Dods,  J.  B Spt.  manifes.  examined  and  explained. 

1855.  Hare,  R Spiritualism  scientifically  explained. 

1855.  Linton,  C Healing  of  the  nations. 

1855.  Mattlson,  H Spirit-rapping  unveiled. 

1855.  Schleiden,  M.  J Uber  Zauberei  und  Geisterspuk. 

1855.  Smedley,  E.,  and  others.       .  History  of  the  occult  sciences. 

1855.  Tuttle,  H Scenes  in  the  spirit-world. 

1856.  Davis,  A.  J Penetralia;  ans.  to  important  questions. 

1856.  Salverte,  E Des  sciences  occultes. 

1856.  Daniels,  J.  W.  ...  Spiritualism  vs.  Christianity. 

1856.  Maitland,  Rev.  Dr.       .       .       .  Science  and  superstition. 

(?)  1856.  Ramsay,  W Spiritualism  a  Satanic  delusion. 

(?)  1856.  Young,  Jacob Autobiography. 

1857.  Guldenstubbe,  L.  de.  .  Reallte  des  esprits. 

1857.  The  spiritualist ;  an  exposition  of  psychology. 

(?)  1858.  Brittan,  S.  B.  and  Hanson,  D.  D.Oral  discussion  at  Hartford. 

1858.  Bushnell,  H.  ....  Nature  and  the  supernatural. 

1858.  Wilkinson.  W.  M..  .       .  Spirit  drawings ;  a  personal  narrative. 

1859.  Owen,  R.  D.          ...  Footfa.  on  the  bound,  of  another  world. 
(?)  1859.  Samson,  G.  W Spiritualism  tested. 

1860.  Jones,  J Natural  and  the  Supernatural. 

1860.  La  Grange,  A/F.  de.    .  .  Le  grand  livre  de  festln. 

1860.  Tuttle,  H Arcana  of  spiritualism. 

1861.  Levi,  E La  haute  magie. 

49* 

BIBLIOGRAPHY. 

1861.  Linden,  E.L.  (ed.)  .      .      .  "Witch  stories. 

1862.  Michelet.  J La  sorclere. 

1862.  Welby,  H Signs  before  death  and  auth'cat'd  app'ns. 

1863.  Bizouard,  J Rapports  de  l'liomme  avec  le  demon. 

1863.  Denton,  W  and  E.   .       .       .  The  soul  of  things. 

1863.  From  matter  to  spirit;  experience  of  spirit  manifestations. 

1863.  Home,  D.  D Incidents  in  my  life. 

1863.  Howitt,  W History  of  the  supernatural. 

1863.  Mary  Jane  :  or  spiritualism  chemically  explained. 

1864.  De  Caston,  M Les  marchandes  de  miracles. 

1864.  Gastineau,  B Monsieur  et  Madame  Satan. 

1864.  Maury,  A La  magic  et  l'astrologie. 

1864,  Mousseaux,  C.  des.  ...  La  magie  au  19e  siecle. 

1864.  "  '*.....  Phenomenes  de  la  magie. 

1865.  Gould,  S.  Baring.     .       .       .  Book  of  were-wolves. 

1865.  Blanc,  H Le  merveilleux  dans  le  spiritisms,  etc. 

1865.  Kardec,  A Le  ciel  et  l'enfer,  selon  le  spiritisme. 

1865.  Levi,  E Le  science  des  esprlts. 

1865.  Remarks  on  certain  phenomena. 
1865.  Spiritualism  and  other  signs ;  by  E.  S. 

1865.  Mousseaux,  C.  des.  .       .       .  Moeurs  et  pratiques  des  demons. 

1866.  Lecky,  W.  E.  H History  of  rationalism  in  Europe. 

1867.  Ashburner,  J Animal  magnetism  and  spiritualism. 

1867.  The  invisibles  j  an  explanation  of  phenomena  called  spiritual. 

1867.  Kardec,  A Le  Uvre  des  esprits. 

1867.        "        "  Le  livre  des  mediums. 

1867.  TJpham,  C.  W History  of  Salem  witchcraft. 

1868.  Blauvelt,  A The  kingdom  of  Satan. 

1868.  Brown,  J.  P The  dervishes  ;  or  oriental  spiritualism. 

1868.  Kardec,  A Le  genese  et  les  miracles  selon  le  sptsme. 

1869.  Biddle,  D.       .       .       .       .       .  The  spirit  controversy. 

1869.  Phelps,  E.  S Gates  ajar. 

1869.  Roskoff,  G Geschlchte  des  Teufels. 

1869.  Sargent,  E.        .       .       .       .  Planchette,  the  despair  of  science. 

1869.  Peeble,  J.  M Seers  of  the  Ages. 

1870.  Hardinge,  E History  of  spiritualism  in  America. 

1870.  Randolph,  P.  B.       .       .       .  After  Death. 

1871.  Delaporte The  d-1;  does  he  exist  andwh'tdoeshe  do. 

1871.  McRae,  T Lectures  on  Satan. 

1871.  Massey,  G Concerning  spiritualism. 

1871.  Owen,  R.  D Deb't'ble  land  bet.  this  w'ld  and  the  n'xt. 

1871.  Reville,  A The  d-1 ;  origin  greatness  and  decadence. 

1871.  Tyler,  E.  B.    .....  Primitive  culture. 

1872.  Beard,  J.  R.                             .  Autobiography  of  Satan. 
1872.  Cobbe,  Frances  P.       .       .      .  Darwinism  In'morals. 

1872.  Cox,  E.  W.        ....  Spiritualism  answered  by  science. 

1873.  Crosland,  N".          .       .       .      .  New  theory  of  apparitions. 
1873.  De  Vere,  M.  S Modern  magic. 

1873.  Lum,  D.  D The  spiritual  delusion. 

1873.  Owen,  R.  D.      .  Threading  my  way  ;  27  years  of  my  auto. 
1873.  "Where  are  the  dead?  or  spiritualism  explained. 

1873.  Zerffi,  G.  G Spiritualism  and. inimal  magnetism. 

1873.  London  Dialectical  Soc'y.    .  Report  on  Spiritualism. 

1873.  Davis,  A.  J The  Diakka  and  the  Earthly  Victims. 

1874.  Crookes,  W Researches  in  the  phenomena  of  sp't'sm. 

1S74.  Lenormant,  F La  magie  chez  les  Chaldeens. 

1874.  Laville,  B.  W Apparitions  ;  a  narrative  of  facts. 

1874.  Wallace,  A.  R Defence  of  modern  spiritualism. 

1874.  Peebles,  J.  M.,  and  J.  O.  Bassett.The  Gadarene. 

1874.  Crowell,  E.  W Identity  bet.  Prim.  Chr.  and  Mod.  Spm. 

1875.  Sargent,  E Proof  palpable  of  immortality. 

1875.  Olcott,  H.  S People  from  the  other  World. 

Note.  The  above  list,  Imperfect  as  I  have  been  forced  to  make  It,  indicates  In  a 
slight  degree  the  attention  which  has  been  given  by  writers,  during  the  past 
twenty-four  centuries,  to  the  subject  of  man's  relation  to  the  other  world.  But 
orientalists  can  quote  to  the  student  a  list,  almost  as  long,  of  works  of  a  like 
character,  among  the  Chinese,  Japanese,  Hindoos,  Egyptian,  Arabs,  and  other 
"Heathen  "nations,  the  authorship  of  which  is,  In  many  case*  lost  among  the 
mists  of  antiquary.   Without  recourse  to  these,  however,  enough  titles  are  herein 

firen  to  show  that  spiritualism  is  "modern  "  only  in  name  ;  while,  upon  consul  t- 
ug  their  pages,  the  reader  will  be  astounded  at  the  multitudinous  prototypes, 
which  exist  of  every  "  manifestation  "  reported  as  occurring  in  these  latter  days 
in  the  presence  of  mediums. 

THE  END. 

c 

Deacidified  using  the  Bookkeeper  process 
Neutralizing  agent:  Magnesium  Oxide 
Treatment  Date:  Nov.  2004 

PreservationTechnologies 

A  WORLD  LEADER  IN  PAPER  PRESERVATION 

1 1 1  Thomson  Park  Drive 
Cranberry  Township,  PA  1 6066 
(724)  779-21 1 1
