Historical Landmarks of Freemasonry (George Oliver, 1846)
==========================================================
Oliver's 1846 landmarks; the great Masonic antiquary's defense and history of the craft. Public domain. Digitized from Internet Archive (https://archive.org/details/historicallandma02olivuoft).

A


THE


HISTORICAL    LANDMARKS


OF


FREEMASONRY.


r


.


L


THE

HISTORICAL   LANDMARKS

AND  OTHER  EVIDENCES

OF

FREEMASONRY,

EXPLAINED:


IN

A  SERIES  OF  PRACTICAL  LECTURES,

WITH    COPIOUS    NOTES.

ARRANGED  ON  THE    SYSTEM  WHICH   HAS  BEEN   ENJOINED    BY  THE

GRAND    LODGE    OF    ENGLAND,    AS    IT    WAS    SETTLED    BY    THE

LODGE  OF  RECONCILIATION,  AT  THE  UNION  IN  1813.


"

THE  REV.  G?1QLIVER,  D.  D.,

AUTHOR    OF

"  THF,     HISTORY    OF    INITIATION,"      "ANTIQUITIES    OF    FREEMASONRY,"     "  STAR  IN   THK   EAST,"

ETC.    ETC.   ETC.

PAST  D.  G.  M.  OF  THE   GRAND   LODGE  OF  MASSACHUSETTS,   U.S.

PAST    D.  P.  G.  M.   FOR    LINCOLNSHIRE;

HONORARY  MEMBER  OF  THE  BANK   OF  ENGLAND  LODGE,  LONDON  J    THE   SIIAKSPEARE  LODGE,

WARWICK;  THE  FIRST  LODGE  OF  LIGHT,  BIRMINGHAM;  THE  ST.  PETER'S  I.ODGK,  WOLVER-

HAMPTON;  THE  WITHAM  IODGE  LINCOLN;   THE  ST.  PETER'S  LODGE,  PETERBOROUGH;

LIGHT  OF  THE  NORTH  LODGE,  LONDONDERRY;  ROYAL  STANDARD    LODGE,  KID-

DERMINSTER, LODGE  RISING  STAR  OF  WESTERN  INDIA,  BOMBAY,

ST.  GEORGE'S  LODGE,  MONTREAL,  ETC.  ETC.  ETC.


WITH    NUMEROUS   ILLUSTRATIONS.


IN    TWO    VOLUMES.


VOL.   II.  /(,V


LONDON:

RICHARD    SPENCER,    314,    HIGH    HOLBORN.

1846.


LIST  OF  ILLUSTRATIONS  TO  VOL.  II.


PA  OK

Portrait  of  the  Author  (on  steel)  .  .  .       Frontispiece

Allegorical  Engraving  of  the  Royal  Order  of  H.  R.  D.  M.         .  14

Tracing-board  of  the  degree  of  Knight  of  the  Sun         .  .  68

Degree  of  Knights  of  the  East  and  West,  by  Bro.  J.  Harris  *  .         117
Emblem  of  the  degree  of  Red  Cross  of  Rome  and  Constantine  132

Specimens  of  Mosaic  work         .  .  .  .  .156

Allegorical  Engraving  of  the  Arches  of  Enoch  .  .         194

David  appointing  Solomon         .  .  .  .         359

Diagram  of  the  cruciform  arrangement  of  the  Stones  in  the

Foundation  of  the  Temple          ....        263
Form  of  the  Ark  of  the  Covenant          .  .  .  .289

Ancient  Window  in  Lincoln  Cathedral  displaying  the  Double

Triangle  (on  steel)          .....         356

The  Sacred  Roll  ......         398

Judea  capta        .  .  .  .  .  .  .         417

Diagrams  of  the  most  holy  Stone  in  the  Foundations  of  the

Temple  .......         432

Vestments  of  the  High  Priest    .  .  .  .  .510

The  Pectoral     .  .  .  .  .  .  .516

Encampment  in  the  Wilderness  .  .  .  .571

Banners  of  the  Tribes,  by  Bro.  J.  Harris  .  .  .         584

Cruciform  Temple  of  the  ancient  Druids  .  .  .         623

Diagrams  of  the  Altar,  the  Cross,  and  Triple  Tau         .  .        637

The  Greek  Cross  ......         637

The  sacred  furniture  of  the  Temple  carried  to  Rome  (Bas- Relief)    654
Seal  of  Solomon  659


*  Artist  and  Engraver  of  the  R.  A.  and  Craft  Tracing  Boards,  published  under
the  sanction  of  His  Royal  Highness  the  late  Duke  of  Sussex,  M.  W.  GK  M.


PREFACE.


WHEN  Theodoras  was  initiated  into  the  Eleusinian
system  of  spurious  Freemasonry,  he  asked  of  Euriclides,
the  hierophant,  what  is  the  greatest  crime  a  man  can
commit ;  who  replied,  "  to  speak  evil  of  the  Mysteries"
Such  was  the  sentence  pronounced  against  those  who
should  incur  the  responsibility  of  treating  such  sacred
subjects  with  levity,  because  they  were  considered
ineffable;  and  the  offence  was  punished  with  death.
"  Si  quis  arcance  mysteria  Cereris  sacra  vulgdsset,
lege  morti  addicebatur."  But  the  crime  was  seldom
committed,  and  therefore  the  penalty  remained  on  their
statute  books,  not  altogether  as  a  dead  letter,  although
it  was  seldom  brought  under  the  consideration  of  the
judge.  It  will  be  remembered,  however,  that  the  spu-
rious Freemasonry  was  not  only  connected  with,  but
constituted  an  essential  part  of  the  national  religion  in
every  country  where  it  existed ;  and  therefore  blasphemy
against  the  mysteries,  was  blasphemy  against  the  gods,
and  punishable  by  the  civil  magistrate,  of  which  Socrates
is  an  eminent  example.

Not  so  the  true  Freemasonry.  It  forms  no  part  of
the  national  religion,  although  it  comprehends  and

a


VI


PREFACE.


teaches  the  genuine  principles  of  Christianity.  But
this  latter  fact  is  not  generally  understood  by  those  to
whom  its  doctrines  are  a  sealed  book ;  and  therefore  it
is  no  unusual  thing  to  hear  Freemasonry  vilified,  be-
cause the  experiment  is  perfectly  innocuous  to  the  party
using  it.  And  the  objections  to  it,  as  a  social  ard
beneficial  institution,  are  urged  with  greater  pertinacity
by  its  adversaries,  and  received  with  a  more  cordial
welcome  by  the  uninitiated  world,  than  those  which
distinguish  an  opposition  to  any  other  science.  Their
object  is  generally  intended  to  show  that  its  pursuits
are  inconsistent,  frivolous,  and  useless ;  that,  as  an  an-
tagonist writer  wittily  observes — "  She  professes  to
teach  the  seven  liberal  arts,  and  also  the  black  art ;
proffers  to  give  one  a  wonderful  secret,  which  is,  that
she  has  none ;  who  sprung  from  the  clouds,  formed  by
the  smoke  of  her  own  records,  which  were  burnt  for
the  honour  of  the  mystery ;  who  stood  the  shock  of
ages,  and  the  revolutions  of  time,  on  the  reputation  of
King  Solomon ;  who  is  always  and  unchangeably  the
the  same  glorious  Fraternity,  whether  of  three  degrees,
of  seven  degrees,  of  thirty -three  degrees,  or  forty -three
degrees,  or  fifty-three  degrees,  or  of  ninety  degrees.
Such  a  flood  of  innovation  has  gone  over  the  ancient
Landmarks,  that  Freernasonry's  own  science,  Masonics,
can  never  again  run  the  lines,  and  establish  the  corners,
without  a  very  free  use  of  the  faculty  of  Abrac."

One  of  the  purposes  of  these  lectures  is  to  rebut
such  absurd  charges,  by  displaying  the  true  design  and
tendency  of  the  Order.  And  I  cannot  describe  the
process  which  has  been  used  to  effect  this  important


PREFACE.  Vll

object  more  appropriately,  than  by  subjoining  the
correspondence  by  which  the  design  was  originally
announced.

TO  SIR  EDWARD  FFRENCH  BROMHEAD,  BART.  PAST  P.  G.  S.  W.  FOR

LINCOLNSHIRE.

MY  DEAR  SIR, — As  you  did  me  the  honour  to  accept  the  office  of
^Provincial  Grand  Senior  Warden  at  my  hand,  when  I  held  the  Deputy
Grand  Mastership  of  the  Province,  and  to  unite  with  me  in  promoting
the  welfare  of  Freemasonry  within  its  limits,  I  take  the  liberty  of  sub-
mitting to  you,  now  my  authority  in  the  province  is  at  an  end,  a  design
which  is  intended  to  be  useful  to  the  Fraternity  at  large.

If  I  may  be  allowed  to  place  any  reliance  on  the  testimony  of  the
public  press,  or  on  the  declarations  of  private  correspondents  in  every
quarter  of  the  globe,  I  trust  it  will  not  be  an  unpardonable  vanity  in
me  to  conclude  that  my  labours  in  the  cause  of  Masonry  have  been
productive  of  some  benefit  to  the  Institution.  Success  has  been  a
'stimulus  to  further  exertions,  and  more  extensive  researches  into  the
origin  and  true  design  of  the  Order.  In  announcing  that  I  am  about
to  take  my  leave  of  the  Fraternity  as  a  public  Masonic  writer,  it  is
not  to  be  understood  that  I  consider  the  subject  exhausted ;  on  the
contrary,  I  conceive  that  I  have  merely  opened  the  mine,  leaving  its
richest  treasures  to  be  gathered  by  other  hands.  But  it  is  time  to
close  my  Masonic  labours — my  sun  is  sinking  in  the  west ;  and  it
will  be  matter  of  high  gratification  to  my  mind,  if  some  other  Brother
shall  resume  the  task,  and  prosecute  it  with  superior  advantages  to
the  Craft ;  although  I  am  certain  that  none  can  possess  greater  zeal
or  sincerity  of  intention.  I  propose,  however,  before  I  bid  my  Brethren
a  final  adieu,  to  furnish  them  with  a  series  of  PRACTICAL  LECTURES
ON  THE  HISTORICAL  LANDMARKS,  and  other  evidences  of  Freema-
sonry, under  the  arrangement  which  has  been  enjoined  by  the  GRAND
LODGE  OF  ENGLAND,  as  settled  by  the  Lodge  of  Reconciliation  at
the  Union  of  the  two  great  divisions  of  the  Craft  in  1813.

In  the  prosecution  of  this  design  I  have  adopted  an  arrangement
corresponding  with  the  order  in  which  our  degrees  are  conferred. —
After  an  Introduction  containing  an  inquiry  into  the  legality  and  use-
fulness of  Masonic  publications ;  and  two  Preliminary  Lectures,  giving


Vlll


a  general  view  of  the  Landmarks  intended  to  be  illustrated,  I  shall  enter
upon  a  series  of  disquisitions  illustrative  of  the  First  Tracing-board  ;
in  which  the  Form,  Situation,  Extent,  Ground  (including  the  first  and
second  Grand  Offerings),  Support,  and  Covering  of  a  Lodge  will  be
dilated  on  in  so  many  Lectures.  The  deliverance  from  Egyptian
bondage,  and  the  ancient  custom  of  opening  a  Lodge  on  the  highest
of  hills,  or  in  the  lowest  of  valleys,  will  close  the  illustrations  of  the
First  DegTee.

The  Second  Degree  will  open  with  a  Lecture  on  the  symbolical
references  of  the  Order.  I  shall  then  proceed  with  a  critical  exa-
mination of  the  number  of  workmen  employed  about  the  Temple  of
Solomon;  and  the  system  of  classification  which  \v:is  adopted  in  the
quarries,  the  forest,  and  the  mountain  of  Moriah.  The  Second
Tracing-board  will  occupy  our  attention — the  Porch  and  its  Pillars—
Jephtha  and  the  Ephraimites — the  "Winding  Stairca-c  and  its  Steps,
with  their  .symbolical  reference — the  Letter  G,  &c. ;  and  Lectures  on
the  Grand  Architect's  Six  Periods — the  Inundations  of  the  Nile — the
Twelve  Grand  Points — and  the  Third  Grand  Offering,  will  close  the
Second  Degree.

In  the  Third  and  its  accompanying  Degrees  and  Orders,  the  sub-
ject becomes  more  diffusive,  and  will  require  to  be  more  extensively
treated.  Accordingly,  commencing  with  the  Legend,  I  shall  endeavour
to  trace  its  origin  amidst  the  darkness  of  a  remote  antiquity,  and  to
explain  its  symbolical  application.  Then  the  nature  and  design  of
Freemasonry  before  the  Flood,  and  the  subject  of  "  Worldly  Pos-
sessions" will  be  examined  ;  while  the  Sacred  Lodge,  the  decorations
of  the  Temple,  and  the  sources  of  King  Solomon's  wealth,  *Till  be
discussed  in  order ;  as  well  as  the  Masonic  reference  attached  to  the
Fall  and  Restoration  of  our  first  parents.  Then  follows,  in  due
course,  a  consideration  of  the  Burning  Bush,  the  Tetragrammaton  or
Incommunicable  Name,  and  the  Rod  of  Moses,  which  will  be  exa-
mined, each  in  a  separate  Lecture.  After  which,  I  shall  open  the
Holy  Lodge  at  the  foot  of  Mount  Sinai,  and  consider  the  application
to  Masonry  of  the  Ark  of  the  Covenant — the  Priestly  Orders — the
Clamp  of  Israel,  and  the  Banners  of  the  Twelve  Tribes ;  none  of
which  will  be  dismissed  without  distinct  and  exclusive  notice.  The
remarkable  events  in  the  reign  of  Josiah  will  be  considered  before  we
proceed  to  the  Babylonish  Captivity,  its  termination,  and  the  opening


PKEFACE.  IX

of  the  Grand  and  Royal  Lodge — the  building  of  the  Sacred  Temple
— the  Triple  Tau,  and  the  departute  of  the  Sceptre  from  Judah.  A
careful  examination  of  all  these  subjects,  so  far  as  they  are  connected
with  Freemasonry,  will  illustrate  the  fact,  that  our  ancient  and  Royal
Order  is  a  progressive  system,  consistent  in  all  its  parts,  and  sym-
bolizing the  way  to  salvation  through  the  merits  of  a  Redeemer,  who
made  atonement  for  the  sins  of  men  by  the  sacrifice  of  the  Cross.

In  the  construction  of  these  Lectures,  I  propose  to  subjoin  copious
authorities  for  every  fact  and  argument  that  it  may  be  necessary  to
introduce  in  illustration  of  the  general  system  of  Freemasonry.  The
Notes  will  therefore  be  extremely  numerous,  and  gathered  from  every
-accessible  source  which  is  worthy  of  credence.  It  is  hoped  that  these
Notes  will  be  found  of  some  service  in  clearing  up  doubtful  or  difficult
points  of  discipline  and  doctrine.  They  will  be  selected  with  great
care,  and  will  constitute  a  series  of  vouchers  for  the  credibility  of  every
important  rite  connected  with  the  several  degrees  of  the  Order,  which
are  practised  at  the  present  day.  They  will  be  a  mirror  to  reflect  the
opinions — a  register  to  chronicle  the  Masonic  sentiments  of  living
Masons,  not  only  in  this  kingdom  but  in  all  others,  as  well  as  of  those
who  have  flourished  in  by-gone  ages.  It  is  true,  I  do  not  profess  to
engage  in  any  formal  illustration  beyond  the  three  symbolical  or  Blue
Degrees  ending  in  the  Royal  Arch  and  its  subsidiary  appendages ;
but  every  other  order  which  is  in  any  way  allied  to  Freemasonry,
will  be  incidentally  noticed,  and  its  claims  to  credence  briefly  inves-
tigated. I  am  anxious  that  the  Brethren  should  familiarly  understand
every  point,  part,  and  secret,  connected  with  the  Institution ;  and
though  I  am  not  ignorant  of  the  responsibility  which  will  naturally
accompany  an  attempt  to  communicate  this  knowledge,  yet  I  flatter
myself  that  I  shall  be  able  to  accomplish  it  with  a  conscientious  regard
to  the  terms  of  my  OB,  and  at  the  same  time,  with  such  perspicuity
as  may  render  the  explanations  plain  and  intelligible  to  the  Fraternity,
while  they  continue  an  impenetrable  mystery  to  those  who  have  not
had  the  advantage  of  initiation.

In  the  system,  as  it  is  practised  in  our  Lodges,  the  connection
between  the  several  consecutive  degrees  is  not  accurately  defined  ;
nor  perhaps  would  it  be  possible,  in  practice,  to  establish  a  series  of
rites  by  which  that  connection  could  be  distinctly  impressed  upon
the  mind  of  a  candidate  during  the  ceremony  of  initiation.  This


PREFACE.

important  eft'ect  can  only  be  accomplished  by  the  subsequent  expla-
nations of  a  zealous  and  indefatigable  Master  ;  and  to  do  this  effect-
ually, he  must  depart  from  the  usual  routine ;  or  rather  he  must
amplify  and  illustrate  the  authorized  lectures  by  the  introduction  of
parallel  facts,  and  explanatory  observances,  connected  with  the  history
and  antiquities,  manners  and  customs,  laws  and  usages,  of  the  country
and  period  which  may  form  the  subject  of  disquisition.  And  there
are  many  reasons  that  make  such  a  course,  under  present  circum-
stances, almost  impracticable.  The  Master  of  a  Lodge  has  generally
other  objects  of  pursuit  to  engage  his  mind,  and  occupy  his  attention,
which  leave  him  little  leisure  to  pursue  the  investigations  necessary
to  accomplish  so  extensive  an  undertaking.  The  present  work  is
intended  to  supply  materials  for  accelerating  these  studies.  No  sub-
ject will  be  left  untouched,  doubts  will  be  removed,  and  difficulties
explained.  The  links  of  connection  between  the  several  degrees  will
be  supplied ;  and  thus  the  Brethren  will  be  furnished  with  a  clue  to
direct  their  enquiries  into  the  right  channel :  and  it  may  not  be  too
much  to  anticipate  that  the  path  to  Masonic  knowledge  will  be  thereby
relieved,  in  a  great  measure,  from  the  difficulties  which  obstruct  the
progress  of  scientific  research  into  the  mysteries  of  the  Order.

I  have  taken  the  liberty,  my  dear  Sir,  of  troubling  you  with  this
imperfect  outline  of  my  plan,  in  the  hope  of  being  favoured  with  your
opinion  of  its  utility.  Tt  is  my  intention  to  leave  no  point  unexplained
connected  with  the  theory  of  Masonry,  which  may  be  prudently  com-
mitted to  print ;  while,  for  obvious  reasons,  the  practical  part  will  be
designedly  omitted,  because  it  may  readily  be  learned  in  tyled  Lodges,
under  the  judicious  direction  of  an  experienced  Master,  whose  peculiar
duty  it  is  to  employ  and  instruct  the  Brethren  in  Masonry.  It  will
embrace  upwards  of  fifty  Lectures  ;  and  while  the  greatest  care  will
be  taken  to  avoid  any  undue  exposure  of  peculiar  secrets,  enough
will  be  said  to  clear  up  all  difficult  and  controverted  questions,  as
well  as  to  connect  the  lower  with  the  higher  degrees  ;  thus  forming
a  regularly  graduated  series,  advancing  step  by  step  to  the  ne  plus
ultra  of  Masonry,  and  unfolding  its  secret  reference  to  that  divine
system  of  religion,  which,  at  the  last  great  day,  will  introduce  us
into  the  Grand  Lodge  above,  a  building  not  made  with  hands,
eternal  in  the  heavens.

1  shall  be  glad,   therefore,  to  learn  whether  you  think  a  work


PREFACE.  XI

founded  on  such  a  basis,  would  be  acceptable  to  the  Masonic  public ;
and  whether  the  Fraternity  would  be  likely  to  suffer  the  closing
offspring  of  a  veteran  labourer  in  their  service  to  perish  for  want  of
their  fostering  support.

Believe  me  to  be,  my  dear  Sir,

Yours  faithfully  and  fraternally,
GEO.  OLIVER,  D.D.
Past  D.  P.  G.  M.  for  Lincolnshire.
SCOPWICK  VICARAGE,
Nov.  22,  1843.


TO  THE  REV.  DR.  OLIVER,  PAST  D.  P.  G.  M.  FOR  LINCOLNSHIRE.

MY  DEAR  SIR, — Your  prospectus  of  a  closing  work  upon  the  subject
of  Masonry  is  very  interesting ;  and  if  the  outline  can  be  filled  up  in
a  manner  at  all  adequate  to  the  design,  it  must  be  a  most  valuable
addition  to  the  current  information  on  the  subject  of  the  Craft.  My
own  ideas  on  matters  of  Masonic  antiquity  are  not  so  bold  as  yours,
though  it  must  be  admitted  that  the  exclusive  Judaic  character
of  the  machinery,  the  Hebrew  references,  and  reference  to  Tyrian
usages,  are  of  themselves  internal  evidence  of  a  very  remote  origin  ;
an  origin  not  taking  place  among  Christians,  whose  ignorance  on
these  subjects,  and  hatred  of  the  Jews  until  a  very  recent  period,
make  the  supposition  of  a  Christian  origin  quite  impossible.  The
moral  application  of  the  principles  does  indeed  admit  unbounded
development,  and  may  keep  pace  with  the  views  and  practice  of  any
present  or  future  benevolence,  On  the  subject  of  the  obligation  I
have  had  some  misgivings,  but  we  perhaps  have  interpreted  it  with
too  much  severity,  and  against  the  public  interest ;  and  it  may  be
questioned  whether  it  was  intended  to  extend  much  beyond  the
solemn  initiatory  rites  of  the  Order.  In  all  your  attempts,  both  in
Masonry  and  out  of  Masonry,  you  have  the  hearty  good  wishes  of

Your  very  faithful  Brother,

E.  FF.  BROMHEAD,
P.  P.  G.  S.  W.  for  Lincolnshire.

LINCOLN,  Nov.  25,  1843.


Xll


P  RET  ACE.


Whether  I  have  succeeded  in  the  accomplishment  of
my  original  intention,  or  whether  I  have  redeemed  the
pledges  contained  in  the  above  correspondence,  is  now
left  to  the  decision  of  the  Fraternity.  I  do  not  expect
that  the  work  will  be  pronounced  faultless,  because
perfection  is  not  the  attribute  of  man,  much  less  of  his
performances.

vitavi  denique  culpam,


Non  laudem  merui. — HOR.
I  hope,  with  the  Bachelor  Sampson  Carrasco,


"  the
hope  they  will  not  dwell


critics  wrill  be  merciful.  T
upon  the  motes  of  the  bright  MID  of  the  work  they  cen-
sure. Though  '  (i/i(/nfinfto  bonus  dormitat  Homer  us  J
they  ought  to  consider  how  wide  he  was  awake  to  p.
his  work  as  much  light  and  leave  as  little  shade  as
possible.  Perhaps  those  very  parts  which  some  men
do  not  fancy,  are  like  moles,  which  sometimes  add  to
the  beauty  of  the  face  that  has  them."

In  the  construction  of  the  Lectures,  I  have  had  little
direct  assistance  except  from  a  few  valued  and  highly
talented  correspondents,  from  whom  I  have  received
various  hints  which  have  been  of  essential  service  ;  and
their  favours  have  been  generally  acknowledged  at  the
foot  of  their  own  communications.  One  of  these
esteemed  friends  gave  me  much  important  information
respecting  the  foreign  degrees,  and  directed  my  enquiries
into  a  channel  which  produced  the  happiest  results ;
and  I  am  proud  in  being  permitted  to  grace  my  pages
with  the  name  of  George  Arnott  Walker  Arnott,  Esq.,
L.  L.  D.,  Depute  Grand  Principal  of  the  Supreme

*  Don  Quixote,  Part  II.  ch.  3.


PREFACE.  Xlll

Grand  Council  of  Rites,  &c.  &c.,  of  Scotland ;  a  most
learned,  intelligent,  and  indefatigable  Brother,  whose
active  exertions  in  the  cause  of  Scottish  Masonry  have
been  rewarded  by  the  esteem  of  the  Fraternity,  and
the  highest  honours  of  the  Order.

Throughout  the  whole  period  in  which  these  Lectures
have  been  in  course  of  publication,  my  anxiety  has
been  great  lest  I  should  violate  my  OB,  by  the  inser-
tion of  any  matter  which  ought  not  to  be  revealed.  To
prevent  improper  disclosures,  I  have  submitted  occa-
sional proof-sheets  to  the  inspection  of  discreet  friends,
and  I  have  not  persisted  in  the  use  of  a  single  paragraph,
or  even  phrase,  whose  removal  has  been  thus  suggested.
My  friend  Dr.  Crucefix,  Past  Grand  Senior  Warden
of  the  Grand  Lodge  of  Massachusetts,  and  Past  Grand
Deacon  of  the  Grand  Lodge  of  England,  has  been  kind
enough  to  incur  the  labour  of  carefully  examining
every  sheet  before  it  was  struck  off;  and  I  must  beg
his  acceptance  of  my  best  thanks  for  many  invaluable
suggestions  which  have  enabled  me  to  profit  advan-
tageously by  the  exercise  of  his  judgment  and  expe-
rience ;  as  well  as  for  his  kind  and  uniform  attention
to  my  wishes  when  I  felt  myself  at  a  loss  on  abstruse
questions  of  discipline ;  for  I  esteem  his  opinion  on
the  laws  of  Masonry  to  be  an  authority  from  which  it
would  be  hopeless  to  appeal.

And  now,  dear  Reader,  nothing  remains  but  to  bid
you  farewell.  We  have  been  fellow-travellers  for  more
than  two  years,  and  have  together  examined  a  variety
of  subjects  connected  with  Freemasonry ;  and  if  you
have  been  amused  or  instructed,  we  have  not  journeyed


XIV


PREFACE.


in  vain.  To  me  the  enquiry  has  been  a  source  of
much  pleasure  and  gratification.  I  dearly  love  these
mysterious  investigations.  I  love  to  wander  through
the  obscure  regions  of  dark  antiquity ;  and  a  research
into  the  hidden  truths  of  history,  science,  or  topography,
is  pleasing  to  my  taste,  and  congenial  to  habits  long
indulged  and  deeply  planted.  Such  pursuits  have  an
indescribable  charm  ;  and  if  you  have  taken  half  the
delight  in  reading  that  I  have  in  compiling  these  varied
Lectures,  I  shall  desire  no  better  evidence  to  prove

that  mv  labours  have  been  attended  with  success.

<j

SCOPWICK  VICARAGE,  May,  1846.


ANALYTICAL  TABLE  OE  CONTENTS

TO  VOLUME  II.


LECTURE  XXV.    (Third  Degree.)

PART  I. — A  GENERAL  VIEW  OF  ALL  THE  ORDERS  AND  DEGREES  OF
MASONRY  WHICH  WERE  PRACTISED  IN  THE  EIGHTEENTH  CENTURY. —
Predilection  for  the  number  Three,  p.  1.  Three  Degrees  of  Ma-
sonry, 5.  Innovations,  9.  The  Suhlime  Degrees,  10.  Royal  Order
of  H.  R.  D.  M.,  account  of  the,  12.  The  Knights  Hospitallers,  20.
Freemasonry  in  the  reign  of  Charles  II.,  27.  New  Degrees,  29.
Ramsay's  Degrees,  31.  Scotch  Masonry,  so  called,  34.  Female
Lodges  instituted,  35.

PART  II. — MASONIC  INNOVATIONS. — The  Petit  Elu,  37.  Schisms  in
Masonry,  39.  The  Supreme  Tribunal,  40.  The  Rose  Croix,  41.
Freemasonry  prohibited,  43.  Chapter  of  Clermont,  44.  The  Strict
Observance,  45.  Emperor  of  the  East  and  West,  47.  King  of
Prussia  becomes  the  Grand  Master  of  Continental  Masonry,  49-  The
Sublime  Degrees  introduced  into  the  New  World,  50.  f  Zinnendorff's
Masonry,  54.  Hunde's  Masonry,  56.  Ecossais,  or  Scotch  Masonry,
57.  The  Grand  Orient  formed,  60.  Knigge's  Masonry,  61.  The
Hermetic  Masonry,  63.

PART  III. — MASONIC  SCHISMS. — Different  systems  in  operation,  66.
Chevalier  du  Soleil,  68.  The  Mopses,  70.  Lodges  of  Adoption,
71.  Le  Mere  Loge  Ecossais,  its  system,  73.  Cagliostro's  Masonry,  74.
Order  of  Mizraim,  75.  Illuminism  founded,  77.  Bahrdt's  Masonry,
82.  Assembly  at  Wilhelmsbad,  83.  Eclectic  Masonry,  85.  The  Royal
Order  of  H.  R.  D.  M.,  86.  Rite  Ancien  et  Accepte,  92.  Prince  of
the  Royal  Secret,  96.  Chapitre  Metropolitain  formed,  97.  Androgynal
Masonry,  98.

PART  IV. — The  French  Lodges,  99.  The  system  in  England,  101 ;  in
Scotland,  103;  in  Ireland,  104;  in  Germany,  and  other  Continental
nations,  106 ;  in  America,  108.  Nomenclature  of  Masonry,  109.  A
hundred  and  fifty  Degrees  enumerated,  111.


XVI


CONTENTS.


.ECTURE  XXVI.

THE  TRACING-BOARD  OF  THE  THIRD  DEGREE  EXPLAINED. — Charac-
teristics of  Masonry,  140.  Emblems  of  mortality,  142;  the  coffin,
144;  the  sprig  of  cassia,  147.  Traditions,  151.  Emblems  on  the
coffin  explained,  154.  Resurrection  from  the  dead,  159.  Fidelity,
160.  Skull  and  bones,  162.

LECTURE  XXVII.
LEGEND  OF  THE  THIRD  DEGREE,  WITH  SOME  CONJECTURES   ON    ITS

PROBABLE    ORIGIN    AND   SYMBOLICAL    REFERENCE.  — The  legend,  165.

Union  of  Speculative  and  Operative  Masonry,  169.  Origin  of  the
legend,  170;  its  meaning,  171.  Abel,  a  type  of  the  Messiah,  174.
Types  and  allegories,  17n.  Progressive  character  of  the  three  Degrees,
179.  A  type  of  the  Christian  dispensation,  181.  The  true  design  of
Masonry,  183.

LECTURE  XXVIII.

THE    NATURE    AND    DESIGN    OF    FREEMASONRY    BEFORE    THE    FLOOD.

Practice  of  morality,  I8ti.  History  of  the  mountain  of  Moriah,  1S7.
Freemasonry  of  the  race  of  Seth,  188.  Vision  of  Enoch,  191 ;  his
subterranean  temple,  193.  Wickedness  of  the  antediluvian  world,  19(>.
Enoch's  pillars,  199;  his  final  exhortation,  202.

LECTURE  XXIX.

WORLDLY  POSSESSIONS. — Tubal  Cain  the  inventor  of  certain  arts,  205 ;
an  artificer  in  brass,  207.  Rude  state  of  the  first  inhabitants  of  the
world,  208.  The  art  of  working  in  metals,  212.  Worldly  possessions,
how  acquired,  213.  Operative  Masonry  invented,  214;  and  the  me-
chanical arts,  217.

LECTURE  XXX.

THE  HOLY  LODGE. — Deliverance  of  the  children  of  Israel,  218.  Battle
with  the  Amalekites,  219.  Mount  Sinai,  221.  The  tabernacle  erected,
223.  The  Holy  Lodge  opened,  224.  Superstitions  of  the  Israelites,
229.  The  golden  calf  set  up,  233.  Ceremonies  of  its  worship,  236.
The  tabernacle  described,  239.  The  Most  Holy  place,  241.  Deco-
rations of  the  tabernacle,  244.  A  symbol  of  the  church  of  Christ,  24ti.

LECTURE  XXXI.

THE  TEMPLE  OF  SOLOMON  AND  THE  SACRED  LODGE. — Symbolical  Ma-
sonry, 248.  Model  on  which  a  Freemason's  Lodge  is  formed,  251.
Stones  for  building  the  temple  carved,  marked,  and  numbered,  253.
Rich  decorations  of  the  temple,  254.  Resemblance  between  the  temple


CONTENTS.  XV11

and  a  Mason's  Lodge,  256.  Wisdom,  Strength,  and  Beauty,  257.
Solomon  classes  the  workmen,  259.  Preparing  the  foundations,  261.
Discovery  in  the  bowels  of  mount  Calvary,  262.  The  Sacred  Lodge
opened,  264.

LECTURE  XXXII.

THE  DECORATIONS  OF  THE  TEMPLE  AND  THE  SOURCES  OF  KlNG  SOLOMON'S

WEALTH. — Ornaments  of  public  buildings  and  of  the  temple,  267.
Cost  of  the  temple  considered,  271.  Solomon's  riches  exhaustless,
274.  The  precious  metals  plentiful  in  the  time  of  Solomon,  277.
Wealth  of  the  Romans,  279  ;  of  Xerxes,  282 ;  of  the  Persians,  284.
Rich  decorations  of  the  temples  of  India,  285.  Wealth  unequally
distributed,  287.

LECTURE  XXXIII.

THE  ARK  OF  THE  COVENANT. — The  ark  described,  289 ;  by  whom
made,  292.  The  propitiatory,  294 ;  an  emblem  of  peace  and  alliance,
296  ;  a  type  of  Christ,  297.  Urim  and  Thummim,  299.  The  taber-
nacle and  its  appendages,  a  type  of  a  Mason's  Lodge,  300.  Pot  of
manna,  302.

LECTURE   XXXIV.     (The  Royal  Arch.}

ON    THE    INCREASE    OF    FREEMASONRY    FROM    ITS    REVIVAL    IN    1717.

Universality  of  the  Order,  305.  The  Landmarks  unalterable,  306.
Masonic  schisms,  308.  Ancient  and  modern  Masonry,  so  called,  union
of,  310.  Spread  of  the  science,  313.  Number  of  Lodges  and  Brethren
314.  Operation  of  the  system  in  America,  320.  Modification  of  the
Constitutions,  325.  Seven  classes  of  the  Rite  Ancien  et  Accepte,  329.
Names  of  the  thirty-three  degrees,  335.  Auxiliary  degrees,  345.

LECTURE  XXXV.

THE  ROYAL  ARCH  TRACING-BOARD. — Symbols  on  the  Tracing-board,
348.  Its  form,  351.  Mosaic  floor,  352.  Double  triangle,  355.
Reference  of  the  luminaries,  357.  Throne  and  canopy,  358.  System
in  the  United  States,  360.  Second  Tracing-board  described,  362.
Morality  of  the  Tracing- board,  365.

LECTURE  XXXVI.

THE  INEFFABLE  DEGREES. — Decorations  and  appointments,  367.  Ac-
count of  a  crime  committed  by  some  Tyrian  workmen,  368.  Chapter
of  Intendants,  370.  Establishment  of  the  degree  of  the  Nine  Elected
Knights,  373.  History  of  the  degree  of  the  Illustrious  Elected  of
Fifteen,  375  ;  and  of  the  Sublime  Knights  elected,  376.  Institution


xviii  CONTENTS.

of  the  degree  of  Illustrious  Masters,  and  of  the  Priestly  Orders,  376.
History  of  the  degree  of  Intimate  Secretary,  380.  Solomon's  apostacy,
383.  Elect  and  Perfect  Masters,  386.

LECTURE  XXXVII.

THE  SACRED  ROLL. — Symbolical  Masonry,  what  it  is,  388.  The  ten
tribes  forsake  Rehoboam,  390.  Disobedience  of  the  Jews,  393.  The
sacred  writings  lost,  395.  Josiah  repairs  the  temple,  396.  Hilkiah
finds  the  sacred  roll,  398.  Huldah  conceals  the  copy,  400.

LECTURE  XXXVIII.

THE  CAPTIVITY  IN  BABYLON. — Nebuchadnezzar  invades  Judea,  403;
takes  Jerusalem  and  destroys  the  temple,  404.  The  captives  not  con-
demned to  slavery,  407.  Some  of  the  Jews  distinguished  at  Babylon,
409.  Meet  in  schools  or  lodges,  410.  Pythagoras  instructed  by
Daniel,  412.  Introduces  Jewish  Masonry  into  Greece,  414.

LECTURE  XXXIX.

THE  GRAND  AND  ROYAL  LODGE. — Grief  of  the  captives  in  Babylon,  416.
Edict  of  Cyrus,  418.  Some  of  the  Jews  demur,  420.  Z.  H.  and  J.  lead
them  from  Babylon,  423.  Grand  Lodges  in  Chaldea,  425.  The
Grand  and  Royal  Lodge,  427.  Construction  of  the  Sanhedrim,  429.

LECTURE  XL.

THE  SECOND  TEMPLE. — The  Jews  set  up  an  altar,  431.  The  founda-
tions of  the  temple  cleared,  and  a  discovery  made,  434.  Footstone  of
the  temple  laid,  439.  Grief  of  the  aged  men,  440.  The  Samaritans
retard  the  work,  442.  Reign  of  Darius,  444  ;  his  decree,  447.  The
building  progresses,  449.  The  Grand  and  Royal  Lodge  opened,  449.
Ezra  visits  Jerusalem,  450.  Nehemiah  appointed  governor  of  Judea,
451.  Dedication,  453.

LECTURE  XLI.

THE  BURNING  BUSH. — The  Israelites  in  Egypt,  455.  The  Egyptians
afraid  of  them,  457.  Moses  preserved,  460.  The  Egyptian  spurious
Freemasonry,  461.  Moses  flees  to  Midian,  463.  The  burning  bush,
465.  Who  it  was  that  appeared  in  the  fire,  469.  Descent  of  the
Deity,  consequences  of  the,  472.  The  day  of  judgment,  475.

LECTURE  XLII.

THE  FALL  AND  RESTORATION  OF  OUR  FIRST  PARENTS. — Adam  and
Eve  in  Paradise,  476.  Freemasonry  of  Adam,  477.  Happiness  in


CONTENTS.  XIX

the  Garden  of  Eden,  479.  Eve  tempted,  481 ;  and  fell,  485.  Our
first  parents  hide  themselves,  486.  Origin  of  signs,  487.  Expulsion
from  Paradise,  490.  The  shekinah,  491.  THE  GREAT  PROMISE,  493.
Design  of  the  temple,  496.  The  promise  realized  in  Christ,  497.
The  serpent's  head  bruised,  498.  Advent  of  the  Messiah,  503.

LECTURE  XLI1I.

THE  PRIESTLY  ORDERS. — Establishment  of  a  priesthood,  505.  The
high  priest  appointed,  509.  His  vestments,  510;  their  symbolical
meaning,  512.  Stones  in  the  Pectoral,  515;  their  reference,  517.
Urim  and  Thummim  explained,  525  ;  Symbolical  reference  of  the,  531.
The  high  priest's  mitre,  533.  Virtue  of  the  mysterious  name  of  God,
535.  The  atonement  of  Christ,  536.

LECTURE  XLIV.

THE  TETRAGRAMMATON. — First  revelation  of  the  Sacred  Name,  537.
What  the  name  was,  539.  Ten  names  of  the  Deity,  541.  Name
not  to  be  profaned,  545.  The  right  pronunciation  of  it  lost,  547.
The  name  introduced  into  Freemasonry,  551.  The  Tetragrammaton
performs  miracles,  553  ;  was  Christ,  556.

LECTURE  XLV.

THE  CAMP  OP  ISRAEL. — History  of  the  Israelites,  559.  Occasions  of
their  dissatisfaction,  561  ;  their  complaints,  565.  How  marshalled  in
the  wilderness,  567.  Their  numbers,  569  ;  and  state  of  discipline,  570.
Arrangement  of  the  camp,  571.  The  plague  of  serpents,  573.  The
brazen  serpent,  574.  The  prophecy  of  Balaam,  577.  The  types  of
a  better  dispensation,  581.

LECTURE  XLVI.

THE  BANNERS  OF  THE  TWELVE  TRIBES.— Devices  on  the  banners,  583
Banners  in  the  division  of  Judah,  585  ;  of  Reuben,  588 ;  of  Ephraim,
590 ;  and  of  Dan,  592.  The  destination  of  the  tribe  of  Levi,  595  ;
Sustained  in  the  wilderness  by  Jehovah,  596.

LECTURE  XLVII.

THE  ROD  OF  MOSES.— The  rod  changed  into  a  serpent,  599.  Rods  of
the  magicians,  601.  Conjectures  on  the  obstinacy  of  Pharoah,  603.
Science  of  Magic,  606.  Punishment  of  the  Egyptians,  608.  Case  of
the  Egyptian  ladies  considered,  611.  Agent  of  the  plagues,  612.
General  use  of  the  rod,  or  staff,  throughout  the  world,  614.  The
royal  sceptre,  615.  The  Egyptians  dismissed,  616.


XX


'  ,  >\TENTS.


LECTURE  XLVIII.


THE  TRIPLE  TAU. — Signs  of  Masonry,  617.  Use  of  the  single  cross,  619,
The  mark  in  Ezekiel,  619.  A  symbol  of  innocence,  621 ;  and  of  life,
622.  Cross  in  the  caverns  of  initiation,  fi-24  ;  used  in  chemistry  and
heraldry,  625.  Sign  of  the  Cross,  630.  The  triple  tau  a  distinction
in  a  Royal  Arch  Chapter,  631.  Reference  to  the  three  great  lights  of
Masonry,  632.  The  triple  tau  cross  supposed  by  some  to  be  a  Nilo-
metre,  633.  Whether  it  was  known  to  the  Jews,  635.  Used  in  the
early  ages  of  Christianity,  636.

LECTURE  XLIX.

THE  DEPARTURE  OF  "THE  SCEPTRE  FROM  JUDAH, — Falling  away  of
the  Jews,  640.  The  temple  profaned,  641 .  The  abomination  of  deso-
lation, 642.  The  sceptre  about  to  depart,  642.  The  appearance
of  the  Prince  of  Peace,  644.  The  wise  men  from  the  East  adore
the  new  born  babe,  645.  The  Jews  still  a  distinct  people,  646.
The  sceptre  departing,  647.  Divisions  amongst  the  Jews,  649.  The
temple  destroyed  by  Titus,  651.  The  holy  mountain  polluted,  653.
The  sceptre  finally  departs,  656.

LECTURE  L.

THE  COROLLARY.— Principal  object  of  the  Lectures,  657.  The  great
atonement,  658.  A  knowledge  of  T.  G.  A.  O.  T.  U.  embodied  in
Freemasonry,  658.  Types  in  the  Landmarks,  660.  Freemasonry  refers
to  Christianity,  661-  Views  of  the  reformers  of  the  Order  in  1717, 662;
of  still  more  ancient  Masons,  664  ;  and  at  the  re-union  in  1813,  665.
Christian  tendency  of  Freemasonry,  667.  Division  of  the  lectures.
668.  The  Royal  Arch,  669.  Introductory  lectures,  671.  Observa-
tions on  the  notes,  674.  Sciences  promulgated  by  Freemasonry,  675.
The  benefits  which  it  conveys  to  society,  676.


INDEX.


THIRD    DEGREE.

NINE  LECTURES


VOL.  II.


•


"  The  third,  or  Master  Mason's  Degree,  leads  to  that  great  truth  which
the  sublimest  part  of  even  the  heathen  mysteries,  though  it  seldom  suc-
ceeded, was  intended  to  teach ;  and  the  faithful  believer  was  assured  of  a
future  life  and  immortality  beyond  the  grave.  And  whereas  the  heathens
had  taught  this  only  by  the  application  of  a  fable  to  their  purpose  ;  tlu>
wisdom  of  the  pious  Grand  Master  of  the  Israelitish  Masons  took  advantage
of  a  real  circumstance  which  would  more  forcibly  impress  the  sublime  truths
he  intended  to  inculcate  upon  the  minds  of  all  Brethren."

ARCHDEACON  MANX.

"  In  the  lectures  of  this  degree,  every  circumstance  that  respects  govern-
ment  and  system,  ancient  lore  and  deep  research,  curious  invention  and
ingenious  discovery,  is  collected,  and  accurately  traced  ;  while  the  mode  of
practising  our  rites,  on  public  as  well  as  private  occasions,  is  satisfactorily
explained.  Among  the  Brethren  of  this  degree,  the  landmarks  of  the
Order  are  preserved ;  and  from  them  is  derived  that  fund  of  information,
which  expert  and  ingenious  Craftsmen  only  can  afford,  whose  judgment  has
been  matured  by  years  and  experience.  To  a  complete  knowledge  of  these
lectures  few  attain ;  but  it  is  an  infallible  truth,  that  he  who  acquires  by
merit  the  mark  of  pre-eminence  to  which  this  degree  entitles  him,  receives
a  reward  which  amply  compensates  for  all  his  past  diligence  and  assiduity."

PRESTON.

"  In  the  ceremonial  of  the  Third  Degree,  the  last  grand  mystery  is  at-
tempted to  be  illustrated  in  a  forcible  and  peculiar  manner,  shewing  by
striking  analogy,  that  the  Master-Mason  cannot  be  deemed  perfect  in  the
glorious  science,  'till  by  the  cultivation  of  his  intellectual  powers  he  has
gained  such  moral  government  of  his  passions,  such  serenity  of  mind,  that
in  synonymous  apposition  with  Mastership  in  operative  art,  his  thoughts
like  his  actions  have  become  as  useful  as  human  intelligence  will  permit ;
and  that  having  passed  through  the  trials  of  life  with  fortitude  and  faith,  he
is  fitted  for  that  grand,  solemn,  and  mysterious  consummation,  by  which
alone  he  can  become  acquainted  with  the  great  secret  of  Eternity.  Unlike
the  E.  A.  and  F.  C.  who  each  anticipate  improvement  as  they  advance,  the
Master- Mason  can  learn  nothing  beyond  the  Third  Degree;  his  hopes  there-
fore, with  his  thoughts  and  wishes,  should  be  directed  to  the  Grand  Lodge
above,  where  the  world's  Great  Architect  lives  and  reigns  for  ever.  The
ceremonial  and  the  lecture  beautifully  illustrate  this  all-engrossing  subject,
and  the  conclusion  we  arrive  at,  is,  that  youth  properly  directed  leads  us  to
honourable  and  virtuous  maturity,  and  that  the  life  of  man  regulated  by  mo-
rality, faith,  and  justice,  will  be  rewarded  at  its  closing  hour  by  the  prospect
o'f  Eternal  Bliss."

From  DR.  CRUCEFIX  MSS.     (Hitherto  unpublished).


LECTURE    XXV.


NUMBER    OF    DEGREES    NAMED    OR    ILLUSTRATED    IN    THIS    LECTURE.

Royal  Order  of  Bruce  2 — The  Temple  5 — Order  of  Perfect  Happiness  (androgyne)  4— Order
of  Clermont  3— Order  of  Strict  Observance  15— Order  of  Mount  Tabor  (androgyne)  9—
Order  of  Mizraim  90— Order  of  the  Illuminati  9— Rite  de  la  Vielle  Bru  9— Rite  des  EIus
Coens  9 — Rite  de  Ecossais  80 — Rite  des  Chevaliers  Bienfaisants  12 — Rite  de  Ancien  et
Accepte,  classes  7 — Rite  de  Ancien  et  Accepte,  degrees  33 — Rite  of  Namur  33 — German
Rose  Croix  9— System  of  the  Royal  York  at  Berlin  9— System  of  Zinnendorff  7 — System
of  Swedenborg  13— System  of  Chartannier  9— System  of  Tschoudy  6— System  of  Scroe-
der  10 — System  of  Cagliostro  (androgyne)  $ — System  of  Fessler  6 — System  of  Viany  16 —
System  of  Page  11— System  of  La  Rouge  7 — System  of  Lemanceau  7 — System  of  Hecart  ft
— System  of  Pyron  43 — System  of  (author  unknown)  33— System  of  Peuvret  81 — System
of  the  Grand  Orient  of  France  7— System  of  Fustier  64— La  Petit  Elu  3—  Philosophical
Masonry  12 — Adonhiramite  Masonry  11— Elu  de  la  Verite  14 — The  German  Union  22 —
Elus  33— -Metropolitan  Chapter  of  France  100 — Persian  Philosophers  (androgyne)  10 —
Swedish  Masonry  12 — Adoptive  Masonry  (androgyne)  5 — General  Masonryl50.  Total  941.


PART  I.

A  GENERAL  VIEW  OF  ALL  THE  ORDERS  AND  DEGREES  OF  MASONRY
WHICH  WERE  PRACTISED  IN   THE   EIGHTEENTH  CENTURY.

"  Besides  those  degrees  which  are  in  regular  succession,  most  of
the  inspectors  are  in  possession  of  a  number  of  detached  degrees,
given  in  different  parts  of  the  world,  and  which  they  generally  com-
municate, free  of  expense,  to  those  Brethren  who  are  high  enough  to
understand  them." — DALCHO.

"  Within  our  own  time  mysterious  inscriptions  and  characters
have  been  found  among  the  rubbish  of  eastern  cities,  over  whose
ruins  more  than  forty  centuries  have  rolled,  Avhich  called  forth  the
wonder  of  the  curious,  and  puzzled  the  most  learned  antiquary,
and  which  none  have  been  found  competent  to  decipher,  save  those
who  are  versed  in  the  higher  orders  of  Masonry."

ORATION  BEFORE  THE  GRAND  LODGE  OF  RHODE  ISLAND.

IN  the  practice  of  primitive  Freemasonry,1  our  ancient
Brethren  had  a  great  regard  for  the  number  THREE.

1  At  the  commencement  of  this  lecture  I  ought  to  remark,  that
from  the  abundance  of  materials  which  lie  before  me,  I  am  appre-

B  2


4  HISTORICAL    LANDMARKS

It  formed,  as  it  were,  the  basis  of  the  Order,  and  not
only  the  details,  but  the  institution  itself  was  modelled
on  an  observance  of  its  peculiar  properties.  From  the
very  beginning  of  time  this  number  was  had  in  great
reverence;  for  it  was  founded  on  the  most  sublime
mystery  of  religion,  and  was  transmitted  through  all
the  systems  which  the  ever-varying  theories  of  men
induced  them  to  adopt  as  modes  of  worship  to  the
Supreme  Being.2  In  conformity  with  this  arrangement,
the  symbolical  science  of  Freemasonry,3  as  it  is  now

hensive  that  it  will  extend  to  an  unusual  length,  even  though  they  1>(>
condensed  to  the  narrowest  possible  limits.  The  history  of  the  hauts
grades  is  involved  in  such  obscurity,  and  so  mixed  up  with  fraud  and
imposture,  that  it  may  be  difficult  to  come  at  the  truth  in  every  par-
ticular. Facts  have  been  so  much  distorted  by  system  makers,  and
so  exaggerated  by  those  who  have  endeavoured  to  wrest  them  from
their  true  purport,  to  lend  a  countenance  to  absurd  and  improbable
theories,  that  the  whole  record  has  become  a  mass  of  inextricable
confusion.  The  following  attempt,  therefore,  at  placing  before  the
Masonic  world  a  consistent  account  of  their  origin  and  design,  will,
it  is  hoped,  be  received  with  indulgence.

2  "  Since  the  ancient  Jews  did  not  think  it  repugnant  to  reason  to
distinguish  the  divine  essence  into  three  lights,  assigning  them  nainc->
very  nearly  resembling  those   by  which  we   denominate  the  three
hypostases  of  the  Christian  trinity  ;  and  since  they  affirm  that  number
in  God  does  not  destroy  hi  a  unity;  since  also  the  system  of  emana-
tions, issuing  from,  and  returning  into,  the  abyss  of  the  divinity,  \\a»
so  generally  admitted  into  the  theology  of  those  pagan  nations,  who^e
sole  guide  in  forming  that  theology  is  averred  to  have  been  the  light
of  reason ;  we  are  justified  in  asserting  that  this  doctrine,  though
not  founded  upon  reason  as  a  basis,  is  by  no  means  destitute  of  its
decided  support  and  concurrence.     The  basis  upon  which  it  rests  is
far  more  noble  as  well  as  durable; — divine  revelation,  strengthened
by  the  most  ancient  traditions,  and  the  consenting  creed  of  nearly  all
the  kingdoms  of  the  Greater  Asia."   (Maur.  Ind.  Ant.  vol.  5,  p.  771.)

3  In  the  document  called  the  Charter  of  Colne,  the  following  ac-


OF    FREEMASONRY.  5

called,4  was  divided  into  three  parts  or  degrees,  and  the
candidates  for  admission  were  advanced  step  by  step
with  deliberate  caution,5  and  at  great  distances  of  timc,';

count  of  the  origin  of  the  name  of  Freemasonry  is  promulgated. — "  It
does  not  appear  to  us,  that  before  the  year  1440,  this  society  was
known  by  any  other  name  than  that  of  Johns  Brothers;  and  they
then  began  to  be  called  at  Valenciennes  Free  and  Accepted  Masons,
at  which  time,  in  some  part  of  Flanders,  by  the  assistance  and  riches
of  the  brotherhood,  the  first  hospitals  were  erected  for  the  relief  of
such  as  were  afflicted  with  St.  Anthony's  fire.  Although  in  the
exercise  of  charity  and  benevolence  we  neither  regard  country  nor
religion,  yet  we  consider  it  both  necessary  and  prudent  to  initiate  no
one  into  our  mysteries,  except  those  who,  in  the  society  of  the  unini-
tiated and  unenlightened,  profess  the  Christian  religion.  By  the
examination  and  proving  of  those  who  seek  for  initiation  into  the
first,  or  E.  A.  degree,  no  bodily  torture  is  used ;  only  such  an
examination  as  is  necessary  to  prove  a  healthy  body  and  good
understanding."

4  It  was  practised  in  early  times  under  the  several  appellations  of
Lux,   NoachidaB,    Mesouraneo,  Philosophy,    Geometry,  Fraternitas
Latomorum,  &c.  &c.,  as  its  operative  or  speculative  divisions  prevailed.

5  Thus  our  constitutions  direct,  that — "  No  Lodge  shall,  on  any
pretence,  make  more  than  five  new  Brothers  on  one  day,  unless  by
dispensation  ;  nor  shall  a  Lodge  be  permitted  to  give  more  than  one
degree  to  a  Brother  on  the  same  day ;  nor  shall  a  higher  degree  in
Masonry  be  conferred  on  any  Brother  at  a  less  interval  than  one
month  from  his  receiving  a  previous  degree,  nor  until  he  has  passed
an  examination  in  open  Lodge  in  that  degree."

6  The  Master's  degree,  in  the  early  part  of  the  last  century,  was
not  conferred  indiscriminately,  as  it  is  now.     By  the  old  charges  it
was  only  necessary  that  a  Brother  should  be  a  Fellowcraft  to  be
eligible  to  the  office  of  Warden  or  Master,  and  this  degree  qualified
a  noble  Brother  for  the  Grand  Mastership  of  England ;  indeed  no
one  was  called  a  Master  Mason  till  he  had  become  the  Master  of  his
Lodge.    A  Fellowcraft,  or  even  an  E.  A.  P.,  was  allowed  to  offer  his
opinion  in  Grand  Lodge,  and  consequently  possessed  a  vote.     And
the  old  constitutions  provided,  that  all  motions  made  in  Grand  Lodge


6  HISTORICAL    LANDMARKS


as  their  merit  might  entitle  them  to  promotion.7  Nor
were  they  allowed  initiation  at  all,  if  they  did  not  dis-
play the  necessary  courage  arid  fortitude  during  the
probationary  ceremonies,  some  of  which  were  of  great
severity,  and  extended  duration.8  It  was,  however,
subsequently  found  necessary  to  split  the  final  degree

should  be  submitted  to  the  perusal,  even  of  the  youngest  Apprentice;
the  approbation  and  consent  of  a  majority  of  all  the  Brethren  present
being  necessary  to  make  the  same  binding  and  obligatory.  And
any  one,  above  the  degree  of  an  E.  A.  P.,  was  capable  of  representing
the  Master  or  Wardens  in  Grand  Lodge  during  their  absence,  pro-
vided he  attended  with  the  proper  jewel  of  office.  It  appears,  there-
fore, that  a  Brother  might  enjoy  all  the  privileges  of  the  Craft  without
being  a  Master  Mason.  At  the  constitution  of  a  new  Lodge  it  was
ordered,  that  "  the  Lodge  being  opened,  the  new  Master  and  Wardens,
being  yet  among  the  Felloivcrafts,  the  Grand  Master  shall  ask  his
deputy  whether  he  has  examined  them,  &c."

7  Which  merit  is  now  ascertained  by  certain  specified  qualification
questions,  that  the  candidate  is  expected  to  answer  in  each  degree
before  he  can  be  admitted  to  a  higher  grade.

8  The  probations  of  the  spurious  Freemasonry  were  very  severe.
A  drawn  sword  was  opposed  to  the  candidate  at  his  very  entrance
into  the  cavern  of  initiation,  "  from  which,"  says  Maurice,  "  in  the
virtuous  obstinacy  of  perseverance,  he  received  more  than  one  wound.
The  inflexibility  and  firmness  of  his  character  being  thus  tried,  and
steel  itself  in  vain  opposed  to  him,  he  was  admitted  through  the
north  gate,  or  that  of  Cancer,  where  a  fire,  fiercely  glowing  with  the
solstitial  blaze,  scared,  but  could  not  terrify  or  retard  the  determined
aspirant.     He  was  compelled  to  pass  through  this  flame  repeatedly,
and  was  thence  hurried  to  the  southern  gate,  or  that  of  Capricorn,
where  the  solstitial  floods  awaited  him.     Into  these  floods  his  ex-
hausted frame  was  instantly  plunged,  and  he  was  obliged  to  swim  in
them,  and  combat  with  the  waves  till  life  was  at  the  last  gasp.     The
dreadful  rite  of  purification  was  not  yet  over ;  he  was  now  doomed
to  undergo  a  rigid  fast,  which  lasted  fifty  days.     He  was  then  beaten
with  rods  for  two  days  ;  and  during  the  last  twenty  days  of  his  trial,
he  was  buried  up  to  the  neck  in  snow."     (Ind.  Ant,  vol.  v.  p.  991. f


OF    FREEMASONRY.  7

into  two  or  more  portions,  each  of  which  assumed  the
form  of  a  separate  grade.9  And  this  disposition  con-
tinued till  about  the  beginning  of  the  last  century,
when,  in  consequence  of  some  schisms10  which  dis-
turbed the  Lodges  on  the  continent  of  Europe,11  several

9  Mr.  Cole,  the  editor  of  the  American  Freemasons'  Library,  says,
"  There  are,  I  am  bold  to  assert,  but  four  degrees  in  ancient  Free-
masonry.    This  opinion  accords,  not  only  with  the  sentiments  of  the
oldest  and  best  informed  Masons,  with  whom  I  have  conversed,  but
is  also  agreeable  to  written  and  printed  documents ;  some  of  the
latter  of  which  are  almost  as  old  as  the  art  of  printing."     And  yet,
in  regard  to  the  Select  Master's  degree,  "  we  know  of  no  degree  in
Masonry  that  has  a  more  needful,  or  more  important  connexion  with
another,  than  the  Select  with  the  lloyal  Arch.     It  fills  up  a  chasm
which  every  intelligent  Mason  has  observed,  and  without  it,  it  seems
difficult,  if  not  impossible,  to  comprehend  clearly  some  of  the  mysteries
that  belong  to  that  august  degree."

10  Smith  says — "  The  harmony  of  the  brotherhood  in  Germany
was  greatly  disturbed,  about  the  middle  of  the  last  century,  by  the
introduction  of  principles  and  conceits  quite  new  in  Masonry.     The
propagators  of  these  novelties  being  mostly  necessitous  persons,  they
in  a  manner  subsisted  upon  the  spoils  of  their  deluded  adherents.
They  pretended  to  a  superior  knowledge  in  the  science  of  Masonry,
and  took  upon  themselves  the  appellation  of  the  Reform  of  the  North,
under  which  name  they  assembled  for  some  time ;  but  at  last  their
principles  were  inquired  into  by  the  true  Brethren,  and  found  to  be
inconsistent  with  true  and  good  Masonry,  and  therefore  they  fell  to
the  ground."  (Use  and  Abuse,  p.  183.)

11  And  by  changing  the  names  of  existing  degrees,  a  system  of
confusion  was  introduced,  which  has  never  been  effectually  rectified,
even  to  this  day.     Thus  the  Royal  Order  of  Kilwinning,  which  was
established  or  revived  by  Robert  Bruce,  and  hence  acquired  the  name
of  Le  rite  ancien  Ecossais,  is  sometimes  named  the  Eagle  and  Pelican,
the  Rose  Croix,  Rosy  Cross,  or  Harodim.    See  a  lucid  article  on  this
point  in  the  F.  Q.  R.  for  1843,  p.  493,  which  contains  some  valuable
information  on  the  subject.


HISTORICAL    LANDMARKS

successive  innovators  made  their  appearance  on  the
Masonic  stage,12  and  introduced  a  series  of  novel-
ties,13 under  specious  names,  which  were  eagerly  em-
braced either  by  one  party  or  another,14  until,  in  pro-
cess of  time,  they  became  incorporated  with  pure

12  The  author  of  the  lleligions  Bergebenheiten  says,  that  "  Men  of
rank  and  fortune,  and  engaged  in  serious  and  honourable  public  em-
ployments, not  only  frequented  the  Lodges  of  the  cities  where  they
resided,  but  journeyed  from  one  end  of  France  and  Germany  to  the
other,  to  visit  new  Lodges,  or  to  learn  new  secrets  or  new  doctrines.
I  saw  conventions  held  at  Wisimar,  at  Wisbad,  at  Kohlo,  at  Bruns-
wick, and  at  Wilhelmsbad,  consisting  of  some  hundreds  of  persons
of  respectable  stations.     Lsaw  adventurers  coming  to  a  city,  pro-
fessing some  new  secret,  and  in  a  few  days  forming  new  Lodges,
and  instructing  in  a  troublesome  and  expensive  manner  hundreds  of
Brethren."

13  The  first  innovation  appears  to  have  been  attempted  at  the  very
beginning  of  the  century,  and  before  the  revival  of  Masonry  in  Eng-
land.    In  1716,  we  learn  that  the  Chevalier  Ma?on  Ecossais,  and
still  higher  degrees  of  Masonry,  were  much  in  vogue  in  the  court  of
Prance.     The  refining  genius  of  the  French,  and  their  love  of  show,
made  the  humble  denominations  of  the  English  Brethren  disgusting,
and  their  passion  for  military  rank,  made  them  adapt  Freemasonry
to  the  same  scale  of  public  estimation,  and  invent  ranks  of  Ma?ons
Chevaliers,  ornamented  with  titles,  and  ribbands,  and  stars.     These
were  highly  relished  by  that  vain  people.   (Robison,  p.  29.)

14  All  the  sublime  degrees  of  Masonry  were  established  before  the
year  1776,  when  illuminism  first  made  its  appearance.

15  Preston  speaks  slightingly  of  these  innovations.     In  a  letter  to
the  Freemasons'  Magazine  (1794)  he  says — "  That  there  are  and
have  been  impostors,  who  have  introduced  modern  fanatical  inno-
vations under  the  sanction  of  secrecy,  to  deceive  the  credulous  and
mislead  the  unwary,  is  a  truth  beyond  contradiction ;  and  that  such
impostors    may   have    intruded    themselves  into   the  assemblies  of
Masons  may  be  also  true.     But  1  will  take  upon  me  to  say,  that
bueli  associations  are  unconnected  with  the  genuine  tenets  of  Ma-
sonry, which,  according  to  the  universal  system,  never  countenance


OF    FREEMASONRY.  9

Freemasonry,15  and  were  received  as  part  and  parcel
of  the  institution.16

Such  is  the  attachment  of  the  human  mind  to  dis-
tinction, and  so  great  is  the  propensity  to  innovation,
particularly  when  coupled  with  mystical  and  complex
forms,  and  splendour  of  display,  that  we  need  not
wonder  if  we  find  the  new  orders  and  degrees  in  high
request,  and  that  they  should  for  a  time  throw  ancient
symbolical  Masonry  into  the  shade.  Wonderful  reve-
lations and  sublime  discoveries  in  the  science  were
announced ;  and,  being  nobly  patronised,  new  theories
were  ultimately  engrafted  on  the  parent  stock,  until,
at  length,  having  passed  through  the  alembic  of  re-
peated trial  and  consideration,  they  settled  down  to
about  forty  degrees,17  which  are  practised  on  the  con-
deception,  nor  do  the  regular  patrons  of  the  Craft  ever  sanction
imposture."

16  An  accurate  and  excellent  writer  in  the  F.  Q.  11.  (vol.  v.  p.  32),
says — "  the  vast  number  of  grades,  orders,  and  rites  in  Prance,  is  a
fearful  lesson  to  the  Masonic  world ;  and  from  it  we  should  all  learn
to  live  in  brotherly  love  and  unity,  to  obey  cheerfully  all  constituted
authorities,  and  above  all,  to  avoid  those  internal  schisms  and  feuds,
which  have  caused  such  evils  in  a  neighbouring  land.    It  is  the  spirit
of  insubordination  which  produced  all  the  various  and  conflicting
orders  and  rites  in  France ;  and  similar  effects  have  followed  similar
causes  in  other  parts  of  Europe.     England  is  now  happily  free  from
any  such  dissentions,  and  long  may  she  continue   so,  and  be  the
temple  of  genuine  Masonry.     Under  a  wise  Masonic  government,
equally  averse  to  sanction  needless  innovation,  or  to  repress  useful
improvement,  our  Order  will  be  established  on  a  firmer  basis,  and
equally  honoured  by  the  initiated  and  the  profane."

17  There  are  systems  still  on  the  continent  which  include  many
more,  as  we  shall  see  during  the  progress  of  this  lecture  ;  and  I  have
before  me  a  list  of  nearly  one  thousand  degrees,  which  have  been,  or
are  now  practised,  under  one  or  other  denomination  of  Freemasonry.


1.0


H 1 STOR1 C  A  L    LAM)  M  A  RK  S


tinent  at  this  day,  under  the  sanction  of  the  several
governing  bodies,  as  I  shall  endeavour  to  explain.

It  will  be  interesting,  as  well  as  useful,  to  trace  the
progress  of  these  innovations.  The  sublime  degrees
are  said  to  have  been  practised  in  Scotland,  imme-
diately after  the  first  crusade  ; 18  but  owing  to  adverse
circumstances,  they  declined,19  and  would  have  been
altogether  lost,  if  a  Scottish  nobleman,  who  was  on  a
visit  to  France  in  1744,  had  not  re-established  them
in  a  Lodge  at  Bourdeaux.  It  will  be  needless  to  add,
that  this  account  is  fabulous,20  although  it  is  gravely

18  The  tradition  is,  that  in  1 150,  some  foreign  Masons,  under  t lie-
protection  of  Alexander  1 II.,  who  were  exiles  from  their  own  country,
built  the  abbey  of  Kilwinning.     They  established  a  Mason's  |,<M
and  kept  aloof  from  the  inhabitants.    From  this  primitive  Lodge  tin-
Order  in  Scotland  took  its  rise ;   "  and  the  rites,"  says  Laurie  (p.  51')),
"  continued  for  many  ages  in  their  simplicity,  long  after  tin  \  had
been  extinguished  in  the  continental  kingdoms."

19  Mr.  Palgrave,  in  his  llise  and  Progress  of  the  English  Comnion-
\\calth  (p.  157),  traces  the  Vehmic  Order  of  Westphalia  to  a  much
more  remote  period.     He  considers  it  as  "  the  original  jurisdiction
of  the  old  Saxons,  which  survived  the  subjugation  of  their  country.
The  singular  and  mystic  forms  of  initiation ;  the  system  of  enigmatical
phrases ;  the  use  of  the  signs  and  symbols  of  recognition,  may  pro-
bably be  ascribed  to  the  period  when  the  whole  system  was  united
to  the  worship  of  the  deities  of  vengeance  before  the  altars  of  Thor
and  Woden."

20  These  vague  traditions  are  numerous ;  but  fortunately  it  is  not
very  difficult  to  separate  truth  from  falsehood.     What   share  the
Templars  may  have  had  in  the  introduction  or  preservation  of  Craft
Masonry  is   another   question.     Archdeacon   Mant   says — "  These
knights  were  all  Freemasons;  from  some  of  the  Syrian  Christians,
who  had  yet  retained  the  mysteries  of  the  Craft,  they  received  their
initiation,  and  no  one  was  admitted  into  the  Templar's  society  before
he  had  been  prepared  by  reception  into  the  three  degrees  of  Masonry.
But  the  jealousy  of  the  Roman  pontiffs  of  anything  which  was  to  be


OF    FREEMASONRY".  11

asserted  by  the  Inspectors-general,  in  a  circular  agreed
to  by  the  Supreme  Council  assembled  at  Charleston  in
1802,  and  published  for  distribution  throughout  the
two  hemispheres.  And  it  is  doubtful  whether  there
be  any  degrees  which  are  capable  of  substantiating  a
just  claim  to  antiquity,  except  the  three  symbolical
ones ;  and  those  appear,  from  evidence  which  is  indis-
putable, to  have  been  in  existence  from  a  remote  and
unknown  period.21

kept  secret  from  them,  was  the  bar  to  this  motive  of  their  meeting-
being  avowed  ;  therefore,  under  the  protection  of  their  pious  charity
and  gallant  bearing,  they  were  enabled  to  continue  the  practice  of
their  mysterious  ceremonies  undisturbed.  The  fact  is  undisputed,
and  indeed  the  Templars  have  been  accused  of  Masonry,  and  Masons
taunted  with  their  descent  from  the  Knights.  We  glory  in  the  charge ;
we  are  proud  to  think  that  we  have  received  our  rites  through  the
hands  of  those  zealous  defenders  of  Christianity,  than  whom  a  more
noble  or  gallant  body  of  men  were  never  linked  together  by  the  bonds
of  brotherhood,  or  persecuted  by  the  bitterest  malignity  of  avarice
and  jealousy.  These  were  the  men  who,  returning  from  the  Holy
Land,  brought  with  them  the  true  principles  of  Freemasonry,  and
patronising  the  operative  branch  also,  re-established  the  Order  on  its
true  basis.  It  is  not  intended  to  assert  that  there  was  no  speculative
Masonry  in  Europe  before  this  time,  the  contrary  has  been  expressly
declared ;  but  the  Templars  restored,  in  many  particulars,  parts  of
the  ceremonies,  which  had  become  corrupted,  to  their  proper  form."
(Pocket  Comp.  p.  54.)

21  The  Abbe  Grandidier  has  preserved,  following  the  registry  of  a
list  of  Masons  at  Strasburgh,  valuable  information  relating  to  the
association  which  erected  the  cathedral  in  that  city.  This  edifice,
one  of  the  master-pieces  of  Gothic  architecture,  was  commenced  in
1277,  under  the  direction  of  Hervin  of  Steinbach,  and  was  not  com-
pleted till  1439.  The  Masons  who  took  part  in  the  erection  of  this
building  consisted  of  Masters,  Fellowcrafts,  and  Apprentices.  The
place  where  they  assembled  was  called  Hulte  (Lodge),  which  has
the  same  meaning  as  the  Latin  word  maceria.  They  made  an  em-


12


HISTORICAL    LANDMARKS


The  only  high  degree  to  which  an  early  date  can
be  safely  assigned,22  is  the  royal  order  of  H.  R.  D.  M.,
founded  by  Robert  Bruce,  in  1314;  and  very  little
is  known  about  it  out  of  Scotland.  Its  history  in
brief  refers  to  the  dissolution  of  the  Order  of  the
Temple.23  Some  of  these  persecuted  individuals24  took

blematic  use  of  the  utensils  of  their  profession,  and  carried  them  on
their  standards.  The  principal  of  these  were  the  square,  the  com-
passes, and  the  level.  They  recognized  each  other  by  [  ovate  signs,
and  they  called  the  sign  by  which  they  knew  each  other,  by  word,
d<is  ivortzeichen,  and  the  salute,  der  gruss.  The  Apprentices,  the
Craftsmen,  and  Masons,  were  received  with  ceremonies,  which  were
kept  secret.  They  admitted,  as  afiiliatcd  Brethren,  persons  who  did
not  belong  to  the  trade  of  masons  ;  and  they  used  the  famous  Masonic

symbol   <$% .  (Clavcl.  Ma9-  Pittoresque,  p.  86.)

22  It  is,  however,  said  that  Masonry  was  first  established  at  Kil-
winning.     I  find  in  the  notes  to  a  poem,  published  at  Paris  in  1820,
entitled,   "  La  Magonncrie,"  that   "  Jacques,  Lord  Stewart,  recut
dans  sa  loge  a  Kilwiu  en  Ecosse,  in  1286,  le  Comptes  de  Glocester
et  Ulster,  Tun  Anglois,  1'autre  Irlandois."    And  it  is  further  asserted
that  there  are  only  four  original  Encampments  in  England  at  the
present  day ;  these  are  at  Bristol,  London,  Bath,  and  York.     They
are  termed  Encampments  of  Baldwin,  and  profess  the  association  to
have  been  established  from  time  immemorial,  thus  claiming  a  very
high  antiquity ;  indeed,  they  consider  it  to  be  coeval  with  the  return
of  Richard  Cour  de  Lion  from  the  Holy  Land,  A.  D.  1195.

23  According  to  the  testimony  of  Baron  Westerode,  who  wrote  in
1784,  this  is  not  the  most  ancient  of  the  high  degrees  of  Masonry.
He  says  that  the  Rose  Croix  was  instituted  amongst  the  Templars
in   Palestine,   A.  D.   1188;  and  that  Prince   Edward,   the   son  of
Henry  III.,  was  admitted  into  the  Order  by  Raymond  Lulle,  in
1196.      Its    founder,    he    says,    was   an    Egyptian   priest   named
Ormesius,  after  he  had  been  converted  to  Christianity.     (See  the
whole  account  in  the  Acta  Latomorum,  vol.  i.  p.  336.)

24  A  member  of  the  Scottish  Order  of  the  Temple   writes  to  me
thus  :   "  The  Knight  Templars  were  not  Freemasons  ;  nor  was  there


OY    FREEMASONRV.  13

refuge  in  Scotland,  and  placed  themselves  under  the
protection  of  Robert  Bruce,25  and  assisted  him  at  the
battle  of  Bannock  Burn,26  which  was  fought  on  St.

any  attempt  to  fraternize  with  them  till  after  the  reformation  in
Scotland,  A.D.  156-80,  when  a  few  of  the  disbanded  esquires,  &c.,
got  up  an  Encampment  near  Stirling ;  and  these,  being  under  no
head,  and  initiating  whom  they  pleased,  the  system  of  Masonic  Tem-
plarism  sprang  up.  If  they  ever  had  the  true  ritual,  it  soon  under-
went many  variations ;  so  that  scarcely  two  Masonic  Encampments
practised  the  same  ceremonies.  I  mentioned  to  you,  I  think,  in  my
last  letter,  that  the  Chivalric  Order  of  the  Temple  had  always  been
kept  up  in  Scotland.  As  in  the  days  of  old,  there  can  be  but  one
Grand  Master  of  the  Order  in  the  world  at  the  same  time.  How  the
Masonic  Templars  ever  dreamed  of  electing  a  Grand  Master  is  to  us
incomprehensible.  They  may  as  well  make  a  Masonic  Order  of  the
Bath  or  Garter,  and  elect  a  sovereign  at  its  head."

25  In  England  and  Ireland,  as  the  Concilia   Magna3  Britannia)
shews,  the  Templars  were  put  down,  and  the  Knights  compelled  to
enter  the  preccptories  of  their  opponents,  the  Knights  of  St.  John,
as  dependants.     In  Scotland,  Edward,  who  had  overrun  the  country
at  the  time,  endeavoured  to  pursue  the  same  course ;  but,  on  sum-
moning the  Knights  to  appear,  only  two,  Walter  de  Clifton,  the
Grand  Preceptor,  and  another,  came  forward.    On  their  examination,
they  confessed  that  all  the  rest  had  fled ;  and,  as  Bruce  was  advancing
with  his  army  to  meet  Edward,  nothing  further  was  done.     The
Templars  being  debarred  from  taking  refuge  either  in  England  or
Ireland,  had  no  alternative  but  to  join  Bruce,  and  give  their  active
support  to  his  cause.     Thus,  after  the  battle  of  Bannock  Burn,  in
1314,  Bruce  granted  a  charter  of  lands  to  Walter  de  Clifton,  as
Grand  Master  of  the  Templars,  for  the  assistance  which  they  ren-
dered on  that  occasion.     Hence  the  lloyal  Order  of  H.  R.  D.  M.
was  frequently  practised  under  the  name  of  Templary.

26  There  is  another  version  of  this  tale  which  is  altogether  fabulous.
"  It  is  feigned  that  a  certain  Templar  called  Aumont,  and  seven  others,
disguised  as  mechanics,  or  operative  masons,  fled  into  Scotland,  and
there,  secretly,  and  under   another  name,  founded  another  Order ;
and,  to  preserve  as  much  as  possible  the  ancient  name  of  Templars.


14


HISTORICAL    LANDMARKS


John's  day,  13145  After  this  battle,  the  Royal  Order
was  founded;28  and  from  the  fact  of  the  Templars
having  contributed  to  the  victory,29  and  the  subse-
quent grants  to  their  Order  by  King  Robert,  for

as  well  as  to  retain  the  remembrance  of  the  clothing  of  masons,  in
which  disguise  they  had  fled,  they  chose  the  name  of  Masons,  in  con-
junction with  the  word  Franc ;  thus  forming  Franc  or  Free  Masonry.
They  preserved  their  bond  of  union,  and  formed  themselves  into  a
society,  which,  instead  of  conquering  or  rebuilding  the  temple  of
Jerusalem,  shoidd  found  symbolical  temples,  consecrated  to  virtue,
truth,  and  light,  to  the  honour  of  the  Great  Architect  of  Heaven  and
Earth."  (F.  Q.  R.  vol.  i.  N.  S.  p.  501.)

27  Has  this  circumstance  any  reference  to  St.  John's  Masonrv  ':

28  Of  the  two  steps  of  which  it  consists  "  the  latter  only  is  an
Order  of  Knighthood.    It  is  besides  the  oldest  and  perhaps  the  only
genuine  Order  of  Masonic  Knighthood  ;  as  in  it  there  is  an  intimate
relation  between  the  sword  and  the  trowel,  which  others  try  to  shun.
There  is  a  peculiarity  about  this  Order  which  distinguishes  it  from
nearly  all  other  Masonic  Orders  of  Knighthood ; — no  Lodge  or
Chapter,  in  short,  no  charter  is  legal  unless  emanating  from  the
Grand  Lodge  in  Scotland ;    or  unless  the  Grand  Master,    or  the
Deputy  Grand  Master  of  the  whole  Order,  himself  grants  one,  or
empowers,  under  very  peculiar  circumstances,  a  Provincial  Grand
Master  to  do  it  for  him."  (F.  Q.  R.  ut  supra,  p.  496.)

29  I  find  the  following  hieroglyphic  of  this  event  in  an  old  Masonic
publication,  which  is  thus  noticed  by
Thory:—  "A.  D.  1314.— Robert  Bruce,
roi  d'Ecosse  sous  le  nom  de  Robert  ler
rree,  le  24  juin,  apres  la  bataille  de  Ban-
nockburn,  1'Ordre  de  St.  Andredu  Char-
don,  auquel  fut  uni,  depuis,  celui  de  H.
D.  M.  en  faveur  des  Magons  Ecossais
qui  faisaient  partie  des  trente  mille  hom-
ines avec  lesquels  il  avait  battu  une  arrnee
de  cent  mille  Anglais.  II  se  reserve  a
perpetuity,  pour  lui  et  ses  successeurse,
le  titre  de  Grand  Maitre.


II   fond,   la    ROY-OBD-ICRrDM^LTP-PALEST
Grande  Loge  Royale  del'Ordre  de  H.  D.  M.  a  Kilvvinnin^."  (Acta.  Latom.
vol.  i.  p.  6.)


OK    FREEMASONRY.  15

which  they  were  formally  excommunicated  by  the
church,30  it  has  by  some  persons  been  identified  with
that  ancient  military  Order.31  But  there  are  sound
reasons  for  believing  that  the  two  systems  were  uncon-
nected with  each  other.32

The  Royal  Order  of  H.  R.  D.  M.  had  formerly  its
chief  seat  at  Kilwinning,   and  there  is  every  reason

30  Instead  of  the  church,  however,  the  author  of  the  Manuel  de
1' Order  de  Temple  asserts,  that  the  excommunication  was  fulminated
by  Larmenius,  the  reputed  Grand  Master  of  the  Order,  because  they
assisted Bruce,  and  "bathed  their  swords  in  bloody  Bannock  Burn."
"  Ego  denique,"  says  the  document  "  fratrum  supremi  conventus
decreto,  e  supremo  mihi  commissa  auctorilate,  Scotos  Templarios
ordinis  desertores,  anathemate  percusses,  illosque  et  fratres   sancti
Johannis  Hyerosolymse,  dominiorum  militise  spoliatores,  quibus  apud
deum  misericordia,  extra  girum  Templi,  nunc  et  in  futurum,  volo,
dico,  jubro."    The  very  existence,  however,  of  Larmenius  is  doubted
by  some  ;  while  others  assert,  that  "  John  Mark  Larmenio  secretly
succeeded  the  Grand  Master  of  the  Templars,  the  unfortunate  James
de  Molay,  who  requested  him  to  accept  the  dignity.    In  concert  with
some  knights  who  had  escaped  the  proscription,  he  invented  different
signs  of  words  and  actions,  in  order  to  recognize  and  receive  knights
into  the  Order  secretly,  and  by  means  of  a  novitiate,  during  which
they  were  to  be  kept  in  ignorance  of  the  object  of  the  association,
which  was  to  preserve  the  Order,  to  re-establish  it  in  its  former
glory,    and  to  revenge  the  deaths  of  the  Grand  Master  and  the
knights  who  perished  with  him ;  and  when  the  qualities  of  the  new
member  w7ere  perfectly  well  known,  the  grand  secret  was  to  be  con-
fided to  him,  after  a  most  formidable  oath."     (Llorente,  Hist.  Eng.
c,  41.)

31  Apres  la  mort  de  Jacques  de  Molay,  des  Templiers  Ecossais
itant   devenue   apostats,   a  1'instigation  du  Roi   Robert  Bruce,  se
rangerent   sous  les  bannieres   d'un  norvelle   ordre  institue  par  ce
prince,   et  dans  lequel  les  receptions  furent  basees   sur  celles  de
1'Ordre  du  Temple.   (Manuel  de  1'Ordre  du  Temple.)

32  The  Grand  Conclave  of  the  Scottish  Order  of  the  Temple,  in  its
Statutes,  recently  published,  tells  us,  that  "the  institution  of  the


16


ISTORICAL    LANDMARKS


to  think  that  it  and  St.  John's  Masonry  were  then
governed  by  the  same  Grand  Lodge.  But  during  the
sixteenth  and  seventeenth  centuries,  Masonry  was  at  a
very  low  ebb  in  Scotland,  and  it  was  with  the  greatest
difficulty  that  St.  John's  Masonry  was  preserved.33  The
Grand  Chapter  of  H.  R.  D.  M.  resumed  its  functions
about  the  middle  of  the  last  century,  at  Edinburgh ;
and  in  order  to  preserve  a  marked  distinction  between
the  Royal  Order  and  Craft  Masonry,  which  had  formed
a  Grand  Lodge  there  in  1736,  the  former  confined
itself  solely  to  the  two  degrees  of  H.  R.  D.  M.  and
R.  S.  Y.  C.  S.

The  first  of  these  degrees  may  not  have  been
originally  Masonic.  It  appears  rather  to  have  been
connected  with  the  ceremonies  of  the  early  Christians.34

Royal  Order  by  King  Robert,  after  the  battle  of  Bannock  Burn,  lias
led  some  historians  to  suppose  that  the  Templars  were  identified
with  that  body;  and  when  we  consider  that  for  centuries  that  Order
was  connected  with  the  higher  grades  of  Masonry,  which  in  our  own
day  have  been  recognized  by  the  Templars,  it  is  not  surprising  to
find  that  this  error  has  been  very  prevalent.  M.  Thory,  in  his  Acta
Latomorum,  gives  an  account  of  the  Royal  Order,  otherwise  called
the  Order  of  H.  D.  M.  of  Kilwinning,  but  does  not  attempt  in  any
way  to  combine  it  with  the  Temple.  Indeed,  no  such  amalgamation
ever  took  place."

33  The  Royal  Order,  or  at  least  its  Grand  Lodge,  had  ceased  its
functions ;  and  had  there  not  been  a  Provincial  Grand  Lodge  in
England  in  a  state  of  activity,  the  Order  must  have  been  annihilated.

34  These  ceremonies  are  believed  to  have  been  introduced  by  the
Culdees,  (Cultores  dei),  in  the  second  or  third  centuries  of  the  Chris-
tian era.     Operative  masonry  existed  in  Britain  at  that  era,  as  is
evidenced  by  the  building  of  a  church  at  York,  and  a  monastery  at
lona  ;  and  it  was  in  active  operation  before  the  twelfth  century.    The
monks  brought  by  King  David  into  Scotland  were  the  Tyronenses,  a
branch  of  the  Benedictines,  who  not  only  patronized  the  arts  and


OF    FREEMASON II Y.  17

The  second  degree,  which  was  termed  the  Grade  de  la
Tour,  is  honorary ;  the  tradition  being  that  it  was  an
order  of  knighthood,  conferred  on  the  field  of  Bannock
Burn,  and  subsequently  in  Grand  Lodge,  opened  in
the  abbey  of  Kilwinning.35  It  is  purely  Scotch,  and
given  to  Scottish  Masons  only;36  or  to  those  who
become  so  by  affiliation,  on  being  registered  in  the

sciences,  but  retained  among  them  in  the  monastery  various  kinds  of
craftsmen.  In  this  way  a  connection  seems  to  have  been  formed
between  the  ceremonies  of  the  operative  masons  and  the  ceremonies
first  introduced  by  the  Culdees,  and  the  result  seems  to  have  been
the  Masonic  degree  of  H.  E.  D.  M. ;  which  was  instituted  partly  to
give  a  Christian  explanation  to  Craft  Masonry ;  for  the  ceremonies
of  reception  bear  some  resemblance  to  the  miracle  plays  or  mysteries
prevalent  at  that  early  period  in  the  Eomish  church.  As  the  candi-
date was  initiated  by  the  lecture,  this  degree  appears  to  have  been
formed  on  a  different  model  from  those  of  the  Knights  of  the  East,
Eose  Croix,  &c.,  which  sprang  up  in  the  last  century,  Before  the
institution  of  the  Order  of  H.  E.  D.  M.,  no  lecture,  beyond  a  few
moral  observations  on  the  working  tools  of  the  Craft,  was  ever  ten-
dered ;  and  the  same  practice  is  still  generally  followed  in  Scotland.

35  It  is  not  supposed  that  Bruce  gave  any  secret  signs  or  tokens
along  with  the  accolade ;  these,  with  the  lecture,  were  probably
added  by  the  Masonic  Fraternity  shortly  afterwards ;  the  degree  of
Knighthood  being  the  highest  step  at  which  a  Mason  could  arrive.
The  rank  of  E.  S.  Y.  C.  S.  terminated  his  career,  and  qualified  him,
ever  afterwards,  as  a  member  of  the  Grand  Chapter.

3(5  When  a  branch  of  the  Order  is  established  in  any  other  country,
the  Chapters  are  permitted  to  grant  the  degree  of  H.  E.  D.  M.  only  ;
and  these  are  placed  under  the  superintendance  of  a  Prov.  G.  Lodge,
which  of  itself  is  not  empowered  to  confer  any  degree  whatever.  The
P.  G.  Master,  however,  receives  the  power,  with  proper  assistance,
of  conferring  the  honour  of  the  E.  S.  Y.  C.  S.  within  his  province ;
and  a  fee  is  paid  for  each  degree  to  the  head  of  the  Order  in  Scotland,
for  registration.

VOL.  II.  C


18  HISTORICAL    LANDMARKS

books  of  the  Grand  Chapter.37  But  no  one  is  regarded
as  a  lawful  Brother  of  H.  R.  D.  M-,  or  Knight  of
R.  S.  Y.  C.  S.,  until  he  be  acknowledged  by  the  Grand
Chapter  of  Scotland.38

The  three  symbolical  degrees  of  Masonry  were  in
active  operation39  throughout  the  whole  of  the  fifteenth
and  sixteenth  centuries;40  and  the  evidence  on  which
this  fact  is  based  is  incontrovertible.41  In  Germany

37  A  legal  independent  Lodge  or  Chapter  of  the  Order  is  an  im-
possibility.    All  admissions  at  such  meetings  arc  irregular,  and  can
never  be  acknowledged.

38  The  lloyal  Order  of  Scotch  Masonry  takes  no  notice  of  the  lloyal
Arch  degrees,  which  are  a  mere  sequel  to  the  Master  Mason's  degree  ;
and  hence  it  is  concluded  that  they  were  not  in  existence  when  the
lloyal  Order  was  established.

39  A  Lodge  of  Craft  Masonry  was  held  at  Canterbury  in  1 12(.>,
under  Grand  Master  Chichely,  as  appears  from  the  latin  register  of
William  Molart,  Prior  of  Canterbury,  in  manuscript,  (p.  88),  in  which
are  named  Thomas  Stapylton,  the  Master ;   John  Moms,  Gustos,  or
Warden ;  with  fifteen  Fellowcrafts,  and  three  Entered  Apprentices,
all  there  named.

40  Anderson  says,  "  King  James  I.,  who  had  received  his  education
in  England,  proved  the  best  King  of  Scotland,  the  patron  of  the
learned,  and  countenanced  the  Lodges  with  his  presence,  (A.D,  1424,)
as  the  lloyal  Grand  Master.     According  to  the  traditions  of  Scottish
Masonry,  he  settled  a  revenue   of  4>L  Scots.,  to  be  paid  by  every
Master  Mason  in  Scotland  to  a  Grand  Master  chosen  by  the  Grand
Lodge,  and  approved  by  the  crown,  one  nobly  born,  or  an  eminent
clergyman,  who  had  his  deputies  in  cities  and  counties  ;  and  every
new  Brother,  at  entrance,  paid  him  also  a  fee."  (Const,  p.  126.)

41  The  Brotherhood  of   Strasburgh   became   famous   throughout
Germany  in  the  fifteenth  century.     All  other  Lodges  acknowledged
their  superiority,  and  it  received,  in  consequence,  the  title  of  Haupte
Hiitte,  or  Grand  Lodge.     The  Lodges  under  her  jurisdiction  were
those  of  Suabia,  Hesse,  Bavaria,  Franconia,  Saxony,  Thuringia,  and


OF    FREEMASONRY.  19

and  other  countries,  Grand  Lodges  were  formed,  and
the  Brethren  governed  on  constitutional  principles.42
In  1519,  we  find  mention  of  a  Lodge  at  Amsterdam,43
and,  a  few  years  later,  there  were  nineteen  Grand
Lodges  in  Europe  ;44  and,  although  no  records  exist  to

the  countries  bordering  on  the  Moselle.  The  Masters  of  these
Lodges  assembled  at  Ratisbon,  in  1459,  and  drew  up  the  act  of
confraternity,  which  established,  as  the  sole  and  perpetual  Grand
Master  of  Germany,  the  head  of  the  cathedral  at  Strasburgh.  The
Emperor  Maximilian  confirmed  this  act,  in  1498  ;  and  the  diploma
was  renewed  by  Charles  V.,  Ferdinand,  and  their  successors.  Another
Grand  Lodge,  which  existed  in  Vienna,  and  from  which  sprung  the
Lodges  of  Hungary  and  Styria,  as  well  as  the  Grand  Lodge  of  Zurich,
which  had  in  allegiance  to  it  all  the  Lodges  of  Switzerland,  had
recourse  to  the  Brethren  at  Strasburgh  in  all  cases  of  a  grave  and
doubtful  nature.  It  possessed  an  independent  and  sovereign  juris-
diction ;  and  judged,  without  the  power  of  appeal,  all  causes  which
were  brought  before  it,  according  to  the  statutes  of  the  society,  which
were  revised  and  printed  in  1563.  (Clavel,  ut  supra.)

42  In  Switzerland,  however  the  Order  was  proscribed  before  the
above  period;   for  the  Brethren  having  been  so  imprudent  as  to
meddle  with  matters  of  state,  their  Grand  Master,  Stephen  Eulzis-
lorfer,  was  summoned  before  the  Diet ;  and,  as  he  did  not  appear,  the
system  was  prohibited  throughout  the  Helvetic  confederation.

43  The  Prince  Frederick  of  Nassau,  who  was  Grand  Master  in
Holland,  in  1819,  procured,  under  the  certificates  of  the  four  Lodges
of  La  Haye  and  Delft,  a  document  in  English  professing  to  be  a
proces  verbal  of  a  Lodge  of  Freemasons  existing  at  La  Have,  in  1637,
under  the  name  of  "  The  Valley  of  Peace ; "  and  it  gave  an  account
of  the  establishment  of  another  Lodge,  of  the  same  name,  at  Amster-
dam, on  the  8th  of  May,  1519.  (Clavel,  p.  124.)

44  This  fact  is  recorded  in  a  curious  document  called  the  Charter
of  Cologne.     The  Lodges  were  holden  at  the  following  places  : —

London,  governed  by  Lord  Carlton.

Edinburgh,  John  Bruce.

Vienna,  Fs.  Yon  I 'pun.

c  2


20


HISTORICAL    LANDMARKS


shew  the  number  of  private  Lodges  under  each  banner,45
we  have  every  reason  to  believe  that  the  Craft  was  in
a  flourishing  state.

About  the  year  1560,  the  Preceptor  of  the  Hos-
pitallers, with  several  of  the  knights,  who,  like
himself,  had  become  Presbyterians,  assisted  by  some
esquires  and  serving  Brethren,  met  and  formed  a
Chapter  at  Stirling.46  They  assembled  for  initiation  in


Amsterdam,

Paris,

Lyons,

Francfort,

Hamburg,

Antwerp,

Rotterdam,

Madrid,

Venice,

Ghent,

Konigsberg,

Brussels,

Dantzig,

Middleburg,

Bremen,


governed  by


represented  by


Cornelius  Banning.

De  Colligni.

Virieux.

John  Scroeder.

Hoffman.

Jacobus  Preposiuis.

A.  Nobel.

Ignatius  de  la  Torre.
Doris.

Jacob  Uttenhoven.

Falek.

Nicholas  Van  Noot.

Philip  Melancthon.

Huissen.

Woomer  Abel.

Harmanus.


Cologne,
Why  are  Strasburgh  and  its  dependencies  omitted  in  the  above  list  ?

45  This  dearth  of  authoritative  records  is  unfortunate,  although  it
arises  out  of  the  security  which  is  one  of  the  fundamental  principles
of  the  Order.     Well  might  an  eminent  Mason  exclaim  :    "He  who
collects  materials  for  a  history  of  this  society,  acts  a  more  important
part  than  all  the  monkish  chroniclers  put  together,  who  have  left  so
many  journals  of  the  pious  inactivity  of  their  brethren  ! "

46  During  the  fourteenth  century,  the   Templars   had   come  to
honourable  terms  with  the  Hospitallers,  and  lived  together  in  the
same  preceptories.     Various  royal  charters  mention  this  fact,  and
speak  of  the  two  Orders  in  distinct  terms.     Private  charters  of  the


OF    FREEMASONRY.  '21

the  adjoining  abbey  of  Cambus  Kenneth,47  arid  sub-
sequently connected  themselves  with  a  Lodge  of  Free-
masons at  Stirling,48  which  was  patronized  by  King

fifteenth  and  sixteenth  centuries  mention  the  Templars  and  the
Templar  lands,  without  any  allusion  to  the  Hospitallers;  so  that,
although  the  two  bodies  lived  together,  some  at  least  of  their  lands
were  not  in  common.  At  the  Reformation  in  Scotland,  the  existing
Preceptor  embracing  Protestantism,  resigned  the  whole  property
belonging  both  to  the  'Hospital  and  the  Temple,  and  received  from
the  crown  a  charter  conveying  them  all  to  himself  under  the  title  of
Lord  Torphichen.  The  Templart  portion  of  the  preceptory,  who
adhered  to  the  Roman  Catholic  religion,  placed  themselves  under
David  Seton,  nephew  to  Lord  Seton ;  and,  although  they  occasionally
admitted  Protestants  into  the  Order,  yet  it  continued  in  the  hands  of
the  high  church  party  till  the  end  of  the  last  century.  The  Grand
Master,  Viscount  Dundee,  was  slain  at  Killikrankie,  with  the  Grand
Cross  of  the  Order  on  his  person.  Prince  Charles  Edward  Stuart
was  admitted  at  Holyrood,  September  24,  1745,  and  became  the
Grand  Master,  which  office  he  held  till  his  death,  when  Mr.  Oiiphant,
of  Bachiltar,  was  elected,  who  died  in  1795.

47  It  may  be  observed  here,  that  an  old  Scottish  tradition  relates
that,  although  the  abbeys  were  the  stated  places  of  initiation,  yet,  in
fine  weather,  the  Fraternity  usually  assembled  on  the  summit  of  the
nearest  hill,  especially  on  public  occasions,  and  marched  in  procession
to  the  places  where  they  were  to  dine.

48  The  present  Stirling  Masons  assert  that  their  predecessors  in
the  Lodge  had  an  old  charter  from  King  David  I.  of  Scotland  ;  but
that  it  was  not  to  be  found  in  1736,  when  the  Grand  Lodge  of
Scotland  was  formed.     They  have,  however,  a  copy  of  what  they
believe  to  have  been  the  original  charter.     The  language  appears  to
have  been  modernized.     In  the  preamble  it  alludes  to  a  number  of
unskilled  workmen  that  had  come  "  to  work  at  our  abbey  of  Cambus
Kenneth,  and  ither  parts  o'  this  town  and  neabourhood ;  and  also
have  erected  Lodges  contrary  to  the  rules  of  Masonry ;  and  being
desirous  of  putting  a  stop  to  such  unskilled,"  &c.     One  clause  is
curious.      "  Item.     And  that  you  mack,  instruck,  and  teach   the


22  HISTORICAL    LANDMARKS

James.49  It  is  probable  that  the  whole  of  the  knights
had  become  Masons,  but  there  appears  to  be  some
doubts  whether  they  practised  the  symbolical  Masonry
of  the  present  day.60  And  it  is  also  a  question  which
does  not  admit  of  a  demonstrative  solution,  whether
the  Templars  of  the  crusades  were  Brothers  of  the

Masonry  of  St.  John  in  all  its  points  and  secrets,  and  as  like  belted
knights,  and  cross  legged  knights  with  armour,  for  the  care  and
keeping  of  our  holy  religion ;  and  all  times  of  meeting  se  there  be  no
scurrility  or  banning  among  you  in  the  Lodge ;  and  such  offending
shall  forfeit  and  pay  five  pounds  S?ots. ;  the  one  half  to  the  Lodge,
the  other  half  to  the  altar  of  St.  Mary's  to  say  mass  for  their  soul.'
It  purports  to  be  signed  at  Edinburgh,  5th  March,  1147,  before
these  witnesses — "  Prince  Henry,  my  son ;  Earle  John  of  Monteith  ;
Earle  Duncan  of  Lennox ;  Herbert,  Bishop  of  Glasgow ;  Robert,
Bishop  of  St.  Andrews."

49  The  Masons  had  been  accused  for  many  years,  as  the  Brethren
themselves  assembled  at  Cologne  testify  in  1535,  of  various  misde-
meanours ;  and  they  enter  seriously  on  their  justification,  not  only  by
a  prompt  denial,  but  by  a  succint  account  of  the  true  design  of  the
Order.  (See  F.  Q.  K,  1841,  p.  290  )

50  Barruel,  however,  expressly  asserts  that  the  whole  system  of
Masonry  was   derived  from  the  Templars.     "  The  whole  of  your
school,  and  all  your  Lodges,"  says  he,  "  descend  from  the  Templars.
After  the  extinction  of  their  Order,  a  certain  number  of  criminal
knights,  who  had  escaped  the  general  proscription,  formed  a  body  to
perpetuate  their  frightful  mysteries.     They  formed  adepts  who  were
to  perpetuate  and  transmit  from  generation  to  generation  the  same
mysteries  of  initiation,  the  same  oaths,  &c.     These  mysteries  have
descended  to  you,  (Freemasons,)  and  you  perpetuate  their  impiety,
their  oaths,  and  hatred.     Such  is  your  origin.     Length  of  time,  the
manners  of  each  age,  may  have  varied  some  of  your  signs,  and  of
your  shocking  systems  ;  but  the  essence  is  the  same,  and  the  plots
are  similar.     You  would  not  think  it,  but  every  thing  betrayed  your
forefathers,  and  every  thing  betrays  their  progeny."    (History  of
Jacobinism,  vol.  ii.  p.  378.)


OF    FREEMASONRY.  23

Masonic  Order.51  Nor  can  I  learn  when  the  Stirling
Templars  laid  down  the  sword,  and  put  on  aprons.52
It  is  clear,  however,  that  they  were  commonly  known
by  the  name  of  "Cross  legged  Masons ;"  but  this
might  be  because  they  were  a  secret  society,53  and
members  of  the  Stirling  Lodge.  It  is  thought  that  the
Masonic  Templars  of  England54  and  Ireland55  sprang

n  A  talented  living  Brother  is  persuaded  that  the  Templar's  Order
has  been  preserved  in  the  system  of  Freemasonry  from  the  period  of
its  proscription.  These  are  his  words  :  "  I  am  fully  convinced  that
the  Order  of  the  Templars  was  received  by  them,  (the  Masons,)  and
to  our  days  preserved,  with  its  constitution,  ceremonials,  and  titles,
as  a  Christian  Order.  This  is  well  attested  by  the  Grand  Lodge  of
Kilwinning,  and  several  Conclaves  established  in  Scotland,  England,
Ireland,  and  particularly  in  France."  (Husenbeth's  Essay,  in  the
F.  Q.  K,  1839,  p.  29.)

52  A  singular  coincidence  is  recorded  by  Clavel,  (p.  355,)  which
appears  to  give  a  colour  to  the  hypothesis  which  assimilates  Tem-
plarism  with  Freemasonry.    He  says  that,  in  the  seventeenth  century,
there  was  discovered  in  Germany,  within  the  grave  of  a  Templar,
who  died  before  the  dissolution  of  the  Order,  a  stone  inscribed  with
sundry  diagrams  connected  with  Freemasonry,  viz.,  the  square  and
compasses ;  the  pentalpha ;  the  celestial  sphere  ;  a  star  of  five  points,
and  several  other  stars.     The  Masonic  $  is  also  found  on  Templar
monuments.

53  The  design  of  Freemasonry,  as  declared  in  1535,  had  "  no  other
object  than  to  be  benevolent  without  ostentation  ;  and  without  turn-
ing aside  from  the  straight  path  of  duty,  to  persevere  in  endeavouring
to  improve  our  understanding."   (Charter  of  Cologne.)

54  In  the  Statutes  of  the  Order  of  the  Temple,  promulgated  in  the
last  century,  five  degrees  only  were  allowed.     1,  Adepts  of  the  great
black  eagle  of  St.  John ;  2,  Eastern  Adepts ;  3,  Adepts ;  4,  Secret
Initiates ;  5,  Initiates.

63  The  priestly  Order  of  the  Temple  is  still  much  practised  about
Belfast,  and  was  at  one  time  well  known  in  England.  I  suspect  it
was  the  highest  of  Baron  Hunde's  seven  degrees,  composed  for  the


24

from  this  primitive  body,56  although  it  is  not  quite  clear
whether  they  elected  a  Grand  Prior,  or  held  a  Gravid
Conclave,  and  granted  charters.  But  it  is  quite  certain
that,  whenever  a  sufficient  number  could  be  assembled,
(never  less  than  nine,)  they  formed  themselves  into
a  Chapter,  and  practised  their  ceremonies  as  Masonic
Templars.

If  we  survey  Freemasonry  as  it  existed  in  the  early
part  of  the  seventeenth  century,  we  shall  find  it  to  con-
sist of  three  degrees  only,  and  them  chiefly  operative:"57

Lodge  of  Strict  Observance,  In  the  north  of  England,  and  at  Bristol,
it  is  amalgamated  with  the  Rose  Croix ;  a  degree  practised  there  and
at  Newcastle.  It  differs,  however,  not  only  inter  se,  but  also  in
many  particulars  from  the  Rose  Croix  of  France.

56  The  French  treat  Templarism  as  a  cosmopolite  Order,    and
divide  it  into  two  general  classes,  1'Ordre  du  Temple,  and  1'Ordre  d'
Orient ;  the  latter  originating  the  former.     Egypt  was  the  cradle  of
the  Order  of  the  East ;  its  chiefs  being  priests  and  legislators,  and
its  occult  rites  being  carefully  withheld  from  the  profane.    They  were
indeed  allowed  to  see  the  emblems,  but  remained  perfectly  ignorant
of  their  interpretation.    Moses  and  Aaron,  having  been  initiated,  are
said  to  have  adopted  the  mysterious  arrangements  of  Egypt,  in
classing  the  Levitical  priesthood.     From  this  source  the  continental
Masons  trace  this  Order  through  the  two  St.  Johns  to  the  crusades ;
and  make  Larmenius  the  link  to  connect  the  ancient  Grand  Masters
of  the  Temple  with  those  of  the  modern  rite  practised  among  them-
selves.    In  conformity  with  this  principle,  they  affirm  that  "  the
Order  of  the  Temple  has  never  ceased  to  exist  in  France,  under  the
government  of  successive  Grand  Masters,  who  have  added  a  lustre
to  the-  institution  by  their  virtues  and  exalted  rank."

57  In  the  middle  ages,  Masonry  was  conducted  by  operative  men,
although  the  abstract  principles  of  speculative  Masonry  were  dilated
on  in  the  Lodges.     A  curious  legend  is  preserved  respecting  the
erection  of  Roslyn  chapel,  which  may  refer  to  the  third  degree.     I
extract  it  from  Willis's  Pencillings  by  the  Way.    "  The  master  mason


OF    FREEMASONRY.  25

In  our  own  country  we  search  in  vain  for  evidence  of  a
Lodge  of  pure  speculative  Masonry.58  The  operative
Lodges59  preserved  and  transmitted  our  secrets,60  taught
morality  and  theoretical  science,  and  received  amongst
their  members  kings,  peers,  and  prelates,  who  were

of  this  edifice,  meeting  with  some  difficulties  in  the  execution  of  his
design,  found  it  necessary  to  go  to  Borne  for  information ;  during
which  time  his  apprentice  earned  on  the  work,  and  even  executed
some  parts  concerning  which  his  master  had  been  most  doubtful ;
particularly  the  fine  fluted  column,  ornamented  with  wreaths  of  foliage
and  flowers  twisting  spirally  around  it.  The  master,  on  his  return,
stung  with  envy  at  this  proof  of  the  superior  abilities  of  his  apprentice,
slew  him  by  a  blow  of  his  hammer.  The  whole  interior  of  the  chapel
is  excessively  rich.  The  roof,  capitals,  keystones,  and  architraves  are
covered  with  sculptures.  On  the  architrave  adjoining  the  appren-
tice's pillar,  is  engraved  the  sententious  inscription,  '  forte  est  vinum  ;
fortior  est  rex  ;  fortiores  sunt  inulieres ;  super  omnia  vincit  veritas.' '
This  inscription  refers  to  the  degree  of  the  Knights  of  the  lied  Cross.

58  We  find,  however,  in  1663,  an  injunction  to  the  following  effect :
"That  every  person  who  is  now  a  Freemason,  shall  bring  to  the
Master  a  note  of  the  time  of  his  acceptation,  to  the  end  that  it  may
be  enrolled  in  such  priority  of  place  as  the  Brother  deserves ;  arid
that  the  whole  company  and  fellows  may  the  better  know  each  other."
(Rules,  iv.)

50  How  much  soever  the  ceremonial  may  have  been  altered  in
modern  times,  particularly  since  the  Christian  era,  it  was  always  con-
nected with  builders  ;  and  it  exhibits  probably  the  most  ancient
method  of  conferring  the  freedom  of  a  craft  or  trade.  Indeed,  about
the  eleventh  century,  and  afterwards,  every  admission  to  a  craft,  and
even  into  an  order  of  knighthood,  was  accompanied  with  a  religious
pantomime,  secret  or  public.  These  exhibitions  had  always  some
typical  meaning  ;  but  the  ceremonial  was  frequently  preserved  after
the  meaning  was  lost.  At  no  time,  however,  was  the  particular
trade,  or  order  of  knighthood,  illustrative  of,  or  instituted  for,  or
arose  out  of,  the  pantomime  ;  but  the  latter  was  uniformly  adopted
as  a  mere  ceremonial  attached  to  what  was  considered  the  main


26  HISTORICAL    LANDMARKS

lovers  of  architectural  studies  and  pursuits;61  thus
blending  speculative  with  operative  Masonry,  until  the
latter  portion  was  excluded  at  the  revival  of  the  Order
in  1717.62  After  this  period,  I  regret  to  say,  that
Freemasonry  does  not  present  the  pleasing  picture  of
Brethren  working  together  in  harmony  and  brotherly
love63 — promoting  each  others  welfare,  and  rejoicing  in

object,  viz.,  the  formal  admission  of  a  member  into  the  Society.
Thus  Freemasonry  was  a  religious  ceremony,  actual  or  typical ;  and
the  initiations  were  considered  a  purification  of  the  candidate  before
he  was  admitted  to  the  privileges  of  the  Craft.

60  It  may  be  right,  however,  to  mention  here,  that  about  the  end
of  the  seventeenth  century,  a  speculative  order  was  instituted  by  one
Gabrino,  called  "the  Apocalypse;"  the  governor  of  which  had  the
title  of  Prince  of  the  Septenary  Number,      It  ultimately  became
blended  with  the  sublime  Masonic  grades.

61  The  power  of  forming  such  Lodges  appears  to  have  been  inherent
and  unrestrained;  for,  in  1717,  we  find  the  following  llesolution
passed  in  the  first  Grand  Lodge  :  "  That  the  privilege  of  assembling
as  Masons,  which  had  been  hitherto  unlimited,  should  be  vested  in
certain  Lodges,"  &c.    Indeed,  it  is  quite  clear  that  a  certain  number
of  Masons,  assembled  together  with  the  consent  of  the  civil  magistrate,
were  empowered  to  practice  all  the  rites  of  Masonry  without  any
other  sanction.

02  It  was  determined  "  that  the  privileges  of  Masonry  should  no
longer  be  restricted  to  operative  masons,  but  extend  to  men  of
various  professions,  provided  they  were  regularly  approved  and
initiated  into  the  Order."

63  Thory  thus  gives  his  opinion  on  these  divisions  and  disputes,
which  he  thinks  arose  out  of  the  difference  of  opinion  respecting  the
origin  and  design  of  the  system  :  "  Every  person  explained  the  three
degrees  according  to  his  own  private  views.  One  said  it  was  invented
during  the  crusades  ;  others  affirmed  that  it  existed  of  old  in  Egypt,
and  in  Greece  ; — that  its  doctrines  might  be  assimilated  with  those
of  the  Essenes,  the  Pythagoreans,  and  other  ancient  sects.  Some
sought  for  its  origin  in  the  reveries  of  Manes  ;  while  others  thought


Ol''    FREEMASONRY.  27

each  others  prosperity.64  On  the  contrary,  we  find
innovation  piled  upon  innovation,  till  the  pure  and
holy  system,  based  on  religion  and  the  love  of  God,
became  a  Babel  of  confusion,  diverging  by  gradual
steps  from  purity,  until  it  degenerated  to  a  system  of
words  and  names,  of  contention  and  dispute;  and
what  is  more  to  be  lamented,  in  some  of  its  novel
grades,  it  abandoned  its  secure  foundation  of  revealed
religion,  and  delighted  in  the  religion  of  nature,  as  it
was  termed,  or  in  plainer  language,  of  infidelity.

Freemasonry  flourished  during  the  reign  of  Charles
II.,65  and  many  new  Lodges  were  constituted  in  Eng-

they  had  found  it  in  the  hermetical  science,  the  cabala  of  the  Jews,
or  in  magic,  theosophy,  pneumatology,  alchymy,  &c. ;  and  there
were  many  who  embraced  the  opinion  that  Freemasonry  originated
with  Christianity,  because  they  found  it  among  the  Gnostics  and
Basilideans.  From  these  conflicting  opinions  numerous  disorders
sprang,  which^still  remain  unsettled."

64  This,  indeed,  is  the  true  design  of  the  Order.     "  If,"  says  the
author  of  the  Freemasons'  Lexicon,  "  if  the  spirit  of  Freemasonry
could  point  the  inquiring  mind  to  nothing  but  to  the  numbers  who
have  been  initiated  into  its  sacred  mysteries,  and  the  benefits  which
its  disciples  have  conferred  upon  mankind,  from  its  commencement
to  the  present  moment,  it  would  still  present  a  most  extraordinary
phenomenon — more  extraordinary  than  any  other  mysterious  or  pro-
fane order,  of  which  it  is  certain  that  none  have  ever,  by  their  own
strength,  arrived  at  such  a  degree  of  greatness,   durability,   and
extension."

65  It  has  been  asserted  that  Cromwell  owed  all  his  success  to  Free-
masonry ;  and  that  to  render  his  system  effective,  and  to  facilitate
his  designs,  he  distributed  degrees  "  into  three  different  classes :  the
first  consisting  of  penetrating  spirits  ;  the  second  of  restless  and
unquiet  spirits ;  and  the  third  of  credulous  and  superstitious  spirits.
Each  of  these  classes  was  instructed  in  one  and  the  same  doctrine,
but  inculcated  in  a  very  different  manner."


28  HISTORICAL    LANDMARKS

land.  The  king  himself  was  initiated,  and  frequently
attended  the  meetings  of  the  fraternity  i66  for  they  had
long  been  the  resort  of  persons  of  rank  and  talent  who
were  not  operative  Masons ;  and  the  Order  was  rapidly
verging  towards  its  speculative  character,  although  its
mechanical  functions  had  not  been  formally  suspended,
as  is  evidenced  by  the  glorious  efforts  of  science  under
D.  G.  M.  Sir  C.  Wren,  in  rebuilding  the  city  of  London
after  the  calamitous  fire  of  1666. G7

Towards  the  close  of  the  seventeenth  century,  the
followers  of  James  II.,  who  accompanied  the  unfor-
tunate monarch  in  his  exile,  carried  Freemasonry  to
France,68  and  laid  the  foundation  of  that  system  of

M  In  his  capacity  of  grand  patron  of  Masons  the  king  levelled  the
footstone  of  the  Royal  Exchange,  in  solemn  form,  in  1667,  which
was  opened  by  the  mayor  and  aldermen  in  1669.

67  "  It  appeared  by  the  certificate  of  Jonas  Moore  and  Ralph
Gatrix,  the  surveyors  appointed  to  examine  the  ruins,  that  the  fire
overran  373  acres  within  the  walls,  and  burnt  13,200  houses,  89
parish  churches,  besides  chapels;  and  that  11  parishes  within  the
walls  only  remained  standing.     To  this  account  may  be  subjoined
the  Royal  Exchange,  Custom-house,  Guildhall,  Blackwellhall,    St.
Paul's  Cathedral,  Bridewell,  the  two  Compters,  fifty-two  halls  of  the
city  companies,  and  three  city  gates.    The  loss  was  computed  at  ten
millions  sterling."  (Anderson's  Masonry,  p.  149.)

68  At  this  time  "  particular  Lodges  were  mostly  held  in  London,
except  where  some  great  works  were  carried  on.     Sir  Robt.  Clayton
procured  an  occasional'Lodge  to  meet  at  St.  Thomas's  Hospital  in
the  year  1693,  near  which  a  stated  Lodge  continued  long  afterwards.
Besides  the  old  Lodge  at  St.  Paul's  there  was  one  in  Piccadilly,
another  by  Westminster  Abbey,  Holborn,  and  Tower-hill.     King
William  was  privately  made  a  Mason,  approved  of  the  choice  of  Sir
C.  Wren,  and  greatly  promoted  the  interests  of  the  Craft."    (Free-
masons' Pocket  Comp.  p.  92.)


OF    FREEMASONRY.  29

innovation69  which  subsequently  threw  the  Order  into
confusion,  by  the  establishment  of  a  new  degree,  which
they  called  the  Chevalier  Ma^on  Ecossais,70  and  worked
the  details  in  the  Lodge  at  St.  Germains.71  This  step
introduced  a  taste  for  novelties,  which  successive  Bre-

C9  In  the  French  Royal  Arch,  which  was  one  of  the  earliest  inno-
vations, there  is  a  jewel  with  the  letters  I.  V.  I.  O.  L  (Inveni  verbum
in  ore  Leonis),  which  are  thus  explained — "  Biblical  history  informs
us,  that  the  Jews  were  slaves  to  the  Egyptians,  until  redeemed  by
Moses  to  take  possession  of  the  promised  land.  We  also  learn  from
the  annals  deposited  in  the  archives  in  Scotland  (?),  that  in  a  certain
battle  the  ark  of  alliance  was  lost  in  a  forest,  and  found  by  the
roaring  of  a  lion,  which  had  devoured  a  great  number  of  the  Egyp-
tians who  attempted  to  carry  it  away,  he  keeping  secure  in  his  mouth
the  key  of  the  ark.  At  the  approach  of  the  high  priest  he  dropped
the  key,  and  retired  crouching  and  tame,  without  offering  the  least
violence  to  the  chosen  people."  In  another  of  these  degrees  it  is
asked — "  What  does  Jackson  signify  ?  A.  I  am  that  I  am ;  which
is  the  name  of  him  who  found  the  cavern  where  the  lion  crouched
that  kept  in  his  mouth  the  key  of  the  ark  of  alliance  which  was  lost."
Now  it  is  evident  that  the  true  meaning  of  Jackson  was  Jaek's-son,
or  Jaques-son,  the  son  of  the  exiled  king.

70  The  symbol  of  this  degree  was,  "  a  lion,  wounded  by  an  arrow,
and  escaped  from  the  stake  to  which  he  had  been  bound,  with  the
broken  rope  still  about  his  neck,  lying  at  the  mouth  of  a  cave,
occupied  with  certain  mathematical  instruments."

71  "  The  constitution  of  English  Masonry,"  says  Robison  (p.  28),
"  appeared  too  coarse  for  the  refined  taste  of  our  neighbours,  and
they  must  make  it  more  like  the  occupation  of  a  gentleman.    There-
fore the  degrees  of  Apprentice,  Fellowcraft,  and  Master,  were  called
symbolical ;    and  the  whole  contrivance  was  considered  either  as
typical  of  something  more  elegant,  or  as  a  preparation  for  it.     The
degrees  afterwards  superadded  to  this,  leave  us  in  no  doubt  which
of  these  views  the  French  entertained  of  our  Masonry.     But  at  all
events  this  rank  of  Scotch  Knight  was  the  first  degree  of  the
Parfait."


30  HISTORICAL    LANDMARKS

thren  of  sanguine  temperament  did  not  fail  to  improve,
and  many  new  degrees  were  invented72  and  practised
in  the  continental  Lodges,  although  they  were  not
numerous  at  that  period.73  These  Lodges  became  the
rendezvous  of  the  partisans  of  James,  and  by  their
means  they  held  communication  with  their  friends  in
England,74  thus  giving  a  political  character75  to  the
new  degrees,  which  those  of  simple  Masonry  would
not  bear.76

Between  the  two  unsuccessful  attempts  to  establish
the  claim  of  the  Stuarts  to  the  throne  of  Great  Britain,
an  enthusiastic  admirer  of  that  unfortunate  family  imuk1
his  appearance  on  the  Masonic  stage.  He  was  learned,
pious,  and  polite ;  and  as  Freemasonry  had  been  used

72  Toland,  in  his  Pantheisticon,  gives  an  account  of  a  fraternity
which  he  calls  Socratica,  or  the  Brothers  Pantheists.     They  are
represented  as  holding  a  Lodge ;  and  a  ritual  of  the  proceedings  is
given,  viz.,  the  ceremonies  of  opening  and  closing,  the  admission  of
members  into  the  different  degrees,  &c.  &c.

73  Kobison  asserts,  that  in  1716  there  existed  forty-five  orders  of
Masonry,  including  fifteen  chivalric  degrees,  interspersed  with  ranks
of  Philosophe,  Pellerin,  Clairvoyant,  &c.    This  assertion,  however,  is
dubious;  for  though  this  author  is  often  correct  in  his  facts,   his
dates  are  frequently  erroneous,  and  his  conclusions  distorted  and
untrue.     At  a  later  period,  there  were  only  four  Lodges  in  Paris,
and  none  at  all  in  the  French  provinces.

7*  They  conferred  a  few  new  degrees,  which  they  pretended  were
imported  from  Ireland,  and  were  therefore  called  "  the  Irish  Master,"
"  the  Perfect  Irish  Master,"  "  the  Puissant  Irish  Master,"  &c.

75  The  third  degree  was  applied  to  the  murder  of  Charles  I.  by
Cromwell  and  his  adherents.

76  Clavel  says  that  "  it  was  under  the  pretext  of  purifying  Free-
masonry, but  in  reality  with  the  design  of  increasing  the  adherents  of
the  exiled  monarch,  that  the  hauts  grades  were  invented."


OF    FREEMASONRY.  31

as  a  tie  to  cement  the  adherents  of  James  more  closely,
so  the  Chevalier  Ramsay77  made  use  of  the  same  ma-
chinery to  extend  the  interests  of  the  Pretender.78  And
for  the  purpose  of  excluding  all  existing  Masons  who
were  not  prepared  for  partisanship,  he  invented  three
new  degrees,  which  he  called  Ecossais,  Novice,  and
Knight  Templar,79  affirming  that  they  dated  their

57  "  Affectionately  attached  to  the  family  of  Stuart  and  to  his
native  country,  he  had  co-operated  heartily  with  those  who  endea-
voured to  employ  Masonry  in  the  service  of  the  Pretender,  and
availing  himself  of  the  pre-eminence  given  to  Scotch  Masonry,  he
laboured  to  show  that  it  existed,  and  indeed  arose,  during  the  cru-
sades ;  and  that  there  really  was  either  an  order  of  chivalry,  whose
business  it  was  to  rebuild  the  Christian  churches  destroyed  by  the
Saracens,  or  that  a  fraternity  of  Scotch  Masons  were  thus  employed
in  the  east,  under  the  protection  of  the  Knights  of  St.  John  of  Jeru-
salem. He  found  some  facts  which  were  thought  sufficient  grounds
for  such  an  opinion,  such  as  the  building  of  the  college  of  these
Knights  in  London,  called  the  Temple,  which  was  actually  done  by
the  public  fraternity  of  Masons  who  had  been  in  the  holy  wars.  It
is  chiefly  to  him  that  we  are  indebted  for  that  rage  for  Masonic
chivalry  which  distinguishes  the  French  Freemasonry."  (Robison,
p.  38.)

78  Ramsay  changed  the  name  of  the  degrees  from  Irlandais  to
Ecossais,  as  he  was  a  Scotchman  by  birth.

79  There  exist  great  doubts,  after  all  that  has  been  said  on  the
subject,  whether  the  true  Templar's  order  was  ever  officially  con-
nected with  Freemasonry.     That  many  Templars  might  have  become
Freemasons  is  not  to  be  denied ;  but  it  does  not  follow  that  there  was
any  requisite  connexion  between  them.     Indeed  it  is  asserted  by
many  learned  Brothers  that  such  connexion  was  never  heard  of
before  the  time  of  Ilamsay  ;  although  it  is  now  implicitly  believed  in
France,  Germany,  and  Sweden ;  the  end  of  all  the  rites  of  Kadosh,
or  the  Templar,  being  the  supposed  restoration  of  the  Knights  to
their  former  influence  and  prosperity,  and  the  possession  of  Palestine.


32


HISTORICAL    LANDMARKS


origin  from  the  crusades,  and  that  Godfrey  de  Bouillon
was  the  Grand  Master.80  These  new  degrees  gave  the
impulse  to  the  establishment  of  the  hauts  grades,
which  a  French  writer  very  properly  denominates
"  superfetations."

In  1725  Freemasonry  was  practised  in  Paris,  under
the  sanction  of  the  Grand  Lodge  of  England,  by  virtue
of  a  charter  granted  to  Lord  Derwentwater,  Maskelync,
Higuetty,  and  some  other  English,  and  they  met  at  an
eating-house  in  the  Rue  de  Boucheries.  The  system
flourished  abundantly,  having  numerous  initiations;81
and  it  was  in  this  authorised  Lodge  that  Ramsay,  who
filled  the  office  of  Grand  Orator  during  Lord  d'Har-
nouester's  Grand  Mastership,  promulgated  his  manu-
factured degrees.  Stimulated  by  the  success  of  his
experiment  amongst  the  adherents  of  the  Chevalier  de
St.  George,  he  brought  his  system  of  pretended  Scottish
Masonry  into  this  country,  with  the  intention,  as  is
supposed,  of  extending  it  indefinitely,  if  he  found  it


80  He  began,  like  all  other  innovators,  by  exacting  the  most  invio-
lable secrecy  from  his  novices.     He  told  them  that   "  silence  and
secrecy  are  the  very  soul  of  the  Order ;  and  you  will  carefully  observe
this  silence,  as  Avell  with  those  whom  you  may  have  only  reason  to
suppose  are  already  initiated,  as  with  those  whom  you  may  hereafter
know  really  belong  to  the  Order.     You  will  never  reveal  to  any
person,  at  present  or  hereafter,  the  slightest  circumstance  relative  to
your  admission,  the  degree  you  have  received,  nor  the  time  when
admitted.     In  a  word,  you  will  never  speak  of  any  object  relating  to
the  Order,  even  before  Brethren,  without  the  strongest  necessity."

81  This  was  the  second  Lodge  established  in  France,  the  first  being-
formed  at  Dunkirk  in  1721 ;  others  soon  followed,  and  the  Lodges
ultimately  became  numerous.     The  Master  was  appointed  for  life.


OF    EREEMASONRY.  33

acceptable  to  the  English  fraternity.82  The  attempt,
however,  failed.83  Masonry  in  London  was  too  pure
in  its  principles  to  countenance  innovations  of  any
kind,  and  the  overtures  of  Ramsay  were  unceremo-
niously rejected.84  He  therefore  returned  to  Paris,
where  he  was  received  with  enthusiasm;85  and  his

82  And  he  was  commissioned  by  the  Pretender  as  an  agent  to
convert   his   interest  with   the   Masons   to   the   advantage  of  his
employer.

83  And  well  it  might ;  for,  to  use  the  words  of  a  pious  Brother —
"  English  Masonry  is  the  excellency  of  the  fear  of  God  ;  the  Mason's
Lodge  is  the  school  of  Christ,  to  all  who  wish  to  learn  his  disci-
pline ;    and  every  Mason  must,    according  to  his  sincerity  in   the
mystic  art,  fear  and  obey  that  God  who  made  him,  who  redeemed
him,  and  who  every  moment  provideth  for  him.     The  true  English
Mason  is  not  only  instructed  in  all  those  principles  and  sentiments
which  lead  him  to  fear  and  obey  his  God,  but  he  also  manifests  in
all  his  conduct  the  most  constant  and  substantial  proof  of  it,  by  the
love  he  exercises  towards  his  fellow-creatures."    (Inwood's  Sermons,
p.  212.)

4  There  are  many  reasons  for  believing  that  the  system  of  Ramsay
was  untainted  with  the  infidelity  which  accompanied  many  of  the  new
degrees  that  were  subsequently  invented.  The  reason,  therefore,  why
his  code  was  rejected  by  the  English  Masons,  was  simply  because
it  was  considered  an  unauthorized  innovation  from  ancient  customs
and  usages.

85  The  construction  of  his  "  Cyrus,"  is  a  proof  that  Eamsay  was
the  friend  of  revealed  religion.  He  says- — "  The  magi  in  Cyrus's
time  were  fallen  into  a  kind  of  atheism,  like  that  of  Spinoza,  Zoroaster,
Hermes,  and  Pythagoras,  adored  one  sole  deity,  but  they  were  deists  ;
Eleazer  resembled  the  Socinians,  who  are  for  subjecting  religion  to
philosophy  ;  Daniel  represents  a  perfect  Christian,  and  the  hero  of
this  book  a  young  prince,  who  began  to  be  corrupted  by  the  maxims
of  irreligion.  In  order  to  set  him  right,  the  different  philosophers
with  whom  he  converses  successively  unfold  to  him  new  truths,  mixed

VOL.  II.  D


[TSTORICAL    LANDMARKS

system  became  the  root  and  stem  of  so  many  addi-
tional degrees  of  Scotch  Masonry  (so  called),  that  their
number  cannot  be  correctly  ascertained.^

At  this  time  mention  is  made  of  a  Grand  Lodge
of  Masons  in  France,87  the  Due  d'Antin  being  elected
the  Grand  Master  for  life,  although  the  Order  appears
to  have  been  under  the  shade  of  royal  displeasure.88
But  it  was  in  reality  nothing  more  than  a  Provincial
Grand  Lodge,  holden  under  a  charter  from  the  Grand
Lodge  of  England.

with  errors.  Zoroaster  confutes  the  mistakes  of  the  magi ;  Pytha-
goras those  of  Zoroaster ;  Eleazer  those  of  Pythagoras ;  Daniel  rejects
those  of  all  the  others,  and  his  doctrine  is  the  only  one  which  the
author  adopts.  The  order  of  these  conversations  shows  the  progress
of  the  mind ;  the  matter  being  so  disposed,  that  the  atheist  becomes
di-ist,  the  deist  Socinian,  and  the  Socinian  Christian."

86  It  said  that  Ham  say  invented  the  Royal  Arch,  and  made  it  the
highest  of  all  his  degrees,  and  it  may  be  to  this  that  Robison  alludes  ;
for  it  cannot  have  been  any  of  the  three  which  are  usually  so  styled,
viz.,  the  R.  A.  of  Enoch,  of  Josiah,  or  of  Zerubbabel.     AVhatcver  it
might  be,  it  is  now  obsolete.

87  There  were,  however,  very  few  Lodges  in  that  country.     Lord
Harnouester  succeeded  Lord  Derwentwater  as  G.  M.,  and  he  was
followed  by  the  Due  d'Aiitin.     Ramsay  was  G.  Orator,  and  worked
his  own  degrees.

88  We  find  the  following  passage  in  the  Acta  Latomorum,  sub  anno
1737  : — "  About  the  end  of  this  year,  Lord  Harnouester,  being  about
to  leave  the  country,  convened  an  assembly  for  the  election  of  a  G.  M.
The  king  having  heard  of  it,  said  that  if  the  choice  fell  on  a  French-
man he  should  be  committed  to  the  Bastile.     Notwithstanding  this
threat,  the  Due  d'Antin  accepted  the  office,  and  no  further  notice
was  taken  of  the  matter."     But  on  the  27th  December,  when  the
Brethren  assembled  to  celebrate  the  festival  of  St.  John  in  the  Rue
de  Deux  Ecus  at  Paris,  several  arrests  took  place,  and  some  of  the
officers  were  imprisoned.


OF    FREEMASONRY.  35

Those  sources  of  amusement89  excited  the  curiosity
of  the  female  portion  of  the  community90  on  the  con-
tinent; and  their  influence  proved  so  effectual,  that
the  Brethren  found  it  necessary  to  admit  them  to  a
participation  in  some  of  the  secrets  of  Masonry,91
Accordingly,  in  1730,  female  Lodges  were  instituted;
and  in  174392  the  order  of  Perfect  Happiness,  to  which

89  "  It  is  well  known,"  says  Preston  (p.  300),  "  to  the  Masons  of
this  country,  that  some  men  of  warm  and  enthusiastic  imaginations
have  been  disposed  to  amplify  parts  of  the  institution  of  Freema-
sonry, and  in  their  supposed  improvements  to  have  elevated  their
discoveries  into  new  degrees ;  to  which  they  have  added  ceremom'es,
rituals,  and  dresses,  ill  suited  to  the  native  simplicity  of  the  Order,  as
it  was  originally  practised  in  this  country.    But  in  all  these  degrees,
though  probably  deserving  reprehension,  as  improper  innovations  on
the  original  system  of  Masonry,  I  can  never  believe  that  they  have
either  proceeded  from  bad  motives,  or  could  be  viewed  in  any  other
light  than  as  innocent  and  inoffensive  amusentents"

90  Clavel  has  recorded  a  curious  anecdote  respecting  the  origin  of
female  Lodges,  which  it  is  difficult  to  credit.     He  says,  that  in  the
year  1741  a  burgomaster  of  Holland  having  heard  of  some  grotesque
exhibition,  which  professed  to  be  an  exposition  of  Masonic  secrets,
caused  himself  to  be  proposed  for  admission,  that  he  might  judge  of
the  correctness  of  what  he  had  seen ;  and  that  he  secretly  placed  his
daughter  at  a  window  to  be  a  witness  to  his  initiation.     The  plan
succeeded,  and  led  to  the  establishment  of  female  Freemasonry.

91  "  The  greater  the  obscurity  of  these  new  degrees,  the  more
curiosity  was  attracted  to  them,  and  none  were  more  eager  than  the
fair  sex.     Their  dressing-rooms  were   metamorphosed  into   secret
schools,  where  the  interpreting  adept  developed  the  mysteries,  and
the  novice  in  ecstacy  applauded  the  mystery  which  was  hidden  from
the  vulgar.    Little  by  little  the  novice  herself  became  an  interpreter,
and  founded  a  Lodge  of  instruction."  (Barruel,  vol.  ii.  p.  344.)

92  The  female  Order  of  Fendeurs  was  established  in  Paris  by  the
Chevalier  Beauchain  in  1743,    and  it  became  extremely  popular.
The  Lodge  represented  a  forest;  and  the  place  of  assembly  was

D  2


30  HISTORICAL    LANDMARKS

ladies  were  admitted,  made  its  appearance.03  This  led
to  other  androgynal  institutions,  until  at  length  female
Freemasonry  flourished  abundantly,  under  royal  and
noble  patronage.


PART  II.

MASONIC    INNOVATIONS.

"  The  attachment  of  the  continental  nations  to  innovation  and
external  finery,  produced  the  most  unwarrantable  alterations  upon
the  principles  and  ceremonies  of  the  Order.  A  number  of  new  de-
grees were  created;  the  office-bearers  of  the  Craft  were  arrayed  in
the  most  splendid  and  costly  attire;  and  the  Lodges  were  trans-
formed into  lecturing  rooms,  where  the  wiser  Brethren  sported  the
most  extravagant  opinions,  discussed  the  abstruscst  questions  in
theology  and  political  economy,  and  broached  opinions  which  were
certainly  hostile  to  true  religion  and  sound  government.  Such  dan-
gerous innovations  have  not  the  smallest  connexion  with  the  prin-
ciples of  Freemasonry.  They  are  unnatural  excrescences  formed  by
a  warm  imagination,  and  fostered  by  the  interference  of  designing
men." — LAURIE.

We  now  approach  the  period  when  wholesale  inno-
vations were  successfully  attempted  by  a  series  of

generally  an  extensive  garden,  in  the  suburbs  of  Paris.  Here  the
sexes  met  and  promenaded  in  couples,  partaking  of  amusements
which  were  mutually  agreeable.

93  This  Order  had  symbols  and  a  vocabulary,  which  were  exclu-
sively nautical.  The  candidate  was  said  to  make  a  voyage  to  the
island  of  Felicity,  under  the  pilotage  of  the  Brethren.  It  had  four
degrees,  called — 1,  the  Cabin  Boy;  2,  the  Master  of  the  Vessel ;
3,  the  Chief  of  the  Squadron  ;  4,  the  Vice  Admiral.  The  Grand
Master  was  termed  the  Admiral.  The  oaths  both  for  males  and


OF    FREEMASONRY.  37

adventurers  for  interested  purposes ;  and  new  degrees
were  introduced  into  the  Lodges,  not  merely  with
impunity,  but  with  perfect  triumph.  The  Masons  of
Lyons,  in  1743,  manufactured  a  degree  called  "the
Petit  Elu,"  as  a  political  speculation.94  It  was  deistical ;
and  it  is  to  be  feared  that  all  the  Elus,  excepting  the
Kadoshes  which  are  still  practised,95  were  but  modifi-
cations of  this  pernicious  degree.  It  was  received  with
avidity,  notwithstanding  its  irreligious  tendency,96  by
all  the  Lodges  into  which  it  was  introduced.'*7  So  suc-
cessful was  this  attempt,  that  innumerable  orders  sprang


females  are  curious.  A  schism  in  the  Order  produced  another
Lodge,  the  members  styling  themselves,  "  Knights  and  Ladies  of
the  Anchor."

94  The  Elu  degrees  had  been  previously  in  vogue,  and  were  com-
bined with  the  Knights  of  the  East,  of  the  Eagle,  the  Elu  de  la
Verite,  the  Sublime  Philosopher,  and  many  others,  which  are  said  to
have  been  in  full  operation  before  1743.

95  The  number  of  Kadoshes  appear  to  have  been  six :  the  Knight
Kadosh  ;  that  of  the  Jesuits  of  Clermont ;  the  Philosophical  Kadosh  ;
the  Prince  Kadosh ;  the  Kadosh  Prince  of  Death ;  and  the  Kadosh
of  the  Rit-ancien.

98  "  These  Lodges  were  frequented  by  persons  of  all  ranks,  and  of
every  profession.  The  idle  and  the  frivolous  found  amusement,  and
glittering  things  to  tickle  their  satiated  fancies.  There  they  became
the  dupes  of  the  declamations  of  the  crafty  and  licentious  abbes,  and
writers  of  every  denomination.  Mutual  encouragement  in  the  indul-
gence of  hazardous  thoughts  and  opinions,  which  flatter  our  wishes
or  propensities,  is  a  lure  which  few  minds  can  resist.  I  can  find  no
other  way  of  accounting  for  the  company  that  I  have  sometimes  seen
in  a  Mason's  Lodge."  (Robison,  p.  51.)

9r  And  no  wonder;  for  the  influence  of  Cardinal  Dubois,  and  (he
young  prince,  afterwards  Louis  XV., had  made  scepticism  a  fashionable
accomplishment .


38


up,  as  from  a  hotbed,98  and  were  divided  into  three
classes,"  viz.,  1,  symbolical,  or  blue  ;  2,  capitular,  or
red;  3,  philosophical.100  In  this  year  an  initiation  took
place,  which  was  destined  to  produce  a  striking  effect
on  the  continental  system  of  Freemasonry.  It  was  that
of  Frederick,  King  of  Prussia,1  then  Prince  Royal.2

06  Amidst  this  confusion  on  the  continent  of  Europe,  symbolical
Masonry  was  flourishing  in  peace  and  harmony  in  England,  and  its
Lodges  were  extended  to  many  other  countries.  Thus  a  petition
from  Bro.  Francis  Byam,  D.  D.,  Master  of  the  Court-house  Lodge,
in  the  island  of  Antigua,  was  received  by  the  Grand  Lodge  of
England,  setting  forth  that  the  Brethren  had  built  a  Lodge-room,
where  they  intended  to  meet  for  the  future,  and  praying  that  it  might
be  entered  in  the  book  of  Lodges,  by  the  name  of  "  the  Great  Lodge
of  St.  John's;"  which  was  granted,  with  this  addition — "the
Great  Lodge  of  St.  John's  in  Antigua."

99  At  the  head  of  the  second  class  was  placed  the  Royal  Arch,
which  is  said  to  have  been  revived  about  this  period.     And  the  third
contained  the  Rose  Croix,  the  Chevalier  du  Soleil,  Kadosh,  &c.

100  This  term  is  rather  equivocal,  and  may  be  understood  to  signify,
at  this  particular  period — scepticism.

1  Clavel  gives  the  date  of  14th  and  15th  August,  1738.     These
are  his  words  :  "  Trois  ans  auparavant  la  Ma9onnerie  allemande  avait
fait  une   acquisition   bien   autrement   importante.     Encore   prince
royal,  Frederick -le-Grand  avait  etc  re9u,  a  Brunswick,  dans  la  nuit
du  14  au  15  Aout  1738,  par  une  deputation  de  la  Loge  de  Ham-
bourg  composee  de  barons  d'  Oberg,  de  Bielefeld,  et  de  Lowen,  du
comte  regnant  de  Lippe  Bucklebourg  et  de  quelques  autres  freres.
La  reception  avait  en  lieu  dans  le  palais  du  comte  de  Korn,  qui
assistait  a  la  seance  avec  plusieurs  Ma9ons  de  distinction  residant  a
Brunswick."  (p.  121.)

2  A  deputation  from  the  Grand  Lodge  of  Prussia,  consisting  of  his
excellency  Major-General  Count  Trouches  de  Waldburg,  ambassador
from  the  King  of  Prussia ;  M.  Andrie,  the  Prussian  envoy ;  Baron
Wassenberg,  envoy  from  the  King  of  Sweden ;  M.  Bielefeld,  sccre-


OF    FREEMASON11Y.  39

Two  years  later,  we  find  great  Masonic  schisms  on
the  continent  of  Europe.3  Numerous  additional  degrees
were  introduced ;  and  the  Grand  Lodge  of  France,
finding  the  innovations  of  too  serious  a  nature  to  be
passed  over  in  silence,  entered  on  a  deliberate  investi-
gation of  all  the  novel  grades,  for  the  purpose  of
coming  to  some  explicit  conclusion  on  the  subject.4

tary  to  the  Prussian  embassy ;  Count  Harrach ;  and  Count  0 'Daniel,
was  received  by  the  English  Grand  Lodge,  with  all  the  honours  of
Masonry,  on  the  19th  of  May,  1741.

3  In  1740  Masonry  was  most  furiously  attacked  by  the  whole  body
of  the  Dutch  clergy,  who  resolved  at  all  events  to  suppress  the  society ;
but  their  endeavours  proved  abortive.  The  following  anecdote  will
show  to  what  a  pitch  they  carried  their  malice  : — "  Two  young  officers
of  very  good  families,  who  were  Masons,  applied  to  the  minister  of
their  parish  to  examine  them  in  certain  points  of  their  religion,
agreeably  to  the  custom  of  the  country,  and  then  to  grant  them  a
certificate  to  entitle  them  to  receive  the  holy  sacrament.  After  the
examination  was  over,  and  the  priest  satisfied  in  regard  to  their
capacity,  he  asked  them  if  they  were  Freemasons  ?  being  answered
in  the  affirmative,  he  refused  to  grant  them  their  certificates,  which
is  a  virtual  expulsion  from  the  communion.  This  transaction  raised
an  uproar  in  Holland,  and  numbers  of  pamphlets  were  published
both  for  and  against  Masonry.  At  last  the  grand  assembly  of  the
States -general  took  it  into  their  consideration,  and  ordered  that  for
the  future  no  clergyman  should  ask  either  that,  or  any  other  question
concerning  Masonry,  in  the  execution  of  his  ecclesiastical  duty ;  and
ordered  the  priest,  before  whom  the  two  officers  had  been  examined,
to  grant  them  their  certificates."  (Smith's  Use  and  Abuse,  p.  196.)
4  In  some  of  these  new  degrees,  the  design  of  the  genuine  Masonic
symbols  was  thus  perverted.  "  The  rough  stone  of  Masonry  is  a
symbol  of  the  primitive  state  of  man,  savage  but  free.  The  stone
split  or  broken,  is  the  state  of  fallen  nature  of  mankind  in  civil
society,  no  longer  united  in  one  family,  but  divided  according  to
their  states,  governments,  or  religions.  The  polished  stone  represents
mankind  reinstated  in  its  primitive  dignity  and  independence."


40  HISTORICAL    LANDMARKS

After  much  anxious  enquiry,  the  members  of  the
Grand  Lodge  formed  the  resolution  of  rejecting  all  the
hauts  grades,  and  extending  their  sanction  solely  to
symbolical  Masonry.  This  decision  being  unacceptable
to  the  innovators,  they  immediately  constituted  them-
selves into  a  Grand  Lodge,  under  the  name  of  "the
Supreme  Tribunal ; "  issued  charters  for  new  Lodges,
and  arranged  the  sublime  degrees,  as  they  termed
them,  into  classes.5  This  assumption  of  power  created
additional  confusion,  and  tended  to  the  still  further
deterioration  of  the  Order.8

In  1745,  the  Prince  Charles  Edward  Stuart  was
received  into  the  Royal  Order  of  Robert  Bruce,  at
Edinburgh,7  and  was  elected  Grand  Master,  which

5  It  will  be  useful  to  observe  that  every  system  contained  a  certain
number  of  degrees,  divided  into  classes,  each  class  being  governed
by  a  distinct  body,  called  a  Lodge,  a  Chapter,  a  College,  a  Conclave,
a  Council,  or  a  Consistory.

6  In  the  history  of  the  Grand  Orient,  mention  is  made  of  an  exhi-
bition at  Caen,  where  the  ceremonies  of  initiation  were  publicly
exhibited  in  travesty.

7 1  believe  I  am  correct,  although  it  is  called  the  Order  of  the
Temple,  as  appears  from  a  letter  written  by  the  Duke  of  Perth  to
Lord  Ogilby,  which  contains  the  following  passage  : — "  On  Tuesday,
Sept.  24,  by  appointment,  there  was  a  solemn  Chapter  of  the  Ancient
Chivalry  of  the  Temple  of  Jerusalem,  held  in  the  audience-room;
not  more  than  ten  Knights  were  present,  for  since  my  Lord  of  Mar
demitted  the  office  of  Grand  Master,  no  general  meeting  has  been
called,  save  in  your  own  north  convent.  Our  noble  prince  looked
most  gallantly  in  the  white  robe  of  the  Order,  took  his  profession
like  a  worthy  Knight,  and  after  receiving  congratulations  of  all  pre-
sent, did  vow  that  he  would  restore  the  Temple  higher  than  it  was
in  the  days  of  William  the  Lyon.  Then  my  Lord  of  Athol  did  demit
as  regent,  and  H.  E.  H.  was  elected  Grand  Master."  (Statutes  of
the  Temple,  xvi.)


OF    FREEMASONRY.  41

office  he  held  till  his  death.8  A  year  or  two  later,
the  prince,  having  effected  his  escape  after  the  failure
of  his  attempt  on  the  English  crown,9  took  up  his
residence  in  France,  and  assumed  the  Grand  Master-
ship of  H.  R.  D.  M.  ;  which,  with  some  modifications,
he  put  into  a  new  form,  and  called  it  the  Rose  Croix.


10


8  He  might  have  received  both,  for  all  his  degrees  were  fragments
of  the  Royal  Order,  "  hashed  up,"  as  a  friend  of  mine  expresses  it,
to  suit  his  own  purposes.     "  The  fatal  issue  of  the  battle  of  Cullodeu
extinguished  the  hope  of  this  brilliant  revival  of  the  Order  in  Scot-
land.   The  majority  of  the  Templars  went  into  exile  with  their  prince,
and  those  who  remained  in  this  country  durst  not  continue  openly  to
practice  the  ceremonies  of  an  Order,  so  inseparably  connected  with
the  ruined  Jacobite  cause.     It  is  to  this  period  that  we  must  look
for  the  real  fraternization  of  the  Scottish  Templars  with  the  Masonic
body,  under  shelter  of  whose  privilege  they  assembled  their  scattered
fragments."  (Statutes,  ut  supra,  xvii.)

9  A  celebrated  Freemason,  named  John  Murray,  of  Broughton,
initiated  in  the  Canongate  Kilwinning,  in  1738,  was  private  secre-
tary to  the  Chevalier  Charles  Edward,  whom  he  accompanied  in  his
eventful  enterprise,  and  after  the  fatal  battle  of  Culloden  fled  to  the
mountains,  where  he  lived  the  life  of  a  hunted  beast.    Having  taken
refuge  at  the  house  of  his  brother-in-law,  Mr.  Hunter  of  Polmond,
in  Peebleshire,  he  was  betrayed  by  a  menial,  and  carried  captive  to
London.    There  he  was  said  to  have  been  induced  to  make  important
revelations.    He  obtained  his  pardon  and  a  pension  for  life ;  but  his
name  was  erased  from  the  books  of  the  Lodge.     (F.  Q.  II.  1841,
p.  296.)

10  Some  think  that  the  11.  C.  of  this  degree  meant  Boris  Cocti,
because  the  matter  of  the  philosopher's  stone  was  supposed  to  be
concocted  dew.     Others  say  it  was  derived  from  Eos  and  Crux,
amongst  whom  was   the   celebrated   scholar   Mosheim.      "  Of  all
natural  bodies,"  says  he,  "  dew  was  deemed  the  most  powerful  sol-
vent of  gold ;  and  the  cross,  in  chemical  language,  is  equivalent  to
light,  because  the  figure  of  a  cro^s  -+-  exhibits  at  the  same  time
three  letters,  of  which  the  word  LVX,   or  light,   is  compounded.


HISTORICAL    LANDMARKS

He  subsequently  established  the  Rite  de  la  Vielle-Bru,
at  Thoulouse,  which  he  denominated  Ecossais  Eideles,
in  honour  of  the  kind  reception  that  his  aide  du  camp,
Sir  Samuel  Lockhart,  had  received  from  the  Masons
there.11  In  this  rite  the  degrees  of  Ramsay  were
blended.12  He  issued  a  manifesto  to  the  town  of
Arras,  conferring  on  the  Lodge  there  the  power  of
working  his  degree,  under  the  name  of  "  the  Eagle
and  Pelican."13  Here,  then,  we  have  three  Grand
Masters  in  Paris  at  the  same  time.14

This  anomaly ,  added  to  the  prevalence  of  schism
amongst  the  Brethren,15  and  perhaps  a  suspicion  of  the

Hence  a  Rosicrusian  philosopher  is  one  who,  by  the  assistance  of  the
dew,  seeks  for  light,  or  the  philosopher's  stone."  (See  Gasseridi's
Examen  Philosophise  Fluddanrc,  s.  xv.  torn.  iii.  p.  261  ;  and  Ivc-
nadot's  Conferences  Publiqucs,  torn.  iv.  p.  87.)

11  This  rite  was  divided  into  nine  degrees,  conferred  in  three
Chapters,    and  administered  in  Consistories   by  a  Council   called
Menatzchims.

12  The  four  first  degrees  comprehend  symbolical  Masonry,   and
form  the  first  Chapter.  The  second  is  composed  of  the  four  following
degrees,  and  comprehend  what  is  called  the  Masonry  of  the  Crusades.
The  third  Chapter  is  formed  of  those  who  have  been  admitted  to  the
ninth  or  last  degree,  or  into  the  secrets  of  scientific  Masonry.    These
three  Chapters  united  take  the  name  of  a  Consistory.    One  thing  in
this  arrangement  I  do  not  perfectly  understand — it  speaks  of  four
degrees  of  symbolical  and  crusade  Masonry,  whereas  it  is  generally
supposed  there  are  but  three  of  each.

13  This  was  the  first  authorised  Grand  Chapter  for  working  the
hauts  grades.

14  These  were  the  Grand  Master  of  symbolical  Masonry ;  of  the
Supreme  Tribunal  of  the  hauts  grades ;  and  of  the  Royal  Order  of
Robert  Bruce,  in  the  person  of  the  exiled  prince.

15  At  this  period  illegal  constitutions,  false  titles,   and  charters
antedated  were  prevalent  amongst  the  Lodges.     They  were  distri-


OF    FREEMASONRY.  43

real  character  of  the  hauts  grades,  threw  the  Order  into
disrepute,  and  caused  its  proscription.16  The  first  note
of  opposition  was  sounded  by  the  States  of  Holland,  in
an  edict  forbidding  the  meetings  of  Masons  under
heavy  penalties.  This  was  followed  by  the  prohibition
of  Louis  XV.  against  French  Masonry ; I7  by  the  bull  of
Pope  Clement  XII.;18  the  edict  of  the  Council  of  Berne ;
and  the  act  of  the  Associated  Synod  of  Scotland.

These  severe  measures,  however,  do  not  appear  to
have  created  a  proportionate  sensation,  or  to  have  pre-
vented the  meetings  of  the  Lodges,  although  a  few
arrests  were  made  at  Paris  by  the  police  ;19  for  in  1753

buted  by  persons  assuming  an  illegal  authority,  and  attributed  a  false
origin  to  the  Order.  These  disorders  sprang  up  amongst  the  adhe-
rents of  the  Chevalier  Charles  Edward  Stuart,  and  produced  great
confusion.  (Thory  Acta.  Lat.  vol.  i.  p.  56.)

16  Thory  says,  that  Le  petit  Elu  spread  itself  out  into  the  degrees
or   titles  of  the   Elect  of  Nine,  or  De   Perignan;   the   Elect   of
Fifteen;    Illustrious   Master;    Knight   of  the  East,   or  of  Hope;
Grand  Inquisitor ;  Grand  Elect ;  Commander  of  the  Temple,  &c.

17  In  1744  the  Chamber  of  Police  renewed  the  prohibition  against
the  meetings  of  Masons,  and  interdicted  the  proprietors  of  houses
and  cabarets  from  harbouring  them,  under  the  penalty  of  3000
francs  for  each  offence.

18  To  evade  the  penalties  of  this  bull,  the  Freemasons  of  Italy
assembled  under  a  new  name.     They  called  themselves  Les  Xero-
phagistes,  and  were  a  kind  of  what  are  now  called  in  England —
teetotallers.

19  The  Commissary  Lavergee,  with  a  military  detachment,  appeared
before  the  Hotel  de  Soissous,  on  the  8th  of  June,  1745,  at  Paris,
where  the  Brethren  were  assembled  for  an  initiation.     He  dispersed
the  assembly,  and  seized  the  furniture  of  the  Lodge.     The  Inqui-
sition had  already  put  an  effectual  stop  to  the  proceedings  of  a  Lodge
at  Madrid,  by  arresting  all  its  members,  and  sending  eight  of  the


44  HISTORICAL    LANDMARKS

we  find  the  Jesuits,  in  the  face  of  the  papal  bull,  esta-
blishing a  Chapter  in  the  college  of  Clermont,20  in
which  they  practised  several  newly  manufactured  de-
grees21 for  the  extension  of  the  Order.22  These  were
founded  on  the  system  of  Ramsay.23  Some  say  it
originated  with  the  Chevalier  de  Bonneville,24  and

chief  persons  to  the  galleys.  (Das  Ganze,  p.  144.)  And  at  Malta
six  Brethren  were  condemned  to  perpetual  banishment  for  attending
a  Lodge.  (Allerneueste  Geheim,  p.  19.)

20  Barruel  denies  this  fact.     He  says — "  The  fable  of  the  Jesuits
Freemasons  was  an  artifice  devised  by  the  llluininees,  and  we  siuill
see  them  own  to  it>  to  divert  the  attention  of  states  iVmu  their  c;\\n
sect  and  conspiracies."    (Hist.  Jac.  vol.  ii.  p.  378.)     But  it  is  tun-,
notwithstanding;  for  this  Lodge  of  the  Jesuits  existed  before  tin-
system  of  illuminism  was  invented.

21  Unfortunately  they  were  not  contented  with  fabricating  neu
degrees,  but  made  innovations  in  the  details  of  symbolical  Masonry,
to  suit  their  own  purposes.     They  changed  the  symbols,  and  made
alterations  in  the  tracing  of  the  Lodge.

22  The  first  degree  was  called  the  Knight  of  the  Eagle;  Hunde's
strict  observance  had  the  same  degree.     It  was  the  third,  and  the
fifty-fifth  of  the  seventh  series  of  the  French  Metropolitan  Chapter.
The  remaining  degrees  were,  the  Illustrious  Knight  of  the  Temple,
and  the  Sublime  and  Illustrious  Knight.     This  rite  is  said  to  be  one
of  the  earliest  attempts  at  uniting  Freemasonry  with  Templarism.

23  At  this  time  the  Craft  flourished  in  the  island  of  Minorca  in  full
vigour ;  the  Brethren  adhered  to  their  rules  so  strictly,  that  neither
the  envious,  malicious,  nor  inquisitive,  could  find  the  least  ground  to
exercise  their  talents ;  and  some  excellent  discourses  of  a  worthy
clergyman  there,  preached  on  their  festivals,  and  the  decency  and
solemnity  of  their  processions,   forced  applause,  even  from  those
who  had  made  it  their  study  to  traduce  the  Craft.   (Noorth.  Const,
p.  257.)

24  Fessler,  however,  distinctly  asserts  that  it  originated  with  the
Jesuits,   and   that   all  the   allegories   and   symbols   pointed  to   the
establishment  of  an  universal  monarch v.


OF    FREEMASONRY.  45

other  distinguished  persons  in  the  court  of  France  ;
mid  is  thought  by  some  to  have  been  named  the
Chapter  of  Clermont  from  Louis  de  Bourbon,  prince
of  Clermont,  who  was  at  this  time  Grand  Master  of
the  fraternity  in  France.  The  Grand  Lodge  now  de-
clared itself  independent  of  England,  and  returned  its
charters,  hoping,  by  such  an  accession  of  power,  to
heal  the  schisms,  which  were  springing  up  on  every
side.  In  the  Chapter  of  Clermont  the  famous  Baron
Hunde,25  though  a  member  of  the  protestant  church,2fi
•contrived  to  obtain  admission.  The  lessons  he  learned
here  formed  the  nucleus,  in  his  prolific  mind,  for  a
new  series  of  seven  degrees,  which  he  introduced  into
Germany,  under  the  imposing  title  of  "  Tempelorden,
or  Orden  des  Stricten  Observant z.27  His  great  and

2:1  Who  assumed  the  characteristic  appellation  of  Eques  ab  Ense.

26  He  subsequently  became  a  Roman  Catholic  at  the  importunity
of  his  wife.

2>  His  appearance  in  Germany  was  under  the  sanction  of  a  patent,
with  the  sign  manual  of  Charles  Edward  Stuart,  "  appointing  him
Grand  Master  of  the  seventh  province ;  but  although  he  had  invented
a  plausible  tale  in  support  of  his  title  and  authority — both  of  which
he  affirmed  had  been  made  over  to  him  by  the  Earl  Marischal  on  his
death-bed — and  of  the  antiquity  of  his  order,  which  he  derived,  of
course,  from  Scotland,  where  the  chief  seat  of  the  Templars  was
Aberdeen,  the  imposture  was  soon  detected ;  and  it  was  even  disco-
vered that  he  had  himself  enticed  and  initiated  the  ill-fated  Pretender
into  his  fabulous  order  of  chivalry.  The  delusions  on  this  subject,
however,  had  taken  such  a  hold  in  Germany,  that  they  were  not
altogether  dispelled  until  a  deputation  had  actually  visited  Aberdeen,
and  found,  among  the  worthy  and  astonished  Brethren  there,  no
trace  either  of  very  ancient  Templars  or  Preeraasonry  "  (Burns.
Hist.  Knights  Templars,  p.  53.)


40


HISTORICAL    LANDMARKS


final  secret  was,    that   every  Mason    is    a
Templar*

The  hauts  grades  were  now  divided  into  three  orders
or  classes29 — the  Masonry  of  the  Jesuits  ;30  Templary ;
and  Hermetic  Masonry.31  The  latter  consisted  of

28  In  1749  Hunde  erected  a  Lodge  on  his  estate  at  Kittlitz,  toge-
ther with  a  protestant  church,  the  first  stone  being  laid  by  the  Bre-
thren, under  which  he  placed  a  copper  plate,  with  Masonic  diagrams
and  an  inscription.

89  This  division  might  occur  a  little  later ;  some  had  been  already
formed.  Thus  the  Petit  Elu  commenced  at  Lyons  in  1713,  and
produced  all  the  Elus,  Inspectors,  &c.,  which  were  subsequently
invented ;  some  of  them  being  connected  with  Craft  Masonry,
others  with  Templarism  ;  and  sometimes  a  degree  which  in  one-  place
was  managed  like  ordinary  Masonry,  became  with  the  Jesuits  a
powerful  engine,  and  in  the  hands  of  the  philosophers,  a  means  of
inculcating  deism.  In  general  there  was  a  mixture  of  degrees,  and
so  many  shades,  that  it  is  difficult  to  extricate  and  classify  them.

30  Martin  Paschal  introduced  a  rite  founded  on  the  Elus,  which  he
denominated  Le  rite  des  Elus  Coe'ns,  or  Priests,  into  certain  Lodges
at  Marseilles,  Toulouse,  and  Bourdcaux.  It  consisted  of  nine  degrees,
called — 1,  Apprentice ;  2,  Fellowcraft ;  3,  Master;  4,  Grand  Elect ;
5,  Apprentice  Coen;  6,  Fellowcraft  Coen  ;  7,  Master  Coen ;  8,  Grand
Architect ;  9,  Knight  Commander.

31  In  Germany  there  had  long  existed  an  association  of  alchemists,
called  Hose  Croix,  or  Roris  Cocti.     It  died  out  in  1750;  but  the
French,  supposing  the  degree  of  Rose  Croix,  introduced  among  them
by  Charles  Edward  Stuart,  had  some  mysterious  connexion  with  the
Alchymists  (who,  however,  had  nothing  to  do  with  Masonry),  created
the  hermetical  degrees,  and  a  Chapter  was  got  up  at  Marburg,  in
Germany,  to  revive  the  taste  for  alchymy  in  connexion  with  the
Rose  +  •     They  pretended  to  be  a  continuation  of  the  old  Rosicru-
sians ;  but  the  emperor  discountenanced  the  scheme,  and  declared
that  all  who  joined  the  Freemason-Alchemical-Rose-Croix,  should
ipso  facto  be  deprived  of  all  offices  under  government.


OF    FREEMASONRY.  47

ninety  degrees.32  In  1758  we  find  the  first  mention
of  a  French  Chapter,  called  "  the  Emperor  of  the  East
and  West."  The  order  practised  by  this  fraternity
consisted  of  twenty-five  degrees,34  partly  adapted  from
existing  materials,  and  partly  invented  for  the  exclusive
use  of  the  Chapter,  and  to  attract  the  lovers  of  novelty

32 1  greatly  doubt  the  hermetic  Masonry  was  deistical.  Barruel
says — "  The  hermetic  Masonry,  or  the  Scotch  degrees,  who  work  in
chemistry,  have  adopted  pantheism,  or  the  true  spinosism.  With
them  everything  is  God,  and  God  is  everything ;  that  is  their  grand
mystery,  engraved  in  one  word,  JEHOVAH  on  the  stone  brought  by
the  Knights  Templars  from  the  Holy  Land."  (Hist.  Jac.  vol.  ii.
p.  321.)  The  German  Rose  4-  contained  nine  degrees,  called —
1,  Zecator ;  2,  Theoricus  ;  3,  Practicus ;  4,  Philosophus ;  5,  Adeptus
Junior;  6,  Adeptus  Major;  7,  Adeptus  Exemptus;  8,  Magister
Tcmpli ;  9,  Magus.  Two  sections  split  off  from  this  society  in  1777
and  1780,  the  former  calling  themselves,  "  the  Brothers  of  the  Rose
Croix  of  gold,"  and  the  latter,  "  the  initiated  Brothers  of  Asia."  I
have  been  favoured  by  a  friend  with  the  copy  of  a  letter  from  a  learned
Parisian  Mason,  who  takes  the  same  view  of  the  Masonic  Rose  +  as
I  have  done.  He  says — "  I  never  could  find  any  trace  of  the  Rose  -J-
in  France  before  1745.  It  was  not  in  the  system  of  Ramsay  ;  I  am
convinced  that  it  is  a  combination  of  the  two  degrees  of  the  Royal
Order  adapted  to  the  Roman  Catholic  religion.  I  have  a  book,
written  in  1623  by  Gabriel  Nande,  secretary  of  the  Cardinal  Maza-
rine, against  the  Rose  +  ;  but  it  was  the  FF/.R/.  +  cabalis-
tique,  and  not  the  F  F  .-.  R  /.  -f  Ma9ons,  against  whom  the  book
was  written."

33  It  ultimately  assumed  the  title  of  the  General  Grand  Chapter
of  France,  and  Dr.  Gerbier,  in  1785,  fabricated  a  Latin  charter,
which  he  affirmed  was  granted  to  that  body  by  the  Grand  Lodge  of
the  Royal  Order  of  Edinbro'.   (Hist.  G.  O.  p.  132.)

34  This  Chapter  was  opposed  by  a  new  establishment,  invented  by
one  Perlet,  a  tailor,  called  the  Council  of  Knights  of  the  East,  which
contained  many  new  degrees,  but  I  arn  ignorant  of  their  names.


HISTORICAL    LANDMARK!

to  its  standard.?5  This  Chapter  was  the  first  which
conferred  on  its  members  the  title  of  "  Sovereign  Prince
Masons.36  These  degrees  soon  spread  over  the  whole
continent  of  Europe,  and  irregularities  of  every  kind
prevailed.37  In  1761  the  Count  de  Clermont,  who  had
resigned  the  Grand  Mastership,  recommended  as  his
deputy  a  dancing  master,  of  the  name  of  Lacorne,
which  disgusted  the  fraternity  so  much,  that  they
refused  to  meet  him,  and  he  was  unceremoniously
rejected;  but,  unfortunately,  he  had  friends  amongst
the  lower  classes  of  Masons,  who  formed  a  new  Grand

35  The  Council  of  this  ( 'hapter  took  the  title  of  "  Le  Sublime  Mere
Lodge  Ecossaise  du  Grand  Globe  Frai^ois,  Souveraine  (1  ramie  Logo
de  France,"  in  rivalry  to  the  existing  Grand  Lodges.     This  was  in
1780;  but  the  French  author  adds — "  Avili  par  son  commerce  de
grades  ma9onniqucs,  il  ne  subsista  pas  long  temps."

36  The  Chapitre  de  Clermont,  and  various  other  self-constituted
governing  bodies,  had  invented  so  many  new  degrees,  and  granted
so  many  new  charters,  that  it  is  utterly  impossible  to  say  how  many
were  floating  throughout  France  in  1762.

3?  A.  most  bewildering  process  was  used  to  introduce  a  candidate
to  some  of  these  high  degrees.  "  The  day  of  initiation  being  fixed,
at  the  hour  agreed  upon,  the  introducing  adept  waits  upon  the  new
proselyte,  and  takes  him  into  a  carriage  The  windows  being  closed,
the  candidate  blindfolded,  and  the  coachman  continually  winding  and
varying  his  course,  are  precautions  more  than  sufficient  to  hinder  the
proselyte  from  ever  being  able  to  trace  the  spot  to  which  he  is  con-
ducted. Led  by  the  hand,  and  still  blindfolded,  he  slowly  ascends
to  the  porch  of  the  mysteries.  His  guide  then  divests  him  of  the
Masonic  insignia,  puts  a  drawn  sword  into  his  hand,  takes  off  the
bandage  from  his  eyes,  and  leaves  him,  strictly  forbidding  him  to
proceed  a  step  until  he  hears  the  voice  which  is  to  call  him.  He  is
then  left  to  his  reflections."  The  same  degree  of  caution  was  used
throughout  the  whole  admission.


OF    FREEMASONRY.  49

Lodge,  and  placed  him  at  its  head ;  on  which  the  count
withdrew  his  protection  from  Lacorne,  and  appointed
Chaillon  de  Joinville  to  the  office  of  Grand  Master.

To  put  an  effectual  period  to  these  dissensions,  the
King  of  Prussia  assumed  the  title  of  Grand  Master  of
the  Sublime  and  Ineffable  degrees  throughout  the  two
hemispheres ;  and  constituting  his  Grand  Lodge  on  a
sound  basis,  he  succeeded  in  reducing  the  system  into
some  kind  of  order.38  He  appointed  deputies  in  the
different  kingdoms  of  Europe,  and  authorised  Chaillon
de  Joinville,  his  deputy,39  the  Grand  Master  of  the

38  It  is  said  that  "  he  conceived  Freemasonry  to  be  so  necessary  to
the  permanent  establishment  of  his  conquests  and  renown,  that  he
had  all  his  principal  officers,  privy  councillors,  nobles,  and  all  persons
in  trust  and  power,  initiated  into  the  very  highest  degrees  of  his
system.    Thus  the  sagacious  monarch  might  be  safe  from  conspiracy,
treason,  and  revolt,  when  he  knew  that  he  had  placed  power  only  in
the  hands  of  faithful  Brethren,  who  were  bound,  by  solemn  ties,  to
watch  over  and  guard  his  sacred  person,  keep  inviolably  his  secret
councils,  and  conquer  or  die  in  his  service.     This  great  king  intro-
duced  the  Fhilippian  Order,  into  which  he  suffered  none  to  lie
initiated  but  the  first  nobility,  who  had  been  previously  created
Knights  of  the  Order  of  the  Temple."

39  There  are  some  doubts  whether  Chaillon  de  Joinville  was,  in
1761,  the  deputy  of  the  King  of  Prussia.     The  rite  used  by  the
Council  of  Emperors  was  introduced  into  Berlin  only  on  the  20th  of
May,  1761,  by  the  Baron  de  Prinzen ;  so  that  if  Joinville  did  pre-
side, he  could  scarcely  have  done  so  as  connected  with  Prussian
Masonry,  but  merely  as  a  Trench  member  of  the  Chapter  at  Paris.
The  document,  however,  whence  the  statement  in  the  text  has  been
taken,  is  a  manifesto  publicly  issued  by  the  Inspectors  General  from
Charlestown,  and  dated  4th  December,  1802,  which  asserts  that  "  the
constitutions  were  transmitted  to  our  illustrious  Brother,  Stephen
Morin,  who  had  been  appointed,  on  the  27th  August,  5765  (1761),
Inspector  General  over  all  Lodges,  &c.  &c.,  in  the  New  World,  by

VOL.  ir.  K


50  HISTORICAL    LANDMARKS

Order  in  France,  to  convene  a  Grand  Consistory  of
Princes  of  the  Royal  Secret  at  Paris,40  for  the  purpox-
of  granting  a  patent  to  a  Jew,  called  Stephen  Morin,
constituting  him  an  Inspector  General  for  the  intro-
duction of  the  system  into  the  New  World ;  with  ample
powers  to  appoint  deputies,  to  constitute  Chapters,  and
to  perform  every  other  duty  appertaining  to  his  high
office.41  It  is  thought  that  Morin  introduced  Sublime
Masonry,  as  it  was  called,  into  England.  We  have
evidence  that  he  proceeded  to  St.  Domingo,42  and  there

the  Grand  Consistory  of  Princes  of  the  lloyal  Secret,  convened  at
Paris,  at  which  presided  the  Kiny  of  J'russia's  deputy,  ChaUlon  dc.
Joinville,  Substitute  General  of  the  Order,  11.  W.  M.  of  the  first
Lodge  in  France,  called  St.  Anthony's,  Chief  of  the  Eminent  Degrees,
Commander  and  Sublime  Prince  of  the  lloyal  Secret,  &c.  &c."

40  Notwithstanding  the  authority  of  the  above  document,  there  arc
considerable  doubts  whether  a  Consistory  of  Princes  of  the  lloyal
Secret  existed  at  this  period,  (Vide  infra  sub  Anno  1805.)

41  A.bont  this  period  the  Craft  Lodges  in  the  East  Indies  having
no  Grand  Master,  petitioned  the  Grand  Lodge  of  England  in  favour
of  Culling  Smith,  Esq.,  an  eminent  Mason  at  Calcutta;  and  it  wa*
ordered,  March  29,  1762,  that  a  deputation  be  made  out,  appointing
Bro.  Culling  Smith  Prov.  G.  M.  for  India,  and  the  expense  paid  by
the  Grand  Lodge.

42  Lodges  and  Chapters  of  the  Royal  Order  of  llobert  Bruce  were
also  opened  in  St.  Domingo  by  Bro.  Achille  Huet  dc  Lachelle,  who
styled  himself  "  the  lloyal  Grand  Master  of  the  G.  L.  of  the  lloyal
Order  of  Heredon."     He  himself  furnishes  the  following  account,
which  is  interesting,  although  it  occurred  at  a  much  later  period  :-—
He  says  he  derived  his  authority  from  the  most  Sublime  Chief  of
the  Order  in  France.     He  established  in  Baltimore  a  Sovereign
Grand  Chapter,  under  the  title  of  the  Chapter  of  Truth,  at  the
request  of  the  potent  Brothers,  Knights  of  the  Cape,  who  had  sought
refuge  in  Baltimore  in  consequence  of  the  troubles  of  the  revolution
in  St.  Domingo.     The  Sovereign  Chief  of  the  Order  for  France  had


OF    FREEMASONRY.  51

executed  his  delegated  authority43  for  propagating  the

been  first  applied  to,  but  he  referred  them  back  to  the  Provincial
Chapter.  Huet  de  Lachelle,  the  G.  M..  was  himself  driven  to  the
United  States  by  the  troubles  in  the  colony,  and  passed  eight  months
there.  During  his  residence  he  established  at  New  York  an  Anglo-
American  Sovereign  Grand  Chapter,  under  the  title  of  the  Chosen
Friends,  of  which  Bro.  Van-den-Brock  was  President ;  and  in  the
same  city  a  Sovereign  Chapter  of  France,  under  the  denomination  of
the  Triple  Union,  of  which  Chalon  Dayral  was  President.  At  the
Oriental  of  Philadelphia  he  established  two  more  Sovereign  Chapters,
one  for  the  members  of  the  Chapter  of  Truth,  of  the  Cape,  under
the  name  of  Truth  and  Union,  Bizoriard,  President ;  and  the  other
for  the  Lodge  of  Amenity  and  Candour,  Gauvin,  President.  All
these  Sovereign  Chapters  appointed  de  Lachelle  ambassador,  by
letters  of  delegation,  to  the  Sovereign  Chief  of  the  Order  at  Kil-
winning  of  Edinburgh  ;  to  the  Sovereign  Grand  Provincial  Chapter
of  France,  sitting  at  Rouen ;  and  to  the  Grand  Orient  of  France.
He  went  to  France  on  this  mission  in  1798,  and  delivered  the  docu-
ments to  M.  Matheu,  G.  M.  of  the  G.  Lodge  at  Rouen.  Soon  after  he
returned  to  St.  Domingo,  and  found  Chapters  established  there  by  the
foreign  Grand  Orients  of  Chaiiestown,  Philadelphia,  and  Marseilles.
These  several  Chapters  were  required  to  acknowledge  the  Grand
Orient  of  France  as  their  head.  In  1803  a  Prov.  G.  Lodge  of  the
Ancien  and  Accepte  was  established  at  the  Orient  of  Port  du  Prince,
by  the  Grand  Orient  of  Pennsylvania,  the  officers  of  which  were
installed  by  de  Lachelle ;  who  thus  acted  as  the  representative  of
both  the  Grand  Lodges  of  France,  as  well  as  of  the  Royal  Order  of
Scotland.

43  u  wnen  -gro  Morm  aiTiveci  m  St.  Domingo,  A.  D.  1742,  lie
appointed  a  deputy  Inspector  General  for  North  America.  This
honour  was  conferred  on  M.  M.  Hayes,  with  the  power  of  appointing
others  where  necessary.  Morin  also  appointed  Bro.  Franklin  deputy
Inspector  General  for  Jamaica,  and  the  British  Leeward  Islands ;
and  Bro.  Col.  Provost  for  the  Windward  Islands  and  the  British
army.  Hayes  appointed  Bro.  Isaac  da  Costa  his  deputy  for  the
State  of  South  Carolina,  who  established  the  Sublime  G.  Lodge  of
Perfection  in  Charlestown.  After  da  Costa's  death,  Bro.  Joseph

K  2


HISTORICAL    LANDMARKS


•44


hauts  grades  throughout  the  New  World,  personally,
and  by  deputation.45

The  King  of  Prussia  at  length  extended  the  Order
by  the  addition  of  eight  degrees,4"  making  the  number

Myers  was  appointed  deputy  for  this  state  by  Hayes ;  who  also
appointed  Bro.  Col.  Solomon  Bush  deputy  for  the  State  of  Penn-
sylvania, and  Bro.  Barend  M.  Spitzer  to  the  same  rank  for  Georgia,
which  was  confirmed  by  a  convention  of  Inspectors  convened  in
Philadelphia,  June  15,  1781.  On  the  1st  May,  1786,  the  consti-
tution of  the  thirty-third  degree,  called  the  Supreme  Council  of
Sovereign  Grand  Inspectors  General,  was  finally  ratified  by  the  King
of  Prussia,  who,  as  (irand  Commander  of  the  Order  of  Princes  of
the  Royal  Secret,  possessed  the  sovereign  Masonic  power  over  the
whole  Craft."  (Circular  of  the  (irand  Inspectors.)

44  A  friend  and  esteemed  correspondent  is  in  possession  of  a
diploma,  granted  to  J.  P.  Rochet,  dated  Kingston  in  Jamaica,  20th
January,  1770,  and  signed  by  Aug.  Provost,  Prince  of  the  Royal
Secret,  and  Grand  Inspector  General.

'^  In  1763,  Moses  M.  Hayes  proceeded  to  Rhode  Island,  where
he  established  a  Council  of  the  thirty-third,  and  conferred  the  degrees
on  several  persons,  and  amongst  the  rest  on  Moses  Seixes  (how  could
the  Jews  consistently  propagate  these  Christian  degrees  ?)  who  Avas
afterwards  Master  of  the  Grand  Lodge  of  llhode  Island.  He  gave
him  authority  to  confer  all  the  higher  degrees,  which  he  held  till  his
death  in  1801 ;  and  then  the  Brethren  placed  themselves  under  the
Supreme  Grand  Consistory  of  New  York.  They  gave  the  degrees  of
knighthood  under  Seixes ;  but  this  power  was  subsequently  trans-
ferred to  the  Grand  Encampment  of  New  England.  In  1832  the
Consistory  of  llhode  Island  possessed  the  power  of  initiating  Master
Masons  into  all  the  degrees  and  grades  of  Philosophical  Masonry,
up  to  the  thirty-second  degree.

46  Dalcho  says,  however,  that  the  highest  degree  was  not  esta-
blished till  some  years  later,  viz.,  May  1,  1786.  "  The  occasion  of
it  was  this — by  the  constitutions  of  the  Order,  which  were  ratified
October  25,  1762,  the  King  of  Prussia  was  proclaimed  as  the  chief
of  the  eminent  degrees,  with  the  rank  of  Sovereign  Grand  Inspector
General,  and  Grand  Commander.  The  higher  Councils  and  Chapters


01'    FREEMASONRY.  53

thirty-three,  as  they  stand  at  the  present  time.47  In
1767  a  patent  was  obtained  from  the  Duke  of  Beau-
fort to  place  the  Lodge  of  Amity  at  Berlin,48  under  the
Grand  Lodge  of  England,  by  the  new  appellation  of
Le  Royale  York  de  I'Amitie,  which  name  was  adopted
in  honour  of  H.  R.  II.  the  Duke  of  York,  who  was
there  initiated  into  Masonry  while  on  his  travels.49

could  not  be  opened  without  his  presence,  or  that  of  his  substitute,
whom  he  must  appoint.  All  the  transactions  of  the  Consistory  of
the  thirty-third  degree  required  his  sanction,  or  that  of  his  substitute,
to  establish  their  legality,  and  many  other  prerogatives  were  attached
to  his  Masonic  rank.  No  provision,  however,  had  been  made  in  the
constitution  for  the  appointment  of  his  successor ;  and  as  it  was  an
office  of  the  highest  importance,  the  utmost  caution  was  necessary  to
prevent  an  improper  person  from  obtaining  it.  The  king,  being  con-
scious of  this,  established  the  thirty-third  degree.  Nine  Brethren
in  each  nation  form  the  Supreme  Council  of  Grand  Inspectors
General,  who  after  his  decease  possess  all  his  Masonic  prerogatives
and  power  over  the  Craft ;  they  are  the  executive  body  of  the  Ma-
sonic fraternity,  and  their  approval  is  now  necessary  to  the  acts  of
the  Consistory,  before  they  can  become  laws,  and  from  their  decision
there  can  be  no  appeal."  (Dalcho,  p.  94.)

47  In  Prussia  it  was  ordained  that  "  every  member  should  pay
twenty-five  rix  dollars  (£4  3s.)  for  the  first  degree;  fifty  rix  dollars
on  his  being  passed  to  the  second  degree ;  and  one  hundred  rix
dollars  on  his  being  raised  to  the  third ;   amounting,  with  a  few
subsidiary  payments,  to  about  £30."

48  It  was  originally  established  hi  1752  by  some  French  refugees.

49  Barruel  had  been  imposed  on  by  a  curious  tale  of  this  Lodge
being  a  nest  of  Illuminees,  when,   in  point  of  fact,  its  operations
were  restricted  to  symbolical  Masonry,  and  a  few  harmless  emana-
tions from  it.    The  degrees  were  confined  to  nine,  compounded  from
the  rituals  of  the  Hose  Croix  d'or,  Swedish  Masonry,  and  the  Chapter
of  Clermont.     It  was  called  the  system  of  Fessler,  and  was  much
esteemed  as  a  practical  scheme,  miincumbcrod  with  unmeaning  de-
gives.— 1,  E.  A.  P.;   2,  F.  C.;   3,  M.  M. ;    1-,  the  lioly  of  Holies;


54


•  RICA  I,


A  new  candidate  for  Masonic  favour  now  appeared,
in  the  person  of  Count  Zinnendorff,50  who  introduced
a  system  of  Masonry51  fabricated  from  the  reveries  of

5,  Justification ;  6,  Celebration  ;  7,  the  True  Light ;  8,  Fatherland ;
9,  Perfection.  Barruel,  however,  asserts  that  "  the  Royal  York  at
Berlin  established  within  itself  a  Directory,  a  Senate  of  Ancients,
and  a  Senate  of  Youngers,  £c.,  for  the  purpose  of  effecting  a  revo-
lution!" (Hist.  Jac.  vol.  iv.  p.  519.) — Mere  nonsense!

50  Zinnendorff  was  physician  in  chief  and  a  minister  of  the  Emperor
Charles  YI.     In  his  general  conversation  he  was  cautious ;  in  his
conferences  with  other  ministers  he  was  reserved.     But  being  a  bon
vivant,  at  his  table  all  this  state  machinery  was  thrown  aside,  then-
he  discoursed  at  large,  and  delivered  the  most  copious  and  instructive
lectures  on  his  exotic  and  domestic  luxuries.     An  excellent  tale  is
told  of  the  delicacy  of  his  palate  : — It  appears  that  there  was  always
an  hour  in  his  public  days  when  he  was  totally  inaccessible.     The
politicians  were  astonished  at  a  retirement  for  which  they  could
assign  no  reason,  until  an  inquisitive  foreigner,  by  giving  a  large
gratuity  to  one  of  his  servants,  was  let  into  the  secret.    Being  placed
in  a  closet  between  the  chamber  of  audience  and  the  room  where  the
count  was,  he  saw  him  seated  in  an  elbow  chair ;  when,  preceded  by
a  page  with  a  cloth  on  his  arm  and  a  drinking  glass,  one  of  his  do-
mestics appeared,  who  presented  a  salver  with  many  little  pieces  of
bread,  elegantly  disposed,  and  was  followed  by  the  first  cook,  who,
on  another  salver,  had  a  number  of  small  boats  filled  with  as  many
different  kinds  of  gravy.     His  excellency  then,  tucking  his  napkin
in  his  cravat,  first  washed  and  gargled  his  mouth,  then  dipped  a
piece  of  bread  successively  in  each  of  the  sauces,  and  having  tasted
it  with  much  deliberation,  carefully  rinsing  his  palate  after  every
one,  to  avoid  confusion,  he  at  length,  with  inexpressible  sagacity,
decided  on  the  destination  of  them  all. — His  system  of  Masonry  was
the  extension  of  a  rite  called  the  Illuminees  of  Avignon,  established
by  Pernetti  in  1760.     He  died  in  1800,  leaving  behind  him  many
new  degrees  of  Masonry,  and  particularly  a  novel  arrangement  of  the
Chevalier  du  Soleil.

51  Zinnendorff  became  Grand  Master  of  the  Grand  Lodge  of  Ger-
many ;  and  his  system  consisted  of  seven  degrees.     BLUE,  or  ST.


Ol'    FREEMASONRY.  •).)

Baron  Swedenborg,5'2  blended  with  the  Scotch  and
Swedish  degrees,53  Templary,  and  St.  John's  German
Masonry  ;54  and  an  adept,  of  the  name  of  Wilhermotts,
initiated  into  it  Prince  Ferdinand  of  Brunswick ;  and

JOHN'S  MASONRY:  1,  E.  A.  P. ;  2,  F.  C. ;  3,  M.  M.  EED  MA-
SONRY, 4,  Scotch  Apprentice  and  F.  C. ;  5,  Scotch  Master. — CAPI-
TULAR MASONRY,  6,  Favourite  of  St.  John ;  7,  Elected  Brother.

52  Swedenborg  admitted  only  six  degrees — 1,  E.  A.  P. ;  2,  F.  C. ;
3,  M.  M.;  4,  Enlightened  Theosophist;  5,  Blue  Brother;  6,  Red
Brother.     The  Swedish  ones  were — FIRST  DIVISION,  first  class,
I,  2,  3,  Symbolical. — Second  class,  4,  Apprentice  and  F.  C.  of  St.
Andrew;    5,  Master  of  St.  Andrew;    6,  Stuart  Brother. — Third
class,  7,  Favoured  Brother  of  Solomon ;  8,  Favoured  Brother  of  St.
John,  or  the  White  Band ;  9,  Favoured  Brother  of  St.  Andrew,  or
the  Purple  Band. — Fourth  class,  10,  Brother  of  the  Red  Cross.
SECOND  DIVISION,  fifth  class,  11,  Member  of  the  Chapter. — Sixth
class,    12,   Grand  Dignitary  of  the  Chapter.     THIRD  DIVISION,
seventh  class,  13,  the  Reigning  Master  (the  king)  who  has  this
title — Salomonis  sanctificatus,  illuminatus,  magnus  Jehovah !

53  In  1767  one  Chartannier  made  an  attempt  to  introduce  the
system  of  Swedenborg,  or  rather  a  modification  and  extension  of  it,
into  this  country,  without  success.     Some  of  his  degrees  were —
1,  2,  3,  as  before;  4,  Apprentice  Theosophist;  5,  Fellowcraft  Theo-
sophist ;  6,  Master  Theosophist ;  7,  Sublime  Scotch'  degree,  or  the
Celestial  Jerusalem ;  8,  Enlightened  Theosophist ;  9,  Red  Brother.
Then,  again,  the  regime  of  the  Philaletes  was  instituted  at  Paris  in
1773,  by  Savalette  Delanges,  founded  on  the  doctrine  of  Sweden-
borg and  St.  Martin.    Besides  these  there  were  various  other  systems
of  Swedenborg's  Masonry.

1  It  may  be  very  readily  believed  that  there  existed  on  the  con-
tinent some  serious  intention  of  excluding  Christianity  from  the
several  systems  of  Masonry,  by  the  fact,  that  in  more  than  one
of  the  rituals  it  was  directed  that,  "  the  Bible  shall  be  of  the
Hebrew  text,  and  the  New  Testament  shall  not  be  bound  up  with
it;"  for  so  long  as  the  Old  and  New  Testaments  conjoined  con-
stituted the  first  great  light  of  Masonry,  Christianity  could  not  be
excluded.


WRICAL


•  MARKS


Prince  Louis  George  Charles  of  Hesse  Darmstadt  be-
came its  Grand  Master.55  At  the  same  time  the  Baron
Hunde  employed  himself  in  promulgating  his  Stricter
Observantz  system,56  superseding  the  Rosaic,57  which
had  been  peculiarly  attractive  from  its  numerous  orders
and  decorations.58  He  was  subsequently  joined  by  two
other  adventurers,  called  Leucht5y  and  Shubard,(i°  who

"  Zinnendorff  attempted  to  introduce  his  system  into  England,
mid  applied  to  the  Grand  Lodge  for  its  sanction,  producing  a  recom-
mendation in  cypher  from  the  Grand  Lodge  of  Sweden,  but  without
effect.

56  Thory  has  given  a  list  of  nearly  eighty  names  of  persons  of
quality  who  were  members  of  the  Strict  Observance  fraternity.

57  Rosa  was  a  Lutheran  priest,  and  had  been  the  Master  of  a  pri-
vate Lodge  at  Halle.     He  was  deputed  by  the  Baron  de  Prinzcn  to
communicate  the  new  degrees  amongst  the  German  fraternity,  under
the  jurisdiction  of  the  Lodge  of  the  Three  Globes  at  Berlin.

68  The  system  of  M.  llosa  was  received  in  Germany  with  the
greatest  enthusiasm.  The  Brethren  bought  up,  at  any  price,  his
splendid  decorations ;  and  accepted,  without  hesitation  or  doubt,
every  imposition  which  he  tendered  to  them.  The  Chevalier  de
1'Aigle,  of  the  llosaic  Masonry,  is  admitted  by  llobison  (p.  180)  to
make  the  Master's  degree  a  commemoration  of  the  passion  of  our
Saviour.  Jesus  Christ  is  represented  as  the  enemy  of  superstitious
observances,  and  the  assertor  of  brotherly  love.

59  This  man  told  his  partisans  that  "  Hunde  was  the  Grand  Master
of  the  seventh  province  of  Masonry,  which  included  the  whole  of
Germany,  and  the  royal  dominions  of  Prussia.     He  showed  them  a
map  of  the  Masonic  empire,  arranged  into  provinces,  each  of  which
had  distinguishing  emblems.     These  are  all  taken  from  an  old  for-
gotten and  insignificant  book,  Typotii  Symbola  divina  et  hurnaua."
(llobison,  p.  72.)

60  Great  disputes  prevailed  about  this  time  between  llunde  and  a
person  of  the  name  of  Johnson,  who  had  introduced  some  new  de-
grees into  Germany,  which  ended  in  the  exposure  and  arrest  of  the
latter  charlatan  at  Magdeburg.


OF    FREEMASONRY.  57

recommended  the  division  of  the  Order  into  two  grand
classes,  to  be  denominated  Strict  Observance61  and
Lax  or  Late  Observance.62

So  many  degrees  of  Ecossais,  or  Scotch  Masonry,
existed  in  France,  that  it  is  next  to  impossible  to  reckon
up  the  number.63  Every  new  series  was  asserted  to  be

61  The  Order  was  distributed  by  Hunde  over  the  whole  world,
which  he  divided  into  provinces,  thus  : — 1,  the  province  of  Arragon ;
2,  Auvergne ;    3,  Languedoc  ;    4,  Lyons ;    5,  Burgundy ;   6,  Great
Britain;  7,  Lower  Saxony,  Prussian  Poland,  Livonia,  and  Courland;
8,  Germany,  Italy,  and  Sicily  ;  9,  Greece  and  the  Archipelago.    The
Assembly  at  Wilhelmsbad  corrected  this  list,  and  changed  the  order
of  the  provinces,  omitting  Great  Britain  altogether.

62  The  latter,  however,  was  evidently  a  schism  from  the  former ;
for  it  assumed  the  pre-eminence,  not  only  over  the  Strict  Observance,
but  over  all  other  systems  of  Masonry.     Its  members  boasted  that
they  had  possession  of  the  true  philosopher's  stone,  the  elixir  of  life,
the  command  of  spirits,  and  a  method  of  discovering  the  hidden
treasures  of  the  Templars.     The  ritual  had  fifteen  degrees,  of  two
classes. — First  class,  1,  2,  3,  as  before;  4,  African  Brother;  5,
Knight  of  St.  Andrew  ;  6,  Knight  of  the  Eagle ;  7,  Scotch  Master ;
8,  Sovereign  Magus ;  .9,  Prov.  Master  of  the  lied  Cross ;  10,  Knight
of  Splendour  and  Light. — Second  class,  11,  Knight  Novice  of  the
third  year;  12,  Knight  of  the  fifth  year;  13,  Knight  of  the  seventh
year;  14,  Knight  Levite ;  15,  Knight  Priest.

63  In  the  Etoile  Flamboyant,  a  work  published  by  the  Baron  de
Tschoudy  in  1766,  the  author  says  (vol.  ii.  p.  47) — "  Je  commence
par  annoncer,  mes  venerable  freres,  que  je  n'entends  point  renfermer
sous  le  nom  d'Ecossais  les  Ma£ons  que  se  disent  tels,  Ecossais  puri-
ficateur ;  Apprentif,  Compagnon,  Maitre  Ecossais,  Ecossais  d'Alic-
dony,  Levite  Ecossais  Martyr,  Ecossais  d'Hiram,  Sublime  Ecossais,
Ecossais  de  Prusse,  Academic  d'Ecosse,  Ecossais  trim'taire,  Ecossais
des  freres  aines,  Ecossais  des  fils  aines,  Grand  Ecossais,  Ecossais  de
le  quarantains,  Ecossais  de  Jacques  VI.,  Ecossais  du  trois  J.,  Parfait
Ecossais,  Ecossais  Anglais,  Ecossais  d'Anjou,  Ecossais  dc  Messiuc,
Ecossais  des  pctits  apartments,  Ecossais  d'Angers,  Ecossais  de  Paris,


'ORICAI,    LANDMARKS

a  fresh  importation  from  Scotland,  when,  in  fact,  they
were  all  indebted  for  their  origin  to  France  and  Ger-
many. The  Order  appears  to  have  been  carried  on
with  great  spirit,  for  in  1765  a  superb  hall,  with  cor-
responding apartments  for  the  accommodation  of  the
fraternity,  was  erected  at  Marseilles,  which  was  mag-
nificently decorated  with  allegorical  painting  and  sculp-
ture, representing  subjects  from  the  Old  and  Now
Testaments  ;64  an  evident  proof  that  the  Brethren  there
were  not  tainted  with  the  infidel  opinions  which  at  this
period  had  made  their  appearance  in  some  of  the  French
Lodges,  and  accompanied  the  propagation  of  the  high
degrees. w

In  1770  numerous  Lodges  and  Chapters,  tired  of
the  schisms  which  rent  the  venerable  Order  into  sects
and  discordant  parties/56  each  of  which  asserted  its

Ecossais  de  Clerinont,  Ecossais  de  Montpellier,  &c.  &c.  &c."  Non-
are  the  names  of  twenty-seven  degrees  called  Ecossais  in  1766,
besides  which  there  are  many  others,  all  varying  in  detail,  and  many
of  them  in  essentials.  I  have  before  me  a  list  of  more  than  eighty
degrees  called  Ecossais !

64  It  contained  paintings  of  Solomon,  John  the  Baptist,  Joseph,
Job,  St.  Paul  and  Barnabas,  David  and  Jonathan,  St.  Peter,  Tobias,
Abraham,  &c.  &c.,  all  exhibited  in  some  interesting  scene  of  their
history,  accompanied  by  appropriate  mottos,  and  interspersed  with
the  arms  of  noble  and  wealthy  Brethren.

65  In  1769  the  Baron  de  Tschoudy,  who  was  a  pupil  of  Ramsay,
died,  leaving  many  valuable  manuscripts  to  the  Council  of  the  Che-
valiers d'Orient,  of  which  he  was  an  active  member,  and  the  inventor
of  the  following  degrees  : — Order  of  Palestine,  Ecossais  of  St.  An-
drew of  Scotland,  Grand  Ecossais  of  ditto,  Order  of  the  Blazing
Star,  Ecossais  of  the  Sacred  Vault  of  James  VI.,  Secret  of  Masonry.

66  For  the  old  Grand  Lodge  had  proceeded  to  the  extremity  of
expelling  all  the  adherents  of  Laconic.


OF    FREEMASONRY.  59

individual  purity  and  authenticity  in  opposition  to  all
others,  placed  themselves  under  the  authority  of  a
Grand  Lodge  at  Lyons,67  called  the  "  Loge  des  Che-
valiers Bienfaisants  de  la  Saint  Cite,68  of  which  the
Due  de  Chartres,69  afterwards  Orleans,  was  appointed
the  Grand  Master,70  and  he  named  the  Due  de  Luxem-
bourg as  his  deputy.  It  had  two  hundred  and  sixty-
six  Lodges  under  its  jurisdiction.71  Subsequently  the

67  These  were  the  remains  of  the  Rosaic  Lodges,  the  Templars,
and  the  Strict  Observance.

68  This  was  also  the  name  of  a  degree,  as  settled  at  the  great
conference  at  Wilhelmsbad  in  1782.

69  The  expelled  Brethren  expressed  their  readiness  to  concur  in
this  appointment,  provided  the  decree  of  expulsion  were  reversed,
and  all  the  acts  of  Grand  Lodge,  from  the  period  of  their  secession,
submitted  to  them  for  revision  and  confirmation.    After  considerable
litigation,  it  was  mutually  agreed,  that  all  matters  in  dispute  should
be  committed  to  the  decision  of  eight  commissioners  to  be  appointed
for  that  purpose.

70  In  this  year  "  the  Prov.  Grand  Master  for  foreign  Lodges  ac-
quainted the  Grand  Lodge,  that  he  had  received  a  letter  from  the
Baron  de  Boetzelaer,  Grand  Master  of  Holland,  requesting  to  be
acknowledged  as  such  by  the  Grand  Lodge  of  England,  whose  supe-
riority he  acknowledged ;  and  promising  that  on  condition  the  Grand
Lodge  of  England  did  not  in  future  constitute  any  new  Lodge  within
his  jurisdiction,  the  Grand  Lodge  of  Holland  should  observe  the
same  restriction  with  respect  to  all  parts  of  the  world  where  Lodges
were  established  under  the  patronage  of  England.      Upon  these
terms  he  requested  that  a  firm  and  friendly  alliance  might  be  executed
in  form  betwixt  the  Grand  Officers  of  each  Lodge ;  and  that  mutual
communications  might  be  made  annually.     The  proposition  was
agreed  to."  (Noorth.  Const,  p.  297.)

71  We  have  a  particular  account  of  a  schism  amongst  the  members
of  this  Lodge,  fomented  by  a  party  calling  themselves  Martinists,
from  a  M.  St.  Martin,  who  was  a  theistical  philosopher.    The  system


HISTORICAL

Masons  in  Paris  formed  themselves  into  a  Grand  Lodge,
called  the  Grand  Orient,  in  which  the  Loge  des  Che-
valiers Bienfaisants  was  merged.72  The  Due  de  Chartres
was  constituted  the  Grand  Master  of  the  united  body,
and  proclaimed  it,  by  manifesto,73  to  be  the  sole  govern-
ing body  of  Masons  on  the  continent  of  Europe  ;74  and

was  dangerous,  inasmuch  as  it  partook  largely  of  the  doctrines  of  its
founder.  The  breach,  after  agitating  the  fraternity  for  a  long  period
of  time,  was  fortunately  healed,  and  the  section  assumed  the  new
name  of  Misadureriis,  which  being  transposed,  produces  the  origin  of
the  term  Amis  Reunis.  By  some  the  renovated  system  was  called
Amis  Keunis  de  la  Verite.  It  had  two  divisions  and  twelve  degrees.
Thejirst  division,  or  Petit  Masonry,  1,  E.  A.  P. ;  2,  F.  C. ;  3,  M.M.;
4,  Elu;  5,  Ecossais;  6,  Knight  of  the  East — Second  division,  or
High  Masonry,  1,  Hose  Croix ;  8,  Knight  of  the  Temple ;  9,  Mys-
terious Philosopher;  10,  Sublime  Philosopher;  11,  the  Initiated;
12,  Philaletes,  or  Lovers  of  Truth,  who  arc  Chiefs  of  the  Order.
This  system  professed  to  restore  man  to  his  original  perfection,  and
bring  him  nearer  to  the  source  of  all  good.

72  Here  the  Electic  Masonry  was  promulgated.     It  commenced
with  the  symbolical  degrees  only;  but,  like  all  the  rest,   it  subse-
quently admitted  a  modification  of  the  hauts  grades.

73  This  manifesto  recited  the  decision  of  the  eight  commissioners
appointed  to  revise  the  system,  and  declared,  that  the  old  Grand
Lodge  of  France  having  ceased  to  exist,  it  was  replaced  by  a  new
governing  body,  which  should  be  esteemed  a  national  Grand  Lodge,
under  the  title  of  the  Grand  Orient  of  France.

74  The  title,  however,  was  formally  controverted  by  the  old  Grand
Lodge,  which  issued  an  edict,  dated  17th  June,  1773,  declaring  the
Grand  Orient  a  fraudulent,  schismatic,  and  illegal  body,  instituted
for  factious  purposes,  and  expelling  the  commissioners  by  name  who
recommended  its  formation,  as  infamous,  and  unworthy  the  name
of  Masons.     It  deputed  M.  Duchaussoy  to  invite  the  members  of
the  Grand  Orient  to  return  to  their  allegiance,  but  without  success ;
and  a  most  disgraceful  contest  was  the  result.


OF    FREEMASONRY.  f)  I

after  a  protracted  struggle  of  some  years  duration,  he
succeeded  in  establishing  its  claim  to  the  title.75

About  this  time  the  celebrated  cosmopolite,  Baron
Knigge,  was  initiated  into  Masonry,  whose  name  flou-
rishes so  prominently  in  the  history  of  illuminism.70
He  became  a  Knight  Commander,  with  the  charac-
teristic name  of  Eques  a  cygno,77  and  meeting  with  one

75  This  Grand  Lodge  appointed  three  Boards,  or  Councils,  which
were  denominated  "  the  Chambers  of  Administration  of  Paris  and  of
the  Provinces ;"  abolished  the  office  of  Worshipful  Master  for  life,
and  made  it  annual  and  elective,  as  in  England.  The  old  Grand
Lodge,  however,  denounced  all  these  proceedings,  and  once  more
voted  the  Grand  Orient  factious  and  schismatic.

70  This  worthy  was  initiated  almost  for  the  express  purpose  of
aiding  his  disorganizing  schemes.  "  The  great  veneration  in  which
the  Scotch  Knights  were  held  by  Masons,  determined  the  Baron
Knigge  to  make  himself  Master  of  this  degree,  and  engraft  it  on
Illuminism.  The  sect  has  constituted  this  into  both  an  intermediate
and  a  stationary  degree.  It  is  stationary  for  those  into  whom  it
despairs  of  ever  infusing  the  principles  required  for  a  further  admis-
sion to  the  mysteries  ;  but  it  is  only  intermediate  for  those  who  have
shown  dispositions  more  accordant  with  the  pursuits  of  the  sect."
(Hist.  Jac.  vol.  iii.  p.  137.)

77  "  Knigge  formed  a  scheme  for  uniting  the  whole  fraternity,  for
the  purpose  of  promoting  his  Utopian  plan  of  universal  benevolence
in  a  state  of  liberty  and  equality.  He  hoped  to  do  this  more  readily
by  completing  their  embarrassment,  and  showing  each  system  how
infirm  its  foundation  was,  and  how  little  chance  it  had  of  obtaining
a  general  adherence.  The  Stricten  Observantz  had  now  completely
lost,  or  was  losing,  its  credit,  by  which  it  had  hoped  to  get  the
better  of  all  the  rest.  Knigge,  therefore,  proposed  a  plan  to  the
Lodges  of  Frankfort  and  Wetzlar,  by  which  all  the  systems  might  be
united,  or  at  least  be  brought  to  a  state  of  mutual  forbearance  and
intercourse.  He  proposed  that  the  English  system  should  be  taken
for  the  groundwork,  and  to  receive  all  and  only  those  who  had  taken
the  three  symbolical  degrees.  After  thus  guarding  this  general  point


62


HISTORICAL    LANDMARKS


Scroeder,78  at  Marbourg,  he  was  completely  fascinated.7
These  worthies  were  followed  by  Gugomos,80  Scroepfer,81

of  faith,  he  proposed  to  allow  the  validity  of  every  degree  or  rank
which  should  be  received  in  any  Lodge,  or  be  made  the  character  of
any  particular  system.  These  Lodges  having  secured  the  adherence
of  several  others,  at  length  brought  about  a  general  convention
at  Wilhelmsbad,  in  Hainhault,  where  every  different  system  \vn-
requested  to  communicate  its  peculiar  tenets.  The  proposition,
however,  after  much  deliberation,  fell  to  the  ground."  (Itobison,
p.  97.)

78  The  system  of  Scroeder  is  thus  described  by  Clavel : — "  1,  A]>-
prcnti;   2,  Compagnon  ;  3,  Maitre,  et  plusieurs  hauts  grades  qui  out
pour  base  la  magie,  la  theosophie,  et  ralchimie."     He  called  it  the
true  and  ancient  Mason's  Hose  Croix,  and  says  it  is  now  practised  in
two  only  of  the  Lodges  under  the  Grand  Lodge  of  Hamburg.

79  "  What  man,"  says  Knigge,  "  would  not  have  been  fired  with
zeal  for  theosophy,  magic,  and  alchymy,  in  the  company  of  Scroeder  ?
These  were  the  mysteries  of  the  Strict  Observance,  in  which  I  was
a  firm  believer,  and  practised  all  the  evocations  of  spirits,  and  other
occult  ceremonies  of  the  Order  ! "

80  Gugomos  professed  the  art  of  making  gold,   of  discovering
hidden  treasures,  and  raising  the  spirits  of  the  dead.    Being  exposed,
he  was  induced,  under  fear  of  the  Inquisition,  to  sign  a  paper
retracting  his  errors,  and  acknowledging  himself  an  impostor.

81  Scroepfer  came  to  an  untimely  end.     He  was  impolitic  enough
to  open  one  of  his  occult  Lodges  at  Leipsic,  his  native  town,  for-
getting that  a  prophet  has  no  honour  in  his  own  country ;  and  he
had  previously  moved  in  a  very  inferior  sphere  of  life.     His  per-
formances were  stigmatised  as  heretical,  and  his  allegations  discre-
dited.    He  acted  a  prominent  part,  under  an  assumed  name,  in  the
different  countries  of  Europe;    but  being  at  length  exposed,  he
returned  to  Leipsic,  and  resumed  his  cabalistic  labours.     He  made
the  most  magnificent  promises  to  his  dupes ;    and  when  hardly
pressed  for  the  performance  of  them,  he  invited  his  disciples  to
accompany  him  into  a  wood,  under  the  pretext  of  showing  them
something  wonderful,  and  here  he  deliberately  blew  out  his  brains
in  their  presence.


OF    FREEMASONRY.  63

and  Stark,82  who  introduced  an  extension  of  the  Her-
metic Masonry,  including  Rosicrucianism,83  magic,
alchymy,  divination,84  necromancy,85  and  many  other
occult  arts,  into  the  high  degrees  of  Masonry,  and
were  very  successful  in  making  converts.86  They

82  Stark  was  the  pupil  of  Scroepfer,  and  soon  exceeded  his  master
in  charlatanerie.     He  was  a  clever  and  talented  impostor,  who  dis-
puted the  palm  of  superiority  with  Cagliostro.     Even  Hunde  would
have  fallen  a  victim  to  his  arts,  if  Schubard  had  not  stepped  in  and
saved  him.

83  This  fact  is  evinced  by  the  password  of  the  degree  of  Chevalier
du  Soleil,  which  refers,  amongst  the  Hermetic  philosophers,  to  the
primitive  matter  whence  all  things  are  formed.

84  The  ancient  Rosicrucians  professed  to  be  in  possession  of  the
genuine  mysteries  of  antiquity,  and  re-established  many  of  their
symbols.     On  their  abraxas  appeared  Mercury  with  the  head  of
a  dog.

85  This  was  the  Masonry  of  the  cabala,  and  was  intended  to  revive
the  unlawful  pursuits  of  a  darker  age.     But  the  intelligence  of  the
period  was  too  far  advanced  to  allow  it  to  be  successful.     "  The
cabalistic  Mason  had  to  study  what  we  should  call  the  conjuring
book.     He  must  be  well  versed  in  the  names  and  signs  of  the  planets
and  constellations ;  he  must  also  know  whether  it  be  a  good  or  evil
genius  which  presides  over  it,  and  which  are  the  numbers  that  repre-
sent them.    By  the  word  Ghenelia,  for  example,  he  must  understand
the  rising  sun,  a  pure,  mild,  and  active  spirit,  presiding  at  births,
and  at  all  natural  affections  which  are  good.     Sethophoros,  on  the
contrary,  is  Saturn,  the  planet  which  may  be  looked  upon  as  the
head-quarters  of  the  evil  genii."

86  Robison  says  (p.  65) — "  This  was  not  the  society  of  Rosi-
crucians which  had  appeared  formerly  under  that  name,  and  was
now  extinct,  but  a  set  of  alchymists,  pretenders  to  the  transmutation
of  metals  and  the  universal  medicine,  who,  the  better  to  inveigle
their  votaries,  had  mixed  with  their  own  tribes  a  good  deal  of  the
absurd  superstitions  of  that  sect,  in  order  to  give  a  greater  air  of
mystery  to  the  whole,  to  protract  the  time  of  instruction,  and  to
afford  more  room  for  evasions,  by  making-  so  many  difficult  conditions


04


HISTORICAL    LANDMARKS


secured  Dom.  Pernetti,  and  formed  the  project  of
enlisting  Hunde  into  their  scheme.87  These  charlatans
soon  quarreled,  and  each  set  up  a  separate  system  ;88
and  were  followed  by  numerous  other  adventurers,  for
whose  names  even  I  have  not  space  here,89  until  the
original  plan  of  Freemasonry,  the  true  application  of
its  symbols,  and  its  obvious  and  beneficial  tendency,
were  lost  and  swallowed  up  amidst  the  chaos  of  new
inventions.  General  assemblies  were  convened  year
after  year,  at  one  place  or  another,  with  the  avowed
purpose  of  settling  these  differences,  and  restoring  the
society  to  its  primitive  purity;  but  they  failed  to
produce  any  abatement  of  the  general  grievance.

necessary  for  perfecting  the  grand  work,  that  the  unfortunate  gull,
who  had  thrown  away  his  time  and  his  money,  might  believe  that
the  failure  was  owing  to  his  own  incapacity  or  unfitness  for  being  the
possessor  of  the  grand  secret.  These  cheats  found  it  convenient  to
make  Masonry  one  of  these  conditions,  and  by  a  small  degree  of
art,  persuade  their  pupils  that  they  were  the  only  true  Masons.
These  Rosicrucian  Lodges  were  soon  established,  and  became  nume-
rous, because  their  mysteries  were  addressed  both  to  the  curiosity,
the  sensuality,  and  the  avarice  of  men."

87  In  1772  a  meeting  was  holden  at  Kohl,  to  settle  the  differences
between  the  Strict  and  Late  Observance;  Frederic  of  Brunswick
being  the  Superior  General  of  the  former,  and  Baron  Hunde  of  the
latter.     It  was  unsuccessful.

88  It  was  by  the  zeal  and  incredible  exertions  of  Knigge  that  the
Eclectic  Masonry  was  brought  into  vogue,  in  its  most  depraved  state,
and  it  became  attractive  from  its  latitudinarian  construction.

89  Amongst  these  we  find  the  system  of  Manicheism,  the  Egyptian
system,  Androgyne  Masonry,  rite  of  Palestine,   of  the   Philadel-
phians,  and  of  the  Philochoreites,  &c. ;  and  the  systems  of  Cagliostro,
Hecart,  Lemanceau,  Pyron,  Viany,  Page,  &c.,  with  the  eighty-one
degrees  of  Peuvret ;  all  concocted  in  France.


(JV    I'ltliE  MASONRY.


PARrr  IT!.

MASONIC    SCHISMS.

"  A  partir  de  ce  moment,  les  doctrines  qui  n'osaient  se  produire
au  grand  jour  se  dresserent  une  tribune  dans  les  Loges  ;  et  Ton  y
enseigna  la  cabale,  la  inagie,  les  evocations,  la  divination,  1'alchimie,
la  theosophie,  et  cent  autres  sciences  non  moins  vaines  et  non  moins
decriees.  Des  charlatans  ehontes  mirent  a  contribution  la  curiosite  et
la  credulite  cles  Ma  90113,  le  caractere  si  simple  et  si  sublime  a  la  fois
de  la  Ma^onnerie  fut  corrompu  ;  son  but  si  vaste  et  si  genereux  fut
mis  en  oubli  ;  1'egalite  et  la  fraternite  qui  en  forment  la  base  ;  la
Concorde,  1'affection  et  la  devouement,  ses  inevitables  eft'ets,  furent
foules  aux  pieds  ;  et  la  societe  Ma^onnique  n'offrit  plus  qu'un  assem-
blage d'exploiteurs  et  d'exploites,  de  fripons  et  d'imbecelles,  aux
quels  so  melaient  quelques  esprits  droits  et  honnetes,  qui  faisaient
'inutiles  efforts  pour  s'opposer  aux  progres  du  mal."  —  CLA.VEL.

All  the  evils,  enumerated  in  the  former  part  of  this
lecture,  arose  from  the  absence  of  unity  amongst  the
Lodges,  and  of  Grand  Lodges  which  could  not  act  in
concert.90  Under  such  circumstances  the  debasement

90  In  fact,  the  Masonic  discipline  was  so  lax,  that  almost  all  the
continental  universities  had  their  Lodges,  which  acknowledged  no
governing  head,  and  therefore  it  is  no  wonder  that  they  became  dis-
orderly, from  the  intemperate  conduct  of  their  youthful  members  ;
for  mere  boys  were  admitted,  and  the  only  qualification  for  member-
ship was,  that  the  candidate  should  have  his  name  on  the  boards  of
the  university.  An  anecdote  is  told  of  a  method  adopted  by  the
Jesuits  to  extinguish  one  of  these  Lodges,  calling  itself  the  Chevaliers
de  la  pure  Verite  :  —  A  sarcastic  song  was  composed  on  the  young
Chevaliers,  and  copies  were  secretly  distributed  to  all  the  young  men
who  did  not  belong  to  the  Lodge.  Scarcely  could  one  of  the  juvenile
Knights  make  his  appearance  without  hearing  some  ridiculous  line
of  this  song  hummed  in  his  ears,  and  in  a  short  time  the  Lodge  was
abandoned.

VOL.  IT.  v


DO  HISTORICAL    LANDMARKS

of  the  noble  Order  appeared  inevitable,  and  hundreds
of  degrees  were  fabricated  and  promulgated  in  the
Lodges,91  to  the  great  detriment  of  the  Order,  and
scandal  of  the  worthy  Brethren  of  symbolical  Masonry  .!)~
Scores  of  different  systems  were  in  operation  at  tlic
same  time,  each  patronised  and  defended  by  ab!<-
advocates  in  every  station  of  life.9'5

91  Thus  in  1776  the  rite  EIu  de  la  Verite  was  formed  in  the  Lodge
of  Perfect  Union  at  Reinics,   by  M.  de  Mangourit,  wiio  established
the  female  Order  of  Mount  Tabor,  of  which  more  presently.      il»"
promulgated  the  fiction  that  the  former  took  its  rise  in  17-i5.   A  few
years  afterwards  a  grade  arose  in  Berlin,  called  Des  freres  inities  do
1'Asie,  whose  object  was  to  afford  greater  iaeilities  for  the  explanation
of  the  Masonic  signs  and  symbols.

92  A  Parisian  Brother,  to  whom  I  have  already  referred,   wnies
thus  : — "  I  have  a  list  of  five  hundred  and   nxty  degrees,  twenty-
seven  sorts  of  Maitres,  seventeen  Elus,  nine  Architects,  forty-nine
Ecossais,  thirteen  Arch,  thirty-three  Chevaliers,  eleven  Rose  Croix,
twelve  du  rite  d' Orient,  nine  Cabalistiques,  eighty-four  Hermetiques,
&c.  &c.  &c.    My  own  opinion  is,  that  the  three  first  degrees  are  very
ancient  and  universal ;  but  except  these  degrees  all  the  rest  are
chimerical  nonsense,  made  for  the  moment  to  aid  religious  or  poli-
tical speculations,  now  past  and  forgotten ;  but  some  of  them  remain,
though  their  object  is  lost.     The  only  exception  is  the  Royal  Order,
which  clearly  proves  its  own  origin,  which  no  other  can  do.     Tlu>
Sublime  Elu  de  la  Verite,  a  magnificent  degree ;  the  Kadosh  de-
honettes  gens,  invented  by  de  Mangourit ;  and  the  degrees  of  the
rite  Philosophique,  invented  by  Pernetti,  all  tended  to  deism."

93  A  French  writer  assigns  a  very  unworthy  reason  for  the  propa-
gation of  Masonry.     "  The  Knights  Templars,"  says  he,  "  being
vanquished  by  the  Saracens,  were  received  as  Brethren  of  the  Rose
Croix,  to  escape  from  their  enemies.     The  Jews  were  made  Masons,
to  nullify  and  avert  the  persecutions  of  Christians  and  Turks.    When
the  Templars  were  dissolved,  their  followers  became  Masons  that  the
principles  of  their  Order  might  be  preserved.     The  British  were
initiated  to  serve  their  party  in  times  of  public  hostility,  and  assumed


OF    FREEMASONRY.  G7

The  complaint  that  the  Lodges  and  Chapters  of  this
period  were  schools  of  scepticism,94  need  not  excite  our
astonishment ;  for  the  court  of  France,  and  the  whole
country,  were  tainted  with  infidel  opinions.95  A  system  of
materialism  was  openly  promulgated96  in  le  petit  Elu.97

the  name  of  Brethren  that  they  might  succour  and  relieve  each  other.
And  this  was  the  general  principle  on  which  Masonry  has  been
maintained  throughout  the  world."

91  "  Mercetinus,  who  wrote  under  Louis  XV.,  seems  to  have
afforded  the  precedent ;  he  assures  his  readers,  that  by  an  accurate1
calculation  there  were  fifty  thousand  incorrigible  atheists  in  the  city
of  Paris.  Atheism  then  may  have  been  the  cause  of  the  French
revolution;  but  it  should  not  be  burthened  on  it  as  its  monster
child."  (Southey.  Omn.  p.  240.)

93  The  Abbe  Barruel,  whose  testimony,  however,  is  not  of  much
value,  describes  the  progress  of  these  opinions  in  his  Seven  Degrees.
See  his  Hist.  Jac.  vol.  ii.  p.  314.

96  One  horrible  degree  was  promulgated  just  before  the  French
revolution,  called  "  the  Invisibles,"  which  is  thus  described  in  a  work
entitled,  Bibliotheque  de  tout  ce  qu'il  y  a  de  femarcmable  stir  les
Societes  secretes. — "  It  is  a  dangerous  degree ;  the  initiations  take
place  at  midnight,  in  a  subterranean  vault ;  and  the  doctrines  arc
atheism  and  self-destruction/'

97  This  was  dignified  with  the  name  of  Kadosh.    It  was  converted
by  the  Jesuitical  Chapter  of  Clermont  into  a  degree,  in  which  the
candidate  was  made  to  imprecate  vengeance  against  the  Knights  of
Malta,  and  all  the  opponents  of  the  Templars.    It  forms  the  Kadosh
of  the  Eit  Ancien.     For  many  years  in  France  Kadosh  has  been
changed  into  a  philosophical  degree,  containing  nothing  of  the  old
Kadosh  but  the  peculiar  secrets.     The  degree,  as  practised  at  Cler-
mont and  by  Baron  Hunde,  was  known  in  London  before  1782  ;  and
I  suspect  is  the  degree  with  the  ladder  of  seven  steps,  alluded  to  in
the  certificate  formerly  given  to  Knights  Templars  by  the  Grand
Conclave  of  England.     Sometimes  Kadosh  is  given  as  a  separate
Order,  and  then  it  consists  of  three  steps — 1,  Illustrious  Knight  of
the  Temple ;  2,  Knight  of  the  Black  Eagle ;  3,  Grand  Elected.    lit
Holland  the  Kadosh  again  differs,  and  is  rather  a  religious  degree,-

v  %


HISTORICAL    LANDMARKS


and  the  Chevalier  du  Soleil,08  or  Prince  Adept.*  A
great  sensation  had  been  created  in  the  Grand  Lodge
of  England  by  these  increasing  innovations,  which
covered  pure  Masonry  with  disgrace;1"*  and  with  a


adapted  to  protestantism.  It  is  said  to  have  been  carried  to  the
Cape  of  Good  Hope  by  a  Scotchman,  and  brought  from  thence  to
Amsterdam.  It  consists  of  three  steps— the  last  is  honorary,  and
has  no  secrets.

98  The  degree  of  Chevalier  du  Soleil  is  undis-
guised materialism.  Had  it  been  ancient  it
would  have  inculcated  different  principles ;  but
it  was  the  production  of  I)om  Pernetti,  who
was  born  in  1716,  and  died  in  1800.  Yet  he  c
was  a  Benedictine  monk.  He  also  invented
the  Ilium inees  d'Avignon,  in  which  the  dog-
mata of  Martinism  and  Swedenborgiariism  are
introduced.  He  had  great  interest  at  Rome;
for  when  the  nuncio  at  Avignon  ordered  Per-
netti  and  his  adepts  to  leave  the  country,  he
procured  an  order  from  Rome  permitting  them
to  remain.  I  subjoin  an  engraving  of  the
Tracing-board.

9  Here  the  Grand  Master,  or  Thrice  Puissant,  figures  away
under  the  imposing  title  of  Father  Adam,  armed  with  a  sceptre
and  globe,  as  an  emblem  of  royalty,  because  he  was  the  soven
father  of  men.  The  Warden  is  styled  Brother  Truth.  There  an;
seven  other  officers,  who  are  called  by  the  cherubic  names  of
Zaphriel,  Zabriel,  Camiel,  Uriel,  Michael,  Zaphael,  and  Gabriel.
The  numerous  symbols  of  this  degree  have  all  a  reference  to
scepticism.

100  Thus,  while  one  of  the  rituals  of  the  highest  degree  of  blue
Masonry  is  made  typical  of  the  atonement  of  Christ,  in  the  Chevalier
du  Soleil  it  refers  to  reason,  that  has  been  destroyed  and  entombed ;
and  the  Master,  in  the  degree  of  the  Sublime  Philosopher,  occasions
the  discovery  of  the  place  where  the  body  is  hid.  Reason  is  raised,
and  superstition  and  tyranny  disappear,  which  restores  the  happiness
of  man .


OF    FKKEMASONRY.  GO

view  of  applying  a  remedy,  the  English  Grand  Master,
Lord  Petre,  entered  into  a  negotiation  with  the  Prince
of  Hesse  Darmstadt,  the  Grand  Master  of  Germany ;
and  a  mutual  compact  was  formed,  which  confirmed
to  the  Grand  Lodge  at  Berlin  the  sole  authority  in
Germany,  thus  annihilating  the  Strict  Observance  of
Baron  Hunde,  which  had  been  the  author  of  much
strife  and  confusion  in  that  country.1  This  compact
was  confirmed  by  the  King  of  Prussia,  who  erected
the  Berlin  Grand  Lodge  into  a  body  corporate.

The  ladies  of  this  age  appear  to  have  been  extremely
zealous  in  the  cause  of  Masonry.2  We  have  already
seen  that  they  had  their  Lodges,3  in  which  certain  de-

1  This  most  interesting  event  is  passed  over  by  Noorthouck  with
great  brevity  ;  when  its  importance  to  Masonry  demanded  a  succinct
historical  account  of  causes  and  effects.     See  his  Ed.  of  the  Const,
p.  305.

2  A  very  pleasing  specimen  of  the  ritual  of  one  of  these  female
Lodges,  called  the  Nymphs  and  Knights  of  the  Hose,  is  given  by
M.  Clavel.     It  is  too  lengthy  for  introduction  here,  but  I  shall  be
excused  for  quoting  the  simple  arrangement. — It  was  established  in
1778,  and  was  under  the  protection  of  the  Due  de  Chartres.     The
Lodge-room  was  termed  the  Temple  of  Love ;  the  walls  were  deco-
rated with  garlands  of  flowers,  intermixed  with  escutcheons  charged
with  the  peculiar  symbols  of  the  Order.     The  meetings  were  under
the  direction  of  a  presiding  officer  of  either  sex,  called  the  Hierophant
and  the  Grand  Priestess  ;  the  former  initiated  the  men,  arid  the  latter
the  women.    The  males  were  introduced  by  a  Knight,  who  was  deno-
minated Sentiment ;  and  the  females  by  a  Nymph,  called  Discretion.
The  former  wore  a  crown  of  myrtle,  arid  the  latter  of  roses.     The
Hierophant  and  Grand  Priestess  were  distinguished  by  a  broad  rose-
coloured  ribbon,  on  which  was  embroidered  in  gold  two  doves  in  the
centre  of  a  crown  of  myrtle,

3  The  celebrated  impostor,  St.  Germain,  gave  a  seasonable  check
to  androgyne  Masonry,  by  the  establishment  of  his  great  Lodge  at


7.U  HISTORICAL    LANDMARKS

grees  were  conferred.4  In  1776  an  institution  of  this
kind  was  founded,  called  the  Mopses,  which  included
both  males  and  females.5  It  derived  its  name  from  the

Ermonville,  which  exhibited  a  scene  of  the  grossest  licentiousness.
Every  woman  who  became  a  member  was  common  to  the  brother-
hood. The  one  appropriated  to  St.  Germain  was  called  the  Virgin ;
she  alone  had  the  privilege  of  not  being  delivered  over  to  chance,  or
to  the  true  Adamites,  unless  the  leader  fixed  his  choice  on  some
pther  woman.

*  The  Order  of  Mount  Tabor,  for  instance,  which  was  estab-
lished so  recently  as  1810,  had  nine  degrees,  divided  into  two
classes,  moral  and  historical. — 1,  Novice  Ecossais ;  2,  (moral)  Novice
Mason ;  3,  (historical)  Novice  Mythologist ;  4,  (moral)  Discreet  Fel-
lowcraft; 5,  (historical)  Biblical  Fellowcraft;  6,  (moral)  Mistress
Adonhiraniite  ;  7,  (historical)  Historical  Mistress ;  8,  (moral)  Moral
Mistress ;  9,  Grand  Philosophical  Mistress.  There  are  many  other
Orders  :  as  the  Knights  and  Ladies  of  Hope,  and  of  the  Dove ;  the
Order  of  the  Amazons ;  Princess  of  the  Crown ;  the  Egyptian  Kite,
&c.  &c. ;  all  of  which  are  androgyne.  The  emblems  relate  to  the
fall  of  our  first  parents,  the  deluge,  the  confusion  of  tongues,  &c.  I
am  enabled  to  subjoin  a  description  of  the  decorations  of  a  Chapter
of  Mount  Tabor,  on  the  occasion  of  a  funeral. — "  The  transparency
of  Asia  and  of  Tabor,  covered  with  black  crape  ;  bands  of  crape  upon
the  wand  of  the  Great  Mistress,  on  the  triple  triangle  of  the  General
of  the  Order,  and  on  the  baskets  of  the  flower  girls.  The  canopy  and
the  curtains  of  the  Chapter  black  and  white,  with  ermines  between.
In  the  centre,  a  pedestal  with  a  funeral  urn,  with  the  name  of  the
deceased  sister,  and  her  ornaments  appended  to  the  urn.  Upon  the
throne  the  torch  of  Benevolence  was  lighted.  Madam,  the  Great
Mistress,  occupied  the  throne  ;  the  Commander-in-chief  of  the  Order
at  her  right ;  the  Master  of  the  mother  Lodge  of  France  at  her  left ;
the  Master  of  the  Grand  Sphynx  by  his  side ;  the  dames  of  eloquence
by  their  altar  at  the  east  of  Tabor,  &c.  &o.'J

5  The  popular  cry  against  Freemasonry  had  ever  been,  the  exclusion
of  females.  The  fabricators  of  this  new  Order  were  resolved  to  avoid
the  censure  ;  and  to  conciliate  the  sex  they  were  incorporated  into  the
system  ;  and  thus  their  interests,  amusements,  and  reputation  wen


OF    FREEMASONRY.  71

ligure  of  a  mastiff  (Mops),  which  was  the  chief  symbol,
denoting  fidelity.6  It  had  ceremonies  of  initiation,
signs,  words,  and  tokens,  and  other  marks  of  recog-
nition ;  and  the  symbols  admitted  of  a  moral  expla-
nation.7 The  ladies  now  assumed  to  themselves  an
exclusive  title,  and  termed  their  places  of  celebration,
"  Lodges  of  Adoption.''  Several  of  these  pleasing
assemblages  were  held  in  different  parts  of  the  con-
tinent,8 under  the  protection  of  the  Grand  Orient,  and

united  in  the  same  bond  ;  and  the  gratifications  of  the  fraternity
were  increased  by  the  presence  of  that  sex  which  contributes  so
materially  to  the  amelioration  of  society.  Females  were  admissible
to  all  offices  but  that  of  Grand  Master,  which  was  held  for  life.  In
fact,  there  were  two  heads,  or  Grand  Mopses,  the  one  a  male,  and
the  other  a  female,  each  governing  the  Order  for  six  months  in
alternate  succession ;  and  the  inferior  officers  were  appointed  at  the
period  when  each  assumed  the  presidency.

6  The  Order  is  said  to  have  arisen  out  of  a  scruple  of  conscience.
Clement  XII.  having  issued  his  famous  bull  against  the  Freemasons
in  1736,  the  people  were  alarmed,  and  hesitating  to  join  a  society
which  had  been  thus  proscribed,  formed  another  on  the  same  prin-
ciple,  which  would  afford  them  equal  gratification,  without  subjecting
them  to  the  thunders  of  the  Vatican.     Freemasonry  was  the  model ;
and  by  the  admission  of  females  they  evaded  the  terms  of  the  papal
denunciation.    The  heads  of  the  Germanic  Union  countenanced,  and
extended  their  patronage  to  the  scheme ;  and  at  Frankfort  the  Lodges
were  composed  of  persons  of  rank  of  both  sexes.

7  For  instance,  the  square  signified  the  solid  foundation  of  the
society.     The  circle  was  explained  by  saying — '*  as  the  radii  of  a
circle  diverge  from  a  common  centre,  so  should  all  the  actions  of  a
Mopse  partake  of  the  same  principle — which  is  love."     The  circle
was  a  symbol  of  the  perpetuity  of  the  Lodge.    An  androgyne  Order
was  established  about  the  same  time  in  Italy,  called  the  Knights
and  Ladies  of  the  Cork.

8  Listen  to  what  one  of  the  Illuminators  says  on  the  subject. —
"  We  must  begin  with  grown  girls.     I  have  four  step-daughters —
fine  girls ;  the  oldest  is  twenty-four,  has  read  much,   is  above  all


7.v  HISTORICAL    LANDMARKS

Le  Mere  Loge  du  rite  Ecossais  Philosophique  •*  and
the  Duchess  of  Bourbon  was  solemnly  installed  their
Grand  Mistress.10

The  Masonic  schisms  in  France  continued  to  gain
strength.11     In  1776  another  claimant  to  the  honour

prejudices,  and  in  religion  thinks  as  I  do  !  They  have  much  acquaint-
ance amongst  the  young  ladies,  their  relations.  You  must  contrive
pretty  degrees,  and  dresses,  and  ornaments,  and  elegant  and  decent
rituals.  No  man  must  be  admitted.  This  will  make  them  become
more  keen,  and  they  will  go  much  farther  than  if  we  were  present,
or  than  if  they  thought  that  we  knew  of  their  proceedings.  Leave
them  to  the  scope  of  their  own  fancies,  and  they  will  soon  invent
mysteries  which  will  put  ns  to  the  blush,  and  create  an  enthusiasm
which  we  can  never  equal."  (Robison,  p.  175.)

9  A  brilliant  fete  was  given,  September  14,  1777,  to  the  Lodge  of
Adoption,  over  which  presided  the  Princess  of  Lamballe.     Another
fete  was  given  to  the  lady  Lodges  in  the  following-  year,  at  which
the  Duchess  of  Chartres,  the  Duchess  of  Bourbon,  and  the  Princess
Lamballe  were  all  present.     These  fetes  always  produced  a  large
subscription  for  charitable  purposes.

10  We  find  also  the  Order  of  Felicity,   of  the  Green  Apple,  the
Lovers  of  Pleasure,  Knights  and  Ladies  of  Perseverance.    The  ritual
of  these  female  Orders  is  curious  : — "  The  chief  lady  who  assists  the
Worshipful  Master  is  called  Grande  Maitresse ;  by  the  Wardens  are
placed  the  Sisters  Inspectors,  and  by  each  other  officer  a  sister,  who
takes  the  name  of  his  office.    The  Lodge-room  is  elegantly  decorated
with  emblems  peculiar  to  each  degree.     Around  are  symbolically
represented  the  various  Masonic  qualities  and  virtues ;  and  in  the
east  are  two  splendid  thrones  for  the  Worshipful  Master  and  Grande
Maitresse.     All  the  sisters  are  in  white,  wear  aprons,  and  also  blue
scarfs,  to  which  are  fastened  the  jewels  of  their  rank.     Each  of  the
officers  is  distinguished  by  her  jewel,  which  is  a  golden  trowel.    The
Brothers,  in  addition  to  the  insignia  of  their  rank,  wear  the  jewel  of
adoptive  Masonry,  a  gold  ladder  with  five  steps  or  rounds.     There
cannot  be  a  more  captivating  scene  than  a  Lodge  of  Adoption  when
fully  attended."  (F.  Q.  E.  1837,  p.  442.)

11  These  schisms  do  not  appear  to  have  weakened  the  cause.     Even
Weishaupt  boasted  of  them  :   he  says,  when  writing  to  his  friend


OF    FREEMASONRY.  ^

of  a  governing  body  made  its  appearance,  and  adopted
the  style  of  Le  Mere  Loge  Ecossaise  de  France,12  and
conferred  twelve  new  degrees,13  which  were  termed
philosophical.14  They  became  popular,  and  for  many
years  sustained  their  rank,  having  the  Marquis  de  la
Rochefoucault  Bayers  for  their  Grand  Master.15  Two

Zwack : — "  I  am  once  more  at  open  war  with  all  our  people ;  that
does  no  harm,  it  enlivens  the  machine."

12  Actes  du  Contrat  Social.  Reg.  ix.  28.

13  At  least  these  degrees  are  not  found  in  any  former  system,  nor
are  they  included  in  the  ninety  of  Mizraim,  or  the  thirty-three  of
the  Eit  ancien  et  Accepte.     In  many  of  them  there  was  a  different
ceremonial  and   different  forms,  adapted  to  the  condition  of  the
recipient.

14  These  philosophical  degrees  were  many  of  them  deistical,  and
the  system  was  carried  out  about  this  time  by  M.  St.  Martin,  which
was  hence  styled  Martinism.     His  degrees  were  few,  and  he  only
admitted  those  relating  to  the  Templars.     He  omitted  the  Rose  +  ;
but  between  the  degrees  of  Prince  of  Jerusalem  and  Kadosh,  he
inserted  one  called  the  Chevalier  le  Palestine.     Here  the  Master
represents  Godfrey  de  Bouillon.     It  is  related  here  that  eighty-one
Masons  came  to  Europe  about  1150  under  the  care  of  Garimont
Patriarch  of  Jerusalem,  and  went  to  Sweden  to  the  Archbishop  of
Upsal,  where  they  inclosed  all  their  Masonic  information  in  a  marble
tomb,  placed  in  a  subterranean  vault.     This  tomb  was  subsequently
discovered,  &c.  &c. ;  and,  according  to  St.  Martin,  these  eighty-one
Masons  established  Freemasonry  in  Europe,  and  nine  of  them  the
Order  of  the  Temple.    The  philosophical  degrees  were,  the  Knight  of
the  Black  Eagle,  or  Rose  -+-  de  Heredom,  in  three  parts ;  4,  Knight
of  the  Phoenix ;   5,  Knight  of  the  Sun ;   6,  Knight  of  the  Rainbow  ;
7,  The  true  Mason;  8,  Knight  of  the  Argonauts;  9,  Knight  of  the
Golden  Fleece ;  10,  Grand  Inspector  of  perfect  Initiations  ;  11,  Grand
Inspector  of  the  Scotch  Degrees ;  12,  Sublime  Master  of  the  luminous
Ring.

15  This  Grand  Lodge  established  a  philosophical  society  for  the
discussion  of  Masonic  questions,  at  which  all  Masons,  under  whatever
system,  were  invited  to  be  present.


1I1STOKICAL    LANDMARKS

years  later  the  Lodge  of  Perfect  Union  at  Reiines  pro-
mulgated a  new  degree,  called  Le  rite  des  Elu  de  la
Verite,  which  was  cabalistic ; 1G  and  a  few  years  after-
wards the  celebrated  Count  Cagliostro  founded  at
Strasburg  his  Egyptian  Masonry.1?  In  1780  the  Order
of  Freres  initi£s  de  1'Asia  was  instituted  by  the  Baron
Ecker  d'Eckhoffer,  Professor  Spangenberg,  and  the
Count  Webna,  in  Austria,  The  members  were  a  sec-
tion of  the  German  Rose  Croix.18  In  1782  a  new  and
attractive  Order  sprang  up,  consisting  of  ninety  de-
grees, which  was  called  the  Order  of  Mizraim,  or  Le
rite  Orientale.19  It  made  its  appearance  in  Italy,  and

16  This  rite  contained  fourteen  degrees,  divided  into  three  classes.
First  class,  1,  E.  A,.  P. ;  2,  F.  C. ;  3,  M.  M. ;  4,  Perfect  Master.-
Second  class,  5,  Elect  of  Nine ;  6,  Elect  of  Fifteen ;  7,  Elect  Master  ;
8,  Petit  Architect ;  9,  Second  Architect ;  1 0,  Grand  Architect ;  11,
Knight  of  the  East ;    12,  Rose  Croix. — Third  class,  13.  Knight
Adept ;  14,  Elect  of  the  Truth.

17  His  first  Lodge  was  founded  at  Lyons,   under  the  name  of
Triumphant  Wisdom ;  but  he  afterwards  extended  his  scheme,  and
opened  at  Paris  an  androgyne  Lodge,  which  he  termed  the  Mother
Lodge  of  Egyptian  Adoptive  Masonry.     He  afterwards  went  to
Courland,  and  was  so  fortunate  as  to  number  amongst  his  dupes
the  Countess  de  Meden,  who  recommended  him  to  the  notice  of
the  Empress  Catherine.      He  was,  however,   finally  exposed  and
denounced.

8  They  prosecuted  the  study  of  all  the  cabalistic  sciences,  except
alchymy,  which  was  expressly  prohibited.     Their  Grand  Sanhedrim
was  at  Vienna.

9  It  was  divided  into  four  series  of  degrees ;  the  names  of  some  of
which  are  highly  inflated  and  absurd.     I  insert  them  in  full.    FIRST
SERIES,  fast  class,   1,   2,   3,  as   before.     Second  class,  4,   Secret
Master;    5,  Perfect  Master;  6,  Master  by  curiosity;  7,  Master  in
Israel;  8,  English  Master.— Third  class,  9,  Elect  of  9  ;  10,  Maitre
I'inconnu;  11,  Elect  of  15  ;  12,  Perfect  Elect;  13,  Illustrious  Elect.


OF    FREEMASONRY.  75

was  said  to  have  been  brought  from  Egypt  by  a  learned

— Fourth  class,  14,  Scotch  Trinitarian ;  15,  Scotch  Fellow  Craft;
16,  Scotch  Master;  17,  Scotch  Panissiere ;  18,  Master  Ecossais;
19,  Elect  of  3,  (incomms)  ;  20,  Scotch  degree  of  the  Sacred  Vault
of  James  VI. ;  21,  Scotch  degree  of  St.  Andrew. — Fifth  class,  22,
Petit  Architect ;  23,  Grand  Architect;  24,  Architecture;  25,  Ap-
prentice Perfect  Architect;  26,  Fellow  Craft  Perfect  Architect;  27,
Master  Perfect  Architect;  28,  Perfect  Architect;  29,  Sublime  Scotch
Degree ;  30,  Sublime  degree  of  Heredom. — Sixth  class,  31,  Royal
Arch;  32,  Grand  Hatchet;  33,  Sublime  Knight  du  Choix,  chief  of
the  first  series.  SECOND  SERIES,  seventh  class,  34,  Knight  of  the
Sublime  Choix;  35,  Prussian  Knight;  36,  Knight  of  the  Temple;
37,  Knight  of  the  Eagle;  38,  Knight  of  the  Black  Eagle;  39,
Knight  of  the  lied  Eagle ;  40,  Knight  of  the  White  Eagle;  41,  Knight
of  the  East. — Eighth  class,  42,  Commander  of  the  East ;  43,  Grand
Commander  of  the  East ;  44,  Architect  of  the  Sovereign  Commanders
of  the  Temple ;  45,  Prince  of  Jerusalem. — Ninth  class,  46,  Sovereign
Prince  Hose  Croix  of  Kil winning  and  Heredom;  47,  Knight  of  the
West;  48,  Sublime  Philosopher;  49,  First  Chaos,  (discrete);  50,
Second  Chaos,  (wise)  ;  51,  Knight  of  the  Sun,  sometimes  called
Knight  of  Grace. — Tenth  class,  52,  Supreme  Commander  of  the
Stars;  53, Philosopher  Sublime.  CLAVI  MASONRY,  54,  (1  degree),
Minor;  55,  (2  degree),  Laveur ;  56,  (3  degree),  Suffleur,  (seeker
of  the  universal  menstruum)  ;  57,  (4  degree),  Fondeur,  (Founder,
application  of  the  menstruum)  ;  58,  True  Mason  Adept;  59,  Sove-*
reign  Elect;  60,  Sovereign  of  Sovereigns  ;  61,  Master  of  Lodges  ;
62,  Thrice  Noble,  and  thrice  Puissant ;  63,  Knight  of  Palestine ;
64,  Knight  of  the  White  Eagle;  65,  Grand  Elected  Knight  of
Kadosh ;  66,  Grand  Inquisitor  Commander.  THIRD  SERIES,  eleventh
class,  67,  Knight  of  Benevolence  ;  68,  Knight  of  the  Rainbow ;  69,

Knight  of  B ,  or  the  Hhanuka,  called  Hynaroth ;  70,  Most  Wise

Israelitish  Prince. — Twelfth  class,  71,  Sovereign  Prince  Talmudim;
72,  Sovereign  Prince  Zakdim ;  73,  Grand  Harain,  or  Supreme
Council  of  Hazids. — Thirteenth  class,  74,  Sovereign  Grand  Prince
Haram;  75,  Sovereign  Prince  Hasidim. — Fourteenth  class,  76,
Sovereign  Grand  Prince  Hasidim;  77,  Grand  Inspector  Intendant,
Registrar  General  of  the  Order. — FOURTH, SERIES,  fifteenth  class,
78,  Supreme  Consistory  of  Sovereign  Princes  of  the  78th  degree;


HISTORl'


.ANDMARKS


Egyptian,  of  the  name  of  Ananiah.20  It  was  soon  trans-
planted into  France,  and  flourishes  there  at  this  day ;
although  it  was  subsequently  shown  to  have  been  in-
vented and  brought  to  maturity  by  two  Jewish  Masons,
called  Bedarride,21  and  doubts  are  entertained  whether

79,  Supreme  Tribunal  of  Sovereign  Princes;  80,  Supreme  Consistory
of  Princes  of  the  80th  degree ;  81,  Supreme  Consistory  General  of
81  Princes. — Sixteenth  class,  82,  Council  of  Sovereign  Princes
of  the  82nd  degree;  83,  84,  85,  86,  Sovereign  Grand  Tribunal  of
Illustrious  Sovereign  Princes  of  the  83rd,  84th,  85th,  and  80th
concealed  degrees. — Seventeenth  class,  87,  Sovereign  ('•  rand  IVinces,
Grand  Masters,  legitimate  Representatives  of  the  Order  for  the  first
series;  88,  Sovereign  Grand  Princes,  &c.,  for  the  second  series  ;  89,
Sovereign  Grand  Princes,  &c.,  for  the  third  series ;  90,  Sovereign
Grand  Masters  absolute,  with  supreme  power  over  the  whole  Order.

20  Barruel  places  the  introduction  of  Egyptian  Masonry  a  little
earlier.     He  says,   "  A  Jutland  merchant,  who  had  lived  some  time
in  Egypt,  began,  in  the  year  1771,  to  overran  Europe,  pretending  to
initiate  adepts  in  the  ancient  mysteries  of  Memphis.     He  stopped
some  time  at  Malta,  where  the  only  mysteries  which  he  taught  wen-
the  tenets  of  Manes  ;  and  these  he  sedulously  infused  into  the  minds
of  the  people.     These  principles  began  to  expand,  and  the  island
was  already  threatened  with  revolutionary  confusion,  when  the  knights
very  wisely  obliged  our  modern  Illuminee  to  seek  his  safety  in  flight.
The  famous  Count  Cagliostro  is  said  to  have  been  a  disciple  of  his,
as  well  as  some  other  adepts  in  the  county  of  Avignon  and  Lyons."
(Hist.  Jac.  vol.  iii.  p.  8.)

21  In  one  of  the  degrees,  detached  portions  are  introduced  of  the
lecture  of  the  Royal  Order  of  Bruce;    and  therefore  it  is  utterly
impossible  that  this  system  could  have  been  imported  from  Egypt,
where  the  above  Order  was  unknown.    Before  the  "French  revolution,
there  were  some  Chapters  of  it  in  Prance.     During  the  ensuing
anarchy,  some  copies  of  several  of  the  lectures  had  found  their  way
into  improper  hands ;    and  it  is  probable  that  the  Bedarrides  had
obtained  possession  of  them,  although  they  had  never  been  initiated
into  the  degree ;  and  thus  the  fragments  of  these  lectures  became
incorporated  into  their  new  system  of  Misraic  Masonry


OF    FREEMASONRY.  77

it  be  so  old  as  the  commencement   of  the  present
century.22

About  this  time  another  daring  impostor  appeared
upon  the  Masonic  stage,  and  introduced  a  system  more
complicated  and  dangerous  than  any  which  preceded
it.23  The  notorious  Weishaupt  promulgated  his  Illu-
minism,  on  some  such  plan  as  the  old  Vehme  Gericht,'24

22  Thory  says  it  was  not  known  in  France  till  1814,  although  he
acknowledges  that  it  was  previously  practised  in  Italy.

23  In  17 85,  the  Emperor  of  Germany  became  alarmed  at  the  aspect
of  public  affairs  ;  and,  without  any  intention  of  prohibiting  Freema-
sonry, issued  an  edict  for  the  regulation   of  the  Order.     In   the
preamble  to  that  document,  which  is  dated  December  1,  he  confesses
that  he  is  ignorant  of  the  mysteries.     "  Je  ne  connais  pas,"  says  he,
"  le  mysteres  des  Franc  Masons ;  et  je  n'ai  jamais  eu  assez  curiosite
pour  chercher  a  m'  instruire  de  leurs  bouffonneries."     After  giving
orders  respecting  periodical  returns  of  the  officers,  members,  &c.,  he
concludes  by  saying,   "  Under  these  regulations,  the  Order  of  Free-
masons may  be  of  great  public  utility."

24  The  initiations  of  the  Vekmic   Order  are  thus  described  by
Palgrave,  in  his  account  of  the  rise  and  progress  of  the  English
Commonwealth  :    "  Bareheaded   and  ungirt,  the  candidate  is  con-
ducted before  the  dread  tribunal.     He  is  interrogated  as  to  his
qualifications,  or  rather  as  to  the  absence  of  any  disqualifications.
If  the  answers  are  satisfactory,  he  then  takes  the  oath,  swearing  by
the  Holy  Law,  that  he  will  conceal  the  secrets  of  the  Holy  Yehme
from  wife  and  child — from  father  and  mother — from   sister   and
brother — from  fire  and  water — from  every  creature  upon  which  the
sun  shines,  or  the  rain  falls — from  every  being  between  earth  and
heaven,  &c.     This  oath  having  been  taken,  the  new  Freischoptf  was
then  entrusted  with  the  secrets  of  the  Vehmic  tribunal.     He  received
the  pass- word,  by  which  he  was  to  know  his  fellows,  and  the  grip,
or  sign,  by  which  they  recognised  each  other  in  silence  ;  and  he
was   warned    of   the   terrible   punishment    awaiting    the   perjured
brother.     If  he  discloses  the  secrets  of  the  Court,  he  is  to  expect
that  he  will  be  suddenly  seized  by  the  ministers  of  vengeance  ;  his
eves  will  be  bound  :  he  will  be  cast  down  on  tlic  soil,  and  his  tongue


78


HISTORICAL    LANDMARKS


with  the  secret  intention  of  overturning  altar  and  throw,
and  elevating  the  empire  of  reason  upon  the  prostrated
shrines  of  Christianity.25  It  consisted  of  nine  degrees,2"
which  he  would  willingly  have  identified  with  Free-
masonry;27 but  though  he  doubtless  found  many  re-
will  be  torn  out  by  the  back  of  the  neck ;  and  he  will  then  be  hanged
seven  times  higher  than  any  other  criminal.  And  whether  rest  rained
by  the  fear  of  punishment,  or  by  the  stronger  ties  of  mystery,  no
instance  ever  was  known  of  any  violation  of  the  secrets."

25  In  a  Masonic  sermon  preached  by  Bro.  Inwood,  just  after  the
scheme  of  Weishaupt  had  exploded,  the  following  passage  occurs  :—
"  Respecting  the  Masonic  Order,  notwithstanding  all  its  secrecy  and
Brotherly  union,  the  members  of  our  government  are  well  convinced
of  its  moral  purity,  of  its  religious  sincerity,  of  its  political  integrity.
They  are  well  informed  of  our  sentiments — they  are  equally  acquainted
with  our  practice.     And  they  know  that  we  love  and  fear  God  ;  and
that  to  serve  Him  is  the  prominent  and  leading  feature  of  all  our
most  secret  and  firmest  bonds  of  fraternal  union.     They  know  that
we  love  our  king  and  constitution.     Dictators  and  directories  we
want  none  of.     But  we  are  ever  ready,  if  called  on,  at  a  moment's
warning,  to  rally  round  the  throne,  and  support  with  our  person,  our
lives,  and  our  property,  that  illustrious  personage  who  now  sways  the
British  sceptre."

26  1,  Novice ;  2,  Minerval ;  3,  Minor  llluminee ;  4,  Major  Illu-
minee,  or  Scotch  Novice ;  5,  Scotch  Knight ;  6,  Epopt,  or  Priest ;
7,  Regent ;  8,  Mage,  or  Man  King ;   9,  Areopagite.     Weishaupt
gloried  in  his  powers  of  deception.    In  a  letter  to  a  friend,  he  says—
"  You  cannot  conceive  how  much  my  degree  of  Priest  is  admired.
And  it  is  very  extraordinary  that  several  eminent  Protestant  divines
have  joined  the  Order,  and  really  believe  that  part  of  the  discourse
which  alludes  to  religion  contains  the  true  spirit  of  Christianity !
Poor  mortals  !  what  could  I  not  make  you  believe  !"

27  In  the  degree  of  Regent,  the  charge  delivered  to  the  candidate
is  long  and  metaphysical,  and  contains  the  following  clause :  "  The
great  strength  of  our  Order  lies  in  its  concealment ;  let  it  never  appear
in  any  place  in  its  own  name,  but  always  covered  by  another  name,
and  another  occupation.     None  is  fitter  than  the  three  lower  degrees


OF    FREEMASON  RV.  7!.)

emits  amongst  the  fraternity,28  who  bitterly  repented
when  the  results  of  his  scheme  became  apparent,29  yet
he  did  not  succeed30  in  establishing  any  specific  union
or  communion  with  our  noble  Order.31

of  Freemasonry  ;  the  public  is  accustomed  to  it,  expects  little  from
it,  and  therefore  takes  little  notice  of  it."

28  In  1781,  a  Lodge  was  established  at  Paris  by  Savalette  la  Lunge,
for  the  purpose  of  concentrating  the  system  of  Weishaupt,  of  which
the  celebrated  St.  Germain,  Cagliostro,  Mesmer,  Raymond,  and  many
other  well  known  impostors,  were  members.     It  was  founded  on  the
revelations  of  Swedenborg,  and  corresponded,  by  accredited  agents,
with  almost  every  European  branch  of  the  system.    Two  other  Lodges
were  formed  at  Paris  at  the  same  time ;  the  one  being  aristocratic,
called  the  Lodge  of  Candour ;  the  other,  philosophical,  called  the
Nine  Sisters.     Both,  however,  had  the  same  designs,  and  practised
the  same  degrees.     These,  and  many  others,  were  secretly  attached
to  republicanism,  to  which  the  Lodge  of  the  Contrat  Social,  composed
of  the  first  men  in  France,  was  a  noble  exception.     They  practised
true  Masonry ;  and  when  the  question  was  mooted,  they  came  to  the
unanimous  resolution  of  discountenancing  all  religious  and  political
discussion.

29  His  private  instructions  to  his  confidential  colleagues  were  :  "  If
there  already  exists  a  Lodge  in  any  given  town,  the  Knights  of  Illu-
imnism  must  find  means  of  establishing    a  more  legitimate  one  ;  at
least  they  should  spare  no  pains  to  gain  the  ascendancy  in  those
which  they  find  established,  either  to  reform  or  destroy  them  ! "

30  Most  of  the  Masonic  Lodg'es  were  closed  against  him.  "  Brethren
and  Companions,"  said  the  Masonic  orator,  when  recommending  the
dissolution  of  the  Lodge,  in  preference  to  the  loss  of  its  purity,  "  give
free  vent  to  your  sorrow  ;  the  days  of  innocent  enjoyment  have  passed
away.     However  holy  our  mysteries  may  have  been,  the  Lodges  are
now  profaned,   and  their  purity  is  sullied.     Let  your  tears  flow.
Attired  in  robes  of  mourning  let  us  seal  up  the  gates  of  our  temples,
for  profane  persons  have  entered  therein.     Lodges  that  may  serve
as  hiding  places  for  conspirators,  must  remain  closed  till  better  times
arrive."

31  His  plan  for  the  preservation  of  secrecy  was  perfect.    All  letters


[AKKS

The  Grand  Orient  finding  itself  unable  to  maintain
any  longer  the  stand  it  had  taken  on  the  three  craft
degrees,'52  agreed,  in  1780,  to  admit  four  of  the  hauts
grades  into  its  system.33  These  were  the  Elu,u  flu-
were  dated  according  to  the  Persian  era,  called  Jezder  gert,  and
beginning  A.D.  630.  The  year  commenced  on  the  1st  of  Plmravardin,
(21st  March).  Their  first  month  had  forty-one  days  ;  and  the
months  themselves  had  new  names,  such  as  Adarpahascht,  Chardad,
Thirmeh,  &c.  The  common  cypher  consisted  in  numbers  corres-
ponding to  letters  in  the  following  order  : —

a    b    cdefghiklmno    p    q    r    s     t    u    w    x    y    z
12  11  10  9  8  7  6  5  4  3  2  1  13  14  15  16  17  18  19  20  21  22  23  -2  I

They  never  wrote  the  name  of  the  Order.  So  venerable  a  word  was
not  to  be  exposed  to  profane  eyes,  and  it  was  designate  d  by  Q ;
while  the  word  Lodge  was  expressed  thus  D.

32  The  convention  of  Masons  at  Paris  for  settling  the  disputes
which  existed  among  the  fraternity,  after  a  very  protracted  session,
presented  their  report,  which  contains,  on  p.  20,  the  following
paragraph :  "  Nous  croyons  devoir  annoncer  avec  franchise  que  le
but,  le  desir,  et  Vesperance  des  convocateurs,  de  tous  les  presents
aux  premiers  travaux,  et  d'un  grand  nombre  de  ceux  dont  nous
avons  re9u  des  memoires,  est  de  profiter  de  la  reunion  des  lumieres
et  du  zele  des  freres,  pour,  d'apres  les  caract  res  de  la  science  de
nous  connus,  et  presque  generalement  avoues,  tenter  de  creer,  d'abord
entre  nous,  ensuite  propager  par  nous  dans  toute  1'Europe  une
nouvelle  association  Philalete,  en  redigeant  ce  qui  nous  est  connu  de
la  Ma9onnerie,  et  surtout  en  la  reformant  et  pnrifiant  de  maniere  a
former  un  corps  de  Ma9ons,  ou  hommes  de  desirs  capables  de  bien
chercher  de  la  verite,  disposes  a  tout  sacrifier  pour  la  meriter,  et
dignes,  autant  que  la  faiblesse  humaine  peut  le  permettre,  de  la
posseder ;  et  ce  vaeu  de  nos  cceurs  est  d'autant  plus  raisonnable,  que
nous  nous  croyons  plus  que  jamais  certains  qu'elle  existe  ;  que  le
plus  grand  nombre  des  Ma9ons  de  ce  siecle  ne  la  cherchent  pas,  ne
la  meritent  pas,  ne  la  trouveront  jamais,  et  que,  sans  doute,  c'est  la
faute  des  Ma9ons,  et  non  de  la  Ma9onnerie."

'  The  evils  attending  upon  this  system  of  government  resembled


OF    FREEMASONRY.  81

Ucossais,  the  Chevalier  cTOrient,  and  the  Rose  Croix.35
But  it  went  a  step  further,  and  consented  to  incor-
porate into  these  the  substance  of  many  others ;  the
latter,  however,  remaining  essentially  the  same  as  the

those  which  afflict  the  tenants  of  an  Irish  estate  owned  by  an  absentee.
There  was  no  supreme  power,  claiming  and  possessing  a  general
interest  with  the  community  at  large,  to  whom  the  oppressed  might
appeal  from  subordinate  tyranny,  either  for  justice  or  mercy."  (Sir
Walter  Scott.)

34  Poor  Barruel,  who  conjured  a  demon  out  of  every  tree-stump  he
met  with,  thus  expresses  his  opinion  on  the  initiation  of  a  candidate
into  one  of  these  Elus  :  "  When  one  of  these  unfortunate  men  has
been  led  away,  &c.  On  the  day  appointed  for  his  initiation,  he
is  led  through  dark  windings  into  the  den  of  trials.  In  this  cavern
the  image  of  death,  the  mechanism  of  spectres,  potions  of  blood,  sepul-
chral lamps,  subterraneous  voices — every  thing,  in  short,  that  can
affright  the  imagination,  and  successively  hurry  him  from  terror  to
enthusiasm,  is  put  in  action ;  until,  at  length,  worn  out  by  fright,
fatigue,  hope,  or  enthusiasm,  the  candidate  is  so  perfectly  deprived
of  his  reason,  that  he  cannot  help  following  any  impulse  that  he  may
receive.  Then  it  is  that  the  voice  of  the  invisible  hierophant  bursts
forth  from  this  abyss,  and  makes  the  vaults  resound  with  his  menaces,
&c."  ! ! !  (Hist.  Jac.  vol.  iv.  p.  356.)

33  This  is  evidently  a  symbolical  name.  The  Hose  is  a  type  of
discretion,  and  the  Cross  an  emblem  of  sanctity ;  united,  they
signify  a  holy  discretion.  Hence,  to  bespeak  confidence  and  discre*
tion,  we  use  the  phrase,  sub  rosd.  The  earliest  notice  I  find  of  this
degree,  is  in  a  publication  of  1613,  entitled  "  La  Reformation
universelle  du  monde  entier  avec  la  fama  fraternitatis  de  1'Ordre
respectable  de  la  Rose  Croix."  It  was  known  much  sooner,  although
not  probably  as  a  degree  in  Masonry  ;  for  it  existed,  as  a  cabalistic
science,  from  the  earliest  times,  in  Egypt,  Greece,  and  Rome,  as  well
as  amongst  the  Jews  and  Moors  in  times  more  recent ;  and  in  our
own  country,  the  names  of  Roger  Bacon,  Pludd,  Ashmole,  and
many  others,  are  found  in  its  list  of  adepts.  Vide  nt  supra  in
nota  110.

VOL.  n.  (•


82


HISTORICAL    LANDMARKS


degree  of  Prince  Charles  Edward,  sometimes  called  the
degree  of  the  Eagle  and  Pelican.36

At  this  period  a  most  unprincipled  divine,  called
Bahrdt,37  presented  himself  before  the  Masonic  public.
He  opened  a  Lodge  of  Masons  by  the  name  of  L'Union
Allemande  des  Vingt-deux,  at  Halle,  in  Germany,
under  the  protection  of  the  Prince  of  Anhalt-Bernburg,
on  cosmopolitical  principles,  which  he  affirmed  lie  had
learned  in  England.  At  first  it  promised  to  be  suc-
cessful; but  was  at  length  put  down  by  the  Grand
Lodge,  because  he  acted  without  a  charter  j38  and  bring
thus  prohibited,  he  formed  a  more  extensive  plan,
which  he  promulgated  under  the  imposing  title  of  "  the
German  Union  ;"3!>  it  nourished  for  a  time,  but  was
ultimately  suppressed.40

30  The  Office  Bearers  in  these  Lodges  and  Chapters,  were  clem  \  -
men,  professors,  persons  having  offices  in  the  common  law  courts,
men  of  letters  by  trade,  such  as  reviewers,  and  journalists,  and  other
public  writers.

37  And  also  Hulmer,  a  famous  Martinist  of  Prussia,  and  Foster,
who,  in  his  great  zeal  for  the  mysteries  of  Swedenborg,  would  pass
fifteen  days  in  fasting  and  prayer  to  obtain  the  vision  of  a  spirit,  or
discover  the  philosopher's  stone.

38  At  the  same  time  the  Grand  Orient  issued  a  circular  forbidding
the  Brethren  to  hold  their  meetings  in  places  where  irregular  Masons
assemble,  under  pain  of  being  erased  from  the  list  of  Lodges.

39  Its  professed  object  was  to  annihilate  superstition,  and  to  elevate
the  human  mind  to  its  proper  dignity.     Barhdt's  primary  address  was
directed  to  the  friends  of  Reason,  Virtue,  and  Truth ;  and  he  succeeded
in  procuring  the  signatures  of  twenty-one  persons  of  rank  and  cha-
racter, which  conferred  popularity  on  the  scheme.    It  had  six  degrees,
1,  L'adolescent ;  2,  L'homme  ;  3,  L'ancien  ;  4,  Le  rnesopolyte  ;  5,
Le  diocesain ;  6,  Le  superieur.    Some  say  it  had  twenty -two  degrees.

40  In  fact,  he  intended  it  as  a  secret  vomitory  for  his  infamous


OF    FKKK  MASONRY.  83

The  famous  Masonic  assembly  at  Wilhelmsbad41
was  attended  by  delegates  from  all  the  continental
Lodges,  and  from  those  of  every  quarter  of  the  globe.
The  object  of  this  meeting  was  to  discover  the  origin
of  the  Order,  whether  it  was  ancient  or  modern ;  and
to  regulate  the  degrees,  ceremonies,  and  observances,
so  as  to  place  it  on  some  permanent  footing  of  uni-
formity. It  did  not,  however,  contribute  much  to  the
ends  for  which  it  was  convened ;  for  we  find  Cagli-
ostro,42  Mesmer,  and  others,  agitating  the  Masonic

publications,  by  which  he  realized  sums  of  money  that  he  squandered
in  the  practice  of  the  lowest  vices ;  and  he  was  at  length  imprisoned
on  the  charge  of  being  the  author  of  an  abominable  farce,  called
Religion  Edict,  and  this  broke  up  the  scheme.

41  Barruel  speaks  in  considerable  alarm  of  this  convention.    "  What
inconceivable  motive  is  it,"  he  exclaims,  "  that  draws  forth  these  agents
from  all  parts  of  the  globe ;  from  Europe,  Asia,  Africa,  and  America  ;
agents  of  men  all  bound  by  the  oath  of  secrecy,  both  as  to  the  nature
of  their  association  and  the  object  of  their  mysteries  ?     What  inten-
tions can  actuate,  what  plans  are  brought  by  these  deputies  of  so
formidable  an  association,  secretly  spreading  its  ramifications  around
us,  throughout  town  and  country,  creeping  into  our  habitations,  and
encompassing  empires  ?     What  do  they   meditate,  what   are    they
going  to  combine  either  for  or  against  nations  ?     If  they  thus  con-
vene for  the  general  good  of  humanity,  and  the  welfare  of  nations,
whence  do  they  derive  their  right  of  deliberating  on  our  religion,
morals,  or  governments  ?    .  For  more  than  six  months  did
these  deputies  deliberate  in   their   immense   Lodge,    without   any
sovereign  harbouring  the  least  suspicion  as  to  his  own  safety,  or  that
of  his  people."   (Hist.  Jac.  vol.  iv.  p.  115.)     The  fact  is,  their  deli-
berations  were  confined  to   the  interesting  subject  of  healing  the
schisms  by  which  the  Order  was  distracted,  and  forming  one  uniform
system  under  which  the  fraternity  might  unite  for  the  future,  and
live  in  harmony  and  brotherly  love.

42  In  the   Acta   Latomorum,  vol.   ii.,   is  a  long  and  interesting

correspondence  between  ('au'liostro  and  the  convention  of  Paris,  in

G  2


SI  HISTORICAL    LANDMARKS

world  by  the  promulgation  of  the  Egyptian  Androgyne
Masonry,  under  the  patronage  of  M.  de  Montmorency,
prince  of  Luxembourg  ;43  and  the  former  was  con-
spicuously prominent  during  the  proceedings  of  tin'
Masonic  convention  at  Paris;44  where  he  had  tin-

1785  ;  and  Clavel  gives  a  detailed  account  of  his  proceedings,  and  of
the  admissions  into  his  system  of  Masonry.

43  Cagliostro's  degrees  were  few  in  number,  but  extremely  effective.
They  were  only  six  for  both  males  and  females,  each  having  the  simple
names  of  Egyptian  E.  A.  P.,  Egyptian  F.  C.,  and  Egyptian  Master
and  Mistress.     At  the  initiation  of  a  female,  the  lady  was  presented
with  a  ribbon,  on  which  was  embroidered  the  words  UNION,  SJLI;\
VIRTUE.     When  a  male  candidate  was  to  be  admitted,  his  courage
was  tested  in  n  variety  of  ways,    lie,  was  first  hoisted  up  to  the  ceiling
by  means  of  a  pulley,  and  after  suffering  considerable  pain,  had  his
hand  scorched  by  a  candle.  His  eyes  were  then  covered  witli  a  bandage,
and  he  received  an  empty  pistol  with  orders  to  charge  it.    This  being
done,  he  was  directed  to  discharge  it,  with  the  muzzle  placed  to  his
forehead  ;  and  upon  his  refusing  to  comply,  the  pistol  was  taken  from
him  with  expressions  of  contempt ;  but  returned  after  a  number  of
ceremonies.     This  course  usually  had  such  an  effect  upon  him,  that,
without  any  regard  to  self-preservation,  he  drew  the  trigger,  and
received  a  smart  blow  on  the  forehead,  which,  however,  produced  no
bad  consequences.     It  was  ultimately  discovered  that  the  pistol  had
been  changed,  an  unloaded  one  having  been  put  into  the  candidate's
hands  when  blindfolded,  and  the  blow  was   struck  by  one  of  the
assistant  Brethren.    The  ceremony  concluded  with  an  oath  of  secrecy.
The  initiated  was  taught  the  pretended  secrets  of  the  hermetic  science,
the  knowledge  of  the  philosopher's  stone,  and  the  elixir  of  life.

44  Cagliostro  at  length   received  the   reward  of  his  insincerity.
His  practices  were  detected  by  two  disguised  familiars  of  the  inqui-
sition at  Home,  whom  he  imprudently  admitted  into  his  confidence.
He  was  condemned  to  death ;  but  the  sentence  was  ultimately  com-
muted for  perpetual  imprisonment.     He  was  sent  to  the  Chateau  St.
Ange,  whence  he  attempted  to  escape  by  a  singular  stratagem.     He
petitioned  to  be  allowed  to  do  penance  for  his  offences,  and  for  a
priest  to  receive  his  confession,  which  was  granted.    Confession  being


OF    FREEMASONRY.  85

audacity  to  propose  that,  in  order  to  conciliate  his
patronage,  the  continental  Lodges  should  not  only
adopt  his  rite,  but  destroy  all  existing  documents.

In  1783,  circulars  were  issued  by  the  Grand  Lodges
of  Erankfort-on-Maine,  and  Wetzler,  announcing  that
the  fraternity  of  those  districts  had  returned  to  the
practice  of  pure  Eclectic  Masonry,  as  it  was  promul-
gated under  the  sanction  of  the  Grand  Lodge  of
England  ;45  thus  excluding  the  cabalistic  reveries  of
Gugomos,  Scroeder,  Stark,  and.  Cagliostro  ;4G  and  in
the  same  year  the  Grand  Lodge  of  the  Three  Globes,
at  Berlin,  came  to  the  resolution  of  excluding  all  the
Brethren  from  their  assemblies  who  had  embraced
Illuminism.47

over,  he  requested  the  Capuchin  to  inflict  the  scourge ;  but,  after  a
few  stripes,  Cagliostro  sprang  on  the  priest  with  the  intention  of
strangling  him,  and  making  his  escape  in  his  garments.  The  Capu-
chin, however,  was  too  much  for  him,  and  kept  him  in  play  till  the
keepers  came  to  his  assistance.

45  The  same  course  was  subsequently  taken  by  the  Mere  Logo
Ecossais  at  Paris.

46  In  1786,  Cagliostro  took  refuge  in  London,  the  scene  of  his
former  magical  exhibitions  ;  and  attempted  to  renew  his  connection
with  the  Masons  by  the  following  advertisement  in  the  Morning
Herald :    "  To  all  true  Masons.     In  the  name  of  Jehovah.     The
time  is  at  length  arrived  for  the  construction  of  the  New  Temple  of
Jerusalem.     The  advertiser  invites  all  true  Masons  to  meet  him  on
the  3rd  inst.,  at  nine  o'clock,  at  lleilly's  Tavern,  Great  Queen-street,
to  form  a  plan  for  levelling  the  footstone  of  the  true  and  only  Temple
in  the  visible  world."     There  is   still  extant  a  curious   engraving,
representing  the  detection  of  this  impostor,  in  the  Lodge  of  Antiquity,
with  portraits  of  Masonic  characters  of  the  day.

47  The  Society  Exegetique  et  Philantropique  was  instituted   in
1787,  for  secret  instruction  in  the  doctrines  of  Mesmer  and  Svvc-
dcnborg.


86


HISTORICAL    LANDMARKS


Two  years  later,  the  Royal  Order  of  H.  R.D.  M.
resumed  its  functions  at  Edinburgh ;  and  several
eminent  persons  were  admitted  to  its  mysteries.48  The
King  of  Great  Britain  was  pronounced  the  ex-officio
Grand  Master  of  the  Order ;  the  D.  G.  Master  pre-
siding at  its  meetings  under  the  name  of  Wisdom.4"
After  the  first  panic  caused  by  the  French  revolution,
and  the  death  of  Grand  Master  Orleans,50  had  in
some  degree  subsided,51  although  all  other  secret
societies  were  strictly  prohibited,  and  Lefranc,52  Bar-
ruel,53  Robison,54  and  others,  pretended  to  trace  its
horrors  to  Freemasonry,  the  Order  began  to  revive

48  A  Grand  Chapter  of  the  Order  was  established  at  Itouen,  and
others  at  Paris,  and  several  other  French  towns  ;  and  M.  Matheu,  an
eminent   merchant  of  the  former  place,  was  nominated  Prov.  G.  M.
for  the  kingdom  of  France,  with  full  powers  to  grant  charters,  ke.
The  Chapter  at  Paris  was  connected  with  the  Kite  Ecossais,  and
consisted  exclusively  of  members  of  that  association.

49  History  of  the  Grand  Orient,  p.  135.

:'°  The  Duke  of  Orleans  perished  on  the  scaffold,  and  the  Lodge
meetings  were  suspended  in  1793.

51  In  1796,  there  were  only  eighteen  Lodges  in  active  existence
throughout  all  France.  (Act.  Lat.  vol.  i.  p.  197  )

32  Like  thousands  besides  himself,  Lefranc  fell  a  victim  to  his
own  theories,  and  was  massacred  in  the  prison  des  Cannes,  at
Paris.  M.  Ledhui,  an  officer  and  a  Freemason,  happening  to  enter
the  prison  at  the  moment,  received  a  severe  cut  from  the  sabre  of  his
murderers,  in  a  fruitless  endeavour  to  save  the  victim.

53  "  There  is,  perhaps,  in  no  language,"   says  Laurie,   (p.  49),
"  such  a  piece  of  downright  sophistry  as  Bamiel's  work.     He  seems
to  scruple  at  no  method,  however  base  or  dishonourable,  that  can
bring  discredit  upon  Freemasonry,  and  every  thing  connected  with  it."

54  A  writer  in  the  Freemasons'  Magazine,  (vol.  x.  p.  35,)  is  rather
smart  upon  the  professor.     "  Some  of  the  wisest  and  most  upright
English  Masons,"  he  says,  "  have  visited  their  Brethren  abroad,  and


OF    FREEMASONRY.  87

amongst  the  continental  nations.  Professor  Fessler,
the  G.  M.  of  the  Royal  York,  at  Berlin,  revised  the
statutes;  regulated  the  meetings  of  the  society,  and
conferred  six  new  degrees.55  At  his  earnest  solicita-
tion, the  King  of  Prussia  ^  tolerated  three  Grand
Lodges  at  Berlin,  and  their  affiliations.  The  meetings
of  all  others,  however,  wrere  strictly  forbidden.57

The  hauts  grades,  thirty- three  in  number,  were
originally  divided  into  seven  classes,58  but  subsequently
subsided  down  to  five,5'- — 1,  Symbolical  Masonry;

have  not  been  able  to  discover  the  wonderful  disparity,  or  been
shocked  at  the  abominable  practices  said  to  be  carried  on  among
them.  Even  M.  llobison  himself  saw  nothing  of  all  this  mischievous
system  while  he  was  in  the  closest  habits  of  intimacy  with  the
foreign  Masons ;  and  this  surely  must  be  some  proof  that  Masonry,
as  it  was  then  practised,  had  not  the  tendency  which  he  has  since
been  pleased  to  attribute  to  it."

55  These  were,  1,  Holy  of  Holies ;  2,  Justification ;  3,  Celebration ;
4,  Knight  of  the  Passage;  5,  Fatherland;  6,  Perfection.

56  "On  the  1st  of  May,  5790,  the  Grand  Constitution  of  the
thirty-third  degree,  was  finally  ratified  by  the  King  of  Prussia,  who,
as  Grand  Commander  of  the  Order  of  Prince  of  the  Royal  Secret,
possessed  the  sovereign  Masonic  power  over  all  the  Craft.     In  the
new  constitution   this   high   power  was  conferred  on  a  Supreme
Council  of  nine  Brethren  in  each  nation,  who  possess  all  the  Masonic
prerogatives  in  their  own  district,  that  his  majesty  individually  pos-
sessed, and  are  sovereigns  in  Masonry."  (Circular  of  the  Inspectors
General  of  Charlestown) .

57  At   the    same   time   he   ordained   that    no  person   should   be
initiated   under  twenty-five  years  of  age,  under  a  penalty  of  one
hundred  rix  dollars ;  and  entered  a  solemn  veto  against  all  kinds  of
traffic  and  speculation  in  the  practice  of  new  degrees.

58  Clavel  gives  seven  classes  as  practised  at  the  present  day.     1,
Symbolical;    2,  Ineffable;    3,  Elu ;    4,  Royal  Arch;    5,  Chevalier
d'Orient ;  6,  Ecossais  ;   7,  Kadosh.

9  Extract  from  Livre  d'Or  du  Supreme  Conseil  du  33  degrc ;
1807,  p.  7.


88


HISTORICAL    LANDMARKS


2,  Elu  ;';o  3,  Ecossais  ;G1  4,  Chevalier  d'Oricut  ;'*  5,
Croix.  These63  represented  all  the  hauts  grades  until
the  year  1799,  when  other  Orders  of  thirty -three
degrees  were  instituted  j64  and  particularly  a  celebrated
one  at  Namur,65  called  the  Rite  Ecossais  Primitif,

60  In  Continental  Masonry  there  are  thirty -three  rites  and  degrees
distinguished  by  the  name  of  Elu.  It  was  introduced  into  all  the
systems  practised  in  Europe.  Some  think  it  was  derived  from
the  Kadoshes,  and  others  vice  versa.  We  find  the  Master  Elu,  the
Perfect  Elu,  and  the  Grand  Elu ;  the  Petit  Elu,  the  Sublime  Elu,
and  the  Symbolical  Elu;  the  English  Elu,  the  London  Elu,  the  Irish
and  Scotch  Elus,  and  the  Elu  of  the  New  Jerusalem ;  the  Sublime
Ladies'  Elu,  &c.  &c.

01  The  Illuminators  adopted  this  designation.  It  was  called  lllu-
niinatus  Diiigentes,  or  Chevaliers  Ecossais.  "  In  preparing  a
candidate  for  this  degree,"  says  the  ritual,  "  we  must  bring  him
into  dilemmas  by  ensnaring  questions.  We  must  endeavour  thus  to
get  the  disposal  of  the  money  of  the  Lodges  of  Freemasons,  or  at
least,  to  take  care  that  it  be  applied  to  purposes  favourable  to  our
Order — but  this  must  be  done  in  a  way  that  shall  not  be  remarked."

62  This  class,  and  the  Chevalier  de  1'Aigle,  were  equally  typical  of
the  life  and  immortality  which  were  brought  to  light  by  the  Gospel
of  Christ.

63  During  the  French   Revolution  Freemasonry   was  suspended,
and  the  several  Grand  Lodges  virtually  dissolved  themselves.    When
the  troubles  were  over,  they  gradually  revived,  and  in  1796  the
following    degrees  were    acknowledged  in  Paris,  according  to   the
\hi9onnerie  Adonhiramite.     Symbolical — 1,  Apprenti ;   2,  Compag-
non;    3,  Maitre.     Sublime — 4,  Maitre  Parfait ;    5,  Elu  des  ncuf,
6,   Elu  de  Perigiian ;   7,  Petit  Architecte ;   8,  Grande  Architecte ;
9,  Chevalier  de  1' Orient ;  10,  Chevalier  de  Rose  Croix;  11,  Chev-
alier Prussian.

34  And  of  other  numbers.  Thus  the  system  of  Viany  contained
sixteen  degrees ;  that  of  Page,  eleven ;  La  Rouge  arid  Lemanceau,
each  seven;  of  Hecart  five,  &c.  &c,,  all  of  which  had  their  fol-
lowers.

5  Thirty-three  seems  to  have  been  a  favourite  number  of  degrees,
but  they  were  not  always  uniform.  We  shall  presently  explain  the


OF    FREEMASONRY.  SJ)

which  differed  essentially  from  those  of  the  Rite  Aiicien
et  Accepte;60  and  another  at  Milan,  instituted  by
Grand  Inspector  General  Pyron.67  But  in  most  of

thirty-three  of  the  Rite  ancien,  (See  Lect.  34  ;)  those  of  Namur  vary
considerably,  and  appear  to  have  been  framed  from  a  combination  of
the  Hit  ancien,  the  Adonhirauiite,  the  Bit  Philosophique,  and  the
Stricten  Observantz  of  Baron  Hunde.  These  are  their  names:  1,
E.  A.  P. ;  2,  F.C. ;  3,  M.  M. ;  4,  Past  Master,  or  Perfect  Master ;  5,
Irish  Master ;  6,  First  elected,  or  Elected  of  nine ;  7,  Second  elected,
or  Elected  1'inconnu;  8,  Third  elected,  or  Elu  de  15  ;  9,  Illus-
trious Master;  10,  Perfect  elected;  11,  Scotch  Apprentice;  12,
Scotch  E.  C.,  or  Grand  Architect ;  13,  Scotch  Master,  or  Sublime
Architect ;  14,  Master  in  perfect  Architecture  ;  15,  lloyal  Arch ;  16,
Noachites,  or  Prussian  Knights  ;  17,  Knight  of  the  East,  or  Sword;
18,  Prince  of  Jerusalem ;  19,  Master  of  all  the  Lodges  ;  20,  Knight
of  the  West;  21,  Prince  of  Palestine ;  22,  Rose  Croix;  23,  Sublime
Scotch,  or  Grand  Pontiff;  24,  Knight  of  the  Sun;  25,  Grand
Scotch  of  St.  Andrew  of  Scotland;  26,  Mason  of  the  Secret;  27,
Knight  of  the  Black  Eagle;  28,  Knight  Kadosh ;  29,  Grand
Elected  of  Verity ;  30,  Novice  of  the  inner  Temple;  31,  Knight  of
the  inner  Temple ;  32,  Perfect  of  the  inner  Temple ;  33,  Commander
of  the  inner  Temple.

66  It  is  one  of  these  degrees  which  Barruel  professes  to  explain
when  he  says,  "  the  candidate  is  shut  up  in  a  daik  cell ;  a  rope  witli
four  slip  knots  is  twisted  round  his  neck,  he  is  stretched  out  upon
the  floor ;  there  by  the  dull  light  of  a  twinkling  lamp,  he  is  aban-
doned to  himself  to  meditate  on  the  wretched  state  of  slavery  in
which  he  exists,  and  to  learn  properly  to  estimate  the  value  of  liberty.
At  length  one  of  the  Brethren  comes  and  introduces  him  to  the
Lodge,  leading  him  by  the  rope,  holding  a  drawn  sword  in  his  right
hand,  as  if  he  meant  to  run  him  through  the  heart,  in  case  he  made
any  resistance.     After  having  undergone  a  long  examination,  and
particularly  after  having  sworn  never  to  reveal  the  secrets  with  which
he  is  entrusted,  he  is  declared  free."  (Hist.  Jac.  vol  ii.  p.  296.)

67  Pyron  had  forty-three  degrees,  as  follows: — 1,  Clearing  up  of
Chaos ;  2,  Ecossais  of  the  Lodge  of  Prince  Edward ;  3,  Ecossais
of  Military  Lodges,  (this  degree  has  three  sub-divisions) ;  4,  Elect  of


90


M  [STORICAl    LANDMARKS


these  innovations — Avliich  usually  bore  either  one  or
other  of  the  above  names68 — the  degree  of  Kadosh  was
most  prominent.69  These  irregular  proceedings  produced

Perignan;  5,  Elected  Keeper;  6,  Elected  Sovereign;  7,  Free
Knight  of  St.  Andrew;  8,  Grand  Commander  of  the  Star  in  the
East;  9,  Grand  Master  of  the  Neapolitan  Chapters;  10,  Grand
Patriarch  of  Chevaliers  Lyriens;  11,  Grand  Prince  of  three
Elus;  12,  Grand  Prince  Depositary ;  13,  Knight  of  the  Crown;
14,  Knight  Defender  of  Masonry;  15,  Knight  of  the  Golden  Eagle  ;
16,  Knight  of  the  Holy  Sepulchre;  17,  Knight  of  the  Red  Eagle  ;
18,  Knight  of  the  Star  ;  19,  Knight  of  Thunder  and  Lightning ;  20,
Knight  of  the  Triple  Sword ;  21,  Knight  of  the  Twelve  Tribes ;  22,
Master  Paracelcist ;  23,  Mystical  Apprentice ;  24,  Mystical  Master ;
25,  Novice  of  the  Star  of  Chevaliers  Lyriens ;  26,  Perfect  Scotch
Architect ;  27,  Perfect  Scotch  Master  of  English  Masonry  ;  28,  Petit
Philosopher ;  29,  Prelate  of  Libanus  ;  30,  Prince  of  the  Great  Black
Eagle;  31,  Prince  Kadosh;  32,  Professor  of  the  Star  of  Chevalier
Lyriens ;  33,  Rosy  Cross  Philosopher ;  34,  The  Sacrificer ;  35,
Scotch  Apprentice ;  36,  Scotch  Trinitarian  Apprentice;  37,  Scotch
Trinitarian  F.  C. ;  38,  Sublime  Elected  Lady;  39,  Sublime  Elect  of
iifteen ;  40,  Sublime  Scotch  Lady;  41,  Sublime  Solomon;  42,
Sublime  Scotch  Degree  of  the  Grand  Lodge  of  Prince  Edward  ;  43,
Sublime  Elect,  or  Adjutant  of  the  Tabernacle  of  Perfect  Elus.

68  The  Acta  Latomorum  enumerates  seventy-one  rites  and  degrees
of  the  name  of  Ecossais.  This  name  was  used  in  all  forms,  and
under  all  circumstances,  as  an  apology  for  the  multiplication  of
degrees.  The  twelfth,  sixty-third,  &c.,  of  the  French  Chapter  ;  the
fourth  of  the  Strict  Observance ;  the  first  high  grade  of  Ramsay  and
Hunde;  the  sixth  degree  of  Illuminism;  the  fourth  of  the  system
practised  in  the  Royal  York,  at  Berlin ;  the  thirtieth  of  Mizraim ;
the  fifth  of  Ziunendorff ;  the  twenty-ninth  of  the  Rit  ancien;  and
several  female  degrees,  were  equally  characterized  by  the  name  of
Ecossais.

59  Another  series  of  thirty-three  is  as  follows  :•»— 1,  2,  3,  as  before  ;
4,  Maitre  Parfait ;  5,  Prevot  et  Juge ;  6,  Mait.  en  Israel ;  7,  Elu  des
9;  8,  Elu  lllustre ;  9,  Chev.  du  Temple;  10,  Elu  de  I'mconnu;
11,  Elu  des  15  ;  12,  Mait.  Anglais  ;  13,  Mait.  Irlandois  ;  14,  Petit


OF    FREEMASONRY.  1)1

great  disputes,70  each  Grand  Lodge  asserting  its
supremacy — the  rest  being  obstinately  contumacious  ;71
and  no  prospect  appeared  of  any  immediate  settlement
of  the  dispute.72  In  1804,  a  new  Grand  Lodge,  or  a

Architect;  15,  G.  Architect;  16,  Appren.  Ecossais ;  17,  Comp.
Ecossais;  18,  Mait.  Ecossais;  19,  Elu,  parfait;  20,  Elu  supreme;
21,  Chev.  Victorieux;  22,  Chev.  1'Aigle ;  23,  Chev.  d'Orient ;  24,
Chev.  du  Soleil;  25,  Sublime  Ecossais;  26,  Chev.  d'Occident;  27,
lloyal  Arche  ;  28,  Ecossais  de  S.  Andre;  29,  Prince  de  Jerusalem;
30,  Commandeur  du  Temple;  31,  Chev.  du  G.  Aigle;  32,  Eose
Croix  ;  33,  G.  I.  G.  E.  Chev.  Kadosh.

70  The  irregularities  extended  to   an   usurped  power  by  private
Lodges  of  granting  charters.    In  1802,  a  copy  of  a  forged  paper  was
transmitted  to  the  Grand  Lodge  of  Scotland,  professing  to  be  issued
by  the  said  Grand  Lodge,  granting  to  the  Lodge  des  Eleves  de
Miiierve  at  Paris,  the  liberty  of  granting  charters.  (See  Laurie,  p.
292.)

71  In  1778,  we  find  the  Grand  Lodge  of  France,  and  the  Mere
Lodge  Ecossais,  complaining  of  the  usurpations  of  the  Grand  Orient ;
and  years  did  not  improve  the  position  of  either.     But  in  1801,  an
union  took  place  between  the  Grand  Orient,  and  the  Grand  Chapter
of  Arras,  the  latter  merging  its  functions  in  the  former  body.

72  A  celebrated  Mason,  M.  Peuvret,  died  about  this  time,  and
amongst  his  papers  was  found  a  MS.,  in  six  volumes,  folio,  containing
a  series  of  eighty-one  degrees,  invented  by  himself,  and  intended  for
promulgation,  if  he  had  lived,  in  the  Lodge  of  St.  Peter,  Martinique,
of  which  he  was  Worshipful  Master,  and  an  honorary  officer  of  the
Grand  Orient  of  France.     These  degrees  he  named  as  follows : —
First  series,  1,  Hermetic  App.  Phil. ;  2,  Hermetic  F.  C.  Phil. ;
3.  Petit  practical  Phil. ;  4,  Grand  practical  Phil. ;   5,  Master  Phil. ;
6,  The  Patriarch,  or  Confidant  of  Solomon ;  7,  Petit  Neapolitan
Phil. ;  8,  Grand  Neapolitan  Phil. ;  9,  Perfect  Master  Phil. ;  10,  De-
positary of  Secrets;   11,  Cabalistic  Mason;  12,  Sublime  Mason;
13,  Sublime  Phil. ;  14,  Architect  of  Solomon  ;   15,  Cabalistic  Phil. ;
16,  Perfect  Mason  Phil. — Second  series,  17,  Sublime  practical  Phil. ;
18,  Sublime  practical  Mason;  19,  App.  Paracelcist,  or  Fire  Phil.;
20,  F.  C.  Paracelcist;  21,  Hermetic  Treasurer;  22,  Confidant  of


HISTORICAL    LANDMARKS

new  organization  of  an  ancient  rite,  which  was  at-
tempted, by  the  formation  of  a  Supreme  Council  of  the

Paracelsus ;  23,  Grand  Treasurer  Paracelcist ;  24,  Keeper  of  Caba-
listic Secrets ;  25,  Master  of  the  Hermetic  Philosophy ;  26,  Con-
fidant of  H.  A.  B.;  27,  Treasurer  of  Solomon;  28,  Sublime
Treasurer  and  Keeper  of  the  Key  of  the  Great  Work ;  29,  Grand
and  Sublime  Hermetic  Philosopher;  30,  Masonic  Philosopher.—
Third  series,  31,  Grand  and  Sublime  Treasurer,  Keeper  of  the
Secrets  of  the  Great  Solomon,  and  Faithful  Guardian  of  Jehovah  ;
32,  App.  Philosopher  of  the  No.  3;  33,  F.  C.  Philosopher  of  the
No.  3  ;  34,  Sublime  F.  C.  Philosopher  of  the  No.  3  ;  35,  Depositary
of  the  No.  5 ;  36,  Sublime  Cabalistic  Philosopher  of  the  No.  5  ;
37,  Treasurer  of  the  No.  7 ;  38,  Grand  Architect  of  3,  5,  and  7  ;
39,  App.  Philosopher  of  the  No.  9  ;  40,  F.  C.  Philosopher  of  the
No.  9 ;  41,  Sublime  Philosopher  of  the  No.  9 ;  42,  F.  C.  of  the
No.  15  ;  43,  Master  of  the  No.  15  ;  44,  111.  Master  of  the  No.  15  ;
45,  Grand  Hermetic  Interpreter. — Fourth  scries,  46,  111.  and  Sub-
lime Grand  Master  Mason;  47,  Grand  Master  of  the  Hermetic
Secrets;  48,  Grand  Treasurer  of  Masonic  Mysteries  ;  49,  111.  Trea-
surer Paracelcist  of  the  five  Masonic  Mysteries;  50,  111.  Master  of
the  seven  Cabalistic  Secrets;  51,  Sublime  Interpreter  of  the  three
Hermetic  Numbers;  52,  111.  Master  of  the  three  Cabalistic  Orders;
53,  Grand  Depositary ;  54,  Knight  of  the  Golden  Star ;  55,  Sublime
Knight  of  the  North,  or  the  dawn  of  the  day  on  the  Brute  Stone ;
56,  Grand  Interpreter  General  of  111.  Philosophical  Masonry;  57,
Sublime  Solomon;  58,  Grand  Hermes;  59,  Sublime  Paracelcist;
60,  Hermetic  Knight. — Fifth  series,  61,  the  Ham;  62,  the  Bull;
63,  the  Twins  ;  64,  the  Crab  ;  65,  the  Lion ;  66,  the  Virgin ;  67,  the
Balance;  68,  the  Scorpion;  69,  the  Archer;  70,  the  Goat;  71,  the
Waterbearer;  72,  the  Fishes;  73,  111.  Grand  Prince  of  the  Seven
Planets;  74,  Masonic  Knight  of  Mercury;  75,  Masonic  Venus;
76,  the  Solar  Knight;  77,  the  Knight  of  Mars;  78,  the  Knight  of
Jupiter;  79,  the  Knight  of  Saturn;  80,  the  Sublime  Jehovah,  and
Keeper  of  the  fifty -five  keys  of  the  Hermetic  and  Cabalistic  Mysteries ;
81,  Perfect  Master  of  all  the  Secrets.  I  find  also  in  this  system  two
other  degrees,  called  Master  Philosopher  by  the  No.  3  ;  and  Master
Philosopher  by  the  No.  9  ;  but  I  am  unacquainted  with  their  places.


'  01'    FRKKMASONIJV.  i).1)

Rite  Ecossais  ancien  et  accepts,  which  made  a  rapid
progress  in  public  opinion,  and  became  so  formidable,
that  the  Grand  Orient  thought  it  prudent  to  hold  out
terms  of  conciliation.  Indeed,  the  contending  Grand
Lodges  began  to  be  aware  that  great  mischief  to  the
society  in  general  might  be  produced  by  such  an  ap-
pearance of  insubordination  ;  and  the  two  chief  parties,
the  Grand  Orient  and  the  Supreme  Council73  (the
former  having  now  adopted  all  the  thirty-three  degrees
which  had  been  reimported  from  America74  in  the  pre-
ceding year),  were  mutually  desirous  of  some  equitable
compromise.  Practising  precisely  the  same  rites,  they
at  length  consented  to  an  union,  in  the  enjoyment  of
equal  privileges  ; 75  but  the  details  appear  to  have  been

73  There  is  some  little  confusion  of  dates  here,  which  it  may  be
difficult  to  reconcile.     On  the  21st  February,   1802,    there  was  a
Supreme  Council  holden  at  Charlestown,   which   conferred  on  the
Count  de  Grasse  Tilly  the  power  of  constituting  new  Chapters,  &c.,
of  the  Kit  ancien  in  both  hemispheres.    Now,  as  the  King  of  Prussia
had  reserved  this  right  to  himself,  it  should  appear  from  the  above
act,  that  the  Supreme  Council  of  Prussia  had  ceased  its  functions,
and  the  only  regular  Council  then  existing  was  in  the  United  States.
In  1804  (22nd  September),  a  Grand  Lodge,  "  Ecossais  du  Hit  ancien
et  accepte,"  was  instituted  at  Paris  by  the  above  noble  Brother,  in
conjunction  with  M.  Pyron  and  Hacquet.     I  suspect  the  revolution
had  extinguished  the  Council  of  Emperors,  and  the  old  establishment
of  twenty-five  degrees.

74  The  Grand  Orient  had   previously  acknowledged  only  seven
degrees— 1,  E.  A.  P. ;  24F.  C. ;  3,  M.  M. ;  4,  Em  Secret ;  5,  Grand
Elu  Ecossais ;  6,  Chevalier  de  1' Orient ;  7,  Hose  Croix.

75  On  the  3rd  December,  1804,  the  commissioners  of  the  Grand
Orient  and  of  the  Supreme  Council  met,  and  mutually  executed  an
agreement,  or  act  of  union,  for  the  two  rites,  and  another  for  a  new
organization  of  Freemasonry  in  France.


94  HISTORICAL    LANDMARKS

inadequately  arranged,  for  disputes  arose  among  the
Grand  officers,76  and  in  the  succeeding  year  the  bond
of  amity  was  broken,  and  the  covenant  annulled.77
So  much  confusion  was  created  by  the  measure,  that
my  limits  will  not  suffer  me  to  enter  on  the  subject  ;78
but  the  Grand  Orient  was  desirous  of  being  considered
the  head  of  the  thirty-three  degrees  in  France,  and

76  This  might  arise  from  the  institution  of  a  new  society  in  1800,
called  "  the  Order  of  the  Temple."  The  legend  of  the  appoint  moil
of  John  Mark  Larmenius  to  the  office  of  Grand  Prior,  by  Molay,  u  as
revived,  and  created  much  dissention  amongst  the  fraternity ;  some
being  inclined  to  receive,  and  others  unequivocally  denouncing  it  as
an  imposition.  The  Brethren  and  Companions  pronounced  them-
selves the  true  successors  of  the  ancient  Templars.  They  boasted
the  possession  of  the  original  charter  of  Larmenius,  written  in  hiero-
glyphical  characters  on  a  large  skin  of  vellum,  and  beautifully  orna-
mented, according  to  the  fashion  of  the  times  when  it  professed  to
be  written,  with  architectural  designs,  illuminated  capitals  highly
enriched  with  gold  and  splendid  colours,  sealed  with  the  Temple
seal,  and  signed  bv  all  the  authorities.  And  they  produced  several
relics,  said  to  have  been  the  property  of  James  Molay.

57  The  Acta  Latomorum  contains  an  account  of  these  dissentions
(vol.  i.  p.  225).  It  appears  that  the  Grand  Orient  refused  to  adopt
the  provisions  of  the  constitution  agreed  to  in  the  preceding  year ;
and  the  Supreme  Council  denounced  many  of  its  officers  with  endea-
vouring to  neutralize  the  agreement.

78  In  1805  the  androgyne  Lodge  of  Free  Knights  and  Ladies  of
Paris  celebrated  a  splendid  festival  at  Strasburg.  Lady  Dietrick
performed  the  functions  of  Grand  Mistress,  assisted  by  the  Empress
Josephine ;  and  two  years  afterwards,  the  Lodge  of  St.  Caroline  held
another  in  Paris,  which  was  celebrated  with  great  magnificence,  under
the  presidency  of  the  Duchess  of  Vaudemont.  The  Prince  Camba-
ceres,  Grand  Master,  was  present,  together  with  many  of  the  nobility,
both  male  and  female — the  Princess  de  Carignan ;  the  Countesses
de  Girandin,  de  Roncherolles,  de  Laborde,  de  Bondy,  &c.  &c.


I


OF    FHEKMASONUY.  95

authorized  its  Lodges70  to  collect  and  practice  other
additional  degrees,    although  I   am  ignorant  of  the

79  The  number  of  Lodges  under  its  constitution  at  this  time  was
about  twelve  hundred ;  and  M.  Fustier,  an  honorary  officer,  drew  up
a  Masonic  chart  of  the  Lodges  affiliated  to  the  Grand  Orient  in  every
country  throughout  the  world.  He  promulgated  a  new  system  of
sixty-four  degrees,  under  the  following  names,  which  I  have  placed
alphabetically  for  want  of  the  true  arrangement : — 1,  App.  Architect ;
2,  Capripede  Eatier  et  Lucifuge ;  3,  the  Celebration ;  4,  Circle  of
Alliance ;  5,  Crowned  Mason ;  6,  Ecossais  of  Dunkirk ;  7,  Ecossais
of  Eldest  sons ;  8,  Ecossais  of  the  Holy  Trinity ;  9,  Ecossais  of
Lisle ;  10,  Ecossais  of  Messina  ;  11,  Ecossais  of  small  Apartments  ;
12,  Elected  Commander;  13,  Elected  Sovereign;  14,  Election,
Sublime  Degree  of;  15,  Emperor  of  all  the  Masons ;  16,  Fellowcraft
Architect;  17,  Grand  Master  of  the  Templars;  18,  Grand  Prince  of
the  Templars;  19,  Grand  Scotch  Degree  of  Wallachia,  Copenhagen,
or  Stockholm;  20,  111.  Grand  Master  of  the  Templars;  21,111.
Symbolical  Master;  22,  Judge  of  the  Works;  23,  Knight  of  the
Altar;  24,  Knight  of  the  Arch  ;  25,  Knight  of  Athens;  26,  Knight
of  Aurora,  or  Hope;  27,  Knight  of  Christ;  28,  Knight  of  the
Columns;  29,  Knight  of  the  Door;  30,  Knight  of  the  Exterior;
31,  Knight  of  the  Golden  Sheaf;  32,  Knight  of  Harmony;  33,
Knight  of  the  inextinguishable  Lamp  ;  34,  Knight  of  the  Interior ;
35,  Knight  Protector  of  Innocence;  36,  Knight  Purificator;  37,
Knight  of  the  Perfumes;  38,  Knight  of  Perron;  39,  Knight  Ser-
vant of  God  and  his  Temple  ;  40,  Knight  of  St.  Andrew ;  41,  Knight
of  St.  George;  42,  Knight  of  the  Sanctuary;  43,  Knight  of  the
Tabernacle  of  Divine  Truth ;  44,  Knight  of  the  Temple ;  45,  Knight
of  the  Throne ;  46,  Knight  of  the  Victorious  East;  47,  Master  of
perfect  Architecture;  48,  Order  of  Feuillants ;  49,  Order  Itratique;
50,  Perfect  Fellowcraft  Architect;  51,  Perfect  Master  of  Hamburg;
52,  Perfect  Scotch  Mason;  53,  Prussian  Fellowcraft  Architect;  54,
Sapicole;  55,  Scotch  Levite  and  Martyr;  56,  Scotch  Quarantain ;
57,  Scotch  King;  58,  Scotch  Trinitarian;  59,  Secret  of  Secrets;
60,  Sovereign  Noachite ;  61,  Star  of  Jerusalem  ;  62,  Sublime  English
Expert ;  63,  Sublime  Scotch  Purifier  ;  64,  Sublime  Supreme  Master
of  the  Order  of  the  Temple.


HISTORICAL    LANDMARKS

number;  but  they  excluded  from  their  system  the
Order  of  Misraim;80  while  the  Supreme  Council  of
the  Rite  ancien  endeavoured  to  extend  its  influence  by
the  establishment  in  Paris  of  a  Grand  Consistory  of
Princes  of  the  Royal  Secret,81  and  installed  the  officers
on  the  24th  September,  1805.82  And  in  the  next  year,

80  It  appears  that  in  1827  the  breach  was  not  healed;  for,  in  an
investigation  of  the  merits  of  Freemasonry  by  a  committee  of  tlir
legislature  of  Massachusetts,  United  States,  it  is  recorded  that  a
controversy  then  existed  for  Masonic  supremacy  between  the  above
bodies,  both  claiming  the  right  of  exclusive  interchange  of  diplomatic
relations  with  the  Supreme  Council  of  America.  A*balustre,  or  docu-
ment, engrossed  in  common  by  the  Supreme  Councils  of  New  York
and  Charlestown,  addressed  to  the  Supreme  Council  of  France,  dated
May  1,  1827,  was  deposited  at  the  General  Secretary's  office  at
Paris  by  Bro.  Houssement,  with  the  indorsement — "  the  Mason  who
entrusted  me  with  this  deposit  desires  to  be  unknown."  The  Grand
Orient  took  possession  of  the  document,  and  opened  a  negociation
and  correspondence  with  the  Supreme  Council  of  America,  claiming
to  be  the  only  authorised  regulator  of  Masonry  in  France.  The
Supreme  Council  of  the  Rite  ancien  et  accepte,  hearing  of  this  cir-
cumstance, entered  a  formal  protest  against  this  assumption,  and
complained  of  the  deceitful  practices  of  the  Grand  Orient,  to  turn  the
Supreme  Council  of  America  away  from  a  correspondence  with  them,
and  engage  it  in  their  own.  And  to  substantiate  their  claim  to  the
highest  Masonic  authority  in  France,  documents  were  forwarded  to
the  American  Supreme  Council,  which,  as  it  appears,  were  deemed
satisfactory ;  for  we  subsequently  find  that  body  engaged  in  a  cor-
respondence with  the  Supreme  Council  of  France,  and  appointing  a
minister  to  reside  near  that  Masonic  power.

1  These  two  bodies  soon  quarrelled  for  power,  the  Thirty-second
claiming  privileges  which  the  Thirty-third  never  intended  to  confer,
and  prohibited  the  exercise  of  them ;  which  ended  in  mutual  recri-
mination.

2  In  this  year  a  Grand  Lodge  of  Adoption  was  held  at  Strasburg
by  the  Empress  Josephine,  for  the  initiation  of  one  of  her  maids  of
honour.


OF    FREEMASONRY.  97

the  Prince  Carnbaceres  was  installed  the  Thrice  Puis-
sant Sovereign  Grand  Commander  of  the  Hit  ancien,
honorary  Grand  Master  of  the  rite  of  H.  R.  D.  M.  of
Kilwinning,  in  France,  and  Grand  Master  of  the  Mere
Loge  du  Hit  Ecossais.

About  the  year  1809,  a  body  made  its  appearance
in  Paris,  calling  itself  the  "  Chapitre  Metropolitan!  de
France."  This  body  practised  a  very  extensive  system
of  sublime  Masonry,  which  was  divided  into  several
series  of  degrees,  amounting  in  the  whole  to  nearly  a
hundred.83  In  1810  new  concessions  were  made  to

83  These  are  their  names — First  series,  1,  E.  A.  P. ;  2.  F.  C. ;
3,  Hermetic  Apprentice ;  4,  Hermetic  Fellowcraft ;  5,  Secret  Master ;
6,  Master  by  Curiosity ;  7,  Intimate  Secretary ;  8,  Provost  and  Judge ;
9,  Intendant  of  the  Buildings. — Second  series,  10,  Elect  of  Nine;
11,  Elect  of  Fifteen  ;  12,  Perfect  Elected  ;  13,  Master  Elect ;  14,  Se-
cret Elected;  15,  Sublime  Elected;  16,  Scotch  Elected;  17,  Elect
of  the  Twelve  Tribes;  18,  Elect. — Third  series,  19,  Particular
Master;  20,  Knight  of  the  Lion;  21,  Knight  of  the  Anchor;
22,  Petit  Architect;  23,  Grand  Architect;  24,  Illustrious  Knight
Commander  of  the  Black  and  White  Eagle  ;  25,  Mysterious  Initiate ;
26,  Master  of  the  French  Lodges ;  27,  Perfect  Mason. — Fourth
series,  28,  the  Golden  Ring;  29,  the  Sacrificers;  30,  Scotch  degree
of  Clermont;  31,  Scotch  degree  of  Franville;  32,  Scotch  Inconnus
of  the  three  J.  J.  J. ;  33,  Knight  of  the  Sacred  Vault  of  James  VI. ;
34,  Scotch  degree  of  Forty;  35,  Ecossais  Fran9ais ;  36,  Scotch  de-
gree of  Montpelier. — Fifth  series,  37,  Elder  Brethren  of  the  Triple
Triangle  ;  38,  Sublime  English  Ecossais ;  39,  Scotch  degree  of  Per-
fection ;  40,  Knight  of  the  two  crowned  Eagles ;  41,  Elect  Ecossais ;

42,  Scotch  degree  of  Naples  or  Sicily;  43,  Scotch  Trinitarian;  44, ;

45,  Grand  Scotch  Architect. — Sixth  series,  46,  the  Noachites;
47,  Quadruple  Respectable  Master ;  48,  Knight  of  St.  John  of  Pales-
tine ;  49,  Knight  of  Benevolence,  or  Perfect  Silence  ;  50,  Knight  of
the  Holy  Sepulchre;  51,  Knight  of  the  Holy  Unction;  52,  Knight
of  the  East,  or  the  Sword  ;  53,  Prince  of  Jerusalem  ;  54,  Commander

VOL.  II.  II


98


HISTORICAL    LANDMARKS


the  ladies,  who  were  freely  admitted  to  the  privileges
of  Masonry.  The  "  Dames  of  Mount  Tabor,"  and
other  androgynal  institutions,  appeared  in  France,84
and  were  liberally  supported.  The  most  recent  rite  of
this  description,  which  I  find  is  termed  the  "  Persian
Philosophers;"85  it  contained  ten  degrees.  But  these
female  institutions  were  never  allowed  in  our  own
country.

of  the  East. — Seventh  series,  55,  Knight  of  the  Eagle,  or  Master
Elect;  56,  Perfect  Master  of  Architecture;  57,  Knight  of  the  Star
in  the  East;  58,  Grand  Commander  of  the  Temple;  59,  Grand
Master  of  Masons;  60,  the  Antipodeans;  61,  Masonry  crowned ;
62,  Profound  Mystery  of  Initiation  ;  63,  Ecossais  of  St.  Andrew. —
Eighth  series,  64,  Knight  of  the  West;  65,  Knight  of  Jerusalem  ;
66,  Knight  of  the  Triple  Cross ;  67,  the  True  Light ;  68,  Proselyte
of  Jerusalem;  69,  Knight  of  the  Temple  ;  70,  Elected  of  London  ;
71,  Grand  Inspector  Commander;  72,  Knight  of  the  Sun. — Ninth
series,  73,  Hermetic  Mason;  74,  Supreme  Elected;  75,  Knight  of
St.  Andrew  of  Chardon;  76,  Knight  of  the  Black  Eagle ;  77,  the
Philosophers;  78,  Supreme  Commander  of  the  Stars;  79,  Sublime
Philosopher  (inconnu) ;  80,  Knight  of  the  Cabala ;  81  to  92  inclusive
have  the  names  of  the  twelve  signs  of  the  zodiac.

84  Their  professed  object  was  to  afford  succour  to  distressed  females
of  good  character.  The  usual  amusements  at  their  periodical  meetings
were  poetry,  music,  eloquence,  and  not  unfrequently  dancing.

85  These  were,  the  Silent  Apprentice,  the  Adept  Fellowcraft,  the
Esquire  of  Benevolence,  Master,  Knight  of  the  Sun,  Architect  of  all
Degrees,  Knight  of  the  Philosophy  of  the  Heart,  Eclectic  Knight  of
Truth,  the  Good  Shepherd,  and  the  Venerable  Grand  Elect.


OF    FREEMASONRY.  99

PART  IV.

'  The  fair  fabric  of  Masonic  splendour  was  planned,  and  reared,
and  finished  for  durability.  It  has  withstood  the  shocks  of  time,  the
revolutions  of  ages,  the  concussion  of  empires,  and  the  convulsions  of
hostile  contending  nations.  While  everything  unsolid  in  nature  falls  ;
while  kings  and  kingdoms  are  lost  in  the  vortex  of  revolutions ;  and
thrones  crumble  into  ruin,  and  totter  and  fall  from  their  basis,  Ma-
sonry towers  above  all  that  is  awful  and  ruinable  in  nature's  realm,
stands  unmoved  as  the  mountain  rock.  She  has  passed  safely  through
the  dark  ages  of  superstition  and  bigotry,  when  wars  and  commotions
convulsed  the  world  to  its  centre,  and  when  change  seemed  to  sway
a  sceptre  of  universal  empire."

From  an  Address  of  the  Masonic  National  Convention  of  America,  1843.

The  fourth  and  concluding  part  of  this  long  lecture
will  be  applied  to  a  brief  consideration  of  Freemasonry
as  it  exists  at  the  present  time.  Continental  Masonry
has  been  purged,  in  a  great  measure,  from  most  of  the
evils  which  it  contracted  from  the  innovations  of  char-
latanerie  during  the  last  century ;  and  although  a  great
number  of  degrees  still  remain  partially  in  practice,
their  tone  is  greatly  subdued,  and  the  mild  and  unas-
suming purity  of  English  Masonry  has  contributed  to
produce  a  change,  which  cannot  fail  to  operate  bene-
ficially for  the  institution,'  in  the  opinion  of  all  unpre-
judiced persons,  although  they  may  not  be  members
of  the  society.

The  French  Lodges  enjoy  great  latitude  with  respect
to  conferring  degrees  j86  some  using  one  system  and

86  Many  additions  to  the  simple  offices  are  permitted,  as  appears
from  a  circular  of  the  Supreme  Grand  Council  issued  in  1838.  Here
we  find  twenty  officers  enumerated — 1,  Grand  Master,  ad  vitam;
2,  Titular  Grand  Master;  3,  Grand  Inspector  General;  4,  Senior
Grand  Warden;  5,  Junior  Grand  Warden  ;  6,  Chief  of  the  General

H  2


100


HISTORICAL    LANDMARKS


some  another ;  and  some  blending  and  practising  rites
partaking  of  the  peculiarities  of  all,87  to  the  amount  of
eight  hundred  at  the  least.88  The  Grand  Orient  and
the  Supreme  Council  of  the  Hit  ancien  have  once  more
come  to  an  amicable  understanding,"9  although  it  ap-
pears improbable  that  they  will  ever  cordially  assimilate,
without  great  and  almost  organic  changes  in  the  con-
stitution of  both  j90  for  the  former  having  a  republican

Secretariat ;  7,  Grand  Secretary ;  8,  Grand  Treasurer ;  9,  Grand
Keeper  of  the  Seals;  10,  Grand  Orator;  11,  Grand  Expert;  12,  Grand
Architect ;  13,  Grand  Director  of  Ceremonies ;  14,  Grand  Almoner ;
15,  Grand  Senior  Deacon;  16,  Grand  Junior  Deacon;  17,  Grand
Standard  Bearer ;  18,  Grand  Sword  Bearer ;  19,  Assistant  Secretary  ;
20,  Grand  Tyler.

87  An  Order  was  invented  in  Paris,  so  recently  as  1832,  called  the
Rite  of  Memphis,  consisting  of  ninety-one  degrees.     I  do  not  know
their  names ;   but  they  wrere  founded  on  principles  similar  to  the
Order  of  Mizraim.

88  When  we  consider  that  during  the  rage  for  manufacturing  de-
grees, the  several  Lodges  competed  with  each  other  which  could
possess  the  greatest  number  of  new  ones — all  the  inventors  pre-
tending they  had  just  received  them  from   "  an  eminent  Scottish
Mason  travelling  in  France ;"  we  shall  have  no  difficulty  in  seeing
that  eight  hundred  degrees  are  short  of  the  actual  number.     In  my
list  of  continental  degrees,  which  contains  more  than  eight  hundred,
our  English  degrees  of  the  Royal  Arch,  and  many  of  the  degrees  of
knighthood  do  not  appear.

89  In  December,  1841,  a  meeting  was  holden  in  Paris,  attended
by  more  than  three  hundred  Brethren,  on  matters  of  controversy
between  the  Grand  Orient  and  the  Supreme  Council;  and  it  was
resolved  that  "  the  Lodges  under  the  jurisdiction  of  the  Grand  Orient
be  authorised  to  admit  to  their  works  Brethren  hailing  under  the
Supreme  Council ;  and  that  members  hailing  under  the  Grand  Orient
be  entitled  to  visit  the  works  of  the  Supreme  Council."

90  The  French  Masons  have  adopted,  and  they  make  no  secret  of
it,  a  symbolical  method  of  expressing  themselves  during  the  hours  of


OF    FREEMASONRY.  101

tendency,  and  the  latter  being  monarchical  and  aristo-
cratical,  the  chances  of  a  permanent  union  between
them  are  not  very  great.

In  England  the  system  is  limited  to  the  symbolical
degrees,91  the  Royal  Arch,  and  Templary.  Mark  Ma-
sonry is  practised  in  some  of  the  Lodges  or  Chapters,92
but  it  is  by  the  tolerance,  and  not  by  the  sanction  of
the  Grand  Lodge.93  The  Supreme  Royal  Arch  Chapter
is  connected  with  the  Grand  Lodge ;  the  former  hold-
ing its  Convocations,  and  the  latter  its  Communi-
cations, quarterly.  The  Grand  Mastership  of  Craft
Masonry,94  the  First  Grand  Principal  of  the  Royal  Arch,

refreshment.  Thus  they  call  the  supper-room,  a  workshop;  the
table,  a  bench;  the  table-cloth,  a  veil;  the  doyleys,  drapery;
the  dishes,  platforms ;  the  plates,  tiles ;  the  spoons,  trowels ;  the
knives,  swords ;  the  forks,  pickaxes ;  the  bottles,  hogsheads,  or
barrels ;  glasses,  cannon ;  meat,  materials ;  bread,  the  rough
ashlar  ;  wine,  strong  powder ;  water,  weak  powder ;  spirits,  ful-
minating powder  ;  salt,  sand;  pepper,  yellow  sand,  &c.  Any  Bro-
ther calling  the  above  by  their  true  name,  is  fined  in  a  glass  of  weak
powder.

91  Thory,  in  his  Synopsis,  enumerates  nineteen  different  kinds  of
Apprentice  Masons.

92  I  have  reason  to  believe  that  many  of  the  hauts  grades  are
also  practised  in  some  of  the  more  numerous  and  flourishing  Lodges.
I  was  in  frequent  communication  with  an  excellent  Lodge  thirty
years  ago,  which  conferred  the  whole  thirty-three  degrees ;  but  it
has  since  been  dissolved.

03  The  great  length  to  which  this  lecture  has  already  extended
compels  me  to  abridge  what  I  had  written  on  the  system  at  present
practised  in  both  hemispheres.  It  would  occupy  an  extra  sheet,
which  may  now  be  more  profitably  employed.

94  The  Editor  of  the  F.  Q,.  R.  has  some  judicious  remarks  in  a
recent  number  on  the  office  of  Grand  Master,  in  which  I  most  cor-
dially concur. — "  A  Lodge  of  Freemasons  may  continue  to  exist  to


102


HISTORIC  AJ


(DMARKS


and  the  Grand  Prior  of  Knighthood,  having  been  for
years  united  in  the  person  of  the  late  Duke  of  Sussex,
a  Grand  Conclave,  however,  had  not  been  held  for
many  years,95  till  it  was  convened  by  the  Grand  Sub
Prior  in  December,  1843,  to  deliberate  on  the  choice
of  a  successor  to  his  Royal  Highness.  Since  the  union
of  ancient  and  modern  Masons  in  1813,  the  Order  has
progressed  satisfactorily,  and  is  conducted  as  an  insti-

eternity,  without  the  constitution  of  a  Grand  Lodge ;  but  a  Grand
Lodge  would  soon  expire  if  there  were  no  private  Lodges  to  sustain
it.  Now  in  private  Lodges  no  Brother  is  permitted  to  iill  the  office
of  Master  more  than  two  years  consecutively,  unless  by  especial  dis-
pensation ;  and  for  this  self-evident  reason — that  he  may  not,  by
perpetuity  of  office,  obtain  aught  like  personal  preponderance,  or
absolute  power.  If  this  be  a  valid  reason  in  private  Lodges,  how
much  more  cogent  is  it  in  application  to  Grand  Lodge?  And  who
is  there,  after  all,  who  would  venture  to  affirm  that  the  annual  elec-
tions of  Grand  Master  were  intended  to  be  annual  farces? — that  the
Book  of  Constitutions  was  intended  to  convey  fallacy  or  falsehood  on
its  pages  ?  Who  is  there  who  would  wish  any  Brother,  royal  or
noble,  affiliated  or  expectant,  to  be  elected  as  Grand  Master  for  life  ?
We  assume  that  through  the  whole  fraternity  there  cannot  be  found
such  a  slave-mason.  And  whilst  we  sincerely  believe  that  such  a
restriction  would  be  of  immense  benefit  to  our  Order,  we  ask,  what
objection  can  be  made,  by  those  who  look  to  the  attainment  of  that
high  office  as  the  coping  stone  to  their  Masonic  career,  or  by  those
whose  votes  may  place  them  there,  to  the  proposition  that  no  Bro-
ther shall  fill  the  office  of  Grand  Master  for  more  than  three  years
consecutively?"  (F.  Q.  11.,  1843,  p.  228.)

95  The  statutes  of  the  Order  have  not  beeu  revised  siuce  1809.
By  these  statutes  it  appears  that  the  privilege  of  attending  the  Grand
Conclave  is  restricted  to  the  Grand  Officers  and  Commanders  of
Encampments,  with  their  captains.  It  should,  however,  be  borne  in
mind,  that  at  the  time  this  restriction  was  made,  it  was  in  analogy
with  the  congressional  regulation  of  the  Grand  Lodge  and  Grand
Chapter.


r

OF    FREEMASONRY.  103

tut  ion  of  peace,  harmony,  and  brotherly  love  ought
to  be.

In  Scotland  the  Lodges  are  strictly  prohibited  from
practising  any  other  than  the  three  degrees,  called  St.
John's  Masonry  j96  and  the  genuine  Templars  of  that
country  are  so  jealous  of  any  extrinsic  interference,07
that  instead  of  endeavouring  to  augment  their  numbers
by  the  establishment  of  new  Encampments,  they  have
made  their  rules  so  stringent,  and  the  admissions  so
expensive,  that  they  hope  in  a  few  years  there  will  not
be  more  than  two  or  three  Priories  in  Scotland.98

96  And  it  is  ordained  by  the  constitutions  (cap.  xix.  art.  6),  that
"  all  Lodges  holding  charter  under  the  Grand  Lodge  of  Scotland,
and  all  members  of  such  Lodges  acting  in  a  disrespectful  manner  to
the  Grand  Lodge,  particularly  by  disobeying  the  positive  injunctions
or  laws  of  that  body,  shall  be  deemed  guilty  of  a  high  misdemeanour,
and  may  be  subjected  to  the  highest  punishment,  viz.,  forfeiture  of
their  charters,  if  Lodges ;  if  individuals,  such  censure,  or  suspension
from  Masonic  privileges,  as  the  Grand  Lodge  shall  adjudge."

97  For  the  prevention  of  any  such  interference,  the  Grand  Con-
clave has  published  a  catalogue  of  its  Priories,  eleven  only  in  number,
and  has  strictly  enjoined,  that  "  the  members  of  these  Priories  will
take  care  that  they  do  not  maintain  any  intercourse  whatever,  as
Templar  Knights,  with  parties  professing  to  belong  to  other  establish-
ments (whether  Masonic  or  chivalric),  and  assuming  to  themselves
the  time-honoured  appellation  of  Knights  Templars."

98  An  eminent  Scottish  Templar  thus  expresses  his  opinion  on  this
subject  in  a  letter  to  the  Author : — "  The  difference,"  he  says,  "  be-
tween the  Masonic  and  true  Templar  is  this — the  former  is  made  in
a  Priory  or  Encampment  attached  to  a  Masonic  Lodge ;  while  the
latter  can  only  be  admitted  and  recognised  as  a  genuine  Knight
Templar  by  a  commission  or  confirmation  from  the  only  Grand
Master  of  the  Order  in  the  world ;  and  such  commission  is  now
never  granted  except  to  a  person  entitled  to  armorial  bearings ;  all


104


In  Ireland  the  Grand  Inspectors  General  possess
the  power  of  conferring  any  of  the  thirty -three  degrees
of  the  Rit  ancien  et  accepte ;  but  they  do  not  avail
themselves  of  it.  They  limit  their  system  to  fourteen
or  fifteen  degrees, w  the  chief  of  which  is  the  Rose
Croix,100  conferred  by  the  Grand  Council  of  Rites,
which  was  established  in  1836  under  the  auspices  of
the  Duke  of  Leinster.1  The  Grand  Chapter  of  the  Rose

who  cannot  produce  it  are  nothing  but  non-commissioned  officers
and  privates,  and  are  not  recognized  by  us  except  as  Masonic
Brethren."  A  provisional  Priory  of  the  Scottish  Order  was  holden
at  Edinburgh,  Nov.  29,  1843,  for  the  admission  of  Lord  Glenlyon,
the  Master  of  Strathallan,  Sir  David  Dundas,  and  John  Whyte  Mel-
ville, Esq.  The  Preceptor  and  Grand  Prior  of  Scotland,  Fra.  G.  A.
Walker  Arnott,  LL.D,,  presided.  The  Chapter-house  was  decorated
with  drapery,  representing  tents ;  the  Beauseant,  and  other  chivalric
banners  were  displayed,  and  the  Red  Cross  Knights,  to  the  number
of  sixty,  were  arranged  in  stalls  according  to  their  respective  rank  in
the  Order.

99  It  is  recorded  that  on  the  20th  February,  1788,  a  Royal  Arch
Chapter  working  in  Charlestown,  South  Carolina,  under  a  warrant
from  Dublin,  formed  a  junction  with  the  Sublime  Grand  Lodge  of
America,  and  the  members  were  received  into  the  degrees  free  of
expense,  being  acknowledged  as  high  as  the  thirteenth  inclusive.

JOG  «  ^Q  modern  Masonic  degree  of  Rose  Croix,"  says  Fellowes
(Expos,  of  the  Mys.  p.  187),  "  seems  to  allude  to  a  conceit  regarding
the  virtues  of  roses.  The  following  dialogue  takes  place  between  the
Master  and  Senior  Warden : — Do  you  know  the  Pelican  ?  I  do.
What  does  it  signify  ?  Amongst  us  it  is  a  symbol  of  the  Saviour  of
the  world,  and  of  his  perfect  humanity.  What  is  the  object  of  the
degree  of  Knights  of  the  Rose  Croix  ?  To  lead  us  to  respect  the
decrees  of  the  Most  High,  who  is  able  to  re-instamp  his  image  on  us."

1  It  was  intended  to  consist  of  "  the  officers  of  all  the  several  high
degrees  of  Masonry  in  Ireland,  or  three  representatives  from  each,
duly  accredited,  who  shall  be  summoned  to  assist  at  all  its  meetings


OF    FREEMASONRY.  105

Croix,  previously  in  existence,  considered  this  move-
ment as  an  infringement  on  their  rights,  and  solemnly
protested  against  it.  The  dispute  at  length  threatening
to  violate  the  peace  of  the  society,  in  February,  1845,
a  mutual  compromise  was  effected,  by  the  exertions
of  the  Duke  on  the  one  part,  and  Henry  O'Connor,
Esq.,  on  the  other;  and  harmony  was  restored  by  the
permanent  union  of  these  two  governing  bodies.2

and  deliberations,  that  is  to  say,  the  officers  or  representatives  of  the
Grand  Inspectors  General ;  the  Sublime  Princes  of  the  Royal  Secret ;
the  Order  of  Mizraim ;  the  Grand  Council  of  the  Knights  of  the
Sun;  the  Illustrious  Colleges  of  Philosophical  Masons,  or  Knights
of  K.  H. ;  the  Chapters  of  the  most  excellent  Knights  of  the  Eagle
and  Pelican,  Sovereign  Princes  Grand  Rose  Croix ;  all  Past  Grand
Commanders  of  the  Illustrious  Colleges  of  Philosophical  Masons ;  and
all  Past  Most  Wise  Sovereigns  of  the  Chapters  of  Prince  Masons."

2  As  the  dispute  is  now  finally  settled,  it  would  be  imprudent  to
notice  particulars.  I  merely  cite  from  the  F.  G.  R.  (1845,  p.  119),
a  perspicuous  explanation  from  Bro.  O'Connor.  "  The  principles  of
equality  and  equity  which  had  been  strictly  pursued  and  maintained
all  through  the  previous  negociation,  were  as  strictly  carried  out
under  the  superintendence  of  the  high-minded  nobleman  who  now
presides  over  a  truly  united  and  supreme  conclave ;  and  the  conse-
quence has  been  the  perfect  reconciliation  and  indissoluble  re-union
of  the  Free-masonic  body  in  this  kingdom.  There  has  been,  in  all
these  proceedings,  no  sacrifice  of  any  principle  on  either  side.  The
Grand  Chapter  has  gained  all  that  it  ever  cared  to  contend  for,  and
the  Supreme  Grand  Council  of  Rites  has,  by  its  union,  only  com-
pleted the  original  plan  of  its  formation.  There  has  been  '  no  sur-
render ;'  but  both  parties  have  cordially  coalesced  in  a  singularly
propitious  re-union  of  heart  and  hand.  I  have  now  only  to  add,
that,  in  imitation  of  the  course  taken  formerly  by  the  '  original
Chapter,'  the  Grand  Chapter  having  now  ceded  all  its  authority  to
the  representative  body,  has  relinquished  its  former  title  of  '  the
Grand  Chapter,'  as  being  no  longer  appropriate,  and  has  taken  the


HISTORICAL    LANDMARKS

There  are  eight  Grand  Lodges  in  Germany,3  some
of  which  work  all  the  high  degrees,  whilst  others  con-
fine themselves,  after  the  example  of  England,  to  the
Avorks  of  blue  or  symbolical  Masonry.4  Switzerland
possesses  two  constituent  authorities — a  Directory  of
the  refined  Scottish  rite  at  Basle,  and  a  national  Grand
Lodge  at  Berne.  The  former  claims  to  be  recognized
as  a  sovereign  and  independent  power  by  all  the  Euro-
pean Grand  Lodges,  and  to  have  the  acknowledged
right  of  conferring  all  the  superior  grades,  although  in
practice  it  confines  itself  to  craft  Masonry  only.  In
Sweden  Masonry  flourishes  abundantly,  and  is  nobly
patronized.5  The  Brethren  contend  that  it  was  derived

appropriate  title  of  the  *  Kilwimiiug  Chapter  of  Prince  or  llose  Croix
Masons  of  Ireland,'  under  the  authority  of  the  General  Representa-
tive Conclave,  united  and  reconciled  as  the  Supreme  Grand  Council
of  Kites."

3  Their  names  are,   Zu  den  drei   \Veltkugeln,    Royal  York  zur
Freundschaft,  Die  Grosse  Landes  Loge  von  Prussen,  all  at  Berlin  ;
the  Die  Grosse  Landes  Loge  von  Hanover,  von  Sachsen  zu  Dresden,
des  eklektischen  Bundes  zu  Frankfort,  zur  Sonne  zu  Bayreuth,  and
zu  Hamburg-.

4  There  have  been  sad  quarrels  among  the  rival  Grand  Lodges
here.     Thus,  in  1807,  three  influential  Chapters  at  Carlsruhe,  Frey-
burg,  and  Heidelberg  united,  formed  a  Grand  Lodge,  and  succeeded
in  establishing  a  schism,  which  still  remains  in  operation.

5  The  whole  system  of  Swedish  Masonry  bears  an  allusion  to  the
dissolution  and  re-establishment  of  Teniplary.     The  members  fancy
that  they  possess  the  last  will  of  James  Molay,  and  thus  give  the
inscription  on  his  tomb  : —

Inscription.
Jacobus  Burgundicu*.  Molay.  Bustus.  Anno  Dom.  Nostri.  Jesus.    Christi. MCCCXHI.  lell  Mars.

This   inscription  is  interpreted  by  certain  Masonic  words,   corre-
sponding in  the  initial  letter.   (See  Thory's  Acta  Lat.  vol.  i.  p.  340.)


OF    FREEMASONRY.  107

from  the  Templars,  and  practise  a  modification  of  the
system  of  Baron  Hunde.6  The  rest  of  Europe  being
under  the  domination  of  papal  supremacy,  disallows
Freemasonry;7  although  a  few  Lodges  are  believed  to
exist  in  Spain,  Portugal,  and  Italy.8

However  we  may  reject  these  puerilities,  they  are  firmly  believed  by
our  Swedish  Brethren.  Their  system  has  twelve  degrees,  divided
into  four  classes.  First  class,  1,  E.  A.  P. ;  2.  "P.  C. ;  3,  M.  M.—
Second  class,  4,  Apprentice  and  Fellow  craft  of  St.  Andrew ;  5,  Master
of  St.  Andrew ;  6,  the  Stuart  Brothers. — Third  class,  1,  the  Favourite
Brethren  of  King  Solomon ;  8,  the  Favourite  Brethren  of  St.  John,
or  the  White  Band ;  9,  the  Favourite  Brethren  of  St.  Andrew,  or  the
Purple  Band. — The  fourth  class  are  called  Brethren  of  the  Red  Cross,
divided  into  three  parts  or  degrees,  viz.,  10,  11,  12,  Brethren  of  the
first,  second,  and  third  classes.

6  Charles  XIII.,  formerly  Duke  of  Sudermania,  before  his  adop-
tion of  Bernadotte,  created  an  Order  of  Knighthood ;  one  of  the
qualifications  of  a  candidate  being,  that  he  must  be  a  Freemason  of
merit,  and  this  qualification  is  still  the  most  stringent.    And  so  highly
is  Freemasonry  esteemed,  that  some  excellent  Brethren,  though  not
of  gentle  blood,  by  virtue  of  being  members  of  this  Order,  take  pre-
cedence at  court  of  some  whose  rank  would  otherwise  entitle  them  to
distinction.

7  The  Archbishop  of  Malta,  in  1843,  issued  an  edict  against  the
Lodges  of  Freemasonry,  which  contains  the  following  passages : —
He  calls  on  the  people   "  to  entertain  the  most  profound  horror  and
the  deepest  indignation  against  the  Lodges  of  Freemasons,  by  us  this
day  publicly  condemned — to  regard  them  as  common  seivers  ofjilth,
and  sinks  of  immorality,  which  endeavour  to  vomit  hell  against,  and
to  stigmatise  the  immaculate  purity  of,  the  Roman  Catholic  religion.
Consider  them,"  he  continues,   "  as  so  many  pernicious  individuals,
to  whom  Pope  Leo  XII.,  in  his  repeated  bulls,  ordered  that  no  one
should  give  hospitality,  not  even  a  passing  salute!"

8  A  Supreme  Council  of  the  thirty-third  degree  was  founded  at
Naples,  in  1809,  and  King  Joachim  consented  to  be  its  Grand
Master.    Another  was  instituted  two  years  afterwards  at  Madrid,  by
the  Count  de  Grassc — Tilly  ;  but  they  worked  very  feebly  under  the


OS


HISTORICAL    LANDMARKS


In  America,  the  liauts  grades  are  practised  under
the  authority  of  one  Supreme  Council,9  which  professes
to  extend  its  authority  over  the  two  hemispheres,  as
they  are  technically  called,  comprising,  however,  only
North  and  South  America,  Terra  Firina,  and  the
Canary  Islands.10  This  Supreme  Council  possesses
extensive  powers,  and  delegates  to  Consistories,  and

ecclesiastical  denunciations,  as  will  appear  from  the  following  fact.
The  Count  Tedeschi,  lying  at  the  point  of  death,  was  threatened  by
the  priests  that  his  body  should  be  deprived  of  the  rites  of  sepulture
unless  he  abjured  Freemasonry.  Pressed  by  his  family,  the  dying
man  was  induced  to  sign  a  paper  to  that  effect,  which  was  printed
and  circulated  by  the  priests.

9  It  should  appear  that  the  Supreme  Council  of  the  United  States
was  connected  with  the  Rite  Ancien  of  France  ;  but  New  York  pos-
sessed a  Sovereign  Grand  Consistory,  connected  with   the  Grand
Orient  of  France ;  and  Bro.  Joseph  Cerneau,  a  French  Mason,  held,
at  one  and  the  same  time,  the  offices  of  Honorary  Member  of  the
Grand  Orient,  Sovereign  Grand  Commander  of  the  Grand  Consistory
of  New  York,  and  Sovereign  Grand  Commander,  for  life,  of  the
Supreme  Council  of  the  United  States  of  America.

10  This  authority  was  conferred  in  1832,  by  a  solemn  treaty  between
Elias  Hickes,  Grand  Commander,  the  Marquis  Santangelo,  Lieut.
Commander,  and  George  Smith,  Grand  Secretary  to  the  Supreme
Council  of  North  America,  and  the  Count  St.  Laurant,  Sovereign
Grand  Commander  for  the  Supreme  Council  of  South  America,  Terra
Firma,  and  the  Canary  Islands.     It  was  agreed  that  the  style  of
every  document  issued  by  this  Supreme  Council  should  be  as  fol-
lows :    "  To  the  terrestrial  glory  of  the  S.  A.  O.  T.  U.  God  and  my
right.     Order  from  Chaos.     From  the  East  of  the  world,  and  of  the
Grand  and  United  Supreme  Council  for  the  Western  hemisphere  of
the  Most  Powerful  Inspectors  General  of  the  thirty-third  and  last
degree  of  the  ancient  and  accepted  Scottish  Rite ;  Sublime  Chiefs  of  the
Royal  and  Military  Order  of  the  ancient  and  modern  Freemasonry,
over  the  two  hemispheres,  duly  and  lawfully  established,  and  con-
gregated under  the  celestial  canopy,  at  the  vertical  point  of  the  zenith,


OF    FREEMASONRY.  109

to  individuals,11  the  privilege  of  forming  Lodges,
Chapters,  Councils,  Colleges,  Grand  Councils,  and
Consistories,12  for  practising,  and  admitting  candidates
to  all  the  degrees  of  Freemasonry  which  are  known
and  acknowledged  throughout  the  whole  extent  of  its
territorial  jurisdiction ; 13  and  under  this  ample  authority,
the  hauts  grades,  to  an  incredible  number,14  are  con-
ferred in  the  New  World.

The  nomenclature  of  this  island  comprehends  some
degrees  which  the  Continental  Masons  reject ;  as,  for

corresponding  to  the  40°  41'  north  latitude,  and  3°  I7  13''  east  longi-
tude, from  Washington  city."  The  treaty  was  recorded  in  the
Golden  Book  of  the  Order.

11  Thus,  in  1802,  as  we  have  already  seen,  the  Supreme  Council
conferred  on  the  Count  de  Grasse  Tilly,  the  power  to   constitute
Lodges,  Chapters,  Councils,  and  Consistories,  of  the   thirty-third
degree,  throughout  the  two  hemispheres.

12  In  1803,  by  a  decree  of  the  Grand  Consistory  of  Kingston,  in
Jamaica,  all  the  establishments  in  this  degree  which  had  been  formed
by  Grand  Inspector  St.  Paul,  were  declared  irregular ;  and  all  initia-
tions and  admissions  under  his  authority,  either  there  or  in  St.
Domingo,  were  pronounced  null  and  void.

13  The  Eev.  Salem  Town,  (Spec.  Freemasonry,  p.  2 3),  erroneously
blends  all  kinds  of  Masonry  as  of  one  foundation,  and  of  the  same
antiquity.     "  What  a  beautiful  structure,"  he  exclaims,  "  is  Freema-
sonry !   so  consistent  in  its  plan ;  so  harmonious  in  its  parts ;    so
finished  in  its  execution !     Generally  it  is  three  stories  high  ;  some-
times less ;  oftentimes  four ;  and  then  seven,  seventeen,  thirty -three,
and  forty-three ;  yet  it  is  always  the  same  superb  edifice  ;  never  too
narrow  on  the  ground ;  never  too  high  in  the  air  ;  and  never  con-
taining more  or  less  than  the  whole  duty  of  man  as  a  moral  being  ;
comprising  a  summary  of  principles  conformable  to  the  very  nature
and  fitness  of  things."

u  The  French  writers  on  Masonry  say :  "  Ce  nombre  est  tres-
considerable,  il  faudrait  un  volume  pour  les  designer  tous  et  une
trop  grande  patience  pour  les  lire."


110


HISTORICAL    LANDMARKS


instance,  the  Mark  and  Past  Masters,  Excellent,  Super-
excellent,  &c.  And  there  are  many  degrees  which  un-
practised in  a  desultory  form,15  in  various  Lodges  ;  but
in  no  individual  Lodge  or  Chapter  that  I  am  acquainted
with,  are  they  practised  as  parts  of  a  system. 10  But
they  are  all  used  occasionally  by  our  Scottish,  Irish,
Continental,  or  Transatlantic  Brethren,  although  many

15  I  quote  the  folio  wing  passage  on  this  subject  from  a  masterly
article  in  the  F.  Q.  R.  for  1838,  on  the  Modern  Pseudo  Masonic
Rites,  by  Latomus : — "  The  rite  of  Mizraim,  in  the  number  of  its
degrees,  in  the  splendour  of  its  ornaments,  in  the  awful  solemnity  <>1
its  initiations,  surpassing,  it  is  said,  those  of  ancient  "Kgypt  or  Eleusis,
and  in  the  alcymical,  magical,  and  jargonical  nature  of  its  mysteries,
far  exceeds  any  rite  known  before.    To  use  a  common,  but  express! \  e
saying — it  out  Herod's  Herod  !     This  Hermetic  rite  consists,  not  of
seven,  nor  twenty-five,  nor  thirty-three  degrees,  but  of  ninety  !    The
Scotch  Masons,  at  the  most,  never  had  more  than  thirty-three,  of
which  twenty-five  were  given  by  communication ;    and   the    Rite
Frai^ais  conferred  formally  four  only  of  its  seven ;  but  the  Misraitic
Order  gives  ninety  !    .And  with  such  names,  such  aprons,  jewels,
stars,  &c.,  such  mystical  and  superhuman  secrets,  which  nobody  ever
hope  to  comprehend,  the  whole  Masonic  world  was  astounded."

16  The  committee  of  Grand  Inspectors  General,  in  their  Report
already  mentioned,  give  the  following  account  of  the  origin  of  these
degrees.     They  state  that,   "  during  the  Crusades,  at  which  27,000
Masons  were  present,  some  Masonic  MSS.  of  great  importance  were
discovered  among  the  descendants  of  the  ancient  Jews ;  and  that
other  valuable  documents  were  found  at  different  periods,  down  to
the  Year  of  Light  5557  ;  at  which  time  a  record  came  to  light  in
Syrian  characters,  relating  to  the  most  remote  antiquity ;  and  from
which  it  would  appear  that  the  world  is  many  thousand  years  older
than  given  by  the  Mosaic  account ;  an  opinion  entertained  by  many
of  the  learned.    Few  of  these  characters  were  translated  till  the  reign
of  our  illustrious  and  most  enlightened  Brother,  Frederick  II.,  King
of  Prussia,  whose  well-known  zeal  for  the  Craft,  was  the  cause  of
much  improvement  in  the  society  over  which  he  condescended  to


Of    FREEMASONRY.  Ill

of  the  rites  which  I  have  described,  have  become
extinct.  To  conclude  this  lecture,  I  subjoin  the  names
of  a  hundred  and  fifty  degrees,  which  have  not  been
before  mentioned.17

.  1,  Adonhiramite  Masonry  ;18  2,  3,  4,  5,  6,  Adoptive,19
or  Female  Freemasonry,20  five    degrees  ;    7,   African

preside.  As  society  improved,  and  as  discoveries  of  old  records  were
made,  tlie  number  of  our  degrees  was  increased,  until,  in  process  of

time,  the  system  became  complete.  From  such  of  our  records  as  are
authentic,  we  are  informed  of  the  establishment  of  the  Sublime  and
Ineffable  degrees  of  Masonry  in  Scotland,  France,  and  Prussia,  imme-
diately after  the  first  croisade.  But  from  some  circumstances  which
to  us  are  unknown,  after  the  year  5662,  they  fell  into  neglect,  until
the  year  5748,  when  a  nobleman  from  Scotland  visited  France,  and
re-established  the  Lodge  of  Perfection  at  Bourdeaux."

17  The  order  of  conferring,  however,  varies  so  considerably,  that  it
is  impossible  to  be  absolutely  correct  in  the  classification,  and  there-
fore 1  have  adopted  an  alphabetical  arrangement.

18  This  is  said  to  be  the  most  universal  system  of  Freemasonry  in
existence.    I  am  ignorant  of  the  number  of  its  degrees.  The  emblems
bear  a  reference  to  the  temple  of  Solomon,  and  the  designs  of  II AB,
whose  death  and  memory  are  celebrated  in  the  details  of  the  Order.

19  "Adoptive  Masonry,"  says  an  elegant  writer,  (F.  d.  11.,  1837,
p.  446),  "stands  a  bright  monument  to  female  secrecy  and  fidelity,
and  proves  how  wrong  all  those  are  who  fancy  a  woman  is  not  to  be
trusted.     There  is  not,  in  the  whole  system  of  adoptive  Masonry,  n
single  step  with  which  the  most  ascetic  moralist  could  find  fault ;  OH
the  contrary,  all  is  pure,  all  is  beautiful :  it  is  the  brightest  jewel
with  which  the  sombre  records  of  Masonry  are  spangled."     Some
give  it  six  degrees,  but  this  writer  enumerates  only  five,  correspond-
ing in  name  and  rank  with  the  first  five  in  the  rite  practised  in  France
at  the  time  this  institution  was  established.     1,  App. ;  2,  Compag-
none ;  3,   Maitresse ;  4,  Parfaite  ;    6,  Elue  Souveraine  ot  Illustre
Ecossaise.

0  The  Masonic  ladies  used  a  symbolical  language  at  their  fetes.
Thus  the  Lodge  was  called  Eden  ;  the  doors,  barriers ;  the  degrees,


112


HISTORICAL    LANDMARKS


Architects,   Order  of;21    8,  Alcantara,    Knight   of;22

9,  Annunciation  of  the  Virgin  Mary,  Knight  of  the ; 23

10,  the  Architect  ;24  11,  Ark  and  Dove  j25  12,  Knight
of  the  Royal  Axe  ;2fi  13,  Knight  of  the  Red  Cross

a  ladder ;  glasses,  lamps;  wine,  red  oil ;  water,  white  oil ;  bottles,
pitchers.  And  it  was  used  thus :  Fill  your  glass,  was,  trim  your
lamp  ;  drink,  was,  snuff  your  lamp  ;  fire,  was,  lift  up  by  Jive,  &c.

21  Instituted  by  one  Baucherren,  in  1767,  with  the  concurrence  of
the  King  of  Prussia,  for  the  purpose  of  making  researches  into  the
history  and  archaeology  of  the  Order.     It  contained  many  degrees  :
the  sixteenth  was  called  Armiger.

22  These  knights  were  distinguished  by  a  green  or  emerald  cross.

23  The  knights  wore  a  collar  made  of  gold  and  silver  plate*,  with
a  figure  of  the  Virgin  suspended  as  a  jewel.

24  The  history  of  this  degree  informs  us  that,  on  the  stoppage  of
the  works,  by  the  death  of  the  chief  architect  of  the  temple,  Solomon
assembled  all  the  Masters  who  were  distinguished  for  their  talents,
and  formed  them  into  a  Lodge  or  Council,  to  supply  the  place  of
HAB ;  and  conferred  on  them  the  privilege  of  entering,  the  S.  S.
having  been  placed  on  the  letter  G,  enclosed  within  a  blazing  star.
From  this  period  the  plans  and  designs  of  the  temple  were  placed  at
the  disposal  of  the  Lodge  of  Architects.

25  This  degree  can  only  be  conferred  on  a  Royal  Arch  Mason ;  and
is  considered  an  honorary  degree.     The  name  shews  its  origin.

26  "  The  Sidonians,"  says  the  lecture  of  this  degree,  "  were  always
very  zealous  for  bold  and  daring  enterprizes,  particularly  if  they  were
attached  to  the  services  of  religion,  from  the  very  earliest  times,  as
oui%  traditions  verify.     They  were  employed  by  Noah  to  cut  down
timber  in  the  forests  of  Lebanon,  for  the  construction  of  the  ark,
under  the  leadership  of  Japhet.     Their  descendants  or  successors,
were  again  employed  by  Moses  to  fell  and  square  cedars  for  the  ark
of  the  Covenant ;  and  afterwards  by  Solomon  for  his  magnificent
temple.     These  latter  were  arranged  under  the  Grand  Mastership  of
the  Prince  of  H.  K.  D.  M. ;  and  were  assisted  by  the  Samaritans  in
conveying  the  finished  work  into  the  plain,  and  placing  it  on  floats
for  conveyance  by  sea  to  Joppa.     The  same  system  was  once  more
in  full  requisition  at  the  building  of  the  second  temple,  under  the


OF    FREEMASONRY.  113

Sword  of  Babylon;27  14,  the  Banquet  of  Wisdom  ;28
15,  Knight  of  the  Black  Cross;29  16,  Knight  of  the
Black  Mark;30  17,  Knight  of  the  Brazen  Serpent;31

princely  direction  of  Zerubabel,  by  order  of  Cyrus,  Darius,  and
Xerxes,  in  succession.  In  all  these  instances,  the  Lodges,  Chapters,
or  Councils,  were  conducted  with  similar  ceremonies  ;  and  they  are
recorded  by  a  series  of  initial  letters  on  the  AXE,  or  jewel,  of  the
Order."

27  The  ceremonies  of  this  degree  are  celebrated  in  two  apartments ;
one  of  which  represents  the  council  chamber  of  Cyrus.     In  the  east
is  a  throne,  over  which  a  transparency  is  placed,  depicting  a  dream
which  induced  the  monarch   to  liberate   the  Jews.     It  is  lighted

O

by  seventy  lamps,  to  represent  the  years  of  their  captivity.  The
principal  symbol  is  a  sword  and  trowel  in  saltire.

28  One  of  the  high  degrees  in  the  primitive  rite  of  Narbonne.

!9  Martyrdom  was  the  undoubted  enjoyment  of  those  crusaders
who  died  fighting  for  the  cross.  Processions  were  instituted  to  the
honour  of  their  memory,  which  were  called  Black  Crosses.  Hence
the  origin  of  the  degree.

30  There  appears  to  be  some  sad  lumber  introduced  into  some  of
these  degrees  in  the  United  States.     A  Brother,  in  his  evidence  on
oath,  before  a  committee  of  the  House  of  llepresentatives,  states  that
"  the  candidates  are  led  about  the  hall,  with  every  obstruction  placed
in  the  way  that  can  be  thought  of.     A  board  has  one  end  laid  on
the  floor,  and  the  other  raised  on  blocks,  and  one  of  the  three  candi-
dates, all  being  tied  together,  is  made  to  walk  up  this  board  as  far
as  the  rope  will  permit,  and  the  blocks  are  then  knocked  out,  and  he
is  brought  to  the  floor  with  violence.     Broken  chairs,  benches,  and
wooden  horses,  are  strewed  in  the  way,  so  as  sometimes  to  enrage
the  candidates.    I  have  seen  a  window  that  was  broken  out,  sash  and
all.    I  was  told  it  was  done  by  a  candidate,  who,  being  vexed,  kicked
a  saw  horse  through  the  window."    The  above  degree  refers  to  Cain.

31  The  dress  of  this  degree  consists  of  a  red  collar,  on  which  is
embroidered  the  device  VIRTUE  AND  VALOUR.     The  jewel  is  a
serpent  entwined  on  the  tau  cross,  with  the  Hebrew  characters
which  arc  interpreted,  One  who  shall  live.

VOL.  ii.  r


HISTORICAL    LANDMARKS


18,  Knight  of  the  Burning  Bush;32  19,  the  Cabalistic
Philosopher;33  20,  Knight  of  Calatrava;34  21,  Chief  of
the  Twelve  Tribes  ;a5  22,  Chief  of  the  Tabernacle  -*>  23,
Order  of  Christ  -*  24,  Knight  of  Christ  ;38  25,  Knight
of  the  Christian  Mark  and  Guard  of  the  Conclave ; !!)

33  A  theosophic  degree,  practised  by  the  Mere  Loge  Ecossais.

33  A  degree  found  in  the  archives  of  the  Amis  lleunis,  at  Calais.

34  The  knights  are  distinguished  by  black  robes,  with  a  red  cross
on  the  breast.

35  The  eleventh  degree,  third  class,  of  the  series  practised  in  the
Chapters  of  the  Emperors  of  the  East  and  West.

36  The  hangings  of  the  Chapter  are  principally  white,  but  inter-
mixed with  black   and   red.     The   lower  end  contains  a  division
separated  by  a  red  curtain,  in  which  is  placed  a  throne  accessible  by
seven  steps,  and  a  table  covered  with  a  red  cloth,  with  the  Bible  and
a  dagger.     Here  is  also  the  Ark  of  Alliance  crowned  by  a  glory,  in
the  centre  of  which  is  the  word  jnfT,  and  at  the  sides,  figures  of
the  sun  and  moon,  flanked  by  altars  for  incense.     In  the  west  are
t\vo   chandeliers  of  five   branches,   and  in  the  east,  another  witk
two  branches.

37  It  is   doubtful  whether   this   be   a   Masonic   Order.     It  was
originally  conferred  by  the  Queen  of  Portugal.     According  to  the
legend,  the  Templars  in  that  country  were  not  destroyed  when  the
Order  was  extirpated  elsewhere ;  but  were  protected  by  the  sovereign,
who  converted  it  into  an  Order  of  Knighthood,  without   secrets,
reserving  to  the  throne  the  Grand  Mastership ;  and  its  name  was
changed  to  the  Order  of  Christ.    A  Masonic  Order  of  the  same  name
was,  however,  subsequently  established  at  Paris  by  a  Portuguese ;
and  the  rites  of  initiation,  as  well  as  the  catechism,  were  adapted  to
the  system  of  French  Masonry.

38  This  is  a  Masonic  Order  practised  in  America,  and  the  knights
wore  a  black  garment  with  a  double  cross.     It  is  sometimes  con-
founded with  the  Holy  and  Thrice  Illustrious  Order  of  the  Cross,
which,  however,  was  a  very  different  degree.

39  The  design  of  this  degree  is  thus  explained  to  the  candidate  at
his  admission  :   "  The  honourable  situation  to  which  you  are  now


OF    FREEMASONRY.  115

20,  Knight  of  the  Cohens;40  27,  Knight  of  Con-
stantinople ;41  25,  Knight  of  the  Cross  ;42  29,  Crowned
Adept,  or  Master  of  the  Key  of  the  Temple ; 43

advanced,  is  one  that  was  highly  coveted  by  the  Italian  princes  and
nobles ;  but  Pope  Alexander  rather  chose  to  appoint  his  ancient
friend,  the  Grand  Master  of  the  Knights  of  St.  John,  to  guard  his
person  from  violence ;  because  that  fraternity  were  celebrated  for
their  faith  and  religious  zeal.  The  members  of  this  guard  were
selected  on  a  view  of  their  physiognomy,  for  an  open  countenance  is
considered  a  sure  indication  of  a  pure  heart.  This  Order  of  the
Christian  Mark  was  conferred  on  those  who,  like  their  Saviour,  went
about  doing  good.  The  jewel  is  a  triangular  plate  of  gold,  with  the
letter  G,  and  five  points,  on  one  side,  and  seven  eyes  on  the  other.
The  motto  is,  "  Christus  regnat,  vincit,  triumphat.  Rex  regnantium,
et  Dominus  dominantium."

40  The  seventh  degree  of  the  system  of  the  Orient.

41  This  degree  forms  no  part  of  any  system,  and  may  be  conferred
on  any  Master  Mason  in  any  Lodge  or  Chapter.     The  Worshipful
Master  seated  in  the  East,  represents  Constantine.  He  has  a  crown  and
sceptre.     The  Brethren  are  divided  into  two  sections,  noblemen,  and
common  people,  or  mechanics  ;   and  the  interest  of  the  degree  rests
in  an  imaginary  dispute,  which  is  decided  by  Constantine  in  favour
of  the  latter.     It  is  truly  an  American  degree.

42  This  is  a  French  degree,  and  is  thus  explained  by  M.  Clavel : —
"  Les  grades  portaient  primitivement  les  noms  d'  Apprenti  de  Com-
pagnon,  de  Maitre  d' Orient,  de  Maitre  de  1'Aigle  noire  de  S.  Jean,
et  de  Maitre  Parfait  du  Pelican.     Le  30  Avril,  1808,  un  decret
magistral   pour   deguiser   cette    originc  Ma9onnique,    decida  qu'a
l'avenir  ces  grades  seraient  appeles ;   initie,    initie   de   1'iiiterieur,
adepte,  adepte  1'Orient,  adepte  de  1'Agle  noire  de  S.  Jean,  et  adepte
parfait   du   pelican.     Le  premier  etablissement  que  fonda   1'ordre
fut,  d'ailleurs,  une  Loge  Ma9onnique,  qui  obtint,  le  23  Decembre,
1805,  du  G.  O.   de  France  des  constitutions  sou  le  titre  de  Che-
valiers  de  la  Croix ;   et  il  se  recruta  particulierement  parmis   le
membres  de  la  Loge  de  S.   Catherine,  composee  de  personnes  de
haut  rang."

43  The  seventh  degree  in  the  Swedish  system  of  Freemasonry.

i  2


16


HISTORICAL    LANDMARKS


30,  the  Diocesan;44  31,  Knight  of  the  Eagle ; 45  32,
Knight  of  the  Eagle,  and  Sovereign  Prince  of  the
Rose  Croix  de  Heredom;46  33,  Order  of  the  East;47
34,  Knight  of  the  East  and  West  ;4S  35,  Knight  of

44  The  fifth  degree  of  Hunde's  German  Union.

45  This  degree  is  founded  on  a  legend  which  records,  that  when
the  Almighty  abandoned  his  holy  temple  to  destruction,  it  was  \\itli
the  design  'of  erecting  a  system  of  spiritual  geometry  which  should
endure  throughout  all  ages,  and  be  impregnable  to  the  assaults  of
time.     Then  the  CUBICAL  STONE  sweated  blood ;  the  foundations
of  the  building  were  rent  asunder,  and  the  celebrated  Corner  Stone
was  cast  forth  amongst  the  ruins  ;  the  Cross  was  erected  on  the  top
of  a  mountain,  for  the  sacrifice  of  the  mystical  Rose,  and  elevated
towards  the  celestial  sphere  by  three  circles,  squares,  and  triangles,
cut  with  a  diamond's  point.     At  that  awful  moment,  the  sun  and
moon  were  withdrawn  from  the  heavens,  the  earth  darkened,  the
implements  of  masonry  destroyed,  the  WORD  was  lost,  and  the  fra-
ternity covered  with  dismay.     This  state   of  things  remained  for
three  days  and  nights ;  when,  by  a  process  which  is  explained  in  the
degree,    every  thing  was  restored  ;  Masonry  reappeared,    and   the
Order  assumed  a  speculative  form,  and  was  thenceforward  conducted
by  the  Theological  and  Cardinal  Virtues.     Gloria  in  excelsis  Deo.

40  It  is  extremely  probable  that  this  degree  might  have  had  a
reference,  at  its  first  institution,  to  the  following  ecclesiastical  cere-
mony. On  the  fourth  Sunday  in  Lent,  1366,  Pope  Urban  V.  sent
a  golden  Rose  inscribed  with  a  Cross,  and  ordained  that  one  should
be  thus  consecrated  annually,  and  being  set  with  precious  stones,
should  be  transmitted  to  some  potentate,  or  church,  as  a  mark  of  the
papal  esteem.  It  is  consecrated  with  frankincense,  balm,  musk,  and
holy  water,  and  then  placed  on  the  altar  at  the  foot  of  the  cross.  In
these  ages,  the  three  qualities  of  the  rose,  viz.,  its  colour,  fragrance,
and  taste,  were  applied  to  believers ;  and  the  golden  rose,  the  musk,
and  the  balm,  symbolized  the  divine,  spiritual,  and  human  nature  of
JESUS  CHRIST.

47  Founded  in  Paris,  in  1806,  and  said  to  have  originated  with  the
Templars.

48  The  Grand  Council  Chamber  of  Knights  of  the  East  and  West,


LEG1    24:


PAGE    117


I. Sains  cLsT^    et    Lith..


•  18 45  iy  3ioT


OF    FREEMASONRY.  117

the  East,  or  the  Sword  ;49  36,  Eclectic  Masonry  ;M  37,

must  be  hung  with  red,  spangled  with  gold  stars.  In  the  east  is  a
canopy  elevated  on  seven  steps,  supported  by  four  lions  and  four
eagles,  and  between  them  an  angel  with  six  wings.  On  one  side  of
the  throne  there  is  a  transparent  painting  of  the  sun ;  and,  on  the
other  side,  one  of  the  moon ;  below  them  is  displayed  a  rainbow.  In
the  east,  a  vessel  containing  perfumes,  another  with  water,  arid  a
human  skull.  On  the  south  and  north  sides  are  smaller  canopies  for
the  Venerable  Ancients  ;  and  opposite  the  throne,  in  the  west,  are
two  canopies,  elevated  on  five  steps,  for  the  two  Venerable  Wardens,
who  act  in  council  as  Grand  Officers.  A  full  council  consists  of
twenty-four  Knights.  On  the  pedestal  is  a  large  Bible,  with  seven
seals  suspended  from  it.  The  floor  cloth  is  a  heptagon  within  a
circle,  over  the  angles  of  which  are  the  letters  B.  D.  W.  P.  H.  G.  S.
In  the  centre,  a  man  clothed  in  a  white  robe,  with  a  golden  girdle
round  his  waist,  his  right  hand  extended,  and  surrounded  with
seven  stars,  a  long  white  beard,  his  head  surrounded  with  a  glory,
and  a  two  edged  sword  in  his  mouth,  with  seven  candlesticks  round
him,  and  over  them  the  letters  II.  D.  P.  I.  P.  11.  C.  (See  the
engraving.)

40  This  degree  refers  to  the  edict  which  was  issued  by  Cyrus  for
rebuilding  the  temple,  and  the  erection  of  an  Order  of  Babylonish
Knights  by  Zerubabel,  in  which  the  triple  triangle  is  introduced  as
an  emblem  of  Equality,  Fidelity,  and  Brotherly  Love.

50  This  Order  was  under  the  protection  of  the  Grand  Orient  of
France.  It  was  purely  symbolical.  Barm  el,  however,  says  :  "  The  ap-
pellation of  Eclectic  is  applied  to  a  Freemason,  as  it  was  formerly  to
certain  philosophers.  We  are  to  understand  by  this  word  those  of  the
adepts,  who,  after  having  passed  through  the  different  degrees  of
Masonry,  attach  themselves  to  no  particular  system,  but  adopt  from
all,  whatever  may  best  suit  their  views.  They  are  neither  Hermetic,
Cabalistic,  nor  Martinist  Masons.  In  Germany,  there  is  another
kind  of  Eclectic  Masons,  who  do  not  disclaim  any  adherence  to  par-
ticular systems,  but  assert  also  that  they  depend  on  none.  According
to  them,  all  are  independent ;  all  have  the  right  of  making  their  own
laws.  It  is  for  that  reason  that  they  have  abolished  the  names  of
Grand  and  Scotch  Lodges."


118  HISTORICAL    LANDMARKS

Elected  of  the  Truth  ;51  38,  Elected  Knight  of  9  ;52
39,  Elected  of  Perignan  -^  40,  Elected  Brother  j54  41,
Elected  Grand  Master,  or  Illustrious  Elected  of  15  j55
42,  Elysian  Knight  j56  43,  Emperor  of  Libanus  ;57  44,
English  Harodim;58  45,  Grand,  Elect,  Perfect,  and

51  The  final  degree  of  instruction  in  the  Elus.

53  Barruel  gives  the  following  inflated  account  of  the  ceremonial.
(Hist.  Jac.  vol.  ii.  p.  290.)  "  The  candidate  is  led  into  the  Lodge
blindfolded,  with  bloody  gloves  on  his  hands.  An  adept,  with  a
poinard  in  his  hand,  threatens  to  run  him  through  the  heart  for  the
crime  with  which  he  is  accused.  After  various  frights,  he  obtains
his  life,  on  condition  that  he  will  revenge  the  father  of  Masonry  in
the  death  of  his  assassin.  He  is  shown  to  a  dark  cavern.  He  is  to
penetrate  into  it,  and  they  call  to  him — '  Strike  all  that  shall  oppose
you !  Enter — defend  yourself,  and  avenge  our  master !  At  that
price  you  shall  receive  the  degree  of  Elect ! '  A  poinard  in  his  right
hand,  and  a  lamp  in  his  left,  he  proceeds  ; — a  phantom  opposes  his
passage,  and  he  hears  the  same  voice  repeat, — '  Strike  !  Avenge
Hiram  !  There  is  his  assassin  ! '  He  strikes,  and  the  blood  flows.
The  voice  then  says — '  Strike  off  his  head  ! '  and  the  head  of  the
corpse  is  lying  at  his  feet.  He  siezes  it  by  the  hair,  and  triumphantly
carries  it  back  as  a  proof  of  his  victory  ;  shews  it  to  the  Brethren,
and  receives  the  degree."

53  This  degree  relates  to  the  punishment  of  certain  criminals  who
are  celebrated  in  symbolical  Masonry.

54  The  seventh  degree  of  the  National  Grand  Lodge  at  Berlin.

55  The  apron  or  badge  of  this  degree  is  white,  with  a  broad  black
border.     On  the  flap  are  three  human  heads   on  spikes,   placed
triangularly.     The  same  device  appears  on  that  part  of  the  black
sash  or  scarf  which  crosses  the  breast.

56  I  cannot  find  to  what  the  Elysian  degree  refers,  except  it  be  to
the  place  of  happiness  in  the  spurious  Freemasonry.

57  This  degree  was  invented  in  the  island  of  Bourbon,  in  1778,
by  the  Count  de  Beurnonville,  who,  at  that  time,  held  the  office  of
Grand  Master  of  the  East  Indian  Lodges.

8  The  mysteries  of  this  Order  are  peculiar  to  the  institution  itself;


OF    FREEMASONRY.  119

Sublime  Mason;™  46,  Grand  Master  Architect;00  47,

while  the  lectures  of  the  Chapter  include  every  branch  of  the  Masonic
system,  and  represent  the  art  of  Masonry,  in  a  finished  and  complete
form.  Different  classes  are  established,  and  particular  lectures
restricted  to  each  class.  The  lectures  are  divided  into  sections,  and
the  sections  into  clauses.  The  sections  are  annually  assigned,  by  the
chief  Harod,  to  a  certain  number  of  skilful  Companions  in  each  class,
who  are  denominated  Sectionists ;  and  they  are  empowered  to  dis-
tribute the  clauses  of  their  respective  sections,  with  the  approbation
of  the  chief  Harod  and  General  Director,  among  the  private  Com-
panions of  the  Chapter,  who  are  denominated  Clauseholders.  Such
Companions  as,  by  assiduity,  become  possessed  of  all  the  sections  of
the  lecture,  are  called  Lecturers  ;  and  out  of  these  the  General
Director  is  always  chosen.  (See  more  in  Preston,  p.  271.)

19  The  Lodge  of  Perfection,  or  ultimate  degree  of  Masonry,  should
represent  a  subterraneous  vault,  painted  red,  and  adorned  with  many
colours,  and  columns  of  a  flame-wlour.  Behind  the  Master  must  be
a  light  to  shine  through  a  triangular  sun ;  and  before  him  a  pedestal
appearing  to  be  broken.  There  ought  to  be  several  other  lights,
arranged  numerically  according  to  the  different  stages  of  Masonry.
The  Most  perfect,  Grand  Elect,  and  Sublime  Master,  in  this  degree,
is  to  represent  Solomon,  seated  in  the  east,  dressed  in  royal  robes,
and  having  a  crown  and  sceptre  placed  on  a  pedestal  before  him.
The  two  Grand  Wardens  are  seated  in  the  west.  On  the  right  hand
of  the  Most  Perfect  sits  the  Grand  Treasurer,  having  a  table  before
him,  upon  which  perfumes  are  placed,  with  a  small  silver  hod,  and  a
trowel  of  gold.  On  his  left  hand  sits  the  Grand  Secretary  behind
a  table,  with  seven  loaves  of  shew  bread,  a  cup  of  port  wine  for  liba-
tion, and  jewels  for  the  candidates  at  their  reception.  These  are,
a  crowned  compass,  extended  at  ninety  degrees,  with  a  sun  in  the
centre  ;  and  on  the  reverse  a  blazing  star  enclosing  a  triangle,  hung
to  a  broad  flame-coloured  ribbon  of  a  triangular  form  round  the
neck  ;  and  also  a  gold  ring  with  the  motto — VIRTUE  UNITES  WHAT
DEATH  CANNOT  PART.  The  apron  is  flamed  with  red,  a  blue  ribbon
round  the  edge,  and  the  jewel  painted  on  the  flap.  The  clothing  is
black,  with  swords.

00  King  Solomon  established  this  degree  with  a  view  of  forming  a


120  HISTORICAL    LANDMARKS

Grand  Patriarch;01  48,  Grand  Pontiff ;(i2  49,  Grand,
or  superintendent  Scotch  Master;63  50,  Knight  of  the
Golden  Key;04  51,  Knight  of  the  Golden  Lance;65

school  of  architecture,  for  the  instruction  of  the  Brethren  employed
in  the  Temple  of  God,  and  animating  them  to  arrive  at  perfection  in
the  royal  art.  Being  desirous  of  rewarding  the  talents  and  virtues
of  faithful  Brethren,  in  order  to  make  them  fit  to  approach  the
Sanctum  Sanctorum,  he  cast  his  eyes  upon  the  chiefs  of  the  twelve
tribes,  as  persons  extremely  proper  to  fulfil  the  promise  made  to
Enoch,  Moses,  and  David,  that  in  fullness  of  time  the  bowels  of  the
earth  should  be  penetrated  for  the  discovery  of  secrets.

61  The  twentieth  degree,  sixth  clause  of  the  Chapter  of  Knights  of
the  East  and  West.

62  The  floorcloth  represents  a  celestial  city,  emblematical  of  ancient
Masonry,  descending  on  clouds  to  replace  the  primitive  city  of  Jeru-
salem polluted  by  infidels,  who  are  tvpified  by  a  three-headed  serpent,
or  dragon,  in  chains,  which  appears  crushed  by  the  superincumbent
weight.     This  celestial  city  is  in  the  form  of  a  square,  measuring
twelve  thousand  furlongs  on  each  side,  and  contains  three  gates  in
each  quarter — twelve  in  all.     In  the  centre  is  a  tree  which  bears  as
many  different  kinds  -  of  fruits,  to  intimate  that  the  Brethren  meet
monthly  for  mutual  instruction  and  mutual  assistance.     On  one  side
is  represented  a  high  mountain.

63  The  Superintendent  Scotch  Master  is  precisely  the  same  as  the
"  Maitre  Ecossais  "  of  the  Adonhiramite  system.     The  work  called
"  Eecueil  de  la  Ma9onnerie  Adonhiramite,"  was  the  production  of
Guilleinain  Saint  Victor,  in  1787.     The  author  speaks  of  a  previous
edition  in  1783,  but  I  never  saw  it.     It  is  believed  that  the  degrees
were  compiled,  and  the  Adonhiramite  rite  got  up,  by  St.  Victor,  but
most  of  the  degrees  were  previously  practised  in  other  systems.    The
Maitre  Ecossais  of  the  Adonhiramite  system  does  not  occur  either  in
the  llite  Ancien  et  Accepte,  or  in  the  Order  of  Mizraiin ;  although,
in  the  latter,  are  two  degrees,  the  one  called  Maitre  Ecossais,  and
the  other  Ecossais  Maitre ;  but  both  are  different  from  the  above
degree  of  Superintendent  Scotch  Master.

64  The  third  degree  of  the  Hermetic  rite  at  Moutpelier,

65  One  of  the  degrees  of  the  Hit  Primitif.


OF    FREEMASONRY.  121


52,  Knight  of  the  heavenly  Band,  or  Zodiac  j66  53,  He-
roine of  Jericho  ;67  54,  Knight  of  the  Holy  Ghost  ;6S
55,  Harmony  Universal;69  56,  Knight  of  the  Holy
Sepulchre,  or  Grave;70  57,  Holy  and  thrice  Illus-
trious Order  of  the  Cross;71  58,  the  Initiated  Bro-

66  The  members  wore  a  band  three  fingers  in  breadth,  fastened  on
the  left  shoulder,  and  brought  over  the  breast  cross  ways  under  the
right  arm.

67  This  is  an  American  degree.    It  is  androgyne,  and  conferred  on
lloyal  Arch  Masons,  their  wives  and  widows,  at  a  meeting  convened
for  that  express  purpose  at  the  dwelling  of  a  Royal  Arch  Mason.

68  This   degree  is  taken  from  Ezekiel  ix.      The  Knights  were
distinguished  by  a  dove  in  the  centre  of  a  cross.

69  The  Order  of  Universal   Harmony  was   instituted  under  the
direction   of  M.  Mesmer,   to  propagate  the   delusions   of   animal
magnetism.

70  Instituted,  as  it  is  said,  in  1219.    It  refers  to  the  circumstance
of  St.  Helena  discovering  the  true  cross  of  Christ.     In  some  Lodges
it  typifies  the  resurrection.    The  council  chamber  represents  a  cathe-
dral, the  altar  being  covered  with  black  cloth,  on  which  are  placed
three  tapers,  a  crucifix,  and  a  skull  with  thigh  bones  in  saltire.    The
Principal  stands  on  the  north  side  of  the  altar,  with  a  Bible  in  one
hand  and  a  pastoral  staff  in  the  other,  to  open  the  council.    The  veil
is  withdrawn  to  plaintive  music,  incense  shed  its  perfume,  the  altar
is  displayed,  and  the  choir  chant —

Hush,  hush,  the  heavenly  choir,

They  cleave  the  air  in  bright  attire ;

See,  see,  the  lutes  the  angels  bring,

And  hark,  divinely  thus  they  sing :
To  the  power  divine  all  glory  be  given,
By  man  upon  earth,  and  angels  in  heaven.

The  council  is  then  declared  open,  with  Kyrie  Elieson — resp.  Gloria
tibi  Domino.  The  dress  is  a  red  cross ;  and  their  vow  to  guard  the
holy  sepulchre,  and  bear  the  banner  of  the  cross.

71  The  origin  of  this  degree  is  referred  to  the  middle  ages,  and  its
grand  symbol  is  found  in  the  Caroccio  of  the  Italian  writers.    It  ap-


122  HISTORICAL    LANDMARKS

thers;72  59,  Intendant  of  the  Buildings,  or  Master  in
Israel;73  60,  Intimate  Secretary;74  61,  the  Illustrious

pears  to  have  been  suggested  by  the  Labarum  of  Constantine.  This
Caroccio  was  the  great  standard  car  of  the  state,  and  is  said  to  have
been  first  used  by  Erebert,  Archbishop  of  Milan,  in  the  war  of  1035,
in  which  the  citizens  supported  him  against  the  rural  nobility ;  and
it  soon  came  to  be  introduced  into  the  array  of  all  the  republics.  It
was  a  car  upon  four  wheels,  painted  RED,  and  so  heavy  that  it  was
drawn  by  four  pairs  of  oxen,  with  splendid  trappings  of  scarlet.  In
the  centre,  raised  upon  a  mast,  which  was  crowned  with  a  golden
orb,  floated  the  banner  of  the  republic,  and  beneath  it  the  Saviour,
extended  on  the  cross,  appeared  to  pour  benedictions  on  the  sur-
rounding host.  Two  platforms  occupied  the  car,  in  front  and  behind
the  mast ;  the  first  filled  with  a  few  of  the  most  valiant  soldiers  of
the  army,  the  chosen  guard  of  the  standard  ;  the  latter  with  a  band
of  martial  music.  Feelings  of  religion  and  of  martial  glory  were
strongly  associated  with  the  Caroccio.  It  was  an  imitation  of  the
Jewish  Ark  of  the  Covenant ;  and  from  its  platform  a  chaplain
administered  the  holy  offices  of  Christianity  to  the  army.  It
was  thus  sacred  in  the  eyes  of  the  citizens,  and  to  suffer  it  to  fall
into  the  hands  of  an  enemy,  entailed  indelible  disgrace.  It  is  by
this  mark  that  a  candidate  is  obligated,  saying — "  I  do,  by  the
honour  and  power  of  the  mark  of  the  holy  and  illustrious  Order  of
the  Cross,  which  I  now  hold  to  heaven  in  my  right  hand,  as  the
earnest  of  my  faith,  &c."

72  The  eleventh  class  in  the  regime  of  the  rhilaletes.

73  The  decorations  consist  of  a  broad  red  ribbon,  or  scarf,  from  the
right  shoulder  to  the  left  hip,  from  which  is  suspended  a  triangle,
fastened  by  a  narrow  green  ribbon.     On  one  side  of  the  triangle  are
the  words,  Benchorim,  Achars,  Jachinai ;  and  on  the  reverse,  Judea,
Ky,  Jea.     The  aprons  are  white,  lined  with  red,  and  bordered  with
green.     In  the  centre  is  a  star  of  nine  points,  over  a  balance ;   and
on  the  flap  a  triangle,  with  the  letters  B.  A.  I.

74  The  Lodge  is  furnished  with  sable  hangings,  and  represents
Solomon's  audience  hall.     It  is  lighted  with  twenty-seven  candles,
in  three  chandeliers  with  nine  branches  each,  and  placed  east,  west,
and  south.


OF    FREEMASONRY.  123

Brothers  ;75  62,  Order  of  Joachim  ;76  63,  Knight  of  St.
John  the  Baptist  ;77  64,  Jordan  Pass  ;78  65,  Illuminated
Theosophists  ;79  66,  Knight  of  Kadosh;80  67,  King  of

75  A  degree  practised  in  the  ancient  Chapter  of  Glermont.

76  It  is  said  of  this  secret  society,  that  the  candidates  were  sworn
to  believe  in  the  Holy  Trinity,  and  to  abstain  from  waltzing !

77  A  section  of  Masonic  Templarism.     Some  say  it  was  invented
in  Ireland  about  the  end  of  the  last  century.

78  This  degree  belongs  to  the  Orange  Lodges.

79  Founded  by  Chastannier  for  the  propagation  of  the  system  of
Swedenborg,  and  said  to  have  been  introduced  into  this  country ;  but
I  am  ignorant  in  what  Lodges  (if  any)  it  was  used.

80  Kadosh  is  an  Hebrew  word,  signifying  Holy.     Now  K.  H.,  the
initials  of  Kadosh,  or  Knights  Holy,  were  explained  in  1816,  by
Knights  of  the  Holy  Ghost.     It  is  thought,  therefore,  that  the
twenty-ninth  degree  of  the  Sovereigns  and  Kadosh  are  of  the  same
tendency.     The  candidate  was  made  to  undergo  many  severe  trials
of  fortitude.     During  the  last  century,  if  Barruel  may  be  credited,
the  noviciate  of  a  Knight  of  Kadosh  was  anything  but  agreeable.
We  are  told  by  M.  Monjoy,  that  the  Duke  of  Orleans  was  obliged  to
ascend  a  ladder,  and  then  throw  himself  off.    A  deep  cave,  or  rather
precipice,  whence  a  narrow  tower  rises  to  the  summit  of  the  Lodge,
having  no  avenue  to  it  but  by  subterraneous  passages  replete  with
horror,  is  the  place  where  the  candidate  is  abandoned  to  himself,
bound  hand  and  foot.    In  this  condition  he  finds  himself  raised  from
the  ground  by  machines,  making  the  most  frightful  noise.    He  slowly
ascends  this  dark  vault,  and  then  suddenly  falls,  as  if  he  were  not
supported  by  anything.     Thus  mounting  and  falling  alternately,  he
must  carefully  avoid  displaying  any  symptoms  of  fear.     He  is  then
conducted  to  a  recess,  closed  with  a  screen  of  black  cloth,  which
being  removed,  three  figures  stand  before  him  dressed  as  devils ;
after  which  he  is  made  to  circumambulate  the  room  three  times,  in
commemoration  of  the  mysterious  descent  of  our  Saviour  into  hell,
which  lasted  three  days.    He  is  again  placed  before  the  recess  covered
with  black,  and  is  told  that  the  horrors  through  which  he  has  passed
arc  as  nothing  in  comparison  with  those  which  are  to  come,  therefore


124  HISTORICAL    LANDMARKS

the  World  ;81  08,  Knight  Adept  of  the  Eagle,  or  Sun  •,"*
69,  Knight  of  Malta;83  70,  Knight  Templar;84  71,

he  is  cautioned  to  summon  all  his  fortitude  to  meet  the  dreadful
scene.  Thus  far  the  Abbe  Barruel. — I  should  conceiye  that  he  had
luxuriated  his  fancy  amidst  the  scenes  which  were  enacted  during
the  initiations  of  the  spurious  Freemasonry.  (See  the  Hist.  Init.
p.  98,  new  ed.)  The  degree  refers  to  the  suppression  of  the  Tem-
plars by  King  Philip.

81  A  degree  in  the  llite  Philosophique.

82  I  find  the  following  lecture  in  a  cotemporary  work: — "  "What
signify  the  seven  degrees  ?  The  steps  which  you  are  bound  to  ascend
before  you  can  arrive  at  the  sublime  degree  of  Knight  of  the  !Suii.
What  are  the  symbols  or  attributes  of  those  degrees  ?     They  are
twenty  in  number — 1,  the  Bible,  which  is  the  law  of  God ;  2,  the
Compass,  which  teaches  us  to  do  justly ;  3,  the  Square,  which  incul-
cates equality  ;  4,  the  Level,  which  teaches  equity  and  justice ;  5,  the
Plumb  shows  that  we  ought  to  walk  uprightly  with  man,  and  humbly
towards  God ;  6,  the  Tracing-board  is  the  symbol  of  human  reason ;
7,  the  Rough  Ashlar  is  an  emblem  of  vice,  which  it  is  our  duty  to
reform ;  8,  the  Perfect  Ashlar,  or  cubical  stone,   shows  that  our
passions  have  been  corrected  by  reason ;  9,  the  Pillars  represent
strength ;  10,  the  Blazing  Star  teaches  that  to  be  perfect  our  hearts
ought  to  be  purified  from  the  intrusion  of  carnal  things,  &c."    Then
follow  explanations  of  the  remaining  ten,  which  are  too  long  to  be
inserted  here,  viz.,  the  sun,  seven  cherubs,  key,  box,  urn,  brazen  sea,
circles  on  triangles,  poinard,  albra,  and  adonai.     In  the  degree  are
four  lectures,  called  Moral,  Physical,  Philosophical,  and  General,  in
each  of  which  the  same  symbols  bear  a  different  interpretation.

83  The  assemblies  are  termed  Encampments.    The  uniform  is  black,
excepting  the  cravat,  which  is  white,  to  denote  that  it  is  not  a  garb
of  mourning,  but  the  habit  of  the  Order.     The  apron  and  sash  are
also  black ;  the  former  being  decorated  with  cross  swords,  skull  and
bones ;  the  latter  with  a  large  star  on  the  left  breast,  in  the  centre  of
which  is  a  cross  and  serpent,  upon  a  red  field.     The  whole  of  these
emblems  are  in  silver  and  pearl,  except  the  serpent,  which  is  of  gold.

81  The  Templars'  degree  is  founded  on  the  Christian  religion.     Its


OF    FREEMASONRY.  12.")

Knight  of  the  9th  Arch;85  72,  Knight  of  Mahadon  -m
73,  Knight  of  Lazarus;87  74,  Knight  of  the  Lilies  of

rites  and  ceremonies,  deeply  and  powerfully  affecting,  are,  in  their
representations,  intimately  connected  with  the  closing  scenes  of  that
glorious  plan  of  redemption,  in  which  the  Son  of  God  died  ignomi-
niously,  as  a  means,  through  faith  in  his  atoning  blood,  of  reconciling
fallen  man  with  his  offended  Creator.  Neither  the  Jew,  Turk,  nor
infidel,  can  take  this  degree.  The  candidate,  before  he  can  cross  the
threshold  of  the  Encampment  for  that  purpose,  is  obliged,  under
circumstances  of  deep  solemnity,  to  avouch  his  belief  that  Jesus
Christ  came  into  the  world  to  save  sinners ;  and  also,  even  that  he
will  wield  a  sword,  should  it  become  necessary,  in  defence  of  the
religion  taught  by  him,  and  to  the  truth  of  which  he  affixed  the
seal  of  his  blood.  He  is  also  required,  with  equal  solemnity,
after  due  time  afforded  for  sober  and  secluded  reflection,  to  avouch
his  innocence  of  any  crime  unrepented  of,  which  would  render
him  unworthy  of  the  degree  to  which  he  aspires.  (Stone's  Letters,
p.  62.)

85  To  form  a  Lodge  in  this  degree  five  persons  at  least  must  be
present. — 1.  The  Most  Potent,  representing  Solomon,  in  the  east,
seated  in  a  chair  of  state  under  a  rich  canopy,  with  crown  and
sceptre,  and  habited  in  robes  of  yellow,  with  an  ermined  vestment  of
blue  satin,  reaching  to  the  elbows,  and  a  broad  purple  ribbon,  or
scarf,  from  the  right  shoulder  to  the  left  hip,  from  which  is  suspended
a  triangle  of  gold.     2.  The  Grand  Warden,  representing  H.  K.  T.,
on  his  left  hand,  clothed  in  a  purple  robe  and  yellow  vestment.
3.  The  Grand  Inspector,  representing  Ghiblim,  in  the  west,  with  a
naked  sword.    4.  The  Grand  Treasurer,  representing  Joabert,  in  the
north,  with  a  golden  key  in  his  fifth  button-hole,  and  upon  it  the
letters  I.  V.  I.  L.     5.  The  Grand  Secretary,  representing  Stolkin,  in
the  south.    The  three  last  have  robes  of  blue  without  vestments,  and
the  same  ribbon  and  jewel  as  the  Most  Potent.

86  A  degree  practised  by  the  Lodge  of  St.  Louis  of  the  Amis
Eeunis  at  Calais.

87  The  Knights  were  distinguished  by  a  cross  of  emerald  on  the
breast.


120  HISTORICAL    LANDMARKS

the  Valley;™    75,   the   Link;80    76,   Knight   of  the
Lion;90    77,  Mark  Master;91  78,   Master  of  all  the

88  This  degree  appears  to  have  been  conferred  by  the  Grand  Orient
of  France,  as  an  appendage  to  Templarism ;  and  here  the  Knights
were  created  Commanders.

89  Refers  to  Genesis  xi.

90  The  third  degree  of  the  Rite  Metropolitaine.

91  This  is  usually  classed  after  the  Master's  degree ;  but  in  strict
propriety  it  ought  to  precede  it,  for  the  Mark  Master  is  but  the
Master  of  a  Lodge  of  Fellowcrafts.     On  this  point  a  friend  writes
thus : — "  I  quite  agree  with  you  that  Mark  and  Past  are  blue  de-
grees, although  only  legally  given  in  a  Royal  Arch  Chapter.     They
are  not  given  at  all  on  the  continent ;  neither  is  our  Royal  Arch
degree.     This  makes  me  frequently  entertain  serious  doubts  about
the  genuineness  of  all  the  red  degrees.     I  am  quite  aware  that  some
centuries  ago  the  Brethren  got  a  mark,  but  I  suspect  this  was  be-
cause few  could  write  their  names."     Mr.  Godwin,  at  the  meeting
of  the  British  Archaeological  Association  at  Canterbury,  September  9,
1844,  in  a  paper  on  Mason-marks,  observed  that  "  in  a  conversation
with  a  Mason  that  morning  at  work  in  the  cathedral,  he  found  that
many  Masons  (all  who  were  Freemasons),  had  their  mystic  marks
handed  down  from  generation  to  generation  ;  this  man  had  his  mark
from  his  father,  and  he  received  it  from  his  grandfather."     The
legend  of  the  degree  is  in  substance  as  follows : — "  A  young  crafts-
man found  in  the  quarries  of  Tyre  a  stone  of  peculiar  form  and  beauty,
which  was  marked  with  a  double  circle,  containing  certain  mysterious
characters  that  greatly  excited  his  curiosity.     He  had  the  ambition
to  produce  this  stone  to  the  inspecting  Mark  Master  as  a  work  of  his
own.     But  as  it  was  neither  a  single  nor  a  double  cube,  nor  of  any
other  prescribed  form,  it  was  rejected,  notwithstanding  the  beauty  of
its  execution,  and  cast  forth  amongst  the  rubbish.     The  young  man
then  frankly  told  the  Master  that  the  work  was  not  his  own,  but
that  he  was  induced  to  bring  it  up  on  account  of  its  perfect  work-
manship, which  he  thought  could  not  be  equalled.     Some  time  after-
wards, when  one  of  the  arches  in  the  foundations  of  the  temple  was
nearly  completed,  the  keystone  was  missing.     It  had  been  wrought


OF    FREEMASONRY.  127

Degrees;92  79,- Knight  of  the  Magnetic  Rose;93  80,
Mediterranean  Pass;94  81,  Melchizedek,  or  the  Royal
Priest;95  82,  Menatzchims,  Council  of ;<J(5  83,  Knight
of  St.  Michael;07  84,  Knight  of  the  Morning  Star,  or
Hope;98  85,  Most  Excellent  Master;90  86,  Knight  of

in  the  quarries  by  H.  A.  B.  himself,  and  ivas  marked  with  his  mark.
Search  was  made  for  it  in  vain,  when  the  adventure  of  the  young
Fellowcraft  was  recollected,  and  amongst  the  rubbish  the  identical
stone  was  found,  which  completed  the  work."  By  the  American  laws
of  the  Royal  Arch  it  is  provided,  that  whenever  a  warrant  is  opened
for  instituting  a  Chapter,  a  power  is  inserted  in  it  to  hold  Lodges  of
Most  Excellent  Past  and  Mark  Masters ;  the  High  Priest,  King,
and  Scribe  (i.  e.  the  three  Principals),  for  the  time  being,  to  be  the
Master  and  Wardens  in  such  Lodges  according  to  seniority.  We
have  no  such  proviso,  although  in  some  Chapters  these  degrees  are
conferred.

92  A  name  given  to  all  who  have  taken  the  twelve  classes  of  de-
grees in  the  regime  of  the  Philaletes  ;  and  they  possessed  the  privilege
of  attaching  it  to  their  signature.

93  Cabalistic,  and  formed,  as  its   title   indicates,  for  Mesmeric
purposes.

94  This  is  an  honorary  degree,  and  is  said  to  be  of  great  utility  to
mariners  in  passing  up  the  Mediterranean  sea.    According  to  Masonic
tradition,  vessels  cruising  about  this  sea  are  in  danger  of  being  cap-
tured and  plundered  by  the  Algerines  and  other  African  pirates  who
infest  the  coast ;  so  that,  unless  there  is  some  person  on  board  who
has  been  admitted  to  this  degree,  the  vessel  will  have  great  difficulty
in  escaping,  otherwise  it  is  allowed  to  pass  without  molestation.

95  The  fifth  degree  of  the  Order  of  Asia,  called  the  true  Hose  Croix.

96  A  name  given  to  the  Supreme  Chiefs  of  the  Rite  of  Vieille  Bru.

97  The  Knights  wear  a  chain  of  gold,  in  shell-work,  with  a  picture
of  St.  Michael  in  gold,  suspended  therefrom.

88  This  degree  is  a  modification  of  K.  D.  S.  H.  according  to  the
nomenclature  of  M.  Fustier,  preserved  in  the  archives  of  the  Lodge
of  Philosophical  Rites.

99  None  but  the  meritorious  and  praiseworthy ;  none  but  those


128  HISTORICAL    LANDMARKS

the  Mother  of  Christ;100  87,  Ne  plus  ultra;1  88,
Elected  of  the  new  Jerusalem;2  89,  Order  of  true
Masons;3  90,  Past  Master;4  91,  Knight  of  Pat-

who,  through  diligence  and  industry,  have  progressed  far  towards
perfection ;  and  none  but  those  who  have  been  seated  in  the  Oriental
chair  by  the  unanimous  suffrages  of  their  Brethren,  are  competent  to
be  admitted  to  this  degree  of  Masonry.  In  its  original  establishment,
when  the  temple  at  Jerusalem  was  finished,  and  the  fraternity  cele-
brated the  cope-stone  with  great  joy,  it  is  demonstrable  that  none
but  those  who  had  proved  themselves  to  be  complete  masters  of  their
profession  were  admitted  to  this  honour ;  and,  indeed,  the  duties
incumbent  on  every  Mason  who  is  accepted  and  acknowledged  as  a
Most  Excellent  Master,  are  such  as  render  it  indispensable  tl  at  lie
should  have  a  perfect  knowledge  of  all  the  preceding  decrees.  Pnring
the  ceremonies  two  pillars  are  erected,  each  about  five  feet  high,  and
an  arch  placed  over  them,  made  in  imitation  of  block-work,  in  tin-
centre  of  which  a  mortice  is  left  for  the  reception  of  a  KKV-STO
the  Most  Excellent  Master,  taking  the  key-stone  in  his  hand,  plae<  ••>
it  in  the  arch,  and  drives  it  home  with  six  raps  of  his  gavel.

100  The  Knights  are  distinguished  by  a  small  red  cross  reflected
with  gold.

1  The  ne  plus  ultra  of  Masonry  varies  in  different  systems.     AYith
some  it  is  one  of  the  Kadoshes ;  with  others,  the  llose  Croix ;  and
with  the  Ancien  et  accepte  it  is  the  thirty-third  degree.     With  all,
however,  the  possession  of  it  is  considered  indispensable  to  those
who  emulate  Masonic  perfection ;  and  no  person  can  be  admitted  to
it  who  is  not  master  of  all  the  previous  degrees.     It  concludes  with
the  words  consummatum  est.

2  The  eighth  degree  of  the  Sublime  Order  practised  in  the  Grand
Chapter  of  Berlin.

3  Founded  at  Montpelier  in  1778,  and  containing  six  hermetical
degrees.     1.  The  true  Mason;  2,  the  true  Mason  in  the  right  way  ;
3,  Knight  of  the  Golden  Key ;  4,  Knight  of  the  Rainbow ;  5,  Knight
of  the  Argonauts  ;  6,  Knight  of  the  Golden  Fleece.

4  According  to  the  testimony  of  Col.  Stone  (Letters,  p.  39),  "  the
chief  object  of  this  degree  in  the  United  States  is  to  exemplify  the


OF    FREEMASONRY.  129

mos  ; 5  92,  Patriarch  of  the  Great  Light ;°  93,  Perfect
Knight/  94,  Perfect  Master;8  95,  Perfect  Master

necessity  of  government,  and  to  enforce  upon  the  minds  of  those  who
are  called  to  govern,  the  importance  of  qualifying  themselves  for  the
skilful  and  efficient  discharge  of  their  duties.  The  ceremonies  of  the
degree  extend  to  no  great  length ;  but  they  are  such  as  strongly  to
impress  upon  the  newly  elected  Master  a  sense  of  his  own  deficiencies
in  the  matter  of  government,  and  the  need  he  has  of  promptness  and
energy  in  preserving  the  discipline  of  the  society  over  which  he  is  to
preside.  The  process  of  conferring  the  degree,  teaching  by  practical
illustration,  is  apparently  grave,  though  withal  rather  amusing.  After
the  Lodge  is  opened  upon  the  third  degree,  the  Master  receives  intel-
ligence from  without  that  some  sudden  emergency  demands  his  pre-
sence is  another  place.  He  therefore  resigns  the  chair,  and  desires
the  Brethren  to  elect  a  successor.  The  new  Master  is  placed  in  the
chair ;  but  from  various  causes,  too  long  to  be  enumerated  here,  he
finds  himself  utterly  unable  to  keep  order,  when  the  old  Master  reap-
pears and  kindly  relieves  him  from  his  embarrassment,  by  teaching
him  how  to  command  obedience ;  for  it  frequently  happens  that,  in
the  plenitude  of  his  power,  a  scrupulous  compliance  with  his  own
ignorant  and  inopportune  mandates  has  occasioned  the  very  confusion
which  had  appalled  him."

5 1  have  the  name  of  this  degree,  but  no  ritual.    It  refers,  of  course,
to  St.  John's  banishment,  and  the  visions  in  the  Apocalypse.

6  This  degree  is  found  in  some  of  the  French  nomenclatures.

7  A  degree  of  Jesuitical  Masonry,  as  practised  in  the  ancient  college
of  Clermont.

8  The  Lodge  is  hung  with  green  tapestry  on  eight  columns,  four
on  each  side,  placed  at  equal  distances,  and  illuminated  with  four
lights  in  each  quarter.     A  table  before  the  canopy  is  covered  with
black.  The  Respectable  Master  represents  Adoriiram,  who  conducted
the  works  of  the  temple  before  H.  A.  B.  arrived  at  Jerusalem,  and
afterwards  had  the  inspection  of  the  works  on  mount  Libanus.  There
is  only  one  Warden.     The  Brethren  have  white  leather  aprons  with
green  flaps,  in  the  centre  of  which  is  embroidered  a  square  stone
within  a  double  circle,  and  the  letter  P.

VOL.  II.  K


130


HISTORICAL    LANDMARKS


Architect;9  96,  Perfect  Prussian;10  97,  Knight  of
the  Phoenix;11  98,  Phi  Beta  Kappa;12  99,  Philippinn
Order;13  100,  the  Preadamites;14  101,  Prince  of  Jeru-
salem;15 102,  Prince  of  the  Tabernacle;16  103,  Prince


9  Sometimes  called  the  Knight  of  the  East.     It  formed  the  fifty-
sixth  degree,  seventh  series,  in  the  French  Metropolitan  Chapter ;
the  thirty-seventh  of  the  rite  of  Mizraim  ;  and  the  sixtieth  of  the  rite
called  the  Knight  of  the  Eagle.

10  Invented  at  Geneva  in  1770,  and  formed  the  second  point  of
reception  into  the  Order  of  the  Noachites.

11  Practised  by  the  Philatetes.

12  First  established  in  William  and  Mary  College,  in  Virginia,  by
Thomas  Jefferson,  President  of  the  United  States,  and  spivad  to
many  other  colleges,  the  mysteries  being  communicated  only  to  the
students.     It  was  instituted  to  promote  the  study  of  moral  philo-
sophy.     On  the  jewel  are  six  stars   and  a  human  hand ;    it  is
suspended  from  a  blue  and  pink  ribbon.

13  I  am  indebted  to  Finch  for  the  name  of  this  Order.     He  says,
the  king  instituted  it  for  the  use  only  of  his  first  nobility  and  prin-
cipal officers,  who  thus  formed  a  select  and  secret  council,  in  which
he  could  implicitly  confide.

14  The  name  of  this  degree  is  found  in  the  archives  of  the  Mere
Loge  Ecossais  in  Paris.

15  In  the  Geschickte  der  unbekanten  on  the  Scotch  degrees,  we
find  it  asserted  that  while  the  symbolic  age  of  an  Entered  Apprentice
is  3  years,  of  a  Fellowcraft  5,  and  a  Master  Mason  7  ;  a  Petit  Archi-
tect 21,  and  a  Grand  Architect  27  ;  that  of  a  Knight  of  the  East
is  70;  a  Prince  of  Jerusalem  5   x   15  =  75;  a  Secret  Master,  a
Maitre  Ecossais,  and  a  Prince  of  Mercy,  81 ;  and  a  Scotch  Knight
500  years.     It  was  by  this  figurative  way  of  reasoning  that  the  cele^
brated  impostor,  the  Count  St.  Germain,  boasted  that  he  was  five
hundred  years  old.

16  This  Lodge,  which  is  called  Hierarchial,  has  two  apartments
connected  with  each  other.     The  first  contains  the  symbols  of  craft
Masonry ;  the  second  is  circular,  and  hung  with  tapestry.     In  the


OF    FREEMASONRY.  131

of  Mercy,  or  Scotch  Trinitarian ; 1?  1 04,  Prince  of
the  Royal  Secret;18  105,  Provincial  Master  of  the
Red  Cross;19  106,  Provost  and  Judge;20  107,
Prussian  Knights,  or  Noachites;21  108,  Red  Cross

centre  is  a  chandelier  with  seven  branches,  each  branch  containing
as  many  lights.

17  This  Chapter  is  styled  the  Third  Heaven,  and  the  Chief  Prince,
who  represents  Moses,  Most  Excellent.     Besides  the  two  Wardens
and  accustomed  officers,  there  is  a  Sacrificer  and  a  Guard  of  the
Palladium.  The  Senior  Warden  is  Aaron,  the  Junior  Warden  Eleazer,
and  the  candidate  Joshua.

18  The  ostensible  object  of  this  degree  is  to  commemorate  the  deli-
verance of  the  Holy  Land  by  the  crusaders.     To  effect  this  purpose,
the  traditions  assert  that  an  attempt  was  made  to  unite  Masons  of
every  grade  into  one  great   body,    under  one  commander;    thus
directing  their  energies  to  the  one  sole  point  of  driving  the  infidels
from  the  consecrated  borders.     This  was  called  the  great  Masonic
army ;  all  the  Masons  were  soldiers,  and  the  ceremonies  of  initiation
adopted  in  this  military  establishment  are  said  to  have  never  been
divulged ;  and  that,  even  at  this  day,  they  remain  in  the  hands  of  a
few  chief  persons  only.     And  though  there  is  no  greater  apparent
difficulty  in  procuring  admission  to  this  than  to  any  of  the  other
philosophical  degrees,  yet  some  think  that  the  true  secrets  are  not
generally  communicated.

19  The  sixth  degree  in  the  system  of  the  Clerks  of  Strict  Observance.

20  The  intention  of  King  Solomon  in  forming  this  degree  was  to
increase  the  means  of  preserving  order  amongst  such  an  immense
number  of  craftsmen.     For  this  purpose  he  created  Tito,  Prince
Harodim,  Adoniram,  and  Abda,  Provosts  and  Judges,  and  gave  them
directions  to  initiate  Joabert,  and  entrust  the  kevs  of  the  building  to

\i

his  care.

21  This  Order,  according  to  John  Holt,  who  printed  an  account  of
it  about  the  middle  of  the  last  century,  consists  of  two  degrees,
called  Minor  and  Major,  and  the  whole  forms  what  may  be  termed  a
Chapter.     It  corresponds  with  Royal  Arch  of  British  Freemasonry,
for  here  the  hidden  word  is  revealed.     The  author  is  under  a  mis-
take, however,  in  his  catechism  ;  for  he  gives  the  principal  word  on

K  2


132


HISTORICAL    LANDMARKS


Knight  j22  109,  Red  Cross  of  Rome  and  Const  an  tine;23
110,  Knight  of  the  Redemption;24  111,  Knight  of
the  Rose  Croix;25  112,  Rose  Croix  of  the  Grand  K<»-

the  very  threshold  of  the  Minor's  degree,  which  cannot  be  in  accord-
ance with  the  correct  system,  if  the  subsequent  explanations  are  to
be  relied  on.

22  The  incidents  upon  which  this  Order  is  founded  occurred  during
the  reign  of  Darius,   King  of  Persia.     It  is  more  immediately  con-
nected with  symbolical  Masonry  than  any  other  Order  of  Knighthood.
The  meeting  is  a  Council.     The  Knights  wear  a  scarf  decorated  with
a  sword  and  trowel,  and  trimmed  with  red  and  green.     Tt  celebrates
the  superiority  of  truth.

23  The  degree  commemorates  the  following  circumstance,  v  liich  is
attested  by  Eusebius  : — The  army  of  Constantine  bring  on  the  inarch
to  meet  the  enemies  of  the  cross,  it  happened  one  evening  w  lien  the
sun  was  declining,  and  the  emperor  was  engaged  in  devotion,  that

there  suddenly  appeared  a  pillar
of  light  in  the  heavens  like  a
cross,  whereon  was  an  inscrip-
tion expressed  in  letters  formed
by  a  configuration  of  stars —
TOYTQNIKA,  in  this  orcrconir.
— Constantine  was  not  a  little
startled  at  this  sight,  and  so  was
the  whole  army  that  beheld  it.
They  looked  upon  it  as  an  inaus-
picious omen,  and  even  the  em-
peror himself  was  confounded.
But  at  night  our  Lord  appeared
to  him  in  a  dream,  with  the  cross
in  his  hand,  commanding  him  to  make  a  royal  standard  like  that
which  he  had  seen  in  the  heavens,  and  cause  it  to  be  borne  before
him  in  his  wars  as  an  ensign  of  victory.

24  The  Knights  were  distinguished  by  a  white  garment  with  a
black  cross.

25  This  Order  one  hundred  years  ago  was  considered  the  ne  plus
ultra  of  Masonry.     The  name  is  delineated  on  the  jewel  by  a  rose


OF    FREEMASONRY.  133

sary;26  113,  Knight  of  the  Triple  Rosy  Cross;27
114,  Royal  Arch  ;28  115,  Royal  Ark  Mariners  ;29  116,
Royal  Master;30  117,  Knight  of  the  Sacred  Moun-

and  a  cross  (see  p.  41,  n.  10 — p.  46,  n.  31).  It  is  also  called
Knights  of  the  Eagle,  from  the  delineation  of  that  princely  bird
upon  it.  By  some  it  is  denominated  Knights  of  the  Pelican,  to
figure  the  Saviour  of  mankind  feeding  his  offspring  witli  his  own
blood.  The  Chapter  is  said  to  have  been  originally  holden  on  the
summit  of  a  mountain  called  Heroden  or  Harodim,  whence  it  derived
a  new  designation.  By  others  it  is  called  Knights  of  St.  Andrew,
because  it  is  a  Scotch  degree,  and  these  use  the  saltire  cross  on  the
jewel.  The  Most  Perfect  Sovereign,  or  Chief  President  of  the  Order,
is  distinguished  by  a  brilliant  star  on  his  breast  of  seven  points,
circumscribing  a  circle  with  the  letter  G,  surrounded  by  the  words
FAITH,  HOPE,  CHARITY,  which  are  repeated  on  the  chapiters  of  the
columns.

26  The  name  of  a  degree  in  the  Rite  Primitif.

27  Contained  in  the  nomenclature  of  the  Lodge  of  St.  Louis  of  the
Amis  Reunis  at  Calais.

28  This  degree,  says  Webb  (Monitor,  p.  149),  is  indescribably
more  august,  sublime,  and  important  than  all  which  precede  it ;  and
is  the  summit  and  perfection  of  ancient  Masonry.    It  impresses  on  our
minds  a  belief  of  the  being  and  existence  of  a  Supreme  Deity,  with-
out beginning  of  days  or  end  of  years,  and  reminds  us  of  the  rever-
ence due  to  his  holy  name.    It  brings  to  light  many  essentials  of  the
craft,  which  were  for  the  space  of  four  hundred  and  seventy  years
buried  in  darkness,  and  without  a  knowledge  of  which  the  Masonic
character  cannot  be  complete.

29  Refers  to  the  deluge,  and  is  intended  to  show  that  every  part  of
the  known  world  which  retains  a  tradition  of  it,  is  indebted  to  the
Royal  Ark  Mariners,  or  Noachidee,  for  their  knowledge.

30  This  degree  cannot  be  legally  conferred  on  any  but  Royal  Arch
Masons,  who  have  taken  all  the  preceding  degrees,  and  it  is  prepa-
ratory to  that  of  Select  Master.     Although  it  is  short,  yet  it  contains
some  valuable  information.     It  enables  us  with  ease  and  facility  to
examine  the  privileges  of  others,  while  at  the  same  time  it  proves


134  HISTORICAL    LANDMARKS

tain;31    118,    Scotch    Fellow    Craft;32    119,    Scotch
Master;33  120,  Secret  Master;34    121,  Secret  Moni-

ourselves.    The  1  Kings  vi.  27,  gives  an  allusion  to  what  is  intended
to  be  inculcated  in  the  degree.

31  A  degree  practised  in  the  Lodge  of  St.  Louis  at  Calais.

32  In  the  inner  apartment  of  this  Lodge  we  find  an  altar  with  an
ascent  of  seven  steps,  covered  with  Masonic  symbols,  and  illuminated
by  eighty-one  lights,  in  the  form  of  an  equilateral  triangle ;  over  this
is  a  glory,  surmounted  by  the  seven  sephiroth,  or  celestial  intelli-
gences.    Here  is  also  a  mysterious  triangle,  bathed  in  light,  con-
taining the  Tetragrammaton ;  and  on  the  borders  of  the  glory  seven
angels'  heads.     The  ark  of  the  covenant  is  also  part  of  the  furniture
of  this  sacred  place,  with  its  mercy-seat  and  flanking  cherubim  ;  before
the  ark  is  an  Agnus  Dei  reposing  on  the  Bible  closed,   and  scaled
seven  times.     Here  we  find  also  the  other  appendages  to  the  taber-
nacle— the  brazen  altar,  five  urns,  the  golden  candlestick,  and  the
table  of  shew  bread.

:J3  In  a  work  published  about  the  middle  of  the  last  century,  on
the  Origin  and  Doctrines  of  Freemasonry,  mention  is  made  of  a
degree  called  the  Scotch  Architect,  which  is  thus  described,  and  may
be  the  same  as  the  above  degree. — "  \Yhcn  a  candidate  presents
himself  to  be  received  a  Scotch  Architect,  the  Tyler  asks  him  whether
he  can  submit  to  a  test  of  his  obedience,  courage,  and  constancy.
If  he  replies  in  the  affirmative,  he  is  introduced  into  the  Lodge,
where  he  finds  represented  the  lion,  the  pelican,  the  dove,  the  fox,
and  the  ape,  which  are  thus  explained : — The  lion  is  symbolical  of
the  strength  and  courage  of  the  Brethren ;  the  pelican  shows  their
brotherly  love  and  affection 'for  each  other  ;  the  peaceful  demeanour
of  the  dove  represents  the  serenity  of  the  Order,  which  restores  the
peace  of  the  golden  age,  &c."  The  presiding  officer  is  styled  Very
Powerful,  and  the  Lodge  is  closed  by  eighty-one.

34  The  following  charge  is  delivered  at  initiations  : — "  My  Brother,
I  receive  you  as  Secret  Master,  and  give  you  rank  among  the  Levites.
This  laurel,  the  emblem  of  victory,  is  to  remind  you  of  the  conquest
you  are  to  gain  over  your  passions.  The  olive  is  the  symbol  of  that
peace  and  union  which  ought  to  reign  amongst  us.  It  belongs  to


Or    FREEMASONRY.  135

tor;35  122,  Select  Master;36  123,  Knight  of  the  Star  ;37
124,  Friend  of  St.  John  ;38 125,  Knight  of  St.  Stephen  j39
126,  Knight  of  St.  John  of  Jerusalem  ;40  127,  Knight

you  to  deserve  the  favour,  that  you  may  be  enabled  to  arrive  in  the
secret  place,  and  contemplate  the  pillar  of  beauty.  I  invest  you
with  the  ivory  key,  suspended  from  a  white  and  black  ribbon,  as  a
symbol  of  your  fidelity,  innocence,  and  discretion.  The  apron  and
gloves  are  marks  of  candour.  You  are  now  to  become  the  faithful
guardian  of  the  S.  S.,  and  I  put  you  in  the  No.  7,  to  be  one  of  the
conductors  of  the  works  which  are  raising  to  the  Divinity.  The  eye
upon  your  apron  is  to  incite  you  to  diligence  and  care."  (Webb's
Monitor,  p.  256.)

35  This  is  professedly  a  trading  degree,  practised  in  the  United
States,  and  has  little  reference  to  Masonry.    See  1  Sam.  xx.  21,  22.

36  This  degree  is  the  summit  and  perfection  of  ancient  Masonry,
and  without  which  the  history  of  the  lloyal  Arch  cannot  be  complete.
It  rationally  accounts  for  the  concealment  and  preservation  of  those
essentials  of  the  Craft  which  were  brought  to  light  at  the  erection  of
the  second  temple,  and  which  lay  concealed  from  Masonic  eye  four
hundred  and  seventy  years.     Many  particulars  relative  to  those  few
who,  for  their  superior  skill,  were  selected  to  complete  an  important
part  of  King  Solomon's  temple,  are  explained;   and  here,  too,  is
exemplified  an  instance  of  justice  and  mercy  by  our  ancient  patron
towards  one  of  the  Craft,  who  was  led  to  disobey  his  commands  by
an  over  zealous  attachment  to  the  institution.     It  ends  with  a  de-
scription of  a  particular  circumstance,  which  characterizes  the  degree.
(Cross's  Chart,  p.  118.)

37  The  Knights  wore  a  star  on  their  hats.

38  Comprehended  in  the  degree  of  Knights  of  the  East  and  West,
and  forms  the  sixth  degree  of  the  system  practised  in  the  Grand
Lodge  of  Sweden.

39  The  Knights  were  distinguished  by  a  black  garment  and  red
cross.

40  The  origin  of  this,  as  a  Masonic  degree,  is  given  as  follows  in
the  high  degree  of  Sovereign  Princes  of  Masonry : — Twenty-seven
thousand  Scottish  Masons  bound  themselves  under  a  vow  to  assist


136  HISTORICAL    LANDMARKS

of  the  South;41  128,  Sovereign  Grand  Inspector
General  ;42  129,  Sovereign  Commander  of  the  Temple-
at  Jerusalem;43  130,  the  Sublimes;41  131,  Sublime
Knight  Elected  ;**  132,  Sublime  Master  of  the  Lumi-

the  crusaders  in  recovering  the  holy  city  from  the  hands  of  infidels ;
and,  after  having  obtained  permission  of  the  ruling  monarch,  they
arrived  in  Palestine,  and  displayed  such  undaunted  bravery  as  to
attract  the  notice  of  the  Knights  of  St.  John  of  Jerusalem,  who,
charmed  with  their  devotedness,  determined  to  seek  admission  into
the  Masonic  Order,  through  the  influence  of  which,  as  it  was  sup-
posed, these  prodigies  of  valour  had  been  performed.  The  Scottisti
Masons  acquiesced  in  their  wishes,  and  a  mutual  exchange  of  know-
ledge was  agreed  on.  The  Knights  of  St.  John  became  Masons,
and  the  Scottish  Brethren  were  admitted  into  their  Order  under  I  he
name  of  Hose  Croix,  or  Eagle  and  Pelican.  At  the  termination  of
the  crusade  they  spread  Masonry  throughout  Europe,  which,  how-
ever, ultimately  became  extinguished  every  where  but  in  Scotland.

41  The  name  of  a  degree  in  Swedish  Masonry ;  sometimes  called
the  Master  of  the  Temple.

42  The  decorations  of  the  Chapter  are  purple,  embroidered  with
emblems  of  mortality.    There  is  a  canopy,  with  a  transparency  repre-
senting the  glorious  delta.     In  the  middle  of  the  room  stands  a
pedestal  of  a  triangular  form,  near  which  a  human  skeleton  bears  the
banner  of  the  Order ;  and  over  the  door  the  motto  DEUS  MEUMQUE
jus.     Four  candelabra  occupy  the  cardinal  points,  that  in  the  east
has  five  lights,  in  the  west  three,  in  the  south  two,  and  in  the
north  one.

43  This  Council  is  styled  a  Court,  and  the  presiding  officer,  All
Powerful  ;    sometimes   Most   Illustrious,    or   Most  Valiant.      The
Wardens  are  called  Sovereign  Commanders.

4  The  name  of  a  degree  conferred  in  the  ancient  Chapter  of
Clermont.

45  The  jewel  worn  in  this  Lodge  is  a  sword,  intended  to  represent
the  sword  of  justice,  hung  to  a  broad  black  ribbon,  on  which  is  em-
broidered an  inflamed  heart.  The  same  is  repeated  on  the  apron.
Twelve  lights.


OF    FREEMASONRY.  137

nous  Ring;4(j  133,  Knight  of  the  Sublime  Porte ; 47
134,  Superexcellent  Master;48  135,  136,  137,  Sym-
bolical Masonry;49  138,  Teutonic  Knights;50  139,
Theoricus;51  140,  Knight  of  the  Three  Kings;52  141,

46  Founded  in  France  by  the  Baron  de  Blaerfindy,  a  Grand  Officer
of  the  Eite  Ecossais  Philosophique,  and  divided  into  three  Orders ;
the  two  first  were  principally  occupied  with  the  history  of  Freema-
sonry, and  the  latter  its  doctrines.

47  The  fourth  degree  of  the  Orient.

48  This  degree  is  said  to  have  been  founded  on  circumstances
which  took  place  at  the  destruction  of  the  temple  by  Nebuchadnezzar.
The  officers  are  stationed  differently  from  those  of  the  Select  Master's
degree.    The  first  officer  represents  Zedekiah,  the  last  King  of  Israel ;
he  is  seated  in  the  east,  and  styled  Most  Excellent  King.    The  second
officer  represents  Gedaliah,  is  styled  Companion,  and  is  seated  in  the
west.    The  third  officer  is  called  the  first  Keeper  of  the  Temple,  and
is  seated  at  the  right  hand  of  Companion  Gedaliah.     The  fourth  is
called  the  second  Keeper  of  the  Temple,  and  is  seated  on  the  left  of
Gedaliah.     The  fifth  is  called  the  third  Keeper  of  the  Temple,  and
is  seated  at  the  door,  within  the  hall,  to  guard  the  sanctuary.  There
are  three  officers  called  Heralds,  whose  stations  are  without  the  hall,
with  bugles  in  their  hands,  whose  duty  it  is  to  bring  intelligence ;
and  there  are  three  other  officers  called  Eoyal  Guards,  whose  duty  it
is  to  attend  upon  the  King.

9  Under  this  name  are  included  the  three  first  degrees,  viz.,
Entered  Apprentice,  Fellowcraft,  and  Master  Mason.  The  Grand
Lodge  is  an  independent  body,  having  legislative,  executive,  and
judicial  supremacy  over  all  the  subordinate  Lodges  within  its  juris-
diction.

0  They  were  sometimes  called  Knights  of  Allemagne,  and  wore  a
white  garment  with  a  black  cross.

51  The  thirteenth  degree  in  the  German  Eose  Croix.

™  Generally  conferred  in  a  Lodge  or  Chapter  after  other  business
is  finished.  All  worthy  Master  Masons  are  entitled  to  it.  It  is
sometimes  given  by  Grand  Lecturers  as  an  honorary  degree  to
reward  deserving  pupils.


138


HISTORICAL    LANDMARKS


Knight  of  the  Triple  Period,  or  3,  5,  7,  and  9  f
142,  Knight  of  the  transparent  Light  ^  143,  The
Friend  of  Truth,  or  the  Aletophylote  j65  144,  Order  of
the  two  Eagles  ;56  145,  Master  of  the  Table  of  Eme-
rald;57 146,  Venerable  Grand  Master  of  all  Symbo-
lical Lodges,  Sovereign  Prince  of  Masonry,  Master  ad
vitam;58  147,  Order  of  the  Vessel;59  148,  Knight  of

53  A  degree  in  the  system  of  des  Amis  Reunis  at  Calais.

54  The  concluding  series  of  the  Clerks  of  the  Strict  Observance.
It  had  five  degrees,   viz  ,    1,  Knight  Novice  of  the  third  year ;
2,  Knight  of  the  fifth  year ;  3,  Knight  of  the  seventh  year ;  4,  the
Levite  ;  5,  the  Priest.

55  The  name  of  the  fifth  degree  of  the  African  Architects,
66  The  symbol  is  a  star  with  nine  points.

57  The  name  of  a  degree  in  the  Rite  Prirnitif.

58  The  Chapters  are  decorated  with  blue  and  yellow  tapestry,  to
remind  the  candidate  of  the  period  when  the  Deity  appeared  to  Moses
on  mount  Sinai,  in  clouds  of  azure  and  gold,  when  he  gave  his  people
the  ordinances  of  the  law,  founded  in  wisdom  and  revealed  in  truth.
The  principal  symbols  are  a  mystical  triangle,  with  the  word  SECRET
engraven  on  it,  and  a  cubical  stone  of  agate,  three  cross  pillars,  and
a  circle  of  brass,  all  endowed  with  a  moral  and  allegorical  signification.

59  An   androgyne  Order,   instituted  in  America   to   imitate  the
adoptive  Order  of  Felicity.

60  The  seat  of  the  supremacy  of  these  Knights  was  the  preceptory
of  St.  John  at  Torphichen,  in  Scotland.     A  learned  Scottish  writer
thus  apostrophises  amidst  the  ruins  of  this  celebrated  edifice. —
"  Upon  entering  the  portal  of  the  venerable  place,  we  involuntarily
uncovered  our  heads,  and  stood  for  a  space  of  time  in  the  centre  of
the  choir,  looking  around  in  silent  contemplation.     What  a  variety
of  thoughts  and  scenes  was  this  spot  calculated  to  call  up !     Here,
perhaps,  on  the  very  ground  which  we  trod  were  the  chivalry  wont
to  assemble  on  great  occasions,  for  council  and  grave  deliberation.
Here,  it  may  be,  were  the  aspirants  to  knightly  honours  and  dis-
tinction received  into  the  ranks  of  the  White  Cross  warriors.


OF    FREEMASONRY.  139

the  White  Cross;60  149,  Knight  of  the  White  Eagle,
or  Pelican;61  150,  the  Wrestle.62

But  now  'tis  silent  all.  The  sharp  twittering  voice  of  the  volatile
swallows,  or  the  hoarse  croaking  of  the  intrusive  raven,  alone  inter-
rupts the  solemn  solitude  of  the  gloomy  hall,  which,  formed  by  the
choir  of  transepts,  is  now  all  that  is  left  of  the  house  of  St.  John."
(P.  Q.  E.  vol.  iv.  p.  191.)

61  The  Lodge  is  an  oblong  square,  with  triple  signs ;  dark  clouds,
amidst  which  appear  the  sun,  moon,  and  stars.     An  eagle  is  seen
beating  its  wings,  as  an  emblem  of  supreme  power ;  and  a  pelican
feeding  its  young  with  its  own  blood.     There  are  also  three  squares,
circles,  and  triangles  within  each  other ;  and  a  cubical  stone  in  agony,
to  represent  the  sufferings  of  the  Saviour.     On  the  cubical  stone  is  a
rose  and  the  letter  J,     The  darkness  is  intended  to  typify  the  cruci-
fixion.    The  veil  of  the  temple  appears  rent  in  twain,  to  typify  the
abolition  of  the  Mosaic  dispensation.     All  the  Brethren  are  clothed
in  black,  with  sable  scarves.

62  Taken  from  Gen.  xxxii.     It  will  be  seen  that  in  addition  to  my
own  personal  knowledge  in  the  illustration  of  the  above  degrees,  I
have  freely  availed  myself  of  all  accessible  sources  of  information,
both  oral  and  written,  and  it  is  only  the  unexpected  length  to  which
the  present  lecture  has  extended,  that  prevents  me  from  subjoining
a  list  of  my  authorities,  extending  over  upwards  of  two  hundred
volumes,  besides  copious  manuscript  collections.


140  HISTORICAL    LANDMARKS


LECTURE    XX VI.

THE    TRACING-BOARD    OF   THE    THIRD    DEGREE    EXPLAINED.

"  Diligently  search  the  Scriptures  for  the  secrets  of  your  art,  and
while  you  toil  to  pry  into  the  covenant,  the  signs,  and  symbols  that
subsisted  between  the  Kings  of  Judah  and  of  Tyre,  O  may  the  spirit
of  the  widow's  son  be  in  you !  filling  you  with  a  knowledge  of  the
points  on  which  all  the  above  turned,  even  wisdom  to  design,  strength
to  execute,  and  the  beauties  of  holiness  to  adorn." — TURNER.

"  The  obscurity  of  the  mysteries  preserves  their  veneration,  for
which  reason  they  are  entrusted  to  the  cover  of  nigjit." — SYNESIUS.

THE  great  characteristic  of  genuine  Freemasonry
consists  in  the  incitements  to  virtue,  which  spring  from
a  desire  of  pleasing  God ;  and  the  prevention  of  vice,
from  the  fear  of  offending  him.  But  in  the  imitative,
or  spurious  Freemasonry,  no  such  principle  is  found.
Whether  we  consider  the  abstruse  speculations  of  the
wisest  of  its  hierophants,  or  the  gross  and  sensual
opinions  of  the  vulgar,  the  same  conclusion  obviously
presents  itself.  No  trace  of  vital  religion  will  be  dis-
covered in  either.  The  former  is  all  uncertainty  and
confusion,  with  no  clear  moral  stimulus  emanating
from  their  belief,  for  their  ideas  of  a  future  state  were
inoperative;1  the  latter,  a  head-strong  submission  to

1  Bishop  Mant  says — "  The  heathen  nations,  before  the  coming
of  Christ,  wanted  the  blessing  of  revelation,  and  knew  nothing  of  the
destination  of  man  after  he  was  laid  in  the  silent  tomb.  One  of  their


OF    FREEMASONRY.  141

prescribed  systems,  stained  with  the  most  brutal  lusts
and  degrading  observances ;  and  even  the  religion  of
the  initiated  was  rendered  useless  by  the  mass  of  super-
stition and  absurdity  with  which  it  was  burdened.
Nor  does  it  appear  that  religion  was  anywhere  incul-
cated except  in  the  true  system  of  worship,  as  affording
a  relief  from  existing  evil,  by  the  prospect  of  happiness
in  a  future  state  as  the  reward  of  its  practice.

The  abstract  doctrine,  however,  was  preserved  and
transmitted  in  the  spurious  Freemasonry ;  and  Bishop
Warburton  was  so  fully  impressed  with  this  truth,
that  the  arguments  in  the  second  book  of  his  Divine
Legation  are  wholly  founded  on  it ;  and  his  profound
researches  into  the  writings  of  antiquity,  appear  to
bear  out  the  conclusion ;  for  happiness  in  a  future  state
was  promised  to  the  initiated  alone.2  And  hence  the

own  poets  tells  us  this.  '  Alas/  says  he,  '  when  the  plants  and
flowers  of  the  garden  have  perished,  they  revive  again,  and  bloom
the  succeeding  year ;  but  we,  mighty,  wise,  and  powerful  men,  when
once  we  die,  remain  insensible  in  the  hollow  tomb,  and  sleep  a  long
and  endless  sleep — a  sleep  from  which  we  never  shall  be  awakened.'
Seneca  said,  '  post  mortem  nihil  est.'  Virgil  describes  death  as  an
c  iron  sleep,  and  an  eternal  night.'  "  (^En.  x.  745.)  But  so  incon-
sistent were  the  heathen  philosophers  upon  these  abstruse  subjects,
which  they  had  received  only  from  dark  and  uncertain  tradition,  that
in  the  sixth  book  of  the  j?Eneid,  the  same  poet  describes,  with  great
minuteness,  the  places  of  reward  and  punishment  which  are  assigned
to  mankind  after  death,  as  the  consequence  of  their  personal  respon-
sibility.

2  The  Scholiast  on  the  Ranse  of  Aristophanes  says — "  It  was  an
universal  opinion,  that  he  who  had  been  initiated  into  the  greater
mysteries,  should  obtain  divine  honours  after  death."  Again,  Isocrates
affirms  (Panegyr.),  "  the  mysteries  teach  the  initiated  to  entertain
the  most  lively  hopes  touching  death  and  immortality."  Cicero  also


142


HISTORICAL    LANDMARKS


sages  term  the  mysteries  those  supernal  things  which
are  most  useful  to  us  in  our  mortal  state,  and  the  best
preparation  for  immortality.3

These  observations  will  aptly  introduce  to  our  notice
the  Master  Mason's  Tracing-board,  covered  with  em-
blems of  mortality,  and  reading  a  lesson  to  the  initiated
of  the  certainty  of  death,4  and  also  of  a  resurrection
from  the  dead.5  Like  that  of  the  two  preceding  de-
grees, it  is  an  oblong  square,  circumscribed  by  a  black
border  within  the  four  cardinal  points  of  the  compass.
The  principal  figure  is  a  black  coffin,'5  on  a  white

(De  leg.  1.  ii.  c.  14),  praises  these  institutions  for  the  same  thing —
"  From  them,"  says  he,  "  we  not  only  reap  the  advantages  of  greater
happiness  in  this  world,  but  are  instructed  to  hope  for  a  better  exist-
ence hereafter."  But  this  reward  was  not  to  result  from  any  reference
either  to  faith  or  practice,  but  only  from  the  simple  fact  of  having
been  initiated.

There  is  a  passage  in  Origen  to  this  effect : — His  adversary,
Celsus,  thus  addresses  him — "  Do  you  believe  eternal  punishments  ?
so  do  the  hierophants  of  the  secret  mysteries.  You  threaten  us  with
them — these,  on  the  other  hand,  threaten  you."  From  these  testi-
monies it  will  be  clear,  that  the  doctrine  of  a  future  state  was  incul-
cated in  the  spurious  Freemasonry,  which  thus  offers  an  indirect
testimony  of  the  truth  of  our  Scriptures.

4  "  The  third  degree  brings  the  Masonic  inquirer  into  a  state  repre-
senting the  meridian  light  of  the  last  and  fullest  revelation  from
heaven  to  man  upon  earth,  by  the  eternal  Son  of  God,  through  whose
resurrection  and  ascension  he  is  raised  from  darkness  and  death  to
the  certainty  of  life  and  immortality."  (Rev.  J.  Watson's  Address  at
Lancaster,  Dec.  28,  1795.)

5  Eccles.  xxii.  1 — 7.

6  The  old  traditions  of  Masonry  say,  that  "  the  temple  of  Jehovah
being  finished,  under  the  auspices  of  the  wise  and  glorious  King  of
Israel,  Solomon,  the  prince  of  architecture,  and  the  Grand  Master
Mason  of  his  day,  the  fraternity  celebrated  the  cope-stone  with  great


Of    VHEfcMASONRY.  143

ground,7  at  the  head  of  which  is  placed  a  sprig  of
evergreen,  called  Cassia,  or  Acacia,  which  appears  to
bloom  and  flourish  over  the  grave,  as  though  it  said,
"  O  death  where  is  thy  sting  !8  O  grave  where  is  thy
victory !"

joy ;  but  it  was  soon  interrupted  by  the  sudden  death  of  their  worthy
Master  H.  A.  B. ;  nor  less  was  the  concern  of  King  Solomon,  who,
after  some  time  allowed  to  the  craft  to  vent  their  sorrow,  ordered  his
obsequies  to  be  performed  with  great  solemnity  and  decency,  and
buried  him  in  the  Lodge  near  the  temple,  according  to  the  ancient
usages  among  Masons,  and  long  mourned  for  his  loss."

7  "  The  Magi  wore  a  white  robe ;  thinking  that  the  divinity  was
not  pleased  but  with  white  robes.     White  horses  were  sacrificed
to  the  sun,  the  image  of  divine  light.     The  white  tunic,  given  by
Armusd,  the  luminous  god,  is  still  the  characteristic  costume  of  the
Parsees.     In  Egypt  a  white  tiara  decorates  the  head  of  Osiris  ;  his
ornaments  are  white,  as  those  of  Aaron ;  and  the  Egyptian  priests
wear  the  linen  robe,  like  the  children  of  Levi.    In  Greece,  Pythagoras
ordered  the  sacred  hymns  to  be  chanted  in  white  robes.    The  priests
of  Jupiter  had  white  vestments.     At  Home,  the  flamen  dialis  alone
had  the  right  to  wear  a  white  tiara ;  the  victims  offered  to  Jupiter
are  white.     Plato  and  Cicero  consecrate  this  colour  to  the  divinity."
(Weale's  Archit.  p.  15,  with  authorities.)

8  The  sacred  volume  informs  us  that  the  Saviour,  after  having
suffered  the  pains  of  death,  descended  into  the  place  of  departed
spirits ;  and  that,  on  the  third  day,  he  burst  the  bands  of  death,
triumphed  over  the  grave,  and  in  due  time  ascended  with  transcendent
majesty  to  heaven,  where  he  now  sits  at  the  right  hand  of  our  hea-
venly Father,  a  mediator  and  intercessor  for  all  those  who  have  faith
in  him.   (Illustrations.  Knight  of  Malta.)

9  The  following  prayer  is  used  in  this  degree  by  our  transatlantic
Brethren :—  '  Thou,  O  God,  knowest  our  downsitting  and  our  up-
rising, and  understandest  our  thoughts  afar  off.     Shield  and  defend
us  from  the  evil  intentions  of  our  enemies,  and  support  us  under  the
trials  and  afflictions  we  are  destined  to  endure,  while  travelling
through  this  vale  of  tears.     Man  that  is  born  of  a  woman  is  of  few
days  and  full  of  trouble.     He  cometh  forth  as  a  flower  and  is  cut


144  HISTORICAL    LANDMARKS

The  coffin  is  a  striking  emblem  of  mortality,10  which
cannot  be  misunderstood.11  It  shows  the  instability  of
human  life;12  and  reminds  us  of  the  dark  abode  in

down ;  he  fieeth  also  as  a  shadow,  and  continueth  not.  Seeing  his
days  are  determined,  the  number  of  his  months  are  with  thee,  thou
hast  appointed  his  bounds  that  he  cannot  pass;  turn  from  him  that
he  may  rest,  till  he  shall  accomplish  his  day.  For  there  is  hope  of  a
tree,  if  it  be  cut  down,  that  it  will  sprout  again,  and  that  the  tender
branch  thereof  will  not  cease.  But  man  dieth  and  wasteth  away ;
yea,  man  giveth  up  the  ghost,  and  where  is  he?  As  the  waters  fall
from  the  sea,  and  the  flood  decay eth  and  dryeth  up,  so  man  lieth
down,  and  riseth  not  up  till  the  heavens  shall  be  no  more.  Yet,  <  >
Lord !  have  compassion  on  the  children  of  thy  creation,  administer
them  comfort  in  time  of  trouble,  and  save  them  with  an  everlasting
salvation."

10  Soros,  a  coffin,  is  derived  from  TK#,  sor,  a  bull,  the  ark  being
considered  in  the  mysteries  as  the  coffin  within  which  the  Noetic
family  was  inclosed.

11  "  Every  Master  Mason,"  says  Grand  Master  Dalcho  (Orations,
p.  89),  "  by  whatever  appellation  he  may  be  called,  knows  that  hi;
may  use  the  figure  of  a  coffin,  skull,  thigh-bones,  &c.,  without  the
smallest  deviation  from  Masonic  propriety,  or  the  most  distant  allu-
sion to  religious  or  political  subjects.     Since  the  first  establishment
of  the  Master's  degree,  these  emblems  have  been  used.     They  are
common  in  many  certificates,  and  on  many  aprons,  upon  medals,
and  even  upon  water  pitchers.     Neither  ancient  nor  modern  can  be
raised  to  this  degree  without  them."

12  It  reminds  us  that  there  is  no  escape  from  the  piercing  arrows
of  death.     The  thick  walls  of  the  palace  of  a  king,  with  the  clay
built  cottage  of  the  lowly  pauper,  are  equally  pregnable  to  his  darts  ;
strength  or  weakness,  health  or  sickness,  riches  or  poverty,  all,  in
one  undistinguished  level,  fall  beneath  his  mighty  arm.     Wherever
he  levels  his  bow,  the  mark  is  certain,  the  victim  falls,  the  silken
cord  of  life  is  cut  in  twain,  and  the  mourners  weep  about  the  streets  ;
for  the  reunion  of  soul  and  body,  when  once  thus  separated,  exceeds
all  human  power.     Such  hath  been  man  in  every  age  of  the  world,
such  is  man  in  his  present  most  exalted  moments,  and  such  are  eacli


OF    FREEMASONRY.  145

which  our  bodies  must  be  consigned  to  our  mother
earth,13  to  become  the  prey  of  worms  and  corrup-
tion.14 Here  we  view  a  striking  instance  of  the  uncer-

of  us.  To-day,  perhaps,  the  sun  of  prosperity  and  joy  shines  upon
our  persons  and  our  families ;  health  and  strength  invigorate  our
frame,  and  we  only  feel  for  the  sorrows  of  another's  woe ;  but  to-
morrow, nay,  perhaps  before  this  day  closes  its  light,  some  friendly
heart  may  sigh  over  our  own  breathless  corpse. — Alas,  my  brother ! "
(Inwood's  Sermons,  p.  112.)

13  Mr.  Fellowes,  in  his  Ancient  Mysteries  (p.  5),  which  were  written
to  prove  that  our  science  is  nothing  more  than  a  branch  or  offspring
from  the  spurious  Freemasonry,  asserts  that  "  the  cenotaph,  or  mock
coffin,  used  in  the  anniversaries,  is  typical  of  the  death  of  the  sun  in
the  inferior  hemisphere,  under  the  name  of  Osiris,  who  is  personated
under  the  Hiram  of  Masonry."

14  Some  writers  explain  these  emblems  astronomically,  in  reference
to  the  legend  of  Osiris,  who,   returning  from  his  travels,  passed
through  Egypt,  and  was  invited  to  a  repast  by  Typhon,  his  brother
and  rival.     Thus  Dupuis  says,  in  L'Origine  de  tons  le  Cultes,  "  the
latter  put  him  to  death,  and  threw  his  body  into  the  Nile.     The  sun
then  occupied  the  sign  Scorpio,  and  the  moon  was  full ;  she  was  then
in  the  sign  opposite  to  Scorpio,  i.  e.,  in  Taurus,  which  lent  its  forms
to  the  sun  of  the  spring  equinox,  or  to  Osiris ;  for  at  that  distant
period  Taurus  was  the  sign  which  answered  to  the  spring  equinox.
As  soon  as  Isis  was  informed  of  the  death  of  the  unfortunate  Osiris,
or  the  sun,  and  when  she  learned  that  the  genius  of  darkness  had
shut  him  up  in  a  coffin,  she  began  a  search  after  his  body.     Uncer-
tain of  the  route  she  ought  to  pursue,  uneasy,  agitated,  her  heart
lacerated  with  grief,  in  mourning  garb,  she  interrogates  every  one
she  meets.     She  is  at  length  informed  by  some  young  children,  that
the  coffin  which  contains  the  body  of  her  husband  had  been  carried
by  the  waters  out  to  sea,  and  thence  to  Byblos,  where  it  was  stopped,
and  was  now  reposing  upon  a  plant  which  had  put  forth  a  superb
stalk.     The  coffin  was  so  enveloped  as  to  exhibit  the  appearance  of
being  a  part  of  it.    The  king  of  the  country,  astonished  at  the  beaui  \
of  the  bush,  had  it  cut,  and  made  of  it  a  column  for  his  palace,  with-

VOL.  II.  L


146  HISTORICAL    LANDMARKS

tainty  of  life,  and  the  vanity  of  all  human  pursuits.
The  last  offices  paid  to  the  dead  are  only  useful  as
lectures  to  the  living ;  from  them  we  derive  instruc-
tion, and  consider  every  solemnity  of  this  kind  as  a
summons  to  prepare  for  our  approaching  dissolution.15
Notwithstanding  the  various  mementos  of  mortality
which  we  daily  meet,  notwithstanding  death  has  esta-
blished his  empire  over  all  the  works  of  nature,  yet,
through  some  unaccountable  infatuation,  we  forget
that  we  are  born  to  die.  We  go  on  from  one  design
to  another,  add  hope  to  hope,  and  lay  out  plans  for
the  employment  of  many  years,10  till  we  are  suddenly

out  perceiving  the  coffin,  which  had  become  incorporated  with  its
trunk.  Isis,  actuated  by  a  divine  impulse,  arrives  at  Byblos,  and
demanded  that  the  precious  column  should  be  given  to  her.  Disen-
gaging the  coffin  from  the  branches  by  which  it  was  covered,  she
took  out  the  body,  and  sent  the  branches  to  the  king,  who  deposited
them  in  the  temple  of  Isis.  She  then  returned  to  Egypt,  where  her
son  Horus  reigned,  and  deposited  the  body  in  a  secret  place,  &c.  &c."

15  The  burial  place  of  a  Master  Mason  is  under  the  holy  of  holies,
with  the  following  legend  delineated  on  the  monument : — A  virgin
weeping  over  a  broken  column,  with  a  book  open  before  her ;  in  her
right  hand  a  sprig  of  cassia,  in  her  left  an  urn  ;  Time  standing  behind
her,  with  his  hands  enfolded  in  the  ringlets  of  her  hair.    The  weeping
virgin  denotes  the  unfinished  state  of  the  temple ;  the  broken  column,
that  one  of  the  principal  supporters  of  Masonry  (H.  A.  B.)  had
fallen  ;  the  open  book  implies  that  his  memory  is  recorded  in  every
Mason's  heart ;  the  sprig  of  cassia  refers  to  the  discovery  of  his
remains ;  the  urn  shows  that  his  ashes  have  been  carefully  collected ;
and  Time  standing  behind  her  implies  that  time,    patience,  and
perseverance  will  accomplish  all  things.

16  One  of  the  emblems  of  this  degree  is  the  beehive,  which  recom-
mends the  right  employment  of  time  by  practical  industry.     It
teaches,  that  as  we  came  into  the  world  rational  and  intelligent


OF    FREEMASONRY.  147

alarmed  with  the  approach  of  death,  when  we  least
expect  him,  and  at  an  hour  which  we  probably  con-
clude to  be  the  meridian  of  our  existence.  What  are
all  the  externals  of  majesty,  the  pride  of  wealth,  or
charms  of  beauty,  when  nature  has  paid  her  just  debt  ?
Fix  your  eyes  on  the  last  scene,  and  view  life  stripped
of  her  ornaments,  and  exposed  in  her  natural  mean-
ness, you  will  then  be  convinced  of  the  futility  of  those
empty  delusions.  In  the  grave17  all  fallacies  are  de-
tected, all  ranks  are  levelled,  and  all  distinctions  done
away.18

There  is  some  difficulty  attending  the  explanation  of
the  sprig  of  cassia,  and  in  assigning  the  true  reason

beings,  so  should  we  be  industrious  ones ;  and  never  remaining  con-
tented while  our  fellow-creatures  are  in  want,  so  long  as  it  is  in  our
power  to  relieve  them  without  inconvenience  to  ourselves.

17  Thus  we  moralize  on  this  striking  emblem. — "  The  light  of  a
Master  Mason  is  darkness  visible,  which  points  out  the  gloom  that
hovers  about  futurity.     It  is  a  mysterious  veil  which  reason  can  never
penetrate  without  the  assistance  of  divine  revelation.     We  stand  on
the  very  brink  of  the  grave,  which,  when  this  transitory  life  shall
have  passed  away,  will  receive  us  within  its  cold  bosom.     Emblems
of  mortality  incite  us  to  contemplate  our  inevitable  destiny,  and  thus
produce  that  great  desideratum,  a  knowledge  of  oneself.     If  we  are
careful  to  perform  our  allotted  task  in  this  world,  we  shall  be  in-
spired with  a  holy  confidence  that  the  Lord  of  life  will  enable  us  to
trample  the  king  of  terrors  beneath  our  feet,  and  lift  up  our  eyes
to  the  bright  morning  star,  whose  rising  brings  peace  and  salvation
to  the  faithful  and  obedient  of  the  human  race."

18  Masonic  funeral  service.    Here  the  pot  of  incense  presents  itself
to  our  notice  as  an  emblem  of  a  pure  heart,  which  is  always  an  accep-
table sacrifice  to  the  Deity ;  and  as  this  glows  with  fervent  heat,  so
should  our  hearts  continually  glow  with  gratitude  to  the  great  and
beneficent  Author  of  our  existence  for  the  manifold  blessings  and
comforts  we  enjoy.

L  2


148  HISTORICAL    LANDMARKS

why  it  was  introduced  into  the  system  of  Freema-
sonry.19 Some  say  it  originated  in  the  Jewish  custom
of  planting  a  branch  of  acacia  vera  (gum  arabic  plant)
on  the  grave  of  a  departed  relative;  others  in  the
custom  of  mourners  bearing  a  branch  of  it  in  their
hands  at  funerals.20  But  no  writer  of  any  authority
mentions  either  of  these  customs,  and  it  is  doubtful
whether  they  ever  existed  amongst  the  Jews.21  The

19  Our  transatlantic  Brethren  say  in  their  lectures — "  The  sprig  of
cassia,  or  acacia,  is  emblematical  of  that  immortal  part  of  man  which
never  dies ;  and  when  the  cold  winter  of  death  shall  have  passed,
and  the  bright  summer's  morn  of  the  resurrection  appears,  the  sun
of  righteousness  shall  descend,  and  send  forth  his  angels  to  coll<v<
our  ransomed  dust ;  then,  if  we  are  found  worthy,  by  his  password,
we  shall  enter  into  his  celestial  Lodge  above,  where  the  Supreme
Architect  of  the  Universe  presides,,  where  we  shall  see  the  King  in
the  beauty  of  holiness,  and  with  him  enter  into  an  endless  eternity.'*

20  The  system  of  Freemasonry,  as  practised  in  different  countries
and  at  different  periods,  is  not  uniform  on  this  subject ;  and  I  feel
so  little  at  liberty  to  bring  forward  evidence  on  such  a  delicate  point,
that  I  am  afraid  it  will  be  impossible  to  place  it  clearly  before  the
Brethren.     One  system  says,  fifteen  Fellowcrafts  went  in  search ;

another  twelve ;  one  asserts  that  the  three  left  the  sprig  of

cassia ;  others  affirm,  that  it  was  the  recanters  who  placed  it  there
as  a  mark.     Some  say  that  many  days  were  expended  in  the  search,

and  that  the  lost was  found  near  the  sea  side ;  others,  that  it

was  soon  discovered  near  Jerusalem.     The  York  Masons  name  the
sea  side;  the  Americans  say,  mount  Moriah;  the  French,  mount
Lebanon.     In  one  account,  the  Brethren  disperse  widely,  east,  west,
south;  in  another,  they  keep  within  hail  of  each  other.      Some
make  the  sprig  to  bloom,  which,  as  it  was  not  an  evergreen,  could
not  be  true,  after  it  had  been  slipped  twelve  days,  according  to  the
continental  system.

21  Moreover,  although  I  am  quite  willing  to  allow  that  the  shittim
wood  is  a  species  of  acacia  (whether  the  vera  horrida,  or  arabica,
it  is  difficult  to  say,  as  they  all  grow  in  Arabia,  as  well  as  in  the


OF    FREEMASONRY.  149

cassia  is  not  indigenous  to  the  soil  of  Palestine,  and  is
only  mentioned  in  Scripture  as  a  fragrant  herb  or  spice,
the  bark  being  used  in  unguents,  and  sometimes  em-
ployed for  embalming;  and  therefore  if  the  legend
refer  to  the  branch  of  a  real  tree,  it  could  be  neither
the  cassia,  or  acacia;  and  this  has  given  rise  to  an
opinion  that  the  branch  or  sprig  is  analogous  to  that
alluded  to  by  Virgil,22  in  his  description  of  the  mys-
teries,23 and  consequently  was  the  olive.24  Others,

north  of  Africa),  still  there  is  not  the  smallest  trace  of  any  tree  of
the  kind  growing  so  far  north  as  Jerusalem.

22  About  fifteen  years  ago  a  learned  Brother,  Dr.  Arnott,  pub-
lished a  botanical  paper,  a  kind  of  Flora  Virgiliana,  in  which  he
suggested  that  Virgil's  plant  was  the  misletoe,  the  same  as  was  used
by  the  Druids.     This  flourishes  in  Greece,  and  is  also  a  native  of
Palestine.     But  be  that  as  it  may,  it  seems  clear  that  if  a  real  plant
was  used,  as  we  say  in  the  legend,  it  must  have  been  an  evergreen.
Now  the  acacia  cannot  be  called  an  evergreen.    I  have  said  that  the
cassia  was  not  a  native  of  Palestine,  nor  even  cultivated  there ;  but
there  is  a  species  of  laurel  which  is  called  cassia,  and  is  an  evergreen.
This  grows  in  Palestine.     The  laurel  was  sacred  to  Apollo,  or  the
sun,  whose  astronomical  death  is  alluded  to  in  the  mysteries ;  and  it
is  perhaps  in  this  way  that  we  may  come  to  a  satisfactory  conclusion
respecting  the  introduction  of  the  word  cassia,  corrupted  since  the
Christian  era,  nay,  since  1730,  into  acacia.

23  See  iEn.  1.  vi.  137 — 144.    And  if  we  consider  with  Faber  these
mysteries  to  be  derived  from  the  Arkite  worship,  we  shall  easily
understand  why  he  was  conducted  to  the  branch  by  two  doves,
maternas  agnoscit  aves.

24  This,  however,  would  only  show  that  the  sprig  originally  alluded
to  in  our  legend,  was  the  mythological  one,  and  that  some  shrub  had
been  substituted  for  it  by  the  architects  at  the  temple.     This  shrub
might  have  been  the  zait,  or  olive ;  but  I  am  doubtful  about  this ;
and  it  is  impossible,  perhaps,  to  decide  correctly  upon  it  at  this
remote  period.     The  names  we  give  seem  certainly  to  have  been
introduced  a  long  time  afterwards.


150  HISTORICAL    LANDMARKS


again,  doubt  whether  our  acacia  (aKafcm)  has  any  refer-
ence to  a  tree  or  shrub  at  all,  but  means  the  texture
and  colour  of  the  Masonic  apron  which  those  Brethren
wore  who  were  deputed  by  Solomon  to  search  for  -  ,
and  simply  refers  to  their  innocence?0  If  this  con-
jecture be  correct,  they  add,  it  corroborates  the  accuracy
of  the  legend  which  says,  "  they  took  a  sprig  of  cassia
in  their  hands  (with  them);"  rather  than  the  version
which  marks  the  place  of  interment  by  it.  I  am  rather
inclined  to  think  that  the  choice  of  the  cassia,  which  is  a
kind  of  laurel,  was  founded  on  some  mysterious  reference
which  it  was  supposed  to  possess,  either  mythological26

29  In  the  middle  of  the  last  century  the  phrase  in  the  account  of
finding  -  was  -  "  a  sprig  of  cassia  ;"  but  it  ended  with  these
remarkable  words,  "  his  tomb  was  in  the  rubbish  and  filth  cast  forth
of  the  temple,  and  acacia  bloomed  over  his  grave."  This  could  not
allude  to  the  shrub,  because,  as  I  have  already  said,  it  is  not  indi-
genous to  the  soil,  and  even  if  it  were,  the  slipt  sprig  could  not  be
said  to  bloom.  It  was  therefore  figurative  solely  of  Hiram's  innocence
of  life,  proposed  for  the  candidate's  imitation.

26  It  was  a  favourite  idea  in  Greece  and  Rome  to  honour  the
graves  of  departed  worthies  with  some  sacred  tree  or  shrub,  as  wit-
ness the  aureus  et  foliis  et  lento  vimine  ramus  of  Virgil,  connected
Avith  —

Preeterea  jacet  exaniinum  tibi  corpus  amici
Heu  nescis  !

Further,  there  is  a  well-known  Grecian  legend  relative  to  a  young
lady  of  the  name  of  Daphne,  who,  under  certain  circumstances,  in-
voked mother  Earth  to  open  and  swallow  her  up  ;  her  request  was
granted,  and  a  laurel  sprang  out  of  her  grave.  Yirgil  gives  us
another  legend  still  more  to  our  purpose.  —  Priam,  King  of  Troy,  at
the  beginning  of  the  Trojan  war,  committed  his  son  Polydoms  to  the
care  of  Polymnestor,  King  of  Thrace,  and  sent  with  him  a  great  sum
of  money  ;  but  after  Troy  was  taken,  the  Thracian,  for  the  sake  of
the  money,  killed  the  young  prince,  and  privately  buried  him.  J£neas,


01'    FREEMASONRY.  151

or  symbolical.27  There  are,  however,  great  difficulties
to  be  surmounted  before  the  truth  can  be  ascertained.

There  are  some  traditions  connected  with  the  Tracing-
board  about  the  curious  and  skilful  artist  H.  A.  B.,28
who  beautified  and  adorned  the  temple,  which  are
equally  difficult  to  reconcile,  because  the  authentic
records  of  his  history  are  lost.  His  marriage  with
the  sister  of  Adonirain29 — his  customs  respecting  the
Tracing-board 3f  —his  revision  of  the  laws  of  Car-
coming  into  that  country,  and  accidentally  plucking  up  a  shrub  that
was  near  him,  on  the  side  of  a  hill,  discovered  the  murdered  body
of  Polydorus.

27  The  cassia,  like  the  laurel,  was  a  symbol  of  honour,  triumph,
life,  and  resurrection,  according  to  Pierius,  who  published  his  Hiero-
glyphica  in  1575,  which  would  be  quite  sufficient  to  authorize  its
introduction  into  our  symbolical  legend.  When  the  Master  Mason
exclaims,  therefore,  "  My  name  is  Cassia,"  it  is  equivalent  to  saying,
"  I  have  been  in  the  grave — I  have  triumphed  over  it  by  rising
from  the  dead — and  being  regenerated  in  the  process,  have  a  claim
to  life  (everlasting)."

as  (( rphere  is  no  propriety,"  says  Mr.  Fellowes  (Ancient  Mysteries,
p.  300),  "  in  the  addition  of  Abitf  to  the  name  of  Hiram.  In  the
original  Hebrew,  from  which  it  is  taken,  the  affix  is  Abbi,  the  pos-
sessive case  of  Abba,  which  signified  father,  and  figuratively  a  supe-
rior. His  proper  address,  therefore,  is  my  father,  or  in  correct  style,
my  lord.  In  this  sense  it  is  equivalent  to  Adonis,  Baal,  or  Osiris,
all  names  of  the  sun.  And  as  Solomon's  temple  was  built  so  as  to
imitate  the  world,  the  grand  architect  was  properly  entitled  Abiff."

29  I  do  not  dwell  upon  these  points  because  they  are  not  well
authenticated,  but  shall  insert  a  few  remarks  by  way  of  notes.     Our
traditions  relate  that  H.  A.  B.  demanded  of  Solomon  the  hand  of
Adoniram's   sister   in   marriage.     His   request  was   granted,    and
honoured  by  the  two  kings  with  a  public  celebration.

30  We  have  an  old  tradition,  delivered  down  orally,  that  it  was  the
duty  of  H.  A.  B.  to  superintend  the  workmen ;  and  that  the  reports
of  his  officers  were  always  examined  with  the  most  scrupulous  ex-


152  HISTORICAL    LANDMARKS

thage31 — his  abolition  of  human  sacrifices  there32 — his

actness.  At  the  opening  of  the  day,  when  the  sun  was  rising  in  the
east,  it  was  his  constant  custom,  before  the  commencement  of  labour,
to  go  into  the  temple  and  offer  up  his  prayers  to  Jehovah  for  a
blessing  on  the  work.  And  in  like  manner  when  the  sun  was  setting
in  the  west ;  and  after  the  labours  of  the  day  were  closed,  and  the
workmen  had  left  the  temple,  he  returned  his  thanks  to  the  Great
Architect  of  the  Universe  for  the  harmonious  protection  of  the  day.
Not  content  with  this  devout  expression  of  his  feelings,  he  always
went  into  the  temple  at  the  hour  of  high  twelve,  when  the  men  were
called  off  from  labour  to  refreshment,  to  inspect  the  work,  to  draw
fresh  designs  upon  the  Tracing-board,  if  such  were  necessary,  and  to
perform  other  scientific  labours — never  forgetting  to  consecrate  his
duties  by  solemn  prayer.  These  religious  customs  were  faithfully
performed  for  the  first  six  years  in  the  secret  recesses  of  his  Lodge,
and  for  the  last  year  in  the  precincts  of  the  most  holy  place.  At
length,  on  the  very  day  appointed  for  celebrating  the  cope-stone  of
the  building,  he  retired  as  usual  at  the  meridian  hour,  and  did  not
return  alive.

31  The  basis  of  these  laws  was,  that  its  senators  should  bind  them-
selves to  preserve  unanimity,  and  practice  patriotism,  fidelity,  and
brotherly  love,  which  proved  the  cause  of  their  prosperity ;  and  the
heaviest  penalties  were  denounced  for  a  breach  of  them.     The  laws
included  full  protection  to  private  property,  although  self-interest
was   strictly  prohibited.      By  these  means  Carthage  was  usually
governed  by  men  of  the  purest  patriotic  principles.

32  "  In  all  emergencies  of  the  state,  and  times  of  general  calamity,
they  devoted  what  was  most  necessary  and  valuable  to  them,  for  an
offering  to  Moloch.     If  a  person  had  an  only  child,  it  was  the  more
liable  to  be  put  to  death,  as  being  esteemed  more  acceptable  to  the
deity,  and  more  efficacious  for  the  general  good.    If  the  parents  were
not  at  hand  to  make  an  immediate  offer,  the  magistrates  did  not  fail
to  make  choice  of  what  was  most  fair  and  promising,  that  the  god
might  not  be  defrauded  of  his  dues.     Upon  a  check  being  received
in  Sicily,  llimilcar  without  any  hesitation  laid  hold  of  a  boy,  and
offered  him  on  the  spot  to  Moloch;   and  at  the  same  time  drowned
a  number  of  priests,  to  appease  the  deity  of  the  sea."   (Bryant.  Anal.


OF    FREEMASONRY.  153

death33 — and  the  loss  of  the  Master  Masons'  word,34
with  that  of  his  widow35 — and  the  three  pillars  of  brass

vol.  vi.  p.  316,  312.)     Freemasons  give  to  Hiram  Abiff  the  honour
of  abolishing  this  cruel  practice  at  Tyre.

33  There  are  some  circumstances  connected  with  his  death  which
it  may  be  interesting  to  subjoin.     His  illustrious  consort,  whose
memory  is  dear  to  every  Mason,  was  so  sincerely  attached  to  him,
that  at  his  death  she  became  inconsolable,  and  refusing  to  be  com-
forted, she  spent  the  greater  part  of  her  time  in  lamentation  and
mourning  over  the  tomb  which  contained  his  venerated  ashes.     The
monument  erected  to  his  memory  was  peculiarly  splendid,  having
been  curiously  constructed  of  black  and  white  marble,  from  plans
furnished  by  the  Grand  Warden  on  the  purest  Masonic  principles,
and  occupied  an  honourable  situation  in  the  private  garden  belonging
to  the  royal  palace.

34  Hear  what  the  vain-glorious  Mr.  Finch  says  on  this  point. —
"  The  last,  though  not  the  least,  matter  of  concern  to  the  brother-
hood is  the  rectifying  the  preposterous  and  gross  errors  concerning
the  real  secrets  of  a  Master  Mason.     Every  Brother  thai  purchases
to  the  amount  of  £%  2s.  will  have  the  most  incontestable  proof  given
to  him  that  the  secrets  delivered  to  a  Brother  when  raised  to  the
third  degree   (erroneously  called  the  Master  Mason)  are  not  the
secrets  of  a  Master  Mason,  nor  any  connexion  with  them  whatever ;
nor  are  they  found  in  the  Eoyal  Arch,  or  in  any  part  of  the  cere-
monies thereto  belonging,  as  is  generally  imagined  :  and  furthermore,
that  the  said  secrets  of  a  Master  Mason  were  never  lost,  but  pre-
served in  a  distinct  degree,  from  the  days  of  Solomon  to  the  present
time.     And  for  a  further  purchase  of  £3  3s.  he  will  communicate  to
such  Brethren  as  have  been  raised  to  the  third  degree  the  real  secrets
of  a  Master  Mason !  !  !"

35  Our  traditions  say  that  his  afflicted  widow  pined  away  at  his
sepulchre.     And  one  evening,  as  she  was  returning  from  the  per-
formance of  her  melancholy  duty  along  the  terrace,  from  the  gate
Shallecheth  to  the  royal  palace,  where  probably  she  had  apartments,
overcome  by  the  intensity  of  her  feelings,  she  precipitated  herself
from  the  arched  causeway,  which  overhung  the  valley  of  Moriah,  and
perished  in  the  dreadful  abyss.


154


HISTORICAL    LANDMARKS


erected  to  his  memory,30  all  of  which  are  said  to  have
taken  place  before  the  dedication  of  the  temple,  can
scarcely  be  reconciled  with  history  ;37  for  the  presump-
tion is  that  he  was  present  at  the  dedication,  and
afterwards  returned  to  Tyre,  and  was  the  adviser  and
principal  confidant  of  Hiram  its  king ;  and  is  said  to
have  originated  that  famous  circumnavigation  of  Africa,
which  is  mentioned  by  Herodotus  and  other  authors  as
a  most  wonderful  undertaking.38

Upon  the  coffin  we  find  several  emblems  which  it
will  be  necessary  to  explain.  First  we  have  a  square,
and  above  that  a  level,  plumb,  and  mallet,39  the  uses

36  To  perpetuate  the  recollection  of  these  distressing  circumstances,
the  Israelitish  and  Tyrian  monarchs  erected  three  brazen  pillars,  one
at  Jerusalem,  another  at  Joppa,  and  a  third  at  Tyre ;  the  former  of
which  was  carried  in  triumph  to  Rome  by  Titus,  after  the  final  de-
struction of  Herod's  temple ;  and  the  latter  shared  in  the  demolition
of  Tyre  by  Alexander  the  Great.

37  Our  traditions  further  say,  that  at  the  time  when  this  celebrated
man  went  into  the  H.  of  H.  to  offer  up  his  orisons  to  God,  at  the
hour  of  H.  twelve,  the  ark  of  the  covenant  had  not  been  removed
thither,  for  that  took  place  at  the  dedication,  after  which  no  one  was
permitted  to  enter  but  the  H.  P.,  and  he  only  once  a-year,  on  the
great  day  of  expiation,  at  which  time  he  had  a  string  or  belt  round
his  waist,  which  extended  into  the  court  of  the  tabernacle,  that  he
might  be  drawn  forth  from  the  S.  S.  in  case  sudden  death  should
occur  whilst  he  officiated  there.     See  Dalcho's  Orations,  p.  22.

38  This,  however,  is  evidently  an  anachronism,  for  this  expedition
was  performed  during  the  reign  of  Nechus,  King  of  Egypt,  many
years  afterwards.

39  In  America  they  had  the  Book  of  Constitutions  guarded  by  the
Tyler's  sword,  as  also  a  sword  pointing  to  a  naked  heart.    The  former
to  remind  us  that  we  should  ever  be  watchful  and  guarded  in  our
thoughts,  words,  and  actions,  particularly  when  before  the  enemies
of  Masonry,  ever  bearing  in  remembrance  those  truly  Masonic  virtues,


OF    FREEMASONRY.  155

«

of  which,  together  with  the  reasons  for  their  intro-
duction here,  every  Master  Mason  knows ;  as  they
do  also  the  reference  of  the  figures  of  5,  standing
on  a  Mosaic  pavement.40  We  see  the  entrance  to  a

silence  and  circumspection ;  the  latter  to  demonstrate  that  justice
will  sooner  or  later  overtake  the  evil  doer ;  and  although  his  thoughts,
words,  and  actions  may  be  hidden  from  the  eyes  of  men,  yet  that
All-seeing  eye,  whom  the  sun,  moon,  and  stars  obey,  and  under
whose  watchful  care  the  comets  perform  their  stupendous  revolutions,
pervades  the  inmost  recesses  of  the  human  heart,  and  will  reward  us
according  to  our  merits.

40  The  Mosaic  pavement  has  been  already  amply  illustrated.  (See
Lectures  v.,  xvi.)  Bro.  Willoughby,  of  Birkenhead,  makes  the  fol-
lowing judicious  observations  on  it  in  a  letter  to  the  author  : — "  The
Mosaic  pavement  I  have  never  heard  explained,  except  as  referring
to  the  chequered  path  of  this  life,  of  alternate  prosperity  and  adver-
sity; but,  in  my  opinion,  it  has  a  far  more  sacred  signification  to
the  doctrine  of  man's  redemption,  which  pervades  the  whole  system
of  Masonry.  We  call  it  MOSAIC,  I  presume,  because  it  was  used  by
Moses  in  the  floor  of  the  tabernacle ;  but  for  what  reason  did  Moses
adopt  it  ?  My  opinion  is,  that  it  was  in  allusion  to  the  redemption
of  the  Israelites  from  their  Egyptian  bondage  by  the  pillar  of  fire  on
the  one  side,  and  of  a  cloud  on  the  other ;  or,  in  other  words,  light
and  darkness.  Light,  and  thereby  salvation  to  the  then  true  church
of  God  ;  and  darkness  and  destruction  to  her  enemies.  A  beautiful
type  of  the  Gospel,  which  when  it  appeared  as  a  light  to  lighten  the
Gentiles,  was  to  the  Jews  a  stumbling  block,  like  the  cloudy  pillar ;
but  to  the  believers,  the  now  true  church  of  Christ,  the  power  of  God
unto  salvation,  as  was  the  pillar  of  fire.  It  is  but  reasonable  then  to
suppose,  that  Moses  adopted  the  chequered  pavement  in  the  taber-
nacle, with  the  same  view  that  Solomon  adopted  the  two  pillars  in
the  porchway  of  the  temple,  as  a  memorial  to  the  children  of  Israel
of  the  happy  deliverance  of  their  forefathers  from  Egyptian  bondage
by  the  memorable  pillar  of  fire  and  cloud,  or  light  and  darkness,
which  was  evidently  a  type  of  human  redemption  through  that  Being


156  HISTORICAL    LANDMARKS

porch,41  or  room,42  being  an  arch  supported  on  pillars  ;
and  perceive,  by  the  withdrawing  of  a  veil,  that  it  is
the  S.  S.  of  the  temple,43  and  contains  the  ark  of  the
covenant,44  covered  with  its  mercy  seat,45  over  which

who  had  two  natures,  divine  and  human,  as  opposite  as  the  light
and  darkness  of  the  Mosaic  pavement."  I  subjoin  specimens  of
Mosaic  work.

41  The  ornaments  of  a  Master  Mason's  Lodge  are  the  porch,
dormer,  and  stone  pavement.     The  porch  is  the  entrance  to  the  II.
of  H. ;  the  dormer,  the  window  that  gives  light  to  the  same ;  and
the  stone  pavement  for  the  H.  P.  to  walk  on,  whose  office  is  to  burn
incense  to  the  honour  and  glory  of  the  Most  High,  and  fervently  to
pray  that  he  would  bestow  peace  and  prosperity  to  the  laraelitish
nation  for  the  ensuing  year.

42  The  entrance  to  the  most  holy  place  was  by  the  fifth  door  of  the
temple ;  the  first  being  that  which  led  into  the  court  of  the  Israelites  ;
the  second  into  the  court  of  the  priests ;  the  third  was  the  door  of
the  porch  ;  the  fourth  led  into  the  holy  place ;  and  the  fifth  into  the
most  holy.

43  This  was  the  oracle ;  and  here  were  four  cherubim,  two  lesser,
constructed  by  Moses  of  massive  gold,  and  two  larger  made  by
Solomon,  and  plated  with  gold.     The  former  were  attached  to  the
lid  of  the  mercy  seat,  the  latter  spread  their  wings  over  it,  as  an
ornament  and  protection.     Solomon  did  not  make  a  new  ark,  which
was  the  only  utensil  belonging  to  the  tabernacle  that  he  did  not  recon-
struct with  greater  splendour ;  but  this  he  was  forbidden  to  touch.
He  therefore  let  it  remain,  and  only  placed  two  other  cherubims  for
ornament.

44  It  is  called  also  the  ark  of  alliance,  and  was  placed  in  the  centre
of  the  S.  S.,  or  dabar,  underneath  the  blazing  star.     The  ark  being
an  emblem  of  the  alliance  which  God~  had  made  with  his  people,  it
was  overshadowed  by  the  wings  of  the  cherubim,  as  the  circle  which
incloses  the  triangle  in  the  blazing  star  is  an  emblem  of  the  alliance
of  Brother  Masons.

45  The  cherubims  of  the  mercy  seat  are  frequently  represented  in
the  symbolical  forms  of  a  man.  an  ox,  a  lion,  and  an  eagle,  which


OF    FREEMASONRY.  157

are  a  human  skull46  and  cross  bones,47  which  are  also
emblems  of  mortality,48  and  prove  that  there  is  no
security  from  death's  devouring  weapon.  Over  these
emblems  is  the  date  of  the  year  when  the  events
occurred  which  are  recorded  on  this  Tracing-board,

represent  the  nature  of  heavenly  messengers.  The  man  signifies
their  benevolence  and  good  will  to  the  human  species ;  the  eagle
denotes  their  swiftness  in  obeying  the  divine  commands ;  the  lion,
their  strength  and  power  in  executing  the  will  of  God ;  and  the  ox,
their  patience  and  assiduity  in  the  performance  of  it.

46  The  word  skull  was  commonly  used  for  a  drinking  vessel,  which
probably  received  this  name  from  the  barbarous  custom  which  pre-
vailed among  several  ancient  nations  of  drinking  out  of  the  skulls  of
their  enemies.     Warnefrid,  in  his  work  De  Gestis  Longobard,  says,
"  Albin  slew  Cunimund,  and  having  carried  away  his  head,  converted
it  into  a  drinking  vessel ;  which  kind  of  cup  is  called  with  us  schala,
but  in  the  Latin  language  it  has  the  name  of  patera."

47  An  ancient  Tracing-board  of  this  degree,  now  before  me,  con-
tains the  lid  of  a  coffin,  on  the  surface  of  which  is  a  sprig  of  cassia,
and  the  real  Master  s  word.     In  the  east  are  a  pair  of  compasses,
and  in  the  opposite  quarter  a  square,  with  the  skull  and  cross  bones  ;
three  lights  in  the  east,  and  the  same  number  in  the  west  and  south  ;
and  the  floor  semee  de  larmes.

48  "  How  often  do  we  see  the  tear  of  sorrow  moistening  the  cheek
of  venerable  age,  while  hanging  over  the  corpse  of  a  beloved  son  or
a  daughter,  snatched  from  life  in  the  bloom  of  youth  and  beauty.
How  often  do  we  see  the  strong  features  of  manhood  disturbed  or
broken  by  unaffected  grief,  while  hanging  over  the  grave  of  a  beloved
wife.     How  often  do  we  drop  a  tear  when  we  see  the  disconsolate
widow  leading  her  orphans  with  trembling  steps  from  the  grave  of
their  departed  father;    and   before  she  could  leave  the  hallowed
ground,  turn  round  to  heave  the  farewell  sigh,  for  her  sorrows  were
too  great  to  weep."     The  Brethren  of  the  Apollo  Lodge,  late  of
Great  Grimsby,  will  recollect  the  above  as  a  passage  in  their  Master's
lecture.


158  HISTORICAL    LANDMARKS

surmounted  by  a  pair  of   compasses,49    as  a  symbol
of  Beauty,  or  the  Master  Architect  of  the  Temple.50
From  these  illustrations,51  you  will  be  at  no  loss  to

49  The  compasses  form  one  of  the  working  tools  of  a  Master ;  these
tools  consist  of  a  skirret,  pencil,  and  compasses.     The  skirret  acting
on  a  centre  pin,  is  used  to  mark  out  the  ground  of  a  new  building.
With  the  pencil  the  Master  draws  his  plans  for  the  direction  of  the
workmen.     But  it  is  by  the  use  of  the  compasses  that  he  ascertains
their  limits  and  proportions  with  accuracy  and  truth.     Speculative
Masons  apply  these  tools  as  so  many  symbols  of  moral  duties.  Thus,
as  the  skirret  has  a  chalked  line  attached  to  it,  it  points  out  the
straight  line  of  duty  chalked  out  in  the  sacred  law  of  God.     The
pencil  teaches  the  doctrine  of  responsibility  for  our  words  and  actions
being  recorded  in  the  divine  book,  we  shall  be  summoned  at  the  last
day  to  account  for  them  all.     The  compasses  refer  to  the  divine  jus-
tice, which  having  given  us  a  law,  and  prescribed  obedience  to  it,
has  left  us  free  to  choose  and  free  to  refuse,  with  the  certainty  of
reward  or  punishment,  as  we  may  obey  or  disregard  these  laws.
Thus,  if  we  attend  to  the  teaching  of  these  working  tools,  and  act
according  to  the  light  that  has  been  vouchsafed  to  us,  we  may  live  in
the  assured  hope,  through  the  merits  of  the  Almighty  Architect  of
the  Universe,  of  ascending  to  the  Grand  Lodge  above,  where  peace,
order,  and  harmony  eternally  shall  reign.

50  Rosenberg   says — "  The  compasses  represent  a  point,   which
forms  the  beginning  of  a  circle,  and  which  comes  back  to  the  point
where  it  began ;  by  this  emblem  we  represent  the  beginning  of  our
life,  and  the  circle  we  run  until  the  moment  when  we  arrive  at  the
end,  and  at  our  eternal  destination."

51  It  ought  to  be  added,  that  toward  the  end  of  the  last  century
the  Tracing-board  of  a  Master  Mason  was  furnished  with  the  forty-
seventh  problem  of  Euclid,  which  has  been  omitted  in  our  present
emblems,  although  it  forms  the  jewel  of  a  Past  Master ;  and  the  fol-
lowing explanation  was  attached  to  it  in  the  old  lectures  : — "  As  the
figure  depends  on  the  connexion  of  several  lines,  angles,  and  triangles,
which  form  the  whole,  so  Freemasonry  depends  on  the  unanimity
and  integrity  of  its  members,  the  inflexibility  of  their  charitable  pur-


OF    FREEMASONRY.  159

discover  how  vain  will  be  the  expectation  of  a  happy
resurrection  from  the  dead/2  if  your  Masonic  and
Christian  duties  have  not  been  faithfully  performed.53

suits,  and  the  immutability  of  the  principles  upon  which  the  society
is  established.  The  position  is  clear,  and  therefore,  in  a  synthetical
sense,  we  demonstrate  that  some  of  our  Brethren,  from  their  exalted
situation  in  life,  may  be  considered  as  standing  on  the  basis  of  earthly
bliss,  emblematic  of  the  greater  square  which  subtends  the  right
angle.  Others,  whom  Providence  hath  blessed  with  means  to  tread
on  the  flowery  meads  of  affluence,  are  descriptive  of  the  squares
which  stand  on  the  sides  that  form  the  right  angle.  The  several
triangles  inscribed  within  the  squares,  are  applicable  to  those  happy
beings  who  enjoy  every  social  comfort,  and  never  exceed  the  bounds
of  mediocrity.  Those  who  have  the  heartfelt  satisfaction  of  admi-
nistering to  the  wants  of  the  indigent  and  industrious,  may  be  com-
pared to  the  angles  which  surround  and  support  the  figure  ;  whilst
the  lines  which  form  it,  remind  us  of  those  unfortunate  Brethren  who,
by  a  series  of  inevitable  events,  are  incapable  of  providing  the  common
necessaries  of  life,  until  aided  by  a  cheerful  and  ready  assistance.
Hence,  from  the  corollary,  we  draw  an  axiom  in  Masonry.  By  con-
necting the  several  lines  together,  and  bringing  the  unfortunate  and
industrious  into  contact  with  the  affluent  and  exalted,  we  form  a  figure
descriptive  of  the  true  basis  on  which  our  ancient  Brethren  raised  the
superstructure  of  Freemasonry — a  basis  which  no  mortal  power  can
shake — THE  BOSOM  or  ALL  GENTLE  CHARITY.  This  heavenborn
virtue  is  a  divine  attribute,  a  sublime  emotion  that  fully  demonstrates
the  existence  of  our  spiritual  being,  and  animates  us  with  the  hope
of  a  glorious  immortality."

52  Even  Volney  admits  the  same  thing  with  respect  to  the  spurious
Freemasonry.     He  says — "  The  truly  grand  tragedies,  the  imposing
and  terrible  representations,  were  the  sacred  mysteries,  which  were
celebrated  in  the  greatest  temples  in  the  world,  in  the  presence  of  the
initiated  only.     It  was  there  that  the  habits,  the  decorations,  the
machinery,  were  proper  to  the  subject;  and  the  subject  was,  the
present  and  future  life.   (Ruins,  p.  236.)"

53  <(  We  Masons,"  says  Hutchinson  (p.  158,  n.  ed.),  "  describing
the  deplorable  estate  of  religion  under  the  Jewish  law,  speak  in  figures.


160  HISTORICAL    LANDMARKS

The  closing  point  of  the  Lodge  is  fidelity,  let  it  also
be  the  closing  point  of  your  life — fidelity  to  God  and
man.  The  present  third  degree  is  founded  on  this
virtue,54  and  if  you  do  not  practise  it,  how  can  you
hope  for  the  rewards  which  are  promised  by  your  reli-
gion to  "  him  that  overcometh."  How  can  you  expert
either  the  white  stone,55  or  the  morning  star  ?5G  If  any
doubt  whether  it  be  really  necessary  that  their  Masonic

Her  tomb  was  in  the  rubbish  and  filth  cast  forth  of  the  temple,  and
acacia  wove  its  branches  over  her  monument.  Anoxia,  being  1 1n-
Greek  word  for  innocence,  or  being  free  from  sin,  implying  that  the
sins  and  corruptions  of  the  old  law,  and  devotees  of  the  Jewish  altar,
had  hid  religion  from  those  who  sought  her,  and  she  was  only  to  be
found  where  innocence  survived,  and  under  the  banner  of  the  divine
Lamb  ;  by  whom  man  was  raised  from  the  death  of  sin  unto  the  life
of  righteousness,  from  the  tomb  of  corruption  unto  the  chambers  of
hope,  from  the  darkness  of  despair  to  the  celestial  beams  of  faith."

54  Bro.  Rosenberg  has  designated  the  three  degrees  by  three  portals,
or  doors,  which  he  thus  explains. — The  first  is  called  the  door  of
eternity,  because  the  sublime  thoughts  which  guard  the  WORD,  are
seated  at  the  entrance  of  the  road  to  science.     The  second  is  called
the  door  of  flowers,  and  is  connected  with  the  pillar  B.     But  the
third,  called  the  door  of  doors,  indicates  the  sublime  school  where
our  ancient  Brethren  communicated  the  mysteries  of  the  true  LIGHT.
The  arts  and  sciences,  the  secrets  of  nature,  and  the  art  of  self-
government,  are  included  in  the  instructions  of  those  privileged  few
who  are  permitted  to  enter  into  the  S.  S.  by  this  closely  tyled  door.

55  "  Jesus  says  in  the  Apocalypse,  I  will  give  to  the  victorious  a
white  stone,  on  which  shall  be  written  a  new  name,  which  no  one
can  know  but  he  who  receives  it.     The  white  stone  is  an  emblem  of
truth,  united  with  righteousness,  and  confirmed  by  works.     In  con-
firmative suffrages  the  ancients  gave  white  pebbles.     The   name
indicates  the  quality  of  the  thing — a  new  name  is  a  quality  of  good,
which  as  yet  does  not  exist."   (Symb.  Colours,  Weale.  Archit.  P.  iv.
p.  18.)

50  Rev.  ii.  17—28.


OF    FREEMASONRY.  161

teaching  should  be  reduced  to  practice  ;  if  they  doubt
whether  they  ought  to  be  peculiarly  cautious  in  their
words  and  actions  ;57  or  whether,  as  Masons,  they
ought  to  possess  a  listening  ear,  a  silent  tongue,  and
a  faithful  heart;58  they  cannot  be  good  and  worthy
Masons ;  for  the  complicated  system  of  Freemasonry
is  not  to  be  received  or  rejected  as  may  suit  their
pleasure  or  convenience.  It  is  true,  the  system  is
symbolical,  but  is  it  less  valuable  on  that  account?'9
By  no  means.  It  is  a  string  of  pearls  to  ornament
the  life  and  conversation  of  its  members ;  and  the
initiated  are  bound  to  perform  the  three  great  moral
duties  which  are  propounded  at  their  first  entrance

57  The  Entered  Apprentice,  at  his  initiation,  in  the  United  States,
is  presented  with  a  new  name,  which  is  CAUTION,  to  teach  him,  that
as  he  is  then  imperfectly  instructed  in  the  mysteries  of  Masonry,  he
ought  to  be  cautious  over  all  his  words  and  actions,  that  nothing  may
escape  him  which  may  tend  to  afford  information  to  the  opponents  of
Masonry.

8  This,  however,  is  the  triad  of  duties  recommended  in  the  first
degree.  Our  continental  Brethren,  in  their  address  to  a  newly  raised
Brother,  thus  enlarge  upon  this  principle. — "  Independamment  de  la
hierarchic  des  fonctious,  les  anciens  inities  avaient  une  hierarchic  de
grades.  Ainsi,  les  isiades  passaient  par  trois  degres  d'initiation ;  les
mysteres  d'Isis,  ceux  de  Serapis  et  ceux  d'Osiris.  Apres  le  temps
d'epreuves  les  inities  d'Eleusis  devenaient  mystes,  puis  epoptes.  Les
Pythagoriens  avaient  trois  grades — auditeur,  disciple,  physicien ;  les
premiers  chretiens  trois  grades  aussi — auditeur,  competent,  fidele ;
les  maiiicheens,  trois  grades  egalement — auditeur,  elu,  maitre.  Les
seuls  mithriades  en  avaient  sept — soldat,  lion,  corbeau,  perse,  bromius,
helios  et  pere.  A  1'exemple  de  toutes  les  initiations  la  franc-ma90ii-
nerie  a  trois  grades,  ceux  d'apprenti,  de  compagnon  et  de  maitre."

50  Our  attention  is  called  at  this  point  to  the  Tracing-board
(Eesurgam)  of  Grand  Master  Wren,  after  the  great  fire  of  London.
See  Preston,  p.  170.

VOL.  II.  -M


1G2


HISTORICAL    LANDMARKS


into  a  Lodge — to  God,  their  neighbour,  and  tlieni-
selves.  Do  you  not  understand  it  in  that  light  ?  It  is
time  you  began  to  enlighten  yourselves  on  these  im-
portant points.  The  coffin60  lies  before  you,  and  you
are  not  informed  how  soon  you  may  be  its  tenant.61
The  skull62  and  bones  are  presented  to  your  view,  and

60  Our  Brother  Rosenberg  thus  philosophizes  on  the  coffin  and
dead  body. — "  The  three  elements,  water,  fire,  and  air,  signify  the
three  F.  C.  which  conduct  us,  and  are  so  necessary  for  our  preserva-
tion, that  our  life  is  at  an  end  the  moment  they  quit  the  body.
Diseases  are  in  general  caused  by  a  revolution  in  these  elements.
The  force  of  one  being  increased  appears  to  destroy  the  others.      I  f
the  element  of  fire  becomes  unnaturally  strong,  it  causes  inflamma-
tion and  fever.     If  it  be  the  element  of  water  which  increases  in
strength,  other  diseases  equally  dangerous  are  brought  on.      When
death  takes  place,  the  three  elements  are  again  represented  by  the
burning  taper,  the  basin  of  water,  and  towels,  which  are  generally
placed  beside  a  dead  body,  and  which  also  represent  the  three  wicked
F.  C.,  who  have  destroyed  their  Master."

61  The  ancient  tombs  which  recent  discoveries  have  laid  open  to
our  inspection,  were  so  constructed  as  to  serve  for  the  purpose  of
initiation  into  the  spurious  Freemasonry.     The  annotators  of  the
Pictorial  Bible  say,  that  "  the  Egyptian  tombs  and  temples  appear  to
have  been  closely  connected  in  their  origin ;  and  that  those  of  royal
persons  often  formed,  in  fact,  cells  of  the  temple,  being  within  its
sacred  inclosure ;  and  there  is  every  probability,  and  some  authority
for  the  conclusion,  which  is  also  supported  by  the  character  of  the
decorations  which  many  of  them  exhibit,  that  they  were  not  merely
tombs,  but  cells  for  the  celebration  of  the  darker  mysteries  and  ido-
latries of  a  most  debasing  superstition."     In  a  word,  they  were
caverns  of  initiation  as  well  as  sepulchres.

62  How  striking  is  this  emblem  of  mortality,  once  animated  like
ourselves,  but  now  it  ceases  to  act  or  think ;  its  vital  energies  are
extinct,  and  all  the  powers  of  life  have  ceased  their  operations.  Such
is  the  state  to  which  we  are  all  hastening.     Let  us,  therefore,  grate-
fully improve  the  remaining  space  of  life,  that  when  our  weak  and


OF    FREEMASONRY.

you  know  not  how  speedily  your  own  flesh  may  be
consumed  in  the  grave,63  and  nothing  left  but  those
striking  emblems  of  mortality.64  The  sprig  of  cassia
may  convince  you  that  no  evil  deeds  can  possibly
escape  the  all-seeing  eye  of  God.65  If  you  think  that
the  dispensations  of  Providence  may  be  subverted  by
human  foresight,  you  will  find  yourselves  miserably
mistaken.  Even  your  own  consciences  will  bring  to

frail  bodies,  like  this  memento,  shall  become  cold  and  inanimate,
and  mouldering  in  sepulchral  dust  and  ruin,  our  disembodied  spirits
may  soar  aloft  to  the  blessed  regions  where  dwell  eternal  life  and
light.  (Illustrations  of  the  Degree  of  Knight  Templar.)

03  In  a  private  room  in  the  temple  of  Tentyra,  the  ceiling  is  divided
into  two  compartments,  by  a  figure  of  Isis  in  very  high  relief.  In
one  of  them  is  the  zodiac ;  in  the  other  a  variety  of  boats,  with  four
or  five  human  figures  in  each,  one  of  whom  is  in  the  act  of  spearing
a  large  egg,  while  others  are  stamping  with  their  feet  upon  the  victims
of  their  fury,  among  which  are  several  human  beings.  Near  this
scene,  a  large  lion,  supported  by  four  dog-headed  figures,  each  carry-
ing a  knife,  may  be  regarded  as  an  additional  type  of  the  sanguinary
purposes  for  which  the  apartment  was  used.  The  walls  of  an  adjoin-
ing room  are  covered  with  several  representations  of  an  individual —
first  lying  on  a  couch  at  the  point  of  death — then  stretched  out
lifeless  upon  a  bier — and,  finally,  being  embalmed.  My  Masonic
readers  will  understand  this  without  comment.

C4  In  the  druidical  initiations  a  scenic  death  and  revivification  took
place.  In  one  of  Taliesin's  poems,  the  hierophant  describes  the
process  he  had  himself  undergone. — "  I  have  been  a  grain  of  the
Arkites,  which  vegetated  upon  a  hill.  I  was  received  by  the  hen
with  red  fangs  and  a  divided  crest.  /  remained  nine  nights  an
infant  in  her  ivomb.  I  have  been  Aedd,  returning  to  my  former
state.  I  have  died,  I  have  revived — and  was  fully  instructed  by  her
with  the  red  fangs.  Of  what  she  gave  me,  scarcely  can  I  express
the  great  praise  that  is  due."

65  Many  interesting  particulars  which  fully  illustrate  these  observa-
tions will  be  found  in  Lecture  xxxvi.

M  2


164


HISTORICAL    LANDMARKS


light  the  hidden  things  of  darkness.  Then  let  us
learn  by  this  sprig  of  cassia,  to  practice  all  Masonic
virtues,  that,  on  our  departure  from  this  frail  life,GG  we
may  be  welcomed  with  the  joyful  salutation — "  Well
done,  good  and  faithful  servants,  enter  into  the  joy  of
our  Lord."

66  "  The  solemn  thought  of  death,"  says  the  Lecture  of  the  Third
Degree,  "  without  revelation,  is  dark  and  gloomy ;  but  the  Christian
is  suddenly  revived  by  the  evergreen  and  everliving  sprig  of  faith  in
the  merits  of  the  Lion  of  the  tribe  of  Jndah,  which  strengthens  him
with  confidence  and  composure,  to  look  forward  to  a  blessed  immor-
tality, and  doubts  not  but  in  the  glorious  morning  of  the  resurrection
his  body  will  rise,  and  become  as  incorruptible  as  his  soul."  (Cro
Chart,  p.  41.)


Ol    FREEMASONRY-.  165


LECTURE    XXVII.

LEGEND    OF    THE    THIRD    DEGREE,    WITH    SOME    CONJECTURES    ON
ITS    PROBABLE    ORIGIN    AND    SYMBOLICAL    REFERENCE.

"  All  men  have  birth,  but  some  are  born  to  more  distinguishing
situations  in  life  than  others  ;  but  in  the  grave  all  are  on  a  level,
death  destroying  all  distinctions." — ANCIENT  LECTURES.

"  The  occasion  of  the  Brethren's  searching  so  diligently  for  their
Master  was,  to  receive  from  him  the  secret  word  of  Masonry,  which
should  be  delivered  down,  as  a  test,  to  the  fraternity  of  after  ages."

ANDERSON.

"  Her  tomb  was  in  the  rubbish  and  filth  cast  forth  of  the  temple,
and  acacia  wove  its  branches  over  her  monument." — ANCIENT
LECTURES.

"  The  veil  of  the  temple  is  rent,  the  builder  is  smitten,  and  we
are  raised  from  the  tomb  of  transgression." — IBID.  .

THE  third  degree  of  Masonry1  contains  a  remarkable
legend,  which  I  shall  endeavour  to  interpret  by  a
reference  to  events  which  occurred  long  before  the

1  ft  This  degree  is  a  favourite  with  Masons  generally,  being  con-
sidered rather  as  a  chef  d'ceuvre  in  the  Craft,  not  even  excepting  the
more  exalted  degree  of  the  Royal  Arch.  Indeed,  properly  speaking,
there  are  but  three  degrees  of  ancient  Masonry ;  all  others  having
been  engrafted  upon  the  original  stock  within  the  last  hundred  years.
It  is  in  this  degree  that  King  Solomon  is  first  introduced  as  an  illus-
trious exemplar  of  Masonry ;  and  it  is  here  also  that  the  lights  of
Masonic  tradition  are  first  suffered  to  shine  upon  the  candidate ; —
lights  whose  rays,  of  course,  never  gleam  athwart  the  vision  of  the
uninitiated  world."  (Stone's  Letters,  p.  26.)


166


HISTORICAL    LANDMARKS


presumed  circumstances  which  it  records  ;a  and  to
a  doctrine  which  is  as  common  to  all  religions  as  the
promise  of  redemption,  and  a  belief  in  a  mediator  to
atone  for  sin.  For  if  the  resurrection  and  a  future
state  were  not  true,3  the  Promise  would  be  useless ;
and,  therefore,  our  ancient  Brethren,  in  the  construc-

2 1  am  decidedly  of  opinion  that  our  tradition  is  merely  allegorical ;
for  there  can  be  no  doubt  but  the  chief  architect  was  present  at  the
dedication  of  the  temple.  Thus  we  find  that  "  Hiram  made  an  end
of  doing  all  the  work  that  he  made  King  Solomon  for  the  house  of
the  Lord."  (1  Kings  vii.  40.)  Lest  this  plain  intimation  should  be
perverted,  the  above  chapter  enumerates  all  the  wonderful  works  of
Hiram,  and  in  the  last  verse,  which  is  in  the  same  connection  with
his  making  an  end  of  all  his  work,  it  is  said  "  so  was  ended  nil  the
it-ork  that  King  Solomon  made  for  the  house  of  the  Lord."  Then,
according  to  the  sacred  writer,  the  very  next  thing  was  the  dedication
of  the  temple.  To  place  the  fact  of  Hiram's  being  alive  at  the
finishing  of  the  temple  beyond  all  doubt,  it  is  said,  (2  Chron.  iv.  11),
"  And  Hiram  finished  the  work  that  he  was  to  make  for  King
Solomon  for  the  house  of  God."  And  again,  in  the  first  verse  of  the
next  chapter,  "  thus  all  the  work  that  Solomon  made  for  the  house
of  the  Lord  was  finished."

3  This  doctrine  is  not  only  recorded  in  our  Bible,  but  in  the  sanvd
writings  of  those  nations  whose  records  can  be  traced  back  to  an
unknown  antiquity.  Thus  in  the  Burma  scriptures,  largely  quoted
in  the  Asiatic  Researches,  (vol.  vi.  p.  223,)  is  a  description  of  future
punishment  in  eight  principal  hells,  each  increasing  in  extremity  of
torture  for  different  classes  of  sinners.  In  one  the  condemned  are
perpetually  torn  asunder  with  red  hot  pincers,  and  then  exposed  to
intense  cold ;  in  another  they  are  extended  for  one  thousand  years
on  a  bed  of  fire,  and  severed  into  pieces  with  burning  iron  saws  and
hooks,  &c.  Besides  these  eight  places  of  punishment,  there  are
several  inferior  ones,  but  the  general  character  is  fire.  One  of  these
is  described  as  "  an  immense  kettle  filled  with  melted  brass.  The
condemned  are  made  to  descend  to  the  bottom  of  this  kettle,  and
then  to  rise  to  the  surface ;  and  it  is  so  deep  that  three  hundred
years  are  consumed  in  each  descent,  and  in  each  ascent."


OF    FREEMASONRY.  167

tion  of  their  system,  with  great  propriety,  introduced
an  account  of  the  fall,  and  the  expulsion  of  our  first
parents  from  Paradise,  which  produced  that  important
Covenant  on  which  the  future  happiness  of  man  is
suspended,  into  the  original  perfect  degree  of  symbolical
Masonry  ;  and  made  the  legend  of  a  resurrection  from
the  dead  to  constitute  the  chief  material  in  a  substi-
tuted degree  ;4  that  the  candidate,  in  his  gradual  and
measured  approach  to  the  great  source  of  Light  and
happiness,5  might  be  instructed  in  its  truth,  connected

4  The  requisites  in  a  candidate  for  this  degree  are  confined   to
a  knowledge  and  practice  of  the  science  and  morals  inculcated  in  the
two  former  degrees.     "Nul  ne  sera,"  say  our  continental  Brethren,
"  admis  aux  epreuves  du   grade  de  Maitre,  qu'il  n'ait  promis  au
venerable  de  se  retirer  dans  un  lieu  solitaire  pendant  une  heure  ou
deux,  pour  y  passer  en  revue  sa  vie,  ses  actions,  ses  pensees,  et  qu'il
n'ait  mis  par  ecrit  le  resultat  de  cet  examen  pour  le  conserve!  chez
lid."

5  The  cabalists  have  a  method  of  determining  the  hidden  meaning
of  things  by  forming  a  word  out  of  the  initial  letters  in  each  word
of  a  sentence.    This  is  the  fifth  rule  of  the  cabala,  and  is  thus  applied
to  Freemasonry  by  Bro.  Hoseuberg,  in  the  explanation  of  his  Masonic
Calendar  for  1837  :  "There  are  seven  mysterious  voyages  necessary
for  the  reception  of  the  Master's  degree.     In  the  first  voyage,  the
candidate  is  instructed  in  music,  poetry,  and  painting.     The  second
voyage  makes  him  acquainted  with  the  sciences  of  geology,  geography,
and  natural  history.     The  third  teaches  him  theology,  medicine,  and
jurisprudence.     The  four  other  voyages  instruct  him  in  the  higher
sciences.    Having  arrived  at  this  point,  he  receives  the  Moral  Light,
and  acknowledges  with  admiration  the  Supreme  Being  Mi  Camoca
Bealim  Jehovah.   (See  Exodus  xv.  11.)    These  four  letters  MCBJ,
are  the  initials  of  the  four  first  words  of  a  hymn  sung  by  Moses  after
having  passed  the  Red  Sea.     They  are  also  the  device  which  the
Macabees  had  on  their  standards  in  the  wars  with  Antiochus  Epi-
phanes.     It  is  probable  that  these  four  letters  compose  the  real
word  of  the degree."


||  K'A  I,     I, A  N  I)  \!  \


\\itli    Hie   doctrine  of   M  |HT.a»u;il   iv  ,JM  m:,ihili!  v  ,'  '

In-  is    introduced   into  llie  .s;mHum  NMiielnrum  to  lenrii

III,-    :,;ieml     IlilllllV    of    Illlll     llimilljll     \\llom    illnlie     (lie

iv  iiiTeclioii    could    he    heiieiiei;il,   ;ind    \\ilhoiil    \vli-
;ilonemeiit  clcrn;d    |)iinislinicii!   would  he  liis  portioi
;ind   In  hecniiie  ;ic(  |ii;iinled  \\ilh   I  lint  consoling  promise,
h\    I  lie   ellicncy   of   \vliicli    (lie   eleniity  of  ;i    future  life
c;iu  ;ilniie  he  iu\  v-il  ed  \vil  h  !  liose  surpassing  comfort  s  of
temporal  I'Y  emiisonry  —  peace.  harmony,  and  hrotlicrK
lo\<

"Tin-   pi.  i  •«•     "I   reWtrd    and    pinir^lniicn!   \MTC  niniilicrril  l>\    i
ii,  il  ,  1,        \inl   the     ii|i|H.   ihmi   lie.  ii      ili,       I,  imp  nl'   p|-..li;ilnli!v


1  1  \\;i     In    I   |.i.Miiiil"..ilr(l  li\   llic  .leu  ->,  .iltil    it    m,i\  ,    |)crli:i|i  -  .   lie  ;i     -Ti
Hi,  it    llie('li.  foligion   :'i\'      .1   Himrlioii  (<>  llir  same  hypotlu

II'  :in    in  ,;HIVI|    :i|>if,||r    speak.    •,!'   a    llmd    IM.IMII       of    (lie    r
diHenii"    I'l.'in  e.ieli    ullni'    in    ••  lo|-\  ,  as  our  si  ar  diU'ef-  iViiin  aimlliei,
il    lln-   plin.il    nniiiliei    I.e  I-I)|IIIMIIII|\    n  ed  liy  <'ln.   I   ami   In-  ap.i  lie   ,
\\lien     ipeflking     "I'    Mn-    place    (if    -.iljil'i  me    lit;     ,  ;    .ml    if    I  lie     Sa\i»Mir
liiiii   .  IT      liMuld    ackiinu  led.-(-    llial    heaven    emilains    maii\    nun-:,
Ihen   \\e  ma\    laiil\    emielude  llial    iheieare  .d  •   reu  ai  d  |n  .ipoi

IhMied    to   Ihe   mea    me   ,.!'  QMUl'l   lailh   and   ol.edienee

'II     i.    unl    Ihe    doctrine    of   the    Chii   lian    icli-.ion    onl\,    (hat   the
Lord    \\onld     lake    VCIIgnilUT    on    -iniiei       in    llainni:1.    lire,    lull     e\er\
.ineieiil    nation    rnlcrlained   a    l-eliet'    thai    Ihe  \\orhl   \\onld    iindi  i
1  1  n  dar   pin  ".it  ion  ;  \\hieh  \\;e-  -A  uilioli/ed   ill  the   proec-,s  of  ad  mi
lo  Ihe     pinion,   I'Veema  .«nry         II   \\n--.   indeed,   a    primil  i\  e  arl  icle  of
lailh.   h.in.rerred   iVoin  Ihe  palnaich     lo  (he  .leu*.  .   1  1  an  mil  ted   in  the
nyiieriei  "I"   pAgRniim  .    and    placed   on  record  lt\    III.  Seneca

Lnei.lu,        and    olhcrs.        But    I  he  duel  rine  \\  as    ol'lcn    mixed   lip  \\  it  h
HMlrononiie.il  lielion  ..    n      I;MIIII"  |o  (   aneei,  ih,    -  .,,|-  I  j|  i;d  •  HUM
or    licry   pile  of  heaven,  Ihe  ollice  of  l)iiniin<>  lo  cinders  (he  ivjnted
jlobc        Tills    In-lit  f,    ho\\e\  er,  \\  a      no!    ••eiKiallv    pre\  alenl  .  all  hoiiv.  h
ihi-  doelrinc  of  dc-,  (ruction  l.\    I'ne  \\..     nnnei

The    '.purions     I  'i  een.a  .mi  \     al  •-,.     pi,.iiii,ed     (he     nio-l     lirilliant

to   the    undated,    l>olh   in  tin.  \\oild  and   the    next.       Tin
kAUghl    llial    ni  a  Inline     l.ile,    •«  Tli,-    miliale.l     hoiild    lie  happier


"


OF     I'KKI'M. \SOMM  .

Ann-  ilir  union  of  speculative  and  operative  Maaonly,9

and  \\luMi  flu*  trinpli*  of  Solomon  \\  as  completed,  a
loiriMid  of  snhlinir  and  symbolical  inranini!;  \vas  inlro-

r">  «/

dmvd  into  tin-  svstrin.1"  ulnch  is  still  ivtainrd,  and
consequently  kno\vn  to  all  Master  Masons.11  llo\\

than  other  mortals  ;  that  \\hile  (In*  souls  of  tlir  profane  stuck  fast  in
mire  ami  tilth,  and  remained  in  darkness,  the  souls  of  (he  initiated
uinr,cd  (heir  (light  directly  to  the  happy  islands,  and  the  Invitations
of  the  gods."  The  plaee  of  e\  i  rlasl  in-  reward  \\a--  called  Klvsiuiu.
and  described  as  "Ion;-;  extended  plains  of  pleasure,"  \\hieh  \\cre
1\  pitied  in  tlie  illuininateil  saccllum  of  the  mysteries.

"Our  aneient  brethren  termed  them  rather  dilVerently.  They
asked.  "  \Vhal  do  yon  learn  l>y  being  a  1/,-iitlfttnin  MUSOH  /'  -Seerocy,
inoi-ality,  and  i';ood  tellowsliip.  \\hat  do  \ou  learn  1>\  lu-in:;-  an
opi'rativi-  masiui  :  -llc\v,  si|iiaiv.  and  iiioulil  stOMO,  lay  a  level,  and
raise  a  perpendicular."

10  This  is  the  ^vncral  lu-liof  of  the  MnsOllS  of  the  prcsent  (lay,  but  1
am  (icrsnaded,  as  u  ill  soon  appear,  (hat  a  similar  legend  \\ as  identified
willi   the  Order  from    (he  ver\   earliest   times,  as  indispensable  to  (In*
system.     In  the  absence  of  records,  it  is  impossible  to  speak  positively
on    (his   subject;   but    presumplne  c\  idence   is  stron;d\   in  favour  of
this  opinion,  lu-eanse  the  legend  contains  a  reference  (o  (he  n-sm'ret--
lioii   of  the   body  ;   and   (his   important    doctrine  \\as  thus  preserved
orally  in  the  earU  ages  o!'  the  \\orld.

11  When  lectures  \\ere  added  (o  the  system  of    Freemasonry,  they
\\erc  sometimes   couched  in  do^gTol  rh\me;    but  their  \erses  seldom
endiodied    any    of  the    peculiar    secrets.      The    introduction    to    the
•'  Master's    Part,"    a-    U  \\  as   (hon  called,  WttS  cxpresscil  na  follows.
The  passage  has  been  expunged  from  our  disquisitions  as  nnmeanin:',
and   useless,    and,   therefore,    there  \\ill    be  no    impropriety   in   iutro
dncin:.:;  an  extract  here,   lo  sho\\    ho\\   our   I  ore  fa  I  hers  \vorked  :    "  Ex.
An   I1!.  A.  l\   I   presume    \ou  ha\c  been.       1\.    ,1    and   1>.   I    have  seen
A.  M.  M.    1   uas   most    rare,    \\ith   diamond,    ashlar;  and  the  square.
l'\.    If  a  M.  M    Nou  \\onld  be.   \ou  must  rightly  nndersland  the  niK-
»>f  three.      And    M.   Iv   shall   make  \on  free;   and  what  you  \\ant    in
Masonry,  shall  in  this  Ludi-y  be  slum  n  to  Mice.      l\.    (u'enl  Masonry.
I  understand;   the  keys  of  all  Lodges  arc  at  m\  command,"  \c.  \e


70  HISTORICAL    LANDMARKS

did  this  legend  originate,  and  to  what  did  it  refer?
It  would  scarcely  have  been  adopted  by  Solomon  to
consecrate  the  memory  of  his  humble  associate,  how-
ever his  virtues  and  services  might  merit  the  continued
respect  of  the  Brethren  of  all  ages  and  times,  because
the  naked  fact,  even  if  it  were  true,  would  have  afforded
a  very  poor  apology  for  the  basis  of  an  institution
which  was  destined  to  extend  to  every  nation  of  the
earth,  and  to  endure  for  ever.  It  would  have  been
surpassed  in  ingenuity  of  invention,  as  it  was  in
splendour  of  display  and  the  imposing  effect  of  its
machinery,  by  the  legend  of  the  spurious  Freemasonry
relating  to  the  death  and  resurrection  of  Osiris  or
Bacchus.

The  historical  foundation  of  the  true  legend  of
speculative  Masonry,12  I  am  persuaded,  had  a  spiritual
reference  to  something  of  a  higher  and  more  supernal
character — something  connected  with  our  best  and
most  valuable  interests  both  in  time  and  eternity —


12  Bro.  Des-Etangs,  President  of  the  council  of  Trinosophes  in
Paris,  thus  defines  speculative  Masonry  :  "  It  is  much  ;  it  is  of  the
utmost  importance,  or  it  is  nothing.  It  is  nothing  to  the  sensualist
or  the  vicious.  It  is  of  much,  nay,  almost  of  the  highest  importance
to  the  virtuous  and  rational  man.  It  is  no  more  to  ambitious,
miserly,  egotistical,  or  lying  men,  than  are  colours  to  the  blind,
music  to  the  deaf,  or  poetry  and  the  fine  arts  to  the  brutes.  To  the
feeling,  sincere,  and  generous  man,  who  knows  the  woes  of  human
nature,  and  would  relieve  them,  it  is  of  much  consequence.  It  is
neither  a  plot,  a  faction,  nor  a  party.  It  is  neither  subservient  to
the  ends  of  ambition,  craft,  nor  cruelty.  In  all  it  is  the  order  of
truth,  the  enemy  of  all  vices,  the  friend  to  all  virtues.  It  is  the
voice  of  the  Omnipotent,  saying, — Do  not  unto  others  as  thou
wouldcst  not  tfoy  should  do  unto  thec  ;  but  as  thou  wouldcst  they
should  do  unto  thee,  so  do  thou  unto  them."


OF    FREEMASONRY.  171

even  to  the  unhappy  fall  of  our  first  parents,  to  which
the  penalty  of  death  was  attached,  which  all  mankind
unite  in  deploring ;  and  the  sprig  of  acacia  is  a  symbol
of  the  tree  of  knowledge  of  good  and  evil,  the  desecra-
tion of  which  produced  the  dreadful  sentence  of  expul-
sion and  death.  It  referred  also  to  their  restoration
to  life  and  holiness  by  the  promise  of  a  mediator,  and
a  resurrection  from  the  dead.  Thus  then  it  appears
that  the  historical  reference  of  the  legend  of  speculative
Freemasonry  in  all  ages  of  the  world  was — to  our
DEATH  IN  ADAM,  AND  LIFE  IN  CHRIST.13  What  then
was  the  origin  of  our  tradition  ?  Or  in  other  words,  to
what  particular  incident  did  the  legend  of  initiation  refer
before  the  flood  ?  I  conceive  it  to  have  been  the  offer-

13  Milton  conjectures  that  the  doctrines  of  Freemasonry  were
communicated  to  Adam  after  his  fall  and  restoration,  by  Michael
the  archangel,  in  these  remarkable  words,  which  every  Brother
should  engrave  on  his  recollection.  Having  taught  him  the  way
of  salvation  through  the  great  atonement,  the  archangel  thus  con-
tinues : —

This  having  learn'd,  thou  hast  attained  the  sum

Of  wisdom.     Hope  no  higher,  though  all  the  stars

Thou  know'st  by  name,  and  all  th'  ethereal  powers,

.All  secrets  of  the  deep — all  Nature's  works,

Or  works  of  God  in  heaven,  air,  earth,  or  sea,

And  all  the  riches  of  this  world  enjoy 'st ;

And  all  the  rule,  one  empire.     Only  add

Deeds  to  thy  knowledge  answerable.     Add  faith,

Add  virtue,  patience,  temperance,  and  love,

By  name  to  come  call'd  CHARITY  ;  the  soul

Of  all  the  rest.     Then  wilt  thou  not  be  loth

To  leave  this  Paradise,  but  shalt  possess

A  Paradise  within  thee,  happier  far.


.72


HISTORICAL    LANDMARKS


ing14  and  assassination  of  Abel15  by  his  brother  Cain,1"

14 1  am  not  sure  whether  that  obscure  passage  which  is  put  into
the  mouth  of  Lamech,  and  has  puzzled  all  our  commentators  so
much,  was  not  the  profession  of  a  newly  initiated  candidate.  "  I
have  slain  a  man  to  my  wounding,  and  a  young  man  to  my  hurt."
For  in  most  of  our  ancient  MSS.  on  the  history  of  Freemasonry,
Lamech  is  mentioned  as  a  distinguished  Brother.  The  Rabbins
have  a  tradition,  that  Lamech  being  blind,  took  his  son  Tubal  Cain
to  hunt  with  him  in  the  woods.  Here  they  met  with  Cain,  who
used  to  lurk  in  the  thickets,  for  fear  he  should  meet  with  any  one
who  should  revenge  the  murder  of  his  brother.  They  say  further
that,  on  a  certain  day,  Tubal  Cain,  hearing  a  rustling  in  one  of  the
bushes,  supposed  it  to  be  occasioned  by  an  animal  of  chase,  and,
directing  Lamech  to  shoot,  he  killed  Cain  by  wounding  him  with  the
arrow.  Afterward,  when  he  found  what  had  happened,  ho  brat
Tubal  Cain  to  death,  and  so  killed  a  young  man  by  hurting  him.
A  very  indifferent  way  of  explaining  the  passage.

15  Some  authors  have  thought  that  Cain  and  Abel  were  twins ;
and  others  say  that  with  each  was  born  a  twin  daughter.    But  there
is  no  foundation  for  any  such  opinions  in  the  Bible  ;  and  all  other
authority  is  to  be  rejected.     They  say,  however,  that  the  occasion  of
the  offering  which  terminated  so  fatally  was  this  :  The  two  brothers
being  born  with  a  twin  sister,  God  directed  Adam  to  marry  each  of
them  to  the  sister  of  the  other.     Cain  refused  his  consent  to  the
arrangement,  because  his  twin  sister  was  the  most  beautiful  woman,
and  he  wras  desirous  of  marrying  her  himself.    To  settle  the  dispute,
Adam  directed  them  to  make  their  offerings  to  God,  and  thus  refer
it  to  His  decision.    Cain  complied  with  great  reluctance,  and  offered
a  sheaf  of  the  very  worst  of  his  com,  while  Abel  sacrificed  the  very
best  of  his  flock.  (See  Abulf.  p.  6,  D'Herbelot.  Bibl.  Art.  Cabil.)

16  Some  think  that  the  evil  passions  of  Cain  were  excited,  because
God  testified  his  approbation  of  Abel's  sacrifice  by  a  fire  from  heaven
— a  bright  flame  from  the  Shekinah,  which  consumed  it.     This  is
the  opinion  of  Bishop  Patrick,  and  many  other  divines,  both  ancient
and  modem.  Amongst  the  heathen,  a  sacrifice  was  deemed  auspicious
when  it  took  fire  spontaneously.     Consult  the  Iliad,  ii.  354,  and
Virg.  Eel.  viii.  105.


OF    FREEMASONRY.  173

the  escape  of  the  murderer,17  the  discovery  of  the
body  by  his  disconsolate  parents,  and  its  subsequent
interment  under  a  certain  belief  of  its  final  resurrection
from  the  dead,  and  of  the  detection  and  punishment
of  Cain18  by  Almighty  vengeance.19

This  incident,  I  conceive,  was  the  archetype  of  the
legend  of  Osiris20  and  Typhon  in  the  spurious  Free-

17  A  tradition  of  Cain  and  Abel  is  thus  preserved  in  the  mysterious
institutions  of    India :    "  Cardameswara  is   the    destructive   power
united  to  a  form  of  clay.     Tswara  attempted  to  kill  his  brother
Brahma,  who,  being  immortal,  was  only  maimed ;  but  Iswara  finding
him  afterwards  in  a  mortal  shape,  in  the  character  of  Dacsha,  killed
him  as  he  was  performing  a  sacrifice."  (Asiat.  Res.  vol.  vi.  p.  473.)

18  I  have  seen  somewhere,  as  I  find  by  a  memorandum  made  many
years  ago,  an  account  of  a  monumental  stone  which  Adam  erected  to
the  memory  of  Abel,  covered  with  geometrical  figures,  and  Masonic
hieroglyphics  ;  together  with  an  explanation  of  the  tau-cross,  which
it  was  there  said  was  the  mark  which  God  placed  on  the  forehead  of
Cain  lest  any  one  should  destroy  him.

19  Whether  the  unequivocal  expression  of  God's  favour  occasioned
the  envy  and  jealousy  of  Cain  is  not  on  record.     Our  Masonic  tra-
dition records  that  Abel's  sacrifice  was  offered  on  the  famous  stone
of  foundation,  and  received  a  visible  token  of  the  divine  acceptance  ;
while  the  unbloody  offering  of  Cain,  not  including  any  type  of  the
covenant,  was  scattered  to  the  four  winds  of  heaven.     This  divine
manifestation  cost  Abel  his  life,  and  polluted  the  earth  with  the  blood
of  the  first  martyr.

20  Diodorus  says  that  Osiris  t)r  Mizraim  was  killed  by  Typhon.
The  Egyptian  records  give  the  account  of  his  death  rather  obscurely.
They  say  that   he  was  torn  in  pieces  by  a  crocodile.     Eusebius
explains  this  by  observing  that  the  Egyptians,  when  these  facts  after-
wards came  to  be  turned  into  fable  and  allegory,  represented  Typhon
by  the  figure  of  a  crocodile ;  and  Plutarch  informs  us,  that  there  was
such  a  representation  of  Typhon  at  Hermopolis.     .Mian  remarks
that  the  reason  for  the  aversion  which  the  inhabitants  of  Apollinopolis


174


HISTORICAL    LANDMARKS


masonry,21  as  well  as  of  any  traditionary  relations  of
a  similar  character  which  may  exist  amongst  onrs elves.
In  each  case  we  find  an  assassination,  a  loss,  a  dis-
covery of  the  body,  and  a  raising  to  a  more  decent
interment,22  as  in  the  original  legend  of  Abel.  And  it
is  a  curious  coincidence,  that  the  Messiah,  of  whom

had  to  a  crocodile,  arose  from  a  tradition  that  Typhon  was  turned
into  a  creature  of  that  shape.

21  See  this  legend  detailed  and  explained  in  the  Antiquities  <>t
Masonry,  p.  95.     Capt.  Seely  observes,  "  The  Egyptians  so  revered
Apis  that  they  raised  pyramids  to  entomb  him.    In  their  mythology,
Osiris  was  identified  with  the  bull,  l*is  with  the  cow.     This  consort
of  Osiris  was  carried  off  and  possessed  by  Typhou,  the  evil  principle.
Men.  ivho  deplore  a  parallel  misfortune  are  said  to  wear  hor-ns,  in
allusion  probably  to  this  primeval  imaginary  elopement."    (Wonder*
of  Elora,  p.  322.)

22  Dr.  Anderson,  who  compiled  the  Book  of  Constitutions,  at  the
command,  and  under  the  sanction,  of  the  Grand  Lodge,  thus  com-
ments on  the  legend  of  the  third  degree  :   "The  accident  by  which
the  body  of  Master  Hiram  was  found  after  his  death,  seems  to  allude,
in  some  circumstances,  to  a  beautiful  passage  in  the  sixth  book  of
Virgil.     Anchises  had  been  dead  for  some  time,  and  Eneas,  his  son,
professed  so  much  duty  to  his  departed  father,  that  he  consulted
with  the  Cumcean  sybil  whether  it  were  possible  for  him  to  descend
into  the  shades  below,  in  order  to  speak  with  him.     The  prophetess
encouraged  him  to  go ;  but  told  him  he  could  not  succeed  unless  he
went  into  a  certain  place,  and  plucked  a  golden  bough  or  shrub,  which
he   should  carry  in  his  hand,  and  by  that  means  obtain  directions
where  he  shoidd  find  his  father.     Anchises,  the  great  preserver  of
the  Trojan  name,  could  not  have  been  discovered  but  by  the  help  of
a  bough  which  was  plucked  with  great  ease  from  the  tree ;  nor,  it
seems,  could  Hiram,  the  Grand  Master  of  Masonry,  have  been  found
but  by  the  direction  of  a  shrub,  which  came  easily  up.    The  principal
cause  of  Eneas's  descent  into  the  shades  was  to  enquire  of  his  father
the  secrets  of  the  fates  which  should  sometime  be  fulfilled  among  his


OF    FREEMASONRY.  175

Abel  w^as  a  legitimate  type,23  in  like  manner  suffered
a  violent  and  unmerited  death24 — was  concealed  for
three  days  within  the  bowels  of  the  earth — raised  him-
self from  the  tomb  of  transgression,  and  triumphantly
ascended  to  take  possession  of  his  seat  in  heaven  ;25

posterity.  The  occasion  of  the  Brethren  searching  so  diligently  for
their  master,  was  to  receive  from  him  the  secret  word  of  Masonry,
which  should  be  delivered  down,  as  a  test,  to  the  fraternity  of  after
ages."  This  remarkable  verse  follows  : —

Procterea  jacet  exanimum  tibi  corpus  amici,  \

lieu  nescis  !  1}

^  Is

This  person  was  Misenus,  that  was  murdered  and  buried,  montesub
aerio,  under  a  high  hill,  a$  Master  Hiram  was.

23  A  degree  called  the  Knight  of  the  Black  Cross,  was  intended  to
be  illustrative  of  this  important  fact.

24  The  cross  on  which  the  Messiah  suffered  was  typified  amongst
the  patriarchs  by  the  staff  ef  Jacob ;  amongst  the  Jews  by  the  rod
of  Moses,  as  an  agent  of  salvation  on  their  deliverance  from  Egyptian
bondage,  and  during  their  sojournings  in  the  wilderness,  and  also  by
the  pole  on  which  the  brazen  serpent  was  suspended ;  and  amongst
the  heathen  by  the  tau-cross  which  was  appropriated  to  Serapis  and
other  deities ;  and  in  its  triple  form  (   ^  ),  constituting  a  striking-
emblem  of  Royal  Arch  Masonry  united  with  Christianity  at  the  pre-
sent day.    And  it  is  remarkable  that  in  each  and  every  case,  whether
of  the  staff  of  Jacob,  the  rod  of  Moses,  the  pillar  of  the  brazen  ser-
pent, or  the  tau  of  heathen  nations,  the  emblem  signified,  like  the
cross  of  Christ,  regeneration  and  life.     Socrates  informs  us,  that
in  the  caverns  of  the  temple  of  Serapis  were  found  sundry  symbols
and  hieroglyphics,  amongst  which  were  several  in  the  form  of  a  cross,
which  the  Gentile  converts  to  Christianity  interpreted  as  signifying —
life  to  come.

25  To  this  event  those  remarkable  words  of  David  refer,  "  thou
shalt  not  leave  my  soul  in  hell,  neither  shalt  thou  suffer  thine  holy
one  to  see  corruption."  (Ps.  xvi.  11.)     St.  Peter  expressly  declares,
that  David  spake  this  of  the  resurrection  of  Christ.  (Acts  ii.  29 — 31.)
But  as  Gray  very  judiciously  observes,  "  Moses  had  no  occasion  to


170


HISTORICAL    LANDMARKS


while  his  betrayer  and  murderer  inflicted  sum  in  a  \\
punishment  on  himself  by  becoming  his  own  execu-
tioner.26 He  hanged  himself  in  Aceldama  and  falling
headlong  he  burst  asunder  in  the  midst,27  and  all  his

reveal  in  precise  terms  the  immortality  of  the  soul,  which  the  Israelites,
as  well  as  all  other  people,  believed;  and  which  had  been  implied  in
God's  promise  to  the  patriarchs.  La  Bleterie,  in  a  note  to  the  ( Vsars
of  Julian,  well  observes — "  that  no  nation  has  received  from  its  law-
givers the  belief  of  another  life,  the  lawgiver*  have  everywhere  found
it.  The  persuasion  of  the  immortality  of  the  soul,  as  well  as  that  of
the  existence  of  God,  is  the  tenet  of  all  nations — the  faith  of  all
mankind."  (Key  to  the  Old  Test.  p.  63.)

26  On  a  superficial  view  of  these  interesting  facts,  it  may  be  con-
ceived that  our  Hebrew  Brethren  will  find  some  difficulty  in  sub-
scribing to  our  opinion ;  but  there  are  no  sound  reasons  why  they
should  dissent  from  it.     They  believe,  as  we  do,  in  the  fall  of  our
first  parents  from  innocence  to  guilt — a  moral  death — and  the  pro-
mise of  restoration  through  the  atonement  of  Messiah.     The  only
point  on  which  we  differ  is,  whether  the  founder  of  Christianity  be
the  Messiah  promised  in  their  sacred  writings.    The  general  doctrine,
so  far  as  the  argument  respecting  Freemasonry  is  concerned,  applies
to  their  belief  with  the  same  force  of  evidence  as  it  does  to  ours ;
nor,  on  a  deliberate  investigation  of  the  case,  can  they  reasonably  be
induced  to  dispute  or  deny  it.

27  This  interpretation  is  borne  out  in  the  higher  degrees  of  sublime
Masonry.     Thus,  in  the  thirty-second,  or  degree  of  Prince  of  the
Royal  Secret,  according  to  the  continental  nomenclature,  the  following
analogies  are  explained : — "  The  symbolic  mystery  of  the  death  of

-" — ,  represents  that  of  the  Messiah;  for  the  three  which

were  given  to  him  at  the  three  gates  of ,  allude  to  the  three

points  of  condemnation  against  Christ  at  three  separate  places,  viz.,
before  Caiaphas,  Herod,  and  Pilate.     It  was  from  the  last  that  he

was  led  to  that  most  violent  and  excruciating  death.    The  three

were  given  with  the  three .     These  are  symbols  of

the  blow  on  the  cheek  of  Christ,  the  flagellation,  and  the  blow  with
the  spear.     Some  substitute  for  the  latter,  but  with  less  propriety,
the  crown  of  thorns.     The  Brethren  assembled  round  the  grave  of


OF    FREEMASONRY.  177

bowels  gushed  out ;  and  thus  he  lay  a  public  spectacle
to  all  mankind.28

I  admit  that  this  interpretation  of  a  well-known
legend  may  appear  overstrained,  as  it  is  novel ; 29  but

is  a  representation  of  the  disciples  lamenting  the  death  of

Christ.  The  word,  which  was  said  to  be  lost,  was  pronounced  upon
the  cross,  which  the  Jews  could  riot  comprehend.  The  false  Brethren
are  represented  by  Judas,  who  proved  false  to  his  Master ;  and  the
sprig  of  cassia  represented  the  cross,  of  which  wood  it  is  said  to  have
been  composed."

28  In  the  spurious  Freemasonry  it  was  taught  that  the  souls  of
such  men  as  Judas,  were  precipitated  into  hell  to  purge  off  their  sins
by  fire ;  after  which  they  were  sent  back  to  the  earth,  and  animated
the  body  of  a  beast  or  insect,  degraded  in  proportion  to  the  filthiness
of  their  former  life.     The  particulars  are  laid  down  in  the  sacred
books  of  most  nations.     Thus,  a  glutton  was  cast  into  a  hell  of  boil-
ing oil,  and  at  a  second  birth  animated  the  body  of  a  rat ;  the  thief
was  continually  gnawed  in  hell  by  dogs  until  his  new  birth,  when  his
soul  entered  into  the  body  of  a  crow ;  the  murderer  became  a  prey
to  snakes,  and  in  another  life  was  infused  into  the  tiger.     The  pro-
gress of  the  soul  in  its  passage  to  perfection  was  not,  however,  con-
fined to  the  human  or  brute  species,  but  was  subject  to  imprisonment
in  the  substance  of  trees,  vegetables,  and  inanimate  matter.     Rocks
and  mountains,  caves  and  solitary  places,  were  made  the  occasional
residence  of  the  human  soul ;  and  sometimes  it  was  chained  for  ages
at  the  bottom  of  the  sea.    Thus  were  the  souls  of  the  wicked  purified
from  their  pollutions,  and  fitted  for  an  ultimate  translation  to  the
heavenly  abodes.

29  The  Abbe  Barruel,   in  his  tirade  against  Freemasonry,    has
brought  forward  a  series  of  improbabilities,  which  have  been  imposed
upon  him  for  truth.     He  deduces  our  origin  from  the  impostor
Manes,  the  founder  of  the  Basilidean  sect  of  Christians,  and  cites  the
Master  Mason's  order  as  a  proof  of  the  correctness  of  his  allegations.
"  In  the  degree  of  Master,"  says  he,  "  everything  denotes  mourning
and  sorrow.     The  Lodge  is  hung  in  black,  in  the  middle  is  a  sarco-
phagus, resting  on  five  stops,  covered  with  a  pall.     Around  it  the
adepts,  in  profound  silence;,  mourn  the  death  of  a  man  whose  ashes

VOL.  II.  N


178  HISTORICAL    LANDMARKS

on  a  reference  to  the  general  construction  of  the  Order,
it  appears  to  me  the  most  rational  method  of  preserving
its  consistency.30  The  types  and  allegories  of  Freema-

are  supposed  to  lie  in  this  tomb.  This  man  is  at  first  said  to  be
Adoniram,  then  Molay,  whose  death  is  to  be  avenged  by  that  of  all
tyrants.  The  allegory  is  rather  inauspicious  to  kings ;  but  it  is  of
too  old  a  date  not  to  be  anterior  to  the  Grand  Master  of  the  Temple.
The  whole  of  this  ceremonial  is  to  be  found  in  the  ancient  mysteries
of  the  disciples  of  Manes.  This  was  the  ceremony  which  they  called
Bema.  They  also  assembled  round  a  sarcophagus,  resting  on  five
steps,  decorated  in  the  like  manner,  and  rendered  great  honours  to
him  whose  ashes  it  was  supposed  to  contain.  But  they  were  all
addressed  to  Manes.  It  was  his  death  that  they  celebrated ;  and
they  kept  this  feast  precisely  at  the  period  when  the  Christians  cele-
brated the  death  and  resurrection  of  Christ.-  In  the  Masonic  games
there  are  two  words  which  comprehend  the  secret  meaning  of  this
mystery ;  the  literal  signification  of  these  words  is,  the  flesh  parts
from  the  bone.  This  very  explication  remains  a  mystery,  which  only
disappears  when  we  reflect  on  the  execution  of  Manes.  This  here-
siarch  had  promised  by  his  prayers  to  cure  the  child  of  the  King  of
Persia.  The  child  died,  and  Manes  fled ;  but  falling  again  into  the
hands  of  the  king,  he  was  flayed  alive  with  the  points  of  reeds.  Such
is  a  clear  explanation  of — the  flesh  leaves  the  bones — he  was  flayed
alive."  (Hist.  Jac.  vol.  ii.  p.  403.)

30  Bro.  Goodacre,  of  the  Withain  Lodge,  Lincoln,  suggests  that
the  various  penalties  which  have  been  introduced  into  Freemasonry,
appear  to  have  a  reference  to  a  particular  kind  of  covenant  which  was
common  amongst  the  Hebrews,  but  which,  he  adds,  "  I  can  find  only
twice  particularly  described.  Godwyn  says — '  making  a  covenant
was  a  solemn  binding  of  each  other  to  the  performance  of  a  mutual
promise,  by  outward  ceremonies  of  cutting  a  beast  in  twain,  and
passing  between  the  parts  thereof  (Jer.  xxxiv.  18)  ;  as  if  they  would
say — thus  let  it  be  done  to  him,  and  thus  let  his  body  be  cut  in  two,
who  shall  break  this  covenant.  This  reference  to  Jeremiah,  where
the  prophet  denounced  the  curse  of  the  Lord  upon  the  princes  and
rulers  who  had  broken  the  covenant  which  they  had  made  with  King
Zedekiah,  may  explain  the  self-imposed  penalty  of  J  -"^'l  .  But  we


OF    FREEMASONRY.  179

sonry  are  illustrative  of  the  sacred  truths  of  religion ;
but  they  embrace  those  points  of  doctrine  only  which
are  common  to  all  mankind;  and  it  is  to  exemplify
these  doctrines,  and  to  make  them  conducive  to  the
practice  of  morality,  that  the  details  of  our  consecutive
degrees  have  been  arranged.  First,  the  candidate  is
taught  how,  under  the  theocracy  of  the  patriarchal  dis-
pensation, the  worship  of  God  consisted  in  a  few  simple
rites  of  devotion,31  which  were  accepted  according  to
the  sincerity  of  the  devotee  ; 32  and  hence  religion  was

must  look  a  little  closer  into  the  manner  of  making  a  covenant,  in
order  to  discover  the  connexion  of  the  different  penalties,  as  refer-
ences to  one  entire  ceremony.  After  an  animal  had  been  selected,
his  throat  was  cut  across  with  one  single  blow,  so  as  to  divide  the
windpipe,  arteries,  and  veins,  without  touching  any  bone.  The  next
ceremony  was  to  tear  the  breast  open  and  pluck  out  the  heart,  and
if  there  were  the  least  imperfection,  the  body  would  be  considered
unclean.  The  animal  was  then  divided  into  two  parts,  and  placed
north  and  south,  that  the  parties  to  the  covenant  might  pass  between
them  from  east  to  west ;  and  the  carcase  was  then  left  as  a  prey  to
voracious  animals.  The  other  example  of  such  a  covenant  is  in
Genesis  xv.,  where  Abraham  slew  three  animals,  and  dividing  their
carcases  in  the  midst,  he  saw  in  a  vision  the  ratification  of  the  cove-
nant, by  the  shekinah  passing  between  the  pieces  like  a  lamp  of  fire.
The  dividing  of  the  beast  in  twain  was  peculiar  to  a  covenant,  but
the  mode  of  killing  was  common  to  all  sacrifices."

31  Barruel,  who  says  he  was  initiated  without  an  O.  B.  (?),  very
unfairly  represents  this  degree.     He  says — "  The  grand  object  of  the
first  degree  is,  at  one  time  the  raising  of  temples  to  virtue,  and  the
excavating  of  dungeons  for  vice ;  at  another,  to  bring  the  adepts  to
light,  and  to  deliver  them  from  the  darkness  with  which  the  profane
are  encompassed ;  and  by  the  profane  are  understood  the  remainder
of  the  universe."  (Hist.  Jac.  vol.  ii.  p.  284.)

32  "  The  state  of  darkness,"  said  an  amiable  Masonic  writer  of  the
last  century,  "  or  obscurity  of  the  first  degree,  strongly  figures  out

N  2


180


HISTORICAL    LANDMARKS


merely  the  practice  of  morality,  based  on  the  love  of
God,  and  his  promise  of  reconciliation  to  his  crea-
tures.33 Secondly,  the  candidate  is  passed  on  to  a  view
of  the  Mosaic  dispensation,  shadowing  forth  a  church
triumphant  when  the  fulness  of  time  should  come.34
And  when  the  theocracy  ceased,  and  a  regal  govern-
ment began,  the  candidate  was  shown,  in  the  details
respecting  the  erection  of  the  temple,  to  the  middle
chamber.  Here,  as  a  Fellowcraft,  he  was  entitled  to
penetrate,  but  no  farther — a  type  of  a  more  glorious
revelation  of  the  divine  shekinah  was  represented  in
the  two  famous  pillars,  and  their  spherical  crowns,
which  were  placed  at  the  entrance  of  the  porch.
Thirdly,  he  is  raised  to  a  higher  and  more  compre-

the  darkness  of  chaos  before  man's  creation ;  or  the  night  into  which
his  glorious  faculties  were  plunged  by  the  fall  consequent  upon  his
original  transgression."  (Address  of  the  Rev.  J.  "Watson,  St.  John's
Lodge,  Lancaster,  1794.)

33  It  will  be  found,  in  the  progress  of  our  inquiries,  that  this  great
promise  runs  like  a  vein  through  the  whole  system  of  Freemasonry.
It  is  true,  "  Masonry  primarily  inculcates  morals  and  the  religion  of
nature,  but  it  has  caught  an  additional  spark  from  the  light  of  reve-
lation and  the  sun  of  righteousness.    And  though  Masonry  continues
to  burn  with  subordinate  lustre,  it  lights  the  human  traveller  the
same  road  ;  it  breathes  a  concordant  spirit  of  universal  benevolence
and  brotherly  love ;  adds  one  thread  more  to  the  silken  cord  of  evan-
gelical charity,  which  binds  man  to  man,  and  crowns  the  cardinal
virtues  with  Christian  graces."   (Watson,  ut  supra.)

34  Barruel  proceeds  in  his  misrepresentations. — "  In  the  second
degree,"  he  continues,  "  the  candidate  learns  that  it  is  to  be  traced
to  Adam  himself,  and  has  been  handed  down  by  Noah,  Nimrod,
Solomon,  Hugo  de  Paganis,  the  founder  of  the  Knights  Templars,
and  Jaques  de  Molay,  their  last  Grand  Master,  who  each  in  their
turn  had  been  the  favourite  of  Jehovah,  and  are  styled  Masonic
sages."   (Barruel,  ut  supra,  p.  297.)


OF    FREEMASONRY.  181

licnsive  view  of  the  beauties  of  the  system,35  by  a  scenic
display  of  the  resurrection  of  the  dead ;  and  is  intro-
duced into  the  sanctum  sanctorum,  where  he  beholds
the  ark  and  propitiatory,  overshadowed  by  the  true
shekinah,  which  in  a  former  degree  was  only  indicated
by  a  symbol,  where

On  cherubim  and  seraphim
1M1  royally  he  rides.36

This  is  a  type  of  the  Christian  dispensation  which
was  established  by  that  sublime  Being,  of  whom  the
Jewish  shekinah  was  the  glory,  or  radiant  appearance ;
and  therefore  it  was  with  manifest  propriety  that  the
resurrection  was  shadowed  forth  in  this  substituted
degree,  because  in  no  preceding  religious  system  was

35  Here  comes  the  climax  of  the  Abbe's  absurd  perversion  of  the
ceremonies  of  Freemasonry.    If  he  had  really  been  initiated,  his  error
must  have  been  wilful,  and  consequently  unpardonable. — "  In  the
third  degree,"  he  adds,   "it  is  revealed  to  the  candidate  that  the
celebrated  word  lost  by  the  death  of  H-^^was  this  name  of  U

It  was  found,  he  is  told,  by  the  Knights  Templars  at  the  time  when
the  Christians  were  building  a  church  at  Jerusalem.  In  digging  the
foundations  in  that  part  on  which  the  holy  of  holies  of  Solomon's
temple  formerly  stood,  they  discovered  three  stones,  which  had
formerly  been  parts  of  the  foundation.  The  form  and  junction  of
these  three  stones  drew  the  attention  of  the  Templars,  and  their
astonishment  was  extreme  when  they  beheld  the  name  engraven  on
the  last.  This  was  the  famous  word  lost  by  the  death  of  Adoniram."

36  Such  are  my  opinions  on  the  origin  and  application  of  the  legend
which  forms  the  mechanism  of  the  third  degree  of  Masonry;  but
I  am  bound  in  candour  to  add,  that  there  are  reasonable  objections
to  the  hypothesis.     Our  intelligent  Brother,   Sir  W.  Drummond,
deems  it  an  astronomical  allegory;  and  his  opinion  has  been  em-
braced by  a  portion  of  the  fraternity,  for  whose  judgment  I  entertain
a  profound  respect,  although  I  find  myself  obliged  to  differ  from
them.


182


HISTORICAL    LANDMARKS


that  doctrine  fully  revealed  and  exemplified.37  Then
the  Master  Mason,38  completely  instructed  in  those
manifestations  which  the  Divinity  vouchsafed  to  his
creatures  in  succeeding  ages  of  the  world,  receives  the
glorious  pentalpha,  "  professes  himself  in  a  short  dis-
tich, which,  from  the  rules  of  our  Order,  I  am  for-
bidden to  commit  to  writing,  but  the  literal  meaning
of  it  is,  ardently  do  I  wish  for  life,  meaning  the  ever-
lasting life  of  redemption  and  regeneration ;  an  avowal

37  The  doctrine,  however,  was  acknowledged  in  subsequent  ages,
and  rewards  and  punishments  were  exemplified  in  the  spurious  Free-
masonry.    It  is  true,  the  doctrine  was  rather  fanciful,  but  the  de-
scription of  the  soul  on  its  departure  from  the  body  after  death  bore
some  resemblance  to  the  truth.    Thus  we  find  in  the  Bhagvat  Geeta
(p.  37),  this  remarkable  description : — "  The  soul  is  incorruptible,
eternal,  inexhaustible,  and  without  birth  ;  the  weapon  divideth  it  not,
the  fire  burneth  it  not,  the  water  corrupteth  it  not,  the  wind  drirtli
it  not  away,  for  it  is  indivisible,  inconsumable,  and  without  dec-
The  idea  of  future  rev/ards  and  punishments  involve  the  principle  of
man's  responsibility.     Plato  in  his  Gorgias  says — "  There  was  this
law  concerning  mortals  in  the  time  of  Saturn,  and  it  is  still  usually
enforced  by  the  gods,  that  he  who  had  lived  a  just  and  pious  lift;
should,  at  his  death,  be  translated  to  those  blessed  islands  which  are
the  seat  of  eternal  happiness.     But,  on  the  contrary,  he  A\ho  hud
lived  wickedly  here  should  be  thrust  into  Tartarus,  a  place  of  eternal
punishment."     How  nearly  does  this  resemble  the  doctrine  of  our
blessed  Saviour,  where  he  says — "  Those  that  have  done  good  shall  go
into  life  eternal,  and  those  that  have  done  evil  into  everlasting  fire."

38  The  adopted  mother  of  the  arch  impostor  Manes  was  a  widow,
and  on  this  fact  Barruel  has  engrafted  his  proofs  of  the  reference  of
our  Master  Mason's  degree.     Thus  he  says — "  All  history  asserts
that  Manes  was  adopted  by  the  widow  to  whom  Budda,  Scythian's
disciple,  fled  for  refuge ;  and  that  the  heresiarch  inherited  all  the
riches  he  had  left   her.     Help  from  the  children  of  the  iciaow.
naturally  alludes  to  the   children   of  Manes."     (Hist.  Jar.  vol.  ii.
p.  408.)


OF    FREEMASONRY.  183

which  carries  with  it  the  most  religious  import,  and
must  proceed  from  a  pure  faith."39  He  is  then  exalted
to  a  more  sublime  view  of  that  holy  Being  ;  and  taught
the  doctrine  of  the  fall  of  man,  and  that  salutary  Pro-
mise which  is  the  foundation  and  cope-stone  of  the
system,  and  points  to  the  Grand  Lodge  above,  where
we  hope  to  be  for  ever  happy  with  him  whose  only  son
died  for  us  on  the  cross,40  and  rose  again,  that  we
might  be  justified  by  faith  in  his  most  precious  blood.41
This  I  conceive  to  be  the  true  design  and  end  of
Freemasonry;  and  it  is  with  this  view,  that,  as  a
Christian  divine,  I  have  considered  it  worthy  of  ex-
tended study  and  exemplification,42  as  an  auxiliary  to

39  Hutch.  Spirit  of  Masonry,  p.  159,  new  edition.

40  We  have  already  observed  that  the  emblem  of  the  cross  was
a  sprig  of  cassia.    Now  in  the  degree  of  Venerable  Grand  Master  of
all  symbolic  Lodges,  Sovereign  Princes  of  Masonry,  Master  ad  vitam,
being  the  twentieth  of  the  Ancien  et  accepte,  it  is  said  that  the  sprig
of  cassia  is  used  in  symbolic  Lodges,  because  the  Sublime  Grand
Elected,  descendants  of  the  ancient  patriarchs,  did  not  think  proper
to  give  the  real  name  or  truth  of  Masonry,  therefore  they  agreed  to
say  that  it  was  a  sprig  of  cassia,  because  of  its  aromatic  properties.

41  The  doctrines  of  the  spurious  Freemasonry,  in  some  countries,
taught  that  this  perfect  felicity  might  be  attained  by  repeated  trans-
migrations.    This  life  was  considered  but  the  infancy  of  our  being,
in  which  souls  were  prepared  for  a  successive  unfolding  of  intelligence
and  happiness.     When  they  had  lived  a  certain  time  upon  the  earth,
men  changed  their  form  and  flew  away  to  the  stars,  where,  with  new
faculties  and  new  light,  they  discovered  new  truths,  and  enjoyed  new
pleasures.     From  thence  they  were  raised  to  another  world,  thence
to  a  third,  and  so  they  travelled  through  the  immensity  of  space  by
endless  metamorphoses.     On  the  same  principle,  bad  men  fell  by
degrees ;  first,  from  the  fixed  stars  into  the  region  of  the  planets,
from  the  planets  to  the  earth,  and  from  the  earth  to  the  infernal
regions.  (Plut.  de  Tsid.  et  Osir.  p.  i.  c.  1.)

42  Our  Rev.  Bro.  Buckeridge,  late  P.G.  Chap,  for  Staffordshire,  in  his


184


HISTORICAL    LANDMARKS


religion,  and  a  pleasing  and  profitable  method  of  im-
proving the  mind  and  purifying  the  morals.43  The
scientific  philosophy  of  Freemasonry  forms  a  rational
employment  of  the  time  in  acquiring  the  wisdom  and
experience  resulting  from  human  knowledge;44  but  it
is  the  theocratic  philosophy  of  the  Order  which  must
elevate  the  industrious  Mason  above  the  things  of  this
life,  and  prepare  him  for  another  and  a  better ;  which
must  teach  him  to  place  his  affections  on  things  above,
and  instruct  him  so  to  pass  through  things  temporal^
as  finally  not  to  lose  the  things  that  are  eternal.

sermon  before  the  P.  G.  Lodge,  justly  observe^  that  "  it  is  inseparably
entwined  with  the  purest  doctrines  of  Christianity ;  and  that  it  owed  its
birth  to  that  genuine  spirit  of  religion  which  pervades  every  human
heart."

43  Barruel  has  the  candour  to  confess,  that  "  the  Master  instructs
the  Brethren  that  the  true  equality  of  the  craft  does  not  authorise
them,  when  out  of  the  Lodge,  to  derogate  from  that  respect  and
deference  due  to  the  rank  which  any  person  bears  in  the  world,  or
their  different  political  degrees  and  titles.    He  has  also  many  excellent
lectures  to  teach  the  craft,  fidelity  and  submission  to  the  laws,  arid
all  the  duties  of  a  loyal  subject."  (Hist.  Jac.  vol.  ii.  p.  281.)

44  At  a  meeting  of  the  Grand  Lodge  of  the  State  of  New  York,
June  4,  1842,  the  following  resolution  on  the  subject  of  science  was
unanimously  agreed  to,  and  printed  in  the  proceedings.     "  In  relation
to  the  recommendation  of  the  D.  G.  M.,  desiring  some  action  of  tho
Grand  Lodge,  with  reference  to  lectures  to  be  delivered  in  the  several
Lodge-rooms,  not  only  on  the  principles  of  Masonry  but  on  the  arts
and  sciences,  embracing  any  or  all  such  subjects  as  shall  improve  the
moral  and  intellectual  powers,  and  qualify  the  Brethren  for  greater
usefulness  in  the  several  spheres  in  which  they  move,  rendering  them,
in  an  eminent  sense,  the  lights  of  Masonry — that  this  Grand  Lodge
recommend  to  the  subordinate  Lodges  to  introduce  lectures  on  such
subjects  of  interest  and  practical  utility  as  they  shall  judge  most
beneficial  to  themselves,  and  honourable  to  the  institution."


OF    FREEMASONRY.  185


LECTURE   XXVIII.

THE  NATURE  AND  DESIGN  OF  FREEMASONRY  BEFORE  THE  FLOOD.

"  Masonry  is,  and  should  be,  in  all  its  precepts  and  forms,  invio-
lable, and  had  it  been  subject  to  changes  and  alterations  in  days  past,
in  what  state  would  it  now  have  reached  us  ?  The  traditions  which
have  been  handed  down  and  communicated  to  us  are  a  sacred  deposit,
which  we  are  bound  by  the  most  solemn  ties  to  transmit  unaltered  to
our  successors." — EXAMEN  D'UN  PROJET.

"  Enoch,  as  a  monument  of  his  superior  abilities  and  love  to  pos-
terity, foreseeing  the  universal  desolation  which  would  soon  happen
by  water  or  fire,  and  deprive  mankind  of  those  arts  and  sciences
already  improved,  raised  two  large  pillars,  one  of  brick,  the  other  of
stone,  and  inscribed  thereon  an  abridgment  of  the  arts  and  sciences,
that  if  the  pillar  of  brick  happened  to  be  overthrown  by  the  flood,
the  other  of  stone  might  remain ;  which  Josephus  tells  us  was  to  be
seen  in  his  time,  in  the  land  of  Siriad,  by  the  name  of  Seth's  or
Enoch's  pillar." — ANDERSON.

FREEMASONRY  before  the  flood.  It  will  be  demanded
on  what  documents  are  the  evidences  of  this  fact  to  be
based?1  In  order  to  show  that  the  inhabitants  of  the

1  "  The  antiquity  of  Freemasonry  must  be  very  great,  as  the  plates
in  Lord  Kingsborough's  large  work  on  the  Antiquities  of  Mexico  and
Peru,  and  Baron  Humboldt's  work,  show  that  Masonry  was  practised
by  the  Tsabeans  of  that  part  of  the  world.  The  Polynesian  islands
possess  Masonic  remains.  Through  the  whole  of  Turkey,  Arabia,
Egypt,  Tartary,  China,  and  Japan,  Masonic  remains  are  found.
Indeed,  travel  where  you  may,  Masonry  has  been  before  you."
(F.  a  B,  1842.  p.  29).


186


HISTORICAL    LANDMARKS


antediluvian  world  were  acquainted  with  the  science
which  includes  all  others,  and  teaches  love  to  God,
united  with  the  duties  which  we  owe  to  our  neighbour
and  ourselves,  we  may  safely  assume  that  whatever  had
for  its  object  and  end  an  inducement  to  the  practice  of
that  morality  which  is  founded  on  the  love  of  God,
may  be  identified  with  primitive  Freemasonry.  The
landmarks  referring  to  antediluvian  times,  introduce'
to  our  notice  the  holy  mountain  Moriah,  which  is  con-
nected with  every  legitimate  branch  of  the  science.
The  history  of  Moriah2  is,  in  fact,  a  detailed  account
of  the  Order  throughout  many  consecutive  ages ;  and
includes  the  greater  portion  of  the  traditions  and
legendary  lore  which  the  institution  contains.3

2  The  Hindoos  have  a  tradition  of  a  sacred  mountain,  connected
with  their  religion,  which  may  form  a  parallel  with  this  eminence
amongst  the  Jewish  and  Christian  Masons.     "  There  is  a  fair  and
stately  mountain,"  says  the  Mahabbarat  (Geeta,  p.  1 J-6),  "  whose
name  is  Meru,  a  most  exalted  mass  of  glory,  reflecting  the  sunny
rays  from  the  splendid  surface  of  its  gilded  horns.     It  is  clothed  in
gold,  and  is  the  respected  haunt  of  Devas  and  Gandhaves.     It  is
beyond  conception  beautiful ;  is  not  to  be  ascended  by  sinful  mortals,
and  is  guarded  by  serpents.     Many  celestial  medicinal  plants  adorn
its  sides,  and  it  stands  piercing  the  heavens  with  its  aspiring  summit.
It  is  adorned  with  trees  and  pleasant  streams,  and  resounds  with  the
delightful  songs  of  various  birds."

3  In  recounting  the  presumed  occurrences  which  are  said  to  have
taken  place  on  this  mountain  before  the  flood,  I  must  be  permitted
to  observe,  that  should  the  statements  fail  to  be  borne  out  by  the
testimony  of  holy  writ,  they  must  not  be  imputed  either  to  my  inven-
tion or  credulity ;  because,  while  tracing  Freemasonry  through  all  its
ramifications,  I  am  bound  to  record  its  traditions  faithfully,  leaving
their  credibility  to  be  determined  by  the  reason  and  judgment  of  my
readers.


OF    FREEMASONRY.  187

Moriah  is  a  mountain  celebrated  in  the  Jewish  scrip-
tures, as  having  been  particularly  hallowed  by  the
visible  presence  of  the  Deity  on  several  remarkable
occasions.4  According  to  the  Talmudists,  Adam  was
created  on  this  mountain,  and  formed  from  its  earth ;
and  here  Cain  and  Abel  offered  their  sacrifices  ;  while
the  latter,  like  Isaac  in  subsequent  times,  was  immo-
lated there  as  a  victim  ;5  and  the  Deity  appeared  to
the  murderer,  whom  he  condemned  to  banishment,

4  "  Moriah  is  the  name  of  a  mountain  on  which  the  temple  of
Jerusalem  was  afterwards  built.  The  Samaritan  version  reads  Moreh,
and  interprets  it  by  mount  Gerizim,  on  which  their  temple  was  built.
The  Mahometans  contend  that  the  site  of  the  transaction  is  the  spot
on  which  their  famous  temple  at  Mecca  was  afterwards  built.     But
in  this,  as  well  as  in  other  circumstances,  they  substitute  Tshmael  for
Isaac.     It  seems  singular  that  the  Jews,  the  Samaritans,  and  the
Mahometans  should  all  wish  to  fix  the  above  events  on  the  site  of
their  respective  temples."  (Pict.  Bibl  vol.  i.  p.  57.)

5  The  spurious  Freemasonry  of  the  American  Indians  recorded
a  tradition  of  this  event.    Hennepin,  in  his  "  Voyage  into  a  country
larger  than  Europe,"  thus  states  the  fact : — "  A  woman  descended
from  heaven,  and  hovered  sometime  in  the  air,  seeking  where  to  rest
her  foot.    The  tortoise  offered  her  his  back,  which  she  accepted,  and
chose  that  place  for  her  residence.     Afterwards  the  filth  of  the  sea
gathered  itself  about  the  tortoise,  and  insensibly  expanded  itself  to
a  great  extent  of  ground.    As  this  woman  did  not  delight  in  solitude,
a  spirit  descended  from  above ;  and  she  was  delivered  of  two  sons,
who  came  out  of  her  side.     When  the  children  were  grown  up  they
exercised  themselves  in  hunting ;  and  as  one  of  them  was  more  suc-
cessful than  the  other,  jealousy  soon  occasioned  discord,  and  they
lived  together  in  an  irreconcilable  hatred.    The  unskilful  hunter,  who
was  of  a  very  savage  temper,  treated  his  brother  so  ill,  that  he  was
obliged  to  leave  the  earth,  and  was  taken  up  into  heaven.     After  he
had  thus   withdrawn   himself,    the  spirit  again  descended,   and   a
daughter  was  born,  who  is  esteemed  the  great  parent  of  the  North
Americans."


188


HISTORICAL    LANDMARKS


and  placed  upon  his  forehead  the  indelible  mark  ol
his  displeasure.  And  as  these  divine  appearances  re-
ferred to  a  dispensation  of  which  the  Mosaic  economy
was  a  type,  the  mountain  has  formed  a  prominent
object  of  illustration  in  both  Jewish  and  Christian
Masonry ;  and  on  this  celebrated  spot  the  sacred  Lodge
was  opened.6  The  allusions  to  certain  events  which
occurred  on  this  mountain,  sanctify  the  floor  of  our
Lodges,  and  form  a  topic  of  conversation  of  no  common
interest  in  all  the  degrees  of  Masonry.7

Many  years  before  the  flood,  we  find  the  pious  race
of  Seth  living  about  Moriah  in  happiness  and  peace/'1

6  It  is  to  be  observed,  that  the  three  original  Lodges  of  Masonry
arc  all  connected  either  with  this  mountain,  or  Horeb,  which  is  also
denominated  "  the  mount  of  God."

7  To  the  Jews  God  was  ever  present  on  mount  Moriah ;  to  Chris-
tians he  is  present  everywhere;  and  we  may  enjoy  the  sublime  idea,
that  while  the  high  priest  alone  was  permitted  to  approach  this  great
and  holy  Being,  and  that  only  once  a-year,  wre  are  favoured  with
a  communion  with  him  in  our  daily  prayers  and  hourly  aspirations.

8  Sir  John  Mandeville  (Voiage  and  Travaile,  p.  13),  gives  the  fol-
lowing legend  of  Seth  and  Adam,  united  with  the  promise  of  redemp-
tion by  the  cross  of  Christ : — "  The  Cristene  men,  that  dwelen  beyond
the  see,  in  Grece,  seyn  that  the  tree  of  the  crosse,  that  we  callen
cypresse,  was  of  that  tree  that  Adam  ete  the  appulle  of;  and  that
finde  thei  written.     And  thei  seyn  also,  that  here  Scripture  seyth,
that  Adam  was  seek,  and  seyd  to  his  sone  Sethe,  that  he  scholde  go
to  the  aungelle  that  kept  Paradys,  that  he  wolde  senden  hym  oyle  of
mercy,  for  to  anoynte  his  membres  with,  that  he  might  haue  hele.
And  Sethe  wente.     But  the  aungelle  wolde  not  late  him  come  in ;
but  seyd  to  him,  that  he  myghte  not  have  the  oyle  of  mercy.     But
he  toke  him  thre  grenes  of  the  same  tree  that  his  fadre  eet  the  appulle
oife,  and  bad  him,  als  sone  as  his  fadre  was  ded,  that  he  scholde
putte  theise  three  groynes  undre  his  tonge,  and  grave  him  so ;  and
he  dide.     And  of  theise  three  greynes  sprong  a  tree,  as  the  aungelle


OF    FREEMASONRY.  189

and  ascending  periodically  to  sing  hymns  to  the  Deity
on  one  of  its  most  elevated  peaks.9  The  first  notice
we  have  of  it  in  the  Bible/0  is  in  the  record  of  a  trans-
action where  Enoch  makes  a  remarkable  figure.11  In
the  history  of  this  eminently  pious  Brother,  we  find
events  which  have  excited  the  astonishment  of  all
mankind  ;  and  traditions  of  his  superior  qualifications
exist  in  most  of  the  eastern  nations.  He  is  the  reputed
inventor  of  alphabetical  characters;12  and  is  said  to

seyde  that  it  scholde,  and  bere  a  fruyt,  throghe  the  whiche  fruyt
Adam  scholde  be  saved.  And  whan  Sethe  came  agen,  he  fonde  his
fadre  nere  ded.  And  whan  he  was  ded,  he  did  with  the  greynes  as
the  aungelle  bad  him ;  of  the  whiche  sprongen  three  trees,  of  the
whiche  the  crosse  was  made,  that  bare  gode  fruyt  and  blessed,  ouve
Lorde  Jesu  Crist ;  throghe  whom  Adam  and  all  that  comen  of  him
scholde  be  saved,  and  delyvered  from  drede  of  dethe  withouten  ende,
but  it  be  there  own  defaute."

9  It  has  been  already  shown  (Lect.  xii.)  that  lofty  hills  and  moun-
tains were  considered  holy  in  all  ages  of  the  world,  amongst  idolaters
as  well  as  the  true  worshippers  of  God ;  and  those  with  three  peaks,
like  Mount  Moriah,  including  Sion  and  Calvary,  were  supposed  to
be  invested  with  a  superior  degree  of  sanctity ;  and  hence  Solomon,
when  seduced  by  his  foreign  vfives  to  offer  incense  to  false  gods,  con-
secrated these  eminences  to  the  triad  of  surrounding  nations,  Milcom,
Chemosh,  Ashtaroth.

10  Some  writers  have  thought  that  the  garden  of  Eden  was  in  the
land  afterwards  called  Palestine, 'where  Mount  Moriah  was  locally
situated.

11  The  legend  of  Enoch  may  be  found  in  Webb's  Masonic  Monitor,
published  under  the  sanction  of  the  Grand  Lodge  of  America ;  and
therefore  I  offer  no  apology  for  introducing  it  here.

12  Thus  in  Jonathan's  Targum  on  Genesis,  we  find  Enoch  termed
"  the  Great  Scribe."     Eupolemus  says  (Grec.  p.  8)  that  Enoch  was
instructed  in  all  things  by  angels — letters,  of  course,  included.    Bar
Hebrceus  affirms  that  he  was  the  first  who   invented   books   and
different  sorts  of  writing.     The  Greek  Christians,  and  all  Arabian


190


HISTORICAL    LANDMARKS


have  had  a  perfect  knowledge  of  the  seven  liberal
sciences.  Indeed,  many  excellencies  have  been  attri-
buted to  Enoch  which  appear  extraordinary  at  so  early
a  period  ;  and  can  be  accounted  for  on  no  other  prin-
ciple than  the  inspiration  of  the  Most  High.13  We  are
favoured  by  St.  Jude  with  a  record  of  his  prophetical
endowments ;  and  of  his  knowledge  of  a  future
judgment,  to  be  followed  by  an  eternal  state  of  happi-
ness or  misery.  He  was  the  seventh  in  descent  from
Adam,  and  lived  a  pious  life,  apart  from  those,  even  of
his  own  race,  who  wavered  in  their  allegiance  to  their
Maker.14

writers,  according  to  Abulfaragius,  supposed  Enoch  to  be  the  first
Egyptian  Hermes ;  and  Beidavi,  a  learned  Arabian  commentator  on
the  Koran,  cited  by  Hottinger,  says  that  he  was  the  first  calarno-
grapher,  and  profoundly  versed  in  astronomy  and  arithmetic.  Aben
Washih  introduces  the  alphabet  of  Enoch,  and  asserts  that  it  was
communicated  by  the  angel  Gabriel ;  while  St.  Augustine  acknow-
ledged that  Enoch  wrote  a  book  of  prophecy ;  and  Tertullian  con-
tended that  it  ought  to  be  received  into  the  sacred  canon.

13  Du  Bartas  says,  speaking  of  this  holy  patriarch  : —

"  Lo,  how  he  labours  to  endure  the  Light
Which  in  th'  arch  essence  shineth  glorious  bright.
How  rapt  from  sense  and  free  from  fleshly  lets,
Sometimes  he  climbs  the  sacred  cabinets
Of  the  divine  ideas  everlasting,
Having  for  wings  faith,  fervent  prayer,  and  fasting
How  at  some  times  tho'  clad  in  earthly  clod,
He  sacred  sees,  feels,  all  enjoys,  in  God.

14  Bro.   Goodwin,  of  Taunton,  in  his  Essay  on  the  connection
between  speculative  and  operative  Masonry,  says  "  that  it  not  only
seems  probable  that  Enoch  introduced  the  speculative  principles  into
the  Masonic  creed,  and  that  he  originated  its  exclusive  character ;
but  it  also  appears  evident  that  the  object  which  demanded  the
utmost  exertion  of  our  early  Brethren  was  that  of  eliciting  truth  and


01?    FREEMASONRY.  191

Our  traditions  state  that,  in  the  solitude  which  he
had  chosen  on  Mount  Moriah,  that  he  might  be  more
at  liberty  to  indulge  in  holy  communings  and  pious
meditations,  he  was  favoured  with  a  celestial  vision  of
the  Logos,  or  Shekinah,  or  Word  of  God.15  In  this
vision,  man's  apostacy  and  punishment  were  revealed
to  him  in  a  scenic  display  of  the  events  which  should
precede  the  universal  destruction  by  means  of  water
and  fire.16  A  change  came  over  the  spirit  of  his

knowledge,  and  propagating  their  beauties  and  advantages,  where
ignorance  and  idolatry  held  their  prejudiced  sway,  and  in  preparing
the  rough  and  unpolished  mind  for  the  reception  of  those  seeds  of
genuine  truth  and  science,  which  would,  in  the  decline  of  a  life  well
spent  in  acts  of  pure  religion  and  piety,  prepare  its  possessor  for
admission  into  that  temple,  not  made  with  hands,  eternal  in  the
heavens ;  and  in  enjoining  the  strict  application  and  observance  of
its  forms,  its  symbols,  and  emblems,  to  the  respective  duties  of
morality,  virtue,  and  truth."  (F.  Q.  K.  1836,  p.  285.)

15  This  communication  to  Enoch,  although  not  recorded  in  our
scriptures,  has  been  thought  by  many  learned  men  to  be  exceedingly
probable.     Archbishop  Tenison  says,  (Idol.  p.  323),  "I  doubt  not
but  God  vouchsafed  to  men  many  other  appearances  of  his  glorious
Shekinah,  besides  those  granted  to  Adam  and  Abel,  before  he  ex-
pressed his  high  resentment  of  the  immorality  of  the  world  in  the
flood  of  Noah,"

16  There  can  be  no  doubt  but  in  the  time  of  Enoch,  the  Cainites,
and  part  of  the  descendants  of  Seth,  had  become  incorrigibly  wicked.
According  to  Borlase,  "  magic,  witchcraft,  or  the  science  of  corres-
ponding with  evil  spirits,  is  as  ancient  as  the  antediluvian  world ;
and,  indeed,  amidst  the  numerous  corruptions  of  those  early  ages,  it
is  not  improbable,  that  the  rapacious,  gloomy,  anxious,  and  vindictive,
should  embrace  this  horrid  commerce  with  demons  ;  an  intercourse
which  (whether  imaginary  or  real)  deluded  them  with  the  prospect
of  superior  knowledge — of  possessing  what  they  lusted  after — of
cursing  their  enemies,  and  executing  all  their  envy,  malice,   and
revenge,  by  incantations  not  to  be  resisted  by  human  talents  ;  this


192


HISTORICAL    LANDMARKS


dream.  He  fancied  himself  plunged  into  the  bowels
of  the  earth.  Descending  perpendicularly  through  a
series  of  arched  caverns  and  hollow  vaults,  surmounted
by  apertures  which  were  secured  under  coverings  of
stone,  to  the  mystical  number'  nine,17  he  saw  shining
amidst  the  darkness  in  brilliant  coruscations  of  light,
certain  mystical  characters,  which  are  denoted  in
a  Masonic  Lodge  by  an  equilateral  triangle,  a
circle,18  and  a  cube,  inscribed  on  a  triangular  plate  of
gold,  enchased  with  precious  stones,  and  lying  on  a
pedestal  of  white  marble.1"  While  contemplating  the
sacred  inscription  with  reverence,  he  was  overpowered
by  the  intensity  of  his  feelings,  and  in  the  midst  of  his
anxiety  he  awoke.

was  a  total  desertion  from  the  service  of  God,  and  listing  into  that
of  the  devil ;  and  proves  that  when  mankind  had  thrown  aside  the
unity  of  the  Godhead,  they  could  not  only  condescend  to  worship
the  meanest  productions  of  nature,  but  the  most  detestable  and
abandoned  of  all  beings."

17  Nine  being  the  square  of  three,  is  a  perfect  ternary,  beyond
which  there  is  no  number.     It  is  observed  by  arithmeticians,  says
Hume,  (Dial.  Nat.  Eel.  p.  167),   "that  the  products  of  9  compose
always  either  9  or  some  lesser  products  of  9,  if  yon  add  together  all
the  characters  of  which  any  of  the  former  products  is  composed.
Thus  of  18,  27,  36,  which  are  products  of  9,  you  make  9,  by  adding
1  to  8,  2  to  7,  3  to  6.     Thus  369  is  a  product  also  of  9  ;  and  if  you
add  3,  6,  9,  you  make  18,  a  lesser  product  of  9."

18  This  legend  is  given  much  more  fully  in  one  of  the  ineffable
degrees,  called  the  Knights  of  the  Ninth  Arch,  than  I  consider
myself  authorized  to  repeat  here.

19  The  vision  is  thus  described  by  himself,  (Book  of  Enoch,  xiv.
8-16),  "  A  vision  thus  appeared  to  me.     Clouds  and  a  mist  invited
me ;  agitated  stars  and  flashes  of  lightning  impelled  me  forwards  ;
while  winds   assisted   my  flight.     I   proceeded   until  I  arrived  at
a  wall  built  with  stones  of  crystal.     A  vibrating  flame  surrounded


OF    FREEMASONRY.  08

In  commemoration  of  this  supernatural  event,  which
lie  truly  conceived  was  vouchsafed  to  him  as  a  divine
communication211  of  the  means  of  preserving  the  arts
and  sciences,  and  other  ineffable  mysteries  when  the
world  should  be  destroyed,  he  excavated  a  vault,
nearly  one  hundred  feet  in  depth,  with  the  assistance
of  Jared  and  Methusaleh,  who,  however,  were  unac-
quainted with  his  motives,  and  constructed  a  subter-
ranean temple,21  consisting  of  nine  brick  vaults,  in  the

it,  which  struck  me  with  terror.  Into  this  vibrating  flame  I  entered,
and  drew  nigh  to  a  spacious  habitation  built  also  with  stones  of
crystal.  Its  walls,  as  well  as  pavement  were  formed  with  stones
of  the  same.  Its  roof  had  the  appearance  of  agitated  stars  and
flashes  of  lightning ;  and  among  them  were  cherubim  of  fire  in
a  starry  sky.  A  flame  burned  around  its  walls ;  and  its  portal  blazed
with  fire.  When  I  entered  this  dwelling  it  was  hot  as  fire  and  cold
as  ice.  No  trace  of  delight  or  of  life  was  there.  Terror  overwhelmed
me,  and  a  fearful  shaking  seized  me.  Violently  agitated  and  trem-
bling I  fell  upon  my  face.  In  the  vision  I  looked ;  I  beheld  there
was  another  habitation  more  spacious  than  the  former,  every  entrance
to  which  was  open  before  me,  erected  in  the  midst  of  vibrating
flame."

20  This  was  not  the  only  revelation  he  was  supposed  to   have
received.     The  Book  of  Enoch  states  that  the  archangel  Uriel,  who
presided  over  the  stars,  disclosed  to  him  the  nature  of  the  month,
and  of  the  tropical  year.    And  the  Mahometan  historians  report  that
he  received  thirty  books  of  revelations  from  God,  in  which  were
written  the  mysteries  of  the  occult  sciences.     In  the  true  spirit  of
Islamism,  they  also  add  that  he  was  the  first  who  took  up  arms  in
the  cause  of  God  and  religion  ;  for  that,  having  been  sent  to  preach
unto  and  reclaim  the  wicked  posterity  of  Cain,  when  they  refused  to
hearken  unto  him,  he  made  war  upon  them,  and  carried  oft7  their
wives  and  children  into  slavery.

21  Something  of  this  nature  is  recorded  in  the  fabulous  annals  of
Persia.     A  younger  brother  of  Seth  was  called  Rocail.     A  dive,  or
giant  of  Mount  Caucasus,  being  hard  pressed  by  liis  enemies,  sought

VOL.  II.  O


194


HISTORICAL    LANDMARKS


bowels  of  Mount  Calvary,  situated  perpendicularly
beneath  each  other,  and  communicating  by  small
apertures  left  in  the  floor  of  each  consecutive  cavern.22
He  then  made  a  plate  of  gold  of  a  triangular  form,
each  side  being  eighteen  inches  long;23  and  enriching
it  with  precious  stones,  in  imitation  of  the  plate  which
he  beheld  in  his  dream,  he  encrusted  the  whole  on  an
agate  stone  of  great  brilliancy  and  beauty  ;  and  en-

araong  the  sons  of  men  for  assistance.  He  made  an  alliance  with
Rocail,  who  extricated  him  out  of  his  difficulties,  and  in  return  was
made  his  grand  vizier.  He  occupied  this  office  for  many  years,  witli
great  advantage  to  the  people  ;  and  when  he  felt  the  approach  of  old
age,  he  was  desirous  of  leaving  some  monument  to  record  his  virtues.
He  therefore  erected  a  magnificent  palace,  underneath  which  were  a
series  of  subterranean  vaults  of  great  depth  and  intricacy,  the  lowest
of  which  was  intended  to  be  his  sepulchre.  To  guard  its  entrance
from  intrusion,  he  constructed  statues  of  such  excellence  that  tlicv
were  capable  of  performing  all  the  functions  of  life.

22  Enoch,  says  the  charge  in  the  degree  above  named,  "  was  the
seventh  in  descent  from  Adam,  and  lived  in  the  fear  and  love  of  his
Maker.  Being  inspired  by  the  Most  High,  and  in  commemoration
of  a  wonderful  vision,  this  holy  man  HER
built  a  nine-fold  temple  under
ground,  and  dedicated  the  same
to  God.  Methusaleh,  the  son  of
Enoch,  and  Tared,  his  father,  con-
structed the  building,  without  being
acquainted  with  his  motives.  This
happened  in  that  part  of  the  world
which  was  afterwards  called  Canaan
or  the  Holy  Land."  The  engraving,
which  I  copy  from  an  old  Masonic  publication,  appears  to  allude
to  this  event.

s  This  implied  a  knowledge  of  geometry  and  metallurgy  ;  and  we
shall  soon  see  how  these  sciences  were  invented  and  brought  to

O

maturity.     See  Lect.  xxix.


MES


OF    FREEMASONRY.  195

graving  on  it  those  ineffable  characters  24  which  all
Royal  Arch  Masons  know,  he  placed  it,  with  solemn
prayer,  in  the  lowest  vault  on  a  pedestal  of  white
oriental  porphyry.

At  this  stage  of  the  proceedings,  so  runs  the  tradi-
tion, Enoch  was  favoured  with  another  vision,25  in
which  he  was  directed  to  make  a  secret  door  of  stone
at  the  entrance  to  each  of  the  nine  arches,  furnished
with  a  ring  of  iron,  that  it  might  be  more  conveniently
raised  when  necessary ;  and  to  close  the  uppermost
aperture  so  carefully  that  it  could  not  be  discovered  K

24  I  copy  from  Wait  (Orient.  Ant.  p.  277,)  a  curious  passage  from
Ibn-nephi,  not  as  possessing  any  authority,  but  to  show  that  a  con-
firmed idea  must  have  existed  in  the  east  that  Enoch  was  acquainted
with  the  use  of  alphabetical  characters.     "  And  God  appointed  him
a  prophet,  and  caused  to  descend  to  him  thirty  books ;  and  he
inherited  the  books  of  Seth,  and  the  ark  of  Adam.    He  lived  by  dint
of  his  own  labour,  and  was  a  tailor  /"

25  In  this  period  "  God  was  more  sensibly  present  in  the  world
than  he  now  is.     He  appeared  to  mankind  by  angels ;  he  caused
them  to  hear  voices,  or  to  dream  dreams ;  and  by  these,  and  such
extraordinary  ways  and  means  as  these  were,  he  convinced  them  of
their  duties,  instructed  them  in  his  will,  and  gave  them  directions
for  the  conduct  of  their  lives.    In  this  sense  many  good  and  virtuous
men  in  the  first  world  had  an  intercourse  with  the  Deity  by  divers
extraordinary  revelations  of  himself  which  he  was  pleased  to  give
them,  if  they  took  care  to  live  up  to  their  duties."  (Shuckf.  Con.
vol.  i.  p.  37.)

26  Our  traditions  say  that  when  Enoch  was  invested  with  the  cha-
racter of  a  prophet,  the  Masonic  stone  of  foundation  was  transferred
to  his  custody ;  and  as  the  world  increased  in  wickedness,  this  pious
man,  fearing  lest  the  treasure  should  be  wrested  from  him  by  force,
secured  it  in  the  bowels  of  the  earth,  within  that  famous  subterranean
temple  which  he  constructed  on  Mount  Calvary,  in  full  assurance
Hint  it  would  remain  there   until  discovered  by  some  favourite  of
heaven.

o  2


190


HISTORICAL    LANDMARKS


Thus  the  nine  arches  being  completed,  and  theentrai
concealed 27  from  human  observation,  the  treasure  which
they  contained  was  a  profound  secret  to  the  cowan  ;-s
and  Enoch  himself  was  prohibited  from  entering  the
sacellum  more  frequently  than  once  in  every  year.  And
it  was  probably  the  contemplation  of  this  divine
mystery,  and  his  own  privileges  as  the  chosen  servant
of  the  Almighty,  that  kept  his  heart  right  in  the  sight
of  God,  amidst  the  general  depravity  of  mankind  ; ''
and  procured  for  him  the  singular  felicity  of  being
translated  to  heaven  without  tasting  the  bitterness  of
death.

In  process  of  time,  the  wickedness  of  the  world
became  so  overwhelming,30  that  even  the  posterity  of

27  "The  arurophylax,  according  to  Plntarch,  is  a  precious  stone
like  unto  silver;  those  who  are  rich  buy  it,  and  place  it  a/  the
entrance  of  their  treasuries.     When  thieves  come,  this  stone  mnkr-
the  sound  of  a  trumpet,  that  the  malefactors,  overpowered  by  an  irre-
sistible force,  are  precipitated  afar.    The  sound  of  the  trumpet  which
is  heard  from  this  stone,  recalls  that  which  sounds  in  the  festivals  of
the  Jewish  people,  and  the  trumpets  of  the  last  judgment.    The  Lord
Jehovah,  says  Zachariah,  shall  sound  the  trumpet ;  i.  e.  will  manifest
his  wisdom."   (AVeale's  Archit.  pt.  iv.  p.  20.)

28  This  was  a  term  of  exclusion  amongst  the  early  Christians.
Before  the  service  of  the  church  commenced,  a  deacon  proclaimed
aloud — Sancta   sanctis  !     Foris  canes  !     (Gr.  KWCS.     TV.   chiens —
hodie  cowans)  ;  i.  e.   Holy  things  for  holy  persons — Dogs  (cowans
or  listeners)  begone  !

29  The  poets  w ell  understood  this  original  defection  from  purity ;
and  described  the  gradual  degeneracy  of  mankind  under  the  figure
of  four  ages,  viz.,  of  gold,  silver,  brass,  and  iron.

30  "They  had  not,"    says  Eusebius,   (Eccl.  Hist.  1.  i.  c.  2,)  "a
vestige  of  civil  society  existing  amongst  them  ;  neither  laws,  statutes,
virtue,   nor  philosophy.     They  lived   in   deserts  like  savages,  and
yielded  themselves  up  to  every  species  of  abominable  wickedness  ;


Ol'    FREEM-ASONEY.  197

holy  Seth  did  not  escape  the  infection.  By  inter-
marriages with  the  apostate  race,31  they  shared  in  the
universal  infatuation,  and  became  obnoxious  to  the
divine  wrath.  Polygamy,  and  that  great  and  crying
evil,  a  community  of  wives,  was  introduced  among
them,  and  perhaps  anthropophagy  ;32  and  idolatry
superseded  the  true  worship  of  God.

they  defiled  one  another's  bodies,  they  shed  one  another's  blood ;
they  devoured  one  another's  flesh;  and  even  undertook  to  wage
unnatural  war  against  God."

31  "  It  happened  after  the  sons  of  men  had  multiplied  in  those
days,  that  daughters  were  born  to  them,  elegant  and  beautiful.    And
when   the  angels,  the  sons  of  heaven,  beheld  them,  they  became
enamoured,  saying  to  each  other — Let  us  select  for  ourselves  wives
from  the  progeny  of  men.    Then  then-  leader,  Samyaza,  said  to  them

—I  fear  that  you  may  perhaps  be  indisposed  to  the  performance  of
this  cnterprize,  and  that  I  alone  shall  suffer  for  so  grievous  a  crime.
But  they  answered  him  and  said — We  all  swear,  and  bind  ourselves
by  mutual  execrations,  that  we  will  not  change  our  intention,  but
execute  our  projected  undertaking.  The  whole  number  was  two
hundred,  who  descended  upon  Ardis,  which  is  the  top  of  Mount
Armon.  That  mountain,  therefore,  was  called  Armon,  because  they
had  sworn  upon  it,  and  bound  themselves  by  mutual  execrations.
These  are  the  names  of  their  chiefs.  Samyaza,  who  was  their  leader,
Urahabaramed,  Akibeel,  Tamiel,  llanmel,  Danel,  Azkeel,  Sarakuyal,
Asael,  Armers,  Batraal,  Anane,  Zavebe,  Samsaveel,  Ertael,  Turel,
Yomyael,  and  Arazyal.  These  were  the  prefects  of  the  two  hundred
angels,  and  the  remainder  were  all  with  them.  Then  they  took  wives
with  whom  they  cohabited ;  teaching  them  sorcery,  incantations,  and
the  dividing  of  roots  and  trees.  And  the  women  conceiving,  brought
forth  giants,  whose  stature  was  each  three  hundred  cubits."  (Book
of  Enoch,  vii.  1-12.)

32  This  was  common  in  the  post  diluvian  world.     Goguet  says  : —
"  Some  authors  have  reported  that  there  were  formerly  public  markets
for  the  sale  of  human  flesh  in  some  countries  both  of  Asia,  Africa,
and  America.     It  appears  to  me  improbable  that  a  people  so  far


198


HISTORICAL    LANDMARKS


_

Error,  superstition,  and  vice,  now  rapidly  increasec
The  earth  became  generally  corrupt,33  and  God  deter-
mined on  its  purgation.  Before  Enoch  was  translated
he  became  conscious  that  the  sins  of  men  would  excite
the  divine  indignation,34  and  meet  with  a  signal  punish-

civilized  as  to  have  public  markets,  would  permit  the  bodies  of  their
fellow-men  to  be  exposed  for  sale  in  them  ;  unless  we  could  suppose
that  they  had  contracted  such  an  appetite  for  this  kind  of  food  that
they  could  not  relinquish  it,  even  when  they  could  procure  other
more  natural  aliments."  See  on  this  subject  Anc.  relat.  des  Ind.
and  de  la  Chine,  pp.  55,  132 ;  Bibl.  Univers.  torn.  ii.  p.  384 ;  Hist,
des  Incas.  p.  51 ;  Hist.  Gen.  de  Voyag.  torn.  v.  p.  97  ;  Mercur.  de
Prance,  Oct.  1717,  p.  84  ;  Laet  Descrip.  des  Ind.  Occid.  1.  v.  c.  15.
33  Ovid  has  described  this  reception  very  freely  : —

Truth,  modesty,  and  shame,  the  world  forsook ;

Fraud,  avarice,  and  force,  their  places  took.

Then  landmarks  limited  to  each  his  right ;

For  all  before  was  common  as  the  light.

Nor  was  the  ground  alone  required  to  bear

Her  annual  income  to  the  crooked  share,

But  greedy  mortals  rummaging  her  store

Digg'd  from  her  entrails  first  the  precious  ore ;

Which  next  to  hell,  the  prudent  gods  had  laid  ;

And  that  alluring  hell  to  sight  display'd.

Thus  curbed  steel,  and  more  accursed  gold,

Gave  mischief  birth,  and  made  that  mischief  bold  ;

And  double  death  did  wretched  man  invade,

By  steel  assaulted,  and  by  gold  betrayed.  •

(Metam.  1.  i.)

4  He  became  acquainted  with  this  awful  truth  from  a  communi-
cation by  means  of  an  allegorical  dream  or  vision,  which  is  thus
related :  He  saw  a  number  of  white  cows  in  a  field,  and  behold  an
angel  went  to  them  and  taught  them  a  mystery.  One  of  them
became  a  man,  and  fabricated  for  himself  a  large  ship.  In  this  he
dwelt,  and  three  cows  with  him.  "  I  lifted  up  iny  eyes,"  says  he,
"  towards  heaven,  and  saw  a  lofty  roof.  Above  it  were  seven  cata-


OF    FREEMASONRY.  1JJ(J

ment,  as  had  been  already  shadowed  forth  in  his  dream.
Alarmed,  therefore,  lest  a  knowledge  of  the  arts  and
sciences  should  be  lost  amidst  the  universal  wreck,35
and  the  secrets  of  the  ninth  arch  overwhelmed,  and  for
ever  hid  from  human  observation,  he  erected  two
pillars,36  one  of  cast  brass,  on  which  he  inscribed  the
history  of  the  creation,  the  elementary  principles  of
the  liberal  arts,37  and  of  speculative  Freemasonry,  so

racts,  which  poured  forth  on  a  certain  village  much  water.  And
behold  the  fountains  were  opened,  and  the  water  began  to  boil  up,
and  rose  over  the  earth ;  so  that  the  village  was  not  seen,  while  its
whole  soil  was  covered  with  water.  Then  I  surveyed  the  height  of
this  water,  and  it  was  elevated  above  the  village,  and  stood  higher
than  the  earth.  Then  all  the  cows  which  were  collected  there  were
drowned,  swallowed  up  and  destroyed  in  the  water.  But  the  ship
floated  above  it."  (Book  of  Enoch,  Ixxxviii.)

35  "  Having   been  forewarned  by  Adam,"  says  Josephus,   (Ant.
Jud.  1.  i.  c.  3,)   "  of  an  universal  deluge  and  conflagration,  they
erected  two  pillars,  one  of  brick  and  the  other  of  stone,  which  they
were  of  opinion  would,  one  or  the  other  of  them,  be  proof  against
every  attack  either  of  fire  or  water.     They  engraved   upon   these
pillars  their  discoveries  and  inventions,  lest,  in  a  series  of  ages,  the
knowledge  of  the  science  itself  should  become  extinct.     Their  pre-
caution was  not  vain ;  for,  to  this  day,  the  stone  pillar  is  to  be  seen
in  Syria."

36  These  pillars  are  named  by  many  other  credible  writers,  although
their  existence  has  been  very  greatly  doubted.

37  Du  Bartas  represents  these  pillars  as  being  found  by  Heber  and
Phaleg,  and  containing  emblems  of  the  seven  liberal  sciences,  which
he  makes  Heber  describe  and  explain  in  full ;  the  signs  of  the  zodiac,
and  the  doctrine  of  numbers.     The  chapter  is  too  long  to  quote  at
large,  although  it  contains  an  analysis  of  the  present  system  of  Free-
masonry.    One  of  the  pillars,  he  says,  was  built  of  brick,  and  the
other  of  marble  ;  which  Seth  and  Enoch

" JBy  tradition  cabalistic  taught,


That  God  would  twice  reduce  this  world  to  nought


200


HISTORICAL    LANDMARKS


far  as  its  details  were  known  and  practised;  and  t he-
other  of  marble,38  covered  also  with  hieroglyphics]
characters,39  importing  that,  near  the  spot  where  they
stood,40  a  precious  treasure  was  concealed  in  a  subter-
ranean depositary  dedicated  to  the  Most  High,  which
wisdom  alone  would  be  capable  of  discovering.41  The

By  flood  and  flame ;  they  reared  cunningly
This  stately  pair  of  pillars  which  you  see  ;
Long  time  safe  keeping  for  their  after  kin,
A.  hundred  learned  mysteries  therein.
This  having  said,  old  lleber  drawing  nighcr,
Opens  a  wicket  in  the  marble  spire,
Where  (Phaleg  following)  soon  perceive  they
A  pure  lamp  burning  with  immortal  light."

(Div.  Weeks,  p.  13U.)

38  The  author  of  the  Scholastical  History  saith  that  Ninus  wrote
the  art  magic  and  the  seven  liberal  arts  in  fourteen  pillars,  seven  of
brass  and  seven  of  brick,  to  preserve  them  from  the  destruction
of  the  world  by  water  or  fire.     This  Ninus  is  supposed  to  have  been
Zoroaster.

39  The  method  of  doing  this  was  to  cut  the  inscription  in  the
stones,  which  were  then  coated  with  a  thick  crust  of  lime,  that  the
engraving  might  continue  for  many  ages  secure  from  all  the  injuries
of  the  weather  and  atmosphere ;    and  when,  by  the  decay  of  its
covering,  it  should,  after  hundreds  or  thousands  of  years,  first  conic
to  light,  it  would  serve  to  show  to  the  latest  posterity  whether  they
had  suffered  any  change.     See  Michaelis,  on  the  Laws  of  Moses,
vol.  i.  p.  357.

40  "  Ousous,  who  lived  in  the  fifth  generation  after  Adam,  is  said
not  only  to  have  invented  clothes,  by  using  the  skins  of  wild  beasts,
and  to  have  been  the  first  man  that  ventured  into  the  sea  upon  a  tree
that  was  blown  down,  but  also  to  have  consecrated  two  pillars  to  the
wind  and  to  the  fire;  and  these  he  adored."  (Curnb.  Sanch.  p.  238.)

41  This  method  of  intimating  the  deposition  of  a  treasure  was  not
uncommon  in  later  limes.     Shaw,  in  his  Travels,  gives  some  iiislanrr.-
of  this  eiision^  from  which  I  extract  the  following : — "  On  a  rising


01'    FREEMASONRY.  201

former  pillar,4-  he  rightly  conjectured,  would  withstand
the  effects  of  a  destruction  by  water,  and  the  latter  by
fire.43

Having  accomplished  this  great  undertaking,44  Enoch

ground,  at  a  league  distance  from  the  river  Shelliff,  is  Memoun
Turroy,  as  they  call  an  old  square  tower,  formerly  a  sepulchral  monu-
ment of  the  Romans.  This,  like  many  more  ancient  edifices,  is
supposed  by  the  Arabs  to  have  been  built  over  a  treasure,  agreeably
to  which  account  they  tell  us,  these  mystical  words  were  inscribed
upon  it  by  Prince  Maimoun  Tizai — '  My  treasure  is  my  shade — my
shade  is  my  treasure.  Search  for  it  arid  despair  not — nay,  despair,
and  do  not  search."1

42  Manctho  also  mentions  these  pillars.     "  From  some  pillars  in
the  land  of  Seriad,"  he  says,  "  inscribed  in  the  sacred  dialect  by  the
first  Mercury  Thyoth,  and  after  the  flood  translated  into  the  Greek
tongue  in  the  sacred  character,  were  laid  up  amongst  the  revestrys
of  the  Egyptian  temples  by  Agathoda3inon,  the  second  Mercury,  and
father  of  Tat."

43  Pillars  formed  the  earliest  tablets  of  which  we  have  any  account,
on  which  inscriptions  were  written.     The  pillars  on  which  astrono-
mical calculations  were  recorded  on  the  plain  of  Shinar,  mentioned
by  Callisthenes  as  having  been  made  within  a  century  of  the  flood,
were  of  brick,   dried  in  the  sun.     The   pillars  of   Scsostris  were
inscribed,  and  the  written  mountains  of  Arabia  are  well  known.

44  The  Arabs  have  a  similar  tradition,   but  it  is  applied  to  the
pyramids.     Saurid  Ebn  Salhouk  reigned  over  Egypt  three  hundred
years  before  the  flood;  of  which  event  he  had  notice  in  a  dream.
He  saw  a  great  convulsion  of  the  earth ;  the  stars  changed  into
white  birds,  which  flew  away  with  his  subjects,  and  inclosed  them
in  the  mountains.     To  prepare  for  this  terrible  event,   he  erected
pyramids,  in  which  he  placed  records  of  the  sciences  of  arithmetic,
geometry,  astronomy,  and  physic ;  together  with  stores  of  gold  and
precious  stones,  protected  by  talismans  and  deadly  poisons.   In  every
pyramid  he  placed  a  treasurer,  or  statue  of  black  agate.    In  one,  the
etatue  had  a  lance  in  his  hand,  and  a  serpent  on  his  head,  which
would  wreath  i'self  round  any  intruder  and  bite  him  in  the  throat


202


HISTORICAL    LANDMARKS


prepared  for  his  departure  from  a  world  which  was
unworthy  of  his  virtues.  He  assembled  his  family  and
tribes  on  the  mountain  of  Moriah,  and  solemnly  expos-
tulated with  them  on  their  apostacy ;  setting  forth  in
glowing  colours  the  happiness  that  would  result  from
a  sincere  repentance,  and  a  return  to  their  religious
duties.  He  exhorted  them  to  forsake  their  unpro-
fitable idolatries,  to  reform  their  evil  customs,  and
to  live  virtuous  and  upright  lives  ;45  and  denounced
against  them  the  heaviest  woes  if  they  disregarded  his
injunctions.46  Finding  that  his  words  were  power-
till  he  died.  In  another,  the  statue  had  shining  eyes,  to  fascinate
any  one  who  might  approach,  and  prevent  his  return.  "  Here,"
says  the  legend,  "  were  preserved  the  stores  of  science  and  know-
ledge; and  hence  they  were  disseminated  amongst  mankind  after
the  deluge."

45  At  this  early  period  mankind  lived  to  a  very  old  age,  which
might  have  a  tendency  to  increase  their  wickedness  by  the  distant
prospect  of  death.     Moses  has  named  some  of  their  ages. — Thus
Adam  lived  930;  Seth  912;  Enos  905;  Cainan  910;  Mahalael
895;  Jared  962;  Enoch  305;  Methuselah  969;  and  Lamech  777
years.

46  Jude  14,  15,  16.     "  We  learn  from  Bruce,  that  this  prophecy,
ascribed  to  Enoch,  is  to  be  found  in  the  apocryphal  book  of  Enoch.
Hence  some  doubt  the  truth  of  the  prophecy  itself,  because  the  book
in  which  it  is  found  is  spurious,  and  conclude  that  Jude  only  cited
it  as  an  argumentum  ad  hominem,  as  deemed  to  be  Enoch's  by  those
to  whom  the  apostle  wrote ;  in  the  same  way  as  he  cited  the  ancient
tradition  respecting  Michael  the  archangel  contending  with  the  devil.
But  surely  the  prophecy  might  be  true,  though  found  in  an  apocryphal
book,  and  yet  the  rest  of  the  book  be  spurious.     Its  complete  fulfil-
ment at  the  deluge  is  evidence  of  its  truth;  and  this  gives  more
weight  to  the  apostle's  argument  than  the  other  supposition."  (Hales.
Anal.  vol.  ii.  p.  35.)


OF    FREEMASONRY.  203

less,47  and  that  the  people  despised  his  admonitions,
he  placed  the  government  of  Freemasonry  in  the  hands
of  his  grandson  Lamech,  and  received  the  reward  of
his  fidelity  by  being  removed  at  once  into  the  realms
of  everlasting  light.  Lamech,  the  Grand  Master,  was
equally  unable  to  work  a  salutary  reform  in  the  cor-
rupted manners  of  the  world,  and  therefore  resigned
his  office  into  the  hands  of  Noah,48  who,  although
a  preacher  of  righteousness,  attempted  in  vain  to
restore  the  purity  of  his  race.

47  James  Montgomery  supposes  him  to  have  addressed  the  people
in  these  words  : —

"  The  saints  shall  suffer,  righteousness  shall  fail,
In  all  the  world  iniquity  prevail ;
Giants,  in  fierce  contempt  of  man  and  God,
Shall  rule  the  nations  with  an  iron  rod ;
On  every  mountain  idol  groves  shall  rise,
And  darken  heaven  with  human  sacrifice.
But  God,  the  avenger  comes ; — a  judgment  day  ;
A  flood  shall  sweep  his  enemies  away.
How  few,  whose  eyes  shall  then  have  seen  the  sun
(One  righteous  family,  and  only  one),
Saved  from  that  wreck  of  nature,  shall  behold
The  new  creation  rising  from  the  old."

(World  before  the  Mood,  p.  101.)

48  Our  traditions  say  that   the  pillars  of  Enoch  had  frequently
attracted  the  attention  of  Noah,  who  determined  to  explore  the
adjacent  eminence  of  Calvary,  because  their  shadows,  at  the  rising
of  the  sun,  pointed  to  that  mountain,  in  the  hope  that  something  of
importance  might  be  there  concealed.     The  search  was  successful ;
he  found  the  perpendicular  tier  of  caverns,  and  not  comprehending
the  depositions,  he  merely  removed  the  inscribed  stone  of  foundation,
and  placed  it  in  the  ark,  as  a  convenient  altar  for  sacrifice.


204


HISTORICAL    LAN  DM  ARKS


LECTURE    XXIX.


WORLDLY    POSSESSIONS.

"  Before  the  general  deluge  there  was  a  man  called  Lemeck,  who
had  two  wives,  the  one  called  Adah,  the  other  Zillah ;  by  Adah  he
had  two  sons,  Jabell  and  Juball ;  by  Zillah  he  had  a  son  called  Tubal,
and  a  daughter  called  Naahmah ;  these  four  children  found  the  be-
ginning of  all  the  crafts  in  the  world. — Jabell  found  out  geometry,
and  had  divided  flocks  of  sheep  and  lands,  he  built  the  first  house  of
stone  and  timber;  Juball  found  out  music;  Tubal  found  out  the
smiths'  trading  or  craft,  also  the  working  of  gold,  silver,  copper,
iron,  and  steel." — ANCIENT  MASONIC  MANUSCRIPT.

"  There  is  scarcely  any  sentiment  in  which,  amidst  the  innumerable
varieties  of  inclination  that  nature  or  accident  have  scattered  in  the
world,  we  find  greater  numbers  concurring,  than  in  the  wish  for
riches ;  a  wish,  indeed,  so  prevalent,  that  it  may  be  considered  as
universal  and  transcendental,  as  the  desire  in  which  all  other  desires
are  included,  and  of  which  the  various  purposes  which  actuate  man-
kind are  only  subordinate  species  and  different  modifications."

DR.  JOHNSON.

"  What  does  it  denote?   Worldly  possessions." — DR.  HEMMING.

A  LEGITIMATE  Masonic  landmark  is  here  displayed,
referring  to  an  age  long  before  the  universal  deluge ;  and
in  an  endeavour  to  explain  it  on  the  true  principles  of
the  Craft,1  it  will  be  necessary  to  revert  to  customs  and

1  The  subject  will  not  admit  of  an  extended  illustration,  as  the
facts  arc  few,  and  the  subject  obscure.  The  reference,  however,  will
be  easily  comprehended,  and  the  Brethren  will  find  no  difficulty  in
making  the  application.


Ol'    FREEMASONRY.  :?U  ">

usages  that  distinguished  the  period  in  which  the  scene
is  laid.2  The  arts  and  sciences  would  be  originated,
partly  from  the  effects  of  accident,  and  partly  by  obser-
vation and  reflection,  and  the  application  of  nature's
works  to  the  requirements  and  conveniences  of  life.
Accordingly  we  find  that  Tubal  Cain3  invented  many
of  the  arts  which  tend  to  increase  the  value  of  worldly
possessions ;  and  for  his  skill  and  ability  he  was  vene-
rated as  a  deity,4  under  his  own  proper  name,  which

2  It  may,  perhaps,  be  difficult  to  produce  Authorities  in  proof  of
the  facts  which  it  will  be  necessary  to  bring  forward  in  illustration
of  this  landmark ;  but  1  think  the  difficulty  is  not  insuperable ;  and
in  the  progress  of  our  investigation  I  shall  probably  be  able  to  furnish
documents  which  will  substantiate  every  argument  that  it  may  be
expedient  to  adduce  for  the  purpose  of  showing  the  nature  of  worldly
possessions  at  the  period  alluded  to.

3  "  That  Tubal  Cain  gave  first  occasion  to  the  name  and  worship
of  Vulcan  hath  been  very  probably  conceived,  both  from  the  very
great  affinity  of  the  names,  and  that  Tubal  Cain  is  expressly  men-
tioned to  be  an  instructor  of  every  artificer  in  brass  and  iron ;  and
as  near  relation  as  Apollo  had  to  Vulcan,  Jubal  had  to  Tubal  Cain,
who  was  the  inventor  of  music,  or  the  father  of  all  such  as  handle
the  harp  and  organ,  which  the  Greeks  attribute  to  Apollo.     And  if
that  be  true  which  Genebrard  and  others  ascribe  to  Naamah,  the
sister  of  Jubal  and  Tubal  Cain,  viz.,  that  she  was  the  inventor  of
spinning  and  weaving,  then  may  she  come  in  for  Minerva.     Thus
we  see  there  were  some  obscure  footsteps  preserved  of  that  part  of
scripture  history  which  preceded  the  flood."  (Still.  Orig.  Sac.  p.  592.)

4  "  Sanchoniatho  says,  that  Chrysor  (Tubal  Cain)  is  called  in  Greek
H(/>aicrros ;  and  his  being  the  eldest  of  that  name,  is  probably  the  man
whom  Manetho  hath  put  first  in  his  first  dynasty  of  gods  and  demi-
gods in  Egypt,  placed  before  the  flood  in  Scaliger's  Eusebian  Chro-
nicle in  Greek.     I  have  more  respect  to  this  first  of  their  gods  in
that  dynasty  than  to  all  the  rest ;  partly  because  of  Sanchoniatho's
testimony  that  such  a  god  was  worshipped  in  their  neighbouring
Phoenicia  before  Noah's  time,  and  partly  because  Herodotus  informs


206


HISTORICAL    LANDMARKS


was  subsequently  modulated  into  Vulcan,5  and  it  de-
scended to  posterity  as  a  characteristic  sobriquet  of
any  one  who  was  a  worker  in  metals.6

But  Tubal  Cain  was  not  only  an  artificer  in  brass
and  iron,  but  originated  the  art  of  making  and  using
edge  tools,7  without  which  very  little  progress  could
have  been  made  in  civilization.8  Naamah,  the  sister  of

me  of  a  temple  built  by  Menes,  or  Mizraim,  to  this  Vulcan ;  for  no
other  deified  man  can  be  found  before  Mizraim's  time  that  was  called
by  the  name  of  Vulcan,  or  a  name  equivalent  thereto,  as  Chrysor  in
the  Phoenician  and  Phtha  in  the  Egyptian  languages  arc  ;  from
which  divers  learned  men  have  suggested  the  Greek  rj^aio-Tos  to  be
derived,  though  with  much  change,  as  in  passing  out  of  one  language
into  another  is  very  usual."  (Cumb.  Snnrh.  p.  2Hi.)

5  As  Tubal  Cain  was  identified  with  Vulcan,  so  his  sister  \v;i-  taken
by  the  Arabians  and  others  for  Venus,  because  of  her  surpassing
beauty.     She  was  the  reputed  inventress  of  drawing  and  colours.

6  "According  to  Sanchoniatho,  Chrysor  or  Vulcan  had  two  brothers,
called  Technites  and  Geinus,  who  were  the  parents  of  Agruerus  and
Agrus.    The  former  was  highly  venerated  by  the  Phoenicians,  and  the
Byblians  esteemed  him  the  greatest  of  the  gods.     The  persons  of
whom  this  generation  was  composed  were  known  by  the  gencial
name  of  Aletse,  or  Titans."  (Fab.  Cab.  vol.  i.  p.  35.)

7  Faber  thinks  this  was  the  origin  of  Freemasonry.    "  All  the  most
remarkable  ancient  buildings,"  says  he,  "  of  Greece,  Egypt,  and  ^
Minor,  were  ascribed  to  Cabircan  or  Cyclopean  masons;  and  in  the
present  day  the  Freemasons,  with  all  their  formalities,  are  wont  to
assist  at  the  commencement  of  every  public  edifice.     Finally,"  he
adds,  "  their  affectation  of  mysterious  concealment,  closely  resembles
the  system  of  the  Epoptas  in  all  ages  and  countries,  particularly  that  of
the  bards,  when  their  religion  reigned  no  longer  paramount.     Th
last  are  probably  the  real  founders  of  English  Freemasonry."

8  It  is  asserted  in  an  old  tradition,  that  mechanical  instruments
were  used  to  destroy  wild  and   ravenous  beasts  which  preyed  on
the  flocks  and  herds,  before  they  were  applied  to  domestic  or  civil
purposes.


OK    FREEMASONRY.  207

Tubal  Cain,  is  supposed  to  have  invented  the  art  of
preparing  wool,  spinning  it  into  threads,  and  weaving
it  into  garments.9  It  has  been  doubted  whether  Tubal
Cain  was  acquainted  with  the  operation  of  smelting
metals,10  or  separating  the  pure  ore  from  the  dross  by
a  refining  process ;  and  therefore  it  has  been  hastily
concluded  that  he  worked  solely  on  native  metals,
which  are  iron  and  copper.11  Excessive  rains  pouring
down  the  sides  of  the  mountains  where  metals  were
deposited,  wrould  bring  them  to  the  plains  and  rivers
in  ingots  and  shapeless  masses.12  But  the  metal  would

9  There  is  much  probability  in  the  supposition ;  but  we  have  no
absolute  authority  for  it,  except  in  the  testimony  of  those  who  lived
in  ages  very  remote  from  the  time  when  she  flourished.     Such,  how-
ever, is   the  Masonic  tradition;    and  the   impulse   for   inventions
having  been  given,  nothing  can  be  more   probable  than  that   the
sister  of  these  benefactors  to  the  human  race  should  have  applied
herself  to  improve  the  arts  which  tend  to  increase  the  comforts  and
conveniences  of  civil  and  social  life.

10  The  encyclopedists  say  :   "  It  seems  highly  probable  that  he  not
only  acted  as  a  smith  to  fabricate  instruments  from  these  metals,  but
that  he  had  actually  discovered  the  method  of  reducing  them  into
the  metallic  form — a  discovery  of  great  difficulty  at  such  an  early
period.     It  is  probable  the  professions  of  smelter  and  founder  would
long  be  united  as  one  person,  as  in  certain  cases,  they  are  still  found
united  among  Eastern  nations,  at  this  day."

11  Brass  is  a  factitious  composition  ;  and  copper  is  nearly  as  hard
as  iron.     The  existence  of  native  iron  was  formerly  questioned  ;  but
the  fact  has  been  proved  beyond  a  doubt  by  modern  discovery.     It
is  found  in  a  cubical  form  about  Senegal,  in  Siberia,  in  South  America,
and  many  other  places ;  it  is  probable  that,  in  the  infancy  of  the
world,  it  might  also  exist,  though  not  so  plentifully  as  copper,  gold,
and  silver.

12  Subsequently,   ^Eschylus   introduces    Prometheus    who    was    a
Cabirean  priest,  or,  in  Masonic  phraseology,  the  Master  of  a  Lodge


208


HISTORICAL    LANDMARKS


be  pure.  Even  mines  might  be  discovered — as  \\,
know  those  of  Potosi  were — by  accident.  Metals,
however,  would  be  disregarded  until  the  art  of  manu-
facturing them  was  invented;13  and  this  beneficial
discovery  did  not  occur  till  the  eighth  generation  from
Adam.

Before  the  use  of  instruments  was  adopted,11  man-
kind must  have  lived  in  a  very  rude  state,  because
they  could  only  have  used  flints,  bones  of  animals,  and
other  imperfect  substitutes  for  metal,  which  would
have  been  insufficient  either  for  hunting,15  war,  or

of  spurious  Freemasons,  describing  the  arts  for  which  mankind  ;nv
indebted  to  his  prolific  genius.  Amongst  the  rest,  he  enunier;He->
"  the  art  of  digging  gold  and  silver,  brass  and  iron,  from  the  prolific
earth  ;  and.  of  fabricating  instruments  for  ornament  and  use."

13  "  Since  the  heathen  gods  were  really  evil  spirits,  who  \\eiv
properly  the  fallen  angels,  it  is  not  unlikely  that  these,  by  their
superior  knowledge  of  nature,  teaching  the  wicked  descendants  of
Cain,  not  only  some  peculiar  arts  and  sciences,  whose  invention  seems
to  be  very  hard  to  account  for,  cither  by  chance  or  human  industry,
but  also  working  such  wonders  as  might  induce  them  to  worship
them  as  Gods."  (Berrington's  Creation,  p.  205.)

14  The  Book  of  Enoch  says  that  "  Azazyel,  one  of  the  apostate
angels,  taught  men  to  make  swords, knives,  shields,  breast-plates,  the
fabrication  of  brazen  mirrors,  and  the  workmanship  of  bracelets  and
ornaments,  the  use  of  paints,  the  beautifying  of  the  eyebrows,  the
use  of  stones  of  every  valuable  and  select  kind,  and  of  all  sorts  of
dyes,  so  that  the  world  became  altered."  (c.  viii.  1.)     "And  there-
fore God  said,  all  the  earth  has  been  corrupted  by  the  effects  of  the
teaching  of  Azazyel.     To  him,  therefore,  ascribe  the  whole  crime."
(c.  x.  22.)

15  And,  therefore,  they  would  be  at  the  mercy  of  wild  animals.
Accordingly,  we  are  told   by  the  Chinese  historians,  that   "  in  the
most  remote  antiquity  men  sheltered  themselves  in  the  hollows  of
rocks,  that  they  dwelt  in  deserts,  and  lived  in  society  with  all  other


OF    FREEMASONRY.  209

domestic  purposes.16  It  is  clear  that  Tubal  Cain
was  acquainted  with  the  uses  of  fire,17  or  he  could
not  have  been  able  to  weld18  iron  and  copper  into

creatures.  They  had  no  thought  of  doing  any  injury  to  the  beasts,
and  the  beasts  did  not  think  of  hurting  them.  But  in  succeeding
ages  they  became  too  wise,  which  made  the  animals  rebel ;  armed
with  claws,  teeth,  horns,  and  venom,  they  assaulted  man,  and  man
was  not  able  to  resist  them."  (Ouai-ki,  cited  in  Goguet,  vol.  iii.,
p.  304.)

16  Diodorus  Siculas  supposes  the  lives  of  the  first  men  to  have
been  far  from  abounding  with  ease  -and  plenty ;  having  houses  to
build,  clothes  to  make,  and  not  having  invented  proper  instruments
to  work  with,  they  lived  an  hard  and  laborious  life ;  and  many  of
them  not  having  made  a  due  provision  for  their  sustenance,  perished
with  hunger  and  cold  in  severe  winters.

17  A  Chinese  historian  says — "  Soui-gine-chi  is  esteemed  the  in-
ventor of  fire.     On  the  summit  of  the  mountain  Pou-tcheou,  are  to
be  seen  the  walls  of  justice.    The  sun  and  the  moon  cannot  approach
them ;  there  is  no  difference  of  seasons  there,  nor  vicissitudes  of  days
and  nights.    This  is  the  kingdom  of  light  on  the  confines  of  Si-ouang-
mou.     A  saint  went  to  make  a  tour  beyond  the  bounds  of  the  sun
and  moon ;  he  beheld  a  tree,  and  upon  that  tree  a  bird,  who  made
fire  come  out  of  it  by  picking  it.     He  was  surprised  at  this,  and
taking  a  branch  of  this  tree,  from  thence  struck  fire,"

18  Faber  very  judiciously  observes — "  From  the  circumstance  of
the  Cabiri  being  esteemed  artificers,  while  they  were  at  the  same
time  thought  to  be  the  sons  of  Vulcan,  I  suspect  that  the  Latins
termed  all  artificers  in  general  Fabri."     Thus  the  term  Cabiri,  or
more  appropriately  Telchines,  as  applied  to  the  ancient  mysteries,
conveys  a  meaning  which  is  strictly  synonymous  with  that  of  Masons
when  applied  to  ourselves.     The  invention  of  fire,  and  the  working
of  mines,  was  attributed  to  the  Cabiri ;  and  hence  we  find  a  Cabirus
represented  with  a  hammer  in  his  hand.     Dr.  Tytler  says  (F.  d.  E.
1838,  p.  58) — "  The  Cabiri  were  idols  in  the  strictest  sense;  their
history  and  character,  therefore,  aifords  one  proof,  amidst  many  that
are  in  existence,  of  idolatry,  whether  considered  as  Phoenician,  Greek,

VOL.  II.  P


210


HISTORICAL    LANDMARKS


form.19     It  will  be  easy,  therefore,  to  estimate  the
titude  of  mankind  to  him  who  first  instructed  them  in
that  useful  art,  of  which  he  might  receive  the  hint  from

Roman,  or  Hindoo,  comprising  a  perverted  view  of  the  facts  recorded
in  holy  scripture ;  and,  consequently,  the  Samothracian  idols  cannot
be  allowed  to  have  any  connexion  either  with  the  origin  or  progress
of  pure  Freemasonry."

19  Many  of  the  antediluvian  arts  were  lost  at  the  deluge ;  and
amongst  the  rest  the  use  of  fire,  which  was  not  regained  for  a  long
period  afterwards.  Goguet  makes  this  observation,  and  affirms—
"  that  it  is  a  truth  attested  by  the  most  ancient  and  most  unanimous
tradition.  The  Egyptians,  Persians,  Phoenicians,  Greeks,  and  several
other  nations,  acknowledged  that  their  ancestors  were  once  without
the  use  of  fire.  The  Chinese  confess  the  same  of  their  progenitors.
However  incredible  these  facts  may  appear,  yet  they  are  confirmed
by  what  several  writers,  both  ancient  and  modern,  have  declared  of
nations  who  were  their  cotemporaries,  and  in  this  state  of  ignorance
and  barbarity  when  they  knew  them.  Pomponius  Mela,  Pliny,
Plutarch,  and  other  ancient  authors,  speak  of  nations  who,  at  the
time  they  wrote,  knew  not  the  use  of  fire,  or  had  but  just  learned  it.
Facts  of  the  same  kind  are  attested  by  several  modern  relators.  The
inhabitants  of  the  Marian  islands,  which  were  discovered  in  1521,
had  no  idea  of  fire.  Never  was  astonishment  greater  than  theirs,
when  they  saw  it  on  the  descent  of  Magellan  on  one  of  their  islands.
At  first  they  believed  it  to  be  a  kind  of  animal  that  fixed  itself  to,  and
fed  upon  wood.  Some  of  them  who  approached  too  near  being  burnt,
the  rest  were  terrified,  and  durst  only  look  upon  it  at  a  distance.
They  were  afraid,  they  said,  of  being  bit,  or  lest  that  dreadful  animal
should  wound  them  with  his  violent  respiration ;  for  these  were  the
first  notions  they  formed  of  heat  and  flame.  Such,  too,  probably
were  the  notions  originally  of  the  Greeks.  And  there  is  no  doubt,
for  this  reason,  that  there  were  some  nations  anciently  who  eat  the
flesh  of  animals  quite  raw.  These  facts  may  enable  us  to  form
a  judgment  of  the  savage  and  barbarous  state  of  mankind  after  the
confusion  of  tongues,  and  dispersion  of  families."  (Origin  of  Laws,
vol.  i.  p.  72.)


OF    FREEMASONRY.  211

the  melted  lava20  streaming  down  the  channels  of  a
volcanic  mountain;  and  hence  the  tools  or  weapons
would  probably  be  cast.21  These  were  principally  made
of  copper ;  for  while  that  useful  metal  would  be  plen-
tifully supplied,  native  iron  would  necessarily  be  scarce,
and  consequently  a  valuable  article.  And  hence  we
find  that  in  the  early  times  after  the  flood,  arms,  im-

0  Thus  Du  Bartas  says  (Divine  Weekes,  p.  107)—

"  While  through  a  forest  Tubal,  with  his  yew,
And  ready  quiver,  did  a  boar  pursue ;
A  burning  mountain  from  its  fiery  vein
An  yron  river  rowls  along  the  plain.
The  witty  huntsman,  musing,  thither  hies,
And  of  the  wonder  deeply  'gan  devise ;
And  first  perceiving  that  this  scalding  metal,
Becoming  cold,  in  any  shape  would  settle,
And  grow  so  hard,  that  with  its  sharpened  side
The  finest  substance  it  would  soon  divide.
He  casts  a  hundred  plots,  and  yer  he  parts,
He  moulds  the  groundwork  of  a  hundred  arts."

21  "  It  is  related  of  certain  sailors,  that  having  landed  on  an
unknown  island,  and  kindled  a  fire  at  the  foot  of  a  mountain,  they
observed  silver  flowing  from  it.  It  is  reported  also  that  the  leader
of  a  new  colony,  settled  in  Paraguay,  observing  a  stone  of  uncommon
hardness,  and  spotted  with  black,  took  it  and  threw  it  into  a  very
hot  fire ;  some  time  after,  he  saw  a  quantity  of  as  good  iron  as  any
used  in  Europe  running  from  the  fire.  Once  more :  it  is  reported,
that  the  captain  of  a  Spanish  ship,  being  obliged  to  put  in  at  a  desert
island,  there  repaired  his  ship's  furnace.  In  making  the  hearth,  he
used  several  layers  of  earth.  When  he  arrived  at  Acapulco,  the
whole  crew  were  greatly  surprised  to  find  under  the  ashpan  of  the
furnace  a  solid  mass  of  gold,  which  the  violence  of  the  fire  had
melted  and  separated  from  the  earth.  I  am  inclined  to  think  that
some  such  accident  might  give  the  first  hint  of  the  art  of  working
metals."  (Goguet.  ut  supra,  vol.  i.  p.  144.)


212


HISTORICAL    LANDMARKS


plements  of  husbandry,  and  tools  for  domestic  uses,
were  uniformly  manufactured  from  copper.22  Even
the  bow  was  of  brass23  or  copper;  and  quivers,  war
hatchets,  swords,  and  javelins,  were  all  of  the  same
material.  The  sword  of  the  Grecian  soldier,  the
hatchet  of  the  Peruvian,  and  the  celt  of  the  British
warrior  were  alike  composed  of  this  universal  metal.24

Thus  the  pupils  of  Tubal  Cain  would  possess  an
abundance  of  raw  material  to  exercise  their  ingenuity
upon ; 25  and  scientific  pursuits  were  accelerated  by  the

22  It  is  said,  however,  that  Orion  was  an  excellent  workman  in
iron,  and  that  he  fabricated  a  subterraneous  palace  for  Vulcan.    (See
Lempriere  in  v.  Orion.)

23  Job  xx.  24.

24  The  Cyclops  are  feigned  to  have  constructed  a  cubical  altar  of
brass,  on  which  was  inscribed  the  name  of  God,  where  Jupiter  made
his  oath  before  his  attack  on  the  Titans.    Here  we  have  a  transcript
of  the  cubical  stone,  the  tetragrammaton,  and  the  Deity  himself,
involved  in  one  transaction,  which  may  find  its  parallel  and  prototype
in  the  history  of  Abraham.     Nay,  these  mysterious  artisans,  who  are
also  described  as  being  powerful  magicians,  which  was  indeed  the
character  of  every  hierophant  of  the  spurious  Freemasonry,    are
reputed  to  have  formed  a  man  of  brass,  which  was  presented  to  Minos
by  Vulcan,  and  performed  the  circuit  of  the  island  of  Crete  three
times  a-day,  in  the  king's  service.    (Apollod.  Bibl.  1.  i.  c.  9.)     And
this  brazen  man  was  connected  with  the  mysteries ;  for  he  is  said,
like  Osiris,  to  have  died,  and  was  revivified,  to  the  great  joy  of  the
people.   (Nonni  Dionys.  1.  xxv.)     In  connection  with  this  passage,
I  find  the  following,  and  I  quote  it  as  an  evidence  of  the  fact,  that
these  men  were  the  curators  of  worldly  possessions  : — "  The  Cuveras,
or  Cubiras,  as  it  is  generally  pronounced,  are  a  tribe  of  inferior  deities,
possessed  of  immense  riches,  and  who  are  acquainted  with  all  places
under  or  above  ground,  abounding  with  precious  metals  and  gems."
(Asiat  Res.  vol.  v.)

25  After  the  flood  these  arts  were  improved  by  the  fabulous  Tel-
chines,  the  reputed  inventors  of  the  spurious  Freemasonry.     Strabo


OF    FREEMASONRY .  213

new  impulse  which  his  inventions  would  convey  to
the  talented  workmen.26

But  their  worldly  possessions  would  be  incomplete
without  a  knowledge  of  the  precious  metals.  Accord-
ingly, if  we  use  the  analogy  of  the  early  periods  after
the  flood,27  we  may  reasonably  conclude  that  gold  and
silver  were  plentiful  amongst  the  antediluvians,  and
contributed  their  share  to  the  corruptions  which  ended
in  then1  destruction.  As  in  other  times  riches  pro-
duced luxury,  which  always  preceded  ruin.28  It  has

informs  us  (1.  xiv.),  that  they  were  excellent  artificers  in  brass  and
iron,  and  that  they  made  the  sickle  of  Cronus.  They  were  also
geometricians  and  architects ;  and  the  principal  buildings  of  antiquity
were  erected  under  the  direction  of  the  hierophants.

26  In  after  times  Tubal  Cain,  under  the  name  of  Vulcan,  and  his
Cyclops,  figured  as  workers  in  metals,  and  inventors  of  the  mysteries ;
and  hence  it  is  probable  that  he  was  the  hierophant  of  a  similar  insti-
tution in  his  day,  copied  from  the  previous  system  of  Seth,  and
applied  to  the  improvement  of  schemes  more  adapted  to  the  physical
pursuits  of  the  race  to  which  he  belonged.

27  All  history  and  experience  corroborate  the  statements  of  Moses
with  regard  to  the  early  and  prior  use  of  gold,  silver,  and  copper.
These  are  the  metals  which  are  the  most  easily  found,  which  are
found  in  the  purest  state,  and  the  most  easily  wrought.     Ancient
writers  frequently  speak  of  rivers  famous  for  the  gold,  silver,  and
copper  which  they  rolled  down  in  their  waters.     These  metals  are
also  found  in  other  situations  in  grains  or  lumps,  and  in  whichever
of  these  forms  exhibited,  the  metal  would  have  been  generally  so
pure  and  unmixed,  as  to  need  none  of  the  elaborate  processes  of
smelting  and  refining.   (Pict.  Bibl.  vol.  i.  p.  225.)

28  Plunder,  robbery,  and  violence  were  common  amongst  the  inha-
bitants of  the  whole  world,  for  the  earth  was  surcharged  with  a  dense
population,  and  the  people  preyed  upon  each  other.  Predatory  bands
of  men  were  everywhere  to  be  found,  and  war  formed  a  plausible
pretext  for  robbery  and  murder.


214


HISTORICAL    LANDMARKS


been  conjectured  that  the  phrase  "  sons  of  God,"  9  sig-
nified men  of  great  worldly  opulence  and  power  j30  who
oppressed  the  poor,  forcibly  abducting  their  daughters,
and  treating  them  in  a  base  and  unworthy  manner.
Protected  by  their  worldly  possessions,  they  threw  every
kind  of  indignity  on  the  lower  classes,  until  they  were
goaded  to  retaliation,  either  in  public  or  in  private;
and  at  length  the  earth  became  a  scene  of  violence,
which  excited  the  divine  indignation.

Coincident  with  other  inventions,  the  science  of
operative  masonry,  or  architecture,  was  developed,  for
the  sacred  writings  inform  us,  that  Cain  built  a  city.
And  this  would  necessarily  imply  a  competent  know-
ledge of  geometry.31  The  invention  of  building  is  attri-
buted by  Moses  to  Cain  and  his  issue ;  for  it  is  certain

29  Gen.  vi.  2.

30  "  Mankind,"  says  a  modern  writer,  "  particularly  in  the  dark
and  ignorant  ages,  were  divided  into  the  strong  and  the  weak ;  the
strong  and  weak  of  animal  frame,  when  corporeal  strength  more
decidedly  bore  sway  than  in  a  period  of  greater  cultivation ;  and  the
strong  and  weak  in  reference  to  intellect;   those  who  were  bold,
audacious,  and  enterprising,  in  acquiring  an  ascendancy  over  their
fellow-men,  and  those  who  truckled,  submitted,  and  were  acted  upon
from  an  innate  consciousness  of  inferiority,  and  a  superstitious  looking
up  to  such  as  were  of  greater  natural  or  acquired  endowments  than
themselves.     The  strong  in  intellect  were  eager  to  avail  themselves
of  their  superiority,  by  means  that  escaped  the  penetration  of  the
multitude,  and  had  recourse  to  various  artifices  to  effect  their  ends."
(Godwin.  Necromancers,  p.  2.)

31  Berosus  tells  us,  that  shortly  after  the  creation  there  appeared
out  of  the  Red  Sea  an  animal  like  a  fish,  called  Cannes.   This  animal
conversed  with  mankind  in  the  daytime,  and  delivered  to  them  the
knowledge  of  various  arts  and  sciences.     He  taught  them  to  erect
temples,  and  instructed  them  in  geometry.


OF    FREEMASONRY.  215

he  must  have  had  many  hands  to  join  with  him  when
he  built  his  first  city  in  the  land  of  Nod,32  calling  it  by
the  name  of  his  eldest  son,  Enoch.  But  in  what  cen-
tury of  his  life  this  was  done  we  are  not  informed ;  he
might  build  this  city  in  any  part  of  his  life,  agreeably
to  the  Mosaic  history.  It  is  probable  that  he  did  it
when  he  was  between  seven  and  eight  hundred  years
old,  and  had  seven  or  eight  generations  descended
from  him ;  and  the  numbers  so  increased,  as  to  be  not
only  sufficient  to  build  it  but  to  inhabit  and  defend
it.33  In  this  time,  all  the  arts  might  easily  be  invented
which  were  requisite  for  such  an  undertaking.  Moses
has  placed  all  the  artists  of  the  line  of  Cain  in  the
eighth  generation,  and  they  consist,  as  we  have  already
seen,  of  three  brothers,  the  children  of  Lamech :  Jabal,

32  "  I  am  not  concerned  to  determine  where  this  land  of  Nod,  or
this  city  was,  but  only  to  affirm,  that  if  it  signifies  only  the  land  of
his  pilgrimage,  or  of  praise,  as  some  render  it,  it  may  either  be
Phoenicia,  where  Sanchoniatho  saith  he  dwelt,  or  he  might  come  out
of  it  thither  in  some  time  of  his  life ;  either  way  his  words  may  be
true."   (Cumb.  Sanch.  p.  229.)     Wherever  it  might  be,  it  is  clear
that  he  laid  the  foundation  of  operative  architecture  and  spurious
Freemasonry,    and   probably   symbolical   knowledge   and  idolatry.
Eemembering  the  glory  of  the  Shekinah,  which  was  familiar  to  the
first  inhabitants  of  the  world,  even  in  their  fallen  state,  and  from
which  he  was  driven  like  an  outcast,  after  the  murder  of  his  brother ;
he  retained  the  same  reverence  for  the  sun,  and  falling  prostrate
before  it,  in  the  same  adoration  which  had  been  given  to  the  Shekinah
over  the  gate  of  paradise,  he  gave  the  first  outline  of  that  system  of
hieroglyphics,  which  afterwards  represented  the  objects  of  Egyptian
idolatry.     These  he  would  teach  to  his  posterity,  and  they  would  be
transmitted  by  Ham  and  his  descendants  to  the  inhabitants  of  the
post  diluvian  world."

33  Whiston  calculates  that  the  inhabitants  of  the  world  at  this
period  amounted  to  1,073,741,824  souls.


216


the  father  of  such  as  dwell  in  tents  ;  Jubal,34  the  father
of  such  as  handle  the  harp  (stringed  music),  and  the
organ  (wind  music};35  and  Tubal  Cain,36  an  instructor
of  artists37  working  in  iron  and  bras^.38

3*  An  old  Rabbinical  tradition  informs  usy  that  the  most  ancient
writing  in  the  world  was  the  work  of  Jubal,  who  having  heard  Adain
say  that  the  universe  would  be  twice  destroyed  by  the  elements  of
fire  and  water,  he  was  anxious  to  know  which  would  happen  first.
But  as  Adam  would  not,  or  could  not  tell  him,  he  inscribed  his
system  of  music  upon  two  pillars,  one  of  stone  and  the  other  of  brick,
which  he  thought  would  be  secure  against  either  element.  This,
however,  is  only  another  version  of  the  pillars  of  Enoch.

35  The  Chinese  ascribe  to  Niu-ova,  or  Eve,  several  instruments  of
music.     The  instruments  seng  and  hoang  served  her,  they  say,  to
communicate  with  the  eight  winds.    By  means  of  konene,  or  double
flutes,  she  united  all  sounds  into  one,  and  made  concord  between  the
sun,  moon,  and  stars.     Niu-ova  had  a  guitar  of  five  strings,  which
she  called  Se.     She  made  another  of  fifty  strings,  whose  sound  was
so  affecting  that  it  could  not  be  borne,  wherefore  she  reduced  them
to  twenty-five,  to  diminish  their  force.

36  "  The  Egyptians  had  other  hero  gods  besides  Vulcan  and  his
brethren.     Diodorus  gives  them  these  names :  Sol,  Saturn,  Rhea,
Jupiter,  Juno,  Vesta,  Meroury ;  and  says  they  all  reigned  in  Egypt
before  Menes;   so  that  they  certainly  lived  before  the  flood;  and
they  had  after  these  a  race  of  heroes,  fifteen  in  number,  who  were
likewise  antediluvians ;  but  I  do  not  imagine  they  were  deified  until
the  correcting  of  the  year."   (Shuck.  Con.  vol.  ii.  p.  285.)

37  The  Druids  gave  a  similar  account  of  their  Plieryllt,  who  were
"  deemed  to  have  been  the  first  teachers  of  all  curious  arts  and
sciences ;  and  more  particularly  are  thought  to  have  been  skilled  in
everything  that  required  the  operation  of  fire.     Hence  some  have
supposed,  that  the  term  implies  ckymists,  or  metallurgists.     But
chymistry  and  metallurgy  seem  rather  to  have  taken  their  British
name  from  these  ancient  priests,  being  called  Celvyddydau  Pheryllt,
the  arts  of  the  Pheryllt,  or  some  of  those  mysteries  in  which  they
were  eminently  conversant."    (Dav.  Dru.  p.  215.)

38  "  Somewhat  answerable  hereunto,  Sanchoniatho  has  placed  his


OF    FREEMASONRY.  217

These  remarks  of  Bishop  Cumberland  are  peculiarly
interesting  when  applied  to  the  present  subject,  because
they  assert  the  occupancy  of  the  Jewish  land  of  pro-
mise before  the  flood,  and  speak  of  the  remains  of
antediluvian  architecture  after  that  event ;  although
the  land  of  Nod,  to  which  Cain  migrated  with  his
family,  was  widely  distant  from  his  city  of  Cain ;  nor
does  his  geography  of  that  place  correspond  with  the
situation  of  the  Cain  of  our  scriptures.39  But  it  assigns
a  high  degree  of  perfection  to  the  mechanical  arts
connected  with  operative  masonry.

chief  artists  in  the  seventh  and  eighth  generations.  His  Vulcan,
with  his  brother  workers  in  iron,  to  him  he  ascribes  the  invention  of
the  hook,  bait,  and  fishing  line;  yea,  of  boats  and  sailing,  songs
of  longer  and  shorter  measures,  mixed  epodse,  and  divinations ;  inso-
much, that  they  worshipped  him  as  a  god  after  his  death,  and  called
him  Dia-michion ;  for  so,  I  think,  his  name  should  be  written  in  two
words  whose  nominative  is  Zfvs  Mt^tos,  from  TTD,  Mahhi,  Machina,
the  great  engineer.  In  his  eighth  generation  he  introduces  Technites,
which  signifies  the  artist ;  and  Autochthon,  to  whom  he  ascribes  the
invention  of  bricks,  tiles,  and  roofs  for  houses."  (Cumb.  Sanch.
p.  231.)

39  It  was  an  ancient  belief  that  the  pyramids  were  built  before
the  flood.  Murtadi,  in  his  legendary  history  of  Egypt  (Merveilles
d'Egypte,  p.  119),  says  that  "  the  priest  Philemon,  being  deputed
by  Pharaan,  the  last  antediluvian  King  of  Egypt,  on  a  religious  con-
ference with  Noah,  was  converted  by  the  patriarch,  and  admitted
into  the  ark  with  his  daughter,  afterwards  married  to  Mizraim,  the
son  of  Ham.  Philemon,  returning  to  Egypt  with  his  grandson  and
thirty  followers,  reopened  the  pyramids,  taught  them  the  secret
writing  of  the  birbas,  or  temples,  the  knowledge  of  the  talismans
concealed  in  them;  and  how  to  make  new  ones ;  and  also  the  rules
how  to  subject  spirits."


218


HISTORICAL   LANDMARKS


LECTURE   XXX.


THE    HOLY   LODGE.

"  The  Holy  Lodge  was  opened  about  the  year  2415,  two  years
after  the  exodus  of  the  Israelites  from  their  Egyptian  bondage,  on
consecrated  ground,  at  the  foot  of  mount  Horeb  in  the  wilderness  of
Sinai,  where  the  host  of  Israel  pitched  their  tents,  and  assembled  to
pour  forth  their  praises  and  thanksgivings  for  the  signal  deliverance
from  the  hands  of  the  Egyptians.  In  this  place  the  Almighty  had
previously  revealed  himself  to  his  faithful  servant  Moses,  when  he
commissioned  him,  as  an  ambassador  of  wrath  against  Pharaoli  and
his  people,  and  of  freedom  and  salvation  to  the  house  of  Jacob.
Here  were  delivered  the  forms  of  those  mysterious  prototypes  of  the
tabernacle,  the  ark  of  the  covenant,  and  the  decalogue,  engraven  by
the  finger  of  the  Most  High,  with  the  sublime  and  comprehensive
precepts  of  religious  and  moral  duty.  And  here  was  dictated  by  his
unerring  wisdom  those  peculiar  forms  of  civil  and  religious  polity
which,  by  separating  his  people  from  all  other  nations,  consecrated
Israel  a  chosen  vessel  for  his  service." — ANON.

"  Though  the  Almighty  and  eternal  Jehovah  has  no  occasion  for
a  temple,  or  house  to  dwell  in,  for  the  heaven  of  heavens  is  not
capable  of  containing  his  immensity,  yet  it  was  his  divine  will  that
a  tabernacle  should  be  erected  for  him  in  the  wilderness  by  Moses  as
his  sanctuary,  which  was  to  be  constructed,  not  according  to  human
invention,  but  after  the  pattern  which  the  Lord  himself  had  given.
The  whole  model  of  the  tabernacle  was  shown  to  Moses  on  mount
Sinai.1' — SMITH.

WE  have  seen,  in  a  previous  lecture,1  in  what
manner  the  children  of  Israel  were  delivered  from  their

1  Lecture  xiii.


OF    FREEMASONRY.  219

Egyptian  bondage,  and  how  they  were  conducted  by
the  Deity,  in  the  visible  form  of  a  pillar  of  a  cloud  and
of  fire,  through  the  Red  Sea,  thus  escaping  the  danger
to  which  they  fancied  themselves  exposed  from  the
numerous  and  well-appointed  army  of  Pharaoh.2  Free-
masonry now  calls  on  us  to  record  some  other  events
which  occurred  after  their  miraculous  escape.

Led  by  this  glorious  pillar,  they  did  not  arrive  at
Sinai  without  interruption.  The  Amalekites,  in  order
to  revenge  an  old  quarrel  with  Moses,  harrassed  the
Israelites  in  their  journey,  and  at  length  brought  them
to  a  pitched  battle.3  Moses  made  due  preparations  for

2  The  etymology  of  the  word  Pharaoh  is  thus  given  in  the  Asiatic
Kesearches  (vol.  v.  p.  115)  : — "  In  the  book  of  Jeremiah  a  king  of
Egypt  is  styled  Pharaoh-hophra ;  and  it  is  not  a  very  improbable
conjecture  that  the  title  of  Pharaoh  given  to  successive  kings  of
Egypt  is  a  corruption  of  the  word  Phraw  or  Praw,  in  its  original
sense  signifying  the  sun,  and  applied  to  the  sovereign  and  priesthood,
as  the  representatives  on  earth  of  that  splendid  luminary."     In  the
first  book  of  Moses,  Pharaoh  gave  Joseph  to  wife  the  daughter  of
Potipherah,  priest  of  On.     Now  the  words  "  priest  of  On,"  seem  to
have  been  added  by  the  sacred  historian  as  explanatory  of  the  title
Potipherah.     A  priest  of  On  is  a  priest  of  the  sun ;  and  Potipherah
is  Petah-phrah,  which  signifies  likewise  a  priest  of  the  sun.    (Fab.
Cab.  vol.  i.  p.  115,  n.)

3  "  Whilst  the  nation  of  Amalek  existed,  they  took  every  oppor-
tunity of  confederating  against  the  people  of  Israel,  and  distressing
them  every  way,  till  they  were  themselves  reduced  to  the  last  ex-
tremity by  Saul  and  David,  and  finally  ruined  by  Hezekiah  King  of
Judah.     Nor  did  this  inveteracy  cease  with  their  nation ;  as  long  as
any  survived  of  the  old  stock,  wherever  scattered  and  removed,  they
still  contrived  mischief  to  the  Jews ;  and  at  one  time  were  well  nigh
retaliating  all  that  they  had  suffered  from  them ;  the  whole  of  the
surviving  race  of  Israel  being  brought  to  the  very  brink  of  ruin  by
the  wicked  suggestions  of   Haman,   who  was  an  Agagite.      The


220


HISTORICAL    LANDMARKS


the  conflict,  and  ascending  a  neighbouring  eminence,
seated  himself  on  the  stone  of  power4  which  had  been
the  resting  place  of  Jacob  in  his  solitary  journey  to
Padanarum.  When  he  elevated  his  hands  in  prayer,
with  the  miraculous  rod  between  them,  the  Israelites
prevailed;  but  when,  from  fatigue,  he  suffered  his
hands  to  sink,  the  Amalekites  had  the  advantage/
Aaron  and  Hur,  who  were  present,  perceiving  the  ef-
fects which  proceeded  from  the  elevation  of  his  hands,
supported  them  till  the  going  down  of  the  sun  ;  and
the  Amalekites  were  totally  routed  and  put  to  flight.6

danger  was  so  imminent  and  immediate,  and  the  mischief  so  nar-
rowly escaped,  that  the  Jews  still  hold  an  annual  feast  in  commemo-
ration of  their  great  deliverance."  (Bryant,  Anal.  vol.  vi.  p.  223.)

4  Our  legends  state,  that  when  the  time  arrived  that  the  Israelites
were  to  depart  out  of  Egypt,  and  Jehovah  deputed  Moses  to  lead
them  forth,  the  lawgiver  retained  the  Stone  on  which  he  found  the
sacred  name  of  God,  by  the  efficacy  of  which  they  were  to  be  con-
ducted in  safety  to  the  promised  land.

5  "  The  Jerusalem  Targum  records  that  during  the  battle,  while
Moses  held  forth  his  hands  in  prayer,  his  people  prevailed.     The
book  of  Exodus  mentions  the  same  miracle  attending  this  act  of
devotion  of  the  great  lawgiver,  whose  arms  were  supported  in  the
peculiar  form  of  supplication  by  Aaron  and  Hur,  until  the  over-
throw of  the  enemy.     Many  have  been  the  opinions  of  the  com-
mentators of  the  bible  upon  this  passage.    The  learned  Adam  Clark
has  suggested  that  Moses  held  forth  the  rod  of  the  Lord  in  his
hands.     The  early  fathers  of  the  church  considered  it  a  type  of  a
sign  destined  hereafter  to  become  peculiar  to  salvation.     The  nrason
is  content  to  draw  from  it  a  beautiful  moral  of  the  influence  of
prayer  supported  by  faith  and  perseverance ;  to  trace  in  it  an  autho-
rity for  those  mysteries  peculiar  to  the  Fellowcraft's  degree,  and  an
additional  confirmation  of  the  divine  origin  of  our  order."  (F.  Q,.  E.
1834.  p.  371.)

6  In  commemoration  of  this  victory  Moses  reared  an  altar,  and


OP    FREEMASONRY.  221

Moses  conducted  this  immense  multitude  to  Mount
Sinai,7  when  the  Lord  appeared8  to  him  amidst  thun-
derings  and  lightnings,9  and  commanded  him  to  erect

called  it  Jehovah  Nissi ;  because  it  had  been  divinely  communicated
to  him  that  (as  it  is  forcibly  expressed  by  the  lawgiver  in  the  ori-
ginal of  Exod.  xviii.  26.)  "  God  had  sworn,  placing  his  hand  on

the  throne  of (here  Moses  used  the  mysterious  word

)  that  he  would  wage  war  against  the  Amalekites  until  he

had  destroyed  them."

7  "It  is  not  easy  to  comprehend,"  says  Niebuhr,  "  how  such  a
multitude  of  people  as  the  Jews  who  accompanied  Moses  out  of
Egypt,  could  encamp  in  such  narrow  gullies  as  exist  in  the  neigh-
bourhood of  Mount  Sinai,  amidst  frightful  and  precipitous  rocks.
But  perhaps  there  are  plains  that  we  know  not  of  on  the  other  side
of  the  mountain.  Two  German  miles  and  a  half  up  the  mountain
stands  the  convent  of  St.  Catherine ;  and  2000  paces  above  this  are
two  trees,  under  which,  at  high  festivals,  the  Arabs  are  regaled  at
the  expence  of  the  Greeks,  The  guides  maintained  this  to  be  the
highest  accessible  peak  of  the  mountain ;  whereas,  according  to
Pococke,  I  had  yet  1000  steps  to  ascend,  when  I  was  obliged  to
return."  (Travels  in  Arabia,  p.  92.)  From  this  immense  height  the
voice  of  the  Lord  was  heard  by  all  the  Israelites,  although  they
amounted  to  two  millions  of  souls,  and  were  distributed,  not  on  a  level
plain  at  the  foot  of  a  mountain,  but  amidst  deep  valleys  and  ravines
dispersed  amongst  the  hills  through  a  space  of  forty  miles  in  diameter.

s  The  Shekinah  came  down  into  the  thick  cloud  with  a  glittering
company  of  angels,  who  appeared  like  flames  of  fire,  according  to
the  Psalmist,  (civ.  4.)  Thus  Moses  himself  seems  to  expound  it
(Deut.  xxxiii.  2.)  "  he  came  with  ten  thousands,  or  myriads  of  holy
angels,  and  from  his  right  hand  went  a  fiery  law  for  them."  (Patrick.
Com.  vol.  i.  p.  268.)

9  Some  critics  have  doubted  whether  the  original  words  have  here
been  correctly  rendered.  "  A  very  different  word  is  used  to  express
lightning  in  the  Hebrew ;  and  here  it  is  to  be  understood  of  trees
naming  around  the  divine  presence,  bearing  some  resemblance  to  the
torches  made  of  splinters  of  wood,  which  were  used  on  less  august
occasions.  All  the  people  heard  the  thunderings,  and  saw  the  trees


222


HISTORICAL    LANDMARKS


a  tent  or  tabernacle10  as  a  place  for  divine  worship,  and
as  a  depository  for  the  two  tables  of  stone,11  and  the

flaming  like  so  many  torches,  and  they  removed  and  stood  afar  off.
Lightning  is  understood  here  without  doubt,  and  that  the  trees  were
set  on  fire  by  the  lightning  will  hardly  be  contested ;  from  wln-mr
else  would  have  come  the  smoke  ?  But  the  word  really  signifies
torches,  and  not  flashes  of  lightning.  According  to  Egmont  and
Heyman,  a  tree,  in  some  measure  resembling  the  tamarisk,  which
produces  a  very  oily  fruit,  grows  in  great  quantities  on  Mount  Sinai.
Whether  they  were  trees  of  this  kind  which  blazed  with  such  awful
pomp  when  the  law  was  given,  or  any  other,  may  be  left  to  the
curious  to  inquire."  (Harmer.  Observ.  vol.  iv.  p.  200.)  If  this
theory  be  correct,  the  fire,  like  that  of  the  burning  bush,  would  emit
light  but  no  heat.

10  "  The  tabernacle  appears  to  have  been  constructed  on  the  plan
of  the  Egyptian  temples.     It  is  true  that,  strictly  speaking,  it  ought
not  to  be  looked  upon  as  a  piece  of  architecture,  being  only  a  va>l
tent.   But  by  reflecting  on  it  more  attentively,  we  shall  perceive  that
the  tabernacle  had  a  great  relation  with  architecture.    In  the  govern-
ment of  the  Hebrews,  the  Supreme  Being  was  equally  their  God  and
King.     The  tabernacle  was  erected  with  a  view  to  answer  to  the
double  title.    It  served  at  once  for  the  temple  and  the  palace.     The
Israelites  went  there  sometimes  to  adore  the  Almighty,  and  sometimes
to  receive  the  orders  of  their  Sovereign,  present  in  a  sensible  manner
in  the  midst  of  his  people.     We  ought  then  to  look  upon  the  taber-
nacle as  a  work  which  should  have  relation  with  the  edifices  in  the
East,  whether  for  the  worship  of  the  gods  or  the  habitation  of  kings.
It  was  the  custom  to  ornament  these  monuments  with  columns  va-
riously worked  and  enriched.     There  were  many  in  the  tabernacle,
supported  on  bases  of  silver  or  copper,  and  surmounted  with  chapi-
ters of  gold  and  silver.     The  shaft  of  these  columns  was  of  precious
wood  covered  with  plates  of  gold  and  silver.    The  whole  construction
of  the  tabernacle  presented,  moreover,  the  model  of  a  regular  edifice
distributed  with  much  skill.     All  the  dimensions  and  proportions
appear  to  have  been  observed  with  care,  and  perfectly  well  adapted."
(Goguet,  vol.  ii.  p.  129.)

11  R.  Johanan  says,  that  the  voice  uttering  the  decalogue  divided


OP    FREEMASONRY.  223

books  of  the  law.12  This  tabernacle  he  was  directed  to
place  due  east  and  west,  in  commemoration  of  the  wind
which  dried  up  the  passage  through  the  Red  Sea,  and
changing  suddenly  into  the  opposite  quarter,  proved
the  destruction  of  Pharoah's  mighty  host.13

itself  into  seventy  languages,  so  that  each  nation  might  hear  it  in  its
own  tongue.  E.  Tanhuma  understands,  in  an  allegorical  sense,  that
by  these  voices  is  meant  the  different  comprehensions  entertained  by
every  person  present,  respecting  the  divine  words ;  and  therefore
adds,  that  the  voice  communicated  itself  to  old  and  young,  women
and  children,  in  proportion  to  their  several  faculties.  (Shemot  Raba,
c.  5.29.)

12  In  the  preface  to  the  Mishna  we  find  this  explanation.  It  is
there  said  that  God  not  only  delivered  the  law  to  Moses  on  Mount
Sinai,  but  the  interpretation  of  it  likewise ;  and  when  he  came  down
from  the  mount,  Aaron  visited  him  in  his  tent,  accompanied  by
Eleazer  and  Ithamar,  to  whom  Moses  repeated  the  interpretation.
Then  the  seventy  elders  of  the  Sanhedrim  came  in,  and  Moses  again
repeated  it  to  them.  Lastly,  all  who  pleased  of  the  common  people
were  invited  to  enter,  and  were  instructed  by  the  lawgiver.  He  after-
wards reduced  the  laws  to  writing,  but  not  the  explanations  of  them ;
these  he  thought  it  sufficient  to  trust  to  memory.  Thus  the  above
mentioned  persons,  having  been  perfectly  instructed,  delivered  them
to  their  children,  and  these  again  to  theirs,  from  age  to  age.

is  (i  "When  the  Israelites,"  says  Godwyn,  "  came  out  of  Egypt,
Moses  commanded  them  to  build  a  tabernacle  for  the  place  of  God's
public  worship.  Afterward,  when  they  were  settled  in  the  promised
land,  then  Solomon  was  commanded  to  build  a  temple.  These  two
shadowed  the  difference  between  the  Jews'  synagogue  and  the
Christian  church.  The  tabernacle  was  moveable,  and  but  for  a
time  ;  the  temple  fixed  and  permanent ;  the  state  of  the  Jews  vanish-
ing, to  continue  in  their  generation ;  the  state  of  Christians  durable,
to  continue  unto  the  world's  end.  More  principally  it  shadowed
forth  the  state  of  the  church  militant  here  on  earth,  and  triumphant
in  heaven.  Unto  both  the  prophet  David  alludeth ; — Lord,  who  shall
sojourn  in  thy  tabernacle  ?  Who  shall  rest  in  thine  holy  mountain  ?"
(Moses  and  Aaron,  p.  62.)


224


HISTORICAL    LANDMARKS


Here  was  opened  the  Holy  Lodge  by  Moses,  Aho-
liab  and  Bezaleel;  and  being  inspired  from  on  high
for  the  particular  service  of  building  the  tabernacle,
the  two  latter  commenced  the  duties  which  were  in-
trusted to  them  with  zeal  and  assiduity,  having  been
appointed  by  Moses  as  his  wardens,  to  superintend
the  execution  of  the  various  details  of  the  work.14  And
nobly  did  they  redeem  the  trust  reposed  in  them.  Pos-
sessed of  equal  industry  and  talent,  they  executed  with
their  own  hands  the  works  which  required  the  greatest
skill  and  ingenuity ;  and  completed  all  those  beautiful
decorations,  as  well  in  the  embroidery  of  blue,  purple
and  crimson  silk  and  fine  linen,15  as  in  the  more  diffi-
cult undertakings  of  the  goldsmith  and  lapidary ;  the

14  It  ought  to  be  here  observed,  that  ail  expert  artists,  of  what-
ever description,  are   designated  by  the   appellation   of  WISDOM.
(Exod.  xxxv.  10.)     And  amongst  the  heathen,  in  like  manner,  all
skilful  architects  are  termed  wise  men.     Thus  Aristotle  says,  "  we
ascribe  wisdom  to  those  who  excel  in  the  arts."     And  he  instances
Phidias  and  Polycletus  as  men  of  superior  wisdom.     This  opinion
was  probably  derived  from  the  Almighty  describing  Bezabel  as  being
filled  with  the  spirit  of  wisdom.   (Exod.  xxxi.  6.)

15  "  The  hangings  of  the  court  of  the  tabernacle  probably  are  to
be  understood  not  to  have  been  simple  linen  cloth,  but  cloth  diapered,
or  wrought  in  pleasing  figures  of  some  such  kind.  (Exod.  xxvii.  9.)
The  curtains  of  the  sacred  tent  itself  were  to  be  of  fine  linen,  inter-
mingled  with   blue,  purple  and  scarlet,  wrought  into   figures  of
cherubs  with  great  art.  (Ib.  xxvi.  1.)    From  which  the  veil  hanging
over  the  door,  certainly  designed  to  be  richer  than  the  preceding,  if
there  were  any  distinction  between  them,  is  described  as  formed  of
the  same  materials  ;  but  the  figures  made  of  maaseh  rokem,  needle-
work, v.  36,  a  very  different  word  from  maaseh  chosheb,  used  in  the
first  verse,  which  is  a  general  term  to  point  out  some  new  and  in-
genious invention  in  any  art,  and  consequently  may  as  well  relate  to
the  art  of  weaving  as  any  other."  (Harmer.  Observ.  vol.  iv.  p.  219.)


OF    FREEMASONRY.  225

chasing,  engraving  and  annealing  of  gold,  silver  and
metals ;  the  polishing  and  setting  of  precious  stones,
and  the  casting  and  decoration  of  the  holy  vessels  and
cherubim  of  gold.16

The  tabernacle  or  tent17  which  Moses  was  ready  to

16  "  Some  may  possibly  think  it  unaccountable,"  says  Bishop  Pa-
trick (on  Exod.  xxxviii.  26.),  "  that  so  great  treasures  should  be
found  amongst  the  Israelites  in  the  desert ;  and  especially  that  they
should  be  furnished  with  such  quantities  of  precious  stones.     But
these  persons  should  consider,  that  their  ancestors  had  gathered  great
riches  before  they  came  into  Egypt,  where  Joseph  left  them  no  small
treasures;  and  though  Pharaoh  perhaps  squeezed  them,  yet  they
preserved  most  of  their  riches,  and  were  reimbursed  for  what  they
lost  by  what  they  borrowed  of  the  Egyptians.     From  whose  dead
bodies,  thrown  on  the  sea-shore,  we  may  well  suppose  they  got  still
more,  as  they  did  also  from  the  Amalekites.    They  had  shittim  wood
in  the  wilderness,  and  some  of  the  Jews  think  they  traded  with  the
neighbouring  nations."

17  "  The  Turks,  and  the  Eastern  nations  generally,  spare  for  no-
thing in  rendering  their  tents  convenient  and  magnificent.     Those
belonging  to  the  grand  signer  were  exceedingly  splendid  and  covered
entirely  with  silk,  and  one  of  them  lined  with  a  rich  silk  stuff.    But
even  this  was  exceeded  by  another,  which  cost  25,000  piasters ;  it
was  made  in  Persia,  and  intended  as  a  present  to  the  grand  signer.
The  outside  was  not  indeed  remarkable,  but  it  was  lined  with  a  single

•  o

piece  made  of  camel's  hair,  and  beautifully  decorated  with  festoons,
and  sentences  in  the  Turkish  language."  (Travels  by  Von  Egmont
and  Heyman,  vol.  i.  p.  212.)  Nadir  Shah  had  a  very  superb  tent,
covered  on  the  outside  with  scarlet  broadcloth,  and  lined  within  with
violet  coloured  satin,  ornamented  with  a  great  variety  of  animals,
flowers,  &c.,  formed  entirely  of  pearls  and  precious  stones.  Chardin
says  that  the  King  of  Persia  caused  a  tent  to  be  made  which  cost
2,000,000  of  money.  They  called  it  the  house  of  gold,  because  gold
glittered  everywhere  about  it.  And  there  was  an  inscription  on  the
cornice  of  the  antechamber,  which  called  it  the  throne  of  the  second
Solomon.

VOL.  II.


226


HISTORICAL    LANDMARKS


frame,  was  a  model  of  the  temple  built  by  King  Solo-
mon on  Mount  Moriah.  And  in  it  God  gave  the
people,  instead  of  the  enigmatical  and  idle  hiero-
glyphics of  the  world  which  were  used  in  Egypt,18  a
more  excellent  system  of  it  in  this  great  typical  fabric  ;
representing,  in  the  three  spaces  of  it,19  the  three  hea-
vens which  the  Jews  so  often  speak  of,  viz.  the  ele-
mentary, the  starry,  and  the  super-celestial  regions.20

18  In  a  "  brief  examination  of  the  Divine  Legation  of  Moses  "  are  the
following  remarks : — "  As  the  Mosaic  constitution  was  accommo-
dated to  the  natural  temper  and  bias  of  a  people  perfectly  Egyp-
tianized,  and  who  knew  nothing  but  the  language,  laws  and  customs
of  Egypt,  the  history  of  Moses  gives  one  almost  as  just  a  notion  of
the  religion,  priesthood  and  worship  of  Egypt,  as  if  their  own  history
had  been  handed  down  to  us.     And  though  Moses  attempted,  in  his
law,  to  reform  the  religion  of  Egypt,  with  regard  to  their  symbolical
polytheism,  or  sideral  worship  by  images,  yet  this  could  never  be
effected,  but  the  gross  of  the  people  still  continued  in  their  symbolical
worship,  except  when  restrained  from  it  by  force  and  compulsion."

19  The  frequent  references  to  the  number  three  in  the  sacred
writings  is  remarkable.     Our  grand  master  David  enumerates  three
kind  of  deaths  which  are  common  to  man.    The  thrice  two  wings  of
the  angels  mentioned  by  Isaiah,  according  to  the  Rabbins,  refer  to
the  understanding  that  knows,  the  will  that  directs,  and  the  power
that  executes.     They  compare  the  law  to  three  things — water,  wine
and  milk.     The  Talmudists  say,  the  disposition  of  a  man  is  ascer-
tained by  his  conduct  in  his  purse,  his  cup  and  his  passion ;  and  the
son  of  Sirach  says  there  are  but  three  things  lovely  and  three  things
hateful.

20  "  St.  Chrysostom,  speaking  of  this  workmanship  of  God,  calleth
it  the  image  of  the  whole  world,  both  sensible  and  intellectual.   And
he  attempteth  the  justification  of  his  notion  by  the  9th  chapter  of
the  Hebrews,  and  particularly  by  the  24th  verse,  in  which  the  holy
places  made  with  hands  are  called  the  figures  of  the  true  or  heavenly
places."  {Ten.  Idol.  p.  339.)


OF    FREEMASONRY.  227

Aholiab  and  Bezaleel21  constructed  the  tabernacle  ac-
cording to  the  pattern  which  Moses  had  received  on
the  mount.  The  Israelites  possessed  many  prejudices,22
.  which  were  arrayed  against  a  steady  perseverance  in
the  true  worship  of  God.  They  had  been  so  much  in
the  habit  of  seeing  the  false  deities  of  Egypt  adored,23
as  to  have  almost  an  hereditary  respect  for  them  ;24  and
though  they  had  been  witness  to  the  stupendous  de-
liverance which  God  had  vouchsafed  to  them,  in  oppo-
sition to  all  the  power  of  the  Egyptian  monarch,  his
priests,  his  magicians,  his  army,  and  his  gods ;  though
they  beheld  and  quailed  under  his  terrible  glory  on
Mount  Sinai,25  and  had  experienced  his  power  both  in

21  The  gold,  silver  and  brass,  for  the  tabernacle,  were  intrusted  to
Bezaleel,  as  the  principal  person  who  was  to  see  it  employed  in
making  everything  which  the  Lord  commanded  Moses.

22  And  therefore,  as  St.  Cyril  says,  because  the  feeble  and  earthly
minds  of  the  Israelites  could  not  without  difficulty  be  brought  off
from  the  worship  and  ungodly  manners,  and  detestable  superstitions
of  the  Egyptians,  God,  by  the  Mosaic  law,  gave  them  a 'spiritual
command  against  many  gods;  and  yet  permitted  them,  after  the
ancient  manner  of  worship  to  which  they  had  been  accustomed,  to
offer   eucharistical   and   expiatory  oblations,  duly  and   wisely  ap-
pointed, and  as  types  and  shadows  of  good  things  to  come."  (Alex,
cont.  Julian,  p.  126.)

23  Clemens  Alexandrinus  (Strom.  1.  i.   670.)  asserts  that  "  the
enigmas  of  the  Egyptians  are  very  similar  to  those  of  the  Jews."

24  The  Talmudists  say,  "  ye  shall  not  make  the  similitude  of  the
ministers  that  minister  before  me  above,  as  the  sun,  the  moon,  the
stars,  or  the  angels."     And  Maimonides  adds,  it  is  unlawful  to  form
images  of  the  sun,  the  moon,  the  celestial  signs,  &c.,  according  to
what  is  written,  "  you  shall  not  make  anything  like  the  ministers
that  serve  me  above."  (Selden,  1.  ii.  2.  de  Jure.)

25  Our  traditional  stone  of  foundation  is  said  to  have  been  in  re-
quisition when  Moses  beheld  this  glory.     He  fell  down  on  his  knees

Q2


228


HISTORICAL    LANDMARKS


justice  and  in  mercy ;  though  they  had  his  Shekinah
amongst  them,  and  were  daily  fed  by  his  heavenly
manna  ;26  yet  their  hearts  secretly  yearned  after  super-
stitions which  were  pompous  and  imposing,  and  had
the  advantage  of  being  endeared  to  them  by  the  early
recollections  of  their  youthful  days.27  Thus  the  prophet

in  an  agony  of  fear,  when  the  majesty  of  God  was  manifested  in  a
bright  consuming  fire  and  flashes  of  brilliant  light,  accompanied  by
terrific  thunderings  and  the  sound  of  angelic  trumpets.  These  tokens,
which  indicated,  the  divine  presence,  were  introduced  with  such  cere-
mony of  preparation,  that  boundary  marks  were  set  round  about  the
mountain,  and  the  penalty  of  death  attached  to  the  crime  of  passing
the  sacred  barrier.  In  this  situation  the  Deity  condescended  to  con-
verse with  Moses  face  to  face,  and  all  the  people  heard  the  gracious
words  that  issued  from  his  mouth.  Every  individual  in  this  great
congregation,  which  occupied  a  space  of  many  miles  in  circumference,
distinctly  understood  the  voice  that  spake  unto  them.  "  Proportio-
nata,"  says  Cardinal  Cajetan,  "  erat  tarn  propinguis,  quam  distantibus
auditoribus."

26  ci  jruchsulS)  a  learned  physician,  testifieth  that  there  falleth  great
store  of  manna  upon  the  mountain  of  Libanus,  which  is  eaten  with-
out harm,  although  they  take  it  in  plentiful  abundance.     Yet  never-
theless it  cannot  be  denied  but  that  the  Israelites  had  many  things
miraculous  in  theirs,  as  that  they  could  not  find  it  on  the  sabbath
day ;  that  he  which  gathered  little,  and  he  that  gathered  much,  had
always  sufficient  for  his  eating,  and  the  like.     All  which  proclaimed
the  power  of  God ;  in  which  regard  he  saith  that  he  fed  them  with
angels'  food.     Not  that  the  angels  eat  of  it,  but  that  it  was  cibus
excellent  issimus,  a  most  excellent  kind  of  meat ;  insomuch  that  were
angels  to  be  fed  with  bread,  they  might  be  fed  with  this."  (Hexam.
c.  v.  s.  2.  par.  6.)

27  Davies  remarks  with  great  propriety,  that  "  as  certain  rites  and
symbols  were  enjoined  to  the  Israelites,  not  because  they  were  hea-
thenish, but  because  they  were  patriarchal,  and  of  divine  institution,
so  they  were  not  omitted  in  consequence  of  the  mere  accident  that
the  gentiles  had  retained  them."  (Druids,  p.  499.)


OY    FliEEMASONRY.  229

Amos  upbraids  them  with  their  superstitions  in  the
wilderness,  by  bearing  about  the  tabernacle  of  Mo-
loch ; m  a  custom  which  they  had  doubtless  derived
from  the  Egyptians,29  and  consequently  had  been  in

28  "  It  is  thought  with  great  probability  that  Moloch,  and  those
other  Pagan  deities  which  the  Tsraelities  carried  with  them  in  the
desert,  were  borne  in  niches  upon  mens'  shoulders,  or  drawn  about
on  covered  carriages,  as  we  know  the  heathens  carried  their  idols  in
procession  or  in  public  marches.     There  are  some  who  believe  that
the  silver  temples  of  the  goddess  Diana,  which  were  made  and  sold
at  Ephesus,  were  also  these  niches  or  portable  temples,  for  the  de-
votion of  pilgrims.     The  custom  of  carrying  the  images  of  the  gods
under  tents  and  in  covered  litters,  came  originally  from  the  Egyp-
tians.    Herodotus  speaks  of  a  feast  of  Isis,  wherein  her  statue  was
carried  upon  a  chariot  with  four  wheels,  drawn  by  her  priests.     The
same  author,  speaking  of  one  of  their  deities,  says,  they  carried  it
from  one  temple  to  another  inclosed  in  a  little  chapel  made  of  gilt
wood.     Clemens  of  Alexandria  speaks  of  an  Egyptian  procession,
wherein  they  carried  two  dogs  of  gold,  a  hawk,  and  an  ibis.     The
same  father  quotes  the  words  of  Menander,  who  rallied  those  vagrant
divinities  that  could  not  continue  in  one  place.    Macrobius  says,  that
the  Egyptian  priests  carried  the  statue  of  Jupiter  of  Heliopolis  upon
their  shoulders,  as  the  gods  of  the  Romans  were  earned  in  the  pomp
of  the  games  of  the  circus.     Philo  of  By  bios  relates,  that  they  used
to  carry  Agrotes,  a  Phoenician  deity,  in  a  covered  niche  upon  a  car
drawn  by  beasts.    The  Egyptian  priests  placed  Jupiter  Ammon  upon
a  little  boat,  from  whence  hung  plates  of  silver,  by  the  motion  of
which  they  formed  a  judgment  of  the  will  of  the  deity,  and  from
whence  they  made  their  responses  to  such  as  consulted  them."  (Cak
met  in  v.  Niches.)

29  The  opinion  of  Spencer  is,  that  the  tabernacle,  together  with  all
its  furniture  and  appurtenances,  was  of  Egyptian  origin ;  and  that  it
was  framed  by  Moses  on  the  model  of  some  such  fabric  which  he  had
observed  in  Egypt,  or  else  that  God  directed  it  to  be  made  with  a
view  of  indulging  the  Israelites  in  the  customs  and  modes  of  worship
they  had  acquired  in  Egypt,  in  so  far  as  they  were  not  directly  sin-
ful.   The  predilection  of  the  Israelites  for  visible  gods  was  indicated


230


HISTORICAL    LANDMARKS


use  long  before  the  time  of  Moses;30  therefore  that
the  Israelites,  who  were  extremely  addicted  to  the
manners  of  the  Egyptians,  might  not  any  longer  bear
about  an  idolatrous  altar,  they  were  commanded
to  build  a  tabernacle  to  the  true  and  living  God,  and
carry  it  about  in  honour  of  him.31

But  while  Moses  was  yet  in  the  mount,32  the  lust  of

before  the  erection  of  the  tabernacle,  in  the  affair  of  the  golden  calf,
and  on  subsequent  occasions ;  and  we  may  infer  from  Amos  v.  26,
and  Acts  vii.  42,  that  they  had  brought  with  them  from  Egypt  the
tabernacle  of  Moloch,  which  was  probably  a  portable  shrine  or  small
temple  containing  the  image  of  the  idol.  See  the  question  argued
at  length  in  the  pictorial  Bible  under  Exod.  xxvi.  30.

30  "  It  appeareth  that  God  gave  the  Jews  sufficient  antidotes
against  idolatry ;  and  it  is  as  manifest  that  their  folly  rendered  them
very  often  ineffectual.  They  by  their  ritual  inclination,  by  cohabi-
tation, by  commerce,  by  apish  affectation  of  foreign  modes,  learned
the  Egyptian,  Assyrian,  and  Babylonian  idolatries.  Some  of  this
leaven  broke  out  in  the  wilderness.  There  they  began  to  lean  to-
wards the  worship  of  false  gods,  by  adoring  the  true  one  in  the  un-
meet symbol  of  a  golden  calf.  They  worshipped  Moloch  by  the
tabernacle  which  the  priests  took  up,  and  Remphan  by  a  star  and
the  host  of  heaven.  Amongst  that  host  of  orderly  lights,  some  have
placed  the  prototype  of  Apis,  and  supposed  him  to  be  the  sun."
(Ten.  Idol.  p.  101.)

1  This  tabernacle  was  furnished  with  an  ark,  an  oracle,  an  altar,
and  other  sacred  appendages,  like  those  of  the  nations  by  which  they
were  surrounded.

32  Mount  Sinai,  as  we  have  seen,  was  very  difficult  of  access,  and
the  Israelites  might  thence  believe  that  Moses  had  perished  in  the
ascent.  Procopius  says  that  no  one  can  pass  the  night  upon  it,  by
reason  of  the  fearful  noises  and  supernatural  sounds  which  are  con-
stantly heard.  Baumgarton  tells  us,  "  the  ascent  was  so  difficult
that  all  our  former  toil  and  labour  seemed  but  sport  to  this.  How-
ever we  did  not  give  over,  but  imploring  the  divine  assistance,  we
used  our  utmost  endeavour.  At  last,  through  untrodden  ways,


01    FREEMASONRY.  231

idolatry  overcame  them,  and  they  tumultuously  assem-
bled round  the  tent  of  Aaron  and  demanded  the  con-
struction of  some  visible  representation  of  the  deity.33
Their  leader  was  absent,  they  feared  he  was  dead,  and
there  is  a  tradition  extant  which  makes  Satan  deceive
them  by  the  appearance  of  a  coffin  in  the  air,  in  which
was  laid  the  dead  body  of  Moses.34  Their  apprehen-
sions were  further  excited  by  the  fearful  super  natural
display  on  the  holy  mountain ;  and  they  required  the

through,  sharp  and  hanging  rocks,  through  clefts  and  horrible  deserts,
pulling  and  drawing  one  another,  sometimes  with  our  staves,  some-
times with  our  belts,  and  sometimes  with  our  hands,  by  the  assist-
ance of  Almighty  God,  we  arrived  at  the  top  of  the  mountain,  which
is  scarce  thirty  paces  in  compass."

33  Any  consecrated  substance  would  have  answered  this  purpose.
An  altar,  a  pillar,  or  a  rude  and  unpolished  stone,  for  such  were  in
use  among  the  heathen.     "  The  symbol  of  Jupiter  Ammon  was  a
conic  stone  in  his  Egyptian  temple  ;   and  in  Africa,  Apollo's  image
was  a  kind  of  erect  stone,  like  a  pyramid.     A  square  stone  was  the
image  of  Mercury,  as  a  pillar  was  that  of  Bacchus.    The  Jews  were
carried  away  by  this  strong  current  of  idolatry,  and  they  set  up  pil-
lars in  every  high  hill  and  under  every  green  tree;   so  that  this
idolatry  of  worshipping  rude  stones  erect  may  be  reckoned  to  have
infected  much  the  greatest  part  of  the  world."  (Borl.  Corn.  p.  162.)

34  Omens  appear  to  have  been  carefully  observed  from  the  very
earliest  times ;  thus  wearing  of  rings  against  witchcraft  was  used  by
the  Greeks,  as  were  also  many  other  spells,  such  as  spitting  into
their  bosoms  thrice  at  the  sight  of  an  insane  person,  anointing  of
stones,  &c.     They  considered  as  unfavourable  omens,  hens  crowing,
the  entrance  of  a  black  dog  or  serpents  into  their  houses,  a  cat  or
weasel  crossing  their  way,  the  mouse  eating  the  salt  bag,  &c.    Then
they  carefully  avoided  obsequies  for  fear  of  incurring  pollution.     If
they  sneezed,  it  was  over  the  right  shoulder ;  the  flight  of  owls  was
a  token  of  good  or  bad  luck.     See  more  of  this  in  the  Archseol.  Attic.
1.  ii.  c.  6,


232


HISTORICAL    LANDMARKS


protection  of  some  palpable  object  of  worship,  such  as
they  had  been  accustomed  to  in  Egypt.35  And  when
Aaron  complied  with  then*  demand,36  and  gave  them  a

35  Maundrell,  in  his  journey  to  Mount  Sinai  (Edit.  1810,  p.  25(5),
speaking  of  the  place  where  the  Israelites  worshipped  the  golden
calf,  says  that  "  there  are  some  rocks  on  the  spot  twelve  or  fifteen
feet  high,  upon  which,  when  the  golden  calf  was  set  up,  it  might
easily  be  seen  and  adored  by  all  the  people  who  were  encamped  in
this  wide  and  extensive  vale ;  and  further,  because  this  place  like-
wise answers,  and  is  situated  directly  over  against  another  vale  to
the  eastward,  by  which  tin  v  !>:>.v  Moses  descended  from  Mount  Sinai,
when  he  brought  with  him  the  tables  of  the  testimony,  and  uhere
it  was  that  he  broke  them  when  he  came  to  the  foot  of  the  moun-
tain."

36  It  may  be  here  remarked,  that  Aaron  called  the  idolatrous  fes-
tival a  feast  to  Jehovah,  making  use,  as  Micah  did  afterwards,  of  the
most  revered  name  of  God.     I  argue  not  here,  says  Archbishop
Tenison  (Idol.  p.  Ill),  "  from  the  bare  imposition  of  that  word,  for
idolaters  did  learn  to  give  creatures  that  incommunicable  name,  but
I  argue  from  the  reverence  which  is  due  to  Aaron,  the  select  high
priest  of  the  God  of  Israel.    lie  offendeth  extremely  against  charity
and  good  manners,  who  thinketh  of  such  a  person  that  he  would
pacify  a  clamorous  people  with  so  vile  a  condescension,     lie  had  a
better  design,  however  the  madness  of  the  people  perverted  it.     It
cannot  be  thought  that  the  God  whom  he  served  in  so  sacred  an
office  should  be  so  soon  forgotten  by  him,  and  so  ungratefully  and
wretchedly  dishonoured  in  a  base  Egyptian  idol,  passing  under  the
most  separate  name  of  Jehovah.     It  was  ill  enough  that  he  set  up
a  symbol  of  God's  presence  where  he  had  not  appointed  him.     It
was  a  crime  sufficiently  high  that  he  had  erected  an  undue  statue,  or
an  arbitrarious  external  sign  of  God's  presence,  though  not  an  image
of  him ;  for  such  the  cherubims  were  not.     For  I  suppose  he  took
his  pattern  from  part  of  what  he  saw  in  the  holy  mount  when  the
Shekinah  of  God  came  down  upon  it,  attended  with  angels.     They
did  not,  as  I  think,  dethrone  God,  but  joined  that  false  god  with
him,  and  corrupted  true  religion  with  mixtures  of  gentilism."


OF    FREEMASONRY.  233

symbol  of  the  divinity  (simulachrum  vituli)?  in  the
joy  of  their  hearts  they  worshipped  it  after  the  Egyp-
tian manner.38  Cajetan  tells  us  that  Aaron  sanctified
it  by  the  Tetragrammaton,39  or  sacred  and  incommuni-
cable name  of  God.40

37  The  person  who  east  the  calf,  according  to  the  Mahometans,
was  one  Sameri,  a  chief  among  the  tribes  of  Israel.     Aaron  directed
him  to  collect  from  the  people  the  rings  and  bracelets  of  gold,  silver,
and  other  materials,  of  which  the  Israelites  had  spoiled  the  Egyp-
tians ;  and  he,  being  acquainted  with  the  Egyptian  method  of  cast-
ing metals,  melted  them  down  into  a  solid  mass,  as  he  pretended,
when,  to  his  great  astonishment,  out  came  a  golden  calf.     The
Israelites  offered  a  religious  worship  to  the  image,  after  the  manner
of  the  Egyptians.     Seeing  this,  the  man  Sameri  is  said  to  have
taken  some  dust  from  under  the  footsteps  of  the  angel  Gabriel's
horse  and  threw  it  into  the  mouth  of  the  calf,  which,  by  virtue  of
that  holy  dust,  began  to  low  and  show  other  signs  of  vitality.     A
writer  quoted  by  D'Herbelot  (Bibl.  Orient,  p.  650),  says  that  all  the
Israelites  worshipped  this  calf  except  12,000  persons.

38  They  pierced  their  flesh  that  the  blood  might  flow  upon  the
altar,  as  was  practised  by  the  heathen  priests  in  their  sacrifices  to
Bellona.      "  They  sacrificed  not,"  says  Tertullian  (Apolog.  c.  9),
"  with  any  other  man's  blood,  but  with  their  own ;  their  shoulders
being  lanced,  and  with  both  hands  brandishing  naked  swords,  they
ran  and  leaped  up  and  down  like  madmen."     (See  also  Lactantius,
p.  40.)

39  The  enthusiastic  notions  of  the  Jews  respecting  the  power  and
application  of  this  name  are  most  wonderful.     "  It  is  stated  by  the
theologians  in  the  book  of  Zoar,  that  all  creatures  are  depicted  by
this  divine  name  (rniT)?  which  says,  look  at  man  and  you  will  see
that  the  head  has  the  form  of  the  >,  the  five  fingers  of  the  right  hand
the  first  n,  the  five  of  the  left  the  other  il,  and  the  line  of  the  body
between  them  •).     Observe  also  the  eagle,  the  head  is  the  \  the  two
wings  are  the  two  ;-f  s,  and  the  body  in  the  centre  the  V    Thus  they
affirm,  that  there  is  no  animal  or  plant  in  which  the  ineffable  name
is  not  depicted."  (Concil.  vol.  i.  p.  110.)

40  It  appears  that  Aaron,  overpowered  by  their  importunities,  made


234


HISTORICAL    LANDMARKS


The  Israelites  therefore  offered  a  sacrifice  to  the  image,
sat  down  to  eat  and  drink  and  rose  up  to  play,41  as  it
is  probable  they  had  frequently  done  to  Apis,42  which

them  a  golden  image,  after  the  manner  of  some  part  of  the  Shekinah
which  he  had  seen  in  his  ascent  to  the  mount  (Exod.  xxiv.  1-11.)
The  Cabalists  say  that  it  was  made  in  the  figure  of  an  ox  or  calf  on
this  account  alone,  for  the  Shekinah  appeared  in  the  quadruple  form
of  a  man,  an  ox,  a  lion,  and  an  eagle ;  man,  as  being  the  chief  of
all  terrestrial  animals ;  the  ox,  of  all  domesticated  ones ;  the  lion,  of
all  wild  beasts ;  and  the  eagle,  of  birds ;  no  allusion  being  made  to
fishes,  because  they  are  hidden  from  the  sight.  So  that  Aaron,  on
this  account,  chose  one  of  these  figures,  imagining  that  it  would  be
more  properly  a  symbol  of  the  deity."

41  Herodotus  gives  an  account  of  a  solemn  festival  in  honour  of
Diana,  which  the  Egyptians  celebrated  at  Bubastis.     He  says,  that
when  they  offer  the  sacrifice  they  dance  round  the  altar,  sing,  and
play  a  hundred  antics,  and  drink  an  incredible  quantity  of  wine ;
which  fact  may  account  in  some  measure  for  the  gross  obscenities
which  take  place  in  an  assembly  consisting  of  700,000  persons  of
both  sexes.     This  was  doubtless  the  ceremony  which  the  Israelites
used  on  the  above  occasion.    Lady  Mary  Wortley  Montague,  speak-
ing of  the  Eastern  dancers,  says,  "  their  manner  of  dancing  is  the
same  that  Diana  is  said  to  have  used  on  the  banks  of  the  Euphrates.
The  great  lady  leads  the  dance,  and  is  followed  by  a  troop  of  young
girls,  who  imitate  her  steps ;  and  if  she  sings,  make  up  the  chorus.
The  tunes  are  extremely  gay  and  lively,  yet  with  something  in  them
wonderfully  soft.     The  steps  are  varied  according  to  the  pleasure  of
her  who  leads  the  dance,  but  always  in  exact  time,  and  infinitely
more  agreeable  than  any  of  our  dances,  at  least  in  my  opinion."

42  It  is  remarkable  that,  as  in  the  aphanism  of  the  mysteries,  the
death  of  Osiris  or  Bacchus,  by  Typhon  his  brother,  so  a  similar  legend
was  celebrated  in  honour  of  the  Egyptian  Apis,  who  was  said  to  have
been  slain  by  his  brothers  Thelxion  and  Telchin.     This  is  according
to  the  testimony  of  Apollodorus.     But  the  genealogy  of  this  famous
Egyptian  deity  is  involved  in  great  confusion,  for  other  authors  make
him  the  son  of  Telchin,  the  grandson  of  Enrops,  and  the  great  grand-
son of  Egialeus,  who  was  reckoned  by  the  Sicyonians  an  autochthon,


OF    FREEMASONRY.  235

the  Egyptians,  in  gratitude  for  his  eminent  services,
had  set  up  at  Joseph's  tomb.43  Nay,  some  authors  go
so  far  as  to  imagine  that  this  idol  was  a  symbol  of
Joseph,44  who  procured  abundance  for  the  people  of
Egypt  when  the  surrounding  nations  were  perishing
by  famine ;  and  the  Israelites,  being  acquainted  with
this  fact,  desired  to  have  this  particular  image  for  their
deity,  which  probably  they  had  venerated  from  their
infancy.45  Jeroboam  afterwards  erected  idols  of  the
same  kind  in  Dan  and  Bethel.46  The  infatuated  people

or  aboriginal.  "  It  is  very  remarkable,"  says  Faber  (Cab.  vol.  i.
p.  377),  "  that,  while  Apis  is  fabled  on  the  one  hand  to  be  the  son
of  Telchin,  or  the  descendant  of  Inachus,  he  is  described  on  the
other  as  the  son  of  Jason  the  argonaut ;  and  yet  is  further  declared
to  be  the  same  as  the  Egyptian  Serapis.  Hence  it  appears  that  three
several  genealogies  are  ascribed  to  Apis ;  he  is  descended  from
Inachus,  from  Telchin  and  Europs,  and  from  Jason.  This  apparent
discrepancy  can  only  be  accounted  for  upon  the  principle  that  the
genealogies  and  the  persons  contained  in  them  are  equally  fabulous,
relating  equally  to  the  deluge  and  the  solar  superstition.  Thus
Osiris  is  the  same  as  Janus  or  Noah ;  Telchin  means  a  priest  of  the
sun,  and  Europs  the  fiery  serpent."

43  August.  Mirab.  Sac.  Script.  1.  i.  c.  15.    For  this  and  some  other
reasons  "  in  the  law  of  Moses  a  deference  is  paid  to  the  Egyptians,
and  the  Israelites  were  ordered  to  look  upon  them  with  an  eye  of
favour ;  nay,  they  were  permitted  to  enter  the  sanctuary  after  the
second  generation."  (Bryant,  b.  iv.  p.  388.)

44  Vid.  Gerard  Vossius,  Opera,  torn,  v.,  et  de  Idol.  1.  i.  c.  29.)

45  They  did  not  conceive  the  image  to  be  God,  but  they  thought
it  contained  the  divine  essence,  and  worshipped  it  in  the  character  of
a  mediator,  never  considering  for  a  moment  that  all  such  symbolical
representations  were  degrading,  and  consequently  offensive  to  the
deity.

46  There  is  a  record  in  a  recent  publication,  called  "  An  Account
of  Ancient  Mexican  Cities,"  of  a  migration  of  certain  of  these
Jewish  idolaters  into  the  plains  of  America.     "  The  Toltecas,"  says


236


HISTORICAL    LANDMARKS


set  no  bounds  to  their  unholy  extravagance.47     Fre
gluttony  they  proceeded   to  uncleanness ; 48    dancing
and  leaping49  with  frantic  and  immodest  gestures,50

this  author,  "  were  descended  from  the  house  of  Israel,  who  wen-
released  by  Moses  from  the  tyranny  of  Pharaoh,  and  after  crossing
the  Bed  Sea  fell  into  idolatry.  To  avoid  the  reproofs  of  Moses,  or
from  fear  of  his  inflicting  upon  them  some  chastisement,  they  sepa-
rated from  him  and  his  brethren,  and  under  the  guidance  of  Tamil,
their  chief,  passed  from  one  continent  to  the  other,  to  a  place  which
they  called  the  Seven  Caverns,  a  part  of  the  kingdom  of  Mexico,
where  they  founded  the  celebrated  city  of  Tula."

47  There  are  some  writers  who  contend  that  the  Israelites  were
found  by  Moses  entirely  naked,  in  imitation  of  a  similar  religious
custom  of  the  Egyptians,  who  thus  danced  round  the  figure  of  a
calf.    Plutarch  and  Diodorus  both  record  that  very  indeeent  practices
were  used  in  the  Egyptian  sacra  ;   and  Herodotus  seems  to  sugi
that  they  had  certain  ceremonies  which  resembled  the  naked  dance
of  the  Israelites  before  the  golden  calf.

48  It  is  said  that  the  Mahometan  devotees,  both  men  and  women,
in  the  fervour  of  their  devotion,  used  to  dance  round  the  caaba
naked ;  whistling,  singing,  and  clapping  their  hands.     The  custom
produced  such  bad  effects,  that  it  was  at  length  prohibited.

49  An  order  of  priests  was  instituted  at  Home,  for  the  exp:  e^s  pur-
pose of  dancing  in  honour  of  the  deity.    They  were  called  Salii.     In
the  reign  of  Numa,  Rome  was  subject  to  the  plague,  and  it  is  said
that  a  certain  brazen  target  fell  from  heaven  into  the  hands  of  Numa,
with  a  divine  promise,  that  so  long  as  it  should  be  kept  safe  the  city
should  be  free  from  all  such  visitations.    In  great  fear  lest  the  shield
should  be  stolen,  the  king  constructed  eleven  other  shields  so  like  it
that  they  could  not  be  distinguished,     Twelve  priests  had  the  cus-
tody of  them,  and  in  the  month  of  March  in  every  year,  on  a  par-
ticular day,  they  put  on  a  party-coloured  coat  with  a  tiara  and  sword
belt,  and  danced   about  the  market-place,  and  the  Capitol,  with
javelins  in  their  right  hand  and  the  shield  •<  in  the  other,  singing  songs
appointed  for  the  occasion,

0  It  seems  extremely  probable  that  the  worship  of  the  calf  was
conducted  with  solemn  processions,  after  the  custom  of  Egypt,  whose


OF    FREEMASONRY.  237

shouting  and  singing,51  like  the  bacchanals52  of
Greece,53  or  the  harlots  at  the  floralia  of  Rome ;  but
which  in  reality  originated  in  the  ceremonies  of  the
Corybantes.54  Imitating  these  pernicious  rites,55  the

sacred  festivals  always  commenced  with  such  solemnities,  and  ended
with  disorder  and  crime.  It  is  still  retained  in  the  East  in  the  horrid
celebrations  of  Jagan  Nath.

51  The  music  used  on  such  occasions  was  wild  and  discordant,  like
that  which  Sir  W.  Jones  informs  us  is  still  practised  at  the  religious
festivals  of  Callee,  the  terrific  deity  of  India.

52  "  In  Athens,"  says  the  Abbe  Bartheleme  (Anacharsis,  vol.  ii.
p.  438),  "  several  days  of  the  year  are  dedicated  to  the  worship  of
Bacchus.     The  city,  the  harbour  of  Piraeus,  the  country,  and  the
neighbouring  towns,  by  turns  re-echo  with  his  name.     I  have  more
than  once  seen  the  whole  city  in  a  state  of  the  most  complete  intoxi-
cation.    I  have  seen  bacchanals  and  bacchanalian  nymphs  crowned
with  ivy,  fennel,  and  poplar,  with  convulsive  agitations  dance  and
howl  through  the  streets,  and  invoke  Bacchus  with  barbarous  accla-
mations ;  I  have  seen  them  tear  the  raw  entrails  of  the  victims  with
their  teeth  and  nails,  squeeze  serpents  in  their  hands,  interweave
them  in  their  hair,  twist  them  round  their  bodies,  and  by  such  kind
of  extravagancies  attract  the  attention  of  the  terrified  multitude."

53  We  are  told  that  in  the  festivals  of  Bacchus,  he  that  could  drink
the  greatest  quantity  of  wine  was  honoured  with  a  golden  crown.

54  "  The  Corybantes  are  described  by  Strabo  rather  like  madmen
than  mere  enthusiasts ;   for  they  danced  about  with  cymbals  and
drums,  and  arms,  and  pipes,  as  though  a  bedlam  had  broke  loose
among  them ;   yet  this  was  in  high  esteem  among  them ;  for  as
Strabo  after  saith,  this  enthusiasm  seemed  to  have  a  divine  touch
with  it,  and  to  come  very  near  to  a  prophetic  spirit."    (Stillingfleet,
Orig.  Sac.  p.  161.)

5  Maillet  informs  us,  that  evident  traces  of  these  practices  still
remain  in  Egypt.  He  says  (Let.  x.  p.  59),  "  You  can  hardly  ima-
gine how  many  traces  of  this  ancient  religion  are  still  met  with  in
Egypt,  which  have  subsisted  there  for  so  many  ages.  In  fact,  with-
out speaking  of  their  passion  for  pilgrimages,  which,  notwithstanding
its  having  changed  its  object,  is  nevertheless  the  same ;  the  modern


238


HISTORICAL    LANDMARKS


Israelites  on  this  occasion  practised  the  Ithyphallic
enormities  of  Egypt ;  and  committing  fornication  both
spiritually  and  carnally.56  "  And  as  soon  as  Moses
came  nigh  nnto  the  camp,  he  saw  the  calf  and  the
dancing ;  and  his  anger  waxed  hot ;  and  he  cast  the
tables  out  of  his  hands,  and  brake  them  beneath
the  mount;  and  he  took  the  calf  which  they  had
made,  and  burnt  it  in  the  fire,  and  ground  it  to

Egyptians  have  still  the  same  taste  for  processions  that  was  remarked
in  their  ancestors.  There  is  perhaps  no  other  country  in  the  world
where  they  are  more  frequent  than  here.  All  the  difference  that
I  find  in  the  matter  is,  that  the  ancients  practised  them  in  honour  of
idols,  and  that  the  Egyptians  of  our  days  perform  them  in  honour
of  the  santoces,  or  saints,  who  are  not  much  better.  There  is  no
regularity  in  these  ceremonies,  either  in  the  way  of  walking  or  the
vestments.  Every  one  dresses  himself  as  he  likes ;  but  those  that
are  in  the  most  grotesque,  and  most  ridiculous  habits,  are  always
most  esteemed.  Some  dance,  others  caper,  some  shout ;  in  one
word,  the  great  point  is  who  shall  commit  most  follies  in  these  extra-
vagant masquerades.  The  more  they  do,  the  more  they' believe
themselves  possessed  with  the  spirit  of  the  prophet."

56  These  ceremonies  were  usually  accompanied  by  passing  through
the  fire,  a  custom  formally  forbidden  in  the  law  (Lev.  xviii.  21) ;
but  still  practised  in  some  idolatrous  nations  of  the  earth.  Sonnerat
thus  describes  it  as  still  existing  in  India  at  the  grand  festival  of
Darma  Rajah,  called  the  feast  of  fire  : — "  The  devotees  walk  barefoot
over  a  glowing  fire,  extending  forty  feet.  It  lasts  eighteen  days,  and
on  the  last  they  assemble  at  the  sound  of  instruments,  their  heads
ciowned  with  flowers,  and  their  bodies  bedaubed  with  saffron,  and
follow  the  figures  of  Darma  Rajah  and  of  Drobede  his  wife,  who  are
carried  in  procession.  When  they  come  to  the  fire,  they  stir  it  to
animate  its  activity,  and  take  a  little  of  the  ashes,  with  which  they
rub  their  foreheads,  and  when  the  gods  have  been  three  times  round
it,  they  walk  either  fast  or  slow,  according  to  their  zeal,  through  this
hot  fire.  After  the  ceremony  the  ashes  are  carefully  collected,  and
preserved  as  amulets."


OF    FREEMASONRY.  239

powder,  and  strawed  it  upon  the  water,  and  made
the  children  of  Israel  drink  of  it."57

Under  these  unhappy  circumstances,  the  Jews  re-
quired some  counteracting  power  to  wean  them  effec-
tually from  the  idolatrous  customs  which  they  had
contracted  in  the  country  of  superstition  whence  they
had  just  emerged.58  This  power  was  to  be  found  in
the  tabernacle  worship,  which  was  constructed  on  such
a  principle  of  external  form  and  show,  as  it  was  hoped
would  implant  a  right  bias  in  their  minds  to  turn  them
from  error  to  the  light  of  truth.

The  tabernacle  was  an  open  temple  built  of  shittim
wood,59  without  any  roof,  like  those  of  ancient  Persia,
Britain,  India,  and  many  other  nations  in  the  early
period  of  their  history,  all  of  which,  like  the  tabernacle,
had  covered  chapels,  or  adyta,  for  the  shrines  of  their

57  Moses,  who  was  skilled  in  all  the  wisdom  of  the  Egyptians,  has
been  ranked  amongst  the  earliest  chemists;  and  as  a  proof  of  his
proficiency,  the  means  he  employed  to  render  the  golden  calf,  which
had  been  fabricated  by  Aaron,  potable,  have  been  adduced.    In  later
times  this  problem  long  exercised  the  ingenuity  of  chemists,  until  it
was  discovered  that  gold  could  be  rendered  potable  by  combining
it  with  sulphur  of  potass,  and  that  the  preparation  had  a  very  nauseous
taste,  and  hence  drinking  it  might  be  a  proper  punishment  to  the
Israelites.

58  St.  Peter  describes  these  customs  (1  Ep.  iv.  3) — "  For  the  time
past  of  our  life  may  suffice  us  to  have  wrought  the  will  of  the  Gentiles
when  we  walked  in  lasciviousness,  lusts,  excess  of  wine,  revellings,
banquetings,  and  abominable  idolatries."

59  Probably  cedar  or  acacia,  as  both  these  trees  were  abundant  in
the  wilderness,  and  possessed  the  properties  ascribed  to  the  shittim.
In  a  degree  called  "  Knights  of  the  Royal  Axe,"  it  is  said  to  have
been  composed  of  the  cedar  of  Lebanon.


240


HISTORICAL    LANDMARKS


respective  deities,60  only,  unlike  them,  instead  of  being
circular,  it  was  an  oblong  square  with  three  divisions.61
The  court  of  the  tabernacle62  was  one  hundred  and
fifty  feet  long  by  seventy-five  broad,  and  surrounded
by  curtains  of  fine  twined  linen  seven  and  a  half  feet
in  height,  supported  by  twenty  brazen  pillars,  filletted
with  silver  on  each  side,  and  ten  at  each  end,63  in  all
sixty;  and  for  the  entrance  into  this  inclosed  space,
a  gate  was  constructed  at  the  east  end,  of  fine  linen,
embroidered  with  cherubim  and  arabesques  in  blue,

60  The  temple  at  Stonehenge  contained  an  outer  court,  an  inner
court,  and  an  adytum.     That  at  Abury  extended  nearly  two  miles  in
length,  but  it  was  exceeded  in  magnitude  by  the  open  temple  at
Carnac.     The  pagoda  of  Seringham  in  India  was  uncovered,  and
was  of  such  vast  dimensions,  that  its  walls  are  said  to  have  been
four  miles  in  circumference.     Mr.  Maurice  has  favoured  us  with  an
engraving  of  an  open  quadrangular  pagoda,  on  the  coast  of  Coro-
mandel,  whose  sides  faced  the  four  cardinal  points,  like  the  tabernacle
of  Moses,  and  its  area  contained  small  covered  chapels  or  shrines  of
their  greatest  deities.

61  The  fabric  of  the  tabernacle,  thus  consisting  of  three  distinct
parts,  was  a  type  of  the  creation  of  the  universe  in  three  parts,  as  we
are  told  by  the  Rabbins ;  the  sublunary  portion  which  we  inhabit,
the  celestial  above  us,  and  the  supreme,  which  theologists  term  the
angelic,  and  philosophers  the  intellectual.

62  These  three  divisions  corresponded  with  the  Greek  and  Horn  an
peribolus,  naos,  and  cella ;  and  with  the  churchyard,  nave,  and  choir
of  our  churches.

i3  "  Although  the  court  were  compassed  about  with  curtains,  yet  it
had  a  door  wide  enough  to  display  all  the  breadth  of  the  tabernacle.
By  the  which  is  signified,  that  the  holy  mysteries  of  the  church  are
not  such  as  the  ceremonies  of  Ceres  and  Eleusis,  which  were  not
imparted  to  strangers ;  or  of  Juno  of  Coos,  unto  the  which  servants
were  not  admitted ;  but  the  secrets  of  the  gospel  are  revealed  to  all
the  world."  (Willet  Hexapla.  p.  630.)


OF    FREEMASONRY.  241

«

purple,  and  scarlet.  The  tabernacle  itself  was  placed
at  the  west  end  of  the  court,  leaving  a  space  of  thirty
feet  from  the  back  of  the  most  holy  place  to  the  western
boundary  of  the  court,  and  the  same  distance  from  each
of  the  sides.  It  was  fenced  in  by  partitions  of  timber,
overlaid  with  plates  of  gold,  and  hung  with  silken  cur-
tains of  the  three  Masonic  colours,64  embroidered  with
cherubim,  fiWers,  and  various  other  embellishments,
which  were  so  contrived  as  to  extend  over  the  whole
tabernacle,  to  constitute  a  protection  for  the  conse-
crated utensils  against  the  weather ;  and  for  this  pur-
pose an  additional  covering  was  provided,  consisting
of  goats'  hair,  rams'  skins,  and  badgers'  skins.

The  most  holy  place  was  in  the  west.  It  was  a
perfect  cube  of  fifteen  feet,  separated  from  the  holy
place  by  a  rich  curtain  or  veil  of  embroidered  silk,65  of

64  These  were  as  above,  blue,  purple,  and  crimson,  or  scarlet.    The
former,  amongst  Masons,  is  an  emblem  of  universal  benevolence  and
friendship ;  and  recommends  that  those  virtues  should  be  as  expansive
as  the  blue  arch  of  heaven.     The  second  is  an  emblem  of  harmony,
union,  and  peace.    And  the  scarlet,  as  an  emblem  of  imperial  dignity,
reminds  our  rulers  of  the  paternal  concern  which  they  should  ever
feel  for  the  welfare  of  the  constitution,  and  the  fervency  and  zeal
with  which  they  should  endeavour  to  promote  its  prosperity.

65  "  Many  of  the  Egyptian  stuffs  presented  various  patterns  worked
in  colours  by  the  loom,  independent  of  those  produced  by  the  dyeing
or  printing  process,  and  so  richly  composed,  that  they  vied  with
cloths  embroidered  with  the  needle.     The  art  of  embroidery  was
commonly  practised  in  Egypt.  The  Hebrews,  on  leaving  the  country,
took  advantage  of  the  knowledge  they  had  there  acquired  to  make  a
rich  hanging  for  the  door  of  the  tent,  of  blue,  and  purple,  and  scarlet,
and  fine  twined  linen  wrought  with  needlework ;  a  coat  of  fine  linen
was  embroidered  for  Aaron,  and  his  girdle  was  of  fine  twined  linen,
and  blue,  and  purple,  and  scarlet  of  needlework."     (Wilkinson's
Egypt,  vol.  iii.  p.  128.)

VOL.  II.  R


242


HISTORICAL    LANDMARKS


blue,  purple,  crimson,  and  white,  suspended  from  four
columns.66  This  partition  was  called  zizon.  Within
this  adytum  were  deposited  the  ark  of  the  covenant,
with  its  mercy  seat,  or  propitiatory  and  cherubims ;
the  tables  of  the  law ;  the  pot  of  manna ;  and  Aaron's
rod  that  budded.  In  the  holy  place,  which  measured
thirty  feet  in  length  by  fifteen  in  breadth,  were  the
table  for  shewbread  on  the  north  side;67  the  golden
candlestick  on  the  south;68  and  before  the  veil  the
golden  altar  of  incense.69  The  large  open  space  called

66  In  the  degree  of  Secret  Master  these  four  columns  are  made  to
refer  to  the  four  cardinal  points  of  the  compass.    And  when  the  veil
was  removed,  the  candidate  is  said  to  have  seen  a  blazing  star  with
nine  beams  (or  the  Shekinah),  each  containing  one  of  the  sacred
names,  and  inclosing  the  letter  G  inscribed  within  a  circle,  and  also
an  equilateral  triangle,  under  which  was  placed  the  ark  of  alliance ;
the  circle  denoting  his  eternity  as  without  beginning  and  without
end ;  the  triangle  signified ;   the  blazing  star,  the  light  of  Pro-
vidence pointing  out  the  way  of  truth;  and  the  letter  G,  glory,
grandeur,  and  Gomel;   all  referring  to  the  divine  name  and  per-
fections.    And  to  these  emblems  was  added  the  all-seeing-  eye,  to
intimate  that  it  is  the  duty  of  a  Secret  Master  to  watch  over  the
conduct  of  the  Brethren.

67  The  heathen  offering  of  cakes  was  of  a  similar  nature  to  the
Jewish  shewbread.     These  cakes  were  compounded  with  honey,  oil,
salt,  and  wine.

68  In  the  twenty-eighth  degree,  according  to  the  arrangement  of
the  rite  Ecossais,  the  Grand  Master  explains  the  candlestick   with
seven   branches,   by   exhorting  the   candidate   to   "  remember  the
mysterious  number  of  seven  Masters  who  were  appointed  to  succeed
one ;  and  from  that  time  it  was  resolved  that  seven  Knights  of  Masonry,
united  together,  were  able  to  initiate  into  Masonry,  and  show  the
seven  gifts  of  the  Eternal,  which  he  will  be  competent  to  understand
when  he  shall  have  been  purified  in  the  brazen  sea."

69  "  This  utensil  showed  to  the  Hebrews,  as  it  does  to  us,  that  our
vows  ought  always  to  be  addressed  to  the  Great  Architect  of  the


OF    FREEMASONRY.  243

the  outer  court  was  for  the  brazen  altar,70  on  which
burnt  a  perpetual  fire,71  and  the  laver  wherein  the
priests  washed  their  hands  and  feet  before  they  pre-
sumed to  minister  to  the  Lord.72

Universe ;  and  that  they  ought  to  be  pure,  and  above  human  passions.
The  remains  of  ancient  altars  that  we  have  seen  in  the  museums  are
in  the  form  of  a  square,  or  a  triangle,  or  a  circle,  having  reference
under  these  forms  to  the  three  truths  taught,  or  to  the  four  elements,
or  to  the  deity.  They  were  excavated  in  the  upper  surface  to  contain
the  fire."  (Esprit,  du  dogme  de  la  Tranche  Mag.)

70  Altars  were  of  great  antiquity,  and  originally  constructed  of
earth,  or  unhewn  stone.    The  Egyptians  used  them  from  the  earliest
times,  while  the  Persians  and  other  nations  offered  their  sacrifices  on
mountains  and  hills,  without  any  altar  at  all.     There  was  scarcely
any  practicable  material  of  which  altars  were  not  subsequently  made.
Some  were  hewn  from  single  large  blocks  of  stone,    others  were
formed  of  squared  stones,  and  many  of  precious  marbles ;  some  were
of  brick,  others  of  metal  (brass,  and  even  gold),  being  probably  over-
laid with  the  metal,  like  the  Hebrew  brazen  altar,  and  the  golden
altar  of  incense ;  others  again  are  said  to  have  been  of  wood,  even
in  Greece ;  but  these  were  not  common ;  neither  do  those  appear  to
have  been  so  which  are  described  as  having  been  built  with  the  bones
of  animals,  curiously  interlaced.     There  were  probably  three  kinds
of  altars :  where  victims  were  consumed  by  fire,  where  unbloody
offerings  only  were  made,  and  for  incense.     The  Hebrews  had  two
of  these ;  viz.,  the  first  and  third,  and  the  table  of  shewbread,  in
some  respects,  answered  to  the  second.

71  "  The  sacred  fire  was  not  peculiar  to  the  Persian  magi.     It  was
kept  constantly  burning  on  the  altar  before  the  tabernacle  in  the
wilderness,  and  the  temple  at  Jerusalem,  and  was  never  to  go  out.
It  was  kindled  from  heaven  in  the  time  of  Aaron,  of  David,  and  of
Solomon;  and  was  not  to  be  rekindled  with  strange  fire,  nor  any
other  to  be  used  in  sacrifices  under  the  penalty  of  death.     Among;
the  Persians,  it  was  to  be  rekindled  only  from  the  sun,  or  with  a  flint,
or  from  some  other  sacred  fire.     And  the  Persian  usages  resembled
those  of  the  Jews  in  many  respects."     (Hales.  Anal.  vol.  iv.  p.  37.)

72  In  one  of  the  detached  degrees  in  France,  called  "  Le  Com-

H  2


244


HISTORICAL    LANDMARKS


The  decorations  of  the  tabernacle  were  composed  of
silk  and  fine  linen,73  of  three  old  and  royal  colours,
which  subsequently  composed  the  magnificent  veil  in
King  Solomon's  temple.  These,  with  the  pure74  white
of  the  linen  cloths,  symbolised  the  four  elements.75
The  Egyptians  excelled  in  the  art  of  dyeing  ;77  and  the

pagnon  Ecossais,"  the  appendages  of  the  holy  and  most  holy  places
were  introduced  in  detail.

73  The  method  of  working  these  decorations,  according  to  Mai-
monides,  was  this  : — They  took  one  thread  of  wire  of  gold,  and  joined
it  with  six  threads  of  blue,  and  twisted  all  seven  into  one.     And  so
they  mingled  the  like  thread  of  gold  with  six  of  purple,  another  with
six  of  scarlet,  and  another  with  six  of  fine  linen ;  so  that  there  were
twenty-eight  threads  in  all.

74  In  all  ages,  and  amongst  all  people,  white  has  been  considered
as  an  emblem  of  innocence  and  purity.     Some  extended  the  signifi-
cation to  joy  and  gladness.     Aristotle  said,  that  white  and  black
betokened  pleasure  and  pain.     The  Greeks  marked  their  fortunate
days  with  a  white  stone.     At  the  resurrection  of  our  Saviour,  the
angels  testified  their  joy  by  appearing  in  white ;  and  at  the  transfi-
guration, Christ  was  arrayed  in  raiment  "  white  as  the  light."     In
like  manner,  the  redeemed  are  clad  in  white  in  the  New  Jerusalem,
(llev.  iv.  7.)     On  this  subject  consult  the  new  editions  of  the  Signs
and  Symbols,  p.  195,  and  Hutch,  p.  128.

75  The  blue  was  an  emblem  of  the  air ;  the  purple  of  water,  in
reference  to  the  fish  murex,  whence  the  dye  of  this  colour  was  pro-
cured; the  red  of  fire ;  and  the  white  linen  of  the  earth,  out  of
which  the  herb  grows  of  which  it  is  manufactured.

5  The  art  of  dveing  in  rich  and  imperishable  colours  was  of  very
ancient  date.  Arrian  says,  that  amongst  the  spoil  found  at  Susa
by  Alexander,  were  five  thousand  quintals  of  Hermione  purple,
which  exceeded  that  of  Tyre  in  beauty,  and  had  been  hoarded  up  by
the  Persian  sovereigns  during  the  space  of  one  hundred  and  ninety
years,  but  the  colour  of  which  was  as  fresh  and  beautiful  as  if  it  had
just  come  from  the  dyer.  The  Egyptian  mummies  display  an  asto-
nishing perfection  in  that  as  well  as  other  fine  arts.  M.  Dutens  tells


OF    FREEMASONRY.  245

Hebrews,  in  the  exercise  of  the  various  duties  imposed
upon  them  as  slaves,  had  probably  been  employed  in
the  mechanical  part  of  the  operation ;  and  were  con-
sequently acquainted  with  the  process,  and  managed
the  details,  of  which  Aholiab  and  Bezaleel  had  the
chief  direction.  Calvin  and  others,  however,  think
that  they  brought  all  this  blue,  purple,77  and  crimson
silk78  and  fine  linen,79  out  of  Egypt,  which  were  pre-

us,  that  in  the  mummies  of  Egypt  he  found  gilding  as  fresh  as  if  it
had  not  stood  fifty  years ;  and  stained  silk,  still  vivid  in  its  colours,
though  thirty  ages  had  passed  over  it.  Pliny  says,  that  the  process
of  dyeing,  by  which  animals  and  flowers  were  produced,  was  the  effect
of  certain  drugs  laid  on  the  surface  of  the  white  cloth  by  dipping.
They  drew  the  figures  with  a  colourless  material,  and  then  plunged
the  cloth  into  the  dye  boiling  hot,  and  they  immediately  assumed  the
proper  colours ;  which  were  so  permanent,  that  nothing  was  able  to
efface  them  so  long  as  the  stuff  remained.

77  A  few  further  observations  may  be  necessary  and  useful  on  this
beautiful  art,  which  was  carried  to  such  perfection,  as  to  produce
colours  which  were  equally  brilliant  and  permanent.    The  preparation
is  said  to  have  contained  a  good  deal  of  salt ;  and  some  think  that
honey  was  an  essential  ingredient.     Herodotus  says,  that  they  im-
pressed flowers,  and  figures  of  birds  and  beasts  upon  their  woollen
cloths,  by  means  of  a  vegetable  mixture,  in  colours  so  durable  that
they  could  not  be  effaced.

78  Mr.  Roberts  states,  that  in   India  it  is  customary  to  invest
a  favourite  child  with  garments  of  crimson,  purple,  and  blue,  which
are  tastefully  intermixed.     And  he  adds — "  A  child  being  clothed  in
such  a  garment  cannot  be  injured  by  fascination  or  evil  spirits,  be-
cause the  attention  is  taken  from  the  beauty  of  the  person  to  that  of
the  garment."

79  Mr.  Thomson  says,  that  the  linen  of  Egypt  was  of  a  texture
superior  to  the  finest  Indian  muslin.     Some  mummy  cloths  which
Belzoni  had  given  him,  were  of  linen,  "  thin  and  transparent,  and  of
very  delicate  texture ;  the  finest  appeared  to  be  made  of  yarns  of  near
one  hundred  hanks  to  the  pound,  with  one  hundred  and  forty  threads


246


HISTORICAL    LANDMARKS


sented  by  the  eager  natives,  in  the  delirium  of  their
panic-fear,  with  jewels  of  gold,  and  silver,  and  raiment,
and  that  their  sons  and  daughters  were  laden  with  the
above  materials  in  the  web.

The  entire  tabernacle  was  a  symbol  of  Christ's
church,  or  a  company  of  faithful  men  worshipping
God  in  spirit  and  in  truth,  sanctified  by  the  Holy
Ghost,  and  glorified  by  the  sanction  of  Christ's  uni-
versal presence ;  for  he  promised  that  wherever  two  or
three  were  gathered  together  in  his  name  he  would  be
present  with  them.  It  was  also  a  type  of  Christ  him-
self, who  is  the  true  tabernacle  of  regenerated  and
spiritual  beings,  striving  for  and  hastening  the  corning
of  the  Lord  to  judgment.

to  the  inch  in  the  warp,  and  about  sixty-four  in  the  woof;  while
a  specimen  of  muslin  in  the  museum  of  the  East  India  House,  the
finest  production  of  the  Dacca  loom,  has  only  one  hundred  threads
to  the  inch  in  the  warp,  and  eighty-four  in  the  woof."  And  Mr.
"Wilkinson  mentions  a  specimen  in  his  possession,  which  he  says,
"  excites  admiration  at  the  present  day ;  being,  to  the  touch,  com-
parable to  silk,  and  not  inferior  in  texture  to  the  finest  cambric.
This  has  five  hundred  and  forty  threads  to  the  inch  in  the  warp,  and
one  hundred  and  ten  in  the  woof;  being  considerably  finer  than  the
richest  cambric  ever  seen  in  this  or  any  other  country."  (Manners
and  Customs,  vol.  iii.  p.  119.)  Herodotus  and  Pliny  both  mention
a  corslet  which  was  presented  to  the  Khodians  by  Amasis,  King  of
Egypt,  which  Avas  of  white  linen,  ornamented  with  numerous  figures
of  animals  worked  in  gold.  Each  thread  was  composed  of  three
hundred  and  sixty-five  fibres !  This  is  an  additional  proof  of  the
surpassing  excellence  of  the  ancient  Egyptians  in  the  art  of  weaving.


OF    FREEMASONRY.  247


LECTURE    XXXI.

THE  TEMPLE  OF  SOLOMON  AND  THE  SACRED  LODGE.

"  The  stones  were  hewn  in  the  quarry,  there  carved,  marked,  and
numbered.  The  timber  was  felled  and  prepared  in  the  forest  of
Lebanon,  and  conveyed  by  floats  from  Tyre  to  Joppa.  The  metals
were  fused  and  cast  in  the  clay  ground  between  Succoth  and  Zere-
dathah.  The  whole  was  then  conveyed  to  Jerusalem  ;  and  when  put
together  on  Mount  Moriah,  each  part  fitted  with  such  perfect  exact-
ness as  to  make  it  appear  like  a  work  of  the  Great  Architect  of  the
Universe,  rather  than  an  exertion  of  human  skill." — OLD  LEC-
TURES.

"  This  magnificent  work  was  begun  on  Monday  the  second  day  of
the  month  Zif,  which  answers  to  the  21st  of  our  April,  being  the
second  month  of  the  sacred  year ;  and  was  carried  on  with  such
speed,  that  it  was  finished  in  all  its  parts  in  little  more  than  seven
years,  which  happened  on  the  eighth  day  of  the  month  Bui,  which
answers  to  the  23rd  of  our  October,  being  the  seventh  month  of  the
sacred  year,  and  the  eleventh  of  King  Solomon.  What  is  still  more
astonishing  is,  that  every  piece  of  it,  whether  timber,  stone,  or
metal,  was  brought  ready  cut,  framed,  and  polished,  to  Jerusalem;
so  that  no  other  tools  were  wanted  or  heard  than  what  were  neces-
sary to  join  the  several  parts  together.  All  the  noise  of  axe,  hammer,
and  saw  was  confined  to  Lebanon,  the  quarries  and  the  plains  of
Zeredatha,  that  nothing  might  be  heard  among  the  masons  of  Sion
save  harmony  and  peace." — ANDERSON.

"  When  you  sacrifice  or  pray,  go  with  a  prepared  purity  of  mind,
and  with  dispositions  so  previously  disposed  as  are  required  of  you
when  you  approach  the  ancient  rites  and  mysteries." — EPICTETUS.

WHILE  working  the  Lectures  of  Masonry,  we  are
frequently  struck  with  incidental  reniarks  and  coinci-


248


HISTORICAL    LANDMARKS


denees,  which,  if  fully  developed,  would  lead  to  in-
teresting, if  not  important  results.  But  unfortunately,
in  too  many  instances,  the  illustration  is  omitted,  and
we  are  furnished  with  nothing  but  the  simple  notice
of  an  expressive  symbol,  or  a  naked  fact,  which  is  thus
left  to  furnish  its  commentary ;  and  this  will  naturally
occur  in  a  series  of  lectures  confined  to  a  certain  pre-
scribed ritual,1  although  it  be  sufficiently  diffusive  to
deter  many  otherwise  expert  masters  from  the  task  of
attempting  to  become  perfectly  acquainted  with  the
entire  course  comprehended  in  the  degrees  terminating
with  the  Royal  Arch.2  There  are  consequently  few

1  The  ritual  varies  to  a  certain  extent  in  every  country,  although
the  landmarks  are  the  same.     And  great  care  is  taken  by  every
Grand  Lodge  to  preserve  the  unity  and  purity  of  the  system,  by  the
appointment  of  Boards  and  Committees  over  every  department.     In
England  we  have  a  Board   of  Benevolence,  a  Board  of  General
Purposes,  Committees  of  Masters,  of  the  Boys'  and  Girls'  Schools,
and  of  the  Asylum  for  worthy  aged  and  decayed  Freemasons,  &c.    In
France  these  Boards  are  extended  to  other  points  connected  with
discipline.      Here  we  find  an  Administrative  Commission  of  the
Supreme  Council  of  France ;  a  Council  and  Sovereign  Tribunal  of
Judge  Commanders ;  a  Grand  Council  of  Knights  of  Kadosh ;  a
Supreme  Council  of  Brazil ;   a  Supreme  United  Council  for  the
Western   Hemisphere ;    a   Committee   of  Finances ;    of   Working
Masons  or  Lecturers,  &c.  &c.      The  standing  Committees  of  the
Grand  Lodge  in  the  state  of  New  York  are  eight,  viz.  on  Creden-
tials, on  Grievances,  on  Warrants,  on  Charity,  on  account  of  Dele-
gates, on  Foreign  Correspondence,  on  Room  Rent,  and  on  Bye
Laws.

2  Dr.  Dalcho,  the  Grand  Inspector  General  of  Freemasonry  in
America,  thus  defines  the  order : — "  Masonry  is  the  most  perfect
and  sublime  institution  ever  formed  for  promoting  the  happiness  of
individuals,  or  for  increasing  the  general  good  of  the  community.
Its  fundamental  principles  are  those  grand  bulwarks  of  society —


OF    FREEMASONRY.  249

Masters  of  Lodges  who,  are  sufficiently  conversant  in
the  lectures,3  as  to  undertake  the  duty  of  extension
and  demonstration  on  points  which  are  left  unexplained.
Even  the  prominent  landmarks  are  some  of  them
obscure,  and  require  elucidation.4  But  where  shall

universal  benevolence  and  brotherly  love.  It  holds  out,  in  its  pre-
cepts, those  captivating  pictures  of  virtue  which  stimulate  the
brotherhood  to  deeds  of  greatness,  and  offers  to  its  professors  dignity
and  respect ;  it  expands  the  ideas,  enlarges  the  benevolent  feelings
of  the  heart,  and  renders  man  the  friend  of  all  his  species  ;  it
teaches  us  those  great  and  awful  truths  on  which  futurity  is  founded,
and  points  to  those  happy  means  by  which  we  may  obtain  the
rewards  of  virtue."  (Orations,  p.  7  )

3  The  ancient  Charges  provide  that  no  one  shall  be  eligible  as
Master  who  does  not  possess  the  necessary  qualifications.     "  All
preferment  among  Masons  is  founded  upon  real  worth,  and  personal
merit  only ;  that  so  the  lords  may  be  well  served,  the  brethren  not
put  to  shame,  nor  the  royal  craft  despised ;  therefore,  no  Master  or
Warden  is  chosen  by  seniority,  but  for  his  merit."     Again;  "the
most  expert  of  the  fellow-craftsmen  shall  be   chosen  or  appointed
the  Master,  or  overseer  of  the  work.     The  Master  knowing  himself
to  be  able  of  cunning,"  &c.     I  am  afraid  these  rules  are  not  always
strictly  observed.

4  Nothing  would  elevate  the  character  of  a  Lodge  more  than  a
course  of  historical  and  philosophical  commentaries  on  the  authorized
lectures,  by  an  experienced  and  talented  master  of  the  work.     If  a
full  and  regular  attendance  of  Brethren  be  desirable,  this  process
would  ensure  it.     If  the  improvement  of  the  mind  and  the  promo-
tion of  moral  virtue  be  the  objects  of  our  pursuit,  this  would  con-
stitute the  most  effectual  means  of  recommending  them  to  notice.
Whatever  is  good  and  valuable  in  the  Masonic  system  would  be  pre-
served and  maintained  by  such  a  practice,  and  the  science  would
become  so  unobjectionable  in  the  opinion  of  the  world,  that  all  man-
kind, if  they  did  not  join  our  ranks,  would  at  least  respect  our
professions,  and  esteem  the  motive  for  our  association,  for  the  sake
of  its  visible  results.


250


HISTORICAL    LANDMARKS


we  find  the  enlightened  Ruler  who  will  venture  to
volunteer  his  commentaries  from  the  chair  of  the
Lodge?5  And  yet  this  is  the  kind  of  information
which  is  of  the  greatest  value  and  interest,  and  would
be  most  eagerly  listened  to  and  highly  prized  by  the
brethren.6

The  subject  proposed  for  illustration  in  this  lecture,
although  of  considerable  interest  to  the  free  and  ac-
cepted Mason,  is  only  incidentally  referred  to  in  the
ordinary  lectures.  It  is  at  this  period  that  we  find

5  Instead  of  such  a  course  of  mental  improvement,  other  means  of
enjoyment  are  sometimes  substituted,  which  prove  injurious  to  the
popularity  of  the  order,  by  the  encouragement  they  afford  to  pro-
tracted sittings  ;  inducing  delay  in  the  time  of  opening  the  Lodge ;
which   is    pregnant    with   serious   consequences.      And   I    would
impress  upon   the   Masters   and  Wardens   the  necessity  of  being
firm   on   this   important    point,    and    always    open   their    Lodges
and    commence   their  Masonic   business  at   the   exact  hour   men-
tioned in   the  summonses;   assured  that  if  they   persevere   in   the
punctual  performance   of  this   duty,  they   will  incite   regularity  in
the   brethren ;  and   the^  consequence   will   be,   that   their   families
and    the   world    at    large    will    appreciate    an    institution    whidi
thus  displays  the  fruits  of  sound  and  wholesome  discipline;  the
Lodges  will  increase  in  number  and  reputation ;  and,  through  their
exemplary  conduct,  Freemasonry  will  secure  a  triumphant  ascendancy
and  excite  general  admiration  and  respect.

6  Such  dissertations  would  tend  to  refute  the  mendacious  absurdi-
ties of  Lefranc,  Latocnaye,  and  other  authors  of  the  same  grade  who
figured  as  the  adversaries  of  Masonry  at  the  latter  end  of  the  last
century.      The  former  says,  "  the  president's  hat  in  the  national
assembly  is  copied  from  that  of  a  Tres  Venerable  Grand  Maitre.
The  scarf  of  a  municipal  officer  is  the  same  with  that  of  a  Brother
Apprentice.     When  the  assembly  celebrated  the  revolution  in  the
cathedral,  they  accepted  of  the  highest  honours  of  Masonry,  by
passing  under  an  arch  of  steel,  formed  by  the  drawn  swords  of  two
ranks  of  Brethren."   ('  !  !)


OP    FREEMASONRY.  251

Freemasonry  in  a  state  of  consistency,7  and  based
upon  a  foundation  that  has  bid  defiance  to  the  en-
croachments of  time  and  hostile  opposition.8  As  the
Masons  met  at  the  building  of  the  temple,  each  Lodge
under  its  Master  and  Wardens,  so  we  meet  now.  Our
Lodges  are  constituted  and  formed  on  the  same  general
principle ;  the  superior  Officers  are  endowed  with  the
same  powers ;  the  meetings  are,  in  like  manner,  regu-
lated by  the  diurnal  rotation  of  the  earth  on  its  axis,
which  produces  the  rising,  southing,  and  setting  of  the
sun ;  and  as  our  ancient  Brethren  erected  a  material

7  Col.  Stone,  the  American — and  his  testimony  is  the  more  valu-
able as  he  is  an  avowed  opponent  of  the  Order — vindicates  the
Brethren  from  the  charge  so  frequently  brought  against  them,  of
intemperate  habits.     "  If  Masons,"  says  he  (Letters,  p.  20),  "  fall
into  habits  of  indolence  or  intemperance  in  consequence  of  clustering
together  at  public  houses,  they  do  so  in  defiance  alike  of  the  example
and  instruction  of  the  Lodge-room,  where  they  are  solemnly  charged
to  avoid  all  irregularity  and  intemperance.     And  if,  therefore,  the
same  vices  beset  the  hangers  on  of  petty  courts,  and  the  loungers
about  country  stores,  &c.,  why  should  the  Masonic  Lodges  alone  be
singled  out  for  condemnation."

8  Our  American  Brethren,  forming  a  Committee  of  the  Grand
Lodge  of  Alabama,  thus  report  respecting  certain  irregularities  which
prevailed  in  the  year  1841 : — "  Your  Committee  are  pained  to  learn
that  some  subordinate  Lodges  have  so  far  departed  from  the  ancient
Landmarks  of  the  Institution,  as  to  initiate,  pass,  and  raise,  at  the
same  time,  more  than  one  applicant.     They  suggest  the  propriety  of
action  on  the  part  of  this  Grand  Lodge,  decidedly  discountenancing
such  proceedings.     They  also  agree  with  the  Grand  Lodges  of  the
other  states,  in  disapproving  and  censuring  the  unmasonic  custom  of
performing  any  work  whatever)  except  what  directly  relates  to  the
conferring  the  degrees  of  E.  A.  P.  and  F.  C.,  in  any  other  than  a
Lodge  of  Master  Masons."


252


HISTORICAL    LANDMARKS


temple 9  without  the  use  of  axe,  hammer,  or  metal  tool,
so  is  our  moral  temple  constructed.10  The  beauty  of
the  temple  of  Solomon  pleased  the  eye ;  but  the
beauty  of  virtue,  still  more  glorious,  which  distin-
guishes the  speculative  Freemasonry  of  modern  times,
imparts  a  superior  pleasure  to  the  understanding.11

9  In  France  the  folio \ving  directions  are  given  respecting  the  con-
struction of  Lodges : — "  Vos  Loges  seront  construites  sur  un  plan
ne  resemble  point  aux  demeures  des  profa  /.  mais  qui  soit  noble,
elegant,  inspirateur.     Elles  seront  decorees  de  totites  les  allegories
qui  peuvent  porter  1'homme  a  1 'etude  et  a  la  meditation,  comme
cela  se  pratique  en  quelques  villes  de  1'Europe.     La  voute,  les
colonnes,  le  trone  et  les  autels  seront  ornes  avec  gout.    Les  ineubles
seront  propres  et  riches."

10  Each  of  these  temples,  the  moral  as  well  as  the  material,  dis-
plays the  beauty  and  effects  of  a  systematic  distribution  of  labour.
The  temple  of  Solomon,  with  all  its  gorgeous  splendour  and  minute
ornaments  in  detail,  was  finished  in  little  more  than  seven  years,
because  nothing  was  heard  amongst  the  workmen  but  harmony  and
peace ;  while  the  temple  of  Herod,  where  the  same  accurate  arrange-
ment did  not  exist,  occupied  nearly  half  a  century ;  that  of  Diana  at
Ephesus,  200  years;  St.  Peter's  cathedral  at  Rome,  155  years;  and
St.  Paul's  in  London,  35  years.     The  work  of  a  Mason's  Lodge,  by
a  similar  division  of  labour,  progresses  with  the  same  admirable  pre-
cision, is  harmonious  and  peaceful  in  its  design,  and  perfect  in  its  end.

11  In  the  last  century  Freemasonry  was  in  much  greater  disrepute
than  at  present.     We  have  now  credit  for  scientific  researches  ;  but
formerly  the  prejudices  against  the  Order  ran  high,  and  it  was  not
believed  to  have  any  good  or  virtuous  reference.     It  is  true,  as  a
writer  of  that  period  affirms,  "  there  are  some  who  speak  against  it
more  from  the  vanity  of  saying  somewhat  on  the  point  than  that
they  can  .urge  a  single  rational  objection.     If  it  be  good,  say  they,
why  not  tell  it  ?    But  we  apprehend,  continue  these  wiseacres,  there
is  nothing  in  it.     As  for  words,  signs,  tokens — all  stuff;  depend
upon  it  there  are  no  such  things.     Now  what  genuine  son  of  Free-


OF    FREEMASONRY.  253

The  stones  with  which  this  superb  edifice  was  con-
structed were  carved,  marked,  and  numbered  in  the
quarry,12  so  that  when  they  were  brought  to  Jerusalem,
each  part  was  found  to  tally  with  such  precision,  that,
when  finished,  the  temple  appeared  to  be  composed  of
a  single  stone ; 13  and  it  might  be  considered  as  a  work
of  the  Great  Architect  of  the  Universe,14  rather  than
an  exertion  of  human  skill.15

masonry  would  hold  converse  with  such  people  ?  Let  them  prattle
on.  If  it  pleases  any  who  hear,  they  must  be  as  weak  as  themselves,
and  it  never  can  injure  you."  (Turner's  Sermon  at  Woolwich,
1787.)

12  A  tradition  is  found  amongst  the  descendants  of  Ishmael,  as  we
are  informed  by  Southey,  in  a  passage  quoted  from  the  commentators
on  the  Koran,  which  originated  in  the  fact  that  the  temple  was  built
of  stone  and  timber  prepared  in  the  quarries  of  Tyre  and  the  forest
of  Lebanon,  conveyed  via  Joppa  to  Jerusalem,  and  there  put  together
by  such  a  process,  that  nothing  was  heard  among  the  workmen  but
harmony  and  peace ;  and  that  the  stones  had  been  prepared  with
such  perfect  accuracy,  that  when  fitted  together  the  joints  could  not
be  discovered.

"  If  on  the  outside  I  do  cast  mine  eye,
The  stones  are  joined  so  artificially,
That  if  the  mason  had  not  chequered  fine
Tyre's  alabaster  with  hard  serpentine,
A.n  hundred  marbles  no  less  fair  than  firm,
The  whole,  a  whole  quar  one  might  rightly  term."

(Du  Bartas.  p.  214.)

14  And  many  of  the  Jews  believe  it  to  have  been  a  divine  work.
Some  of  them  suppose  that  the  stones  were  not  so  framed  and
polished  by  human  art  and  industry,  but  by  a  worm  called  Samir,
which  God  created  for  the  purpose.  And  they  further  feign,  in  the
height  of  their  enthusiasm,  that  the  stones  came  to  the  temple  of
their  own  accord,  and  were  put  together  by  angels.  This  legend
appears  to  have  arisen  from  a  misinterpretation  of  the  word  samir,
which  signifies  a  very  hard  stone,  that  might  be  cut  and  polished


254


HISTORICAL    LANDMARKS


The  gold,  the  precious  stones,  the  jewels,  the  blue,
purple,  and  crimson  silk,  and  fine  linen  of  the  purest
white,16  all  served  to  embellish  and  adorn  this  stately
edifice,  and  to  crown  the  designs  of  Wisdom  and  the
productions  of  Strength  with  the  decorations  of
Beauty.17  They  were  symbols  of  the  sterling  and
precious  doctrines  with  which  wisdom  hath  embel-
lished the  science.  The  oblong  form  of  the  temple18

with  great  perfection.  This  was  an  emblem  of  the  peace  and  quiet
of  a  Christian  church.  In  Masonic  lore,  the  above  worm  is  called
"  the  insect  Shermah."

15  In  like  manner  the  Temple  of  Speculative  Masonry  is  built  by
piling  precept  upon  precept,  symbol  upon  symbol,  instruction,  ex-
planation, admonition,  example,  and  historical  fact,  like  a  series  of
polished  and  perfect  stones,  of  which  every  Brother  is  expected  to
contribute  his  quota,  emblematically  carved,  marked,  and  numbered,
to  denote  his  talent  and  ability  for  the  work,  until  the  moral  struc-
ture is  complete — a  building  not  made  with  hands,  etenial  in  the
heavens.

16  "  White  signifies  wisdom  in  three  degrees.     In  the  first,  the
white  light  will  denote  the  dilute  wisdom,  which  is  goodness  itself;
in  the  second  degree,  the  diamond  and  the  crystal  will  be  the
symbols  of  spiritual  wisdom,  which  possesses  the  interior  intellect
of  the  divinity ;  and  in  the  third  degree,  the  white  and  opaque
stone,  and  the  vestments  of  linen,  will  signify  natural  wisdom,  or
external  faith,  which  produces  works."  (Weale's  Architecture,  P.  iv.
p.  11.)

17  Thus  originated  the  symbolical  names  of  the  chief  Officers  of  a
Lodge.

18  This  form  is  thus  made  the  subject  of  moral  reference  in  some
of  the  old  lectures.     "  He  that  is  truly  square,  well  polished,  and
uprightly  fixed,  is  qualified  to  be  a  member  of  our  most  honourable
society.     He  that  trusteth  such  a  person  with  any  engagement  is
freed  from  all  trouble  and  anxiety  about  the  performance  of  it,  for
he  is  faithful  to  his  trust ;  his  words  are  the  breathings  of  his  heart,
and  he  is  an  utter  stranger  to  deceit."


OF    FREEMASONRY.  255

was  a  prototype  of  the  Lodge,  whose  dimensions  are
unlimited,  and  point  to  the  universality  of  the  system
and  the  unbounded  influence  of  its  excellent  rules  and
orders.  The  embroidered  silk  was  emblematical  of  the
ornaments  of  a  meek  and  teachable  spirit,  by  which
the  fraternity  ought  to  be  distinguished ;  the  sky-blue
colour  19  symbolized  the  elevation  of  our  hearts  to  the
Most  High ;  the  purple  referred  to  the  assiduity  and
zeal  which  are  displayed  by  an  anxious  Brother  during
his  search  after  Masonic  truth  and  perfection ;  and  the
crimson  or  double  scarlet  (tolaghath  shani)  depicted
the  twofold  love  of  God  and  our  neighbour.20  Such

19  "  In  China,  blue  is  attributed  to  the  dead ;  red  designates  the
living.  Red  represents  fire,  vivifying  heat ;  blue,  the  symbol  of  the
soul  after  death.  In  Christian  symbolism,  azure  is  similar.  In  a
MS.  of  the  tenth  century,  Jesus  in  the  tomb  is  bound  by  blue  fillets ;
his  countenance  is  blue,  the  sepulchre  red.  Two  angels  appear  on  a
stone ;  the  one  on  the  right  has  a  blue  aureola  and  violet  mantle,
symbols  of  the  passion  and  of  the  death  of  Christ ;  the  angel  on  the
left  has  a  yellow  aureola  and  purple  mantle,  symbol  of  the  triumph
of  divine  love  and  revelation.  The  Salisbury  breviary  contains
several  miniatures,  in  which  appear  biers  covered  with  a  blue  mor-
tuary cloth.  On  some  others,  but  more  rarely,  the  pall  is  red,  and
the  dais  which  covers  the  catafalque  blue.  The  two  colours,  one
over  the  other,  indicate  divine  love  raising  the  soul  to  immortality.
The  dais  is  the  emblem  of  heaven;  violet,  composed  of  red  and
blue,  was  likewise  a  mortuary  colour.  In  the  same  MS.  appears  a
coffin,  with  a  violet  pall.  The  colour  of  the  celestial  dome,  azure,
was,  in  divine  language,  the  symbol  of  eternal  truth  ;  in  consecrated
language,  of  immortality ;  and,  in  profane  language,  of  fidelity."
(Symb.  Colours,  Weale,  P.  v.  p.  23.)

20  On  a  monument  at  Thebes,  engraved  and  coloured  in  the  De-
scription of  Egypt  (torn.  iii.  pi.  34,  of  the  French  government  work),
the  symbol  is  illustrated.  Here  we  find  a  red  globe  and  two  golden
serpents,  with  red  and  blue  wings  ;  the  red  is  the  symbol  of  divine


256


HISTORICAL    LANDMARKS


are  the  doctrines  explained  to  the  candidate  at  his  first
introduction  into  Freemasonry,  in  the  hope  that  his
future  life  may  be  influenced  by  the  salutary  lesson.

These  signs  of  resemblance  between  the  temple  of
Solomon  and  a  Mason's  Lodge21  are  not  exaggerated  ;22
for  as  a  Lodge  in  its  universal  application  is  a  micro-
cosm or  miniature  world,  so  in  its  restricted  or  local

love,  the  gold  or  yellow  indicates  the  word  or  revelation,  the  blue  is
an  emblem  of  the  air  or  the  divine  breath.

21  Brother  Rosenberg  thus  assimilates  the  temple  and  the  Lodge  :
— "  The  curtain  of  the  temple  of  Jerusalem  separated  the  Holy  of
Holies  from  the  other  parts  of  the  temple  appropriated  to  the  simple
priests  and  initiated.     In  the  same  manner  the  office  bearers  of  a
Mason's  Lodge,  where  Masonry  is  properly  understood  and  prac-
tised, are  also  separated  from  common  members.     This  is  analogous
to  the  ten  cabalistic  spheres.     The  three  superior  officers  are  in  the
east  of  the  Lodge,  and  are  placed  so  as  to  form  a  triangle  similar  to
the  three  superior  spheres ;   and  like  the  Jod  celestial,  of  which
mention  has  above  been  made.     The  seven  other  office  bearers  are
placed  in  conformity  with  the  disposition  of  the  seven  other  spheres,
&c."

22  In  the  Helvetian  ritual  it  is  observed,  that  "  the  names  of
Lodges  are  sometimes  ill  chosen.     The  Apollo,  the  Minerva,  the
Vesta,  &c.,  are  heathen  names,  giving  ideas  of  idolatry  and  super-
stition, and  can  have  nothing  to  do  with  Freemasonry.     The  names
of  great  Masons  of  old  may  be  chosen,  or  the  Lodge  may  be  named
after  the  great  man  or  bishop  who  built  the  nearest  cathedral,  for
every  cathedral  was  built  by  the  ancient  society  of  Free  and  Ac-
cepted Masons."     A  French  writer  says,  "  Yos  LL  /.  ne  pourront
prendre  pour  titres  distinctifs  que  des  noms  de  grands  homines  qui
auraient  bien  merite  de  1'hunianite,  ou  des  noms  de  vertus  que
cherissent  tous  les  hommes.     Elles  s'appelleront.  L.  de  Zoroastre,  de
Confucius,  de  Pythagore,  de  Socrate,  &c.  &c.     L.  de  la  Sagesse,  de
la  Bonne  Foi,  de  1'Amitie',  de  la  Constance,  &c.  &c.     Ecole  de  — ,
Temple  de  — ,  les  Amis  de  — ,  les  Enfans  de  — ,  les  Disciples  de  — ,
les  Admirateurs  de  — ."


OF    FREEMASONRY.  257

signification,  it  is  a  transcript  of  King  Solomon's
temple.  The  Wisdom  of  the  King  of  Israel  contrived
this  gorgeous  edifice  for  the  glorious  purpose  of  wor-
shipping God  with  solemnity  and  decorum ;  hence  the
W.  M.  is  the  representative  of  this  divine  quality,
which  he  exerts  for  the  general  benefit  of  the  com*
munity  over  which  he  presides.  The  King  of  Tyre23
supported  the  designs  of  his  brother  monarch  by
furnishing  materials  and  men,  which  constitute  the
Strength  by  which  the  plans  of  Wisdom  are  carried
into  effect ;  and  the  S.  W.  being  his  representative  in
the  Lodge,  assists  the  Master  in  the  developement  of
his  wise  and  genial  lessons  of  virtue.24  To  complete
the  comparison  it  must  be  observed,  that  the  orna-

23  The  Tyrians  were  the  most  public-spirited  race  of  the  ancient
world ;  they  excelled  in  mercantile  pursuits,  and  in  the  sciences  of
geography,  astronomy,  and  architecture.     This  knowledge  was  in  a
manner  forced  upon  them  by  the  peculiarities  of  the  country  which
they  had  colonized.     "  Inhabiting  a  barren  and  ungrateful  soil,  they
were  obliged,  by  unwearied  industry,  to  correct  the  deficiencies  of
nature;    and,  by  extensive   commercial   enterprises,  to   make  the
abundant  wealth  of  more  distant  nations  and  fertile  regions  their
own.    They  soon  began  to  send  forth  colonies  to  all  the  surrounding
nations  that  would  receive  them ;  they  established  an  intercourse
with  all  the  islands  of  the  Mediterranean  Sea,  and  with  the  principal
maritime  cities  of  Persia,  India,  and  Egypt.      The  ports  of  the
Arabian  gulf  were  crowded  with  their  vessels ;  they  were  the  general
factors  of  the  Oriental  world,  and  all  trade  was  carried  on  in  Pho>
nician  vessels.     In  a  word,  they  were  the  Britons  of  remote  an-
tiquity."    (Maur.  Ind.  Ant.  vol.  vi.  p.  256.)

24  Barruel  has  enumerated  several  ridiculous  ceremonies,  which  he
affirms  take  place  during  the  initiations,  and  which  he  professes  to
have  received  from  those  who  had  undergone  them.  (See  Hist.  Jac.
vol.  ii.  p.  311.)     The  most  mild  construction  that  we  can  put  on
these  misrepresentations  is,  that  they  are  disingenuous  and  unfair.

VOL.  IT.  s


258


HISTORICAL    LANDMARKS


mental  details  of  the  temple,  which  constituted  its
beauty  and  excellence,  were  entrusted  to  the  mecha-
nical ingenuity  of  H.  A.  B.,  who  was  the  most  accom-
plished designer  and  worker  in  metals  upon  earth;25
and  like  Aholiab  and  Bezaleel,  was  probably  inspired
from  on  high  for  that  purpose.20  He  is  personated  by
the  J.  W.,  who  superintends  the  details  of  the  moral
edifice,  calls  the  men  from  labour  when  the  meridian

25  His  father  was  an  Hebrew  residing  at  Tyre,  and  therefore  in
respect  of  country  is  termed  a  man  of  Tyre  ;  but  as  regards  family,
he  was  of  the  tribe  of  Naphtali.  (1  Kings  vii.  14.)  On  the  mother's
side  he  was  a  Danite.

20  In  the  degree  of  Knights  of  the  Eagle  or  Sun,  the  candidate  is
introduced  to  four  Masonic  Worthies,  viz.  K.S.,  H.  K.  T.,  II.  A. B.,
and  John  the  Baptist.  The  two  first,  he  is  told,  may  stimulate  him
by  their  zeal  in  the  royal  art  to  follow  the  sublime  example,  of  which
Solomon  was  the  institutor  and  Hiram  the  support,  when  the  temple
at  Jerusalem  was  erected.  H.  A.  B.  was  a  symbol  of  truth  on
earth ;  and  John  the  Baptist  teaches  us  to  preach  repentance  and
good  works,  that  our  brethren  may  be  able  to  see  the  truth,  with  her
form  and  virtues  uncovered.  This  bears  a  striking  resemblance  to
the  teaching  of  the  Druids.  There  is  a  plate  in  Montfaucon  which
represents  two  groups  of  figures,  three  in  each ;  the  one  of  young,
the  other  of  aged  men.  The  former  look  towards  a  woman  full
clothed,  the  latter  towards  one  naked,  to  represent  Truth.  This  is  in-
tended to  show  that  "  knowledge  and  truth  are  veiled  from  youthful
eyes ;  that  mysteries  are  clothed  and  wrapped  up  in  allegory,  symbol,
and  significant  rites.  At  first  the  young  disciples  are  not  permitted  to
look  towards  the  real  truth ;  but  as  they  grow  older  are  proportion-
ably  brought  nearer  to  it  and  taught  the  divine  secrets,  though  still
enshrined  in  figure  and  mythology.  But  when  age  has  ripened  the
judgement  and  disciplined  the  passions,  he  is  allowed  to  approach
the  goddess,  to  show  that  truth  unveils  all  her  mysteries  to  those
who,  by  passing  through  the  several  stages  of  their  discipline,  were
enlightened,  and  prepared  to  receive  truth  in  her  most  undisguised,
simple,  and  natural  appearances."  (Borlase,  Corn.  p.  105.)


OF    FREEMASONRY.  259

*

sun  displays  its  Beauty,  and  sees  that  the  duties  of  the
Lodge  are  decorously  resumed  after  the  necessary
respite  from  toil.

Our  G.  M.  David,  being  worn  down  with  years  and
infirmities,  assembled  the  princes  of  his  people,  and
acquainted  them  with  his  design  of  building  a  mag-
nificent shrine  for  the  ark  of  God.  He  had  made
great  preparation  for  it,  by  laying  up  immense  quan-
tities of  costly  materials  ;  and  providing  plans  and
models  for  the  different  parts  of  the  structure,  when
he  was  forbidden  to  proceed  by  the  Most  High,
and  told  that  the  work  should  be  accomplished  by
his  son.27  After  his  death,  Solomon  commenced  the
building  of  the  temple.  The  workmen  were  classed
into  orders,  lodges  and  messes  ;  they  were  distinguished
by  signs,  words  and  tokens,28  and  their  work  by  marks  ;
all  of  which  were  necessary  to  produce  regularity  and

27  He  requested  them  to  assist  his  son  in  this  laudable  work,  and
they  were  not  averse  to  comply  with  his  wishes ;  so  that  an  amazing
quantity  of  gold,  silver,  copper,  and  other  metals,  besides  precious
stones,  marble,  porphyry,  and  other  rich  materials,  were  brought  to
him  from  all  parts  of  the  kingdom.

28  The  science  of  Freemasonry  is  still  characterized  by  S.  W.  and
T.,  but  it  is  a  grievous  error  to  suppose  them  to  be  the  essence  of  the
system  ;  they  are  merely  senseless  designations  of  something  pos-
sessing greater  value ;  they  are  to  the  Mason  as  the  wig  to  the
judge,  lawn  sleeves  to  the  reverend  prelate,  or  the  gold-headed  cane
to  the  ancient  physician, — essentials  as  to  form,  but  unimportant  in
reality.     The  sterling  value  of  our  doctrines,  as  well  as  their  uni-
versality, would  remain  uninjured  if  these   conventional  marks  of
recognition  were  all  abolished.     Preston  calls  them  the  keys  of  our
treasure :  and  so  indeed  they  are  to  a  certain  extent,  but  the  cabinet
might  be  opened  if  these  keys  were  lost.     The  S.  W.  and  T.  are
merely  conventional,  although  it  is  not  to  be  denied  that  great  mini'


260  HISTORICAL    LANDMARKS


decorum,  that  alone  could  render  effective  the  united
services  of  such  an  immense  body  of  men.

In  clearing  the  ground  and  preparing  the  founda-
tions to  form  a  level  site  on  which  to  erect  the  pro-
posed building,  with  its  courts,  cloisters  and  appen-
dages, it  was  necessary  to  construct  many  vaulted
passages,29  and  to  make  subterranean  buildings  of
great  strength  and  solidity  to  support  the  superincum-
bent mass.  This  was  a  work  of  vast  labour ;  because
the  surface  of  the  mountain  was  very  irregular,  and
probably  covered  with  trees  of  great  size,  for  David
called  it  "  the  field  of  the  wood ;"  although  these
would  be  subsequently  felled,  lest  the  temple  should
be  placed  in  an  idolatrous  grove.  In  order  to  ensure
a  space  sufficiently  capacious  for  the  area  of  the  entire
structure,  it  was  expedient  to  construct  terraces,30  one

bers  of  Masons  are  satisfied  with  their  possession,  and  look  for
nothing  beyond  them.

29  We  have  a  tradition  that  King  Solomon  concealed  certain  trea-
sures beneath  the  foundations  of  the  temple,  which  were  found  when
they  were  opened  to  build  the  second  temple.     It  was  common  in
ancient  times  to  secrete  treasures  in  such  vaults  and  caverns.     "  It
is  usual  in  the  east,"  says  Chardin,  "  for  sorcerers  to  accompany
conquerors  for  the  purpose  of  pointing  out  the  places  where  treasures
are  hid.     Thus  at  Surat,  when  Siragi  came  thither,  there  were  a
people  who,  with  a  stick  striking  on  the  ground  or  against  walls,
found  out  those  that  had  been  hollowed,  and  ordered  such  places  to
be  opened."     Dr.  Perry  has  given  us  an  account  of  some  immense
treasures  hidden  in  the  ground  by  the  principal  people  of  the  Turkisli
empire ;   which,  upon  a  revolution,  were   discovered   by  domestics
privy  to  the  secret.     D'Herbelot  has  also  mentioned  treasures  con-
cealed in  the  same  manner,  and  discovered  by  a  series  of  very  singular
accidents.

30  There  was  a  tradition  amongst  old  Masons,  that  seven  days  after


OF    FREEMASONRY.  261

of  which  remained  till  the  final  destruction  of  the
temple.  It  was  600  feet  in  height,  and  supported
those  magnificent  cloisters  which  were  called  "  Solo-
mon's Porch."  During  these  preparations  vast  hol-
lows had  to  be  filled  up,32  partly  by  soil  and  partly  by

the  foundation-stone  was  laid,  the  three  Grand  Masters  entrusted  the
Fellowcrafts  with  a  new  sign,  as  a  reward  for  their  previous  labours
and  an  encouragement  for  them  to  persevere  in  well-doing ;  and  that
the  communication  was  accompanied  by  an  OB.

31  The  several  courts  were  elevated  above  each  other  in  terrace
form,  and  the  temple  itself  was  placed  higher  than  them  all.     From
the  outer  court  into  the  Chel  or  space  between  the  two  walls  which
enclosed  the  court  of  the  women  there  was  an  elevation  of  10j  feet,
which  was  surmounted  by  14  steps ;  from  thence  to  the  court  of  the
women  was  a  staircase  of  5  steps,  rising  3|  feet.     The  brazen  gate
was  accessible  from  this  court  by  a  semicircular  staircase  of  15  steps,
in  altitude  11£  feet ;  and  from  the  inner  court  to  the  porch  the  ascent
was  9  feet  by  12  steps.     Thus  the  temple  was  elevated  above  the
court  of  the  Gentiles  by  an  ascent  of  46  steps,  rising  in  the  whole
34  feet  6  inches.     And  the  court  of  the  Gentiles  was  raised  above
the  level  of  the  valley  beneath,  as  we  have  just  seen,  600  feet.    Thus
taking  the  porch  or  tower  of  the  temple  at  180  feet,  the  ascent  from
the  court  of  the  Gentiles  34  feet,  and  the  terrace  600  feet,  it  will
appear  that  the  battlements  of  the  porch  were  814  feet  above  the
level  ground ;   and  hence  the  probability  is,  that  in  a  clear  day  it
would  be  visible  from  the  elevated  mountains  in  the  most  distant
regions  of  Palestine.

32  A  writer  in  the  F.  Q.  E.  thus  spiritualizes  the  temple  of  Solo-
mon : — "  The  deep  trenches  of  our  spiritual  temple  represent  that
most  beautiful  of  all  virtues — humility,  which  points  out  the  un-
measurable  distance  between  the  unworthiness  of  the  creature  and
the  beneficence  of  the  Creator ;  in  the  foundation  thus  prepared,  the
squared  stones  are  laid  emblematic  of  the  perfect  actions  of  a  good
man's  life ;  the  quarrying  of  them,  and  the  felling  of  the  timbers  at  a
distance  from  the  holy  pile,  points  out  the  necessity  of  subduing  all
tumultuous  and  unholy  passions  ere  we  commence  the  task  of  ren-
dering our  hearts  worthy  of  the  dwelling-place  of  the  Most  High,


262  HISTORICAL    LANDMARKS


the  construction  of  jambs,  and  massive  walls,  and
pillars  of  solid  masonry,  beneath  the  foundations.  For
this  purpose,  soil  and  stones  from  the  adjacent  hill  of
Calvary,  which  forms  an  intrinsic  part  of  the  same
mountain,  were  transferred  to  Moriah  in  great  abun-
dance.33 While  the  workmen  were  thus  making  ex-
cavations to  collect  these  materials,  they  discovered  the
remains  of  an  ancient  building,  beneath  which  were
deposited  a  variety  of  curious  and  valuable  articles,34
which  Solomon  concluded  to  have  been  the  adjuncts
to  the  worship  of  idols ;  and  the  discovery  caused  him
to  deliberate  on  the  propriety  of  building  a  temple  in
honour  of  the  true  God  so  near  to  a  sanctuary  of  pol-

The  contributions  of  Hiram,  K.  T.,  inculcate  a  lesson  of  mutual  de-
pendance  between  man  and  man;  the  decorations  and  beautiful
porchway  represent  the  graceful  arts,  &c.  &c."  (F.  Q.  II.  1830,
p.  14.)

33  Josephus  says  that  the  stones  were  50  feet  long,  24  broad,  and
16  thick.

34  Dr.  Dalcho  remarks,  in  his  Orations,  published  at  the  especial
request  of  the  Grand  College  of  Knights  of  K.  H.,  and  the  original
Chapter  of  Prince  Masons  of  Ireland  (p.  20),  "  the  present  Masi
word  is  to  be  found  in  no  language  that  ever  was  used  ;  it  is  in  fact
not  a  word,  but  merely  a  jumble  of  letters  forming  a  sound  without
meaning.     The  manner  in  which  the  pristine  word  was  lost,  and  the
particular  situation  in  which  another  was  substituted,  is  too  well
known  for  me  to  repeat.    The  first  expressions  of  the  F.  C.,  according
to  the  system  of  ancient  Masonry,  were  two  Hebrew  words,  highly
significant  and  appropriate  to  the  melancholy  occasion.     From  the
corruption  of  these  the  present  word  is  formed ;  not  from  design,
because  it  means  nothing,  but  from  ignorance  and  inattention.     The
word  of  the  Free  and  Accepted  Masons  is  nearly  in  the-  same  situa-
tion ;  like  the  Ancient  Masons,  it  is  a  word  without  meaning ;  it  is
the  initials,  or  acrostic  of  an  Hebrew  sentence,  which  is  elegantly
illustrative  of  the  discovery  which  was  made  by  the  Fellowcrafts."


OF    FREEMASONRY.


263


lution.  In  this  dilemma  he  was  favoured  with  a
vision,  in  which  the  Almighty  made  such  communica-
tions as  induced  him  to  persevere  in  his  original  plan ;
and  in  the  solemn  ceremony  of  levelling  the  footstone,35
King  Solomon  and  the  twelve  tribes  of  Israel  circum-
ambulated the  mountain  three  times  in  jubilee  pro-
cession.36 The  work  was  put  together  without  the  use

35  This  footstone,  according  to  Masonic  tradition,  inclosed  an  agate
of  a  cubical  form,  on  which  certain  characters  were  engraven  on  a
plate  of  gold,  known  only  to    Solomon  himself;    and  it  was  de-
posited before  the  rising  of  the  sun,  as  an  example  to  the  work-
men, that  they  ought  to  begin 'the  day  early  and  work  with  assiduity
and  zeal.

36  Tt  will  be  unnecessary  to  introduce  in  this  place  the  details  of
this  famous  structure.     Every  particular  has  been  already  embodied
in  my  Antiquities  and  Theocratic  Philosophy.     It  was  begun  in  the
fourth  year  of  Solomon's  reign,  and  the  third  after  the  demise  of  his
father;  420  years  after  the  passage  of  the  Eed  Sea;  on  the  second
day  of  the  month  Zif,  which  was  the  second  month  of  the  sacred
year,  corresponding  with  our  twenty-first  of  April,  A.M.  2992.     Mr.
Davies  of  Shrewsbury  has  communicated  to  me  a  curious  passage
respecting  our  foundation-stone.      "  The  temple  of  Solomon,"  he
says,  "  had  three  foundations,  the  first  of  which

contained  seventy  stones  ;  five  rows  from  north  to
south,  and  fourteen  in  each  row  running  from  east
to  west.  The  centre  row  corresponded  with  the
upright  of  a  cross,  whose  transverse  was  formed
by  two  stones  on  each  side  of  the  eleventh  stone,
from  the  east  end  of  the  centre  row  of  which  the
upright  is  formed,  and  the  fourth  stone  from  the
west  end  of  it.  This  stone,  which  hence  occupied
the  place  of  the  crossing  of  the  beams,  was  under
the  centre  of  the  S.  S.,  where  was  deposited  the
ark  of  the  covenant  and  Shekinah."  And  this
gentleman  goes  on  to  prove  that  this  design  con-
tained an  evident  reference  to  the  cross  of  Christ ;


264


HISTORICAL    LANDMARKS


of  axe,  hammer,  or  metal  tool,37  and  was  carried  on
with  such  order,  regularity  and  despatch,  as  to  be  com-
pleted in  the  eleventh  year  of  his  reign,  in  the  month
Bui,  which  is  the  eighth  month ;  thus  occupying  seven
years  and  six  months  only.

During  the  progress  of  the  work,  the  Sacred  Lodge
was  opened  in  the  bosom  of  the  mountain,38  on  the

and  that  this  cross  was  so  placed,  that  the  part  where  the  heart  of
Christ  would  be  at  the  time  of  his  crucifixion  was  under  the  centre
of  the  S.  S.

37  The  commentators  on  the  Koran  tell  us  that  David,  having  laid
the  foundations  of  the  temple  of  Jerusalem,  when  he  died,  left  it  to
be  finished  by  his   son   Solomon,  who  employed  the  genii  in  the
work ;  that  Solomon,  before  the  edifice  was  completed,  perceiving
his  end  draw  nigh,  bogged  of  God  that  his  death  might  be  con-
cealed from  the  genii  till  they  had  entirely  finished  it;   that  God
therefore  so  ordered  it,  that  Solomon  died  as  he  stood  at  his  prayers
leaning  on  his  staif,  which  supported  the  body  in  that  posture  a  full
year ;  and  the  genii,  supposing  him  to  be  alive,  continued  their  work
during  that  term ;   at  the  expiration  whereof,  the  temple  being  per-
fectly completed,  a  worm,  which  had  gotten  into  the  staff,  eat  it
through,  and  the  corpse  fell  to  the  ground  and  discovered  the  king's
death.     Possibly  this  fable  of  the  temple  being  built  by  genii,  and
not  by  men,  might  take  its  rise  from  what  is  mentioned  in  scripture,
that  the  house  was  built  of  stone  made  ready  before  it  was  brought
thither  ;  so  that  "  there  was  neither  axe,  hammer,  or  tool  of  iron  heard
in  the  house  while  it  was  building."    (Kimchi  in  loc.  Buxt.  Lex.
Talm.  p.  2456.)

38  The  H.  Manasseh  ben  Israel  says,  "  Solomon  had  a  deep  cave
underground,  with  many  intricacies,  over  which  he  fixed  a  stone,
wherein  he  put  the  ark  and  cherubim.    They  say  he  did  this  because,
foreseeing  by  the  holy  spirit  that  the  temple  would  be  destroyed,  he
therefore  made  a  secret  place  where  the  ark  might  be  kept,  so  that
its  sanctity  might  not  be  profaned  by  heathen  hands ;  and  they  are
of  opinion,  that  subsequently  Josiah  secreted  therein  the  ark.    They
prove  it  firstly  from   1  Kings  vi.  10,   and   the    oracle  within  the


OP    FREEMASONRY.  265

most  holy  spot  of  ground  which  could  be  selected  by
S.  K.  T.,  H.  K.  T.  and  H.  A.  B. ;  it  was  denominated
the  Sacred  Lodge,  because  it  was  held  in  the  very
situation  which  Moses  had  predicted  should  be  the
depository  chosen  by  the  Most  High  for  the  reception
of  his  SACRED  NAME.

house  he  prepared  to  place  there  the  ark ;  where  by  prepare  they
understand  to  mean  a  preparation  for  the  future ;  as  we  see,  when
treating  of  the  ark  and  cherubim,  it  says,  "  and  they  were  there
until  this  day — a  term  in  holy  scripture  which  signifies  to  all  eter-
nity." (Concil.  vol.  ii.  p.  75.)


266  HISTORICAL    LANDMARKS


LECTURE  XXXII.


THE  DECORATIONS  OF  THE  TEMPLE  AND  THE  SOURCES  OF  KING
SOLOMON'S  WEALTH.

"  The  Israelites  could  go  nowhere  and  see  a  place  comparable  to
this  stately  temple,  there  being  at  that  time  nothing  in  the  whole
world  like  it  for  riches  and  glory." — OLD  LECTURES.

"  David  himself  gave  towards  the  building  of  the  temple,  out  of
his  own  treasures,  3000  talents  of  gold  of  Ophir  and  7000  talents
of  silver.  The  princes  of  his  kingdom  followed  the  glorious  example
of  their  king,  and  gave  5000  talents  and  10,000  drachmas  of  gold,
10,000  talents  of  silver,  18,000  talents  of  brass,  and  100,000
talents  of  iron,  as  also  a  great  many  of  the  most  precious  stones." —
SMITH.

IT  appears  to  have  been  an  universal  custom  in  the
earliest  ages,  and  particularly  in  the  time  of  Solomon,
to  decorate  public  buildings  with  ornaments  which
possessed  a  symbolical  reference1  to  facts  that  it  was

1  It  is  remarkable  how  this  custom  prevailed  in  every  quarter  of
the  globe.  Thus  on  an  Egyptian  monument  now  at  Turin  "  there
are  two  royal  personages,  one  male  and  the  other  female,  with  a  long
inscription,  by  which  it  appears  that  the  name  of  the  Pharaoli  was
Horus,  and  the  name  of  the  woman  was  Tmauhmot,  his  daughter,
who  succeeded  him  in  the  kingdom.  The  purport  of  this  inscription
is,  that  the  image  of  Horus  and  his  daughter  were  placed  in  the
temple  on  account  of  the  great  benefits  they  had  bestowed  upon
Egypt,  and  the  respect  they  had  shown  towards  the  gods."  (Spineto.
Hier.  p.  412.)  We  find  the  same  system  in  India,  and  in  the  picture
writings  of  ancient  Mexico.


OF    FREEMASONRY.  267

considered  desirable  to  perpetuate.2  Our  lectures
pourtray  the  ornaments  of  the  temple  in  gorgeous
colours.  After  having  described  the  cherubims,  the
gold  and  silver  vessels,  the  rich  vestments,  and  all
the  paraphernalia  of  the  temple,  they  go  on  to  say,  the
inner  walls,  posts,  doors,  beams,  floors,  and  ceilings,
were  made  of  cedar  wood,  olive3  and  fir,  overlaid  with
plates  of  burnished  gold,4  richly  enchased  with  mag-
nificent designs,  and  adorned  with  various  coloured
gems  dispersed  in  the  most  exquisite  order  by  H.A.B.
The  golden  nails  which  fastened  those  plates  to  the
timber  had  then:  heads  enchased  with  curious  work-
manship.5 On  the  doors  were  delineated  cherubims

2  This  practice  does  not  appear  to  have  been  included  in  the  de-
nunciations of  the  Mosaic  law,  which  forbids  only  visible  objects  of
actual  worship,  and  therefore  Solomon  adorned  and  enriched  the
temple  profusely ;  and  in  particular  the  most  holy  place,  and  the
veil  which  concealed  it  from  public  inspection,  with  symbolical  orna-
ments and  decorations,  which  referred,  according  to  Josephus,  to
creation  and  providence,  and  the  establishment  and  details  of  the
Jewish  religion.

3  The  olive  was  held  in  great  esteem  by  the  F.  C.  who  were  em-
ployed about  the  temple,  on  account  of  its  admirable  virtues,  which
appeaj  to  have  constituted  one  of  the  secrets  of  that  degree,  in
softening  iron  by  the  application  of  its  oil.

4  The  scripture  says,  "  he  garnished  the  house  with  precious  stones
for  beauty."  (2  Chron.  iv.  6.)     Some  think  it  ought  to  be  rendered,
"  he  paved  the  house  with  precious  and  beautiful  marble."   But  this
pavement  must  have  been  under  the  planks  of  fir  (1  Kings  vi.  15)  ;
and  if  so,  the  whole  temple,  not  excepting  the  floors,  which  appear
to  have  been  formed  of  Mosaic  work,  was  lined  entirely  with  boards,
which  were  principally  faced  with  plates  of  gold.

5  The  palaces  and  public  buildings  of  all  nations  were  thus  deco-


268


HISTORICAL    LANDMARKS


in  great  abundance,  interspersed  with  flower-work  of
gold.  The  hosts  of  angels  were  here  represented  as
attending  on  the  majesty  of  God  to  execute  his  will
and  pleasure.

A  vast  number  of  precious  stones6  were  used  about
the  edifice  which  increased  its  beauty  and  splendour,
and  contributed  a  gorgeousness  to  the  details  which
struck  the  spectator  with  wonder  and  admiration.
These  precious  stones  were  imported  by  the  ships  of
Tyre,7  which  gave  rise,  amongst  the  enthusiastic  Jews

rated.     Lucan  gives  the  following  description  of  the  palace  of  Cleo-
patra.  (Phars.  x.)

"  Rich  as  some  fane  by  lavish  zealots  rear'd,

For  the  proud  banquet  stood  the  hall  prepar'd ;

Thick  golden  plates  the  latent  beams  enfold,

And  the  high  roof  was  fretted  o'er  with  gold  ;

Of  solid  marble  all  the  walls  were  made,

And  onyx  e'en  the  meaner  floor  inlaid  ;

While  porphyry  and  agate  round  the  court

In  massive  columns  rose,  a  proud  support ;

Of  solid  ebony  each  post  was  wrought,

From  swarthy  Meroe  profusely  brought ;

With  ivory  was  the  entrance  crusted  o'er,

And  polished  tortoise  hid  each  shining  door  ;

While  on  the  cloudy  spots  enchased  was  seen

The  lively  emerald's  never-failing  green."

6  All  the  names  of  gems  were  derived  from  the  Amonians — as
adamant,  amethist,  opal,  agate,  pyropus,  onyx,  sardonyx,  alabaster,
beryl,  coral,  cornelian,  &c.     As  this  was  the  shore  where  these  gems
were  found,  it  was  usually  called  the  pearl  coast.    There  was  a  pearl
fishery  in  the  Red  Sea.  (Purchas.  v.  778.)

7  The  Masonic  tradition  runs,  that  about  four  years  before  the
building  of  the  temple  H.  A.  B.,  as  the  agent  of  the  Tyrian  monarch,
purchased  some  curious  stones  from  an  Arabian  merchant ;  and  upon


OF    FREEMASONRY.  269

of  later  times,  to  exaggerated  accounts  respecting  the
riches  of  the  temple  in  jewellery,  which  have  been
properly  rejected  from  our  lectures,  as  exceeding  the
bounds  of  reason  and  credibility.8  The  floors  are  said
to  have  been  of  Mosaic  work,9  decorated  with  elegant

inquiry  where  he  met  with  them,  he  was  told  that  they  were  found
by  accident  on  an  island  in  the  Red  Sea.  H.  E.  T.  deputed  his
agent  to  investigate  the  truth  of  the  report ;  and  he  had  the  good
fortune  to  discover  many  precious  stones,  and,  amongst  the  rest,  an
abundance  of  that  valuable  stone  called  the  topaz,  with  which  the
King  of  Tyre  richly  adorned  his  palaces  and  temples,  as  we  are
informed  by  the  prophet  Ezekiel.  Subsequently  the  island  was
called  Topaz,  according  to  Pliny,  from  the  abundance  of  this  stone
found  there.

8  I  subjoin  the  following  passage  from  some  old  lectures  in  my
possession : — "  Under  the  first  foundation  was  another,  which  con-
tained 900  square  stones,  disposed  in  thirty  rows,  with  thirty  in  each
row.      Each  of  these  stones  was  inlaid  with  precious  stones  in
arabesque  patterns.     There  were  twelve  other  stones,  richly  deco-
rated, to  represent  the  twelve  tribes  of  Israel.     The  number  of
precious  stones  in  the  S.  S.  were  603,550.     In  the  holy  place  were
22,288  precious  stones,  beautifully  arranged;  and  the  ceiling  of  the
S.  S.  was  beautifully  spangled  in  the  form  of  a  circle  within  a  square,
overlaid  with  gold ;  and  the  sides  of  the  S.  S.  were  similarly  orna-
mented down  to  the  height  of  ten  cubits ;  from  whence  to  the  floor
the  wall  was  of  solid  gold,  enchased  and  annealed,  forming  the
greatest  exhibition  of  human  ingenuity  ever  recorded   in  history.
The  value  of  these  precious  stones,  according  to  the  best  authorities,
amounted  to  the  prodigious  sum  of  £62,675,000,000."

9  If  the  following  account  of  the  emerald  be  correct,  it  would  form
a  beautiful  basis  for  Mosaic  work.    The  ancients  have  thought  proper
to  propagate  many  tales  about  emeralds.     "  They  say  that  in  the
isle  of  Cyprus  there  was,  on  the  sea  shore,  a  lion  of  marble  whose
eyes  were  of  emeralds.     These  stones,  they  pretend,  were  so  lively,
that  their  lustre  penetrated  to  the  bottom  of  the  sea.     The  tunny
fish  were  frightened  by  them,  and  deserted  that  shore.     The  fisher-


270


HISTORICAL    LANDMARKS


patterns,  and  composed  of  costly  materials ;  the  win-
dows of  agate,  the  gates  of  carbuncle,  and  the  borders
of  pleasant  stones.10  These  decorations  were  con-
sidered necessary  by  the  wise  king,  because  the  Jews
had  been  witness  to  the  imposing  fascinations  of  the
spurious  Freemasonry  exhibited  in  the  temples  of

men,  not  knowing  what  to  attribute  this  accident  to,  suspected  that
it  might  be  occasioned  by  the  emeralds  of  which  the  eyes  of  the  lion
in  question  were  made.  They  took  them  away,  and  immediately  the
fishes  returned  in  as  great  plenty  as  before.  Herodotus  assures  us,
that  he  had  seen  in  the  temple  of  Hercules  a  column  of  only  one
emerald,  which  gave  a  very  great  light  at  night.  Theophrastus  re-
ports, that  a  King  of  Babylon  made  a  present  to  the  King  of  Egypt
of  an  emerald  four  cubits  long  and  three  broad.  He  adds,  that  Ihe
Egyptians  boasted  also  of  having  in  their  temple  of  Jupiter  an  obelisk
of  forty  cubits  in  height  and  four  in  breadth,  composed  of  foul-
emeralds.  Another  writer  pretends  that  in  his  time  they  still  had,
in  the  labyrinth  of  Egypt,  a  colossal  statue  of  the  god  Serapis,  nine
cubits  high,  which  was  only  of  one  emerald."  (Goguet.  vol.  ii.
p.  124.)

10  Isa.  liv.  12.  From  this  temple  and  its  enrichments  the  Arabians
might  derive  a  knowledge  of  magnificence,  when  applied  to  either
palaces  or  religious  houses ;  and  hence  the  command  of  Aladdin  to
the  genie.  "  I  would  have  you  build  me,"  said  he,  "  a  palace  at  a
proper  distance  from  the  Sultan's,  fit  to  receive  my  spouse.  I  leave
the  choice  of  the  materials  to  you,  i.  e.  of  porphyry,  jasper,  lapis
lazuli,  and  the  finest  marble  of  the  most  varied  colours.  But  I  ex-
pect that  the  walls  be  made  of  massive  gold  and  silver,  laid  alter-
nately; that  each  front  shall  contain  six  windows,  the  lattices  of
which  shall  be  so  enriched  with  art  and  symmetry,  with  diamonds,
rubies  and  emeralds,  that  they  shall  exceed  everything  of  the  kind
that  has  ever  been  seen  in  the  world."  This  kind  of  work  became
common  amongst  the  Israelites.  (2  Kings  xxiv.  16.)  Many  beau-
tiful patterns  of  Mosaic  have  been  found  in  Egypt,  from  whence  the
art  passed  into  Greece,  through  the  medium  of  Tyrian  navigation,
and  thence  to  Rome.  See  Lect.  xxvi.  note  40.


OF    FREEMASONRY.  271


Hercules  and  Astarte  at  Tyre,11  of  Dagon  at  Gaza,
and  at  other  places  in  the  neighbourhood  of  Judea ; 12
and  it  was  to  wean  them  from  the  idolatrous  usages
of  those  splendid  superstitions,  that  the  temple  at
Jerusalem  was  made  to  surpass  them  all,  for  there  was
not  a  building  in  any  part  of  the  world  which  could
be  compared  with  it  for  riches  and  glory.13

The  entire  cost  of  building  this  temple  appears  to
have  created  the  astonishment  of  every  one  who  has
taken  the  subject  into  his  consideration.14  The  in-

11  The  temple  of  Hercules  was  remarkable  for  superb  mythological
devices — the  egg  of  creation,  the  nymphoea,  and  the  serpent.     It
was  supported  by  those  two  magnificent  columns,  the  one  of  massive
gold,  the  other  consisting  of  a  solid  emerald,  which  were  seen  and
described  by  Herodotus  (1.  ii.  p.  108),  on  his  visit  to  that  Qity ;  the
latter  of  which,  he  asserts,  illuminated  at  night  the  whole  of  that
vast  fabric.

12  "  These  temples  had  no  windows  ;  some  received  light  only  by
the  door ;   in  others,  lamps  were  suspended  before  the  principal
statue ;  others  again  were  divided  into  three  aisles,  by  two  ranges  of
columns.      The  middle  aisle  was  entirely  open,  and  sufficient  to
admit  light  into  the  side  aisles,  which  were  'covered.     The  grand
arcades,  which  we  discover  in  the  lateral  parts  of  a  temple,  have
been  laid  open  long  after  it  was  built."  (Ajiacharsis,  vol.  ii.  p.  493.)

13  We  have  a  tradition  how  the  Tyrian  Grand  Master,  when  he
came  to  survey  it  just  before  the  dedication,  confessed  its  great  supe-
riority ;  and  concluding  from  thence  that  the  Most  High  had  inspired
Solomon  above  all  other  men,  conceded  the  pre-eminence  to  him
under  the  name  of  JEDEDIAH — the  beloved  of  God.

14  The  Mahometan  writers  say,  "  the  devils  having,  by  God's  per-
mission, tempted  Solomon  without  success,  they  made  use  of  a  trick
to  blast  his  character.     For  they  wrote  several  books  of  magic  and
hid  them  under  that  prince's  throne  ;  and,  after  his  death,  told  the
chief  men  that  if  they  wanted  to  know  by  what  means  Solomon  had
obtained  his  absolute  power  over  men,  genii,  and  the  winds,  they


272


HISTORICAL    LANDMARKS


credible  quantities  of  the  precious  metals  which  were
really  used  in  its  construction,  added  to  the  wages  of
more  than  200,000  workmen  of  all  classes,  appear  so
extravagant,  that  the  question  frequently  arises,  where
was  all  this  profusion  of  bullion  procured?15  The
edifice  alone,  as  has  been  estimated,  consumed  more
gold  and  silver  than  at  present  exists  upon  the  whole
earth.  It  is  asserted  by  Prideaux,  that  the  treasure
bequeathed  by  David  alone16  exceeded  the  riches  of  all

should  dig  under  his  throne.  Having  done  this,  they  found  the
aforesaid  books,  which  contained  impious  superstitions.  The  better
sort  refused  to  learn  the  evil  arts  therein  delivered,  but  the  common
people  did  ;  and  the  priests  published  this  scandalous  story  of  Solo-
mon, which  obtained  credit  among  the  Jews,  till  God  cleared  that
king  by  the  mouth  of  Mahomet,  who  declared  that  Solomon  was  no
idolater."  (Yahya,  cited  by  Sale,  vol.  i.  p.  19.)

15  In  every  country,  at  the  earliest  periods,  gold  was  used  in  pro-
fusion. Joseph  had  a  chain  of  gold  placed  about  his  neck.  At  a
still  more  remote  era,  Abraham  is  said  to  have  carried  "  exceeding
riches  of  gold  and  silver"  out  of  Egypt;  and  at  the  deliverance  of
the  Israelites,  immense  quantities  of  these  metals  in  jewels,  vessels,
&c.  must  have  been  abducted ;  otherwise  we  should  be  at  a  loss  to
account  for  the  profuse  decoration  of  the  tabernacle  in  gold  and
precious  stones,  which  is  recorded  in  the  Pentateuch ;  because  the
people  could  not  have  been  supplied  with  these  materials  from  any
other  source.

IG  (c  "With  the  return  of  peace,"  says  Eussel  (Con.  vol.  iii.  p.  34),
"  the  mind  of  this  renowned  prince  opened  to  the  pious  duty  of
building  a  temple.  Tor  this  purpose  he  devoted  a  large  share  of  the
booty  which  fell  into  his  hands  when  sacking  the  towns  of  the  Syrian
kings,  who  joined  in  the  league  formed  against  him  by  the  Ammo-
nites ;  and  the  golden  crowns  and  brazen  shields  found  on  the  bodies
of  the  enemy  in  the  field  of  battle  he  accumulated  as  a  fitting  material
for  constructing  the  sacred  furniture  required  by  the  priests  in  the
solemn  rites  of  their  religion."


OF    FREEMASONRY.  '273

the  world  in  specie  at  the  present  day,  for  it  amounted
to  100,000  talents  of  gold17  and  1,000,000  talents  of
silver  ; 18  or,  as  computed  by  the  Eubsean  talent,  equal,
the  former  to  £547,500,000,  the  latter  to  £342,000,000
of  our  present  money ;  and  together  reaching  almost
£900,000,000  sterling.19

But  it  appears  that  King  Solomon's  riches  were

17  There  is  clear  proof  in  Exod.  xxxviii.  25,  that  the  talent  con-
tained 3000  shekels.     "  And  the  silver  of  them  that  were  numbered
was  100  talents,  and  1775  shekels."    There  were  603,550  men  that
offered  each   of  them   half   a   shekel,  making  altogether   301,775
shekels,  which  amounting  to  100  talents,  with  1775  shekels  over,
demonstrates  that  a  talent  contains  3000  shekels.

18  1  Chron.  xxii.  14.    "  According  to   the   common   calculation,"
says  Michaelis   (vol.  i.  p.  283),    "  David's  treasures   amounted  to
5,000,000,000  of  rix  dollars,  i.  e.  50,000  tons  of  gold.     According
to  my  calculation,  that  sum  would  sink  to  500,000,000  ;  and  Ken-
nicott  has  remarked,  that  in  the  enumeration  a  cipher  too  many  has
been  written;  which,  if  we  cut  off,  there  yet  remains  50,000,000  of
dollars,  which  is  a  very  great  treasure,  and  only  to  be  accounted  for
from  the  plunder  of  so  many  conquered  nations."

19  Arbutlmot,  in  his  tables  of  ancient  coins,  says   800,000,000.
The  editors  of  the  Pictorial  Bible  thus  express  themselves  on  this
difficult  point , — "  In  1  Chron.  xxii.  we  have   an   account  of  what
David  set  apart  as  a  king,  and  in  ch.  xxix.  we  see  what  he  offered
as  an  individual,  and  what  the  principal  persons  of  the  kingdom
offered.     We  will  collect  those  particulars  in  a  table;  and  assuming
that  the  talent  of  125 Ibs.  troy  is  intended,  state  the  English  weight,
and  the  present  value,  at  the  rate  of  <£4  an  ounce  for  the  gold  and
5,9.  an  ounce  for  the  silver.     We  omit  the  brass  and  iron,  as  the
amount  of  that  only  which  the  chief  persons  gave  is  slated,  thai
which  the  king  contributed  being  without  weight.


VOL.    II.


274


HISTORICAL    LANDMARKS


exhaustless ; 20  for  when  the  entire  expence  of  the
temple  had  been  incurred,  an  enormous  sum  remained
in  the  royal  treasury,  for  gold  and  silver  were  abundant
as  the  stones  of  the  streets.21  And  when  we  consider
the  high  value  which  is  placed  on  gold  in  these  days,
we  are  struck  with  astonishment  at  finding  Solomon
using  it,22  not  only  for  the  sanctum  sanctorum  which
the  Deity  consecrated  by  his  especial  presence,  not
only  for  the  altar  of  incense  and  the  holy  vessels,  but
for  many  common  and  ordinary  purposes.23

The  oracle  was  a  cube  of  30  feet,  or  a  superficies  of
at  least  5400  square  feet ;  and  it  was  covered  over
with  plates  of  pure  gold;  and  its  furniture,  the  ark


Contributed.

Talents.

Weight  in  Ibs.  Troy.

Value  in  pounds  sterling.

By  David  as  king
Do.  as  an  individual
By  chief  persons  ......

Total

Gold.

Silver.
1,000,000

7,000

10,000

Gold.

Silver.

Gold.

Silver.

100,000
3.000
5,000

12,500,000
375,000
625,100

125,000,000
«75  000
1,250,000

GOO,  000,000
18,000.000

30.000,000

375,000,000
2,«25,000
3,7.50,000

108,000

1,017,000

13,500,000
Tota

127,125,000
1  value  in  goi

648.000,000
Gold

d  and  silver

3«1,  3/5.000
(»48,on<i,oii<i

1,029,375,000

0  Fabulous  history  ascribes  to  Solomon  the  power  of  making-
gold,  or  a  knowledge  of  the  transmutation  of  metals.

21  2Chron.  i.  15,  1  Kings  x.  27.

'  "  In  Solomon's  days,  independently  of  the  great  inland  trade
which  he  carried  on  in  spices,  Egyptian  linen,  yarn,  horses  and
chariots,  with  all  the  kings  of  the  Hittites  and  Syrians,  the  influx  of
gold  and  silver  from  his  commercial  voyages  to  Ophir  or  Sofala,  and
from  Tarshish,  was  prodigious ;  the  weight  of  gold  in  a  single  year
was  666  talents;  and  a  gold  talent  £4108  Us.  <dd. ;  supposing,
with  Herodotus,  gold  to  be  only  thirteen  times  the  value,  would
amount  to  £2,736,494;  and  if  we  add  the  silver,  the  .revenue  of
Solomon,  from  his  comparatively  small  kingdom,  equalled  the  fixed
revenue  of  the  vast  Persian  empire."  (Hales.  Anal.  vol.  iv.  p.  132.)

23  See  1  Kings  x.  16-21.


OF    FREEMASONRY.  275

and  cherubims  were  formed  of  the  same  precious
metal.24  Also  the  table  for  shewbread,  the  candle-
sticks, the  chains,  tongs,  bowls,  vessels,  snufiers,  basins,
spoons,  censers,  drinking  cups,  shields,  chargers,  &c.
to  the  amount  of  234,000  in  number,  were  all  of  solid
gold.25  And  there  were  also  318,000  utensils  of  silver,
besides  21,000  vestments  for  the  priests,  composed  of
purple,  blue  and  crimson  silk,  ornamented  with  gold
embroidery  and  gems,  wrought  in  gorgeous  patterns ;
600,000  gold  and  silver  musical  instruments,  and
200,000  stoles  of  silver  for  the  Levites.26

24  "  The  inner  temple  or  sanctuary  was  the  most  splendid  and
magnificent  part  of  the  whole  stately  pile ;  the  roof  being  covered  all
over  with  plates  of  gold,  was  so  brilliant,  that  when  the  sun,  at  his
rising,  shone  thereon,  passengers  at  a  distance  could  not  bear  to  look
at  it,  and  it  seemed  like  a  mount  of  snow,  being  excessively  white
below  the  gold  or  roof."  (Hales.  Anal.  vol.  i.  p.  431.)
23  The  following  table  is  from  Josephus : —

Of  gold.  Of  silver.

Vessels  of  gold      ....     20,000     .     .     .     40,000

Candlesticks 4,000     .     .     .       8,000

Wine  cups 80,000

(ioblets 10,000     .     .     .     20,000

Measures 20,000     .     .     .     40,000

Dishes 80,000     .     .     .  160,000

Censers ;     20,000     .     .     .     50,000

234,000     .     .     .  318,000

8  The  Masonic  traditions  on  these  points  are  too  incredible  to  be
admitted.  I  subjoin  them,  however,  for  the  information  of  those
Brethren  who  may  be  desirous  of  seeing  the  calculations  of  Masonry
fifty  years  ago  : — "  The  moveable  jewels  used  in  the  construction  of
the  temple,  consisting  of  gold  and  silver  vessels  and  other  sacred
utensils,  amounted  to  £ 6,904,822, 500  sterling.  The  wages,  diet,  and
clothing,  of  all  classes  of  the  workmen,  amounted  to  £140,000,000 ;
and  the  value  of  the  stones,  timber,  ivory,  brass,  iron,  and  other

T2


276  HISTORICAL    LANDMARKS

As  the  temple  and  its  appendages  were  dedicated  to
the  glory  of  God,  and  designed  for  the  devout  celebra-
tion of  divine  worship,  it  does  not  appear  unreasonable
that  the  paraphernalia  should  have  been  constructed  of
these  costly  materials;  and  it  is  an  extraordinary  in-
stance of  Solomon's  magnificence  and  piety,  that,
regardless  of  expcnce,27  he  should  have  covered  the
vralls,  doors  and  pavement,  not  only  of  the  temple
itself,  but  of  the  upper  chambers  also,  with  broad
plates  of  gold ;  and  made  the  hinges,  bolts  and  other
minor  appointments,  and  even  covered  the  roof,  with
the  same  metal.20

materials,  which  were  classed  under  the  head  of  fixtures,  or  im-
moveable  jewels,  to  £  15 0,000,000.  To  raise  this  money  the  oH'cring
of  Solomon  was  princely  ;  and  with  what  was  given  by  his  princes  and
people,  together  with  the  magnificent  presents  of  H.  K.  T.,  the  Queen
of  Slieba  and  others,  amounted  to  no  less  than  £80,000,000,000  of
our  money ;  and  when  all  the  expenses  of  the  temple  were  paid,  there
was  £  11,041,5 83,707  left  in  the  treasury."

27  In  Cross's  Masonic  Chart  (p.  99),  we  find  the  computation  as
follows  : — "  According  to  the  most  accurate  estimate  of  the  number
of  talents  of  gold,  silver  and  brass,  laid  out  upon  the  temple,  the
sum   amounts  to    £6,904,822,500    sterling;    and    the   jewels    are
reckoned  to  exceed  this  sum.     The  gold  vessels  are  estimated  at
£545,296,203  4s.,  and  the  silver  ones  at  £439,344,000,  amounting
in  all  to  £984,630,230  4s.  sterling."

28  "  Its  inner  walls,  beams,  posts,  doors,  floors  and  ceilings,  were
made  of  cedar  and  olive  wood,  and  planks  of  fir,  which  were  entirely
covered  with  plates  of  gold,  with  various  beautiful  engravings,  and
adorned  with  precious  jewels  of  many  splendid  colours.     The  nails
which  fastened  these  plates  were  also  of  gold,  with  heads  of  curious
workmanship.     The  roof  was  of  olive  wood  covered  with  gold  ;  and
when  the  sun  shone  thereon  the  reflection  from  it  was  of  such  a
refulgent  splendour,  that  it  dazzled  the  eyes  of  all  who  beheld  it."
(Masonic  Lecture,  from  Cross's  Chart,  p.  98.)


OF    FREEMASONRY.  .277

It  is  very  evident,  from  a  consideration  of  the  his-
tory of  ancient  times,  that  the  precious  metals  were
much  more  plentiful  than  at  present ; 29  mines  of  gold
and  silver  existed  in  many  parts  of  the  world,  which
have  been  long  exhausted  ;30  as  in  Spain,31  Sofala  or
Ophir,32  Egypt,33  Havilah,34  Arabia,35  Ethiopia,36  and

29  In  the  time  of  the  judges,  the  Ishmaelites  appear  to .  have  been
addicted  to  the  custom  of  wearing  earrings  of  gold ;  and  when  the
Midianites  were  defeated  by  Gideon,  the  spoil,  consisting  of  "  the
earrings  of  the   prey,"  weigned  1700  shekels   of  gold,   valued  at
.£4000  of  our  money.     Besides  which,  the  golden  ornaments,  col-
lars, and  chains  were  of  incredible  value ;  for  one  of  the  principal
commodities  in  which  the  Midianitish  merchants  abounded,  was
gold.  (See  Isai.  Ix.  7.)

30  For  instance,  the   riches  of  the   Gauls,  says  Logan   (vol.  ii.
p.  128),  "  enabled  them  to  indulge  in  very  extravagant  expenditure.
Luernius,  a  king  of  the  Arveni,  to  court  popularity,  was  accustomed
to  throw  silver  and  gold  in  great  quantities  amongst  the  people."

31  The  mines  of  Andalusia  and  Cordova  in  Spain  were  so  pro-
ductive, that  the  Tyrians  carried  away  gold  and  silver  as  ballast  for
their  ships ;  and  even  their  anchors  and  other  appendages  were  con-
structed of  the  same  material.     Hence  the  wealth  and  splendour  of
Carthage,  which  was  a  Tyrian  colony  ;   the  temple  of  Apollo  there
contained  a  statue  of  the  god  of  massive  gold,  and  the  inside  of  the
temple,  all  lined  with  plates  of  the  same  metal,  weighing  1000  talents.

32  According  to  Bruce,  Sofala,  on  the  coast  of  Mosambique,  is  the
Ophir  of  scripture.     He  says,  that  "  to  come  to  a  certainty  where
this  Ophir  was,  it  will  be  necessary  to  examine  what  scripture  says
of  it,  and  to  keep  precisely  to  everything  like  description  which  we
find  there,  without  indulging  our  fancy  farther.     1.  The  trade  to
Ophir  was  carried  on  from  the  Elanitic  gulf  through  the  Indian
ocean.     2.  The  returns  were  gold,  silver  and  ivory,  but  especially
silver.     The  time  of  going  and  coming  of  the  fleet  was  precisely
three  years,  at  no  period  more  or  less."

33  It  is  said  that  at  Bajeh,  a  country  adjacent  to  Upper  Egypt,
there  were  the  richest  gold  mines  in  the  world.  (Macpherson's  An-


278  HISTORICAL    LANDMARKS

_

many  other  accessible  parts  of  the  globe.37    An
must  have  been  amazingly  productive,  because  in  some

nals  of  Commerce,  vol.  i.  p.  269.  "  The  regular  annual  revenue  of
Ptolemy  Philadelphus  amounted  to  14,800  talents  in  money,  inde-
pendent of  the  immense  tribute  paid  in  kind  by  many  of  the  pro-
vinces of  Egypt ;  and  at  his  decease  there  were  found  in  his  treasury
740,000  talents,  amounting  to  £190,000,000  sterling."  Athenaeus,
1.  v.  p.  103.)

34  Havilah  was  noted  for  its  gold  and  precious  stones ;  it  was  a
country  well  known  by  this  name  in  the  days  both  of  Abraham  and
Saul,  although  it  had  not  this  name  before  the  flood,  having  been
planted  by  Havilah,  one  of  the  sons  of  Joktan,  or  perhaps  Gush.    It
was  famous  for  its  gold  and  precious  stones.

35  We  are  informed  by  Agatarchides  and  Strabo,  that  the  mines  of
Arabia  were  so  extremely  prolific,  as  to  cause  the  inhabitants  to  con-
sider gold  as  dross ;  and  they  would  give  double  its  weight  for  iron,
treble  for  brass,  and  ten  times  its  weight  for  silver.    It  was  produced
in  lumps  as  big  as  a  pigeon's  egg,  and  often  larger,  so  pure  as  not  to
need  any  refining ;   and  in  some  parts  the  sands  of  the  rivers  and
streams  would  be  so  fully  charged  with  this  metal,  as  to  constitute  a
perfect  bed  of  solid  gold ;  so  that  the  inhabitants  gathered  it  without
trouble,  and  used  it  for  the  formation  of  culinary  utensils  and  other
common  purposes ;  even  their  horses  were  shod  with  it.    In  Ethiopia
it  was  equally  plentiful ;  the  whole  soil  was  full  of  it,  and  it  was
washed  from  the  mountains  by  the  torrents  which  followed  the
autumnal  rains  in  such  quantities  that  the  people  held  it  in  no
esteem.

36  "  Enriched  by  their  commerce,"  says  Anderson,  "  the  Sabceans
are  profuse  in  their  expenses  for  ornamental  plate  and  admirable
sculptures,  a  variety  of  cups  and  vases  of  gold  and  silver,  and  sump-
tuous beds  and  tripods.     The  columns  of  the  houses  are  covered
with  gold,  or  made  entirely  of  silver ;  and  even  their  doors  and
ceilings  are  adorned  with  gold,   silver,  ivory,  gems  and  precious
stones.    In  short,  whatever  is  to  be  seen  of  rich  or  elegant  furniture
is  to  be  found  here."

37  "  Although  it  is  true  that  mines  of  gold  or  silver  are  not  now
known  or  worked  in  Arabia,  we  are  not  bound  to  reject  the  concur-


OF    FREEMASONRY.  279

of  the  Eastern  countries  gold  was  of  less  value  than
iron  or  even  tin.  And  hence  it  probably  is  that  we
hear  so  much  of  golden  altars,  images  of  gold38  of
forty  and  even  ninety  feet  in  height,  golden  thrones
and  chariots,  and  other  stupendous  facts,  which,  in
our  days,  could  scarcely  be  accomplished  by  the  united
energies  of  a  whole  nation.

In  Rome,  gold  and  silver39  were  so  plentiful,40  that

rent  testimony  of  the  ancient  writers,  whose  statements,  after  allowing
for  exaggeration,  purport  that  the  precious  metals  abounded  there
more  than  in  any  other  known  country ;  and  were  indeed  so  common
as  to  remind  us  of  things  as  the  Spaniards  found  them  in  Mexico
and  Peru.  The  pillars  of  their  houses  were  resplendent  with  gold
and  silver ;  they  had  vessels  and  domestic  utensils  of  the  same
metals  ;  and  their  persons  were  profusely  adorned  with  various
oriental  ornaments,  composed  of  the  same  substances  and  also  of
precious  stones."  (Pict.  Bibl.  p.  201.)

38  The  quantity  of  gold  in  the  statue  of  Minerva,  according  to
Thucydides,  was  40  talents ;  some  authors  say  44,  others  50.     I
follow  the  testimony  of  Thucydides.    Supposing  that  in  his  time  the
proportion  of  gold  to  silver  was  as  1  to  13,  as  it  was  in  the  time  of
Herodotus,  the  40  talents  of  gold  would  give  520  talents  of  silver;
which,  at  5400  livres  the  talent,  would  produce  a  total  of  2,808,000
livres.     But,  as  in  the  age  of  Pericles,  the  talent  of  silver  was  worth
5700  livres,  the  40  talents  in  question  would  be  worth  at  least
2,964,000  livres.  (Anacharsis,  vol.  ii.  p.  495.)

39  Livy  says  that  Scipio  and  other  Romans  employed  constantly
forty  thousand  men  in  the  Spanish  mines,  and  removed  from  thence,
every  nine  years,  the  vast  sum  of  111,542  pounds  weight  of  silver,
and  4095  pounds  weight  of  gold,  besides  coined  money  in  incredible
quantities.     And  as  a,  proof  of  their  great  resources,  Anthony  laid
a  tribute  upon  Asia  of  twenty  myriads  of  talents,  amounting  to
J638, 750,000  sterling,  to  be  paid  in  ten  years.

40  During  the  troubles  of  the  Roman  empire,  rich  men  buried
their  treasures.     Thus  80,000  large  gold  coins  or  medals,  each  of
the  value  of  six  lloman  crowns,  were  discovered  in  1714,  near


280  HISTORICAL    LANDMARKS


even  Seneca  was  accused  of  amassing  in  four  years
the  incredible  sum  of  £2,343,750,  simply  by  defraud-
ing dying  men  of  their  property.41  Their  riches  pro-
duced luxurious  habits.42  Pliny  speaks  of  five  hundred
silver  dishes  in  Rome,  each  weighing  a  hundred
pounds  ;43  and  Drusellanus,  who  was  only  the  servant

Modena  in  Italy.  (Montf.  Suppl.  Ant.  B.  v.  p.  329.)  Vast  treasures
of  Roman  money  were  also  dug  up  in  France,  Germany  and  JSpain,
during  the  middle  ages,  and  actually  supplied  the  necessary  means
of  carrying  on  the  commercial  intercourse  of  Europe.

41  The  wealth  of  many  Roman  citi/ens  was  unbounded  ;    Lmtulus
was  worth  three  millions  and  a  quart  er,  Pallas  two  millions  and  a
half  sterling  ;  and  the  glutton  Apicius,  after  squandering  incalculable
sums  of  money  on  his  sensual  appetite,  poisoned  himself  because  In
was  only  worth  about  £  100, 000,  fearing  he  should  perish  from  want
of  the  common  necessaries  of  life.     Even  some  slaves,  when  made
free,  amassed  fortunes  of  several  millions  sterling.

42  They  were  so  prodigal  of  their  unbounded  riches,  and  so  luxu-
rious in  their  habits,  that  it  was  at  one  time  fashionable  for  a  host  to
honour  his  guests  by  presenting  them  as  a  beverage  pearls  dissolved
in  vinegar.     It  is  recorded  of  Esop  the  tragedian,  that  at  a  supper
given  by  him  to  a  few  of  his  friends,  a  single  dish  of  birds  cost
.€5000.     Their  drinking  cups  and  other  utensils  were  composed  of
gold,  inlaid  and  encrusted  with  gems  and  diamonds.

43  "  The  Romans,  glutted  with  the  spoils  of  the  earth,  set  no
bounds  to  their  extravagance.    Whatever  was  very  expensive  became
the  object  of  their  desire ;  and  the  most  enormous  or  even  incredible
prices  were  given  for  things  of  little  or  no  real  use.     Silk,  and  a  fine
species  of  linen  called  byssinus,  sold  for  their  weight  in  gold.     The
value  of  precious  stones  and  pearls  being  merely  imaginary,  can  be
rated  only  by  the  abundant  wealth  or  folly  of  the  buyer.     We  are
told  by  Pliny,  that  he  saw  Lollia  Paulina,  at  a  moderate  entertain-
ment, dressed  in  jewels  which  cost  £322,916  13s.  4d.  of  our  modern
sterling  money.     No  ancient  author,  I  believe,  says  anything  of  the
price  of  diamonds  at  Rome;  but  Julius  Cpesar  gave  £48,437  10,v.
for  a  pearl,  which   he  presented  to  one  of  his  mistresses  ;  and  he


O F    FREEM A  S  O  N  K  Y .  :2  S  ]

of  Claudius,  ordered  a  silver  dish  to  be  made  of  such
unusual  dimensions,  that  the  manufacturer  was  obliged
to  build  a  new  workshop  to  make  it  in,  his  own  being
too  small.44  These  dishes  were  used  for  the  display
of  a  certain  condiment  called  "  the  Trojan  Horse,"45
which  was  a  whole  boar  of  large  size,  stuffed  with
smaller  animals.46

gave  £15,500  for  a  picture.  A  statue  of  Apollo  sold  for  above
£ 29,000.  The  nmrrhine  vessels  of  Egypt  were  in  sucli  esteem,  that
two  of  them  were  bought  by  a  consul  and  an  emperor  at  the  price  of
£2421  Us.  Qd.  sterling  for  each.  For  the  kinds  of  fish  which
happened  to  be  in  fashion  they  gave  the  most  extravagant  prices ;
£64  was  the  price  of  a  mullet ;  and  the  mursena,  supposed  to  be  the
lamprey,  was  too  precious,  in  the  estimation  of  some  epicures,  to  be
sold  for  money."  (Macpherson,  Annals  of  Commerce,  vol.  i.  p.  143.)

44  "  When  we  hear,"  says  Maurice  (Tnd.  Ant.  vol.  vii.  p.  536),
"  of  a  Vitellius  consuming  between  seven  and  eight  millions  a-ycar
on  entertainments,  and  a  Caligula  expending  above  £80,000  ster-
ling on  a  supper,  we  cannot  wonder  at  the  tragedian  who  lavished
600  sestertia  on  one  dish,  or  the  young  spendthrift  who  treated  each
of  his  guests  after  dinner  with  a  superb  cordial,  in  which  a  costly
pearl  had  been  dissolved."

45  The  Roman  extravagance  was  so  great,  that  Martial  charged
one  of  these   wealthy  spendthrifts, — "  Ventris   onus  puro,  nee  te
pudet,  excipis  auro."    Their  very  baths,  numerous  though  they  were,
and  Publius  Victor  estimates  them  at  800  and  upwards,  were  com-
posed of  silver.     Thus  Statins —

—  argento  felix  propellitur  unda,
Argentoque  cadit,  labris  intentibus  instat,
Delicias  mirata  suas.

And  Seneca  says  (Epist.  86),  that  some  of  these  were  paved  and

inlaid  with  precious  stones.

46  This  was  a  favourite  delicacy  with  the  luxurious  llomans.    At  a
later  period,  "  the  ruffians  of  the  Pretorian  guard,  whose  duty  it  was
to  defend  the  person  of  the  emperor,  after  murdering  Pertinax,  had


282  HISTORICAL    LANDMARKS

If  we  look  abroad  into  other  states  and  empires  of
the  ancient  world,  we  shall  find  riches  equally  abun-
dant ; 47  proving  that  the  sources  of  wealth,  now
entirely  closed,  must  have  appeared  inexhaustible.  In
the  noble  but  unfortunate  expedition  of  Xerxes  into
Greece,  we  are  struck  with  admiration  at  the  re-
sources48 which  enabled  that  monarch  to  maintain  his
prodigious  army,  consisting  of  two  millions  of  men,49
during  their  lengthened  march  through  hostile  coun-

the  insolence  to  proclaim  an  auction  of  the  imperial  title  to  the
highest  bidder.  Pidius  Julian  became  the  purchaser  at  the  price  of
above  £200  sterling  to  each  man,  the  total  sum  being  between  three
and  four  millions  sterling."  (Macpherson,  vol.  i.  p.  198.)  A  striking
proof  of  the  enormous  wealth  of  a  country,  when  individuals  could
thus  give  such  immense  sums  for  an  empty  and  uncertain  dignity.

47  The  following  presents  were  sent  to  the  temple  of  Delphi  by
the  kings  of  Lydia,  according  to  Herodotus  (1.  i.  c.  14)  and  Diodo-
rus  Ciculus  (1.  xvi.)     Six  large  paterae,  weighing  30  talents  of  gold,
worth  ,£87,750  of  our  money;    117   semiplinths,    weighing   232
talents,   worth   £678,600;    a   lion,   weighing    10  talents,    worth
£29,250;  a  statue,  weighing  8  talents,  worth  £23,400;  a  crater,
weighing  8  talents  and  42  minse,  worth  £25,447  10,9. ;  360  phials
of  gold,  weighing  12  talents,  worth  £35,100:  amounting  altogether
to  £879,547  10s.  sterling.

48  He  had  been  enriched  by  his  predecessor  Cambyses,  who  took
out  of  Egypt  300  talents  of  gold  and  2300  talents  of  silver,  besides
the  golden  zone  of   Osmaudyas,    altogether   worth   two   millions.
Indeed  the  riches  of  the  Ptolemies  was  enormous.     Appian  says,
that  Ptolemy  Philadelphus  left  at  his  decease  the  vast  sum  of  740,000
talents,  equal  to  £191,166,666  sterling,  (Arbuthnot's  Tables,  p.  192.)
And  from  Strabo  we  learn  (1.  xvii.)  that  the  annual  revenue  of  Pto-
lemy Auletes  was  12,500  talents,  or  £2,421,875  sterling.

49  After  passing  the  Hellespont,  they  are  said  to  have  been  nearly
three  millions;  while  the  servants,  eunuchs,  and  other  camp  fol-
lowers, were  computed  to  be  as  many  more.


OF    FREEMASONRY.

tries.50  To  remunerate  himself  for  his  losses  in  this
failure,  he  plundered  the  city  of  Babylon,  and  took
from  thence  immense  riches,51  in  statues  and  vessels  of
gold,  bullion  and  specie,  to  the  amount  of  more  than

50  A  single  anecdote  may  serve  to  convince  us  of  the  ample  pro-
vision which  was  made  before  the  undertaking  was  commenced.
Pythias,  an  opulent  merchant  of  Lydia,  who  had  already  presented
to  Darius  a  vine  and  plane  tree  of  wrought  gold,  on  whose  branches
huge  clusters  of  emeralds  and  rubies  were  suspended  in  imitation  of
fruit,  entertained  at  his  own  expence  the  whole  of  this  great  army  ;
and,  at  the  conclusion  of  the  repast,  offered  to  advance,  towards
defraying  the  expense  of  the  expedition,  2000  talents  of  silver  and
3,993,000  darics  of  gold.     A  claric  exceeded  the  weight  of  one  of
our  old  guineas,  but  from  the  purity  of  the  gold  it  was  worth  about
255.  of  our  money.     It  is  clear  therefore  that  this  man,  a  private
merchant,  was  able  to  spare,  without  inconvenience,  a  sum  equal  to
more  than  five  millions  sterling.    Xerxes  was  so  much  gratified  with
this  munificent  proposal,  that  he  not  only  declined  it,  but,  to  show
that  his  resources  were  in  no  respect  in  need  of  such  assistance,  he
ordered  7000  darics  to  be  presented  to  Pythias  from  his  own  trea-
sury, as  a  token  of  the  royal  favour  and  esteem.     Such  instances
display,  not  merely  the  riches  but  the  noble  feelings  and  sentiments
which  prevailed  in  the  ancient  world.

51  Herodotus  mentions  the  statues  in  the  temple  of  Belus,  and
states  that  the  single  one  of  Jupiter  Belus  was  valued  at  800  talents,
or  £5,760,000  sterling.     Diodorus  speaks  of  three  golden  statues  :
this  of  Jupiter ;  a  statue  of  Rhea,  which  weighed  1000  talents,  and
was  seated  on  a  throne  of  massive  gold,  accompanied  by  two  golden
lions  and  two  serpents  in  silver,  which  weighed  30  talents  each ;  and
a  statue  of  Juno,  which  weighed  800  talents,  her  right  hand  grasp-
ing a  serpent  by  the  head,  and  her  left  a  golden  sceptre  incrusted
with  gems.     Before  these  three  colossal  figures   stood  an  altar  of
beaten  gold,  40  feet  in  length,  15  in  breadth,  and  weighing  500
talents.     On  this  altar  stood  two  vast  flagons,  each  weighing  30
talents  ;  two  censers  for  incense,  each  weighing  500  talents ;  and
three   vessels   for   the   consecrated   wine,    weighing   together   900
talents.


284


HISTORICAL    LANDMARKS


thirty  millions  sterling.  The  riches  of  the  Persian
monarchs  appear  to  have  been  incalculable.52  The
palace  of  Susa,  with  its  throne  of  gold  studded  with
gems  of  great  value ;  its  walls  overlaid  in  fanciful
patterns  with  gold,  ivory  and  amber ;  gold  and  silver
vessels  and  rich  vestments ;  the  court  guarded  by  a
band  of  10,000  men,  all  wearing  collars  of  pure  gold
and  robes  of  golden  tissue  ;  is  spoken  of  by  all  writers
in  terms  of  rapture.53  The  monarch's  bedstead  was  of
gold,  and  his  bolster  was  laid  on  a  casket  containing
5000  golden  talents.  His  chariot  is  described  as  a
mine  of  gold  and  rubies ;  it  contained  a  golden

52  The  places  where  wealth  was  secreted  and  preserved  in  these
early  times  were  subterranean  caverns  of  the  earth,  as  we  learn  from
the  following  incident  in  Herodotus  (1.  ii.  c.  50.)     "  Some  robbers
having  formed  a  design  to  steal  the  immense  treasures  of  Sjirdana-
palus,  King  of  Nineveh,  which  were  laid  up  in  subterranean  vaults,
began  to  carry  on  a  mine  in  that  direction,  from  the  house  in  which
they  dwelt,  to  the  king's  palace.     During  the  night  they  threw  the
earth  which  they  had  dug  out  in  the  day  into  the  Tigris,  which  flows
beside  Nineveh,  and  so  they  accomplished  their  purpose.

53  AVhen  this  royal  palace  was  plundered  by  Alexander  the  Great,
it  afforded  him  a  prize  of  9000  talents  of  coined  gold,  and  40,000
talents  of  bullion.     And  the  same  conqueror  took  from  Persepolis
120,000  talents  of  gold,  worth  £S  64,000,000  of  our  money,  besides
gems,  vessels,   and  embroidered  garments  beyond  all  calculation.
(Diod.  Sic.  la  xviii.  c.  66)  ;  Plutarch  (Steph.  p.  2t.)  says,  as  much
as  1000  pair  of  mules  and  500  camels  could  carry  away.     Justin
further   informs  us  (Hist.  1.  xiii.  p.  117),  that  the  annual  tribute
arising  from  all  the  conquests  of  this  victorious  drunkard  amounted
to  300,000  talents,  which  he  distributed  amongst  his  followers  with
princely  munificence.  -  And  hence  he  is  reported  to  have  said  of  his
soldiers,  "  those  who  had  no  property  besides  their  armour  a  few
years  ago,  now  sleep  in  bedsteads  of  silver  and  cover  their  table  with
golden  vessels."


OF    FREEMASONRY.  285

throne,  supported  by  statues,  and  surmounted  by  an
eagle  of  the  same  metal.

I  have  briefly  noticed  a  few  instances  of  the  wealth
of  the  ancient  world,  to  show  that  the  accounts  which
have  been  transmitted  to  us  respecting  the  superb
decorations  of  King  Solomon's  temple  are  by  no  means
exaggerated.  Thus,  although  the  expence  of  overlaying
the  oracle  with  plates  of  burnished  gold  amounted  to
the  enormous  sum  of  600  talents,  yet  it  did  not  exceed
in  value  the  visible  deities54  in  the  idol  temple  of
Sumnaut  in  India,55  which  contained  many  thousand

54  The  expense  of  the  temple  furniture,  added  to  that  of  its  con-
struction, ornaments  and  jewels,  is  placed  out  of  the  power  of  com-
putation ;  but  still,  although  no  parallel  may  exist  to  compete  with
the  taste  and  delicacy  of  the  architecture  and  decorations,  yet  for
riches  some  idol  temples  appear  to  have  scarcely  fallen  short  of  it.

55  We  are  told  by  Philostratus  (1.  ii.  c.  11.),  that  the  very  altar  of
the  temple  was  of  massive  gold ;  the  incense  flamed  in  censers  of
gold ;   and  golden  chalices  and  vases  bore  the  honey,  the  oil,  the
wine,  and  the  fruits,  offered  at  their  sacrifices.     The  lofty  walls  of
porphyry  were  internally  covered  with  broad  plates  of  gold,  sculp-
tured with  rays,  that,  diverging  every  way,  dazzled  the  beholder ;
while  the  radiant  image  of  the  adored  deity  burned  in  gems  of  infi-
nite variety  and  unequalled  beauty  on  the  spangled  floor.     The
pavement  was  also  covered  with  plates  of  gold ;  and  thus  the  Hin-
doo, in  his  purer  devotion,  trampled  upon  the  god  of  half  mankind
(See  Maur.  Ind.  Aut.,  vol.  vii.  p.  495).     In  evidence  of  their  super-
abundant wealth  in  bullion  may  be  enumerated  the  expiatory  obla-
tions for  certain  offences,  ordained  by  the  Hindoo  code  to  be  made
in  that  metal  by  the  ancient  Rajahs,  and  which,  in  fact,  were  fre-
quently made  to  atone  for   or  to  avert  evil ;   as,  for  instance,  the
weight  of  the  person  presenting  the  offering  in  gold  or  silver,  trees
and  vines  of  gold,  golden  elephants,  golden  horses  and  cows,  and
even    chariots    drawn    by  horses   and    elephants,  entirely  of  gold.
Aycen  Akbcry,  vol.  iii.  p.  229.)


286


HISTORICAL    LANDMARKS


golden  statues;50  and  a  chain  of  the  same  metal  was
suspended  from  the  ceiling  of  the  adytum,  which
weighed  1600  Ibs.57

The  above  details,  which  are  well  authenticated,
may  satisfy  the  sceptic  that  the  accounts  contained  in
Freemasonry  are  not  to  be  considered  as  an  exaggera-
tion of  facts,58  because  our  ideas  are  very  limited  re-
specting the  comparative  value  of  the  precious  metals
in  these  days  of  scarcity,  as  contrasted  with  the  supe-

56  And  it  must  be  observed,  that  all  this  treasure  was  lost  to  the
state  and  unemployed  in  its  service,  being  suffered  to  remain  useless
in  the  temple.     \Ve  may  hence  form  some  estimate  of  the  riches  and
resources  of  a  nation  having  no  mines  within  its  own  territories,
which  could  conveniently  allow  so  large  a  sum  to  lie  dormant.

57  "  Let  us  attend  this  valiant  marauder  on  another  or  two  of
his  plundering  excursions  into  Hindoostan.     At  the  holy  fane  of
Krecslma,  at  Mathura,  he  found  five  great  idols  of  pure  gold,  with
rubies  for  eyes,  of  immense  value.     He  found  also  there  a  hundred
idols  of  silver,  which  being  melted  down,  loaded  as  many  camels
with  bullion  ;  and  it  will  be  remembered,  that  the  usual  load  which
this  powerful  animal  carries  is  from  750  to  1200  Ibs.  weight,  varying
according  to  its  magnitude."  (Maur.  Ind.  Ant.,  vol.  ii.  p.  499.)

58  This  profusion  of  expense  in  the  decoration  of  temples  devoted
to  public  worship  was  not  confined  to  Jews  and  heathen,  but  was
used  also  in  the  early  ages  of  Christianity.     Thus  Tanner  says,
"King  Ina  gave  2640 Ibs.  weight  of  silver  to  make  a  chapel  at
Glastonbury ;  2  64  Ibs.  weight  of  gold  for  the  altar,  the  chalice  and
paten  had  10  Ibs.  of  gold,  the  censer  8  Ibs.  and  20  manes  of  gold,
the  candlesticks  12  Ibs.  of  silver;  in  the  covers  of  the  book  of  the
gospels  20  Ibs.  and  40  manes  of  gold,  the  vessels  for  water  and
other  vessels  for  the  altar  17  Ibs.  of  gold,  the  basins  8  Ibs.  of  gold,
the  vessel  for  the  holy  water  20 Ibs.  of  silver;   the  images  of  our
Lord  and  St.  Mary,  and  the  twelve  apostles,  175  Ibs.  of  silver  and
38  Ibs.  of  gold  ;  the  altar  and  priestly  vestments  all  interwoven  with
gold  and  precious  stones."  (Notit.  Pref.  ii.  n.  6.)


OF    FREEMASONRY.  287

rior  abundance  in  the  early  ages  of  the  world,  when
immense  supplies  of  both  gold  and  silver  were  pro-
vided by  nature  in  accessible  situations,  where  it  might
be  gathered  with  little  labour  and  expence.  Riches,
however,  were  very  unequally  distributed ;  and  one
kingdom  or  another  which  happened  to  be  pre-eminent
in  its  day,  accumulated  the  wealth  and  its  accessories
of  many  other  nations.  Thus  the  Assyrians  and  the
Chaldeans,  Egypt  and  Tyre,  India,  Persia  and  Greece,59
Macedon  and  Rome,  all  had  their  several  periods  of
unbounded  riches,60  which  were  succeeded  by  degene-
racy and  lassitude ;  and  in  their  turn  each  fell  before
a  poorer  and  consequently  more  hardy  and  warlike
people.61  Judea,  in  like  manner,  had  its  period  of
successful  power,  and  was  inferior  to  no  other  nation
in  its  magnificence  and  state  under  the  sway  of  Solo-

59  When  the  Phoenicians  seized  the  temple  of  Delphi,  they  melted
down  golden  ornaments  to  the  amount  of  10,000  talents.   (Diod.
Sic.  1.  16.)

60  "  The  treasures  of  the  King  of  Calicut  were  so  immense  that
they  could  not  be  contained  in  two  large  vaults ;  they  consisted  of
precious  stones,  plates  of  gold,  and  as  much  coined  gold  as  may
suffice  to  lade  100  mules.     In  his  treasury  was  a  coffer  three  spans
long  and  two  broad,  full  of  precious  stones  of  incalculable  value."
(Burder.  Orient,  volii.  p.  165.)

61  Powerful  nations  were  always  wealthy ;  for  their  riches  were
increased  by  inroads  on  a  weaker  people,  whom  wealth  had  effemi-
nated and  rendered  an  easy  conquest.     War  indeed  was  but  another
name  for  plunder  and  robbery.    The  hero  fought  for  worldly  posses-
sions, and  not  to  secure  any  ill-defined  balance  of  power.     The  evils
of  war  fell  lightly  on  those  nations  which  offered  no  temptation  to
the  cupidity  of  a  successful  plunderer ;  for  it  was  the  riches  of  a
people  which  produced  luxury  and  an  incapacity  for  athletic  exer-
cises, and  these  rendered  them  an  easy  prey  to  their  enemies.


UISTOlUf'AI,  LANDMARKS

mon02  our  Grand  Master."3  But  even  the  wisest  of
men,  in  his  degeneracy,  gave  the  fatal  blow  which
produced  a  diminution  of  its  greatness;  and  after  him
it  gradually  decayed,  till  at  length  it  was  utterly  extin-
guished, never  more  to  rise  from  its  state  of  humilia-
tion, till  that  predicted  period,  when  "  the  times  of
the  Gentiles"  shall  be  completed.

02  "  Solomon  derived  great  riches  from  his  commercial  intcrconr-e
in  partnership  with  Hiram  King  of  Tyiv.  From  Ophir  he  imported
gold,  almug  trees  or  ebony,  and  precious  stones  ;  from  Turshish,
on  the  coast  of  Spain,  he  brought  >il\er;  and  from  the  coa>t  of
Africa,  gold,  ivory,  apes  and  peacocks  These  commercial  \M\,
produced  a  prodigious  influx  of  wealth,  the  annual  import;  tion  of
ii<»ld  alone  amounting  to  I  :>,<;  I  i;,:>r>0 ;  and  as  to  silver,  it  \v;  s  of  no
estimation,  and  was  as  Atones  for  abundance."  (Hales.  Anal.  vol.  ii.
p.  :jf>2.)

!  The  regal  state  in  which  Solomon  lived  may  be  interesting  to
the  Free  and  Accepted  Mason  ;  his  provision  for  one  day  was  30
measures  of  fine  flour  and  GO  measures  of  meal,  10  fat  oxen  and
20  oxen  out  of  the  pastures,  and  100  sheep,  beside  harts,  and  roe-
bucks, and  fallow  deer,  and  fatted  fowl."  (1  Kings  iv.  22,  23.)
This  statement  may  excite  surprise,  but  it  is  less  astonishing  to  one
who  is  acquainted  with  the  extent  and  arrangement  of  the  oriental
courts.  The  daily  consumption  of  provisions  in  t|je  royal  establish-
ment of  Cyrus  was  1000  bushels  of  wheat,  the  same  of  barley  meal,
400  sheep,  300  lambs,  100  oxen,  30  horses,  30  deer,  400  fat  geese,
100  goslings,  300  doves,  600  small  birds,  3750  gallons  of  wine,
150  gallons  of  milk,  Src.  Taverner  says,  that  in  the  Grand  Signior's
seraglio  there  were  seven  kitchens,  and  not  less  than  400  cooks.
After  this  we  shall  wonder  less  at  the  consumption  of  Solomon's
household.  Extended  details  on  this  subject  may  be  found  jn  the
Pictorial  Bible,  vol.  ii.  p.  160.


Or    FREEMASONRY.  289


LECTURE    XXXIII.

THE    AIIK    OF    THE    COVENANT.

"  The  heavenly  oracle  dictated  the  construction  of  the  ark  of  the
covenant  and  its  protecting  tabernacle  in  the  wilderness,  and  the
magnificence  of  King  Solomon's  temple  afterwards,  the  two  patterns
of  stone  and  military  architecture." — WATSON.

"  In  the  middle  of  the  procession  is  carried  the  ark  of  the  cove-
nant, covered  over  with  a  veil  of  blue,  purple,  and  crimson  silk.  It
is  carried  by  four  of  the  oldest  Masons  that  can  be  found  in  the  whole
company.  The  age  of  the  Masons  and  not  of  the  Lodge  is  here  to
be  observed.  The  furniture  of  the  ark  is  the  Old  Testament,  salt,
clay,  a  pair  of  compasses,  &c.  Before  the  procession  commences,
the  Grand  Master,  and  all  the  company  present,  walk  round  the  hall,
preceded  by  a  purple  Brother  with  a  basin  containing  perfumes.
With  this  the  Grand  Master  sprinkles  the  veil,  saying—'  May  all
our  deeds  be  sweet  and  savoury ;  may  we  be  a  refreshing  odour  to
all  our  poor  Brethren,  for  charity  is  as  sweet  as  roses.' '

HELVETIAN  CEREMONIES.

THE  ark  of  the  covenant1  was  a  kind  of  chest  or
coffer,  placed  in  the  sanctum  sanctprum,2  with  the  two

1  This  sacred  chest  is  a  legitimate  appendage  to  the  third  degree,
although  it  is  mentioned  in  many  of  the  higher  orders,  and  is  parti-
cularly explained  in  the  degree  of  Superintendent  Scotch  Master.

2  "  At  the  east  end  of  every  synagogue  the  modern  Jews  have
a  chest,  which  they  call  aron,  or  ar^,  ir  Ihich  is  locked  up  the  pen-
tateuch,  written  on  vellum  in  square  characters.     This  method  of
proceeding  was  also  observed  at  the  building  of  King  Solomon's
temple,  when  the  Craftsmen  were  not  to  be  made  Masters  until  that

VOL.  II.  U


290  HISTORICAL    LANDMARKS


tables  of  stone  containing  the  decalogue/'1  written  with
the  finger  of  God,  and  containing  the  most  sacred
monument  of  the  Jewish,  or  any  other  religion.  Along
with  the  ark  were  deposited  the  rod  of  Aaron,  and  the
pot  of  manna.4  The  ark  was  a  symbol  of  the  divine
presence  and  protection  of  the  Israelites,5  and  a  pledge

glorious  edifice  should  be  completed,  that  so  they  might  acquire  com-
petent skill,  and  be  able  to  give  ample  proof  'of  their  qualifications."
(Calcott,  p.  72.)

3  As  the  ark  was  the  emblem  of  peace  and  alliance  which  God
made  with  his  people,  it  was  put  under  the  shadow  of  the  wings  of
the  cherubims.     The  same  may  be  said  of  the  blazing  star  and  tri-
angle within  a  circle,  which  is  placed  in  a  situation  which  all  Secret
Masters  know.

4  "  And  Moses  said  unto  Aaron,  take  a  pot,  and  put  an  omer  full
of  manna  therein,  and  lay  it  up  before  the  Lord,  to  be  kept  for  your
generation."  (Exod.  xvi.  23.)    "  Moses  placed  the  cruse  of  gold,  or
pot  of  manna,  in  the  tabernacle,  to  instruct  the  priests  that  in  the
proper  exercise  of  their  ministry,  they  ought  to  feed  on  the  spiritual
manna  shut  up  in  the  sciences  which  they  were  explicitly  charged  to
study."  (Esprit  du  Dogine,  p.  41.)     Tt  may  be  here  necessary  to
say,  that  I  have  made  a  few  quotations  from  the  above  French  writer
on  Masonry,  although,  I  am  afraid,  his  principles  incline  to  deism,
simply  to  show  the  difference  between  the  continental  illustrations
and  our  own.     The  book  from  which  they  have  been  taken  is  a  thick
octavo,  embellished  with  diagrams,  and  contains  many  theories  which
are  subversive  of  the  genuine  principles  of  the  Order.

5  "  I  am  much  inclined  to  think,"  says  Faber  (Cab.  vol.  i.  p.  227),
"  that  the  sacred  ark,  or  boat  of  God,  overshadowed  by  the  pro-
tecting wings  of  the  cherubim,  has  the  very  same  commemorative
allusion  to  the  Noetic  ark  as  the  baris  of  Egypt.     It  is  perpetually
called  the  ark  of  the  covenant,  with  a  primary  reference,  I  apprehend,
to  the  covenant  vouchsafed  by  .God  to  Noah,  though,  doubtless,  with
a  secondary  reference  to  that  same  covenant  renewed  in  a  particular
manner  with  the  seed  of  Abraham.  Hence,  in  the  Jewish  tabernacle,
it  was  surmounted  by  the  mercy  seat  and  the  cherubim,  as  the  mercy


OF    FREEMASONRY.  291

of  the  stability  of  the  theocracy,  so  long  as  the  people
adhered  to  the  articles  of  the  covenant  which  the  ark
contained.6

This  sacred  chest7  was  made  of  shittim  wood,  or  the

of  God  rested  upon  the  diluvian  ark,  arid  as  his  providence  guarded
it  from  surrounding  dangers.  In  all  the  sacred  processions,  and  in
all  the  marches  of  Israel  through  the  wilderness,  it  was  borne  aloft
upon  the  shoulders  of  the  priests,  exactly  in  the  same  manner  as  the
baris  of  the  Egyptian  ogdoad ;  but  there  was  this  essential  difference
between  them,  the  ark  was  consecrated  to  the  service  of  the  Most
High,  and  served  perpetually  to  remind  his  chosen  people  of  the
most  signal  instance  of  divine  mercy  and  justice  ;  while  the  primitive
use  of  the  baris  was  miserably  perverted  to  the  purposes  of  a  base
and  degraded  idolatry."

6  "  Sacred  chests,  bearing  much  the  resemblance  in  principle  to  this
ark,  have  been  found  in  different  ancient  and  modern  nations.     We
incline  to  suppose  that  those  of  the  heathen  were  either  copies  of  the
Mosaic  ark,  or  else  that  the  idea  was  sufficiently  simple  and  natural
to  occur  among  people  who  had  no  intercommunication  or  common
source  of  knowledge.     The  Egyptians,  on  some  occasions,  carried  in
solemn  processions  a  sacred  chest,  containing  the  secret  things  and
mysteries  of  their  religion.     The  Trojans  also  had  a  sacred  chest ;
and  the  palladium  of  the  Greeks  and  Romans  was  something  not
very  unlike.     It  is  further  remarkable,  that  as  the  Hebrew  tabernacle
had  a  holy  of  holies  in  which  the  ark  was  deposited,  so  had  the
heathen,  in  the  inmost  part  of  their  temples,  an  adytum,  or  penetrale,
which  none  but  the  priests  might  enter."  (Pict.  Bibl.  vol.  i,  p.  202.)

7  Some  say  there  were  two  arks.     In  Siphre,  it  says  that  the  ark
which  moved  in  advance  of  the  camps  was  the  one  that  contained
the  two  broken  tables.     R.  Joda  ben  Lakish  held  the  opinion  that
Israel  carried  two  arks  in  the  wilderness,  one  made  by  Moses  pre-
vious to  that  of  Bezaleel,  in  which  he  put  the  broken  tables,  and  the
other  made  by  Bezaleel  after  the  construction  of  the  tabernacle,  in
which  the  new  ones  were  placed.     Of  these  two,  the  one  Moses  had
made  went  before  the  camp  in  the  three  days'  journey,  and  went  out
with  the  army  when  they  offered  battle,  and  was  the  one  captured
by  the  Philistines  in  the  time  of  Eli ;  but  that  of  Bezaleel,  which

u  2


292


HISTORICAL    LANDMARKS


timber  of  a  thorny  shrub,8  which  grew  in  great  pro-
fusion in  many  parts  of  the  wilderness  where  the
Israelites  were  directed  to  encamp,  and  gave  its  name  to
a  particular  place,  which  was  hence  called  Abel-Shittim.
It  is  supposed  to  have  been  the  wood  of  the  burning
bush,  which  was  once  held  in  such  veneration  in  our
Royal  Arch  Chapters.  This  timber  had  a  close  grain,
and  consequently  was  capable  of  receiving  a  beautiful
polish,  and  like  the  cedar,  from  its  fragrance,  was
exempt  from  the  attacks  of  worms  and  rottenness.
Hence  the  ark  endured,  without  losing  any  of  its  spe-
cific virtues,  from  the  time  of  its  construction  in  the
wilderness,9  till  the  demolition  of  the  temple  by  Nebu-
chadnezzar, a  period  of  nine  hundred  years.  It  was
made  by  Aholiab  and  Bezalecl,  under  the  direction  of
Moses,  and  according  to  the  pattern  which  Jehovah
had  shown  him  on  the  holy  mountain ;  and  appro-

contained  the  other  tables  and  the  law,  always  moved  in  the  centre
of  the  camps.  (See  Concil.  vol.  i.  p.  246.)  This  is,  however,  an
error,  because  there  was  bnt  one  ark  in  the  camp  of  the  Israelites.

8  This  was  perhaps  the  acacia  horrida,  a  kind  of  mimosa,  and
a  native  of  Arabia.    The  thorns  are  twined,  as  in  many  other  species
of  this  genus,  and  nearly  equal  to  the  leaves  in  length ;  the  leaves
are  repeatedly  winged ;  the  spikes  of  white  flowers  proceed  from  the
bottom  of  the  leaves  ;  the  wood  is  of  an  excellent  quality,  and  never
decays.

9  It  may  be  here  remarked  that  a  degree,  called  the  Prince  of
Mercy,  has  been  instituted  to  commemorate  the  events  which  took
place  in  the  wilderness.     It  is  the  twenty-sixth  of  the  Ancien  et
accepte.     The  Chapter  is  styled  the  Third  Heaven,  and  the  chief
Prince  is  called  Most  Excellent.    Besides  the  two  Wardens  and  accus-
tomed officers,  there  is  a  Sacrifice!*  and  a  Guard  of  the  Palladium.
The  Chief  Priest  represents  Moses  ;  Senior  Warden,  Aaron  ;  Junior
Warden,  Eleazer ;  and  the  candidate,  Joshua.


OF    FREEMASONRY.  293

priated  to  such  a  sublime  office,  that  all  persons  were
forbidden  to  look  upon  or  touch  it,  under  pain  of
death  ;10  a  penalty  which  was  inflicted  on  fifty  thousand
men  of  Bethshemesh  for  this  offence  only.

The  ark  was  overlaid  with  plates  of  gold,11  and  sur-
rounded with  a  golden  rim  or  cornice,  which  was  deno-
minated a  crown,  in  reference  to  the  ornament  that
was  worn  by  monarchs  as  a  symbol  of  their  dignity.12
This  fillet  of  gold  served  also  to  support  the  mercy
seat,  which  constituted  the  lid  or  cover  of  the  ark.
The  propitiatory  was  not  made  of  shittim  wood  over-
laid with  gold,  like  the  ark,  but  consisted  of  one  plate
of  pure  beaten  gold,  surmounted  by  two  cherubims,

10  "  The  inhabitants  of  the  north  of  Germany,"  says  Picart  (Cer.
vol.  iii.  p.  146),  "and  our  Saxon  ancestors  in  general,  worshipped
Herthum,  i.  e.  the  Mother  Earth,  and  believed  her  to  interpose  in
the  affairs  of  men,  and  to  visit  nations ;  that  to  her,  within  a  sacred
grove,  a  vehicle  or  ark,  covered  with  a  vestment,  was  consecrated,
and  allowed  to  be  touched  by  the  priests  alone,  who  perceived  when
the  goddess  entered  into  this  her  secret  place,  and  with  profound
veneration  attended  her  vehicle,  which  was  drawn  by  cows,"     The
same  custom  was  imitated  in  almost  all  nations.     Even  the  savages
in  the  South  Sea  Islands  had  their  sacred  ark,  or  chest,  which  was
carried  on  poles,  and  was  not  allowed  to  be  profaned  by  the  touch  of
an  unconsecrated  person.

11  The  gold  of  the  ark  was  symbolical  of  the  divinity  of  Christ ;
the  wood,  of  his  humanity ;  the  crown  was  typical  of  his  regal  cha-
racter ;  the  pot  of  manna,  of  his  priestly  office — feeding  his  people
with  spiritual  food ;   and  the  mercy  seat,  of  his  prophetical  dig-
nity ;  while  Aaron's  rod  was  an  emblem  of  his  resurrection — of  the
revival  and  blooming  of  his  body  after  it  had  been  consigned  to  the
grave.

12  These  descriptions  are  given  with  great  minuteness  in  a  degree
called  the  Scotch  Master  (Le  Maitre  Ecossais),  and  indeed  they  form
the  principal  part  of  the  lecture  of  the  degree.


294


HISTORICAL    LANDMARKS


formed  out  of  the  same  mass,13  and  it  was  so  con-
structed as  to  fit  exactly  the  inside  of  the  crown,  that
no  interstice  might  be  perceived.  Between  these
cherubims  Jehovah  is  said  to  have  dwelt.14  The
cherubinis 15  being  represented  with  their  faces  towards

13  There  were  some  differences  between  the  cherubims  of  the  taber-
nacle and  those  of  the  temple ;  the  former  were  on  the  ark  of  alliance,
while  the  latter  stood  on  the  floor.     Those  of  the  tabernacle  were  of
beaten  gold,  while  those  in  the  temple  were  of  cedar  covered  with
gold.

14  Isai.  xxxvii.  16.     Some  learned  writers  are  of  opinion  that  the
appearance  of  Jehovah  on  the  mercy  scat  between  the  cherubims  was
the  SACKED  NAME  or  WORD.     "  I  should  imagine,"  says  Landscer,
in  his  JSabean  Researches,  "that  the  ashcrim  of  the  lle!.n\\s  urn
surrounded  by  the  NAME  of  the  Lord  Jehovah,  expressed  in  Hebrew
characters,  which  contained  a  literal  mystery.     Let  the  reader  refer
to  those  passages  in  the  Lamentations  of  the  Hebrew  poets  where
the  phrase,  the  name  of  the  Lord  occurs,  and  let  him  observe  the
mingled  sentiment  of  woe  and  detestation  that  is  felt  by  the  author
of  some  of  the  psalms,  when  the  Babylonian  invaders  had  violated
the  sanctuary,  and  cast  the  NAME  of  the  Lord  to  the  ground."

'•"'  The  cherubims  are  pourtrayed  by  Ezekiel  as  being  in  the  form
of  a  man,  an  ox,  a  lion,  and  an  eagle.  (Ant.  Mas.  p.  288,  note  48,
new  cd.)  Some  of  our  Brethren  are  inclined  to  invest  them  with
an  astronomical  character,  and  explain  their  views  in  the  following
manner: — According  to  the  usual  system  of  chronology,  the  world
\\as  created  about  5845  years  ago;  but  making  allowance  for  the
precession  of  the  equinoxes,  the  sun,  at  the  winter  solstice  was  then
in  Aquarius  (the  man  with  the  pitcher  of  water)  ;  at  the  vernal
equinox  it  was  in  Taurus ;  at  the  summer  solstice  in  Leo  ;  and  at
the  autumnal  equinox  in  Scorpio ;  instead  of  the  latter  the  Jews
and  Babylonians  used  the  figure  of  an  eagle ;  and  thus  these  four
cardinal  constellations  derived  their  names  from  the  appearance  of
the  cherubims.  In  process  of  time  the  knowledge  of  the  cherubim,
was  lost,  and  the  equinoctial  and  solstitial  constellations  themselves
held  in  veneration  by  idolaters.  By  degrees,  however,  the  sun  passed
out  of  the  bull,  and  got  into  the  constellation  of  the  ram  at  the  vernal


OF    FREEMASONRY.  295

each  other,  and  their  eyes  fixed  on  the  covering  of
the  ark,  denoted  that  they  were  the  guardians  of
the  law  enclosed  within  it.1(j  Their  wings  being  ex-
panded was  symbolical  of  their  readiness  to  fly  wherever
they  might  be  commanded  to  execute  the  divine  will.17
But  the  wings  of  the  two  cherubims  met  together  over
the  centre  of  the  mercy  seat,  forming  a  recess  which
was  denominated  the  throne  of  God.18  Their  faces

equinox ;  and  hence,  while  some  of  the  Mystse  employed  still  their
old  deity,  or  deified  bull,  others  adopted  the  ram.  In  the  former
case,  the  hierophant  was  clothed  in  a  bull's  hide,  while  others  used
a  ram's  skin ;  which  we  now,  to  christianize  the  symbol,  denominate
a  lamb's  skin.

16  11.  Abraham  Ab  Ezra  thinks,   that  the  cherubim  signify  any
shape,  either  of  bird,  beast,  or  man ;  as  in  Ezekiel,  the  beasts  which
appeared  having  the  face  of  a  man,  an  ox,  a  lion,  and  an  eagle,  are
in  a  subsequent  chapter  called  cherubims.     But  it  must  be  observed
that  the  prophet  calls  them  cherubims,  not  on  account  of  the  form  or
shape  wherein  they  appeared,  but  because  he  knew  them  to  be  angels
or  spirits  of  God.     He  therefore  gave  the  same  name  to  them  all,
and  there  their  form  is  expressed ;  but  when  they  are  called  cherubims,
without  any  determination  of  their  form,  they  are  always  to  be  under-
stood as  appearing  in  human  shape.   (Tostatus.  Quest.  18.)

17  The  mysteries  of  the  S.  S,  are  particularized  and  explained  in
the  ineffable  degree  of  Secret  Master.

18  "  This  shows  they  were  made  like  flying  creatures ;  but  had  not
the  resemblance  of  any  fowl  that  we  know.     So  Josephus,  flying
animals  like  to  none  of  those  which  are  seen  by  men ;  but  such  as
Moses  saw  figured  in  the  throne  of  God,  when  he  beheld  his  majesty
in  the  mount,  attended  by  the  heavenly  host.     And  again,  nobody
can  tell  or  conceive  what  the  cherubims  were  like.     Some  think  that
we  may  understand  their  true  figure  from  what  Ezekiel  said  of  them,
and  that  they  had  the  face  of  oxen ;  for  that  face  which  Ezekiel  calls
the  face  of  an  ox,  is  afterwards  called  the  face  of  a  cherub.     But  it
is  to  be  considered,  that  there  is  no  proof  the  cherubims  spoken  of
by  Moses  had  the  same  face  with  those  mentioned  by  Ezekiel,  but


296  HISTORICAL    LANDMARKS


being  turned  towards  each  other  showed  their  mutual
consent  and  co-operation.19

The  ark  with  its  propitiatory  was  not  only  an  emblem
of  peace  and  alliance  between  God  and  his  people,  but
was  also  a  plain  type  of  the  Messiah,  in  whom  dwelt
all  the  fulness  of  the  godhead  bodily.  Over  the  ark
appeared  the  glory  of  God20 — over  the  head  of  Christ,

were  rather  a  quite  different  representation.  For  here  God  was  repre-
sented as  dwelling,  nay,  sitting  and  abiding  among  the  Israelites ;
but  there  as  removing  and  departing  quite  away  from  his  dwelling-
place  ;  and  consequently,  I  conceive,  his  ministers  and  attendants
appear  then  in  quite  different  shapes  from  what  they  had  now."
(Patrick.  Com.  vol.  i.  p.  305.)

M  It  is  remarkable  how  faithfully  the  heathen  nations  imitated  the
practice  of  the  true  worshippers  in  the  const  ruction  of  their  symbo-
lical machinery.  The  imaginary  forms  of  the  cherubim  were  multi-
plied in  every  fanciful  variety,  to  accommodate  the  demands  of  a  false
worship.  The  sun  was  the  great  deity  of  most  idolatrous  nations ;
and  the  cherubic  emblems  were  enlisted  to  represent  that  potent
divinity.  The  man  was  Osiris,  or  Apollo,  or  the  solar  deity  under
whatever  name  in  all  the  countries  under  heaven;  the  lion,  with
shaggy  mane,  and  fire  sparkling  from  his  eyes,  symbolized  the  same
luminary ;  as  did  the  head  of  the  ox,  garnished  with  horns,  like  the
rays  of  light  which  streamed  from  the  head  of  Moses  when  he  returned
from  the  mount ;  and  also  the  eagle,  from  the  swiftness  of  his  motion,
and  his  propensity  to  soar  with  steadfast  look  at  the  blaze  of  light
by  which  every  other  creature  is  overpowered.  These  animals  beinsf
symbolical  of  fire,  light,  and  air,  became  venerated  and  embodied  in
the  persons  of  Ptha  or  Vulcan,  Osiris  or  Mithra,  and  Cneph  or  Zeus.
Thus  the  cherubic  symbol  of  the  true  God  was  dissected,  and  con-
verted into  a  radix  whence  were  derived  almost  all  the  principal
divinities  in  the  mythological  pantheon  of  the  heathen  world.

20  «  \yhen  Moses  was  gone  into  the  tabernacle  of  the  congregation
to  speak  with  him,  then  he  heard  the  voice  of  one  speaking  unto  him
from  off  the  mercy  seat  that  was  upon  the  ark  of  testimony,  from  be-
tween the  two  eherubims — and  he  spake  unto  him."  (Numb.  vii.  89.)


OF    FREEMASONRY.  297

the  true  ark  of  the  covenant,  the  heavens  opened  at
his  conception,  at  his  birth,  at  his  baptism,  at  his
transfiguration,  and  at  his  ascension ;  and  in  each  case
the  divine  glory  was  manifested.  The  pot  of  manna21
was  an  emblem  of  Christ.  Manna  was  bread  from
heaven ;  Christ  is  the  true  bread  of  life.22  He  was  the
ark  containing  the  holy  law  of  God,  and  revealing  its
beneficent  conditions  for  the  benefit  of  man.  In  this
ark  all  heavenly  virtues  centred,  and  from  thence  im-
parted, not  only  as  an  oracle  to  foretel  future  events,
but  also  to  confer  present  benefits — to  heal  the  sick —

21  This  kind  of  emblem  was  imitated  in  the  Egyptian  hieroglyphics,
thus,  says  Ibn  Washih,  "  if  they  wished  to  express  a  powerful,  brave,
cunning,  or  avaricious  king,  they  painted  the  figure  of  a  man  with
the  head  of  a  lion,  pointing  with  one  of  his  fingers  to  a  fox  before
him.     If  they  wished  to  express  the  attribute  of  understanding,
sagacity,  and  wisdom,  they  represented  a  man  with  the  head  of  an
elephant,  pointing  with  one  of  his  fingers  to  a  sitting  ape.     If  they
wished  to  give  him  the  attributes  of  justice,  generosity,  and  liberality,
they  drew  a  man  with  a  bird's  head,  and  before  him  a  balance,  a  sun,
and  a  moon.     If  they  meant  to  represent  him  cruel,  faithless,  and
ignorant,  they  gave  him  a  dog's,  ass's,  or  boar's  head,  with  a  pot  of
Jire  placed  before  him,  as  a  symbol  of  purification  and  regeneration."

(Ancient  Alphabets,  p.  47.')

22  These  types  are  so  clear  and  satisfactory,  that  the  Masons  who
reject  them  have,  in  some  instances,  been  refused  admission  into  the
Lodges.     Thus  in  1838,  as  it  is  reported,  the  Brethren  at  Berlin
deliberated,  on  the  application  of  the  fraternity  at  Frankfort  and
Hamburgh,  "  whether  Jews  were  admissible.    In  two  of  them  it  was
immediately  decided  in  the  negative,  on  the  ground  that  these  insti-
tutions are  purely  Christian.     The  Lodge,  lloyal  York,  came  to  a
contrary  conclusion,  by  a  majority  of  a  few  votes.     The  question  is
not,  however,  set  at  rest.     The  meeting  was  adjourned  for  seven
years;  and  there  will  be  a  general  revisal  of  the  statutes  in  1845."
(F.  Q.  11.  1838,  p.  357.)     Tn   Prussia  the  Jewish  Masons  are  all
but  prohibited.


298  HISTORICAL    LANDMARKS

to  give  sight  to  the  blind,  and  feet  to  the  lam<
raise  the  dead,  and  to  cast  out  devils.  The  mercy  seat
was  the  oracle  of  the  Jews  ;23  Christ  is  the  oracle  of  us
Christians.  Did  Dagon  and  the  false  gods  fall  pros-
trate before  the  ark?  Tradition  assures  us  that  the
Egyptian  idols  did  the  same  before  the  infant  Jesus
when  his  reputed  father  conveyed  him  into  that  country
to  escape  from  the  rage  of  Herod;24  and  more  cer-

23  The  most  striking  analogy  between  the  ark  of  the  covenant  and
the  sacred  chests  of  other  nations,  is  exhibited  in  one  of  the  South
Sea  Islands  discovered  by  Captain  Cook.    Hawkesworth  describes  it
as  "a  kind  of  chest,  or  ark,  the  lid  of  which  was  nicely  sewed  on,
and  thatched  very  neatly  with  palm-nut  leaves.     It  was  fixed  upon
two  poles,  and  supported  upon  little  arches  of  wood,  very  neatly
covered ;  the  use  of  the  poles  seemed  to  be  to  remove  it  from  place
to  place,  in  the  manner  of  our  sedan-chairs.     In  one  end  of  it  was
a  square  hole,  in  the  middle  of  which  was  a  ring  touching  the  sides,
and  leaving  the  angles  open,  so  as  to  form  a  round  hole  within,
a  square  one  without.     The  first  time  Sir  Joseph  Banks  saw  this
coffer,  the  aperture  at  the  end  was  stopped  with  a  piece  of  cloth,
which,  lest  he  should  give  offence,  he  left  untouched.     Probably
there  was  then  something  within ;  but  now  the  cloth  was  taken  away,
it  was  empty.     The  general  resemblance  between  this  repository  and
the  ark  of  the  Jews  is  remarkable ;  but  it  is  still  more  remarkable
that,  upon  inquiring  of  the  boy  what  it  was  called,  he  said  Ewharre
no  Etau,  the  House  of  God.     He  could,  however,  give  no  account
of  its  signification  or  use."

24  Both  Eusebius  and  Athanasius  have  recorded  the  following  fact,
that  when  Joseph  and  Mary  arrived  in  Egypt,  they  took  up  their
abode  in  Hermopolis,  a  city  of  the  Thebais,  in  which  was  a  superb
temple  of  Serapis.    Conducted  by  Providence,  or  induced  by  curiosity,
to  visit  the  temple  with  the  infant  Saviour,  what  was  their  wonder
and  consternation,   on  their  very  entrance,  to  find  not  only  the
great  idol  itself,  but  all  the  dii  minores  of  the  temple,  fall  prostrate
before  them.     The  priests  fled  away  with  horror,  and  the  whole  city
was  in  the  utmost  alarm.


OF    FREEMASONRY.  299

tainly,  the  demons,  whom  those  inanimate  statues
represented,  succumbed  before  the  powerful  word  of
Christ,  and  quitted  their  victims  with  reluctant  howlings
at  his  command.25  And  the  heathen  oracles,  which
were  the  engines  of  those  impure  spirits  to  ensnare  the
souls  of  men,  ceased,  and  were  for  ever  silenced  at  his
appearance  in  the  world.26  Was  the  presence  of  the
ark  necessary  to  the  perfection  of  the  Jewish  religion  ?
Christ  is  essential  to  ours ;  to  that  universal  religion
which  shall  one  day  prevail  over  the  whole  earth,  and
include  Jew  and  Gentile  alike  in  one  fold,  under  one
shepherd,  Jesus  Christ  the  Lord.

Again  the  Urim  and  Thummim  rested  on  the  breast
of  the  high  priest ;  Christ  reposes  on  the  bosom  of
the  Father.  And  the  veil  referred  to  the  flesh  of

25  See  the  Gospels,  passim.

26  A  story  is  told  by  Cleombrotus,  one  of  the  speakers  in  Plu-
tarch's dialogue  concerning  the  cessation  of  oracles,  that  he  was
sailing  for  Italy  ;  and  being  one  evening  becalmed,  most  of  the
passengers  were  carousing  after  supper,  when  there  came  a  voice
from  the  island  Paxa3,  which  called  aloud  for  Thamus.     He  was  the
pilot,  but  was  unknown  by  name  to  the  passengers.     He  suffered
himself  to  be  called  twice  without  making  any  answer,  but  at  the
third  call  he  spoke.     The  voice  then  said  with  great  vehemence —
when  you  come  to  the  Pelodes,  tell  the  people  that  the  great  Pan  is
dead.     They  were  astonished  at  this ;  and  when  they  came  to  the
place  indicated,  the  winds  and  waves  being  calm,  Thamus  turned
his  face  towards  the  land,  and  declared  with  a  loud  voice  that  the
great  Pan  was  dead.    Immediately  they  heard  from  the  shore  groans
and  lamentations,  as  of  a  multitude  of  people.     When  the  vessel
arrived  at  Rome,  Thamus  was  sent  for  by  the  Emperor  Tiberias,  and
he  gave  such  credit  to  the  account  as  to  inquire  of  the  philosophers
who  this  Pan  was.     They  declared  he*  was  the  son  of  Mercury  and
Penelope,  and  an  oracle.


300  HISTORICAL    LANDMARKS


Christ  which  shadowed  his  divinity.  The  high  pn<
is  described  as  a  temporary  mediator,  who  offered
sacrifices  of  atonement  on  the  altar,27  to  save  the  people
from  their  sins  ;£8  which  constitutes  a  lively  type  of
Christ,  who  offered  a  sacrifice  once  for  sin,  and  for
ever  sits  as  a  Mediator  at  the  right  hand  of  God.
Hence  the  reason  why  the  priestly  orders  were  intro-
duced into  Freemasonry.

The  tabernacle,  with  its  holy  emblems,  was  a  type  of
a  Mason's  Lodge. ''     It  was  an  oblong  square,  arid

27  "  The  Israelites  had  but  one  only  altar  appointed  upon  which
they  were  to  offer  all  their  sacrifices  ;  this  one  altar  was  a  type  of
our  blessed  Saviour,  who  only  satisfieth  for  our  sins  ;  neither  are  we
to  use  any  other  helps  in  our  own  works,  or  in  the  merits  <-r  media-
tion of  saints  beside  Christ ;  for  this  were  nothing  else  than  to  appoint
another  new  altar  beside  Christ,  who  only  is  ordained  of  God  to  be  the
Saviour  of  the  world.     As  St.  Peter  saith — Neither  is  there  salva-
tion in  any  other,  for  among  men  there  is  given  no  other  name  under
heaven  whereby  we  must  be  saved."  (Willet.  Ilexapla.  p.  620.)

28  For  this  purpose  he  entered  into  the  S.  S.  once  every  year,
where  he  offered  nothing  but  blood.     "  For  he  must  enter  thither
with  the  blood  of  a  bullock  and  of  a  goat,  and  offer  it  by  sprinkling
it  with  his  finger  upon  and  before  the  Mercy  Seat  seven  times.
Whence  it  appears  that  this  offering  of  the  high  priest  did  not  con-
sist in  the  slaughter  of  those  beasts  whose  blood  he  offered ;  and
therefore  neither  did  the  offering  of  Christ,  answerable  thereto,  con-
sist in  the  death  of  Christ,  but  by  his  entrance  into  heaven  after  his
death.     Indeed  the  death  of  Christ  is  called  an  offering  and  sacri-
fice ;  yet  it  is  so  called  for  the  resemblance  of  it  with  the  free-will
and  peace  offerings,  and  therefore  especially  because  it  was  most
grateful  and  acceptable  to  God  ;  in  which  respect  also  other  notable
works  of  piety  may  be  and  are  called  in  scripture  offerings  and
sacrifices  unto  God."  (Lushington.  Expiat.  p.  160.)

29  Some  have  compared  it  to  the  heavens,  from  the  words  of  St.
Paul  (1  Cor.  xii.  2.),  who  mentions  three  heavens  corresponding


OF    FREEMASONRY.  301

with  its  courts  and  appendages  it  represented  the
whole  habitable  globe.  Such  is  also  the  extent  of  our
Lodges.  The  former  was  supported  by  pillars,  and
the  latter  is  also  sustained  by  those  of  W.  S.  and  B.
They  were  equally  situated  due  east  and  west.30  The
sacred  roll  of  God's  revealed  will  and  law  was  deposited
in  the  ark  of  the  covenant;  the  same  holy  record  is
placed  in  a  conspicuous  part  of  our  Lodges.  The
altar  of  incense  was  a  double  cube ;  and  so  is  our
pedestal  and  stone  of  foundation.31  The  covering  of
the  tabernacle  was  composed  of  three  colours,  as  a
representation  of  the  celestial  hemisphere;  such  also

with  the  three  divisions  of  the  tabernacle.  "  The  first  heaven  is  the
air,  wherein  winds,  clouds  and  fowls  do  fly  ;  2.  the  upper  firmament,
where  the  sun,  moon  and  stars  are  set ;  and  3.  the  high  places
where  angels  dwell.  The  first  of  these  is  like  the  outward  court  of
the  tabernacle,  and  is  most  open  to  us  ;  the  second  is  like  the
inward  court,  less  open,  and  abounding  with  starry  lights  or  lamps,
never  going  out ;  and  the  next  is  as  the  Sanctum  Sanctorum,  whither
He  is  entered  once  for  all,  who  is  a  priest  for  ever,  and  maketh
intercession  for  us.  In  the  two  lowest  is  no  felicity,  for  neither  the
fowls  nor  stars  are  happy.  It  is  the  third  of  these  alone  where  the
blessed  Trinity  enjoyeth  itself,  and  the  glorified  spirits  enjoy  it."
(Hexameron.  c.  v.  s.  1.)

30  In  allusion  to  the  course  of  the  sun,  which  rises  in  the  east,
gains  its  meridian  in  the  south,  and  sets  in  the  west.

31  It  is  well  known  that  this  particular  figure  was  possessed  of
some  mysterious  properties,  not  only  in  the  opinion  of  those  who
adhered  steadfastly  to  the  worship  of  the  true  God,  but  also  of  those
who  had  fallen  into  the  errors  of  idolatry ;  thus,  when  a  pestilence
raged  at  Delphi,  the  oracle  was  consulted  as  to  the  means  of  arrest-
ing its  progress  ;  and  it  commanded  that  the  cube  should  be  doubled.
This  was  understood  to  refer  to  the  altar,  which  was  of  a  cubical
form.     They  immediately  increased  its  altitude  to  the  prescribed
dimensions,  and  the  pestilence  ceased.


302  HISTORICAL    LANDMARKS

is  the  covering  of  a  Mason's  Lodge.32  The  floor  of
the  tabernacle  was  so  holy,  that  the  priests  were  for-
bidden to  tread  upon  it  without  taking  off  their
shoes  j33  the  floor  of  the  Lodge  is  holy  ground.  Like
Freemasonry,  the  tabernacle  worship  enforced  upon
the  Israelites  three  important  duties — to  God,  their
neighbour,  and  themselves.  The  Tetragrammaton  is
displayed  on  our  altar;  and  in  like  manner  it  was
engraven  on  the  golden  plate  in  front  of  the  high
priest's  mitre.  Jehovah  was  in  the  pillar  of  a  cloud
and  of  fire  which  hovered  over  the  tabernacle;  and
the  same  appearances  are  symbolized  in  our  Lodges
by  the  two  pillars  which  are  usually  disposed  in  front
of  the  Master's  chair.34  The  pot  of  manna  was  placed
in  the  sanctuary  to  commemorate  the  heavenly  bread
by  which  the  Israelites  were  sustained  in  the  wilder-
ness ;  it  has  therefore  been  adopted  as  a  Masonic
emblem,  to  signify  that  Christ  is  the  bread  of  God
which  came  down  from  heaven.  The  Lodge  being
thus  constructed  on  a  plan  similar  to  the  tabernacle  of
Moses,  it  will  scarcely  be  denied  that  its  reference  is
the  same.  If  the  former  was  typical  of  Christianity,
so  will  be  the  latter  also.

32  The  clouds  of  heaven  illuminated  with  the  prismatic  colours  of
the  rainbow.

33  "  Moses  took  off  his  shoes  by  the  command  of  God,  at  the
Burning  Bush  on  Mount  Horeb,  that  he  might  be  ready  to  offer  up
his  prayers  to  the  Almighty;,  to  thank  him  for  mercies  received,
crave  pardon  for  past  offences,  and  implore  his  aid  and  protection  in
all  future  endeavours."  (R.  A.  Lect.,  see  Star  in  the  East,  p.  102.)

34  They  signify  also  the  universality  of  Masonry,  as  spread  over
eternal  space,  and  extending  from  the  earth  to  the  heavens.


THE   ROYAL   ARCH


AND  ITS


SUBSIDIARY  DEGREES.

•

NINETEEN    LECTURES.


"  Now  in  the  first  year  of  Cyrus,  King  of  Persia  (that  the  word  of  the
Lord  by  the  mouth  of  Jeremiah  might  be  fulfilled),  the  Lord  stirred  up
the  spirit  of  Cyrus,  King  of  Persia,  that  he  made  a  proclamation  through-
out all  his  kingdom,  and  put  it  also  in  writing,  saying,  Thus  saith  Cyrus,
King  of  Persia,  the  Lord  God  of  heaven  hath  given  me  all  the  kingdoms
of  the  earth,  and  he  hath  charged  me  to  build  him  an  house  at  Jerusalem,
which  is  in  Judah.  Who  is  there  among  you  of  all  his  people  ?  his  God
be  with  him,  and  let  him  go  up  to  Jerusalem,  which  is  in  Judah,  and  build
the  house  of  the  Lord  God  of  Israel  (He  is  the  God)  which  is  in  Jeru-
salem."—  EZRA.

"  It  was  the  end  and  drift  of  initiation  to  restore  the  soul  to  that  state
from  whence  it  fell,  as  from  its  native  seat  of  perfection." — PLATO.

Joy  !  the  sacred  law  is  found,

Now  the  temple  stands  complete  ;
Gladly  let  us  gather  round,

Where  the  pontiff  holds  his  seat.

Now  he  spreads  the  volume  wide,
Opening  forth  its  leaves  to  day  ;
And  the  monarch  by  his  side,
Gazes  on  the  bright  display.

Joy  !  the  secret  vault  is  found,

Full  the  sunbeam  falls  within  ;
Pointing  darkly  under  ground,

To  the  treasure  we  would  win.

They  have  brought  it  forth  to  light,

And  again  it  cheers  the  earth  ;
All  its  leaves  are  purely  bright,

Shining  in  their  pristine  worth.

This  shall  crown  the  mighty  ARCH,

When  the  temple  springs  on  high ;
And  the  Brethren  bend  their  march,

Wafting  incense  to  the  sky.

Then  the  solemn  strain  shall  swell,

From  the  bosom  and  the  tongue ;
And  the  Master's  glory  tell,

In  the  harmony  of  song.

CROSS'S  CHART


LECTURE   XXXIV.

ON  THE  INCREASE  OF  FREEMASON  11Y  FROM  ITS  REVIVAL  IN  1717.

"  The  difference  among  the  different  bodies  of  Masons,  in  regard
to  the  numbers  of  degrees  in  the  Order,  and  the  dependence  of  one
degree  upon  another,  is  extremely  puzzling,  and  much  to  be  re-
gretted."— NOACIIIDA  DALRUADICUS.

"  We  hereby  authorize  and  empower  our  illustrious  Brother  to
establish,  congregate,  superintend,  and  inspect  all  Lodges,  Chapters,
Councils,  Colleges,  and  Consistories  of  the  Royal  and  Military  Order
of  Ancient  Freemasonry  over  the  surface  of  the  two  hemispheres,
agreeably  to  the  Grand  Constitutions." — PATENT  OF  A  GRAND
INSPECTOR  GENERAL.

"  He  who  collects  materials  for  the  history  of  this  Society,  acts  a
more  important  part  than  all  the  monkish  chroniclers  put  together,
who  have  left  so  many  journals  of  the  pious  inactivity  of  their
brethren." — FREEMASON'S  LEXICON.

FREEMASONRY,  under  one  constitution  or  another,
is  spread  over  the  whole  habitable  globe;  and  how-
ever diversified  the  sublime  or  philosophical  degrees
may  be,  pure  symbolical  Masonry  remains  unchanged,1

1  De  Witt  Clinton,  an  American  G.  M.  and  G.  H.  P.,  says,  "  the
principles  of  Masonry  are  essentially  and  uniformly  the  same  in  all
parts  of  the  world."  A  similar  observation  was  made  by  Brother
Ilussell,  Past  G.  M.  of  Mass,  after  his  secession  from  the  order.  "  The
Masonic  institution  has  been  and  now  is  the  same  in  every  place ;  no
deviation  ever  has  been  made  or  can  be  made  from  its  usages,  rules
and  regulations.  Such  is  its  nature,  that  no  innovation  on  its  customs
can  either  be  introduced  or  sanctioned.  Its  ancient  usages  have
been  handed  down  and  carefully  preserved  from  the  knowledge  of

VOL.  II.  X


HISTORICAL    LANDMARKS

and  is  practised  with  a  strict  conformity  to  the  ancient
Landmarks.2  Indeed  a  violation  of  these  unalterable
tokens  of  truth  is  altogether  impracticable,3  because
such  a  proceeding  would  destroy  the  character  of  the
institution,  and  it  would  no  longer  be  Freemasonry.4

the  world,  and  the  members  are  solemnly  bound  to  observe  and
obey  them."

2  Thus,  at  the  revival  of  Masonry  in  1717,  in  compliment  to  the
Brethren  of  the  four  Old  Lodges  by  whom  the  Grand  Lodge  was
first  formed,  it  was  resolved,  "  that  every  privilege  which  they  col-
lectively enjoyed  by  virtue  of  their  immemorial  rights,  they  should
still  continue  to  enjoy;  and  tliat  no  law,  rule,  or  regulation,  to  be
hereafter  made  or  passed  in  Grand  Lodge,  should  ever  deprive  them
of  such  privilege,  or  encroach  on  any  Landmark  which  was  at  that
time  established  as  the  standard  of  Masonic  government.

3  An  American  writer  says,   "  Freemasonry,  though  constantly
assailed  and  often  drenched  in  the  blood  of  her  followers — though
chains  and  dungeons  have  been  their  doom,  and  the  rack  and  the
wheel  have  responded  to  their  groans — has  hitherto  remained  unhurt
by  ignorance,   superstition  and  tyranny ;    and,  by  the  aid  of  its
enlightened  philanthropy  and  undefiled  religion,  has  soared  aloft,
dipped  her  broad  pencil  in  the  clouds  of  heaven,  and  spread  the
cement  of  brotherly  affection  through  earth's  remotest  realms.     She
has  scattered  the  bauds,  extinguished  the  flames,  and  unbound  the
victim;  she  has  shed  her  rays  in  every  portion  of  the  habitable
globe,  and  extended  her  salutary  influence  to  the  distressed  in  every
clime.     Her  merited  praise  is  in  every  quarter  of  the  globe.     The
widows'  thanks  and  the  orphans'  tears  are  her  grateful  encomiums ;
courtesy  and  friendship  hail  her  with  gratitude.     She  has  promoted
the  kindly  intercourse  of  nations — has  softened  the  asperities  and
diminished  the  woes  of  war — she  has  smiled  upon  science  and  lite-
rature, and,  in  concert  with  other  institutions,  has  aided  Christi-
anity in  introducing  this  distinguished  era  of  light  and  salvation."
(Brown's  Narrative,  p.  237.)

4  To  guard  effectually  against  such  a  calamitous  result,  the  G.  L.,
at  its  very  first  establishment.,  made  it  a  standing  law  of  Masonry,


OF    FREEMASONRY.  307

This  process  has  been  the  policy  of  its  adversaries  in
all  ages,  and  it  formed  the  watchword  of  the  American
Antimasons  in  their  unholy  crusade  against  the  Order
a  few  years  ago.5  "  Let  us  subvert  the  Landmarks,"
they  exclaimed,  "  and  the  institution  cannot  be  sus-
tained."6 Hence  in  the  constitution  of  every  Grand
Lodge,  it  is  laid  down  as  a  fundamental  principle,

that  "  the  G.  L.  has  an  inherent  power  to  make  or  alter  the  regula-
tions for  the  benefit  of  the  fraternity,  provided  that  the  old  Land-
marks be  carefully  preserved  ;  and  that  such  alterations  be  proposed
and  agreed  to  at  the  quarterly  communication  preceding  the  annual
grand  feast ;  and  that  they  be  offered  also  to  the  perusal  of  all  the
Brethren  before  dinner,  in  writing,  even  of  the  youngest  Apprentice ;
the  approbation  and  consent  of  the  majority  of  all  the  Brethren
present  being  absolutely  necessary  to  make  the  same  binding  and
obligatory."

5  Adams,  the  ex -President  of  the  U.  S.,  was  strongly  impressed
with  their  importance  when  he  affirmed  that  "  the  whole  cause  be-
tween Masonry  and  Antimasonry  is  concentrated  in  one  single  act.
Let  a  single  Lodge  resolve  that  they  will  change  one  Landmark,  and
that  Lodge  is  dissolved ;  let  the  whole  Order  resolve  to  do  the  same,
and  the  whole  Order  is  dissolved;  for  the  abolition  of  that  one
Landmark  necessarily  implies  the  extinction  of  all  the  others."

0  The  ex-President  lent  himself  to  the  Antimasonic  party,  in  the
unfulfilled  hope  that  it  would  elevate  him  to  power ;  and  in  his  zeal
condescended  to  make  use  of  the  following  language  in  reply  to  a
communication  from  the  Vermont  Antimasonic  State  Convention : —
"  This  and  the  like  of  this  are  the  ancient  Landmarks,  which  the
Grand  Eoyal  Arch  Chapter  of  the  U.  S.  have  earnestly  exhorted  the
Chapters  and  Lodges  under  their  jurisdiction  inflexibly  to  maintain.
Among  the  evidences  of  the  true  spirit  and  character  of  Freemasonry
which  are  daily  disclosing  themselves  to  the  world,  is  this  fanatical
attachment  and  devotion  to  their  ancient  Landmarks,  which  might
be  more  properly  denominated  those  incurable  vices  of  the  institu-
tion. It  is  therefore,  with  unmingled  satisfaction,  that  I  received
the  assurance  that  the  Antimasons  of  Vermont  have  determined  to

v  9,


80S  HISTORICAL    LANDMARKS

that  the  Landmarks  of  symbolical  Masonry  shall  never
be  changed,7  even  in  the  slightest  particle."

The  Masonic  schisms  by  which  the  last  century  was
unfortunately  distinguished,  failed  to  make  any  visible
deviation  from  the  Landmarks,  although  they  con-
tributed to  the  unpopularity  of  the  Order.  In  England,

persevere  in  the  righteous  cause  in  which  they  have  engaged,  vi/
that  of  breaking  down  the  aii'-ient  Landmarks  of  Freemasonry  !"

7  The  constitutions  of  every   (Jrand  Lodge;  are  careful  to  guard
against  innovations  in  the   Landmarks  of  Masonry.     Thus,  at  the
revival  of  Masonry  in  this  country,  it  was  provided,  that  "  it  is  not
in  the  power  of  any  man,  or  body  of  men,  to  make  any  alteration  or
innovation  in  the  old  Landmarks  of  Masonry."     Again,  at  the  iirsi
schism,  the  Ancients  made  a  la\v  that  "  every  (Irand  Lodge  has  an
inherent  power  and  authority  to  make  new  regulations,  &c.,  provided
always  that  the  old  Landmarks  be  carefully  preserved."     And  in  an
ancient  charge  at  initiation  into  the  third  degree,  we  find  the  follow-
ing recommendation,  "  the  ancient  Landmarks  of  the  Order  you  are
to  preserve  sacred  and  imiolable,  and  never  suffer  an  infringement
of  our  rites  or  a  deviation  from   established  usage  and  custom.''
Laurence  Dcrmot,  in  the   Ahiman    liczon,   "  honestly  assures   his
readers,  that  no  man  who  rightly  understands  the  Craft,  can  be
blind  as  to  trample  upon  its  ancient  Landmarks."     Other  countries
have  used  the  same  caution.     Thus,  in  the  Massachusetts  Book  of
Constitutions  it  is  provided,  that  "  the  ancient  Landmarks  are  to  be
carefully  preserved."      In  that  of  lihode  Island  the  same  provision
is  made ;  and  one  of  its  Committees  came  to  a  resolution,  that  "  it
is  inexpedient  to  make  any  alterations  in  the  ancient  Landmarks  of
the  Order."     It  is  unnecessary  to  accumulate  authorities,  for  the
same  laws  on  this  point  exist  in  every  Grand  Lodge  upon  earth.

8  In  the  Latin  Charter  of  Colne  it  is  expressed,  that  "  he  only  is
acknowledged  as  a  Free  and  Accepted  Mason,  who  has  been  initiated
into  our  mysteries  in  a  certain  manner,  with  the  assistance  and  under
the  superintendence  of  at  least  seven  Brethren,  and  who  is  able  to
prove  that  he  has  been  regularly  initiated  by  the  ready  use  of  those
signs  and  words  which  are  used  by  the  other  Brethren,"


OF    FKKK MASONRY  300

about  the  year  1736,  several  Brethren  seceded  from
their  allegiance,  and  frequently  met  together  in  the
character  of  Freemasons,  in  violation  of  the  laws  of
the  Grand  Lodge.9  Aware  of  the  impropriety  of  such
proceedings,  and  of  the  infringement  on  the  established
laws  of  the  society,  the  Grand  Lodge,  after  trying
every  lenient  measure  they  could  devise  to  reunite
them  with  their  Brethren,  were  under  the  painful
necessity  of  resorting  to  coercive  measures,  and  to
expel  them  from  the  order.10  They  also  unanimously

0  Noorthouck  gives  the  following  account  of  this  schism  : — "  Under
a  fictitious  sanction  of  the  ancient  York  Constitution,  which  was
dropped  at  the  revival  of  the  Grand  Lodge  in  1717,  they  presumed
to  claim  the  right  of  constituting  Lodges.  Tliis  illegal  and  uncon-
stitutional claim  obliged  the  regular  Masons  to  adopt  new  measures
to  detect  these  impostors,  and  debar  them  and  their  abettors  from
the  countenance  and  protection  of  the  regular  Lodges.  To  accom-
plish this  purpose  more  effectually,  some  variations  were  made  in  the
established  forms,  which  afforded  a  subterfuge,  at  which  they  readily
grasped.  They  now  assumed  the  appellation  of  A.ncient  Masons ;
proclaimed  themselves  enemies  to  all  innovation,  insisted  that  they
preserved  the  ancient  usages  of  the  Order,  and  that  the  regular
Lodges,  on  whom  they  conferred  the  title  of  Modern  Masons,  had
adopted  new  measures,  illegal  and  unconstitutional ;  thus  using  the
necessary  precautions  taken  by  the  Grand  Lodge  to  detect  them,  as
grounds  for  a  novel  and  ridiculous  distinction  of  ancient  and  modern
Masons."  (Const,  p.  240.)

10  Dermott,  in  the  Ahiman  llezon,  thus  arraigns  the  pretensions  of
the  Grand  Lodge  of  England,  which  he  pronounces  "  a  self-created
assembly.  Nor,"  he  continues,  "  was  a  self-creation  the  only  defect ;
they  were  defective  in  numbers.  To  form  what  Masons  mean  by  a
Grand  Lodge,  there  should  have  been  the  Masters  and  Wardens  of  five
regular  Lodges  ;  that  is  to  say,  five  Masters  and  ten  Wardens,  making
the  number  of  installed  officers  fifteen.  This  is  so  well  known  to
every  man  conversant  with  the  ancient  laws,  usages,  customs  and


HISTORICAL    LANDMARKS

resolved  to  discourage  their  meetings,  and  to  enforce
the  laws  against  those  Brethren  who  should  assist  at
any  of  the  irregular  assemblies,  or  connive  at  the
reception  of  any  candidate  for  Masonry.

This  was  the  origin  of  a  schism  which  divided  the
institution  into  two  sects,  and  disturbed  its  harmony
until  the  year  1813,  when  an  union  was  effected  by
their  Royal  Highnesses  the  Dukes  of  Kent  and  Sussex,
the  Grand  Masters  of  Ancient  and  Modern  Masonry.11
In  Germany,  somewhat  later  in  the  century,  the  schisms
of  Hunde,12  Zinnendorff  and  others,  attracted  atten-

eerenionies  of  Master  Masons,  that  it  is  needless  to  say  more,  than
that  the  foundation  was  defective  in  number,  and  consequently  de-
fective in  form  and  capacity."  But  Dermott's  reasoning  was  mere
casuistry ;  the  revival  of  the  Grand  Lodge  of  England  was  effected  by
all  that  remained.  Dermott  sanctions  five  or  more  revolting  Lodges.

11  By  the  act  of  union  it  was  provided,  that  "  after  the  day  of  the
re-union  as  aforesaid,  and  when  it  shall  be  ascertained  what  are  the
obligations,  forms,  regulations,  working  and  instruction  to  be  uni-
versally established,  speedy  and  effectual  steps  shall  be  taken  to
obligate  all  the  Members  of  each  Lodge  in  all  the  degrees,  according
to  the  form  taken  and  recognized  by  the  G.  M.,  P.  G.  M.,  G.  Officers
and  Representatives  of  Lodges  on  the  day  of  re-union ;  and  for  this
purpose  the  worthy  and  expert  Master  Masons,  appointed  as  afore-
said, shall  visit  and  attend  the  several  Lodges  within  the  bills  of
mortality  in  rotation,  dividing  themselves  into  quorums  of  not  less
than  three  each,  for  the  greater  expedition ;  and  they  shall  assist  the
Master  and  Wardens  to  promulgate  and  enjoin  the  pure  and  unsullied
system,  that  perfect  reconciliation,  unity  of  obligation,  law,  work-
ing, language  and  dress,  may  be  happily  restored  to  the  English
Craft:'  (Art,  xv.)

12  Baron  Hunde  asserted  that  he  had  learned  some  great  Masonic
secrets  in  the  Lodges  which  were  held  by  the  Earl  of  Kilmarnock
and  other  gentlemen  in  the  service  of  the  Pretender,  to  whom  he
had  been  introduced  by  Lord  Clifford.     He  adds,  that  he  attached


OV    1'REEMASONllY.  311

•

tion ;  and  tlieir  innovations  were  propagated  over  the
entire  continent  of  Europe,13  and  contributed  to  the
popularity  and  numbers  of  the  new  degrees,  until
the  matters  in  dispute  were  partially  compromised  in
1773  by  a  formal  compact  between  the  Grand  Lodges
of  England  and  Germany ; u  Lord  Petre  being  the
Grand  Master  of  the  former  and  the  Prince  of  Hesse
Darmstadt  of  the  latter.15  Subsequently  the  society  of
the  Illuminati,  which  wras  attempted  to  be  identified

himself  to  the  fortunes  of  the  Pretender,  in  the  hope  of  benefiting
from  his  protection.

13  See  Lect.  xxv.

14  By  this  compact  it  was  provided,  that  "  the  said  two  contract-
ing Grand  Lodges  do  hereby  mutually  agree  to  keep  a  regular
amicable  correspondence  with  each  other,  and  to  afford  all  possible
assistance,  each  to  the  Members  of  the  other  Grand  Lodge,  to  do
and  transact  whatever  may  be  found  most  likely  to  contribute  to  the
true  interest  and  honour  of  the  society ;  and  particularly  to  use  their
endeavours  to  destroy  all  schemes  in  Masonry,  and  more  especially
that  sect  of  Masons  who  call  themselves  the  Strict  Observance,  and
whose  principles  are  inconsistent  with  true  Masonry."

15  "  In  Germany,  the  qualifications  for  a  Freemason  are  great  and
numerous.     No  person  is  initiated  into  the  Order  without  the  con-
sent of  every  Member  of  the  Lodge ;  and  it  frequently  happens,  that
a  German  even  is  excluded  by  a  single  dissentient  voice.     On  this
account  the  Lodges  of  that  country  are  filled  with  persons  of  the  first
rank  and  respectability,  and  everything  is  conducted  with  the  greatest
decorum  and  solemnity.     As  Masonry  is  there  held  in  the  highest
estimation,  an  Englishman  will  obtain  an  easier  introduction  to  the
chief  nobility  and  literati  of  Germany  in  a  Mason's  Lodge  than  in
any  other  place,  and  will  never  repent  of  having  been  initiated  into
the  Order  in  his  native  country."  (Bender.  Tour  through  Germany,
vol.  i.  Introd.  p.  30.)  Dr.  Render  maintains,  that  Freemasonry  has
greatly  improved  the  manners  and  dispositions  of  the  Germans.
(Vol.  ii.  p.  200  n.  Sec  Laurie,  p.  144.)


'51.2  HISTORICAL     LANDMARKS


with  Freemasonry,  although  not  a  single  feature  of  the
system  was  common  to  both,  except  their  secresy,10
inflicted  a  severe  blow  on  the  Order,  from  which  it
did  not  speedily  recover.  In  France,  several  hostile
Grand  Lodges  or  governing  bodies  were  opposed  to
each  other,  and  continued  for  many  years  to  prosecute
their  operations  independently.17  By  the  mediation  of
mutual  friends  the  orders  were  at  length  united,18  but

0  Bamtel  admits  that  the  Masons  who,  he  says,  were  prevailed  on
to  convert  their  Lodges  to  the  purposes  of  Illumimsm,  were  dupes.
"  Nothing,"  he  continues,  "  is  more  easy  than  to  be  duped  in
.Masonry.  Such  may  have  been  the  lot  of  those  who  only  seek  to
make  acquaintances  in  the  Lodges,  or  to  pass  their  leisure  hours  with
men  apparently  intimate  at  first  sight.  It  is  true  that  this  intimacy
seldom  extends  beyond  the  walls  of  the  Lodge ;  but  the  days  of
their  meeting  are  often,  days  of  festivity.  These  repasts  are  height-
cued  by  the  temporary  equality,  which  adds  much  to  the  rnirth  of
I  he  meeting,  and  all  cares  subside  for  the  day.  What  has  been  said
of  certain  assemblies,  where  decency  was  not  respected,  is  most  cer-
tainly the  invention  of  calumny.  The  extreme  order  and  morality
of  these  meetings  has  often  proved  a  snare  to  captivate  those  who
are  to  be  caught  with  outward  appearances."  (Hist.  Jac.,  vol.  ii.
p.  316.)

17  The  most  lamentable  schism  in  Masonry  which  appeared  on  the
continent  of  Europe  was  that  of  St.  Martin.     We  have  in  the  lists
of  its  orators  and  office  bearers,  many  names  of  persons  who  have
had  an  opportunity  of  making  their  sentiments  public.    One  of  these
was  the  notorious  Abbe  Sieyes  ;  another  was  Lequinio,  the  author  of
a  most  profligate  book,  called  "  Prejuges  vaincus  par  la  liaison."
Despremenil,  Bailly,  Fauchet,   Maury,  Mourner,  and  many  others
whose  names  are  celebrated  for  their  crimes,  were  amongst  the  fol-
lowers of  St.  Martin.

18  A  re-union  of  the    Supreme  Council  of  the   rite  Ancien  et
accepte  and  the  Grand  Orient  took  place  in  the  year  1841,  when  for
the  first  time  the  two  Grand  Lodges  met  to  exchange  the  fraternal
bond.     It  is  most  devoutly  to  be  wished,  that  this  fricndh  meeting


OF    FREEMASONRY.  'U  tf

it  is  the  opinion  of  the  most  able  judges  that  they  will
never  assimilate.  In  the  United  States  are  many
Grand  Lodges,  but  they  act  in  concert.19

I  am  persuaded  however  that  these  schisms,  by
their  general  operation,  rather  accelerated  than  re-
tarded the  onward  progress  of  Masonry;  for,  at  the
precise  time  when  they  were  the  most  active,  we  find
the  Science  spreading  over  all  the  European  nations,
and  exciting  the  attention  of  all  ranks  and  classes  of
mankind.20  In  some  countries  it  was  patronized,  in


may  lay  the  foundation  of  brotherly  love,  which  may  cement  the  two
orders  in  a  permanent  and  lasting  chain.

19  The  Morgan  schism  has  already  been  noticed  in  the  introduction
to  these  lectures.  Brother  Brown  (Narrative,  p.  213)  says,  it  was
composed  of  "  some  who  have  been  expelled  from  Masonic  Lodges —
some  who  have  heretofore  sought  admission  and  failed  of  success —
some  who  have  long  been  Members,  and  have  not  received  the
recompense  due  to  their  fancied  merits — some  who  have  felt  aggrieved
by  the  conduct  of  individual  Masons — and  some  too  for  political
purposes,  have  enlisted  under  its  banners."  But  he  adds,  "  some  of
its  most  zealous  votaries,  particularly  those  who  have  not  obtained
that  influence  and  power  to  which,  by  their  zeal,  they  supposed
themselves  entitled,  are  besjinning  to  doubt  whether  Antimasonry  is
calculated  to  promote  their  temporal,  to  say  nothing  of  their  eternal,
welfare."

0  I  have  enumerated  the  degrees  in  a  vast  variety  of  systems  in
Lect.  xxv.,  but  I  find  still  more  extensive  interpolations  promulgated
by  successive  enthusiasts.  Thus,  M.  Viany  invented  a  system  of
sixteen  degrees;  viz. — 1.  Mystical  F.  C.  2.  Grand  English  Archi-
tect Ecossais,  or  Grand  Patriarch.  3.  Illustrious  Scotch  Architect.
4.  Grand  Scotch  Patriarch.  5.  Grand  Ecossais  of  the  Patriarchs.
6.  Grand  Ecossais  of  the  Crusades.  7.  The  Patriarch.  8.  The  Great
Light.  9.  Knight  of  Palestine.  10.  The  Sapicole.  11.  The  Adept.
12.  Knight  of  the  Rising  Sun.  13.  Knight  Protector  of  Innocence.
1  I.  Sublime  Master  of  Elected  Philosophers.  15.  Perfect  Venc-


314  HISTORICAL    LANDMARKS

others  it  was  proscribed.21  But  persecution  could  not
crush  what  internal  divisions  failed  to  destroy;  and
the  noble  Order  still  continued  to  prosper  and  flourish
in  the  face  of  every  adverse  circumstance.

This  will  more  fully  appear  from  a  review  of  the
union  and  strength  of  Freemasonry,  arising  out  of
the  number  of  its  Lodges  and  Brethren,  dispersed
under  the  wide  and  lofty  canopy  of  heaven ;  united  by

rable.  16.  Supreme  Commander  of  the  Stars. — M.  Page  introduced
eleven  degrees,  viz. — 1.  Prussian  Apprentice  Architect.  2,  Perfect
Apprentice  Architect.  3.  Free  Knight  of  the  Carpenters  of  St.
Andrew.  4.  Mighty  Knight  of  Masonry.  5.  Degree  of  Masonic
Clemency.  6.  Ecossais  of  St.  George.  7.  Patriarch  of  the  Great
Light.  8.  Valiant  Prince  of  Jerusalem.  9.  Grand  Prince  of  the
East.  10.  English  Recognition.  11.  Grand  Commander  of  the
Temple. — The  system  of  Le  Rouge  consisted  of  seven  degrees,  viz. —
1.  Knight  of  the  Black  Eagle.  2.  Cabalistic  Knight  of  the  Sun.
3.  English  Ecossais.  4.  Emperor  of  Libanus.  5.  The  Innominable.
6.  Philosophical  Kadosh,  or  Grand  Elect  Knight  of  the  White  and
Black  Eagle.  7.  Perfect  English  Master. — In  like  manner  Leman-
ceau  had  seven  degrees,  viz. — 1.  English  Master.  2.  Hermetic
Master.  3.  Illustrious  Master.  4,  5,  6.  Knight  of  St.  John  of
Jerusalem  :  this  degree  is  divided  into  three  sections.  7.  Sovereign
of  Sovereigns,  Grand  Commander  of  the  Temple. — M.  Hecart  more
modestly  confined  his  system  to  five  degrees  only,  viz. — 1.  Knight
of  the  Prussian  Eagle.  2.  Knight  of  the  Comet.  3.  The  Scotch
Purifier.  4.  Victorious  Knight.  5.  Scotch  Trinitarian,  or  Grand
Master  Commander  of  the  Temple.

21  Pope  Clement  led  the  way  in  this  unholy  warfare  against  an
innocent  and  laudable  institution,  by  a  bull  condemnatory  of  "  the
Society  or  Conventicles  de  Liberi  Muratori,  or  of  the  Freemasons,
under  the  penalty  of  ipso  facto  excommunication,  the  absolution  from
which  is  reserved  to  the  Pope  alone,  except  at  the  point  of  death."
This  was  followed  by  an  Ordonnance  from  the  magistrates  of
Berne,  and  an  act  of  the  Associate  Synod  of  Scotland  to  the  same
effect.


OF    FREEMASONRY.  315

a  common  tie,  using  a  common  language,  which  is
universally  understood,  and  living  in  the  exercise  of
brotherly  love  towards  each  other.22  The  inquiry  is
too  comprehensive  to  admit  of  perfect  accuracy,  and
the  results  can  only  be  an  approximation  to  the  truth.
The  number  of  Lodges  may  be  calculated  with  some
degree  of  precision,23  but  the  Members  which  they
respectively  contain  it  will  be  difficult  to  compute,
without  taking  into  the  account  the  vast  number  of
Masons  in  every  province  and  country  who  have  with-
drawn,24 for  various  reasons,  Jrom  the  institution.  In

22  The  exercise  of  this  virtue  has  been  converted,  by  an  extra-
ordinary train  of  reasoning,  into  a  ground  of  accusation  against  the
morality  of  the  Order.     In  an  American  document  now  before  me,  I
find  the  following  absurd  charges : — "  An  evidence  of  the  exclusive
benefits  derived  from  Masonic  ties,  which  appear  to  be  adverse  to
the  enjoyment  of  equal  rights,  and  to  establish  peculiar  and  dan-
gerous relations  between  citizens  of  different  civil  governments,
especially  in  time  of  war  and  in  all  commercial  relations,  may  be
found  in  the  Massachusetts  Political  llegister  for  1814,  p.  186,  in
the  following  item  : — c  April  8, 1814,  six  boats,  with  about  200  men
from  a  British  frigate  and  a  brig,  laying  oif  Saybrook,  Connecticut,
entered  the  port  of  Pettipague,  and  burnt  and  destroyed  twenty
valuable  vessels.     One  man,  who  had  a  vessel  on  the  stocks,  saved
her  by  making  it  known  to  the  commander  of  the  British  force
that  he  was  a  Freemason.' '

23  "  Ce  que  Ton  sait  de  positif  c'est  que  des  1'an  227  on  trouve
des  Francs — Ma9ons'en  Angleterre.     On  a  des  details  authentiques
qui  remontent  a  1314,  ou  Robert  i.,  roi  d'Ecosse,  prend  le  titre  de
Grand  Maitre.     En  1571,  elle  florissait  en  Angleterre;  en  1725,
elle  est  ofnciellement  introduite  en  France  ;  en  1729,  a  Dublin;  en
1731,  a  Amsterdam,  et  quelques  annees  apres  en  Espagne,  en  Por-
tugal, en  Italic,  et  meme  en  llussie.     Enfin  en  1787  on  compte  703
loges  en  France,  et  3148  dans  le  monde  connu."   (Explic.  du  Tab.
Ma9-  p.  2.)

24  A  Mason  may  withdraw  from  his  Lodge,  but  the  membership


316  HISTORICAL    LANDMARKS


171725  there  were  only  four  Lodges  in  the  south  of
England,26  but  in  1730  they  had  increased  to  215
registered  Lodges.  In  176727  there  were  416  ;  in
1794  we  find  542 ;  in  1804,  600,  on  the  books  of  the
Grand  Lodge  of  England,  besides  about  300  Lodges
of  Ancient  Masons ;  some  of  them  being  in  foreign

remains  inviolable,  according  to  the  law  laid  down  in  the  Treaty  of
Union,  Alliance,  and  Masonic  Confederation  between  the  contracting
Supreme  Councils  of  the  33rd  Degree  in  Trance,  America,  the
Netherlands,  Naples  and  Brazil,  in  1834,  in  the  following  words : —
"  The  true  Mason  considers,  as  one  of  his  most  sacred  duties,  the
exact  fulfilment  of  the  engagements  which  bind  him  to  his  rite,  the
Lodge  from  whence  he  first  received  the  light,  and  the  Masonic  body
from  which  he  received  his  powers,  lie  cannot  be  relieved  f: om  his
obligations,  except  by  the  Masonic  power  with  which  he  made  his
engagements,  and  according  to  the  Masonic  laws  which  he  has  sworn
to  observe  and  respect.  Every  attempt  which  may  have  for  its
object  to  compel  a  Mason,  either  by  persecution  or  violence,  to  quit
a  rite  to  which  he  belongs,  is  contrary  to  the  spirit  and  laws  of
Masonry."

25  I  commence  here  with  the  revival  of  Masonry,  but  a  reference
to  Lect.  xxv.  will  show  that  the  Lodges  were  much  more  numerous
at  an  earlier  period.

20  At  this  time  a  sufficient  number  of  Masons  meeting  together
with  the  consent  of  the  magistrate,  were  empowered  to  practice  the
rites  of  Masonry  without  any  warrant  from  the  Grand  Lodge.  This
privilege  was  inherent  in  themselves  as  Masons.

27  "  In  1765,"  says  the  Inspector  General's  Report  already  referred
to,  "  the  Lodges  and  Councils  of  the  superior  degrees  being  extended
throughout  the  continent  of  Europe,  his  Majesty  the  King  of  Prussia,
as  Grand  Commander  of  Princes  of  the  Royal  Secret,  was  acknow-
ledged by  all  the  Craft  as  the  head  of  the  Sublime  and  Ineffable
Degrees  of  Masonry  throughout  the  two  hemispheres ;  his  Royal
Highness  Charles,  hereditary  Prince  of  Sweden,  Duke  of  Sudermania,
Avas  the  Grand  Commander  of  Sublime  Masonry  in  Sweden  ;  and  his
Royal  Highness  Louis  of  Bourbon,  and  the  Cardinal  Prince  dc
Rohan,  were  at  the  head  of  those  degrees  in  France."


OF    FREEMASONRY.  317

countries,  and  others  itinerant ;  in  1811,  the  number
of  both  amounted  to  nearly  1000.  After  the  Union
in  1813,  the  numbers  appear  to  have  decreased;28  and
at  present  the  registered  Lodges  on  the  Grand  Lodge
books  do  not  exceed  800,  including  all  that  are  under
the  constitution  of  England ;  whether  on  the  continent
of  Europe  or  America,  the  East  or  West  Indies,  or
attached  to  regiments  of  the  line.

There  are  Masonic  Lodges  in  every  country  under
heaven ;  but  in  some  Christian  nations  the  Brethren
are  obliged  to  work  in  secret,  because  the  Order  is
under  a  papal  interdict.29  In  1787,  there  were  com-
puted to  be  upwards  of  3000  Lodges  and  Chapters  in
the  universe,30  containing  300,000  Members.31  The

28  This  is  an  extraordinary  fact,  but  it  is  quite  correct,  and  can
only  be  accounted  for  by  supposing  that,  at  the  purgation  of  the
lists  both  of  the  ancient  and  modern  systems  for  a  new  arrangement
of  the  numbers,  great  quantities  of  Lodges  were  found  to  have  become
extinct,  although  their  names  had  not  been  erased.

29  A  few  years  ago  the  following  placard  was  .posted  in  the  streets
of  Lisbon,  to  influence  the  people  against  the  Freemasons , — "  Let
the  Queen  deal  death  at  oue  blow  to  the  republican  monster  of  Free-
masonry.    The  gallows  and  the  triangles  must  work  conjointly  and
with  energy,  and  fires  must  be  kindled  in  every  quarter  of  Portugal,
to  reduce  to  ashes  the  bodies  and  property  of  these  vile  monsters.
Then,  and  then  only,  may  we  exclaim  triumphantly — Long  live  our
holy  religion !    Long  live  our  beloved  Queen !    Long  live  all  true
loyalists  !   Death  and  destruction  to  all  Freemasons  ! ! ! "

30  We  have  no  data  to  determine  the  number  of  Lodges  at  an
earlier  period  than  the  beginning  of  the  last  century.     We  find  it
recorded,  however,  that  "  many  Lodges  in  the  reign  of  Charles  II.
were  constituted  by  leave  of  the  several  noble  Grand  Masters ;  the
fraternity  being  still  considerable,  and  many  gentlemen  and  famous
scholars  requested  to  be  admitted."  (Pocket  Companion,  p.  91.)

31  In  1780  the  Baron  Knigge,  speaking  of  the  number  of  Masons


318  HISTORICAL    LANDMARKS

Baron  de  Tschoudy,32  ten  years  earlier,  computed  the
number  of  Masons  at  ten  millions.33  These  numbers
are  incorrect ;  but  in  the  Freemasons'  Lexicon  the
errors  are  considerably  greater  ;**  for  while  the  number
of  Brethren  is  over  stated,35  the  number  of  Lodges  is
the  reverse.36  In  Great  Britain  the  Lodges  in  1817

in  Germany,  says,  "  I  cast  an  eye  on  the  immense  multitude  of
Brethren ;  I  observed  it  to  be  composed  of  men  of  all  stations  in
life;  of  noblemen,  of  men  of  great  riches  and  power,  and  of  men
possessing  superior  knowledge  and  activity.  I  saw  these  men  actu-
ated by  one  common  sentiment,  though  I  could  not  very  well  conceive
the  object  of  their  union."

33  L'Etoile  Flamboyant,  p.  230.  Meimers  estimates  the  number
at  two  millions,  and  Nicolai  at  five  millions.  Dr.  Stark,  in  his  work
on  Ancient  and  Modern  Mysteries,  says,  that  at  the  lowest  compu-
tation the  number  of  Masons  at  that  time  in  France  must  have
amounted  to  one  million,  and  in  the  whole  world  to  three  millions.
So  uncertain  is  conjecture.

33  The  Acta  Latomorum  contains  the  following  estimate  of  the
number  of  Lodges  for  the  above  year : — France,  703  ;  England,  525  ;
Scotland,  284  ;  Ireland,  227  ;  Germany,  319  ;  Prussia,  304  ;  Russia,
1  15;  Batavia,  79;  Switzerland,  72;  Turkey,  9;  Poland,  75;  Swe-
den, 69;  Denmark,  192;  Geneva,  36;  the  Windward  and  Leeward
Islands,  16;  North  America,  85;  the  East  Indies,  10;  the  British
Islands,  07.— Total,  3217.

34  The  author  says  that  the  number  of  Lodges  in  Germany  in  the
above  year  was  198;  in  Great  Britain,  300;  in  France,  300;  in
Holland,  100  ;  in  Switzerland,  20  ;  in  Denmark,  10  ;  in  Sweden,  10  ;
and   in   Russia,    15 — forming  a  total  of   953.     According  to  the
average  number,"  he  continues,  "  of  ninety  members  to  a  Lodge,  we
have,  in  Europe  alone,  85,770  Freemasons.     We  may  take  100,000
for  the  number ;  for  many  Brethren  live  inactive,  or  in  countries
where  there  are  no  Lodges  allowed  to  be  held ;  without  taking  into
account  the  members  who  live  in  other  parts  of  the  world."

35  The  average  of  ninety  members  for  each  Lodge  is  much  too  high,
and  the  calculations  founded  thereon  are  extravagant.

o

36  Besides,  no  allowance  appears  to  have  been  made  in  any  of  the


0V    FREEMASONRY.  319

cannot  have  been  less  than  1550,37  while  in  the  above
account  they  are  stated  at  300  only.  In  France,  under
so  many  Grand  Lodges  and  governing  bodies,38  the
error  must  be  equally  great  ;39  and  similar  inaccuracies

calculations,  which  have  come  under  my  notice,  for  vicissitudes ;  and
Freemasonry,  like  all  other  secret  societies,  has  had  its  times  of
adversity  as  well  as  of  prosperity.  Anacharsis  was  told  by  a  member
of  the  Pythagorean  society,  about  three  centuries  before  the  Christia*
era,  that  the  fraternity  at  that  period  was  very  much  reduced ;  that
the  members  were  separated  from  each  other  by  persecution,  and
excited  neither  envy  nor  pity.  "  We  practice,"  says  the  Samian,
"  in  secret  the  precepts  of  our  founder.  Judge,  however,  of  the
influence  they  had  in  the  origin  of  our  institution  by  that  which  they
still  retain;  for  we  initiated  Epaminondas;  and  Phocion  formed
himself  on  the  example  of  our  philosophers.  It  is  not  necessary  that
1  should  remind  you  that  this  society  has  produced  a  multitude  of
legislators,  geometricians,  astronomers,  naturalists,  and  celebrated
v  men  of  every  class ;  that  it  enlightened  Greece ;  and  that  the  modern
philosophers  have  derived  from  us  the  greater  part  of  the  discoveries
which  give  a  lustre  to  their  works."  (Anachar.  vol.  vi.  p.  306.)

37  That  is,  in  England,  650;  Scotland,  300;  and  Ireland,  600.
This  is  the  lowest  possible  average.

38  On  the  continent  the  Masonic  body  numbered  amongst  its
members,  according  to  the  testimony  even  of  Barruel,  princes,  coun-
cillors of  the  regency,  dukes,  professors  of  colleges,  counts,  barons,
excellencies,  ministers  of  the  crown,  presidents,  vice-presidents,  &c.

39  "  So  early  as  the  year  1787  we  find  that  France  contained  two
hundred  and  eighty-two  towns,  in  which  were  to  be  found  regular
Lodges.     In  Paris  alone  there  existed  eighty-one ;  sixteen  at  Lyons ;
seven  at  Bourdeaux ;  five  at  Nantes ;  six  at  Marseilles ;  ten  at  Mont-
pellier ;  ten  at  Toulouse ;  in  short,  in  almost  every  town  the  Lodges
were  in  pretty  just  ratio  to  the  population.     Indeed,  it  would  seem
that  even  this  vast  empire  over  French  Masonry  was  not  sufficient
for  the  Grand  Orient,  as  by  the  same  statement  we  find  the  Grand
Master  issuing  his  instructions  to  the  Lodges  of  Chambery  in  Savoy,
of  Locle  in  Switzerland,  of  Bruxelles  in  Brabant,  of  Cologne,  Liege,


320  HISTORICAL    LANDMARKS

prevail  in  the  remainder,  which  it  may  be  impossible
now  to  correct.  At  present  there  are  under  the  (.I  rand
Lodge  of  England  about  800  Lodges ;  under  that  of
Scotland,  600;  and  of  Ireland,  1000  ;4"  but  tin-
number  of  Brethren  they  contain  can  only  be  deter-
mined by  the  official  returns  to  the  several  Grand
Lodges.41

In  America  we  find  the  entire  system  in  full  and
efficient  operation,  notwithstanding  the  recent  attempt42

and  Spa  in  Westphalia,  of  Leopold  and  Warsaw  in  Poland,  of  Moscow
in  llussia,  of  Portsmouth  in  Virginia,  of  Fort  lioyal  in  Grenada,  and,
in  short,  to  Lodges  in  all  the  French  colonies."  (Hist.  Jac.  vol.  vi.
p.  3-43.)

40  These  numbers  are  only  an  approximation  to  the  truth ;  but  they
will  serve  all  the  purposes  of  a  general  calculation.    If  we  allow  t  ueni  \
members  to  each  Lodge,  which  may  be  a  fair  average,  the  number  of
Mrethren  will  be,  in  England,  16,000;  Scotland,  12,000;  and  Ire-
land, 20,000.

41  Tn  Lincolnshire,  1841,  there  were  eight  Lodges,  containing  an
average  of  twenty-five  Brethren  to  each,  which  I  should  conceive  to
be  a  general  average  in  the  agricultural  districts.     In  manufacturing
districts  the  average  would  be  much  larger ;  and  great  additions  may
be  made  to  the  numbers  by  taking  into  the  account  those  Brethren
who  have  discontinued  their  attendance  on  the  Lodges.

42  In  my  course  of  reading  I  have  found  an  extraordinary  instance
of  arbitrary  power  in  reference  to  Freemasonry,  which  does  not  appear
to  harmonize  with  the  institutions  of  a  free  country.     The  general
consociation  of  Christian   ministers  of  the  Baptist  persuasion,  for
Genesse,  issued  the  following  resolution,  during  the  Morgan  schism,
to  all  the  pastors  under  its  jurisdiction  : — "  Resolved,  that  the  con-
sociation will  neither  licence,  ordain,  or  instal,  those  who  sustain  any
connexion  with  the  institution  of  Freemasonry;  or  who  will  not
disapprove  and  renounce  it ;  nor  will  we  give  letters  of  recom-
mendation in  favour  of  such  persons,  to  prca  •h  in  any  of  the  church* •-
in  our  connexion."


OP    FREEMASONRY.  321

to  suppress  it.43  The  arrangements  are,  generally  speak-
ing, judicious  and  comprehensive,  and  well  calculated
for  the  effect  which  they  are  intended  to  produce.44

43  The  following  quotation  is  long,  but  it  is  valuable,  because  it
displays  the  real  object  and  effects  of  the  wild  rage  and  indiscriminate
fury  of  the  party  who  were  confederated  against  the  most  beneficent
of  all  human  institutions.     I  copy  it  from  a  little  work  called  "  A
Narrative  of  the  Antimasonic  Excitement;    by  H.  Brown,  Esq.,
Counsellor  at  Law,"  (p.  216.) — "  Another  prominent  principle  of
antimasonry  consists  in  denouncing,  not  only  all  Masons  indiscri-
minately, but  all  persons  who  will  not  denounce  the  Order.    In  that
particular  it  resembles  Balak,  King  of  Moab,  who,  not  content  with
cursing  Israel  himself,  sent  for  Balaam  to  curse  them  too.     Antima-
sonry,  separate  from  the  attainment  of  power,  seems  to  have  no  object.
Havoc  and  spoil,  and  ruin,  are  its  gain.    Cold  as  the  icicle  that  hangs
on  Norway's  cliff — cheerless  as  the  winter  amid  polar  snows — obdu-
rate as  the  tiger  in  its  native  forest — and  deceptive  as  the  crocodile
in  its  native  fen,  it  can  neither  Jbe  approached  by  sighs  or  tears.
Nothing  but  submission  to  its  dictates,  and  aid  in  the  diffusion  of  its
terrors,  can  save  its  victims,  or  avert  the  meditated  blow.     It  has
severed  the  ties  of  mankind — it  has  destroyed  the  peace  of  families
— it  has  interrupted  the  pleasures  of  social  intercourse — it  has  armed
in  almost  deadly  strife  one  portion  of  the  community  against  the
other — it  has  caused  the  violation  of  law,  of  principle,  and  of  justice
— it  has  entered  our  courts — it  has  entered  our  sanctuaries — and  it
has  entered  our  schools  and  seminaries  of  learning.     Fraud,  decep-
tion, and  hypocrisy  have  marked  its  course.    Injustice  and  oppression
have  accompanied  its  progress,  and  a  wide  waste  of  moral  ruin  has
followed  in  its  train."

44  Laurie  has  recorded  his  disapprobation  of  the  high  degrees.    He
says,  under  date  1802,  that  the  Grand  Lodge  of  Scotland  received
a  circular  from  the  Grand  Lodge  of  America ;  and  adds,  "  the  spirit
of  illumination  which  it  breathed,  and  the  supernumerary  degrees,
amounting  to  about  fifty,  which  it  authorised,  were  sufficient  reasons
for  drawing  down  the  contempt  of  Scottish  Masons,  whose  honour  it
is  to  have  preserved  Freemasonry  for  many  centuries  in  its  original

VOL.  II.  Y


322


HISTORICAL    LANDMARKS


But,  unfortunately,  the  Lodges  differ  in  practice ;  some
adopting  the  York  rite,45  some  the  Scottish  rite,  while
others  are  governed  by  that  of  France.46  And  I  arn
inclined  to  think  that  upwards  of  a  hundred  degrees
are  practised  under  the  sanction  of  one  or  other  of  the

and  simple  form ;  and  whose  pride  it  shall  ever  be  to  transmit  to  the
latest  posterity,  the  principles  and  ceremonies  of  their  Order  unpol-
luted and  unimpaired."  (p.  292.)

45  The  Grand  Lodge  of  New  York  thus  freely  comments  on  what
they  term  an  irregular  practice. — "  It  is  a  common  practice  in  Eng-
land for  Brethren  to  belong  to  several  Lodges  at  the  same  time,  and
it  is  no  unusual  circumstance  to  find  the  same  Brother  Master  of  two
Lodges,  while  at  the  same  time  he  fills  another  office  in  a  third  Lodge.
AVe  believe  this  practice  has  not  been  tolerated  in  any  part  of  this
country,  and  we  hope  it  never  will  be.     The  Grand  Lodge  decided
against  it  many  years  ago."  (Transactions,  1843,  p.  56.)

46  The  United  States  are  unhappily  troubled  with  the  assumption
of  spurious  Grand  Lodges.     In  1$43  the  committee  on  foreign  cor-
respondence, appointed  by  the  Grand  Lodge  of  New  York,  passed  a
series  of  resolutions  denouncing  such  unauthorised  proceedings.  The
following  appears  on  the  Grand  Lodge  books : — "  Resolved  unani-
mously, that  the  Grand  Lodge  of  St.  John's,  of  the  State  of  New
York,  being  an  assemblage  of  clandestine  Masons,  is  denounced  to
all  Masons  as  an  irregular  clandestine  body,  and  an  enemy  to  the
Masonic  Order ;  and  that  it  is  forbidden  to  all  Lodges  and  Masons
of  the  jurisdiction  of  the  Grand  Lodge  of  Louisiana,  to  hold  or  have
any  Masonic  communication  with  the  said  assembly,  or  with  any
Lodge  or  Masons  who  admit  its  power."     And  again  we  find  the
following  entry : — "  The  Grand  Lodge  of  New  Jersey  held  their
annual  communication  at  Trenton,  Nov.  8,  1842.     The  establish-
ment of  the  Michigan  Grand  Lodge  is  disapproved  of.     Strong  pro-
hibitory resolutions  were  adopted  in  relation  to  the  intercourse  with
clandestine  and  expelled  Masons  from  this  State  with  Masons  and
Lodges  in  New  Jersey ;  and  a  vote  of  censure  was  passed  upon  St.
John's  Lodge  at  Newark,  for  receiving  expelled  Masons  from  the
city  of  New  York."


OP    FREEMASONRY.  323

Grand  Lodges,  Chapters,  or  Consistories  of  the  United
States.  More  than  one  of  the  French  systems  contain
ninety  degrees ; 47  and  although  these  are  not  all  used
in  America,48  the  fraternity  have  some  degrees  which
are  not  enumerated  in  the  continental  catalogue.49  The
system  is  extensively  diffused,50  owing  to  the  local  in-

47  Bro.  Ward,  a  clever  writer  against  Freemasonry  during  the
Morgan  excitement,  expressed  his  surprise  when  he  was  told  that
a  system  of  Masonry  contained  ninety  degrees.    He  says  afterwards,
"  I  have  now  before  me,  in  fair  type,  the  names,  and  the  numbers
against  the  names,  of  these  ninety  degrees  of  Freemasonry,  as  given
in  Europe  in  1825.     They  are  divided  into  four  series,  the  first  of
thirty-three  symbolic  degrees ;  the  second  of  thirty-three  philosophical
degrees ;  the  third  of  eleven  mystic  degrees ;  and  the  fourth  of  thir-
teen hermetic  and  cabalistic  degrees.     The  four  series  are  again
divided  into  seventeen  classes."  (Freemasonry,  p.  393.)

48  Men  of  the  highest  standing  in  the  United  States  were  almost
all  Masons.     Washington,  Franklin,  Warren,   Jackson,   De  Witt
Clinton,  and  a  thousand  high  names,  which  are  regarded  with  vene-
ration and  respect,  are  found  amongst  the  number.     Farmer,  who
was  by  no  means  friendly  to  the  institution,  admits  that  "  the  names
which  appear  coupled  with  the  offices  of  the  craft,  are  often  among
those  distinguished  in  the  state,  in  the  army,  and  in  the  ministry."

49  In  1826  a  Consistory  was  established  at  Newburyport,  in  which
it  is  stated  that  all  the  high  degrees  of  Masonry  are  conferred.  And
there  are  several  others  of  the  same  nature  in  the  United  States.

50  Some  of  the  American  Lodges  indulged  a  levity  on  the  proposal
and  introduction  of  a  candidate  which  is  quite  at  variance  with  the
grave  and  serious  character  of  the  Order.     During  an  investigation
of  Freemasonry  before  a  committee  of  the  legislature  of  Massachu-
setts in  1834,  several  instances  of  this  were  revealed.    1  subjoin  one:
— "  In  some  Lodges  in  New  York,  in  proposing  the  candidate,  they
use  a  great  many  strange  gestures,  and  make  strange  noises,  to  alarm
the  candidate,  and  impress  him  with  the  idea  that  it  is  something
great  and  awful.    The  Master  of  Ceremonies  has  a  large  cloak,  with

y  2


324


HISTORICAL  LANDMARKS


fluence  of  its  numerous  independent  Grand  Lodges.51
There  are  twenty-five  of  them,62  comprising  about
1,200  private  Lodges,  which,  at  a  calculation  of  fifty

hideous  figures  upon  it.  The  preparation  room  is  painted  black,
with  a  coffin  upon  a  table  in  it,  covered  with  a  pall,  with  a  skull
bone  on  the  coffin.  I  made  no  remark,"  continues  the  evidence,
"  and  was  not  told  by  the  Master  what  it  was  for ;  I  was  left  to
draw  my  own  inference.  This  was  in  Adelphi  Lodge,  No.  91,  New
York,  where  I  was  initiated ;  but  they  had  nothing  of  the  kind  in
Mount  Carmel  Lodge,  except  a  board  in  the  form  of  a  coffin  upon
wheels,  for  the  purpose,  Sec."

51  In  the  American  state  document,  frequently  quoted,  the  opera-
tion of  the  system  is  thus  described: — "  1.  A  Supreme  Council,
having  jurisdiction  over  North,  Central,  and  South  America,  and  the
West  Indies.      2.  A  Sovereign  (jrand  Consistory  for  the  United
States,  subject  to  the  above  power,  and  having  six  or  eight  subor-
dinate Grand  Councils  in  the  different  States,  and  numerous  Sove-
reign Grand  Chapters,  &c.     3.  A  General  Grand  Encampment  for
the  United  States,  with  twelve  or  fifteen  subordinate  Grand  Encamp-
ments in  the  States,  to  which  some  fifty  or  more  Encampments  arc
subject.     4.  A  General  Grand  Royal  Arch  Chapter  for  the  United
States,  with  twenty-four  subordinate  Grand  Chapters,  one  in  each
State,  and  probably  at  least  five  hundred  and  fifty  Chapters  and
Lodges  above  the  third  degree.     5.  Seventy-five  Grand  Lodges,  with
about  two  thousand  subordinate  Lodges  in  the  United  States  (?).
Each  Lodge,  it  is  estimated,  averages  about  fifty  members,  making
about  one  hundred  thousand  Masons,  who  are  members  of  Lodges
in  the  United  States."

52  In  1805  Webb  gives  a  list  of  16  Grand  Lodges,  and  588  private
ones ;  and  reckoning  thirty  members  to  each,  which  would  be  a  fair
average  for  the  United  States  at  that  time,  gives  a  total  of  17,640
members.     The   enumeration   is  as  follows : — Massachusetts,   82 ;
New  Hampshire,  9  ;    Connecticut,  46 ;  Vermont,  20 ;  New  York,
102;  New  Jersey,  15;  Pennsylvania,  100;  Delaware,  5;  Virginia,
65  ;  North  Carolina,  33  ;  South  Carolina,  44 ;  Georgia,  21 ;  Ken-
tucky, 6  ;  Upper  Canada,  12  ;  Lower  Canada,  12.


OF    FREEMASONRY.  325

members  for  each,53  makes  60,000  Masons  in  the  United
States.51

The  utmost  attention  has  been  recently  given  to
a  modification  of  the  constitutions  of  Masonry,  for  the
purpose  of  producing  regularity  of  discipline  in  private
Lodges;53  and  a  general  organization  of  the  fraternity

53  An   American  Book  of  Constitutions  directs,  that  "  a  Lodge
•ought  to  assemble  for  work  at  least  once  in  every  calendar  month  ;
and  may  consist  of  as  many  members  as  the  majority  of  the  Lodge
may  think  proper,  although  more  than  forty  or  fifty  are  generally
found  inconvenient  for  working  to  advantage ;  and  therefore  when
a  Lodge  comes  to  be  numerous,  some  of  the  ablest  master  workmen,
and  others  under  their  direction,  should  apply  to  the  Grand  Lodge
for  a  warrant  to  work  by  themselves,  in  order  to  the  advancement  of
the  craft."

54  Brown  trebles  that  number.     He  says,  "  it  is  calculated  that
there  are  in  the  United  States  about  3000  Lodges,   and  between
150,000  and  200,000  members."    (Aiitimasonic  Excitement,  p.  7.)
Thacher  makes  the  number  300,000.    (Speech  in  the  Faneuel  Hall,
Boston.)     Bernard  magnifies  the  number  to  a  much  higher  figure ;
he  affirms  that  in  America  there  are  500,000  Entered  Apprentices ;
400,000  Master  Masons ;  200,000  Royal  Arch ;  and  10,000  Knights.
(Light,  p.  88.)     Others,  however,  reduce  them  so  low  as  thirty  or
forty  thousand.

55  In  a  MS.  ritual  of  Helvetian  ceremonies,  in  my  possession,
I  find  the  following  directions  respecting  the  construction  of  a  Lodge-
room  : — "  A  Lodge  should  have  closets  in  all  convenient  places.
They  are  of  great  use ;  and  the  architect  can  easily  contrive  them.
A  preparation-room,  in  which  none  but  the  dead  are  to  enter,  is  of
especial  importance.     The  entrance  from  the  street  should  have  two
turnings  ;  a  straight  entrance  is  quite  unmasonic.     Window  curtains
there  are  none ;  but  one  green  moreen  or  silk  curtain,   very  thick,
draws  across  all  the  windows  along  a  brass  rod  on  brass  rings  ;  there
is  no  valance  or  fringe,  or  other  ornament ;  the  colour  of  the  curtain
is  purple,  crimson,  and  blue,  in  alternate  stripes  ;  the  lining  is  black.
The  Master's  throne  is  on  three  steps ;  behind  it  should  be  a  screen,


326  HISTORICAL    LANDMARKS

throughout  the  universe.56  The  greatest  unanimity
prevails  amongst  the  several  national  Grand  Lodges,57
and  an  interchange  of  representatives  secures  the  con-
tinuance of  a  good  understanding,  and  a  friendly  feeling
between  the  different  orders  and  classes  of  the  society.

three  sides  of  a  square,  and  higher  than  his  head,  on  which  should
be  delineated  a  death's  head,  intersecting  triangles,  and  the  letter  fc
one  above  the  other.  The  floor  of  the  Lodge  should  be  covered  with
mats  or  drugget ;  the  sound  of  the  feet,  or  the  noise  of  the  seats
disturbs  a  good  Lodge,  in  which,  as  we  all  know,  the  profoundest
silence  is  to  be  preserved.  It  is  a  good  practice  to  have  light  come
from  the  centre  of  the  roof.  Facing  the  Master's  throne  is  an  organ,
and  a  gallery  for  singers  and  musicians,  who  are  Brothers.  Behind
the  Master's  throne,  and  high  up  in  the  ceiling,  should  be  a  well-
toned  bell,  or  Indian  gong."

56  The  American  Grand  Lodges  are  at  this  time  mooting  a  question
on  the  propriety  of  sending  a  delegate  to  England,  with  powers  to
treat  with  the  Grand  Lodge  respecting  an  arrangement  of  the  three
degrees  of  Masonry  on  some  uniform  system,  which  may  be  univer-
sally adopted.     A  correspondent  to  Bro.  Moore's  Masonic  Magazine
thinks  this  would  be  ineffective,  and  proposes  that  "  the  Grand  Lodge
of  the  United  States  appoint  three  delegates,  to  meet  three  from  the
Grand  Lodges  of  England,  Scotland,  and  Ireland,  in  London,  or
elsewhere,  to  examine  and  decide  upon  a  system  of  work  and  lectures,
which  shall  thereafter  be  uniformly  practised,  and  binding  upon  the
fraternity  in  both  hemispheres."     I  greatly  doubt,  however,  whether
a  perfect  uniformity  be  attainable.

57  The  charter  of  Come,  made  A.  D.  1535,  speaks  on  this  point. —
"  Although  our  Order  does  not  now  stand  under  the  superintendence
of  one  universal  head,  or  Grand  Master,  but  the  different  societies  of
which  it  is  composed  are  ruled  by  different  Grand  Masters,  according
to  the  laws  and  customs  of  the  various  countries  where  they  are  esta-
blished ;  yet  nothing  is  more  necessary  than  a  similarity  of  working
in  all  the  Lodges  spread  over  the  whole  surface  of  the  earth,  as
members  of  one  universal  body,  acting  in  concert  for  one  common
object,"


OF    FREEMASONRY.  327

The  subordinate  Lodges58  are  ranged  in  due  form,
respect  being  had  to  seniority  of  constitution ;  and
they  take  precedence  in  Grand  Lodge  according  to
their  numbers ; 59  for  the  peculiar  name  of  a  Lodge  is
a  very  modern  addition  in  this  country.60  Its  local

58  These  Lodges  are  mentioned  in  a  document  purporting  to  be
a  code  of  laws  agreed  on  in  Grand  Lodge,  1663,  Henry  Jermyn,
Earl  of  St.  Albans,  being  G.  M ;  Sir  John  Denham,  D.  G.  M. ;  Sir
Christopher  Wren  and  John  Webb,  G.  W. — "  That  no  person  of
what  degree  soever  be  accepted  a  Freemason,  unless  in  a  regular
Lodge,  whereof  one  to  be  a  Master  or  a  Warden,  in  that  division
where  such  Lodge  is  kept,  and  another  be  a  Craftsman  in  Masonry.
And  the  Master  shall  enrol  the  same  in  parchment,  and  shall  give  an
account  of  such  acceptance  at  every  general  assembly."

59  "  The  precedency  of  Lodges  is  derived  from  the  number  of  their
constitution,  as  recorded  in  the  books  of  the  Grand  Lodge."  (Const,
of  Private  Lodges,  s.  9.)

60  I  do  not  find  that  the  Lodges  had  any  distinctive  names  before
the  latter  end  of  the  last  century.     The  four  regular  Lodges  which
were  found  in  practice  in  the  south  of  England  at  the  revival  of
Masonry,  were  designated  by  the  sign  of  the  taverns  where  they  were
respectively  held.     The  same  practice  continued  for  many  years.
Before  1738,  by  an  order  of  Grand  Lodge,  an  engraved  list  was
published,  which  was  renewed  as  occasion  required.     I  am  in  pos-
session of  two  copies  of  this  list ;  the  one  printed  in  1764,  and  dedi-
cated to  Lord  Blaney,  G.  M.,  and  the  other  in  1767,  dedicated  to
the  Duke  of  Beaufort,  G.  M.     In  both  cases  the  Lodges  are  mostly
without  names,  and  are  designated  by  a  pictorial  representation  of
the  sign  of  the  tavern  where  the  Brethren  met.  There  are  only  three
or  four  proper  names  in  the  lists.     A  printed  list,  dated  1774,  ex-
hibits no  alteration.     In  1784,  Noorthouck  published  his  edition  of
Anderson's  Constitutions  ;  and  the  laws  of  the  Grand  Lodge  therein
recorded  make  no  mention  of  the  name  of  a  Lodge,  but  recognize  the
engraved  list.     My  next  catalogue  is  dated  1790,  and  here  I  find
that  the  Lodges  have  names  as  well  as  numbers ;  and  in  17921  have
a  more  perfect  list  of  Lodges,  with  names  and  numbers  as  altered  by


328  HISTORICAL    LANDMARKS

rank  is  arranged  without  regard  either  to  name  or
number.61

The  orders62  and  degrees  which  are  practised  in
France,  America,  and  elsewhere,  are  nominally  THTRTY-

Grand  Lodge.  My  lists  are  not  complete,  as  will  be  seen  by  the
above  statement,  and  therefore  I  am  unable  to  speak  positively  as  to
the  exact  date  when  particular  names  were  officially  acknowledged ;
but  it  must  have  been  between  the  years  1784  and  1813,  when
names  of  Lodges  were  recognized  and  enrolled.

61  "  Every  country  Lodge  shall  have  a  local  as  well  as  a  general
rank,  so  that  if  any  Lodge  be  removed  from  one  province  into  another,
although  it  is  to  retain  the  original  number  in  the  Grand  Lodge
books,  and  preserve  the  same  rank  in  the  united  Grand  Lodge,  and
in  all  public  meetings  out  of  the  province  into  which  it  may  have
been  removed,  yet  within  the  said  province  it  is  to  rank  immediately
after  the  lowest  numbered  Lodge  previously  existing,  as  well  at  the
Provincial  Grand  Lodge  as  at  public  ceremonies.     The  seniority  of
country  Lodges  in  their  particular  district  is,  therefore,  ever  to  be
determined  by  the  date  of  their  registry  in  the  books  of  the  Provincial
Grand  Lodge."  (Const,  of  Country  Lodges,  s.  7.)

62  It  may  be  necessary  to  offer  a  brief  observation  here  on  the
meaning  of  the  word  Order.     It  signifies  a  genus  or  class,  as  distin-
guishable from  a  rite  or  degree.     Thus  Freemasonry,  considered  as
a  whole,  is  an  Order.    But  Craft  Masonry  is  also  an  Order,  consisting
of  three  degrees.     Royal  Arch  Masonry  is  an  Order,  including  a
number  of  degrees,  varying  in  different  countries.     And  there  are
several  orders  of  chivalry,  each  containing  its  specified  number  of
degrees.     A  degree,  as  the  word  imports,  is  merely  a  grade  or  step,
or  preparation,  as  one  grade  is  but  preparatory  to  another  higher,
and  so  on  in  progression,  to  the  ne  plus  ultra.    A  degree  sometimes,
but  not  in  Preemasonry,  means  a  class  or  order.     A  rite  is  an  item
in  the  ceremonial  of  conferring  degrees ;  although  in  some  countries
it  is  extended  to  include  a  number  of  orders  and  degrees ;  as  in  the
French  rite  Ancien  et  accepte,  which  comprehends  the  Ma9onnerie
Symbolique,  Elu,  Chev.  d'Orient,  du  Soleil,  Kadosh,  Rose  Croix,  &c.,
with  the  Grades  dits  Philosophiques  et  Administratifs.


01'    FREEMASONRY.  329

THREE,  divided  into  seven  classes.63 — 1.  Symbolical;64
2,  Capitular;65  3,  Military,  or  Christian;66  4,  Consis-

63  In  treating  on  this  delicate  subject  I  have  been  particularly
careful  not  to  disclose  any  peculiar  secret.     I  have,  in  fact,  inserted
nothing  but  what  may  be  found  in  detached  portions  throughout  the
authorized  publications  on  Masonry.     Enumerations  of  the  degrees
may  be  seen  in  "  Le  veritable  Lien  de  Peuples,"  published  under
the  auspices  of  the  Grand  Orient ;  in  Rosenberg's  Chart ;  and  also
in  a  circular  issued  by  the  Grand  and  Supreme  Council  of  the  M.  P.
S.  G.  Inspectors  General  of  the  rite  Ancien  et  accepte,  addressed,
"  Universi  terrarum  orbis  architectonis  per  gloriam  ingentis.     DEUS
MEUMQUE  jus.     Ordo  ab  Chao  ;"  and  in  a  report  thereon  made  by
a  committee  of  S.  G.  Inspectors  General.     They  are  repeated  by  Dr.
Dalcho  (himself  a  P.  R.  S.  Sovereign  G.  Inspector  General  of  the
thirty-third,  and  S.  G.  Commander  of  the  United  States  of  America),
in  a  publication  under  the  sanction  of  the  Grand  Lodges  of  Ireland
and  America ;  and  partially  by  Webb,  Cross,  and  others,  who  pub-
lished them  at  the  express  recommendation  of  several  Grand  Lodges
and  Chapters  in  the  latter  country.     The  illustrative  notes  may  also
be  found,  in  a  detached  form,  in  Webb's  Monitor,  Cross's  Chart,
Dalcho's  Orations,  Town's  Speculative  Masonry,  and  other  authorized
publications.

64  Stone,  the  Antimason,  admits  that  "  much  of  the  language  of
Freemasonry  is  allegorical ;  and  the  emblems  and  symbols  used  are,
many  of  them,  pregnant  with  useful  instruction.     The  moral  virtues
and  duties,  and  some  of  the  soundest  religious  truths  are  imprinted
on  the  mind,  and  impressed  upon  the  memory,  by  lively  and  visible
images.     And  although  I  have  never  witnessed  any  of  the  burlesque
representations  which  have  been  made  of  the  Order,  I  can  yet  easily
perceive  how  they  may  be  rendered  exceedingly  ridiculous  in  the  eyes
of  a  popular  audience  by  a  mock  display  upon  the  stage.     But  this
fact  is  no  evidence  either  of  wickedness  or  folly,  on  the  part  of  those
who  are  actually  receiving  moral  instruction  from  these  symbolic
lessons  in  a  well  regulated  Lodge-room."     (Letters  on  Masonry,
p.  14.)

65  A  convention  of  seceding  Masons  holden  at  Le  Roy,  Tenessce
county,  New  York,  in  1828,  published  the  degrees  of  Masonry  under


330  HISTORICAL  LANDMARKS

torial;67  5,  Ineffable ; (i!i  6,  Philosophical  ;':<J  7,  Admini-

the  following  arrangement : — In  the  Chapter,  Mark  Master,  Past
Master,  Most  Excellent  Master,  and  Royal  Arch.  In  the  Encamp-
ment, Knights  of  the  Red  Cross,  Templar  of  Malta,  of  the  Christian
Mark,  and  of  the  Holy  Sepulchre..  In  the  Ancient  Council  of  the
Trinity,  denominated  the  Holy  and  Thrice  Illustrious  Order  of  the
Cross,  the  Illustrious,  Most  Illustrious,  and  Thrice  Illustrious  degrees.

66  The  officers   of  the   Grand    Conclave    are   as    follows : — Most
Excellent  Grand  Master;    Deputy   Grand  Master;    Grand  Prior;
( i  rand  Sub  Prior ;  Grand  Prelate ;  Senior  Grand  Captain ;  Junior
Grand  Captain ;  Grand  Chancellor ;  Grand  Orator,  and  Keeper  of
the  Archives ;  Grand  Vice-Chancellor  and  Registrar;  Grand  Trea-
surer ;  First  Grand  Expert ;  Second  Grand  Expert ;  Grand  Almoner ;
Grand  Standard  Bearer  ;  Grand  fliamlHTlain  ;  Captain  of  the  Lines ;
Grand  Aid  du  Camps;  Grand  Heralds;  Grand  Provosts;  Grand
Kquerries.

67  The  Consistorial  degrees  in  America  are  conferred  in  Lodges,
Chapters,  Councils,  Colleges,  Grand  Councils,  and  Consistories,  all
of  which  are  under  the  government  of  a  Supreme  Council.     The
following  bodies  and  designations  of  titles  are  comprised  in  this
class  : — Grand  College  of  Rites ;    Sovereign  Princes  of  Masonry  ;
Chapters  of  Rose  Croix,  and  of  the  Triple  Alliance ;  Grand  Council
of  Princes  of  the  Royal  Secret ;  Sovereign  Chapter  of  Princes  Rose
Croix ;  M.  P.  S.  G.  Consistory  for  the  United  States  of  America ;
and  the  M.  P.  United  G.  and  S.  Council  of  Sovereign  Grand  In-
spectors General  of  the  thirty-third  degree  for  the  western  hemi-
sphere.    The  members  of  this  degree  are  styled  "  Royal  and  Most
Illustrious  Princes  of  High  Masonry ;"  and  the  presiding  officer  has
the  title  of  M.  P.  S.  G.  Commander,  and  Sovereign  Grand  Inspector
General  of  the  thirty-third  degree  for  life.

68  Sometimes  the  Ineffable  and  Consistorial  degrees  are  united,
and  consist  of  Lodges,  Chapters,  Councils,  S:c.  Sec.

69  It  will  be  observed  that  philosophical  Masonry  is  a  very  different
thing  from  the  philosophy  of  Masonry.    The  latter  professes  to  treat
of  morality  and  religion,  while  the  former  set  at  nought  them  both,
and  on  one  occasion  exerted  all  its  energies,  as  Clavel  very  correctly
observes — "  D'etablir  la  religion  naturelle  sur  le  mines  de  toutes  les,


OF    FREEMASONRY.  331

strative.70  These  are  all  regular,  and  consist  of  the
above  number  of  degrees  ;71  but  several  others  which

religions  revelees."  Philosophical  Masonry,  as  practised  on  the
continent  during  the  last  century,  was  disguised  deism.  But  it
must  be  remembered  that  this  does  not  apply  so  much  to  the  class
called  philosophical  (although  it  contains  some  unsound  degrees),  as
to  the  professed  philosophical  orders,  which  were  numerous.  Thus
we  find  orders  and  degrees  in  sublime  Masonry,  which  are  respectively
named  cabalistic,  practical,  hermetic,  and  sublime  philosophers —
philosophers  inconnu — of  the  numbers  five  and  nine,  &c.,  amounting
to  more  than  twenty  varieties,  all  of  which  had  the  same  end  in
view,  although  it  was  to  be  compassed  by  different  means.

70  The  Supreme  Council  of  S.  G.  Inspectors  General  exercise  all
the  attributes   and  prerogatives  of  sovereign  power.     They  enact
laws,  and  impose  oaths ;  maintaining  all  the  high  diplomatic  rela-
tions of  independent  states.     The  office  of  Grand  Commander  is  an
appointment  for  life,    and  is  duly  proclaimed  and  installed.     The
Grand  Inspectors  General  have  the  power  of  creating  and  suspending
at  pleasure,   all  S.  G.  Consistories,  S.  G.  Chapters  and  Councils.
"  In  a  document  before  us,"  say  the  committee,  appointed  by  the
House  of  Representatives  in  the  United  States  to  examine  into  the
designs  of  Freemasonry,  who  appear  to  have  entertained  an  absurd
and  childish  apprehension  of  the  Masonic  titles  and  offices,  "  the
S.  G.  Consistory  for  the  United  States  of  America  was  arraigned
before  the  Supreme  Council,  in  1827,  for  an  attempt  (among  other
charges  enumerated)  to  place  on  the  THRONE  a  sovereign  prince,  not
entitled  to  that  dignity ;  and  upon  this  arraignment,  the  Supreme
Council  resolved  that  the  high  prerogative  vested  by  the  general
regulations  of  the  Order,  and  the  immemorial  recognition  OF  ALL
LEGITIMATE  PRINCES,  in  the  Supreme  Council,  may  and  ought  to
be  interposed  and  exercised  in  all  cases  where  the  honour,  dignity,
and  reputation  of  the  respective  grades  of  exalted  Masonry  are  in
anywise  assailed,  threatened,  or  exposed."

71  There  are  many  different  arrangements  of  the  degrees  in  different
countries ;  but  the  rite  which  I  have  adopted  for  illustration  is  one
of  the  best  known  forms  of  sublime  Masonry,  consisting  of  thirty-
three  regular,  and  six  detached,  or  auxiliary  degrees.


332  HISTORICAL    LANDMARKS


are  occasionally  conferred72  in  the  Chapters,  Colleges,
and  Consistories  of  various  countries.  The  above  divi-
sion is  arbitrary,73  and  a  great  diversity  of  practice
manifests  itself  in  different  countries,  and  under  dif-
ferent Grand  Lodges.74  The  system  practised  formerly
by  the  Grand  Orient  consisted  only  of  two  divisions,
including  seven  degrees  ;75  while  the  Supreme  Council
of  the  rite  Ancien  et  accepte,  in  addition  to  the  thirty-
three  legitimate  degrees,  add  six  supplemental  ones.70

72  When  Zwack,  who  was  also  called  Cato,  the  associate  of  Weis-
hnupt  in  the  propagation  of  illurainism,  was  admitted  by  Marotti  into
the  high  degrees  of  Masonry,  he  admits  that  his  instructor  explained
to  him  all  the  abstruse  mysteries,  and  told  him  that  they  were  founded
on  religion  and  the  history  of  the  church.

73  It  is  an  assertion  of  Des  Estangs  that — "  Excepte  les  trois  pre-
miers grades,  qul  sont  1'Apprenti,  le  Compagnon,  et  le  Maitre ;  tous
les  autres  ont  etc  institues  par  diverses  associations,  ct  chez  diffeivns
peuples,  a  1'occasiou  d'une  mort  a  venger,  d'un  prince  a  retablir,  on
d'une  secte  a  faire  triompher."

74  In  1813  Finch  could  only  make  out  sixty-nine  degrees,  and  he
distributed  them  amongst  thirty-nine  orders.

75  These  were — 1.  App.    2.  Comp.    3.  Mait.    4.  Elu.    5.  Ecos-
sais.    6.  Chevalier  d'Orient.    7.  Rose  Croix.     This  was  so  recently
as    1803.      But   we    learn    from    the  Ma9onnerie    Adonhiramite,
that  "  seven  years  previous  the  following  degrees  were  orthodox  and
legitimate,  the  first  three  being  Symbolic,  the  rest  Sublime — 1.  App.
2.  Comp.    3.  Mait.    4.  Maitre  Parfaite.    5.  Elu  des  Neuf.    6.  Elu
de  Perignon.     7.  Petit  Architect.     8.  Grande  Architect.    9.  Maitre
Ecossois.    10.  Chevalier  de  1'Orient.    11.  Chevalier  de  Hose  Croix.
12.  Chevalier  Prussien.

76  Rosenberg  describes  the  modem  degrees,  as  he  calls  them  (du  rit
Fran9ais  moderne),  as  being  seven  in  number,  and  arranged  as  fol-
lows:—!. E.  A.  P.     2.  F.  C.     3.  M.  M.     4.  Secret  Elected.    5.
Grand  Scotch  Elected      6.  Knight  of  the  East.     7.  Rose  Croix;
therein  differing  from  Clavel  and  some  others.


OF    FREEMASONRY.  333

The  first  division  or  class  contains  the  Blue  Degrees,
which  are  conferred  in  Symbolical  Lodges  ;77  the  Ca-
pitular are  given  in  Chapters  ;7iJ  the  Military  or
Christian  in  Conclaves79  and  Encampments  ;80  the  Con-

77  In  a  report  published  by  the  Supreme  Council  of  S.  G.  In-
spectors General,  in  1802,  I  find  the  following  passage  : — "  In  the
—  degree  we  are  informed,  that  in  consequence  of  the  death  of
H — h  +,  the  Master's  word  was  lost,  and  that  a  new  one,  which
was  not  known  before  the  building  of  the  temple,  was  substituted  in
its  place.    Now  if  Masonry,  as  is  generally  believed,  and  as  many  of
our  ancient  records  import,  took  its  rise  from  the  creation,  and
nourished  in  the  first  ages  of  man,  they  were  in  possession  of  a
Secret  Word,  of  which  the  Masons  under  Solomon  had  no  know-
ledge.    Here  then  was  an  innovation  of  one  of  the  fundamental
principles  of  the  Craft,  and  a  removal  of  one  of  the  ancient  Land-
marks ;  this  however  we  are  unwilling  to  allow.     It  is  well  known  to
the  Symbolical  Master,  that  King  Solomon  and  his  Royal  Visitor  were
in  possession  of  the  real  and  pristine  Word,  but  of  which  he  must
remain  ignorant,  unless  initiated  into  the  Sublime  Degrees.     The
authenticity  of  this  Mystic  Word,  as  known  to  us,  and  for  which  our
much  respected  Master  died,  is  proven  to  the  most  sceptic  mind,
from  the  sacred  pages  of  holy  writ,  and  the  Jewish  history  from  the
earliest  period  of  time."

78  In  America,  Eoyal  Arch  Masonry,  comprising  four  degrees,  is
arranged  by  its  constitution  into  Lodges  and  Chapters,  subordinate
to  the  Grand  Chapter,  with  the  G.  G.  H.  P.  at  its  head.    The  Grand
Chapter  in  each  State  is  formed  of  the  officers  of  its  subordinate
Chapters ;  and  the  G.  G.  Chapter  is  composed  of  the  officers  of  the
State  Grand  Chapters,  holding  its  meetings  triennially.    The  organi-
zation of  this  Order  is  complete,  commencing  with  a  Mark  Mason's
Lodge  and  terminating  in  the  G.  G.  Chapter.

79  The  degrees  of  Knighthood  in  the  United  States  are  arranged
by  constitution  into  Encampments  in  each  State,  subject  to  the
Grand  Encampment ;  and  the  Grand  Encampments  for  the  States
are  subject  to  a  General  Grand  Encampment  of  Knights  Templars,
and  other  military  degrees  and  orders,  corresponding  in  the  organ i-


334


HISTORICAL    LANDMARKS


sistorial  in  the  Sublime  Grand  Lodge ;  the  Philoso-
phical81 by  the  Council  of  Grand  Inspectors,82  who  are

zation  with  the  Royal  Arch.  There  are  supposed  to  be  five  or  six
subordinate  Encampments  in  each  State.  Some  few  years  ago  Mas-
sachusetts and  Ehode  Island  formed  only  one  encampment.

80  In  the  Grand  Conclave  of  Scottish  Templars  it  is  decreed,  that
"  as  this  Order  was  originally  and  still  is  a  religions  and  chivalrir
one,  although  latterly  much  blended  with  Freemasonry,  it  is  not
necessary  that  persons  admitted  into  the  Provisional  Priory  of  the
Grand  Council  shall  have  obtained  any  Masonic  degree;  but  in
order  riot  to  dissolve  altogether  at  once  the  link  which  lias  existed  in
time  past  between  the  Temple  and  the  Masonic  Fraternities,  candi-
dates who  are  not  Freemasons  shall,  upon  their  reception  into  the
Order  of  the  Temple  in  the  said  Provisional  Priory,  pay  the  sum  of
10/.  10s. ;   Master  Masons,  and  those  under  that  degree,  11.  Is.  :
and  Royal  Arch  Masons  4/.  4s.,  as  at  present.    All  these  dues  being
payable  direct  to  the  conclave."  (Statutes  of  the  Temple  in  Scot-
land, Additions,  p.  11.)

81  "  Many  of  the  lectures  of  the  sublime  degrees  contain  an  epitome
of  the  arts  and  sciences,  and  several  valuable  and  important  facts
are  recorded  in  the  historical  divisions  which  have  been  obtained
from  authentic  archives  in  the  possession  of  our  Society,  and  which,
from  the  manner  of  their  communication,  can  never  be  mutilated  or
corrupted."  (Grand  Inspector-General's  Report,  agreed  on  at  Charles-
ton in  1802.)

82  "  All  the  degrees,  above  the  16th,  are  under  the  jurisdiction  of
the  Supreme  Council  of  the  Inspectors-General.     When  it  is  neces-
sary to  establish  the  Sublime  Degrees  in  a  country  where  they  are
unknown,  a  Brother  of  the  30th  degree,  which  is  called  K.  H.,  is
appointed  Deputy  Inspector- General  over  the  district ;  he  selects
from  amongst  the  Craft  such  Brethren  as  he  believes  will  do  honour
to  the  Society,  and  communicates  the  Sublime  Degrees  to  as  many
as  is  necessary  for  the  first  organization  of  the  Lodge ;  when  they
elect  their  own  officers,  and  govern  themselves  by  the  constitution
and  warrant  which  is  furnished  them.     The  jurisdiction  of  a  Lodge
of  Perfection  is  twenty-five  leagues."    (Grand  Inspector-General's
Report.)


OF    FREEMASONRY.  335

sovereigns  in  Masonry;83  where  the  three  Adminis-
trative degrees  are  also  conferred.84

The  above  degrees  are  given  in  the  following  order :
-1.  Apprentice.85     2.  Fellow   Craft.86     3.  Master.87

83  The  names  of  the  officers  are  as  follows: — 1.  Thrice  puissant
Sovereign   Grand   Commander.      2.  Thrice   illustrious   Lieutenant
Grand   Commander.      3.  Grand   Secretary  of  the   Holy  Empire.
4.  Grand  Treasurer  of  the  Holy  Empire.     5.  Illustrious  Master  of
the  Ceremonies.     6.  Grand  Chancellor.    7.  Chief  of  the  Secretariat.
The  principal  officer  is  invested  with  a  crimson  satin  robe  bordered
with  white,  crowned,  and  holding  a  sword  in  his  hand.

84  In  the  United  States,  under   Inspector-General   Dalcho,  the
degrees  were  rather  differently  arranged.     The  three  first  degrees
were,  as  usual,  given  in  Symbolic  Lodges.     From  the  4th  to  the
14th  inclusive,  in  the  sublime  Grand  Lodge,  and  the  officers  of  both
were  elected  annually ;  the  15th  and  16th  were  given  by  the  Council
of  Princes  of  Jerusalem;  from  the  17th  to  the  33rd  inclusive  were
given   by  the   Inspectors-General.      The  officers  of  the   Supreme
Council  were  appointed  for  life.     The  system,  as  practised  at  pre-
sent, differs  from  this  series.     The  three  first  degrees  are  as  usual.
Then  follow  four  Capitular  degrees,  conferred  in  Chapters ;  these  are
the  Mark,  Past,  and  Most  Excellent  Master,  and  Royal  Arch.     The
degrees  of  the  High  Priesthood  are  given  in  the  Council  of  High
Priest,  while  the  Royal,  Select,  and  Superexcellent  Master  are  con-
ferred  in   Councils.      Four  degrees  of  Knighthood  are   given  in
Encampments,  and  the   eleven   Ineffable  degrees  in  the  Sublime
Grand  Lodge.     The  Knight  of  the  East  and  Prince  of  Jerusalem
are  conferred  in  Councils  of  Princes,  and  the  remaining  fifteen  de-
grees of  the  rite  Ancien  can  only  be  given  by  the   Inspectors-
General.

85  Our  Brethren  of  the  eighteenth  century  seldom  advanced  beyond
the  first  degree ;  few  were  passed,  and  fewer  still  were  raised  to  the
third.     The  Masters'  degree  appears  to  have  been  much  less  com-
prehensive than  at  present ;  and  for  some  years  after  the  revival  of
Masonry,  the  third  degree  was  unapproachable  to  those  who  lived  at
a  distance  from  London ;  for  by  the  laws  of  the  Grand  Lodge  it  was
ordered,  that  "  Apprentices  must  be  admitted  Fellow  Crafts  and


336  HISTORICAL    LANDMARKS

4.  Secret  Master.83  5.  Perfect  Master.8"  6.  Intimate
Secretary.90  7.  Provost  and  Judge.91  8.  Intendant
of  the  Buildings,  or  Master  in  Israel.92  9.  Elected

Masters  only  here  (in  Grand  Lodge),  unless  by  a  dispensation  from
the  Grand  Master."

86  "  No  Brother  can  be  a  Warden  until  he  has  passed  the  part  of
a  Fellow  Craft,  nor  a  Master  until  he  has  acted  as  a  Warden,  nor  a
Grand  Warden  until  "he  has  been  Master  of  a  Lodge,  nor  Grand
Master  unless  he  has  been  a  Fellow  Craft  before  his  election."
(Ancient  Charges,  iv.)     Thory  furnishes  a  list  of  ten  degrees  of
Fellow  Crafts.

87  I  may  remark  here,  that  "  the  Master's  part,"  as  it  was  called,
or,  in  other  words,  the  third  lecture,  consisted  formerly  of  only  seven
questions,  with  very  brief  replies,  exclusive  of  the  Lodge  examination
on  the  principal  points,  which  have  the  same  reference  as  our  present
third  degree,  but  shorn  of  all  their  beauty;  yet  I  cannot  help  ex-
pressing a  wish  that  some  of  the  ceremonies  were  still  further  sim-
plified ;  they  are  too  complicated  to  produce  a  chaste  and  striking
effect.

88  The  presiding  officer  represents  King  Solomon  coming  to  the
temple  to  elect  seven  experts ;  the  Warden  is  Adoniram ;  and  the
symbols,  olive  and  laurel  branches  with  a  triangle  within  a  circle,
the  blazing  star,  the  letter  G,  and  the  contents  of  the  holy  place.

89  The  same  Adoniram  is  here  called  K.  W.  M. ;   and,  as  in  the
former  degree,  there  is  only  one  Warden,  who  is  called  Stolkyn.
The  emblems  are  a  double  square  and  circle,  or  two  cross  pillars ;
the  colour  green,  as  a  symbol  of  moral  virtue.

90  The  Lodge  is  complete  with  the  presence  of  two  persons  only,
who  represent  the  two  kings  of  Israel  and  Tyre.     The  emblems  are
twenty-seven  lamps,  triangle  with  A.  P.  P.  &c.

91  The  Lodge  is  adorned  with  red  silk,  and  has  a  blue  and  starry
canopy  in  the  east,  where  Tito,  Prince  of  Harodim,  is  seated,  under
the  style  of  Thrice  Illustrious ;  the  lights  are  five.     In  this  degree
are  first  introduced  the  ebony  box  and  key,  the  balance  in  equilibrio,
and  the  roses  red  and  white.

92  This  Lodge  is  decorated  with  red  hangings  and  illuminated  with
twenty-seven  lights,  distributed  by  three  times  nine  round  the  Lodge.


OF    FREEMASONRY.  337

Knights  of  Nine.93  10.  Elected  Grand  Master,  or
Illustrious  Elected  of  Fifteen.94  11.  Sublime  Knights
Elected.95  12.  Grand  Master  Architect.96  13.  Royal
Arch.97  14.  Grand  Scotch  Rite98  of  the  Sacred  Vault

There  are  also  five  other  great  lights  on  the  altar  before  the  Most
Puissant,  who  represents  Solomon  seated  with  a  sceptre  in  his  hand.
The  first  Warden  represents  Tito  Harodim,  and  is  called  Inspector ;
the  second  Warden  is  Adoniram,  and  the  Brethren  are  ranged  angu-
larly.

93  This  chapter  represents  the  audience  chamber  of  King  Solomon,
and  is  decorated  with  white  and  red  hangings.   There  are  nine  lights
in  the  east  and  eight  in  the  west.      The  Master  represents  Solo-
mon, with  the  style  of  Most  Potent.

94  The  apartment  of  King  Solomon  is  represented  in  this  degree,
and  is  decorated  as  before.     The  senior  Warden  is  called  Inspector.
The  Lodge  consists  of  only  fifteen  members ;  and  should  there  be
more  at  the  time  of  a  reception,  they  must  attend  in  the  ante-
chamber.

93  This  Lodge  is  called  a  Grand  Chapter.  Solomon  presides,  and
has  a  sceptre  in  his  hand.  The  two  next  officers  are  called  Grand
Inspector  and  Grand  Master  of  Ceremonies.  The  emblems  are  an
inflamed  heart,  a  sword,  and  flour,  milk,  wine,  and  oil,  to  represent
goodness,  gentleness,  fortitude,  and  wisdom.  The  Knights  were
princes  or  commanders  over  the  tribes  of  Israel.

96  The  room  in  which  this  Chapter  is  held  should  be  painted
white  with  red  flames,  to  signify  the  purity  of  heart,  and  zeal  which
ought  to  be  characteristic  of  every  Grand  Master  Architect.     It
should  have  also  a  delineation  of  the  five  orders  of  architecture  ;
together  with  a  representation  of  the  north  star,  with  seven  small
stars  round  it ;  to  signify,  that  as  the  north  star  is  a  guide  to  mari-
ners, so  ought  virtue  to  be  the  guide  of  Grand  Master  Architects.
The  jewel  is  a  gold  medal,  on  both  sides  of  which  are  engraven  the
five  orders  of  architecture,   suspended  by  a  broad  stone-coloured
ribbon  from  the  left  shoulder  to  the  right  hip.

97  This  is  not  the  Royal  Arch  degree  which  is  practised  in  England,
but  refers  to  a  passage  in  the  history  of  Enoch,  and  is  otherwise

VOL.  ii.  'z


338  HISTORICAL    LANDMARKS

of  James  VI. ,  according  to  Des  Etangs,"  Rosenberg,
and  Clavel ;  but  in  the  American  nomenclature  it  is
called  the  degree  of  "  Perfection,"  or  Grand  Elect
Perfect  and  Sublime  Mason.100  15.  Knight  of  the

called  Knights  of  the  Great  Arch.  The  particulars  of  this  degree
have  already  been  given  in  Lect.  xxviii.

98  From  this  rite  is  dated  the  custom  of  processions  by  torch
light,  which  was  revived  in  Scotland  during  the  year  1836,  and  is
thus  recorded  in  the  F.  Q.  R.  (p.  96.)     "  The  Lodge  of  Melrose
renewed  their  annual  ceremony  of  marching  by  the  light  of  torches
round  the  ruins  of  St.  David's  pile.     A  band  of  music  preceded  the
procession,  playing  solemn  airs.     Nothing  could  be  more  singular
and  impressive  than  the  spectacle  which  here  presented  itself.     The
red  glaring  light  of  the  llumbraux,  as  it  Hashed  upon  the  pillars  and
projections  of  the  ancient   abbey,  discovering  the  grotesque  figures
and  faces  of  grinning  monks,  sculptured  on  the  corbels  and  capitols
of  many  a  mouldering  arch,  contrasted  strikingly  with  the  dec])
mysterious  gloom  of  the  retiring  aisles  and  cloisters,  whose  darkness
was  ever  and  anon  partially  illuminated  as  the  singular  procession
passed  along."

99  Who  thus  comments  upon  it : — "  Nous  nous  entiendrous  la.
Les  autres  grades,  dont  je  vous  ai  donne  la  liste,  vous  seraient  in-
utiles.    A  leurs  seules  denominations  vous  verrez  qu'ils  ne  vous  con-
viendraient  pas.     Yous  ne  pouvez  etre  Grand  Ecossais  de  la  route
sacree  de  Jaques  vi.,  ni  Grand  Pontife  Ecossais  de  la  Jerusalem
celeste,  et  encore  moiiis  Grand  Inquisiteur.     On  n'embrasse  presque
plus  cette  espece  de  Maco  .*.  que  par  suite  de  vieilles  habitudes,  ou
pom*  se  separer  de  la  foule  qui  a  envahi  les  premiers  grades."

100  The  emblems  of  this  degree  are  an  equilateral  triangle,  the
burning  bush  flaming  over  some  ruins,  and  a  broken  pedestal ;  three
lights — the  shovel,  crow,  and  pickaxe.     After  the  admission  of  a
candidate,  the  M.  P.  decorates  him  with  the  ornaments  of  the  Order,
saying,  "  I  now  salute  you  as  a  Grand  Elect,  Perfect,  and  Sublime
Mason,  which  title  I  confer  upon  you  by  the  investiture  of  these
symbols.     Eeceive  this  ribbon,  the  triangular  figure  of  which  is
emblematical  of  the  divinity ;  the  crown  upon  your  jewel  is  a  symbol


OF    FREEMASONRY.  339

East  and  the  Sword.1  16.  Prince  of  Jerusalem.2  17.
Knight  of  the  East  and  West.3  18.  Knight  of  the
Eagle,  and  Sovereign  Prince  of  Rose  Croix4  de  Here-
of the  royal  origin  of  the  degree ;  the  compasses,  extended  to  ninety
degrees,  denote  the  extensive  knowledge  of  the  Grand  Elect."

1  It  records  a  remarkable  dream  of  Cyrus,  which  induces  him  to
invest  Zerubbabel  with  authority  to  rebuild  the  temple  at  Jerusalem ;
and  explains  as  a  reason  why  the  number  81  is  held  in  such  venera-
tion amongst  Masons,  that  the  number  explained  the  triple  essence
of  the  divinity,  symbolized  in  the  triple  triangle,  by  the  square  of  9
and  the  number  3  ;  and  it  is  recorded  in  this  degree,  that  King
Solomon  levelled  the  footstone  of  the  temple  before  the  rising  of  the
sun,  to  show  that  it  is  the  duty  of  the  creature  to  begin  the  day  with
the  worship  of  the  Creator.

2  In  the  Chapters  of  this  degree  are  two  apartments — one  for
Darius  and  the  other  for  Zerubbabel — connected  by  a  gallery.     The
colour  of  one  is  yellow,  and  the  other  red,  and  the  emblems  are  a
triangle,  a  sword,  five  stars,  a  sceptre,  a  dart,  a  balance,  a  shield,  and
the  letters  D.  Z.     The  western  apartment  represents  the  court  of
Zerubbabel  at  Jerusalem  ;  the  chief  officer  is  styled  Most  Equitable
Prince,  the  Wardens  Most  Enlightened,  and  the  other  officers  Valiant
Princes.     The  design  of  the  degree  is  to  record  the  refusal  of  the
Samaritans  to  pay  the  usual  tribute,  and  the  successful  appeal  to
Darius.

3  The  presiding  officer  is  called  Most  Puissant,  the  Wardens  Ee-
spectable  Ancients,  and  the  other  companions  Respectable  Knights.
The  colour  is  white,  with  a  blue  ribbon  ;  the  emblems  are  a  bow  and
arrow,  a  crown,  two-edged  sword,  human  skull,  seven  stars,  seven
trumpets,  and  seven  seals.     It  refers  to  the  crusades.

4  The  rose  was  an  ancient  symbol  of  secresy,  and  hence  it  was  a
custom  at  entertainments  to  distribute  roses  amongst  the  guests,  to
remind  them  that  whatever  may  pass  must  not  be  spoken  of  abroad.
Thus  Newton,  in  his  Herball  to  the  Bible,  says,  "  1  will  heere  adde
a  common  country  custom  that  is  used  to  be  done  with  the  rose.
When  pleasaunt  and  merry  companions  doe  friendly  meete  together
to  make  goode  cheere,  as  soone  as  their  feast  or  banket  is  ended,
they  give  faithfull  promise  mutually  one  to  another,  that  whatsoever

z2


140


HISTORICAL    LANDMARKS


dom.5  19.  Grand  Pontiff,  or  Sublime  Scotch  Masonry.6
20.  Venerable  Grand  Master  of  all  Symbolic  Lodges ;
Sovereign  Prince  of  Masonry ;  Master  ad  vitam?

hath  been  merrily  spoken  by  any  in  that  assembly,  should  be  wrapped
up  in  silence,  and  not  to  be  carried  out  of  the  doores.  For  the
assurance  and  performance  whereof,  the  tearmes  which  they  use  is,
that  all  things  there  saide  must  be  taken  as  spoken  under  the  rose.
Whereupon  they  use  in  their  parlours  and  dining-roomes  to  hang
ROSES  over  their  tables."

5  The  jewel  of  this  degree  is  a  pair  of  golden  compasses  extended
to  23i  degrees,  on  the  head  of  which  is  a  rose,  and  in  the  middle  a
cross,  the  foot  of  which  rests  on  the  centre  of  the  circle.     On  one
side  is  an  eagle,  with  head  and  wings  reclining ;  on  the  other  a
pelican,  feeding  a  nest  of  young  ones  :  these  two  are  of  silver.   The
jewel  is  suspended  from  a  bright  red  ribbon  edged  with  black,  a  rose
being  at  the  lower  end,  and  a  black  cross  on  each  side.     The  degree
is  copious  and  sublime.

6  The  hangings  of  this  Lodge  are  blue,  sprinkled  with  gold  stars.
The  chief  officer  bears  a  royal  sceptre,  and  has  the  title  of  Thrice
Puissant.    He  is  seated  on  a  throne  under  a  blue  canopy,  and  wears
a  robe  of  white  satin.    In  a  niche  behind  the  throne  is  a  transparent
light  of  sufficient  brilliancy  to  illuminate  the  whole  Lodge  room.
There  is  only  one  Warden,  and  he  is  placed  in  the  west  with  a  staff
of  gold  in  his  hand.     The  members  are  clothed  in  white  robes,  and
have  the  title  of  True  and  Faithful  Brothers.    They  wear  a  blue  satin
fillet  round  their  foreheads,  embroidered  with  twelve  golden  stars.
The  degree  treats  of  the  celestial  Jerusalem,  as  it  is  described  in  the
Apocalypse.

7  The  Lodge  room  is  decorated  with  blue  and  yellow,  in  reference
to  the  appearance  of  gold  and  azure  on  Mount  Sinai  when  the  law
was  delivered  to  Moses.    The  Grand  Master  sits  on  a  throne  elevated
by  nine  steps  under  a  canopy.   The  pedestal  contains  the  three  Great
Lights  of  Masonry,  a  sword,  a  mallet,  a  chisel,  24 -inch  rule,  the  sun,
moon,  seven  stars,  &c.     In  the  collection  of  Chifflet  is  a  Basilidean
Gem,  or  Abraxas,  containing  these  appearances,  viz.  the  sun,  seven
stars,  square  and  compass,  &c.    This  Lodge  is  lighted  with  a  cande-
labrum with  nine  branches.      The  Grand  Master  represents  Ar-


OF    FREEMASONRY.  341

21.  Grand  Patriarch  Noakites,  or  Prussian  Knights.8

22.  Knight  of  the  Royal  Axe ;   called  by  some  the
Grand  Patriarch,  Prince  of  Libanus.9     23.  Chief  of
the   Tabernacle.10      24.    Prince   of  the   Tabernacle.11

taxerxes  in  his  royal  robes,  with  broad  blue  and  yellow  ribbons
crossing  each  other.  The  emblems  are,  a  triangle  with  the  word

on  it,  a  lion  in  a  cavern  with  a  key  in  his  mouth,  a  gold  collar

round  his  neck  with  the  word  J ;  a  cubical  agate  stone,  con-
taining the  NAME  on  a  gold  plate,  and  supported  on  a  triangular
pedestal,  surrounded  by  three  cross  pillars  and  a  circle  of  brass.

3  The  officers  are  called  Chevalier  Lieutenant  Grand  Commander,
Deputy  Lieutenant  Grand  Commander,  Master  of  Ceremonies,  Che-
valier of  Eloquence,  Chevalier  of  the  Guard,  Chevalier  Chancellor  of
the  Finances.  The  title  Chevalier  Prussian  Mason  is  given  to  the
members.  A  Lodge  cannot  be  opened  unless  the  three  superior
officers  are  present.  The  Knights  are  said  to  be  descended  from
Peleg,  the  Grand  Architect  of  the  Tower  of  Babel.  At  the  Crusades
the  Freemasons  were  desirous  of  knowing  their  mysteries ;  and  the
Prussian  Knights  were  persuaded  that  none  could  be  more  worthy  of
their  confidence.  Since  that  period  it  is  always  required  that  the
candidates  should  be  Master  Masons.  The  jewel  is  an  equilateral
triangle  of  gold  traversed  by  an  arrow  pointing  downwards,  and
attached  to  a  broad  black  scarf  from  right  to  left ;  the  apron  and
gloves  are  yellow.

9  This  degree  is  said  to  have  been  established  in  commemoration
of  the  felling  of  cedar  trees  on  Mount  Lebanon  at  three  several
periods,  viz.  to  build  the  ark  of  Noah,  the  tabernacle  of  Moses,  and
the  temple  of  Solomon.     In  the  earliest  ages  of  time,  says  the  his-
tory of  this  degree,  colleges  were  established  on  the  mountain  for  the
construction  of  the  tabernacle ;  and  at  a  subsequent  period  they  were
revived,  to  furnish  materials  for  building  the  temple.   King  Solomon
built  a  house  on  Mount  Lebanon,  where  he  might  occasionally  reside
to  inspect  the  proceedings.    In  this  degree  the  names  of  our  ancient
Grand  Masters  are  preserved,  and  also  the  memory  of  the  Sidonians,
by  whose  ingenuity  and  skill  the  holy  temple  was  decorated  and
enriched.

10  The  presiding  officer  is  styled  Grand  Commander,  the  Wardens


HISTORICAL    LANDMARKS


25.  Knight  of  the  Brazen  Serpent.12  26.  Prince  of
Mercy,  or  Scotch  Trinitarian.13  27.  Sovereign  Com-
mander of  the  Temple  at  Jerusalem.14  28.  Grand

High  Priests,  and  the  rest  Levites.  The  Lodge  is  called  a  Sovereign
Council,  and  the  three  principal  officers  represent  Aaron,  Eleazar,
and  Ithamar.  The  candidate  represents  Haraan.  The  apron  is
white,  lined  with  deep  scarlet,  and  edged  with  blue,  purple,  and
crimson  ribbons.  A  gold  chandelier  of  seven  branches  occupies  the
centre,  and  a  violet-coloured  myrtle  the  flap.  The  jewel,  which  is  a
thurible,  is  sometimes  worn  from  a  broad  scarf  of  yellow,  purple,
blue,  and  scarlet  ribbon,  from  left  to  right.

11  This  assemblage  is  called  a  Hierarchy,  the  Master  is  styled  Most
Powerful,  and  the  Wardens  Powerful.    The  officers  represent  Moses,
Aaron,  Bezalcel,  and  Aholiab,  and  the  candidate  represents  Eleazar.
The  apron  is  white,  bordered  with  crimson,  or  in  some  cases  lined
with  deep  scarlet  and  edged  with  green.     A  representation  of  the
tabernacle  is  embroidered  upon  it  with  crimson  silk,  while  the  flap  is
sky-blue.

12  The  Lodge  is  called  the  Court  of  Sinai,  the  chief  Knight  is
called  Most  Powerful  Grand  Master,  the  Wardens  Ministers,  and
the  Members  Knights.     There  is  also  an  Examiner,  and  the  candi-
date a  Traveller.     The  degree  refers  to  the  erection  of  the  brazen
serpent  in  the  wilderness.

13  The  Lodge  room  is  painted  green,  and  supported  by  nine
columns,  alternately  white  and  red ;  upon  each  of  which  is  a  chan-
delier with  nine  lights,  forming  in  all  81.     The  canopy  is  green,
white,  and  red ;  under  which  is  a  green  throne ;  the  table  is  covered
with  a  cloth  of  the  same  colour.     The  M.  E.  uses  an  arrow,  whose
plume  is  green  arid  red,  and  the  head  gold.     Here  is  a  statue  of
Truth,  which  is  considered  the  palladium  of  the  Order.

14  The  Chapter  is  painted  red  and  supported  by  black  columns,  on
each  of  which  there  is  a  human  hand  with  a  light.     The  throne  is
red,  with  black  tiers.     Tn  the  centre  of  the  Lodge  is  a  chandelier
with  twenty-seven  lights  in  three  rows,  viz.  twelve  on  the  lowest  tier
of  branches,  nine  on  the  second,  and  six  on  the  third  or  uppermost
tier.     Twenty-seven  other  lights  are  placed  on  a  round  table,  about
which  the  Commanders  are  placed  in  Council.


Or    FREEMASONRY.  343

Scotch  Degree  of  St.  Andrew.15    29.  Knight  of  the  Sun,
or  Prince  Adept.10  30.  Grand  Elected  Knight  of  K.  H.17

15  The  candidate  for  this  degree  is  extended  on  the  floor  of  a  dark
cell,  having  a  rope  with  four  slip-knots  twisted  round  his  neck,  to
reflect  on  the  wretched  state  of  slavery  in  which  he  lives  while  un-
regenerated  by  the  divine  .graces  of  Christianity,  and  to  learn  how  to
estimate  the  value  of  redemption  by  the  blood  of  Jesus.     At  length
his  conductor  appears,  and  after  exhorting  him  to  courage  and  forti-
tude, introduces  him  into  the  Lodge.     A  detailed  account  of  this
degree  may  be  found  in  a  work  entitled  "  The  Scotch  Degrees,"
published  at  Stockholm,  1784.     Barruel  (vol.  iii.  p.  140.)  mentions
and  describes  this  degree  as  an  appendage  to  Illummism.

16  The  Grand  Master  or  Thrice  Puissant,  sometimes  called  Father
Adam,  is  clothed  in  a  robe  of  pale  yellow ;  he  wears  his  hat,  and
bears  a  sceptre  in  his  right  hand,  on  the  top  of  which  is  a  globe,  to
signify  that  he  is  the  Sovereign  Father  of  all  Mankind.     The  globe
is  repeated  on  his  jewel,  which  is  suspended  from  a  chain  of  gold.
When  the  degree  is  conferred,  however,  neither  apron  nor  jewel  is
used.    The  Warden  sits  opposite  to  the  Grand  Master,  and  is  called
Brother  Truth.     The  order  which  belongs  to  this  degree  is  a  broad
white  watered  ribbon  worn  as  a  collar,  with  an  eye  embroidered  in
gold  upon  it.     The  other  offices  are  seven,  and  named  after  the
cherubim,  Zaphriel,  Zabriel,  Camiel,  Uriel,  Michael,  Zaphael,  and
Gabriel.     Should  there  be  more  than  the  above  number  of  Knights,
they  are  called  Sylphs,  and  are  assistants  in  all  the  ceremonies  ;  they
wear  a  ribbon  of  flame  colour  to  the  third  button-hole  of  their
coats.

17  The  following  is  frequently  recited  or  sung  during  the  cere-
monies : —

When  first  a  Mason  views  the  Light,
Astonished  at  the  awful  sight,

He  wonders  and  reveres ;
The  path  sublime  at  length  ascends,
Until  he  royally  descends,
Yet  still  a  shade  appears.

More  happy,  thrice  more  happy  he,
Who  lives  the  second  Light  to  sec,
The  former  gloom  dispel ;


344


HISTORICAL    LANDMARKS


or  the  White  and  Black  Eagle.18  31.  Grand  Inquisitor
Commander.19  32.  Sublime  and  Valiant  Prince20  of
the  Royal  Secret.21  33.  Grand  Inspector  General.22


And  raise  him  by  a  law  divine,
Like  the  bright  EASTERN  STAB,  to  shine,
Where  princes  ever  dwell.

But  you  K.  H.,  you  chosen  few,
To  whom  'tis  given  thus  to  view

The  mystic  Third  Great  Light ;
The  proud  pre-eminence  you've  gain'd,
By  virtuous  works  must  be  maintain'd,

T'  enhance  your  sacred  right.


Five  perfect  Brothers  is  sufficient  to  constitute  a  Lodge ;  they
are  clothed  in  black,  with  white  gloves,  and  a  broad  black  scarf  from
left  to  right,  to  which  hangs  a  red  saltire  cross  between  two  swords.
No  aprons  are  worn.  The  jewel  is  a  sable  eagle,  displayed  with  two
heads  and  a  naked  sword  in  its  dexter  claw,  and  spreading  wings.
It  is  suspended  from  a  broad  crimson  ribbon.  The  French  say  of
this  degree,  "  Je  vous  ferai  parvenir  dans  quelques  temps  le  grade  de
Chev.  K.  H.  Celui — la.  est  important.  II  est  le  complement  de  la
Ma9onnerie.  Yous  ne  le  communiquerez  qu'a  des  freres  d'une  science
et  d'une  vertu  eprouvees.  Les  initiations  trop  faciles  ont  perdu  la
ma9onnerie  en  Europe.

19  The  assembly  is  termed  a  Consistory,  and  the  presiding  officer
is  called  Sovereign  of  Sovereigns ;  and  the  remaining  officers  have
titles  equally  sonorous  and  magnificent.

20  The  original  Chapter  of  Prince  Masons  in  Ireland  was  limited  to
the  number  of  thirty-three.     When  one  of  this  body  dies,  the  sur-
vivors associate  to  themselves,  to  fill  his  stall,  an  individual  judged,
from  his  long  standing  in  Masonry,  his  zeal  for  the  maintenance  of
its  benevolent  principles,  and  his  influence  amongst  the  Craft,  deserv-
ing of  this  the  highest  and  most  distinguished  dignity  connected  with
the  Order.

21  The  following  charge  is  addressed  to  the  candidate  who  has
been  admitted  as  a  Prince  of  the  Royal  Secret : — "  My  dear  Brother,
— The  Saracens  having  taken  possession  of  the  Holy  Land,  those


OF    FREEMASONRY.  345

The  six  auxiliary  degrees  conferred  by  the  Supreme

who  were  engaged  in  the  crusades  not  being  able  to  expel  them,
agreed  with  Godfrey  de  Bouillon  to  veil  the  mysteries  of  religion
under  emblems  by  which  they  would  be  able  to  maintain  the  devo-
tion of  the  soldier,  and  protect  themselves  from  the  incursions  of
those  who  were  their  enemies,  after  the  example  of  the  scriptures,
the  style  of  which  is  figurative.  Those  zealous  Brethren  chose  Solo-
mon's temple  for  their  model.  This  building  has  strong  allusions  to
the  Christian  church.  Since  that  period  the  Masons  have  been
known  by  the  name  of  Master  Architect,  and  they  have  employed
themselves  in  improving  the  law  of  that  admirable  Master.  From
hence  it  appears  that  the  mysteries  of  the  Craft  are  the  mysteries  of
religion.  Those  Brethren  were  careful  not  to  entrust  this  important
secret  to  any  whose  discretion  they  had  not  proved.  For  this  reason
they  invented  different  degrees  to  try  those  who  entered  among
them ;  and  only  gave  them  symbolic  secrets,  without  explanation,  to
prevent  treachery,  and  to  make  themselves  known  only  to  each
other.  For  this  purpose  it  was  resolved  to  use  different  signs,  words,
and  tokens  in  every  degree,  by  which  they  would  be  secured  against
Cowans  and  Saracens.

22  The  style  of  the  Grand  Consistory  of  Inspector-General  of
France  is  as  follows  : — "To  the  glory  of  the  Grand  Architect  of  the
Universe.  Ordo  ab  Chao.  At  the  Orient  of  the  M.  P.  Sovereign,
Grand  Consistory  of  Grand  Inspectors-General,  and  true  Conser-
vators of  the  Order  of  the  thirty-third  degree ;  and  Princes  of  the
Iloyal  Secret,  Supreme  Chiefs  of  exalted  Masonry  of  the  ancient
Scottish  rite  of  Harodim,  under  the  celestial  vault ;  in  the  sign
Cancer,  and  point  vertical  from  the  zenith  for  48°  50'  14"  of  north
latitude,  and  longitude  0  the  meridian  of  Paris,  in  the  second  day  of
the  month  Tamuz,  &c.  &c.  Given  under  our  signs,  the  seal  of  our
arms,  the  great  seal  of  the  Princes  of  Masonry,  and  the  private  seal
of  the  Sovereign  Grand  Commander,  in  a  place  wherein  are  deposited
the  greatest  treasures,  the  sight  of  which  fills  us  with  joy,  consola-
tion, and  acknowledgment,  for  everything  that  is  great  and  good
under  the  celestial  canopy."  The  Supreme  Council  of  France  has
recently  published  a  document  purporting  to  be  an  extract  from  the


346


HISTORICAL    LANDMARKS


Council  are  thus  named : — 1 .  Elu  de  Perignan.23  2.  Le
petit  Architecte,24  3.  Grand  Architecte,  or  Compagnon
Ecossais.25  4.  Le  Maitre  Ecossais.26  5.  Chevelier  de
1'Orient.27  6.  Le  Chevalier  Rose  Croix.28

Livre  d'Or,  v/hich  records  the  installations  or  enthronings  into  this
high  degree.

23  The  Lodge  room  represents  the  cabinet  of  Solomon,  and  is
lighted   by  twenty-seven  lamps,  distributed   by  three  times  nine.
Solomon,  dressed  in  royal  robes,  with  black  fringed  gloves  and  a
white  apron  trimmed  with  silver  lace,  sits  in  the  east,  holding  a  blue
sceptre  with  a  luminous  triangle  at  the  top,  emblematical  of  his
wisdom,  power,  and  benevolence.     Hiram,  King  of  Tyre,  is  dressed
like  Solomon,  and  holds  in  his  hand  a  dagger.    The  degree  refers  to
H.  A.  B.,  and  the  three  gates  of  the  temple.

24  The  floor-cloth  is  an  oblong  square,  terminating  in  u  triangle
inscribed  within  a  circle,  containing  a  blazing  star  with  the  letter  G.
At  the  angles  are  the  letters  S.  V.  G.   The  room  is  hung  with  black,
and  lighted  by  twenty-one  candles,  eighteen  of  which  are  placed  in
two  chandeliers  with  nine  branches  each.    The  throne  is  elevated  on
three  steps ;  and  on  the  altar  are  placed  the  great  lights,  a  triangle,
an  urn  containing  a  golden  trowel,  and  a  paste  made  of  flour,  milk,
oil,  and  wine ;  and  the  three  remaining  lights.     The  apron  is  edged
with  crimson,  and  the  triangular  jewel  attached  to  a  blue  rose  is  sus-
pended from  a  broad  crimson  collar.      This  degree  recounts  the
appointment  of  an  Architect  in  the  room  of  H.  A.  B.

25  The  Lodge  is  hung  with  red  tapestry  adorned  with  hyacinth
flowers.     Near  the  throne  is  an  altar,  on  which  is  the  first  great
light,  a  double  triangle,  and  a  plan  of  the  temple  unfinished.     The
jewel  is  a  pair  of  compasses  and  a  level  within  a  circle  of  gold.

26  The  appointments  of  this  Lodge  are  the  same  as  the  preceding
one,  except  that  a  pedestal  is  placed  in  the  west,  and  the  plan  repre-
sents the  temple  completed.    Before  the  pedestal  is  a  stool,  on  which
the  candidate  is  seated  with  his  head  leaning  on  the  pedestal,  while
the  temporary  black  curtain  is  removed.

2?  For  this  degree  two  apartments  adjoining  each  other  are  neces-
sary; the  one  belongs  to  Cyrus,  and  the  other  is  the  court  of  the


OF    FREEMASONRY.  347

Thus  have  I  given,  as  concisely  as  the  nature  of  the
subject  would  admit,  a  general  view  of  the  statistics  of
Masonry,  and  of  the  working  of  the  Sublime  Degrees.29

temple ;  the  first  is  hung  with  green,  but  a  space  of  six  feet  between
the  hangings  and  the  wall  must  be  left.  The  throne  is  in  the  east,
two  arm-chairs  in  the  west,  and  benches  for  the  members  in  the
south.  Behind  the  throne  is  a  transparency,  representing  the  dream
of  Cyrus  ;  above  which,  in  a  triangular  glory,  is  the  word  rPJi\  An
eagle  issues  from  it  with  a  label  in  its  mouth,  inscribed  "  LIBERTY
TO  THE  CAPTIVES."  The  second  apartment  is  hung  with  red,  and
the  carpet  represents  the  furniture  of  the  H.  and  M.  H.  places.
Above  the  ark  is  the  Shekinah,  represented  by  a  lamb  seated  on  a
book  with  seven  seals.  At  one  of  the  angles  is  a  broken  column.

28  The  jewel  of  this  degree  is  a  quadrant,  with  a  pair  of  compasses
inclosing  the  rosy  cross.     At  the  foot  is  a  pelican  feeding  its  young.
The  collar  is  crimson,  and  the  Lodge-room  is  hung  with  the  same
colour.     In  the  east  is  a  triangular  altar  elevated  on  seven  steps,
containing  a  transparency  representing  the  crucifixion.     On  one  of
the  faces  is  drapery  interlaced  with  roses,  and  above,  the  letters
INRI.   Before  the  transparency  are  some  broken  columns,  on  which
Roman  soldiers  are  sleeping,  and  a  tomb  with  grave-cloths  at  its
mouth.     There  are  three  triangular  tables,  each  containing  a  light ;
one  in  the  east  and  the  others  in  the  west.   At  the  time  of  reception
the  room  is  hung  with  black.     No  furniture  is  used,  except  three
columns  placed  triangularly,  and  inscribed — FAITH,   HOPE,  and
CHARITY.

29  In  the  explanations  attached  to  the  above  catalogue,  I  have  been
particularly  careful  to  insert  nothing  but  what  may  be  found  in  the
printed   works  of   Webb,  Dalcho,   Cole,  Town,  Taunchill,   Cross,
Hardie,  Greenleaf,  and  others,  whose  respective  publications  were
issued  under  the  expressed  sanction  of  Grand  Lodges,  Chapters,
Consistories,  &c.,  and  I  have,  therefore,  had  no  hesitation  in  trans-
ferring them  to  my  pages.


348  HISTORICAL    LANDMARKS


LECTURE  XXXV.


THE    ROYAL    ARCH    TRACING-BOARD.

"  These  mysteries  are  so  profound  and  so  exalted,  that  they  can
be  comprehended  by  those  only  who  are  enlightened.  I  shall  not,
therefore,  attempt  to  speak  of  what  is  most  admirable  in  them,  lest
by  discovering  them  to  the  uninitiated,  I  should  oifend  against  the
injunction  not  to  give  what  is  holy  to  the  impure,  nor  to  cast  pearls
before  such  as  cannot  estimate  their  worth."

CYRIL  or  ALEXANDRIA.

"  I  am  the  Rose  of  Sharon,  and  the  Lily  of  the  Valleys.  As  the  lily
among  thorns,  so  is  my  love  among  the  daughters.  As  the  apple-
tree  among  the  trees  of  the  wood,  so  is  my  beloved  among  the  sons.
I  sat  down  under  his  shadow  with  great  delight,  and  his  fruit  was
sweet  to  my  taste." — SOLOMON.

"  There  are  seven  pillars  of  gothic  mould
In  Chillon's  dungeons  deep  and  old,
There  are  seven  columns,  massy  and  gray,
Dim  with  a  dull  imprisoned  ray, —
A  sunbeam  which  hath  lost  its  way,
And  through  the  crevice  and  the  cleft
Of  the  thick  wall  is  fallen  and  left ;
Creeping  o'er  the  floor  so  damp,
Like  a  marsh's  meteor-lamp." — BYRON.

THE  symbols  and  ornaments  which  are  displayed  on
the  Royal  Arch  Tracing-boards,1  as  well  as  the  forms

1  It  will  be  observed  that  I  refer  to  the  Tracing-boards  published
by  Bro.  Harris,  under  the  sanction  of  the  Supreme  Grand  Chapter.


OF    FREEMASONRY.  349

and  ceremonies  at  present  observed  in  our  Chapters,
are  said  to  have  been  adopted  by  our  predecessors2  at
the  building  of  the  second  temple,3  and  were  intended

2  Its  antiquity  is  doubted  by  many  of  its  most  zealous  members.
An  American  writer  says — "  That  the  Royal  Arch  is  a  degree  of
ancient  Freemasonry,  one  hundred  Chapters  in  the  single  state  of
New  York  are  ready  to  testify,  with  Webb,  Town,   Cross,   Cole,
Dalcho,  and  a  host  of  other  authors,  sanctioned  by  the  highest  autho-
rities of  Freemasonry.     On  the  other  hand,  that  it  is  not  a  degree  of
ancient  Freemasonry,  is  asserted  by  the  Grand  Lodge  of  England
and  Scotland,  and  by  all  the  legally  constituted  Masonic  authorities
of  Great  Britain,  supported  by  Preston,  Laurie,  and  the  Book  of
Constitutions  of  Massachusetts."  (Freemasonry,  by  a  Master  Mason,
p.  165.)

3  A  committee  of  seceding  Masons  in  America,  in  their  report
(1830)  say — "  It  is  certain  that  the  primeval  Chapter  of  Royal  Arch
Masons  was  instituted  A.  D.  1747,  at  Arras,  in  France;  that  Moses
Michael  Hayes,  a  Jew,  introduced  it,  with  the  still  deeper  mysteries,
into  this  country  (United  States),  by  a  patent  dated  Dec.  6,  1778  ;
that  the  first  mention  of  a  Chapter  of  Masons  in  this  country  was  in
1776;  the  first  Grand  Chapter  was  instituted  at  Philadelphia  in
1797 ;  and  the  first  General  Grand  Chapter  of  United  States  was
instituted  in  the  city  of  New  York,  June  6,  1816."     Other  autho-
rities say  that  it  was  introduced  into  America  in  1764  ;  while  Clavel
and  others  contend  that  the  Royal  Arch  degree  was  only  established
in  1777,  and  had  its  origin  in  England.     But  we  possess  substantial
evidence  of  its  prior  existence.     A  work  called  "  Hiram,  or  the
Master  Key  to  the  Door  of  Freemasonry,"  was  published  in  1766,
by  a  person  styling  himself  a  Member  of  the  Royal  Arch.     Law-
rence Dermott,  after  some  remarks  on  the  conduct  of  certain  Brothers
who  were  dissatisfied  at  not  having  been  admitted  to  the  Royal  Arch,
says — "  To  this  I  will  add  the  opinion  of  our  Worshipful  Brother,
Dr.  Fitfield  D'Assigney,  printed  in  the  year  1744.     '  Some  of  the
fraternity,'  says  he,  '  have  expressed  an  uneasiness  at  the  Royal  Arch
being  kept  a  secret  from  them,  since  they  had  already  passed  through
the  usual  degrees  of  probation  ;  but  I  cannot  help  being  of  opinion,
that  they  have  no  right  to  any  such  benefit  until  they  make  a  proper
application,  and  are  received  with  due  formality  as  having  passed


350  HISTORICAL    LANDMARKS

to  impress  upon  the  minds  of  Royal  Arch  Masons,  to
the  end  of  time,  the  providential  means  of  a  series  of
important  discoveries  ;4  by  which  the  Jewish  nation
was  enlightened  by  a  knowledge  of  the  truth,5  without
a  fresh  revelation,  after  all  traces  of  the  written  law
had  been  swept  away  at  the  destruction  of  Jerusalem
by  Nebuchadnezzar ; 6  and  the  knowledge  and  worship
of  the  true  God  was  only  retained  by  memory,  and
transmitted  by  oral  tradition  amongst  the  remnant  of
his  people,  existing  by  sufferance,  and  as  exiles  and
captives  in  the  midst  of  an  idolatrous  nation,7  prac-

the  chair,  and  given  undeniable  proofs  of  their  skill."  It  is  evident,
therefore,  that  the  degree  was  in  existence  before  1744 ;  and  that  it
was  conferred  only  on  Past  Masters.

4  "  In  the  Royal  Arch  Mason's  degree  I  beheld  myself  exalted  to
the  top  of  Pisgah ;  an  extensive  scene  opened  to  my  view  of  the
glory  and  goodness  of  the  M.  E.  H.  P.  of  our  salvation.  I  dug  deep
for  hidden  treasures,  found  them,  and  regained  the  omnific  word."
(Cole.)

5 1  find  in  an  old  Masonic  work  the  following  concise  account  of
its  origin : — "  Royal  Arch  degree  dates  its  origin  from  the  return  of
the  Jews  to  rebuild  the  temple  of  Jerusalem,  under  G.  H.  and  J.
From  this  period  Masonry  ascends  to  the  tabernacle  in  the  wilderness,
under  the  superintendence  of  M.  A.  and  B. ;  and  from  thence  to  the
sacrifice  of  Noah,  under  the  rainbow  as  an  arch,  and  the  altar  as
a  pedestal;  and  lastly,  to  the  remotest  period  of  time,  where  we
trace  the  origin  of  our  five  grand  original  signs,  which  occurred  at
the  expulsion  of  our  first  parents  from  the  garden  of  Eden."

6  Our  Irish  Brethren  allege  that  the  English  mode  mixes  up  two
distinct  matters ;  and  that  the  time  used  in  England  for  the  events
of  the  Arch  belongs  properly  to  another  degree,  viz.,  the  Knight  of
the  Sword  and  the  East ;  while  some  intelligent  Brethren  consider
the  f\  degree  to  be  really  a  part  of  the  order  of  the  East.

7  "  It  is  in  the  Royal  Arch  degree  only,  where  the  full  fruition  of
light  and  knowledge  is  to  be  enjoyed ;  where  the  aspiring  student,
like  another  Prometheus,  can,  as  it  were,  steal  sacred  fire  from  the


OF    FREEMASONRY.  351

tising  a  splendid  superstition,  profusely  decorated  with
all  the  adjuncts  which  might  render  it  imposing  and
attractive.8

The  form  of  the  Tracing-board  before  us  is  an  oblong
square,  with  its  eastern  end  curved  into  an  arch :  but
the  Companions  are  supposed  to  be  seated  round,9  in
the  form  of  the  catenarian  arch,10  in  which  the  thrones
of  the  three  Principals  form  the  key  or  cope-stone,11  to

chariot  of  the  sun,  to  kindle  his  genius,  and  hold  converse,  face  to
face,  with  immortal  Truth  herself,  in  all  her  perfection  and  beauty."
(Stone's  Letters,  p.  44.)

8  The  members  of  this  degree  are  denominated  Companions,  and
entitled  to  a  full  explanation ;  whereas,  in  former  degrees,  they  are
recognized  by  the  familiar  appellation  of  Brothers,  and  kept  in  a
state  of  profound  ignorance  of  the  sublime  secret  which  is  here  dis-
closed.    Pythagoras  distinguished  his  pupils  in  the  same  manner.
After  a  probation  of  five  years  they  were  admitted  into  his  presence,
while  previously  he  delivered  his  instructions  from  behind  a  screen.

9  As  is  represented  in  an  engraving  of  the  new  temple  attached  to
the  Grand  Lodge  in  the  Freemasons'  Quarterly  Review,  vol.  v.  p.  476.

10  Prom  the  impenetrable  nature  of  the  strongest  of  all  architec-
tural forms,  we  learn  the  necessity  of  guarding  our  mysteries  from
profanation  by  the  most  inviolable  secrecy.     The  catenarian  chain
also  typifies  that  adherence  to  order,  and  that  spirit  of  fraternal
union,  which  has  given  energy  and  permanency  to  our  institution ;
thus  enabling  it  to  survive  the  wreck  of  mighty  empires,  and  resist
the  destroying  hand  of  time.     And  as  the  subordinate  members  of
a  catenarian  arch  strongly  gravitate  towards  the  centre,  or  key-stone,
which  comprehends  and  cements  the  whole  structure,   so  are  we
taught  to  look  up  with  reverence,  and  submit  with  cheerfulness,  to
every  constituted  authority,  whether  Masonic  or  civil.

11  The  cope-stones  are  represented  by  the  three  Principals  of  the
Chapter,   because  as  a  knowledge  of  the  secrets  of  the  vaulted
chamber  could  be  only  known  by  drawing  them  forth,  so  the  com-
plete knowledge  of  this  degree  can  be  obtained  only  by  passing
through  its  several  offices.


352


HISTORICAL    LANDMARKS


preserve  a  memory  of  the  vaulted  shrine  in  which  King
Solomon  deposited  the  sacred  name  or  word.  The
floor  is  a  Mosaic  pavement,12  with  a  tesselated  border,
extending  from  west  to  east,  approachable  by  six  broad
steps,  the  platform  of  the  arch  being  on  the  seventh ;
to  denote  the  six  degrees  which  are  usually  requisite
to  qualify  a  candidate  for  exaltation.13

The  first  object  that  attracts  attention  on  the  Mosaic
floor,  paved  with  black14  and  white  flags,15  after  having

12  "  Count  de  Gebelin  relates  that,  among  the  Athenians  black
was  the  colour  of  affliction,  and  white  that  of  innocence,  joy,  and
purity.      Thus  the   expiatory  ship,  that  every  year  sailed  first  to
Crete,  and  then  to  Delos,  hoisted  black  sails  at  departure  and  white
on  its  return ;  visible  symbols  of  mental  darkness  and  light,  of  grief
and  joy,  which  followed  in  its  wake.     Theseus  neglecting,  on  his
return,  to  hoist  the  white  signal,  his  father  Egeus  in  despair  cast
himself  into  the  sea.    The  Greeks  wore  black  in  mourning.    Pericles
congratulated  himself  in  never  having  caused  any  one  to  wear  it.
The  Arabs,  and  blazonry,  give  to  black  a  signification  evidently
derived  from  traditions  of  initiation.     It  designates,  amongst  the
Moors,  grief,  despair,  obscurity,  and  constancy.     Black,  in  blazon
named  sable,  signifies  prudence,  wisdom,  and  constancy  in  adversity
and  woe."    (Symbolic  Colours,  Weale's  Arch.  v.  26.)     Hence  the
Mosaic  work  of  a  Mason's  Lodge.

13  These  six  degrees  are,  1,  Entered  Apprentice;  2,  Fellowcraft  ;
3,  Master  Mason;  4,  Mark  Master;  5,  Past  Master;  6,  Most  Ex-
cellent Master.     These  degrees  are  all  required  in  America  and  other
countries ;  but  amongst  ourselves  any  Master  Mason  is  eligible  on
producing  the  prescribed  certificate  from  his  Lodge.     The  whole  six
preparatory  degrees  are  still  used  by  our  Irish  Brethren ;  and,  indeed,
the  degree  of  the  Royal  Arch  varies  considerably  amongst  them  from
our  own  forms.

14  "  Plutarch  states  Osiris  to  be  of  a  black  colour,  because  water
blackens  substances  which  it  saturates ;  from  this  the  primitive  idea
of  God  agitating  chaos  is  evident.     The  statue  of  Saturn  in  his
temple  was  of  black  stone.    His  priests  were  Ethiopians,  Abyssinians,


OP    FREEMASONRY.  353

attained  the  seventh  step,  is  the  holy  Bible  open,  upon
a  crimson  cushion,  with  tassels  of  gold.  Without  a
full  acknowledgment  of  the  truths  contained  in  that
sacred  volume,  no  one  can  penetrate  the  secrets  within
the  veil  of  the  sanctuary.  On  one  side  are  the  square
and  compasses,16  and  on  the  other  a  trowel  and  sword
in  saltire.17  Further  eastward  we  see  certain  curious

or  from  other  black  nations.  They  wore  blue  vestments  and  rings
of  iron.  When  the  king  entered  this  temple,  his  suite  wore  black  or
blue.  The  opposition  of  these  two  colours  represents  the  antagonism
of  life  and  death,  in  the  spiritual  and  material  states,  manifested  in
the  age  of  which  Saturn  is  the  symbol."  (Symb.  Col.  p.  20.)

15  ((  "White  being  the  symbol  of  absolute  truth,  black  should  be
that  of  error,  of  annihilation,  of  that  which  is  not.     God  alone  pos-
sesses self-existence ;  the  world  is  an  emanation  from  him.     White
reflects  all  luminous  rays.     Black  is  the  negation  of  light ;  it  was
attributed  to  the  author  of  evil  and  falsehood.    Genesis  and  the  Cos-
mogonies mention  the  antagonism  of  light  and  darkness.     The  form
of  this  fable  varies  according  to  each  nation ;  but  the  foundation  is
everywhere  the  same — under  the  symbol  of  the  creation  of  the  world
it  presents  the  picture  of  regeneration  and  initiation."  (Ibid.  p.  23.)

16  The  Bible,  square,  and  compasses  are  considered  as  appropriate
emblems  of  the  three  Grand  Masters  who  founded  the  first  temple.
The  Bible  denotes  the  wisdom  of  Solomon ;  the  square  the  power  of
Hiram ;  and  the  compasses  the  exquisite  skill  of  H.  A.  B.    But  spe-
culative Masons  regard  them  as  symbols  of  the  wisdom,  truth,  and
justice  of  the  Most  High.     His  wisdom  being  exemplified  in  the
sacred  volume,  which  contains  the  records  of  his  mighty  acts,  and
the  treasures  of  his  revealed  will ;  his  truth  is  represented  by  the
square,  as  the  acknowledged  symbol  of  strength  and  criterion  of
perfection,  which  by  his  unerring  and  impartial  justice  has  accurately
defined  the  limits  of  good  and  evil ;  assigning  to  mankind  a  due  pro-
portion of  pleasure  and  pain,  as  elucidated  by  the  compasses,  which
enable  us  to  ascertain  the  limits  of  all  geometric  forms,  and  reduce
our  ideas  of  proportion  and  equality  to  a  certain  standard.

17  The  sword  and  trowel  have  been  adopted  by  Koyal  Arch  Masons
to  commemorate  the  valour  of  those  worthy  individuals,  who  carried

VOL.  II.  A  A


354


fTSTORICAL    LANDMARKS


utensils  of  manual  labour,  on  which  is  placed  an  open
scroll,  written  in  some  unknown  language;  these  are
the  pickaxe,  the  crow,  and  the  shovel,18  supporting  the
sacred  roll  of  the  law,111  which  having  been  deposited
in  a  place  of  security  at  the  building  of  the  first  temple,
was  lost,  together  with  the  sacred  name,20  at  the  Baby-
on  the  building  of  the  second  temple  with  a  trowel  in  their  hand  and
a  sword  by  their  side,  that  they  might  be  ready  to  defend  the  holy
sanctuary  against  any  hostile  attack ;  by  which  they  left  an  impressi\e
lesson  to  succeeding  ages,  that  next  to  obedience  to  lawful  authority,
a  manly  and  determined  resistance  to  lawless  violence  is  an  essential
part  of  social  duty.

18  As  mechanical  instruments,  the  pickaxe  is  used  to  loosen  tin-
earth  ;  the  crow  to  make  purchases ;  and  the  shovel  to  clear  away
the  rubbish  and  loose  earth.     These  may  be  spiritualized  as  folio \\  - :
the  sound  by  the  stroke  of  the  pickaxe  reminds  us  of  the  sound
of  the  last  trumpet,  when  the  grave  shall  be  shaken,  loosened,  and
deliver  up  its  dead;  the  crow,  being  an  emblem  of  uprightness,
alludes  to  the  erect  manner  in  which  the  spirit  will  arise  on  that
great  and  awful  day  to  meet  its  tremendous  though  merciful  judge  ;
the  mortal  state  in  which  the  body  is  laid  in  the  grave,  is  powerfully
depicted  by  the  shovel,  that  when  the  remains  of  this  body  shall  have
been  properly  disposed  of,  we,  with  humble  but  holy  confidence,  hope
the  spirit  may  arise  to  everlasting  life.

19  "  We  have  a  tradition,  descending  from  time  immemorial,  in-
volving certain  facts  unknown  to  the  world,  that  the  sacred  ark,
together  with  the  book  of  the  law,  was  removed  from  the  most  holy
place,  under  Masonic  direction,  and  so  deposited  as  to  escape  that
overwhelming  destruction  which  swept  away  the  whole  land  of  Judea.
From  this  tradition  we  learn  where,  and  under  what  circumstances,
the  book  of  the  law  was  found.     The  very  name  of  Royal  Arch
has  a  significant  allusion,  well  understood  by  every  Brother  of  that
degree.     The  very  foundation  of  the  degree  rests  on  this  fact."
(Town.  Spec.  Mas.  p.  208.)

20  The  time  and  circumstances  attending  the  loss  of  the  word,  are
stated  thus  in  the  eighteenth  degree : — The  moment  when  the  veil


OF    FREEMASONRY.  355

lonisli  captivity,  and  accidentally  found  at  the  con-
struction of  the  second.21

Beyond  these  symbols,  and  about  the  centre  of  the
floor-cloth,  we  are  struck  with  certain  appearances
which  excite  astonishment  and  awe.  A  double  circle,
with  an  embossed  border,  encloses  a  double  equilateral
triangle,  a  symbol  which  may  be  traced  in  every  coun-
try of  the  world,  and  amongst  all  religions.22  With

of  the  temple  was  rent ;  when  darkness  and  consternation  covered
the  earth ;  when  the  stars  disappeared,  and  the  lamp  of  day  was
darkened;  when  the  implements  of  Masonry  were  lost,  and  the
cubical  stone  sweated  blood  and  water — that  was  the  moment  when
the  great  Masonic  word  was  lost.

21  «  When  the  idolatrous  Manasseh  ascended  the  throne  of  Judah,
to  preserve  the  book  from  the  rude  hands  of  infidelity  and  violence,
it  was  hidden  away,  and  remained  in  its  place  of  security  until  found
by  Hilkiah.     Again,  towards  the  close  of  the  reign  of  Josiah,  fore-
seeing the  wickedness  of  his  son  and  successor,  and  also  the  destruc-
tion of  the  temple,  and  the  carrying  away  into  Babylon,  Huldah,  the
prophetess,  once  secreted  the  law  in  a  place,  where  it  remained  until
the  return  from  the  captivity.     It  was  then  discovered  by  Ezra,
Zerubbabel,  and  their  associates,  on  the  removal  of  the  ruins  of  the
old  temple,  preparatory  to  the  erection  of  the  new."  (Stone's  Letters,
p.  46.)

22  This  emblem  has  been  found  in  the  cave  of  Elephanta,  on  the
great  image  of  the  Deity ;  at  Ghuznee,  in  the  wall  of  the  temple ;
in  Normandy  and  Brittany,  on  medallions  ;  on  the  breasts  of  Knights
Templars,  as  they  lie  in  their  recumbent  effigies  in  their  priories  ;  in
Christian  cathedrals ;  on  the  gates  of  Somnauth  ;  and  in  innumerable
other  monuments  of  bygone  ages.  Mr.  Drummond  Hay,  in  an  account
of  an  exploration  of  Western  Barbary,  speaking  of  the  ornaments  of
rooms  in  the  interior  of  a  Moor's  harem,  says — "  A  brass  frame,  in
the  shape  of  two  intersecting  squares,   served  as  a  chandelier  in  the
centre  of  the  ceiling  of  each  room.     These  brazen  frames  are  some-
limes  composed  of  two  intersecting  equilateral  triangles ;  and  this
latter  appears  to  be  the  correct  form  of  a  symbol  which  is  held  sacred

A  A  2


the  Jew  it  referred  to  the  Sephiroth ;  the  Moslem  saw
in  it  the  Deity  and  his  prophet :  and  with  the  Christian
it  symbolized  the  Creator,  in  his  capacity  of  Mediator,
working  out  our  redemption  under  two  natures,  the
human  and  divine.23  It  was  the  Pythagorean  symbol
of  health.  On  the  circumference  of  the  circle  are
placed  three  great  luminaries  in  a  triangular  form,  and
at  the  intersections  of  the  triangles  three  lesser  ones.24

by  several  races  in  the  East,  under  the  name  of  SOLOMON'S  SEAL."
Further  on,  speaking  of  a  Jewish  synagogue,  he  adds — "  In  front  of  a
recess,  wherein  the  sacred  rolls  were  deposited,  was  suspend  -d  a  lain]),
in  the  shape  of  a  gigantic  glass  tumbler,  held  within  a  bra/.en  frame,
formed  to  represent  the  seal  of  Solomon,"  viz.,  a  double  triangle,

23  "With  this  reference,  the  emblem  was  inserted  in  almost  all  per-
manent Christian  works,  and  particularly  in  the  painted  windows  of
our  cathedrals  and  collegiate  churches.     "  These  windows,"  says  M.
Portal,  "  like  the  paintings  of  Egypt,  have  frequently  a  double  sig-
nification, the  apparent  and  the  hidden ;  the  one  is  for  the  uninitiated,
the  other  applies  itself  to  the  mystic  creeds."     I  subjoin  a  plate  of
a  light  in  one  of  the  windows  of  Lincoln  cathedral,  in  illustration
of  this  point,  which  has  been  kindly  furnished  by  Brother  the  Rev.
J.  O.  Dakeyne,  Prov.  Grand  Chaplain  for  Lincolnshire.     The  apex
of  the  triangle  pointing  upwards  denotes  the  divinity,  and  that
pointing  downwards  the  humanity  of  Christ.     It  occurs  also  in  a
large  painted  window  in  Lichfield  cathedral ;    in  one  of  the  old
churches  at  Chester  ;  and  several  other  buildings.    Bro.  Willoughby,
of  Birkenhead,  in  a  letter  to  the  author  observes — "  It  is  my  opinion
that  the  true  ecclesiastical  style  of  arch  was'that  which  contains  equi-
lateral triangles ;  I  mean  the  form  of  arch  adapted  by  our  ancient
Brethren,  and  intended  by  them  to  conceal  the  doctrine  of  the  Tri-
nity, and  being  understood  only  among  themselves,  was  probably  one
of  their  secrets."

24  The  two  intersecting   triangles  were  formerly  said  to  be  an
emblem  of  the  elements  of  fire  and  water,  of  prayer  and  remission,
of  petition  and  blessing,  of  creation  and  redemption,  of  life  and  death,
of  resurrection  and  judgment.


8

I


\


«    -4


v^E


>


V


\


'^-


V

V


^


>,


OF    FREEMASONRY.  357

The  three  large  lights  refer  to  the  sacred  Logos,  and
are  expressive  of  his  creative,  preserving,  and  destroying
power,  as  the  Creator,  Redeemer,  and  Judge  of  man-
kind. In  the  centre  of  these  lights,  and  upon  the  two
triangles,25  is  placed  a  box,  or  chest,  in  the  form  of  a
double  cube,26  with  some  mysterious  depositories  on  its
upper  surface,  which  are  carefully  veiled  from  public
observation.

In  the  east  we  see  a  throne,  elevated  on  a  dais  with
three  steps,  having  a  superb  and  royal  canopy,  com-
posed of  the  three  Masonic  colours,27  blue,28  purple,

25  Attached  to  the  intersecting  triangle  there  is  frequently  the
motto  of,  NIL  NISI  CLAVIS  DEEST,  which  is  a  declaration  that  the
wearer  of  a  jewel  containing  this  emblem  is  desirous  of  doing  his
duty,  and  filling  up  with  justice  that  link  in  the  chain  of  creation,
wherein  the  Most  High  hath  been  pleased  to  place  him.

26  The  cube  is  a  symbol  of  truth,  of  wisdom,  and  moral  perfection.
The  new  Jerusalem,  promised  in  the  Apocalypse,  is  equal  in  length,
breadth,  and  height.     The  mystical  city  ought  to  be  considered  as
a  new  church,  where  divine  wisdom  will  reign.     Isaiah,  announcing
the  coming  of  the  Messiah,  said,  "  He  shall  dwell  in  the  highest
place  of  the  solid  rock,  and  the  water  which  shall  flow  from  him
shall  give  life."

27  The  purple  implies  awe  and  reverence,  the  blue  truth  and  con-
stancy, and  the  crimson  justice  tempered  with  mercy ;  from  whence
may  be  drawn  inferences  of  the  most  important  character,  which  are
too  obvious  to  need  explanation.

28  "  Symbolism  distinguishes  three  blue  colours :   one  of  which
emanates  from  red,  another  from  white,  and  a  third  allied  to  black,
frequently  distinguished  by  different  gradations  of  colour,  and  some-
times confounded  in  one  alone.    The  blue  emanating  from  red  repre-
sents the  etherial  fire ;  its  signification  is  the  celestial  love  of  truth.
In  the  mysteries,  it  relates  to  the  baptism  of  fire.  The  blue  emanating
from  white  indicates  the  truth  of  faith ;  and  relates  to  the  living
waters  of  the  Bible,  or  to  the  baptism  of  the  spirit.    The  blue  allied


358


HISTORICAL    LANDMARKS


and  crimson,29  fringed  and  tasselled  with  gold,  and
surmounted  by  a  crown,  out  of  which  springs  the  staff
of  a  white30  banner,  charged  with  a  triangle31  within  a
circle,  including  the  triple  tau.32  Placed  beneath  the

to  black,  conducts  us  back  to  the  cosmogony,  to  the  spirit  of  God
moving  on  chaos ;  it  relates  to  natural  baptism.  These  three  aspects
of  the  same  colour  correspond  to  the  three  principal  degrees  of
ancient  initiation,  and  to  the  triple  baptism  of  Christianity."  (Sym-
bolic Colours,  ut  supra,  p.  19.)

29  Or  more  properly  scarlet,  twice  dyed  in  the  blood  of  the  murex.
Te  bis  afro — murice  tinctse — vestiunt  lanse.

0  The  Americans  explain  the  colours  scarlet,  purple,  blue,  and
white  as  follows : — Scarlet  is  emblematical  of  fervency  and  zeal,  and
the  appropriate  colour  of  the  Royal  Arch  degree;  it  admonishes  us
to  be  fervent  in  the  exercise  of  our  devotions  to  God,  and  zealous  in
our  endeavous  to  promote  the  happiness  of  men.  Purple  is  produced
by  a  due  mixture  of  blue  and  scarlet ;  the  former  of  which  is  the
characteristic  colour  of  the  symbolic  degrees ;  it  teaches  us  to  cul-
tivate and  improve  that  spirit  of  harmony  between  Craft  Masons  and
the  Companions  of  the  sublime  degrees,  which  should  ever  distin-
guish the  members  of  a  society  founded  on  the  principles  of  ever-
lasting truth  and  universal  philanthropy.  Blue  is  an  emblem  of
friendship  and  benevolence ;  and  instructs  us,  that  in  the  mind  of  a
Mason,  those  virtues  should  be  as  expansive  as  the  blue  arch  of
heaven  itself.  White  is  emblematical  of  that  purity  of  heart  and
rectitude  of  conduct,  which  is  essential  to  obtain  admission  into  the
sanctum  sanctorum.

31  In  the  days  of  Pythagoras,  the  triangle  was  esteemed  the  most
sacred  of  emblems  ;  and  when  an  obligation  of  more  than  usual
importance  was  administered,  it  was  universally  given  in  a  triangle ;
and  when  so  taken,  none  were  ever  known  to  violate  it.  The  Egyp-
tians termed  it  the  sacred  number,  or  number  of  perfection ;  and  so
highly  did  the  ancients  esteem  the  figure,  that  it  became  among
them  an  object  of  worship,  and  the  great  principle  of  animated
existence.  They  gave  it  the  name  of  God,  affirming  that  it  repre-
sented the  animal,  vegetable,  and  mineral  creation.

3*  This  figure  forms  two  right  angles  on  each  of  the  exterior  lines,


Or    FREEMASONRY.  359

canopy,  in  a  triangular  form,  are  three  sceptres,  the
one  surmounted  by  a  crown,  and  the  two  others  by
a  mitre,  and  the  Allseeing  Eye ;  and  on  each  side  of
the  floor-cloth  are  a  series  of  banners,33  mounted  on
staves,34  which  formed  the  distinctive  bearing35  of  the

and  another  at  the  centre,  by  their  union,  for  the  three  angles  of
each  triangle  are  equal  to  two  right  angles.  This  being  triplified,
illustrates  the  jewel  worn  by  the  Companions  of  the  Order  ;  which,
by  its  intersection,  forms  a  given  number  of  angles,  which  may  be
taken  in  five  several  combinations  ;  and  these  being  reduced,  the
amount  in  right  angles  will  be  found  equal  to  the  five  Platonic
bodies  which  represent  the  four  elements  and  sphere  of  the  universe.

33  For  a  particular  explanation  of  the  banners  I  refer  the  reader
to  Lecture  46.

34  In  the  year  2513,  while  Moses  was  tending  the  flock  of  his
father-in-law  Jethro,  at  the  foot  of  a  mountain,  he  was  commanded
by  the  Almighty  to  go  down  into  Egypt  and  deliver  his  brethren
from  their  galling  captivity.     But  Moses  was  in  doubt,  and  said,
"Who  am  I,  that  T  should  go?"     To  encourage  him,  the  Lord
promised  his  divine  assistance.     Even  this  did  not  satisfy  Moses
of  the  truth  of  the  communication ;  he  therefore  requested  a  sign,  to
convince  him  of  His  power  and  to  confirm  his  promise.     The  Deity
then  asked  him,  "  What  is  that  in  thine  hand  ? "     And  he  said — a
rod.     And  the  Lord  said  unto  him,  "  Cast  it  upon  the  ground  ! "
And  he  cast  it  on  the  ground  and  it  immediately  became  a  serpent,
and  Moses  fled  from  it.   And  the  Lord  said  unto  Moses,  "  Put  forth
thine  hand  and  take  it  by  the  tail."     He  did  so,  and  it  resumed  its
original  form.     This  is  the  origin  of  our  E.  A.  staves.

35  The  old  Masons  used  to  say  in  the  R.  A.  Lecture,  "  On  the  top
of  those  staves  are  the  banners  of  the  twelve  tribes,  which  we  have
for  many  purposes,  especially  to  commemorate  the  great  wonders
wrought  for  the  children  of  Israel  during  their  travels  in  the  wilder-
ness, when  they  were  first  set  up  as  standards  around  their  encamp-
ments, arid  about  which  each  tribe  was  assembled  in  due  form.    The
devices  thereon  were  emblematical  of  what  should  happen  to  their
posterity  in  after  ages.


360


HISTORICAL    LANDMARKS


twelve  tribes  of  Israel,  and  figurative  of  the  peculiar
blessing  bequeathed  to  each  by  the  patriarch  Jacob,
who  assembled  them  together,  when  he  was  dying,  for
that  purpose.36

The  system  in  the  United  States  differs  materially
from  that  which  is  practised  amongst  ourselves,  al-
though in  essentials  we  agree.  The  chapter-room  is
considered  a  transcript  of  the  tabernacle  in  the  wilder-
ness,37 i.  e.  an  oblong  square,  inclosed  by  four  veils  or
curtains,  and  divided  into  separate  apartments  by  four
cross  veils,  including  the  west  end  veil  or  entrance.31'

36  The  bearings  on  the  wands  denote  the  regal,  the  prophetical,
and  the  sacerdotal  offices,  all  of  which  were,  and  still  ought  to  be
conferred,  and  in  a  peculiar  manner  accompanied  with  the  possession
of  particular  secrets.

37  This  arrangement  is  rather  equivocal,  unless  it  have  a  reference
to  the  holy  Lodge  opened  by  Moses,  Aaron,  and  Bezaleel,  in  the
wilderness  of  Arabia  ;  and  such  an  allusion  would  certainly  be  out  of
place  here.

38  I  am  ignorant  of  the  authority  for  this  disposition  of  a  Royal
Arch  Chapter.     The  tabernacle  in  the  wilderness,  as  well  as  the
temple  of  Solomon,  had  only  one  veil.     The  former  indeed  had  ten
curtains,  but  only  three  principal  ones  which  formed  actual  divisions,
and  through  which  it  was  necessary  for  the  high  priest  to  pass  into
the  sanctum  sanctorum ;  but  I  am  not  aware  that  they  were  subject
to  any  surveillance.     "  The  first  curtain,"  says  Josephus  (Ant.  Jud.
B.  iii.  c.  6.),  which  served  to  separate  the  Holy  of  Holies  from  the
holy  place,  was  ten  cubits  square,  and  was  richly  ornamented  with
flowers  and  various  other  figures ;  from  which,  however,  those  of
living  creatures  were  totally  excluded.     A  second  curtain,  of  equal
size  and  workmanship,  overspread  the  five  columns  at  the  entrance
of  the  building,  being  fastened  with  hooks  and  eyes  to  the  top,  and
hanging  down  as  low  as  the  middle  of  the  columns,  the  remaining
part  being  left  open  for  the  entrance  of  the  priests.    This  curtain  was
commonly  concealed  from  view  by  another  of  the  same  size,  placed


OF    FREEMASONRY.  361

The  veils  were  parted  in  the  centre,  and  protected  by
four  sentinels  with  drawn  swords.  In  the  east,  Haggai,
Joshua,  and  Zerubbabel39  usually  sat  in  grand  council,
to  examine  all  who  wished  to  be  employed  in  the
noble  and  glorious  work  of  rebuilding  the  temple.40
Since  that  time,  every  Chapter  of  Royal  Arch  Masons,
if  properly  formed,  is  a  correct  representation  of  this
tabernacle.41

at  a  small  distance  from  it,  but  less  costly  in  its  materials  and  work-
manship."

39  The  Chapter  consists  in  the  United  States  of  nine  officers  acting
under  a  charter  or  warrant  from  the  Grand  Chapter  within  whose
jurisdiction  it  is  held.     This  charter  empowers  them  to  confer  four
degrees,  viz.  Mark,  Past,  and  Most  Excellent  Masters,  and  the  Royal
Arch.     The  officers  are — 1.  High  Priest;  2.  King;  3.  Scribe;  4.
Captain  of  the  Host ;  5.  Principal  Sojourn er  ;  6.  Eoyal  Arch  Cap-
tain;  7.  Grand  Master  of  the  Third  Veil;   8.  Grand  Master  of
Second  Veil;  9.  Grand  Master  of  First  Veil.

40  Fellows  untruly  represents  the  ceremonies,  as  being  attended
with  thunder  and  lightning,  firing   of  pistols,  rolling  of  cannon
balls,  &c.     In  the  conclusion,  says  he,  the  aspirants  are  brought  to
light,  and  presented  to  what  is  called  the  Grand  Council,  consisting
of  three  personages,   denominated  High  Priest,   King,   and  Holy
Scribe ;   on  whose  decorations  some  hundreds  of  dollars  are  ex-
pended, in  order  to  prepare  them  to  sustain  the  exalted  characters
allotted  to  them.      These  three  are  the  principal  persons  of  the
drama.     The  fourth,  and  next  in  dignity,  is  styled  the  Captain  of
the  Host,  who  is  stationed  at  the  right  hand  of  the  Grand  Council,
and  whose  duty  is  to  receive  their  orders  and  to  see  them  duly  exe-
cuted.    The  High  Priest  corresponds  with  the  hierophant  of  the
mysteries,  the  King  with  the  flambeaux  bearer  the  Sun,  who  was
deemed  the  king  and  governor  of  the  world  ;  the  Holy  Scribe  with
Isis,  and  the  Captain  of  the  Host  with  Anubis,  Hermes,  or  Mercury,
the  messenger  of  the  gods."    And  the  author  concludes  with  saying,
"  the  identity  of  these  institutions  cannot  be  mistaken."

41  Stone  observes  with  greater  truth,  "  the  pattern  of  the  Chapter


302


HISTORICAL    LANDMARKS


The  second  Tracing-board  represents  a  city,  with
the  ruins  of  some  magnificent  building,  underneath
which  we  see  a  series  of  beautiful  pillars,42  and  amongst
the  ruins  lie  three  key  stones,43  and  the  working  tools ;
beneath  which  an  arched  vault44  appears,  containing  an

is  taken  from  the  rich  pavilion  temple  erected  by  Moses  in  the  wil-
derness. The  curtains  are  of  blue,  purple,  and  scarlet;  the  first
being  an  emblem  of  universal  friendship  and  benevolence,  the  second
of  harmony  among  brethren  and  everlasting  truth,  and  the  third  in-
culcating fervency  of  our  devotions  to  God,  and  zeal  in  promoting
I  he  happiness  of  men."  (Letters,  p.  49.)

42  Fellows  erroneously  supposes,  that  "  the  arch  supported  by  two
pillars  only,  is  a  representation  of  the  semicircle  made  by  the  appa-
rent course  of  the  sun  in  upper  hemisphere,  from  Aries  to  Libra
inclusive ;  from  whence  originates  the  name  of  the  lloyal  Arch  degree
of  Masonry."  (Anc.  Mys.  p.  5.)     And  to  the  same  effect  he  says  in
another  place  (p.  321.),  "  the  Itoyal  Arch  degree  owes  its  title  to  the
imaginary  arch  made  in  the  heavens  by  the  course  of  King  Osiris,  the
.sun,  from  the  vernal  to  the  autumnal  equinox.     The  signs  through
which  he  passes  in  forming  this  semicircle,  including  those  of  the
equinoxes,  being  seven,  the  number  of  grades  or  steps  required  to  be
taken  by  the  Mason  to  entitle  him  to  the  honours  of  this  degree."

43  To  teach  us  not  to  rely  on  our  own  reasom'ng  and  abilities  for
our  conduct  through  life,  but  to  draw  forth  our  rules  of  government
from  the  law,  the  prophets  and  the  sacred  word ;  and  also  to  com-
memorate the  discovery  of  the  Royal  Arch.

44  It  is  an  error  to  suppose  that  arches  were  unknown  at  the  build-
ing of  the  temple.     Their  construction  was  indeed  a  secret,  but  it
was   known   to   the  Dionysiaca,    a   party   of  whom   were   present
at  that  period.     "  An  opinion,"  says  Mr.  Wilkinson  in  his  Topo-
graphy  of  Thebes,    "  admitted   by  the  generality  of  the   learned
world,  gains  force  by  want  of  contradiction,  till  at  length  it  passes
into  fact.     Such  has  been  the  case  with  the  antiquity  of  the  arch,
which,  to  the  surprise  of  every  one  who  has  attentively  considered
ancient  remains,  has  been  confined  to  the  era  of  Augustus.    Without
stopping  to  mention  one  of  the  time  of  Psamaticus  II.,  or  the  pro-


OP    FREEMASONRY.  363

altar  or  pedestal  similar  to  the  one  already  noticed,
and  closely  veiled  in  a  blue  covering,45  standing  in  the

bability  of  its  being  employed  in  the  houses  of  the  Egyptians  from
the  earliest  times,  owing  to  the  small  quantity  of  wood  growing  in
the  country,  and  in  roofing  the  chambers  of  crude  brick  pyramids,  I
proceed  to  facts,  which  require  neither  argument  to  support  nor  allow
prejudice  to  refute  them.  I  had  long  felt  persuaded,  that  the  greater
part  of  the  crude  brick  vaults  in  the  western  tombs  of  Thebes  were
at  least  coeval  with  the  eighteenth  dynasty,  but  had  never  been  for-
tunate enough  to  find  proofs  to  support  my  conjecture,  till  chance
threw  in  my  way  a  tomb,  vaulted  in  the  usual  manner,  with  an  arched
doorway  of  the  same  materials,  stuccoed,  and  bearing  in  every  part
of  the  fresco-paintings  the  name  of  Amunoph  I.  Innumerable  vaults
and  arches  exist  at  Thebes  of  early  date,  but  unfortunately  none  with
the  names  of  kings  remaining  on  them.  The  style  of  the  paintings
in  the  crude  brick  pyramids  evince  at  once  that  they  belong  either  to
the  last  end  of  the  last  mentioned,  or  the  beginning  of  the  seven-
teenth dynasty."  This  discovery  carries  the  existence  of  the  arch  up
to  B.  c.  1540,  or  460  years  before  the  building  of  Solomon's  temple.
And  Wilkinson  (Thebes,  p.  338)  thinks  they  were  known  at  a  still
earlier  period.  Dr.  Clark  says,  in  his  book  of  Travels,  that  "  the
Cyclopean  gallery  of  Tyrius  exhibits  lancet  arches  almost  as  old  as
the  time  of  Abraham ;"  and  this  opinion  is  corroborated  by  Sir  W.
Gell.  (Argolis,  p.  56.)  The  first  religious  temple  in  the  world  was
furnished  with  domes,  and  probably  arches.  Heb.  GOBION,  trans-
lated by  Buxtorf,  Parkhurst,  and  others  KotXoorafyios,  fornix.

45  In  Egypt  AM  ON  is  the  divine  word,  the  new  sun,  the  sun
of  spring.  He  enters  the  golden  circle  of  the  year  by  appearing  in
the  sign  Aries ;  victor  over  the  darkness  of  the  inferior  hemisphere,
he  expands  his  heat  and  light  upon  the  earth.  His  image,  according
to  Eusebius,  was  that  of  a  man  sitting,  of  an  azure  colour,  with  a
ram's  head ;  he  is  thus  represented  on  Egyptian  paintings.  The
fathers  of  the  church  call  Jesus  the  new  sun,  the  lamb  divine,

sacrificed  to  efface  the  sins  of  the  world,  and  conquer  the  spirit  of
darkness.  On  paintings  of  the  middle  ages  the  robe  of  the  Messiah
is  blue,  during  the  three  years  of  his  preaching  truth  and  wisdom."
(Symbolic  Colours,  p.  18.)


364


HISTORICAL    LANDMARKS


centre  of  a  double  circle46  containing  the  signs47  of  the
Zodiac.48  Near  the  altar  is  a  scroll,  upon  which  the  sun
darts  its  rays49  through  an  aperture  in  the  roof.50  On

46  The  circle  has  ever  been  considered  symbolic  of  the  deity ;  for
as  a  circle  appears  to  have  neither  beginning  nor  end,  it  may  justly
be  considered  a  type  of  God,  without  either  beginning  of  days  or
ending  of  years.    It  also  reminds  us  of  a  future  state,  where  we  hope
to  enjoy  everlasting  happiness  and  glory.

47  The  Egyptians,  at  a  very  early  period  of  their  history,  placed
the  various  parts  of  the  body  under  the  Zodiacal  signs.     Thus,  "  the
hair  belonged  to  the  moon,  the  celestial  nile,  the  god  of  the  primitive
waters,  and  father  of  the  gods ;  the  head  to  the  sun ;  the  eyes  to
Venus ;  the  ears  to  Macedo,  a  god  represented  with  the  head  of  a
jackall,  the  guardian  of  the  tropics ;  the  right  temple  to  the  stars  ;
the  left  temple  to  the  living  spirit ;  the  nose  and  lips  to  Ainibis ;  the
teeth  to  Selk ;  the  beard  to  Macedo ;  the  neck  to  Isis ;  the  arms  to
Osiris  ;  the  knees  to  Neith  ;  the  elbows  to  Ord ;  the  back  to  Sisho ;
the  thighs  to  Bal  Hor ;  the  legs  to  Netpe ;  the  feet  to  Phtha ;  tho
fingers  to  Uraei,  or  all  the  goddesses."  (Spineto.  Hier.  p.  313.)    The
above  appropriation  is  Egyptian ;   but  the  same  thing,  how  absurd
soever  it  may  be  deemed,  was  practised  in  this  country  down  to  the
beginning  of  the  present  century ;  as  may  be  evidenced  by  the  Vox
Stellarum,  or  any  other  almanack  of  that  period,  under  the  head  of
"  The  Anatomy."

48  In  some  of  the  continental  systems,  the  twelve  signs  of  the
Zodiac  give  their  names  to  as  many  degrees.

49  We  have  a  tradition,  that  the  height  of  the  sun  at  Jerusalem,  on

the  day ,  was  fifty -eight  degrees,  which  formed  an  angle  of  the

same  dimensions  with  the  horizon  of  that  latitude ;  and  by  this  repre-
sentation in  our  Chapters,  we  are  enabled  to  convey  a  more  lasting
impression  to  the  mind,  of  the  nature  of  certain  discoveries  recorded
in  the  degree.

50  See  Lecture  39.

51  I  am  inclined  to  think  that  the  Ark,  Mark,  and  some  others,
including  what  are  now  termed  "  the  veils,"  as  well  as  the  Link,
were  all  preparatory  to  the  Royal  Arch,  at  its  first  establishment,
forming  a  series  of  degrees  connected  with  Jewish  or  sacred  history  ;


OF    FREEMASONRY.  365

this  part  of  the  subject  I  cannot  be  explicit,51  but  must
recommend  the  anxious  inquirer  to  search  for  informa-
tion in  the  regular  Chapters  of  the  Order.

With  such  a  series  of  emblems  before  us,  it  will  be
impossible  to  resist  the  moral  which  they  are  intended
to  convey.  And  this  is  merely  a  completion  of  the
lesson  which  was  taught  at  our  first  introduction  into
Masonry — veneration  for  the  deity — kindness,  respect,
and  assistance  to  our  Brethren — and  a  due  regard  to
the  four  cardinal  virtues  in  our  own  persons.  If  we
practice  these  duties  with  fidelity,  we  shall  be  truly
Royal  Arch  Masons,  and  be  blessed  with  the  possession
of  an  immortal  inheritance  in  those  heavenly  mansions
veiled  from  mortal  eye,  into  which  the  great  I  AM
will  bid  us  enter,  as  into  a  celestial  Lodge,  where
peace,  order,  and  harmony  eternally  preside.

while  the  three  blue  degrees  formed  another  series,  connecting  the
Jews  and  Gentiles.  I  suspect  also,  that  in  the  Jewish  series  alluded
to,  it  was  customary  to  make  the  word  and  token  of  an  inferior
degree  the  pass  word  and  pass  token  to  the  next  superior  one ;  and
as  the  gradation  was  not  by  any  means  uniform,  the  signs,  words,
and  tokens  became  in  the  end  inextricably  confused.


3(50


HISTORICAL    LANDMARKS


LECTURE    XXXVI.


THE  INEFFABLE  DEGREES.

"The  Ineffable  Degrees  of  Masonry  are  as  ancient,  it  is  all.
as  the  time  of  King  Solomon  ;  the  proof  of  which  is  probably  known
only  to  those  who  are  professors  of  the  degnr.-." — \\KHH.

"Entering  now  into  the  mystic  dome,  tin:  candidate  is  filled  \\ith
horror  and  amazement;  he  is  seized  with  solicitude  and  a  tolal  per-
plexity ;  he  is  unable  to  move  a  step  forward,  and  is  at  a  loss  to  find
the  road  \\hieh  i>  to  lead  him  to  the  pluee  he  aspires  to,  till  his  con-
ductor lays  open  the  vestibule  of  the  temple." — THKMISTIUS.

"  The  station  you  are  called  on  to  fulfil  is  important,  not  only  a-
it  respects  the  correct  practice  of  our  rites  and  ceremonies,  and  the
internal  economy  of  the  Chapter  over  which  you  preside,  but  the
public  reputation  of  the  institution  will  be  generally  found  to  rise  or
fall  according  to  the  skill,  fidelity,  and  discretion  with  which  its  con-
cerns are  managed,  and  in  proportion  as  the  character  and  conduct
of  its  principal  officers  arc  estimable  or  censurable."

ADDRESS  TO  H.  P.  (CROSS.)

THE  Ineffable  Degrees1  record  traditions  of  events
which  are  said  to  have  occurred  about  the  time  when

1  These  degrees,  eleven  in  number,  commence-  with  that  of  Secret
Master,  and  end  with  the  degree  of  Perfection.  In  most  of  these
degrees,  the  sacred  word  is  the  same  with  a  different  pronunciation,
according  to  the  disposition  of  the  vowel  points ;  thus,  a  different
pointing  of  the  four  consonants  (Jod,  He,  Vau,  He),  which  form  the
ineffable  name  of  Jehovah,  produces  a  different  word.  In  the  degree
of  perfection  the  candidate  is  enjoined  to  pronounce  the  word  but


OF    FREEMASONRY  367

the  temple  was  completed.2  Their  decorations  and
appointments  are  splendid  and  imposing ;  and  the
candidate,  at  his  illumination,  is  surprised  at  the  dis-
play of  silks  and  brocades  of  various  colours,  jewels,
and  gems,  with  which  the  Lodges  or  Chapters  are
hung,  and  the  companions  decorated ;  the  general
effect  being  heightened  by  numerous  lights,  which
throw  a  halo  of  glory  over  the  scene,  and  show  to
great  advantage  the  collection  of  unusual  symbols
which  are  disposed  in  the  several  quarters  of  the  room.3

once  during  his  lifetime ;  and  hence  it  is  termed  ineffable,  or  unut-
terable. The  ineffable  degrees  have  undergone  several  revisions.

2  I  am  unacquainted  with  the  authority  on  which  these  traditions
rest,  and  introduce  them  here  for  the  information  of  those  Brethren
who  are  in  the  dark  respecting  the  higher  degrees  of  foreign  Lodges.
To  pure  Freemasonry  these  degrees  have  little  relation ;  and  I  can
conceive  that  they  are  only  practised  as  a  species  of  dramatic  amuse-
ment, subsidiary  to  the  general  business  of  the  Lodge.   But  they  are
patronized  on  the  continent  and  in  America,  by  "  most  potent,  grave,
and  reverend  signers,"  got  up  with  much  splendour  and  expense,
and  practised  with  great  regularity  and  precision.     Our  American
Brother  Webb  thinks,  in  the  words  of  my  motto,  that  they  are  as
ancient  as  the  time  of  King  Solomon.     This  however  is  incredible.
Much  ingenuity  has  been  displayed  in  their  formation  ;  their  design
is  benevolent,  and  their  institution,  as  Bro.  Webb  concludes,  was
doubtless  intended  for  the  glory  of  the  deity  and  the  good  of  man-
kind.

3  These  degrees  do  not  appear  to  have  been  definitively  classed
and  settled  till  a  very  recent  period.    In  1797,  four  Jews,  at  Charles-
ton in  America,  whose  names  were  John  Mitchell,  Frederick  Dalcho,
Emanuel  de  la  Motta,  and  Abraham  Alexander,  assumed  the  func-
tions of  Grand  Inspectors  General  of  the  33rd  throughout  the  two
hemispheres,  and  took  the  entire  management  of  philosophical,  sub-
lime, and  ineffable  Masonry  into  their  own  hands.    Little  appears  to
have  been  done,  however,  till  the  year  1802,  when,  at  a  general
meeting  of  the  Order,  the  following  resolution  was  placed  on  the


368


IIISTOKH    \l,     I.ANhM  AHKS


The  traditions  perjtetuated  in  these  eleven  decrees'  an-
as follows  :  ''—

When  the  temple  of  Solomon  was  nearly  finished,
some  of  the  Tyrian  workmen  committed  a  crime  nf
such  magnitude,  that  they  found  it  necessary  to  flee
from  Judea  to  avoid  the  consequences.6  King  Solo-
minutes  : — "  Union,  contentment,  wisdom.  The  Grand  Commander
informed  the  lii-p.rtors,  that  tliey  were  convened  lor  the  purpose  of
taking  into  consideration  (lie  propriety  of  addressing  circular  In-
to the  dilfcrent  Symbolic  Grand  Lodges  and  Snhlime  Councils
throughout  the  two  hemispheres,  explanatory  of  the  or.igin  and
nature  of  the  s  nl.  lime  degrees  of  Masonry  ;  and  a  resolution  \\  i-  imme-
diately adopted,  appointing  the  above  named  Inspectors  to  draft  and
submit  such  letters  to  the  Council  at  their  next  meeting.  In  pur-

iicc  of  this  authority  the  commit!  ded  to  class  the  deim

and  to  place  them  on  a  footing  \\hieh  might  be  considered  permanent.

The  result  was  promulgated  in  aft  accredited  manifesto,  dated  hi.-

1802."      l-'rom   this   period   the  decrees  which   form  the  subject   of
the  present  lecture  \\eiv  termed  inelfable,  as  they  n.-Iat<  \ely

to  Jewish  affairs,  in  order  to  distinguish  them  from  the  sublime
degrees,  which  are  mostly  Christian.

4  The  names  of  these  degrees  are  as  follows: — 1,  Secret  Mast< T  ;
2,  Perfect  Master:   3,  Intimate  Secretary;   1,   Provost  and  Judge;
5,   Tntcndant   of  the   Buildings,    or   Master  in    I-rael:    f>,    Klected
Knights  of  Nine;  7,  Elected   Grand  Master;   8,  Sublime  Kni
Elected;    9,  Grand  Master  Architect;  10,  Knights  of  the  Ninth
Arch;  11,  Grand  Elect,  Perfect,  and  Sublime  "Mason.

5  As  these  degrees  are  not  tolerated  by  the  Grand  Lodge  of  1  •! up-
land, I  feel  myself  perfectly  at  liberty  to  publish  their  general  history,
leaving,  however,  the  peculiar  details  untouched.

G  This  offence  is  said  to  have  occasioned  the  loss  of  the  Master's
word.  Dalcho  suggests  that  this  word  is  to  be  found  in  no  language
that  was  ever  used.  "  It  is,  in  fact,"  he  says,  "  not  a  word,  but
merely  a  jumble  of  letters,  forming  a  sound  without  meaning.  The
manner  in  which  the  pristine  word  wras  lost,  and  the  particular  situa-
tion in  which  another  was  substituted,  is  too  well  known  for  me  to
repeat.  The  tirst  expressions  of  the  Fellowcrafts,  according  to  the


OF    FKEEMSONRY.  309

mon  was  overwhelmed  with  grief,  and  offered  a  great
reward  for  the  discovery  of  the  culprits.  Colonel
Webb,  who  was  the  Great  High  Priest  of  the  Supreme
Grand  Chapter  of  Rhode  Island,  and  Grand  Master  of
the  Knights  Templars,  in  his  "  Monitor,"  a  publication
specifically  sanctioned  by  the  Grand  Lodges  of  America,
relates  some  very  interesting  particulars  respecting  this
event ;  in  which  he  refers  to  an  existing  tradition7  of
the  deliberations  of  King  Solomon  with  the  Masters
of  his  Lodges,8  when  a  stranger  applied  for  admission,

system  of  ancient  Masons,  were  two  Hebrew  words,  highly  signi-
ficant, and  appropriate  to  the  melancholy  occasion.  From  the  cor-
ruption of  these  the  present  word  is  formed."

7  The  degree  of  Perfect  Master  is  founded  on  this  traditional  event.
At  the  death  of  H.  A.  B.,  Solomon  being  desirous  of  paying  a  tribute
of  respect  to  his  friend,  requested  Grand  Inspector  Adoniram  to  make
arrangements  for  his  interment.     He  furnished  a  superb  tomb  and
obelisk  of  black  and  white  marble,  which  he  finished  in  nine  days.
The  entrance  to  the  tomb  was  between  two  pillars,  supporting  a
square  stone  surrounded  by  three  circles,  on  which  was  engraven  the
letter  J.     The  heart  was  enclosed  in  a  golden  urn,  to  the  side  of
which  a  triangular  stone  was  fixed,  inscribed  with  the  letters  J.  M.  B.,
within  a  wreath  of  cassia.     The  urn  was  placed  on  the  top  of  the
obelisk.     Three  days  after  the  interment,  Solomon  visited  the  tomb,
and  with  solemn  ceremonies,  in  the  presence  of  the  Brethren,  offered
up  a  prayer,  and  with  hands  and  eyes  elevated  to  heaven,  exclaimed,
"  It  is  accomplished  !"

8  This  was  an  assembly  of  Intendants,  and  originated  the  degree
of  the  Elected  Knights  of  Nine.     As  the  degree  is  at  present  prac-
tised, the  Brethren  are  clothed  in  black,  with  hats  flapped,  and  a
broad  black  scarf  worn  from  left  to  right,  on  the  lower  part  of  which
are  nine  red  roses,  four  on  each  side  and  one  at  the  bottom,  to  which
is  hung  a  dagger.     The  aprons  are  white,  lined  with  black,  speckled
with  blood  ;  in  the  centre  a  human  arm  holding  a  man's  head  by  the
hair,  and  on  the  flap  an  arm  and  dagger.     Adjoining  the  Lodge  iu
a  dark  room,  representing  a  cavern,  in  which  is  placed  a  lamp,

VOL.  II.  B  B


370  HISTORICAL    LANDMARKS

stating  that  he  had  facts  of  the  utmost  consequence  to
impart.

The  communications  of  the  stranger  were  of  a  most
secret  and  important  nature ;  and  Solomon,  with  the
advice  of  his  Chapter  of  ninety9  Intendants,10  adopted
certain  resolutions,  and  prescribed  certain  passwords,"

a  basin  of  water,  and  a  dagger,  on  a  table,  with  a  representation  of  a
hs-ad  just  severed  from  the  body,  and  underneath  the  lamp  the  word
VENGEANCE.  This  degree  must  not  be  confounded  with  the  Knights
of  the  Ninth  Arch,  which  has  twelve  words,  all  referring  to  the  Tetra-
grammaton,  three  containing  three  letters  =  9  ;  three  containing  five
letters  =  15  ;  three  with  seven  letters  =  21 ;  and  three  with  nine
letters  =  27.  The  three  first,  according  to  the  system  practised  in
the  last  century,  signified  the  everlasting;  the  offering  up;  and  the
all-seeing  eye  ;  the  second  three  signified  the  just  ;  the  beginning;  and
the  ending;  the  third  three  the  all-powerful  l>eity  ;  perfection  and
truth,  the  Almighty;  the  fourth  three  the  divine  abundance;  mercy,
grace,  and  truth ;  the  divine  will  and  pleasure.  As  they  are  prac-
tised at  present  by  our  Transatlantic  Brethren  the  reference  is  rather
different.  1.  All-powerful,  divine  light,  striking  light.  2.  It  is
what  it  will  be,  good  himself  (some  give  Alpha  and  Omega),  eternal
God.  3.  Eternal,  the  sustaining  Deity,  God  of  light.  4.  God  of
mercy,  my  trust  is  in  God — TIIE  SACRED  NAME.  They  make  the
Grand  Sanhedrim,  including  the  two  Grand  Officers,  out  of  the  above
numbers,  viz.,  9  +  15  +  21  +  27  =  72.

9  Some  say  ninety-nine.

10  An  Intendant  of  the  buildings  must  have  made  "  the  five  steps
of  exactness,  penetrated  the  inmost  part  of  the  temple,  and  beheld
the  great  light  containing  the  three  mysterious  Hebrew  characters."

11  The  writer  of  Ashmole's  life  says  that  Freemasons  are  known  to
one  another  all  over  the  world  by  certain  passwords,  known  to  them
alone ;  that  they  have  Lodges  in  different  countries,  where  they  are
relieved  by  the  brotherhood  if  they  are  in  distress.     And  he  adds,
"  the  manner  of  their  adoption  or  admission  is  very  formal  and
solemn,  and  with  the  administration  of  an  oath  of  secrecy,  which  has
had  better  faith  than  all  other  oaths,  in  that  it  has  ever  been  most


OF    FREEMASONRY.  $7

to  meet  the  exigencies  of  the  case.12  The  facts  cannot
be  made  public.  The  darkness13  of  the  cavern  or  Lodge
near  Joppa,14  where  the  dramatic  scenes  were  enacted
which  resulted  from  the  stranger's  revelations,  is  illu-
minated by  a  single  lamp,15  to  symbolize  the  star  of
direction,16  which  caused  the  delegates  to  become
acquainted  with  the  circumstances17  that  caused  the

religiously  observed ;  nor  has  the  world  been  yet  able,  by  the  inad-
vertency, surprise,  or  folly  of  any  of  its  members,  to  dive  into  this
mystery,  or  to  make  the  least  discovery."

12  This  person  is  symbolised  by  a  dog,  on  account  of  its  fidelity.

13  Darkness,  according  to  the  legend,  often  obliged  them  to  place
their  hands  before  their  eyes  to  save  them ;  and  they  were  obliged
also  frequently  to  cross  their  legs,  from  the  roughness  of  the  roads ;
whence  the  manner  in  which  Elected  Knights  sit  in  the  Lodge.

14  Joppa  is  a  sea-port  town  in  Palestine,  and  was  the  only  port
leading  to  Jerusalem,  whence  all  the  materials  sent  from  the  forest
and  quarries  towards  the  building  of  the  temple,  were  brought  and
landed  here.     It  is  said  to  have  been  built  by  Japhet,  and  from  him
to  have  taken  its  name  Japho,   afterwards  Joppa.     Some  heathen
writers  say  it  was  built  before  the  flood.     It  is  now  called  Jaffa.

15  Hence  the  expression  in  the  ritual  of  the  degree  : — "  One  cavern
received  me ;  one  lamp  gave  me  light ;  and  one  fountain  slaked  my
thirst."

16  He  is  feigned  to  have  been  directed  by  a  star,  and  a  burning
bush.

17  Dr.  Dalcho,  the  late  Grand  Master  of  South  Carolina,  enter-
tained some  very  reasonable  doubts  respecting  this  fact.    "  I  candidly
confess,"  says  he,  "  that  I  feel  a  very  great  deal  of  embarrassment
while  I  am  relating  to  the  ministers  of  God's  holy  word,  or  to  any
other  gentlemen,  a  story  founded  on  the  grossest  errors  of  accumu-
lated ages,  errors  which  they  can  prove  to  be  such  from  the  sacred
pages  of  holy  writ,  and  from  profane  history,  written  by  men  of
integrity  and  talents  ;  and  that,  too,  in  a  minute  after  I  have  solemnly
pronounced  them  to  be  undeniable  truths,  even  by  that  very  Bible
on  which  1  have  received  their  obligation."

B  B  2


372


HISTORICAL    LANDMARKS


loss  of  the  Master  Mason's  word.18     The  catastrophe 1!'


18   ci


111  the


degree,"   say  the  Inspectors  General  in  their


circular,  already  referred  to,  "  we  are  informed  that  in  consequence

of  the  death  of ,  the  Master's  word  was  lost,  and  that  a  new

one,  which  was  not  known  before  the  building  of  the  temple,  was
substituted  in  its  place.  If  Masonry,  as  is  generally  believed,  and
as  many  of  our  ancient  records  import,  took  its  rise  from  the  creation,
and  flourished  in  the  first  ages  of  man,  they  were  in  possession  of
a  secret  word,  of  which  the  Masons  under  Solomon  had  no  know-
ledge. Here  then  was  an  innovation  of  one  of  the  fundamental
principles  of  the  Craft,  and  a  removal  of  one  of  the  ancient  land-
marks; this,  however,  we  are  unwilling  to  allow.  It  is  well  known
to  the  Blue  Master,  that  King  Solomon  and  his  royal  visitor  were  in
possession  of  the  real  and  pristine  word ;  but  of  which  he  must
remain  ignorant,  unless  initiated  into  the  sublime  degrees.  The
authenticity  of  this  mystical  word,  as  known  to  us,  and  for  which
our  much  respected  Master  died,  is  proven  to  the  most  sceptic  mind
from  the  sacred  pages  of  holy  writ,  and  the  Jewish  history  from  the
earliest  period  of  time."

19  The  American  antimasons,  during  the  Morgan  agitation,  made
good  use  of  this  apocryphal  event,  as  though  it  proved  Masonry  to
be  a  system  of  premeditated  assassination.  Thus  a  writer,  whose
letters  (unfortunately  for  himself)  have  been  preserved  by  Bernard,
in  his  Light  on  Masonry  says,  in  his  excited  address  to  the  Brethren  :
— "  Here  I  must  ask  you  to  pause,  ponder,  and  deeply  reflect  on  the
history  here  given  of  the  fate  of  Akirop.  Compare  it,  with  all  its
bearings,  with  the  fate  of  Morgan,  and  then  say,  if  you  dare  say  it
that  Morgan  was  not  executed  according  to  the  laws  of  Masonry.
Why  has  a  degree,  instituted  to  keep  in  remembrance  the  execution
of  a  traitor,  been  kept  in  existence  ever  since,  if  not  to  stimulate  the
Brethren  to  a  similar  act,  should  a  similar  circumstance  ever  arise  ?
Such  a  degree  is  in  existence  at  this  day  in  the  United  States ;  and
it  is  preposterous  to  suppose,  that  the  members  of  that  degree,
assembled  in  their  bloody  dens,  with  bloody  aprons,  and  repre-
sentations of  the  bloody  head  of  a  traitor  before  them,  and  seeing
vengeance  written  in  capital  letters  upon  the  walls  of  their  cavern ;
and  knowing  Morgan  was  writing  the  secrets  of  Masonry,  that  they


OF    FREEMASONRY.  373

is  tragical;20  but  it  has  no  foundation  in  the  known
history  of  the  period.  It  appears,  however,  a  natural
effect  of  a  series  of  concurrent  causes,  although  the
zeal  of  the  principal  actor  urged  him  beyond  the
bounds  of  discretion.21  But,  after  mutual  explana-
tions, he  and  his  eight  associates  were  rewarded  by
the  king  with  the  possession  of  certain  privileges,
which  are  embodied  in  a  degree  called,  "  the  Nine22
Elected  Knights."23

A  short  period  after  these  transactions,  Benzabee,  an
Intendant  of  King  Solomon  in  the  country  of  Cheth,
and  a  chief  of  the  Lodge,  or  secret  institution  of  the

would  not,  one  and  all,  with  all  the  zeal  of  Joabert,  arise  in  their
wrath,  and  strike  the  villain  to  the  heart."

20  Thus  the  candidate  is  instructed  to  say,  "  by  revenge  I  destroyed
the  traitor;   by  disobedience  I  transgressed  my  instructions;    by
clemency  I  obtained  the  king's  pardon ;  and,  as  I  stood  alone,  and
we  were  only  nine  chosen  for  the  business,  our  Lodges  are  opened
and  closed  by  eight  and  one."

21  In  some  of  the  rituals  it  is  stated  that  Solomon  was  so  trans-
ported with  rage,  that  he  ordered  Joabert  to  immediate  execution,
and  was  only  appeased  by  all  the  Brethren  uniting,  on  their  knees,
to  supplicate  his  mercy.

22  Thus  there  are  used  in  this  degree  nine  strokes  for  admittance,
nine  lights,  and  nine  red  roses ;  red  being  the  emblem  of  the  blood
that  was  spilt  in  the  temple,  and  suffered  to  remain  unobliterated,
until  atonement  was  made  by  the  punishment  of  the  assassins.

23  The  moral  of  these  circumstances  is  thus  conveyed  to  the  can-
didate : — Prom  the  death  of  the  traitor  you  learn  that  murder  can
never  be  concealed ;  from  the  rashness  of  Joabert,  you  are  to  learn
always  to  attend  strictly  to  the  instructions  of  your  superiors ;  and
by  his  pardon,  you  learn  to  be  merciful  to  those  beneath  you,  and  to
cultivate  the  friendship  of  your  associates,  by  seeing  the  value  of
their  services  on  this  occasion.


374


HISTORICAL    LANDMARKS


Nabiim  there,24  caused  diligent  inquiry  and  due  search
to  be  made  respecting  the  remainder  of  the  criminals  ;
and  published  so  accurate  a  description  of  their  persons,
that  information  was  given  him  that  strangers,  of  a  very
suspicious  character,  had  been  employed  to  dig  stones
in  the  quarry  of  Bendaca ;  arid  from  their  conversation,
it  appeared  that  they  had  worked  at  the  temple  of  Jeru-
salem. This  information  was  conveyed  by  express  to
King  Solomon.

So  soon  as  the  Israelitish  monarch  had  received
the  welcome  intelligence,  he  selected  fifteen  Master
Masons  in  whom  perfect  confidence  might  be  placed,
and  invested  them  with  authority  to  proceed  to  Cheth,
to  ascertain  the  accuracy  of  the  information,  under
an  escort  of  troops,  bearing  letters  to  Maacha,  its

24  These  institutions  are  said  to  have  been  established  by  the  pro-
phet Samuel,  to  counteract  the  progress  of  the  spurious  Freemasonry,
which  was  introduced  into  Palestine  before  his  time.  They  were
seminaries  in  which  the  most  talented  and  pious  youths  of  Israel
were  educated  to  become  the  future  teachers  of  the  nation.  For  this
purpose  young  men  of  superior  capacity  were  invited  to  enter  these
institutions  from  all  parts  of  Israel ;  the  system  of  instruction  com-
prising a  thorough  knowledge  of  the  law  and  writings  of  Moses,
natural  philosophy,  music,  and  poetry  ;  and  as  this  last  was  altogether
devoted  to  celebrate  the  power  and  goodness  of  God,  Samuel,  in  the
99th  Psalm,  is  enumerated  amongst  those  worthies  who  promoted
divine  knowledge.  After  the  death  of  Samuel,  the  Nabiim  spread
widely  over  the  land,  and  similar  Lodges  or  Seminaries  were  founded
in  every  part  of  Israel.  In  the  days  of  Elijah  three  of  these  insti-
tutions are  spoken  of;  and  though  little  is  known  of  their  internal
economy,  their  rites  and  ceremonies  being  strictly  concealed,  there
can  be  no  doubt  that  they  were  in  many  respects  similar  to  our
Masonic  Lodges,  and  in  some  of  their  features  they  bore  a  resemblance
to  the  collegiate  institutions  of  our  own  country.


OF    FREEMASONRY.  375

king,25  requesting  that  the  suspected  persons  might  be
immediately  apprehended,  and  sent  to  Jerusalem,  that
if  they  should  prove  to  be  the  criminals  whom  he  had
been  so  long  in  search  of,  they  might  receive  the  just
punishment  due  to  their  misdeeds.  At  the  end  of  five
days26  the  deputation  arrived  at  the  quarry  of  Bendaca,
and  found  the  two  men27  at  work  in  the  utmost  security.
They  were  immediately  seized,  and  brought  to  Jerusalem
in  chains,28  where,  being  found  guilty,  they  suffered
condign  punishment.29  Out  of  this  event  a  degree
was  formed,  called  the  Illustrious  Elected  of  Fifteen.

After  vengeance  had  been  taken  on  the  traitors,
Solomon  instituted  another  degree,  which  he  called  the
Sublime  Knights  Elected;30  both  as  a  reward  for  the

25  There  are  several  persons  mentioned  in  the  Bible  of  the  name  of
Maacha,  both  male  and  female ;  but  this  was  probably  the  King  of
Gath,  mentioned  1  Kings  ii.  39.

26  The  history  of  the  degree  tells  us  that  five  days  were  spent  in
the  search,  when  Terbal,  who  bore  Solomon's  letter,  discovered  them
cutting  stone  in  the  quarry ;  when  they  were  immediately  seized  and
secured  by  fetters.

27  Their  names  appear  to  have  been  Kurmavil  and  Gravelot.

28  Some  rituals  place  them  in  the  tower  of  Achizer  for  the  night.
20  Solomon  determined,  says  the  lecture,  that  their  punishment

should  be  adequate  to  their  crimes.  They  were  brought  forth  at  ten
o'clock  in  the  morning,  and  being  secured  to  upright  posts  in  a  public
place,  their  bodies  were  cut  open,  by  two  incisions  in  the  form  of  a
cross,  in  which  state  they  were  suffered  to  remain  till  six  o'clock  in
the  evening,  when  their  heads  were  cut  off,  and  placed  on  the
pinnacles  of  the  temple  where  the  offence  had  been  committed.

30  No  one  can  receive  this  degree  without  first  giving  satisfactory
proof  that  he  has  not  been  concerned  in  the  above  crime ;  as  a  proof
of  which  he  is  required  to  make  a  symbolical  offering  of  a  portion  of
the  heart  of  our  Grand  Superintendent  II.  A.  B.,  which  is  pretended
to  have  been  preserved  ever  since  his  death.


376


HISTORICAL    LANDMARKS


/eal  and  integrity  of  the  Grand  Masters  Elect  of  Fif-
teen ;  and  also,  by  their  preferment,  to  make  room  for
raising  other  worthy  Brethren  from  the  lower  degrees
to  that  of  Illustrious  Masters.31  He  accordingly  ap-
pointed twelve  of  the  fifteen,  chosen  by  ballot,  to  con-
stitute a  Grand  Chapter,  and  gave  them  command  over
the  twelve  tribes  of  Israel:'52  He  expressed  a  particular
regard  for  this  order,  and  showed  them  the  precious
things  of  the  tabernacle  and  temple.*8

Subsequently  the  priestly  order  was  instituted,  and
the  Chapter  was  opened  under  Solomon's  private  arch  ;
in  which  the  veil  of  the  temple  was  said  to  be  drawn
aside  by  the  above  twelve  Companions,  and  the  can-

31  "  The  various   translations  and  changes  which   the  Ineilablc
degrees  have  undergone  since  their  first  establishment,  from  one
language  to  another,  and  that  oftentimes  by  men,  illiterate  even  in
their  mother  tongue,  is  another  cause  of  the  variety  which  we  lament.
Many  of  the  sublime  degrees  are  founded  on  the  polite  arts,  and
unfold  a  mass  of  information  of  the  first  importance  to  Masons."
(Grand  Inspector's  Circular.)

32  The  Illustrious  Knights  rendered  a  daily  account  to  Solomon  of
the  work  which  had  been  done  in  the  temple  by  the  respective  classes
of  workmen,  and  received  their  wages.

33  TRIBES.  ILLUSTRIOUS  KNIGHTS.


Judah   .

Benjamin

Simeon

Ephraim

Manasseh

Zebuluri

Dan      .

Asher  .

Nap  th  ali

Reuben

Tssachar

Gad


Joabert  .
Stolkin  .
Terrey  .
Morphey
Alycuber
Dorson  .
Kerius  .
Bertheniar


U    W.  MASTERS.

Tito  Zadok.

Akirop.

H.  A.  B.

Adoniram.

Stolkyn,

Benabinadab.

Joabert.

Ghiblin.


Tito Mohabiii.

Terbal    .     .     .     .  H.  A.  B.

Benachard  .     .     .  Zerbel,

Tabar  Hcldai.


OF    FREEMASONRY.  377

didate  permitted,  during  the  reading  of  the  holy  law,
to  view  the  treasures  deposited  in  the  sanctum  sanc-
torum,34 which  were  exhibited  in  due  order  by  the  high
priest,  Tito  Zadok,  Prince  of  Harodim.35

34  One  of  which  was  the  mysterious  ppJTj  pronounced  yow-lio.
This  ineffable  word,  in  its  orthography,  cannot  be  altered,  although
its  pronunciation  may;    and  it  is  from  this  circumstance,  which
cannot  be  particularly  explained  here,  that  these  degrees  are  deno-
minated Ineffable.

35  The  following  address  is  recited  at  the  closing  of  sublime  Lodges,
and  might  with  great  propriety  be  adopted  in  symbolic  ones  : — "  You
are  now  about  to  quit  the  sacred  retreat  of  friendship  and  virtue,  to
mix  again  in  the  world.     Amidst  its  concerns  and  employments
forget  not  the  duties  you  have  heard  so  frequently  inculcated,  and  so
forcibly  recommended  in  the  Lodge.    Be  therefore  diligent,  prudent,
temperate,  and  discreet ;  and  remember  that  before  this  altar  you
have  solemnly  promised  to  befriend  and  relieve  with  unhesitating
cordiality,  so  far  as  shall  be  in  your  power,  every  worthy  Brother
who  shall  need  your  assistance ;  that  you  have  promised  to  remind
him,  in  the  most  delicate  manner,  of  his  failings,  and  aid  his  refor-
mation, to  vindicate  his  character  when  wrongfully  traduced,  and  to
suggest  in  his  behalf  the  most  candid,  favourable,  and  palliating
circumstances,  even  when  his  conduct  is  justly  reprehended,  that  the
world  may  see  how  Masons  love  each  other.     And  these  generous
principles  are  to  extend  further :  every  human  being  has  a  claim
upon  your  kind  offices ;  so  that  we  enjoin  it  upon  you  to  do  good
unto  all  men,  while  we  recommend  it  more  especially  to  the  house-
hold of  the  faithful.     By  diligence  in  the  duties  of  your  respective
callings  ;  by  liberal  benevolence  and  diffusive  charity ;  by  constancy
and  fidelity  in  your  friendships;   by  uniformly  just,  amiable,  and
virtuous  deportment ;  show  to  the  world  the  happy  effects  of  this
ancient  and  honourable  institution.    Let  it  not  be  supposed  that  you
have  here  laboured  in  vain,  and  spent  your  strength  for  nought ;  for
your  work  is  with  the  Lord,  and  your  recompencc  with  your  God.
Finally,  Brethren,  be  of  one  mind,  live  in  peace,  and  may  the  God  of
love  and  peace  delight  to  dwell  with  you,  and  to  bless  you."  (Dalcho's
Orations,  p.  99.)


378  HISTORICAL    LANDMAllKS

When  the  temple  was  completed,26  and  the  solemn
ceremony  of  dedication  duly  performed,  another  event
occurred  which  gave  rise  to  an  Ineffable  degree.37  It
will  be  recollected  that  by  a  treaty  between  Solomon
and  Hiram,  before  the  commencement  of  the  building,
the  latter  agreed  to  furnish  workmen,  as  well  as  timber
from  Lebanon,  and  stone  from  the  Tyrian  quarries,  all
ready  carved,  marked,  numbered,  and  prepared  for  the
work ;  and  Solomon  on  his  part  stipulated  to  provide
certain  subsidies  of  wheat,  oil,  and  honey,  for  the  work-
men ;  and  as  a  recompense  to  the  King  of  Tyre,  he
promised  that  when  the  cope  stone  was  celebrated,  he
would  present  him  with  a  province  in  Gallilee  con-
taining thirty  cities.  Solomon,  however,  suffered  a

ae  «  When  the  temple  of  Jerusalem  was  finished,"  according  to  the
historical  part  of  the  lecture  in  the  degree  of  Perfection,  "  the  Masons
who  were  employed  in  constructing  that  stately  edifice,  acquired
immortal  honour.  Their  order  became  more  uniformly  established
and  regulated  than  it  had  been  before.  Their  delicacy  in  admitting
new  members  to  their  order  brought  it  to  a  degree  of  respect,  as  the
merits  of  the  candidate  was  the  only  thing  they  then  paid  attention
to.  These  principles  instilled  into  their  minds,  many  of  the  Grand
Elect  left  the  temple  after  its  dedication,  and  dispersed  themselves
among  the  neighbouring  kingdoms,  instructing  all  who  applied,  and
were  found  worthy,  in  the  sublime  degrees  of  ancient  craft  Masonry."
(Webb's  Monitor,  p.  284.)

37  It  may  be  here  remarked  that  Barruel  has  grievously  misrepre-
sented the  design  of  these  Ineffable  degrees.  "  I  learned,"  he  says,
"  from  one  of  the  adepts,  that  at  the  time  when  he  was  about  to  take
the  oath,  one  of  the  Knights  held  a  pistol  at  his  breast,  making
a  sign  that  he  would  murder  him  if  he  did  not  pronounce  it.  On
my  asking  him  if  he  believed  that  he  was  in  earnest,  he  said  he
certainly  did  believe  so,  though  he  could  not  be  sure."  (Vol.  ii.
p.  312.)


01'    FREEMASONRY.  379

whole  year  to  elapse  without  fulfilling  the  terms  of  his
treaty.38  At  the  end  of  this  period  Hiram  visited  the
territory,  and  found  it  an  impoverished  tract  of  country,
consisting  of  barren  and  unprofitable  lands,39  inhabited
by  a  rude  and  immoral  people.40  Concluding,  there-
fore, that  its  possession  would  be  of  little  value,  and
in  no  respect  equivalent  to  the  service  which  he  had
rendered  to  the  Israelitish  monarch,  he  proceeded  to

38  In  the  Jerusalem  Targum  it  is  recorded,  that  during  the  building
of  the  temple,  King  Solomon  had  frequent  occasion  to  exercise  his
judgment  in  deciding  cases  of  dispute  which  occasionally  arose  amongst
the  workmen ;  and  from  the  satisfaction  which  his  decisions  invariably
gave,  acquired  the  surname  of  the  Wise,  a  title  of  which  he  at  last
became  so  vain,  that  the  Great  Architect  of  the  world,  by  whom  he
had  been  inspired,  thought  fit  to  reprove  him.  (See  F.  d.  11.  vol.  iv.
p.  172.)

39  This  conclusion,  although  found  in  the  traditions  of  Masonry,
does  not  agree  with  the  opinion  of  our  soundest  commentators.
Bishop  Patrick  thinks,  that  when  Hiram  said,  "  what  cities  are  these
that  thou  hast  given  me,  my  Brother  ?"  he  did  not  speak  it  in  con-
tempt ;  for  it  is  very  unlikely  that  Solomon  would  give  to  such  an
attached  friend  what  was  of  little  value.     The  truth  is,  these  cities
were  not  suited  to  his  purpose  as  the  monarch  of  a  commercial
people,  and  therefore  he  returned  them  to  Solomon,  who,  no  doubt,
made  him  some  other  more  acceptable  recompense.    And  this  appears
the  more  probable,  because  their  friendship  continued  unbroken  till
death.

40  In  the  neighbourhood  of  Tyre  there  is  an  ancient  edifice,  com-
monly called  the  Wells  of  Solomon,  which  all  travellers  have  spoken
of  with  admiration.     These  wells,  or  cisterns,  have  obtained  their
name  from  a  tradition  that  they  are  supplied  by  a  subterranean
river,  which  King  Solomon  discovered  by  some  supernatural  process,
and  that  he  caused  them  to  be  made  for  Hiram,  King  of  Tyre,  as
a  part  of  the  recompense  for  the  materials  whicli  had  been  furnished
by  that  prince  towards  the  building  of  the  temple.


380  HISTORICAL    LANDMARKS

Jerusalem  to  expostulate  personally  with  Solomon,  as
he  suspected  the  existence  of  fraud.41  Arriving  at  the
palace,  he  forced  himself  through  the  royal  guards,  and
penetrating  to  the  king's  private  apartment,  he  found
him  alone.42  At  this  interview,43  the  reconciliation  of

41  The  R.  Manassah  ben  Israel  says,  "  Solomon  gave  these  twenty
cities  to  Hiram,  who  on  going  to  see  them,  the  present  did  not  please
him,  either  from  their  situation  or  beauty,  and  therefore  said  to  him,
'  what  cities  are  these  that  thou  hast  given  me,  my  Brother  ? '     But
as,  in  courtesy,  he  could  not  decline  accepting  them,  he  afterwards
sought  an  opportunity  to  restore  them.     So  that  one  time  Solomon
gave  them  to  Hiram,  and  at  another  Hiram  gave  them  to  Solomon."
(Concil.  vol.  ii.  p.  79.     Compare  also  1  Kings  ix.  11  with  2  Chron.
viii.  2.)

42  These  facts  are  recorded  in  the  degree  of  Intimate  Secretary ;
and  therefore  the  Lodge  is  made  to  consist  of  two  persons  only,  who
represent  Solomon  and  Hiram.     They  are  clothed  in  blue  mantles
lined  with  ermine,  with  crowns  on  their  heads,  sceptres  in  their
hands,  and  seated  at  a  table,  on  which  are  placed  two  naked  swords,
a  roll  of  parchment,  and  a  death's  head.     The  rest  of  the  Brethren
are  considered  only  as  Perfect  Masters,   and  are  termed  Guards.
They  should  have  white  aprons,  lined  and  embroidered  with  crimson,
and  strings  of  the  same ;  with  crimson  collars,  to  which  is  suspended
a  solid  triangle.  (Webb,  p.  259.)

43  The  following  particulars  respecting  this  interview  are  recorded
in  the  above  degree  : — The  countenance  of  Hiram  exhibiting  marks
of  auger  and  resentment,  Joabert,   who  was  amongst  the  guards,
became  alarmed  for  the  safety  of  his  master,  and  with  the  eager
anxiety  of  a  favoured  servant,  placed  himself  within  the  door  that  he
might  be  ready  to  prevent  any  attempt  at  violence.    In  this  situation
he  was  discovered  by  the  Tyrian  king,  who  being  exasperated  at  his
suspicious  conduct,  seized  him  by  the  hand,  and  dragged  him  into
Solomon's  presence,  demanding  instant  punishment  on  the  intruder,
and  drawing  his  sword  to  inflict  what  he  conceived  to  be  a  merited
chastisement.     Solomon,  alarmed  at  the  dangerous  situation  of  his


OF    FREEMASONRY.  381

Solomon  and  Hiram  was  effected,  and  Joabert  was
advanced  to  the  rank  of  Intimate  Secretary44  to  both,
on  the  ratification  of  a  new  treaty  of  friendship  and
mutual  aid.45

Thus  far  the  reign  of  Solomon  was  splendid,  and  his

trusty  follower,  descended  from  his  throne,  and  requested  his  Brother
Hiram  to  stay  his  hand ;  but  summoning  his  guards,  he  committed
Joabert  to  their  custody,  with  strict  orders  to  prevent  his  escape,
and  to  produce  him  when  called  for.  After  he  had  been  removed,
Solomon  represented  to  Hiram,  that  of  all  his  servants  Joabert  was
the  most  faithfully  attached  to  his  person,  and  most  devoted  to  his
interests ;  and  that  he  was  convinced  his  appearance  in  that  question-
able situation  was  either  accidental,  or  designed  for  some  laudable
purpose.  Under  this  assurance,  Hiram  was  prevailed  on  to  pardon
him,  particularly  as  Solomon  offered  himself  as  a  voluntary  surety  for
the  purity  of  Joabert's  intentions.  The  Tyrian  monarch  became
pacified,  and  not  only  extended  his  forgiveness  to  Joabert,  but  his
patronage  also,  after  that  individual  had  explained  what  his  intentions
really  were.

44  Invested  in  open  Lodge  the  candidate  is  thus  addressed : —
"  My  Brother,  I  receive  you  as  an  Intimate  Secretary,  on  your  pro-
mise to  be  faithful  to  the  order  in  which  you  have  just  been  admitted,
and  trust  that  your  fidelity  will  be  proof  against  every  temptation.
I  present  you  with  a  sword,  as  an  emblem  of  defence  against  the
attacks  of  those  who  may  try  to  extort  from  you  the  secrets  which
I  am  now  about  to  communicate."

45  The  Tracing-board  of  the  degree  of  Intimate  Secretary  is  thus
explained  : — "  The  window  in  the  clouds  represents  the  vault  of  the
temple,  and  the  letter  J,  which  you  see  inscribed  therein,  indicates
the  Tetragrammaton,  or  sacred  name  of  God.     The  door  represents
the  principal  entrance  from  the  palace;    the  tears  symbolize  the
repentance  of  Joabert  in  Solomon's  chamber  of  audience,  and  are  also
emblematical  of  the  lamentations  of  the  king  in  the  apartment  hung
with  black,  where  he  used  to  retire  to  lament  the  unhappy  fate  of
H.  A.  B. ;  and  here  it  was  that  he  received  the  King  of  Tyre."


382


HISTORICAL    LANDMARKS


^

acts  were  wise,4'5  honourable,  and  glorious.47     And  it
would  have  been  better  for  his  memory  if,  like  his

46  A  most  singular  account  of  the  wisdom  of  Solomon  is  found  in
Du  Bartas : —

"  He  knows,

Whether  the  heaven's  sweet  sweating  kisse  appear
To  be  pearls'  parent,  and  the  oysters  pheer,
And  whether  dusk,  it  makes  them  dim  withall,
Cleer  breeds  the  cleer,  and  stormy  brings  the  pale ;
Whether  from  sea  the  amber-grcece  be  sent,
Or  be  some  fishes  pleasant  excrement ;
He  knowes  why  the  earth's  iminovcable  and  round,
The  lees  of  nature,  centre  of  the  mound  ;
Hee  knowes  her  measure;  and  hee  knowes  besidr
How  coloquintida  (duely  apply'd)  is
Within  the  darkncsse  of  the  conduit  pipes,
Amid  the  winding  of  our  inward  tripes,
Can  so  discreetly  the  white  humour  lake."

47  There  is  a  curious  circumstance  in  the  life  and  transactions  of
Solomon,  which  displays  the  extent  of  his  traffic,  and  the  advantages
which  he  derived  from  his  connexion  with  the  King  of  Tyre.     Jit-
carried  on  an  extensive  trade  with  Egypt  for  horses;    which   is
extremely  singular,    because  up  to  this  reign   the  Israelites  were
ignorant  of  the  use  and  management  of  these  animals.     The  Egyp-
tians and  Canaanites,  in  the  earliest  times,  had  chariots  and  horses,
but  God's  chosen  people  had  none.    In  the  time  of  Saul  the  Arabians
had  no  horses,  for  when  conquered  by  the  tribes  beyond  Jordan,  the
spoil  consisted  of  camels,  sheep,  asses,  and  slaves,  but  no  booty  in
horses  is  mentioned.     In  the  reign  of  David  he  was  opposed  by
cavalry,  but  used  none  against  his  enemies ;  and  so  little  knowledge
had  he  of  the  value  of  the  horse,  that  when  he  captured  those  of  the
enemy,  he  ordered  them  to  be  hamstrung  and  slain.     "  Arabia  was
not  at  this  period,"  according  to  Michaelis,  "  famed  for  the  breeding
of  horses,  the  best  of  which  came  from  Egypt ;  and  the  Phoenician
kings  on  the  north  side  of  Palestine,  between  the  Orentes  and  the
Mediterranean,  used  a  great  many  horses,  partly  for  state  and  partly
for  cavalry.     In  fact,  we  find  that  Hiram,  King  of  Tyre,  had  esta-


OF    FREEMASONRY.  383

associate  Grand  Master,  he  had  died  at  this  period,  for
then  his  prosperity  would  have  been  unclouded,  his
reputation  without  a  stain,  and  acacia  would  have
bloomed  over  his  monument.48  It  would  be  advan-
tageous to  his  memory,  were  it  possible  to  throwr  a  veil
over  the  transactions  which  deformed  the  closing  period
of  his  life.  But  it  will  be  impossible  to  conceal  the
lamentable  fact,  that  when  he  was  advanced  in  years,
and  his  understanding  became  impaired,  he  forgot  the
Lord,  by  whom  he  had  been  favoured  more  than  any
other  man,49  and  prostituted  the  beneficent  principles

Wished  a  riding  ground.  By  this  passion  of  the  Tyrians  for  horses,
Solomon  took  care  to  profit."  (Laws  of  Moses,  vol.  i.  p.  306.)

48  The  Mahometan  paradise  is  reputed  to  abound  with  acacia  trees,
and  is  thus  described  in  the  Koran  (c.  56) : — "  The  companions  of
the  right  hand  (how  happy  shall  the  companions  of  the  right  hand
be !)  shall  have  their  abode  among  the  lote  and  acacia  trees,  free
from  thorns,  and  loaded  regularly  with  their  produce  from  top  to
bottom ;  under  an  extended  shade,  near  a  flowing  water,  and  amidst
fruits  in  abundance,  which  shall  not  fail,  nor  shall  be  forbidden  to  be
gathered ;  and  they  shall  repose  themselves  on  lofty  beds.     Verily,
we  have  created  the  damsels  of  paradise  by  a  peculiar  creation ;  and
we  have  made  them  virgins,  beloved  by  their  husbands,  of  equal  age
with  them ;  for  the  delight  of  the  companions  of  the  right  hand."

49  Hence  the  following  dialogue  fei  the  ritual,  that  such  profane
forgetfulness  may  not  occur  again : — Q,.  What  is  the  disposition  of
an  Elect  Perfect  and  Sublime  Mason  ? — A.  To  have  a  heart  divested
of  jealousy,  revenge,    and  every  other  evil  passion ;  to  be  always
ready  to  communicate  benefits ;  and  to  have  a  tongue  of  good  report.
d.  What  kind  of  behaviour  is  recommended  to  you? — A..  The  most
profound  respect,   and   submission  to   authority.     Q.  Why  are  all
Masons  considered  to  be  on  an  equality? — A.    Because  they  are
equally  subject  to  that  infinite  and  superior  Being,  who  is  represented
in  our  Lodges  by  the  sacred  and  ineffable  name,  and  by  the  equilateral


triangle.


384


HISTORICAL    LANDM  \KKS


m

which  had  hitherto  been  his  guide,  by  introducing  am

practising  the  most  disgusting  idolatries.  He  selected
wives  and  concubines  from  the  prohibited  nations,50  who
plunged  him  into  mortal  sin.  .  He  insulted  the  omni-
present God,  by  polluting  the  temple  which  he  had
built  on  mount  Moriah  with  so  much  taste,  and  dedi-
cated with  so  much  piety;  and  he  set  up  the  abomi-
nable triad,  Milcom,  Chemosh,  Ashtaroth,  on  the
summits  of  Moriah,  Calvary,  andSion;51  entertained

i0  "  He  had  seven  hundred  wives,  princesses,  and  three  hundred
concubines;  and  his  wives  turned  away  his  heart."  (1  Kings  xi.  :j.)
On  this  text  the  commentators  thus  remark  : — Solomon  had  Iteeome
quite  as  luxurious  as  oriental  monarch*  usually  are.  Amongst  them
an  extensive  female  establishment  is  regarded  as  a  piece  of  royal
state;  but  the  prince  distinguishes  only  three  or  four  of  the  number
and  sometimes  but  one,  with  his  personal  attention  and  favour.  In
the  present  instance,  the  seven  hundred  wives  included  not  only
females  of  royal  extraction,  but  the  daughters  of  eminent  persons  of
his  own  as  well  as  of  other  nations.  China,  India,  Persia,  and
Turkey,  afford  instances  similar  to  that  of  Solomon.  But  Khoosroo,
the  Persian,  seems  to  have  eclipsed  all  other  monarchs  mentioned  in
history;  in  his  harem  there  were  twelve  thousand  ladies,  each,  if
we  may  believe  the  gravest  Persian  writers,  equal  to  the  moon  in
splendour  and  beauty.

51  The  scene  of  Solomon's  idolatries  was  called  the  Hill  of  Offence,
being  the  site  of  a  temple  to

Ashtoreth,  whom  the  Phoenicians  called

Astarte,  queen  of  heaven,  with  crescent  horns ;

To  whose  bright  image,  nightly  by  the  moon,

Sidonian  virgins  paid  their  vows  and  songs ;

In  Ziou  also  not  unsung,  where  stood

Her  temple  on  the  offensive  mountain,  built

By  that  uxorious  king,  whose  heart,  though  large,

Beguiled  by  fair  idolatresses,  fell

To  idols  foul. — MILTON.


OF    FRKKMASONRY.  385

an  idolatrous  priesthood ;  and  practised  on  the  highest
of  hills  and  in  the  lowest  of  valleys  the  spurious  Free-
masonry, which  he  had  probably  learned  in  Egypt.52
He  sacrificed  on  the  high  places  of  Topliet,53  and  caused
the  people  to  pass  their  sons  and  their  daughters,  by
way  of  purification,  through  the  fire  before  the  statue
of  Moloch,  in  the  valley  of  Hinnorn.54

52  The  authors  of  the  Universal  History  thus  describe  the  origin
and  progress  of  the  spurious  Freemasonry  in  Judea,  which  rivalled
and  threatened  to  overturn  the  true  system  of  speculative  Masonry.
"  It  began  about  the  times  of  Othniel  and  Ehud,  and  increased  so  fast,
and  spread  so  wide,  that  it  would  be  endless  to  enumerate  their  false
deities,  and  the  places  dedicated  to  their  worship,  as  well  as  the
abominable  ceremonies  practised  in  them.     They  adopted  the  false
£ods  of  all  those  nations  in  the  midst  of  whom  they  lived,  and  set
up  altars  arid  idols  to  them  upon  every  hill  and  high  place.     The
sun,  moon,  and  stars  were  of  the  number  of  their  gods  ;  and  as  their
rites  became  more  and  more  shameful,  and  unfit  for  common  view,
they  set  up  tents  and  booths,  ar>d  planted  groves  to  conceal  their
abominable  practices.     The  very  women,  who  were  grown  too  old
for  prostitution  in  their  own  persons,  became  subservient,  to  the
infamous  commerce  of  the  younger  generation,  by  furnishing  the
votaries  with  all  kind  of  conveniences.     Solomon  is  justly  branded
in  scripture  with  having  brought  this  evil  to  its  greatest  height  by
the  multitude  of  his  strange  women ;  an  abuse  which  was  never
thoroughly  rooted  out  till  Josiah's  reign."

53  He  worshipped  all  the  gods  of  the  heathen,  numerous  though
they  were,  even  Nerval  and  Ashimah;  Succoth  Benoth,  which  was
a  hen  and  chickens  ;  Nergal,  a  cock  ;  Asima,  a  gcat ;  Nibhaz,  a  dog  ;
Tartak,  an  ass ;  Adrammelech,  a  mule  ;  Anammelech,  a  horse ;  and
Bimmon,  which  signifies  a  pomegranate.

54  The  11.  Manassch  ben  Israel  says,  however,  that  "  the  ancient
and  almost  all  modern  commentators  are  of  opinion,  that  Solomon
was  never  actually  an  idolater  himself,  but  that  the  sin  he  committed
was  in  not  having  rebuked  his  wives,  and  prohibited  them   from
following  a  false  religion ;   according  to  the  words  of  Leviticus—

VOL.  IT.  c  c


HISTORICAL    LANDMARKS

When  the  Elect  and  Perfect  Masters  beheld  this
lamentable  apostacy  in  their  Grand  Master,  they  were
greatly  distressed;55  being  assured  that  it  would  be
punished  by  a  justly  offended  God  with  some  dreadful
catastrophe.  Nor  were  their  apprehensions  unfounded  :
for  Solomon  dying  impenitent,36  the  kingdom  was  rent

'  thou  shalt  rebuke  thy  neighbour,  that  thou  bear  not  his  sin  ;'  for  this
reason  the  sin  of  idolatry  may  be  imputed  to  Solomon,  because  lie
ought  to  have  rebuked  his  wives  and  did  not."  (Concil.  vol.  ii.  p.  82.)

55  These  particulars  are  recorded  in  the  ritual  of  the  degree  of
Perfection,  the  last  of  the  eleven  Ineffable  degrees.     As  practised  by
our  transatlantic  Brethren,  in  the  decorations  of  the  Lodge-room,
there  is  a  transparency  behind  the  Master  of  a  burning  bush,  with
a  triangle  and  the  letters  rniT  i11  the  centre  of  the  fire.    In  the  west
is  the  pillar  of  beauty.     The  pedestal  is  formed  from  the  fragments
of  Enoch's  pillar,  which  being  found  in  the  ruins  were  put  together
for  that  purpose.    Other  curious  things,  which  were  also  found  there,
are  disposed  in  convenient  situations.     The  Companions  are  seated
triangularly ;  and  the  twenty-four  lights  are  placed,  three  and  five  in
the  west,  seven  in  the  south,  and  nine  behind  the  Master's  chair.

56  "  Mortuus  est  sine  pcenitentia,"  are  the  words  of  Abulfaragius.
This  is,  however,  doubtful ;  for  most  commentators  are  of  opinion,
that  he  did  repent ;  and  in  the  depth  of  his  contrition  composed  the
book  of  Ecclesiastes,  to  show  his  sense  of  the  utter  worthlessness  of
all  earthly  pursuits,  which  he  concludes  in  these  remarkable  words  :
— "  Let  us  hear  the  conclusion  of  the  whole  matter ;  fear  God,  and
keep  his  commandments,  for  this  is  the  whole  duty  of  man  ;  for  God
will  bring  every  work  into  judgment,  together  with  every  SECRET,
whether  it  be  good  or  whether  it  be  evil."     "  The  general  tenor  of
his  argument,"  says  Hale  (Anal.  vol.  ii.  p.  370,)  "  strongly  resembles
that  of  Job,  in  favour  of  a  future  state,  whose  words,  '  naked  came
I  out  of  my  mother's  womb,'  he  had  adopted ;  and  many  of  the
Psalms  express  the  same  persuasion ;  with  which  Solomon  must  have
been  well  acquainted.    Prom  this  truly  wise  and  religious  conclusion
of  the  book,  we  are  warranted  charitably  to  hope  that  Solomon  died
a  sincere  penitent,  and  was  restored  to  the  divine  favour."


OP    FREEMASONRY.  387

asunder,  and  ten  of  the  tribes  severed  from  the  domi-
nion of  his  son.  But  the  evil  did  not  rest  here ;  for
the  fascinations  and  pleasures  of  the  latitudinarian
system,  which  so  long  prevailed  under  the  influence  of
his  pernicious  example,  had  become  so  agreeable  to  his
subjects,57  that  the  whole  ten  tribes  soon  became  con-
firmed idolaters ;  nor  did  Judah  and  Benjamin  escape
the  infection.58

57  The  degree  in  which  these  facts  are  preserved  thus  concludes  ita
history : — "  When  the  time  arrived  that  the  Christian  princes  deter-
mined to  free  the  Holy  Land  from  the  infidels,  the  virtuous  Masons
voluntarily  offered  their  services,  on  the  condition  that  they  should
have  a  chief  of  their  own  election,  which  was  granted.     The  valour
and  fortitude  of  those  Elected  Knights  was  such,  that  they  were
admired  by  all  the  princes  of  Jerusalem ;  who,  believing  that  their
mysteries  inspired  them  with  courage  and  virtue,  were  desirous  of
being  initiated.    The  Masons  complied  with  their  request;  and  thus
the  royal  art  became  popular  and  honourable,  and  was  diffused
throughout  their  various  dominions,  and  has  continued  to  spread,
through  a  succession  of  ages,  to  the  present  day."

58  These  Ineffable  degrees  are  little  known  or  esteemed  in  this
country;   for  the  evidences   on  which   they  rest   are  of  doubtful
authority.     Nor  is  their   existence  essential  to  the  well-being  of
Freemasonry,  because  the  system  is  perfect  without  them ;  and  they
contain  no  typical  references  of  any  great  value,  either  to  improve
the  morals,  or  amend  the  heart.


c  c  2


388


HISTORICAL    LANDMARKS


LECTURE   XXXVII.


THE    SACRED    11OLL.

"  And  Ililkiuh,  the  priest,  said  unto  Shaphan,  the  Scribe,  'I  have
found  the  book  of  the  law  in  the  house  of  the  Lord.'  And  Hilkiah
gave  the  book  to  Shaphan,  and  lie  read  it." — 2  KINGS  xxii.  8.

"  In  the  time  of  Josiali,  through  the  impiety  of  the  two  preceding
reigns  of  Manasseh  and  Ainmon,  the  book  of  the  law  was  so  destroyed
and  lost,  that  besides  that  copy  of  it  whieh  Hilkiah  found  in  the
temple,  there  was  then  none  other  to  be  had.  For  the  surprise
which  Hilkiah  is  said  to  be  in  at  the  finding  of  it,  and  the  grief
which  Josiah  expressed  at  the  hearing  of  it  read,  do  plainly  show
that  neither  of  them  had  ever  seen  it  before.  And  if  the  king  and
the  high  priest,  who  were  both  men  of  eminent  piety,  were  without
this  part  of  holy  scripture,  it  can  scarce  be  thought  that  any  one  else
then  had  it." — PRIDEAUX.

THE  study  of  that  portion  of  symbolical  Masonry
which  relates  to  its  history  and  traditions,  is  identified
with  the  patriarchal  and  Jewish  economy ;  for  it  cele-
brates no  event  of  importance  which  is  not  connected,
directly  or  indirectly,  with  God's  chosen  people.  And
hence  it  has  been  held  as  an  axiom,  that  Freemasonry
is  a  system  of  Judaism,  and  cannot  properly  be  applied
to  any  dispensation  but  that  which  was  promulgated
from  mount  Sinai.  This  conclusion  is  essentially  cor-
rect, for  Freemasonry  is  Judaism  in  its  perfected  state.1

J  "  Freemasonry,"  says  Bro.  Husenbeth  (F.  Q.  E,  vol.  iii.  p.  20),
"  is  a  science  not  to  be  confined  to  a  few  Israelitish  traditions  learned


OF    FREEMASONRY.  389

The  religion  of  Moses  was  incipient  Christianity  ;  every
precept,  every  ordinance,  every  promise,  and  every  pre-
diction bore  reference  to  a  dispensation  which  was  to
come.  Moses  spake  of  a  prophet  like  himself;  and
comforted  his  people  with  the  hope  of  his  appearance
when  he  was  about  to  be  withdrawn  from  them.2  Thus
it  will  appear  clear  to  every  well-instructed  Brother,
that  all  our  Masonic  illustrations  refer  to  that  great
and  exalted  personage  who  made  atonement  on  the
cross  for  the  sins  of  men.3

by  heart,  like  as  a  schoolboy  learns  his  lesson,  it  is  a  science  which
embraces  everything  useful  to  man ;  it  corrects  the  heart,  and  pre-
pares it  to  receive  the  mild  impressions  of  the  divine  code ;  its  moral
injunctions,  if  duly  weighed  and  properly  applied,  never  fail  to  form
its  disciples  into  good  members  of  society.  It  opens  a  progressive
field  for  inquiry,  and  ought  never  to  be  driven  into  narrow  bounds
by  the  enactment  of  a  law,  saying — thus  far  we  will  allow  you  to  go,
and  no  farther,  under  the  penalty  of  exclusion  from  its  universality."

2  This  prophecy  has  been  variously  misapplied.     By   one  it  is
applied  to  Joshua,  by  another  to  Jeremiah  ;  by  others  to  a  succession
of  prophets.     But  the  scriptures  condemn  all  these  references ;  for
after  the  Babylonish  captivity  they  say  in  express  terms,  that  there
had  not  arisen  a  prophet  in  Israel  like  unto  Moses.     None  of  the
Jewish  prophets  conversed  so  frequently  and  so  familiarly  with  God
face  to  face ;  none  of  them  ever  wrought  so  many  and  so  great
miracles ;  no  one  was  ever  equal  or  comparable  to  Moses  in  these

respects,  but  Jesus,  the  Messiah.

#

3  Dalcho  says — "  Many  of  the  sublime  degrees  have  a  retrospect
to  the  earliest  age  of  man ;  when  innocence  undcfiled,  and  virtue
pure  as  the  breath  of  heaven,  shone  with  resplendent  lustre  on  all  his
actions ;  when  the  great  truths  of  nature  stood  revealed  to  the  eyes
of  our  primordial  parent,  and  his  generous  heart  felt  the  springs  of
that  sublime  religion  which  emanates  from  God.    The  age  of  Enoch,
of  Noah,  and  his  descendants,  form  an  interesting  period  in  historv,
which  claims  the  attention  of  the  Craft.    The  over-ruling  providence
of  a  merciful  Being,  the  sacred  treasures  preserved  by  divine  inspira-


390


HISTORICAL    LANDMARKS


When  Rehoboam  succeeded  Solomon  on  the  throne
of  Israel,  he  went  down  to  Shechem,  where  the  princes
and  elders  were  assembled  to  proclaim  him  king.  The
commencement  of  his  reign  was  distinguished  by  a
policy  so  adverse  to  the  interests  of  his  people,  that
ten  of  the  tribes  seceded  from  his  government,  and
choosing  Jeroboam  for  their  riuYiv  set  up  idols  at  Dan
mid  Bethel,  and  formed  a  schismatic  worship,  which
ended  in  their  ruin.  The  tribes  of  Judah  and  Benjamin
alone  retained  their  allegiance  to  Rehoboam.  As  time
rolled  on,  both  nations  made  themselves  obnoxious  to
the  vengeance  of  God  ;  and  their  corruptions  increased
to  such  an  extent,4  that,  like  the  heathen,  they  adopted

tion,  are  subjects  calculated  to  interest  the  finest  feelings  of  the  heart,
and  to  reward  the  toil  and  expense  of  the  candidate.  The  age  of
Solomon,  &c.,  furnishes  an  elegant  picture  of  the  combination  of
wisdom  and  religion,  and  in  i+s  enlarged  point  of  view,  when  cir-
cumstances and  characters  are  brought  forth  to  embellish  the  grand
design,  it  renders  the  account  of  his  reign  more  interesting.  The
temple  was  destroyed  by  Nebuchadnezzar,  and  rebuilt  by  /ernbbabel,
after  encountering  numerous  difficulties,  in  the  reign  of  Darius,  who
was  a  prince  of  Jerusalem.  Tile  second  temple  was  destroyed  by
Pompcy,  who  afterwards  directed  the  erection  of  the  third,  which
was  destroyed  by  Titus.  The  connexion  of  these  circumstances  with
the  sublime  degrees,  throws  a  light  on  ancient  history  which  cannot,
as  far  as  I  know,  be  obtained  from  any  other  authentic  source.  The
principles  of  Christianity  have  afforded  the  Masonic  historian  some
elegant  materials  for  some  of  the  superior  degrees."  (Ualcho's
Masonic  Orations,  p,  25.)

4  Their  addiction  to  polytheism  was  so  inveterate  that  no  calamity
Was  capable  of  restraining  it.  Thus  Ahaz  determined  to  sacrifice  to  the
Syrian  gods,  because  they  gave  them  victory.  "  The  prophet  Hosea,
speaking  of  the  idolatry  of  Israel,  represented  under  the  figure  of  an
adulteress,  puts  these  words  into  her  mouth : — *  I  will  go  after  my
lovers  (the  false  gods),  that  give  me  my  bread  and  my  water,  my


OF    FREEMASONRY.  391

the  system  of  worshipping  tutelary  divinities,  until
there  was  scarcely  a  town  in  Judea  without  its  pro-
tecting deity.5  Thus  the  prophet  says — "  According
to  the  number  of  thy  cities  were  thy  gods;  and
according  to  the  number  of  the  streets  of  Jerusalem
have  ye  set  up  altars  to  that  shameful  thing,  even
altars  to  burn  incense  unto  Baal."  This  was  the
closing  step  in  their  idolatrous  career,  and  they  were
finally  given  up  to  condign  punishment.6  The  ten

wool  and  my  flax,  my  wine  and  my  oil.'  And  when  Jeremiah
reproved  the  Jews  thai  fled  into  Egypt  for  their  idolatry,  they
answered  in  words  to  this  effect — that  as  long  as  they  had  worshipped
the  queen  of  heaven,  all  had  gone  well  with  them ;  and  her,  therefore,
they  would  worship,  and  to  her  sacrifice,  in  spite  of  all  his  admo-
nitions." (Michaelis5  Laws  of  Moses,  vol.  i.  p.  185,  n.)

5  Felix  Faber,   a  monk  of  Ulma,  thus  describes  the  system  of
tutelary  protection  under  a  certain  form  of  Christianity  : — "  A  town,"
says  he  (Hist.  Swev.  p.  315),  "  near  to  Ulma,  is  Seflingen,  in  which
the  blessed  Virgin  presides  in  the  garden  of  Virgins,  and  keeping  on
the  west  of  the  walls  of  the  city.    On  the  south  is  situate  the  village
of  Wiblirigen,  in  which  St.  Martin  armed  both  with  the  temporal
and  spiritual  militia,  is  the  patron  of  the  church,  and  the  guardian  of
the  Ulmenses.     Nigh  also  is  Schuvekhofen,  an  ancient  town,  where
stands  a  church,  in  which  St.  John  the  Evangelist  watches  over
Ulma.     On  the  east  is  the  village  of  Pful,  which  contains  a  mauso-
leum of  the  blessed  Virgin,  who  demonstrates  her  presence  by  miracles,
From  thence  she  extends  her  mercy  arid  protection  to  Ulma.    In  that
village  St.  Udabricus  is  the  patron,   and  is  an  excellent  guardian  to
the  citizens  who  implore  his  aid.   On  the  royal  mountain  of  Elchingin,
to  the  north,  is  a  lofty  throne  for  the  Virgin,  to  the  terror  of  those
who  do  evil  at  Ulma."  He  further  mentions  St.  George,  St.  Leonard,
All  Saints,  with  the  Virgin  in  the  midst  of  them,  St.  James,  and
St.  Michael,  as  patrons  and  defenders  of  that  place.     The  latter  is
placed  on  a  mountain  on  the  west  side,  as  a  watchman  looking  over
the  city,  and  in  armour  to  protect  it.

6  Jer.  xi.  13.     It  is  a  curious  fact,  and  illustrative  of  God's  loving


392


HISTORICAL    LANDMARKS


tribes  were  carried  into  captivity  by  the   Assyria  i
from  which  they  never  returned.8

kindness  to  his  people,  that  during  every  king's  reign,  both  in  Israel
and  in  Judah,  there  were  always  prophets  to  direct  them  right,  con-
tinually admonishing  them  of  their  duty,  and  endeavouring  to  pre*er\e
them  in  the  practice  of  pure  religion.  At  the  \ery  time  when  Israel
was  carried  captive,  they  had  the  prophets  llosea,  Amos,  Isaiah,  and
Micnh ;  and  in  the  days  of  the  last  king,  when  Judah  was  made
captive,  they  had  Jeremiah  and  K/ekiel.

7  \Ve  are  at  a  loss  to  determine  how  and   where  the  ten  tribes
eairied   away  into   Media   were   dispersed.     There   are  various  and
conflicting  opinions  on  flu:  subject.      Some  Jewish  writers  <ay  they
were  earned  into  Tartary,  because  the  word  Tartar  signifies  remains;
these  tribes  being  the  remains  of  ancient    Israel.     These   -ay   that
vestiges  of  Israclitish  customs  are  found  among  them  ;  as  for  instance,
circumcision.     And  on  an  examination  of  their  language  and  name,
with  those  of  the  Jews,  their  tribes,  and  their  religion,  the  descent
may  be  easily  deduced.     And  they  add,  that  it  is  not  surprising  to
find  the  ten  tribes  in  Tartary,  since  it  is  no  great  distance  from
Assyria,  whither  they  were  transplanted.      It  is  further  conjectured,
that  a  portion  of  these  tribes  migrated  as  far  as  the  East  Indies  and
China.     Be  this  as  it  may,  it  is  evident  that,  since  their  dispersion,
the  Jews  have  made  themselves  conspicuous  in  several  countries ;
and  yet  the  world  had  no  distinct  knowledge  of  them  till  after  the
destruction  of  the  kingdom  of  Judah.

8  "  There  was  something  very  signal  in  the  catastrophe  of  these
tribes  that  were  carried  into  Mesopotamia,  between  the  Tigris  and
Euphrates.     It  is  well  known  how  the  Israelites,  after  their  servitude
in  Egypt,  were  conducted  to  the  land  of  promise,  which  they  enjoyed
above  seven  hundred   years.      Upon   their  repeated   rebellion   and
idolatry,  ten  of  the  tribes  were  carried  into  a  second  bondage ;  and
what  is  remarkable,  many  of  them  went  to  another  land  of  Goshen,
but  not  like  that  of  old ;  to  another  city  Avaris,  and  in  succession  to
the  same  people  to  whom  their  fathers  had  succeeded  in  Egypt,  even
the  Cuseans.     Their  captivity  was  attended  with  this  cruel  circum-
stance, that  they  went  now  to  a  wild  and  uncultivated  country ;  and
had  the  mortification  to  see  the  people  who  had  quitted  it  occupy


OF    FREEMASONRY.  393

This  judgment,9  severe  as  it  was,  did  not  open  the
eyes  of  the  two  remaining  tribes  to  the  danger  of  their
own  situation,  if  they  continued  in  their  disobedience ;
for  neither  the  calamities  with  which  they  were  occa-
sionally visited,10  nor  the  blessings  with  which  they

the  pleasant  fields  of  Israel.  The  King  of  Assyria  brought  men
from  Babylon,  and  from  Cuthah,  and  from  Ava,  and  from  Hamath,
and  from  Sepharvaim,  and  placed  them  in  the  cities  of  Samaria.
(2  Kings  xvii.  24.)  Here  was  every  additional  circumstance  to
aggravate  their  misfortune,  and  embitter  their  servitude ;  to  bring-
to  their  memory  continually  what  they  had  been,  and  what  they  now
were ;  to  point  out  visibly  the  finger  of  God  in  the  peculiar  sufferings
of  such  a  reprobate  people;  and  at  the  same  time  to  alarm  the
remaining  tribes,  that  they  might  take  warning  at  the  sight  of  such
particular  judgments,  and  recollect  themselves  in  good  time."  (Bryant.
Anal.  vol.  vi.  p.  254.)

9  An  Indian  Brother,  in  1840,  communicated  to  the  editor  of  the
P.  Q.  R.  the  following  interesting  fact : — He  says,  "  a  Brother  has
just  sent  me  a  Masonic  emblem,  or  rather  a  copy  of  one,  found  in
a  stone  wall  at  Ghuznee.     It  is  merely  the  five  points,  with  an
inscription  in  Persian  round  it,   the  translation   of  which  is,   God
grant  me  what  I  want.     I  have  remarked  during  our  campaign
through  Afghanistan  a  strong  resemblance  to  the  customs,  dress,
and  manners  of  the  ancient  Jews,  very  prevalent  among  the  Affghans.
Indeed,  at  Candahar  they  acknowledged  their  direct  descent,  and
called  themselves  the  children  of  the  Jews.     I  cannot,  therefore,
wonder  why  a  Masonic  emblem   should  be  known  to  them.     No
doubt  many  more  might  be  traced ;  and  if  due  examination  were
made,  we  should  probably  elicit  those  scintillations,  embers  of  the
Masonic  light  itself,  which  might  be  enkindled  into  pristine  power
and  beauty."

10  The  captive  Israelites  were  subjected  to  great  indignities.    They
were  frequently  slain  by  Sennacherib  without  just  cause,  out  of  resent-
ment for  his  bad  success  against  Jerusalem  in  the  time  of  Hezekiah.
(Tobit  ii.  3,  &c.)     These  slaughtered  Jews,  Tobit,  among  his  other
good  works,  buried,  and  by  that  means  exposed  himself  to  great


394


HISTORICAL  LANDMARKS


were  frequently  favoured;  neither  the  covenant  of
their  fathers,  the  miracles  of  their  temple,  nor  the
voice  of  their  prophets ;  neither  the  long-suffering  nor
forbearance  of  their  God,11  could  prevail  upon  this
perverse  people  to  forsake  the  evil  of  their  ways,  and
turn  to  the  worship  of  Jehovah.12  At  length  God
determined  to  remove  Judah  out  of  his  sight,  as  he
had  removed  Israel,  to  cast  off  Jerusalem  which  he  had
chosen,  and  the  temple  of  which  he  had  said,  his  name
should  be  there.13

danger  of  his  life.  (Ch.  i.  and  iii.)  "  Here  we  find  that  the
poor  Jews  were  often  put  to  death  arbitrarily ;  that  their  bodies
were  left  unburied  on  the  outside  of  the  town,  near  the  walls  of
Nineveh,  or  left  hanging  upon  the  walls ;  that  the  prince  sometimes
inquired  after  the  dead  bodies ;  that  Tobit  being  complained  of  for
burying  them,  he  was  sought  for  to  be  put  to  deatli  for  that  reason ;
and  that  they  were  sometimes  put  to  death  in  private,  and  afterwards
exposed  to  public  view."  (llarmer's  Obs.  vol.  iv.  p.  235.)

11  The  author  of  a  book  called  Derech  llayaser,  printed  at  Am-
sterdam in  1779,   says   (p.   26) — "  Now  I  am  going  to  relate  a
singular  thing,  which  I  never  before  told  to  any  one  else.     I  made
a  discovery  of  what  the  world  before  doubted  of,  concerning  the  ten
tribes ;    having  been  informed    by  many  trustworthy  and  credible
persons,  that  the  ten  tribes  dwell  beyond  the  river  Sambatyon,  are
very  rich,  and  have  kings  and  governors,  and  are  not  in  want  of
any  thing  but  prophecy  and  the  holy  temple  at  Jerusalem.    They  live
in  peace,  and  the  surrounding  nations  pay  them  tribute ;  and  if  any
should  rebel,  they  go  to  war  till  they  compel  them  to  submit.     Some
say  they  are  far  on  the  other  side  of  the  river ;  others,  that  they
dwell  after  you  pass  the  river  Gozan ;  and  others,  that  they  reside
on  the  far  side  of  the  mountains  of  Obscurity,  &c.  &c."     Those  who
have  any  curiosity  to  peruse  the  fabidous  account  of  the  river  Sam-
batyon, and  the  Jews  who  are  said  to  dwell  there,   may  consult
Edrehis'  "  Book  of  Miracles."

12  See  Lect.  xxiii.  for  particulars.

13  Tomline's  Theol.  P.  1.  c.  3.


OF    FREEMASONRY.  395

To  such  an  extent  had  the  men  of  Judah  neglected
their  religion,  and  abandoned  their  God,  priests  as  well
as  people,  that  in  the  time  of  Josiah  the  temple  was  in
ruins,  the  sacred  writings  had  become  a  dead  letter,
and  it  was  believed  that  there  was  not  a  single  copy
of  the  law  in  existence.14  The  good  king  saw  and
lamented  the  general  apostacy,  and  resolved  to  restore
the  true  worship  of  God.  For  this  purpose  he  gave
orders  that  the  temple  should  be  repaired ;  and  con-
stituted three  Grand  officers  to  carry  the  design  into
effect.  A  public  collection  was  made  throughout
Judah  and  Benjamin,  and  the  remnant  of  the  people
of  Israel,  and  the  amount  was  placed  in  the  hands  of
Hilkiah,  the  high  priest.  Shaphan,  Maaseiah,  and
Joahaz  were  the  chief  men  in  this  undertaking;  and
under  them  were  installed  Jahath,  Obadiah,  Zechariah,
and  Meshullam,  as  overseers  to  superintend  the  work-
men ;  besides  whom,  scribes  and  other  officers  were
appointed  to  preserve  order  and  regularity.  By  their
plans  and  directions  the  temple  underwent  a  thorough
and  complete  repair ;  its  walls  were  rebuilt,  its  floors
were  renewed,  and  many  of  its  ornamental  details
restored.

14  It  is  supposed  that  these  books  or  rolls  were  made  of  linen,
and  therefore  perishable.  Ilarmer  says,  "  the  linen  was  primed  or
painted  all  over  before  they  began  to  write,  and  consequently  liable
to  crack.  We  are  told,  the  use  of  the  papyrus  was  not  known  till
after  Alexandria  was  built.  Skins  might  do  for  records  but  not  for
books,  unless  prepared  like  parchment,  of  which  AVC  are  assured
Etimenes  was  the  inventor,  in  the  second  century  before  Christ.  Ink
or  paint  must  have  been  used  to  write  on  linen,  and  pens  must  have
been  reeds  or  canes,  like  those  now  used  in  Persia,  which  agrees
better  with  the  Hebrew  word  we  render  pen."  (Observ.  vol.  ii.)


396


HISTORICAL    LANDMARKS


During  the  progress  of  the  work  a  most  important
discovery  was  made;15  and  the  consequences  prove  the
melancholy  fact,  that  the  holy  writings  of  Moses,  at

15  One  of  the  embittered  enemies  of  our  Masonic  Zion  in  America
(himself  a  Mason),  says  (Freemasonry,  by  a  M.  M.  p.  166) — "  Mr.
Town,  sanctioned  by  the  Grand  Chapter  of  New  York,  and  numbers
of  other  great  Masons,  labours  to  show  that  ancient  Masonry  lias
been  the  medium  through  which  the  Pentateuch,  or  five  Books  of
Moses,  have  been  preserved  to  the  world."     And  then  proceeds  to
refute  the  supposed  assertion,  in  a  strain  of  sarcasm  against  the  insti-
tution.    But  his  argument  is  baseless  as  the  fabric  of  a  vision.     We
do  not  pretend  to  say  that  the  world  is  indebted  to  Freemasonry  for
the  preservation  of  the  Pentateuch;  nor  does  Mr.  Town  make  any
such  assertion.     We  have  merely  embodied  in  one  of  our  degrees,
a  circumstance  of  the  greatest  importance  to  mankind  respecting  the
discovery  of  the  sacred  roll  of  the  law  ;  although,  according  to  modern
practice,  which  blends  two  separate  degrees,  an  anachronism  is  intro-
duced, which  naturally  creates  a  confusion  of  ideas  on  the  subject.
The  copy  of  ti.e  law  here  referred  to  was  found  by  some  workmen
when  the  temple  was  repaired,  and  purified  from  its  abominations  by
Josiah.     The  sacred  records  inform  us  (2  Kings  xxiii.  8  ;  2  Chron.
xxxiv.  14),  that  Hilkiah  found  the  roll,  but  it  was  doubtless  through
the  medium  of  the  workmen ;  as  the  building  of  the  temple  is  attri-
buted to  Solomon,  and  its  restoration  to  Josiah.     It  had  doubtless
been   deposited  in  some   secret  place ;    but  whether  closed  up  by
masonry  within  a  niche  in  the  wall  of  one  of  the  treasure  chambers,
or  buried  in  a  vault  under  the  floor,  the  scriptures  do  not  say.    They
give  us,  however,  a  concise  description  of  the  order  and  ceremony
which  was  observed  on  the  occasion.     The  high  priest  transmitted
the  invaluable  document  to  the  king,  by  the  hand  of  the  Scribe ;  and
when  the  king  had  heard  it  read,  he  referred  it  to  Huldah  the  pro-
phetess.    This  plain  statement  will  make  it  quite  clear  that  Free-
masonry assumes  no  such  merit  as  its  opponents  hpve  ridiculously
endeavoured  to  make  it  responsible  for.     It  might,  with  equal  truth,
be  said,  that  because  we  celebrate  several  striking  types  of  Chris-
tianity, we  claim  for  Masonry  the  merit  of  being  the  sole  herald  of
the  Christian  dispensation.


OF    FREEMASONRY.  397

that  period,  were  altogether  unknown  to  the  inhabitants
of  Judah  and  Israel.16  The  prohibition  of  Manasseh
had  been  complete ;  and  the  copies  of  the  sacred
writings  had  been  all  destroyed.  In  repairing  the
treasure  chambers  of  the  temple,  a  solitary  copy17  of  the

16  The  same  calamity  again  occurred  about  the  time  of  the  Baby-
lonish captivity ;  and  "  the  great  work  of  Ezra  was,  his  collecting
together  and  setting  forth  a  correct  edition  of  the  scriptures,  which
he  laboured  much  in,  and  went  a  great  way  in  the  performance  of  it.
This  both  Christians  and  Jews  give  him  the  honour  of;  and  many
of  the  ancient  Fathers  attribute  more  to  him  in  this  particular  than
the  Jews  themselves ;  for  they  hold  that  all  the  scriptures  were  lost
arid  destroyed  in  the  Babylonish  captivity,  and  that  Ezra  restored
them  again  by  divine  revelation."   (Prid.  Con.  p.  1,  b.  5.)

17  "  It  is  doubted,  supposing  this  to  have  been  an  original  copy  of
the  Pentateuch,  written  in  the  time  of  Moses,  and  deposited  in  its
hiding  place  at  the  building  of  the  temple,  whether  a  writing  could
remain  in  a  perfect  state  of  preservation  for  so  long  a  period  ?  It  will
be  remembered  that  the  very  old  Egyptians  used  to  write  on  linen
things  which  they  designed  should  last  long ;  and  those  characters
continue  to  this  day,  as  we  are  assured  by  those  who  have  examined  the
mummies  with  attention.     So  Maillet  tells  us,  that  the  filleting,  or
rather  the  bandage  of  a  mummy,  which  was  presented  to  him,  and
which  he  opened  in  the  house  of  the  Capuchin  monks  of  Cairo,  was
not  only  charged  from  one  end  to  the  other  with  hieroglyphical
figures,  but  they  also  found  certain  unknown  characters,  written  from
the  right  hand  towards  the  left,  and  forming  a  kind  of  verses.
These,  he  supposed,  contained  the  eulogium  of  the  person  whose
body  this  was,  written  in  the  language  which  was  used  in  Egypt  at
the  time  in  which  she  lived ;  that  some  part  of  this  writing  was
afterwards  copied  by  an  engraver  in  Prance,  and  these  papers  sent
to  the  virtuosi  through  Europe,  that  if  possible  they  might  decypher
them  ;  but  in  vain.     Might  not  a  copy  of  the  law  of  Moses,  written
after  this  manner,  have  lasted  eight  hundred  and  thirty  years  ?  Is  it
unnatural  to  imagine  that  Moses,  ivho  was  learned  in  all  the  arts
of  Egypt,  wrote  after  this  manner  on  linen  P     And  doth  not  this


398


HISTORICAL    LANDMARKS


scriptures  was  found,  and  delivered  to  Ililkiah;1"  who,
being  struck  with  its  contents,  placed  it  in  the  hands
of  Shaphan  the  Scribe,  that  he  might  apprise  the  king
of  its  existence;19  and  lie  accordingly  read  it  in  his
presence.20  Josiah  was  so  strongly  impressed  with  its
fearful  denunciations  against  those  very  sins  to  which
his  subjects  were  addicted,  that  he  rent  his  clothes,
and,  penetrated  with  grief  and  sorrow,  he  directed  his
officers  to  consult  lluldah  the  prophetess,  on  this  melan-
choly state  of  affairs,  who  denounced  the  approaching
\engeaiice  of  heaven  upon  the  Jewish  nation."1

To  avert  these  heavy  calamities,  the,  king  convened
a  general  meeting  of  the  priests,  the  elders,  the  Levites,

supposition  perfectly  well  agree  with  the  accounts  we  have  of  the.
form  of  their  books,  their  being  rolls,  and  of  their  being  easily  cut
in  pieces  with  a  knife,  and  liable  to  be  burned?"  (Ilarmer's  Obs.
vol.  ii.)

18  If  any  copies  of  the  Pentateuch  were  in  existence  at  this  time,
they  were  carefully  and  secretly  preserved  by  the  conservators  of
Jewish  Masonry,  because  if  produced  they  would  certainly  have  been
destroyed ;  the  injunctions  of  Manasseh  and  his  son  Ammon  were  so
stringent,  that  none  dare  openly  disobey  them.     It  is  quite  clear
that  even  Josiah  himself  had  never  seen  a  copy  of  this  invaluable
document.

19  I  have  been  enabled,  by  the  kindness  of  the  proprietor  of  the
Pictorial  Bible,  to  present  my  readers  with  an  engraving  illustrative
of  the  above  event.

20  The  place  at  which  he  casually  commenced  was  Deut.  xxviii.,  in
which  the  fearful  curses  on  disobedience  are  denounced.     Conscious
of  the  offences  of  his  predecessors,  and  the  general  wickedness  of  the
people,  the  king  rent  his  clothes ;  and  being  apprehensive  that  their
iniquities  were  full,  and  the  judgments  immediately  impending,  he
adopted  such  salutary  measures,  as  displayed  his  united  wisdom  and
piety.

21  2  Chron,  xxxiv.  23—25.


OF    FREEMASONRY,  399

and  the  people,  in  the  house  of  the  Lord,  which  had
been  purified  from  the  defilements  of  idolatry;  and,
standing  by  a  pillar,22  he  rehearsed  the  prophecies  and
denunciations  in  their  presence,  which  had  been  pro-
nounced upon  their  apostacy ;  and  he  "  made  a  cove-

22  The  use  of  pillars  in  the  ancient  world  is  very  remarkable ;  and
even  amongst  the  worshippers  of  the  true  God,  and  the  professors  of
the  true  Freemasonry,  the  erection  of  pillars  seems  to  have  conferred
a  sort  of  holiness  on  the  spot.  Hence  the  pillars  of  our  Lodges.
"  Where  these  stones  were  erected,  places  of  worship  were  established
out  of  respect  to  the  moral  and  religious  character  of  their  author.
Bethel  became  a  place  of  worship,  because  of  Jacob's  pillar ;  Gilgal
also,  for  a  like  reason,  because  of  the  pillars  erected  by  Joshua  at  the
passing  of  Jordan.  Gilead,  Galeed,  or  Mizpah,  became  also  in  after
ages  a  place  of  worship,  and  of  idolatry,  as  the  rest.  These  places
having  been  consecrated  to  the  purposes  of  religion,  were  soon  after
justly  thought  worthy  of  being  the  scenes  of  all  the  most  important
affairs  of  the  nation,  so  that  no  ties  or  covenants  were  thought  so
obligatory  as  those  which  were  contracted  in  these  sacred  places.
Samuel  made  Bethel  and  Gilgal  the  annual  seats  of  judgment.  At
Gilgal,  Saul  was  confirmed  king,  and  the  allegiance  of  his  people
renewed,  with  sacrifices  and  great  festival  joy.  At  Mizpah,  Jeptha
was  solemnly  invested  with  the  government  of  Gilead,  and  the  general
council  against  Benjamin  seems  to  have  been  held  here.  At  the  stone
or  pillar  of  Shechem,  erected  by  Joshua,  Abimelech  was  made  king.
Adonijah  by  the  pillar  of  Zoheleth.  Jehoash  was  crowned  king
standing  by  a  pillar,  as  the  manner  was ;  and  Josiah  stood  by  a
pillar  when  he  was  making  a  solemn  covenant  with  God.  There  was
something  emblematical  in  their  choosing  thus  to  stand  by  erected
stones  or  pillars,  when  they  were  employed  in  affairs  of  such  solemnity;
and  doubtless  it  was  their  intent  to  intimate,  that  their  engagements
entered  into  in  such  places  ought  to  be  as  firm  and  lasting,  and  their
decisions  as  impartial  and  upright,  as  the  symbolical  pillar  that  stood
before  their  eyes."  (Borl.  Ant.  Cornw.  p.  164.)  The  reflections  of
the  Tree  and  Accepted  Mason  will  here  be  naturally  directed  to  the
jewel  of  the  Junior  Warden.


400


HISTORICAL    LANDMARKS


limit  before  the  Lord,  to  walk  after  the  Lord,  and  to
keep  his  commandments,  and  his  testimonies,  and  his
statutes,  with  all  his  heart,  and  with  all  his  soul,  to
perform  the  words  of  the  covenant  which  are  written
in  this  book.  And  he  caused  all  that  were  present  in
Judah  and  Benjamin  to  stand  to  it."  After  which
he  kept  a  solemn  passovcr,  in  the  eighteenth  year  of
his  reign,  which  was  a  greater  celebration  than  had
ever  occurred  before,  from  the  days  of  Samuel  to  the
present  time.24  In  the  spirit  of  prophecy  Huldah,
foreseeing  the  Babylonish  captivity,  which  would  be
accelerated  by  the  disobedience  of  her  countrymen,
again  hid  a  copy  of  the  roll  in  a  place  of  security,  the
knowledge  of  which  was  entrusted  only  to  a  few  pious
persons,  in  whom  she  could  safely  confide.

The  above  circumstances  have  been  embodied  in  a
degree  which  is  practised  by  our  Brethren  of  the  Sister
Isle,25  as  an  indispensable  branch  of  legitimate  Free-

23  2  Chron.  xxxiv.  31,  32.

24  It  lasted  seven  days ;  and  the  number  of  animals  sacrificed  was
3,800  oxen,  and  37,000  sheep.

25  A  very  intelligent  Irish  Brother,  who  writes  in  the  Freemasons'
Quarterly  Review  under  the  soubriquet  of  Noachidse  Dalruadicus,
thus  enumerates  the  legitimate  degrees  of  Masonry  authorised  by  the
Grand  Lodge  of  Ireland  : — "  The  degrees  practised  by  the  Masonic
bodies  in  Dublin,  and  elsewhere  in  Ireland,  under  the  sanction  of  the
authorities  of  the  fraternity,  are  the  following,  divided  into  four  orders
or  classes,  each  under  its  respective  representative,  legislative  and
executive,  assembly. — The  degrees  of  E.  A.,  K  C.,  and  M.  M.,  under
the  government  of  the  Grand  Lodge  of  Ireland ;  the  11.  A.  degree,
including  those  of  P.  M.,  Excellent,  and  Superexcellent,  under  the
Supreme  Grand  Royal  Arch  Chapter.     The  degrees  of  Knight  of  the
Sword,  of  the  East,  of  the  East  arid  West,  and  of  Knight  Templar,
all  subject  to  the  Supreme  Grand  Encampment  of  Knight  Templars  ;


OF    FREEMASONRY.  401

masonry ;  but  in  this  country  it  is  blended  with  the

Royal  Arch.

i

which  was,  I  imagine,  a  convenient,  though  not  a  correct  arrange-
ment, as  the  three  first  named  of  this  class  belong  rather  to  the
former  class ;  and  lastly,  the  degrees  of  Rose  Croix,  or  Prince  Mason ;
K.  H.,  or  Philosophical  Masons ;  Knight  of  the  Sun ;  Princes  of  the
Royal  Secret;  and  Grand  Inspectors  General  (together  with  the
order  of  Mizraim,  which  is  possessed  by  some  members  of  the  College
of  K.  H.,  but  not  practised),  all  of  which  are  subject  to  the  Grand
Council  of  Rites,  lately  organized,  to  the  great  advantage  of  these
higher  degrees."  (F.  Q.  R.  1839,  p.  154.)


VOL.  II.  D  D


402


HISTORICAL    LANDMARKS


LECTURE    XXXVIII.

THE    CAPTIVITY    IN    BABYLON.

"  We  have  fallen  under  the  displeasure  of  the  Almighty  through
the  offences  committed  by  our  ancestors;  who,  deviating  from  true
Masonic  principles,  not  only  fell  into  great  errors  and  corraptions,
but  were  guilty  of  the  most  abominable  sins;  wherefore  ,lel  ovah,  in
his  wrath,  denounced  heavy  judgments  against  them  by  Jeremiah
and  other  prophets,  declaring  that  their  fruitful  land  should  be
spoiled,  their  city  become  desolate  and  an  abomination,  and  them-
selves and  their  descendants  feel  the  effects  of  his  displeasure  for  the
space  of  seventy  years,  which  commenced  in  the  fourth  year  of  the
reign  of  Jehoiachim,  A.  L.  3398." — OLD  LECTURES.

"  Nebuchadnezzar  being  now  at  rest  from  all  his  wars,  and  in  full
peace  at  home,  applied  himself  with  great  industry  to  the  grand
design  of  finishing  his  buildings  at  Babylon,  and  employed  therein
all  the  able  artists  of  Judea,  and  other  captives,  besides  his  own
Chaldean  masons ;  who,  by  their  joint  labour,  made  it  the  fourth  of
the  seven  wonders  of  art." — ANDERSON.

IN  the  preceding  lecture  we  have  briefly  detailed  the
iniquities  of  the  people  of  Israel,  and  the  miserable
captivity  of  the  ten  tribes,  which  had  been  inflicted  by
the  Almighty  as  their  punishment.  The  effect  of  this
judgment  on  the  remaining  tribes  was  very  evanescent.
Their  infatuation  in  favour  of  the  spurious  Freemasonry
of  their  heathen  neighbours  was  not  corrected ; l  and

1  "  They  forsook  the  great  and  good  King  David  to  follow  his
rebellious  son ;  they  slew  Zacharias,  the  son  of  Jehoida,  in  the  most


OF    FREEMASONRY.  403

therefore  their  ancient  enemies,  the  descendants  of
Esau,  were  permitted  to  harass  them  by  repeated
inroads;  and  at  length  they  seized  a  portion  of  the
land,  and  united  with  the  Chaldeans  to  destroy  them
as  a  nation.  And  accordingly,  as  the  people  did  not
show  a  disposition  to  reform  their  lives  at  the  repeated
admonitions  of  the  prophet  Jeremiah,2  but  rather
hardened  themselves  against  the  divine  authority,
Nebuchadnezzar,  King  of  Babylon,3  was  incited  to
invade  and  subdue  the  kingdom  of  Judah.  He  had

holy  place,  making  the  very  priest  himself  a  sacrifice  of  their  cruelty.
And  as  to  the  high  priests,  they  treacherously  designed  the  death  of
Jeremiah,  and  had  effected  it,  if  they  had  not  been  hindered  by  the
authority  of  some  of  the  rulers.  However,  they  extorted  thus  much,
that  he  should  be  held  a  captive  till  the  very  moment  the  city  was
taken."  (Grot,  de  vent.  B.  5,  s.  20.)

2  "  In  the  fourth  year  of  Jehoiakim,  Jeremiah  prophesied  of  the
coming  of  Nebuchadnezzar  against  Judah  and  Jerusalem,  that  the
whole  land  should  be  delivered  into  his  hands,  and  that  a  captivity
of  seventy  years  continuance  should  after  that  ensue  upon  the  people
of  the  Jews ;  and  he  also  delivered  several  other  prophecies  of  the
many  calamities  and  woful  desolations  that  were  then  ready  to  be
brought  upon  them,  intending  thereby,  if  possible,  to  bring  them  to
repentance,  that  so  the  wrath  of  God  might  be  diverted  from  them."
(Prideaux.  Con.  P.  1,  B.  1.)

3  "  Nebuchadnezzar  has  been  worse  used,"  says  Southey  (Omniana,
vol.  i.  p.  152),  "in  doggrel  than  even  poor  As-in-pro3sent  himself.
But  scurvily  as  he  has  been  berhymed  for  his  conquest  of  Jerusalem,
etymologists  have  as  scurvily  explained  his  name,  and  invented  a
story  to  explain  their  explanation.     They  say,  he  was  exposed  when
an  infant  under  a  tree ;  a  she  goat  gave  him  suck,  and  an  owl  hooted
at  noon  day  from  the  boughs  above.     This  unusal  noise  excited  the
attention  of  a  leper  who  was  passing  by;  he  turned  aside  to  the
tree,  saw  the  child,  and  preserved  him ;  and  in  memory  of  these
circumstances  named  him  Nabuchodonosor,   nabuz   signifying   in
Chaldee  an  owl;  code,  a  she  goat ;  and  nosor,  a  leper."

D  D  2


404


HISTORICAL    LANDMARKS


no  quarrel  with  its  king,  nor  any  particular  motive  for
an  invasion  of  the  country  ;  it  was  the  effect  of  chance,
directed  by  an  over-ruling  Providence,  intent  on  punish-
ing the  people  for  their  disobedience.  Nebuchadnezzar
coming  with  his  army  to  a  place  where  two  roads  met,
he  had  recourse  to  divination  for  the  puqwse  of  deter-
mining which  country  he  should  next  invade.  The
lot  fell  upon  Judah  ;  and  accordingly  he  turned  his
successful  arms  against  Jerusalem.

The  contest  was  soon  decided.  He  ravaged  the
whole  country  ;4  and  the  holy  city  of  Cod,  aft  CM-  a  pro-
tracted siege,  during  which  many  traitors  went  over  to
the  enemy,  was  abandoned  to  pillage  ;"'  they  burned
the  temple,"  broke  down  the  walls  of  ilic  city,7  set  fire


4  Hence  originated  the  degree  of  SaperexceDenl

6  Although  Jehovah  suffered  his  people  to  be  carried  to  Babylon
for  their  sins,  yet  he  denounced  the  heaviest  judgments  on  their
captors.  See  Isai.  xiii.  17  —  23.

6  In  remembrance  of  this  calamity  the  Jews  keep  two  fasts,  even
to  this  day  ;  the  seventeenth  of  the  fourth  month,  which  falls  in  our
June,  for  the  destruction  of  the  city  ;    and  the  ninth  of  the  fifth
month,  which  is  in  July,  for  that  of  the  temple.     Josephus  sa\>,
that  it  was  burnt  on  the  same  day  of  the  year  on  which  it  was
afterwards  destroyed  by  Titus.

7  A  Rabbinical  tradition  asserts,  that  "  before  the  temple  was
taken,  Jeremiah  abstracted  the  ark  of  the  covenant,  and  all  that  \V;H
laid  up  therein,  and  hid  it  in  a  certain  rock  ;  saying,  '  that  no  man
shall  take  it  away  except  Aaron;  nor  shall  any  man  see  the  tables
laid  up  therein,  be  he  priest  or  prophet,  except  Moses.     And  at  the
resurrection,  the  ark  shall  first  rise  and  come  forth  out  of  the  rock  ;
and  it  shall  be  laid  on  mount  Sinai,  and  thither  unto  it  will  all  the
saints  assemble  together,  looking  for  the  Lord,  and  flying  from  the
enemy  which  would  have  destroyed  them,  coming  unto  this  rock.'
And  he  sealed  up  this  rock  with  his  finger,  writing  thereon  the  XAME
OF  GOD  ;  the  form  of  it  was  like  the  engraving  of  iron  ;  and  a  li.'ihl


Ol(>    FREEMASONRY.  405

upon  her  towers,8  and  carried  away  the  consecrated
vessels  of  gold  and  silver,  the  brazen  sea  and  altar,9
and  the  two  pillars  of  Jachin  and  Boaz,  which  stood
at  the  entrance  of  the  porch.  All  the  princes,  the

'  cloud  overshadowed  and  covered  the  name  of  God ;  neither  knew
any  man  this  place ;  neither  could  any  man  read  the  sealing  unto
this  day,  neither  shall  unto  the  end.  This  rock  is  in  the  desert
where  the  ark  was  made  at  the  first,  between  two  mountains,  where
Moses  and  Aaron  lie  buried."

8  1  Esdras  i.  55.     As  a  punishment  for  this  profanation,  it  was
said  of  the  King  of  Babylon — "  Hell  from  beneath  is  moved  for  thee
to  meet  thee  at  thy  coming ;  it  stirreth  up  the  dead  for  thee,  even
all  the  chief  ones  of  the  earth ;  it  hath  raised  up  from  their  thrones
all  the  kings  of  the  nations.     All  they  shall  speak  and  say  unto  thee
—art  thou  also  become  as  weak  as  we  ?  art  thou  become  like  unto

us?"  (Isai.  xiv.  9,  10.)  This  bold  prosopopoeia  has  been  well
elucidated  by  Bishop  Lowth. — "  The  regions  of  the  dead,"  he  says,
"  are  laid  open,  and  Hades  is  represented  as  rousing  up  the  shades
of  the  departed  monarchs.  They  rise  from  their  thrones  to  meet  the
King  of  Babylon  at  his  coming ;  and  insult  him  on  his  being  reduced
to  the  same  low  state  of  impotence  and  desolation  as  themselves.
The  image  of  the  state  of  the  dead,  or  the  infernum  poeticum  of  the
Hebrews,  is  taken  from  their  custom  of  burying,  those  at  least  of
the  highest  rank,  in  large  sepulchral  vaults,  hewn  in  the  rock.  Of
this  kind  of  sepulchres  there  are  remains  at  Jerusalem  now  extant ;
and  some  that  are  said  to  be  the  sepulchres  of  the  Kings  of  Judah.
You  are  to  form  to  yourself  the  idea  of  an  immense  subterraneous
vault,  a  vast  gloomy  cavern,  all  round  the  sides  of  which  there  are
cells  to  receive  the  dead  bodies ;  here  the  deceased  monarchs  lie  in
a  distinguished  sort  of  state,  suitable  to  their  former  rank,  each  on
his  own  couch,  with  his  arms  beside  him,  his  sword  at  his  head,  and
the  bodies  of  his  chiefs  and  companions  around  him.  These  illustrious
shades  rise  at  once  from  their  couches,  as  from  thrones,  and  advance
to  the  entrance  of  the  cavern  to  meet  the  King  of  Babylon,  and  to
receive  him  with  insults  on  his  fall."  (Lowth,  Isai.  p.  219.)

9  But  before  this,  "  Jeremy  the  prophet  had  taken  the  holy  fire,
with  the  tabernacle,  the  ark,  and  the  altar  of  incense,  and  laid  them


403


HISTORICAL    LANDMARKS


nobility,10  and  every  person  of  consequence,11  according
to  the  prediction  of  Jeremiah,12  were  removed  into  the
land  of  Chaldea;13  but  Nebuzaradan,  the  chief  of

in  a  cave,  and  stopped  the  door.  And  some  of  those  that  followed
him  came  to  mark  the  way,  but  they  could  not  find  it,  which  when
Jeremy  perceived,  he  blamed  them,  saying — '  As  for  that  place,  it
shall  be  unknown  until  the  time  that  God  gather  his  people  again
together,  and  receive  them  unto  mercy.'  "  (2  Maccab.  ii.  1 — 7.)

10  "  Them  that  escaped  from  the  sword  carried  he  away  to  Babylon,
where  they  were  servants  to  him  and  his  sons,  until  the  reign  of  the
King   of  Persia.     At  the  close  of  this  there  was  a  representation
of  the  destruction  of  Jerusalem  by  Nebuchadnezzar,  and  the  carrying
away  captive  of  the  children  of  Israel  to  Babylon.     We  were  seized,
bound  in  chains,  and  confined  in  a  dungeon."    (Lectures,  according
to  some  authorities.)

11  An  old  Masonic  tradition  says,  that  the  chains  of  the  Jewish
captives  were  of  a  triangular  form  ;  because  the  Chaldeans,  knowing
t  hat  the  Jewish  Masons  esteemed  the  triangle  as  emblematical  of  the
sacred  name  of  God,  constructed  their  fetters  in  that  form  for  the
purpose  of  increasing  the  mental  sufferings  of  their  captives  by  a
desecration  of  the  Tetragrammaton.

12  "  When  Jeremiah  prophesied,  the  Jews  were  guilty  of  the  highest
abominations,  and  yet  they  came  regularly  to  the  worship  of  the
temple,  but  without  a  reformation  of  their  lives ;  hereupon  the  pro-
phet's message  to  them  was,  that  if  they  continued  in  this  course,
they  might  put  their  burnt  offerings  to  their  sacrifices,  and  eat  the
flesh ;  they  might  even  break  through,  and  not  pretend  to  observe
the  legal  institutions  for  their  burnt  offerings ;  for  that  God  would
not  accept  them  for  an  exact  performance  of  any  part  of  his  law  only,
when  what  he  required  of  them  was  to  obey  his  voice,  and  to  walk
in  all  his  ways  that  he  had  commanded  them."   (Shuck.  Con.  vol.  iii.
p.  136.)

13  "  Nebuchadnezzar  having  made  himself  master  of  Jerusalem,  took
thence  all  the  treasures  of  the  house  of  the  Lord,  and  the  treasures
of  the  king's  house,   and  cut  in  pieces  the  vessels  of  gold  which
Solomon,  King  of  Israel,  had  made  in  the  temple  of  the  Lord,  and
carried  them  to  Babylon ;    and   he   also  carried  thither  with  him


OF    FREEMASONRY.  407

Nebuchadnezzar's  officers,  left  behind  many  families
of  the  lower  classes  to  cultivate  the  vineyards,  and
other  servile  purposes,14  with  strict  injunctions  to
transfer  the  fruits  thereof  to  Babylon  in  their  season,
as  luxuries  for  the  tables  of  the  nobility.15

It  must  not  be  imagined  that  the  captives  were
condemned  to  interminable  slavery.  A  distribution
was  made  according  to  rank  and  family  ;  some  were
retained  at  Babylon ;  others  were  disposed  in  the  pro-
vinces to  augment  the  population,  and  improve  the
general  resources  of  the  empire.  They  were  allowed
to  collect  and  retain  their  moveable  property  j  to  pur-
chase lands  and  build  houses ;  and  they  located  them-
selves in  this  novel  situation  contentedly ;  for  it  had
been  asserted  by  Jeremiah,  that  all  hopes  of  present

a  vast  number  of  captives.  Jehoiach.in  the  king,  his  mother,  and
his  wives,  and  his  officers  and  princes,  and  all  the  mighty  men  of
valour,  even  to  the  number  of  10,000  men  out  of  Jerusalem  only;
besides  the  smiths,  and  the  carpenters,  and  other  artificers ;  and  out
of  the  rest  of  the  land,  of  the  mighty  men  7000,  and  of  the  craftsmen
and  smiths  1000,  besides  3023  which  had  been  carried  away  the
year  before  out  of  the  open  country,  before  the  siege  of  Jerusalem
was  begun.  With  the  mighty  men  of  valour  he  recruited  his  army,
and  the  artificers  he  employed  in  carrying  on  of  his  buildings  at
Babylon."  (Prid.  Con.  P.  1,  B.  1.)

14  2  Kings  xxv.  11,  12.

15  According  to  Usher's  computation,  the  temple  was  burnt  about
424  years  after  it  was  built.     Josephus,  who  conceives  it  to  have
been  burnt  470^  years  from  the  time  of  its  building,  observes,  with
astonishment,  that  the  second  temple  was  burnt  by  the  Romans  on
the  very  same  day  of  the  month ;  and  the  Jewish  doctors  add,  that
the  Levites  were  singing  the  same  hymn  at  both  destructions,  viz.,
Ps.  xciv.  23.


408


HISTORICAL    LANDMARKS


restoration  were  entirely  groundless,  and  that  it  was
ordained  of  God  that  the  period  of  their  exile  should
be  seventy  years.16

We  shall  see  hereafter  that  this  particular  period
was  named  as  the  duration  of  their  captivity,  for  the
purpose  of  allowing  the  land  to  enjoy  its  sabbaths,17  in
fulfilment  of  the  divine  ordinance,  which  had  been
defeated  by  the  disobedience  of  their  forefathers,  who

16  At  this  period  the  pure  science  of  Light  or  Masonry  was  intro-
duced into  Babylon,  and  was  practised  by  Daniel  and  his  associates
in  opposition  to  the  spurious  system  which  was  celebrated  in  the
old  tower  of  Belus,  the  lower  apartments  of  which  were  used  for  the
purpose  of  initiation.     Their  steady  adherence  to  the  practice  of
primitive  Freemasonry  drew,  down  upon  them  the  vengeance  of  the
priests  and  princes  of  Babylon,  and  brought  upon  the  three  principal
Brethren  the  punishment  of  fire,  and  upon  Daniel  that  of  being  torn
in  pieces  by  wild  beasts.     But  in  both  these  cases  God  gave  a  signal
proof  of  his  divine  protection ;  the  fire  was  divested  of  its  consuming
powers,  the  mouths  of  hungry  lions  were  closed,  and  all  the  world
saw  and  acknowledged  that  these  unusual  effects  must  have  been
brought  about  by  a  power  infinitely  superior  to  that  of  their  own
national  deities.     The  king  himself  was  so  impressed  with  wonder
and  religious  veneration  at  the  appearance  of  a  visible  protecting
power,  extending  safety  over  the  three  Brethren,  in  the  midst  of
a  furnace  of  fire  heated  "  one  seventimes  more  than  it  wras  wont  to
be  heated,"  that  he  publicly  blessed  the  God  of  Israel,  and  issued
a  proclamation,  commanding  him  to  be  worshipped  throughout  the
whole  of  his  extensive  dominions.

17  When  the  children  of  Israel  were  put  in  possession  of  the  pro-
mised land,  the  Almighty  strictly  ordained  that  as  every  seventh  day
was  a  sabbath,  or  day  of  rest,  so  every  seventh  year  the  land  should
lie  fallow  and  be  at  rest.    The  people  did  not  observe  this  command,
and  therefore  were  exiled  from  their  country  for  seventy  years,  that
the  land  might  enjoy  the  portion  of  rest  which  it  had  lost  by  their
disobedience.


OF    FREEMASONRY.  409

cultivated  the  land  every  seventh  year,  when  it  was
commanded  to  lie  at  rest.18

The  chief  Jewish  families  resided  in  the  city  of
Babylon,  and  some  of  their  noblest  men  were  taken
into  the  royal  palace,  and  by  their  superior  wisdom
were  admitted  to  share  in  the  councils  of  state,  to  the
great  annoyance  of  the  native  princes,  who  strove  by
every  means  in  their  power  to  involve  them  in  disgrace,
and  by  their  invidious  policy  succeeded  in  subjecting
them  to  a  series  of  severe  trials.19  Daniel  was  cast
into  a  den  of  hungry  lions;  and  Hananiah,  Misael,

18  It  may  be  interesting  to  add,  that  Jeremiah  did  not  go  into
captivity  in  Babylon,  but  passed,  with  many  of  his  countrymen,  into
Egypt,  where  he  died,  some  say  by  stoning.     The  Egyptians  were
incensed  against  him  because  he  had  predicted  that  their  idols  should
be  overthrown  by  an  earthquake,  at  the  birth  of  the  Messiah.    Others
say  that  he  was  thrown  into  a  pit,  and  transfixed  with  darts.     The
later  Jews  held  the  memory  of  Jeremiah  in  the  greatest  reverence ;
and  some  of  the  Christian  fathers  have  fancied  that  as  his  death  is
not  mentioned  in  scripture,  he  was  living  in  the  time  of  Christ ;  and,
as  we  learn  from  St.  Matthew  (xvi.  14),  it  was  even  supposed  that
Christ  was  no  other  than  that  prophet.

19  At  this  time  the  Jews  were  classed  into  three  degrees  or  ranks.
— 1.  Keschagnim,  or  the  ungodly;  adherents,  probably,  of  the  spu-
rious Freemasonry.     2.  Tmdikim,  or  righteous.     3.  Ckasidim,  or
sanctified.     The  individuals  who  composed  the  last  class  were  after-
wards called  Kasideans,  and  were  the  conservators  of  Masonry  among
the  Jews ;  nor  were  the  second  class  uninitiated  (if  I  may  so  speak),
for  they  were  sometimes  confounded  with  the  Kasideans.     From
them  sprang  the  Essenes,  who  brought  Masonry  down  to  the  time
of  Jesus  Christ,    and  perhaps  later ;    for  the   Hebrews  had   been
originally  selected  by  Jehovah,  and  formally  separated  from  the  rest
of  the  world,  to  preserve  from  annihilation  every  institution  which
professed  to  enforce  the  true  worship,  and  the  moral  duties  necessarily
resulting  from  it.    A  modern  writer,  however,  thinks  that  the  Essenes
were  no  other  than  the  early  Christians.    Sec  Bluckwood's  Mag.  1840.


HISTORICAL    LANDMARKS

and  Azariah  into  a  furnace  of  fire;  but  both  tnese
attempts  not  only  failed,  but  awfully  recoiled  on  the
conspirators,  by  the  righteous  decrees  of  retributive
justice.  The  Jews  in  Chaldea  even  preserved  an  ap-
pearance of  regal  state  in  the  midst  of  an  enemy's
country ;  and  on  the  death  of  Jehoiakim,  who  reigned
over  them  at  the  commencement  of  the  captivity,
Salathiel  his  son  was  formally  inaugurated  as  King  of
the  Jews,  and  head  of  the  captivity ;  and  the  latter
style  was  continued  for  many  years  after  the  rebuilding
of  the  temple,  by  those  who  preferred  to  remain  in
Chaldea,  where  they  had  been  born  and  educated,  and
was  thus  endeared  to  them  by  early  recollections.20

The  people  who  adhered  to  the  faithful  worship  of
God,  and  they  were  neither  few  nor  insignificant,
continued  to  meet  in  their  schools  or  Lodges,  for  the
undisturbed  practice  of  their  system  of  ethical  Free-
masonry; which  they  did  not  fail  to  propagate  for
their  mutual  consolation  during  this  calamitous  reverse
of  fortune,  and  for  the  benefit  of  their  descendants.
It  so  happened  that  about  this  period  Cambyses  invaded
Egypt,  and  amongst  his  freaks  in  that  country  took  the
celebrated  philosopher  Pythagoras21  prisoner,  and  con-

20  A  kind  of  state  was  preserved  amongst  this  people,  which  con-
secrated the  authority  of  their  monarch,  and  cemented  the  jurisdiction
that  could  only  be  voluntary,  because  they  were  in  reality  the  subjects
of  another  nation,  and  an  imperium  in  imperio  would  scarcely  have
been  permitted  to  exist  in  any  country,  if  it  had  been  attended  with
insubordination  or  dispute.

21  Diogenes  affirms   (Porph.  p.  8),  that  Pythagoras  gained  the
greatest  part  of  his  wisdom  from  Egypt  and  Chaldea.    Of  these  and
the  Pho3iiicians  he  learned  the  sciences  called  mathematical.     The
Egyptians  taught   him  geometry ;    the  Phoenicians,  numbers  and


OF    FREEMASONRY.  411

veyed  him  to  Babylon,  which  city  Thales  had  already
visited.22  This  event  constitutes  an  era  in  Masonry,
for  it  is  extremely  probable  that  the  second  Zoroaster
was  living  there  at  the  same  time,  together  with  the
Jewish  prophets.  From  Zoroaster,  the  Samian  philo-
sopher, it  is  said,  but  lam  afraid  on  doubtful  authority,23
received  full  instruction  in  the  peculiar  mysteries  of  the

proportion;  and  the  Chaldeans,  astronomy,  divine  rites,  and  the
worship  of  the  gods.  These  are  more  generally  known,  because  he
committed  them  to  writing ;  but  the  rest  of  his  instructions,  being
communicated  orally,  are  more  involved  in  mystery.

22  A  portion  of  the  philosophy  of  Thales  has  been  preserved  in
a  catechetical  form,  as  follows  : — "  What  is  it  that  is  most  beautiful?
The  universe;  for  it  is  the  work  of  God.- — What  most  immense?
Space ;  because  it  controls  everything. — What  most  powerful  ?  Neces-
sity ;  because  it  triumphs  over  all  things. — What  most  difficult  ?  To
know  one's  self. — What  most  easy  ?    To  give  advice. — What  most
rare  ?  A  tyrant  who  arrives  at  old  age. — What  difference  is  there
between  living  and  dying?    They  are  equally  indifferent. — Why  do
you  not  die  then  ?    Because  they  are  equally  indifferent. — What  is
there  that  can  console  us  in  misfortune  ?    The  sight  of  an  enemy
more  wretched  than  ourselves. — What  method  must  we  take  to  lead
an  irreproachable  life  ?  To  do  nothing  which  we  should  condemn  in
others. — What  is  necessary  to  happiness  ?    A  sound  body,  an  easy
fortune,  and  an  enlightened  mind."

23  Diogenes,  however,  positively  asserts  (Porph.  p.  2),  that  Zoroaster
lived  with  Pythagoras  in  Babylon,  and  that  he  cleansed  him  from  pollu-
tion, instructed  him  from  what  things  virtuous  persons  ought  to  be
free,    and  taught  him  the  principles  of  nature  and  the  universe.
Apuleius  (Florid,  ii.)  confirms  this,  and  adds,  that  Zoroaster  was  his
chief  instructor,   terming  him,    omnis  divini  arcanum  antistitem.
Alexander,  in  his  book  of  Pythagoric  Symbols,  calls  him  Mazaratus,
the  Assyrian ;  Suidas  calls  him  Zares  ;  Diogenes,  Zabratus  ;   Cyril,
Zaran  ;  and  Plutarch,  Zaratus.    But,  according  to  Selderi  (Do  diis
Syris),  they  all  mean  Zoroaster,  the  Magian,  who  was  also  called
Zaradis,  according  to  Theodoret  and  Agathias.


412


HISTORICAL    LANDMARKS


Magian  religion;24  but,  what  is  more  to  our  puqx
he  procured  initiation,  at  the  hands  of   Daniel/'  into
the  Jewish  system  of  Freemasonry,™  which  he  studied
with  great  intensity  during  his  entire  residence  of  t  wcl\  e
years  in  Chaldea;"7  and  when  he  returned  home  and

24  "  The  Magi  received  him  kindly,"  says  lumblichus  (he  M\  .
c.  iv.),  "  and  instructed  him  in  the  most  profound  and  sublime
mysteries.  By  their  means  also  lie  arrived  at  a  very  high  decree  of
perfection  in  arithmetic,  music,  and  other  mathematical  sciences.
From  them,  as  \  alcrin>  Maximum  informs  us,  he,  with  a  docile  mind,
re<-(  i\cd  a  knowled-v  of  tin-  motion  of  the  >tar>,  their  power,  pro-
perties, and  ctl'ects;  their  states  and  periods;  the  various  inflm  :
of  both  in  the  nativities  of  men  ;  a>  likewise  the  remedies  of  di-ea-

-:>  hr.  Jlyde,  however,  thinks  it  uas  K/ekiel.  lie  >a\s  (!><•  re].
vet,  Tors.  p.  361),  that  both  the  prophet  K/.ekiel  and  Zoroaster
resided  there  at  the  same  time.  "  The  former,  attached  to  the  man
who  had  submitted  in  Kgypt  to  one  fundamental  rite  prescribed  by
tlie  Jewish  law,  instructed  Pythagoras  in  the  awful  principles  of  the
Hebrew  religion  ;  the  latter  made  him  acquainted  with  the  doctrines
of  the  two  predominant  principles  in  nature,  of  good  and  evil,  and
unfolded  to  his  astonished  view  all  the  stupendous  mysteries  of
Milhra."

*°  "  That  he  conversed  with  the  Jews  at  Babylon,"  saith  the  Arch-
bishop of  Armagh,  "  may  be  argued  ;  for  that  he  transferred  many  of
their  doctrines  into  his  philosophy,  as  Hermippus  declares,  in  his
iiist  book  of  things  concerning  Pythagoras,  cited  by  Josephus;  and
in  his  first  book  of  Lawgivers,  cited  by  Origen ;  which  likewise  is
confirmed  by  Aristobulus,  the  Jew,  a  peripatetic  philosopher,  in  his
first  book  to  Philometor ;  who,  moreover,  was  induced  by  the  same
reason  to  believe,  that  the  books  of  Moses  were  translated  into  Greek
before  the  Persian  empire ;  whereas  it  is  much  more  probable,  that
Pythagoras  received  that  part  of  his  learning  from  the  conversation
which  he  had  with  the  Hebrews."  (Stanley.  Hist.  Phil.  vol.  iii.
P.  1,  p.  8.)

27  He  was  not  the  only  heathen  philosopher  who  had  the  good
fortune  to  be  thus  enlightened.     Thales  had  already  been  instructed


OF    FREEMASONRY.  413

established  his  school,  he  disseminated,  along  with  the
esoteric  secrets  of  his  philosophy,  the  peculiar  rites  and
ceremonies  of  Jewish  Masonry,28  which  gave  a  new
character  to  his  sect,29  and  conferred  upon  it  a  high

in  the  principles  of  the  Jewish  faith,  and  many  of  the  Eabbins,  as
well  as  some  ancient  Christian  writers,  suppose  Plato  to  have  received
instruction  from  Jeremiah;  which  is  probable,  as  Plato  was  born
some  years  before  the  Babylonish  captivity,  and  Jeremiah  was  taken
there  before  he  went  into  Egypt.  It  is  further  asserted  by  the  Jewish
chronologists,  that  his  secretary,  Baruch,  died  there  many  years  after
the  destruction  of  the  temple ;  so  that,  if  not  by  Jeremiah,  he  might
have  been  instructed  by  Baruch.  See  Leon.  Dial.  iii.  Concil.  i.  8.

28  "  In  his  system  there  were  two  or  three  different  degrees  of
Perfection,  to  be  obtained  only  by  diligence,  patience,  and  perse-
verance.    The  initiated  were  bound  to  secrecy ;  were  entrusted  with
private  signs,  words,  and  tokens ;  were  bound  to  consider  and  treat
as  Brethren  all  their  fellows  in  the  Lodge ;  and  to  keep  a  watch  of
the  most  rigid  purity  over  their  conduct.     He  taught  the  eternal
essence  and  unity  of  the  Creator  of  the  world,  and  acknowledged  no
other  God  but  one.     The  name  of  this  being  he  gave  as  a  mystery  to
his  disciples,  and  described  the  Deity  in  the  same  word  as  the  Jews,
signifying  the  SELF  EXISTENT.    He  inculcated  the  necessity  of  pure
worship,  and  taught  the  doctrines  of  a  peculiar  providence,  of  the
immortality  of  the  soul,   and  incorporeality  of  the  Deity.     These
doctrines  he  learned  from  the  Jews,  and  his  mode  of  inculcating
them,  by  Signs  and  Symbols,  leaves  us  no  room  to  doubt  of  the  con-
nexion of  his  system  with  Freemasonry."  (Mant's  Comp.  p.  37.)

29  Amidst  the  voluptuousness  that  prevailed  among  the  inhabitants
of  Crotona,  the  Samian  sage  found  his  instructions  respected,  and
his  approbation  courted;  the  most  debauched  and  effeminate  were
pleased  with  the  eloquence  and  graceful  delivery  of  the  philosopher,
who  boldly  upbraided  them  for  their  vices,  and  called  them  to  more
virtuous  and  manly  pursuits.     These  animated  harangues  were  at-
tended with  rapid  success,  and  a  reformation  soon  took  place  in  the
morals  and  the  life  of  the  people  of  Crotona.     The  females  were
exhorted  to  become  modest,  and  they  left  off  their  gaudy  ornaments ;
the  youth  were  called  away  from  the  pursuit  of  pleasure,  and  they


414


HISTORICAL    LANDMARKS


pre-eminence  amongst  the  systems  promulgated  by
the  sages  of  Greece.30

The  enthusiasm  of  such  a  celebrated  philosopher31  in
favour  of  these  practices  would  give  a  genial  impulse
to  the  Jewish  institutions,  and  prevent  them  from
suffering  by  apathy  and  supineness  in  the  midst  of  an

instantly  forgot  their  intemperance,  and  paid  to  their  parents  that
submissive  attention  and  deference  which  the  precepts  of  Pythagoras
required.  As  to  the  old,  they  were  directed  no  longer  to  spend  their
time  in  amassing  money,  but  to  improve  their  understanding,  and  to
seek  that  peace  and  those  comforts  of  mind,  which  frugality,  bene-
volence, and  philosophy  alone  can  produce.  (Lempreire.  Clas.  Die.
p.  281.)

30  "  He  applied  himself,"  says  Stanley  (Hist.  Phil,  ut  supra,  p.  10),
"  to  the  Cretan  Epimenides,  that  eminent  soothsayer,  as.  Apuleius
calls  him.     He  went  down  with  him  into  the  Idrean  cave,  wrapped
in  black  wool,  and  stayed  there  three  times  nine  days,  according  to
the  custom;  and  to  Jupiter,  and  saw  the  throne  which  is  made
yearly  there  for  him,  and  wrote  an  epigram  upon  his  tomb,  beginning
thus : —

Here  Zan  deceased  lies,  whom  Jove  they  call.

Thus  was  he  initiated  into  all  religious  rites,  as  well  Grecian  as
barbarian."

31  "  Pythagoras,  who  reigned  over  the  whole  body  of  his  disciples
with  the  tenderness  of  a  father,  but  with  the  authority  of  a  monarch,
lived  with  them  as  with  his  friends.     He  took  care  of  them  in
sickness,  and  consoled  them  under  their  sufferings ;  and  it  was  by
the  kindness  with  which  he  treated  them,  as  much  as  by  his  under-
standing and  knowledge,  that  he  obtained  such  an  ascendancy  over
their  minds,  that  his  most  trivial  expressions  were  considered  by
them  as  oracles ;  and  that  they  frequently  returned  no  other  answer
to  objections  urged  against  them  than  by  these  words — He  has  said
it. — By  this  also  he  infused  into  the  hearts  of  his  disciples  that  rare
and  sublime  friendship  which  has  passed  into  a  proverb."  (Anachar.
vol.  vi.  p.  299.)


OF    FREEMASONRY.  415

idolatrous  country,  where  pains  and  penalties32  were
the  threatened  punishment  of  any  deviation  from  the
worship  of  false  gods.

32  «  Whoso  falleth  not  down  and  worshippeth,  shall  the  same
hour  be  cast  into  the  midst  of  a  burning  fiery  furnace."  (Dan.  iii.  6.)
"  Whosoever  shall  ask  a  petition  of  any  god  or  man  for  thirty  days,
save  of  thee,  0  King,  he  shall  be  cast  into  the  den  of  lions."  (Ibid,
vi.  7.)


410


HISTORICAL    LANDMARKS


LECTURE    XXXIX.

THE    GRAND    AND    ROYAL    LODGE.

"  The  masons  who  were  selected  to  build  the  temple  of  Solomon
were  declared  FREE,  and  were  exempted,  together  with  their
descendants,  from  imposts,  duties,  and  taxes.  They  had  also  tin-
privilege  to  bear  arms.  At  the  destruction  of  the  temple  by  Nebu-
chadnezzar, the  posterity  of  these  ma.sons  urn;  carried  into  captivity
with  thu  ancient  Jews.  But  the  good  will  of  Cyrus  gave  them
permission  to  erect  a  second  temple,  having  set  them  at  liberty  for
that  purpose.  It  is  from  this  epoch  that  we  bear  the  name  of  Free
and  Accepted  Masons." — YORK  LECTURES.

"  Thus  the  mysteries  become  useful ;  thus  we  seize  the  true  spirit
of  them  ;  that  every  thing  therein  was  instituted  by  the  ancients  for

instruction  and  amendment  of  life." — EPICTETUS.

•

"  Cyrus,  who  had  been  fore  ordained  to  restore  the  children  of
Israel,  and  to  rebuild  the  holy  temple  at.  Jerusalem,  having  founded
the  Persian  empire,  issued  out  his  decree  for  those  welcome  purposes.
He  constituted  Zerubbabel,  the  son  of  Salathiel,  his  Provincial  Grand
Master  in  the  land  of  Judea,  the  lineal  heir  of  David's  royal  race,
and  prince  of  the  reduction ;  with  the  high  priest  Joshua  his  deputy  ;
under  the  title  of  Tirshatha,  by  immediate  commission  from  him.
All  the  vessels  of  gold  and  silver  brought  to  Babylon  from  Jerusalem,
were,  by  this  decree,  ordered  to  be  delivered  to  Zerubbabel,  who
carried  them  back  to  Jerusalem." — ANDERSON.

THE  grief  of  the  first  captives  at  being  exiled  from
their  beloved  country,1  and  for  ever  excluded  from  the

1  At  Exeter,  in  1838,  a  copper  coin  of  the  Emperor  Vespasian  was
found,  which  contained  on  the  reverse  a  female  figure  in  the  attitude


OF    FREEMASONRY.


417


holy  city  of  their  forefathers,2  was  excessive  as  it  was
hopeless.3  Conscious  that  their  unhappy  fate  was  the
just  punishment  of  their  unbelief,4  and  disregard  of
the  prophetical  warnings  which  had  been  mercifully
vouchsafed  to  them  ;  now  that  they  saw  the  denuncia-
tions of  Jeremiah  fulfilled,  they  resigned  themselves  to

of  grief,  seated  under  a  palm-tree,  with  the  inscription  JUD^A  CAPTA.
It  is  supposed,  however,  to  refer  to  the
destruction  of  Jerusalem  by  Titus.

2  The  reason  why  the  Jews  had  such
an  attachment  to  the  Holy  Land,  was
not  only  from  its  fruitfulness,  but  also
from  its  situation  in  the  centre  of  the
ancient  divisions  of  the  globe.     The
1st  was  made  to  pass  through  Meroe  ;
2,  Sienna;    3,  Alexandria;    4,  Jeru-
salem  and   Rhodes ;    5,   Rome ;    6,

Pontus ;  7,  through  the  mouth  of  the  Borysthenes.

3  The  ardent  love  which  the  captive  Jews  entertained  for  their
native  land  is  pathetically  described  in  the  137th  Psalm.     The  same
grief  still  remains  amongst  their  posterity  at  the  present  day.     The
Rabbi  Kimchi  thus  laments  over  the  desolation  of  his  country  : —
"  These  are  the  days  of  the  captivity — even  these.    We  have  neither
king  nor  prince,  and  are  in  the  power  of  the  kings  and  princes  of
the  Gentiles.     We  have  no  sacrifices  for  God,  nor  images  for  idols  ;
no  ephod  that   declares  future  things ;   no   teraphim  which   show
things  to  come  !"     The  age  in  which  the  Rabbi  lived,  however,  was
a  terrible  period  for  this  desolate  people.    Proscribed  and  persecuted
everywhere,  they  had  no  abiding  place  on  the  face  of  the  whole  earth.

4  The  flat  and  level  plain  on  which  Babylon  had  been  built,  was
intersected  by  so  many  rivers  and  canals  as  to  become  soft  and  boggy,
and  thus  produced  an  abundance  of  willow  trees,  which  thrive  freely
in  such  situations.     This  peculiar  feature  of  the  country  is  alluded
to,  not  only  in  the  Psalms,  but  also  by  the  Prophets,  and  these  were
the  willows  on  which  the  daughters  of  Judah  suspended  their  harps
when  the  songs  of  their  native  land  were  discontinued.

VOL.  II.  E  E


418


HISTORICAL    LANDMARKS


despair,  and  transmitted  their  amor  patrice  to  their
posterity.  5

It  is  remarkable,  however,  that,  notwithstanding
the  prevalence  of  these  feelings,  numbers  declined  to
profit  by  the  edict  of  Cyrus,6  which,  when  the  term  of


5  This  holy  feeling  still  operates  powerfully  in  their  hearts.     They
love  and  languish  for  their  native  land,  and  would  suffer  and  die  for
it.     Dr.  Bowriug,  in  his  recently  published  Travels  in  Palestine,
strongly  expresses  this  feeling.     He  says,  "  The  most  interesting
circumstance  which  presents  itself  to  my  mind,  in  recording  what  I
saw  of  the  Hebrew  nation  in  the  East,  is  the  universal  diffusion  of
the  love,  the  undying  love  of  the  Jews  for  their  own  Judea,  the
Canaan  of  their  fathers.  Who  could  see,  without  emotion,  thousands
of  poor  Israelites,  who,  from  the  remotest  parts  of  Europe,  have  made
their   way — by   long   and    woary   pflgri&age — through   privations
incalculable,  and  sufferings  without  end — often  shoeless,  and  almost
clotheless,  friendless,  pennyless — that  they  might  see   the  city  of
David,  and  lay  their  bones  in  the  bosom  of  Jerusalem  ?    What  mul-
titudes are  there  among  them  who  have  sold  their  last  possession,
having  gathered  together  their  little,  their  insufficient  all,  and  have
started,  marching  towards  the  rising  sun,  from  the   Vistula,    the
Dnieper,  and  the  Danube,  on  a  journey  as  long  as  perilous !     How
many  have  perished,  exhausted  on  the  way !     How  many  that  have
landed  at  Joppa,  or  crossed  the  Taurus  at  Antioch,  have  been  unable,
from  over-exhaustion,  to  reach  their  longed-for  goal !     How  many
have  sunk  in  sight  of  the  Mount  of  Olives !     And  how  many  have
closed  their  eyes  in  peace  and  blessedness,  when  the  privilege  has
been  vouchsafed  to  them  of  treading  within  the  walls  of  Salem."

6  This  edict  was  procured  by  the  prophet  Daniel,  the  ALrchimagus,
(Dan.  v.  11),  who  acquainted  Cyrus  with  the  prophecy  of  Isaiah,
(xliv. — xlv.),  which  mentioned  him  by  name  as  the  emancipator  of
the  Jews.     This  magnificent  prophecy  opens  with  the  omens  and
prognostics  of  the  Babylonian  soothsayers,  predicting  the  stability
of  that  empire,  contrary  to  the  Jewish  prophets,  who  announced  the
restoration  of  Israel ;  the  rebuilding  of  their  city  and  temple ;  and
the  desolation  of  Babylon  by  the  drying  up  of  the  river  Euphrates.


OF    FREEMASONRY.  419

their  captivity  was  completed,7  gave  them  permission
to  return  and  rebuild  the  temple  of  their  forefathers.
Even  of  the  twenty  courses  of  the  priests,  only  four
could  be  induced  to  accompany  the  expedition  under
Zerubbabel,  although  he  was  their  lawful  prince,  being
the  son  of  Salathiel,  and  grandson  of  Jehoiachim  ;
and  was  constituted  governor  of  Judea  by  a  com-
mission from  Cyrus,  under  the  name  of  Tirshathah,
the  Ethiopian  title  of  king,  like  the  Pharaoh  of  Egypt,
and  Cesar  of  Rome.  His  authority  was  consecrated
by  the  sanction  of  religion  ;  for  Jeshua  the  high  priest
was  a  lineal  descendant  from  Seraiah,  who  held  the
pontificate  when  the  temple  was  destroyed ;  and  he
became  the  associate  and  colleague  of  Zerrubbabel  in
furtherance  of  the  great  design.

The  example  of  the  prince  and  high  priest,  although
enforced  by  the  energetic  admonitions  of  the  prophets,
was  incapable  of  stimulating  the  wealthy  Jews  to
abandon  their  possessions  in  Chaldea,8  in  exchange  for

1  "  Then  shall  the  land  enjoy  her  sabbaths  as  long  as  it  lieth
desolate."  (Lev.  xxvi.  34,  35.)  The  Almighty  spoke  clearly
respecting  the  Babylonish  captivity  that  it  should  last  seventy  years.
Israel  had  been  850  years  in  the  Holy  Land,  during  the  whole  of
which  period  they  had  not  observed  the  sabbatical  year,  in  giving  it
repose  for  sixty-two  years,  and  eight  jubilees,  making  together
seventy.  This  debt,  therefore,  they  were  condemned  to  pay ;  and
while  they  were  captives  in  Babylon,  the  land  was  not  cultivated,
but  actually  rested  seventy  years  before  their  deliverance  by  Cyrus.
(Concil.  vol.  i.  p.  62.)

8  The  fact  is,  they  lived  luxuriously  in  Chaldea,  and  were  doubtful
whether  the  same  indulgencies  would  be  allowed  under  their  own
laws.  Babylon  was  a  city 'of  great  magnificence,  and  I  need  only
mention,  to  show  the  opulence  of  the  inhabitants,  that  Pliny,  speak-
ing of  the  carpets  which  covered  the  sofas  they  made  use  of  at  table,

E  E  2


420


HISTORICAL    LANDMARKS


the  inheritance  of  their  ancestors  ;  and  little  more
than  fifty  thousand  persons9  could  be  prevailed  on  to
revisit  and  establish  themselves  in  Judea.10  The
opulent  Jews  were  unwilling  to  leave  their  houses  and
lands  where  they  were  comfortably  and  respectably
settled,11  for  the  hazard  of  a  portion  in  their  own

says  th;it  eacli  was  frequently  worth  81,000  sestertia.  We  may
judge  by  this  sum  of  the  great  value  and  magnificence  of  the
domestic  appointments  of  the  Babylonians.  They  used  vessels  of
gold,  silver,  and  ivory ;  many  of  which  wrre  adorned  with  precious
stones.  (Rev.  xviii.  12.)  Herodotus  gives  a  glowing  account  of  the
luxury  and  splendour  iu  which  they  lived.  They  wallowed  in  every
species  of  voluptuousness  ;  for  there  was  no  end  to  their  riches  ;  and
this  made  the  Jews  so  unwilling  to  return  to  their  own  country,  to
encounter  poverty  and  persecution.  Their  luxury,  however,  had  its
disadvantages,  for  it  produced  lewdness  and  debauchery,  which  were
practised  to  an  extent  that  would  be  incredible,  were  it  not  well
attested  by  unexceptionable  authority.  Consult  Isai.  xxiii.  j  Jer.  li.  ;
l>;m.  iv.  30  ;  llev.  xviii.

0 The  true  number,  as  corrected  by  Ezra  and  Nehemiah,  was
42,360,  to  which,  if  the  servants  and  the  singers  be  added,  the  gross
number  will  amount  to  nearly  50,000.

10  It  is  a  common  saying  amongst  the  Jews  to  this  day,  that  none
but  the  dregs  of  the  people  returned  on  this  occasion  ;  while  the
greater  part  of  the  priesthood,  nobility,  and  gentry,  amongst  whom
they  include  Daniel  and  other  prophets,  remained  behind.     Nor  did
the  subsequent  grants  and  privileges  overcome  their  reluctance  to
depart,  although  they  were  addressed  to  all  Jews  wherever  dispersed
over  the  face  of  the  earth.

11  And  yet  the  Holy  Land  was  fruitful  and  prolific.     Indeed  it
was  so  desirable  as  a  place  of  residence,  that  many  ancient  writers
have    spoken   of  it  in  glowing  language.     Arista3as   says    that    it
abounded  in   corn,  wine,  and  oil,  with  abundance  of  honey,  olive
trees,  vines,  and  palm  trees ;  the  latter  of  which  were  so  fat,  that
the  oil  might  be  pressed  out  by  merely  placing  the  foot  upon  them.
lie  further  declares  that  it  produced  spices  of  all  kinds,  nuts  and


OF    FREEMASONRY.  421

country,  which  might  subject  them  to  infinite  trouble
arid  inconvenience  before  they  should  be  able  to
establish  themselves  permanently  in  new  habitations  ;12
and  they  probably  thought  the  pageant  of  royal  state,
under  the  protection  of  the  powerful  king  of  Persia,  in
whose  court  many  of  them  held  offices  of  honour  and
emolument,  more  desirable  than  the  government  of  a
newly  peopled  province,  surrounded  by  jealous  and
discontented  neighbours.13

So  soon  as  the  prescribed  term  of  the  captivity  was
expired,14  the  Babylonian  monarchs  were  expelled,
according  to  the  voice  of  prophecy,15  and  the  anger  of

almonds,  mines  of  various  metals,  gold  and  precious  stones,  with
salutary  fountains  and  rivers  ;  and  that  60,000  acres  of  meadow
ground,  situated  on  the  banks  of  the  Jordan,  were  rendered  pecu-
liarly fruitful  and  productive  by  the  periodical  overflowing  of  the  river.

12  Besides,  during  their  captivity,  they  had  forgotten  their  own
language,  and  spake  nothing  but  the  Syriac  or  Chaldee,  in  which
even  a  great  part  of  the  Prophecies  of  Daniel,  and  the  Book  of
Ezra,  were  written.    And  many  of  them  had  done  still  worse.    They
had  married  the  daughters  of  their  captors  ;  they  had  been  initiated
into  the  spurious  Freemasonry  of  Babylon  ;  and  had  conformed  to
the  usages  of  the  country  both  civil  and  religious,  and  therefore  felt
indisposed  for  a  change.

13  The  number  of  Jews  who  refused  to  benefit  by  the  royal  pro-
clamation of  Cyrus  for  rebuilding  the  temple,  exceeded  those  who,
in  obedience  to  the  voice  of  their  prophets,  returned  into  Judea.

14  That  is,  seventy  years,   (see  Note  7),  which  began  from  the
fourth  year  of  Jehoiachim,  and  expired  on  the  first  of  Cyrus ;  when
he  granted  his  decree  for  rebuilding  the  temple,  and  the  return  of
the  Jews  into  their  own  land.   (Jer.  xxv. ;  2  Chron.  xxxvi.  20.)

15  As  the  Chaldeans  destroyed  Jerusalem,  so  Babylon  was  destroyed
in  her  turn.     It  is  remarkable  how  strictly,  and  to  the  letter,   scrip-
ture has  been  fulfilled  in  the  utter  desolation  of  this  once  famous


HISTORICAL    LANDMARKS

the  Lord  being  appeased,  he  stirred  up  the  heart  of
Cyrus,  King  of  Persia  and  Babylon,  by  communicating
to  him  the  GREAT  SECRET,  16  to  issue  a  proclamation
for  the  building  of  the  temple.17  The  people  were
liberated;  the  holy  utensils  restored  to  the  number
of  five  thousand  four  hundred,  which  had  escaped

city.  Wild  beasts  of  the  desert  still  be  there ;"  and  the  ruined
houses  are  full  of  doleful  creatures ;  owls  dwell  there,  and  satyrs
dance  there  ;  and  the  wild  beasts  of  the  field  cry  in  the  desolate
buildings,  and  dragons  in  the  ruined  palaces.

10  Arcana  Secretorum.  (Isai.  xlv.  3,  vulg.)  This  is  said  to  have-
been  communicated  in  a  dream ;  which,  in  the  degree  of  Knights  of
the  Kasl,  Cvnis  himself  is  traditionally  reported  to  have  thus  related
to  the  Brethren  :  "  I  have  long  since  resolved  to  liberate  the  Jews,
to  which  1  was  incited  by  the  following  remarkable  dream.  I  saw
a  ferocious  lion  in  the  act  of  springing  upon  me.  I  was  terrified  at
his  appearance,  and  looked  round  for  the  means  of  avoiding  his
attack.  At  that  very  instant,  I  beheld  my  two  predecessors,  in  the
habit  of  slaves,  beneath  a  glory  ;  out  of  which  certain  words  appeared
to  issue,  which  signified  LIBERTY  TO  THE  CAPTIVES  ;  and  I  was
given  to  understand  that  if  I  neglected  to  comply  with  this  requisi-
tion, my  kingdom  should  pass  away  from  me,  and  be  given  to
si  rangers."

17  "  There  can  be  no  doubt  but  this  decree  in  favour  of  the  Jews
was  obtained  by  Daniel,  when  Cyrus  first  came  into  Babylon ;  on
his  taking  the  city,  he  found  there  an  old  minister  of  state  famed  for
his  great  wisdom  all  over  the  East,  and  long  experienced  in  the
management  of  the  public  affairs  of  the  government;  and  such
councillors  wise  kings  always  seek  for ;  and  moreover,  his  late  read-
ing of  the  wonderful  handwriting  on  the  wall,  which  had  puzzled  all
the  wise  men  of  Babylon,  and  the  event  which  happened  immediately
after,  exactly  agreeable  to  his  interpretation,  had  made  a  very  great
and  fresh  addition  to  his  reputation.  And,  therefore,  on  Cyrus's
having  made  himself  master  of  the  city,  he  was  soon  called  for,  and
was  made  the  first  superintendant,  or  prime  minister  of  state  over
all  the  provinces  of  it."  (Prid.  Con.  p.  1,  b.  ii.)


Ol'    FREEMASONRY.  423

destruction  ;18  and  the  tribes  who  consented  to  return,
under  their  respective  princes  and  chieftains,19  were  led
triumphantly  into  the  promised  land  by  Zerubbabel,20

18  He  brought  them  forth  by  the  hand  of  Mithredath,  the  treasurer,
and  numbered  them  to  Sheshbazzar,  the  prince  of  Judah,  which  is
another  name  for  Zerubbabel ;  for  it  was  common,  during  the  cap-
tivity, for  the  great  men  of  Judah  to  have  two  names,  the  one
belonging  to  their  own  country,  and  the  other  a  Chaldean  name,
which  was  used  at  court.  (Old  Lectures.)

19  It  is  from  this  period,  according  to  Masonic  tradition,  that  \ve
are  said  to  have  taken  the  name  of  Accepted ;  for  the  fraternity  were
declared  free  by  King  Solomon ;  and  the  Brethren,  when  the  first
temple  was  completed,  were  furnished  with  an  honorary  jewel  or
gold  medal,  with  the  word  FREE  inscribed  upon  it.     The  posterity
of  some  of  the  Masons  who  assisted  at  the  erection  of  Solomon's
temple  having  settled  on  the  confines  of  Judea,  were  carried  into
captivity  with  the  Jews,  and  preserving  a  knowledge  of  the  sciences
of  geometry  and   architecture,  even  in  their  fallen  fortunes,  were
liberated  by  Cyrus,  and  subsequently  declared  free,  exonerated  from
all  imposts,  duties,  and  taxes,  and  invested  with  the  privilege  of
bearing   arms   by   Darius   au<)    Artaxerxes,   who    commanded   the
governors  of  the  surrounding  provinces  that  they  should  require  no
tax  or  other  imposition  from  any  of  the  priests,  Levites,  porters,
or  any  that  were  concerned  about  the  temple ;  and  that  no  man
should  have  authority  to  impose  anything  upon  them.

20  Zerubbabel  is   said,  in  the  degree  of  the  Red  Cross  Sword  of
Babylon,  to  have  been  invested  by  Cyrus  with  ample  powers,  in  the
following  terms : — "  I  give  you  full  permission  to  proceed  into  the
land  of  Judea,  and  rebuild  your  temple,  which  was  destroyed  by
Nebuchadnezzar.  You  are  appointed  the  chief  amongst  your  Brethren,
with  full  powers  to  rule  over  Judea  as  a  tributary  province ;  and  the
annual  payment  shall  be  made  within  the  porch  of  the  temple,  of
which  you  will  forward  to  me  a  correct  model,  to  be  registered  here
as  a  public  memorial  of  my  protection  and   friendship.     As  the
symbol  of  your  power,  I  invest  you  with  the  sword  which  Nebu-
chadnezzar received  from  your  ancestor  Jehoiakim,  and  exhort  you


424


HISTORICAL    LANDMARKS


the  prince  ;21  Jeshua,  the  priest ;  and  Haggai,  the
prophet.  ^

During  the   captivity  in   Babylon,    the  Jews  had
practised  Freemasonry,   and  consoled  themselves  by

to  use  it  prudently  in  defence  of  your  religion,  liberty,  and  laws.
I  create  you  a  Knight  of  the  lied  Cross  Sword,  and  will  commu-
nicate to  you  those  ineffable  secrets  which  have  hitherto  been
entrusted  only  to  the  princes  of  my  own  court.  I  present  you
with  the  sacred  vessels  and  ornaments  of  your  ancient  temple,  which
were  removed  at  the  captivity  of  your  forefathers  ;  and  I  give  you
a  jewel  and  olive  branch,  as  an  emblem  of  the  peace  which,  I  trust,
will  ever  subsist  between  us."

21  The  connexion  between  Cyrus  and  Zerubbabcl  is  not  only  recorded
in  the  lloyal  Arch,  but  also  in  many  other  degrees,  and  particularly
in  the  twentieth,  called  Venerable  Grand  Master  of  all  Symbolic
Lodges,  who  are  Sovereign  Princes  in  Masonry.

22  Michaelis  observes,  when  speaking  of  the  addiction  of  the  Jews
to  polytheism,  that  "  Solomon,  being  afflicted  with  a  phrenzy,  fell
into  idolatry,  nor  did  this  mental  disease  lose  aught  of  its  power  over
mankind,  until  the  period  when  Cyrus  extended  his  dominion  over
the  whole  of  Western  Asia.     The  Persians  were  enemies  to  idol
worship ;  they  believed  in  but  one  invisible  God,  of  whom  fire  was
a  faint  image ;  that  God,  and  not  fire,  was  the  object  of  their  adora-
tion ;  and  hence  they  were  attached  to  the  Jews ;  nor  did  it  cost
Cyrus  any  struggle  with  his  religious  principles  to  acknowledge,  by
a  public  manifesto,  Jehovah,  the  God  of  heaven,  who,  by  the  mouth
of  his  prophet  Isaiah,  had  foretold  his  coming,  as  the  God  who  had
helped  him  to  all  his  victories,  and  whose  gift  alone  were  the  king-
doms he  had  conquered.    Out  of  gratitude,  therefore,  and  obedience
to  ancient  prophecy,  he  sent  the  people  of  this  God  back  to  Palestine ;
and  his  successors,  who  were  perfect  iconoclasts  in  hostility  to  Greek
and  Egyptian  idol  worship,  caused  offerings  to  be  made  in  their
names  in  the  temple  of  Jerusalem.     The  worship  of  one  God  had
now  no  longer  to  struggle,  as  before,  with  the  practice  and  opinion
of  mankind ;   and  from  this  time  we  find  the  Jews  such  zealous
worshippers  of  Jehovah,   that  the  Greeks  could  not,  even  by  the


OF    FREEMASONRY.  425

brotherly  communications  in  regular  Lodges,23  until
the  appointed  time  of  their  deliverance.  And  those
that  chose  to  remain  continued  to  observe  their  Masonic
duties  ;  and  for  this  purpose  they  had  three  Colleges,
or  Grand  Lodges;  one  at  Sora,  and  the  others  at
Pompeditha  and  Naharda.24  Thus  were  they  more
capable  of  restoring  the  city  of  Salem,  and  building
the  holy  temple  on  its  old  foundations,  and  carrying
on  the  work  on  scientific  principles.  When  the  Jews
were  settled  in  the  land  of  Judea,  and  had  appor-
tioned the  lands,  and  prepared  for  a  permanent  resi-

fiercest  persecutions,  cause  them  to  abandon  their  religion."  (Laws
of  Moses,  vol.  i.  p.  182.)

23  In  a  German  work,  by  C.  L.  Reinhold,  entitled,  the  Hebrew
Mysteries,  or  the  Oldest  Religious  Freemasonry,  it  is  affirmed  that
"  the  Mosaic  religion  was  an  initiation  into  mysteries,  the  principal
form  arid  regulations  of  which  were  borrowed  by  Moses  from  the
secrets  of  the  old  Egyptians."  This  conclusion  he  may  have  arrived
at  by  a  little  distortion  of  the  words  of  Josephus,  who  says,  that
"  the  high  and  sublime  knowledge,  which  the  Gentiles  with  difficulty
attained  in  the  celebration  of  their  mysteries,  was  habitually  taught
to  the  Jews  at  all  times.  So  that  the  body  politic  seems,  as  it  were,
one  great  assembly,  constantly  kept  together  for  the  celebration  of
sacred  mysteries."

21  We  are  assured  by  the  Eabbins  that  the  tribes  which  had  been
carried  into  captivity  to  Babylon,  founded  the  celebrated  fraternity
of  Neharda  on  the  Euphrates,  for  the  preservation  of  traditional
knowledge,  and  its  transmission  to  a  selected  few,  while  it  was  kept
secret  from  the  rest  of  the  world.  And  he  further  adds  that
Zerubbabel  the  prince,  Jeshua  the  priest,  and  Esdras  the  scribe
carried  away  all  the  secret  knowledge  which  was  so  carefully  pre-
served within  the  closed  recesses  of  this  mysterious  institution  with
them  to  Jerusalem ;  and  that  they  established  in  the  latter  city  a
similar  fraternity  for  the  same  purpose.


426  HISTORICAL  LANDMARKS

dence  in  the  country,  Zerubbabel  summoned  a  solemn
Sanhedrim  to  deliberate  on  the  course  of  their  future
proceedings.25

This  great  council  of  the  Jews,  one  of  the  gravest
and  most  majestic  assemblies  that  ever  existed  in  the
world,  was  originally  constituted  by  Moses  in  the  wil-
derness, under  the  divine  direction.  Six  chief  men
were  chosen  from  each  tribe,26  except  that  of  Levi,

25  At  this  time  several  of  the  tribes  of  Israel  took  advantage  of  the
edict  of  Cyrus  aiid  returned  to  their  native  count ry,  along  with  Judah
and  Benjamin    "  And  in  .Jerusalem  dwelt  the  children  of  Judah,  the
children  of  Benjamin,  and  the  children  of  Kj.hraim  and  Manasseh.
And  many  additions  were  made  at  other  times  to  the  population  of
,1 1 idea ;  so  that  Judah  became  the  general  name  of  the  whole  nation ;
and  after  the  Kabylonish  captivity,  they  were  no  longer  called  the
people  of  Israel,  but  the  people  of  Judah,  or  the  Jews.

26  If  the  birth  of  any  person  proposed  as  a  candidate  for  this  honour
was  in  the  slightest  degree  tainted,  he  was  ineligible  for  election.
There  were  many  other  necessary  qualifications :   they  were  to  be
skilful  in  the  law,  both  oral  and  written ;  they  were  to  understand
the  liberal  sciences,  as  well  as  astrology,  divination,  magic,  physic,
and  the  languages.     The  Jews  say,  they  were  not  eligible  unless
they  understood  seventy  tongues,  or  in  other  words,  they  were  to
know  all  languages,   for  the  Hebrews  acknowledge  only  seventy.
Eunuchs,  usurers,  persons  deformed  in  body,   gamesters,  &c.  &c.,
were  excluded  from  the  Sanhedrim;    the  members  of  which  were
to  be  of  mature  age,  sound  judgment,  strict  morality,  with  a  hand-
some person,    and  a  fortune  which  would  place  him  out  of  the
power  of  a  bribe.    The  authority  of  the  Sanhedrim  was  very  extensive,
and  it  decided  all  causes  which  were  brought  under  its  jurisdiction
by  appeal  from  the  inferior  courts.     It  possessed  a  superintendence
over  the  general  affairs  of  the  nation,  and  the  right  of  judging  in
capital  cases,  and  pronouncing  sentence  of  death;  which,  indeed,
could  not  take  place  elsewhere  but  in  the  hall  which  they  commonly
used,  called  Laschat  Haggazith,  or  the  Pavement.


OF    FREEMASONttY.  427

which  furnished  four  Principals  for  the  guidance  and
direction  of  the  whole.  This  arrangement  continued
during  the  entire  existence  of  the  theocracy ;  but  after
the  regal  power  commenced,  the  members  of  the  San-
hedrim were  appointed  by  the  state ;  after  the  captivity,
they  were  chosen  principally  from  the  tribe  of  Judah
alone.27

In  the  Grand  and  Royal  Lodge,  which  was  sum-
moned amongst  the  ruins  of  Jerusalem  on  the  first
return  from  captivity,28  Zerubbabel  presided  as  the

27  When  the  Israelites  were  firmly  settled  in  the  land  of  promise,
and  the  temple  of  God  was  completed,  this  court  could  not  be  legally
holden  out  of  Jerusalem.     Apartments  were  provided  within  the  pre-
cincts of  the  temple  for  the  accommodation  of  its  periodical  sessions,
and  the  room  where  the  members  assembled  was  termed  Gazeth,  or
the  Stone  Conclave.     It  was  built  partly  within  the   sanctuary  and
partly  without ;  but  the  court  sat  in  the  latter  portion  of  the  hall.
The  first  Principal,  called  Hannasci,  occupied  a  throne  at  the  head
of  the  room,  and  was  supported  by  two  Vice  Principals,  called  Ab
and  Haccam,  who  were  also  seated  on  thrones,  the  one  at  the  right
hand  of  the  Nasci,  and  the  other  at  his  left ;  while  benches  were
placed,  in  a  curvilinear  form,  on  each  side,  for  the  other  members  of
the  Sanhedrim,  forming  altogether  the  true  catenarian  arch,  or  emblem
of  unity  and  strength.

28  Eussel  (Con.  vol.  i.  p.  207)  denies  the  existence  of  any  such
court  at  this  period.     His  words  are — "  It  does  not  admit  of  any
doubt,  that  the  Sanhedrim,  so  much  lauded  by  the  Jews,  had  no
existence  at  the  early  period  of  their  history  which  falls  under  our
consideration.     Calmet  justly  observes,  that  the  antiquity  of  this
Eabbinical  establishment  is  altogether  fabulous ;  that  the  prerogatives
which  they  ascribe  to  it,  as  well  as  the  most  part  of  the  rules  which
they  assign  for  its  direction  in  the  administration  of  justice,  are  very
ill  founded,  and  extremely  uncertain.     The  real  Sanhedrim  had  its
origin  in  the  time  of  the  Maccabees,  acquired  strength  and  consistency
under  the  Asmonoean  sovereigns,  and  at  length  rose  to  such  a  degree
of  authority  as  to  become  formidable  even  to  these  kings  themselves."


428  HISTORICAL    LANDMARKS

first  Principal,29  assisted  by  Haggai,  the  prophet/0  and
Jeshua,31  the  high  priest,32  Esdras  being  the  scribe,*3

29  Our  transatlantic  Brethren,  impelled  probably  by  a  dislike  to
royalty,  have  deposed  Z.  from  the  first  chair,  and  placed  the  H.  P.
in  his  place,  giving  the  king  only  the  second  throne,  which  is  evidently
erroneous ;  and  they  have  also  greatly  injured  the  force  of  the  illus-
tration of  the  triple  office  of  the  Messiah,  by  substituting  a  scribe  for
a  prophet  in  the  third  chair.

30  A  reverend  and  intelligent  Brother  observes,  in  a  letter  to  the
author,  "  there  is  another  particular  in  which  I  think  the  English
practice  is  wrong,  and  could  easily  be  amended,  1  refer  to  the  order
of  the  three  Principals.     I  have  no  doubt  it  ought  to  be  L.  J.  H.
instead  of  Z.  11.  J.,  not  only  because  J.  is  recorded  in  the  scripture
account  as  taking  an  active  part  with  Z.,  but  also  because  tiie  office
of  priest  had  an  acknowledged  superiority  over  that  of  prophet.    Nor
will  you  be  insensible  to  this  consideration,  that  our  Lord  entered
first  upon  the  prophetical  office ;  second,  on  the  sacerdotal,  viz.,  at
Golgotha ;  and  third,  on  the  regal,  viz.,  from  Olivet."

31  This  office  belonged  to  him  by  lineal  descent,  he  being  the  son
of  Jozedek,  whose  father  Seraiah,  the  high  priest  at  the  taking  of
Jerusalem,  had  been  put  to  death  at  Itiblah.    As  for  Jozedek  himself,
he  was  carried  captive  into  Babylon,  and  died  before  the  publication
of  this  decree,  so  that  Jeshua  was  at  that  time  the  head  of  the
pontifical  family.

32  These  three  officers,  as  we  have  just  observed,  bear  an  evident
reference  to  the  triple  office  of  our  Saviour,  which  is  a  striking  proof
that  Eoyal  Arch  Masonry  was  intended  to  pave  the  way  for  the
Christian  degrees  of  the  Order.

33  The  origin  of  the  Scribes  is  uncertain.    They  were  probably  first
employed  in  subserviency  to  the  prophets,  and  perhaps  educated  in
their  schools.     They  seem  to  have  been  established  as  an  order  of
men  after  the  captivity,   and  to  have  risen  into  repute  after  the
cessation  of  prophecy.     They  are  mentioned  in  the  New  Testament
as  doctors  of  the  law,  and  teachers  of  the  people.     They  appear,
however,  in  still  later  times  to  have  corrupted  the  sacred  writings  by
their  traditions,  and  to  have  degenerated  into  a  loose  and  luxurious
style  of  living.


OF    FREEMASONRY.  429

who  was  succeeded  in  this  important  office  by  Ezra
and  Nehemiah.  And  it  has  been  thought  that  Daniel,
Zachariah,  and  Malachi ;  Hananiah,  Misael,  and  Aza-
riah,34  were  members  of  this  holy  assembly.

It  is  asserted  by  Maimonides  and  others,  that  the
number  of  persons  constituting  the  Sanhedrim  was,
one  hundred  and  twenty.  This  does  not  agree  with
our  Masonic  tradition,  which  restricts  the  number  to
seventy-two  ;35  and  it  is  doubtful  whether  all  the  pro-
phets and  holy  men  above  mentioned  were  present;
because  their  names  are  not  included  amongst  the
eminent  individuals  Avho  are  believed  to  have  accom-
panied the  expedition  from  Chaldea.  These,  in  addi-
tion to  the  three  Principals  of  the  Sanhedrim,  were
Esdras,  Zachariah,  Nehemiah,36  Ezra,  Seraiah,  Rulaiah,

34  These  were  the  three  holy  men  who  were  preserved  by  the
Messiah  in  person  from  Nebuchadnezzar's  fiery  furnace,  into  which
they  had  been  cast  for  refusing  to  worship  the  golden  image  on  the
plain  of  Dura.    In  the  Chaldean  language  they  were  called  Shadrach,
Mesheck,  and  Abednego.

35  This  number,  say  the  Cabalists,  was  the  Tetragrammaton,  or
Sacred  Name,  written  >n  V)  Tf  "TV,  which  are  seventy-two.     This
interpretation  is  adduced  in  the  Bereshit  llaba,  c.  44  ;  Yalcut,  art.  77;
Taniya,  in  Hilchof  Pesah ;  and  II.  Joseph,  Caro  in  Beth  Joseph,  as
one  of  the  highest  names,  being  taught  by  the  priests  once  in  seven
years  to  their  equals  ;  and  the  pronunciation  was  accounted  extremely
difficult,  and  was  preserved  as  a  profound  secret.     The  Sanhedrim
sitting  at  Jerusalem,  in  the  time  of  Christ,  consisted  of  seventy-two
persons,  who  were  chosen  principally  from  the  sect  of  the  Pharisees.
This  dominant  party  possessed  the  most  profound  learning  in  the
traditional  dogmata  of  the  Talmuds,  and  therefore  dictated  to  the
people,  witli  great  haughtiness,  the  laws,  both  civil  and  ecclesiastical.

36  These  are  included  in  that  list  of  Masonic  worthies,  or  holy  men,
whose  actions  are  honourably  recorded  in  Masonry,  which  has  bern


430


HISTORICAL    LANDMARKS


Mordecai,Bilsham,Mispar,Bigvai,Reuhm,andBaanah.37
But  Daniel  and  Ezekiel  certainly  did  not  return ;  for
the  former  was  appointed  governor  of  Shush  an,  in
Persia,  where  he  died;38  and  the  latter  is  thought  to
have  retired  into  Assyria,  where  he  presided  over  the
remnant  of  the  tribes  of  Gad  and  Dan.39

furnished  by  the  son  of  Sirach.  "  How  shall  we  magnify  Zorobabel?
even  he  was  as  a  signet  on  the  right  hand.  So  was  Jesus,  the  son
of  Josedic,  who  in  their  time  builded  the  house,  and  set  up  an  holy
temple  to  the  Lord,  which  was  prepared  for  everlasting  glory.  And
among  the  elect  was  Neemias,  whose  renown  is  great,  who  raised  up
for  us  the  walls  that  were  fallen,  and  set  up  the  gates  and  the  bars,
and  raised  up  our  ruins  again."  (Eccles.  xlix.  11,  12,  13.)

37  In  a  degree  called  Master  ad  Vitam,  the  following  Grand  Masters
are  said  to  have  travelled  to  Jerusalem  on  this  occasion : — Esdras,
Zerubbabel,  Phaci,  Jeshua,  Elial,  Torgada,  Hoinen,  Nehemias,  and
Malchias.     They  did  not,  however,  all  assemble  at  the  same  period.

38  Epiphanius  and  others  affirm  that  he  died  at  Babylon,  and  they
say  that  his  sepulchre  was  there  to  be  seen  many  ages  after  in  the
royal  cave.    But  it  is  more  probable,  accordirg  to  common  tradition,
that  he  was  buried  at  Shushan,  where  certainly  he  sometimes  resided,
and  perhaps  as  governor  of  Persia,  and  where  he  was  favoured  with
some   of  his   last   visions.      Benjamin    Tudela    informs   us,    that
he  was  shown  the  reputed  tomb  of  Daniel  at  Tuster,  the  ancient
Shushan ;  where  likewise,  as  we  are  assured  by  Josephus,  was  a
magnificent  edifice  in  the  form  of  a  tower,  which  was  said  to  have
been  built  by  Daniel,  and  which  served  as  a  sepulchre  for  the  Persian
and  Parthian  kings.     This,  in  the  time  of  the  historian,  retained  its
perfect  beauty,  and  presented  a  fine  specimen  of  the  prophet's  skill
in  architecture  and  masonry.    (Gray's  Key  to  the  Bible,  p.  408.)

39  It  is  said  that  the  countrymen  of  Ezekiel  were  so  incensed  by
his  reproaches  as  to  put  him  to  a  cruel  death.     It  was  believed  that
his  remains  were  deposited  in  the  same  sepulchre  with  those  of  Shem,
the  son  of  Noah,  which  was  supposed  to  be  situated  between  the
river  Euphrates  and  that  of  Chaboras ;  and  it  was  much  resorted  to,
not  only  by  the  Jews,  but  also  by  the  Medes  and  Persians,  who
reverenced  the  tomb  of  the  prophet  with  extravagant  devotion.


OF    FREEMASONRY.  431


LECTURE   XL.

THE    SECOND    TEMPLE.

"  As  soon  as  the  Jews  were  returned  from  Babylon,  they  applied
themselves  assiduously  to  the  work  of  rebuilding  the  sacred  edifice,
that  the  worship  of  Jehovah,  according  to  their  law,  might  be  resumed.
This  was  at  length  effected  by  the  piety  and  zeal  of  Jeshua,  the  high
priest,  and  Zerubbabel,  the  prince  of  Judah ;  although,  owing  to  their
desolate  condition,  the  temple  was  so  much  inferior  to  that  which  the
old  men  remembered  before  its  destruction  by  Nebuchadnezzar,  that
they  wept  bitterly  at  the  prospect  when  the  foundations  of  the  second
were  laid.  The  young  men  rejoiced  with  shouts  and  acclamations ;
but  the  ancient  people  disturbed  them  with  their  groans  and  lament-
ings,  when  they  reflected  on  the  superb  magnificence  of  the  first
temple,  and  compared  it  with  the  expected  inferiority  of  the  present
structure." — OLD  LECTURES.

"  On  rebuilding  the  temple  in  the  reign  of  Cyrus,  the  work  was
performed  by  the  religious  of  the  Israelites,  and  not  by  ordinary
mechanics ;  for  they  refused  to  admit  the  Samaritans  to  a  share  of
the  work,  although  they  petitioned  for  it  under  the  denomination
of  servants  of  the  same  God  ;  yet  they  were  rejected,  as  unworthy  of
works  of  piety,  and  unacceptable  to  the  God  of  Israel ;  for  though  they
professed  themselves  to  be  servants  of  the  true  God,  they  polluted
their  worship  by  idols." — HUTCHINSON.

THE  first  business  in  which  the  redeemed  Jews
engaged  after  their  return  to  Palestine,  was  to  appoint
overseers  from  amongst  the  Levites,  that  everything
might  be  ordered  in  conformity  with  the  law  of  Moses.
They  then  set  up  an  altar  for  sacrifice,1  on  which  burnt

1  This  altar  was  composed  of  rough  ashlars,  for  an  iron  tool  was
not  permitted  to  leave  its  pollutions  on  the  sacred  utensil.  It  was


432


HISTORICAL    LANDMARKS


offerings  were  offered  and  prayers  preferred  to  the  God
of  their  fathers,2  that  the  work  they  were  about  to
engage  in  might  be  attended  with  a  blessing.3  While

forty-eight  feet  square  at  the  base,  and  thirty-six  at  the  summit,
which  was  covered  with  a  plate  of  solid  brass  eighteen  inches  thick.
The  whole  height  of  the  altar  was  fifteen  feet.  It  was  adorned  with
horns  at  the  angles,  which  were  made  hollow  to  contain  some  of  the
blood  of  the  sacrifices.  They  were  esteemed  a  public  sanctuary,  and
afforded  protection  to  criminals  ;  and  such  was  the  sacred  veneration
in  which  they  were  held,  that  their  violation  was  accounted  the
highest  degree  of  sacrilege  that  a  human  being  could  commit.

2  A.t  these  sacrificial  feasts  a  Masonic  virtue  Avas  strongly  reconir
mended  and  practised,  in  the  distribution  of  provisions  to  the  poor.
Ezra  and  Nehemiah  directed  that  "  portions  should  be  sent  to  them
for  whom  nothing  was  prepared."    (Nehem.  viii.  10.)     This  was
afterwards  practised  by  the  heathen,  who,  in  their  solemn  feasts,  not
only  entertained  their  guests,  but  allowed  them  to  carry  away  portions
of  provision ;  the  remains  of  which  were  also  distributed  amongst
the  poor.

3  The  Jewish  Talmud  contains  some  curious  traditions  respecting
the  square  pavement  of  the  most  holy  place,  and  the  altar  here
referred  to,  of  which  the  following  is  a  specimen  : — Of  all  odd  numbers
in  the  denary  scale,  5  and  7  are  the  nearest  roots  of  two  square
numbers,  one  of  which  shall  be  double  the  other,  or,  which  is  the
same  thing,  the  diagonal  of  a  square  whose  side  is  5,  is  equal  to  7
and  the  square  root  of  1  ;  for  5  x  5  =  25,  and  7x7  =  49,  and
the  square  of  the  square  root  of  1  =  1 ;  but  494-1  =  50  =  25  x  2.
Of  this  mystery  the  Jews  have  a  tradition,  that  the  1  wanting  to  the
49  to  make  the  double  square,  is  the  Logos,  or  Messiah ;  and  they
explain  it  by  the  annexed  diagrams.     If  in  these  two  squares,  or


OP    FREEMASONRY.  433

preparations  were  in  progress  for  this  holy  undertaking,
sojourners  and  pilgrims  from  Babylon,  incited  by  the
admonitions  of  the  prophets,  occasionally  added  to  the
number  of  those  who  engaged  with  enthusiasm  in  these
laborious  duties;  and  their  example  afforded  great
encouragement  to  the  workmen.4

pavements,  we  make  all  the  stones  we  can  double  squares,  we  have
all  the  stones  except  one  in  each  square,  of  the  holy  form,  viz.,  of
the  proportions  of  the  holy  place ;  but  the  corner  one  is  most  holy,
being  of  the  proportions  of  the  holy  of  holies,  and  is  called  by  them
the  chief  corner  stone.  By  this  division  it  is  observable  that  the
square  is  exactly  doubled,  one  containing  twelve  holy  stones,  and  the
most  holy  one ;  the  other  twenty-four  holy  stones,  and  its  most  holy
one ;  the  one  corresponding,  amongst  the  Jews,  to  Jehovah  at  the
head  of  his  twelve  prophets ;  and  amongst  Christians,  to  Christ  and
his  twelve  apostles ;  the  other,  say  the  Jews,  refers  to  the  future
state  of  glory  under  their  Messiah ;  while  the  Christians  refer  it  to
the  future  glory  of  the  church,  symbolized  by  St.  John  by  twenty-four
elders  round  the  opener  of  the  seven  sealed  book ;  thereby  making
the  future  glory  and  perfection  of  the  Mosaic  or  Christian  dispensation
analogous  to  the  duplication  of  the  square.  The  most  holy  stone  is
placed  in  the  south-east  angle ;  because,  as  we  are  told  in  the  Baby-
lonish Talmud,  that  this  angle  of  the  altar  built  for  the  temple  of
Zerubbabel,  stood  upon  the  portion  of  a  tribe  that  had  no  part  in
the  service  of  the  priesthood,  and  was  therefore  left  unformed  to  the
space  of  a  cubic  cubit.  Some  of  the  Rabbins  say,  however,  that  the
true  reason  for  this  omission  was,  that  in  the  foundations  of  the  altars
which  were  built  of  twelve  stones,  one  for  each  tribe,  there  was
a  mystical  stone  added  to  the  south-east  angle,  without  which  the
square  would  not  have  been  complete.  In  the  altar  of  the  second
temple,  the  most  holy  stone  was  undoubtedly  omitted,  because  the
Shekinah  had  withdrawn  its  glory.

4  A  contribution  was  then  made  for  the  restoration  of  the  temple,
and  the  people  gave  liberally,  contributing  61,000  drachmae  of  gold,
arid  5000  manim  of  silver,  about  the  value  of  £48,000.

VOL.  II.  F  V


434


IIISTOKICAI.    I.  \\DMAUKS


The  foundations  of  the  temple"'  were  opened  and
cleared  from  the  accumulation  of  rubbish,  that  a  level
site  might  be  procured  for  the  commencement  of  the
building.  While  engaged  in  excavations  for  this  pur-
pose, three  fortunate  sojourners  are  said  to  have  dis-
covered our  ancient  stone  of  foundation,  which  had
been  deposited  in  the  secret  crypt  by  Wisdom,  Strength,
and  Beauty,  to  prevent  the  communication  of  ineffable
secrets  to  profane  or  unworthy  persons.  The  discovery
having  been  communicated  to  the  prince,  priest,  and
prophet  of  the  Jews,  the  stone  was  adopted  as  the
chief  corner  stone  of  the  rc-ediiied  building  ;  and  thus
became,  in  a  new  and  expressive  sense,  the  type  of
a  more  excellent  dispensation.'1  An  avenue  was  also

5"  The  obscure  vision  of  Iv/ckiel  is  generally  supposed  to  contain
the  description  of  a  temple,  corresponding  in  its  structure  and  dimen-
sions with  that  of  Solomon.  The  prophet,  by  presenting  to  the
captives  this  delineation  of  what  had  been  the  desire  of  their  eyes,
reminded  them  of  the  loss  which  they  had  suffered  from  their  un-
righteousness, and  furnished  them  with  a  model  upon  which  the
temple  might  again  rise  from  its  ruins ;  as  it  did,  with  less  magni-
ficence, indeed,  in  the  time  of  ZembbabeL  I'ndrr  the  particulars
detailed  by  Ezekiel,  however,  we  often  discover  the  economy  of  a
spiritual  temple,  which  should  again  be  filled  with  the  glory  of  the
Lord  coming  from  the  east."  (Gray's  Key  to  the  Bible,  p.  399.)

6  Here  it  remained  undisturbed  for  many  centuries.  Even  the
splendid  renewal  of  the  temple  by  Herod  did  not  remove  this  cele-
brated stone,  because  he  built  partly  on  the  old  foundations.  Herod's
temple  was  not  completed  at  the  time  when  the  Messiah  made  his
appearance  upon  earth  as  the  real  corner  stone  and  foundation  of
man's  eternal  happiness — the  true  JEHOVAH,  whose  mystical  NAME
formed  the  essence,  and  constituted  the  value  of  the  stone  of  foun-
dation, which  was  still  concealed  in  the  bowels  of  the  earth,  although


OF    FREEMASONRY.  435

accidentally  discovered,  supported  by  seven  pair  of
pillars,7  perfect  and  entire,8  which,  from  their  situation,
had  escaped  the  fury  of  the  flames  that  had  consumed
the  temple,  and  the  desolation  of  war  which  had  de-
stroyed the  city.  This  secret  vault,9  which  had  been

it  was  fabled  that  Christ  had  stolen  the  sacred  name  which  it  con-
tained, and  by  its  assistance  performed  all  his  miracles.

7  "  Under  the  dome  of  the  mosque  of  Omar,  which  stands  on  the
site  of  the  old  temple,  is  a  remarkable  lime-stone  rock,  which  occupies,
in  an  irregular  form,  the  greater  part  of  the  area  beneath,  and  is
surrounded  by  a  gilt  iron  railing,  to  keep  it  from  the  touch  of  the
numerous  pilgrims.     It  appears  to  be  the  natural  surface  of  the  rock
of  mount  Moriah ;  in  a  few  places  there  are  marks  of  chiselling.    At
the  south-east  corner  of  this  rock  is  an  excavated  chamber)  to  which
there  is  a  descent  by  a  flight  of  stone  steps.     This  chamber  is  irre-
gular in  form,  and  its  superficial  area  is  about  six  hundred  feet,  the
average  height  seven  feet.    It  derives  a  peculiar  Sanctity  from  having
been  successively,  according  to  Mahomedan  tradition,  the  praying
place  of  Abraham,  David,  Solomon,  and  Jesus.    Its  surface  is  quite
plain,  and  there  are  a  few  small  altars.     In  the  centre  of  the  rocky
pavement  is  a  circular  slab  of  marble,  which  being  struck,  returns
a  hollow  sound,  clearly  showing  that  there  is  a  well  or  excavation
beneath.     This  is  called  by  the  Mahomedans,  Bif  arruah,  the  well
of  souls ;  and  I  was  gravely  informed  that  this  well  was  open  until
about  forty  years  ago,  and  up  to  that  period  was  frequented  by  those
who  were  desirous  of  holding  converse  with  the  souls  of  the  departed."
(Bartlett's  Walks  about  Jerusalem.,  p.  167.)

8  Pausanias  takes  notice  of  a  most  curious  and  remarkable  piece
of  antiquity  which  stood  near  mount  Taygetus,  and  was  called  the
monument  of  Osiris.     He  tells  us,  that  "  at  particular  intervals  from
this  monument  were  erected  seven  pilfers,  placed  according  to  some
ancient  rule  and  method,  which  pillars  were  supposed  to  represent
the  seven  planets.     If  the  exterior  stones  represented  the  planets,
the  central  monument  was  doubtless  dedicated  to  the  sun."

9  Some  remains  of  this  vault  existed  in  the  time  of  Maundrell,  who
says,  in  his  book  of  Travels  (p.  135) — "  We  entered  the  city  at  Sion

r  F  2


436  HISTORICAL    LANDMARKS

built  by  Solomon  as  a  secure  depository  for  certain
valuable  secrets,10  that  would  inevitably  have  been
lost11  without  some  such  expedient  for  their  preserva-

gate ;  turning  down  as  soon  as  we  had  entered,  on  the  right  hand,
and  going  about  two  furlongs  close  by  the  city  wall,  we  were  led
into  a  garden,  lying  at  the  foot  of  mount  Moriah,  on  the  south  side.
Here  we  were  shown  several  large  vaults  annexed  to  the  mountain  on
this  side,  and  running  at  least  fifty  yards  under  ground.  They  were
built  in  two  aisles,  arched  at  the  top  with  huge  Jinn  stone,  ami
sustained  with  tall  pillars,  consisting  each  of  one  single  stone,  and
two  yards  in  diameter.  This  might  possibly  be  some  underground
work  made  to  enlarge  the  area  of  the  temple."

10  In  Bartlctt's  "  Walks  about  the  City  of  Jerusalem"  (p.  170),  is
described  a  small  vault  under  that  part  of  the  mosque  of  Omar  which
occupies  the  site  of  the  sanctum  sanctorum  of  the  ancient  temple,  that
may  be  an  improvement  or  extension  of  Solomon's  private  chapel.
"  Beneath  the  dome,  at  the  south-east  angle  of  the  temple  wall,  con-
spicuous from  all  points,  is  a  small  subterranean  place  of  prayer,
forming  the  entrance  to  the  extensive  vaults  which  support  the  level
platform  of  the  mosque  above.     It  may  be  presumed  that  the  whole
of  this  eastern  side  of  the  platform  is  so  supported,  but  the  only  part
accessible  is  immediately  beneath  the  south-east  angle.     Here  are
fifteen  rows  of  square  pillars,  from  which  spring  arches  supporting
the  }  la  t  for  in."

11  In  preparing  the  foundations,  as  we  are  told  by  the  Jewish
Rabbins,  the  workmen  discovered  a  subterranean   vault  or  cavity,
supported  by  seven  pair  of  pillars  supporting  so  many  arches.     This
vault,  at  the  destruction  of  Jerusalem,  having  been  filled  with  the
rubbish  of  the  building,  escaped  observation,  and  wa.3  indicated  at
the  present  period  by  the  discovery  of  a  key-stone  amongst  the  foun-
dations.   The  Rabbins  add,  that  Josiah  foreseeing  the  destruction  of
the  temple,  commanded  the  Levites  to  deposit  the  ark  of  the  covenant
in  this  vault,  where  it  was  found  by  some  of  Zerubbabel's  workmen.
But  there  is  no  ground  for  this  belief;  for  if  the  secret  of  the  vault
had  been  known  to  Josiah,  it  must  have  been  known  also  to  his
idolatrous  predecessors,  who  would  doubtless  have  plundered  it  of  its
valuable  contents,  and  exposed  them  to  the  world  in  contempt  of  the


OF    FREEMASONRY.  437

tion,12  communicated  by  a  subterranean  avenue  with

true  God  to  whom  they  referred,  and  whom  these  degenerate  monarchs
had  wholly  renounced.  It  is  much  more  probable,  that  in  the  latter
years  of  Solomon,  when  he  had  almost  forgotten  God,  his  visits  to
this  vault  were  discontinued,  and  the  entrance  being  curiously  con-
cealed amongst  the  caverns  underneath  his  palace,  the  secret  died
with  him,  and  the  communication  was  for  ever  closed.  It  is  certain,
however,  if  the  tradition  of  this  vault  be  correct,  that  the  ark  of  the
covenant  was  not  found  in  it ;  for  it  was  one  of  the  invaluable  gifts
of  God  which  the  second  temple  did  not  contain,  and  consequently
it  could  not  have  been  preserved  by  Josiah.

12  There  is  some  diversity  of  opinion  respecting  the  results  of  this
discovery.  The  old  Masons  say,  that  the  commencement  of  the  roll
there  found  was  in  the  words  of  the  first  verses  of  the  gospel  of  St.
John.  This  has  been  considered  an  error  by  the  moderns,  who  have
substituted  the  opening  words  of  the  Pentateuch.  The  opinion  of
the  former  is  corroborated  by  Philostorgius  and  Nicephorus,  who
relate,  that  at  the  clearing  of  the  foundations,  when  Julian  the  Apos-
tate commenced  the  rebuilding  of  the  temple,  a  stone  was  taken  up
that  covered  the  mouth  of  a  deep  cave,  cut  out  of  the  rock  in  a  cubical
form,  into  which  one  of  the  labourers  was  lowered  by  a  rope  fastened
round  his  middle.  He  found  it  full  of  water  a  foot  deep,  and  in  the
centre  an  altar  reaching  above  the  surface  of  the  water,  on  which
lay  the  roll  of  a  book  wrapped  in  a  fine  linen  cloth.  Being  drawn
up,  the  linen  was  observed  to  be  fresh  and  undecayed  ;  and  the  roll
being  unfolded  was  found,  to  the  amazement  both  of  Jews  and  Gen-
tiles, to  contain  the  first  words  of  the  gospel  of  St.  John,  written  in
capital  letters — "  IN  THE  BEGINNING  WAS  THE  WOIID,  AND  THE
WORD  WAS  WITH  GOD,  AND  THE  WORD  WAS  GOD.''  See  a  con-
firmation of  this  tradition  in  the  Elucidariuin  ascribed  to  St.  Austin
(c.  24).  O'Brien,  in  his  essay  on  the  Bound  Towers  of  Ireland
(p.  483),  asserts,  that  "  it  is  beyond  all  question  that  St.  John  was
not  the  author  of  those  words,  but  having  found  them  to  his  hand,
existing  after  the  circuit  of  ages  and  centuries,  the  composition
seemed  so  pure,  and  so  consonant  with  Christianity,  nay,  its  very
vitality  and  soul,  that  ho  adopted  it  as  the  preface  to  his  own
production."


438


HISTORICAL    LANDMARKS


the  king's  palace;13  but  at  the  destruction  of  Jeru-
salem, the  entrance  having  been  closed  by  the  rubbish
of  falling  buildings,  it  had  been  now  discovered  by  the
appearance  of  a  key  stone14  amongst  the  foundations  of

13  "The  same  course  had  been  previously  adopted  in  the  pyramid*
of  Egypt,  under  which  were  constructed  secret  crypts,  which  have
since  been  discovered  by  adventurous  travellers.    The  supposed  well
in  the  great  pyramid,  which  was  imagined  to  communicate  with
a  canal  from  the  Nile,  was  descended  first  by  Davison,  and  after-
wards by  Caviglia.     It  consisted  of  three  separate  shafts,  the  first  of
twenty -two  feet  depth,  and  at  the  distance  of  about  eight  feet  laterally
from  its  bottom,  a  second  shaft  of  thirty-four  feet  depth  ;  and  beside
this,  a  third  shaft  of  ninety-nine  feet,  which,  added  together,  make
the  whole  depth  one  hundred  ;md  fifty-five  feet;  but  this  was  dry  at
the  bottom,  where  it  was  found,  by  the  latter,  to  communicate,  by
a  horizontal  passage,  with  the  principal  entrance,  or  main  passage  of
the  pyramid,  which  he  succeeded  in  clearing  of  stones  and  rubbish ;
and   after  he  had  opened  this  continuation  of   the  main  passage,
sloping  downwards  in  the  same  inclined  angle,  to  the  distance  of
two  hundred  feet  from  its  commencement,  he  found  a  doorway,
which  opened  upon  the  bottom  of  the  well.     The  new  passage,  how-
ever, did  not  terminate  there,  but  continuing  to  the  distance  of
twenty-three  feet  beyond  it  in  the  same  angle  of  inclination,  it
became  narrower,  and  took  a  horizontal  direction  for  about  twenty-
eight  feet  farther,  where  //  opened  info  a  spacious  chamber  imme-
diately under  the  central  point  of  the  pyramid  "     (Hales'  Anal,
vol.  i.  p.  383.)

14  That  no  evidence  of  the  possibility  of  these  arches  being  con-
structed in  this  situation  may  be  wanting,  I  subjoin  an  extract  from
the  Egyptian  Antiquities  in  the  "  Library  of  Entertaining  Know-
ledge," in  proof  of  the  antiquity  of  this  useful  appendage. — "  At
Zebel  Barkal,  Mr.  Waddington  observed  an  arched  roof  in  a  portico
attached  to  a  pyramid.     The  only  question  then  is,  the  antiquity  of
these  particular  Nubian  arches ;  for  if  we  admit  that  the  pyramids
of  Nubia,  together  with  their  porticos,  are  of  higher  antiquity  than
the  pyramids  of  Egypt,  it  will  be  difficult  to  give  any  probable  reason
why  the  arch  was  not  used,  as  it  might  have  been,  by  the  Egyptians


OF    FREEMASONHY.  439

the  sanctum  sanctorum.13  A  careful  inspection  was
then  made,  and  the  invaluable  secrets  were  placed  in
safe  custody.16

When  the  first  stone  was  laid,17  with  solemn  cere-
monies,18 the  younger  part  of  the  assembly  shouted  for

in  the  construction  of  their  sacred  edifices.  Later  discoveries  in
Ethiopia  have  brought  to  light  arches  regularly  constructed  with  the
key-stone"  See  Lect.  xxxv.  n.  44.

15  This  subterranean  passage  was  renewed  by  Zerubbabel.     We
read  of  it  during  the  pontificate  of  Aristobulus,  the  son  of  Hyrcanus ;
it  was  known  to  Herod  and  his  two  Wardens  ;  and  the  secret  remained
in  few  hands  till  the  destruction  of  the  temple  by  Titus.

16  It  may  be  appropriately  remarked  here,  that  in  Ireland  the
system  of  the  Royal  Arch  consists  of  three  degrees,  viz.,  Excellent,
Superexcellent,  and  Royal  Arch.    As  a  preliminary  step  to  which  the
degree  of  the  Chair  is  necessary.    The  two  first  are  given  in  Lodges
governed  by  a  Master  and  Wardens,  and  the  third  in  a  Chapter  under
three  Principals.     The  two  first  appear  to  have  reference  exclusively
to  the  legation  of  Moses.     After  the  candidates  have  received  these,
the  Chapter  is  opened,  the  events  of  the  Arch  are  transacted,  and
the  sublime  secrets  communicated.

17  "  Five  hundred  and  thirty-five  years  before  the  birth  of  our
Saviour,  the  foundation  of  the  second  temple  was  laid  at  Jerusalem,
at  which  time  those  peculiar  circumstances  occurred  which  gave  rise
to  the  lloyal  Arch  degree."  (Templar's  Chart,  p.  10.)

8  We  have  an  old  tradition  that  the  foundation  stone  was  laid
before  the  rising  of  the  sun.  The  Helvetian  ceremonies,  however,
prescribe  a  different  period.  "  A  Mason,"  say  they,  "  assisted  by
two  others,  if  there  be  a  dearth  of  workmen,  or  distress,  or  war,  or
peril,  or  threats  of  danger,  may  begin  the  work  of  building  a  Lodge ;
but  it  is  better  to  have  seven  known  and  sworn  workmen.  The
Lodge  is,  as  we  know,  due  east  and  west ;  but  its  chief  window,  or
its  chief  door,  must  look  to  the  east.  On  a  day  allowed,  and  a  plan-
appointed,  the  whole  company  of  builders  act  out  after  li'n/h  noon
to  lay  the.Jiml  atom-.'''


440  HISTORICAL    LANDMARKS

joy ; lf)  but  the  aged  men,  who  had  beheld  the  glory  oi
the  first  temple,  were  grieved  to  reflect  on  their  ina-
bility to  restore  the  house  to  its  former  splendour ;  the
returned  captives  being  feeble  in  numbers,  restricted
in  their  resources,  and  having  a  prospect  of  being  har-
rassed  by  powerful  foes  who  surrounded  them  on  all
sides,  and  might  offer  insurmountable  impediments  to
obstruct  the  work.  They  were  too  much  under  the
influence  of  prejudice  to  understand  that  the  worship
of  God  is  spiritual ;  and  that  although  pompous  edifices
and  sublime  ceremonies  serve  to  impress  the  mind  with
an  expanded  idea  of  the  divine  magnificence  and  power,
yet  pure  religion  is  a  vital  principle,  which  can  exist  in
all  its  force  even  in  the  absence  of  these  gorgeous
appendages.20  The  true  ark  of  the  covenant  was

19  "  To  encourage  them  in  their  undertaking,  a  peculiar  instance
of  the  divine  favour  was  manifested.  That  stupendous  mystery,
concealed  before  the  flood  by  the  wisdom  and  piety  of  Enoch,  pre-
served amid  the  strife  of  waters,  the  wreck  of  a  drowned  world,  and
the  revolution  of  ages,  was  revealed  to  the  builders  of  the  second
temple.  Once  more  the  ineffable  characters  were  unveiled,  and  the
lost  secret  found."  (F.  Q.  II.  vol.  iv.  p.  157.)

. 20  The  Jews,  after  their  return  from  captivity,  began  insensibly  to
deviate  from  the  purity  of  their  morals  and  religious  worship,  when
at  the  same  time  they  grew  more  earnest  and  zealous  for  the  observ-
ance of  rites  and  ceremonies.  Might  I  be  indulged  with  making
one  reflection  I  would  observe,  that  for  want  of  miracles  and  pro-
phecies, which  prevented  them  from  taking  that  for  religion  which
was  no  more  than  the  external  part,  the  pomp  and  grandeur  of  it,
the  Jews  gave  blindly  into  the  idle  traditions  of  their  formal  doctors,
who  raised  their  own  merit  upon  the  ruins  of  prophecy,  and  thought
the  surface  and  externals  of  the  law  requisite  for  supporting  the
splendour  of  a  difficult  and  troublesome  discipline,  which  was  no


OF    FREEMASONRY.  441

lost,21  and  never  again  appeared  among  the  Jews,  till  it
received  the  adoration  of  the  Persian  Magi  in  a  cavern
at  Bethlehem.  But  although  the  first  temple  was
enlightened  and  sanctified  by  the  presence  of  the  divine
Shekinah,22  the  second  temple,  after  its  reparation  by
Herod,  was  consecrated  by  the  reappearance  of  the
Shekinah  in  human  form;  the  great  antitype  of  the
patriarch  Isaac,  who  was  offered  as  a  sacrifice  to  God
on  the  same  holy  precinct.

longer  upheld  by  miracles.  The  whole  form  of  the  Jewish  religion
was  thereupon  totally  changed,  and  the  Jews  assumed  the  mask  of
hypocrisy.  But  though  the  ceremonies  and  customs  of  men  appear
never  so  incommodious,  yet  they  are  still  infinitely  more  easy  than
the  reformation  of  the  heart."  (Cerem.  of  Rel.  p.  68.)

21  "  The  Jews  contend  that  it  was  hid  and  preserved  by  Jeremiah,
say  some,  out  of  the  second  book  of  Maccabees.     But  most  of  them
will  have  it,  that  King  Josiah,  being  foretold  by  Huldah,  the  pro-
phetess, that  the  temple  would  spedily  after  his  death  be  destroyed,
caused  the  ark  to  be  put  in  a  vault  underground,  which  Solomon,
foreseeing  this  destruction,  had  caused  of  purpose  to  be  built  for
the  preserving  of  it.     And  for  the  proof  hereof  they  produce  the
text  (2  Chron.  xxv.  3),  where  Josiah  commands  the  Levites  to  put
the  holy  ark  into  the  house  which  Solomon,  the  son  of  David,  King
of  Israel,  did  build,  interpreting  it  of  his  putting  of  the  ark  into  the
said  vault,  where,  they  say,  it  hath  lain  ever  since,  even  to  this  day,
and  from  thence  shall  be  manifested,  and  brought  out  again  in  the
days  of  the  Messiah."  (Prid.  Con.  P.  1,  B.  3.)

22  The  Rabbins  say,  that  the  sacred  fire,  or  Shekinah,  which  reposed
on  the  tabernacle  at  the  consecration  of  Aaron,  and  was  afterwards
repeated  at  the    dedication  of   Solomon's  temple,    was  constantly
maintained  night  and  day  by  the  priests,  and  was  never  allowed  to
be  extinguished.     Some  think  it  was   withdrawn  in  the  time  of
Manasseh ;  but  others,  with  more  reason,  believe  that  it  continued
till  the  destruction  of  the  temple  by  the  Chaldeans,  when  it  was
carried  away  and  secreted  by  Jeremiah,  the  prophet.


442  HISTORICAL    LANDMARKS

On  the  death  of  Cyrus,  the  Samaritans,23  through
the  influence  of  Rehum,  the  chancellor,  and  Shimshai,
the  scribe,  succeeded  in  procuring  repeated  injunctions
from  Cambyses,  and  Artaxerxes  his  successor,  to  sus-
pend the  work.24  Hence  the  progress  of  the  building
was  greatly  retarded,  and  for  several  years  it  advanced

23  The  Samaritans  had  shown  their  hostility  during  the  life  of
Cyrus.     At  the  commencement  of  the  building  they  came  to  Jeru-
salem, and  "  expressing  a  great  desire  of  being  admitted  to  worship
God  at  the  same  temple  in  joint  communion  with  them,  offered  to
join  with  them  in  the  building  of  it.     But  Zerubbabel,  and  Jeshua,
and  the  rest  of  the  elders  of  Israel  made  answer  to  them,  that  they,
not  being  of  the  seed  of  Israel,  had  nothing  to  do  in  the  building  of
a  temple  to  God  with  them.     The  reason  of  this  answer  was,  they
saw  they  intended  not  sincerely,  but  came  with  an  insidious  design
to  get  an  opportunity,  by  being  admitted  among  them,  of  doing
them  mischief.     At  which  the  Samaritans  being  incensed,  they  did
all  they  could  to  hinder  the  work ;  and  although  they  could  not  alter
Cyrus's  decree,  yet  they  prevailed  by  bribes  and  underhand  dealings
with  his  ministers,  and  other  officers  concerned  herein,  to  put  obstruc-
tions to  the  execution  of  it,  so  that  for  several  years  the  building  went
on  but  very  slowly."   (Prid.  Con.  P.  1,  B.  3.)

24  The  Samaritans  were  bitter  enemies  to  the  Jews,  and  it  appears
that  the  Jews  returned  their  hostility  with  interest.    They  refused  to
eat  or  drink  with  them,  and  excommunicated  them  in  the  name  of
the  sacred  Tetragrammaton,  in  a  formula,  which,  as  the  later  Jews
say,  was  supplied  by  Ezra  and  Neherniah,     It  is  asserted  that  they
assembled  the  whole  congregation  in  the  temple,  and  with  three
hundred  priests,  as  many  trumpets,  and  copies  of  the  law,  while  the
Levites  were  singing,  and  the  trumpets  sounded,  they  cursed  the
Samaritans  in  the  mysterious  name  of  Jehovah ;  and  with  the  denun-
ciation of  the  superior  and  inferior  houses  of  judgment,  that  no
Israelite  should  eat  the  bread  of  a  Samaritan;  that  no  Samaritan
should  be  received  as  a  proselyte,  nor  have  any  part  in  the  resur-
rection of  the  dead.


OF    FREEMASONRY.  443

very  slowly,  to  the  extreme  regret  of  every  one  who
took  an  interest  in  the  re-establishment  of  the  temple
worship.25  The  Jews,  however,  did  not  entirely  dis-
continue their  labours,  because  the  edict  of  Cyrus  had
not  been  formally  repealed  ;  and  recollecting  the  emi-
nent services  rendered  to  King  Solomon  by  the  Tyrian
architects,  they  made  application  for  assistance  to  the
same  people;  and  their  proposals  were  readily  com-
plied with,  on  the  condition  of  receiving  an  adequate
supply  of  corn,  wine,  and  other  productions  of  Judea
in  return.26  This  stipulation  having  been  agreed  to,
a  number  of  architects,  masons,  and  artificers  were  fur-
nished, and  the  forest  of  Lebanon  once  more  resounded
with  their  axes27  in  the  preparation  of  timber  for  the

25  The  surrounding  nations  entertained  a  sovereign  contempt  for
the  Jews.     Thus  when  Sanballat  the  Horonite,  and  Tobiah  the
servant,  the  Ammonite,  and  Geshem  the  Arabian,  heard  that  they
were  set  upon  building  the  walls  of  Jerusalem,  they  laughed  them  to
scorn,  and  despised  them,  and  said — "  What  is  this  thing  that  ye
do  ?     Will  ye  rebel  against  the  king?"  And  Tobiah  the  Ammonite,
said  in  derision — "  Even  that  which  they  build,  if  a  fox  go  up,  he
shall  even  break  down  their  stone  wall."    The  prophet  Malachi  tells
them  why  they  were  so  contemptible.     He  says — "  God  has  made
you  contemptible  and  base  before  all  people,  because  you  have  not
kept  his  ways ;  but  have  profaned  the  holiness  of  the  Lord,  and
married  the  daughter  of  a  strange  god."     And  it  is  remarkable  that
they  with  whom  they  had  committed  this  crime,  as  Sanballat,  and
Tobiah,    and  the  Cutheans,  were  made  the  instruments   of  their
punishment.   (Neh.  ii.  19,  iv.  1  ;  Mai.  ii.  11.)

26  It  is  indeed  taught  in  one  of  the  subsidiary  degrees,  (Knight  of
the  East),  that  Cyrus  prescribed  the  dimensions  of  the  temple,  and
directed  that  the  timber  should  be  felled  in  the  forest  of  Lebanon,
and  the  stone  hewn  in  the  quarries  of  Tyre,  in  order  that  the  mate-
rials for  the  first  and  second  temple  should  exactly  correspond.

2r  A  degree  was  established  from  this  circumstance,  called  Knights


444


HISTORICAL    LANDMARKS


temple  of  God,  which,  as  in  the  former  instance,  was
conveyed  to  Jerusalem  by  way  of  Joppa.

When  Darius  came  to  the  throne  of  Persia,  the  pro-
phet Haggai28  strenuously  exhorted  the  Jews  to  proceed
with  the  work  ;  and  being  assisted  by  Zachariah,21'  the

of  the  lloyal  Axe,  which  is  explained  on  the  jewel  of  the  order :
vi/.,  an  axe  or  hatchet,  with  the  following  initial  letters.  On  one
side  of  the  handle  is  an  L  for  Lebanon  ;  and  on  the  top,  S  for  Solo-
mon ;  A  B  for  Abda ;  A  for  Adonirain  ;  C  for  Cyrus  ;  D  for  Darius ;
X  for  Xerxes ;  Z  for  Zerubbabcl ;  and  A  for  Ananias.  On  the  other
side  are  S  for  Sidonians;  X  for  Noah  ;  S  for  Shem  ;  H  for  Hani ;
J  for  Japhet;  M  tor  Moses  ;  B  for  Bezaleel ;  A  for  Aholiab.  The
jewel  is  of  gold,  and  suspended  from  a  riband  of  all  the  prismatic
colours.

28  This  holy  prophet  and   principal  of  the  Sanhedrim,   or  Royal
Chapter,  was  born  during  the  Babylonish  captivity,  and  returned  to
Jerusalem  with  Zerubbabel  and  Jeshua.    He  exhorted  them  to  resume
the  work  of  the  temple,  when  it  had  been  interrupted  nearly  fourteen
years,  in  consequence  of  the  intrigues  of  the  Samaritans,  and  other
obstructions  excited  to  defeat  the  edict  of  Cyrus.     The   prophet
represents  the  people  as  more  ready  to  build  and  adorn  their  own
dwellings  than  to  labour  in  the  service  of  God.     He  tells  them  that
the  unfruitful  seasons  they  had  experienced  were  entirely  owing  to
this   cause.     He  then    encourages   them  with  promises  of  future
blessings ;  and  predicts  the  important  revelations  that  should  precede
the  final  advent  of  the  Messiah,  when  the  kingdoms  of  the  world
should  become  the  kingdoms  of  the  Lord  and  of  his  Christ.

29  Zachariah  was  incited  to  concur  with  Haggai  by  a  remarkable
dream  or  vision,   which  he  thus  relates:   "I  saw  by 'night,  and
behold,  a  man  riding  upon  a  red  horse,  and  he  stood  among  the
myrtle  trees  that  were  in  the  bottom ;  and  behind  him  were  there
red  horses  speckled  and  white.     The  angel  that  communed  with  me
said  unto  me,  Cry  thou  saying,  thus  saith  the  Lord  of  Hosts,  I  am
jealous  for  Jerusalem  and  for  Sion  with  a  great  jealousy.     I  am
returned  to  Jerusalem  with  mercies  ;  my  house  shall  be  built  in  it,
and  a  line  shall  be  stretched  forth  upon  Jerusalem.     The  hands  of


OF    FREEMASONRY.  445

Jews  once  more  girded  up  their  loins,  and  prepared
themselves  for  a  vigorous  effort  to  complete  the  building
of  the  second  temple  without  further  delay.30  Again,
however,  their  good  intentions  were  frustrated  by  the
Samaritans,  who  prevailed  on  Tatnai,  the  governor  of
Palestine,  to  visit  Jerusalem,  with  the  design  of  putting
an  entire  period  to  the  hopes  of  God's  people  by  a
positive  prohibition.31  But  Zerubbabel  producing  the
decree  of  Cyrus,  the  governor  did  not  think  himself
authorized  to  interfere  till  he  had  consulted  Darius.32

Zerubbabel  have  laid  the  foundations  of  this  house,  his  hands  shall
also  finish  it."  (Zech.  i.  8,  14,  16 ;  iii.  9.)

30  And  here  another  remarkable  type  or  prophecy  of  the  Messiah
occurs,  which  is  peculiarly  connected  with  our  design.     Some  of  the
Jews,  who  had  chosen  to  remain  in  Babylon  after  the  return  of  their
brethren  to  their  own  land,  showed  that  they  were  not  altogether
unmindful  of  their  duties,  by  sending  presents  of  gold  and  silver  for
the  use  of  the  temple.     God  commanded  that  of  the  gold  and
silver  two  crowns  should  be  made,  which  should  be  placed  on  the
head  of  Jeshua;  and  in  explanation  of  the  sign,  the  prophet  was
ordered  to  direct  their  attention  to  the  promised  Messiah,  in  whom
all  honour  and  power,  whether  regal,  priestly,  or  prophetical,  should
be  combined.     See  Zech.  vi.  12.

31  This  event  is  celebrated  in  a  degree  called  Knights  of  the  Red
Cross,  where  it  is  said  that  Zerubbabel  went  personally  to  the  court
of  Darius,  and  solicited  the  king's  protection  ;  representing  that  his
companions  had  long  and  frequently  been  impeded  in  the  great  and
pious  undertaking  of  building  the  temple  by  their  inveterate  enemies,
although  Cyrus  had  set  them  at  liberty  for  that  purpose,  and  favoured
them  with  his  protection ;  he  therefore  implored  the  king's  clemency,
hoping  that  he  would  receive  him  into  his  royal  favour.

32  "  The  works    had    gone  on  very  slowly  and  negligently  ever
since  the  first  of  Cyrus,  they  being  in  a  poor  condition,  and  hindered
by  the  Samaritans  ;  after  which  the   people  grew  sluggish,   being
more  intent  upon  building  their  own  houses,  which  they  carried  on
with  greater  earnestness  than  the  house  of  God.     However,  they


440  HISTORICAL    LANDMARKS

The  Sanhedrim  was  assembled  in  the  first  year  of  Da-
rius,33 to  deliberate  on  their  unfortunate  situation,  and
to  devise  means  whereby  they  could  obtain  the  favour
and  concurrence  of  the  new  sovereign  in  proceeding
with  the  work  of  the  house  of  God;  and  a  solemn
appeal  was  made  to  the  king  for  his  protection  and
support.34  In  pursuance  of  this  appeal,  Darius  ordered

gave  Tatnai  a  faithful  account  of  the  whole  matter ;  and  he  very
worthily  represented  it  to  the  king,  as  they  informed  him,  without
any  addition  or  diminution  of  his  own ;  which  shows  that  lie  and
his  companions  were  not  their  enemies,  but*  impartially  wrote  what
they  affirmed  to  be  true."  (Patrick.  Com.  vol.  ii.  p.  656.)

33  It  is  asserted  in  the  above  degree,  that  when  Darius  was  a
private  man,  he  made  a  vow  that  if  ever  he  should  ascend  the  throne
of  Persia,  he  would  send  all  the  holy  utensils  which  remained  at
Babylon  back  to  Jerusalem.     Zerubbabel  had  contracted  a  friendship
with  Darius,  and  on  this  occasion  offered  to  take  a  long  and  tedious
journey  into  Persia,  for  the  purpose  of  reminding  the  king  of  his
vow.     It  is  needless  to  add  that  his  mission  was  successful.

34  On  this  occurrence  a  degree  has  been  formed,  which  is  thus
described  in  an  authorized  publication  in  the  United  States,  called
the  Templar's  Chart :  "  The  Order  of  Knights  of  the  Ked  Cross  has
taen  known  and  conferred  in  several  parts  of  Europe  by  various
titles ;  the  present  was  given  to  it  on  account  of  the  red  cross  which
the  knights  bore  on  their  banners  when  they  took  the  field.     The
incidents  upon  which  the  order  was  founded  occurred  in  the  reign  of
Darius,  King  of  Persia;  and  it  is  more  particularly  connected  with
Symbolic  Masonry  than  any  other  order  of  knighthood.     When
Darius  had  established  himself  on  the  throne  of  Persia,  Zerubbabel,
being  stimulated  by  a  spirit  of  true  patriotism,  voluntarily  offered  to
encounter  the  hazardous  enterprize  of  traversing  the  Persian  dominions
and  seeking  admission  into  the  royal  presence,  to  plead  the  cause  of
his  country.     He  had  some  hope  of  success,  on  account  of  having
been  formerly  distinguished  by  the  favourable  notice  and  friendship
of  the  king,  while  in  private  life.   On  his  arrival,  he  waited  a  favour-
able opportunity  to  prefer  his  suit.     An  occasion  soon  offered  itself,


OF    FREEMASONRY.  447

the  public  rolls  of  the  kingdom  to  be  searched,  and
finding  the  edict  in  question,  immediately  confirmed  it
by  a  royal  degree/5  and  commanded  Tatnai  and  Sethar-
boznai  to  take  proper  measures  for  the  protection  of
the  Jews,30  and  for  affording  every  facility  for  the  pro-

when  Zerubbabel,  by  his  consummate  wisdom  and  persuasive  argu-
ments, obtained  the  king's  favour,  who  gave  him  permission  to
rebuild  his  city  and  temple,  and  restored  all  the  holy  vessels  which
still  remained  at  Babylon.  The  King  of  Persia,  desirous  of  perpetu-
ating a  remembrance  of  those  interesting  events  which  had  occasioned
a  renewal  of  the  friendship  which  had  formerly  subsisted  between
himself  and  Zerubbabel,  instituted  a  new  order,  which  he  called
Knights  of  the  East.  This  title  was  afterwards  changed  to  Knights
of  the  Eagle.  In  Prance  they  were  known  as  Knights  of  the  Sword ;
and  in  Palestine  as  Knights  of  the  Red  Cross."

35  Which  originated  thus  :  At  the  close  of  a  sumptuous  entertain*
ment  given  to  his  nobles  and  tributaries,  Darius  proposed  certain
questions,  and  decreed  the  highest  honours  to  the  person  who  should
answer  them  most  satisfactorily.     The  questions  were  these  : — "  Is
there  any  thing  stronger  than  wine  ?    What  can  exceed  the  strength
of  kings  ?     What  is  superior  to  the  power  of  women  ?     Can  any
thing  surpass  truth?"     These  questions  Zerubbabel  answered  as
follows  : — "  Neither  the  force  of  wine,  nor  the  power  of  princes,  can
be  denied ;  but  women  have  incontestibly  the  superiority.     Before
the  king,  the  mother  of  the  king  existed.     The  charms  of  women
compel  us  to  abandon  our  country,  relations,  and  dearest  friends,
and  to  attach  ourselves  wholly  to  them.     But  neither  women  nor
kings  can  be  put  in  competition  with  the  power  of  truth.     Truth
alone  is  immutable  and  perfect ;  the  advantages  we  derive  from  it
are  not  subject  to  the  vicissitudes  of  fortune,  but  are  pure,  irreproach-
able, and  eternal."     This  answer  was  so  pleasing  to  the  king,  that
he  promised  Zerubbabel  any  thing  he  should  desire ;  who  immediately
reminded  him  of  his  vow,  which  the  king  was  graciously  pleased  to
fulfil.

36  He  issued   orders   to   the  governors  of  Samaria,   Syria,  and
Phffinicia,  to  lend  every  assistance  to  the  Jews  in  the  prosecution  of
this  work ;   exempted   all   who  were  engaged  in   it  from  imposts,


448  HISTORICAL    LANDMARKS

secution  of  their  design  j37  declaring  that  whosoever
should  alter  the  same,  or  offer  any  obstruction  to  it,
should  have  his  house  pulled  down,  and  should  be
hanged  upon  a  gallows  made  of  the  timber  thereof.38

The  publication  of  this  decree39  at  Jerusalem  was
just  seventy  years  after  the  final  burning  of  the  city
and  temple ;  and  the  date  of  the  edict  of  Cyrus  was
also  seventy  years  from  the  first  captivity  in  the  fourth
year  of  Jehoiakim ;  and  therefore  in  which  way  soever
the  calculation  may  be  made,  the  prophecy  of  Jeremiah

duties,  and  taxes ;  declared  them  FREE  ;  and  pronounced  that  the
Samaritans,  their  ancient  enemies,  should  contribute  to  the  structure.
These  privileges  were  a  source  of  so  much  joy  to  the  Jews  in  Babylon,
that  when  Zerubbabel  returned  to  Jerusalem,  he  was  followed  by
nearly  five  millions  of  people  from  the  tribes  of  Judah,  Benjamin,
and  Levi.  (Jos.  Ant.  1.  xi.  c  4.)

37  The  degree  of  Prince  of  Jerusalem  is  founded  on  the  above
facts.

38  As  the  Samaritans  failed  in  their  attempt  to  prevent  the  temple
from  being  rebuilt,  Manasses,  brother  to  Jaddua,  the  high  priest,
having  married  the  daughter  of  Sanballat,  obtained  leave  from  Alex-
ander the  Great  to  build  a  temple  upon  Gerizim,  one  of  the  highest
mountains  in  Samaria,  whither  many  of  the  apostate  Jews  fled  along
with  Manasses,  who  was  made  their  high  priest ;  and  this  schism
began  the  sect  of  the  Samaritans.

39  The  decree  was  in  this  form,  as  we  learn  from  the  records  of
the  degree  of  Prince  of  Jerusalem  : — "  We  Darius,  king  of  kings,
willing  to  favour  and  protect  our  people  at  Jerusalem,  after  the
example  of  our  illustrious  predecessor,  King  Cyrus,  do  will  and
ordain  that  the  Samaritans,   against  whom  complaints  have  been
made,  shall  punctually  pay  the  tribute  money  which  they  owe  for  the
sacrifices  of  the  temple  ;  otherwise  they  shall  receive  condign  punish-
ment.    Given  at  Shushan,  the  palace,  this  fourth  day  of  the  second
month,  in  the  year  3534,  and  of  our  reign  the  third  ;  under  the
royal  signet."


OF    FREEMASONRY.  449

was  remarkably  fulfilled.  It  caused  great  rejoicing
amongst  the  Jews ;  and  the  building  was  carried  on
with  enthusiasm  under  the  direction  of  the  Tyrian
architects,40  till  the  cape-stone41  was  celebrated  with
sacrifices  and  rejoicing.42  Here  was  opened  the  Grand
and  Royal  Lodge,  about  the  year  of  the  world  34 1G,43

40  Many  of  the  Tyrians  had  been  carried  into  captivity  by  Nebu-
chadnezzar, and  liberated  along  with  the  Jews.

41  On  this  stone  were  engraven  SEVEN  EYES,  at  the  express  com-
mand of  God,  which  were  intended  to  represent  the  eyes  of  the  Lord,
which  run  to  and  fro  throughout  the  earth ;  and  had  a  symbolical
reference  to  the  Lamb  who  was  afterwards  slain  for  the  sins  of  the
world  ;  which  St.  John  saw  in  heaven,  having  seven  eyes,  which  are
the  seven  spirits  of  God.  (Zech.  iii.  9  ;  2  Chron.  xvi.  9  ;  Rev.  v.  6.)

42  The  temple  had  been  forty-six  years  in  building.    It  was  begun
in  the  second  year  of  Cyrus,  and  finished  in  the  ninth  of  Darius.
Cyrus  reigned  twenty-nine  years  after  it  was  commenced ;  Cambyses
eight,  and  Darius  nine  years,  making  together  forty-six  years.

43  In  the  construction  of  a  degree  from  the  above  materials,  by
whatever  name  it  may  be  denominated,  and  the  Brethren  of  different
countries  are  not  agreed  on  the  point,  there  exist  some  few  anamolies.
The  names  of  Ezra  and  Nehemiah  are  associated  with   those  of
Z.  J.  H. ;  which  must  be  erroneous,  as  I  think  will  appear   from
hence.     The  foundation  of  the  second  temple  was  laid  in  the  year
B.  c.  535  ;  the  building  was  hindered  after  this  till  B.  c.  520  ;  when
it  went  on  by  order  of  Darius,  and  was  dedicated  B.  c.  515.     Ezra
did  not  come  up  from  Babylon  till  the  reign  of  Artaxerxes,  B.C.  457,
being  fifty-eight  years  after  the  dedication  of  the  second  temple,  and
seventy-eight  after  the  foundations  were  laid ;  and  Nehemiah  was
not  made  governor  till  twelve  years  later  still.     They  could  not  then
have  participated  with  the  original  builders  of  the  temple.     And  I
suppose  this  anachronism  arose  from  Ezra  having  recorded  in  his
first  six  chapters,  what  happened  from  sixty  to  eighty  years  before
his  time ;  and  from  the  name  of  Nehemiah,  evidently  a  different
person,  appearing  in  that  account  as  one  of  the  persons  who  came
with  Zerubbabel.

VOL.  II.  O  (i


450  HISTORICAL    LANDMARKS

when  the  kingly  power  was  restored  in  the  person  of
Zerubbabel,  who  was  descended  from  the  royal  line
of  David  and  the  tribe  of  Judah.

Still,  although  the  temple  was  finished  and  dedi-
cated, the  state  of  the  Jews  was  not  prosperous,  on
account  of  the  persecution  of  their  enemies  ;  and  Ezra
the  Scribe  was  deputed  by  Artaxerxes  to  visit  Jeru-
salem, in  company  with  so  many  of  the  captive  Jews
as  voluntary  chose  to  remove  with  him ;  and  he  invested
him  with  full  authority  to  regulate  the  religion  and
government  of  Judea  ;  and  to  collect  contributions  from
those  that  remained  behind,  either  to  beautify  the  tem-
ple, or  to  provide  for  the  expense  of  the  daily  sacrifices.
Ezra  was  a  wise  and  learned  man,44  well  skilled  in
the  scriptures,  and  perfectly  competent  to  undertake
the  important  duty  of  reforming  the  abuses  which  the
Jewish  religion  had  contracted  during  the  Babylonish
captivity,45  and  restoring  many  important  rites  and

44  "  Of  true  religion  Artaxerxes  gave  a  specimen  early  in  his  reign,
when  he  sent  Ezra  to  Judea,  with  ample  commission  to  establish  the
law  of  God,  and  the  law  of  the  king,  in  the  western  provinces  ;  and
Cor  beautifying  the  house  of  the  Lord  in  Jerusalem,  and  providing
for  regular   sacrifices  there.     Artaxerxes  was  happy   in   two   such
master  councillors  as  Ezra  and  Nehemiah."   (Male's  Anal.  vol.  iv.
p.  191.)

45  "  On  his  arrival,  he  delivered  up  to  the  temple  the   offerings
which  had  been  made  to  it  by  the  king  and  nobles,  and  the  rest  of
the  people  of  Israel  that  stayed  behind,  which   amounted  to  one
hundred  talents  of  gold,  twenty  basins  of  gold  of  the  value  of  one
thousand  darics,  and  six  hundred  and  fifty  talents  of  silver,  with
vessels  of  silver  of  the  weight  of  about  one  hundred  talents  more."
(Prid.  Con.  p.   1,  b.  v.)     A  darie    was  worth    about   twenty-five


shillings  of  our  money.


OF    FREEMASONRY.  451

observances,  which  otherwise  were  in  danger  of  being
for  ever  lost.46  He  held  the  government  thirteen  years,
and  during  this  period  he  placed  the  religion  and  laws
on  a  firm  and  durable  principle,  which  experience  had
shown  to  be  capable  of  producing  the  peace  and
happiness  of  the  people,  and  securing  the  general
welfare  of  the  state.47

Nehemiah  succeeded  to  the  government  of  Judea,
and  was  entrusted  with  a  special  commission  to  rebuild
the  walls,  and  renew  the  fortifications  of  Jerusalem,48

46  The  Jews,  according  to  the  Koran,  say  that  Ezra  was  the  son
of  God ;  which  the  commentators  observe  referred  to  some  heterodox
Jews  of  Medina,  who  believed  that  all  the  copies  of  the  Sacred  Law
were  lost  during  the  Babylonish  captivity ;  and  that  Ezra  was  raised
to  life  a  century  after  he  had  been  gathered  to  his  fathers,  for  the
purpose  of  restoring  the  Scriptures  to   their   original   perfection.
That  having  dictated  them  to  the  Scribes  from  memory,  they  con-
cluded that  he  must  have  been  the  son  of  God.

47  He  collected  and  collated  the  Hebrew  Scriptures,  and  digested
them  into  a  systematic  form,  and  read  them  periodically  in  the  ears
of  the  people.     His  wisdom  and  prudence  procured  him  such  a  high
degree  of  reputation,  that  many  later  writers  have  pronounced  him
to  be  no  other  but  Malachi  the  prophet.   But  there  is  no  foundation
for  this  conjecture.     An  ancient  copy  of  the  law  might  possibly  have
been  found  at  the  rebuilding  of  the  second  temple,  which  would  be
exceedingly  valuable ;  but  it  is  scarcely  to  be  doubted  that  there
were  many  copies,  or  at  least  detached  parts,  of  the  sacred  writings
in  existence  amongst  the  Jews  at  Babylon,  to  which  Ezra  had  access  ;
and  his  principal  labour  would  be  in  collating  and  comparing  the
ancient  and  modern  copies,  which  were  written  in   two   different
languages  ;  in  making  a  regular  distribution  of  the  canonical  books,
and  in  transcribing  the  whole  in  the  Chaldean  character,  which  was
now  almost  universally  substituted  for  the  ancient  Hebrew.

48  "  In  the  twentieth  year  of  his  reign,"  says  Hales,  (Anal.  vol.  ii.
p.  484,)  Artaxerxes  granted  that  permission  which  he  had  so  long

G  G  2


452


HISTORICAL    LANDMARKS


and  to  effect  a  full  restoration  of  the  lands  and
property  which  had  been  seized,  during  the  captivity,
by  the  neighbouring  nations.49  When  he  arrived  at
Jerusalem,  and  took  possession  of  his  government,  he
found  his  country's  enemies,  the  Samaritans  and  others,
headed  by  Sanballat,  Tobias,  and  Geshem,  opposing
every  obstacle  that  might  distress  and  discommode
the  Jews.  The  reparation  of  the  walls  and  fortifica-
tion met  with  a  formidable  resistance  from  these  people,
who  conspired  to  attack  the  Jews  while  engaged  in

refused,  of  rebuilding  the  walls  of  Jerusalem,  at  the  instance  of
Nehemiah,  a  Jew,  and  his  cup-bearer,  (when  Esther  the  queen  was
present,)  whom  he  appointed  Tirshatha,  or  governor  of  Judea,  in
succession  to  Zerubbabel,  whose  death  about  this  time  might  furnish
an  additional  reason  for  his  appointment ;  while  Ezra,  the  scribe,
zealously  co-operated  with  him  in  his  proper  function  of  teaching  the
law  to  the  people."

49  The  history  of  his  appointment  to  this  office  is  thus  related  : —
"  Walking  near  Susa,  the  capital  of  Persia,  Nehemiah  heard  some
people  conversing  in  Hebrew,  on  which  he  asked  them  whence  they
came.  They  said  from  Judea ;  and  on  his  enquiry  respecting  Jeru-
salem, they  said  that  the  walls  were  destroyed,  the  country  exposed
to  the  inroads  of  the  enemy,  the  people  carried  into  captivity,  and
the  dead  bodies  left  on  the  highways.  While  Nehemiah  was  bitterly
lamenting  these  grievous  calamities,  he  was  informed  that  the  king
was  going  to  supper,  on  which  he  hastened  to  attend  his  duty.  After
supper,  the  king  observing  Nehemiah's  grief,  enquired  the  cause ;  on
which  he  said,  '  How  can  I  but  be  miserable,  when  the  place  of  my
birth  is  destroyed ;  Jerusalem  become  a  heap  of  rubbish  ;  the  gates
of  the  city  burnt ;  the  tombs  of  my  ancestors  violated  ;  and  the  ashes
of  the  dead  profaned  ?  And  I  must  request  your  royal  permission
to  go  to  Jerusalem,  to  assist  in  completing  the  temple,  and  rebuild-
ing the  walls.'  The  king  complied  with  his  wishes,  and  gave  him
letters  to  his  governors,  commanding  them  to  assist  him  in  the
intended  work."  (Jos.  Ant.  1.  xi.  c.  5.)


Or    FREEMASONRY.

labour,  and  consequently  unarmed ;  and  to  this  they
were  encouraged  by  some  traitors  within  the  city.  The
vigilance  of  Nehemiah  frustrated  the  scheme.50  He
directed  the  work  to  be  carried  on  by  armed  men,
protected  also  by  bands  of  warriors,  placed  at  conve-
nient distances  round  the  city,  to  receive  the  enemy
at  every  point.  Thus  prepared,  the  Samaritans  aban-
doned their  design,  and  contented  themselves  with
mockery  and  derision.  At  length  the  fortifications
were  completed,  the  gates  set  up,  and  the  whole
dedicated  with  solemn  ceremonies.51  Thus  rebuilt  and

50  The  following  chronology  may  be  usefully  consulted.     Nebu-
chadnezzar  destroyed   Jerusalem,  B.  c.   586.     Belshazzar's  death,
553.     The  Jews  return  from  captivity,  under  Zerubbabel,  536.   The
second  temple  begun,  535.  Cambyses,  529.  Darius  Hystaspes,  521.
The  temple  finished,  485.     Artaxerxes  stops  the  building  of  Jeru-
salem, 463  ;  marries  Esther,  458;  deputes  Ezra,  457;  and  Nehe-
miah,   444.     The   walls   and  the  city  rebuilt,  432.     Nehemiah's
reform,  420.

51  And  it  being   recollected   that   a  traditional  account  was  in
existence,  how  Jeremiah  the  prophet,  when  the  temple  was  sacked
and  plundered  by  Nebuzaradan  the  captain  of  the  guard,  commanded
certain  priests  to  hide  the  sacred  fire  in  a  dry  vault ;  Nehemiah
summoned  the  posterity  of  those  priests,  to  whom  the  signs  and
marks  by  which  the  place  might  be  known  had  been  confided,  and
with  their  assistance  the  vault  was  discovered.     But  not  finding  any
fire  there,  the  vault  containing  nothing  but  muddy  water,  he  carried
some  of  it  away,  and  sprinkled  it  upon  the  altar  ;  when,  to  his  great
astonishment,  the  wood  took  fire  as  soon  as  the  sun  shone  upon  it.
When  the  King  of  Persia  was  informed  of  this  miracle,  he  encom-
passed the  vault  where  the  holy  fire  had  been  hid  by  Jeremiah  with
walls ;  and  confirmed  the  privileges  which  had  been  given  to  the
liberated  Jews.     The  fire,  according  to  the  Rabbins,  was  found  at
the  feast  of  tabernacles,  after  the  walls  of  the  city  had  been  com-
pleted.     In  honour  of  this  event,  a  commemorative  festival  was
instituted,  called  "  the  Feast  of  the  New  Eire."


454


HISTORICAL    LANDMARKS


peopled  with  inhabitants,  under  the  wise  government
of  Nehemiah,52  assisted  by  the  prudent  counsel  of
Ezra,  Jerusalem  soon  recovered  a  portion  of  its  former
splendour.

52  A  profound  peace,  attended  with  a  long  course  of  uninterrupted
prosperity,  was  'favourable  to  the  practice  of  all  those  arts  and
sciences  which  embellish,  and  stamp  a  value  on  the  enjoyment  of
social  life ;  and  amongst  the  rest,  the  comprehensive  science  of  Free-
masonry received  distinguished  marks  of  attention.  The  encourage-
ment afforded  by  Z.  H.  and  J.,  seconded  by  E.  and  N.,  and  their
successors,  to  the  sublime  science,  which  united  religion  and  morals
in  a  bond  of  social  harmony,  gave  a  new  stimulus  to  the  exertions  of
those  worthy  and  faithful  few,  who  had  been  the  conservators
of  Freemasonry  in  r»:i!>ylon.


OJ?    THEEMASONRY.  455


LECTURE    XLI.

THE    BURNING    BUSH.

"  Now  Moses  kept  tlie  flock  of  Jethro  his  father-in-law  the  priest
of  Midian  ;  and  he  led  the  flock  to  the  back  part  of  the  desert,  and
came  to  tlie  mountain  of  God,  even  to  Horeb.  And  the  Angel  of
the  Lord  appeared  unto  him  in  a  flame  of  fire,  out  of  the  midst  of  a
bush ;  and  he  looked,  and  behold,  the  bush  burned  with  fire,  and
the  bush  was  not  consumed.  And  Moses  said,  I  will  now  turn  aside
and  see  this  great  sight,  why  the  bush  is  not  burnt.  And  when  the
Lord  saw  that  he  turned  aside  to  see,  God  called  unto  him  out  of
the  midst  of  the  bush,  and  said,  Moses,  Moses.  And  he  said,  Here
am  I.  And  he  said,  Draw  not  nigh  hither  ;  put  oft'  thy  shoes  from
off  thy  feet,  for  the  place  whereon  thou  standst  is  holy  ground."

EXODUS.

K\i)6i  irvpbs  TIJV  (jxavfjv. — Hear  the  voice  of  Fire.

ORACULA  MAGICA  ZOROASTKI.

WHEN  the  death  of  the  twelve  patriarchs  had
effaced  the  memory  of  those  essential  benefits  which
the  Egyptians  derived  from  the  wisdom  and  foresight
of  Joseph,1  and  the  Israelites  increased  so  rapidly  that

1  Sir  John  Mandeville  (Yoiage  and  Travaile,  p.  63,)  gives  a  curious
legend  about  the  granaries  built  by  Joseph,  which  he  says  were  in
existence  in  the  fourteenth  century.  His  words  are,  "  Now  I  schalle
speke  of  another  thing,  that  is  beyonde  Babyloyne,  above  the  flode
of  Nyle,  toward  the  desert,  betwene  Africk  and  Egypt ;  that  is  to
seyn,  of  the  gerneres  of  Joseph  that  he  lete  make,  for  to  kepe  the
greyncs  for  the  perile  of  the  dere  zeres.  Thei  ben  made  of  ston,  full
well  made  of  masonncs  craft,  of  the  whiche  two  ben  marvevllouse


456


HISTORICAL    LANDMARKS


the  inhabitants  entertained  some  apprehensions  lest
their  liberties  should  be  endangered  by  the  existence
of  such  a  numerous  band  of  strangers,  governed  by  a
foreign  policy,  and  worshipping  a  different  God.  They
thought  it  possible  that  this  people,  though  now  pur-
suing a  pastoral  and  quiet  life,  might  be  incited  to
unite  with  the  enemy  in  the  event  of  a  foreign  invasion ;
and  Amenophis,2  or  Memnon,  who  was  the  monarch
of  a  new  dynasty,  and,  therefore,  did  not  know  Joseph,3

grete  and  hye,  and  to  there  ne  ben  not  so  gret ;  and  every  gernere
hath  a  zate  for  to  entre  withinnc,  a  lytille  highe  fro  ye  erthe,  for  the
londe  is  wasted  and  fallen  sith  the  gerners  were  made.  And  withinnc
this  ben  alle  fulle  of  serpentes.  And  aboven  ye  gerners  withouten,
ben  many  scriptures  of  dyverse  languages.  And  sum  men  seyn,  that
thei  ben  sepultures  of  grete  lordes  that  weren  sometyne;  but  that  is
not  trewe  ;  for  alle  ye  coinoun  rymour  and  speche  is  of  alle  ye  peple
there,  both  fer  and  nere,  that  thei  ben  the  gerneres  of  Joseph."  Our
erudite  traveller  has  evidently  mistaken  the  pyramids  of  Cephrenus
and  Mycerinus  for  the  graneries  of  Joseph.

3  Bishop  Cumberland  says — "  The  year  of  Israel's  departure  was
the  last  of  Amenophis  the  father  of  Barneses,  who  was  also  called
Egyptus,  and  had  Danaus  for  his  brother,  called  also  Armais.  This
is  proved  partly  by  scripture  testimony,  which  affirms  that  the
Pharoah,  from  whose  dominions  they  departed,  was  drowned  with
his  host  in  the  Bed  Sea ;  which  evinces  that  their  departure  was  in
the  last  year  of  a  king's  reign,  though  Moses  gives  us  not  his  name,
partly  by  two  heathen  witnesses,  Manetho  and  Chceremon,  who  both
affirm  the  Jews  going  out  of  Egypt  from  under  Amenophis,  whom
they  both  distinguish  from  others  of  the  same  name,  by  his  being-
father  to  the  great  Barneses,  as  appears  by  the  words  of  both  these
writers  set  down  by  Josephus  against  Apion."  (Sanch.  p.  398.)
Wilkinson,  however,  gives  this  monarch  the  name  of  Thotmes  III.,
and  says  he  was  the  predecessor  of  Amenophis.  See  his  Tables.

3  It  is  probable  that  the  musical  head,  now  in  the  British  Museum,
was  a  bust  of  this  -monarch,  or  of  a  successor  of  the  same  name.  It
is  described  by  Strabo  and  Pausanias ;  the  latter  of  whom  thus


OF    FREEMASONRY.  457

and  his  council  of  state  held  many  an  anxious  consul-
tation to  devise  a  method  of  neutralizing  the  danger,4
without  depriving  themselves  of  the  advantages  which
they  derived  from  their  services.5  And  at  length  they

expresses  himself :- — "  I  was  much  surprised  with  the  colossus  at
Thebes,  which  you  come  to  after  crossing  the  Nile  in  your  way  to
the  tombs.  Seated  on  a  chair,  is  a  statue  which  is  generally  called
Meninon.  Tradition  reports  that  he  came  out  of  Ethiopia  into
Egypt,  and  carried  his  expedition  as  far  as  Susa.  The  Thebans  call
it  a  statue  of  Amenoph.  It  daily,  at  sunrise,  produces  a  sound,
which  you  may  compare  with  the  snapping  of  a  harp-string."  Wil-
kinson, however,  says  that  the  sound  was  an  artifice  of  the  priests.
These  are  his  words — "  On  examining  the  statue  and  its  inscriptions,
I  found  that  one  Ballilla  had  compared  it  to  the  striking  of  brass ;
and  feeling  convinced  that  this  authority  was  more  decisive  than  the
vague  accounts  of  those  writers  who  had  never  heard  it,  I  determined
on  posting  some  peasants  below,  and  ascending  myself  to  the  top  of
the  statue  with  a  view  of  hearing  from  them  the  impression  made  by
the  sound.  Having  struck  the  sonorous  block  with  a  small  hammer,
I  enquired  what  they  heard ;  and  their  answer,  you  are  striking
brass,  convinced  me  that  the  sound  was  the  same  that  deceived  the
Romans,  and  led  Strabo  to  observe  that  it  appeared  to  him  as  the
effect  of  a  slight  blow."  (Thebes,  p.  37.)

4  "  The  policy  of  the  new  sovereign,  as  mentioned  by  Moses,  is
easily  illustrated.     He  found  himself  master  of  a  land  in  which  were
two  distinct  races  of  men ;  who,  from  a  sense  of  mutual  benefits,
had  generally  lived  in  strict  amity  with  each  other ;  and  he  was  fully
aware,  or  at  least  he  naturally  suspected,  that,  notwithstanding  any
temporary  disgust,  the  Israelites  would  be  far  more  likely  to  make
common  cause  with  their  friends  the  Mizraim  than  with  himself  and
his  intrusive  warriors.     Hence  to  a  man  who  was  restrained  by  no
nice  scruples  of  conscience  ;  who  considered  only  how  he  might  best
secure  his  conquest ;    and  who  neither  knew  nor  regarded  Joseph,
the  policy  is  obvious  ;  and  the  principle  of  it  is  most  distinctly
exposed  by  Moses."  (Eab.  Pag.  Idol.  vol.  iii.  p.  553.)

5  The  Egyptians  could  not  conceal  from  themselves  the  humiliating
fact,  that,  from  the  peculiar  blessing  of  God,  the  substance  of  their


458  HISTORICAL    LANDMARKS

came  to  the  resolution  of  paralyzing  their  strength  by
hard  and  incessant  labour,  and  thinning  their  numbeis
by  the  destruction  of  all  their  male  children.

Things  were  in  this  state  when  the  time  approached,
according  to  the  promise,0  which  was  to  redeem  the
Israelites  from  the  enduring  tyranny  of  their  cruel
task-masters.7  One  of  the  magicians  of  Egypt  had

slaves  had  wonderfully  increased,  and  that  their  undertakings  \\  ere
always  prosperous.     They  disliked  their  religion,  although  its  1>< •HC-
ficent  fruits  were  before  their  eves  because  the  Hebrews  sacrilieed
the  identical  animals  which  the  Egyptians  held  in  the  higher
and  even  worshipped ;  and  they  disliked  their  masonry,  because  it
taught  what  they  were  not  inclined  to  practice,  viz.,  Truth,  Ju.~
and  Mercy.

6  About  this  time  Cod  appeared  to  Ainraiu,  the  lather  of  A!

in  a  vision,  and  said  :  "  It  was  1  who,  from  such  a  small  beginning,
raised  your  nation  to  its  present  populous  state.  You  may  be
assured,  therefore,  that  I  will  not  fail  to  provide  for  the  welfare  of
the  Hebrew  nation,  and  of  yourself  hi  particular;  for  the  child,
whose  predicted  birth  is  so  much  dreaded  by  the  Egyptians,  shall
be  born  to  thee ;  shall  escape  all  the  snares  laid  for  his  life ;  shall
be  educated  in  a  manner  totally  unexpected ;  and,  in  due  time,
shall  rescue  the  Israelites  from  the  yoke  of  the  Egyptians,  and
render  his  name  immortal  by  the  glorious  achievements  he  shall  j;er-
form ;  he  shall  have  a  brother  whom  I  will  invest  with  the  high
priesthood,  which  dignity  I  will  confirm  to  him  and  his  heirs  in
perpetuity.  Take  courage,  therefore ;  for  this,  and  much  more  will
I  do  for  yourself  and  your  descendants."  (Jos.  Ant.  b.  ii.  c.  9.)

7  They  were  not  only  condemned  to  the  toil  of  making  brick,  but
also  of  converting  that  material  into  solid  buildings,  both  in  cities
and  in  solitary  catacombs  and  pyramids.     They  were  also  subjected
to  the  labour  of  forming  vast  canals  and  reservoirs  for  the  waters  of
the  Nile ;  a  work  so  destructive  of  human  life  in  those  times,  that
when  Mehemet  Ali  attempted  to  unite  the  Nile  with  the  Mediter-
ranean sea,  he  did  not  desist  until  he  had  lost  20,000  of  his  men.
The  custom  of  the  Egyptians,  in  placing  task-masters  over    their


OF    FREEMASONRY.  459

predicted  that  about  this  period  a  Hebrew  child  would
be  boru,  who  should  prove  a  scourge  to  the  Egyptians,
and  advance  his  own  nation  to  great  worldly  glory.
The  edict  for  the  destruction  of  the  male  children,9  was

foreign  labourers,  is  not  discontinued  even  at  the  present  day.  Came,
in  his  Letters  from  the  East,  (p.  71,)  tells  us  that  when  he  was  at
Alexandria,  a  new  canal  was  in  progress.  "  The  bed  of  the  canal
presented  a  novel  spectacle,  being  filled  with  a  vast  number  of  Arabs
of  various  colours,  toiling  in  the  intense  heat  of  the  day,  while  their
Egyptian  task-masters,  with  whips  in  their  hands,  watched  the  pro-
gress of  the  labour.  It  was  a  just  and  lively  representation,"  the
writer  continues,  "  of  the  children  of  Israel  forced  to  toil  by  their
oppressive  masters  of  old.  The  wages  Mahmoud  allowed  to  these
unfortunate  people,  whom  he  had  obliged  to  quit  their  homes  and
families  in  Upper  Egypt,  were  only  a  penny  a  day  and  a  ration
of  bread."

8  Josephus  informs  us,  (Ant.  b.  ii.  c.  9,)  that  the  princess,  having
no  child,  adopted  Moses,  and  brought  him  whilst  a  child  to  her
father ;  and  admiring  both  the  beauty  of  his  person,  and  the  promis-
ing appearance  of  a  genius  in  him,  wished  he  would  appoint  him  to
be  his  successor,  if  she  should  have  no  children ;  that  the  king  here-
upon, in  a  pleasant  humour,  put  his  crown  upon  the  child's  head ;  and
that  Moses  took  it  off,  and  laid  it  upon  the  ground,  turning  it  about
with  his  feet.     One  of  the  priests  in  attendance  thought  his  actions
ominous,  and  was  earnest  to  have  him  killed,  as  a  person  that  would
be  fatally  mischievous  to  the  Egyptian  crown  ;  but  the  princess  here
again  saved  him  from  destruction.

9  "  The  savage  custom  of  exposing  new-born  infants  prevailed  in
ancient  Germany.     The  learned  are  aware  it  was  by  no  means  con-
fined thereto.     Amongst  the  Teutones,  it  was  usual  to  leave  the
child  on  the  floor  of  the  chamber,  whereon  the  mother  herself  lay,  until
the  father,  being  called,  acknoAvledged  his  offspring,  either  by  taking  it
in  his  arms,  or  by  directing  it  to  be  cast  forth.  Then  comes  in  another
of  those  superstitious  observances,  so  often  made  part  and  parcel  of
eldern  codes.     The  infant  might  not  be  legally  abandoned,  if  it  had
acquired  a  right  to  live  by  tasting  food.     A  story  is  told,  that  Lial-
burga,  mother  of  St.  Ludigcr,  was  preserved  to  the  world  through


460


HISTORICAL    LANDMARKS


therefore  strictly  enforced.  But  the  counsels  of  the
Most  High  cannot  be  evaded  by  human  policy.  Moses
was  preserved  by  the  ingenuity  of  his  mother,10  and
became  the  favourite  of  the  Egyptian  princess,11  who
educated  him  in  every  princely  accomplishment,  and
placed  him  under  the  especial  tuition  of  a  learned
priesthood.  Here  he  was  instructed  in  the  arts  and
sciences,  and  the  peculiar  mysteries  of  religion.12

such  an  incident.  The  babe  had  been  carried  away  by  a  servant,
with  orders  to  immerse  it  in  a  pail  of  water ;  he  did  so,  but  the
destined  mother  of  the  saint,  clinging  to  the  sides  of  the  vessel
instinctively,  was  pitied  and  snatched  away  by  a  matron  passing,
who  applied  some  honey  to  her  lips  ere  the  emissary  could  prevent."
(Graphic  Illustrator,  p.  36.)

10  "  In  the  7th  chapter  of  the  Acts,  v.  20,  it  is  said  that  he  was
exceeding  fair  to  God,  which  some  translations  render,  by  God,  that
is,  his  beauty  came  from  God,  or  God  in  a  singular  manner  had
made  him  very  fair  and  beautiful.     "When  therefore  his  parents  saw
him  so,  they  imagined  that  God  would  not  have  it  be  in  vain,  that
an  infant  should  be  bora  of  so  beautiful  and  comely  a  countenance.
And  therefore  they  doubted  not  but  he  should  be  preserved  by  the
singular  providence  of  God,  so  as  they  also  provided  as  much  as  lay
in  their  power.     And  the  event  was  answerable  to  their  faith."
(Expiat.  of  a  Sinner,  p.  273.)

11  The  princesses  of  Egypt  lived  in  sumptuous  state.     Diodorus
says,  that  the  whole  revenue  of  the  fishery  of  Lake  Mceris,  and  it
amounted  to  a  talent  a-day,  was  appropriated  to  find  the  princess  in
robes  and  perfumes  only.

12  There  is  a  curious  Arabian  tradition,  quoted  in  the  "  Library  of
Entertaining  Knowledge,"  respecting  a  monolith  chamber  which
formed  a  part  of  the  palace  in  which  Moses  was  brought  up.     It
was  called  the  green  chamber,  and  is  thus  described  as  being  found
amongst  the  ruins  of  Memphis : — "  It  is  made  of  a  single  stone,
nine  cubits  high,  eight  long,  and  seven  broad.    In  the  middle  of  the
stone  a  niche  or  hole  is  hollowed  out,  which  leaves  two  cubits  of
thickness  for  the  sides,  as  well  as  for  the  top  and  bottom.     All  the


Of    FREEMASONRY.  461

It  is  well  known  that  there  was  a  species  of  know-
ledge in  the  Egyptian  spurious  Freemasonry,  which
was  communicated  to  none  but  those  who  were  intended
for  the  throne  or  the  priesthood.  This  knowledge  was
veiled  in  allegory,  and  illustrated  by  symbols  and
hieroglyphics  of  very  expressive  character  and  import,13
and  was  carefully  concealed14  from  all  who  were  not

rest  forms  the  interior  capacity  of  the  chamber.  It  is  quite  covered,
both  outside  and  inside,  with  intaglios  in  relief.  On  the  outside  is
the  figure  of  the  sun  in  the  east,  and  a  great  number  of  stars,  spheres,
men,  and  animals.  The  men  are  represented  in  different  attitudes,
some  stationary,  others  moving ;  some  have  their  dresses  tucked  up
to  allow  them  to  work,  others  carry  materials,  and  some  are  giving
orders.  It  is  evident  that  these  .representations  refer  to  important
things,  remarkable  actions,  and  represent,  under  emblems,  very  pro-
found secrets.  This  niche  was  firmly  fixed  on  supports  of  massive
granite,  and  placed  in  a  magnificent  temple  constructed  of  enormous
stones,  put  together  with  the  most  perfect  art."

13  Many  of  these  hieroglyphics  have  been  explained  by  Ibn  Washih.
"  A  man  killed  by  violent  death  was  represented  by  the  figure  of  a
man  with  the  head  of  an  owl,  or  bat,  and  behind  him  a  scorpion.  If
he  was  poisoned,  he  was  represented  with  the  head  of  a  beetle,  or
crab  before  him,  and  a  glass.     Death  occasioned  by  the  plague,  a  hot
fever,  or  corruption  of  the  blood,  was  represented  by  a  man  sitting
in  a  chair  with  an  arrow  in  his  hand.    A  man  of  perfect  wisdom  and
understanding,  accomplished  in  all  his  ways,  and  without  the  least
blame,  was  painted  with  a  beautiful  face,  wings  like  an  angel,  holding
in  his  hands  a  book,  a  sword,  and  a  balance,  and  behind  him  two
vases,  one  of  them  full  of  water,  and  the  other  of  blazing  fire ;  under
his  right  foot  a  ball,  with  a  crab  painted  on  it,  and  under  his  left
a  deep  pot  full  of  serpents,  scorpions,  and  other  reptiles,  the  covering
of  which  had  the  shape  of  an  eagle's  head."     (Ancient  Alphabets,
p.  48.)

14  The  Egyptian  sphynx,  it  is  thought,  "  expressed  enigmatically
the  doctrine  of  man's  regeneration,  as  explained  to  Nicodemus  by
our  Saviour ;  and  which  is  supposed  to  have  been  one  of  the  ancient


4G2  HISTORICAL    LANDMARKS

deemed  worthy  of  initiation.15  It  was  indeed  an  insti-
tution of  secrecy,  which  included  many  important  doc-
trines, and  particularly  those  of  the  divine  unity  and
a  future  state.16  It  may  be  presumed  that  Moses  was
not  left  in  ignorance  of  this  mysterious  knowledge,
because  he  informs  us,  that  he  was  acquainted  with  all
the  learning  of  Egypt.  When  arrived  at  man's  estate,
he  was  entrusted  with  the  command  of  armies,  and
fought  with  distinguished  bravery.  And  thus  he
acquired  great  reputation  and  authority  amongst
the  Egyptians,  which  was  of  infinite  service  to  him

Egyptian  (it  certainly  was  one  of  the  Indian)  doctrines  derived  from
primitive  revelation."  (Lord  Lindsay's  Letters  on  the  Holy  Land,
vol.  i.  p.  85.)

15  It  is  well  known  that  the  Egyptian  priests,  in  order  to  preserve
the  treasures  of  knowledge  and  their  discoveries  in  natural  science,
and  at  the  same  time  to  render  them  inscrutable  to  any  but  the
initiated  few,  made  use  not  of  common  writing  but  of  hieroglyphics,
with  which  they  inscribed  obelisks,  walls,  and  even  subterraneous
chambers  and  galleries,  as  well  as  square  stones.    These  monuments
were  deified  by  the  multitude,  who  worshipped  in  them  Thoth,  the
Egyptian  god  of  learning.

16  We  no  longer  wonder  at  the  high  esteem  in  which  the  spurious
Freemasonry  was  held,  when  we  consider  that  the  most  judicious  and
best  instructed  writers  of  Greece  and  Rome  were  persuaded  that  it
had  contributed  more  than  any  other  means  to  soften  the  savage
manners  of  the  first  inhabitants  of  the  world.     They  have  not  hesi-
tated to  attribute  to  these  ceremonies  all  the  knowledge  and  polite-
ness which  the  most  enlightened  age  enjoyed.     "  These  are  the
mysteries,"  says  Cicero,  "  which  have  drawn  us  from  the  barbarous
and  savage  life  our  ancestors  led.     It  is  the  greatest  good  that  has
come  to  us  from  the  city  of  Athens,  among  so  many  that  she  has
conferred  upon  mankind.     It  is  she  that  has  taught  us  not  only  to
live  with  joy,  but  still  more,  to  die  with  tranquillity,  in  the  hope  of
becoming  more  happy."   (Goguet.  vol.  ii.  p.  G9.)


OY    FREEMASONRY.  463

when  he  afterwards  demanded  the  emancipation  of  the
Israelites  from  captivity.

Having  attained  the  age  of  forty  years,  he  began
to  consider  the  afflictions  of  his  brethren ;  and  their
destitute  condition  so  affected  him,  as  to  produce  that
renunciation  for  which  he  is  so  highly  applauded  by
St.  Paul.17  Seeing  a  taskmaster  exercise  a  degree  of
severity  on  one  of  his  countrymen,  which  he  thought
greatly  to  exceed  the  offence,  he  drew  his  sword,  slew
the  oppressor,  and  buried  his  body  in  the  sand.18  This
incident  being  reported  to  the  king,  he  used  it  as
a  pretext  to  take  away  the  life  of  Moses,19  whom  he
both  envied  and  feared,  because  the  magicians  now
unanimously  pronounced  that  he  was  destined  to  effect
great  changes  in  Egypt.  Moses  therefore  fled,  and
dwelt  an  exile  in  the  land  of  Midian  forty  years,20  where

17  Heb.  xi.  24 — 26.  He  refused  to  be  called  the  son  of  Pharoah's
daughter.     He  renounced  the  pleasures  of  the  royal  palace,  preferring
the  society  of  his  afflicted  brethren  to  the  splendours  and  gratifications
of  a  luxurious  court ;  for  he  had  respect  unto  the  recompense  of  the
reward.

18  There  is  some  degree  of  uncertainty  about  this  affair.     Some
think  that  Moses  found  the  Egyptian  in  adultery  with  a  Jewish
woman  ;  others  say,  it  was  a  formal  single  combat ;  and  others,  with
greater  probability,  suppose  that  Moses  acted  under  the  impression
that  God  had  constituted  him  a  judge  between  the  Israelites  and
their  oppressors.    Be  this  as  it  may,  it  is  quite  clear  that  Moses  fled
to  avoid  the  consequences.

19  The  Jews  pretend  that  he  was  actually  imprisoned  for  the  fact,
and  condemned  to  be  beheaded ;  but  that  when  he  should  have  suf-
fered, his  neck  became  as  hard  as  ivory,  and  the  sword  rebounded
on  the  executioner.     (Shash.  Hukkab.  p.  11,  cited  by  Sale,  Koran,
vol.  i.  p.  136.)

20  There  is  a  curious  coincidence  between  a  circumstance  in  the


464  HISTORICAL    LANDMARKS

he  was  subjected  to  the  hardships  of  a  pastoral  life,
that  he  might  be  better  prepared  to  encounter  the
dangers  and  privations  attending  the  duty  of  con-
ducting his  brethren  out  of  Egypt,21  than  if  he  had
been  fresh  from  the  enervating  habits  of  the  palace

ancient  history  of  India,  and  these  events  in  the  life  of  Moses,  given
by  the  missionary,  Father  Bouchet,  in  a  letter  to  the  Bishop  of
Avranches.  Vishnu,  who  was  the  second  person  in  the  Indian  trinity,
so  soon  as  he  was  born,  "  was  exposed  in  a  great  river,  to  prevent
his  falling  a  victim  to  the  king's  anger,  who  was  resolved  to  put  him
to  death  the  moment  he  should  come  into  the  world.  The  river,  out
of  veneration  for  the  child,  smoothed  its  surface,  and  would  not  suffer
its  waters  to  hurt  so  precious  a  charge.  The  child  was  taken  out  of
this  inconstant  element,  and  brought  up  among  shepherds,  lie
afterwards  married  with  the  daughters  of  those  shepherds,  and  for
a  long  time  kept  the  flocks  of  his  father-in-law.  The  young  man
soon  distinguished  himself  from  the  rest  of  his  companions,  who
elected  him  for  their  chief,  when  he  performed  wonders  in  protecting
the  flocks  and  those  who  kept  them.  He  put  the  king  to  death,  who
had  threatened  them  with  a  bloody  war,  and  was  pursued  by  his
enemies ;  when  finding  himself  unable  to  make  head  against  them,
he  withdrew  towards  the  sea,  which  immediately  contracted  its  waters
to  open  them  a  passage,  and  thereby  overwhelmed  all  his  pursuers,
by  which  means  he  escaped  their  cruelty."

21  Josephus  relates  several  particulars  of  Moses,  which  we  find  no
hints  of  in  the  books  of  scripture.  He  has  a  long  account  of  a  war
with  the  Ethiopians,  in  which  Moses  commanded  the  Egyptian  army.
He  reports  him  to  have  besieged  Saba,  the  capital  city  of  Ethiopia,
which  he  took,  and  married  Tharbis,  the  king's  daughter.  It  is
probable  that  this  account  might  induce  our  English  translators  of
the  Bible  to  render  Numbers  xii.  1,  thus — "  And  "Miriam  and  Aaron
spake  against  Moses,  because  of  the  Ethiopian  woman  whom  he  had
married."  Eusebius  says,  that  the  Ethiopians  settled  in  Egypt  in
the  time  of  Amenophis ;  and  he  places  his  reign  so  as  to  end  about
four  hundred  and  thirty-one  years  after  Abraham's  birth,  i.  e.
A.  M.  2439.


OF    FREEMASONRY.  465

where  he  had  been  brought  up.22  His  mind  was  ma-
tured by  divine  meditation  while  he  kept  the  flocks  of
his  father-in-law,  Jethro  the  priest  of  Midian,  amidst
the  solitary  mountains  of  Arabia  ;23  and  his  previous
education  qualified  him  for  the  character  he  was  now
about  to  assume,  as  a  lawgiver,  a  leader,  and  a  judge,
over  God's  chosen  people.

At  the  expiration  of  the  period  assigned  by  pro-
phecy for  the  detention  of  Israel  in  Egypt,  the  Lord
appeared  to  Moses  by  fire,24  in  the  midst  of  a  bush  of

22  This  argument  has  been  adduced,  amongst  others,   by  Grotius,
in  reply  to  those  who  object  to  the  Messiah  on  account  of  his  mean
extraction.     "  Many,"  says  he,  "  are  offended  at  the  mean  condition
of  Jesus,  but  without  any  reason ;  for  God  says  everywhere  in  the
sacred  writings,  that  he  exalteth  the  humble,  and  casteth  down  the
proud.     Jacob  went  over  Jordan,  carrying  nothing  with  him  but  his
staff,  and  returned  thither  again  enriched  with  great  plenty  of  cattle.
Moses  was  banished  and  poor,  and  a  feeder  of  cattle,  when  God
appeared  to  him  in  the  bush,  and  made  him  a  leader  of  his  people.
David  also,  when  he  was  feeding  his  flock,  was  called  to  be  king;
and  the  sacred  history  is  full  of  other  such  like  examples.     And  of
the  Messiah  we  read,  that  he  was  to  be  a  joyful  messenger  to  the
poor ;  that  he  should  not  lift  up  his  voice  in  the  streets,   nor  make
use  of  contention,  but  should  act  mildly,  so  as  to  spare  a  shaking-
reed,  and  to  cherish  the  heat  wh^ch  remained-in  the  smoking  flax."
(De  Verit.  1.  v.  s.  19.)

23  Mountains  were  always  considered  sacred,  as  the  abode  of  the
divinity.     Thus  Isaiah,  making  use  of  such  notions  as  were  generally
received  in  his  time,  introduces  Lucifer,  boasting  that  he  would  exalt
his  throne  above  the  stars  of  God ;  and  would  sit  on  the  mount  of
the  congregation,  or  assembly  of  the  gods,  on  the  sides  of  the  north.
This  reference  forcibly  reminds  us  of  the  celestial  divan  on  mount
Olympus.

24  "  According  to  an  oracle  cited  by  St.  Justin  and  Eusebius,  the
Chaldeans  had   the  same  doctrine  as  the  Hebrews  respecting  the

VOL.  n.  H  H


460  HISTORICAL    LANDMARKS


seneh,23  on  mount  Horeb,-"  near  which  he  was  tending
his  sheep.  This  appearance  was  in  conformity  with
the  divine  manifestations  at  other  times,  which  had
always  been  attended  with  a  cloud  or  with  fire.27  This
was  a  palpable  elemental  fire  which  gave  light,28  though

divinity.  They  called  fire  a  principle,  lire  intellect,  splendour  un-
created, eternal,  figurative  expressions,  equally  consecrated  by  the
biblical  books.  Jehovah  appeared  in  a  burning  bush  ;  aluminous
column  conducted  the  children  of  Nrael  in  the  desert.  The  sacred
tire  of  the  tabernacle  is  a  symbol  of  the  presence  of  (iod  in  Israel."
(Sytnb.  Col.  p.  L8.)

25  In  sublime  Masonry  is  a  derive  called  the  Knight  of  the  Brazen
Serpent,  in  the  decorations  of  \\hich  there  is  a  transparency  of  a
burning  bush,  with  HUT  in  the  centre  of  the  ilaiiie.

20  Josephus  appears  to  have  entertained  the  opinion  that  Horeb
and  Sinai  \\ere  the  same  mountain  ;  while  others  say  that  they  \\ en-
two  distinct  mountains  in  the  same  range.  Cajetan  >ays  that  the
summit  of  mount  Sinai  was  called  Iloreb;  while  others  believe  that
Horeb  is  the  general  name  of  the  di>tnct  in  which  Sinai  was  placed,
and  that  it  was  very  full  of  bushes  of  seneh,  acacia,  and  other  prickly
and  aromatic  shrubs.

27  According  to  the  opinion  of  Plato  there  are  three  kinds  of  fire,
— 1,  a  thick  fire,  as  in  the  burning  of  wood ;  2,  a  bright  and  subtile
fire ;  3,  a  pure  clear  fire,  Avhich  lights  but  does  not  burn,  as  in  the
stars.    Some  add  a  fourth,  an  elemental  fire,  which  neither  gives
light  nor  burns.     The  fire  of  the  bush  was  of  the  second  kind,  not
an  imaginary  or  apparent  fire,  but* a  true  one;   otherwise  .Moses
would  not  have  wondered  that  the  bush  was  not  burned.

28  In  opposition  to  the  fire  of  hell,  which  burns  but  gives  no  light.
Thus  Prosper  (De  Vita.  Cont.  1.  iii.  c.  12)  observes — "  To  be  cast
into  everlasting  fire  with  the  devil  and  his  angels,   to  see  no  light  in
that  Jire,  but  to  feel  that  it  burneth;   to  suffer  the  terrible  cracks  of
that  flaming  fire ;  to  have  their  eyes  blinded  with  the  bitter  smoke
of  that  fuming  gulf,  and  to  be  drowned  in  the  deep  lake  of  hell ;  to
think  on  these  things,  and  many  such  like,  is  a  sure  way  to  renounce
all  vice,  and  refrain  from  all  allurements  of  the  flesh."


OF    FREEMASONRY  467

it  did  not  burn  j29  for  the  bush,  though  formed  of  com-
bustible materials,  was  not  consumed.30  Philo  says
that  the  bush  was  a  symbol  of  the  persecuted  Israelites,
and  the  fire31  of  their  affliction  and  misery.32  For  as
the  fire  burned  for  a  time  without  destroying  the
bush,33  and  afterwards  was  extinguished  by  the  divine

29  The  phenomenon   that  excited  the  curiosity  and   surprise  of
Moses  was,  that  the  fire  should  burn  so  brightly,  and  the  bush  be
not  consumed.     He  had  retired  with  his  flock  to  this  solitary  situa-
tion at  the  back  side  of  the  desert,  that  he  might  indulge  his  con-
templative disposition  without  fear  of  interruption,  and  he  approached
to  investigate  the  cause  of  such  an  unexpected  occurrence.     It  was
here  that  Jehovah  manifested  himself  by  name,  and  deputed  Moses
to  deliver  his  people  from  captivity.

30  Dr.  Plot  tells  us  "  of  certain  fire  in  some  veins  of  coals,  very
deep  in  the  earth,  that  required  neither  air  to  preserve  its  activity,
nor  any  other  than  its  own  constituent  matter  to  feed  upon ;  but
then  it  was  such  a  fire  as  gave  light  but  did  not  burn,  a  mere  lambent
flame,  like  that  of  those  sepulchral  lamps  of  the  ancients,  which  upon
the  least  admission  of  air  into  them  were  extinct,  and  vanished  into
nothing,  and  left  behind  them,  no  not  so  much  as  the  least  smoke  or
vapour."  (Phil.  Trans.  No.  166.)

31  Fire,  in  all  ancient  religions,  was  the  symbol  of  divine  love.
This  we  learn  from  the  history  of  sacrifices ;  for  victims  consumed
by  fire  formed  the  basis  of  all  religion.

32  "  This  symbol  of  love  divine  revealing  itself  to  man,  is  again
found  in    pagan   religions.     Vischnou,  says   the   Bagavadam,  ap-
peared at  first  in  the  human  form,  with  a  body  clothed  with  purple
and  brighter  than  the  sun,  similar  to  the  fire  which  is  found  in  wood,
in  stones,  in  the  water,  and  in  air.    Vischnou  is  everywhere.    This
divinity  is  the   Demiurgus,  who  created  the  world  in  his  love."
(Weale's  Archi.  P.  Symbolic  Colours,  sec.  2,  p.  10.)

33  On  this  mountain  was  built  a  monastery  dedicated  to  St.  Cathe-
rine, behind  the  altar  of  which,  as  we  are  told  by  Mandeville,  "  is
the  place  where  Moyses  saughe  cure  Lord  God  in  a  burnnynge

H  TI  2


468  HISTORICAL    LANDMARKS

power,54  so  were  the  Israelites  preserved  amidst  all
their  troubles  and  difficulties  in  Egypt,  and  delivered,
by  the  same  power,  from  their  enemies,  whose  cruelties
were  punished,  as  the  thorns  of  this  bush35  would
pierce  into  a  man's  hand,  if  it  were  forcibly  inserted
there.

bussche.  And  whanne  the  nionkes  entren  iii  to  that  place,  thci  don
of  both  hosen  and  shoon  or  boles  alweys  ;  because  that  oure  Lord
seyde  to  Moyses,  do  of  thei  hoscu  and  thi  sehoon,  for  the  place  that
thou  standest  on  is  land  holy,  and  blessed.  And  the  monkes  clepen
that  place  Bezeleel,  that  is  to  seyw,  the  Schadoweof  God."  (Voiage
and  Travaile,  p.  71.)

34  The  Mahometan  coininentators  say,  that  "  Moses,  having  ob-
tained leave  of  Shaib  or  Jctliro,  liis  fathor-in-law,  to  visit  his  mother,
departed  with  his  family  from  Midiau  towards  Egypt;  but  coming
to  the  valley  of  Iowa,  \\  herein  mount  Sinai  stands,  his  wife  fell  in
labour,  and  was  delivered  of  a  son,  in  a  very  dark  and  snowy  night.
He  had  also  lost  his  way,  and  his  eat  tie  were  scattered  from  him  ;
when  on  a  sudden  he  saw  a  tire  by  the  side  of  a  mountain,  which,
on  his  nearer  approach,  he  found  burning  in  a  green  bush."  (Sale
from  Al  Beidawi,  vol.  ii.  p.  134.)

85  In  the  highest  of  the  Ineffable  degrees  of  Masonry,  called  the
Grand,  Elect,  Perfect,  and  Sublime  Mason,  which  is  omitted  in  the
continental  arrangement  of  the  rite  Ancien  et  Accepte,  there  is  placed
behind  the  Master's  throne  a  triangle,  with  the  mysterious  name,
iTm>  in  the  centre  of  a  burning  bush,  as  above.  Opposite  is  the
pillar  of  beauty.  A  broken  pedestal  also  appears  which  forms  part
of  Enoch's  pillar,  and  the  Chapter  is  adorned  with  vases  and  urns
of  silver  and  gold,  which  make  a  splendid  appearance.  M.  Portal
says  (Symb.  Col.  p.  7),  "  the  neophite  cannot  be  regenerated  but  by
the  twofold  baptism  of  the  spirit  and  of  fire,  by  the  union  of  truth
and  love.  The  Egyptian  Minerva,  Neith,  espouses  the  god  of  fire,
the  Saite  and  Memphite  Ptha ;  from  this  marriage  the  sun  is  born,
symbol  of  eternal  light  and  of  divine  revelation.  So  is  the  Grecian
Minerva  united  to  celestial  Yidcan,  the  god  of  pure  fire,  she  gives
birth  to  Apollo,  the  sun."


OF    FREEMASONRY.  469

The  angel  of  JEHOVAH  who  appeared  in  this  fire^
has  been  conjectured  to  be  Michael,  the  leader  of  the
host  of  heaven,  who  appeared  also  to  Joshua  and
Daniel  j37  but  he  was  really  and  truly  the  Captain  of
our  salvation,38  or  Jehovah  himself,  the  Creator  of  the

36  "It  was  a  symbol  of  the  celestial  fire  which  dwells  in  the  heart
of  man.     In  the  Sanscrit,  different  expressions  which  symbolize  fire

-have  the  symbolic  signification  of  the  number  three.  The  name  of
the  divinity  Om  has  the  same  numerical  meaning ;  and  hence  is
frequently  spelt  Aum.  So  in  the  Thibetian  language,  Me  signifies
fire  and  the  number  three.  Thus  the  third  divine  attribute,  or  the
Holy  Ghost,  the  love  of  God,  and  worship,  have  the  same  symbol,
jfire,  which  is  translated  in  the  language  of  colours  by  red."  (Symb.
Col.  p.  8.)

37  "  We  are  deceived,"  says  Fleury  (Hist,  of  the  Israelites,  p.  20)
"  by  not  seeing  titles  amongst  the  Israelites,  like  those  of  our  nobility.
Every  one  was  called  plainly  by  his  own  name ;  but  the  names  sig-
nified great  things,  as  those  of  the  patriarchs.     The  name  of  God
was  part  of  most,  which  was,  in  a  manner,  a  short  prayer.     Elijah
and  Joel  are  made  up  of  two  of  God's  names,  joined  in  a  different
way.     Jehoshaphat  and  Shephatiah  signify  the  judgment  of  God;
Jehozedek  and  Zedekiah,  his  justice ;  Johanan,  his  mercy ;  Nathanael,
Elnathan,  Jonathan,  and  Nathaniah,  all  four  signify  God-given,  or
the  gift  of  God.    Sometimes  the  name  of  God  was  understood,  as  in
Nathan,  David,  Obed,  &c. ;  as  is  plain  by  Eliezer,  God  my  helper ;
Uzzicl,  God  my  strength ;  and  Obadiah,  the  Lord's  servant.     The
Greek  names  also  are  of  the  same  import,  many  being  composed
of  the  names  of  their  gods :   as  Diodorus,  Diogenes,  Hermodorus,
Haephestion,  Athenais,  and  Artemisia."

38  Willett  affirms  that  "  it  was  Christ  himself  that  appeared  here
in  person,  though  not  in  substance,  as  may  thus  be  made  manifest —
it  is  evident  that  he  was  God,  for  the  name  of  Jehovah  (Exod.  iii.  7)
and  Eheie  (v.  14)  is  peculiar  to  God,  and  not  communicable  to  any
angel,  either  properly  or  representatively;  for  the  angels,  though
speaking  in  the  name  of  God,  yet  discovered  themselves  to  be  angels
(Luke  i.  19  ;  llev.  xxii.  9).    Now,  that  it  was  the  person  of  the  Son
that  appeared,  rather  than  of  the  Father,  or  of  the  Holy  Ghost,  is


470


HISTORICAL


world,  or  Jesus  Christ,  called  by  Masons  the  Grand
Architect  of  the  Universe,39  who  only  hath  immortality,
dwelling  in  the  Light  which  no  man  can  approach
unto.40  This  divine  Being  called  to  Moses  by  his
name,  and  commanded  him  to  approach  with  naked
feet,41  because  the  ground  on  which  he  stood  was

thus  showed : — The  Father  is  never  said  to  be  nil  angel  i.  e.,  a  mes-
senger, or  sent ;  nor  yet  is  the  Holy  Spirit  in  Scripture  called  by
that  name,  but  the  son  of  God  is  called  the  Angel  of  the  Covenant
(Mai.  iii.  1),  in  respect  of  his  incarnation  to  come,  when  he  was  scut
of  his  Father  into  the  world,  which  name  of  angel  given  unto  Christ
i«*  a  title  of  office,  not  showing  his  nature."  (Ili-xapla  in  Kxoduni.
p.  83.)

39  "  Some  understand  by  the  fire  in  the  bush  the  divine  nature  of
Christ,  which  did  not  consume  or  dissolve  his  human  nature.    Some
apply  it  to  the  Virgin  Mary,  of  whom  Christ  was  born,  that  carried
fire  and  was  not  consumed.     Some  understand  it  of  the  state  of  a
regenerate  man,  in  whom  there  are  two  parts,  the  illumination  of  the
spirit  as  the  fire,  and  the  corruption  of  the  flesh  as  the  bramble."
(Ibid.  p.  32.)

40  1  Tim.  vi.   15,   16.     Tertullian  bears  testimony  to  this  fact.
"  He  who  spoke  to  Moses  was  the  Son  of  God ;  and  it  is  he  who
has  always  appeared.     It  is  the  Son  who  hath  judged  from  the  be-
ginning ;  dashing  down  the"proud  tower  of  Babel,  confounding  the
tongues  of  the  impious  race  who  built  it ;  punishing  the  whole  world
with  a  flood  of  waters ;  and  raining  upon  Sodom  and  Gomorrah
a  storm  of  fire  and  brimstone — the  Lord  from  the  Lord.       It  is  he
who  hath  at  all  times  descended  to  hold  converse  with  men,  from  the
days  of  Adam  to  the  times  of  the  patriarchs  and  prophets,  in  vision,
iii  sleep,  in  apparition,  and  in  parables ;  preparing  his  way  without
ceasing  from  the  very  epoch  of  the  creation.     The  infinite  and  innu-
merable things  which  he  was  to  accomplish,  he  was  ever  learning
(from  his  Father)  ;  and  no  other  God  to  hold  intercourse  with  man-
kind upon  earth  but  the  Word  who  was  to  be  made  flesh."  (Tertull,
Adver.  Prax,  c.  16.)

41  This  putting  off  the  shoes,  some  say,  was  commanded  Moses,
that  he  thereby  should  sanctify  that  place  by  making  bare  his  feet.


OF    FREEMASONRY.  471

holy,42  or  consecrated  by  the  divine  presence.  And
therefore  Moses  took  off  his  shoes  in  obedience  to  the
divine  command,43  and  prostrated  himself  before  the
Deity.44

But  the  place  was  holy  already,  because  of  God's  presence ;  the
place  was  not  holy  because  Moses  put  off  his  shoes,  but  because  it
was  holy  he  is  bid  to  put  off  his  shoes.  Ambrose  thus  applieth  it —
"  that  because  the  shoes  are  made  of  the  skins  of  dead  beasts,  Moses
should  put  off  all  fear  of  death,  for  fear  whereof  he  fled  at  the  first
from  Pharoah."  (Comment,  in  Lucam,  1.  vii.)  Cyprian  says,  "  that
Moses,  by  putting  off  his  shoes,  does  not  challenge  any  right  in  the
spouse  of  the  church,  but  resigneth  it  to  Christ,  the  head  and  husband
thereof;  for  this  was  the  custom,  that  the  next  kinsman,  by  putting
off  a  shoe,  surrendered  his  right  to  his  deceased  brother's  wife."
(Advers.  Jud.  c.  19.)

42  Now  the  act  of  going  with  naked  feet  was  always  considered
a  token  of  humility  and  reverence,  and  the  priests  in  the  temple
worship,  always  officiated  with  feet  uncovered,  although  it  was  fre-
quently injurious  to  their  health.    The  command  thus  given  to  Moses
did  not  represent  the  civil  and  legal  ceremony  of  putting  off  the
shoes,  as  the  Israelites  were  subsequently  directed  to  do,  when  they
renounced  any  bargain  or  contract  (Deut.  xxv.  9 ;  Ruth  iv.  3)  ;  nor
yet  the  sign  of  grief  and  sorrow,  as  when  David  entered  into  Jeru-
salem barefooted  (2  Sam.  xv.  30) ;  but  it  was  enjoined  that  Moses
might  approach  that  sacred  place  with  reverence  and  godly  fear,  as
if  it  had  been  a  temple  consecrated  to  divine  worship.     Thus  the
preacher  says  (Eccles.  iv.  17) — "  Take  heed  unto  thy  feet  when
thou  enterest  the  temple  of  God."

43  It  is  curious  to  observe  how  widely  and  universally  this  custom
was  disseminated.     Even  in  the  distant  isles  of  Britain  and  Ireland,
the  chief  druid,  when  gathering  the  sacred  selago,  was  to  be  clothed
in  white,  with  bare  feet,  as  an  emblem  of  internal  purity.     There  is
an  iron  fixed  at  the  door  of  German  synagogues  to  remove  the  dirt
from  their  shoes ;  because,  they  say,  the  ground  on  which  they  are
about  to  tread  is  holy.

44  Bishop  Patrick  observes — "  Moses  did  not  give  the  first  begin-
ning to  this  rite,  but  it  was  derived  from  the  patriarchs  before  him,


-72


HISTORICAL     J.A.NDMAKKs


hi  tliis  vision  a  most  remarkable  expression  <KTI
which  I  cannot  suffer  to  pass  without  an  observation,
because  it  is  referred  to  in  more  than  one  ol'  the  h.iih
decrees.     Jehovah  says,  I  am  come  dtncn  to  delr
my  people.     Now   how  can  God,  who  is  universally
present,  be  said  to  descend.46     Where  is  the  heaven  of
heavens?    It  cannot  contain  Him.    There  is  not  a  par-
ticle of  matter  in  the  whole  universe,   but  (iod  ion
a  constituent  portion  of  its  substance. :';    Properly  speak-
ing,   therefore,    he    can    neither    ascend    nor    descend,
because  he  i>  always  with  us.     This  is  therefore  a  form
of  expression  adapted  to  man's  uross  and  carnal  under-
>t;indiii^,  to  convey  an  idea  of  superiority,  and  it  is
observable,  that  the  Deity  has  never  declared  his  iuten-

aiul  transmitted  to  future  times  from  that  ancient  general  truliticm  ;
for  we  find  no  command  in  the  la\v  of  Moses  for  the  priests  per-
forming the  service  of  the  tain-made  without  shoes,  but  it  is  certain
they  did  so  from  immemorial  custom  ;  and  so  do  the  Mahometan^
and  other  nations  at  this  day."  (Comment,  vol.  ii.  p.  ISC.)

45  The  Rabbins  contend  that  lie  did  not.  Maimonides  says,  that
by  the  Divinity  descending,  must  be  understood  the  descent  of  his
inlluenee  on  inferiors.  Abarbanel  and  Beehai  uflinn  the  same ;
\\hile  Jonothan  ben  Uziel  and  Onkelos  paraphrastically  translate  the
word  descended  by  "  discovered."  All  the  sages,  both  ancient  and
modern,  confirm  this  version,  and  agree  that  God  did  not  descend  on
mount  Sinai,  according  to  human  conception.  Some  say  that  the
Lord  never  descends  below  ten  degrees,  neither  did  Moses  or  Elijah
ascend  above  those  ten ;  which  ten  are  to  be  understood  for  the  ten
degrees  or  orders  of  the  angelic  hierarchy,  viz. — 1,  creatures  of
sanctity;  2,  wheels ;  3,  supremes ;  4,  fiery  essences;  5,  seraphim ;
6,  angels;  7,  powers;  8,  sons  of  powers;  9,  cherubim;  10,  men.
(SeeConcil.  vol.  i.  p.  152.)

4(5  The  holy  spirit  of  God  dwells  in  our  hearts.  See  Rom.  v.  5  ;
\  Cor.  iii.  16;  2  Cor.  i.  22  ;  (ial.  iv.  6;  Eph.  iii.  16,


Of    FK  Kb:  MASONRY.  473

tion  of  descending  upon  earth  to  visit  the  sons  of  men,
but  some  melancholy  judgment  has  followed.47  He  is
said  to  have  descended  when  the  flood  destroyed  all
flesh  ;  when  the  language  of  the  human  race  was  con-
founded at  Babel ;  when  the  cities  of  the  plain  were
overwhelmed  with  fire;48  and  at  the  period  under  our
consideration,49  which  terminated  in  the  overthrow  of
the  Egyptians,  by  a  succession  of  fearful  plagues  and
the  destruction  of  its  monarch  in  the  Red  Sea.

He  was  said  to  come  down  in  the  person  of  Jesus
Christ,50  whose  crucifixion,51  which  polluted  the  city

47  In  the  degree  of  Hose  Croix  he  is  said  to  have  manifested  his
glory  at  the  period  when  the  word  was  recovered  j  the  cubical  stone
changed  into  a  mystical  rose ;  attended  with  the  appearance  of  a
flaming  star,  dispelling  darkness,  restoring  the  true  light,  and  making
the  new  law  visible  in  our  works.

48  Thus  hell  will  appear  as  a  fierce  furnace  of  fire,  from  whence
will  exhale  the  heat  of  wrath,  envy,  and  all  other  vicious  propensities.
The  condemned  submit  to  the  government  of  their  evil  passions,  for
the  flame  which  devours  them  operates  upon  their  hearts,  as  well  as
upon  their  flesh.

49  The  Jews  believe  that  God  has  descended  to  the  earth  nine
times,  and  that  he  shall  descend  on  the  tenth  in  the  person  of  the
Messiah  : — 1,  in  the  garden  of  Eden ;  2,  at  the  confusion  of  tongues ;
3,  at  the  destruction  of  Sodom ;  4,  to  Moses  at  mount  Iloreb ;
5,  at  his  appearance  on  mount  Sinai ;  6  and  7,  \vhen  he  spake  to
Moses  in  the  hollow  of  the  rock ;  8  and  9,  in  the  tabernacle ;  I 0,  the
times  of  the  Messiah.    (See  Allix's  Judgment  of  the  Jewish  Church,
p.  282.)

50  In  the  degree  of  Prince  of  Mercy,  the  Triple  Alliance  is  spoken
of  as  having  the  following  references  : — 1,  to  the  covenant  made  with
Abraham  by  circumcision ;    2,  to  that  which  God  made  with  his
people  in  the  wilderness  by  Moses ;  3,  and  to  that  which  he  made
with  mankind  by  the  mediation  of  his  son  Jesus  Christ.

51  in  the  apartment  prepared  for  the  degree  of  Knight  of  the  Eagle


474  HISTORICAL    LANDMARKS

that  had  hitherto  been  denominated  holy,  was  accom-
panied by  fearful  signs52 — a  darkened  sun,  moon  turned
into  blood,  rocks  rent,  graves  opened,53  dead  bodies
disinterred,54  and  seen  walking  in  the  streets  of  Jeru-
salem. And  it  is  said  that  the  Almighty  will  descend

is  a  mount  elevated  to  represent  mount  Calvary,  on  which  are  placed
three  crosses,  and  upon  each  a  skull  and  cross  bones.  Before  the
mound  is  -an  altar  covered  with  black  cloth,  on  which  is  a  cross  and
two  lighted  tapers^  Between  the  altar  and  the  mound  is  a  sable
curtain,  made  so  as  to  draw  back  on  each  side.

52  In  the  symbolical  language  of  the  high  degrees,  "  Masonry  was
destroyed  at  this  portentous  period,  the  veil  of  the  temple  was  rent
in  twain,  the  light  of  the  sun  and  moon  was  withheld,  the  earth  was
overspread  with  darkness,  the  Masonic  tools  broken,  the  blazing  star
obscured,  and  the  AYord  lost.  The  whole  fraternity  were  plunged  in
the  lowest  depths  of  misery  and  despair.  They  wandered  about  for
three  days  in  Egyptian  darkness,  without  knowing  whether  their  lives
were  secure.  At  the  expiration  of  this  period,  by  the  will  and  pleasure
of  that  Great  Being,  who  orders  and  conducts  all  tilings  by  his  super-
intending providence,  the  light  was  again  restored,  the  tools  of  Ma-
sonry repaired,  and  the  blazing  star  shone  with  unusual  brilliancy,  by
which  the  Word  was  found,  &c."

53  In  a  degree  of  the  rite  Ancien,  there  is  represented  in  a  trans-
parent painting  the  resurrection  of  Jesus  Christ,  surmounted  by  the
mysterious  triangle  enveloped  in  a  nimbus.     The  curtains  of  the
chapter  arc  also  painted  transparently,  to  represent  the  azure  firma-
ment, studded  with  brilliant  stars  of  gold,  and  interspersed  with
glory.     The  altar  placed  in  the  east  is  illuminated  with  transparent
lights.     In  a  word,  the  chapter  is  entirely  lighted  by  transparencies,
on  all  sides  of  which  appear  the  awful  figure  of  the  resurrection  of
Christ.

54  This  was  followed  by  a  tremendous  judgment.     The  city  was
destroyed,  and  the  people  slaughtered  by  thousands  and  tens  of
thousands.     Even  the  holy  temple  of  God,  where  his  sacred  name
had  been  placed,  was  trodden  underfoot  by  the  heathen;  polluted
with  the  abomination  of  desolation;  and  at  length   so  completely
demolished,  that  not  a  vestige  was  left  to  mark  its  situation.


OF    FREEMASONRY.  475

at  the  last  day,  when  the  earth  shall  be  finally  de-
stroyed, the  elements  melted  with  fervent  heat,  the
heavens  wrapped  together  like  a  parchment  scroll;
when  those  that  have  the  Mark  on  their  foreheads55
shall  be  exalted  to  the  Grand  Lodge  above  ;  and  those
that  have  not,  shall  be  cast  into  a  lake  that  burneth
with  brimstone  and  fire.56  May  we  be  prepared  to
meet  him  when  he  shall  so  descend.

55  These,  in  the  language  of  sublime  Masonry,  are  called  Knights
of  the  Christian  Mark,  and  refer  to  the  man  with  the  inkhorn,  in
the  prophecy  of  Ezekiel  (c.  ix),  and  to  the  men  with  the  destroying
weapons  in  their  hands.     In  a  certain  part  of  the  ceremony  the
senior  Knight  says  to  him  with  the  inkhorn — "  Stay  thine  hand,
proceed  no  further  until  thou  hast  set  a  mark  on  the  faithful  who  put
their  trust  in  the  Most  High.     Take  the  signet  and  set  the  mark
upon  their  foreheads;  for  having  passed  through  great  tribulation
they  have  made  their  robes  white  in  the  blood  of  the  Lamb  which
was  slain  from  the  foundation  of  the  world."

56  In  one  of  the  continental  degrees  this  doctrine  is  painted  in
hieroglyphics  on  the  walls  of  the  Lodge-room.     Here  is  represented
a  lively  picture  of  the  lake  that  burneth  with  fire  and  brimstone ;
human  figures  in  excruciating  torment,  enveloped  in  flames,  whicli
burn  but  give  no  light,  and  suffering  amidst  the  blackness  of  darkness.


470  HISTORICAL    LANDMARKS


LECTURE     X  L  1 1 .


THE    FALL    AND    RESTORATION    OF    OUR    FIRST    PARENTS.

"LET  THERE  BE  LIGHT!" — the  Almighty  spoke,
Refulgent  streams  from  Chaos  broke,

To  illume  the  rising  earth  !
Well  pleased  the  (I real  .lehovah  stood —
The  power  Supreme  pronounc'd  it  good,
And  gave  the  planets  birth.

MASONIC

"  The  great  outlines  in  the  history  of  Creation  are  here  unfolded  ;
as  also  the  primitive  innocence  of  man,  with  the  fall  and  consequent
scenes  of  natural  and  moral  evil." — TOWN.

"  That  the  first  parents  of  mankind  were  instructed  by  the  Almighty,
as  to  his  existence  and  attributes,  and  after  their  fall,  were  further
informed  of  the  redemption  which  was  to  be  perfected  by  Christ,  and
as  a  sign  of  their  belief,  were  commanded  to  offer  sacrifices  to  God,
I  fully  assent  to  the  creed  of  Masonry  in  believing.  It  is  also  highly
probable,  that  symbolical  actions  should  have  been  instituted  by  them
in  memory  of  their  penitence,  reverence,  sympathy,  fatigue,  and
faith,  arid  that  these  might  be  transmitted  to  posterity.

A.RCIIDEACON  MANT.

WHEN  our  first  parents  were  placed  in  Paradise  by
the  Almighty  Father  of  the  Universe,  and  made  capable
of  perfect  happiness,1  they  were  furnished  with  a  test

1  The  distinguished  Orientalist,  Professor  Rask,  of  Copenhagen,  in
a  pamphlet,  published  in  1828,  on  the  most  ancient  Hebrew  Chrono-
logy until  Moses,  has  made  a  comparison  between  the  age  of  the
Adamites,  according  to  biblical  years,  and  their  age  according  to  solar


OF    FREEMASONRY.  477

to  enable  them  to  display  their  gratitude  and  obedience.
Good  and  evil  were  set  before  them,  and  they  were  left
free  to  choose  and  free  to  refuse.2  Their  Freemasonry,
so  to  call  it,  or  system  of  moral  duties,  was  the  devotion
of  a  guileless  heart,  penetrated  with  a  deep  and  fervent
veneration  towards  the  gracious  Author  of  their  feli-

years.  According  to  this  calculation  not  more  than  713  years
elapsed  between  Adam  and  Noah.  Rask  thence  draws  the  unsound
conclusion,  that  Adam  was  not  the  first  man  upon  the  earth,  and
consequently  not  the  father  of  the  whole  human  race,  although  he
certainly  might  be  the  first  man  within  the  localities  comprised  in  the
Mosaic  writings,  and  thus  the  father  of  the  human  race  which  pro-
ceeded from  these  localities,  and  called  the  Caucasian,  from  which  the
Europeans  for  the  most  part  are  descended.  "  Without  entering
upon  an  examination  of  this  view,"  says  the  Count  Bjornstjerna,  "  it
seems  however  probable  that  man's  first  existence  upon  the  earth
must  be  earlier  than  713  years  before  Noah,  which  would  not  be  more
than  3200  years  before  Christ,  which  is  much  too  short  a  period
compared  with  that  testified  by  the  traditions  of  all  the  other  ancient
nations,  and  especially  when  compared  with  the  age  of  the  great
pyramid  at  Gizeh,  as  confirmed  by  astronomical  calculations,  which
is  5000  years  earlier  than  the  birth  of  Christ,  and  consequently  2000
years  older  than  the  period  maintained  as  that  of  the  existence  of  the
first  man  upon  the  earth."  From  these,  and  other  arguments  and
calculations,  the  Count  comes  to  the  conclusion,  that  "  we  cannot
conceal  from  ourselves  that  the  existence  of  man  upon  the  earth  must
be  of  a  far  higher  date  than  that  which  is  indicated  by  the  Mosaic
Chronology."  (Theog.  of  the  Hindoos,  p.  156.)

2  This  is  symbolized  in  the  Mosaic  floor  of  the  Lodge  ;  and  also
in  the  androgynal  principle  of  heathen  nations.  Thus  "  Light  and
heat,  symbols  of  the  wisdom  and  love  of  God,  were  the  two  principles
male  and  female.  The  doctrine  of  Pymander  explains  why  the
Egyptian  god  Kneph,  or  the  Eternal,  was  androgynous.  Jupiter,
according  to  Orpheus,  is  the  husband,  and  the  immortal  nymph ;
Mithras  appears  likewise  to  have  had  a  divinity  male  and  female.
According  to  Rabbinical  traditions,  Adam  was  created  male  and
female  ;  love  and  wisdom  existed  conjointly  in  him."  (Symb.Col.  p.  5.)


478


HISTORICAL    LANDMARKS


city;3  and  a  fervent  charity,  which  is  the  blossom  and  fruit
of  innocence,  and  of  more  value  than  either  of  the  other
two  theological  virtues,  because  in  their  state  of  per-
fection they  were  unnecessary.  They  practised  the
four  cardinal  virtues,  typified  in  the  four  streams  of
their  beautiful  garden.4  They  had  nothing  to  fear,
nothing  to  hope  for,  and  universal  love  was  the  one
absorbing  principle  of  their  life  and  actions.5

'  Our  unfortunate,  but  highly-talented  brother,  Dr.  Dodd,  in  his
celebrated  Oration  on  Freemasonry,  thus  speaks  of  its  origin,  "Though
it  might  owe  to  the  wise  and  glorious  King  of  Israel  some  of  its  many
mystic  forms  and  hieroglyphic  ceremonies,  yet  certainly  the  art  itself
is  coeval  with  creation ;  when  the  Sovereign  Architect  raised  on
Masonic  principles  this  beauteous  globe  ;  and  commanded  that  inaMrr
science  geometry  to  lay  the  rule  to  thr  planetary  world,  and  to  regu-
late by  its  laws  the  whole  stupendous  system  in  just  unerring  pro-
portion, rolling  round  the  central  sun."

4  In  Pisor,  our  first  parents  revered  the  fountain  of  prudence.     In
Gihon  they  beheld  the  sacred  stream  of  justice.     The  rapid  torrent
of  Hiddekel  denoted  fortitude.     And  the  Euphrates,  the  mild  and
steady  current  of  temperance.     Happy  was  their  state,  while  these
sacred  truths  continued  to  guide  their  actions  ;  and  the  Mason  will
be  equally  happy  who,  through  life,  adheres  to  the  lessons  here  incul-
cated.    Instructed  by  prudence,  guided  by  justice,  strengthened  by
fortitude,  and  restrained  by  temperance,  like  Adam  in  the  garden  of
Eden,  his  services  will  be  acceptable  to  the  Deity.

5  Thus  pure  was  the  birth  of  Freemasonry.     The  famous  charter
of  Colne  has  taken  an  erroneous  view  of  the  origin  of  the  Order.
It  asserts  that  "  our  Brotherhood  had  its  origin  in  those  times  when
a  few  of  the  initiated,  filled  with  a  desire  of  true  knowledge  and  a
correct  interpretation  of  the  mysteries  of  Christianity  separated  them-
selves from  the  various  sects  who  professed  the  Christian  religion ;  for
in  those  times,  a  few  wise  and  enlightened  men  perceiving  that  certain
heathenish  ceremonies  had  been  introduced  into  Christianity,  which
would  destroy  the  principle  of  brotherly  love,  united  themselves  with
an  oath,  to  preserve  and  maintain,  in  its  original  purity,  the  Christian


O¥    FREEMASONRY.  479

Too  short  and  fleeting  were  those  golden  days.6  The
life  of  our  great  Progenitor  was  so  happy,  and  his
Freemasonry  so  pure  as  to  excite  the  envy  of  the
apostate  spirit  ;7  and  he  resolved  upon  making  an  effort

religion,  with  its  benign  influence  on  the  hearts  and  consciences  of
mankind  ;  to  bring  the  true  light  out  of  darkness,  and  to  labour
together  in  combatting  ignorance,  intolerance,  and  superstition,  and
to  establish  peace  and  happiness  amongst  mankind,  by  teaching  arid
enforcing  every  human  virtue.  Thus  the  Masters  of  our  Order  took
the  name  of  Initiated  Brethren  of  St.  John,  following  the  footsteps
and  imitating  the  conduct  of  St.  John  the  Baptist,  the  forerunner  of
the  Light,  and  the  first  martyr  of  the  enlightened.  The  teachers  and
writers,  according  to  the  customs  of  the  times,  were  called  Masters,
and  chosen  from  the  experienced  and  learned  of  their  disciples,  or
fellow-labourers,  from  whence  we  derive  the  name  of  Fellowcraft ;
while  the  remainder  of  the  brotherhood,  according  to  the  custom  of
the  Hebrews,  Greeks,  and  Romans,  were  called  Apprentices."

6  Some  say  our  first  parents  remained  in  Paradise  one  hundred
years ;  others  forty  years ;  others  think  he  fell  on  the  fourteenth  day ;
and  some  say  that  it  was  on  the  same  day  on  which  he  was  created.
Thus  Theophylact  observes,   (on  Mat.  xxvii),   that  "as  man  was
created  on  the  sixth  day,  and  eat  of  the  forbidden  tree  on  the  sixth
hour  of  that  day ;  so  Christ,  in  atoning  for  his  sin,  was  nailed  to  the
tree  on  the  sixth  day  and  the  sixth  hour."     And  hence  also  arose  that
saying  concerning  Adam,  that  in  one  and  the  same  day  he  was  formed
and  deformed,  not  continuing  in  righteousness  and  true  holiness  until
the  Sabbath ;  for  if  he  had  done  this  he  would  have  performed  the
ordinances  of  the  Sabbath,  one  of  which  was,  to  eat  of  the  tree  of
life,  which  if  he  had  done,  he  would  have  lived  for  ever,  and  never
fallen  from  that  state  of  blessedness.

7  Milton  ascribed  the  malignity  of  Satan  against  our  first  parents
to  a  feeling  of  envy.  (Par.  Lost,  vi.  4.)

"  O  hell !  what  do  mine  eyes  with  grief  behold  ?
Into  our  room  of  bliss  thus  high  advanced,
Creatures  of  other  mould  ;  earth-born  perhaps,
Not  spirits,  yet  to  heavenly  spirits  bright
Little  inferior.     Aside  the  devil  turned
For  envv."


480  HISTORICAL   LANDMARKS

to  destroy  the  illusion,  and  pollute  the  divine  image  in
which  God  had  created  man.  Under  the  form  of  a
serpent,8  he  assailed  the  woman9  with  the  subtle  and
prevailing  logic,  that  instead  of  death  being  the  conse-
quence of  eating  the  fruit  of  the  forbidden  tree,10  she
would  enjoy,  by  that  means,  an  increase  of  happiness,
and  certain  immortality  ;n  and  that  it  was  mere  scl-

8  "  The  Egyptian  symbolism  reproduced  not  only  the  Mosaical
types,  but  it  reappeared  in  Christianity.     Typhon,  the  evil  genius  of
a  red  colour,  took  the  form  of  a  serpent,  as  the  red  dragon,  who  is
the  devil  and  satau  in  the  Apocalypse."     (Symb.  Col.  p.  23.)     The
members  of  the  encampments  of  Templars  in  Ireland,  are  directed  to
appear  with  the  badge  of  the  order  ;  which  is  a  gold  cross  suspended
from  a  black  ribbon  or   scarf,  worn  from  left  to  right ;  also  a  black
apron  trimmed  with  white,  and  a  star  of  seven  points  on   the  left
breast,  of  brilliants  set  in  silver,  having  in  the  centre  a  cross,  and  at
its  base  a  serpent.     Motto  :  IN  HOC  SIGNO  VINCES.

9  Hence  serpent  rites  were  mucli  practised  by  females  ;  and  from  a
tradition  of  the  lamentations  which  followed  tho  unhappy  fall  of  our
first  parents,  they  loudly  invoked  Eva.     During  the  celebration  of
these  rites,    they  worked    themselves    up   into   absolute   phrensy.
Olympias,  the  mother  of  Alexander,  to  give  a  colour  to  the  dracontic
origin  of  her  son,  was  enthusiastically  devoted  to  these  celebrations  ;
and  while  engaged  in  the  process,  she  and  her  female  followers,  with
thyrsi  in  their  hands,  and  serpents  entwined  in  their  hair,  uttered
shrieks  and  cries  like  the  ravings  of  so  many  demons.

10  Bryant,  (Anal.  vol.  iii.  plate  7,)  has  favoured  us  with  an  engra-
ving of  a  Tyrian  coin,  in  which  a  serpent  is  coiled  round  the  trunk
of  a  tree ;  and  Maurice,  (Ind.  Ant.  vol.  vi.)  has  preserved  a  similar
medal.     Now  to  what  other  fact  can  these   representations  refer,
together  with  the  corresponding  symbols  of  the  serpent  entwining
the  staff  of  Mercury,  Esculapius,  and  others ;  but  the  paradisiacal
serpent,  and  the  tree  of  knowledge  of  good  and  evil.

11  The  contests  for  supreme  authority  between  the  good  and  evil
powers,  which  the  spurious  Freemasonry  represented  as  being  inter-
minable,  were  variously   depicted   by  expressive  symbols :  and  the


OP    FREEMASONRY.  481

fishness  in  the  Deity  to  restrain  her  from  acquiring  such
a  vast  accession  of  knowledge  and  power.12  In  a  word,
he  persuaded  her  to  believe  that  by  partaking  of  the
fruit,  she  and  her  partner  would  become  as  gods,13  and
be  able  to  distinguish  with  perfect  accuracy  between
good  and  evil.

machinery  by  which  it  was  shadowed  forth  are  fanciful  in  the  extreme.
In  Persia  the  hierogram  was  two  serpents  contending  for  an  egg,  as  a
symbol  of  the  world  ;  and  in  India  it  was  embodied  by  the  still  more
remarkable  figure  of  the  serpent's  head  crushed  under  the  heel  of  the
middle  god  Vischnu ;  while  in  a  corresponding  Mexican  painting  in
the  Borgian  collection,  the  deity  appears  in  conflict  with  a  dragon.
He  ivounds  the  dragon  s  head  ivitli  a  sword,  while  the  monster  has
succeeded  in  biting  off  his  foot  at  the  heel.  These  instances  display
the  evil  power  in  two  essentially  different  attitudes.  In  the  former,
he  exhibits  an  appearance  of  equality,  while  contending  as  before  the
full,  with  the  beneficial  deity  for  possession  of  the  universe ;  while
the  latter  exhibits  him  writhing  and  prostrate,  beneath  the  power
which  he  had  wantonly  provoked.  Hence  also  arose  all  the  absurd
fictions  about  Jupiter  and  the  Titans — Osiris  and  Typhon — Ormisda
and  Ahriman — Apollo  and  Python — Brahma  and  Siva.  And  when
mythology  became  transferred  to  romance,  the  same  fable  was  pre-
served in  the  combat  of  St.  George  with  the  dragon,  and  other
legends  of  a  similar  tendency ;  which  all  bore  a  reference  to  the  tra-
dition of  a  prophecy  delivered  at  the  fall,  that  the  Messiah  should
bruise  the  serpent's  head.

12  "  It  is  the  doctrine  of  the  ablest  divines  and  primitive  fathers  of
the  church,  that  if  Adam  had  not  sinned,  he  would  never  have  died,
but  would  have  been  translated  from  earth  to  heaven;  and  this  doctrine
the  reader  may  see  illustrated  in  the  learned  Bishop  Bull's  discourse
of  the  state  of  man  before  the  fall."  (Newton,  cited  in  Todd's  Milton,
vol  iii.  p.  222.)

13  In  all  the  systems  where  our  scripture  facts  have  been  preserved,
a  star  indicated  the  Mediator,  and  a  serpent  was  its  acknowledged
symbol.     The  tradition  of  a  star  as  the  residence  of  the  deity,  led  to
the  practice  of  astronomy,  which  subsequently  degenerated  into  jtuli-

VOL.  II.  I  I


482


HISTORICAL    LANDMARKS


Thus  by  the  wiles  of  the  serpent  tempter  01
mon  parents  plucked  the  forbidden  fruit,"  and  broke
the   condition15  on   which   their   happiness  was   sus-

cial  astrology,  and  the  oracle  was  said  to  be  inspired  by  a  serpent ;
thus  transmitting  the  belief  which  Eve  embraced  in  Paradise,  that
the  knowledge  of  good  and  evil  was  to  be  attained  through  the  inter-
vention of  that  odious  reptile.  One  of  the  most  famous  places  where
Ophiolatreia  was  practised  was  Delphi,  where  Python,  the  serpent
deity,  was  esteemed  oracidar ;  and  the  tripod  of  the  priestess  \sn-  a
triple-headed  serpent  of  gold.  The  idea  of  this  reptile  being  pos-
sessed of  the  power  of  vaticination,  must  have  emanated  from  the
tradition  of  the  devil  speaking  through  the  serpent  in  paradise;  and
hence  the  word  demon  springs  from  Sarjpuv,  skilful,  learned,  or  full
of  know  I  and  the  word  nncJmxht  OMMvfcrAu,  denotes  a  serpent

and  divination.  The  witch  of  Kndor  was  a  pythoness,  and  vatici-
nated by  the  use  of  Ophiolatreia.

14  The  Creek  mythology  furnishes  another  instance  of  this  primi-
tive  dm.-; line    amongst  the  heathen,   in  the  fable  of  the  garden  of
Hesperides,  which   is  but  a  corrupted   name  of  Paradise.     Here
existed  a  tree  which  produced  golden  apples,  and  was  guarded  from
violation,  by  a  serpent  romitiny  fire,  (an  evident  transcript,  in  the
confused  and  blended  traditions  of  heathen  mythology,  as  well  of  the
serpent  tempter,  as  of  the  Saraph,  or  flaming  cherub,  placed  to  guard
the  tree  of  life,)  whose  folds  encircled  the  trunk  of  the  sacred  tree.
Hercules,  in  his  character  of  god-man,  (0eai>0po>7ror),  the  offspring  of
a   celestial   father,   and  a  terrestrial  mother;    after   the  voluntary
surrender  of  his  life  was   received  into   heaven — successfully  en-
countered the  serpent ;  and  having  slain  him,  took  away  the  precious
fruit.     This  event  being  deemed  of  sufficient  importance  to  be  per-
petuated, it  was  introduced  into  the  celestial  sphere ;  where  Hercules
is  represented  as  trampling  on  the  serpent's  head.

15  Dean,  speaking  of  the  poetical  fiction  of  winged  dragons,  as
guardians  of  treasure  and  protectors  of  female  innocence,  observes,
"  singularly  enough,  the  malevolent  actions  of  the  paradisiacal  serpent
had  a  colouring  given  by  heathen  mythologists  diametrically  opposite
to  the  reality.  The  seducer  of  Eve  is  perversely  termed  the  protector
of  maiden  virtue ;  and  the  tempter,  who  induced  her  to  pluck  the


OF    FREEMASONRY.  483

pended,16  in  the  vain  hope  of  some  imaginary  good  in
prospect.17  Thus  primitive  Masonry  was  defeated,18  and
sin,  death,  and  every  moral  evil  were  introduced  by
this  rebellious  spirit,19  who  exulted  in  having  thrown

forbidden  fruit,  is  the  guardian  of  the  golden  apples  in  the  garden
of  the  Hesperides.  So  powerful  is  the  '  prince  of  this  world  '  to
delude  his  victims."  (Worship  of  the  Serpent,  p.  21.)

16  His  malignity  was  rather  excited  than  satiated  by  success  ;  and
he  would  have  triumphed  effectually,  if  our  erring  parents  had  been
permitted  to  eat  of  the  tree  of  life,  which  would  have  secured  to  them
a  state  of  absolute  and  endless  wretchedness  ;  enabling  them  to  live
for  ever  amidst  sin,  and  misery,  and  despair.     But  God,  merciful  in
justice,  graciously  interfered  ;  and  before  the  first  paroxysms  of  grief
had  entirely  subsided,  and  the  tempter,  who  still  lurked  near  them,
could   find  a   favourable  opportunity  of  renewing  the  attack,  his
designs  were  frustrated  by  the  expulsion  of  his  victims  from  the  scene
of  their  transgression.     Thus  sin  brought  death  into  the  world  ;  and
thus  death  became  the  avenue  to  eternal  life  ;  for  "as  in  Adam  all
die,  so  in  Christ  shall  all  be  made  alive."

17  Brother  Aarons  says,  that  the  knowledge  of  certain  secrets  was
withheld  from  Adam  in  consequence  of  his  sin.     These  secrets,  he
adds,  "were   reserved  for  the  patriarch   Abraham,  to  whom  the
Almighty  had  shown  the  consecrated  spot  where  the  Sanctum  Sanc-
torum would  be  built,  on  mount  Moriah  ;  which  in  the  Hebrew  sig-
nifies the  central  spot  of  the  universe,  or  Almighty,  as  we  discover  in
the  word  Moriah,  the  Tetragrammaton.     Here  Abraham  proved  his
intuitive  faith,  by  leading  his  only  and  beloved  son  Isaac  a  destined
victim  to  the  altar  of  his  God."  (F.  Q.  R.  1837,  p.  19.)

18  The  Freemasonry  of  Adam  being  thus  perverted  by  the  serpent's
triumph,  he  was  expelled  from  his  bower  of  delight,  into  a  world
polluted   by  his   disobedience  ;  and  from   the  signal  and  merited
punishment  of  our  first  parents,  originated  a  series  of  significant
signs,  which  are  perpetuated  in  Freemasonry,  to  preserve  the  recol-
lection of  this  melancholy  event.

19  From  a  tradition  of  the  above  attempt,  made  by  that  rebellious
spirit  who  had  been  excluded  from  the  blessed  abodes  of  light  and


i  i


484


HISTORICAL    LANDMARKS


into  disorder  that  beautiful  creation  which  God  had
pronounced  to  be  very  good.20

Thus  the  first  parents  of  mankind,  formed  by  the
Grand  Architect  of  the  Universe  in  the  utmost  per-
fection, seated  in  a  paradise  of  pleasure  ;  bounteously
supplied  with  means  for  the  gratification  of  every
desire,  and  at  full  liberty  for  enjoyment,  with  only  one-
prohibition,21  for  the  trial  of  their  obedience,  violated

purity,  to  introduce  confusion  and  anaivliy  into  the  Creator's  works,
many  peculiar  observances  arose,  \\liicli  pne  a  character  to  the  my-
thology of  ancient  nations,  and  strongly  pervaded  their  spurious
1'ivemasonry.  Hence  sprang  that  whimsical  but.  fundamental  doc-
trine which  existed  in  all  the  >y>tcm>  of  heathenism  of  i  \vo  equally
potent,  but  irreconcilably  hostile  powers,  continually  engaged  in  a
fruitless  contest  for  supremacy.

20  From  this  circumstance  originated,  not  only  the  errors  of  ido-
latry, but  also  the  fictions  of  romance,  which  represent  a  continual
opposition  between  good  and  evil  powers.     These  abound  in  the
Arabian  Tales,  and  in  all  the  romances  and  metrical  poems  of  the
ehivalric  ages,  where  enchanters  are  introduced  to  attack  and  carry
off  knights  and  damsels,  keeping  them  in  durance  under  the  influence
of  some  talisman  or  charm,  which  is  at  length  dissolved  by  an  adven-
turous knight,  under  the  protection  of  a  benevolent  fairy,  whose
power  is  superior  to  her  adversary  ;  or  who  conquers  by  policy,
taking  advantage  of  some  propitious  moment  to  counteract  his  machi-
nations. These  adventures  are  frequent  in  the  works  of  Ariosto,  Tasso,
Spenser,  and  the  continental  romance  writers.     The  legends  of  our
Christian  saints  abound  in  the  like  adventures ;  and  they  have  been
introduced  with   effect   both    by    Shakespeare  and   Milton  in  the
Tempest  and  Comus.     The  principle  has  descended  to  our  times  ;
and  the  chief  art  of  constructing  a  modern  novel  appears  to  consist
in  judiciously  forming  a  series  of  adventures  on  the  basis  of  the
plotting  and  counterplotting  of  an  intriguing  villain,  to  subvert  the
happiness,  or  destroy  the  prospects,  of  the  hero  or  heroine  of  the  tale.

21  "  It  has  been  the  fashion  with  minute  philosophers  and  philoso-
phizing divines,"  says  Hales,  (Anal.  vol.  ii.  p.  10,)  "  to  endeavour  to


OF    FREEMASONRY.  485

the  contract,  and  thereby  became  obnoxious  to  the
penalty — disease,  misery,  and  death.22  To  preserve  us
from  which,  and  as  a  memento  to  guard  us  against  a
similar  error,  Freemasonry  has  preserved  the  remem-
brance of  this  unhappy  event  in  the  archives  of  its
secret  chapters.23

explain  away  the  reality  of  the  fall,  and  resolve  it  all  into  allegory,  apo-
logue, or  moral  fable.  But  the  whole  scheme  of  redemption  by  Christ
is  founded  thereon,  and  must  stand  or  fall  therewith ;  a  figurative
fall  requiring  only  a  figurative  redemption.  Even  that  noted  deist,
Lord  Bolingbroke,  justly  rejects  the  allegorical  mode  of  interpreta-
tion ;  it  cannot,  says  he,  be  admitted  by  Christians ;  for  if  it  was,
what  would  become  of  that  famous  text — the  seed  of  the  woman  shall
crush  the  serpent's  head — whereon  the  doctrine  of  our  redemption  is
founded."

22  Hesiod  seems  to  have  allegorized  the  fall  of  man,  and  the  hope
of  redemption  through  the  woman's  seed,  in  his  fable  of  the  beau-
tiful but  crafty  Pandora,  who  deceived  Epimetheus,  the  first  man,  by
opening  the  forbidden  jar  (fnOos)  of  evils,  leaving  behind  nothing  but
hope.     (Works  and  Days,  v.  60.)     The  Greeks  had  a  custom  of
appealing  to  the  feelings  of  the  people  by  a  remarkable  proverb.
When  a  general  was  desirous  of  exciting  confidence  amongst  his
soldiers  in  the  face  of  a  more  powerful  enemy — or  a  demagogue  to
excite  the  people  by  agitation — each,  at  the  most  interesting  period
of  his  harangue,  would  produce  the  lacerated  head  of  a  snake,  ex-
claiming, the  serpent's  head  is  crushed,  his  power  must  fall.  (Polyoeni.
Stratag.  2.)

23  In  the  French  Adoptive  Masonry,  which  is  used  for  the  admis-
sion of  females,  the  construction  of  the  second  degree  refers  to  the
fall  of  man,  and  the  share  which  the  first  fair  lady  in  the  world  had
in  that  event.     The  timid  candidate,  after  many  trials,  is  admonished
by  the  Worshipful  Master  to  act  most  carefully,  and  above  all  to  resist
temptation.     She  is  told  that  from  those  who  seek  this  grade  much
is  required,  and  that  it  will  depend  entirely  on  herself  whether  she
obtain  it  or  not.     The  ceremony  proceeds,  and  the  tempting  moment
is  at  hand ;  the  wily  tempter,  ever  near,  seizes  the  favourable  oppor-


480  HISTORICAL    LANDMARKS

Scarce  had  our  great  projenitors  thus
than,  conscious  of  their  crime,24  and  filled  with  shame
and  horror,  they  endeavoured  to  hide  themselves  from
the  presence  of  that  Being,25  who  had  hitherto  been
their  solace  and  delight ;  but  hearing  his  awful  \.
in  the  garden,  and  unable  to  bear  the  splendour  of  his

tunity,  and  prompts  her  to  yield  ;  admonitions,  promises,  and  conse-
quences are  alike  forgotten  ;  she  falls,  and  is  instantly  informed,  that
for  ever  she  is  precluded  from  obtaining  Masonic  rank.  Repentance
follows  the  sin,  and  the  forgiving  brothers  and  sisters,  rememberim-;
their  own  errors,  relent,  and  after  a  seven'  reprimand,  admit  their
contrite  sister  to  a  participation  in  the  my.-tcrion-  grade.  (1\  Q.  H.,
1837,  p.  443.)

24  Eve  might  probably  consider  the  serpent  as  an  angel  of  light,  or
seraph,  from  tp^  to  burn;  for  saraph  signifies  a  fiery  and  highly-
venomous  seq)ent  ;  while   its   plural  >eraphim  is    a  name  of  angels,
who,  from  the  shining  brightness  of  their  aspect,  seem   flaming  and
fiery.  The  Rabbi  Bechai,  on  Genesis  xiv.,  says,  "  this  is  the  mystery
of  our  holy  language,  that  a  serpent  is  called  saraph,  as  an  angel  is
called  seraph."     Archbishop  Tcnison,  on  this  passage  in  the  Lexicon,
says,  there  is  an  authority  in  this  argument,  which  is  to  me  valuable,
not  simply  for  the  notation  of  the  word,  but  for  the  sense  to  accom-
modate to  my  notion.     It  is  that  of  Tertullian  in  two  places.     The
first  place  in  his  Book  de  Prescriptione  HaBreticorum.     There  he
suggesteth  from  others,  that  Eve  gave  attention  to  the  serpent,  as  to
the  Son  of  God.     The  second  place  is  in  his  Book  against  the  Valen-
tinians.     There,  he  saith,  that  the  serpent  from  the  beginning  was
one  that  sacriligiously  usurped  the  divine  image.     This  souudeth  as
if  the  devil,  in  serpentine  form,  had  represented  part  of  the  Shekinah
of  the  Logos ;  and  that  Eve  conceived  him  to  be  an  angel  apper-
taining to  his  glorious  presence,  and  a  minister  of  his  pleasure."   (Of
Idol.  p.  356.)

25  As  the  Almighty,  or  according  to  the  commentators,  the  Son  of
God  appeared  in  a  terrible  radiance,  their  guilty  souls  were  afraid
and  they  hid  themselves  among  the  trees  or  coverts   of  the  garden,
because  they  knew,  and  were  ashamed,  of  their  nakedness.


OF    FREEMASONRY.  487

appearance  ;2G  in  a  humble  and  lowly  posture  they  ap-
proached him  with  fear  and  trembling ;  their  left  hand
elevated  as  a  shield  against  the  radiant  glory  of  that
presence  which  sin  had  made  them  incapable  of  en-
during.27 In  this  posture  they  heard  the  dreadful  sen-
tence that  the  ground  should  be  accursed  for  their  sakes,
and  no  longer  bring  forth  its  fruits  spontaneously,


28


26  "  I  cannot  but  think,"  says  Bishop  Patrick,  "  that  the  Shekinali
appeared  at  this  time,  quite  otherwise  than  formerly,  i.  c.  not  in
so  mild  a  lustre  as  when  they  were  first  acquainted  with  him  j   but
in  a  more  terrible  burning  light,  as  if  it  would  consume  them.     For
so  we  read  in  after  times,  that  the  same  Lord  who  appeared  unto
Moses  in  a  flame  of  fire  out  of  the  midst  of  a  bush,  (Ex.  iii.  2.)  came
down  in  a  more  dreadful  manner,  at  the  giving  of  the  law,  from
mount   Sinai,  when   the   mountain   was   "  altogether  on  a   smoke
(Exod.  xix.  18),  because  the  Lord  descended  upon  it  in  fire;"  and
that  fire  so  great,  that  it  flamed  unto  the  midst  of  heaven  (Deut.  iv.
11)  with  darkness,  clouds,  and  thick  darkness.     (Comment,  vol.  i.
p.  21.)

27  I  am  debarred  from  speaking  particularly  upon  this  posture ;
but  I  may  add,  that  it  is  made  good  use  of  in  Freemasonry.     When
Moses  came  down  from  the  mount  it  was  used.     Again  at  the  build-
ing of  the  second  temple ;  and  more  particularly  when  Alexander
the  Great,  with  his  victorious  legends,  approached  Jerusalem  in  order
to  destroy  it,  he  was  met  by  the  High  Priest  in  his  pontificial  robes,
accompanied  by  the  priests  and  Levites  in  solemn  procession,  who
saluted  him  with  this  significant  sign.     It  is  an  historical  fact,  that
Alexander  was  so  much  struck  by  the  sight,  that  he  did  homage  to
God's  vicegerent ;  which,  it  is  said,  proceeded  from  the  mutual  recog-
nition of  Masonic  Brotherhood.

28  Still  the  world  enjoyed  a  temperature  which  has  never  been  ex-
perienced since  the  flood.     It  had  a  constant  serenity  of  the  atmos-
phere, without  any  considerable  variety  in  the  seasons ;  and  hence  it
was  that  the  human  body  continued  unimpaired  for  so  many  gene-
rations, because  there  was  no  external  violence  to  cause  its  premature
decay.


468


[ST01UCAL   LANDMARKS


and  that  they,  driven  from  the  blessed  abodes  of  para-
dise, should  cultivate  the  hungry  soil,  and  earn  their
food  by  sweat  and  labour.29  And  banished  from  the
presence  of  their  God,  they  became  sensible  of  their
crime  by  the  wants  and  calls  of  nature ;  and  with  true
contrition  of  heart,  they  humbly  implored  forgiveness.30
But  fervent  prayer,  the  only  balm  to  heal  a  wounded
conscience,  produced  a  gleam  of  hope,31  and  encouraged

19  This  sentence  was  accompanied  by  the  imposition  of  six  addi-
tional precepts,  as  Maimonides  informs  us,  viz. — 1,  not  to  be  guilty
of  idolatry ;  2,  not  to  blaspheme  the  name  of  God ;  3,  neither  to
kill ;  4,  or  to  commit  adultery  ;  5,  or  to  steal ;  6,  to  appoint  judges.

30  There  is  a  rabbinical  tradition,  that  "  Adam,  being  in  great  fear
of  death,  earnestly  desired  to  obtain  a  branch  of  the  tree  of  life,  which
was  growing  in  paradise,  thinking  he  might  escape  the  dreadful  effects
of  his  siii  by  this  means ;  and  he  sent  one  of  his  sons  to  the  gate  of
paradise.     He  accordingly  asked  it  of  the  cherub,  who  gave  him  a
bough,  telling  him  that  what  had  been  appointed  should  be  fulfilled.
During  his  absence  Adam  died,  and  was  buried ;  and  his  son  planted
the  branch  upon  his  grave,  where  it  took  root  and  became  a  great
tree.     This  tree,  with  the  bones  of  Adam  beneath  it,  being  preserved
in  the  ark,  Noah  divided  the  bones  amongst  his  sons.    The  skull  fell
to  the  share  of  Shern,  who  buried  it  on  a  mountain,  which  was  thence
called  Golgotha,  Calvary,  or  the  place  of  a  skull.     The  tree  was
planted  upon  Lebanon,   and  was  of  such  an  extraordinary  nature,
that  it  was  at  once  palm,  cypress,  and  cedar,  typical  of  victory,  death,
and  eternity.     Of  this  mystical  wood  the  cross  of  Christ  was  made,
and  it  was  erected  upon  the  very  spot  where  the  skull  of  Adam  had
been  deposited."

31  The  Almighty,  who  is  not  extreme  to  mark  what  is  done  amiss,
might  be  the  more  inclined  to  extend  his  pardon  to  them,  as  their
sin  admitted  of  some  palliation.     It  is  thought  that  "  when  Satan
beguiled  Eve  he  was  transformed  into  an  angel  of  light.    (2  Cor.  xi.
3 — 14.)     Eve  might  easily  have  mistaken  him  for  an  angel  in  this
disguise,  especially  when  possessed  of  speech,  which  was  denied  to
the  brute  creation.    And  she  might  have  imagined  that  he  came  out


OF    FREEMASONRY.  489

them  to  pursue  their  toil  with  greater  cheerfulness.
At  length  their  minds  became  more  calm,  and  ani-
mated by  the  brightest  hopes,  with  uplifted  hands  and
hearts  they  praised  God  for  his  gracious  promise  of
redemption.32

These  illustrations  are  inherent  to  the  Freemasonry
which  is  now  practised.  They  bear  internal  testimony
of  truth ;  and  the  silent  appeals  which  are  thus  offered
to  our  reason,  cannot  be  resisted.  The  situation  of
Adam  after  his  sin  had  been  committed,33  and  he  first

of  good  will,  to  explain  more  fully  the  nature  of  the  divine  covenant,
and  to  enlighten  her  ignorance."  (Hales'  Anal.  vol.  ii.  p.  13.)

32  Milton  has  given  a  beautiful  reason  why  Jehovah  suffered  our
first  parents  to  be  tempted  and  overcome.    (Par.  Lost,  b.  i.  v.  211.)

The  will

And  high  permission  of  all-ruling  Heaven
Left  him  (Satan)  at  large  to  his  own  dark  designs,
That  with  reiterated  crimes  he  might
Heap  on  himself  damnation,  while  he  sought
Evil  to  others ;  and,  enraged,  might  see
How  all  his  malice  served  but  to  bring  forth
Infinite  goodness,  grace,  and  mercy,  shown
On  man  by  him  seduced ;  but  on  himself
Treble  confusion,  wrath,  and  vengeance  pour'd.

33  A  judicious  and  learned  writer  in  the  F.  Q.  R.,  who  signs  himself
Noachide  Dalruadicus,  speaking  of  some  errors  in  O'Brien's  essay
on  the   Bound   Towers  of  Ireland,    observes — "  While   he   repre-
sents Eve  as  the  first  Buddhist,  and  Cain,  her  apostate  son,  as  the
first  priest  of  the  Buddhist  order,  because  he  recognized  Jehovah
only  as  the  God  of  nature  and  increase,  and  did  not  look  forward  to
the  redemption  by  blood ;  in  other  passages  he  represents  the  Budd-
hist doctrine  as  being,  in  so  far  as  the  redemption  by  blood  was
a  part  of  it,  identical  with  that  of  the  Freemason  and  the  Christian.
But  acknowledging,  as  I  do,  the  Bible  as  the  rule  of  faith,  and  con-
tented to  understand  what  it  relates  in  a  plain  and  literal  sense,  I


490  HISTORICAL    LANDMARKS

experienced  the  evil  consequences  of  it31  in  the  novel
sensation  of  shame  at  finding  himself  naked :  and  the
unusual  apprehension  which  came  over  him  at  the  idea
of  meeting  his  Creator ;  the  subsequent  circumstances
of  his  case ;  the  condemnation  and  curse ;  the  expulsion
from  paradise;35  and  the  terrible  appearance  of  the

see  no  difficulty  in  believing  literally  the  Mosaic  history  of  the  fall  of
Adam,  or  in  agreeing  with  learned  commentators,  that  the  test  of
obedience  prescribed  to  him,  simple  as  it  was,  of  abstaining  from
a  particular  fruit,  was  sufficient  to  make  him  sensible,  that  though
he  had  dominion  over  all  things,  yet  he  was  not  their  Lord,  but
himself  a  servant  of  the  Most  High;  and  that  it  was  admirably
suited  to  the  state  of  man  in  paradi-e.  where  it  would  have  been
needless  to  have  forbidden  adultery,  murder,  theft,  or  coveting,  when
there  were  only  Adam  and  his  wife,  and  they  gifted  with  dominion
over  all."  (F.  Q.  R.  1836,  p.  147.)

34  «  Permit  me,"  says  Bishop  Watson,  in  his  celebrated  reply  to
T.   Paine,   "  permit  me  to  recommend  to  your  consideration  the
universality  of  the  doctrine  concerning  an  evil  being,  who  in  the
beginning  of  time  had  opposed  himself,  and  still  continues  to  oppose  •
himself,  to  the  supreme  source  of  all  good.    Amongst  all  nations,  in
all  ages,  this  opinion  prevailed,  that  human  affairs  were  subject  to
the  will  of  the  gods,  and  regulated  by  their  interposition.     Hence
has  been  derived  whatever  we  have  read  of  the  wandering  stars  of
the  Chaldeans,  two  of  them  beneficent,  and  two  malignant ;  hence
the  Egyptian  Typho  and  Osiris ;  the  Persian  Arimanius  and  Oro-
masdes ;  the  Grecian  celestial  and  infernal  Jove ;  the  Bramah  and
the  Zupay  of  the  Indians,  Peruvians,  Mexicans ;  the  good  and  evil
principle,  by  whatever  names  they  may  be  called,  of  all  other  bar-
barous nations ;  and  hence  the  structure  of  the  whole  book  of  Job,
in  whatever  light  of  history  or  drama  it  be  considered.     Now  does
it  not  appear  reasonable  to  suppose  that  an  opinion,  so  ancient  and
so  universal,  has  arisen  from  tradition  concerning  the  fall  of  our  first
parents,  disfigured,  indeed,  and  obscured,  as  all  traditions  must  be,
by  many  fabulous  additions."

35  In  one  of  the  philosophical  degrees  this  event  is  alluded  to ;  but


OF    FREEMASONRY.  491

Shekinah,  which,  in  the  eyes  of  the  unhappy  culprits,
assumed  the  semblance  of  flaming  swords,36  glittering
and  flashing  in  every  direction  to  guard  the  entrance
of  those  happy  glades,37  where  they  had  enjoyed  supreme

it  is,  I  fear,  for  no  good  purpose.  These  are  the  words — "  Men
passed  from  their  peaceable  state  to  the  yoke  of  servitude.  Eden,
that  terrestrial  paradise,  was  lost  to  them.  Subjects  of  sin  and
slavery,  they  were  reduced  to  servitude,  and  obliged  to  gain  their
bread  by  the  sweat  of  their  brow.  In  the  number  of  these  men
some  promised  to  protect,  and  thus  became  their  chiefs  ;  at  first  they
reigned  over  herds  or  clans ;  these  were  soon  either  conquered,  or
united  together,  in  order  to  form  a  numerous  people;  hence  arose
nations,  and  their  chiefs  or  kings.  At  the  formation  of  states  and
nations  the  world  ceased  to  be  a  great  family,  to  be  a  single  empire,
the  great  bond  of  nature  was  rent  asunder."

36  Angels,  according  to  Maimonides,  are  able  to  change  themselves
into  all  kinds  of  forms,  whether  beneficent  or  terrible ;  but  the  expres-
sion referred  to  above  does  not  signify  any  change  in  the  Shekinah,
but  refers  to  motion  alone,  which  was  so  very  swift  and  glittering,
that  devouring  flames  seemed  to  stream  out  of  it  on  every  side.

37  The  Hindoos  have  a  tradition,  preserved  in  their  sacred  insti-
tutions, that  a  destroying  angel  was  placed  to  the  eastward  of  the
garden  of  Eden,  and  is  represented  as  a  cherub ;  he  is  called  Garuda,
or  the  Eagle,  upon  whom  Vischnu  is  mounted.     In  his  compound
character,  Garuda  approaches  to  the  Hebrew  cherub.     He  is  some-
times depicted  as  a  man,  with  the  countenance,  wings,  and  talons  of
an  eagle.    In  scripture  the  Deity  is  represented  riding  upon  a  cherub,
and  flying  on  the  wings  of  the  wind.     This  is  something  like  the
Simorgh,  of  Persian  romance,  who  carries  the  heroes  between  his
wings  from  one  extremity  of  the  world  to  another.    Garuda  is  called
the  vahau  (literally  the  vehicle)  of  Vischnu,  and  he  thus  answers  to
the  cherub  of  scripture ;  for  many  commentators  derive  this  word
from  the  obsolete  root  charab  in  the  Chaldean  language,  a  word
synonimous  with  the  Sanscrit  vahau.     Now,  whence  could  these
primitive  people  be  supposed  to  derive  their  notion  of  the  Jewish
cherubim  but  from  a  primitive  tradition  of  the  fall  of  man  propagated
by  the  family  of  Noah  after  the  flood.


492  HISTORICAL    LANDMARKS

felicity,  might  naturally  produce  those  feelings,  and  that
behaviour,  which  are  so  beautifully  depicted  in  the
Masonic  legend  which  has  been  just  repeated.

But  the  incident  was  introduced  by  our  ancient
Brethren  into  Freemasonry, 3S  not  merely  as  an  evidence
of  the  antiquity  of  the  system,  or  to  point  out  its  con-
nexion with  the  patriarchs  with  their  federal  head  ;
not  merely  to  show  that  Freemasonry,  so  to  call  it,  or
Lux,  at  its  first  establishment,  was  an  emanation  of
the  Deity,  because  it  was  practised  in  paradise  under
the  divine  inspection  before  our  first  parents  became
acquainted  with  sin  and  its  bitter  fruits  ;3y  but  for  the

38  It  was  a  doctrine  received  both  by  the  patriarchs  and  Jews,  and
therefore  it  is  an  infringement  of  the  universal  principles  of  Masonry
to  reject  our  Jewish  Brethren  from  a  participation  in  our  mysteries,
as  some  of  the  continental  Grand  Lodges  have  done ;  on  which  the
Grand  Lodge  of  Florida  thus  remarks : — "  We  regret  to  observe  a
disposition  to  draw  a  line  of  demarcation  between  Masonic  Brethren
of  the  Christian  and  Jewish  faith.  The  perfection  and  beauty  of
the  system  of  Masonry,  we  have  ever  been  taught  to  believe,  consists
in  its  universality.  That  the  ever-green  tree  of  Masonry  shoots  its
roots  to  the  centre,  and  throws  out  its  umbrageous  boughs  to  the
circumference  of  the  world,  equally  sheltering  beneath  its  foliage  each
Brother  of  the  mystic  tie,  regardless  of  political  principles,  sectarian
tenets,  or  condition  in  life,  whether  he  be  the  jewelled  monarch,
radiant  in  glorious  panoply,  or  the  poorest  heart-stricken  peasant
that  winds  his  noiseless  way  along  the  sequestered  vale  of  life.  We
are  the  more  surprised  at  this  attempt  of  invidious  denunciation  of
a  people,  the  originators  and  founders  of  glorious  Masonry."  (Trans-
actions, Jan.  9,  1843.)

39    "  Here  the  first  pair  in  paradise  were  placed,
With  heavenly  innocence  and  beauty  graced  ;
And  here,  by  sinful  disobedience  wrought,
The  race  of  man  was  to  destruction  brought ;


OF   FREEMASONRY.  493

purpose  of  placing  clearly  before  the  Brethren,40  the
GREAT  PROMISE,41  in  which  all  their  hopes  of  happiness
centre.

Hence  we  might  execrate  the  baleful  ground,
Had  it  not  given  the  salve  as  well  as  wound ;
For  here  the  Saviour  of  the  world  had  birth,
To  purge  our  souls,  and  save  a  guilty  earth ;
The  gospel  first  in  Asia's  regions  spread,
And  for  mankind  the  blest  Redeemer  bled ;
Here  cities  first  were  built,  and  statutes  made,
And  of  vast  empires  the  foundation  laid ;
Here  Masons  first  their  secrets  did  impart,
And  to  mankind  reveal 'd  their  sacred  art."

(Smith's  Use,  p.  226.)

40  "  The  great  scheme  of  redemption  began  to  be  published  to  our
first  parents  immediately  after  their  apostacy.     Early  was  the  first
promise  made  of  a  Saviour,  even  that  divine  Word  which  created  all
things.     Here  was  laid  that  deep  foundation  on  which  the  whole
superstructure  of  the  gospel  dispensation  was  erected.     The  same
precious  promise  is  the  great  corner  stone  in  the  edifice  of  speculative
Freemasonry"  (Town's  Spec.  Freemasonry,  p.  171.)

41  This  promise  constituted  the  foundation  of  the  patriarchal  and
Jewish  religions.    It  was  known  to  the  heathen ;  and  its  chief  truths
and  conditions  were  preserved  in  their  spurious  Freemasonry.     It
forms  the  great  bulwark  of  our  own  mode  of  faith,  and  constitutes  a
means  of  salvation  to  all  the  nations  of  the  earth.  There  was  a  beauty
and  propriety,  therefore,  in  its  introduction  into  Freemasonry,  which
is  an  universal  institution,  embracing  all  nations,  people,  and  lan-
guages.    It  augments  the  value  of  the  system,  and  recommends  it
by  new  and  interesting  claims  to  the  Christian  Mason,  as  an  adjunct
to  his  holy  religion.    However  this  interpretation  may  have  hitherto
been  overlooked  and  disregarded,  it  certainly  forms  the  immoveablc
basis  of  Christian  Freemasonry  ;  and  is  an  article  of  faith  so  common
to  all  sects  and  parties  under  the  dispensation  of  the  gospel,  as  well
as  to  every  other  religion  upon  the  face  of  the  earth,  as  to  be  incapable
of  creating  any  difference  of  opinion,  or  violating  that  fundamental
principle  of  the  society  which  excludes  polemical  controversy  from  its


494  HISTORICAL    LANDMARKS

In  the  system  of  Christian  Freemasonry  the  promise
is  thus  interpreted  : — Our  first  parents  having  violated
the  contract  of  their  Maker,42  by  eating  the  forbidden
fruit,43  became  liable  to  misery  and  death.44  That  this

assemblies.  Nor  would  the  general  terms  of  this  promise  be  rejected
by  the  Brethren  of  any  other  creed ;  for  it  is  not  from  the  Promise,
but  its  interpretation,  that  our  Brethren  of  the  Jewish  or  Mahometan
persuasion  dissent.

42  These  ideas  were  connected  in  all  systems  of  religious  worship,
whether  true  or  false,  which  existed  in  any  age,  or  in  any  pail  of  the
habitable  globe ;  for  every  religion  had  its  record  or  veneration  of
a  serpent,  the  true,  as  the  tempter  of  man ;  and  the  false,  as  a
powerful  god,  who  possessed  an  unbounded  influence  over  human
ai lairs.     Every  incarnation  of  a  deity  in  the  form  of  a  serpent  to
deceive  a  female,  as  in  the  instances  of  Jupiter,  who  twice  assumed
this  form  to  seduce  llhea  and  Proserpine,  bore  an  accurate  allusion
to  the  means  adopted  by  the  rebellious  spirit  to  effect  man's  ruin  in
the  garden  of  Eden.     Should  we  fail  to  discern  the  serpent  in  eveiy
idolatrous  code,  its  introduction  into  a  few  only  might  be  considered
casual ;  but  as  it  exists  in  all,  I  am  not  aware  that  any  other  infer-
ence can  be  drawn,  than  that  it  is  indebted  for  its  ascendancy  to  a
perverted  tradition  of  the  paradisiacal  serpent,  that  effected  man's
destruction  by  its  successful  temptation  of  our  great  progenitors.

43  Bro.  Rosenburg  thus  explains  the  event  in  his  Explication  du
Tableau  Ma9onnique — "  D'abord  le  premier  homme,  encore  dans  la
priineur  de  ses  premieres  passions,  cede  aux  desirs  que  lui  inspire  la

femme ;  sa  force  et  sa  raison  sont  vaincues,  il  est  seduit Mais

bientot  il  a  goute  1'arbre  de  la  science  et  reconuu  la  mission  sublime
qui  lui  est  imposee,  a  lui  chef  d'ceuvre  du  Createur.     Aussitot  il  est
banni  de  1'Eden.  car  la  science  et  le  repos  ne  peuvent  vivre  ensemble,
et  Adam,  vetu  du  tablier  de  travail,  va  cultiver  le  monde."

44  The  same  tradition  of  the  fall  is  thus  recorded  by  Plato,  who
learned  it,  as  he  himself  confesses,  from  the  Egyptian  hierophant  by
whom  he  was  initiated,  after  he  had  imbibed  the  Orphic  and  Pytha-
gorean philosophy  in  the  mysteries  of  Greece.    But  whether  he  really
had  it  from  hence,  or  from  the  Jewish  writings,  is  not  very  material ;
for  the  authority  of  the  latter  was,  perhaps,  of  less  weight  with  this


OF    FREEMASONRY.  495

dreadful  defection  from  primitive  righteousness  might
never  be  absent  from  their  minds,45  God  instituted
a  system  of  worship,  the  principal  feature  in  which
was,  animal  sacrifices,  that  by  observing  the  dying
agonies  of  innocent  creatures,  they  might  be  sensibly
impressed  with  the  misery  and  pain  of  that  death,
which  their  disobedience  had  brought  on  all  created
flesh.46  He  clothed  them  in  the  skins  of  these  animals,

acute  philosopher  than  the  former.  He  propagated  it  as  a  doctrine
already  in  existence,  although  it  suited  his  purpose  to  veil  it  in  the
following  allegory  : — Porus,  the  god  of  plenty,  is  feasting  with  the
rest  of  the  gods  until  he  becomes  intoxicated,  when  he  goes  forth
into  the  garden  of  Jupiter  and  falls  asleep.  Penia  comes  to  the  door
to  beg,  and  observing  Porus,  steals  to  him,  and  by  this  deceit  con-
ceives. In  this  fable  Origen  traces  the  resemblance  of  the  garden  of
Jupiter  to  paradise,  Penia  to  the  serpent,  and  Porus  to  Adam,  who
was  deceived  by  the  reptile.

45  The  Mahometan  gospel  of  Barnabas  says,  that  the  sentence
which  God  pronounced  upon  the  serpent  was,  that  he  should  have
his  legs  cut  off  by  the  angel  Michael,  with  the  sword  of  God ;  and
that  the  devils,  as  a  punishment  for  rendering  our  first  parents
unclean,  were  condemned  to  subsist  on  the  dung  of  serpents.

46  Le  Clerc,  in  his  Annotations  on  Grotius  (de  Verit.  1.  i.  s.  16),
assumes  that  the  introduction  of  serpent  worship  into  the  spurious
Freemasonry  had  a  direct  reference  to  the  fall  of  man.     He  says —
"  In  the  most  ancient  Greek  mysteries  they  cried  out  Eva,  and  at
the  same  time  showed  a  serpent ;  which  is  mentioned  by  Heyschius,
Clemens  in  his  Exortations,  and  Plutarch  in  his  Life  of  Alexander.
Chalcidius  to  Timasus  has  these  words  : — '  that  as  Moses  says,  God
forbad  the  first  man  to  eat  the  fruit  of  those  trees,  by  which  the
knowledge  of  good  and  evil  should  steal  into  their  minds.'     And  in
another  place — to  this  the  Hebrews  agree,  when  they  say  that  God
gave  to  man  a  soul,  by  a  divine  breath,  which  they  call  reason,  or  a
rational  soul ;  but  to  dumb  creatures  and  wild  beasts  of  the  forest,
one  void  of  reason ;  the  living  creatures  and  beasts  being  by  the
command  of  God  scattered  over  the  face  of  the  earth,  amongst  which


496  HISTORICAL    LANDMARKS

that  with  such  a  covering  continually  before  their  eyes,
they  might  never  lose  the  recollection  of  their  grievous
transgression  ;47  and  be  admonished  by  the  punishment
of  toil  and  labour,  against  the  renewed  commission  of
sin,  of  which  they  had  already  tasted  the  bitter  fruits.48
The  design  of  the  serpent  tempter  was  evidently
to  deprive  our  first  parents  of  the  favour  and  pro-
tection of  God,49  and  consequently  to  ruin  their  hap-

was  the  serpent,  who  by  his  evil  persuasions  deceived  the  first  of
mankind."

47  The  consequences  of  their  guilt  being  thus  brought  constantly
before  their  recollection,  they  became  overwhelmed  with  melancholy
and  despair.     To  relieve  their  disquietude,  therefore,  Jehovah  gra-
ciously vouchsafed  to  them  a  peculiar  revelation,  which  composed
their  minds,  and  consoled  them  under  the  privations  to  which  they
had  irretrievably  subjected  themselves.     From  this  benignant  reve-
lation they  understood,  that  in  times  far  distant,  a  provision  was
made  in  the  counsels  of  heaven  to  neutralize  the  effects  of  original
sin,  and  restore  mankind  to  a  capacity  of  propitiating  the  divine
favour.     He  promised  that  "  the  seed  of  the  woman  should  bruise
the  serpent's  head,  though  it  should  bruise  his  heel."    This  promise,
which  was  frequently  renewed  to  the  patriarchs  and  prophets  (nume-
rous instances  of  which  are  embodied  in  the  system  of  Freemasonry),
became  remarkably  fulfilled  in  Jesus  Christ.

48  Our  common  mother  was  called  Isscha  before  her  name  was
changed  into  Eve.     This  alteration  was  made  by  Adam,  under  the
impression  that  she  would  become  the  mother  of  all  mankind,  and
particularly  of  the  promised  seed,  by  whom  he  hoped  to  be  raised
from  the  dead  to  immortal  life  and  happiness.

49  According  to  Sir  John  Chardin,  the  Persians  call  the  constel-
lation of  the  serpent  Ophiuchus,  the  serpent  of  Eve;  and  this  serpent
plays  a  similar  part  in  the  theology  of  the  Phoenicians,  to  whom  the
druids  were  greatly  indebted  for  their  mythological  knowledge ;  for
Pherecydes,  their  disciple,  and  the  master  of  Pythagoras,  said  that
Ophioneus  Serpentinus  had  been  chief  of  the  rebels  against  Jupiter.
Nothing  can  more  nearly  approach  the  Mosaic  account  of  the  temp-


OF    FREEMASONRY.  497

piness.50  And  his  attempt  was  for  the  time  crowned
with  success.51  He  destroyed  their  peace  of  mind,  and
rendered  all  their  posterity  subject  to  temporal  evils
which  necessarily  resulted  from  their  transgression ;
hoping  also  that  their  misery  would  terminate  in  ever-
lasting punishment.  But  the  divine  promise  included
an  assurance  that  the  design  should  be  defeated  by  the
advent  of  a  mediator  at  some  remote  period  of  time.
It  was  realized  in  Jesus  Christ ;  who,  by  his  sufferings

tation  of  our  first  parents  by  the  rebel  angel,  in  the  form  of  the
paradisiacal  serpent,  or  be  more  strongly  corroborative  of  the  sacred
record  of  man's  original  defection  from  righteousness;  especially
when  we  consider  further  that  the  Persians  depicted  their  evil  power,
Ahriman,  in  the  constellation  Serpentarius,  under  whose  sway  the
odious  reptile  is  placed.

50  When  serpents  were  consecrated  and  in  temples,  they  were  called
Dracones.     Angues  aquarium  sunt,  serpentes  terrarum,  Templorum
Dracones.     The  Hebrews  had  a  different  word  for  land  and  water
serpents ;  the  latter  were  called  Tennin.     Thus  when  Moses's  rod
was  turned  into  a  serpent  before  Pharoah,  it  is  called  Letennin,  a
water  snake,  as  Pharoah  was  probably  taking  his  morning's  walk  on
the  bank  of  a  river ;  but  the  serpent  that  tempted  Eve  was  a  Nachash,
a  land  serpent,  and  not  a  Tennin.

51  A  short  time  before  the  birth  of  her  first  child,  the  devil  asked
Eve  whether  she  knew  how  she  was  to  get  rid  of  it  ?    This  question
alarmed  her  exceedingly,  and  she  ran  to  Adam  for  advice.     Being
unable  to  determine  the  inquiry,  he  became  melancholy.     The  devil,
taking  advantage  of  his  sadness,  appeared  to  him,  and  told  him  that
he  possessed  the  power  of  causing  Eve  to  be  delivered  of  a  son  in  his
own  likeness,  which  he  would  do  on  condition  that  Adam  would  call
him  by  the  name  of  Abdolhareth,  the  serpent  of  Al  Hareth,  which
was  the  name  given  to  the  chief  of  the  fallen  angels  in  heaven.  Adam
unfortunately  consented,  and  when  the  child  was  born  he  gave  it  that
name,  and  it  immediately  died.     The  above  is  an  Arabian  tradition,
according  to  Selden.  (De  jure  Nat.  Sec.  Heb.  1.  v.  c.  8.)

VOL.  ir.  K  K


498


HISTORICAL    LANDMARKS


and  death,  reconciled  man  to  God,  and  opened  a  way
to  salvation,  through  the  efficacy  of  repentance,  fnith
in  his  name  and  merits,  and  obedience  to  his  com-
mands/'2

For  this  purpose,  to  bruise  the  serpent's  head,53  his

52  "  That  there  are  angels,"  says  Bishop  Kurd,  "  and  spirits  good
and  bad ;  that  at  the  head  of  these  last  there  is  one  more  consi-
derable and  malignant  than  the  rest,  who,  in  the  form,  or  under  the
name  of  a  serpent,  was  deeply  concerned  in  the  fall  of  man,  and
whose  head,  as  the  prophetic  language  is,  the  Son  of  man  was  one
day  to  bruise;  that  this  evil  spirit,  though  that  of  prophecy  be  in
part  completed,  has  not  yet  received  his  death's  wound,  but  is  still
permit  led,  for  ends  unsearchable  to  us,  and  in  ways  which  we  cannot
particularly  explain,  to  have  a  certain  degree  of  power  in  this  world
hostile  to  its  virtue  and  happiness,  and  sometimes  exerted  with  too
much  success;  all  this  is  so  clear  from  scripture,  that  no  believer,
unless  he  be  first  of  all  spoiled  by  philosophy  and  vain  deceit,  can
possibly  entertain  a  doubt  of  it."

53  A  tradition  that  the  Messiah,  or  Middle  God,  shall  bruise  the
serpent's  head,  while  it  should  bruise  his  heel,  existed  alike  in  the
east  and  in  the  west,  amongst  the  Indians,  the  Greeks,  and  the  Goths
of  Scandinavia.    The  Brahmins  placed  in  their  temples  certain  sculp-
tured figures,  which  were  unquestionably  descriptive  of  this  prediction.
One  of  them  represents  Vischnu,  with  his  foot  placed  upon  the  head
of  a  serpent ;  and  another  pourtrays  the  same  deity  encompassed
within  the  folds  of  the  same  reptile,  which  is  in  the  act  of  biting  his
heel.     These  can  have  no  other  meaning  than  as  a  pictorial  deve-
lopment of  the  original  promise  of  a  mediator.     Mr.  Maurice,  in  his
History  of  Hindostan,  has  published  engravings  of  these  sculptures ;
the  reader  cannot  but  be  struck  with  an  extraordinary  coincidence
which  subsists   between  the  former  portraiture  and  the  monkish
picture  of  the  victory  of  Michael  over  the  devil,  where  the  archangel
is  represented  as  being  surrounded  by  the  angelic  host,  and  trampling
on  the  head  of  a  horned  dragon.     How  this  coincidence  arose  it
might  be  difficult  to  conjecture,  unless  we  admit  that  they  both
originated  in  an  ancient  tradition,  that  the  seed  of  the  woman  should


OF    FREEMASONRY.  499

heel  was  permitted  to  be  bruised,  and  his  blood  shed
upon  the  cross.54  Whence  God  was  pleased  to  accept
his  death  as  a  sacrifice  and  expiation  ;55  and  as  a  sign
or  symbol  of  such  acceptance,  he  raised  him  from  the
dead.56  This  was  also  intended  as  a  revelation  of  our

bruise  the  serpent's  head.  In  the  same  mythology,  the  principal
deities  are  all  accompanied  by  serpents,  as  appears  from  the  carvings
on  the  walls  of  their  most  ancient  temples  ;  and  the  monster  Garuda,
compounded  of  two  portions  of  the  cherubim,  the  eagle,  and  the  man,
is  represented  as  being  placed  at  the  eastern  portal  of  the  garden  of
Eden,  to  prevent  the  intrusion  of  serpents,  to  which  reptile  he  was
supposed  to  bear  a  mortal  antipathy.  And  they  have  a  legend,  that
after  a  severe  conflict  he  destroyed  them  all  except  one,  which  he
slung  round  his  neck  as  a  trophy,  evidently  referring  to  the  fall  of
man,  the  cherubim  at  the  gate  of  paradise,  and  the  destruction  of  all
mankind  at  the  deluge,  except  the  patriarch  Noah.

64  In  the  coins  of  Constantino  we  find  the  labarium,  or  banner  of
the  cross,  which  is  surmounted  by  the  sacred  monogram,  erected  on
the  body  of  a  prostrate  serpent.  A  striking  emblem  of  Christianity
triumphant  over  the  Ophite  idolatry,  and  a  proof  that  serpent  worship
was  prevalent  at  that  period.

55  From  this  promise,  which  included  the  doctrine  that  the  sacrifice
of  one  should  be  accepted  as  an  atonement  for  all,  arose  the  custom
of  human  sacrifices  to  avert  calamities  and  restore  blessings.     There
have  been  a  diversity  of  opinions  respecting  the  origin  of  this  practice ;
although  a  little  consideration  might  have  traced  it  to  the  above
doctrine,  rather  than  to  the  figurative  sacrifice  of  Isaac  or  the  murder
of  Abel.

56  "  What  does  symbolism  teach  us?"  says  M.  Portal.    (Weale's
Archit.  part  vi.  p.  32.)     "  It  teaches  that  the  God  of  Moses  was  the
God  of  the  Pharoahs,  of  the  Brahmins,  and  of  the  Chaldees ;  that  he
created  man  for  happiness ;  for  forsaking  the  path  marked  out  for
him,  he  fell  into  evil.     The  redemption  of  the  world  became  subse-
quently the  universal  creed ;  Christianity,  hidden  or  revealed,  was  the
centre  of  every  worship  before  and  after  God  was  made  manifest  in
the  flesh.     The  unavoidable  conclusion  is,  that  Christianity  is  the

K  K  2


500  HISTORICAL  LANDMARKS

resurrection ;  as  his  ascension  was  of  our  immortal
happiness  in  heaven,  if  we  faithfully  perform  the  con-
ditions prescribed  for  our  observance.67

The  above  facts  and  arguments  constitute  a  strong
testimony  to  the  truth  of  the  Mosaic  writings;  for
they  prove  unquestionably  that  an  ancient  tradition  of
the  unhappy  fall  of  man,58  accomplished  through  the

consequence  and  bond  of  all  religion ;  that  by  the  divine  power  the
whole  world  will  be  united  in  one  common  brotherhood,  and  in  the
preservation  of  various  exterior  forms,  the  light  which  emanates  from
divine  truth  may  be  discerned."

57  Thus  full  and  clear  are  the  proofs  that  the  unhappy  defection  of
man  from  pristine  innocence,  by  the  temptation  of  a  serpent,  was
propagated  throughout  the  Gentile  world  in  the  spurious  Freemasonry.
And  the  frequent   appearance  of  the  serpent  in  the  initiations  will
evince  the  pains  that  were  taken  to  prevent  the  knowledge  of  this
event  from  being  lost  amidst  the  erroneous  practices  and  speculative
opinions  with   which   idolatry,  in  its  sweeping  progress,  gradually
enfolded  the  great  primitive  truths  relating  to  religious  worship  and
the  salvation  of  man.     Simple  facts  were  often  converted  into  wild
and  improbable  allegories ;  and  complicated  symbols  were   substi-
tuted for  simple  realities,  till  reason  was  incapable  of  unravelling  the
inextricable  web.    During  the  initiations,  a  serpent  was  cast  into  the
aspirant's  bosom,  and  suffered  to  pass  downwards  between  his  robe
and  flesh,  as  a  sign  of  regeneration.    Now,  what  theology  could  have
been  so  unnatural  as  to  teach  that  personal  regeneration  could  emanate
from  the  contact  of  this  filthy  creature,  if  purity  and  salvation  had  not
been  originally  connected  with  it,  by  the  promise  that  the  Redeemer
of  mankind  should   accomplish  this  great  object  by  bruising  the
serpent's  head  ?

58  Every  legend  of  the  deliverance  of  a  devoted  female  by  an  armed
warrior  from  the  fangs  of  some  monstrous  dragon,  like  those  of
Perseus  and  Andromeda  amongst  the  heathens,  and  St.  George  and
Sabra  amongst  Christians,  has  been  thought  to  refer  to  the  destruc-
tion of  the  huge  dracontian  temples  which  existed  in  all  nations ;
but  the  temptation  of  Eve  by  the  serpent  was  the  undoubted  proto-


OF    FREEMASONRY.  501

intervention  of  a  serpent,59  perverted,  indeed,  in  many
instances,  from  its  primitive  meaning,60  was  preserved
throughout  the  whole  world ;  although  this  disgusting

type ;  while  in  all  such  cases  the  deliverer  was  the  promised  Messiah.
But  the  tradition  was  thus  far  perverted,  that  instead  of  the  moral
principle  which  was  destroyed  in  our  first  parents,  a  physical  de-
struction was  supposed  to  take  place  in  the  persons  of  the  exposed
females.  In  Mexico  is  a  rude  carving  preserved  in  one  of  the  Domi-
nican convents,  of  a  serpent  coiled  up  in  an  irritated  erect  position,
with  the  jaws  extended,  and  in  the  act  of  gorging  an  elegantly  dressed
female,  who  appears  in  the  mouth  of  this  enormous  reptile,  crushed
and  lacerated.

59  The  serpent  commenced  his  hateful  career  with  uncompromising
hostility  to  man,  and  his  enmity  has  never  been  abated.  In  all  ages
he  has  been  a  scourge  and  a  curse  ;  and  the  adoration  he  has  excited
has  been  the  abject  devotion  of  a  slave  under  the  lash.  It  was  a
worship  of  propitiation.  Pignorius  (De  Mensa  Isiaca)  says,  that
mankind  being  vanquished  by  the  craft,  pride,  and  malice  of  the  devil,
in  the  shape  of  a  serpent,  endeavoured  to  redeem  the  loss  he  had
sustained  by  turning  that  reptile  into  a  sacred  idol.  Hence  the
practice  of  offering  the  most  valuable  possessions,  even  wives  and
daughters  at  its  altar.  And  hence  the  Grecian  custom  to  which
Clemens  Alexandrinus  refers,  when  he  says  (Peed.  1.  245),  that
"  females  were  not  ashamed  to  wear  about  their  persons  these
symbols  of  the  evil  power ;  for  as  the  serpent  deceived  Eve,  so  the
golden  ornament  in  the  form  of  a  serpent  misleads  her  daughters."

60  In  the  most  early  period  of  Sabianism,  and  perhaps  before  the
deluge  of  Noah,  the  serpent  was  made  a  symbol  of  the  sun.  Hence
it  is  conjectured  that  the  dracontian  temples  of  Abury,  Stanton  Drew,
Shap,  and  others  in  this  island,  were  Ophite  temples  dedicated  to  the
sun ;  and  it  is  remarkable  that  the  august  structure  at  Abury  was
formed  to  represent  a  serpent  connected  with  the  sun,  and  was  in  the
exact  shape  of  the  hydra  of  the  sphere.  We  find  in  ancient  mytho-
logy the  most  extraordinary  legends  about  the  serpent  or  dragon,
which  constituted  a  never-failing  theme  of  discussion  amongst  thoso,
who  practised  the  abominations  of  ophiolatry.


502  HISTORICAL    LANDMARKS

animal61  became  an  object  of  adoration62  in  many
nations  j63  and  in  the  initiations  of  the  spurious  Free-
masonry was  constituted  the  medium  of  the  soul's
regeneration64  from  sin65  and  misery,66  even  as  the

61  With  the  terror  usually  inspired  by  this  hideous  vermin,  might
be  blended  another  feeling  of  a  higher  and  purer  character.     In  the
ages  immediately  subsequent  to  the  flood,  the  sons  of  Noah  would
propagate  amongst  their  posterity  the  fact,  that  the  knowledge  of
good   and  evil  was  acquired  by  the  original  parents  of  mankind,
through  the  intervention  of  a  serpent  endowed  with  speech,  wisdom,
and  foresight.     Such  a  representation,  proceeding  from  such  high
authority,  would  naturally  induce  a  feeling  of  respect  and  veneration
for  an  animal  possessing  these  extraordinary  attributes,  which,  when
the  true  God  was  entirely  forsaken,  would  soon  degenerate  into  actual
worship.     This  may  be  assumed  as  one  pristine  cause  of  ophiolatry ;
and  it  is  highly  probable  that  it  exercised  some  influence,  not  only
with  the  heathen,  but  with  the  Christian,  and  also  with  the  Jew.

62  The  simple  fact  of  serpent  worship  has  never  been  disputed ;  for
in  the  Apocalypse  (xii.  8),   ike  serpent  is  said  to  have  deceived  the
ivhole  world.     Testimonies  to  that  effect  are  purposely  scattered
throughout  the  writings  of  antiquity,  which  plainly  intimate  that
some  knowledge  of  antediluvian  events  was  spread  over  the  face  of
the  globe  by  the  erratic  tribes  who  migrated  from  Shinar,  how  much
soever  it  might  be  cast  into  shade  in  later  times.

63  Serpent  worship  derived  its  origin  from  this  source ;  and  the
name,  applied  with  a  transmitted  authority  to  the  destructive  power,
has  reached  our  times ;  for  the  Deva  or  Dive  of  the  East,  who  was
considered  the  tempter  of  Eve ;  the  Diu  of  ancient  Hibernia ;  the
Armoric  Due ;  the  Gaelic  Dhu,  were  no  other  than  the  Diabolus  of
the  Greeks  and  Latins,  and  the  English  Devil.

64  It  appears  that  not  only  were  serpents  made  emblems  of  the
divine  nature,    and  entwined  about  the  rods  of  Mercury,  Osiris,
Esculapius,  Trophonius,  Hercyna,  and  many  others ;  but  they  were
also  painted  on  the  walls  of  the  caverns  of  initiation,  and  also  on  the
inferior  rooms  of  Greek  and  Roman  houses ;   and  lamps  were  kept
continually  burning  before  them.     Serpents  were  painted  on  the


OF    rilEKMASOMlV.  503

advent  of  the  Messiah,  who  was  represented  in  the
wilderness  by  a  brazen  seraph,67  was  intended  to  heal
the  wounds  inflicted  by  the  serpent  tempter  at  the  fall,
and  to  restore  God's  favoured  creature  to  his  pristine
purity  of  mind.

banners  of  the  Assyrians,  the  Celta3,  the  Parthians,  Scythians,  Chinese,
and  Egyptians,  as  the  sacred  portraiture  of  the  deity ;  and  the  temple
of  Serapis,  or  the  Serpent,  was  the  largest  and  most  magnificent
sanctum  in  Egypt.  In  all  nations  the  serpent  was  an  object  of  wor-
ship ;  for  being  attached  to  the  promise,  it  was  accounted  holy ;  not
from  its  form  or  properties,  the  first  being  disgusting,  and  the  latter
baneful,  but  from  a  superstitious  belief  that  its  body  was  the  resi-
dence of  the  divinity ;  and  was  hence  adored  as  the  emblem  of  a
divine  Saviour.

65  He  is  termed  in  our  scriptures,  "  the  great  dragon,  that  old
serpent  called  the  Devil,"  (Rev.  xii.  9,)  and  was  considered  an  em-
blem of  wisdom,  and  a  foreteller  of  future  events.    Thus,  in  Grecian
fable,  Melampus  having  preserved  two  snakes  from  destruction,  as  he
slept  one  day  beneath  an  oak,  the  reptiles  crept  up  and  licked  his
ears.     Awaking  from  sleep,  he  found  himself  able  to  understand  the
language  of  birds,  and  discovered  that  he  was  capable  of  prying  into
futurity.     The  Scholiast  on  the  Hecuba  of  Euripides  says,  that
serpents  licking  a  person's  ears,  make  him  so  sharp  of  hearing,  that
he  can  understand  the  counsels  of  the  gods,  and  be  capable  of  pro-
phesying.   Divination  by  the  agency  of  serpents  was  very  extensively
propagated,  and  the  superstition  is  scarcely  yet  extinguished ;  for
the  appearance  of  a  snake  on  any  person's  premises  is  still  accounted
an  omen  either  for  good  or  evil.

66  Clem.  Alex,  cohort  ad  Gent.  p.  17.     In  the  hieroglyphics  of
Egypt,  a  serpent  casting  his  skin  represented  the  eternity  of  the
Deity  (Pier.  Hier.  fo.  103),  and  it  was  believed  that  nothing  could
be  eternal  but  God.

67  See  Num.  xxii.  8,  compared  with  Wisdom  xvi.  7.     As  Moses
symbolized  this  august  personage  by  a  serpent,  the  early  Christians
accepted  the  emblem,  and  applied  it  to  Jesus  Christ.


501  HISTORICAL    LANDMARKS


LECTURE     XLIII.

THE    PRIESTLY    ORDERS.

"  The  tabernacle  might  be  considered  as  the  palace  of  the  Most
High,  the  dwelling  of  the  God  of  Israel ;  wherein  the  Israelites,
during  their  peregrination  in  the  wilderness,  performed  the  chief  of
their  religious  exercises,  offered  their  sacrifices,  and  worshipped
God."— SMITH.

"  The  ruler  of  the  Jews,  perceiving  how  prone  the  minds  of  the  igno-
rant were  to  be  perverted  by  show  and  ceremony ;  and  that  the  eye,
being  caught  by  pomp  and  solemn  rites,  debauched  the  judgment,  and
led  the  heart  astray  ;  and  being  convinced  that  the  magnificent  festivals,
processions,  sacrifices,  and  ceremonials  of  the  idolatrous  nations,  im-
pressed the  minds  of  mankind  with  a  wild  degree  of  reverence  and
enthusiastic  devotion,  thought  it  expedient  for  the  service  of  the  God
of  Israel,  to  institute  holy  offices,  though  in  an  humbler  and  less
ostentatious  mode ;  well  judging  that  the  service  and  adoration  of
the  deity,  which  was  only  clothed  in  simplicity  of  manners,  and
humble  prayer,  must  be  established  in  the  conviction  of  the  heart  of
man,  with  which  ignorance  was  ever  waging  war." — HUTCHINSON.

"  The  High  Priest  of  every  Chapter  has  it  in  special  charge,  as
appertaining  to  his  office,  duty,  and  dignity,  to  see  that  the  By-Laws
of  his  Chapter,  as  well  as  the  constitution,  and  the  general  regula-
tions of  the  Grand  Chapter  be  duly  observed  ;  and  that  all  the  other
officers  of  his  Chapter  perform  the  duties  of  their  respective  offices
faithfully,  and  are  examples  of  diligence  and  industry  to  their  com-
panions. He  has  the  special  care  and  charge  of  the  warrant  of  his
Chapter,  as  well  as  the  right  and  authority  of  calling  his  Chapter  at
pleasure,  upon  any  emergency  or  occurrence,  which  in  his  judgment
may  require  their  meeting,  and  he  is  to  fill  the  chair  when  present."
— WEBB.

THE  most  extraordinary  institution  that  distinguished
the  sojourning  of  the  Israelites  in  the  Wilderness,  was


OF    FREEMASONRY.  505

i

the  establishment  of  a  permanent  priesthood.  During
the  continuance  of  the  patriarchal  dispensation,  every
head  of  a  family,  or  tribe,  united  in  his  own  person  the
threefold  character  of  king,1  priest,  and  prophet.2  But
when  God  had  determined  to  form  his  people  into  a
body  politic,3  and  destined  them  to  become  a  great  and
powerful  nation ;  when  he  found  it  necessary  to  give
them  a  code  of  laws  for  their  local  government,  and  a
series  of  religious  observances  for  their  spiritual  direc-

1  This  was  typical  of  the  combined  office  of  Christ  over  his  church  ;
and  his  authority  in  each  of  these  capacities  was  never  disputed  by
his  followers.

2  The  three  principals  of  a  Chapter  are  called,  according  to  the
English  practice,  Z,  H,  J.     As  the  Royal  Arch  is  a  typical  order,  I
think  it  ought  to  be  Z,  J,  H,  because  J  is  said  in  Scripture  to  have
taken  an  active  part  with  Z  in  building  the  second  temple.     And  it
will  be  remembered  further  that  our  Lord,  who  is  here  typified,  en-
tered first  upon  the  prophetical  office ;  then  on  the  sacerdotal  at  Gol-
gotha ;  and  lastly  on  the  regal  from  Olivet.

3  The  Theocracy  appears  to  have  had  a  democratic  tendency.  Thus
Michaelis  says,  "  From  various  passages  of  the  Pentateuch,  we  find
that  when  Moses  published  any  law,  he  had  to  convene  the  whole
congregation  of  Israel.  If  on  such  occasions  every  individual  had  to
give  his  vote,  everything  would  certainly  have  been  democratic  in  the
highest  degree  ;  but  it  is  scarcely  conceivable  how,  without  very  par-
ticular regulations  made  for  the  purpose,  (which,  however,  we  nowhere
find,)  order  could  have  been  preserved  in  an  assembly  of  600,000  men,
their  votes  accurately  numbered,  and  acts  of  violence  prevented.  If,
however,  we  consider  that  while  Moses  is  said  to  have  spoken  to  the
whole  congregation,  he  could  not  possibly  be  heard  by  600,000  peo-
ple, (for  what  human  voice  could  be  sufficiently  strong  to  be  so  ?)  all
our  fears  and  difficulties  will  vanish  ;  for  this  circumstance  alone  must
convince  any  one  that  Moses  could  only  have  addressed  himself  to  a
certain  number  of  persons  deputed  to  represent  the  rest  of  the  Israel-
ites." (Laws  of  Moses,  vol.  i.  p.  229.)


.06


HISTORICAL    LANDMARKS


tion,  he  also  set  over  them  a  gorgeous  hierarchy,4  en-
dowed with  special  priveleges,  and  invested  with  a  cor-
responding pomp  and  splendour.5  To  the  head  of  this
hierarchy  prophetical  powers  were  attached,  which  the
high  priest6  possessed  the  privilege  of  exercising  through

4  In  almost  all  countries  the  worship  of  the  Deity  was  splendid
and  imposing.     The  Lacedemonians  were  a  solitary  exception.  They
had  a  law  that  the  service  of  the  gods  should  be  conducted  with  as
little  expense  as  possible ;  for  said  Lycurgus,  if  religion  were  made
as  expensive  at  Lacedemon  as  it  is  in  other  parts  of  Greece,  it  was
highly  probable  that  through  the  covetousness  of  some,  and  the  poverty
of  others,  it  might  be  entirely  neglected.

5  Godwyn  says,  "  many  superstitions  were  derived  unto  the  heathen
from  the  true  worship  of  God,  which  he  himself  had  prescribed  unto
his  people.     Thus  as  God  had  his  tabernacle,  priests,  altars,  and
sacrifices ;  so  the  devil  had  his  tabernacles,  priests,  altars,  and  sacri-
fices.    As  God  had  his  fire  ever  burning  upon  the  altar,  (Lev.  vi.  3,)
so  had  the  devil  his  fire  preserved  burning  by  those  vestal  votaries.
As  God  had  his  Propitiatory  or  Mercy-seat;  so  had  the  devil  his
sacros  tripodas,  his  oracles  from  which  he  would  speak  unto  them
that  served  him."  (Moses  and  Aaron,  p.  147.)

6  The  high  priesthood  amongst  Masons  is  restricted  to  a  Royal
Arch  Chapter.  "No  one,"  says  Cross  in  his  Masonic  Chart,  (p.  122,)
"  can  be  legally  entitled  to  receive  it,  until  he  has  been  duly  elected
to  preside  as  High  Priest  in  a  regular  Chapter  of  Royal  Arch  Masons.
Tin's  order  should  not  be  conferred  when  a  less  number  than  three
duly  qualified  High  Priests  are  present.     Whenever  the  ceremony  is
performed  in  due  and  ample  form,  the  assistance  of  at  least  nine  High
Priests,  who  have  received  it,  is  requisite.     Though  the  High  Priest
of  every  regular  Royal  Arch  Chapter,  having  himself  been  duly  qua-
lified, can  confer  the  order,  under  the  preceding  limitation  as  to
number ;  yet  it  is  desirable,  when  circumstances  will  permit,  that  it
should  be  conferred  by  the  Grand  High  Priest  of  the  Grand  Royal
Arch  Chapter,  or  such  present  or  past  High  Priest  as  he  may  dele-
gate for  that  purpose.     A  convention,  notified  to  meet  at  the  time  of
any  convocation  of  the  Grand  Chapter,  will  afford  the  best  opportu-


OP    FREEMASONRY.  507

the  agency  of  a  supernatural  power  inherent  in  the
breast  plate,  which  was  the  distinctive  badge  of  his
office.7  This  power  was  denominated  Urim  and  Thum-
mim,  or  light  and  perfection  ;  and  it  was  the  unerring
oracle  of  the  Israelites.

That  the  priests  might  be  unconnected  with  secular
affairs,8  they  were  separated  from  the  people  ;9  and  the

nity  of  conferring  this  important  and  exalted  degree  of  Masonry
with  appropriate  solemnity."

7  The  twenty-third  and  twenty-fourth  degrees,  called  the  Chief
and  Prince  of  the  Tabernacle,  have  been  formed  from  the  official
duties  of  the  Priests.  In  the  former  we  find  the  ark  and  altar  and
golden  candlestick ;  and  the  wardens  are  styled  High  Priests,  while
the  presiding  officer  has  the  title  of  Great  Sovereign  Sacrificer.  In
the  latter  degree  the  assembly  is  called  a  hierarchy.  There  are  three
wardens  ;  the  first  is  placed  in  the  south,  the  second  in  the  west,  and
third  in  the  north.  The  officers  of  this  hierarchy  represent  the  law-
giver Moses ;  the  high  priest,  Aaron ;  Bezaleel,  and  Aholiab,  the
cunning  artists  under  whose  direction  the  tabernacle  was  constructed.
The  candidate  represents  Eleazer,  who  succeeded  Aaron  in  the  High
Priesthood.

8  Dr.  Cudworth,  in  a  discourse  concerning  the  right  notion  of  the
Lord's  Supper,  observes,  that  there  was  a  table  and  candlestick  made
for  God's  house,  because  they  were  the  ordinary  furniture  of  a  room.
For  which  reason  the  table  had  its  dishes,  spoons,  bowls,  and  covers,
(though  they  were  never  used,)  and  was  always   furnished  with
bread  ;  as  the  candlestick  also  had  lamps  continually  burning.    From
hence  it  was  likewise  that  there  was  a  continual  fire  in  this  dwelling
of  God,  upon  his  altar  ;  and  constant  meat  and  provision  brought  to
it  by  the  sacrifices  there  offered,  which  were  partly  consumed  by  fire
upon  God's  own  altar,  and  partly  eaten  by  the  priests,  who  were
God's  domestic  servants,  and  therefore  maintained  by  him.

9  In  the  first  degrees  of  Scotch  knighthood,  the  adept  is  informed
that  he  has  been  elevated  to  the  degree  of  high  priest ;  which  en-
titles him  to  receive  the  following  information.  He  is  given  to  under-
stand that  he  is  in  future  to  adore  the  Deity  under  the  name  of


508


HISTORICAL    LANDMARKS


tribe  of  Levi,  from  which  they  were  chosen,  had  no
inheritance  in  the  promised  land.  It  was  appropriated
exclusively  to  holy  purposes,  and  arrangements  were
made  in  the  Mosaic  law  for  its  maintenance  and  sup-
port by  the  other  tribes.  The  priests  were  intended  to
be  more  holy,  more  circumspect  in  their  actions,  and
more  pure  in  their  conversation  than  worldly  men.
And  as  an  emblem  and  perpetual  memento  of  their
purity,  both  in  body  and  mind,  certain  parts  of  their
dress  were  recommended  to  be  white.10  Devoted  to  an

Jehovah,  which  is  much  more  expressive  than  the  word  Adonai.  In
this  degree  he  receives  the  Masonic  science  as  descended  from
Solomon,  and  revived  by  the  Templars ;  while  in  the  second  degree
it  is  traced  to  the  creation,  and  transmitted  through  Noah,  Abraham,
Moses,  Solomon,  Hugo  de  Paganis,  the  founder  of  the  Knights
Templars,  and  Jaques  de  Molay,  their  last  Grand  Master ;  and  in  the
third  degree,  the  Great  Word  is  revealed  to  him,  being  found  by
the  Knights  Templars  when  they  were  building  a  church  at  Jeru-
salem. In  digging  under  the  holy  of  holies,  they  discovered  three
stones,  on  one  of  which  this  word  was  engraven.  The  Knights
Templars  carried  with  them  these  stones ;  and  arriving  in  Scotland,
they  deposited  them  on  St.  Andrew's  day,  as  the  foundation  stones
of  their  first  lodge ;  whence  they  assumed  the  name  of  Knights  of  St.
Andrew.  The  tradition  adds  that  their  successors  being  entrusted
with  this  secret,  are  Perfect  Masters  of  Freemasonry  at  the  present
day  and  High  Priests  of  Jehovah.

10  This  colour  was  always  considered  an  emblem  of  purity.  Por-
phyry, who  wrote  so  largely  on  the  Spurious  Freemasonry,  says,
"  They  esteem  him  not  fit  to  offer  sacrifice  worthily,  whose  body  is
not  clothed  in  a  white  and  clean  garment ;  but  they  do  not  think  it
any  great  matter,  if  some  go  to  sacrifice,  having  their  bodies  clean,
and  also  their  garments,  though  their  minds  be  not  void  of  evil.  As
if  God  were  not  the  most  delighted  with  internal  purity,  which  bears
the  nearest  resemblance  to  him.  It  was  even  written  in  the  temple
of  Epidaurus — Let  all  who  come  to  offer  at  this  shrine,  be  pure.  Now
purity  consists  in  holy  thoughts."


OF    FREEMASONRY.  509

attendance  on  the  tabernacle  worship,  their  office  was
to  magnify  the  glory  of  God,  and  to  prevent  the  people
from  returning  to  the  idolatrous  practices  of  that  im-
pure nation  from  which  they  had  been  redeemed.

Aaron  was  appointed  by  the  Almighty  to  be  the  first
high  priest,11  and  in  that  capacity  was  an  eminent  type
of  the  great  High  Priest  of  a  new  and  more  perfect  dis-
pensation,12 which  should  be  revealed  to  man  when  the
fulness  of  time  was  come  ;13  and  his  glorious  apparelwas
symbolical  of  the  pure  artd  shining  graces  of  the  spirit

11  In  the  consecration  of  the  High  Priest  "  was  typed  out  the
unction  of  our  Savour,  who  was  anointed  with  the  oil  of  gladness
above  his  fellows.     He  was  anointed  extensive  and  intensive.     Ex-
tensive, for  though  Aaron  was  anointed  priest,  Saul  anointed  king,
Elisha  anointed  prophet,  Melchisedek  king  and  priest,  Moses  priest
and  prophet,  David  king  and  prophet ;  yet  none,  save  only  Christ,
King,   Priest,   and   Prophet.     Intensive,   he   was   anointed  —  we
sprinkled.     He  was  full  of  grace  and  truth ;  and  from  this  fulness
we  receive  grace  for  grace."  (Moses  and  Aaron,  p.  13.)

12  In  the  illustration  of  the  above  points,  which  are  of  the  utmost
importance  to  Christian  Masons,  we  must  refer  to  the  sublime  degrees,
in  which  they  are  described  by  a  series  of  types  and  ceremonies,
which  refer  to  the  substantial  truths  of  our  most  holy  religion.

13  In  a  Royal  Arch  Chapter,  the  priestly  order  is  of  great  import-
ance.    In  the  intermediate  degrees  between  the  Master  Mason  and
the  Royal  Arch,    the  High  Priest  acts  as  Master  of  the  Lodge,
according  to  the  system  as  practised  by  our  transatlantic  brethren  ;
while  the  king  acts  as  Senior  Warden ;  the  scribe  as  Junior  Warden  ;
the  Captain  of  the  Host  as  Marshall,  or  Master  of  the  Ceremonies  ;
the  Past  Sojourner  as  Senior  Deicon;  the  Royal  Arch  Captain  as
Junior  Deacon ;  the  Master  of  the  First  Veil  as  Junior  Overseer  ;  the
Master  of  the  Second  Veil  as  Senior  Overseer ;  the  Master  of  the
Third  Veil  as  Master  Overseer ;  the  Treasurer,  Secretary,  Chaplain,
Stewards,  and  Tyler,  as  officers  of  corresponding  rank. — See  Cross's
Masonic  Chart,  p.  135.


510


HISTORICAL    LANDMARKS


with  which  the  Messiah  was  to  be  adorned.14  The
priestly  vestments15  were  ten,16  a  number  which  indi-
cated perfection,  and  symboli/ed  heaven.17  They  were
gorgeously  embroidered,1"  in  colours  of  gold,  in  refer-

11  1'hilo  says  that  the  high  priest  was  God's  logos,  clothed  with
the  four  elements,  alluding  to  the  four  colours,  blue,  purple,  crim
and  white.  He  was  a  temporary  .Mediator,  and  stood  between  the
dead  and  the  living  ; — but  Christ  was  an  eternal  Mediator,  and  Judge
of  quick  and  dead.  The  high  priest  offered  the  sacrifice  of  beasts —
but  Christ  ottVml  his  own  body  as  a  Sacrifice  for  MH.  The  high  priest
entered  once  a  year  into  the  Holy  of  Holier,  where  God  was  seated
on  the  cherubim,  to  make  atonement  for  the  sins  of  the  Jewish  peo-
ple— Christ,  after  his  atonement,  sitteth  at  the  right  hand  of  tin
csty  on  high,  the  everlasting  sanctum  sanctorum,  to  intercede  per-
petually for  all  mankind.

15  The  Rabbins  seem  to  have  the  sanction  of  Scripture  for  their
opinion,  that  the  robes  were  so  essential  a  part  of  the  priestly  cha-
racter, that  without  them  a  priest  had  no  more  right  than  private
persons  to  officiate  at  the  altar.

16  These  were — 1.  The  linen  breeches.    2.  The  linen  coat.   3.  The
girdle.    4.  The  bonnet.    5.  The  cphod.    6.  The  breast  plate.  7.  The
robe  with  bells  and  pomegranates.     8.  The  girdle.     9.  The  mitre.
10.  The  golden  plate.

17  The  vestments  of  Aaron  and  the  Hebrew  priests,  says  M.  Portal,
were  purple,  scarlet,  and  hyacinth.     Purple  predominated  in  all  the
ornaments  of  the  high  priest ;  and  it  tinted  the  rocket,  the  cphod,
and  the  strings  of  the  breast  plate.    (See  Engraving  opposite.)

18  It  is  well  known  that  "  the  Israelites  were  acquainted  with  the
secret  of  putting  gold  into  the  tissue  of  stuffs,  and  in  embroideries.
The  Scripture  observes,  that  they  used  much  gold  in  the  habits  of
the  high  priest,  and  in  the  veils  designed  for  the  tabernacle.     How
did  they  then  prepare  that  metal  for  the  making  of  stuffs  ?     Was  it,
as  at  present,  drawn  into  wire,  beaten,  wound,  and  wrapped  round
other  threads  ?     Or  was  it  merely  gold  hammered  into  very  thin
leaves,  afterwards  cut  with  a  chisel  into  little  plates,  or  long  and
small  shreds,  which  they  put  into  the  texture  of  their  stuffs  ?     Moses


COSTUME    OF    HIGH  PRIEST.


OF    FREEMASONRY.  511

ence  to  the  spotless  virtues  by  which  Christ  was
adorned.19  The  white  linen  garment20  of  the  high
priest,21  signified  Christ's  innocence  ;22  the  girdle  his

says,  they  beat  the  gold  into  thin  plates,  and  cut  it  into  wires.
(Exod.  xxxix.  3.)  The  sense  of  these  expressions  does  not  appear
to  me  sufficiently  determinate,  absolutely  to  decide  in  favour  of  the
first  of  these  methods  which  I  have  shown.  The  most  natural  inter-
pretation is,  that  they  twisted  the  plates  of  gold  about  some  of  the
different  stuffs  of  which  the  ephod  and  the  veils  of  the  tabernacle
must  have  been  composed.  They  made,  by  this  means,  a  sort  of  gold
thread  resembling  ours,  except  that  the  basis  of  this  thread  was  of
pure  gold  cut  into  shreds,  whereas  ours  is  only  silver  gilt,  drawn  by
the  drawing  iron."  (Goguet,  vol.  ii.  p.  109.)

19  The  Royal  Arch  sashes  are  of  these  three  colours — blue,  purple,
and  crimson,  issuing  like  rays  of  light.  They  are  emblematical  of
every  grace  and  virtue  which  can  adorn  and  beautify  the  human  mind ;
each  of  which  is  fully  illustrated  in  the  charges  delivered  to  the  sub-
ordinate officers  of  the  Chapter.

20 Et  Phaebo  digna  locuti,

Q-uique  sui  memores  alios  fecere  merendo

Omnibus  his  nivea  cinguntur  tempora  vitta. — VIRGIL.

"  The  white  colour  is  a  symbol  of  absolute  truth  ;  of  Him  who  is.
It  alone  reflects  all  luminous  rays ;  it  is  the  unity  whence  emanate
the  primitive  colours,  and  the  thousand  hues  which  colour  nature.
Wisdom,  said  Solomon,  is  the  emanation  radiating  from  the  Almighty,
the  purity  of  eternal  light,  the  spotless  mirror  of  the  works  of  God,
and  the  image  of  his  goodness  ;  and  being  but  one,  can  do  all  things.
The  prophet  saw  the  Divinity  clothed  with  a  mantle  white  as  snow,
and  his  hair  white,  or  compared  to  pure  wool.  God  created  the
universe  in  his  love,  and  ordered  it  by  his  wisdom.  In  all  cosmogo-
nies, divine  wisdom,  eternal  light  subdues  primitive  darkness,  and
makes  the  world  issue  from  Chaos."  (Symb.  Col.  p.  12.)

21  Godwyn  very  justly  remarks — "  As  kings  were  distinguished
from  the  people  by  many  ensigns  of  honour ;  by  their  crown,  their
sceptre,  their  throne,  &c. ;  so  likewise  were  they  distinguished  by
their  apparel.  Though  purple  and  white  colours  were  not  appro-
priated unto  kings  ;  yet  these  colours  were  in  chief  esteem,  and  prin-


51  2  HISTORICAL    LANDMARKS

justice  ;  the  crown  and  mitre  his  kingdom  and  power,
both  temporal  and  spiritual.23  His  robe  ornamented
with  bells  and  pomegranates,  symbolized  the  prophe-
tical office  of  Christ,  and  the  golden  plate  in  the  mitre

cipally  used  by  them.  Yea  purple  above  all  others  was  affected  by
the  emperors  and  nobility  of  Rome  ;  and  white  by  the  nobility  of  the
Jews  ;  whence  the  Hebrews  term  their  noblemen,  and  such  as  are  of
best  rank,  Chorim,  albatos,  men  clad  in  white  ;  and  on  the  contrary,
men  of  meaner  rank,  Chaschucim,  sordidatos,  men  clad  with  a  foul
garment.  Hence  is  that  of  St.  James — if  there  come  a  man  with  a
gold  ring,  and  in  a  white  garment,  and  there  come  also  a  poor  man
in  vile  or  foul  raiment,  &c.  This  may  be  the  reason  why,  when  the
Jews  accused  Christ  of  treason,  Pilate's  soldiers  clad  him  in  purple,
and  Herod  put  on  him  a  white  garment.  Both  therein  applying  to
themselves  the  customs  of  their  own  country,  and  in  derision,  clothing
him  as  a  king."  (Moses  and  Aaron,  p.  12.)

22  Our  American  Brethren  thus  explain  the  white  lambskin  apron.
"  The  lamb  has  in  all  ages  been  considered  as  an  emblem  of  inno-
cence and  peace.  The  Lamb  of  God  who  taketh  away  the  sins  of
the  world,  will  grant  to  those  who  put  their  trust  in  him,  his  peace.
He,  therefore,  who  wears  the  lambskin  as  a  badge  of  Masonry,  is
reminded  of  that  purity  of  life  and  conversation,  which  it  is  abso-
lutely necessary  for  them  to  observe  who  expect  to  be  admitted  into
the  Grand  Lodge  above."  (Hardie's  Monitor,  p.  140.)

23  Josephus  thus  symbolizes  the  high  priest's  garments.  "  The
linen  of  which  they  are  composed  represents  the  earth,  and  its  violet
colour,  the  heavens.  The  pomegranates  refer  to  the  lightning,  and
the  noise  of  the  bells  to  the  thunder.  The  ephod  with  its  four
several  colours  has  a  reference  to  the  nature  of  the  universe ;  and  the
intermixture  of  gold  which  we  observe  in  it,  may  be  considered  as
referring  to  the  rays  of  the  sun.  The  essen,  which  is  placed  in  the
middle  of  the  garment,  denotes  the  situation  of  the  earth  in  the  centre
of  the  universe.  The  girdle  which  passes  round  the  body  of  the
priest,  is  a  symbol  of  the  sea  environing  the  earth.  The  sun  and
moon  may  be  supposed  to  be  expressed  by  the  two  onyx  stones ;  and
either  the  twelve  months,  or  the  signs  of  the  zodiac,  by  the  twelve


01'    FREEMASONRY.  513

his  priestly  office.24  The  ephod  was  enriched25  with
two  onyx  stones,  on  which  were  engraven  the  names  of
the  twelve  tribes  of  Israel,  six  on  one  and  six  on  the
other,26  and  placed  on  each  shoulder  for  tokens  of

other  stones.  The  violet  colour  of  the  tiara  resembles  heaven ;  and
it  would  have  manifested  a  great  want  of  reverence  to  the  Deity  to
have  inscribed  his  sacred  name  on  any  other  colour.  The  splendour
and  majesty  of  the  Supreme  Being  are  signified  by  the  triple  crown
and  plate  of  gold."  (Ant.  Jud.  1.  iii.  c.  7.)

24  In  the  high  priest's  general  apparel,  "  the  threefold  office  of  our
Saviour  Christ  was  shadowed.    The  crown  signified  his  kingly  office ;
the  Urim  and  Thurmnim,  and  likewise  his  bells  and  pomegranates,
his  prophetical  office,  for  by  Urim  and  Thummim  he  answered  as
from  an  oracle ;  by  the  bells  was  typed  the  sound  of  his  doctrine,
and  by  the  pomegranates  the  sweet  savour  of  a  holy  life  ;  the  names
of  the  twelve  tribes  engraven  on  the  ephod  and  the  breastplate,  sig-
nified his  priestly  office,  presenting  unto  God  the  whole  church,  for
which  he  maketh  intercession."  (Godwyn  ut  supra,  p.  15.)

25  Harmer  says — "  Embroidery  and  curious  needlework  were  not
unknown  to  that  age  and  that  country ;  and  that  such  ornamental
pieces  of  work  were  deposited  in  the  tabernacle;  that  the  ephod
itself  was  something  of  the  same  kind ;  and  that  such  things  were
given  to  those  that  bore  a  distinguished  part  in  gaining  a  victory."
(Observ.  vol.  ii.  p.  518.)

ze  «  ^nv  one  at  all  acquainted  with  the  arts,  is  well  aware  that  the
engraving  of  precious  stones  demands  no  common  measure  of  address,
precision,  and  knowledge.  There  must  be  a  considerable  number  of
very  fine  and  delicate  tools,  and  great  decision  of  hand  and  practice.
It  is  indeed  true,  that  the  engraving  of  names  admits  of  no  com-
parison with  the  skill  and  delicacy  of  execution  required  in  cutting
the  figures  of  men  and  animals ;  but  still,  as  to  the  essentials  of  the
art,  the  process  is  the  same  in  both,  and  the  difference  is  only  a
question  of  more  or  less  perfection.  Goguet  is  astonished  to  see,  that
in  the  time  of  Moses,  and  doubtless  earlier,  men  had  made  so  much
progress  in  art  as  to  be  able  to  execute  such  works.  Considering  the
number  of  previous  discoveries,  which  it  is  necessary  to  suppose,  as

VOL.  II.  L  L


514  HISTORICAL    LANDMARKS

remembrance.27  There  are  various  opinions  respecting
the  symbolical  reference  of  these  stones  j28  but  being
borne  on  the  shoulders  of  the  high  priest,  they  apply
generally  to  Him  who  bore  our  griefs,  and  carried  our

well  as  the  degree  of  knowledge  and  attainment  which  it  involves,
the  same  author,  not  without  reason,  is  disposed  to  regard  the
engraving  of  precious  stones  as  a  most  marked  evidence  of  the
general  progress  which  the  arts  had  made  in  certain  countries  at
a  very  early  period."  (Pict.  Bibl.  vol.  i.  p.  246.)

27  They  were  intended  to  embody  the  early  transactions  in  their
history ;  how  they  were   miserable   slaves  and  outcasts  in  Egypt ;
how  they  were  delivered   by  Jehovah  with  signs  and  wonders  and
mighty  deeds  by  the  hand  of  Mo^es  ;  and  how  they  were  fed  in  the
barren  wilderness  with  bread  from  heaven,  before  they  were  admitted
to  dwell  in  a  land  flowing  with  milk  and  honey,  and  there  to  IHVOIIM-
a  great  and  mighty  nation,  according  to  the  promise  made  to  their
forefathers,  Abraham,  Isaac,  and  Jacob.

28  From  these  stones  might  probably  proceed  the  doctrine  of  ma-
gical amulets  and  gems,  which  constituted  a  great  characteristic  of
the  spurious  Freemasonry.     In  the  history  of  Waterford  is  a  curious
account  of  the  reputed  virtues  of  such  gems  even  at  the  present  day.
"  In  a  little  isle  near  the  Skie,  in  a  chapel  dedicated  to  St.  Colon ib,
on  an  altar,  is  a  blue  stone  of  a  round  form,  always  moist.     Fisher-
men, detained  by  contrary  winds,  wasli  this  stone  with  water,  ex-
pecting thereby  to  procure  a  favourable  wind,  which  the  credulous
say  never  fails ;  it  is  likewise  applied  to  the  side  of  people  troubled
with  stitches ;  and  so  great  is  the  regard  they  have  for  this  stone,
that  they  swear  decisive  oaths  upon  it.     Baul  muly  is  a  green  stone,
like  a  globe  in  figure,  big  as  a  goose  egg ;  the  virtue  of  which  is  to
remove  stitches,  and  to  swear  upon ;  the  credulous  firmly  believe
that  if  this  stone  is  cast  among  the  front  of  an  enemy,  they  will  all
run  away.     Paracelsus  affirms,  that  by  means  of  a  crystal  stone  are
seen  things  past,  present,  and  to  come.    Of  this  sort  were  the  crystals
made  use  of  by  Dr.  Dee  and  Mr.  Kelly,  in  their  mysterious  visions
and  operations"  (p.  107).     A  curious  account  of  one  of  these  stones
may  be  found  in  the  notes  to  Sir  Walter  Scott's  romance  of  the
Talisman.


OF    FREEMASONRY.  515

sorrows  ;29  who  was  wounded  for  our  transgressions,
and  bruised  for  our  iniquities ;  and  bore  upon  his
shoulders  the  cross,  loaded  with  the  sins  of  men.

The  stones  in  the  pectoral  were  twelve,  alluding
equally  to  the  twelve  tribes  of  Israel  and  the  twelve
apostles  of  Christ.30  The  application  of  each  of  the
several  stones  to  its  particular  tribe,  in  the  former
case,  has  been  identified  ;31  but  not,  that  I  am  aware

29  The  Greeks  used  bloody  sacrifices ;  which  custom  originated,
according  to  Pausanias,  thus — "  The  Limnatse  among  the  Spartans,
arid  the  Cynosurenses,  and  those  who  came  from  Mesoa  and  Pitane,
while  they  were  sacrificing  to  Diana  quarrelled  with,  and  even  slew
each  other ;  and  as  many  of  them  died  at  the  altar,  the  rest  were
destroyed  by  disease.     Hence  an  oracle  was  given,  signifying  that
this  altar  ought  to  be  sprinkled  with  human  blood.      Lycurgus
changed  the  custom  of  sacrificing  a  man  by  lot  to  the  scourging  of
young  men  with  whips,  as  by  this  means  the  altar  is  equally  im-
brued with  human  blood."    (Lacon.  1.  3,  c.  17.)     The  doctrine  of
redemption  by  blood  was  indeed  admitted  by  all  mankind.

30  Compare  Exod.  xxviii.  21,  with  Eev.  xxi.  19,  Matt.  xix.  28.

31  This  assertion  must  be  received  \vith  some  limitation ;  for  there
exist  a  variety  of  opinions  not  only  respecting  the  identity  of  the  tribes
with  the  stones  in  the  breastplate,  but  also  with  regard  to  the  stones
themselves.     The  carbuncle  has  been  mistaken  for  the  ruby,  the
jasper  for  the  diamond,  and  the  onyx  for  the  beryl ;  while  there  are
doubts  whether  the  agate  represented  Asher,  Napthali,  or  Issachar ;
whether  the  amethyst  was  the  stone  of  Zebulun  or  Gad ;  or  whether
the  beryl  stood  for  Ephraim,  Zebulun,  or  Asher.     Willet  thus  ex-
presses himself  on  this  difficult  subject : — "  I  take  it  that  these  twelve
precious  stones  and  their  varieties  are  the  same  in  kind,  though  dif-
fering in  names.   The  jasper,  the  sapphire,  the  emerald,  the  sardonyx,
the  sardius,  the  beryl,  the  topaz,  the  amethyst,  are  expressed  by  their
names ;  all  the  question  is  about  these  four :  the  chalcedon  the  third,
the  chrysolite  the  seventh,  the  chrysoprase  the  tenth,  and  the  hya-
cinth the  eleventh,  which  may  be  reduced  to  these  kinds.    The  chal-

L  L  2


HISTORICAL    LANDMARKS


of,  in  the  latter ;  for  though  the  stones  are  classed  in
the  Apocalypse,  the  arrangement  of  the  apostles  differ
in  each  of  the  evangelists,  who  has  given  us  the  cata-
logue.    This  ornament  was  called  the  Breastplate  of
Judgment;32  because  when  the  high  priest  was  em-

cedon  is  of  like  colour  to  the  carbuncle,  and  therefore  it   may  be
referred    to    the    precious
stone  which  is  here  in  the
third  place,   bareketh,  the
carbuncle,   as   the   chalce-
don  is  the  third  there,  so
called  because  it  was  found
in  the  Chalcedon  sea,  or
rather  the  diamond  may  be
the  chalcedon  stone ;  for  as
Bede  saith,  it  shineth  with
a  pale  and  wan  colour  as
the  light  of  a  lantern,  and
the  diamond  is  like  unto
iron   red    hot ;    then    the
chrysolite  may  be  the  car-
buncle, the  chrysoprase  the
agate,  which   is  of  divers
colours,  and  so  is  the  chry-
oprase,  mixed  of  a  yellow
and  green  colour ;  the  hya-
cinth may  be  the  turquoise,
which  Hierom   taketh  for
the  hyacinth,  which  is  the
seventh  stone  in  order ;  and
he  thus  further  saith,  the
same  precious   stones  are
laid  in  the  foundation  of  the

celestial  Jerusalem."   (Hexapla  in  Exodum,  p.  64-4.)  The  above  en-
graving is  from  Calmet's  Dictionary,  edited  by  Taylor,  who  does  not


OF    FREEMASONRY.  517

ployed  in  matters  of  importance  he  always  wore  it,
for  it  was  the  sacred  depository  of  the  Urim  and
Thummim.33

The  first  stone  was  a  sardius,  or  ruby,34  and  referred

assign  any  reason  why  he  has  arranged  the  tribes  differently  from  the
statement  in  the  twenty-eighth  chapter  of  Deutronomy ;  and  merely
observes  that  "the  names  given  to  the  stones  here  are  not  free
from  doubt,  for  we  are  very  imperfectly  acquainted  with  this  part  of
natural  science."  The  engraving,  however,  will  afford  a  very  correct
idea  of  the  construction  of  this  mysterious  emblem.

32  The  breastplate  of  the  High  Priest  in  a  Eoyal  Arch  Chapter  is
an  imitation  of  that  upon  which  were  engraven  the  names  of  the
twelve  tribes,  and  worn  by  the  high  priest  of  Israel ;  and  is  intended
to  teach  the  wearer  that  he  is  always  to  bear  in  mind  his  responsi-
bility to  the  laws   and  ordinances  of  the  institution,  and  that  the
honour  and  interests  of  his  Chapter  and  its  members  should  be
an  object  of  his  most  anxious  attention.    (Cross.  Masonic  Chart.

p.  137.)

33  We  need  not  wonder  at  the  refinements  of  art  which  were  neces-
sary to  produce  this  superb  ornament,  or  the  decorations  of  the
tabernacle  generally  ;  for  independently  of  the  fact  that  Bezaleel  and
Aholiab  were  divinely  inspired,  the  Israelites  must  have  attained
much  artistical  knowledge  in  Egypt,  where  mechanical  pursuits  were
carried  to  great  perfection.    Spineto  says — "  besides  enamelling,  the
art  of  gilding  was  in  great  perfection  among  them,  and  they  knew
how  to  beat  gold  nearly  as  thin  as  ours ;  for  Belzoni  found  many
ornaments  of  the  kind,  and  a  leaf  of  gold,  which  appeared  to  him
extremely  pure,  and  of  a  finer  colour  than  is  generally  seen  in  our
own.     They  knew  also  how  to  cast  copper  and  form  it  into  sheets ;
and  had  a  metallic  composition  not  unlike  our  lead,  rather  softer,
but  of  greater  tenacity.     Carved  works  were  very  common,  and  in
great  perfection,  particularly  in  the  proportion  of  their  figures."
(Hier.  p.,  38.)

34  The  ancients  had  many  curious  fancies  about  these  stones ;  the
ruby  they  described  as  a  red  gem,  shining  in  the  dark  like  a  spark


518  HISTORICAL    LANDMARKS

to  Reuben.35  The  next  was  a  topaz,36  a  stone  anciently
reputed  to  be  an  antidote  to  lunacy,37  and  was  referred
to  Simeon.38  The  third  was  a  carbuncle,  which  shines
gloriously  in  the  dark,39  and  was  hence  an  emblem  of
the  princely  tribe  of  Judah.40  The  first  stone  in  the

of  fire,  which  was  reputed  to  purify  the  sight,  and  to  expel  sad  and
troublesome  dreams.

35  Not  from  any  similarity  in  the  name,  but  because  of  his  fiery
temper  and  sanguine  disposition,  which  induced  him  to  violate  his
father's  concubine,  igne  libidinls  incensus  fuit;  and  produced  that
remarkable  sentence,  which  was  afterwards  indicative  of  the  tribe-
unstable  as  water  he  shall  not  excel.

36  The  topaz  was  anciently  called  a  chrysolite,  because  of  its  golden
colour.     It  is  now  considered  as  a  variety  of  the  sapphire.     The
finest  topazes  in  the  world  are  found  in  the  East  Indies.     The  Great
Mogul  possesses  one  which  is  said  to  weigh  157  carats,  and  worth
upwards  of  £20,000  sterling.

37  There  are  two  kinds  of  topazes,  one  of  a  gold  colour,  reflecting
the  beams  of  the  sun ;  and  the  other  inferior,   being  of  a  saffron
colour.     It  was  an  ancient  belief,  that  if  this  stone  were  put  into
boiling  water  it  would  immediately  cool  it ;  and  that  being  laid  on
a  wound,  the  blood  immediately  ceases  to  flow.

38  This  patriarch,  inflamed  with  unholy  passion  and  insane  resent-
ment, led  his  brethren  to  the  slaughter  of  the  Shechemites,  when
they  were  incapable  of  defending  themselves  from  the  effects  of  their
credulity.     For  this  breach  of  faith  and  charity  he  was  subjected  to
his  father's  dying  imprecation.

39  This  gem  was  known  amongst  the  ancients  by  the  name  of
autharax.     When  held  up  against  the  sun  it  loses  its  deep  tinge  of
scarlet,  and  becomes  of  the  colour  of  burning  charcoal,  from  whence
it  derives  its  name.

40  Of  this  tribe  came  David  and  Solomon,  in  whose  time  the
Israelitish  nation  was  exalted  to  its  greatest  glory.     And  as  the  car-
buncle gives  a  red  light  like  fire,  it  typified  the  Messiah,  who  sprang
from  the  tribe  of  Judah,  and  appeared  in  fire  to  Moses  and  the
patriarchs.


OF    FREEMASONRY.  519

second  row  was  an  emerald,41  a  green  gem,42  which
reflects  other  colours  on  its  shining  surface,  like  the
glittering  skin  of  a  serpent;43  and  hence  it  was  appro-
priated to  Dan,  who  is  compared  by  his  father  to  "  an
adder  in  the  way."  The  next  was  the  sapphire,44  an
emblem  of  Napthali,45  on  account  of  its  celestial  beauty.


4ti


41  The  emerald  is  of  a  transparent  green  colour,  and  was  formerly
believed  to  defend  the  wearer  from  the  falling  sickness,  and  to  protect
female  chastity.

42  "  Green,  the  symbol  of  the  regeneration  of  the  soul,  of  the  spi-
ritual new  birth,  was  the  emblem  of  natural  birth.    Tor  a  long  period
to  the  emerald  was  superstitiously  attributed  the  miraculous  virtue  of
hastening  childbirth.     That  the  neophyte  must  gain  the  victory  over
his  passions  was  prefigured  in  the  books  of  Genesis,  the  Zends,  and
the,  Eddas,  by  the  serpent.     That  emerald  powder  cures  the  bite  of
venomous  animals  was  a  popular  legend.     Green  was  the  symbol  of
immortality  and  of  worldly  hope."   (Symb.  Col.  p.  10.)

43  "  Caerulea3  cui  terga  nota3  maculosus  et  auro

Squamam  incendebat  fulgor,  ceu  nubibus  arcus

Mille  trahit  varios,  adverse  sole  colores."   (Virgil  M\\.  v.)

44  The  sapphire  is  a  transparent  gem  of  an  azure  colour,  found  in
the  East.     It  was  said  to  be  of  a  frigid  nature :  corroborating  the
heart,  preserving  chastity,  and  serving  as  an  antidote  against  the
bite  of  serpents,  poison,  or  pestilence.

45  The  apostles  of  our  Saviour  are  thought  to  have  been  of  this
tribe,  who  propagated  amongst  mankind  the  heavenly  doctrines  of
their  divine  master,  that  the  saving  truths  of  his  gospel  might  be
proclaimed  to  the  end  of  the  world,  and  all  mankind  inherit  the
beauty  of  holiness.

46  It  was  an  emblem  of  truth.    Thus  ^Elian  (1.  xiv.  c.  24),  says —
"  The  judges  in  old  time  amongst  the  Egyptians  were  priests,  the
chief  of  whom  was  considered  to  be  a  man  of  perfect  justice,  because
in  his  decisions  he  favoured  neither  rich  nor  poor.     As  a  symbol  of
his  office  he  wore  round  his  neck  an  ornament  embellished  with
sapphires,  which  was  called  Truth."


520


HISTORICAL    LANDMARKS


And  the  last  a  diamond,47  a  precious  stone  hard  and
insoluble,  and  not  capable  of  being  molified  cither  with
iron  or  fire;48  and  hence  it  was  symbolical  of  Gad."

47  "  The  diamond,  says  superstition,  calms  anger,  binds  the  married
in  union,  and  is  named  the  stone  of  reconciliation.     Wisdom,  inno-
cence, and  faith  indicated  by  the  whiteness  and  purity  of  this  stone ;
appease  anger,  bind  conjugal  affection,  and  reconcile  man  with  (!<>d.
In    iconologic  language,    according  to  Noel,   the  diamond  is  the
symbol  of  constancy,  of  power,  of  innocence,  and  other  heroic  virtues.
Popular  tales  account  that  diamonds  produce  diamonds.    Kucns  pre-
tends that  a  princess  of  Luxemburg  possessed  an  hereditary  family  of
them.     Do  we  not  recogni/e  in  this,  that  wisdom  is  transmitted  from
ancestors,  and  engenders  all  the  virtues  ?    Kpiphanius  wrote  that  the.
chief  priest  of  Israel  wore  a  diamond  \\hen  he  entered  into  the  sanc-
tuary at  the  thn:e  grand  festival-;  of  the  year.     This  stone  >hoii<-  with
the  brilliancy  of  snow  \\hen  aimouucin<:  an  auspicious  event  ;  it  ap-
peared red  as  blood  at   approaching  war  ;  and  black  when  general
woe  was  near.     Here  is  found  the  altered  tradition  of  the  Urim  and
Thnmmim,  which  manifested  the  divine  responsions  by  the  variations
of  light."  (Symb.  Col.  p.  18.)

48  Goguet  brings  forward  many  reasons  in  proof  of  the  hypothesis,
that  the  diamond  was  unknown  in  the  time  of  Moses.     He  says —
"  I  do  not  think  one  ought  to  put  the  diamond  among  the  precious
stones  they  knew  at  that  time.     Many  reasons  authorize  this  doubt.
1  could  immediately  avail  myself  of  the  opinions  of  interpreter!  and
commentators,  the  greater  part  of  whom  do  not  admit  of  the  diamond.
1  could  likewise  show,  that  those  who  have  thought  proper  to  com-
prehend this  stone  among  those  of  the  breastplate,  are  not  supported
by  any  certain  etymology."  (Origin  of  Laws,  vol.  ii.  p.  114.)

49  Because  his  courage  is  described  as  that  "  of  a  lion  who  teareth
the  arm  with  the  crown  of  the  head."     "  The  diamond  is  the  most
precious  of  all  stones,  and  the  hardest,  insomuch  that  it  cutteth  glass,
and  yieldeth  not  to  the  stroke  of  hammer  or  fire ;  notwithstanding  it
is  softened  with  goats'  blood  being  warm,  soon  after  she  hath  eaten
parsley  or  drunken  wine."    (Hexameron,  p.  256.)     "  The  diamond,
in  its  most  perfect  state,   is  clear  and  pellucid  as  the  purest  water,


OF    FREEMASONRY.  521

In  the  third  row  was  a  ligure,  hyacinth,50  or  turquoise,
of  a  blue  mineral  colour,51  appropriated  to  Asher  ;52  an

and  is  eminently  distinguished  from  all  other  substances  by  its  vivid
splendour  and  the  brightness  of  its  reflections.  However,  it  is  fre-
quently found  tinged  with  a  yellowish,  bluish,  reddish,  and  sometimes
a  greenish  cast,  by  the  accidental  mixture  of  some  metalline  particles ;
but  the  tinges  are  usually  slight,  and  in  these  states  it  is  extremely
different  from  other  gems  of  those  colours,  being  of  infinitely  greater
lustre.  The  largest  diamond  in  the  world  was  that  in  possession  of
the  Great  Mogul ;  it  weighed  279  carats,  and  was  valued  at  .£779,244
sterling."  (Univ.  Displ.  vol.  ii.  p.  204.)

50  "  St.  Epiphanius  compares  the  virtues  of  the  hyacinth  to  those
of  the  salamander.     Not  only,  says  Gregory  Nazianzen,  the  sala-
mander lived  in  and  delighted  in  flames,  but  more,  she  extinguished
fire.     The  hyacinth,  says  Epiphanius,  placed  in  a  fierce  furnace  is
unaffected,  and  even  extinguishes  it.     The  salamander  and  the  hya-
cinth were  symbols  of  enduring  faith,  which  triumphs  over  the  ardour
of  the  passions,  and  extinguishes  them.     Submitted  to  fire,  the  hya-
cinth is  discoloured  and  becomes  white ;  we  may  here  perceive  a
symbol  of  triumphant  faith."   (Symb.  Col.  p.  15.)

51  "  In  Cosmogonies,  Divine  Wisdom  creates  the  world,  and  the
Creator  is  always  coloured  blue.     Vischnu,  according  to  the  sacred
books  of  the  Hindoos,  was  born  of  a  blue  colour.     Does  not  this
indicate  that  wisdom,  emanating  from  God,  is  symbolized  by  azure  ?
On  Langley's  Indian  monuments  Vischnu  is  twice  represented  creating
the  world — his  body  is  celestial  blue.     In  Egypt,  the  supreme  god,
the  creator  of  the  universe,  Cneph,  was  painted  skyblue.    In  Greece,
azure  is  the  colour  of  Jupiter.     In  China,  heaven  is  the  supreme
god  ;  and  in  Christian  symbolism  the  azure  vault  is  the  mantle  which
veils  the  Divinity.    Azure  is  likewise  the  symbol  of  God  the  Saviour,
Eedeemer  of  mankind."    (Ibid.  p.  18.)

52  Because  his  portion  of  the  land  of  Canaan  abounded  in  minerals
and  metals.     "  The  turquoise  is  dark,  of  a  sky-colour,  and  grcv    ish.
It  helpeth  weak  eyes  and  spirits,  refresheth  the  heart,  and,  if  i  c
wearer  of  it  be  not  well,  it  changeth  colour  and  looketh  pale  and  dnL
but  increascth  to  his  perfectness  as  the  wearer  recovereth  to  his
health. —


.22


HISTORICAL    LANDMARKS


agate,  on  which  is  frequently  depicted  by  the  hand  of
nature  mosses,  trees,  and  rural  productions  generally  ;"*

"  The  sympatliizing  turquoise  true  doth  tell,
By  looking  pale,  the  wearer  is  not  well."

(Hexameron,  p.  25U.)

"  The  virtues  of  the  turquoise,"  says  Willet  (Hexapla  in  Exodum),
"  are  these  :  it  taketh  up  straws  as  the  loadstone  drawcth  iron ;  it
discovcreth  poison,  and  is  good  for  those  that  want  colour.  They
say  it  is  comfortable  to  the  stomach,  and  stayeth  the  flux.  It  rather
imitated  the  purple  colour,  which  was  one  of  the  four  used  in  the
tabernacle."

53  On  many  agates  are  representations  of  men,  animals,  and  rural
ncry,  inscribed  by  the  hand  of  nature.  \'el>ehius  had  in  his  custody
an  agate,  on  one  side  of  which  appeared  a  half  moon  in  great  per-
fection, represented  by  a  milky  semicircle ;  on  the  other  sirfe,  the
phases  of  Vesper,  or  the  evening  star;  whence  he  denominated  it  an
aphrodisian  agate.  Another  is  mentioned  by  Kircher,  on  which  was
the  representation  of  a  heroine  armed  ;  and  one  in  the  church  of  St.
Mark,  at  Venice,  has  the  representation  of  a  king's  head  adorned
with  a  diadem.  An  agate  in  the  cabinet  of  the  late  King  of  France
had  a  figure  of  St.  John  the  Evangelist,  carried  away  by  an  eagle  and
crowned  by  an  angel.  On  others  we  find  the  triumph  of  Joseph —
our  first  parents,  with  tree,  serpent,  &c. ;  and  Kircher  mentions  one
containing  the  letters  I.  N.  R.  I.  In  the  museum  of  the  Prince  of
Gonzaga  was  an  agate  with  the  body  of  a  man  in  a  running  posture.
A  still  more  curious  one  is  mentioned  by  De  Boot,  wherein  appears
a  circle  struck  in  brown,  as  exactly  as  if  it  had  been  done  with  a  pair
of  compasses,  and  in  the  centre  of  the  circle  the  exact  form  of  a
bishop  in  his  mitre.  By  inverting  the  stone  a  little  another  figure
appears ;  and  if  it  be  turned  still  further  two  others  appear,  one
a  male  and  the  other  a  female.  We  find  also  the  apotheosis  of
Augustus  and  of  Germanicus ;  the  figures  of  Ceres  and  Triptolernus,
Jupiter,  and  Minerva,  &c.  &c.  But  the  most  curious  agate  of  that
description  is  that  of  Pyrrhus,  wherein  were  represented  the  nine
Muses,  each  with  their  proper  attributes,  standing  in  a  circle,  arid  in
the  centre  Apollo,  playing  on  the  harp.  In  the  emperor's  cabinet  is
an  oriental  agate  of  surprising  bigness,  being  fashioned  into  a  cup,


OF    FREEMASONRY.  523

and  was  hence  an  emblem  of  Issachar;54  and  an  ame-
thyst,55 of  a  blue  and  delicate  violet  colour,56  resembling
the  blue  sea ;  and  therefore  symbolical  of  the  inactive
tribe  of  Zebulun.57  The  last  row  commenced  with  the
beryl,58  a  green  gem  ascribed  to  Ephraim,59  but  where-

whose  diameter  is  an  ell,  bating  two  inches.  In  the  cavity  is  found
delineated  in  black  specks,  B.  X  E I S  T  O  E.  S.  X  X  X.

54  Because  it  was  a  rural   tribe,    addicted   to   the    pursuits  of
husbandry.

55  The  amethyst  is  sometimes  found  colourless,  and  may  at  any
time  be  easily  made  so  by  putting  it  in  the  fire,  in  which  pellucid  or
colourless  state,  it  so  resembles  the  diamond,  that  its  want  of  hardness
seems  the  only  way  of  distinguishing  it.    The  notion  that  it  prevented
intoxication,  however  imaginary,  prevailed  to  that  degree  amongst  the
ancients,  that  it  was  usual  for  great  drinkers  to  wear  it  about  their
necks.     Mr.  Morin  showed  Dr.  Lister  a  large  piece  of  French  ame-
thyst, which  weighed  between  two  hundred  and  three  hundred  pounds.
Eay  speaks  of  a  mountain  of  amethysts.    The  oriental  amethysts  are
the  best ;  some  of  the  finer  specimens  being  so  hard  and  bright  as  to
equal  any  of  the  coloured  gems  in  value.

se  (t  yiolet  was  typical  of  the  mystic  nuptials  of  our  Lord  and  his
church ;  the  Saviour,  by  the  divine  sacrifice,  was  the  type  of  that
which  man  should  accomplish  on  earth ;  it  is  only  in  this  world  that
man  can  attain  celestial  union,  for  there  is  no  marriage  in  heaven.
Violet  was  assigned  to  martyrs,  because  they  underwent,  in  imitation
of  their  divine  master,  the  punishment  of  the  cross."  (Symb.  Col.
p.  16.)

57  This  tribe  is  described  as  "  sucking  of  the  abundance  of  the  seas,
and  of  treasures  hid  in  the  sand."

58  The  properties  of  the  beryl  were  very  wonderful,  in  the  opinions
of  the  ancient  naturalists ;  for  instance,  it  kept  people  from  falling
into  ambuscades  of  enemies ;  excited  courage  in  the  fearful ;  and
cured  diseases  of  the  eyes  and  stomach.    It  has  none  of  these  virtues
now,  because  in  this  enlightened  age  men  have  not  the  credulity  tcv
believe  in  them.

59  Some  think  Zebulun  was  represented  by  the  beryl.


524  HISTORICAL    LANDMARKS

fore  I  am  at  a  loss  to  determine.  Then  followed
onyx,60  a  stone  of  a  very  light  vermilion,  or  colour  of
healthy  human  flesh,  which  was  ascribed  to  Manasseh.61
And  lastly  the  jasper,  a  green  stone  speckled  with  red
spots,  like  clots  of  blood,  was  a  striking  symbol  of
Benjamin.62

The  general  signification,  or  symbolical  reference  of
the  pectoral  was  this — the  four  rows  of  precious  stones
referred  to  the  four  cardinal  virtues  ; "3  and  the  three
stones  in  each,  to  the  three  theological  virtues.64  The
twelve  stones  denoted  the  precious  doctrines  of  chris-

60  The  word  oi/u£  signifies  nail;  the  poets  feigning  this  stone  to
have  been  formed  from  a  piece  of  Yenus's  nail,  cut  off  by  Cupid  with
one  of  his  arrows.     It  was  said,  in  the  age  of  credulity,  to  be  a  great
preservative  of  chastity,  and  to  cure  ulcers  about  the  nails.    Albertus
Magnus  says,  that  if  it  be  suspended  from  the  neck  it  will  contribute
to  strengthen  the  body.

61  On  account  of  his  superior  courtesy  and  humanity.     By  the
reddish  whiteness  of  this  stone,  some  have  understood  the  pleasant
virtues  of  Joseph  transferred  to  Manasseh.     Its  flesh  colour  may
properly  signify  a  tender  affection.

62  Of  this  tribe  Jacob  prophecied — "Benjamin  shall  ravin  as  a
wolf;  in  the  morning  he  shall  devour  the  prey,  and  at  night  he  shall
divide  the  spoil."     And  their  warlike  and  unyielding  disposition  was
manifested  in  their  fighting  singlehauded  against  all  Israel,  till  they
were  utterly  destroyed  and  almost  annihilated  as  a  tribe.    The  jasper
is  possessed  of  an  astringent  quality,  and  stauncheth  blood.     Pliny
says,  tot  habet  virtutes  quot  venas — it  hath  as  many  virtues  as  veins ;
thus  resembling  the  perfection  of  Benjamin,  when  it  pleased  the
Lord  to  build  his  temple  in  that  tribe,  and  to  dwell  amongst  them.

63  The  colours  and  precious  stones  in  the  vestments  and  breast-
plate, symbolize  the  utmost  perfection  of  wisdom,  truth,  purity,  virtue,
and  justice.

64  These  still  continue  to  be  important  subjects  of  illustration  in
the  present  system  of  Freemasonry.


OF    FREEMASONRY.  525

tianity  promulgated  by  the  twelve  apostles ;  and  the
Urim  and  Thummim,  the  vital  spark  of  these  doctrines,
was  Christ,  who  bears  his  church  to  the  throne  of
heaven,  as  the  high  priest  bore  that  mystical  oracle  on
his  breast.65  This  utensil  has  been  variously  explained,
one  translating  the  words  Urim  and  Thummim  by
elucidations  and  perfections ;  another  doctrines  and
truths;  others  brightness  and  perfection,  justice  and
doctrine,  lucid  and  perfect,  &c.  Philo  says,  they  were
duas  virtutes  depictas ;  and  the  Seventy  translate  them
by  the  words  A^UO-CI/  and  AX^ciav,  manifestations  and
truth.66  They  were  certainly  some  tangible  substances,

65  Here  also  the  high  priest  was  a  significant  type  of  the  Messiah.
His  ornaments  are  compared  by  Grotius  to  those  of  the  temple,  as
though  the  temple  and  the  high  priest  were  identified  as  a  standing
emblem  of  Christ. — "  The  colours,"  says  he,  "  have  the  same  refer-
ence.   The  priestly  garments  answer  to  the  lamps ;  the  jewels  to  the
twelve  loaves ;  the  inner  linings  of  the  ephod  to  the  veil  and  six
curtains."   (Grot,  in  Exod.  xxviii.  518.)

66  A  similar  instrument,  or  judicial  amulet,  was  used  in  Egypt
before  the  Exode.    Wilkinson  (Manners  and  Customs,  vol.  ii.  p.  27)
says — "  When  a  case  was  brought  for  trial,  it  was  customary  for  the
arch  judge  to  put  a  golden  chain  round  his  neck,  to  which  was  sus-
pended a  small  figure  of  Truth,  ornamented  with  precious  stones.
This  was,  in  fact,  a  representation  of  the  goddess  who  was  worshipped
under  the  double  character  of  truth  and  justice,  and  whose  name,
Thmei,  appears  to  have  been  the  origin  of  the  Hebrew  Thummim ;
a  word,  according  to  the  Septuagint  translation,  implying  truth,  and
bearing  a  further  analogy  to  its  plural  termination."     Diodorus  and
others  tell  us  the  same  thing — "  The  chief  judge  of  Egypt,"  he  says,
"  has  Truth  suspended  from  his  neck."    (Diod.  1.  i. ;  ^Elian.  Var.
Hist.  1.  xiv.  c.  34.)     In  like  manner  the  archdruid  of  Britain  was
invested  with  a  mysterious  jewel,  called  the  Breastplate  of  Judgment ;
and  the  people  were  impressed  with  an  unshaken  belief,  that  "  if  he
gave  a  wrong  judgment,  it  would  close  round  his  neck  and  strangle


526


HISTORICAL    LANDMARKS


which  were  placed  in  the  doublings  of  the  pectoral,  as
in  a  purse  or  pocket,  by  which  responses  were  vouch-
safed to  the  wearer  of  the  ephod.67  We  are,  however,
very  much  in  the  dark  about  these  divine  things,68  nor

him ;  but  if  he  gave  a  just  judgment,  it  would  expand  itself,  and
hang  loose  upon  his  shoulders.  It  was  applied  for  the  same  purpose
to  the  necks  of  witnesses."  (Gough's  Camb.  vol.  ii.  p.  230.)  Lord
1'rudhoe  has  very  ingeniously  suggested  that  the  Urirn  is  derived
from  the  two  asps  or  basilisks,  Ureit  which  were  the  emblems  of
royalty  in  Egypt.  "  The  chief  priest  of  the  Jews,"  continues  the
above  author,  "  who  before  the  election  of  a  king  was  also  the  judge
of  the  nation,  was  alone  entitled  to  wear  this  honorary  badge,  which,
like  the  Egyptian  breastplate  of  judgment,  was  studded  with  precious
stones  of  various  colours."

67  "  The  Jews  were  governed  by  the  high  priest,  as  the  prime
minister  under  God,  who  in  all  weighty  cases  consulted  (Jod  what
was  to  be  done ;  which  is  the  reason  why  God  commands  Moses  to
make  such  garments  for  Aaron  as  should  be  for  his  glory  and  beauty,
to  make  him  appear  great  like  a  prince ;  for  they  were  really  royal
garments.    And  for  his  sons  also  he  was  to  make  bonnets  of  the  like
kind  for  honour  and  glory,  they  being  in  the  form  of  the  tiarse  which
kings  wore,   and  are  joined  in  scripture  with  crowns."     (Patrick.
Comment,  vol.  i.  p.  266.)

68  Archbishop  Tenison  conceived  Uriin  to  be  two  golden  images
with  wings,  shaped  like  serpents,  or  seraphim,   to  correspond  with
the  two  cherubim  of  the  mercy  seat ;  as  he  takes  the  breastplate  to
have  been  a  transcript  of  the  ark  of  the  covenant.     And  Dr.  Spencer
and  others  have  entertained  the  same  opinion.  Thummim,  he  thought,
was  a  copy  of  the  moral  law,  or  decalogue,  written  in  small  characters
on  a  roll,  or  engraven  on  a  stone,  and  put  into  the  pectoral,  as  the
two  tables  of  stone,  which  Moses  received  on  the  mount,  were  depo-
sited in  the  ark.     If  this  be  true,  the  oracle  would  be  in  the  Urim
alone.  (See  1  Sam.  xxviii.  6.)     Willett  is  of  opinion,  that  the  Urim
and  Thummim  were  written  in  some  precious  matter,  not  made  by
art,  but  prepared  of  God,  and  given  to  Moses,  who  put  them  within
the  breastplate.


OF    FREEMASONRY.  527

does  Freemasonry  enlighten  us.  The  use  of  this  oracle,
like  the  pronunciation  of  the  sacred  name  of  God,  was
an  ineffable  secret,  communicated  by  the  high  priest  to
none  but  those  of  his  own  order  and  degree,  and  con-
sequently it  has  not  descended  to  our  times.  The  Jewish
doctors  think  it  was  the  Tetragrammaton,69  because^they
entertain  a  high  opinion  of  its  efficacy,70  and  suppose
that  miracles  may  be  performed  by  its  use  ;71  and  hence

69  Michaelis  was  of  a  different  opinion.     He  says — "  If,  without
stating  the  grounds  of  it,  I  might  briefly  mention,  it  was  three  very
ancient  stones,  which  the  Israelites,  before  Moses'  time,  used  as  lots ;
one  of  them  marked  with  an  affirmative,  a  second  with  a  negative,
and  a  third  blank,  or  neutral ;  and  which  Moses  commanded  to  be
kept  within  the  choseh,  or  breastplate ;  and  had  no  connexion  with
the  twelve  precious  stones  therein  set."     (Laws  of  Moses,  vol.  i,
p.  261.)

70  The  words  of  Spencer  are — "  Dicam  verbo,  asserit  hypothesis
mea,  Deum  e  pectorali  voce  formata  respondisse,  mediante  simulachra
prsesentia   angelica  animate,  et  in  hominis  forte  speciem  efficto  j
utpote  organo,   quo  nullum  ad  vocem  formandam  vel  prassentiam
illam  indicandam  magis  aptum  et  decorum,  aut  oracula  tradendi
modo  in  sancto  sanctorum  usitato  magis  conforme  fingi  potest."  (De
Leg.  Heb.  Eit.  1.  iii.  c.  3.)

71  Hence  originated  the  heathen  oracles,  and  the  demon  of  Socrates,
by  which,  that  philosopher  said,  "that  he  repeatedly  received  a  divine
premonition  of  dangers  impending  over  himself  and  others ;  and  con-
siderable pains  have  been  taken  to  ascertain  the  cause  and  author  of
these  premonitions.     Several  persons,  among  whom  we  may  include
Plato,  have  conceived  that  Socrates  regarded  himself  as  attended  by
a  supernatural  guardian,  who  at  all  times  watched  over  his  welfare
and  concerns.     But  the  solution  is  probably  of  a  simpler  nature.
Socrates,  with  all  his  incomparable  excellencies  and  perfections,  was
not  exempt  from  the  superstitions  of  his  age  and  country.     He  had
been  bred  up  among  the  absurdities  of  polytheism.     In  them  were
included  a  profound  deference  for  the  responses  of  oracles,  and  a
vigilant  attention  to  portents  and  omens.     Plato  tells  us  that  this


528  HISTORICAL    LANDMARKS

they  affirmed  that  this  sacred  name72  in  the  inmost
recesses  of  the  temple.73  The  manner  in  which  responses
were  delivered  by  Urim74  has  been  a  fruitful  source  of
conjecture  with  learned  men  in  all  ages  ;75  and  after

intimation,  which  lie  spoke  of  as  his  demon,  never  prompted  him  to
any  act,  but  occasionally  interfered  to  prevent  him  from  proceeding
in  anything  that  would  have  been  attended  with  injurious  conse-
quences. Sometimes  he  described  it  as  a  voice  which  no  one  heard
but  himself;  and  sometimes  it  showed  itself  in  the  act  of  sneezing.
If  the  sneezing  came  when  he  was  in  doubt  to  do  a  thing  or  not  to
do  it,  it  confirmed  him ;  but  if,  being  already  engaged  in  any  act,  he
sneezed,  this  he  considered  as  a  warning  to  desist."  (Lives  of  the
Necromancers,  p.  114.)

72  See  Basnage,  p.  194.     Sandys  says  "  that  the  Jews  believed
that  our  Saviour  entered  into  the  sanctum  sanctorum,  and  taking
from  thence  this  powerful  name,  sewed  it  up  in  his  thigh,  arid  by  its
virtue  he  could  make  himself  invisible;  that  he  rode  on  the  sun-
beams, raised  the  dead  to  life,  and  performed  many  other  wonderful
things."  (Travels,  p.  147,  ed.  1615.)

73  But  this  conjecture  appears  scarcely  tenable,  because  the  Name
was  engraven  on  the  golden  plate  of  the  mitre,  and  therefore  its
repetition  would  be   unnecessary.      Many  believe  that  Urim  and
Thummim  were  not  visible  substances  of  any  kind,  but  consisted  of
virtues  with  which  the  pectoral  was  endowed  at  its  consecration  by
the  especial  favour  of  God,  which  enabled  it  to  reply,  by  some  method
which  the  high  priest  understood,  when  he  was  invested  with  the
ephod  to  which  it  was  permanently  attached,  to  inquiries  proposed
according  to  the  divine  directions,  and  for  the  general  benefit  of  the
Jewish  people.

74  "  After  the  death  of  Moses,  the  high  priest  put  on  the  breast-
plate of  judgment,  and  presented  himself  before  the  Lord  to  ask
counsel,  without  the  veil,  with  his  face  towards  the  ark  of  the  cove-
nant inside ;  and  behind  him,  at  some  distance,  without  the  sanctuary,
stood  Joshua,  the  judge,  or  person  who  wanted  the  response,  which
seems  to  have  been  given  with  an  audible  voice  from  within  the
veil."  (Hales.  Anal.  vol.  li.  p.  240.)

7:5  The  portable  character  of  the  tabernacle  rendered  an  imposture


OF    FREEMASONRY.  529

all,  it  can  be  only  supposition ;  for  what  the  Deity  has
not  condescended  to  reveal,  man  will  be  scarcely  able
to  discover.76  The  opinion  that  it  was  effected  by  an

in  this  case  impracticable ;  whilst  the  oracles  of  other  nations  were
all  the  effect  of  imposition.  Fosbroke  has  collected  several  instances.
"  In  the  temples  of  Venus,"  he  says,  speaking  of  that  at  Argos,  "  the
further  from  the  entrance,  where  the  altar  was,  being  an  excavation
of  the  rock,  the  altar  yet  remains ;  but  the  most  remarkable  part
of  the  whole  is  a  secret  subterranean  passage,  terminating  behind
the  altar,  its  entrance  being  at  a  considerable  distance,  towards  the
right  of  a  person  facing  the  altar,  and  so  cunningly  contrived,  as  to
have  a  small  aperture,  also  concealed,  and  level  with  the  surface  of
the  rock.  This  was  barely  large  enough  to  admit  the  entrance  of  a
single  person,  who,  having  descended  into  the  narrow  passage,  might
creep  along  until  he  arrived  immediately  behind  the  centre  of  the
altar,  where  being  hid  by  some  colossal  statue,  or  other  screen,  the
sound  of  his  voice  would  produce  a  most  imposing  effect  among
the  humble  votaries  prostrate  beneath,  who  were  listening  in  silence
upon  the  floor  of  the  sanctuary."  (Foreign  Topog.  p.  22.)  In  the
hieron  of  Trophonius,  "  the  throne  of  Mnemosyne  was  near  to  the
adytum,  where  those  who  came  from  consulting  the  oracle  being-
seated,  underwent  the  necessary  interrogatories.  This  chamber  is
five  feet  ten  inches  from  the  ground ;  immediately  below  it  is  the
stoma,  or  sacred  aperture  of  the  adytum  ;  it  is  small  and  low,  shaped
like  an  oven,  and  barely  capacious  enough  to  admit  the  passage  of  a
man's  body.  Here  the  oracle  was  delivered,"  (p.  121.)  In  like
manner,  at  Narbonne,  in  the  garden  of  the  ancient  theatre,  there  is,
or  was,  a  very  curious  antique,  commonly  called  1' Hotel  des  Oracles.
It  is  a  small  niche  with  an  aperture,  through  which  the  oracular
voice  is  supposed  to  have  proceeded.  The  part  called  Canopus  of
the  Villa  of  Hadrian,  at  Tibur,  contained  a  secret  upper  room  which
was  used  for  oracular  purposes ;  and  the  responses  were  delivered  by
a  priest  concealed  there  for  that  especial  duty.  And  it  required  an
ingenious  and  ready  witted  man  to  adapt  his  reply  in  such  an  equi-
vocal form,  that,  however  the  event  might  happen,  the  prediction
should  be  true.

76  Lindo,  the  Jew,  gives  the  following  opinion  on  this  subject. —

VOL.  II.  M  M


530  HISTORICAL    LANDMARKS

audible  voice  is  the  most  probable.77  And  hence  the
heathen  oracles  might  originate,78  which  always  deli-

«c  As  some  persons  may  be  curious  to  know  how  the  inanimate  stones
of  the  breastplate  could  predict  by  the  Urim  and  Thummim  the  will
of  the  Omnipotent,  the  following  tradition  of  our  sages  fully  explains
it : — When  any  particular  tribe  was  indicated,  the  stone  bearing  its
name  shone  with  extraordinary  and  unusual  lustre,  and  the  decision
was  pointed  out  by  the  letters  of  the  alphabet  forming  it  protruding
in  a  manner  visible  to  all  present ;  so  that  it  might  not  be  supposed
the  high  priest,  who  proclaimed  it,  was  guided  by  his  own  will,  like
the  priests  of  heathen  oracles.  The  following  example  (Judges  i.  12),
will  demonstrate  it  clearly — when  it  was  asked  of  the  Lord,  who
shall  go  up  first  ?  the  answer  was  Jndah.  The  emerald,  on  which
his  name  was  engraven,  shone  resplendently,  and  the  letters  of  the
word  H/liS'S  he  shall  go  up,  protruded."

77  Thus,  in  the  case  of  David,  I  am  at  a  loss  to  form  any  other
conjecture ;  because,  if  it  had  been  a  different  method  of  response,
the  high  priest  alone  would  have  been  able  to  interpret  it.     "  David
said  to  Abiathar,  the  priest,  bring  hither  the  ephod.     Then  said
David,  0  Lord  God  of  Israel,  thy  servant  hath  certainly  heard  that
Saul  seeketh  to  come  to  Keilah,  to  destroy  the  city  for  my  sake.
Will  the  men  of  Keilah  deliver  me  up  into  his  hand  ?     Will  Saul
come  down  as  thy  servant  hath  heard  ?     And  the  Lord  said,  he  ivill
come  down.     Then  said  David,  will  the  men  of  Keilah  deliver  me
and  my  men  into  the  hand  of  Saul?     And  the  Lord  said,  they  will
deliver  thee  up."   (1  Sam.  xxiii.  9 — 12.)     Thus  also  at  the  original
institution  of  the  pectoral,  it  is  said  that  "  when  Moses  was  gone
into  the  tabernacle  of  the  congregation  to  speak  with  him,  then  he
heard  the  voice  of  one  speaking  unto  him  from  off  the  mercy-seat
that  was  upon  the  ark  of  testimony,  from  between  the  two  cherubims  ;
and  he  spake  unto  him."  (Numb.  vii.  89.)

78  Origen  says,  that  the  Jews  were  brought  up  to  believe  them-
selves the  people  of  the  Lord,  that  they  might  not  depend  upon  such
doubtful  information  as  proceeded  from  the  heathen  oracles.  "  Then-
laws  being  so  profitable"   says  Origen  (Cont.  Gels.  1.  v.),  "  and  they
being  so  easily  taught  a  knowledge  of  God,  of  the  immortality  of  the
soul,  and  human  responsibility,  they  held  divination  in  contempt,


OF    FREEMASONRY.  531


80


vered  their  responses  audibly,79  and  enigmatically;
and  herein  they  differed  essentially  from  the  oracles  of
Urim,  which  were  direct,  clear,  and  intelligible.81
But  it  is  with  the  typical  or  symbolical  reference  of

because  they  thought  it  proceeded  from  demons  rather  than  from
God,  and  sought  for  a  knowledge  of  future  things  only  when  it  was
conceived  necessary  to  appeal  to  the  Deity  through  the  medium  of
the  high  priest,"

79  The  superstition  used  in  the  middle  ages  of  Christianity  of  divi-
nation by  the  beryl,  or  crystal,  was  probably  derived  from  the  breast-
plate of  the  high  priest.    "  Another  mode  of  consulting  spirits,"  says
Grose,  "  was  by  the  beryl,  by  means  of  a  speculator,  or  seer,  who,  to
have  a  complete  sight,  ought  to  be  a  pure  virgin,  or  a  youth  of  irre-
proachable life  and  purity  of  manners.     The  method  of  such  con-
sultation is  this — the  conjuror,  having  repeated  the  necessary  charms
and  adjurations,  with  the  litany,  or  invocation  peculiar  to  the  spirits,
or  angels,  he  wishes  to  call,  the  seer  looks  into  a  crystal,  or  beryl,
wherein  he  will  see  the  answer,  represented  either  by  types,  or  figures ;
and  sometimes,  though  very  rarely,  will  hear  the  angels,  or  spirits,
speak  articulately."

80  "  The  magi  of  the  East,  either  really  thinking,    or  at  least
making  the  vulgar  believe,  that  these  discoveries  made  by  the  Urim
and  Thummim  of  the  Jews,  were  owing  to  some  innate  virtue  in  the
stone,  made  it  a  part  of  their  magical  system.    Immediately  after,  it
became  the  profession  of  persons  properly  appointed  to  explain  and
interpret  the  various  shades  and  coruscations,  the  different  colours,
dews,  clouds,  and  images,  which  these  gems  differently  exposed  to
the  sun,  moon,  stars,  fire,  or  air,  at  particular  times  inspected  by
proper  persons,  did  exhibit.     After  these  stones  were  ritually  conse-
crated, they  assumed  in  the  next  place  a  medicinal  influence,  and
their  power  was  pretended  to  be  very  great,  as  a  charm,  or  amulet,
against  misfortunes."  (Boiiase,  Ant.  Corn.  p.  183.)

!1  Some  are  of  opinion  that  the  virtues  inherent  in  the  pectoral
ceased  to  operate  after  the  reign  of  Solomon ;  because  as  it  was
intended  to  be  a  medium  of  communication  between  the  divine
Governor  and  his  subjects  during  the  continuance  of  the  theocracy,
it  became  useless  after  the  monarchy  was  permanently  established.

M  M  2


532


HISTORICAL    LANDMARKS


these  articles,  whatever  they  might  be,  that  we,  as
Masons,  are  more  particularly  interested.82  In  what
manner  soever  they  might  operate,  or  when  they  ceased
to  be  effectual,  is  of  no  further  importance  to  us  than


as  shadows  of  things  to  come.


It  has  been  thought


that  Christ  was  symbolized  by  the  Urini  and  Thuin-
mim;83  and  the  breastplate  of  judgment  is  thus  ex-
plained i84 — "  The  Urim,  which  is  interpreted  lights,
showed  that  in  Christ  are  laid  up  all  the  treasures  of

82  In  the  twenty -third  degree,  the  Chief,  or  Grand  Sacrificer,  is
invested  with  a  peculiar  habit.     He  wears  a  red  tunic,  over  which
is  placed  another  of  yellow,  shorter  than  the  first,  and  without  sleeves.
Upon  his  head  is  a  mitre  of  cloth  of  gold,  painted  or  embroidered  in
front  with  a  delta,  containing  the  ineffable  name.     About  this  dress
he  puts  a  black  sash  with  silver  fringe,  from  which  is  suspended  by
a  red  ribbon  a  poinard ;  this  sash  is  worn  from  right  to  left.     The
two  High  Priests,  or  Wardens,  have  a  similar  dress,  except  the  delta
upon  the  mitre.     The  Levites  wear  a  white  tunic,  tied  with  a  red
belt  and  gold  fringe  ;  from  this  belt,  by  a  black  ribbon,  is  suspended
a  censer,  which  is  the  jewel  of  the  degree.

83  The  pectoral  was  placed  on  the  high  priest's  bosom — Christ  was
in  the  bosom  of  his  Father.     The  Urim  and  Thummim  were  a  light
and  guide  to  the  Israelites — Christ  is  the  same  to  his  people ;  and
with  much  greater  propriety,  because  while  the  former  only  delivered
their  instructions  on  great  and  solemn  occasions  which  involved  the
welfare  of  a  whole  people,  the  lessons  of  our  Saviour  are  applicable
to  individuals,  and  extend  to  the  most  minute  and  private  trans-
actions of  our  lives.     The  revelations  of  Urim  applied  only  to  tem-
poral things — those  of  Christ  to  things  eternal,  which  embrace  our
future  misery  or  happiness.     The  light  of  Urim,  though  a  type  of
the  gospel  of  Christ,  was  imperfect,  because  the  latter  light  is  more
resplendent  than  the  sun — more  glorious  than  the  arch  of  heaven,
with  all  its  glittering  panoply.

84  It  will  be  borne  in  mind  that  the  breastplate  was  constantly
bound  upon  the  ephod,  and  he  who  used  the  former,  must  of  necessity
use  the  latter  also.


OF    FREEMASONRY.  533

wisdom  and  knowledge  •  and  Thummim,  which  be-
tokencth  perfections,  was  a  sign  or  symbol  of  perfect
purity,  which  is  to  be  sought  only  in  Christ.  And
both  signify,  that  as  without  Christ  there  is  nothing
but  darkness  and  sin,  so  he  is  our  illumination  and
perfection."85

In  front  of  the  high  priest's  mitre86  was  fixed  a
golden  plate,87  on  which  was  inscribed  the  mysterious

85  "  It  was  in  the  third  century,  when  the  followers  of  Christ  were
most  severely  tried  by  the  fires  of  persecution,  that  the  discipline  of
secrecy  respecting  the  perfect  mysteries  of  their  religion  was  most
strictly  observed ;  according  to  that  observation  of  Tertullian — '  A
faithful  concealment  is  due  to  all  mysteries  from  their  very  nature
and  constitution.'"  (Travels  in  Search  of  a  lleligion,  p.  73.)

i6  "It  is  scarcely  necessary  to  remind  the  reader  that  the  mitre  of
Aaron,  and  of  the  Jewish  high  priest,  was  undeniably  a  consecrated
mystic  symbol;  and  that  the  triangle  is  likewise  in  Freemasonry
a  sacred  emblem,  to  which  Southey  beautifully  alludes  in  his  poeti-
cally inspired  description  of  the  heaven  of  heavens,  where  Seva's  self
doth  dwell —

Behold  the  sacred  triangle  is  there,

Holding  the  emblem  which  no  tongue  may  tell.

And  it  will  be  remembered  also,  that  when  Ptolemy  Philadelphia
sent  a  kingly  present  to  the  Jewish  temple,  in  gratitude  for  having
been  initiated  into  the  mysteries  of  the  Old  Testament,  it  consisted
of  a  certain  triangular  golden  table,  in  whose  centre  blazed  an
invaluable  carbuncle."  (F.  Q.  R.  1840,  p.  320.)

87  This  mitre  was  a  turban  of  fine  linen,  furnished  in  front  with
a  plate  of  pure  gold,  on  which  were  inscribed  the  words  tTIT^  ttf'fp,
HOLY  TO  JEHOVAH,  and  which  was  attached  to  the  turban  by  a  blue
lace.  The  plate  was  ornamented  with  arabesques  of  foliage,  and  was
probably  itself  in  the  form  of  some  sacred  flower.  These  kind  of
turbans,  decorated  in  front  with  gold  and  precious  stories,  were  the
usual  crowns  of  monarchs.  Many  examples  of  this  kind  might  be
here  adduced.


534


HISTORICAL    LANDMARKS


Word,  or  name  of  God.88  It  was  placed  there  to  con-
secrate the  offerings,  that  they  might  be  acceptable  to
the  Deity.89  For  these  offerings,  being  necessarily  im-
perfect, were  made  holy  by  the  efficacy  of  the  name
engraven  there;  and  no  sacrifice  could  be  accepted
unless  the  high  priest  had  this  mystical  implement90
on  his  forehead.91  But  in  order  to  avoid  an  erroneous

88  In  the  charge  at  the  installation  of  the  High  Priest  in  the  Ame-
rican Royal  Arch,  the  following  passage  occurs : — "  Let  the  mitre,
with  which  you  are  now  invested,  remind  you  of  the  dignity  of  the
office  you  sustain ;  and  let  its  inscription  impress  upon  your  mind
a  sense  of  your  dependence  upon  God,  and  show  you  that  perfection
is  not  attainable  on  this  side  the  grave ;  and  that  perfect  holiness
belongeth  unto  God  alone."

89  In  the  East,  according  to  M.  Pluche,  any  person  preferred  to
honours,  bore  a  sceptre,  or  staff,  and  sometimes  a  plate  of  gold  on
the  forehead,  called  Kadosh,  or  Caeduceus,  signifying  their  sacred
character  (kadosh,  sanctus,  separates),  to  apprize  the  people  that
the  bearer  of  this  rod,  or  mark,  was  a  public  person,  who  possessed
the  privilege  of  entering  into  hostile  camps  without  fear  of  losing  his
personal  liberty.

90  This  ornament  was  used  by  the  priests  of  Isis  and  Osiris,  and
was  also  adopted  by  the  magi,  or  priests  of  Mithra  in  Persia,  and  by
the  priests  of  Jupiter  at  Athens  and  Home.    It  afterwards  served  for
the  head  dress  of  certain  Bom  an  females ;  and  in  time  was  adopted
by  Christian  pontiffs,  and  by  the  Knights  Templars.     It  generally
retained  the  plate  of  gold.

91  In  like  manner  the  mark,  or  tau  cross,  mentioned  by  Ezekiel,
and  the  name  of  God  which  distinguished  the  144,000  in  the  Apoca-
lypse, were  equally  inscribed  on  the  forehead.     And  it  is  recorded
by  Josephus,  that  when  tidings  were  conveyed  to  Jerusalem  that
Alexander  the  Great  was  marching  with  a  formidable  army  towards
the  city,  "  Jaddus,  with  the  priests  and  people,  went  in  solemn  pro-
cession to  Sapha,  and  Alexander  seeing  the  people  clothed  in  white
garments,  the  priests  in  silken  robes,  and  the  high  priest,  having  on
his  forehead  the  mitre,  and  golden  plate  bearing  the  sacred  name  of


Ol1    FREEMASONRY.  535

interpretation  of  this  ceremony,  we  must  keep  in  view
a  just  distinction  between  the  power  of  the  Creator  and
the  helplessness  of  the  creature.  The  virtue  of  the
name  thus  displayed  was  not  inherent  in  the  plate,92
because  the  same  name  was  frequent  in  the  books  of
the  law,  and  on  the  tables  inscribed  with  the  finger  of
God;93  and  neither  of  them  are  pretended  to  contain
any  supernatural  qualities  of  this  description.94  It  was

God  on  it,  advanced  alone,  paid  homage  to  the  inscription,  and  com-
plimented the  high  priest.  He  then  granted  them  the  privilege  of
enjoying  their  own  laws,  and  an  exemption  from  the  usual  tribute."
(Jos.  Ant.  Jud.  1.  xi.  c.  8.)

92  Many  of  the  Jews,  however,  took  an  erroneous  view  of  the
design  of  God  in  the  institution  of  the  above  ceremony.     It  was  to
be  a  symbol  of  obedience,  and  a  test  of  duty,  like  the  rite  of  circum-
cision, or  our  own  sacrament  of  baptism.    Obedience  was  the  sacrifice
with  which  Jehovah  was  best  pleased,  and  the  promise  of  acceptance
and  grace  was  extended  to  it.    If  the  high  priest  offered  the  sacrifices
with  the  golden  plate  on  his  forehead,  it  was  an  efficacious  atone-
ment.    But  the  virtue  was  not  in  the  name  though  holy,  nor  in  the
plate  though  consecrated,  because  in  any  other  situation  its  powers
did  not  exceed  those  of  an  ordinary  piece  of  gold.     And  hence  the
sacrifice  of  Saul  was  rejected,  because  it  was  made  in  the  absence  of
the  high  priest  with  his  mitre  and  ephod.

93  But  the  Jews  were  not  exempt  from  this  superstitious  weakness.
They  thought  that  all  the  letters  of  the  alphabet  depend  on  the  holy
Tetragrammaton,  which  was  also  incribed  on  our  Masonic  porphyry
stone.     They  cast  up  the  sum  of  the  alphabetical  letters  which  com-
pose the  name,  and  from  thence  frame  one  of  twelve  letters,  i.  e.
Hemmimphoras,  another  of  forty-two,  and  a  third  of  seventy-two
letters,  which  is  the  most  powerful  of  them  all.

94  The  heathen  fell  into  this  fatal  error,  whence  arose  their  nume-
rous amulets  and  talismans  ;  a  faith  in  the  virtues  of  which  became
firmly  planted  in  their  hearts,  and  being  transmitted  from  generation
to  generation,  our  Christian  forefathers  entertained  a  belief  of  their

O  *

efficacy,  and  the  superstition  is  scarcely  yet  eradicated.    The  heathens


536  HISTORICAL    LANDMARKS

simply  intended  to  denote  that  as  the  sins  whicl
atoned  for,95  when  crowned  with  this  distinguishing
badge  of  his  office,96  were  to  be  pardoned  for  the  sake  of
Him,  of  whom  the  high  priest,  when  invested  with  his
sacerdotal  robes,  was  a  type ;  so  when  the  reality  ap-
peared, sin  should  be  redeemed  by  one  single  atonement
on  the  cross.

placed  the  most  implicit  confidence  in  consecrated  stones,  gems,
glassbeads,  and  other  trifles ;  and  in  many  countries  these  were
rejuilcd  to  be  inscribed  with  the  powerful  name  of  God.  The  Ara-
bians ascribed  the  same  potency  to  the  seal  of  Solomon,  which  \\a-
a  circle  within  a  double  triangle,  as  displayed  on  the  altar-screen  of
the  Temple  church  in  London,  and  thought  by  its  use  evil  spirits
might  be  subjected  to  their  command.

95  This  atonement  is  now  made  by  the  sacrifice  of  a  cock  for  a  man,
and  a  hen  for  a  woman.  "  This  cock  they  swing  three  times  about
llu;  priest's  head,  saying,  '  this  cock  shall  be  a  propitiation  for  me.'
After  that  they  kill  the  bird,  acknowledging  themselves  worthy  of
death ;  and  then  they  cast  the  entrails  upon  the  top  of  the  house,
that  some  raven  or  crow  might  carry  both  them  and  their  sins  into
the  wilderness.  The  reason  why  they  make  choice  of  a  cock  is  this
— the  word  gebher,  which  in  the  holy  language  signifieth  a  man,  in
their  Talmud  signifieth  a  cock.  Now  they  say,  the  justice  of  God
requires  that  as  gebher  sinned,  so  gebher  should  make  satisfaction."
(Moses  and  Aaron,  p.  130.)

36  As  the  presence  of  this  awful  name,  elevated  above  the  rest  of
the  pontifical  robes,  was  necessary  to  the  successful  performance  of
the  high  priest's  sacrifices — so  was  Christ  of  necessity  elevated  to
redeem  mankind.  The  Tetragrammaton  was  on  the  head  of  the
high  priest,  and  the  Being  whose  name  it  was,  is  the  head  of  the
Christian  church.  The  high  priest  bore  the  name  of  God  on  his
forehead — Christians  should  bear  it  in  then1  hearts.  "  All  these,"
says  St.  Paul,  "  were  but  shadows  of  things  to  come,  but  the  reality
is  Christ."


OF    FREEMASONRY.  537


LECTURE     XLIV.

THE    TETRAGRAMMATON,    OR    INCOMMUNICABLE    NAME.

"  I  worship  not  the  sun  at  noon,
The  wandering  stars,  the  changing  moon,

The  wind,  the  flood,  the  flame ;
I  will  not  bow  the  votive  knee
To  wisdom,  virtue,  liberty;
There  is  no  god  but  God  for  me,

JEHOVAH  is  his  name." — MONTGOMERY.

"  All  pure  beings,  past,  present,  and  to  come,  were  created  by  the
Word,  and  that  Word  is — I  AM." — ZENDAVESTA.

"  That  sacred  place,  where  three  in  one,

Compris'd  thy  comprehensive  Name;
And  where  the  bright  meridian  sun

Wras  soon  thy  glory  to  proclaim." — DUNCKERLY.

THE  first  formal  revelation  which  was  made  of  God's
sacred  name  was  to  Moses  at  the  burning  bush,  that
it  might  be  a  pass-word  to  induce  the  Israelites  to  be-
lieve that  he  had  been  really  sent  for  their  deliverance.1

1  Some  think  that  the  name  of  Jehovah  was  not  known  to  Abraham,
Isaac,  and  Jacob,  because  if  Moses  was  not  previously  acquainted
with  it,  neither  could  the  patriarchs  who  preceded  him.  And  the
Rabbis,  who  entertained  this  opinion,  defend  it  by  the  angel's  reply
to  Manoah,  when  he  demanded  his  name — "  Why  askest  thou  after
my  name,  seeing  it  is  secret  ?  "  It  is,  however,  to  be  presumed  that
this  name  was  in  some  degree  familiar  to  the  antediluvian  patriarchs  ;
for,  at  the  very  commencement  of  the  scripture  history,  the  fact  ap-


538


ISTORICAL    LANDMARKS


It  was  the  sublime  Word,2  which  the  later  Jews  pro-
nounced ineffable,  or  incommunicable,  and  was  called
the  Tetragrammaton,  as  Gregory  Nazianzen  explains
it — universum  id,  quod  est,  in  se  complectitur,  nee
principium  habens,  nee  finem  habiturus.3  The  Word,
as  respects  the  being  of  God,  is  indeed  ineffable,  be-
cause it  cannot  be  justly  applied  to  any  created  thing,
although  the  heathen  have  impiously  assigned  it  to
gods  of  their  own  invention.4  "  Men  serving  either

pears  to  be  clearly  avouched.  The  first  recorded  acts  of  the  human
race  after  the  fall  are  the  unhappy  differences  between  Cain  and  his
brother  Abel ;  and  the  account  contains  plain  indications  that  the
name  of  God  was  known  to  both.  We  are  here  told  that  Cain
brought  an  offering  to  Jehovah,  the  triune  Elohim — that  Jehovah
had  respect  to  the  offering  of  Abel — that  Jehovah  said  to  Cain  ;  and
Cain  said  unto  Jehovah — and  Jehovah  set  a  mark  on  Cain,  and
Cain  went  out  from  the  presence  of  Jehovah.  (Gen.  iv.  3 — 17.)
After  this,  it  would  be  against  evidence  to  believe  that  either  of  the
brothers  was  unacquainted  with  this  remarkable  name  of  God.  And
if  so,  it  was  known  also  to  all  the  children  and  posterity  of  Adam  in
both  branches.

2  "  As  the  word  in  the  first  verse  of  St.  John  constitutes  the  foun-
dation, the  subject  matter,  and  the  great  ultimate  end  of  the  Christian
economy ;  so  does  the  same  word,  in  all  its  relations  to  man,  time,
and  eternity,  constitute  the  very  essence  of  speculative  Freemasonry."
(Town,  Spec.  Masonry,  p.  154.)

3  "  The  Jewish  traditions  relate  that  the  angels  having  spoken  of
man  with  some  contempt,  God  told  them  that  Adam  was  wiser  than
they ;  and  to  convince  them  of  it,  he  desired  them  to  give  names  to
the  several  animals,  which  they  were  not  able  to  do.     God  put  the
same  question  to  the  man,  who  readily  executed  the  task.     He  then
asked  his  own  name,  and  Adam  replied  that  his  name  was  Jehovah."
(R.  Moses  Haddarshan,  in  Bereschit  Kabbah.)

4  The  book  of  Enoch  (Ixviii.  19,  20)  says — "  The  principal  part
of  the  oath  which  the  Most  High,  dwelling  in  glory,  revealed  to  the
holy  ones.     Its  name  is  Beker.     He  spoke  to  holy  Michael  to  dis-


OF    FREEMASONRY.  539

calamity  or  tyranny  did  ascribe  unto  stones  and  stocks
the  INCOMMUNICABLE  NAME/'  As  this  work  is  written
for  the  information  of  Masons,  the  subject  must  be
considered  somewhat  in  detail.6

The  Word  which  was  communicated  to  Moses,7  as
a  credential  necessary  to  the  successful  performance  of
his  mission,  was  EHEIE,  which,  in  our  translation,  is
rendered  I  AM  THAT  I  AM.8  Some  writers  have  sug-

cover  to  them  the  SECRET  NAME,  that  they  might  understand  that
secret  name,  and  thus  remember  the  oath  ;  and  that  those  who  pointed
out  every  secret  thing  to  the  children  of  men,  might  tremble  at  that
name  and  oath."

5Wisd.  xiv.  21.

e  "  By  tracing  Masonic  customs,  and  comparing  certain  ceremonies
in  the  economy  of  the  institution,  there  appears  to  be  an  existing
fact,  indicative  not  only  of  the  antiquity  but  high  object  of  ancient
Masonry.  Prom  this  fact  it  appears,  that  ancient  Masons  were  in
possession  of  the  appropriate  name  of  the  promised  Messias,  termed
in  the  New  Testament  the  LOGOS  or  Word.  The  knowledge  of  this
Word  was  an  object  of  great  moment,  and  sought  with  all  diligence
by  members  of  the  institution.  This  divine  Word  has,  in  every  age
of  the  world,  been  held  sacred,  and  faithfully  transmitted  from  one
to  another,  in  ancient  form,  to  the  present  day."  (Town,  p.  147.)

7  "Adam  must  be  supposed  to  communicate  the  name  of  his  Creator
in  some  intelligible  manner  to  his  posterity,  and  they  to  theirs,  down
to  the  time  of  Noah.  Noah  and  his  sons,  who  repeopled  the  earth,
would  be  inclined  to  adopt  the  same  course,  not  only  in  preserving
the  name  itself,  but  even  the  manner  of  pronouncing  it.  In  this  way
both  might  have  been  transmitted,  with  little  or  no  variation,  through
Abraham,  Jacob,  Moses,  and  the  Jewish  priests,  till  the  days  of
Solomon.  That  language  may  have  varied  during  this  period  can
be  no  objection.  Since  the  time  of  Solomon,  however,  we  have  no
doubt  but  the  very  same  Word,  with  the  manner  of  pronunciation,
has  been  religiously  observed  in  the  Masonic  institution,  in  every  age
and  country,  to  the  present  day."  (Town,  p.  154.)

8 "  Our  blessed  Lord,"  says  Dr.  A.  Clark,  in  his  learned  com-


540


HISTORICAL  LANDMARKS


gested  an  improvement,  by  the  substitution  of  a  im in-
expressive form,  viz.,  Ero  qui  eroy  I  shall  be  that  1
shall  be ;  others  have  declared  in  favour  of  the  past
form,  which  was — and  thus  it  is  said  of  Christ  in  the
Apocalypse — "  He  which  was,  and  is,  and  is  to  come  ;'"
including  all  times,  past,  present,  and  future;1"  and
this  appears  to  be  the  most  comprehensive  phrase.
The  Septuagint  writes  it  <5  £>v,  which  was,  using  the
present  tense  only.11  But  it  was  not  uncommon  for

mentary,  "  solemnly  claims  to  himself  what  is  intended  in  th's  divine
name,  rP-  (John  viii.  38.)  Before  Abraham  was  (yfvc<r6tu,  was  born),
(ya>  ft/it,  I  AM,  not  /  was,  but  /  am,  plainly  intimating  his  divine
and  eternal  existence."

9  "  A  knowledge,  belief,  and  due  reverence  of  the  divine  Word
constitutes  the  very  essence  of  all  true  religion,  whether  ancient  or
modern.     St.  John  begins  his  gospel  by  saying — In  the  beginning
was  the  Word,  and  the  "Word  was  with  God,  and  the  Word  was  God.
This  Word,  however  mysterious  it  may  appear  to  the  world,  has  been
understood  and  held  sacred  by  the  Masonic  Order  from  time  imme-
morial.    This  same  Word  is  that  by  which  Masons  in  every  country
do  now  recognize  each  other,  as  having  been  advanced  to  the  more
sublime  degrees;   and  as  every  fundamental  principle  of  our  holy
religion  emanates  from  and  centres  in  him  who  is  the  brightness  of
his  Father's  glory ;  just  as  anciently  as  the  reverential  use  of  this
name  can  be  traced  in  our  institution,  just  so  long  it  must  appear
that  ancient  Masonry  Avas,  in  a  very  important  sense,  ancient  Chris-
tianity." (Town,  p.  86.)

10  The  doctrine  of  the  eternity  of  the  Godhead  was  acknowledged
in  every  system  of  religion  that  the  world  ever  knew,  as  well  as  that
of  man's  personal  responsibility.

11  "  The  Greeks  and  Romans  strove  to  find  a  similitude  between
their  own  gods  and  the  gods  of  every  country  they  came  to,  per-
suading themselves  that  they  were  all  the  same,  under  different  deno-
minations. This  was  the  case  with  respect  to  the  gods  of  the  Germans
and  Gauls,  as  well  as  those  of  Syria  and  Egypt,  which  they  adopted
for  their  own.     And  had  they  travelled  to  the  Ganges  or  to  China,


Ol'    FREEMASONRY.  541

the  Hebrews  to  use  the  future  instead  of  the  preter
tense.  However  this  may  be,  the  above  name  expresses,
and  was  intended  to  express,  the  eternity  of  the  God-
head ;  and  points  to  his  unchangeableness,  as  well  as
his  infinite  perfections.

The  Jewish  scriptures  contain  ten12  several  names  of
the  Deity,13  which  are  thus  brought  together  by  St.
Jerome — EEL,  which  signifies  strength  ;14  ELOHIM  and

it  would  have  been  all  one ;  they  would  have  done  the  same  by
Vischnu  and  Ixora,  Bramah  and  Somonacodoma,  or  by  Vitzliputzli
at  Mexico.  They  presumed  to  have  an  acquaintance  even  with  the
JEHOVAH  of  the  Jews ;  and  Plutarch  assures  us,  he  was  no  other
than  Bacchus."  (Bryant.  Anal.  vol.  vi.  p.  117.)

12  Rosenberg  gives  twelve   cabalistic  names,  as  follows : — Ehje,
Jehovah,  Elohim,  El,  Gibbor,  Eloah,  Sabaoth,  Tsebaoth,  Schaddai,
Adonai,  Makom,  Agla.     The  ineffable  degrees  of  Masonry  contain  a
record  of  the  same  number  of  names,  viz.,  three  containing  three
letters  each,  Jah,  Jeo,  and  Eva;  three  containing  five  letters  each,
Havah,  Gotha,  Jevah ;  three  containing  seven  letters  each,  Adonajh,
Jakinai,  some  give  Thummim  instead  of  this,  and  Jehovah  ;  three  of
nine  letters  each,  Elchannan,  Jehabulum,  and  miT.     This  is  ex-
plained as  follows  : —  3  x  3  =  9,  3  x  5  =  15,  3  x  7  =  21,  and
3  x  9  =  27  ;  then  9  +  15  +  21  +  27  =  72,  being  the  number
of  the  Sanhedrim  of  Jerusalem,  including  the  two  Grand  Officers.

13  The  Arabs  have  ninety  names  of  God ;  and  they  believe  that
"  if  frequently  repeated,  and  written  on  a  paper,  and  worn  on  the
person,  are  supposed  to  make  the  wearer  a  particular  object  for  the
exercise  of  all  the  beneficent  attributes.    In  like  manner  it  is  believed
that  the  ninety-nine  names,  or  titles,  of  the  prophet,  written  upon
anything,  compose  a  charm,  which  will,  if  placed  in  a  house,  and
frequently  read  from  beginning  to  end,  keep  away  every  misfortune,
pestilence,  and  all  diseases,  infirmities,  the  envious  eye,  enchantment,
burning,  ruin,   anxiety,  grief,  and  trouble."     (Modern  Egyptians,
vol.  i.  p.  339.)

14  The  Hebrews  were  not  singular  in  expressing  their  notion  of  the
Deity  under  different  names.     If  they  wished  to  express  his  divine


542  HISTORICAL    LANDMARKS

ELOIIE,  power.  These  were  derived  from  the  former
word  Eel.  SABAOTII,  the  Lord  of  Hosts ;  HELION,
high ;  as  God  is  frequently  called  in  scripture  the  Most
High;  EHEIE,  because  of  his  perpetual  existence,  or
eternity;  ADONAI,  Lord;  SHADDAI,  because  he  is
omnipotent;  JAII  and  JEHOVAH.15  The  latter  was
distinguished  by  the  name  of  the  Tetragrammaton  ;


Hi


essence,  they  used  the  word  Jehovah ;  if  his  omnipotence  was  the
theme,  it  was  El,  Elah,  or  Eloah  ;  to  express  his  excellency  they  used
the  word  Elion;  and  for  his  mercy,  Klrhaiman.

"  Jerome.  Epist.  ad  Marcell.  136.  In  one  of  the  Basilidean  charms
of  Abracadabra,  found  among  the  papers  of  lloger  Bacon,  an  invo-
cation to  the  Supreme  Being  occurs  under  the  names  of  Adonni,
Elohe,  Zazael,  Paliel,  Shaddai,  Yabsoe,  Isebaoth,  Ilelion,  Yaras,  and
closing  with  the  ineffable  name  iTlJT-  The  names  were  in  black
letter,  and  between  each  of  them  was  the  figure  of  a  cross  >|*.  It
may  be  here  added,  that  in  an  old  manuscript,  well  known  amongst
Masons,  one  branch  of  the  science  is  to  teach  "  the  facultie  of
Abrac."

16  The  late  Bro.  Tytlcr  has  referred  this  name  to  the  solution  of
the  great  problem  of  the  duplication  of  a  cube,  or  in  other  words,
"  the  finding  the  side  of  a  cube  that  shall  be  double  in  solidity  to  a
given  cube,  a  problem  cultivated  by  the  geometricians  two  thousand
years  ago.  It  was  first  proposed  by  the  oracle  of  Apollo  at  Dclphos,
which  being  consulted  about  the  manner  of  stopping  a  plague  then
raging  at  Athens,  returned  for  answer,  that  the  plague  should  cease
when  Apollo's  altar,  which  was  cubical,  should  be  doubled.  Upon
this  they  applied  themselves  in  good  earnest  to  seek  the  duplication
of  the  cube,  which  henceforward  was  called  the  Delian  problem.
This  problem  is  only  to  be  solved  by  finding  two  mean  propor-
tionals between  the  side  of  the  cube  and  double  that  side,  the  first
whereof  will  be  the  side  of  the  cube  doubled.  Leaving  the  consi-
deration of  the  various  methods  which  have  been  employed  to  accom-
plish the  solution  of  this  very  important  problem,  it  remains  for  me
to  add,  that  the  solution  constitutes  the  apex  of  the  temple,  and
renders  a  parallelipipidon  containing  16  linear  units — equal  to  15


OF    FREEMASONRY.  543

and  the  four  letters  which  compose  it,  viz.,  jod,  he,
vau,  he,  were  called  litercB  flatus  et  quietus,  symbo-
lically referring  to  the  Creator,  as  the  author  of  breath
and  life,  and  the  only  giver  of  true  rest.1'2

The  Jews  are  said  to  have  substituted  the  word

linear  units — thus  bringing  the  number  16,  or  iTl#D»  Messiah;  by
the  Musuppur  Kutun,  or  short  reckoning,  D  40  +  ttf  300  -j-  •>  10  +
H  8  =  358.  And  3  +  5  +  8  =  16 ;  into  IT  10  +  5  =  15  ;  the
great  name  JAII,  comprising  the  first  two  letters  of  the  Tetragram-
maton,  or  ineffable  name  of  the  Deity."  (P.  d.  R.  1839,  p.  330.)

17  The  writers  of  the  Universal  History  remark  upon  the  Tetra-
grammaton,  that  "  the  cabalistal  Jews,  and  after  them  Josephus,  and
some  of  the  Romanists,  think  that  Moses  did  not  ask  for  the  name
of  God,  but  for  the  true  pronunciation  of  it,  which  they  say  had  been
lost  through  the  wickedness  of  mankind ;  for  which  reason  the  former
affirm  that  the  word  Gholam,  used  by  God  presently  after,  being-
written  without  a  vau,  should  not  be  rendered  for  ever,  but  hid,
from  the  root  Ghalam,  to  hide ;  not  considering  that,  if  that  was  the
case,  it  should  be  written  Ghalum,  and  not  Gholam.  Upon  this
account  the  name  is,  by  all  the  Jews,  called  Shemhamphorah,  the
unutterable  name,  which  Josephus  says  was  never  known  or  heard
of  before  God  told  it  to  Moses ;  for  which  reason  they  never  pro-
nounce it,  but  use  the  word  Adonai,  or  Elohim,  or  plainly  the  word
Hashem,  the  NAME,  to  express  it.  Thus,  in  their  letters  and  common
discourse,  instead  of  saying  the  Lord  bless  you,  they  say  the  Name
bless  you."  Thus  far  the  authors  of  the  Universal  History.  But
their  reasoning  on  the  causes  why  the  name  should  be  called  a^paa-rov,
or  not  to  be  uttered,  will  scarcely  be  satisfactory  to  the  Royal  Arch
Mason ;  although  he  is  taught  to  say,  in  conformity  with  this  doc-
trine— "  We  have  heard  with  our  ears,  and  our  fathers  have  declared
to  us,  that  in  their  time,  and  in  times  of  old,  it  was  not  lawful  for
any  one  to  mention  the  sacred  and  mysterious  name  of  the  Most
High,  except  the  high  priest  once  a  year,  when  he  entered  into
the  Holy  of  Holies  alone,  and  before  the  ark  of  the  covenant,  made
propitiation  for  the  sins  of  Israel."


544


HISTORICAL    LANDMARKS


Adonai18  for  this  incommunicable  name;19  but  this
admits  of  some  qualification.  St.  Jerome,  and  after
him  Bellarmine,  doubted  the  fact,  because  Jehovah  and
Adonai  were  two  several  names  of  God,  and  equally
legitimate;  and  in  some  instances  were  appointed  to
be  used  in  conjunction,  as  Jehovah  Adonai;20  and  the

18  The  Samaritans  also  avoided  pronouncing  the  sacred  name,  and
used  the  word  Sema  in  lieu  of  it.

19  The  Arabians,  and  indeed  every  nation  professing  Islamism,
entertain  a  veiy  different  opinion.     They  prefix  the  name  of  God  to
all  their  books  and  writings  and  legal  proceedings.     It  forms  Ihc
commencement  of  every  chapter  or  division  of  the  Koran  ;  and  it  is
considered  imperative  on  every  Mussulman  to  have  the  sacred  nnino
constantly  in  his  mouth,  to  be  used  on  ordinary  occasions,  even  to
consecrate  vice,  and  lend  a  sanction  to  the  most  immoral  and  criminal
actions.

20  Niebuhr,  speaking  of  the  Ism-Ablah,  or  science  of  the  name  of
God,  says — "They  pretend  that  God  is  the  lock  of  this  science,  and
Mahomet  the  key;   that  consequently  none  but  Mahometans  can
attain  it ;  that  it  discovers  what  passes  in  distant  countries ;  that  it
familiarizes  the  possessors  with  the  genii,  who  are  at  the  command  of
the  initiated,  and  who  instruct  them ;  that  it  places  the  winds  and
the  seasons  at  their  disposal ;  that  it  heals  the  bite  of  serpents,  the
lame,  the  maimed,  and  the  blind  ;  they  say  that  some  of  their  greatest
saints,  such  as  Abdulkadir,  Cheilani  of  Bagdad,  and  Ibn  Alvvan,  who
resided  in  the  south  of  Yemen,  were  so  far  advanced  in  this  science,
that  they  said  their  prayers  eveiy  noon  in  the  kaba  of  Mecca,  and
were  not  absent  from  their  own  houses  any  other  part  of  the  day.
A  merchant  of  Mecca,  who  had  learnt  it  from  Mahommed  el  Dsja-
nadsenji,  pretended  that  once  being  in  danger  of  perishing  at  sea,  he
fastened  a  billet  to  the  mast,  with  this  name  inscribed  on  it,  and
the  tempest  immediately  ceased.    There  are  books  of  instructions  in
the  science,  with  appropriate  prayers.     Some  shut  themselves  up  in
dark    caverns,  and  remain  without  food  until  nature  is  almost  ex-
hausted ;  and  pretend  that  on  the  repetition  of  certain  prayers  the


OF    FREEMASONRY.  545

Septuagint  uses  the  word  \VP^  or  <vpios.  It  is  clear,
however,  that  the  Jews  interpret  the  text  literally —
"  he  that  nameth  the  NAME  shall  be  stoned  ;"21  whereas
it  signified  nothing  more  than  that  the  name  should  not
be  taken  in  vain,22  or  used  profanely,  lightly,  or  indiscri-
minately in  common  conversation,  which  was  forbidden
in  the  third  commandment ; 23  and  therefore  our  autho-
rized translation  is  more  correct,  which  interprets  the
original  by  the  words,  "he  that  blasphemeth  the  Name,24
shall  surely  be  put  to  death."  The  word  Jehovah

Deity  appears  to  them,  and  reveals  his  sacred  name ;  which  possesses,
in  addition  to  the  above  attributes,  the  secret  of  discovering-  hidden
treasures."

21  Levit.  xxiv.  11 — 16.  Because  they  thought  that  by  using  the
true  NAME  miracles  were  wrought.  The  Mahometans  have  a  tradi-
tion, that  when  Noah  was  enclosed  in  the  ark,  it  moved  or  remained
stationary  at  his  pleasure,  by  the  pronunciation  of  this  sacred  Word.

12  Michaelis  thus  paraphrases  the  passage — "  Tt  was  enacted  in
the  Mosaic  law,  that  blasphemy  against  God  is  a  heinous  sin.  It  is
a  sin  even  in  the  heathen  to  blaspheme  what,  according  to  his  opinion,
is  divine.  But  if  any  one  expressly  mention  the  name  Jehovah,  so
that  no  doubt  can  remain  whether  he  meant  to  blaspheme  the  true
God,  he  shall  be  stoned  to  death."

23  The  Egyptians  expressed  the  name  of  God  by  hieroglyphical
characters  representing  his  attributes.     Thus  Ibn  Washih,  speaking
of  the  Hermesian  alphabet,  says — "  There  is  a  sign  which  signifies
the  name  of  God  Almighty,  simple  and  alone.     If  they  wished  to
express  one  of  the  particular  attributes  of  God,  they  added  some-
thing to  the  original  sign,  and  proceeded  in  this  manner  throughout
the  alphabet,"     It  contains  the  hieroglyphics  of  nine  attributes,
besides  the  symbol  of  the  name,  viz.,  the  Almighty,  Allclemcnt,
Avenger,  Allpowerful,  Allmerciful,  Nourisher,  Destroying,  Living,
and  Omniscient.

24  This  is  all  that  the  Hebrew  contains  in  both  the  above  verses.

25  Some  commentators  think  the  blasphemy  here  referred  to  con-

VOL.  II.  N  N


540  HISTORICAL    LANDMARKS


was  written  and  pronounced  by  the  high  priest  on
certain  solemn  occasions.  It  follows,  therefore,  that  it
was  not  incommunicable.26

It  is,  however,  admitted,  that  though  the  high  priest
persisted  in  the  use  of  this  formula,  even  until  the
destruction  of  the  temple  by  the  Romans,  precautions
were  used  to  prevent  its  pronunciation,27  whether  right
or  wrong,  from  being  learned  by  the  people;28  for
during  the  benediction  in  which  this  name  appeared,

sisted  in  pronouncing  the  sacred  name,  for  which  offence  the  delinquent
was  punished  with  death.

26  Our  Rev.  Bro.  Town  says  (p.  150),  "previous  to  the  regular
organization  of  the  Masonic  institution,  a  knowledge  of  thi.s  might
have   constituted    that  mark   of  distinction  amongst   our   ancient
Brethren,  by  which  they  did  recognize  and  fellowship  with  each
other.     To  the  world  this  may  appear  hypothetical,  but  to  well-in-
formed Brethren,  who  are  sufficiently  advanced,  there  can  be  scarcely
a  doubt  of  its  correctness.     That  a  knowledge  of  the  divine  Logos,
or  Word,  should  have  been  the  object  of  so  much  religious  research
from  time  immemorial,  adds  not  a  little  to  the  honour  of  speculative
Freemasonry.    The  same  Word  which  breathed  the  spirit  of  life  into
Adam,  and  which  appeared  in  the  flesh  for  the  salvation  of  man,  has
been  peculiar  to  the  Masonic  institution,  since  the  organization  by
Solomon,  and  probably  to  the  patrons  of  Masonic  principles  since
the  days  of  Enoch."

27  "  The  ten  tribes,  living  beyond  the  river  Sambatyon,"  says
Edrehi,  "  are  extremely  pious,  God  fearing,  and  just.     They  never
take  an  oath,  and  never  mention  profanely  the  holy  name  of  God ;
and  they  even  punish  those  who  use  his  name  to  attest  anything ;
for  they  say,  what  is  the  use  of  swearing  by  his  holy  name,  knowing
that  for  doing  so,  children  die  when  they  are  young."  (Hist.  Ten
Tribes,  p.  28.)

28  It  was  frequently  designated  symbolically,  a  custom  which  is
still  preserved  amongst  Masons ;  being  depicted  in  our  Lodges  by
four  different  hieroglyphics,  an  equilateral  triangle,  a  cube,  a  square,
and  a  perfect  double  cube.


OF    FREEMASONRY.  547

the  priests  and  Levites  raised  their  voices  to  a  louder
strain  while  singing  the  accompanying  service,  that  no
one  present  might  have  the  advantage  of  hearing  it.29
A  most  effectual  method  of  burying  it  in  oblivion.30
Thus  the  high  priest  himself,  in  subsequent  ages,
doubted  whether  he  possessed  the  right  pronunciation
of  this  adorable  name ;  until  at  length  a  superstitious
belief  became  prevalent  throughout  the  whole  nation,
that  if  any  person  were  fortunate  enough  to  attain  to
its  proper  pronunciation,31  he  might  shake  heaven  and

29  The  ineffable  name  is  found  in  various  passages  of  scripture ;
as  for  instance,  y^H  ^/Tl  D^Ottfil  inOW,  "  Let  the  heavens  rejoice
and  the  earth  be  glad."  (Ps.  xcvi.  11.)    Here  the  initial  letters  form
the  Tetragrammaton.    This  process  is  an  illustration  of  the  fifth  rule
of  the  Cabala.     At  other  times  the  name  is  found  by  beginning  at
the  conclusion  of  the  words,  and  reading  them  backwards,  which  is
said  to  include  another  mystery,  and,  according  to  the  Cabalists
signifies  strict  justice.

30  "  The  same  veneration  for  the  name  of  their  deities  was  enter-
tained by  other  nations ;  for  they  believed  it  to  be  of  divine  insti-
tution, full  of  mysterious  signification,  and  remounting  to  the  first
origin  of  all  things.     And  although  we  find  these  mystic  names
expressed  phonetically  in  the  hieroglyphical  legends,  yet  we  are  to
remember  that  these  texts  were  written  by  the  priesthood,  and  that
the  characters  themselves  were  considered  as  sacred,  and  peculiarly
fitted  to  be  employed  in  religious  matters.     This  is  so  true,  that  in
all  documents  written  in  the  demotic,  or  common  characters  of  the
country,  the  names  of  the  gods  and  goddesses  were  always  and  inva-
riably written  symbolically.     And  Champollion  asserts,  that  '  they
tvrote  the  name  of  their  principal  deity  in  one  way,  and  pronounced
it  in  another.'  "  (Spineto  Hier.  p.  122.)

31  In  like  manner  the  ancient  heathens  dreaded  to  pronounce  the
name  of  Demogorgon,  because  they  conceived  it  would  produce  very
disastrous  effects.  Thus  the  spectre  of  Laius  is  invoked  in  the  (Edipus
"  by  Demogorgon's  NAME,  at  which  ghosts  quake."

N  N  2


548  HISTORICAL    LANDMARKS


earth,32  work  miracles,83  and  penetrate  the  arcana  of
heaven.34  The  Talmuds  are  very  severe  on  any  delin-
quent who  endeavours  to  convert  the  Tetragram-
rauton  to  such  a  purpose  j35  and  it  is  thought  that  the

32  The  Erichtho  of  Lucan,  during  her  incantations,  bcinu  disap-
pointed at  the  tardy  obedience  of  the  infernal  spirits,  calls  afresh  on
the  powers  of  hell,  and  threatens  to  pronounce  the  dreadful  name,
which  cannot  be  articulated  without  consequences  never  to  be  thought
of,  nor  without  the  direst  necessity  to  be  M-ntured  upon.    (See  God-
win's Lives  of  the  Necromancers,  p.  144.)     The  custom  was  used
by  conjurors  of  a  more  modern  date.     Minshew  in  his  Dictionary
says — "The  conjuror  seemeth  by  praiers  and  in  meat  ion* •  of  Cn<J\
powerful  names,  to  compel  the  divell  to  say  or  doe  what  lie  coni-
inandelh  him.     The  witch,  on  the  contrary,   dealcth  rather  by  a
friendly  and  vohmtnric  conference,  or  agreement,  between  him  and
her  and  the  divell  or  familiar,  to  have  her  turn  served,  in  lieu  or
stead  of  blood,  or  other  gift  offered  unto  him,  especially  of  his  or  her
soule."

33  In  the  Mark  Master's  lecture  we  find  the  following  passage  :—
"  It  was  this  grand  and  ineffable  Name,  attended  by  all  its  glorious
attributes,  which  assisted  and  enforced  the  eloquence  of  our  wise  and
n>\al  (Jrand  Master  Solomon,  in  the  conversion  of  his  friend  and
useful  ally,  the  puissant  King  of  Tyre.     And  hence  it  was  that  these
two  powerful  monarchs,  in  their  capacity  of  Grand  Masters  of  Ma-
sonry, and  in  conjunction  with  the  Grand  Superintendent  11.  A.  !>.,
conferred  this  name  on  the  Brethren  who  were  congratulated  as
Mark  Masters."

34  Southey  has  recorded  a  beautiful  version  of  this  belief  in  his
"  Thalaba,"  B.  IV.

35  Andrews,   in   his   "  Continuation   of  Dr.   Henry's    History,"
(p.  502),  tells  us,  "  that  on  all  the  old  houses  still  existing  in  Edin-
burgh, there  are  remains  of  talismanic,  or  cabalistical  characters,
which  the  superstition  of  earlier  ages  had  caused  to  be  engraven  on
their  fronts.     These  were  generally  composed  of  some  text  of  scrip-
ture, of  the  name  of  God,  or  perhaps  of  an  emblematic  representation
of  the  resurrection."


OF    FREEMASONRY.  549

angels  are  debarred  from  its  use.36  Thus  the  true  pro-
nunciation of  this  mysterious  Word  became,  as  they
say,  entirely  lost  during  the  Babylonish  captivity.

Indeed  there  seems  no  agreement  in  the  opinions  of
ancient  writers  on  the  just  method  of  pronouncing  this
august  name  at  any  period.37  Macrobius,  Diodorus
Siculus,  Clemens  Alexandrinus,  Irseneus,  Augustine,
Theodoret,  and  a  host  of  other  celebrated  names  might
be  adduced  in  proof  of  this  fact.38  One  says  it  was

36  "  The  Jewish  Rabbins  thought  the  true  knowledge  of  names  to
be  a  science  preferable  to  the  study  of  the  written  law,  and  they
entertained  many  surprising  fancies  about  the  word  JEHOVAH  ;  one
of  which  was,  that  it  was  so  wonderfully  compounded,  that  none  but
an  inspired  person  could  give  it  a  true  pronunciation.    In  like  manner
Plotinus  and  Jamblichus  thought  some  notes  to  be  of  so  celestial
a  composure,  that  the  rightly  using  them  could  not  fail  of  obtaining
oracles ;  and  Phoebus  and  Pythagoras  are  said  to  have  cured  diseases
by  the  use  of  such  names."  (Shuckford,  Con.  vol.  ii.  p.  377.)

37  "  There  is  some  difference,"  says  Willet  in  his  Hexapla  (p.  64),
"  in  the  pronunciation  of  this  word  Jehovah,  which  is  called  Tetra-
grammaton,  because  it  consisteth  of  four  letters,  he,  jod,  vau,  he,  as
Qeos  in  Greek,  and  Deus  in  Latin,  have  likewise  four  letters.  Irenseus
doth  seem  to  call  it  Jaoth;  Isidore,  Jodjod;  Diodorus  Siculus  saith
that  the  name  of  the  Jew's  God  was  Jew;  so  also  Macrobius ;  while
Clemens  Alex,  says  Jau;  Theodoret  saith  that  the  Samaritans  pro-
nounce it  Javah,  the  Hebrews  Ja.     But  the  received  pronunciation
is  Jehovah,  as  may  appear  by  the  abbreviation  thereof  used  in  scrip-
ture, Jah.     Hence  also  it  is  probable  that  the  heathen  derived  the
oblique  cases  of  Jupiter,  Jovis,  Jovi;  for  from  Jehovah  the  word
Jove  seemeth  to  be  contracted ;  which  might  make  Varro  also  to
think  that  Jove  was  the  God  of  the  Jews."

38  The  Jews  accumulated  many  traditions  respecting  the  miraculous
properties  of  what  is  termed,  "  the  Stone  of  Foundation. "     They
thought  that  the  divine  appearances  which  are  said  to  have  usually
attended  its  use,  were  attributable  to  the  efficacy  of  the  SACRED  NAME
engraven  on  its  upper  surface,  which  was  reputed  to  possess  the


550  HISTORICAL    LANDMARKS

Jau,  another  thinks  it  was  Jaoth,  a  third  Java  ;39  others
Juba,  Jao,  Jah,  Jehovah,  and  Jove.40  In  a  word,  the
letters  of  the  name  are  perishable,  and  the  pronun-
ciation of  little  moment;  but  the  Being  himself  is
ineffable,41  incomprehensible,  and  worthy  of  our  utmost

power  of  controlling  the  ordinary  course  of  nature ;  of  commanding
the  obedience  of  unclean  spirits ;  of  healing  the  sick,  and  of  raising
the  dead ;  and  as  these  constituted  the  principal  objects  of  the
supernatural  powers  exercised  by  Jesus  Christ,  it  was  no  wonder
if  those  who  refused  to  receive  his  credentials,  or  to  believe  him
to  be  the  Messias,  of  whose  identity  and  truth  such  miracles  were  to
be  the  test,  should  attribute  his  success  to  a  cause  which  appeared
to  afford  an  easy  solution  of  the  mystery.

39  From  the  corruption  of  the  grand  word  sprung  the  Juba  of  the
Moors,  the  Jupiter  of  the  Romans,  and  others  of  the  like  nature.
The  true  name  was  visible  in  the  temple  at  the  time  St.  Jerome
flourished,  written  in   the   ancient  Samaritan  character,   and    still
preserved  in  the  system  of  Royal  Arch  Masonry,  embodied  in  three
signs,  three  tokens,  three  words,  and  three  passwords ;  in  order  to
commemorate  the  mysterious  history  of  the  Burning  Bush,  where
Jehovah  imposed  upon  the  ancient  patriarch  that  he  should  never
fully  pronounce  his  holy  name.

40  "  The  true  ancient  pronunciation,"  says  Hales  (Anal.  vol.  ii.
p.  124),  "  of  this  name  was  lost  by  the  superstitious  scruples  of  the
Jews  to  utter  it;  perverting  the  meaning  of  Deut.  xxviii.  58,  and
substituting  for  it  Jehovah,  formed  by  the  vowels  of  Elohim,  &c.
But  the  primitive  pronunciation  has  been  fortunately  preserved  in
several  of  the  heathen  classics,  according  to  the  pronunciation  of
those  foreigners  who  had  early  intercourse  with  the  Israelites,  and
afterwards  the  Jews.     Thus  the  Clarian  oracle  (founded  before  the
Trojan  war),  in  answer  to  the  inquiry,  which  of  the  gods  is  he  to  be
reckoned  who  is  called  IAQ?  uttered  a  remarkable  response,  pre-
served by  Macrobius,  of  which  this  is  a  part — Learn  that  the  God
supreme  of  all  is  IAQ."

41  In  the  degree  of  Perfection  the  following  explanations  are  given
to  the  candidate  : — "  The  true  pronunciation  of  the  name  was  revealed
to  Enoch,  and  he  transferred  it  to  a  triangular  plate  of  gold,  by  the


OF    FREEMASONRY.  551

veneration.  He  was  called  by  the  Romans  Jove  or
Jah,  by  the  Chaldeans  the  Phoenicians,  and  the  Celtse
Bel  or  Bui  •  and  by  the  Indians,  Egyptians,  and  Greeks,
Oni  or  On.42  This  name  should  never  be  lightly  re-
ferred to,  or  used  irreverently  or  profanely.  He  that
sweareth  by  the  throne  of  God,  sweareth  by  Him  that
sitteth  thereon.  In  this  sense  only  the  sacred  name  of
God  is  unpronounceable.

It  is  with  great  propriety  that  a  respect  for  this
sacred  name  has  been  introduced  into  every  degree  of
Freemasonry.43  A  knowledge  of  the  Tetragrammaton

four  consonants,  m»V.  The  vowels  not  being  named  occasioned
many  differences  in  its  pronunciation ;  which  Masons  have  divided
into  so  many  eras,  marked  by  the  same  number  of  patriarchal  names,
viz.,  three,  five,  seven,  nine,  and  the  several  pronunciations  have  been
thus  arranged : — the  three  patriarchs  after  Enoch,  viz.,  Methusaleh,
Lamech,  and  Noah,  pronounced  the  above  word  JTJHA  (Yu-haw).
In  the  five  succeeding  ages,  Shem,  Arphaxad,  Selah,  Heber,  and
Peleg,  it  was  pronounced  JEVA  ( Ye-waw} .  By  the  seven  patriarchs
Reu,  Serug,  Nahor,  Terah,  Abraham,  Isaac,  Judah,  it  was  JOVA
(Yo-waw}  ;  and  by  the  nine,  Hezron  and  Ram,  JEVO  (  Yay-wo)  ;
by  Aminadab  and  Nasshon,  JEVAH  (Ye-ivay) ;  by  Salmon,  Boaz,
and  Obed,  JOHE  (Yo-hay) ;  by  Jesse  and  David,  JEHOVAH  (Ye-ho-
waw).  You  will  observe  that  the  names  of  Enoch,  Jacob,  and  Moses
are  omitted  in  this  enumeration,  because  the  true  pronunciation  had
been  revealed  to  them  personally.  The  number  of  corruptions  is
esteemed  to  be  nine.  Now  the  ages  of  Masonry,  3  +  5  +  7  +  9  =
24  x  3  =  72,  the  number  of  the  Sanhedrim ;  and  to  this  if  you  add
the  number  of  the  corrupted  words,  the  amount  will  be  81,  the  age
of  a  Grand,  Elect,  Perfect,  and  Sublime  Mason."

43  The  first  was  plainly  Jehovah,  the  second  was  a  common  name
of  God,  and  the  last  was  used  by  the  early  Christians  to  express  the
Being  whom  they  worshipped.  O  GN  K<U  o  r\v,  KCU  o  ep^op.fvos — "  God,
which  is,  and  was,  and  is  to  come."  (Rev.  i.  4.)

43  The  process  of  acquiring  it  is  thus  described : — "  In  the  Mark


552  HISTORICAL  LANDMARKS


not  only  distinguishes  the  Royal  Arch  degree/1  but
formed  the  highest  ambition  of  our  ancient  Jewish
Brethren.45  They  believed  this  incommunicable  Word

Masons'  degree  T  obtained  a  plan,  well  ordered  in  all  things,  to  avert
the  evils  of  any  disorganizing  power,  and  prevent  the  calamities  of
poverty  and  want.  As  a  Past  Master  I  learned  the  true  art  of
governing  myself  and  those  over  whom  I  should  be  appointed  to
preside.  Tn  the  Most  Excellent  Master's  degree,  I  was  carried  back
to  the  time  when  the  temple  was  finished,  the  cope-stone  brought
forth,  with  shoutings  of  grace,  grace  to  it;  the  ark  safely  seated,  the
Most  Excellent  Masters  prostrate  before  the  Eternal,  praising  his
goodness  and  mercy,  and  the  fire  of  heaven  not  only  burning  on  the
altar,  but  in  the  hearts  of  the  worthy  ;  my  heart  was  touched  its  with
a  live  coal  from  the  altar,  and  I  could  not  but  exclaim — *  Glory  to
God  in  the  highest.'  Tn  the  lloyal  Arch  Mason's  degree  1  beheld
myself  exalted  to  the  top  of  Pisgah ;  an  extensive  scene  opened  to
my  view  of  the  glory  and  goodness  of  the  most  excellent  High  Priest
of  our  salvation.  I  dug  deep  for  hidden  treasures,  found  them,  and
regained  the  omnific  WORD."  (Freemasons'  Library,  published  under
the  sanction  of  the  Grand  Lodge  of  Maryland.)

44  "  The  degree  of  Royal  Arch,"  says  a  Masonic  writer,  (Miscel-
lanies, p.  235,)  "is  the  highest  in  this,  or  perhaps  any  other  country,
that  has  any  immediate  connection  with  the  real  business  of  Masonry.
There  are,  it  is  true,  the  degrees  of  Knights  Templar,  Knights  of
Malta,  &c. ;  but  as  these  have  more  of  a  warlike  than  of  a  scientific
or  moral  tendency,  we  look  upon  them  as  distinct  from,  and  uncon-
nected with  the  other  Masonic  Orders ;  and  I  know  nothing  to  pre-
vent them  from  being  given  to  persons  altogether  unacquainted  witli
the  foregoing  degrees."

45  In  the  infancy  of  the  world,  the  Deity  revealed  himself  personally
to  his  creatures  ;  and  continued  his  gracious  manifestations  for  ages
amongst  his  favourite  people,   even  after  a  great  majority  of  the
human  race  had  fallen  away  from  him.     At  the  first  mention  of
Abraham,  we  find  him  selected  by  Jehovah  as  the  individual  through
whom  the  promise  of  the  Messiah  was  to  pass ;  in  consequence  of
which,  he  built  an  altar  of  earth  to  God,  and  called  it  by  the  name
of  Jehovah.     And  the  Deity  said,  T  AM  JEHOVAH,  that   brought


OF    FREEMASONRY.  553

to  be  replete  with  every  virtue  ;46  and  thought  that  by
its  efficacy  united  with  the  agency  of  his  wonderful
rod,  an  indispensable  appendage  to  all  magical  cere-
monies, the  miracles  in  Egypt  and  the  wilderness  were
performed.47

The  Tetragrammaton  was  indeed  the  actual  author
of  all  the  miracles  which  distinguished  the  patriarchal
and  Jewish  dispensations.48  But  it  is  absurd  to  believe

thee  out  of  Ur  of  the  Chaldees.  And  Abraham  replied  with  the  very
name,  "  EHOVA,  whereby  shall  I  know  this?"  Nay,  even  his
servant  could  say,  "Blessed  be  Jehovah,  the  God  of  my  master
Abraham."  The  same  forms  of  expression  are  frequently  used  in
the  histories  of  Isaac  and  Jacob.

46  "The   Name   of  God,    says   Calmet,    (Diet.  vol.  i.  p.  750,)
"  includes  all  things.     He  who  pronounces  it  shakes  heaven  and
earth,  and  inspires  the  very  angels  with  astonishment  and  terror.
There  is  a  sovereign  authority  in  this  name ;  it  governs  the  world  by
its  power.     The  other  names  and  surnames  of  the  Deity  are  ranged
about  it,  like  officers  and  soldiers  about  their  sovereigns  and  generals.
From  this  KING  NAME,  they  receive  their  orders  and  obey."

47  The  Masonic  Foundation-stone  is  said  to  have  been  inscribed
\vith  the  awful  Name  or  Word  which  is  confided  to  the   Perfect
Master  when  he  has  arrived  at  the  highest  dignity  of  the  science.
The  characters  were  placed  within  an  equilateral  triangle  and  circle,
as  a  symbol  of  the  divine  Being  under  whose  protection  this  conse-
crated stone  was  placed  ;  and  hence  it  was  frequently  termed  the
Stone  of  Life.     The  Rabbins  believed  that  from  the  potency  of  this
Word,  the  stone  was  invested  with  oracular  powers,  and  many  other
singular  virtues.

48  It  was  the  Name,  or  Word,  or  Logos,  that  created  the  world  ;
and  in  the  form  of  a  glorious  Shekinah,  expelled  man  from  Paradise.
It  was  the  same  divine  personage  that  appeared  to  Abraham  on
Mount  Moriah ;  to  Jacob  in  his  celebrated  vision  ;  to  Moses  at  the
burning  bush.     It  was  Jehovah  that  the  seventy  Elders  saw,  when
there  was  under  his  feet  a  pavement  of  sapphire  stone.     He  was  the
pillar  of  a  cloud  and  of  fire ;  and  the  Shekinah  of  the  Mercy-seat.


554  HISTORICAL    LANDMARKS

with  the  heathen,  (and  it  is  doubtful  whether  the  Jews
also  did  not  entertain  a  similar  faith,)  that  inanimate
substances,49  however  consecrated  and  inscribed  by
the  art  and  science  of  man,  could  be  endowed  with
the  property  which  belongs  only  to  Jehovah  himself.50
Thus  the  Jewish  Talmud  ascribes  miraculous  powers
to  the  Stone  of  Foundation,61  because  it  was  inscribed
with  the  sacred  hierogram.52

The  same  Logos  manifested  himself  to  Gideon,  and  Manoah,  and
Samuel ;  and  was  the  guardian  power  that  advanced  the  Jewish
nation  gradually  to  the  eminence  which  it  attained  in  the  glorious
reign  of  Solomon;  and  promised  to  sustain  it  in  that  high  pre-
eminence, if  his  people  would  observe  the  laws  which  were  delivered
to  Moses  on  Mount  Sinai.

9  Thus  the  Egyptians  believed  the  poisonous  onion  of  their
country,  called  Scilla,  to  be  possessed  of  similar  powers,  because  it
was  esteemed  the  consecrated  residence  of  the  Divinity.

50  The  Abbe  Barruel,  in  his  reckless  tirade  against  Freemasonry,
which  he  endeavours  vainly  to  prove  was  the  proximate  cause  of  the
French  revolution,  accuses  it  with  blaspheming  God  by  transferring
his  sacred  name  to  the  creature.

51  "This  religious  feeling  seems  to  have  prevailed  among  the
Greeks  also.     For  in  Athens  they  had  a  prophetic  and  a  mysterious
book,  which  they  called  the  Testament,  to  which  they  believed  the
safety  of  the  republic  was  attached.     They  preserved   it  with  so
much  care,  that  amongst  all  their  writers  no  one  ever  dared  to  make
any  mention  of  it ;  and  the  little  we  know  of  this  subject  has  been
collected  from  the  famous  oration  of  Dinarchus  against  Demosthenes,
whom  he  accuses  of  having  failed  in  the  respect  due  to  this  ineffable
book,   so   connected   with   the  welfare   and  safety  of  the  state."
(Spineto,  Hier.  p.  122.)

53  This  hierogram  included  the  point  within  a  circle,  of  which
St.  Augustine,  (de  Ordine,  i.  2,  inf.  ix,  c.  4,)  thus  speaks  :  "  For
as  in  a  circle,  however  large,  there  is  one  middle  point,  whither  all
converge,  called  by  geometricians  the  centre,  and  although  the  parts
of  the  whole  circumference  may  be  divided  innumerably,  yet  is  there  no


01'    FREEMASONRY.  555

It  is  to  be  presumed  that  the  Jews,  instead  of
ascribing  the  miracles  to  the  first  cause,53  imputed
them  to  the  second.54  They  were  impressed  with  an
idea  that  all  the  merit  consisted  in  the  disposition  of
the  four  letters  which  composed  it.55  They  saw  the
effect,  but  were  not  duly  sensible  of  the  cause ;  although
it  was  constantly  before  their  eyes  in  the  cloudy  and
fiery  pillar,  for  the  veil  was  on  their  hearts.56  The

other  point  save  that  one  from  which  all  measure  equally,  and  which,
by  a  certain  law  of  evenness  hath  the  sovereignty  over  all.  But  if
you  leave  this  one  point,  whatever  point  you  take,  the  greater  num-
ber of  lines  you  draw,  the  more  everything  is  confused  ;  so  the  soul
is  tossed  to  and  fro  by  the  very  vastness  of  things ;  and  is  crushed
by  a  real  destitution,  in  that  its  own  nature  compels  it  every  where
to  seek  One  Object,  and  the  multiplicity  suffers  it  not."

53  Many  of  the  Jews,  even  at  this  day,  are  afraid  to  look  on  a
rainbow,   and  instead  thereof,  as  soon  as  they  behold  it,   "they
presently  go  forth  and  confess  their  sins,  acknowledging  that  they
are  worthy  to  be  destroyed  with  a  flood  as  the  old  world  was ;  and
in  being  spared,  they  celebrate  the  mercy  and  clemency  of  God.  But
they  mingle  this  religion  with  much  superstition ;  for  they  fancy  the
name  of  Jehovah  is  engraven  on  the  bow  ;  and  therefore  turn  their
eyes  away  as  from  the  majesty  of  God  appearing  there,  not  daring
to  look  upon  it,  lest,  beholding  the  face  of  God,  they  die."  (Hex-
ameron,  p.  103.)

54  The  Talmudists  say,  "  Nothing  will  hurt  you  so  long  as  you
keep  round  your  neck  the  Riminga,  which  means  the  holy  name  of
God.     Thieves  and  evil  spirits  will  not  touch  you  ;  and  God  will  be
with  you,  whose  name  is  round  your  neck."

55  tt  The  cabalistical  theologians  think  that  the  divine  Tetragram-
maton  represents  the  world  of  emanation,  in  which  are  the  ten
sovereign  lights  or  attributes ;  and  in  the  construction  of  its  letters
it  unites  all  the  emanations ;  so  that  in  this  quadriletter  Name,
they  say  are  depicted  all  the  ten  sovereign  lights  it  represents."
(Concil.  vol.  i.  p.  108.)

36  In  Exodus  (xxiii.  21)  we  find  Jehovah  saying  of  the  angel  of


556  HISTORICAL    LANDMARKS

Tetragramraaton  was  Jehovah  ;57  and  Jehovah  was
Christ ;  and  Christ  was  the  true  and  awful  Word58  by

the  covenant,  who  led  the  Israelites  out  of  Egypt,  "  My  Name  is  in
him  ;"  where  the  name  implies  the  essence  of  the  Deity.  In  Psalm
xci.  14,  it  is  said,  "  He  was  set  on  high  because  he  hath  known  my
Name."  And  in  Ezra  (vi.  12)  the  place  where  the  Name  of  Jehovah
appears  is  declared  to  be  peculiarly  holy.  It  was  from  an  imperfect
consideration  of  these  kind  of  passages,  which  abound  in  the  writings
of  the  Old  Testament,  that  the  carnal  Jews  imbibed  such  a  high
veneration  for  the  Tetragrammaton,  or  sacred  Name  of  God.

57 1  have  once  more  the  pleasure  of  offering  a  suggestion  of  our
late  ingenious  Bro.  Tytler  :  "  The  number  45  is  expressed  in  Hebrew
by  the  two  letters  t"Q,  which  are  indicative  of  ntiTiTtCO,  MESSIAH
JEHOVAH.  But  45  ='  JT  x  3,  or  15  x  3  =  45  x  5  =  225  ;  the
first  being  equivalent  to  JT,  multiplied  by  the  number  of  letters  in
^Jltf ,  the  triple-lettered  NAME  ;  and  the  second  to  IT,  multiplied  by
the  number  of  letters  in  D^il/N,  the  five-lettered  NAME.  There-
fore 225  is  the  square,  or  152  of  which  each  stone  of  the  temple
consisted,  and  45,  or  15x3,  is  the  equilateral  triangle  inscribed
within  each  of  the  stones,  5x45  =  15x15  =  225  The  vertical
point  45,  equivalent  to  the  cosine  point  of  the  radius,  taken  as  60,
is  the  bisector  both  of  the  latter  and  the  cotangent,  or  the  tangent
of  45°  of  the  major  circle  ;  and  each  bisected  line  being  equal  to  2,
therefore  2x2  =  4,  4  +  4=8,  the  mysterious  cubic  number,  which,
by  means  of  the  short  reckoning,  is  obtained  from  ("PIT,  the  Great
Tetragrammaton;  or  •»  10  +  H  5  +  |  6  +  H  5  =  26,  or  2  +  6=8,
the  square  root  of  which  is  INACCESSIBLE."  (F.  Q.  11.,  1839,  p.  139.)

58  "  Some  of  the  Jews  ascribe  the  miracles  of  Jesus  to  a  certain  secret
name  which  was  put  in  the  temple  by  Solomon,  and  kept  by  two
lions  for  above  one  thousand  years,  but  was  conveyed  thence  by
Jesus.  Which  is  not  only  false,"  says  Grotius,  (De  Verit,  b.  v.  s.  4,)
"  but  an  impudent  fiction,  non  mendaciter  modo,  sed  et  impudenter
confictum  est.  For  as  to  the  lions,  so  remarkable  and  wonderful  a
thing,  neither  the  books  of  the  Kings,  nor  the  Chronicles,  nor
Josephus,  mention  anything  of  them.  Nor  did  the  Romans,  who,
before  the  times  of  Jesus,  entered  the  temple  with  Pompey,  find  any
such  thing."


OF    FREEMASONRY.  557

which  all  these  miracles  had  been  wrought.59  He  it
was  who  appeared  to  the  patriarchs  ;60  for  in  the
beginning  was  God.  And  thus  the  Logos  himself
censures  those  who  put  their  trust  in  the  virtue  and
efficacy  of  the  name  alone,  without  placing  their  chief
reliance  on  the  being  to  whom  it  belongs : — "  Many
will  say  to  me  in  that  day,  Lord,  have  we  not  pro-
phesied in  thy  Name  ?  and  in  thy  Name  have  cast  out
devils  ?  and  in  thy  Name  done  many  wonderful
works  ?61  And  then  will  I  profess  unto  them,  I  never

50  Even  the  celebrated  Eabbi  Judah  the  holy,  confessed  that  it
was  acknowledged  by  all  the  Jews,  that  the  prophetical  passages  in
the  Old  Testament,  and  particularly  Psalm  xci.,  referred  to  the
Messiah,  or  Word  of  God.  And  Eabbi  Menahem,  as  Cardinal
Pole  informs  us,  (Synops.  Tom.  i.  438,)  asserts  out  of  the  Jewish
writers,  that  the  angel  which  is  so  frequently  said  to  appear  as  a
divine  messenger  and  agent  of  the  numerous  miracles  recorded  in
the  Scriptures,  was  Angelum  Redemptorum,  or  the  Logos  of  God.

60  The  Chevalier  Ramsay  was  fully  impressed  with  the  importance
of  this  doctrine.  He  said  "it  was  the  Messiah  who  conversed  with
our  fathers  under  a  human  form ;  it  was  he  who  appeared  to  the
Lawgiver  upon  the  Holy  Mount ;  it  was  he  who  spake  to  the  pro-
phets under  a  visible  appearance ;  and  it  is  he  who  will  at  last  come
in  triumph  upon  the  clouds,  to  restore  the  universe  to  its  primitive
splendour  and  felicity."  (Cyrus,  p.  251.)

1  The  Eomans  had  a  great  veneration  for  a  certain  name,  which
was  held  "  in  such  reverence  that,  for  want  of  use,  it  was  lost,  and
is  now  not  known.  Solinus  informs  us  that  a  person  named  Maremis
Soranus  was  condemned  to  torture  and  death  for  having  incidentally
pronounced  it.  And  the  passage  in  Lucan,  already  noticed,  shows
that  the  name  of  Demogorgon,  which  the  Gentiles  had  given  to  the
Supreme  God,  was  considered  so  ineffable,  that  it  was  believed  the
whole  earth  would  tremble  if  that  name  were  uttered.  And  the  sor-
ceress Erito  threatens  to  pronounce  this  terrible  name  as  the  most
powerful  charm  to  command  the  obedience  of  evil  spirits."  (Spinet o,
Hier.  p.  123.)


558


HISTORICAL    LANDMARKS


knew  you ;  depart  from  me  ye  that  work  iniquity.


The


the  truth  of  these


testimonies  to  me  trutn  01  tnese  suggestions  are
abundant ;  and  contribute  to  show  the  futility  of  any
confidence  except  in  the  Almighty  power  of  God.63  St.
John  says,  "  the  Word  was  made  flesh  and  dwelt
among  us."64  St  Paul  adds,  "In  Him  dwelt  the
fulness  of  the  Godhead  bodily;"65  and  Christ  himself
crowns  the  argument  with  its  concluding  evidence  by
declaring,  "  I  and  my  Father  are  ONE.


66


2  Mat.  vii.  22,  23.

63 "  Some  think  that  the  name  Jesus  is  derived  of  Jehovah,
being  inserted  only  to  signify  the  assumption  of  the  human  nature ;
but  the  angel  giveth  another  interpretation  of  the  name  Jesus,
because  Christ  should  save  the  people  from  their  sins ;  so  that  it  is
rather  derived  of  Jeshua,  salvation,  than  of  Jehovah.  But  howsoever
it  is  for  the  derivation  of  this  name,  the  signification  doth  most
properly  agree  unto  Christ,  who  is  indeed  God  Jehovah ;  for  so  the
prophets,  speaking  of  Christ,  do  call  him  Jehovah ;  as  Jeremiah,
(xxiii.  61,)  This  is  the  name  whereby  they  shall  call  him,  Jehovah
our  righteousness.  And  as  now  the  Lord  calleth  himself  Jehovah,
when  he  delivered  the  Israelites  out  of  the  bondage  of  Egypt ;  so
Christ  showed  himself  Jehovah  in  delivering  of  us  from  the  spiritual
thraldom  of  sin."  (Hexapla.  in  Exodum,  p.  64.)

64  John  i.  14.     Our  Jewish  Brethren  admit  that  Tetragraminaton
is  the  name  of  the  Messiah.    Thus  the  R.  Manasseh  ben  Israel  says,
"  There  is  no  impropriety  in  applying  the  Tetragrammaton  to  the
Messiah,  as  it  is  occasionally  given  to  inanimate  things,"  (Concil.
vol.  ii.  p.  158.)     A.nd  Bro.  Tytler  says  that  in   Leviticus   JT  is
expressly  declared  to  be  Jesus,  the  Name  above  every  name ;  because
Moses  declares,  Jah  is  my  strength  and  my  song,  and  shall  be  to  me
Jesus.     This  was  fulfilled  when   the   three  fourteen   generations,
which  terminated  in  the  birth  of  Christ,  were  accomplished ;  because
by  the  musufur  rotan,  or  short  reckoning,  three  fourteens  contain
15  ;  in  this  manner,  1  +  4=5,   5  x  3  =  15  =  iT.     Jah  then
appeared  in  Jesus  Christ."  (F.Q.K  1838,  p.  168.)

65  Coloss.  ii.  9.
60  John  x.  30.


OF    FREEMASONRY.  550


LECTURE     X  L  V.

THE    CAMP    OF    ISRAEL.

"The  tribes  being  now  mustered,  registered,  and  formed  into
distinct  troops,  the  next  order  given  to  Moses  and  Aaron  was  about
the  regular  form  of  their  encampments  in  the  places  where  they
resided,  and  of  their  marches  when  they  made  their  movements."

OLD  LECTURES.

"  The  square  was  the  figure  under  which  the  Israelites  formed
their  encampments  in  the  wilderness,  and  under  which  they  fortified
or  defended  the  holy  tabernacle,  sanctified  with  the  immediate
presence  of  the  divinity." — HUTCHINSON.

"  How  goodly  are  thy  tents,  0  Jacob,  and  thy  tabernacles,  0
Israel !  As  the  valleys  are  they  spread  forth,  as  gardens  by  the
river's  side,  as  the  trees  of  lign  aloes  which  the  Lord  hath  planted,
and  as  cedar  trees  beside  the  waters." — BALAAM'S  PROPHECY.

UNDER  all  the  visible  manifestations  of  divine  favour
in  behalf  of  the  Israelites,  at  their  deliverance  from
Egyptian  bondage,  and  during  their  subsequent  sojourn-
ing in  the  wilderness — the  passage  through  the  Red
Sea — the  pillar  of  a  cloud  and  of  fire — the  awful
appearance  on  Mount  Sinai — the  establishment  of  a
permanent  religion  in  the  tabernacle  worship — and
the  daily  supply  of  food  from  heaven1 — all  of  a

1  "  E.  Jose  ben  Hanina  said,  if  you  are  surprised  at  this,  go  and
learn  of  the  manna.  To  adults  it  tasted  like  bread ;  to  the  aged
like  cakes  with  honey ;  and  to  children  like  breast  milk ;  which


560


1STORICAL    LANDMARKS


miraculous  nature — their  frequent  murmurings  and
dissatisfaction — form  a  remarkable  feature  in  their
history.2  Every  trifling  obstacle  that  presented  itself
to  their  progress,  and  every  untoward  occurrence,
formed  a  pretext  of  accusation  against  Moses  and
Aaron,  who  had  conducted  them  into  the  wilderness,
and  querulous  complaints  against  God,  who  was  their
protection  and  defence.3  Nor  were  those  dispositions
restrained  by  the  most  signal  and  repeated  punish-
ments. They  committed  fornication  with  the  daughters

is  the  purport  of  the  Scripture  saying — like  the  humidity  of  oil.
1'or  if  the  manna,  being  only  of  one  description,  could  become  of  so
many  flavours,  according  to  the  various  tastes,  how  much  more  ran
the  voice  of  God  accommodate  itself  to  all  capacities."  (Concil.
vol.  i.  p.  149.)

2  Moses  frequently  expostulated  with  them  on  this  infirmity  with-
out success. — "  Do  not  consider  me,"  said  he,  "  as  Moses  the  son  of
Amram  and  Jochabed,  but  as  the  instrument  of  God,  by  whom  the
waters  of  the  Nile  were  changed  into  blood,  and  the  Egyptians  dis-
comfited by  a  diversity  of  plagues.     You  are  to  consider  me  only  as
the  messenger  of  heaven;  for  the  God  who  performed  the  above
wonders,  honours  you  with  the  precepts  which  I  shall  deliver  in
obedience  to  his  commands."  (Jos.  Ant.  Jud.  1.  iii.  c.  5.)

3  "  And  they  said  one  to  another,  let  us  make  a  captain,  and  let
us  return  into  Egypt.     They  knew  that  Moses  would  not  conduct
them  thither,  and  therefore  they  thought  of  choosing  another  Jeader.
But  though  they  might,  in  a  raging  fit,  speak  of  returning  to  Egypt,
yet  it  is  an  amazing  thing  that  they  should  continue  in  this  madness,
and  deliberate  about  it,  nay,  actually  appoint  them  a  captain,  as
Nehemiah  (ix.  17)  saith  they  did.     For  how  could  they  get  thither
without  food  ?  which  they  could  not  expect  God  would  send  them
from  heaven,  when  they  had  forsaken  him.    Or  how  could  they  hope
to  find  their  way,  when  his  cloud  which  directed  them  was  withdrawn
from  them ;  or  hope  to  deal  with  those  that  might  oppose  their
passage,  if  they  hit  upon  the  right  way?"    (Patrick.  Com.  vol.  i.
p.  G01.)


OJb1    FREEMASONRY.  561

of  Moab,  and  fell  by  the  plague  four  and  twenty
thousand  persons.  They  tempted  Jehovah,  and  were
destroyed  of  serpents.  They  murmured,  and  were  de-
stroyed of  the  destroyer.4  These  awful  events  proved
no  warning  to  the  survivors.  Even  the  final  and  total
exclusion  of  that  generation  from  the  promised  land5
had  no  effect  upon  their  children ;  and  they  continued  to
murmur  and  disobey,  even  while  in  the  act  of  enjoying
the  gracious  gifts  of  their  munificent  Benefactor.

The  several  occasions  of  their  dissatisfaction  were
various  and  contradictory.  They  were  tired  of  their
bondage  in  Egypt,  which  was  severe  and  burdensome ;
and  yet  they  were  no  sooner  delivered,  than  they
expressed  their  resentment  against  Moses  for  the  part
he  had  taken  in  that  deliverance.6  When  Moses  was

4  1  Cor.  x.  5—10.

5  Read  the  very  affecting  account  m  Ezek.  xx.  15 — 21.

6  "  The  mixed  multitude  that  were  among  them  fell  a  lusting ;  and
the  children  of  Israel  also  wept,  and  said — who  shall  give  us  flesh  to
eat  ?  we  remember  the  fish  which  we  did  eat  in  Egypt  freely ;  the
cucumbers,  and  the  melons,  and  the  leeks,  and  the  onions,  and  the
garlick;  but  now  our  soul  is  dried  away."  (Numb.  xi.  4 — 6.)    The
food  of  the  Egyptians  was  doubtless  exquisite.  Hasselquist  (Voyages,
p.  255 — 290),  speaking  of  the  water  melon,  says — "The  Arabians
call  it  Batech.    It  is  cultivated  on  the  banks  of  the  Nile,  in  the  rich
clayey  earth  which  subsists  during  the  inundation.     This  serves  the
Egyptians  for  meat,  drink,  and  physic.     Whoever  has  tasted  the
onions  of  Egypt,  must  allow  that  none  can  be  better  in  any  part  of
the  universe.     Here  they  are  sweet,  and  in  other  countries  they  are
nauseous  and  strong ;  here  they  are  soft,  whereas  in  the  north  and
other  parts,  they  are  hard  of  digestion.     Hence  they  cannot  in  any
place  be  eaten  with  less  prejudice  and  more  satisfaction  than  in
Egypt.     They  eat  them  roasted,  cut  into  four  pieces,  with  some  bits

VOL.  II.  O  O


562  HISTORICAL    LANDMARKS


in  the  mount,  they  regretted  that  their  leader  had
departed  from  them ;  and  when  he  returned  to  resume
his  magisterial  office,  they  rebelled  against  him  on  the
principle  that  he  had  assumed  an  undue  authority  over
them.7  When  on  travel,  they  complained  of  weariness
— when  at  rest,  of  inactivity.  They  murmured  for
want  of  bread — for  want  of  water,8  which  he  gave

of  roasted  meat,  which  the  Turks  call  kebab;  and  with  this  dish
they  are  so  delighted,  that  I  have  heard  them  wish  they  might  enjoy
it  in  paradise."

7  This  mixed  multitude,  who  were  instrumental  in  creating  the
rebellion,  continued  with  the  Israelites  until  after  the  delivery  of  the
law,  and  the  departure  of  the  host  from  mount  Sinai,  in  tho  second
mouth  of  the  second  year  of  the  exode.     In  consequence  of  these
frequent  rebellions,  the  reins  of  government  became  too  heavy  for
Moses,  and  he  established,  by  the  divine  appointment,  a  Sanhedrim,
or  council  of  seventy  elders ;  after  which  we  hear  no  more  of  the
strangers,  and  it  is  very  probable  that  they  were  formally  separated
from  the  people  by  this  court,  and  sent  back  into  their  own  country ;
for  they  were,  without  doubt,  Egyptians  of  the  lowest  class,  and
probably  many  of  them  were  aliens  residing  in  that  country,  whose
means  of  livelihood  were  equivocal.

8  This  appears  very  natural,  if  we  may  beb'eve  what  Baumgarten
says  about  the  sufferings  of  the  caravans,  in  which  he  travelled,  for
want  of  this  necessary  article  of  refreshment.    He  says — "  Travelling
all  that  day  and  night  without  eating,  resting,  or  sleeping,  we  could
not  avoid  falling  .oif  our  camels,  while  we  were  half  sleeping,  half
waking.     A  thousand  strange  dreams  and  fancies  came  into  our
heads  whilst  hungry  and  weary,  and  we  sat  nodding  on  our  camels.
We  thought  we  saw  somebody  reaching  us  victuals  and  drink,  and
putting  out  our  hands  to  take  it,  and  stretching  out  ourselves  to
overtake  it,  when  it  seemed  to  draw  back ;  we  tumbled  off  our
camels,  and  by  a  severe  fall  found  it  a  dream  and  an  illusion.     We
underwent  the  same  hardships  all  the  twenty-second  and  twenty-
third  days,  mutually  pitying  one  another's  leanness  and  misery."


OF    FREEMASONRY.  563

them  out  of  the  dry  rock9 — for  want  of  flesh.10  If  any
restraint  was  imposed  upon  them,  they  became  per-
fectly refractory  and  ungovernable ;  as,  in  gathering  a
superfluous  quantity'of  manna;11  and  in  fighting  with
the  Amalekites,  contrary  to  the  express  command  of
Moses;  for  both  which  errors  a  signal  punishment
speedily  followed.12  These  constitute  a  few  of  the  sub-
jects of  their  repeated  complaints,  and  show  what  a
dissatisfied  and  thankless  people  were  committed  to
the  management  of  our  great  legislator  during  their

9  "  European   travellers   say  that  this  rock  stands  prominently
amongst  several  lesser  ones,  about  one  hundred  paces  from  mount
Horeb,  and  appears  to  have  been  split  by  some  extraordinary  con-
cussion from  the  neighbouring  mountain.    They  describe  it  as  a  mass
of  red  granite,  almost  round  on  one  side,  and  flat  on  the  other ;  twelve
feet  high  and  as  many  thick,  and  about  fifty  feet  in  circumference."
(Sicard,  dans  les  Memoires  des  Missions,  torn.  vii.  p.  14.)

10  The  pigeons,  woodcocks,  partridges,  &c.  of  Egypt  were  parti-
cularly delicious.     And  Pococke  says  that  the  fish  of  the  Nile  was
esteemed  a  great  delicacy,  and  so  plentiful,  that  during  the  hot  season
it  constitutes  the  principal  food  of  the  people.

11  The  Talmudists  contend  that  the  manna  possessed  many  different
flavours,  according  to  the  various  ages  of  the  people ;  whence  it  was
called  celestial  bread.

12  "  These  murmuring  and  obstinate  Israelites  do  diversely  offend.
— 1.  In  their  ingratitude,  in  extenuating  the  benefits  which  they  have
received  upon  every  occasion ;  they  look  only  unto  their  present  state
and  place  where  they  were,  and  think  not  of  the  place  of  bondage
whence  they  were  brought.     2.  They  prefer  carnal  things  before
spiritual;  the  flesh  pots  of  Egypt  before  the  glorious  presence  of
God,  who  now  showed  himself  visibly  among  them.     3.  They  prefer
their  miserable  bondage  in  Egypt,  with  their  gross  flesh  pots,  before
their  glorious  liberty,  being  in  some  want ;  whereas  men  will  even
with  the  loss  of  their  lives  redeem  their  liberty."    (Willett.  Hexapla.
p.  235.)

o  o  2


564  HISTORICAL    LANDMARKS

abode  in  that  pathless  desert.13  But  most  of  all  they
rebelled  at  the  report  of  the  spies,  although  Joshua
and  Caleb  exhorted  them  not  to  be  afraid  of  the
Canaanites,  whose  defence,  or  shadow  (tzillani),  had
departed  from  them.14

If  it  be  asked,  how  are  these  contradictory  feelings
to  be  reconciled?  I  answer — by  a  reference  to  the
genius  and  disposition  of  the  people.  They  had  been
held  in  cruel  subjection  for  the  long  period  of  one
hundred  and  fifty  years,  and  a  state  of  slavery  is  natu-
rally a  state  of  dissatisfaction.  Yet  their  murmurings
only  served  to  increase  the  severity  of  their  oppression,
and  new  burdens  furnished  them  with  fresh  causes  of
complaint.15  And  this  feeling  would  not  be  relieved

13  And  all  this  in  the  face  of  those  glorious  promises  which  were
vouchsafed  to  them  by  their  God  and  King.    (See  Exod.  xix.  4.)

14  Upon  which  the  Rabbins  thus  comment : — they  say,  "  that  in
the  night  of  the  seventh  day  of  the  seventh  month,  God  showed  his
people  by  moonshine  what  should  happen  to  them  in  the  year  fol-
lowing.    They  pretend  that  if  any  one  went  out  into  the  moonshine
that  night  in  a  proper  dress,  he  would  see  the  shadow  of  his  body
diverse,  according  to  what  would   happen  unto  him  ;  for  instance,
the  shadow  of  his  hand  held  out  would  want  a  finger,  if  he  was  to
lose  that  year  a  friend ;  his  right  hand  would  cast  no  shadow,  if  his
son  was  to  die ;  his  left  hand,  if  his  daughter ;  if  the  person  himself
was  to  die,  then  his  shadow  would  appear  without  a  head,  or  perhaps
his  body  would   cast   no  shadow  at  all,  his  shadoiv  being  departed
from  him.    The  Greeks  had  a  whim  about  the  shadow  of  those  who
entered  the  temple  of  the  Arcadian  Jupiter  not  altogether  unlike  this
fiction  of  the  Rabbins,  and  the  monkish  tale,  which  some  of  our
vulgar  people  can  still  tell,  of  their  shadow  on  the  night  of  St.
Mark's  festival,  was  perhaps  derived  from  it."   (Shuck.  Con.  vol.  iii.
p.  173.)

15  Thus  we  wonder  how  they  could  entertain  such  a  fervent  desire


OF    FREEMASONRY.  565

by  contrasting  their  situation  with  the  traditional
accounts,  which  were  doubtless  prevalent  amongst
them,  of  the  glory  of  their  ancestors  in  the  time  of
Joseph,  when  they  were  not  only  honoured  and  be-
loved, but  regarded  with  gratitude  and  respect  by  the
Egyptians  as  friends  and  benefactors.16

Thus  were  they  educated  for  three  generations  in
the  science  of  grumbling.17     Their  residence  in  Egypt

of  returning  to  the  service  of  their  oppressors ;  although  it  is  quite
certain  that  in  the  time  of  Moses  they  thought  of  Egypt  with  regret,
and  were  often  inclined  to  return.  "  Indeed,  their  penchant  for  this
their  ancient  country  was  so  strong  and  permanent,  that  he  found  it
necessary  to  introduce  into  the  fundamental  and  unalterable  laws  of
the  government,  an  express  ordinance  against  all  return  to  Egypt.
Sooner,  however,  would  the  Israelite  become  acquainted  with  the
chief  of  nature's  gifts  to  his  new  country,  and  accustomed  to  the  use
of  wine  and  oil,  than  his  longing  after  a  country  which  produced
neither,  would  totally  cease."  (Michaelis,  vol.  iii.  p.  139.)

16  Thus,  from  the  first  dawning  of  reason,  they  were  taught  to
believe  themselves  a  people  unjustly  persecuted  and  oppressed  by
those  who  ought  to  have  held  them  in  especial  honour  as  the  pre-
servers of  their  nation,  particularly  by  the  great  chiefs  of  the  spurious
Freemasonry,  because  their  ancestor  had  secured  to  them  one-fifth  of
the  entire  produce  of  the  land  of  Egypt,  by  his  judicious  manage-
ment of  the  supplies  of  grain,  when  he  saved  the  inhabitants  from
perishing  by  famine.

ir  «  Where  is  the  difference,  said  they,  whether  we  are  subjected
to  the  tyranny  of  Pharoah  or  Moses  ?  We  change  our  master  it  is
true,  but  our  condition  must  continue  to  be  the  same,  so  long  as  we
submit  to  be  deluded  by  the  artifices  of  this  ambitious  man.  Mark
what  a  boast  he  makes  of  his  private  conversations  with  the  Deity,
and  of  his  revelations  from  heaven,  as  if  the  knowledge  of  the  secret
intentions  of  the  Almighty  had  been  communicated  to  him  alone.
Are  we  not  all  the  descendants  of  Abraham  ?  Whence  arises  it  then
that  Moses  should  exclusively  possess  this  privilege  of  foretelling
future  events  ?  Is  not  this  the  land  of  which  God  promised  us  the


566  HISTORICAL    LANDMARKS

had  been  one  continued  series  of  dissatisfaction  and
complaint ;  it  was  engrafted  in  their  very  nature  ;  and
we  are  not  therefore  surprised  that  it  was  difficult  to
subdue.  But  we  are  surprised  that  a  few  generations
of  prosperity  did  not  succeed  in  correcting  it.  The
Almighty  graciously  condescended  to  expostulate  with
them  by  precept,  exhortation,  and  example,  for  the
purpose  of  uprooting  this  inherent  propensity,  which
he  foresaw  would  prove  their  bane  and  final  ruin.  1  Ir
gave  them  bread  from  heaven,  and  water  from  the
hard  rock.18  to  sustain  them  in  the  ban-en  desert.  It
was  useless.  All  his  glorious  manifestations  in  their
behalf,  his  luminous  presence,  his  solemn  promises,
were  directed  to  this  end;  no  less  than  the  terrible

possession  ?  Why,  therefore,  do  we  hesitate  to  make  ourselves  masters
of  it  ?  Without  suffering  ourselves  to  be  longer  deluded  with  idle
pretences,  and  submitting  to  the  arrogance  and  insolence  of  an  indi-
vidual, let  us  at  once  put  ourselves  under  the  guidance  of  the  Almighty,
and  give  up  all  dependence  upon  the  presumed  wisdom  of  our  self-
elected  legislator."  (Jos.  Ant.  Jud.  1.  iv.  c.  1.)

18  Jonathan  ben  Uziel  tells  us,  that  the  well  which  the  Israelites
are  said  to  have  dug  at  Beer  was  first  opened  by  Abraham,  and  used
by  Isaac  and  Jacob  ;  that  Moses  drew  it  after  them  in  the  wilderness
by  virtue  of  his  rod ;  and  that  it  followed  them  over  the  hills  and
through  the  vallies,  going  even  round  the  camp  to  distribute  its
stores  to  every  one  at  his  tent  door ;  and  that  it  thus  followed  them
till  they  came  to  the  borders  of  the  land  of  Moab,  where  they  lost  it
on  the  top  of  a  hill  over  against  Beth  Jeshimon.  (Targum  on  Numb,
xxxi.)  Others  say,  that  the  miraculous  water  sprang  from  the  stone
of  foundation,  which  was  cast  out  of  paradise  by  Adam,  and  coming
into  the  possession  of  Shoaib,  or  Jethro,  was  delivered,  along  with
the  rod,  to  Moses ;  that  the  waters  issued  from  three  orifices  on  each
of  the  four  sides  of  the  stone,  one  for  each  tribe,  and  ran  thence,  in
so  many  rivulets,  to  every  quarter  of  the  camp.


OF    FREEMASONRY.  567

visitations  which  swept  them  off  by  thousands.1"  His
mercy  and  long-suffering  are  the  most  prominent  fea-
tures throughout  a  history  which  abounds  in  repetitions
of  obstinacy,  rebellion,  and  neglect  of  God.

The  Israelites  in  the  wilderness  were  marshalled
according  to  their  tribes,20  each  tribe  being  subdivided
into  families.21  Every  head  of  a  subdivision,  or  thou-
sand, was  furnished  with  an  ensign,  or  banner,  under
which  his  followers  arranged  themselves,22  according  to

19  These  judgments,   severe  as  they  were,  appear  to  have  been
necessary.     The  Almighty  had  given  the  people  a  law  to  govern  their
faith  and  practice  in  every  particular.     Perfect  obedience  was  com-
manded, and  if  the  slightest  innovation  in  the  services  of  the  taber-
nacle had  been  permitted,  it  would  have  led  to  great  irregularities,
terminating,  most  probably,  in  a  total  renunciation  of  God,  like  the
nations  by  which  they  were  surrounded.     The  same  obedience  to
the  laws  of  Masonry  is  required  of  every  member  of  a  Lodge,  other-
wise the  system,  beautiful  and  pure  as  it  is,  would  so^n  be  prostituted,
like  the  Lodges  of  Illuminism,  to  purposes  foreign  to  the  intention  of
its  establishment.

20  "  The  number  twelve,"  says  M.  Portal,  "  was  a  perfect  and
complete  number.     The  number  thirteen  indicated  the  commence-
ment of  a  new  course  of  a  new  life,  and  thence  it  became  the  emblem
of  death."

21  "  That  they  were  divided  into  twelve  great  tribes  is  known  to
every  one ;  and  that  as  early  as  the  time  of  Moses,  every  tribe  had
its  own  chief.     But,  as  we  nowhere  find  that  Moses  appointed  them,
this  would  seem  to  have  been  an  ancient  institution  brought  with
them  from  Egypt  into  the  wilderness.     Indeed  we  know  that,  while
in  Egypt,  this  people  actually  had  their  elders,  who  probably  were
nothing  else  than  these  same  chiefs  of  families."    (Michaelis,  vol.  i.
p.  233.)

22  The  Lord  commanded  Moses  and  Aaron,  saying — "  Every  man
of  the  children  of  Israel  shall  pitch  by  his  own  standard,  with  the
ensign  of  their  father  s  house"  (Numb.  ii.  1.)


568


HISTORICAL    LANDMARKS


a  preconcerted  plan,  both  when  in  camp  and  when  on
the  march  ;  and  thus  all  confusion  was  prevented,  how
hastily  soever  the  order  might  be  given  to  proceed,  or
to  halt  and  pitch  their  tents.  The  four  leading  divi-
sions were  designated  by  the  component  parts  of  the
cherubim,  a  man,  an  ox,  a  lion,  and  an  eagle.23

It  has  been  estimated  that  there  were  about  two
millions  of  souls  in  the  camp  of  Israel,24  which,  by  a

23  This  arrangement  has  given  rise  to  some  curious  conceits.    The
man  was  a  symbol  of  the  prophet  Isaiah,  because  of  his  prophecy  of
Christ  being  a  man  by  his  birth  of  a  virgin ;  and  of  St.  Matthew,
because  he  gives  Christ  human  genealogy.     The  lion  was  considered
the  symbol  of  Jeremiah,  because  of  the  terrible  voice  of  his  thrrati-n-
ings ;  and  of  St.  Mark,  because  his  gospel  begins  with  the  voice  in
the  wilderness.     An  ox  was  the  symbol  of  Ezekiel,  because  he  sets
forth  the  restoration  of  the  temple  and  altar — the  emblem  of  atone-
ment being  an  ox ;  and  of  St.  Luke,  who  commences  with  the  nar-
rative of  Zacharias  the  priest.     An  eagle  was  the  symbol  of  Daniel,
because  he  spake  with  angels,  and  received  visions  which  relate  to  all
time ;  and  of  St.  John,  who  in  his  gospel  treats  upon  Christ's  divinity,
and  soars  to  heaven,  like  an  eagle,  in  the  book  of  Revelation.  Again,
Christ  is  the  cherubim ;  a  man,  from  his  human  nature ;  a  lion,  as
being  descended  from  the  tribe  of  Judah ;  an  ox,  as  being  a  priest ;
and  an  eagle,  from  his  divine  nature.

24  "  There  were  three  camps,  viz.,  the  camp  of  the  Shekinah,  or  of
the  Lord,  i.  e.,  the  sanctuary,  with  its  courts,  which  are  called  the
tents  of  the  Lord.     And  next  the  camp  of  the  Levites,  who,  with
Aaron  and  his  sons  made  a  camp  about  the  tabernacle ;  and  then
the  camp  of  Israel,  which  encompassed  them  all.     Answerable  to
these,  when  the  temple  was  built,  they  reckoned  the  temple  itself
from  the  east  gate,  to  be  the  camp  of  the  Lord ;  and  the  camp  of
the  Levites,  to  be  from  the  entrance  of  mount  Moriah  to  that  east
gate  of  the  temple.     And  the  camp  of  Israel,  they  thought,  extended
from  the  entrance  of  Jerusalem  to  the  mount  Moriah."    (Patrick.
Com.  vol.  i.  p.  554.)


OF    FREEMASONRY.


general  division  into  twelve  parts,  will  give  nearly
170,000  souls  to  each  tribe.25  It  is  well  known,  how-
ever, that  the  tribes  were  not  thus  equally  divided.26
Within  the  square  formed  by  the  twelve  tribes  was
placed  the  camp  of  the  priests  and  Levites,  which
was  also  of  a  quadrilateral  form ;  and  the  sides  were
occupied  by  Moses,  Aaron,  and  the  priests,  and  the
families  of  the  three  sons  of  Levi.  The  priests  had

25  "  Moses  has  left  us  accurate  enumerations  of  the  Israelites.    The
men  able  to  bear  arms  somewhat  exceeded  600,000,  and,  including
the  Levites,  amounted  to  nearly  620,000.    If,  according  to  the  usual
principle  of  calculation,  we  admit  the  whole  people,  women  and
children  included,  to  have  been  four  times  as  many,  we  shall  have
nearly  2,500,000  souls  for  the  amount  of  the  population.     Yet  we
must  add  something  further,  on  account  of  polygamy  and  slavery,
although  these  only  took  place  in  the  families  of  the  more  opulent ;
and  I  should  therefore  think  that,  upon  the  whole,  the  number  of
people  that  Moses  had  to  carry  into  Palestine  could  not  have  been
kss  than  3,000,000."  (Michaelis,  vol.  i.  p.  99.)

26  The  following  table  contains  the  number  of  men  in  each  tribe
who  were  upwards  of  twenty  years  of  age  : —

Numb.  ch.i.          Numb.  ch.  xxvi.

43,730   }  These  pitched  their  tents
on  the  south  side  of  the


Reuben    .

.     46,500

Simeon    .

.     59,300

Gad    .     .

.     45,650

Judah

.     74,600

Issachar  .

.     54,400

Zebulun   .

.     57,400

Ephraim  .

.     40,500

Manas  seh

.     32,200

Benjamin

.     35,400

Dan    .     .

.     62,700

Asher  .     .

.     41,500

Naphtali  .

.     53,400

Levites    .

.     22,273

22,200
40,500
76,500
64,300
60,500
32,500
52,700
45,600
64,400
53,400
45,400
23,000.


camp.

These  tribes  occupied  the
east,  and  most  honour-
able station  in  the  camp.

These  pitched  on  the  west
side  of  the  camp.

These  tribes  were  stationed
on  the  north  side  of  the
camp.


570


HISTORICAL  LANDMARKS


their  station  in  the  east,  between  the  standard  of
Judah  and  the  entrance  of  the  tabernacle.  The  Ko-
hathites  pitched  on  the  south,27  the  Gershomites  on
the  west,28  and  the  Merarites  on  the  north.29  And
thus  each  party  having  its  particular  office,  all  con-
fusion was  avoided  when  the  tabernacle  was  removed,
or  set  up.

The  above  general  division  will  show  the  state  of
discipline  which  was  considered  necessary  to  preserve
order  -and  regularity.30  For  a  single  tribe,  consisting  of
170,000  souls,  would  constitute  an  unwieldy  host,  and
difficult  to  remove  from  place  to  place,  encumbered,

27  To  them  was  committed  the  care  of  the  ark,  the  shewbread
table,  the  altars,  and  all  the  appendages  to   the   holy  of  holies.
Their  number  was  8600.

28  In  number  seven  thousand  five  hundred.     They  had  the  charge
of  all  the  hangings  and  curtains  belonging  to  the  tabernacle.

29  In  number  six  thousand  two  hundred.     They  had  the  care  of
the  walls  of  the  sacred  edifice,  including  the  boards,  pillars,  sockets,
pins,  &c.

30  The  camp  of  Israel  was  like  one  great  body  under  the  Sanhedrim,
officered  by  Moses,  Aaron,  and   Joshua ;   while  the  twelve  tribes
were  subordinate  Grand  Lodges  under  their  respective  princes ;  and
the  captains  of  thousands,  hundreds,  and  tens,  formed  private  Lodges
for  the  purposes  of  order  and  regularity.     And  it  was  by  means  of
this  divinely  regidated  policy,  that  unanimity,  and  a  regular  discipline
were  kept  up  amongst  this  vast  and  unequally  tempered  body.     The
seventy  were  the  counsel  of  state,  which  consulted  only  on  the  public
affairs  of  the  theocracy;  the  others  attended  upon  private  affairs.
The  former  was  the  senate  of  the  Jews,  which  at  the  first  consisted
indifferently  of  men  taken  out  of  all  the  tribes,  six  out  of  each  of  the
eleven  tribes,  the  Levites  being  excepted,  and  the  other  four  to  make
up  seventy,  were  supplied  by  the  priests  and  Levites,  and  were  the
principal  officers  of  the  Sanhedrim.


OF    FREEMASONRY.  571

as  it  must  have  been,  with  women  and  children,  aged
and  sick  persons,  and  cattle,  if  the  arrangement  and
disposition  had  not  been  punctilious  and  exact.  Ban-
ners, therefore,  were  a  useful  auxilary  to  each  sub-
division and  section;31  and  they  were  accordingly  of
different  colours,  and  charged  with  various  devices,
that  there  might  be  no  difficulty  in  distinguishing
them  ;32  and  that  the  people,  on  a  known  signal,
might  be  enabled  to  assemble  round  their  own  family
ensign.

The  camp  was  thus  arranged  according  to  the  most
approved  disposition,  both  for  commodiousness  and
convenience.  A  perfect  square33  of  twelve  miles  was
set  out,  and  one  mile  on  each  side  appropriated  to  a
single  tribe ;  and  those  which  were  nearest  in  affinity
to  each  other  were  commanded  to  encamp  together,
the  tabernacle  being  placed  in  the  midst,  surrounded

31  Tacitus  informs  us,  (de  mor.  Germ.)  that  the  Germans  carried
with  them  into  battle  certain  signs  and  figures  which  they  took  out
of  the  groves,  viz.,  the  images  of  their  deities,  which  were  considered
a  sacred  protection  of  the  host.     Effigiesque  signa  qusedam  detracta
lucis  ad  prselium  ferunt.

32  In  like  manner,  the  ancient  inhabitants  of  our   own  island,
according  to  the  testimony  of  the  bards,  used  banners  in  battle,
called    "  the  variegated  webs   of  heroism,  woven   with   unbroken
threads;3'  and  a.  great  standard,  denominated  Gounddelw,  is  de-
scribed by  Aneurin  as  the  glory  of  the  great  field  of  battle ;  and  it
was  regarded  as  possessing  a  miraculous  power  of  protection  from
military  disgrace.

33  The  square  appears  to  have  been  one  of  the  earliest  geometrical
figures  which  was  applied  to  any  practicable  purpose.     And  hence  it
became  of  great  importance  with  the  first  Masons,  which  it  still
retains  in  our  Lodges,  and  is  an  emblem  of  morality  and  justice.


HISTORICAL    LANDMARKS

by  the  tents34  of  the  priests  and  Levites,85  with  then
several  banners:36  The  Wisdom,  Strength,  and  Beauty,
of  this  disposition  cannot  be  too  much  admired.  Here
was  sufficient  room  for  every  purpose,  both  public  and
domestic,  and  nothing  superfluous.  The  space  was
not  inconveniently  crowded,  nor  were  the  separate
camps  of  the  tribes  so  detached  as  to  leave  each  other
unprotected.  Moses  had  been  well  trained  in  the
castrametary  warfare  of  the  Egyptians,  and  on  this
great  occasion  brought  his  experience  into  efficient
operation  for  the  welfare  of  the  people  of  God.37  Being

34  "  It  is  impossible  to  ascertain  with  precision  the  construction
and  appearance  of  the  patriarchal  tents ;  but  we  shall  not  probably  be-
far  from  the  truth  if  we  consider  the  present  Arab  tent  as  affording  the
nearest  existing  approximation  to  the  ancient  model.    It  is  generally
of  an  oblong  figure,  varying  in  size  according  to  the  wants  or  rank
of  the  owner,  and  not  unaptly  compared  by  Sallust,  and  after  him
Dr.  Shaw,  to  the  hull  of  a  ship  turned  upside  down."

35  They  were  placed  in  this  situation  as  a  legion  of  honour  to
protect  the  tabernacle ;  which  was  probably  the  reason  why  they
were  not  arrayed  under  the  banners  of  the  other  tribes.

86  "  There  were  two  thousand  cubits  between  the  ark  and  the  camp
when  they  marched.  And,  in  all  probability,  the  same  proportion
was  observed  when  they  rested.  This  distance  some  interpret  to  be
one  mile,  some  two ;  some  measuring  it  according  to  a  lesser,  others
according  to  a  longer  cubit ;  but  all  agree  in  this,  that  these  two
thousand  cubits  were  a  sabbath-day's  journey ;  though  none  have
observed  the  reason  why  it  was  so  called ;  which  I  take  to  be  that
on  the  sabbath  day  they  were  all  to  repair  to  the  place  of  God's
public  worship,  which  was  two  thousand  cubits  distant  from  those
who  camped  nearest.  Hence  two  thousand  cubits  might  be  called
a  sabbath  day's  journey."  (Godwyn,  p.  100.)

37  The  duties  of  the  posterity  of  Levi,  of  course,  underwent
considerable  modifications  after  the  temple  was  built.  They  were


OF    FREEMASONRY.  573

thus  arranged,  the  order  of  march  was  prescribed  j38
and  it  is  impossible  to  conceive  a  system  better  adapted
to  the  purposes  and  regularity  than  that  which  was
enjoined  on  the  Jews  in  the  wilderness  of  Arabia.39

An  extraordinary  instance  of  the  fatal  consequences
attending  the  unnatural  murmurings  against  God
through  his  servant  Moses,  which  were  so  common
amongst  the  Israelites,  has  been  introduced  into  Free-
masonry, and  constitutes  an  additional  proof  of  its
typical  reference  to  the  original  Promise  of  a  Mediator,
vouchsafed  to  our  first  parents  after  their  unhappy  fall.
The  people,  as  a  punishment  for  their  disobedience,
were  destroyed  of  serpents ; 40  and  when  they  applied
to  him,  in  terror  and  repentance,  to  remove  the  plague,

to  act  as  general  assistants  to  the  priests.  They  set  up  the  taber-
nacle, took  it  down,  removed  it  from  place  to  place,  and  formed
its  guard.  They  prepared  the  victims  for  sacrifice.  The  Kohathites
had  the  most  honourable  distinction,  by  being  charged  with  the  care
of  the  most  sacred  things  belonging  to  the  sanctuary.

38  It  will  be  unnecessary  to  describe  the  order  of  march  here,  as  it
is  particularized  in  the  tenth  chapter  of  Numbers.

39  Travelling  in  the  desert  was  always  dangerous,  even  to  a  small
party ;  and  this  immense  host  must  inevitably  have  perished,  if  it
had  not  been  protected  by  the  pillar  of  a  cloud  and  of  fire.

40  "  As  Moses  represents  the  serpents  which  bit  the  Israelites  to
have  caused  a  great  mortality,  so  the  heathen  writers  concur  in  testi-
fying, that  the  deserts  wherein  the  Israelites  journeyed,  produced
serpents  of  so  venemous  a  kind,  that  their  bite  was  deadly,  beyond
the  power  of  any  art  then  known  to  cure  it.     The  ancients  observed
that  the  most  barren  and  sandy  deserts  had  the  greatest  number  and
most  venomous  of  serpents.     Diodorus  makes  this   remark  more
particularly  of  the  sands  in  Africa ;  but  it  was  equally  true  of  the
wilderness  wherein  the  Israelites  journeyed.    Serpents  and  scorpions
were  here,  according  to  Moses,  as  natural  as  draught  and  want  of
water ;    and   Strabo's    observation   agrees  with  Moses ;    and   both


574


HISTORICAL    LANDMARKS


Moses  was  commanded  to  construct  a  serpent  of  brass,41
and  elevating  it  on  a  staff  or  tau  cross  like  a  banner/"
to  place  it  in  the  midst  of  the  camp  as  a  symbol  of
safety  and  protection;43  and  accordingly  every  person

Strabo  and  Diodorus  concur  that  the  serpents  which  were  so
numerous  there  were  of  the  most  deadly  kind,  and  that  there  was  no
cure  for  their  biting."  (Shuck.  Con.  vol.  iii.  p.  253.)

41  "  Brass,"  says  M.  Portal,  in  his  Essay  on  symbolical  colours,
"  in  the  Bible,  represents  the  last  degree,  or  the  natural ;  applied  to
man,  it  indicates  the  body ;  applied  to  religion,  it  denotes  the  letter,
which  is  the  body  of  the  spirit.     The  adoration  of  the  letter  is  the
last  term  of  all  religions  ;  thus  symbolism  created  paganism.  Judaism
perished  in  the  same  manner.     The  letter  kills  says  the  Evangelist,
but  the  spirit  vivifies.    So  John,  in  the  Apocalypse,  saw  Jesus  Christ
with  feet  like  fine  brass  when  in  a  burning  furnace.     Martianus
Capella  says,  that  the  god  Sun,  that  is  to  say,  the  mystic  Sun,  was
shod  with   fine   brass.     In  paganism,    religious  instruments  were
generally  of  brass ;  and  Servius  says  that  this  metal  is  more  agree-
able to  the  gods.     The  instruments  of  Mosaic  worship  were  all  of
brass,  because  it  represented  religion  in  its  last  degree  in  material
worship.     Likewise  the  brazen  sea,  the  brazen  altar  for  holocausts,
signified  the  natural  man,  which  ought  to  be  purified  by  water,  and
regenerated  by  the  sacrifice  of  passions,  represented  by  the  victims
offered."

42  Many  of  the  Jews  fancied  that  this  serpent  was  a  talisman,  and
received  its  power  from  the  influence  of  the  stars.     But  Aben  Ezra
exclaims  -.  "  God  forbid  that  we  should  have  any  such  thought.    Let
us  not  search  into  the  reasons  for  this  divine  order,  although  there
was  a  miracle  about  it,  as  Jonathan  observes — he  shall  be  healed
who  directs  his  heart  to  the  name  of  God."     As  Christians  we  refer
this  name  to  Jesus  Christ,  who  was  the  eternal  Word,  prefigured  by
suspending  the  brazen  serpent  upon  a  tau  cross,  that  all  might  look
upon  him  and  live.

So  did  the  Hebrew  prophet  raise

The  brazen  serpent  high  ;
The  wounded  felt  immediate  ease,

The  camp  forebore  to  die.


Or    FREEMASONRY.  575

who  suffered  from  the  bite  of  these  winged  and  fiery
reptiles,  was  immediately  healed.44  The  introduction
into  Freemasonry  of  this  expressive  symbol,  could
have  no  other  reference  than  to  Him45  who  was  equally
the  subject  of  Jewish  prophecy  and  Jewish  type.46  If
it  be  admitted  that  all  the  ceremonies,  precepts,  and
historical  legends  of  Masonry  possess  a  moral  or  reli-

These  lines  are  repeated  in  one  of  the  higher  degrees,  in  reference  to
Christ  as  the  true  Prince  of  Mercy.

44  It  was  an  emblem  of  the  Messiah  elevated  on  a  cross  for  the
sins  of  men  ;  and  in  this  real  transaction  the  terms  of  the  Promise
are  completed;  for  though  the  serpent  thus  bruised  his  heel,  he
bruised  the  reptile's  head,  by  destroying  sin  and  opening  a  way
to  salvation.     The  prophets  had  said  that  by  looking  on  him  who
was  pierced,  sin  should  be  removed,  and  holiness  accomplished  ;  and
hence  the  apostles  call  upon  us  to  look  unto  Jesus  as  the  author  and
finisher  of  our  faith.    And  Christ  himself  acknowledges  the  legitimate
application  of  the  type  by  plainly  declaring  that  his  own  body  on  the
cross  would  be  the  antitype.     "  As  Moses  lifted  up  the  serpent  in
the  wilderness,  even  so  must  the  son  of  man  be  lifted  up."  (John
iii.  14.)

45  Ita  lignum  hoc  crucis  gessisset  figuram,  sicuti,  Christi  domini
typum   gessit  hie   serpens.     And  indeed  there  is  no  type  of  the
Messiah  extended  on  the  cross,  throughout  the  entire  existence  of  a
dispensation  which  was  intended  to  shadow  forth  the  true  system  of
salvation,  but  this  one  of  the  brazen  serpent  on  the  tau ;  and  the
Jews  were  consequently  so  much  impressed  with  the  importance  of
the  symbol,  that  in  after  ages  they  worshipped  this  very  identical
brazen  serpent  in  the  character  of  a  mediator.  Thus  is  Freemasonry,
in  this  instance  also,  consistent  with  itself,  by  inculcating  one  uniform
doctrine  in  all  its  ordinances,  whether  ceremonial,  symbolical,  or
preceptive.

46  The  degree  of  Knight  of  the  Brazen  Serpent  has  been  founded
on  this  event ;  in  which  it  is  stated,  that  when  Moses  made  a  brazen
serpent,  and  placed  it  upon  the  tau,  in  obedience  to  the  commands


576  HISTORICAL    LANDMARKS

gious  tendency, — and  this  fact  can  neither  be  doubted
nor  denied, — they  must  necessarily  point  to  something
which  will  make  the  practice  of  religion  and  morality
valuable ;  and  this  can  be  nothing  else  but  the  com-
pletion of  the  covenant  between  God  and  man.47
Accordingly  we  find  that  Freemasonry  contains  scarcely
a  single  ceremony,  symbol,  or  historical  narration,
which  does  not  apply  to  this  glorious  consummation  of
the  divine  economy  of  the  Creator  towards  his  erring
creatures.

An  incident  occurred  just  before  the  Israelites
passed  over  Jordan,  which  is  of  such  importance,  that
in  describing  their  passage  through  the  wilderness,  it
would  be  inexcusable  to  omit.48  I  refer  to  the  extra-
ordinary interference  and  prophecy  of  Balaam.  He
was  invited,  under  profuse  promises  of  wealth  and
honour,  by  Balak  the  King  of  Moab,  who  entertained
considerable  apprehensions  for  his  safety  on  the  approach
of  the  Israelites,  to  pronounce  a  malediction  on  this

of  God,  every  one  that  looked  upon  it  was  directed  to  pronounce  the
word  HATATHI.  /  have  sinned ;  and  having  done  this,  he  was
immediately  healed.  In  the  decorations  of  the  Lodge,  the  curtains
are  red  and  blue  ;  there  is  only  one  large  candle ;  and  in  the  centre  of
the  room  is  a  mount,  accessible  by  five  steps,  on  which  stands  the
symbol  of  the  degree.

47  It  is  said  that  Moses  used  the  Masonic  stone  of  foundation
when  the  brazen  serpent  was  elevated ;  and  hence  Rupertus  and
other  writers  make  it  a  symbol  of  the  grace  of  the  Gospel,  as  the
serpent  was  an  emblem  of  the  great  Author  of  that  Gospel.

48  From  a  circumstance  in  the  history  of  Baalam,  which  I  have
not  considered  it  necessary  to  introduce  here,  Pythagoras  is  supposed
to  have  formed  one  of  his  symbolical  sentences ;  that  is,  "  pass  not
by  a  place  where  an  ass  was  thrown  upon  his  knees."


OF    FTIEEMASONRY.  577

people  ;  that  by  placing  them  under  God's  wrath,  he
might  make  a  successful  attack  upon  them.49  The
prophet50  said,  "I  shall  see  HIMSI — I  shall  behold
HIM."  To  whom  does  he  refer  ?  To  no  lesser
personage  than  the  Messiah.52  Him,  out  of  Jacob,

49  A  series  of  circumstances  which  are  detailed  at  large  in  the
Book  of  Numbers,  prevented  the  infliction  of  the  prophet's  curse,
and  changed  it  into  a  blessing.

50  "  It  is  disputed  by  some  whether  Balaam  was  indeed  a  prophet
and  a  worshipper  of  the  true  God.     They  imagine  him  to  be  a  mere
magician  or  enchanter  :  one  that  prophecied  by  the  rules  of  vaticina-
tion in  use  in  those  days  amongst  the  worshippers  of  false  gods.     If
this  opinion  be  true,  then  the  revelations  that  were  made  to  him
from  the  true  God,  must  have  been  made  to  him  in  a  manner  he
had  not  been  accustomed  to,  and  beyond  his  expectation ;  in  like
manner  as  the  Egyptian  magicians  were  enabled  to  work  real  miracles.
But  1  should  think  this  notion  of  Balaam  is  not  consistent  with  what
Moses  relates  of  him.     When  the  messengers  of  Balak  came  first  to
him,  he  immediately  applied  to  God  for  direction  ;  and  the  God  he
applied  to  was   not  Baal,  nor  any  of  the  gods  of  the   idolatrous
nations,  but  Jehovah,  the  true  and  living  God.     And  he  does  not
appear  to  have  been  at  any  time  surprised  at  the  answers  God  was
pleased  to  give  him,  or  at  the  angel's  appearing  to  him,  or  at  the
word  of  prophecy  put  into  his  mouth  ;  being  well  apprized  of,  and
acquainted  with,   God's  communicating  his  will  to  his  servants  in
these  several  manners."  (Shuck.  Con.  vol.  iii.  p.  278.)

51  David  Levi,  (Proph.  vol.  i.  p.  8,)  says,  "  Balaam  here  shows
that  his  visions  were  real  prophecies.     And  although  he  was  so  far
overpowered  by  the  force  of  the  vision,  that  his  corporeal  faculties
were  deprived  of  their  proper  functions,  yet  his  intellectual  powers
were  in  full  force ;  which  he  beautifully  describes  by  his  falling  down
in  a  trance  but  having  his  eyes  open.     And  as  he  clearly  saw  the
vision  with  his  intellectual  eye,  he  makes  use  of  that  image  to  show
the  nature  of  his  prophecy  ;  and  therefore  observes,  I  see  him,  but
not  now  ;  I  view  him,  but  not  nigh."

52  "Wagenseil,  from  the  II.  Isaac,  thinks  this  cannot  be  Understood

VOL.  II.  P   V


578  HISTORICAL    LANDMARKS

that  should  have  dominion.53  And  who  could  he
expect  should  have  dominion  and  destroy  those  that
remain  in  the  city,  but  that  promised  Redeemer  who
should  be  heralded  by  a  Star ;  whose  sceptre  should
be  everlasting,  and  his  dominion  without  end.54  Christ
is  called  in  scripture  the  Day  Star — the  bright  Morn-
ing Star ;  and  no  star  ever  arose  with  splendour  equal
to  his.55

It  may  be  proper  to  pause  here  for  the  purpose  of

of  David  or  any  other  King  of  Israel,  because  none  of  them  ever
reigned  over  all  the  earth  ;  t.  e.  over  all  the  children  of  Seth,  whom
none  of  them  destroyed ;  but  it  is  meant  of  the  Messiah,  who  is
compared  to  a  star,  because  of  the  perennity  of  his  kingdom,  the
splendour  of  his  dominion,  and  his  mighty  power.

53  The  address  of  Bualam  to  the  Moabites  contains  a  full  and
complete  revelation  of  circumstances  which  were  to  take  place  in
distant  ages  of  the  world.     A  star  and  sceptre  were  to  rise  which
should  destroy  Edom  and  Moab  ;   which  was  literally  fulfilled  in
David.     He  smote  Moab,  and  destroying  two  thirds  of  the  people,
reduced  the  remainder  to  the  state  of  slaves.     In  like  manner  were
the  Edomites  also  treated.     Now  if  Freemasonry  inculcates  such
doctrines  as  these  as  a  motive  to  faith  in  God's  veracity,  and  obe-
dience to  his  commands,  it  would  be  worthy  of  our  especial  regard.
But  when  it  takes  a  wider  range— -when  these  remarkable  prophecies
are  referred  to  another  and  more  perfect  dispensation,  its  interest
and  value  proportionably  increase ;    and  we  become  absorbed  in
enquiries  which  involve  so  many  points  connected  with  our  eternal
welfare.

54  This  refers  to  the  Masonic  and  Christian  doctrine  of  the  resur-
rection and  a  future  state.

55  "  A  star,  in  the  Egyptian  hieroglyphics,  denoted  God.     Thus
God,  in  the  Prophet  Amos,  reproving  the  Israelites  for  their  idolatry
on  their  first  coming  out  of  Egypt,  says,  '  Have  ye  offered  unto  me
sacrifices  and  offerings  in  the  wilderness  forty  years,  0  house  of
Israel?     But  ye  have   borne  the  tabernacle  of  your  Moloch  and


OF    FREEMASONRY.  579

taking  into  our  consideration  some  of  those  reasons
why  Freemasonry  has  been  so  particularly  careful  to
record  the  transactions  in  which  the  great  legislator  of
the  Jews  occupies  so  conspicuous  a  position.56  The

Chiun,  your  images,  the  Star  of  your  God,  which  ye  made  to  your-
selves.' (Amos  v.  25,  26.)  The  star  of  your  God  is  a  noble  figurative
expression  to  signify  the  image  of  your  God ;  for  a  star  being  em-
ployed in  the  hieroglyphics  to  signify  God,  it  is  used  here  with  great
elegance  to  signify  the  material  image  of  a  God ;  the  words,  the  star
of  your  God,  being  only  a  repetition  of  the  preceding,  Chiun,  your
image ;  and  not,  as  some  critics  suppose,  the  same  with  your  god-
star.  Hence  we  conclude  that  the  metaphor  used  by  Baalam  of  a
star  was  of  that  abstruse  mysterious  kind,  and  so  to  be  understood ;
and  consequently  that  it  related  only  to  Christ,  the  eternal  Son  of
God."  (Warb.  Div.  Leg.  b.  iv.  s.  4.)

56  The  following  points  of  resemblance  between  Moses  and  Jesus
Christ,  were  noticed  by  an  early  Christian  writer.  "  Moses  first  rescued
the  Jewish  nation  from  Egyptian  superstition  and  idolatry,  and
taught  them  the  true  religion ; — Jesus  Christ  was  the  first  teacher  of
true  religion  to  the  Gentiles.  Moses  confirmed  his  religion  by
miracles  ; — so  did  Jesus  Christ.  Moses  promised  a  holy  land,  and
therein  a  happy  life  to  those  who  kept  the  law ;  and  Christ  promised
a  better  country,  that  is  a  heavenly  one  to  those  who  obey  his  gospel.
Moses  fasted  forty  days  ;  so  did  Christ.  Moses  supplied  the  people
with  bread  in  the  wilderness ;  and  our  Saviour  fed  five  thousand  at
one  time,  and  four  thousand  at  another,  with  a  few  loaves.  Moses
led  the  people  through  the  midst  of  the  sea  ; — Christ  walked  on  the
sea,  and  enabled  Peter  to  do  the  same.  Moses  stretched  out  his
hand  over  the  sea,  and  it  went  backward ; — our  Saviour  rebuked  the
wind  and  the  sea,  and  there  was  a  great  calm.  Moses'  face  shone
when  he  descended  from  the  mount ;  and  Christ's  shone  like  the
sun  in  his  transfiguration.  Moses,  by  his  prayers,  cured  Miriam  of
her  leprosy ; — Christ,  by  a  word,  healed  many  lepers.  Moses  con-
stituted seventy  rulers  over  the  people ;  and  our  Saviour  appointed
seventy  disciples.  Moses  sent  twelve  men  to  spy  out  the  land  ;  and

p  P2


580  HISTORICAL    LANDMARKS

simple  facts  are  mere  matters  of  history,  and  would
have  scarcely  been  of  sufficient  importance  to  form  a
component  part  of  Christian  Masonry,  had  they  not
been  invested  with  a  symbolical  reference  that  elevated
their  character,  and  made  them  subservient  to  the
transmission  of  truths  connected  with  the  present  and
future  welfare  of  man.

Accordingly  we  find  that  every  one  of  the  transac-
tions which  have  been  introduced  to  our  notice  in  the
Lectures  of  Masonry,  are  typical  of  the  Great  Teacher
who  was  promised  at  the  fall57 — whose  glory  was
manifested  in  the  Jewish  Shekinali — who  formed  the
one  principal  subject  of  scripture  prophecy — awl
whose  appearance  indicated  the  dissolution  of  the
Jewish  polity,58  conformably  to  the  prophecy  of

Christ  twelve  apostles  to  visit  all  nations.  Moses  gave  several  moral
precepts ;  and  our  Saviour  carried  them  to  the  highest  perfection.
Moses  was  buried,  and  no  man  knew  where  his  body  was  laid  ;
neither  could  the  Jews  find  the  body  of  Christ.  Moses  was  a  law-
giver ;  and  so  was  Christ :  which  no  prophet  ever  was,  except  these
two.  And  lastly,  before  his  death,  Moses  promised  another  prophet,
and  Christ  another  comforter."

57  "  The  science  of  Masonry  stands  in  the  same  relation  to  Christi-
anity, or  perhaps,  more  correctly  speaking,  it  is  the  spiritual  essence
of  the  old  law,  not  extended  to  the  height  and  sublimity  of  the  new
covenant,  but  a  step  in  advance — not  in  the  spiritual  meaning  of  the
old  laMr,  but  of  man's  interpretation  of  it ;  a  more  spiritual,  and
therefore  more  correct  reading  of  it  than  that  followed  by  the  mass
of  the  people,  who  looked  more  to  the  letter,  and  understood  not
that  fulfilling  of  the  law,  as  defined  by  Christ,  when  he  declared  the
law  broken  by  him  who  even  gazed  on  a  woman,  to  lust  after  her."
(Cato,  in  F.  Q.  11.  1843,  p.  379.)

58  Indeed  these  are  the  true  reasons  why  the  above  events  were


Otf    laiEEMASONKY.  581

Jacob.59  It  is  not  my  intention  to  follow  the  Israelites
in  their  wanderings  in  the  wilderness,  because  I  am
not  engaged  in  a  history  of  that  people.  I  am
desirous  of  impressing  on  your  minds  a  series  of
facts  connected  with  our  divine  institution  ;  which,
with  their  plain  and  evident  application  to  the  general
design  of  Freemasonry/50  may  indicate  the  propriety
of  their  introduction  ;  and,  in  common  with  the  pre-
ceptive portion  of  our  Lectures,61  point  out  that  striking

introduced  into  Freemasonry.  It  was  to  carry  out,  in  a  consistent
manner,  the  principles  of  that  one  vast  design  which  was  projected
by  the  Creator  at  the  original  defection  of  our  first  parents  from
godliness,  for  the  restoration  of  man  to  the  divine  favour  that  he
might  behold  the  glory  of  Jehovah  in  the  realms  above.

39  This  prophecy  was — "  The  sceptre  shall  not  depart  from  Judrrh,
nor  a  lawgiver  from  between  his  feet,  until  Shiloh  come ;  and  unto
him  shall  the  gathering  of  the  people  be."  (Gen.  xlix.  10.)

60  Tor  the  establishment  tmd  promulgation  of  these  principles,
Freemasonry  is  practised  at  the  present  day.   We  meet  in  the  Lodge,
to  trace  wisdom  and  to  follow  virtue ',  because  we  consider  wisdom
to  constitute  true  nobility  of  character ;  virtue  to  be  the  channel  by
which  wisdom  is  directed  and  conveyed  ;  and  wisdom  and  virtue
alone  to  distinguish  us  in  the  character  of  Masons.     Without  the
presence  of  these  qualities,  Masonry  would  be  worthless,  and  unde-
serving of  the  high  grade  which  it  at  present  occupies  amongst  the
beneficent  institutions  of  this  enlightened  age  and  nation.

61  Professor  Robison,  after  all  his  virulence,  closes  his  book  with
an  admission  that  our  pursuits  are  thus  innocent  and  laudable  : —
"  While  the  Freemasonry  of  the  Continent  was  tricked  up  with  all
the  frippery  of  stars  and  ribbons,  or  was  perverted  to  the  most
profligate  and  impious  purposes,  and  the  Lodges  became  seminaries
of  foppery,  of  sedition,  and  impiety,  it  has  retained  in  Britain  its
original  form,  simple  and  unadorned,  and  the  Lodges  have  remained
the  scenes  of  innocent  merriment,  or  meetings  of  charity  and  bene-
ficence.    As  the  good  sense  and  sound  judgment  of  Britons  have


582


HISTORICAL    LANDMARKS


moral  truth  which  it  is  their  principal  aim  to  inculcate
on  the  Brethren,  viz.,  our  duty  to  God,  our  neighbour,
and  ourselves.

preserved  them  from  the  absurd  follies  of  transmutation,  of  ghost
raising,  and  of  magic,  so  their  honest  hearts  and  their  innate  good
dispositions  have  made  them  detest  and  reject  the  mad  projects  and
impious  doctrines  of  cosmopolites,  epicurists,  and  atheists.

O  fortunatos  nimiuni,  sua  si  bona  norint
Anglicolas  !


FREEMASONRY,  583


LECTURE    XLVI.

THE    BANNERS    OF    THE    TWELVE    TRIBES.

"  When  the  Israelites  marched  through  the  wilderness,  we  find
that  the  twelve  tribes  had  between  them  four  principal  banners  or
standards  ; ,  every  one  of  which  had  its  particular  motto ;  and  each
standard  also  had  a  distinct  sign  described  upon  it.  They  encamped
round  about  the  tabernacle,  and  on  the  east  side  were  three  tribes
under  the  standard  of  Judah  ;  on  the  west  were  three  tribes  under
the  standard  of  Ephraim  ;  on  the  south  were  three  tribes  under  the
standard  of  Reuben ;  and  on  the  north  were  three  tribes  under  the
standard  of  Dan.  The  standard  of  Judah  was  a  lion ;  that  of
Ephraim  an  ox  ;  that  of  Reuben  a  man ;  and  that  of  Dan  an  eagle  ;
whence  were  framed  the  hieroglyphics  of  cherubim  and  seraphim,  to
represent  the  children  of  Israel." — DR.  ASHE.

"  The  ensigns  which  the  Companions  bear  upon  their  staves  were
the  distinctive  bearings  of  the  twelve  tribes  of  Israel,  and  figurative
of  the  peculiar  blessing  bequeathed  to  each  by  the  patriarch  Jacob,
who,  before  his  death,  assembled  them  together  for  that  purpose."

OLD  LECTURES.

DURING  the  sojourning  of  the  Israelites  in  the
wilderness,  each  tribe  was  distinguished  by  a  banner
charged  with  a  device1  which  bore  reference  to  the

1  The  Rabbi  Mannasseh  ben  Israel,  on  the  passage  of  scripture —
every  man  of  the  children  of  Israel  shall  pitch  by  his  own  standard,
with  the  ensign  of  their  father's  house — says,  "  that  each  standard
was  of  a  different  colour,  according  to  that  of  the  precious  stone  on
which  the  name  of  it  was  engraven,  that  was  placed  in  the  breast-
plate of  the  high  priest ;  and  on  each  standard  their  symbol  was


584  HISTORICAL    LANDMARKS

future  habits  of  the  people,  as  they  had  been  described
by  the  prophecy  of  Jacob,  the  patriarch  of  their  race.2
The  four  superior  tribes  had  for  their  bearings,  the
component  parts  of  the  cherubic  symbol  of  the  Deity,3
who  accompanied  and  afforded  protection  to  the  host
in  the  sacred  pillar  of  a  cloud  and  of  fire.  Under  each
of  these  great  banners,  the  four  principal  divisions
were  arranged.4  The  standard  of  Judah  was  borne  by

painted  ;  therefore  it  appears  that  paintings  were  not  forbidden.
Besides,  in  the  holy  temple,  Solomon  made  twelve  oxen  under  the
brazen  sea,  and  in  his  own  house  placed  twelve  carved  lions  on  the
steps  of  his  splendid  throne,  without  any  sin  being  imputed  to  him
for  those  acts."  (Concil.  vol.  i.  p.  1G1.)

2  Jacob,  in  his  blessing  to  his  sons,  told  them  that  he  had  read  in
the  heavens  the  destiny  of  their  posterity,  and  communicated  to  them
that  series  of  predictions  which   are   recorded    in   the  forty-ninth
chapter  of  Genesis.     Hence  Albertus  Magnus,  and  his  followers,
styled  the  heavens  "  the  Universal  Book,"  full  of  information  by  the
various  configurations  of  the  stars  ;  and  implicitly  believed  that  there
might  be  distinctly  foreseen  the  secret  fortunes  of  individuals  whose
time  of  birth  had  been  correctly  registered.     The  belief  is  scarcely
yet  extinguished.

3  The  Old  Lectures  of  Masonry  contained  a  passage  to  the  follow-
ing effect :  "  The  standard  seems  to  have  been  a  common  banner
under  which  every  three  tribes  were  united  ;  besides  which  each  tribe
seems  to  have  had  a  separate  ensign,  in  the  nature  of  a  flag.     The
distance  of  the  camp  of  Israel  from  the  tabernacle  was  about  two
thousand  cubits.     This  space  was  left  for  the  priests  and  Levites  to
pitch  their  tents  in,  as  a  protection  to  the  tabernacle."

4 1  subjoin  Bro.  Harris's  explanation  of  the  engraving  which
accompanies  this  lecture.  He  says,  "  I  have  made  considerable
alterations  in  the  emblematical  figures  and  characters  thereon,  as
well  as  a  different  form  (from  my  Illustrations  of  the  Eoyal  Arch)
of  the  leading  banners  and  standards  of  the  Israelites  ;  for  which  I
assign  these  reasons  and  authority  for  such  alteration :  1st.  From
the  recent  discoveries  among  the  Egyptian  temples,  tombs,  &c.,  and


¥m*Jiitm


OF    FREEMASONRY.  585

Nahshon,  its  prince.  It  was  designated  by  a  LION
couchant  surmounted  by  a  crown  and  sceptre ;  because
from  this  tribe  the  Messiah — the  King  of  Kings — the

the  various  works  still  left  of  their  paintings  on  the  walls,  of  the
same  of  processions,  sacrifices,  coronations,  with  a  vast  assemblage
of  characteristic  figures,  standards,  &c.,  prove  to  me  that  the  state
of  the  arts  among  the  Egyptians,  which  is  traced  to  the  time  of
Joshua,  must  have  existed  with  little  or  no  variation  in  a  similar
state  during  the  time  the  Israelites  were  dwelling  among  them  in
bondage ;  and  2ndly,  as  they  were  divided  into  the  twelve  tribes
after  the  establishing  of  the  tabernacle  in  the  wilderness,  and  had
become  the   chosen  and  independent  people  of  God,  it  was  then
that  the  prophecy  of  Jacob,  as  recorded  in  the  forty-ninth  chapter  of
Genesis,    was  exemplified  by  the  distinguishing  figure  for  each  of
the  leaders ;  and  presuming  that  their  knowledge  of  the  arts  as  then
existing  among  the  Egyptians  would,  in  a  great  measure,  be  borrowed
from  them,  (except  idolatrous  figures,)  they  would  make  their  banners,
standards,  and  devices  thereon,  something  similar.     I  have  therefore
endeavoured  to  give  the  various  devices,  characters,  figures,  &c.,  so
as  to  correspond  with  the  ancient  Egyptian  standards,  and  have  put
on  each  banner  and  standard  the  name  of  the  leader  or  tribe  in  the
Hebrew  character,  and  have  placed  them  in  an  enlarged  form  round
a  representation  in  the  centre  of  the  tabernacle,  with  the  court  of  the
priests,  and  tents  of  the  Israelitish  camp,  as  in  the  wilderness,  with
the  names  on  each  tent,  to  show  the  reader  the  particular  place  of
each  leader  and  the  different  tribes  under  him.     I  shall  now  give  a
slight  explanation  of  certain  characters,  figures,  &c.,  introduced.  The
oval  was  a  figure  invariably  used  by  princes,  rulers,  and  leaders,
among  the  Egyptians,  and  was  handed  down  to  the  time  of  the
Roman  emperors  ;  they  having  used  the  same  figure  to  enclose  the
characteristic  device  assumed,   (as  is  now  done  in  modern  heraldry
by  the  shield).     The  oval  is  therefore  given  on  the  four  principal  or
leading  banners  enclosing  the  particular  device  of  each  leader.   (See
Wathen's  Arts  and  Antiquities  of  Egypt,  and  Wilkinson's  Ancient
Egyptians.)     The  small  circles  or  discs  denote  the  son  of  a  chief  or
prince,  as  Jacob  was  the  father  of  the  twelve  tribes  ;  hence  it  is
introduced  on  each  of  the  banners  and  standards.     The  triangle  is


586


HISTORICAL    LANDMARKS


Prince  of  Peace5 — the  Lion  of  the  tribe  of  Judah — was
destined  to  spring.  The  colour  of  this  banner  was
crimson  or  scarlet.6  To  the  tribe  of  Judah  was  assigned
the  most  honourable  station  in  the  camp,  viz.,  in  the
east,7  before  the  entrance  of  the  tabernacle ;  and  under

also  put  to  each,  denoting  supreme  power,  or  the  chosen  of  the
Almighty ;  another  character,  thus  ^ ,  to  distinguish  those  who
were  the  legitimate  oft'spring  by  the  wives  Leah  and  llachael,  as
Joseph,  Benjamin,  Issachar,  Zebulon,  &c.  The  numbers  are  distin-
guished by  small  strokes,  thus  1. 11.  111.,  on  to  nine,  and  figure  ten
thus  0  ;  and  the  banners  are  of  the  peculiar  form  of  being  in  length
double  the  width,  and  a  fringe  at  the  bottom  of  each."

5  Some  learned  Jews  have  held  that  this  emblem  merely  referred
to  power,  as  Pompey  the  Great  painted  on  his  standard  Leo  cnsifer,
from  the  same  cause.     But  I  am  persuaded  that  the  above  interpre-
tation is  correct,  because   Jacob,  in   his   prophecy,   connects  with
Judah  the  lion,  the  sceptre,  and  Shiloh.     Judah  was  the  chief  tribe,
and  was  more  eminently  distinguished,  both  for  prosperity  in  war,
and  peace  and  quietness  at  home.     Its  dignity  was  marked  by  the
divine  favour,  in  chusing  David  from  this  tribe  to  be  the  instrument
of  his  blessings  to   the  people  of  Israel ;    and  also  the  ancestor,
according  to  the  flesh,  of  the  incarnate  Messiah,  whose  kingdom  is
everlasting,  and  his  dominion  without  end.     In  the  prophecy,  Judah
is  first  compared  to  a  lion's  whelp,  then  to  a  lion,  and  afterwards  to
an  old  lion ;  thus  describing  the  rise,  progress,  and  ultimate  decay
of  the  tribe  by  the  loss  of  its  sceptre  at  the  advent  of  the  Messiah.

6  In  the  Order  of  High  Priesthood,  certain  charges  are  given  at
the  investiture  of  the  Masters  of  the  Veils.     I  subjoin  the  charge
delivered  to  the  Master  of  the  third  Veil,  when  he  is  presented  with
the  ensigns  of  his  office,  the  sword  and  scarlet  banner  :  "  The  rich
and  beautiful  colour  of  your  banner  is  emblematical  of  fervency  and
zeal ;  it  is  the  appropriate  colour  of  the  Royal  Arch  degree ;  and
admonishes  us  that  we  should  be  fervent  in  the  exercise  of  our  devo-
tions to  God,  and  zealous  in  our  endeavours  to  promote  the  happiness
of  man."   (Cross,  Masonic  Chart,  p.  145.)

7  According  to  an  ancient  belief  of  the  Jews,  the  east  was  the
front  or  fore  part  of  the  world ;  and  hence,  standing  in  the  east,


OF    FREEMASONRY.  587

its  standard  the  tribes*  of  Isachar  and  Zebulun  pitched
their  tents,  because  they  were  all  the  children  of  Leah,
and  consequently  united  in  a  mutual  bond  of  consan-
guinity to  excite  each  other  to  amity  and  love.  The
banner  of  Issachar  was  borne  by  the  standard  bearer
of  Prince  Nethaneel.  It  was  sky-blue,  and,  according
to  some  authorities,  was  charged  with  a  strong  ass
crouching  beneath  its  burden  ;8  according  to  others,
it  bore  a  sun  and  moon ;  and  the  Rabbins  are  inclined
to  patronize  the  latter  opinion.  Prince  Eliab  erected
the  banner  of  Zebulun.  It  was  purple,9  and  bore  for

they  worshipped  God  by  praying  with  their  faces  towards  the  west.
Vide  ut  supra,  vol.  i.  p.  194.)

8  Gen.  xlix.  14,  15.     "  The  ass  is  a  patient  animal,  and  a  proper
symbol  of  labour.     And  accordingly  the  posterity  of  Issachar  sat
down  quietly  upon  the  land  allotted  to  them,  and  cultivated  it  with
diligence  and  assiduity.     Instead  of  employing  themselves  in  war  or
mercantile  pursuits,  they  were  lovers  of  peace  and  quietness.     The
act  of  the  ass  crouching  between  its  burdens  was  an  apposite  symbol
of  the  indolent  character  of  this  tribe,  who  would  prefer  a  submission
to  every  species  of  tyranny  and  oppression,  rather  than  be  at  the
trouble  of  asserting  their  natural  rights  in  the  field  of  battle.     Like
the  ass,  which,  though  a  strong  and  hardy  animal,  would  rather  sink
tamely  under  the  heaviest  load  than  shake  it  off  by  an  exertion  of  its
bodily  powers."  (Old  Lectures.)

9  The   following   charge,   according   to  Cross's   Masonic   Chart
(p.  146),  is  delivered  by  our  transatlantic  Brethren  at  the  instal-
lation of  the  Master  of  the  Second  Veil : — "  Companion,  I  invest
you  with  the  purple  banner,  which  is  the  ensign  of  your  office,  and
arm  you  with  a  sword,  to  enable  you  to  maintain  its  honours.     The
colour  of  your  banner  is  produced  by  a  clue  admixture  of  blue  and
scarlet  ;  the  former  of  which  is  the  characteristic  colour  of  the  sym-
bolic, or  first  three  degrees  of  Masonry,  and  the  latter,  that  of  the
"Royal  Arch  degree.     It  is  an  emblem  of  union,  and  is  the  charac-
teristic colour  of  the  intermediate  degrees.     It  admonishes  us  to


588  HISTORICAL    LANDMARKS

its  distinguishing  characteristic  *  a  ship.10  Thus  the
principal  quarter  of  the  camp  was  marked  by  standards
of  the  three  royal  colours,  blue,  purple,  and  crimson.

The  south  side  of  the  camp,  being  the  next  honour-
able  post,  was  occupied  by  the  tribes  of  Reuben,
Simeon,  and  Gad,  who  were  brothers  by  Leah  and
Zilpah  her  handmaiden.  The  device  on  the  great
banner  of  this  division,  which  was  borne  by  Prince
Elizur,  was  another  of  the  cherufcic  forms,  viz.,  a  MAN,
because  Reuben  was  the  first-born  of  his  father,  "  the
excellency  of  his  dignity  and  power."  Vatablus
thinks  that  this  emblem  referred  to  reason  and  reli-
gion. But  Jacob  prophesied  that  Reuben  should  not
excel,  by  reason  of  his  instability ;  and  hence  some

cultivate  and  improve  that  spirit  of  union  and  harmony  between  tie
Brethren  of  the  symbolic  degrees,  and  the  Companions  of  the  sublime
degrees,  which  should  ever  distinguish  the  members  of  a  society
founded  upon  the  principles  of  everlasting  truth  and  universal
philanthropy."

10  This  was  the  prophecy — "  Zebulun  shall  dwell  at  the  haven  of
the  sea,  and  he  shall  be  for  an  haven  of  ships,  and  his  border  shall
be  unto  Sidon."  (Gen.  xlix.  13.)

11  Gen.  xlix.  3,  4.    "  These  epithets  may  refer  in  general  to  the  pre-
rogatives of  the  first  born,  which  Reuben  would  certainly  have  enjoyed
according  to  his  just  claim,  if  he  had  not  forfeited  it  by  his  offence.
And  therefore  his  father  predicted  of  him,  '  unstable  as  water  thou
shalt  not  excel ;'  and  then  he  mentions  the  reason  why,  which  means,
that  as  water,  by  a  natural  propensity  inherent  in  its  substance  flows
from  its  source  in  an  elevated  situation,  to  a  place  that  is  lower  than
itself,  so  should  lleuben  fall  from  his  birthright,  and  subside  into  an
inferior  situation  amongst  the  tribes.    And  the  prophecy  was  remark-
ably verified ;  for  nothing  great  or  praiseworthy  has  been  recorded
respecting  the  posterity  of  lleuben.     They  were  inferior  in  numbers
to  the  other  tribes,  and  the  pre-eminence  was  given  to  Judah."  (Old
Lectures.)


OF    FREEMASONRY.  589

think  the  device  upon  his  banner  was  a  mandrake ;
for  nothing  great  or  honourable  is  recorded  of  this
tribe.  The  colour  of  the  banner  was  red.12  Prince
Shelumiel,  as  the  leader  of  the  tribe  of  Simeon,  bore
a  yellow  banner,  emblazoned  with  a  city,  as  some  say ;
others  think  it  was  a  tower,  in  reference  to  the  tower
of  Shechem ;  but  the  most  probable  conjecture  is,  that
the  figure  was  the  sword13  used  by  their  progenitor  in
the  slaughter  of  the  Shechemites.14  The  banner  of  the
tribe  of  Gad  was  under  the  charge  of  Prince  Eliasaph.

12  We  are  rather  surprised  at  this  colour,  because  Reuben  was  not
a  warlike  tribe ;  and  M.  Portal  says — "  in  the  popular  language  of
every  nation,  the  colour  of  blood  was  the  emblem  of  combat."

13  "  Simeon  and  Levi  were  represented  by  instruments  of  war,  the
former  by  a  sword,  and  the  latter  by  a  dagger ;  in  allusion  to  the
abhorrence  testified  by  the  dying  patriarch  of  the  cruelty  of  these
two  sons,  in  the  barbarous  murder  of  the  Shechemites,  under  the
assurance  of  kindness  and  good  faith.     Their  father  therefore  said,
'  cursed  be  their  anger,  for  it  was  fierce ;  and  their  wrath,  for  it  was
cruel.     I  will  divide  them  in  Jacob,  and  scatter  them  in  Israel.'1    It
will  be  observed  that  the  malediction  is  not  pronounced  upon  Simeon
and  Levi  personally,  but  upon  their  violent  passions,  which  he  thus
formally  denounced.     They  were  to  be  divided  in  Jacob,  and  scat-
tered in  Israel.     Having  been  associated  in  wickedness,  it  was  or-
dained by  a  superintending  Providence  that  their  posterity  should  be
disunited,  that  they  might  not  be  furnished  with  an  opportunity  of
working  evil  upon  their  brethren,  after  the  example  of  their  pro-
genitors.    Hence  the  tribe  of  Simeon  had  litde  or  no  possessions  in
the  promised  land,  but  dwelt  in  the  midst  of  Judah ;  some  of  them
wandered  in  search  of  a  dwelling  place  as  far  as  mount  Seir  and  the
deserts  of  Gideon.     As  for  the  tribe  of  Levi,  we  have  already  seen
that  it  was   entirely  dispersed  amongst  the  other  tribes."     (Old
Lectures.)

14  Gen.  xlix.  5,  6.


HISTORICAL    LANDMARKS

It  was  white,15  and  De  Loutherbourg,  in  his  famous
picture  of  the  standards  of  Israel,  has  charged  it  with
semee  of  stars  ;  but  the  probability  is  that  it  contained
a  troop  of  horsemen.10  Some  give  it  a  flag.17

The  third  side  of  the  camp  was  occupied  by  the  half

15  In  the  American  system  of  the  Royal  Arch  the  sixth  officer,
called  a  Captain,  bore  a  white  banner ;  and  at  his  installation  and
investiture  the  following  charge  is  delivered  to  him : — "  Companion,
the  well  known  duties  of  your  office  require  but  little  elucidation.
It  corresponds  with  that  of  Junior  Deacon  in  the  preparatory  degrees.
It  is  your  province,  conjointly  with  the  Captain  of  the  Host,  to  attend
the  examination  of  all  visitors,  and  to  take  care  that  none  are  per-
mitted to  enter  the  Chapter  but  such  as  have  travelled  the  nijrgcd
path  of  trial,  and  evinced  their  title  to  our  favour  and  friendship.
You  will  be  attentive  to  obey  the  commands  of  the  Captain  of  the
Host,  during  the  introduction  of  strangers  among  the  workmen  ;  and
should  they  be  permitted  to  pass  your  post,  may  they  by  him  be
introduced  into  the  presence  of  the  Grand  Council.  The  white  baniu  r
entrusted  to  your  care  is  emblematical  of  that  purity  of  heart  and
rectitude  of  conduct,  which  ought  to  actuate  all  those  who  pass  the
white  veil  of  the  sanctuary.     I  give  it  to  you  strongly  in  charge,
never  to  suffer  any  one  to  pass  your  post  without  the  signet  of  truth."
(Cross,  Masonic  Chart,  p.  144.)

16  Gen.  xlix.  19.    "  Gad  signifies  a  troop ;  and  it  is  in  allusion  to
the  name  that  Jacob  foretold  the  difficulties  that  would  be  opposed
to  the  progress  of  his  posterity  by  the  hostility  of  their  neighbours.
But  though  they  were  doomed  to  be  sometimes  overcome,  yet  in  the
end,  by  the  divine  assistance,  they  should  overcome  all  difficulties,
and  establish  themselves  firmly  and  peaceably  in  the  portion  allotted
to  them.     This  prophecy  was  fulfilled  to  the  letter ;  for  the  tribe
occupying  a  country  beyond  Jordan,  were  necessarily  exposed  to  the
incursions  of  the  Ammonites,  from  whom  they  suffered  severely ;  but
at  length,  through  the  military  talents  of  Jeptha,  the  Ammonites
were  finally  subdued,  and  troubled  them  no  more."   (Old  Lectures.)

17  See  the  Title  page  to  Barker's  Bible.


OP    FREEMASONRY.  591


tribe  of  Ephraim,  united  with  those  of  Manasseh  and
Benjamin,  all  of  whom  were  descended  from  Rachel.18
Ephraim  stepped  into  the  inheritance  of  his  father
Joseph,19  and  was  elevated  into  one  of  the  leading
tribes  of  Israel.  His  green  banner,  borne  by  Prince
Elishama,  was  consecrated  with  the  figure  of  a  cherubic
emblem  of  the  Deity,  viz.,  an  OX,  which  denoted  patient
industry  and  strength.20  Thus  Jehovah  said,  Ephraim

18  Here  we  find  Ephraim  and  Manasseh,    though  only  Grand-
children of  Jacob,  taking  precedence  of  his  own  children ;  which  was
one  consequence  of  the  blessing  of  the  dying  patriarch.    (See  Gen.
xlviii.  16—20.)

19  According  to  a  system  of  lectures  which  were  in  use  when  I  was
exalted,  it  was  said — "  Joseph  is  a  fruitful  bough  growing  by  a  well-
watered  soil,  and  shooting  forth  two  luxurious  branches.  This  referred
to  the  tribes  of  Ephraim  and  Manasseh ;  and  the  prediction  was  ful-
filled by  their  future  pre-eminence.     Of  Joseph  it  was  said — '  the
archers  sorely  grieved  him,  and  shot  at  him,  and  hated  him ;'  which
referred  to  the  persecutions  of  his  brethren  who  sold  him  into  Egypt ;
to  the  false  accusation  by  which  he  was  thrown  into  prison.    But  '  his
bow  abode  in  strength,  and  the  arms  of  his  hand  were  made  strong
by  the  mighty  God  of  Jacob.'    As  his  enemies  were  termed  archers,
so  he  is  here  said  to  be  armed  with  a  bow  in  his  own  defence,  by
which  he  triumphed  over  all  his  enemies,  and  rose  to  the  highest
state  of  worldly  prosperity."  (Old  Lectures.)

20  A  bull  was  the  symbol  of  the  city  of  Tyre.     In  Egypt  it  was
believed  that  the  soul  of  Osiris  had  migrated  into  a  bull ;  and  the
sacred  Apis  was  considered  as  a  beautiful  representation  of  the  soul
of  the  deity.     The  figure  of  a  bull,  as  a  symbol  of  vigour,  watch-
fulness, and  fidelity,  was  frequently  employed  by  the  ancients  in  the
construction  of  their  mystical  emblems.    It  is  thought  that  the  fable
of  Jason's  golden  fleece  being  guarded  by  brazen  footed  bulls,  was
grounded  upon  a  tradition  of  the  cherubim,  which  with  flaming
swords  were  placed  at  the  eastern  gate  of  paradise. —

Ecce  adamanteis  vulcanum  naribus  offlant
.Eripides  Tauri. — (Metam.  1.  vii.  v.  101,)


592  HISTORICAL    LANDMARKS


is  the  strength  of  my  head.21  Prince  Gamaliel  led  tin1
tribe  of  Manasseh;  their  tents  were  pitched  under  a
flesh-coloured  banner,  which  was  charged  with  a  luxu-
riant vine,  planted  by  the  side  of  a  wall,  which  its
tendrils  overhung.  Some  authors  give  this  banner  a
unicorn,  and  others  a  palm-tree.  Abidan,  Prince  of
the  tribe  of  Benjamin,  was  designated  by  a  green
banner,  emblazoned  with  a  wolf,22  because  it  was  ever
a  warlike  and  cruel  tribe.23

The  fourth  and  last  quarter  of  the  camp  was  assigned
to  Dan,  with  whom  were  associated  the  two  remaining
tribes,  Asher  and  Naphtali,  the  sons  of  the  two  con-
cubines, Bilhah  and  Xilpali.'4  The  great  banner  was
borne  by  Prince  Ahiezer.  It  was  of  a  bright  green
colour,  and  charged  with  an  EAGLE,  a  component  part
of  the  cherubim,  denoting  wisdom  and  sublimity.2-''

21  Ps.  lx.  7.

22  Gen.  xlix.  27.

23  "  We  may  here  observe  that  though  Benjamin  was  a  great
favourite  with  his  father  as  being  the  youngest  son,  yet  he  conferred
no  peculiar  blessings  upon  him,  but  describes  him  as  the  father  of  a
fierce  and  warlike  people.    This  is  an  evident  proof  that  Jacob  acted
under  the  influence  of  divine  inspiration.    The  tribe  accordingly  par-
took of  the  character  thus  predicted;  they  made  war  single-handed
against  all  the  other  tribes,  and  overcame  them  in  battle.    Saul  also,
who  sprang  from  this  tribe,  possessed  great  military  talents.     His
whole  life  was  spent  in  war ;  and  at  length  he,  as  well  as  his  sons,
were  slain  in  battle."  (Old  Lectures.)

24  The  tribe  of  Dan  was  the  largest  tribe  next  to  Judah,  and  it
was  for  this  reason,  probably,  that  it  was  placed  in  the  rear.     Thus
the  most  numerous  parts  of  the  host  formed  the  front  and  rear  guard,
as  they  may  be  termed,  for  the  greater  security  of  the  tabernacle.

25  An  eagle  was  the  insignia  of  Egypt,  as  it  was  afterwards  of
Rome.


OF    FREEMASONRY.  593

Some  give  to  Dan  the  device  of  a  serpent  biting  the
heels  of  a  horse,26  because  Jacob  prophesied  that  "  Dan
shall  be  a  serpent  by  the  way,  an  adder  in  the  path
that  biteth  the  horse's  heels,  so  that  the  rider  shall  fall
backward."  But  this  is  evidently  a  misappropriation  ;27
for  it  is  clear,  from  all  authentic  testimony,  that  the
device  was  an  eagle.  And  as  this  tribe  set  such  an
evil  example,  as  to  fall  into  idolatry  very  soon  after  the

26  The  Universal  History,   from  Reyherus,   attributes  to  Dan  a
banner  with  an  eagle  bearing  a  serpent  in  his  talons,     Some  of  the
Rabbins  think  that  his  standard  contained  a  serpent  only ;  and  this
opinion  has  been  followed  by  De  Loutherbourg;  and  it  is  so  dis-
played in  the  title  page  to  Barker's  Bible,  1634.     But  if  the  four
leading  tribes  bore  the  constituent  parts  of  the  cherubic  form,  then
the  banner  of  Dan  would  certainly  be  charged  with  an  eagle ;  for  I
cannot  subscribe  to  the  doctrine  which  makes  the  cherubim  of  our
scriptures  an  astronomical  allegory,  originating  in  the  nodes  of  the
moon  being  called  "  the  dragon's  head  and  tail."     The  prophet
Ezekiel  is  express  upon  this  point ;  and  that  is  an  authority  to  which
I  implicitly  bow.

27  The  R.  David  Soda  thinks  that  Dan's  standard  bore  a  lion's
whelp.     Being  in  Ethiopia,  he  says,  he  was  present  at  one  of  their
festivals,  and  amongst  the  various  emblems  of  their  tribes,  such  as
their  breastplates,   forehead  pieces,  instruments  of  music,   &c.,  he
particularly  noticed  the  banners  that  preceded  the  cavalcade,  upon
which  there  was  a  lion's  whelp,  which,  according  to  the  blessing
given  to  the  twelve  tribes,  "  and  to  Dan  he  said,  Dan  is  a  lion's
whelp,  he  shall  leap  from  Bashan"  (Dent,  xxxiii.  2.-),  leaves  little
doubt  on  the  mind  of  the  learned  Rabbi,  that  they  are  descendants
from  the  tribe  of  Dan,  part  of  whom  sojourned  in  this  country.    The
above  mentioned  author  also  observes,  that  the  tribes  of  Napthali,
Gad,  and  Asher,  followed  that  of  Dan  into  the  country ;  that  they
passed  beyond  the  river  of  Ethiopia,  feeding  their  flocks,  and  dwelling
in  tents.    They  were  governed  by  a  king  descended  from  Oliah,  and
they  observed  the  principal  ordinances  of  the  law.

VOL.  II.  «,  U


594


HISTORICAL    LANDMARKS


death  of  Joshua,28  so,  probably,  those  latitiulinarian
idolaters  the  Romans,  who  introduced  the  gods  of  all
nations  into  their  teeming  pantheon,  might  have  hence
derived  their  puissant  eagle,29  under  whose  wings  they
subdued  all  nations,  and  planted  this  symbol,  now
become  abominable  in  the  sight  of  God,  on  the  holy
porch  of  the  temple  at  Jerusalem.  Prince  Pagiel
unfurled  the  purple  banner  of  Asher,  which  bore  a
flourishing  tree,30  or  a  cup;;n  and  that  of  Prince
Ahira,  leader  of  the  tribe  of  Naphtnli,  was  blue;12  and
designated  by  a  hind.3'1

28  "  The  name  of  Dan  signifies  judging ;  and  therefore  Jacob  said,
'  Dan  shall  judge  his  people;'  or,  in  other  words,  that,  tribe;  should
he  the  head  of  one  of  the  great  divisions  in  the  wilderness.    Ho  said
further,  '  Dan  shall  be  a  serpent  in  the  way  ;'  and  the  tribe  of  Dan
were  remarkable  for  defeating  their  enemies  rather  by  policy  than
force,  of  which  there  are  many  instances  in  the  Bible.     The  tribe  of
Dan,  however,  were  ringleaders  of  idolatry,  and  were  the  first  who
apostatised  from  God."  (Old  Lectures.)

29  "  Dicunt  in  vexillo  Reuben  fuisse  imaginem  kominis,  in  vexillo
Jehudah  imaginem  leonis,  in  vexillo  Ephraim  imaginem  bovis,  in
vexillo  Dan  imaginem  aqmla"     These  are  the  words  of  Eben  Ezra,
which  have  been  explained   by  Bro.  Aarons  in  the  Freemasons'
Quarterly  Keview  for  1838,  p.  441.

30  Gcu.  xlix.  20.     Asher's  tribe  is  promised  a  tract  in  the  Holy
Land  which  should  be  fruitful  and  prolific,  and  accordingly  it  pro-
duced the  necessaries  of  life   in   abundance,    and  mount  Cariiiel
abounded  in  the  choicest  fruits.

31  See  the  title  page  to  Barker's  Bible.

32  "  Blue,"  says  a  Chinese  commentator,  "  is  a  colour  formed  of
black  and  red  mixed  together.     The  colour  of  heaven  is  blue,  it  is
the  JU  and  the  JANG  reunited  in  one,  that  is,  the  active  and  passive
principle,  the  male  and  female,  the  obscure  and  the  brilliant.     All
corporeal  beings  are  produced  by  inapprehensible  nature,  emanated


OF    FREEMASONRY.  595

It  will  be  observed  that  in  the  above  enumeration,
the  tribe  of  Levi  is  not  included.  The  members  of
this  tribe  were  separated  from  the  congregation  of
Israel,  to  be  devoted  exclusively  to  the  service  of  the
altar;34  and  therefore  they  had  no  settled  inheritance
in  the  land  of  Canaan,  but  had  a  maintenance  assigned
to  them  out  of  the  public  stock.35  They  were  accord-
ingly exempted  from  taxes,  tribute,  war,  and  all  other
public  duties  of  the  commonwealth.36  They  were  not

from  Tao,  blue,  and  blue  is  the  origin  of  all  subtile  natures,  &c/5
(Paulthicr  on  the  Tao-te-King  Philosophy  of  the  Hindoos,  by  Cole-
brook.)

33  Gen.  xlix.  21.     "  Naphtali  is  a  hind  let  loose,  he  giveth  goodly
words.    This  prophecy  denotes  that  the  posterity  of  Naphtali  should
be  a  spirited  and  free  people ;  and  that  the  tribe  should  be  fruitful,
and  undergo  a  prodigious  increase.    And  thus  from  four  sons,  which
Naphtali  brought  with  him  into  Egypt,  proceeded  upwards  of  fifty
thousand  descendants  when  they  were  emancipated  from  their  cap-
tivity.    Their  portion  was  in  Upper  Galilee,  a  country  always  noted
for  the  productiveness  of  its  soil.     This  agrees  with  the  blessing
which  was  given  to  the  tribe  of  Naphtali  by  Moses — '  O  Naphtali,
satisfied  with  favour,  and  full  with  the  blessing  of  the  Lord.'  "  (Deut.
xxxiii.  23.)

34  See  Num.  viii.  6 — 24.

35  The  sons  of  Aaron  were  appointed  to  the  priesthood,  by  the
divine  economy,  in  preference  to  those  of  Moses,  because  the  latter
were  the  offspring  of  a  strange  woman,  Zipporah,  the  wife  of  Moses,
being  the  daughter  of  Jethro,  a  priest  of  Midian.     These,  therefore,
retained  no  superiority  over  the  rest  of  the  Levites,  but  were  honoured
with  sacred  services  out  of  respect  to  Moses  and  Aaron,  who  led  the
Israelites  out  of  Egypt  by  the  special  appointment  of  Jehovah,  after
he  had  exhibited  his  signs  and  wonders  amongst  the  idolatrous
Egyptians  by  their  agency,  to  convince  that  stiffnecked  people,  wise
in  their  own  conceit,  that  their  idol  gods  were  powerless,  and  that
the  Deity  of  the  Israelites  was  the  only  ruler  of  heaven  and  earth.

5  There  were  three  degrees  to  be  taken  before  the  Levites  could

u  Q  2


596


even  numbered  with  the  rest  of  the  people,37  to  show
that  they  had  been  set  apart  entirely  for  a  particular
duty  of  greater  sanctity  and  honour  than  the  rest  of
the  tribes.

There  was  a  peculiar  beauty  in  all  these  appropria-
tions, which  shows  that  they  were  directed  by  some-
thing of  a  higher  character  than  mere  human  wisdom.38
It  was  the  presence  of  Jehovah  that  sustained  the
Israelites  in  the  barren  wilderness,  where  they  would
otherwise  have  perished  for  lack  of  food  ;39  it  was  the
protection  of  the  same  divine  power  that  preserved
the  lives  of  Moses  and  Aaron  during  the  ebulitions  of

be  allowed  to  perform  the  services  of  the  tabernacle.  The  first  was
initiation,  the  second  consecration,  and  the  third,  admission  to  the
duties.  At  fifty  years  of  age  the  laborious  services  were  remitted,
and  their  duty  was  then  to  instruct  the  younger  Levites.

37  The  design  on  the  banner  of  Levi  was,  according  to  some,  an
open  book ;  but  the  more  general  opinion  is,  that  it  was  a  dagger.

8  Even  Moses,  who  was  not  only  perfectly  acquainted  with  the
learning  of  Egypt,  but  divinely  inspired  to  teach  the  Israelites  the
true  system  of  morality  and  religion,  and  therefore  may  be  supposed
to  be  as  well  qualified  as  any  human  being  could  be  to  arrange  and
govern  the  unruly  mass  of  people  whom  he  brought  forth  out  of
Egypt  was  incapable  of  conceiving  and  executing  the  great  design
of  converting  a  nation  of  slaves  into  princes  and  freemen,  and  trans-
ferring them  from  the  land  of  their  degradation  to  a  fruitful  and
salubrious  country,  with  cities  ready  constructed  for  their  residence ;
vineyards  and  oliveyards  planted  for  their  use ;  cornfields,  and  pas-
tures, and  gardens  for  their  enjoyment ;  and  all  things  useful  and
ornamental  provided  for  their  immediate  occupation.

39  And,  therefore,  distrusting  the  providence  of  God,  they  fre-
quently threatened  to  return  into  Egypt,  as  we  have  already  seen.
They  recollected  the  good  things  of  the  land  and  its  fruitfulness ;
and  probably  thought  that  weakened,  as  the  people  must  necessarily
have  been  by  the  total  loss  of  their  army  and  its  appointments  in  the


OF    FREEMASONRY.  597

disaffection  and  schism,  which  manifested  themselves
so  frequently  amongst  the  people ;  it  was  the  same
divinity  which  preserved  them  amidst  the  hostile  jea-
lousy of  the  nations  through  whose  provinces  they
passed ;  and  it  was  by  the  mercy  and  goodness  of  God
that  they  were  finally  planted  in  the  peaceful  possession
of  the  promised  land.

Red  Sea,  added  to  the  destruction  of  their  first  born  children,  the  con-
quest of  that  country  would  have  been  easier  than  the  reduction  of
Canaan,  inhabited  by  a  warlike  people  in  the  height  of  prosperity
and  power.


598  HISTORICAL    LANDMARKS


LECTURE    XLVII.


THE    ROD    OF    MOSES.

"  And  the  Lord  said  unto  him,  What  is  that  in  thine  hand  ?  And
he  said,  a  rod.  And  he  said,  Cast  it  on  the  ground.  And  he  cast
it  on  the  ground,  and  it  became  a  serpent ;  and  Moses  fled  from
before  it.  And  the  Lord  said  unto  Moses,  Put  forth  thine  hand,  and
take  it  by  the  tail.  And  he  put  forth  his  hand  and  caught  it,  and  it
became  a  rod  in  his  hand." — PENTATEUCH.

"  As  our  first  parents  were  beguiled  by  the  devil  in  the  form  of  a
serpent  to  eat  the  fruit  of  the  forbidden  tree,  so  a  branch  of  that  tree
in  the  hands  of  Moses,  was  changed  into  a  serpent,  to  confirm  the
promise  of  delivering  a  select  portion  of  their  posterity  from  Egyptian
bondage." — OLD  LECTURES.

"  With  this  rod  Moses  smote  the  rocks  in  the  wilderness,  and  the
waters  gushed  out  abundantly  to  supply  the  wants  of  his  thirsty
people.  With  it  he  also  was  an  instrument  in  the  hands  of  God  to
divide  the  waters  of  the  Red  Sea,  that  the  Israelites  might  pass  over
in  safety ;  and  by  the  same  instrument  he  performed  his  wonders  in
Egypt.  Hence,  in  commemoration  of  these  remarkable  occurrences,
we  use  rods  or  staves  in  our  Chapters,  as  emblems  of  royalty. — IBID.

THE  communication  to  Moses  of  the  sacred  Name  of
God,1  as  explained  in  a  preceding  lecture,  was  attended

1  Josephus,  in  reference  to  this  subject,  merely  says  that  Moses
entreated  God  to  tell  him  his  Name,  that  he  might  know  how  to
invoke  him  properly  when  he  offered  sacrifice.  Whereupon  God
declared  to  him  bis  name ;  which,  he  adds,  had  never  before  been
revealed  to  man,  and  concerning  which  it  is  not  lawful  for  me  to  say
more.


OF    FREEMASONRY.  599

with  a  miracle  which  has  introduced  two  significant
symbols  into  Freemasonry.  As  a  sign  that  God  had
commissioned  him  to  this  service,  he  was  commanded
to  cast  his  rod  upon  the  ground,  and  it  was  imme-
diately changed  into  a  serpent;2  to  represent,  by  a
symbol,  that  his  rod  should  be  terrible  as  a  serpent  to
the  Egyptians,3  but  the  sceptre  of  a  mild  and  upright
government  to  the  people  of  Israel.4  Nothing  can  be

2  The  serpent  was  an  Egyptian  deity ;  its  body  and  tail  often
accompany  human  and  animal  heads  in  there  presentations  of  Egyptian
gods.

3  While  reflecting  on  the  awful  succession  of  plagues  which  were
inflicted  on  the  Egyptians,  as  a  punishment  for  their  unreserved
cruelties  to  the  people  of  God,  on  the  one  hand,  and  an  inducement
to  emancipate  them,  on  the  other.    We  are  struck  with  a  high  degree
of  reverential  awe  at  the  instances  of  unlimited  power  which  a  jealous
God  has  sometimes  exhibited  for  the  chastisement  of  those  who  have
slighted  his  providence,  or  treated  his  institutions  with  contumacious
neglect.     The  instances  of  such  fearful  exertions  of  his  wrath  con-
tained in  the  scriptures  are  not  numerous,  but  they  are  striking  and
memorable.     The  deluge,  the  plagues  of  Egypt,  the  destruction  of
the  rebellious  Israelites  by  various  means  in  the  wilderness ;  as  well
as  the  annihilation  of  Sennacherib  and  his  army,  are  of  this  kind,  and
constitute  standing  examples  of  the  divine  wrath  to  all  succeeding
generations.

4  This  rod,  which  was  made  the  agent  in  the  deliverance  of  Israel,
is  the  subject  of  a  Masonic  legend,  for  whicli  we  have  the  authority
of  the  Talmud.     I  subjoin  an  abbreviation  of  it  from  a  Royal  Arch
lecture,  which  was  delivered  many  years  ago. — "  This  rod,  or  staff",
had  its  origin  in  the  garden  of  Eden.     When  our  first  parents  fell
from  their  original  state  of  innocence,  and  were  expelled  from  para-
dise, Adam,  bending  under  the  oppression  of  guilt,  supported  his
weary  limbs  by  taking  in  his  hand  a  branch  of  that  fatal  tree  which
had  occasioned  his  disgrace.    This  was  permitted  by  Jehovah,  when
he  gave  him  the  promise  of  a  Redeemer ;  and  it  was  afterwards  mira-
culously preserved  for  a  particular  purpose.     By  Adam  it  was  be-


600


HISTORICAL    LANDMARKS


more  awful  than  the  succession  of  evils  which  God
brought  upon  Egypt  by  the  agency  of  Moses.5  It  was

qucathed  to  Methusaleh,  the  son  of  Enoch,  who  transferred  it  to
Noah,  and  he  preserved  it  in  the  ark.  It  then  passed  into  the  pos-
session of  his  grandson  Mizraim,  who  founded  the  city  of  Memphis,
and  he  deposited  it  in  the  celebrated  college  there,  where  it  continm-d
unnoticed  for  many  generations.  But  when  Jethro  was  consecrated,
and  sent  forth  by  this  college  to  be  a  priest  of  Midian,  he  took  with
him  this  miraculous  rod,  under  the  impression  that  it  possessed  some
extraordinary  properties.  It  appears,  however,  that  he  derived  no
benelit  from  it,  for  shortly  after  his  arrival  in  the  country,  chancing
to  strike  the  lower  end  of  this  rod  into  the  soil  of  his  garden,  to  his
great  astonishment  he  found  himself  unable  to  withdraw  it.  But  it
was  subsequently  revealed  to  him  in  a  dream,  or  vision,  that  the  rod
should  remain  immoveable  until  God  should  send  a  person  to  take  it
away.  When  Moses  had  slain  the  tyrannical  Egyptian,  he  fled  for
concealment  and  safety  to  Jethro,  and  as  they  were  walking  together
in  the  garden,  privately  conversing  upon  the  subject  of  his  flight,
Moses,  apparently  by  accident,  laid  his  hand  upon  the  rod,  and
without  any  exertion  drew  it  out  of  the  ground.  Jethro  was  very
much  surprised  at  this  occurrence ;  but  after  the  first  emotions  had
subsided,  he  acquainted  Moses  with  every  circumstance  relating  to
this  wonderful  rod.  Thus  assured,  the  future  lawgiver  took  the  rod
into  his  own  possession,  and  at  the  time  appointed,  by  its  agency
wrought  all  his  miracles  in  Egypt."  It  is  needless  to  add,  that  this
tradition  is  not  contained  in  the  present  authorized  lectures  of  the
Royal  Arch.

5  Strabo  mentions  Moses  as  an  Egyptian  priest,  who  endeavoured
to  abolish  animal  sacrifices.  Justin  regards  him.  as  being  endowed
by  nature  with  the  most  extraordinary  talents,  and,  like  his  ancestor
Joseph,  being  able  to  interpret  dreams  and  to  work  miracles.  Manetho
mentions  him  under  the  name  of  Osarsiph,  a  priest  of  Heliopolis,
who  gave  the  Jews  a  new  religion,  and  delivered  them  from  slavery.
Diodorus  of  Sicily  speaks  of  a  lawgiver  of  the  Hebrews  as  a  man  of
great  wisdom  and  tried  courage,  who  conducted  them  from  Egypt  to
the  neighbouring  wilderness,  where  he  gave  them  laws,  appointed
priests  and  other  officers,  himself  retaining  the  highest  power.


OF    FREEMASONRY.  601

to  no  purpose  that  the  king  opposed  his  magicians,
Jannes  and  Jambres,6  to  his  wonder-working  rod.7
They  were  soon  silenced ;  for  causes  and  effects  were
thrown  into  such  inextricable  confusion,  that  the  usual
incantations  and  magical  ceremonies  failed  to  produce
the  expected  results;8  and  at  length,  while  suffering

Clemens  of  Alexandria  affirms,  that  Moses  studied  in  the  colleges  of
the  priests  in  Egypt,  and  there  learned  arithmetic,  geometry,  poetry,
harmony,  medicine,  and  music ;  that  he  devoted  his  time  to  a  know-
ledge of  symbols  and  hieroglyphics ;  which  Justin  Martyr  calls  the
emblematical  part  of  the  Egyptian  scriptures.  The  above  authorities
were  collected  by  Count  Bjornstjerna.  (Theog.  of  the  Hindoos,
p.  142.)

6  Several  other  names  of  magicians  assembled  on  this  occasion  are
given  by  Eastern  writers.  (See  D'Herbelot,  Bibl.  Orient,  art.  Mousa.)
The  chief  magician,  or  hierophant,  they  call  Simeon,  and  add  Sadur
and  Ghadur,  Jaath  and  Mosfa,  Waran  and  Zainan ;  each  of  whom
came  attended  by  their  numerous  disciples.    The  feat  of  the  serpents
is  said  to  have  been  thus  performed : — they  provided  ropes  of  the
proper  substance,  and  having  cut  them  into  lengths,  they  threw  them
down,  and  by  making  them  move  and  twist  themselves  about,  they
so  deceived  the  eyes  of  the  beholders,  that  at  a  distance  they  fancied
them  to  be  serpents.

7  The  divining  rod  of  the  middle  ages  was  a  transcript  of  the  rod
of  Moses.     The  virgula  divina,  or  baculus  divinatorius,  says  the
Scottish  Encyclopedia,  is  a  forked  branch  in  the  form  of  a  Y,  cut  off
an  hazel  stick,  by  means  whereof  people  have  pretended  to  discover
mines  or  springs  underground.     The  method  of  using  it  is  this  : —
the  person  who  bears  it,  walking  very  slowly  over  the  places  where
he  suspects  mines  or  springs  may  be,  the  effluvia  exhaling  from  the
metals,  or  vapour  from  the  water,  impregnating  the  wood,  makes  it
dip,  or  incline,  which  is  the  sign  of  a  discovery.

8  They  were  sufficient  to  produce  some  show  of  signs  and  wonders,
in  order  that  by  this  means  the  power  of  Moses  might  be  better
known,  as  darkness  makes  the  light  more  glorious ;  and  also  that
Moses  might  be  free  from  the  imputation  of  being  a  sorcerer,  like


602


HISTORICAL    LANDMARKS


from  the  inflictions  with  which  all  the  people  of  Egypt
were  attacked,  from  the  monarch  to  the  slave,  they  were
compelled  to  acknowledge  the  superior  and  uncontrol-
lable power  of  Him  under  whom  Moses  and  Aaron9
professed  to  act.10  But  the  confession  was  fruitless.
Pharoah  was  not  affected  by  it.11  He  refused,  as  before,

them.  Thus  the  difference  is  evident  between  his  performances  in
the  name  of  God,  and  those  of  the  magicians  by  the  power  of  the
devil.

0  This  power  was,  at  the  first,  most  remarkably  displayed  by
smiting  the  river  Nile.  (Exod.  vii.  20.)  11.  Tauhum,  in  Shemot
Kaba  (c.  3),  says — "  In  a  moral  sense  Moses  did  not  smite  the  river
Nile  himself,  lest  he  should  be  thought  ungrateful  for  the  benefit  it
had  afforded  him  when  he  was  committed  to  it  by  his  parents,  and
therefore  the  business  of  smiting  the  stream  was  committed  to  Aaron."
Ebeii  Ezra,  however,  affirms,  that  in  this  miracle  Aaron  and  Moses
operated  jointly  ;  for  although  Aaron  performed  the  duty,  it  was  with
the  rod  of  Moses.  Others  entertain  a  different  opinion,  and  say  that
the  Nile  was  smitten  by  Moses  himself,  because  he  said  to  Pharoah,
"  behold  I  will  smite  with  the  rod  that  is  in  mine  hand  the  waters
which  are  in  the  river,"  i.  e.,  the  Nile ;  and  that  Aaron  was  com-
manded to  smite  all  the  tributary  streams.

10  St.  Cyril  says,  however,  that  the  Greeks  believed  that  the
Egyptians  esteemed  Moses  as  a  god ;  these  are  his  words — "  Moses
was  well  known  to  the  Greek  historians,  for  Polemon,  in  his  first
book  of  Grecian  history,  maketh  mention  of  him.     So  do  Ptolemoeus
Mendesius  Hellanicus,  Pholochorus,  and  Castor,  and  many  others.
Diodorus,  who  inquired  very  curiously  into  the  affairs  of  Egypt,  says
he  heard  of  him  from  their  wise  men,  and  of  him  he  thus  writeth —
"  After  the  ancient  way  of  living  in  Egypt,  the  people  were  brought
to  live  under  written  laws,  by  a  man  of  a  very  great  mind,  one
Moses,  who  was  called  a  god"    (Alex,  contr.  Julian,  1.  i.  p.  15.)

11  Pharoah's  belief  in  the  marvellous  has  been  common  in  all  ages
of  the  world,  and  is  not  yet  extinct.     It  was  decreed  by  the  Avan-
sicane  council  that,  "  Whosoever  belie veth  that  anything  can  be  made,
or  be  changed  into  better  or  worse,  or  transformed  into  any  shape


Or    FREEMASONRY.  603

to  part  with  his  hereditary  bondmen,  who  were  of  such
essential  service  to  the  state ;  and  his  refusal  only
served  to  incense  the  Almighty  still  more,  and  brought
upon  his  land  a  series  of  plagues,  each  more  fearful
than  its  predecessor.  What  were  the  reflections  of
this  impious  and  self-willed  monarch,  when  he  laid  his
head  upon  his  pillow  at  night,  after  an  eventful  day,
wherein  the  justice  and  mercy  of  God  had  been  in
their  turn  displayed?12  They  were  the  reflections  of
insanity ;  for  they  incited  him  to  brave  a  power  with
whom  daily  experience  and  simple  reason  ought  to
have  convinced  him  that  he  was  unable  to  compete.

It  is  not  to  be  denied  but  the  king  might,  in  the
first  instance,  be  deceived.13  Moses  had  been  educated
in  Egypt,14  and  doubtless  understood  the  priestly
incantations  by  which  an  appearance  of  miracles  was

or  likeness,  but  by  the  Creator  who  made  all  things,  is  undoubtedly
an  infidel,  and  worse  than  a  heathen."

12  He  was  acquainted  with  the  doctrine  of  a  future  state,  but
ignorant  of  the  true  nature  of  human  responsibility.

13  Pharoah  was  unable  to  persuade  himself  that  these  inflictions
were  not  effected  by  the  art  of  Moses,  under  the  power  of  some
malignant  demon,  whom  he  had  subjected  to  his  will  by  potent  spells
and  incantations.     And  such  a  belief  was  quite  consistent  with  the
spirit  of  the  age.     Thus  Porphyry  affirms  that  the  souls  of  wicked
men  become  demons ;  and  those  that  have  not  been  buried  hover
about  their  bodies,  which  they  are  sometimes  compelled  to  resume.
Hosthanes  professed  himself  capable  of  raising  the  dead  and  con-
versing with  them.    Pliny  relates  that  Appion  told  of  a  certain  herb
called  cynocephalus,  which  had  the  power  of  raising  the  dead ;  and
that,  by  the  power  of  this  herb,  he  called  up  the  ghost  of  Homer  to
enquire  respecting  the  place  of  his  birth.     There  are  many  similar
accounts  in  ancient  authors.

14  He  had  been  initiated  into  the  spurious  Freemasonry  of  the


604


HISTORICAL    LANDMARKS


produced ; 15  and  Pharoah  knew  him  to  be  expert  in
all  the  practices  of  the  soothsayers,16  as  well  as  learned
in  all  the  arts  of  that  superstitious  nation  ; 17  and  he
therefore  might  consider  it  as  a  trial  of  skill  between
two  adepts  of  the  same  school ;  for  it  is  highly  pro-
bable that  Moses  and  the  magicians  of  Egypt  had
been  students  together  in  those  occult  mysteries  which
constituted  a  part  of  the  secrets  of  the  spurious  Free-
masonry ;  and  taught,  in  the  first  instance,  by  action,
or  dramatic  representation ;  and  subsequently  by  sym-

country,  which  taught,  among  other  curious  arts,  divination  and
sorcery.

13  It  has  been  a  question  amongst  theologians  whether  the  infidelity
of  Pharoah  admits  of  any  apology  or  excuse.  It  is  answered  that  it
does  not,  because  he  could  not  be  ignorant  of  the  great  difference
between  the  miracles  of  Moses,  and  the  tricks  of  his  own  sorcerers ;
who  themselves  confessed  that  Moses  worked  by  the  finger  of  God.

16  The  Egyptian  sorcerers  communicated  their  secrets  to  none  but
their  own  disciples,  lest  they  should  be  debased  by  innovations.  They
concealed  them,  therefore,  under  inscriptions  which  were  intelligible
to  the  sons  of  wisdom  and  learning  only,  who  were  divided  into  four
classes  or  degrees.

17  There  can  be  no  doubt  but  the  absence  of  Moses  for  forty  years
had  been  attributed  to  his  desire  of  perfecting  himself  in  occult
studies,  in  some  secret  retirement,  where  he  had  intercourse  with
departed  spirits ;  for  there  were  certain  places  famous  for  necromancy,
where  the  oracles  of  the .  dead  were  delivered ;  as  the  Cymmerian
oracle  at  the  lake  Avernus.     Tertullian  says  that  the  CeltaB  used  to
consult  the  dead  at  the  tombs  of  their  deceased  warriors.     "  Such
was  the  vain  opinion  which  the  heathen  had  of  this  magical  art ;
which  Pliny  himself  derideth  as  vain  and  foolish,  because  Nero,  that
wicked  and  beastial  emperor  who  was  given  over  to  all  lewdness,
yet  could  not  be  induced  by  Tyridates  soliciting  him  thereunto,  and
bringing  magicians  unto  him,  to  give  any  credit  unto  necromancy."
(Plin.  1.  xxx.  c.  2. ;  Willet.  Hexapla,  p.  80.)


OF   FREEMASONftY.  605

bols  and  hieroglyphics,  or  magical  characters.18  Nor
is  it  improbable  but  the  monarch  might  be  inclined  to
flatter  himself,  as  the  contrary  belief  would  have  been
highly  prejudicial  to  him,  that  his  own  jugglers  pos-
sessed an  advantage  over  their  adversary  in  the  first
miracles ;  for  they  changed  their  divining  rods  into
serpents,19  and  produced  frogs  and  blood  as  Moses
had  done.

18  It  appears,  therefore,  that  none  of  the  magicians  were  convinced
by  the  miracles,  except  Sadur  and  Ghadur,  who  acknowledged  that
the  miracle  of  the  lice  was  performed  by  the  finger  of  God.     These
two  brothers  were  the  sons  of  a  powerful  magician;  and  being  sum-
moned by  Pharoah,  their  mother  persuaded  them  to  go  to  their  father's
tomb  and  ask  his  advice.    Having  propounded  their  enquiry,  he  told
them  that  they  should  endeavour  to  ascertain  whether  the  rod  of
Moses  became  a  serpent  while  its  master  slept,  or  only  when  he  was
awake  ;  because  magical  devices  are  ineffective  during  the  sleep  of
the  sorcerer ;  and  therefore,  if  such  was  the  case,  they  might  conclude
that  his  actions  were  directed  by  the  power  of  God,  and  not  by  the
science  of  magic.     When  the  two  magicians  arrived  in  Egypt,  their
enquiries  were  soon  rewarded  with  the  information  that  when  Moses
and  Aaron  retired  to  rest,  their  rod  became  a  serpent,  to  guard  them
from  nocturnal  dangers.  (D'Herbelot,  art.  Mousa.)

19  Jugglers  and  serpent  charmers  were  very  common  in  Egypt  in
these  early  times,  and  the  serpents  might  have  been  produced  by
slight  of  hand.     Captain  Seely  gives  an  instance  of  the  facility  with
which  this  transformation  is  performed.    "  A  man,"  says  he,  (Elora,
p.  450,)  "  gave  me  a  small  roll  of  cloth,  about  seven  inches  long,
and  told  me  to  hold  it  in  my  hands ;  he  then  went  off  a  little  distance,
returned,  muttered  some  gibberish,  looked  at  my  hand  to  see  if  it
was  closed,  gave  it  a  squeeze,  and  told  me  to  open  it ;  when  lo  !  in
my  hand  was  a  small  live  snake ;  which  I  dropped  with  the  same
instinct  that  a  child  would  a  hot  coal."

20  The  agency  of  the  devil  was  believed  to  be  capable  of  producing
wonderful  things,  even  during  the  Christian  era.     Fosbroke,  (Mon-
achism,  Ed.  1843,  p.  7,)  has  recorded  that — "  In  1287,  at  a  place
called  Bilebury,  near  Wroxeter,  the  famous  Roman  town,  the  devil,


000


HISTORICAL  LANDMARKS


Nor  will  it  alter  this  view  of  the  case,  should  it  be
urged  that  while  the  serpents  and  frogs  of  Moses  were
real,  those  of  Jannes  and  Jambres21  were  only  a  decep-
tion to  the  sight ;  for,  in  the  judgment  of  Pharoah,
who  was  the  chief  party  concerned  in  the  decision  of
this  intricate  question,  both  might  be  believed  to  pro-
ceed from  the  same  source,22  viz.,  from  Cneph,  the
great  serpent  deity  of  Egypt,  in  whose  faith  both  they
and  Moses  had  been  educated  in  common ;  and  hence
the  contest  would  be  regarded  by  the  royal  spectator
as  an  object  of  surpassing  interest.23  But  when  an
offensive  bodily  disease  was  inflicted,  and  the  sorcerers

compelled  by  a  certain  enchanter,  appeared  to  a  boy,  and  showed
him  urns,  a  ship,  and  a  house  with  immense  towers.  Here  we  see
a  property  of  the  devil,  evidently  borrowed  from  the  Arabian  genie.
There  were  persons  accused  of  keeping  devils  in  the  form  of  cats  ;
but  this  is  of  northern  origin,  and  refers  to  witchcraft,  or  direct  com-
munication with  fiends,  chiefly  confined  to  Jews  and  women,  and
very  different  from  scientific  magic,  mostly  brought  from  Seville,  says
John  Rons,  who  adds,  that  nothing  made  by  necromancy  can  deceive
the  sight  of  those  who  behold  it  in  water,  a  perversion  of  specific
gravity."

21  "  Afterwards   Jannes   and   Jambres,    Egyptian   scribes,   were
thought  to  be  famous  for  magical  arts,  about  the  time  that  the  Jews
were  driven  out  of  Egypt,  for  these  were  they  who  were  chosen  out
of  the  multitude  of  the  Egyptians,  to  contend  with  MusaBus,  the
leader  of  the  Jews,  a  man  very  powerful  with  God  by  prayers."
(Euseb.  1.  viii.  c.  8.)  The  above  is  quoted  from  Numenius,  in  which
Musa3us  evidently  means  Moses,  and  the  Egyptian  scribes  the  two
sorcerers  mentioned  above.

22  Namely,  from  their  occult  alphabets.     Ibn  Washih  mentions
one  particular  alphabet  which  contained  the  art  of  talismans,  and
magical  conjurations  which  was  unparalleled  amongst  either  ancients
or  moderns.     This  alphabet  was  used  by  the  Chaldeans.

3  It  may  be  here  observed  that  the  king,  as  well  as  the  priests,
had  been  educated  in  all  the  mysteries  of  the  spurious  Freemasonry,


OF    FREEMASONRY.  607

were  themselves  subjected  to  its  operation  ;  and  when
commanded  by  Pharoah  to  remove  it  from  himself  and
from  his  people,  they  were  obliged  to  confess  their
inability  to  comply  with  his  wishes,  and  to  declare  that
it  was  the  finger  of  a  God  more  powerful  than  their
own  deities,24  he  was  inexcusable  in  refusing  to  make
the  same  acknowledgment,25  and  neglecting  to  obey
the  commands  of  this  potent  Deity.26

which  included  the  practice  of  magic  as  one  of  its  chief  arts ;  and,
therefore,  he  himself  would  be  no  mean  adept.  The  monarch  was
usually  chosen  out  of  the  caste  of  the  priests  or  of  the  soldiers.  If
the  former,  he  had  already  been  instructed  in  these  mysteries ;  if  the
latter,  it  was  indispensable  that  he  should  be  initiated  at  Hieropolis,
the  great  college  of  the  priesthood,  and  taught  all  the  recondite
sciences  of  the  priestly  order,  that  he  might  be  legally  qualified  to
reign  over  the  land  of  Egypt.

24  And  yet  the  sorcerers  of  the  ancient  world  performed  many
remarkable  things.     Thus  Clement  of  Rome,  speaking  of  Simon
Magus,  who  had  long  bewitched  the  people  of  Samaria,  (Acts,  viii.)
says,  "  When  and  to  whom  he  pleased,  he  made  himself  invisible  ;
he  created  a  man  out  of  the  air ;  he  passed  through  rocks  and  moun-
tains without  encountering  an  obstacle ;  he  threw  himself  from  a
precipice  uninjured ;  he  flew  along  in  the  air  ;  he  flung  himself  into
the  fire  without  being  burned,  &c.  &c."    (Godwin,  Necr.  p.  152,
from  Clern.  Roman.  Recog.  1.  ii.  c.  9.)

25  The  blindness  of  this  monarch  must  have  proceeded  from  the
causes  above  enumerated,  or  he  would  have  yielded  to  the  request  of
Moses,  and  thus  have  saved  his  country  from  ruin.     He  probably
entertained  hopes  that  his  own  gods  would  at  length  assert  their
superiority,  and  deliver  him  from  persecution.     It  was  universally
believed  that  they  possessed  the  power  not  only  of  transforming
themselves  into  a  variety  of  shapes,  representing  animals,  reptiles,
or  men,  as  in  the  life  of  Anthony  we  are  told  the  devil  appeared  to
him  in  the  shape  of  terrible  beasts  ;  but  also  that  they  were  capable
of  counterfeiting  the  shape  of  inanimate  objects.

26  And  it  appears,  therefore,  probable  that  Pharoah  never  enter-


G08


HISTORICAL    LANDMARKS


Pererius  makes  a  catalogue  of  the  punishments  of
the  Egyptians,  for  the  purpose  of  showing  that  they
extended  to  all  ranks  of  men,  in  every  situation  of  life.
They  were  punished  by  insignificant  insects  and  rep-
tiles ;  as  frogs,  lice,  caterpillars,  and  flies  ;27 — the  fury
of  the  elements  was  arrayed  against  them,  and  earth,
water,  fire,  and  air,  were  combined  for  their  destruc-
tion. The  corn28  and  all  the  fruits  of  the  earth  were
destroyed;  their  chief  deities  were  converted  into
agents  of  wrath  ;  the  sun,  the  moon,  and  all  the  host
of  heaven  withdrew  their  light,  and  left  them  to  tin-
abiding  miseries  of  a  darkness  that  might  be  felt;-1'

taiued  the  idea  that  he  was  opposing  an  omnipotent  God,  for  then
his  obstinacy  must  have  given  way  on  a  consideration  of  his  peopK-V
welfare  ;  but  he  thought  that  the  evils  were  inflicted  by  a  powerful
necromancer,  whose  patience  he  expected  to  weary.  Thus  the  Koran
makes  him  say  to  the  magicians,  (c.  20,)  "  Terily  this  is  your  master,
who  hath  taught  you  magic.  But  I  will  surely  cut  off  your  hands
and  your  feet  on  the  opposite  sides  ;  and  I  will  crucify  you  on  trunk ^
of  palm-trees ;  and  ye  shall  know  which  of  us  is  more  severe  in
punishing,  and  can  longer  protract  your  pains/'

27  The  beetle  or  scarabeus  was  deified  and  worshipped,  as  was  also
the  ibis,  and  the  latter  was  embalmed  at  the  initiations,  and  deposited
in  sacred  places.     Such  mummies  have  frequently  been  found  in
tombs,  and  particularly  at  Saccara.

28  In  1843,  there  was  grown  in  a  garden  near  Doncaster,  a  small
portion  of  wheat,  the  seed  of  which  was  from  one  ear  of  the  second
year's  produce  of  a  single  grain  of  Egyptian  wheat,  taken  from  an
alabastar  sepulchral  vase,  found  in  an  ancient  tomb  by  Sir  Gardiner
Wilkinson,  during  his  travels  in  the  Thebaid,  and  supposed  to  have
been  un visited  for  upwards  of  three  thousand   years.     Seventeen
corns  were  planted,  which  produced  eighty-six  ears  ;  thus  increasing
nearly  a  hundred  fold.

29  "  It  is  astonishing  to  see  a  nation  which  boasted  of  its  supe-
riority  above  all  others  with  regard  to  wisdom  and  learning,  thus
blindly  abandon  itself  to  the  most  gross  and  ridiculous  superstition.


OF    FREEMASONRY.  f)OJ

they  were  punished  by  men,  for  Moses  and  Aaron
were  the  agents  of  their  sufferings  ;  and  by  angels,  as
the  ministers  of  the  plagues  ; 30  they  were  punished  in
their  luxury  and  pride ;  all  the  delicious  fruit,  which
was  abundant  and  various  in  that  prolific  country,  was
destroyed  ;  their  cattle  were  killed;31  even  the  sacred
animals  were  not  saved  ;32  their  own  bodies  were

Indeed,  to  read  of  animals  and  vile  insects  honoured  with  religious
worship,  placed  in  temples,  and  maintained  with  great  care  at  an
extravagant  expense ;  to  read  that  those  who  killed  them  were
punished  with  death ;  and  that  these  animals  were  embalmed,  and
solemnly  deposited  in  tombs  assigned  them  by  the  public  ;  to  learn
that  this  extravagance  was  carried  to  such  a  pitch  that  leeks  and
onions  were  acknowledged  as  deities,  were  invoked  in  necessity,  and
depended  upon  for  succour  and  protection ;  are  absurdities  which  we,
at  this  distance  of  time,  can  scarcely  believe  ;  and  yet  they  have  the
evidence  of  all  antiquity."  (Rollin.  vol.  i.  p.  116.)

30  Psalm  Ixxviii.  44.

31  "  The  other  gods  of  the  Egyptians  were  worshipped  in  monstrous
shapes,  bulls,  cats,  dogs,  &c. ;  and  the  reason  alleged  for  this  worship
is  derived  from  the  fabulous  tradition,  that,  when  the  giants  invaded
heaven,  the  gods  were  so  affrighted  that  they  fled  into  Egypt,  and
there  concealed  themselves  in  the  shapes  of  various  animals ;  and  the
Egyptians,  out  of  gratitude,  worshipped  the  creatures  whose  shapes
the  gods  had  assumed."   (Ovid,  Met.  v.  419.)

32  It  appears  to  have  been  a  reason  why  the  Jews  required  permis-
sion to  go  three  days'  journey  into  the  wilderness  to  sacrifice,  lest
by  immolating  the  beasts  which  the   Egyptians  worshipped,  they
should  bring  down  the  vengeance  of  the  people  upon  them.   Diodorus
Siculus  (1.  1.)  relates  an  anecdote  to  this  effect:  That  at  a  time  when
the  Egyptians  were  in  great  fear  of  the  Romans,  the  king  commanded
the  people  to  pay  all  manner  of  respect  to  persons  from  Italy,  that
they  might  not  excite  their  displeasure.  A  lloman  in  Egypt  happening
to  kill  a  cat,  the  people  assembled  in  great  crowds  about  the  house,
and  neither  the  king  or  his  nobility  could  prevent  them  from  tearing
the  man  in  pieces,

VOL.  II.  11  K


610


HISTORICAL    LANDMARKS


afflicted  with  incurable  diseases,  and  their  children
died.  Even  their  bodily  senses,  in  which  the  Egyptian
ladies  evinced  great  delicacy,  were  grievously  offended ;
their  sight  was  obstructed  by  a  thick  darkness,  attended
with  horrible  visions  j33  their  hearing  was  paralyzed  by
the  pealing  thunder ;  their  thirst  became  intense  when
the  water  was  turned  into  blood ;  their  sense  of  smell
was  offended  by  the  noisome  stench  of  the  dead  frogs,
and  the  ulcers  on  their  bodies ;  and  they  were  tormented
in  their  sensibility  of  feeling  by  the  same  ulcers,  and
the  biting  wounds  inflicted  by  the  gnats  and  lice.34
The  bodily  torments  were  each  and  all  attended  with
grief  and  fear,  but  they  were  only  preparatory  to  the
last  great  judicial  punishment,  the  destruction  in  the

33  These  visions,  we  may  reasonably  suppose,  were  such  as  usually
accompanied  the  incantations  of  their  magicians ;  in  which  "  the
heavens  were  darkened ;  the  thunder  rolled ;  and  fierce  and  blinding
lightnings  flashed  from  one  corner  of  the  heavens  to  the  other.    The
earth  quaked  and  rocked  from  side  to  side.     All  monstrous  and
deformed   things  showed  themselves ;   gorgons,  and   hydras,  and
chimeras  dire,  enough  to  cause  the  stoutest  heart  to  quail.     Devils,
whose  name  was  legion,  and  to  whose   forms   and  distorted  and
menacing  countenances  superstition  had  annexed  the  most  frightful
ideas,  crowded  in  countless  multitudes  upon  the  spectator,  whose
breath  was  flame,  whose  dances  were  full  of  terror,  and  whose  strength
infinitely  exceeded  anything  human."  (Godwin,  Necrom.  p.  23.)

34  Philo,  the  Jew,  observes :  "  Some  perhaps  may  enquire,  Why
did  God  punish  the  country  by  such  minute  and  contemptible  insects
rather  than  by  bears,  lions,  leopards,  or  other  savage  beasts  which
prey  on  human  flesh  ;  or  by  the  Egyptian  asp,  whose  bite  is  instant
death  ?     But  let  the  enquirer  know  that  it  was  not  God's  intention
to  destroy  the  inhabitants,  but  to  correct  them.  For  if  he  had  desired
their  annihilation,  it  would  have  been  unnecessary  to  make  use  of
animals,  when  he  had  famine  and  pestilence  at  his  command."


OF    FREEMASONRY.  611

Red  Sea;35  The  delicate  ladies  of  Egypt  had  suffered
for  a  whole  month  every  infliction  which  was  disgust-
ing and  horrible.  They  had  lamented  over  their
protracted  miseries  ;  they  mourned  for  their  children  ;
they  cheerfully  relinquished  their  golden  ornaments,
and  trinkets,  and  vases  ;36  in  the  hope  of  exemption

35  The  length  of  time  which  the  infliction  of  these  plagues  occu-
pied has  been  variously  computed.     Some  say  twelve  months,  and
others  a  much  shorter  period.  If  they  were  all  brought  on  the  people
in  immediate  succession,  as  may  be  presumed  from  the  account  which
Moses  has  left  behind  him,  the  wonder  will  be  greater  that  Pharoah
did  not  liberate  the  Israelites  while  smarting  under  their  infliction,
than  it  would  be  if  a  considerable  length  of  time  were  suffered  to
elapse  between  each  judgment ;  for  then  the  impression  would  have
been  much  weakened  by  time.    But  a  quick  repetition  of  the  plagues
— one  being  inflicted  before  the  people  had  recovered  from  the  effects
of  its  predecessor — was  enough  to  conquer  the  obstinacy  of  any  man,
though  it  failed  in  the  case  of  Pharoah.     The  real  time  occupied  by
these  transactions  appears  to  be  as  follows  : — From  the  appearance
of  Moses  in  Egypt  to  the  first  miracle  was  three  days.     The  miracle
of  converting  the  waters  into  blood,  continued  seven  days ;  that  of
frogs,  two  days ;  of  lice,  one  day  ;  of  flies,  three  days ;  of  the  murrain
in  cattle,  two  days ;  of  boils  and  blains,  one  day ;  of  hail,  three  days ;
of  locusts,  three  days ;  of  darkness,  three  days ;  of  the  destruction  of
the  first  born,  two  days.     In  all  thirty  days.

36  It  is  from  this  circumstance  alone  that  we  can  account  for  the
great  quantity  of  trinkets  which  the  Hebrews  were  provided  with  in
the  desert ;  where  they  offered  for  the  making  of  the  works  intended
for  divine  service,  their  bracelets,  ear-rings,  rings,  clasps,  and  vases
of  gold  and  silver.     Chardin  says  that  the  women  of  the  East  wear
rich  rings  and  bracelets  of  gold.     They  are  rather  manacles  than
bracelets.     Sometimes  the  arm  is  covered  with  them  from  the  wrist
to  the  elbow.     The  ear-rings  and  pendants  were  so  large,  that  you
might  insert  your  finger  in  them ;  and  some  were  four  inches  in
diameter  and  two  inches  thick.     "  Moses  made  all  these  trinkets  be
melted,  and  converted  them  to  different  works  proper  for  the  worship

R  Il2


612


HISTORICAL    LANDMARKS


from  further  suffering ;  but  the  sacrifice  only  led  to
increased  mourning  for  the  husbands  and  fathers  that
perished  in  the  waters.

The  agent  in  the  infliction  of  these  plagues,  was  the
rod  of  Moses  ;37  although  it  will  be  observed  that  it
was  most  frequently  placed  in  the  hands  of  Aaron  to
produce  the  effect.  And  this  was  probably  done  to  rebut
the  opinion  of  Pharoah,38  that  the  superiority  of  Moses,

of  the  Almighty.  The  greatest  part  of  these  works  were  gold,  and
among  them  they  had  pieces  of  great  execution  and  highly  finished
workmanship.  A  crown  of  gold  entirely  surrounded  the  ark  of  alliance.
The  table  of  shewbread  was  adorned  with  a  border  of  open  chased
gold  work.  The  chandelier  of  seven  branches  appears  to  me,  above
all,  worthy  of  much  attention.  The  description  which  the  holy  scrip-
ture makes  of  it,  gives  us  an  idea  of  a  very  ingenious  and  well  com-
posed design.  This  piece,  considerable  in  itself,  was  of  very  fine
gold,  beat  by  the  hammer."  (Goguet,  vol.  ii.  p.  159.)

37  This  Rod,  fearful  as  the  attack  of  a  serpent  to  the  Egyptians,
was  a  sceptre  of  righteousness  to  the  children  of  Israel.  It  was  a  sign
of  the  divine  authority,  and  a  visible  demonstration  of  God's  power,
used  to  confound  the  pretended  skill  of  the  magicians,  to  show  the
Omnipotence  of  the  Deity,  and  to  humble  the  pride  of  Pharoah,  when
he  beheld  the  mighty  wonders  wrought  by  so  contemptible  an  agent
as  a  shepherd's  staff.     But  above  all,  this  rod,  metamorphosed,  was
a  type  of  Christ's  death,  to  which,  indeed,  Freemasonry  ultimately
points ;  for  as  by  a  serpent  death  came  into  the  world,  so  by  the
death  of  the  Son  of  God,  the  serpent,  or  satan,  was  fully  vanquished
and  trodden  under  foot.     Thus  Moses  lifted  up  the  serpent  and  tau
cross  in  the  wilderness,  that  as  many  as  looked  on  it  might  be
healed  of  the  wounds  inflicted  by  fiery  serpents  for  their  disobedient
murmurings  ;  and  the  suspension  of  Christ  upon  the  cross,  there
typified,  was  to  deliver  us  from  sin  and  death,  and  to  be  a  full
satisfaction  and  atonement  for  the  sins  of  the  world.

38  Pharoah  remained  obstinate  to  the  last.     There  is  an  Arabian
tradition,  quoted  by  Sale  (vol.  ii.  p.  435)  from  Jallaloddin,  that
because  the  wife  of  Pharoah  believed  in  Moses,  her  husband  cruelly


01?    FREEMASONRY.  613

shown  in  the  act  of  his  rod  devouring  the  rods  of  the
magicians,39  was  merely  owing  to  his  greater  application
to  the  study  of  sorcery,40  when  under  the  tuition  of  the
Egyptian  priests.41  The  miracles  thus  performed  caused
the  rod42  to  be  highly  esteemed  by  the  Jews,43  and

tormented  her,  fastening  her  hands  and  her  feet  to  four  stakes,  and
laying  a  large  millstone  on  her  breast,  her  face,  at  the  same  time,
being  exposed  to  the  scorching  beams  of  the  sun.  These  pains,  how-
ever were  alleviated  by  angels  overshadowing  her  with  their  wings  ;
and  showing  her  the  mansion  prepared  for  her  in  heaven.  At  length
she  was  taken  up  alive  into  Paradise.

39  Now  let  it  be  observed  that  the  serpents  which  the  Egyptian
sorcerers  brought  forth,  were  only  such  in  appearance,  as  is  evidenced
by  Josephus,  (Ant.  b.  ii.  c.  15,)  Justin  Martyr,   (Queest.  Orthodox,
16,)   Tertullian,   (lib.   de  anima,)  Ambrose,   (in  cap.  iii.  2  Tim.)
Jerom,  (Advers.  Jovin.  1.  2,)  and  others.

40  We  are  unacquainted  with  the  formula  of  incantation  which
these  magicians  used,  but  we  know  what  was  the  custom  of  some
other  nations  when  invoking  demonical  powers.     Southey,  in  the
poem  of  Thalaba,  has  clothed  the  fact  in  beautiful  poetry.

41  This  belief  was  probably  understood  by  Moses,  and  he  therefore
committed  the  agency  of  producing  the  plagues  to  Aaron,  that  no
undue  weight  might  be  attached  by  the  Egyptians  to  the  conceit  of
his  superior  magical  attainments.     That  this  end  was  not  answered
could  not  be  owing  to  any  fault  on  the  part  of  Moses,  who  appears
to  have  conducted  himself  with  great  meekness  and  humility  through-
out the  whole  of  this  arduous  and  distressing  contest   with   the
Egyptian  monarch.     Thus  Aaron  appeared  as  the  agent  of  justice,
and  Moses  of  mercy.     The  former  inflicted  the  plagues,  while  the
latter  removed  them.    Pharoah  was  too  much  blinded  by  his  passion
to  observe  this  distinction;  and  he  thus  rushed  headlong  into  the
gulph  which  his  prejudices  prevented  him  from  observing,

42  Proclus  speaks  of  a  wonderful  wand  or  rod,  by  the  use  of  which
the  operator  was  capable  of  drawing  the  soul  out  of  the  body,  and
restoring  it  again.    Quoting  from  Clearchus,  in  his  treatise  on  Sleep,
he  mentions  an  instance  of  this.   The  operator,  gently  striking  a  boy


614


HISTORICAL    LANDMARKS


subsequently  by  all  the  nations  where  a  tradition  of
these  events  had  been  circulated,  from  the  Brahmins,
Magi,  and  the  hierophants  of  the  east,  to  the  Druids
of  Britain,  the  Drottes  of  the  northern  nations  of
Europe,  and  the  priests  of  Mexico  and  Peru.  It  is
true,  the  hypothesis  of  a  previous  use  of  the  rod  in  the
performance  of  magical  ceremonies,  may  be  considered
tenable,  from  the  instance  of  the  rods  by  which  the
Egyptian  magicians  executed  then-  sorceries;44  but
the  rod  of  Moses  was  the  undoubted  prototype  which
originated  the  general  use  of  this  instrument.45

with  his  rod,  he  drew  out  his  soul,  and  led  it  to  a  distance  from  his
body,  for  the  purpose  of  proving  that  the  body  is  without  sensation
when  the  soul  is  taken  away.  By  means  of  his  rod  he  restored  the
soul  to  the  body.

43  The  authorities  for  these  opinions,  and  all  other  Jewish  tradi-
tions, are  contained  in  the  dictionary  which  the  Jews  of  Constantinople
abridged  under  the  title  of  Aruc  Hakkctser,  or  the  Little  Aruc.  In
this  dictionary,  which  is  written  in  Rabbinical  Hebrew,  all  the  Avords
of  the  Talmud  are  to  be  found.  There  is,  hoAvcver,  another  dictionary
of  this  kind,  published  at  Venice,  in  1587,  by  David  de  Pomis,  an
Italian  JCAV,  Avhich  is  more  useful,  because  it  is  printed  in  tAvo  columns,
the  first  Avhereof  gives  the  pure  Hebrew  words  of  the  Bible,  arid  the
other  the  Rabbinical  Hebrew  Avords,  both  being  translated  into  Latin
and  Italian.

4  The  priests  in  every  country  were  accounted  capable  of  perform-
ing feats  out  of  the  usual  course  of  nature ;  and  hence  the  rod  became
an  indispensable  agent  in  the  hand  of  the  necromancer ;  and  it  Avas
generally  formed  of  ebony,  because  this  Avood  was  reputed  to  be  pro-
duced by  a  violation  of  nature's  laws,  and  growing  Avithout  the  usual
appearances  incident  to  vegetable  life.

45  Maurice,  however,  doubts  this  fact.     After  mentioning  that  the

priests  of  every  nation  Avere  distinguished  by  rods  or  staves,  he  adds,

'  This  instrument  symbolized  the  solar  beam  that  explores  nature's

most  secret  depths,  and  penetrates  into  the  abyss  of  matter.  Diviners,


OP    FREEMASONRY.  615

The  rod  was  an  ensign  of  authority,  like  the  sceptre
of  a  monarch  ;46  and  though  unable  of  itself  to  perform
any  work  out  of  the  common  track  of  nature,  yet  the
Most  High  chose,  on  this  occasion,  to  use  it  as  an
instrument  by  which  all  his  miracles  in  Egypt  and  the

therefore,  in  their  lofty  pretensions  to  be  acquainted  with  her  arcana,
and,  as  if  conversant  with  her  mysterious  operations,  in  their  nocturnal
orgies,  waved  on  high  the  solar  wand,  in  circles  imitative  of  the
revolution  of  his  orb.  I  would  by  no  means  be  understood  as  apply-
ing this  observation  to  the  rod  of  Moses,  by  which  Aaron  wrought
before  the  hardened  Pharoah  the  prodigies  of  Egypt.  In  truth,  the
rod  of  Moses  was  originally  the  pastoral  wand  with  which  he  guided
his  flock ;  from  those  flocks  he  was  taken  to  be  the  pastor  of  Israel ;
with  that  simple  instrument  he  was  enabled  by  Jehovah  to  awe  the
sovereign  of  Egypt,  and  to  confound  the  magicians  opposed  to  him.
Those  magicians  indeed  had  their  rods,  such  as  we  have  described,
peculiar  to  their  iniquitous  profession ;  but  that  of  Moses,  by  annihi-
lating the  others,  proved  at  once  the  superiority  of  its  origin,  and
the  irresistible  might  of  him  under  whose  auspices  it  was  employed."
(Ind.  Ant.  vol.  vi.  p.  232.)

46  The  cabalistic  traditions  of  the  Jews  describe  the  rod  of  Moses
as  something  of  a  higher  character  than  a  mere  shepherd's  staff.
They  consider  it  in  the  light  of  a  consecrated  utensil  destined  for  his
sole  use.  And  hence  we  are  expected  to  deduce  the  superiority  over
the  rods  of  the  magicians.  But  it  was  the  divine  power  of  Jehovah
alone  which  endowed  it  with  this  superiority.  It  is  also  necessary
to  be  considered,  in  allusion  to  the  double  reference  which  is  assigned
to  the  rod  in  our  Lodges  and  Chapters,  that  although  kings  and  the
heads  of  tribes  were  furnished  with  this  honourable  appendage,  there
existed  a  distinction  which  must  ever  be  kept  in  view,  that,  although
the  word  Virgo,  is  used  in  scripture  equally  for  the  rod  of  a  king  or
a  priest,  yet  the  former  was  a  sceptre,  or  symbol  of  temporal  authority
and  dominion,  while  the  latter  was  peculiar  to  the  chief  ministers  of
religion,  as  an  emblem  of  spiritual  jurisdiction ;  like  the  crosier  of  a
Christian  bishop,  which  may  be  deduced  in  common  with  the  rod  of
Moses,  from  the  pastoral  staff  of  a  shepherd.


11(5


HISTORICAL    LANDMARKS


wilderness  were  effected.  By  the  agency  of  thi
the  miseries  were  inflicted  on  the  Egyptians  which
ultimately  impelled  the  inhabitants  to  liberate  the
Israelites,  loaded  with  presents  to  accelerate  their
departure.  They  were  sent  forth  in  haste,47  with  their
loins  girded,  shoes  on  their  feet,  staves  in  their  hands,
and  their  kneading  troughs  bound  on  their  shoulders  ;
conducted  by  Moses  bearing  his  rod  as  a  sceptre  of
authority,  and  guided  by  their  Almighty  Father,  in  a
pillar  of  a  cloud  by  day,  and  a  pillar  of  fire  by  night.

47  A  writer  in  Eraser's  Magazine  thinks  that  "  Moses,  Cadmus,
and  Dauaus,  led  their  followers  from  Egypt  at  the  same  time ;  and
that  the  date  of  it  was  but  a  few  years  removed  from  1500  before
the  Christian  era,  according  to  the  express  statement  and  tenor  of
the  sacred  writings.  It  may  not  be  out  of  place  to  observe  that  the
etymons  of  the  names  of  the  three  leaders  mentioned  are  well  worthy
of  notice.  The  Jewish  leader  was  called  Moses,  because  he  was
drawn  out  of  the  water  by  the  daughter  of  Pharoah ;  the  Argivc
leader,  Danaus,  from  the  drying  up  of  the  Red  Sea  ;  and  the  Theban
leader,  Cadmus,  in  consequence  of  his  arrival  from  the  east,  and
introduction  of  the  Oriental  letters  and  mysteries  into  Greece.  The
names  of  all  these  are  hence  equally  consistent  with  the  events."
(Eraser's  Mag.  Oct.  1836,  p.  466.)


[As  this  series  of  lectures  is  now  drawing  to  a  close,  I  think  it
necessary  to  say,  that  the  publisher  having  undertaken  to  comprise
them  in  two  volumes,  I  am  under  the  necessity  of  adopting  a  consi-
derable condensation  of  my  materials,  by  throwing  a  great  quantity
of  matter  into  the  notes  which  would  more  properly  occupy  a  pro-
minent place  in  the  text.  The  information,  however,  will  not  be
curtailed,  although  the  construction  of  the  lectures  may  suffer  some
diminution  in  arrangement,  and  perhaps  in  perspicuity.  It  is  still
hoped  that  the  intelligent  Brother  will  not  be  disappointed  in  the
main  object  of  his  research.]


OP   FREEMASONRY.  617


LECTURE    XLVIII.

THE    TRIPLE    TAU.

"  A  good  Lodge  may  be  known  by  its  ornaments.  Tn  most  Lodges
all  sorts  of  decorations  are  heaped  together  without  the  slightest  at-
tention to  propriety.  There  should  be  no  picture,  statue,  or  emblem
of  heathen  deities ;  nor  any  bust  or  picture  of  heathen  philosophers.
The  proper  images  or  emblems  are  to  be  taken  from  the  Bible,  which
alone  contains  the  authentic  records  of  ancient  Masonry.  The  deco-
rations should  be  Masonic  emblems,  intersecting  triangles,  the  Triple
Tau,  square  and  compasses,  death's  head,  &c. ;  and  these,  if  properly
managed,  can  be  made  highly  ornamental."

HELVETIAN  CEREMONIES.

"  The  triple  tau  forms  two  right  angles  on  each  of  the  exterior
lines,  and  another  at  the  centre,  by  their  union,  for  the  three  angles
of  each  triangle  are  equal  to  two  right  angles.  This  being  triplified
illustrates  the  jewel  worn  by  the  Companions  of  the  Royal  Arch ;
which  by  its  intersection  forms  a  given  number  of  angles,  that  may
be  taken  in  five  several  combinations,  and  reduced,  their  amount  in
right  angles  will  be  found  equal  to  the  five  Platonic  bodies  which
represent  the  four  elements,  and  the  sphere  of  the  universe."

E.  A.  LECTURES.

THE  signs  or  marks  of  our  sublime  science  are
generally  explained  on  a  principle  which  is  evident  and
satisfactory,  and  not  liable  to  misapprehension,  although
Freemasonry  is  a  secret  society.1  Whether  these  sym-

1  Secret  societies  existed  in  every  age  and  amongst  every  people.
Bro.  Husenbeth  says — "  In  the  earliest  times,  and  under  the  most
abject  idolatry,  the  propagation  of  the  belief  in  one  undivided  deity,


618


[ISTORICAL    LANDMARKS


bols  have  been  constructed  from  instruments  of  manual
labour,  from  geometrical  figures,  from  the  works  of
nature,  or  the  sublime  vaults  of  heaven,  there  can  be
no  doubt  in  the  mind  of  the  well-instructed  Mason
respecting  their  general  reference  and  application.2  The
design  of  their  adoption  was  to  embody  valuable  moral
and  religious  truths,  that  the  view  of  a  sensible  object
might  raise  before  the  contemplative  Brother's  mental
eye  some  intellectual  maxim,  by  which  he  might  become
wiser  and  better.3  This  is  a  noble  design.  It  allures
to  the  pursuit  of  virtue,  and  inspires  a  love  for  investi-

also  teaching  the  superior  sciences,  but  more  especially  experimental
philosophy  and  chemistry,  would  have  drawn  the  severest  persecution
upon  its  authors  and  their  disciples,  had  they  made  an  open  profes-
sion of  their  sublime  doctrines.  It  was  therefore  necessary  to  use
hieroglyphics,  or  some  lingua  sacra,  which  at  once  served  as  an  ex-
clusion to  the  vulgar,  who  could  not  understand  it.  What  this  lingua
sacra  was  we  cannot  positively  state,  but  we  may  conjecture  that
signs  and  tokens,  as  well  as  words,  formed  its  ground-work.  Zoro-
aster, Moses,  Solomon,  Pythagoras,  Plato,  and  numerous  others,
were  all  initiated  into  the  secret  societies  of  their  times."  (F.  Q.  R.
1835,  p.  275.)

2  See  a  curious  illustration  in  the  works  of  the  satirical  Dean  of  St.
Patrick,  vol.  xii.  p.  250,  ed.  1766.

3  The  same  design  is  pursued  in  the  holy  scriptures. — "  According
to  the  prophets,  three  spheres  emanate  from  God,  which  occupy  the
three  heavens ;  the  first,  or  sphere  of  love,  is  red ;  the  second,  or
sphere  of  wisdom,  is  blue ;  the  third,  or  sphere  of  creation,  is  green.
In  the  Bible  the  Eternal  is  represented  dwelling  on  an  azure  throne,
surrounded  by  a  flaming  sphere.     In  the  Apocalypse  he  appears  in
the  centre  of  an  emerald  rainbow.     Three  degrees  of  regeneration
correspond  to  the  three  celestial  spheres.     They  are  again  found  in
antique  initiation,  with  their  three  symbolic  colours,  red,  blue,  and
green,  indicating  fire,  air,  and  earth."    (Symb.  Col.  Weale.  Archit.
pt.  vi.  pp.  1,  2.)


OF    FREEMASONRY.  619

gations  whose  aim  and  end  are  the  perfection  of  our
mental  faculties.  And  thus  science  is  applied  to  the
practice  of  moral  virtue  and  religious  duty.

There  is  much  difficulty  in  treating  perspicuously  on
the  subject  of  this  lecture,  because  the  materials  are
scanty  and  much  depends  on  tradition.  We  have  no
lack  of  evidences  respecting  the  use  of  the  single  cross,
which  has  been  traced  through  the  tau  of  Jews  and
heathens,  to  the  rod  of  Moses,  and  the  staff  of  Jacob ;
but  the  use  and  signification  of  the  triple  tau  are  in-
volved in  mystery.  The  letter  tau4  is  translated  from
the  Chaldaic  Hebrew,  to  signify  the  MARK  spoken  of
by  the  angel  which  Ezekiel  saw  in  the  spirit,5  when  the

4  Mr.  Maurice  (Hist.  Hind.  vol.  i.  p.  246)  says  of  this  symbol —
"  The  Samaritan  tau  and  the  Ethiopia  tavvi  are  the  evident  prototype
of  the  Greek  r ;  they  differ  only  in  the  upright  stroke  being  elevated
higher  than  it  is  in  the  Greek,  exactly  after  the  manner  of  the  common
cross  on  which  malefactors  suffered  in  the  Eoman  empire,  and  which
was  sanctified  by  the  hallowed  body  of  Christ."

5  In  the  book  of  Revelation  we  find  a  similar  passage. — "  And  I
saw  another  angel  ascending  from  the  east,  having  the  seal  of  the
living  God.     And  he  cried  with  a  loud  voice  to  the  four  angels  to
whom  it  was  given  to  hurt  the  earth  and  the  sea,  saying,  Hurt  not
the  earth  neither  the  sea,  nor  the  trees,  till  we  have  sealed  the  ser-
vants of  our  God  in  their  foreheads."  (Rev.  vii.  2,  3.)    There  were
scaled  144,000  persons,  which  chiliads  or  thousands  are  cubical
numbers,  and  signifies  stability  or  constancy ;  one  hundred  and  forty-
four  being  the  square  of  these  chiliads,  of  which  the  root  is  twelve,
which  is  the  apostolical  number.     The  twelve  patriarchs  are  put
figuratively  for  the  twelve  apostles,  and  the  children  of  Israel  for  the
church  of  Christ,  of  which  the  Israelites  are  here  a  type.     Now  it
may  be  imagined  that  as  the  single  tau  was  used  to  distinguish  those
whose  temporal  salvation  -was  indicated  by  Ezekiel,  it  is  possible,
although  by  no  means  certain,  that  the  triple  tau  may  have  been  the
mark  or  seal  of  those  who  are  to  be  saved  eternally.     St.  Cyril,  of


020


HISTORICAL    LANDMARKS


man  with  writer's  inkhorn6  was  recommended  to  go
through  the  cities  of  Jerusalem,  and  set  the  mark  of  God7
on  those  who  sigh  and  cry  for  the  abominations  that
are  in  the  midst  thereof.8  The  words  are,  "  I  will  put

Jerusalem,  exhorts  his  catechumen,  "  not  to  be  ashamed  of  the  cross
of  Christ ;  and  if  any  one  so  be,  do  thou  at  least  openly  mark  it  on
thy  forehead,  that  the  devils,  beholding  the  royal  ensign,  may  retire
trembling.  And  use  that  sign  eating  and  drinking,  sitting  and  lying,
rising  from  bed,  conversing  and  walking ;  in  one  word,  use  it  on  all
occasions."

6  This  is  explained  in  the  degree  of  Knight  of  the  Christian  Mark,
when  the  candidate  is  instructed  to  exclaim,  "  Woe  is  me,  for  I  am
a  man  of  unclean  lips,  and  my  dwelling  has  been  in  the  tents  of
Kedar,  and  among  the  children  of  Meshec."     Then  he  that  has  the
inkhorn  by  his  side,  takes  a  live  coal  with  the  tongs  from  the  altar,
and  touches  the  lips  of  the  candidate,  and  says,  "  If  you  believe,
your  iniquities  shall  be  taken  away,  and  your  sin  shall  be  purged ;
for  I  have  trodden  the  wine  press  alone,  and  with  me  was  none  of
my  people.     And  behold,  I  come  with  dyed  garments  from  Bozrah,
mighty  to  save."     He  then  takes  the  signet  and  presses  it  to  the
candidate's  forehead,  saying,  "  Sir  Invincible  Knight,  the  number  of
the  sealed  are  144,000,"  &c.  &c.

7  Dr.  Clark  says — "  The  original  words  have  been  translated  by
the  Vulgate,  et  signa  than — and  mark  thou  tau  on  their  foreheads.
The  sense  derived  from  this  by  many  commentators  is,  that  God
having  ordered  those  penitents  to  be  marked  with  this  figure,  which
is  the  sign  of  the  cross,  intimated  that  there  is  no  redemption  but
by  the  cross  of  Christ ;  and  that  this  will  avail  none  but  the  real
penitent."

8  "  I  have  elsewhere  observed,"  says  Maurice,  "  the  very  singular
manner  after  which  the  Latin  Vulgate,  and  probably  the  more  ancient
copies  of  the  Septuagint,  have  rendered  the  original  of  that  passage
in  Ezekiel  (ix.  4) — I  will  set  a  mark  upon  their  forehead — ren-
dering it  in  their  version,  I  will  mark  them  on  the  forehead  with  the
letter  tau ;  which  affords  room  to  suppose,  it  was  a  symbol  of  more
sacred  import  than  is  generally  imagined,  in  the  early  patriarchal
age."


OF    FREEMASONRY.  021

the  mark  tan  upon  their  foreheads."9  Tertullian  says,
this  tau  was  in  the  form  of  our  cross,10  and  was  in-
tended to  be  the  herald  of  life  and  salvation  in  the  true
Jerusalem.  Origen  was  of  the  same  opinion.11  And
by  this  mark  they  were  preserved  when,  by  the
wrathful  displeasure  of  Jehovah,  the  idolatrous  people
were  slain.12  And  hence  the  &  has  been  presumed  to
be  a  Jewish  symbol.13

In  ancient  times  this  mark  f  was  set  on  those  who
had  been  acquitted  by  their  judges,  as  a  symbol  of
innocence.  The  military  commanders  placed  it  on
soldiers  who  escaped  unhurt  from  the  field  of  battle,
as  a  sign  of  their  safety  under  the  divine  protection.

9  This  custom  of  regeneration  by  marking  the  forehead  was  widely
disseminated.    Even  in  the  obscure  country  of  Darian,  the  initiatory
rite  of  religion  is  accompanied  by  tracing  a  cross  with  pure  water  on
the  forehead.     And  the  same  symbol  was  engraven  on  the  sepulchres
of  the  ancient  American  Indians.

10  St.  Jerome  thought  the  same,  and  adds  that  this  Hebrew  letter
H  tau,  was  formerly  written  like  a  cross.     It  follows,  therefore,  that
the  people  were  signed  with  the  sign  of  the  cross.    In  ancient  Sama-
ritan coins  the  above  letter  tau  was  certainly  made  in  this  form  + .

11  There  are  many  who  affirm  that  the  tau  cross  referred  to  physical
life,  and  hence  signified  the  phallus.     I  had  prepared  a  copious  note
derived  from  ancient  writers  on  this  subject,  but  was  induced  to
strike  it  out  for  the  reason  named  in  the  note  on  page  616.

12  St.  Ephrem  says  in  one  of  his  sermons — "  Let  us  paint  on  our
doors,  and  imprint  on  our  foreheads,  this  life  giving  cross.     Let  us
put  on  this  invincible  armour  of  a  Christian,  by  which  we  may  over-
come death,  destroy  heresies,  and  protect  the  orthodox  faith.     Let
us  undertake  nothing  without  this  sign ;  whether  rising  up  or  retiring
to  rest ;  whether  eating,  drinking,  or  travelling,  let  us  adorn  our
members  witli  this  sacred  sign;   by  which  all  nations   have  been
united  in  one  faith,  one  baptism,  and  cemented  in  the  universal  bond
of  charity."


022


HISTORICAL    LANDMARKS


For  these  causes  it  has  been  designated  as  an  emblem
of  LIFE.  In  our  own  island  it  was  venerated  in  con-
nexion with  the  oak,  which  was  a  tree  sacred  amongst
all  nations,  and  considered  as  peculiarly  sanctified  by
the  gods,14  if  not  their  immediate  residence.15  As  a

13  A  learned  and  highly  intelligent  Brother,  whose  name  would
add  a  lustre  to  my  pages,  if  I  were  permitted  to  use  it,  says  :  "  I
observe  in  the  March  number  of  the  F.  Q.  R.  for  1843,  at  page  17,
an  observation  that  the  R.  A.  badge   jlj  is  of  Christian  origin.    Your
views  exactly  agree  with  what  mine  once  were ;  but  I  have  been  con-
siderably staggered  by  the  information  that  tlus  same  symbol  is  placed
above  the  entrance  to  some  part  of  the  Jewish  synagogues.  I  believe,
however,  that  with  H.  A.  Masons  it  ought  to  mean  merely  Hiram  of
Tyre,  H  T-     Do  you  not  think  it  the  same  as  the  Hebrew  letter
shin  (i#)  engraven  on  the  Jewish  phylacteries  ?     The  three  TTT  or

i-rM  not  losing  their  original  import  by  being  divaricated."  My
worthy  correspondent  must  have  been  misinformed  as  to  the  above
fact.  1  have  mentioned  the  subject  to  many  Jewish  Masons  wlw
have  not  been  exalted,  and  they  profess  their  entire  ignorance  of  this
emblem,  and  declare  they  never  saw  it  before.  It  can  scarcely,  there-
fore, be  inscribed  on  the  Jewish  synagogues.

14  Robora  numinis  instar.  (Claud,  in  Const.  Stilich.  1.  i.)

15  The  fairest  tree  in  the  grove  was  solemnly  consecrated  with  many
superstitious  ceremonies.  It  represented  the  central  tree  in  the  garden
of  Eden,  and  was  a  transcript  of  a  similar  superstition  all  over  the
world,  from  an  old  tradition  of  the  trees  of  knowledge  and  life;
because  the  ideas  of  science  and  immortality  were  combined  in  this
sacred  tree.     Isaiah  (Ixvi.  17,)  gives  a  curious  illustration  of  this
practice,  as  used  by  the  idolaters  for  purification.     Sometimes  the
tree  was  divested  of  its  collateral  branches,  and  one  of  the  largest,
being  so  constructed  as  to  exhibit  the  form  of  a  tau  cross,  was  care-
fully preserved,  and  consecrated  with  solemn  ceremonies.     On  the
back  of  the  tree  they  cut  deeply  into  the  bark  the  word  TAU,  by
which,  as  we  are  informed  by  Borlase,  they  meant  God.    On  the  right
arm,  was  inscribed  HESUS,  on  the  left  BELENUS,  and  on  the  middle
of  the  trunk,  THAEAMIS.     This  was  to  represent  the  sacred  triad.


OF    FREEMASONRY.  023

badge  of  innocence  it  was  reputed  to  have  been  trans-
mitted by  the  antediluvian  patriarchs.  With  this  refer-
ence it  occurs  amongst  the  hieroglyphics  of  India,16  was
accounted  sacred  amongst  the  Celtic  Druids,17  and  by
the  Greeks  was  esteemed  a  prodigy  (eav/^a).18  In  Rome


16  Upon  comparing  the  Hindoo  Mithratic  temples  with  the  pyramids
of  Egypt,  and  the  Irish  cavern  at  New  Grange,  we  found  that  one
method  of  constructing  those  places  of  worship  was  to  dispose  the
building  in  the  shape  of  a  cross,  and  over  the  sacallum  to  raise  a
lofty  pyramid.     Such  is  the  form  of  the  supernal  pagoda  at  Benares,
and  of  the  subterraneous  grotto  at  New  Grange.     Keeping  this  cir-
cumstance in  view,  we  shall  be  led  to  discover  the  real  use  of  two
curious  relics  of  antiquity,  situated  near  Tortosa,  in  the  region  which
lies  directly  north  of  Beruth  Tyre  and  Palestine."  (Fab.  Cab.  vol.  ii.
p.  438.)     These  were  also  cruciform.

17  At  Classerniss,  in  the  island  of  Lewis,  Scotland,  is  a  specimen
of  a  cruciform  temple,  which  was  in  existence  long  before  the  advent
of  Christ.     It  had  a  circle  consisting  of  twelve  stones  ;  and  three

I


\
I  I


I

each  on  the  east,  west,  and  south  sides,  placed  in  right  lines ;  while
on  the  north  is  a  double  row  of  twice  nineteen  stones  in  two  perpen-
dicular parallel  lines,  forming  a  superb  avenue,  with  a  single  elevated
stone  at  the  entrance.  The  whole  number  of  stones  was  sixty.  In
the  centre  of  the  temple  stands,  in  an  elevated  situation,  the  gigantic
representative  of  the  deity  to  which  the  adoration  of  the  worshippers
was  peculiarly  directed.

18  According  to  Faber  (Cab.  vol.  ii.  p.  390),  the  cross  was  a  grand


G24


HISTORICAL    LANDMARKS


the  statue  of  Osiris  had  this  emblem,  which  was  a  cross
with  two  limbs,  the  transverse  ones  placed  at  the  top,
and  shorter  than  the  upright  pillar.19  The  goddess
Isis  or  Ceres,  the  great  patroness  of  the  spurious  Free-
masonry, was  frequently  depicted  bearing  this  extra-
ordinary instrument ;  and  the  caverns  of  initiation,  in
various  parts  of  the  world,  were  constructed  in  the
form  of  a  cross,20  with  a  pyramid,  or  some  other  sacred
building  placed  over  the  sacellum.21  The  original

symbol  throughout  the  pagan  world,  long  previous  to  its  becoming,
for  a  very  different  reason,  an  object  of  veneration  to  Christians.
Mr.  Shelton  observes — "  How  it  came  to  pass  that  the  Egyptians*
Arabians,  Indians,  before  Christ  came  among  us,  and  the  inhabitants
of  the  extreme  northern  parts  of  the  world,  before  they  had  so  much
as  heard  of  him,  paid  a  remarkable  veneration  to  the  sign  of  the
cross,  is  to  me  unknown,  but  the  fact  itself  is  well  known."

19  But  it  will  be  observed  that  the  Christian  cross  was  a  different
affair ;  for,  if  Lactantius  may  be  believed,  "  when  the  idolaters  sacri-
fice to  their  gods,  they  cannot  proceed  if,  a  Christian  being  present,
he  sign  his  forehead  with  the  cross;  nor  can  the  diviner  give  his
responses.     This  has  often  been  the  cause  of  the  persecutions  we
have  undergone*     And  in  like  manner,  when  some  masters  were  on
the  point  of  sacrificing  in  the  presence  of  their  Christian  servants,
the  latter,  by  making  the  sign  of  the  cross  on  the  forehead,   so
frightened  away  the  gods,  that  nothing  could  be  collected  from  the
bowels  of  the  victims."

20  A  remarkable  instance  of  this  appropriation  of  the  cross  in  Ire-
land, before  the  establishment  of  Christianity,  is  thus  described  in
Led  wick's  Antiquities.      "  Observing  stones  under  the  green  sod,
Mr.  Campbell,  in  1699,  carried  many  of  them  away,  and  at  length
arrived  at  a  broad  flag,  that  covered  the  mouth  of  the  gallery.     The
dome  or  cave,  with  the  long  gallery,  gives  the  exact  figure  of  a  cross;
in  each  arm  of  which  there  are  two  large  oval  rock  basins."

21  "  I  conceive,"  says  the  learned  Faber,  (Cab.  vol.  ii.  p.  445,)
"  the  two  vaults  with  their  pyramidal  appendages,  to  have  been  des-
tined for  the  celebration  of  the  mysteries  of  the  helio-arkito  super-


OF    FREKMASONRY.  625

caduceus  of  Mercury22  was  cruciform,  to  symbolize,  as
was  supposed,  the  four  elements.23  The  most  ancient
astronomical  characters  used  to  designate  the  planets
and  the  days  of  the  week,24  were  also  of  the  same  form,

stition.  Accordingly  we  find  that  they  are  each  constructed  in  the
form  of  the  tautic  cross  "7-  ;  that  they  have  each  an  adytum,  or
sacellum ;  and  that  they  have  each  a  pyramid,  studiously  and  uni-
formly, not  accidentally,  erected  precisely  over  this  adytum.  We
further  find,  that  the  entrance  into  them  is  by  a  small  passage,  so
narrow,  that  a  person  is  obliged  to  advance  crawling  rather  than
walking ;  and  that  there  are  within  them  a  number  of  recesses,  hol-
lowed out  in  imitation  of  the  irregularities  of  a  natural  cavern,  which
were  used  by  the  priests,  partly  for  the  management  of  their  terribly
fantastic  machinery,  and  partly  as  troughs  for  water."

22  In  the  degree  of  Knights  Adepts  of  the  Eagle  or  Sun,  a  caduceus
is  depicted  as  an  emblem  of  the  projection  of  metals.    It  represents,
says  the  philosophical  lecture  of  the  degree,  the  double  mercury  that
you  must  extract  from  matter,  or  in  other  words,  the  mercury  fixed,
from  whence  the  precious  metals  are  extracted.

23  The  trident  of  Neptune  appears  to  have  had  no  connexion  with-
the  triple  tau,  although  some  of  our  intelligent  Brethren  seem  to
think  it  had.     Bryant  imagines  that  the  "  trident  of  Poseidon  was  a
mistaken  implement,  as  it  does  not  appear  to  have  any  relation  to
the  deity  to  whom  it  has  been  by  the  poets  appropriated.     Both  the
towers  on  the  sea-coast,  and  the  beacons  which  stood  above  them,
had  the  name  of  Tor-ain.     This  the  Grecians  changed  to  Triaina,
and  supposed  it  to  have  been  a  three  pronged  fork.    The  beacon,  or
torain,  consisted  of  an  iron,  or  brazen  frame,  wherein  were  three  or
four  tines,  which  stood  up  upon  a  circular  basis  of  the  same  metal.
They  were  bound  with  a  hoop,  and  had  either  the  figures  of  dolphins,
or  else  foliage,  in  the  intervals  between  them.     These  filled  up  the
vacant  spaces  between  the  tines,  and  made  them  capable  of  holding
the  combustible  matter  with  which  they  were  at  night  filled."  (Anah
vol.  ii.  p.  117.)

24  The  Hindoo  days  of  the  week  correspond  with  the  names  of
tkeir  deities,  exactly  like  those  which  we  have  derived  from  our-
ancestors  the  Saxons.

VOL.  II.  s  s


026  HISTORICAL    LANDMARKS

or  in  other  words,  were  composed  of  a  cross  united
with  a  circle,25  to  represent  the  sun  and  moon;  the
latter,  as  the  two  parents  of  the  universe,  producing
the  cross  as  an  emblem  of  life.26  In  like  manner  the
cross  was  used  in  forming  the  chemical  characters27
before  the  time  of  Christ;  and  in  heraldic  devices
afterwards.28  It  is  worthy  of  observation,  and  displays

25  Thus  the  sun  is  marked  0,  the  moon  J ,  Saturn  £ ,  Jupiter  ^ ,
Mars  <j ,  Venus  ? ,  and  Mercury  $ .

20  In  the  twenty-eighth  degree  of  Masonry,  according  to  the  system
of  the  rite  Ancien  et  Accepte,  the  cross,  surrounded  by  two  serpents,
signifies  that  we  ought  carefully  to  guard  against  entertaining  vulgar
prejudices  which  may  affect  our  belief  in  the  truths  of  rcM-lntion  ;
and  be  very  prudent  in  regard  to  our  knowledge  and  secrets,  in  those
matters  which  may  have  a  tendency  to  make  us  waver  in  our  duty  to
God  and  man.

17  Thus  the  plain  cross  stood  for  imperfection  -f ,  copper  was  do-
noted  by  <j> ,  iron  by  <y ,  antimony  g  ,  tin  ^,  lead  <*}  lime  ^ ,  mag-
nesia ^,barytes  <£,- sulphur  ^,  and  gum  y.

28  In  heraldry  crosses  were  of  various  kinds,  and  distinguished  by
characteristic  names,  as  the  saltire,  flory,  moline,  cercele,  Calvary,
raguled,  patriarchal,  Malta,  quadrate,  vair,  lozengy,  Jerusalem,  and
many  others ;  but  we  do  not  find  that  it  adopted  the  triple  tan.
The  following  curious  illustration  of  the  heraldic  cross,  by  old  Fuller,
is  worth  quoting : — "  The  plain  crosse,  or  St.  George's  crosse,  I  take
to  be  the  mother  of  all  the  rest ;  as  plain-song  is  much  senior  to  any
running  of  division.  Now,  as  by  transposition  of  a  few  letters,  a
world  of  words  are  made,  so,  by  varying  of  this  crosse  in  form,  colour,
and  metall  (ringing  as  it  were  the  changes),  are  made  infinite  several
coats.  The  crosse  of  Jerusalem,  or  five  crosses,  most  frequently  used
in  the  holy  warre ;  crosse  patee,  because  the  ends  thereof  are  broad  ;
fiche,  whose  bottom  is  sharp,  to  be  fixed  in  the  ground;  wavee,
which  those  may  justly  weare  who  sailed  thither  through  the  miseries
of  the  sea,  or  sea  of  miseries ;  molinee,  because  like  to  the  rind  of  a
mill ;  saltyree,  or  St.  Andrew's  crosse ;  florid,  or  garlanded  with
flowers  ;  the  crosse  crossed,  because  the  divers  tricking  or  dressing :


OF    FREEMASONRY.  627

the  workings  of  an  over-ruling  Providence,  that  the
Jews  and  Romans  should  have  condemned  Jesus  to
die29  by  the  very  instrument,30  which  in  all  nations  was

as  piercing,  voiding,  fimbriating,  ing-railing,  couping,  and  in  fouxie
and  devices  there  is  still  a  plus  ultra ;  insomuch,  that  crosses  alone,
as  they  are  variously  disguised,  are  enough  to  distinguish  all  the
several  families  of  gentlemen  in  England."

29  Bro.  Willoughby,  of  Birkenhead,  has  an  ingenious  theory  respect-
ing the  cross  of  Christ,  which  connects  it  with  the  legend  of  the  third
degree.    He  says — "  The  instruments,  &c.,  were  the  plumb  rule,  the
level,  and  the  heavy  setting  maul.    The  two  former  united  represent
the  cross  ;  the  plumb  rule  constituting  the  lower  limb,  and  the  level,
the  upper  and  transverse  limb ;  while  the  heavy  setting  maul  would
be  a  point  within  a  circle.     The  mallet  of  an  operative  mason  is  in-
variably globular,  with  the  handle,  like  a  point,  inserted  in  its  centre,
And  it  appears  to  me  clear  that  our  ancient  Brethren,  in  depicting
on  the  tracing-board  these  three  emblems,  intended  them  to  bear  a
mystical  reference  to  the  death  of  the  Great  Architect  of  the  Christian
church.     And  as,  in  the  allegory,  the  plumb  rule  and  the  level  were
instrumental,  &c.,  so,  in  the  fact,  the  cross,  thus  formed,  was  instru-
mental in  the  death  of  the  actual  Grand  Master ;  and  the  death  blow,
as  in  the  case  of  Isaac,  comes  from  the  father,  while  the  victim,  in
each  case,  was  the  only  son.     Now,  as  the  point  within  a  circle  has
been  held  sacred  among  most  nations,  as  an  emblem  of  the  Deity,
may  we  not,  in  this  instance,  consider  it  as  an  emblem  of  the  Eternal
Father  inflicting  the  death  blow  ?"    I  am  afraid.  I  have  rather  weak-
ened, by  condensation,  the  force  of  our  worthy  Brother's  reasoning ;
but  the  entire  argument,  which  possesses  great  merit,  is  too  long  for
insertion  here.

30  Godwyn  thus  classes  the  cross  of  ancient  times  : — cc  Crux.  This
word  is  sometimes  applied  to  any  tree  or  stake  on  which  a  man  is
tortured  to  death ;  but  most  properly  it  is  applied  to  a  frame  of  wood,
consisting  of  two  pieces  of  timber  compacted  crosswise.     This  latter
is  threefold. — 1.  Crux  decussata.  This  was  made  of  two  equal  pieces
of  timber  obliquely  crossing  one  the  other  in  the  middle,  after  the
manner  of  a  Roman  X,  and  thence  it  is  called  decussata ;  and  by  the
common  people  St.  Andrew's  cross.     2.  Crux  commissa.    This  was

s  s  2


628


HISTORICAL    LANDMARKS


esteemed  the  symbol  of  eternal  life.31  And  hence  it-
appears  that  this  emblem  T ,  amongst  Christians,  was
not  altogether  primitive.  But  it  is  by  no  means  clear
that  the  early  converts  were  acquainted  with  its  specific
use  amongst  their  heathen  neighbours.32  Although  in
Egypt  the  statues  of  the  various  deities33  were  distin-
guished by  it  ;34  and  the  same  figure  was  sculptured  on

when  a  piece  of  timber  erected  was  joined  in  the  middle  to  a  traverse,
or  overthwart  top,  somewhat  shorter  than  the  piece  erect,  thus  f  ;
this  is  called  St.  Anthony's  cross.  3.  Crux  iwmissa.  This  was  when
a  short  traverse,  somewhat  obliquely  crossed  the  stake  erect,  not  quite
in  the  middle,  as  crux  decussata,  nor  quite  on  the  top,  as  en  x  nmi-
missa,  but  near  to  the  top  in  this  manner  t  .  This  is  thought  to
have  been  the  cross  on  which  our  Saviour  suffered."  (Moses  and
Aaron,  p.  201.)

31  The  cross  was  assumed  by  the  followers  of  our  Saviour  as  the
symbol  of  their  faith,  because  it  was  the  instrument  on  which  Jesus
wrought  out  man's  redemption.  His  death  was  considered  by  the
heathen  to  be  the  most  ignominious  that  a  malefactor  could  suffer ;
and  it  was  inflicted  on  Christ,  that  the  utmost  public  contempt  might
be  poured  upon  him,  and  the  effect  of  his  mission  be  altogether  ex-
tinguished. But  the  early  Christians  rejoiced  in  bearing  this  emblem
of  disgrace  and  torture ;  and  thus  it  became  the  great  standard  of
our  faith — the  power  of  God  unto  salvation.

3S  Mr.  Burton,  in  his  Exerpta,  has  given  two  plates  of  sculptures
found  at  Alabastron.  In  one  of  the  plates  we  have  a  curious  sub-
ject— a  figure  with  the  face  erased,  standing  before  an  altar,  with  a
knife  in  his  right  hand.  In  one  corner  is  a  circle,  to  represent  the
sun,  and  from  the  lower  part  of  its  circumference  issue  fifteen  shafts,
all  of  which  are  furnished  with  a  human  hand,  several  of  them  con-
taining the  tau  cross,  and  one  seems  as  if  he  were  about  to  transfer
the  emblem  to  the  uplifted  hand  of  another.  These  sculptures  are
much  older  than  the  era  of  Christianity.  In  the  portico  of  Esne,
.some  sitting  figures  bear  the  tau  cross.

33  On  coins  the  symbol  of  Cneph  was  a  cross  within  a  circle.

31  Osiris  is  represented  with  a  caduceus  and  spear;  a  sceptre,


OF    FREEMASONRY.  629

gems,35  to  signify  vitam  elernam™  And  when  the
temple  of  Serapis,  at  Alexandria,  was  destroyed  by  the
command  of  Theodosius,  sundry  crosses  cut  in  stone37
were  found  in  the  vaults ;  which,  as  we  are  informed
by  Socrates,38  occasioned  many  of  the  people  to  become

consisting  of  a  staff,  crooked  at  the  end,  and  finished  by  the  crux
ansata ;  the  phallus,  a  forked  stick,  and  many  other  emblems.  The
crux  ansata  is  by  some  thought  to  be  a  key.

35  To  this  ancient  way  of  inscribing  names  on  sacred  symbols  St*
John  seems  to  allude  in  Eev.  iii.  12 — "  Him  that  overcometh  I  will
make  a  pillar  in  the  temple  of  my  God,  and  /  will  write  upon  him
the  name  of  my  God,  and  I  will  write  upon  him  my  new  name,"
And  again  (xiii.  1) — "  On  the  forehead  of  the  beast  the  name
MYSTEIIY  was  written."  See  also  xvii.  3.

56  In  the  Pictorial  Bible  (vol.  L  p.  444)  are  a  series  of  repre-
sentations of  the  several  Egyptian  deities,  and  they  have,  almost  all
of  them,  the  crux  ansata  in  their  hands  ;  an  evident  proof  that  the
tau  cross  was  a  sacred  emblem  long  before  the  time  of  Moses.  This
symbol  of  a  cross  appended  to  a  circle,  or  globe  and  cross,  similar  to
the  orb  which  is  always  placed  in  the  left  hand  of  the  Kings  of  Great
Britain  during  the  coronation  ceremony,  was,  as  is  generally  believed,
first  adopted  by  Theodosius,  who  is  represented  with  it  in  his  hands
on  some  of  his  coins.  The  globe,  indeed,  had  long  been  a  favourite
emblem  with  the  Roman  emperors,  some  of  whom  surmounted  it
with  the  imperial  eagle,  some  with  the  figure  of  Victory,  and  the
family  of  Constantino  with  a  phoenix ;  but  Theodosius  placed  on  it
a  cross,  intimating  the  triumph  of  Christianity  over  the  whole  earth.
(Cruciana,  p.  112.)

37  "  In  part  of  the  great  avenue  leading  from  Luxor  to  Carnak,  a
row  of  crio-sphynxes  still  remain  quite  free  from  any  accumulations
of  sand,  and  some  of  them  are  in  very  good  preservation.     They  are
now  partly  shaded  by  a  row  of  palm  trees,  and  the  two  parallel  lines
are  sixty-three  feet  asunder.    The  sphynxes  are  only  twelve  feet  apart
in  the  line,  are  made  of  sandstone,  and  each  has  between  its  forelegs
a  mummy-shaped  figure,  with  its  hands  crossed  on  its  breast,  and  in
each  hand  the  sacred  tau."  (Egypt.  Ant.  vol.  i.  p.  213.)

38  Hist.  Eccles.  1.  v.  c.  17.


630


IISTORICAL  LANDMARKS


Christians.39  The  sign  of  the  cross  amongst  the
Egyptians  signified  life,40  and  Avas  the  mark  by  which
the  Cabalists41  expressed  the  number  ten,42  which  was

39  The  respect  which  the  primitive  Christians  had  for  the  cross,
occasioned  them  to  be  accused  of  worshipping  it.     Minutius  Felix
vindicates  himself  from  the  charge ;  and  Prudentius,  in  one  of  his
hymns,  admits  that  it  was  a  custom  strongly  recommended  to  use
the  sign  of  the  cross  at  bed-time,  for  the  purpose  of  banishing  evil
spirits. —

Frontem  locumque  cordis
Crucis  figura  signet,

Crux  pellit  orane  crimeii,
Fugiunt  crucem  tenebra,  &c.

Hence  the  cognizance  of  the  Knights  Templars  was  a  patriarchal
cross,  enamelled  red,  and  edged  with  gold,  worn  at  the  breast
pendant  to  a  ribbon.  They  sometimes  wore,  embroidered  on  their
upper  habit,  a  red  cross  like  the  order  of  Malta.

40  <c  jn  front  Of  ^e  door  Of  the  temple  of  Amunoth  III.  at  Thebes,
who  reigned  about  the  time  when  the  Israelites  took  possession  of
Canaan,   are  two  large  stela?  of  gritstone,  with  the  usual  circular
summits,  on  which  are  sculptured  long  inscriptions,  and  the  figures
of  the  king  and  queen,  to  whom  Amunre  and  Sokari  present  the
emblem  of  life;"  i.  e.,  the  tau  cross.  (Wilk.  Thebes,  p.  32.)

41  Those  Brethren  who  are  desirous  of  knowing  the  principles  of
the  cabalistic  science,  may  profitably  refer  to  the  works  of  II.  Moses
Cordovero,  in  the  abridgment  called  Pardes  lUmonim.     It  is,  how-
ever, treated  of  more   at   large  in   the  Meppetah  Hakkabala,  the
Sud  Sudot,  Sephir  Bahir,  &c.,  Avhich  contain  an  account  of  the
practical  cabala,  including  all  the  ridiculous  theories  of  talismans,
palmistry,  amulets,  physiognomy,  &c.

42  It  was,  in  fact,  the  crux  ansata  of  Hermes,  which  is  represented
by  Kircher  ((Edipus,  vol.  iii.  p.  277)   as  a  sublime  hieroglyphic,
possessing   mysterious   powers  and   virtues,    as  a  wonder-working
amulet,  and  placed  on  that  account  in  the  hands  of  their  most  potent
deities.     It  is  said  to  be  one  of  the  most  perfect  mathematical  figures,
habentem  longitudinem  atque  latitudiiiem,  et  quatuor  angulos  rectos,


OF    FREEMASONRY.  631

a  perfect  number,  denoting  heaven,  and  the  Pytha-
gorean Tetractys,  or  incommunicable  name  of  God.43
Hence  crosses  were  abundantly  used  in  the  composition
of  charms  by  Christians,44  after  they  became  acquainted
with  this  peculiarity,45  as  the  name  was  used  by  the
Jews.46

The  emblem  ffi  forms  the  principal  distinction  of  a
Royal  Arch  Mason's  apron  and  jewel.  Being  placed
in  the  centre  of  a  triangle  and  circle,47  both  emblems

which  typified  the  four  elements,  and  referred  to  the  four  cardinal
points  of  the  compass.

43  Count  de  Gebelin  informs  us,  that  this  symbol  T  was  carried
by  the  Egyptian  priests  in  all  their  sacred  processions,  as  an  attribute
of  the  deity.

44  "  Christian  painters  of  the  middle  ages,"  says  M.  Portal  (Symb.
Col.  p.  9),  "  painted  the  cross  of  a  green  colour,  symbol  of  regene-
ration, of  charity,  of  hope ;  sometimes  it  was  bordered  with  a  red
band,  as  in  the  large  windows  of  Chartres  cathedral."     Green,  how-
ever, according  to  the  same  author,  was  consecrated  to  the  Indian
Ganesa,  to  the  lloman  Janus,  to  the  Egyptian  Jannes,  to  the  Christian
St.  John  the  Evangelist,  and  to  all  the  divinities  of  paganism  which
represent  the  good  and  true  in  the  actions  of  life.

45  Many  instances  of  the  manner  in  which  the  cross  was  used  in
these  charms,  may  be  found  in  Sir  Henry  Ellis's  edition  of  Brand.
(Vol.  iii.  p.  152.)

46  It  must  be  observed,  however,  that  the  symbolical  pagan  cross
was  tautic ;  for  the  compound  figure  with  four  arms  + ,  I  apprehend,
was  more  modern.

47  In  the  triple  tau  we  have  the  Masonic  point  within  a  circle,  and
two  parallel  lines.     If  the  single  tau  cross  be  added  to  our  circle  and
Hues,  it  will  produce  the  legitimate  emblem.     Our  E.  A.  P.  Tracing-
board  displays  the  Three  Great  Lights  surmounting  the  above  emblem.
But  what  supports  them?  nothing.     Now  if  an  inverted  level  be
placed  on  the  point  thus  (^  ,  it  will  be  a  platform  for  this  essential
symbol,  and  at  the  same  time  constitute  the  triple  tau.


632


HISTORICAL    LANDMARKS


of  the  Deity,  it  would  appear  that  it  was  originally
intended  to  typify  the  sacred  name,  as  the  author  pro-
bably of  eternal  life ;  being  tripled  in  the  Christian
system,48  because  the  life  to  come,  according  to  the
light  of  revelation,  is  superior  to  the  elysium  of  the
heathen  ;  or  perhaps  in  allusion  to  the  three  heavens
mentioned  by  St.  Paul.49  It  has  been  referred  to  the
Three  Great  Lights  of  Masonry,  expressive  of  the  crea-
tive, preserving,  and  destroying  power  of  God.50  Some
interpret  it  as  being  allusive  to  the  temple  at  Jeru-
salem ;51  others  as  the  monogram  of  Hiram,  King  of

48  An  interesting  form  of  the  Masonic  cross  is  assumed  by  one  of
the  regular  bodies,  called  the  hexaedron.    (See  the  F.  Q.  11.  1840,
p.  426.)

49  This,  however,  is  doubtful ;  and  as  there  is  unfortunately  a  very
imperfect  illustration  appended  to  the  degree,  it  will  be  difficult  to
determine  at  what  period,  and  under  what  circumstances,  the  emblem
was  assumed,  or  to  explain  it  in  a  satisfactory  manner.

50  The  fraternity  do  not  appear  to  be  agreed  respecting  the  true
reference  of  this  Masonic  Mark.     Its  interpretation  is  involved  in
mystery.     The  general  discussions  which  prevail  in  the  Chapter  do
not  elucidate  the  subject  in  a  satisfactory  manner.     The  three  lights
are  placed  in  the  form  of  an  equilateral  triangle,  each  of  the  lesser
intersecting  the  line  formed  by  the  two  greater ;  thus  geometrically
dividing  the  greater  triangle  into  three  lesser  triangles,  at  its  extre-
mities, and  by  their  union  form  a  fourth  triangle  in  the  centre,  all  of
them  being  equal  and  equilateral ;  emblematical  equally  of  the  Tetra-
grammaton  and  the  four  degrees  of  Masonry.

51  Teinplurn  Hierosolymse ;  and  some  think  that  the  T  is  placed
over  the  H,  to  denote  the  superiority  of  the  place  which  was  the
habitation  of  God  over  that  which  was  only  the  dwelling-place  of
man ;  for  though  the  city  was  holy,  the  temple  exceeded  it  in  holiness.
The  old  lectures  stated  that  the  compound  character  j¥j  is  the  sig-
nature of  a  Royal  Arch  Mason,  by  which  he  proclaimed  himself  a


OF    FREEMASONRY.  633

Tyre ;  and  some  assert  that  it  was  only  a  modification
of  the  Hebrew  letter  schin  W ;  while  there  are  those  who
hold  it  to  have  no  further  signification  than  to  the
triplification  of  the  heathen  tau  cross;  which  being
known  to  the  Israelites  in  their  wanderings,  was  a
Jewish  symbol  in  existence  before  the  temple  of  Solomon
was  erected.52  It  is  said  to  be  found  in  the  Isiac
table;53  and  hence  has  been  taken  by  some  for  a  nilo-
metre,64  or  key  of  the  Nile,55  to  measure  the  increase
and  decrease5''  of  its  fructifying  waters.57

worshipper  of  the  true  God,  and  it  referred  to  the  superb  temple
where  his  true  worship  was  first  established.

52  This,  however,  was  not  the  tau  triplified,  of  which  I  can  find  no
instances  on  record  more  ancient  than  the  advent  of  Christ.     In  the
ancient  alphabets  preserved  by  Ibn  Washih,  are  some  approaches  to
this  singular  symbol.    For  instance,  in  an  ancient  alphabet  unnamed,
this  mark  W  is  used  for  the  word  ashes.    In  the  alphabet  of  Sagit-
tarius this  'Iff  stands  for  the  letter  N ;    in  that  of  Pisces  this  @
stands  for  Sh;  in  the  Shishim  alphabet  the  letter  S  is  thus  repre-
sented  ]Jj ,  and  Ch  thus  Hf" .     In  the  alphabet  of  King  Kimas  Ty
or  Th  is  known  by  this  mark  fi* ;  and  in  the  Hermesian  alphabet,
the  sign  Pisces  is  thus  represented  ^ .     There  are  many  similar
characters  in  these  alphabets,  but  no  perfect  triple  tau.

53  This  is  probably  a  mistake.    I  have  attentively  examined  all  the
numerous  Egyptian  hieroglyphics  to  which  I  have  access,  without
being  able  to  find  any  appearance  of  the  triple  tau.

54  The  nilometre  was  a  column  erected  in  a  well,  to  ascertain  the
height  which  the  river  attains  in  its  periodical  inundations.     This
instrument  bears  so  close  a  resemblance  to  the  triple  tau,  that  many
learned  men  have  had  110  hesitation  in  explaining  the  emblem  with
this  reference.

55  "  The  Egyptians  expressed  the  several  increases  of  their  swelling
river  by  a  column  marked  with  one,  two,  or  three  lines,  in  form  of  a
cross,  and  surmounted  with  a  circle,  the  symbol  of  God,  to  charac-
terize providence,  which  governs  this  important  operation.     More
commonly,  instead  of  a  column,  they  made  use  of  a  pole  terminated
like  a  T,  or  crossed  with  one  or  more  transverse  pieces.     To  abridge


634


[1STORICAL    LANDMARKS


It  is  extremely  doubtful  whether  the  triple  tan  was

these  remarks,  they  were  often  contented  with  one  small  cross,  which
put  upon  a  vessel  or  elsewhere,  might  signify  the  increase  of  the
water."  (Fellows,  Anc.  Mys.  p.  10.)

56  "Among  the  sacred  figures  in  the  Egyptian  temple  of  Dendera,"
says  Clement  of  Alexandria,  "  is  an  Isis  pointing  with  a  reed  to  a
graduated  staff  held  by  another  figure  of  the  same  deity,  from  which
are  suspended   scales  containing  water  animals,   the  whole   group
perhaps  being  an  emblem  of  her  influence  over  the  Nile,  in  regulating
its  periodical  inundations."  (Strom.  1.  vi.  p.  166.)     Bro.  Fellows
observes  on  this  passage — "  The  author  seems  not  to  be  aware  that
the  Isis  pointing  with  a  reed  to  a  graduated  staff,  was  directing  the
attention  of  the  Egyptians  to  the  nileometre,  or  measure  of  the  inun-
dations so  important  to  their  well  being.     This  measure,  in  after
times,  became  an  ensign  of  office,  Mercury's  wand,  and  as  such,  has
been  adopted  by  Masonry."

57  A  writer  in  an  obscure,  and  now  obsolete  and  forgotten,  peri-
odical, thus  explains  the  reference :  "  The   ffi  has  been  looked  upon
as  a  symbol  of  knowledge ;  and  as  knowledge  has  something  of  a
divine  nature  in  it,  the  tau  or  cross  is  a  symbol  of  divinity.  But  how
came  the  symbol  to  be  thus  reverenced?     From  its  utility  to  the
farmer.     The  knowledge  of  the  exact  height  of  the  water  was,  and
still  is,  of  so  much  importance,  that  during  the  time  of  the  overflowing
of  the  river,  the  common  crier  of  the  town  makes  daily  proclamation
of  it  in  solemn  form.     He  goes  to  Michiah  in  Cairo,  which  is  the
well  that  is  connected  with  the  water  of  the  Nile ;  and  in  that  well
there  is  a  graduated  pillar,  denoting  the  height  of  the  water.     This
he  views,  and  proclaims  accordingly.     But  intelligence  is  expressed
in  the  Egyptian  language  by  Kneph,  one  of  their  names  of  God ;  and
Kneph,  or  the  god  of  intelligence,  was  nothing  more  than  this  triple
tau ;  i.  e.  the  post  within  the  well,  at  or  near  Thebes.     It  is  tlie>.
measure  of  the  river,  and  is  compounded  of  kane,  a  stick  or  rod,  and
oph,  a  serpent ;  i.  e.  the  overflowed  river."     I  am  persuaded,  how-
ever., that  this  opinion  is  erroneous ;  for  the  nilometre  would  scarcely
have  been  considered  of  sufficient  importance  to  be  stamped  on  the
forehead  of  the  Egyptian  epopts ;  much  less  would  such  a  custom
have  been  imitated  in  Persia ;  and  the  tau,  as  Tertullian  informs  us,
(and  he  is  an  unexceptionable  authority,  because  he  had  himself  been
initiated  before  his  conversion  to  Christianity,)  was  inscribed  on  the


OF    FREEMASONRY.  635

known  to  the  Jews  ;r'8  and  I  think  it  much  better
adapted  to  Christian  Freemasonry,59  partaking  of  the
typical  nature  and  application  of  all  other  parts  of  the
Jewish  mode  of  worship  ;  for  although  the  single  tau
is  found,  as  we  have  already  seen,  amongst  the  sacred
symbols  of  many  ancient  nations,  we  have  no  certain
evidence  that  the  compound  figure  ft  existed  as  a  single
symbol,  till  after  the  crucifixion  of  Christ.60  And
though  there  are  amongst  the  fraternity  many  theo-

ibreliead  of  every  person  who  had  been  admitted  into  the  mysteries
of  Mithars.

58  A  correspondent  of  my  own  says — "  I  wish  you  could  assist  me
in  solving  the  Masonic  puzzle,  the  \I\ .     I  know  the  interpretations
usually  given,  and  think  them  very  unsatisfactory  ;  for  if  it  belong
to  the  Royal  Arch,  it  must  be  a  Jewish  symbol,  and  in  use  long  before
the  letters  we  compare  it  with  were  known  to  the  institutions  of  the
Order.     In  most  episcopalian  churches  it  forms  the  middle  letter  of
IRS,  behind  the  altar;   hence  it  might  be  supposed  to  be  of
Christian  origin ;  but  I  feel  almost  certain  that  it  is  truly  a  Jewish
symbol ;  but  how  made  up,  or  whence  derived,  I  cannot  satisfactorily
explain.     The  level,  or  inverted    "p    was,  I   think,  an   Egyptian
symbol ;  and  if  I  be  not  mistaken,  it  was  sometimes  the  mark  or
brand  on  the  forehead  given  by  the  Jews.     Moreover  the  cross,  as  a
punishment,  was  obviously  well  known  in  the  East  before  the  Chris-
tian era ;  but  still  I  do  not  see  how  or  why  this  symbol  ought  to  be
annexed  to  the  Royal  Arch  degree."

59  It  is  mentioned  in  a  degree  called  the  Knight  of  the  East,  and
is  there  said  to  represent  the  number  three,  the  square  of  nine,  and
the  three  persons  in  the  Godhead.

60  A  writer,  whose  opinions,  however,  are  not  of  much  value,  asserts
that  "  the  triple  phallus  carried  about  at  the  Pamylia,  refers  to  the  Isiac
Table,  and  particularly  to  the  triple  Crux  Ansata  which  is  represented
at  the  top  of  the  spear  which  the  newborn  child  Ilarpocrates  holds
in  both  his  hands."     I  have  some  doubts  of  the  correctness  of  this
assertion,  and  can  only  say  it  has  never  been  my  fortune  to  meet  with
it,  and  my  reading  has  been  somewhat  extensive.


636


[ISTORICAL


LMAKKS


retic  opinions  respecting  its  construction/11  it  is  almost
universally  interpreted  as  a  Christian  symbol.  1  am
inclined  to  think  that  it  was  adopted  in  some  very  early
age  of  the  church,02  as  an  hierogram  to  represent  the
great  I  AM,63  by  whom  the  gloomy  and  shapeless
masses  of  chaos  were  changed  into  order,  regularity,
and  beauty ;  and  probably  used  as  the  sign  or  mark  of

61  Our  ingenious  Bro.  Snowing,  to  whom  I  am  indebted  for  some
valuable  hints,  says  :  "  Upon  an  examination  of  the  tau  cross,  we  find
it  composed  of  right  lines  and  angles.     In  the  inverted  level  ~J~ ,  we
have  an  angle  of  ninety  degrees ;  a  horizontal,  and  a  perpendicular ;
in  forming  of  which  the  tools  of  the  F.  C.  are  necessary.     If  we  turn
from  the  operative  to  the  speculative  application  of  these  tools,  we
find  an  evident  relation  to  the  steps  of  the  E.  A. ;  and  by  the  square,
level,  and  upright,  we  hope  to  arrive,  &c.     Let  us  now  make  these
right  lines  and  angles  thus  h— H,  the  signification  of  which  is  well
known  ;  and  upon  them  let  us  place  the  emblem  of  vitam  eternam,
to  which  we  are  taught  to  believe  they  lead,  and  we  have  the  tau
cross  in  its  triplified  character   \H-{ ."

62  In  the  seventh  century  of  Christianity,  elevated  crosses  of  wood
and  stone  were  erected  in  this  island,  as  trophies  of  victory.     Subse-
quently they  were  placed  in  streets,  where  proclamations  were  made,
and  the  bearers  of  a  corpse  rested  in  their  progress  to  the  church ;  in
market  places  to  serve  as  a  restraint  against  coveteousness ;  in  the
highways,  to  prevent  robbery  by  the  influence  of  religious  feelings ;
in  the  fields,  as  landmarks ;  and  in  primitive  times  the  south  side  of
every  churchyard  contained  a  column  placed  on  a  basement  or  pedestal
surmounted  by  a  cross.     It  was  super  stitiously  believed  that  the
nearer  a  corpse  was  buried  to  the  cross,  the  sooner  would  the  soul  be
released  from  purgatory ;  which  is  one  great  reason  why  the  south
side  of  a  churchyard  contains  the  greatest  number  of  interments ;  for
individuals  had  a  solemn  dread  of  being  buried  in  the  north,  where
there  was  no  cross.

63  In  the  Romish  ceremonial,  a  prelate  has  a  single  cross  borne
before  him;  a  cardinal,  a  double  one;  and  the  pope,  who  styles
himself  God's  vicegerent  upon  earth,  is  distinguished  by  a  triple  cross.


OF    FREEMASONRY.


G37


some  eminent  ecclesiastical  architect,64  and  hence  per-
petuated in  the  system  of  Freemasonry  as  a  Master's
mark.  It  is  thus  represented  on  the  coins  of  the  Greek
empire  under  the  Constantines.65

64  Bro  Willoughby  connects  with  the  cross  of  Christ,  by  a  geome-
trical process,  the  double  cube,  and  the  triple  tau.

"  The  number  seven,"  he  says,  "  is  among  ourselves
looked  upon  as  the  number  of  perfection,  and  the
Mason  who,  through  a  life  of  faith  and  hope,  and
acts  of  charity,  has  reached  the  summit  of  the  theo-
logical ladder,  is  said  to  have  arrived  at  a  degree  of
perfection,  which  is  depicted  by  the  seven  stars  in
the  cube,  (see  vol.  i.  p.  174,)  in  which  figure  I  see
an  allusion  to  the  stone  which  the  builders  rejected,
and  is  now  become  the  head  stone  of  the  corner.
Allow  me  to  draw  your  attention  to  the  third  chapter
of  Zechariah,  (v.  8,  9,)  where  Christ  is  foretold  under
the  names  of  the  Branch  and  the  Corner  Stone.
There  is  a  curious  coincidence  between  the  corner
stone  with  seven  eyes  there  spoken  of,  and  the  per-
fect ashlar  formed  by  the  seven  points,  the  accom-
panying figures,  formed  by  two  intersecting  circles,
being  divided  into  ten  equidistant  points,  will  give
the  dimensions  of  the  tabernacle  and  temple,  the
altar,  the  cross,  and  the  triple  tau."

65  Of  one  of  the  coins  on  which  this  symbol  appears,  Dr.  Walsh
thus  writes  :  "  Justinian  erected  a  statue

in  the  Augusteion,  to  which  he  gave  the
globe  and  cross  which  others  had  confined
to  their  coins.  He  seemed  ambitious  of
distinction  in  minor  points.  He  modified
the  form  of  the  cross  into  that  which  still
continues  in  the  eastern  church  to  be  pecu-
liarly called  the  Greek  cross ;  and  he  bent
down  the  tiara,  so  as  to  give  it  the  shape
of  the  modern  crown  surmounted  by  a


9


088


HI STO R  T C A L    L A N I ) M A R K S


Now  I  am  at  a  loss  to  apprehend  how  it  could
have  happened  that  the  Christian  symbol  should  have
been  preserved  and  perpetuated  in  the  spurious  Free-
masonry ;  and  with  the  selfsame  reference,  viz.,  Inno-
cence and  Eternal  Life,66  if  it  had  not  been  impressed
on  the  darkened  minds  of  the  heathen  by  the  divine
wisdom,  for  the  purpose  of  preparing  them  for  the  easy
reception  of  the  reality  when  it  actually  appeared.67  And
the  device  was  eminently  successful  ;6U  for  after  the

cross,  ns  used  at  present  by  Christian  monarchs.  These  circumstances
are  commemorated  on  his  coins.  The  figure  represents  the  Greek
cross  standing  on  a  pedestal  of  steps."  The  cross  appears  upon
anglo-Saxon  and  Norman  coins;  and  was  exhibited  under  almost
c\  cry  possible  form  before  the  end  of  the  reign  of  Henry  III.  "  Then,"
says  lluding,  "the  only  dillVreiice  between  his  earlier  and  later  coin-
ages is,  that  in  the  former,  the  cross  is  bounded  by  the  inner  circle,
and  has  four  pellets  in  each  quarter ;  whilst  in  the  latter,  it  extends
to  the  outer  circle,  and  the  number  of  pellets  is  reduced  to  three."

66  The  simple  tan  cross  signified  ///<?,  and  was  the  mark  by  which
the  Egyptians  expressed  the  number  ten,  or  heaven.     Now  the  addi-
tion of  the  circle,  as  a  symbol  of  eternity,  to  to  the  T  gives  ^- ,  a
form  in  which  it  repeatedly  occurs  on  Egyptian  monuments,  and
appears  to  denote,  by  the  union  of  the  hieroglyphics,  eternal  life  to
come.

67  St.  Barnabas,  in  his  general  epistle,  thus  moralizes  on  the  sub-
ject :  "  Understand,  therefore,  children,  these  things  more  fully,  that
Abraham,  who  was  the  first  that  brought  in  circumcision,  looking
forward  in  the  spirit  to  Jesus  circumcised,  having  received  the  mys-
tery of  three  letters.     Tor  the  scripture  says  that  Abraham  circum-
cised three  hundred  and  eighteen  men  of  his  house.  But  what  there-
fore was  the  mystery  that  was  made  known  unto  him  ?     Mark,  first
the  eighteen,  and  next  the  three  hundred.     For  the  numeral  letters
of  ten  and  eight  are  IH.,  and  these  denote  Jesus.     And  because  the
cross  was  that  by  which  we  were  to  find  grace,  therefore  he  adds
three  hundred  ;  the  note  of  which  is  T.     Wherefore  by  two  letters
he  signified  Jesus,  and  by  the  third  his  cross."

68  In  a  curious  and  rare  book,  intituled  "  The  Canterburian's  Self-


OF    FREEMASONRY.  039

establishment  of  Christianity,69  when  every  other  in-
ducement was  insufficient  to  wean  .the  idolaters  from
their  senseless  objects  of  worship,70  it  was  readily
accomplished  by  inscribing  them  with  the  sign  of  the
cross.

conviction,"  4to.  1640,  in  the  Scottish  dialect,  no  place  or  printer's
name,  (p.  81,  c.  vi.)  "  anent  their  superstitions,"  is  this  passage: —
"  They  avow  that  signing  with  the  signe  of  the  crosse  at  rysing  or
lying  downe,  at  going  out  or  coming  in,  at  lighting  of  candles,  closing
of  windows,  or  any  such  action,  is  not  only  a  pious  and  profitable
ceremonie,  but  a  very  apostolick  tradition."  A  great  number  of
these  superstitions  may  he  found  in  Sir  H.  Ellis's  notes  to  Brand's
Popular  Antiquities,  vol.  i.  p.  90.

69  The  cross  was  used  in  the  middle  ages  very  abundantly,  for  the
purposes  of  superstition.     In  Boswell's  Life  of  Johnson,  (vol.  iii.
p.  200,)  it  is  observed  :  "  In  the  days  of  superstition,  they  thought
that  holding  the  poker  before  the  fire  would  drive  away  the  witch
who  hindered  the  fire  from  burning,  because  it  made  the  sign  of  the
cross."     The  sight  of  a  single  magpie  is  still  esteemed  unlucky  ;  but
the  omen  may  be  averted  by  "  crossing  it  out,"  as  the  rustics  say  ;
but  plainly  by  making  the  sign  of  the  cross.    Sir  H.  Ellis  has  inserted
a  note  to  the  following  effect  in  his  edition  of  the  Popular  Antiquities,
(vol  iii.  p.  139.)     ''To  sit  cross-legged,  I  have  always  understood
was  intended  to  produce  good  or  fortunate  consequences.     Hence  it
was  employed  as  a  charm  at  school  by  one  boy  who  wished  well  to
another,  in  order  to  deprecate  some  punishment  which  both  might
tremble  to  have  incurred  the  expectation  of.     At  a  card-table  I  have
also  caught  some  superstitious  players  sitting  cross-legged,  with  a
view  of  bringing  good  luck."

70  The  erection  of  upright  stone  crosses  is  generally  supposed  to
have  dated  its  origin  from  the  custom  which  the  first  Christians  in
this  island  adopted  of  inscribing  the  Druid  stones  with  a  cross,  that
the  worship  of  the  converted  Idolater  might  be  transferred  from  the
idol  to  the  emblem  of  his  faith.


640


HISTORICAL    LANDMARKS


LECTURE    XLIX.


THE    DEPARTURE    OF   THE    SCEPTRE    FROM    JUDAH.

"  In  Zerubbabel  the  kingly  power  was  again  restored,  and  continued,
although  with  decreasing  splendour,  till  the  destruction  of  the  city
and  temple  by  the  Romans,  under  the  command  of  Titus  ;  when
Herod,  who  was  not  of  their  own  royal  line,  nor  even  a  Jew,  \v;is
appointed  king;  thus  verifying  the  prophecy  of  Jacob  before  the
Israelites  were  enslaved  by  the  Egyptians,  that  the  sceptre  would  not.
depart  from  Judah,  nor  a  lawgiver  from  between  his  feet,  until  Shilo
come." — OLD  LECTURES.

"  In  that  generation  when  the  son  of  David  shall  come,  the  syna-
gogue shall  be  a  brothel,  Gallilee  shall  be  destroyed,  and  Gibeah
shall  be  a  desolation.  The  wisdom  of  the  scribes  shall  rot,  good  and
merciful  men  shall  fail,  Truth  itself  shall  decay,  and  the  face  of  that
generation  shall  be  like  the  face  of  dogs.  The  son  of  David  shall
not  come,  save  in  a  generation  whose  faces  shall  be  impudent  and
deserving  of  destruction.  When  you  shall  see  generation  after
generation  railing  and  blaspheming,  then  expect  the  feet  of  King
Messiah." — R.  LEVI.

AFTER  the  deliverance  from  Babylonish  captivity,
and  the  rebuilding  of  the  temple  under  Zerubbabel,
the  most  learned  and  pious  Jews  retained  their  alle-
giance to  the  true  God,  and  preserved  their  faith  pure
and  unsullied ;  choosing  death  rather  than  the  aban-
donment of  their  religion  ;  while  others,  seduced  by
the  evil  example  of  the  surrounding  nations,  fell  away
to  idolatry ;  and  the  holy  mountain  of  Moriah  was
frequently  polluted  by  sacrifices  to  demons.  The


OF    FREEMASONRY.  O-H

temple  was  profaned  by  the  abominations  of  the  spu-
ious  Freemasonry,1  even  to  the  preliminary  ceremony2
in  the  holy  porch.3  Both  sexes  joined  with  the  Gentiles
in  celebrating  the  mysteries  of  Bacchus,  and  appeared
in  the  processions  of  the  Bacchantes  as  Periphallia,
bearing  ivy  branches;4  for  which  custom  they  had
been  prepared  by  the  ceremony  of  carrying  vine
branches  at  their  own  feast  of  tabernacles.5  These
were  signs  that  the  sceptre  of  Judah  was  losing  its
authority.  G

1  There  was  an  old  Jewish  tradition  preserved  by  the  Rabbi  Judah,
in  the  Gemara,  that  before  the  Messiah  should  come,  the  house  of
God  should  be  made  a  brothel.     As  an  illustration  of  this  prophecy,
Jesus  Christ  said,  "  My  house  is  called  the  house  of  prayer,  but  ye
have  made  it  a  den  of  thieves."

2  This  ceremony  had  been  practised  there  on  former  occasions,
if  the  letter  from  Jeremiah  to  Baruch  may  be  credited  ;  in  which  he
complains  bitterly  about  it.  (Baruch,  vi.  43.)     The  custom  is  fully
described  by  Strabo,  (1.  xi.  p.  805.)

3  2  Mac.  vi.  4.

4  Ibid,  vi.  7.

5  This  was  a  time  of  great  rejoicing,  and  it  induced  the  heathen  to
believe  that  it  was  a  celebration  of  the  Dionusiaca.     Plutarch  says,
(Symp.  1.  i.  Prob.  3,)  "  In  the  midst  of  the  vintage,  the  Jews  spread
tables  furnished  with  all  manner  of  fruit,  and  live  in  tabernacles
made  of  palm  and  ivy  wreathed  together.-    A  few  days  after,  they
keep  another  festival,  which  we  cannot   doubt  was  dedicated  to
Bacchus,   for  they  carried  boughs  in  their  hands,  with  which  they
went  into  the  temple,  accompanied  by  instruments  of  music."

6  By  the  sceptre  of  Judah  we  are  not  to  understand  that  to  Judah
was  given  the  supremacy  over  the  other  tribes,  for  he  had  no  such
rank.    It  meant  that  the  independant  jurisdiction  of  this  tribe  should
remain  after  all  the  other  tribes  were  dispersed,  and  their  power  had
ceased ;  and  that  it  should  not  be  annihilated  till  after  the  appearance
of  the  Messiah.

VOL.  ii.  T  T


642


HISTORICAL    LANDMARKS


About  170  B.  c.  the  abomination  of  desolation  was
placed  on  the  altar.7  This  was  its  first  appearance8  on
the  holy  mountain  ;'J  for  I  do  not  find  that  Nebuchad-
nezzar ventured  to  insult  the  vanquished  Jews  with
such  wantonness,  as  to  offer  an  idolatrous  sacrifice  in
the  temple.  But  although  this  might  be  a  sign  that
the  sceptre  was  about  to  depart,  yet  it  was  not  to  be
taken  from  them  till  Shilo,  or  their  Messiah,  should

7  At  this  period  Antioclms  Epiplianes  took  Jerusalem,  slew  forty
thousand  of  the  inhabitants,  and  plundered  the  city  and  temple  of  all
their  wealth.     He  seized  the  golden  altar  of  incense,  the  table  of
shewbread,  the  candlesticks,  censers,  bowls,  &c.,  and  also  the  golden
shields,  crowns,  and  other  ornaments,  which  were  preserved  in  the
treasure  chambers.     He  took  away  the  golden  plating  of  the  doors,
and  other  details  of  the  temple ;  the  veil  that  separated  the  holy
from  the  most  holy  place,  and  one  thousand  eight  hundred  talents  of
gold.     He  entered  into  the  most  holy  place  ;  and  in  contempt  of  the
antipathy  which  the  Jews  entertained  to  swine's  flesh,  he  sacrificed  a
sow  upon  the  altar,  and  after  boiling  it,  sprinkled  the  liquor  over
every  part  of  the  temple,  that  he  might  cover  it  with  pollution  and
defilement.

8  "  He  dedicated  the  temple  to  Jupiter  Olympius,  and  set  up  his
statue  on  the  altar  of  burnt  offerings.     Another   lesser   altar  was
raised  before  it,  on  which  they  offered  sacrifices  to  that  false  deity.
All  who  refused  to  come  and  worship  this  idol,  were  either  massacred
or  put  to  some  cruel  torture  till  they  either  complied  or  expired  under
the  hands  of  the  executioners.    At  the  same  time,  altars,  groves,  and
statues,  where  raised  everywhere  through  the  country,  and  the  inha-
bitants compelled  to  worship  them  under  the  same  severe  penalties ;
while  it  was  instant  death  to  observe  the  sabbath,  circumcision,  or
any  other  institution  of  Moses."  (Encyc.  art.  Jews,  5.)

9  "The  idol  was  set  up  in  the  temple  on  the  15th  of  the  month
Cisleu,  which  answers  to  part  of  our  November  and  December ;  but
they  did  not  begin  to  offer  sacrifices  to  it  till  the  25th  of  that  month,
which  was  the  king's  birthday ;  so  that  from  thenceforth  they  con-


OF    FREEMASONRY.  043

come.10  Accordingly,  although  the  temple  was  re-edified
with  great  splendour11  by  Herod,  who  was  not  of  the
royal  line,  nor  even  a  Jew,12  just  before  the  incarnation
of  Christ,  so  as  almost  to  have  equalled  the  temple  of

tinued  sacrificing  to  it  every  25th  day  of  the  month,  till  the  Jewish
religion  and  state. were  restored  by  Judas  Maccabeus."  (Michaelis,
vol.  iii.  p.  56.)

10  Wagenseil  thus  explains  the  passage  :  "  That  royal  power  and
authority  established  in  the  posterity  of  Judah,  shall  not  be  taken
from  them;  or  at  least,  they  shall  not  be  destitute  of  rulers  and
governors,  no  not  when  they  are  in  their  declining  condition,  until
the  coming  of  the  Messiah.     But  when  he  is  come,  there  shall  be  no
difference  between  the  Jews  and  other  nations ;  who  shall  all  be
obedient  to  the  Messiah.    And  after  that,  the  posterity  of  Judah  shall
have  neither  king  nor  ruler  of  their  own ;  but  the  whole  common-
wealth of  Judah  shall  quite  lose  all  form,  and  never  recover  it  again."

11  The  temple  of  Herod  is  described  by  Josephus  as  a  most  mag-
nificent fabric  of  marble,  set  off  with  the  greatest  profusion  of  costly
decorations ;  and  was  the  finest  building  upon  earth  since  the  days
of  Solomon;  being  much  larger  than  the  temple  of  Zerubbabel,
besides  possessing  the  advantage  of  the  Grecian  style  with  all  its
improvements.     It  was  not  completely  finished  till  about  six  years
before  Christ  made  his  appearance.     In  the  arrangement  of  this
work,  Herod  acted  as  Grand  Master;  Hillel  and  Shammai  as  his
Wardens ;  and  Manahem  as  his  Grand  Superintendent  of  Works ;
under  whose  management  ten  thousand  masons,  besides  labourers,
were  employed.     But  instead  of  completing  it  in  seven  years,  as
Solomon  had  done,  this  temple  was  forty-nine  years  in  hand  before
it  was  finally  completed.

12  The  Jews  complained  that  it  was  a  shameful  injustice  in  the
Senate,  to  set  a  private  person  on  the  throne,  who  was  an  Idumcean,
or  half  Jew,  contrary  to  the  Jewish  laws  and  right  of  succession ;  that
if  they  resented  his  receiving  the  crown  from  the  Parthians,  there
were  still  enough  left  of  the  royal  and  sacerdotal  race,  who  had
deserved,  to  the  full,  as  well  of  the  Romans  as  Herod,  and  in  whom
they  might  more  justly  bestow  the  royal  dignity,  (See  Michaelis,
vol.  iii.  p.  155.)

TT2


64 1


HISTORICAL    LANDMARKS


Solomon,13  it  was  little  better  than  "  a  den  of  thieves,"
as  it  was  denominated  by  Jehovah  himself.

By  the  appearance  of  the  Prince  of  Peace  in  this
temple,14  it  was  overshadowed  by  a  parting  ray  of
glory.  The  light  shone  in  darkness,  but  the  darkness
comprehended  it  not.15  The  glory  was  transient.  Its
final  destruction  was  speedily  accomplished,  as  one  of
the  unhappy  consequences  of  his  rejection  and  sacrifice.
To  prove  himself  the  true  Messiah,  he  was  heralded  by
John  the  Baptist,16  who  was  undoubtedly  an  Essenian

13  Tacitus  calls  it  immensoe  opulcnlice  templum.

14  There  is  a  confusion  respecting  the  era  of  Christ's  birtli  which
has  been  introduced  into  Freemasonry,  and  causes  an  apparent  dif-
ference of  four  years  in  the  chronology.     There  are  many  opinions
respecting  the  true  era  of  Christ's  birth.     Some  make  it  seven
thousand  years  from  the  creation,  and  others  not  more  than  half  that
number.     The  most  moderate  party,  however,  agree  with  our  Grand
Chapter,  and  consider  it  to  be  four  thousand  years.     The  question
was  not  finally  settled  till  the  sixth  century,  and  then  it  was  evidently
four  years  too  late,  being  placed  after  the  death  of  Herod,  when,  in
fact,  Christ  was  born  before  his  death,  as  is  evidenced  in  Matthew  ii.
And  his  death  is  accurately  authenticated  by  a  remarkable  eclipse  of
the  moon.     Hence  the  statement  will  be  : —

True  era  of  Christ's  birth,  the  temple  of  Janus  )   A.  A.  c.        4

being  closed )   A.  L.      4000

Vulgar  Christian  era     .         .         .    A.  D.  1846.    A.  L.       1850

15  Would  my  readers  like  to  know  how  Fellows  explains  this
passage  ?     They  shall  hear.     He  says — "  It  alludes  to  a  time  past,
when  the  sun  was  enveloped  in  clouds  in  either  of  the  tropics  ;  and
his  extrication  and  triumph  over  Typhon,  the  prince  of  darkness.
This,"  he  adds,  "  was  the  very  cause  of  the  celebration  here  imitated
by  Freemasons  "  ! ! !

16  The  festival  of  this  saint  is  universally  observed  amongst  the
Craft,  in  every  part  of  the  world,  to  this  day ;  and  the  Grand  Lodges
of  America  have  recently  promulgated  an  order  for  its  celebration.


OF    FREEMASONRY.  645

Freemason;17  he  compelled  the  Wise  men18  to  come
from  the  east  to  acknowledge  and  adore  him,19  on
the  appearance  of  a  supernatural  star.20  The  material

"  There  is  another  deviation,"  says  the  Beport,  "  from  ancient  cus-
tom, to  which  we  hold  it  proper  immediately  to  return.  It  is  the
celebration  of  those  Masonic  festivals,  the  24th  of  June,  and  the
27th  of  December,  which  are  so  generally  observed  by  the  Fraternity
throughout  the  world.  From  the  first  organization  of  this  Grand
Lodge,  (New  York,)  the  practice  of  regulating  the  manner  in  which
the  annual  festivals  should  be  observed,  was  strictly  attended  to  at
the  previous  quarterly  meetings.  And  all  our  Lodges  were  required
to  meet  and  open  on  those  days,  up  to  the  date  when  the  present
regulations  of  the  Grand  Lodge  came  into  operation."

17  Calmet  thinks  that  John  the  Baptist  was  a  member  of  this
Fraternity.

18  "  Of  these  magi,  or  sages,  vulgarly  called  the  three  kings  of
Cologne,  the  first  named  Melchior,  an  aged  man  with  a  long  beard,
offered  gold ;  the  second,  Jasper,  a  beardless  youth,  offered  frank-
incense ;  the  third,  Belthazar,  a  black  or  Moor,  with  a  large  spreading
beard,  offered  myrrh,  according  to  this  distich  : —

Tres  Reges  Kegi  Eegum  tria  dona  ferebant ;
Myrrham  Homini,  Uncto  Aurum,  Thura  dedere  Deo."

(Festa  Anglo-Komana,  p.  7.)

19  In  the  eastern  system  of  idolatry,  when  a  god  was  newly  conse-
crated, they  adopted  many  methods  of  offering  the  incense  of  adora-
tion.    Ezekiel  says  they  lifted  up  their  eyes  to  it ;  Isaiah  adds  that
they  solemnly  blessed  and  sanctified  it  by  ceremonial  purifications ;
and  David  tells  us  that  they  offered  to  it  sweet  savours  and  valuable
gifts,  as  gold,  frankincense,  and  myrrh.    Thus  "  when  the  wise  men
saw  the  young  child,  with  Mary  his  mother,  they  fell  down  and
worshipped  him ;  and  when  they  had  opened  their  treasures,  they
presented  unto   him   gifts,  gold,    and   frankincense,    and  myrrh."
(Mat.  ii.  9—11.)

20  These   men   knew,   doubtless   from   an  authentic  tradition  of
Balaam's  prophecy,  that  an  extraordinary  person  would  appear  in
Judea,  whose  coming  was  to  be  announced  by  a  miraculous  star.
Else  how  could  they  be  induced  to  leave  their  respective  kingdoms


646


HISTORICAL    LANDMARKS


temple  had  been  built  by  Solomon  and  Zerubbabel.
But  the  prophet  speaks  of  another  temple  which  should
flourish  after  the  material  temple  was  destroyed.21  This
was  to  be  raised  by  the  Messiah,22  and  was  no  other
than  the  church  of  God  which  Christ  has  founded  upon
earth,23  and  against  which  the  power  and  policy  of  man
will  not  be  able  to  prevail.

The  Jews  now  lived  under  the  dominion  of  the  Per-
sians,24 the  Egyptians,25  the  Greeks,  and  the  Romans ;

under  its  guidance,  to  ofier  gifts  and  to  worship  ?  Why  should  they
rejoice,  if  they  had  no  grounds  for  believing  that  his  salvation  would
extend  to  the  Gentiles  ?  But  they  came  to  adore  the  newly  conse-
crated God,  pursuant  to  the  customs  of  their  own  country.

21  Consult  an  interesting  volume,  entitled  "  Travels  in  the  Holy
l.aud,  by  an  American."

22  "The  promised  seed  of  Abraham,"  say  the  Jews,  "was  the
constant  object  of  faithful  expectation.    All  the  patriarchal  ordinances,
institutions,  and  predictions,  had  allusion,  either  positive  or  incidental,
to  the  promise  of  the  King  Messiah,  that  from  his  seed,  the  glorious
blessing  should  arise,  and  from  the  tribe  of  Judah ;  and  he  shall  have
the  possession  of  the  whole  universe  by  the  blessing  and  promises  of
the  Divinity  to  his  faithful  patriarch.     The  sceptre  shall  not  depart
from  Judah,  nor  a  lawgiver  from  between  his  feet,  until  Shilo  come,
and  unto  him  shall  the  gathering  of  the  people  be."  (Edrehi,  Ten
Tribes,  p.  197.)

23  The  false  Freemasonry  of  German  illmnmism  was  a  mystical
association ;  and,  to  attract  attention,  it  was  said  to  be  founded  by
Christ  as  its  Grand  Master.     The  apostles,  Peter,  James,  John,  and
Andrew,  were  called  the  ELECT,  as  having  been  admitted  to  the
highest   degree,  and  entrusted  with  the  most  sublime  mysteries  of
the  Order.     The  rest  of  the  apostles  were  of  an  inferior  grade,  or
second  degree,  and  the  seventy  of  the  first,  into  which  Neophytes
only  were  admitted.

2*  Thevenot  assures  us  that  in  Persia  the  Jews  actually  wear  a
piece  of  stuff  on  their  garments  as  a  badge.  It  is  square,  and  about
two  inches  broad,  and  worn  upon  the  breast.  It  is  no  matter  what


OF    FREEMASONRY.  647

but  still  they  were  a  distinct  people,  and  enjoyed  their
own  laws.26  Their  power,  indeed,  was  abridged,  for
they  could  not  execute  a  criminal  without  the  consent
of  the  Roman  governor.27  The  sceptre  was  then  de-
parting ;  and  the  holy  mountain  of  Moriah  was  shortly
afterwards  abandoned  to  utter  ruin.28  Christ  had  pre-
dicted that  when  the  abomination  of  desolation29  should

kind  of  stuff  it  is  made  of,  provided  the  colour  be  different  from  that
of  the  garment.

25  Ptolomy  Philopator  made  a  law,  by  which  all  the  Jews  were  to
have  the  form  of  an  ivy  leaf,  which  was  the  plant  consecrated  to
Bacchus,  imprinted  on  their  body  with  a  hot  iron,  as  a  public  indi-
cation that  they  had  lost  their  liberty.

26  The  authority  of  their  rulers  and  elders  subsisted  under  these
foreign  masters,  as  it  had  while  they  were  in  Egypt ;  and  under  the
Asmonean  princes,  as  it  had  under  the  government  of  the  judges,
and  Samuel,  and  Saul ;  for  in  the  books  of  Maccabees  there  is  frequent
mention  of  the  rulers  and  elders,  and  council  of  the  Jews,  and  of
public  acts  and  memorials  in  their  name.     It  subsisted  to  a  certain
extent  even  in  our  Saviour's  time ;  for  in  the  gospels  the  chief  priests,
and  scribes,  and  elders  of  the  people  are  often  mentioned.

27  Thus  they  said  to  Pilate — "  It  is  not  lawful  for  us  to  put  any
man  to  death."

28  This  event  is  commemorated  in  the  degree  of  Rose  Croix,  which
was  formerly  considered  the  ne  plus  ultra  of  Masonry.     It  has  many
diiferent  titles.    It  was  called  Rose  Croix,  from  the  rose  on  the  cross
of  the  jewel ;  Knight  of  the  Eagle,  because  of  the  eagle  represented
in  the  jewel ;  Knight  of  the  Pelican,  emblematical  of  Jesus  Christ,
who  shed  his  blood  for  our  redemption ;  de  Heredon,  because  the
first  Chapter  was  said  to  be  held  on  a  Scottish  mountain  so  called ;
Knight  of  St.  Andrew,  because  the  first  Masons  made  an  annual  pro-
cession on  the  festival  of  that  saint.     It  is  also  said  that  the  true
construction  of  the  jewel  being  lost,  the  cross  of  St.  Andrew  was
substituted.

29  Josephus  tells  us  (Ant.  1.  xviii.  c.  7),  that  "  when  Vitellius,
Governor  of  Syria,  was  going  to  pass  through  Judea  with  a  Roman


648


HISTORICAL    LANDMARKS


again  pollute  the  temple,  it  should  be  so  completely
destroyed,  that  one  stone  should  not  be  left  standing
upon  another.30  And,  accordingly,  about  forty  years
after  he  had  made  atonement  for  our  sins  upon  the
cross,31  and  during  the  life  of  his  beloved  disciple,
St.  John32  the  Evangelist,33  the  sceptre  finally  departed

army,  to  make  war  upon  the  Arabians,  the  chief  of  the  Jews  met
him,  and  earnestly  entreated  him  to  lead  his  army  another  way ;  for
they  could  not  bear  the  sight  of  those  images  which  were  in  the
ensigns  under  which  they  marched,  they  were  so  abominated  by
them.  These  ensigns,  therefore,  for  the  sake  of  those  images  in  them,
\\rre  abominations  to  the  Jews;  and  by  reason  of  the  desolations
which  were  wrought  under  them  by  the  Roman  armies  in  conquered
nations,  they  were  called  the  abominations  of  desolation ;  and  they
were  never  more  so  than  when,  under  them,  the  Roman  armies
besieged,  took,  and  destroyed  Jerusalem.

30  Luke  xix.  43,  44.

31  The  last  degree  of  Masonry  is  consummated  in  the  crucifixion  of
Christ.     He  who  has  received  it  has  a  right  to  assist  in  all  others
without  being  subjected  to  any  examination.     Before  the  degree  can
be  communicated,  the  candidate  must  prove  that  he  has  been  admitted
as  an  Elu,  Ecossais,  and  a  Knight  of  the  East.     There  are  three
points  or  divisions  in  this  degree,  two  for  reception,  and  the  third
used  only  on  the  most  solemn  occasions.

32  An  American  writer  on  Masonry  (Dr.  Mackey)  says,  that  our
Lodges  were  dedicated  to  the  two  St.  Johns  for  the  following  reasons  :
— "  St.  John  the  Baptist,  by  announcing  the  approach  of  Christ,  and
by  the  mystical  ablution  to  which  he  subjected  his  proselytes,  and
which  was  afterwards  adopted  in  the  ceremony  of  initiation  into
Christianity,  might  well  be  considered  as  the  Grand  Hierophant  of
the  church ;    while  the  mysterious  and  emblematic  nature  of  the
Apocalypse  assimilated  the  mode  of  teaching  adopted  by  St.  John
the  Evangelist,  to  that  practised  by  the  Fraternity."  (Moore's  Mag.
vol.  iii.  p.  7.)

33  An  Asiatic  system,  as  it  was  called,  of  Knights  of  St.  John  the
Evangelist,  was  instituted  about  the  year  1780 ;  and  the  first  active


OE    FREEMASONRY.  649

from  Judah,  in  verification  of  Jacob's  prophecy  before
the  Israelites  were  made  the  slaves  of  the  Egyptians.

The  two  events  named  as  its  forerunners  were  the
corning  of  the  Messiah,34  and  the  calling  of  the  Gentiles;
and  these  show  exactly  the  precise  period  of  time  when
the  sceptre  should  depart.35  Now  it  is  certain,  that
before  the  destruction  of  Jerusalem,  and  the  disso-
lution of  the  Jewish  commonwealth,  the  Messiah  was
not  only  come,36  but  great  numbers  of  the  Gentiles  were
converted  to  him.37  At  this  period  divisions  and  dis-

extender  of  it  was  the  Freiherr  Ecker  von  Eckliofen.  In  this  system
should  be  found  the  pure  explanation  of  all  Masonic  symbols,  signs,
and  words.

34  The  E.  Bechai  confesses  it  right  to  understand  Gen.  xlix.  10,  of
the  Messiah ;  and  that  the  words,  "  till  Shilo  come,"  meant  his  son,
or  proceeding  from  his  seed.     And  the  reason  why  the  word  Beno  is
not  used  in  this  prophecy,  but  Shilo,  is,  because  he  would  empha-
tically express  a  son,  who  should  be  brought  forth  of  his  mother's
womb,  after  the  manner  of  those  that  are  born  of  a  woman.

35  Godwyn  says — "  Some  are  of  opinion  that  the  sceptre,  taken  in
the  first  acceptation,  by  and  to  be  given  to  Judah,  i.  e.,  to  the  twelve
tribes  from  the  time  of  Moses,  and  that  it  was  taken  from  them  fully
in  Herod's  time,  the  coming  of  the  Messiah  being  a  forerunner  of
the  departure  of  the  sceptre.     But  I  rather  think  that  the  principal
thing  aimed  at  in  the  prophecy  is,  that  the  departure  of  the  sceptre
was  a  token  of  the  coining  of  the  Messiah."     Joseph  Scaliger  (Ex
quo  Casaub.  advers  Baron,  p.  19),  however,  positively  asserts  that  the
sceptre  was  not  taken  from  them  until  the  destruction  of  Jerusalem.

36  The  Jewish  writers  all  agree  that  the  sign  of  the  coming  of  the
Messiah  is  the  universal  degeneracy  of  man.     See  the  motto.

37  This  was  predicted  by  our  Saviour  himself. — "  This  gospel  of
the  kingdom  shall  be  preached  in  all  the  world,  for  a  witness  unto  all
nations,  and  then  shall  the  end  come"  (Matt.  xxiv.  14),  the  destruc-
tion of  Jerusalem,  and  the  end  of  the  Jewish  constitution.     And  we
find  that  the  apostles  and  their  companions  preached  the  gospel  in
all  parts  of  the  world.     "  Their  sound  went  into  all  the  earth,  and


050


HISTORICAL    LANDMARKS


putes,  and  bloodshed,  prevailed  within  the  city,  which
rendered  the  inhabitants  an  easy  prey  to  their  enemies.38
Their  ancient  foes,  the  Idumceans,  entered  the  city  and
commenced  an  indiscriminate  slaughter;'39  in  the  midst
of  which  the  Romans  invaded  Jerusalem,  and  having
taken  the  castle,  laid  siege  to  the  temple,  with  the
intention  of  preserving  it  from  destruction.40  The  im-
pulse, however,  which  fulfilled  the  prophecy  of  Christ,

their  words  unto  the  ends  of  the  world."  (Horn.  x.  18.)  And  an
end  was  put  to  the  Jewish  polity  in  church  and  state.

38  Josephus  mentions  many  prodigies  that  ushered  in  the  destruc-
tion of  Jerusalem.     A  strange  comet  hung  over  the  city  one  whole
year,  in  the  shape  of  a  sword ;  an  extraordinary  light  played  round
the  altar  at  the  ninth  hour  of  the  night  during  the  passovcr ;  a  cow,
as  she  was  led  to  the  altar  for  sacrifice,  brought  forth  a  lamb ;  the
eastern  gate  of  the  temple,  made  of  solid  brass,  so  heavy  that  it
required  ten  men  to  open  and  shut  it,  was  flung  open  by  invisible
hands  in  the  middle  of  the  night,  although  secured  with  strong  bolts
and  bars  ;  the  sky,  just  before  sunset,  was  filled  with  the  appearance
of  chariots  and  armed  men  flitting  to  and  fro ;  and  a  voice,  after  a
kind  of  rumbling  noise,  was  heard  distinctly  to  say — "  Let  us  depart,
let  us  depart!"

39  They  plundered  the  houses  and  slew  the  inhabitants ;  but  they
wore  not  so  intent  on  the  destruction  of  the  common  people,  as  on
wreaking  their  vengeance  on  the  priests,  whom  they  no  sooner  found
than  they  beheaded  them,  and  trampled  their  dead  bodies  under  foot.

40  "  As  this  was  the  temple  in  which  Jesus  taught,  it  is  deeply
interesting  to  obtain  a  general  idea  of  its  appearance.     The  area  on
which  it  stood  is  described,  in  general  terms,  as  a  square,  surrounded
by  a  wall  and  cloister.     In  the  centre  of  this  vast  enclosure  (the
court  of  the  Gentiles,  from  which  Christ  expelled  the  traders),  was
a  second  court,  also  surrounded  by  a  wall;  to  this  there  was  an
ascent  by  a  flight  of  steps.     Within  this  court  was  the  noble  temple
itself,  with  its  porticos,  its  golden  front  reflecting  back  a  fiery  splen-
dour when  the  sun  rose  above  the  mountains  of  Arabia.     The  archi-
tecture was  probably  Greek  or  Koman,  fancifully  applied,  and  not,  as


OF    FREEMASONRY.  651

was  irresistible.41  The  Jews  set  fire  to  one  part  and
the  Romans  to  another.42  Every  person  found  about
the  temple  was  slain  ;43  and  with  shouts  of  exultation  the
pagan  standards  were  planted  on  the  holy  mountain.44
The  greater  part  of  the  city  being  consumed  by  fire,
the  soldiers  were  commanded  by  Titus  to  level  the
remainder  with  the  ground.45  This  order  was  so  punc-
tually executed  that,  with  the  exception  of  some  walls

that  of  Solomon,  of  a  Tyrio-Egyptian  character."  (Bartlett's  Jeru-
salem, p.  35  )

41  It  is  a  curious  coincidence  that  at  the  very  same  time,  the  temple
of  Apollo  at  Delphi,  was  overthrown  by  earthquakes  and  fire  from
heaven;  and  neither  of  them  were  ever  rebuilt.     The  concurrence
of  these  circumstances  shows  that  the  coming  of  the  Messiah  was
intended  to  abolish  Jewish  ceremonies  and  heathen  idolatry,  that  the
kingdom  of  Christ  might  be  fully  established  in  the  world.

42  A  soldier  threw  a  burning  brand  through  the  golden  window,
into  the  chambers  on  the  north  side,  and  they  were  immediately  in
flames.     All  the  endeavours  of  Titus  and  his  army  to  extinguish
them  were  ineffectual.     The  fire  soon  communicated  to  the  other
buildings,  and  the  whole  temple  was  presently  in  a  blaze.

43  "  As  the  flames  sprang  up,"  says  Bartlett,  "  the  Jews  uttered  a
cry  of  despair  and  vengeance,  and  madly  rushed  upon  the  swords  of
their  Roman  butchers.     The  rage  and  hate,  which  had  been  months
in  gathering  to  a  head,  now  found  an  awful  issue ;  the  carnage  at  the
foot  of  the  blazing  building  was  horrible."

44  Milman  graphically  describes  the  confusion  and  terror  by  which
the  desolation  was  accompanied. — "  The  shouts  of  the  Roman  soldiers,
as  they  ran  to  and  fro,  and  the  bowlings  of  the  insurgents,  who  were
perishing  in  the  flames,  mingled  with  the  roaring  of  the  conflagration,
and  the  thundering  sound  of  falling  timbers.     The  echoes  of  the
mountains  replied  or  brought  back  the  shrieks  of  the  people  on  the
heights ;  all  along  the  walls  resounded  screams  and  wailings ;  men
who  were  expiring  with  famine,  rallied  their  remaining  strength  to
utter  a  cry  of  anguish  and  desolation."

45  See  Freemasons'  Quarterly  llevicw  for  1838,  p.  183.


652


1STOR1CAL    LANDMARKS


and  towers,46  which  for  their  strength  and  beauty  were
left  as  monuments  to  posterity  of  the  splendour  of  the
city,47  the  whole  was  laid  so  flat  that  there  was  nowhere
left  one  stone  upon  another,48  which  was  not  thrown
down.49  A  ploughshare  was  passed  over  the  founda-

46  Jowett,  in  his  llesearches  in  the  Holy  Land,  minutely  describes
these  ancient  walls.

47  In  the  degree  of  Sovereign  Princes  of  Masonry  it  is  said,  that
when  the  Masons,  who  beheld  with  sorrow  and  regret,  the  temple
utterly  destroyed,  departed  from  Jerusalem,  in  conformity  with  the
recommendation  of  Jesus  Christ — "  Let  him  that  is  in  Judea  flee  to
the  mountains," — after  they  had  embraced  Christianity,  and  deter-
mined never  to  assist  in  constructing  it  again ;  they  divided  them-
selves ipto  companies,  and  migrated  to  different  parts  of  the  earth.
One  party  came  into  Scotland,  and  established  a  Lodge  at  Kilwimiing,
where  they  built  a  town.

48  "  If  Jerusalem  was  destroyed  exactly  forty  years  after  our  Saviour's
death,"  says  the  author  of  the  Harmony  of  the  four  Evangelists
(vol.  i.  p.  487),  "  as  it  is  apparent,  then  that  destruction  of  it  befel
just  in  the  year  of  the  world  4000.     And  so,  as  the  temple  of  Solo-
mon had  been  finished  A.  M.  3000,  so  in  A.  M.  4000  both  the  city
and  the  temple,  that  then  was,  were  destroyed,  never  to  be  repaired
or  rebuilt  again.    And  from  that  time  most  properly  began  the  king-
dom of  heaven  and  the  new  Jerusalem,  when  that  earthly  kingdom
and  that  old  city  were  utterly  ruined."     The  Jews  have  a  prophecy,
which  is  preserved  in  Josippon  (c.  97),  to  the  following  effect: —
"  The  day  will  come,   the  time  of  our  redemption,  and  our  God
will  deliver  us.     He  will  remember  the  oath  made  with  our  fathers,
and  will  build  up  our  city  and  restore  our  temple,  and  gather  our
dispersions,  and  will  bring  back  our  captivity,  and  hasten  the  coming
of  the  Messiah."

19  "  Titus  carried  away  out  of  the  sanctuary  the  golden  table  of
shew-bread,  which  weighed  several  talents ;  the  seven  branch  candle-
stick, a  rich  and  curious  piece  of  art ;  the  sacred  roll  of  the  law,
covered  with  a  costly  gold  cloth,  which  was  considered  the  most
venerable  of  all  the  trophies.  The  two  former  he  placed  in  the  temple


OF    1'REEMASONUY.  653

tions  of  the  temple,50  and  Jerusalem  appeared  as  though
it  had  never  been  inhabited.

Thus  was  the  holy  mountain,  which  God  had  con-
secrated by  his  presence,  suffered  to  be  polluted  by
idolaters.51  And  Jehovah  ordained  that  the  temple
should  never  be  rebuilt,  until  the  final  restoration  of
his  chosen  people.52  Their  temple  being  destroyed/'53

of  Peace,  which  his  father  had  built ;  the  latter,  together  with  several
curious  and  costly  veils,  and  other  rich  furniture  of  the  temple,  he
converted  to  his  own  private  use."  (Jos.  de  bel.  Jud.  1.  vi.  c.  24.)

50  Upon  the  foundations  of  the  temple  an  exquisite  building  was
subsequently  erected  by  the  Saracens,  called  the  Mosque  of  Omar ;
and  to  the  south  of  this,  on  the  extreme  edge  of  the  summit  of  mount
Moriah,  stands  the  venerable  Christian  church  of  the  Virgin,  erected
by  the  Emperor  Justinian,  whose  stupendous  foundations,  remaining
to  this  day,  fully  justify  the  astonishing  description  given  of  the
building  by  Procopius.

51  The  city,  however,  was  subsequently  rebuilt,  although  the  temple
remained  a  perpetual  ruin ;  and  a  degree  has  been  formed  out  of
this  circumstance,  of  which  I  subjoin  a  brief  sketch. — It  gives  an
account  of  the  rebuilding  of  Jerusalem  by  the  Emperor  Adrian  in
120,  and  its  subsequent  domination  under  the  Persians,  Turks,  &c.r
till  the  time  of  the  crusades.     It  speaks  of  the  search  made  by  St.
Helena  for  the  cross  of  Christ ;  and  how  she  discovered  three  crosses
under  the  foundations  of  the  temple  of  Venus ;  that  being  at  a  loss
to  discover  which  of  these  was  the  true  cross,  Pope  Marcellinus
advised  her  to  try  their  efficacy  in  a  case  of  sickness.     Applying  two
of  them  to  a  sick  woman,  they  produced  no  effect ;  but  when  she
placed  her  hand  upon  the  third  she  was  restored  to  her  former  health.
On  the  spot  where  the  crosses  were  found  St.  Helena  erected  a  stately
church.    The  degree,  which  is  called  the  Knights  of  the  Holy  Sepul-
chre, then  speaks  of  the  crusades,  and  of  the  conquests  of  Baldwin
and  Godfrey  de  Bouillon.

52  The  Jews  have  a  tradition,  which  is  preserved  in  the  Gemara,
that  in  the  latter  days,  when  the  covenant  shall  be  completed  by
their  restoration,  the  temple  will  be  rebuilt  on  mount  Moriali,  in  a


054


HISTORICAL    LANDMARKS


and  their  sacred  implements  taken  from  them,54  their

style  of  magnificence  which  shall  greatly  exceed  that  of  King  Solo-
mon. Instead  of  hewn  stone,  they  say,  its  walls  will  be  constructed
of  polished  jasper,  and  ornamented  decorations  of  gold  and  ivory,  and
consecrated  by  the  presence  of  the  Divinity.  At  the  dedication  a
grand  banquet  will  be  prepared,  consisting  of  every  delicacy  the  world
can  produce.  A  leviathan,  fattened  for  the  occasion ;  a  female  behe-
moth ;  and  the  bird  bariuchne,  whose  outstretched  wings  are  of  such
vast  extent,  as  to  obstruct  the  sun's  rays,  are  named  amongst  the
provisions  of  this  august  feast.  "VVine  from  the  vaults  of  Adam  and
Enoch,  miraculously  preserved  from  the  time  of  these  patriarchs,  so
that  its  flavour  increases  in  richness  every  age,  will  be  produced  iu
quantities  which  cannot  be  exhausted ;  and  all  virtuous  Jews,  from
the  time  of  the  deliverance  from  Egyptian  bondage,  will  be  summoned
from  their  graves,  to  be  present  and  partake  of  the  feast ;  at  which
time  a  new  worship  will  be  introduced,  more  pure  and  spiritual  than
anything  which  has  ever  been  practised  from  the  creation  of  the
world.

53  In  the  degree  of  Knight  of  K — H.,  the  transmission  of  Tree-
masonry  in  the  first  ages  of  Christianity,  is  thus  explained  : — After
the  temple  of  Zerubbabel  and  Herod  were  destroyed,  the  Masons
endeavoured  to  produce  a  reformation  of  manners ;  and  as  the  ma-
terial edifice  was  forbidden  to  be  rebuilt,  they  endeavoured  to  con-
struct in  their  arts  a  spiritual  and  moral  temple.  Manchin  was  a
noted  person  amonst  this  class  of  Masons,  and  in  his  time  a  large
section  of  them  embraced  Christianity,  and  formed  themselves  into
Lodges,  living  together  like  a  family  of  Brethren.  Towards  the  sixtli
century,  the  Order  sadly  decreased,  although  there  were  still  found  a
few  zealous  Masons,  by  whose  exertions  it  was  prevented  from  falling
into  oblivion.  In  the  year  1118,  eleven  Grand  Elect  and  Perfect
Masons  appeared  before  Garinus,  Prince  of  Jerusalem,  and  requested
him  to  accept  the  office  of  their  Grand  Master.  An  alliance  was
formed  between  these  princes  to  re-establish  in  Jerusalem  the  worship
of  the  Most  High.  But  the  result  of  the  crusades  being  unfavour-
able, they  were  obliged  to  perform  their  vows  in  theory ;  and  there-
fore they  do  not  admit  any  into  their  order  but  such  as  have  sig-
nalized themselves  by  the  practice  of  brotherly  love,  relief,  and  truth.

14  I  introduce  a  copy  of  a  bas-relief  from  the  triumphal  arch  of


OF    FREEMASONRY.  055

sacrifices  were  of  course  abolished,  their  ceremonial
law  rescinded,55  the  royal  stock  of  Judah  extinct,56  and
themselves  dispersed  over  the  face  of  the  earth.57  The

Titus,  to  show  the  forms  of  the  golden  candlestick,  and  other  imple-
ments and  vessels,  which  were  borne  in  procession  by  the  captive
Jews.  Vide  engraving.

55  "  It  was  not  intended  that  the  religion  of  the  Jews  should  subsist
entire  after  the  destruction  of  Jerusalem,  which  was  the  seat  of  the
Sanhedrim,  to  whose  decisions  the  Jews  were  obliged  to  submit.  For
which  reason  the  Rabbis,  in  their  histories,  principally  endeavoured
to  show,  that  notwithstanding  the  deplorable  condition  to  which  their
nation  was  reduced,  by  so  many  banishments  into  divers  kingdoms,
they  had  not  lost,  however,  their  traditions,  because  they  imagine
their  famous  schools  or  academies,  where  those  traditions  have  been
always  taught,  have  preserved  them.  Though  they  could  boast  no
longer  of  any  infallible  consistories,  yet  they  insist  that  they  ever  had
a  succession  of  men  who  took  upon  them  the  dignity  of  Nasci,  or
Principal  of  the  Sanhedrim,  and  there  are  some  persons  amongst  the
Jews,  even  to  this  day,  who  assume  that  title  to  themselves  as  a  mark
of  honour."  (Cer.  of  the  Jews,  c.  69.)

50  The  government  of  the  tribe  of  Judah  had  subsisted  in  one  form
or  another  from  the  death  of  Jacob  to  the  last  destruction  of  Jeru-
salem, and  then  it  was  utterly  ruined ;  and  soon  the  distinction  of
tribes  was  in  a  manner  lost.  They  are  all  Jews  at  the  present  day  ;
but  the  tribe  of  Judah  is  so  far  from  bearing  rule,  that  they  are  uncer-
tain which  is  the  tribe  of  Judah ;  they  exercise  dominion  nowhere,
but  everywhere  live  in  subjection.

57  The  modern  Jews  boast  of  their  dispersion  and  preservation  as
a  mark  of  the  divine  favour.  "  The  preservation  of  the  Jewish  nation,"
says  one  of  their  Rabbis,  "  is  a  signal  and  illustrious  act  of  Divine
Providence.  They  are  dispersed  amongst  all  nations,  and  not  con-
founded with  them  ;  the  drops  of  rain  that  fall,  and  the  great  rivers
which  flow  into  the  ocean,  are  mingled  and  lost  in  that  great  and
immense  body  of  water ;  and  such  would  have  been  the  fate  of  the
Jewish  nation  In  the  ordinary  course  of  nature  they  would  have
been  mingled  and  lost  in  the  common  mass  of  mankind,  but  they
flow  in  all  parts,  blended  with  all  nations,  and  yet  are  religiously  and


656


HISTORICAL    LANDMARKS


sceptre  had  finally  departed  from  Judah,M  and  Shilu
was  indeed  come.

civilly  separated  from  all ;  they  still  remain  in  their  faith  a  distinct
people ;  they  are  unable  to  live  conformably  to  their  laws ;  they
nowhere  elect  their  own  magistrates,  nowhere  exercise  the  whole  of
their  religion,  intolerance  restrains  them ;  they  are  checked,  bruised,
and  contemned ;  yet  they  are  wonderfully  saved  and  preserved  from
oppression,  like  their  ancestors,  Moses  in  the  bulrushes,  or  Daniel  in
the  lions'  den.  Human  power  is  frustrated,  and  there  is  no  destroying
those  whom  God  chooses  to  preserve."

58  Simeon  explains  this  clearly.  He  says — "  The  ten  tribes  were
spoiled  of  their  power  when  they  wore  carried  captive  to  Assyria ;
but  the  tribe  of  Judah  retained  both  their  ecclesiastical  and  civil
polity  even  in  Babylon.  If  they  did  not  exercise  it  to  the  same
extent  as  before,  they  had  by  no  nu-ans  wholly  lost  it.  As  they  had
possessed  it  in  Egypt,  and  retained  it  the  whole  time  of  their  Egyptian
bondage,  so  they  still  nominated  their  priests  and  elders  while  they
were  oppressed  with  the  Chaldean  yoke.  Their  bondage  in  Babylon
was  exceedingly  heavy ;  but  many  of  them  were  suffered  to  build
houses  and  plant  gardens,  and  to  live  rather  as  a  colony  than  as
slaves.  On  their  return  from  Babylon,  their  own  chiefs  and  elders
were  appointed  to  superintend  the  execution  of  Cyrus's  decree ;  and
after  that  period  they  continued  to  enjoy  their  privileges  till  the  time
of  our  Lord's  advent.  Soon  after  that  they  were  reduced  to  the  state
of  a  Roman  province  ;  but  still  exercised  the  same  powers,  only  in  a
more  limited  manner.  But  forty  years  after  the  death  of  Christ,
when  his  gospel  had  been  fully  preached,  and  people  of  all  nations  had
been  gathered  to  him,  their  city  and  temple  were  utterly  destroyed,
and  they  themselves  dispersed  into  all  lands.  Prom  that  time  their
sceptre  has  utterly  departed  from  them ;  nor  can  the  smallest  vestige
of  their  former  power  be  traced.  They  are,  therefore,  living  proofs
throughout  the  whole  world  that  their  Messiah  is  indeed  come."


OF    FREEMASONRY.  057


LECTURE    L.

COROLLARY.

"  Let  us  hear  the  conclusion  of  the  whole  matter.  Fear  God  and
keep  his  commandments,  for  this  is  the  whole  duty  of  man.  For
God  shall  bring  every  work  into  judgment,  with  every  secret  thing,
whether  it  be  good  or  whether  it  be  evil." — ECCLESIASTES.

"  Cultivating  brotherly  love,  the  foundation  and  cope  stone,  the
cement  and  glory,  of  this  ancient  Fraternity,  avoiding  all  wrangling
and  quarrelling,  all  slander  and  backbiting ;  not  permitting  others  to
slander  any  honest  Brother,  but  defending  his  character,  and  doing
him  all  good  offices,  as  far  as  is  consistent  with  your  honour  and
safety,  and  no  farther;  that  all  may  see  the  benign  influence  of
Masonry,  as  all  true  Masons  have  done  from  the  beginning  of  the
world,  and  will  do  to  the  end  of  time.  Amen,  so  mote  it  be."

ANCIENT  CHARGE.

Koy£  O/x?ra£.     "  Watch  and  abstain  from  evil." — CHARGE  AT  THE

CLOSE  OF  THE  SPURIOUS  FREEMASONRY  OP  GREECE.

%

HAVING  brought  the  lectures  to  a  conclusion,  nothing
now  remains  but  to  take  a  brief  view  of  the  general
doctrines  which  they  inculcate,  and  the  truths  which
they  impart.  And  this  will  show  that  Freemasonry  is
not  the  useless  institution  which  some  affect  to  think
it,  and  bestow  considerable  pains  to  persuade  others
that  their  decision  is  correct.

The  principal  object  I  have  had  in  view  has  been  to
deduce  from  the  science  of  Freemasonry  a  series  of
proofs,  in  corroboration  of  the  fact  contained  in  the

VOL.  II.  U  U


658


HISTORICAL    LANDMARKS


sacred  writings,  that  the  design  of  God,  throughout
the  whole  of  his  dispensations,  was  to  prepare  the
minds  of  men  for  the  development  of  the  great  plan  of
human  redemption  by  an  atonement  for  sin,  to  be
wrought  out  by  the  sacrifice  of  the  word  of  God,  the
Messiah  of  the  Jews,  and  the  founder  of  the  Christian
scheme  of  salvation.

The  evidences  of  this  fact  are  numerous  and  con-
clusive, and  prove  beyond  the  slightest  doubt  that  the
G.  A.  O.  T.  U.,  who  declared  his  NAME  to  Moses  at  the
burning  bush,  appeared  on  earth  at  the  time,  and  in
the  place,  which  had  been  foretold  by  the  Jewish
prophets,  divested  of  his  external  splendour ;  that  he
attested  the  truth  of  his  mission  by  the  most  stupendous
miracles,  and  terminated  his  efficacious  atonement  by
a  public  ascension  into  the  cloudy  pillar,  or  Shekinah,
which  hovered  above  the  mount  of  Olives ;  and  that
the  consecutive  steps  of  this  great  scheme  have  been
embodied  in  the  system  of  Freemasonry.  It  has  there-
fore been  shown  that  the  Historical  Landmarks  consist
of  certain  prominent  facts  recorded  in  the  Jewish  scrip-
tures, which  have  been  received  in  all  ages,  both  be-
fore and  after  the  advent  of  Christ,  as  typical  of  the
Redeemer  of  man,  and  of  him  only.

If  it  be  admitted  that  the  Order  contains  abundant
references  to,  and  explanations  of  the  promise  made  to
our  first  parents ;  in  the  offering  of  Isaac ;  the  pro-
phecy of  Jacob  respecting  the  coming  of  Shilo,  when
the  sceptre  should  depart  from  Judah ; l  the  commu-

1  The  fabricators  of  our  Royal  Arch,  I  am  persuaded,  intended  it
to  be  substantially  a  Christian  degree,  else  they  would  scarcely  have
embodied  so  direct  a  reference  to  the  advent  of  the  Redeemer  as  the


OF    FREEMASONRY.  059

nication  of  the  Tetragrammaton  to  Moses ;  the  rod  and

prophecy  of  Jacob,  which  formed  a  conspicuous  part  of  the  original
illustration ;  corroborated  by  the  two  principal  symbols  of  the  degree,
viz.,  the  cross  of  Constantine,  called  the  triple  tau,  and  the  double
triangle,  referring  to  the  two  natures  of  Christ.  This  latter  emblem
is  frequently  represented  with  five  points  only,  as  an  endless  triangle,
thus  3JL.  It  was  the  Pythagorean  pentalpha,  and  the  pentangle  of
Solomon ;  and  in  one  or  other  of  its  different  forms  constituted  the
famous  seal  of  our  ancient  G.  M.,  which  was  said  to  bind  the  evil
genii  so  fast,  that  they  were  unable  to  release  themselves.  Thus  the
genius  in  the  Arabian  Nights  says,  "  Solomon,  the  son  of  David,
commanded  me  to  swear  fealty,  and  submit  myself  to  him,  which  I
refused.  To  punish  me,  he  shut  me  up  in  this  copper  vessel,  and  to
make  sure  of  me,  that  I  should  not  break  prison,  he  himself  stamped
upon  this  leaden  cover  his  seal,  with  the  great  name  of  God  engraven
upon  it.  Then  he  gave  the  vessel  to  one  of  the  genii  who  submitted
to  him,  with  orders  to  throw  me  into  the  sea."  Christians  used  it
to  represent  the  five  wounds  of  Christ,  as  in  the  figure  engraved  in
the  Theocratic  Philosophy,  p.  169.  And  there  is  a  legend  in  Eeuben
Butler's  "  Lives  of  the  Saints,"  of  St.  Francis  receiving  the  stigmata
of  Christ  after  the  same  fashion.  The  double  triangle  was  adopted
by  our  ecclesiastical  architects  at  a  very  early  period,  to  embody  the
idea  of  the  union  of  the  divine  and  human  natures  of  Christ,  as  may
be  seen  in  the  high  altar  of  the  Temple  church,  the  cathedrals  of
Lincoln,  Lichfield,  and  many  other  places  ;  and  it  is  found  combined
with  the  circle  and  rose,  as  the  ornament
of  a  keystone  in  a  crypt  in  St.  Sibald's,  at
Nuremburgh,  as  in  the  subjoined  engraving.
It  is  singular  that  this  diagram  should  be
a  transcript  of  the  Name  inscribed  on  the
Foundation  Stone  of  Masonry,  and  consti-
tuted the  actual  seal  of  Solomon,  which,  is
represented  as  "  a  double  triangle  inclosed
within  a  circle,  having  in  the  centre  a
flower."  By  virtue  of  this  seal,  as  the  Moslems  believed,  Solomon
compelled  the  genii  to  assist  him  in  building  the  Temple  of  Jerusalem,
and  many  other  magnificent  works.

u  u  2


GOO


OUK'Al.     I.  \\DMAKKS


serpent ;  the  deliverance  of  the  Israelites  from  bondage  ;
the  wanderings  in  the  wilderness ;  the  tabernacle  and
its  appendages ;  the  Urim  and  Thuminini ;  the  esta-
blishment of  a  priesthood ;  the  banners  of  the  twelve
tribes;  the  brazen  serpent;  the  passage  of  the  river
Jordan;  Jeptha  and  the  Ephraimites ;  the  vision  of
David  on  mount  Moriah ;  the  building  of  the  temple
by  Solomon ;  the  Babylonish  captivity  and  deliverance
thence ;  the  erection  of  the  second  temple  by  Zerub-
babel,  &c. ; — it  will  be  impossible  to  deny  that  l;ree-
masonry  has  been  made  a  vehicle  to  embody  the  most
prominent  types  of  the  Messiah — the  founder  of  the
Christian  religion,  celebrated  in  blue  Masonry  as  the
G.  A.  O.  T.  U.,  and  in  red  Masonry,2  as  the  King,
Priest,  and  Prophet  of  his  people.3

-  While  speaking  of  blue  and  red  Masonry,  it  may  not  be  amiss  to
observe  that  there  is  some  diversity  in  the  colours  enjoined  by  the
different  Grand  Chapters.  In  Ireland,  the  Grand  officers  wear  light
blue ;  in  England,  garter-blue ;  and  in  Prance,  orange.

3  Our  Hebrew  Brethren,  and  all  who  favour  their  views,  exclude
Christianity  altogether  from  the  system  of  Freemasonry ;  and  a  Mason
of  my  acquaintance  prescribes  the  line  which,  in  his  opinion,  ought
to  be  drawn.  He  says — "  The  three  first  degrees  form  a  bond  of
brotherly  love,  relief,  and  truth,  between  all  who  acknowledge  a
Supreme  Being ;  and  I  am  much  averse  to  introducing  anything  into
blue  Lodges  which  may  tend  to  injure  the  universal  bond ;  and  this
must  be  the  case  if  we  make  allusion  to  Christianity,  or  prove,  or
try  to  prove,  that  the  three  first  degrees  have  a  Christian  reference.
Were  I  to  draw  up  a  series  of  lectures,  I  would  refrain  from  chris-
tianizing one  single  topic  in  blue  Masonry,  and  draw  every  expla-
nation, either  from  the  Bible  previous  to  Solomon's  temple,  or  from
the  Egyptian  or  Eleusinian  mysteries,  or  astronomy,  or  all  these
combined."  Hutchinson,  Stephen  Jones,  Watson,  Inwood,  and  a
host  of  modern  writers,  are  express  in  favouring  the  contrary  opinion.


OF    FREEMASONRY.  661

The  conclusion  is  therefore  obvious.  If  the  lectures
of  Freemasonry  refer  only  to  events  which  preceded
the  advent  of  Christ  (for  I  do  not  include  Templary  in
these  observations,  because  it  is  professedly  Christian),
and  if  those  events  consist  exclusively  of  admitted  types
of  the  Great  Deliverer,  who  was  preordained  to  become
a  voluntary  sacrifice  for  the  salvation  of  mankind,  "  a
light  to  lighten  the  Gentiles,  and  the  glory  of  the  people
of  Israel,"  it  will  clearly  follow  that  the  Order  was
originally  instituted  in  accordance  with  the  true  prin-
ciples of  the  Christian  religion;  and  in  all  its  conse-
cutive steps  bears  an  unerring  testimony  to  the  truth  of
the  facts,  and  of  their  typical  reference  to  the  founder
of  our  faith.

That  such  were  the  views  embraced  by  the  Masons

I  am  in  possession  of  a  voluminous  correspondence  on  the  subject.
One  Brother  says — "  My  greatest  desire  with  regard  to  Masonry  is,
that  it  should  continue  to  be  what  it  originally  was,  a  beautiful  but
figurative  system,  under  the  veil  of  which  is  concealed  some  of  the
most  sublime  truths  of  Christianity,  and  the  doctrine  of  human
redemption."  Another  observes — "  I  fully  agree  with  you  as  to  the
direct  allusion  in  all  the  degrees  of  Freemasonry  to  the  religion  of
Christ.  The  light  on  this  subject  becomes  clearer  in  each  succeeding
degree,  and  is,  I  think,  brought  to  a  full  effulgence  in  the  exquisite
mysteries  of  the  Hose  Croix."  While  a  third,  though  entertaining
the  same  opinions,  confines  the  interpretation  within  certain  limits.
He  asks — "  Did  it  ever  occur  to  you  that  Freemasonry  is  entirely  a
Christian  institution,  and  that  the  story  of  Hiram  was  got  up  about
the  fifth  or  sixth  century  ?  I  am  very  unwilling  to  allow  this ;  but
there  are  several  circumstances  which  favour  the  hypothesis ;  at  all
events,  it  has  undergone  so  many  alterations  to  adapt  it  to  the
Christian  religion,  that  the  original  secret  history  has  probably  been
long  since  lost.  There  cannot  be  a  doubt  but  the  events  of  the  third
degree  are  an  allegory  to  represent  the  resurrection  of  Christ."


662


HISTORICAL    LANDMARKS


who  were  instrumental  in  the  revival  of  the  Order  at
the  beginning  of  the  last  century,  we  have  the  most
indisputable  evidence.  For  not  only  were  the  Lodges
figuratively  reputed  to  be  held  in  the  vale  of  Jehoshaphat,
where,  as  the  early  Christians  firmly  believed,  the  final
judgment  would  be  celebrated,  at  which  Jesus  Christ
would  appear  with  his  holy  angels  amidst  the  clouds  of
heaven  ;4  but  they  used  a  Christian  prayer  at  initiations
which  was  of  great  antiquity  in  the  Order  ;5  not  only

4  This  was  a  Jewish  tradition,  but  it  was  eagerly  embraced  by  the
Christians  for  the  first  twelve  centuries  of  Christianity ;  and  the  belief
is  yet  scarcely  eradicated.  The  judgment-seat  of  Christ  was  assigned
to  the  mount  of  Olives.  (See  Gerhard  de  Extremo  Judicio,  p.  60.)
Mi*.  Sandys  (Trav.  p.  146),  describing  this  valley,  says — "  It  is  where
the  general  judgment  shall  be,  if  the  Jews  or  Latins  may  be  believed,
who  ground  their  opinions  upon  the  prophecy  of  Joel ;  which  I  will
not  gainsay,  since  some  of  our  divines  have  of  late  so  laboured  to
approve  it."  To  this  Lamartin  adds — "  The  valley  of  Jehoshaphat
is  celebrated  in  the  traditions  of  three  religions,  where  the  Jews,
Christians,  and  Mahomedans  agree  in  placing  the  terrible  scene  of
the  supreme  judgment ;  which  has  already  seen  upon  its  borders  the
greatest  scene  of  the  evangelic  drama — the  tears,  the  groans,  and
the  death  of  Christ.  Here  all  the  prophets  have  passed  in  their
turn,  in  uttering  a  cry  of  sadness  and  horror,  which  seems  to  resound
there  still ;  and  must  one  day  hear  the  noise  of  the  torrent  of  souls
rolling  before  God,  and  appearing  of  themselves  for  the  award  of
their  fatal  judgment."  See  Joel  iii.  12.

5 1  find  this  prayer  printed  in  the  Freemasons'  Pocket  Companion,
A.  i>.  1764,  in  the  following  form: — "  A  Prayer  to  be  used  of
Christian  Masons  at  the  empointing  of  a  Brother,  used  in  the
reign  of  Edward  IV. — The  mighty  God  and  Father  of  heaven,  with
the  wisdom  of  his  glorious  Son,  through  the  goodness  of  the  Holy
Ghost,  that  hath  been  three  persons  in  one  Godhead,  be  with  us  at
our  beginning,  give  us  grace  to  govern  in  our  living  here,  that  we
may  come  to  his  bliss  which  shall  never  have  an  end."


OF    FREEMASONRY.  663

do  we  find  frequent  references  to  Christianity  in  the
public  charges  of  Desaguliers,  Martin  Clare  (whose
lectures  were  used  by  all  the  English  Lodges  on  the
authority  of  the  Grand  Lodge),  Dunckerley,  and  other
eminent  Masons  high  in  office,6  but  in  the  very  first
Masonic  lecture  which  was  adopted  by  the  Grand
Lodge  after  its  revival,  and  supposed  to  be  the  joint
production  of  Anderson  and  Desaguliers,  the  latter  of
whom  was  Grand  Master  of  English  Ereemasonry  in
1719,  we  find  it  stated  as  a  reason  why  the  Lodges
were  dedicated  to  St.  John  the  Baptist,  "  because  he
was  the  forerunner  of  our  Saviour,  and  laid  the  first
parallel  line  of  the  gospel ;"  and  the  letter  —  is  there
explained  as  referring  to  "  the  Grand  Architect  of
the  Universe,  or  Him  that  was  taken  up  to  the  top
pinnacle  of  the  holy  temple."  It  also  contained  the
usual  references  to  the  theological  and  cardinal  virtues,
which  are  exclusively  the  appendages  to  Christianity.

It  is  equally  clear  from  authentic  records,  that  the
same  doctrine  existed  amongst  Masons  of  still  higher

6  A  collection  of  these  testimonies  may  be  found  in  the  "  Star  in
the  East,  ch.  2."  The  Ahiman  Eezon,  or  Book  of  Constitutions
used  by  the  ancient  division  of  Freemasons,  which  separated  from
the  Grand  Lodge  of  England  about  the  year  1736,  introduces  this
Christian  maxim  in  an  enumeration  of  the  true  principles  of  the
Craft — "  A  Mason  is  obliged  by  his  tenure  to  believe  firmly  in  the
true  worship  of  the  eternal  God,  as  well  as  in  all  those  sacred  records
which  the  dignitaries  and  fathers  of  the  church  have  compiled  and
published  for  the  use  of  good  men ;  ever  making  that  golden  precept
the  standing  rule  of  his  actions,  which  engages  to  do  unto  all  men
as  he  would  they  should  do  unto  him."  (Ed.  1813,  p.  18.)  This  is
an  undeniable  proof  that  the  ancient  Brethren  esteemed  English
Masonry  to  be  essentially  Christian.


064


HISTORICAL    LANDMARKS


antiquity.  In  the  document  called  the  Charter  oi
Colne,  the  following  account  of  the  origin  of  the  name
of  Freemasonry  is  promulgated : — "  It  does  not  appear
to  us  that  before  the  year  1440  this  society  was  known
by  any  other  name  than  that  of  JOHN'S  BROTHERS  ;7
but  that  they  then  began  to  be  called  at  Vallenciennes
Free  and  Accepted  Masons ;  at  which  time,  in  some
part  of  Flanders,  by  the  assistance  and  riches  of  the
Brotherhood,  the  first  hospitals  were  erected  for  the
relief  of  such  as  were  afflicted  with  St.  Anthony's  fire.
Although  in  the  exercise  of  charity  and  benevolence
\\ r  neither  regard  country  nor  religion,  yet  we  consider
it  both  necessary  and  prudent  to  initiate  no  one  into
our  mysteries,  except  those  who  profess  the  Christian
religion."

And  in  a  MS.  of  still  more  ancient  date,  now  in  the
British  Museum,  we  have  a  distinct  testimony  to  the
same  effect.  This  MS.  professes  to  explain  the  ancient
history  and  principles  of  Freemasonry,  the  original  of
which  is  dated  in  the  tenth  century,  and  was  written
in  Saxon  during  the  reign  of  Athelstan.  It  commences
as  follows  : — "  The  Almighty  Father  of  Heaven,  with
the  wisdom  of  the  glorious  Son,  through  the  goodness
of  the  Holy  Ghost,  three  persons  in  one  Godhead,  be
with  our  beginning,  and  give  us  grace  so  to  govern
our  lives  that  we  may  come  to  his  bliss,  which  shall
never  have  an  end."

There   is   a   passage   in   Dr.   Hernming's   charge,

7  The  two  parallels  of  ancient  Masonry  have  been  ejected  from  the
English  lectures,  although  the  articles  of  union  make  it  imperative
to  hold  the  United  Grand  Lodge  and  annual  festival  on  St.  John's
clay.  (Art,  i.)


O*1    FREEMASONRY.  665

enjoined  by  the  United  Grand  Lodge  to  be  recited  at
the  initiation  of  every  Brother,  which  forms  a  striking
evidence  that  English  Freemasonry  was  considered  to
bear  a  Christian  reference  at  the  great  reunion  of  the
Order  in  1 8 1 3 .  The  Worshipful  Master  there  instructs
the  candidate  to  be  .  ever  mindful  of  "  the  important
duties  which  he  owes  to  God,  his  neighbour,  and  him-
self." Now  what  is.  this  but  a  paraphrase  upon  the
words  of  our  blessed  Saviour,  when  he  told  his  disciples
that  the  duty  of  mankind,  as  his  followers,  consists  in
loving  God  with  all  their  heart,  and  their  neighbour  as
themselves.  These  are  the  sentiments  of  Masonry,8  as
promulgated  by  the  Grand  Lodge  of  England ;  and  the
Fraternity  are  bound  by  their  allegiance  to  receive  them
as  the  dictates  of  truth,  and  yield  to  them  an  implicit
obedience.

I  have  been  anxious  to  establish  this  great  truth,
because,  if  Ereemasonry  does  not  contain  any  direct
references  to  our  holy  religion,  its  morality,  beautiful

8  Dr.  Slade  P.  G.  Chaplain  for  Staffordshire,  is  very  energetic  in
his  proof  of  this  important  fact.  In  a  Masonic  Sermon  preached  at
Wolverhampton,  in  1841,  he  says  :  "  Charity,  or  brotherly  kindness,
is  fundamentally  as  much  a  Masonic  as  it  is  a  Christian  virtue.  It
is  professedly  the  ruling  principle  of  the  Masonic  as  it  is  of  the
Christian  faith.  The  advent  of  the  Messiah's  kingdom  was  an-
nounced by  angels  with  this  celestial  chorus — Glory  to  God  on  high,
peace  on  earth,  goodwill  towards  men.  And  the  standard  of  Free-
masonry bears  upon  its  banner,  in  golden  characters,  the  same  token
of  its  divine  mission.  The  Gospel  of  Christ,  the  Epistles  of  his
Apostles,  teach  one  faith  on  this  article  of  a  Christian's  creed.  The
records  and  lectures  of  Masonry  take  no  other  basis  for  instruction
and  initiation  into  its  mysteries."  And  in  the  same  sermon,  he
justly  speaks  of  Christianity  and  Freemasonry  as  fraternities  united
in  one  and  the  same  bond.


666


HISTORICAL  LANDMARKS


though  it  be,  would  not  be  sufficient  to  save  it  from
the  effects  of  public  obloquy  in  this  Christian  country.9
For  though  it  is  freely  admitted  to  be  an  universal
system,  embracing  in  its  wide-spreading  arms  the
Christian,  the  Jew,  the  Mohammedan,  and  the  Hindoo,
yet  with  the  former,  the  types  and  symbols,10  the  graces

9  An  intelligent  correspondent,  whose  knowledge  of  Masonry  is
very  extensive,  thus  writes  to  me  on  this  point :  "  I  do  not  know  if
you,  who  consider  Masonry  of  little  use  unless  connected  with  Chris-
tianity, are  aware  of  the  singular  interpretation  that  may  be  giv^en  to
the  words  and  pass-words  of  the  three  degrees,  when  written  as  a
sentence  in  llrbivw,  and  read  from  right  to  left.     Being  transposed
according  to  our  mode  of  reading,  tin-  iiu-aning  of  the  words  will
stand   as   follows,   the   italics   being   supplementary ;    and   it  will
be  observed,  that   c  the  Smitten   Son,'   means    '  the  Builder,'   or
G.A.O.T.U.

M.  M.  PASS.

The  Smitten  Son  shall  bring  back  the  possession :

F.  C.  PASS.  E.  A.  P.

He  shall  establish  it  in  the  Lord,  in  plenty,  and  in  strength.

I  do  not  mean  to  say  that  this  was  really  the  -meaning  of  those  who
got  up  the  words,  but  it  is  a  remarkable  coincidence.  In  some
antiquities  in  the  Isle  of  Man  which  I  have  seen,  there  is  a  similar
illustration  of  the  names  of  the  Patriarchs,  from  Adam  to  Noah,
showing  that  when  placed  together,  they  formed  one  of  the  most
remarkable  prophecies  of  the  Messiah.  The  author  argues  that  these
names  were  given  intentionally,  to  keep  it  in  remembrance."

10  In  truth,  Christianity  is  actually  that  universal  religion  which
is  destined  to  supersede  all  others ;  and,  in  God's  good  time,  it  will
spread  over  the  whole  earth  "  as  the  waters  cover  the  sea."     Con-
sult the  Prophecy  in  Isai,  xi.     The  Eev.  Salem  Town,  Grand  Chap-
lain, in  his  System  of  Speculative  Freemasonry,  p.  24,  published
under  the  sanction  of  the  Grand  Chapter  of  New  York,  thus  expresses
himself  on  this  point :  "In  speculative  Masonry,  we  discover  the
wisdom  of  God  in  the  symmetry  of  nature,  and  the  finger  of  Provi-
dence in  the  government  of  the  world.     The  great  outlines  in  the


OF    FREEMASONRY.  667

and  virtues,  can  be  no  other  than  those  which  are
recommended  and  explained  in  the  Gospel,  and  the
Being  to  whom  all  prayers  and  aspirations  in  the  Lodge
are  addressed,  and  in  whose  name  the  obligations  are
sealed,  even  T.  G.  A.  O.  T.  U.,  can  only  be  Jehovah
or  Jesus  Christ.  In  the  absence  of  such  an  admission,
Freemasonry  might  reasonably  be  termed  an  useless
and  frivolous  pursuit;  and  it  would  be  difficult  to
remove  the  popular  objections  which  have  been  arrayed
against  it.11

These  proofs,  corroborated  by  others  of  equal  weight,

history  of  creation  are  also  unfolded.  The  primitive  innocence  of
man  ;  the  fall,  and  consequent  scenes  of  natural  and  moral  evil.  In
a  word,  the  history  of  nature  and  grace  is  most  beautifully  pre-
figured in  a  lively  display  of  Masonic  symbols.  Here  we  view
the  coincidence  of  principle  and  design  between  the  Christian  scheme
and  speculative  Freemasonry,  with  that  pleasing  admiration  which
satisfies  enquiry,  and  clearly  proves  our  system  based  on  the  rock  of
eternal  ages."

11  I  am  glad  to  be  able  to  strengthen  my  argument  by  a  reference
to  the  writings  of  many  eminent  Masons  of  the  present  day.  I  need
only  mention  the  deeply  reflecting  Brethren  whose  communications
grace  and  dignify  the  F.  Q.  R.,  under  the  sobriquets  of  Sit  Lux,
Cato,  &c. ;  and  the  many  P.  Gr.  Chaplains  whose  printed  sermons
have  conferred  equal  honour  on  themselves  and  the  Order  ;  to  quote
from  which  would  be  too  voluminous  a  process  for  my  present  limits.
From  the  sermon  of  one  upright  and  learned  Mason,  however,  the
venerable  Archdeacon  Mant,  P.  G.  M.  for  Carey  and  Dunluce,  I
shall  subjoin  a  single  passage,  to  show  that  I  am  not  singular  in  my
construction  of  the  true  design  of  English  Freemasonry.  In  this
discourse,  the  preacher  eloquently  pointed  out  "  the  near  connection
between  Freemasonry  and  Christianity ;  enlarging  upon  Faith,  Hope,
and  Charity,  as  the  three  principal  steps  of  the  Masonic  ladder ;  and
he  urged  upon  the  Brethren  an  adhesion  to  the  dictates  of  the  last
virtue,  by  treating  those  who  conscientiously  differed  from  them,


008


HISTORICAL    LANDMARKS


have  established  in  my  mind  a  firm  conviction  of
the  Christian  tendency  of  Freemasonry  throughout  the
whole  period  of  its  presumed  existence.  Before  the
advent  of  Christ,  as  a  symbol;  and  after  the  Promise
had  been  fulfilled,  it  became  the  humble  handmaiden
of  Christianity,  promulgating  the  mild  doctrines,  and
recording  the  types  "and  prophecies  which  heralded
the  Prince  of  Peace.  On  the  other  hand,  if  it  can  be
proved  that  the  above  passages  from  the  ancient  history
of  the  world  are  not  amongst  the  Historical  Landmarks
of  Masonry,  or  that  they  do  not  possess  the  meaning
which  I  have  assigned  to  them,  then  indeed  it  may  be
admitted  that  my  theory  is  unsound.  But  in  the
absence  of  such  proofs,  it  must  inevitably  stand.  Q.'K.'I).
I  have  thought  it  expedient  to  arrange  the  Lectures
in  four  divisions,  each  containing  the  landmarks  of  a
degree.  But  it  must  not  hence  be  concluded  that  I
coincide  in  opinion  with  those  who  consider  the  Royal
Arch  as  a  separate  degree;  whether,  according  to
one  hypothesis,  it  be  called  the  fourth  ™  or  in  con-
either  in  religious  or  political  opinions,  with  the  utmost  forbearance  ;
and  by  acts  of  kindness  and  benevolence  to  the  distressed,  illustrate
its  genial  operation  upon  them,  both  as  Freemasons  and  as  Chris-
tians."

12  If,  however,  Freemasonry  in  its  present  form  requires  the  Royal
Arch  to  be  considered  as  a  separate  degree,  inasmuch  as  it  has
acquired  the  designation  of  Red  Masonry,  in  contradistinction  to  the
three  first  degrees,  which  are  esteemed  Blue ;  and  not  only  possesses
detached  funds,  but  is  placed  under  the  direction  of  a  different
governing  body,  with  a  separate  code  of  laws,  it  will  be  more  con-
sistent with  the  general  principles  of  the  Order,  to  consider  it  as  the
seventh  than  the  fourth ;  for  four  is  not  a  Masonic  number ;  and  as
it  is  now  constituted,  some  intermediate  ceremonies  appear  to  be


OF    FREEMASONRY.  669

formity  with  another,  it  be  denominated  the  seventh™
I  subscribe  to  neither.  I  am  persuaded  that  the  Lodge
of  Reconciliation,  which  was  formed  of  the  most  emi-
nent Masons  from  both  the  ancient  and  modern  parties
at  the  Union,  assisted  by  experienced  Scotch  and  Irish

necessary  to  connect  it  with  the  previous  degrees.  There  is  more
than  one  opinion  in  existence  on  this  subject,  but  I  have  room  only
for  a  few  words  of  discussion.  The  fabricators  of  this  sublime  and
excellent  degree  were  too  deeply  impressed  with  the  true  principles
of  Masonry,  to  be  guilty  of  such  a  solecism  as  to  place  what  was
intended  to  be  the  final  crown  of  the  Order,  in  the  unmasonic  posi-
tion of  a  fourth  degree.  It  is  well  known  that  3,  5,  7,  and  11,  are
the  distinguishing  numbers  of  Freemasonry,  where  4  holds  no  place ;
although,  as  connected  with  10,  it  was  the  great  and  perfect  number
of  the  spurious  Freemasonry.  Nor  does  the  existence  of  the  Tetra-
grammaton  in  this  degree  weakdn  the  force  of  the  argument ;  because
that  holy  quadrilateral  word  was,  throughout  all  antiquity,  attached
to  the  third,  and  not  to  the  fourth  degree.

13  It  is  an  established  doctrine  of  the  Order,  that  while  three  form
a  Lodge,  and  five  may  hold  it,  seven  only  can  make  it  perfect.  In
such  a  case  there  requires  an  intermediate  degree  to  complete  the
series ;  for  the  Mark  and  Past  Masters  have  been  already  admitted
into  the  Craft  Lodges.  This  degree,  as  used  by  our  transatlantic
Brethren,  who  are  zealous  and  intelligent  Masons,  is  called  the
Excellent  Master,  and  the  routine  is  thus  stated  . — 1.  E.  A.  P.  ;
2.  F.  C. ;  3.  M.  M. ;  4.  Mark  Master;  5.  Past  Master  ;  6.  Excellent
Master ;  7.  Royal  Arch.  In  Ireland,  the  degree  has  three  stages,
the  Excellent,  Superexcellent,  and  Royal  Arch.  In  England,  the
north  of  Ireland,  and  America,  the  time  refers  to  Ezra  iii.  8 — 10,
about  534  B.  c. ;  but  in  Dublin,  the  time  is  that  related  in  2  Chron.
xxxiv.,  being  624  B.  c.  And  the  main  fact  is  referred  to  in  verse  14
of  this  chapter.  This  difference  of  time  causes  other  differences,
particularly  with  respect  to  the  officers ;  for  instead  of  Z.  H.  and  J.
the  Chapter  is  governed  by  three  Principals  without  names;  and
there  is  a  H.  P.  independant  of  them,  instead  of  being  one  of  them.
The  time  of  our  E.  A.  is  also  embodied  in  a  degree  called  the  Knight
of  the  East  and  the  Sword.


070  HISTORICAL    LANDMARKS

Brethren,  decided  right  when  they  pronounced  "  that
pure  ancient  Masonry  consists  of  three  degrees  and  no
more  ;  viz.,  those  of  the  Entered  Apprentice,  the  Fel-
low Craft,  and  the  Master  Mason,  including  the  supreme
Order  of  the  Holy  Royal  Arch.  But  this  article  is  not
intended  to  prevent  any  Lodge  or  Chapter  from  hold-
ing a  meeting  in  any  of  the  degrees  of  the  Orders  of
Chivalry,  according  to  the  Constitutions  of  the  said
Orders."14

It  will  be  seen  that  in  addition  to  the  two  preliminary
lectures,  which  contain  a  general  view  of  the  landmarks
in  all  the  degrees,  whether  original  or  supplemental,
I  have  prefaced  each  of  the  four  divisions  of  the  subject
with  an  introductory  lecture ;  which  is  partly  intended
to  illustrate  the  various  subjects  under  discussion,  and

14  Articles  of  Union,  II.  The  Royal  Arch  is  evidently,  therefore,
to  be  considered  as  a  completion  of  the  third  degree ;  which,  indeed,
appears  broken  and  imperfect  without  it ;  and  originally  was  con-
ferred complete  at  one  time  in  the  Grand  Lodge  only  ;  for  private
Lodges,  previously  to  the  year  1725,  were  not  authorised  to  raise  a
M.  M.  In  the  ancient  Rules  of  the  Grand  Lodge,  we  find  in
Art.  X.  that  "Apprentices  must  be  admitted  Fellow  Crafts  and
Masters  only  here,  (Grand  Lodge,)  unless  by  a  dispensation  from
the  Grand  Master."  It  is  uncertain  when  the  division  of  this  degree
took  place ;  but  there  is  presumptive  evidence  to  prove  that  the
Royal  Arch  was  instituted  after  the  revival,  in  1717,  and  that  it  was
in  existence  in  the  year  1730.  When  the  French  imported  Free-
masonry from  this  country  in  1725,  the  M.  M.  degree  was  evidently
perfect,  for  I  have  before  me  a  French  Floor-cloth,  or  Tracing-board,
which  contains  the  true  Master's  Word,  as  it  was  used  by  the  French
Lodges  of  that  period.  A  degree  was  introduced  about  that  time  by
the  Chevalier  Ramsay,  which  he  called  the  Royal  Arch ;  but  it  was
not  the  rite  which  is  now  practised,  and  is  more  properly  termed  the
Arch  of  Enoch.


OF    FREEMASONRY.  671

partly  as  a  vehicle  for  the  introduction  of  a  few  col-
lateral points,  which,  though  of  great  importance,
were  incapable  of  being  included  in  the  general  design.
The  lecture  which  is  placed  at  the  head  of  the  third
part,  contains  a  brief  view  of  the  schisms  and  innova-
tions which  deformed  our  noble  Order  on  the  Continent
of  Europe  during  the  last  century,13  by  the  introduction
of  an  innumerable  host  of  new  degrees  which  have
little  connection  with  pure  Freemasonry.  The  volu-
minous systems  of  Fustier,  Peuvret,  and  others,  have,
however,  fallen  into  desuetude,  and  the  Hauts  Grades
consist  now  only  of  the  thirty -three  degrees  of  the  Rite
Ancien  et  Accepte,16  and  of  the  Orders  of  Chivalry  •

15  I  am  in  doubt  whether  T  have  succeeded  in  producing  a  clear
and  perspicuous  view  of  this  curious  but  most  intricate  subject ;  for
the  materials  which  a  very  extensive  correspondence  has  placed  at
my  disposal  are  so  diffuse  and  important,  that  it  was  difficult  to
arrange  a  brief  analysis  of  them,  so  as  to  produce  an  unambiguous
record  of  all  the  principal  facts  within  a  reasonable  compass.  A
general  history  of  Freemasonry  on  the  Continent  during  the  eighteenth
century,  would  of  itself  occupy  a  moderate  sized  volume.

10  These  degrees  have  never  been  legally  recognised  in  England.
Ramsay  attempted  to  introduce  them,  but  he  was  unsuccessful.  I
find,  however,  that  in  1784,  the  twenty-five  degrees  of  Heredom
were  practised  at  York  by  a  body  that  called  itself  the  "  College  of
Heredom  Templars ;  being  No.  1  under  the  Constitutions  of  the
Ancient  Lodge  of  York,  south  of  the  river  Trent,  sitting  at  York."
I  am  ignorant  under  what  authority  this  governing  body  was  esta-
blished ;  for  it  is  doubtful  whether  the  ancient  Grand  Lodge  at  York
ever  issued  charters  for  more  than  blue  Masonry.  And  as  this  Col-
lege of  Heredom  Templars  were  nearly  all  foreigners,  it  is  probable
their  authority  might  be  derived  from  the  continent.  There  was  a
Consistory  at  Hull  about  the  beginning  of  the  present  century,  which
might  be  a  branch  from  the  above  College  at  York.  It  was,  how-
ever, very  feeble,  and  seldom  assembled.  Another  was  occasionally
held  at  Grimsby,  which  conferred  a  few  of  the  degrees.


072


HISTORICAL  LANDMARKS


although  the  Rite  of  Namours,  the  Order  of  Mizraim,17
and  others,  are  still  partially  recognized  bv  some  of
our  governing  bodies.18

17  The  Order  of  Mizraim  contains  ninety  degrees.     It  v
blished  by  Bedarride  at  Paris  on  the  21st  of  May,  1811,  and  was
divided  into  four  series,  viz.,   thirty-three  Symbolic;    thirty-three
Philosophical;  eleven  Mystical;  and  nine  Cabalistic  degrees.     To
these  are  added,  but  not  in  any  of  the  four  series,  four  other  degrees,
each  of  which  superintends  one  of  the  previous  series.     The  three
first  are  for  the  Grand  Ministers,  constituent  of  the  Order  ;  arid  the
last  for  Masters  absolute.

18  I  subjoin  a  chronological  list  of  the  references  of  these  degrees,
with  their  proper  colours  attached;  although  it  must  be  observed
that  the  colours  vary  under  different  Grand  Lodges,  as  there  is  no
uniform  standard  for  the  high  degrees.     Blue  is  marked  (!>.},  black
(£>/.),  red  (r.),  yellow  (y.),  green  (^.),  purple  (/?.),  white  (/r.),  rain-
bow or  iris  (/.)

A.A.C.

4008.    Royal  Arch  (r.)

3769.    Knight  of  the  Black  Mark  (w.)

3019.    Knight  of  the  Ninth  Arch  (b.  y.)

2469.    Prince  of  Libanus  (/.)

R.  A.  Mariners  (b.)  ;  Ark  and  Dove  (b.)

The  Link  (r.)  ;  Grand  Patriarch.  Noachitc  (y.)

E.  A.  P.  (b.)

Prince  of  Mercy  (^.)  ;  E.  A.  P.  (b.)

The  Wrestle  (r.)

E.  A.  P.   (b.);    M.  M.  (6.);   Royal  Arch  (r.)  ;   Chief  and
Prince  of  the  Tabernacle  (w.}

Prince  of  Libanus  (i.)  ;  Prince  of  Mercy

Knight  of  the  Brazen  Serpent  (r.  b.)

Fellow  Craft  (b.)

The  same.

Prince  of  Libanus  (z.)

Mark  Man  (6.)  ;  Knight  of  the  Ninth  Arch  (b.  y.)

M.  M.  (6.)  ;  Mark  Master  (b.)  ;  G.  M.  of  Sym.  Lodges  (b.

E.  A.  P.  (6.)  ;  F.  C.  (b.)  ;  P.  M.  (b.)  ;  M.  E.  Master  (/-.)  ;
Secret  Master  (  bl  )


2352
2247
1892
1872
1739
1491


1452
1250
1143
1014
1011
1009
1008


OF    FREEMASONRY.  673

Perfect  Master  (</.)  ;  Order  of  Three  Kings  (r.)  ;  Intimate

Secretary  (bl.)

— —  Provost  and  Judge  (lozengy  r.  bl.)  ;  Master  in  Israel  (r. g.}

1007.  Elected  Knights  of  Nine  (w.  r.)  •  Elected  of  Fifteen  (bl.  iv.)
Sublime  Knights  Elected  (r.  bl.)

•  G.  M.  Archit.  (tv.r.) ;  Perfection  (r.) ;  Elect  of  Perignan  (bl.)

Junior  Architect  (bl.) ;  Grand  Architect  (bl.)

1005.  Select  Master  (r.  y.) ;  Royal  Master  (r.)

1004.  Knight  of  the  Christian  Mark  (bl.)

586.  Superexcellent  Master  (r  )

536.  G.  M.  of  Symb.  Lodges  (b.  y.) ;  Knight  of  the  East  (g.}

534.  Royal  Arch  (r.)  ;  Knight  of  the  East  and  Sword  (r.)

520.  Knight  of  the  lied  Cross  (bl.)

518.  Prince  of  Jerusalem  (y.  r.)

19.    G.  M.  of  Symbolic  Lodges  (b:  y.)
A.  3>.  '

27.    Knight  of  the  Eagle  and  Sun  (y.)

29.    Knight  of  the  Holy  Grave  (bl.)  ;  Knight  Templar  (&/!);

Prince  of  Mercy  (g.)
Knight  of  the  Rose  -f  (r.)  ;  111.  Order  of  the  Cross  (bl.)

Mediterranean  Pass  (bl.) ;  Knight  of  the  White  Eagle  and

Pelican  (bl.)

Knight  of  Malta  (bl.) ;  Rose  +  de  Heredom  (bl.)

70.    G.  M.  of  Symbolic  Lodges  (b.  y.)
96.    Scotch  Master  (r.  b.)
296.    Knight  of  the  Holy  Sepulchre  (bl.)
314.    Knight  of  Constantinople  (r.)  ;  Red  +  of  Rome  and  Con-

stantine  (r.)

409.    Knight  of  the  Christian  Mark  (bl.y
1099.   Knight  of  the  Black  Cross  (bl.)
1120.    Knight  of  the  White  Cross  (bl.)
1192.    Knight  of  St.  John  of  Jerusalem  (bl.) ;  Sovereign  Commander

of  the  Temple  (r.)
1194.    Ecossais  of  St.  Andrew  (g.)

1314.    Knight  of  Kadosh  (bl.) ;  Prince  of  the  Royal  Secret  (bl.)
1625.    Sacred  Vault  of  James  VI.  (bl.) ;  Grand  Inquisitor  Com-
mander (p.)

1762.    Grand  Inspector  General  (p.)
Resur.  Knight  of  the  East  and  Sword  (r)  •  Grand  Pontiff  (b.)

VOL.  II.  X  X


HISTORICAL    LANDMARKS

An  important  peculiarity  of  these  lectures  consists
in  the  multiplicity  of  notes  with  which  they  have  been
illustrated.  Collected  from  authors  of  all  descriptions,
both  ancient  and  modern,  whose  sentiments  and  opi-
nions have  thus  been  drawn  into  one  focus,  they  are
intended  not  only  to  corroborate  and  verify  the  truth
of  the  various  matters  under  discussion,  but  also  to
show  the  diversity  of  subjects  embraced  by  the  com-
prehensive system  of  1'Yeemasonry,  and  the  connexion
which  they  bear  to  the  general  literature  of  the  world,
in  all  ages,  and  under  every  fluctuation  of  learning  and
science.  This  will  constitute  a  proof,  if  one  be  needed,
that  Freemasonry  is  not  devoid  of  legitimate  claims  on
the  attention  of  the  public,  as  a  science  which,  accord-
ing to  a  definition  contained  in  the  old  established
lectures  of  the  lloyal  Arch  degree,  "  includes  all  others,
and  teaches  all  human  and  divine  knowledge  as  well  as
the  practical  duties  which  are  incumbent  upon  the
Brethren,  as  members  of  civil  society."

19  It  is  a  curious  coincidence  that  Cervantes  describes  a  perfect
knight  errant  in  much  the  same  language  that  we  use  when  speaking
of  a  good  and  worthy  Mason.  "  It  is  a  science  which  includes  in  it
all  or  most  of  the  other  sciences  of  the  world.  He  who  professes  it,
must  be  a  theologian,  in  order  to  be  able  to  give  a  reason  for  the
Christian  faith  which  he  professes,  whenever  it  is  required  of  him.
He  must  be  a  physician,  and  especially  a  botanist,  in  order  to  know,
in  the  midst  of  wildernesses  and  deserts,  the  herbs  and  simples  which
have  the  virtue  of  curing  wounds,  for  the  knight  errant  must  not,  at
every  turn  be  running  to  look  for  somebody  to  heal  him.  Pie  must
be  an  astronomer,  in  order  to  know  by  the  stars  not  only  what  is  the
clock,  but  what  part  of  the  world  he  is  in.  He  must  understand
mathematics,  because  at  every  step  he  will  stand  in  need  of  them  ;
and  he  must  be  adorned  with  all  the  cardinal  and  theological
virtues."


OF    FREEMASON11Y.  675

How  comprehensive  soever  this  definition  may  appear,
it  is  borne  out  by  the  extended  references  of  Freema-
sonry, although  many  of  the  sciences  are  but  slightly
marked  in  the  ordinary  lectures.  The  seven  liberal
sciences  are  amongst  the  stated  illustrations  of  the
Order,  but  they  are  by  no  means  exclusively  so.  For
instance,  the  second  degree  contains  an  allusion  to
geography  as  well  as  astronomy ;  and  to  arithmetic
as  well  as  geometry  and  its  application  to  architecture ;
and  in  the  third  degree  we  have  references  to  geology
and  metallurgy ;  the  former  of  which  is  more  parti-
cularly displayed  in  one  of  the  lectures  of  the  Royal
Ark  Mariners.  It  will  be  unnecessary  to  enlarge  upon
this  point,  as  the  evidences  of  it  are  abundantly  con-
tained in  the  preceding  notes  ;  which,  on  this  account
alone,  in  the  absence  of  any  other  merit,  cannot  fail  of
being  particularly  interesting  to  the  Free  and  Accepted
Mason.  They  contain  an  application  to  every  point  in
the  Lodge  lectures,  indicating  what  is  not  sufficiently
apparent,  and  illustrating  what  may  be  considered
obscure.

It  is  owing  to  a  progressive  opinion  on  all  these
points,  that  the  Order,  in  the  present  day,  is  becoming
more  generally  diffused  throughout  all  ranks  of  society ;
arising  in  a  great  measure  from  the  persevering  zeal
of  a  few  Masonic  writers,  who  have  disarmed  prejudice,
by  bringing  it  more  prominently  before  the  public  eye.
Since  the  cause  of  Freemasonry  has  been  advocated
from  the  press,  the  charges  urged  against  her  with
sucirpertinacity  and  confidence  have  been  discovered
to  be  groundless  and  untrue ;  the  torrent  which


676    HISTORICAL    LANDMARKS    OF    FREEMASONRY.

threatened  to  overwhelm  her  has  exhausted  its  force  ;
numerous  flourishing  Lodges  exist  where  Masonry  was
formerly  a  by-word  and  a  reproach ;  the  numbers  of
the  Brethren  have  doubled  and  trebled  ;  her  charities
are  abundant ;  her  members  virtuous  and  happy  ;  and
never  was  there  a  time  in  the  annals  of  Masonry  when
she  was  such  a  blessing  to  the  Brethren  at  large  ;  and
in  such  general  estimation  amongst  those  who  have
not  been  admitted  into  her  communion.  All  this
amount  of  good  I  have  no  hesitation  in  attributing,
almost  solely,  to  the  judicious  publications  on  the
subject  of  Masonry  which  have  appeared  during  the
present  and  the  latter  end  of  the  last  century;  and
much  of  it  to  the  leading  periodical  and  organ  of  the
Craft — the  Freemasons'  Quarterly  Review.


GENERAL    INDEX,

THE    TEXT.


Aaron  and  Hur  support  the  hands  of  Moses,  ii.  220  ;  makes  a  calf,  232 ;
his  rod,  290  ;  the  first  high  priest,  509.

Abbe  Barruel  mentioned,  i.  24.
*  Abduction  of  Morgan,  reputed,  i.  15.

Abel,  great  stone  of,  i.  577 ;  murdered  by  his  brother,  ii.  172 ;  a  type  of
the  Messiah,  174 ;  slain  on  mount  Moriah,  187.

Abelmizraim,  i.  285.

Abolition  of  human  sacrifices,  ii,  152.

Abomination  of  desolation  placed  on  the  altar,  ii.  642.

Abraham,  i.  57  ;  receives  the  promises,  65  ;  his  grand  festival,  95  ;  history
of,  98;  disgusted  with  the  spurious  Freemasonry,  99;  arrives  in  Ca-
naan, 100;  promised  a  son,  101;  loves  Ishmael,  103;  receives  three
strangers,  104  ;  promised  a  heir,  105 ;  his  descendants  practice  Masonry,
106;  weans  Isaac,  107;  the  father  of  two  nations,  115;  commanded
to  sacrifice  Isaac,  208;  his  feelings,  209;  journeys  to  Moriah,  211;
ascends  the  mountain,  213;  lays  Isaac  on  the  altar,  213;  raises  the
knife,  214  ;  his  arm  arrested,  215 ;  cast  into  the  fire,  269.

Abrax,  what,  i.  177.

Absence  of  unity,  ii.  65.

Abundance  of  the  precious  metals  in  ancient  times,  ii.  286.

Abuses  in  religion  regulated  by  Ezra,  ii.  450.

Abyssinian  mountains,  the,  i.  550.

Acacia  vera,  planted  over  a  grave,  ii.  148  ;  means  innocence,  150.

Aceldema,  ii.  176.

Achte  Illuminat,  mentioned,  i.  25.

Acquirements  of  an  E.  A.  P.  threefold,  i.  246.

Adam,  happiness  of,  in  Paradise,  i.  54 ;  expelled  in  the  west,  203 ;  precepts
of,  266 ;  created  on  Moriah,  ii.  187  ;  and  Eve  in  Paradise,  476 ;  violate
the  contract,  484 ;  hide  themselves,  486 ;  cast  out  of  Paradise,  488.

Adept  of  the  Eagle  or  Sun,  degree  of,  ii.  124.

Admission,  who  eligible  for,  ii.  664.

Administrative  Masonry,  ii.  330.

ADONAI,  a  name  of  God,  ii.  592.

Adonhiramite  Masonry  mentioned,  i.  22:  Masonry,  ii.  111.

Adoniram,  chief  of  the  provosts  and  judges,  i.  429,  431.

Adoption  of  Masonic  symbols,  reasons  for  the,  ii.  618.

Adoptive  Masonry,  ii.  111.

Advancing,  three  ways  of,  i.  247,  311.

Advent  of  Christ,  ii.  473,  503,  649.

Adventurers,  Masonic,  numerous,  ii.  64.

African  Architects,  order  of  the,  ii.  112.

Agate  in  the  pectoral,  its  signification,  ii.  522.

Age  of  the  ark  of  the  covenant,  when  lost,  ii.  292.

Aged  men  weep  at  laying  the  foundations  of  the  second  temple,  ii.  440.


678


GENERAL  INDEX  TO  THE  TEXT.


routed,  220.


Agriculture  of  Egypt,  imperfect,  i.  556.

Aholiab  and  Bezaleel  make  the  ark,  ii.  292.

Alcantara,  Knight  of,  ii.  112.

Aletophylote,  degree  of  the,  ii.  138.

Alexandria,  Lodge  of  Masons  at,  i.  552  ;  library  at,  constructed,  564.

All  religions  patronize  Freemasonry,  i.  206.

All-seeing  eye  of  God,  ii.  163.

Allegorical  frontispiece  described,  i.  1 ;  references  of  Freemasonry,  399  ;
paintings  in  the  Masonic  Hall  at  Marseilles,  ii.  58.

Allegory,  Masonry  veiled  in,  i.  120.

Allyns  ritual  of  Masonry  mentioned,  i.  15.

Altar  of  incense  a  cube,  i.  192;  of  incense,  the,  ii.  242;  or  pedestal  found,
3G3  ;  set  up  by  Zerubbabel,  431.

Altitude  of  the  Egyptian  temples,  i.  5G1.

Amalekites  defeated,  i.  329  ;  battle  with  the,  ii.  219  ;

Amenophis,  King  of  Egypt,  ii.  456.
-  America,  an  Inspector  General  appointed  for,  ii.  50  ;  Freemasonry  in,  108

Amethyst  in  the  pectoral,  its  signification,  ii.  523.

Ammonites  defeated  by  Jeptha,  i.  ."HC).

Amorites  amongst  the  builders  of  the  temple,  i.  411.

Amsterdam,  antiquity  of  Freemasonry  in,  ii.  19.

Amusement,  Freemasonry  a  source  of  rational,  i.  88.

Analogy  of  a  Lodge  to  Solomon's  temple,  i.  24:2.

Ananiuh,  a  learned  Egyptian  -Mason,  ii.  76.

Ancient  nations  ascribe  their  origin  to  Abraham,  i.  217;  creed  of  Free-
masonry, 287;  charge,  second  degree,  380;  Junior  Warden,  444;  Senior
Warden,  445;  and  modern  Masons,  union  of,  ii.  102;  buildings  disco-
vered in  Calvary,  262  ;  Landmarks  of  Masonry,  306.

Anderson,  Dr.,  an  eminent  Mason,  i.  89;  his  statement  of  the  number  of
workmen  at  the  temple,  402.

Androgyne  Masonry  instituted,  ii.  '.'>'>.

Angel  of  the  covenant,  i.  82 ;  the  destroying,  239.

Angels  ascending  and  descending,  i.  27."> ;  when  created,  480,  488 ;  with
seven  plagues,  526.

Anhalt  Bernburg,  prince  of,  patronizes  Bahrclt,  ii.  82.

Animal  sacrifices  instituted,  ii.  495.

Animosities  to  be  extinguished  by  the  Master,  i.  170.

Antediluvian  Landmarks,  ii.  186;  architecture,  217.

Antediluvians,  wickedness  of  the,  i.  62.

Antimasonry  in  America,  i.  18;  in  New  York  and  Vermont,  18;  strength
of  the,  20;  extinction  of,  21.

Antimasons  try  to  alter  the  Landmarks,  ii.  307.

Antiquity  of  the  Landmarks,  i.  265  ;  of  the  new  degrees  doubtful,  ii.  11  ;
of  the  Royal  Order  of  H.  R.  D.  M.,  12;  of  the  symbolical  degrees,
18;  on  the  Continent,  19.

Antitypes,  important,  i.  385.

Apartments  in  the  temple,  i.  443.

Apis,  a  deification  of  Joseph,  ii.  234.

Apocalypse,  machinery  of  the,  i.  522,  526.

Apostacy  of  the  race  of  Seth,  i.  59;  of  Solomon,  ii.  384.

Apostate  spirit,  the,  envies  the  happiness  of  Adam,  ii.  479.

Appearance  of  the  Shekinah,  ii.  490.

Application  of  the  pectoral,  ii.  515.

Apprehension  of  suspected  persons,  ii.  375.

Approach  of  death  alarming,  ii.  147.

Arabians,  spring  from  Abraham,  i.  115;  never  conquered,  117.

Araunah  the  Jebusite,  i.  225.

Arcana  of  Freemasonry,  i.  87.


GENERAL    INDEX    TO    THE    TEXT.  679

Archdeacon  Mant,  on  the  third  grand  offering,  i.  578.

Arched  portico,  i.  451  ;  vault,  an,  ii.  362.

Arches  of  Enoch  discovered,  i.  585  ;  subterranean,  588;  of  Enoch,  ii.  195.

Architect,  the,  degree  of,  ii.  112;   Perfect  Master,  degree  of,  130.

Architects,  Lodges  of,  i.  421.

Architectural  triumphs  of  Euclid,  i.  553.  •*

Architecture,  antediluvian,  ii.  217-

Archive  fur  Freymatirer  mentioned,  i.  25.

Archives  Mystico  Hermetiques  mentioned,  i.  23.

Ark  of  the  covenant,  i.  75;  taken  to  the  army,  574 ;  seized  by  the  Philis-
tines, 574;  restored,  576 ;  placed  on  mount  Sion,  577;  of  the  covenant,
ii.  156;  described, '289  ;  contents  of,  290  ;  symbolical,  290;  made  of  the
wood  of  the  burning  bush,  292;  sacred  nature  of,  293;  overlaid  with
plates  of  gold,  2^3 ;  an  emblem  of  peace,  29G ;  a  type  of  the  Messiah,
296  ;  Shekinah  over  the,  297  ;  lost,  440.

Ark  and  Dove,  degree  of,  ii.  112 ;  Mariners,  133.

Armenia,  Abraham  escapes  to,  i.  99.

Arms  manufactured,  ii.  211.

Arrarat,  the  ark  of  Noah  rests  upon,  i.  326.

Arras,  Freemasonry  at,  ii.  42.

Arrangement  in  the  Tyrian  quarries,  i.  420 ;  at  the  building  of  the  temple,
429  ;  of  the  Lectures  explained,  ii.  C68.

Artaxerxes  forbids  the  Jews  to  proceed  with  the  temple,  ii.  442.

Articles  of  union  quoted,  ii.  670.

Artists  in  the  time  of  Cain,  ii.  215.

Arts  and  sciences  preserved  by  Enoch,  ii.  193 ;  state  of  the,  before  the
flood,  205.

Ascending  and  descending,  what,  ii.  472.

Ascension  of  Christ,  ii.  500.

A  she,  Dr.,  on  the  Masonic  ladder,  i.  265.

Asher,  the  ninth  grand  point  refers  to,  i.  313;  his  banner  explained,  ii.  594.

Ashlar,  rough  and  perfect,  i.  144.

Asbmole,  an  eminent  Mason,  i.  89.

Asiatic  churches,  the,  i.  527-

Ask  and  ye  shall  have,  i.  112.

Ass,  the  device  on  the  standard  of  Issachar,  ii.  587.

Assassination  of  Abel,  ii.  172.

Astronomical  characters,  cruciform,  ii.  625.

Atad,  i.  285.

Atheist,  a  Mason  cannot  be  an,  i   236,  535.

Atonement,  the,  i.  87;  for  sin,  type  of  the,  in  Freemasonry,  209;  on  the
cross,  ii.  536.

Attachment  to  the  number  three,  universal,  i.  248.

Attempts  to  destroy  Freemasonry  unsuccessful,  i.  27.

Authority  strengthened  by  judicious  publications  on  Masonry,  i.  2;  of
Zerubbabel,  ii.  419  ;  of  Moses,  462.

Autopsia,  i.  540.

Auxiliary  degrees,  ii.  345.

Avenue  of  arches,  i.  588.

Axe,  hammer,  or  metal  tools,  not  used,  i.  425 ;  prohibited,  ii.  252.

Baal  Peor,  orgies  of,  i.  332 ;  what,  571 ;  worshipped,  ii.  391.
Babel,  tower  of,  built,  i.  63,  268  ;  descent  of  the  Deity  at,  ii.  473.
Babylon  plundered,  ii.  283 ;  riches  of,  283 ;  the  chief  Jews  reside  in.  409.
Babylonish  captivity,  the,  ii.  402.
Bacchanalia,  i.  333.

Badge  worn  by  the  Israelites  in  Egypt,  i.  363 ;  of  innocence,  the  cross  a,
ii.  623.


(580


GENERAL    INDEX    TO    THE    TEXT.


"20  ;  of  Masonry  to  .society,


Babrdt  mentioned,  i.  24;    a  Masonic  innovator,  ii.  82;    establishes  the

German  union,  82.
Balaam  communicates  with  God  in  a  valley,  i.  340;  his  offering,  516;  hi*

prophecy,  ii.  576 ;  to  whom  it  refers,  577.

Banners  of  the  tribes,  symbols,  i.  77  ;  of  the  Royal  Arch,  ii.  359  ;  of  the
*   tribes,  567,  583 ;  their  use,  571.
Bannockburn,  battle  of,  ii.  13.
Banquet  of  Wisdom,  degree  of  the,  ii.  113.
Baptist,  St.  John  the,  i.  166.
Barruel,  the  Abbe,  mentioned,  i.  24.
Battle  with  the  Amalekites,  ii.  219.
Beasts  created,  i.  492.
Beauty  and  usefulness  of  Freemasonry,  i.  80 ;  pillar  of,  139 ;  a  symbol  ot
Israel  and   Tyre  united,   155;   to  adorn,   236;  of  the  temple,  ii.  252;
decorations  of,  254;  of  H.  A.  B.,  258.
Beautiful  decorations  of  the  tabernacle,  ii.  224.

Uedarride,  the  name  of  two  Jewish  innovators  in  Frecma.x>iiry,  ii.  7(i
Bedstead  of  gold,  ii.  284.
Bring  of  a  God,  i.  45.

Ik-1,  worshipped  by  the  Phoenicians,  ii.  ;"•;">!.
Benai,  what,  i.  402.
Bendaka,  quarry  of,  ii.  "74.
Benediction  of  the  high  priot,  ii.  .">!'•.
Beneficial  tendency  of  Masonry,  i.  151.
Benefit  of  promulgating  Masonic  information,  i.

ii.  676.

Benevolence  and  charity,  i   30.
Benjamin,  the  twelfth  grand  point  refers  to,  i.  316;   his  banner  explained,

ii.  592.

Benzabee,  the  chief  intendant  of  Solomon,  ii.  37-1.

Berlin,  Freemasonry  at,  placed  under  tlie  Grand  Lodge  of  England,  ii.  .r>.'v
Bernard's  Light  on  Masonry  mentioned,  i.  13.
Berne,  the  Council  of,  issue  an  edict  against  Freemasonry,  ii.  43.
Beryl  in  the  pectoral,  its  signification,  ii.  523.

Bethel,  i.  279;  Jacob  erects  an  altar  at,  281  ;  idols  set  up  at,  ii.  390.
Bethlehem,  Christ  born  at,  i.  48.

Bible  explained,  i.  169;  the  Tracing- board  of  the  G.  A.  ().  T  U.,  145;
square  and  compasses  explained,  168,  169;  in  a  Royal  Arch  Chapter,
ii.  353.

Birds  created,  i.  492.
Birth  of  the  Son  of  God,  i.   159;  of  day,  203 ;  life  and  death,  '25*2;  of

light,  177.

Black  Mark,  Knight  of  the,  ii.  113.
Blasphemers  to  be  stoned,  ii.  545.
Blazing  star,  i.  158.
Blessing  of  Jacob,  ii.  360.
Blue,  purple,  and  crimson,  works  in,  ii.  224,  245  ;  a  symbol  of  the  elevation

of  the  heart  to  God,  255.

Boast  of  the  American  antimasonic  party,  i.  19.
Boaz,  i.  450.

Bodies  of  the  Egyptians  driven  ashore,  i.  371.
Bodily  torments  of  the  Egyptians,  ii.  610.
Body,  the,  raised,  ii.  174.
Bondage  in  Egypt,  i.  68.

Bond  and  free,  difference  between,  i.  109  ;  of  Freemasonry,  \'2'.).
Bondwoman,  the,  cast  out,  i.  95;  and  her  son  dismissed,  113.
Book  with  seven  seals.,  i.  525  ;  of  the  law  found  by  Hilkiah,  ii.
Bottom  of  Jordan  dried  up,  i.  21)3.


GENERAL  INDEX  TO  THE  TEXT.          681

Bouillon,  Godfrey  de,  ii.  32.

Boundary  marks  of  Egypt  restored,  i.  553 ;  what  they  were,  562.

Boundaries  of  Canaan,  i.  101 ;  of  the  tabernacle,  ii.  241.

Bouneville,  le  Chevalier,  an  eminent  Mason,  ii.  34.

Bourbon,  Louis  de,  G.  M.  of  France,  ii.  45;  Duchess  of,  G.  Mistress  of

Female  Lodges,  72.

Bowels  of  Calvary,  subterranean  temple  in  the,  i.  584.
Bows  and  arrows  made  by  Tubal  Cain,  ii.  211.
Brahmins  of  India  supposed  to  be  descended  from  Abraham,  i.  219.
Branch,  kingdom  of  the,  i.  336.

Brass  pillars  of  Enoch,  ii.  199;  or  copper,  arms  principally  made  of,  211.
Bravery  of  Moses,  ii.  462.
Brazen  serpent,  the,  i.  I,  80  ;  Knight  of  the,  ii.  113 ;  a  type  of  Christ,  503,

575  ;  altar,  243.
Breadth  of  the  Lodge,  i.  136.
Breastplate  of  judgment,  ii.  516.
Breath  of  life,  i.  495.
Brethren  bound  by  the  tie  of  Freemasonry,  i.  129;  depart  satisfied,  141  ;

number  of,  ii.  314.
Bright  morning  star,  what,  ii.  578.

British  Museum,  MS.  in,  refers  Masonry  to  Christianity,  ii.  664.
Brotherly  love,  i.  1 64.

Bruce,  King  Robert,  founds  the  Royal  Order,  ii.  12.
Bui  worshipped  by  the  Chaldeans,  ii.  551.
Bullion  for  the  temple,  whence  procured,  ii.  272.

Burning  bush,  the,  i.  67,  72,  328  ;  Knight  of  the,  ii.  114 ;  the,  455,  465,  473.
Burning^ of  the  temple,  ii.  651.
Burnished  gold  of  the  temple,  ii.  285.
Burnt  offering,  Isaac  a,  i.  209.

Cabala,  Egyptian,  i.  153;  mystical,  255.

Cabalistic  degree  instituted,  ii.  74,  114.

Cable  tow,  the,  i.  174.

Caduceus  of  Mercury,  the,  was  cruciform,  ii.  625.

Cagliostro, Count,  founds  his  Egyptian  Masonry,  ii.  74;  his  bold  proposal,  85.

Cain,  what  his  posterity  believed,  i.  54;  slays  Abel,  ii.  172;  builds  a  city,
214;  at  what  period,  215.

Calamities  inflicted  on  the  Jews,  i.  573.

Calcott's  difinition  of  Masonry,  i.  130.

Caleb,  the  D.  G.  M.,  i.  566.

Calf,  the  golden,  burned,  ii.  238.

Calling  of  the  Gentiles,  ii.  649.

Calvary,  investigations  in  mount,  i.  584;  subterranean  temple  in,  587;
mount,  Enoch's  caverns  in,  ii.  194;  stones  taken  from,  262.

Cambaceres,  Prince,  installed  the  head  of  the  Supreme  Council,  ii.  97.

Cambus  Kenneth,  Freemasonry  established  at,  ii.  21.

Cambyses  forbids  the  Jews  to  proceed  with  the  temple,  ii.  442.

Camp  of  Israel,  beauty  of  the,  i.  469 ;  of  the  Israelites,  ii.  559 ;  how  many
souls  in  the,  568  ;  its  disposition,  571.

Canaan,  promised  to  the  posterity  of  Abraham,  i  100  ;  boundaries  of,  101  ;
invasion  of,  289 ;  wickedness  of  the  inhabitants  of,  297  ;  some  destroyed
and  others  made  tributary,  298  ;  why,  299;  divided  by  lot,  304.

Candidate  to  be  free  by  birth,  i.  109;  for  admission,  ii.  5.

Canopy  of  heaven,  i.  272;  of  the  Royal  Arch,  ii.  357.

Capitular  Masonry,  ii.  38,  329.

Captains,  monthly,  i.  430.

Captivity  in  Babylon,  ii.  350,  402;  not  a  state  of  slavery,  407;  com-
pleted, 419.


GENERAL    INDEX    TO    THE    TEXT.


Carbuncle  in  the  pectoral,  its  signification,  ii.  518.

Cardinal  virtues,  the,  i.  175;  points  of  the  compass,  137  ;  virtues  of  Adam,
ii.  478  ;  symbol  of  the,  524.

Carlile's  works  mentioned,  i.  13.

Carmel,  mount,  i.  334.

Carthage,  revision  of  the  laws  of,  ii.  152.

Cassia,  what  it  was,  ii.  149.

Castrametary  warfare  of  the  Egyptians,  ii.  572.

Catalogue  of  the  thirty-three  degrees,  ii.  335.

Catechisme  des  Francrnatjon,  le,  mentioned,  i.  22.

Catenarian  arch,  the,  ii.  351.

Cathedrals,  crypts  of,  i.  3 15.

Cattle  of  Egypt  killed,  ii.  609.

Causes  of  the  inundations  of  the  Nile,  i.  558.

Caverns,  veneration  for,  i.  324;  of  .Tudea  polluted,  570;  nine,  shown  to
Enoch  in  his  vision,  ii.  192;  near  Joppa,  371 ;  of  initiation  in  the  form
of  a  cross,  G'J  1.

Celestial  Grand  Lodge  opened,  i.  528 ;   Lodge,  the,  ii.  305

Cement  of  the  Lodge,  i.  404.

Census  taken  by  David,  i.  227.

Ceremonial  law,  the,  rescinded,  ii.  G55.

Ceremony  at  the  creation  of  man,  i.  494.

Chaldea,  Grand  Lodge  in,  ii.  425.

Chaldeans  persecute  Abraham,  i.  98.

Chalk,  charcoal,  and  clay,  i.  245.

Chapitre  Metropolitain  de  France  instituted,  ii.  97.

Chapter  of  Clermont  established  by  the  Jesuits,  ii.  44;  of  the  Emperor  of
the  East  and  West  formed,  47;  room  represents  the  tabernacle,  361;

Chapters,  ii.  332  ;  forms  and  ceremonies  in  340.

Characteristic  of  Masonry,  ii.  140.

Chariots  of  gold,  ii.  279;  and  precious  stones,  281.

Charities  increased  through  the  influence  of  Masonic  publications,  i.  3 ;  of
Freemasonry,  ii.  676.

Charity  defined,  i.  171,  265.

Charlatans,  Masonic,  i.  10  ;  quarrels  amongst,  ii.  64.

Charles  II.,  Freemasonry  flourishes  in  his  reign,  ii.  27  ;  initiated,  28.

Charleston,  Supreme  Council  at,  ii.  11.

Charms,  composition  of,  ii.  631.

Charter  of  Colne  mentions  Christianity,  ii.  664.

Chartres,  Due  de,  appointed  G.  M.,  ii.  59.

Chemical  characters  cruciform,  ii.  626.

Cherubic  forms,  i.  527  ;  symbol  on  the  four  leading  banners,  ii.  584.

Cherubim,  vision  of  the  sixty-eight  wings  of  the,  i.  583;  formed,  ii.  225,
243 ;  on  the  doors  of  the  temple,  267  ;  of  the  mercy  seat,  293 ;  how
symbolized,  295.

Chevalier  Maeon  Ecossais  established,  ii.  29 ;  du  Soleil  established,  68 ;
Rose  Croix,  346;  de  1' Orient,  346.

Chief  of  the  Tabernacle,  degree  of,  ii.  341  ;  Jewish  families,  of  the,  resided
in  Babylon,  409 ;  corner  stone,  what,  434 ;  types  of  Christ  in  Freema-
sonry enumerated,  658.

Children  passed  through  the  fire  to  Moloch,  ii.  385.

Chisel,  the,  its  moral  reference,  i.  180.

Christ,  types  of,  embodied  in  Freemasonry,  i.  66 ;  typified  in  the  four  chief
banners  of  the  tribes,  77;  in  the  propitiatory,  78;  by  the  pectoral,  78;
by  the  brazen  serpent,  80 ;  bruises  the  serpent's  bead>  85 ;  crucified  with
his  face  to  the  west,  204 ;  will  come  again  in  the  east,  204 ;  transfiguration
of,  260 ;  born  in  a  cavern  of  initiation,  342  ;  his  parables,  398  ;  typified
by  the  pillar,  460;  order  of,  ii.  114;  Knight  of,  114;  concealed  in  thr


GENERAL    INDEX    TO    THE    TEXT.  680

bowels  of  the  earth,  175 ;  his  church  symbolized  by  the  tabernacle,  246  ;
typified  in  the  ark  of  the  covenant,  296 ;  in  the  pot  of  manna,  297 ;
miracles  of,  298  ;  casts  out  devils,  299;  typified  by  the  Urim  and  Thum-
mim,  525,  532;  by  the  high  priest,  300,  509,  536;  a  prophet  like  Moses,
389 ;  whether  it  was  he  that  appeared  to  Moses,  470  ;  crucifixion  of,  474  ;
reconciles  man  to  God,  498 ;  typified  by  the  brazen  serpent,  503,  575 ;
his  spotless  virtues,  5X1;  typified  in  the  onyx  stones,  514;  the  Tetra-
grammaton,  or  Jehovah,  556;  typified  in  the  Landmarks  of  Masonry,
576,  659;  referred  to  in  the  prophecy  of  Balaam,  577;  called  the  Day-
star,  578 ;  incarnation  of,  643 ;  the  Messiah  of  the  Jews  and  G.  A.  O.  T.  U.
of  Freemasonry,  658 ;  typified  in  the  King,  Priest,  and  Prophet  of  the
Royal  Arch,  660 ;  will  appear  in  the  vale  of  Jehoshaphat,  662 ;  men-
tioned  in  the  earliest  Masonic  lectures  known,  663.

Christian  religion  shown  in  Freemasonry,  i.  44 ;  ministers  may  profit  by
Freemasonry,  89;  churches  east  and  west,  203;  legends,  393;  Free-
masonry at  Kilwinning,  ii.  16;  Mark,  Knight  of  the,  114;  dispensation,
a  type  of  the  third  degree,  181 ;  Masonry,  329  ;  what,  494 ;  the  triple  tan
adapted  to,  635 :  prayer  used  in  Lodges,  662  ;  trinity  mentioned  in  an
ancient  Masonic  MS.,  664  ;  tendency  of  Freemasonry,  6G8.

Christianity,  the  universal  religion,  ii.  299 ;  was  the  religion  of  Moses,  389  ;
doctrines  of,  524 ;  referred  to  in  the  original  lectures  of  Masonry,  663  ;
mentioned  in  the  Charter  of  Colne,  664.

Christians,  Masons  confess  themselves  to  be,  i.  42.

Church  of  Christ  symbolized  by  the  tabernacle,  ii.  246.

Churches  east  and  west,  why,  i.  203 ;  the  seven,  527.

Circle,  the  boundary  line  between  God  and  man,  i.  166.

Circumambulation,  i.  311 ;  of  Mount  Moriah,  ii.  263.

Circumcision,  i.  58.

City  built  by  Cain,  ii.  214  ;  where  it  stood,  217-

Classes  of  Freemasonry,  ii.  38 ;  of  the  Hants  Grades,  87  ;  of  the  Rite
Ancien  et  Accepte,  329.

Classification,  of  workmen  at  the  temple,  i.  410;  of  the  Hants  Grades,
ii.  46.

Clean  and  unclean  beasts,  i.  515.

Clearing  the  foundations  of  the  temple,  ii.  260,

Clef  des  Magon,  la,  i.  22.

Clermont,  Chapter  of,  ii.  44  ;  Count  of,  G.  M.,  48.

Closing  the  Lodge,  i.  139,  316  ;  point  of  the  Lodge,  the,  ii.  160.

Cloud  and  fire,  pillar  of  a,  i.  73,  460  ;  its  use,  463.

Cloudy  canopy,  i.  272  ;  pillar  used  as  an  oracle,  470.

Code  of  morals,  i.  135.

Coffin,  the,  ii.  142;  explained,  144;  emblems  on  the,  154.

Cohens,  Knight  of  the,  ii.  115.

Colleges,  ii.  332.

Colour  of  the  standard  of  Judah,  ii.  586  ;  of  Issachar,  587  ;  of  Zebulun,
587  ;  of  Reuben,  589  ;  of  Simeon,  589  ;  of  Gad,  590;  of  Ephraim,  591  ;
of  Manasseh,  592  ;  of  Benjamin,  592  ;  of  Dan,  592 ;  of  Asher,  594  ;  of
Napthali,  594.

Colours,  the  three,  i.  245 ;  the  Masonic,  ii.  245.

Columns,  capitals  of  the,  i.  443.

Commander  of  the  temple,  ii.  342.

Commemorative  rites  on  hills  and  in  valleys,  i.  319.

Commencement,  middle,  end,  i.  252

Commentary  on  the  lectures,  i.  96 ;  ii.  250.

Communications  held  quarterly,  ii.  101.

Common  gavel,  i.  180.

Compagnon  Ecossais,  ii.  346.

Comparison  between  the  temple  and  a  Mason's  Lodge,  i.  238.


684


GENERAL    INDEX    TO    THE    TEXT.


Compass,  cardinal  points  of  the,  i.  137  ;  of  the  conscience,  146.

Compasses,  the,  i.  161  ;  explained,  IC9.

Complaints  against  God,  ii.  560,  562.

Completion  of  the  temple,  ii.  366;  of  the  seventy  years'  captivity,  419.

Compound  symbol  introduced  into  Freemasonry,  i.  79.

Conclaves,  ii.  333  ;  of  Templars,  24.

Condition  of  the  modern  Jews,  i.  365.

Confusion  of  tongues,  i.  64.

Conjectures  on  the  Sacred  Name,  ii.  540.

Connection  between  science  and  morals,' i.  183.

Consecrated  fires  of  Persia,  i.  200.

Consecration  of  the  seventh  day,  i.  61.

Consistory  of  Princes  of  the  Royal  Secret  formed,  ii.  50.

Consistorial  Masonry,  ii.  330.

Consistories  in  America  formed,  ii.  109,  332.

Conspiracy  against  the  life  of  Moses,  ii.  463.

Constitutions  of  England,  Lodges  under  the,  ii.  317  ;  of  Masonry  modified,

325.

Construction  of  the  tabernacle,  i.  74;  of  the  temple  service.  242;  of  Specu-
lative Masonry,  183;  of  Masonic  symbols,  ii.  618.
Contents  of  the  Tracing-board  of  an  E.  A.  P.,  i.  132;  of  the  Most  Holy

Place,  ii.  242  ;  of  the  Ark  of  the  Covenant,  290.
Contention  and  dispute,  ii.  27.

Continental  Lodges  invent  new  degrees,  ii.  30  ;  Masonry  purified,  99.
Converts  to  the  high  degrees,  ii.  63.
Convocations  held  quarterly,  ii.  101
Cope-stone  of  the  system  of  Freemasonry,  ii.  183;  of  the  second  temple

celebrated,  449.
Copper,  working  in,  ii.  207.
Corinthiuu  order  in  architecture,  the,  i.  15  1.
Corn-field,  a,  i.  443.
Corollary,  the,  ii.  657.

Corroboration  of  the  Historical  Landmarks  by  notes,  ii.  674.
Corruptions  of  truth,  i.  389  ;  of  the  Israelites,  ii.  390.
Corybantes,  ceremonies  of  the,  imitated,  ii   237.
Cost  of  the  temple,  ii.  271.
Costly  decorations  of  the  temple,  i.   578 ;    paraphernalia  of  the  temple,

ii.  276.

( 'ouncil  of  the  Trinity,  i.  494 ;  of  Grand  Inspectors,  ii.  334.
Courage  recommended,  ii.  6.
Court  of  the  Gentiles,  i.  442 ;  of  the  tabernacle,  a  type  of  the  elementary

heavens,  ii.  226  ;  described,  240.
Covenant,  the,  i.  47  ;  re-established  with  Abraham,  58 ;  with  Jacob,  275  ;

angel  of  the,  82  ;  old,  Ishmael  a  type  of,  112  ;  between  the  Grand  Orient

and  Supreme  Council  broken,  ii.  94;  with  Adam,  167;  ark  of  the,  289.
Covering  of  the  Lodge,  i.  171,  265,  274;  ii.  301.
Cowans,  i.  142  ;  envy  Freemasons,  349.
Creative  power,  symbol  of,  i.  1.
Creator,  the,  referred  to,  ii.  543.

Creation,  history  of  the,  i.  53,  476  ;  of  man.  492  ;  memorial  of  the  512.
Credibility  of  legends  in  the  early  ages  of  the  world,  i.  55.
Crime  committed  by  the  Tyrian  workmen,  ii.  368.
Criminals  sought  for,  ii.  374.
Crimson,  a  symbol  of  divine  love,  ii.  255.
Cross,  the,  a  symbol  of  life,  i.  70;  an  emblem  of  salvation,  80;  Knight  of

the,  ii.  115  ;  use  of  the,  619  ;  of  Christ,  an  emblem  of  eternal  life,  628  ;

the  ancient  mark  to  signify  ten,  630.
Cross-legged  Masons,  so  called,  what,  ii.  23.


GENERAL    INDEX    TO    THE    TEXT.

Crow,  iron,  a  symbol,  ii.  354.

Crown  of  the  ark,  a  symbol  of  dignity,  ii.  298;  of  the  Royal  Arch,  358  ;

and  mitre,  a  symbol,  512.
Crowned  adept,  degree  of,  ii.  115.
Crucefix,  Dr.,  vote  of  thanks  to,  i.  36.
Crucifixion,  a  type  of,  one  of  the  Grand  Offerings  of  Masonry,  i.  67  ;  of

Christ,  ii.  474.

Cruel  treatment  of  the  Israelites  in  Egypt,  i.  358.
Crusades,  Templars  of  the,  whether  they  were  Masons,  ii.  22.
Crypt,  a  transcript  of  the  sacred  valley,  i.  346.
Cube,  double,  i.  1 89.
Cultivation  of  the  mind,  i.  120.
Curtains  of  the  tabernacle,  ii.  241.
Cyrus,  edict  of,  ii.  418 ;  restores  the  holy  vessels,  442.

Dagon  falls  from  its  pedestal  before  the  ark,  i.  575 ;  falls  before  the  ark,
ii.  298.

Dalcho,  an  eminent  Mason,  i.  89.

l)an,  his  banner,  i.  78  ;  the  seventh  grand  point  refers  to,  311 ;  and  Bethel,
336 ;  idols  set  up  at,  ii.  390;  banner  of  explained,  592.

Daniel  cast  into  a  den  of  lions,  ii.  409  ;  instructs  Pythagoras,  411 ;  appointed
governor  of  Shushan,  430.

Daniel's  four  prophecies,  i.  321.

Dames  of  Mount  Tabor,  order  of,  instituted,  ii.  98.

Darius  consulted,  ii.  445 ;  confirms  the  edict  of  Cyrus,  447-

Darkness,  emblems  of,  i.  1,  245,  277  ;  and  light,  460;  on  the  face  of  the
earth,  476 ;  of  Egypt,  ii.  608.

Daughter,  the,  of  Jeptha,  meets  him,  i.  505  ;  and  submits  to  her  fate,  505  ;
whether  she  were  immolated,  506.

David  numbers  the  people,  i.  82 ;  a  Grand  Master,  222  ;  account  of,  224  ;
is  desirous  of  building  a  temple,  224;  reforms  the  Lodges,  225  ;  forbidden
to  build  a  temple,  226 ;  numbers  the  people,  227 ;  and  is  condemned,  228 ;
his  choice  of  three  calamities,  229  :  his  penitence  and  pardon,  230  ;  the
plague  ceases,  231  ;  he  purchases  the  threshing  floor  on  Mount  Moriah,
232;  and  builds  an  altar,  233;  his  prayer,  233;  the  site  of  the  temple
communicated  to,  234 ;  collects  materials,  235 ;  assembles  the  princes,
ii.  259.

Day,  what  created  on  the  first,  i.  479  ;  of  rest,  510;  of  judgment,  appear-
ance of  the  Deity  at,  ii.  474.

Decalogue,  the,  ii.  290.

Dearth  of  Masonic  writers  accounted  for,  i.  32.

Death,  certainty  of,  ii.  142;  of  HAB,  153;  no  security  from,  157;  in
Adam  and  life  in  Christ,  171 ;  of  Judas,  176  ;  introduced  into  the  world,
483;  of  Christ,  an  expiation  for  sin,  499;  of  the  first-born  of  Egypt,  610.

Decay  of  the  Jews,  ii.  288.

Decorations  of  the  pillars,  i.  246,  449;  of  the  temple,  442 ;  costly,  578  ;
of  the  tabernacle,  ii.  224  ;  of  the  temple,  266 ;  of  the  ineffable  degrees,
367.

Dedication  of  the  temple,  i.  83,  580  ;  of  the  second  temple,  ii.  453.

Definitions  of  Freemasonry,  i.  126  ;  ii.  672.

Degeneracy  of  mankind,  i.  538.

Degrees,  three,  ii.  5  ;  new  invented,  9,31 ;  symbolical,  18;  sublime,  the  ten
of  Ramsay's  Masonry,  31  ;  of  hermetic  Masonry,  46 ;  in  the  Emperor  of
the  East  and  West,  47  ;  of  Scotch  Masonry,  57 ;  of  Le  Mere  Loge
Ecossais,  73 ;  of  the  Order  of  Mizraim,  74  ;  of  Illuminism,  78  ;  of  Fess-
ler,  87  ;  of  the  Chapitre  Metropolitain,  98  ;  of  the  rite  of  Persian  philo-
sophy, 98  ;  number  of  in  France,  100  ;  in  Ireland,  104 ;  in  America,  322  ;
and  Orders,  328  ;  catalogue  of,  335  ;  auxiliary,  345.


(J8G


GENERAL  INDEX  To  TUE  TEXT.


the,  consecrates  Moriah,  ii.  187  ;
47,355;  commemorated,  193;  of


Deism  refuted  by  Freemasonry,  i.  52.

Deity  denoted  by  the  letter  G,  i.  532
appears  on  Sinai,  221.

Deliverance  from  Egyptian  bondage,  i
the  Israelites,  ii.  559.

Deliverer,  the,  i.  62.

Delta  sign,  i.  247-

Denunciation  of  Enoch,  ii.  202;  on  the  Jews,  398  ;  of  Jeremiah  fulfilled,
471.

Deluge,  universal,  i.  46,  62,  268  ;  appearance  of  the  Deity  at  the,  ii.  473.

Departure  of  the  sceptre  from  Judah,  ii.  640.

Depth  of  the  Lodge,  i.  1 36.

Deputy  Grand  Masters  appointed  by  the  King  of  Prussia,  ii.  49.

Derwentwater,  Lord,  practises  Freemasonry,  ii.  32.

Des  erreurs  et  de  la  Verite  mentioned,  i.  23.

Desaguliers,  an  eminent  Mason,  i.  89.

Descent  of  the  Deity,  ii.  472.

Description  of  the  tabernacle,  ii.  240 ;  of  the  ark,  289.

Desetangs  on  the  second  degree,  i.  380.

Design  of  the  second  degree,  i.  439;  of  Freemasonry,  ii.  183;  before  the
flood,  185;  of  the  serpent  tempter,  490 ;  of  the  Lectures  of  Masonrv.
657.
Destruction  of  Freemasonry,  a  book,  so  called,  mentioned,  i.  25  ;  of

salem  by  Nebuchadnezzar,  ii.  350;  of  the  Israelites,  561.
Deuen  die  es  verstchen  mentioned,  i.  25.
Devices  on  the  four  leading  banners,  ii.  568 ;  on  all  the  banners,  583.
Devils  cast  out  by  Christ,  ii.  299.
Diadem  of  stars,  i.  157-

Diamond  in  the  Pectoral,  its  signification,  ii.  519.
Dies  quietus,  i.  531.
Differences  in  Masonry  settled,  ii.  64.
Diffusion  of  Freemasonry,  ii.  675.

Dimensions  of  the  temple,  i.  442,  579  ;  of  the  Most  Holy  Place,  ii.  242.
Diocesan,  degree  of  the,  ii.  116.
Dionysiaca,  the,  i.  155.
Discipline,  strictness  of,  i.  438.

Discrepancies  respecting  the  number  of  men  at  the  temple,  i.  409.
Discoveries  of  Solomon's  workmen,  i.  585.
Discovery  of  the  body  of  Abel,  ii.  173;  an  important  one,  communicated,

434.

Disgrace  of  Freemasonry,  ii.  68.

Disorders  prevented  at  the  building  of  the  temple,  i.  429.
Dispensations  of  religion,  old  and  new,  i.  50  ;  three,  250.
Dispersion,  the,  i.  64.

Disputes  occasioned  by  removing  the  Landmarks,  i.  552;  on  the  Continent,
ii.  27 ;  amongst  the  Grand  Lodges,  91  ;  between  the  Grand  Council  and
Grand  Chapter,  105  ;  amongst  the  Jews,  650.
Disquisitions  on  Masonry  beneficial,  i.  1.
Dissolution  of  the  Templars,  ii.  12.
Distinction,  a  fondness  for,  ii.  9.
Distortion  of  religious  legends,  i.  392.
Diurnal  rotation  of  the  earth,  ii.  251.
Diversity  of  practice  in  non-essentials,  ii.  332.
Divine   presence   manifested,   i.   230 ;   qualities,   three,  244 ;   unity,  453 ;
instructor,  a,  necessary,  538  ;  to  whom  revealed  in  Greece,  540  ;  manifes-
tations, ii.  559.

Division  of  labour,  i.  437  ;  of  the  camp  of  Israel,  ii.  570.
Doctrine  of  the  trinity,  i.  256,


GENERAL  INDEX  TO  THE  TEXT.          687

Doctrines  of  Masonry  not  fully  illustrated  in  the  Lodge  lectures,  i.  3 ;  spiri-
tual of  Freemasonry,  87,  of  the  three  degrees,  186;  vindicated,  399;
precious,  ii.  254  ;  of  Christianity,  524.

Dodd,  an  eminent  Mason,  i.  89  ;  his  definition  of  Masonry,  129.

Dog-star,  rising  of  the,  i.  547.

Domingo,  St.,  sublime  Masonry  introduced  into,  ii.  50.

Door  of  the  middle  chamber,  i.  439.

Doric  order  in  architecture,  the,  i.  154.

Double  meaning  of  some  symbols,  i.  56 ;  cube,  the,  189 ;  ii.  301,  357 ;  circle,
355  ;  triangle,  355.

Dove  of  Noah,  i.  515.

Drawings  on  the  Tracing-board,  i.  352.

Dreams,  future  events  communicated  by,  i.  541  ;  of«Pharoah,  516.

Dress  of  the  priests,  ii.  508.

Due  d'Antin,  G.  M.  of  France,  ii.  34.

Due  east  and  west,  i.  192.

Duties  of  Freemasonry,  ii.  159  ;  to  our  neighbour  and  ourselves,  186,  582.

Duty  to  God  taught  in  Freemasonry,  i.  129,  382  ;  of  a  Mason,  236.

Dwelling  place  of  the  Deity,  i.  541.

Dyeing,  art  of,  Israelites  acquainted  with  the,  ii.  245.

Eagle,  double  headed,  the,  i.  1 ;  and  Pelican,  degree  of,  established,  ii.  42  ;
Knight  of  the,  116,  339 ;  the  device  on  the  banner  of  Dan,  592 ;  ensign
of  the  Romans,  594.

Ear  of  corn,  i.  443;  a  symbol  of  plenty,  501  ;  a  listening,  ii.  161.

Earth,  the,  repeopled  after  the  deluge,  i.  63 ;  created  from  water,  253 ;
becomes  corrupt,  ii.  198.

East,  the,  a  place  of  light,  i.  138  ;  and  west,  due,  192 ;  why  Lodges  are  so
placed,  193  ;  worshipping  towards  the,  194  ;  Garden  of  Eden  in  the,  202  ;
the  birth  of  day,  203 ;  wind  blows  on  the  red  sea,  373 ;  and  west,  taber-
nacle to  be  placed  due,  ii.  223.

Ebal,  pillars  at  mount,  i.  302.

Eclectic  Masonry  practised,  ii.  8,  5,  117.

Ecossais,  Chevalier  Ma<jon,  established,  ii.  29 ;  Fideles,  established,  42 ;
degrees  so  named,  57-

Eden,  Garden  of,  i.  499.

Edge  tools,  origin  of,  ii.  206.

Edict  of  Cyrus,  ii.  418  ;  for  the  destruction  of  male  children,  459.

Editor  of  the  Freemasons'  Quarterly  Review  mentioned,  i;  36.

Edomites,  the,  i.  219.  ^

EEL,  a  name  of  God,  ii.  541.

Egypt,  the  trade  of,  i.  116;  use  of  hieroglyphics  in,  153;  first  population
of,  548.

Egyptian  hieroglyphics,  double  meaning  of  the,  i.  56 ;  bondage,  68  ;  deli-
verance from,  355  ;  temples,  magnitude  of,  562  ;  Masonry  founded,  ii.
74;  androgyne  promulgated,  84;  idols  fall  before  Christ,  298;  spurious
Freemasonry,  461  ;  idols  bear  a  cross,  628 ;  signifying  life,  630.

Egyptians  employed  at  the  building  of  the  temple,  i.  411 ;  whether  they
believed  in  the  divine  unity,  538;  refer  their  disputes  to  Euclid,  552;
afraid  of  the  Israelites,  ii.  456;  punished,  608.

EHEIF,  a  name  of  God,  ii   539,  542.

Eighth  grand  point  explained,  i.  312.

Eleazer,  the  S.  G.  W.,  i.  566.

Elect,  Perfect  and  Sublime  Mason,  degree  of,  ii.  338.

Elected  of  the  Truth,  degree  of,  ii.  118  ;  Brother,,  degree  of,  118  ;  of  the
New  Jerusalem,  128  ;  Knights  of  Nine,  337.

Elements  of  Masonic  morality,  i.183;  the  four,  termed  the  mother  of
nature,  253.


688


GENERAL  INDEX  TO  THE  TEXT.


Eleventh  grand  point  explained,  i.  31  1 :  step  of  the  winding  stain-use,

Er.noE,  a  name  of  God,  ii.  542.

Eli,  his  weakness,  i.  572.

Eliezer  of  Damascus,  i.  101.

Elijah  lives  in  a  cave,  i.  334.

ELOHIM,  a  name  of  God,  ii.  541.

Elu,  le  petit,  established,  ii.  37  ;  de  Perignan,  34fi.

Elucidation  of  the  Landmarks,  ii.  249.

Elysian  Knights,  degree  of,  ii.  118.

Embalming  the  dead,  cassia  employed  in,  ii.  1 19.

Embellishments  of  the  tabernacle,  ii   241,  244.

Emblem  of  the  Deity,  i.  247,  248  ;  of  mortality,  ii.  142  ;  on  the  cc

of  peace,  296.

Emblems  of  darkness,  i.  1  :  of  Masonry,  120;  local,  12f>;  on  the  Tracing-
board  of  an  E.  A.  P.,  133.

Emblematical  construction  of  Freemasonry,  i.  384.
Embroidered  work  of  the  temple,  ii.  255;  vestments,  510.
Emerald  in  the  pectoral,  its  signification,  ii.  518.
Emerods  brought  on  the  Philistines,  i.  575.
Eminent  Masons,  enumeration  of,  i.  89.
Emperor  of  the  East  and  West,  degree  of,  formed,  ii.  47;  of  I/.hanns,

degree  of,  118.
Encampments,  ii.  333.
End  of  time  proclaimed,  i.  527-

Endliche  Schickfall  des  Freymaurer  Ordens  mentioned,  i.  27.
England,  Ramsay's  degrees  rejected  in,  ii.  33;  and  Germany  form  a  Ma-
sonic compact,  69;  constitutions  of,  317.
English  Masonry  pure,  ii.  33,  99;  Harodim,  118.

Enoch  translated,  i.  515 ;  his  arched  temples,  585  ;  on  mount  Moriah,  ii.
189;  vision  of,  191;    excavates  a  vault,  183;    contents  of,  104;  has  a
second  vision,  195;  erects  two  pillars,  199;  assembles  his  family,  202;
his  final  exhortation,  202 ;  is  translated,  203.
Enormities  of  Egypt  practised  by  the  Israelites,  ii.  238.
Entered  Apprentices'  Tracing-board  explained,  i.
the  building  of  the  temple,  414 ;  Lodges  of,  424
wages,  436.

E.  A.  P.,  degree  of,  ii.  335.
Entrance  of  the  candidate,  i.  308.
Ephod  of  the  high  priest,  ii.  513.
Ephraim's  banner,  i.  78 ;  the  half  tribe  of,  threatened  Jeptha,  507  ;  defeated,

508  ;  slain,  509 ;  banner  explained,  ii.  590.
Equality,  i.  162 ;  of  the  grave,  ii.  147.
Equilateral  triangle,  i.  247,  446.
Eques  a  cygno,  a  title  of  Knigge,  ii.  61.
Erection  of  the  tabernacle,  i.  74.
Errors  propagated  by  Ham,  i.  60;  in  computing  the  number  of  Brethren,

ii.  319.

Esau  the  father  of  the  Edomites,  i.  219.
Eternal  life,  ii.  628.
Eternity  of  the  Deity,  i.  490.

Etesian  wind  precedes  the  inundation  of  the  Nile,  i.  549.
Euclid,  forty  seventh  problem  of,  i.  144;  a  Tyrian,  548 ;  teaches  the  Egyp-
tians geometry,  552  ;  his  knowledge  of  architecture,  553  ;  forms  a  Mason's
Lodge  in  Egypt,  563  ;  restores  the  ancient  usages  of  Masonry,  564  ;  his
digest  of  geometry,  565.
Evangelist,  St.  John  the,  i.  166.
Eve  plucks  the  forbidden  fruit,  ii.  482.
Evidences  of  Masonry,  i.  42  ;  indirect,  52  ;  internal,  87.


120;  educated,  403  ;  at
how  many,  427  ;  their


GENERAL    INDEX    TO    THE    TEXT.  689

Evil  introduced  into  the  world,  ii.  483  ;  produced  by  the  serpent,  496.

Examination  recommended,  i.  9.

Excellence  of  Freemasonry,  i.  231.

Excellencies  of  Enoch,  ii.  190.

Excellent  Masons,  Lodges  of,  i.  420 ;  how  many,  427 ;  disposition  of  the

camp  of  Israel,  ii.  572.
Exclusion  from  the  promised  land,  ii.  561.
Exemption  from  imposts,  duties  and  taxes,  ii.  595.
Exhortation  of  PJnoch,  ii.  202.

Exile  of  the  Jews  in  Babylon  to  continue  seventy  years,  ii.  408.
Expedition  of  Xerxes,  ii.  282.

Expostulation  of  H.  K.  T.,  ii.  380;  divine,  with  the  Israelites,  566.
Expulsion  from  Paradise,  ii.  107  ;  of  seceding  Brethren,  309.
Extent  of  the  Lodge,  i.  135, 191 ;  ii.  301 ;  of  Freemasonry,  305.
Extermination  of  the  Canaanites,  i.  298.
Extraordinary  prediction  respecting  Moses,  ii.  459.
Eyes  of  the  cherubim,  symbolical,  ii.  295.
Ezekiel  retires  into  Assyria,  ii.  430;  the  mark  of,  what,  619.
Ezekiel's  vision  of  the  cherubim,  i.  67  ;  offering  in,  518.
Ezra,  his  mission,  ii.  450.

Fable  degenerates  into  romance,  i.  393.
Fabricated  degrees,  ii.  66.

Facilities  for  acquiring  Masonic  knowledge,  i.  38.

Facts  in  Freemasonry,  i.  45;  transmitted  before  the  deluge,  55;  not  re-
corded by  Moses,  57  ;  and  legends,  400 ;  typical  of  Christ,  ii.  581.
Faith,  what  it  is,  i.  65;  taught  in  Freemasonry,  129;   Hope,  and  Charity,

159;  defined,  171  ;  of  Abraham,  212,  216.
Fall  of  man,  i.  54 ;  through  the  temptations  of  a  serpent,  54 ;  of  our  first

parents,  ii.  171;  restoration  of,  476;  why  introduced  into  Freemasonry,

492.

False  deities  of  Egypt,  ii.  227.

Families  distributed  in  the  provinces  of  Chaldea,  ii.  407.
Favours  to  the  Israelites,  ii.  559.
Fellowcraft,  the,  a  type,  ii.  180;  degree  of,  335.
Fellowcrafts,  three,  i.  246 ;  Lodges  at  the  temple,  403,  421  ;  how  many,

427 ;   Tracing-board  explained,  439.
Fellowship,  points  of,  i.  185.
Female  Freemasonry  flourishes,  ii.  36,  111.
Females  desirous  of  being  received  into  Masonry,  ii.  35.
Fertility  of  Egypt,  i.  554.

Fertilizing  sediment  deposited  by  the  Nile,  i.  555.
Fessler,  his  system  of  Masonry,  ii.  87.
Fidelity,  the  symbol  of,  i.  177  ;  ii.  160.
Field  of  the  Wood,  Moriah  so  termed,  i.  226 ;  of  corn,  twelve  stones  taken

from  a,  294 ;  Jeptha's  battle  in  a,  509.
Fifteen  Master  Masons  selected,  ii.  374.
Fifth  grand  point  explained,  i.  309  ;  step  of  the  winding  staircase,  454 ;

period,  492.
Final  destruction  of  Freemasonry,  a  book  so  called,  i.  25;  judgment  in  the

valley  of  Jehoshaphat,  342  ;  exhortation  of  Enoch,  ii.  202.
Finch's  works  mentioned,  i.  12.
Fines  for  neglect  of  duty,  i.  438.
Fire  in  the  burning  bush,  i.   72  ;   pillar  of,  73,  373 ;  from  heaven,  459 ;

heaven  created  from,  253 ;  water,  air,  253  ;  without  heat,  468  ;  without

light,  469;  uses  of,  how  discovered,  ii.  209,  in  the  burning  bush,  467.
Firmament,  waters  above  the,  what,  i.  482.

VOL.  II.  Y  Y


090


GENERAL    INDEX    TO    THE    TEXT.


First  parents  of  mankind  punished,  i.  Gl  ;  degree,  93;  grand  offering  of
Freemasonry,  67,  205;  grand  point  explained,  306;  step  of  the  winding
staircase,  453;  period,  479;  person  in  the  trinity,  5*2'2;  born  of  Egypt
destroyed,  ii.  610.

Fishes  created,  i.  492.

Five  senses,  i.  496 ;  figures  of,  on  the  coffin  explained,  ii.  155.

Flaming  swords  over  the  garden  of  Eden,  ii.  491.

Floats  to  Joppa,  i,  425.

Floods  of  the  Nile  beneficial,  i.  549.

Floor  of  the  Lodge  consecrated,  ii.  188,  202.

Foot-stone  levelled,  ii.  263.

Forest  of  Lebanon,  timber  of,  used  in  the  second  temple,  ii.  443.

Form  of  the  Lodge,  i.  135,  188;  of  the  Royal  Arch  Tracing-board,  ii,  351.

Forms  and  ceremonies,  i.  187  ;  in  the  Chapters,  ii.  319.

Formula  of  the  high  priest,  ii.  546.

Fortifications  of  Jerusalem  completed,  ii.

Fortitude,  i.  176;  recommended,  ii.  G.

Foundation  of  the  legend  of  the  third  degree,  ii.  170;  of  the  systems  o
Freemasonry,  183;  stone  of  the  second  temple  laid,  -139.

Foundations,  the,  cleared,  ii.  260  ;  of  the  second  temple  opened,  4JJ4.

Four  principal  banners,  what  they  represented,  i.  77  ;  veils  of  the  Royal
Arch,  ii.  360.

Fourth  grand  point  explained,  i.  308 ;  period,  486.

France,  attempt  made  to  extinguish  l-'n-umasonry  in,  i.  22  ;  unsuccessful,
24 ;  Grand  Lodge  of,  its  proceedings,  ii.  39.

Franklin,  Dr.,  an  eminent  Mason,  i.  89.

Fraternity,  the,  disgusted,  ii.  48 ;  organized,  325.

Freeborn,  why  Masons  are  said  to  be,  i.  66,  95  ;  candidate  to  be,  109.

Freemasonry,  whether  injured  liy  Masonic  publications,  i.  10,  11  ;  de-
nounced, 16;  but  uninjured,  17;  on  the  continent  of  Europe,  21  ;  ad-
vances in  public  opinion,  28 ;  merits  of,  31 ;  has  hitherto  contributed
little  to  the  general  fund  of  literature,  and  why,  32 ;  too  securely  based  to
be  overthrown,  37  ;  facts  in,  45 ;  types  in,  45,  48 ;  why  instituted,  50 ;
identified  with  religion,  51  ;  proofs  in,  51 ;  refutes  deism,  52  ;  historical
facts  in,  53  ;  of  the  antediluvian  world,  60 ;  primitive,  what,  61 ;  embodies
the  types  of  Christ,  66;  a  vehicle  of  predictions,  70;  increases  in  public
estimation,  88;  illustrated  by  symbols,  126;  definitions  of,  127;  not  a
system  of  religion,  128;  bond  of,  129;  founded  on  religion,  130;  univer-
sality of,  136  ;  moral  teaching  of,  182  ;  philosophy  of,  186 ;  spread  of,  199 ;
frequent  references  to  mount  Moriah  in,  205 ;  attached  to  all  religions,
206;  contains  a  type  of  the  Christian  atonement,  209;  something  more
than  a  technical  institution,  220 ;  its  excellence,  231 ;  moral  and  religious
teaching  of,  237;  ternary  allusions  in,  243;  ancient  creed  of,  287  ;  not
taken  from  the  heathen  mysteries,  318;  subject  to  slander  and  detraction,
349;  what  it  is,  381;  an  allegorical  system,  384;  its  tendency  open  to
investigation,  385 ;  connected  with  the  original  promise,  386 ;  its
doctrines  and  practice  vindicated,  399 ;  modelled  on  the  number
three,  ii.  4;  a  symbolical  science,  4;  schisms  in,  7 ;  established  at  Kil-
winning,  15  ;  in  the  seventeenth  century,  24;  teaches  morality,  25;  dete-
riorated, 27;  in  the  reign  of  Charles  II,  27;  earned  into  France  by
James  II.,  28;  used  to  cement  the  adherents  of  the  Stuarts,  31  ;  female,
36  ;  divided  into  classes,  38 ;  persecuted,  43 ;  of  the  Jesuits,  46  ;  improved
by  the  King  of  Prussia,  49 ;  amalgamated  with  sundry  forbidden  arts,  63  ;
writings  against,  86;  of  England.,  pure,  99;  in  Scotland,  103  ;  in  Ireland,
104;  in  Germany  and  Switzerland,  106;  in  Sweden,  106;  in  America,
108,320;  nomenclature  of,  109;  duties  of,  159,  161;  peace,  harmony,
and  brotherly  love  of,  168  ;  legend  of,  171 ;  foundation  and  cape- stone  of,
183;  true  design  of,  183;  before  the  flood,  185;  what  it  teaches,  186:


GENERAL    INDEX    TO    THE    TEXT.  691

placed  in  the  hands  of  Lamech,  203;  beauty  of,  252;  universality  of,
255;  accounts  of  the  temple  in,  286;  priestly  orders  in,  300;  extent  of,
305  ;  spreads  over  Europe,  313;  extensively  diffused,  323;  is  Judaism  in
its  perfected  state,  388 ;  refers  to  Christianity,  389 ;  Jews  practise  it  in
Babylon,  424  ;  of  Adam,  what,  477,  479  ;  practised  in  Paradise,  492 ;
brazen  serpent  in,  575  ;  symbols  of,  refer  to  Christ,  576 ;  records  the  chief
types  of  Christ,  579;  a  secret  society,  617;  applied  to  the  practice  of
virtue,  619;  accords  with  Christianity,  661;  called  St.  John's  Brothers,
664;  defined,  674;  sciences^  taught  in,  674;  its  universality,  675. — See
MASONRY.

Freemasons  meet  in  the  crypts  of  cathedrals,  i.  346;  Quarterly  Review
commended,  ii.  676.

French  Masonry  prohibited,  ii.  43 ;  rite,  S22.

Freres  inities  de  1'Asia,  new  order  of,  instituted,  ii.  74.

Friend  of  St.  John,  degree  of,  ii.  135  ;  of  Truth,  degree  of,  138.

Friendship,  symbol  of,  i.  251.

Frogs  and  blood  produced  by  the  magicians  of  Egypt,  ii.  605.

Frontispiece,  allegorical,  described,  i.  1.

Fruits  of  Egypt  destroyed,  ii.  608.

Fruitfulness  of  Canaan,  i.  300.

Fundamental  principle  of  Masonry,  a,  ii.  308.

Funds  augmented  by  the  influence  of  Masonic  publications,  i.  3.

Funerals,  Jewish  mourners  at,  carried  a  branch  of  acacia,  ii.  148.

Furniture  of  the  Lodge,  what,  i.  168 ;  three  articles  of,  245.

Future  happiness,  i.  62;  state,  539;  events  communicated  by  dreams,  541 ;
state,  truth  of  a,  ii.  166.

G,  signification  of  the  letter,  i.  532.

Gad,  the  eighth  grand  point  refers  to,  i.  312;  banner  of,  explained,  ii.  590.

Garden  of  Eden  in  the  east,  i.  202,  499.

Gates  of  the  New  Jerusalem,  i.  250.

Gavel,  the,  i.  180.

Genius  of  Masonry,  i.  1.

Gentiles,  court  of  the,  i.  442;  converted  to  Christianity,  ii.  649.

Geometry,  i.  454 ;  signified  by  the  letter  G,  533 ;  taught  by  Euclid,  552  ;

known  before  the  flood,  ii.  214.
Geometrical  staircase,  i.  456.

General  view  of  the  Landmarks,  i.  41  ;  diffusion  of  Freemasonry,  ii.  675.
German  Rose  Croix  mentioned,  ii.  74  ;  union  established,  82.
Germany,  attempt  made  to  extinguish  Freemasonry  in,  i.   24;  antiquity

of  Masonry  in,  ii.    19 ;    Hunde's   introduction   of  Masonry  into,   45 ;

Freemasonry  in,  106.
Gershomites,  station  of  the,  ii.  570.
Geschichte,  der  Unbeckannter,  mentioned,  i.  25.
Ghiblim,  i.  402.
Ghiblimites,  i.  411.

Gibeonites  employed  in  the  building  of  the  temple,  i.  415.
Gilead,  elders  of,  invite  Jeptha  to  return  home,  i.  504;  insulted  by  the

Ephraimites,  507.

Girdle  of  the  High  Priest,  a  symbol,  ii.  512.
Globes  on  the  pillars,  why  placed  there,  i.  475.
Glory  of  God  arising  from  the  practice  of  Masonry,  i.  39 ;  of  Solomon's

temple,  85,  478 ;  suspended  over  the  ark,  ii.  296.
God,  being  of  a,  i.  45;  mount  of,  75;  duty  to,  taught  in  Freemasonry,

129 ;  appeared  to  the  patriarchs  on  hills,  327  ;  rested  on  the  seventh

day,  512  ;  adored  under  symbols,  569  ;  descended  at  the  flood,  ii,  473.
Godhead,  three  persons  in  the,  i.  255.
Godfrey  de  Bouillon  mentioned,  ii.  3'2.


692


GENERAL    INDEX    TO    THE    TEXT.


Gold  and  silver  known  before  the  flood,  ii.  214;  the  temple  embellished
with,  254 ;  sanctum  sanctorum  lined  with,  274 ;  holy  vessels  made
of,  275;  mines,  277;  of  less  value  than  iron,  279;  gathered  at  little
expence,  287  ;  throne  of,  284 ;  statues  of,  in  India,  286 ;  vessels  of  the
temple  carried  away,  405.

Golden  legend,  the,  i.  391 ;  candlesticks,  524,  527 ;  vials,  plagues  in  the,
526;  lance,  Knight  of  the,  ii.  120;  calf  of  Aaron,  232;  burned,  238;
candlesticks,  242;  ornaments  of  the  Egyptian  ladies  relinquished,  611.

Goldsmith's  work  executed  by  Aholiab  and  Bezaleel,  ii.  224.

Golgotha,  i.  247.

Good  Mason,  a,  described,  i.  government,  438 ;  and  worthy  Masons,  what,
ii.  161.

Gorgeous  ornaments  of  the  temple,  ii.  267.

Governing  body  of  the  Order  of  H.  R.  D.  M.,  ii.  18.

Grade  de  la  Tour,  an  honorary  degree  of  H.  R.  D.  M.,  ii.  17.

Grand  Architects'  six  periods,  i.  476.

Grand  Chapter  of  H.  R.  D.  M.,  ii.  16;  of  St.  John's  Masonry  at  Kil-
winning,  16;  lodges  of  ancient  times,  19;  Lodge  of  France  declares  its
independence,  45  ;  Orient  formed,  60  ;  protects  the  Lodges  of  Adoption,
71 ;  admits  new  degrees,  80 ;  Lodge  condemns  Bahrdt's  system,  82 ;
Orient  and  Supreme  Council  unite,  93 ;  Orient  adopts  the  thirty-three
degrees,  95;  consistory  established  at  Paris,  96;  conclave,  102  ;  Council
of  Rites  in  Ireland  established,  104;  Chanter  of  the  Rose  Croix,  105;
Lodges  in  Germany,  106;  Master,  118;  elect,  perfect,  and  sublime
Mason,  118;  Master  Architect,  119,  337  ;  Inspector  General,  136,  344;
Lodges  in  the  United  States,  313;  appoint  representatives,  326;  Council
of  the  Inspectors  General,  334;  Pontiff,  340;  Architect,  340;  Master
of  Symbolic  Lodges,  340;  patriarch,  341;  elected  Knight  of  K.  H.,
343;  Inquisitor  Commander,  344;  Chapter  of  Solomon,  376;  and  Royal
Lodge,  416;  Lodges  in  Babylon,  425  ;  and  Royal  Lodge  opened,  427,
449  ;  Lodge  of  England,  lectures  recommended  by,  665.

G.  A.  O.  T.  U.  was  Christ,  ii.  658,  667  ;  so  called  in  the  earliest  Masonic
lectures  known,  663.

Grand  Lodge  opened  in  the  heavens,  i.  528 ;  offering,  the  first,  67,  205 ;
the  second,  82,  222 ;  the  third,  83 ;  three,  246 ;  festival,  Abraham's  95,
107  ;  Masters,  three,  246  ;  points  of  Masonry,  twelve,  287  ;  Architects,
Lodges  of,  421 ;  Orient  calls  itself  a,  ii.  60.

Gratitude  of  mankind  to  Tubal  Cain,  ii.  209.

Grave,  holy,  Knight  of  the,  ii.  121  ;  the,  143  ;  equality  of  the,  147.

Graces  of  the  spirit,  symbol  of  the,  ii.  509 ;  and  virtues  of  Freemasonry
purely  Christian,  667.

Great  stones  of  Solomon's  temple,  i.  426 ;  moral  duties  of  Masonry,  what,
ii.  161 ;  luminaries  of  the  Royal  Arch,  356  ;  secret  communicated  to
Cyrus,  422;  Council  of  the  Jews,  426;  Promise,  the,  493;  deliverer,
types  of  the,  in  Freemasonry,  661.

Greater  lights,  i.  244.

Greeks  and  Romans  venerated  the  seventh  day,  i.  529.

Grief  of  the  captives  in  Babylon,  ii.  416.

Ground  of  the  Lodge,  i.  122,  205.

Groves  planted  on  hills,  i.  331.'

Guard  of  the  Conclave,  degree  of,  ii.  1 14.
Gugomos,  a  Masonic  adventurer,  ii.  62.

Guttural  sign  explained,  i.  175.

Hagar  given  to  Abraham,  i.  102;  offended,  108;  and  Ishmael  dismissed,
113;  promises  to,  116;  supports  her  son  in  the  wilderness,  117;  de-
scendants of,  219.

Hagarenes,  the,  i.  117.


GENERAL    INDEX    TO    THE    TEXT.  693

Haggai,  his  prophecy,  i.  86;  accompanies  Z.  and  J.,  ii.  424;  exhorts  the

Jews  to  proceed,  444.

Ham  propagates  the  errors  of  the  Cainites,  i.  60.
Hananiah,  Misael,  and  Azariah,  cast  into  a  fiery  furnace,  ii.  410.
Handmaiden  of  religion,  P>eetnasonry  is  the,  i.  128.
Hands  of  Moses  elevated,  ii.  220.

Hants,  Grades  established,  ii.  32 ;  rejected,  40 ;  classed,  46.
Happiness  in  another  world,  i.  62;  the  end  of  Masonry,  130;  the  number

of,  518;   in  a  future  state,  ii.  141;   in  the  Grand  Lodge  above,  how

attained,  183;  in  Paradise,  perfect,  476.
Happy  resurrection  from  the  dead,  a,  ii.  159.
Harmony  and  brotherly  love,  ii.  26.
Harodim,  i.  402;  prince  of,  429.
Harp,  the,  invented,  ii.  216.
Heart,  a  faithful,  ii.  161.
Heathen  mythology,  the,  i.  396 ;  oracles  cease  at  the  advent  of  Christ,  ii.

299  ;  triad  worshipped  by  Solomon,  384.
Heaven,  where  it  is,  ii.  472.
Heavenly  Jerusalem,  the,  i.  250 ;  bodies  inhabited,  491  ;  band,  Knight  of

the,  ii.  121.

Heavens,  three,  i.  250  ;  created,  253.
Height  to  which  the  river  Nile  rises,  i.  559;  of  the  Lodge,  136  ;  of  the

porch,  441 ;  of  the  temple,  ii.  261.
Heliacal  rising  of  the  dog  star,  i.  550.
HELION,  a  name  of  the  Deity,  ii.  456.
Heraldic  devices,  cruciform,  ii.  626.
Hemming,  Dr.,  his  lectures,  ii.  664.
Hermes  Trismegistus  invents  Hieroglyphics,  i.  153.
Hermetic  Masonry  founded,  ii.  46.
Hero  gods,  who  they  were,  i.  541.

Herod,  reign  of,  i.  48  ;  his  temple,  86 ;  re-edifies  the  temple,  ii.  643.
Heroine  of  Jericho,  degree,  of,  ii.  121.
Hesse  Darmstadt,  the  Prince  of,  G.  M.  ii.  56.
Hewers  of  wood  and  drawers  of  water,  i.  424.
Hezekiah's  offering,  i.  517.
Hierarchy  of  the  Jews,  ii.  506.
Hieroglyphics   explained,  i.    153 ;  of  Egypt,  539 ;  their  import,  ii.   461  ;

understood  by  Moses,  604.

Hieroglyphical  characters  on  the  pillars  of  Enoch,  ii.  200.
High  priest,  the,  i.  75 ;  a  type  of  Christ,  ii.  300,  509,  536 ;  the  represen-
tative of  the  Deity,  507;  pronounced  the  Name  annually,  546.
High  places  condemned  in  the  Jewish  law,  i.  321  ;  of  Tophet,  ii.  385.
Highest  of  hills  and  lowest  of  valleys,  the,  i.  317,  350.
Higuetty  practises  Freemasonry,  ii.  32.
Hilkiah  finds  the  roll,  ii.  398.
Hill  and  cavern  temples,  i.  324.
Hills,  veneration  of,  i.  324  ;  sanctity  of,  329.
Hind,  the  device  on  the  banner  of  Napthali,  ii.  594.
Hinnom,  valley  of,  ii.  385.

Hints  gathered  from  the  first  chapter  of  Genesis,  i.  60.
H.  A.  B,  traditions  of,  ii.  151 ;  his  death,  153 ;  present  at  the  dedication  of

the  temple,  154  ;  virtues  and  services  of,  170.
Hiram,  King  of  Tyre,  the  ally  of  David,  i.  225 ;  his  navy,  418 ;  AbifF,

431.
Historical  facts  in  Freemasonry,  i.   53,  87 ;    lectures,  382 ;   facts,  386 ;

Landmarks  of  Masonry,  the,  contain  undeniable  types  of  Christ,  ii.  658.
History  of  the  creation,  i.  53 ;  degenerates  into  fable,  393.


GENERAL    INDEX    TO    THE    TEXT.

Hittites  amongst  the  builders  of  Solomon's  temple,  i.  414.

H.   K.  T.  dissatisfied  with  the  country  given  him  by  Solomon,  ii.  370 ;

supposed  monogram  of,  632
H.  R.  D.  M.,  Order  of,  established,  ii.  14;  Grand  Chapter  of,  16;  degree

of,  118.

H.  R.  H.  the  Duke  of  York  initiated,  ii.  53.
Holy  of  Holies,  i.  78  ;  consecrated  by  the  Shekinah,  583.
Holy  Bible,  i.  167  ;  ground,  Lodge  rests  on,  205  ;  mountain,  Jerusalem  so

called,  335.
Holy  Ghost,  Knight  of  the,  ii.  121  ;  sepulchre,  degree  of  the,  121  ;  Lodge,

the,   218;    opened,   224;    place,   a   type   of  the   starry   heavens,   226;

described,  242  ;  ground,  471-
Holland,  State  of,  prohibit  Freemasonry,  ii.  43.
Hollow  pillars,  their  use,  i.  448.
Honour,  i.  164.

Hope,  symbol  of,  i.  62;  defined,  171  :   Knight  of,  ii.  127.
Horeb,   Mount,  i.  72;  the  Deity  appears  on,  320;     the  Deity  appear*  to

Moses  on,  ii.  466.
Hospitality  of  Abraham,  i.  1<)1.
Hospitallers,  preceptor  of  the,  ii.  20.
Host  of  heaven  worshipped,  i.  487.

Hostile  Grand  Lodges  injurious  to  Freemasonry,  ii.  3 1 '2.
Hours  of  labour,  i.  438.

House  of  God  beautified,  i.  459 ;  of  the  Lord  purified,  ii.
Huldah  the  prophetess  consulted,  ii.  398 ;  hides  the  roll,  4UO.
Human  pursuits,  vanity  of,  ii.  146;  sacrifices,  abolition  of,  152;  and  divine

natures  of  Christ,  symbolized  by  the  double  triangle,  356.
Hunde,  the  Baron,  initiated,  ii.  45;   invents  new  degrees,  45;  his  great

secret,  46  ;  promulgates  his  degrees,  56.
Hundred  and  fifty  degrees  enumerated,  ii.  111.
Husse,  an  eminent  Mason,  i.  89.

Hutchinson,  his  opinion  of  Freemasonry,  i.  41;  mentioned,  89  ;  his  defi-
nition of  Masonry,  130.
Hyacinth  in  the  Pectoral,  its  signification,  ii.  521.

I  AM  THAT  I  AM,  a  name  of  the  Deity,  ii.  539;

Iconisms  in  the  Apocalypse,  i.  5'J'J.

Identity  between  Freemasonry  and  Illuminism  attempted  to  be  established,

i.27.
Idolatry  symbolized,  i.  526 ;  punishable  by  law,  568 ;  introduced  into  the

world,  ii.  197.

Idolatrous  customs  of  the  Jews,  ii.  239;  priesthood  of  Solomon,  385.
Idols  of  Jeroboam,  ii.  235.

Idumoeans,  the,  i.  219;  slaughter  the  Jews,  ii.  650.
Ignorance  condemns  what  it  ought  to  venerate,  i.  153.
Illuminated  Theosophists,  degree  of,  ii.  123.
Illuminati  excluded  from  Freemasonry,  ii.  85;  establishment  of  the,  211.
Illuminism  instituted,  ii.  77  ;  attempted  to  be  identified  with  Freemasonry,

78.
Illustrious  elected  of  fifteen,  degree  of,  ii.  118;  Order  of  the  Cross,  121  ;

Brothers,  degree   of,  123,  337  ;    instituted,  375 ;    Masters,   degree   of,

instituted,  376.

Immoveable  jewels,  what,  i.  144.
Implements  of  husbandry  manufactured,  ii.  211.
Impolicy  of  restraining  publications   on  the  philosophy  of  Freemasonry,

i.  29.
Imposing  appointments  of  the  Ineffable  Degrees,  ii.  367.


GENERAL    INDEX    TO    THE    TEXT.  695

Imposts,  duties,  and  taxes,  exemption  from,  i.  434.

Improvement  of  the  mind  by  Masonry,  ii.  181.

Inanimate  substances  have  no  inherent  power,  ii.  554.

Incantations  of  Egypt  understood  by  Moses,  ii.  603.

Incarnation  of  Christ,  ii.  643.

Incommunicable  name  of  God,  i.  542;  explained,  ii.  537-

Incorrect  estimate  of  Freemasonry,  ii.  318.

Indian  temples,  riches  of,  ii.  285.

Indirect  evidences,  i.  52.

Ineffable  triad,  i.  247:  Masonry,  ii.  330;  degrees,  the,  365;  secrets,  527 ;
why  the  Name  was  considered,  538.

Infatuation  of  man,  ii.  146.

Inferior  officers,  how  many,  i.  244.

Influence  of  Freemasonry,  i.  136.

Information,  sources  of,  should  be  accessible,  i.  32;  by  symbols,  124.

Initiated  Brothers,  degree,  ii.  182.

Injustice  of  preventing  the  spread  of  Masonic  information,  i.  29.

Innocence  implied  by  the  sprig  of  acacia,  ii.  150 ;  symbol  of,  511,  621.

Innovations  of  the  eighteenth  century,  ii,  27,  36.

Innumerable  new  Orders,  ii.  37.

Insects  created,  i.  494.

Instability  of  life,  ii.  144.

Institution  of  a  Sabbath,  i.  54,  512;  Female  Lodges,  ii.  35;  of  the  Freres
inities  de  1'Asia,  74.

Instruction,  mutual,  i.  242  j  symbolical,  383  ;  conveyed  by  proverbs,  397.

Integrity,  i.  162.

Intellectual  wisdom  conveyed  by  Mason's  symbols,  ii.  618.

Intendant  of  the  buildings,  degree  of,  ii.  122,  336.

Intimate  Secretary,  degree  of,  ii.  122,  336;  instituted,  381.

Introduction  of  novelties  condemned,  ii.  8.

Introductory  lectures,  their  object,  ii.  670.

Intrusted,  i.  313.

Inundations  of  the  Nile,  i.  547  ;  how  produced,  558  ;  how  improved,  559.

Invaluable  secrets  discovered,  ii.  439.

Invasion  of  Canaan,  i.  289.

Invention  of  new  degrees,  ii.  30.

Inverted  pyramid,  pillar  of  a  cloud  in  the  shape  of  an,  i.  470.

Investigations  in  Mount  Calvary,  i.  584.

Investment,  the,  i.  313.

Invocation  at  the  dedication  of  the  temple,  i.  581.

Ionic  order  in  architecture,  i.  154.

Irregularities,  great,  prevail,  ii.  48.

Ireland,  Freemasonry  in,  ii.  104.

Iron,  working  in,  ii.  207 ;  more  valuable  than  gold,  ii.  279.

Isaac,  i.  66;  promised,  105;  weaned,  107;  perplexed  by  Ishmael,  108;  to
be  the  father  of  a  mighty  people,  108  ;  born  of  a  free  woman,  112 ;  a  type
of  the  new  covenant,  112;  endures  the  taunts  of  Ishmael,  113;  account
of  his  sacrifice,  207  ;  bears  the  wood,  213  ;  is  bound  and  laid  on  the  altar,
214;  is  delivered,  215  ;  raised  up,  216.
Ish  Chotzeb,  i.  402  ;  Sabbal,  402.

Ishmael,  i.  66;  born,  103;  teazes  and  perplexes  Isaac,  108,  112;  bis  slavish
principles,  108;  account  of,  examined,  112  ;  born  of  a  slave,  112  ;  claims
the  right  of  primogeniture,  113;  how  supported  in  the  wilderness,  117.
Ishmaelites,  the,  purchase  Joseph,  i.  116.
Isis  bears  in  her  hand  the  tau  cross,  ii.  624.

Israelites,  i.  289  ;  arrayed  and  marshalled  for  the  conquest  of  Canaan,  296 ;
disobedient,  300 ;  defiled,  332 ;  in  Egypt,  357  ;  cruelly  treated,  358 ;  dis-
missed, 360;  whether  they  were  armed  at  the  deliverance,  361  ;  wore  a


GENERAL  INDEX  TO  THE  TEXT.


badge  of  disgrace,  363 ;  afraid  of  the  Egyptian  army,  3?2 ;  pass  the  Red
Sea,  374;  not  bondmen,  414;  ignorant  of  working  in  metals,  419;  led
by  a  pillar,  461  ;  exchange  the  true  for  the  spurious  Freemasonry,  566  ;
under  the  theocracy,  566  ;  separated  from  other  nations,  567  ;  prejudiced
in  favour  of  the  spurious  Freemasonry  of  Egypt,  568  ;  worship  in  groves,
569;  practice  the  rites  of  the  Dionysiaca,  570;  worship  the  rising  sun,
571 ;  the,  delivered  from  bondage,  ii.  218;  covet  the  superstitions  of  ido-
latry, 228 ;  demand  a  visible  deity,  231  ;  sacrifice  to  the  golden  calf,  234  ;
corruptions  of,  390 ;  disobedience  of,  394 ;  in  Egypt,  456  ;  their  resent-
ment against  Moses,  561 ;  marshalled  in  the  wilderness,  567 ;  depart
from  Egypt,  616.

Issachar,  the  sixth  grand  point  refers  to,  i.  311  ;  standard  of,  explained,
ii.  587.

Italy,  Freemasonry  disallowed  in,  ii.  107

Jabal  improves  the  pastoral  life,  ii.  216.

Jachin  and  Boaz  mentioned,  i.  12,  450  ;  carried  to  Babylon,  ii.  405.

Jacob,  his  vision,  i.  67,  171 ;  blesses  his  sons,  69  ;  flies  into  Padanarum,
270 ;  is  very  unhappy,  271  ;  benighted  at  Luz,  272 ;  has  the  vision  of  the
ladder,  273;  receives  the  promises,  274;  awakes,  277;  sets  up  a  pillar,
278 ;  has  another  vision,  279 ;  wrestles  with  an  angel,  280 ;  erects  an
altar,  281  ;  passes  into  Egypt,  282 ;  placed  in  Goshen,  283 ;  dies,  and  is
buried,  284  ;  blesses  his  children,  ii.  360.

.F  AH,  a  name  of  God,  ii.  453.

James  II.  carries  Freemasonry  into  France,  ii.  28.

Jannes  and  Jambres,  the  magicians  of  Pharoah,  ii.  601.

Jasper  in  the  Pectoral,  its  signification,  ii.  524.

Jau,  thought  to  be  the  right  pronunciation  of  the  Name,  ii.  550.

Jealousy  of  the  Scotch  Templars,  ii.  103.

Jebus,  city  of,  i.  224.

Jehovah,  i.  45  ;  angel  of,  464;  speaks  out  of  the  cloud,  470;  Christ  typified
by  the  cloud,  473 ;  dwells  between  the  Cherubim,  ii.  294 ;  appears  to
Moses,  469 ;  a  name  of  God,  452 ;  was  Christ,  556.

Jehovah  Jireh,  i.  215.

Jehoshaphat,  vale  of,  i.  317;  final  judgment  in  the,  342;  Lodges  held  in
the,  ii.  662.

Jeptha  and  the  Ephraimites,  i.  500  ;  his  history,  50e3  ;  sent  away  from  his
father's  house,  503 ;  his  reputation  for  bravery,  504 ;  invited  to  return,
£04  ;  defeats  the  Ammonites,  505  ;  his  rash  vow.  505  ;  its  consequences,
506 ;  threatened  by  the  half  tribe  of  Ephraim,  507  ;  tries  to  pacify  them,
507  ;  gives  them  battle  and  defeats  them,  508  ;  secures  the  passes  of  the
Jordan,  508  ;  slays  the  Ephraimites,  509.

Jeremiah  admonishes  the  Jews,  ii.  403.

Jeroboam  placed  his  golden  calves  on  hills,  i.  336 ;  his  idols,  ii.  235 ;  chosen
king  by  the  ten  tribes,  390.

Jerusalem,  the  Jews  turn  to,  when  they  pray,  i.  147  ;  city  of,  225;  called
the  Holy  Mountain,  335 ;  taken  by  Nebuchadnezzar,  ii.  350, 404  ;  besieged
by  the  Romans,  650.

Jeshua  the  High  Priest,  the  colleague  of  Z,  ii.  419.

Jesuits,  the,  practise  Freemasonry,  ii.  44.

Jethro,  Moses  feeds  his  flock,  i.  72 ;  entertains  Moses,  ii.  465.

Jewels,  immoveablo,  what,  i.  144 ;  moveable,  what,  161,  245  ;  of  gold  and
silver,  365 ;  ii.  246.

Jews  sprung  from  Abraham,  i.  115;  how  they  worshipped,  196;  venerate
hills,  338 ;  present  condition  of  the,  356 ;  not  a  learned  people,  419  ;
obtain  property  in  Chaldea,  ii.  407  ;  preserve  a  regal  state,  410 ;  secrets
of  their  Masonry,  413;  receive  permission  to  rebuild  the  temple,  419:
afraid  of  returning  to  Jerusalem,  421  :  practise  Freemasonry  in  Babylon.


GENERAL    INDEX    TO    THE    TEXT.  697

224;  appeal  to  Darius,  446;  and  protected,  447;  build  the  walls  armed,

453 ;  use  Adonai  for  the  Name,  544  ;  mistaken  in  the  application  of  the

Name,  555  ;  retain  their  allegiance  to  God,  640  ;  wilder  foreign  dominion,

646.
Jewish  legends,  i.  393 ;  traditions,  394  ;  customs  at  funerals,  ii.  148  ;   She-

kinah,  a  type,  181  ;  religion  regulated  by  Ezra,  450.
Joabert,  i.  431 ;  advanced,  ii.  381.
Job's  friends,  i.  250  ;  his  purification,  518.
Jod  within  a  triangle,  i.  534.
John  the  Baptist  heralds  the  Messiah,  ii.  644.
John's  Brothers,  a  name  of  Freemasonry  in  early  times,  ii.  664.
Joinville,  Chaillon  de,  appointed  G.  M.,  ii   49.
Jonah  in  the  whale's  belly,  i.  250.
Jones,  Stephen,  his  definition  of  Masonry,  i.  131.
Joppa,  materials  conveyed  to,  i.  425;  cavern  near,  ii.  371.
Jordan,  the  passage  of,  i.  291;  tha  waters  of,  recede,  293;  twelve  stones

taken  from  the,  293  ;  the  waters  return  295  ;  pass,  degree  of,  ii.  123.
Joseph  sold  into  Egypt,  i.  116,  281 ;  imprisoned,  282  ;  and  is  promoted,  282  ;

his  filial  piety,  283  ;  a  great  light  of  Masonry,  285  ;  dies,  and  is  embalmed,

286  ;  the  eleventh  grand  point  refers  to,  314;  symbolized  in  Apis,  ii.  235.
Josephus,  his  account  of  the  number  of  men  employed  at  the  temple,  i.  407,
Joshua,  his  authority  over  the  Israelites,  i.  259  ;  passes  the  Jordan,  293;

erects  two  pillars,  294  ;  is  the  Grand  Master  of  Masons,  506.
Josiah,  reign  of,  ii.  395;  determines  to  repair  the  temple,  395;  convenes

the  priests,  398 ;  exhorts  the  people  to  repent,  400.
Jove  worshipped  by  the  Romans,  ii.  551.
JUBAH,  a  name  of  God,  ii.  550.
Jubal  invents  music,  ii.  216.

Jubilee,  the,  i.  5J.G ;  procession  round  Mount  Mori.ih,  ii.  263.
Judah,  his  sceptre,  i.  69;  his  banner,  77  ;  the  fourth  great  point  refers  to,

308  ;  standard  of  explained,  ii.  584  ;  royal  stock  of,  extinct,  655.
Judas  punished,  ii.  176.
Judea,  power  of,  under  Solomon,  ii.  287  ;  decays,  288 ;  divided  into  two

kingdoms,  387.

Judgment,  breastplate  of,  ii.  516.
Junior  Warden  in  the  South,  i.  139  ;  his  duty,  141  ;  a  representative  of

H.  A.  B.  ii.  258.

Jupiter  a  corruption  of  Jehovah,  i.  537.

Jurisdiction  of  the  G.  L.  at  Lyons,  ii.  59;  of  the  Supreme  Council,  109.
Justice  defined,  i.  108.

Kadosh,  degree  of,  ii.  90  ;  Knight  of.  123.

Kestner  mentioned,  i.  25.

Keturah,  descendants  of,  i.  219.

Key,  the,  an  expressive  symbol,  i.  181.

Key-stones  of  the  Royal  Arch,  ii.  362  ;  found,  438.

Kil winning,  Masonry  established  at,  ii.  15.

King,  priest,  and  prophet,  i.  66,  249.

King  of  kings,  i.  78.

King  of  Prussia  initiated,  ii,  38  ;  assumes  the  office  of  universal  G.  M.  49;
of  the  Jews  was  styled  the  head  of  the  captivity  in  Babylon,  410 ;  of  the
world,  degree  of,  124;  priest  and  prophet,  505;  of  the  Royal  Arch,  a
type  of  Christ,  660.

Kings,  peers,  and  prelates,  patronize  Freemasonry,  ii.  25.

Knigge,  the  Baron,  mentioned,  i.  26 ;  initiated,  ii.  61.

Knight  of  the  R.  S.  Y.  C.  S.,  ii.  18 ;  of  the  Royal  Axe,  112,  341 ;  of  the
Black  Cross,  113;  of  Calatrava,  114;  of  Constantinople,  115;  of  the
East  and  West,  1 16,  339;  of  the  East  or  the  Sword,  117,  339  ;  of  Nine,

VOL.  IT.  Z  Z


698


GENERAL  INDEX  TO  THE  TEXT.


118;  of  the  Golden  Key,  125;  of  the  Magnetic  Rose,  127  ;  of  Patmos,
129;  of  the  Phoenix,  130;  of  the  Redemption,  132;  of  the  Rose  Croix,
132;  of  the  Star,  135;  of  the  South,  136;  of  the  White  Cross,  139;  of
the  Brazen  Serpent,  342 ;  of  the  Sun,  340.

Knock,  and  the  door  of  Masonry  shall  be  opened,  i.  112.

Knowledge  of  a  Redeemer  embodied  in  Freemasonry,  i.  02.

Kohathites,  station  of  the,  ii.  570.

Labour  of  Masonry,  i.  95;  closed  with  prayer,  242;  hours  of,  438;  and
rest,  511.

Lacorne  appointed  D.  G.  M.,  ii.  48  ;  rejected  by  the  Brethren,  and  forms
a  new  G.  L.,  49.

Ladder,  vision  of,  i.  67;  the  theological,  129:  Masonic,  explained,  171  ;
re'aches  to  the  heavens,  172,  273.

Ladies,  zealous  Masons,  ii.  69  ;  of  Egypt,  their  sufferings,  611.

Lamb  that  had  been  slain,  the,  i.  524.

Lamtch  the  Governor  of  Freemasonry,  ii.  203;  the  children  of,  expert
architects,  21.">.

Lamp,  a  symbol,  ii.  371.

Landmarks,  general  view  of,  i.  41  ;  innovations  in  the,  to  be  avoided,  41  ;
from  the  deluge  to  the  advent  of  Christ,  65  ;  sacred,  87  ;  in  the  lectures,
96  ;  unchangeable,  18*2  :  antiquity  of  the,  265  ;  derived  from  the  patriarchs,
267  ;  types  of  great  events,  385  ;  of  Egypt  obliterated  by  the  overflowing
of  the  Nile,  5.rr2 :  what  they  were,  562;  of  the  antediluvians,  ii.  186;
before  the  flood,  204  ;  the  prominent,  249  ;  unalterable,  306  ;  subversion
of,  attempted,  307.

Land  of  Promise,  i.  73,  289 ;  and  water  separated,  483 ;  produces  fruits,
484.

Language,  an  universal,  in  Freemasonry,  i.  120.

Lapidary  work  executed  by  Aholiab  and  Bezaleel,  ii.  224.

Large  size  of  the  stones  of  the  temple,  i.  425.

Latitude  of  the  French  Lodges,  ii.  99.

Latocnaye  mentioned,  i.  24.

Laver,  the,  ii.  243.

Laurie's  definition  of  Masonry,  i.  131.

Lax  Observance,  Order  of,  instituted,  ii.  57.

Lazarus,  Knight  of,  ii.  125.

Lebanon,  workmen  classed  in,  i.  422.

Lectures  of  the  Lodge  too  confined,  i.  3 ;  amplification  of,  recommended,
7;  their  design,  42  ;  important  facts  in  the.  48;  give  an  account  of  the
tabernacle,  74;  of  the  third  degree,  85  ;  frequently  delivered  incorrectly,
95  ;  every  Mason  ought  to  be  acquainted  with  the,  ii.  2 19 ;  of  Masonry,
full  of  Christian  types,  580  ;  recommended  by  the  Lodge  of  Reconcilia-
tion, 665.

Le  Franc  mentioned,  i.  23

Legendary  lore,  i.  388,  391.

Legends  communicated  by  Adam  to  his  children,  i.  55;  what,  123;  how
perverted,  395;  of  Freemasonry,  399;  of  the  third  degree,  ii.  165;  of
the  resurrection,  167  ;  of  Solomon's  temple,  169  ;  of  Osiris  and  Typhon,
173 ;  of  Moriah,  186 ;  in  the  ineffable  degrees,  369 ;  of  Masonry  refer
to  Christ,  576.

Legislator,  the,  may  profit  by  a  knowledge  of  Freemasonry,  i.  88.

Legitimate  subjects  of  discussion  in  the  Lodge,  i.  207.

Le  Maitre  Ecossais,  degree  of,  ii.  346.

Le  Mere  Loge  Ecossais  de  France  instituted,  ii.  73.

Leucht,  a  Masonic  adventurer,  ii.  56.

Length  of  the  Lodge,  i.  135  ;  breadth,  depth,  and  height,  191.

Le  Petit  Architecte,  degree  of,  ii.  316.


GENERAL    INDEX    TO    THE    TEXT.

Le  Rite  Orieutale  formed,  ii.  74.

Lesser  Lights,  i.  244 ;  luminaries  of  the  Royal  Arch,  ii.  356.

Lessons  of  Masonry  useful,  ii.  256.

Letter  G,  signification  of  the,  i.  532;  two  meanings  of  the,  533  ;  tan,  the,

ii.  619.

Level,  the,  explained,  i.  162.
Levelling  the  footstone,  ii.  263.

Levi,  the  third  grand  point  refers  to,  i.  308  ;  tribe  of,  separated,  ii.  595.
Levites,  support  of  the,  ii.  508.
Lewis,  the,  explained,  i.  1 48.
Libertine,  a  Mason  cannot  be  a,  i.  236.
Library,  Masonic,  establishment  of  a,  i.  35.
Lice,  the  magicians  cannot  produce,  ii.  626
Life,  symbol  of,  ii.  622.
Light,  symbolized  by  a  trowel,  i.  245  ;  creation  of,  477  ;  and  happiness,  ii.

167  ;  shining  in  the  darkness,  644.
Lights,  the  three  lesser,  i.  158;  the  three  greater,  168,  244;  signify  Christ,

ii.  532.

Lily  work,  net  work,  and  pomegranates,  explained,  i.  443,  449.
Lilies  of  the  valley,  Knight  of  the,  ii.  126.
Link,  the,  degree  of,  ii.  126.
Links  of  tradition,  i.  58.
Lion  of  Judah,  i.  69 ;   Knight  of  the,  ii.  126  ;  the  device  on  the  banner  of

Judah,  585.
Listeners,  i.  142.
Literary  Brethren  dissatisfied  with  the  Lodge  lectures,  i.  6  ;  may  profit  by

a  knowledge  of  the  Order,  89.
Locke,,  an  eminent  Mason,  i.  89.
Lodge,  symbol  of  a,  i.  1  ;  site  of  the,  71 ;  form  of  the,  135,  188  ;  opened,

138;  closed,  139;  ornaments  of  the,  158;  furniture  of  the,  168;  covering

of  the,  171,  265,  274;  due  east  and  west,  why,  183,   193;  nature  of  the,

187  ;  extent  of  a,  191  ;  situation  of  the,  192  ;  ground  of  the,  205  ;  subjects
of  discussion  in  the,  207  ;  reformed  by  David,  225  ;  support  of  the,  236  ;
on  what  founded,  241 ;  construction  of  the,  243  ;  opened  in  the  quarries,
341 ;  of  Masons  at  Alexandria,  552;  at  St.  Germains  established,  ii.  29;
opened  at  Halle,  in   Germany,  by  Bahrdt,  82 ;  floor  of  the,  consecrated,

188  ;  a  microcosm,  256  ;  and  tabernacle  compared,  302;  of  Reconciliation,
lectures  recommended  by  the,  665.

Lodges  of  the  workmen,  i.  426;  Grand,  in  ancient  times,  ii.  19  ;  continental
invent  new  degrees,  30;  of  females  instituted,  35  ;  formation  of,  40;  of
females,  69;  ot  adoption  formed,  71  ;  at  the  building  of  the  temple,  251  ;
number  of,  314- ;  seniority  of,  327  ;  in  Chaldea,  410;  held  in  the  vale  of
Jehoshaphat,  662.

Loge  des  Chevaliers  Bienfaisants  de  la  Saint  Cite,  ii.  59-

Logos,  the,  i.  280  ;  the  Tetragrammaton  or  Jehovah,  ii.  556.

London  re-built,  ii.  28  ;  the  Masons  of,  reject  Ramsay's  degrees,  33.

L'Ordre  des  Franc  Masons  trahi,  mentioned,  i.  22.

Lords  of  the  creation,  i.  499.

Loss  of  the  M.  M.  word,  ii.  153,  372.

Louis  XV.  forbids  Freemasonry  in  France,  ii.  43 ;  de  Bourbon,  G.  M.  of
France,  45.

Love  of  God,  i.  129 ;  universal,  137 ;  and  friendship,  the  cement  of  the
Lodge,  404  ;  taught  in  Freemasonry,  ii.  186.

Lovers  of  novelty  attracted,  ii.  47-

Lux,  an  emanation  of  the  Deity,  ii.  492.

Luxembourg,  Due  de,  appointed  D.  G.  M.,  ii.  59.

Luxury  of  the  Romans,  ii.  281.

Lyons,  Masons  of,  ii.  37  ;  Grand  Lodge  at,  59.


INDEX    TO    THE    TEXT.


Maacba,  King  of  Cheth,  ii.  374.

Machinery  of  the  Apocalypse,  i.  52/.

Magonnerie  Adoniramite  ddvoil«5e  mentioned,  i.  22.

Macpelah,  cave  of,  i.  284.

Magi,  worship  the  rising  sun,  i.  202.

Magicians  of  Pharoah  silenced,  ii.  601  ;  produce  frogs  and  blood,  605 ;
cannot  produce  lice,  606:  acknowledge  the  power  of  God,  607.

Magnificence  of  Solomon,  ii.  276  ;  of  the  Indian  temples,  287.

Mahadon,  Knight  of,  ii.  125.

Mahanaim,  Jacob's  vision  at,  i.  279.

Male  children  destroyed,  i.  359.

Males  and  females  meet  in  Lodges,  ii.  70.

Maltese  cross,  i.  1.

Mamre,  oak  of,  i.  103.

Man  receives  dominion  over  all  living  creatures,  i.  493 ;  the  device  on  the
standard  of  Reuben,  ii.  588.

Manassah  ben  Israel,  his  opinion  respecting  the  number  of  men  employed  at
the  temple,  i.  409 ;  his  banner  explained,  ii.  592.

Manasseh  orders  all  copies  of  the  law  to  be  destroyed,  ii.  31)7

Manifesto  of  the  G.  M.,  ii.  42;  of  the  G.  O.,  60.

Manifestations,  divine,  ii.  55!),  566.

Manna,  an  emblem  of  Christ,  ii.  '297.

Manners  of  the  Egyptians,  the  Israelites  addicted  to.  ii.  230.

Mant,  Archdeacon,  on  the  second  degree,  i.  380.

Manual,  sign,  i.  177.

Manufacture  of  metals  by  Tubal  Cain,  ii.  208.

Marble  pillar  of  Enoch,  ii.  200.

Marchings  of  the  Israelites,  ii.  568.

Mark  Masons'  Lodges,  i.  4J2  :  ho\v  many,  427;  Masonry  practised  in
England,  ii.  101  ;  Master,  degree  of,  126  :  on  the  forehead  of  Cain,  J88  :
of  the  righteous,  475  ;  of  Ezekiel,  819  ;  of  God,  620.

Marking  the  materials,  i.  424.

Marks  of  the  workmen,  i.  427;  ii.  259.

Marriage,  symbol  of.  i.  251.

Marseilles,  superb  Masonic  hall  at,  ii.  58.

Martin,  St.,  mentioned,  i.  23.

Maskelyne,  Dr.,  practises  Freemasonry,  ii.  32.

Masonic  charlatans,  i.  10;  information,  benefit  of  promulgating,  29  ;  chiefs
ought  to  patronize  the  spread  of  the  Order,  31 ;  writers,  dearth  of,  32;
library  and  museum,  35;  labour,  95;  tradition,  115;  morality,  elements
of,  183  ;  virtues  of  Joseph,  285 ;  references  to  the  twelve  tribes,  305 ;  import
of  the  letter  G,  532  :  Templars,  ii.  23 ;  innovations,  36;  schisms,  39,  65  ;
hall  at  Marseilles,  58;  compact,  69;  assembly  at  VVilhelmsbad,  83;  con-
vention at  Paris,  84 ;  accounts  of  the  temple,  286 ;  illustrations  refer  to
Christ,  389  ;  symbols,  617  ;  science,  the,  applied  to  the  practice  of  virtue,
619  ;  MS.  of  the  tenth  century  dedicates  Freemasonry  to  the  Christian
trinity,  664.

Masonry,  symbol  of,  i.  1 ;  receives  the  patronage  of  wealth  and  talent,  91 ;
conducive  to  morality,  91 ;  practised  by  the  descendants  of  Abraham,  106 ;
predictions  of,  114;  founded  on  geometry,  120.  —  See  FKEEMASONRY.

Masons  profess  religious  principles,  i.  41  ;  eminent,  89 ;  why  styled  free-
born,  95  ;  good,  described,  165  ;  how  they  ought  to  be  circumscribed,
1 68 ;  their  duty,  236 ;  Lodge  compared  with  the  temple  of  Solomon,  238 ;
hold  Lodges  on  hills  and  in  valleys,  322  ;  declared  free,  433;  arrested  at
Paris,  ii.  43.

Master  Mason's  Lodges,  i.  421  ;  how  many  at  the  building  of  the  temple,
427  ;  of  the  key  of  the  temple,  degree  of,  ii.  115  ;  in  Israel,  122,  336 ;  of


GENERAL  INDEX  TO  THE  TEXT.          701

all  the  degrees,  127  ;  of  the  Luminous  Ring,  1 37  ;  of  the  Table  of  Eme-
rald, 138;  ad  vitam,  340.

M.  M.  word,  loss  of  the,  ii.  153,  372  ;  degree,  335.

Masters  of  the  work,  i.  350 ;  Lodge,  353.

Materials  for  building  the  temple  prepared  in  three  places,  i.  246 ;  conveyed
to  Moriah,  428;  and  men  furnished  by  H.  K.  T.,  ii.  257.

Mature  age,  candidate  to  be  of,  i.  110.

Mechanical  arts,  comparative  perfection  of,  before  the  flood,  ii.  217.

Mediator,  promise  of  a,  i.  57.

Mediators,  i.  541.

Mediterranean  Pass,  degree  of,  ii.  127-

Meetings  of  seceding  Brethren,  ii.  310.

Melancthon,  an  eminent  Mason,  i.  89.

Melchisedec,  degree  of,  ii.  127.

Members,  unworthy,  no  disparagement  to  the  Order,  i.  148;  of  the  Grand
and  Royal  Lodge,  ii.  429.

Mementoes  of  mortality,  ii.  142.

Memorial  of  the  creation,  i.  511.

Men  slain  by  an  earthquake,  i.  527  ;  called  from  labour  to  refreshment,
ii.  258.

Menatzchim,  i.  402;  council  of,  ii.  127.

Merarites,  station  of  the,  ii.  570.

Mercies  of  Jehovah,  Lodge  founded  on  the,  i.  241.

Mercury,  his  caduceus  was  cruciform,  ii.  625.

Mercy,  i.  164;  seat,  a  type  of  Christ,  78;  Shekinah  placed  on  the,  583;
seat,  the,  ii.  156 ;  what,  293.

Merits  of  Freemasonry  ought  to  be  openly  discussed,  i.  31.

Mesmer,  a  Masonic  adventurer,  ii.  83.

Messiah,  revelation  of  the,  i.  217;  the,  suffers  a  violent  death,  ii.  175;  the
ark  a  type  of  the,  296 ;  of  the  Jews  the  founder  of  Christianity,  658.

Metal  tools  not  used,  i.  425 ;  substitutes  for,  ii.  208.

Metaphorical  imagery,  i.  123  ;  language,  397.

Methusaleh,  i.  57.

Micah,  prophecy  of,  i.  335.

Middle  chamber,  i.  439.

Military  array,  whether  the  Israelites  were  equipped  in,  i.  366  ;  Masonry,
ii.  329.

Mines  discovered  by  accident,  ii.  208  ;  of  gold  and  silver,  277.

Ministers  of  the  plagues,  ii.  G09.

Miracles  and  prophecy,  i.  44;  of  Christ,  ii.  298;  wrought  by  the  Tetra-
grammaton,  548  ;  performed  by  the  rod,  613.

Miraculous  demonstrations  of  power,  i.  50.

Misrepresentations  of  the  American  antimasonic  party,  i.  18.

Mistake,  a  common  one  in  Masonry,  i.  381.

Mitre  of  the  high  priest,  ii.  S02,  533.

Mizraim  removes  into  Upper  Egypt,  i.  549;  order  of,  ii.  74.

Mockery  of  Isaac,  i.  112.

Mode  ot  conveying  Masonic  information,  i.  122.

Modification  of  the  Constitutions,  ii.  325.

Mohabin,  i.  431.

Moloch,  worship  of,  i.  301  ;  tabernacle  of,  331  ;  carried  by  the  Israelites,
ii.  229.

Monolith,  the  temple  appears  like  a,  i.  429.

Mopses,  an  Androgyne  order,  ii.  70;  ceremony  of  initiation  into,  71.

Moral  influence  of  Masonry  increased  by  judicious  publications,  i.  2  ;  refer-
ence of  the  symbols,  1 24  ;  and  social  virtue  inculcated,  126,  130  ;  teaching
of  Freemasonry,  182  :  tendency  of,  237  ;  duties,  three.  244  ;  of  the  Royal
Arch.,  ii.  365.


702


GENERAL    INDEX    TO    THE    TEXT.


Morality  and  science  blended,  i.  30;  system  of,  127;  code  of,  135;  and
justice,  162 ;  of  the  the  three  degrees,  186  ;  taught  in  Freemasonry,  ii.  25  ;
of  Masonry  insufficient  without  Christianity.  G6G.

Morgan,  his  book  useless,  i.  13;  abduction  of,  15.

Moriah,  mount,  i.  67,  205 ;  covered  with  a  grove  of  olive-trees,  22G  ;  the
Deity  appears  on,  320;  the  mountain  of,  its  history,  ii.  186;  the  residence
of  the  family  of  Seth,  IS8  ;  circumambulation  of,  268  ;  polluted,  610;  by
the  abomination  of  de-solution,  C50.

Morin,  Stephen,  appointed  Inspector  General  for  the  New  World,  ii.  50.

Morning  Star,  Knight  of  the,  ii.  127  ;  the,  100,  578.

Mortality,  emblem  of,  ii.  1  1 1.  1

Mosaic  pavement,  i.  113,  445;  consecrated,  219;  dispensation,  the,  207;
pavement  explained,  ii.  155;  dispensation,  an  emblem  of  the  second  de-
gree, 180;  work  in  the  floors  of  the  Jews,  269;  of  the  chapter,  352;
dispensation  was  typical  of  Christianity,  389.

Moses  feeds  the  flock  of  Jethro,  i.  72  :  preserved  and  educated  by  I'll  iroah,
359;  the  hands  of,  elevated,  ii.  '1'iO  ;  commanded  to  erect  a  tabernacle,
222;  Aholiaband  15c/aleel  open  the  Holy  Lodge,  'J-J4  ;  in  the  mount,  230 ;
conduct  of,  before  the  golden  cult',  2M^  ;  prophesied  of  <  'hrist,  389 ;  writings

«if,  unknown,  -5!>7 ;  extraordinary  prediction  respecting,  459 ;  preserved,

460  ;  acquire-  a  knowledge  of  hieroffly]  '  ;  commands  the  armies

of  Egypt,  46-  ;  punishes  an  offender,  4(>'J ;  c  .-capes  into  Midian,  463  ;
understood  the  sorceries  of  Kgypt,  604.

Most  Excellent  .Master,  d  ii.  127;  Holy  Place,  a  type  of  the  super-

celestial  heavens.  226  ;  described,  2  11.

Mother  of  Cliri-t.  Knight  of  the,  ii.  128.

Motto  over  tlu1  entrance  of  Egyptian  temples,  i.  .YJ.'J.

Mount  Horeb,  i.  72;   Moriah,'  67,  2l)5  ;   holy.  320;   of  God.

Mourning  for  Jacob,  i.

Moveable  .Jewels  '•   161.

Murmuring!  of  the  Israelites,  ii.  5,  60.

Museum,  Masonic,  establishment  of  a.  i.  35;  the,  of  Euclid,  564.

Music  invented  by  .Tubal,  ii.  216.

Mutual  instruction,  i.  242.

Mysteries  of  religion.  Mosei  instructed  in  the,  ii.  460;  of  Bacchus  cele-
brated on  Moriah,  641.

Mysterious  reference  of  the  sprig  of  cassia,  ii.  150.

Mystery  of  religion,  ii.  4.

Mystical  figures,  use  of,  i.  153  ;  references  of  Freemasonry,  384  ;  characters
in  Enoch's  vision,  ii.  192.

Mythology  of  Egypt,  i.  539.  396.

Naaman's  leprosy,  i.  521.

Nabiim,  institution  of,  ii.  374.

Naked  feet,  ii.  470.

Names  of  one  hundred  and  fifty  degrees,  ii.  Ill  ;  of  Lodges,  327-

Name,  where  to  be  placed,  i.  224,  230  ;  sacred,  447  ;  the  heathen  acquaint3d

with  the,  542;  the,  incommunicable,  ii.  537  ;  not  to  be  used  irreverently,

545;  right  pronunciation  of  it  doubted.,  547.
Namur,  order  of,  instituted,  ii.  88.

Napthali,  the  tenth  grand  point  refers  to,  i.  313  ;  his  banner  explained,  ii.  594.
Nathan  forbids  David  to  build  a  temple,  i.  226.
Nations,  rise  and  fall  of,  ii.  287.
Nature  of  the  Lodge,  i.  187.
Navy  of  Hiram,  i.  418.
Nebuchadnezzar's  fiery  furnace,  i.  250.
Nebuchadnezzar  destroys  Jerusalem,  ii.   350,  403,  404,  leaves  the

classes  of  the  people  in  Judea,  407.


GENERAL    INDEX    TO    THE    TEXT.  703

Nehemiah  builds  the  walls  of  Jerusalem,  ii.  451.

Neighbour,  duty  to  our,  i.  129.

New  orders  and  degrees,  modern,  ii.  11,  31  ;  Lodges  formed,  40.

Newton,  Sir  Isaac,  an  eminent  Mason,  i.  89.

Ne  plus  ultra,  ii.  128.

Nile,  inundations  of  the,  i.  547  ;  height  to  which  it  rises,  559.

Nilometre,  the,  ii.  633.

Nine,  its  import,  i.  1  ;  degrees  of  Freemasonry,  431 ;  Deputy  Grand  Mas-
ters, 581  ;  vaults  of  Enoch,  ii.  193;  Elected  Knights,  degree  of,  373.

Ninth  grand  point  explained,  i.  313.

Noachidae,  the,  i.  331  ;  precepts  of  the,  510.

Noachites,  the,  ii.  131,  341.

Noah  and  his  family  preserve  thq  true  traditions,  i.  59 ;  precepts  of,  266 ;
and  the  ark,  268  ;  and  his  dove,  515  ;  governs  Freemasonry,  ii.  203.

Nobility,  Jewish,  carried  to  Babylon,  ii.  406.

Nocturnal  pillar,  its  nature,  i.  467.

Nomenclature  of  Masonry,  ii.  109.

Notes,  why  introduced,  ii.  674.

Novelties  introduced,  ii.  8.

Number,  three,  i.  236  ;  of  workmen  in  Lebanon,  424  ;  of  men  of  all  classes
at  the  building  of  the  temple,  401,  434;  of  steps  to  the  middle  chamber,
444;  seven,  510  ;  three,  regard  for  the,  ii.  3  ;  of  Masonic  Lodges,  314.

Oak  ofMamre,  i.  103.

Obedience  practised  by  Abraham,  i.  211.

Obelisks,  i.  439.

Object  of  the  assembly  at  Wilhelmsbad,  ii.  83 ;  of  the  introductory  lectures,

670 ;  of  the  notes,  674.

Obligations,  three,  i.  247  ;  the,  312;  of  secresy,  540.
Oblong  square,  i.  188 ;  ii.  240,  300;  form  of  the  temple,  254.
Observance,  strict,  order  of,  founded,  ii.  45.
Occasional  degrees  conferred,  ii.  110.
Occult  mysteries  of  Egypt,  ii.  604.
Odd  numbers,  i.  452.
Offering,  symbolical  i.  206.
Offerings,  consecrated,  ii.  534.
Officers  of  the  Grand  and  Royal  Lodge,  ii.  428.
Official  patronage  of  Masonic  publications,  i.  36.
Old  and  new  dispensations,  i.  50  ;  traditions  of  Masonry,  408.
Olive  trees  on  Mount  Moriah,  i.  226 ;  branch  in  the  Eneid,  referred  to,  ii.

149.

OM,  worshipped  by  the  Hindoos,  ii.  551.
ON,  worshipped  by  the  Egyptians,  ii.  551.
One  fold  under  one  shepherd,  ii.  299.

Onyx  stones  of  the  High  Priest,  ii.  513;  of  the  Pectoral,  524.
Opening  the  Lodge,  i.  138,  three  different  ways  of,  246',  3U6;  of  the  sacred

Lodge,  ii.  264.
Operative  Masonry,  i.  42;  derived  from  three  sources,  246;  honoured,  354 ;

secrets  of,  ii.  25  ;  and  speculative  Masonry  blended,  26  ;  invented,  214.
Ophir,  gold  brought  from,  i.  418.
Oracle,  dimensions  of  the,  i.  441;  lined  with  gold,  ii.  274;  of  the  Christians,

298;  of  the  Israelites,  507.
Oracles  cease  at  the  coming  of  Christ,  ii.  299.
Oral  communication,  i.  58.
Orb,  light,  and  flame  of  the  sun,  i.  254.
Order  of  Strict  Observance  foumled,  ii.  45 ;  of  Mizraim,  74  ;  of  the  East,

116;  of  Joachim,  123  ;  of  True  Masons,  128  ;  of  the  Two  Eagles,  139  ;

of  the  Vessel,  139;  of  march,  573.


L    INDEX    TO    THE    TEXT.

Orders  in  architecture,  i.  153,  455;  ne\v,  ii.  9;  and  degree*,  328;  now
practised,  671.

Ordinances  of  Moses  referred  to  Christianity,  ii.  .'>S9.

Organ,  the,  invented,  ii.  216.

Organization  of  the  fraternity,  ii.  325.

Orgies  of  the  Israelites  to  the  golden  calf,  ii.  236.

Orient,  Grand,  formed,  ii.  60.

Origin  of  a  respect  for  the  number  three,  i.  259  ;  of  the  spurious  Freema-
sonry, 350  ;  of  the  present  forms  of  Masonry,  437 ;  of  Scotch  Masonry,
ii,  17  ;  of  the  legend  of  the  third  degree,  165  ;  of  the  Masonic  schisms  in
England,  310 ;  of  signs,  4»7;

Original  points  of  Masonry,  i.  287  ;  language,  symbolical,  389  :  lectures,
the,  refer  to  Christianity,  ii.  663.

Orleans,  Due  de,  appointed  G.  M.,  ii.  59.

Ornaments  of  the  Lodge,  i.  158;  three,  245;  of  a  Master's  Lodge,  240.

Ornamental  details  of,  the  temple,  ii.  258.

Osiris,  legend  of  ii.  173;  bears  in  his  hand  the  cross,  (1-24.

Ourselves,  duty  to,  i.  129.

Outer  court  of  the  temple,  dimensions  of  the,  i.   1 12.

Overseers  oppointed,  ii.  431.

Ox,  the  device  on  the  banner  of  Kphraim.  ii.  591.


Padanaram,  Jacob  flies  to,  i.  270.
Pagan  standards  planted  on  Morinh,  ii.  651.
Paintings  in  the  ,Alas<mic  hall  at  Marseilles,  ii.  58.
Papal  denunciation  of  Freemasonry,  ii.  107;  interdict,  effects  of  a,  317.
Parables  of  Christ,  i.  398.

Paradise,  happiness  of  the  first  man  in,  i.   15,  12WJ ;  driven  out  of,  55  ;  ex-
pulsion from,  ii.  167.
Parallel  lines  explained,  i.  166.
Paraphernalia  ot  the  Temple,  costly,  ii.  '270.
Paris,  the  Masons  of,  practice  Ramsay's  degrees,  ii.  33 ;  Masonic  inventions

at,  84.

Parts  of  Freemasonry  consistent  \vith  each  other,  i.  385.
Passage  of  the  river  Jordan,  i.  291.
Passages  referring  to  Christianity  quoted  from  the  earliest  lectures  known,

ii.  663.

Passover  of  Josiah,  ii.  400.
Pass  words  of  the  Intemlants,  ii.  370 ;  revealed  to  Moses  at  the  burning

bush,  537.

Past  Master,  degree  of,  ii.  128.
Past,  present,  and  future,  i.  252.
Pastoral  life  of  Moses,  ii.  46 1.
Path  from  earth  to  heaven,  i.  135.
Patriarch,  Grand,  degree  of  120  of  the  Great  Light,  ii.  129.
Patriarchal  system,  the  original  model  of  Freemasonry,  i.  207  ;  dispensation,

the,  an  emblem  of  the  first  degree,  ii.  179  ;  the,  505.
Patriarchs,  Landmarks  of  Masonry  derived  from  the,  i.  267;  sacrifice  on

hills,  327  ;  worshipped  the  true  God,  534.

Patronage  of  wealth  and  talent,  5.  30,  91  ;  of  various  Grand  Masters,  34.
Pattern  of  the  Tabernacle  received  from  God,  ii:  227.
Pavement,  Mosaic,  i.  143.
Paying  wages,  i.  437-
Peace,  symbol  of,  i.  251  ;  and  harmony  amongst  the  workmen,  437  ;  unity,

and  plenty,  emblem  of,  449;  and  happiness  of  the  Jews  under  Ezra,  ii.

451.
Pectoral  of  the  high  priest,  a  symbol,  i.  79  ;  explained,  176  ;  stones  in  the,

ii.  515.


GENERAL    INDEX    TO    THE    TEXT.  705

Pedal  sign  explained,  i,  178.

Pelican,  its  import,  i.  1.

Penalty  of  death,  ii.  171.

Peniel,  Jacob  wrestles  with  an  angel  at,  i.  279.

Pentalpha,  the  emblem  of  a  Master  Mason,  ii.  182.

People,  the,  numbered  by  David,  i.  227.

Perau,  Abbe  le,  his  ritual  mentioned,  i.  22.

Perfect  Ashlar,  explained,  i.  146 ;  Lodge,  what  constitutes  a,  454 ;  arrange-
ment of  the  men  at  the  building  of  the  temple,  437  ;  Knight,  ii.  129  ;
Master,  336.

Perfection,  symbol  of,  i.  190  ;  degree  of,  ii.  119,  338.

Perfections ,  refer  to  Christ,  ii.  533.

Perignan,  elected  of,  ii.  118.

Period,  the  second,  i.  482  ;  the  third,  483  ;  the  fourth,  486 ;  the  fifth,  492 ;
the  sixth,  492.

Period  when  Masonic  Lodges  ceased  to  be  held  on  hills  or  in  valleys,  i.  35  i.

Periodical  inundations  of  the  Nile,  i.  554.

Periods,  six,  of  the  Grand  Architect,  i.  476.

Pernetti,  his  new  scheme  of  Masonry,  ii.  64.

Perpetual  fire  of  the  altar,  ii.  243.

Persecution  of  Isaac,  i.  112.

Persecutions  of  Freemasonry,  ii.  43.

Persia,  riches  of,  ii.  284.

Persian  Philosophers,  rite  of,  established,  ii.  98.

Persians  worship  towards  the  East,  i.  200.

Personal  responsibility,  ii.  168.

Persons  in  the  Godhead,  three,  i.  255 ;  of  rank  initiated,  ii.  28.

Pestilence  stayed,  i.  82.

Petre,  Lord,  Grand  Master  of  England,  negotiates,  ii.  69.

Phallic  symbol,  the,  placed  on  altars,  i.  571.

Pharaoh  dismisses  the  Israelites  and  repents,  i.  360 ;  follows  them,  374  ;
his  dream  516  ;  refuses  to  liberate  the  Israelites,  ii.  602 ;  might  be  deceived,
603 ;  took  Moses  for  a  powerful  magician,  605 ;  doubts  his  divine  mission,
606.

Phi  Beta  Kappa,  degree  of,  ii.  130.

Philanthropist,  the,  may  benefit  by  a  knowledge  of  Freemasonry,  i.  89.

Philippian  Order,  ii.  130.

Philistines,  the,  afflicted,  i.  575.

Philo  mentioned,  i.  26.

Philosophical  Masonry,  ii.  38,  330.

Philosophy  of  Masonry,  the,  should  be  submitted  to  open  investigation,
i.  33,  186.

Phineas,  the  J.  G.  W. ,  i.  566.

Phoenicians,  hewers  of  stone,  i.  425.

Pick-axe,  a  symbol,  ii.  354.

Piety  of  Joseph,  i.  283 ;  of  Solomon,  ii.  276.

Pillar  of  a  cloud  and  of  tire,  i.  73 ;  dismays  the  Egyptians,  373  ;  places  itself
between  the  Israelites  and  the  Egyptians,  465  ;  what  it  was,  467 ;  mira-
culous, 469;  unaffected  by  storms,  470;  a  direction  to  the  Israelites,  471  ;
its  further  uses,  472  ;  of  a  cloud  and  of  fire,  ii.  219,  302.

Pillars,  the  two,  i.  71,  439,  443,  447;  three  great,  153;  constructed  by
Joshua,  294 ;  at  Mount  Ebal,  302;  where  cast,  44? ;  reference  of,  460 ;
of  brass  erected  to  the  memory  of  H.  A.B.,  ii.  154;  of  the  porch,  180;
of  the  Royal  Arch,  362 ;  of  the  temple  carried  away,  405 ;  seven  pair  of,  435.

Pisgah,  i.  333.

Plagues  of  Egypt,  ii.  600 ;  ministers  of  the,  609.  ,

Plan  and  details  of  the  temple  communicated  to  David,  i.  234 ;  of  human
redemption  embodied  in  Freemasonry,  ii.  658.
VOL.  ii.  3  A


706


GENERAL    INDEX    TO    THE    TEXT.


Plans  and  models  of  the  temple,  ii.  259.

Plates  of  gold  enchased  in  the  temple,  ii.  267  ;  on  the  ark,  293 ;  in  front  of

the  high  priest's  mitre,  533.
Platform  of  the  arch,  ii.  352.
Plenty,  the  symbol  of,  i.  502.

Plough,  a,  passed  over  the  foundations  of  the  temple,  ii.  653.
Plumb  rule,  the,  explained,  i.  162.
Point  within  a  circle,  explained,  i.  166,  310.
Points  in  the  ministry  of  Christ,  i.  4J);  of  fellowship  explained,  185;  of

Masonic  duty,  236 ;  in  the  life  of  Christ,  ii.  '_'1»7-
Police,  the,  commanded  to  arrest  all  Masons,  ii.  43.
Polygamy  introduced,  ii.  197.
Pontiff,  grand,  degree  of,  ii.  120.
Pope  Clement  denounces  Freemasonry,  ii.  43.
Popularity  of  Masonry,  increased  by  opposition,  i.  28.
Porch,  pillars  of  the,  i.  72;  height  of  the,  Ml  ;  the,  451  ;  ii.
Portugal,  Freemasonry  disallowed  in,  ii.  107-
Posterity  of  Ishmael,  the,  i.  117  ;  their  manner  of  lite,  181  ;  preserve  their

fivtdom,  119.

Pot  of  manna,  an  emblem  of  Christ,  ii.  297  ;  a  Masonic  emblem,  3(>'J.
Power  of  the  Deity,  i.  535  ;  of  the  high  priest,  ii.  507  ;  of  the  Jews  abridged,

647.
Practice  of  religion  recommended  in  Freemasonry,  i.  128  ;  of  duty,  382;  of

Freemasonry  vindicated,  399;  of  Masonic  teaching  necessary,  ii.  161.
Prayer,  closes  Masonic  labour,  i.  242 ;  the,  309 ;  at  the  dedication  of  the

temple,  581.

Preacher  of  righteousness,  a,  ii.  203.
Preadamites,  the,  ii.  130.
Precedence,  ii.  327.

Preceptive  admonitions  of  the  lectures,  i.  382.
Precepts  of  Masonry  to  be  reduced  to  practice,  i.  150 ;  of  the  Noachidae,

516.

Precious  metals,  the,  a  knowledge  of;  ii.  213;  stones,  the  temple  embel-
lished with,  254,  268  ;  metals  plentiful  in  ancient  times,  277,  286 ;  things
of  the  tabernacle  exhibited,  376.
Predictions  of  Masonry,  i.  114.
Prejudice,  effect  of,  i.  32.
Prejudices  of  the  Israelites,  ii.  227.
Preliminary  lectures,  the,  their  design,  ii.  C70.
Preparations  for  the  temple  made  by  David,  ii.  259 ;  for  the  second  temple,

443.

Preparing,  three  different  ways  of,  i.  247 ;  the  candidate,  307.
Prescribed  ritual,  the,  ii.  248.
Presence  of  Jehovah  in  the  camp,  ii.  596.
Present  forms  of  Masonry,  whence  they  originated,  i.  437.
Presiding  officers  of  a  Lodge,  what  they  represent,  i.  239.
Preston  mentioned,  i.  89.
Prevalence  of  irregularities,  ii.  48.
Priestly  orders,  reasons  why  they  were  introduced  into  Freemasonry,  ii.  300  ;

the,  504 ;  vestments,  509.
Primitive  Freemasonry,  what,  i.  61,  387;  Lodges,  three,  247;  qualities,

253.

Prince  of  the  Royal  Secret,  degree  of,  ii.  344  ;  Grand  Consistory  of,  formed,
50;  Adept,  degree  of,  established,  68,343;  of  Jerusalem,  130,339;  of
Mercy,  131,  342 ;  of  Libanus,  341 ;  of  the  Tabernacle,  341 ;  of  Peace,
appears  in  the  temple,  644.

Princes  of  the  twelve  tribes,  i.  430 ;  of  Judah  carried  to  Babylon,  ii.  406.
Princess,  the,  of  Egypt,  adopts  Moses,  ii.  460.


GENERAL    INDEX    TO    THE    TEXT.  707

Principal  officers,  i.  244.

Principals,  three,  i.  247  ;  thrones  of  the  three,  ii.  351.

Principles  of  religion  in  Freemasonry,  i.  52;  of  slavery,  112;  of  charity,

114.

Private  chapel  of  Solomon,  i.  587  ;  arch  of  Solomon,  ii.  376.
Probations,  i.  135,  540.
Proceedings  of  the  Templars,  ii.  24.
Procession  of  the  Israelites  out  of  Egypt,  i.  367-
Productiveness  of  the  mines  of  precious  metals,  ii.  278.
Profession  sometimes  at  variance  with  practice,  i.  150;  of  a  Master  Ma-
son, ii.  182.

Progress  of  Masonry  accelerated,  ii.  313.
Progressive  increase  of  Freemasonry  in  England,  ii.  316.
Prohibition  of  Freemasonry,  ii.  43 ;  of  secret  societies,  66.
Prominent  emblems  on  the  Tracing-boards,  i.  153.
Promise  of  a  Saviour,  i.  46 ;  its  importance  in  Freemasonry,  62 ;  renewed

to  Abraham,  65,  100 ;  through  Jacob,  69  ;  land  of,  73 ;  of  a  Saviour,  ii.

168;  of  redemption,  489.

Promises  to  Hagar,  i.  116;  to  Jacob,  274 ;  to  the  Israelites,  ii.  566.
Promotion  the  result  of  merit,  ii.  6.
Pronunciation  of  the  Name  not  agreed  on,  ii.  542.
Proofs  in  the  Landmarks,  ii.  658.
Prophecy  of  Balaam,  ii.  576.
Prophecies  embodied  in  Freemasonry,  i.  69.
Prophetical  endowments  of  Enoch,  ii.  190.
Prophets  dwell  on  hills,  i.  334.
Propitiatory,  i.  75 ;  the,  what,  ii.  293.
Proposal  of  Cagliostro,  ii.  85.

Protection  of  the  tabernacle,  ii.  241 ;  of  the  Israelites,  under  Jehovah,  569.
Proverbs  of  Solomon,  i.  397.
Provincial  Master  of  the  Red  Cross,  ii.  131.
Provost  and  judge,  ii.  131,  336.

Provosts  and  judges,  Adoniram  the  chief  of  the,  i.  427.
Prudence,  emblem  of,  i.  158  ;  explained,  177,  252.
Prussia,  King  of,  initiated,  ii.  38.

Prussian,  Perfect,  degree  of,  ii.  130;  Knights,  131;  341.
Public  opinion  in  favour  of  Freemasonry,  i.  30 ;  symbols,  125 ;  buildings,

ornaments  of,  ii.  266.
Publication  of  the  decree  of  David,  ii.  448.
Publications  on  Masonry,  impolicy  of  restraining,  i.  29.
Punishment,  force  of,  i.   254;  of  Cain,  ii.    173;   of  the  Jews,  391;  for

naming  the  sacred  word,  545 ;  of  fiery  serpents,  573  ;  of  the  Egyptians,

608.

Punishments  and  rewards,  i.  49.
Purification  of  a  righteous  man,  i.  220 ;  of  continental  Masonry,  ii.  99 ;

of  the  Morals  by  Masonry,  184.
Purity,  emblem  of,  ii,  508.
Purple,  a  symbol  of  assiduity  and  zeal,  ii.  255.
Purveyors,  i.  430.

Pyramids  built  by  the  Israelites,  i.  363.
Pyron,  his  system  of  Masonry,  ii.  89.
Pythagoras  in  Babylon,   ii.   41 1 ;   instructed   by  Daniel,  412 ;   introduces

Jewish  Masonry  into  Greece,  414.

Quadrilateral  word,  ii.  543;  form  of  the  camp,  569.
Qualifications  of  a  candidate,  three,  i.  244.
Queen  of  Sheba  visits  Solomon,  i.  591.


708


GENERAL  INDEX  TO  THE  TEXT.


Races  of  Seth  and  Cain  kept  separate,  i.  58.

Radiant  appearance  of  the  Shekinah,  ii.  181.

Rainbow  in  the  heavens,  i.  522.

Raising  of  Christ  from  the  dead,  ii.  175.

Ram,  a,  substituted  for  Isaac,  i.  215.

Rameses,  the  Israelites  journey  from,  i.  360.

Ramsay,  the  Chevalier,  invents  new  degrees,  ii.  31 ;  introduces  them  into

England,  32  ;  where  they  are  rejected,  33.
Rank  of  Lodges,  ii.  328.

Rational  amusement,  Freemasonry  a  source  of,  i.  88.
Reason  insufficient  to  penetrate  divine  mysteries,  i.  546.
Reasons  why  our  Lodges  are  situated  due  east  and  West,  i.  183,  198  ;  why
Masons  hold  their  Lodges  on  hills  or  in  valleys,  323 ;  for  the  adoption  of
Masonic  symbols,  ii.  618;   why  the  triple  tau  was  incorporated  into  Free-
masonry, 638.

Rebellion  of  the  Israelites,  ii.  562.
Redcross  Sword  of  Babylon,  degree  of,  ii.  1J3;  Knight,  131;  of  Rome

and  Constantine,  132.
Red  Sea,  division  of  the,  i.  372,  466;  drowns  the  Egyptians,  376;  passage

of  the,  ii.  219  ;  descent  of  the  Deity  at,  -173.

Redeemer,  a  knowledge  of  embodied  in  primitive  Freemasonry,  i.  62.
Redemption  of  man,  i.  70;  how  typified,  159,  216;  from  bondage,  481  ;

promise  of,  ii.  489.

References  to  the  number  seven,  i.  514-
Refreshment  called,  i.  139;  hours  of,  438.
Refining  of  metals,  ii.  207.
Reflections  of  Pharoah,  ii.  603.
Regeneration  of  a  Master  Mason,  ii.  182.

Regularity  and  decorum  recommended,  ii.  260;  of  Masonic  classes,  331.
Rehoboam's  unwise  conduct,  ii.  390.
Rehum  the  Chancellor,  ii.  442.
Reinhold  mentioned  i.  25.
Rejoicings  of  the  Egyptians  when  the  Nile  overflows,  i.  551  ;  amongst  the

Jews,  ii.  449.
Relief,  i.  164.
Religion  identified  with  Freemasonry,  i.  51;  principles  of,  established  in

Freemasonry,  52;  not  obliterated,  539;  of  the  initiated,  ii.  141.
Religions,  Begehenheiten,  mentioned,  i.  25.

Religious  reference  of  symbols,  i.  124,  237  ;  legends  distorted,  392  ;  ser-
vices, 536.

Remphan,  star  of,  i.  331.
Report,  the,  i.  308 ;  of  the  spies,  ii.  564.
Reports,  threefold,  i.  246 ;  and  signals,  438.
Representatives  appointed  by  Grand  Lodges,  ii.  32G.
Reputation  of  Moses,  ii.  462.
Research  recommended,  i.  9.
Resolutions  of  Solomon  with  the  Intendants,  ii.  370.
Responses  by  the  Urim  and  Thummim,  ii.  526;  how  delivered,  528 ;  whether

by  an  audible  voice,  530.

Resurrection,  the,  i.  49;  of  the  dead,  ii.  142;  truth  of  the,  166,  600.
Rest,  hours  of,  i.  438.
Reuben,  his  banner,  i.  77  ;  the  first  grand  point  refers  to,  306 ;  banner  of,

explained,  ii.  587.

Reunion  of  ancient  and  modern  Masonry,  ii.  665.
Revelation,  i.  538;  of  the  Messiah,  217 ;  to  Moses,  ii.  537.
Revival  in  1717,  views  of  the  Masons  at  the,  ii.  662.
Revolt  of  the  ten  tribes,  ii.  387.
Reward  for  the  discovery  of  certain  culprits,  ii.  369.


GENERAL    INDEX    TO    THE    TEXT.  709

Rewards  attending  the  faithful  practice  of  Masonry,  i.  152 ;  and  punish-
ments, 539.

Riches  produce  luxury,  ii.  213  ;  of  the  temple  exaggerated,  269  ;  of  Rome,
279;  of  Xerxes,  282 ;  of  Babylon,  283;  of  Persia,  284  ;  unequally  dis-
tributed, 287.  •

Right  angles,  i.  189;  pronunciation  of  the  Name  doubted,  ii.  547-

Rise  and  fall  of  nations,  ii.  287.

Rising  sun,  the,  i.  138;  worship  towards  the,  194;  by  the  Jews,  571;
southing,  and  setting  of  the  sun,  ii.  251.

Rite  Ecossais  Primitif  established,  ii.  88 ;  Ancien  et  Accepte  established,
89;  degrees  of  the,  conferred  in  Ireland,  104.

Rites  and  ceremonies,  i.  120;  of  Freemasonry  vindicated,  399;  of  Jewish
Masonry,  ii.  413.

Ritual  of  Masonry  mentioned,  i.  14;  prescribed,  ii.  248.

River  Nile,  the,  destroys  the  crops,  i.  548.

Robe  of  the  high  priest,  ii.  512.

Robert  Bruce  founds  the  Royal  Order,  ii.  12.

Robinet  mentioned,  i.  24.

Robison's  proofs  of  a  conspiracy  mentioned,  i.  12.

Rod  of  Moses,  i.  329;  divides  the  Red  Sea,  372;  of  Aaron,  ii.  290;  of
Moses,  598;  a  symbol  of  Freemasonry,  599;  the  agent  of  the  plagues  of
Egypt,  612  ;  an  ensign  of  authority,  615.

Rods  of  the  magicians  changed  into  serpents,  ii.  605,  614.

Rosaic  order  mentioned,  ii.  56.

Rose  Croix,  the,  i.  246;  instituted,  ii.  41  ;  degrees  of,  conferred  in  Ireland,
104;  de  Heredom,  116.

Rosicrucianism  assimilated  with  Freemasonry,  ii.  63.

Romans,  the,  invade  Judea,  ii.  650.

Rome,  riches  of,  ii.  279.

Royal  Arch,  the  seventh  degree,  i.  514;  the,  practised  in  England,  ii.  101,
133,  303, 337 ;  Tracing-board  of  the,  348 ;  described,  352 ;  sacred  symbols
of,  355  ;  Tetragrammaton  in,  552 ;  denoted  by  the  triple  tau,  631 ;  whether
a  separate  degree,  668.

Royal  Order  of  H.  R.  D.  M.,  ii.  12 ;  founded,  14 ;  its  history,  15 ;  resumes
its  functions,  86.

Royal  Priest,  degree  of,  ii.  127;  Secret,  Prince  of  the,  131  ;  Master,  133,

Royal  York  Lodge  at  Berlin  instituted,  ii.  53.

R.  S.  Y.  C.  S.  founded,  ii.  16.

Ruby  in  the  pectoral,  its  signification,  ii.  517.

Rude  state  of  man  before  the  time  of  Tubal  Cain,  ii.  208.

Rue  de  Boucheries,  first  Lodge  in  the,  ii.  32.

Rules  of  the  Scotch  Templars,  ii.  103.

SABAOTH,  a  name  of  the  Deity,  ii.  546.

Sabbath,  a  day  of  rest,  i.  61 ;  institution  of  a,  512 ;  a  constituent  part  of
the  Jewish  religion,  513  ;  ought  to  be  venerated,  528.

Sabbatical  year,  i.  516.

Sacred  Landmarks,  i.  87;  emblem,  240;  name,  248,  477;  crypts,  339;
triangle,  445;  rolls  kept  in  the  pillars,  418  ;  writings,  the  number  seven
celebrated  in  the,  519  ;  furniture  of  the  temple,  579;  Mountain,  Knight
of  the,  ii.  133;  Lodge,  the,  247;  Lodge  opened,  264;  name,  the,  265;
chest  of  the  Holy  of  Holies  described,  291 ;  roll  of  the  law  found,  354,
396 ;  roll,  the,  388 ;  writings,  none  in  existence,  395 ;  name,  528 ;  on  the
mitre,  534 ;  virtues  of  the,  535 ;  why  considered  ineffable,  538  ;  conjectures
on  the,  540 ;  hierogram,  554.

Sacrifice  of  Asa,  the,  i.  517.

Sacrifices  at  the  dedication  of  the  temple,  i.  583 ;  of  Cain  and  Abel,  ii.  187  ;
to  the  golden  calf,  236.


10


GENERAL    INDEX    TO    THE    TEXT.


Sages  visit  Jerusalem,  i.  591.

St.  Andrew,  degree  of,  ii.  343.

St.  Germains,  first  Lodge  at,  ii.  29.

St.  John  the  Baptist,  how  referred  to  in  the  lectures  of  Masonry,  i.  166.

St.  John's  Masonry  established  at  Kilwinning,  ii.  16  j  in  Scotland,  103.

St.  John  of  Jerusalem,  Knight  of,  ii.  135.

St.  Michael,  Knight  of,  ii.  127.

St.  Stephen,  Knight  of,  ii.  135.

Samaritans,  the,  hinder  the  work,  ii.  442.

Sanballat  and  others  oppose  the  Jews,  ii.  452.

Sanctity  of  hills,  i,  329.

Sanctum  Sanctorum,  i.  443;  the,  ii.  156 ;  lined  with  gold,  274.

Sanhedrim,  the,  restored,  ii.  426 ;  assembled,  446.

Sapphire  in  the  pectoral,  its  signification,  ii.  518.

Saracens,  the,  from  whom  derived,  i.  117.

Sarah  barren,  i.  101  ;  remonstrates  with  Abraham,  108,  113j  offended  at

the  claims  of  Ishmael,  113.
Saul  succeeded  by  David,  i.  223.
Saviour  Christ,  i.  48.
Scenic  representations,  i.  395.
Sceptre  departing,  i.  65 ;  of  Judah,  69 ;  of  Balaam,  ii.  578 ;  departure  of

the,  from  Judah,  640;  loses  its  authority,  641;  departing,  647;  finally

departs,  656.

Sceptres  of  the  Royal  Arch,  ii.  359.
Schisms  in  Masonry,  ii.  7,  39 ;  among  the  Brethren,  42,  65 ;  gain  strength,

72;  of  Hunde,  Zinnendorff,  and  others,  311  ;  Masonic,  have  not  injured

the  Order,  312
Science  and  morals  blended,  i.  30,  44;  and  arts  taught  in  Masonry,  131  ;

connexion  between,  183  ;  of  the  three  degrees,  186 ;  of  Tyre  and  Sidon,

418.

Sciences  taught  in  Freemasonry,  ii.  674.
Scientific  pursuits  recommended,  i.  3 ;  philosophy  of  Freemasonry,  what,

ii.  184;  pursuits  of  Tubal  Cain,  212.
Scotch  Masonry,  origin  of,  ii.  17;  degrees  of,  34,  55,  57;  Trinitarian,  131.

342;  Fellowcraft,  134;  Master,  134;  rite,  the,  322;  of  the  sacred  vault

of  James  VI.,  338.
Scotland,  the  associated  synod  of,  pass  an  act  against  Freemasonry,  ii.  43 ;

Freemasonry  in,  103.

Scripture  prophecy  confirmed  by  Masonic  tradition,  i.  119.
Scriptures,  the  sacred,  lost,  ii.  395.
Scroeder,  a  Masonic  adventurer,  ii.  62.
Scroepfer,  a  Masonic  adventurer,  ii.  62.
Scroll,  the,  ii,  354.
Sealed  book,  the,  i.  527.
Seals,  seven,  book  with,  i.  525.
Seceding  Brethren  meet,  ii.  309.
Second  grand  offering,  i.  82,  222 ;  point,  reference  of  the,  307  ;  person  in

the  trinity,  525 ;  degree,  379 ;  design  of  the,  439 ;  period,  482 ;  vision

of  Enoch,  ii.  195  ;  temple,  building  of  the,  349, 431 ;  foundations  of  the,

laid,  434 ;  completed,  449.
Secret  des  Francmagonnes  mentioned,  i.  22 ;  de  la  Revolution  explique,  le,

mentioned,  23 ;   mode  of  conveying  information,  122 ;  the  great,  541  ;

observances  of  the  spurious  Freemasonry  forbidden,  571 ;  societies  pro-
hibited, ii.  86;  Master,  134,  336;  monitor,  135;  crypt,  434;  vault  of

Solomon  formed,  435.
Secrets  and  Landmarks,  i.    187;  objects  of  suspicion,  344;  preserved  in

operative  Lodges,  ii.  25 ;  of  the  Jewish  Masonry,  413 ;  invaluable  dis-
covered, 439.


GENERAL    INDEX    TO    THE    TEXT.  711

Secrecy,  symbol  of,  i.  181 ;  observed  in  the  Lodges,  424 ;  in  the  spurious

Freemasonry  of  Egypt,  ii.  462.
Sects  and  parties  in  Masonry,  ii.  58.
Sediment  of  the  Nile,  fertilizing,  i.  555.
Seek  and  ye  shall  find,  i.  112.
Seizure  of  the  criminals,  ii.  375-
Select  Master,  degree  of,  ii.  135.
Seneca,  riches  of,  ii.  280.
Senior  Warden  in  the  West,  i.  139;  his  duty,  141;  a  representative  of

H.  K.  T.,  ii.  257.
Seniority  of  Lodges,  ii.  327.
Separation  of  the  waters,  i.  482.
Sephiroth  of  the  Jews,  ii.  356.
Septenaiy  number,  importance  of  the,  i.  513.
Serapis,  temple  of,  had  many  crosses  cut  in  stone,  ii.  629.
Serpent  tempter,  i.  46  ;  fall  of  man  through  his  temptations,  54 ;  his  head
bruised,  62;  and  tan  cross,  a  symbol,  80;  the,  tempts  Eve,  ii.  480;  to
be  defeated,  497 ;  his  head  to  be  bruised  by  Christ,  498  ;  worshipped,
502 ;  a  symbol  in  Masonry,  599.
Serpents,  punishments  of  the  fiery,  ii.  573 ;  produced  by  the  magicians  of

Egypt,  605 ;  supposed  to  be  sent  by  Cneph,  606.
Serpentine  emblem,  the,  i.  62.
Seth,  the  posterity  of,  resided  on  mountains,  i.  326  ;  his  family  live  on  Mo-

riah,  ii.  188 ;  posterity  of,  corrupted,  197.

Seth  and  Cain,  their  descendants  kept  separate,  i.  58 ;  when  blended,  59.
Setting  sun,  the,  i.  139,  194;  maul,  the,  180.

Seven  stars,  a  symbol,  i.  173;  degrees,  510;  number,  celebrated  in  the
sacred  writings,  519;  ages,  521 ;  classes  of  the  rite  Ancien  et  Accepte,
ii.  329;  pair  of  pillars,  435.

Seventh  day  consecrated,  i.  61 ;  grand  point  referred  to,  31 1 ;  step  of  the
winding  staircase,  456 ;  day,  510 ;  revered  by  the  Greeks  and  Romans,  529.
Seventy  years'  exile,  the,  ii.  408.
Severe  measures  against  Masonry,  ii.  43.
SHADDAI,  a  name  of  the  Deity,  ii.  524
Shaphan  reads  the  Scriptures  to  Josiab,  ii.  398.
Sheba,  Queen  of,  visits  Solomon,  i.  591.
Shekels,  the  workmen  paid  in,  i.  435.

Shekinah,  the,  i.  45 ;  appears  to  Adam,  55 ;  at  the  dedication  of  the  temple.,
83,  583 ;  a  symbol  of  God's  presence,  84 ;  appears  in  the  form  of  Christ,
84 ;  manifested,  86 ;  appears  in  thunder  on  mount  Sinai,  339 ;  or  Logos,
the  Creator,  479;  appears  to  Enoch,  ii.   191;  suspended  over  the  ark,
296 ;  in  the  first  and  second  temple,  441 ;  appearance  of  the,  490.
Shem  lived  in  the  time  of  Jacob,  i.  58.
Shibboleth,  the  test  word  of  Jeptha,  i.  508.
Shilo,  i.  65  ;  appearance  of,  ii.  656.
Shimshai  the  scribe  mentioned,  ii.  442.
Ship,  the  device  on  the  banner  of  Zebulun,  ii.  588.
Shittim  wood,  ii.  239.

Shoes,  Moses  commanded  to  take  off  his,  ii.  471.
Shovel,  a  symbol,  ii.  354.
Shubard,  a  Masonic  adventurer,  ii.  66.

Sidonians  employed  about  the  temple,  i.  411  ;  whether  they  were  the  sub-
jects of  Solomon,  412.
Signals  and  reports,  i.  438.
Signification  of  the  letter  G,  i.  532.

Signs,  threefold,  i.  244,  247;  words,  and  tokens  of  the  Mopses,  ii.  71 ;  of
Freemasonry,  259,  617;  of  the  zodiac,  364;  attending  the  crucifixion,
474  ;  origin  of,  487-


712


GENERAL    INDEX    TO    THE    TEXT.


Silence,  symbol  of,  i.  181.

Silk,  whence  the  Israelites  obtained  it,  ii.  245.

Silver  mines,  ii.  277  ;  dishes  common,  280.

Simeon,  the  second  grand  point  refers  to,  i.  307;  banner  of,  explained,
ii.  689.

Similarity  of  some  customs  in  the  true  and  spurious  Freemasonry,  i.  317.

Sin,  consequences  of,  i.  61  ;  introduced  into  the  world,  ii.  483.

Sinai,  mount,  the  Deity  appears  on,  i.  320;  the  Israelites  arrive  at,  ii.  211);
the  appearance  of  the  Deity  on,  221.

Single  pillar,  i.  465.

Site  of  the  temple  communicated  to  David,  i.  233.

Situation  of  the  Lodge,  i.  71 ;  of  the  officers,  71  ;  of  the  candidate,  314  ;  of
the  Lodge,  ii.  301.

Six  periods,  the,  i.  476.

Sixth  grand  point,  reference  of  the,  i.  311 ;  period,  492

Skirtwork,  i.  174.

Skull  and  cross-bones,  ii.  157.

Slavery  of  the  Israelites,  ii.  564.

Smelting  metals,  ii.  207.

Social  emblems,  i.  125.

Society,  the  benefits  it  derives  from  Freemasonry,  ii.  676.

Sodom  and  Gomorrah,  descent  of  the  Deity  at,  ii.  473.

Sojourners,  three,  i.  247  ;  from  Babylon  appear,  ii.  433 ;  discover  the  stone
of  foundation,  434.

Solar  worship,  rites  of  the,  i.  195.

Solomon,  his  message  to  Hiram,  i.  404  ;  extent  of  his  dominions,  417  ;  in-
capable of  building  without  foreign  aid,  41(J  ;  prepares  for  the  dedication,
581 ;  his  prayer,  582  ;  his  private  arch,  587  ;  his  wisdom  and  power,  591  ;
his  fame  extended,  592 ;  his  temple  the  glory  of,  85 ;  whether  he  adopted
the  legend,  ii.  170;  his  porch,  261 ;  his  vision,  263;  possessed  of  enor-
mous sums  of  money,  274 ;  his  great  power,  287  ;  institutes  a  new  degree,
373;  his  Grand  Chapter,  376;  his  private  arch,  376;  and  Hiram  recon-
ciled, 380 ;  pollutes  the  temple,  384.

Son  of  a  Master  Mason  called  a  Lewis,  i.  146  ;  of  God,  birth  of  the,  159.

Sons  of  Eli  profane  the  tabernacle,  i.  572;  of  God,  who,  ii.  214.

Sound  judgment,  candidate  to  be  of,  i.  1 10.

Source  of  the  Nile,  a  mystery,  i.  557-

Sources  of  information  should  be  accessible,  i.  32 ;  of  Solomon's  wealth,
ii.  266.

Sovereign  Prince  Masons,  the  title  first  invented,  ii.  48;  of  the  Rose  Croix,
1 16 ;  Commander  of  the  Temple,  136  ;  Prince  of  Masonry,  138,  340 ;  of
Rose  Croix  de  Heredom,  340.

Spain,  Freemasonry  disallowed  in,  ii.  107.

Spartacus,  the  Illuminist,  mentioned,  i.  26.

Speculative  Masonry,  i.  42;  its  construction,  183;  and  operative  Masonry
blended,  ii.  26,  169  ;  beauty  of,  252.

Spherical  balls,  i.  475.

Spies,  report  of  the,  ii.  564.

Spirit  of  Masonry,  descent  of  the,  i.  1.

Spirits  of  God,  seven,  i.  527.

Spiritual  doctrines  of  Freemasonry,  i.  87;  Tracing-board,  145;  reference
of  the  blazing  star,  160.

Splendour  of  display,  ii.  9.

Spotless  nature  of  Christ,  ii.  511.

Spread  of  Freemasonry,  i.  199.

Sprig  of  cassia,  the,  ii.  143;  explained,  147;  or  branch  alluded  to  by  Virgil,

^  149 ;  a  kind  of  laurel,  150.

Spurious  Freemasonry,  the,  invented,  i.  60 ;  practised  at  Tyre,  164 ;  per-


GENERAL    INDEX    TO    THE    TEXT.  713

verts  the  doctrine  of  the  Trinity,  258;  origin  of  the,  390;  whether  it

retained  a  knowledge  of  one   God,  534;  embraced  by  the   Jews,  507;

in  the  time  of  Eli,  573;  the,  said  to  convey  happiness,  ii.  143;  legend

of,  173;  practised  by  the  Jews,  402;  makes  the  serpent  a  medium  of

regeneration,  502;  of  Egypt,  Moses  initiated  into,  604.
Square  of  God's  word,  i.   146;  the,  explained,  162,  169;  one  of  the  great

lights,  189;  a  symbol  of  perfection,  190.
Staircase,  winding,  i.  443,  451  ;  geometrical,  456.
Star  in  the  East,  i.  159;  of  Remphan,  331  ;  of  Balaam,  ii.  578  ;  guides  the

wise  men  to  Bethlehem,  645.
Stars  of  heaven,  i.  480  ;  are  worlds,  490.
Stark,  a  Masonic  adventurer,  ii.  62.
State  of  man,  original,  ii.  208.
States  of  the  Israelites,  ii.  505.
Station  of  the  priests,  ii.  569.

Statues  of  the  Egyptian  deities  depicted  bearing  a  cross,  ii.  628.
Staves  of  the  Royal  Arch,  ii.  359.
Steps,  the  three,' i.  244;  number  of,  to  the  middle  chamber,  444  ;  emblems

of  what,  452.

Stigma  cast  on  Masonry  by  unworthy  Brethren,  i.  149.
Stirling,  Freemasonry  established  at,  ii.  20.
Stolkyn,  i.  431.
Stone  of  foundation  used  by  Jacob  when  he  fled  to  Laban,  i.  270 ;  as  a

pillow,  272 ;  Moses  seated  on  the,  ii.  220 ;  discovered  by  the  sojourners,

434;  miraculous  powers  ascribed  to,  554.
Stones  taken  from  Jordan,  i.  293;  of  the  temple,  large  size  of  the,  425;

fitted  exactly,  429 ;  carved,  marked,  and  numbered,  ii.  253 ;  taken  from

Calvary,  262 ;  in  the  pectoral,  515.
Stone's  Letters  on  Masonry  mentioned,  i.  13.
Stonesquarers,  i.  426;  with  seven  eyes,  521  ;  of  Abel,  577.
Strangers  in  Israel,  who,  i.  413.
Strasburg,  Freemasonry  founded  at,  ii.  74.
Stream  of  water,  i.  444,  452.
Strength,  pillar  of,  i.  139;  a  symbol  of  Tyre,  154;  to  support,  236;  and

stability,  447 ;  productions  of,  ii.  254 ;  of  Hiram,  257.
Strict  morality,  the  candidate  to  profess,  i.  110 ;  Observance,  order  of,  ii.  69.
Strictness  of  discipline,  i.  438.

Strictures  on  the  science  and  philosophy  of  the  order  recommended,  i.  8.
Stringent  rules  of  the  Scotch  Templars,  ii.  103.
Stuart,  Charles  Edward,  received  into  the  royal  order,  ii.  40  ;  elected  G.  M.,

41 ;  issues  a  manifesto,  42.
Stuarts,  the,  patronize  Freemasonry,  ii.  30.
Study  of  symbolical  Masonry,  ii.  388.
Sublime  discoveries  announced,  ii.  9  ;  degrees,  the,  10  ;  Masonry  introduced

into  England,  50;  Knight  elected,  136,  337,  375;   Porte,  Knight  of  the

137 ;  Grand  Lodge,  the,  334 ;   Scotch  Masonry,  340.
Sublimes,  degree  of  the,  ii.  1 36.
Substitutes  for  metal,  ii.  208.

Subterranean  temple  in  mount  Calvary,  i.  587;  arches,  588;  temple  con-
structed by   Enoch,  ii.    193;    building  made,  260;    avenue  of  arched

pillars,  438.

Subversion  of  the  Landmarks  attempted,  ii.  307.
Successes  of  the  Israelites,  i.  308.
Succoth,  i.  360 ;  and  Zeredatha,  44?.
Sufferings  of  the  Egyptians  detailed,  ii.  610.
Summit  of  the  ladder,  i.  274;  of  mountains,  holy,  320.
Sun,  rising  and  setting,  worship  of  the,  i.  195;  and  moon,  the  messengers

of  God's  will,  157  ;  and  Master,  what,  158;  and  stars  created,  486;  the

VOL.  ii.  3  B


GENERAL    INDEX    TO    THE    TEXT.


dwelling-place  of  the  Deity,  541  ;  in  Cancer,  550;  rising,  southing,  and
setting  of  the,  ii.  251  ;  and  moon,  whether  they  were  depicted  on  the
banner  of  Issachar,  587  ;  obscured,  608.

Superexcellent  Masons,  Lodges  of,  i.  420;  how  many,  427 ;  Master,  de-
gree of,  ii.  137.

Superficial  Masons,  their  error,  i.  383.

Superintendent  Scotch  Master,  ii.  120.

Supernatural  star  appears,  ii.  645.

Supplemental  degrees,  ii.  322.

Support  of  the  Lodge,  i.  236  ;  ii.  301.

Supreme  Council  at  Charleston,  ii.  11;  Tribunal,  the,  established,  40;  of
the  rite  Ancien  et  Accepte  formed,  92 ;  in  America,  108.

Susa,  riches  of  the  palace  of,  ii.  284.

Suspected  persons  apprehended,  ii.  375.

Suspicions  entertained  of  the  Freemasons,  i.  347.

Sweden,  Freemasonry  in,  ii.  106.

Sweden borg's  reveries  noticed,  ii.  55.

Swedish  degrees,  the,  ii.  •'>•'».

Switzerland,  Freemasonry  in,  ii.  106.  I

Sword  and  trowel,  symbols,  ii.  '3 '>'•'>.

Symbol  of  Masonry  and  a  Lodge,  i.  1  ;  of  hope,  G2 ;  of  fidelity,  177  ;  of
silence,  181  ;  of  secrecy,  181  ;  of  perfection,  196;  of  the  Deity,  217;  and
allegory  in  the  primitive  languages,  389;  of  universality,  450 ;  of  God's
presence,  463 ;  of  beauty,  what,  ii.  158  ;  of  the  trees  of  knowledge  and
life,  171  ;  of  health,  356  ;  of  the  brazen  serpent,  575.

Symbols,  facts  embodied  in,  i.  56  ;  in  the  wilderness,  76  ;  compound,  79  ;
Masonry  illustrated  by,  120,  123  ;  what,  124  ;  use  of,  125  ;  a  distinguishing
feature  in  Freemasonry,  126  ;  table  of,  135;  contained  in  the  first  learn-
ing of  the  ancient  world,  381  ;  of  the  Mopses,  ii.  71  ;  and  ornaments  of
the  Royal  Arch  Tracing- board,  348 ;  of  Freemasonry,  599  ;  from  what
constructed,  618.

Symbolical  offering,  i  206 ;  instruction,  383  ;  references,  385  ;  degrees,  the,
ii.  18;  Masonry,  38,  329  ;  reference  of  the  third  degree,  165  ;  ornaments
of  public  buildings,  266  ;  Masonry  unchangeable,  305  ;  Landmarks  of,
cannot  be  altered,  308 ;  reference  of  the  onyx  stones,  514  ;  of  the  Pectoral,
524  ;  of  the  Urim  and  Thummim,  532 ;  of  Christian  Masonry,  580.

Synchronisms  of  the  apocalypse,  i.  525.

System  of  Zinnendorff,  ii.  54;  of  Masonry  in  England,  101.

Systems,  numerous,  in  operation,  ii.  66.

Tabernacle  and  temple  worship,  i.  47,  85  ;  erection  of,  74 ;  symbolical  of
Christianity,  75  ;  introduced  into  Freemasonry,  why,  75 ;  at  Shilo,  pro-
faned, 572;  Chief  of  the,  degree  of,  ii.  114  ;  Prince  of  the,  130  ;  com-
manded to  be  erected,  222  ;  what  a  type  of,  226,  246 ;  worship,  why
commanded,  239  ;  form  of  the,  240  ;  described,  240  ;  the  type  of  a  Mason's
Lodge,  306.

Table  of  symbols,  i.  135.

Talmud,  the,  i.  391.

Talent,  value  of  the,  ii.  273.

Tannehill  on  charity,  i.  265.

Tassels,  i.  174.

Tatnai  stops  the  work,  ii.  445.

Tau  cross  and  serpent,  i.  80  ;  of  the  Jews  and  heathen,  ii.  619  ;  was  a  cross,
621 ;  a  symbol  of  innocence,  621 ;  and  life,  622  ;  of  the  Druids,  622  ;  of
India,  623 ;  in  Rome,  624  ;  denoted  by  a  cross,  631  ;  and  signifying,  631.

Tempelorden,  Order  of,  founded,  ii.  45.

Temperance  defined,  i.  175.

Templar,  Knight,  degree  of,  ii.  124.


GENERAL    INDEX    TO    THE    TEXT.  715

Templars,  dissolution  of  the,  ii.  12  ;  contribute  to  the  victory  of  Bannock-
burn,  14  ;  whether  they  were  Masons,  22  ;  Masonic,  23  ;  proceedings  of,
24;  Scottish,  jealousy  of,  103.

Templary,  degrees  of,  ii.  55  ;  practised  in  England,  101.

Temple,  dedication  of  the,  i.  83,  580  ;  of  Herod,  86;  site  of  the,  233  ;  and
a  Masons'  Lodge  compared,  238  ;  number  and  classification  of  the  work-
men  at  the,  401 ;  one  of  the  wonders  of  the  world,  438;  dimensions  of
the,  441  ;  profusely  ornamented,  458  ;  not  a  large  edifice,  579  ;  of  Solo-
mon, ii.  247  ;  appears  like  a  single  stone,  253  ;  and  a  Masons'  Lodge
compared,  256  ;  finished,  264  ;  and  dedicated,  266  ;  surpassed  all  other
buildings,  271  ;  cost  of  the,  271 ;  covered  with  plates  of  gold,  276  ;  burned,
404  ;  the  triple  tau  refers  to,  632  ;  re-edified  by  Herod,  643  ;  given  over
to  destruction,  648  ;  fired,  651  ;  and  levelled  with  the  ground,  652 ;  not
to  be  rebuilt,  654  ;  of  Sumnaut,  riches  of,  285.

Temples,  the  three,  i.  247  ;  in  caverns,  324  ;  veneration  for,  544.

Ten  tribes  revolt,  ii.  387  ;  carried  into  captivity,  392  ;  names  of  the  Deity,
541  ;  tribes  marshalled  in  the  wilderness,  569.

Tendency  of  Masonic  predictions,  i.  114  ;  ought  to  be  investigated,  385;
of  the  degree  of  Elu,  ii.  37.

Tenth  grand  point  explained,  i.  313.

Ternary  allusions,  i.  242.

Terraces  constructed,  ii.  260.

Terrible  glory  of  God  in  Sinai,  ii.  227.

Tesselated  border,  i.  174.

Tetragrammaton,  the,  i.  45,  81 ;  used,  ii.  233,  302  ;  explained,  537  ;  works
miracles,  548,  553  ;  in  Freemasonry,  551 ;  was  Jehovah,  556.

Teutonic  Knights,  degree  of,  ii.  137.

Thales,  in  Babylon,  ii.  411.

Theocracy,  the,  i.  47,  304;  establishment  of  the,  68.

Theocratic  philosophy  of  Freemasonry,  ii.  184.

Theological  ladder,  the,  i.  129;  virtues,  three,  244;  of  Adam,  ii.  478;
symbols  of  the,  in  Freemasonry,  524.

Theoricus,  degree  of.  ii.  137.

Theories,  new,  ii.  9.

Third  grand  offering,  i.  83,  578 ;  grand  point  explained,  308 ;  step  of  the
winding  staircase,  454 ;  period,  483;  person  in  the  trinity,  525;  degree,
ii.  1;  divided,  6;  legend  of  the,  161;  established,  169;  temple,  the
church  of  Christ,  646 ;  degree,  includes  the  Royal  Arch,  670.

Thirty  thousand  E.  A.  P.s  at  the  building  of  the  temple,  i.  414;  three,
order  of,  established,  ii.  53 ;  rite  of,  328.

Thory's  synopsis  mentioned,  i.  22.

Three  strangers  appear  to  Abraham,  i.  104;  great  pillars,  153;  references
to  Solomon's  temple,  155;  primitive  orders,  153;  lesser  lights,  1,5}?;
greater  lights,  168;  steps  of  the  ladder,  173  ;  calamities  offered  to  David,
229;  the  number,  236 ;  Fellowcrafts,  246 ;  an  emblem  of  the  Deity,  247  ;
five,  seven,  or  more,  444;  degrees,  ii.  5;  Kings,  Knight  of  the,  137;
heavens,  the  tabernacle,  a  type  of,  226;  colours,  301  ;  greater  and  lesser
luminaries  of  the  Royal  Arch,  356 ;  great  lights  of  Masonry,  the  triple
tau  refers  to,  632.

Threshing-floor  purchased  by  David,  i.  233.

Throne  of  God,  i.  527.

Thrones  of  gold,  ii.  2?!) ;  in  Persia,  284  ;  of  the  three  Principals,  351 ;  of
the  Royal  Arch,  357.

Thummim  denotes  perfections,  ii.  532.

Thunder  and  lightning,  i.  466.

Tito,  Prince  of  Harodim,  i.  429;  Zadok,  431  ;  ii.  377-

Titus  takes  Jerusalem,  ii.  661.

Toil  and  labour  the  lot  of  man,  ii.  496.


716


GENERAL    INDEX    TO    THE    TEXT.


Tongue,  a  silent,  recommended,  ii.  161.

Tongues,  confusion  of,  i.  64.

Tools  and  weapons  formed  by  Tubal  Cain,  ii.  210.

Topaz  in  the  pectoral,  its  signification,  ii.  518.

Touching  the  ark,  a  grave  offence,  ii.  293

Tour,  Grade  de  la,  an  honorary  degree,  ii.  17.

Tower  of  Babel  built,  i.  63,  268;  the  device  on  the  banner  of  Simeon,
ii.  589.

Tracing-board  of  an  E.  A.  P.  explained,  i.  120  ;  its  contents,  132 ;  spiritual,
145;  drawings  on  the,  352;  of  a  Fellowcraft,  439 ;  of  the  third  degree
explained,  ii.  140  ;  customs  respecting  the,  151  ;  of  the  Royal  Arch,  348.

Traditional  points,  three,  i.  244;  relations,  ii.  174.

Traditions  weakened  by  the  union  of  the  two  races  before  the  flood,  i.  59 ;
in  the  three  degrees,  186;  of  Masonry,  237;  perverted,  390;  of  the
Jews,  393;  of  the  workmens'  wages  doubted,  435;  H.  AB.,ii.  151;  of
Enoch,  187;  of  the  death  of  Moses,  231;  transmitted  orally,  350;  of
Masonry,  300;  of  the  rod  of  Moses,  614;  of  the  fall  of  man,  500.

Tragical  catastrophe,  ii.  373.

Tranquillity,  zone  of,  i.  254.

Transfiguration  of  Christ,  the,  i.  250.

Transmission  of  facts  from  Seth  to  Abraham,  i.  57.

Transparent  Light,  Knight  of  the,  ii.  138.

Treasure  bequeathed  by  David,  ii.  272.

Treasury  rooms,  i.  454.

Treaty  between  Solomon  and  Hiram,  ii.  378.

Tree,  the  device  on  the  banner  of  Asher,  ii.  594.

Trestle,  the,  i.  144.

Triad,  the,  i.  236  ;  of  ancient  nations,  256 ;  resolved  into  a  monad,  263.

Trial,  zone  of,  i.  254.

Trials  of  the  Jews  in  Babylon,  ii.  409.

Triangle  formed  by  the  presiding  officers  of  a  Lodge,  i.  239 ;  247;  sacred,  445  ;
of  nine,  446  ;  and  jod,  534;  circle,  and  triple  tau,  ii.  358  ;  explained,  631.

Triangular  sconces,  i.  248.

Tribes  of  Israel,  i.  289;  at  rest,  305;  Masonic  references  to  the,  305;
princes  of  the,  430.

Trinity,  doctrine  of  the,  i.  256,  454;  in  unity,  261 ;  obscured,  262.

Triple  tau,  i.  81 ;  ii.  358,  617  ;  presumed  to  be  a  Jewish  symbol,  621  ;  an
emblem  of  the  Royal  Arch  degree,  631  ;  a  Christian  symbol  of  the  life
to  come,  632  ;  sundry  references  of  the,  632  ;  adapted  to  Christian  Free-
masonry, 635  ;  a  symbol  of  the  Great  I  AM,  636;  represented  on  early
Greek  coins,  637.

Triple  rosy-cross,  ii.  133  ;  Period,  Knight  of  the,  138.

Troop  of  horsemen,  the  device  on  the  banner  of  Gad,  ii.  590.

Trowel,  what  a  symbol  of,  i.  245 ;  and  sword,  a  symbol,  ii.  353.

True  design  of  Freemasonry,  ii.  183.

Truth,  i.  164;  sought  in  the  bowels  of  the  earth,  184;  represented  by
symbols,  381 ;  corrupted,  389 ;  of  the  Mosaic  writings,  ii.  500.

Truths,  transmitted  through  Cain,  i.  54.

Tubal  Cain  invents  the  arts,  ii.  205,  207 ;  knew  the  uses  of  fire,  209 ;
formed  tools  and  weapons,  210;  his  scientific  pursuits,  212;  acquainted
with  the  precious  metals,  213;  his  worldly  possessions,  214.

Turquoise  in  the  pectoral,  its  signification,  ii.  521.

Tutelary  deities,  i.  541  ;  divinities  adopted  by  the  Jews,  ii.  391.

Twelve  grand  points  explained,  i.  287  ;  stones  taken  from  Jordan,  293 ;
tribes,  chief  of  the,  ii.  114.

Twelfth  grand  point  explained,  i.  316.

Twenty. four  inch  rule,  i.  180.

Two  pillars,  i.  71  ;  parallel  lines,  166.


GENERAL    INDEX   TO    THE    TEXT.  717

Tyler,  the,  his  place,  i.  142.

Types  of  Christianity  in  Freemasonry,  i.  45 ;  of  Christ,  66 ;  and  ob-
servances, 85;  or  symbols,  120;  and  allegories,  187;  of  Freemasonry,
ii.  178 ;  of  the  Redeemer  in  Freemasonry,  658.

Tyranny  of  the  taskmasters  of  Egypt,  ii.  458.

Tyrian  quarries,  arrangement  in  the,  i.  420.

Tyrians,  the,  good  architects,  i.  154 ;  assist  David,  2'25  ;  employed  at  the
building  of  the  temple,  410;  whether  subject  to  Solomon,  412  ;  under-
stood geometry  and  astronomy,  547  ;  imported  the  precious  stones,  ii.  268  ;
workmen,  commit  a  crime,  368  ;  employed  by  Zerubbabel,  443.

Tyre,  spurious  Freemasonry  of,  i.  154,  569 ;  embraced  by  the  Jews,  566  ;
an  independent  kingdom,  416.

Unalterable    Landmarks,  ii.  306.

Unanimity  amongst  Masons,  ii.  326.

Unauthorized  publications  on  Masonry,  i.  12,  21

Unfaithful  Brethren  mentioned,  i.  147.

Union  of  the  two  systems  in  France,  ii.  100  ;  of  ancient  and  modern  Masons,
102,  310  ;  of  the  two  governing  bodies  in  Ireland,  105  ;  of  operative  and
speculative  Masonry,  169  ;  and  strength  of  Freemasonry,  314.

United  States,  Grand  Lodges  in  the,  ii.  313  ;  the  system  in,  320  ;  degrees
practised,  322  ;  number  of  Lodges,  324;  Royal  Arch  in,  360.

Unity  of  labour,  i.  438  ;  evils  arising  from  the  absence  of,  ii.  65.

Unsuccessful  attempts  to  destroy  Freemasonry,  i.  27.

.Universal  language  of  Masonry,  i.  120  ;  love  of  the  Brethren,  137  ;  system
of  Freemasonry  in  the  time  of  Solomon,  591 ;  harmony,  degree  of,  ii.  121 ;
use  of  the  divining  rod,  614.

Universality  of  Masonry,  i.  130 ;  emblem  of,  i.  450  ;  ii.  255,  666  ;  of  the
Christian  religion,  ii.  299.

Universe,  the  temple  of  the  l)eity,  i.  157.

Urim  means  Lights,  ii.  532.

Urim  and  Thummim,  a  type  of  Christ,  ii.  299  ;  of  the  Pectoral,  507  ;  ex-
plained, 525  ;  thought  to  be  the  Tetragrammaton,  527 ;  responses  by,
how  delivered,  528  ;  whether  by  an  audible  voice,  530.

Use  of  the  pillar  of  a  cloud,  i.  465.

Vale  of  Jehoshaphat,  i.  317.

Valley  of  Hinnom,  ii.  385.

Valleys  dedicated  to  the  infernal  deities,  i.  320  ;  lowest  of,  339.

Value  of  the  precious  metals,  ii.  286.

Vanity  of  human  pursuits,  ii.  146.

Vaults  discovered  in  Calvary,  ii.  262.

Vehme  Gerichte  mentioned,  ii.  77.

Veil  of  the  Most  Holy  Place,  ii.  241.

Venerable  Grand  Master  of  Symbolic  Lodges,  ii.  138.

Veneration  for  hills  and  caverns,  i.  324,  338  ;  for  the  septenary  number,

513  ;  for  temples,  544.
Vengeance,  ii.  375.

Vessels  of  gold  and  silver  in  the  temple,  ii.  275.
Vestments  of  the  priests,  ii.  275,  509.
Views  of  Masonry  at  the  revival  in  1717,  ii.  662.
Vine,  the  device  on  the  banner  of  Manasseh,  ii.  592.
Violence  of  mankind  before  the  flood,  ii.  214.
Virgin  Mary,  degree  of  the  annunciation  of,  ii.  112.
Virtue  inculcated  by  symbols,  i.  126,  164.
Virtues,  the  three,  i.  244;  rewarded,  ii.  141  ;  and  services  of  H.  A  B.,

170  ;  beauty  of,  252  ;  of  Christ  typified  in  the  ark,  297  ;  of  the  Sacred

Name,  535.


718


GENERAL    INDEX    TO    THE    TEXT.


Vision  of  Jacob,  i.  67,  273 ;   of  Moses,  273  ;   of  the  cherubim,  273 ;  of

Abraham,  101  ;  of  Enoch,  ii.  191  ;  of  Solomon,  263  ;  of  Moses,  469.
Vital  religion,  ii.  140.
Volcanic  mountains,  ii.  210.
Vulcan,  Tubal  Cain  worshipped  under  the  name  of,  ii,  206.


Wages  of  the  workmen,  i.  435  ;  considerable,  ii.  272.

Walls  of  Jerusalem  broken  down,  ii.  404.

Washington,  an  eminent  Mason,  i.  89.

Water,  the  earth  said  to  be  created  from,  i.  253  ;  separated  from  the  land,482.

Warren,  an  eminent  Mason,  i.  89.

Wealth  and  talent  patronize  Freemasonry,  i.  30  ;  of  Solomon,  ii.  266  ;  of

Xerxes,  282.

Wealthy  Jews  refuse  to  leave  Chaldea,  ii   419.
Weapons  collected  from  the  drowned  Egyptians,  i.  370.
Webb's  Monitor  referred  to,  ii.  369.
Weishaupt,    the   founder   of  Illuminism,  mentioned,  i.   26 ;    promulgates

Illuminism,  ii.  77.

Welcome  to  the  Grand  Lodge  above,  ii.  164.
Welding  of  iron,  ii.  209.
West,  Christ  crucified  towards  the,  i.  204.
What  is  Masonry  ?  i.  381.
White  Eagle  or  Pelican,  Knight  of  the,  ii.  139  ;  stone,  the,  160  ;  and  black

Eagle,  degree  of,  344  ;  an  emblem  of  purity,  508.
Whole  duty  of  man,  the,  i.  168.

Wickedness  of  the  antediluvians,  i    62  ;  of  the  old  world,  ii.  196.
Widow  of  H.  A  B.,  death  of  the,  ii.  153.
Wilderness,  wanderings  in  the,  i.  47  ;  symbols  in  the,  76  ;   Hagar  flies  into

the,  102.

Wilhelmsbad,  Masonic  assembly  at,  ii.  83.
Wilhermott  initiates  Prince  Frederick  of  Brunswick,  ii.  55.
Wind  blows,  and  the  waters  of  the  Red  Sea  return,  i.  376.
Winding  staircase,  i.  443,  451.
Wings  of  the  cherubim,  symbolical,  ii.  295.
Wisdom,  pillar  of,  i.  138  ;  strength  arid  beauty,  154,  236,  239  ;  a  symbol  of

Israel,  154  ;  illustration  of,  156;  derived  from  history,  184  ;  to  contrive,

236  ;  the  details  of,  237  ;  symbol  of,  252  ;  designs  of,  ii.  254  ;  of  Solomon,

257  ;  of  certain  Jews  in  Babylon,  409  ;   of  Joseph,  455.
Wise  men  from  the  East,  ii.  645.
Wives  and  concubines  of  Solomon,  ii.  384.
W.  M.  in  the  east,  i.  138 ;  his  duty,  140  ;  a  representative  of  Solomon,

ii.  257.

Wolf,  the  device  on  the  banner  of  Benjamin,  ii.  592.
Woman  created,  i.  497.
Wonderful  works  of  the  creation,  i.  535.
Wood  of  the  ark  imperishable,  ii.  292.
Wool,  preparing  of,  invented  by  Tubal  Cain,  ii.  207.
Wolsey,  Cardinal,  an  eminent  Mason,  i.  89.
Word,  the,  was  Christ,  ii.  556.
Words,  the  three,  i.  247.
Worker  in  metals,  name  of  a,  ii.  206.
Working  tools  of  an  E.  A  P.,  i.  244  ;  of  a  R.  A.  M.,  247;  in  metals,  the

Jews  ignorant  of,  419  ;  the  sublime  degrees,  ii.  347  ;  tools,  362.
Workmen  classed  in  the  forest,  i.  422  ;  their  marks,  429  ;  their  wages,  435  ;

travel,  589  ;  and  get  good  employment,  590  ;  classed,  ii.  259.
Works  for  the  tabernacle  executed  by  Aholiab  and  Bezaleel,  ii.  224.
Worldly  possessions,  ii.  204.
Worshiping  towards  the  east,  i.  194.


GENERAL    INDEX    TO    THE    TEXT.  719

Wren,  Sir  Christopher,  an  eminent  Mason,  i.  89 ;  rebuilds  London,  ii.  28.
Wrestle,  the,  degree  of,  ii.  139.
Writer's  inkhorn,  man  with  the,  ii.  620.
Writings  against  Masonry,  ii.  86.

Xerxes,  expedition  of,  noticed,  ii.  282  ;  plunders  Babylon,  283.

York,  rite  of,  ii-  322-

Young  men  shout  for  joy,  ii.  440.

Zebulun,  the  fifth  grand  point  refers  to,  i.  309  ;   standard  of,  explained,

ii.  587.
Zerubabel,  temple  of,  i.  86 ;  made   governor  of  Judea,  ii.  419  ;  leads  the

people  to  Jerusalem,  423  ;  restores  the  kingly  power,  450.
Zechaiiah  exhorts  the  Jews  to  proceed,  ii.  444.
Zion,  strong-hold  of,  i.  225.
Zizon,  what,  ii.  242.
Zodiac,  signs  of  the,  ii.  364.
Zones,  the  three,  i.  254.
Zoroaster  in  Babylon,  ii.  411  ;  said  to  have  instructed  Pythagoras,  411.


GENERAL  INDEX  TO  THE  NOTES.


Aaron  makes  a  golden  calf,  ii.  232 ;  smites
the  Nile,  602;  the  agent  of  justice,  613.

Abduction  of  Morgan  disavowed,  i.  17.

Abraham,  where  he  was  born,  i.  98;  tries
to  convert  the  Chaldeans,  and  is  cast
into  the  fire,  99;  escapes,  100;  promise!
blessings,  101;  receives  three  angels,
105;  his  severity  accounted  for,  111;
had  a  knowledge  of  the  advent  of  Christ,
205,  210;  commanded  to  sacrifice  his
son,  208;  tempted  by  the  devil,  210;
his  vision,  211;  his  perplexity,  212;
accounts  of  in  profane  writers,  217;
legend  of,  232;  compared  with  the  sun.
249;  visits  Ararat,  269.

Abraxas,  what,  i.  177;  figure  on,  ii.  63.

Abracadabra,  what,  ii.5  42.

Abuse  of  Masonry,  i.  237.

Abacus,  what,  i.  548.

Abyss  of  the  divinity,  ii.  4.

Absurd  pretensions  of  Hunde,  ii.  45.

Abiff,  meaning  of,  ii.  151.

Abel,  his  sacrifice,  ii.  172;  his  death,  173.

Abominable  wickedness  of  the  world,  ii.  196.

Abury,  temple  of  mentioned,  ii.  240,  501.

Abundance  of  gold  in  early  times,  ii.  278.

Abominations  of  the  Jews,  ii.  406.

Abomination  of  desolation,  what,  ii.  648.

Ab  Haccam,  Vice-Principal  of  the  Sanhe-
drim, ii.  427.

Academy  of  secrets,  i.  6.

Account  given  of  Ishmael  by  the  Maho-
metans, i.  113;  of  the  high  grades  in
America,  ii.  50.

Action  used  instead  of  words,  i.  217.

Act  of  confraternity,  ii.  19.

Acacia,  what,  ii.  148;  horrida,  what,  292,
in  the  paradise  of  Mahomet,  383.

Address  voted  to  Geo.  III.,  i.  30;  of
H.R.  H.  the  Duke  of  Sussex  to  the
ladies,  33 ;  to  a  candidate  for  a  Knight
Templar,  108;  of  Enoch,  ii.  203;  to
the  High  Priest,  366;  at  the  closing  of
sublime  Lodges,  377;  to  an  Intimate
Secretary,  381.


ADAD,  a  name  of  the  Deity,  i.  544.

Adventurers,  Masonic,  ii.  8.

Admission,  origin  of  the  ceremonies  of,
ii.  25;  in  Prussia,  fees  of,  53;  of  a  can-
didate in  America,  113;  of  the  Levites,
596.

Adherents  of  the  house  of  Stuart  con-
fuse Freemasonry,  ii.  42.

Adonhiramite  Masonry,  ii.  88;  explained,
111.

Adoptive  Masonry  explained,  ii.  Ill;
custom  in  485.

Adytum  of  the  heathen  temples,  ii.  291.

Addiction  of  the  Israelites  to  idolatry,  ii.
389.

Adventures  of  romance,  ii.  484.

Adam  and  Christ  compared,  ii.  479.

JEsop,  riches  of,  ii.  280.

Affiliations  of  the  Grand  Orient,  ii.  95.

Affliction,  emblem  of,  ii.  352.

Age  of  an  E.  A.P.,  i.  132.

Agate,  peculiarities  of  the,  ii.  522.

Agency  of  serpents,  ii.  503;  of  the  devil,
^605.

Ahriman,  the  Persian  evil  power,  ii.  497.

Ahiman  Rezon,  quoted,  ii.  663.

Air,  i.  264;  symbol  of  the,  ii.  244,  296.

Akirop,  fate  of,  ii.  372.

Allyn's  Ritual  of  Masonry,  i.  15.

Alfred,  king,  mentioned,  i.  42.

Allegory,  of  bond  and  free,  i.  109 ;  Masonry
imbedded  in,  384;  of  the  Druids,  388.

Allegories  of  Jesuitical  Masonry,  ii.  44.

Allegorical  characters  of  the  Druids,  i.  123;
emblems,  method  of  teaching  by,  67,
133;  paintings  at  Marseilles,  ii.  58;
dream  of  Enoch,  198;  language  of  Free-
masonry, 329.

Alphabets,  ancient,  i.  393 ;  of  Enoch,
ii.  190.

Alexandria,  vaults  under  the  city  of,
i.  559.

Alexander  plunders  Susa  and  Persepolis,
ii.  284;  and  Mathura,  286 ;  pays  homage
to  the  High  Priest,  535.


GENERAL  INDEX  TO  THE  NOTES.


7-21


Alexandrine  library,  i.  564 ;  extent  of,  565.

Alchymy,  some  attribute  the  origin  of
Freemasonry  to,  ii.  27;  introduced  into
Freemasonry,  46 ;  in  the  high  de-
grees, 62.

Alliance  between  the  G.  Lodges  of  England
and  Holland,  ii.  59;  emblem  of,  290.

Alcantara,  distinction  of  a  knight  of,  ii.  112.

Allseeing  eye,  symbol  of  the,  ii.  242.

Altar  of  incense  explained,  ii.  242;  of
gold,  283;  of  the  second  temple,  432.

Altars,  antiquity  of,  ii.  243.

Aladdin,  palace  of,  ii.  270.

Alteration  of  the  landmarks  fatal  to  Free-
masonry, ii.  307.

Alabastron,  sculptures  at,  ii.  628.

Amusements  in  the  Lodge,  ii.  37.

Ami  Reunis,  degrees  of,  ii.  60.

America,  number  of  Masons  in,  ii.  318.

American  tradition  of  Cain  and  Abel,  ii.  187.

Amsterdam,  ancient  Lodge  at,  ii.  19,  20.

Amalekites,  their  hatred  of  the  Israelites,
ii.  219.

Amount  of  the  treasures  of  David,  ii.  273.

Amazement  of  the  candidate,  ii.  366.

Amethyst  described,  ii.  523.

Anderton's  tirades  against  Masonry,  i.  14.

Anti-Masonic  state  convention,  threats  of,
i.  16;  excitement,  fury  of  the,  20.

Anti-Masonry,  its  object,  ii.  321.

Anecdote  of  an  initiation,  i.  22;  of  the
flight  of  Hagar,  102;  illustrative  of
bond  and  free,  109;  of  Pythagorean
charity,  122;  of  Joseph,  281,  285;  of
female  Lodges,  ii.  35;  of  adverse  pro-
ceedings in  Holland,  39;  of  Bro.  J.
Murray,  41;  of  an  initiation,  48;  of
Zinnendorf,  54;  of  the  Jesuits,  65;  of
Cagliostro,  84;  of  Xerxes,  283;  of  the
benefits  of  Masonry,  315;  of  St.  Lu-
diger,  459.

Ancient  of  days,  the,  i.  49;  Masonic
MSS.,  57,  563 ;  Tracing-board  explained,
133,  440;  MS.  account  of  Masonry  in,
199;  temples  face  the  east,  200;  Ma-
sonic regulation  respecting  the  third
degree,  455 ;  council  of  the  trinity,  494 ;
Masons  worked  six  days,  512;  Lodge
of  craft  Masonry,  ii.  18;  Masonic  rules,
22;  Masonic  MSS.  discovered,  110;
tombs,  their  use,  162;  charges  quoted,
249 ;  usages  to  be  preserved,  305 ;  and
modern  Masons,  distinctions  of,  309;
council  of  the  trinity,  330.

Antediluvian  symbols,  i.  56;  idols,  59.

Antiquity  of  the  apron,  i.  444 ;  of  sacred
chests,'  ii.  291;  of  the  Royal  Arch,  349;
of  the  arch,  362;  of  the  ineffable  degrees,
367;  of  altars,  243.

VOL.  II.


Antediluvians,  character  of  the,  i.  60 ;
acquainted  with  the  name  of  God,  ii.  538.

Angel,  the  destroying,  i.  230.

Angels,  three,  appear  to  Abraham,  i.  104;
ministration  of,  274;  ascending  and
descending,  276;  creation  of,  480;  for-
sake their  allegiance,  ii.  197;  their
power,  491.

Angelic  hierarchy,  ii.  472.

Angles  of  a  square,  i.  189;  peculiarities  of
the,  190.

Angeronia,  the  goddess  of  silence,  i.  148.

Anderson,  Dr.,  on  the  number  three,  i.
236;  on  the  master's  word,  ii.  165;  on
the  death  of  H.  A.B.,  174;  on  the
pillars  of  Enoch,  185;  on  the  temple  of
Solomon,  247;  on  the  return  of  the
Jews,  416.

Animals,  instinct  of,  i.  493;  why  wor-
shipped, ii.  609.

Anchor  of  hope,  i.  268.

Anubis,  the  star  so  called,  i.  158;  a
symbol  of  initiation,  551.

Antwerp,  ancient  Lodge  at,  ii.  20.

Antigua,  petition  from  the  island  of,  ii.  38.

Anthropophagy  practised,  ii.  197.

Antidotes  against  idolatry,  ii.  230.

Andalusia,  gold  mines  in,  ii.  277.

Analogy  between  the  arks  of  various
nations,  ii.  298.

Anomalies  in  the  R.  A.,  ii.  449.

Antiochus  desecrates  the  temple,  ii.  642.

Annual  festivals,  regulation  of,  ii.  645.

Apparatus,  philosophical,  in  Lodges,  i.  5.

Apathy,  Masonic,  condemned,  i.  3i2.

Apologue,  Asiatic,  i.  127.

Apron,  the,  i.  313;  an  emblem  of  inno-
cence, 444;  of  the  elected  G.  Master,
ii.  118;  and  gloves,  135;  explained,  512.

Appearances  of  the  Shekinah,  i.  465;  of
Christ  to  the  patriarchs,  ii.  557;  of  the
temple,  650.

Apprentice,  an,  executes  a  rich  column,
ii.  25.

Apocalypse,  the,  an  Order  in  Masonry,  ii.
26;  seal  of  the,  619.

Aphanism  of  the  spurious  Freemasonry,
ii.  234.

Apis,  who,  ii.  235.

Appointments  of  le  Maitre  Ecossais,  ii.  346.

Appointment  of  Nehemiah,  ii.  452.

Apostles,  the,  symbolized,  ii.  433.

Apparel,  distinction  of,  ii.  511.

Approximations  to  the  triple  tau,  ii.  633.

Articles  of  union,  the,  i.  4.

Arguments  against  Freemasonry,  i.  6.

Arcana  of  Masonry  not  to  be  committed  to
writing,  i.  10.

Ark  of  the  covenant  placed  in  the  Sanctum

3c


722


GENERAL    INDEX    TO    THE    NOTES.


Sanctorum,  i.  83;  the,  575;  a  symbol,  ii.
156,  289;  of  Herthum,  293;  tradition
of  the,  354;  mark  and  link,  design
of  the,  364 ;  hidden  in  Solomon's
vault,  441.

Arabian  idols,  i.  59,  273;  tradition  re-
specting the  creation,  484;  tradition  of
the  ark  of  the  covenant,  575;  magnifi-
cence, 270;  tradition,  460;  of  Eve,  497;
superstition,  541.

Arabia,  Masonic  remains  in,  ii.  185;  rich
mines  of,  278;  profuse  use  of  the  name
of  God  in,  544.

Arabs,  the,  never  conquered,  i.  103;  many
attempts  to  do  so,  116;  their  theory  of
a  prior  creation,  494.

Araunah,  the  friend  of  David,  i.  232.

Arrangement  of  a  Lodge-room,  i.  241;  in
the  quarries,  420;  of  the  Irish  degrees,
ii.  401.

Arched  vault  of  Solomon,  i.  485.

Arch,  number  of  degrees  of  the,  in  France,
ii.  66;  of  steel,  250;  known  before
Solomon's  temple,  363 ;  great  antiquity
of  the,  438;  of  Enoch,  found  by  Zrru-
babel,  440;  of  Solomon,  441.

Architect,  number  of  degrees  of,  in  France,
ii,  66;  history  of  the  degree,  112.

Arrests  of  Masons,  ii.  34.

Artifice  to  make  Freemasonry  unpopular,
ii.  108.

Arurophylax,  a  mystical  talisman,  ii.  196.

Arts  and  sciences  invented,  ii.  208 ;  of  the
Antediluvians  lost,  210.

Army  of  Xerxes,  numerous,  ii.  282.

Arbitrary  power  in  Freemasonry,  ii.  320.

Artaxerxes  deputes  Ezra,  ii.  450.

Associations  for  mutual  improvement,
i.  2,  6.

Astronomical  allegories  of  the  spurious
Freemasonry,  i.  63;  construction  of
Freemasonry,  141  ;  calculations  on
pillars,  ii.  201;  characters  of  the  cheru-
bim, 294 ;  interpretation  of  the  R.  A.,  362.

Astronomy  introduced  into  Greece,  i.  547.

Ashe,  Dr.,  on  the  covering  of  the  Lodge,  i.
265;  on  the  banners,  ii.  583.

Asher,  tribe  of,  i.  313;  ii.  594.

Astrological  predictions,  prevalence  of,
i.  488.

Ascending  and  descending  of  the  hero-
gods,  i.  541.

Ascent  of  Masonry  to  the  creation,  ii.  350.

Aspirant,  severe  probations  of  the,  ii.  6.

Ashlars,  the,  interpreted,  ii.  39.

Assemblies  of  Masonry  dispersed,  ii.  43.

Assembly  of  intendants  described,  ii.  369.

Ass,  its  symbolical  reference,  ii.  587.

Athclstan,  king,  mentioned,  i.  42.


Attitude  of  the  Jews    when   they   pray,

i.  198.
Atheists,  the  greatest  enemies  to  Masonry,

i.  236.

Atheism  the  cause  of  the   French  Revolu-
tion, ii.  67.

Atonement  of  the  Jews,  annual,  ii.  300, 530.
Aumont,  said  to  have  founded  templary  in

Scotland,  ii.  13.
Avidity  with    which   the   ladies  received

Freemasonry,  ii.  35.
Authority  of  the  supreme  council,  ii.  108;

of  the  Sanhedrim,  426.
Authenticity  of  the  Word,  ii.  330,  372.
Audience  chamber  of  king  Solomon,  ii.  337.
Augury  of  the  eastern  magi,  ii.  531.
Axe,  hammer,  and  metal  tools  prohibited,

ii.  247.
Azure,  a  symbol  of  the  Saviour,  ii.  521.

Badge  of  the   templars,  ii.  480;    of  tho

Jews,  646.
Badges  of  Masonry,  whence  derived,  i.  5 ;

explained,  313;  honourable,  445.
Barruel,  Abbe,  his  account  of  some  Masonic

MSS.,   i.   23;    his   boast,    24;  censures

Fi« cinasonry,  76;  his  misapprehensions,

90;  his  opinion  of  Masonry,  ii.  22, 177;

his  account  of  an  initiation,  48,  81;  his

errors,  64,  89;  his  accuracy  qiiestioned,

87;  his  account  of  the  second  degree,

180;  of  the  third  degree,  181.
Bahrdt,  his   writings  on   Masonry,  i.  24 ;

his  system  of  Masonry,  ii.  82.
Babel,  tower  of,  i.  63.
Baal  Peor,  what,  i.  332.
Babylon,  desolation  of,  ii.  422.
Babylonish  captivity,  the,  ii.  402.
Banners  of  the  tribes,  i.  77;  ii.  359,  583;

of  the  Assyrians  and  others,  503;    of

the  Britons,  571.
Bare  feet,  i.  290;  ii.  467.
Bahumet,  what,  i.  396.
Bardic  proverbs,  i.  398.
Bathshish,  a  name  given  to  the  seventh

day,  i.  512.

Barbarous  custom  of  the  Egyptians  i.  554.
Balaam,  his  altars,  i.  510;  his  prophecy,

ii.  559;    who   he  was,  577;    tradition

of,  645.

Bath,  encampment  at  mentioned,  ii.  12.
Baths  made  of  silver,  ii.  281.
Baldwin,  encampment  of,  ii.  12.
Bannock  Burn,  battle  of,  ii.  13.
Bavaria,  ancient  Lodge  in,  ii.  18.
Basilideans,  Freemasonry  attributed  to  the,

ii.  27;  charms  of  the,  542.
Baltimore,  grand  chapter  in,  ii.  50.
Balustre  of  the  supreme  council,  ii.  96.


GENERAL    INDEX    TO    THE   NOTES.


723


Baucherren,  his  system  of  Masonry,  ii.  112.
Baerfindy,  his  system  of  Masonry,  ii.  137.
Battle  with  the  Amalekites,  ii.  220.
Baptist,   St.   John,   one   of  the   Masonic

worthies,  ii.  258.
Bajeh,  rich  mines  of,  ii.  277.
Baris  of  the  spurious  Freemasonry,  ii.  290.
Batavia,  number  of  Lodges  in,  ii.  318.
Baptism  of  the  spirit,  symbolized,  ii.  357.
Bandage  of  a  mummy,  ii.  397.
Betraying  the  Masonic  secret,  impossible,

i.  11.

Bernard  very  inaccurate,   i.   13;    his  de-
nunciation of  Masonry,  27;  his  curious
reason  for  violating  an  oath,  14.
Beauty  and  utility  of  the  lectures,  i.  43;

of  Moses,  ii.  460.

Being  of  a  God  acknowledged  by  the  can-
didate, i.  45.
Belief  in  dreams,  i.  104.
Beverley,    Bro.     Mackenzie,    mentioned,

i.  139.

Benevolence,  the  object  of  Freemasonry,
ii.  5 ;  symbol  of,  358 ;  of  Pythagoras,  414.
Belfast,  order  of  the  temple  at,  ii.  23.
Bedaridde,  his  system  of  Masonry,  ii.  76.
Beurnonville,  his  degrees,  ii.  118.
Beehive,  a  symbol,  ii.  146.
Benefits  derived  from  Freemasonry,  ii.  306 ;

of  the  spurious  Freemasonry,  462.
Beryl,  properties  of  the,  ii.  523.
Benjamin,  his  character,  ii.  592.
Beetle,  the,  worshipped,  ii.  608.
Bible,  the  Masonic  ladder  rests  on,  i.  67;
square  and  compasses  explained,  ii.  353.
Birth,   life,  and  death,  i.   198;    of  light,
477;  of  Freemasonry,  ii.  478;    of  the
first  child  of  Eve,  497;  of  Christ,  558.
Bisset,  Bro.,  his  opinion  of  Masonic  light,

i.  478.

Blue  Masonry,  i.  4 ;  lectures  of,  when  intro-
duced, 305 ;  purple  and  crimson,  ii.  245 ;
explained,  594;  and  red  Masonry,  660.
Black,  its  signification,  ii.  352.
Blessing  of  God  on  the  Israelites,  ii.  457.
Blazing  star  explained,  i.  158;  symbol  of

the,  ii.  242.

Block  of  marble,  morality  of  a,  i.  1 70.
Blanchard,  Bro.,  on  Masonic  secrecy,  i.  185.
Bloody  sacrifices,  ii.  515.
Bond  and  free,  an  allegory,  i.  109.
Bondmen  cannot  be  initiated,  i.  110.
Boerne,  Dr.,  his  opinion  of  Freemasonry,

i.  130.
Book  of  nature,  the,  i.  145;  of  the  law

hidden,  ii.  355.
Bonnets  of  the  priests,  ii.  526.
Bodies  of   the  Egyptians  driven  ashore,
i.  371.


Body  of  Osiris  found,  ii.  146;  of  H.  A.B.

found,  174.

Boaz,  the  ancestor  of  David,  i.  451 ;  Jachin
and,  461.

Boast   of   the   members   of    the   lax   ob-
servance, ii.  57.

Boards,  Masonic,  ii.  248.

Bourdeaux,  number  of  Lodges  at,  ii.  319.

Brainherd,    Bro.,    his    eulogy   on    Free-
masonry, i.  28.

Brown,  the  Rev.  Bro.,  his  opinion  of  Free-
masonry, i.  42.

Brethren  rise  by  merit,  i.  43;  search  for
their  master,  ii.  175.

Brotherly  love    recommended,  ii.   9;    the
foundation  of  the  Order,  657.

Brotherhood,  a  common,  ii.  500.

British  temples  built  by  the  Tyrians,  ii.  41 1.

Brass  pillars  of  the  temple,  contents  of  the,
i.  448;  their  signification,  ii.  574.

Brazen  pillars  to  the  memory  of  H.  A.  B.,
ii.  154;  serpent,  a  talisman/ 5 7  4.

Brookfield,  the  Rev.  Bro.,  his  opinion  of
Freemasonry,  i.  474.

Brunswick,  Masonic  convention  at,  ii.  8.

Bristol,  encampment  at,  ii.  12,  templary
at,  24.

Bruce  joined  by  the  Templars,  ii.  13 ;  secret
signs  of  his  degree,  1 7.

Brussels,  ancient  Lodge  at,  ii.  20.

Bruising  the  serpent's  head,  ii.  481.

Branch  of  the  tree  of  knowledge  preserved,
ii.  488;  taken  away  by  Adam,  599.

Brilliancy  of  the  diamond,  ii.  520.

Breastplate  of  the  High  Priest  described,
ii.  516.

Bremen,  ancient  Lodge  at,  ii.  20.

Burning  Bush,  the,  i.  68;  ii.  455,  467;
appearance  of  Christ  at,  469.

Burney,  Dr.,  his  opinion  of  Freemasonry,
i.  90.

Buccaneers,  assimilated  with  Masons,  i.  136.

Buildings  executed  by  the  Israelites  in
Egypt,  i.  358.

Building  of  the  temple,  ii.  254.

Builder,  the,  smitten,  ii.  165.

Buckeridge,  the  Rev.  Bro.,  on  Christianity
in  Masonry,  ii.  184.

Bullion  in  the  temple  of  Sumnaut,  ii.  285.

Burlesque  representations  of  Masonry,
ii.  329.

Bull,  its  signification,  ii.  591.

Buhle,  professor,  his  opinion  of  Free-
masonry, i.  21.

Cabala,  mysteries  of  the,  i.  55;  of  the
Jews,  origin  of  Masonry  attributed  to,
ii.  27,  63;  explained,  547;  treatises  on
the,  630.


724


GENERAL    INDEX    TO    THE    NOTES.


Cabalistic  Book  of  Raziel,  i.  60;  meaning
of  the  pillars,  450;  Rose  Croix,  ii.  47;
Jews,  their  respect  for  the  name,  543 ;
characters  in  Edinburgh,  548.

Cabalistiques,  number  of  degrees  of  the,
ii.  66.

Candidate,  qualifications  of  a,  i.  110;  duty
of  a,  121;  preparation  of  a,  140,  307;
probations  of  a,  147,  308;  entrance  of
a,  308;  passes  through  the  seven  stages
of  initiation,  530;  ought  to  profess  the
Christian  religion,  ii.  5;  purified  by
initiation,  26;  probation  of  the,  89;  re-
quisites in  a,  167.

Canal  from  the  Nile  to  the  Red  Sea  At-
tempted, i.  301.

Canals  of  Egypt,  i.  560;  dug  by  the
Israelites,  ii.  469.

Captivities  of  the  Israelites,  i.  573.

Captivity  of  the  ten  tribes,  ii.  392;  in
Babylon,  402.

Cassia,  sprig  of,  explained,  i.  580;  ii.  148.

Calvary,  mount,  i.  234;  vaults  under,  586;
subterranean  temples  in,  195.

Cassalry,  mount,  i.  452.

Carlile,  his  exposition  of  Masonry,  i.  13;
his  vain  boast,  28.

Cain,  his  punishment,  i.  56;  and  Abel,
whether  they  were  twins,  ii.  172;  killed
by  Tubal  Cain,  172;  invents  hierogly-
phics, 215.

Cardinal  points,  reference  to  the,  i.  142.

Caution,  the  name  of  an  E.  A.  P.,  i.  147;
ii.  161;  used  in  the  high  degrees,  48.

Caverns  of  initiation,  several  enumerated,
i.  184;  peculiarly  sacred,  324;  rites
celebrated  in,  341;  of  hidden  treasure,
ii.  284;  in  mount  Moriah,  435.

Cavern  of  death,  ii.  81;  of  Enoch  found
by  Noah,  203;  of  horror,  369;  holy
fire  hidden  in  a,  405;  cruciform,  624.

Cave  of  Elijah,  i.  334;  of  the  nymphs,
339 ;  where  Christ  was  born  de-
scribed, 342.

Calasay,  mount,  ladder  on,  i.  273.

Canaanites  extirpated,  i.  299;  wickedness
of  the,  ii.  191.

Catacombs  at  Rome,  i.  341.

Catalogue  of  the  high  degrees,  ii.  3;  of
priories,  103.

Catechism  of  a  Scotch  master,  i.  352;  of
Thales,  ii.  411.

Cabest,  Bro.,  on  Masonic  secresy,  i.  352.

Cathedral  of  Strasburg  built  by  the  Free-
masons, ii.  11.

Canterbury,  ancient  Lodge  at,  ii.  18.

Calcutta,  petition  from  the  Masons  there,
ii.  50.

Cagliostro,  his  system  of  Masonry,  ii.  74;


his  degrees,  84;  his  imprisonment
in  London,  85.

Caroccio,  of  the  Italians,  what,  ii.  122.

Carthage,  laws  of,  ii.  152;  wealth  of,  277.

Cabiri,  the  reputed  inventors  of  fire,  ii.  209.

Calf,  why  this  figure  was  chosen  by  Aaron,
ii.  234.

Candlestick,  symbol  of  the,  ii.  242.

Candlesticks  of  gold  and  silver,  ii.  275.

Caligula,  extravagance  of,  ii.  281.

Calicut,  immense  riches  of,  ii.  287.

Canada,  number  of  Lodges  in,  ii.  324,

Catenarian  arch,  the,  ii.  351.

Captives  taken  to  Babylon,  ii.  407.

Canonical  books  transcribed,  ii.  459.

Causes  of  serpent  worship,  ii.  502.

Carbuncle  described,  ii.  518.

Camp  of  Israel,  ii.  559;  what,  570.

Cat,  a  sacred  animal,  ii.  609.

Caduceus,  how  used,  ii.  GlM.

Ceremonies  of  initiation,  passing  and  rais-
ing, i.  121;  of  illuminism,  351;  intro-
duced by  the  Culdees,  ii.  16;  of  Masonry
connected  with  builders,  25;  improper,
35;  of  initiation  into  Cagfiostro's  Ma-
sonry, 84;  in  the  degree  of  knight  of
Nine,  118;  in  the  Egyptian  pilgrimages,
238,  of  the  Royal  Arch  untruly  repre-
sented, 361.

Celestial  hierarchy,  the,  i.  488;  city,  the,
ii.  120.

Certificates,  origin  of,  ii.  25.

Cerneau,  Bro.,  his  Masonic  rank,  ii.  108.

Censers  of  gold  and  silver,  ii.  275.

Cessation  of  oracles,  ii.  299.

Character  of  the  Antediluvians,  i.  60;  of
David,  223.

Cherubim,  the,  of  great  importance  in
Freemasonry,  i.  68;  refer  to  the  hiero-
glyphics of  Egypt,  77;  the  seven,  of  the
28th  degree,  527;  their  form,  ii.  156;
what,  294.

Cherubic  emblems  of  heathen  nations,  ii.296 .

Charity,  Masonic,  objects  of,  i.  136;  the
key-stone  of  Masonry,  137;  verses  on,
172;  the  basis  of  Freemasonry,  ii.  5;
practice  of,  432.

Chequered  pavement,  the,  i.  143.

Charge  at  closing  a  Lodge  in  the  U.  S.,  i.
150;  of  an  E.  A.  P.,  208;  in  the  de-
gree of  regent,  ii.  78;  in  the  degree  of
perfection,  338;  to  a  prince  of  the  royal
secret,  344;  to  the  high  priest,  534;
to  the  captains  of  the  veils,  586,
587,  590.

Chisel,  the,  explained,  180.

Christ,  five  points  in  the  life  of,  i.  43;  the
G.  A.  0.  T.  U.,  53;  compared  with
Isaac,  216;  appears  on  the  mount  ot


GENERAL    INDEX    TO   THE    NOTES.


725


Olives,  336;  crucified,  587;  accused
of  stealing  the  name,  459;  ii.  528;  a
belief  in,  professed,  125;  resurrection
of  142;  whether  he  be  the  Messiah  of
the  Jews,  176;  several  symbols  of,  in
Masonry,  293;  silences  the  heathen
oracles,  299;  type  of,  300;  Jeshua  a
type  of,  445;  symbolized  by  the  stone
with  seven  eyes,  449;  mean  condition
of,  465 ;  appeared  at  the  burning  bush,
469;  office  of,  typified,  505;  by  the
high  priest,  510;  clothed  in  purple,
512;  anointed,  509;  various  types  and
symbols  of,  532;  appears  to  Abraham,
Jacob,  and  Moses,  553;  references  to,
in  the  Old  Testament,  557;  the  tetra-
grammaton,  558;  the  cherubim,  568;
typified  by  the  brazen  serpent,  574;
and  by  the  star  of  Balaam,  579;  on  the
cross  symbolized,  612;  to  appear  in  the
vale  of  Jehoshaphat,  662.

Christian  doctrine  proceeded  from  the  east,
i.  202;  churches  erected  on  hills,  325;
trinity,  ii.  4;  degrees,  125;  doctrine  of
rewards  and  punishments,  182;  church
compared  with  the  tabernacle,  240;
cathedrals,  double  triangle  found  in,
356;  origin  of  Freemasonry,  478;  saints,
legends  of,  484;  redemption,  485;  Free-
masonry, basis  of,  493;  mark  ex-
plained, 620.

Christianity,  mosaic  pavement  a  type  of,
ii.  155;  emblem  of  in  R.  A.  Masonry,
175;  triple  baptism  of,  358;  types  of,
in  Masonry,  396;  emblems  of,  499;
vestiges  of  in  all  systems,  499 ;  how  re-
lated to  Masonry,  580;  in  Masonry,
opinions  respecting,  660;  the  universal
religion,  666.

Church  of  Christ  and  temple  of  Solomon
compared,  i.  580;  built  by  Hunde,  ii.
46;  mysteries  of  the,  240;  glory  of  the
symbolized,  433.

Choiseul,  Bro.,  his  opinion  of  Freemasonry,
i.  231.

Chinese  Triad  society,  i.  253,  257;  tradi-
tion of  the  invention  of  fire,  ii.  209.

China  peopled  by  Noah,  i.  269;  Masonic
remains  in,  ii.  185.

Chaos,  i.  476.

Chaldean  oracles,  the,  on  the  creation  of
light,  i.  486.

Chaldeans,  the,  teach  Pythagoras  as-
tronomy, ii.  411.

Charter  of  Colne,  ii.  4,  19;  to  the  Masons
at  Stirling,  21;  of  Larmenius,  94.

Chasm  between  blue  and  red  Masoury
filled  up,  ii.  7.

Chapter,   what  makes  it  legal,  ii.  14;  of


chivalry  at  Edinburgh,  40 ;  of  the  Tem-
plars, decoration  of  a,  104;  of  knights
of  the  red  cross  sword  of  Babylon,  113;
of  a  prince  of  mercy,  292;  what  de-
grees are  given  in  a,  330  ;  of  a  prince
of  Jerusalem  described,  339.

Charles  Edward  Stuart,  G.  M.  of  the
Templars,  ii.  21

Chaillon  de  Joinville,  distinguished,  ii.  49.

Charlestown,  Gr.  Orient  of,  ii.  51;  supreme
council  of,  93.

Chastannier,  hia  system  of  Masonry,  ii.
55,  123.

Chevalier  du  Soleil,  what,  ii.  68;  1'Orient
degree  of,  explained,  347.

Chevaliers,  number  of  degrees  of,  ii.  66.

Chapitre,  Metropolitain  de  France,  degrees
of  the,  ii.  97.

Chant,  in  the  degree  of  holy  grave,  ii.  121.

Chel,  the,  what,  ii.  261.

Chariots  of  gold,  ii.  285.

Chasidim,  a  class  of  the  Jews,  ii.  409.

Chronology  of  the  second  temple,  ii.  452.

Chief  of  the  evil  spirits,  ii.  498.

Chymistry,  cruciform  symbols  of,  ii.  626.

Chronological  list  of  the  degrees,  ii.  672.

Circle  and  parallel  lines  explained,  i.  166;
of  the  signs,  311 ;  symbol  of  the,  ii.  242;
its  signification,  364,  585.

Circular  movement,  the,  i.  199;  stone
temples,  296;  of  the  G.  Orient,  ii.  82.

Cities  of  refuge,  i.  242;  given  to  Hiram,
ii.  379.

Civilization  of  mankind  in  the  time  of
Abraham,  i.  98.

Clinton,  Gov.,  his  address  on  Masonry,  i.
21;  his  opinion  of  Masonry,  ii.  305.

Clothing  of  a  master  Mason,  i.  170.

Closing  the  Lodge,  prayer  at,  i.  316.

Cloudy  pillar,  the,  protects  the  Israelites,
i.  374;  directs  them,  471,  overshadows
the  camp,  472.

Classification  of  the  workmen  at  the
temple,  i.  401.

Classes  of  Templary  in  France,  ii.  24;  of
Cromwell's  Masonry,  27;  of  the  Hauts
Grades,  46,  87;  of  Swedenborg's  Ma-
sonry, 55;  of  Ecossais,  57;  of  the  Or-
der of  Mizraim,  74;  of  Harodim,  119;
of  the  Jews,  409.

Class,  meaning  of,  ii.  328.

Cliff  at  Joppa,  steepness  of  the,  i.  425.

Clergy  of  Holland  forbidden  to  interfere
with  Freemasonry,  ii.  39.

Clermont,  degrees  of  the  Chapter  of,  ii.  44.

Clavel  on  the  practices  of  the  Hauts  Grades,
ii.  65.

Classerniss,  Temple  of,  ii.  623.

Cowans,  Ephraimites  so  called,  i.  5 ;  origin


726


GENERAL    INDEX    TO    THE    NOTES.


of  the  word,  142;  punishment  of,  143;
more  fully  explained,  349;  what,  196.

Collegia  Artificum,  Freemasonry  derived
from,  i.  42.

Corporations  of  architects,  i.  43.

Comparison  between  Noah  and  the  heathen
deities,  i.  47;  between  the  High  Priest
and  Christ,  ii.  536.

Court  of  the  tabernacle  a  type  of  the  Jewish
church,  i.  48,  75;  of  France  patronizes
the  high  degrees,  ii.  8;  of  Sinai,  342.

Covenant  with  Abraham,  Isaac,  and  Jacob,
i.  47.

Columns  executed  by  an  apprentice,  ii.  25 ;
of  Hercules,  270;  of  emerald,  270.

Confusion  of  tongues,  i.  63.

Conception  of  Sarah,  i.  106;  an  emblem  of
the  28th  degree,  158.

Controversy,  religious  and  political,  for-
bidden, i.  106  ;  Masonic,  ii.  96.

Combermere,  Lord,  his  opinion  of  Freema-
sonry, i.  151.

Compasses,  the,  explained,  i.  165;  ii.  158.

Colours  of  a  Master  Mason,  i.  170.

Colour  of  the  Masonic  apron,  i.  444;  of  the
curtains  of  a  Lodge,  ii.  325;  of  the  vest-
ments of  Aaron,  510;  of  the  standards,
583.

Cord  of  God,  i.  174.

Consecration  of  Masonic  Lodges,  i.  216;  of
idols,  301 ;  of  the  Levites,  ii.  596.

Consecrated  gems,  ii.  536.

Coffins  not  used  in  Egypt,  i.  286.

Coffin  of  Osiris,  ii.  145.

Commemorative  pillars,  i.  294.

Corner  stone,  the  chief,  i.  314;  of  the  tem-
ple, ii.  433;  of  Freemasonry,  493.

Commerce  of  the  Tynans,  i.  406.

Commercial  undertakings  of  Solomon,  ii.
288.

Cochleus,  what  it  was,  i.  456.

College  at  Alexandria,  i.  564;  of  Heredom
Templars,  ii.  671.

Cole,  Bro.,  on  the  number  of  degrees,  ii.
7;  on  the  R.  A.,  350.

Cologne,  ancient  Lodge  at,  ii.  20;  Kings
of,  645.

Confidence  may  be  placed  in  the  Frater-
nity, ii.  49.

Consistory,  Grand,  of  Princes  of  the  Royal
Secret,  ii.  50;  at  Newbury  Port,  323.

Consistorial  degrees,  where  conferred,ii.330.

Commissioners  appointed  to  settle  disputes,
ii.  59.

Compact  between  the  Grand  Lodges  of
England  and  Holland,  ii.  59,  311.

Consequences  of  a  laxity  of  discipline,  ii.  65.

Contrat  Social,  Lodge  of,  practises  pure
Masonry,  ii.  79.


Convention  of  Masons  at  Paris,  ii.  80,  84;

of  Wilhelmsbad,  83.
Council  of  Emperors  extinguished,  ii.  93;

of  Rites,  members  of  the,  104;  chamber

of  Knights  of  the  East  and  West,  116;

of  the   Holy  Sepulchre,   121;  of  Nine

Inspectors,  officers  of,  335.
Cope-stone  of  the  temple  celebrated,  ii.  142 ;

represented,  351.
Consummatum  est,  ii.  128.
Corybantes,  their  wild  ceremonies,  ii.  237.
Committees,  Masonic,  ii.  248.
Construction  of  Lodges,  directions  for  the,

ii.  252;  of  a  romance,  484.
Colonies  of  the  Tyrians,  ii.  257.
Contributions  to  the  temple,  table  of,  ii.

274;  to  the  second  temple,  433.
Cost  of  the  temple,  ii.  276.
Cordova,  gold  mines  of,  ii.  277.
Caesar,  riches  of,  ii.  281.
Coffer  of  the  South  Sea  Islands  described,

ii.  298.

Consumption  of  provisions,  ii.  288.
Connecticut,  number  of  Lodges  in,  ii.  324.
Convention  of  seceding  Masons,  ii.  329.
Commander  of  the  Temple,  Chapter  of  a,

ii.  342.

Collar  and  jewel  of  Kadosh,  ii.  344.
Companions  of  the  R.  A.,  ii.  351.
Conclusion  of  the  whole  matter,  ii.  386, 657.
Coin  of  Vespasian,  ii.  417.
Copies  of  the  Scriptures,  ii.  451.
Contests  between  the  good  and  evil  powers,

ii.  480.

Consequences  of  the  guilt  of  Adam,  ii.  496.
Constancy,  symbol  of,  ii.  520.
Consulting  of  spirits,  ii.  531.
Concealment  of  mysteries,  ii.  533.
Conjectures  on  the  pronunciation  of  the

Name,  ii.  551.
Combat,  symbol  of  ii.  589.
Cognizance  of  the  Knights  Templars,  ii.  630.
Corollary,  ii.  657.

Cross  and  serpent,  i.  62;  used  as  a  sym-
bol, 81;  legged  Masons,  ii.  22;  standard

of  the,  122;  of  Christ  typified,  175;  by

the  sprig  of  cassia,  177;  formed  by  the

foundation-stones  of  the   temple,   263;

banner  of  the,  499;  mark  of  the,  620;

on  Samaritan  coins,  621 ;  and  serpents,

626;  universal  use  of  the,  636;  found

by  Helena,  653.
Cross,  Bro.,  on  the  symbols  of  an  E.  A.  P.,

i.  161,  163;  on  the  office  of  High  Priest,

ii.  506.

Crux  ansata,  what,  ii.  629.
Cruciform  temples,  ii.  623;    signs  of- the

planets,  626.
Creator,  footsteps  of  the,  i.  157.


GENERAL    INDEX    TO    THE    NOTES.


727


Creation,  the,  i.  45,  477;  of  angels,  480;
of  the  world  by  the  Name,  ii.  553 ;  sphere
of,  618.

Craftsman,  duty  of  a,  i.  175.

Craftsmen  in  the  monasteries,  ii.  17.

Craft,  secresy  of  the,  i.  350;  Masonry,
ancient  Lodge  of,  ii.  18.

Crypts  under  Christian  churches,  i.  325;
their  use,  346;  under  the  pyramids,  ii.438.

Crucefix,  Dr.,  on  the  third  degree,  ii.  2.

Crusades,  origin  of  Masonry  attributed  to
the,  ii.  26;  events  during  the,  110;
Masonry  of  the,  42.

Cromwell's  Freemasonry,  ii.  27.

Cruelty,  symbol  of,  ii.  297.

Crow,  the  spiritualized,  ii.  354.

Crotona,  Pythagoras  reforms  the  people  of,
ii.  413.

Crystal,  divination  by  the,  ii.  531.

Curiosity  respecting  Freemasonry,  i.  37.

Cubical  stone,  legend  of  the,  i.  54 ;  a  sym-
bol, 192;  account  of  the,  ii.  116;  altar
of  brass,  212;  stone  sweats  blood  and
water,  355;  and  mystical  rose,  473.

Cube  doubled,  i.  192;  ii.  301;  the,  ex-
plained, 357;  duplication  of  the,  642.

Customs  of  naked  feet,  i.  291;  in  the  wor-
ship of  the  golden  calf,  ii.  233 ;  in  adop-
tive Masonry,  485.

Cuthites  of  Shinar,  the,  i.  326.

Culdees,  the,  supposed  to  introduce  the
Masonic  ceremonies,  ii.  16.

Curtains  of  the  tabernacle,  what,  ii.  224.

Culinary  utensils  made  of  gold,  ii.  278.

Current  of  temperance,  ii.  78.

Cyclops,  the,  introduce  astronomy  into
Greece,  i.  547 ;  powerful  magicians,  ii.212.

Cyrus,  the,  of  Ramsay,  quoted,  ii.  35;  his
daily  consumption  of  provisions,  288;
proclamation  of,  304;  edict  of,  418;
dream  of,  422.

Cypher  of  illuminism,  ii.  80.

Dalcho,  Bro.,  his  opinion  of  Freemasonry,
i.  45 ;  ii.  248 ;  on  Masonic  secrecy,  i.  344 ;
on  the  sprig  of  cassia,  580;  on  the  Hauts
Grades,  ii.  52;  on  the  emblems  of  the
third  degree,  144 ;  on  the  traditions  of  the
third  degree,  154;  on  the  Master's  word,
262 ;  his  arrangement  of  the  degrees,  335 ;
doubts  the  truth  of  some  of  our  traditions,
371;  on  the  sublime  degrees,  389.

David,  mysterious  knowledge  of,  i.  55 ;  his
valour,  223;  his  Lodges,  225;  numbers
the  people,  227;  his  punishment,  229;
why  he  was  forbidden  to  build  the  tem-
ple, 234;  collects  materials,  235;  his
offerings,  ii.  266;  applies  his  spoils  to
the  building  of  the  temple,  272.


Day,  remarks  on  the,  i.  141.

Dakeyne,  the  Rev.  Brother,  his  opinion  on
secresy,  i.  238.

Dan,  tribe  of,  i.  312;  ii.  592.

Darkness,  i.  324;  and  light,  373;  of  Egypt,
469;  the  element  of  fire,  479;  explained,
ii.  179.

Dark  temples,  ii.  271.

Dagon  described,  i.  574.

Daughter  of  Jeptha,  whether  she  was  im-
molated, i.  507.

Dantzick,  ancient  Lodge  at,  ii.  20.

Dangers  of  a  novitiate,  ii.  123.

Dancing  at  religious  festivals,  ii.  234.

Daric,  value  of  the,  ii.  283.

Date  of  the  R.  A.,  ii.  350.

Daniel  practises  Freemasonry,  ii.  408;  ob-
tains a  decree,  422;  death  of,  430.

Darius,  his  vow,  ii.  446;  restores  the  holy
utensils,  446;  proposes  questions,  447;
fulfills  his  vow,  447;  his  decree,  448.

Defection  from  Masonry,  reason  for  a,  i.  7;.
of  man,  ii.  500.

Denunciation  of  Freemasonry,  i.  16,  91;  ii.
317;  of  the  Grand  Orient  of  France,  60.

Desire  of  information,  i.  36.

Derivation  of  the  Order,  i.  42 ;  of  the  Rose
Croix,  ii.  41.

Deluge,  the  subject  of  the  spurious  Free-
masonry, i.  46 ;  revealed  to  Enoch,  ii.  198.

Degree,  meaning  of,  ii.  328 ;  of  Elected  G.
M.  explained,  337;  of  Prince  of  Mercy,
442.

Degrees,  only  three,  i.  81;  not  to  be  taken
chronologically,  223 ;  additional,  288 ;  em-
blematical, 385 ;  in  the  forest  and  quarry,
407;  catalogue  of,  ii.  3;  number  of,  7;
names  of,  7;  of  Templary,  23;  of  the
Fendeurs,  36 ;  of  Prince  Charles  Edward,
41 ;  of  Elu,  43,  88;  of  Paschal's  system,
46;  of  Fessler,  53,  87;  of  Zinnendorff,
54;  of  Swedenborg,  55;  of  Chartannier,
55;  of  the  Lax  Observance,  57;  of  Ts-
choudy,  58 ;  of  the  Ami  Reunis,  60 ;  of
Scroeder,  62;  of  Kadosh,  67;  of  Mount
Tabor,  70;  of  St.  Martin,  73;  of  Elu
de  Verite,  74;  of  Mizraim,  75;  of  Illu-
minism, 78;  of  Bahrdt,  82;  of  Cagliostro,
84;  of  Adonhiramite  Masonry,  88;  of
Namur,  89;  of  Pyron,  89;  of  Peuvret,
91;  of  the  Grand  Orient,  93,  332;  of
Fustier,  95 ;  of  the  Chapitre  Metropoli-
tain,  97;  of  the  Persian  Philosophers,
98;  of  the  Swedish  system,  107;  of
adoptive  Masonry,  111;  of  the  Cross,
115;  of  Most  Excellent  Master,  128;  of
Past  Master,  129;  age  of  different  130;
of  Prussian  Knights,  131;  of  the  Trans-
parent Light,  138;  of  Viany,  313;  of


728


GENERAL    INDE^    TO    THE    NOTES.


Page,  314;  of  Le  Rouge,  314;  of  Leman-
ceau,  314;  of  Hecart,  314;  of  the  Prince
of  Mercy,  explained,  342;  why  called
ineffable,  367;  practised  in  Ireland,  400;
of  Masonry,  479 ;  of  the  Tabernacle,  de-
scribed, 507;  several,  explained,  552;
chronological  list  of,  672.

Descendants  of  Seth  seduced,  i.  58,  267.

Descent  of  Mahomet  from  Ishmael,  i.  117;
of  the  Deity,  its  signification,  ii.  472.

Degeneracy  of  mankind,  i.  59;  ii.  649.

Despair  of  Hagar,  i.  115.

Des  Etangs,  his  opinion  of  Masonry,  i.  135,
176;  on  the  second  degree,  380;  on
speculative  Masonry,  ii.  170;  his  opinion
of  the  high  degrees,  332.

Dead,  conversing  with  the,  i.  333;  symbol
of  the,  ii.  255 ;  consulted,  604.

Death  of  Jaques  de  Molay,  ii.  15;  of  H.A  B.
143;  of  Abel,  173;  of  Christ,  symbol  of
the,  255,  300,  612;  of  the  traitor,  373.

Decorations  of  a  Lodge,  i.  191;  of  female
Lodges,  ii.  70;  of  a  Chapter-house,  104;
of  a  Chapter  of  Grand  Inspectors,  136;
of  Masters  ad  Vitam,  138;  of  the  temple
of  Solomon,  266;  of  temples,  286;  of  a
Chapter  of  G.  M.  Architect,  337;  of  a
Lodge  of  Perfection,  386.

Dedication  of  the  tabernacle,  i.  196;  of  the
temple,  197 ;  ceremony  at  the,  581  ;
prayer  at  the,  584 ;  of  the  expected
temple,  ii.  654.

Design  of  a  sacrifice,  i.  215;  of  Christian
Masonry,  386 ;  of  the  Hauts  Grades,  ii.  4 ;
of  Freemasonry,  23,  27;  of  the  conven-
tion of  Wilhelmsbad,  83;  of  the  degree
of  Guard  of  the  Conclave,  114;  of  Most
Excellent  Master,  127 ;  of  Masonry  before
the  flood,  185;  of  the  tabernacle,  222;
of  Aaron  in  making  a  golden  calf,  232.

Destroying  angel,  the,  i.  230.

Destruction  of  Jerusalem,  ii.  406,  652.

Deiseal,  what,  i.  258.

Deacon,  Bro.,  his  opinion  of  Masonry,  L  347.

Deliverance  of  the  Israelites,  i.  355.

Defensive  armour  of  the  Egyptians,  i.  389.

Detached  degrees,  ii.  3.

Dearth  of  Masonic  records,  ii.  20.

Deputation  from  the  Grand  Lodge  of  Prus-
sia, ii.  38.

Delanges,  his  system  of  Masonry,  ii.  55.

Deity,  the,  present  on  Moriah,  ii.  188;
presence  of,  195;  dwells  on  high  moun-
tains, ii.  465.

Deities  of  the  Egyptians,  ii.  216.

Deposition  of  a  treasure,  ii.  200.

Dens,  the  dwellings  of  the  first  men,  ii.  208.

Decalogue,  the,  delivered,  ii.  223.

Devotees  walk  barefooted,  ii.  238.


Delay  in  opening  the  Lodge  condemned,  ii.
250.

Devils  try  to  blast  Solomon's  character,  ii.
271;  appear  in  the  form  of  cats,  600.

Delphi,  riches  of  the  temple  of,  ii.  282;
golden  ornaments  of,  287;  destruction  of,
651.

Devotion  to  the  ancient  Landmarks  ii.  307.

Dermott,  Bro.,  on  the  Landmarks,  ii.  308;
on  the  R.  A.,  349.

Denmark,  number  of  Masons  in,  ii.  318.

Delaware,  number  of  Lodges  in,  ii.  324.

Deus  meumque  jus,  ii.  136,  329.

Designations  of  governing  bodies,  ii.  330.

Decree  of  the  Scottish  Templars,  ii.  334;
of  Darius,  448.

Description  of  an  Intendant's  Lodge,  ii.  33G.

Desolation  of  Babylon,  ii.  422.

Democracy  in  the  wilderness,  ii.  505.

Demon  of  Socrates,  what,  ii.  527.

Delian  problem,  the,  solved,  ii.  542.

Demogorgon,  a  terrible  name,  ii.  547.

Devices  on  the  banners  ii.  585.

Dendera,  symbolical  figures  at,  ii.  634.

Departure  of  the  sceptre,  ii.  640.

Defence  of  a  Brother's  character,  ii.  657.

Diffusion  of  truth  and  light,  i.  3.

Discipline  recommended,  i.  4;  system  of,
438;  of  the  Israelitish  camp,  ii.  570.

Dissatisfied  Brethren  to  retire,  i.  7.

Disappointment  of  some  Brethren,  i.  7.

Differences  in  working  blue  Lodges,  i.  8.

Dissolution  of  the  world  i.  528.

Divine  manifestations,  i.  51;  commission  of
Moses,  470;  unity,  the,  537;  honours  to
the  initiated,  ii.  141;  love,  symbol  of,
255,  467;  word,  the,  363;  lamb,  the,
363;  nature  of  Christ,  symbol  of,  470;
authority,  612.

Divinity  of  Christ,  ii.  293;  supposed  to  be
in  the  serpent,  503.

Divination  by  the  crystal,  ii.  531.

Divining  rod,  what,  ii.  601.

Dismissal  charge  in  the  U.  S.,  i.  150.

Diagram  of  the  fonn  of  a  Lodge,  i.  188;  of
the  rise  and  fall  of  the  Nile,  560;  of  the
foundation  stone,  ii.  432.

Diana,  triple  statue  of,  i.  258.

Dionysius,  ear  of,  i.  319.

Dionysiacs,  at  the  building  6f  the  temple,
i.  403;  divided  into  Lodges,  412;  iden-
tified with  Masons,  590.

Dimensions  of  the  temple,  i.  441.

Dissentions,  Masonic,  discountenanced,  ii.  9.

Dispersion  of  a  Masonic  assembly,  ii.  43;
of  the  masons  when  the  temple  was  com-
pleted, 378;  of  the  Jews,  656.

Disputes,  ii.  59;  in  Germany,  106;  amongst
the  workmen,  379.


GENERAL    INDEX  ~  L*    THE    NOTES.


7'29


Discussion  of  Masonic  questions,,  ii  73.

Discretion,  symbol  of,  ii.  81.

Disobedience,  punishment  of,  ii.  103;  curses
on,  398.

Dignity,  symbol  of,  ii.  241.

Division  of  labour,  ii.  252.

Discovery  of  hidden  treasures,  ii.  260.

Dishes  of  gold  and  silver,  ii.  275.

Distinguished  Masons  in  America,  ii.  323.

Difficulty  of  procuring  the  third  degree,  ii.
335.

Disposition  of  a  R.  A.  Chapter,  ii.  360;  of
the  greater  and  lesser  lights,  632.

Dialogue  in  the  degree  of  Perfection,  ii.  383.

Dispensation  of  the  Gospel,  ii.  493.

Diamond,  the,  described,  ii.  520.-

Discovery  of  mines,  ii.  601.

Divers  crosses  of  heraldn-,  ii.  626.

Diversity  of  opinion  respecting  the  origin
of  Masonry,  ii.  26;  in  the  form  of  the
cross,  627.

Doyle,  Sir  John,  his  opinion  of  Masonry,  i.  37.

Double  cube,  the,  sacred,  i.  135,  192;  tri-
angle explained,  174,  534  ;  found  on
Templar  monuments,  ii.  23;  mysterious
properties  of  the,  301;  universal  use  of,
355;  several  meanings  of,  35C;  cube  ex-
plained, 637-

Dog  star,  the,  appearance  of,  i.  156;  wor-
shipped by  the  Israelites,  331;  portends
the  rising  of  the  Nile,  551.

Door  of  the  middle  chamber,  i.  452;  of
doors,  ii.  160.

Doubts  respecting  the  connection  between
Masonry  and  Templary,  ii.  31.

Domingo,  St.,  Chapters  opened  in,  ii.  50.

D'Oricnt,  degrees  in,  ii.  66.

Dove,  its  symbolical  meaning,  ii.  134.

Dormer,  the,  explained,  ii.  153.

Doctrines  of  Freemasonry  communicated  to
Adam,  ii.  171;  value  of  the,  259;  of  an
evil  being,  490.

Dodd,  Dr.,  on  the  creation,  ii.  478.

Doubtful  information  of  heathen  oracles,  ii.
530.

Drink  water,  Bro.,  his  opinion  of  Masonry,
i.  38.

Dream  of  Constantine,  ii.  132;  of  Cyrus,
339;  of  Zechariah,  444.

Dreams,  a  belief  in,  i,  101;  knowledge  im-
parted by,  541.

Druids,  symbolical  characters  of  the,  i.  123 ;
doctrines  of  the,  485.

Druidical  superstitions,  i.  254;  triads,  258;
initiations  mentioned,  ii.  163;  cross,  622.

Dress  of  a  M.  M.,  i.  169;  uniformity  of,
ii.  310.

Drinking,  ceremonies  of,  i.  200 ;  cups  inlaid
vvitli  diamonds,  ii.  280.
VOL.  II.


Drunkenness  at  the  festivals  of  Bacchus,
ii.  237.

Dragon  of  the  Apocalypse,  ii.  503.

Drawing  and  colours  invented,  ii.  206.

Duke  of  Sussex,  his  Masonic  address  to  the
ladies,  i.  33 ;  desirous  of  the  diffusion  of
Masonry,  38;  favours  free  enquiry,  38;
his  opinion  of  Masonry,  69.

Durham,  Earl  of,  commends  the  Freema-
sons' Quarterly  Review,  i.  36;  favours
free  enquiry,  38 ;  his  opinion  of  Masonry,
137,  318.

Duties  of  Masters,  i.  43,  97;  of  candidates,
121;  of  Craftsmen,  175;  of  a  Mason,
282;  of  officers,  322;  of  the  first  degree,
ii.  161 ;  of  the  officers  of  a  R.  A.  Chap-
ter, 509.

Duty,  symbol  of,i.  189;  ofaG.M.,ii.  101.

Dutch  Masonic  Almanack,  extract  from  the,
i.  134;  clergy  attack  Freemasonry,  ii.
39;  Kadosh,  67.

Dunckerley,  Bro.,  his  opinion  of  Masonry,
i.  149.

Duplication  of  the  cube,  ii.  542.

Duration  of  the  plagues  of  Egypt,  ii.  611.

Dwelling  of  God,  ii.  504.

Dyeing,  art  of,  ii.  244.

East,  praying  towards  the,  i.  195;  ancient
temples  face  the,  200;  implies  the  Re-
deemer, 202;  the  front  of  the  world,  ii.
586.

East  Indies,  petition  from  the,  ii.  50;  num-
ber of  Masons  in  the,  318.

Ear  of  Dionysius,  i.  319;  of  corn,  legend
respecting  an,  503.

Earrings  of  gold  worn  by  the  Israelites,  ii.
277.

Early  Christians,  the,  worshipped  towards
the  cast,  i.  203.

Earth,  state  of,  before  the  creation  of  man,
i.  483;  symbol  of  the,  ii.  244.

Eagle  or  Sun,  lecture  of  the  degree  of,  ii.
124;  a  symbol  of  swiftness,  157;  of  St.
John,  568;  the  insignia  of  Egypt  and
Rome,  592.

Eastern  star  of  Kadosh,  ii.  344.

Ebony  box,  the,  i.  431.

Ecossais,  various  classes  and  degrees  of,  ii.
57,  66;  its  various  application,  90.

Eclectic  Masonry,  promulgation  of,  ii.  60,
117.

Ecclesiastical  arches,  ii.  356.

Eckofer,  his  system  of  Masonry^,  ii.  649.

Edfou,  temple  of,  described,  i.  457.

Edward  III.  summonses  the  Templars,
ii.  13.

Edinburgh,  ancient  Lodge  at,  ii.  19;  Chap-
ter of  Chivalry  at,  40.

3D


730


GENERAL  INDEX  TO  THE  NOTES.


Edict  for  the  regulation  of  Masonry,  ii.  77;
against  Freemasonry,  107;  of  Cyrus,
117,  418.

Eden,  the  name  of  a  female  Lodge,  ii.  Ill ;
lost,  491.

Effects  of  Masonry,  i.  135.

Egyptians,  the,  taught  the  sciences  by
Abraham,  i.  101;  defensive  armour  of,
369;  drowned  in  the  Red  Sea,  370;
punished,  375;  grandeur  of  their  build-
ings, 411.

Egyptian  Masonry  introduced,  ii.  75;  tra-
dition of  the  death  of  Osiris,  173;  origin
of  the  tabernacle,  229;  mummies,  244;
fine  linen,  245;  Mosaic,  270.

Egypt,  the  source  of  the  Order  of  the  East,
ii.  24;  Freemasonry  said  to  be  derived
from,  26;  riches  of,  278;  Pythagoras
taught  geometry  in,  410;  princess  of,
adopts  Moses,  459 ;  sphynx  of,  explained,
461;  symbolism  of,  480;  tradition  of  the
fall  in,  494 ;  standards  of,  imitated,  585 ;
magicians  of,  601;  legend  of  the,  60<5;
deities  of,  carry  the  tau-cross,  629.

Ellis,  Bro.,  his  opinion  of  Masonry,  i.  177.

Elementary  fire,  a  sjnnbol,  i.  264.

Elements,  three,  their  symbolical  reference,
ii.  162.

Eleusinian  mysteries,  the,  i.  319.

Elijah,  cave  of,  i.  334.

Eleven,  its  meaning,  i.  453.

EL,  a  name  of  the  Deity,  i.  587.

Elu,  degrees  of,  ii.  37;  number  of,  43,  66;
de  Verite,  degrees  of,  74;  named,  88;
de  Perignan,  Lodge-room  of,  described,
346.

Election  of  G.  M.,  ii.  102.

Elysium  of  the  spurious  Freemasonnvi.  1 69 .

Elevation  of  the  hands  of  Moses,  ii.  220.

Elephants  of  gold,  ii.  285.

Eligibility  of  a  candidate  for  the  R.  A.,
ii.  352.

Elected  Knights,  valour  of  the,  ii.  386.

Elders  of  Israel,  who,  ii.  567.

Emblem  of  prudence  explained,  i.  76;  its
meaning,  386.

Emblems  of  the  first  degree,  i.  94,  163;
amongst  the  Romans,  160;  of  female
Masonry,  ii.  70;  explained,  71;  of  the
third  degree,  114;  explained  astronomi-
cally, 145;  of  mortality,  147;  in  the
temple,  261 ;  of  the  degree  of  Intimate
Secretary,  336;  of  the  Rose  Croix,  347;
in  a  Lodge,  617.

Emblematical  figures  on  the  banners,  ii.  584.

Emerods,  the  plague  of,  described,  i.  576.

Embalming,  i.  283.

Emerald,  account  of  the,  ii.  269;  described,
519;  rainbow,  618.


Eminent  Masons  enumerated,  i.  349.

Emperor  of  Germany,  his  opinion  of  Ma-
sonry, ii.  77.

Embroidery,  art  of,  ii.  241.

Enoch's  pillars,  i.  59;  legend  of,  ii.  189;
describes  his  vision,  192;  prophecy  ot.
202;  his  arch  found  by  Zerubabcl,  440;
his  pillars,  468.

E.  A  P.,  age  of  an,  i.  132;  ii.  130;  name
of,  i.  147;  explanation  of  the  emblems
of,  163;  virtues  of,  414;  entitled  to  vote
in  Grand  Lodge,  ii.  5;  different  classes
of,  101.

Entrance  of  the  candidate,  i.  308;  to  the
Lodge,  ii.  325.

England  free  from  Masonic  dissentions,  ii.
9;  refuses  the  system  of  ZinnendorlV,  ~>C>;
and  Holland,  compact  between,  59;  num-
ber of  Masons  in,  318.

English  Harodim  explained,  ii.  118.

Enigmatical  phrases,  ii.  10.

Knranipments  of  Baldwin,  history  of,  ii.
12;  of  the  Knights  of  Malta,  124;  of
Mount  Sinai,  221;  Grand,  324;  what
degrees  are  given  in,  330.

Eneas,  descent  of,  into  hell,  ii.  174.

Engraving  of  truth,  ii.  258;  of  precious
stones,  513.

Envy  of  Satan,  ii.  479.

Ephraimites  called  Cowans,  i.  5,  509;  mo-
lest Jeptha,  508.

Epicurean  theory  of  the  creation,  i.  494.

Epochs  of  Masonry,  i.  226.

Ephod,  what,  ii.  513.

Equality  of  the  Brethren,  i.  161 ;  explained,
ii.  184.

Equilateral  triangle  explained,  i.  174;  sym-
bol of,  ii.  242.

Eques  ab  ense,  Hunde's  title,  ii.  45.

Error,  symbol  of,  ii.  353.

Era  of  Christ's  birth  corrected,  ii.  644.

Essenes,  Freemasonry  said  to  be  derived
from  the,  ii.  26;  origin  of  the,  409.

Establishment  of  the  thirty-third  degree,
ii.  53;  of  the  Grand  Orient  of  France,
60;  of  the  sublime  degrees,  334.

Eternity,  door  of,  ii.  160;  of  the  soul,  182;
of  the  Deity,  symbolized,  503.

Eternal  existence  of  Christ,  ii.  540.

Ethiopia,  gold  of,  ii.  278.

Eulogy  on  Freemasonry,  i.  28.

Eureka  of  Pythagoras,  i.  552.

Euclid  said  to  be  the  pupil  of  Abraham,  i.
66;  famous  problem  of,  162;-ii.  158;
teaches  geometry  i.  547,  563;  his  account
of  the  primitive  state  of  Egypt,  554;  un-
derstood Masonry,  563.

Evidences  of  interest  in  the  Fraternity,  i.  3;
respecting  the  stone  of  foundation,  270.


GENERAL  INDEX  TO  THE  NOTES,


731


Evil  spirits  assume  the  form  of  goats,  i.  568.
Evil  eye,  its  fascination,  i.  228.
Evils  of  misgovernment,  ii.  80.
Evangelist,  St.  John  the,  chosen  G.  M.  i.

167.

Evocation  of  spirits,  ii.  68.
Everlasting  lamp,  ii.  200;  fire,  466.
Eve  said  to  be  the  inventor  of  music,  ii.

216;  her  opinion  of  the  serpent,  486.
Eva  of  the  Greek  mysteries,  what,  ii.  405.
Excitement   against    Freemasonry  in  the

United  States,  i.  16.
Excellent  Master,  degree  of,  i.  583.
Excellence  of  the  third  degree,  ii.  165.
Extirpation  of  the  Canaanites,  reasons  for

the,  i.  299.
Exodus,  the,  i.  361.
Examination  questions,  ii.  6.
Extent  of  the  fire  of  London,  ii.  28;  of

Solomon's  traffic,  382.
Excrescences  of  Masonry,  ii.  36.
Executive  body  of  the  Masonic  Fraternity,

ii.  53.
Expulsion  of  the  adherents  of  Lacorne,

ii.  58.
Explanation  of  the  sprig  of  cassia,  ii.  148;

of  the  degree  of  Venerable  Gr.  M.,  340;

of  the  Lodges  of  Nabiim,  374;  of  the

statue  of-Memnon,  457.
Extract  from  the  earliest  known  lectures,

ii.  169.

Extravagance  of  the  Romans,  ii.  280.
Expence  of  the  temple  furniture,  ii.  285.
Expiatory  ship  of  Athens,  ii.  352.
Exhortation  of  Haggai,  ii.  444.
Exemption  from  imposts,  duties,  and  taxes,

ii.  448.

Exquisite  food  of  the  Egyptians,  ii.  561.
Ezra  collects  the  Scriptures,  ii.   397;  de-
puted by  Artaxerxes,  450.
Ezekiel  instructs  Pythagoras, ii.  412;  death

of,  430;  vision  of,  434;  mark  of,  620.

Faith   defined,  i.  65;  depicted  bearing  a

cross,  129;  Hope,  and  Charity,  89,  171;

a    Roman  goddess,   172;   of  Abraham,

what,  211.

Fall  of  water,  i.  502  ;  of  Adam,  ii.  476.
Fable  of  Niobe,  i.  549  ;  of  the  death  of

Solomon,  ii.  264 ;  of  Pandora,  485 ;  of

Melampus,  503.

Fasting,  candidates  exposed  to,  ii.  6.
False    charters     granted,   ii.    42 ;    deities

worshipped  by  Solomon,  385.
Faber,  the  Rev.  S.,  on  the  origin  of  Masonry,

ii.  203.

Fascination,  how  averted,  ii.  245.
Facultie  of  Abrac,  what,  ii.  542.
Female  rising  in  the  moon,  a  symbol,  i.  158 ;


Lodges,  tests  of  fortitude  in,  176;  anec-
dote of,  ii.  35  ;  Order  of  Mount  Tabor,
66 ;  Freemasonry  described,  69  ;  festival
of,  94;  explained,  111 ;  candidate  tried,
486.

Feast  of  tabernacles,  i.  290  ;  ii.  640.

Festival  of  Female  Masons,  ii.  94;  of  Diana,
234  ;  of  Bacchus,  disorders  at  the,  237  ;
of  the  fire,  453 ;  of  St.  John,  614.

Fete  of  the  Lodges  of  Adoption,  ii.  72.

Fertility  of  Egypt,  i.  556,  559.

Fellowcraft's  Tracing-board  explained,  i.
439 ;  degree,  its  importance,  ii.  5 ;  age
of  a,  130;  ten  degrees  of,  336.

Feuds,  Masonic,  ii.  9.

Fendeurs,  Order  of,  i.  413  ;  what,  ii.  35.

Fellows,  his  erroneous  opinions  on  Masonry,
i.  139  ;  on  the  pillars,  239,  449  ;  on  the
third  degree,  ii.  145.

Felicity,  island  of  ii.  36;  Order  of,  de-
scribed, 72.

Fees  of  admission  in  Prussia,  ii.  53;  of
initiation,  87  ;  of  the  Scottish  Templars,
334.

Fessler,  his  system  of  Masonry,  ii.  53;
degrees  of  87.

Fervency  and  zeal,  symbol  of,  ii.  241,  586.

Fetters  of  the  Jews,  ii.  406.

Feet  of  the  Druids,  bare,  ii.  471.

Finch,  his  Masonic  pamphlets  utterly  use-
less, i.  13  ;  his  appropriation  of  the  three
lights,  140.

Five  points  in  the  life  of  Christ,  i.  43  ;  lights
in  the  ineffable  degrees,  169;  doors  of
the  temple,  ii.  156;  steps  of  exactness,
370.

Fidelity,  symbol  of,  i.  172;  how  depicted,
177 ;  of  Masons,  ii.  49 ;  an  emblem  of,
255,  371.

First  born,  his  privileges,  i.  275 ;  Grand
Chapter  of  the  Hauts  Grades,  ii.  42  ;
attempt  to  introduce  scepticism  into  Ma-
sonry,38 ;  and  to  exclude  Christianity,  55.

Fire,  worship  of,  i.  462  ;  the  Deity  appears
in,  467  ;  and  water,  candidates  exposed
to,  ii.  6;  the  punishment  of  sinners,  168;
invented,  209 ;  symbol  of,  244,  296.

Firmament,  the,  what  it  is,  i.  482.

Fine  linen  of  Egypt,  ii.  245.

Fictions  of  romance,  origin  of  the,  ii.  484.

Fish  of  the  Nile,  delicate,  ii.  563.

Floor-cloth  of  the  third  degree,  i.  45 ;  of
the  degree  of  Grand  Pontiff,  ii.  120  ;  of
le  Petite  Architecte,  346.

Flooring,  Mosaic,  of  the  Greeks,  i    143.

Flemish  Masons,  ii.  5.

Floats  to  Joppa,  ii.  112.

Flowers,  door  of,  ii.  160.

Form  of  a  Lodge,  i.  185,  187.


732


GENERAL  INDEX  TO  THE  NOTES,


Forms  of  the  cherubim,  ii.  294;  of  the
banners,  586.

Formula  of  excommunication,  ii.  442.

Fortitude  illustrated,  i.  176,  209.

Four,  the  number,  i.  263 ;  and  seven
blended,  522 ;  and  ten,  perfect  numbers,
523 ;  and  three  united,  525 ;  old  Lodges,
privileges  of,  ii.  305  ;  rivers  of  Paradise,
578 ;  years  in  the  birth  of  Christ,  error
of,  644.

Fosbroke,  the  Rev.  Bro.,  his  opinion  of
Freemasonry,  i.  323.

Foreigners  employed  by  Solomon,  i.  405.

Forty,  a  celebrated  number,  i.  523.

Foundation  stone  cast  forth,  ii.  116;  ex-
plained, 263.

Fountain  of  prudence,  ii.  478.

Free  enquiry  favoured,  i.  38 ;  man  born  of
a  free  woman,  107-

Freemason,  what,  i.  5  ;  nut  to  work  with
those  who  are  not  free,  415  ;  declared
free  and  accepted,  ii.  -11(5,  323.

Freemasonry,  argument  against,  i.  0;  a
grave  and  serious  pursuit,  7;  recom-
mendations of,  10;  will  always  remain  a
secret,  11;  denounced,  16;  aivu>ed  «i'
infidelity,  18;  friendly  to  religion,  19;
persecuted,  21;  threatened,  27;  eulogy
on,  28;  pursuits  of  exposed,  30;  a  pro-
blem, 37;  whence  derived,  42;  eclipses
all  other  institutions,  44;  teaches  Chris-
tianity, 48 ;  not  a  system  of  religion,
51;  called  geometry,  66;  perverted  by
the  Illuminati,  71;  censured  by  Bar-
ruel,  70;  an  auxiliary  to  religion,  87;
denounced  by  the  papal  see,  91;  an
universal  system,  106  ;  founded  on
geometry,  120;  probable  eflfects  of,  135;
not  sun  worship,  138;  whence  it  sprang,
199;  three  degrees  of,  compared  with
the  dispensations  of  religion,  207;  ef-
fects of,  209;  abused,  237;  false  opinions
respecting,  240;  lectures  of,  305;  obliga-
tions of,  312;  badge  of,  313;  Volney's
derivation  of,  318;  light  of,  373;  in
Sweden,  383;  Christian  design  of,  386;
identified  with  Christianity,  393;  not
derived  from  the  Israelites,  408;  intro-
duced into  Europe  by  the  Tynans,  413;
of  Adam,  493,  499  introduces  a  taste
for  the  fine  arts,  591;  origin  of  the  name,
ii.  5;  names  of,  5;  revived  by  the  Tem-
plars, 11;  prohibited  in  Switzerland,
19 ;  design  of,  23 ;  privileges  of  ex-
tended, 26;  of  Cromwell,  27;  proscribed
in  France,  34;  excrescences  of,  36;  at-
tacked by  the  Dutch  clergy,  39;  of  the
crusades,  42 ;  assumes  a  new  name,  43  ;
persecuted  at  Malta,  44;  of  the  Cabala,


63;  perpetuity  of,  99;  King  of  Sweden
patronizes,  107;  prejudices  against,  2-32 ;
increase  of,  30-5 ;  in  no  danger,  306 ;
would  be  destroyed  by  altering  tin'
landmarks,  307;  papal  warfare  against,
314 ;  in  all  ranks,  318  ;  allegorical
language  of,  329;  diffused,  386;  intro-
duced into  Babylon,  408 ;  of  Moses,
what,  425;  of  Adam,  what,  483;  corner
stone  of,  493 ;  traced  from  the  creation,
508;  retains  the  true  word,  646;  sacred
name  preserved  in,  550 ;  its  utility,
581;  useless  without  Christianity,  666.

Freedom  of  a  craft  or  guild,  ii.  25.

Freemasons'  Quarterly  Review,  commended,
i.  36;  ii.  676.

Freemasons  arrested  in  Paris,  ii.  34.

Fratemitas  latomorum,  ii.  •'>.

Fraternal  union,  symbol  of,  ii.  '!51.

Fraternization  of  the  Scottish  Templars,
ii.  41.

Fraud  and  virtue  contrasted,  i.  39.

Friendship,  symbol  of,  ii.  241,  :]58.

French  Lodges,  rules  of  the,  i.  126;
opinions  of  Freemasonry  in  the,  131  ;
Masons,  xc;il  of  th",  ii.  8;  royal  arch,
what,  29;  Rose  Croix,  what,  47;  Re-
volution, causes  of  the,  67;  Kadosh,
what,  67.

France,  tomplary  in,  ii.  24;  denunciation
of  the  Grand  Orient  of,  60;  number  of
Masons  in,  318.

Franconia,  ancient  Lodge  in,  ii.  18.

Fruitfulness  of  Palestine,  i.  300.

Frankfort,  ancient  Lodge  in,  ii.  20.

Furnell,  Bro.,  his  opinion  of  Masonry,
i.  131.

Furniture  of  a  Lodge,  how  disposed,  i.
193;  of  the  pedestal,  309;  of  a  Lodge-
seized,  ii.  43;  of  a  chapter  of  the  taber-
nacle degrees,  114;  of  a  council  of  knights
of  the  east  and  west,  116;  of  the  taberna-
cle, 230;  of  a  chapter  of  the  eagle,  474.

Funeral  of  Jacob,  i.  284.

Furnaces,  fiery, of  Ur  and  Babylon,!.  468.

Fustier,  his  system  of  Masonry,  ii.  95.

Future  rewards,  ii.  182.

G.,  the  letter  explained,  i.  455,  532.
Garments  of  truth,  i.   164;    of  the  high

priest  symbolized,   ii.  512;   of  a  Grand

sacrificer,  532.

Gavel,  the,  explained,  i.  180.
Gabaon,  mount,  i.  335.
Galleries  under  the  pyramids,  i.  364.
Garden  of  Eden,  the,  i.  496;  where,  499;

of  the  Hesperides,  ii.  482.
Gabrino,  a  Masonic  innovator,  ii.  26.
Gauls,  riches  of  the,  ii.  277.


GENERAL  INDEX  TO  THE  NOTES.


733


Gallery  in  a  Lodge  for  singers,  ii.  326;  of
Tyrins,  arches  in  the,  363;  supported
loy  pillars,  436;  in  the  form  of  a  cross,
624.

Gazeth,  what,  ii.  427.
Gad,  his  character,  ii.  590.
Geometry,  a  name  of  Masonry,  i.  66,  120;

ii.  5;  origin  of,  i.  81.
Gentiles  worship  towards  the  east,  i.  201.
Genealogy  of  Christ,   i.    524;   of  Osiris,

ii.  234.

Generation  of  animals,  i.  492.
Genius  of  Masonry  opposed  to  innovation,

ii.  8.

General  view  of  the  high  degrees,  ii.  13;
Grand  chapter  of  France,  instituted,  49.
Garbier,  Bro.,  fabricates  a  charter,  ii.  47.
Georgia,    consistory   of,    52;    number    of

Lodges  in,  324.

German  Rose  Croix,  ii.  46;  degrees  of,  47;

union,  object  of,  82;  illuminism,what,  646.

Germany,  names  of  the  G.  Lodges  of,  ii.

106;  Eclectic  Masons  of,  117;  number
of  Masons  in  318.
Gems,  names  of,  ii.  268;  of  the  spurious

Freemasony,  514.
Generosity,  symbol  of,  ii.  297.
Geneva,  number  of  Masons  in,  ii.  318.
Gentleness,  symbol  of,  ii.  337.
Gerizim,  temple  of,  built,  ii.  448,
Ghiblimites,  the,  who,  i.  411.
Ghent,  ancient  Lodge  at,  ii.  20.
Ghenelia,  meaning  of,  ii.  63.
Ghuznee,  Masonic  emblem  found  at,  ii.  393.
Gilgal,  i.  294;  pillars  of,  ii.  399.
Giants,  race  of,  i.  303.
Girding  the  loins,  what,  i.  368.
Giblites,  the,  i.  402.
Gilding  on  the  Egyptian  mummies,  ii.  245,

517.
Glory  of  Christ  appears  in  the  East,  i.  201;

of  the  church  symbolized,  ii.  433.
Glastonbury,  riches  of  the  chapel  at,  ii.  286.
Gnostics,  the,  i.  178;  cabala  of  the,  ii.  27.
Governor  Clinton's  opinion  of  Masonry,  i.  19.
God,  a  belief  in,  taught  in  Freemasonry,  i.

107.
Goodwin,  Bro.,  his  opinion  of  Masonry,  i.

196;  on  the  Masonry  of  Enoch,  ii.  190.
Goodness  of  God,  i.  274;  symbol  of,  ii.  337.
Golgotha,  a  curious  legend  respecting,  i.

587.
Gold  mines  discovered,  ii.  211;  silver  and

copper  the  first  metals  known,  213;  pro-
fusion of,  in  early  times,  272;  brought

from  Ophir,  274.
Golden   key,   the,    i.    431 ;    Rose   Croix

founded,  ii.  47;  calf  worshipped,  232;

made  portable,  239;  crowns  of  the  Am-


monites, 272;  ornaments  of  the  Egyp-
tians, 611.

Government  of  the  high  degrees,  ii.  40;  of
the  33rd  degree,  87.

Goblets  of  silver  and  gold,  ii.  275.

Governing  bodies,  designation  of,  ii.  330.

Good  and  bad  spirits,  ii.  498.

Gozan,  the  river,  ii.  394.

Grand  Inspectors  General,  their  manifesto,
i.  5 ;  Masters  patronize,  34 ;  Pontiff,
degree  of,  explained,  187,  524;  east,
what,  192.

Grand  Lodge  of  England,  seal  of,  i.  68 ;
rejects  the  system  of  Ramsay,  90;  of
Hamburg,  its  opinion  of  Freemasonry,
121;  Lodges,  321;  architects  six  periods,
476;  offering,  578;  Master  of  the  Tem-
plars, ii.  13;  of  H.  R.  D.  M.,'his
powers,  17;  Lodge  at  Vienna,  19;  and
at  Zurich,  19;  of  Prussia,  deputation
from,  38;  Orient  of  France  established,
60;  Mopses,  71;  Orient,  circular  of  the,
82;  Chapter  of  H.  R.  D.  M.,  at  Rouen,
86;  Orient,  degrees  of  the,  93;  affilia-
tions of  the,  95;  and  Supreme  Council
agree,  100,  312;  Master  architect,  119;
Pontiff,  floor  cloth  of,  120,  340;  archi-
tect, age  of  a,  130;  Lodge,  what  con-
stitutes a,  309;  Consistory,  324;  Lodges
in  the  U.S.,  324;  ancient  laws  of,  327;
Conclave,  officers  of  the,  330;  of  Scot-
tish Templars,  333,  and  Royal  Lodge,
416;  Lodges  in  the  wilderness,  570.

G.  A.  O.  T.  U.,  is  Jesus  Christ,  i.  53.

Grant,  Bro.,  his  opinion  of  Masonry,  i.  52;
on  laying  a  foundation  stone,  314.

Greeks,  mosaic  pavements  of  the,  i.  143.

Grvlls,  the  Rev.  Bro.,  his  opinion  of
Masonry,  i.  150.

Greater  lights,  the,  i.  169.

Groves  planted,  i.  332;  idolatrous,  569.

Grip  and  sign  of  a  Mason,  i.  348.

Grandeur  of  the  buildings  of  Egypt,  i.  411.

Grades  to  the  R.A.  degree,  i.  432;  or  de-
grees of  Masonry,  seven,  514.

Grave  of  a  Templar,  ii.  23;  a  symbol,  147;
decorated  with  shrubs,  150.

Greece,  Masonry  said  to  have  originated
in,  ii.  26.

Gravelot,  the  name  of  an  assassin,  ii.  375.

Granaries  of  Joseph,  ii.  455.

Grimsby,  consistory  at,  ii.  671.

Greek  cross,  the,  ii.  637.

Gugomos,  his  system  of  Masonry,  ii.  62.

Guardians  of  treasure,  ii.  82.

H.  R.  D.  M.,  Chapters  of,  i.  4;  sometimes
called  Templary,  ii.  13;  history  of,  14;
usages  of,  17;  Grand  Chapter  of,  86.


734


GENERAL  INDEX  TO  THE  NOTES.


Harodiin,  English,  explained,  ii.  118.

Ham,  a  wicked  person,  i.  60.

Hagar's  flight,  i.  102;  her  despair,  115.

Hagarenes,  account  of  the,  i.  114.

Habits  of  the  descendants  of  Ismael,  i.
118.

Hastings,  the  Marquis  of,  his  opinion  of
Masonry,  i.  127.

Harpocrates,  the  god  of  silence,  i.  148.

Hauts  Grades,  history  of  the,  ii.  4;  why
invented,  30;  practised  in  England,  101.

Hamburg,  ancient  Lodge  at,  ii.  20.

Hands  of  Moses  elevated,  ii.  220.

Hangings  of  the  tabernacle,  ii.  224;  of  a
Lodge  of  Compagnon  Ecossais,  346.

Harmony,  a  symbol  of,  ii.  241,  and  peace
of  the  workmen  at  the  Temple,  247.

Hayes,  Bro.,  introduces  the  R.A.,  ii.  319

Hades,  picture  of,  ii.  405.

Hanna.sci,  who,  ii.  427.

Hatred  of  the  Jews,  ii.  443.

Haggai,  his  zeal,  ii.  444.

Hatathi  what,  ii.  576.

Heubner,  Dr.,  refutes  Bahrdt,  i.  25.

Heathen  deities,  Noah  compared  with,  i.  46;
temples,  whence  derived,  24;  situation
of,  194;  triads,  253;  refer  to  the  trinity.
255;  evidences  of  the  Exodus  of  Israel,
359 ;  veneration  of,  for  the  number
seven,  519;  oracles  silenced,  ii.  297;
superstitions  derived  from  the  Jews,
506 ;  oracles,  origin  of,  527 ;  veneration
for  the  gods,  547 ;  deities  afraid  of  the
cross,  624.

Hemming,  Dr.,  his  opinion  of  Masonry,  i.
120;  on  the  blazing  star,  158;  on' the
situation  of  the  Lodge,  183;  on  the  sup-
port of  the  Lodge,  236.

Heselton,  Bro.,  his  opinion  of  the  Jews,  i.
163.

Herod's  temple,  i.  248;  described,  ii.  643.

Hermesian  secrets,  i.  245,  517.

Hermes,  cross  of,  ii.  630.

Herinetical  science,  Masonry  attributed  to
the,  ii.  27;  degrees  established,  46;
rites,  110.

Hermetiques,  number  of  degrees  in,  ii.  66.

Heroic  ages,  the,  i.  297.

Hills,  highest  of,  i.  317;  venerated,  329;
and  mountains  holy,  ii.  183;  of  offence,
384.

Hell  fire,  effects  of,  ii.  473.

Heat  in  the  wilderness,  excessive,  i.  373 ;
without  light,  ii.  466.

Heaven  created,  i.  482;  mentioned,  ii.  255.

Hesse,  ancient  Lodge  at,  ii.  18.

Heredom,  degree  of,  ii.  116.

Helena,  St.,  discovers  the  Gross,  ii.  121,
653.


Height  of  Mount  Sinai,  ii.  221.

Hecart,  his  system  of  Masonry,  ii.

Heart  of  H.  A.  B.,  the,  ii.  369.

Helvetian  ceremony  of  laying  the  founda-
tion stone  of  a  Lodge,  ii.  439.

Head  of  Memnon,  ii.  456.

Hesperides,  garden  of  the,  ii.  482.

Heraldry,  cruciform  symbols  of,  ii.  626.

H.R.H.  the  Duke  of  Sussex,  his  opinion
of  Masonry,  i.  6.

High  degrees,  Christian,  i.  49;  catalogue
of  the,  ii.  3;  patronized  by  the  Court  of
France,  8;  antiquity  of  the,  111;  dis-
countenanced in  Scotland,  321 ;  Priest,
who  is  eligible  for  the,  506.

Hieroglyphics  of  Egypt,  i.  77;    explained,
Io3;  ii.  461;  Jewish,  i.  263;  truth  em
bodied  in,  390 ;  of  tombs,  397 ;  of  the
order  of  H.  R.  D.  M.,  ii.  14;  Cain   in
vents,  215;  of  the  (i.  attributes,  515.

H.  A.  Ii.,  who  he  was,  i.  155;  tradition
of  his  stylus,  458;  death  of,  ii.  143;
tradition  respecting,  151;  his  birth,  258;
a  symbol  of  truth,  258.

History  of  Masonry,  a  desideratum,  i.  4,
184;  of  the  degree  of  architect,  ii.  112;
of  Mark  Masonry,  126;  of  the  birth  of
giants,  197;  of  Moses,  226,  5G1;  of  the
degree  of  Royal  Axe,  341.

Historical  commentaries  on  the  lectures,
ii.  -19;  lecture  in  the  degree  of  perfec-
tion, 379.

H.  K.  T.,  his  embassy  to  David,  i.  224;
supports,  ii.  258;  dissatisfied  with  the
cities,  380.

Hilkiah  finds  the  roll,  ii.  388.

Highest  of  hills  and  lowest  of  valleys,  i.
317.

Hindoos  sacrifice  by  sevens,  i.  517.

Hierogram  of  the  29th  degree,  i.  534;  of
serpents,  ii.  481;  on  the  stone  of  founda-
tion, 554.

Hierarchy  of  the  degrees  of  the  tabernacle,
ii.  342.

Hierarchial  Lodges  described,  ii.  130.

H.  T.,  meaning  of,  ii.  622.

Hierapolis,  a  college  of  priests  at,  ii.  607.

Holy  place,  the,  a  symbol,  i.  48;  Lodge,
the,  321,  ii.  218;  land,  Freemasonry
said  to  be  brought  from  the,  11;
sepulchre,  degree  of,  121;  fire  hidden,
405;  land,  attachment  of  the  Jews  to,
417;  name  of  Jehovah,  556.

Horeb,  what  famous  for,  i.  72;  and  Sinai,
what,  328;  where  it  was,  ii.  466.

Honour,  temple  of,  i.  164.

Honorary  jewel,  ii.  423.

Hope  explained,  i.  172.

Hospitality,  a  Masonic  virtue,  i.  104.


GENERAL    INDEX    TO    THE    NOTES.


735


Hospitallers,  account  of,  ii.  20.

Host  of  heaven,  the,  i.  489.

Horses  imported  by  Solomon,  ii.  382.

Hostility  of  the  Samaritans,  ii.  442.

Hutchinson,  Bro.,  his  opinion  of  the  3rd
degree,  i.  52;  ii.  159;  on  the  three  Masonic
epochs,  i.  226;  on  the  second  temple,  ii.
431;  on  the  priestly  office,  504.

Husenbeth,  Bro.,  on  Masonic  symbols,  i.
122;  on  the  Templars,  ii.  23;  of  Ma-
sonry, 388  ;  on  secret  societies,  617.

Human  victims,  i.  570  ;  redemption,  ii.  155.

Hunde,  assumes  an  exclusive  title,  ii.  45  ;
his  system,  45  ;  founds  a  Lodge,  46  ;
quarrels  with  Johnson,  56.

Hulmer,  a  mystic,  ii.  82.

Humanity  of  Christ,  ii.  293.

Humility,  symbol  of,  ii.  471.

Hull,  consistory  at,  ii.  671.

Hypostases,  theories  of  the,  i.  261.

Hyacinth,  the,  described,  ii.  521.

IAO,  the  one  supreme  God,  i.  542.
Idols  of  the  Arabians,  i.  278  ;   of  Egypt
fall  down  before  Christ,  ii.  298  ;  set  up
in  the  Temple,  642.
Idolatry  forbidden,  ii.  227.
Idean  cave,  Pythagoras  visits  the,  ii.  414.
Identity  of  a  Lodge  with  Jerusalem,  i.  239.
Ignorance  of  the  figure  of  the  Cherubim,

ii.  295.

Illuminism,  object  of,  i.  26;  held  its  meet-
ings in  vaults,  350;  schemes  of,  ii.  88.
Illuminees  of  Avignon  established,  ii.  54.
Illuminati,  the,  pervert  Freemasonry,  i.  71,

310.

Illegal  constitutions,  ii.  42.
Illustrious  knights,  names  of  the,  ii.  376.
Impossibility  of  betraying  the  secrets,  i.  11.
Immoveable  jewels,  what,  i.  144.
Implements   of   architecture,   symbols,    i.
160;  adopted  by  the  Freemasons,  ii.  12.
Immortality,  ii.  2  ;  symbol  of,  255.
Impostors,  Masonic,  ii.  8,  64.
Imposture  of  Hunde  detected,  ii.  45.
Impositions  of  the  Heathen  priests,  ii.  529.
Improvements  ought  to  be  encouraged,  ii.  9.
Images  of  the  gods  carried  in  procession,

ii.  229.

Improper  ceremonies,  ii.  323.
Implements  of  Masonry  lost,  ii.  355.
Imposts,  &c.,  exemption  from,  ii.  448.
Initiation,  a  grave  undertaking,  i.  7;  anec-
dote of  an,  22;  into  the  spurious  Free-
masonry, terrible,  567;  by  lecture,ii.  17;
places  of,  21;  typical,  25;  into  the  hauts
grades    described,   48;     caricatured    by
Barruel,  81;  fees  of,  87;  object  of,  303;
regularity  of,  308;  of  the  Levitrs,  596.


Initiations    regulated,    ii.     5 ;     into     the
Vehmic   order,   10,    77;    in    cruciform
caverns,  624.
Infidelity,  Masonry  falsely  accused  of,  i.

18;  of  Pharaoh,  ii.  604.
Information,  desire  of,  i.  36.
Interpretation  of  symbols,  i.   56;   of  the
ceremonies,   121;   of  the   decalogue,  ii.
223;  of  the  name  of  Jesus,  558.
Instruction,  Masonic,  i.  128.
India,  splendour  of  Masonry  in,  i.   159;

Mason  marks  in,  429.
Indian  triads,   i.   256;   tradition  of  Cain
and  Abel,  ii.  173;  symbol,  481;    tradi-
tion of  the  Messiah,  398.
Incense,  ingredients  of,  i.  190.
Invisible  shield,  what,  i.  223.
Invisibles,  the,  a  pretended  Masonic  de-
gree, ii.  67.

Innovations,  Masonic,  i.  287;  ii.  8,  372 ;
condemned,  35  ;  not  to  be  sanctioned,
305.

Inscribed  pillars  of  Joshua,  i.  302  ;  build-
ings, ii.  462.

Inscription  over  the  porch  of  the  Temple,

i.  447;  in  Roslyn  Chapel,  ii.  25  ;  on  the

tomb  of  Molay,  106;  on  a  monument,

266;  on  the  mitre,  533.

Inscriptions,   mysterious,   ii.    3 ;     on    the

pillars  of  Sesostris,  201.
Increase  of  the  Israelites,  i.  362  ;  of  Ma-
sonry, ii.  305.

Inundations  of  the  Nile,  i.  547.
Insubordination,  its  evils,  ii.  9.
Inquisition,  the,  persecutes  Freemasonry,

ii.  43.
Inwood,   the   Rev.   Bro.,  his   opinion   of

Masonry,  ii.  78.

Indestructibility  of  Freemasonry,  ii.  99.
Intimate  secretary,  lodge  of,  described,  ii.

122.

Intimacy  of  Masons,  ii   302.
Inventions  before  the  flood,  ii.  204,
Indecent  practices  before  the  golden  calf,

ii.  236.

Innocence,  symbol  of,  ii,  244.
Intemperance  forbidden,  ii.  251.
Insect  Shermah,  ii.  254.
Inspectors  General,  their  power,  ii.  331.
INRI,  its  meaning,  ii.  347;  on  an  agate,

522.

Institution  of  the  R.  A.,  ii.  349.
Ineffable  degrees,  the,  ii.  366;  when  they

were  classed,  367.
Indignities  of  the  Jews,  ii.  394.
Influence  of  Pythagoras,  ii.  414.
Investiture  of  Zerubabel,  ii.  423.
Inkhorn,  man  with  the,  ii.  475.
Introduction  of  serpent  worship,  ii.  49.>.


736


GENERAL    INDEX    TO    THE    NOTES.


Incommunicable,  name,  the,  ii.537.

Infernal  spirits  afraid  of  the  name,  ii.  548.

Ingratitude  of  the  Israelites,  ii.  5 03.

Invocation  of  demons,  ii.  613.

Infant  Jesus  worshipped,  ii.  645.  t

Irregularity  in  the  blue  degrees,  i.  54  ;  ii
91;  condemned,  251;  noticed,  322.

Irregular  Lodges,  ii.  21.

Ireland,  number  of  Masons  in,  ii.  318.

Irish  Masonry,  so  called,  ii.  30  ;  degrees,
400.

Isaac  and  Ishmael,  types  of  the  two
covenants,  i.  107 ;  carries  the  wood  for
the  offering,  213  ;  and  Christ  compared,
216.

Ishmael,  why  he  mocked  Isaac,  i.  1 12  ;  has
two  wives,  114;  the  ancester  of  Ma-
homet, 117.

Ishmaelites,  customs  of  the,  ii.  277.

Issachar,  tribe  of,  i.  311.

Israelites,  the,  worship  the  dogstar,  i.  331;
their  deliverance  wonderful,  356;  were
indifferent  mechanics,  409  ;  led  like  a
flock,  473 ;  fond  of  visible  gods,  ii.  229  ;
had  plenty  of  gold  in  the  wilderness,
272 ;  their  idolatry,  390,  and  guilt,  420 ;
deliverance  of,  466  ;  camp  of,  50S.

Israelitish  tradition  not  the  sole  object  of
Masonry,  ii.  388.

Island  of  felicity,  female  Lodge  so  called,  ii.
36.

Ischa,  a  name  of  Eve,  ii.  496.

Ism  Ablah,  what,  ii.  544.

Ivory  key,  its  hidden  meaning,  ii.  131.

Ivy  leaf,  a  symbol,  ii.  647.

Jachin  and  Boaz  mis-states  Freemasonrv,
i.  12.

Jabal,  account  of,  i.  57.

Jacob  covets  the  privilege  of  the  first-born,
i.  113;  compared  with  the  Zodiac,  249;
sent  to  Padanaram,  270;  his  sin,  272;
his  vision,  277;  birth  of  his  children,
277;  builds  an  altar,  278;  his  troubles,
279;  wrestles  with  an  angel,  280;  his
death,  283;  his  pillar,  ii.  399.

Jacques  de  Molay,  death  of,  ii.  15.

James  I.  attends  the  Masonic  Lodges,  ii.  18.

Jackson,  a  word  of  the  old  French  R.  A.,
ii.  29.

Jamaica,  Inspector  General  at,  ii.  52.

Japan,  Masonic  remains  in,  ii.  185.

Jasper,  its  properties,  ii.  524.

Jannes  and  Jambres,  ii.  606.

Jesus  Christ  the  Son  of  David,  i.  65 ;  his
character  in  the  Rosaic  Masonry,  ii.  56.

Joshua,  a  type  of  Christ,  ii.  445.

Jews,  the,  powerful  in  Arabia,!.  115;  wor-
shippers of  fire,  467;  their  veneration  for


the  septenary  number,  514, 517;  apostat  y
of  the,  566;  propagate  the  Christian  de-
grees of  Masonry,  ii.  52;  believe  tin-
temple  to  have  been  a  divine  work,  253;
forget  their  language,  421;  excom-
municate the  Samaritans,  442;  murmur
against  Moses,  565.

Jewish  traditions,  i.  124;  allusions  to  the
number  three,  242 ;  readings  of  tin-
scripture,  254;  hieroglyphics,  263;
Masons  refer  to  the  Messiah,  388;
legends  391  ;  Talmuds,  authority  of.
394;  cabala,  Freemasonry  traced  to  the
ii.  27;  Masons  rejected  by  the  I.
of  Berlin,  297 ;  atonements,  300 ;
Brethren  ought  to  be  admitted,  492  ;
account  of  the  miracles  of  Christ,  508.

Jerusalem,  excellency  of,  i.  240;  de-
stroyed, ii.  406,  6-1:2.

Jewels,  Masonic,  their  reference,  i.  I'2~>  ;
of  the  Egyptians,  365;  of  a  P.  Mast<-.-.
552;  explained,  i~> •'>'•'..

Jewel  of  a  Master  illustrated,  i.  1S9;  of
the  French  R.  A.,  ii.  29;  of  the  Knights
of  the  Virgin  Mary,  112;  of  the  Sublime
Knights  elected,  136;  of  the  Rose  Croix,
340;  of  the  Royal  Axe,  443;  of  the
Royal  Arch,  617.

Jehoshaphat,  valley  of,  i.  317;  described,
343;  ii.  662.

Jeptha  and  the  Ephraimites,  i.  500  ;  a
captain  of  a  band  of  robbers,  503;  his
treaty  with  the  Ammonites,  50 1 ;
whether  he  sacrificed  his  daughter,  505.

Jehovah,  the  son  of  God,  i.  105;  the  seven
lettered  name,  542  ;  known  to  Cain
and  Abel,-ii.  538;  whether  known  to
the  Romans,  541.

Jesuits,  the,  practise  Masonry,  ii.  44;
anecdote  of,  65.

Jedediah,  a  name  of  Solomon,  ii.  271.

Jeremiah,  his  prophecy,  ii.  403;  hides  the
ark,  404;  death  of,  409;  instructs
Plato,  413.

Jethro  has  possession  of  the  rod,  ii.  600.

Jieans,  the  Rev.  Bro.,  on  the  compasses,
i.  165.

Jonah,  a  type  of  Christ,  i.  250.

Joseph  accused,  i.  281;  his  wife,  282;  his
flourishing  progeny,  315;  his  character,
ii.  590.

Jordan,  passing  the,  i.  291;  Masonic
version  of,  293;  twelve  stones  of  the,  295.

Joppa,  steepness  of  its  cliff,  i.  425.

John's  Brothers,  origin  of  the  name,  ii.  5;
Masonry,  what,  22 ;  Templary  traced  to
the  two  parallels,  24.

Josephine,  the  empress,  holds  a  G.  Lodge
of  Adoption,  ii.  96.


GENERAL     INDEX    TO    THE    NOTES.


7.->'7
Of


Joy,  emblem  of,  ii.  352.

Joabert,  rashness  of,  ii.  373;  his  dangerous

situation,  380;  pardoned,  381.
Josiah  ignorant  of  the  scriptures,  ii.  398.
Joshua,  pillars  of,  ii.  399.
Journey  of  Zembabel,  ii.  446.
Jurisdiction  of  the  G.  Lodge  at  Strasburg,

ii.  18;  of  the  Supreme  Council,  108.
Jupiter,   golden   statue   of,   ii.    283;  wor-

shipped in  the  temple  at  Jerusalem,  642.
Justice  and  mercy,  symbol  of,  ii.  357.
Judea  capta,  ii.  417.
Judicial  amulet,  a,  ii.  525.
Judgments  on  the  Israelites,  ii.  567.
Jugglers  of  Egypt,  the,  ii.  605.
Judah,  tribe  of,  extinct,  ii.  65-5.

Kasideans,  where  their  Lodges  were  held,
i.  323,  origin  of  the,  ii.  409.

Kadosh,  design  of,  ii.  31  ;  number  of  its
orders,  37;  degrees  of  described,  67;
its  signification,  123,  534.

Kestner,  his  opinion  of  Freemasonry,  i.  25.

Key,  a  symbol,  i.  180,  432  ;  of  the  re-
newal of  the  year,  551.

Keystones  of  great  antiquity,  ii.  439.

Kebla,  what,  i.  195,  201.

Kentucky,  number  of  Lodges  in,  ii.  324.

Keschagnim,  a  class  of  the  Jews,  ii.  409.

Kilwinning,  ancient  Lodge  at,  i.  352  ;
abbey  of,  built,  ii.  10;  Masonry  es-
tablished at,  12,  652;  chapter  of  Rose
Croix,  106.

King  of  Tyre,  why  called  the  anointed
cherub,  i.  417;  of  Prussia  initiated,  ii.
38  ;  of  Sweden  patronizes  Freemasonry,
107  ;  Name,  the,  553.

Kings  of  Cologne,  the,  ii.  645.

Knigge,  his  character,  i.  26  ;  his  scheme
of  Masonry,  ii.  61.

Knight  Templars,  address  in  the  degree
of,  i.  108;  of  the  East  and  West,  173;
seven  seals  of,  525;  of  the  three  kings,
581;  Templar,  admission  of  a,  ii.  103;
of  the  brazen  serpent,  jewel  of,  de-
scribed, 113;  of  the  cross,  explained,
415;  of  Malta,  described,  124;  Templar,
design  of,  124  ;  of  the  9th  arch,  de-
scribed, 125;  of  the  East,  age  of  a,  130;
of  St.  John  of  Jerusalem,  history  of,
135  ;  of  the  transparent  light,  138,
Templar,  cognizance  of  a,  630.

Knighthood,  Masonic,  the  oldest  order  of,
ii.  14.

Knowledge  of  names,  ii.  549;  symbol
of,  643.

Kohl,  convention  at,  ii.  64.

Koningsberg,  ancient  Lodge  ;it,  ii.  20.
"


VOL.   IT.


Landmarks  genuine,  i.  4,  97;  antiquity  of

the,  186;  not  to  be  altered,  ii.  306.
Law  respecting  printing  local  proceedings,

i.  30.

Latocnaye,  anecdote  of  his  initiation,  i.  25.
Ladies  admitted  to  public  meetings,  i.  33;

the  conciliated,  ii.  70.
Lamech,  account  of,  i.    57;  tradition  of,

ii.  172.

Language,  the  primary,  lost,  i.  64.
Ladder  rests  on  the  Holy  Bible,  i.  67;  of
seven  steps,  171;  explained,  173;  vision
of  the,  273;  of  the  Hindoos,  522.
Labour  and  refreshment,  i.  82;  explained,

154.
Lambskin,  the,  i.  313;  apron,  444;  whence

derived,  ii.  295;  explained,  512.
Lamb,  throne  of  the,  i.  336.
Latomus,  a  name  of  Masonry,  ii.  5.
La  Haye,  ancient  Lodge  at,  ii.  19.
Laurie,    Bro.,   on    Masonic    innovations,

ii.  36.

Lachelle,  Bro.,  opens  a  chapter,  ii.  50.
Lax  observance,  boast  of  the,  ii.  57.
Lacorne,  his  adherents  expelled,  ii.  58.
Laxity    of    discipline,    its    consequences,

ii.  65.
Lament   over   a   Lodge,   ii.    79  ;    of  the

Jews,  417.
Laurel,  its    symbolical  meaning,  ii.    134;

a  species  of  Cassia,  149.
Last  degree  of  Masonry,  ii.  648.
Leading  tenets  of  Masonry,  no  secrets,  i.  2.
Lefranc,  his  account  of  Masonic  secrets,  i.

23;  his  melancholy  fate,  ii.  86.
Le  Rouge,  his  system  of  Masonry,  ii.  314.
Legendary  history  of  Masonry,  i.  185.
Legends  of    Masonry  founded    on    Holy

Writ,  i.  53,  388.

Legend  of  the  cubical   stone,    i.   54;    of
Abraham,    66,    232  ;    of  the    cave    of
Macpelah,  218;  of  the  death  of  Pharaoh,
370  ;    of  the  Jews   and  -Mahometans,
391;  of  the  seal  of  Solomon,  416;  re-
specting the  formation  of  woman,  497;
of  an  ear  of  corn,  502 ;  of  Solomon,  581 ;
attached  to   Roslyn  chapel,  ii.   24  ;  of
the    French    R.  A..,    29 ;    of   Martinist
Masonry,  73;  of  Larmcnius,  94;  of  the
degree  of  the   Royal  Axe,  112;  of  the
Knights  of  the    Eagle,    115;  of  Mark
Masonry,  126;  of  a  Knight  of  St.  John,
135;  of  the  body  of  Osiris,   145;  of  a
Master  Mason,    146,    178;  of  Daphne,
150;    of  the  third    degree,   165;    alle-
gorical, 1GG;  of  the  death  of  H.  A.B.,
166;  of  the  resurrection,  169;  of  Cain
and  Abel,  172;  of  Adam  and  Soth,  188;
of  Enoch,  ISO;   of  the   1  mild  ing  of  the

E


733


GENERAL    INDEX    TO    Ti:E    NOTES.


pyramids,  217;  of  the  golden  calf,  233;
of  the  foundation  stone,  261 ;  of  the
cessation  of  oracles,  299 ;  of  the  degree
of  Perfect  Master,  369;  of  Nebuchad-
nezzar, 403;  of  Solomon's  private  vault,
437;  of  the  Egyptian  princess,  459;  of
the  burning  bush,  468;  of  Hercules.
382,  of  Eve,  497;  of  the  deluge,  499;
of  devoted  females,  500;  of  the  Knight
Templars,  508  ;  of  the  rod  of  31
599;  of  the  Egyptian  magicians,  605;
of  the  power  of  a  rod,  613.

Learning  concealed  under  symbols,  i.  122;
of  Enoch,  ii.  190.

Level,  Masons  meet  on  the,  i.  131;  spi-
rituali/ed,  ii.  627;  an  Egyptian  symbol,
635.

Lesser  lights,  the,  i.  168.

Letter  (i,  explained,  i.  455,  532.

Le  Sublime  Merc  Loge  Ecossais,  ii.  48.

Leucht,  his  misrepresentations,  ii.  56.

Leipsic,  occult  Lodge  opened  at,  ii.  62.

Le  Maitre  Ecossais,  degree  of,  ii.  2!)  3.

Lemanceau,  his  system  of  Masonry,  ii.  314.

Legitimate  degrees,  ii.  332.

Let  there  be  light,  ii.  476.

Levites,  camp  of  the,  ii.  568;  duties  of  the
672.

Levi,  his  character,  ii.  589.

Light  and  truth,  i.  3;  demanded,  135;
what  it  means,  251;  of  Freemasonry,
373;  to  lighten  the  Gentiles,  475;  birth
of,  477  ;  explained,  478 ;  without
heat,  ii.  466.

Lights,  why  none  in  the  north,  i.  139;
lesser,  168;  greater,  169;  in  (iod,
three,  250 ;  of  Masonic  tradition,  ii.
165;  of  Kadosh,  343.

Lightnings  on  mount  Sinai,  explained,
ii.  221.

Library  and  Museum  of  the  G.  Lodge
commended,  i.  35.

Life  of  man  symbolized,  i.  198;  of  virtue,
ii.  2;  symbol  of  a,  638.

Lion,  its  symbolical  meaning,  ii.  134;  a
symbol  of  strength,  157;  of  St.  Mark,
568;  its  signification,  586.

Living,  symbol  of  the,  ii.  255.

Lisbon,  Masonry  denounced  at,  ii.  317.

Lincolnshire,  number  of  Masons  in,  ii.  320.

Lincoln  cathedral,  double  triangle  in,  ii.
356,  659.

Lichfield  cathedral,  double  triangle  in,  ii.
356,  659.

Liberty  to  the  captives,  ii.  422.

Lingua  sacra,  what,  ii.  618.

Lodge  instruction,  i.  6;  richly  decorated
in  India,  159;  enrichments  of  a,  191;
situation  of  the,  194;  on  the  highest  of


hills,  212;  of  David,  225;  room,  arrange-
ment of  the,   211;  opening  of  a,    306;
what,   316;  of  Kihvinning  estab'"
ii.    10;  of  Masons  at  Stratum/,  11;  at
Stirling,  21;  of  Felicity,  72;   of  i
tion,    119;    of  a    Master    Mason,    177;
compared  with  the  temple  of  Solomon,
256;  what  constitutes  a,  31
number  of  members  of  a,   325;    room,
construction  of  a,  325;  ofaprovo-
jmlge,  33(5;   pillars  of  the,  399;    of  the
brazen  serpent,  576.

Lodges  placed  due  east  and  west,  i.  138;
Gran:!,  thnv  celebrated,  321;  system  of
the,  322;  opened  in  Lebanon,  336;  at
Tyre,  311;  of  strangers,  433;  power  of
forming,  ii.  26;  ancient,  28;  of  the  Elu
deurees  :j~;  of  adoption,  72;  of  Cadi-
(istro.  71;  the  three  original,  IMS;  names
of,  2">6  ;  number  o!'.  .'i!7:  p:vefdcnry
of,  327;  dedicated  to  St.  John,  why,
648.

Louis  XVI.  persecutes  the  Masons,  i.  21.

-.   the   shckinah,   i.    73;  type  of  the,
ii.  .")!();  appears  to  the  patriarch?.

Lower  Canada,  number  of  Lodges  in,
ii.  321.

London,  encampment  at,  mentioned,  ii.  12;
ancient  Lodge  at,  19.

Love  of  God  and  man  the  object  of  Free-
masonry,  ii.  33;  sphere-  of,  018.

Loyalty  of  English  Masons,  ii.  78.

Loss  of  the  "Word,  ii.  116;  explained,  262,
333;  consequences  of,  355.

Lux,  a  name  of  Masonry,  ii.  5  ;  how
formed,  41;  symbol  of,  296.

Luxury  of  the  Babylonians,  ii.  420.

Luke,  St.,  symbolized  by  an  ox,  ii.  568.

Mant,  Bro.,  his  opinion  of  the  1st  degree,
i.  94;  on  the  1st  grand  offering,  205;
on  the  2nd  degree,  380;  on  the  classes
of  workmen,  401  ;  on  the  3rd  Grand
offering,  578;  on  the  3rd  degree,  ii.  2;
on  the  Templars,  10;  on  the  system  of
Pythagoras,  413;  on  the  five  signs,  476;
on  the  Christian  reference  of  the  Order,
667.

Mant,  bishop,  on  death,  ii.  140.

Masonic  Register  mentioned,  i.  3;  MSS.,
Barruel's  account  of  some,  23;  apathy
condemned,  32;  legends,  53;  traditions,
83  ;  jewels,  reference  of  the,  125  ;
obedience,  126;  instruction,  128;  la-
bour explained,  154;  history  imperfect,
184;  landmarks,  antiquity  of,  186;  halls
built,  237;  references  to  the  number
three,  244;  innovations,  287;  version  of
the  passing  of  the  Jordan,  293;  tradition.


GENERAL    INDEX    TO    THE    NOTES.


739


302;  adventures,  ii.  8;  dissentions,  9;
Templarism,  13;  knighthood,  14;  em-
blems inscribed  on  stones,  23;  alchymy
condemned,  46;  empire  arranged  into
provinces,  56;  questions  discussed,  73;
Lodges  closed  against  Weishaupt,  70;
convention  at  Paris,  80 ;  controversy
96;  remains  in  Polynesia,  185;  boards,
248;  worthies,  258,  429;  schism  in
England,  309;  dupes,  312;  emblems
found  at  Gfhuznee,  393  ;  mark,  632.

Masonry  consists  of  three  degrees,  i.  4 ;  is
free,  127;  definitions  of,  440;  of  St.
John,  ii.  22.

Mason's  Lodge,  a  school  of  piety,  i.  8 ;  its
nature,  316;  marks,  345,  421,  426.

Macons  chevaliers,  ii.  8.

Master  Mason,  symbols  of  the  degree  of,
i.  167;  Lodges  of,  consecrated,  216;
degree  conferred  in  G.  Lodge,  ii.  5;  in
Israel,  122;  decorations  of,  122;  age  of
a,  130;  secrets  of  a,  153;  word  of  a,
157,  368;  explained,  262;  when  the
degree  was  divided,  670.

Maitres,  number  of  degrees  of,  ii.  66;
Ecossais,  130.

Masters  of  Lodges,  duties  of,  i.  43  ;  jewel
of,  illustrated,  189.

Mark  of  Cain  explained,  i.  56;  ii.  173;  of
the  workmen,  i.  401;  Master's  lecture,
411  ;  ii.  548  ;  use  of  the  degree  of,  i.
421  ;  duty  of  a,  433;  Masonry,  design
of,  ii.  126;  on  the  foreheads  of  the
elect,  475;  of  the  cross,  622;  of
Ezekiel,  622.

Manifesto  of  the  Gr.  Inspectors  General,  i.
4;  ii.  49;  of  the  Gr.  Master  of  France,  60.

Martin,  St.,  his  system  of  Masonry,  i.  23.

Martinists,  a  party  of  Masons  so  called,
ii.  59.

Mahomet  hates  the  Jews,  i.  115 ;  religious
ceremonies  of,  ii.  236.

Materials  of  the  temple,  value  of,  ii.  276.

Maceria,  the  name  of  a  Lodge,  ii.  11.

Madrid,  ancient  Lodge  at,  ii.  20  ;  Lodges
at  prohibited,  43;  Supreme  Council  at,
107.

Manes,  Freemasonry  attributed  to,  ii.  26.

Man,  a  symbol  of  benevolence,  ii.  157;  of
St.  Matthew,  568.

Malta,  the  Masons  persecuted  at,  ii.
44,  107.

Marseilles,  G.  Orient  of,  ii.  51  ;  Masonic
hall  at,  58;  number  of  Masons  at,  319.

Magic  introduced  into  Masonry,  ii.  62  ;
engraven  on  the  pillars  of  Ninus,  200 ;
amulets,  514  ;  arts  practised,  604.

Mangourit,  his  system  of  Masonry,  ii.  66.

Matheti,  an  eminent  Mason,  ii.  86.


Marriage  of  H.  A.B.,  ii.  151.

Magnificence  of  the  Temple,  ii.  266.
Majesty  of  God  displayed,  ii.  227.
Massachusetts,    legislature    of,    ii.     323;

number  of  Lodges  in,  324.
Maacha,  who,  ii.  375.
Matthew,     St.,    symbolized    by   a   man,

ii.  568.

Magicians  of  Egypt,  names  of  the,  ii.  601.
Maurice,  on  the  rod  of  Moses,  ii.  614.
Mallet,  the,  spiritualized,  ii.  627.
M.  C.  B.  I.,  meaning  of,  ii.  167.
Mediator,  tradition  of  a,  i.  387  ;  symbol

of  a,  ii.   481;    known  in  the  spurious

Freemasonry,  493.

Mesouraneo,  a  name  of  Masonry,  ii.  5.
Menatzchims,  council  of,  ii.  42.
Memphis,  nv^steries  of,  ii.  76,  100.
Members  of  the   Gr.  Council  of  Rites,   ii.

104  ;  human,  placed  under  the  signs,  364.
Mediterranean  pass,  its  use,  ii.  127.
Metals,  manufacture  of,  ii.   208  ;  cast  in

Zeredatha,  247.

Metallurgy  known  to  the  Druids,  ii.  216.
Mercy  seat,  its  signification,  ii.  291.
Membership  of  a  Mason,  ii.  315.
Mexican  gold,  279;  symbol,  ii.  481.
Miller,  reputed  murder  of,  i.  14.
Miracles  an  evidence  of  divine  power,  i.

50;  in  Babylon,  ii.  408  ;  of  Moses  and

Christ,  579.
Miracle  plays,   ceremonies  of    the    early

Masons    resemble    the,  ii.   17  ;    of  the

sacred  fire,  453.
Misletoe,  an  emblem  of  the   divine  triad,

i.  253.

Mishna  and  Talmud  of  the  Jews,  i.  395.
Middle  Chamber,  contents  of  the,  i.  456,

589.

Middleburg,  ancient  Lodge  at,  ii.  20.
Minorca,  nourishing  state  of  Masonry  in,

ii.  44.

Misadurenis,  a  system  of  Masonry,  ii.  60.
Mizraim,  Order  of,  ii.  74.
Mines  of  gold  in  Palestine,  ii.  421.
Minerva,  golden  statue  of,  ii.  279.
Michael,  St.,  his  victory  over  the  devil,

ii.  498.

Mitre,  the,  a  mystic  symbol,  ii.  533.
Moran,  Bro.,  his  opinion  of  Freemasonry,

i.  29;  of  Egyptian   Masonry,  138;  on

the  East,  203.
Most  Holy  Place,  the,  a  type  of  the  church

triumphant,  i.  48.

Most  Excellent  Master,  degree  of,  ex-
plained, i.  590 ;  ii.  127  ;  Holy  Stone,
situation  of  the,  433.

Moses,  his  knowledge  of  Egyptian  hiero-
glyphics, i.  72  ;  his  divine  commission,


740


GENERAL    INDEX    TO    THE    NOTES.


470  ;  and  Aaron,  Templary  traced  to,  ii.
24  ;  procures  timber  from  Lebanon,  112;
a  chemist,  239  ;  takes  off  his  shoes,
302;  slays  the  Egyptian,  463  ;  at  the
Burning  Bush,  467  ;  the  messenger  of
heaven,  560 ;  compared  with  Christ,
579;  mentioned  by  the  heathen,  600;
the  agent  of  mercy,  613.

Mosaic  pavement,  morality  of  the,  i.  143  ;
illustration  of,  219  ;  described,  445 ;
observations  on  the,  ii.  155  ;  chro-
nology examined,  477.

Moon,  female  rising  in  the,  i.  158;  likened
to  Isaac,  249;  rules  the  night,  487.

Mopses,  Order  of  the,  i.  179.

Moriah,  the  seat  of  the  Divine  presence,  i.
209;  the  place  where  Adam  was  born
and  Abel  sacrificed,  23.'!;  occurrences  on,
ii.  186;  caverns  in,  435.

Mountains,  the  abode  of  the  Deity,  i.  212;
worship  on,  332;  holy,  337;  consecrated
to  Jupiter,  338;  considered  sicred,  ii.
465.

Monad  and  Duad,  what  thev  represented,
i.  249.

Monasteries,  the    residence    of   craftsmen,

ii.  17.

Morin,  Bro.,  introduces  the  high  grades
into  the  New  World,  ii.  49;  appoints
his  officers,  51.

Molay,  inscription  on  the  tomb  of,  ii.  106.

Modern  pseudo  Mosonic  rites,  ii.  110.

Monument  of  a  Master  Mason,  ii.  146;  of
Abel,  173  ;  of  Osiris,  435  ;  inscribed,
462.

Monolith,  the  temple  like  a,  ii.  253;  cham-
ber, 460.

Moveable  jewels  of  the  temple,  ii.  275.

Montpellier,  number  of  Masons  at,  ii.  319.

Moral  perfection,  symbol  of,  ii.  357.

Motto  of  the  Templars,  ii.  480.

Mosque  of  Omar  built,  ii.  653.

Museum  and  library  commended,  i.  35.

Music  invented,  ii.  205;  by  Eve,  216.

Murmurings  of  the  Israelites,  ii.  563.

Mysteries  of  the  cabala,  what,  i.  35;  origin
of  the  name,  323;  of  Memphis,  ii.  76.

Mysterious  inscriptions,  ii.  3;  voyages  of
a  Master  Mason,  167.

Mystic  form  of  initiation  into  the  Vehmic
Order,  ii.  10;  Rose,  sacred,  116;  stone,
433;  nuptials  of  Christ  and  his  church,
523.

Mystical  reference  of  the  legends  of  Ma-
sonry, i.  55 ;  personages  of  the  heathen,
528.

Napthali,  tribe  of,  i.  314;  his  character,
ii.  595.


Names  of  the  princes  of  the  tubes,  i.
of  God,  536;  of  degrees,  changed,  ii.  7;
symbolical,  101;  of  the  Grand  Lodges
of  Germany.  106;  of  Lodges,  256.  ;>'27;
of  the  inen'able  degrees,  368;  expressive
of  the  Israelites,  469;  of  the  devil,  502;
of  three,  five,  seven,  and  nine  letters,
541;  of  the  Egyptian  magicians,  601.

Name  of  God,  the  protector  of  the  Israel-
ites, i.  470;  given  to  the  golden  calf,  ii.
232;  of  Jehovah,  a  mystery,  294,  537;
of  Masonry,  479;  on  the  mitre,  528;
preserved  in  the  R.  A.  550.

Namur,  rite  of,  ii.  89.

Naples,  Freemasonry  at,  ii.  107.

Native  iron  found,  ii.  207.

Natural  wisdom,  symbol  of,  ii.  254.

Nantes,  number  of  Masons  at,  ii.  319.

Nabihn.  institutions  of,  ii.  374.

Net \verk  of  the  pillars,  i.  449.

New  principles   introduced   into  Masonry,
ii.  7;  secrets.  8;  series  of,  33;  d<
90;   York.  Grand  Chapter  at,  51:
land.  Grand  Encampment  of.  ~>'2 ;  Hamp-
shire, number  of  Lodges  in,  324;  name,
629.

Newcastle,  Templary  at.  ii.  24.

Ne  plus  ultra,  what,'  ii.  128,  647.

Nebuchadnezzar  builds  Babylon,  ii.  402;
takes  the  vessels  from  the  temple,  406.

Neharda,  fraternity  of,  ii.  425.

Neptune's  trident  explained,  ii.  625.

Niobe,  fable  of,  i.  549.

Kilometre,  the,  ii.  633.

Nine,  a  mystical  number,  ii.  192;  arches
of  Enoch,  194;  descents  of  the  Deitv,
473.

Ninety  names  of  God,  ii.  541.

Nil  nisi  clavis  deest,  ii.  357.

Noah  and  the  stone  of  foundation,  i.  268;
procures  timber  from  Lebanon,  ii.  112;
explores  mount  Calvary,  203  ;  Dalrua-
dicus  on  the  Irish  degrees,  400.

Noachites,  degree  of,  explained,  i.  63;  Or-
der of,  described,  ii.  131.

Noachidae,  precepts  of  the,  i.  186,  387;
where  they  held  their  Lodges.  327 ;  the
name  of  primitive  Masons,  ii.  5.

Novelties  in  Masoniy  condemned,  i.  74.

North  Carolina,  number  of  Lodges  in,  ii.
324.

Novitiate  of  the  Templars,  ii.  15;  of  the
degree  of  Kadosh,  123.

Number,  odd,  propitious,  i.  248;  of  work-
men at  the  temple,  401;  seven,  510;
four,  521;  ten,  526;  of  the  degrees  of
Elu,  ii.  43;  of  degrees  in  France,  48;  of
degrees  of  Ecossais,  58 ;  three,  references
to  the,  226;  of  precious  stones  in  the


GENERAL  INDEX  TO  THE  NOTES.


741


temple,  269;  of  Lodges,  317,  328;  of
Masons  in  America,  325;  of  the  Sanhe-
drim, 541;  of  the  Israelites,  569.

Numbers,  doctrine  of,  inscribed  on  the  pil-
lars of  Enoch,  ii.  199.

Nymphs,  cave  of  the,  i.  339;  and  Knights
of  the  Rose,  ii.  69.

Oak,  the,  an  object  of  veneration,  i.  103,517.

Oath,  Paley's  opinion  of  an,  i.  10;  of  Py-
thagoras, 263;  in  the  Vehmic  Order,  ii.
77;  of  secresy,  370;  of  the  Most  High,
538.

Obligation,  unity  of  the,  i.  4,  312;  ii.  310.

Objections  against  Freemasonry,  i.  9.

Objects  of  Masonic  charity,  i.  136.

Object  of  the  German  union,  ii.  82 ;  of  the
Rose  Croix,  104;  of  the  E.  A  P.,  179.

Observations  on  the  Mosaic  pavement,  ii.
155.

Observances  of  the  Mosaic  law,  ii.  227.

Occult  Masonry,  ii.  46 ;  Lodges  opened  by
Scroepfer,62;  alphabets,  talismans  in,606.

O'Connor,  Bro.,  letter  from,  ii.  105.

Odd  numbers  propitious,  i.  248.

Offerings  to  David,  ii.  259,  266;  towards
the  building  of  the  temple,  450.

Officers  of  the  R.  A.  in  America,  i.  86;  of
David,  225;  duty  of  Masonic,  322;  of
Solomon,  430;  of  the  Red  Cross,  444;
of  the  degree  of  Chevalier  du  Soleil,  ii.
68  ;  of  female  Freemasonry,  71  ;  of
Lodges,  82  ;  of  the  Supreme  Council,
99;  of  the  Sublime  Knights  Elected,
337;  of  the  Prince  and  Chief  of  the
Tabernacle,  341;  o"f  Prince  Adept,  343;
of  the  R.  A.,  361  ;  of  Intimate  Secre-
taiy,  380.

Office  of  Grand  Master,  ii.  101.

Old  method  of  distinguishing  masons,  i.
139 ;  Landmarks  to  be  preserved,  ii.  307 ;
lectures  quoted,  583.

Olympus,  a  symbol  of  the  trinity  in  unitv,
i.  254.

Olives,  mount  of,  i.  339.

Olive,  its  symbolical  meaning,  ii.  134 ;
whether  the  Masonic  Cassia,  149;  highly
esteemed,  267.

Oliver,  the  Rev.  Bro.,  on  the  deliverance,
i.  355;  his  opinion  of  Freemasonry,  379.

Omnific  word,  the,  regained,  ii.  350.

Omar,  mosque  of,  built  on  the  site  of  Solo-
mon's temple,  i.  501;  ii.  653.

Operative  Masonry,  i.  5;  splendid  produc-
tions of,  347;  whence  derived,  408;  its
early  existence,  ii.  16.

Operative  Masons  take  refuge  in  Scotland,
ii.  13.

Opinions  of  H.  R.  H.  the  Duke  of  Sussex,


i.  6;  of  Freemasonry  in  the  American
Register,  19;  and  in  France,  131;  on
the  degree  of  Rose  Croix,  ii.  41.

Opening  of  the  Lodge,  i.  306 ;  of  the  Holy
Lodge,  ii.  218.

Ophir,  its  situation  considered,  i.  458;  gold
brought  from,  ii.  274.

Ophiolatreia  practised,  ii.  482.

Origin  of  geometry,  i.  81;  of  the  Hauts
Grades,  ii.  4 ;  of  the  name  of  Freemason,
5,  26;  of  Ramsay's  degrees,  31;  of  female
Lodges,  35,  71;  of  the  highest  degree,
52;  of  "  under  the  rose,"  8 1 ;  of  Masonry
according  to  Barruel,  177;  of  the  San-
hedrim, 427;  of  Jewish  tradition,  440;
of  signs,  483;  of  serpent  worship,  502;
of  the  rod  of  Moses,  599.

Oriental  custom  of  setting  up  stones,  i.  279.

Orders  and  degrees  explained,  i.  228;  num-
ber of,  ii.  9;  in  sublime  Masonry,  331;
of  Darius,  447;  of  angels,  472.

Order  of  the  Temple,  ii.  13;  its  statutes,
15;  at  Belfast,  23;  of  the  East,  deriva-
tion of,  24 ;  of  Fendeurs,  35 ;  of  Felicity,
72;  of  Mizraim,  74,  672;  of  the  Tem-
ple instituted,  94;  of  Christ,  114;  of  the
Christian  Mark,  115;  of  the  Cross,  121;
meaning  of,  328;  of  the  three  Principals,
428;  of  march,  573.

Organ  of  a  Lodge,  ii.  326.

Organization  of  the  R.  A.  in  America,  ii.
333;  of  a  Chapter  of  Prince  Masons,
344.

Oracle  of  Serapis,  i.  543;  furniture  of  the,
in  Solomon's  temple,  ii.  156.

Ormesius,  the  reputed  founder  of  the  Rose
Croix,  ii.  12.

Ornaments  of  a  Master  Mason's  Lodge,  ii.
156;  of  the  tabernacle,  222;  of  the  Ish-
maelites,  277.

Ordo  ab  Chao,  ii.  329.

O'Shaughnessy,  Bro,.  his  opinion  of  Ma-
sonry, i.  453.

Osiris,  death  of,  ii.  145;  killed  by  Typhon,
173;  the  same  as  Noah,  235;  symbol  of,
628.

Overseers  of  the  work,  i.  409.

Ox,  a  symbol  of  patience,  ii.  157;  and  of
St.  Luke,  568.

Oxen  symbolized  by  Solomon,  ii.  584.

Pass  words,  i.  5,  85;  of  the  Chevalier  du
Soleil,  ii.  63,  370.

Passing  the  Jordan,  i.  291;  the  chair  de-
scribed, ii.  129.

Patronage  of  Grand  Masters  to  Masonic
publications,  i.  34.

Parts  of  the  Cherubim  how  referred  to  in
Freemasonry,  i.  78.


742


GENERAL    INDEX    TO    THE    NOTES.


Past  Master,  how  designated,  i.  162;  his
jewel,  552;  object  of  the  degree  of,  ii.
128;  jewel  of,  explained,  158.

Padanaram,  Jacob  sent  to,  i.  270.

Palestine,  the  lawful  property  of  the  Trasel-
ites,  i.  222  ;  fruitfulness  of,  300 ;  ii.
428.

Paris,  ancient  Lodge  at,  ii.  20;  convention
of  Masons  at,  80,  83 ;  number  of  Masons
in,  319.

Pantomimic  exhibition  anciently  accompa-
nied initiation,  ii.  25.

Pantheistic  Brothers,  what,  ii.  30.

IVclial,  his  system  of  Freemasonry,  ii.  46.

Paintings  in  the  Masonic  hall  at  Marseilles,
ii.  58.

Paul,  St.,  his  proceedings  declared  irregular,
ii.  109.

Patrick,  Bishop,  on  the  cherubim,  ii.  296.

Pa»-c,  his  system  of  Masonry,  ii.  314.

Pagan  symbol  of  the  Cm-s  ii    C.'Jl.

Perjury  considered,  i.  10.

Perau,  Abbe,  his  exposure  of  FrcemaMinry
incorrect,  i.  22.

Pcleir  suimests  the  building  of  tin?  Tower
of  J5;,bel,  i.  63.

Perplexity  of  Abraham,  i.  212.

People,  the,  numbered,  i.  227.

Pedestal,  furniture  of  the,  i.  309.

Petit  Architecte,  degree  of,  noticed,  i.  534.

Petit  Klu  in  vented/ ii.  46.

Perfection,  degree  of,  explained,  i.  585;
Lodge  of,  described,  ii.  119;  emblems
of  the  degree  of,  338;  of  truth,  447;  of
virtue,  types  of,  521.

Perfect  Master,  formation  of  a  Lodge  of,  ii.
129;  wisdom,  symbol  of,  461;  justice,
emblem  of,  519.

Period  for  conferring  degrees,  ii.  5.

Perpetual  Grand  Master,  ii.  19.

Perpetuity  of  Masonry,  ii.  99.

Petition  from  the  island  of  Antigua,  ii.  38.

Perversion  of  Masonic  symbols,  ii.  39.

Persecution  of  the  Masons,  ii.  44.

Penalty  for  practising  Masonry,  ii.  43;  of
the  Vehmic  Order,  77.

Penalties  of  Freemasonry,  ii.  178.

Perlet,  his  system  of  Masonry,  ii.  47.

Pensylvania,  Grand  Orient  of,  ii.  51;  num-
ber of  Lodges  in,  324.

Pernetti,  his  system  of  Masonry,  ii.  54;
his  influence,  68.

Peuvret,  his  system  of  Masonry,  ii.  91.

Pelican,  a  symbol  of  Christ,  i.  75;  its  sig-
nification, ii.  104;  its  symbolical  mean-
ing, 134.

Penal  sign,  the,  explained,  ii.  158.

Peace,  emblem  of,  ii.  290.

Periods  of  Masonic  assembly,  ii.  325.


Pectoral,  a  symbol  of  the  church,  ii.  532.

Pentangle  of  Solomon,  the,  ii.  659.

Philosophical  apparatus  in  Lodges,  i.  5;
degrees,  165;  their  object,  ii.  73;  com-
mentaries on  the  lectures  recommended,
249;  Masonry,  what,  330.

Philosopher's  stone,  what,  i.  158.

Philosophy,  a  name  of  Masonry,  ii.  5;  of
Masonry,  what,  330.

Philaletes,  who,  i.  3-50;  the  regime  of  in-
troduction, ii.  •>">.

Philippian  Order  introduced,  ii.  19.

Philadelphia,  grand  Chapter  at,  ii.  51.

Pliienicians,  the,  teach  Pythagoras  mathe-
matics, ii.  -110.

Phcryllt,  the  lirst  teachers  of  the  art  in
Britain,  ii.  216.

Phallus,  the  tau  supposed  to  signify  a,  ii.
621.

Pillars  of  Enoch,  i.  59;  of  the  temple,  the
palladium  of  .Jewish  liberty,  73  ;  the
three,  explained,  155;  commei  lorative,
L'ii  1 ;  iiiM'ribed,  302;  of  the  temple,  1  IN;
references  of.  loll,  UiU  ;  of  Knocli  t

ii.  199;  Me  of.  :)99.

Pis^ah  mentioned,  i.  '.'>'•'>  i .
Pickaxe,  the,  spirituali/ed,  ii.  '\~>  1 .
Plumb-rule,  the,  explained,  i.  165;  spiritu-
ali/ed, ii.  6'J~.
Planets  compared   with   the   patriarchs,    i.

21!);  refer  to  the  metals,  524;  cruciform

H'/C-S  of  the,  ii.  626.
Platonic  bodies,  the,  ii.  617.
Places  of  initiation  in  Scotland,  ii.  21;  of

reward  and  punishment,  1'
Plan    of   the    liluminati,    ii'    71  ;    of  the

tabernacle,  222.
Politics  excluded  from  Masonic  Lodges,  i.

82,  148.
Powers,    Bro.    Blanchard,  his  opinion    of

Masonry,  i.  88.

Power  of  forming  Lodges,  ii.  26;  of  Solo-
mon, 271;  of  the  sacred  Name,  233,550;

of  Hiram,  symbol  of  the,   353  ;  of  the

Jews   in   Babylon,  410  ;    of  Zerubabel,

423.
Points,  three,  of  Masonic  institution,  i.  127;

of  resemblance  between  a  Lodge  and  the

temple  of  Solomon,  239.
Point  within  a  circle  explained,  i.  166, 168;

ii.  554,  627.
Porch  of  the  temple,  its  dimensions,  i.  447;

explained,  ii.  156.
Pot  of  incense,  a  symbol,  ii.  147;  of  manna,

meaning  of  the,  290.
Powerful  king,  symbol  of  a,  ii.  297.
Poland,  number  of  Masons  in,  ii.  318.
Potency  of  the  Word,  ii.  553;  of  the  rod

of  Moses,  615.


GENERAL    INDEX    TO    THE   NOTES.


743


Presiding  Officer,  the,  ought  to  be  a  man

of  talent,  i.  8.
Preston,  Bro.,  his  opinion  of  Masonry,  i.

31;  his  explanation  of  the  first  degree,

94;  on  the  third  degree,  ii.  2;  on  Ma-
sonic innovations,  8,  35.
Provost  Middlemas,  his  opinion  of  Masonry,

i.  34;  and  judge,  degree  of,  429;  origin

of  the  degree,  ii.  131.
Problems  sub  judice,  Freemasonry  of  the,

i.  37.
Promise  of  a  Saviour  in  Freemasonry,  i.

45;  ii.  180,  493;  to  Amram,  458.
Prayers  of  Masonry  offered  up  in  the  name

of  Christ,  i,  49.
Prayer  at  the  dedication  of  the  temple,  i.

197 ;    at  closing  the   Lodge,    316  ;    on

mountains,  efficacious,  331 ;  of  the  third

degree,  ii.  143 ;  of  Christian  Masons,  662.
Praying  towards  the  East,  i.  195.
Prussian  Knights,  degree  of,  explained,  i.

63;  ii.  131;  object  of  the  degree,  341.
Prussia  colonized  by  Peleg,  i.  63  ;  King

of,  adapts  Masonry  to  politics,  ii.  49  ;

establishes  the  thirty-third  degree,  53;

number  of  Masons  in,  318.
Prudence,  symbol  of,  i.  76.
Preservation  of  the  Landmarks,  i.  97.
Prison,  Masons  cannot  be  legally  initiated

in  a,  i.  111.
Preparation  of  the  candidate,  its  reference,

i.  134,  140,  307;  room,  ii.  325.
Presumed  astronomical  construction  of  Free-
masonry, i.  141.

Probation  of  the  candidate,  i.  147,  308.
Probations  of  the  spurious  Freemasonry,  ii.

6  ;  of  the  candidate,   84,   89  ;    of   the

third  degree,  167.

Prejudices  against  Freemasonry,  ii.  252.
Procul,  0  procul,  este  profani,  i.  331.
Processions,    directions   for,   ii.    289 ;   by

torch-light,  338.
Princes  of  the  tribes,  i.  430;  of  the  Royal

Secret,  ii.  50;  power  of,  447.
Prince  of  Jerusalem,  age  of  a,  ii.  130;  of

Mercy,  age  of  a,   130  ;    of  the  Royal

Secret  described,  131;  lecture  of,  quoted,

176;  Chapter  of,  292;  of  Masonry,  331.
Preservation  of  the  Landmarks,  ii.  2;  of

the  sacred  writings,  397.
Privileges  of  a  Fellowcraft,  ii.  5;  of  the

R.  S.  Y.  C.  S.,  17;  of  Freemasonry,  26.
Pre-eminence  of  Scottish  Masonry,  ii.  31.
Professions  of  Masonry  to  be  respected,

ii.  249.

Prohibition  of  the  Masons'  meetings,  ii.  43.
Prinzen  introduces  a  new  rite  into  Berlin,

ii.  49  ;  deputes  Rosa  to   propagate  his

degrees,  56.


P.  GK  M.  for  India  appointed,  ii.  50.

Provinces  of  the  Masonic  empire  enume-
rated, ii.  57.

Presumed  antiquity  of  the  high  degrees,
ii.  111.

Prometheus,  the  Master  of  a  Lodge,  ii.  207.

Precious  stones  of  the  Israelites,  ii.  225;
in  the  Temple,  267  ;  discovered,  267  ;
engraving  of,  513.

Preferment  the  reward  of  merit,  ii.  249.

Proclamation  of  Cyrus,  ii.  304.

President  Adams  tries  to  destroy  Free-
masonry, ii.  307.

Precedency  of  Lodges,  ii.  327.

Profound  mysteries,  ii.  348.

Protector  of  female  innocence,  what,
ii.  482,

Principles  of  a  chapter,  the,  ii.  505.

Pursuits  of  Masonry  explained,  i.  30.

Punishments  of  a  cowan,  i.  142;  of
David,  229  ;  of  disobedience,  ii.  103  ;
places  of,  166  ;  of  tho  assassins,  373;
of  the  Egyptians,  600.

Purification  of  a  candidate,  ii.  26.

Purity  of  Masonry  in  the  island  of
Minorca,  ii.  44 ;  sjnnbolized  by  white
ornaments,  143  ;  of  mind,  347 ;  of
heart,  symbol  of,  358,  508,  590.

Public  buildings  decorated,  ii.  267  ;  meet-
ings of  Lodges,  328.

Putting  off  the  shoes,  what  it  denotes,
ii.  471.

Pythagorean  charity,  anecdote  of,  i.  122  ;
symbols,  134  ;  allusions  to  the  number
three,  243  ;  triangle,  the,  ii.  358.

Pyramids,  vaults  under  the,  i.  364 ;  Arab
tradition  of  the,  ii.  201  ;  whether  they
were  built  before  the  flood,  217;  vaults
under  the,  438  ;  built  by  the  Israelites,
458.

Pyron,  his  system  of  Masonry,  ii.  89.

Qualifications  of  a  candidate,  i.  110  ;  of  a

W.  M.,  ii.  249  ;  in  Germany,  311.
Qualification  questions,  ii.  6.

Ramsay,  Lord,  his  opinion  of  Freemasonry,
i.  220.

Rainbow,  the,  a  symbol,  i.  268  ;  of  peace,
326  ;  its  effect  upon  the  Jews,  ii.  555.

Rank  of  the  R.  S.Y.C.S.,  ii.  17;  of
Lodges,  328.

Ranks  in  French  Masonry,  ii.  30.

Ramsay,  origin  of  his  degrees,  ii.  31  ;  an
agent  of  the  Stuarts,  33  ;  his  system  re-
jected, 33.

Raymond,  a  Masonic  impostcr,  ii.  79.

Recommendations  of  Masonry,  i.  10.

Resolutions  of    the   (i.   Chapter  of  Now


744


GENERAL    INDKX    TO    THE    NOTES.


York,  i.  18  ;    respecting  spurious  Grand
Lodges,  ii.  322.

Reinhold,  his  opinion  of  Masonry,  i.  25 ;
on  religions  Freemasonry,  ii.  425.

Revival  of  Masonry  in  America,  i.  31.

Resurrection,  the,  taught  in  tin-  degree  of
Knight  Templar,  i.  50 ;  of  Christ,  ii.
143,  293;  typified,  166,  175.

Refreshment  and  labour,  i.  82.

References  of  the  first  seven  degrees,  i.  95  ;
to  the  number  three  by  the  Je\vs,  I'll'  ;
by  Pythagoras,  243 ;  by  Freemasons,
244  ;  in  the  spurious  Freemasonry,  2  1  (i  ;
various  others,  246;  of  the  heathen
triads,  262;  of  Swedish  Masonry,  ii.
106;  of  the  sprig  of  co-i.i,  151;  of
the  penalties,  178  ;  to  the  number
three,  226 ;  of  the  ark,  290 ;  of  the
triple  alliance,  473.

Regalia, i.  162;  splendid,  introduced,  ii.  36.

Reasons  lor  .-ecre.-y,  i.  238.

Red,  a  symbolical  colour,  ii.  255.

Red  Cross  Kni-ht,  design  of  the  degree,
ii.  132;  of  Rome  and  Constantino  ex-
plained, 446.

Rewards  of  virtue,  ii.  2  ;  of  the  spurious
Freemasonry,  168 ;  of  the  Fellow-
Crafts,  261."

Reception  of  Prince  Edward,  ii.  40.

Regulations  of  Masonry  in  Germany,  ii.
77  ;  of  G.  Lodges  respecting  the  land-
marks, ii.  308.

Regent,  charge  in  the  degree  of,  ii.  78.

Report  of  a  Masonic  convention,  ii.  80.

Relics  of  Molay  produced,  ii.  94.

Revision  of  the  statutes,  ii.  102.

Regularity  to  be  encouraged,  ii.  250  ;  of
initiation,  308.

Repasts  of  Masons,  ii.  312.

Removal  of  Lodges,  ii.  328.

Rectitude  of  conduct,  symbol  of,  ii.
358,  590.

Rebuilding  of  Jerusalem,  ii.  653.

Rhode  Island,  Grand  Council  at,  ii.  51.

Rhea,  golden  statue  of,  ii.  283.

Roberts,  the  Rev.  Bro.,  his  opinion  of
Masonry,  i.  128;  on  the  G.  Lodge
above,  266.

Ribbans,  Bro.,  his  opinion  of  Masonry,  i.
175.

Ritual  of  the  Jews  governed  by  the  number
seven,  i.  520.

Rite  of  Memphis,  ii.  100.

Rites,  number  of,  ii.  9.

R.  S.  Y.  C.  S.,  Chapters  of,  i.  4;  rank  of,
ii.  17.

Rosicrucian  philosophy,  what,  ii.  42;  ex-
plained, 63.

Rose,   the,   a  symbol    of  silence,   i.    181;


Knights  and  Nymphs  of  the,  ii.  69;  a
type,  81 ;  mystical,  116;  of  Sharon,  348.

Rose  Croix,  whether  instituted  by  the
Templars,  ii.  12;  whence  derived,  41;
of  Germany,  46;  of  France,  47;  Cheva-
liers, 66;  antiquity,  81;  object  of,  104;
ad  of,  115;  explained,  133,  647;
customs  respecting  the,  339.

Rosa,  his  system  of  Masonry,  ii.  56.

Royal  Arch  included  in  the  third  degree,
i.  4;  sublime  nature  of  the,  86;  a  modern
degree,  ii.  18;  of  Ramsay.  '•>(;  its  sub-
limity, 133,  303;  Grand  Chapter  of,
324  ;  Tracing-board  explained,  348  ;
three,  drnives  of,  439;  anomalies  in,
449;  a  Christian  decree.  65S;  whether
the  third,  fourth,  or  seventh,  669;  when
lilished,  (i~0.

Royal   family  of  England   patronize  Free-
masonry, i.   21;    bodge,  the,   321;
change   commenced    by  Masons,   ii.   28;
Masters,  degree  of,  133  ;  Axe,  jewel  of

the,  444.

Rosenberg,  Bro.,  his  opinion  of  Masonry,
i.  382  ;  his  application  of  the  double
triangle,  531;  on  the  compasses,  ii.  158;
on  the  coHin.  1(>2;  his  arrangement  of
the  di'uTecs.  332;  on  the  fall  of  Adam,
•I'M.

Roman  and  Greek  colleges,  i.  42;  symbols,
160  ;  pontiffs  jealous  of  Freemasonry,
ii.  10.

Robinson,  Bro.,  his  opinion  of  Freemasonrv,
i.  70.

Rotterdam,  ancient  Lodge  at,  ii.  20.

Ro>Iyn  chapel,  legend  of,  ii.  24.

Rouen,  Grand  Chapter  at,  ii.  86.

Roll,  sacred,  commencement  of  the,  ii.  437,

Russell,  the  Rev.  Bro.,  his  opinion  of  Ma-
sonry, i.  83,  149;  ii.  305.

Rules  of  the  French  Lodges,  i.  126;  ancient
Masonic,  ii.  22;  of  the  Knights  Templar,
103;  of  the  cabala,  167.

RUDER,  a  name  of  the  Deity,  i.  544.

Russia,  number  of  Masons  in,  ii.  318.

Sacred  triangle,  i.  263  ;  Lodge,  the,  321 ;
ii.  247;  mountain,  tradition  of  a,  186;
name,  power  of  the,  233,  370;  shield,
the,  236;  fire,  243,  441;  chests  used  in
all  religions,  291;  law  found,  303;  num-
ber, the,  358 ;  word  in  the  ineffable  de-
grees, 366;  roll,  the,  388;  found,  453;
Name,  several  ways  of  pronouncing  the,
551.

Sanctity  of  hills  and  valleys,  i.  338;  sym-
bol of,  ii.  81.

Sanhedrim  appointed,  ii.  502  :  who  were
eligible  for  the,  426;  how  elected,  570.


GENERAL    INDEX    TO    THE    NOTES.


745


St.  Martin,  his  sj^stem  of  Masonry,  i.  23;
ii.  59;  schism  of,  312.

St.  John's  Masonry,  what,  i.  81;  an  Es-
senian  Freemason,  88,  167 ;  the  two,
old  illustration  respecting,  166;  why
called  parallels,  167;  whether  the  be-
ginning of  his  gospel  was  original,  ii.
437,  540;  symbolized  by  an  eagle,  568;
festival  of  644.

St.  Germain,  his  system  of  Masonry,
ii.  69.

St.  Victor,  his  system  of  Masonry,  ii.  120.

St.  Andrew,  probations  of  the  degree  of,
ii.  343.

St.  George  and  the  dragon,  ii.  481.

St.  Mark,  superstitions  respecting  his  fes-
tival, ii.  564 ;  symbolized  by  a  lion,  568.

St.  Francis,  stigmata  of,  ii.  659.

Sanctum  sanctorum,  the  ark  placed  in  the,
i.  83  ;  mystery  of,  explained,  ii.  295.

Saxony,  ancient  Lodge  at,  ii.  18.

Savalette,  his  system  of  Masonry,  ii.  74.

Sagacity,  symbol  of,  ii.  297.

Sambatyon,  the  river,  ii.  394.

Samaritan  Tau,  the,  ii.  619.

Saraph,  what,  ii.  486.

Sashes  of  the  Royal  Arch,  ii.  511.

Sciences  hidden  in  the  Pyramids,  ii.  201;
protected  by  talismans,  202.

Scientific  architecture,  i.  5 ;  association
overawed,  6  ;  Masonry,  ii.  42.

Sceptre,  the,  its  signification,  i.  69 ;  a
mark  of  dignity,  ii.  534  ;  of  Judah,
581  ;  meaning  of  the,  641.

Scotch  clans  resemble  the  tribes  of  Israel,
i.  304  ;  Master,  catechism  of  the  de-
gree of,  352,  511;  Templary,  ii.  13;
Masonry,  pre-eminence  of,  31  ;  frater-
nization of,  41  ;  knight,  age  of  a,  130  ;
Trinitarian,  degree  of,  131 ;  Fellow-
Craft,  Lodge  of  described,  134  ;  knight-
hood, degrees  of,  507.

Scotland,  Masonry  introduced  into,  ii.
10  ;  number  of  Masons  in,  318  ;  dis-
countenances the  high  degrees,  321.

Scroeder,  his  system  of  Masonry,  ii.  62.

Schemes  of  illuminism,  ii.  88.

Scribes,  origin  of  the,  ii.  428;  copy  the
scriptures,  451.

Scriptures,  the,  restored  by  Ezra,  ii.  45 1_

Secret  signs  at  the  building  of  the  temple,
i.  403;  societies  among  the  Phoenicans,
alphabet,  421  ;  society  of  Tyrians,  433  ;
of  secrets,  543  ;  Master,  degree  of,  545;
ceremonies,  ii.  12  ;  sign  of  the  Order  of
Bruce,  17 ;  Master,  age  of  a,  130 ;
charge  delivered  to  a,  134;  sword  of
Masonry,  175,  333  ;  Master,  degree  of,
explained,  242 ;  vault  found,  303 ;
VOL.  II.


knowledge  carried  to  Jerusalem,  425;
passages  in  heathen  temples,  529;
name  known  to  the  angels,  539;  so-
cieties, 617.

Secrets,  academy  of,  i.  6  ;  the  true,  cannot
be  disclosed,  10  ;  use  of,  11  ;  said  to  be
betrayed,  24;  to  be  kept  sacred,  32;
of  the  Craft,  42,  272;  Locke's  opinion
of  the,  87  ;  never  communicated,  186  ;
of  a  M.  M.,  ii.  153;  withheld  from
Adam,  483  ;  of  Egyptian  sorcerers,  604.

Secresy,  divine  precepts  respecting,  i.  34  ;
illustrated  185  ;  reasons  for,  238  ;
necessity  of,  344;  of  the  Craft,  350;
uses  of,  353  ;  recommended,  390  ;  en-
joined by  Ramsay,  ii.  32;  in  Illuminism,
80  ;  symbol  of,  339.

Seal  of  the  Grand  Lodge,  impression  of  the,
i.  68  ;  of  Solomon,  legend  of  the,  416  ;
what  it  was,  ii.  356,  659  ;  of  the  name
of  God,  404  ;  of  the  Apocalypse,  619.

Serpent  and  Tau  Cross  explained,  i.  80  ;
of  Egypt,  ii.  480  ;  rites  practised  by
females,  480  ;  usurps  the  divine  image,
486  ;  worship,  501  ;  and  Tau,  a  symbol
of  Christ,  575  ;  charmers  of  Egypt,  605 ;
of  the  magicians,  613.

Seven  stepped  ladder,  i.  171;  stars  ex-
plained, 173  ;  manifestations  of  the
Deity,  328  ;  things  created  on  the  first
sabbath,  513;  seals,  525;  liberal  sciences
on  the  pillars  of  Enoch,  ii.  199  ;  pillars,
348  ;  on  the  tomb  of  Osiris,  435  ;  pair
of  pillars  support  a  gallery,  436 ;  eyes.,
stone  with,  449.

Septenaries,  the  three  great,  i.  526.

Second  degree,  preliminary  ceremonies  of
the,  i.  399  ;  temple,  the,  ii.  431  ;  time
of  building  the,  449  ;  chronology  of  the,
452.

Select  Master,  degree  of,  its  importance,
ii.  7  ;  explained,  135.

Several  Orders  of  female  Masonry  named,
ii.  70.

Seniority  of  Lodges,  ii.  328.

Setting  maul,  spiritualized,  ii.  627.

Sharp,  Bro.,  his  opinion  of  the  symbols,
i.  76,  124;  on  the  connexion  between
Masonry  and  religion,  206.

Shovel,  the,  spiritualized,  ii.  354.

Six  centuries  unaccounted  for,  i.  4;  periods
of  the  Great  Architect,  45,  476.

Signs  and  symbols,  i.  123  ;  or  grips,  348  ;
of  secret  societies,  414 ;  preceding  the
influx  of  the  Nile,  547;  and  words
used  by  the  Masons  of  Strasburg,  ii.  12;
of  the  zodiac,  199  ;  words  and  tokens,
259  ;  and  symbols  of  Pythagoras,  413  ;
of  the  name  of  God,  54. "5 ;  of  the  cross,  621.
3  P


746


GENERAL    INDEX    TO    THE    NOTES.


Situation  of  the  Lodge,  i.  194.

Site  of  the  temple  revealed,  i.  231.

Sinai,  encampment  of  mount,  ii.  221  ;
difficult  of  access,  230.

Similarity  of  working  recommended,  ii.  326.

•Simeon,  the  Rev.  C.,  on  the  dispersion  of
the  Jews,  ii.  656.

Simon  Magus,  his  performances,  ii.  607.

Signature  of  a  R.  A.  Mason,  ii.  632.

Singular  interpretation  of  Masonic  words,
ii.  666.

Skull,  origin  of  the  name,  ii.  157.

Skirret,  explained,  ii.  15S.

Skill  of  H.  A.  B.,  symbol  of  the,  ii.  3-33.

Slaves  cannot  he  initiated,  i.  110.

Slade.  Dr..  liis  opinion  that  our  system  of
Masonry  is  Christian,  ii.  665.

Snewing,  Bro.,  his  opinion  of  unworthy
Brothers,  i.  150  ;  of  the  Christianity  of
Masonry,  346  ;  of  the  Tan.  ii.  036.

Social  intercourse  inculcated  Ity  Free-
masonry, i.  2.  10.

Solomon,  mysterious  knowledge  of,  i.  •'>•')  ;
his  temple,  241  ;  practises  the  spurious
Freemasonry,  337  ;  employs  the  Tynans
404;  connexion  with  the  Egyptians,
415;  his  private  vault,  588;  n.  264;
his  extensive  dominion,  i.  589  ;  idolatry
of,  ii.  189;  instructs,  258;  conceals
certain  treasures,  260  ;  his  power,  271  ;
his  commercial  undertakings,  288 ;
whether  he  repented,  386 ;  the  ark
hidden  in  his  vault,  441.

South  wick,  his  abuse  of  Freemasonry,  i.
237.

Sources  of  operative  Masonry,  i.  408  ;  of
the  Nile  a  secret,  556.

South  Carolina,  number  of  Lodges,  ii.  324.

Sovereign  lights,  what,  ii.  555.

Spirit  of  inquiry,  i.  2,  264  ;  of  Masonry,
what,  ii.  27.

Spurious  Freemasonry,  references  in  the,
i.  245  ;  preparation  of  the  candidate  in,
307  ;  held  its  meetings  in  caverns,  319  ;
why  instituted,  390  ;  practised  by  the
Jews,  566  ;  initiations  of  terrible,  567  ;
probations  of  the,  ii.  G ;  on  a  future
state,  142 ;  invented,  212 ;  Grand
Lodges,  evils  of,  322  ;  in  Judea,  385  ;
Moses  initiated  into  the,  603.

Sprig  of  Acacia,  i.  430 ;  a  significant
sy^mbol,  ii.  148  ;  an  emblem  of  life,  151 ;
represents  the  cross  of  Christ,  177  ;  a
name  of  Masonry.

Splendid  regalia  introduced,  ii.  36.

Speculative  temple  built,  ii.  254.

Spheres,  the,  ii.  256.

Sphere  of  love,  ii.  618.

Square,   Masons   part   on   the,  i.  131  ;  its


signification,  161  ;  stone,  an  emblem  of
virtue,  l(!i;  a  symbol  of  duty,  189;
of  a  square,  190;  an  emblem  of  justice.
•"••13  ;  and  compasses  conjoined,  ii.  12  ;
morality  of  the,  254  ;  figure,  559.

Squaring  the  stones,  i.  437.

Stone,  Colonel,  his  prediction  respecting
the  dissolution  of  Freemasonry,  i.  11;
his  letters  on  .Masonry,  13;  his  funeral
oration  on  -Masonry,  27";  his  opinion  of
the  first  degree,  94  ;  compares  Free-
masons with  the  buccaneers,  13(5;  on
the  emblems  of  the  first  decree,  161  ;
on  the  opening  of  the  Lodge,  306  ;  on
.Masonic  regularity,  ii.  251;  on  the
R.  A.,  350.

Stone,  cubical,  legend  of  tin.  .  ~>  1 ;  of
foundation,  -i>7  ;  a  talisman,  272;
idols,  worship  of,  278;  circles,  294,  296;
of  foundation  placed  in  the  tern  >le,  459  ;
ancient,  inscribed  with  Masonic  em-
blems, ii.  23  ;  brought  by  the  Templars
from  the  Holy  Land,  47  ;  pavement  ex-
plained, 156  ;  of  foundation  deposited
by  Enoch.  I'.).;  ;  in  the  possession  of
Moses,  220  ;  conclave,  427  ;  with  seven
eyes,  449.

Stonehengc  supposed  to  be  built  by  the
Tyrians,  i.  410  ;  temple  of,  mentioned,
ii.  240.

Star  in  the  east,  the,  i.  86,  94,  202  ;  of
Remphan,  ii.  230 ;  and  burning  bush,
371 ;  of  the  Templars,  480  ;  the  re-
sidence of  the  Deity,  481  ;  of  prophecy,
578.

Stevens,  Bro.,  his  lines  on  charity,  i.  172.

Study  of  Freemasonry,  how  useful,  i.  266.

Staves  or  rounds  of  the  ladder,  i.  274  ;  in
the  R.  A  ,  origin  of,  ii.  359.

Strasburg,  Masons  at,  i.  345  ;  ii.  11,  18.

Stirling,  encampment  at,  ii.  13;  ancient
Lodge  at,  20.

Statutes  of  Scottish  Templary,  ii.  15,  102.

Strict  Observance,  titled  members  of  the,
ii.  56.

Standard  of  the  cross,  ii.  122.

Standards  of  the  tribes,  ii.  567  ;  of  the
Germans,  571.

Steps  of  the  temple,  ii.  261.

Station  of  the  ark  in  processions,  ii.  291.

Style  of  a  Grand  Consistory,  ii.  345.

Sublime  figure  of  the  Divinity,  i.  5;  de-
grees of  Masonry,  when  formed,  ii.  8 ;
refer  to  the  earliest  ages,  389.

Sun  worship  of  Egyptians,  i.  138  ;  rising,
the  Romans  worshipped  at  the,  197 ;
rising,  southing,  and  setting,  199 ;  ii.
301  ;  likened  to  Abraham,  i.  249  ;  rules
the  day,  487  ;  a  place  of  punishment.


GENERAL    INDEX    TO    THE    NOTES.


541 ;  and  moon  darkened,  ii.  116  ;  the
cherubim  referred  to,  296.

Sum  given  by  David  for  the  threshing
floor,  i.  233.

Support  of  the  Lodge,  i.  236.

Superb  edifices  of  Masons,  i.  591.

Superstitions  observed  at  the  rising  of  the
Nile,  i  555 ;  of  the  Jews,  ii.  535 ;  of
the  Egyptians,  608.

Superiority  of  the  Lodge  at  Strasburg,  ii.
18  ;  of  the  temple  of  Solomon,  271.

Supreme  tribunal,  ii.  42 ;  council  at  Charles-
town,  93,  108,  324;  officers  of  the,  99;
style  of  the,  108.

Sub  rosa,  origin  of  the  phrase,  ii.  81.

Suclermania,  duke  of,  creates  a  new  order,
ii.  107.

Superintendent  Scotch  Master,  what,  ii.  120.

Superexcellent  Master,  degree  of.  why
founded,  ii.  137.

Subterranean  vaults  in  Persia,  ii.  194;
discovered,  436  ;  passage  renewed  by
Zerubabel,  439.

Susa,  palace  of,  plundered,  ii.  284.

Sumnaut,  golden  altar  of,  ii.  285.

Submission  to  authority  recommended,  ii.
351.

Sweden,  Freemasonry  in,  i-  383  ;  number
of  Masons  in,  ii.  318.

Swedish  Masonry,  its  reference,  ii.  106.

Sword,  naked,  opposed  to  the  candidate,
ii.  6 ;  and  trowel,  connexion  between,
14;  and  heart  explained,  154;  and
troAvel  explained,  353.

Swabia,  ancient  Lodge  at,  ii.  18.

Switzerland,  Masonry  prohibited  in,  ii.  19;
number  of  Masons  in,  318.

Swedenborg,  his  system  of  Masonry,  ii.  55.

Symbols  in  the  antediluvian  world,  i.  56  ;
of  the  deluge,  62 ;  learning  concealed
under,  122  ;  types,  124;  explained,  125;
method  of  instruction  by,  133  ;  of
Pythagoras,  134,  144;  of  an  E.  A.  P.,
163;  of  a  M.  M.,  168  ;  of  the  Grand
Superintcndant,  431 ;  of  God's  presence,
462;  of  Freemasonry  perverted,  ii.  39  ;
of  Jesuitical  Masonry,  the  object  of,  39;
in  the  temple  of  Tentyra,  163;  of  the
treatment  of  Christ  before  his  death,
176;  in  the  temple  of  Hercules,  270  ;
very  instructive,  329  ;  of  the  degree  of
Perfect  Master,  336,  468 ;  of  fire,  469  ;
of  the  sacred  name,  546  ;  used  by  ido-
laters, 621  ;  repositories  of  the  Christian
scheme,  667;  of  the  French  Koyal
Arch,  29;  of  Christ,  104;  of  the
Christian  faith,  628.

Symbolism,  instruction  of,  ii   499.

System  of  llamsiiy,  ii.  33;  of  Huiule,  45;


of  Fessler,  53  ;  of  Swedenborg,  55  ;  of
Mark  Masonry,  126  ;  of  the  R.  A.,  ex-
plained, 669.
Systems,  Masonic,  vary  in  numbers,  ii.  88.

Tan  Cross  and  serpent  explained,  i.  80,  81  ;
of  Ezekiel,  ii.  534  ;  at  Thebes,  630.

Tannehill,  Bro.,  his  opinion  .of  Masonry,
i.  20  ;  on  the  landmarks,  41,  97  ;  on
Masonic  charity,  265.

Tabernacle,  symbols  in  the,  i.  135;  placed
due  east  and  west,  138  ;  why  so  placed,
195;  dedicated,  196;  building  of  the,
ii.  218;  plan  of  the,  222;  a  type  of
Christianity,  223  ;  and  of  the  creation,
240  ;  carried  in  the  wilderness,  291  ;
compared  to  the  heavens,  301 ;  feast  of
the,  640.

Taylor,  his  interpretation  of  Faith,  Hope,
and  Charity,  i.  171.

Tessellated  border,  the,  i.  174.

Tabor,  mount,  Order  of,  ii.  66.

Tartary,  Masonic  remains  in,  ii.  185.

Tetragrammaton  delivered  to  Moses,  i.  68  ;
its  reference,  523;  desecrated,  ii.  406;
the,  537,

Ten  sovereign  lights,  i.  68;  the  number,
263 ;  Orders  of  celestial  beings,  165  ;
connected  with  seven,  526  ;  tribes,
where  carried,  ii.  392  ;  several  of  them
return  to  Jerusalem,  426 ;  symbol  of,  638.
Temple,  by  what  supported,  i.  84;
symbols  in  the,  125;  prayer  at  the  de-
dication of,  197;  of  Tyre,  pillar  in  the,
443  ;  allegorized,  582;  of^love,  female
Lodges  so  called,  ii.  69  ;  of  Vulcan,  206;
of  Solomon,  said  to  have  been  put  to-
gether by  angels,  253  ;  and  Lodge
compared,  258 ;  spiritualized,  261 ;  of
Hercules  at  Tyre,  270  ;  of  Solomon  de-
scribed, 650  ;  church,  double  triangle
in,  659.

Templars,  Order  of  instituted,  i.  342 ;
were  Freemasons,  ii.  10  ;  revive  Free-
masonry in  Europe,  11  ;  G.  M.  of  the,
13;  whether  they  instituted  the  Rose
Croix,  12;  summoned  to  appear,  16;
and  hospitallers  agree,  20 ;  use  the
symbol  of  a  double  triangle,  23.

Templary,  amalgamated  with  the  Rose
Croix,  ii.  24;  Avhence  deduced,  24.

Tcmplum  Hierosolymae,  ii.  632.

Tenison,  Bro.,  his  opinion  of  Masonry,  i.  140.

Technical  terms  in  female  Lodges,  ii.  112.

Tentyra,  symbols  in  the  temple  of,  ii.  168.

Testimonies  that  our  system  of  Freemasonry
is  Christian,  ii.  663.

Threats  of  the  anti-Masonic  State  Conven-
tion, i.  16.


748


GENERAL  INDEX  TO  THE  NOTES.


Third  heaven  of  philosophical  Masonry,  i.
335;  Grand  Offering,  578;
cellence  of,  ii.  165 ;  misrepresented  bv
Barruel,  181.

Thirty-third  derive  established,  ii.  53.
Theological  Society  instituted  liy  St.  John,

i.  88;  bidder  explained,  173.
Theocracy,  its  nature,  i.  296,  669;  tin-,  ii.
505.

Theosophy  in  the  high  degrees,  ii.  62.

Thnringia,  ancient  Lodge  at,  ii.  IS.

Thrice  puissant  of  the  degree  of  Prince
Adept,  ii.  343.

Time  of  the  It.  A.,  ii.  350;  of  the  plagues,
(ill.

Titles,  spurious,  conferred  on  the  contii
ii.  42.

Tilly,  de  Grasse,  his  extensive  Masonic
power,  ii.  lO'.l.

Town,  the  Kev.  Bro.,  his  opinion  of  .Ma-
sonry, i.  •")  1 ;  refen  to  the  ih--t  degree,
\>-~>;  confounds  the  degrees  of  Masonry,
ii.  101);  defcii'  :  on  the  Sacred

Name,  6

Tool>.  >ymlMilical,  i.  160.

Torpliieheii,  Lord.  ha.-  a  grant  of  the  Tem-
plars' property,  ii-  -1.

Tomb  of  Jl.  A  B.,  ii.  369;  of  Daniel,  430.

Tombs  «it'  the  Kgyptians,  places  of  initia-
tion, ii.  lli'J.

Toulouse,  numher  of  Lodges  in,  ii.  319.

Truth  and  light  diii'iiM-d.  i.  '.'>:  the  mother
of  virtue,  101;  symbol  of,  I!'1-';  amoral
virtue,  252;  other  symbols  of,  ii.  160,
255,  353;  represented,  258;  of  faith
symboli/.ed,  3-37:  the  perfection  of,  447.

True  secrets,  the.  cannot  be  revealed,  i.  10;
religion  practised  by  Abraham,  100  ;
pronunciation  of  the  Name  lost,  ii.  550.

Traditions  of  the  Jews,  i.  124;  in  Pheni-
cian  mythology,  214  ;  respecting  the
Master  Masons,  424  ;  respecting  the
wages,  435;  of  the  stylus  of  H.  A  B.,
458.

Tradition  of  the  introduction  of  Masonry
into  Scotland,  ii.  10  ;  of  the  places  of
initiation,  21;  of  H.  A  B.,  151;  before
the  flood,  185;  in  the  ineffable  degrees,
367;  Jewish,  origin  of,  440;  respecting
the  stone  of  foundation,  549;  of  Lamech,
ii.  172;  of  the  pyramids,  201;  of  the
temple,  253;  of  treasures  concealed  by
Solomon,  260;  of  the  foot-stone,  263,
439;  of  the  temple  built  by  genii,  264;
of  the  topaz,  268;  of  the  temptation  of
Solomon,  271 ;  of  the  cost  of  the  temple,
275;  of  the  meeting  of  Hiram  and  Solo-
mon, 380;  of  Nebuchadnezzar,  403;  of
the  hiding  of  the  ark,  404;  of  the  Jewish


chains,  406;  of  the  pavement  ot  the  '

place,   432;  of  Moriah,  -i3-">;   of

463;   of  the    tree    of  life,    4SS;    of  the

rdn  of  F.den,  491;  of  Noah.  •>  1
the  well  at  Beer,  566;   of  Balaam's  pro-
phi  i  , .  t'll't:  of  a  third  temple,  (>3:>;  of
the  vale  of  Jehoshaphat.  '•
Traditional  history  of  Masonry,  i.  185.
Tracing-hoard,  its  use,  i.   132:   ancient

••iaim-d,  1  '.V,];  of  the  Mo;
17!':   of  a    Fellowcraft   illust:
of  the   Lodge  altered,  ii.    H;   of  the  de-
gree of  the  Chevalier  du  Soleil.  •
tomsofthe,    1.32;   of  an  lntim:r
tary,  381.

place  in  :        :  .  i.  188.

Trinity  in  unity,  i.  '2  17;  whether  the  liothen
.nee  to  the,  '2.  '>•'>  ;  the
Christian,  ii.  -I  :   doctrine  of  the.
Triad    S..  China,    i.    2,37  ;    of  the

Druid-,  iL  62

Triads  of  ivitv.  i.  253,  256,  260;  refer.
562.

Tria

Triple  alliance,  i.  HO;  triangle,  the,  ii.  117:
an  emblem,  339;  tan  explained.  '.'>•'>*,  61  7  ;
alliance,  the,  473;   of  the  lectures  032;
not    before    the   advent   of   ('hi
whether  it  be  a  Jewi.-h  symbol,  '

Trowel  and  sword  explained,  »i.  1  1.

Travr-tv    of  the   ceremonies   of  initiation,
ii.  40.

Trust  in  the  fraternity,  ii.  49.

Turin-r.  the  Kev.  Hro.,  on  Freemasonry,  ii.
140;   on  the  secrets,  253.

Transmigration  of  souls,  ii.  177.

Transmission  of  Fr<  y  after  the  de-

struction of  the  temple,  ii.  (i-31.

Treaty  of  confederation  quoted,  ii.  310.

Tschoudy,  his  system  of  Masonry,  ii.  58.

Tsadikim,  a  Jewi.-h  sect,  ii.  409.

Tubal  Cain,  account  of,  i.  57;  an  instructor
in   brass  and   iron,   ii.    20-3  ;    identi
with  Vulcan,  206;  discovers  the   u-e  of
fire,  211.

Turkey,  Masonic  remains  in,  ii.  185;  num-
ber of  Lodges  in,  318.

Turquoise,  virtues  of  the,  ii.  522.

Twenty-four  inch  guage  explained,  i.  180.

Twelve  original  points,  i.  287;  signs  in  the
degree  of  Grand  Pontiff,  288;  hton.
Jordan,  295 ;  apostles  symbolized,  ii.  433 ;
cabalistic  names,  541;  tribes  registered,
559;  a  perfect  number,  567;  tribes  num-
bered, 569.

Typical  figures,  i.  57.

Types,  use  of,  i.  123.

Tyre  traded  to  the  Indies,  i.  418;  its  present
state,  418.


GENERAL    INDEX    TO    THE    NOTES.


749


Tyrian  Masons,  the,  i.  403;  employed  by
Solomon,  404 ;  introduce  Freemasonry
into  Europe,  413;  excellent  mechanics,
419;  invented  navigation,  425;  science
of  the,  ii.  257 ;  assist  the  Jews,  449 ;
coin  of  the,  480.

Tytler,  Bro.,  on  the  Name,  ii.  556..

Universe,  the  temple  of  the  Deity,  i.  79;
compared  to  a  triangle,  446.

Universality  of  Masonry,  i.  61;  ii.  302.

Union,  articles  of,  quoted,  i.  4;  amongst
Masons  proposed,  ii.  61;  between  the
Grand  Orient  and  the  Supreme  Council
93;  violated,  94,  105;  symbol  of,  587.

Unity  of  the  obligation,  i.  4  ;  recommended,
ii.  9 ;  and  strength,  symbol  of,  427.

United  States,  Freemasonry  in  the,  i.  20.

Uniformity  of  Masonry,  i.  126;  recom-
mended ii.  326.

Unworthy  reasons  for  Masonry,  ii.  66.

Undefiled  religion  in  Freemasonry,  ii.  306.

Upper  Egypt,  gold  mines  of,  ii.  277;  Ca-
nada, number  of  Lodges  in,  324.

Urim  and  Thummim,  how  used,  i.  79 ;
derivation  of,  ii.  526 ;  a  symbol  of  Christ,
532.

Uriel  the  archangel  teaches  Enoch,  ii.  193.

Use  of  Masonic  secrets,  i.  11 ;  of  the  Tracing-
board,  132;  of  fire  unknown  after  the
flood,  ii.  210;  of  pillars,  399.

Usages  of  the  Masons,  i.  383;  of  the  Order
ofH.R.  D.  M.,  ii.  17.

Useful  improvements  ought  to  be  encou-
raged, ii.  9.

Usurpations  of  the  Grand  Orient,  ii.  91.

Utopian  plan  of  Knigge,  ii.  61.

Vault  under  Mount  Calvary,  i.  586 ;  secret,

of  Solomon,  588 ;  under  the  mosque  of

Omar,  588.
Vaults  under  the  city  of  Alexandria,  i.  559;

under  the  temple,  ii.   436  ;   under  the

pyramids,  438  ;   renewed  by  Zerubabel,

439;  and  found  by  Herod,  439.
Various  references  to  the  number  three,  i.

246.

Variety  in  the  ineffable  degrees,  ii.  376.
Valley  of  Hinnom,  i.  340  ;  of  Peace,  ancient

Lodge  so  called,  ii.  19.
Valleys,  lowest  of,  i.  317  ;  of  the  spurious

Freemasonry,  322.
Valenciennes  Masons,  ii.  5.
Vast  number  of  degrees,  ii.  9.
Veneration  for  the  temples  of  the  Deity,  i.

84  ;  for  the  septenary  number,  ii.  513.
Vesica  piscis  explained,  i.  259  ;  a  symbol

of  Christ,  422.
Vehmic  Order,  the,  ii.  10  ;  initiation  into,


described,  77  ;  secrets  of,  never  revealed,
78.

Venice,  ancient  Lodge  at,  ii.  20.

Vestiges  of  Freemasonry  in  ancient  Mexico,
ii.  185.

Veil  of  the  tabernacle,  ii.  224.

Veils,  disposition  of,  in  a  R.  A.  Chapter,
ii.  360.

Vessels  of  gold  and  silver  in  the  temple,  ii.
275 ;  sacred,  carried  away  by  Titus,  G52.

Vermont,  number  of  Lodges  in,  ii.  324.

Visions,  belief  in,  i.  104  ;  of  Abraham,  211 ;
of  Elijah,  389  ;  the  four  great,  527.

Vision  of  Constantino,  ii.  132,  of  Enoch,
191 ;  of  Ezekiel,  434 ;  of  Amram,  458  ;
of  Balaam,  577  ;  of  the  magicians,  610.

Vienna,  ancient  Lodge  at,  ii.  19.

Victor,  St.,  his  system  of  Masonry,  ii.  120.

Virtue  and  fraud  contrasted,  i.  39  ;  a  god-
dess, how  depicted,  164 ;  unites  what
death  cannot  part,  ii.  119;  of  crystal
stones,  514  ;  of  the  emerald,  519  ;  of  the
Pectoral,  531 ;  of  the  rod  of  Moses,  615.

Virtues  of  an  E.  A  P.,  i.  414.

Viany,  his  system  of  Masonry,  ii.  313.

Virginia,  number  of  Lodges  in,  ii.  324.

Violent  death,  symbol  of,  ii.  461.

Vishnu  compared  with  Moses,  ii.  464.

Virgula  divina,  what,  ii.  601

Volupia,  a  goddess  of  silence,  i.  148.

Voltaire,  his  opinion  of  the  seven-stepped
ladder,  i.  171.

Volney,  his  derivation  of  Masonry,  i.  318.

Vocabulary  of  female  Lodges,  ii.  36.

Voyages,  mysterious,  of  a  Master  Mason,
ii.  167.

Voice  of  God  audible,  ii.  221.

Vote  of  censure  on  spurious  Grand  Lodges,
ii.  322.

Washington,  General,  his  opinion  of  Free-
masonry, i.  10 ;  Supreme  Council  at,  ii.
109.

Watson,  the  Rev.  Bro.,  his  opinion  of  Ma-
sonry, i.  61 ;  on  the  corner  stone,  439 ;
on  the  third  degree,  ii.  142  ;  on  Christian
Masonry,  180.

Waterhouse,  Bro.,  his  opinion  of  Freema-
sonry, i.  123.

Waters  of  the  Red  Sea  drowned  the  Egyp-
tians, i.  376;  of  the  Nile,  how  used,  555.

Wages  of  the  craftsmen,  how  paid,  i.  427 ;
traditions  respecting,  435;  of  the  different
classes,  436;  amount  of  the,  ii.  275.

Ward,  on  the  high  degrees,  ii.  323.

Walls  of  Jerusalem  rebuilt,  ii.  452.

Watch  and  abstain  from  evil,  ii.  657.

Weishaupt,  his  opinion  of  Freemasonry,  i.
26  ;  his  character,  27  ;  his  system,  ii.  78.


750


GENERAL    INDEX    TO    THE    NOTES.


Weaving  known  to  the  Israelites,  ii.  224.

Well,  truth  at  the  bottom  of  a,  i.  164 ;  of
souls,  ii.  435.

Wells  of  Solomon,  ii.  379.

Webb,  Bro.,  on  the  ineffable  degrees,  ii.
366;  on  the  the  duty  of  a  High  Priest,
504.

Weeping  virgin,  a  symbol,  ii.  146.

Wealth  of  the  Roman  citizens,  ii.  280.

What  is  Masonry,  i.  381.

What  is  God,  i.  546.

Whiston,  hi* theory  of  the  creation,  i.  484.

White  and  black  ribbon,  symbolical  mean-
ing of,  ii.  135  ;  Eagle  and  Pelican,  Lodge
of,  described,  139;  robes  worn,  143;
stone,  to  whom  given,  160;  an  emblem
of  innocence,  244  ;  and  black  represent
truth  and  error,  353  ;  its  extensive  use,
508.

Wheat  in  a  mummy,  vitality  of,  ii.  608.

Wind,  east,  facilitated  the  passage  of  the
Red  S;-a,  i.  71.

Widow's  son,  the,  who  ho  was,  i.  105.

Widow  of  H.  A.  13.,  disconsolate,  ii.  153.

Wisdom,  strength,  and  beauty,  illustrated,
i.  155;  the  name  of  an  artist,  ii.  '221  :
symbol  of,  254  ;  of  Solomon,  symbol  of
the,  3.53  ;  described,  382 ;  of  Adain,  538;
sphere  of,  618.

men  worship  the  infant  Jesu>.  ii.  I1.!/).

Willoughby,  Bro.,  his  explanation  of  the
ladder,  i.  173;  on  tho  pillars,  \(.~>;  <m
the  cross,  ii.  (>27  ;  on  the  triple  tan,  637.

Winding  staircase  the1,  i.  -1  12.   i •'>'•'>.

Wilderness,  the,  frightful,  i.  472;  abounds
in  serpents,  ii.  573.

Wisimar.  convention  at,  ii.  8.

AVilhelmsbad,  convention  at,  ii.  8,  83.

William  III.  initiated,  ii.  28.

Wickedness  of  Cainites,  ii.  191.

Willow  trees  in  Babylon,  ii.  417.

Wine,  power  of,  ii.  447.

Working  the  Lodges,  i.  4  ;  tools  of  a  Master
Mason,  ii.  158 ;  uniformity  of,  310.

Words,  the,  i.  5  ;  of  the  Knights  of  the
Ninth  Arch,  ii.  370.


Word  of  God,  the  Shekinah,  i.    73;  the,

lost,  ii.  116;  singular  interpretation   of

the,  666.
Worship  of  the  solar  deity,  i.  488  ;  of  the

planets,  537.
Worshipping  towards  the  east,  i.  201  ;  of

stones,  ii.  231  ;  the  golden  calf,  236.
Worlds,  the  three,  i.  253 ;  when  created,  496.
Worldly  possessions,  ii.  204;  hope,  symbol

of,  519.

'Wonders  in  Egypt,  i.  356.
Woman  created,  i.  498;  power  of,  ii.  447.
W.  M.  to  be  a  man  of  talent,  i.  S  ;  a  life

office,   ii.    32  ;  office  of  regulated,  61  ;

his  duties,  249.
Worthies  Masonic,  ii.  429.
Writings  of  Bahrdt  indecent,  i.  24.
Writing  on  linen,  ii.  395.
Wright,  the  Rev.  Bro.,  on  Masonic  forms

and  ceremonies,  i.  165.
Wren,  Sir  C.,  the  G.  M.,  ii.  28.

Xeropruigistes,  a  name  of  Masons,  ii.  43.
El  \ast  wealth,  ii.  282.

Year  newly  arranged  by  Wcisharpt,  ii.  80;

of  jubilee,  419.

Youngest  son  preferred,  i.  283.
Youthful  Masons,  ii.  G8.

,    encampment    at,    ii.     12;     lectures

quoted,  410.

Zeal  of  the  French  Masons,  ii.  '

Zerubabel's  temple,  i.  241;  bii.,ds  it  with
timber  from  Lebannon,  ii.  113;  finds
the  book  of  the  law,  355;  power  of,
424  ;  sets  up  an  altar,  431;  di:  covers  a
vault,  436  ;  petitions  Darius,  445.

Zcchariah  encourages  the  Jews,  ii.  444.

Zebulun,  tribe  of,  i.  310.

Zinnendortf",  his  system  of  Masonry,  ii.  5 }.

Zodiac,  compared  to  Jacob,  i.  249  ;  called
the  circle  of  the  signs,  311.

Zwack,  his  system  of  Masonry,  ii.  332.

Zurich,  Grand  Lodge  at,  ii.  19.


J'KlM'liJ)     IJY     \v.     WILCOCKSOIV.    ROLLS     Bl'lJ.DIKt;  S,    TL.Vl'1  I     ]  AM '..


-


University  of  Toronto
Library


DO  NOT

REMOVE

THE

CARD

FROM

THIS

POCKET


Acme  Library  Card  Pocket
LOWE-MARTIN  CO.  LIMITED
