ν' 


et 
ὃ Φ 
nt 
9 @ 
Ὁ ΟΖ 
« 


Form 16 15M-9-28 


« 
ΕΞ 
᾿ ΞΕ 
ᾶΪ εἶ ἊΝ τὰ εἴ 
« 
«ἴα» 
Bee 
on 
DS , 
"29 : 
: bs) £ 
Ἢ = is 
oa 
ef = 2 = 
= 7 
, " 
4 



DEMCO 38 


ve lll 
ο 3 1223 0055 


NS 
6 4548 


T. E. PAGE, trrr.p. 
E. CAPPS, pn.p., u.p. W. Η. Ὁ. ROUSE, trri.p. 


τὰ 


ΟΡΡΙΑΝ 
COLLUTHUS 
TRYPHIODORUS 


OPPIAN 
COLLUTHUS . 
TRYPHIODORUS 


WITH AN ENGLISH TRANSLATION BY 
A. W. MAIR, D.Lrrr. 


PROFESSOR OF GREEK, EDINBURGH UNIVERSITY 


(ol ΄ 
ὅ.ὁ δῷ 


LONDON : WILLIAM HEINEMANN LTD 
NEW YORK: G. P. PUTNAM’S SONS 
MCMXXVIII 


i. 
cee ΟΝ 


284794 


Printed in Great Britain. 


se 


PREFACE 


Tue present volume forms the third instalment of 
those translations from the Greek poets on which, 
almost by an accident, I have spent no inconsiderable 
portion of the little leisure of my life. If now, con- 
templating that work dispassionately, I am moved 
by some misgiving and am tempted to consider it as 
being, however useful, 


σπουδῆς γε μέντοι τῆς ἐμῆς οὐκ ἄξιον, 


perhaps the same sober reflection occurs to most men 
in looking upon the finished labour of their hands : 
fecine operae pretium? Be that as it may, if it should 
oceur to any, otherwise approving, to regret that I 
have selected for my purpose a series of poets who, 
after all, dwell rather on the lower levels of Parnassus, 
I am not altogether without hope that I may here- 
after find time to do similar homage to some choicer 
spirits, to Aeschylus, for example, and to Pindar : 
for which last, indeed, what I have hitherto written 
was in a sense and in the first instance merely pre- 
paratory. But for the immediate future another 
sort of work suggests itself which cannot wisely be 
postponed and which one might, when too late, regret 
to have left unattempted. Vitae summa brevis spem 
nos vetat incohare longam. Even as I write, while the 
September sea breaks at my feet on the grey stones 

Vv 


PREFACE 


of Loch Ranza, not the least prominent thought in 
my mind is the moving memory of the vanished 
eyes—of Sir William Ridgeway, Sir John Sandys, 
J. 5. Reid, Arthur Platt, J. S. Phillimore, to name but 
these, and of others nearer and unnamed—which 
would have looked upon these pages with a kindly 
interest, and, I would fain think, not wholly without 
approval : 

ἔστι δὲ καί τι θανόντεσσιν μέρος 

κὰν νόμον ἐρδομένων, 

κατακρύπτει δ᾽ οὐ κόνις 

συγγόνων κεδνὰν χάριν. 


Some little inconsistency in minor detail between 
one part of the book and another will be explained 
by the fact that Colluthus and Tryphiodorus—apart 
from the Index—were in type so long ago as 1921, 
while Oppian is only now completed. 

This last, being largely pioneer work, has occupied 
more time and labour than one would have cared 
deliberately to contemplate. The identification of 
the animals mentioned, and of the fishes in particular, 
is a difficult and perilous task, and while I have done 
what I could by collation of the statements in ancient 
authors and by the use of such hints as could be 
derived from modern nomenclature or from the 
apparent etymological significance of the old names, 
I can hardly expect that my identifications, some of 
them novel, will command complete approval. But 
the statement of facts as here presented may lighten 
the labour of any future editor. 

It only remains to thank all who have in sundry 
ways and at divers seasons helped me. Dr. Page, 
whose interest has been a great encouragement, has 
not only read my proofs with almost disconcerting 
vi 


PREFACE 


vigilance, but has, in his capacity as one of the 
Editors, done perhaps some violence to his proper 
judgement in allowing me unusual space for: -ex- 
planatory or illustrative comment: superest ut nec 
me consilii nec illum paeniteat obsequii. Professor 
D’Arcy Thompson; ποτανὸς ἀπὸ πατρός, has given me 
kindly counsel and—¢idwy ἔλεγχον ἀψευδέστατον--- 
the loan of books, and, in addition, read and an- 
notated the proofs of the Cynegetica : those of the 
Halieutica he was unhappily prevented by circum- 
stances from reading. Conversations at various 
times with some of my colleagues, Sir Edward 
Sharpey-Schafer, Emeritus Professor Cossar Ewart, 
Professor Ashworth, and with my brothers, have 
been helpful. Dr. James Ritchie of the Royal 
Scottish Museum has generously placed his know- 
ledge at my service, and in these last days, when 
I have been beyond the reach of books, Mr. P. H. 
Grimshaw of that institution has supplemented 
some gaps in my knowledge of Natural History 
from Kels to Whales. In the same circumstances, 
Mr. W. R. Cunningham, Librarian of Glasgow Uni- 
versity, has at some personal trouble supplied me 
with information otherwise inaccessible. My col- 
leagues of the Greek Department in Edinburgh 
University, Mr. J. A. FitzHerbert, now Professor of 
Classics in the University of Adelaide, and Mr. 
P. B. R. Forbes, have rendered me helpful services 
of the most varied kind—paduora, δέ τ᾿ ἔκλυον αὐτοί--- 
and in particular have read the bulk of the proofs ; 
in which matter some assistance was given also by 
Mr. C. J. Fordyce, of Jesus College, Oxford, as by 
my eldest son, Cc. G. R., in connexion with the 
Colluthus and Tryphiodorus Index. Nor must I 


vii 


PREFACE 


forget my nameless informants both among landward 
men and among them that go down to the sea in 
ships, τοῖσίν τε θαλάσσια ἔργα μέμηλεν, with whom, as 
occasion served, I have held illuminating converse. 

Lastly, I would express my thanks, sincerely but 
briefly—for gratitude lies not in the much predication 
of it—to Mr. William Maxwell, Managing Director 
of Messrs. R. & R. Clark, to their accomplished 
Reader, and to the rest of their Staff, whose patience 
I have often tried, but never exhausted ; for indeed 
it seems to be inexhaustible. 


A. W. M. 


TO OPPIAN, COLLUTHUS, TRYPHIODORUS 


Farewell awhile! who somewhile dwelt with me 
Tm sunny days and sullen, good and ill, 
Discoursing still your measured minstrelsy, 
Legends of lowly daring, craft, and skill, 
Lore of dead men which yet hath power to thrill 
Spirits attuned to Nature’s mystery, 
Things secret of the everlasting hill 
And precious things of the eternal sea. 


In other mood ye sang of him who chose 
For Beauty’s Crown the Daughter of the Foam, 
Mistook for gain what proved his bitter loss 
And prelude to an Iliad of woes— 
Won Helen from her happy Spartan home 
And drenched with blood the soil of Hios. 


A. W. M. 


viii 


CONTENTS 


PAGE 


OPPIAN: 
Inrropucrion— 
τ. The Authorship of the Poems... i xiii 
1. Zoology before Oppian : : Bie, ῸΠῚ 
τι, Hunting, Fishing, Fowling . A . eK 
tv. On the Identification of certain Fishes xlix 
v. Some Animal Idiosyncrasies _ sar IKEX 
vi. Analyses. : ; : : 5 Ἰκσῖν 
vu. Bibliography : : : . Ixxvi 
Cynecetica, on Toe Cuase— 
Book I . j ; : : : ; Ὁ 
Book II . : : : . si) δ 
Book III . : : ὶ ca aha Π) 
Book IV . : : : : ! ἌΣ 160 
Hautevurica, or Fisninc— 
ee eee Re τ τ οὐ 
Book II . Γ ἢ : : . . 286 
Book III . 5 ; : : : . 844, 


CONTENTS 
Book IV 
Book V 
CuassiFieD ZooLtocicaL CATALOGUE 


GENERAL INDEX 


COLLUTHUS : 
InTRODUCTION— 


1. The Life of Colluthus . 
u. The Text 
Bibliography 


Tue Rape or HELEN 


TRYPHIODORUS: 
INTRODUCTION— 


1. The Life of Tryphiodorus 
τι. The Manuscripts . 
ut. Bibliography 


Tue Taxine or Inios . 


InpEx oF Proper Names ΙΝ CoLLUTHUS AND 


TRYPHIODORUS 


402 
4.58 


517 
523 


535 
537 
538 


542 


575 
576 
71 


580 


634 


OPPIAN 


INTRODUCTION 


I. Tue AvurHorsuie oF THe Poems 


Tue authorship of the Cynegetica and the Halieutica 
presents a problem of some perplexity owing to the 
impossibility of reconciling some of the external 
evidence regarding Oppian with the internal evidence 
presented by the poems themselves. 

I. Exrernat Evinence.— This consists in the 
ancient Vitae (Biov) preserved in various mss. of 
the poems, with a short notice in Suidas, and some 
references to and quotations from the Halieutica— 
there are no references to or quotations from the 
Cynegetica—in later writers. 

Vitae. —Of the ancient Lives, which show at once 
considerable agreement and considerable discrepancy, 
Anton. Westermann, in his ΒΙΟΡΡΑΦΟΙ, Brunsvigae, 
1845, distinguishes two recensions, which we shall 
here denote as Vita A and Vita B respectively. 

Vita A, “quae narrationem praebet omnium sim- 
plicissimam,” as printed by Westermann may be 
translated as follows :— 

“ Oppian the poet was the son of Agesilaus and 
Zenodoté, and his birthplace was Anazarbos in 
Cilicia. His father, a man of wealth and considered 
the foremost citizen of his native city, distinguished 

xiii 


ἐ 


OPPIAN 


too for culture and living the life of a philosopher, 
trained his son on the same lines and educated him 
in the whole curriculum of education—music and 
geometry and especially grammar. When Oppian 
was about thirty years of age, the Roman Emperor 
Severus® visited Anazarbos. And whereas it was 
the duty of all public men to meet the Emperor, 
Agesilaus as a philosopher and one who despised 
all vain-glory neglected to do so. The Emperor 
was angered and banished him to the island of 
Melite in the Adriatic. There the son accompanied 
his father and there he wrote these very notable 
poems. Coming to Rome in the time of Antoninus,? 
son of Severus—Severus being already dead—he 
read his poetry and was bidden to ask anything he 


-pleased. He asked and obtained the restoration of 
~ his father, and received further for each verse or line 


Ἢ of his poetry a golden coin. Returning home with 


his father and a pestilence coming upon Anazarbos 


~ he soon after died. His fellow-citizens gave him a 


funeral and erected in his honour a splendid monu- 
ment with the following inscription : 

“¢]T, Oppian, won everlasting fame, but Fate’s 
envious thread carried me off and chilly Hades took 


~ me while still young—me the minstrel of sweet 


- song. But had dread Envy allowed me to remain 


= 


alive long, no man would have won such glory as I.’¢ 
“ He wrote also certain other poems and he lived 


for thirty years. He possessed much polish and 


α Kmperor 193-211 a.p. 

> 4.¢. Caracalla, Emperor 211-217. : 

° ᾽ρππιανὸς κλέος εἷλον ἀείδιον᾽ ἀλλά με Μοίρης | βάσκανος 
ἐξήρπαξε μίτος, κρυερός T ᾿Αἴδας με | καὶ νέον ὄντα κατέσχε τὸν 
εὐεπίης ὑποφήτην. | εἰ δὲ πολύν με χρόνον ζωὸν μίμνειν φθόνος 
αἰνὸς | εἴασ᾽, οὐκ ἄν τίς μοι ἴσον γέρας ἔλλαχε φωτῶν. 

Χιν 


INTRODUCTION 


smoothness coupled with conciseness and nobility— 
a most difficult combination. He is particularly 
successful in sententious sayings and similes.” 

Vita B, which is “referta interpolationibus,’’ is 
given by Westermann in its most interpolated form. 
In the main it agrees with Vita A and we merely 
note the discrepancies, apart from those which are 
only verbal. 

1. The birthplace of Oppian is first given as 
“either Anazarbos or Corycos” and afterward it 
is referred to as Corycos. 

2. The Melite to which his father was banished is 
described as an island of Italy, whereas in Vita A 
it is said to be in the Adriatic. This points to a 
confusion of the Adriatic Meleda with Malta—both 
anciently Melite. 

3. While Vita A describes the poetry written at 
Melite quite vaguely as τοιαῦτα τὰ ποιήματα ἀξιολογώ- 
tara ὄντα, Vita B says, τὰ ποιήματα τὰ κάλλιστα ταῦτα 
ἐν ε΄ βιβλίοις [i.e. the Halieutica]. 

4, While Vita A says no more of his other writings 
than merely: ἔγραψε δὲ καὶ ἄλλα ποιήματά τινα, Vita B 
has; συνέταξε δὲ καὶ ἄλλα ποιήματα. θαυμαστὰ παῖς dv 
ἔτι, τά τε ᾿ἰξευτικὰ καὶ Κυνηγετικά, ἑκάτερα ἐν ε΄ (sic) 
βιβλίοις παρὰ μέρος περιλαβών. ἐν τούτοις δὲ [sc. the 
Halieutica] μάλιστα. διέπρεψεν, ἅτε δὴ περὶ τὴν ἀκμὴν 
τοῦ φρονεῖν γεγενημένος. 

Westermann prints also a Life of Oppian in στίχοι 
πολιτικοί by Constantinus Manasses which is merely 
a paraphrase of Vita A. 

Lastly, we have the notice in Suidas 5. ᾿Οππιανός" 
Κίλιξ ἀπὸ Κωρύκου πόλεως, γραμματικὸς καὶ ἐποποιός, 
γεγονὼς ἐπὶ Μάρκου ᾿Αντωνίνου βασιλέως. ᾿Αλιευτικὰ 
ἐν βιβλίοις ε΄, Κυνηγετικὰ ἐν βιβλίοις τέσσαρσι, 


XV 


OPPIAN 


᾿Ιξευτικὰ βιβλία PB’ (se. ἔγραψεν). He adds a single 
sentence about his being rewarded by the Emperor 
—as he does not specify what Emperor, doubtless 
he means Mareus Antoninus as above. 


Other references or quotations 


Athenaeus 13 Ὁ (in a list of verse ᾿Αλιευτιίκά): καὶ 
τὸν ὀλίγῳ πρὸ ἡμῶν γενόμενον ᾿Οππιανὸν τὸν Κίλικα. 
The precise date of Athenaeus is not certainly 
known. Suidas has 5. ᾿Αθήναιος Ναυκρατίτης" ypap- 
ματικός, γεγονὼς ἐπὶ τῶν χρόνων Μάρκου. The con- 
temptuous reference to the Emperor Commodus in 
Athen. 537f τί οὖν θαυμαστὸν εἰ καὶ Kal? ἡμᾶς 
Κόμμοδος ὁ αὐτοκράτωρ ἐπὶ τῶν ὀχημάτων παρακείμενον 
εἶχεν τὸ Ἡράκλειον ῥόπαλον ὑπεστρωμένης αὐτῷ λεοντῆς 
καὶ Ἡρακλῆς καλεῖσθαι ἤθελεν suggests that the 
Deipnosophistae was not finished till after the death 
of Commodus (a.p. 193). 

Suidas [10th cent.] 5. ᾿Ασφάλιος Ἰ]οσειδῶν’ ᾿Ασφά- 
Aros ῥιζοῦχα θεμείλια νέρθε φυλάσσων' τελευταῖος οὗτος 
τοῦ ε΄ τῶν ᾿Αλιευτικῶν ᾿Οππιανοῦ (Hal. v. 680]. 

Geoponica [10th cent.] xx. 2 gives Oppian as the 
authority for that chapter: “Iy@ts eis ἕνα τόπον 
συναγαγεῖν. ᾿Οππιανοῦ. 

Etymologicum Magnum [c. Α.Ὁ. 1100] 5. ἀφύη"... ἡ 
μὴ πεφυκυῖα, τοῦ ἃ κακὸν σημαίνοντος. ᾿Ὀππιανός" 
Ὧδε καὶ ἠπεδανῆς ἀφύης ὀλιγηπελὲς ἔθνος | οὔτινος 
ἐκγεγάασιν ad’ αἵματος οὐδὲ τοκήων [-- Hal. i. 767 Ε.7’ 
καὶ μεθ᾽ ἑτέρους <5’>% ζήτει στίχους" ἐκ δὲ γενέθλης | 
οὔνομ᾽ ἐπικλήδην ἀφρήτιδες αὐδάωνται | = Hal. i. 775 f.]- 
γράφεται ἀφυήτιδες. 5. Κωρύκιον"... καὶ ᾿Οππιανὸς 
ἐν τρίτῳ “Αλιευτικῶν- Πανὶ δὲ Κωρυκίῳ βυθίην παρα- 

« Added by Editor. 
XVi 


INTRODUCTION 


κάτθεο τέχνην παιδὶ τεῷ [-- Hal. iii. 15]. 5. λάβραξ' 


«ον ἔστιν οὖν παρὰ τὸ λάβρως eOleue ᾿ἀδηφάγον γάρ 
ἐστι τὸ ζῶον, ὡς ἱστορεῖ ᾿Οππιανὸς ἐν τοῖς ᾿Αλιευτικοῖς 
[ = Hal. ii. 18 


0 

Eustathius ee cent. | on Dion. P. ii. 270 τοῦ 
εὐρωποῦ, ὅπερ δηχοῖ τὸν πλατὺν ἢ σκοτεινόν, ἐξ οὗ 
καὶ σπήλαιον παρὰ τῷ ᾿Οππίανῷ εὐρωπόν [apparently 
thinking of Hal. iii. 19 ἢ ἔκ τε βερέθρου | δύμεναι 
εὐρωποῖο] ; on 538 οἱ δὲ περὶ Κύζικον καὶ ἹΠροκόνησον 
τὸν Μέλανα κόλπον τιθέμενοι δοκοῦσιν a ἀμάρτυρα λαλεῖν, 
εἰ μὴ ἄρα ἐκ τινος χωρίου βοηθοῦνται κειμένου ἐν τοῖς 
τοῦ ᾿Οππιανοῦ “Αλιευτικοῖς, ὅπου περὶ τῆς τῶν πηλαμύδων 
dy pas « ἐκεῖνός φησι [-- Hal. iv. 115]; on 772 ᾿Οππιανὸς 
δὲ καὶ τοὺς περὶ Τίγριν ᾿Ασσυρίους καλεῖ, οὗς καὶ 
πολυγύναικας ἱστορεῖ [-- Hal. iv. 204]; on 808 καὶ 
τὸ ἀλγινόεις παρὰ. τῷ ᾿Ὀππιανῴ [ = Hal. iv, . 78]; on 916 
καὶ ᾿Οππιανὸς τοῦ ἀλγινόεις ἀ ἀπισχνάνας τὴν δίφθογγον 
εἰς μονόφθογγον διὰ τοῦ t γράφει ὡς προερρέθη τὴν 
προπαραλήγουσαν = Hal. iv. 73); on 1055 ὅτι εὕρηται 
ὧδε τὸ ἀέναος διὰ ἑνὸς Κὶ μετὰ ἐκτάσεως τῆς ἀρχούσης. 
φησὶ γάρ, καὶ πόρον ἀενάων ποταμῶν... εἰ μή τις 
τὴν τῶν ἀντιγράφων αἰτιώμενος φαυλότητα φυλάσσει 
μὲν τὴν διὰ τῶν δύο ἦν γραφήν, θεραπεύει δὲ τὸ πάθος 
τοῦ μέτρου διὰ συνιζήσεως, ὡς καὶ ἐν τῇ ἀρχῇ τῶν 
᾿Αλιευτικῶν ᾿Οππιανοῦ [ = Hal. i. 24]. 

Eustathius on Hom. quotes Oppian thus: on 
Hom. Il. xxi. 337 οὕτω δέ πως καὶ ᾿Οππιανὸς τὴν λέξιν 
λαμβάνει, φλέγμα λέγων τὴν θερινὴν φλόγωσιν;[ = Hal. i. 
20]; on Hom. Od. xxii. 468 διδάσκει δὲ (ὁ ᾿Αθηναῖος) 
ἀκολούθως τῷ ᾿Οππιανῴ καὶ ὅτι ἡ τρίγλη τριγόνοις 
γοναῖς ἐπώνυμος οὖσα [ = Hal. i. 590]; on Hom. Od. 
xviii. 367 ἰστέον δὲ καὶ ὅτι ’Ommiavds μὲν καὶ τὸ αἷμα 
ἔαρ ἔφη διὰ μόνου τοῦ ε ψιλοῦ | = Hal. ii. 618] ; on Od. 


ii, 290 ὁ τρόφις, οὗ αἰτιατικὴ μὲν παρὰ ᾿Οππιανῷ ἐν 


b xvii 


OPPIAN 
τῷ “ἱερὸν τρόφιν (v.l: τρόχιν) ᾿Εννοσιγαίου,᾽ εὐθεῖα δὲ 
πληθυντικὴ παρὰ τῷ Ἡροδότῳ ἐν τῷ ἐπὰν γένωνται 
τρόφιες (Herod. iv. 9) [= Hal. ii. 634]; on Il. iv. 20 
ὅτι μύξα od μόνον περίττωμα τὸ ζωικὸν ἀλλὰ καί τις 
ἑτεροία ἡ παρὰ τῷ ᾿Οππιανῷ γλαγόεσσα (cf. Eustath, 
on Jl. ii. 637) [-- Hal. iii. 376]; on Il. iii. 867 ἔστι 
καὶ ὄνομα (1.6. adjective) rapa τῷ ᾿Οππιανῴῷ ὀφέλλιμος, 
ὅ τινες ὀφέλσιμος ἔγραψαν Αἰολικώτερον [= Hal. iii. 
429]; on Il. iii. 54 ᾿Οππιανὸς οὖν λατύσσεσθαι πτερυ- 
yous [= Hal. i. 628 λατυσσομένη πτερύγεσσιν] ἰχθύας 
καὶ ἔλαφον πτώσσειν ἠλέματον [ = Hal. iv. 590 ἔλαφοι 
ἠλέματα πτώσσουσι]. Schol. BV on Il. xiii. 443 
quotes H. i. 134 ἢ 

II. Inrernat Eviwence.—Cynegetica. 1. The Cyn- 
egetica is dedicated to Caracalla (more correctly 
Caracallus), one of the two sons (the other being 
Geta) of L. Septimius Severus, Roman Emperor, 
a.D. 193-211, by his second wife, Julia Domna of 
Emesa in Syria: Cyn. i. 3 f. ᾿Αντωνῖνε: | τὸν μεγάλη 
μεγάλῳ φιτύσατο Aduva Σεβήρῳ. Caracalla (this is 
only a nickname), born at Lyons in a.p. 188, was 
first called Bassianus. He was made Caesar in 196, 
Imperator under the name of M. Aurelius Antoninus 
in 197, and Augustus with tribunician power in 198. 
On the death of Severus at York in 211, his two 
sons: shared the imperial throne till the murder 
of Geta in 212. The most natural date for the 
Cynegetica is after Caracalla became sole Emperor, 
1.6.. after 212. 

2. The poem is in any case dated after 198 by 
the allusion in i. 31 ἐφρασάμην IdpOwv τε δύας καὶ 
Κτησιφόωντα to the capture of Ctesiphon by Severus 
in that year, when Caracalla was but ten years of age. 

3. The author of the poem belongs to Apamea on 


XViil 


INTRODUCTION 


the Orontes in Syria, as is shown by Cyn. ἢ. 125 ff. 
where, speaking of the Orontes he writes: 


‘Fai xz ΄ > ΄ ΄, 
αὐτὸς δ᾽ ἐν μεσάτοισιν ἐπαιγίζων πεδίοισιν, 
αἰὲν ἀεξόμενος καὶ τείχεος ἐγγὺς ὁδεύων, 
χέρσον ὁμοῦ καὶ νῆσον, ἐμὴν πόλιν, ὕδατι χεύων 


and just below 156 f. (after mentioning the Syrian 
tomb of Memnon) he says: 
ἀλλὰ τὰ μὲν κατὰ κόσμον ἀείσομεν εὐρέα κάλλη 
πάτρης ἡμετέρης ἐρατῇ Πιμπληΐδι μολπῇ. 


Haleutica.—1. The author of the Halieutica is a 
Cilician as is proved by two passages : 


(a) Η. iii. 7 8... 
σοὶ δ᾽ ἐμὲ τερπωλήν τε καὶ ὑμνητῆρ᾽ ἀνέηκαν 
δαίμονες ἐν Κιλίκεσσιν ὑφ᾽ “Ἑρμαίοις ἀδύτοισι. 
“Ἑρμεία, σὺ δέ μοι πατρώϊε κτλ. 


(6) H. iii, 805 8.-- 


᾿Ανθιέων δὲ πρῶτα περίφρονα πεύθεο θήρην, 
οἵην ἡμετέρης ἐρικυδέος ἐντύνονται 
πάτρης ἐνναετῆρες ὑπὲρ Σαρπηδόνος ἀκτῆς 


* χέρσον ὁμοῦ καὶ νῆσον -- Χερσόνησον, ““ quod versu dicere 
non est,” one of the names of Apamea or Pella on the 
Orontes. Cf. Steph. Β. s. ᾿Απάμεια, Συρίας πόλις, ἀπὸ 
᾿Απάμας, τῆς Σελεύκου μητρός: ἐκλήθη καὶ Χερρόνησος, ἀπὸ τῆς 
περιοχῆς τῶν ὑδάτων, καὶ Πέλλα, ἀπὸ τῆς ἐν Μακεδονίᾳ ; Strabo 
752 ἡ δ᾽ ᾿Απάμεια καὶ πόλιν ἔχει τὸ πλέον εὐερκῆ: λόφος γάρ 
ἐστιν ἐν πεδίῳ κοίλῳ τετειχισμένος καλῶς, ὃν ποιεῖ χερρονησίζοντα 
ὁ ᾿Ορόντης καὶ λίμνη περικειμένη μεγάλη καὶ ἕλη πλατέα λειμῶνάς 
τε βουβότους καὶ ἱπποβότους διαχεομένους ὑπερβάλλοντας τὸ 
μέγεθος: ἥ τε δὴ πόλις οὕτως ἀσφαλῶς κεῖται (καὶ δὴ καὶ Χερρο- 
νῆσος ἐκλήθη διὰ τὸ συμβεβηκός) καὶ χώρας εὐπορεῖ παμπόλλης 
εὐδαίμονος [(7. C. ii. 150 4.1, δι’ ἧς ὁ ᾿Ορόντης ῥεῖ. . . ἐκαλεῖτο 
δὲ καὶ Πέλλα ποτὲ ὑπὸ τῶν πρώτων Μακεδόνων διὰ τὸ τοὺς 
πλείστους τῶν Μακεδόνων ἐυταῦθα οἰκῆσαι τῶν στρατευομένων, 


ΧΙΧ 


.-- 


ΟΡΡΙΑΝ᾽ 


ὅσσοι θ᾽ “Eppeiao πόλιν, ναυσίκλυτον ἄστυ 
Κωρύκιον, ναίουσι καὶ ἀμφιρύτην EXcotocav. 
ρ > 1) 


These passages certainly suggest that the author of 
the Haleutica came from Corycus, but they by no 
means prove it. The poet is'describing a method of 
fishing, and Anazarbos as an inland town (Ptolem. 
v. 8. 7 among inland [μεσόγειοι] towns in Cilicia is 
Καισάρεια πρὸς ᾿Αναζάρβῳ) would not be in point. 
Nor is Ἑρμεία, σὺ δέ μοι πατρώϊε conclusive, as 
Hermes appears on coins of other Cilician towns, 
e.g. Adana and Mallos. 

2. The Haleutica is dedicated to a Roman 
Emperor, who is addressed as Antoninus® (ZZ. i. 3, 


δ ete.) without further specification. ; 


3. That Emperor’s son, whose name is. not 
indicated, is several times in the poem coupled with 
his father: H. i. 66, the fish in a royal preserve are 
a ready spoil σοί τε, μάκαρ, καὶ παιδὲ μεγαυχέϊ; 1. 77 
ff. σὺ δ᾽ ἰθύνειας ἕκαστα, | πότνα Θεά, καὶ πατρὶ καὶ υἱέϊ 
παμβασιλῆος | θυμήρη τάδε δῶρα τεῆς πόρσυνον ἀοιδῆς ; 
ii. 41 σοί τε, μάκαρ σκηπτοῦχε, καὶ ἀγλαόπαιδι γενέθλῃ ; 
ii, 682 Justice prevails among men ἐξ οὗ μοι κραί- 
νουσι μέγαν θρόνον ἐμβεβαῶτες | ἄμφω θεσπέσιός τε 
πατὴρ καὶ φαίδιμος ὀρπηξ ; iv, 4 ΕΗ! ἀλλά σύ μοι, 
κάρτιστε πολισσούχων βασιλήων, | αὐτός τ᾽, ᾿Αντωνῖνε, 
καὶ υἱέος ἠἡγάθεον κῆρ, | πρόφρονες εἰσαΐοιτε κτλ. 

Suidas, as we have seen above, puts the Cilician 
Oppian ἐπὶ Μάρκου ᾿Αντωνίνου βασιλέως, which most 
naturally means Marcus Aurelius Antoninus, Emperor 
161-180, in which case the son will be L. Aurelius 


* The ambiguity is sufficiently great since the name 
Antoninus was borne by Antoninus Pius 138-161, M. 
Aurelius Antoninus 161-180, Commodus 180-192, Caracalla 
211-217, Opellius 217-218, Elagabalus 218-222, etc. 


XX 


INTRODUCTION 


Commodus,* son of Marcus Aurelius and Faustina, 
Emperor 180-192. Born in 161, he was made a 
Caesar in 166, and Imperator in 176. As H. ii. 682 
ff. (quoted above) implies that the son was associated 
with his father in the imperial power, this would 
date the Halieuticté’ between 176, and the death of 
Marcus Aurelius in 180. For the sporting proclivities 
of Commodus cf. Herodian i. 15. The schol. in 
most places, i. 66, i. 77, ii. 41, iv. 4 take the son 
to be ’Avrwvivy (sic) τῷ Γορδιανῷ, but on ii. 683 
the father and son are given as ᾿Αντωνῖνος καὶ 
Κώμοδος. 

The identification of the Antoninus οὐ the 
Halieutica with Marcus Aurelius has been generally 
accepted. The date thus assigned to the Cilician 
Oppian agrees admirably with the external evidence 
mentioned above. It agrees too with the date given 
for Oppian by Eusebius (Chron. ap. S. Hieron., vol. 
viii. p. 722, ed. Veron. 1736), and Syncellus 
(Chronogr. pp. 352 f., ed. Paris, 1652), who place 
Oppian in the year 171 or 178. If there be anything 
at all in the somewhat suspicious story of the 
banishment of the father and his restoration through 
his son, the story would appear to refer to the poet 
of the Cynegetica. 

The latest edition (sixth) of W. von Christ’s 
Geschichte der griechischen Literatur (ed. ΝΥ. Schmid 
and O. Stihlin) holds that the Cynegetica and the 
Halieutica, although by different authors, are both 
alike dedicated to Caracalla. von Christ himself 
held, as we hold, that the Halieutica was dedicated 
to Marcus Aurelius. The reasoning by which the 


* His imperial name was Marcus Aurelius Commodus 
Antoninus. 
Xxi 


OPPIAN 


latest editors reach their conclusion is nothing less 
than astounding : 

(1) Assuming Vita A to be the most trustworthy, 
they take the banishment to refer to the father of 
the Cilician Oppian. 

(2) They put the visit of Severus in 194, when he 
was marching against Pescennius Niger. 

(3) The poet of the Halieutica, they say, died 
in the thirtieth year of his age, after the death of 
Severus in 211. But the Vita A—their sole 
authority—says that the poet was about thirty years 
of age when his father was banished, and that he 
died at the age of thirty. In any case the whole 
story seems to contemplate a short period of banish- 
ment. On the showing of Messrs. Schmid-Stihlin 
it extended at least from 194-212, a period of 
eighteen years. 

(4) Caracalla had noson. It was, apparently, only 
after his death that any hint was made with regard 
to the paternity of Elagabalus or his cousin; in any 
case neither youth could possibly have been referred 
to in the terms in which the poet of the Halieutica 
refers to the son of Antoninus. Messrs. Schmid & 
Stahlin, feeling this difficulty, comfortably say that 
in H. i. 66 “ist wohl πατρί statt παιδί zu schreiben.” 
It is regrettable that their researches in Oppian 
should not have proceeded a little further, when the 
other references to the son, as quoted above, would 
have needed more serious surgery. 

Our conclusion, on the whole, is that the 
Haleutica alone is the work of the Cilician Oppian. 
The Cynegetica, which shows knowledge of the 
Hateutica not merely in detail, C2. Cy a 50 
compared with Hail. iii. 35, but in general treatment, 


ΧΧΙ 


INTRODUCTION 


is the work of a Syrian imitator, dedicated very 
naturally to Caracalla, with regard to whom, amid so 
many uncertainties, nothing about his later years 
seems certain except his close relations with Syria. 


o¢ 


II, ZooLocy BEFORE OpPiAN 


The earliest classification of animals in any detail 
that we possess occurs in Book II. of the Hepi Διαίτης, 
a treatise in the Corpus Hippocrateum, the collection 
of writings which pass under the name of Hippocrates. 
This particular treatise is assigned to the 5th century 
and has been by some ascribed to Herodicus of 
Selymbria, teacher of Hippocrates and father of 
Greek Medicine (cf. Suid. 5. Ἱπποκράτης, Soranus, 
Vit. Hippocr., Tzetz. Chil. viii. 155). This classifica- 
tion is purely incidental and is confined moreover to 
animals which are eaten. The author is discussing 
the qualities of the flesh of various edible animals 
(rept ζῴων τῶν ἐσθιομένων ὧδε χρὴ γινώσκειν) and he 
divides them according to their habitat, on land, in air, 
in water, into the three popular genera of Beasts— 
or as the writer calls them Quadrupeds (τετράποδα)--- 
Birds (ὄρνιθες), Fish (ἰχθύες). Such grouping as 
there is within these great divisions is based on 
similarity in quality of flesh—distinguished as light 
or heavy, firm or flaccid, and so forth. Under the 
first genus he distinguishes Cattle, Goats, Swine 
(Wild and Tame), Sheep, Asses, Horses, Dogs, Deer, 
Hares, Foxes, Hedgehogs. ‘Under the second genus 
he specifies φάσσα (Ringdove), περιστερά (Domestic 
Pigeon), Partridge, Cock, Turtle-dove, Goose ; then 


XXii 


OPPIAN: 


ὅσα σπερμολογέει (no specific bird is mentioned but 
the reference would be first and foremost to the 
Rook, Corvus frugilegus, L., cf. A. 592 Ὁ 28, Aristoph. 
Av. 232, 579, ete.), and lastly “the Duck (vijcoo) and 
others which live in marshes or in water.” Here we 
have traces of sub-groups based on habit or habitat. 
Under the third genus (Fishes) we have several 
such groups. He specifies (1) σκορπίος, δράκων, κόκ- 
κυξ, γλαῦκος, πέρκη, θρίσσα: (2) οἱ πετραῖοι (rock- 
haunting fishes), of which he mentions κίχλη, 
puis, ἐλεφιτίς (ἀλφηστής ?), κωβιός ; (3) οἱ πλανῆταια 
(wandering fishes), no example being named; (4) 
νάρκαι καὶ pivar καὶ ψῆσσαι καὶ ὅσα τοιαῦτα; (5) fishes 
which live in muddy and wet places—xépadou, κε- 
στραῖοι, ἐγχέλυες καὶ of λοιποὶ τοιοῦτοι ; (6) fishes of 
River and Lake (οἱ ποτάμιοι καὶ Arpvaior); (7) πολύ- 
modes καὶ σηπίαι καὶ τὰ τοιαῦτα ; (8) τὰ κογχύλια (i.e, 
Ostracoderms): πίνναι, πορφύραι, λεπάδες, κήρυκες, 
ὄστρεα, μύες, κτένες, τελλίναι, κνίδαι, ἐχῖνοι ; (9) κάρα- 
Bos, μύες (μαῖαι ἢ, καρκίνοι (ποτάμιοι καὶ θαλάσσιοι) 
—1.e. Crustaceans. 

This enumeration, as we have said, is introduced 
incidentally and there are indications that the writer 
was familiar with more detailed classifications. For 
example, he uses the term Selachian (τὰ σελάχεα), 
although he neither defines the group nor specifies 
the fishes which belong to it. Again, at the end of 
the list. he makes a series of other distinctions such 
as Wild and Tame (these latter again being sub- 


* This should correspond to Aristotle’s puddes or πελάγιοι 
but there is a curious discrepancy as to the quality of their 
flesh: Περὶ A. of δὲ πλανῆται καὶ κυματόπληγες... στερεωτέρην 
τὴν σάρκα ἔχουσιν, ἢ,6. than οἱ πετραῖοι, but A. 598 8 8 αἱ σάρκες 
συνεστᾶσι μᾶλλον τῶν τοιούτων ἰχθύων [1.9. τῶν προσγείωνἾ], τῶν 
δὲ πελαγίων ὑγραί εἰσι καὶ κεχυμέναι. 


XXIV 


INTRODUCTION 


divided into ἑλονόμα καὶ ἀγρονόμα on the one hand 
and τὰ ἔνδον τρεφόμενα on the other); Carnivorous 
(opopdya) and Vegetarian (ὑλοφάγα) ; ὀλιγοφάγα and 
πολυφάγα; καρποφάγα and ποηφάγα; ὀλιγοπότα and 
πολυπότα; and what suggests more than superficial 
observation, πολύαϊμα; ἄναιμα, ὀλίγαιμα. 

The real founder of scientific Zoology is Aristotle 
(385/4—322/1 B.c.), and for more than eighteen cen- 
turies writers on Natural History hardly. did more 
than copy or translate his works or comment upon 
them. We know but little of his predecessors in 
this field, as Aristotle is not prone to base his state- 
ments upon authority. In his History .of Animals 
(ai περὶ τὰ ζῷα ἱστορία!) the writers referred to are 
Aeschylus, Alemaeon ὃ of Croton, Ctesias 5 of Cnidus, 
Democritus,? Diogenes ὁ of Apollonia, Herodorus/ of 
Heracleia, Herodotus,? Homer,’ Musaeus,? Polybus 4 
son-in-law of Hippocrates, Simonides* of Ceos, 
Syennesis’ of Cyprus. But in any case, so far as 
scientific Zoology is concerned, the opinion of Cuvier 
is probably not far from the truth: “Je ne pense 
pas au reste qu il ait fait grand tort aux ichtyologistes 
qui l’ont précédé, 5} y en a eu avant Jui; ceux des 
fragmens conservés par Athénée que l’on pourrait 


*"633 a 19, 

> 492414; 581a16. 

ὁ 5014225; 523426; 606a8. 

@ 628 a 32. 

4 511b30; 512b 12. 

7 563a7; 615a9. 

9 593a 17: 579 Ὁ 2, 

Ὁ 513b27; 519418; 574634; 575b5; 578b1; 59706; 
606 a 20; 615b9; 618b25; 629 Ὁ 22. 

ὁ 563 a 18. 4 512b 12. 

k 542 b %. 511623; 512 012. 


XXKV 


OPPIAN ° 


leur attribuer, n’annoncent point qu’ils aient traité 
leur sujet avec méthode ou avec étendue; et tout 
nous fait croire que c’est sous la plume d’Aristote 
seulement que l’ichtyologie, comme toutes les autres 
branches de la zoologie, a pris pour la premiére fois 
la forme d’une véritable science’? (Cuv. et Val. i. 
. 16). 
A The chief writings of Aristotle upon Natural His- 
tory are 1. History of Animals, in ten Books. In the 
best mss. there are only nine Books and Bk. x. is 
universally regarded as spurious. Doubt has also 
been cast upon Bk. ix., and even upon Bk. vii., which 
in the mss. follows Bk. ix. and was first put in its 

present place by Theodorus Gaza (15th cent.). 2. 
~ On the Parts of Animals (Περὶ ζῴων μορίων), four 
Books. 3. On the Generation of Animals (Περὶ ζῴων 
γενέσεως), five Books. 4. On the Locomotion of Animals, 
one Book. 

With regard to the achievement of Aristotle in the 
field of Zoology we may conveniently quote—especi- 
ally as a large part of his work is concerned with. 
Ichthyology—the words of Cuvier in the Introduction 
to the Histoire Naturelle de Poissons: “Ce grand homme, 
secondé par un grand prince [Alexander the Great], 
rassembla de toute part des faits, et ils parurent dans 
ses ouvrages si nombreux et si nouveaux, que pendant 
plusieurs siécles ils excitérent la défiance de la 
postérité. Les personnages d’ Athénée se demandent 
[Athen. 352 4] οὰ Aristote a pu apprendre tout ce 
quil raconte des meeurs des poissons, de leur pro- 
pagation et des autres détails de leur histoire qui se 
passent dans les abymes les plus cachés de la mer. 
Athénée lui-méme répond a cette question, puisqu’il 
nous dit [Athen. 398 ὀκτακόσια yap εἰληφέναι τάλαντα 


XXvi 


INTRODUCTION 


map ᾿Αλεξάνδρου τὸν Σταγιρίτην λόγος ἔχει εἰς τὴν 
περὶ τῶν ζῴων ἱστορίαν] qu’ Alexandre donna ἃ Aristote, 
pour recueiller les matériaux de son histoire des 
animaux, des sommes qui montérent 4 neuf [510] cents 
talens, ἃ quoi Pline [viii, 44] ajoute que le roi mit 
plusieurs millier’y d’hommes ἃ la disposition du 
philosophe, pour chasser, pécher et observer tout ce 
qu il désirait connaitre. 

“ Ce n’est pas ici le lieu d’exposer en détail le parti 
qu’Aristote tira de cette munificence, d’analyser 
ses nombreux ouvrages d’histoire naturelle, et 
d’énumérer l’immense quantité de faits et de lois 
qu'il est parvenu 4 constater; nous ne nous occu- 
perons pas méme de montrer avec quel génie il jeta 
les bases de l’anatomie comparée, et établit dans 
le régne animal, et dans plusieurs de ses classes, 
d’aprés leur organisation, une distribution ἃ laquelle 
les Ages suivans n’ont presque rien eu ἃ changer. 
C’est uniquement comme ichtyologiste .que nous 
avons 4 le considérer, et dans cette branche méme 
de la zoologie, n’edt-il traité que celle-la, on devrait 
encore le reconnaitre comme un homme supérieur. 
1] a parfaitement connu la structure générale des 
poissons. . . . Quant aux espéces, Aristote en connait 
et en nomme jusqu’a cent dix-sept, et il entre, sur 
leur maniére de vivre, leurs voyages, leurs amitiés et 
leurs haines, les ruses qu’elles emploient, leurs 
amours, les époques de leur frai et de leur ponte et 
leur fécondité, la maniere de les prendre, les temps 
ou leur chair est meilleure, dans des détails que l’on 
serait aujourd’hui bien embarrassé, ou de contredire 
ou de confirmer, tant les modernes soient loin d’avoir 
observé les poissons comme ce grand _ naturaliste 
parait Vavoir fait par lui-méme ou par ses corres- 


XXvii 


OPPIAN 


pondants. I] faudrait passer plusieurs années dans 
les iles de l’Archipel, et y vivre avec les pécheurs, 
pour étre en état d’avoir une opinion a ce sujet” 
(Cuv. et Val. pp. 16 ff.). - 

Two examples may be quoted to illustrate the 
accurate observation either of Aristotle himself or of 
his informants: (1) the assertion (A. 538a 20; 567a 
27) that the Erythrinos and the Channa (both belong- 
ing to the genus Serranus) are hermaphrodite, a fact 
rediscovered by Cavolini¢ (2) The assertion (A. 
565 Ὁ 4) that in the Smooth Dog-fish, yaAeds ὁ λεῖος, 
the embryon is attached to the uterus by a “ yolk- 
sac placenta,” rediscovered by Johannes Miller, 
“Ueber d. glatten Hai d. Aristoteles (Mustelus 
laevis),” Abh. ἃ. Berlin. Akad. 1840. 

As regards the classification of animals we can 
here notice only the main outlines of Aristotle’s 
system. All animals are distributed into two groups: 
I. ἔναιμα,. blooded animals [ = Vertebrates]. II. 
ἄναιμα, bloodless animals [ = Invertebrates]. 

Group I., ἔναιμα, is subdivided into: 
(a) ζῳοτοκοῦντα ἐν αὑτοῖς [ = Mammals]. 
(ὁ) ὄρνιθες [Birds], 
(0) τετράποδα ἢ ἄποδα φοτοκοῦντα [Reptiles and 
Amphibia]. 
(d) ἰχθύες [Fishes]. 
Group II., ἄναιμα, is subdivided into : 
(a) μαλάκια [Cephalopods]. ° 
δ) μαλακόστρακα [Crustaceans]. 
‘3 ἔντομα [Insects, Arachnidae, Worms]. 
(d) ὀστρακόδερμα [Mussels, Sea-snails, Ascidia, 
Holothuria, Actinia, Sponges]. 
τ τ emoria sulla generazione dei pesci 6 dei granchi, Naples, 
XXVili 


INTRODUCTION 


Theophrastus of Eresos (circ. 372-287), the suc- 
cessor of Aristotle as head of the Peripatetic school, 
wrote Ilepi ζῴων (Athen. 387 b), Ilept τῶν δακέτων 
καὶ βλητικῶν (Athen. 314 ο), Περὶ τῶν μεταβαλλόντων 
τὰς χρόας (Athen. 817 f), Περὶ τῶν φωλευόντων 
(Athen. 314 b, eté), Ilept τῶν ἐν τῷ ξηρῷ διαιτωμένων 
(Athen. 812 b: διατριβόντων 817 f), Περὶ τῶν κατὰ 
τόπους διαφορῶν (Athen. 317 f), which are known to 
us only by quotations. 

Aristophanes of Byzantium (circ. 257-180 B.C.) 
made an Epitome of Aristotle’s History of Animals, 
which was used by Aelian (circ. a.p. 200) and Suidas 
(cire. Α.Ὁ. 950) and is perhaps identical. with the 
pseudo-Aristotelian ζωικά (Athen. 319 d, etc.). This 
Epitome was extracted by Sopatros of Apameia (4th 
cent. a.p.), cf: Phot. Bibl. 104b26 ὁ δε ἐνδέκατος ἔχει 
τὴν συναγωγὴν... ἀλλὰ μὴν καὶ ἐκ τῶν ᾽Αριστο- 
φάνους τοῦ γραμματικοῦ περὶ ζῴων βιβλίου πρώτου 
καὶ δευτέρου. Extracts were also made from the 
Epitome for Constantine VII. (Porphyrogennetos), 
Emperor a.p. 912-959 [ed. Spuridion Lambros, Suppl. 
Aristot. 1. Berlin 1885]. 

Clearchus of Soli (3rd cent. 8.c.) wrote Περὲ ἐνύδρων 
Athen. 332 b, cf: 317 c]. Nicander of Colophon 
tb circ. 200 B.c.) wrote the extant T'heriaca and Alezi- 
pharmaca, the former on the bites of venomous 
animals and their remedies, the latter on antidotes 
to poison. Tryphon of Alexandria (1st cent. B.c.) 
wrote ΠΕερὶ ζῴων (Suid. s. Τρύφων, Athen. 324 f). 
Dorion (for whom see Athen. 337 b, Μ. Wellmann, 
Hermes 23 [1888]) wrote, in 1st cent. B.c., Περὶ 
ἰχθύων, frequently cited by’ Athenaeus. Juba IL., 
king of Mauretania, after the death of his father in 
46 B.c., was brought a prisoner (Plut. Caes. 55 ᾿Ιόβας 


XXix 


OPPIAN 


vids ὧν ἐκείνου κομιδῇ νήπιος ἐν TH θριάμβῳ παρήχθη, 
μακαριωτάτην ἁλοὺς ἅλωσιν, ἐκ βαρβάρου καὶ Νομάδος 
Ἑλλήνων τοῖς πολυμαθεστάτοις ἐναρίθμιος γενέσθαι 
συγγραφεῦσι) to Rome, where he remained till his 
restoration by Octavian in 30 B.c. One of the most 
erudite men of his time (Plut. Sert. 9 ἱστορικωτάτου 
βασιλέων ; Athen. 88 Ὁ ἄνδρα πολυμαθέστατον ; Plin. 
v. 16 studiorum claritate memorabilior etiam quam 
regno), he wrote on Assyria, Arabia, and Africa—his 
work on the latter supplying information on the 
Elephant (Plin. viii. 7, 14, 35; Plut. Mor. 972 b; 
Ael. ix. 58), the Lion (Ael. vii. 23), the Crocotta 
(Plin. viii. 107) etc., cf’ M. Wellmann, Hermes 27 
(1892) “Iuba eine Quelle ἃ. Aelian” About the same 
date Metrodorus of Byzantium and his son Leonidas 
(Athen. 13 ς, cf. M. Wellmann, Hermes 30 [1895] 
“ Leonidas von Byzanz u. Demostratos’’) and Demo- 
stratus wrote on Fishes (Ael. Ν. 4. epilog.). Alex- 
ander of Myndos (first half of Ist cent. a.p., cf. M. 
Wellmann, Hermes 26 [1891], 51 [1916]) wrote Iepi 
ζῴων (Athen. 392 c, Bk. II. being on Birds, περὲ 
πτηνῶν, Athen. 388 ἃ etc.), based mainly on Aristo- 
phanes’ Epitome of the H.A. of Aristotle, as well as 
a Θηριακός and a Θαυμασίων συναγωγή (Phot. Bibl. 
p. 145 b Bekker λέγει δὲ περί τε ζῴων Kal φυτῶν καὶ 
χωρῶν τινῶν καὶ ποταμῶν καὶ κρηνῶν καὶ βοτανῶν καὶ 
τῶν τοιούτων). He made use of Leonidas of Byzan- 
tium and Juba, and was one of the sources of Aelian, 
Dionysius De avibus, and Plut. De sollert. animalium. 
Pamphilos of Alexandria (middle of Ist cent. a.p.) 
was the author of a lexicon Περὶ γλωσσῶν ἤτοι λέξεων, 
in ninety-five books. This lexicon, which was at 
once a glossary and an encyclopaedia of general 
information, was excerpted in the reign of Hadrian 


XXX 


INTRODUCTION 


first by Julius Vestinus and then by Diogenianus of 
Heracleia—the work of the latter being the basis of 
the extant lexicon of Hesychius. The zoological 
matter in Pamphilus was utilized by Aelian, Athe- 
naeus, etc.; cf. M. Wellmann, Hermes 51 (1916). 
Plutarch of Chaeroneia (circ. a.v. 46-120) wrote De 
sollertia animalium (Πότερα τῶν ζῴων φρονιμώτερα, τὰ 
χερσαῖα ἢ τὰ ἔνυδρα) and Bruta ratione uti ΑἸερὲ τοῦ τὰ 
ἄλογα λόγῳ χρῆσθαι). ! 

More or less contemporary with Oppian (i.e., the 
author of the Halieutica) was Julius Polydeuces 
(Pollux) of Naucratis in Egypt, whose extant ’Ovopa- 
στικόν (ten books), dedicated to Commodus, Emperor 
180-192, contains a good deal of zoological informa- 
tion. Somewhat later Claudius Aelianus of Praeneste 
(circ. a.pD. 170-235) wrote De natura animalium (TIepi 
ζώων) in seventeen books and Varia historia (Ποικέλη 
ἱστορία) in fourteen books. Lastly we may mention 
here, although we know on his own authority that 
he was a little later than the author of the Halieutica 
(Athen. 13 b τὸν ὀλίγῳ πρὸ ἡμῶν γενόμενον ᾿Οππιανὸν 
τὸν Kihixa), Athenaeus of Naucratis, whose Δειπνο- 
σοφισταί, in fifteen books, contains an immense 
amount of undigested information. His zoological 
information is probably largely based on the Lexicon 
of Pamphilus and thus indirectly on Alexander of 
Myndos. 

M. Wellmann, who has discussed the sources of 
Aelian, Oppian, ete., in a series of articles in 
Hermes (23 [1888], 26 [1891], 27 [1892], 30 [1895], 
51. [1916]) regards Leonidas of Byzantium and 
Alexander of Myndos as the’ chief sources of the 
Haleutica, The close agreement in many passages 
of Aelian and Oppian he attributes to the use of 


Xxxi 


OPPIAN — 


common sources, not to direct borrowing of the one 
from the other. 


11. Huntine, Fisnine, Fow.ine 


And God said, Let us make man in our image, 
after our likeness: and let them have dominion over 
the fish of the sea, and over the fowl of the air, and 
over the cattle, and over all the earth, and over 
every creeping thing that creepeth upon the earth. 
—Genesis i. 26. 


ἰχθύσι μὲν καὶ Onpot Kat οἰωνοῖς rerenvois. Hesiod, 


φῦλά θ᾽ ἑρπετὰ τόσσα τρέφει μέλαινα γαῖα 

θῆρές τ᾽ ὀρεσκῷοι καὶ γένος μελισσᾶν 

καὶ κνώδαλ᾽ ἐν βένθεσσι πορφυρέας ἁλός, 

εὕδουσιν δ᾽ ὀϊωνῶν φῦλα τανυπτερύγων. Aleman fr. 
65 (10). 

κουφονόων τε φῦλον ὀρνίθων ἀμφιβαλὼν ἄ ἄγει 

καὶ θηρῶν ἀ ἀγρίων ἔθνη πόντου τ' εἰναλίαν φύσιν 

σπείραισι δικτυοκλώστοις 


περιφραδὴς ἀνήρ. Soph. Antig. 343 ff. 


Tum laqueis captare feras et fallere visco 
inventum et magnos canibus circumdare saltus, 
atque alius latum funda iam verberat amnem 
alta petens pelagoque alius trahit humida lina. 
Verg. Georg. i. 139 ff. 

Corresponding to the popular division of wild life 
according to habitat—creatures of the land, the 
water, the air—we find the art of capturing or 
ΧΧΧΙΪ 


INTRODUCTION 


killing wild creatures divided into Hunting, Fishing, 
Fowling. Xen. Hell. iv. 1. 15 ἔνθα καὶ τὰ βασίλεια 
ἦν Φαρναβάζῳ. εἷς καὶ θῆραι αἱ μὲν καὶ ἐν περιειργμένοις 
παραδείσοις, αἵ δὲ καὶ ἐν ἀναπεπταμένοις τόποις, πάγκαλαι. 
περιέρρει δὲ καὶ ποταμὸς παντοδαπῶν ἐχθύων πλήρης. 
ἦν δὲ καὶ τὰ πτηνὰ "ἄφθονα τοῖς ὀρνιθεῦσαι δυναμένοις ; 
Οἷς. De fin. ii. 8. 25 piscatu, aucupio, venatione; 
Plin. viii, 44 Alexandro Magno rege inflammato 
cupidine animalium naturas noscendi delegataque 
hae commentatione Aristoteli, sammo in omni doc- 
trina viro, aliquot millia hominum in totius Asiae 
Graeciaeque tractu. parere iussa omnium quos 
venatus, aucupia, piscatusque alebant quibusque 
vivaria, armenta, alvearia, piscinae, aviaria in cura 
erant, ne quid usquam genitum ignoraretur ab eo. 
Pliny’s alebant reminds us that the capture of wild 
creatures was at first a practical affair, the provision 
of food ; cf: Pind. I. i. 47 μισθὸς yap ἄλλοις. ἄλλος ἐφ᾽ 
ἕρμασιν ἀνθρώποις “γλυκύς, | μηλοβότᾳ τ᾽ ἀρότᾳ τ᾽ 
ὀρνιχολόχῳ τε καὶ ὃν πόντος τρέφει" | γαστρὶ δὲ πᾶς 
τις ἀμύνων λιμὸν αἰανῆ τέταται. And it may be 
noted that Izaak Walton, The Compleat Angler, c. i. 
makes each of his three disputants, Auceps, Venator, 
and Piscator, in commending the rival claims of 
their different arts, refer to this practical aspect: 
-Auceps: “the very birds of the air... are both 
so many and so useful and pleasant to mankind. 

They both feed and refresh him; feed him with 
their choice bodies, and refresh him with their 
heavenly voices.” Venator: “the Earth feeds man 
and all those several beasts that both feed him and 
afford him recreation.” Piscator: “And it may be 
fit to remember that Moses appointed fish to be 
the chief diet for the best commonwealth that 


c XXXiil 


OPPIAN 


ever was.” Later the three arts are regarded more 
as forms of healthy recreation or, in the case 
of Hunting, as useful preparation for the art of 
war: Xenoph. Cyn. 1. 18 ἐγὼ μὲν οὖν παραινῶ. τοῖς 
νέοις μὴ καταφρονεῖν κυνηγεσίων μηδὲ τῆς ἄλλης 
παιδείας: ἐκ τούτων γὰρ γίγνονται τὰ εἰς τὸν πόλεμον 
ἀγαθοί. 

In the Greek Anthology we have a series of 
epigrams (4.P, vi. 11-16 and 179-187) in which 
three brothers, Damis, a Hunter, Pigres, a Fowler, 
Cleitor, a Fisher, make dedicatory offerings of the 
instruments of their several crafts. 

1, Fowling (ὀρνυθευτική, ἰξευτική, aucupium). The 
methods of the Fowler are alluded to C. i. 64ff.,, 
H. i, 31 ff; iv. 120 ff. (where see notes). The 
practice of Hawking is mentioned in Aristot. H.A. 
620 a 32 ἐν δὲ Θράκῃ τῇ καλουμένῃ ποτὲ Κεδρειπόλει 
ἐν τῷ ἕλει θηρεύουσιν οἱ ἄνθρωποι τὰ ὀρνίθια. κοινῇ 
μετὰ τῶν ἱεράκων" οἱ μὲν γὰρ ἔχοντες ξύλα σοβοῦσι 
τὸν κάλαμον Kat τὴν ὕλην ἵνα πέτωνται τὰ ὀρνίθια, οἱ 
δ᾽ ἱέρακες ἄνωθεν ὑπερφαινόμενοι καταδιώκουσιν: ταῦτα 
δὲ φοβούμενα κάτω πέτονται πάλιν πρὸς τὴν γῆν" οἱ δ᾽ 
ἄνθρωποι τύπτοντες τοῖς ξύλοις λαμβάνουσι, καὶ τῆς 
θήρας μεταδιδόασιν αὐτοῖς: ῥίπτουσι γὰρ τῶν ὀρνίθων, 
οἱ δὲ ὑπολαμβάνουσιν. The same story is: told A. 
Mirab. 841 Ὁ 15 ff., Antig. 28, Ael. ii. 42, Plin. x. 23. 
For a different method of employing the Hawk see 
Dionys. De av. iii. 5 and for the employment of 
the Owl (γλαῦξ, noctua) see Dionys. De av. iii: 17, 
Arist. H.A. 609 a 13 τῆς. δὲ ἡμέρας καὶ τὰ ἄλλα ὀρνίθια 
τὴν γλαῦκα περιπέταται, ὃ καλεῖται θαυμάξειν, καὶ 
προσπετόμενα τίλλουσιν᾽ διὸ οἱ ὀρνιθοθῆραι θηρεύουσιν 
αὐτῇ παντοδαπὰ ὀρνίθια ; cf. 617b4. For Doves 
(περιστεραί) as Decoy birds cf. Aristoph. Av. 1082 


XXXiV 


INTRODUCTION 


Tas περιστεράς θ᾽ ὁμοίως συλλαβὼν εἵρξας ἔχει, | 
κἀπαναγκάζει παλεύειν δεδεμένας ἐν δικτύῳ; Arist. 
H.A, 613a23, Ael. iv. 16, xiii. 17; for Part- 
ridges used in the same way, Arist. HLA. 614a 10, 
Ael. iv. 16. Cf. in general Xen. Cyrop. i. 6. 89 σὺ 
γὰρ ἐπὶ μὲν τὰς "ὄρνιθας ἐν τῷ ἰσχυροτάτῳ χειμῶνι 
ἀνιστάμενος ἐπορεύου νυκτός, καὶ πρὶν κινεῖσθαι τὰς 
ὄρνιθας ἐπεποίηντό σοι αἱ πάγαι αὐταῖς καὶ τὸ KEKL- 
νημένον χωρίον ἐξείκαστο, τῷ ἀκινήτῳ' ὄρνιθες δ᾽ 
ἐξεπεπαίδευντό σοι ὡς σοὶ μὲν τὰ συμφέροντα ὑπηρετεῖν, 
τὰς δὲ ὁμοφύλους ὄρνιθας ἐξαπατᾶν. F owling furnishes 
Homer with a simile O. xxii, 468 ws δ᾽ ὅταν ἢ κίχλαι 
τανυσίπτεροι ἠὲ πέλειαι | ¢ épke ἐνιπλήξωσι, τά θ᾽ ἑστήκῃ 
ἐνὲ θάμνῳ, αὖλιν ἐσιέμεναι, στυγερὸς δ᾽ ὑπεδέζατο 
κοῖτος, | ὡς αἵ y ἑξείης κεφαλὰς ἔχον, ἀμφὶ δὲ πάσαις] 
δειρῇσι βρόχοι ἦσαν. The Fowler’s dedications in 
the A.P. vi. include νεφέλαι, ἰχνοπέδη, παγίς, κλωβιοί, 
στάλικες (stakes to support the nets), limed reeds, 
ἐπισπαστήρ (=émridpopos of the Hunter's net), and 
a net or noose for catching cranes by the neck 
(ἄρκυν te kAayepov λαιμοπέδαν γεράνων, cf. Sepayxn 
A.P. vi, 109). 

Of ancient writings on Fowling we possess, in 
addition to some fragments of the De aucupio of 
Nemesianus (a.p. 3rd cent.), a prose paraphrase by 
Eutecnius of a lost poem—sometimes supposed to be 
the ᾿Ιξευτικά ascribed to Oppian (Suid. 5. ᾿θΟππιανός), 
but now generally attributed to Dionysius the 
Periegete (in time of Hadrian). We quote it as 
Dionys. De av. 1.6. Διονυσίου περὶ ᾿Ορνίθων (Cramer 
Anec. Par. i. 22f.). The treatise (3 Bks.) reminds 
one of the Oppianic manner.’ Thus Bk. III. begins, 
like our Cynegetica and Halieutica, with a com- 
parison of Hunting, Fishing, and Fowling. While 


XKXKV 


OPPIAN | 


the business of the first two is hazardous, “it suffices 
the Fowlers ‘to wander with delight in plain and 
grove and meadow and to hearken to the sweet 
singing of the birds, using neither sword nor club 
nor spear, nor employing nets and dogs, but carrying 
only birdlime and reeds, and fine lines and lightest 
creels (κύρτους, traps, cages) under the arm. | Some- 
times too they dress a tree with branches not its 
own and bring tame birds to share the hunt.” 
Fowling methods are summarized thus: ἰξῷ χρωμένοις 
ἢ θριξὶν ἱππείαις ἢ λίνοις ἢ πάγαις ἢ καὶ πηκτίσιν ἢ 
τροφῇ δελεάζουσιν ἢ τὸν σύμφυλον ὄρνιν ἐπιδεικνῦσιν, 
Pliny x. deals with Birds. There are nine lines 
on Fowling (Paulini Nolani carmen de aucupio) in 
Poet. Lat. Minores, ed. N. E. Lemaire, Paris, 1824, 
vol. 1. 

2. Hunting (κυνηγέσιον, κυνηγετική, venalio). On 
Hunting we possess the Cynegeticus of Xenophon 
(ο. 430—c. 354 B.c.) and the supplementary Cynegeticus 
of Arrian (c. a.p. 150), and in Latin the Cynegetica of 
Grattius (contemporary of Ovid, cf, Ep. ex Pont. iv. 
16. 34 aptaque venanti Grattius arma daret) in 541 
hexameters, and the Cynegetica of Nemesianus (a.D. 
3rd cent.). Much useful information is to be found 
in the Onomasticon of Pollux (circ. a:p. 166 dedicated 
to Commodus), especially v. 1-94, which is practically 
a systematic treatise on the subject; in the περὶ 
Ζφων of Aelian (in time of Septimius Severus); and 
in the Natural History of Pliny (a.v. 23-79), especially 
Bk. viii., as well as in the Res rusticae. of. Varro 
(116-278.c.), the De re rustica of Columella (A.D. 
Ist cent.), and Palladius (a.p. iv. cent.). Merely 
incidental references are often instructive, e.g. Xen. 
Cyr. i. 6. 40 “ Against the Hare, again, because he 


XXXVi 


INTRODUCTION 


feeds in the night and hides by day, you reared dogs 
which should find him by scent. And because, 
when found, he fled swiftly, you had other dogs 
fitted to take him by speed of foot. If again, he 
escaped these also, you would learn his roads and 
the sort of places that he is caught fleeing to, and in 
these you would spread nets difficult to see and the 
Hare in his impetuous flight would fall into them 
and entangle himself. And, to prevent him from 
escaping even from these, you set watchers of what 
happened (7.e. ἀρκυωροί Xen. Cyn. 6.5), who from 
close at hand might quickly be on the spot; and 
you behind shouting close upon the Hare frightened 
him so that he was foolishly taken, while, by in- 
structing those in front to be silent, you caused 
their ambush not to be perceived.” See also “ Joannis 
Caii Britanni De canbus Britannicis” and “ Hier. 
Fracastorii Alcon sive De cura canum Venaticorum” 
in Lemaire, op. cit. vol. 1. pp. 147 ff. The work. of 
Dr. Caius—founder of Caius College, Cambridge—is 
addressed to Gesner. 

3. Fishing (ἁλιευτική, piscatus). We possess a 
fragment—some 132 hexameters—of the Halieutica 
of Ovid (cf. Plin. xxxii. 152 his adiciemus ab Ovidio 
posita nomina quae apud neminem alium reperiuntur, 
sed fortassis in Ponto nascentium, ubi id volumen 
supremis suis temporibus inchoavit: bovem, cercurum 
in scopulis viventem, orphum rubentemque erythinum, 
tulum, pictas mormyras aureique coloris chrysophryn, 
praeterea sparum, tragum, et placentem cauda mela- 
nurum, epodas lati generis, Praeterea haec insignia 
piscium tradit : channen ex se ipsa concipere, glaucum 
aestate nunquam apparere, pompilum qui semper 
comitetur navium. cursus, chromim qui nidificet in 


XXXVIL 


i 


OPPIAN © 


aquis. Helopem dicit nostris incognitum undis, ex 
quo apparet falli eos qui eundem acipenserem existi- 
maverint. Helopi palmam saporis inter pisces multi 
dedere), the genuineness of which has been wrongly 
suspected. But for the most part we must depend 
on general works, such as Aristot. H.A., Ael. N.A., 
Pliny (especially ix. and xxxii.) and other works 
mentioned in the previous section (Hunting). 

In Plato’s Sophist 219 sq., Socrates, wishing to 
define a sophist and considering that the sophist is 
a γένος χαλεπὸν καὶ δυσθήρευτον, proposes to practise 
definition on an easier subject, and he selects the 
- Angler (ἀσπαλιευτής) as “known to everyone and 
not a person to be taken very seriously.” He pro- 
ceeds as follows : 

Angling is an Art and of the two kinds of Art— 
Creative and Acquisitive—it belongs to the latter. 
Again the Acquisitive is of two kinds—that which 
proceeds by voluntary Exchange and that which 
proceeds by Force—and Angling belongs to the 
latter. Force may be open, z.e. Fighting, or secret, 
i.e. Hunting. Hunting again is of the Lifeless—this 
sort of Hunting has “no special name except some 
sorts of diving” (Plato no doubt means σπογγοθηρική 
[sponge-cutting, Poll. vii. 139 or the like ])—or of the 
Living, 1.6. Animal Hunting. This again is divided 
into Hunting of Land Animals and Hunting of Water 
Animals (Animals which swim). Water animals 
may be Winged, 1.6. Birds, and the hunting of these 
is called Fowling, or they may live in the water, and 
the hunting of these is called Fishing. Of Fishing 
there are two kinds, that which proceeds by En- 
closures (é€pxn)—1.e. κύρτοι, δίκτυα, βρόχοι, πόρκοι, 


and the like—and that which proceeds by Striking 


XXXVHi 


INTRODUCTION 


(πληγή), 1.6. by Hooks (ἄγκιστρα) and Tridents (τριό- 
dovtes). This again is divided into (1) Night-fishing, 
done by the light of a fire and called by fishermen 
mupevtiky ; (2) Day-fishing, which may be called as 
a whole ἀγκιστρευτική, ὡς ἐχόντων ἐν ἄκροις ἄγκιστρα 
καὶ τῶν τριοδόντων» but is further divided into (1) 
τριόδοντία or Spearing, in which the blow is down- 
ward and the’ fish is struck in any part of the body ; 
(2) ἀσπαλιευτική or Angling, where the fish is hooked 
about the head or mouth and drawn upwards from 
below by rods or reeds (ῥάβδοις καὶ καλάμοις ἀνα- 
σπώμενον) ; cf. Plato, Laws, 823. 

Oppian, H. iii. 72 ff., distinguishes four methods of 
Fishing—by Hook and Line, Nets, Weels, Trident. 

With regard to the Hook and Line he distinguishes 
Rod-fishing from fishing without a Rod, z.e. with hand- 
lines, and in the case of the latter method he: dis- 
tinguishes two sorts of line—the κάθετος, or leaded line 
(see H. iii. 77 τι.) and the πολυάγκιστρον, or line with 
many hooks, for which cf: A. 621 ἃ 15 ἁλίσκονται (sc. 
af ἀλώπεκες, Fox Sharks) περὶ ἐνίους τόπους πόλυ- 
αγκίστροις ; 582 Ὁ 9 a certain monstrous sea creature 
is said “λαβέσθαι ποτὲ τοῦ πολυαγκίστρου τῷ ἄκρῳ av- 
τοῦ, i.e. to have seized a night-line with its extremity. 
Apost. p. 47 is disposed to identify the πολυάγκιστρον 
with a species of lines used in Greece to-day especially 
for catching “EpvOpivia (Sea-breams) but also for 
other fishes. These lines are called παραγάδια, 
presumably from being mainly used near the land 
(παρὰ γῆν, παραγάδι). It isa species of line, he says, 
well known in the N. of France and on all the coasts 
of England, where it is used for catching Congers 
and Rays. It consists of a very long and strong 
line, which; to protect it from the action of the salt 


ΧΧΧΙΧ 


OPPIAN 


water, is dyed red by dipping in an infusion of oak- 
bark and which carries a large number of hooks 
attached at intervals by short lines of finer quality 
(παράμωλα). This sort of line is-employed at night. 
One end is anchored, while to the other end a piece 
of cork or the like is attached to indicate its position. 
On dark nights, in place of a cork, a triangle is 
attached, made of wood of the elder-tree, surmounted 
by a bell, which rings as it is swayed by the waves 
and so guides the fisherman to the spot. When this 
engine is withdrawn from the sea, the lines are 
arranged in a basket, the sides of which are furnished 
with pieces of cork into which the hooks are stuck. 
At Paxo, near Corfu, these lines are arranged in such 
a way that they float and small sails are attached 
which, driven by the wind, set the whole apparatus 
in motion. 

With regard to Nets the different sorts mentioned 
by Oppian are not easy to identify with certainty, 

1. δίκτυον is generic for every sort of Net. 

2. ἀμφίβληστρον is usually taken to be a “ casting- 
net,” which is supported by Hesiod, Sc. 213 f, αὐτὰρ 
ἐπ᾿ ἀκταῖς | ἧστο ἀνὴρ ἁλιεὺς δεδοκημένος: εἶχε δὲ 
χερσὶν | ἰχθύσιν ἀμφίβληστρον ἀπορρίψοντι ἐοικώς, 
although Theocritus i. 44. in ἃ parallel passage has 
μέγα δίκτυον és βόλον ἕλκει. This sense. suits Aesch, 
Ag. 1382, where Clytemnestra, describing how she 
enveloped Agamemnon in a bath-robe, says: ἀμφί- 
βληστρον | ὥσπερ ἰχθύων περιστιχίζω, πλοῦτον εἵματος 
κακόν. Cf. Aesch. Ch. 492; Herod. i, 141; ii, 95. 
Pollux i. 97 mentions together δίκπυα, ἀμφίβληστρα, 
γρῖφοι, πάναγρον λίνον, and so x. 188 where he adds 
γάγγαμον. Plut. Mor, 977 Ε οἱ ὃ ἁλιεῖς συνορῶντες 
os σὰ πλεῖστα διακρουόμενα τὰς da’ ἀγκίστρου βολὰς 


Χ] 


INTRODUCTION 


ἐπὶ βίας ἐτράπησαν, καθάπερ of ἹΤΠέρσαι σαγηνεύοντες 
(Herod. iii. 149, vi. 81), ὡς τοῖς ἐνσ χεθεῖσιν ἐκ λογισμοῦ 
καὶ σοφίας διάφευξιν οὖσαν. ἀμφιβλήστροις μὲν γὰρ 
καὶ ὑποχαῖς. κεστρεῖς καὶ ἰουλίδες ἁλίσκονται, μόρμυροί 
τε καὶ σαργοὶ καὶ κωβιοὶ καὶ λάβρακες: τὰ δὲ βολιστικὰ 
καλούμενα, τρίγλα καὶ χρυσωπὸν καὶ σκορπίον, γρίποις 
[ἀφ. γρίφοις] τε καὶ σαγήναις σύρουσι περιλαμβάνοντες: 
τῶν δικτύων οὖν τὸ γένος ὀρθῶς “Ὅμηρος πάναγρον 
προσεῖπεν (Il, ν. 487). The. primary meaning of 
“ casting-net ” seems pretty well established, but it 
could easily be extended. to any sort of Net (Aesch. 
ΡΟ, 81 of the chains of Prometheus, Soph. Ant. 
343 φῦλον ὀρνίθων ἀμφιβαλὼν ἄγει σπείραιοι δικτυο- 
κλώστοις). In the N.T. Matth. iv. 18 and John xxi. 
some difficulties are raised which cannot be discussed 
here. Usually a “casting-net” is understood to be 
a Net cast by a single person and immediately with- 
drawn. It is thus the πεζύβολος of modern Greece : 
Apost. p. 38 “Le, πεζόβολος, épervier, est un filet 
qu'on jette de terre en entrant parfois dans l’eau jus- 
qu’aux genoux. Onle tire a la hate et aussitét aprés 
lavoir lancé pour ne pas laisser aux poissons avant 
qu'il ne se renferme le temps de s’échapper entre les 
mailles et le fond de la mer. Cet engin est, croyons- 
nous, celui qu Oppian décrit dans ses ᾿Αλιευτικά 
sous le nom de σῴφαιρών [see below]. La forme 
méme de l’engin autorise cette supposition. 1] faut 
une grande adresse pour se servir de cet filet. Le 
pécheur doit le lancer de maniére ἃ ce qu’il tombe 
tout ouvert sur le bane des. poissons 41} a apercu 
du rivage.” 

Those nets which are withdrawn a few moments 
after being cast. are called in M. G. Nets ἀπὸ βολῆς 
(at, Paros ἡμεροβόλια), or ἀφρόδυκτα 1.6. foam-nets, 


xli 


OPPIAN 


being designed to catch surface fishes, ἀφρόψαρα, 
fishes which swim between two waters, such as 
Mackerel, Horse-Mackerel, etc. Nets, on the other 
hand, which are shot in the morning and drawn next 
morning are called ἀπὸ στατοῦ, and are generally 
“ compound,” μανώμενα, consisting of a Net with fine 
meshes between two with larger meshes, as opposed 
to the simple Nets, ἁπλάδια, Apost. pp. 32 f. 

3. ypipos (γρῖπος) is the generic name for the 
draw-net or seine. Plutarch, as we have seen, 
couples γρῖφος and σαγήνη. Cf. A.P. vi. 28. 8 δέξο 
σαγηναίοιο λίνου τετριμμένον ἅλμῃ | λείψανον, αὐχ- 
μηρόν, EavOev ἐπ’ ἠιόνων, γρίπους τε; cf. Poll. i. 97, x. 
132. So the Nets employed in analogous manner 
for the capture of land animals and bearing the 
same names are coupled by Plut. Mor. 471 " οὐδ᾽ ὁ 
γρίφοις καὶ σαγήναις ἐλάφους μὴ λαμβάνων. Aposto- 
lides p. 35 (who errs in thinking that Oppian 
identifies ypipos and ἀμφίβληστρον) describes the 
γρῖφος as consisting of two parallel nets, to which is 
attached another having the form of a sack. These 
two nets are called at Poros [off coast of Argolis] 
πτερά, “wings.” The parallel Nets are suspended 
on two cords; the lower having hung on it at equal 
intervals pieces of lead (μολυβίθρες), the upper, called 
in some places σαρδούνας (cf. Xen. Cyn. 6.9 σαρδονίων, 
Poll. v. 31 σαρδόνες), being hung with corks (φελλοῦ.. 
The two pieces of wood, at the front ends of the 
two parallel Nets, to which is attached the cord by 
which the seine is drawn to land, are called at Paros 
σταλίκια, the triangular cord being called yaXtvos. | 

Three species of seine are used in modern ‘Greece 
according to Apostolides, 1. the yptros proper, called’ 
in many places trata, consisting of two parallel nets 


xlii 


INTRODUCTION 


with very large meshes and the bag-net with very 
fine meshes. It is cast by a special boat and drawn 
to land. [ is used especially for Sardines and other 
surface fish. One of these Nets employs fifteen or 
more men. 2. The γριπαρόλι or. κωλοβρέχτης, a 
smaller sort, managed by four men, used for catching 
Grey Mullets and other shore fishes. 3. The ἀνεμό- 
tpara, a very large seine. In the use of this two 
boats are always associated. They set out early in 
the morning, taking advantage of the off-shore wind 
(adxoy.)—which in summer blows during the night 
from the land—and when they reach the open sea 
they cast the seine, moor their boats, and remain till 
mid-day. Then when the landward breeze begins 
to blow, the two boats proceed, parallel. to one 
another, harbourwards, drawing the seine behind 
them. - 

4. γάγγαμον. The name ydyyapov (γαγγάμιον) is 
still used round the Black Sea, although in most 
parts of Greece a slightly altered form—yayyaPpa— 
is in use. The Net is a dredge-net: and is employed 
in fishing for Sponges, Oysters, and Sea-urchins. It is 
constructed thus : “autour d’un arc en fer est cousu 
un filet de forme conique; la corde, trés large, de 
Vare est aussi en fer; de la corde et de l’are partent 
en rayonnant différentes cordes, au point de rencontre 
desquelles est attachée une grosse corde au moyen 
de laquelle on tire l'appareil.” Cf. schol. yayyapov 
γαγγάμη, λίνος παχὺς δικτυωτός, σιδήρῳ κύκλῳ περι- 
ἐχόμενος; Aesch. Ag. 861 μέγα δουλείας γάγγαμον 
ἄτης παναλώτου. Strabo 307, speaking of the cold 
in the region of the Sea of Azov, says: ὀρυκτοί τέ εἰσιν 
ἰχθύες οἱ ἀποληφθέντες ἐν τῷ κρυστάλλῳ τῇ προσ- 


ἀγορευομένῃ γαγγάμη. Poll. i 169 τὸ δικτυῶδες ὃ 


xliii 


OPPIAN © 


καλεῖται νῦν γάγγαμον ἤ, ὡς οἱ πολλοί, σαγήνη: δον 
132 γρῖφοι καὶ γάγγαμον:; Hesych. 5. γαγγάμη" 
σαγήνη ἢ δίκτυον ἁλιευτικόν; EWM. 5. γαγγαμών'". ς 

σημαίνει. δὲ τὸ λαμβάνον ste ἔστι κυρίως yayy apn 
σαγήνη ἢ δίκτυον. 

5. ὑποχή. The schol. says ἐς κυρίως δίκτυα περι- 
φράττοντα καὶ ἐπέχοντα τόπους ἐν οἷς καὶ τὸ θυννο- 
σκοπεῖον λεγόμενον. It looks as if this note which 
describes the σαγήνη had got misplaced. All the 
evidence points to the ὑποχή being a bag-net, much 
like the modern shrimp-net. In modern Greek the 
word used is ἀποχή, cf. Apost. p. 89 “Les haveneaux, 
ἀποχαί, sont des filets en forme de poche a mailles 
trés serrées, d'un métre ou 50 centimetres d’ouver- 
ture. Le bord est tendu sur un are en bois ou en 
fer dont une corde forme le rayon. Un baton ou 
manche, terminé par une fourche en bois, est attaché 
au milieu de la corde. La partie moyenne de 
lare est solidement fixée un peu plus haut. En se 
servant de cet engin, pour la péche des crevettes, 
le pécheur entre dans l'eau jusqu’au genou, ratisse 
le fond en marchant devant lui, d’un mouvement 
continu, rasant le sable au moyen de la corde 
tendue. L’autre extrémité du manche est tenue 
sous le bras ou appuyée contre la poitrine,” cf. Plut. 
Mor. 977 κε ἀμφιβλήστροις μὲν γὰρ καὶ ὑποχαῖς κεστρεῖς 
καὶ ἰουλίδες ἁλίσκονται, μόρμυροί τε καὶ σαργοὶ καὶ 
κωβιοὶ καὶ λάβρακες; Ael. xiii. 17 κορακίνους ταῖς 
ὑποχαῖς πολλοὺς συλλαβόντες, 

τ 6. σαγήνη, from which our Seine is ulbananely 
derived (Lat. sagena, Fr. seine), is a large Seine or 
Draw-net. It seems to be undistinguishable from 
the γρῖφος and, like the ypidos, is sometimes ἃ 
Fishing-net (Alciphw: i. 13; 20; 21; Plut: Mor. 


xliv 


INTRODUCTION 


977 F; Luc. Pise. 51; Tim. 22, ete.), sometimes a 
Hunting-net (Plut. Mor. 471 Ὁ; Babr. 43. 8). 

7. κάλυμμα. What sort of Net this is, is very 
uncertain. The metaphorical use in Aesch. Ch. 494 
βουλευτοῖσιν ἐν καλύμμασιν, referring to the bath- 
robe which entatigled Agamemnon, suggests an 
ἀμφίβληστρον, which is used immediately before 
(v. 492). Otherwise it may be the form of ὑποχή 
used in the Sporades and elsewhere for taking the 
Sea Crayfish or Spiny Lobster, Apost. p. 41 “C'est 
un haveneau dont le cercle de fer est disposé de 
maniere ἃ tourner autour d’un demi-cercle également 
en fer qui se fixe perpendiculairement aux extrémités 
de son diamétre. Sur ce second demi-cercle: est 
attaché le baton; il y a plus, le sommet de la poche 
du haveneau est pourvu d’un morceau de liége. 
Voila comment on opére: Aussitét qu’on a apercu, 
au fond de la mer, une Langouste (ἀστακός vulg.), on 
la couvre avec le cercle sur lequel est tendue la 
poche, qui, grace au liége flottant, reste ouverte 
dans toute sa hauteur. Une fois qu’on est certain 
que l’animal est dedans, qu’on Je voit se cramponner 
contre les parois du filet, on enléve brusquement 
Yengin, le pois de l’animal alors, faisant bascule, 
entraine la poche de haut en bas et fait tourner les 
cercles de fer autour de ces points d’appui; ainsi 
Vanimal se prend comme dans un sac et on le sort 
intact de la mer.” 

8. πέζαι ace. to the schol. are a species of small 
Net (εἶδος καὶ τοῦτο δικτύου μικροῦ), while 9. σφαι- 
ῥῶνες ace. to the schol. are round Nets (δίκτυα 
στρογγύλα). The σφαιρών is identified by Apost. 
Ῥ. 38, with the πεζόβολος or Casting-net. 

10. πάναγρον is found already in Hom. JI. v. 487 


xlv 


OPPIAN © 


μή πως, ὡς ἁψῖσι λίνου ἁλόντε. πανάγρου, | ἀνδράσι 
δυσμενέεσσιν ἕλωρ καὶ κύρμα γένησθε, where the refer- 
ence seems to be to a Seine, which also is apparently 
intended in the only other Homeric reference to 
Net-fishing (also in a simile), Od. xxii. 383 τοὺς δὲ iey 
μάλα πάντας ἐν αἵματι καὶ κονίῃσι) πεπτεῶτας πολλούς, 
ὥς τὶ ἰχθύας, οὕς θ᾽ ἁλιῆες | κοιλὸν ἐς αἰγιαλὸν πολυῆς 
ἔκτοσθε θαλάσσης | δικτύῳ ἐξέρυσαν πολυωπῷ᾽ οἱ δέ τὲ 
πάντες κύμαθ᾽ ἁλὸς ποθέοντες ἐπὶ ψαμάθοισι κέχυνται" | 
τῶν μέν τ᾽ ἠέλιος φαέθων ἐξείλετο θυμόν. : 

Next we have fishing by means of Weels (κύρτοι), 
of which Apost. p. 51, says: ‘‘ La péche au moyen 
de nasses est bien simple, mais toutes n’ont pas la 
méme forme: elle change suivant les poissons qu’on 
cherche 4 capturer. Ce sont des paniers, avec un 
orifice précédé d’une entrée cénique, par laquelle, 
une fois entrés, les poissons ne peuvent plus sortir. 
Pour attirer les poissons, on 165. amorce en mettant 
a l’intérieur des sardines salées, ou d’autres aliments 
souvent en putréfaction.” 

Next we have the use of the Trident, or Fish- 
spearing, which, according to Tristram, p. 292, is 
much used in the smaller streams and the northern 
rivers of the Lebanon; cf. Job xli. 7 “ Canst thou 
fill his;skin with barbed irons? or his head with fish 
spears?’’ This method was practised either by day 
or at night by the light of a fire. For the former cf. 
Apost. p. 49 “La péche au harpon est fort simple, 
elle:dépend surtout de lagilité du pécheur a viser 
le poisson. Les habitants de Vile de Spetzia [off S. 
coast of Argolis] attachent ἃ la hampe du trident 
une longue corde, lancent ainsi quelquefois le harpon 
a de grandes profondeurs.. Mais les pécheurs de 
Missolonghi sont plus adroits que tous les autres 


xlvi 


INTRODUCTION 


pécheurs grecs. C’est ἃ une’ véritable chasse aux 
poissons, surtout contre les daurades, les loups et les 
anguilles, qu’ils se livrent dans les lagunes qui 
entourent leur ville... Trente ou quarante bateaux 
armés de harpons (énormes fourchettes a trois dents) 
ou tridents se mettent.en marche. Un seul pécheur 
56: tient sur le devant du bateau qu'il gouverne et 
fait marcher avec le trident en guise d’aviron et avec 
lequel il transperce les poissons qui se trouvent a 
sa. portée.”’ 

Night-fishing by firelight (πυρευτική Plato, Sophist, 
220d, πυρίαι A. 537a18, Poll. vii. 138) might be 
either with Trident or Net. The former is referred 
to in Oppian, H. iv. 640-646, Q. Smyrn. vii. 569-576, 
of. Scott, Guy Mannering, c. xxvi.; the latter in Oppian, 
C. iv. 140 Εἰ, ef: Apost. p. 40, where he describes the 

method of fishing for Belone (Gar-fish) in the 
Sporades: “ Pendant les nuits les plus obscures du 
mois d’Octobre, aussitét aprés l’arrivée des poissons, 
les bateaux quittent leur mouillage le soir et se 
rendent au large. Arrivés ἃ l’endroit désigné, les 
pécheurs aménent les voiles et marehent lentement 
a la rame en examinant la mer de tous cétés. I] est’ 
facile de se rendre compte de la présence du poisson 
en écoutant le bruit que font les dauphins qui le 
poursuivent a la surface de l’eau. Alors, les pécheurs 
allument un grand feu avec du bois résineux sur une 
espéce de gril en fer, qu’ils fixent a la proue du 
navire (πυροφάνι et πυριά vulg.). Les poissons attirés 
par la lueur accourent vers le bateau comme pour y 
chercher un abri contre lennemi qui ne cesse de 
les décimer.” | After rowing about and making the 
boat turn upon itself some score of times, so. as 
to reflect the light in all directions, they row slowly 


xl vii 


OPPIAN 


shorewards, followed by the fish. ‘On arrive ainsi 
a la céte. La on prend des précautions pour que le 
bateau ne touche terre, le moindre choc faisant 
déguerpir aussitét les poissons. On Varréte ἃ une 
distance d’un ou de deux métres, et, laissant les 
rames, on prend les haveneaux en main, et l’on com- 
mence 4 envelopper le poisson des deux cétés du 
bateau.” 

Fishing by poisoning the water, referred to by 
Oppian, H. iv. 647 ff., is said by Tristram, p. 292, to 
be very commonly practised on the Lake of Galilee 
by the poorest classes. ‘Men sit on a rock over- 
hanging the water, on which they scatter crumbs 
poisoned with vitriol, which are seized by the fish. 
As soon as they are seen to float on their backs, then 
men rush into the sea and collect them.” 

Apost. p. 52ff. gives an interesting account of 
fishing by Weirs and Stake-nets as practised in 
modern Greece; in a great number of river-mouths, 
the shallower waters of several gulfs, in lakes, pools, 
and lagoons, “les poissons sont pris exclusivement 
au moyen des écrilles et des claies de roseau. Tous 
les endroits sont appelés vulg. Βιβάρια,᾽᾽ i.e. Lat. 
vivaria. Similar methods are practised in Palestine, 
Tristram, p. 292, who says “Among the laws of 
Joshua, the Rabbis relate, was one forbidding the use 
of stake-nets in the Sea of Chinnereth (Galilee), for 
fear of damage to the boats.” The reader will 
remember that the use of stake-nets got a fictitious 
Joshua (Geddes) into trouble (Scott, Redgauntlet). 

Finally, for the earliest references to Fly-fishing, 
natural or artificial—Mart. v. 18. 7 f., Ael. xiv. 22, 
xv. 1, the reader may be referred to the discussion in 
Radcliffe ¢. ix, 


xlviii 


INTRODUCTION 


IV. On tHe IpentiricatTion or Certain Fisues 


Ce que lon doit le plus regretter dans cette masse 
d’instructions si prédfeuses, c’est que l’auteur [Aristotle] 
ne se soit pas douté que la nomenclature usitée de son 
temps put venir a sobscurcir, et quil n’ait pris aucune 

récaution pour faire reconnaitre les espéces dont il parle. 
Cest le défaut général des naturalistes anciens; on est 
presque obligé de deviner le sens des noms dont ils se 
sont servis ; la tradition méme a changé, et nous induit 
souvent en erreur: ce n'est que par des combinaisons 
trés pénibles, et le rapprochement des traits épars dans 
les auteurs, qu'on parvient sur quelques espéces a des 
résultats un peu positifs ; mais nous sommes condamnés a 
en ignorer toujours le plus grand nombre. 

Cuvier et Valenciennes, 
Histoire naturelle de poissons, i. p. 23. 


Diese Unzulinglichkeit unsers jetzigen Wissens darf 
man sicherlich nicht ignoriren—wir sind tiberzeugt, dass 
mit der Vermehrung uusrer Kenntnisse in dieser Rich- 
tung, der Beobachtung des Haushaltes, der Lebensweise, 
der Instincte der Thiere Griechenlands cine grosse Anzahl 
von Angaben des Aristoteles bestiatigt und in das rechte 
Licht gestellt werden wird. 

Aubert u. Wimmer, p. 55. 


Certains procédés de péche qui existent chez nous 
étonnant le voyageur au point qu’il les range parmi les 
fables, se sont maintenus par la tradition, Ceux qui sont 
familiers avec les écrits des anciens, Aristote, Athénée, 
Théophraste, Xénocrate, Oppien, etc. et qui se sont occupés 
d’histoire naturelle, ne trouveront pas étrange notre asser- 
tion. Aucun naturaliste moderne ‘n’a poussé la curiosité de 
lobservation et de la connaissance des meeurs et habitudes 
des animaux aussi loin que les anciens. 

Apostolides, La Péche en Giréce, p. 44. 


d xlix 


OPPIAN 


Alphestes, Alphesticus, or Cinaedus ; Phycis ; Cirrhis 
H. i. 126 f. 


καὶ κίχλαι ῥαδιναὶ καὶ puKides οὕς θ᾽ ἁλιῆες 
ἀνδρὸς ἐπωνυμίην θηλύφρονος ηὐδάξαντο. 

Mss. and schol. ἅς θ᾽, : 

1. There can be no doubt that the reference in 
ἀνδρὸς ἐπωνυμίην θηλύφρονος is to the fish called 
κίναιδος (cf. the synonyms of κίναιδος in Poll. vi. 126 
καταπύγων, . . . OndAvdpias, . . . yuvaikias, . . . 
ἀνδρόγυνος, . .. θῆλυς τὴν ψυχήν), ἀλφηστής, ἀλφη- 
otixds. The first name occurs Plin. xxxii. 146 Cinaedi 
soli piscium lutei, and is no doubt intended in Hesych. 
8. Kuvaovides (sic) ἰχθῦς. For the other names cf. 
Athen. 281 e. Apollodorus of Athens (Ὁ. circ. 180 
B.c.), after quoting Sophron’s “ καταπυγοτέραν τ᾽ 
ἀλφηστᾶν,᾽ says: “The ἀλῴησταί are a species of 
fish, yellowish (κιρροειδεῖς) as a whole but purplish 
in parts. It is said, that they are taken in couples, 
one following in the rear of the other. From this 
following in the rear (κατὰ τὴν πυγήν) of one another 
the name was applied to the licentious and lewd” 
(ἀκρατεῖς καὶ καταφερῖς) [1.6. καταπύγονες). Aristotle 
ἐν τῷ περὶ Ζῴων says “ μονάκανθον (with a single 
spine) εἶναι καὶ κιρρὸν (yellow) τὸν ἀλφηστικόν.᾽" 
Numenius, of Heracleia, ἐν “Αλιευτικῷ mentions it 
thus: «ἄλλοτε δ᾽ αὖ πέρκας, ὅτε δὲ στροφάδας παρὰ 
πέτρην» | φυκίδας ἀλφηστήν τε καὶ ἐν χροιῇσιν ἐρυθρὸν 
| σκορπίον <i) πέρκαισι καθηγητὴν μελάνουρον».. Also 
Epicharmus, ἐν “HBas γάμῳ". μύες ἀλφησταί τε κορα- 
κῖνοί τε κοριοειδέες ; cf. Kustath. Hom. Jl. xviii, Ῥ. 
1166. 42; Athen. 305 b Diocles ἐν πρώτῳ “Ὑγιεινῶν: 


οἱ δὲ πετραῖοι καλούμενοι μαλακόσαρκοι, κόσσυφοι, 
“ Supplied from Athen. 319 b, 390 e. 
] 


INTRODUCTION 


κίχλαι, πέρκαι, κωβιοί, puxides, ἀλφηστικός. E.M. s. 
ἀλφηστής repeats Apollodorus in Athen. 281 e as 
quoted above ; of. ELM. s. θηλυτεράων: ὅτι τὰ λοιπὰ 
ζῷα ὅρον ἔχει τῆς μίξεως τὴν σύλληψιν, αὗται δὲ ἀεί: 
διὸ ἐκ τοῦ ἐναντίου οἱ ἄνδρες. ἀλφησταὶ λέγονται οἱ 
κατωφερεῖς, κατὰ μεξαφορὰν ἀπὸ τῶν ἰχθύων' ἀλφησταὶ 
γὰρ εἶδος ἰχθύος. Hesych. 5. ἀλφηστίς" ἰχθύος εἶδος, 
In Homer ἀλφησταί is an obscure epithet of men 
in general, but in later Greek a bad association 
seems to have attached to ἀλφάνω and its derivatives, 
perhaps through an idea that παρθένοι ἀλφεσίβοιαι 
(Hom. Ji. xviii. 593, H. Aphr. 119) meant—to quote 
Dugald Dalgetty—“such quae quaestum corporibus 
faciebant, as we said of Jean Drochiels at Marischal 
College”; cf: Lycophron 1393 τῆς (Mestra) παντο- 
; μόρφου βασσάρας λαμπουρίδος | τοκῆος (Erysichthon), 
ἥ T ἀλφαῖσι ταῖς καθ᾽ ἡμέραν | βούπειναν ἀλθαίνεσκεν 
ἀκμαίαν πατρός. 

The fish intended is one of the Wrasses (they had 
the repute of lasciviousness, cf. Epicharm. ap. Athen. 
305 ¢ [see too 287 b, E.M. 5. βεμβράς] Bap Spaddves τε 
καὶ κίχλαι Aayot δράκοντές 7 ἄλκιμοι, where perhaps 
λάγνοι should be read: cf. κιχλίζω), such as Creni- 
labrus melops, the Gold-sinny or Corkwing. 

2. The reading of the mss. and schol. ds θ᾽ 
would make ds refer to φυκίδες, So the Schol. φυκέδες" 
at λαπίναι. τοῦτο δ᾽ εἶπε σκώπτων τὸν γυναικώδη. 
φυκίδας εἶπεν ἐνταῦθα ὁ ποιητὴς θέλων λοιδορῆσαί 
τινα «εὐνοῦχον φυκαρίζοντα. (ie. rouging) TOS παρειὰς 
αὑτοῦ. ἦν δ᾽ ὁ εὐνοῦχος οὗτος ὃν λοιδορῆσαι θέλει ὁ 
ποιητής, ὡς ἔοικεν, ὁ ,καταλαλήσας τὸν ᾿Αγησίλαον 
τὸν πατέρα τοῦ ποιητοῦ εἰς τὸν βασιλέα Σεβῆρον, ὡς 
εἴπομεν, ὅτι κατεφρόνησεν ὁ ᾿Αγησίλαος ἐξελθεῖν εἰς 


α Scott, Legend of Montrose, c. ix. 
li 


OPPIAN 


aA q an 4 
συνάντησιν τοῦ βασιλέως, ἅτε ζῶν φιλοσόφως καὶ 
καταφρονῶν τὰ πάντα. All this seems to be pure 
invention. The fish called φυκίς is mentioned fre- 
quently. A. 567b18 τίκτουσι δ᾽ οἱ μὲν ἄλλοι τῶν 
φοτόκων ἰχθύων ἅπαξ τοῦ ἐνιαυτοῦ, πλὴν τῶν μικρῶν 

΄ Ὁ τ ΄ ΄ > e¢ » ΄ a 
φυκίδων, αὗται δὲ dis. διαφέρει δ᾽ ὁ ἄρρην φύκης τῆς 
θηλείας τῷ μελάντερος εἶναι καὶ μείζους ἔχειν τὰς 
λεπίδας ; 591b10 τὰ δ᾽ ὡς ἐπὶ τὸ πολὺ νέμονται μὲν 
oe Ν Ν mt le) @ Ἂς \ ΑΝ 
τὸν πηλὸν καὶ τὸ φῦκος... οἷον φυκὶς καὶ κωβιὸς 

\ ic a ὲ € Ν Ἂν ” ay Ν 2 
καὶ οἱ πετραῖοι: ἡ δὲ φυκὶς ἄλλης μὲν σαρκὸς οὐχ 
ἅπτεται, τῶν δὲ καρίδων ; 607 "18 μεταβάλλει δὲ καὶ 
ε Ν \ a X \ ” , ᾽᾿ 
ἡ φυκὶς τὴν χρόαν: τὸν μὲν γὰρ ἄλλον χρόνον λευκή 
ἐστι, τοῦ δ᾽ ἔαρος ποικίλη" μόνη δ᾽ αὕτη τῶν θαλαττίων 
ἰχθύων (builds a nest), ὥς φασι, καὶ τίκτει ἐν τῇ 
στιβάδι; Plut. Mor. 981 F ἰδίᾳ δ᾽ αἱ φυκίδες ἐκ τῶν 
φυκίων οἷον νεοττιὰν διαπλασάμεναι περιαμπέχουσι τὸν 
γόνον καὶ σκέπουσιν ἀπὸ τοῦ κλυδῶνος ; Ovid, Hal. 122 
Atque avium phycis (mss. dulcis, emend. Ulitzius) 
nidos imitata sub undis; Plin. ix. 81 mutat (colorem) 
et phycis, reliquo tempore candida, vere varia. 
Eadem piscium sola nidificat ex alga atque in nido 
parit; xxxii, 150 phycis saxatilium; Ael. xii. 28 
ἰχθῦς δὲ τὴν χρόαν μεταβλητικοὶ οἵδε: κίχλαι τε καὶ 
κόσσυφοι καὶ φυκίδες τε καὶ μαινίδες; Athen. 305 Ὁ 
Διοκλῆς. .. “οἱ δὲ πετραῖοι, φησίν, “ καλούμενοι 
μαλακόσαρκοι, κόσσυφοι, κίχλαι, πέρκαι, κωβιοί, 


φυκίδες, ἀλφηστικός᾽᾿; 810 b Σπεύσιππος ἐν δευτέρῳ 
‘Opotwv παραπλησίας εἶναι λέγων πέρκην, χάνναν, 
oxida. . Νουμήνιος δ᾽ ἐν ᾿Αλιευτικῷ “ἄλλοτε δ᾽ 


αὖ πέρκας, ὅτε δὲ στροφάδας παρὰ πέτρην | φυκίδας 
ἀλφηστήν τε καὶ ἐν χροηΐσιν ἐρυθρὸν | σκορπιόν (ef. 
80 πὰ 320" e)))4: 581 0s-¢ ᾿Αριστοτέλης ἐν τῷ περὶ 
ζωικῶν ἀκανθοστεφῆ φησιν εἶναι καὶ ποικιλόχροα φυκίδα; 
Mare. S. 19 καὶ σκάροὶ ἀνθεμόεντες ἐρευθήεσσά τε φυκίς; 


1 


. INTRODUCTION 


A.P. vi. 105 τρίγλαν dx ἀνθρακιῆς καὶ φυκίδα σοί, 
λιμενῖτι [Ἄρτεμι, δωρεῦμαι (= Suid. 5. φυκίδα). The 
statement that the φυκίς builds a nest led Cuvier 
to identify it with Gobius niger, the Black Goby. 
But all the other evidence points to one of the 
Wrasses (Labridaé), for which χειλοῦ, φυκόψαρο, 
metpovapo are in M.G. generic names, and it is 
now known that some at least of the Wrasses build 
nests. The schol. here, as we have seen above, 
interprets φυκίδες by λαπίναι. In M.G. Crenilabrus 
pavo is λήπαινα, at Chalcis Aariva μαύρη and X. μεγάλη 
and this identification is in all probability right. 

It should be pointed out that, both φυκίς and the 
κίναιδος being Wrasses, it is quite possible that 
Oppian or Oppian’s source may have identified 
them and thus ἅς Θ᾽ may after all be the correct 
reading. 

3. The Cirrhis («ippis) of H. i. 129, iii. 187, which 
is not mentioned in Aristotle, seems to be another 
of the Wrasses, perhaps Labrus mixtus, cf. E.M. s. 
Kippus ὁ ἰχθύς, ἐπειδὴ κιρρός ἐστι τὴν χροιάν. In H. 
i. 129 the schol., reading σκιρρίς, interprets λεπιδυταί 
ἢ ὕσκας. 


Anthias : Aulopias : Callichthys : Callionymus 


The chief references may be grouped as follows : 

(1) A. 570 b 19 τίκτει δὲ καὶ 6 avAwrias, ὃν καλοῦσί 
τινες ἀνθίαν͵ τοῦ θέρους. 

(2) A. 610b5 the Anthias is one of the gre- 
garious (ἀγελαῖοι) fishes. 

(3) A. 620 b 33 ὅπου ἂν ἀνθίας ὁραθῇ, οὐκ ἔστι 
θηρίον. ᾧ καὶ σημείῳ χρώμενοι κατακολυμβῶσιν οἱ 
σπογγεῖς, καὶ καλοῦσιν ἱεροὺς ἰχθῦς τούτους ; cf. 

1Π| 


OPPIAN 


Athen. 282 c; Plut. Mor. 981 ©; Δεῖ]. viii. 28; 
Plin. ix. 153 certissima est securitas vidisse planos 
[anthias ?] pisces, quia nunquam sunt ubi maleficae 
bestiae, qua de causa urinantes (é.e, divers) sacros 
appellant eos. ¥ 

(4) Ovid, Hal. 45 Anthias his tergo quae non 
videt utitur armis, Vim spinae novitque suae 
versoque supinus Corpore lina secat fixumque inter- 
cipit hamum; Plin. xxxii. 13 anthias tradit idem 
[sc. Ovidius in eo volumine quod Halieuticon in- 
seribitur, 26. 11] infixo hamo invertere se, quoniam 
sit in dorso cultellata spina, eaque lineam praesecare; 
ix. 182 idem anthiae cum unum hamo teneri viderint, 
spinis quas in dorso serratas habent lineam secare 
traduntur, eo qui teneatur extendente ut praecidi 
possit; Plut. Mor. 977 c οἱ δ᾽ ἀνθίαι τῷ συμφύλῳ 
βοηθοῦσιν ἰταμώτερον" τὴν γὰρ ὁρμιὰν ἀναθέμενοι κατὰ 
τὴν ῥάχιν καὶ στήσαντες ὀρθὴν τὴν ἄκανθαν ἐπιχειροῦσι 
διαπρίειν τῇ τραχύτητι καὶ διακόπτειν ; Ael. i. 4 ὅταν 
νοήσωσι τεθηρᾶσθαι τὸν σύννομον, προσνέουσιν ὦὥκιστα: 
εἶτα ἐς αὐτὸν τὰ νῶτα ἀπερείδουσιν καὶ ἐμπίπτοντες 
καὶ ὠθούμενοι τῇ δυνάμει κωλύουσιν ἕλκεσθαι. 

(5) Plin. ix. 180 describes the mode of catching 
the Anthias practised in the Chelidonian islands 
[ev μεθορίῳ τῆς Παμφυλίας καὶ Λυκίας, Strabo 651]: 
parvo navigio et concolori veste eademque hora per 
aliquot dies continuos piscator enavigat certo spatio 
escamque proicit. Quicquid ex eo mittitur, suspecta 
fraus praedae est cavetque quod timuit. Cum id 
saepe factum est, unus aliquando consuetudine invi- 
tatus anthias escam appetit. Notatur hic intentione 
diligenti ut auctor spei conciliatorque naturae, neque 
est difficile cum per aliquot dies solus accedere audeat. 
Tandem et aliquos invenit paulatimque comitatior 


liv 


INTRODUCTION 


postremo greges adducit innumeros, iam vetustissimis 
quibusque adsuetis piscatorem agnoscere et e manu 
cibum rapere. Tum ille paulum ultra digitos in esca 
iaculatus hamum singulos involat verius quam capit, 
ab umbra navis brevi conatu rapiens ita ne ceteri 
sentiant, alio intus’’excipiente centonibus raptum, ne 
palpitatio ulla aut sonus ceteros abigat. Conciliatorem 
nosse ad hoc prodest ne capiatur, fugituro in reliquum 
grege. This is evidently the method described in 
Oppian, H. iii. 205 ff. and is identical with that which 
was used for the Aulopias in the Tyrrhenian islands 
(46. the Aeoliae imsulae between Italy and Sicily) 
according to Ael. xiii. 17: “Having selected in 
advance places where they suppose the Aulopias to 
congregate and thereafter having caught in their 
scoop-nets (ὑποχαΐ) many Crow-fish (kopaxivous), they 
anchor their boat and keeping up a continuous din 
they project the Crow-fish attached to lines (éppac). 
The Aulopias, hearing the din and beholding the 
bait, swim up from all directions and congregate and 
circle about the boat. And under the influence 
of the din and the abundance of food they become 
so tame that even when the fishermen stretch out 
their hands they remain and suffer the touch of 
man, enslaved, as I should judge, by the food but, as 
the experts say, already confident in their valour. 
And there are among them tame ones whom the 
fishermen recognize as their benefactors and comrades 
and towards these they maintain a truce. These 
leaders are followed by stranger fishes which, as 
aliens, so to say, the fishermen hunt and kill. But 
with regard to the tame fishes, the position of which 
is like that of decoy pigeons, they refrain from 
hunting them and observe a truce, nor would any 


lv 


OPPIAN 


pressure of circumstances induce a wise fisherman to 
catch a tame Aulopias intentionally : for he is grieved 


even when he catches one accidentally.” ΔΕ]. xii. 
47, on the capture of the Anthias, has nothing which 
helps identification. $ 


(6) Ananios, ap. Athen. 282 b, the Anthias is in 
prime condition in winter. 

(7) The Aulopias is described <Ael. xiii. 17: 
“ About the Tyrrhenian islands fishermen catch the 
huge (κητώδη) fish which is found there and which 
they call Aulopias. . . . In size the largest Aulopias 
is inferior to the largest ‘Tunnies, but in strength and 
prowess it would bear away the palm in comparison 
with them. . . . It opposes the fisherman as an equal 
adversary, and for the most part gets the better of 
him. . . . When caught it is beautiful to behold, 
having the eyes open and round and large, like the 
ox-eyes of which Homer sings. The jaw is strong 
... yet adds to the beauty of the fish. The back 
is of the deepest blue, the belly white; from the 
head a gold-coloured line extends to the hinder part 
where it ends in a circle.” 

(8) Oppian thrice mentions the Anthias. (ὃ 
H. i. 248-258 the Anthias frequents deep rocks, but 
ranges everywhere under the impulse of gluttony. 
The mouth is toothless. There are four species— 
yellow, white, black, and a fourth called εὐωπός or 
αὐλωπός, 


A ΕἾ las 7 c ΄ νὰ ag 

οὕνεκα τοῖς καθύπερθεν ἑλισσομένη κατὰ κύκλον 

ὀφρὺς ἠερόεσσα περίδρομος ἐστεφάνωται (256 ty. 
The precise meaning of αὐλωπός is not easy to 
determine (schol. στενοφθάλμους... τοὺς ἔχοντας 

΄ > Ν / > Lal ε Ἄς 2 2 ε “A 
μεγάλους ὀφθαλμοὺς δίκην αὐλῶν, ὁποῖοί εἰσιν of τῶν 
lvi 


INTRODUCTION 


παγούρων [Crabs] καὶ ἀστακῶν | Lobsters]; οἱ Hesych. 
8. αὐλωπίας: κοιλόφθαλμος, 5. αὐλώπιδι: στενῇ περὶ 
τοὺς ὀφθαλμούς), whether “hollow-eyed” or “with 
lobster-like eyes”: of. Xen. Symp. v. 5 καρκίνον 
εὐοφθαλμότατον εἶναι τῶν ζῴων. (ii) H. iii. 192 the 
bait for the Anthias is the Basse (AdBpaé). (iii) Η. 
iii, 205-334, where he describes modes of fishing for 
the Anthias, and says its “mouth is unarmed” 
(στόμα τοῖσιν ἄοπλον), 1.6. is toothless (328). His 
account of its struggles to escape—Puipevos εἰς ἅλα 
δῦναι (310)—shows that he means by Anthias what 
Aelian means by Aulopias, xiii. 17 ὡς πρὸς ἀντίπαλον 
ἵσταται τὸν ἁλιέα καὶ κρατεῖ τὰ πλεῖστα, ἐπὶ μᾶλλον 
ἑαυτὸν πιέσας καὶ κάτω νεύσας τὴν κεφαλὴν καὶ ὠθήσας 
κατὰ τοῦ βυθοῦ. 
(9) Archestratus ap. Athen. 326 a νεαροῦ μεγάλου 7° 
αὐλωπία ἐν θέρει dvot | kpaviaalso suggests a large fish. 
Callichthys. To Oppian Callichthys (1) differs from 
Anthias, (2) is called ἱερὸς ἰχθύς, (3) is comparable in 
strength to the Anthias, (4) is a deep-sea fish, (5) is 
ealled Callichthus, 1.6. Beauty-fish, on account of its 
beauty: H. i. 179 οἱ δ᾽ ἐν ἀμετρήτοισιν ἄλην πελά- 
γεσσιν ἔχουσι, | τηλοῦ ἀπὸ τραφερῆς οὐδ᾽ ῃηόσιν εἰσὶν 
ἑταῖροι... ἐν τοῖς καὶ κάλλιχθυς ἐπώνυμος, ἱερὸς 
ἰχθύς ; H. iii. 191 θύννῳ μὲν κάλλιχθυς ἰαίνεται, αὐτὰρ 
ὀνίσκοις | ὄρκυνος, λάβρακα δ᾽ ἐπ’ ἀνθίῃ ὁπλίζοιο; iii. 
335 (after an account of capture of Anthias) τοῖον 
καὶ κάλλιχθυς ἔχει σθένος ἠδὲ γενέθλη | ὀρκύνων ὅσσοι 
τε δέμας κητώδεες ἄλλοι | πλάζονται" τοίοις δὲ βραχίοσιν 
ἀγρώσσονται ; ν. 627 ff. sponge-cutters are safe if 
they see a κάλλιχθυς: τῷ καί μιν ἐφήμισαν ἱερὸν 
ἰχθύν. Bussemaker, identifying it with ἀνθίας εὐωπός, 
makes it Serranus gigas, the Métou, which we identify 
with ὀρφός. 
lvii 


OPPIAN 


The epithet ἱερός is used of a fish in Hom. JI. xvi. 
407 ὡς ὅτε τις φὼς | πέτρῃ ἔπι προβλῆτι καθήμενος 
ἱερὸν ἰχθὺν | ἐκ πόντοιο θύραζε λίνῳ καὶ ἤνοπὶ χαλκῷ 
(sc. ἕλκῃ), where ace. to the schol. some interpreted 
πομπίλος, some κάλλιεχθυς," while others took the 
epithet in a general sense (dverdv καὶ εὐτραφῆ, ὡς ἱερὸν 
βοῦν λέγομεν τὸν ἀνειμένον). From Athen. 282 e Sq. 
it seems that tepds was used of several fishes besides 
the Anthias (Dolphin, Pilot-fish, Gilthead, etc.) and, 
while Athenaeus himself seems to identify Anthias 
and Callichthys, he tells us that Dorion denied the 
identity: Athen. 282 ¢ μνημονεύει δ᾽ αὐτοῦ καὶ Awpiwv 
ἐν τῷ περὶ ἰχθύων" “τὸν δ᾽ ἀνθίαν τινὲς καὶ κάλλιχθυν 
καλοῦσιν, ἔτι δὲ καλλιώνυμον καὶ ἔλοπα ".. .. ᾽Αριστο- 
τέλης δὲ καὶ καρχαρόδοντα εἶναι τὸν κάλλιχθυν 
σαρκοφάγον τε καὶ συναγελαζόμενον. ᾿Επίχαρμος δ᾽ 
ἐν Μούσαις τὸν μὲν ἔλοπα [ef Ael. viii. 28] κατ- 
αριθμεῖται, Tov δὲ κάλλιχθυν ἢ καλλιώνυμον ὡς τὸν 
αὐτὸν ὄντα σεσίγηκεν..... Δωρίων δ᾽ ἐν τῷ rept ἰχθύων 
διαφέρειν φησὶν ἀνθίαν καὶ κάλλιχθυν, ἔτι τε καὶ 
καλλιώνυμον καὶ ἔλοπα; cf. E.M. 5. ἄνθεια (sic): 
εἶδος ἰχθύος: ἀνθίαν τινὲς καὶ κάλλιχθυν καλοῦσι καὶ 
καλλιώνυμον καὶ ἔλλοπα; Suid. 5. ἱερὸν ἰχθῶν:. 
οὐ τὸν κάλλιχθυν ἢ τὸν πομπίλον, ὥς τινες. 

Callionymus.—The Callionymus is almost certainly 
Uranoscopos scaber, the Hemerocoetes or Nycteris of 
Oppian (see note on ἢ. ii. 199 ff.). It is an ugly fish 
and was only euphemistically called καλλιώνυμος : ef: 
ELM. 8. ἁλεσούριος: εἶδος ἰχθύος θαλασσίου ὅν τινες 
κατ᾽ εὐφημισμὸν καλλιώνυμον καλοῦσιν κτλ. : Hesych. 
5. καλλιώνυμος and s. ἁλεσούριον. From its habit of 
hiding in the sand it was also called ψαμμοδύτης or 
Sand-diver, Hesych. s. ψαμμοδύτης: ἰχθύς, ὃν καὶ 
καλλιώνυμον ὀνομάζουσιν. The similarity of name 


lviii 


INTRODUCTION 


might easily lead to confusion with κάλλιχθυς, but 
we think that in discussing the identity of that fish 
and of the Anthias the Callionymus may be left out 
of the question. 

The identification of the Anthias and the Cal- 
lichthys has hitherto proved an insoluble problem. 
Both are pelagic fishes, comparable in size to the 
Tunny. The one definite distinction between them, 
if we can trust it, is that the Anthias is, according 
to Oppian H. i. 253 and iii. 328, toothless, whereas 
according to Athen. 282 c Aristotle described the 
Callichthys as καρχαρόδους. 

Rondelet,* who supposed the name Anthias to be 
applied to more than one fish, identified his Anthias 
primus with Serranus anthias—the Barbier of the 
Mediterranean—Labrus anthias L., Anthias sacer Bloch, 
“Je plus beau poisson de mer, aux couleurs les plus 
éclatantes”” (Apost. p. 13). “Le barbier est un des 
plus beaux poissons de la Méditerranée et des plus 
faciles 4 caractériser. La longue épine flexible qui 
séléve sur son dos, les filets qui prolongent ses 


@ Guillaume Rondelet (b. at Montpellier in 1507), the 
greatest of the sixteenth-century naturalists who laid 
the foundations of modern Ichthyology. He had a unique 
knowledge of the fishes of the Mediterranean. Of his work 
on fishes the first part, Libri de piscibus marinis in quibus 
verae piscium effigies expressae sunt, appeared at Lyons in 
1554; the second, Universae aquatilium historiae pars altera, 
cum veris ipsorum imaginibus in 1555. Almost simultane- 
ously P. Belon (who was murdered by robbers when 
gathering herbs at a late hour in the Bois de Boulogne, no 
doubt in connexion with a translation of Dioscorides, on 
which he was engaged) published his De aquatilibus libri it., 
Paris, 1553; H. Salviani his Aquatilium anmalium historia, 
1554-1557 ; and Conrad Gesner—the correspondent of Dr. 
John Caius—his Historiae animalium liber iv., qui est de 
piscium et aquatilium animantium natura, Ziirich, 1558. 

lix 


OPPIAN 


ventrales, et les deux lobes de sa caudale, surtout 
Vinférieur, suffiraient pour Je distinguer de tous les 
autres poissons; enfin, l’éclat de lor et du rubis 
dont brillent ses écailles, auraient dd attirer de tout 
temps l’attention des naturalistes” (Cuv. ii. p. 250). 
Against this identification Cuvier vigorously protests : 
“rien n’a été hasardé plus légérement, et méme, si 
quelque chose en cette matiére peut étre susceptible 
de preuve, c’est qu’aucun des caractéres attribués a 
des anthias ne convient au barbier.’ For his own 
part Cuvier would identify the Anthias with Thynnus 
alalonga, the Albicore: “ Pour moi, si j étais obligé 
de me prononcer sur le poisson qui a porté ce nom 
autrefois, je dirais au moins de l’anthias d’Elien que 
c'est le germon (Scomber alalonga). 1] est un peu 
moindre que le thon, qu’il accompagne souvent ; 
il va en grandes troupes. Son dos est bleu; son 
ventre blane. On voit sur ses flancs une ligne 
argentée. On ne peut pas dire qu'il manque de 
dents; mais il les a plus faibles méme que le thon. 
On en prend en abondance prés des cétes de 
Sardaigne, et l’on y en prendrait encore davantage, 
si lon faisait les mailles des mandragues un peu plus 
petites que pour le thon. 

“Certainement bien des poissons décrits par les 
anciens, et que l’on croit avoir reconnus, ne |’ont 
pas été sur autant de caractéres. 

“A la vérité, il n’y a point de germons, ni d’espéces 
voisines, qui soient blancs, jaunes ou rouge-noir, 
comme Oppien le dit de ses anthias; mais nous 
sommes si accoutumés a voir le méme nom appliqué 
chez les anciens aux étres les plus différens, que nous 
ne devons pas nous étonner qu Oppien ait entendu 
celui d’anthias autrement qu’Elien. Peut-étre a-t-il 


lx 


INTRODUCTION 


voulu parler du mérou, du cernier, ou de tel autre 
trés-grand acanthoptérygien: toujours est-il certain 
quil n’a point désigné, par lépithéte de μεγακήτεα, 
le barbier, petit poisson qui passe A peine cing ou 
six pouces.” 


oe 
Glaucus 


The chief references may be grouped as follows: 
(1) A. 508b20. The Glaucus has few caecal 
appendages (ἀποφυάδας). (2) A. 598a13. It is a 
pelagic (πελάγιος) fish. Cf gaudent pelago, Ovid, 
Hal. 94. (3) A. 599 b 32 γλαῦκος- οὗτος γὰρ τοῦ 
θέρους φωλεῖ περὶ ἑξήκονθ᾽ ἡμέρας. Cf. Ovid, Hal. 
117 Ac nunquam aestivo conspectus sidere glaucus ; 
Plin. ix. 58 quidam rursus aestus impatientia mediis 
fervoribus sexagenis diebus latent, ut glaucus ; xxxii. 
153 (tradit) (Ovidius) . .. glaucum aestate nunquam 
apparere. (4) A. 607 b27 ὅμοιοι δὲ κύοντες καὶ μὴ 
ὀλίγοι [1.6. a few fishes are in the same condition 
whether with spawn or not], οἷον γλαῦκος. (5) Opp. 
C. iii. 113 οἵην μὲν κομιδὴν τεκέων evi κύμασι δελφὶς | 
αἰὲν ἔχει γλαῦκός te χάροψ; ἢ. i. 749 of all ovi- 
parous (φοτοκῆες) fishes it shows most affection for 
its young. When the young are hatched, it remains 
with them, and when danger threatens, ἀμφιχανὼν 
κατέδεκτο διὰ στόμα, pera Ke δεῖμα | χάσσηται, τότε δ᾽ 
αὖτις ἀνέπτυσε λευκανίηθεν. So ΑΕ]. i. 16; Phil. 90. 
(6) Opp. ἢ. i. 170 γλαῦκοι, are mentioned among 
fishes which ἐν πέτρῃσι καὶ ἐν ψαμάθοισι νέμονται. 
(7) Opp. H. iii. 198. The bait for Glaucus is the 
Grey Mullet (κεστρεύς). (8) Mare. S. 66 σὺν χλοεροῖς 
λαχάνοις δὲ καθεψομένου γλαύκοιο Σωμὸς ἄγει γάλα 
λευκὸν ἐελδομένῃσι τιθήναις πινόμενος, τῆθαι δὲ φίλαι 
τότε νηπιάχοισι | ἕλκουσιν πόμα λαρὸν εὐγλαγέων ἀπὸ 

Ixi 


OPPIAN 


μαστῶν. (9) It was obviously a large fish: Geopon. 
xx. 7. 2 πρῶτον δὲ πάντων ἐστὶ δέλη πρὸς τὰ μεγάλα 
ὀψάριω, οἷον... γλαύκους ; Eupolis ap. Athen. 107 b 
κειμένων ἰχθυδίων | μικρῶν, τρεμόντων τῷ δέει τί 
πείσεται, θαρρεῖν κελεύσας ἕνεκ᾽ ἐμοῦ ταῦτ᾽ οὐδὲ ev 
φήσας ἀδικήσειν ἐπριάμην γλαῦκον μέγαν. Hence 
special cuts of it are commended: Archestr. ap. 
Athen. 295 ¢ ἀλλά μοι dover γλαύκου κεφαλὴν ev 
᾿Ολύνθῳ | καὶ Μεγάροις; Anaxandr. tbid. πα ὁ πρῶτος 
εὑρὼν πολυτελὲς τμητὸν μέγα | γλαύκου πρόσωπον τοῦ 
T ἀμύμονος δέμας  θύννου ; Amphis zbid. Ε γλαῦκοι δ᾽ 
ὅλοι, ῥαχιστὰ κρανίων μέρη... and γλαυκινιδέου 
κεφάλαια; Antiph. ἐδιά. γλαύκου προτομή. (10) Numen. 
ap. Athen. 295 b ὕκην ἢ κάλλιχθυν, ὁτὲ χρόμιν, ἄλλοτε 
δ᾽ ὀρφὸν | ἢ γλαῦκον περόωντα κατὰ μνία σιγαλόεντα. 

The legend that the Glaucus takes in its young 
would suggest a Dog-fish, but the possession of caeca 
mentioned in A. 508 b 20 is against that supposition, 
since Selachians have no caeca. Cuvier makes the 
-Glaucus Sciaena aquila. Bussemaker makes it some 
species of Cod (Gadi quaedam species). 


Onos or Assfish: Oniscus : Callarias 


1. The ὄνος is mentioned twice in Aristotle: (a) 
A. 599 Ὁ 26 “Some fishes hide (φωλεῖ in the sand, 
some in the mud, with only the mouth projecting. 
The majority hide only in winter—Crustaceans and 
Rock-fishes and Rays and Cartilaginous fishes only 
during thé wintriest days, as is shown by the fact 
that they are not caught when the weather is cold. 
But some fishes hide also in summer, for instance 
the Glaucus, which hides in summer for about 60 
days. The Onos and the Gilthead also hide [i.e. in 
summer]. That the Onos hides for the longest time 
)xii 


INTRODUCTION 


seems to be proved by the fact that there is the 
longest interval when it is not caught. And that 
the fishes hide in summer seems to be indicated by 
the fact that catches are made only at the rising ὦ of 
the constellations, particularly at the rising of the 
Dog-star; for at that time the sea is turned up, a 
thing which is very well known in the Bosporus. 
For the mud comes to the top and the fishes are 
brought up. It is said too that often when the sea- 
bottom is dredged, more fish are caught by the 
second haul than by the first ; and after heavy rains 
many creatures become visible which previously 
were not seen at all or only infrequently.” Cf. 
Oppian, H. i. 151. See below. (6) A. 620 b 29 
καθαμμίζουσι δ᾽ ἑαυτὰ καὶ ὄνος καὶ βάτος καὶ ψῆττα καὶ 
ῥίνη, καὶ ὅταν ποιήσῃ ἑαυτὰ ἄδηλα, εἶτα ῥαβδεύεται τοῖς 
ἐν τῷ στόματι ἃ καλοῦσιν οἱ ἁλιεῖς ῥα βδία: προσέρχονται 
δ᾽ ὡς πρὸς φυκία ἀφ᾽ ὧν τρέφονται. It may be noted 
that the ὄνος is absent in the rendering of this passage 
in Pliny ix. 144 simili modo squatina [ = ῥίνη, cf. Plin. 
xxxii. 150 rhine quem squatum vocamus] et rhombus 
[-- ψῆττα] abditi pinnas exsertas movent specie 
vermiculorum, item quae vocantur raiae [ = βάτοι: 
Other references to the ὄνος are Athen. 315 e ὄνος 
καὶ ὀνίσκος. “ὄνος, φησὶν Αριστοτέλης ἐν τῷ περὶ ζωικῶν, 
ἔχει στόμα ἀνερρωγὸς ὁμοίως τοῖς γαλεοῖς: καὶ οὐ 
συναγελαστικός. καὶ μόνος οὗτος ἰχθύων τὴν καρδίαν ἐν 
τῇ κοιλίᾳ ἔχει καὶ ἐν τῷ ἐγκεφάλῳ λίθους ἐμφερεῖς 
μύλαις. φωλεύει τε μόνος ἐν ταῖς ὑπὸ κύνα θερμοτάταις 
ἡμέραις, τῶν ἄλλων ταῖς χειμεριωτάταις φωλευόντων. 


@ As the Editor has elsewhere shown, references to a star 
as indicating the time of year are (unless the context very 
definitely—not merely implies—but explicitly asserts the 
opposite) always to the rising (heliacal) of a star. 

lxiii 


OPPIAN 


μνημονεύει ὃ αὐτῶν Emixappos ἐν HBas γάμῳ" “ '“μεγα- 

λοχάσμονάς τε χάννας κἠκτραπελογάστορας ὄνους. 

διαφέρει δ᾽ ὄνος ὀνίσκου, ὥς φησι Δωρίων ἐν τῷ περὶ 
¢ 5) @ ON oe ἢ 

ἰχθύων γράφων οὕτως" “ὄνος, ὃν καλοῦσί τινες γάδον" 

γαλλερίας, ὃν καλοῦσί τινες ᾿ὀνίσκον τε καὶ μάξεινον.᾽ 

υὐθύδημος δ᾽ ἐν τῷ περὶ ταρίχων “ot μὲν βάκχον, φησί, 

Aovi iL δὲ γελαρί ἱ δὲ ὀνίσκον.᾿ ᾿Αρχέστρατο 
καλοῦσιν, οἱ δὲ γελαρίην, οἱ δὲ dvicxov.” ᾿Αρχέστρατος 
δέ φησι" ““ τὸν δ᾽ ὄνον ᾿Ανθηδών, τὸν καλλαρίαν καλέουσιν 
| ἐκτρέφει εὐμεγέθη ᾿᾿ κτλ. ; Ael. vi. 80 ὁ ἰχθὺς ὁ ὄνος τὰ 
μὲν ἄλλα, ὅσα ἐντὸς προσπέφυκεν, οὐ πάνυ τι τῶν ἑτέρων 
διεστῶτα κέκτηται, μονότροπος δέ ἐστι καὶ σὺν ἄλλοις 
βιοῦν οὐκ ἀνέχεται. ἔχει δὲ ἄρα ἰχθύων μόνος οὗτος 
ἐν τῇ γαστρὶ τὴν καρδίαν [=Ael. ν. 20] καὶ ἐν τῷ 
ἐγκεφάλῳ λίθους, οἵπερ οὖν ἐοίκασι μύλαις τὸ σχῆμα. 
Σειρίου δὲ ἐπιτολῇ φωλεύει μόνος, τῶν ἄλλων ἐν ταῖς 

4 4 3 ΄ . eee 
κρυμωδεστάταις φωλεύειν εἰθισμένων ; Oppian, H. iii. 
138 ff. GAN ὁπόταν καθέτοισι πελώριοι ἀμφιχάνωσιν 
> ᾿ς & nN 7, / ΄ nv ἣν 
ἰχθύες, οἷα βοῶν τε πέλει προβάτων τε γένεθλα | ἢ βατὶς 
ἢ καὶ ὄνων νωθρὸν᾽ γένος, οὐκ ἐθέλουσιν | ἑσπέσθαι, 

΄ 3 > Ν ἊΣ a“ ΤΙ / > vA > 
ψαμάθοισι & ἐπὶ πλατὺ σῶμα βαλόντες | ἀθρόοι ἐμ- 
βαρύθουσι, μόγον δ᾽ ἁλιεῦσιν ἔθηκαν. | πολλάκι ὃ ἐξ- 
ώλισθον ax ἀγκίστροιο λυθέντες. 

2. Dorion, as quoted above, distinguished ὄνος and 
ὀνίσκος, which we may take to mean that they were 
not usually distinguished. Oppian thrice mentions 
the ὀνίσκος, H. iii. 191 as bait for the ὄρκυνος ; Π. i. 
105 where he says its habitat is in πηλοῖσι καὶ ἐν 
τενάγεσσι θαλάσσης (102), while the habitat of the 
ὄνος is ev βένθεσσιν H. i. 145 ff. Lastly, H. i. 593, 
the mode of propagation of the ὀνίσκος is said to be 
unknown. To Oppian therefore the ὄνος and ὀνίσκος 
were different fishes. On the other hand they are 
identified by Eustath. Hom. p. 862 ὄνος, ἰχθὺς ποιός, 


ὃ καὶ ὀνίσκος καὶ βάκχος. 


lxiv 


INTRODUCTION 


3. The Latin asellus represents ὄνος. Ovid, Hal. 
131 Et tam deformi non dignus nomine asellus; 
Plin. xxxii. 145 peculiares autem maris . . . asellus. 
See below for Plin. ix. 58. 

Callarias.—Oppian, H. i. 105 mentions καλλαρίαι 
along with the ὀνίσιζδς, where incidentally it may be 
noted that the schol. has ὀνίσκων' ἀειδάρων (yadapiov ?). 
We have seen above that Archestratus ap. Athen. 
316 a equates ὄνος with καλλαρίας. Cf: Athen. 118 ¢ 
καθάπερ καὶ τὸν χελλαρίην" καὶ γὰρ τοῦτον ἕνα ὄντα 
ἰχθὺν πολλῶν ὀνομασιῶν τετυχηκέναι: καλεῖσθαι γὰρ 
καὶ βάκχον καὶ ὀνίσκον καὶ χελλαρίην; Hesych. 
8. yahapias ἰχθὺς ὁ ὀνικός, and Hesych. 5. γαλίαι: of 
ὀνίσκοι ; Hesych. 5. Aagivns: χαραδρίας" καλαρίας ἰχθύς; 
Pliny ix. 61 postea praecipuam auctoritatem fuisse 
lupo et asellis Nepos Cornelius et Laberius poeta 
mimorum tradidere . . . asellorum duo genera collyri 
[=callariae] minores et bacchi, qui non nisi in alto 
eapiuntur, ideo praelati prioribus; Plin. xxxii. 146 
collyris, asellorum generis, ni minor esset. Plin. 
xxxli. 145 mentions bacchus among the “ peculiares 
maris.” 

The generally accepted opinion is that those fishes 
are Gadidae or members of the Cod-family. A 
difficulty is suggested by Athen. 306 e where dis- 
cussing the Grey Mullets he says καταδεέστεροι δὲ 
πάντων οἱ χελλῶνες οἱ λεγόμενοι βάκχοι. The ὄνος 
is traditionally identified with the Hake (Gadus 
merluccius L., Merluccius vulgaris Cuv.), cf. Ital. 
asinello, Gr. yddos. A. 620 Ὁ 29 (quoted above) 
would seem to imply that the ὄνος has some sort 
of oral appendages which it employs in catching 
smaller fishes. The Hake has nothing of the sort, 
not even barbels (which the Fork-beard Hake, 


6 Ιχν 


OPPIAN 


Phycis blennioides, and the Mediterranean Hake, P. 
mediterranea, have). But it seems probable that in 
Aristotle /.c. either ὄνος should be omitted, as Plin. 
ix. 144 omits it, or that ῥαβδεύεται should not be 
extended to it. Bussemaker makes ὄνος Gadus 
mustela L., ὀνίσκος, Gadus merlangus L. 

This is a convenient place to explain Oppian, H. i. 
151 ff. “Among these also is numbered the Hake, 
which beyond all fishes shrinks from the bitter assault 
of the Dog-star in summer, and remains retired 
within his dark recess and comes not forth so long as 
the breath of the fierce star prevails.’ The origin 
of this passage is A. 599 b 33 φωλεῖ δὲ καὶ ὁ ὄνος καὶ 
ὁ χρύσοφρυς: σημεῖον δὲ δοκεῖ εἶναι TOU τὸν ὄνον πλεῖστον 
φωλεῖν χρόνον τὸ διὰ πλείστου χρόνου ἁλίσκεσθαι. τοῦ 
δὲ καὶ θέρους τοὺς ἰχθῦς φωλεῖν δοκεῖ σημεῖον εἶναι τὸ 
ἐπὶ τοῖς ἄστροις γίνεσθαι τὰς ἁλώσεις καὶ μάλιστα ἐπὶ 
κυνί: τηνικαῦτα γὰρ ἀνατρέπεσθαι τὴν θάλατταν' ὅπερ 
ἐν τῷ Βοσπόρῳ γνωριμώτατόν ἐστιν ἡ γὰρ ἰλὺς ἐπάνω 
γίνεται καὶ ἐπιφέρονται οἱ ἰχθύες. A. and W. under- 
stand ἐπὶ τοῖς ἄστροις to mean “at the setting” of 
certain constellations and the Oxford translation 
“between the rise and setting of certain constella- 
tions” is no improvement. It means “at the rising 
of the constellations” as Pliny ix. 58 rightly under- 
stood; Quidam rursus aestus impatientia mediis 
fervoribus sexagenis diebus latent, ut glaucus, asellus, 
auratae. Fluviatilium silurus caniculae exortu side- 
ratur .. . et alioqui totum mare sentit exortum eius 
sideris, quod maxime in Bosporo apparet. Alga enim 
et pisces superferuntur omniaque ab imo versa. The 
meaning is that the hiding of the ὄνος in summer is 
indicated by the fact that when the sea is turned up 
by stormy weather catches of this fish occur. Cf. 


Ixvi 


INTRODUCTION 


ΑΕ]. vi. 30 Σειρίου δὲ ἐπιτολῇ φωλεύει μόνος [ὁ ὄνος], 
τῶν ἄλλων ἐν ταῖς κρυμωδεστάταις φωλεύειν εἰθισμένων ; 
Ael. ix. 88 ἀριθμοῖτο δ᾽ ἂν ἐν τούτοις [1.6. among fishes 
which hide in summer] καὶ ὁ ὄνος" δέδοικε δὲ μάλιστα 
ἰχθύων τὴν τοῦ Σειρίου ἐπιτολὴν οὗτος. For the con- 
vulsion of the sea at the rising of the Dog-star cf. 
Plin. ii. 107 caniculae exortu accendi solis vapores 
quis ignorat? cuius sideris effectus amplissimi in 
terra sentiuntur: fervent maria exoriente eo. And 
for the association of weather phenomena with the 
Rising and Setting of certain stars cf. Plin. ii. 105 
ut solis ergo natura temperando intelligitur anno, 
sic reliquorum quoque siderum propria est quibusque 
vis et ad suam cuique naturam fertilis.. Alia sunt in 
liquorem soluti umoris fecunda, alia concreti in 
pruinas aut coacti in nives aut glaciati in grandines, 
alia flatus, alia teporis, alia vaporis, alia roris, alia 
rigoris. . . . Nec meantium modo siderum [1.6. 
Planets] haec vis est sed multorum etiam adhaeren- 
tium caelo [i.e. Fixed Stars]. 


Cetus : Phalaena; Physalus 


Κήτεα is used in Oppian, ©. i. 71, H. i. 360, v. 46 
to denote the larger sea-beasts generally, including 
not only the Cetaceans (Whales and Dolphins) but 
also Selachians (cf. H. v. 63 where νόσφι κυνῶν 
implies that the Dog-fish are included among the 
θῆρες ὑπερφυέες -- κήτεα). Cf. Strabo 24 τοῖς μείζοσι 
τῶν ζῴων οἷον δελφίνων καὶ κυνῶν καὶ ἄλλων κητωδῶν. 
But in H. ν. 7ι ff. the singular κῆτος seems to 
indicate a definite animal, and the indications point 
to the Cachalot or Sperm Whale, Physeter macro- 
cephalus, the only large Whale possessing teeth 

Ixvii 


OPPIAN 


(v. 140). For the occurrence of the Cachalot in 
Greek waters cf. H. 368n. With the account of 
the hunting of the κῆτος H. ν, 111 ff. the reader may 
compare the hunting of the Sword-fish (ξιφίας or 
γαλεώτης) in the Straits of Messina as described in 
Strabo (after Polybius) 24: “One outlook is set for 
a large number of men who lie in waiting in two- 
oared boats, two men in each boat. One man rows, 
the other stands on the prow armed with a spear, 
when the outlook indicates the appearance of the 
Sword-fish—the animal swims with a third of its 
body projecting above the water. When the boat 
has come to close quarters, the spearman strikes the 
fish and then withdraws his spear from its body 
excepting the point, which is barbed and is purposely 
attached but loosely to the shaft and has a long 
rope fastened to it. This rope they pay out to the 
wounded fish until it is weary of struggling and 
trying to escape. ‘Then they hale it to land or, if 
it is not altogether a full-sized fish, they take it on 
board the boat. Even if the spear-shaft fall into 
the sea, it is not lost, as it is made of oak and — 
pine, and while the oaken part is submerged by its 
weight the remainder floats and is easily recoverable. 
Sometimes the oarsman gets wounded through the 
boat owing to the size of the animal’s sword and 
because its strength, as also the manner of hunting 
it, is comparable to that of the Wild Boar.” 


Phalaena H. i. 404 and Physalus H. i. 368 are 
sufficiently discussed in the notes on these passages. 
If they are not identical, possibly Phalaena may be, 
as A. and W. incline to think, Delphinus tursio, and 
Physalus the Cachalot. Bussemaker, identifying 


Ἰχν 


INTRODUCTION 


Physalus with the Cachalot, takes Phalaena to be 
Balaena musculus, properly Balaenoptera musculus, the 
Common Finner, the average length of the males 
being about 60 feet, that of the females rather more. 


6 


V. Some Anima Ipiosyncrasies 


1. Narce, Torpedo, Crampfish, or Electric Ray : 
H. i. 104, ii. 56 ff., H. iii. 149 ff. In all the Torpedoes 
the electric organ consists of a large patch of hexa- 
gonal cells, as many as 400 in the larger species. 
These are placed under the skin on each side of the 
head, below and behind the eye, and covering the 
base of the enlarged pectoral fin. They are modified 
muscle-cells and each is filled with a clear jelly-like 
substance. The shock which the animal communi- 
cates when touched is capable of being carried along 
a metallic conductor, such as a knife or spear, and is 
said to render the needle magnetic and to decompose 
chemical compounds. The exercise of this power 
soon exhausts its possessor and renders a period of 
recuperation necessary. 


2. Fox feigning death: H. i. 107 ff. “ When a fox 
is caught in a trap or run down by dogs he fights 
savagely at first, but by-and-by he relaxes his efforts, 
drops on the ground, and apparently yields up the 
ghost. The deception is so well carried out that dogs 
are constantly taken in by it, and no one, not previ- 
ously acquainted with this clever trickery of nature, 
but would at once pronounce the creature dead, and 
worthy of some praise for having perished in so brave 
a spirit. Now, when in this condition of feigning 


lxix 


OPPIAN 


death, I am quite sure that the animal doesnot al- 
gether lose consciousness. It is exceedingly difficult 
to discover any evidence of life in the opossum ; but 
when one withdraws a little way from the feigning 
fox, and watches him very attentively, a slight open- 
ing of the eye may be detected ; and, finally, when 
left to himself, he does not recover and start up like 
an animal that has been stunned, but slowly and 
cautiously raises his head first, and only gets up when 
his foes are at a safe distance. Yet I have seen 
gauchos, who are very cruel to animals, practise the 
most barbarous experiments on a captured fox without 
being able to rouse it into exhibiting any sign of life. 
This has greatly puzzled me, since, if death-feigning 
is simply a cunning habit, the animal could not suffer 
itself to be mutilated without wincing. I can only 
believe that the fox, though not insensible, as its 
behaviour on being left to itself appears to prove, 
yet has its body thrown by extreme terror into that 
benumbed condition which simulates death, and 
during which it is unable to feel the tortures practised 
on it.’ W. H. Hudson, The Naturalist in La Plata 
(1903). 


3. Deer and Snakes: C. ii. 233 ff., H. ii. 289 ff. 
“The gauchos of the pampas give a reason for the 
powerful smell of the male deer. . . . They say that 
the effluvium of Cervus campestris is abhorrent to 
snakes of all kinds . . . and even go so far as to 
describe its effect as fatal to them ; according to this, 
the smell is therefore a protection to the deer. In 
places where venomous snakes are extremely abund- 
ant, as in the Sierra district on the southern pampas 
of Buenos Ayres, the gaucho frequently ties a strip 


lxx 


INTRODUCTION 


of the male deer’s skin, which retains its powerful 
odour for an indefinite time, round the neck of a 
valuable horse as a protection. . . . Considering then 
the conditions in which C. campestris is placed—and 
it might also be supposed that venomous snakes have 
in past times been’fnuch more numerous than they 
are now—it is not impossible to believe that the 
powerful smell it emits has been made protective. 
. . . The gaucho also affirms that the deer cherishes 
a wonderful animosity against snakes ; that it be- 
comes greatly excited when it sees one and proceeds 
at once to destroy it, they say, by running round and 
round it in a circle, emitting its violent smell in larger 
measure, until the snake dies of suffocation. It is 
hard to believe that the effect can be so great ; but 
that the deer is a snake hater and killer is certainly 
true: in North America, Ceylon, and other districts 
deer have been observed excitedly leaping on 
serpents, and killing them with their sharp-cutting 
hoofs.” W. H. Hudson, op. cit. 


4. The Life-history of the Eel (Anguilla vulgaris) : 
H. i. 513 ff. The propagation of the Eel is referred 
to several times in Aristotle’s History of Animals : 
538 a 3 “ The Eel is neither male nor female and 
engenders nothing of itself. Those who assert that 
they are sometimes found with hairy or worm-like 
attachments speak inconsiderately, not observing the 
situation of these attachments. For no such animal 
is viviparous without being oviparous and no Eel has 
ever been seen with an egg ; and viviparous animals 
have their young in the womb and closely attached, 
not in the belly.” To the same effect 570 a 3 sq. 
where he adds: ‘Eels spring from the so-called 


Ixxi 


OPPIAN 


‘earth’s entrails’ (γῆς ἔντερα, earth-worms), which 
grow spontaneously in mud and moist ground. Eels 
have in fact sometimes been seen to emerge from 
such earth-worms and at. other times have been 
rendered visible when the earth-worms were laid 
open by scraping or cutting. Such earth-worms are 
found both in the sea and in rivers, particularly where 
there is decayed matter.” Cf. 517 b 8, 567 a 21, 
569 a 6, 608 a 5. 

Till within the last half-century or so the problem 
remained in much the same position as it was in the 
time of Aristotle, but in recent years and in particular 
through the systematic and elaborate investigations 
of Dr. J. Schmidt, the life-history of the Eel has been 
greatly elucidated. The result of these investigations 
may be briefly summarized : 

The Eel is oviparous and its spawning-ground is 
in the deep waters of the Atlantic Ocean near the 
Bermudas. Thence the larval ‘‘ Ribbon-eels ” travel 
eastward, a direction of migration which is instinctive 
and not due to drift of the current, as is proved by 
experiments with bottles and the like cast overboard. 
After a journey which lasts for about two years the 
young Eels in their third year, when about three 
inches in length, enter the European rivers, being 
now known as Elvers or ‘‘ Glass-Eels.”’ They ascend 
the rivers in spring, travelling in compact bodies and 
swimming close to the river-banks. They show re- 
markable determination in their upward journey, 
overcoming such obstacles as waterfalls by wriggling 
through the grass upon the banks. Examination of 
the growth-rings on the minute scales, on the otoliths 
(“ ear-stones ”’), and on the centra of the vertebrae, 
shows that at three years of age, after a year in fresh 


Ixxii 


INTRODUCTION 


water, an Eel is about 34 inches long, at 5 years it is 
about 6 inches, at 8 years about 1 foot, and at 13 years 
nearly 2 feet in length. 

Eels do not spawn in fresh waters. When the 
period of maturity approaches and with it the repro- 
ductive impulse, at’ the age of from 6 to 10 years, 
they become silvery in appearance (“‘ Silver-eels ἠδ); 
their eyes become larger, and they make for the 
rivers in which they descend to the sea. Having 
reached the sea they travel oceanwards, at an average 
rate of more than 9 miles a day, on their final journey 
—pour l’amour et pour la mort—of over 2000 miles to 
their breeding-ground in the depths of the Atlantic 
Ocean, where they spawn and die. 

The occurrence of Eels in land-locked waters, which 
seemed to complicate the problem of their origin and 
mode of propagation, is explained by the ability of 
the Eel to exist for a considerable time out of the 
water (A. 592 a 13, Plin. ix. c. 38) and to the agility of 
the young Eels in travelling for some distance over- 
land (A. Part, An. 696 a 5, Theophrast. περὶ ἰχθύων 
τῶν ἐν τῷ ξηρῷ διατριβόντων fr. 171), and so making 
their way even into waters from which the adult Eels 
under the reproductive impulse in vain endeavour 
to escape. On the other hand there are no Eels in 
the Danube, nor in the Black Sea or the Caspian Sea, 
these waters being beyond the reach of the young 
Eels migrating from the Atlantic Ocean. 

Cf. J. Schmidt, “The Breeding-place of the Eel,” 
Ann. Rep. Smithsonian Inst. Washington, 1924 [1925], 
pp. 279-316 ; C. Rabot, “ Les Anguilles du Pacifique,’ 
Nature, Paris, 1926, pp. 113-118; K. Marcus, “ Uber 

Alter und Wachstum des Aales,” Jahrb. Hamburg 
miss. Anst. xxxvi (1919), pp. 1-70. 
Ixxiii 


OPPIAN 


VI. ANALYSES 


Analysis of the Cynegetica : 

Bk. I. 1-46 Prooemium ; 47-80 Triple division of 
the hunting of wild creatures—Fowling, Hunting, 
Fishing ; 81-90 Physical qualities of Hunter; 91-109 
The Hunter’s equipment; 110-146 Seasons of 
Hunting ; 147-157 The Hunter’s weapons; 158-367 
Horses ; 368-538 Dogs. ᾿ 

Bk. II. 1-42 The Inventors of Hunting; 43-175 
Bulls ; 176-292 Deer; 293-295 Broad-horn ; 296-299 
Iorcus; 300-314 Antelope; 315-325 Gazelle; 326- 
444 Wild Goats and Sheep; 445-488 Oryx; 489-550 
Elephant; 551-569 Rhinoceros; 570-585 Panther, 
Cat, Dormouse ; 586-597 Squirrel; 598-604 Hedge- 
hog and Spiny Mouse; 605-611 Ape; 612-628 
Blind Rat. 

Bk. III. 1-6 Prooemium; 7-62 Lion; 63-83 
Leopard ; 84-106 Lynx ; 107-138 Digression on the 
affection of animals for their young; 139-182 Bear; 
183-250 Wild Ass; 251-261 Wild Horse; 262-339 
Wolf and Hyena; 340-363 Tiger; 364-390 Wild 
Boar; 391-406 Porcupine; 407-448 Ichneumon, 
Crocodile, and Asp; 449-460 Fox; 461-481 Giraffe ; 
482-503 Ostrich; 504-525 Hare. 

Bk. IV. 1-76 Prooemium; general precepts on 
Hunting ; 77-211 Lion Hunting; 212-229 Hunting 
of Thos and Leopard; 230-353 Leopards and 
Dionysus; 354-424 Bear Hunting; 425-438 Hare 
Hunting; 439-447 Gazelle Hunting; 448-453 Fox 
Hunting. 

Analysis of the Halieutica : 

Bk. I. 1-79 Prooemium ; comparison of Hunting, 
Fishing, and Fowling ; 79-92 Depth of the Sea, etc. ; 


lxxiv 


INTRODUCTION 


93-445 Habitat and Habit of various Fishes; 446- 
512 the Mating of various Fishes; 513-553 Mating 
of Eels, Turtles, Poulpes; 554-579 Mating of 
Muraena; 580-583 Mating of Dolphin; 584-637 
Fish-breeding in general; 638-645 Molluscs, Sel- 
achians, etc. ; 646-685 Dolphin; 686-701 Seal; 702- 
733 Love of offspring among animals ; 734-741 Dog- 
fish ; 742-746 Angel-shark ; 747-755 Glaucus; 756- 
761 Tunny ; 762-797 Oysters and Aphya. 

Bk. II. 1-42 Prooemium ; 43-55 Fishes prey one on 
the other; 56-85 the Torpedo; 86-119 the Fishing 
Frog; 120-127 Cuttle-fish; 128-140 Prawn; 141- 
166 Ox-ray (Cephalopterus Giorna); 167-180 Crab 
and Oyster; 181-185 Star-fish and Oyster; 186-198 
Pinna and Pinnoteres ; 199-224 Uranoscopus scaber ; 
225-231 Sea-urchins; 232-252 Poulpe (Octopus) ; 
253-421 Spiny Lobster, Muraena, Poulpe; 422-500 
- Venomous Fishes—Scolopendra, Iulis, Poulpe, Cuttle- 
fish, Goby, Scorpion, Sea-swallow, Weever, Squalus 
centrina, Sting-ray ; 501-532 Parasites of Tunny and 
Dog-fish ; 533-552 Dolphin; 553-627 Dolphin and 
Amia (Bonito); 628-641 Dolphin; 642-663 Grey 
Mullet (κεστρεύς) ; 664-688 Epilogue. 

Bk. III. 1-28 Prooemium; 29-49 Attributes of 
the Fisherman; 50-71 Seasons for Fishing; 72-91 
Instruments of Fisherman; 92-97 Wiles of Fish; 
98-116 Grey Mullet (κεστρεύς); 117-120 Muraena ; 
121-125 Basse; 126-127 Mormyrus; 128-131 Basse ; 
132-187 Orcynus (largest size of Tunny); 138-143 
Ox-ray, Sea-sheep, Skate, Hake (?); 144-148 Bonito 
and Fox-shark; 149-155 Torpedo; 156-165 Cuttle- 
fish ; 166-168 Squid; 169-204 Baits for various Fish ; 
205-337 Anthias; 338-370 Cantharus or Black Sea- 
bream ; 371-413 Admos ; 414-431 Saupe ; 432-442 Red 


ΙΧΧΥ 


OPPIAN 


Mullet; 443-481 Melanurus; 482-528 Grey Mullet 
(κεστρεύς); 529-575 Sword-fish ; 576-619 Mackerel, 
Tunny, Needle-fish, Dentex ; 620-648 Tunny. 

Bk. IV. 1-10 Fishes captured through love of their 
kind ; 11-39 Address to Love (Eros) ; 40-126 Parrot- 
wrasse; 127-146 Grey Mullet (κέφαλος); 147-171 
Cuttle-fish; 172-241 Merle-wrasse and Thrush-wrasse; 
242-263 Dog-fishes; 264-307 Poulpes; 308-403 
Sargues ; 404-436 Hippurus ; 437-438 Pilot-fish ; 439- 
449 Squid; 450-467 Eel; 468-503 Aphya; 504-592 
Pelamyds; 593-615 Divers catch Sargue ; 616-634 
Divers catch Sciaena; 635-646 Weel, Hook, Net, 
Trident, Burning the water; 647-693 Poisoning the 
water. 

Bk. V. 1-45 Prooemium; 46-357 Sea-monsters ; 
Whale-guide (67-108); Whale-hunting (109 ff); 
358-364 Lamia (Lamna) ; 365-375 Dog-fishes ; 376- 
391 Seal ; 392-415 Turtles; 416-588. Dolphin, Legends. 
of ; 589-597 Testaceans ; 598-611 Purple-shells ; 612- 
674 Sponge-fishers ; 675-680 Epilogue. 


VII. Bisyiograruy 


1. Eprrions or Oppran 


1. Editio princeps. Greek Text of Hal. and Cyn., with 
Lat. verse rendering of Hai. by Laurentius Lippius, 
Ald., Venice, 1517. 

2. Oppiani de Venatione libri IV., Parisiis apud Vasco- 
sanum, 1549. 

3. Oppiani Anazarbei de Piscatu libri V., de Venatione 
libri IV., Parisiis, 1555, apud Turnebum. 

4. Oppiani Poetae Cilicis de Venatione lib. IV., de 

Ixxvi 


INTRODUCTION 


Piscatu lib. V., cum interpretatione latina, com- 
ment. et indice rerum . . . studio et opera Conradi 
Rittershusii, Lugduni Bat., 1597. 

5. Poet. graec. veteres carm. heroici scriptores qui exstant 
omnes, apposita est e regione latina interpretatio 
-.. cura et,~ecensione Iac. Lectii, Aureliae 
Allobrog., 1606. 

6. Opp. Poet. Cilicis de Ven. lib. IV. et de Pisc. lib. V. 
cum paraphr. gr. librorum de Aucupio, gr. et lat., 
cur. J. G. Schneider, Argentorati, 1776. 

7. Opp. Poem. de Ven. et Pisce. cum interpr. lat. et schol. 


...tom. I. Cynegetica ... recens. Iac. Nie. 
Belin de Ballu, Argent., 1786. 
8. Opp. Cyn. et Hal. . . . emend. J. G. Schneider . 


Accedunt versiones lat. metrica et prosaica, plurima 
anecdota et ind. graecitatis, Lipsiae-1813 [the Lat. 
metrical version of the Cyn. is by David Peifer 
(1555) ; there is no metrical version of the Hal., no 
prose version of either poem, no anecd., no index 
graecitatis]. 

9. Opp. et Nicandr. quae supersunt . . . gr. et lat. ed. 
I. S. Lehrs in Poet. bucolici et didactici, Didot, 
Paris., 1846. 

10. Oppians des jiingeren Gedicht von der Jagd .. . I. 
Buch, metrisch tibers. ἃ. mit erklarenden Bemerk. 
versehen von M. Miller, Programm. Amberg, 1885 ; 
IJ. Buch (1-377), Mimchen, 1891; IV. Buch, 
Programm, Amberg, 1886. 

11. Opp. Cyn. (Oppien d’Apamée La Chasse), éd. crit. par 
P. Boudreaux, Libr. H. Champion, Paris, 1908. 


Translations: Halieutica, English verse, by Diaper and 
Jones, Oxford, 1722. Cynegetica in French, Limes, 
Paris, 1817. Both poems in Italian, Salvini, Florence, 
1728. 


2. Epirions or Scuoria AND PARAPHRASES 


Scholia et Paraphrases in Nicandrum et Oppianum ed. 
Bussemaker, Didot, Paris, 1849. Of. O. Tiiselmann, 


Ixxvii 


OPPIAN 


Zur handschrift. Uberlief. v. Oppians Kyn., Progr., 
Ilfeld, 1890, and Abh. d. Kénigl. Geselisch.d. Wissensch., 
Philol.-hist. Klasse, N. Folge, iv. 1, 1900; A. Ludwich, 
Aristarchs homerische Teatkritik, ii. 597 ff. 


¥ 
3. Oruer Oppianic LirERATURE 


Bodinus, J., Opp. de Ven. lib. IV. I. Bodino . . . interpret. 
. . - accessit commentarius, Lutetiae, 1555. 5 
Brodaei, J., Annotationes in Opp. Cyn. libr. IV., Basileae, 

1552. 
Headlam, W., Various Conjectures, Journ. of Philol. xxiii. 
> 3895). 
Schmidt, O., De elocutione Oppiani Apameensis, Leipzig, 
1866 


4, Cuter ABBREVIATIONS USED IN QUOTING 
ANcIENT AUTHORS 


A.=Aristotle, History of Animals. Other works of 
Aristotle are quoted by A. with abbreviations for 
particular works as eg. A. P.A.=Aristotle, De 
Partibus Animalium, A. De Gen. = Arist. De Genera- 
tione, and so on. 

Ael.=Aelian, De Natura Animalium. If the Varia 
Historia is referred to, V.H. is added. 

Antig.=Antigonus of Carystus (8rd cent. s.c.), Hist. 
Paradox. Synagoge. 

Arr. C., Tact. = Arrianus of Nicomedia (c. a.p. 100), Cyne- 
getica, Tactica: 

Ath. (Athen.) = Athenaeus (6. a.p. 200), Deipnosophistae. 

E.M.=Etymologicum Magnum (12th cent. A.v.). 

Dion. P. = Dionysius Periegetes (2nd cent. 4.p.). 

Geop. = Geoponica (Cassianus Bassus), 10th cent. a.v. 

Gratt. = Grattius, Cynegetica. 

Marc. 8. = Marcellus of Side in Pamphylia (2nd cent. a.p.), 
author of Jatrica (101 lines extant). 

Nemes. = Nemesianus (8rd cent. 4.p.), Cynegetica. 


lxxviii 


INTRODUCTION 


Phil. = Manuel Philes, De Animalium Proprietate. 

Plin. = Pliny’s Natural History. 

Poll. = Julius Pollux (Πολυδεύκης) of Naucratis (2nd cent. 
A.D.), ᾿Ονομαστικόν. 

Solin.=C. Iulius Solinus (8rd cent. a.v.), Collectanea 
rerum memorabilium. 

Varr. = Varro, De Re Rustica. 

Xen. C. = Xenophon, Oynegeticus. 


5. Cuter ABBREVIATIONS USED IN REFERRING TO 
Movern AurHors 


A. and W.=Aubert and Wimmer, Aristotles Thierkunde, 
Leipzig, 1868. 

Apost. = Apostolides, La Péche en Gréce®, Athens, 1907. 

Badham =C. D. Badham, Ancient and Modern Fish Tattle, 
London, 1854. 

Bik. =Bikélas [i.e. Vicelas], La Faune de Gréce, Paris, 
1879. 

Bussemaker =U. C. Bussemaker, Index Animalium in 
edition of Scholia to Nicander and Oppian, Paris, 
1849, 

Cuvier =Cuvier et Valenciennes, Histoire Naturelle des 
Poissons, Paris, 1828-1849. 

Day =F. Day, British Fishes, 1889. 

Erh. = Erhard, Fauna der Cykladen, Leipzig, 1858, 

Forbes =Edw. Forbes, Natural History of the European 
Seas, 1859. 

Gesner = Konrad von Gesner, Historia Animalium, 1551-8. 

Ginther =Giinther, Introduction to the Study of’ Fishes, 
1880. 

Lindermayer =A. Lindermayer, Die Végel Griechenlands, 
Passau, 1860. 

Mommsen = August Mommsen, Griechische Jahreszeiten, 
Hft. IIT., Schleswig, 1875. 

M°Intosh =W. C. M°Intosh, British Marine Food Fishes, 
1897. 

Mihle=H. von der Miihle, Beitrdge zur Ornithologie 
Griechenlands, Leipzig, 1844. 

Ixxix 


OPPIAN 


Radcliffe =W. Radcliffe, Fishing from the Earliest Times, 
London, 1921. 

. Ridg.=Sir W. Ridgeway, Origin and Influence of the 
Thoroughbred Horse [Cambridge Biological Series], 
Cambridge University Press, 1905. 

St. John, V.H.=C. St. John, Natural History and Sport 
in Moray, Edin., 1868. 

St. John, Wild Sports.=C. St. John, Wild Sports and 
Natural History of the Highlands, Lond., 1846. 

Sundevall=C. I. Sundevall, Thierarten des Aristoteles, 
Stockholm, 1863. 

Thompson, Glossary =D’Arcy W. Thompson, A Glossary 
of Greek Birds, Oxford, 1895. 

Tristram =H. B. Tristram, The Natural History of the 
Bible, London, 1880. 


Turner = Turner on Birds (1544), ed. Evans, Cambridge, 
1903. 


VIII. Mss. or Oppran 


A=Venetus 479, XI. century (Cyn. only). 

B =Parisinus 2736, XV. cent. (Cyn. only). 

C = Parisinus 2860, XV. cent. (Cyn. only). 

Ὁ =Neapolitanus II. F. 17, XV. cent. (Cyn. and Hai.). 
E=Laurentianus 31. 27, XVI. cent. (Cyn. only). 

F =Parisinus Suppl. Gr. 109, XVI. cent. (Cyn. only). 

G =Parisinus 2723, XIV. cent. (Cyn. only). 

H=Venetus 468, XIII. cent. (Hal. and Cyn., the latter 

incomplete). 

I= Matritensis 4558, XV. cent. (Hal. and Cyn.). 

K =Laurentianus 82. 16, XIII. cent. (Hal. and Cyn.). 
L=Vindobonensis 135, XV. cent. (Hal. and Cyn.). 
M =Laurentianus 31. 8, XIII. cent. (Hal. and Cyn.). 
N=Venetus 480, XV. cent. (Hal. and Cyn.). 

O =Laurentianus 86. 21, XV. cent. (Hal. and Cyn.). 

P = Parisinus 2737, a.p. 1554 (Cyn. only). 

Q =Salmanticensis 11-18, copied 1326 (Hal. and Cyn.). 
R=Vaticanus 118, XV. cent. (Hal. and Oyn.). 
lxxx 


CYNEGETICA anp HALIEUTICA 


OITIIANOY 
KYNHTETIKOQN TO A 


Loi, μάκαρ, ἀείδω, γαίης ἐρικυδὲς ἔρεισμα, 
φέγγος ἐνυαλίων πολυήρατον Awveaddwy, 
Αὐσονίου Ζηνὸς γλυκερὸν θάλος, ᾿Αντωνῖνε- 
\ / ip té / / 
Tov μεγάλη μεγάλῳ φιτύσατο Δόμνα Σεβήρῳ, 
3 le > a \ Bd > , 
ὀλβίῳ εὐνηθεῖσα καὶ ὄλβιον ὠδίνασα, 5 
͵ὔ 3 / \ / / 
νύμφη ἀριστοπόσεια, λεχὼ δέ τε καλλιτόκεια, 
3 ,ὔ / δ 2 / y¢ 
Acoupin Κυθέρεια καὶ od λείπουσα Σελήνη, 
Ε \ > / \ , / 
οὐδὲν ἀφαυρότερον Ζηνὸς Κρονίδαο γενέθλης" 
(εὐμενέοι τὰν Φαέθων καὶ Φοῖβος ᾿Απόλλων.) 
τῷ pa πατὴρ μεγάλῃσι πονησάμενος παλάμῃσι 10 
ὥκεν ἔχειν πᾶσαν τραφερήν, πᾶσαν δὲ καὶ ὑγρήν. 
σοὶ μὲν γὰρ θαλέθουσα κύει πάνδωρος ἄρουρα, 
\ ‘4 ΕΣ γέ 12 \ ~ / 
καὶ πάλιν εὐδιόωσα τρέφει κλυτὰ φῦλα θάλασσα: 


Τονοἱς κρατερῇσι. 


* M. Aurelius Severus Antoninus Augustus (Caracalla), 
Emperor a.p, 211-217. 

> Romans. Lucret. i. 1 3 Verg. Aen. viii. 648, 

¢ Italian. 

4 =Diwus, of Roman Emperors ; here of Ι,. Septimius 
Severus Pertinax Augustus, Emperor a.p, 193-211, in which 
year (4 Feb.) he ae at York. 

wy _* Julia D. of Emesa in 9 ria, second wife of 
“\ (Gibbon ¢. 6); died ap. 917. > goal 

7 The Syrian (Assyrian) Ashtoreth or Astarte, the 

2 


ve 


OPPIAN 


CYNEGETICA, or THE CHASE 
I 


To thee,“ blessed one, I sing : thou glorious bulwark 
of the earth, lovely light of the warlike sons of 
Aeneas,” sweet scion of Ausonian ὁ Zeus,? Antoninus, 
whom Domna® bare to Severus, mighty mother to 
mighty sire. Happy the husband whom she wedded 
(and happy the son to whom she gave birth—bride 
of the best of men and mother of a noble son, Assyrian 


Phaethon 4 be it spoken and of Phoebus Apollo !)5— 
to whom thy sire, by the labour of his mighty hands, 
gave in keeping all the dry land and all the wet sea.” 
Yea, for thee doth earth, giver of all gifts, conceive 
and blossom; for thee again the sunny sea rears 


‘*moonéd Ashtoroth” of Milton (Nativ. 22), was pictured 

_with horns, representing the crescent moon, and by the 
Greeks usually identified with Aphrodite, but also with the 
moon-goddess, Selene: Plut. Mor. 3578; Lucian, De dea 
Syr. For Assyrian=Syrian see C. i. 340 n. 

9 The poets often use Phaethon (Verg. Aen. v. 105) and 
Titan (Verg. Aen. iv. 119) for the Sun. Vor this paren- 
thetic apology cf. H. v. 339 n. 

Ὁ Lycophr. 1229 γῆς καὶ θαλάσσης σκῆπτρα καὶ μοναρχίαν 
λαβόντες ; Luc. i. 83 populum terrae pelagique potentem. 


3 


OPPIAN 


σοὶ δέ τε πάντα vdovow ἀπ᾽ ᾿Ωκεανοῖο ῥέεθρα, 
φαιδρά τε μειδιόωσα θέει κλυτὸς Ἢριγένεια. 15 

Tovyap ἐγὼν ἔραμαι θήρης κλυτὰ δήνε᾽ ἀεῖσαι. 
τοῦτό με Καλλιόπη κέλεται, τοῦτ᾽ ἼΑρτεμις αὐτή. 
ἔκλυον, ἧ θέμις ἐστί, θεείης ἔκλυον ἠχῆς, 
καὶ θεὸν ἠμείφθην- πρώτη δέ με τοιάδ᾽ ἔνισπεν- 
A. Ἔγρεο, καὶ τρηχεῖαν ἐπιστείβωμεν ἀταρπόν, 20 
τὴν μερόπων οὔπω τις ἑῆς ἐπάτησεν ἀοιδαῖς. 

O. Ἵλαθι, πότνια δῖα, τὰ δ᾽ ἐν φρεσὶ σῇσι μενοινᾷς, 
ἄμμες ὑφ᾽ ἡμετέρῃ μεροπηΐδι λέξομεν ἠχῇ. 

A. Οὐκ ἐθέλω τριετῆ σε τὰ νῦν ᾽Ορίβακχον ἀείδειν, 
οὐ χορὸν ᾿Αονίου παρὰ βένθεσιν ᾿Ασωποῖο. 25 
Λείψομεν, ὡς κέλεαι, τὰ Σαβάζια' νύκτερα 

θύσθλα: 
δηθάκις ἀμφεχόρευσα Θυωναίῳ Διονύσῳ. 

. Μὴ γένος ἡρώων εἴπῃς, μὴ ναυτίλον ᾿Αργώ, 
μηδὲ μόθους μερόπων, μή μοι Βροτολοιγὸν ἀείσης. 
O. Οὐκ ἐρέω πολέμους, οὐκ [Ἄρεος ἔργα κάκιστα" 30 
ἐφρασάμην Πάρθων τε δύας καὶ Κτησιφόωντα. 


τὰ σὰ βάζειν mss, 


* Lucret. i. 920 avia Pieridum peragro loca nullius ante 
Trita solo; Nemes. C. 8 ducitque per avia qua sola nunquam 
Trita rotis; Verg. G. iii. 291; Hor. C. iii. 1. 2; Milton, 
να, 16. Ὁ Cf. ὀρίδρομος Nonn. ii. 230. 

“ Τριετῇ here =rprernpixdy. Trieterica (Ov. R.A. 593, Μ΄ vi. 
587; Verg. Aen. iv. 302; repetita triennia Ov. M. ix. 641; 
τριετηρίς Kur. Bacch. 133: Diod. iii. 54, etc.) is what we should 
call a biennial festival, recurring in alternate years, παρ᾽ ἔτος 
(Paus. Vi. 26.2, viii. 23. 1, x. 4. 8). Hence Stat. 4. i, 593 
Alternam renovare piae trieterida matres Consuerant, . 

ἄγ in Boeotia (Aonia). 

* Dionysus (Phrygian) ; Aristoph. V. 9. θύσθλα, the thyrsi 
and the like (Hom. 71. vi. 134), here perhaps “" Bacchice rites,”? 

7 δηθάκις" πλειστάκις δα1α. ; δηθάκι: πυκνῶς, πολλάκις Hes. 
Properly “for a long time”; the transition is seen in Hom, 


4 


CYNEGETICA, 1. 14-31 


her splendid broods ; for thee flow all the streams 
from Ocean; for thee with cheerful smile springs 
up the glorious Dawn. 

Fain then am I to sing the glorious devices of the 
chase. So biddeth,me Calliope, so Artemis herself. 
T hearkened, as is meet, I hearkened to the heavenly 
(voice, and I answered the goddess who first to me 
spake thus. 

artemis. Arise, let us tread a rugged path, which 
never yet hath any mortal trodden with his song.* 

ΟΡΡΙΑΝ. Be gracious, holy Lady, and whatsoever 
things thou thinkest in thy mind, these will we de- 
clare with our mortal voice. 

_ art. I would not now have thee sing Mountain- 
(Bacchus ὃ of the triennial feast,° nor his choir by the 
deep waters of Aonian Asopus.4 ἘΞ uD 

opp. We will leave, as thou biddest, the nightly 
rites of Sabazius’; often’ have I danced ‘around 
Dionysus, son of Thyone.7 ἜΘ ὦ ἘΌΝ 
arr. Tell not of the race of heroes, tell not of 
the seafaring Argo; sing not the battles of men, 
sing not to me the Destroyer of Men.” 

opr. I will not tell of wars, nor of Ares’ works 
most evil; I have remarkéd the Parthians’ woes 
and Ctesiphon.? 

Tl. xxi. 131 ᾧ δὴ δηθὰ πολεῖς ἱερεύετε ταύρους, where Didymus 
τὸ ““ δηθὰ " ὡς οὐχ ᾿Ομηρικῶς κείμενον αἰτιῶνται, 2.6. δηθά was 
taken to be not =éml πολὺν χρόνον or ἐκ πολλοῦ χρόνου, as 
usually in Hom. but -- πολλά, συνεχῶς. Cf. LM. 5.0. 
(9 te. Semele, d. of Cadmus and m. of Dionysus. C/. 
\ Pind. P. iii. 99. 4% Ares (Hom. Jl. v. 31). 

 Ctesiphon (Polyb. v. 46. 4; Strabo 743; Tac. A. vi. 42; 
Plin. V.H. vi. 122; Amm. Mare. xxiii. 6. 23; T. Simoc. iv. 
3. 3) on_left bank of Tigris, seat of the Parthian kings in 
(second century, taken by the Emperor Septimius Severus 


\a.p. 198: Herodian iii. 9. 
9 


OPPIAN 


A. ᾿Αμφὶ πόθοις! ὀλοοῖσιν ἀκὴν ἔχε, λεῖπέ τε 
κεστούς" 
, 
ἐχθαίρω τὰ λέγουσιν ἀθύρματα ΠΟοντογενείης. 
5 tA 
O. ’Exdvonev σε, μάκαιρα, γάμων ἀμύητον 
ἐοῦσαν. 
lon > ~ > , 
A. Μέλπε μόθους θηρῶν τε καὶ ἀνδρῶν ἀγρευτή- 
ρων" 35 
/, ’ ᾽ὔ \ a ἰόλ Όλ 
μέλπε γένη σκυλάκων τε καὶ ἵππων αἰόλα φῦλα, 
βουλὰς ὠκυνόους, στιβίης etixepSéos ἔργα- 
” / ΄ / Ao > ὃ 
ἔχθεά μοι θήρεια λέγειν, φιλότητας ἀείδειν 
καὶ θαλάμους ἐν ὄρεσσιν ἀδακρύτοιο ἸΚυθείρης 
καὶ τοκετοὺς ἐνὶ θηρσὶν ἀμαιεύτοιο λοχείης. 40 
Τοῖαι συνθεσίαι Ζηνὸς μεγάλοιο θυγατρός. 
Ψ ΠΣ ΤᾺ / > ? / > /, 
ἔκλυον, ἀείδω- βάλλοιμι δ᾽ ἐπίσκοπον ἠχῆήν. 
+ \ Τὰ > > if ie δε \ ΄ 
ἀλλὰ σύ γ᾽, ἀντολίηθεν ἐπ’ ᾿Ωκεανὸν βασιλεύων, 
εὔδιον ἀμβροσίῃσιν ὑπ᾽ ὀφρύσι σῇσι γεγηθώς, 
δεξιτερὴν ὁπάσαιο πανίλαον ὀλβοδότειραν 45 
γαίῃ καὶ πολίεσσι καὶ εὐθήροισιν ἀοιδαῖς. 
Τριχθαδίην θήρην θεὸς ὥπασεν ἀνθρώποισιν, 
» / \ 
ἠερίην χθονίην τε Kal εἰναλίην ἐρατεινήν." 
3 > 


᾿ > τὸ > \ , > , 
ἀλλ᾽ οὐκ ἶσος aeOdos: ἐπεὶ πόθεν ἶσα τέτυκται, 
ἰχθὺν ἀσπαίροντα βυθῶν ἀπομηρύσασθαι, 50 


\ \ » δ᾽ 5. πο Ὁ Jennys 
καὶ ταναοὺς ὄρνιθας ἀπ ἡέρος εἰρύσασθαι, 
\ \ 
ἢ θηρσὶν φονίοισιν ἐν οὔρεσι δηρίσασθαι; 
> aa = 
od μὲν ἄρ᾽ οὐδ᾽ ἁλιῆϊ Kal οὐκ erds ἰξευτῆρι 


1 πόθοις Koechly: μόθοις. 


“ Hom. 7|. xiv. 214. 

> 4.6. Aphrogeneia, Aphrodite: Hes, 7. 196. 

° The epithet (applied to Athena, Colluth. 33) is used of 
Artemis as the huntress maid, ἰοχέαιρα παρθένος Pind. Ρ. ii, 9, 

4 Cf. ii. 15; Herod. iii, 35 ἐπίσκοπα τοξεύοντα. For 
metaphor cf. Pind. Ο. ii. 98, xiii. 94; IV. vi, 27, ix, 25, 
6 


CYNEGETICA, I. 32-53 


art. Be silent about deadly passion and leave 
alone the girdles α of love: I abhor what men call 
the toys of the Daughter of the Sea.” 

opp. We have heard, O blessed Lady, that thou 
art uninitiate in marriage.° 

art. Sing the battles of wild beasts and hunting 
men; sing of the breeds of hounds and the varied 

| tribes of horses ; the quick-witted counsels, the deeds 
of skilful tracking ; tell me the hates of wild beasts, 
sing their friendships and their bridal chambers of 
_tearless love upon the hills, and the births which 
/ among wild beasts need no midwifery. 

Such were the counsels of the daughter of mighty 
Zeus. I hear, I sing: may my song hit the mark ! 4 
But do thou, who rulest from the East unto the 
Ocean,’ with serene joy on thine immortal brows, 

youchsafe thy right hand gracious and prosperous to 
_land and cities and to songs of the happy chase. 

Triple 7 sorts of hunting hath God bestowed on 
men—in air and on earth and on the sea delightful. 
But not equal is the venture : for how can these be 
equal—to draw the writhing fish from the deeps or 
hale the winged birds from the air and_to contend 
with deadly wild beasts on the hills? Yet not for 
the fisherman either and truly not’ for the fowler 


e 2,6. the West. 

7 Of, Walton’s Piscator, Venator, Auceps; Greek Anthol. 
vi. 11-16, 179-187. More elaborate division, Plato, Soph. 
219 x. See Introd. p. xxxvili. 

9 οὐκ eros normally means ‘not for nothing,” haud frustra, 
e.g. Aristoph. Pl. 404, 1166. But: the old Lewica (Hesych., 
etc.) confuse this érés with éros=genuine and érdovos= vain 
(the schol. on our passage has ἐτός- ἔστι μάταιος) and, what- 
ever the punctuation and syntax intended, the sense seems 


to be as we have given it. 
fi 


OPPIAN 


dypn νόσφι πόνοιο" πόνῳ δ᾽ ἅμα τέρψις ὀπηδεῖ 
μούνη, καὶ φόνος οὔτις: ἀναίμακτοι δὲ πέλονται. 55 
ἦτοι ὁ μὲν πέτρῃσιν ἐφήμενος ἀγχιάλοισι 

γυραλέοις δονάκεσσι καὶ ἀγκίστροισι δαφοινοῖς 
ἄτρομος ἀσπαλιεὺς ἐπεδήσατο δαίδαλον ἰχθύν -' 
τερπωλὴ δ᾽, ὅτε χαλκοῦ" ὑπαὶ γενύεσσι τορήσας 
ὕψι μάλα θρώσκοντα βυθῶν ὕπερ ἀσπαίροντα 60 
εἰνάλιον φορέῃσι δι’ ἠέρος ὀρχηστῆρα. 

ναὶ μὴν ἰξευτῆρι πόνος γλυκύς" ἢ γὰρ ἐπ᾽ ἄγρην 
οὐκ ἄορ, οὐ δρεπάνην, οὐ χάλκεα δοῦρα φέρονται, 
ἀλλ᾽ αὐτοῖς ἐπὶ δρυμὰ συνέμπορος ἕσπετο κίρκος 
καὶ δολιχαὶ θώμιγγες ὑγρός τε μελίχροος iéds βρὲ 
οἵ τε διηερίην δόνακες πατέουσιν ἀταρπόν. 

τίς τάδε τολμήσειεν ἀείδειν ἰσοτάλαντα : 

ἢ βασιλῆϊ λέοντι τίς αἰετὸν ἀντιβάλοιτο; 

ἰῷ πορδαλίων δὲ τίς ἂν μύραιναν ἐΐσκοι, 


Wi 


ἢ θῶας κίρκοις, ἢ ῥινοκέρωτας ἐχίνοις, 70 


* I. 58 is omitted in Aldine (Editio princeps), Venice, 1517. 
2 χαλκὸν Mss. 


@ κίρκος hawk generically ; specifically A. 620 a 17 τῶν 
ἱεράκων κράτιστος μὲν ὁ τριόρχης (Buzzard 3), δεύτερος δ᾽ ὁ 
αἰσάλων (Merlin ?), τρίτος ὁ κίρκος. Cf. Turner on Birds 
Givens), pp. 14 ἢ; Hawks of English fowlers, Walton, 

ἘΠῚ. Ὅν ΙΝ 

> Ps. 140.5 “The proud have hid a snare (nx, LXX 


παγίδα) for me and cords ” (πη, LX X σχοινία). Of. AP, 


ἵστησι βρόχους, παγίδας, ῥάβδους, ἕρκη, νεφέλας, δίκτυα πηκτάς 
“ Made of mistletoe berries : A.P. Vis 109. καὶ πὸν εὔκολλον 


8 


CYNEGETICA, I. 54-70 


is their hunting without toil. But their toil only 

(pleasure attends and no bloodshed: unstained of 
gore are they. The angler sits on the rocks beside 
the sea and with curving rods and deadly hooks he 
catches, at his ease, the fish of varied sheen; and .~ 
joy is his when he strikes home with barbs of bronze 
and sweeps through the air the writhing dancer of 
the sea, leaping high above the deeps. Yea and to 
the fowler his toil is sweet; for to their hunt the 
fowlers carry nor sword nor bill nor brazen spear, 
but the Hawk? is their attendant when they travel 
‘to the woods, and the long cords® and the clammy 
| yellow birdlime ὁ and the reeds¢ that tread an airy 
\ path. Who would dare to sing of these things as of 
equal weight? Or who would pit the Eagle against 
the Lion King’? And who would liken the Muraena 
to the venom of the Pard, or Jackal to Hawk, or 
Rhinoceros to Sea-urchin, or Gull to Wild Goat, or any 
δρυὸς ἰκμάδα τόν τε πετεινῶν ἀγρευτὰν ἰξῷ μυδαλέον δόνακα. 
Cf. Athen. 451 Ἴων δὲ. . δρυὸς ἱδρῶτα εἴρηκε τὸν ἰξὸν ἐν 
τούτοις᾽ δρυός μ᾽ ἱδρὼς καὶ θαμνομήκης ῥάβδος ἥ τ᾽ Αἰγυπτία] 
βόσκει λινουλκὸς χλαῖνα, θήραγρος πέδη. It may have been 
sometimes made, as now, from holly bark. 

4 The limed reeds (‘‘lime-twigs,” Milton, Com. 646) of 
the fowler: ἰξευταῖς καλάμοις A.P. vi.152. As in the case of 
the fishing-rod (dévaxa τριτάνυστον A.P. vi. 192), several 
reeds might be so joined together as to be capable of 
extension. Cf. Bion, iv. 5 (ἰξευτὰς) τὼς καλάμως dua πάντας 
ἐπ’ ἀλλάλοισι συνάπτων: A.P. ix. 273 δουνακόεντα Κρίτων 
συνθεὶς δόλον ; Mart. xiv. 218 Non tantum calamis sed cantu 
fallitur ales, Callida dum tacita crescit arundo manu; Mart. 
ix. 54; Sil. vii. 674; Ov. M. xv. 474, and especially ‘Val. 
Fl. Arg. vi. 260 Qualem populeae fidentem nexibus umbrae 
Siquis ayem summi deducit ab aere rami, Ante manu tacita 
cui plurima crevit harundo; Illa dolis viscoque super 
correpta tenaci Implorat calamos atque inrita concitat alas. 

e Ael. iii. 1 λέων. . . ὁ τῶν ζώων βασιλεύς : Phil. 34 θηρῶν 
βασιλεὺς θρασὺς ἄναξ λέων. 

9 


OPPIAN 


ἢ λάρον αἰγάγροις, ἢ κήτεα πάντ᾽ ἐλέφαντι; 

θηρητῆρε λύκους ὄλεσαν, θύννους ἁλιῆες, 

ἀγρευτῆρες dis, τρήρωνας ἕλον δονακῆες, 

ἄρκτον ἐπακτῆρες, καὶ μορμύρον ἀσπαλιῆες, 

τίγριν δ᾽ ἱππῆες, καὶ τριγλίδας ἰχθυβολῆες, 75 

κάπριον ἰχνευτῆρες, anddvas ἰξευτῆρες. 

ἀλλὰ σὺ μέν, Νηρεῦ, καὶ δαίμονες ᾿Αμφιτρίτης, 

ἠδὲ φιλορνίθων Δρυάδων χορὸς, ἱλήκοιτε: 

δὴ γὰρ ἐπιστροφάδην με φίλαι καλέουσιν ἀοιδαί: 

δαίμοσι θηροφόνοισι παλίντροπος ἔρχομ᾽ ἀείσων. 80 
Πρῶτα μὲν αἰζηοὶ μή μοι μάλα πίονες ἔστων: 

ἦ γάρ τοι σκοπέλοισι θορεῖν μὲν ὑπείροχον ἵππον 

χρειὼ ἀναγκαίη, χρειὼ δ᾽ ἄρα τάφρον ἁλέσθαι. 

δηθάκι δ᾽ ἐν δρυμοῖσιν ἀνάγκη θῆρα δίεσθαι, 

ποσσὶν ἐλαφρίζοντα καὶ εὐφόρτοις μελέεσσι. 85 

τῷ μὴ πιαλέοι θήρης ἐπὶ μῶλον ἴοιεν, 

μηδ᾽ ἔτι λεπταλέοι' καὶ γάρ ποτε δηρίσασθαι 

θηρσὶν ἐνυαλίοισι χρεὼ πολυαγρέα φῶτα. 

τοὔνεκά μοι δέμας ὧδε κερασσάμενοι φορέοιεν, 

ἀμφότερον κραιπνόν τε θέειν σθεναρόν τε μάχεσθαι. 90 

καὶ δ᾽ ἄρα δεξιτερῇ μὲν ἐπικραδάοιεν ἄκοντας 

ἀμφιδύμους ταναούς, δρεπάνην δ᾽ ἐπὶ μεσσόθι ζώνης- 


« Cf. H.i. 100, iii. 196. Pagellus mormyrus, one of the sea- 
breams (Sparidae). M.G. μουρμούρι(ον) : known in Rome as 
mormillo, Venice as mormiro, Genoa as mormo. A. 570 b 20 
Ov. H. 110 (=Plin. xxxii. 152) pictae τὴ 
Epicharm. ; ὑμορμύλος Dorio ap. Ath. 313 e f. 

> We assume that τριγλίς -- τρίγλη. So, in Arist. fr. 189, 
Porph. v. 45 has τριγλίδος, Diog. L. viii. 19 τρίγλης. 

° Cf. C. ii, 158; Emped, frag. 35 αὐτὰρ ἐγὼ παλίνορσος ἐλεύ- 
σομαι ἐς πόρον ὕμνων : Luer. i, 418, 

@ Poll. v. 18 en dé (6 Κυνηγέτης) νέος, κοῦφος, ἐλαφρός, 
δρομικός κτλ. 

4 Cf. Kutecn. par. πρός 


10 


. 
? 


ormyres ; μύρμης 


, 
Te τάφρων καὶ σκοπέλων ἅλματα. 


CYNEGETICA, I. 71-92 


Sea-monster to the Elephant? Hunters kill Wolves, 
—fishermen kill Tumnies; the hunter with his net 
takes Sheep, the fowler with his reeds takes Doves ; 
the hunter with his hounds takes the Bear, the angler 
takes the Mormyrus*; the mounted hunter takes 
—the Tiger, the fisher with his trident takes the Red 
Mullet ®; the tracker takes the Boar, the fowler with 
his birdlime takes the Nightingale.. But thou, Nereus, 
and ye godsof Amphitrite and the choir of Dryads who 
Clove the birds, grant me your grace! For now dear 
themes of song invite me earnestly ; I, turning back,° 

{ proceed to sing to the gods of the chase. 
First, give me young men who are not over-stout.? 
For the hunter must mounté the noble horse amid 
the rocks and anon must leap a ditch. And often in 
the woods must he with light feet and nimble limbs 
pursue the wild beast. Therefore let them not be 
stout who come to the warfare of the chase, nor 
yet over-lean ; for at times the keen hunter must 
contend with warlike wild beasts. So I would have 
them bear a body tempered thus—both swift to run 
‘and strong to fight. And in the right hand let them 
brandish two/ long javelins and have a hunting-bill? at 


So of the war-horse Xen. Hg. 3. 7 τάφρους διαπηδᾶν, τειχία 
ὑπερβαίνειν, én’ ὄχθους dvopovew, dm’ ὄχθων καθάλλεσθαι; Arr 
Tact. 44. 2 καὶ τάφρον δὲ διαπηδᾶν μελετῶσιν αὐτοῖς of ἵπποι 
καὶ τειχίον ὑπεράλλεσθαι. 

7 ἀμφιδ." ἀμφοτέρωθεν κόπτων schol., but δύο Euteen. rightly. 
Cf. Hom. II. iii. 18 δοῦρε δύω : so x. 76, xii. 298, etc. Verg. 
Aen. i. 313=xii. 165 Bina manu lato crispans hastilia ferro ; 
of. v. 557, xii. 488; Xen. Cyr. 1, 2. 9 παλτὰ δύο, ὥστε τὸ μὲν 
ἀφεῖναι, τῷ δέ, ἂν δέῃ, ἐκ χειρὸς χρῆσθαι, ᾽ 

9 Of. v. 63; Ken. CO. 2, 9 καὶ τὰ δρέπανα, ἵνα ἢ τῆς Uys 
τέμνοντα φράττειν τὰ δεόμενα ; Gratt. 343 et curvae rumpant 
non pervia falces; Poll. v. 19 δρέπανα δὲ ὅπως εἰ δέοι τῆς ὕλης 
τι κόψαι εἰς τὴν τῶν ἀρκύων ἀκώλυτον στάσιν ὑπάρχοι τὰ δρέπανα. 


11 


OPPIAN 


Kal yap καὶ θήρεσσι πικρὸν φόνον ἐντύνοιντο, 
καί τε κακῶν φορέοιεν ἀλεξητήρια φωτῶν. 
λαιῇ δὲ πεζὸς μὲν ἄγοι κύνας, ἱππελάτης δὲ 
ἵππων ἰθύνειε κυβερνητῆρα χαλινόν. 
εὐσταλέως δὲ χιτῶνα καὶ εἰς ἐπιγουνίδα πήξας 
ἑλκέσθω, σφίγγουτο δ᾽ ἐπημοιβοῖς τελαμῶσιν. 
αὐχένος αὖθ᾽ ἑκάτερθε παρήορον ἐκ παλαμάων 
εἷμα περιστέλλοιτ᾽ ὀπίσω σθεναρῶν ὑπὲρ ὦμων, 
ῥήϊον ἐς κάματον: γυμνοῖσι δὲ ποσσὶν ὁδεύειν 
κείνους, τοῖσιν ἴχνη μέλεται δυσδερκέα θηρῶν, 
ὄφρα κε μὴ θήρεσσιν ἀπ’ ὄμματος ὕπνον ἕλοιτο 
ἠχὴ τριβομένων λιπαροῖς ὑπὸ ποσσὶ πεδίλων. 
μηδ᾽ ἄρα λῶπος ἔχειν μάλα λώϊον: οὕνεκεν εἷμα 
πολλάκι κινύμενον πνοιῇ κελάδοντος ἀήτου 
θῆρας ἀνεπτοίησεν, ἀνήϊξαν δὲ φέβεσθαι. 
ὧδε μὲν εὖ στέλλοιντο θοὸν δέμας ἀγρευτῆρες" 
τοίους γὰρ φιλέει Λητωϊὰς ᾿Ιοχέαιρα. 

ἤλλλοτε δ᾽ ἀλλοίην ὥρην ἐπὶ θῆρας ἰόντων, 

7 


wv e 7 \ 


ματος ἱσταμένοιο, καὶ ἤματος ἀνομένοιο, 


95 


100 


105 


110 


\ , ν 5: τὸ ,ὕ \ 3 > \ 
καὶ μεσάτου, ποτε ὃ εσπεριου" ΠΟΤΕ ὃ QUTE και. 


ΕΣ 
ὄρφνῃ 
a e > 3 Ψ ’ > / 
ρας ὑπ᾽ ἀκτίνεσσι σεληναίης ἐδάμασσαν. 
᾿Ηὼς μὲν τέταται περιδέξιος ἀγρευτῆρι 
πᾶσα γαληνιόωσα πανηματίοισι δρόμοισιν 
εἴαρι φυλλοτόκῳ καὶ φυλλορόῳ φθινοπώρῳ- 

4 Poll. ν. 17 χιτὼν εὐσταλὴς πρὸς τὴν ἰγνύαν καθήκων; Hes, 
Se. 287 ἐπιστολάδην δὲ χιτῶνας ἐστάλατο. εὐσταλής --- διισοϊηιοίτιο, 
in ref. to the high-girt tunic of the hunter: Ov. Am. iii. 
2. 31 Talia pinguntur succinctae crura Dianae Cum sequitur 
fortes fortior ipsa feras; ΠΤ. x. 536 Fine genus vestem ritu 
succincta Dianae; Juv. vi. 446 Crure tenus medio tunicas 
succingere debet ; Philostr. Jm. 28 (of a hunter) συμμετρεῖται 
δὲ ὁ χιτὼν εἰς ἥμισυ τοῦ μηροῦ: Ov. A.A. iii. 143; MM, iii, 156, 
ix. 89, 


12 


115 


CYNEGETICA, I. 93-116 


the midst of their girdle. For they should both array 
bitter slaughter for wild beasts and also carry de- 
fences against evil men. With his left hand the 

unter on foot should lead his hounds ; with his left 


ihe cagenicd hunter should guide the bridle that 
steers his horse. Let him wear a tunic well-girt ὁ and 
fastened above the knee and held tight by crossing 
straps. Again on either side of his neck let his 
mantle? be flung back over his strong shoulders to 
hang away from the hands, for easy toil. With 

aked feet should they travel who study the dim 
ee of wild beasts, lest the noise of their sandals 
| grating under their sleek feet drive sleep from the 


wild beasts—at rising morm and when the day wanes 
and at mid-day and anon at evening; sometimes 
again éven in the dark they slay wild beasts by the 
Pree of the moon.? The whole span of day is favour- 
able and fair to the hunter for all-day coursing in 


(leafy spring ° and in autumn when the leaves fall.) 


> Poll. v. 18 καὶ χλαμὺς ὁμοία ἣν δεῖ τῇ λαιᾷ χειρὶ περιελίττειν 
ὁπότε μεταθέοι τὰ θηρία ἢ προσμάχοιτο τούτοις. 

¢ Poll. v. 49 θηρατέον μὲν τοίνυν ἐν παντὶ καιρῷ ; Ken. C. 4. 
11 ἀγέσθωσαν δὲ (αἱ κύνες) θέρους μὲν μέχρι μεσημβρίας, χειμῶνος 
δὲ δι’ ἡμέρας, μετοπώρου δὲ ἔξω μεσημβρίας, ἐντὸς δ᾽ ἡμέρας τὸ ἔαρ. 
Cf. ibid. c. 5. 

@ ‘*Many a deer is killed during the bright moonlight 
nights” (St. John, Wild Sports, p. 50). 

¢ See v. 459 n. 

13 


OPPIAN 


ἔξοχα yap τελέθουσι καὶ ἵπποις καὶ μερόπεσσι 
καὶ κυσὶν ὠμηστῇσι θέειν εὐκραέες ὧραι 

εἴαρι χρυσείῳ, κρυερῶν νεφέων ἐλατῆρι, 

ὁππότε ποντοπόροισι βατὴ πλώουσι θάλασσα, 
ἀργυφα τειναμένοισι λινοπτερύγων ὅπλα νηῶν" 
ὁππότε γαῖα βροτοῖσι φυτηκομέουσι γέγηθεν- 
ὁππότε καὶ καλύκεσσι καὶ ἄνθεσιν ἅμματα λύει" 
ἢ πάλιν ἐσχατίῃσιν ὀπωρινῇσι τροπῆσιν, 

ἡνίκα δῶμα τέθηλεν ὀπωρολόγοιο γεωργοῦ, 
καρπὸς ᾿Αθηναίης λιπαρὴν ὅτε γαυλίδα πλήθει 
καὶ βότρυς ἡμερίδων θλίβων ἐπιλήνια χαίρει, 
σίμβλα μελισσάων ὅτε λείρια κηρία βρίθει. 
χείματι δ᾽ ἐν μεσάτῳ μέσου ἤματος ἀγρώσσοιεν, 
εὖτέ τις ἐν δρυμοῖσιν ὑπὸ σπήλυγγι λιασθείς, 
κάρφεα λεξάμενός τε καὶ ὠκύμορον φλόγα νήσας, 
ἄγχι πυρὸς. κλινθεὶς ὁπλίσσατο δόρπον ἀμορβός. 
ἐν δὲ θέρει χρειὼ φυγέειν φλογόεσσαν ἐνιπὴν 
ἄζαν τ᾽ ἠελίου" κέλομαι δ᾽ ἐπ᾽ ἄεθλον ἱκάνειν 


“ περὶ φθίνουσαν ὀπώραν Eutecn. τροπαί here, not in its 
strict sense of the Solstice, but of the Equinox. Of. Sext. 
Empir. Adv. M. v. 11 ἐν Κριῷ μὲν γὰρ ἐαρινὴ γίνεται τροπή, 
ἐν Αἰγοκέρῳ δὲ χειμερινή, ἐν Καρκίνῳ δὲ θερινή, καὶ ἐν ζυγῷ 
φθινοπωρινή. So in Latin tropicus of the Equin. as well as 
the Solst. Cf Auson. Opusc. vii. 15. 1 Nonaginta dies et 
quattuor ac medium Sol Conficit, a tropico in tropicum dum 
permeat astrum ; ibid. 15 Scandit Lanigeri (Ram) tropicum 
Sol aureus astrum; Manil. iii. 621 Quae tropica appellant, 
quod in illis quattuor anni Tempora vertuntur signis. 
οὔ The Olive. 

: een pail, basin, tub. Cf. κυρτίς Nicand. A. 493 with 
schol. 

ὦ For θλίβων ἐπιλήνια of. Mart. iv. 14. 2 Presserat hic 
madidos nobilis uva lacus. We assume that ἐπιλήνιον is 
part of the wine-press, whether the press strictly, οὐ Suid. 
and H.M. s. τριπτήρ. . . πιθάκνη ἐκπέταλος οἷα Τὰ ἐπιλήνια, 


14. 


120 


125 


130 


CYNEGETICA, I. 117-134 


For excellent well tempered for the running of 
horses and men and carrion dogs are the seasons in 
golden spring which puts to rout the chilly clouds ; 
when the sea is navigable for seafaring men, who 
spread the white rigging of their canvas-winged ships, 
what time the earth rejoices in them that tend 
plants ; when, too, she looses the bands of bud and 
flower ; or again in late autumn 4 when the year is on 
the turn, when the house of the rustic vintager 
flourishes ; when the fruit of Athena? fills the shining 
pail® and the clusters of the garden vines joyfully 
straiten? the wine-vats; when the lilywhite combs 
fill the hives of the bees. But in mid-winter let the 
~{ hunters hunt at mid-day, in the season when in the 
woods the swain shelters in a cave and gathering 
dry sticks and piling a swiftly dying flame lies down 
beside the fire and makes his supper. And in summer 
the hunter must shun the fiery assault and heat of 
the sun: at_earliest_dawn 1 bid him come to_his 
οὐ Ξεὑπολήνιον,. Lat. lacus, a sense which τριπτήρ also has 
(πολλὰ σημαίνει τοὔνομα L.M.), cf. Poll. x.130 τριπτήρ, ὁ κρατήρ, 
εἰς ὃν ἀπορρεῖ τοὔλαιον ἀλλὰ καὶ ληνὸς καὶ ὑπολήνιον. Our 
rendering, reached independently, agrees with the Lat. 
version of D. Peifer (1555): Cum premit arcta nimis 510] 
torcularia botrus Gaudens. Schn.’s βότρυν assumes that the 
subject to χαίρει is γεωργός. If that is right, then the con- 
struction of ἐπιλήνια is difficult. Does it go with θλίβων or 
χαίρει The schol. taking βότρυς as acc. pl. has ἐπὶ λήνια" 
ἐπὶ ras πίλας (i.e. Lat. pilas, presses). Hutecn. has ἀμπέλων 
δὲ βότρυς ἁπαλοῖς ποσὶ θλιβόμενος σκιρτᾶν παρασκευάζει τὰ 
ἐπιλήνια. We hear of songs of the wine-press: Ath. 199 ἃ 
ἐπάτουν δὲ ἑξήκοντα Σάτυροι πρὸς αὐλὸν ἄδοντες μέλος ἐπιλήνιον + 
Anacreont. 57. 9 (Hiller) ἐπιληνίοισιν ὕμνοις : Poll. iv. 55 (ef. 
ib. 53) ἐπιλήνιον αὔλημα ἐπὶ βοτρύων θλιβομένων ; and of a 
dance, Long. Daph. and Ch. ii. 36 Aptas δὲ ἀναστὰς Kal 
κελεύσας συρίττειν Διονυσιακὸν μέλος ἐπιλήνιον αὐτοῖς ὄρχησιν 
ὠρχήσατο. But ἐπιλήνια χαίρειν would be a very bold 

expression. 
15 


OPPIAN 


πρώτῃ ὑπ᾽ ἀμφιλύκῃ, ὅθ᾽ ἑωθινὸν ἀγροιῶται 
ἱστοβοῆος ἔνερθεν ὑπ᾽ εὐποίητον ἐχέτλην 
γειοτόμον δαμάλῃσιν ἐπιθύνουσιν ἄροτρον" 
ἢ πάλιν ἑσπερίῃσιν ὅτ᾽ ἠέλιος ζυγὰ κλίνει, 
ὁππότε σημαίνουσιν ἑαῖς ἀγέλῃσι νομῆες, 
εὖτε καταστείχουσι ποτὶ σφετέρους πάλι σηκοὺς 
βριθόμεναι μαζούς τε καὶ οὔθατα κυμαίνουσαι". 

« 3 3 A ΟΥ̓ ΝΣ ἀφ ὦ + / > 4 
οἱ δ᾽ ἀπὸ λαϊνέων ἄμοτον προθορόντες ἐναύλων 
πάντες ἑαῖσι φίλῃσι περισκαίρουσι τεκούσαις, 

> A A > ,ὔ Ξ a 7 7 
ἀμφὶ μὲν εὐγλήνους δαμάλας βλοσυρώπεε μόσχω, 
αὐτὰρ ἐὔκραίρους dias περὶ βληχάδας ἀμνώ, 

͵ὔ ee eee as \ 4 > fe 7 

μηκάδας αὖτ᾽ ἐρίφω, καὶ φορβάδας ὠκέε THAW. 

Καὶ μὴν τόσσα φέροιντο ποτὶ Κνημοὺς ξυλόχους τε 
ἐργοπόνοι κρατεροὶ θήρης ἐρικυδέος ὅπλα, 
ἔντεά τ᾽ εὐθήροιο μέγα πνείοντα φόνοιο, 
ἄρκυας εὐστρεφέας τε λύγους ταναόν τε πάναγρον 
» 
δίκτυά τε σχαλίδας τε βρόχων τε πολύστονα δεσμά, 
αἰχμὴν τριγλώχινα, σιγύνην εὐρυκάρηνον, 

ε > - 
ἁρπάλαγον κάμακάς τε Kal εὔπτερον ὠκὺν ὀϊστόν, 

* Cf. Ov. M. xi. 257 Pronus erat Titan inclinatoque 
tenebat_ Hesperium temone fretum; Hor. C. ji, 98. 21 
devexi Orionis. 

> Cf. Poll. v. 17 ff.; Xen. C. 9. 

¢ For hunting-nets in general cf. Xen. C. 2; Arr. O. 1; 
Gratt. 25 ff.; and espec. Poll. v. 4, who says that while all 
nets may be called δίκτυα, hunting parlance distinguishes 
(1) δίκτυα Ξ-- τὰ ἐν τοῖς ὁμαλοῖς καὶ ἰσοπέδοις ἱστάμενα (i.e. set up 
on level ground) ; (2) ἐνόδια τὰ ἐν ταῖς ὁδοῖς (i.e. set up on the 
‘‘roads” or tracks of wild beasts); (3) ai δὲ ἄρκυες τούτων μὲν 
ἐλάττους εἰσὶ τοῖς μεγέθεσι, κεκρυφάλῳ δὲ ἐοίκασι κατὰ τὸ σχῆμα, 
εἰς ὀξὺ καταλήγουσαι. Thus δίκτυον -- Lat. rete, net in general 
or specifically a large net or haye; évédvov= Lat. plaga, a 
net placed in a known ‘ road” of the game; ἄρκυς = Lat. 
cassis, a funnel-shaped net, resembling, as Pollux says, a 


κεκρύφαλος = Lat. reticulum, which means (1) a net-work cap 
for the hair (Hom. 74. xxii. 469); (2) any bag-shaped reticule 


16 


135 


140 


145 


150 


CYNEGETICA, I. 135-153 


task, when in the morning the countrymen with well- 
fashioned stilt guide the earth-cutting plough behind 
the steers beneath the pole; or again at evening 
when the sun slopes® his team toward the West ; 
when herdsmen command their herds what time they 
travel homeward to their folds, heavy of breast and 
swollen of udder : and, bounding incontinently from 
the stone-built steading, all leap about their beloved 
mothers—the bright-eyed calves about the large- 
eyed cows, the lambs about the bleating horned 
ewes, the kids about the bleating goats, and about 
the brood mares their swift foals. 

And these are the weapons ὃ of the glorious chase 

/ which the stalwart. hunters should carry to hill and 
wood, these their arms breathing of the blood of 
beasts : purse-nets ὁ and well-twisted withes and long 
sweep-net? and hayes and net-props? and grievous 
fettering nooses, three-pronged spear, broad-headed 
hunting lance,’ hare-stick 9 and stakes and swift winged 
or purse (the ‘‘ women’s ridicules ” of Noah Claypole, Oliver 
Twist, c. 42). Cf. Nemes. 299f. casses venatibus aptos 
Atque plagas, longoque meantia retia tractu. 

@ Of. Hom. Il. v. 487 ἁψῖσι λίνου ἁλόντε πανάγρου ; Hesych. 
πάναγρα, πανάγρια, ἐν οἷς τὰ λεπτὰ θηρεύεται: LM. ἁψίς ; 
ἘΠῚ ἰθὺ, ἀκα 9. χοῦς 

4 Forked sticks for supporting. nets= Lat. varae, cf. Luc. 
iv. 439 Dum dispositis attollat retia varis; Ken. C. 2. 7 ff. 
(v.l. στάλικες, oradides), vi. 78. It is hard to know if 
σχαλίδες differ from στάλικες (v. 157), Poll. v. 19 has 
σταλίδες, σταλιδώματα as well as σχαλίδες, σταλίδες, σχαλιδώματα 
(cf. ib. 82). Hesych. σχαλίς᾽ τὸ δίκτυον, and σχαλίδες᾽ δι’ ὧν 
σχάζουσι τὰ δίκτυα ὀρθὰ ἑστῶτα, which suggests that σχαλίδες 
may -- δἰ. amites and have been used with the clap-net. 
Of. Poll. vii. 114 μυάγρας, ὧν τὸ ἱστάμενόν τε καὶ σχαζόμενον 
παττάλιον. 

7 Athen. 901 Ὁ κυνηγοὶ ἔχοντες σιβύνας ἐπιχρύσους ; Verg. 
Aen. iy. 131 lato venabula ferro. 

9 Only here; possibly -- λαγωβόλον Theoe. iv. 49, vii. 128. 

Ὁ 17 


OPPIAN 


/ a 7 / / 
φάσγανα βουπλῆγάς τε λαγωοφόνον τε τρίαιναν, 
/ 
ἀγκυλίδας σκολιὰς μολιβοσφιγγέας TE κορωνας, 155 
oh ΄, 
σπαρτόδετον μήρινθον ἐὔπλεκτόν τε ποδάγρην, 
& 
ἅμματά τε στάλικάς τε πολύγληνόν τε σαγήνην. 
3 / 
Ἵππους δ᾽ εἰς θήρην μέγα κυδήεντας ἀγέσθων 
΄ὔ 
ἄρσενας" οὐ μόνον ὅττι χερείονές εἰσι πόδεσσι, 
θηλύτεραι τελέειν δολιχὸν δρόμον ἐν ξυλόχοισιν, 160 
ἀλλ᾽ ὅτ᾽ ἀλεύασθαι χρειὼ φιλοδέμνιον ἦτορ 
ἵππων ὠκυπόδων, ἀπὸ δ᾽ ἑἱππάδα τηλόσ᾽ ἐρύκειν, 
yy ΧΑ / / / 
ὄφρα κε μὴ χρεμέθωσι λιλαιόμεναι φιλότητος, 
καί τ᾽ ἀΐοντες ἀδην' κρυερὴν φύζανδε νέωνται 
νεβροὶ δορκαλίδες τε θοαὶ καὶ δειμαλέος πτώξ. 165 
ν 3 7 “- y AOS NY) , ~ 
ἵππων δ᾽ αἰόλα φῦλα, τόσ᾽ ἔθνεα μυρία φωτῶν, 
ὅσσα βροτοῖσι γένεθλα δεδασμένα σῖτον ἔδουσιν." 
ἀλλ᾽ ἔμπης ἐρέω, τόσσοι μετὰ πᾶσι κραταιοὶ 
ὅσσοι θ᾽ ἱππαλέοισιν ἀριστεύουσιν ὁμίλοις" 
1 yl. αὐδὴν. 


@ Poll. v. 19 mentions ξίφη among the hunter’s weapons. 

ὃ Poll. Le. καὶ ἀξίνας παρασκευαστέον, εἰ καὶ πρέμνα κόψαι δέοι. 

° Lat. tridens, fuscina. 

4 The sense of ἀγκυλίδες (only here) and κορῶναι is only to 
be guessed. 

° Stipa _tenacissima L. (or allied species), which grows 
wild in Spain and Africa, still called sparto or esparto. 
Plin. xix. 26 ff.; Cato 3; Varr. RR. i. 93. 6; Colum. xii. 
52. 8; Aul. Gell. xvii. 3.4; Xen. ©. 9. 13; Ael. V.A. xii. 
43; Bliimner, Technologie, i. 294. 

7 Of. C. iv. 43; A.P. vi. 296 ἀστεμφῇ ποδάγρην ; Xen. Cyr. 
i. 6. 28 ἐλάφους (δολοῦν) ποδάγραις Kal ἁρπεδόναις. See Xen. 
C.9. 12 ff. for description of the ποδοστράβη (pedica dentata) ; 
Gratt. 92 dentatas iligno robore clausit Venator pedicas. ᾿ 

9 The precise sense of ἅμματα here is uncertain : possibly 
the same as the ἁρπεδόναι of Xen. Cyr. i. 6. 28. 

% See ἢ. on v. 150. Cf. A.P. vi. 152, vi. 187, xii, 146: 
Theocr. Fp. iii. 2; Tryphiod. 222: Poll. v. 19, 31, 80; x. 
141; Hesych. 95. στάλικας and 5. δοκάναι, who has also 
σταλίδας- τοὺς κάμακας ἢ χάρακας. 


18 


CYNEGETICA, I. 154-169 


arrow, swords® and axes? and hare-slaying trident,° 
bent hooks ὦ and lead-bound crooks, cord of twisted 
broom’ and the well-woven foot-trap,’ and ropes % 
and net-stays” and the many-meshed seine.’ 

As for Horses, let,them bring to the hunt proud 
stallions; not only because mares are inferior in 
speed for accomplishing a long course in the woods 
but also because it is needful to avoid the amorous 
passion of swift-footed horses and to keep mares 
far away, lest in their amorous desire they neigh 
and, hearing, the wild beasts incontinently’ betake 
them to chilly flight—fawns and swift gazelles* and 
timid hare Cpe ee τς: 

Various are the tribes of horses, even-as the count- 
less races of men, the diverse tribes of mortals that 
live by bread. Nevertheless I will declare which are 

(the best among them all, which are foremost in the 
companies of horses ; to wit, the Tuscan,” Sicilian,” 

ὁ Lat. sagena, verriculum, a large sweep-net; more 
usually of the fisherman’s drag-net (Opp. H. iii. 81). Cf. 
σωγηνεύω (Herod. iii. 149, vi. 31; Plato, Legg. 698 5) of 
‘rounding up” the inhabitants of a country (procedure 
described Herod. vi. 31 and Plato /.c.). 

2 ἄδην: αὐταρκῶς, δαψιλῶς (schol.); of. Hesych. ἄδην: ἀθρόως, 
ἐξαίφνης, δαψιλῶς. dlovr’ αὐδήν K, Boudreaux, perhaps 
rightly. Dual for plural is common in late epic. 

Ὁ Assuming that δορκαλίς (cf. 441) means the same as 
δόρκος C. ii. 12, 315 ff., 405, 428, iii. 3, iv. 439 ff. (cf. πάρδαλις, 
πάρδος) we may suppose that this is Aristotle’s δορκάς (H.A. 
499 a 9; De part. an. 663 a 11, 663 Ὁ 27), prob. Antilope dorcas, 
Gazelle. 

t Hor. Epod. ii. 35 pavidumque leporem. 

m «Down to modern times Tuscany, Ancona, and the 
region of Bologna have been noted for fine breeds of black 
horses” (Ridgeway, p. 314). Go 

n Gratt. 524 Possent Aetnaeas utinam se ferre per arces, 
Qui ludus Siculis; Arr. C. 23 Scythian and Illyrian horses 
are not, to look at, comparable ἵππῳ Θεσσαλικῷ ἢ Σικελῷ. 


19 


OPPIAN 


Tuponvoi, Σικελοί, Κρῆτες, Μάξικες," ᾿Αχαιοΐί, é 170 
Καππαδόκαι, Madpor, Σκυθικοί, Μάγνητες, ᾿Επειοί, 

ΕΣ 3 / Fae > / 

loves, ᾿Δρμένιοι, Λίβυες, Θρήϊκες, "EpeuBol. 


ἵππον δ᾽ ἐν πάντεσσι πανέξοχον ἐφράσσαντο 
, DY 2 fi 
Wpoves ἱπποδρόμων καὶ βουκολίων ἐπίουροι, 


> 7 
εἴδεσιν ὃς τοίοισιν ὅλον δέμας ἐστεφάνωται" 175 
a 4 A 
βαιὸν ὑπὲρ δειρῆφι μετήορον ὕψι κάρηνον 
/ i 3 \ 5 , 


ἀείροι, μέγας αὐτὸς ἐὼν περιηγέα γυῖα" 
\ Ψ' ua 
ὕψι κάρα, νεάτην δὲ γένυν ποτὶ δειράδα νεύοι" 
1 yl. Μάζηκες. 


* The Mazices (Amm. Mare. xxix. 5. 51) or Mazaces 
(Suet. Wer. 30; Luc. iv. 681; Claud. Stil. i. 356; Nemes. 
261), Mdgves (Hecat. fr. 304; Steph. Byz. Mdives- οἱ Λιβύης 
νομάδες), Μάξυες (Herod. iv. 191 ἀροτῆρες ἤδη Λίβυες καὶ οἰκίας 
τῷ νομίζοντες ἐκτῆσθαι, τοῖσι οὔνομα κέεται M.) were a people of 

™( Mauretania famous for horsemanship. See C.iv.50n. As 
Mazaca was an old name for Caesarea in Cappadocia, there 
is sometimes a doubt as to the reference. 

> Nemes. 241 Cappadocumque notas referat generosa 
propago; Mart. x. 76 Nec de Cappadocis eques catastis. 

° Nemes. 259 Sit tibi praeterea sonipes Maurusia tellus 
quem mittit ; Strabo 828; Paus. viii. 43. 3; Ridg. pp. 242 
and 248, 

4 Arr. C. 1. 4, 23. 2; Strabo 312 ἴδιον δὲ τοῦ Σκυθικοῦ. καὶ 
τοῦ Σαρματικοῦ παντὸς ἔθνους τὸ τοὺς ἵππους ἐκτέμνειν εὐπειθείας 
χάριν- μικροὶ μὲν γάρ εἰσιν, ὀξεῖς δὲ σφόδρα καὶ δυσπειθεῖς : Ridg. 
pp. 125 f. 

¢ It is not clear whether this foes to the Thessalian 
Magnesia or the Lydian, near Mt. ip lus, or that on the 


Maeander. For the horses of the firs cf. Luc. vi. 385 
Magnetes equis gens cognita; Pind. P. ii. 45; for Lydian 
horses, Ridg. pp. 194 f. 

7 i.e. Kleian (Strabo 340; Steph. Byz. s.v.): τοὺς ἐξ Ἤλιδος 
Euteen. 

9 Strabo 525 ἱππόβοτος δὲ καὶ αὕτη ἐστὶ διαφερόντως καὶ ἡ 
᾿Αρμενία. Of. Strabo 529 and note on Nesaean ν. 319, 
Togarmah in Ezekiel xxvii. 14, “They of the house of 
Togarmah traded in thy fairs with horsemen (or war- 
horses?) and mules” is Armenia or neighbouring country 


20 


re 


CYNEGETICA, I. 170-178 


Cretan, Mazician,* Achaean, Cappadocian,? Moorish, ° 
Seythian,? Magnesian,’ Epeian,’ Ionian, Armenian,’ 
Libyan,” Thracian,’ Erembian/ As the best horse of 
all men skilled in horse-racing and overseers of herds 
have remarked the horse whose whole body is 
crowned with these features. He should have a 
small head! rising high above his neck, himself being 
big ™ and round of limb; the head should be high, 
the nether jaw curving toward the neck ; the brow” 


(Ridg. p. 193). Armenian mounted archers, Arr. Tact. 
44. 1. 


h See’ C. ivy 50n3 Arrs Ce 14, 94. Pfs Aels NUS iit 
2; Ridg. 238 ff., 470 ff. The horses of Cyrene were specially 
famous, Strabo 837 ἱπποτρόφος ἐστὶν ἀρίστη (sc. Κυρήνη): 
Pind. P. iv. 2 εὐίΐππου K.3 P. ix. 4 διωξίππου K. 

ὁ Schol. Theocr. xiv. 47 ἵπποι Θρηίκιοι Λακεδαιμόνιαί re γυναῖ- 
kes. Cf. Hom. Jl. x. 545 ff.; Verg. den. v. 565 ff.; Ridg. p. 108. 

7 τοὺς ἐκ τῆς Τρωγλοδύτιδος, Eutecn. Cf. Hom. Od. iv. 84 
where Schol. and Eustath. say Aristarchus identified them 
with the Arabians. Strabo 41; Dionys. Per. 180, 963. 

“Cf. in general Xen. Hq. 1; Poll. i. 189 f.; Geopon. xvi. 
1; Verg. G. iii. 72 ff.; Varro, 1.10. ii. 7; Columell. vi. 29; 
Nemes. 240 ff.; Pallad. iv. 18; M. H. Hayes, Points of the 
Horse (London 1904); Goubaux and Barrier, The Hxterior 
of the Horse (1892). 

t Xen. Hg. 1. 8 ἡ δὲ κεφαλὴ ὀστώδης οὖσα μικῤῥὰν σιαγόνα ἔχοι : 
Poll. i. 189 κεφαλὴ ὀστώδης, προτομὴ βραχεῖα (opposed to 
κεφαλὴν βαρεῖαν σαρκώδη ib. 191); Geop. xvi. 1. 9 τὴν κεφαλὴν 
ἔχει μικράν: Verg. G. iii. 79 Illi ardua cervix’ argutumque 
caput; Hor. S. i. 2. 89 breve quod caput, ardua cervix ; 
Varro, R.R. ii. 7. δ si caput habet non magnum ; Colum. vi. 
29 Corporis vero forma constabit exiguo capite ; Pallad. iv. 
13 exiguum caput et siccum. Cf. Hayes p. 193, ‘*‘ When the 
head is large and ‘fleshy’ we may generally assume that 
the animal is ‘ soft’ and wanting in ‘ blood.’ ” 

m Geop. lc. τῇ περιοχῇ τοῦ cupmaros μέγαν, εὐπαγῆ πᾶσι τοῖς 
μέρεσι. 

” «(σοοα width between the eyes is generally regarded 
as a sign of intelligence and of a generous disposition” 
(Hayes, p. 196), 


21 


OPPIAN 


εὐρὺ πέλοι φαιδρόν τε μεσόφρυον: ἐκ δ᾽ doa κόρσης 
ἀμφὶ μέτωπα τριχῶν πυκινοὶ σείοιντο κόρυμβοι- 180 
ὄμμα τορόν, πυρσωπόν, ἐπισκυνίοισι δαφοινόν" 
εὐρεῖαι ῥῖνες, στόμα δ᾽ ἄρκιον, οὔατα Bad: 

γυραλέη δειρὴ τελέθοι λασιαύχενος ἵππου, 

ὡς ὅτε χαιτήεσσα λόφον νεύει τρυφάλεια: 

πουλὺ πέλοι στέρνον, δολιχὸν δέμας, εὐρέα νῶτα, 18 
καὶ ῥάχις ἀμφίδυμος μέσον ἰσχία πιαίνουσα"- 


1 leg. πειραίνουσα ? 


@ Poll. i. 189 προκόμιον (forelock) εὐπρεπές: Xen. Eq. 5. 8 
δέδοται παρὰ θεῶν καὶ dyhatas ἕνεκα χαίτη καὶ προκόμιόν τε καὶ 
οὐρά. 

δ «« The eye should be clear and free from tears, the pupil 
black,” Hayes p. 212. Cf. G, and B. p. 54 among the 
beauties of the eye is ‘‘the clearness and little abundance 
of the tears’’; Xen. Eq. 1. 9 τὸ ἐξόφθαλμον εἶναι ἐγρηγορὸς 
μᾶλλον φαίνεται τοῦ κοιλοφθάλμου ; Poll. i. 189 ὄμμα προπετὲς 
ὡς ἐξόφθαλμον. εἶναι, ὀφθαλμοὶ πυρώδεις, ὕφαιμον βλέποντες (opp. 
to κοιλόφθαλμος rb. 191); Geop. lc. ὄμμα μέλαν: Varr. le. 
oculis nigris ; so Colum. J.c. ; Pallad. 1.6. oculi magni. 

° **The nostrils should be . . . of ample capacity, so as 
to suggest the possession of large air-passages,” Hayes, p. 
214; **The absolute beauty of the nostril resides in its 
width . . . Small nostrils are an absolute defect and 
associate themselves with a chest that is narrow,” G. and-B. 
p- 60; Xen. Hg. 1. 10 καὶ μυκτῆρές ye οἱ ἀναπεπταμένοι τῶν 
συμπεπτωκότων εὐπνοώτεροί τε ἅμα εἰσὶ καὶ γοργότερον τὸν ἵππον 
ἀποδεικνύουσι: Poll. i, 190 μυκτῆρες ἀναπεπταμένοι (opp. to 
μυκτῆρες συμπεπτωκότες ib, 191); Geop. Lc. ῥῖνας μὴ συμ- 
πεπτωκυίας: Warr. [.6. naribus non angustis; Colum. 7.6. 
naribus apertis; Pallad. 1.6. nares patulae. 

4 «The old practical rule of finding whether a horse is 
wide enough between the jaws is to try if the clenched fist 
can be placed within the hollow,” Hayes, p. 216, 

° ** The ear is beautiful when it is short,” G. and B. p. 43; 
Xen. Eq. 1.11 ὦτα μικρότερα ; Poll. i. 190 ὦτα βραχέα (opp. 
to ὦτα μεγάλα ib. 191); Geop. l.c. ὦτα προσεσταλμένᾳ : Varr. 
i.e. auribus applicatis; Colum. Ic. brevibus auriculis et 
arrectis ; Pallad. 1.6. aures breves et argutae, 


22 


CYNEGETICA, I. 179-186 


should be broad and bright; from the temples the 
hair should wave in dense curls about the forehead  ; 
the eye® should be clear and fiery under beetling 
brows; the nostrils ὁ should be wide, the mouth ὦ 
adequate, the ears ¢,small; the neck’ of the shaggy- 
maned 2 horse should be curved, even as the arched 
Cerest of a plumed helmet; the breast” should be 
large, the body long, the back broad, with a double 
chine‘ running between fat hips’; behind should flow 


f ardua cervix, Verg. (Οὐ. iii. 79; Hor. S. i. 2. 89; cervice 
lataque nec longa, Colum. 1.6. ; erecta cervix, Pallad. 
ee 

9 Varr. l.c. iuba crebra; Verg. @. iii. 86 and Colum. l.c. 
densa iuba; Pallad. J.c. coma densa; Geop. lc. χαίτην 
βαθεῖαν ; Poll. l.c. χαίτη εὔθριξ. 

h Xen. Ey. 1. 7 στέρνα πλατύτερα ὄντα καὶ πρὸς κάλλος καὶ 
πρὸς ἰσχὺν καὶ πρὸς τὸ μὴ ἐπαλλὰξ ἀλλὰ διὰ πολλοῦ τὰ σκέλη 
φέρειν εὐφυέστερα: Geop. l.c. στῆθος εὐρὺ μεμυωμένον ; Poll. 
Lc. στέρνα πλατέα: Varr. ἰ.ὁ. pectus latum et plenum; Verg. 
G. iii, 81 Luxuriatque toris animosum pectus; Colum. Le. 
lato et musculorum toris numeroso. pectore ; Pallad. l.c. 
pectus late patens. 

ὁ Xen. Mg. 1. 11 ῥάχις ἡ διπλῆ τῆς ἁπλῆς καὶ ἐγκαθῆσθαι 
μαλακωτέρα καὶ ἰδεῖν ἡδίων ; Poll. i. 190 ὀσφὺς διπλῆ: τὸ δὲ αὐτὸ 
καὶ ῥάχις καὶ ἕδρα (ib. 190 the bad horse has ὀσφὺν ὀξεῖαν, cf. 
Gratt. 526 tenuis dorso curvatur spina); Geop. l.c. ῥάχιν 
μάλιστα μὲν διπλῆν, el δὲ μή, μή γε κυρτήν: Verg. Ο΄. ii. 87 
At duplex agitur per lumbos spina; Varr. l.c. spina 
maxime duplici, si minus, non extanti; Colum. ἐ.6. spina 
duplici; Hayes, p. 250 ‘In many draught animals the 
upper muscles of the loins and back stand out as distinct 
ridges of muscle on each. side of the backbone. This 
beauty in the coarser breeds is not confined to them, but 
may sometimes be seen in well-bred horses. . . . This 
‘ double-backed’ condition [well shown in a photograph of 
a Boulonnais horse in Hayes, p. 251] may come on or dis- 
appear according to the amount of ‘ flesh’ which the animal 
carries.” Of. G. and B, p. 119. 

2 Xen. Hg. 1. 13 ἰσχία πλατέα . . . καὶ εὔσαρκα. Cf. 
Poll, Lc. 

23 


OPPIAN 


ἐκ δὲ θέοι πολλὴ μετόπισθε τανύτριχος οὐρή: 

μηροὶ δ᾽ εὐπαγέες, μυώδεες- αὐτὰρ ἔνερθεν 

ὀρθοτενεῖς δολιχοί τε ποδῶν περιηγέες αὐλοὶ 

καὶ μάλα λεπταλέοι- καὶ σαρκὲ λελειμμένα κῶλα, 190 

οἷα τανυκραίροισιν ἀελλοπόδεσο᾽ ἐλάφοισι:" 

καὶ σφυρὸν ἀγκλίνοιτο, θέοι δὲ περίδρομος ὁπλὴ 

ὕψι μάλ᾽ ἐκ γαίης, πυκινή, κερόεσσα, κραταιή. 

τοῖός μοι βαίνοι κρατερὴν θήρειον ἐνυὼ 

θυμαίνων, συνάεθλος, ἀρήϊος, ὄβριμος ἵππος. 195 

Tuponvot τοιοίδε καὶ ᾿Αρμένιοι καὶ ᾿Αχαιοὶ 
αἁππαδόκαι τε κλυτοὶ Ταύρου πρόπαρ of re! 

νέμονται. 

θαῦμα δὲ ΚΚαππαδόκεσσι μέγ᾽ ἔδρακον ὠκυπόδεσσι- 

εἰσόκε μὲν νεογιλὸν ὑπὸ στομάτεσσιν ὀδόντα. 

καὶ γλαγερὸν φορέουσι δέμας, τελέθουσ᾽ ἀμενηνοί: 200 

κραιπνότεροι δὲ πέλουσιν, ὅσῳ μάλα γηράσκουσι. 

κείνους εἰς πόλεμον μεγαλήτορα θωρήσσοιο 

αἴθωνάς τ᾽ ἐπὶ θῆρας. ἐπεὶ μάλα θαρσήεντες 

ὅπλοις ἀντιάαν, πυκινὴν ῥῆξαί τε φάλαγγα, 


1 πρόπαρ οἵ τε Koechly : προπάροιθε Mss. 


* Cf. Xen. Eq. 1. 5, 7; Poll. 1.6. οὐρὰ προμήκης ; Geop. lc. 
οὐρὰν μεγάλην οὐλότριχα ; Varr. l.c. cauda ampla subcrispa ; 
Colum. ἐ.6. cauda longa et saetosa ; Pallad: 1.6. cauda, 
profusior. 

> **The muscles of the thighs should be well developed” 
(Hayes p. 311); Geop. Le. μηροὺς μεμυωμένους s Colum, lee. 
feminibus torosis et numerosis. Xen. Hg. 1 distinguishes 
the μηροὶ ois ὑπὸ Ταῖς ὠμοπλάταις (8 7), ἐ.9. what are now 
called the “ fore-arms”’ (extending from elbow to knee 5 
from the μηροὶ of ὑπὸ τῇ οὐρᾷ, 1.6. thighs + gasking (the latter 
her being used to denote the hind leg from thigh to 
10ck), 

° te. the part of the leg between knee and fetlock: the 
“shanks ” (Cossar Ewart ap, Hayes p. 16). avAol =tibiae, 
24 


CYNEGETICA, I. 187-204 


an abundant hairy tail*; the thighs® should be well 
compact and muscular; the rounded cannons ¢ be- 
neath should be straight? and long and very thin,’ 
and the limbs’ should be unfleshy, even as in the 
horned windswift stag ; the pastern” should be slop- 
ing; the rounded hoof” should run high above the 
ground, close-grained, horny, strong. Such would I 
have the horse to be who goes to the fierce warfare 
with wild beasts, a spirited helper, warlike and strong. 
Such are the Tuscan horses and the Armenian and 
the Achaean and the famous Cappadocian horses 
which dwell in front of Taurus.* A marvel have I 
seen among the Cappadocian horses; so long as 
they have their foal teeth in their mouth and are 
milk-fed, they are weakling, but as they grow older, 
they become swifter. Those are the horses which 
thou shouldst array for manly war and against fierce 
wild beasts ; for they are very brave to face arms 
and break the serried phalanx and contend against 


4 Geop. l.c. σκέλη ὀρθά; Varr. l.c. cruribus rectis ; Colum. 
l.c. altis rectisque cruribus. 

* i.e. not fleshy. Cf. Ken. Hg. 1. 5 τῶν κνημῶν τὰ ὀστᾶ 
παχέα χρὴ εἶναι. . .. οὐ μέντοι φλεψί ye οὐδὲ σαρξὶ παχέα; 
Poll. lc. κνῆμαι ἄσαρκοι. 

7 Jt seems on the whole better to take the vague term 
κῶλα as continuing the description of the leg from knee to 
fetlock (as in 408) than to refer it to the ““ gaskins.”’ 

9 Xen. Hg. 1. 4 δεῖ τὰ ἀνωτέρω μὲν τῶν ὁπλῶν κατωτέρω dé 
τῶν κυνηπόδων (fetlock) ὀστᾶ μήτε ἄγαν ὀρθὰ εἶναι ὥσπερ αἰγός 

. οὐδὲ μὴν ἄγαν ταπεινά. 

Ὁ Xen, Hg. 1. 8 οὐδὲ τοῦτο δεῖ λανθάνειν, πότερον αἱ ὁπλαί 
εἰσιν ὑψηλαὶ ἢ ταπειναί. .. αἱ μὲν γὰρ ὑψηλαὶ πόρρω ἀπὸ τοῦ 
δαπέδου ἔχουσι τὴν χελιδόνα (the ““ frog”) καλουμένην. .. καὶ 
τῷ ψόφῳ δέ φησι Σίμων δήλους εἶναι τοὺς εὔποδας, καλῶς λέγων- 
ὥσπερ γὰρ κύμβαλον ψοφεῖ πρὸς τῷ δαπέδῳ ἡ κοίλη ὁπλή. Cf. 
Poll. 7.0. 

ὁ Mountain range in Asia Minor. 


25 


OPPIAN 


θηρσί τ᾽ ἐνυαλίοισιν ἐναντία δηρίσασθαι. 205 
πῶς μὲν γάρ τε μάχαισιν ἀρήϊος ἔκλυεν ἵππος 
ἦχον ἐγερσίμοθον δολιχῶν πολεμήϊον αὐλῶν; 
ἢ πῶς ἄντα δέδορκεν ἀκαρδαμύτοισιν: ὀπωπαῖς 
αἰζηοῖσι λόχον πεπυκασμένον. ὁπλίτησι, 
καὶ χαλκὸν σελαγεῦντα, καὶ ἀστράπτοντα σίδηρον, 210 
καὶ μάθεν εὖτε μένειν χρειώ, πότε δ᾽ αὖτις ὀρούειν, 
καὶ μάθεν εἰσαΐειν κρατερῶν σύνθημα λοχαγῶν; 
πολλάκι καὶ δῆριν" ἀνδρῶν ἐπελάσσατο πύργοις 
ἤρεμος ἀσπιδόεσσαν ὑπόπτερον, εὖτε βροτοῖσιν 
ἀσπὶς ὑπὲρ κεφαλῆς ἐπικάρσιον ἀσπίδ᾽ ἐρείδει, 51 
ὁππότ᾽ ἐέλδονται δηΐων πόλιν ἐξαλαπάξαι, 
καὶ πεδίον τεύχουσι μετήορον, ἑπταβόειον, 
δαιδαλέον, πυκινόν, πολυόμφαλον, ἀντία δ᾽ αἴγλη 
χαλκοῦ ἀποθρώσκει φαεθοντιάς, αἶψα δ᾽ ὀπίσσω 
κλινομένης ἀκτῖνος ἀπαστράπτει πολὺς αἰθήρ. 220 
ἵπποις γὰρ περίαλλα φύσις πόρε τεχνήεσσα 
ἡμερίων κραδίην καὶ στήθεσιν αἰόλον HTOp* 
αἰὲν γινώσκουσιν ἑὸν φίλον ἡνιοχῆα 
καὶ χρεμέθουσιν ἰδόντες ἀγακλυτὸν ἡγεμονῆα 
καὶ πολέμοισι πεσόντα μέγα στενάχουσιν ἑταῖρον. 225 
ἵππος ἐν ὑσμίνῃ ῥῆξεν ποτὲ δεσμὰ σιωπῆς 
καὶ φύσιος θεσμοὺς ὑπερέδραμε καὶ λάβεν ἠχὴν 

1 wll. ἀσκαρδαμύκτοισιν, ἀσκαρδαμύτοισιν, ἀκαρδαμύκτοισιν. 

2 δηΐων most mss. 


* The distinction between the rhetorical interrog. and the 
exclamation disappears in late Greek, so that πῶς, Toros = 
ws, ὅσος. Cf. πόσση 330. 

> Cf. Job xxxix. 19 ff. 

¢ Here and in iv. 134 ἀκαρδαμύτοισιν (given by three mss. 
in the latter place) seems the safest reading. καρδαμύσσω 
(for doxapd-) is recognized by Hesych. and £.M. $v. See 
further iii. 478 n. 

4 The lect. vulg. δηΐων necessitates (1) the change of 


26 : 


CYNEGETICA, I. 205-227 


warlike wild beasts. How in the battle doth the war- 
horse ὃ hearken to the martial note of the long trumpet 
that makes the din of conflict ! How with unwinking ὁ 
eyes doth he look upon the dense array of armed 
warriors, the gleaming bronze, the flashing sword ! 
He hath learned also when it behoves him to stand 
and anon to charge ; and he hath learned to hearken 
to the watchword of mighty captains. Often, too, 
he calmly brings nigh to the towers the warfare ὁ of 
men with soaring shields, when athwart the heads 
of men shield presses upon shield, what time they 
are fain to sack the city of the enemy and fashion 
aloft a plain with their shields of sevenfold hides, 
daedal and dense and many-bossed; in front the 
sunlight glances from the bronze and straightway 
behind great space of sky lightens with rays refracted. 
To horses beyond all mortal creatures cunning Nature 
has given a subtle mind and heart, Always they 
know their own dear charioteer and they neigh when 
they see their glofious rider and greatly mourn ¢ their 
comrade when he falls in war. Ere now in battle a 
horse has burst the bonds of silence and overleapt 
ὑπόπτερον to ὑπὸ πτερόν ; (2) the assumption that Opp. used 
the fem. termin. -ecoay with a neuter (for the converse 
of. Nicand. T. 129 ψολόεντος ἐχίδνης, Colluth. 83 περόνην 
θυόεντα); (3) taking πτερόν to be (as in Procop. De aed. 
ii. 8)=Lat. pinna but here as denoting not a defensive 
propugnaculum but the testudo, χελώνη (for which ¢f. Arr. 
Tact. 11. 4; 36. 1f.). On the other hand δῆριν, which 
Boudreaux reads (apparently with some ms, authority), 
makes 6. dor. ὑπόπτ. a simple metonomy for the χελώνη. 
Cf. Lue. iii. 474 Ut tamen hostiles densa testudine muros 
Tecta subit virtus armisque innexa priores Arma ferunt 
galeamque extensus protegit umbo. 
¢ Of. Tryph. 14; Verg. Aen. xi. 89 Post bellator equus 
positis insignibus Aethon It lacrimans guttisque humectat 
grandibus ora; Solin. xlv. 13, 
29 


OPPIAN 


ἀνδρομέην καὶ γλῶσσαν ὁμοίϊον ἀνθρώποισιν. 

ἵππος ἐνυαλίοιο Μακηδονίου βασιλῆος 

Βουκεφάλας ὅπλοισιν ἐναντία δηριάασκεν. 280 
ἵππος ἐπ᾽ ἀνθερίκων ἔθεεν κούφοισι πόδεσσιν, 

ἄλλος ὑπὲρ πόντοιο, καὶ οὐ στεφάνην ἐδίηνεν. 

ἵππος ὑπὲρ νεφέων Χιμαροκτόνον ἤγαγε φῶτα, 

καὶ χρεμέθων ποτὲ πῶλος ὑφ᾽ ἡνιόχοιο δόλοισι 
θήκατο τῶν Περσῶν ᾿Ασιηγενέων βασιλῆα. 235 
ἔξοχα δ᾽ αὖ τίουσι φύσιν: τὸ δὲ πάμπαν ἄπυστον 

ἐς φιλότητα μολεῖν, τὴν οὐ θέμις- ἀλλὰ μένουσιν 
ἄχραντοι μυσέων," καθὰρῆς τ᾽ ἐράουσι Κυθείρης. 
ἔκλυον ὡς προπάροιθε πολυκτεάνων τις ἀνάκτων 
καλὸν ἔχεν πεδίοις ἵππων ἀγελαῖον ὅμιλον: 240 
τοὺς πάντας μετέπειτα δαμασσαμένη προθελύμνους 
immadén νοῦσος πρόλιπεν δύο, μητέρα μούνην 

καὶ μητρὸς φιλίης ὑπομάξζιον εἰσέτι πῶλον. 

αὐτὰρ ἐπεὶ μέγας ἢν, Ππειρᾶτο σχέτλιος ἀνὴρ 
μητέρα παιδὸς ἑοῖο παρ᾽ ἀγκοίνῃσι, βαλέσθαι. 245 
τοὺς δ᾽ ὡς οὖν ἐνόησεν ἀναινομένους φιλότητα 

καὶ γάμον ἀμφοτέροισιν ἀπώμοτον, αὐτίκ᾽ ἔπειτα 
αἰνὰ τιτυσκόμενος δολίην ἐπὶ μῆτιν ὕφαινεν, 
ἐλπόμενος καλέειν γένος ἵπποισιν παλίνορσον. 

ἄμφω μὲν πρώτιστα καλύψατο βυσσοδομεύων 260 
ἄλλοισιν ῥινοῖς - μετέπειτα δὲ χρῖσεν ἐλαίῳ 

πᾶν δέμας εὐώδει, κηώδεϊ-: ἔλπετο γὰρ δὴ 

ὀδμὴν ἡγήτειραν ἀμαλδῦναι φιλότητος. 


1 μυσῶν Mss. 


* Hom. Il: xix. 404 ‘Xanthus, the horse of Achilles, 
prophesies his death. 

ὃ The charger of Alexander the Great: Ael, vi, 44; Diod. 
xvii. 76 and 95; Plin. viii. 154; Arr. Anab. v.14. 4. and 
v. 19. 4, 
3° Hom. 1. xx. 226 (of the offspring of Boreas and the 


28 


CYNEGETICA, 1. 228-253 


the ordinance of nature and taken a human voice @ 
and a tongue like that of man. Bucephalas,® the 
horse of the warrior king of Macedon, fought against 
armed men. A horse there was which ran with light 
feet over the corn-ears ὁ and brake them not ; another 
ran over the sea and wetted not his coronet.? A horse 
carried above the clouds him that slew the Chimaera? ; 

and the neighing’ of a horse through the craft δὲ 
his charioteer made one king of the Asian Persians. 

Above others, again, horses honour nature, and it is 
utterly unheard of that they should indulge unlawful 
passion, but they remain unstained of pollution and 
cherish chaste desire. I have heard’ how of old a 
prince of great possessions had in his fields a fair 
herd of horses. All these a disease of horses utterly 
destroyed, leaving but two—only a mare and a foal 
yet at its mother’s foot. But when it grew up, the 
wicked man essayed to mate the foal with its dam. 
And when he saw a union forsworn of both, imme- 
diately he with dreadful design wove a subtle device, 
hoping to call back his breed of horses. First in his 
eraft he covered both with alien hides, and then he 
anointed all their bodies with sweet-smelling oil and 
fragrant ; for he hoped to destroy the tell-tale scent. 


mares of Hrichthonius) ai δ᾽ ὅτε μὲν σκιρτῷεν ἐπὶ ζείδωρον 
ἄρουραν, ἄκρον ἐπ᾽ ἀνθερίκων καρπὸν θέον οὐδὲ κατέκλων-: ἀλλ᾽ ὅτε 
δὴ σκιρτῷεν ἐπ᾽ εὐρέα νῶτα θαλάσσης, ἄκρον ἐπὶ ῥηγμῖνος ἁλὸς 
πολιοῖο θέεσκον. 

4 The portion of the pastern immediately above the hoof. 

¢ A monster (Hom. Jl. vi. 179; Lucr. ν. 905) slain by 
Bellerophon (tetrico domitore Chimaerae, Ov. 17. ii. 397) 
with the aid of his winged horse Pegasus ; ; Pind. O. xiii. 84, 
1. vi. 44. 

7 Darius, 5. of Hystaspes, became king of Persia by the 
craft of his groom Oebares: Herod. iii. 84. 

9 The story is told A. 631 a1-7; Ael. iv. 7; Antig. 54; 
Varr. ii. 7. 9; Plin. viii. 156 ; Hierocl. Hipp. p. 173. 

29 


OPPIAN 


καὶ λάθεν, ὦ μάκαρες, ῥέζων κακά" καὶ τετέλεστο 
ξεῖνος, ἀπόπτυστος θάλαμος, στυγερώτατος ἵπποις, 255 
οἷος ἐν ἀνθρώποισιν ἐνυμφεύθη προπάροιθε 

Καδμεῖος γάμος αἰνὸς ἀλήμονος Οἰδιπόδαο. 

οἱ δ᾽ ὅτε γυμνωθέντες ἑὴν ἄτην ἐνόησαν, 

λοξῇσίν τ᾽ ἄθρησαν ἀνιάζοντες ὀπωπαῖς 

ἡ μὲν ἄρα τλήμων ἄγονον γόνον, αὐτὰρ ὅ γ᾽ αἶψα 560 
αἰνόγαμος κακόλεκτρος ἀμήτορα μητέρα δειλήν, 

ὕψι μάλ᾽ ἠέρθησαν, ἀμείλιχα φυσιόωντες, 

δεσμά τ᾽ ἀπορρήξαντες ἴτην μεγάλα χρεμέθοντες, 
οἷα θεοὺς μάκαρας μαρτυρόμενοι κακότητος, 

ἀράς τ᾽ εὐχόμενοι πολυπήμονι νυμφευτῆρι" 265 
ope δὲ μυρόμενοί τε Kal ἄσχετον ἀΐσσοντες, 
ἀντιπέρην πέτρῃσιν ἑὰς κεφαλὰς ἐλόωντες, 

ὀστὰ συνηλοίησαν, ἑὸν δ᾽ ἀπὸ φέγγος ἄμερσαν 
αὐτοφόνοι, κλίναντες ἐπ᾽ ἀλλήλοισι κάρηνα. 

ὧδε φάτις προτέροις κλέος ἵπποισιν μέγ᾽ ἀείδει. 970 
ἵππων δ᾽ ὅσσα γένεθλ᾽ ἀτιτήλατο μυρίος ata, 
ὠκύτατοι Σικελοί, Λιλυβήϊον οἵτε νέμονται 

καὶ τρικάρηνον ὄρος ὅθι τοι σκέπας ᾿Εγκελάδοιο 
πυρσοῖς αἰθερίοισιν ἐρευγομένοιο κεραυνοῦ 

Σικελικῆς Αἴτνης ἀνεκάχλασεν ἀέναον πῦρ. 275 
κραυπνότεροι Σικελῶν δὲ παρ᾽ Evdpyrao ῥέεθρα 
᾿Αρμένιοι Πάρθοι τε βαθυπλόκαμοι τελέθουσιν. 

ἀλλ᾽ ἄρα καὶ Πάρθοισι μέγα προφέρουσιν Ἴβηρες, 
ὠκυτέροισι πόδεσσι κροαΐνοντες πεδίοιο. 

κείνοισιν τάχα μοῦνος ἐναντίον ἰσοφαρίζοι 280° 


* King of Thebes, who unwittingly married his own 
mother: Soph. 0.7. 


ὃ Of. Soph. El. 1154. μήτηρ ἀμήτωρ. 
σ (Οἷς. Verr. 11. ii. 20, * S.W. Sicily. 
30 


CYNEGETICA, I. 254-280 


And, ye blessed Gods, without their knowledge he 
wrought his wickedness and there was fulfilled a 
union monstrous and abominable and most abhorred 
of horses, like that dread marriage that was made of 
old among men, the, Cadmean bridal of the wanderer 
Oedipus.* But when they were made naked and 
knew their sin, and in sorrow and with eyes askance 
looked one on the other, the unhappy mother on 
her dishonoured son, and he anon, victim of a terrible 
and evil union, upon his poor unmothered? mother, 
they leapt on high, snorting terribly, and brake their 
bonds and went neighing loudly as if they were 
calling the blessed gods to witness their evil plight 
and cursing him who contrived their woeful union ; 
and at last, rushing wildly in their grief, they dashed 
their foreheads against the rocks and brake the bones 
and took away their light of life, self-slain, leaning 
their heads on one another. So report proclaims the 
fame of the horses of former days. Now of all the 
breeds of horses that the infinite earth nourishes most 
swift are the Sicilian,’ which dwell in Lilybaeum ¢ and 
where the three-peaked hill that covers Enceladus,’ 
as the thunderbolt belches forth in beams reaching 
to the sky, discharges the eternal fire of Sicilian 
Aetna. Fleeter than the Sicilian are by the streams 
of Euphrates the Armenian and Parthian’ horses of 
flowing mane. Yet the Parthian horses are greatly 
excelled by the Iberian,’ which gallop over the plains 
with swifter feet. With them might vie only the 


¢ Giant buried under Aetna: Apollod. i. 6. 2; Callim. fr. 
117: Luc. vi. 293; Verg. Aen. iii. 578; Stat. 7. 111. 595; 
Q. Sm. v. 642. 
7 Of. 302 and C. iv. 112 f.; Strab. 525; Gratt. 508; Ridg. 
pp. 189 f. 
9 Ridg. pp. 256 f. 
31 


OPPIAN 


> A 9 4 > 7 / 
αἰετὸς αἰθερίοισιν ἐπιθύνων γυάλοισιν, 
lod ie 

ἢ κίρκος ταναῇσι τινασσόμενος πτερύγεσσιν, 
Bt 5 r \ r FA ἢ θ , ¢ 6b. 
ἢ δελφὶς πολιοῖσιν ὀλισθαίνων ῥοθίοισι. 

3 ΄ὔ 
τόσσον "Ἴβηρες ἔασι θοοὶ πόδας ἡνεμόεντας" 
> > 2\/7 / / \ 3 / > 
ἀλλ᾽ ὀλίγοι βαιοί τε μένος καὶ ἀνάλκιδες HTOP, 285 
καὶ δρόμον ἐν παύροισιν ἐλεγχόμενοι σταϑδίοισιν" 
εἴδεα δ᾽ ἀγλαόμορφα κλυτὸν δέμας ἀμφιέσαντο, 
ὁπλὴν δ᾽ οὐ κρατερήν, πηλότροφον, εὐρυπέδιλον. 
Μαύρων δ᾽ αἰόλα φῦλα πολὺ προφέρουσιν ἁπάντων 
ἀμφὶ δρόμους ταναούς τε καὶ ἀμφὶ πόνους ἀλεγεινούς. 290 
καὶ Λίβυες μετὰ τοὺς δολιχὸν δρόμον ἐκτελέουσιν, 
ὅσσοι Κυρήνην πουλυψηφῖδα νέμονται. 
” > > , ¢ , \ ” = 
εἴδεα δ᾽ ἀμφοτέροισιν ὁμοίια, πλὴν ὅσον αὖτε 
μείζονες εἰσιδέειν Λίβυες κρατεροὶ γεγάασιν, 
3 ni 7 / low \ > \ " 
ἀλλὰ δέμας δολιχοί- πλευρῇσι γὰρ ἀμφὶς ἔχουσι 295 
τῶν ἄλλων πλέονα σπαθίην Kréva: τοὔνεκέν εἰσι 
πάσσονες εἰσιδέειν καὶ κρείσσονες ἰθὺς ὀρούειν, 
> \ 3 2 ἫΝ / Me > \ 
ἐσθλοὶ δ᾽ ἠελίου φορέειν πυρόεσσαν ἐρωὴν 
καί τε μεσημβρινὴν δίψους δριμεῖαν ἐνιπήν. 
σ \ \ \ + v4 “-- 
ἵπποι Ἰυρσηνοὶ δὲ καὶ ἄπλετα Κρήσια φῦλα 800 
ἀμφότερον κραιπνοί τε θέειν δολιχοί τε πέλονται. 
Μαύρων δ᾽ ὠκύτεροι Σικελοί, Σικελῶν δέ τε 

Πάρθοι" 
\ \ / \ ᾿ > 7 

καὶ χαροποὶ τελέθουσι καὶ ἔξοχον αἰγλήεντες, 
καὶ μοῦνοι μίμνουσι μέγα βρύχημα λέοντος. 
ἦ γάρ τοι θήρεσσιν ἐπ᾽ ἄλλοις ἄλλα γένεθλα 305 
ἵππων ἄρμενα πολλὰ τά τοι φράζουσιν ὁπωπαί. 
στικτοπόδεσσ᾽ ἐλάφοις κυανώπεας ὁπλίζοιο, 


1 Πάρθοι Brodaeus (of. iv. 112 ff.) θυμόν mss. Gesner 
supposed that a line has been lost after vy. 302 which men- 
tioned the Πάρθοι. 


* The eagle (Pind. P. ij. 50, v. 112, NV. iii. 80; Hom. 1]. 
32 


CYNEGETICA, I. 281-307 


eagle® speeding over the vales of air, or the hawk 
hasting with long pinions spread, or the dolphin 
gliding over the grey waves. So fleet are the Iberian 
horses of wind-swift feet ; but they are small and 
weak of spirit and anvaliant of heart and in a few 
furlongs are found wanting ὃ in speed; and though 
clothed in fair form and glorious shape, yet the hoof 
is lacking in strength, bred to soft ground and broad. 
The dappled breed of Moorish horses are far the best 
of all for extended courses and laborious toil. And 
next to these for accomplishing a long course come 
the Libyan horses, even those which dwell in many- 
pebbled Cyrene. Both are of similar type, save only 
that the strong Libyan horses are larger to look at ; 
but these latter are long of body, having in their 
sides more space of broad rib than others, and hence 
are stouter to look at and superior in a charge and 
good at enduring the fiery force of the sun and the 


keen assault of noontide thirst. The Tuscan horses ~ 


and the immense Cretan breeds are both swift in 
running and long of body. The Sicilian are swifter 
than the Moorish horses, while the Parthian are 
swifter than the Sicilian, grey-eyed¢ also and emin- 
ently handsome, and they alone abide ὦ the loud roar 
of the lion. For-verily against different wild beasts 
different breeds of horses are fitting in many cases, 
as the eyes declare. Against the deer of spotted 
feet thou shouldst array dark-eyed horses; blue- 


‘xxi. 252); the dolphin (Pind. P. ii. 51, NV. vi. 72); the hawk 
(Hom. il. xv. 237, Od. xiii. 86) are types of swiftness. 

» But Nemes. 253 says Spanish horses ‘‘ valent longos 
intendere cursus’; Mart. 1.49, xiv. 199. 

ὁ yaporot may here mean merely ‘‘bright-eyed.” For: 
the sense of the word when applied to colour see note on 308. 
EO OF. Os ἀν. 116: 

D 33 


OPPIAN 


7, 

ἄρκτοισι γλαυκούς, Kal πορδαλίεσσι δαφοινούς, 
\ 
αἴθωνας δ᾽ ἵππους πυριλαμπέας ἀμφὶ σύεσσιν, 
a / 

αὐτὰρ ἐριγλήνους χαροποὺς χαροποῖσι λέουσι. 
κάλλεϊ δ᾽ ἐν πάντεσσι πέλει πανυπείροχος ἵππος 
Νησαῖος," τὸν ἀγουσιν ἐρϊκτέανοι βασιλῆες" 

\ > a 3 / / Doe ,ὕ “. lon 
καλὸς ἰδεῖν, ἀταλός τε φέρειν ἐϊπείθει δεσμῷ" 

\ \ / \ ὃ N θ , ὃ A 
βαιὸς μὲν κεφαλήν, πολλὸς δὲ βαθύτριχα δειρήν, 
κυδιόων ἑκάτερθε μελιχρύσοισιν ἐθείραις. 

\ \ + / > a > 7 

Nat μὴν ἄλλο γένεθλον ἐπήρατον ὠπήσαιο 
στικτόν, ἀρίζηλον, τοὺς wpuyyas καλέουσιν, 
na Ψ / > » 5 / 
ἢ ὅτι καλλικόμοισιν ἐν οὔρεσιν ἀλδήσκουσιν, 
a “ ,ὔ aN > Poke. / > ΄ 
ἢ ὅτι πάγχυ θέλουσ᾽ ἐπὶ θηλυτέρῃσιν ὀρούειν. 
δοιὰ δ᾽ ἐπ᾽ ὠρύγγων τελέθει πολυανθέα κάλλη" 
τοὶ μὲν γὰρ δειρὴν καλλίτριχά 7” εὐρέα νῶτα 
γεγράφαται δολιχῇσιν ἐπήτριμα ταινίῃσι, 
τίγριες οἷα θοοί, κραιπνοῦ Ζεφύροιο γενέθλη" 

\ 3 » Doe / / ὁ 
τοὶ δ᾽ ap’ ἐὐτροχάλοισι περίδρομα δαιδάλλονται 
σφραγῖσιν πυκινῇσιν ὁμοίϊα πορδαλίεσσι-" 
τοὺς ἔτι νηπιάχους γράψαν τεχνήμονες ἄνδρες 
αἰθομένῳ χαλκῷ ταναὴν τρίχα πυρσεύοντες. 

Ψ > 
δηθάκι δ᾽ ἄλλα βροτοὶ πανεπίφρονα μητίσαντο, 

an ΨὍ 7, oo 
πῶλον ἐπιγράψαι καὶ νηδύϊ μητρὸς ἐόντα. 


1 yl. Νισ(σ)αῖος. 


“ γλαυκός and χαροπός are not easy to distinguish. Cf. A. 
491 Ὁ 34 ὀφθαλμοῦ δὲ τὸ μὲν λευκὸν ὅμοιον ὡς ἐπὶ τὸ πολὺ πᾶσιν, 
τὸ δὲ καλούμενον μέλαν διαφέρει: τοῖς μὲν γάρ ἐστι μέλαν, τοῖς δὲ 
σφόδρα γλαυκόν, τοῖς δὲ χαροπόν, ἐνίοις δὲ αἴγωπόν : Hom. Od. 
xi. 611 χαροποὶ λέοντες but γλαυκιόων of lion JI. Xe Wie, 
Perhaps if we call y\. “greyish-blue” and xap. “" bluish- 
grey,” we shall be nearly right. 

ὑ Or Nisaean: famous breed of horses from the Nesaean 
plain in Media: Steph. B. 9. Νησαῖον πεδίον, ἀφ᾽ οὗ παρὰ 
Μήδοις οἱ Νησαῖοι ἵπποι; Herod. iii, 106, vii. 40; Strab. 
34 


31 


( 


818 


320 


32 


i 
.- 


CYNEGETICA, I. 308-329 


eyed against bears; tawny-eyed against leopards ; 
fiery and flaming against swine; brilliant and grey of 
eye against the grey-eyed lion. In beauty the most 
excellent of all horses is the Nesaean,? which wealthy 
kings drive ; beautiful to behold, gentle to ride and 
obedient to the bit, small of head but shaggy-maned, 
glorying in the yellow locks on either side his neck. 

Yet another lovely breed thou mayst see, the 
dappled conspicuous breed which men call the Orynx,° 
either because they flourish on the grassy hills 
(οὔρεσιν), or because they are very eager to mate 
(ὀρούειν) with their females. In the case of the 
Orynxes there are two species of many-patterned 
beauty. One species are inscribed:on neck and 
broad hairy back with a series of long stripes, even 
as the swift tigers, the offspring of rapid Zephyrus.4 
The others are adorned all about with densely set 
round spots, like those of leopards; this species 
while they are still but baby foals, are tattooed by 
skilful men, who brand their long hair with the 
flaming bronze. And ofttimes men have contrived 
other subtle devices for inscribing ὁ the foal while yet 
525, 5380; Athen. 194 e; Amm. Mare. xxiii. 6. 30; Synes. 
Ep. 40; Arr. Anab. vii. 13; A. 682 ἃ 80; Lucian, Hist. 39; 
Ridg. pp. 190 ff. 

¢ Oppian seems to denote by this name two species of 
horses: (1) with neck and back striped like tiger, (2) spotted 
like leopard. The first he regards as a natural breed, the 
second as an artificial production. Cf. Eutecn. τοὺς μὲν 
πρώτους ἡ φύσις οὕτω διεζωγράφησε, τῶν δευτέρων ᾿ δ᾽ ἀνδρῶν 
εὑρήματα τὰ ποικίλματα. The first suggests the zebra. 

4 The West Wind (Lat. Favonius) was supposed to have 
an impregnating influence; Hom. JI. xvi. 150; Plin. xvi. 
93; Lucr. i. 11; Verg. G. iii, 272 ff.; Plin. x. 166; Varr. 
ii. 1. 19; Colum. vi. 27; A. 560a6; G.A.749b1. Of 
other winds: Hom. Jl. xx. 222; Ael. vii.27; Solin. xlv. 18. 

¢ Of. O.T, Genesis xxx. 37 ff.; Scott, Red Gauntlet, c. xviii. 


35 


-OPPIAN 


ZY 7 δώ / / “λ. ’, " 
W ποσσὴ Kpaoln, TOTO μερόπεσσι πέλει φρήν. 33¢ 
ἔρξαν ὅπως ἐθέλουσι: θέσαν πολυειδέας ἵππους, 
μητρὸς ἔτι γλαγερῇσι περισχομένους λαγόνεσσιν. 
ὅππότε θηλυτέρην γὰρ ἕλῃ φιλοτήσιος ὁρμὴ 
ἵππον τ᾽ ἐγγὺς ἰόντα κλυτὸν μεγαλήτορα μίμνῃ, 
δὴ τότε δαιδάλλουσι πόσιν καλόν: ἀμφὲ δὲ πάντῃ 388 
πᾶν δέμας εὐστίκτοισι περὶ χροιῇσι γράφουσι, 
καὶ ποτὶ λέκτρον ἄγουσιν ἐπ᾽ ἀγλαΐῃ κομόωντα. 
ὡς δέ τις ἠϊθέων ὑπὸ νυμφοκόμοισι γυναιξὶν 
εἵμασιν ἀργεννοῖσι καὶ ἄνθεσι πορφυρέοισι 
στεψάμενος, πνείων τε ἸΠαλαιστίνοιο μύροιο, 340 
ἐς θάλαμον Baivnow ὑμὴν ὑμέναιον ἀείδων: 
ὡς ἵππον σπέρχοντα γαμήλιά τε χρεμέθοντα, 
πρόσθεν ἑῆς ἀλόχοιο κλυτὸν πόσιν ἀφριόωντα, 
δηρὸν ἐρητύουσι φίλης λελιημένον εὐνῆς" 
> / / a > , > le 
ope δέ τοι μεθιᾶσιν ἐπήρατον ἐς φιλότητα" 345 
ἡ δ᾽ ὑποκυσαμένη πολυανθέα γείνατο παῖδα, 
νηδύϊ μὲν πόσιος γόνιμον θορὸν ἀείρασα, 
δεξαμένη μορφὴν δὲ πολύχροον ὀφθαλμοῖσι. 
Told νυ κἀκεῖνοι, τοῖσιν δόνακες μεμέληνται, 
μησάσθην πυκινοῖσι νοήμασιν ἰξευτῆρες, 350 
€ Me uA of va 
ὁππότε δαιδάλλουσι πεληϊάδεσσι νεοσσούς- 
εὖτε γὰρ ἐς φιλότητα θοαὶ τρήρωνες ἴωσι, 
μιγνύμεναι στομάτεσσι βαρυφθόγγοις ἀλόχοισι, 
δὴ τότε μῆτιν ὕφαινε κλυτὴν τιθασοτρόφος ἀνήρ, 
ἄγχι δὲ. θηλυτέρῃσιν ἐθήκατο δαίδαλα πολλὰ 355 | 
{2 ΄ \ \ A + ~ 
εἵματα πορφύρεα" ταὶ δὲ κλιδὸν ὄσσε βαλοῦσαι 
υμὸν ἰαινόμεναι τίκτουσ᾽ ἁλιπόρφυρα τέκνα. 
@ ΟἹ 206 n. 
ὃ Stat. S. v. 1. 213 Palaestini simul Hebraeique liquores. 
It is not to be assumed that the perfume meant is one 


native to Palestine (which is not rich in aromatic shrubs). 
The spices and perfumes of the Far East came to Europe 


36 


CYNEGETICA, I. 330-357 


in his mother’s womb. O what? a heart, what.a . 
mind have mortal men! ‘They do as they list ; they 
make horses of varied colours while yet enveloped 
in the milky mother’s loins. What time the mating 
impulse seizes the mare and she abides the approach 
of the glorious high-spirited horse, then they cun- 
ningly adorn the beautiful sire. All about they 
inscribe all his body with spots of colour and to his 
bride they lead him, glorying in his beauty. Even 
as some youth, arrayed by the bridal women in white 
robes and purple flowers and breathing of the per- 
fume of Palestine,’ steps into the bridal chamber 
singing the marriage song, so while the hasting 
horse neighs his bridal song, long time in front of 
his bride they stay her glorious spouse, foaming in 
his eagerness ; and late and at last they let him go 
to satisfy his desire. And the mare conceives and 
bears a many-patterned foal, having received in her 
womb the fertile seed of her spouse, but in her eyes 
his many-coloured form. Such devices have they 
also with cunning wits contrived whose business is 
with the reed, even the fowlers, when they variegate 
the young of doves. For when the swift doves 
mate and mingle mouths®’ with their deep-noted 
spouses, then the breeder of tame birds contrives a 
glorious device. Near the hen-birds he puts many 
vari-coloured purple cloths; and they, beholding 
them with eyes askant are gladdened in their hearts 
and produce sea-purple children. Nay, even so also 


by way of Palestine and Syria (Diod. iii. 41) and are 
generally called indifferently Syrian (Propert. iii. 5. 14; 
Tibull. iii. 4. 28, iii. 6. 63; Hor. C. ii. 7. 8; Catull. vi. 8) or 
Assyrian (Hor. C. ii. 11.16; Catull. Ixviii. 143; Verg. 1. 
iv. 25% Tibull. i. 3. 7, iii. 2. 23). 
¢ A. 560 b 26. 
37 


OPPIAN 


vat μὴν ὧδε Λάκωνες ἐπίφρονα μητίσαντο 
αἷσι φίλαις ἀλόχοις, ὅτε γαστέρα κυμαίνουσι" 
γράψαντες πινάκεσσι πέλας θέσαν ἀγλαὰ κάλλη, 360 
᾿ τοὺς πάρος ἀστράψαντας ἐν ἡμερίοισιν ἐφήβους, 
Νιρέα καὶ Νάρκισσον ἐϊμμελίην θ᾽ “γάκινθον, 
Κάστορά τ᾽ εὐκόρυθον καὶ ᾿Αμυκοφόνον Πολυ- 
δεύκην, 
ἠϊθέους τε νέους, τοί 7° ἐν μακάρεσσιν ἀγητοί, | 
Φοῖβον δαφνοκόμην καὶ κισσοφόρον Διόνυσον" 365 
αἱ δ᾽ ἐπιτέρπονται πολυήρατον εἶδος ἰδοῦσαι, 
τίκτουσίν τε καλοὺς ἐπὶ κάλλει πεπτηυῖαι. 
Τόσσα μὲν ἀμφ᾽ ἵπποισιν" ἀτὰρ κατάβηθι, φίλη 
φρήν, 
οἶμον ἐπὶ σκυλάκων: τόσσοι δ᾽ ἐπὶ πᾶσι κύνεσσιν | 
ἔξοχ᾽ ἀρίζηλοι, μάλα τ᾽ ἀγρευτῆρσι μέλονται, 810. 
Παίονες, Αὐσόνιοι, Κᾶρες, Θρήϊκες, Ἴβηρες, | 
᾿Αρκάδες, ᾿Αργεῖοι, Λακεδαιμόνιοι, Τεγεῆται, 
Σαυρομάται, KeAroé, Κρῆτες, Μάγνητες, ᾿Αμοργοί, 


* Next to Achilles the handsomest Greek at Troy : Hom. 
Jl. ii. 671, 

» A beautiful youth of Thespiae who, for hopeless love of 
his own reflection, died and was turned into the flower 
which bears his name: Ov. M. iii. 341; Paus. ix. 31. 7. 

° A beautiful Spartan youth, accidentally slain by Apollo: 
from his blood sprang the ‘¢ hyacinth.” See n. on Colluthus 
248. Cf. Apollod. iii. 10. Sty Pause 1111: 3, iii, 19. 5; 
Nicand. T. 902; Ov. M. x. 162, xiii. 394 ff. 

4 Castor and Pollux, the Dioscuri, sons of Zeus 
(Tyndareus) and Leda: Hom. 11. iii, 237. 

* King of the Bebryces, slain by Pollux: Apollod. i. 9. 
20; Theocr. xxii. 27; Ap. Rh. ii. 1 ; Val. ΕἸ. iv. 99, 

7 Of. generally Xen. ¢. 3 ff. ; Arr. Οἱ 2 ff. ; Poll. v. 37 ΤΟΣ 
Geop. xix. 1ff.; A. 574a16f€ and passim; Verg. GQ. iii. 
404 ff; Varr. ἢ. 9; Plin. viii, 149 ff.; Colum. vii. 12; 
Gratt. 150 ff. ; Nemes. 103 ff. 9 Poll. v. 46 f. 

* 4.6. Italian, including the vividus Umber of Verg. Aen. 


38 


CYNEGETICA, I. 358-373 


the Laconians contrived a subtle device for their 
dear wives when they are pregnant. Near them 
they put pictures of beautiful forms, even the youths 
that aforetime were resplendent among mortal men, 
Nireus® and Narcissus? and Hyacinthus¢ of the goodly 
ashen spear, and Castor? with his helmet, and Poly- 
deuces. that slew Amycus,’ and the youthful twain 
who are admired among the blessed gods, laurel- 
crowned Phoebus and Dionysus of the ivy wreath. 
And the women rejoice to behold their lovely form 
and, fluttered by their beauty, bear beautiful sons. 
Thus much about horses; but now descend, my 
soul, to the lay of Dogs. These among all dogs are 
the most excellent and greatly possess the mind of 
hunters: to wit, Paeonian,? Ausonian,” Carian,’ 
Thracian, Iberian,’ Arcadian,* Argive,’ Lacedae- 
monian,” Tegean, Sauromatian,” Celtic,? Cretan,? 


xii. 753 (cf. Varr. ii. 9. 65 Gratt. 172 and 194; Senec. Thy. 
497; Sid. Ap. vii. 191; Sil. iii. 296); the Sallentine, Varr. 
ii. 9. 5; the Tuscan, Nemes. 231. 

+ Poll, ν. 37; Arr. C. 3. 1f.; Dio Chr. Or. 15. 

i Poll. l.c.; Nemes. 127. There seems no ground for 
supposing that the Iberians περὶ τὸν Καύκασον (Strab. 118, 
499 f.) are meant. 

& Poll. Le.; Ov. M. iii. 210, A.A. i. 272 (Maenalius) ; 
Gratt. 160 (Lycaones). 

1 Poll. Lc. ᾿Αργολίδες. 

m Poll. l.c.; Soph. Aj. 8; Xen. C. 3:1; Lue. iv. 441; 
Gratt. 212; Varr. ii. 9.5; Callim. H. iii. 94; Ov. M. iii. 
208; Plin. x. 177 f.; A. 574a 16 ff. ; Shakesp. M.N’s.D. “iv. - 
1. 123 ‘* My hounds are bred out of the Spartan kind.” 

™ The Sauromatae or Sarmatae inhabited S. Russia. 
Herod. iv. 110 ff.; Dion. P. 653. 

ὁ Poll. l.c.; Arr. C. 1. 4, 2.13; Gratt. 156; Plin. viii. 148. 

» Of. Η. iv. 273; Poll. 1.6. Xen. OC. 10.1; Arr. C. 2-3; 
Ael. iii. 2; Gratt. 212; Ov. M. iii. 208; Lue. iv. 441 ; 
Senec. Hipp. 33; Claud. Stil. iii. 300; Shakesp. M.N’s.D. 
iv. 1. 130, 

39 


OPPIAN 


ὅσσοι τ᾽ Αἰγύπτοιο πολυψαμάθοισιν ἐπ᾽ ὄχθαις 
βουκολίων οὖροι, Λοκροί, χαροποί τε Μολοσσοί. 376 

Εἰ δέ νύ τοι κεράσαι φίλον ἔπλετο δοιὰ γένεθλα, 
εἴαρι μὲν πρώτιστα λέχος πόρσυνε κύνεσσιν" 
εἴαρι γὰρ μᾶλλον φιλοτήσια μέμβλεται ἔργα 

npot τε καὶ σκυλάκεσσι καὶ οὐλομένοισι δράκουσιν 
ἠερίοις τ᾽ ὄρνισι καὶ εἰναλίοις νεπόδεσσιν. 380 
εἴαρι μὲν χολόεντος ἔχις πεφορυγμένος ἰοῦ 
ἧκτο λέχος ποτὶ θῖνα θαλασσαίης ἀλόχοιο: 
εἴαρι πόντος ὅλος δὲ περισμαραγεῖ Κυθερείῃ 
καὶ νέποδες γαμέοντες ἐπιφρίσσουσι γαλήνῃ" 
εἴαρι καὶ τρήρωνες ἐπιθύνουσι πελείαις, 385 
ἵπποι δ᾽ ἀγραύλοις ἐπὶ φορβάσιν ὁπλίζονται, 
ταῦροι δ᾽ ayporépas ἐπὶ πόρτιας ὁρμαίνουσι, 
καὶ κτίλοι εἱλικόεντες ἐν εἴαρι μηλοβατεῦσι, 
καὶ κάπροι πυρόεντες ἐπαιχμάζουσι σύεσσι, : 
καὶ χίμαροι λασίῃσιν ἐφιππεύουσι χιμαίραις- 890 
καὶ δ᾽ αὐτοῖς μερόπεσσιν ἐν εἴαρι μᾶλλον ἔρωτες" | 
claps γὰρ πάνδημος ἐπιβρίθει Κυθέρεια. 

Ἔθνεα σοὶ δὲ κυνῶν θαλαμηπολέοντι μελέσθω 
ἄρμενά τ᾽ ἀλλήλοισιν ἐοικότα τ᾽ ἔξοχα φῦλα. 
᾿Αρκάδας ᾿Ηλείοις ἐπιμίσγεο, Παίοσι Κρῆτας, 8395 
Κᾶρας Θρηϊκίοις, Τυρσηνὰ γένεθλα Λάκωσι, 

αἁρματικόν τε πόσιν φορέοις πρὸς ᾿Ἰβηρίδα νύμφην. 
ὧδε μὲν εὖ κεράσειας- ἀτὰρ πολὺ φέρτατα πάντων, 


* The dogs of the Carian Magnesia are mentioned Poll. 
v. 47; Ael. Vi. xiv. 46. Cf. Ν. 4. vii. 38, 

» Here prob.=Nile, as in Hom. Od. iv. 47 ete. For 
Egyptian dogs cf. A. 606423; Ael. vi. 53, vil. 19; ΚΗ. 
1.45 Plin. viii. 148; Solin. xv. 19. 

° Xen. C. 10.1; Poll. v. 37. 

4 Poll. le; ΑΕ]. iii, 2, xi. 20; Athen. 201 b; Aristoph. 
T. 416; Luer. vy, 1061; Verg. 6. iii, 404; Hor, Epod. vi. 
40 


CYNEGETICA, I. 374-398 


Magnesian,¢ Amorgian, and those which on the 
sandy banks of Egypt? watch the herds, and the 
Locrian¢ and the bright-eyed Molossian.¢ 

If thou shouldst desire to mix two breeds, then 
first of all mate ὁ the dogs in spring’; for in spring 
chiefly the works of love possess the hearts of wild 
beasts and dogs and deadly snakes and the fowls of 
the air and the finny creatures of the sea. In spring 
the serpent, foul with angry venom, comes to the 
shore to meet his sea bride%; in spring all the deep 
rings with love and the calm sea” foams with fishes 
mating; in spring the male pigeon pursues the 
female ; horses assail the pasturing mares and bulls 
lust after the cows of the field; in spring the rams 
of crooked horn mount the ewes and fiery wild boars 
mate with the sows, the he-goats the shaggy females ; 
yes, and mortals also in spring are more prone to 
desire ; for in spring the spell of Love is heavy upon 
all. 

In mating the tribes of dogs take heed that the 
breeds are fit and right suitable for one another. 
Mate Arcadian with Elean, Cretan with Paeonian, 
Carian with Thracian, Tuscan? breed with Laconian ; 
put a Sarmatian sire with an Iberian dam. So shall 
you mix the breeds aright; but far best of all it 


5, S. ii. 6. 114; Stat. T. iii. 203, 8. ii. 6. 19, A. i. 147; 
Plaut. Capt. 86; Luc. iv. 440; Mart. xii. 1; Senec. Hipp. 
32; Claud. Stal. ii. 215, iii. 293; Gratt. 181 ff.; Nemes. 
107; A. 608 a 28. 

¢’Xen. C. 7. ΤῈ; Arr. ΟἹ 27 ff. ; Varr: ii. 9. 11; Gratt. 
263 ff. ; Nemes. 108 ff. 

7 ve Lucr. i. 1 ff.; Verg. G. ii. 323 ff. 

9 The Muraena. Cf. H. i. 559. 

» This sense of γαλήνη occurs Hom. Od. vii. 319. Cf. 
Callim. 20. vi. 5. 

+ Nemes. 231 ff. 

4] 


OPPIAN 


φῦλα μένειν μονόφυλα, τὰ δ᾽ ἔξοχα τεκμήραντο 
ἄνδρες ἐπακτῆρες" τὰ δὲ μυρία φῦλα πέλονται, 400 
τῶν ἀμόθεν μορφαί τε καὶ εἴδεα τοῖα πελέσθω. 
μηκεδανόν, κρατερὸν δέμας ἄρκιον, ἠδὲ κάρηνον 
κοῦφον, ἐὔγληνον" κυαναὶ στίλβοιεν ὀπωπαί: 
κάρχαρον ἐκτάδιον τελέθοι στόμα" βαιὰ δ᾽ ὕπερθεν 
οὔατα λεπταλέοισι περιστέλλοιθ᾽ ὑμένεσσι' 406 
δειρὴ μηκεδανή, καὶ στήθεα νέρθε κραταιά, 
εὐρέα: τὼ πρόσθεν δέ τ᾽ ὀλιζοτέρω πόδες ἔστων" 
ὀρθοτενεῖς κώλων ταναοὶ δολιχήρεες ἱστοί: 
εὐρέες ὠμοπλάται, πλευρῶν ἐπικάρσια Tapod: 
ὀσφύες εὔσαρκοι, μὴ πίονες- αὐτὰρ ὄπισθε 410 
στρυφνή τ᾽ ἐκτάδιός τε πέλοι δολιχόσκιος οὐρή. 
τοῖοι μὲν ταναοῖσιν ἐφοπλίζοιντο δρόμοισι | 
δόρκοις ἠδ᾽ ἐλάφοισιν ἀελλοπόδῃ τε λαγωῷ. β 
Θοῦροι δ᾽ αὖθ᾽ ἕτεροι, τοῖσιν μενεδήϊος ἀλκή, | 
ov \ 4 3 ὔ Dos / 
οσσοι καὶ ταύροισιν ἐπέχραον ἠύγενείοις 415 
καὶ σύας ὑβριστῆρας ἐπαΐξαντες bAcooay: : 
ὅσσοι μηδὲ λέοντας ἑοὺς τρείουσιν ἄνακτας, 


* Gratt. 154 mille canum patriae. 

" τῶν ἁμόθεν is taken from Hom. Od. i. 10, and the meaning 
seems to be either that the ‘points of the dog”’ here 
enumerated are not an exhaustive description of any breed 
or that they do not apply to all breeds. Eutecn. ἀμωσγέπως. 
Of. Suid. 5. ἀμηγέπη. 

° Arr. O. 4. 2 f. πρῶτα μὲν δὴ μακραὶ ἔστων ἀπὸ κεφαλῆς ἐπ’ 
οὐράν. 

@ Xen. C. 4. 1 κεφαλὰς ἐλαφράς. Of. Arr. O. 4. 45 Poll. 
Meroe | 

4 Xen. Lc. ὄμματα μετέωρα [sint celsi vultus, Nemes. 269] 
μέλανα λαμπρά. Cf. Arr. 4. δ; Poll. le. Geop. xix. 2; Varr. 
ii. 9. 3 oculis nigrantibus aut ravis; Colum. vil. 12 nigris 
vel glaucis oculis acri lumine radiantibus. 

7 Xen. lic. ὦτα λεπτὰ καὶ ψιλὰ ὄπισθεν. Cf. Poll. 1.96. On 


42 


CYNEGETICA, I. 399-417 


is that the breeds should remain pure, and those all 
hunters judge best. Those breeds are without 
number,? and the form and type of them should be 
approximately? these. The body “ὁ should be long and 
strong and adequate; the head @ light and with good 
eyes’; the eyes should be dark of sheen; the saw- 
toothed mouth should be long ; the ears’ that crown 
the head should be small and furnished with mem- 
branes; the neck’ long and under it the breast 
strong and broad; the front legs? should be shorter 
than the hinder ; the shanks? should be straight, thin, 
and long ; the shoulder-blades * should be broad ; the 
᾿ row of ribs? sloping obliquely ; the haunches ™ well- 
fleshed but not fat; and behind the far-shadowing 
tail” should be stiff and prominent. Such are the 
dogs which should be arrayed for the swift chase of 
gazelle and deer and swift-footed hare. 

Another species there is, impetuous and of stead- 
fast valour, who attack even bearded bulls and rush 
upon monstrous boars and destroy them, and tremble 
not even at their lords the lions ; a stalwart breed, 


the contrary Arr. C. 5. 7 ὦτα μεγάλα ἔστω καὶ μαλθακά; 
Varr. ii. 9. 4 auriculis magnis ac flaccis. 

9 Xen. lc. τραχήλους μακρούς. Of. Poll. l.c.; Arr. 1.6. 

» Xen. l.c. στήθη πλατέα μὴ ἄσαρκα. Cf. Poll. 1.6. ; Arr. OC. 
5. 9; Colum. 1.6. amplo villosoque pectore. 

§ Xen. 1.0. σκέλη τὰ πρόσθε μακρά, ὀρθά, στρογγύλα, στιφρά 3 
Poll. ν. 58 σκέλη ἑκάτερα μὲν ὑψηλὰ μείζω δὲ τὰ ἐξόπισθεν. 

7 ἱστοί -Ξ αὐλοί (189) -- tibiae. 

& Xen. l.c.3 Poll. d.c.; Arr. 1.0.1 Colum. 7.6. latis armis : 
Nemes. 274 validis tum surgat pectus ab armis. 

1 Xen. ἐ.6. πλευρὰς μὴ ἐπὶ γῆν βαθείας ἀλλ᾽ εἰς τὸ πλάγιον 
παρηκούσας. , ; 

m Xen. l.c. ὀσφῦς σαρκώδεις. Cf. Poll. l.c.; Arr. 1.6. ὀσφὺν 
πλατεῖαν ἰσχυράν. 

™ Xen. lc. οὐρὰς μακράς, ὀῤθάς, λιγυράς ; Poll. v. 69; 
Arr. Lc. 

43 


“a 


OPPIAN 


ζατρεφέες, πρώνεσσιν ἐοικότες ἀκρολόφοισι" 

σιμότεροι μὲν ἔασι προσώπατα, δεινὰ δ᾽ ὕπερθε 

νεύει ἐπισκυνίοισι μεσόφρυα, καὶ πυρόεντες 420 

ὀφθαλμοὶ χαροπαῖσιν ὑποστίλβοντες ὁπωπαῖς" 

ῥινὸς ἅπας λάσιος" κρατερὸν δέμας" εὐρέα νῶτα" 

κραιπνοὶ δ᾽ οὐ τελέθουσιν, ἀτὰρ μένος ἐνδόθι πολλόν, 

καὶ σθένος ἄφραστον, καθαρόν, καὶ θυμὸς ἀναιδής. 

ἐς μέν νυν θήρην ὁπλίζεο τοῖα γένεθλα 425 

αἰχμητῶν σκυλάκων, τοὶ κνώδαλα πάντα δίενται. 

χροιαὶ δ᾽ ἀργενναί τε κακαὶ μάλα κυάνεαί τε" 

οὔτε γὰρ ἠελίοιο φέρειν μένος ὦκα δύνανται 

οὔτε νιφοβλήτοιο μένος πολυχειμέρου ὥρης. 

κεῖνοι δ᾽ ἐν πάντεσσιν ἀριστεύουσι κύνεσσι, 430 

τοῖς ἴκελαι μορφαὶ μάλα θήρεσιν ὠμηστῇσι, 

μηλοφόνοισι λύκοις ἢ τίγρεσιν ἠνεμοέσσαις 

7 καὶ ἀλωπήκεσσι θοαῖσί τε πορδαλίεσσιν 

n ὁπόσοι Δήμητρι. πανείκελον εἶδος ἔχουσι 

συτόχροοι" μάλα γάρ τε θοοὶ κρατεροί τε πέλονται. 435 
Εἰ δέ νύ τοι πινυτὴ σκυλακοτροφίη μεμέληται, 

μήποτ᾽ ᾿ἀμέλγεσθαι σκύλακας νεοθηλέϊ μαζῷ 

αἰγῶν ἢ προβάτων, μηδ᾽ οἰκιδίῃσι κύνεσσιν" 

ἢ γάρ τοι vw )ροί τε καὶ οὐτιδανοὶ βαρύθοιεν" 

ἀλλ᾽ ἐλάφων ἢ που pale τιθασοῖο λεαίνης 440 

ἦ που “δορκαλίδων ἢ »νυκτιπόροιο λυκαίνης" 

ὧδε γὰρ ἂν κρατερούς τε καὶ ὠκέας ἔξοχα θείης, 

εἰδομένους αὐτῇσι γαλακτοφόροισι τιθήναις. 


« See 308'n. 

> Xen. C. 4. 7 τὰ δὲ χρώματα οὐ χρὴ εἶναι τῶν κυνῶν οὔτε 
πυρρὰ οὔτε μέλανα οὔτε λευκὰ παντελῶς: ἔστι γὰρ οὐ γενναῖον τοῦτο 
ἀλλ᾽ ἁπλοῦν καὶ θηριῶδες. So Poll. ν. 65. But Arr. CO. 6 τὰ 
δὲ χρώματα οὐδὲν διοίσει ὁποῖα ἂν ἔχωσιν. οὐδ᾽ εἰ παντελῶς elev 
μέλαιναι ἢ πυρραὶ ἢ λευκαί: οὐδὲ τὸ ἁπλοῦν χρὴ ὑποπτεύειν τῆς 
χρόας ὡς θηριῶδες. 


44 


CYNEGETICA, I. 418-443 


like unto high-crested mountain peaks. Somewhat 
flat-nosed of face they are, and dread are their 
bended brows above and fiery their eyes, flashing 
with grey ὅ light ; all their hide is shaggy, the body 
strong, the back+broad. They are not. swift, but 
they have abundant spirit and genuine strength un- 
speakable and dauntless courage. Array then for 
the hunt such breeds of warlike dogs, which put to 
flight all manner of beasts. But as to colour,® both 
white and black are bad exceedingly ; for'they are 
not readily able to bear the might of the sun nor 
the rage of the snowy winter season. Among. all 
dogs those are the best whose colour is like that of 
ravenous wild beasts, sheep-slaying wolves or wind- 
swift tigers or foxes and swift leopards, or those 
which have the colour of Demeter’s¢ yellow corn ; for 
these are very swift and strong. 

If now prudent dog-breeding is thy care, never 
suckle whelps on the fresh breast of goats or sheep 
nor domestic dogs?—for they will be sluggish and 
feeble and heavy—but on the breast of deer or tame 
lioness or gazelle or she-wolf that roams by night ; 
for so shalt thou make them strong and swift ex- 
ceedingly, like unto their milky foster-mothers them- 


selves. 


© ξανθὴ Δημήτηρ (Hom. Jl. v. 500)=flava Ceres (Verg. Gt 
i. 96). .The name of the goddess is a common metonomy 
for corn: Verg. G. i. 297 At rubicunda Ceres medio suc- 
ciditur aestu; Mart. iii. ὁ. 6 Hic farta premitur angulo 
Ceres. omni; Gratt. 398 Blanditur mensis Cereremque 
effagibat ore; Nemes. 161 Interdumque cibo Cererem 
cum lacte ministra. Cf. H. iii. 463, 484. 

4 Xen. C. 7. 3 advises that puppies should be suckled 
by their own mothers. (Qf. Arr. C. 30.1f. For domestic 


dogs of. 473 n, 
45 


“@ 


OPPIAN 


Αὐτὰρ νηπιάχοισιν én’ οὐνόματα σκυλάκεσσι 
βαιὰ τίθει, θοὰ πάντα, θοὴν ἵνα βάξιν ἀκούῃ. 445 
ἵπποισι κρατεροῖσι δ᾽ ὁμήθεες ἀγρευτῆρσιν 
ἐξέτι νηπιάχων ἔστων, μερόπεσσί τε πᾶσιν 
ἠθάδιοι φίλιοί τε, μόνοισι δὲ θήρεσιν ἐχθροί. 
μηδ᾽ ὑλάαν ἐθέλοιεν: ἐπεὶ μάλα θηρευτῆρσι 
σιγὴ τέθμιός ἐστι, πανέξοχα δ᾽ ἰχνευτῆρσιν. 450 
Εἴδεα δὲ στιβίης δυσδερκέος ἔπλετο δισσά, 
ἀνδρῶν ἠδὲ κυνῶν" μέροπες μὲν ἄρ᾽ αἰολόβουλοι 
ὄμμασι τεκμήραντο καὶ ἐφράσσαντο κέλευθα: 
μυξωτῆρσι κύνες δὲ πανίχνια σημήναντο. 
ναὶ μὴν ἀνθρώποισι πέλει περιδέξιος ὥρη 455 
χειμερίη, στείβουσί τ’ ἀμοχθήτοισιν ὀπωπαῖς, 
οὕνεκα καὶ νιφετοῖσι γεγραμμένα πάνθ᾽ ἅμ᾽ ὁρᾶται 
καὶ πηλοῖσι μένει τετυπασμένα εἴκελα Tapo@.* 
ἐχθρὸν ἔαρ δὲ κύνεσσι, φίλον δὲ πέλει φθινόπωρον" 
εἴαρι γὰρ βοτάνῃσιν ἄδην ποιητρόφος ata 460 
ἄνθεσι πληθύει τε πολύπνοος, ἀμφὶ δὲ πάντῃ 
εὐστέφανοι λειμῶνες ἀνήροτα πορφύρουσι, 
καὶ πᾶσαν στιβέεσσιν ἐῦὔρρίνοισι κύνεσσιν 
ὀσμὴν πρεσβεύτειραν ἀμαλδύνουσιν ἄρουραι" 
αὐτὰρ ἐν εὐκάρπῳ γλυκεροσταφύλῳ φθινοπώρῳ 465 


1 χετυπωμένα δείκελα ταρσῶν Brunck. 


* Xen. C. 7. 5 Τὰ bvéuara’ avrats ΤΙ εσθαι βραχέα ἵνα 
εὐανάκλητα εἴη (where he gives forty-seven dog names, all 
dissyllabic). Colum. vii. 12 Nominibus non longissimis 
appellandi sunt, quo celerius quisque vocatus exaudiat: nec 
tamen_ brevioribus quam quae duabus syllabis enuntientur, 
sicut Graecum est σκύλαξ (ὕλαξ ἢ Verg. E. viii. 107), Latinum 
ferox, Graecum λάκων, Latinum celer: vel femina, ut sunt 
Graeca σπουδή, ἀλκή, ῥώμη (these three from Xen.), Latina 
lupa (ef. Lycisca: Verg. E. viii. 18), cerva, tigris. 

ὃ Xenophon, C. 8, gives instructions for hunting hares in 


46 


CYNEGETICA, I. 444-465 


To the young whelps give names that are short @ 
and swiftly spoken that they may hear a command 
swiftly. And from their whelphood let them be 
acquainted with the mighty horses of the hunt and 
friendly and familiar with all men and hostile only 
to wild beasts. Neither let them be prone to bark ; 
for silence is the rule for hunters and above all for 
trackers. 

Tracking the dim trail is of two sorts, by men and 
by dogs. Men, cunning of counsel, divine and mark 
the trail by the eyes ; dogs trace all tracks by the 
nostrils. Now for men winter ὃ is a favourable season 
and they track the quarry with untroubled eyes, 
since every mark is written in the snow to see and 
the likeness of the foot remains imprinted in the 
mud. For dogs spring ὁ is hostile but autumn kindly ; 
for in spring the grassy earth is many-scented and 
over-full of herbs and flowers, and all around the 
fair-crowned meadows without tillage are purple, 
while the tilled fields destroy all the scent which is 
the ambassadress to the keen-nosed tracking dogs. 
But in autumn,’ rich in fruit and sweet with grapes, 


winter (cf. Bik. p. 14 On en fait la chasse presque toute 
lYannée, mais surtout en hiver): κύνας μὲν οὖν οὐδὲν δεῖ ἔχοντα 
ἐξιέναι ἐπὶ τὴν θήραν ταύτην: ἡ γὰρ χιὼν καίει τῶν κυνῶν τὰς 
ῥῖνας, τοὺς πόδας, τὴν ὀσμὴν τοῦ λαγῶ ἀφανίζει διὰ τὸ ὑπέρπαγες" 
λαβόντα δὲ τὰ δίκτυα μετ᾽ ἄλλου ἐλθόντα πρὸς τὰ ὄρη παριέναι 
ἀπὸ τῶν ἔργων, καὶ ἐπειδὰν λάβῃ τὰ ἴχνη, πορεύεσθαι κατὰ ταῦτα. 
Cf. ib. 5. 1 ££. 

° Xen. C. 5. 5 τὸ δὲ ἔαρ κεκραμένον τῇ ὥρᾳ καλῶς παρέχει τὰ 
ἴχνη, λαμπρά, πλὴν εἴ τι ἡ γῆ ἐξανθοῦσα βλάπτει τὰς κύνας εἰς τὸ 
αὐτὸ συμμιγνύουσα τῶν ἀνθῶν τὰς ὀσμάς. CF. Poll. ν. 49. 

4 Xen. C. ὅ. ὃ τοῦ δὲ μετοπώρου καθαρά (sc. τὰ ἴχνη). ὅσά 
γὰρ ἡ γῆ φέρει, τὰ μὲν ἥμερα συγκεκόμισται, τὰ δὲ ἄγρια γήρᾳ 
διαλέλυται: ὥστε οὐ παραλυποῦσι τῶν καρπῶν αἱ ὀσμαὶ εἰς ταὐτὰ 


φερόμεναι. Cf. Poll. ν. 49. 
47 


OPPIAN 


ποῖαι Kat Bordva Kai τ᾽ ἄνθεα γηράσκουσι, 
γυμνὴ δὲ σκυλάκεσσι μένει θήρειος ἀὑτμή. 

Ἔστι δέ τι σκυλάκων γένος ἄλκιμον ἰχνευτήρων, 
βαιόν, ἀτὰρ μεγάλης ἀντάξιον ἔμμεν᾽ ἀοιδῆς" 
τοὺς τράφεν ἄγρια φῦλα Βρετανῶν αἰολονώτων: 470 

Ψ 

αὐτὰρ ἐπικλήδην σφὰς ᾿Αγασσαίους ὀνόμηναν. 
τῶν ἤτοι μέγεθος μὲν ὁμοίϊον οὐτιδανοῖσι 
λίχνοις οἰκιδίοισι τραπεζήεσσι κύνεσσι, 
γυρόν, ἀσαρκότατον, λασιότριχον, ὄμμασι νωθές, 
ἀλλ᾽ ὀνύχεσσι πόδας κεκορυθμένον ἀργαλέοισι 476 
καὶ θαμινοῖς κυνόδουσιν ἀκαχμένον ἰοφόροισι:" 
cr δ᾽ ioe iA / 4 > 2M My 
pweo δ᾽ αὖτε μάλιστα πανέξοχός ἐστιν ᾿Αγασσεὺς 
καὶ στιβίῃ πανάριστος- ἐπεὶ καὶ γαῖαν ἰόντων 
wn € ᾿ / / ὃ \ Ζ > \ \ 2 \ 
ixviov εὑρέμεναι μέγα δὴ σοφός, ἀλλὰ Kal αὐτὴν 
ἴδμων ἠερίην μάλα σημήνασθαι ἀύϊτμήν. 480 

ai τις ἐπακτήρων πειρηθῆναι σκυλακήων 
ἱμείρων, προπάροιθε πυλάων αἰπεινάων 
δ / nv / , ΄ / 
ἢ νέκυν ἢ ζώοντα φέρει παλάμῃσι Aaywov: 

vA a 
ἑρπύζει δὲ πάροιθε παραιβαδὸν ἀτραπιτοῖο, 
πρῶτα μὲν ἰθεῖαν, μετέπειτα δὲ δοχμὸν ἐλαύνων, 


A Ps \ ε > ‘ ς 485 
λαιῇ, δεξιτερῇ, σκολιὴν ὁδὸν ἀμφὶς ἑλίσσων" 


* This epithet (lit. ‘of particoloured backs ”) we take to 
refer to the practice of staining or tattooing. Caes. B.G. v. 
14 Omnes se Britanni vitro inficiunt. So of Scythians, 
Verg. G. ii. 115 pictos Gelonos ; A. iv. 146 picti Agathyrsi; 
Amm. Marc. xxxi. 2. 14; Herod. v. 6 τὸ μὲν ἐστίχθαι εὐγενὲς 
κέκριται (among Thracians), τὸ δὲ ἄστικτον ἀγεννές; Herodian 
iii. 14 τὰ σώματα στίζονται (οἱ Βρεταννοί) γραφαῖς ποικίλων ἑῴων 
εἰκόσιν, ὅθεν οὐδὲ ἀμφιέννυνται, ἵνα μὴ σκέπωσι τοῦ σώματος τὰς 
γραφάς. 

» The chief ancient references to British dogs are Strab. 
199 among exports from Britain are: κύνες εὐφυεῖς πρὸς τὰς 
κυνηγεσίας- Κελτοὶ δὲ καὶ πρὸς τοὺς πολέμους χρῶνται καὶ τούτοις 
καὶ τοῖς ἐπιχωρίοις; Gratt. 174 ff. Quid freta si Morinum 


48 


CYNEGETICA, I. 466-486 


grass and herbs and flowers wax old and the scent 
of the wild beasts remains naked for the hounds. 

There is one valiant breed of tracking dogs, small 
indeed but as worthy as large dogs to be the theme 
of song; bred by,.the wild tribes of the painted ¢ 
Britons and called by the name of Agassaeus.? Their 
size is like that of the weak and greedy domestic 
table dog’: round, very lean, shaggy of hair, dull 
of eye, it has its feet armed with grievous claws 
and its mouth sharp with close-set venomous 
tushes. With its nose especially the Agassian dog 
is most excellent and in tracking it is best of all; 
for it is very clever at finding the track of things 
that walk the earth but skilful too to mark the airy 
scent. 

When some hunter desires to make trial of his 
dogs, he carries in his hands before the high gates 
a hare, dead or alive, and walks forward on a devious 
path, now pursuing a straight course, now aslant, 
left and right twining his crooked way ; but when 


dubio refluentia ponto Veneris atque ipsos libeat penetrare 
Britannos? O quanta est merces et quantum impendia 
supra, Si non ad speciem mentiturosque decores Protinus— 
haec una est iactura Britannis—At magnum cum venit opus 
promendaque virtus, Et vocat extremo praeceps discrimine 
Mavors, Non tunc egregios tantum admirere Molossos. 
Comparet his versuta suas Athamania fraudes Azorusque 
Pheraeque et clandestinus Acarnan: Sicut Acarnanes sub- 
ierunt proelio furto, Sic canis illa suos taciturna supervenit 
hostes ; Nemes. 124 f. divisa Britannia mittit Veloces nostri- 
que orbis venatibus aptos; Claud. Stil. iii. 301 magnaque 
taurorum fracturae colla Britannae. 

¢ Cf. 438; Hom. Od. xvii. 309 where the disguised 
Odysseus on seeing his old dog Argus remarks: καλὸς μὲν 
δέμας ἐστίν, ἀτὰρ τόδε γ᾽ οὐ σάφα οἶδα, εἰ δὴ Kal ταχὺς ἔσκε θέειν 
ἐπὶ εἴδεὶ τῷδε, ἢ αὕτως οἷοί re τραπεζῆες κύνες ἀνδρῶν γίγνοντ᾽. 
ἀγλαΐης δ᾽ ἕνεκεν κομέουσιν ἄνακτες ; Il. xxii. 69 ; xxiii. 118. 


Ε 40 


OPPIAN 


ἀλλ᾽ ὅτε δὴ μάλα πολλὸν am’ ἄστεος ἠδὲ πυλάων 
ἔλθῃ, δὴ τότε βόθρον ὀρυξάμενος κατέθαψε: 
νοστήσας δ᾽ ἐπὶ ἄστυ παλίσσυτος αὐτίκ᾽ ἀγινεῖ 
A 3 > 
ἀτραπιτοῖο πέλας κύνα μέρμερον- αὐτὰρ ὅγ᾽ αἶψα 490 
ὠρίνθη, φριμάᾳ τε λαγωεΐης ὑπ᾽ ἀὺὐτμῆς- 
ἴχνια μαστεύει δὲ κατὰ χθονός, οὐδὲ μάλ᾽ εὑρεῖν 
ε ,ὔ ’, ὔ 3 3 / > 4 
ἱμείρων δύναται: μάλα δ᾽ ἀσχαλόων ἀλάληται. 
ὡς δ᾽ ὅτε τις κούρη δέκατον περὶ μῆνα σελήνης 
πρωτοτόκος λοχίῃσιν im ὠδίνεσσι τυπεῖσα 495 
4, \ / ~ ee) A ,ὔ ~ 
λύσατο μὲν πλοκάμους, λῦσεν δ᾽ ἀπὸ δαίδαλα μαζῶν, 
ἠδ᾽ ἀχίτων δειλή τε καὶ ἀκρήδεμνος ἐοῦσα 
στρωφᾶται πάντῃ κατὰ δώματα καὶ μογέουσα 
+ \ / / A 3 3" 
ἄλλοτε μὲν πρόδομον μετανίσσεται, ἄλλοτε δ᾽ αὖτε 
> / > 7 A > ed , ε “- 
ἐς λέχος ἰθύει, ποτὲ δ᾽ ἐν κονίῃσι ῥιφεῖσα δ00 
κωκύει ῥοδαλῇσιν ἐπισμήχουσα παρειαῖς" 
Δ Ψ / > 74 > ΄ 
ὡς ὃ γε, θυμοβόροισιν ἀνιάζων ὀδύνῃσι, 
τῇ καὶ τῇ θύει τε καὶ ἑξείης ἐρεείνει 
/ , \ 4, , A a > A 
πάντα λίθον καὶ πάντα λόφον καὶ πᾶσαν ἀταρπὸν 
δένδρεά θ᾽ ἡμερίδας τε καὶ αἱμασιὰς καὶ ἀλωάς. 505 
> > ¢€ Pia 5... 4. 3 \ / / 
ἀλλ᾽ ὁπότ᾽ ixveos ὀψὲ διηερίοιο τυχήσῃ, 
καγχαλάᾳ κνυζεῖ τε κεχαρμένος, oid τε τυτθαὶ 
σκιρτεῦσιν δαμάλαι περὶ πόρτιας οὐθατοέσσας: 
\ an 
ὡς καὶ τῷ μάλα θυμὸς ἐχήρατο, σευόμενος δὲ 
εἱλεῖται σκολιοῖσιν ἐπεμβεβαὼς πεδίοισιν. δ10 
οὐδ᾽ ἀπό μιν πλάγξαις, οὐδ᾽ εἰ μάλα τηλόθ᾽ ἐλαύνοις, 
> ~ ~ 
(Oder δ᾽ ἀπρὶξ γλυκερῆς δεδραγμένος ὀδμῆς, | 
εἰσόκε τέρμα πόνοιο καὶ εἰς βαλβῖδα περήσῃ. 
εἰ δέ μιν ὁπλίσσειας ἀθηρήτοισι λαγωοῖς, 
/ \ 4 ΝΑ cw ey? YJ 
λάθρη μὲν πελάει, κατὰ δ᾽ ἴχνιον ἴχνος ἐρείδει, 515 
/ 
βαιὸς ὑφ᾽ ἡμερίσιν κεκαλυμμένος ἢ καλάμῃσιν, 
οἷά τε ληϊστὴρ ἐρίφων κλόπος, ὅστε νομῆα 
ὑπνώοντα πέλας δεδοκημένος ἤρεμος ἕρπει. 
50 


CYNEGETICA, I. 487-518 


he has come very far from the city and the gates, 
then he digs a trench and buries the hare. Return- 
ing back to the city, he straightway brings nigh the 
path the cunning dog ; and immediately it is excited 
and snorts at the’’scent of the hare, and seeks the 
track upon the ground, but for all its eagerness is 
not able to find it and roams about in great distress. 
Even as when a girl in the tenth lunar month, 
smitten by the birth-pangs of her first child, undoes 
her hair and undoes the drapery of her breasts and, 
poor girl, without tunic and without snood, roams 
everywhere about the house, and in her anguish now 
goes to the hall and anon rushes to her bed, and 
sometimes throws herself in the dust and mars her 
rosy cheeks; so the dog, distressed by devouring 
grief, rushes this way and that and searches every 
stone in turn and every knoll and every path and trees 
and garden vines and dykes and _ threshing-floors. 
And when at last he hits the airy trail, he gives 
tongue and whines for joy ; even as the little calves 
leap about the uddered cows, so the dog rejoices 
exceedingly, and in haste he winds his way over the 
mazy fields ; nor couldst thou lead him astray, even 
if thou shouldst then drive him very far, but he 
runs straight on, holding steadfastly to the sweet 
scent, until he reaches the end of his labour and to 
his goal. But if thou wert to array him against the 
hare difficult of capture, stealthily he draws nigh, 
planting step on step, hiding low under vines or 
stubble, even as the robber thief of kids who, watch- 


ing near at hand the sleeping shepherd, quietly 
5] 


“ea 


OPPIAN 


GAN’ ὅτε δὴ λόχμῃσι Aayweinor πελάσσῃ, 

ῥίμφ᾽ ἔθορεν, τόξῳ ἐναλίγκιος ἠὲ δράκοντι 
GUPLKTH, τὸν ὄρινεν ἑἕῆς πάρος ἀτρεμέοντα 
ἰοδόκου χειῆς ἀμαλητόμος͵ ἦ τις ἀροτρεύς. 

ὡς ὅ γε καγχαλόων ὠκὺς θόρεν: ἣν δὲ τυχήσῃ, 
ῥεῖά μιν ὀξυτέροισι δαμασσάμενος ὀνύχεσσι 

καὶ γενύεσσιν ἑλὼν φόρτον μέγαν ἀντιάσειεν"" 
ὦκα φέρει μογέων τε βαρυνόμενός τε πελάζει. 
οἵη δ᾽ ἐκ ληΐοιο φέρει θέρος ἀμητοῖο 

ριθομένη πυρῷ τε μετ᾽ αὔλιον εἶσιν ἀπήνη, 
τὴν δ᾽ ἐσιδόντες ὁ “ὄρουσαν. ἀολλέες ἀγροιῶται, 
πρόπροθι δ᾽ ἀντήσαντες ὁ “μὲν κύκλοισιν ἐρείδει, 
ἄλλος ὑπερτερίην, ὁ δ᾽ ἄρ᾽ ἄξονα βουσὶν ἀρήγων' 
εἰς αὖλιν δὲ μολόντες ἐλύσανθ᾽ ἱστοβοῆα, 

ταῦροι δ᾽ ἱδρώοντες ἀνέπνευσαν καμάτοιο, 

θυμὸς δ᾽ ἠπεδανοῦ μέγ᾽ ἐχήρατο βουπελάταο" 
ὡς ὁ μὲν ἱκνεῦται φόρτον γενύεσσιν ἀγινῶν. 
αὐτὰρ ὅ A ἀντιάᾳ κεχαρημένος ὠκὺς ἐπακτήρ, 
ἄμφω δ᾽ ἀείρας ἀπὸ μητέρος. ὑψόθι γαίης, 
κόλποισιν θέτο θῆρα καὶ αὐτὸν θηροφονῆα. 


1 ἀντία σεῖο Lobeck. 


52 


520 


525 


530 


535 


CYNEGETICA, I. 519-538 


steals upon the fold. But when he approaches the 
covert of the hare, swiftly he springs, like an arrow 
from the bow or like the hissing snake which some 
harvester or ploughman has disturbed when lying 
quietly in front of his venomous lair. So the dog 
gives tongue and springs ; and if he hit his quarry, 
easily he will overcome him with his sharp claws and 
take his great load in his mouth and go to meet his 
master : swiftly he carries his burden but labouring 
and heavy-laden he draws near. As the wain brings 
from the cornfield the fruits of harvest and comes to 
the steading laden with wheat and the rustics when 
they see it rush forth together to meet it in front 
of the yard ; one presses on the wheels, another on 
the frame, another on the axle to help the oxen; 
and when they come into the yard they unstrap the 
pole and the sweating steers have respite from their 
toil, and the heart of the swinked teamster rejoices 
exceedingly ; even so the dog comes bringing his 
burden in his mouth. And the swift hunter meets 
him joyfully and lifting both high from mother earth 
he puts in his bosom® both the beast and the dog 
himself that slew the beast. 


* Plin. viii. 147 (canes) senecta fessos caecosque ac debiles 
sinu ferunt. 


53 


KYNHTETIKQN TO B 


Εἰ δ᾽ dye μοι, “Ζηνὸς θύγατερ, καλλίσφυρε Φοίβη, 
παρθένε χρυσομίτρη, δίδυμον γένος ᾿Απόλλωνι, 
εἰπέμεναι μερόπων τίς ἀγασθενέων θ᾽ ἡρώων 
σῆς ἀπὸ χειρὸς ἄειρε μεγακλέα δήνεα θήρης. 

᾿Αμφὶ πόδας Φολόης ἀνεμώδεος ἄγρια φῦλα ὅ 
θηρομιγῆ, μερόπων μὲν ἐπ᾽ ἰξύας, ἰξυόφιν δὲ 
ἵππων ἡμιβρότων, ἐπιδόρπιον εὕρετο θήρην. 
ἐν μερόπεσσι δὲ πρῶτος ὁ > Γοργόνος αὐχέν᾽ ἀμέρσας," 
Ζηνὸς χρυσείοιο πάϊς κλυτός, εὕρετο Περσεύς" 
ἀλλὰ ποδῶν κραιπνῇσιν ἀειρόμενος πτερύγεσσι 10 
καὶ πτῶκας καὶ θῶας ἐλάζυτο καὶ γένος αἰγῶν 
ἀγροτέρων δόρκους τε θοοὺς ὀρύγων τε γένεθλα 
ἠδ᾽ αὐτῶν ἐλάφων στικτῶν αἰπεινὰ κάρηνα. 
ἱππαλέην δ᾽ ἄγρην ὁ φαεσφόρος εὕρετο Κάστωρ. 
καὶ τοὺς μὲν κατέπεφνεν ἐπίσκοπον ἰθὺς ἄκοντι 15 
βαλλόμενος, τοὺς δ᾽ αὖτε θοοῖς ἵπποισιν ἐλαύνων 
θῆρας ἕλε ξυνοχῇσι μεσημβρινοῖο δρόμοιο. 


1 εἶ] νῦν CFGI. 
2 vl. αὐχένα κόψας. 
α M. in Arcadia, home of the Centaurs. 
> For ἐπιδόρπιον cf. μεταδόρπια Plat. Oritias, 115 x. 
¢ S. of Danae whom Zeus visited in a golden rain. 
4 The winged shoes of Perseus. Apollod. ii. 4. 2. 
¢ Castor and Pollux became the constellation Gemini, the 
Twins, and aid those in peril atsea; Claud. Bell. Gild. i. 


54 


oo 


CYNEGETICA, or THE CHASE 
Il 


Come now, daughter of Zeus, fair-ankled Phoebe, 
maid of the golden snood, twin birth with Apollo, 
declare, I pray thee, who among men and mighty 
heroes received at thy hands the glorious devices of 
the chase. 

By the foot of windy Pholoe® did savage tribes, 
half-beast half-men, human to the waist but from 
the waist horses, invent the chase for pastime after 
the banquet.’ Among men it was invented first by 
him who cut off the Gorgon’s head, even Perseus,’ 
the son of golden Zeus; howbeit he soared on the 
swift wings ὦ of his feet to capture Hares and Jackals 
and the tribe of wild Goats and swift Gazelles and 
the breeds of Oryx and the high-headed dappled 
Deer themselves. Hunting on horseback did Castor, 
bringer of light,’ discover ; and some beasts he slew 
by straight hurling of his javelin to the mark; 
others he pursued on swift horses and put them to 
bay fin the noontide chase. Saw-toothed 5 dogs were 
221 caeca sub nocte vocati Naufraga Ledaei sustentant vela 
Lacones. Cf. Callim. (Loeb) HW. v. 24m. For dogs called 
καστορίαι cf. Xen. C. 3.1; Poll. v. 39. 

7 Lit. “took (slew) in the narrows.” Of. Lat. angustiae. 
The phrase is from Hom. 71. xxiii. 330 ἐν ξυνοχῇσιν ὁδοῦ. 

9 QO, iii, 5n. 

55 


OPPIAN 


πρὸς δὲ μόθους θηρῶν κύνας ὥπλισε καρχαρόδοντας 
διογενὴς πρῶτος Λακεδαιμόνιος Πολυδεύκης" 
καὶ γὰρ πυγμαχίῃσι λυγροὺς ἐναρίξατο φῶτας 2 
καὶ σκυλάκεσσι θοαῖς βαλίους ἐδαμάσσατο θῆρας. 
ἔξοχα δ᾽ ἐν σταδίοισιν ὀρέιοτέροισι μόθοισιν 
Οἰψείδης ἤστραψεν ἐνυάλιος Μελέαγρος. 
ἄρκυας αὖτε βρόχους τε καὶ ἀγκύλα δίκτυα πρῶτος 
“Ἱππόλυτος μερόπεσσιν ἐπακτήρεσσιν ἔφηνε. 25 
Σχοινῆος πρώτη δὲ κλυτὴ θυγάτηρ ᾿Αταλάντη 
θηρσὶ φόνον πτερόεντα συηβόλος εὕρετο κούρη. 
νυκτερίους δὲ δόλους, νυχίην πανεπίκλοπον ἄγρην, 
᾿Ωρίων πρώτιστος ἐμήσατο κερδαλεόφρων. 
τόσσοι μὲν θήρης κρατεροὶ πάρος ἡγεμονῆες. 80 
πολλοὺς δ᾽ αὖ μετόπισθεν ἔρως ἐδαμάσσατο δριμύς- 
οὐ γάρ τις κέντροισι δαμεὶς ἄγρης ἐρατεινῆς 
αὖθις ἑκὼν λείψειεν ἔχει δέ μιν ἄσπετα δεσμά. 
οἷος μὲν γλυκὺς ὕπνος ἐπ᾽ ἄνθεσιν εἴαρος ὥρῃ, 
οἵη δ᾽ αὖτε θέρευς γλυκερὴ σπήλυγγι χαμεύνη, 35 
οἵη δ᾽ ἐν σκοπέλοισιν ἐπακτήρεσσι πάσασθαι 
τερπωλή: πόσση δὲ χάρις κείνοισιν ὀπηδεῖ 
δρεπτομένοις αὐτοῖσι μελιχρῆς ἄνθος ὀπώρης-" 
ψυχρὸν δ᾽ ἐξ ἄντροιο προχεύμενον ἄργυφον ὕδωρ 
οἷον κεκμηῶσι ποτὸν γλυκερόν τε λοετρόν- 40 
οἷα δ᾽ ἐνὶ ξυλόχοις κεχαρισμένα δῶρα φέρουσιν 
ἐν γλυκεροῖς ταλάροισι παρ᾽ αἰπολίοισι νομῆες. 

᾿Αλλ’ ἄγε δὴ ταύρων ζηλήμονα πάγχυ γενέθλην 

\ , 


πρῶτον ἀείδωμεν καὶ μυρίον ἔξοχα νεῖκος 


“ Gratt, 213 assigns this distinction to the Boeotian 
Hagnon. 


56 


CYNEGETICA, 11. 18. 44. 


first arrayed for battle with wild beasts by Polydeuces¢ 
of Lacedaemon, son of Zeus ; for he both slew baleful 
men in the battle of the fists and overcame spotted 
wild beasts with swift hounds. Pre-eminent in close 
combat on the hills shone the son of Oeneus, warlike 
Meleager.® Nets again and nooses and curving hayes 
did Hippolytus ὁ first reveal to hunting men. Winged 
death for wild beasts did Atalanta invent, the glorious 
daughter of Schoeneus, the maiden huntress of the 
Boar. And snaring by night, the guileful hunting 
of the dark, crafty Orion ὁ first discovered. These 
were the mighty leaders of the chase in former days. 
But afterward the keen passion seized many ; for 
none who has once been smitten by the charms of 
the delightful hunt would ever willingly forsake it 
again: he is held by wondrous bonds. How sweet 
the sleep upon the flowers in springtime; how 
sweet in summer the low couch in some cave ; what 
delight for hunters to break their fast amid the rocks 
and what joy attends them when they cull for them- 
selves the flower of honied fruit; and the cold clear 
water flowing from a grotto—what a draft for a 
weary man and how sweet a bath; and in the 
woods what grateful gifts in pleasant baskets are 
brought by shepherds watching by their flocks ! 

But come now let us sing first the very jealous 
race ef Bulls and tell of the tremendous feud which 


δ S.of Aetolian Oeneus and Althaea, killed the Calydonian 
boar. Apollod. i. 8. 2. 

¢ 5. of Theseus and the Amazon Hippolyte, was favourite 
of Artemis and famous hunter. 

4 D. of Schoeneus (Paus. viii. 35, etc.) or Iasus (Callim. 
H, iii. 216, etc.), was first to shoot the Calydonian boar 
(Apollod. i. 8. 2; Paus. viii. 45). 

¢ Giant hunter of Boeotia: Apollod. i. 4. 3. 


57 


OPPIAN 


oa , 
οἷον ὑπὲρ θαλάμοιο πανάγρια δηρίσαντο. 45 
΄ > la 
εἷς βασιλεὺς ἀγέληφι τυραννεύων ox’ ἄριστος 
> Ζ 
βαιοτέροις ταύροις καὶ θηλυτέρῃσιν ἀνάσσει" 
ε “ 
πέφρικεν δ᾽ ἀγέλη κεραὸν μέγαν ἡγεμονῆα" 
αἱ δ᾽ αὖτε τρομέουσιν ἐὸν πόσιν ἀγριόωντα, 
e / / > ” 1 , Ἂ ἀλλ᾽ ee LD, ἘΣ ἜΝ IAA 
οπποτε MUKYOQALT , ἀγριοι Boes a. oT ἐπ AAAW 50 
~ > \ / / 
ταῦρος ἀποκρινθεὶς ἀγέλης, πλατὺν αὐχένα τείνας, 
5 . a 5 
οἷος tn,” κἀκεῖνος ἄναξ σφετέροισιν ἀνάσσων, 
> 
δὴ τότ᾽ ἐπ᾽ ἀμφοτέροισιν ὑπέρβιος ἵστατ᾽ ἐνυώ. 
πρῶτα μὲν ἀντίπρωρον ἐς ἀλλήλους ὁρόωντες 
ἄγρια θυμαίνοντι χόλῳ μέγα παιφάσσουσι 55 
καὶ πυρόεν πνείουσι Kal ἀμῶνται ποσὶ γαῖαν, 
οἷα κονιόμενοι" προκαλίζονται δ᾽ ἑκάτερθεν, 
ὀξέα κεκλήγοντες ἐνυαλίοισιν ἀῦταῖς" 
> \ > \ ve 24? ς , 3 vA 
αὐτὰρ ἐπεὶ σάλπιγξαν ἐφ᾽ ὑσμίνην ἀλεγεινήν, 
ἄσχετον ἀΐσσουσιν, ἕοῖσι δ᾽ ἄφαρ κεράεσσι 60 
“ Vy ae δι 3 iN > / 
πᾶν δέμας ἀλλήλοισιν ἀμοιβαδὶς οὐτάζουσιν. 
ae ὃ᾽ 3 κα λ / β θί av ,ὔ "A 
ola δ᾽ evi πτολέμῳ βυθίῳ, ὅτε ναυμάχος Ἄρης 
δῆριν ἀείρηται, δοιαὶ πανυπείροχα νῆες, 
στράπτουσαι θαμινοῖσιν ἐναντίον ὁπλίτῃσιν, 
ἀντίβιον πρώρῃσι μετωπαδὸν ἐγχρίμπτονται, 65 
- / ~ 
σπερχόμεναι πνοιῇ τε λάβρῳ παλάμηφι τε ναυτῶν- 
“ ~ 
ἔντεσι χαλκείοις δὲ περιβρέμεται κτύπος ἀνδρῶν 
~ 9 
νηῶν T ἀγνυμένων. στένεται δ᾽ ὅλος οἴδματι Νηρεύς" 


1 ἄγριον GI. 2 ἴῃ Turnebus: ἔη mss. 


* A. 572,b 16 ὁ δὲ ταῦρος, ὅταν ὥρα τῆς ὀχείας ἦ, τότε γίνεται 
σύννομος καὶ μάχεται τοῖς ἄλλοις, τὸν δὲ πρότερον χρόνον μετ᾽ 
ἀλλήλων εἰσίν, ὃ καλεῖται ἀτιμαγελεῖν. πολλάκις γὰρ οἵ γ᾽ ἐν τῇ 
᾿Ηπείρῳ οὐ φαίνονται τριῶν μηνῶν ; id. 611 ἃ 2 ἀπόλλυνται δὲ καὶ 
οἱ ταῦροι, ὅταν ἀτιμωγελήσαντες ἀποπλανηθῶσιν, ὑπὸ θηρίων. 

> Plin. viii. 181 Sed (tauro) tota comminatio prioribus in 
pedibus. Stat ira gliscente alternos replicans spargensque in 
58 


CYNEGETICA, II. 45-68 


above others they wage with utter fury over their 
mating. One Bull is monarch of a herd and easily 
supreme, and he rules the lesser Bulls and females ; 
the herd quake before their mighty horned leader, and 
the cows of the field too tremble at their own lord in 
his anger when he bellows. But when a Bull separates 
from the herd? and arching his mighty neck comes 
against another all alone, he too being lord and 
master of his own, then between the twain arises 
violent war. First face to face they glare at one 
another and greatly quiver with wildly seething 
wrath and breathe fiery breath and tear up the 
earth? with their feet, even as if they were wrestlers 
dusting themselves° for the fray. They challenge 
from either side, loudly bellowing the cry of battle ; 
and when they have sounded the trumpet for grievous 
combat, incontinently they charge and straightwa 

with their horns each wounds in turn all the body of 
the other. Even as in battle upon the deep when 
the sea War-god raises strife, two ships, splendidly 
flashing with serried warriors face to face, clash with 
opposing prows front to front, sped by the violent 
wind and the hands of the sailors ; and amid brazen 
armour rings the din of men and the noise of crash- 
ing ships, and the whole sea seethes and groans; 


alyum harenam et solus animalium eo stimulo ardescens. 
Cf. Pind. P. iv. 226. 
¢ Wrestlers anointed with oil and sprinkled themselves 
with dust; #.M. 5. xoviw; Plut. Mor. 966 ς προθέσεις καὶ 
παρασκευὰς ταύρων ἐπὶ μάχῃ κονιομένων 3 ibid. 970 F διακονίεσθαι ; 
Lucian, Anach. xxxi. etc.; Anth. Gr. (App. Pl.) xxv. 8: 
Luc. iy. 613 Perfundit membra liquore Hospes (Hercules) 
Olympiacae servato more palaestra, Ille (Antaeus) parum 
fidens pedibus contingere matrem Auxilium membris calidas 
infudit harenas. 
59 


~ OPPIAN 


a \ ve 3 ἰθέ ὃ A ε Ψ. 
τοῖος καὶ ταύροισιν ἐς αἰθέρα δοῦπος ἱκάνει, 
θεινόντων ἄμοτον καὶ θεινομένων κεράεσσιν, 70 
εἰσόκε δή τις ἕλῃσι φίλην ἑτεραλκέα νίκην. 

a). ~ \ 
αὐτὰρ 0 γ᾽ οὔτι φέρει δοῦλον Coydv- aiddpevos δὲ 
Ay 
καὶ βαρέα στενάχων ἐπὶ δάσκιον ἤλυθεν ὕλην" 
οἷος δ᾽ ἐν σκοπέλοισι περιπλομένων ἐνιαυτῶν 

, a) ΄ ΠΑΝ, δὲ 3 λό 
φέρβετ ὀρειαύλοισιν ἀποσταὸον ἐν év οχοισιν, 75 
οἷά τις ἀθλεύων- βριαρὸν δ᾽ ὅτε κάρτος ἴδηται 
καὶ σθένος ἀμφήριστον, ἀνέκραγεν αὐτίκ᾽ ὄρεσφιν: 
αὐτὰρ oy’ ἀντήῦσεν- ἐπεσμαράγησε δὲ δρυμών- 
ἀλλ᾽ ὅτε θαρσήσειε κραταιοτέρῃσιν ἀῦταῖς, 
δή pa τότ᾽ ἐξ ὁρέων ἐπὶ δήϊον εὐθὺς ἱκάνει, 80 
ca 2 a \ εν / 3 te 
peta δ᾽ ἕλεν: φορβαῖς yap ἐὸν δέμας ἐξήσκησε 
τηλόθ᾽ ἐνὶ δρυμοῖσι σθενοβλαβέος Kubepeins. 

By, \ / \ \ + / , 

Hidea πολλὰ πέλει δὲ Kal ἤθεα μυρία ταύροις. 
Αἰγύπτου" μὲν ἔασι παρ᾽ ὄχθαις ἀγλαοκάρποις 
Νείλου πυροφόροιο πολυσχιδέος ποταμοῖο 85 
χιόνεοι χροιήν, μέγεθος πάντων ὄχ᾽ ἄριστοι" 


1 Αἰγύπτιοι Brunck. 


* Verg. G. iii. 224 Nec mos bellantes una stabulare, sed 
alter Victus abit longeque ignotis exulat oris, Multa gemens 
ignominiam plagasque superbi Victoris, tum quos amisit 
inultus amores, Kt stabula aspectans regnis excessit avitis ; 
Ael. vi. 1 ταῦρος ἡγεμὼν τῆς ἀγέλης, ὅταν ἡττηθῇ ἡγεμόνος ἄλλου, 
ἑαυτὸν ἀποκρίνει εἰς χῶρον ἕτερον. 

δ Verg. G. iii. 229 Ergo omni cura vires exercet et inter 
Dura iacet, pernox instrato saxa cubili, Frondibus hirsutis 
et carice pastus acuta, Et tentat sese atque irasci in cornua 
discit, Arboris obnixus trunco yentosque lacessit Ictibus 
et sparsa pugnam proludit harena; ΑΕ]. lc. ἑαυτῷ γίνεται 
γυμναστὴς καὶ ἀθλεῖ πᾶσαν ἄθλησιν κονιόμενος καὶ τοῖς δένδροις 
τὰ κέρατα προσανατρίβων. 

¢ Verg. G. iii. 235 Post ubi collectum robur viresque 
refectae, Signa movet praecepsque oblitum fertur in hostem ; 


60 


CYNEGETICA, II. 69-86 


even in such wise the din of the Bulls ascends to 
heaven, as they smite amain and are smitten with 
their horns, until one wins the dear and doubtful 
victory. But the vanquished ὦ cannot endure the yoke 
of slavery. Ashamed and groaning heavily he goes 
unto a shady wood and alone among tlie rocks as 
the seasons circle round he pastures, retired among 
the thickets of the hill, as an athlete in training.? 
And when he beholds his debated power and strength 
have waxed mighty,° he straightway lifts up his voice 
upon the mountains ; and the other answers; and 
therewith the forest resounds. But when he takes 
good heart for his mightier cry, then straightway 
from the hills he comes to meet his foe and easily 
overcomes him. For he has made his body fit by 
his pasture in the forest far from that lust of sex 
which saps the strength.4 

Many are the forms and countless the characters 
of Bulls. The Egyptian Bulls there are by the fruit- 
ful banks of the Nile which makes the wheat to grow, 
a many-branched river; white of colour they are 
and far the greatest of all in size*: thou wouldst say 


Stat. 7. ii. 251 Sic ubi regnator post exulis otia tauri 
Mugitum hostilem summa tulit aure iuvencus Agnovitque 
minas, magna stat fervidus ira Ante gregem spumisque 
animos ardentibus efflat, Nunc pede torvus humum, nunc 
cornibus aera findens; Horret ager trepidaeque expectant 
proelia valles. 

4 Verg. G. iii. 209; A. 575a 20; Ael. lc. 

4 A. 606 a 21 ἐν Αἰγύπτῳ τὰ μὲν ἄλλα μείζω ἢ ἐν τῇ ᾿Ελλάδι, 
καθάπερ οἱ βόες καὶ τὰ πρόβατα. Prof. D’Arcy Thompson 
writes: ‘‘The Egyptian bulls were large, but not ‘ white.’ 
The bulls of Apis were black, with white markings ; those 
mentioned here were probably the light-coloured bulls of 
Mnevis. Both had long, lyre-shaped horns, the type still 
surviving at Khartoum, etc. (Bos Africanus Brehm).” 

61 


OPPIAN 


φαίης Kev κατὰ γαῖαν ἴμεν βαθυτέρμονα νῆα 
ἤπια δὲ φρονέουσι καὶ ἠθάλεοι μερόπεσσιν, 
ὅττι βροτοὶ δ᾽ ἐνέπουσιν, ἐνηέες ἐξανέχονται.ἷ 
Ot Φρύγιοι χροιὴν μὲν ἀριπρεπέες τελέθουσι, 90 
ξανθοί τε .droyepot τε" βαθεῖαι δ᾽ αὐχένι σάρκες" 
σφαιρωτὸς δ᾽ ἐφύπερθε μετήορος ὕψι κόρυμβος. 
είἰνη δ᾽ ἐν κεράεσσι φύσις κείνοισι τέτυκται" 
οὐ γάρ τοι κρατερῇσιν ὑπὲρ κεφαλῆφι πέπηγε, 
κλίνουσιν δὲ κέρατα καὶ ἀγκλίνουσ᾽ ἑκάτερθε. 95 
Μώνυχες ᾿Αόνιοι, στικτὸν γένος, οἰοκέρωτες, 
ἔκ τε μέσου κέρας αἰνὸν ἐπαντέλλουσι μετώπου. 
᾿Αρμενίοις δίδυμον μὲν ἀτὰρ κέρας εἱλικόμορφον 
αἰχμῇσιν, μέγα πῆμα, παλίστροφον ἠέρτηται. 

i Σύριοι ταῦροι δέ, Χεροννήσοιο γένεθλα, 100 
αἰπεινὴν τοὶ Πέλλαν ἐὔκτιτον ἀμφινέμονται, 
αἴθωνες, κρατεροί, μεγαλήτορες, εὐρυμέτωποι, 
ἄγραυλοι, σθεναροί, κερααλκέες, ἀγριόθυμοι, 
μυκηταί, βλοσυροί, ζηλήμονες, εὐρυγένειοι:" 
ἀλλ᾽ οὐ πιαλέοι δέμας ἀμφιλαφὲς βαρύθουσιν, 10ὅ 
οὐδὲ πάλιν λιπόσαρκοι ἑὸν δέμας ἀδρανέουσιν" 
ὧδε θεῶν κλυτὰ δῶρα κερασσάμενοι φορέουσιν, 
ἀμφότερον κραιπνοί τε θέειν σθεναροί τε μάχεσθαι: 
κεῖνοι, τοὺς φάτις ἔσκε Διὸς γόνον Ἡρακλῆα 

1 ἐνηέες ἐξανέχονται Editor: νεηνίαι εἰσανέχονται most ss. : 


ἐνηῆες εἰσανέχονται M: ἐνηῆες ἀνέχονται K, Schn. Lehrs, 
Boudr. 


4 Badur. only here: ἡ βαθὺ κοῖλον βάθος ἔχουσα schol. 

» A. 517 8 97 τὰ δὲ κέρατα προσπέφυκε μᾶλλον τῷ δέρματι ἢ 
τῷ ὀστῷ" διὸ καὶ ἐν Φρυγίᾳ εἰσὶ βόες καὶ ἄλλοθι οἱ κινοῦσι τὰ 
κέρατα ὥσπερ τὰ Sra; Plin. ii. 124 (dedit natura) mobilia 
eadem (i.¢. cornua) ut aures Phrygiae armentis. Cf. Antig. 
75. So of other cattle, Solin. lii. 36: Ael. ii. 20, xvi. 33, 
xvii. 45 ; Diod. iii. 34; Agatharch. ap. Phot. p. 455 b Benner. 


62 


CYNEGETICA, 11. 87-109 


it was a deep-drawing ship 4 that was going upon the 
land. Yet are they kindly of spirit and familiar 
with men, and whatsoever mortals bid them, they 
obey with mildness. 

The Phrygian Bulls are notable in colour, yellow 
and of the hue of fire. The neck is deeply fleshed, 
and high and lofty are the coiled curls upon their 
heads. Strange is the nature of their horns ; for 
these are not fast fixed upon the powerful head, but 
they move them ® to and fro on either side. 

The Aonian¢ Bulls do not divide the hoof; a dappled 
breed they are and with a single horn—a dread horn 
which they project aloft from the midst of the 
forehead. ὃ 

The Armenian Bulls have two horns, indeed, but 
these curved of form, a dread bane with their 
backward-bent points. 

The Syrian Bulls, the breed of the Chersonese,? 
pasture about high well-builded Pella ; tawny, strong, 
great-hearted, broad of brow, dwellers of the field, 
powerful, valiant of horn, wild of spirit, loud-bellow- 
ing, fierce, jealous, abundant of beard, yet they are 
not weighed down with fat and flesh of body, nor 
again are they lean and weak ; so tempered are the 
gifts they have from heaven—at once swift to run 
and strong to fight. These are they which report 
said Heracles, the mighty son of Zeus, when fulfilling 


¢ This should mean Boeotian (so the schol.), but it seems 
clear that there is some error. According to A. 499 b 18 
μονοκέρατα καὶ μώνυχα ὀλίγα οἷον ὁ ᾿Ἴνδικος ὄνος ; Plin. viii. 76 
In India [Ctesias scribit esse] ‘et boves solidis ungulis 
unicornes ; Solin. lii. 38 sunt praeterea [in India] boves 
unicornes et tricornes solidis ungulis nec bifissis. 
4 Chersonese and Pella were old names for Apamea on 
the Orontes in Syria; Strab. 752. See Introd. p. xix. 
63 


OPPIAN 


3 J 
καρτερὸν ἀθλεύοντ᾽ ἀγέμεν πάρος ἐξ *Epvbeins, 
ὁππότ᾽ em ᾿Ωκεανῷ δηρίσατο Γηρυονῆϊ 

lod 
καὶ κτάνεν ἐν σκοπιῇσιν: ἐπεὶ πόνον ἄλλον ἔμελλεν 
> av / 9.9 τὰ ~ > a 
οὐχ “Hpn τελέειν οὐδ᾽ Edpuvabjos ἐνιπαῖς, 
A , Η Ὧν Cre 3) Π LN ΓΕ Ψ. δί 
ρχίππῳ δ᾽ ἑτάρῳ, ΠἜέλλης ἡγήτορι Sins. 
3 “- 
ἢ γάρ τοι προπάροιθε παραὶ πόδας ᾿Εμβλωνοῖο 
πᾶν πεδίον πελάγιζεν: ἐπεὶ πολὺς αἰὲν ᾿Ορόντης 
ἵετ᾽ ἐπειγόμενος, χαροποῦ δ᾽ ἐπελήθετο πόντου, 
δαιόμενος Νύμφης κυανώπιδος ᾿᾽ΩὨκεανίνης " 
δήθυνεν δὲ πάγοισι, κάλυπτε δ᾽ ἐρίσπορον αἶαν 
4 7 ~ / 4 , 
οὔτι θέλων προλιπεῖν δυσέρωτα πόθον Μελιβοίης. 
οὔρεσί T ἀμφότερωθε περίδρομος ἐστεφάνωτο 
τειναμένοις ἑκάτερθεν ἐπ᾽ ἀλλήλοισι κάρηνα: 
Hee > / cA 7, > v 
niev ἀντολίηθε Διόκλειον δέμας αἰπύ, 
> > + / \ / > aA 
ex δ᾽ dpa δυσμάων λαιὸν κέρας ᾿μβλωνοῖο, 
αὐτὸς δ᾽ ἐν μεσάτοισιν ἐπαιγίζων πεδίοισιν, 
αἰὲν ἀεξόμενος καὶ τείχεος ἐγγὺς ὁδεύων, 
χέρσον ὁμοῦ καὶ νῆσον, ἐμὴν πόλιν, ὕδασι χεύων. 
A 3 Sr 3, ” \ Y. > / 
τοῦνεκεν αὐτίκ᾽ ἔμελλε Διὸς γόνος ἀμφοτέροισι 


* Apollod. ii. 5. 10 δέκατον ἐπετάγη ἄθλον τὰς Τηρυόνου βόας 
ἐξ ᾿Ερυθείας κομίζειν. ᾿Ερύθεια δὲ ἣν Ὠκεανοῦ πλησίον κειμένη 
νῆσος, ἣ viv Tddepa (=Gades: cf. Pind. WN. iv. 68; Dion. P. 
451) καλεῖται. ταύτην κατῴκει Τηρυόνης. . .. τριῶν ἔχων ἀνδρῶν 
συμφυὲς σῶμα; Herod. iv. 8; Diod. iv. 17; Strab. 148; 
Aesch. 49. 870. 

δ S. of Sthenelus (s. of Perseus). When Heracles was 
about to be born Zeus declared that the descendant of 
Perseus then to be born should rule Mycenae. Hera caused 
Eurystheus to be born, a seven-month child, while she 
delayed the birth of Heracles. When Heracles in his 
madness had slain his children, the Delphic oracle κατοικεῖν 
αὐτὸν εἶπεν ἐν Τίρυνθι, Ἐὐρυσθεῖ λατρεύοντα ἔτη δώδεκα καὶ τοὺς 
ἐπιτασσομένους ἄθλους δέκα ἐπιτελεῖν ; Apollod. ii. 4. 5. 

° See Introd. p. xix. This myth seems to be found only 
here, and Archippus, Diocleium, and Emblonus are nowhere 


64 


110 


115 


120 


125 


CYNEGETICA, II. 110-128 


his labours, drove of old from Erytheia,* what time 
he fought with Geryoneus beside the Ocean and 
slew him amid the crags; since he was doomed to 
fulfil yet another labour, not for Hera nor at the 
behest of Eurystheus,? but for his comrade Archippus,° 
lord of holy Pella. For aforetime all the plain by 
the foot of Emblonus was flooded; since evermore 
in great volume rushed Orontes in his eagerness, 
forgetting the sea and burning with desire of the 
dark-eyed nymph, the daughter of Ocean. He 
lingered amid the heights and he covered the fertile 
earth, unwilling to forgo his hopeless love of 
Meliboea. With mountains on either side was he 
encircled round, mountains that on either hand 
leaned their heads together. From the East came 
the lofty form of Diocleium, and from the West the 
left horn of Emblonus, and in the midst himself 
raging in the plains, ever waxing and drawing nigh 
the walls, flooding with his waters that mainland 
at once and island,? mine own city. Therefore was 
the son of Zeus destined straightway with club and 


else mentioned. The schol. on 109 has: ois ἩΗρακλῆς ἀθλῶν 
πρότερον ἐξ ᾿Βρυθείας ἐκόμισεν, τὸν Τηρυόνα ἀνελών, ὅτε δὴ Kal 
᾿Αρχίππῳ Πέλλης ἡγεμόνι (φίλος δ᾽ ἄρα οἱ καὶ συνήθης ὁ Αρχ- 
ἱππος) ἄθλον ἐκτελεῖν ἔμελλεν οὐδὲν ἀτιμότερον «ἢ» ὁ Εὐρυσθεὺς 

. ἐπέταττεν. ὁ γάρ τοι τὴν ᾿Αντιόχου παραρρέων ᾿Ορόντης 
λίμνην προσεκκαυθεὶς καὶ μεθύων τῆς νύμφης τῷ ἔρωτι (Μελίβοια 
τῇ νύμφῃ τὸ ὄνομα, ᾿Ὡκεανὸς τῇ λίμνῃ πατήρ) τῆς ἐπὶ θάλατταν 
μὲν ἐπελάθετο, ὄρεσι δὲ καὶ πεδίοις περιελίμναζε, νῦν μὲν τὸν 
᾿Εμβλωνὸν (ὄρος δ᾽ οὗτος) καὶ τοὺς αὐτοῦ καταιγίζων πρόποδας, 
ἄρτι δὲ πρὸς γῆν ἐκτρεπόμενος, καὶ ταύτην ἐπικαλύπτων τῷ ῥεύματι, 
ἐνίοτε δὲ καὶ μέσος τῶν ὀρέων συρόμενος ἀμφοῖν ᾿Εμβλωνοῦ καὶ 
Διοκλείου, τῶν ἐξ ἕω καὶ δυσμῶν ἐπικεκυφότων ἀλλήλοις, καὶ 
παντοῖος διὰ τὴν ἐρωμένην γινόμενος, ἀνοιδαίνων τε καὶ ἀνα- 
καχλάζων, καὶ πελάζων τοῖς τείχεσι καὶ τὴν εἰς Χερρόνησον δι- 
εσχηματισμένην πόλιν ἐμὴν περικλύζων τῷ ὕδατι. 

4 i.e, Chersonese; cf. 100 n. 


F 65 


OPPIAN 


\ a) a 
νάματα μετρήσειν ῥοπάλῳ καὶ χερσὶ κραταιαῖς, 
~ 3. ΄ 
ὕδατα δ᾽ ἐκ πεδίοιο διακριδὸν ἰθύνεσθαι 130 
εὐπλοκάμου λίμνης ἠδ᾽ εὐτροχάλου ποταμοῖο. 
᾿ ,ὔ 
ἔρξε δὲ πουλὺν ἄεθλον, ἐπεὶ στεφάνην διέκερσεν 
> / > / λῦ δ᾽ EA λ See ὃ / 
ἀμφιβόλων ὀρέων, λῦσεν δ᾽ ἄπο Adiva δεσμά, 
καὶ ποταμὸν προέηκεν ἐρευγόμενον προμολῇσιν, 
,ὔ 
ἄσχετα κυμαίνοντα καὶ ἄγρια μορμύροντα, 135 
” 3 > \ ~ ¢ > ” 5 Ψ; / 
ἴθυνεν δ᾽ ἐπὶ θῖνας: ὁ δ᾽ ἔβραχεν ἠπύτα πόντος 
\ f. / / ͵7 ΟῚ a 
καὶ Συρίου κονάβησε μέλαν δέμας αἰγιαλοῖο. 
οὐ τοίω γ᾽ ἑκάτερθε πολυσμαράγοιο θαλάσσης 
ἀντιπόρω ποταμὼ καταβαίνετον ὕδατι λάβρῳ" 
ἔνθεν μὲν Βορέαο τεμὼν ἀργῆτα χαλινὰ 140 
Ων ἢ » / / ft: / 
ἂν XKvbinv “lorpos λέλακεν μέγα πάντοθε πάντῃ, 
συρόμενος κρημνοῖσι Kal ὑδατοπλήγεσιν᾽ ἄκραις" 
“" 3 ce > "ς Θ A yh 3 "ὦ 
τῇ δ᾽ αὖτ᾽ ἐκ Λιβύης ἱερὸν ῥόον Αἰγύπτοιο | 
ἀμφί ἑ ῥηγνύμενον τρομέει ταναηχέτα πόντος. | 
ὡς ποταμὸς KeAdpule μέγας περὶ θῖνας ᾿Ορόντης 145 
σμερδαλέον μύκημα:" πελώρια δ᾽ ἴαχον ἀκταὶ | 
΄ ey ay ὃ cy ΄ 
εχνύμεναι κόλποισι νεήλυδος οἶδμα θαλάσσης" 
γαῖα δ᾽ ἀνέπνευσεν μελανόχροος, οὐθατόεσσα, 
7 > lon / / ¢ ~ 
κύματος ἐξαναδῦσα, νέον πέδον ‘HpakAfos. 
> “A 
πάντῃ δ᾽ εἰσέτι viv σταχυηκομέουσιν ἄρουραι, 150 
΄ δ᾽ μὴ ~ 6 Xr \ / θ > \ 
πάντῃ δ᾽ ἔργα βοῶν θαλερὰς βέβριθεν adwas 
/ lod 
εμνόνιον περὶ νηόν, ὅθ᾽ ᾿Ασσύριοι ναετῆρες 
Μέμνονα κωκύουσι, κλυτὸν γόνον ᾿Πριγενείης, 
u 
ὅν ποτε Iprapidnow ἀμυνέμεναι πελάσαντα 
, / 5 ae 
θαρσαλέος πόσις ὦκα δαμάσσατο" Δηϊδαμείης. 155 
1 ὑδατοπήγεσιν MSS.: corr. Guietus. 
2 γί, παρέδραμε. 


@ Danube. 

> Apparently here, as in Hom. Od. iv. 477 etc.,=the Nile. 

° King of the Ethiopians, 5. of Eos (Dawn) and Tithonus, 
fought against the Greeks at Troy (Hom. Od. iv. 188; xi. 522), 


66 


CYNEGETICA, II. 129-155 


mighty hands to apportion their water unto each, 
and to give separate course from the plain for the 
waters of the fair-tressed lake and the fair-flowing 
river. And he wrought his mighty labour, when he 
cut the girdle of the encircling hills and undid their 
stony bonds, and sent the river belching to its 
mouth, surging incontinent and wildly murmuring, 
and guided it toward the shores. And loudly roared 
the deep sea, and the mighty body of the Syrian 
shore echoed to the din. Not with such violent flood 
descend those contrary-travelling rivers on either 
side the echoing sea: here Ister,* cleaving the white 
barriers of the North through Scythia, roars loudly 
everywhere, trailing amid precipices and water- 
smitten heights ; while on the other hand the sound- 
ing sea trembles at the holy stream of Egypt ® when 
from Libya it breaks about it. So the mighty river 
Orontes made a noise of dread bellowing about the 
shores; and mightily roared the headlands when 
they received within their bosom the swell of the 
new-come sea; and the black and fertile earth took 
heart again, arisen from the waves, a new plain of 
Heracles. And to this day the fields flourish every- 
where with corn and everywhere the works of oxen 
are heavy on the prosperous threshing-floors around 
the Memnonian shrine, where the Assyrian dwellers 
mourn for Memnon,’ the glorious son of the Morning, 
whom, when he came to help thé sons of Priam, the 


doughty husband of Deidameia @ swiftly slew. How- 


where he was slain by Achilles (Pind. Ο. ii. 91; N. vi. 56). 
His tomb was shown in various places, among others at 
Paltos in Syria (Strab. 728). Assyrian=Syrian, ¢f. C. i. 7 n. 

4 D. of Lycomedes of Seyros, m. by Achilles of Neo- 
ptolemus. 


67 


40 


OPPIAN 


/ 
ἀλλὰ τὰ μὲν κατὰ κόσμον ἀείσομεν εὐρέα κάλλη 
“-. ΝᾺ ~ 
πάτρης ἡμετέρης ἐρατῇ UyumdAntds μολπῇ" 
5 , 
νῦν δὲ παλίντροπος εἶμι κλυτὴν θήρειον ἀοιδήν. 
- 
Ἔστιν ἀμαιμάκετον φονίοις ταύροισι γένεθλον, 
> / 
τοὺς καλέουσι Βίσωνας: ἐπεὶ πάτρης τελέθουσι 
ai rh > \ yw yA A 
Βιστονίδος Θρήκης" arap ἔλλαχον εἴδεα τοῖα" 
φρικαλέην χαίτην μὲν ἐπωμαδὸν αἰθύσσουσιν 
αὐχέσι πιαλέοισι καὶ ἀμφ᾽ ἀταλοῖσι γενείοις " 
οἷά τε λαχνήεντες ἀριπρεπὲς εἶδος ἔχουσι 
z / / ~ , ᾽ὔ 
ξανθοκόμαι, βλοσυροί, θηρῶν μεδέοντε λέοντες" 
ὀξεῖαι κεράων δὲ πυριγλώχινες" ἀκωκαὶ 
χαλκείοις γναμπτοῖσιν ἐπείκελοι ἀγκίστροισιν" 
> > 3 « « ᾽ὔ > , Ee / 
ἀλλ᾽, οὐχ ὡς ἑτέροισιν, ἐναντίον ἀλλήλοισι 
νεύουσι στυγερῶν κεράων ἐπικάρσιον αἰχμαί, 
ὕπτια δ᾽ εἰσορόωντα πρὸς αἰθέρα φοίνια κέντρα. 
τοὔνεκεν, ὁππότε δή TW ἐπιχρίμψωσι κιχόντες 
Ya “ 
ἢ βροτὸν 4 τινα θῆρα, μετήορον ἀείρουσι. 
an an \ a 
γλῶσσα δὲ τοῖς στεινὴ μὲν ἀτὰρ τρηχεῖα μάλιστα, 
οἷα σιδηροβόροιο πέλει τέχνασμα σιδήρου" 
va 
γλώσσῃ δ᾽ αἱμάσσοντες ἀπὸ χρόα λιχμάζουσι. 
Ναὶ μὴν ὠκυπόδων ἐλάφων γένος ἔτραφεν ata 


1 γ,ἷ, περιγλώχινες. 2 αἰχμαί Boudr.: αἰχμήν Mss. 


@ Fountain in Pieria sacred to the Muses. Callim. ἢ. iv. 7. 

> Bos bonasus (Bison ewropaeus), the Wisent or European 
Bison, now exterminated in Lithuania, where a herd was 
maintained by the Tsar of Russia, and probably in the 
Caucasus also. Aristotle describes it under the name 
βόνασος 630 a 18 ff. : cf. 498 Ὁ 28; 506 Ὁ 30. In 630 a 20 he 
says it is called by the Paeonians μόναπος. Cf. A. Mirab. 
830 a 5 ἐν τῇ ἸΠαιονίᾳ φασὶν . .. elval τι θηρίον τὸ καλούμενον 
βόλινθον, ὑπὸ δὲ τῶν Παιόνων μόναιπον : ΑΕ]. vii. 3 μόνωψ : 
Antig. 53 μόνωπος : Plin. viii. 40 Tradunt in Paeonia feram 
quae bonasus vocetur equina iuba, cetera tauro similem, 


68 


160 


165 


170 


175 


CYNEGETICA, II. 156-176 


beit the spacious glories of our fatherland we shall 
sing in due order with sweet Pimplean@ song; now I 
turn back to sing of glorious hunting. 

There is a terrible breed of deadly Bulls which 
they call Bisons,” since they are natives of Bistonian® 
Thrace. And they have forms of this sort. Over 
their shoulders they have bristling hair on their 
fleshy necks as also about their tender jaws; con- 
spicuous form they have, even as the king of beasts, 
the shaggy, tawny, fierce-eyed Lion. Sharp are the 
curved points of their horns, like unto bent hooks of 
bronze; but the points of their hateful horns, unlike 
those of other cattle, incline athwart to face one 
another,’ and their deadly daggers are sloped back- 
wards and look up to the sky. Therefore when 
they come upon and attack any man or wild beast, 
they lift their victim on high. Their tongue is 
narrow, but exceeding rough, even as the device of 
iron for devouring iron; and with the tongue they 
draw blood from the flesh and lick it. 

Moreover the earth breeds the race of swift-footed 
cornibus ita in se flexis ut non sint utilia pugnae; cf. Solin. 
xl. 10. Pausan. x. 13 gives an account or the capture of the 
Paeonian Bison by means of a pit. The Bison with short 
stout horns is not to be confounded with the Aurochs, Bos 
taurus (B. primigenius), the Latin urus: Caes. B.G. vi. 28; 
Verg. G. ii. 374, iii. 582; Macrob. vi. 4. 23, of which the 
last was killed in Poland in 1627. Bison and urus are men- 
tioned together Plin. viii. 38 iubatos bisontes excellentique 
et vi et velocitate uros; Senec. Hipp. 64 f. villosi terga 
bisontes Latisque feri cornibus uri. 

¢ A pseudo-etymology. The Bistones dwelt on S. coast 
of Thrace near Abdera, Strab. 331 fr. 44. 

7 A. 499 b 31 διχαλὰ δ᾽ ἅμα καὶ χαίτην ἔχοντα καὶ κέρατα δύο 
κεκαμμένα εἰς αὑτά ἐστιν ἔνια τῶν ζῴων, οἷον ὁ βόνασος, ὃς 
γίνεται περὶ τὴν Παιονίαν καὶ τὴν Μαιδικήν ; Plin. viii. 40 


(quoted above). 
69 


OPPIAN 


εὐκέραον, μεγαλωπόν, apimpeTtés, αἰολόνωτον, 
στικτόν, ἀρίζηλον, ποταμηπόρον, ὑψικάρηνον, 
πιαλέον νώτοις καὶ λεπταλέον κώλοισιν" 
οὐτιδανὴ δειρὴ καὶ βαιοτάτη πάλιν οὐρή" 
τετράδυμοι ῥῖνες, πίσυρες πΡοιῇσι δίαυλοι" 
ἀβληχρὴ κραδίη καὶ θυμὸς ἔσωθεν ἄναλκις, 
καὶ κωφαὶ κεράων αἰχμαὶ τόσον ἀντέλλουσιν" 
οὔ ποτε γὰρ κεφαλῆφιν ἐναντία δηρίσαιντο, 

οὐ θηρσὶ κρατεροῖς, οὐκ ἀργαλέοισι κύνεσσιν, 
οὐδ᾽ αὐτοῖς δειλοῖς λασιοκνήμοισι λαγωοῖς. 


@ ἔλαφος is (1) specifically the Red Deer, Cervus elaphus, 
(2) generically Deer, and is used both of Stag and Hind. 

> ἐς Instances too sometimes occur of a stag being found 
swimming narrow parts of the Moray Firth; a solitary deer 
who probably has been driven by dogs from his usual haunts, 
till frightened and bewildered he has wandered at random 
and, at last, coming to the shore, has swum boldly out, 
attracted by the appearance of the woods on the opposite 
side,” St. John, NV. 1. and Sport in Moray, p. 240; cf. Wild 
Sports and NV. H. of the Highlands, p. 23; A.P. ix. 275 τὴν 
δὲ ταχεῖαν εἰν ἁλὶ Kal χαροποῖς κύμασιν εἷλ᾽ ἔλαφον. 

¢ Cf. G. White, ΜΝ. H. of Selborne, Letter xiv. (March 12, 
1768): ‘‘If some curious gentleman would procure the 
head of a fallow-deer, and have it dissected, he would 
find it furnished with two spiracula, or breathing-places, 
besides the nostrils; probably analogous to the puncta 
lacrimalia in the human head. When deer are thirsty they 
plunge their noses, like some horses, very deep under water 
while in the act of drinking, and continue them in that 
situation for a considerable time; but to obviate any 
inconveniency, they can open two vents, one at the inner 
corner of each eye, having a communication with the nose. 
Here seems to be an extraordinary provision of nature 
worthy our attention ; and which has not, that I know of, 
been noticed by any naturalist. For it looks as if these 
creatures would not be suffocated, though both their mouths 
and nostrils were stopped. This curious formation of the 
head may be of singular service to beasts of chase, by 


70 


180 


185 


CYNEGETICA, II. 177-186 


Stags,” goodly of horn, large of eye, handsome, of 
dappled back, spotted, conspicuous, river-swimming,? 
lofty of head, fat of chine and lean of shank ; the 
neck is weak and the tail again is very small; the 
nostrils are fourfold,’ four passages for the breath ; 
the heart is weak and the spirit within cowardly 4 ; 
and the pointed horns that rise so high are but 
dummies ; for they will never with their heads con- 
tend against strong wild beasts nor fierce dogs, nor 
even the timid hare of furry legs. 


affording them free respiration; and no doubt these addi- 
tional nostrils are thrown open when they are hard run... . 
Oppian, the Greek poet, by the following line [1.6. 181] 
seems to have had some notion that stags have four 
spiracula.” Dr. James Ritchie, Royal Scottish Museum, 
Edinburgh, writes: ‘‘The spiracula of deer, or, as they 
are now called, the sub-orbital glands, vary a great deal in 
their development in different species of deer, but in many 
cases the glands seem to be of very considerable importance, 
lying in specially deep depressions in the skull. The glands 
secrete a waxy material, and I have seen this oozing in 
masses, even after red deer had been dead for several 
days. The secretion is most active during the pairing 
season, and there are a number of observations showing 
that deer seem deliberately to rub the secretion upon trees 
and stones. The suggestion has been made that this is in 
order to convey the scent of their passing, and this might 
be the effect even if we attribute the rubbing simply to a 
desire to get rid of the annoyance of surplus secretion. . . . 
The sub-orbital gland has a sort of contractile lip which, 
closed at one time, may at another be so pulled back that 
the inner surface is everted and there is exposed the large 
cavity of the gland lined with pink mucous membrane. 
The action and the appearance are quite enough to suggest 
similarity with the movement and appearance of the nostrils, 
but of course there is no sort of connexion between the 
sub-orbital glands and the air-passages.” 

4 A. 488 Ὁ 15 τὰ δὲ φρόνιμα καὶ δειλά, οἷον ἔλαφος, δασύπους 5 
cf. Suid. and LM. 95. ἐλάφειος. 


fod 


71 


OPPIAN 


ΑΝ 4 “hed ye 
Τρηχὺς δ᾽ αὖτ᾽ ἐλάφοισιν ἔρως πολλή τ᾽ ᾿Αφροδίτη 
ui ὔ > 
καὶ θυμὸς ποτὶ λέκτρον ἀναιθόμενος πρόπαν ἦμαρ, 
οἷον ἀειθούροισιν ἀλεκτρυόνεσσι μαχηταῖς 
πᾶσίν τ᾽ ἀνθοκόμοις πτεροείμοσιν οἰωνοῖσι. 190 
; Yq Ν 
κεύθουσιν λαγόνεσσι δ᾽ ὑπ᾽ αὐτὴν ἔνδοθι νηδὺν 
5 bi δ᾽ 4 AY wv vA > Jd 
ἀμφιδύμους ὁλκούς»" τοὺς εἴ KE τις ἀμήσειεν, 
᾽ ,ὔ ~ ww ,ὔ > > , , 
αὐτίκα θῆλυν ἔθηκε, πρόπαν δ᾽ ἀπέρευσε καρήνων 
la 
ὀξύκομον κεράων πολυδαίδαλον αἰόλον ἔρνος. 
, A 
οὐ μὲν ἄρ᾽ els εὐνὴν γάμιος νόμος οἷά Te Onpot 195 
τοῖς ἄλλοις, ξεῖνοι δὲ πόθοι κείνοισι μέλονται" 
οὔτε γὰρ ἑσταότες παρὰ τέμπεσιν ἀγρονόμοισιν, 
” 9 ” 4 “- bx EA , 
οὔτ᾽ dpa κεκλιμένοι χθαμαλοῖσιν ἐπ᾽ ἄνθεσι ποίης 
θηλυτέραις ἐλάφοισιν ὁμιλαδὸν εὐνάζονται, 
> A A a vA 3 / iA 
ἀλλὰ ποσὶ κραιπνοῖσι θέων ἐκίχανε θέουσαν" 200 
φεύγουσαν μάρπτει δὲ καὶ ἀγκὰς ἔχει παράκοιτιν" 
> > 99 «Δ ὔ a , a2 \ ΤᾺ 
ἀλλ᾽ οὐδ᾽ ὡς παρέπεισε: φέρουσα πόσιν δ᾽ ἐπὶ νώτου 
ἐμμενέως φεύγει, παναμείλιχον ἦτορ ἔχουσα" 
> \ iA 9 ¢€ Ἦν a A Ψ 
αὐτὰρ ὅ γ᾽ ἑσπόμενος δισσοῖς λαιψηρὰ πόδεσσιν 
οὐ μεθίησι πόθον, γαμίους δ᾽ ἐτελέσσατο θεσμούς. 206 
> > Ὁ A Ve / ᾽ὔ 
ἀλλ᾽ ὅτε δὴ μετόπισθε περιπλομένῃσι σελήναις 


2 A. 6579 ἃ 4 ταῦτα δὲ ποιεῖ τὸ ἕῷον διὰ τὸ φύσει λαγνὸν εἶναι ; 
Solin. xix. 9 mares generis huiusce, cum statum tempus 
venerem incitavit, saeviunt rabie libidinis. 

> A. 488 Ὁ8 τὰ μὲν ἀφροδισιαστικά, οἷον τὸ τῶν περδίκων καὶ 
ἀλεκτρυόνων γένος. 

¢ A. 689 10 οἱ δ᾽ ἔλαφοι, ἐὰν μὲν μήπω τὰ κέρατα ἔχοντες 
διὰ τὴν ἡλικίαν ἐκτμηθῶσιν, οὐκέτι φύουσι κέρατα" ἐὰν δ᾽ ἔχοντας 
ἐκτέμῃ τις, τό τε μέγεθος ταὐτὸν μένει τῶν κεράτων καὶ οὐκ 
ἀποβάλλουσιν: cf. 517225; Plin. viii. 117 Non decidunt 


12 


CYNEGETICA, II. 187-206 


But there is rough passion among Stags and much 
venery,? and a heart that burns for mating all the day, 
even as have the lustful fighting cocks ὃ and all the 
feathered birds of flowery plumage. They have 
hidden within their loins under the very belly twin 
ducts. If one cut these out, straightway he makes 
the animal effeminate, and from its head falls away 
all the daedal many-branched growth of sharp horns.° 
But the manner of their mating? is not after the 
custom of other beasts, but strange are the passions 
that possess them. Not standing in the pastoral 
valleys nor lying on the flowery grass upon the 
ground do the Stags consort with the female deer, 
but the hind runs and the Stag running with swift 
feet overtakes her and seizes the fugitive and em- 
braces her for his bride. But not even so does he 
persuade her. Carrying her mate upon her back 
she flees with all her might, having a heart altogether 
implacable. But he following swiftly on two feet 
forgoes not his desire but accomplishes ‘the rites of 
union. Howbeit, when afterward with the circling 
of the moons the female brings forth her young, she 


castratis cornua nec nascuntur; Solin. xix. 14. ‘* The horns 
of the Ruminants are frequently asecondary sexual character ; 
this is especially the case with the Deer. . . . That they are 
associated with the reproductive function is shown by their 
being shed after the period of rut, the destruction of the 
velvet at that period, and also by the effect upon the horns 
which any injury to the reproductive glands produces,” 
Camb. N. H. x. Mammailia, p. 201. 

@ A. 540a 5 οὔτε τοὺς ἄρρενας ἐλάφους al θήλειαι ὑπομένουσιν 
εἰ μὴ ὀλιγάκις, ... διὰ τὴν τοῦ αἰδοίου (cf. 500 b 28) συντονίαν, 
ἀλλ’ ὑπάγοντα τὰ θήλεα δέχονται τὴν γονήν᾽ καὶ γὰρ ἐπὶ τῶν 
ἐλάφων ὦπται τοῦτο συμβαῖνον, τῶν γε τιθασῶν ; Plin. x. 174 
Taurorum cervorumque feminae vim non tolerant: ea de 
causa ingrediuntur in conceptu. 

73 


“a 


OPPIAN 


θηλυτέρη τίκτει, τρίβον ἀνθρώπων ἀλεείνει, 
οὕνεκεν ἀτραπιτοὶ μερόπων θήρεσσι βέβηλοι. 

"E€oya δ᾽ ἐν θήρεσσιν ἐπ ἀγλαΐῃ κομόωσιν 
ἄρσενες εὐκέραοι, πολυδαίδαλον ἔρνος ἔχοντες" 210 
ἢ γὰρ eVox dew κεράων ὥρησι πεσόντων, 
βόθρον μὲν κατὰ γαῖαν ὀρυξάμενοι κατέθαψαν, 
ὄφρα κε μή τις ἕλῃσιν ἐπ᾿ αὔλακος ἀντιβολήσας" 
κεύθονται δ᾽ αὐτοὶ πυμάτοις λασίοισί τε θάμνοις, 
αἰδόμενοι θήρεσσι καρήατα τοῖα φανῆναι, 215 
γυμνά, τά TOL προπάροιθε μετήορον ἀείροντο. 

᾿Αμφίβιοι δ᾽ ἔλαφοι" καὶ γὰρ τραφερὴν πατέουσι 
καὶ πόντον περόωσιν, ὁμόστολον ἀλλήλοισι 
ναυτιλίην πλώοντες, ὅτ᾽ ἐξανύουσι θάλασσαν" 
πρόσθε μὲν εἷς ἐλάφοισιν ἐπὶ στίχας ἡγεμονεύει, 220 
οἷα κυβερνητὴρ μεθέπων oinia νηός" 


1 πατέουσι... περόωσιν IK: other mss. περόωσι... πατέουσι. 


« Contrary to the usual doctrine; A. δ78 Ὁ 16 ποιεῖται τοὺς 
τόκους παρὰ τὰς ὁδοὺς διὰ τὸν πρὸς τὰ θηρία φόβον : 611] ἃ 1ὅ ἡ 
ἔλαφος οὐχ ἥκιστα δοκεῖ εἶναι φρόνιμον τῷ τε τίκτειν παρὰ τὰς 
ὁδούς (τὰ γὰρ θηρία διὰ τοὺς, ἀνθρώπους οὐ προσέρχεται) : Plin. 
viii. 112 in pariendo semitas minus cavent humanis vestigiis 
tritas quam secreta ac feris opportuna. Cf. Plut. Mor. 971 5; 
Antig. 29: Ael. vi. 11. Oppian seems to have confused 
the seclusion of the Hind after the birth of the young (A. 
578 b 20; Antig. l.c.; Plin. viii. 118; Solin. xix. 10) with 
her behaviour at their birth, just as Ael. ἰ.6. καταπιανθεῖσα 
δὲ οὐκ ἂν ἔτι τέκοι παρὰ τὰς ὁδούς confuses this with the 
seclusion of the Stags when they have grown fat (A. δ79 ἃ ὃ ; 
Plin. viii. 113). 

> A. 611 a 25 ἀποβάλλουσι δὲ καὶ τὰ κέρατα ἐν τόποις χαλεποῖς 
καὶ δυσεξευρέτοις᾽ ὅθεν καὶ ἣ παροιμία γέγονεν “ob αἱ ἔλαφοι τὰ 
κέρατα ἀποβάλλουσιν." ὥσπερ γὰρ τὰ ὅπλα ἀποβεβληκυῖαι φυλάτ- 
τονται ὁρᾶσθαι; A. Mirab. 885 Ὁ 27; Antig. 20; Ael. ili. 17; 
Plin. viii. 115; Theophr. fr. 175. 

¢ Ael. vi. 5 of ἔλαφοι τὰ κέρατα ἀποβαλόντες εἰσδύνονται 


74 


CYNEGETICA, II. 207-221 


avoids @ the track of men, because the paths of mortals 
are profane to wild beasts. 

Above all wild beasts the Stags of goodly horn 
plume themselves upon their beauty, having a rich 
and various growth of horn. Indeed when their 
branching horns in due season fall off, they dig a 
trench in the ground and bury them,?® lest someone 
chance upon them in the furrow and take them, and 
themselves hide¢ in the depths of the dense thickets, 
ashamed that wild beasts should behold thus naked 
their heads that aforetime soared so high. 

Deer are amphibious. For they tread the solid 
earth and cross the deep, voyaging together in com- 
pany when they travel over the sea.@ One in front 
leads the Deer in line, even as a pilot handles the 


παρελθόντες εἰς τὰς λόχμας... ἔρημοι γὰρ τῶν ἀμυντηρίων ὄντες 
ἀφῃρῆσθαι καὶ τὴν ἀλκὴν πεπιστεύκασιν ; Plin. viii. 115 cornua 
mares habent solique animalium omnibus annis stato veris 
tempore amittunt, ideo sub ista die quam maxime invia 
petunt. Latent amissis velut inermes. Cf A. De Plant. 
818 b 25. 

4 In the popular sense. Of. Plat. Ax. 368 ὁ (of sailor) 6 
γὰρ ἐπίγειος ἄνθρωπος ws ἀμφίβιος αὑτὸν εἰς τὸ πέλαγος ἔρριψεν: 
Amm. Marc. xxii. 15. 14 Exuberat Aegyptus pecudibus 
multis, inter quas terrestres sunt et aquatiles: aliae quae 
humi et in humoribus vivunt unde ἀμφίβιοι ; Colum. viii. 13 
eas aves quas Graeci yocant ἀμφιβίους, quia non tantum 
terrestria sed aquatilia quoque desiderant pabula, nec magis 
humo quam stagno consueverunt. Eiusque generis anser. . .; 
G. White, NV. H. of Selborne, xxix. “* Quadrupeds that prey 
on fish are amphibious. Such is the otter”; Ael. xi, 37 
ἀμφίβια δὲ ἵππος ποτάμιος, ἔνυδρος, κάστωρ, κροκόδειλος. In 
stricter sense Arist. ap. Athen. 806 b (Newt); 4.P. vi. 43 
(Frog). See A. 589 a 10; 566 b 27. A. does not use the 
term ἀμφίβιος (except ap. Athen. 306 b) but ἐπαμφοτερίζειν. 

4 Plin. viii. 114 maria trameant gregatim nantes porrecto 
ordine et capita imponentes praecedentium clunibus vicibus- 
que ad terga redeuntes. Cf. Ael. v. 56; Solin. xix. 11. 

75 


OPPIAN ἢ 


τῷ δ᾽ ἕτερος κατὰ νῶτον ἐρειδόμενος μετόπισθε 
δειρὴν ἠδὲ κάρηνον ὁμαρτεῖ ποντοπορεύων" 
ἄλλος δ᾽ ἄλλον ἔπειτα φέρων τέμνουσι θάλασσαν. 
ἀλλ᾽ ὅτε ,γηχόμενον κάματος πρώτιστον ἕλῃσι, 228 
στοῖχον ὁ μὲν προλιπὼν ἔμολεν ποτὶ τέρμα φάλαγγος, 
παύσατο δ᾽ ἀγκλινθεὶς “ἑτέρῳ βαιὸν καμάτοιο" 
ἄλλος δ᾽ αὖτ᾽ οἴηκας ἔχων ἐπὶ πόντον ὁδεύει" 
πάντες δὲ πλώοντες, ἀμοιβαδὶς ἡγεμονῆες, 
ποσσὶ μὲν οἷα πλάταισιν ἐρέσσουσιν μέλαν ὕδωρ, 230 
ὕψι δ᾽ ἀνίσχονται κεράων πολυήρατον εἶδος, 
οἷά τε λαίφεα νηὸς ἐπιτρέψαντες ἀήταις. 

Ἔθος δ᾽ ἀλλήλοισιν ἀνάρσιον αἰὲν ἔχουσι, 
πᾶν ὀφίων ἐλάφων τε γένος, πάντῃ δ᾽ ἐρεείνει 
οὔρεος ἐν βήσσῃς ἔλαφος θρασὺν ἑρπηστῆρα. 235 
ἀλλ᾽ ὅτ᾽ ἴδῃ στροφάλιγξιν ὑφαινόμενον δολιχῇσιν 
ἴχνος ἀλλ ες μέγα καγχαλόων ἀφικάνει | 
ἄσσον φωλειοῦ, ῥῖνας δ᾽ ἐπεθήκατο χειῇ, | 
πνοιῇσι λάβρῃσιν ἐφελκόμενος ποτὶ δῆριν | 
ἑρπετὸν οὐλόμενον" TOV δ᾽ οὐκ ἐθέλοντα μάχεσθαι 940. 
ἄσθμα βιησάμενον μυχάτης ἐξείρυσεν εὐνῆς" 
αἶψα γὰρ εἴσιδεν ἐχθρόν, ἐς αἰθέρα θ᾽ ὑψόσ᾽ ἀείρει 
λευγαλέην δειρήν- λευκοὺς δ᾽ ὑπέσηρεν ὀδόντας, 
ὀξέα meppixovras: ἐπικροτέει δὲ γένειον 
πυκνοῖς φυσιόων συρίγμασιν ἰοφόρος θήρ. 245, 
αὐτίκα δ᾽ αὖτ᾽ ἔλαφος, Kal μειδιόωντι ἐοικώς, 
δαυτρεύευ στομάτεσσιν ἐτώσια δηριόωντα, | 
Kal μιν ἑλισσόμενον περὶ γούνασιν ἀμφί τε δειρὴν 
ἐμμενέως δάπτει" κατὰ δὲ χθονὶ πολλὰ κέχυνται | 
λείψανα παιφάσσοντα Kal ἀσπαίροντα φόνοισι. 950 


1 yl. ἔχῃσι. 


76 


CYNEGETICA, II. 222-250 


helm of a ship. Another behind rests on his back 
his neck and head and so travels with him in his 
seafaring. And so in turn, one supporting another, 
they plough the sea. But when weariness overtakes 
the foremost swimmer, he leaves his rank and goes 
to the end of the line and resting on another takes 
a little respite from his toil, while another takes the 
helm and journeys over the deep. And all the 
swimmers leading in turn, they row the dark water 
with their feet as with oars, and hold aloft the varied 
beauty of their horns, submitting them, like the sails 
of a ship, to the breezes. 

All the race of Snakes and Deer wage always 
bitter feud with one another, and everywhere in the 
mountain glens the Deer seeks out the bold serpent. / 
But when he sees the snaky trail woven with long 
coils, greatly exulting he draws nigh to the lair and 
puts his nostrils to the hole, with violent breath 
drawing the deadly reptile to battle. And the com- 
pelling blast hales him, very loth to fight, from the 
depth of his lair. For straightway the venomous. 
beast beholds his foe and raises high in the air his 
baleful neck and bares his white teeth, bristling 
sharp, and snaps his jaws, blowing and hissing fast. 
And immediately in his turn the Deer, like one who 
smiles, rends with his mouth the vainly struggling 
foe, and, while he writhes about his knees and neck, 
devours him amain. And on the ground are shed 
many remains, quivering and writhing in death. 


* Plin. viii. 118 Et his cum serpente pugna. Vestigant 
cayernas nariumque spiritu extrahunt renitentes. Cf. Ael. 
ii. 9, ix. 20; Phil. 59; Solin. xix. 15; Plut. Mor. 976 p 
ἐλάφοις δ᾽ ὄφεις ἀγόμενοι ῥᾳδίως ὑπ᾽ αὐτῶν᾽ 7 καὶ τοὔνομα πεποίηται 
παρώνυμον οὐ τῆς ἐλαφρότητος ἀλλὰ τῆς ἕλξεως τοῦ ὄφεως: 


HWM, 5. ἔλαφος. 
77 


OPPIAN 


καί κε τάχ᾽ οἰκτείρειας ἀπηνέα περ μάλ᾽ ἐόντα 
ὠμηστῆρα ῥιφέντα πολυτμήτοισι φόνοισι. 

“ἽἹπποβότου Λιβύης δ᾽ ἐπὶ τέρμασι πουλὺς ἀλᾶται 
ἄσπετος οὐλόμενος στρατὸς αἰόλος ἑρπηστήρων᾽ 
ἀλλ᾽ ὅτε δὴ κλινθεὶς ἔλαφος ψαμαθώδεσιν ἄκραις 255 
οἷος ἔῃ, τῷδ᾽ αὐτίκ᾽ ἐπέσσυτο πάντοθεν ἐχθρὸς 
ἑσμὸς ἀπειρεσίων ὀφίων στυγεραί τε φάλαγγες 
ἰοτόκοι" ῥινῷ δὲ πικροὺς ἐνέρεισαν ὀδόντας, 
ἅψεα πάντ᾽ ἐλάφοιο περισταδὸν ἀμφιχυθέντες" 
οἱ μὲν γάρ τ᾽ ᾽ ἐφύπερθεν ἐπιστρέψαντε' κάρηνον, 260 
ὀφρύας ἠδὲ μέτωπον ἐνιπρίουσι. γένυσσιν, 
οἱ δ᾽ ἄρα λεπταλέην δειρὴν καὶ στέρνον ἔνερθε | 
καὶ λαγόνας νηδύν τε διὰ στόμα δαιτρεύουσιν, β 
ἄλλοι δ᾽ αὖθ᾽ ἑκάτερθε περὶ πλευρῇσιν ἔχονται, | 
μηροὺς δ᾽ αὖθ᾽ ἕτεροι καὶ νῶτον ὕπερθε νέμονται, 205, 
ἄλλος δ᾽ ἄλλοθεν ἐχθρὰ πεπαρμένος ἠώρηται. 
αὐτὰρ 6 παντοίῃσι περιπληθὴς ὀδύνῃσι 
πρῶτα μὲν ἐκφυγέειν ἐθέλει κραιπνοῖσι πόδεσσιν, 
ἀλλ᾽ οὐ κάρτος ἔχει" τοῖός μιν ἀθέσφατος ὄχλος 
αἰόλος ἀμφιέπει δυσπαίπαλος ἑρπηστήρων. 270 
δὴ τότε δὴ βαρύθων ἐ ἔστη κρατερῆς ὑπ᾽ ἀνάγκης, 
δάπτει δὲ στομάτεσσιν ἀπείριτα δήϊα φῦλα 
βεβρυχὼς ὀδύνῃσιν" ,ἐπιστροφάδην δ᾽ ἑκάτερθεν 
οὐδὲν ἀλευόμενον γένος ἕρπετόεν κεραΐζει. 
κεῖνοι δ᾽ οὐ μεθιᾶσι, διολλύμενοι δὲ μένουσιν, 275 
ἄτροπον ἦτορ ἔχοντες ἀναιδείῃσι νόοιο" | 
καὶ τοὺς μὲν γενύεσσι διέσχισε, τοὺς δὲ πόδεοσι | 
καὶ χηλῇσιν ὄλεσσε, ῥέει δ᾽ ἐπὶ γαῖαν ἀτέρμων | 


1 yl. ἐπιτρέψαντε. 


7A. 606 "9 “ἐν τῇ Λιβύῃ τὸ τῶν ὄφεων μέγεθος γίνεται 
ἄπλατον ; Solin. xxvii. 28 Africa serpentibus adeo fecunda 


78 


CYNEGETICA, II. 251-278 


Haply thou wouldst pity, unkindly though he be, 
the ravenous monster rent piecemeal with deadly 
wounds. 

In the borders of Libya,” pasture land of horses, 
roams a great and»countless host of deadly spotted 
Snakes. When a Stag lies down alone on the sandy 
hills, straightway upon him from every side rush the 
hostile swarm of Snakes beyond number and the 
hateful venomous ranks. In his hide they fix their 
bitter teeth, swarming around about all the limbs of 
the Stag. Some devote themselves to his head above 
and fix their teeth in brow and forehead; others 
rend with their mouths his slender neck and breast 
and his flanks and belly ; others again cling to his 
ribs on either side; others feed on his thighs and 
back above ; one here, one there, with deadly im- 
palement they hang about him. And he, full of all 
manner of pain, first is fain to escape on swift feet, 
but he has not the strength; such an infinite crowd 
of cruel spotted snakes besets him. Then, oppressed 
by grievous constraint, he makes a stand and with 
his jaws he rends the infinite hostile tribes, bellowing 
the while for pain ; and wheeling this way and that 
he makes havoc of the reptile race which make no 
endeavour to escape. Yet they do not let go their 
hold, but abide steadfast unto death, having a relent- 
less mind and a heart not to be turned. And some 
he rends with his jaws ; others he destroys with foot 
and hoof, and on the ground flows from the serpents 


est ut mali huius merito illi potissimum palma detur. . Cf. 
Herod. iv. 191 ἢ. where he says ἔλαφος δὲ καὶ ὃς ἄγριος ἐν 
Λιβύῃ πάμπαν οὐκ ἔστι; A. 606 ἃ 6 ἐν δὲ Λιβύῃ πάσῃ οὔτε σῦς 
ἄγριός ἐστιν οὔτ᾽ ἔλαφος οὔτ᾽ alé ἄγριος: ΔΕ]. xvii. 10 ἐν Λιβύῃ 
συῶν ἀγρίων ἀπορία ἐστὶ καὶ ἐλάφων ; Plin. viii. 120 Cervos 
Africa propemodum sola non gignit. 

79 


+ 


OPPIAN 


> + Ie td 3 / ” 2 A δὲ θ “-“ 
ἰχὼρ αἱματόεις ὀφίων ἄπο: γυῖα δὲ θηρῶν 
“ / θ᾽ ε / A 6 Mi > / Ξ 280 
ἅψεά θ᾽ ἡμίβρωτα κατὰ χθονὸς ἀσπαίρουσιν 
” EAN a , 7, ε fas 
ἄλλα δ᾽ ἐνὶ πλευρῇς θλίβει πάλιν ἡμιδάϊκτα" 
καὶ φθίμενοι γὰρ ἔχουσιν ἔτι κρατεροῖσιν ὀδοῦσι, 
ῥινῷ δ᾽ ἐμπεφυῶτα καρήατα᾽ μοῦνα μέμυκεν. 
αὐτὰρ ὁ γινώσκων θεόθεν τόπερ ἔλλαχε δῶρον, 
πάντῃ μαστεύει δνοφερὸν ποταμοῖο ῥέεθρον" 285 
κεῖθεν καρκινάδας δὲ φίλαις γενύεσσι δαμάσσας 
φάρμακον αὐτοδίδακτον ἔχει πολυπήμονος ἄτης" 
> A / \ > ne / / a 
αἶψα δὲ πικράων μὲν ἐπὶ χθόνα λείψανα θηρῶν 
ἐξέπεσεν ῥινοῖο παραὶ πόδας αὐτοκύλιστα, 
> A > ε ,ὔ > Ve > / 290 
ὠτειλαὶ δ᾽ ἑκάτερθεν ἐπιμύουσιν ὀδόντων. 
Ζώει δ᾽ αὖτ᾽ ἔλαφος δηρὸν χρόνον" ἀτρεκέως δὲ 
ἀνθρώπων γενεή μιν ἐφήμισε τετρακόρωνον. 
"Ἄλλους δ᾽ αὖ καλέουσι βροτοὶ πάλιν εὐρυκέρωτας 
δ 3 Θὲ ΄ , 219 ee | 
πάντ᾽ ἔλαφοι τελέθουσι, φύσιν κεράων δ᾽ ἐφύπερθεν, _ 
οἵην τοὔνομα θηρσὶ κατηγορέει, φορέουσι. 295 


2A. 611 ἃ 18 καὶ ἐπὶ τὴν σέσελιν δὲ τρέχουσι, Kal φαγοῦσαι 
οὕτως ἔρχονται πρὸς τὰ τέκνα πάλι ; 611 Ὁ 20 ὅταν δὲ δηχθῶσιν 
αἱ ἔλαφοι ὑπὸ φαλαγγίου ἤ τινος τοιούτου, τοὺς καρκίνους 
συλλέγουσαι ἐσθίουσιν: Cic. De nat. deorwm ii. 50; Plin. 
viii. 112, xx. 37, xxv. 92; Ael. V.H. xiii. 35 λέγουσι φυσικοὶ 
ἄνδρες τὴν ἔλαφον καθάρσεως δεομένην σέσελιν ἐσθίειν, φαλαγγίων 
δὲ κνήσμασιν ἐχομένην καρκίνους. 

» «The Highlanders assign a great age to the red deer ; 
indeed they seem to suppose that it has no limit, save a 
rifle ball,” St. John, WV. H., etc., in Moray, p. 235. Cf. A. 

578 Ὁ 23 περὶ δὲ τῆς ζωῆς μυθολογεῖται μὲν ws ὃν μακρόβιον, οὐ 
φαίνεται δ᾽ «οὔτε τῶν μυθολογουμένων οὐθὲν σαφές, ἥ τε κύησις καὶ 
ἡ αὔξησις τῶν νεβρῶν συμβαίνει οὐχ ὡς μακροβίου τοῦ ζῴου ὄντος : 
Plin. viii. 119; Solin, xix. 18; A.P. xi. 72 ἡ φάος ἀθρήσασ᾽ 
ἐλάφου πλέον. | 
¢ Hesiod fr. 171=Plut. Mor. 415 c ἐννέα τοι ζώει γενεὰς 
λακέρυζα κορώνη (Crow) | ἀνδρῶν ἡβώντων: ἔλαφος δέ τε τετρα- 
κόρωνος" | τρεῖς δ᾽ ἐλάφους ὁ κόραξ (Raven) γηράσκεται : Plin. 
vil. 153; Auson. vii. 5; Arist. Av. 609 πέντ᾽ ἀνδρῶν γενεὰς 
80 


CYNEGETICA, II. 279-295 


an endless bloody stream, and the limbs and joints 
of the beasts half-devoured quiver upon the ground ; 
others again upon his ribs he crushes half-dead ; for 
even in death they still keep hold with their strong 
teeth and, clinging.to his hide, their mere heads still 
groan. But he, knowing the gift that he hath gotten 
from Heaven, seeks everywhere for the dark stream 
of a river. Therefrom he kills crabs@ with his jaws 
and so gets a self-taught remedy for his painful woe ; 
and speedily the remnants of the cruel beasts fall 
from his hide of their own motion beside his feet, 
and the wounds of their teeth on either side close up. 

The Stag, moreover, lives a long time,? and of a 
truth men say that he lives four lives of a crow.® 

Others again men call Broad-horns.4 They are 
altogether deer but they carry aloft such nature of 
horns as the name of the beast declares. 


ζώει λακέρυζα κορώνη; Arat. 290 évvedynpa κορώνη. For 
longevity of Crow and Stag cf. Babr. xlvi. 8; Οἷς. Tuse. iii. 
28. 69; of Crow cf. A.P. v. 288 ἡ γραῦς ἡ τρικόρωνος ; Lucr. 
v. 1082; Hor. C. iii. 17. 13; Mart, x. 67. 5, ete. 

4 Fallow Deer, Cervus dama, M.G. πλατῶνι. “1,6 daim 
se trouve a |’état sauvage en Acarnanie dans la grande forét 
Manina qui s’étend ἃ l’ouest du fleuve Achélous jusqu’a 
Catouna, [1 n’y est pas trés-abondant et sa destruction est 
ἃ craindre” (Bik. p. 18). εὐρύκερως, only here and C. iii. 2 
(except as epithet Mosch. ii. 153), seems to be the same as 
πλατύκερως (Poll. v. 76)=platyceros, Plin. xi. 123 Nec alibi 
maior naturae lascivia. Lusit animalium armis; sparsit 
haec in ramos, ut cervorum; aliis simplicia tribuit, ut in 
eodem genere subulonibus ex argumento dictis ; aliorum 
fudit in palmas digitosque emisit ex his, unde platycerotas 
vocant. The last of Pliny’s three species points clearly to 
the palmated antlers of the Fallow Deer ; his first species 
is the Red Deer, Cervus elaphus; his second apparently 
the Roe Deer, Cervus capreolus, the πρόξ of A. 506 a 22, 
515 Ὁ 34, 520b 24; P.A. 650b15; 676 Ὁ 97. 

G 81 


OPPIAN 


Τοὺς δ᾽ dpa κικλήσκουσιν ἐνὶ ξυλόχοισιν ἰόρκους" 
κἀκείνοις ἐλάφοιο δέμας, ῥινὸν δ᾽ ἐπὶ νώτῳ 
στικτὸν ἅπαντα φέρουσι παναίολον, οἷά τε θηρῶν 
πορδαλίων σφραγῖδες ἐπὶ χροὶ μαρμαίρουσι. 
Βούβαλος αὖτε πέλει μείων δέμας ,»εὐρυκέρωτος, 800 
μείων εὐρυκέρωτος, ἀτὰρ δόρκου μέγ᾽ ἀρείων" 
ὄμμασιν “αἰγλήεις, ἐρατὸς χρόα, φαιδρὸς ἰδέσθαι" 
καὶ κεράων ὀρθαὶ μὲν ἀπὸ κρατὸς πεφύασιν 
ἀκρέμονες προτενεῖς, ὑψοῦ δ᾽ αὖθις ποτὶ νῶτον 
ἄψορρον νεύουσι παλιγνάμπτοισιν ἀκωκαῖς. 90ὅ 
ἔξοχα ὃ. αὖ τόδε φῦλον ἐὸν δόμον ἀμφαγαπάζει 
ἠθαλέας τ᾽ εὐνὰς φίλιόν τε νάπεσσι μέλαθρον" 
εἰ δέ τέ μιν στρεπτῇσι πεδήσαντες βροχίδεσσιν 
ἀγρευτῆρες ἄγοιεν ἐπ᾽ ἄλλους αὐτίκα χώρους, 
τηλόθι δ᾽ ἐν βήσσῃσιν ἐλεύθερον αὖθι λίποιεν, 810 
ῥεῖα ποτὶ γλυκερὸν δόμον ἤλυθεν, ἧχι ναίεσκεν, 
οὐδ᾽ ἔτλη ξεῖνός τις ἐπ᾽ ἀλλοδαποῖσιν ἀλᾶσθαι. 
οὐκ ἄρα τοι μούνοισι φίλη πάτρη μερόπεσσι, 
καὶ βαλίων δὲ πόθος τις ἐνέστακται φρεσὶ θηρῶν. 
Ναὶ μὴν ὠκυτάτων δόρκων ἀρίδηλα γένεθλα 315 
μορφήν τ᾽ ἴδμεν ἅπαντες ὁμῶς μέγεθός τε καὶ ἀλκήν. 


* The Roe Deer, C. capreolus, M.G. ἕξαρκάδι, ** still found 
in Acarnania and on Parnassus, but not RETIN hs p: 
18). The form topkos occurs only here and C. Siseg Ge 
Hes. s. ἴορκες᾽ τῶν δορκάδων ζῴων" ἔνιοι δὲ oe ἐλάφου 
and 5. ἴυρκες᾽ αἶγες ἄγριαι. In Herod. iv. 192 ἕορκάδες seem 
to be Gazelles ; cf. Hesych. ζόρξ- ἡλικία ἐλάφου ἢ δορκός. The 
evidence is ‘confusing but there seems reason to think that 
δορκάς was used in two senses, @= Gazelle, (2)=Roe Deer ; 
of. Ael. vii. 47 τάς γε μὴν δορκάδας καὶ ζόρκας καὶ πρόκας 
εἰώθασιν ὀνομάζειν ; vii. 19. 

δ Antilope (Alcelaphus) bubalis. A. 515b34 and 516a5 
(BovBanis) ; P.A. 663 a11 ( (BovBados) ; ef. Strab. 827; Diod. 
ii. 51; Ael. v. 48, x. 25, xiii, 25; Plin. viii, 38 uros quibus 
82 


CYNEGETICA, II. 296-316 


Other beasts in the woods they call Iorecus.¢ These 
also have the form of a deer, but on their back they 
have a hide, all various with spots, like the marks 
that twinkle upon the skin of the wild Leopards. 

The Antelope ® again is less in stature than the 
Broad-horn: less than the Broad-horn but far 
mightier than the Gazelle: bright of eye, lovely in 
colour, cheerful of aspect. Straight from the head 
spring the long branches of its horns but aloft they 
bend again toward the back with curved points. 
Above all others doth this race love its own home and 
its accustomed lair and its dear dwelling in the glades. 
Even if hunters bind it with twisted ropes and carry 
it straightway to other regions and far away in the 
glens leave it there to its freedom, easily doth it 
come to the sweet home where it used to dwell and 
endures not to wander as a stranger amid aliens. 
Not then to men alone is their native land dear, but 
even in the hearts of the dappled wild beasts is 
instilled a desire of home. 

Furthermore we all know the conspicuous tribes 
of the most swift ὁ Gazelles,? their beauty alike and 
their stature and their strength. The lustful ὁ Part- 


imperitum volgus bubalorum nomen imponit, cum id gignat 
Africa vituli potius cervique quadam similitudine. 

¢ A. P.A. 663a 11 (προστέθεικεν ἡ φύσις) τάχος βουβάλοις Kal 
δορκάσι. Cf. Ael. xiv. 14. 

4 Gazella dorcas ‘*is by far the most abundant of all the 
large game in’ Palestine ” (Tristr. p. 129); A. 499a9 τὰ δὲ 
τῶν ἱππελάφων κέρατα παραπλήσια τοῖς τῆς δορκάδος ἐστίν ; P.A. 
663 b 26 ἐλάχιστόν ἐστι τῶν γνωριζομένων (κερατοφόρων) δορκάς. 

ὁ. A. 4888 τὰ μὲν ἀφροδισιαστικά, οἷον τὸ τῶν περδίκων καὶ 
ἀλεκτρυόνων γένος. Cf. 5θ4. ἃ 24f., 613 b 25 f.; Ο΄. 41. 146 1 
etc.; Athen. 389 a τὸ δὲ (Woy ἐπὶ λαγνείας συμβολικῶς παρ- 
είληπται : Ael. iii. 5, etc. : Antig. xxxix. 101; Plin. x. 100; 
Solin. vii. $0; Phil. 12; Dion. De av. i. 9. 

83 


“4 


ΟΡΡΙΑΝ 


A > tA 
πέρδικες θοῦροι δὲ πυρώπεες, αἰολόδειροι, 
δόρκοισιν φιλίην παρὰ τέμπεσιν ἐσπείσαντο, 
a 
ἠθαλέοι τε πέλουσι καὶ ἀλλήλοισιν ὅμαυλοι, 
εὐνάς τ᾽ ἐγγὺς ἔχουσι, καὶ οὐκ ἀπάνευθε νέμονται. 390 
ex δι} ΄ a 
ἢ μάλα δὴ μετόπισθεν ératpeins τάχα πικρῆς 
καὶ φιλίης ἀπέλαυσαν ἀμειδέος, ὁππότε φῶτες 
a / 
κερδαλέοι δειλοῖσιν ἐπίφρονα μητίσαιντο, 
/ / Uy. > ih ’, 
πέρδικας δόρκοισι φίλοις ἀπατήλια θέντες, 
ἔμπαλι δ᾽ αὖ δόρκους ἑτάροις ἴσα περδίκεσσιν. 395 
Αἰγῶν δ᾽ αὖτε πέλει προβάτων τε πανάγρια φῦλα 
οὐ πολλὸν τούτων' ὀΐων λασίων τε χιμαιρῶν 
, > \ / \ 7 / 
μείζονες, ἀλλὰ θέειν κραιπνοὶ σθεναροί τε μάχεσθαι, 
στρεπτοῖσιν κεφαλῆφι κορυσσόμενοι κεράεσσι. 
κάρτος δ᾽ αὖτ᾽ ὀΐεσσιν ἐν ἀργαλέοισι μετώποις- 3380 
ys > ¢ / by Keel | 7. wv 
πολλάκι δ᾽ ὁρμηθέντες evi ξυλόχοισιν ἔθηκαν 
καὶ σύας αἰθυκτῆρας ἐπὶ χθονὸς ἀσπαίροντας. 
” > Ψ 5» 3 / > Δ 3 sh 
ἔστι δ᾽ ὅτ᾽ ἀλλήλοισιν ἐναντίον ἀΐξαντες 
μάρνανται: κρατερὸς δὲ πρὸς αἰθέρα δοῦπος ἱκάνει" 
5 (4 > > tA / wv feo 3 a 
οὐδέ τ᾽ ἀλεύασθαι θέμις ἔπλετο δήϊον αὐτοῖς, 335 
νίκην δ᾽ ἀλλήλοις φορέειν ἀτίνακτος ἀνάγκη 
ἠὲ νέκυν κεῖσθαι" τοῖον σφίσι νεῖκος ὄρωρεν. 
> zo / la > 3 3 ~ > \ > if 
Αἰγάγροις δέ τίς ἐστι δι᾿ αὐτῶν αὐλὸς ὀδόντων 
λεπταλέος πνοιῆς, κεράων μέσον, ἔνθεν ἔπειτα 


1 τούτων, of. Schol. τούτων " ἤγουν τῶν ἡμέρων : τιθασῶν 


Koechly. 


* ** Perdix graeca, kettenweise auf allen Bergen der 
Cycladen, die Insel Syra ausgenommen, hdufig. Auf 
letzterer sind die Steinhiihner durch fortwihrende Verfol- 
gung der Ausrottung nahe. Perdix cinerea, auf den 
Cycladen giinzlich unbekannt.” Erh. p. 60; cf. Bik. p. 
49. **The commonest Partridge of the Holy Land is 
the Greek Partridge, a bird somewhat resembling our Red- 


84 


CYNEGETICA, II. 317-339 


ridges, fiery of eye and speckled of neck, make pact 
of friendship with the Gazelles® in the vales and are 
. familiar with them and dwell with them and have 
(their nests near them and do not range apart from 
(them. Verily it,may well be that afterward they 
reap bitter fruit of their companionship and laughter- 
less profit of their friendship, when guileful men 
contrive a cunning device against the hapless crea- 
tures, setting the Partridges to decoy their friends 
the Gazelles and, in turn, setting the Gazelles in like 
manner to decoy their comrades the Partridges. 
Again there are the wild tribes of Goats and 
Sheep. These are not much larger than our Sheep 
and shaggy Goats, but they are swift to run and 
strong to fight, armed as their heads are with twisted 
horns. The strength, moreover, of the Sheep lies in 
their terrible foreheads. Many a time in the woods 
they charge and lay rushing Boars writhing on the 
ground. Sometimes also they rush upon one another 
and.do battle, and a mighty din reaches unto heaven. 
And it is not lawful for them to shun the foe, but 
unshakable constraint is upon them either to win 
the victory one over another or tuo lie dead: such 
strife arises between them. 
And wild Goats have a slender channel for the 
breath ὁ right through the teeth between the horns, 


legged Partridge in plumage . . . but much larger” (Tristr. 
p. 225). Perdix cinerea is found in Epirus and Macedonia, 
Mommas. p. 261. 

> The friendship of Partridge and Deer is mentioned Dion. 
De av. i. 9. 

ὁ. A, 492 a 14 ᾿Αλκμαίων οὐκ ἀληθῆ λέγει, φάμενος ἀναπνεῖν τὰς 
αἶγας κατὰ τὰ ὦτα [quoted G. White, Δ. H. of Selborne, Letter 
xiv.]; Plin. viii. 202 auribus eas spirare, non naribus, . . 
Archelaus auctor est, Cf. Ael, i, 53; Varro ii. 3, ὁ, 


85 


OPPIAN 


ΕῚ a > / \ ΄ ἡθὺ ς », 
αὐτὴν ἐς κραδίην καὶ πνεύμονας εὐθὺς ἱκάνει: 3840 
εἰ δέ τις αἰγάγρου κηρὸν κέρασιν περιχεύοι, 

~ > / sO \ lo ΄ 

ζωῆς ἐξέκλεισεν ὁδοὺς πνοιῆς τε διαύλους. 

"Eéoxa δ᾽ αὖ μήτηρ ἀταλοὺς ἔτι νηπιάχοντας 

« nan UZ / De gah Ig a 
‘os παῖδας κομέει" γήρᾳ δ᾽ ἔνι μητέρα παῖδες. 

ς \ \ / , > / 
ws δὲ βροτοὶ yevérny πεπεδημένον ἀργαλέοισ, 345 
γήραος ἐν δεσμοῖσι, πόδας βαρύν, ἅψεα ῥικνόν, 
ἀβληχρὸν παλάμας, τρομερὸν δέμας, ὄψιν ἀμαυρόν, 
ἀμφαγαπαζόμενοι περὶ δὴ περὶ πάμπαν ἔχουσι͵ 
τινύμενοι κομιδὴν παιδοτροφίης ἀλεγεινῆς" 
ὡς αἰγῶν κοῦροι φιλίους κομέουσι τοκῆας 860 
γηραλέους, ὅτε δεσμὰ πολύστονα γυῖα πεδήσῃ᾽" 
βρώμην μέν τ᾽ ὀρέγουσιν ἐΐδροσον ἀνθεμόεσσαν, 
δρεψάμενοι στομάτεσσι" ποτὸν δ᾽ dpa χείλεσιν ἄκροις 
ἐκ ποταμοῦ φορέουσιν ἀφυσσάμενοι μέλαν ὕδωρ: 
λώσσῃ δ᾽ ἀμφιέποντες ὅλον χρόα φαιδρύνουσιν. 355 
γλώσσῃ δ᾽ ἀμ XP ρ 

> 7 4 / / 
εἰ δέ νύ τοι βροχίδεσσι μόνην γενέτειραν ἀείραις, 

op " \ Ad ov / Ἂν Ἢ 
αὐτίκα καὶ παλάμηφιν ἕλοις νεοθηλέας ἀμνούς" 
τὴν μὲν γὰρ δοκέοις παῖδας μύθοισι δίεσθαι, 
λισσομένην τοίοισιν ἀπόπροθι μηκηθμοῖσι:" 
φεύγετέ μοι, φίλα τέκνα, δυσαντέας ἀγρευτῆρας, 360 

/ \ / ~ 
μή με λυγρὴν δμηθέντες ἀμήτορα μητέρα Ore. 
τοῖα φάμεν δοκέοις τοὺς δ᾽ ἑσταότας προπάροιθε 
πρῶτα μὲν ἀείδειν στονόεν μέλος ἀμφὶ τεκούσῃ, 
αὐτὰρ ἔπειτ᾽ ἐνέπειν φαίης μεροπήϊον ἠχήν, 

ε ,ὔ / > “ oe “. 
ῥηξαμένους βληχήν, στομάτων τ᾽ ἄπο τοῖον αἀὑτεῖν, 86ὅ 
φθεγγομένοις ἰκέλους καὶ λισσομένοισιν ὁμοίους - 
πρός σέ Διὸς λιτόμεσθα, πρὸς αὐτῆς ᾿Ιοχεαίρης, 

Ἄ > a 76. δ 
λύσεο μητέρα μοι φιλίην, τὰ δ᾽ ἄποινα δέδεξο, 

86 


CYNEGETICA, II. 340-368 


whence again the channel goes straight to the very 
heart and lungs. If one pours wax about the horns 
of the wild Goat, he blocks the paths of its life and 
the channels of its breath. 

Notable is the, care which the dam among these 
takes for her tender young and which the children 
take for their mother in her old age. And even as 
among men, when a parent is fettered in the grievous 
bonds of old age—heavy of foot, crooked of limb, 
feeble of hand, palsied of body, dim of eye—his 
children cherish and attend him with utmost heed, 


‘repaying the care of their laborious rearing : so do 
paying 8: 


the young of the Goats care for their dear parents in 
their old age, when sorrowful bonds fetter their 
limbs. They cull with their mouths and_ proffer 
them dewy food and flowery, and for drink they 


| bring them dark water which they draw from the 
_river with their lips, while with their tongues they 


tend and cleanse all their body. Didst thou but 
take the mother alone in a snare, straightway thou 
mightst take the young lambs with thy hands. For 
thou wouldst think that she was driving away her 
children with her words, entreating them afar with 
such bleatings as these: “ Flee, children dear, the 


ycruel hunters, lest ye be slain and make me your 


poor mother a mother no more!” Such words thou 
wouldst think she spoke, while they, standing before 
her, first sing, thou wouldst imagine, a mournful 
dirge about their mother, and then, breaking forth 
in bleating, speak in human accents and as if they 
used the speech of men and like as if they prayed, 
utter from their lips such language as this: “ In the 
name of Zeus we pray thee, in the name of the 
Archer Maid herself, release to us our dear mother, 


87 


“ὦ 


ΠΌΟΡΡΙΑΝ 


\ A ’, ~ 
ὅσσα φέρειν δυνάμεσθα Avypot wept μητέρι δειλῇ, 
eos 3 ΄, : ΄ \ » 5 
ἡμέας αἰνομόρους - γνάμψον τεὸν ἄγριον ἦτορ 370 

, / lod 
αἰδόμενος μακάρων τε θέμιν yevérad τε γῆρας, 
εἴ ῥά νύ τοι γενέτης λιπαρὸν κατὰ δῶμα λέλειπται. 
al vv Δ ,’ 3 vA 
τοῖά τις av δόξειε λιταζομένους ἀγορεύειν. 
> > oe δί ir 10 be 
ἀλλ᾽ ὅτε rev κραδίην παναμείλιχον ἀθρήσωσιν, 
> MY > / / “60 > A / 75 
αἰδὼς ὦ πόσση, πόσσος πόθος ἐστὶ τοκήων, 375 
> / / \ >? / / 
αὐτόδετοι βαίνουσι καὶ αὐτόμολοι περόωσι. 
eM eer ao \ / Ἂν 1S / / 
Εἰσὲ δ᾽ ὄϊς ξανθοὶ πυμάτης ἐνὶ τέρμασι Ἰζρήτης, 
ἐν χθαμαλῇ γαίῃ Τορτυνίδι, τετρακέρωτες" 
λάχνη πορφυρόεσσα δ᾽ ἐπὶ χροὸς ἐστεφάνωται 
πολλή τ᾽ οὐκ ἁπαλή τε" τάχ᾽ αἰγὸς ἂν" ἀντιφερίζοι 380 
τρηχυτάτῃ χαίτῃ δυσπαίπαλος, οὐκ ὀΐεσσι. 

i \ ~ 4 x > / 

Toinv που καὶ σοῦβος ἔχει ξανθωπὸν ἰδέσθαι 
χρουὴν μαρμαίρων, ἀτὰρ οὐκ ἔτι λαχνήεσσαν, 
οὐδὲ πάλιν πισύρεσσιν ἀρηραμένην κεράεσσιν, 
LAAG ὃ \ “a ς \ > / Ua 
αλλᾶ OVOl KpaTEpols ὕπερ εὐρυτάτοιο μετώπου. 385 
> ,ὔ \ lol >? \ > ~ ς ΄ 
ἀμφίβιος καὶ σοῦβος, ἐπεὶ κἀκεῖνος ὁδεύει" 

\ 
ὁππότε yap ποτὶ βυσσὸν ἴῃ bod κύματα τέμνων, 

\ / \ a ς - 
δὴ τότε πουλὺς ὅμιλος ὁμαρτῇ ποντοπορεύων 
> l4 Ψ ai > ov ͵ὕὔ 
ἰχθυόεις ἕπεται, κατὰ δ᾽ ἅψεα λιχμάζονται, 

/ / / / os 7 
τερπόμενοι κερόεντι φίλῳ, τερενόχροϊ σούβῳ. 890 
” δ᾽ > tA \ > \ Re 
ἔξοχα δ᾽ ad φάγροι τε καὶ οὐτιδανοὶ μελάνουροι 


1 ἂν αἰγὸς mss. : corr. Turnebus. 


“ Cf. Anecd. Ox. iv. 267 ὁ σοῦβος ὡς πρόβατόν ἐστι ξανθὸν 
καὶ λεῖον. Unidentified. The name suggests the Hebrew 
vas (the “roe” or ‘‘roebuck” of the A.V, Deut, xv. 22, 


88 


CYNEGETICA, 11. 369-391 


and accept a ransom, even all that we unhappy can 
offer for our poor mother—even our hapless selves. 
Bend thy cruel heart and have regard unto the law 
of Heaven and to the old age of a parent, if thou 
hast thyself an aged parent left in thy bright home.” 
Such prayer might one fancy that they utter. But 
when they see that thy heart is altogether inexor- 
able,—how great their regard, how great their 
love for their parents !—they come to bondage of 
‘their own accord and of their own motion pass the 
bourne. 

Yellow Sheep there are in the bounds of utmost 
Crete, in the low land of Gortyn—Sheep with four 
horns; and bright wool is wreathed about their 
flesh—abundant wool but not soft: so rugged is it 
that it might compare with the roughest hair of 
Goats, not with the wool of Sheep. 

“Such yellow-coloured form has also the brilliant 
Subus,? but no longer shaggy nor again furnished 
with four horns but with two strong ones above 
amplest forehead. Amphibious too is the Subus ; 
for he also walks upon the land; but when he 
travels to the deep and ploughs the swift waves, 
then a great company of fishes attends him and 
travels the sea along with him; and they lick his 
limbs and rejoice in their horned friend, the Subus of 
tender body. Above all the Braize® and the feeble 


etc.) and one is reminded of Aelian’s amphibious κεμάς 
(xiv. 14), where the context suggests some species of 
Gazelle. But Oppian’s ‘ Subus” seems to be a Sheep. 

> One of the Sea-breams (Sparidae): either Pagrus 
vulgaris, M.G. μερτζάνι (‘c'est un nom ture équivalent au 
grec ἐρύθρινος ᾿ Apost. p. 17) or Dentex macrophthalmus, 
M.G. gayypi. A. 598a13; 601b30; Athen. 300 e, 327 ¢; 
Ael, ix. 7, x, 19; Plin, xxxii. 125 ; Ov. Hal. 107 rutilus pagur. 


89 


“4 


OPPIAN 


καὶ padides τρίγλαι τε Kal ἀστακοὶ ἀμφὶς ἕπονται. 
θάμβος ἔφυ τόδε, θάμβος ἀθέσφατον, ὁππότε θῆρας 
ἀλλοδαποὶ τείρουσι πόθοι καὶ ὑπείροχα φίλτρα. 

οὐ γὰρ ἐπ᾽ ἀλλήλοισι μόνὸν φιλότητος ἐΐσης 395 
θεσμὸν ἀναγκαῖον δῶκεν θεός, οὐδ᾽ ὅσον αὐτῶν 
φῦλον ἀναλδήσκειν αἰειγενέος βιότοιο. 

θαῦμα μὲν οὖν κἀκεῖνο δαμήμεναι ἄφρονα φῦλα 
ἅμμασιν ἱμερτοῖς καὶ ὁμόγνια φίλτρα δαῆναι 

καὶ πόθον οὐ νοέοντα ἐν ἀλλήλοισι κεράσσαι, 400 
οἷάπερ ἀνθρώποισιν ἐπιφροσύνη τε νόος τε 
ὀφθαλμοὺς ἐπέτασσεν ἔρον θ᾽ ὑπεδέξατο θυμῷ: 
ἀλλὰ καὶ ὀθνείοις ἐπεμήνατο ὑψόθι φίλτροις. 

οἷος μὲν πόθος ἐστὶν ἀριζήλοις ἐλάφοισι 


3 / Ψ \ / ΩΝ / 
ATTAYEWV* οσσος δὲ τανυκραιροιῖς ἐπι δόρκοις 405 


2 A Sea-bream, Oblata melanura, M.G. μελανοῦρι. A. 
591a15; Athen. 313d, 319 ᾿ς, 320e; Phil. 92; Plin. xxxii. 
17 and 149; Colum. viii. 16; Ael. i. 41 : Ov. Hal. 113 laude 
insignis caudae melanurus. 

>» The Gar-fish, Belone acus, M.G. Bedovida, ἕαργάνα : 
“tres abondante depuis le mois d’aofit jusqu’A la fin 
d’Octobre ” (Apost. p. 25): of. H. i. 172, iii. 577, 605 f. ῥαφίς 
=Berdvn, cf. Athen. 319d Awpiwy δ᾽ ἐν τῷ περὶ ἰχθύων 
“*Behovav,” φησίν, ““ἣν καλοῦσιν paglda.” ᾿Αριστοτέλης δ᾽ ἐν 
πέμπτῳ ζῴων μορίων βελόνην αὐτὴν καλεῖ. ἐν δὲ τῷ περὶ ζωικῶν 
ἢ ἰχθύων ῥαφίδα αὐτὴν ὀνομάσας ἀνόδουν φησὶν αὐτὴν εἶναι, καὶ 
Σπεύσιππος αὐτὴν βελόνην καλεῖ. In A. 506b9, 6617 Ὁ 23, etc. 
βελόνη is Syngnathus acus, the Pipe-fish (Needle-fish), M.G. 
σακκοράφα, κατουρλίδα (Apost. p. 7), but in 610b6 it seems 
to be the Gar-fish. In H. iii. 608 Oppian’s ῥαφίς has teeth, 
which suits the Gar-fish, while Athen. 305 ἃ, 319 ἃ says 


90 


CYNEGETICA, II. 392-405 


Melanurus@ and the Needle-fish? and the Red Mullet¢ 
and the Lobster? are attendant upon him. A marvel 
is this, a marvel unspeakable, when alien desires and 
strange loves distress wild beasts. For it is not 
alone for one another that God has given them the 
compelling ordinance of mutual love, nor only so far 
that their race should wax with everlasting life. 
That is, indeed, a marvel, that the brute tribes 
should be constrained by the bonds of desire and 
should know the passions of their own kind and, 
albeit without understanding should feel mutual 
desire for one another, even as for men thought and 
intelligence opens the eye and admits love to the 
heart ; but the wild races are also highly stirred by 
the frenzy of alien desires. What a passion is that 
of the lordly Stag for the Francolin’! How great 
that of the Partridge for the long-horned Gazelle ! 


that Aristotle described the ῥαφίς as toothless, which suits 
Syngnathus acus. 

ὁ M.G. τρίγλες, μπαρμπούνι(α), the Roman mullus, including 
Mullus  surmuletus L. (M.G. πετρόψαρο, τσιγαρόλια), M. 
fuscatus Rafin. (M.G. μπαρμπούνι), M. barbatus L. (M.G. 
κεφαλάδες, from shape of head, which presents an almost 
vertical profile). 4 Homarus vulgaris. 

ὁ ἀτταγήν, arrayas, arraBuyds (Hesych.), ταγηνάριον (Suid, 
who says it was abundant in Marathon), prob. Tetrao 
francolinus L. Not now found in Greece but resident in 
Asia Minor, esp. in the swampy regions (τὰ λιμνώδη Kat 
ἕλεια χωρία καταβόσκεται, Suid. s.v.) of the 5. (Momms. p. 
261). ‘In the rich lowland plains, as of Gennesaret, Acre, 
and Phoenicia, the place of the Partridge is taken by the 
Francolin, a bird of the same family, . . . formerly found 
in S. Europe as far as Spain, but now quite extinct on this 
continent” (Tristr. p. 228); A. 617625 τὸ χρῶμα (of the 
ἀσκαλώπας, Woodcock) ὅμοιον ἀτταγῆνι; 633a30 ὅσοι μὴ 
πτητικοὶ ἀλλ᾽ ἐπίγειοι, κονιστικοί, οἷον ἀλεκτορίς, πέρδιξ, ἀτταγήν ; 


Athen. 387 ff. ; Acl. iv. 42, etc.; Plin. x, 133. 
91 


OPPIAN 


~ > a ᾿: ie 
περδίκων: πῶς δ᾽ αὖτε Boots χαίρουσιν ἐφ᾽ ἵπποις 
ὠτίδες, αἷσι τέθηλεν ἀεὶ λασιώτατον otas* 
ὃς αὖ ΄ ὺν aAAnA J 
ψιττακὸς αὖτε λύκος τε σὺν ἀλλήλοισι νέμονται" 
δ \ ΄ 7 3 ΄, ” 
αἰεὶ yap ποθέουσι λύκοι ποεσίχροον ὄρνιν. 
, ,ὔ 
ὄβριμ᾽ "ἔρως, πόσος ἐσσί, πόση σέθεν ἄπλετος ἀλκή, 410 
a x / “- 
πόσσα νοεῖς, πόσα κοιρανέεις, πόσα δαῖμον, ἀθύρεις ! 
γαῖα πέλει σταθερή, βελέεσσι δὲ σοῖσι δονεῖται" 
x ya / > ‘A ’ὔ \ A 3 
ἄστατος ἔπλετο πόντος, ἀτὰρ σύγε καὶ τὸν ἔπηξας" 
ἦλθες ἐς αἰθέρα ἔδδεισεν δὲ σε' μακρὸς "Ολυμπος- 
" / / \ > A > \ “ 
δειμαίνει δέ σε πάντα, καὶ οὐρανὸς εὐρὺς ὕπερθε 415 
, a ΟΣ, ὦ Non ν, \ , : 
γαίης ὅσσα τ᾽ ἔνερθε καὶ ἔθνεα λυγρὰ καμόντων, 
« / \ a” € \ / \ Ὁ 
ot Λήθης μὲν ἄφυσσαν ὑπὸ στόμα νηπαθὲς ὕδωρ 
\ ΄ ᾿, WZ \ > 3 , ‘fi 
καὶ φύγον ἄλγεα πάντα, σὲ δ᾽ εἰσέτι πεφρίκασι. 
~ A / \ lol a [2 + /, 
σῷ δὲ μένει καὶ τῆλε περᾷς, ὅσον οὔποτε λεύσσει 
~ > A 
ἠέλιος φαέθων" σῷ δ᾽ ad πυρὶ καὶ φάος εἴκει 490 
“- «ς ~ 
δειμαῖνον, καὶ Ζηνὸς ὁμῶς εἴκουσι κεραυνοί. 
“a lj “. 
τοίους, ἄγριε δαῖμον, ἔχεις πυρόεντας ὀϊστούς, 
ὃ Ψ" λ ͵ὔ θ / > / 
mevKedavous, μαλερούς, φθισόφρονας, οἰστρήεντας, 
ὃ / , 3 λθ , @ \ > \ 
τηκεδόνα πνείοντας, ἀναλθέας, οἷσι καὶ αὐτοὺς 
lol > / 9. 3 > vA 
θῆρας ἀνεπτοίησας ἐπ᾽ ἀζεύκτοισι πόθοισι. 49: 
/ Ψ / > wa 2 
θάμβος, ὅταν κερόεσσαν ἀχαϊνέην πτερόεντες 
1 So C.K: most mss. ἤλυθες εἰς αἰθῆρ᾽, οἷδεν δέ σε. 


α Otis tarda L., M.G. ἀγριόγαλλος. It seems to be 
becoming rarer in Greece, Momms. p. 263; Bik. p. 50; A. 
509a4, δὅ89 Ὁ 30, 563a29, etc.; Plin. x. 57 Proximae his 


92 


CYNEGETICA, II. 406-426 


How again does the Bustard α of the shaggy ear® re- 
joice in the swift Horse! The Parrot ὁ again and the 
Wolf herd together ; for Wolves have ever a passion 
for. the grass-hued ἃ bird. Mighty Love, how great 
art thou ! how infinite thy might ! how many things 
dost thou devise and ordain, how many, mighty 
spirit, are thy sports! The earth is steadfast : yet 
is it shaken by thy shafts. Unstable is the sea : \ 
yet thou dost make it fast. Thou comest unto the 
“upper air and high Olympus is afraid before thee. 
All things fear thee, the wide heaven above and all 
that is beneath the earth and the lamentable tribes 
of the dead, who, though they have drained with their 
lips the oblivious water of Lethe, still tremble before 
thee. By thy might thou dost pass afar, beyond 
what the shining sun doth ever behold: to thy fire 
even the light yields place for fear and the thunder- 
bolts of Zeus likewise give place. Such fiery arrows, 
fierce spirit, hast thou—sharp, consuming, mind- 
destroying, maddening, whose melting breath knows 
no healing—wherewith thou dost stir even the very 
wild beasts to unmeet desires. A marvel it is when 
the winged Francolins leap on the spotted back of 


(6.9. tetraonibus) sunt quas Hispania aves tardas appellat, 
Graecia ὠτίδας. For Bustard and Horse Of. NEL. ite 28; 
Plut. Mor. 9818; Athen. 390f; Dion. De av. iii. 8. 

> In ref. to the etymology aris from οὖς, ὠτός (ear). 

¢ Species unknown ; according to Prof. Alfred Newton 
‘**the Greeks could not have known Psittacus Alexandri.” 
A. 597b 27; Arr. Ind. i. 15. 8; Paus. ii. 28, 1 3 Plin’ x; 1172 
Ael. vi. 19, ete. 

4 Plin. l.c. viridem toto corpore, torque tantum miniato in 
cervice distinctam; Stat. §. ii. 4. 25 Psittacus ille plagae 
viridis regnator EKoae; Apul. Flor. 12 color psittaco viridis 

- nisi quod sola cervice distinguitur . . . cervicula eius 
circulo mineo velut aurea torqui . . . cingitur. 
93 


es 


“4 


OPPIAN 


A he 
ἀτταγέες νώτοισιν ἐπὶ στικτοῖσι θορόντες 
Ν » 
ἢ δόρκοις πέρδικες ἐπὶ πτερὰ πυκνὰ βαλόντες 
a / ,ὔ δ 
ἱδρῶ ἀποψύχωσι, παρηγορέωσί τε θυμὸν 
/ 
καύματος ἀζαλέοιο, λατυσσόμενοι πτερύγεσσιν" 480 
ἃ 7 
ἢ ὁπότε προπάροιθεν ἴῃ κἀναχήποδος ἵππου 
\ ᾽ὔ 
ὠτὶς ὀλισθαίνουσα δι’ ἠέρος ἱμερόεσσα, 
A 9 3 7 > / a > \ δὲ Α͂ 
σαργοὶ δ᾽ αἰπολίοισιν ἐπέχραον ἀμφὶ δὲ σούβῳ 
“ "Δ 
φῦλον ἅπαν νεπόδων τὸ πολύπλανον ἐπτοίηται, 
, 
ἕσπονται δ᾽ ἅμα πάντες, OT ἄγρια κύματα τέμνει, 435 
/ / > € 4 A6 > A δὲ / 
στείνονταί θ᾽ ἑκάτερθε γεγηθότες, ἀμφὶ δὲ πόντος 
ἀφριάᾳ λευκῇσι τινασσόμενος πτερύγεσσιν" 
αὐτὰρ ὅ γ᾽ οὐκ ἀλέγων ἕξείνης φιλίης πανάθεσμος, 
εἰναλίους ἑτάρους δάπτει στομάτεσσι δαφοινοῖς 
ὃ ἊΣ \ δ᾽ 4 > > 6 > na id ~ 
αινυμενος " TOL aloav εν op aApotow ορῶντες, 440 
οὐδ᾽ ὡς ἐχθαίρουσι καὶ od λείπουσι φονῆα. 
σοῦβε τάλαν, κακοεργέ, καὶ αὐτῷ σοὶ μετόπισθε 
πόντιον ἀγρευτῆρες ἐπαρτυνέουσιν ὄλεθρον 
\ = ; δ ἢ , 7 
καὶ δολερῷ περ ἐόντι καὶ ἰχθυφόνῳ τελέθοντι. 
t t 
ΕΣ if ὃ na / 3 F θ ip r 
Eore δέ τις δρυμοῖσι παρέστιος ὀξύκερως θήρ, 445 
ἀγριόθυμος ὄρυξ, κρυερὸς θήρεσσι μάλιστα" 


@ A, 506a 24 τῶν δ᾽ ἐλάφων αἱ ἀχαίναι καλούμενοι δοκοῦσιν 
ἔχειν ἐν τῇ κέρκῳ χολήν (Antig. 70); 611 Ὁ 18 ἤδη δ᾽ εἴληπται 
ἀχαίνης ἔλαφος ἐπὶ τῶν κεράτων ἔχων κιττὸν πολὺν πεφυκότα 
χλωρόν, ὡς ἁπαλῶν ὄντων τῶν κεράτων ἐμφύντα ὥσπερ ἐν ξύλῳ 
χλωρῷ (Athen. 353a; Antig. 29: Theophr. C.P. ii. 17). 
Apoll. Rh. iv. 174 ἐλάφοιο. . . ἥν τ᾽ ἀγρῶσται ἀχαιινέην 
καλέουσιν, where schol. Ayala ἐστὶ τῆς Κρήτης πόλις év 7 
γίνονται ἀχαιίνεαι λεγόμεναι ἔλαφοι: al καὶ σπαθίνειαι καλοῦνται" 
οἱ δὲ κέρατα μεγάλα ἔχοντες ἔλαφοι κερασταί; HKustath. 
Il. p. 111. 38 εἰ μὴ ἄρα αἱ ἀχαίναι καὶ οἱ σπαθίναι λεγόμενοι 
ἡλικίᾳ τινὶ διαφέρουσιν ἢ εἴδει καὶ κεράτων ἰδιότητι καὶ μεγέθει. 
Perhaps Brocket, a young male Deer in the spring of the 
year after its birth, when its-antlers are straight and un- 
branched, may be sufficiently accurate: Latin swbulo. 

> Sargus vulgaris, M.G. σαργὸς: S. Rondeleti, M.G. 


94 


CYNEGETICA, II. 497-446 


the horned Brocket ¢ or Partridges wheel swiftly about 
the Gazelle and cool their sweat and comfort their 

hearts in the sweltering heat with the flapping of 
_ their wings; or when before a Horse of clattering 
hoof the Bustard goes, gliding delightful through 
the air; or when the Sargues ὃ approach the herds of 
Goats. About the Subus, indeed, the whole wander- 
ing tribe of fishes is fluttered and all follow with him 
when he ploughs the wild waves and throng on either 
side for joy and the sea foams round about, lashed 
by their white fins. But he, recking not of their 
strange friendship, all lawlessly devours his com- 
panions of the sea and banquets on them with bloody 
jaws. And they, though seeing doom before their 
eyes, hate him not even so nor desert their slayer. 
Wretched Subus, worker of evil, for thine own self 
hereafter shall the hunters devise death by sea, crafty 
though thou art and slayer of fishes ! 

There is a certain sharp-horned beast that dwells 
in the thickets, even the fierce Oryx,’ most formidable 


σπάρος, etc.,.a Sea-bream; A. 543 ἃ 7, 591b19; Athen. 
313 d, 321 a; Plut. Mor. 977 τ ; Plin. ix. 162. For Sargues 
and Goats cf. H. iv. 308 ff. ; Ennius ap. Apul. Apol. 60. 

° Oryx leucoryx (the Sable Antelope) from Kordofan to 
the Syrian and Arabian deserts ; and Ὁ. beisa, in Somaliland, 
εἴς. ; both figured on Egyptian monuments. The latter 
species is distinguished by its black face and cheeks ; cf. 
A. Bonnet, L’Oryx dans Vancienne Egypte, Lyon, 1908. 
Plin. x, 201 orygem perpetuo sitientia Africae generant; cf. 
viii. 214; Iuv. xi. 140 Gaetulus oryx; Mart. xiii. 95 Matuti- 
narum non ultima praeda ferarum Saevus oryx constat quod 
mihi morte canum? Herod. iv. 192 καὶ dpves, τῶν τὰ κέρεα 
"τοῖσι Φοίνιξι οἱ πήχεες ποιεῦνται (μέγαθος δὲ τὸ θηρίον κατὰ 
βοῦν ἐστί). We are not here concerned with the fabled 
Oryx of A. 499 b 20 μονόκερων καὶ διχαλὸν ὄρυξ : of. PA. 
663 ἃ 23; Plin. ii. 107, xi..255 unicorne et bisuleum oryx; 
Ael. vii. 8, εἰς. ; Plut. Mor. 974 r, 

95 


OPPIAN 


~ 8 A NX. \ ee) 3. a LA 
τοῦ δ᾽ ἤτοι χροιὴ μὲν ἅτ᾽ εἰαρινοῖο γάλακτος, 
μούναις ἀμφὶ πρόσωπα μελαινομένῃσι παρειαῖς" 
διπλὰ δέ οἱ μετόπισθε μετάφρενα πίονα δημῷ" : 
ὀξεῖαι κεράων δὲ μετήοροι͵ ἀντέλλουσιν 450 

ξ J 5 "J 
αἰχμαὶ πευκεδαναί, μελανόχροον εἶδος ἔχουσαι, 
καὶ χαλκοῦ θηκτοῖο σιδήρου τε κρυεροῖο 

{te 

πέτρου τ᾽ ὀκριόεντος ἀρειότεραι πεφύασιν᾽ 
ἰοφόρον κείνοις δὲ φύσιν κεράεσσι λέγουσι. 
θυμὸς δ᾽ αὖτ᾽ ὀρύγεσσιν ὑπερφίαλος καὶ ἀπηνής" 455 
οὔτε γὰρ εὐρίνοιο κυνὸς τρομέουσιν ὕλαγμα, 
οὐ συὸς ἀγραύλοιο παρὰ σκοπέλοισι φρύαγμα, 
οὐδὲ μὲν οὐ ταύρου κρατερὸν μύκημα φέβονται, 
πορδαλίων δ᾽ οὐ γῆρυν ἀμει ἔα πεφρίκασιν, 

δ᾽ ἣν “ 4 / ΄ λέ. 460 
οὐδ᾽ αὐτοῦ φεύγουσι μέγα βρύχημα λέοντος, 
οὐδὲ βροτῶν ἀλέγουσιν ἀναιδείῃσι νόοιο" 

4 > 3 aA > ,ὔ \ > \ 
πολλάκι δ᾽ ἐν κνημοῖσιν ἀπέφθυτο καρτερὸς ἀνὴρ 
θηρητὴρ ὀρύγεσσι δαφοινοῖς ἀντιβολήσας. 

ε / 3 3 / Ὰ + /, ~ 

ὁππότε δ᾽ ἀθρήσειεν ὄρυξ κρατερόφρονα θῆρα, 

nv “ λ “ὃ 3 αἵ "ὃ λέ 

ἢ σῦν xavALlodovT ἡ καρχαροόοντα AcovTa 465 
ἢ κρυερῶν ἄρκτων ὀλοὸν θράσος, αὐτίκ᾽ ἄρ᾽ aty 
νευστάζων κεφαλήν τε μέτωπά τε πάμπαν ἐρείδει 
τεινάμενος, πήξας τε παρὰ χθονὶ πικρὰ βέλεμνα 
ἐσσύμενον μίμνει, τὸν δ᾽ ὥλεσε πρῶτος ἐναίρων. 
δόχμια γὰρ κλίνας βαιὸν κερόεντα μέτωπα, 410 
τεύχεσιν ὀξυτέροις δεδοκημένος ἔμπεσε θηρί" 

2 \ id 3 > > / \ and ΩΝ > , 
αὐτὰρ ὅ γ᾽ οὐκ ἀλέγει, κατὰ δ᾽ ἄσχετον ἰθὺς opover, 
ὀξέσι πεφρικὼς συνερειδόμενος σκολόπεσσιν. 

ς 3 59 “Ὁ / 3 / / 
ὡς δ᾽ ὅτ᾽ ἐνὶ ξυλόχοισιν ἐπεσσυμένοιο λέοντος, 

"Δ, 7, ὃ ὃ ΄ / + > ὦ r 

ρτέμιδος δώροισι κεκασμένος ἄλκιμος ἀνήρ, 47% 

3 lot 
αἰχμὴν ἀστράπτουσαν ἔχων κρατερῇς παλάμῃσιν, 

5 \ , Ks ks 
εὖ διαβὰς μίμνῃ, τὸν δ᾽ ἄγρια θυμαίνοντα 
α «The horns, often exceeding three feet in length, though 


96 


CYNEGETICA, II. 447-477 


to wild beasts. His colour is even as that of milk in 
spring, only the cheeks about his face being black. 
He has a double back, rich in fat. Sharp rise aloft 
the piercing points of his horns, black of hue, which 
are mightier than whetted bronze or chilly iron or 
jagged rock, and men say that those horns have a 
venomous nature. The spirit of the Oryx is over- 
weening and stern. For they tremble neither at the 
yelping of the keen-scented Hound nor at the snort- 
ing of the wild Boar among the rocks, neither do 
they fear the mighty bellowing of the Bull nor 
shudder at the mirthless cry of the Leopard nor the 
mighty roar of the Lion himself, nor in the dauntless- 
ness of their heart do they care aught for men: 
many a time a mighty hunter has perished 4 on the 
hills when he has encountered the deadly Oryxes. 
When the Oryx descries a valiant wild beast, a tusked 
Boar or a saw-toothed® Lion or chilly Bear of deadly 
courage, straightway he bows to earth and holds 
steadfast his outstretched head and brows, and fixing 
close to the ground his sharp weapons, awaits the 
onset of the foe and strikes him first and slays. For 
bending a little aside his horned brows he watches 
and springs with his sharper weapons on the beast ; 
which, heeding not, rushes incontinently straight on 
and horribly clashes with the sharp palisade of 
his horns. As when in the thickets, as a Lion 
charges, a valiant man, who is skilled in the gifts of 
Artemis, holding in his hands his flashing spear, with 
feet set well apart, awaits him, and, as he rages 
so recurved are a formidable weapon of offence, and when 
wounded and brought to bay, it will frequently pierce the 
hunter by a sudden and well-directed blow ” (Tristr. p. 58). 
Diod. iii. 27 (certain Ethiopians) ὅπλοις ἀμυντηρίοις χρώμενοι 
τοῖς τῶν ὀρύγων κέρασι. δι Cig duns 


H ΟἿ 


OPPIAN 


~ / > PA , 
δέξηται προβλῆτα φέρων ἀμφήκεα χαλκόν: 
/ Vy ~ 
ὡς ὄρυγες μίμνουσιν ἐπεσσυμένους τότε θῆρας, 
/ / 
αὐτοφόνους σφετέρῃσιν ἀτασθαλίῃσι δαμέντας" 
= > , 
ῥεῖα γὰρ ἐν στέρνοισιν ὀλισθαίνουσιν ἀκωκαί: 
~ CS 
πολλὸν δ᾽ αἷμα κελαινὸν am ὠτειλῶν ἑκάτερθεν 
/ ΄ὔ 
ἐκχύμενον γλώσσῃσιν ἐὸν τάχα λιχμάζουσιν" 
οὐδὲ μὲν ἐκφυγέειν οὐδ᾽ ἱεμένοισι πάρεστιν᾽' 
3 Ly > > / > 7 / 
ἀλλήλους δ᾽ ὀλέκουσιν ἀμοιβαίοισι φόνοισι. 

Yi / 
καί κέ τις ἀγρονόμων ἢ βουκόλος ἢ τις ἀροτρεύς, 
ἀμφιδύμοις νεκύεσσι παραὶ ποσὶν ἀντιβολήσας, 
ἄγρην εὐάντητον ἔχει μεγαθαμβέϊ θυμῷ. 

ε / ΦΟῚΝ \ / / 

Ἐξείης ἐνὶ θηρσὶ κερατοφόροισι γένεθλα 
ἀείδειν ἐπέοικεν ἀπειρεσίων ἐλεφάντων: 

a Hs 
κεῖνα yap ev yevdecow ὑπέρβια τεύχεα Soud, 
" Α ey ΕΣ \ 3 / 
εἴκελα χαυλιόδουσιν ἐπ᾽ οὐρανὸν ἀντέλλοντα, 
w+ \ / > \ 3 / > / 
ἄλλοι μὲν πλήθους ὀλοοὺς ἐνέπουσιν ὀδόντας 
πλαζόμενοι, νῶϊν δὲ κεράατα μυθήσασθαι 

, a 
εὔαδεν: ὧδε γὰρ ἄμμι φύσις κεράων ἀγορεύει. 
σήματα δ᾽ οὐκ ἀΐδηλα διακριδὰ τεκμήρασθαι: 

\ / tg ~ 
θηρσὶ yap ἐκφύσιες γενύων ἀπὸ τῶν ἐφύπερθεν 
ov oh 
ὅσσαι μὲν κερόεσσαι ἀνωφερὲς ἀΐσσουσιν" 
Ve A 

εἰ δὲ κάτω νεύοιεν, ἀτεχνῶς εἰσὶν ὀδόντες. 

, δὴ a > / / 
κείνοισιν δὲ διπλοῖς ἐλεφαντείοις κεράεσσι 
cv 
ῥίζαι μὲν πρώτιστον ἀπὸ κρατὸς πεφύασιν 


* Ael. iv. 81 ὁ ἐλέφας, οἱ μὲν αὐτοῦ προκύπτειν χαυλιόδοντάς 
φασι, οἱ δὲ κέρατα ; xi. 37 τὸν ἐλέφαντα οὔ φημι ὀδόντας ἔχειν ἀλλὰ 
κέρατα: Cramer, Anec. iii, 357 ods ἐπὶ τῶν ἐλεφάντων οὐκ 
ὀδόντας ἀλλὰ κέρατα καλοῦσιν ; Plin. viii. 7 armis suis quae 
Iuba cornua appellat, Herodotus (iii. 97 ἐλέφαντος ὀδόντας 
μέγάλους εἴκοσι) tanto antiquior et consuetudo melius dentes ; 
A. 501. Ὁ 80 ὀδόντας μὲν ἔχει τέτταρας ἐφ᾽ ἑκάτερα... χωρὶς 
δὲ τούτων ἄλλους δύο τοὺς μεγάλους ; Philostr. Vit. Apollon. 


98 


480 


485 


490 


495 


500 


CYNEGETICA, II. 478-501 


wildly, receives him with his two-edged brazen spear 
advanced : even so the Oryxes in that hour await 
the charge of the wild beasts, who are self-slain by 
their own folly. For the points of the horns glide 
easily into their breasts, and much dark blood, pour- 
ing on either side from their wounds—their own blood 
—they speedily lick with their tongues; nor can 
they escape if they would, but they slay one another 
with mutual slaughter. And some countryman, a 
herdsman or a ploughman, chancing on the two 
corpses at his feet, with marvelling heart wins a 
welcome prey. 

Next in order among horned wild beasts it is meet 
to sing the tribes of the Elephant infinite in size. 
Those two mighty weapons in their jaws, which rise 
like tusks towards the heavens, others of the vulgar 
herd call deadly teeth ; wherein they err: we are 
pleased to name them horns®; for so the nature of 
horns declares to us. Not obscure are the signs 
whereby they may be distinguished. For such 
growths from the upper jaws of wild beasts as are 
horny, spring upward: if they incline downward, 
they are certainly teeth.? Of those two horns of the 
Elephant the roots first of all spring from the head, 


ii. 12 οὗτος ὁ ᾿Ιόβας τοὺς ὀδόντας κέρατα ἡγεῖται τῷ φύεσθαι μὲν 
αὐτοὺς ὅθενπερ οἱ κρόταφοι, παραθήγεσθαι δὲ μηδενὶ ἑτέρῳ, μένειν 
δ᾽ ὡς ἔφυσαν καὶ μή, ὅπερ οἱ ὀδόντες, ἐκπίπτειν εἶτ᾽ ἀναφύεσθαι" 
ἐγὼ δ᾽ οὐ προσδέχομαι τὸν λόγον. Pausan. ἰ.6. says just the 
reverse: κέρατα γὰρ κατὰ ἐτῶν περίοδον ἀπογίνεται καὶ αὖθις 
ἐκβλαστάνει ζῴοις, καὶ τοῦτο ἔλαφοί τε καὶ δορκάδες, ὡσαύτως δὲ 
καὶ οἱ ἐλέφαντες πεπόνθασιν. ὀδοὺς δὲ οὐκ ἔστιν ὅτῳ δεύτερα 
παρέσται τῶν γε ἤδη τελείων" εἰ δὲ ὀδόντες τὰ διὰ τοῦ στόματος 
ἐξίσχοντα καὶ μὴ κέρατα ἦσαν, πῶς ἂν καὶ ἀνεφύοντο αὖθις ; 
δ΄ Pausan. v. 12 (arguing that the tusks are horns) ποτα- 
plows γε μὴν ἵπποις καὶ boly ἡ κάτωθεν γένυς τοὺς χαυλιόδοντας 
φέρει, κέρατα δὲ ἀναφυόμενα ὁρῶμεν ἐκ γενύων. 
99 


OPPIAN 


ἐκ μεγάλου μεγάλαι, φηγῶν ἅτε- νέρθε δ᾽ ἔπειτα 

κρυπτόμεναι ῥινοῖσιν ὁμιλοῦσαι κροτάφοισιν 

ἐς γένυν ὠθεῦνται" γενύων δ᾽ ἀπογυμνωθεῖσαι 

ψευδέα τοῖς πολλοῖσι δόκησιν ὄπασσαν ὀδόντων. 505 

ναὶ μὴν ἄλλο βροτοῖσιν ἀριφραδὲς ἔπλετο σῆμα: 

πάντες yep θήρεσσιν ἀκαμπέες εἰσὶν ὀδόντες, 

οὐδὲ τέχναις εἴκουσιν, ἀμείλικτοι δὲ μένουσι" 

τοὺς σοφίῃ τεῦξαι κεραοξόος ἣν ἐθέλῃσιν 

εὐρέας, ἀντιλέγουσιν ἀπηλεγές" ἣν δὲ βιῶνται, δ10 

ἄγνυνται καυληδὸν ἀπειθέες- ἐκ δὲ κεράων 

τόξα τε κυκλοτερῆ καὶ μυρία τεύχεται ἔργα" 

ὡς δὲ κεράατα κεῖνα, τά τοι καλέουσιν ὀδόντας, 

γνάμπτειν εὐρύνειν τ᾽ ἐλεφαντοτόμοις ὑποείκει. 
Θηρσὶ δέ τοι μέγεθος μὲν ὅσον μήπω κατὰ γαίης 515 

ἄλλος θὴρ φορέει" φαίης κεν ἰδὼν ἐλέφαντα 

ἢ κορυφὴν ὄρεος παναπείρυτον εὑ νέφος αἰνὸν 

χεῖμα φέρον δειλοῖσι. βροτῶν ἐπὶ χέρσον ὁδεύειν. 

ἴφθιμον δὲ κάρηνον. ἐπ᾽ οὔασι βαιοτέροισι, 

κοίλοισι, ξεστοῖς " ἀτὰρ ὀφθαλμοὶ τελέθουσι 520 

μείονες ἢ κατ᾽ ἐκεῖνο δέμας, μεγάλοι περ ἐόντες. 

τῶν δ᾽ ἤτοι μεσσηγὺς ὑπεκπροθέει μεγάλη ῥίς, 

λεπτή τε σκολιή τε, προ οσκίδα τὴν καλέουσι. 

κείνη θηρὸς ἔφυ παλάμη" κείνῃ τὰ θέλουσι 

ῥηϊδίως ἔρδουσι. ποδῶν γε μὲν οὐκ ἴσα μέτρα: 525 

ὑψόθι yap ot πρόσθε πολὺ πλέον ἀείρονται. 

ῥινὸς δ᾽ αὖτε δέμας δυσπαίπαλος ἀμφιβέβηκεν, 

ἄσχιστος 'κρατερός τε, τὸν οὔ κε μάλ᾽ οὐδὲ κραταιὸς 


2 Pausan. ὁδὲά. ἐλέφαντι οὖν τὰ κέρατα ἴστω τις διὰ κροτάφων 
κατερχόμενα ἄνωθεν καὶ οὕτως ἐς τὸ ἐκτὸς ἐπιστρέφοντα. τοῦτο 
οὐκ ἀκοὴν γράφω, θεασάμενος δὲ ἐλέφαντος ἐν γῇ τῇ Καμπανῶν 
κρανίον ἐν ᾿Αρτέμιδος ἱερῷ. 

> Pausan. l.c. οὐ μὴν οὐδὲ εἴκειν πυρὶ ἔχουσιν ὀδόντες φύσιν" 


100 


CYNEGETICA, II. 502-528 


mighty as the head is mighty, even as the roots of 
the oak; then below, concealed by skin where they 
meet the temples, they project into the jaw; and 
when left bare by the jaws they give to the vulgar 
the false impression of teeth.* Moreover, there is 
another clear sign for men. All teeth of wild beasts 
are unbending and do not yield to art but remain 
intractable, and if a worker in horn wishes by his 
skill to make them broad, they flatly refuse, and if 
they are forced, the stubborn teeth break stemwise. 
From horns on the other hand are fashioned bent 
bows and countless other works of art. In like 
manner those elephant horns which men call teeth, 
yield to the ivory-cutter to bend them or to broaden.? 

These beasts have a bulk such as on the earth no 
other wild beast yet hath worn. Seeing an Elephant 
thou wouldst say that a huge mountain-peak or a 
dread cloud, fraught with storm for hapless mortals, 
was travelling on the land. The head is strong with 
ears small, hollow, and polished. The eyes, though 
large, are small for that size of beast. Between 
them projects a great nose, thin and crooked, which 
men call the proboscis. That is the hand? of the 
beast ; with it they easily do whatsoever they will. 
The legs are not equal? in size; for the fore-legs rise 
to a far greater height. The hide that covers the 
body is rugged, impenetrable and strong, which not 


κέρατα δὲ καὶ βοῶν καὶ ἐλεφάντων ἐς ὁμαλές τε ἐκ περιφεροῦς καὶ 
ἐς ἄλλα ὑπὸ πυρὸς ἄγεται σχήματα. 


¢ A. 497} 26 ἔχει μυκτῆρα τοιοῦτον... ὥστε ἀντὶ χειρῶν ἔχειν 
αὐτὸν: Ael. iv. 31 μυκτῆρα... -" Χειρὸς πανχρηστότερον : Cf. 
ii. 11; Plut. Mor. 972 v προβοσκίδα.. . ὥσπερ χεῖρα παρα- 


βαλών ; Plin. viii. 29 spirant et bibunt odoranturque haud 

improprie dicta manu ; ibid. 34; Phil. 40. 
@ A, 497 b 24 τὰ πρόσθια σκέλη πολλῷ μείζω 5 of. Ael. iv. 31. 
101 


OPPIAN 


/ / 
θηκτὸς πανδαμάτωρ τε διατμήξειε σίδηρος. 
ΓῚ Zz A 
θυμὸς ἀπειρέσιος πέλεται κατὰ δάσκιον ὕλην 530 
Ε aA > > / 
ἄγριος" ev δὲ βροτοῖς τιθασὸς μερόπεσσι τ᾽ ἐνηής. 
lol ,ὔ , 
ἐν μὲν dpa χλοερῇσι πολυκνήμοισί τε βήσσαις 
sy ἕξ ,ὔ 
καὶ φηγοὺς κοτίνους τε καὶ ὑψικάρηνα γένεθλα 
3, 4 
φοινίκων mpdppila κατὰ χθονὸς ἐξετάνυσσεν, 
a ,ὔ , 
ἐγχρίμψας θηκτῇσιν ἀπειρεσίαις γενύεσσιν" 535 
low / te 
ὁππότε δ᾽ ἐν μερόπων βριαρῇσι πέλει παλάμῃσι, 
λήθετο μὲν θυμοῖο, λίπεν δέ μιν ἄγριον ἦτορ. 
A 
ἔτλη καὶ ζεύγλην καὶ χείλεσι δέκτο χαλινὰ 
a ΄ yy 
καὶ παῖδας νώτοισι φέρει onudvropas ἔργων. 
Φήμη δ᾽ ὡς ἐλέφαντες ἐπ᾽ ἀλλήλοις λαλέουσι, 540 
θογγὴν ἐκ στομάτων μεροπηΐδα τονθρύζοντες- 
3 39 3 a > A μή / > as / 
ἀλλ᾽ οὐ πᾶσιν ἀκουστὸς ἔφυ θήρειος dirt, 
κεῖνοι δ᾽ εἰσαΐουσι μόνον τιθασεύτορες ἄνδρες. 
θαῦμα δὲ καὶ τόδ᾽ ἄκουσα, κραταιοτάτους ἐλέ- 
φαντας 
, Ψ, ~ 
μαντικὸν ev στήθεσσιν ἔχειν κέαρ, ἀμφὶ δὲ θυμῷ 545 
γινώσκειν σφετέροιο μόρου παρεοῦσαν ἀνάγκην. 
οὐκ ἄρα τοι μούνοισιν ἐν ὀρνίθεσσιν ἔασι 
κύκνοι μαντιπόλοι γόον ὕστατον ἀείδοντες, 
3 ἣν, \ > 7] εν / \ 
ἀλλὰ καὶ ἐν Onpecow ἑὴν θανάτοιο τελευτὴν 
φρασσάμενοι τόδε φῦλον ἰήλεμον ἐντύνουσι. 550 
Ῥ ,ὔ 39. Ψ A ” id > “ 
ἱνοκέρως δ᾽ ὄρυγος μὲν ἔφυ δέμας αἰθυκτῆρος 
τ \ y i 57] > ς ἣν + ¢ \ 
οὐ πολλὸν μείζων, ὀλίγον δ᾽ ὑπὲρ ἀκρια ῥινὸς 
ἀντέλλει κέρας αἰνόν, ἀκαχμένον, ἄγριον Gop: 
κείνῳ μὲν χαλκόν τε διατρήσειεν ὀρούσας, 
> / / / ,ὔ 
οὐτήσας βριαρήν τε διατμήξειε χαράδρην. 555 
1 


κείνης Brodaeus. 
102 


CYNEGETICA, II. 529-555 


even a whetted blade of mighty all-subduing iron 
would easily cleave. Wild without limit is the temper 
of the Elephant in the shady wood but among men 
he is tame and gentle to human kind. In the green 
glens of many cliffs he stretches root and branch 
upon the ground, oaks and wild olives and the high- 
crowned race of palms, assailing them with his 
sharp tremendous tusks; but when he is in the 
strong hands of men, he forgets his temper and his 
fierce spirit leaves him: he endures even the yoke 
and receives the bit in his mouth and carries upon 
his back @ the boys who order his work. 

It is said that Elephants talk to one another, 
mumbling with their mouths the speech of men. 
But not to all is the speech of the beasts audible, 
but only the men who tame them hear it. This 
marvel also have I heard, that the mighty Elephants 
have a prophetic soul within their breasts and know 
in their hearts when their inevitable doom is at hand. 
Not then among birds only are there prophets, even 
the Swans? who sing their last lament, but among 
wild beasts also this tribe divine the end of death 
and perform their own dirge. 

The Rhinoceros ¢ is not much larger than the bound- 
ing Oryx. A little above the tip of the nose rises 
a horn dread and sharp, a cruel sword. Charging 
therewith he could pierce through bronze and with 
its stroke could cleave a mighty cliff. He attacks 


a A, 497b28; Ael. vii. 41, xiii. 9. 

> Plato, Phaed. 844; Aesch. 40. 1444; Ael. ii. 32, v. 34, 
x. 36; Phil. 10; Mart. xiii. 77; Stat. S. ii. 4. 10. 

¢ Rhinoceros indicus, cf. Agatharch. ap. Phot. p. 4δδ ἃ 29 
Bekker; Strab. 774; Diod. iii. 54: Athen. 201 c; Ael. 
xvii. 44; Plin. viii. 71; Suet. Aug. 43; Solin. xxvii. 16, 
xxx. 21; Mart. Lib. Spect. ix. xxii. 

103 


OPPIAN 


- ~ \ x\ 7 
κεῖνος καὶ σθεναρῷ περ ἐφορμηθεὶς ἐλέφαντι 
πολλάκις ἐν κονίῃσι νέκυν τοιοῦτον ἔθηκεν. 
ἠρέμα δὲ ξανθοῖς ἐπὶ καλλικόμοισι μετώποις 
΄ 
καὶ νώτῳ ῥαθάμιγγες ἐπήτριμα πορφύρουσι. 
. a a 
πάντες δ᾽ dppevés εἰσι καὶ οὔποτε θῆλυς ὁρᾶται" 
Α ’ὔ > 25 / 7 τὴς xs 1 e ὃ ὃ / 
καὶ πόθεν, οὐκ ἐδάην, φράζω δ᾽ οὖν' ds δεδάηκα, 
εἴτ᾽ οὖν ἐκ πέτρης ὀλοὸν τόδε φῦλον ἐπῆλθεν, 
Ore) ? » ’, > 2 DWN δὲ tJ 
eit αὐτόχθονές εἰσιν, ἐπαντέλλουσι δὲ γαίης, 
εἴτε πρὸς ἀλλήλων, τέρας ἄγριον, ἐκφύονται 
νόσφι πόθων καὶ νόσφι γάμων καὶ νόσφι τόκοιο. 
ἤδη καὶ διεροῖσιν ἐν ὑγροπόροιο θαλάσσης 
βένθεσιν αὐτόρρεκτα φύει καὶ ἀμήτορα φῦλα, 
» 7 33 > ὃ 9 > 7 / > , θλ 
ὁστρεά" τ΄" ἠπεδαναί τ᾽ ἀφύαι κόχλων τε γένεθλα 
ὄστρακά τε στρόμβοι τε, τά τε ψαμάθοισι φύονται. 
aA Ἢ ~ ” , > \ deat 
Μοῦσα φίλη, βαιῶν οὔ μοι θέμις ἀμφὶς ἀείδειν" 
οὐτιδανοὺς λίπε θῆρας, ὅσοις μὴ κάρτος ὀπηδεῖ, 
πάνθηρας χαροποὺς ἠδ᾽ αἰλούρους κακοεργούς, 
1 οὐχ most Μ88. : corr. Brunck. 


5. ὄστρεον BCDE: ὀστρέων FHM. 


3. χ᾽ after ὄστρεα Schneider, om. mss. 


* Diod. iii. 34 τοῦτο (the Rhinoceros) περὶ τῆς νομῆς del 
διαφερόμενον ἐλέφαντι τὸ μὲν κέρας πρός τινας τῶν μειζόνων 
πετρῶν θήγει, συμπεσὸν δ᾽ εἰς μάχην τῷ προειρημένῳ θηρίῳ καὶ 
ὑποδῦνον ὑπὸ τὴν κοιλίαν ἀναρρήττει τῷ κέρατι, καθάπερ ξίφει, 
τὴν σάρκα. τῷ δὲ τοιούτῳ τρόπῳ τῆς μάχης χρώμενον ἔξαιμα 
ποιεῖ τὰ θηρία καὶ πολλὰ διαφθείρει. ὅταν δὲ ὁ ἐλέφας, φθάσας 
τὴν ὑπὸ τὴν κοιλίαν ὑπόδυσιν, τῇ προβοσκίδι προκαταλάβηται τὸν 
ῥινόκερων, περιγίνεται ῥᾳδίως, τύπτων τοῖς ὀδοῦσι (6. ἴων καὶ 
τῇ βίᾳ πλέον ἰσχύων. Similar account in Strabo, Plin., Ael., 
Solin. 7. cc! Pausan. v. 12 of δὲ Αἰθιοπικοὶ ταῦροι τὰ κέρατα 
φύουσιν ἐπὶ τῇ ῥινί seems to mean the Rhinoceros. 

ὃ Diod. Lc. τὴν χροὰν πυξοειδῆ. Plin. lice. and Solin. xxx. 
21 color buxeus. On the other hand Strab. J.c. οὐδὲ πύξῳ τὸ 
χρῶμά ἐμφερὲς ἀλλ᾽ ἐλέφαντι μᾶλλον. 

° Cf. H. i. 762 ff. where the examples of spontaneous 
generation given are ὄστρεα σύμπαντα and ἀφύη. The present 


104 


560 


565 


570 


CYNEGETICA, II. 556-572 


the Elephant strong though it be and many a time 
lays so mighty a beast dead in the dust. On his 
yellowish,’ hairy brows and on_his back dense 
spots show darkly. All the breed are males and a 
female is never seen. Whence they come I know not, 
but I speak as I have learnt, whether this deadly race 
springs from the rock or whether they are children 
of the soil and spring from the ground, or whether 
the wild monsters are begotten of one another, 
without desire and without mating and without 
birth. Even in the wet depths of the sea with its 
watery ways there are tribes which come into being 
self-made and motherless *—Oysters and feeble Fry 
and the races of Sea-snails and Testacea and Spiral- 
shells and all that grow in the sands. 

Dear Muse, it is not meet for me to sing of small 
creatures. Leave thou the feeble beasts which have 
no strength in them—the grey-eyed Panthers? and 


list is unintelligible. If ὄστρακα -- ὀστρακόδερμα, then the 
term is either equivalent to or includes ὄστρεα (according 
as that word is used in a wider or narrower sense), as it also 
includes κόχλοι (A. 527 Ὁ 35 τὰ ὀστρακόδερμα τῶν ζῴων, οἷον... 
οἱ κόχλοι καὶ πάντα τὰ καλούμενα ὄστρεα) and στρόμβοι, whether 
that term be specific or generic (1.9. -Ξ- τὰ στρομβώδη)---ἰῃ 
which case it includes κόχλοι (A. 528410 ὁ κόχλος καὶ 
τἄλλα τὰ στρομβώδη; cf. P.A. 679b14). If we ventured 
to substitute, for ὄστρεα, κεστρέων or xéorpea (for the 
spontaneous generation of which cf. A. 543b17, 569a17 
etc.; Athen. 306 F) and, for ὄστρακα, ὄστρεα, we should 
get a more intelligible text. 

4 See C. iii. 63 n. Clearly to Oppian πάνθηῤ denotes a 
smaller animal than πόρδαλις. According to Wiegmann (in 
Oken’s isis (1831), pp. 282 ff.) rdvOnp= Felis uncia, the Ounce 
or Snow Leopard. It is confined to the highlands of 
Central Asia; cf. Plin. viii. 63 Nunc varias et pardos, qua 
mares sunt, appellant in eo omni genere creberrimo in 
Africa Syriaque. Quidam ab his pantheras candore solo 
discernunt, nec adhuc aliam differentiam inveni; A. 280 a 25. 


105 


OPPIAN 


τοί τε κατοικιδίῃσιν ἐφωπλίσσαντο καλιαῖς, 
καὶ τυτθοὺς ἀταλοὺς ὀλιγοδρανέας τε μυωξούς" 
τοὶ δ᾽ ἤτοι σύμπασαν ἐπιμύουσι μένοντες 
χειμερίην ὥρην, δέμας ὕπνοισιν μεθύοντες" 
δύσμοροι, οὔτε βορὴν ἑλέειν, οὐ φέγγος ἰδέσθαι" 
φωλειοῖσι δ᾽ ἑοῖς ὕπνον τοσσοῦτον ἔχουσιν, 
ἧς νέκυες κεῖνται, δυσχείμερον οἶτον ἑλόντες. 
αὐτὰρ ἐπὴν ἔαρος πρῶται γελάσωσιν ὀπωπαΐ, 
ἄνθεά τ᾽ ἐν λειμῶσι νέον γε μὲν ἡβήσειαν, 
νωθρὸν κινήσαντο δέμας μυχάτης ἀπὸ λόχμης, 
φάεά τ᾽ ἀμπετάσαντο καὶ ἔδρακον ἠελίου φῶς, 
καὶ γλυκερῆς νεοτερπὲς ἐδητύος ἐμνήσαντο, 
αὖθις δὲ Cwot τε πάλιν τ᾽" ἐγένοντο μυωξοί. 
Λείπω καὶ λάσιον γένος οὐτιδανοῖο σκιούρου, 
ὅς ῥά νύ τοι θέρεος μεσάτου φλογερῇσιν ἐν ὥραις 
οὐρὴν ἀντέλλει σκέπας αὐτορόφοιο μελάθρου" 
οἷον δή νυ ταῶνες ἐὸν δέμας ἀγλαόμορφον 
γραπτὸν ἐπισκιάουσιν ἀριπρεπὲς aioAdvwrov* 
τῶν οὐδὲν μερόπεσσι Διὸς τεχνήσατο μῆτις 


1 πάλιν τ᾽ Turnebus: πάλιν mss. 


2 In Oppian, asin A. δ40 ἃ 10 ; 580a 23; 6192 Ὁ 15, αἴλουρος 
seems to be a general name for the Cat, whether 17, catus, 
the Wild Cat, M.G. dypisyaros, or the Domestic Cat, F. 
domestica, M.G. γάτα : cf. Callim. H. vi. 110; Ael. iv. 44, ν. 
7, v. 30, v. 50. vi. 27; Plin. x. 174; Plut. Mor. 959 τ γαλαῖ 
καὶ αἴλουροι. 

> Myouwus glis, M. nitela, M. dryas are all found in Greece. 
Erh., p. 20, mentions M. nitela as frequenting the orange- 
groves in Syra, where it climbs the trees and attacks the 
young fruit. In A. 600b 13 φωλεῖ δὲ καὶ ὁ édevds ἐν αὐτοῖς τοῖς 
δένδρεσι καὶ γίνεται τότε παχύτατος the ref. seems to be to 
M. glis, or possibly M. nitela, though the Squirrel has been 
suggested, Bik. p. 192. Tristram found in Palestine ‘three 
species of dormouse, the largest of which (M. glis) is six 
inches long without the tail, which is five inches more. The 


106 


575 


580 


585 


590 


CYNEGETICA, II. 573-591 


the villain Cats * which attack the nests of domestic 
fowls ; and leave thou the tiny, tender, weakling 
Dormice.? These indeed remain with eyes closed all 
the winter season, drunk with sleep. Hapless crea- 
tures! to take ng food! not to behold the light ! 
In their lairs, so deep asleep are they, they lie as 
dead and a wintry lot is theirs. But when the eyes 
of spring first smile and the flowers in the meadows 
newly bloom, they stir their sluggish bodies from 
their secret lair and open their eyes and behold the 
light of the sun, and with new delight bethink them 
of sweet food, and once more become alive and 
Dormice once again. 

I leave too the shaggy race of the feeble Squirrel,’ 
who in the fiery season of midsummer erects his tail 
to shelter his self-roofed dwelling?; even as the 
Peacocks? shelter their own beautiful form, their 
splendid form with many-pictured back : than whom 
the wisdom of Zeus hath devised for men naught 


English dormouse we did not find (p. 122)”; Plin. viii. 224 
conditi etiam hi cubant; rursus aestate iuvenescunt; Mart. 
iii. 58. 36 somniculosos glires; id. xiii. 59 Tota mihi dor- 
mitur hiemps et pinguior illo Tempore sum quo me nil nisi 
somnus alit. 

¢ Sciwrus vulgaris L., var. niger, M.G. βερβερίτξα. ‘* De 
Vécureuil il n’a été observé jusqu’a présent en Grece que 
la variété au pelage noirdtre. I] habite les foréts de sapins 
des montagnes du Nord de la Gréce, ot il a été trouvé 
par le Dr. Kriiper surtout au mont Parnasse, au mt. Velouchi 
et au mt. Olympe de Thessalie. Mr. A. de Hoeslin m’a 
assuré de l’avoir vu dans les foréts de sapins du mt. 
Ménalos en Arcadie” (Bik. p. 13). i 

ἃ ΑΕ]. v. 21 ἐν ὥρᾳ θερείῳ σκέπην οἴκοθεν καὶ οὐκ ἠτημένην 
οὐδὲ ὀθνείαν παρέχεται ; Plin. viii. 138 Provident tempestatem 
et sciuri obturatisque qua spiraturus est ventus cavernis 
ex alia parte aperiunt fores. De cetero ipsis villosior cauda 
pro tegumento est. ¢ Pawo cristatus, M.G. παγῶνι. 


107 


OPPIAN 


a > iy 
τερπνότερον φαιδροῖσιν ἐν ὄμμασιν εἰσοράασθαι, 
»: 7 
οὐδ᾽ ὅσα πανδώτειραν ἐπὶ χθόνα μητέρα βαίνει, 

0.93 ¢ ὔ Le (Mere) oer: Ad “ὃ a 
οὐδ᾽ ὁπόσα πτερύγεσσιν ἐπ᾽ ἠέρα πουλὺν ὁδεύει, 

aA tA δ 
οὐδὲ μὲν ὅσσα βυθοῖσιν ἐπ᾿ ἄγρια κύματα τέμνει" 

“- Dia) > / > / > ? 
τοῖον ἐπ᾽ opvilecow ἀριζήλοις ἀμαρύσσει 

an 3 / “ 
χρυσῷ πορφύροντι μεμιγμένον αἰθόμενον πῦρ. 

Οὐκ ἐρέω κρυερὸν γένος ὀκριόεντος ἐχίνου 

, > / \ Ie τ > / 
μείονος- ἀμφίδυμοι yap ἐχίνοις ὀξυκόμοισιν 
ἀργαλέαι μορφαὶ Kpvepdv τε περίδρομον ἕρκος" 

re A ἂν if μὴ > A λέθ 
οἱ μὲν γὰρ βαιοί τε καὶ οὐτιδανοὶ τελέθουσι, 

~ ’ὔ ak ~ > Ld 
τυτθῇσι φρίσσοντες ἐπὶ προβλῆσιν ἀκάνθαις" 

¢€ > EA \ / A ? 299 Φ / 
οἱ δ᾽ dpa καὶ μεγέθει πολὺ μείζονες, ἠδ ἑκάτερθεν 
ὀξέα πεφρίκασιν ἀρειοτέρῃσιν ἀκωκαῖς. 

Λείπω τῤισσὰ γένεθλα, κακὸν μίμημα, πιθήκων: 
τίς γὰρ ἂν οὐ στυγέοι τοῖον γένος, αἰσχρὸν ἰδέσθαι, 
ἀβληχρόν, στυγερόν, δυσδέρκετον, αἰολόβουλον; 

cal \ ,ὔ Ψ / A / 
κεῖνοι καὶ φίλα τέκνα δυσειδέα δοιὰ τεκόντες 

> > aA > / 4 ’ὔ v4 
οὐκ ἀμφοῖν ἀτάλαντον ἑὴν μερίσαντο ποθητύν, 


* The Common Hedgehog, Hrinaceus europaeus, M.G. 
ἀκανθόχοιρος, is common in Greece (Erh. p. 12, Bik. p. 8), as 
it is in Palestine (Trist. p. 101). Oppian’s lesser Hedgehog 
is almost certainly the Spiny Mouse, ἢ. acomys, of Syria 
and Africa, of which at least three species occur in Palestine. 
“They are most beautiful little creatures of a light sandy 
colour above and white beneath, and covered all over the 
back with bristles like a hedgehog ” (Tristr. p. 123), from 
which, when the spines are erected, they are, except for 
their size, almost indistinguishable. A. 58lal1 οἱ 8’ ἐν 
Αἰγύπτῳ μύες σκληρὰν ἔχουσι τὴν τρίχα ὥσπερ οἱ χερσαῖοι ἐχῖνοι ; 
Mirab. 832 a 31 ἐν Κυρήνῃ δέ φασιν οὐχ ὃν εἶναι μυῶν γένος 

. τινὰς δὲ ἐχινώδεις ods καλοῦσιν ἐχῖνας: Herod. iv. 1992 
108 


595 


600 


605 


CYNEGETICA, II. 592-609 


more pleasant to behold with glad eyes, neither 
amid all that walk mother earth, giver of all gifts, 
nor amid all that travel on wings the spacious air, 
nor amid those that in the deep cleave the wild 
waves : in such wise on the splendid birds twinkles 
blazing fire mingled with the sheen of gold. 

I will not tell of the chilly race of the prickly 
Hedgehog *—the lesser; for two dread forms there 
are of the sharp-spined Hedgehogs with chilly fence 
encircling them. The one kind are small and feeble 
and bristle with small jutting spines ; the other sort 
are far larger in size and have stronger prickles 
bristling sharp on either side. 

I leave the triple breeds of Apes,? those villainous 
mimics.¢ For who would not abhor such a race, ugly 
to look on, weak, loathsome, evil of aspect, crafty of 
counsel? These, though they bring forth twin chil- 
dren of evil mien, divide not their love equally 


μυῶν γένεα τριξὰ αὐτόθι (in Libya) ἐστί... of δὲ ἐχινέες 9 
Plin. viii. 221 plura eorum genera in Cyrenaica regione, 
. . . alii irenaceorum genere pungentibus pilis; id. x. 186 
Aegyptiis muribus durus pilus sicut irenaceis; ε΄. Ael. xv. 
26; Hesych. s. éxivos. 

> The triple breeds are doubtless those of A. 502 a 16 ἔνια 
δὲ τῶν ζῴων ἐπαμφοτερίζει τὴν φύσιν τῷ τ᾽ ἀνθρώπῳ Kal τοῖς 
τετράποσιν, οἷον πίθηκοι καὶ κῆβοι καὶ κυνοκέφαλοι. ἔστι δ᾽ ὁ μὲν 
κῆβος πίθηκος ἔχων οὐράν, καὶ οἱ κυνοκέφαλοι δὲ τὴν αὐτὴν ἔχουσι 
μορφὴν τοῖς πιθήκοις, πλὴν μείζονές 7’ εἰσι καὶ ἰσχυρότεροι καὶ τὰ 
πρόσωπα ἔχοντες κυνοειδέστερα, ἔτι δὲ ἀγριώτερά τε τὰ ἤθη καὶ 
τοὺς ὀδόντας ἔχουσι κυνοειδεστέρους καὶ ἰσχυροτέρους. They thus 
correspond to our Ape, Monkey, Baboon, and πίθηκος is 
prob. the Barbary Ape (Strab. 827), Mavacus Inuus; the 
κῆβος a Cercopithecus; the κυνοκέφαλος the Cynocephalus 
hamadryas or Arabian Baboon ; cf. Plin. viii. 215, xi. 246; 
Ael. ν. 7. xvii. 25 etc. ; Solin, xxvii. 56. 

e ΑΕ]. v. 26 μιμηλότατόν ἐστιν ὁ πίθηκος Sor ; Solin. lc. 
non sine ingenio aemulandi. 


109 


OPPIAN. 


ἀλλὰ τὸ μὲν φιλέουσι, τὸ δ᾽ ἐχθαίρουσι χόλοισιν"" 610 


αὐταῖς δ᾽ ἀγκαλίδεσσιν ἑῶν τέθνηκε" τοκήων. 

Οὐ μὲν θὴν οὐδ᾽ ἀσπαλάκων αὐτόχθονα φῦλα 
ποιοφάγων, ἀλαῶν, μέλπειν ἐθέλουσιν ἀοιδαί, 
εἰ καὶ βάξις ἄπιστος ἐπ᾽ ἀνθρώπους ἐπέρησεν 
3 ͵ὕ a > 3 ov > ΄ὔ θ 
ἀσπάλακας βασιλῆος ἀφ᾽ αἵματος εὐχετάασθαι 
Φινέος, ὅν ῥ᾽ ἀτίτηλε κλυτὴ Θρήϊσσα κολώνη" 
Owéi γάρ ποτε δὴ Φαέθων ἐκοτέσσατο Τυτάν, 
μαντιπόλου Φοίβοιο χολωσάμενος περὶ νίκης, 

’ὔ ς ,ὔ w+ > 7 ~ 3 ” 
καί ot φέγγος ἄμερσεν, ἀναιδέα φῦλα δ᾽ ἔπεμψεν 
ἁρπυίας, πτερόεντα παρέστια πικρὰ γένεθλα. 
> > > \ > 7 Ν 7 Μ 
ἀλλ᾽ ἐπεὶ οὖν περόωντο μετὰ χρύσειον ἄεθλον 
᾿Αργῴης ἐπὶ νηὸς ᾿Ιήσονι συμπονέοντες 

a / / / oh 4 
παῖδε Βορειόνεω Ζήτης Kddais τε κλεεννώ, 
οἰκτείραντε γέροντα κατέκτειναν τότε φῦλα, 
καὶ γλυκερὴν μελέοισι δόσαν στομάτεσσιν ἐδητύν. 
3 3 0.3 Δ / / as > , 
ἀλλ᾽ οὐδ᾽ ds Φαέθων χόλον εὔνασεν, ἀλλά μιν 

αἷψα 

> / / / \ / 30} 
ἀσπαλάκων ποίησε γένος μὴ πρόσθεν ἐόντων" 
τοὔνεκα νῦν ἀλαόν τε μένει καὶ λάβρον ἐδωδαῖς. 


1 λόχοιο Ay in ras. BGH: πόθοισι CDE. 
2 χέθνηκε Pauw: ἔθανε 1: ἔκτεινε. 


* ἀσπάλαξ both in Opp. and in A. 4888], 491 b 28, 
533.a 3, 605b31, etc., is prob. Spalax typhlus, a rodent 
“‘with much of the external appearance of our mole but 
considerably, larger, . .. of a silvery grey colour, without 
any external eyes or tail” (Tristr. p. 121). It is found in 
the Cyclades, where it is called τυφλοποντικός (6.6. blind- 
rat), Erh. p. 21. Neither our Common Mole, Talpa europaea, 
nor 7. caeca has been found in the Cyclades (Erh. 1.6.) 
or in Palestine (Tristr. p. 100); in continental Greece 7 
ewropaea is not found and the occurrence of J. caeca seems 
to be doubtful. 


110 


615 


620 


625 


CYNEGETICA, II. 610-628 


between both, but they love the one and hate and 
are angered at the other; and he perishes in the 
very arms of his parents. 

Neither of a truth will minstrels sing the earth- 
born tribes of the Moles,* eaters of grass ® and blind,° 
albeit a rumour not to be believed has spread among 
men that the Moles boast themselves sprung from 
the blood of a king, even of Phineus,? whom a famous 
Thracian hill nurtured. Against Phineus once on a 
time was the Titan Phaethon angered, wroth for the 
victory of prophet Phoebus, and robbed him of his 
sight and sent the shameless tribes of the Harpies, 
a winged race to dwell with him to his sorrow. But 
when the two glorious sons of Boreas, even Zetes 
and Calais, voyaged on the ship Argo in quest of 
the golden prize, assisting Jason, then did they take 
compassion on the old man and slew that tribe and 
gave his poor lips sweet food. But not even so did 
Phaethon lull his wrath to rest, but speedily turned 
him into the race of Moles which were before not ; 
wherefore even now the race remains blind and 
gluttonous of food. 


>’ While 7. cwropaca and T. caeca are insectivorous, S. 
typhlus is entirely vegetarian. 

ὁ The eyes of 7. europaea, though rudimentary, are 
visible externally ; those of 7. caeca and S. typhlus are not. 
A. 491 b 29 ὅλως μὲν γὰρ οὔθ᾽ ὁρᾷ (ὁ ἀσπάλαξ) οὔτ᾽ ἔχει εἰς 
τὸ φανερὸν δήλους ὀφθαλμούς. Of. δ88 ἃ 8; De an, 425 a 10; 
Plin. xi. 139 quadrupedum talpis visus non est: oculorum 
effigies inest, siquis praetentam detrahat membranam. 

@ Phineus of Salmydessus in Thrace was blinded of both 
eyes and afflicted by the Harpies until these were destroyed 
by Zebes and Calais (Pind. P. iv. 182), the sons of Boreas ; 
Apollod. i. 9. 21; Ap. Rh. ii. 176 ff; Verg. A, iii, 225 ff. 
The connexion of Phineus with the mole seems to be 
peculiar to Oppian. 


111 


a 


KYNHTETIKQN TO Γ 


᾿Αλλ᾽ ὅτε δὴ Kepady ἠείσαμεν ἔθνεα θηρῶν, 

΄ 599 > 7, »Q> > , > \ 
ταύρους ἠδ᾽ ἐλάφους ἠδ᾽ edpuxépwras ἀγαυοὺς 
καὶ δόρκους ὄρυγάς τε καὶ αἰγλήεντας ἰορκοὺς 
ἄλλα θ᾽ ὅσοισιν ὕπερθε καρήατα τευχήεντα, 
~ + 2Q_ δε / “ λ 
νῦν ἄγε καρχαρόδοντα, θεά, φράζωμεν ὅμιλον ὄ 
σαρκοφάγων θηρῶν καὶ χαυλιόδοντα γένεθλα. 

Πρωτίστην δὲ λέοντι κλυτὴν ἀναθώμεθα μολπήν. 
Ζηνὸς ἔσαν θρεπτῆρες ὑπερμενέος Kpovidao 
νηπιάχου Ἰζουρῆτες, ὅτ᾽ ἀρτίγονόν μιν ἐόντα 
ἀραμένη γενετῆρος ἀμειλίκτοιο Κρόνοιο 10 
κλεψιτόκος “Ῥείη κόλποις ἐνικάτθετο Κρήτης. 
Οὐρανίδης δ᾽ ἐσιδὼν κρατερὸν νεοθηλέα παῖδα 

4 > / A e aA > A 
πρώτους ἀμφήλλαξε Διὸς ῥυτῆρας ἀγαυοὺς 
καὶ θῆρας ποίησεν ἀμειψάμενος Κουρῆτας. 


“.Α. 50la 14 καὶ τὰ μὲν χαυλιόδοντας ἔχει, ὥσπερ οἱ ἄρρενες 
ὑές, τὰ δὲ οὐκ ἔχει. ἔτι δὲ τὰ μέν ἐστι καρχαρόδοντα, αὐτῶν, οἷον 
λέων καὶ πάρδαλις καὶ κύων, τὰ δὲ ἀνεπάλλακτα, οἷον ἵππος καὶ 
βοῦς" καρχαρόδοντα γάρ ἐστιν ὅσα ἐπαλλάττει τοὺς ὀδόντας τοὺς 
ὀξεῖς; P.A. 661 Ὁ 22 οὐδὲν δὲ τῶν ζῴων ἐστὶν ἅμα καρχαρόδουν 
καὶ χαυλιόδουν, διὰ τὸ μηδὲν μάτην ποιεῖν τὴν φύσιν μηδὲ περι- 
εργόν᾽ ἔστι δὲ τῶν μὲν (sc. the tusks) διὰ πληγῆς ἡ βοηθεία, 
τῶν δὲ (sc. the saw-teeth) διὰ δήγματος : Plin. xi. 160 dentium 
tria genera, serrati aut continui aut exserti; serrati pecti- 
112 


49 


CYNEGETICA, or THE CHASE 
III 


Bur now that we have sung the tribes of horned 
wild beasts, Bulls and Stags and splendid Broad-horns 
and Gazelles, of the Oryx and beautiful Ioreus and 
others whose heads are armed above, come now, O 
goddess, let us tell of the saw-toothed# company of 
flesh-eating ὃ beasts and the tusked races. 

First of all to the Lion let us dedicate the glorious 
lay. The Curetes were the nurses of the infant Zeus, 
the mighty son of Cronus, what time Rhea concealed 
his birth and carried away the newly-born child 
from Cronus, his sire implacable, and placed him in 
the vales of Crete. And when the son¢ of Uranus 
beheld the lusty young child he transformed the 
first glorious guardians of Zeus and in vengeance 
made the Curetes wild beasts. And since by the 
natim coeuntes, ne contrario occursu atterantur (Aw ΡΣ. 
661 Ὁ 21), ut serpentibus, piscibus, canibus; continui, ut 
homini, equo ; exserti, ut apro, hippopotamo, elephanto. . . 
Nulli exserti quibus serrati. The carcharodonts are cat- 
nivorous and have sharp, saw-like, cutting cheek teeth ; 
the chauliodonts have flat-crowned cheek teeth, adapted for 
crushing or grinding. 

b A, 594a25 τῶν δὲ τετραπόδων καὶ ζῳοτόκων τὰ μὲν ἄγρια 
καὶ καρχαρόδοντα πάντα σαρκοφάγα. 

¢ 1.9. Cronus. Cf. Callim. H, i., Diod. v. 65, Verg- 6, 
iv. 151. 

I 113 


OPPIAN 


3 A “- “Δ \ 
ot δ᾽ dp’, ἐπεὶ βουλῇσι θεοῦ μεροπηΐδα μορφὴν 15 
iE 
ἀμφεβάλοντο Kpdvowo καὶ ἀμφιέσαντο λέοντας, 
΄, 
δώροισιν μετόπισθε Διὸς μέγα κοιρανέουσι 
A 
θηρσὶν ὀρειαύλοις καὶ puyedavov θοὸν ἅρμα 
“Peins εὐώδινος ὑπὸ ζεύγλῃσιν ἄγουσιν. 
lol aA » ε / 

Αἰόλα φῦλα δὲ τοῖσι καὶ εἴδεα θηρσὶν ἑκάστοις. 20 
τοὺς μέν νυν προχοῇσι πολυρραθάγου ποταμοῖο, 
Τίγρει, ἐπ᾽ εὐρυρέοντι, κυήσατο τοξεύτειρα 
᾿Αρμενίη Πάρθων τε πολύσπορος εὔβοτος ata, 
ξανθοκόμαι τελέθουσι καὶ οὐ τόσον ἀλκήεντες. 
πάσσονα μὲν φορέουσι δέρην, μεγάλην δέ τε κόρσην, 25 
ὄμματα δ᾽ αἰγλήεντα καὶ ὀφρύας ὕψι βαθείας, 
> A > x ta ih ᾿: 3 δ᾽ + ὃ ~ 
ἀμφιλαφεῖς ἐπὶ ῥῖνα κατηφέας- ἐκ δ᾽ dpa ειρῆς 
καὶ γενύων ἑκάτερθε θοαὶ κομόωσιν ἔθειραι. 

Τοὺς δὲ τρέφει μεγάδωρος ᾿Βρεμβῶν αὖθις ἄρουρα, 
τὴν ἔθνη μερόπων εὐδαίμονα κικλήσκουσι, ᾿ 80 

ειραὶ κἀκείνοις καὶ στήθεα λαχνήεντα 
καὶ πυρὸς ἀστράπτουσιν ἀπ᾽ ὀφθαλμῶν ἀμαρυγαί, 
” 3 > / > / fi 
ἔξοχα δ᾽ ἐν πάντεσσιν ἀρίζηλοι τελέθουσιν- 
> > 39 7 ,ὔ ” ,ὔ > 
ἀλλ᾽ ὀλίγον τούτων γένος ἔλλαχε μυρίος αἷα. 

ΠΟουλὺς δ᾽ ἐν Λιβύῃ ἐριβώλακι διψάδι γαίῃ 35 
ὄχλος ἐπιβρομέει βριαρῶν βρύχημα λεόντων, 

> ᾽ὔ ra 2\7 > > / ww 2 
οὐκέτι λαχνήεις, ὀλίγη δ᾽ ἐπιδέδρομεν αἴγλη"- 
σμερδαλέος δὲ πρόσωπα καὶ αὐχένα: πᾶσι δὲ γυίοις 
ἦκα μέλαν κυάνοιο φέρει μεμορυγμένον ἄνθος. 
ἀλκὴ δ᾽ ἐν μελέεσσιν ἀπείριτος ἠδὲ λεόντων 40 
κοιρανικῶν Λίβυες μέγα κοιρανέουσι λέοντες. 

1 ἴστρω (ἴστρου) μ88. : corr. Brodaeus. 
2. ἐπιδέδρομε λάχνη F. 


* Of. Η. i. 651, Lucian, Asin. 14. Chi 179 n: 

° Arabia Felix; οὐ Strabo 39 τὴν ᾿Αραβίαν ἣν εὐδαίμονα 
προσαγορεύουσιν οἱ νῦν : Dion. P. 927 κεῖθεν δ᾽ ὀλβίστων ᾿Αράβων 
παρακέκλιται ala; Diod. ii. 49 ἡ δ᾽ ἐχομένη τῆς ἀνύδρου Kal 
114. 


CYNEGETICA, III. 15-41 


devising of the god Cronus they exchanged their 
human shape and put upon them the form? of Lions, 
thenceforth by the boon of Zeus they greatly lord 
it over the wild beasts which dwell upon the hills, 
and under the yoke they draw the terrible swift car 
of Rhea who lightens the pangs of birth. 

Various are the tribes of them and each species 
has its own form. Those which by the waters of a 
noisy river, even beside the broad stream of the 
Tigris, are bred by Armenia, mother of archers, and 
by the land of the Parthians, rich in tilth and pasture, 
are yellow-haired and not so valiant. They have a 
stouterneck and a large head, bright eyes and high and 

‘bushy brows, ample and lowering over the nose. From 
neck and jaws springs on either side luxuriant hair. Ὁ 

Those again which the bountiful land of the 
Erembi® rears—the land which the tribes of mortal 
‘men call Fortunate’—these also have shaggy neck 

—~ and breast, and Hashes of fire lighten from their 
~~ eyes, and they are handsome above all; but of 
these the infinite earth hath but a scanty breed. 

But a great throng of mighty Lions roar in the 
goodly land of thirsty Libya—no longer shaggy these 
but a thin sheen runs over them. Terrible are they 
of face and neck, and on all their limbs they bear a 
blackish hue stained with dark blue. The strength 
in their limbs is limitless, and the Libyan Lions 
greatly lord it over the lordly Lions. 


ἐρήμου χώρας ᾿Αραβία τοσοῦτο διαφέρει ταύτης ὥστε διὰ TO πλῆθος 
τῶν ἐν αὐτῇ φυομένων καρπῶν τε καὶ τῶν ἄλλων ἀγαθῶν εὐδαίμονα 
᾿Αραβίαν προσαγορευθῆναι: Solin. xxxiii. 4. hanc Arabiam Graeci 
Eudaemonem, nostri Beatam nominaverunt ; Amm. M. xxiii. 
6. 45 Arabes beati, ideo sic appellati quod frugibus iuxta 
et fetibus et palmite odorumque suavitate multiplici sunt 
locupletes. 

115 


OPPIAN 


is 5 , a 
Ἔκ δέ ποτ᾽ Αἰθιόπων Λιβύην ἠμείψατο γαῖαν, 
θαῦ ἐγ᾽ εἰσιδέ λανό ἠὕὔκομος NX 
αῦμα μέγ᾽ εἰσιδέειν, μελανόχροος ἠὔκομος λῖς, 
> a 4 7, "ὃ ὃ dh a ἴθ 
εὐρὺς ὕπερθε κάρηνα, πόδας δασύς, ὄμμασιν αἴθοψ, 
an Ν 4 
μούνοισι EavOois φοινισσόμενος στομάτεσσιν. 45 
” 5 θό at θῃ ὃ , 
ἔδρακον, οὐ πυθόμην, κεῖνόν ποτε θῆρα δαφοινόν, 
κοιρανικοῖς τ᾽ ἔμολεν διαπόμπιμος ὀφθαλμοῖσιν. 
a 14 lot , 
Φορβῆς od χατέει πάντ᾽ ἤματα φῦλα λεόντων, 
Ε Ss te 
ἀλλὰ τὸ μὲν δόρποισι μέλει, TO δέ τ᾽ αὖτε' πόνοισιν" 
vt 
οὐδ᾽ ὕπνον μυχάτοισιν ἔχει παρὰ τέρμασι πέτρης, 50 
,ὔ 
ἀμφαδὸν ὑπνώει δέ, θρασύφρονα θυμὸν ἑλίσσων, 
ὑδ δ᾽ ᾽ θ / 6 , ε ,ὔ “ξ 
εὗδει δ᾽ ἔνθα κίχησιν ὑπείροχος ἕσπερίη νύξ. 
” 3" 3 a ΄ὔ > ~ 
Exdvov αὖ κἀκεῖνο λεοντοκόμων αἰζηῶν, 
\ e A a ’ wn / 
δεξιτερὴν ὑπὸ χεῖρα φέρειν αἴθωνα λέοντα 
, 7. a ,ὕ ae, , A 
νάρκα θοήν, τῇ πάντα Avyotv? ἄπο γούνατα θηρῶν. 55 
Πεντάκι θηλυτέρη δὲ τόκων ἀπελύσατο ζώνην: 
,ὔ > > ,ὔ 3 ,ὔ ε Ὁ ,ὔ 
βάξις δ᾽ ἀτρεκέως ἀνεμώλιος, ὡς ἕνα τίκτει. 
πέντε φέρει πρώτιστον: ἀτὰρ πίσυρας μετέπειτα 
3 , , we > « Ψ ε / 
ὠδίνει σκύμνους, κατά θ᾽ ἑξείης ὑπένερθε 
νηδύος ἐκ τριτάτης τρεῖς ἔκθορον" ex δὲ τετάρτης 60 
3 A aA ΄ > “ , » 
ἀμφίδυμοι παῖδες - πύματον δ᾽ ἕνα γείνατο μήτηρ 
γαστρὸς ἀριστοτόκοιο κλυτὸν βασιλῆα λέοντα. 


1 rére δ᾽ αὖτε most Mss. 
2 λυγοῦν Editor: λυγρῶν mss. 


* A. 594b18 τῇ δὲ βρώσει (ὁ λέων) χρῆται λάβρως Kal 
καταπίνει πολλὰ ὅλα οὐ διαιρῶν, εἶθ᾽ ἡμέρας δύο ἢ τρεῖς ἀσιτεῖ : 
Plin. viii. 46; Ael. iv. 34; Solin. xxvii. 18. 

> O.T. Num. xxiv. 9 He couched, he lay down as a lion, 
and as a great lion: who shall stir him up? 


116 


CYNEGETICA, III. 42-62 


From the Ethiopians once on a time there came to 
the land of Libya, a great marvel to behold, a well- 
maned Lion, black of hue, broad of head above, 
hairy of foot, bright of eye, reddening only on the 

ellow mouth. I have seen, not merely heard of, 
that terrible beast, when it was transported to be 
a spectacle for royal eyes. 

The tribes of Lions do not need food? every day 
but one.day they devote to feeding, the next in 
turn to labour. Neither doth the Lion take his 
sleep by the inmost bounds of a rock, but he sleeps ὃ 
in the open, revolving a courageous soul, and where- 
soever sovran night overtakes him at evening, there 
he sleeps. 

This also have I heard from the keepers of Lions, 
to wit that under his right paw the tawny Lion has 
a power of swift benumbing,’ wherewith he utterly 
benumbs the knees of wild beasts. 

Five times? doth the Lioness loose her zone in 
birth, and idle truly is the report that she bears 
but one. Five she bears the first time, but next she 
travails with four cubs ; then next in order from her 
third labour spring three; from her fourth spring 
twin young; and last from her womb of noble 
progeny the mother brings forth the glorious Lion 
King. 


¢ Schol, B Hom. 11. xx. 170 ἔχει (ὁ λέων) ὑπὸ τῇ οὐρᾷ κέντρον 
μέλαν, ὡς κεράτιον, δι’ οὗ ἑαυτὸν μαστίζει, ὑφ᾽ οὗ νυττόμενος πλέον 
ἀγριοῦται. A. 680 ἃ ὅ mentions the suppuration of wounds 
inflicted by lions’ teeth and claws, but says nothing of 
numbing. 

@ A. 519b9 οἱ δ᾽ ἐν Συρίᾳ λέοντες τίκτουσι πεντάκις, τὸ 
πρῶτον πέντε, εἶτ᾽ ἀεὶ ἑνὶ ἐλάττονα" μετὰ δὲ ταῦτα οὐκέτι οὐδὲν 
τίκτουσιν, ἀλλ᾽ ἄγονοι διατελοῦσιν : De gen. 750 8.82; Plin. viii. 
45; Ael. iv. 34; Phil. xxxv. ; Solin. xxvii. 16. 


117 


OPPIAN’ 


Hopdartes δ᾽ ὀλοαὶ δίδυμον γένος αἱ μὲν ἔασι 


, \ / ΕΣ / an 
μείζους εἰσιδέειν Kal πάσσονες εὐρέα νῶτα, 


Yj / 
αἱ δέ τ᾽ ὀλιζότεραι μὲν ἀτὰρ μένος οὔτι yepelous: 


εἴδεα δ᾽ ἀμφοτέρῃσιν ὁμοίϊὰ, δαιδάλλονται, 


, , 2 αὶ ~ > » 3 , 
νόσφι μονὴς ουρὴς, Τ τ ἔμπαλιν εἰσοραασται" 


μείοσι μὲν μείζων τελέθει, 


μεγάλῃσι δὲ μείων. 


εὐπαγέες μηροί, δολιχὸν δέμας, ὄμμα φαεινόν: 


γλαυκιόωσι κόραι βλεφάροις ὕπο μαρμαίρουσαι, 


γλαυκιόωσιν ὁμοῦ τε καὶ ἔνδοθι φοινίσσονται, 


> / wv ,ὔ > A A 
αἰθομέναις ἴκελαι, πυριλαμπέες" αὐτὰρ ἔνερθεν 


\ , 
ὠχροί τ᾽ ἰοτόκοι τε περὶ στομάτεσσιν ὀδόντες. 


ἐὺς κἷν 8 ὃ ΔΩ ary 9 Paden , 
plvos Οαιοάαλεος, χροιῃ T επι παμφανοώσῃ 


ἠερόεις, πυκινῇσι μελαινομένῃσιν ὀπωπαῖς. 


rer? , Poe .3.. oy: 52 Δ > 4 
WKUTQATOV Peter, και τ ἄλκιμον ἰθὺς OPOUVEL* 
, ε γι δῖ of , , 
φαίης, ΟἼΤΊΤΟΤ ἴδοιο, διηερίην φορέεσθαι. 
ἔμπης καὶ τόδε φῦλον ἐπικλείουσιν ἀοιδοὶ 


πρόσθ᾽ ἔμεναι Βάκχοιο φερεσταφύλοιο τιθήνας" 


” δ112 A ” ΄ , 
τοῦυνέκεν ELOETL νυν OWW beya καγχαλόωσι, 


δεχνύμεναι στομάτεσσι Διωνύσου μέγα δῶρον. 
, fs 2 , \ \ ” = 
τι χρεος εκ μερόπων δὲ κλυτὰς ἤμειψε γυναικας 
ἢ ,ὕ , Ey 5. Er 
ες τόδε πορδαλίων γενος αγριον, αὖθις αξεισω. 


Ναὶ μὴν ἄλλο θοὸν διφυὲς γένος ὠπήσαιο, 


* πάρδαλις (πόρδαλι5), the commoner and older word (Hom. 
Il. xiii. 103, xxi. 573 ; Od. iv. 457), and πάνθηρ (first in Herod. 


iv. 192) are translated alike by 
118 


panthera in Latin writers, 


75 


. 80 


CYNEGETIGA, III. 63-84 


Next the deadly Leopards“ are a double race. The 
one sort are larger to look on and stouter as to their 
broad backs, while the other sort are smaller but no 
whit inferior in valiance. The daedal forms of both 
are alike, apart only from the tail, where a perversity 
is seen: the lesser Leopards have the larger, the 
large the lesser tail. The thighs are well knit, the 
body is long, the eye bright : the shining pupils 
show grey-green beneath their brows, grey-green 
at once and red within, flaming as if on fire ; but in 
the mouth beneath the teeth are pale and venomous. 
The hide is variegated and on a bright ground is 
dark with close-set black spots. Very swift it is in 
running and valiant in a straight charge. Seeing 
it thou wouldst say that it sped through the air. 
Notwithstanding minstrels celebrate this race of 
beasts as having been aforetime the nurses of 
Bacchus, giver of the grape ; wherefore even now 
they greatly exult in wine and receive in their 
mouths the great gift of Dionysus. What matter it 
was that changed glorious women from the race of 
mortals into this wild race of Leopards I shall here- 
after sing. 

Another swift race, moreover, of twofold nature 


as conversely the later Greek writers render the Latin 
panthera by πάρδαλις (Plut. Cic. xxxvi. coll. Cic. Ad fam. 
ii: 11). When πάρδαλις and πάνθηρ are distinguished (Xen. 
Ο. ἃ. 1; Athen. 201 c; Ael. vii. 47; Poll. v.. 88), then, 
according to Wiegmann, πάρδαλις = Felis pardus L, and Cuv. 
(F. leopardus Temminck), while rdvOnp=F. uncia. Of the 
two Panthers or Leopards in our present passage the larger. 
according to Wiegmann, is 17. pardus L. and Cuv. (Ff. 
leopardus Temm.), the varia (Plin. viii. 63) and pardus of 
the Romans, while the smaller is F. pardus Temm., frre 
and W. ii. p. 294. See C. ii. 572 ἱ. 

119 


OPPIAN 


λύγγας ἀριζήλους αἱ μὲν yap ἔασιν ἰδέσθαι 85 
τυτθαί, βαιοτέροισί τ᾽ ἐφωπλίσσαντο λαγωοῖς- 

ca 
ταὶ δ᾽ dpa μείζονές εἰσιν, ἐπιθρώσκουσι δὲ ῥεῖα 
εὐκεράοις ἐλάφοισι καὶ ὀξυτέροις" ὀρύγεσσι. 
μορφὴν δ᾽ ἀμφίδυμοι πανομοίϊον ἀμφιέσαντο" 
Ss \ / ae} > 0 A ~ > \ 90 
ἶσαι μὲν βλεφάροισιν ὕπ᾽" ὀφθαλμῶν ἀμαρυγαὶ 
ἱμερόεν᾽ στράπτουσι" προσώπατα δ᾽ ἀμφοτέρῃσι 
φαιδρὰ πέλει βαιόν τε κάρη καὶ καμπύλον οὔας" 
μούνη δ᾽ εἰσιδέειν ἀνομοίϊος ἔπλετο χροιή" 
μείοσι μὲν λυγγῶν ἐπιδέδρομε ῥινὸς ἐρευθής, 

», \ / if > ww Xr w+ 0 95 
μείζοσι δὲ κροκόεν τε θεείῳ τ᾽ εἴκελον ἄνθος. 
ἔξοχα δ᾽ αὖ τάδε φῦλα φίλην ἀγάσαντο γενέθλην 
εὔγληνοι λύγγες τε πυρίγληνοί" τε λέοντες 
πορδάλιές τ᾽ ὀλοαὶ καὶ τίγριες ἠνεμόεσσαι. 

~ 3 ς / ΄ "ὦ > 4 
τῶν δ᾽ ὁπότε σκύμνους νεοθηλέας ἐν ξυλόχοισι 
λάθρη συλήσωσιν ἀταρβέες ἀγρευτῆρες, 100 

ς 3 » > wv 3 > / / 4 3 , 
at δ᾽ ἄρ᾽ ἔπειτ᾽ ὀπίσω πάλι νεύμεναι ἀθρήσωσιν 
ἐξαπίνης κενεούς TE δόμους καὶ ἔρημα μέλαθρα, 
μύρονται λιγέως ἀδινὸν γόον, ἐκ δ᾽ ἄρα τηλοῦ 
κωκυτὸν προϊᾶσι πολύστονον, οἷά τε πάτρης 
περθομένης ὑπὸ δουρὶ καὶ αἰθομένης πυρὶ λάβρῳ 105 
πεπτάμεναι περὶ τέκνα μέγα κλαίουσι γυναῖκες. 
ἦ pa τόσον τεκέων τε καὶ ἀρτιγόνοιο γενέθλης 
φίλτρον ἐνὲ κραδίῃ στάξεν θεός" οὐδ᾽ ἄρα μούνοις 

1 ὀξυκέροις G. 2 ὕπ᾽’ Editor: ἀπ᾽. 
3 περίγληνοι L. 


4 The two species of Lynx appear to be: 1. Felis lynx 
(A. 499 b 24, 500 b 15, 539 b 22, etc.; Plin. viii. 72), M.G. 
ῥῆσος: ‘*Le lynx, habitant les gorges des montagnes et 
surtout la région des bois de sapins, est devenu trés rare 
en Gréce, mais n’en est pas disparu. Son existence a été 
notamment constaté en Attique par un individu tué le 18 
mars 1862 au mont Parnés et conservé empaillé au Musée 


120 


CYNEGETICA, III. 85-108 


thou mayst see, the notable Lynxes.* Of these the 
one sort are small to look on and attack the little 
Hares; the other sort are larger and easily leap 
upon the Stags of goodly horns and the swift Oryx. 
Both are clothed, in altogether similar form. Alike 
are the delightful flashes that lighten from their 
eyes beneath their brows ; both have bright face, 
small head, and curving ear; only their colour is 
dissimilar to look on. The smaller Lynxes are 
covered with a ruddy hide, while the colour of 
the larger is saffron and like sulphur. Beyond 
others these tribes love their dear offspring, the 
keen-eyed Lynxes and the fiery-eyed Lions and 
the deadly Leopards and the windswift Tigers. 
When in the thickets fearless hunters secretly steal 
away their suckling cubs, and they returning after- 
ward behold their empty house and home made 
desolate, they shrilly wail their loud lament and 
far they send abroad their doleful dirge; even as, 
when their fatherland is sacked with the spear and 
burnt with raging fire, women fall upon their children’s 
necks and loudly weep. Such constraining love of 
child and new-born babe hath God instilled into the 


Zoologique d’Athénes; d’aprés VExpédition scientifique 
de Morée il habite le mont Olenos d’Achaie et les mon- 
tagnes. de Cynurie; d’aprés Mr. A. de Hoeslin il a été 
observé dans la gorge de Phlampouritza an mont Cylléne 
et un individu a été tué prés de Xylocastron par Mr. I. 
Notaras. D’aprés les renseignements de Mr. le Dr. Kriiper 
il se trouve aussi au mont Olympe en Thessalie,” Bik. 
pp. 11 f. 2. F. caracal, the Caracal, a small animal about 
14 inches in height and about ,34 inches long without the 
tail, which is about 10 inches; in colour reddish-brown, 
paling to white under throat and belly. It is sometimes 
trained to hunt small mammals, such as hares, and the 
larger birds such as cranes, kites, ete. 


121 


OPPIAN 


ἀνθρώποις, of πάντα νοήμασι μητίσαντο, 

“ \ ~ 
ἀλλὰ καὶ ἑρπηστῆρσι' καὶ ἰχθύσιν ἠδὲ Kal αὐτοῖς 
-“ 39 

θήρεσιν ὠμηστῇσι καὶ ὑψιπόλοις ἀγέλαισιν 
lo 7 
οἰωνῶν: τόσσον pa φύσις κρατερώτατον ἄλλων. 
. \ 
οἵην μὲν κομιδὴν τεκέων ἐνὶ κύμασι δελφὶς 
dA wv ~ / 4 va va 
αἰὲν ἔχει γλαῦκός τε χάροψ φωκή τε δυσαής. 
πῶς δ᾽ dp ἐν οἰωνοῖσι ποθὴν ἀλίαστον ἔχουσιν 
a Ly il ,ὕἷ Ἧ ,ὔ, , 
ὧν τεκέων φῆναί τε βαρύφθογγοί τε πέλειαι 
αἰετόεντά τε φῦλα πολύζωοί τε κορῶναι. 
πῶς δ᾽ ὄρνις κατὰ δῶμα συνέστιος ἀνθρώποισιν, 
ἀρτιτόκος, νεαροῖσι περισκαίρουσα νεοσσοῖς, 
κίρκον ὑπὲρ τέγεος κατεπάλμενον ἀθρήσασα 
> \ \ 2 > \ + > \ ~ 
ὀξὺ μὲν ἔκλαγεν αἶψα καὶ ἄνθορεν ὀξὺ λακοῦσα, 
αὐχένα δ᾽ ὑψόσ᾽ ἄειρεν ἐς ἠέρα γυρώσασα 
\ / ε / ~ ” > , 
καὶ πάσαις ἑκάτερθε θοῶς ἔφριξεν ἐθείραις 
> 
καὶ πτερὰ πάντα χάλασσε ποτὶ χθόνα“ τοὶ δ᾽ dpa 
δειλοὶ 
a δ; ὁ9. 3 ,ὔ , St ,ὔ 
τεῖχος Um εὐπτέρυγον πρυλέες τρύζουσι νεοσσοί: 
ε Ἂ \ nv ? /, 44 ” + > ~ 
ἡ δὲ Kat ab ἐφόβησε Kal ἤλασεν ὄρνιν ἀναιδῆ, 
> la ,ὔ{ / ,ὕὔ 3 > 7 7, / 
εἰρυμένη φίλα τέκνα, τά τ᾽ εἰσέτι νήπια φέρβει, 
/ ~ 
ἄπτερα λυσιτόκων" θαλάμων" ἀπολύμενα δεσμοῦ. 
\ 
ὡς δὲ Kal ἐν θήρεσσιν ἐρίβρυχοί τε λέαιναι 
» , \ \ / > / 
πορδάλιές τε θοαὶ καὶ τίγριδες αἰολόνωτοι 
‘ ,ὔ a \ a 
παισὶ πέρι προβεβᾶσι Kat ἀγρευτῆρσι μάχονται 
, \ a a 
Kal Te περὶ σφετέρων τεκέων τετλᾶσι δαμῆναι, 
5 Ji 3 ~ 
ἀντίον αἰχμητῇσι συνιστάμεναι μερόπεσσιν" 


SAT ἑρπυστῆρσι K+: ἑρπηστῆσι BK. 
2 wv. Ul. λυσικόμων, λυσιτόμων. 3 πτερύγων suprascr. G. 


« Of. H. i. 648 ff. > Of. H. i. 149 ff. 
© Of. H. i. 686 ff. 


4 Cf. H. i. 727. Prob. Gypaétus. barbatus, the Lammer- 
122 


110 


115 


120 


125 


130 


CYNEGETICA, III. 109-133 


heart : not alone in men who devise all things by 
their wits but even in creeping things and fish and 
the ravenous wild beasts themselves and the high- 
ranging flocks of birds: so much is nature mightier 
than all beside. What care doth the Dolphin® amid 
the waves take evermore of its children, and the 
bright-eyed Glaucus® and the Seal® of evil smell! 
And how among the fowls of air do they cherish 
unfailing love for their own children—the Giers ὦ and 
the deep-noted Doves and the tribes of the Eagle 
and the long-lived Crow! And the domestic mother 
Hen, companion of the homes of men, fluttering 
about her new-hatched chicks, how, when she sees 
a Hawk swooping down over the roof, doth she 
straightway utter a piercing scream and spring up 
with shrill ery and lift her arching neck high into 
the air and speedily ruffle all her plumage and droop 
her wings to the ground, while the poor chickens 
cheeping cower together beneath the bulwark of her 
wings ; and speedily she routs and drives away the 
shameless bird, defending her dear children, still 
infants whom she feeds, unfledged and newly de- 
livered from the bondage of the chambers of birth.¢ 
So also among wild beasts roaring Lionesses and 
swift Leopards and Tigers of striped back stand 
forward to defend their children and fight with 
hunters and for their young ones are prepared to 
die, joining issue with the spearmen face to face ; 


geier, M.G. ὀξυά etc., the 55 of Lev. xi. 13; Deut. xiv. 
12. Cf. A. 563.4 27, 592 Ὁ 5, 619.213, b 23 ff.; Plin. x. 11 
genus aquilae quam barbatam vocant, Tusci vero ossifragam ; 
x. 13; Hom. Od. iii. 372 ; xvi. 217. 

ὁ The reader will remember St. Matt. xxiii. 37 ποσάκις 
ἠθέλησα ἐπισυναγαγεῖν τὰ τέκνα σου, dv τρόπον ὄρνις ἐπισυνάγει 
τὰ νοσσία αὐτῆς ὑπὸ τὰς πτέρυγας, καὶ οὐκ ἠθελήσατε. 


128 


: OPPIAN 


τὰ ’ὔ > > , ta > > “- Θλ 
οὐδέ ποτ᾽ ἐρρίγασιν ἑῆς ἐν ἀγῶνι γενέθλης 
> A > ~ > ,ὔ > ~ 
od πληθὺν ἐπιοῦσαν ἀκοντοβόλων αἰζηῶν, 135 
ov χαλκὸν σελαγεῦντα Kal ἀστράπτοντα σίδηρον, 
οὐδὲ βολὰς βελέων τε θοὰς" μυλάκων τε θαμειάς, 
vA > nv , a n’ , ~ 
σπεύδουσιν δ᾽ ἢ πρόσθε θανεῖν ἢ τέκνα σαῶσαι. 
ἼΑρκτοι δ᾽ ἀγριάδες, φόνιον γένος, αἰολόβουλον, 
λάχνην μὲν πυκινὴν δυσπαίπαλον ἀμφιέσαντο, 140 
μορφὴν δ᾽ οὐκ ἀγανὴν παναμειδήτοισι προσώποις" 
κάρχαρον, οὐλόμενον, ταναὸν στόμα, κυανέη ῥίς, 
A /, % 3 Ψ" A /, > \ ,ὔ 
ὄμμα θοόν, σφυρὸν ὠκύ, τορὸν δέμας, εὐρὺ κάρηνον, 
χεῖρες χερσὶ βροτῶν ἴκελαι, πόδες αὖτε πόδεσσι, 
, , A ’ὔὕ + a 
σμερδαλέη βρυχή, δολερὸν κέαρ, ἄγριον ἦτορ, 145 
A \ K , \ ἫΝ A ὔ 5, A 
καὶ πολλὴ ἸΚυθέρεια καὶ οὐ κατὰ κόσμον ἰοῦσα" 
᾿», αὐ \ , 3 ’ὔ’ / 
ἥματα yap Kal νύκτας ἐελδόμεναι φιλότητος 
3 Α 4 4\3 9 > + Ὁ vA 
αὐταὶ θηλύτεραι μάλ᾽ ἐπ᾽ dpocow ὁρμαίνουσι, 
παῦρα μεθιέμεναι γαμίης παντερπέος εὐνῆς, 
τέκνα κυϊσκόμεναι νηδὺν ὅτε κυμαίνουσι. 160 
la 
od yap τοι θήρεσσι νόμος, γαστὴρ ὅτε πλήθει, 
> , 9 ᾽ὔ δ » Ε 
ἐς λέχος ἐρχομένοις τελέειν φιλοτήσιον ἔργον, 
~ > ~ 
νόσφι μόνων λυγγῶν ὀλιγοδρανέων τε λαγωῶν. 
9 ’ , 
ἄρκτος δ᾽ ἱμείρουσα γάμου στυγέουσά τε λέκτρον 
lod , 
χῆρον ἔχειν τόσα παισὶ ταλάσσατο μητίσασθαι: 16 
πρὶν τοκετοῖο μολεῖν ὥρην, πρὶν κύριον Hap, 
νηδὺν ἐξέθλιψε, βιάσσατο τ᾽ Ἐϊλειθυίας. 
4 
τόσση μαχλοσύνη, τόσσος δρόμος εἰς ᾿Αφροδίτην. 
᾿ 9 e€ / \ 3 
τίκτει δ᾽ ἡμιτέλεστα καὶ οὐ μεμελισμένα τέκνα, 


124 


CYNEGETICA, III. 134-159 


and in the battle for their offspring they shudder not 
at the advancing crowd of javelin-throwers, not at 
the gleaming bronze and flashing iron, nor at the 
swift cast of shaft and shower of stones, but they are 
eager either to die first or save their children. 

Wild Bears,“ a deadly race of crafty wits, are 
clothed in a close and rugged coat of hair® and a form 
unkindly with unsmiling eyes. Sawtoothed, deadly, 
and long is their mouth ; nose dark, eye keen, ankle 
swift, body nimble, head broad, hands ὁ like the hands 
of men, feet like men’s feet; terrible their roar, 
cunning their wits, fierce their heart ; and they are 
much given to venery and that not orderly. For 
‘evermore by day and night the females lust for 
‘mating and themselves pursue the males, seldom 
intermitting the pleasures of union and conceiving 
young when already pregnant. For it is not the 
custom for wild beasts when they are with young 
to mate and fulfil the work of desire, apart only 
from the Lynxes and the weakling Hares.? But the 
she Bear in her desire for mating, and abhorring to 
have her bed widowed, endures to devise for her 
children thus: ere the season of birth, ere the 
appointed day arrives, she puts pressure on her 
womb and does violence to the goddesses of birth : 
so great her lechery, so great her haste for love. 
She brings forth her children half formed and not 


α Ursus arctos, the European Brown Bear or, the Syrian 
Bear, U. Syriacus, which differs from the other only in its 
lighter colour. 

δ. A. 498 b 97. 

© A, 498 a 33 ἔχει (ἡ φώκη) τοὺς πόδας ὁμοίους χερσίν, ὥσπερ 
καὶ οἱ τῆς ἄρκτου. 


4 Of, 515 fF. 


125 


OPPIAN 


σάρκα δ᾽ ἄσημον, ἄναρθρον, ἀείδελον ὠπήσασθαι, 160 
ἀμφότερον δὲ γάμῳ παιδοτροφίῃ τε μέμηλεν" 
ἀρτιτόκος δ᾽ ἔτ᾽ ἐοῦσα μετ᾽ ἄρσενος εὐθὺς ἰαύει. 
λιχμᾶται γλώσσῃ τε φίλον γόνον, οἷά τε μόσχοι 
λιχμῶνται γλώσσῃσιν ἀμοιβαδίς, ἀλλήλοισι 
τερπόμενοι" γάνυται δὲ βοὸς χροὶ καλλίκερως βοῦς" 165 
οὐδ᾽ ἀποπλάζονται, πρὶν ἀπὸ γλυκὺν ἵμερον εἷναι" 
θυμὸν δ᾽ ἑσπομένοιο συνιαίνουσι νομῆος. 

ὡς ἄρκτος λιχμῶσα φίλους ἀνεπλάσσατο παῖδας, 
εἰσόκε κνυζηθμοῖσιν ἀναιδέα τονθρύζωσι. 

Nat μὴν χειμερίην πανυπείροχα δείδιεν ὁρμὴν 170 
καὶ λασίη περ ἐοῦσα" χιὼν δ᾽ ὅτε πάντα παλύνει, 
ἑσπερίου ζεφύρου πανεπήτριμα χευαμένοιο, 
κεύθετ᾽ ἐνὶ σπήλυγγι, τόθι σκέπας ἄρκιον εὕρῃ, 
καὶ βόσιος χατέουσα πόδας χεῖράς τε λιχμαίνει, 
οἷά τ᾽ ἀμελγομένη, καὶ γαστρὸς ἔκλεψεν ἐρωήν. 175 
τοῖά νύ που βένθεσσιν ἐν εὐρυπόροιο θαλάσσης 
πουλύποδες σκολιοὶ παρὰ κύμασι μητίσαντο, 
χείματος οὗ μεσάτου κρυερὴν τρείοντες ἐνιπὴν 


4.Α, δῖ9 ἃ 21 ἐλάχιστον δὲ τίκτει (ἡ ἄρκτος) τὸ ἔμβρυον τῷ 
μεγέθει ὡς κατὰ τὸ σῶμα τὸ ἑαυτῆς... καὶ ψιλὸν καὶ τυφλὸν 
καὶ σχεδὸν ἀδιάρθρωτα τὰ σκέλη καὶ τὰ πλεῖστα τῶν μορίων. 
Cf. 580a 7: De gen. 174b 14. 

> Plin. viii. 126 hi (the cubs of the Bear) sunt candida 
informisque caro, paulo muribus maior, sine oculis, sine 
pilo, ungues tantum prominent; Ov. M. xv. 379 Nec 
catulus partu quem reddidit ursa recenti, Sed male viva 
caro est; Ael. vi. 8 ἡ ἄρκτος ὅτι τίκτει σάρκα ἄσημον ; ii. 19 τὸ 
δὲ εἰκῆ κρέας καὶ ἄσημόν τε καὶ ἀτύπωτον καὶ ἄμορφον ; Phil. 49 
ἄσημον ἄρκτος ἀποτίκτουσα κρέας. 

° Plin. 1.6. hance lambendo paulatim figurant; Ov. Le. 
lambendo mater in artus Fingit et in formam quantum capit 
ipsa reducit; Ael. ii. 19 λειαίνει τῇ γλώττῃ Kal ἐκτυποῖ εἰς 
ἄρθρα καὶ μέντοι καὶ κατὰ μικρὰ ἐκμορφοῖ: vi. 8 τῇ γλώττῃ 


126 


CYNEGETICA, III. 160-178 


articulate,? shapeless. flesh, and unjointed and 
mysterious to behold. At one and the same time 
she attends to mating and to the rearing of her 
young and when she has but newly given birth she 
couches with the male. And she licks with her 
tongue her dear’ offspring, even as cattle lick one 
another in turn with their tongues and take delight 
in each other; and one of the fair-horned kine 
rejoices in the other and they do not part till they 
have put from them sweet desire, and they gladden 
the heart of their attendant herdsman. So doth 
the she Bear shape her children by licking, while 
they whine and mumble incontinently. 

Moreover the Bear beyond all others dreads the 
onset of winter, shaggy of hair though she be. And 
when the snow besprinkles everything, what time 
the stormy West Wind sheds it thickly all about, 
she hides ὦ in a cave where there is shelter adequate 
and spacious, and for lack of food she licks her feet ὁ 
and paws even as if she were milking them and 
beguiles the craving of the belly. Even such a device 
have the coiling Poulpes’ devised in the depths of 
the wide-wayed sea amid the waves ; who dreading 
the chilly menace of mid-winter hide in the shelving 


διαρθροῖ αὐτὴν καὶ οἱονεὶ διαπλάττει: Phil. J.c. λεάνασα δὲ 
μαλθακῆς γλώττης πόνῳ: Cf. Don. Vit. Verg. 22 non absurde 
carmen se ursae more parere dicens et lambendo demum 
effingere; Aul. Gell. xvii. 10 dicere eum solitum ferunt 
parere se versus more ursino. Namque ut illa bestia fetum 
ederet ineffigiatum informemque, lambendo id postea quod 
ita edidisset, conformaret et fingeret, etc. 

4 Cf. Η. ii. 247 ff.; A. 600 a 2% b 12; 611 Ὁ 34; Plin. viii, 
126; Ael. vi. 3. 

“ Cf, H. ii, 250; Plin. viii. 127 priorum pedum suctu 
vivunt; Ael. vi. 3 ἀπόχρη δὲ αὐτῇ τὴν δεξιὰν περιλιχμᾶσθαι. 

πἸΟ H. ii. 241 ff. 

127 


OPPIAN 


͵ὔ ~ εν “" 28 ὲ 
κεύθονται πλαταμῶσιν ἑὰς πλοκαμῖδας ἔδοντες 
> fe > v4 
αὐτὰρ ἐπὴν ἔαρ ὑγρὸν ἐὔτροφον ἀνθήσειεν, 180 
ἀκρέμονες σφίσιν ὦκα νέοι πάλιν ἀλδήσκουσι, 
καὶ πάλιν εὐπλόκαμοι δολιχὴν πλώουσι θάλασσαν. 
ole ¥. 4 
‘E€eins ἐνέπωμεν ἐΐσφυρον, ἠερόεντα, 
4 » 
κραιπνόν, ἀελλοπόδην, κρατερώνυχον, αἰπὺν ὄναγρον᾽" 
,ὔ 
ὄσσε' πέλει φαιδρός, δέμας ἄρκιος, εὐρὺς ἰδέσθαι, 185 
ἀργύρεος χροιήν, δολιχούατος, ὀξύτατος θεῖν" 
ταινίη δὲ μέλαινα μέσην ῥάχιν ἀμφιβέβηκε, 
χιονέῃς ἑκάτερθε περισχομένη στεφάνῃσι. 

A ” / ” / 3 

χιλὸν ἔδει, φέρβει μιν ἄδην ποεσιτρόφος aia, 

3 > > A a > \ / wv , 

ἀλλ᾽ αὐτὸς Kparepois ἀγαθὴ βόσις ἔπλετο θηρσί. 190 
~ > > / / ᾽ὔ > / 

φῦλα δ᾽ ἀελλοπόδων ζηλήμονα πάμπαν ὀνάγρων 

πολλαῖσίν τ᾽ ἀλόχοισιν ἀγαλλόμενοι κομόωσι" 

A > Ὁ > id / ες fA 
θηλύτεραι δ᾽ ἕσπονθ᾽, ὅθι τοι πόσις ἡγεμονεύει" 
πρὸς νομὸν ἰθύνουσιν, ἐπὴν ἐθέλῃσιν ἀνώγειν, 
πρὸς πηγὰς ποταμῶν, θηρῶν μέθυ, καὶ πάλιν αἷψα 195 
πρὸς λασίους οἴκους, ὅταν ἕσπερος ὕπνον ἄγῃσι. 
ζῆλον δ᾽ ἄρσεσι πᾶσιν ἐπὶ σφετέροισιν ὀρίνει 
υἱάσι νηπιάχοισι πανάγριος οἶστρος ἀναιδής" 

ς , , \ ” , 2 > , 
ὁππότε θηλυτέρη γὰρ ἔχει κόπον" Ἐἰλειθυίης, 
1 ὄσσε Β. de Ballu: ὅστε mss. 
2 κόπον Jacobs: τόκον MSS. 


* Equus onager, the Asiatic Wild Ass, or EH. onager 
hemippus, the Syrian Wild Ass, which hardly differs from 
the other. A. 580b1 εἰσὶ δ᾽ ἐν Συρίᾳ οἱ καλούμενοι ἡμίονοι, 
ἕτερον γένος τῶν ἐκ συνδυασμοῦ γενομένων ἵππου καὶ ὄνου, 
ὅμοιοι δὲ τὴν ὄψιν, ὥσπερ καὶ οἱ ἄγριοι ὄνοι πρὸς τοὺς ἡμέρους, 
ἀπό τινος ὁμοιότητος λεχθέντες. . . . αὗται αἱ ἡμίονοι γεννῶσιν 
ἐξ ἀλλήλων. Cf. A.491a2, 577623. The fertile ἡμίονοι 
were of course a species of Wild Ass, which perhaps explains 
the portent in Herod. iii. 151 f. Cf. Plin. viii. 174; Hom. J. 
ii. 852; Herod. vii. 86; Varro ii. 1. 5; Colum. vi. 37; Ael. 


128 


CYNEGETICA, III. 179-199 


rocks and devour their own tentacles; but when 
spring blooms, moist and fertile, new arms speedily 
grow for them again and once again with fair array 
of suckers they sail the long path of the sea. 

Next in order Jet us tell of the Wild Ass,¢ well- 
ankled, swift as air, fleet-footed® like the wind, 
strong-hoofed, and tall. Bright is he of eye, strong 
of body, broad to behold, silvery of colour, long- 
eared, most swift to run. About the middle of his 
back is set a black stripe, surrounded on either side 
by snowy bands. He eats πᾶν ὁ and the grass- 
growing earth feeds him abundantly ; but he himself 
is good food for mighty wild beasts. The tribes of 
the wind-footed Wild Asses are altogether prone to 
jealousy and they glory in many wives and plume 
themselves thereon. The females follow whereso- 
ever the husband leads: they haste to the pasture 
when he wills to bid them, and, when he bids, to 
the river springs, the wild beasts’ wine, and anon 
to their bosky homes when evening brings sleep. A 
fierce and shameless frenzy stirs jealousy @ in all the 
males against their own young sons. For when the 
female is in the travail of Eileithyia, the male sits 


xvi. 29; xiv. 10; xvii. 31; Verg. G. iii. 409; Mart. xiii. 97 
and 100. Hunting of, Amm. M. xxiii. 4. 7; Poll. v. 84; 
Ridgeway, pp. 43 f. 

>A. 580b4 εἰσὶ δ᾽ ὥσπερ οἱ ὄνοι of ἄγριοι καὶ αἱ ἡμίονοι τὴν 
ταχυτῆτα διαφέροντες. 

¢ Job vi. 5 Doth the wild ass bray when he hath grass? 
Cf. abid. xxiv. 5. 

4 Solin. xxvii. 27 Inter ea quae dicunt herbatica eadem 
Africa onagros habet, in quo genere singuli imperitant 
gregibus feminarum. Aemulos libidinis metuunt. Inde est 
quod gravidas suas servant, ut in editis maribus si qua 
facultas fuerit generandi spem morsu detruncent, quod 
caventes feminae in secessibus partus occulunt. 


K 129 


OPPIAN 


ἄγχι μάλ᾽ ἑζόμενος σφέτερον γόνον ἄντα δοκεύει" 200 

/ ¢> “ ,ὔ A 
Kal ῥ᾽ OTE νηπίαχον μητρὸς παρὰ ποσσὶ πέσῃσιν, 
εἰ μὲν θῆλυ πέλει, ποθέει τέκος, ἠδ᾽ ἑκάτερθε 

ue / , A > ,ὔ 
γλώσσῃ λιχμάζων φίλιον γόνον ἀμφαγαπάζει" 
ἄρσενα δ᾽ εἴ μιν ἴδοι, Tore δὴ τότε θυμὸν ὀρίνει 
λευγαλέῳ ζήλῳ περὶ μητέρι μαινόμενος θήρ᾽ 205 
ἐκ δ᾽ ἔθορεν μεμαὼς παιδὸς γενύεσσι ταμέσθαι 
μήδεα, μὴ μετόπισθε νέον γένος, ἡβήσειεν. 
ἡ δὲ λεχώ περ ἐοῦσα καὶ ἀσθενέουσα τόκοισι 
παιδὶ λυγρῷ πολεμιζομένῳ μήτηρ ἐπαμύνει. 
ὡς δ᾽ ὁπότ᾽ ἐν πολέμῳ πολυκήδεϊ μητέρος ἄντην 910 
νηπίαχον κτείνωσιν ἀπηνέες αἰχμητῆρες, 
αὐτήν T αὖ ἐρύωσιν ἔτι σπαίροντι φόνοισιν 
υἱέϊ πλεγνυμένην, στονόεν μέγα κωκύουσαν, 
δρυπτομένην ἁπαλήν τε παρηΐδα, νέρθε τε μαζῶν 
αἵματι δευομένην θερμῷ λιαρῷ τε γάλακτι: 215 
ὡς Kat θῆλυς dvaypos ἐφ᾽ υἱέϊ πάμπαν ἔοικεν 
οἰκτρὰ κινυρομένῃ καὶ δύσμορα κωκυούσῃ. 
φαίης κεν πανάποτμον, ἑὸν πάϊν ἀμφιβεβῶσαν, 
μείλιχα μυθεῖσθαι καὶ λισσομένην ἀγορεύειν" 
ἄνερ, ἄνερ, τί νυ σεῖο προσώπατα τρηχύνονται, 990 
ὄμματα φοινίχθη δέ, τά τ᾽ ἣν πάρος αἰγλήεντα; 
ovxt μέτωπον ἀθρεῖς λιθοεργέος ἄγχι Μεδούσης, 
οὐ γόνον ἰοβόρον παναμειλίκτοιο δρακαίνης, 
οὐ σκύμνον πανάθεσμον ὀρυπλάγκτοιο λεαίνης. 
παῖδα λυγρὴ τὸν ἔτικτον, ὃν ἀρώμεσθα θεοῖσι, 995 
παῖδα τεὸν γενύεσσι τεῇς οὐκ ἄρσενα θήσεις; 
ἴσχε, φίλος, μὴ Tape: τί μοι τάμες; οἷον ἔρεξας; 


1 γένος Schneider: γέ μεν Mss. 


* A. Mirab. 831 a 99. 
’ Cf. C.ii. 9 n, Her head turned the gazer to stone: 
130 


CYNEGETICA, III. 200-227 


hard by and watches for his own offspring. And 
when the infant foal falls at the feet of his mother, 
if it is a female, the father is fond of his child and 
licks it on either side with his tongue and caresses 
his dear offspring « but if he sees that it is a male, 
then, then the frenzied beast stirs his heart with 
deadly jealousy about the mother and he leaps forth, 
eager to rend* with his jaws the privy parts of his 
child, lest afterward a new brood should grow up ; 
while the mother, though but newly delivered and 
weak from the travail of birth, succours her poor 
child in the quarrel. As when in grievous war cruel 
warriors slay a child before the eyes of his mother 
and hale herself while she clings to her son yet 
writhing in his blood and wails with loud and lament- 
able cry and tears her tender cheek and is drenched 
below with the hot blood and warm milk of her 
breasts ; even so the she Wild Ass is just as if she 
were piteously lamenting and sorrowfully wailing 
over her son. Thou wouldst say that all unhappy, 
bestriding her child, she was speaking honeyed words 
and uttering this prayer. “Ὁ husband, husband, 
wherefore is thy face hardened and thine eyes red 
that before were bright? It is not Medusa’s ® brow 
who turned men to stone that thou beholdest near ; 
not the venomous offspring of Dragoness implacable ; 
not the lawless whelp of mountain-roaming Lioness. 
The child whom I, unhappy mother, bare, the child 
for whom we prayed to the gods, even thine own 
child, wilt thou with thine own jaws mutilate? 
Stay, dear, mar him not! Ah! why hast thou 
marred him? What a deed thou hast done! Thou 


Ov. Μ΄. v. 217 saxificae vultus Medusae; Ov. 70. 555; Eur. 
Ale. 1118; Pind. P. x. 47; Apollod, ii. 4. 3, 
13] 


OPPIAN 


παῖδα τὸ μηδὲν ἔθηκας, ὅλον δέμας ἐξαλαώσας. 
δειλὴ ἐγώ, πανάποτμος ἀωροτάτοιο λοχείης, 
καὶ σὺ τέκος πάνδειλον ἀλιτροτάτοιο τοκῆος. 
δειλὴ ἐγώ, τριτάλαινα, κενὸν τόκον ὠδίνασα, 
καὶ σὺ τέκος, τμηθεὶς οὐχὶ στονύχεσσι λεόντων, 
ἀλλ᾽ ἐχθραῖς γενύεσσι λεοντείῃσι τοκῆος. 

τοῖα. τις ἂν πανάποτμον ἐὸν περὶ νήπιον υἷα 
μυθεῖσθαι gain: τὸν δ᾽ οὐκ ἀλέγοντα δαφοινοῖς 
δαίνυσθαι στομάτεσσιν ἀμειδέα παιδὸς ἐδητύν. 
Ζεῦ πάτερ, ὅσσον ἔφυ ζήλοιο πανάγριον ἦτορ. 
κεῖνον καὶ φύσιος κρατερώτερον εἰσοράασθαι 
θῆκας, ἄναξ, δῶκας δὲ πυρὸς δριμεῖαν ἐρωήν, 
δεξιτερῇ δὲ φέρειν ἀδαμάντινον ὥπασας ἄορ. 
οὐ παῖδας τήρησε φίλους γλυκεροῖσι τοκεῦσιν, 
οὐχ ἑτάρους πηούς τε μολών, οὐκ οἶδεν ὁμαίμους, 
ὁππόταν: ἀργαλέος τε καὶ ἄσπετος ἀντιβολήσῃ. 
κεῖνος καὶ προπάροιθεν ἑοῖσιν ἐφώπλισε παισὶν 
ἀὐτοὺς ἡμιθέους καὶ ἀμύμονας ἡμιθεαίνας, 
Αἰγείδην Θησῆα καὶ Αἰολίδην ᾿Αθάμαντα, 
᾿Ατθίδα καὶ Πρόκνην καὶ Θρηϊκίην Φιλομήλην 


* When Hippolytus was falsely accused by his step- 
mother Phaedra, his father Theseus pronounced a curse 
on him which led to his death. Apollod. Epit. i. 18; 
Eur. Hippol. 

> His wife Ino tried to kill her step-children, Phrixus and 
Helle, who escaped on the Ram of the Golden Fleece, 
Apollod. i. 9. 

° Philomela and Procne were daughters of Pandion, king 
of Athens. * Procne married Tereus, king of Thrace. Tereus 
insulted Philomela and, lest she should reveal his guilt, cut 
out her tongue. But Philomela depicted her misfortune on 
a tapestry which she sent to Procne. Procne killed her son 
Itylus and served him up as food to his father Tereus. 
Tereus was turned into a Hoopoe, Procne into a Nightingale, 
Philomela into a Swallow. Apollod. iii. 14; Ov. M. vi, 426 ff, 


132 


240 


246 


CYNEGETICA, III. 228-247 


hast turned the child to nothingness and hast made 
all his body blind. Wretched and unhappy I in my 
untimely motherhood, and altogether wretched thou, 
my child, in thy most sinful father. Wretched I, 
thrice miserable, who have travailed in vain, and 
wretched thou, marred not by the claws of Lions, 
but by the cruel lion jaws of thy sire.” Thus one 
would say the unhappy mother speaks over her 
infant son, while the unheeding father with bloody 
~ jaws makes mirthless banquet of his child. O father 
Zeus, how fierce a heart hath Jealousy! Him hast 
thou made, O lord, mightier than nature to behold 
and hast given him the bitter force of fire, and in his 
right hand hast vouchsafed to him to wear a sword 
of adamant. He preserves not, when he comes, 
dear children to their loving parents, he knows nor 
comrade nor kin nor cousin, when he intervenes 
grievous and unspeakable. He also in former times 
arrayed against their own children heroes them- 
selves and noble heroines—Theseus,* son of Aegeus, 
and Athamas,? son of Aeolus, and Attic Procne¢ 
and Thracian? Philomela and Colchian Medea? and 
The Roman writers usually invert the stury, making Procne 
the Swallow (¢.g. Ov. 25, ii. 855), Philomela the Nightingale 
(e.g. Verg. G. iv. 511, but the Greek version Z. vi. 79), and 
this has become traditional in English poetry. , 

4 To the Greek poets the Swallow is typically the Thracian 
bird and its twittering the type of barbaric speech. Aristoph. 
Ran. 679 ff. Κλεοφῶντος ἐφ᾽ οὗ δὴ χείλεσιν ἀμφιλάλοις δεινὸν 
ἐπιβρέμεται Θρῃκία Χελιδών, ἐπὶ βάρβαρον ἑζομένη πέταλον ; 
Aesch. Ag. 1050 χελιδόνος δίκην ἀγνῶτα φωνὴν βάρβαρον 
κεκτημένη; RK. Browning, Waring vi. 32 ‘As pours some 
pigeon, from the myrrhy lands | ,.Rapt by the whirlwind to 
fierce Scythian strands | Where breed the swallows, her 
melodious cry | Amid their barbarous twitter.” 

4 Daughter of Aietes, killed her children by Jason 
through jealousy of Glauce, daughter of king of Corinth. 


133 


OPPIAN 


Kodyida te Μήδειαν ἀρίζηλόν τε Θεμιστώ. 
ἀλλ᾽ ἔμπης μετὰ φῦλον ἐφημερίων ἀλεγεινῶν 
θηρσὶ Θυεστείην ὀλοὴν παρέθηκε τράπεζαν. 250 
” 3 Dee ͵ὔ ee a Αἱθ ,ὔ 
Εστι δ᾽ ἐϊὐκρήμνοις ἐπὶ τέρμασιν Αἰθιοπήων 
€ / \ lan > 2 Σ / 
ἱππάγρων πολὺ φῦλον, ἀκαχμένον ἰοφόροισι 
δοιοῖς χαυλιόδουσι' ποδῶν γε μὲν οὐ μίαν ὁπλήν, 
χηλὴν δ᾽ αὖ φορέουσι διπλῆν, ἰκέλην ἐλάφοισι" 
χαέτη δ᾽ αὐχενίη μεσάτην ῥάχιν ἀμφιβεβῶσα 255 
οὐρὴν ἐς νεάτην μετανίσσεται:" οὐδὲ βροτείην 
δουλοσύνην ἔτλη ποθ᾽ ὑπερφίαλον γένος aivev: 
3 > > ,ὔ > a Ds. / ,ὔ 
ἀλλ᾽ εἰ καί ποθ᾽ ἕλοιεν ἐῦὐστρέπτοισι βρόχοισιν 
or ,ὔ / , > Ψ 
ἵππαγρον δολίοισι λόχοις μελανόχροες ᾿Ϊνδοί, 
+ \ > / \ / oe / 
οὔτε βορὴν ἐθέλει μετὰ χείλεσιν αἶψα πάσασθαι 969 
+ cal > A \ / \ Ψ “- 
οὔτε πιεῖν, ὁὀλοὸς δὲ φέρειν ζυγὸν ἔπλετο δοῦλον. 
Φράζεο καὶ δύο φῦλα δυσάντεα, καρχαρόδοντα, 
i , 3 , 3 > ” 
μηλοφόνον te λύκον δυσδερκέα τ᾽ αὖθις ὕαιναν, 


“ Wife of Athamas, killed her children through jealousy 
of Ino, the previous wife of Athamas. 

> Thyestes, s. of Pelops, had an intrigue with the wife of 
his brother Atreus, king of Argos, who banished him, but 
afterwards, pretending to be reconciled, recalled him and 
at a*banquet served up to him his own son. 

¢ The ref. is not to what are ordinarily called Wild Horses 
(A, 488 a 30; P.A. 643 b 6: Probl. 895 Ὁ 24) but to the 
Hippelaphus ; A. 478 b 31 ἔχει δὲ καὶ ὁ ἱππέλαφος καλούμενος 
ἐπὶ τῇ ἀκρωμίᾳ χαίτην καὶ τὸ θηρίον τὸ πάρδιον ὀνομαζόμενον" ἀπὸ 
δὲ τῆς κεφαλῆς ἐπὶ τὴν ἀκρωμίαν λεπτὴν ἑκάτερον: ἰδίᾳ δ᾽ ὁ ἱππ- 
ἔλαφος πώγωνα ἔχει κατὰ τὸν λάρυγγα, ἔστι δ᾽ ἀμφότερα κερατοφόρα 
καὶ διχαλά- ἡ δὲ θήλεια ἱππέλαφος οὐκ ἔχει κέρατα, τὸ δὲ μέγεθός 
ἐστι τούτου τοῦ ζῴου ἐλάφῳ προσεμφερές. γίνονται δ᾽ οἱ ἱππέλαφοι 
ἐν ’Apaxwras. . . . τὰ δὲ τῶν ἱππελάφων κέρατα παραπλήσια 
τοῖς τῆς δορκάδος ἐστίν. The Ethiopians of Oppian are the E. 
Ethiopians on E. of Persian Gulf in the region of Baluchistan 


134 


CYNEGETICA, III. 248-263 


glorious Themisto.* But notwithstanding, after the 
race of afflicted mortals, to wild beasts also he served 
up a banquet of Thyestes.? 

In the precipitous bounds of the Ethiopians there 
is a great tribe of Wild Horses,° armed with two 
venomous tusks. Their feet, however, have not a 
single hoof, but double like that of Deer. The mane 
of the neck covers the middle of the back even to 
the end of the tail. Never does that dread over- 
weening tribe endure the servitude of man, but 
even if the dark-skinned Indians by crafty ambush 
take the Wild Horse in their well-twisted toils, he 
will not readily taste food with his lips nor drink, 
but badly bears the yoke of slavery. 

Mark also two dread saw-toothed? tribes, the 
sheep-slaying Wolf’ and again the weak-sighted’ 


and so corresponding to A.’s Arachotae, for whom cf. Strabo 
513 ff., 721 ff. ; Dion. P. 1096; Amm. M. xxiii. 6. 72; Solin. 
liv. 2. The animal intended seems to be the Nylghau 
(Boselaphus tragocamelus), cf. the tragelaphus of Plin. viii. 
120 ; Diod. ii. 51. On the other hand, O. Keller, Die Antike 
Tierwelt, i. 274 tales ἵππαγρος to be the Gnu. 

a-Che Gili. δι. 

6 Canis lupus, M.G. λύκος, still pretty common in N. 
Greece and as far S. as Euboea and Attica, especially in 
severe winters, and in the Peloponnesus (Bik. p. 10), and 
“‘now as of old the dread of the shepherds of Palestine” 
(Tristr. p. 153). 

7 Of the possible senses of δυσδερκής, δυσδέρκετος, (1) seeing 
with difficulty, (2) seen with difficulty, (3) ill to see, 1.6. hideous 
or terrible, δυσδέρκετος in C. ii. 607 of the Ape seems to have 
sense (3) ; δυσδερκής has sense (2) in C. i. 102 ἴχνη δυσδερκέα 
and 451 ortBins δυσδερκέος. In 1]. i. 47 where the κήτεα are 
called δυσδερκέα δείματα λίμνης (Schol. δυσθέατα, δυσθεώρητα) 
the sense may be (3) or (1); H. ν. 64 οὔτε γὰρ εἰσορόωσιν 
ἀπόπροθεν is in favour of the latter. In the case of the 
Hyena here and 290 it is not easy to decide between (3) and 
(1), but the latter is rather favoured by I. 269. 


135 


OPPIAN 


τὸν μὲν ποιμενίων τε Kal αἰπολίων ὀλετῆρα, 

τὴν δ᾽ ἐχθρὴν σκυλάκεσσιν ἀρειοτέροις τε κύνεσσι" 265 
τὸν μὲν νυκτερινὸν διὰ γαστρὸς ἄφυκτον ἐρωὴν 
ἀρνειῶν ἐρίφων τε πολυπλόκον ἁρπακτῆρα, 

τὴν δ᾽ αὖ νυκτιπόρον καὶ νὑκτιπλανῆ τελέθουσαν 
οὕνεκά οἱ διὰ νύκτα φάος, σκότος αὖτε μετ᾽ ἠῶ. 
εἴδεα δ᾽ ἀμφοτέροις ἀνομοίϊα θηρσὶ Sadowois: 570 
τὸν μὲν γάρ τε κύνεσσι πανείκελον ὠπήσαιο 

μείζοσι ποιμενικοῖς, λασίη δ᾽ ἐπιέσπεται οὐρή᾽" 

ἡ δέ τε κυρτοῦται μεσάτην ῥάχιν, ἀμφὶ δὲ πάντῃ 
λαχνήεσσα κυρεῖ, κατὰ δ᾽ ἔγραπται δέμας αἰνὸν 
κυανέῃς ἑκάτερθεν ἐπήτριμα Tawinot: 275 
στεινὴ τ᾽ ἐκτάδιός τε πέλει Kal νῶτα καὶ οὐρήν: 
ῥινὸν. δ᾽ ἀμφοτέροισιν ἐπικλείουσιν ἀοιδοὶ 

ῥιγεδανόν" τῆς" μέν τε διατμήξας περὶ ποσσὶν 

εἰ φορέοις, φορέοις σκυλάκων μέγα δεῖμα κραταιῶν, 
καί σε κύνες κείνοισιν ἐπεμβεβαῶτα πεδίλοις 280 
ἀντίον οὐχ ὑλάουσι πάρος ye μὲν ὑλακόωντες. 

εἰ δὲ λύκον δείρας ῥινῶν ἄπο τεκτήναιο 

τύμπανον εὐκέλαδον Διδυμήϊον, ὠλεσίκαρπον, 
μοῦνόν τοι μετὰ πᾶσι βαρύβρομον ἔκλαγεν ἠχὴν 

καὶ μοῦνον παταγεῖ, τὰ δ᾽ ἐὔθροα πρόσθεν ἐόντα. 285 
τύμπανα σιγάζει κώφησέ τε πᾶσαν ἰωήν. 


1 τρῦ Brodaeus. 


* Hyaena striata, or Striped Hyena, which ranges from 
India to N. Africa and ‘‘is very common in all parts of 
Palestine” (Tristr. p. 108); A. 594 a 31 ὃν καλοῦσιν οἱ μὲν 
Ὑλάνον, of δ᾽ ὕαιναν ; 579b 15; De gen. 157a3; PA, 
667 ἃ 20; Mirab. 845 a 24; Plin. viii. 105 f.; Herod. iv. 192; 
Ael. i. 25, iii. 7, vi. 14, ete.; Solin. xxvii. 23 f. ; Phil. 51. 

> Pind. P. ii. 84; Plut. Mor. 971 a. 

© A. 579D15 ἡ δὲ ὕαινα τῷ μὲν χρώματι λυκώδης ἐστί, δασυτέρα 
δέ, καὶ λοφιὰν ἔχει δι’ ὅλης τῆς ῥάχεως ; of. 5941. 

136 


CYNEGETICA, III. 264-286 


Hyena‘; the first a destroyer of flocks of Sheep 
and herds of Goats, the other the foe of Dogs and 
mighty Hounds ; the one, through the unescapable 
impulse of hunger, the crafty ® harrier by night of 
Lamb and Kid, the other a night-farer and night- 
wanderer, since for it there is light by night but 
darkness by day. The forms of these two bloody 
beasts are unlike. The Wolf thou wouldst behold 
like to the larger shepherd Dogs, with bushy tail 
behind. The Hyena has the midst of the back 
arched and it is shaggy® all about and the dread 
body is marked on either side with close-set dark 
stripes. It is narrow and long of back and tail. 
The hide of both beasts the minstrels celebrate 
as terrible. If thou wert to cut off a piece of hide 
of the Hyena and wear it on thy feet, thou wouldst 
wear a great terror to mighty Dogs, and Dogs bark 
not at thee wearing those shoes, even if they barked 
before. And if thou shouldst flay a Wolf and from 
his hide make a sounding tabor, like the tabor of 
, Dindymus? which destroys increase,’ it alone of all 
sounds its deep note and it alone makes a din, while 
all the tabors that had a goodly sound before are 


4 Dindymus, or Didymus metri gratia, a mt. in Mysia 
near Pessinus (Strabo 567), associated with the worship of 
Cybele, in whose rites the drum and the cymbals played a 
prominent part; Stat. 7. viii. 221 gemina aera sonant Idaea- 
que terga. 

¢ Homer uses ὠλεσίκαρπος of the willow, Od..x. 510, cf. 
Theophr. H.P. iii. 1. 3 τὴν iréay ταχὺ προκαταβάλλειν πρὸ τοῦ 
τελείως ἁδρῦναι καὶ πέψαι τὸν καρπόν" δι’ ὃ Kal τὸν ποιητὴν ov 
κακῶς προσαγορεύειν αὐτὴν ὠλεσίκαρπον : id. C.P. ii. 9. 145 
Plin. xvi. 110 ocissime salix amittit semen, antequam omnino 
maturitatem sentiat, ob id dicta Homero frugiperdia. The 
ref. is to the self-emasculation practised by the worshippers 
of Cybele and her eunuch priests (galli). 

137 


OPPIAN 


καὶ φθίμενοι. γὰρ ὄϊς φθίμενον λύκον ἐρρίγασι. 

θαῦμα δὲ καὶ τόδ᾽ ἄκουσα περὶ στικτῇσιν ὑαίναις, 
ἄρσενα καὶ θήλειαν ἀμείβεσθαι λυκάβαντι, 

καί ῥ᾽ ὁτὲ μὲν τελέθειν δυσδερκέα νυμφευτῆρα, 290 
νωλεμὲς ἱμείροντα γάμων, ποτὲ δ᾽ αὖθις ὁρᾶσθαι 
θηλυτέρην νύμφην λοχίην καὶ μητέρα κεδνήν. 

᾿Αλλὰ λύκων τελέθει πολιότριχα πέντε γένεθλα, 
εἴδεα δ᾽ ἀλλήλοις ἀνομοίϊα τεκμήραντο 
φῶτες ἀμορβῆες, τοῖσιν μάλα δήϊα φῦλα. 29ὅ 
πρῶτα μὲν ὃν καλέουσι θρασύφρονα τοξευτῆρα᾽ 
ξουθὸς μὲν πρόπὰν εἶδος, ἀτὰρ περιηγέα γυῖα 
καὶ κεφαλὴν “Φορέει πολὺ “μείζονα καὶ θοὰ κῶλα: 
γαστέρα δ᾽ ἀργαίνουσαν ἔχει πολιῇ ῥαθάμιγγι" 
σμερδαλέον δ᾽ ἰάχει τε καὶ ὑψόθι πάμπαν ὀρούει, 300 
αἰὲν ἐπισσείων κεφαλὴν πυρόεν τε δεδορκώς. 

ἤΑλλος δ᾽ αὖ ὃ μέγεθος μὲν ὑπέρτερος, ἅψεα δ᾽ αὖτε 
μηκεδανός, πάντεσσι θοώτερος ὦκα Δύκοισι:" 
τὸν μέροπες κίρκον᾽ τε καὶ ἅρπαγα κικλήσκουσι. 
πολλῷ σὺν ῥοίζῳ δὲ μάλ᾽ ὄρθριος εἶσιν ἐπ᾽ ἄγρην 305 
πρώτῃ ὑπ᾽ ἀμφιλύκῃ: ῥέα γάρ τ᾽ ἐπιδεύετ᾽ ἐδωδῆς" 
χροιὴ δ᾽ ἀργυφέη σελαγεῖ πλευράς τε καὶ οὐρήν, 
ναίει δ᾽ οὔρεα μακρά: τὰ δ᾽ ὁππότε χείματος ὥρῃ 
ἐκ νεφέων προχυθεῖσα χιὼν κρυόεσσα καλύψῃ, 
δὴ τότε καὶ πόλιος πέλας ἵ ἵκετο "θὴρ ὀλοόφρων, 3810 
πᾶσαν ἀναιδείην ἐπιειμένος εἵνεκ᾽ ἐδωδῆς, 
λάθρη τ᾽ ἐμπελάει μάλα τ᾽ ἤρεμος, εἰσόκεν ἄγρῃ 
ἐγχρίμψῃ: τὴν δ᾽ αἶψα θοοῖς ὀνύχεσσιν ἔμαρψεν. 

@ A. 579b 16 περὶ δὲ τῶν αἰδοίων ὃ λέγεται, ὡς ἔχει ἄρρενος 
καὶ θηλείας, ψεῦδός ἐστιν: De gen. 157 a 8 ff.; Diodor, 32 
Tas λεγομένας ὑαίνας τινὲς μυθολογοῦσιν ἄρρενας ἅμα καὶ θηλείας 
ὑπάρχειν καὶ παρ᾽ ἐνιαυτὸν ἀλλήλας ὀχεύειν, τῆς ἀληθείας οὐχ 


οὕτως ἐχούσης : Ael. i. 25; Phil. 51; Plin. viii. 105; Ov. M. 
xv. 409 ff. 


138 


CYNEGETICA, III. 287-313 


silent and hush all their noise. Sheep even when 
dead shudder at a dead Wolf. This marvel¢ also I 
have heard about the spotted Hyenas, to wit that 
the male and female change year by year, and one 
is now a weak-eyed bridegroom all eager to mate 
and anon appears as a lady bride, a bearer of children, 
and a goodly mother. 

But five in number are the grey-haired breeds of 
Wolves, and herdsmen, whose bitter foes the wolf- 
tribes are, have remarked their different forms. 
First there is that which they call the bold Archer. 
Tawny is all his body, and his rounded limbs and head 
and swift limbs are larger far. The belly is light- 
coloured with grey spots. Terribly he howls and 
very high he leaps, ever shaking his head and glaring 
with fiery eyes. 

Another again is superior in size and long of limb, 
swiftest in speed ὃ among all Wolves that are; him 
men name the Hawk and the Harrier. With much 
din he fares forth in the early morning to seek his 
prey at the first glimmering of dawn; for he easily 
becomes anhungered. Silvery gleams his colour on 
ribs and tail. He dwells on the high® hills; but 
when in the winter season the chilly snow pours from 
the clouds and covers the hills, then doth the deadly 
beast draw nigh even to the city, having clothed 
himself with utter shamelessness for the sake of 
food ; and stealthily he approaches and very quietly - 
till he comes upon his prey, which speedily he seizes 
in his sharp claws. 


> ὦκα may be merely = ὄχα (Hom.). 

ὁ waxpd=high; cf. οὔρεα μακρά (Hom. Jl. xiii. 18, etc.), 
δένδρεα μακρά (Hom. II. ix. 541, etc.), μακρὸς "Ολυμπος (Hom. 
Tl. xv. 193). So Bpaxvs=short of stature, Pind. 1. vi. 44. 

139 


OPPIAN 


ἣ , \ + 
Ἔστι δέ tis Ταύροιο νιφοβλήτους ὑπὲρ ἄκρας 
an 3 “ 
ἐνδιάων Κίλικάς τε πάγους καὶ πρῶνας ᾿Αμανοῦ, 315 
- [2 “Ἔ 
καλὸς ἰδεῖν, θήρεσσι πανέξοχος, ὅντε καλεῦσι 
/ ΕΥ̓ 
χρύσεον, ἀστράπτοντα περισσοκόμοισιν ἐθείραις, 
3 ν ts 
od λύκος, ἀλλὰ λύκου προφερέστατος αἰπύτατος θήρ, 
la > 7 
χείλεσι χαλκείοισι τεθηγμένος, ἄσπετος ἀλκήν. 
λλά Α λ A > ᾽ὔ λλά AG 
πολλάκι τοι καὶ χαλκὸν ἀτειρέα, πολλάκι λᾶαν 390 
ἐμμενέως ἐτόρησε καὶ αἰχμήεντα σίδηρον. 
καὶ κύνα Σείριον οἷδε καὶ ἀντέλλοντα φοβεῖται" 
αὐτίκα δὴ ῥωχμὸν καταδύεται εὐρέος αἴης ; 
ἠὲ κατὰ σπήλυγγος ἀφεγγέος, εἰσόκεν alns 
ἠέλιος παύσαιτο καὶ οὐλομένου κυνὸς ἀστήρ. 395 
ΣΑΣ io ὃ ,ὔ , τὰ ,ὔ ,ὕ 
κμονες αὖ δοιοί, φόνιον γένος, αὐχένα βαιοί, 
εὐρύτατοι νώτοισιν, ἀτὰρ λασιότριχε μηροὺς 
\ , OQ\ 7 γᾺ7 » f , 
καὶ πόδας ἠδὲ πρόσωπον ὀλίζονες, ὄμμασι βαιοί. 
τῶν ὁ μὲν ἀργυρέοις νώτοις καὶ γαστέρι λευκῇ 
παμφαίνει, δνοφερὸς δὲ μόνων ἄκρα νείατα ταρσῶν" 330 
ὅν τινες ἰκτῖνον πολιότριχα φῶτες ἔλεξαν. 
αὐτὰρ ὅ γε χροιῇσι μελαινομένῃσι πέφανται, 
μείων μὲν προτέροιο, τὸ δὲ σθένος οὐκ ἐπιδευής. 
θηρεύει δ᾽ ἔκπαγλον ἐπὶ πτώκεσσιν ὀρούων" 
~ / > ϑ λέ > 0 \ ὔ Ε 
πᾶσαί T ἐκ μελέων ὀρθαὶ φρίσσουσιν ἔθειραι. 335 
ve > ,ὔ A 
Δηθάκι δ᾽ αὖτε λύκοι Kat πορδαλίεσσι δαφοιναῖς 
> 5 A > / Ψ / ~ 
eis εὐνὴν ἐπέλασσαν, ὅθεν κρατερόφρονα φῦλα, 
. -“ “εἨ \ ~ 
θῶες ὁμοῦ δὲ φέρουσι διπλοῦν μεμορυγμένον ἄνθος, 
"2 x ¢ a > - 
μητέρα μὲν ῥινοῖσι, προσώποις δ᾽ αὖ γενετῆρα. 


«Μ, between Cilicia and Syria: Strab. 749, οἷο. 

Ὁ It seems impossible to determine whether ἄκμονες here 
is merely an epithet (-- ἀκμῆτες, ἀκάματοι), or a metaphorical 
use of dxuwy=anvil, or a specific name (ef. Hesych. s.v. 
140 


CYNEGETICA, III. 314-339 


And there is one which beyond the snow-clad 
heights of Taurus inhabits the Cilician hills and cliffs 
of Amanus,“ beautiful of aspect, most excellent among 
beasts, which they call the Golden Wolf, brilliant 
with abundant hair: no Wolf but a tall beast more 
excellent than a Wolf, armed with mouth of bronze, 
infinite in might. Many a time he pierces amain 
the enduring bronze, many a time he pierces stone 
or the iron spear. He knows the Dog-star Sirius 
and dreads his rising ; straightway he creeps into 
some cleft of the wide earth or into a lightless cave, 
until the sun and the baleful Dog-star abate their 
heat. 

Again there are two redoubtable? Wolves, a deadly 
race, small of neck, very broad of back, but less of 
size in shaggy thighs and feet and face and small 
of eye. Of these one is brilliant with silvery back 
and white belly, and is dark only on the extremities 
of his feet. This grey-haired Wolf some men have 
named the Kite. But the other is dark of hue, 
smaller than the former yet not wanting in strength. 
He is a great hunter and makes Hares his prey, 
leaping upon them while all the hair upon his limbs 
bristles erect. 

Often ὁ Wolves mate with the fierce Leopards, and 
from the union springs the mighty tribe of Jackals.4 
They wear two colours mingled together, the mother’s 
colour on the hide, the father’s on the face. 


ἄκμων .. .- ἔστι δὲ καὶ γένος ἀετοῦ). Bodinus has crudivori, 
Peifer fortes, Morel infatigati, schol. δυνατοί. 

CHO Onin Zi πὶ 

4 The description of the θώς here suits the Civet, Viverra 
civetta (Ethiopian and Egyptian) and allied species, rather 
than the Jackal, and according to some authorities the θώς 
of Aristotle is not the Jackal but the Civet. 


141 


OPPIAN 


TiypiSos αὖ μετέπειτα κλυτὸν δέμας ἀείδωμεν, 340 
τῆς οὐ τερπνότερον φύσις ὥπασε τεχνήεσσα 
ὀφθαλμοῖσιν ἰδεῖν θηρῶν μετὰ πουλὺν ὅμιλον. 
τόσσον δ᾽ ἐν θήρεσσι μέγ᾽ ἔξοχος ἔπλετο τίγρις, 
ὅσσον ἐν ἠερίοισι ταὼς καλὸς" οἰωνοῖσι. 
πάντα μιν ἀθρήσειας ὀρέσβιον οἷα λέαιναν, 345 
νόσφι μόνου ῥινοῖο, TOV αἰόλον ἐστεφάνωται, 
δαίδαλα πορφύροντα καὶ ἄνθεσι μαρμαίροντα. 
τοίην μὲν πυρόεσσαν ὑπὸ βλεφάροισιν ὁὀπωπαὶ 
μαρμαρυγὴν στράπτουσιν᾽ ἀτὰρ δέμας ἔπλετο τοῖον, 
καρτερόν, εὔσαρκον" τοίη δολιχόσκιος οὐρή᾽" 350 
τοῖα περὶ στομάτεσσι mpoownara: τοῖον ὕπερθε 
νεύει ἐπισκύνιον" τοῖοι σελαγεῦσιν ὀδόντες. 
ὠκυτέρη τελέθει δὲ θοῶν πανυπείροχα θηρῶν" 
αὐτῷ γάρ τε θέειν ἰκέλη Ζεφύρῳ γενετῆρι" 
οὔτι γε μὴν γενετῆρι᾽ τίς ἂν τάδε πιστώσαιτο, 355 
θῆρες ὅτι δμηθεῖεν ὑπ᾽ ἠέρι νυμφευτῆρι; 
ἔπλετο γὰρ κείνη κενεὴ φάτις, ὡς τόδε φῦλον 
θῆλυ πρόπαν τελέθει καὶ ἀδέμνιον ἄρσενός ἐστι" 
δηθάκι γάρ κεν ἴδοις πολυανθέα καλὸν ἀκοίτην᾽ 
ῥεῖα γὰρ οὐκ ἂν ἕλοις: δὴ γάρ τε λιπὼν ἑὰ τέκνα 360 
ἐμμενέως φεύγει, θηρήτορας εὖτ᾽ ἂν ἴδηται" 

ἡ δ᾽ ἕπεται σκύμνοισιν ἀνιάζουσά τε θυμόν, 
χάρμα μέγ᾽ ἀγρευτῆρσι, πρὸς ἄρκυας ἰθὺς ἱκάνει. 

Κάπρος ἐνυαλίοις δὲ μέγ᾽ ἔξοχος ἐν θήρεσσιν 


«γ᾽ tigris, A. 607 a4; Plin. vill. 66; Ael. viii. 1, xv. 145 
Solin. xvii. 4 ff., xxvii. 16, lili, 19. 

> Plin. 1.6. animal velocitatis tremendae, cf. Solin. xvii. 4; 
Lue. ν. 405; Claud. In Ruf. i. 90. 

ὁ See CO. i. 323 n.3 of. Claud. De rapt. Proserp. iii. 262 
Arduus Hyrcana quatitur sic matre Niphates, Cuius Achae- 
menio regi ludibria natos Advexit tremebundus eques: 
fremit illa marito Mobilior Zephyro. 


142 


CYNEGETICA, III. 340-364 


Next let us sing the Tiger® of glorious form, than 
which cunning nature has vouchsafed naught more 
pleasant for the eyes to behold amid the great 
company of wild beasts. As much doth the Tiger 
excel among wild beasts as the Peacock doth for 
beauty among the fowls of air. Every way like a 
lioness of the hills wouldst thou behold it, apart only 
from the hide, which is variegated, with darkling 
stripes and brilliant sheen. Like are the eyes that 
lighten with fiery flash beneath the brows ; like the 
body, strong and fleshy ; like the long and bushy 
tail; like the face about the mouth ; like the 
frowning brows above; like the gleaming teeth. 
Swifter® is it than all wild beasts that are ; for it runs 
with speed like its sire, the West Wind ὁ himself. 
Yet the West Wind is not its sire ; who would believe 
that wild beasts mated with an airy bridegroom ? 
For that also is an empty tale, that all this tribe is 
female and mates not with a male ; for often mightst 
thou see its handsome spouse of many colours, but 
not easily couldst thou capture him; for he leaves 
his young? and flees amain when he descries the 
hunters ; but the female follows her cubs and in the 
anguish of her heart---to the great joy of the hunters 
—comes straight to the nets. 

Eminent among warlike wild beasts is the Boar. 


4 Plin. 7.0. ubi vacuum cubile reperit feta, maribus enim 
subolis cura non est, fertur praeceps odore vestigans, 

4 Sus scrofa, M.G. ἀγριόχοιρος, ἀγριογούρουνο. The Wild Boar 
is still pretty common in the mountainous parts of Attica, 
Euboea, and N. Greece, and occurs, though it has become 
rare, in the Peloponnesus (Bik. p. 15). It does not occur 
in the Cyclades, though feral Swine are found (Erh. p. 26). 
It is very common in Palestine (Tristr. p. 54) ; Of AAs. 
571b 13; 578425; Plin. viii. 212; Ael. ν. 45; Xen. C. 10, 


143 


OPPIAN 


Sind 3 \ θέ. ᾽ὕὔ be, ,ὔ θ A 5 
εὐνὰς μὲν ποθέει πυμάτοις «vt βένθεσι κρημνῶν, 366 
ἔξοχα δὲ στυγέει δοῦπον πολυηχέα θηρῶν. 

͵ὔ 3 3 / 5 / LA LA 
θηλυτέρῃ δ᾽ ἀλίαστος ἐφορμαίνων ἀλάληται 
καὶ μάλ᾽ ἐρωμανέων σφριγᾷ: κατὰ δ᾽ αὐχένος ὀρθαὶ 
φρίσσουσι τρίχες, οἷα περισσολόφων πηλήκων, 
ἀφρὸν ἀποσταλάει δὲ κατὰ χθονός" αὐτὰρ ὀδόντων 370 
ἕρκος ἐπικροτέει λευκόχροον ἄσθματι θερμῷ" 
A / > νὴ ὔὕ A ᾽7ὔ raid 3 ͵ 
καὶ χόλος ἀμφὶ γάμοισι πολὺ πλέον ἠέπερ αἰδώς. 
7 3 » ‘A ¢€ YA / 
θηλυτέρη δ εἴ μίν κεν ὑποπτήξασα μένῃσιν, Ὁ 
ἔσβεσε πάντα χόλον, κατὰ δ᾽ εὔνασε θηρὸς ἐρωὴν᾽ 

> 7, 9, > ᾿ς »»} re > 4 
εἰ δέ κ᾿ ἀνηναμένη φεύγῃ φιλοτήσιον εὐνήν, ᾿ 375 
αὐτίκ᾽ ὀρινόμενος θερμῷ πυρόεντι μύωπι ; 
nv ὔ > aN > "4 > ὃ 4 
ἢ γάμον ἐξετέλεσσεν ἀνάγκῃ, ἶφι δαμάσσας, 

νέκυν ἐν κονίῃσι βάλεν, γενύεσσιν ὀρούσας. 

” Ἢ ΔΛ Vi , \ 9. ᾽ὔ, 

ἔστι δέ τις κάπροιο φάτις πέρι λευκὸν ὀδόντα 
λάθριον ἐντὸς ἔχειν μαλερὴν πυρόεσσαν ἐνυπήν. 380 
σῆμα δ᾽ ἐφημερίοισιν ἀριφραδὲς ἐρρίζωται" 

ὁππότε γὰρ πολὺς ὄχλος ἐπήτριμος ἀγρευτήρων 

σὺν κυσὶν εὐτόλμοισι ποτὶ χθόνα θῆρα βάλωνται, 
αἰχμῇσιν δολιχῇσιν ἐπασσύτερον δαμάσαντες, 

δὴ τότ᾽ ἀπ᾽ αὐχένος εἴ τις ἀειράμενος τρίχα λεπτὴν 385 
θηρὸς ἔτ᾽ ἀσθμαίνοντος ἐνιχρίμψειεν ὀδόντι, 

3 , \ > » > , , 
αἶψα μάλα σφαιρηδὸν ἀνέδραμεν αἰθομένη θρίξ. 
καὶ δ᾽ αὐτοῖσι κύνεσσιν ἐπὶ πλευρῇς ἑκάτερθεν, 
ἔνθα συὸς γενύων πέλασαν αἴθωνες ὀδόντες, 
ἴχνια πυρσευθέντα διὰ ῥινοῖο τέτανται. 390 

‘Yor ὔ δ᾽ ΝΜ “λ. A ὃ rd 5A 

ρίγγων δ᾽ οὔπω τι πέλει κατὰ δάσκιον ὕλην 
ῥίγιον εἰσιδέειν οὔτ᾽ ἀργαλεώτερον ἀλλο: 


@ Plin. 1.6. maribus in coitu plurima asperitas. 
> Xen. C. 10.17 τεθνεῶτος ἐάν τις ἐπὶ τὸν ὀδόντα ἐπιθῇ τρίχας, 
συντρέχουσιν: οὕτως εἰσὶ θερμοί" ζῶντι δὲ διάπυροι ὅταν ἐρεθίζηται" 


144. 


CYNEGETICA, III. 365-392 


He loves a lair in the farthest depths of the crags 
and greatly he loathes the noisy din of wild beasts. 
Unceasingly he roams in pursuit of the female and 
is greatly excited by the frenzy of desire. On his 
neck the hair bristles erect, like the crest of a great- 
plumed helmet. He drops foam upon the ground and 
gnashes the white hedge of his teeth, panting hotly ; 
and there is much more rage about his mating than 
modesty. If the female abide his advances, she 
quenches all his rage and lulls to rest his passion. 
But if she refuses intercourse and flee, straightway 
_ stirred by the hot and fiery goad of desire he either 
overcomes her and mates with her by force or he 
attacks her with his jaws and lays her dead in the 
dust. There is a tale touching the Wild Boar that 
his white tusk has within it a secret devouring fiery 
force. A manifest proof of this for men is well 
founded. For when a great thronging crowd of 
hunters with their Dogs lay the beast low upon the 
ground, overcoming him with long spear on spear, 
then if one take a thin hair from the neck and 
approach it to the tusk of the still gasping beast, 
straightway the hair takes fire and curls up. And 
on either side of the Dogs themselves, where the 
fierce tusks of the Swine’s jaws have touched them, 
marks of burning are traced upon the hide. 

Than the Porcupines ¢ there is nothing in the shady 
wood more terrible to behold nor aught more deadly 


οὐ yap ἂν τῶν κυνῶν ἁμαρτάνων τῇ πληγῇ τοῦ σώματος ἄκρα τὰ 
τριχώματα περιεπίμπρα. 
¢ Προίγία cristata. ““ Τῇ is very, common in all the rocky 
districts and mountain glens of the Holy Land” (Tristr. p. 
125); A. 490 b 29; 579 a 29; 600 a 28; Ael. i. 31, vii. 47, 
xii. 26; Phil. 71; Herod. iv. 192; Plin. viii. 125; Solin. 
xxx. 28, 
Ι, 145 


OPPIAN 


τῶν ἦτοι μέγεθος μὲν ὁποῖα λύκοισι δαφοινοῖς, 
βαιόν, ὀλιζότερον, κρατερὸν δέμας, ἀμφὶ δὲ ῥινὸς 
τρηχείαις λασίαισι πέριξ πέφρικεν ἐθείραις, 
ὁπποίαις θωρήξατ᾽ ἐχίνων αἰόλα φῦλα. 
ἀλλ᾽ ὅτε μιν σεύωσιν ἀρείονες ἔξοχα θῆρες, 
δὴ τότ᾽ ἐμήσατο Tota: θοὰς ἔφριξεν ἐθείρας 
καί τ᾽ ὀπίσω νώτοισιν ἀκαχμένον ὠκυπέτῃσιν 
ἰθὺς ἀκοντίζει μαλερὸν βέλος - ἀμφότερον δὲ 
φεύγει τ᾽ ἐμμενέως καὶ ἀλευόμενος πολεμίζει. 
δηθάκις ἔκτεινεν κύνα κάρχαρον: ὧδέ κε φαίης 
αἰζηὸν τόξων δεδαηκότα τοξεύεσθαι. 
τοὔνεκεν ὁππότε μιν θηρήτορες ὠπήσωνται, 
οὔτι κύνας μεθιᾶσι, δόλον δ᾽ ἐπετεκτήναντο, 
τὸν μετέπειτ᾽ ἐρέω, θηρῶν φόνον ὅππότ᾽ ἀείδω. 
᾿Ιχνεύμων βαιὸς μέν, ἀτὰρ μεγάλοισιν ὁμοίως 
μέλπεσθαι θήρεσσι πανάξιος εἵνεκα βουλῆς 
ἀλκῆς τε κρατερῆς ὑπὸ νηπεδανοῖσι μέλεσσιν. 
ἢ γάρ τοι κέρδεσσὶ κατέκτανε διπλόα φῦλα, 
ἑρπηστῆρας" ὄφεις καὶ ἀργαλέους κροκοδείλους, 
κείνους Νειλῴους, φόνιον γένος" ὁππότε γάρ τις 
θηρῶν λευγαλέων εὕδῃ τρίστοιχα πετάσσας 


1 ἑρπυστῆρας ΚΜ. 


* A. 490 Ὁ 28 τὰς ἀκανθώδεις τρίχας οἵας οἱ χερσαῖοι ἔχουσιν 
ἐχῖνοι καὶ οἱ ὕστριχες : Claud, De hystr. 17; Calpurn. Eel. 
vi. 13. 

> A. 623.232 τὰ βάλλοντα ταῖς θριξίν, οἷον αἱ ὕστριχες ; Ael. 
i. 31; Phil. /.c.; Solin. 1.6.: Plin. 1.0. hystrices generat 
India et Africa spina contectas ex irenaceorum genere, sed 
hystrici longiores aculei et, cum intendit cutem, missiles. 
Ora urguentium. figit canum et paulo longius iaculatur. 
The legend, which arose doubtless from ‘‘ the rattling of the 
spines and the occasional falling out of loose ones” (Camb, 
ΔΗ͂. x. p. 501), is elaborated by Claud. De hystr. with the 
inevitable comparison to the shafts of the flying Parthian 


146 


395 


400 


405 


410 


CYNEGETICA, III. 393-413 


Their size is like that of the bloody Wolves; short, 
small, and strong is their body, but their hide bristles 
all about with rough and shaggy quills, such as those 
with which the cunning tribes of Hedgehogs@ are 
armed. But when far mightier beasts pursue him, 
then he uses this“device. He erects his sharp quills 
and backward hurls® straight the dire shaft that 
bristles on his flying back, and both flees amain 
and fights as he seeks to escape. Many? a time 
he slays a saw-toothed Dog; even so, one would 
say, shoots a man well] skilled in archery. Therefore 
when the hunters espy him, they do not slip the 
Dogs but devise a trick, which I shall tell4¢ when I 
sing of the slaying of wild beasts. 

The Ichneumon® is small, but as well worthy to be 
sung as large beasts by reason of the cunning and 
great valiance which it hides in a feeble body. For 
indeed by its craft it slays two tribes—the reptile 
Serpents and the terrible Crocodiles,’ those creatures 
of the Nile, a deadly race. When one of the dread 
beasts sleeps, opening his lips with triple row and 


(v. 21), whom he feigns to have learned his art from the 
Porcupine: Parthosque retro didicisse ferire Prima sagitti- 
ferae pecudis documenta secutos (47 f.). 

© For δηθάκις of. i. 27 π. 

4 This promise is nowhere fulfilled in our extant text. 

ὁ Herpestes ichnewmon or Pharaoh’s Cat, a species of 
Mongoose, still domesticated in Egypt as a destroyer of 
Rats and Mice. It is extremely common in every part of 
Palestine, ‘‘so that it is scarcely possible ever to take a 
walk soon after sunrise without meeting this little animal trot- 
ting away to its hole”’(Tristr.p.151). A.580a 93; 612a15; 
Strabo 812; Nemes, 54; Phil. 98; Plin. viii. 88; Cic. ΔΝ... 
i. 36. 101. Also called ἰχνευτής Herod. ii. 67; Nicand. 7.195; 
Hesych. 5, ἰχνευταί: οἱ viv ἰχνεύμονες λεγόμενοι. 

7 A. 487 a 22; δ08 ἃ 1, εἴς. ; Plin. viii. 89; Herod. ii. 68; 
Solin. xxxii. 22; Plut. Mor. 976 8, 982 c. 

147 


OPPIAN 


in A /, > Some a " ” ἰόλ ῳ 

χείλεα καὶ χάος εὐρὺ καὶ ἄσπετον αἰόλον ἕρκος, 

δή pa τότ᾽ ἰχνεύμων δολίην ἐπὶ μῆτιν ὑφαίνων 418 
λοξοῖς ὀφθαλμοῖσιν ἀπείρονα θῆρα δοκεύει, 

εἰσόκε τοι βαθὺν ὕπνον ἐπὶ φρεσὶ πιστώσηται" 

5 eee 2 RC me} , δ ες A > \ 
αἶψα δ᾽ dp’ ἐν ψαμάθοισι καὶ ἐν πηλοῖσιν ἐλυσθεὶς 
ῥίμφ᾽ ἔθορεν, πυλεῶνα διαπτάμενος θανάτοιο 
τολμηρῇ κραδίῃ, διὰ δ᾽ εὐρέος ἤλυθε λαιμοῦ. 420 
αὐτὰρ ὅ γ᾽ ἐξ ὕπνου βαρυαέος ἔγρετο δειλός, 
καὶ κακὸν ἐν λαγόνεσσι φέρων τόσον ἀπροτίελπτον, 
πάντῃ μαινόμενος καὶ ἀμήχανος ἀμφαλάληται, 
ἄλλοτε μὲν ποτὶ τέρματ᾽ ἰὼν μυχάτου ποταμοῖο, 
ἄλλοτε δ᾽ αὖ ψαμάθοισι κυλινδόμενος ποτὶ χέρσον, 425 
ἄγριον ἀσθμαίνων, στρωφώμενος ἀμφ᾽ ὀδύνῃσιν. 
αὐτὰρ ὅ γ᾽ οὐκ ἀλέγει, γλυκερῇ δ᾽ ἐπιτέρπετ᾽ ἐδωδῇ: 
ἥπατι δ᾽ ἄγχι μάλιστα παρήμενος εἰλαπινάζει" 
> \ t \ \ / μὲ », 
ὀψὲ δέ τοι προλιπὼν κενεὸν δέμας ἔκθορε θηρός. 
ἰχνεῦμον μέγα θαῦμα, μεγασθενές, αἰολόβουλε, 430 
ὅσσην τοι κραδίη τόλμαν χάδεν. ὅσσον ὑπέστης, 
ἀγχίμολον θανάτοιο τεὸν δέμας ἀμφὶς ἐρείσας. 

7A. ὃ ὍΝ > Ψ. Δ 3 7 aA 

σπίδα δ᾽ ἰοφόρον τοίαις ἐδαμάσσατο βουλαῖς. 

lel / > / A “ / 
πᾶν δέμας ἐν ψαμάθοισι καλύψατο θῆρα δοκεύων, 
νόσφι μόνης οὐρῆς τε καὶ ὀφθαλμῶν πυροέντων᾽ 435 
οὐρή οἱ δολιχὴ γὰρ ὀφιονέη τε τέτυκται, 
ἄκροισιν κεφαληδὸν ἐειδομένοισι κορύμβοις, 


1 yl. μεγάθυμε. 


« Diod. i, 87; ΑΕ]. viii. 25, x. 47; Phil. 98; Solin. XXxXii. 
25; Plin. vili. 90; Plut. Mor. 966 >: Amm. M. xxii. 15, 19; 
Strabo 812. . 

> The Naja haje, an African species of Cobra, called ἀσπίς 
(1.6. shield) from its shield or hood. When annoyed, it 
erects itself on its hinder part, while it spreads out the 
head and neck to right and left. It is much employed by 
snake-charmers in Palestine (Tristr. ps 271). 


148 


CYNEGETICA, III. 414-437 


his wide gape and his fence unspeakable of flashing 
teeth, then the Ichneumon weaves a subtle device. 
With eyes askance he watches the huge beast until 
he is confident in his heart that it is deep asleep. 
Then, having rolled himself in sand and mud he 
swiftly springs afid flies with daring heart. through 
the gate of death and passes through the wide throat. 
Then the wretched Crocodile wakes from his heavy 
sleep and carrying in his belly such an evil unlooked 
for, everywhere he roams in helpless rage, now going 
to the farthest reaclies of the river, now rolling shore- 
ward in the sand, gasping wildly and tossing in his 
agony. But the Ichneumon heeds not but enjoys 
his sweet repast ; and mostly by the liver he sits to 
banquet ; then late and last he leaps forth and leaves 
the empty body of the beast. O Ichneumon, mar- 
vellous and mighty, cunning in counsel, how 
great daring thy heart holds! What a task thou 
dost undertake, advancing thy body to the very 
jaws of death. 

The venomous Asp?® the Ichneumon overcomes by 
this device. He lies in wait for the beast, hiding all 
his body in the sands, save only the tail and the fiery 
eyes ; for the tail is long and snakelike with curling 


° A. 612a 15 ὁ δ᾽ ἰχνεύμων ὁ ἐν Αἰγύπτῳ ὅταν ἴδῃ τὸν ὄφιν τὴν 
ἀσπίδα καλουμένην, οὐ πρότερον ἐπιτίθεται πρὶν συγκαλέσῃ βοηθοὺς 
ἄλλους- πρὸς δὲ τὰς πληγὰς καὶ τὰ δήγματα πηλῷ καταπλάττουσιν 
ἑαυτούς: βρέξαντες γὰρ ἐν τῷ ὕδατι πρῶτον, οὕτω καλινδοῦνται ἐν 
τῇ γῇ ; Strabo 812; Ael. iii. 22, v. 48: vi. 38, x. 47: Phil, 
98; Antig. 32; Nicand. 7. 190 ff.; Plin. viii. 88; Luc. iy, 
724 Aspidas ut Pharias cauda sollertior hostis Ludit et iratas 
incerta proyocat umbra Obliquumque caput vanas serpentis 
in auras Effusae tuto comprendit guttura morsu [ etiferam 
citra saniem; tunc inrita pestis Exprimitur, faucesque 
fluunt pereunte veneno. 


149 


OPPIAN. 


x Pe ~ / ε , 
ἄντα μελαινομένη, θηρῶν φολίδεσσιν ὁμοίη. 
τὴν δ᾽ ὅτε φυσιόωσαν ἔχιν ψολόεσσαν ἴδηται, 
lod , 
ἀντία γυρώσας προκαλέσσατο θῆρα δαφοινήν. 
ἀσπὶς δ᾽ ἰοφόρον πέλας ἀντήειρε κάρηνον, 
στήθεά τ᾽ εὔρυνε, στυφελόν & ὑπέσηρεν ὀδόντα, 
μαρναμένη γενύεσσιν ἐτώσια λευγαλέῃσιν. 
> > 3 > ΄ tor) 3 Fae > ΄ὔ 
ἀλλ᾽ οὐκ ἰχνεύμων τότ᾽ ἀρήϊος ἐν ψαμάθοισι 
δηθύνει, πικρῶν δὲ θορὼν ἐδράξατο λαιμῶν, 
δαρδάπτει τε γένυσσιν ἑλισσομένην ἑκάτερθε, 
καὶ νέκυν αὐτίκ᾽ ἔθηκ᾽ ἀποφώλιον ἐκπτύουσαν 
\ / ie ~ / Die. 
πευκεδανὸν θανάτοιο φίλον, ζαμενῆ χόλον, ἰόν. 
\ \ > / ΒΕ 3 7 / 

Ναὶ μὴν αἰολόβουλος én’ ἀγραύλοισι μάλιστα 
θηρσὶ πέλει κερδώ, μάλ᾽ ἀρήϊος ἐν πραπίδεσσι- 
καὶ πινυτὴ ναίει πυμάτοις ἐνὶ φωλειοῖσιν, 
ἑπταπύλους οἴξασα δόμους τρητάς τε καλιὰς 

729 3 3 8 Υ͂ ΄ὔ Li A 
τηλόθ᾽ am’ ἀλλήλων, μή μιν θηρήτορες ἄνδρες 
ἀμφὶ θύρῃ λοχόωντες ὑπὸ βροχίδεσσιν ἄγωνται" 
ἀργαλέη γενύεσσι καὶ ἀντία δηρίσασθαι 

ἡρσί τ᾽ ἀρειοτέροισι καὶ ἀγρευτῆρσι κύνεσσιν. 
εὖτε δὲ χεῖμα πέλει κρυερὸν βόσιός τε χατίζει, 

\ > ¢ / \ / b 4 
γυμναὶ δ᾽ ἡμερίδες περὶ βότρυσιν ἰνδάλλονται, 
δὴ τότε καὶ θηρᾶν' πικρὴν ἐπὶ μῆτιν ὕφαίνει, 
οἰωνούς τε δόλοισιν ἑλεῖν καὶ τέκνα λαγωῶν. 


1 θήραν or θήρην or θῆρα Mss. 


* “The name Spy-slange [given to it by the Boers], 
meaning Spitting Snake, refers to the habit which this and 
other African Cobras have of letting the poison drop from 
the mouth like saliva when they are excited” (Camb. N.H. 
viii. p. 628). 

> The cunning of the Fox is of course proverbial: A. 
488 Ὁ 20 τὰ μὲν πανοῦργα Kal κακοῦργα οἷον ἀλώπηξ. Hence its 
name κερδώ (2.6. κερδαλεόφρων), a fem. Kosename or pet-name 
150 


440 


445 


450 


455 


460 


CYNEGETICA, III. 438-460 


headlike tufts, black to the view, like the scales of 
serpents. When he seeks the dusky puffing viper, 
he arches his tail in front of her and challenges the 
deadly beast. The Asp over against him lifts up 
her head hard by and expands her breast and bares 
her stubborn teeth and fights vainly with her deadly 
jaws. But then the warlike Ichneumon lingers not 
in the sands, but leaps and seizes her terrible throat 
and rends her with his jaws as she twists this way 
and that and straightway lays her dead—vainly 
spitting? forth the bitter deadly venom of her 
passionate wrath. 

Furthermore, most cunning ὃ among all the beasts 
of the field is the Fox. Warlike of heart and wise 
she dwells in remotest lair, with seven-gated openings 
to her house and tunnelled earths far from one 
another, lest hunters set an ambush about her doors 
and lead her captive with snares. Terrible is she 
to fight with her teeth against stronger wild beasts 
and hunting Dogs. And when chilly winter comes 
and she lacks food, and the vines show bare of grapes, 
then she weaves a deadly device for hunting, to 
capture by craft birds? and the young of Hares.’ 


(cf. ᾿Ἐνυώ : ’Hvvdd\wos) parallel to the masc, πίθων : πίθηκος. 
Both occur together in Pind. P. ii. 72 καλός τοι πίθων . ... αἰεὶ 
καλός. . . κερδοῖ δὲ τί μάλα τοῦτο κερδαλέον τελέθει; where 
καλός alludes not merely to the forrnula καλός, ναιχὶ καλός 
(cf. Callim. Z. xxx. 5 (Loeb) n.) but also to καλλίας, a pet- 

name for the Ape (cf. Callim. (Loeb) Fr. Incert, 141 n.), 
© Canis vulpes, M.G. ἀλεποῦ, still pretty common in 
Greece, where it is smaller and more greyish in hue than 
the Fox of N. Europe (Bik. p. 11); very frequent in Palestine 
where the common Fox of the S: and central country is the 
Egyptian Fox, greyer and smaller than ours (¢f. A. 606 a 24), 
while in the N. is found the larger Syrian Fox (Tristr. p. 85). 

4 Cf. H. ii. 107 ff. n. ¢ Ael, xiii. 11. 
151 


OPPIAN ' 


Ἔννεπέ μοι κἀκεῖνα, πολύθροε Μοῦσα λιγεῖα, 

μικτὰ φύσιν θηρῶν, διχόθεν kekepaoueva, φῦλα, 
A Ps 

πόρδαλιν αἰολόνωτον ὁμοῦ ξυνήν τὲ κάμηλον. 

aA Aw Ζ 
Ζεῦ πάτερ, ὅσσα νόησας, ὅσ᾽ εἴδεα νῶϊ φύτευσας, 
ὅσσα βροτοῖσιν ὄπασσας, ὅσ᾽ εἰναλίοις νεπόδεσσιν, 465 
ὃς τόδ᾽ ἐμήσαο πάγχυ καμήλων αἰόλον εἶδος, 
ἀμφιέσας ῥινοῖσιν ἀναιδέσι, πορδαλέοισι 
φαίδιμον, ἱμερόεν, τιθασὸν γένος ἀνθρώποισι. 
δειρή οἱ ταναή, στικτὸν δέμας, οὔατα βαιά, 
ψιλὸν ὕπερθε κάρη, δολιχοὶ πόδες, εὐρέα ταρσά, 470 
κώλων δ᾽ οὐκ ἴσα μέτρα, πόδες τ᾽ οὐ πάμπαν ὁμοῖοι, 
3 3 € / ” > / ¢ if X 
ἀλλ᾽ οἱ πρόσθεν ἔασιν dpeloves, ὑστάτιοι δὲ 

A > /, 4 3 > γι « aA 

πολλὸν ὀλιζότεροι, κατά τ᾽ ὀκλάζουσιν ὁμοῖοι. 
> \ / lod , ij? 7ON > vA 
ex δὲ μέσης κεφαλῆς δίδυμον κέρας ἰθὺς ὀρούει, 
οὔ τι κέρας κερόεν, παρὰ δ᾽ οὔατα μεσσόθι κόρσης 475 
aBAnxpat κροτάφοισιν ἐπαντέλλουσι κεραῖαι" 
ἄρκιον, ὡς ἐλάφοιο, τέρεν στόμα, λεπταλέοι τε 
ἐντὸς ἐρηρέδαται γαλακόχροες" ἀμφὶς ὀδόντες 
αἴγλην παμφανόωσαν ἀπαστράπτουσιν ὀπωπαί. 

3 \ > Seo) > “a a Ψ if 
οὐρὴ δ᾽ αὖτ᾽ ἐλαχεῖα, Boats ἅτε δορκαλίδεσσιν, 480 

/ 

ἄκραισιν μετόπισθε μελαινομένῃσιν ἐθείραις. 


1 γαλακόχροες Editor coll. Callim. Hee. i. 4.3: γαλακτόχροες 
(γαλοκτ- DE) ss, 


4 Diod. ii, 50 ξῴα διφυῆ καὶ μεμιγμένα ταῖς ἰδέαις. 

» The Camelopard or Giraffe, Giraffe Camelopardalis, Cf: 
Agatharch. ap. Phot. 455. 4 παρὰ τοῖς τρωγλοδύταις ἐστὶν ἡ 
λεγομένη παρ᾽ Ἕλλησι καμηλοπάρδαλις, σύνθετον τρόπον τινὰ κατὰ 
τὴν κλῆσιν καὶ τὴν φύσιν λαχοῦσα. τὴν μὲν γὰρ ποικιλίαν (2.6. 
spotted hide) ἔχει παρδάλεως, τὸ μέγεθος δὲ καμήλου, τὸ πάχος 
δὲ ὑπερφυές, τὸν δὲ αὐχένα τοιοῦτον ὥστε ἀπ’ ἄκρων ἀμέλγεσθαι 
τῶν δένδρων τὴν τροφήν ; Strabo 827; Diod. ii. 51; Heliod, 
x. 273 Athen. 201 c; Solin. xxx, 19; Plin. viii. 69 Nabun 
Aethiopes vocant collo similem equo, pedibus et cruribus 
bovi, camelo capite, albis maculis rutilum colorem dis- 
152 


CYNEGETICA, III. 461-481 


Tell also, I pray thee, O clear-voiced Muse of 
diverse tones, of those tribes of wild beasts which 
are of hybrid ¢ nature and mingled of two stocks, even 
the Pard of spotted back joined and united with the 
Camel? O Father Zeus, how many things hast thou 
devised, how many forms hast thou created for us, 
how many hast thou given to men, how many to the 
fmny creatures of the sea! Even as thou hast devised 
this very varied form of the Camel, clothing with 
the hide of the shameless Pard a race splendid and 
lovely and gentle to men. — Long is its neck, its body 
spotted, the ears small, bare the head above, long 
the legs, the soles of the feet broad; the limbs are 
unequal and the legs are not altogether alike, but 
the fore-legs are greater while the hind-legs are much 
smaller and look as if they were squatting on their 
haunches. From the middle of the head two horns 
rise straight up—not horny horns,’ but feeble pro- 
jJections on the head which alongside the ears rise 
up between the temples. The tender mouth is 
sufficiently large, like that of a Stag and within are 
set on either side thin milk-white teeth. A bright 
gleam lightens from the eyes. The tail, again, is 
short, like that of the swift Gazelles, with dark hair 
at the hinder end. 
tinguentibus, unde appellata camelopardalis, dictatoris 
Caesaris circensibus ludis primum visa Romae. A. 498 b 32 
τὸ θηρίον τὸ πάρδιον (v.l. ἱππαρίδιον) ὀνομαζόμενον, described as 
having a fine mane, horned and cloyen-hooved, has been 
thought to refer to the Giraffe. 

° The so-called ‘‘horns” of the Giraffe, which are pos- 
sessed both by male and female, though less developed in 
the latter, “" differ from those of all other Ruminants ; they 
are small bony prominences of the frontal bones, which 
become fused with the Skull, and which are covered with un- 
modified skin. They are not shed ” (Camb. N.H., x, p- 302). 


153 


OPPIAN 


Nat μὴν ἄλλο γένεθλον ἐμοῖς ἴδον ὀφθαλμοῖσιν 
ἀμφίδυμον, μέγα θαῦμα, μετὰ στρουθοῖο κάμηλον" 
τὴν ἔμπης κούφοις μεταρίθμιον οἰωνοῖσι 
καὶ πτερόεσσαν ἐοῦσαν ἐμαὶ μέλψουσιν ἀοιδαί, 48 

¢ μ 3 
οὕνεκεν ἡμετέρης μιν ἕλεν νόμος αἰόλος ἄγρης. 
οὔτε γὰρ ὀρνίθων σφε δαμάσσατο δήϊος ἰξός, 
οὔτε διηερίην δόνακες πατέοντες ἀταρπόν. 

3 > a 7 J, \ \ epee A , 
ἀλλ᾽ ἵπποι σκύλακές τε θοοὶ καὶ ἀείδελα δεσμά. 

~ » / \ [᾿ “ἡ ov Ψ 
τῆς ἤτοι μέγεθος μὲν ὑπέρβιον, ὅσσον ὕπερθε 490 
νώτοις εὐρυτάτοισι φέρειν νεοθηλέα κοῦρον: 
καὶ πόδες ὑψιτενεῖς, ἴκελοι νωθροῖσι καμήλοις, 
ὁπποῖον θαμινῇσιν ἀρηράμενοι φολίδεσσι 

“ + ~ > / A > > iP: 
σκληρῇς ἄχρι διπλῆς ἐπιγουνίδος - ὕψι δ᾽ ἀείρει 
\ \ / \ \ fd A 

αὐὴν μὲν κεφαλήν, πολλὴν δὲ τανύτριχα δειρὴν 495 
κυανέην" κείνῃσι πολὺ πτερόν: οὐ μὲν ὕπερθεν" 
5] ς / > 7 FA 
ἠέρος ὑψιπόροισιν ἐπιπλώουσι κελεύθοις, 
> cet? , \ \ 4 
ἀλλ᾽ ἔμπης θείειν ποσσὶ Κραιπνοὶ τελέθουσαι 
αὐτοῖσιν φορέουσιν ἴσον τάχος οἰωνοῖσιν. 

b) \ \ > , ε Pee > A > / 
οὐδὲ μεν ὀρνίθεσσιν ομοιίος ἀμβαδὸν €vUv7), 500 
Βάκτριον οἷα δὲ φῦλον ἔχουσιν ἀπόστροφα λέκτρα" 


1 After 496 all mss. insert C. iv. 74-76. 


* The Ostrich, Struthio camelus; A. 616 Ὁ ὁ τὸν ἐν Λιβύῃ 
στρουθόν; P.A. 697 Ὁ 14 ὁ στρουθὸς ὁ Λιβυκός ; of. ibid. 
695a 17; 658a13; De gen. 749 Ὁ17: ΑΕ]. ii. 27 ἡ στρουθὸς 
ἡ μεγάλη; cf. iv. 857, v. 50, ix. 58, xiv. 7; Phil. 4; Herod. 
iv. 192 στρουθοὶ κατάγαιοι : Diod. ii. 50 ai ὀνομαζόμεναι oT pou- 
θοκάμηλοι, cf. iii. 27; Agatharch. ap. Phot. 468 ἃ 25; Plin. x. 
1 Sequitur natura avium, quarum grandissimi et paene 
bestiarum generis struthocameli Africi vel Aethiopici. 

> This is not a mere form of expression for ‘the two 
thighs,” ‘‘thigh of each leg” but a ref. to the notion that 
the Camel—and by analogy the Ostrich—is double-jointed. 
Herod. iii. 103 τὸ μὲν δὴ εἶδος ὁκοῖόν τι ἔχει ἡ κάμηλος, ἐπισταμέ- 


154 


CYNEGETICA, III. 482-501 


Yea and another double breed have I beheld with 
mine eyes, a mighty marvel, Camel united with 
Sparrow ®; which, though it is numbered with the 
lightsome birds and is winged, notwithstanding my 
lays shall celebrate, since the varied range of our 
hunting admits it: For the lime that is the enemy 
of birds does not prevail over it, nor the reeds that 
tread an airy path, but Horses and swift Hounds and 
unseen snares. Its size is huge, so that it can carry 
on its broad back a young boy. The legs are long, 
like to those of the sluggish Camels, and are arrayed 
as it were with close-set hard scales up to the double 
thigh. Small is the head that it rears on high but 
long the hairy dusky neck. They have abundant 
feathers ; yet they do not sail aloft on the high paths 
of air, but notwithstanding, as they run swiftly with 
their feet, they have a speed equal to the birds 
themselves. Nor do they mate like birds® by 
mounting but, like the Bactrian tribe,’ rear to 


νοισι τοῖσι Βλλησι οὐ συγγράφω: τὸ δὲ μὴ ἐπιστέαται αὐτῆς, τοῦτο 
φράσω: κάμηλος ἐν τοῖσι ὀπισθίοισι σκέλεσι ἔχει τέσσερας μηροὺς 
καὶ γούνατα τέσσερα : cf. Ael. x. 8. The statement is contra- 
dicted A. 499 a 19 καὶ γόνυ & ἔχει ἐν ἑκάστῳ τῷ σκέλει ἕν καὶ 
τὰς καμπὰς οὐ πλείους, ὥσπερ λέγουσί τινες, ἀλλὰ φαίνεται διὰ τὴν 
ὑπόστασιν τῆς κοιλίας, 1.6. on account of the way in which the 
belly is supported (for this use of ὑπόστασις cf. A. P.A. 
659 ἃ 94. ἕνεχ᾽ ὑποστάσεως τοῦ βάρους. Similarly ὑπόστημα 
De an. incess. 708 Ὁ 2)—the ref. being to the callosities on 
the joints which support the belly in the same way that the 
front part of the body is supported by the breast callosity 
(A. 499 a 16 ἄλλον δ᾽ ἔχουσιν ὕβον τοιοῦτον οἷον ἄνω ἐν τοῖς κάτω, 
ἐφ᾽ οὗ, ὅταν κατακλιθῇ εἰς γόνατα, ἐστήρικται τὸ ἄλλο σῶμα). 

¢ A, 5599} 9 ποιοῦνται σύνδυασμὸν τάτε πλεῖστα τῶν τετραπόδων 
ἐπιβαίνοντος ἐπὶ τὸ θῆλυ τοῦ ἄρρενος καὶ τὸ τῶν ὀρνίθων ἅπαν 
γένος οὕτω τε καὶ μοναχῶς : ef. Plin, x. 143. 

ἅ The Bactrian Camel, Camelus bactrianus, with two 
humps: A. 498b8; 499 a 14; Plin. viii. 67, 

155 


OPPIAN 


> la 
τίκτει δ᾽ ἄπλετον φόν, ὅσον χαδέειν τόσον ὄρνιν, 
“. 7 
κυκλόσε λαϊνέοις θωρησσόμενον κελύφεσσι. 
Πτῶκας ἀείδωμεν, θήρης ἐρίδωρον ὀπώρην. 
~ / / / 7 > 
σῶμα πέλει τυτθόν, λάσιον, δολιχώτατον obas, 505 
βαιὸν ὕπερθε κάρη, βαιοὶ πόδες, οὐκ ἴσα κῶλα" 
χροιὴν δ᾽ ἀμφιέσαντ᾽ ἀνομοίϊον" of μὲν ἔασι 
3 
κυάνεοι δνοφεροί τε μελάμβωλον κατ ἄρουραν, 
ξανθοὶ δ᾽ αὖθ᾽ ἕτεροι πεδίων ἐπὶ μιλτοπαρήων" 
αὐτὰρ ἐρίγληνοι χαροπὸν στράπτουσιν ὀπωπαὶὺ 510 
κανθὸν ἀγρυπνίῃ κεκορυθμένον: οὔποτε γὰρ δὴ 
ἔς > \ 7 > 7 La 
ὕπνον ἐπὶ βλεφάροισιν ἀποβρίξαντες ἕλοντο, 
δειδιότες θηρῶν τε βίην μερόπων τε θοὸν κῆρ᾽ 
νυκτὶ δέ 7 ἐγρήσσουσι καὶ ἐς φιλότητα μέλονται: 


? This idea, entertained about various opisthuretic animals 
(Solin. xxvii. 16 (Leones) ayersi [ἡ.6. ἀντίπυγοι, ἀπόστροφοι] 
coeunt: nec hi tantum sed et lynces δὲ cameli et elephanti 
et rhinocerotes et tigrides) is contradicted by A. 540a 13 ai 
δὲ κάμηλοι ὀχεύονται τῆς. θηλείας καθημένης: περιβεβηκὼς δὲ ὁ 
ἄρρην ὀχεύει οὐκ ἀντίπυγος (cf. δ42 8, 16), ἀλλὰ καθάπερ καὶ τὰ 
ἄλλα τετράποδα with regard to Camels, and of Elephants by 
Diod. ii. 42 ὀχεύεται δὲ τοῦτο τὸ ζῷον οὐχ, ὥσπερ τινὲς φασίν, 
ἐξηλλαγμένως, ἀλλ᾽ ὁμοίως ἵπποις καὶ τοῖς ἄλλοις τετραπόδοις 
ζῴοις. 4 

> Lepus timidus L. and allied species. M.G. λαγωός. 
Besides the normal Greek name λαγώς we find (1) the 
poetical term πτώξ (cf. C. i. 165), first as an epithet, Hom. 
Ll. xxii. 310 πτῶκα λαγωόν, ‘the cowering Hare,” in allusion 
to its timidity (Poll. v.72; Ael. vii. 19), but already in Hom, 
11. xvii. 676 as a substantive ; ef. Aesch, Ag. 137 (2) δασύπους, 
the Furry-footed, frequent in Aristotle, used also by Plut. 
Mor. 971 a,» ete.; Poll. y. 68, and, acc. to Athen. 399 e, f, 
by some of the Comic Poets; Plin. viii, 219 (quoted on 
1. 519), where he seems to distinguish lepus and dasypus, is 
unintelligible. Similarly in the Anthol. x. 1] λασίου ποδὸς 
ixvca=tracks of the Hare. 

The Hare is very common in the whole of Greece (Bik. 
p. 14)—though it would appear that at one time it was rare 


156 


CYNEGETICA, ITI. 509-514 


rear. It lays a huge egg, of size to hold so great a 
bird, armed about with stony shell. 

Let us sing of Hares,® rich harvest of the hunt. 
The body ¢ is small and hairy, the ears are very long, 
small the head above, small the feet, the limbs 
unequal. The colour with which they are clothed 
varies ; some are dark and dusky, which inhabit the 
black-soiled tilth : others are reddish-yellow, which 
live in red-coloured plains. Brightly flash their 
goodly orbs, their eyes armed with sleeplessness  ; 
for never do they slumber and admit sleep upon their 
eyelids, being afraid of the violence of wild beasts 
and the nimble wit of men, but they are wakeful in 
the night and indulge their desire. Unceasingly 


in Attica, cf. Nausicrates (Comic Poet) ap. Athen. l.c. ἐν τῇ 
yap’ Αττικῇ τίς εἶδε πώποτε | λέοντας ἢ τοιοῦτον ἕτερον θηρίον ; | οὗ 
δασύποδ᾽ εὑρεῖν ἐστιν οὐχὶ ῥᾷδιον. In many of the Cyclades the 
Hare is extremely common and differs in no essential point 
from the Common Hare of Europe (Erh. p. 22). On the 
other hand, in some of the Cyclades it is either not found at 
all or confined to a particular region, its place being taken 
by the Rabbit, Z. cwniculus. The curious thing is that 
Hares and Rabbits in the Cyclades seem to be mutually 
exclusive. Thus only Hares are found in Ceos, Siphnos, 
Syros, Tenos, Naxos, Paros, Melos, and the North of 
Andros; only Rabbits in Gyaros, Cythnos, Seriphos, As- 
pronisi, Myconos, Delos, Cimolos, Pholegandros, and the 
South of Andros. There is nothing in the geographical 
conditions to account for this phenomenon ; all the islands 
offer exactly similar facilities for life and nurture. Yet 
Syros has only Hares, while the little island of Aspronisi, 
six nautical miles 5. of Syros, has only Rabbits. ‘A curious . 
parallel is offered by Syria, where the Hare is common, 
while ‘* No Rabbit is found in Syria or in any of the adjoin- 
ing countries ” (Tristr. p. 99). Cf. Plin. viii. 296 f. 

¢ A. 519 a 22, etc.; Xen. C. 5. 22 ff. ; Poll. y. 66 ff.; Ael. 
xiii. 13 f.; Phil. 60 f.; Plin. viii. 217 ff. 

4 Callim. H. iii. 95 οὐ μύοντα λαγωόν ; Ken. CO. 5. 11 and 
26; Poll. v. 69 and 72; Phil. 60: Ael. ii. 12, xiii. 13. 


157 


OPPIAN 


WY CE οὐ , ” > » 5 1 
νωλεμὲς ἱμείρουσι γάμων, ἔτι δ᾽ ἔγκυοι οὖσαι: 515 
οὔποτ᾽ ἀναίνονται πόσιος πολύθουρον ἐρωήν, 
οὐδ᾽ ὅτε γαστρὶ φέρωσι πολύσπορον ὠκὺν ὀϊστόν" 

» A , A 7 > » ” > 
ἔξοχα yap τόδε φῦλον, ὅσ᾽ ἄπλετος ἔτραφεν aia, 
πουλυγόνον τελέθει" τὸ μὲν" ἄρ ποθι νηδύος ἐκτὸς 
” 3 / / La > Vi 
ἔμβρυον ἐκθρώσκει τετελεσμένον, ἄλλο δ᾽ ἔσωθεν 520 
/ \ / \ 3 4 > € /, >7 
νόσφι τριχὸς φορέει, TO δ᾽ ἄρ᾽ ἡμιτέλεστον ἀέξει, 
” > Ψ wv 4 / 3 ,’ 
ἄλλο δ᾽ ἄναρθρον ἔχει θορόεν βρέφος ὠπήσασθαι:" 
ἑξείης τίκτει δέ, καὶ οὔποτε θῆλυς ἀναιδὴς 
/ , / 3 Ld A 3 ia 
λήθετο μαχλοσύνης Tedder δ᾽ ὅσα θυμὸς ἀνώγει, 
οὐδ᾽ αὐταῖς ὠδῖσιν ἀνηναμένη ΙΚυθέρειαν. 525 


1 ἐγγὺς ἐοῦσαι Mss. : corr. Turnebus. 


9 Strabo 144; Athen. 400; Plin. J.c.; A. Rhet. 1413 a 16. 

> Herod. iii. 108 ὁ Adyos ὑπὸ παντὸς θηρεύεται θηρίου καὶ 
ὄρνιθος καὶ ἀνθρώπου, οὕτω δή τι πολύγονόν ἐστι" ἐπικυίσκεται 
μοῦνον πάντων͵ θηρίων καὶ τὸ μὲν δασὺ τῶν τέκνων ἐν τῇ γαστρί, τὸ 
δὲ ψιλόν, τὸ δὲ ἄρτι ἐν τῇσι μήτρῃσι πλάσσεται, τὸ δὲ ἀναιρέεται : 
A. 579b30 οἱ dactrodes . .. ὀχεύονται καὶ τίκτουσιν πᾶσαν 
ὥραν καὶ ἐπικυίσκονται ὅταν κύωσι καὶ τίκτουσι κατὰ μῆνα. τίκτουσι 
δ᾽ οὐκ ἀθρόα ἀλλὰ διαλείπουσιν ἡμέρας ὅσας ἂν τύχωσιν. ἴσχει δ᾽ 
ἡ θήλεια γάλα πρότερον ἢ τεκεῖν καὶ τεκοῦσα εὐθὺς ὀχεύεται καὶ 


158 


CYNEGETICA, III. 515-525 


they yearn to mate and while the females are still 
pregnant they do not reject the lustful advances of 
the male, not even when they carry in the womb 
the swift arrow of fruitfulness. For this tribe, among 
all that the infinite earth breeds, is the most prolific.¢ 
The one embryo? Gomes forth from the mother’s womb 
full-formed, while she carries one within her still 
hairless, and nourishes another half-formed, and has 
in her womb yet another—a formless foetus to look 
on. In succession she brings them forth and the 
shameless female never forgets her lust but fulfils 
all her desire and not even in the throes of birth 
does she refuse her mate. 


συλλαμβάνει ἔτι Ondagouévn; cf. 542b31; De gen. 174a31; 
Xen. C. 5. 13 πολύγονον δ᾽ ἐστὶν οὕτως ὥστε τὰ μὲν τέτοκε, τὰ 
δὲ τίκτει, τὰ δὲ κυεῖ ; ΑΕ. ii. 12 φέρει δὲ καὶ ἐν τῇ νηδύι τὰ μὲν 
ἡμιτελῆ, τὰ δὲ ὠδίνει, τὰ δὲ ἤδη οἱ τέτεκται: Plin. viii. 219 
Lepus omnium praedae nascens solus praeter dasypodem 
superfetat, aliud educans, aliud in utero pilis vestitum, aliud 
implume, aliud inchoatum gerens pariter; Poll. v. 73; 
Eratosth. Catast. 34; Athen. 400 e; Phil. 61; Varro iii. 
12. 4; Clem. Alex. Paed. ii. p. 291. 


159 


KYNHTETIKON TO A 


AN ts Ψ 
Hidea μὲν τόσα θηρσί, τόσαι δ᾽ ἀνὰ δάσκιον ὕλην 
/ λό ¢€ Aa) / aN 
νυμφίδιοι φιλότητες ὁμήθειαί τε πέλονται 
ἔχθεά τε κρυεροί τε μόθοι νόμιοί τε χαμεῦναι. 
τλησιπόνων δ᾽ ἀνδρῶν χρέος ἄπλετον ἀείδωμεν, 
\ 
ἀμφότερον κρατερόν τε μένος καὶ ἐπίφρονα βουλὴν 5 
/ 4 > ? v4 δ / 
κέρδεά τ᾽ αἰολόβουλα πολυφράστοις τε δόλοισι 
φραξαμένην κραδίην: ἢ γάρ τε πρὸς ἄγρια φῦλα 
μάρναται, οἷσι θεὸς σθένος ὥπασε καὶ μένος HU 
καὶ φρένας οὐδ᾽ αὐτῶν πολὺ μείονας ἀγρευτήρων. 
Ἤθεα' πολλὰ πέλει κλειτῆς πολυαρκέος" ἄγρης, 10 
ἄρμενα καὶ θήρεσσι καὶ ἔθνεσιν ἠδὲ χαράδραις, 
μυρία" τίς κεν ἅπαντα μιῇ φρενὶ χωρήσειεν 
εἰπέμεναι κατὰ μοῖραν ὑπ᾽ εὐκελάδοισιν ἀοιδαῖς; 
/ > DN / > ceed / EYE oN V4. 3 la 
τίς δ᾽ ἂν πάντ᾽ ἐσίδοι; τίς δ᾽ ἂν τόσον ὠπήσαιυτο 
\ ee ~ \ \ CoP / > ¢ / 
θνητὸς ἐών; μοῦνοι δὲ θεοὶ ῥέα πάνθ᾽ dpdwow. 


αὐτὰρ ἐγὼν ἐρέω τά τ᾽ ἐμοῖς ἴδον ὀφθαλμοῖσι, ᾿ 
θήρην ἀγλαόδωρον ἐπιστείχων ξυλόχοισιν, 

ὅσσα τ᾽ ἀπ᾽ ἀνθρώπων ἐδάην, τοῖσιν τὰ μέμηλεν, 
αἰόλα παντοίης ἐρατῆς μυστήρια τέχνης, 

ἱμείρων τάδε πάντα Σεουήρου Διὸς υἱῷ 20 


1 εἴδεα Brunck. 2 πολυάρκυος or πολυερκέος Brodaeus. 


* Dion. P. 1169 μοῦνοι δὲ θεοὶ ῥέα πάντα δύνανται, imitated 
160 


CYNEGETICA, or THE CHASE 
IV 


So many are the species of wild beasts, so many in 
the shady wood their nuptial loves and companion- 
ships, their hates and deadly feuds, their couches 
in the wild. Now let us sing the great business of 
the toilsome hunters, both their valiant might and 
their prudent counsel, their cunning craft and their 
heart armed with manifold wiles; for verily that 
heart wars against wild races to whom God hath given 
strength and goodly courage and wits not far inferior 
to the hunters themselves. 

Many are the modes of glorious and profitable hunt- 
ing : modes innumerable, suited to the various beasts 
and tribes and glens. Who with his single mind should 
comprehend them all and tell of them in order with 
euphonious song? Who could behold them all? 
Who could behold so much, being mortal? Only 
the Gods easily see all things.* But I shall tell what 
I have seen with my own eyes when following in the 
woods the chase, splendid of boons, and whatever 
cunning mysteries of all manner of delightful craft I 
have learned from them whose business it is; fain as 
I am to sing of all these things to the son of Divine 


from Hom. Od. x. 305 χαλεπὸν δέ τ᾽ ὀρύσσειν | ἀνδράσι γε θνητοῖσι 
θεοὶ δέ τε πάντα δύνανται: Od. iv. 879 θεοὶ δέ τε πάντα ἴσασιν. 


Μ 161 


OPPIAN | 


, / 
ἀείδειν: od δέ, πότνα θεά, παγκοίρανε θήρης, 
a oh > “ 
εὐμενέουσα θοῇ βασιληΐδι λέξον ἀκουῇ, 
2, ro 4 
ὄφρα τεῶν ἔργων προμαθὼν ὀαρίσματα πάντα 
“ a \ 3 “ 
θηροφονῇ, μακαριστὸς ὁμοῦ παλάμῃ καὶ ἀοιδῇ. 
na a > nA 
Θηρῶν of μὲν ἔασιν ἐπίφρονες, aioAdBovror, 25 
ἀλλὰ δέμας βαιοί: τοὶ δ᾽ ἔμπαλιν ἀλκήεντες, 

\ 7. 9 / 5 / ες 3. εὐ ον ¢ ~ 
βουλὴν δ᾽ ἐν στήθεσσιν ἀνάλκιδες" οἱ ὃ ap ὁμαρτῇ 
καὶ κραδίην δειλοὶ καὶ γυῖα πέλουσ᾽ ἀμενηνοί, 

3 \ / la a A \ / ,ὔ 
ἀλλὰ πόδεσσι Boot: τοῖσιν δὲ θεὸς πόρε πάντα, 

\ 4 \ / 3 / ~ 
βουλὴν κερδαλέην, κρατερὸν δέμας, ὠκέα γοῦνα. 80 
γιγνώσκουσι δ᾽ ἕκαστος Ens φύσιος κλυτὰ δῶρα, 
yA > > id \ ” / / 
ev? ὀλιγοδρανέες τε καὶ ἔνθα πέλουσι δαφοινοί. 
οὐκ ἔλαφος κεράεσσι θρασύς, κεράεσσι δὲ ταῦρος" 
οὐ γενύεσσιν ὄρυξ κρατερός, γενύεσσι λέοντες" 
οὐ ποσὶ ῥινόκερως πίσυνος, πόδες ὅπλα Aaywav: 35 

/ BQ? > \ ͵7ὔ ,ὔ 3», 
πόρδαλις οἶδ᾽ ὀλοὴ παλαμάων λοίγιον ἰόν, 
καὶ σθένος αἰνὸς ὄϊς μέγα λαϊνέοιο μετώπου, 
καὶ κάπρος μένος οἷδεν ἑῶν ὑπέροπλον ὀδόντων. 

“Oooo μέν νυν ἔασιν ἐπακτήρεσσι δαφοινοῖς 
μουναδὸν ἐν σκοπέλοισι προμήθειαί τε πάγαι τε, 40 
κεκριμένας φράσομεν θήρας ἐπὶ θηρσὶν ἑκάστοις 

N / 3 ao / ε , » 3 lol 

ξυνὰ δέ θ᾽ ὅσσα πέλουσιν, ὁμοίΐης ἔλλαχεν φδῆς. 
ξυναὶ θηροσύναι τε λίνων ξυναί τε ποδάγραι" 


* A stock theme: A. P.A. 662 b 33 δέδωκε yap ἡ φύσις τοῖς 
μὲν ὄνυχας, stots δ᾽ ὀδόντας μαχητικούς, τοῖς δ᾽ ἄλλο τι μόριον 
ἱκανὸν ἀμύνειν ; Lucr. v. 862 Principio genus acre leonum 
Saevaque saecla Tutata est virtus, volpes dolus et fuga 
cervos; Cic. VD. ii. 50. 127 Iam illa cernimus, ut contra 
metum et vim suis se armis quaeque defendat: cornibus 
tauri, apri dentibus, morsu leones ; aliae fuga se, aliae 
occultatione tutantur; atramenti effusione sepiae, torpore 
162 


CYNEGETICA, IV. 21-43 


Severus. And do thou of thy grace, O lady goddess, 
queen of the chase, declare those things for quick 
royal ears, so that knowing before all the lore of 
thy works the king may slay wild beasts, blessed at 
once in hand and song. 

Of wild beasts some are wise“ and cunning but small 
of body ; others again are valiant in might but weak 
in the counsel of their breasts; others are both 
craven of heart and feeble of body, but swift of foot ; 
to others again God hath given all the gifts together 
—cunning counsel, valorous strength, and nimble 
knees. But they know each® the splendid gifts of. 
his own nature—where they are feeble and where 
they are deadly.° Not with his hornsis the Stag bold 
but with his horns the Bull; not with his teeth is 
the Oryx strong, but with his teeth the Lion; not 
in his feet doth the Rhinoceros trust, but feet are 
the armour of the Hare ; the deadly Leopard knows 
the baleful venom of his claws and the dread Ram 
the mighty strength of his stony forehead, and the 
wild Boar knows the exceeding might of his tusks. 

Now whatever special arts and snares are used by 
deadly hunters amid the crags, the particular ways 
of hunting we shall tell for each sort of beast ; but 
those things which are common to all, are sung in 
one lay. Common is hunting with nets, common 
torpedines: multa etiam infectantes odoris intolerabili 
foeditate depellunt; cf. Ov. Hal. 1 ff. ; 

> Ael. ix. 40 οἷδε δὲ dpa τῶν ζῴων ἕκαστον ἐν ᾧ μέρει κέκτηται 
᾿ τὴν ἀλκήν: Ov. Hal. 7 Omnibus ignotae mortis timor, 
omnibus hostem Praesidiumque datum sentire et noscere 
teli Vimque modumque sui. ; 

© δαφοινός is sometimes definitely of colour = πυρρός, reddish ; 
Hom. 7}. ii. 308 δράκων ἐπὶ νῶτα δαφοινός 3 x. 23 δαφοινὸν δέρμα 
λέοντος, but often merely = φόνιος, φοβερός ; cf. 37 infr., Hes. 
and Suid. s.0., #.M. s. ἀρθρέμβολα. 

163 


OPPIAN 


ξυνὰ δέ τ᾽ ἀνθρώποισι ποδωκέα πάντα γένεθλα 
td ἠδὲ 7 ὃ / ᾿ χλλ δ᾽ ἊΝ 
ἵπποις ἠδὲ κύνεσσι διωκέμεν: ἄλλοτε δ᾽ αὖτε 
καὶ μούνοις ἵπποισι κυνῶν ἄτερ ἰθὺς ἐλαύνειν" 
ὔ a 
ἵπποισιν κείνοισιν, ὅσοι περὶ Mavpida γαῖαν 

7 > >! ΄ “’ ΟΝ \ y “. ~ 
φέρβοντ᾽, ἢ Λιβύεσσιν- ὅσοι μὴ κάρτεϊ χειρῶν 
ἄγχονται ψαλίοισι βιαζομένοιο χαλινοῦ, 

/ \ tL ῳ \ ε ͵ 
πείθονται δὲ λύγοισιν, ὅπη βροτὸς ἡγεμονεύει. 
τοὔνεκεν ἱππελάται κείνων ἐπιβήτορες ἵππων 
\ he / = ,ὔ , , > > δ, 
ἠδὲ κύνας λείπουσὶ φίλους πίσυνοί 7 ἐλόωσιν 
σ > Ya a \ / > A 
ἵπποις ἠελίου te βολῇ καὶ νόσφιν ἀρωγῶν. 

A > / A \ > if / 
᾿ ξυνὸν ἀκοντίζειν δὲ καὶ ἀντία τοξάζεσθαι 
θῆρας ἀρειοτέρους, τοί τ᾽ ἀνδράσιν ἶφι μάχονται. 

3 \ y A , > Ss la 

Es δὲ λίνον χρειὼ στέλλειν oinia θήρης, 

\ 
καὶ mou ἀνέμου φεύγειν ἀνεμόν τε δοκεύειν. 


α« The caltrop, ποδάγρα (A.P. vi. 296 ἀστεμφῆ ποδάγρην) or 
ποδοστράβη (Poll. ν. 32 καλοῖτο δ᾽ ἂν καὶ ποδοστράβη), Was 
employed chiefly for Deer, but also for wild Swine (Poll. d.c., 
Xen. Cyr. i. 6.28). It corresponds to the Lat. pedica dentata 
(Gratt. 92 Quid si dentatas iligno robore clausit Venator 
pedicas ἢ) and is said to have been invented by Aristaeus 
(Plut. Mor. 757 εὔχονται δ᾽ ᾿Αρισταίῳ δολοῦντες ὀρύγμασι καὶ 
βρόχοις λύκους καὶ ἄρκτους, ὃς πρῶτος θήρεσσιν ἔπηξε ποδάγρας : 
cf. Nonn. v. 234). It is described Poll. ἐ.0., Xen. C. 9. 11 ff. 
It consisted of a wooden hoop (στεφάνη) containing a frame- 
work (πλόκανον) in which were set nails of wood and iron 
alternately (Poll. seems to say that the nails were in the 
στεφάνη but Xen. describes them as ἐγκαταπεπλεγμένους ἐν τῷ 
πλοκάνῳ and acc. to Poll. πλόκανον ἐν μέσῳ TO πλέγματι 
πέπλεκται). Inside the frame is set a noose (βρόχος) and 


45 


50 


55 


attached to*it by a rope (σειρίς, ἁρπεδόνη) is a clog (ξύλον): ᾿ 


trap, rope, and clog are all sunk in the ground and covered 
over. When the trap is sprung (ἀνεστραμμένη) by the beast 
treading on it, the noose entangles the foot or feet of the 
game while the clog hampers its movements and by its 
trail on the ground indicates the path of its flight. 

» Arr. C. 24. 8 Λιβύων παῖδες ὀκταέτεις ἔστιν οἱ αὐτῶν, οἱ δὲ 


164 


CYNEGETICA, IV. 44-57 


are traps,* and common is the chase of all the swift- 
footed tribes by men with horses and dogs, or some- 
times without dogs pursuing the quarry with horses 
only : those horses which pasture in the land of the 
Moors, or Libyan,horses, which are not constrained 
by might of hand with the curb of the compelling 
bridle but obey the riding-switch,? wheresoever their 
rider directs their course. Wherefore the riders who 
are mounted on those horses leave their beloved dogs 
at home and ride forth trusting to their horses 
and the rays of the sun, without other helpers. 
Common, too, is hurling the javelin and shooting with 
the bow at the mightier wild beasts which fight amain 
with men. 

With reference to the net one must steer the course 
of the hunt and avoid the breath of the breeze and 


οὐ πολλῴ πρεσβύτεροι, ἐπὶ γυμνῶν τῶν ἵππων ἐλαύνουσιν, ῥάβδῳ 
χρώμενοι ἐπ᾽ αὐτοῖς ὅσα “Ἑλληνες χαλινῴ ; Strab. 828 σχεδὸν δέ 
τι καὶ οὗτοι (οἱ Μαυρούσιοι) καὶ οἱ ἐφεξῆς Μασαισύλιοι καὶ κοινῶς 
Λίβυες. . .- μικροῖς ἵπποις χρώμενοι. ὀξέσι δὲ καὶ εὐπειθέσιν ὥστ᾽ 
ἀπὸ ῥάβδου οἰακίζεσθαι: Verg. A. iv. 41 Numidae infreni; 
Nemes. 263 ff. Nec pigeat quod turpe caput deformis et 
alvus Est ollis quodque infrenes ... Nam flecti facilis 
lascivaque colla secutus Paret in obsequium lentae modera- 
mine virgae. Verbera sunt praecepta fugae, sunt verbera 
freni; Auson. dd Grat. Imp. xiv. mirabamur poetam (sc. 
Vergilium) qui infrenos dixerat Numidas et alterum (sc. 
Nemes.) qui ita collegerat ut diceret in equitando verbera 
et praecepta esse fugae et praecepta sistendi; Luc. iv. 682 
Et gens quae nudo residens Massylia dorso Ora levi flectit 
frenorum nescia virga; Sil. i. 215 Numidae, gens nescia 
freni; id. ii. 64 nullaque levis Gaetulus habena; Liv. xxxv. 
11 equi sine frenis; xxi. 46 frenatos equites)(Numidis ; 
Polyb. iii. 65 κεχαλινωμένην ἵππον) Νομαδικοὺς ἱππεῖς ; Claud. 
Bell. Gild. 1. 439 sonipes ignarus habenae: Virga regit; 
Mart. ix. 22, 14 Et Massyla meum virga gubernet equum ; 
Herodian vii. 9 of δὲ Νομάδες. . . ἱππεῖς ἄριστοι ws Kai 
χαλινῶν ἄνευ ῥάβδῳ μόνῃ τὸν δρόμον τῶν ἵππων κυβερνᾶν. 


165 


OPPIAN 


κι a / + 
οἷα δὲ ποντοπόρων ἀκάτων ἐπιβήτορες ἄνδρες 
~ > 7, DN 
ἐζόμενοι πρύμνῃσι, νεῶν ἐφέποντες dyfas, 
a / 
ἠέρα παπταίνουσι καὶ ἀργεστῇσι Νότοισι 
, Ψ ~ 
πειθόμενοι τανύσαντο Awomreptywv ὅπλα νηῶν" 
- ~ , , Μ 
ὧδε καὶ ἐν τραφερῇ κέλομαι θηρήτορας avdpas 
᾽ὔ 3 
παπταίνειν ἑκάτερθεν ἐπιπνείοντας ἀήτας, 
” , , fal , 
ὄφρα λινοστατέωσι βοηλατέωσί' τε πάντῃ 
αὔραις ἀντιάσαντες. ἐπεὶ μάλα θήρεσι πᾶσιν 
> τς ¢ ~ 3 7 > \ / 
ὀξύταται ῥινῶν ὀσφρήσιες εἰ δὲ φράσαιντο 
ἢ σταλίκων ὀδμὴν ἢ πεπταμένοιο λίνοιο, 
ἔμπαλιν ἰθύνουσιν, ἐπιστροφάδην δὲ φέβονται 
αὐτοῖς ἄντα βροτοῖσι, πόνον δ᾽ ἅλιον θέσαν ἄγρης. 
lan / > Ve Paws 
τῷ μοι παπταίνοιεν ἐπαιγίζοντας ἀήτας 
/ Ψ, / / 3 >? ΄, 
θηροφόνοι, στάλικάς τε λινοστασίην τ ἐφέποιεν 
3. , 2 / ~ + > > / 
ἀντύπέρην ἀνέμοιο Borns: ὄπιθεν δ᾽ ἐλάοιεν 
ἐς Νότον αἰθρήεντος ἐγειρομένου Βορέαο: 
> \ a ~ ; ee a / 
ἐς δὲ Βορῆν σαλαγεῦντος ἐπὶ δροσεροῖο Νότοιο: 
+ 2S , / ,ὔ ” 
Edpou δ᾽ ἱσταμένοιο θέειν Ζεφυρίτισιν αὖραις" 
κινυμένου Ζεφύρου δὲ θοῶς εἰς Εὖρον ἐλαύνειν. 
᾿Αλλὰ ΄ , δὴ t oo ” 
ἃ ov μοι πρώτιστα λεόντων ἔξοχον ἄγρην 
> 0 lol Bara \ > ὃ n~ tA > 
ev συμῷ βάλλοιο καὶ ἀνδρῶν ἄλκιμον ἤτορ. 
“- \ ,ὔ > / 
χῶρον μὲν πρώτιστον ἐπεφράσσαντο κιόντες, 
, \ 3 oh al 
ἔνθα περὶ σπήλυγγας ἐρίβρομος ἠὔκομος Xs 
> ,ὔ a a ~ 
ἐνδιάει, μέγα δεῖμα βοῶν αὐτῶν τε νομήων:" 
\ » δ 
θηρὸς δ᾽ αὖ μετέπειτα πελώριον ὠπήσαντο 
” , > , eo \ 
ἴχνεσι τριβομένοισιν arapmirov, τ eve πολλὸς 
2 Δ ε 
λαρὸν πιόμενος ποταμηπόρος ἰθὺς ὁδεύει. 


1 vl. βροχηλατέωσι. 
166 


60 


65 


70 


75 


80 


CYNEGETICA, IV. 58-84 


watch the wind. And even as men who ride in 
seafaring ships sit in the stern with the tiller in their 
hands and scan the sky and obedient to the white 
South Wind ® spread the sails of their ships of canvas 
wings,® so on the dry land I bid the hunter scan on 
either hand the winds that blow, that so they may 
set up their nets and drive the game ever against 
the wind ; since all wild beasts have keenest sense 
of smell, and if they perceive the scent either of the 
net-stakes or the spread net, they rush the other way 
and flee incontinently even in the very face of the 
men and make vain the labour of the hunt. There- 
fore I would have the slayers of wild beasts scan the 
rushing winds and face the course of the wind when 
they attend to their stakes and the setting of nets ; 
let them make back to the South when the clear 
North Wind rises ; to the North if the dewy South 
Wind rages ; when the East Wind gets up, let them 
run with the breezes of the West; when the West 
Wind stirs, let them speedily make for the East. 

But I would have thee first of all lay to heart the 
excellent lion-hunt and the valiant spirit of the 
bunters. -First they go and mark a place where 
among the caves a roaring well-maned Lion dwells, 
a great terror to cattle and to the herdsmen them- 
selves. Next they observe the great path with 
the worn tracks of the wild beast, whereby he often 
goes to the river to drink a sweet draught. There 


@ Hom. Jl. xi. 306; xxi. 334 ἀργεστᾶο Νότοιο, where the 
ancient critics interpreted the epithet either as (1)=)ev«és ; 
cf. Λευκόνοτος, Hor. C. 1. 7. 15 Albus ut obscuro deterget 
nubila caelo Saepe Notus neque parturit imbres Perpetuos ; 
A. Probl. 942 a 34 ὁ νότος, ὅταν μὲν ἐλάττων 7, αἴθριός ἐστιν, 
ὅταν δὲ μέγας. νεφώδης ; or (9)-- ταχύς. 

δ Aesch. P.V. 468 λινόπτερα ναυτίλων ὀχήματα. 

167 


OPPIAN 


Α 3 A lj 
ἔνθ᾽ ἤτοι βόθρον μὲν edSpopov ἀμφὶς ὄρυξαν, 85 
‘ , 3: ἃ ΄ 
εὐρὺν καὶ περίμετρον" ἀτὰρ μεσάτῃ ἐνὶ τάφρῳ 
κίονα δειμάσθην μέγαν, ὄρθιον, ὑψικόλωνον- 
A es , 
τοῦ δ᾽ ἄπο μὲν κρεμάσαντο μετήορον αὖ ἐρύσαντες 
, 
ἀρνειὸν νεογιλὸν ὑπ᾽ ἀρτιτόκοιο τεκούσης" 
” > > / ’ > τ 
ἔκτοθε δ᾽ αὖ βόθροιο περίτροχον ἐστεφάνωσαν 90 
’΄ 
αἱμασιήν, πυκάσαντες ἐπασσυτέροις μυλάκεσσιν, 
ὄφρα κε μὴ πελάσας δολερὸν χάος ἀθρήσειε" 
> oe cal 
καί ῥ᾽ ὁ μὲν ὑψικρεμὴς ὑπομάζιος ἀμνὸς diret: 
τοῦ δέ τε πειναλέην κραδίην ἐπάταξεν iw: 
μαιόμενος δ᾽ ἴθυσε, φίλον κεχαρημένος ἦτορ, 9ὅ 
wy > / ~ 3995 wy A Ψ, 
ixvos ἐπισπέρχων βληχῆς ἠδ᾽ ἔνθα καὶ ἔνθα 
ἐᾷ / 4, > A + / 
παπταίνων mupoev> τάχα δ᾽ ἤλυθεν ἄγχι δόλοιο, 
ἀμφί τε δινεῦται, κρατερὸς δέ ἑ λιμὸς ὀρίνει. 
αὐτίκα δ᾽ αἱμασιὴν μὲν ὑπέρθορε γαστρὶ πιθήσας, 
δέκτο δέ μιν χάος εὐρὺ περιστεφές, οὐδ᾽ ἐνόησεν, 100 
4“ Ἢ “ 3 5 
ὡς ἐπὶ βυσσὸν ἵκανεν ἀνωΐστοιο βερέθρου- 
παντόσε δινεῖται δὲ 'παλίσσυτος αἰὲν ὀρούων, 
ὁπποῖος περὶ νύσσαν ἀεθλοφόρος θοὸς ἵππος, 
ἀγχόμενος παλάμῃσι καὶ ἡνιόχοιο χαλινῷ. 
οἱ δ᾽ ἄρ᾽ ἀπὸ σκοπιῆς τηλαυγέος ἀθρήσαντες 105 
ἀγρευτῆρες ὄρουσαν, ἐριτμήτοισι δ᾽ ἱμᾶσι 
δησάμενοι καθιᾶσιν ἐΐστροφα τυκτὰ μέλαθρα, 
ὀπταλέον κἀκεῖσε δόλον κρύψαντες ἐδωδῆς" 
i: A Ψ 3 3 / 7 i Lee) (Pe > Ve 
αὐτὰρ ὃ γ᾽ ἐκ βόθροιο δοκεύμενος αὐτίκ᾽ ἀλύξειν 
la 
evOope καγχαλόων: παρὰ δ᾽ οὐκέτι νόστος ἕτοιμος. 110 
ἘΣ \ > \ \ A , r Se > 
ὧδε μὲν ἀμφὶ χυτὴν Λιβύων πολυδίψιον afar. 
? \ oe 
Αὐτὰρ ἐὑρρείταο παρ᾽ ὄχθαις Εὐφρήταο 
σ \ 
ὑπποὺς μὲν χαροποὺς μεγαλήτορας ἀρτύνονται 


“Χρῃ, C. 11. 4 ἔστι δὲ οἷς αὐτῶν καὶ ὀρύγματα ποιοῦσι περιφερῆ 
μεγάλα βαθέα, ἐν μέσῳ λείποντες κίονα τῆς γῆς, ἐπὶ δὲ τοῦτον εἰς 
νύκτα ἐπέθεσαν δήσαντες alya καὶ ἔφραξαν κύκλῳ τὸ ὄρυγμα ὕλῃ, 


168 


CYNEGETICA, IV. 85-113 


they dig a round pit,* wide and large; and in the 
midst of the trench they build a great pillar, sheer and 
high. From this they hang aloft a suckling lamb 
taken from its mother that hath newly yeaned. 
And outside the pit they wreath a wall around, built 
with close-set boulders, that the Lion may not see 
the crafty chasm when’ he draws near. And the 
high-hung suckling lamb bleats, and the sound 
strikes the Lion’s hungry heart, and he rushes in 
search of the lamb, exulting in his heart, hasting in 
the track of the cry and scanning this side and that 
with fiery eyes. And anon he comes nigh the snare, 
and he wheels about and a great hunger urges him, 
and straightway obeying the impulse of hunger he 
leaps over the wall, and the wide round chasm receives 
him, and he comes unwittingly to the gulf of a pit 
unlooked for. Everywhere he circles about, rushing 
ever backwards and forwards, even as a swift race- 
horse round the turning-post, constrained by the 
hands of his charioteer and by the bridle. And from 
their far-seen place of outlook the hunters see him 
and rush up, and with well-cut straps they bind and 
let down a plaited well-compacted cage, in which also 
they put a piece of roasted meat. And he, thinking 
straightway to escape from the pit, leaps in exulting ; 
and for him there is no more any return prepared. 
Thus they use in the alluvial thirsty ® land of the 
Libyans. 

But by the banks of the fair-flowing Euphrates 
they array bright-eyed, great-hearted horses for the 
ὥστε μὴ προορᾶν, εἴσοδον οὐ λείποντες. τὰ δὲ ἀκούοντα τῆς φωνῆς 
ἐν τῇ νυκτὶ κύκλῳ τὸν φραγμὸν περιθέουσι καί, ἐπειδὰν μὴ εὑρίσκῃ 
δίοδον, ὑπερπηδᾷ καὶ ἁλίσκεται. 

> Verg. H. i. 65 sitientes Afros; Plin. x. 21 perpetuo 
sitientia Africae. 


169 


OPPIAN 


~ é A / 
θήρειον ποτὲ μῶλον: ἐπεὶ yaporol γεγάασι 
> , 
κραιπνότατοι θείειν καὶ ἀναιδέες ἶφι μάχεσθαι 11ὅ 
a a > Λ / 
καὶ μοῦνοι τετλᾶσι λεόντων ἀντία βρυχήν" 
ς 3 + / \ > 1g > / 
οἱ δ᾽ ἄλλοι τρείουσι Kal ἀγκλίνουσιν ὀπωπάς, 
δευμαίνοντες ἄνακτος ἑοῦ πυριλαμπέα κανθόν, 
Δ > 4 \ if θ 2 € λέ 3 ὃ a 
ὡς ἐφάμην καὶ πρόσθεν ἐν ἱππαλέοισιν ἀοιδαῖς. 
ὰ " 7 
πεζοὶ δ᾽ ἐκτανύσαντο λίνοιο περίδρομον Epos, 190 
ἄρκυας ἀσσυτέροις ἐπιδειμάμενοι σταλίκεσσι:" 
τόσσον δ᾽ αὖθ᾽ ἑκάτερθεν ἐπιπρονένευκε κεραίη, 
ὅσσον ἐπημύει κέρας ἀρτυτόκοιο σελήνης. 
τρισσοὶ δ᾽ αὖ λοχόωσι λίνων ἔπι θηρητῆρες, 
εἷς μέσατος, δοιοὶ δ᾽ ἄρ᾽ ἐπ᾽ ἀκροτάτοισι κορύμβοις, 195 
ὁππόσον ἐκ μεσάτοιο γεγωνότος ἀμφοτέροισιν 
εἰσαΐειν ἑκάτερθε διπλῶν ἀκρόπτερα φωτῶν. 
ες > a St, / ip: ~ 
ot δ᾽ ἄλλοι στήσαντο νόμῳ πολέμοιο δαφοινοῦ, 
φρυκτοὺς αὐσταλέους πυριλαμπέας ἀμφὶς ἔχοντες" 
“ > a 
ἀνδρῶν δ᾽ αὐτὸς ἕκαστος ἔχει σάκος ἐν χερὶ λαιῇ, 130 
5 / 4 lal rat 
(ἀσπίδος ἐν πατάγῳ θηρσὶν μέγα δεῖμα δαφοινοῖς ") 
lod Ξ Uf a 
δεξιτερῇ δὲ φέρει πεύκης ἄπο δαιόμενον πῦρ᾽ 
, N oh a 
ἔξοχα yap δείδοικε πυρὸς μένος ἠὔκομος Nis, 
3 ~ a 
οὐδ᾽ ἐσιδεῖν τέτληκεν ἀταρμύκτοισιν ὀπωπαῖς. 
ς 3 « PRS) > ᾽ὔ Ψ' + io 
οἱ δ᾽ ὁπότ᾽ ἀθρήσωσι λεόντων ἄλκιμον ἦτορ, 135 
/ ς a a 
πάντες ὁμῶς ἱππῆες ἐπέσσυθεν, ἀμφὶ δὲ πεζοὶ 
ἕσπονται παταγεῦντες, ἀὐτὴ δ᾽ αἰθέρ᾽ ἱκάνει. 
a > ? / 
θῆρες δ᾽ od pipvovow, ἐπιστροφάδην δὲ νέονται 
\ > \ / > 
θυμὸν ὀδὰξ πρίοντες, ἀμυνέμεν οὐκ ἐθέλοντες. 
ε δ > rye Sea , 5 Χά > τς 
ὡς ὃ ἰχθῦς ἀνὰ νύκτα δολόφρονες ἀσπαλιῆες 140 
\ / ’ lal 
πρὸς βόλον ἰθύνουσι Boats ἀκάτοισι φέροντες 


αν, θυ εἰ ὥρᾶς 
’ Thackeray, Timbuctoo (The Lion Hunt), xi Quick issue 


out, with musket, torch, and brand, The sturdy blackamoors, 
a dusky band. 


170 


CYNEGETICA, IV. 114-141 


warfare of the hunt; since their bright-eyed horses 
are swiftest in running and stubborn to fight amain, 
and they alone endure to face the Lion’s roar, while 
other horses tremble and turn away their eyes, 
fearing the fiery eye of their lord the Lion: as I said 
before * when I sang of horses. Men on foot spread 
the circling hedge of flax, building up the nets on 
close-set stakes. And the wings on either side 
project forward as much as doth the horn of the 
new-born moon. Three hunters lie in ambush by 
the nets, one in the middle, the other two at the 
extreme corners, at such distance that when the 
man in the middle calls to them the men on the 
wings can hear. The others take their station after 
the manner of bloody war, holding in their hands on 
either side dry flaming torches. And each man of 
them holds a shield in his left hand—in the din of the 
shield there is great terror for deadly beasts—and 
in his right hand a blazing torch? of pine; for, above 
all, the well-maned Lion dreads the might of fire,¢ 
and will not look on it with unflinching eyes.4 And 
when they see the lions of valiant heart the horsemen 
all rush on together, and the men or. foot follow with 
them making a din, and the noise goes unto heaven. 
And the beasts abide them not, but turn and flee, 
gnashing their teeth with rage but unwilling to 
fight. And even as in the night crafty fishermen in 
their swift ships guide the fish toward their nets, 


© A. 629 b 21 ἀληθῆ τὰ λεγόμενα, τό τε φοβεῖσθαι μάλιστα τὸ 
πῦρ, ὥσπερ καὶ “Ὅμηρος ἐποίησεν “" καιόμεναί τε δεταί, τάς τε τρέει 
ἐσσύμενός wep” (Hom. Il. xi. 554=xvii. 663); cf. Ael. vi. 22; 
vii. 6; xii. 7; Plin. viii. 52; Claud. In Rufin. ii. 252 vacuo 
qualis discedit hiatu Impatiens remeare leo quem plurima 
cuspis Et pastorales pepulerunt igne catervae. 

4 See C. i. 208 n. 


171 


OPPIAN 


λαμπομένας δαΐδας" τοὶ δὲ τρείουσιν ἰδόντες 
ἔλλοπες, οὐδὲ μένουσιν ἑλισσομένην ἀμαρυγήν" 
ὡς καὶ θῆρες ἄνακτες ἐπιμύουσιν ὀπωπάς. 
καὶ τότε δειδιότες κτύπον ἀνδρῶν καὶ φλόγα πυρσῶν 146 
αὐτόματοι πλεκτῇσι λίνων λαγόνεσσι πέλασσαν. 

Ἔστι δέ τις θήρης τρίτατος νόμος Αἰθιοπήων 
ἀκάματος, μέγα θαῦμα: τὸ δ᾽ ἀνέρες ἀλκήεντες 
Αἴθοπες ἠνορέῃ πίσυνοι πίσυρες τελέουσι." 
πλεκτὰ σάκη τεύχουσιν ἐϊστρέπτοισι λύγοισι 150 
καρτερὰ καὶ πλευρῇσι περίδρομα, κὰδ δὲ βοείας 
ἀζαλέας τανύουσιν ἐπ᾽ ἀσπίσιν ὀμφαλοέσσαις 
ἄλκαρ ἔμεν τ᾽ ὀνύχων βριαρῶν γενύων τε δαφοινῶν: 
αὐτοὶ δ᾽ οἰὸς ἄωτα πρόπαν δέμας ἀμφιέσαντο, 
σφιγξάμενοι καθύπερθεν ἐπασσυτέροις τελαμῶσι" 155 
καὶ κόρυθες κρύπτουσι καρήατα: μοῦνα δ᾽ ἀθρήσαις 
χείλεά τε ῥῖνάς τε καὶ ὄμματα μαρμαίροντα. 
ἄντα δὲ θηρὸς ἴασιν. ἀολλέες," εὐκελάδοισι 
μάστιξιν θαμινῇσι δι᾿ ἠέρος αἰθύσσοντες- 
αὐτὰρ ὅ γε σπήλυγγος ὑπεκπροθορὼν ἀλίαστος 160 
βρυχᾶται πετάσας φόνιον χάος ἀντία φωτῶν, 
δερκόμενος χαροποῖσιν ὑπ᾽ ὄμμασιν αἰθόμενον πῦρ, 
θυμῷ παφλάζων ἴκελος δίοισι κεραυνοῖς. 
οὐ τοῖον Τ'άγγαο ῥόος πρόσθ᾽ ἠελίοιο 
᾿Ινδὸν ὑπὲρ δάπεδον Μαρυανδέα" λαὸν ἀμείβων — 165 
μυκᾶται βρύχημα πελώριον, ὁππότε κρημνῶν 
ἐκπροθορὼν ἐκάλυψε μέλαν δέμας αἰγιαλοῖο- 
ὅστε καὶ εὐρύτατός περ ἐὼν καί τ᾽ εἴκοσιν ἄλλοις 
κυρτοῦται ποταμοῖσι κορυσσόμενος λάβρον ὕδωρ: 
οἷον ἐπισμαραγεῖ δρίος ἄσπετον ἠδὲ χαράδραι 170 

1 χελέθουσι Mss. 
= ἀολλέες : vv.ll. ἅμ᾽ ὁρμαῖς, ἅμα ῥώμαις. 
5 γι, βαρυανθέα. 


172 


CYNEGETICA, IV. 142-170 


carrying blazing torches*; and the fishes tremble to 
behold them and do not abide the whirling gleam ; 
so the kings of beasts shut their eyes and then, 
fearing the din of men and the flame of torches, of 
their own motion they approach the plaited flanks 
of the nets. 

There is a third manner of hunting among the 
Ethiopians, untiring, marvellous. And this do four 
valiant Ethiopians perform, trusting in their valour. 
They fashion with twisted withes plaited shields, 
strong and with round sides, and stretch dried ox- 
hides over the bossy shields to be a defence at once 
against strong claws and murderous jaws. They 
themselves array all their bodies in the fleeces of 
sheep, fastening them above with close-set straps. 
Helmets cover their heads; only their lips and 
nostrils and shining eyes could you see. And they 
go together to chase the beast, flashing in the air 
many a sounding whip. But the Lion leaps forth 
from his cave unflinchingly and opens his deadly gape 
in the face of the men and utters his roar, while 
with his bright eyes he looks blazing fire, blustering 
in his wrath like the thunder-bolts of Zeus. Not 
Ganges’ stream, which sunward over the Indian land 
passes the Maryandean® people, bellows with such 
stupendous roar when it leaps forth from the pre- 
cipices and covers the dark space of the shore ; that 
stream which, although it is exceeding broad, yet 
by twenty other rivers is it swollen and arches the 
crest of its furious flood ; not Ganges roars so loud 
as roar the boundless wood and the ravines with 

« Of. H. iv. 640 ff. 

» Possibly the people mentioned in Ptolemy, Geogr. vii. 2. 
14 ὑπὸ δὲ τούτους (sc. Ταγγανούς) Μαροῦνδαι μέχρι τῶν 1) αγ- 
γαριδῶν, ἐν οἷς πόλεις πρὸς τῷ Τ᾿άγγῃ ποταμῷ κτλ. A 

1 


OPPIAN 


a - 3 Ψ 3᾽ "A 
βρυχηθμοῖς ὀλοοῖσιν, ἐπιβρέμεται δ᾽ ὅλος αἰθήρ. 
ey Ee 
Kal ῥ᾽ ὁ μὲν αὐτίκ᾽ dpovoe λιλαιόμενος χροὸς doar, 
δ e \ ὔ 
λαίλαπι χειμερίῃ mavopotios: of δὲ μένουσιν 
“ Ψ μὴ » 
ἀστεμφεῖς πυρόεσσαν ἐπαιγίζουσαν ἐνυπήν. 
m / 
αὐτὰρ 6 γ᾽ ἔν τ᾽ ὀνύχεσσι γένυσσί τε λευγαλέῃσιν 175 
ἄσχετος ὅν κεν ἕλῃσιν ἐπαιθύσσων κεραΐζει. 
3 ~ 
τὸν δ᾽ ἕτερος κατόπισθε μεταθρώσκων αἰζηῶν 
~ / A 
κικλήσκει, παταγῶν τε διαπρύσιόν τε γεγωνώς. 
αἶψα δ᾽ ἐπιστρεφθεὶς μεγαλήνωρ ἠὔκομος As 
ὦρτο λιπὼν ὃν ἔμαρψεν ὑπὸ στόμα: καὶ πάλιν ἄλλος 180 
δόχμιος ἠὐγένειον opiver θῆρα κελαινόν-" 
w+ 3 > / > / Ψ' 
ἄλλοι δ᾽ ἀλλαχόθεν μιν ἐπασσύτεροι κλονέουσι 
ῥινοῖσιν πίσυνοι σακέεσσί τε καὶ τελαμῶσι, 
τοὺς οὔτε κρατεροὶ γενύων τάμνουσιν ὀδόντες, 
οὔτε σιδηρείων ὀνύχων πείρουσιν ἀκωκαί. 185 
> A c / ͵7 ᾽ὔ + 4 
αὐτὰρ ὁ μαψίδιον φθινύθει πόνον, ἄκριτα θύων, 
τὸν μὲν καλλείπων, τὸν δ᾽ αἰρόμενος χθονὸς αἶψα 
αὖ ἐρύων, τῷ δ᾽ αὖτις ἀάσχετος ἰθὺς ὀρούων. 
τ 3 ε esd 3 / > Tee + \ 
ws δ᾽ ὁπότ᾽ ἐν πολέμοισιν ἀρήϊον ἄνδρα κραταιὸν 
δήϊος ἀμφιβάλῃ στεφάνη μαλεροῖο μόθοιο, 190 
\ “ ,ὕ / » » A » 
αὐτὰρ 6 γε πνείων μένος “Apeos ἔνθα καὶ ἔνθα 
ἀΐσσει, παλάμῃ κραδάων πεφονωμένον ἔγχος, 
> \ / & > 4 / > an 
ὀψὲ δέ μιν δάμνησιν ἐνυάλιος λόχος ἀνδρῶν, 
πάντες ὁμοῦ Bpicavres: ὁ δ᾽ ὀκλάζει κατὰ γαίης, 
βαλλόμενος πυκινῇσι τανυρροίζοισιν ἀκωκαῖς: 195 
> 
ὡς ὃ γ᾽ ἀνηνύστοισιν ἀπειπάμενος καμάτοισιν 
> \ an 3) Tee iA e, 
ὀψὲ βροτοῖσιν ἔδωκε βραβήϊα πάντα μόθοιο" 
ἀφρὸν ἀποσταλάει δὲ ποτὶ σχερὸν αἱματόεντα" 


“ αὖ ἐρύων, t.¢. αὐερύων, ἐ.6. dvFeptwy, from ἀνά - ἐρύω. In 
Homer the verb occurs (1) with reference to sacrifices (11. 
1. 459, il. 422 αὐέρυσαν μὲν πρῶτα), where scholl. interpret it 
of drawing the victim’s head backward and upward, (2) of 


174 


CYNEGETICA, IV. 171-198 


the deadly bellowing of the Lion, and all the sky 
resounds. And he straightway rushes, fain to glut 
him with flesh, like unto a winter storm, while the 
hunters steadfastly abide the onset of the fiery 
tempest. He with claws and deadly jaws incon- 
tinently assails and mauls any man that he can seize. 
Then another of the youths rushes on him from behind 
and calls his attention with clattering din and loud 
shout. And swiftly the lordly well-maned Lion turns 
and charges, leaving the man whom he had seized 
in his mouth; and again another on the flank pro- 
vokes the bearded swarthy beast. Others on this 
side and on that in close succession harass him, 
trusting in hides and shields and baldricks, which 
neither the mighty teeth of his jaws can cleave nor 
the points of his iron claws pierce. And the Lion 
wears out his strength in vain’ labour, charging 
blindly—leaving one man, lifting another straightway 
from the ground and wrenching his neck,# and again 
incontinently rushing straight upon another. And 
as when in war a hostile ring of fierce battle sur- 
rounds a mighty warrior, and he, breathing the spirit 
of war, rushes this way and that, brandishing in his 
hand his gory sword, and at last a warlike company 
of men overcomes him, all pressing on him together, 
and he sinks to the ground, smitten by many long 
whistling arrows; even so the Lion, exhausted by 
ineffectual efforts, at last yields to the men all the 
prizes of battle, while he sheds to earth ὃ the bloody 


drawing a bow (Ul. viii, 325 αὐερύοντα map’ ὠμόν), (3) of 
pulling up the palisade (στῆλαι) of:a wall (Jl. xii. 261). To 
Oppian it was probably two words. 
> σχερόν appears to mean ‘‘ ground,” ¢f. Hesych. σχερός" 
ἀκτή, αἰγιαλός, which would equate it with ξερὸν ἠπείροιο 
(Hom. Od. v. 402). 
175 


OPPIAN 


\ > / 
εἴκελος αἰδομένῳ δὲ ποτὶ χθόνα κανθὸν ἐρείδει. 
a τὰ 
ὡς δὲ βροτὸς πολλοῖσιν ἐρεψάμενος κοτίνοισι 200 
~ 7 
πυγμαχίης ἐν ἀγῶσιν, ὑπ᾽ ἀνέρος ἀλκήεντος 
a ih 
ἄντην ἀσσυτέρῃσιν' ὑπ᾽ ὠτειλῇσι δαμασθείς, 
a ,ὔ 
ἔστη μὲν πρώτιστα λελουμένος αἵματι λάβρῳ, 

o , , 
οἷα μεθυσφαλέων, ἑτεροκλινέων τε κάρηνον" 

ΕΣ \ ” > AY a Ὁ Xr 80 > Vf 0 ‘ 
αὐτὰρ EMELT ἐπι γαῖαν ὑποκλαὸδον ἐξετανύσ ) 205 
ὡς Oy ἐπὶ ψαμάθου κεκαφηότα γυῖα τάνυσσεν. 

> 3 Ψ 

οἱ δὲ τότ᾽ ἐγκονέουσι πολὺ πλέον, αἶψα δ᾽ ὕπερθε 

a > \ na 
πάντες ἐρεισάμενοι κρατεροῖσι δέουσ᾽ ὑπὸ δεσμοῖς 
οὐδὲν ἀλευόμενον, μάλα δ᾽ ἤρεμον ἀτρεμέοντα. 
5 / - “ ΄ Ψ 2 
Ww μεγα τολμήεντες, ὅσον χάδον, ὅσσον ἔρεξαν, 210 
αἰνὸν κεῖνο πέλωρον ἅτε κτίλον ἀείρουσιν. 

Ἤ λ τ ,ὔ ς i ,, ’ 

κλυον ὡς βόθροισιν ὁμοίοισίν τε δόλοισι 
θήρασσαν καὶ θῶας ἀναιδέας, ἠδὲ γένεθλα 
, 3 / > A \ / / 
πορδαλίων ἀπάτησαν, ἀτὰρ πολὺ μείοσι βόθροις- 

/ > ot ΥΝ ᾽ὔ \ > 2 , / 
κίονα δ᾽ οὐχὶ λίθοιο, δρυὸς ὃ ἐτάμοντο κεραίην" 215 
οὐδὲ μὲν ὑψικρεμῆ χιμάρου γόνον ἠώρησαν, 

3 \ la A > BES A / lol ε UA 

ἀλλὰ κυνός" τοῦ δ᾽ αὖτ᾽ ἀπὸ μήδεα δῆσαν ἱμάσθλαις 
᾽ὔ ¢ > ἌΡ > \ re , 

λεπταλέαις: ὁ ὃ ἂρ ὦκα περισπερχὴς ὀδύνῃσιν 

ὠρυθμοῖς ὑλάει καὶ πορδαλίεσσιν diiret: 


ἡ δὲ μάλ᾽ ἰάνθη, διά τε δρίος ἰθὺς dpover. 990. 


ὡς δ᾽ ὁπότ᾽ ἰχθυβόλοι κύρτου δόλον ἐστήσαντο, 
πλεξάμενοι σπάρτῳ Σαλαμινίδι, καὶ λαγόνεσσι 
πούλυπον ἢ κεστρῆα πυρὶ φλεγέθοντες ἔθεντο" 
ὀδμὴ δ᾽ ἐς πλαταμῶνας ἀφίκετο, καὶ ποτὶ κύρτον 


* Ael. xiii, 10 describes a somewhat similar method used 
by the Moors. > Of. ἢ. iii. 388. 

¢ Of. C.i. 156, H. iii. 341, The ref. of Σαλαμινίδι--- whether 
to the island or to the town in Cyprus—is unexplained, but 
no plausible emendation has been proposed. 


176 


CYNEGETIGA, IV. 199-224. 


foam and, like one ashamed, fixes his eye upon the 
ground. As a man who hath won many a crown of 
wild olive for boxing in the games, when he is over- 
come with wound on wound by a valiant adversary 
in close combat, stands at first bathed in torrents 
of blood, as if reeling with drink, and hanging his 
head to one side; then his legs give way and he 
is stretched upon the ground; even so the Lion 
stretches his exhausted limbs upon the sand. 
Then the hunters busy themselves much more, and, 
swiftly pressing all upon him, they bind him with 
strong bonds, while he makes no attempt to escape 
but is altogether quiet and motionless. O greatly 
daring men! what a feat they compass, what a deed 
they do—they carry off that great monster like a tame 
sheep ! 

I have heard that with trenches and like devices 
men capture also the bold Jackals and deceive the 
tribes of Leopards ὅ : only with much smaller trenches, 
and they cut not a pillar of stone but a beam of oak. 
And they do not hang aloft a kid,’ but a puppy, the 
privy parts of which they bind with thin straps. In 
its agony it straightway howls and barks, and its 
ery is heard by the Leopards. The Leopard rejoices 
and rushes straight through the wood. As when 
fishermen set up a weel to ensnare fish, plaiting it 
of Salaminian broom,’ and in the inside of it put a 
Poulpe? or Grey Mullet’ roasted in the fire; the 
savour thereof comes unto the flat ledges and brings 


@ For the Poulpe or Octopus cf. H. i. 306 n.; for broiled 
Poulpe as bait, H. iii. 345. ' 

e Of. H.i. 11in. The schol. here is worth quoting for 
its absurdity: κεστρῆα᾽ κενὸς N@pos. Read κεντητὸς λῶρος. 
The schol. has confused κεστρεύς with xeorés, a girdle; cf. 
Zon. κεστός" ὁ κεντητὸς λῶρος. 


Ν Laer 


OPPIAN 


ἔλλοπας αὐτομόλους εἰσήγαγεν, οὐδὲ δύνανται 225 

αὖτις ὑπεκδῦναι, δεινοῦ δ᾽ ἤντησαν ὀλέθρου" 

ὡς κείνη, σκυλακῆος ἀπόπροθεν εἰσαΐουσα, 

ἔδραμε καὶ θόρεν, οὔτιν᾽ ὀϊσσαμένη δόλον εἶναι, 

γαστέρι πειθομένη δὲ μυχοὺς ἐπέλασσε βερέθρου. 
Ἰ]ορδάλιας καὶ δῶρα Διωνύσοιο δάμασσαν, 230 

θηροφόνων δολερῶν δολερὴν πόσιν οἰνοχοεύντων, 

οὐδὲν ἀλευομένων ζαθέοιο κότον Διονύσου. 

πορδάλιες νῦν μὲν θηρῶν γένος, ἀλλὰ πάροιθεν 

οὐ θῆρες βλοσυραί, χαροπαὶ δ᾽ ἐπέλοντο γυναῖκες, 

οἰνάδες, ὠσχοφόροι, τριετηρίδες, ἀνθοκάρηνοι, 235 

Βάκχου φοιταλιῆος ἐγερσιχόροιο τιθῆναι. 

νηπίαχον γὰρ Baxyov' ᾿Αγηνορὶς ἔτραφεν “Iva, | 

μαζὸν ὀρεξαμένη πρωτόρρυτον υἱέϊ Ζηνός" | 

σὺν δ᾽ ap’ ὁμῶς ἀτίτηλε καὶ Αὐτονόη καὶ ᾿Αγαύη- β 

ἀλλ᾽ οὐκ εἰν ᾿Αθάμαντος ἀταρτηροῖσι δόμοισιν, 940. 

ovpet δ᾽ ὃν τότε Μηρὸν ἐπικλήδην καλέεσκον. | 


1 Ἴακχον G. 


* In more restricted sense ὠσχο(ὀσχο-) φόροι were two 
youths of each tribe chosen from noble families (τῶν γένει 
καὶ πλούτῳ προεχόντων Suid. s.v.), who, dressed in female 
garb (ἐν γυναικείαις στολαῖς ΠΗ. 7]. s.v., Procl. ap. Phot. p. 322 n.) 
led the procession of women at the Oschophoria from temple 
of Dionysus to temple of Athena Sciras at Phalerum (Hesych. 
8. ὠοχοφόριον), Carrying ὦσχοι (ὦσχαι, ὄσχοι), ἐ.6. vine-branches | 
laden with grapes; ef. schol. Nicand. A. 109 ὀσχοφόροι 
λέγονται ᾿Αθήνῃσι παῖδες ἀμφιθαλεῖς (1.9. having both parents 
alive; cf. Callim. Ait. iii. 1.3; Poll. iii. 40, etc.) ἁμιλλώμενοι | 
κατὰ φυλάς, οἱ λαμβάνοντες κλήματα ἀμπέλου ἐκ τοῦ ἱεροῦ τοῦ F 
Διονύσου ἔτρεχον els τὸ τῆς Σκιράδος ᾿Αθηνᾶς ἱερόν... .. ὄσχαι 
κυρίως οἱ κλάδοι τῆς ἀμπέλου. 

δ 8566 Οὐ, 1. 94. n- 

° Cadmus, 5. of Agenor, had by Harmonia four daughters, 
Autonoé, Ino, Semele, Agave. Semele, m. by Zeus of 
178 


CYNEGETICA, IV. 225-241 


the fishes of their own will to the weel, and they are 
unable to get out again and meet a terrible death ; 
so the Leopard, hearing the puppy from afar, runs 
and makes his spring, suspecting no guile, and 
obeying the call-ef hunger, enters the recesses of 
the pit. 

Leopards are overcome also by the gifts of 
Dionysus, when crafty hunters pour for them the 
crafty draught, shunning not the anger of holy 
Dionysus. Leopards are now a race of wild beasts, 
but aforetime they were not fierce wild beasts but 
bright-eyed women, wine-drinking, carriers of the 
vine branch,® celebrators of the triennial festival,® 
flower-crowned, nurses of frenzied Bacchus who 
rouses the dance. For Ino,’ scion of Agenor, reared 
the infant Bacchus and first gave her breast to the 
son of Zeus, and Autonoe likewise and Agave joined 
innursing him, but not in the baleful halls of Athamas,? 
but on the mountain which at that time men called by 
the name of the Thigh (Mypés).¢ For greatly fearing 


Dionysus (Bacchus), died at his birth and the child was 
conveyed by Hermes to Ino (Apollod. iii, 4. 3). 

4 Athamas, 5. of Aeolus and king of Boeotia, married Ino 
as his second wife. 

ὁ When Dionysus was born untimely, Zeus sewed the 
infant in his thigh (μηρός). After Athamas and Ino, driven 
mad by Hera, had slain their children, Hermes conveyed 
the child Dionysus πρὸς νύμφας ἐν Νύσῃ κατοικούσας τῆς ᾿Ασίας 
(Apollod. ἐ.0.) and the name Meros was given to a hill there. 
The location of Meros thus depends on the location of Nysa 
which is usualiy placed in India; Strabo 687 Νυσαίους δή 
τινας ἔθνος προσωνόμοσαν καὶ πόλιν παρ᾽ αὐτοῖς Νῦσαν Διονύσου 
κτίσμα καὶ ὄρος τὸ ὑπὲρ τῆς πόλεως Μηρόν ; Plin. vi, 79 Nysam 
urbem plerique Indiae adscribunt montemque Merum Libero 
Patri sacrum, unde origo fabulae Iovis femine editum; cf. 
id. xvi. 144; Solin. lii. 16; Dion. P. 1159. But there were 
other localizations ; see note on 251 below. ; 


179 


OPPIAN 


Ζηνὸς yap μεγάλην ἄλοχον μέγα δειμαίνουσαι 

καὶ ΠΠενθῆα τύραννον ᾿Εχιονίδην τρομέουσαι 

εἰλατίνῃ χηλῷ δῖον γένος ἐγκατέθεντο, 

νεβρίσι δ᾽ ἀμφεβάλοντο καὶ ἐστέψαντο κορύμβοις 945 
ἐν σπέϊ, καὶ περὶ παῖδα τὸ μυστικὸν ὠρχήσαντο: 
τύμπανα δ᾽ ἐκτύπεον καὶ κύμβαλα χερσὶ κρόταινον, 
παιδὸς κλαυθμυρισμῶν προκαλύμματα: πρῶτα δ᾽ 


32 


ἔφαινον 
» ΤῸΝ \ , \ Se » a 
ὄργια κευθομένῃ περὶ λάρνακι" σὺν δ᾽ ἄρα τῆσιν 
be ~ a 
Αόνιαι λάθρη τελετῶν ἅπτοντο γυναῖκες" 250 


ἐκ δ᾽ ὄρεος morhow ἀγερμοσύνην ἑτάρῃσιν' 
ἔντυον ἰθῦσαι Βοιωτίδος ἔκτοθε γαίης" 
/ \ » /, > / ¢ \ . A 
μέλλε yap ἤδη, μέλλεν ἀνήμερος ἡ πρὶν ἐοῦσα 
/ 


/ G 


a ta 

γαῖα φυτηκομέειν ὑπὸ λυσιπόνῳ Διονύσῳ. 
/ 

χηλὸν δ᾽ ἀρρήτην ἱερὸς χορὸς delpacat 255 
στεψάμεναι νώτοισιν ἐπεστήριξαν ὄνοιο" 

Jerks 3 7 Pad: Lee ” tA 
Εὐρίπου δ᾽ ἵκανον én’ ἠόνας, ἔνθα κίχανον 

/ ες lat , ¢ / > \ \ “ 
πρέσβυν ὁμοῦ τεκέεσσιν ἁλίπλανον- ἀμφὶ δὲ πᾶσαι 
γριφέας ἐλλίσσοντο βυθοὺς ἀκάτοισι περῆσαι" 
αὐτὰρ ὅ γ᾽ αἰδεσθεὶς ἱερὰς ὑπέδεκτο γυναῖκας. 960 


1 dyepu. Mss.: corr. Brodaeus. 


* King of Thebes, 5. of Echion and Agave, opposed the 
worship of Dionysus. Spying upon the Bacchants on 
Cithaeron he was torn in pieces by his mother who mistook 
him for a wild beast (Apollod, iii. 5. 2). 

Ὁ The prosody of κλαυθμυρισμῶν is no reason for altering 
the text. It,is no worse than Lucan’s * distincta zmaragdo ”’ 
(x. 121), ¢f Mart. v. 11. 1, and even Homer has ὑλήεντι 
Δακύνθῳ and the like. 

° Cf. the legend of the Curetes and the infant Zeus ; 
Callim. 117. i. 51 ff. 

4 Boeotian. 

* 1.6. Meros (241 n.). As obviously a hill in Boeotia is 
intended, that implies a Boeotian Nysa. Now though Nysa 
180 


CYNEGETICA, IV. 242-260 


the mighty spouse of Zeus and dreading the tyrant 
Pentheus,* son of Echion, they laid the holy child in 
a coffer of pine and covered it with fawn-skins and 
wreathed it with clusters of the vine, in a grotto 
where round the, child they danced the mystic dance 
and beat drums and clashed cymbals in their 
hands, to veil the cries ὃ of the infant. It was around 
that hidden ark that they first showed forth their 
mysteries, and with them the Aonian? women secretly 
took part in the rites. And they arrayed a gathering 
of their faithful companions to journey from that 
mountain ¢ out of the Boeotian land. For now, now 
was it fated that a land,f which before was wild, 
should cultivate the vine at the instance of Dionysus 
who delivers from sorrow. Then the holy choir took 
up the secret coffer and wreathed it and set it on the 
back of an ass. And they came unto the shores of 
the Euripus, where they found a seafaring old man 
with his sons, and all together they besought the 
fishermen that they might cross the water in their 
boats. Then the old man had compassion on them 
and received on board the holy women. And lo! on 


is generally put in India, Herodotus puts it in Ethiopia: 
Herod. ii. 146 Διόνυσόν τε λέγουσι οἱ “Ἑλληνες ὡς αὐτίκα γενόμενον 
ἐς τὸν μηρὸν ἐνερράψατο Ζεὺς καὶ ἤνεικε ἐς Νύσην τὴν ὑπὲρ 
Αὐγύπτου ἐοῦσαν ἐν τῇ Αἰθιοπίῃ ; cf. ibid. iii. 97. Diod. iv. 2 
puts it μεταξὺ Φοινίκης καὶ Νείλου ; cf. iii. 65; Hom, HH. xxxiil. 
8; Steph. Byz. 5. Νῦσαι enumerates ten—on Helicon, in 
Thrace, in Caria, Arabia, Egypt, Naxos, India, Caucasus, 
Libya, Euboea. Oppian, we must suppose, is thinking of 
the Heliconian Nysa: cf. Strabo 405 γράφουσι δὲ καὶ τοῦτο 
(sc: Hom. Il. ii. 508 Νῖσάν τε ζαθέην) ““ Νῦσάν τε Fabénv.” κώμη 
δ᾽ ἐστὶ τοῦ ᾿Βλικῶνος ἡ Νῦσα. Cf. Paus. i. 89. 

7 Euboea. Cf. Steph. Byz. 5. Νῦσαι. .. δεκάτη ἐν BiBoly 
ἔνθα διὰ μιᾶς ἡμέρας τὴν ἄμπελόν φασιν ἀνθεῖν καὶ τὸν βότρυν 
πεπαίνεσθαι. 


181 


OPPIAN 


καὶ δή οἱ χλοερὴ μὲν ἐπήνθεε σέλμασι μῖλαξ, 
πρύμνην δ᾽ ὡραίη ἕλινος" καὶ κισσὸς ἔρεπτον᾽ 
καί κεν ὑπὲρ πόντοιο κυβίστεον ἀσπαλιῆες 
A i) 
δείματι δαιμονίῳ πεπτηότες, ἀλλὰ πάροιθεν 
a ἢ / A 

ἐς γαῖαν δόρυ κέλσε: πρὸς Ἡὐβοίην δὲ γυναῖκες 566 
ἠδ᾽ ἐπ᾽ ᾿Αρισταίοιο θεὸν κατάγοντο φέρουσαι, 

“ Pe Ἂν ᾿» + ΟῚ ’ EE: SI SP 4 
oof ὕπατον μὲν ἔναιεν ὄρος ἹΚαρύῃσιν" ὑπ᾽ ἄντρῳ, 
μυρία δ᾽ ἄγραυλον βιοτὴν ἐδιδάξατο φωτῶν: 
πρῶτος ποιμένιον" ἱδρύσατο, πρῶτος ἐκεῖνος 

\ > / - ", 3 2 
καρποὺς ἀγριάδος λιπαρῆς ἔθλιψεν ἐλαίης, 970 
~ ,ὔ 

καὶ ταμίσῳ πρῶτος γάλα πήξατο, καὶ ποτὶ σίμβλους 
ἐκ δρυὸς ἀείρας ἀγανὰς ἐνέκλεισε μελίσσας. 

1 σέλινος (-ov GI) Μ88.: corr. Brodaeus. 

2 ὄρος Hditor: ὄρει mss. 

ὃ. Kaptyow Editor: καὶ ῥύησιν CDEF: καὶ ῥοιῆσιν AB: 


καὶ ῥοῆσιν GLM: κεράεσσιν Turnebus. 4ἍὯ ἄντ ῳ : ἄντρου MSS. 
ῥοῆ ρ ρᾳ ρ 
> ποιμένιον Schneider: ποιμενίων Mss. 


* Similar miracles take place when Dionysus is carried 
off by Tyrrhenian pirates; Hom. H. vii. 35 ff.; Nonn. xlv. 
105 ff. ; Apollod. iii. 5. 3; Philostr. Imag. i. 19; Ov. ἢ. iii. 
577 ff. > Smilax aspera. 

° No doubt the vine is intended. Nonn. xii. 299, speak- 
ing of the vine, has ἀγριὰς ἡβώωσα πολυγνάμπτοισι σελίνοις 
(cf. Dion. P. 1157 ἕλικές τε πολυγνάμπτης ἑλίνοιο), whence it 
might be argued that Oppian used σέλινος for vine-tendril. 
But (1) cédwos (for σέλινον) seems not to occur; (2) the 
penult of σέλινον is long (except 4.P. vii, 621. 2). 

4 Pind, N. ix. 27 ἐν γὰρ δαιμονίοισι φόβοις φεύγοντι καὶ 
παῖδες θεῶν. 

4 S. of Apollo and Cyrene, patron of all rural life, of 
flocks and herds, hunting, bee-keeping, etc. Pind. Ρ, ix. 
59 ff.; Nonn. v. 229 ff., xiii. 253 ff. ; Diod. iv. 81 ; Verg. 
G. i. 14, iv. 315 ff. When Ceos was suffering from pestilence 
owing to the heat of the Dog-star, Aristaeus went there 
and built an altar to Zeus Icmaeus, i.e. Zeus as God of 
Moisture, and established an annual sacrifice to Zeus and 
Sirius on the hills of the island, Ever after Zeus caused 


182 


CYNEGETIGA, IV. 261-272 


the benches of his boat flowered ¢ the lush bindweed ὃ 
and blooming vine and ivy wreathed the stern. 
Now would the fishermen, cowering in god-sent 
terror,? have dived into the sea, but ere that the boat 
came to land. And to Euboea the women came, 
carrying the god, and to the abode of Aristaeus,* who 
dwelt in a cave on the top of a mountain at Caryae’ 
and who instructed the life of country-dwelling men 
in countless things; he was the first to establish a 
flock of sheep %; he first pressed the fruit of the oily 
wild olive,” first curdled milk with rennet,and brought 
the gentle bees‘ from the oak’ and shut them up in 


the Etesian winds to blow for forty days after the rising 
of Sirius. Hence Aristaeus was worshipped in Ceos_as 
Zeus Aristaeus (Callim. Ait. iii. 1. 33 ff. [Loeb]; Ap. Rh. 
ii. 516 ff.; Nonn. v. 269 f.; xiii. 279 ff.). In the present 
passage he seems to be conceived as dwelling in Euboea. 

7 κεράεσσιν ὑπ᾽ ἄντρου (Schneid. and Lehrs) seems to have 
no probability. We know no example of κέρατα applied to 
a cave (Claud. Paneg. Prob. et Ol. 209 has ‘* curvis Tiberinus 
in antris”) and ὄρευς κεράεσσιν ὑπ’ ἄντρῳ (suggested by 
Schneid. in note) would be preferable. We venture to read 
Καρύῃσιν (practically the reading of the mss.) and suppose 
that Caryae=Carystus, founding upon Callim. Ait. 111. 1. 
56 f£, where we are told that Xenomedes recounted the 
legendary history of Ceos, ἄρχμενος ws νύμφῃσιν ἐναίετο 
Κωρυκίῃσι τὰς ἀπὸ Παρνησσοῦ Nes ἐδίωξε μέγας, | Ὑδροῦσσαν τῷ 
καί μιν ἐφήμισαν, ὥς τε Κιρω. .. | 50. θυσι. ΤῸ « 
ᾧκεεν ἐν Καρύαις, coupled with Heraclid. Περὶ πολιτειῶν ix. 
(Miiller, 15.1.6. ii, p. 214) ἐκαλεῖτο μὲν γδροῦσα ἡ νῆσος" 
λέγονται δὲ οἰκῆσαι Νύμφαι πρότερον αὐτήν. φοβήσαντος δὲ αὐτὰς 
λέοντος εἰς Κάρυστον διαβῆναι. Also acc. to one version 
(schol. Ap. Rh. ii. 498) Carystus was the father of Aristaeus. 

9 Nonn. v. 261 ff. r Tb. 258 ff. ἐ Ib. 242 ff. 

i Before the invention of the artificial hive, the only 
honey known was “‘ wild honey ” (μέλι τὸ καλούμενον ἄγριον 
Diod. xix. 94; μέλι ἄγριον N.T. Matt. iii. 4) «« deposited in 
the hollow of old trees and in the cavities of rocks ” 
(Gibbon, c. x.). Claud. In Ruf. ii. 460 ff, 

183 


OPPIAN 


“A la \ / ta λὸ Ἄν ..9. + 

os τότε καὶ Διόνυσον ἑῷ νεογιλὸν ὑπ᾽ ἄντρῳ 
᾿Ινώης ἔθρεψε δεδεγμένος ἐκ χηλοῖο, 

σὺν Δρυάσιν δ᾽ ἀτίτηλε μελισσοκόμοισί τε Νύμφαις 
᾿υὐβοΐσιν τε κόρῃσι καὶ ᾿Αονίῃσι γυναιξίν. 
ἤδη κουρίζων δ᾽ ἑτέραις μετὰ παισὶν ἄθυρε: 
νάρθηκα προταμὼν στυφελὰς οὐτάζετο πέτρας, 
αἱ δὲ θεῷ μέθυ λάρον ἀνέβλυσαν ὠτειλάων. 

+ > > ih > ~ > Sew ~ 

ἄλλοτε δ᾽ ἀρνειοὺς αὐτῆς ἐδάϊξε δορῇσι 

καὶ μελεϊστὲὶ τάμεν νέκυας δ᾽ ἔρριψεν ἔραζε, 

S 3. Ὁ \ Doe / / 
αὖτις δ᾽ ἅψεα χερσὶν ἐϑσταλέως συνέβαλλεν, 

ε 3 + yA “ > A cal 
ot δ᾽ ἄφαρ ἔζωον χλοεροῦ θ᾽ ἅπτοντο νομοῖο. 
ἤδη καὶ θιάσοισιν ἐμέμβλετο καὶ κατὰ πᾶσαν 
γαῖαν ἐκίδνατο δῶρα Θυωναίου Διονύσου. 
πάντῃ δὲ θνητοῖς ἀρετὴν πωλέσκετο φαίνων: 

3 A \ \ / > VA \ / 
ope δὲ καὶ Θήβης ἐπεβήσατο καὶ πυρίπαιδι 
πᾶσαι ὑπηντίασαν ἸΚαδμηΐδες- αὐτὰρ ὁ μάργος 
Πενθεὺς οὐχὶ δετὰς παλάμας ἔδεεν Διονύσου, 

\ \ ? / > / \ oh. 
καὶ θεὸν αὐτοφόνοισιν ἀπείλεε χερσὶ δαΐξαι, 

3 4 /, / / 7. 
οὐ Tupiov ἹΚάδμοιο καταιδόμενος τρίχα λευκήν, 
οὐδὲ κυλινδομένην οἷσι πρὸ πόδεσσιν ᾿Αγαύην" 
σύρειν δ᾽ αἰνομόροισιν ἐβώστρεεν οἷς ἑτάροισι, 
σύρειν τε κλείειν τε, χορόν 7 ἐλάασκε γυναικῶν. 

¢€ ,ὔ / rea “ 
οἱ μέν νυν Βρόμιον [Πενθηϊάδαι φυλακῆες 
δεσμοῖσιν δοκέοντο σιδηρείοισιν ἄγεσθαι 
» Aon A φ» 3 ¢ ? 
ἄλλοι Ἰζαδμεῖοί τε: θεοῦ ὃ οὐχ ἅπτετο δεσμά: 
παχνώθη δὲ κέαρ θιασώτισι, πάντα δ᾽ ἔραζε 
ῥῖψαν ἀπὸ κροτάφων στεφανώματα θύσθλα τε 

χειρῶν" 


4 Ferula communis. 

> Num. xx. 1 Moses lifted up his hand, and with his rod he 
smote the rock twice: and the water came out abundantly. 

° Semele (Pind. P. iii. 99; Hom. H. xxxiy. 29). 


184 


275 


280 


285 


295 


CYNEGETICA, IV. 273-299 


hives. He at that time received the infant Dionysus 
from the coffer of Ino and reared him in his cave and 
nursed him with the help of the Dryads and the 
Nymphs that have the bees in their keeping and the 
maidens of Euboea and the Aonian women. And, 
when Dionysus was now come to boyhood, he played 
with the other children; he would cut a fennel @ stalk 
and smite ὃ the hard rocks, and from their wounds 
they poured for the god sweet liquor. Otherwhiles 
he rent rams, skins and all, and clove them piece- 
meal and cast the dead bodies on the ground ; and 
again with his hands he neatly put their limbs 
together, and immediately they were alive and 
browsed on the green pasture. And now he was 
attended by holy companies, and over all the earth 
were spread the gifts of Dionysus, son of Thyone,° 
and everywhere he went about showing forth his 
excellence to men. Late and at last he set foot in 
Thebes, and all the daughters of Cadmus came to 
meet the son of fire. But rash Pentheus bound the 
hands of Dionysus that should not be bound and 
threatened with his own murderous hands to rend 
the god. He had not regard untu the white hair 
of Tyrian Cadmus nor to Agave grovelling at his 
feet, but called to his ill-fated companions to hale 
away the god—to hale him away and shut him up— 
and he drave away the choir of women. Now the 
guards of Pentheus thought to carry away Bromius 4 
in bonds of iron, and so thought the other Cadmeans ; 
but the bonds touched not the god. And the heart 
of the women worshippers was chilled, and they cast 
on the ground all the garlands from their temples 
‘and the holy emblems of their hands, and the cheeks 


@ Dionysus (Pind. fr. Ixxv, 10; Aesch. 27. 24, 
185 


OPPIAN 


,ὔ 

πάσαις δ᾽ ἐστάλαον Βρομιώτισι δάκρυ παρειαί: 800 
αἷψα δ᾽ ἀνηύτησαν: ἰὼ μάκαρ, ὦ Διόνυσε, 
A ,ὔ , Pas a” δ᾽ 2). “λ 
ἅπτε σέλας φλογερὸν πατρώϊον, ἂν δ᾽ ἐλέλιξον 
γαῖαν, ἀταρτηροῦ δ᾽ ὄπασον τίσιν ὦκα τυράννου" 

lol ἐμ / ~ 
θὲς δὲ παρὰ σκοπιῇσι, πυρίσπορε, Πενθέα ταῦρον, 

ῦ : ἢ x δὲ OF 305 
ταῦρον μὲν IlevOja δυσώνυμον, ἄμμε δὲ θῆρας 
ὠμοβόρους, ὀλοοῖσι κορυσσομένας ὀνύχεσσιν, 
ὄφρα μιν, ὦ Διόνυσε, διὰ στόμα δαιτρεύσωμεν. 

«Δ ἴω 3 / uA Bs. 98 Δ 3 ~ 
ὡς φάσαν εὐχόμεναι" τάχα δ᾽ ἔκλυε Νύσιος ἀρῆς. 
Πενθέα μὲν δὴ ταῦρον ἐδείξατο φοίνιον ὄμμα, 
αὐχένα τ᾿ ἠώρησε, κέρας τ᾽ ἀνέτειλε μετώπου: 310 
ταῖσι δὲ γλαυκιόωσαν ἐθήκατο θηρὸς ὀπωπήν, 
καὶ γένυας θώρηξε, κατέγραψεν δ᾽ ἐπὶ νώτου 
ῥινὸν ὅπως νεβροῖσι, καὶ ἄγρια θήκατο φῦλα. 
¢€ A “- a > 7 / A 
αἱ δὲ θεοῦ βουλῇσιν ἀμειψάμεναι χρόα καλὸν 
πορδάλιες Ἰ]ενθῆα παρὰ σκοπέλοισι δάσαντο. 315 
τοιάδ᾽ ἀείδοιμεν, τοῖα φρεσὶ πιστεύοιμεν" 
ὅσσα Κιθαιρῶνος δὲ κατὰ πτύχας ἔργα γυναικῶν, 
ἢ μυσαρὰς κείνας, τὰς ἀλλοτρίας Διονύσου, 
μητέρας οὐχ ὁσίως ψευδηγορέουσιν ἀοιδοί. 
Θ / δέ δὸ ᾿ς ¢ / \ yw 
npopovos δέ τις ὧδε πάγην ἑτάροισι σὺν ἄλλοις 320 
θηρσὶ φιλακρήτοισιν ἐμήσατο πορδαλίεσσι. 
πίδακα λεξάμενοι Λιβύης ἀνὰ διψάδα γαῖαν, 
Ὁ ~ 
ἥ τ᾽ ὀλίγη μάλα πολλὸν ἀνυδρότατον κατὰ χῶρον 
5 / 2h 3 , / 4 
ἀπροφάτως ἀΐδηλον ἀνασταλάει μέλαν ὕδωρ, 
/ lal ~~ 
οὐδὲ πρόσω χεῖται κελαρύσμασιν, ἀλλὰ μάλ᾽ αἰνῶς 325 

Vas 
βλύζει re oradin τε μένει ψαμάθοισί τε δύνει. 
Σ 35 
ἔνθεν πορδαλίων γένος ἄγριον εἶσι μετ᾽ ἠὼ 

ἰς 5. 
πιόμενον" τοὶ δ᾽ αἶψα κατὰ κνέφας ὁρμηθέντες 
> a , d a 
ἀγρευτῆρες ἄγουσιν ἐείκοσιν ἀμφιφορῆας 
186 


CYNEGETICA, IV. 300-329 


of all the worshippers of Bromius flowed with tears. 
And straightway they cried: “Io! blessed one, 
O Dionysus, kindle thou the flaming lightning of 
thy father and shake the earth and give us speedy 
vengeance on the,evil tyrant. And, O son of fire, 
make Pentheus a bull upon the hills, make Pentheus 
of evil name a bull and make us ravenous wild beasts, 
armed with deadly claws, that, O Dionysus, we may 
rend him in our mouths.” So spake they praying 
and the lord of Nysa speedily hearkened to their 
prayer. Pentheus he made a bull of deadly eye 
and arched his neck and made the horns spring from 
his forehead. But to the women he gave the grey 
eyes of a wild beast and armed their jaws and on 
their backs put a spotted hide like that of fawns and 
made them a savage race. And, by the devising of 
the god having changed their fair flesh, in the form 
of Leopards they rent Pentheus among the rocks. 
Such things let us sing, such things let us believe 
in our hearts! But as for the deeds of the women 
in the glens of Cithaeron, or the tales told of those 
wicked mothers, alien to Dionysus, these are the 
impious falsehoods of minstrels. 

In this fashion does some hunter with his comrades 
devise a snare for the Leopards which love neat wine. 
They choose a spring in the thirsty land of Libya, 
a spring which, though small, gives forth in a very 
waterless place abundant dark water, mysterious 
and unexpected; nor does it flow onward with 
murmuring stream, but bubbles marvellously and 
remains stationary and sinks in the sands. Thereof 
the race of fierce Leopards come at dawn to drink. 
And straightway at nightfall the hunters set forth 
and carry with them twenty jars of sweet wine, which 


187 


OPPIAN 


οἴνου νηδυμίοιο, τὸν ἑνδεκάτῳ λυκάβαντι 330 

a vA 
θλῖψε τις οἰνοπέδῃσι φυτηκομίῃσι μεμηλώς- 
ὕδατι δ᾽ ἐγκέρασαν λαρὸν μέθυ καὶ προλιπόντες 
πίδακα πορφυρέην οὐ τηλόθεν εὐνάζονται, 

vA 

προπροκαλυψάμενοι δέμας ἄλκιμον ἢ σισύρῃσιν 
ἢ αὐτοῖσι λίνοισιν: ἐπεὶ σκέπας οὔ τι δύνανται 335 
εὑρέμεν οὔτε λίθων οὔτ᾽ ἠὐκόμων ἀπὸ δένδρων" 
πᾶσα γὰρ ἐκτέταται ψαφαρὴ καὶ ἀδένδρεος αἷα. 
τὰς δ᾽ ἄρα σειριόεντος ὑπ᾽ ἠελίοιο τυπείσας 

> / / Ῥ 3 3 "ἢ 3... / 
ἀμφότερον δίψη τε φίλη τ᾽ ἐκάλεσσεν αὕτμή: 

΄, > > 7 Le \ / A 
πίδακι δ᾽ ἐμπέλασαν Βρομιώτιδι καὶ μέγα χανδὸν 340 
λάπτουσιν Διόνυσον, ἐπ᾽ ἀλλήλῃσι δὲ πᾶσαι 
σκιρτεῦσιν μὲν πρῶτα χοροιτυπέουσιν ὁμοῖαι, 

> 7 na tA cae) / ~ 
εἶτα δέμας βαρύθουσι, προσώπατα δ᾽ és χθόνα δῖαν 


/, 7 
ἠρέμα νευστάζουσι κάτω- μετέπειτα δὲ πάσας 


κῶμα βιησάμενον χαμάδις βάλεν ἄλλυδις ἄλλην. 846 


ὡς δ᾽ ὁπότ᾽ εἰλαπίνῃσιν ἀφυσσάμενοι κρητήρων 

ἥλικες εἰσέτι παῖδες, ἔτι χνοάοντες ἰούλους, 

λαρὸν ἀείδωσι, προκαλιζόμενοι μετὰ δεῖπνον 

ἀλλήλους ἑκάτερθεν ἀμοιβαδίοισι κυπέλλοις, 

ὀψὲ δ᾽ ἐλώφησαν: τοὺς δ᾽ ἔρριφεν ἄλλον ἐπ᾽ ἄλλῳ 350 

καὶ φρεσὶ καὶ βλεφάροισιν ἐπιβρῖσαν μένος οἴνου" 

ὡς κεῖναι μάλα θῆρες ἐπ᾽ ἀλλήλῃσι χυθεῖσαι 

νόσφι πόνου κρατεροῖσιν' ὑπ᾽ ἀγρευτῆρσι γένοντο. 
Ἄρκτοισιν δὲ πονεῦσι κλυτὴν περιώσιον ἄγρην 


/ wf 7 3 
Τίψριν ὅσοι ναίουσι καὶ Δρμενίην κλυτότοξον. 355. 


\ 7 ,ὔ ~ 
πουλὺς ὄχλος βαίνουσι τανύσκια βένθεα δρυμῶν, 
Y ? v4 2 ae 
pies αὐτολύτοις" σὺν ἐὑρίνεσσι κύνεσσιν, 


1 κρατεροῖο Mss. : corr. G. Hermann. 
2 αὐτολύτοις Schneider : αὐτολύγοις Mss. vulg.: αὖτ᾽ ὀλίγοι 


Tiiselmann coll. Paraphr. Ρ. 42. 30 βραχεῖς δὲ αὐτῶν: αὖτ᾽ 
ὀλίγοις ΑΟΚΤΙΜ. 


188 


CYNEGETICA, IV. 330-357 


someone whose business is the keeping of a vineyard 
had pressed eleven years before,* and they mix the 
sweet liquor with the water and leave the purple 
spring and bivouac not far away, making shift to 
cover their valiantbodies with goat skins or merely 
with the nets, since they can find no shelter either of 
rock or leafy tree; for all the land stretches sandy 
and treeless. The Leopards, smitten by the flaming 
sun, feel the call both of thirst and of the odour which 
they love, and they approach the Bromian spring and 
with widely gaping mouth lap up the wine. First 
they all leap about one another like dancers ; then 
their limbs become heavy, and they gently nod their 
heads downwards to the goodly earth; then deep 
slumber overcomes them all and casts them here 
and there upon the ground. As when at a banquet 
youths of an age, still boys, still with the down upon 
their cheeks, sing sweetly and challenge each other 
after dinner with cup for cup ; and it is late ere they 
give over, and the strength of the wine is heavy on 
head and eye and throws them over one upon the 
other; even so those wild beasts are heaped on one 
another and become, without mighty toil, the prey 
of the hunters. 

For Bears an exceeding glorious hunt is made by 
those who dwell on the Tigris and in Armenia famous 
for archery. A great crowd go to the shady depths 
of the thickets,® skilful men with keen-scented 


@ From Hom. Od. iii. 391 οἴνου ἡδυπότοιο, τὸν ἑνδεκάτῳ 
ἐνιαυτῷ (ἰ.6. eleven years after it was made)  ὥιξεν ταμίη καὶ 
ἀπὸ κρήδεμνον ἔλυσε. 

> αὐτολύγοις of most Mss. seems meaningless. αὐτολύτοις 
(Schneid.) means ‘‘on a slip-leash.” Cf. Hes. 5. αὐτόλυσις" 
déua ἐφ᾽ ᾧ ἀγκύλη ἐφῆπται καὶ οὐχ ἅμμα γέγονεν. 

189 


OPPIAN 


lan , aA 
ἴχνια μαστεύσοντ᾽" ὀλοῶν πουλύπλανα" θηρῶν. 
ἀλλ᾽ ὁπότ᾽ ἀθρήσωσι κύνες σημήϊα ταρσῶν, 
e fond 
ἕσπονται στιβέας τε ποδηγετέουσιν ὁμαρτῇ, 860 
~ / 
ῥῖνας μὲν ταναὰς σχεδόθεν, χέρσοιο τιθέντες" 
By D 4 
εἰσοπίσω δ᾽ εἴπέρ τι νεώτερον ἀθρήσειαν 
3, if 
ἴχνος, ἐπειγόμενοι θόρον αὐτίκα καγχαλόωντες 
~ > 3, a 
ληθόμενοι τοῦ πρόσθεν" ἐπὴν δ᾽ εἰς ἄκρον ἵκωνται 
/ / 
εὐπλανέος στιβίης θηρός τε παναίολον εὐνήν, 
v) yh ~ 
αὐτίχ᾽ ὁ μὲν θρώσκει παλάμης ἄπο θηρητῆρος, 
2, / 
οἰκτρὰ μάλ᾽ ὑλακόων, κεχαρημένος ἔξοχα θυμόν. 
ω Ε) ” ¢ 
ws δ᾽ ὅτε παρθενικὴ γλαγόεντος ἐν εἴαρος ὥρῃ 
> , δ 259. » / > > , 
ἀβλαύτοισι πόδεσσιν ἀν οὔρεα πάντ᾽ ἀλάληται, 
») ,ὔ ‘ / δ 4 725 > me 
ἄνθεα διζομένη: τὸ δέ of μάλα τηλόθ᾽ ἐούσῃ 
νηδύμιον προπάροιθεν ἴον μήνυσεν air: 370 
~ 3 4\> 9,7 / yp A > tf 
TH δὲ μάλ᾽ ἰάνθη μείδησέ τε θυμὸς ἐλαφρός, | 
ἀμᾶται δ᾽ ἀκόρητος, ἀναψαμένη δὲ κάρηνον 
εἶσιν ἐς ἀγραύλων δόμον ἀείδουσα τοκήων" 
ὡς κυνὸς ἰάνθη θυμὸς θρασύς. αὐτὰρ ἐπακτὴρ 
καὶ μάλα μιν θύνοντα βιησάμενος τελαμῶσι 375 
/ , ΕΣ > A ¢ A 
καγχαλόων παλίνορσος ἔβη μεθ ὅμιλον ἑταίρων. 
τοῖσι δὲ καὶ δρυμὸν διεπέθραδε, θῆρά τε πικρὴν 
3 \ \ / oe 7) ” 
αὕτος Kal συνάεθλος ὅπου λοχόωντες ἔλειψαν. 
> 
ot δ᾽ dp’ ἐπειγόμενοι στάλικας στήσαντο κραταιοὺς | 
/ Pe Ε 
δίκτυά τ᾽ ἀμπετάσαντο καὶ ἄρκυας ἀμφεβάλοντο: 
> a A 
ev δὲ δύω κλῖναν δοιαῖς ἑκάτερθε κεραίαις 
> 
ἀνέρας ἀκρολίνους ὑπὸϑ μειλινέοισι πάγοισιν." 
> 3 “ aw Ν ~ 
ἐκ δ᾽ αὐτῶν κεράων τε καὶ αἰζηῶν πυλαωρῶν 


365 


380 | 


' μαστεύσοντ᾽] dual for plural. 
* πολυπλανέα Mss. : corr. Schneider. 
3 ἐπὶ in lit. ΒΚ. 4 πάγαισι B de Ballu.’ 


190 


CYNEGETICA, IV. 358-384 


dogs on leash, to seek the mazy tracks of the 
deadly beasts. But when the dogs descry the signs 
of footprints, they follow them up and guide the 
trackers with them, holding their long noses nigh 
the ground. And» afterwards if they descry any 
fresher track, straightway they rush eagerly, giving 
tongue the while exultingly, forgetting the previous 
track. But when they reach the end of their devious 
tracking and come to the cunning lair of the beast, 
straightway the dog bounds from the hand of the 
hunter, pitifully barking, rejoicing in his heart 
exceedingly. As when a maiden in the season of 
milky spring roams with unsandalled feet over all 
the hills in search of flowers and while she is yet afar 
the fragrance tells her of the sweet violet ahead ; 
her lightsome heart is gladdened and smiles, and 
she gathers the flowers without stint and wreathes her 
head and goes singing to the house of her country- 
dwelling parents; even so the stout heart of the 
dog is gladdened. But the hunter for all his eager- 
ness constrains him with straps and goes back 
exulting to the company of his comrades. And he 
shows them the thicket and where himself and his 
helper ambushed and left the savage beast. And 
they hasten and set up strong stakes and spread 
hayes and cast nets around. On either hand in the 
two wings they put two men at the ends of the net 4 
to lie under piles of ashen boughs. From the wings 
themselves and the men who watch the entrance 


4 The word ἀκρολίνους gives much the same sense as 
ἀκρωλένια (with which, of course, it has no etymological 
connexion) or “‘elbows’’ of Xen. C. 2. 6, which Poll. v. 29 
defines as τὰ πέρατα τῶν ἀρκύων. μειλινέοισι πάγοισι --- if 
correct—seems to mean ‘‘piles” or “heaps” of ashen 
boughs. 


19] 


OPPIAN 


λαιῇ μὲν μήρινθον ἐὔστροφον ἐκτανύουσι 988 
μηκεδανήν, λινέην, ὀλίγον γαίης ἐφύπερθεν, 

ὅσσον ἐπ᾽ ὀμφαλὸν ἀνδρὸς ἱκανέμεναι στροφάλιγγα" 
τῆς ἀπὸ μὲν κρέμαται περιδαίδαλα παμφανόωντα 
ἄνθεα ταινιῶν πουλύχροα, δείματα θηρῶν, 

ἐκ δ᾽ ἄρ᾽ ἀπήρτηται πτίλα μυρία παμφανόωντα, 390 
οἰωνῶν τε διηερίων περικαλλέα ταρσὰ 

γυπάων πολιῶν τε κύκνων δολιχῶν τε πελαργῶν. 
δεξυτερῇ δὲ λόχους ὑπὸ ῥωγάσιν' ἐστήσαντο, 

ἢ χλοεροῖς πετάλοισι θοῶς πυκάσαντο μέλαθρα, 
τυτθὸν ἀπ᾽ ἀλλήλων, πίσυρας δ᾽ ἐκάλυψαν ἑκάστῳ 395 
ἀνέρας, ὁρπήκεσσι πρόπαν δέμας ἀμφιβαλόντες. 
αὐτὰρ ἐπὴν κατὰ κόσμον ἐπαρτέα πάντα πέλωνται, 
σάλπιγξ μὲν κελάδησε πελώριον, ἡ δέ τε λόχμης 
ὀξὺ λέληκε θοροῦσα καὶ ὀξὺ δέδορκε λακοῦσα" 
αἰζηοὶ δ᾽ ἐπόρουσαν ἀολλέες, ἐκ δ᾽ ἑκάτερθεν 400 
ἀντία θηρὸς ἴασι φαλαγγηδὸν κλονέοντες. 


1 ῥωπάσιν Az, in lit. Μ. 


* The formido of Latin writers, a line hung with feathers 
and ribbons of various colours by which the game is scared 
and driven in the desired direction, Verg. A. xii. 749 
Inclusum veluti si quando flumine nactus Cervum aut 
puniceae saeptum formidine pennae Venator cursu canis 
et latratibus instat; G@. iii. 371 Hos (cervos) non inmissis 
canibus, non cassibus ullis Puniceaeve agitant pavidos 
formidine pennae; Senec. Hipp. 46 Picta rubenti linea 
penna Vano claudat terrore feras; De ira ii. 11. 5 cum 
maximos ferarum greges linea pennis distincta contineat et 
in insidias agat, ab ipso adfectu dicta formido ; De clem. i. 
12. 5 Sic feras lineae et pennae clausas continent. Easdem 
a tergo eques telis incessat: temptabunt fugam per ipsa 
quae fugerant procalcabuntque formidinem ; Luc. iv. 437 


Sic dum pavidos formidine cervos Claudat odoratae me- 
tuentes aera pennae. 


192 


CYNEGETICA, IV. 385-401 


they stretch on the left hand a-well-twined long rope 4 
of flax a little above the ground in such wise that 
the cord would reach to a man’s waist. Therefrom 
are hung many-coloured patterned ribbons, various 
and bright, a scare to wild beasts, and suspended 
therefrom are countless bright feathers, the beautiful 
wings of the fowls of the air, Vultures? and white 
Swans ¢ and long Storks.4 On the right hand they set 
ambushes in clefts of rock, or with green leaves they 
swiftly roof huts a little apart from one another, and 
in each they hide four men, covering all their bodies 
with branches. Now when all things are ready, 
the trumpet sounds its tremendous note, and the 
Bear leaps forth from the thicket with a sharp cry 
and looks sharply as she cries. And the young men 
rush on in a body and from either side come in 
battalions against the beast and drive her before 


> For the feathers used in the formido cf. Gratt. 77 ff. 
Tantum inter nivei iungantur vellera cygni, Et satis armorum 
est ; haec clara luce coruscant Terribiles species ; ab vulture 
dirus avaro Turbat odor silvas, meliusque alterna valet res ; 
Nemes. 312 ff. Dat tibi pinnarum terrentia millia vultur, 
Dat Libye, magnarum avium fecunda creatrix, Dantque 
grues cygnique senes et candidus anser, Dant quae flu- 
minibus craseisque paludibus errant Pellitosque pedes 
stagnanti gurgite tingunt. Of Vultures two species are 
distinguished: A. 592b6 τῶν δὲ γυπῶν δύο ἐστὶν εἴδη, ὁ 
μὲν μικρὸς. καὶ ἐκλευκότερος, ὁ δὲ μείζων καὶ σποδοειδέστερος. 
The former is Neophron percnopterus Τ.,., which nests in 
Greece, its arrival about 21st March being reckoned by 
shepherds as the beginning of Spring (Mommas. p. 1); the 
latter Vuliwr fulvus Briss. and perh. V. cinereus. 

¢ Both Cygnus musicus, the Whistling Swan or Whooper, 
and C. olor, the Mute Swan, are found in Greece, but only 
the latter appears to nest there (Mommas. pp. 286 f.). 

4 Ciconia nigra and C. alba are both visitors in Greece, 
the latter being resident in Macedonia (Momms. pp. 285 f.). 


ο 193 


OPPIAN| 


ἡ δ᾽ ὅμαδον προλιποῦσα Kat ἀνέρας ἰθὺς ὀρούει, 
γυμνὸν ὅπου λεύσσει πεδίον todd: κεῖθεν ἔπειτα 
ἑξείης κατὰ νῶτον ἐγειρόμενος λόχος ἀνδρῶν 
κλαγγηδὸν παταγοῦσιν, ἐπ᾽. ὀφρύα μηρίνθοιο 405 
σευόμενοι Kal δεῖμα πολύχροον: ἡ δέ τ᾽ ἀνιγρὴ 
ἀμφίβολος μάλα πάμπαν ἀτυζομένη πεφόρηται" 
πάντα δ᾽ ὁμοῦ δείδοικε, λόχον, κτύπον, αὐλόν, αὑτήν, 
δειμαλέην μήρινθον- ἐπεὶ κελάδοντος ἀήτεω 

ταινίαι τ᾽ ἐφύπερθε διηέριαι κραδάουσι 410 
κινύμεναι πτέρυγές τε λιγήϊα συρίζουσι. 

τοὔνεκα παπταίνουσα κατ᾽ ἄρκυος ἀντίον ἕρπει, 

ἐν δ᾽ ἔπεσεν λινέοισι λόχοις" τοὶ δ᾽ ἐγγὺς ἐόντες 
ἀκρόλινοι θρώσκουσι καὶ ἐγκονέοντες ὕπερθε 
σπαρτόδετον τανύουσι περίδρομον ἄλλο δ᾽ ex” ἄλλῳ 415 
νηήσαντο λίνον: μάλα γὰρ τότε θυμαίνουσιν 

ἄρκτοι καὶ γενύεσσὶ καὶ ἀργαλέαις παλάμῃσι: 
δηθάκι δ᾽ ἐξαυτῆς φύγον ἀνέρας ἀγρευτῆρας 

δίκτυά 7 ἐξήλυξαν, ἀΐστωσαν δέ τε θήρην. 

ἀλλὰ τότε κρατερός τις ἀνὴρ παλάμην ἐπέδησεν 420 
ἄρκτου δεξιτερήν, χήρωσέ τε πᾶσαν ἐρωήν, 

δῆσέ τ᾽ ἐπισταμένως, τάνυσέν τε ποτὶ ξύλα θῆρα, 
καὶ πάλιν ἐγκατέκλεισε δρυὸς πεύκης τε μελάθρῳ, 
πυκνῇσι στροφάλιγξιν ἑὸν δέμας ἀσκήσασαν. 


* Cf. i. 1δ6. The περίδρομος is a rope passing through 
the meshes along the upper and lower margins of the net, 
which, when the game is driven in, the ambushed hunter 
pulls and so closes the mouth of the net. Hes. 5. περίδρομοι" 
τοῦ δικτύου τὸ διειρόμενον σχοινίον ; Poll. v.28 ἄστι δὲ περίδρομος 
τῆς ἄρκυος σχοινίον ἑκατέρωθεν τῶν ἄνω τε καὶ κάτω βρόχων 
διειρόμενον, ᾧ συνέλκεταί τε τὰ δίκτυα καὶ πάλιν ἀναλύεται ; 


194 


CYNEGETICA, IV. 402-424 


them. And she, leaving the din and the men, rushes 
straight where she sees an empty space of open 
plain. Thereupon in turn an ambush of men arises 
in her rear and make a clattering din, driving her to 
the brow of the rope and the many-coloured scare. 
And the wretched beast is utterly in doubt and flees 
distraught, fearful of all alike—the ambush of men, 
the din, the flute, the shouting, the scaring rope ; 
for with the roaring wind the ribands wave aloft in 
the air and the swinging feathers whistle shrill. 
So, glancing about her, the Bear draws nigh the net 
and falls into the flaxen ambush. Then the watchers 
at the ends of the net near at hand spring forth and 
speedily draw tight above the skirting cord α of broom. 
Net on net they pile; for at that moment Bears 
greatly rage with jaws and terrible paws, and many 
a time they straightway evade the hunters and 
escape from the nets and make the hunting vain. 
But at that same moment some strong man fetters 
the right paw of the Bear and widows her of all her 
force, and binds her skilfully and ties the beast to 
planks of wood and encloses her again in a cage of 
oak and pine, after she has exercised her body in 
many a twist and turn. 


Xen. CO. 2. 4 ὑφείσθωσαν δὲ οἱ περίδρομοι ἀνάμματοι, ἵνα εὔτροχοι 
ὦσι. The περίδρομοι might also be attached to the net by 
loops (τοὺς δὲ περιδρόμους ἀπὸ στροφέων Xen. C. 2. 63 cf. 
Poll. v. 29 προβάλλονται δὲ τοῖς δικτύοις ἀπὸ στροφέων) : Ken. 
C. 10. 7 τὸν περίδρομον ἐξάπτειν ἀπὸ δένδρου ἰσχυροῦ. Xen. 
Ο. 6. 9 speaks of fastening the περίδρομοι to the ground 
(καθάπτων τοὺς περιδρόμους ἐπὶ τὴν γῆν). Here he must be 
referring to the skirting-rope at, the lower margin of the 
net from which the upper rope was sometimes distinguished 
as ἐπίδρομος : Poll. v. 29 τινὲς δὲ τούτους ἐπιδρόμους ὠνόμασαν, 
οἱ δὲ δύο ὄντων τὸν μὲν ἐκ τοῦ κάτω περίδρομον, ἐπίδρομον δὲ 
τὸν ἄνωθεν. 


195 


OPPIAN 


/ 
Χρειὼ δὲ σκοπέλου μὲν ἀνάντεος ἠδὲ πάγοιο 
σεύεσθαι προθέοντα ποδώκεα φῦλα λαγωῶν, 
a , > re 
πρὸς δὲ κάταντα σοφῇσι προμηθείῃσιν ἐλαύνειν" 
3 
αὐτίκα γὰρ σκύλακάς τε καὶ ἀνέρας ἀθρήσαντες 
πρὸς λόφον ἰθύνουσιν- ἐπεὶ" μάλα. γιγνώσκουσιν, 
ὅττι πάροιθεν ἔασιν ὀλιζότεροι πόδες αὐτοῖς. 
τοὔνεκα ῥηΐδιοι πτώκεσσι πέλουσι κολῶναι, 
ῥηΐδιοι πτώκεσσι, δυσάντεες ἱππελάτῃσι. 
ναὶ μὴν ἀτραπιτοῖο πολυστιβίην ἀλεείνειν 
καὶ πάτον, ἐν δ᾽ ἄρα τῇσι γεωμορίῃσιν ἐλαύνειν: 
\ 
κουφότεροι yap ἔασι τρίβῳ Kat ποσσὶν ἐλαφροὶ 
a > 
ῥεῖά τ᾽ ἐπιθρώσκουσιν- ἀρηρομένῃ δ᾽ ἐνὶ γαίῃ 
καὶ θέρεος βαρύθουσι πόδες καὶ χείματος ὥρῃ 
ἄχρις ἐπισφυρίων ὀλοὴν κρηπῖδα φέρουσιν. 
"H > NA ὃ f ὃ ,ὔ λ ΄ \ My 
v mot ἐλῇς δόρκον δέ, φυλάσσεο μὴ μετὰ 
πολλὸν 
> / / / \ / / 
ἐκτάδιον δολιχόν τε δρόμον καὶ τέρμα πόνοιο 
> 
τυτθὸν ὑποσταίη, λαγόνων δ᾽ ἀπὸ μήδεα xen 
δόρκοι γὰρ περίαλλα δρόμοις ἐνὶ μεσσατίοισι 
κυστίδα κυμαίνουσιν, ἀναγκαίοισιν ὑπ᾽ ὄμβροις 
βριθόμενοι λαγόνας, ποτὶ δ᾽ ἰσχίον ὀκλάζουσιν" 
” > 2\7 Lé / > \ ~ 
ἣν δ᾽ ὀλίγον πνεύσωσι πολυσφαράγων ἀπὸ λαιμῶν, 
πολλὸν ἀρειότεροι λαιψηρότεροί τε φέβονται, 
γούνασιν εὐφόρτοισι καὶ ἔγκασι κουφοτέροισι. 
K ὃ \ δ᾽ EY λ ,ὔ 1A ie » / 
€pow ὃ οὔτε λόχοισιν ἁλώσιμος οὔτε βρόχοισιν 


4 Xen. Οἱ 5. 17 θέουσι μάλιστα μὲν τὰ ἀνάντη .. . τὰ δὲ 
κατάντη ἥκιστα. 

> Xen. C. 5. 80 σκέλη τὰ ὄπισθεν μείζω πολὺ τῶν ἔμπροσθεν. 

¢ Xen. C. 8. 8 ταχὺ γὰρ ἀπαγορεύει διὰ τὸ βάθος τῆς χιόνος 
καὶ διὰ τὸ κάτωθεν τῶν ποδῶν λασίων ὄντων προσέχεσθαι αὐτῷ 
ὄγκον πολύν. 

4 i.e. their feet are caked with mud. The metaphor is 


196 


425 


430 


435 


440 


445 


CYNEGETICA, IV. 425-448 


In hunting the swift-footed tribes of the Hare the 
hunter should run in front and head them off from 
upward-sloping rock or hill and with cunning prudence 
drive them downhill. For the moment that they 
see hounds and huntsmen they rush uphill?; since 
they well know ‘that their forelegs’ are shorter. 
Hence hills are easy for Hares—easy for Hares but 
difficult for mounted men. Moreover, the hunter 
should avoid much-trodden ways and the beaten 
track and pursue them in the tilled fields. For on 
the trodden way they are nimbler and light of foot 
and easily rush on. But on the ploughed land their 
feet are heavy in summer and in the winter ° season 
they carry a fatal shoe ὦ that reaches to the ankle. 

If ever thou art hunting a Gazelle, beware that 
after a very long and extended course and term of 
toil it do not halt a moment and relieve? nature. 
For in Gazelles beyond all others the bladder swells 
in the midst of their course and their flanks are 
burdened by involuntary waters and they squat upon 
their haunches. But if they take breath a little 
with their noisy throats, they flee far more strongly 
and more swiftly with nimble knees and lighter 
loins. 

The Fox is not to be captured by ambush nor by 


illustrated by the use of κρηπίς to mean a species of cake 
ἐξ ἀλεύρου καὶ μέλιτος Poll. vi. 77. 
¢ Of. A. δ19 ἃ 12 (of Deer, ἔλαφοι) ἐν δὲ τῷ φεύγειν ἀνά- 
παυσιν ποιοῦνται τῶν δρόμων καὶ ὑφιστάμενοι μένουσιν ἕως ἂν 
πλησίον ἔλθῃ ὁ διώκων" τότε δὲ πάλιν φεύγουσιν. τοῦτο δὲ δοκοῦσι 
ποιεῖν διὰ τὸ πονεῖν τὰ ἐντός" τὸ γὰρ ἔντερον ἔχει λεπτὸν καὶ 
ἀσθενὲς οὕτως ὥστε ἐὰν ἠρέμα τις πατάξῃ, διακόπτεται τοῦ δέρματος 
ὑγιοῦς ὄντος ; Plin. viii. 113 et alias semper in fuga acquie- 
scunt stantesque respiciunt, cum prope ventum est rursus 
fugae praesidia repetentes. Hoc fit intestini dolore tam 
infirmi ut ictu levi rumpatur intus, 
197 


OPPIAN 


» / > \ \ > 4 lol 
οὔτε Aivous: δεινὴ γὰρ ἐπιφροσύνῃσι νοῆσαι, 
\ > > ve “- € \ De ὦ ~ 
δεινὴ δ᾽ αὖτε κάλωα ταμεῖν, ὑπὸ ὃ appara λῦσαι, 450 
καὶ πυκινοῖσι δόλοισιν ὀλισθῆσαι θανάτοιο. 
5 Ν ΄ + > » 0.» 3.51.5. > ~ 
ἀλλὰ κύνες μιν «ἄειραν ἀολλέες - οὐδ ap’ ἐκεῖνοι 
καὶ κρατεροί περ ἐόντες ἀναιμωτὶ δαμάσαντο. 


198 


CYNEGETICA, IV. 449-453 


noose nor by net. For she is clever in her cunning 
at perceiving them; clever too at severing a rope 
and loosing knots and by subtle craft escaping from 
death. But the thronging hounds take her; yet 
even they for all their strength do not overcome her 
without bloodshed. 


199 


¥, 


AAIEYTIKON TO A 


"EOved τοι πόντοιο πολυσπερέας τε φάλαγγας 
παντοίων νεπόδων, πλωτὸν γένος ᾿Αμφιτρίτης, 
ἐξερέω, γαίης ὕπατον κράτος, ’Avrwvive: 
ὅσσα τε κυματόεσσαν ἔχει χύσιν, ἧχί θ᾽ ἕκαστα 


ey? , 7 , , 
εννέμεται, διερούς τε γάμους διεράς TE γενέθλας δ 


> 


\ ,ὔ 4 Δαν \ / 
καὶ βίον ἰχθυόεντα καὶ ἔχθεα καὶ φιλότητας 
A / ΘΝ V4 » 

καὶ βουλάς, ἁλίης τε πολύτροπα δήνεα τέχνης 
κερδαλέης, ὅσα φῶτες ἐπ’ ἰχθύσι μητίσαντο 
> ᾽ὔ > he > ’ 4 
ἀφράστοις. ἀΐδηλον ἐπιπλώουσι θάλασσαν 
τολμηρῇ κραδίῃ, κατὰ δ᾽ ἔδρακον οὐκ ἐπίοπτα 
βένθεα καὶ τέχνῃσιν ἁλὸς διὰ μέτρα δάσαντο 
δαιμόνιοι. χλούνην μὲν ὀρίτροφον ἠδὲ καὶ ἄρκτον 
Ὡρητὴρ ὁράᾳ τε καὶ ἀντιόωντα δοκεύει 
> ,ὔ Ὁ / -“ / Ue 
audadinv, ἕκαθέν τε βαλεῖν σχεδόθεν τε δαμάσσαι" 
A > > / ,ὔ a” / \ PA AN 
ἄμφω δ᾽ ἀσφαλέως γαίης ἐπι θήρ τε καὶ ἀνὴρ 
μάρνανται, σκύλακες δὲ συνέμποροι ἡγεμονῆες 
κνώδαλα σημαίνουσι καὶ ἰθύνουσιν ἄνακτας 
εὐνὴν εἰς αὐτὴν καὶ ἀρηγόνες ἐγγὺς ἕπονται. 
οὐδ᾽ dpa τοῖς οὐ χεῖμα τόσον δέος, οὐ μὲν ὁὀπώρη 
φλέγμα φέρει" πολλαὶ γὰρ ἐπακτήρων ἀλεωραὶ 
λόχμαι τε σκιεραὶ καὶ δειράδες ἄντρα τε πέτρης 
αὐτορόφου: πολλοὶ δὲ τιταινόμενοι κατ᾽ ὄρεσφιν 

uA 3, An 
ἀργύρεοι ποταμοί, δίψης ἄκος ἠδὲ λοετρῶν 


* Introduction, p. xx. 
200 


10 


HALIEUTICA, or FISHING 
I 


Tue tribes of the sea and the far scattered ranks of 
all manner of fishes, the swimming brood of Amphi- 
trite, will I declare, O Antoninus,” sovereign majesty 
of earth; all that inhabit the watery flood and where 
each dwells, their mating in the waters and their 
birth, the life of fishes, their hates, their loves, their 
wiles,’ and the crafty devices of the cunning fisher’s 
art—even all that men have devised against the 
baffling fishes. Over the unknown sea they sail with 
daring heart and they have beheld the unseen deeps 
and by their arts have mapped out the measures of 
the sea, men more than human. The mountain-bred 
Boar and the Bear the hunter sees, and, when he 
confronts him watches him openly, whether to shoot 
him afar or slay him at close quarters. Both beast 
and man fight securely on the land, and the hounds 
. go with the hunter as guides to mark the quarry and 
direct their masters to the very lair and attend close 
at hand as helpers. To them winter brings no great 
fear, nor summer brings burning heat; for hunters 
have many shelters—shady thickets and cliffs and 
caves in the rock self-roofed ; many a silvery river, 
too, stretching through the hills to quench thirst and 
> Of fishes, ef. H. ii. 53 f., iii. 92 ff. Editors, punctuating 

at φιλότητας, take βουλάς of the devices of fishermen. 
201 


OPPIAN 


«αὐ y, A A 4 e; 0 
ἀέναοι ταμίαι" παρὰ δὲ χλοάουσι ῥέεθροις 
ποῖαί τε χθαμαλαί, μαλακὴ κλίσις ὕπνον ἑλέσθαι 
/, 
εὔδιον ἐκ καμάτοιο, Kal ὥρια δόρπα πάσασθαι 
, 
ὕλης ἀγρονόμοιο, τά T οὔρεσι πολλὰ φύονται. 
τερπωλὴ δ᾽ ἕπεται θήρῃ πλέον ἠέ περ ἱδρώς. 
aA Uj 
ὅσσοι δ᾽ oiwvoiow ἐφοπλίζονται ὄλεθρον, 
€ w.Q/ \ - / \ ες / a 
pnidin Kat τοῖσι πέλει Kal ὑπόψιος ἄγρη: 
τοὺς μὲν γὰρ κνώσσοντας ἐληΐσσαντο καλιῆς 
»} Ἁ A /, ¢ , > / 
κρύβδην" τοὺς δὲ δόναξιν ὑπέσπασαν ἰξοφόροισιν" 
2 \ 
ot δὲ τανυπλέκτοισιν ἐν ἕρκεσιν ἤριπον αὐτοὶ 
εὐνῆς χρηΐζοντες, ἀτερπέα δ᾽ αὖλιν ἔκυρσαν. 
τλησιπόνοις δ᾽ ἁλιεῦσιν ἀτέκμαρτοι μὲν ἄεθλοι, 
> \ > > A / , > > »» 
ἐλπὶς δ᾽ οὐ σταθερὴ σαίνει φρένας it ὄνειρος" 
/, 
οὐ yap ἀκινήτου γαίης ὕπερ ἀθλεύουσιν, 
\ nan , 
ἀλλ᾽ αἰεὶ Kpvep@ τε Kal ἄσχετα μαργαίνοντι, 
σ΄ ae Δ A ,ὔ > ᾽ὔ 
ὕδατι συμφορέονται, ὃ καὶ γαίηθεν ἰδέσθαι 
δεῖμα φέρει καὶ μοῦνον ἐν ὄμμασι πειρήσασθαι:" 
δούρασι δ᾽ ἐν βαιοῖσιν ἀελλάων θεράποντες 
πλαζόμενοι, καὶ θυμὸν ἐν οἴδμασιν αἰὲν ἔχοντες, 
αἰεὶ μὲν νεφέλην ἰοειδέα παπταίνουσιν, 
αἰεὶ δὲ τρομέουσι μελαινόμενον πόρον ἅλμης" 
> r4 / > / , 3 ἊΝ ΓῺ} 
οὐδέ τι φοιταλέων ἀνέμων σκέπας, οὐδέ τιν ὄμβρων 
ἀλκήν, οὐ πυρὸς ἄλκαρ ὀπωρινοῖο φέρονται. 


25 


35 


40 


45 


πρὸς δ᾽ ἔτι καὶ βλοσυρῆς δυσδερκέα δείματα λίμνης 


, 
κήτεα πεφρίκασι, τά τε σφίσιν ἀντιόωσιν, 
εὖτ᾽ ἂν ὑποβρυχίης ἄδυτον περόωσι θαλάσσης" 
/ 
οὐ μέν τις σκυλάκων ἁλίην ὁδὸν ἡγεμονεύει 


* Manil. v. 371 Aut nido captare suo ramove sedentem | 
Pascentemve super surgentia ducere lina ; cf. ΟἹ i. 64. 

> Cf. Gaelic proverbs: ‘* Precarious is the hunting, unre- 
liable the fishing ; place thy trust in the land, it never left 
man empty”; ‘* Unstable is the point of the fish-hook”’; 


᾽ 


‘*Good is the help of the fishing, but a bad barn is the fish- 


202 


50 


HALIEUTICA, I. 24-50 


dispense a never-failing bath; and by the green- 
fringed streams are low beds of grass, a soft couch 
in sunny weather for sleep after toil, and seasonable 
repast to eat of woodland fruits which grow abundant 
on the hills. Pleasure more than sweat attends the 
hunt. And those who prepare destruction for birds, 
easy for them too and visible is their prey. For some 
they capture unawares asleep upon their nests %; 
others they take with limed reeds; others fall of 
themselves into the fine-plaited nets, seeking for a 
bed, and a woeful roost they find. But for the toil- 
some fishermen their labours are uncertain,® and 
unstable as a dream is the hope that flatters their 
hearts. For not upon the moveless® land do they 
labour, but always they have to encounter the chill 
and wildly raging water, which even to behold from 
the land brings terror and to essay it only with the 
eyes. In tiny barks they wander obsequious to the 
stormy winds, their minds ever on the surging waves ; 
always they scan the dark clouds and ever tremble 
at the blackening tract of sea ; no shelter have they 
from the raging winds nor any defence against the 
rain nor bulwark against summer heat. Moreover, 
they shudder at the terrors awful to behold of the 
grim sea, even the Sea-monsters ὦ which encounter 
thera when they traverse the secret places of the 
deep. No hounds guide the fishers on their seaward 


ing,” Carmichael, Carmina Gadelica (Edin. 1900), p. 255. 
‘* Plough the sea!” said ‘Triptolemus; ‘‘that’s a furrow 
requires small harrowing,” Scott, The Pirate, ¢. 5. 

¢ Walton, Compleat Angler, c..i. Venator: The Karth is 
a solid, settled element. 

4 κῆτος (H. i. 360 n.) denotes Whales, Dolphins, Seals, 
Sharks, Tunnies, and the large creatures of the sea 


generally. 
203 


OPPIAN 


ἰχθυβόλοις- ἴχνη yap ἀείδελα νηχομένοισιν" 

οὐδ᾽ οἵ γ᾽ εἰσορόωσιν ὅπῃ σχεδὸν ἵξεται ἄγρης 

ἀντιάσας, οὐ γάρ τι μίην ὁδὸν ἔρχεται, ἰχθύς" 

θριξὶ δ᾽ ἐν ἠπεδανοῖσι παλιγνάμπτοιό τε χαλκοῦ 

χείλεσι καὶ δονάκεσσι Aivoiol. τε κάρτος ἔχουσιν. 55 
Οὐ μὴν τερπωλῆς ἀπολείπεαι, αἴ κ᾽ ἐθέλῃσθα 

τέρπεσθαι, γλυκερὴ δὲ πέλει βασιλήϊος ἄγρη. 

νῆα μὲν εὐγόμφωτον, ἐὔΐζυγον, ἔξοχα κούφην, 

αἰζηοὶ κώπῃσιν ἐπειγομένῃς ἐλόωσι, 

νῶτον ἁλὸς θείνοντες: 6 δ᾽ ἐν πρύμνῃσιν ἄριστος 60 

ἰθυντὴρ ἀλίαστον ἄγει καὶ ἀμεμφέα νῆα 

χῶρον ἐς εὐρύαλόν τε καὶ εὔδια. πορφύροντα- 

ἔνθα δὲ δαιτυμόνων νεπόδων ἀπερείσια φῦλα 

φέρβεται, οὗς θεράποντες ἀεὶ κομέουσιν, ἐδωδῇ 

πολλῇ πιαίνοντες, ἑτοιμότατον χορὸν ἄγρης 65 

σοί τε, μάκαρ, Kal παιδὲ μεγαυχέϊ, πώεα θήρης. 

αὐτίκα γὰρ χειρὸς μὲν ἐὔπλοκον εἰς ἅλα πέμπεις 

ὁρμιήν, 6 δὲ ῥίμφα γένυν κατεδέξατο χαλκοῦ 

ἰχθὺς ἀντιάσας, τάχα δ᾽ ἕλκεται ἐκ βασιλῆος 

οὐκ ἀέκων, σέο δ᾽ ἦτορ ἰαίνεται, ὄρχαμε γαίης. Τὸ 

\ A 4 \ 3 \ ΄ D7 

πολλὴ yap βλεφάροισι καὶ ἐν φρεσὶ τέρψις ἰδέσθαι 

παλλόμενον καὶ ἑλισσόμενον πεπεδημένον ἰχθύν. 
᾿Αλλά μοι ἱλήκοις μὲν ἁλὸς πόρῳ ἐμβασιλεύων 


* ἐν τῷ βιβαρίῳ schol. The reference is to ἃ royal marine 
fish-preserve. Such a fish-preserve, which might be either 
in fresh or salt water, was called by the Romans piscina 
(Varro, iii. 17. 2 cum piscinarum genera sint duo, dulcium et 
salsarum, alterum apud plebem et non. sine fructu, ubi 
lymphae aquam piscibus nostris villaticis ministrant: illae 
autem maritimae piscinae nobilium, quibus Neptunus et 
aquam et pisces ministrat, cf. iii. 3. 2 ff., 17. 2; Plin. x. 193 s 
Colum. i. 6. 21, 8. 17) or viwariwm (M.G. BiBdpiov), a more 
general term, applicable to any preserve for wild creatures 
204 


HALIEUTICA, I. 51-73 


path—for the tracks of the swimming tribes are 
unseen—nor do they see where the fish will encounter 
them and come within range of capture ; for not by 
one path does the fish travel. In feeble hairs and 
bent hooks of bronze and in reeds and nets the fishers 
have their strength. 

Yet not bereft of pleasure art thou, if pleasure 
thou desirest, but. sweet is the royal sport. A ship 
well-riveted, well-benched, light exceedingly, the 
young men drive with racing oars smiting the back 
of the sea; and at the stern the best man as steers- 
man guides the ship, steady and true, to a wide space 
of gently heaving waves; and there feed ¢ infinite 
tribes of feasting fishes which thy servants ever tend, 
fattening them with abundant food, a ready choir of 
spoil for thee, O blessed one, and for thy glorious 
son, the flock of your capture. For straightway thou 
lettest from thy hand into the sea the well-woven 
line, and the fish quickly meets and seizes the hook 
of bronze and is speedily haled forth—not all un- 
willing—by our king ;® and thy heart is gladdened, 
O Lord of earth. For great delight it is for eye and 
mind to see the captive fish tossing and turning. 

But be thou gracious unto me, thou who art king 


(Plin. ix. 168 ostrearum vivaria; ibid. 170 reliquorum piscium 
vivaria, viii. 115 for Deer, viii. 211 vivaria eorum (sc. Wild 
Swine) ceterarumque silvestrium), with its subdivisions, 
leporariwm (not confined to Hares, Varro, iii. 3. 1), aviariwm 
(Varro, iii. 3. 6) or ornithon (Varro, iii. 3. 1), ete. Cf. Ael. 
viii. 4, xii. 30; Juv.iv. 51; Mart. iv. 30; Aul. Gell. ii. 20. Af.; 
Badham, pp. 35 ff. ; Radcliffe, pp. 224 ff. 

* Cf. Beaumont and Fletcher, The False One, i. 2. “ She 
was used to take delight, with her fair hand | To angle in 
the Nile, where the glad fish, | As if they knew who ‘twas 
sought to deceive them, | Contended to be taken ” (quoted 
Radeliffe, p. 173); Mart. i. 104 norunt cui serviant leones. 


205 


OPPIAN 


εὐρυμέδων Kpovidns γαιηόχος, ἠδὲ Θάλασσα 

αὐτή, καὶ ναετῆρες ἐριγδούποιο θαλάσσης 75 
δαίμονες, ὑμετέρας τ᾽ ἀγέλας καὶ ἁλίτροφα φῦλα 
εἰπέμεν αἰνήσαιτε" σὺ δ᾽ ἰθύνειας ἕκαστα, 

πότνα Θεά, καὶ πατρὶ καὶ ‘vidi παμβασιλῆος 
θυμήρη τάδε δῶρα τεῆς πόρσυνον ἀοιδῆς. 

Μυρία μὲν δὴ φῦλα καὶ ἄκριτα βένθεσι πόντου 80 
ἐμφέρεται πλώοντα- τὰ δ᾽ οὔ κέ τις ἐξονομήναι 
ἀτρεκέως" οὐ γάρ τις ἐφίκετο τέρμα θαλάσσης" 
ἀλλὰ τριηκοσίων ὀργυιῶν ἄχρι μάλιστα 
ἀνέρες ἴσασίν τε καὶ ἔδρακον ᾿Αμφιτρίτην. 
πολλὰ δ᾽ (ἀπειρεσίη γὰρ ἀμετροβαθής τε θάλασσα,) 85 
κέκρυπται, τά κεν οὔ τις ἀείδελα μυθήσαιτο 
θνητὸς ἐών: ὀλίγος δὲ νόος μερόπεσσι καὶ ἀλκή. 
οὐ μὲν γὰρ γαίης πολυμήτορος ἔλπομαι ἅλμην 
παυροτέρας ἀγέλας οὔτ᾽ ἔθνεα μείονα φέρβειν. 
ἀλλ᾽ εἴτ᾽ ἀμφήριστος ἐν ἀμφοτέρῃσι γενέθλη 90 
εἴθ᾽ ἑτέρη προβέβηκε, θεοὶ σάφα τεκμαίρονται, 
ἡμεῖς δ᾽ ἀνδρομέοισι νοήμασι μέτρα φέροιμεν. 

᾿Ιχθύσι μὲν γενεή τε καὶ ἤθεα καὶ πόρος ἅλμης 
κέκριται, οὐδέ τι πᾶσι νομαὶ νεπόδεσσιν ὁμοῖαι" 
ot μὲν γὰρ χθαμαλοῖσι παρ᾽ αἰγιαλοῖσι νέμονται, 96 
ψάμμον ἐρεπτόμενοι καὶ ὅσ᾽ ἐν ψαμάθοισι φύονται, 
ἵπποι κόκκυγές τε θοοὶ ξανθοί 7° ἐρυθῖνοι 


* Ael. ix. 35 εἰς τριακοσίας ὀργνιάς φασιν ἀνθρώποις κάτοπτα 
εἶναι τὰ ἐν τῇ θαλάττῃ, περαιτέρω γε μὴν οὐκέτι. But Plin. 
ii. 102 Altissimum mare xv. stadiorum Fabianus tradit. 

» Hippocdmpus brevirostris Cuy. or H. guttulatus Cuy., 
both M.G. ἀλογάκι (ie. Horse), the latter being commoner 
in Greek waters (Apost. p. 7). Cf. Mare. S. 21: Plin, 
axxli. 149; Athen. 304e. 

¢ One of the Gurnards, prob. Trigla lyra L., The Piper. 
It is of a bright red colour (ἐρυθρὸν κόκκυγα Numen. ap. 
Athen. 309 f) and Athen. 324f quotes Speusippus, etc., for 


206 


HALIEUTICA, I. 74-97 


in the tract of the sea, wide-ruling son of Cronus, 
Girdler of the earth, and be gracious thyself, O Sea, 
and ye gods who in the sounding sea have your abode ; 
and grant me to tell of your herds and sea-bred 
tribes ; and do thou, O lady Goddess, direct 411 and 
make these gifts of thy song well pleasing to our 
sovereign lord and to his son. 

Infinite and beyond ken are the tribes that move 
and swim in the depths of the sea, and none could 
name them certainly ; for no man hath reached the 
limit of the sea, but unto three hundred fathoms @ less 
or more men know and have explored the deep. But, 
since the sea is infinite and of unmeasured depth, 
many things are hidden, and of these dark things 
none that is mortal can tell ; for small are the under- 
standing and the strength of men. The briny sea 
feeds not, I ween, fewer herds nor lesser tribes than 
earth, mother of many. But whether the tale of 
offspring be debatable between them both, or whether 
one excels the other, the gods know certainly ; but 
we must make our reckoning by our human wits. 

Now fishes differ in breed and habit and in their 
path in the sea, and not all fishes have like range. 
For some keep by the low shores, feeding on sand 
and whatever things grow in the sand; to wit, 
the Sea-horse,’ the swift Cuckoo-fish,* the yellow 
its resemblance to the Red Mullet. Marc. S. 21 ὀξύκομοι 
xéxxvyes in allusion to the dorsal spines which they erect on 
being touched (Day i. p. 55); A. 598a15 ἐπαμφοτερίζουσιν, 
i.e. found both in deep and shallow water; 535 Ὁ 20 ““ utters 
a sound like the cuckoo, whence its name.” ~ Cf. Ael. x. 11. 
The noise made by Gurnards when taken from the water is 
due to escape of gas from the air-bladder. Apost. p. 11 
(where he identifies Aristotle’s κόκκυξ with the allied Dactylo- 
pterus volitans Mor.) enumerates eight species of Trigla 
found in Greek waters. 

207 


OPPIAN 


καὶ κίθαροι καὶ τρίγλα καὶ ἀδρανέες μελάνουροι 
τραχούρων τ᾽ ἀγέλαι βούγλωσσά τε καὶ πλατύουροι 
ταινίαι ἀβληχραὶ καὶ μορμύρος, αἰόλος ἰχθύς, 100 
σκόμβροι κυπρῖνοί τε καὶ on φίλοι αἰγιαλοῖσιν. 


Λλλοι δ᾽ αὖ πηλοῖσι καὶ ἐν τενάγεσσι θαλάσσης 


* The hermaphrodite Eryth(r)inus of A. 538 a 20, 567 a 97, 
etc. ; Plin. ix. 56, seems to be a Serranus (perhaps S. anthias). 
It is a pelagic fish (A. 598213). Asa descriptive term like 
Erythinus (¢.¢. red) might be applied to different fishes (of. 
Athen. 300 ἢ), the schol. λιθρινάρια, ῥούσια, which suggests a 
Pagrus or Pagellus, perhaps Pagellus erythrinus, M.G. 
λυθρίνι, λυθρινάρι (collectively for all species of Pagellus, 
Apost. p. 17) may be right. Ov. Hal. 104 caeruleaque 
rubens erythinus in unda; Plin. xxxii. 152; Hesych. s. 
ἐρυθῖνοι. : 

» A species of Flatfish. Galen, De aliment. JSacult. iii. 30 
περὶ δὲ τῶν κιθάρων καὶ πάνυ θαυμάζω τοῦ Φιλοτίμου" παραπλήσιος 
γὰρ ὧν ὁ ῥόμβος αὐτῶν μαλακωτέραν ἔχει τὴν σάρκα, τῶν ὀνίσκων 
ἀπολειπόμενος οὐκ ὀλίγῳ ; Plin. xxxii. 146 citharus rhomborum 
generis pessimus. Cf. A. 508b17; Athen. 305fff.; Poll. 
vi. 50. Ael. xi. 23 describes the κιθαρῳδός, a Red Sea fish, 
as πλατὺς τὸ σχῆμα κατὰ Thy βούγλωττον. ᾿ 

© C. ii. 392 n. 

4 Ὁ. ii. 391 n. For habitat, Marc. 8. 13 ἀκταῖοι μελάνουροι. 
The schol. οἱ μοσχῖται οἱ οὐροῦντες μέλαν ἢ τὰ καλαμάρια mis- 
takes the etymology. 

4 H. iii. 400 n. 

7 Solea vulgaris, M.G. γλῶσσα, at Nauplia and Missolonghi 
xXwuarida (Apost. p. 22). Mare. S. 18 ἐκτάδιον βούγλωσσον ; 
Athen. 136 b, 288 b, where he says ᾿Αττικοὶ δὲ ψῆτταν αὐτὴν 
καλοῦσιν. Cf. Galen, De aliment. facult. iii. 30 παρέλιπε δ᾽ 
ἐν τούτοις ὁ Φιλότιμος καὶ τὸ βούγλωττον, .. . εἰ μή τι ἄρα τῷ 
τῆς ψήττης ὀνόματι καὶ κατὰ τῶν βουγλώττων ἐχρήσατο. παρα- 
πλήσια μὲν γάρ πώς ἐστιν, οὐ μὴν ἀκριβῶς ὁμοειδῆ βούγλωττόν τε 
καὶ ψῆττα" μαλακώτερον γάρ ἐστι καὶ ἥδιον εἰς ἐδωδὴν καὶ παντὶ 
βέλτιον τὸ βούγλωττον τῆς ψήττης ; Plin. ix. 52 soleae (Pontum 
non intrant), cum rhombi intrent ; Hesych. s.v. and 5. irra ; 


208 


HALIEUTICA, I. 98-102 


Erythinus,* the Citharus ὃ and the Red Mullet* and 
the feeble Melanurus,? the shoals of the Trachurus,¢ 
and the Sole’ and the Platyurus,’ the weak Ribbon- 
fish” and the Mormyrus* of varied hue and the 
Mackerel’ and the Carp* and all that love the 
shores.! 

Others again feed in the mud and the shallows 1: 


Oy. Hal. 124 Fulgentes soleae candore et concolor illis | 

Passer et Adriaco mirandus litore rhombus. 

9 Schol. ψησσία, πλατεῖς. Some species of Flatfish. 

“*% Schol. fapydvac (a term used to interpret σφύραιναι 
ἘΠ i. 172, iii. 117 and ῥαφίδες H. i. 172). A. 504632 ἡ 
καλουμένη ταινία has two fins; Athen. 329f Σπεύσιππος... 
παραπλήσιά φησιν εἶναι ψῆτταν, βούγλωσσον, ταινίαν. Busse- 
maker males it Monochirus Pegusa Risso, a species of Sole ; 
A. and W. suggest Cobitis taenia L., the Spined Loach, as, 
though like Cepola rubescens Cuv. (C. taenia Bloch) it has 
two pairs of fins, the pectoral are very short. 

¢C.i.74n. For habitat, Marc. S.= Archestr. ap. Athen. 
313 f μόρμυρος αἰγιαλεύς : A.P. vi. 304 ᾿Ακτῖτ᾽ ἃ καλαμευτά, 
ποτὶ ξερὸν ἔλθ᾽ ἀπὸ πέτρας | καί με λάβ᾽ εὐάρχαν πρώιον ἐμπολέα" | 
αἴτε σύ γ᾽ ἐν κύρτῳ μελανουρίδας aire tw’ ἀγρεῖς μορμύρον ἢ 
κίχλην ἢ σπάρον ἢ σμαρίδα. 

4 Scomber scomber L., M.G. σκουμβρί (Apost. p. 18). 
A. 571a14, 597a 22, 599a2, 610b7; Athen. 19] 8, 32La. 
They are pelagic fishes (Ov. Hal. 94 gaudent pelago quales 
scombri), but ‘‘at certain seasons approach the shores in 
countless multitudes, either prior to, during, or after breed- 
ing, or else for predaceous purposes,” Day, i. p. 85. 

& Oyprinus carpio L., abundant in lakes of Thessaly and 
Aetolia, M.G. cafdu, καρλόψαρο in Thessaly, τσερούκλα in 
Aetolia (Apost. p. 23). Cf. A. 568 b 26, etc.; Athen. 309 a f. 
‘It mostly frequents ponds, canals, sluggish pieces of water 
. . . being especially partial to localities possessing soft, 
marly, or muddy bottoms,” Day, ii. p. 159. 

1A. 488 Ὁ 7 τῶν θαλαττίων τὰ μὲν πελάγια, τὰ δὲ αἰγιαλώδη, 
τὰ δὲ πετραῖα. 

m τεναγώδης as an epithet of fish is opposed to πελάγιος 
Hices. ap. Athen. 320d; cf. A. 54841, 602a9. For τέναγος 
cf. Herod. viii. 129; Pind. Δ΄. iii. 24. 


Ρ 209 


OPPIAN | 


»“» 5 ¢ iA vA 
φέρβονται, Barides τε βοῶν θ᾽ ὑπέροπλα γένεθλα 
͵ὕ > 3 {2} Ν 3 7 » / 
τρυγών τ᾽ ἀργαλέη καὶ ἐτήτυμον οὔνομα νάρκη, 

a , 3 > , 
ψῆτται καλλαρίαι καὶ τριγλίδες ἔργα τ᾽ ὀνίσκων 
“ ,ὔ Ve / \ Ψ > > vA λ a 
σαῦροι τε σκέπανοϊ Te καὶ ὅσσ᾽ ἐνιτέτροφε πηλοῖς. 
an aA / 
Ova δ᾽ ava πρασόεσσαν ὑπὸ χλοεραῖς βοτάνῃσι 


βόσκονται μαινῖδες ἰδὲ τράγοι ἠδ᾽ ἀθερῖναι 


* Raia batis L., M.G. Bari, and allied species of Raiidae, 
of which five others occur in Greek waters—R. clavata 
Rond., R. punchata Risso, R. chagrinea Pennant, R. mira- 
letus Rond., R. ondulata or Mosaica (Apost. p- 6). Baris in 
A. 565 a 27, etc. seems generic for the oviparous Rays. Cf. 
Athen. 286 b-e; Poll. vi. 50; Plin. xxxii, 145. 

> A, ii. 141 .n. ¢ H. ii. 462 n. 

4 FT s its, 560m. Δ Of. H. i. 169, 371, ii. 460. 

7 The references of Aristotle to the ψῆττα (A. 538 a 20, 
543 a 2, 620 b 30) do not enable us to say more than that it 
is a Pleuronectid. In Graeco-Latin glossaries it is equated 
with Latin rhombus, cf. Athen. 330 Ὁ Ρωμαῖοι δὲ καλοῦσι τὴν 
ψῆτταν ῥόμβον καί ἐστι τὸ ὄνομα ᾿λληνικόν. But Ael. xiv. 5 
τοὺς ἰχθῦς τοὺς πλατεῖς. .  ψηῆττας τε καὶ ῥόμβους καὶ στρουθοὺς 
distinguishes them; ef. Galen, Aliment. fac. iii, 30. It 
was sometimes identified with the Sole: Hesych. s. ψῆττα" 
ἰχθύδιον τῶν πλατέων ἢ ψῆττα ἥν τινες σανδάλιον ἢ βούγλωσσον : 
Athen. 988 Ὁ ᾿Αττικοὶ δὲ ψῆτταν αὐτὴν καλοῦσιν : Galen, I.c. 
παρέλιπε δ᾽ ἐν τούτοις ὁ Φιλότιμος καὶ τὸ βούγλωττον, . .. εἰ μή 
τι ἄρα τῷ τῆς ψήττης ὀνόματι καὶ κατὰ τῶν βουγλώττων ἐχρήσατο. 
παραπλήσια μὲν γάρ πώς ἐστιν, οὐ μὴν ἁκριβῶς ὁμοειδῆ : Cf. 
schol. Plato; Symp. 191 p. But Oppian (H. i. 99) distin- 
guishes them, as do Archestr. ap. Athen. 1.6. and 330a, 
Dorion ibid., Speusipp. ib. 329 F, Plin. ix. 57 condi per hiemes 
torpedinem, psettam, soleam tradunt. 

9 Introd. p. lxv. * C.i. 75 n., ii. 392 n. 

* Introd. p. Ixiv. Schol. ἔργα τ᾽ ὀνίσκων: ἤγουν οἱ ὀνίσκοι, 
περίφρασις. 


210 


105 


HALIEUTICA, I. 103-108 


of the sea; to wit, the Skate 5 and the monster tribes 
of the Ox-ray ὃ and the terrible Sting-ray,¢ and the 
Cramp-fish? truly named,’ the Turbot‘ and the 
CallariasY the Red Mullet” and the works of the 
Oniscus,’ and the Horse-mackerel/ and the Scepanus* 
and whatsoever else feeds in mud. 

On the weedy beach under the green grasses feeds 
the Maenis? and the Goat-fish ™ and the Atherine,” 


7 Schol. σαῦροι" σαυρίδες. If σαῦρος differs from τραχοῦρος 
v. 99, iii. 400—they are identified Xenocr. Aliment. c. 7 but 
distinguished Galen, Aliment. fac. iii. 30-31—it may be 
Caranx suareus which differs little from Trachurus trachurus. 
It is known in M.G. as σαυρίδι κυνηγός or κοκκάλι (Apost. 
p- 14); of. A. 610b5, Athen. 309f, 322 c-e, Hesych. s. 
σαῦρα, Marc. S. 33, Plin. xxxii. 89 sauri piscis marini (¢f. 
ibid. 151), but in Latin usually lacertus, Plin. xxxii. 146, 
Stat. S. iv. 9. 13, Mart. x. 48. 11, etc. From Athen. 305c¢ 
it seems that the κίχλη was also called σαῦρος. 

© Schol. σκεπανοί" κόπανοι. A species of Tunny: ** Thynnus 
brachypterus, vulg. ὄρκυνος et κόπανος dans le golfe de Volo 
(Sinus Pagasaeus),” Apost. p. 14; cf. Hesych. 5. σκεπινός ; 
Athen. 322 e σκεπινός" τούτου μνημονεύων Awpiwy .. . καλεῖσθαί 
pnow αὐτὸν ἀτταγεινόν. 

1 H. iii. 188 n. 

m The male Maenis in the breeding season: A. 607b9 
κύουσα μὲν οὖν ἀγαθὴ μαινίς" . . . συμβαίνει δ᾽ ἀρχομένης 
κυίσκεσθαι τῆς θηλείας τοὺς ἄρρενας μέλαν τὸ χρῶμα ἴσχειν καὶ 
ποικιλώτερον καὶ φαγεῖν χειρίστους εἷναι" καλεῖται δ᾽ ὑπ᾽ ἐνίων 
τράγοι περὶ τοῦτον τὸν χρόνον. Cf. Athen. 328 c, 356 b, Ael. 
xii. 28, Mare. S. 23 τραγίσκος, Ov. Hal. 112, Plin. xxxii. 
152. 

" Atherina hepsetus, M.G. ἀθερίνα (Apost. p. 21); ef. 
A. 570b15, 571a6, 610b6, Athen. 285 a, 329a. ‘The 
Atherines are littoral fishes, living in large shoals... . 
They rarely exceed a length of six inches, but are never- 
theless esteemed as food... . The young, for some time 
after they are hatched, cling together in dense masses and 
in numbers almost incredible. The inhabitants of the 
Mediterranean coast of France call these newly hatched 
Atherines ‘ Nonnat’ (unborn),” Giinther, p. 500. 

211 


OPPIAN 


καὶ opapides καὶ βλέννος ἰδὲ σπάροι ἀμφότεροί τε 

βῶκες ὅσοις τ᾽ ἄλλοισι φίλον πράσον ἀμφινέμεσθαι. 11ι 
Κεστρέες αὖ κέφαλοί τε, δικαιότατον γένος ἅλμης, 

λάβρακές τ᾽ ἀμίαι τε θρασύφρονες ἠδὲ χρέμητες 

πηλαμύδες γόγγροι τε καὶ ὃν καλέουσιν ὄλισθον 

γείτονα ναιετάουσιν ἀεὶ ποταμοῖσι θάλασσαν 

ἢ λίμναις, ὅθι λαρὸν ὕδωρ μεταπαύεται ἅλμης, 11 

πολλή τε πρόχυσις συμβάλλεται ἰλυόεσσα, 

ἑλκομένη δίνῃσιν ἀπὸ χθονός. ἔνθα νέμονται 

φορβὴν ἱμερτὴν γλυκερῇ θ᾽ ἁλὶ πιαίνονται. 

λάβραξ δ᾽ οὐδ᾽ αὐτῶν ποταμῶν ἀπολείπεται ἔξω, 


* Smaris vulgaris, M.G. σμαρίς, μαρίς (Apost. p. 18), a 
small Mediterranean fish (Fam. Maenidae): A. 607 b 22. 
Athen. 315 b, 328 f; Ov. Hal. 120; Plin. xxxii. 151, ete. 

> Seven species of Blenny are found in Greek waters : 
Blennius pavo Risso, M.G. cadidpes, B. gattorugine, M.G. 
σαλιάρα, Β, palmicornis Cuv., B. ocellaris L., B. Montagui 
Flem., B. trigloides Val., B. pholis L. (Apost. p. 9). Cf. 
Athen. 288 a. 

° A Sea-bream, Fam. Sparidae, Genus Sargus, of which 
four species occur in Greek waters: 8S. vulgaris, M.G. 
σαργός, xapaxida at Siphnas; S. Rondeletit, M.G. σπάρος ; 
S. vetula, M.G. σκάρος ; S. annularis, M.G. σουβλομύτης, at 
Corfu (Apost. p. 16); A. 508¢17; Ov. Hal. 106 et super 
aurata sparulus cervice refulgens; Mart. iii. 60. 6 res tibi 
cum rhombo est, at mihi cum sparulo, 

4 H. iii. 186 n. 4 Η. ii. 642 n., iv. 127 n. 

7 H., ii. 643 n. PRES lie 9 0 ns & A, ii. 554.n. 

* We assume this to be the fish which is otherwise called 
χρόμις, xpéuus, xpéuy, etc; A. 5384a8 μάλιστα δ᾽ εἰσὶ τῶν 
ἰχθύων ὀξυηκόοι κεστρεύς, χρέμψ, λάβραξ, σάλπη, χρόμις, where 
xpéuw should probably be omitted as a mere v.l. for χρόμις. 
Cf. Plin. x, 193 produntur etiam clarissime audire mugil, 
lupus, salpa, chromis; A. 535b16 ψόφους δέ τινας ἀφιᾶσι καὶ 
τριγμοὺς ods λέγουσι φωνεῖν, οἷον λύρα καὶ χρόμις (οὗτοι yap 
ἀφιᾶσιν ὥσπερ γρυλισμόν) : 543 ἃ 4 χρόμις is one of the shoal- 
fishes (χυτοί) which spawn once a year; 601 Ὁ 29 μάλιστα δὲ 


212 


HALIEUTICA, I. 109-119 


the Smaris * and the Blenny ὃ and the Sparus © and 
both sorts of Bogue ὦ and whatsoever others love to 
feed on sea-weed. 

The Grey Mullets «—Cestreus and Cephalus—the 
most righteous‘ race of the briny sea, and the 
Basse? and the ‘bold Amia,* the Chremes,’ the 
Pelamyd,i the Conger,* and the fish which men call 
Olisthus “—these always dwell in the sea where it 
neighbours rivers or lakes, where the sweet water 
ceases from the brine, and where much alluvial silt 
is gathered, drawn from the land by the eddying 
current. There they feed on pleasant food and 
fatten on the sweet brine. The Basse does not fail 
even from the rivers themselves but swims up out 


πονοῦσιν ἐν τοῖς χειμῶσιν οἱ ἔχοντες λίθον ἐν τῇ κεφαλῇ, οἷον 
χρόμις, λάβραξ, σκίαινα, φάγρος. Cf. Plin. ix. 57 Praegelidam 
hiemem omnes sentiunt, sed maxime qui lapidem in capite 
habere existimantur, ut lupi, chromis, sciaena, phagri; 
Athen. 305 ἃ ᾿Αριστοτέλης . . . nol... τὰ μὲν λιθοκέφαλα 
ὡς κρέμυς: Plin. xxxii. 153 (among fishes mentioned by 
Ovid) chromim qui nidificet in aquis; Ov. Hal. 121 
immunda chromis; Hesych. s. xpéuus’ ὁ ὀνίσκος ἰχθύς ; 5. 
χρόμις᾽ εἶδος ἰχθύος; ΑΕ]. xv. 11 incidentally mentions 
χρέμης as having a large beard (γένειον), while in ix. 7 he 
mentions the otolith and acute hearing of xpéus. Aristotle’s 
χρόμις is identified by J. Miiller, etc., with Sciaena aquila 
Cuv., which ‘porte le nom vulg. μυλοκόπι et κρανιός ἃ 
Chalcis” (Apost. p. 13). Bussemaker takes χρέμης to be 
one of the Cod-family (Gadidae). 

4H. iv. 504 n, 

k Conger vulgaris, M.G. μουγγρί, δρόγγα at Missolonghi 
(Apost. p. 26). 

t Schol. ὄλισθον" γλίσχρος γάρ ἐστιν γλανεόν, 1.6. the γλάνις 
of A. 621 421, etc., Silwrus glanis, M.G. γλανός (Apost. p. 24). 
It is a fresh-water fish but is given among marine fishes by 
Marc. 8. 11 and Plin. xxxii. 149, just as Oppian, H. i. 101 
and 592 includes the Carp among marine fishes. Gesner 
p. 742 suggests the Lamprey,. 


213 


OPPIAN 


ἐκ δ᾽ ἁλὸς ἐς mpoxods ἀνανήχεται" ἐγχέλυες δὲ 12 
ἐκ ποταμῶν πλαταμῶσιν ἐνιχρίμπτουσι θαλάσσης. 
Πέτραι δ᾽ ἀμφίαλοι πολυειδέες" αἱ μὲν ἔασι 
φύκεσι μυδαλέαι, περὶ δὲ μνία πολλὰ TEPUKE * 
Tas ἦτοι πέρκαι καὶ ἰουλίδες ἀμφί τε χάννοι 
φέρβονται σάλπαι τε μετὰ σφίσιν αἰολόνωτοι 12. 
καὶ κίχλαι ῥαδιναὶ καὶ φυκίδες οὕς θ᾽: ἁλιῆες 
ἀνδρὸς ἐπωνυμίην θηλύφρονος ηὐδάξαντο. 
ἤΑλλαι δὲ χθαμαλαὶ ψαμαθώδεος ἄγχι θαλάσσης 
λεπράδες, ἃς κίρρις τε σύαινά τε καὶ βασιλίσκοι 
ἐν δὲ μύλοι. τρίγλης Te podexpoa φῦλα νέμονται. 13¢ 
Ἄλλαι δ᾽ αὖ ποιῇσιν ἐπίχλοοι ὑγρὰ μέτωπα 


1 Gs θ᾽ mss. and schol. 


« H. i. 520 n.; of. A. 569 a 6. ς 

Ὁ Hither Perca fluviatilis—* on le trouve dans les affluents 
de l’Alphée” Apost. p. 12—a fresh-water fish (Auson. 
Mosell. 115 Nec te, . . . perca, silebo | Amnigenos inter 
pisces dignande marinis) which sometimes enters salt 
water (Plin. xxxii. 145 Communes amni tantum ac mari... 
percae)—as generally in Aristotle (A. 568420, ete.), or 
Serranus seriba, M.G. πέρκα (Apost. p. 12), as apparently 
in A. 599b8, where it is classed among ‘‘ rock fishes,” οἱ 
πετραῖοι, as it is in Galen, De aliment. facult. iii. 28, Plin. 
ix. 57 percae et saxatiles omnes. Marc. S. 16 includes 
mépkat among marine fishes. Cf. Ov. Hal. 112; Athen. 
319 b-c, 450 ο. ° ἢ, ii. 484 n, 

@ Aristotle’s χάννη (χάννα) is either Serranus cabrilla or 
S. seriba (Fam. Percidae, Gen. Serranus), the former still 
known in Greece as xydvos. Marc. 5. 33. The genus 
Serranus is hermaphrodite as was known to Aristotle : 
A. 538a21, 567a27, De gen. 755621, 760a9; Plin. ix. 
56, xxxii. 153; Ov. Hal. 107 et ex se | Concipiens channe, 
gemino fraudata parente; Athen. 319 Ὁ, 327 f. 

° H. iii. 414. π. For “spangled ” of. Arist. ap. Athen. 321 e 
πολύγραμμος καὶ ἐρυθρόγραμμος. For habitat cf. A. 598a19 
γίνονται... ἐν ταῖς λιμνοθαλαττίαις πολλοὶ τῶν ἰχθύων, οἷον 
σάλπαι. 


214 


HALIEUTICA, I. 120-131 


of the sea into the estuaries; while the Eels * come 
from the rivers and draw to the flat reefs of the sea. 

The sea-girt rocks are of many sorts. Some are 
wet and covered with seaweed and about them 
grows abundant moss. About these feed the Perch ὃ 
and the RainboW-wrasse® and the Channus? and 
withal the spangled Saupe ὁ and the slender Thrush- 
wrasse 7 and the Phycis 9 and those which fishermen 
have nicknamed from the name of an effeminate 
man.9 

Other rocks are low-lying beside the sandy sea and 
rough; about these dwell the Cirrhis* and the Sea- 
swine? and the Basiliscus’ and withal the Mylus * 
and the rosy tribes of the Red Mullet. 

Other rocks again whose wet faces are green with 


7 Hiv. 173 n. 

9 Introduction, p. 1. ἃ Introd. p. liii. 

 Schol. ὕσκαι (used again to interpret ὕαινα H, i. 372) ἢ 
συάκιον ἢ σύαινα, which suggests a Flatfish. Hesych. s. 
συάριον᾽" βούγλωσσον. Cf. Du Cange, Gloss. ΟὟ. 8. σιάκιον and 
5. ovat. Epicharm. ap. Athen. 326 e couples ὑαινίδες, 
βούγλωσσοι, κίθαρος. 

2 Schol. βασιλίσκοι" σκιρίδια. On H. i. 370 the schol. uses 
βασιλίσκος to interpret πρῆστις, on H. i. 592 to interpret 
gvicxos. Bussemaker gives Clupea alosa L., the Shad. 

& Schol. μύλοι᾽ μυλοκόπια, μυλοκόποι, which points to one of 
the Sciaenidae, μυλοκόπος being in M.G. Sciaena aquila (αν. 
(Apost. p. 13). Corvina nigra Cuv., Bik. p. 81. Athen. 
308 e Εὐθύδημος δ᾽ ἐν τῷ περὶ ταρίχων τὸν κορακῖνόν φησιν ὑπὸ 
πολλῶν σαπέρδην προσαγορεύεσθαι . .. ὅτι δὲ καὶ πλατίστακος 
καλεῖται ὁ σαπέρδης [we are not here concerned with the 
freshwater σαπερδίς of A. 608 a 2], καθάπερ καὶ ὁ κορακῖνος, 
Παρμένων φησίν ; 118 ὁ τοὺς δὲ προσαγορευομένους φησὶ (Δωρίων) 
μύλλους ὑπὸ μέν τινων καλεῖσθαι ἀγνωτίδια, ὑπὸ δέ τινων πλατι- 
στάκους ὄντας τοὺς αὐτούς. ..'. οἱ μὲν οὖν μείζονες αὐτῶν 
ὀνομάζονται πλατίστακοι; οἱ δὲ μέσην ἔχοντες ἡλικίαν μύλλοι, οἱ 
δὲ βαιοὶ τοῖς μεγέθεσιν ἀγνωτίδια. Bussemaker makes μύλος 
Sciaena cirrhosa. 

215 


OPPIAN ° 


πέτραι capyov ἔχουσιν ἐφέστιον ἠδὲ σκίαιναν 

χαλκέα καὶ κορακῖνον ἐπώνυμον αἴθοπι χροιῇ, 

καὶ σκάρον, ὃς δὴ μοῦνος ἐν ἰχθύσι πᾶσιν ἀναύδοις 

φθέγγεται ἰκμαλέην λαλαγὴν καὶ μοῦνος ἐδητὺν 135 

ἄψορρον προΐησιν ἀνὰ στόμα, δεύτερον αὖτις 

awvpevos, μήλοισιν ἀναπτύσσων ἴσα φορβήν. 
Ὅσσαι δ᾽ αὖ χήμῃσι περίπλεοι 7) λεπάδεσσιν, 

ἐν δέ ofw θαλάμαι τε καὶ αὔλια δύμεναι ἰχθῦς, 

τῆσι δὲ καὶ φάγροι καὶ ἀναιδέες ἀγριόφαγροι 140 


2 ‘ \ 
κέρκουροί τε μένουσι καὶ ὀψοφάγοι KQL aviypat 


* C.ii. 483 n. Of. H. i. 510. 

> H, iv. 596 n. 

° Zeus faber L., M.G. χριστόψαρο, σανπιέρος etc. (Apost. 
p. 15): Plin. ix. 68 est et haec natura ut alii alibi pisces 
principatum obtineant, coracinus in Aegypto, Zeus idem 
faber appellatus Gadibus (cf. xxxii. 148); Colum. vii. 16; 
Ov. Hal. 110 Et rarus faber; Athen. 398 ἃ διαφέρει δὲ τῆς 
χαλκίδος ὁ χαλκεύς, οὗ μνημονεύει. .. Evdvdnuwos . . . λέγων 
αὐτοὺς περιφερεῖς τε εἶναι καὶ κυκλοειδεῖς;: A. 535 "18 (among 
fishes which ψόφους τινὰς ἀφιᾶσι καὶ τριγμούΞ5) ἔτι δὲ χαλκὶς (i.e. 
χαλκεύς) καὶ κόκκυξ' ἡ μὲν γὰρ ψοφεῖ οἷον συριγμόν. The Dory 
makes a noise on being removed from the water, cf. Day i. 

. 140. 

Pa AT, iii. 184 n. 

ὁ Scarus cretensis (Fam. Labridae), M.G. σκάρος (Bik. p. 84, 
Erh. p. 91); anciently held in high esteem: Epicharm. ap. 
Athen, 319 f ἁλιεύομεν σπάρους | καὶ σκάρους, τῶν οὐδὲ τὸ oKap 
θεμιτὸν ἐκβαλεῖν θεοῖς : Plin. ix. 62 Nunc principatus scaro 
datur; Hor. Epod. ii. 50, 5. ἢ. 2. 22; Galen, De aliment. 
facult. iii. 23 ἄριστος δ᾽ ἐν αὐτοῖς (se. τοῖς πετραίοις) ἡδονῆς ἕνεκεν 
ὁ σκάρος εἶναι πεπίστευται. 

? Aesch. Pers. 577 ἀναύδων παίδων τᾶς ἀμιάντου; Hes. Se. 
212; Soph. Aj. 1297, id. fr. 691; Athen, 277, 308; Ov. 
A. A. iii. 325, cf. the jest οὐδεὶς κακὸς μέγας ἰχθύς Athen. 348 a. 

9 Athen. 331 d Mvacéas ... rods év τῷ Κλείτορι ποταμῷ 
φησιν ἰχθῦς φθέγγεσθαι (Plin. ix. 70; Pausan. viii, ΡΟ), 
καίτοι μόνους εἰρηκότος ᾿Αριστοτέλους φθέγγεσθαι σκάρον καὶ τὸν 
ποτάμιον χοῖρον. The ““ voice” of fishes is discussed A. 
216 


HALIEUTICA, I. 132-144 


grasses have for tenant the Sargue ¢ and the Sciaena,” 
the Dory,° and the Crow-fish,? named from its dusky 
colour, and the Parrot-wrasse,¢ which alone among all 
the voiceless 7 fishes utters a liquid note 9 and alone 
rejects its food back into its mouth, and feasts * on 


it a second time, throwing up its food even as sheep 
and goats.? 

Those rocks again which abound in Clams’ or 
Limpets * and in which there are chambers and 
abodes for fish to enter—on these abide the Braize! 
and the shameless Wild Braize ™ and the Cercurus ” 
and the gluttonous and baleful Muraena® and the 


535 Ὁ 14 ff., where the σκάρος is not mentioned, cf. Ael. x. 11; 
Plin. xi. 267. 

* i.e. chews the cud: A. 591b22 δοκεῖ δὲ τῶν ἰχθύων ὁ 
καλούμενος σκάρος μηρυκάζειν ὥσπερ τὰ τετράποδα μόνος. Cf. 
A. 508b12; P. A. 675a3; Athen. 319 f;Ael.. ii, 54. 
Antig. 73; Plin. ix. 62 solus piscium dicitur ruminare; Ov. 
Hal. 119 ut scarus epastas solus qui ruminat escas. 

* μῆλα, Kleinvieh, Sheep and Goats (Hom. Od. ix. 184 PAN, 
ὄδιές τε καὶ αἶγες) as opp. to Kine ; Hom. JI. xviii. 524 μῆλα... 
καὶ ἕλικας βοῦς, Il. v. 556 Boas καὶ ἴφια μῆλα ς Pind. P. iv. 148 
μῆλά τε... καὶ βοῶν ξανθὰς ἀγέλας. Cf. τὰ βληχητά Ael. ii. 
δ4. Here merely as typical Ruminants. 

7 χήμη is generic for certain species of bivalves: Hices. 
ap. Athen. 87b; Plin. xxxii. 147; Galen, op. cit. iii. 33 
ὄστρεά Te kal χήμας. From A. 547b13 al χῆμαι... ἐν τοῖς 
ἀμμώδεσι λαμβάνουσι τὴν σύστασιν it is suggested that Venus- 
shells ( Veneraceae) are especially meant, 

* Patella vulgata and allied species. Cf. Athen. 85 c-86 f. 

CP is SOI Tn: 

™ Only here. Schol. ἀγριόφαγροι" διωξίφαγροι διὰ τὸ κινεῖσθαι 
ταχέως. 

™ Schol. κέρκουροι" κουτζουρίναι (bob-tailed); Ov. Hal. 102 
Cercurusque ferox scopulorum fine moratus; Plin. xxxii. 
152 cercurum in scopulis viventem; Hesych., 5. κερκοῦρος" 
εἶδος πλοίου καὶ ἰχθύς. Not identified. 

° Muraena helena L., the Murry, M.G. σμέρνα, σμῦρνα 
(Apost. p. 96). 

217 


OPPIAN 


, a / \ 3 / / 3 ~ 
μύραιναι σαῦροί τε καὶ ὀψιμόρων γένος ὀρφῶν, 
οἱ πάντων περίαλλα κατὰ χθόνα δηθύνουσι 
7 
ζωοὶ καὶ τμηθέντες ἔτι σπαίρουσι σιδήρῳ. 
κ , 
ΑΛλλοι δ᾽ ἐν βένθεσσιν ὑπόβρυχα μιμνάζουσι 
JN a / / \ Ψ ἠδὲ / 
φωλειοῖς, πρόβατόν τε καὶ ἥπατοι ἠδὲ πρέποντες, 
” ’ὔ 7 \ iN , 
ἴφθιμοι μεγάλοι τε φυήν, νωθροὶ δὲ κέλευθα 
~ / 
εἱλεῦνται- τὸ Kal οὔποθ᾽ ἑὴν λείπουσι χαράδρην, 
a / 
ἀλλ᾽ αὐτοῦ λοχόωσι παραὶ μυχόν, ὅς κε πελάσσῃ, 
/ LLO λ > Ta > θ / / + 
χειροτέροις ἀΐδηλον ἐπ᾽ ἰχθύσι πότμον ἄγοντες 
ἐν καὶ ὄνος κείνοις ἐναρίθμιος, ὃς περὶ πάντων 


a a , 
πτήσσει ὀπωρινοῖο κυνὸς δριμεῖαν ὁμοκλήν, 


* H. i. 106 π. The reading σαῦροι involves duplication 
in view of v. 106, but so does the v.1. σκόμβροι (read by schol. 
σκόμβροι" σαῦροι) in view of v. 101. 

> The Great Sea-perch, Serranus (Epinephelus) gigas, 
M.G. ὀρφώς, popds, ‘poisson trés estimé pour sa chair 
blanche, 2 qui se péche presque toujours ἃ ’hamegon” 
(Apost. p. 13): Ov. Hal. 104 f. Cantharus . . . tum concolor 
illi | ‘Orphiis ; ; Aristoph. Vesp. 493; Marc. S. 33 ; Plin. ix. 57, 
xxxii. 152. For habitat, A. 598 a 9 πρόσγειος ; of. ‘Athen. 315 a, 
Ael. v.18. The epithet ‘‘ late-dying ” refers not to longevity 
—{y οὐ πλέον δύο ἐτῶν Athen. 315 b—but to tenacity of life: 
Athen. 315 a ἴδιον δ᾽ ἐν αὐτῷ ἐστι. .. τὸ δύνασθαι πολὺν χρόνον 
ζὴν μετὰ τὴν ἀνατομήν ; Ael. ἦ.6. εἰ ἕλοις καὶ ἀνατέμοις, οὐκ ἂν ἴδοις 
τεθνεῶτα παραχρῆμα αὐτόν, ἀλλ᾽ ἐπιλαμβάνει τῆς κινήσεως καὶ οὐκ 
ἐπ᾽ ὀλίγον. For spelling and accent cf. Athen. 815 ς, Poll. 
vi. 50, HM. s.v. 

ὁ Lines 145-154 are paraphrased by Ael. ix. 38 and, in part, 
by, Suid. 5. ὕπατοι. 

4 Only here and H, iii. 139, Ael. ἐ.6., Suid. 5. ὕπατοι" εἶδος 
ἰχθύος κητώδους, οἱ καλοῦνται καὶ πρόβατα καὶ πρέποντες. ἀριθμοῖτο 
δὲ τούτοις καὶ ὁ ὄνος. ““ Rondeletius umbram piscemia Graecis 
huius temporis ovem marinam appellari scribit, Bellonius 
aselli speciem, quam vulgo Merlangum [1.6. 2. poutassou, 
218 


14 


18 


HALIEUTICA, I. 142-152 


Horse-mackerel* and the race of the late-dying 
Merou,® which of all others on the earth remain 
longest alive and wriggle even when cut in pieces 
with a knife. 

Others ὁ in the deeps under the sea abide in their 
lairs ; to wit, thé’Sea-sheep ὦ and the Hepatus¢ and 
the Prepon.’ Strong and large of body are they, 
but slowly they roll upon their way ; wherefore also 
they never leave their own cleft, but just there they 
lie in wait beside their lair for any fish that may 
approach, and bring sudden doom on lesser fishes. 
Among these also is numbered the Hake,’ which 
beyond all fishes shrinks from the bitter assault of 
the Dog-star in summer, and remains retired within 


M.G. yaidoupsyapor] vocitant, ovem facit,” Gesner, p. 770. 
One of the Cod-family (Gadidae) ? 

¢ A. 508b 19 has few caeca; ΑΕ]. xv. 11. ἡ γαλῆ δέ, φαίης 
ἂν αὐτὴν εἶναι τὸν καλούμενον ἥπατον" ... Kal τὸ μὲν γένειον 
ἔχει τοῦ ἡπάτου μεῖζον ; Athen. 108 ἃ ἐστὶ δὲ καὶ ἰχθύς τις ἥπατος 
καλούμενος ὅν φησιν Βὔβουλος . . . οὐκ ἔχειν χολήν. , . ᾿Ἡγήσ- 
avdpos δ᾽... ἐν τῇ κεφαλῇ φησι τὸν ἥπατον δύο λίθους ἔχειν τῇ 
μὲν αὐγῇ καὶ τῷ χρώματι παραπλησίους τοῖς ὀστρείοις τῷ δὲ σχήματι 
ῥομβοειδεῖς ; id. 300 ε Σπεύσιππος παραπλήσιά φησιν εἶναι φάγρον 
ἐρυθῖνον ἥπατον : id. 801 c ἥπατος -- λεβίας (for which cf. Athen. 
118 b, Hesych. 8. λέβια, Poll. vi. 48); Mare. 8. ἥπατοι 
ἀγκυλόδοντες; Plin. xxxii. 149 hepar; Galen, De aliment. 
fac, iii. 30 τοὺς ἡπάτους καλουμένους Kal τοὺς ἄλλους, ὅσους ἔμιξε 
τοῖς πετραίοις τε καὶ τοῖς ὀνίσκοις ὁ Φιλότιμος ἐν τῷ μέσῳ καθεστη- 
κέναι γίνωσκε τῶν θ᾽ ἁπαλοσάρκων καὶ τῶν σκληροσάρκων. Cuvier 
ii. p. 232 (who, however, wrongly says ‘“‘dans un autre 
endroit [xvi. 11] Elien fait entendre que c’est un poisson 
court, dont les yeux sont rapprochés,” that being said not of 
the hepatus but of the γαλῆ) thinks most of the indications 
point—in spite of the “few caeca”—to Gadus eglefinus, the 
Haddock. 

7 Only here, Ael. l.c., Suid. 1.6.. Mare. S. 8. One of the 
Gadidae ? 

9 Introduction, p. Ixii. 


219 


OPPIAN 


of 
μίμνει δ᾽ ἐγκαταδὺς σκότιον μυχόν, οὐδὲ πάροιθεν 
, 5 / 
ἔρχεται, ὅσσον ἄησιν ἐπὶ χρόνον ἄγριος ἀστήρ. 
Ἔστι δέ τις πέτρῃσιν ἁλικλύστοισι μεμηλώς, 15 
A 3 a ~ bY > , > ἐν 
ξανθὸς ἰδεῖν, κεστρεῦσι φυὴν ἐναλίγκιος ἰχθύς, 
τὸν μερόπων ἕτεροι μὲν ἐπικλείουσιν ἄδωνιν, 
, 
ἄλλοι δ᾽ ἐξώκουτον ἐφήμισαν, οὕνεκα κοίτας 
2 4 ¢ δ , “- 3 FN ,ὔ 3 ἊΝ 
ἐκτὸς ἁλὸς τίθεται, μοῦνος δ᾽ ἐπὶ χέρσον ἀμείβει, 
i U4 , v4 > Ni ya 5 
ὅσσοι ye -Bpdyxy, στόματος πτύχας, ἀμφὶς ἔχουσιν. 160 
εὖτε γὰρ εὐνήσῃ χαροπῆς ἁλὸς ἔργα γαλήνη, 
αὐτὰρ ὅ γ᾽ ἐσσυμένοισι συνορμηθεὶς ῥοθίοισι, 
πέτραις ἀμφιταθεὶς ἀμπαύεται εὔδιον ὕπνον. 
2 “a > cy\/ /, , a ec Ψ 
ὀρνίθων δ᾽ ἁλίων τρομέει γένος, οἵ οἱ ἔασι 
δυσμενέες: τῶν ἦν τιν᾽ ἐσαθρήσῃ πελάσαντα, 165 
μ > “ " Μ΄ ¢ / 
πάλλεται ὀρχηστῆρι πανείκελος, ὄφρα ἑ πόντου 
προπροκυλινδόμενον. σπιλάδων ἄπο χεῦμα σαώσῃ. 
.1 ν δι. 12 / A edie 4 , 
Ot δὲ καὶ ἐν πέτρῃσι καὶ ἐν ψαμάθοισι νέμονται, 


* Clearchus ap. Athen. 332d ἐστὶ δ᾽ ὁ ἐξώκοιτος τῶν 
πετραίων καὶ βιοτεύει περὶ τοὺς πετρώδεις τόπους. 

» One of the Blennies (H. i. 109 n.). The description by 
Clearch. ap. Athen. 332 ¢ ὁ ἐξώκοιτος ἰχθύς, ὃν ἔνιοι καλοῦσιν 
ἤΛλδωνιν, τοὔνομα μὲν εἴληφε διὰ τὸ πολλάκις τὰς ἀναπαύσεις ἔξω 
τοῦ ὑγροῦ ποιεῖσθαι" ἐστὶ δὲ ὑπόπυρρος καὶ ἀπὸ τῶν βραγχίων 
ἑκατέρωθεν τοῦ σώματος μέχρι τῆς κέρκου μίαν ἔχει διηνεκῆ λευκὴν 
ῥάβδον suggests Montague’s Blenny (B. Montagui). For 
its habit (shared by other species of Blenny) of remaining 
for hours out of the water οὐ Day i. p. 201; cf. Hesych. 5. 
“Adwuis* ἰχθὺς θαλάσσιος, οὗ μνημονεύει Κλέαρχος : 5. ἐξώκοιτος" 
εἶδος ἰχθύος, καὶ "Αδωνις. ΑΕ]. ix. 36, describing the habits 
of ἐξώκοιτος or “Adwvis, calls it a γένος κεστρέως (so too Phil. 
114), a misunderstanding of Oppian’s κεστρεῦσι φυὴν ἐναλίγκιος, 
which appears to be based on Clearch. l.c. κατὰ τὸ μέγεθος 
220 


HALIEUTICA, I. 153-168 


his dark recess and comes not forth so long as the 
breath of the fierce star prevails, 

A fish there is which haunts the sea-washed rocks,# 
yellow of aspect and in like build unto the Grey 
Mullet ; some men call him Adonis ὃ ; others name 
him the Sleeper-out, because he takes his sleep out- 
side the sea and comes to the land, alone of all them 
that have gills, those folds of the mouth, on either 
side. For when calm®¢ hushes the works of the 
glancing sea, he hastes with the hasting tide and, 
stretched upon the rocks, takes his rest in fine 
weather. But he fears the race of sea-birds 4 which 
are hostile to him; if he sees any of them approach, 
he hops like a dancer until, as he rolls on and on, 
the sea-wave receives him safe from the rocks. 

Others live both among the rocks and in the sands ; 


ἴσος ἐστὶ τοῖς παραιγιαλίταις κεστρινίσκοι. Plin. ix. 70 
Miratur et Arcadia suum exocoetum, appellatum ab eo quod 
in siccum somni causa exeat. Circa Clitorium vocalis hic 
traditur et sine branchiis, idem aliquis Adonis dictus. Pliny 
confuses with Clearchus’s account of exocoetus another 
passage of Clearchus which immediately follows in Athen, 
332 f ἐπεί τινες τῶν ἰχθύων οὐκ ἔχοντες βρόγχον φθέγγονται. 
τοιοῦτοι δ᾽ εἰσὶν οἱ περὶ KXelropa τῆς ᾿Αρκαδίας ἐν τῷ Λάδωνι 
καλουμένῳ ποταμῷ" φθέγγονται γὰρ καὶ πολὺν ἦχον ἀποτελοῦσιν 
(cf. Pausan. viii. 21. 2). 

5 Clearch. ap. Athen. 332 ἃ ὅταν ἢ γαλήνη, συνεξορούσας 
τῷ κύματι κεῖται ἐπὶ τῶν πετριδίων πολὺν χρόνον ἀναπαυόμενος ἐν 
τῷ ξηρῷ καὶ μεταστρέφει μὲν ἑαυτὸν πρὸς τὸν ἥλιον" ὅταν δ᾽ 
ἱκανῶς αὐτῷ τὰ πρὸς τὴν ἀνάπαυσιν ἔχῃ, προσκυλινδεῖται τῷ ὑγρῷ, 
μέχρι οὗ ἂν πάλιν ὑπολαβὸν αὐτὸν τὸ κῦμα κατενέγκῃ μετὰ τῆς 
ἀναρροίας εἰς τὴν θάλασσαν. 

4 Clearch. ἐ.6. ὅταν δ᾽ ἐγρηγορὼς ἐν τῷ ξηρῷ τύχῃ, φυλάττεται 
τῶν ὀρνίθων τοὺς παρευδιαστὰς καλουμένους, ὧν ἐστι κηρύλος, 
τροχίλος, καὶ ὁ τῇ κρεκὶ προσεμφερὴς ἐρωδιός" οὗτοι γὰρ ἐν ταῖς 
εὐδίαις παρὰ τὸ ξηρὸν νεμόμενοι πολλάκις αὐτῷ περιπίπτουσιν, ods 
ὅταν προΐδηται φεύγει πηδῶν καὶ ἀσπαίρων, ἕως ἂν εἰς τὸ ὕδωρ 
ἀποκυβιστήσῃ. 


221 


OPPIAN 


3 he 7, > yy 3 \ 4 

ayAain χρύσοφρυς ἐπώνυμος ἠδὲ δράκοντες 
σῖμοί τε γλαῦκοί τε καὶ ἀλκησταὶ συνόδοντες, 
σκορπίος ἀϊκτήρ, δίδυμον γένος, ἀμφότεραί τε 
σφύραιναι δολιχαὶ ῥαφίδες θ᾽ ἅμα τῆσιν ἀραιαί" 
ἐν δὲ χάραξ κοῦφοί τε κυβιστητῆρες ἔασι 
κωβιοί: ἐν δὲ μυῶν χαλεπὸν γένος, οἵ περὶ πάντων 
θαρσαλέοι νεπόδων καί τ᾽ ἀνδράσιν ἀντιφέρονται, 
οὔτι τόσοι περ ἐόντες" ἐπὶ στερεῇ δὲ μάλιστα 
ῥινῷ καὶ πυκινοῖσι πεποιθότες ἔνδον ὀδοῦσι, 
ἰχθύσι καὶ μερόπεσσιν ἀρειοτέροισι μάχονται. 


« Chrysophrys awrata Cuv., M.G. χρυσόφα (cf. χρύσαφοι 
Mare. 5. 12) τσιππούρα, κότσα at Corfu μαρίδα at Misso- 
longhi (Apost. p. 17). Habitat, A. 598a10 πρόσγειος, cf. 
δ48 Ὁ8 ; Day i. p. 33. Cf. in general Athen. 284 ¢, 328 a-c; 
Plut. Mor. 981 p; Ael. xiii. 28; Plin. ix. 58; Mart. xiii. 90. 

> It gets its name (cf. Lat. awrata [Plin. l.c., etc.], Fr. 
Daurade, etc.) from its interorbital golden band: Ov. Hal. 
110 et auri | Chrysophrys imitata decus; Plin. xxxii. 152 
auri coloris chrysophryn. 

° H. ii, 459 n. Habitat, A. 598a11 mpdscyeos. Plin. ix. 
82; Day i. p. 79. 

4 Schol. μικροί πατζοὶ τὴν ἡλικίαν" πατζοὶ ἤγουν σιμοσπόνδυλοι. 
In list of Nile fishes Athen. 312 b, but not Strabo 823. Of. 
fish called αἰθίοψ, διὰ τὸ καὶ τοῦ προσώπου σιμὸν ἔχειν τὸν τύπον 
Agatharch. ap. Phot. p. 460 Bekker. 

ὁ Introd. p. lxi. 

7 H. iii. 610 n. 

9 Scorpaena scrofa L., M.G. σκόρπινα, and S. porcus L.: 
**a cette seconde espéce d'une coloration brune on donne 
vulg. le nom de σκορπιός et χάφτης " (Apost. p. 12). Hices. 
ap. Athen. 320 ἃ τῶν σκορπίων ὁ μέν ἐστι πελάγιος, 6 δὲ τεναγώδης. 
καὶ ὁ μὲν πελάγιος πυρρός, ὁ δ᾽ ἕτερος μελανίζων. διαφέρει δὲ τῇ 
γεύσει καὶ τῷ τροφίμῳ ὁ πελάγιος: Athen. 355 ἃ σκορπίοι δὲ 
οἱ πελάγιοι καὶ κιρροὶ τροφιμώτεροι τῶν τεναγωδῶν τῶν ἐν τοῖς 
αἰγιαλοῖς τῶν μεγάλων (μελάνων Coraes); Numen. ap. Athen. 
320 6 ἐρυθρὸν σκορπίον, KEpicharm. ibid. σκορπίοι ποικίλοι. 
Aristotle has σκορπίος 508 b 17, δ48 ἃ 7, 598 ἃ 14, σκορπίς only 
ὅ45 Ὁ ὃ σκορπίδες (v.l. cxouBpides) ἐν τῷ πελάγει (τίκτουσιν). Cf. 
222 


170 


175 


HALIEUTICA, I. 169-178 


to wit, the Gilt-head,* named ὃ from its- beauty, and 
the Weever ¢ and the Simus ὅ and the Glaucus ὁ and 
the strong Dentex,’ the rushing Scorpion,’, a double 
race, and both sorts of the long Sphyraena” and there- 
withal the slender Needle-fish; the Charax/ like- 
wise is there and ‘the nimble tumbling Goby * and 


the savage tribe of Sea-mice,’ which are bold beyond 
all ‘other fishes and contend even with men; not 
that they are so very large, but trusting chiefly to 


their hard hide and the serried teeth of their mouth, 
they fight with fishes and with mightier men. 


Athen. 320 ἢ ἐν δὲ πέμπτῳ ζῴων μορίων ὁ ᾿Αριστοτέλης σκορπίους 
καὶ σκορπίδας ἐν διαφόροις τόποις ὀνομάζει ἄδηλον δὲ εἰ τοὺς αὐτοὺς 
λέγει" ὅτι καὶ σκόρπαιναν καὶ σκορπίους πολλάκις ἡμεῖς ἐφάγομεν 
καὶ διάφοροι καὶ οἱ χυμοὶ καὶ αἱ χρόαι εἰσίν, οὐδεὶς ἀγνοεῖ: Plin. 
xxxiil. 70 marini scorpionis rufi; ibid. 151 scorpaena, scorpio. 

® Schol. σφύραιναι" ζαργάναι (see H. i.100n.). Apparently 
Sphyraena spet (8. vulgaris), M.G. λοῦτζξος or σφύραινα, ““ the 
pike-like Bicuda or spet of the Mediterranean” (Lowe ap. 
EK. Forbes p. 122) and some similar species. σφύραινα-- Attic 
κέστρα Athen. 323 a; Plin. xxxii. 154 Sunt praeterea a nullo 
auctore nominati sudis Latine appellatus, Graece sphyraena, 
rostro similis nomini, magnitudine inter amplissimos; 
Hesych. 5. xéorpa, s. σφῦρα; A. 610b 5. 

tC. ii. 392 n. 

i Sargus vulgaris is in M.G. σαργός but xapaxida at Siphnos 
(Apost. p. 16), and such evidence as we have points to a 
Sea-bream: Athen. 355 e συνόδους καὶ χάραξ τοῦ μὲν αὐτοῦ 
γένους εἰσί. Cf. Ael. xii. 25, 

& Η͂, ii. 458 n. 

+ Balistes capriscus, M.G. povdxoupos, Apost. p. 8, the 
File-fish (Fam. Sclerodermi): Athen. 355 f καπρίσκος καλεῖται 
μὲν καὶ μῦς; Plin. ix. 71 exeunt in terram et qui marini 
mures vocantur; Ov. Hal. 130 durique sues; Ael. ix. 41 τῶν 
γε μὴν οἰκετῶν (μυῶν) θρασύτεροι οἱ θαλάττιοι. μικρὸν μὲν αὐτῶν 
τὸ σῶμα, τόλμα δὲ ἄμαχος" καὶ θαρροῦσι δύο ὅπλοις, δορᾷ τε εὐτόνῳ 
καὶ ὀδόντων κράτει" μάχονται δὲ καὶ τοῖς ἰχθύσι τοῖς ἁδροτέροις καὶ 
τῶν ἁλιέων τοῖς μάλιστα θωρατικοῖς ; Mare. 8. 80 μύες εὐθώρηκες ; 
Phil. 119, 

223 


OPPIAN 


Οἱ δ᾽ ἐν ἁμετρήτοισιν ἄλην πελάγεσσιν ἔχουσι, 
τηλοῦ ἀπὸ τραφερῆς οὐδ᾽ ἠόσιν εἰσὶν ἑταῖροι, 18¢ 
θύννοι μὲν θύνοντες, ἐν ἰχθύσιν ἔξοχοι ὁρμήν, 
κραιπνότατοι, ξιφίαι τε φερώνυμοι ἠδ᾽ ὑπέροπλος 
ὀρκύνων γενεὴ καὶ πρημάδες ἠδὲ κυβεῖαι, 
καὶ κολίαι σκυτάλαι τε καὶ ἱππούροιο γένεθλα. 
ἐν τοῖς καὶ κάλλιχθυς ἐπώνυμος, ἱερὸς ἰχθύς- 18% 
ἐν κείνοις νέμεται καὶ πομπίλος, ὃν πέρι ναῦται 
alovrat, πομπῇ δ᾽ ἐπεφήμισαν οὔνομα νηῶν" 
ἔξοχα γὰρ νήεσσι γεγηθότες ὑγρὰ θεούσαις 


* Thynnus thynnus (1. vulgaris), M.G. μαιάτικο τουνῖνα 
etc., 7. thynina, T. brachypterus. θύννοι θύνοντες is a punning 
reference (παρήχησις schol.) to the (popular) derivation from 
θύ(νγω : HM. s.v.; Athen. 302 Ὁ, 324d θύω θύννος, 6 ὁρμητικός, 
διὰ τὸ κατὰ τὴν τοῦ κυνὸς ἐπιτολὴν ὑπὸ τοῦ ἐπὶ τῆς κεφαλῆς οἴστρου 
ἐξελαύνεσθαι (see H. ii. 508 n.). 

> ἢ. ii. 462 n. oy Ae iii Sims 

# Young Tunny in its first year: A. 599b17 αἱ πριμάδες 
κρύπτουσιν ἑαυτὰς ἐν τῷ βορβόρῳ᾽ σημεῖον δὲ τὸ μὴ ἁλίσκεσθαι 
καὶ ἰλὺν ἐχούσας ἐπὶ τοῦ νώτου φαίνεσθαι πολλὴν καὶ τὰ πτερύγια 
ἐντεθλιμμένα: Athen. 328 Ὁ πρημνάδας τὰς θυννίδας ἔλεγον : 
Hesych 5. πρημάδες καὶ πρῆμναι" εἶδος θυννώδους ἰχθύος. 

¢ The κύβιον was apparently a small-sized Tunny which 
was cut into κύβοι and salted: Athen. 116 e τὰ νεώτερα τῶν 
θυννείων τὴν αὐτὴν ἀναλογίαν ἔχειν τοῖς κυβίοις ; 118 a πηλαμύδας 
κύβια εἶναί φησι (Ἱκέσιος) μεγάλα; 120 € κράτιστα δὲ τῶν μὲν 
ἀπιόνων (ταριχῶν) κύβια καὶ ὡραῖα καὶ τὰ τούτοις ὅμοια γένη, τῶν 
δὲ πιόνων τὰ θυννεῖα καὶ κορδύλεια. . . τὸ δὲ θυννεῖον, φησί 
(Δίφιλο:), γίνεται ἐκ τῆς μείζονος πηλαμύδος, ὧν τὸ μικρὸν ἀναλογεῖ 
τῷ κυβίῳ. Cf. 356 f.; Poll. vi. 48; Plin. χχχίϊ. 146 cybium 
—ita vocatur concisa pelamys quae post xl. dies a Ponto in 
Maeotim redit; ibid. 151 tritomum pelamydum generis 
magni ex quo terra cybia fiunt; ix. 48 Pelamydes in apo- 
lectos particulatimque consectae in genera cybiorum disper- 
tiuntur. For the development of meaning ef. ἑψητός (Athen. 
301), τμητόν (Athen. 357 a), and our ‘‘ Kipper,” formerly a 
Salmon, now a Herring. κυβιοσάκτης -- 6816 in salt-fish, 
Strabo 796, cf. Sueton. Vesp. xix. 


224 


HALIEUTICA, I. 179-188 


Others roam in the unmeasured seas far from the 
dry land and companion not with the shores ; to wit, 
the dashing Tunny,* most excellent among fishes for 
spring and speed, and the Sword-fish, truly named,? 
and the huge race of the Orcynus ὁ and the Premas 4 
and the Cybeia é’and the Coly-mackerel’ and the 
Scytala% and the tribes of the Hippurus.”. Among 
these, too, is the Beauty-fish,’ truly named, a holy 
fish 7 ; and among them dwells the Pilot-fish * which 
sailors revere exceedingly, and they have given him 
this name for his convoying of ships. For they 
delight exceedingly in ships that run over the wet 


7 Scomber colias, M.G. xodtbs. ** Ce poisson, salé, est tres 
estimé, on Je mange surtout au mois d’aotit. Un proverbe 
dit: ‘Chaque chose son temps, et le colios au mois 
d’aotit’” (Apost. p. 14). A. 548 ἃ 9, 598.a 24, Ὁ 27, 610 Ὁ 73 
Plin. xxxii. 146 colias sive Parianus sive Sexitanus a patria 
Baetica lacertorum minimi. Cf Athen. 120 f ἡ δὲ σάρδα 
προσέοικε τῷ κολίᾳ μεγέθει. . . κρείσσων δὲ ὁ ᾿Αμυνκλανὸς Kal 
Σπανὸς ὁ Σαξιτανὸς λεγόμενος. 

9 Schol. σκυτάλαι" αἱ ἀβίναι λεγόμεναι λεπίδαι. Not men- 
tioned elsewhere. 

h H. iv. 404n. Of. Ov. Hal. 95 (gaudent pelago) hippuri 
celeres. 

+ H, iii. 335 n. 

71 For use of this term ¢f. Athen. 282 c-284 e. 

k Naucrates ductor, one of the Horse-mackerels (Caran- 
gidae): **ce poisson partage avec certains squales le nom 
vulg. de κουλαγοῦξος. C'est, d’aprés les pécheurs grecs, un 
conducteur d’autres poissons” (Apost. p. 14). Cf. Athen. 
982 ff.; Ael. ii. 15, xv. 23; Plin. ix. 51 idem (sc. Tunny-fish) 
saepe navigia velis euntia comitantes mira quadam dulcedine 
per aliquot horarum spatia et passuum milia a gubernaculis 
spectantur, ne tridente quidem in eos saepius iacto territi. 
Quidam eos qui hoc e thynnis faciant pompilos vocant ; id. 
xxxii. 153 pompilum qui semper comitetur navium cursus ; 
Ov. Hal. 100 Tuque comes ratium tractique per aequora 
sulci | Qui semper spumas sequeris, pompile, nitentes. See 
further H. y. 70 n. 

Q 225 


OPPIAN 


ian ΤΩ 
ἕσπονται πομπῆες ὁμόστολοι, ἄλλοθεν ἄλλος 
I. /, 
ἀμφιπερισκαίροντες edlvyov ἅρμα θαλάσσης 190 
, wn A 
τοίχους τ᾽ ἀμφοτέρους περί Te πρυμναῖα χαλινὰ 
> ᾽ὔ 
οἰήκων, ἄλλοι δὲ περὶ πρώρην ἀγέρονται" 
9 \ an 
οὐδέ Kev αὐτόμολον κείνων πλόον, ἀλλ᾽ ὑπὸ δεσμῷ 
,ὔ 
φαίης εὐγόμφοισιν ἐνισχομένους πινάκεσσιν 
ἑλκομένους ἀέκοντας ἀναγκαίῃσιν ἄγεσθαι. 
, ” Lond 3 > ¢ 4 1} A > 6 
τόσσον ἔρως γλαφυρῇσιν ἐφ᾽ ὁλκάσιν éopov ἀγείρει. 
a A ~ / 9 δ > A 
οἷον δὴ βασιλῆα φερέπτολιν ἠέ τιν᾽ ἄνδρα 
> / an ων» lot 
ἀθλοφόρον, θαλλοῖσι νεοστέπτοισι κομῶντα, 
A vA > > oh, / A > , 5 J, 
παῖδές τ᾽ ἠΐθεοί Te Kal ἀνέρες ἀμφιέποντες 
Δ ih 3 / A > / OA “ 
ὃν δόμον εἰσανάγουσι καὶ ἀθρόοι αἰὲν ἕπονται, 200 
εἰσόκεν εὐερκῆ μεγάρων ὑπὲρ οὐδὸν ἀμείψῃ:" 
> . 
ὡς οἵ γ᾽ ὠκυπόροισιν ἀεὶ νήεσσιν ἕπονται, 
ὄφρ᾽ οὔτις γαίης ἐλάει φόβος. ἀλλ᾽ ὅτε χέρσον 
/ \ 2 
φράσσωνται, τραφερὴν δὲ μέγ᾽ ἐχθαίρουσιν ἄρουραν, 
> > , > , doh ΄ 
αὖτις ἀφορμηθέντες ἀολλέες hire νύσσης 205 


195 


πάντες ἀποθρώσκουσι Kal οὐκέτι νηυσὶν ἕπονται. 
σῆμα τόδε πλωτῆρσιν ἐτήτυμον ἐγγύθι γαίης 
Ya > ~ 
ἔμμεναι, εὖτε λιπόντας ὁμοπλωτῆρας ἴδωνται. 
,ὔ ,ὔ 
πομπίλε, ναυτιλίῃσι τετιμένε, σοὶ δέ τις ἀνὴρ 
ry a esti! , ΧΩ 2 ” 
εὐκραεῖς ἀνέμων τεκμαιρεται ἐλθέμεν αὔρας" 210 
ὑδ ay ‘rN \ ὑὃ la / 
εὔδια γὰρ στέλλῃ τε καὶ εὔδια σήματα daivers. 
\ A δ id ~ a. 
Kai pen δὴ πελάγεσσιν ὁμῶς ἐχενηΐς éraipy: 
6 3 > tal ~ 
ἡ δ᾽ ἦτοι ταναὴ μὲν ἰδεῖν, μῆκος δ᾽ ἰσόπηχυς, 


* The ἐχενηίς of A. 505b19 ἰχθύδιόν τι τῶν πετραίων ὃ 
καλοῦσί τινες ἐχενηίδα ; Plin. ix. 79 parvus admodum piscis 
adsuetus petris echeneis appellatus, may be Echeneis remora 


226 


HALIEUTICA, I. 189-213 


seas, and they attend them as convoyers, voyaging 
with them on this side and on that, gambolling 
around and about the well-benched chariot of the 
sea, about both sides and about the controlling helm 
at the stern, while others gather round the prow ; 
not of their own motion thou wouldst say that they 
voyage, but rather entangled in the well-riveted 
timbers are pulled against their will as in chains and 
carried along perforce ; so great a swarm does their 
passion for hollow ships collect. Even as a city- 
saving king or some athlete crowned with fresh 
garlands is beset by boys and youths and men who 
lead him to his house and attend him always in troops 
until he passes the fencing threshold of his halls, 
even so the Pilot-fishes always attend swift-faring 
ships, so long as no fear of the earth drives them 
away. But when they mark the dry land—and 
greatly do they abhor the solid earth—they all turn 
back again in a body and rush away as from the 
starting-post and follow the ships no more. This is 
a true sign to sailors that they are near land, when 
they see those companions of their voyage leaving 
them. O Pilot-fish, honoured of seafarers, by thee 
doth a man divine the coming of temperate winds ; 
for with fair weather thou dost put to sea and fair 
weather signs thou showest forth. 

Companion of the open seas likewise is the 
Echeneis.* It is slender of aspect, in length a cubit, 


L. (Fam. Scombridae), but the fish described by Oppian is 
the Lamprey, Petromyzon marinus, M.G. λάμπρινα. For 
similar confusion cf. Day i. p. 109. For legend of Echeneis 
detaining ships cf. Plut. Mor. 641 8; Ael. ix. 17; Phil. 117; 
Plin. xxxii. 2-6; Ov. Hal. 99 Parva echeneis adest, mirum, 
mora puppibus ingens; Lucan vi. 674 f. puppim retinens 
Euro tendente rudentes | In mediis echeneis aquis, 


227 


OPPIAN 


co ee ΤΑ 
χροινὴ δ᾽ αἰθαλόεσσα, φυὴ δέ οἱ ἐγχελύεσσιν 
” 9¢\ δέ ¢ An / ,ἷ θ / 
εἴδεται, ὀξὺ δέ of κεφαλῆς στόμα νέρθε νένευκε 
> a 

καμπύλον, ἀγκίστρου περιηγέος εἴκελον αἰχμῇ. 

~ “-“ μ 4 
θαῦμα δ᾽ ὀλισθηρῆς ἐχενηΐδος ἐφράσσαντο 
ναυτίλοι: οὐ μὲν δή τις evl φρεσὶ πιστώσαυτο 
εἰσαΐων: αἰεὶ γὰρ ἀπειρήτων νόος ἀνδρῶν 
δύσμαχος, οὐδ᾽ ἐθέλουσι καὶ ἀτρεκέεσσι πιθέσθαι: 
νῆα τιταινομένην ἀνέμου ζαχρηέος ὁρμῇ, 
λαίφεσι πεπταμένοισιν ἁλὸς διὰ μέτρα θέουσαν, 
> \ > Νὴ PANS, / / 2 y 
ἰχθὺς ἀμφιχανὼν ὀλίγον στόμα νέρθεν ἐρύκει, 
πᾶσαν ὑποτρόπιος βεβιημένος" οὐδ᾽ ἔτι τέμνει 
κῦμα καὶ ἱεμένη, κατὰ δ᾽ ἔμπεδον ἐστήρικται, 
nit ἐν ἀκλύστοισιν ἐεργομένη λιμένεσσι. 
καὶ τῆς μὲν λίνα πάντα περὶ προτόνοισι μέμυκε, 
ῥοχθεῦσιν δὲ κάλωες, ἐπημύει δὲ κεραίη, 

lod " ΄ "ὕ 
ῥιπῇ ἐπειγομένη, πρύμνῃ δ᾽ ἔπι πάντα χαλινὰ 
ἰθυντὴρ ἀνίησιν, ἐπισπέρχων ὁδὸν ἅλμης: 
ε 3 ww” > af > 4 +” 3 > 7 
ἡ δ᾽ οὔτ᾽ οἰήκων ἐμπάζεται οὔτ᾽ ἀνέμοισι 

, >» ¢€ a > ΄ 3 \ ed 
πείθεται, od ῥοθίοισιν ἐλαύνεται, ἀλλὰ παγεῖσα 
μίμνει τ᾽ οὐκ ἐθέλουσα καὶ ἐσσυμένη πεπέδηται 
ἰχθύος οὐτιδανοῖο κατὰ στόμα ῥιζωθεῖσα:" 

lo \ / EI) \ / 
ναῦται δὲ τρομέουσιν, ἀείδελα δεσμὰ θαλάσσης 

\ / 

δερκόμενοι καὶ θάμβος ἴσον λεύσσοντες ὀνείρῳ. 
ς CeCe trees ΄ DEEN \ , τ 
ὡς δ᾽ ὅτ᾽ ἐνὲ ξυλόχοισιν ἀνὴρ λαιψηρὰ θέουσαν 
θηρητὴρ ἔλαφον δεδοκημένος ἄκρον ὀϊστῷ 
κῶλον ὑπὸ πτερόεντι βαλὼν ἐπέδησεν ἐρωῆς:" 

\ 
ἡ δὲ Kai ἐσσυμένη περ dvayKains ὀδύνῃσιν 
3 a> > 
ἀμφιπαγεῖσ᾽ ἀέκουσα μένει θρασὺν ἀγρευτῆρα" 

, oh 7 
τοίην νηΐ πέδην περιβάλλεται aiddros ἰχθὺς 
3 ,ὔ ,ὕἷ \ 
ἀντιάσας" τοίων δὲ φερωνυμίην λάχεν ἔργων. 
228 


2 


215 


220 


225 


230 


235 


240 


HALIEUTICA, I. 214-243 


its colour dusky, its nature like that of the eel; 
under its head its mouth slopes sharp and crooked, 
like the barb of a curved hook. A marvellous thing 
have mariners remarked of the slippery Echeneis, 
hearing which a man would refuse to believe it in 
his heart; for always the mind of inexperienced 
men is hard to persuade, and they will not believe 
even the truth. When a ship is straining under 
stress of a strong wind, running with spread sails 
over the spaces of the sea, the fish gapes its tiny 
mouth and stays all the ship underneath, constrain- 
ing it below the keel; and it cleaves the waves no 
more for all its haste but is firmly stayed, even as if 
it were shut up in a tideless harbour. All its canvas 
groans upon the forestays, the ropes creak, the yard- 
arm bends under the stress of the breeze, and on the 
stern the steersman gives every rein to the ship, 
urging her to her briny path. But she nor heeds 
the helm nor obeys the winds nor is driven by the 
waves but, fixed fast, remains against her will and 
is fettered for all her haste, rooted on the mouth of 
a feeble fish. And the sailors tremble to see the 
mysterious bonds of the sea, beholding a marvel like 
unto a dream. As when in the woods a hunter lies 
in wait for a swift-running Deer and smites her with 
winged arrow on the leg and stays her in her course 5 
and she for all her haste, transfixed with compelling 
pain, unwillingly awaits the bold hunter ; even such 
a fetter doth the spotted fish cast about the ship 
which it encounters, and from such deeds it gets its 


name. 
229 


OPPIAN 


a 2 , , 
Χαλκίδες αὖ θρίσσαι τε καὶ ἀβραμίδες φορέονται 
% / 
ἀθρόαι, ἄλλοτε δ᾽ ἄλλον ἁλὸς πόρον, ἢ περὶ πέτρας 348 
an Ψ “ 
ἢ πελάγη, δολιχοῖσί τ᾽ ἐπέδραμον αἰγιαλοῖσιν, 
oA 3 , , sO A iki > LAN 
αἰὲν ἀμειβόμεναι ξείνην ὁδὸν Hit” a ῆται. 
’ὔ 
᾿Ανθιέων δὲ μάλιστα νομαὶ πέτρῃσι βαθείαις 
A A 3 A ͵7ὔ ἌΝ Ε 
ἔμφυλοι: ταῖς δ᾽ οὔτι παρέστιοι αἰὲν ἔασι, 
te 
πάντῃ δὲ πλάζονται, ὅπῃ γένυς, ἔνθα κελεύει 250 
5 ᾽ὔ > ~ 
γαστὴρ Kat λαίμαργος ἔρως ἀκόρητος ἐδωδῆς" 
> > vd 
ἔξοχα yap παρὰ πάντας ἀδηφάγος οἶστρος ἐλαύνει 
~ la 
κείνους Kal νωδόν περ ὑπὸ στόμα χῶρον ἔχοντας. 
τέσσαρα δ᾽ ἀνθιέων μεγακήτεα φῦλα νέμονται, 
fae 5 : , \ \ , a 1 , 
ξανθοί τ᾽ ἀργεννοί τε τὸ δὲ τρίτον αἷμα' κελαινοί: 255 
Ψ > > 7 \ > 3 / 
ἄλλους δ᾽ εὐωπούς τε Kal αὐλωποὺς καλέουσιν, 
οὕνεκα τοῖς καθύπερθεν ἑλισσομένη κατὰ κύκλον 
, 
ὀφρὺς ἠερόεσσα περίδρομος ἐστεφάνωται. 


1 αἷμα : efua Koechly. 


* Clupea sardina Cuv. (Alosa sardina Moreau). The 
precise identification is uncertain. Aristotle’s references to 
χαλκίς are perplexing, but Oppian’s fish is probably intended 
in A. 543a 9, 691 Ὁ 7, 602 Ὁ 28, Plin. ix. 154 adeoque nihil 
non gignitur in mari ut cauponarum etiam aestiva animalia 
pernici molesta saltu aut quae capillus maxime celat existant 
et circumglobatae escae saepe extrahantur .. . quibusdam 
vero ipsis innascuntur, quo in numero chalcis accipitur ; 
Athen, 328 ¢ χαλκίδες καὶ τὰ ὅμοια, θρίσσαι, τριχίδες, ἐρίτιμοι ; 
ἐδια. 328 f ᾿᾽Βπαίνετος, .. φησί. .. χαλκίδας ἃς καλοῦσι καὶ 
σαρδίνους. Cf. Athen. 829 ἃ 355f; Ael. i. 68. 

PA. 621b15 οὐ γίνεται δ᾽ ἐν τῷ εὐρίπῳ (οὗ Pyrrha in 
Lesbos A. 621 b 12: Strabo 617 τὸν Πυρραίων εὔριπον, cf. 
Plin. v. 189) οὔτε σκάρος οὔτε θρίττα οὔτε ἄλλο τῶν ἀκανθηροτέρων 
οὐθέν ; Thritta Plin. xxxii. 151. ΤῈ 15 clear from Athen. 998 c- 
329 b that it is a Clupeid, or member of the Herring family, 


230 


HALIEUTICA, I. 244-258 


The Pilchard? again and the Shad? and the 
- Abramis¢® move in shoals, now in one path of the 
sea, now in another, round rocks or in the open sea, 
and they also run to the long shores, ever changing 
to a strange path like wanderers. 

The range of the Anthias ὦ is most familiar to the 
deep rocks ; yet no wise do they always dwell among 
these, but wander everywhere as they are bidden 
by their jaws, their belly and their gluttonous desire 
insatiate of food; for beyond others a voracious 
passion drives those fishes, albeit the space of their 
mouth is toothless, Four mighty tribes of the 
Anthias inhabit the sea, the yellow, the white, and, 
a third breed, the black; others men call Euopus 
and Aulopus, because they have a circular dark brow 
ringed above their eyes. 


like χαλκίς and τριχίς. Athen. 328 b θρισσῶν δὲ μέμνηται ’Apioro- 
τέλης ἐν τῷ περὶ ζῴων καὶ ἰχθύων ἐν τούτοις᾽ “μόνιμα (ὃ μαϊνα) 
θρίσσα, ἐγκρασίχολος, μεμβράς, κορακῖνος, ἐρυθρῖνος, Tpixls’” 5 
398 f τῶν δὲ λεγομένων ἔσθ᾽ ὅτι ἥδεται ὀρχήσει Kal gon 
(ἡ τριχίΞ) καὶ ἀκούσασα ἀναπηδᾷ ἐκ τῆς θαλάσσης, of. Plut. Mor. 
961 e where the same is said of the θρίσσα : καὶ τὴν θρίσσαν 
ἀδόντων Kal κροτούντων ἀναδύεσθαι καὶ προιέναι λέγουσιν. Per- 
haps the Shad, Alosa vulgaris, which is anadromous (Athen. 
328 e Awpiwy δ᾽ ἐν τῷ περὶ ἰχθύων καὶ τῆς ποταμίας μέμνηται 
θρίσσης καὶ τὴν τριχίδὰ τριχίαν ὀνομάζει: Auson. Mosell. 127 
Stridentesque focis, obsonia_plebis, alausas) or the nearly 
allied Sardinella aurita, M.G. θρίσσα, φρίσσα (Apost. p. 24). 
The schol. θρίσσαι δύο εἴδη ἐχθύων ol τριχαῖοι καὶ ἕτερον ὅμοιον 
σκόμβρῳ ἢ μικρότερον rather suggests the Twaite Shad (Alosa 

finta) and the larger Allis Shad (A. vulgaris). 
¢ Mentioned among Nile fishes Athen. 312 b (along with 
θρίσσα). Salted Abramis (ἀβραμίδια) are mentioned Xenocr. 
De aliment. 36. Schemseddin Mohammed, an Arabic writer 
of XVI. cent., gives abermis as the old name for modern bowri 
= Mugil cephalus(Grey Mullet) which was salted and exported 
from Egypt. Schneider’s Artedi Synonymia piscium, p. 322. 

4 Introduction p. liii. 

231 


OPPIAN 
Δοιοὲ δὲ σκληροῖσιν ἀρηρότα γυῖα χιτῶσι 
͵ὔ 
φραξάμενοι κόλποισιν ἐνιπλώουσι θαλάσσης, 260 
Uf 3 \ 592 > / τ \ \ y+ 
κάραβος ὀξυπαγὴς ἠδ᾽ ἀστακός- of δὲ Kal ἄμφω 
πέτραις ἐνναίουσι καὶ ἐν πέτρῃσι νέμονται. 
> x e 4 

ἄστακος αὖ πέρι δή τι καὶ od φατὸν οἷον ἔρωτα 
τ / Ui 4 , 3 ’ 3 CR. 
oixeins θαλάμης κεύθει φρεσίν, οὐδέ mor’ αὐτῆς 

, > ε Ya > > wy > y 3 ΄ 
λείπεθ᾽ ἑκών, ἀλλ᾽ εἴ μιν ἀναγκαίῃ τις ἐρύσσας 265 

lod , Cie of Ψ, 
τῆλε φέρων ἑτέρωσε πάλιν πόντονδε μεθείη, 
αὐτὰρ oy οὐ μετὰ δηρὸν ἑὴν νόστησε χαράδρην 
σπεύδων, οὐδ᾽ ἐθέλει ξεῖνον μυχὸν ἄλλον ἑλέσθαι, 
οὐδ᾽ ἑτέρης πέτρης ἐπιβάλλεται, ἀλλὰ διώκει 

A / a / A wo A ‘ Ψ 
καὶ δόμον ὃν κατέλειπε καὶ ἤθεα καὶ νομὸν ἅλμης 210 

7 Ψ ” \ Ε) 37 ᾽ὔ 
κείνης ἥ μιν ἔφερβε καὶ οὐκ ἤχθηρε θάλασσαν, 
τῆς μιν ἀπεξείνωσαν ἁλίπλοοι ἀγρευτῆρες. 

a ” \ lal εν / 3 A Τα 
ὡς dpa καὶ πλωτοῖσιν ἑὸς δόμος ἠδὲ θάλασσα 
πατρῴη καὶ χῶρος ἐφέστιος, ἔνθ᾽ ἐγένοντο, 

/ Fe AN uA A / 2939 + ΄ 
στάζει ἐνὶ κραδίῃ γλυκερὸν γάνος, οὐδ apa μούνοις 275 
πατρὶς ἐφημερίοισι πέλει γλυκερώτατον ἄλλων- 
οὐδ᾽ ἀλεγεινότερον καὶ κύντερον, ὅς κεν ἀνάγκῃ 

,ὔ 7 , / > la 
φυξίπολιν πάτρης τελέσῃ βίον ἀλγινόεντα, 

a > 9 ~ > , \ “ 
ξεῖνος ἐν ἀλλοδαποῖσιν ἀτιμίης ζυγὸν ἕλκων. 

Ἔν κείνῃ γενεῇ καὶ καρκίνοι εἰσὶν ἀλῆται 280 


* Here Oppian begins his account of μαλακόστρακα or 
Crustaceans ; cf. A. 593 b 5 ἕν δὲ τῶν μαλακοστράκων" ταῦτα δ᾽ 
ἐστὶν ὅσων ἐκτὸς τὸ στερεόν, ἐντὸς δὲ τὸ μαλακὸν καὶ σαρκῶδες" τὸ 
δὲ σκληρὸν αὐτῶν ἐστιν οὐ θραυστὸν ἀλλὰ θλαστόν, οἷόν ἐστι τὸ 
τῶν καράβων καὶ τὸ τῶν καρκίνων. In this class A. includes 
ἀστακός, κάραβος, καρίς, various species of καρκίνος (πάγουρος, 
πιννοφύλαξ, οἷς.) and two species of καρκίνιον or Hermit-crab. 
Plin. ix. 83 piscium sanguine carent de quibus dicemus. 
Suntautem tria genera: in primis quae mollia [Ξε μαλάκια, 


232 


_ 


HALIEUTICA, I. 259-280 


Two @ fishes whose limbs are fenced with hard coats 
swim in the gulfs of the sea ; to wit, the Spiny Cray- 
fish ὃ and the Lobster.* Both these dwell among the 
rocks and among the rocks they feed. The Lobster 
again holds in his heart a love exceeding and un- 
speakable for his own lair and he never leaves it 
willingly, but if one drag him away by force and 
carry him elsewhere far away and let him go again 
in the sea, in no long time he returns to his own cleft 
eagerly, and will not choose a strange retreat nor 
does he heed any other rock but seeks the home that 
he left and his native haunts and his feeding-ground 
in the brine which fed him before, and leaves not the 
sea from which seafaring fishermen estranged him. 
Thus even to the swimming tribes their own house 
and their native sea and the home place where they 
were born instil in their hearts a sweet delight, and 
it is not to mortal men only that their fatherland is 
dearest of all; and there is nothing more painful 
or more terrible then when a man perforce lives the 
grievous life of an exile from his native land, a 
stranger among aliens bearing the yoke of dishonour. 

In that kind are also the wandering Crab 4 and the 


see ἢ]. i. 638 n.| appellantur, dein contecta crustis tenuibus 
[=Crustaceans], postremo testis conclusa duris [=Testa- 
ceans]. Cf. Athen. 106c; Ael. xi. 37; Galen, De aliment. 
Fac. iii. 34; A. 490 b 10 ff. 

δ Palinurus vulgaris, the Spiny Lobster or Sea Crayfish: 
A. 525032 ff.; Athen. 104c-105d; Marc. S. 34 κάραβος 
ὀκριόεις, In Latin writers it is usually locusta (Plin. ix. 95 
Locustae crusta fragili muniuntur), sometimes carabus 
(Plin. ix. 97). 

¢ Homarus vulgaris. A. 525a32f.; Athen. lc.; Plin. 
l.c.3 Mare. 8. 31 ἀστακοὶ ἠυκέρωτες. 

4 Decapoda brachyura in general. For different species, 
A. δ95 Ὁ 8 ff.; Plin, ix. 97. 

233 


OPPIAN 


καρίδων τε νομαὶ Kat ἀναιδέα φῦλα παγούρων, 
οἵτε καὶ ἀμφιβίοις ἐναρίθμιον αἶσαν ἔχουσι. 

Πάντες δ᾽ οἷσί τε κῶλον ὑπ᾽ ὀστράκῳ ἐστήρικται, 
ὄστρακον ἐκδύνουσι γεραίτερον, ἄλλο δ᾽ ἔνερθε 
σαρκὸς ὑπὲκ νεάτης ἀνατέλλεται" οἱ δὲ πάγουροι, 285 
ἡνίκα ῥηγνυμένοιο βίην φράσσωνται ἐλύτρου, 
πάντῃ μαιμώωσιν ἐδητύος ἰσχανόωντες, 
ῥηϊτέρη ῥινοῖο διάκρισις ὄφρα γένηται 
πλησαμένων" εὖτ᾽ ἂν δὲ διατμαγὲν ἕρκος ὀλίσθῃ, 
οἱ δ᾽ ἦτοι πρῶτον μὲν ἐπὶ ψαμάθοισι τέτανται 990 
αὔτως, οὔτε βορῆς μεμνημένοι οὔτε τευ ἄλλου, 
ἐλπόμενοι φθιμένοισι μετέμμεναι οὐδ᾽ ἔτι θερμὸν 
ἐμπνείειν, ῥινῷ δὲ περιτρομέουσιν ἀραιῇ 
ἀρτιφύτῳ- μετὰ δ᾽ αὖτις ἀγειρόμενοι νόον ἤδη 
βαιὸν θαρσήσαντες ἀπὸ ψαμάθοιο πάσαντο" 295 
τόφρα δὲ θυμὸν ἔχουσιν ἀμήχανον ἀδρανέοντες, 
ὄφρα περὶ μελέεσσι νέον σκέπας ἀμφιπαγείη. 
ws δέ τις inrnp νουσαχθέα φῶτα κομίζων 
ἤμασι μὲν πρώτοισι βορῆς ἀπόπαστον ἐρύκει, 
πήματος ἀμβλύνων μαλερὸν σθένος, αὐτὰρ ἔπειτα 300 
τυτθὰ βορῆς ὠρεξε νοσήλια, μέχρις ἅπασαν 
ἄτην γυιοβόρους τε δύας ὀδύνας τε καθήρῃ" 
ὡς οἵγ᾽ ἀρτιφύτοισιν ἀναΐσσουσιν ἐλύτροις 
δειδιότες νούσοιο κακὰς ὑπὸ κῆρας ἀλύξαι. 

ἤΑλλοι δ᾽ ἑρπυστῆρες ἁλὸς ναίουσιν ἐναύλους, 306 
πουλύποδες σκολιοὶ καὶ κορδύλος ἠδ᾽ ἁλιεῦσιν 


OE in AS ΤΣ 

ὃ Cancer pagurus L., the Edible Crab, M.G. καβούρι: A. 
525b 5; Athen. 319 ἃ. σ"Ο ἃ. ΟἿ. ave 

4 A. 601] ἃ 10 τῶν θαλαττίων οἱ κάραβοι καὶ ἀστακοὶ ἐκδύνουσιν 
+ + + ἐκδύνουσι δὲ καὶ οἱ καρκίνοι τὸ γῆρας. ,. ὅταν δ᾽ ἐκδύνωσι, 
μαλακὰ γίνεται πάμπαν τὰ ὄστρακα καὶ οἵ γε καρκίνοι βαδίζειν οὐ 
σφόδρα δύνανται ; Plin. ix. 95 ambo (i.e. locustae and cancri) 
234 


HALIEUTICA, I. 281-306 


herds of the Prawn 5 and the shameless tribes of the 
Pagurus,? whose lotis numbered with the amphibians.° 

All those whose body is set beneath a shell put off 
_ the old shell 4 and another springs up from the nether 
flesh. The Pagurus, when they feel the violence of 
the rending shell, rush everywhere in their desire 
for food, that the separation of the slough may be 
easier when they have sated themselves. But when 
the sheath is rent and slips off, then at first they lie 
idly stretched upon the sands, mindful neither of 
food nor of aught else, thinking to be numbered with 
the dead and to breathe warm breath no more, and 
they tremble for their new-grown tender hide. 
Afterwards they recover their spirits‘again and take 
a little courage and eat of the sand; but they are 
weak and helpless of heart until a new shelter is 
compacted about their limbs. Even as when a 
physician tends a man who is laden with disease, in 
the first days he keeps him from tasting food, blunt- 
ing the fierceness of his malady, and then he gives 
him a little food for the sick, until he has cleared 
away all his distress and his limb-devouring aches 
and pains; even so they retire, fearing for their 
new-grown shells, to escape the evil fates of disease. 

Other reptiles dwell in the haunts of the sea, the 
crocked Poulpe® and the Water-newt’ and the 
Seolopendra,’ abhorred by fishermen, and the 


veris principio senectutem anguium more exuunt renovatione 
tergorum; Phil. iii.; Ael. ix. 357. For use of comparative 
γεραίτερον cf. παλαίτερος Callim. 17. vi. 1. An account of 
Crab casting shell, St. John, V.#., etc., im Moray, p. 208. 

ὁ Octopus vulgaris. 

7 Triton palustris, or allied species, cf. A. 487 a 28, 490 a 4, 
589b 27; De resp. 476a6; Part. an. 695625; Athen, 
306 ἢ. 9 H, ii. 424.n. 

235 


OPPIAN 


ἐχθομένη σκολόπενδρα Kal ὀσμύλος. οἱ δὲ καὶ αὐτοὶ 
ἀμφίβιοι- καί πού τις ἀνὴρ ἴδεν ἀγροιώτης 

γηπόνος, ἀγχιάλοισι φυτηκομίῃσι μεμηλώς, 

ὀσμύλον εὐκάρποις ἢ πούλυπον ἀμφὶ κράδῃσι 810 
πλεγνύμενον γλυκερόν τε φυτῶν ἀπὸ καρπὸν ἔδοντα. 
τοῖς δὲ μεθ᾽ ἑρπυστῆρσιν ἴσον λάχεν οἶμα δολόφρων 
σηπίη" ἄλλα δὲ φῦλα μετ᾽ οἴδμασιν ὀστρακόρινα, 
πολλὰ μὲν ἐν πέτρῃσι, τὰ δ᾽ ἐν ψαμάθοισι νέμονται, 
νηρῖται στρόμβων τε γένος καὶ πορφύραι αὐταὶ 315 
κήρυκές τε μύες τε καὶ ἀτρεκὲς οὔνομα σωλὴν 
ὄστρεά θ᾽ ἑρσήεντα καὶ ὀκριόεντες ἐχῖνοι" 

τοὺς εἴ τις καὶ τυτθὰ διατμήξας ἐνὶ πόντῳ 

ῥίψῃ, συμφυέες τε παλίνζωοί τε νέμονται. 


* Probably Μίοάοτιο moschata, a species of Octopus 
variously named from its strong smell: A. 525a19 ἣν 
καλοῦσιν οἱ μὲν βολίταιναν [BddtTros=dung], οἱ δ᾽ ὄζολιν [ὄζειν = 
smell]; 621 b,17 οὐδὲ πολύποδες οὐδὲ βολίταιναι ; Athen. 318e 
εἴδη δ᾽ ἐστὶ πολυπόδων ἑλεδώνη, πολυποδίνη, βολβιτίνη, ὀσμύλος, 
ὡς ᾿Αριστοτέλης ἱστορεῖ καὶ Σπεύσιππος ; Athen. 329 a Καλλίμαχος 
«ον. καταλέγων ἰχθύων ὀνομασίας φησίν" ὄξαινα ὀσμύλιον Θούριοι : 
Epicharm. ap. Athen. 318 e x4 δυσώδης βολβιτίς : Ael. ν. 44, 
ix. 45 ὀσμίλος : Hesych. s. ὀσμύλια' τῶν πολυπόδων αἱ ὄζαιναι 
λεγόμεναι: 8. ὀσμύναι" βολβιτῖναι θαλάσσιοι: Plin. ix. 89 
Polyporum generis est ozaena dicta a gravi capitis odore, ob 
hoe maxime murenis eam consectantibus. 

» This passage is paraphrased Ael. ix. 45 ’Aypod γειτνιῶντος 
θαλάττῃ καὶ φυτῶν παρεστώτων ἐγκάρπων γεωργοὶ πολλάκις 
καταλαμβάνουσιν ἐν ὥρᾳ θερείῳ πολύποδάς τε καὶ ὀσμύλους ἐκ τῶν 
κυμάτων προελθόντας καὶ διὰ τῶν πρέμνων ἀνερπύσαντας κτλ. Cf. 
Phil. 101. 32; A. 622a31; Plin. ix. 85 (polypi) soli mollium 
in siccum exeunt ; Athen. 317 b-c. 

5. H. ii. 191 n. Its craft; Phil. 105; A. 691 Ὁ 28. 

ὦ 1.¢.Testaceans, A. 523b 8 ἔτι δὲ τὰ ὀστρακόδερμα" τοιαῦτα 
δ᾽ ἐστὶν ὧν ἐντὸς μὲν τὸ σαρκῶδές ἐστιν, ἐκτὸς δὲ τὸ στερεόν, θραυστὸν 
ὃν καὶ κατακτόν, ἀλλ᾽ οὐ θλαστόν. τοιοῦτον δὲ τὸ τῶν κοχλιῶν γένος 
καὶ τὸ τῶν ὀστρέων ἐστίν ; Plin. ix. 40 Aquatilium tegumenta 
plura sunt. Alia... teguntur. . . silicum duritia ut ostreae 
et . Ael. xi. 37; Galen, De aliment. fac. iii. 33. 

23 


HALIEUTICA, I. 307-319 


Osmylus.? These also are amphibious; and some 
rustic tiller of the soil, I ween, who tends a vineyard 
by the sea, has seen an Osmylus or a Poulpe twining 
about the fruit-laden branches and devouring the 
sweet fruit off the trees.2 The same way as these 
reptiles have also the crafty Cuttle-fish.¢ But other 
tribes dwell in the waves which have a hard shell,4 
many among the rocks and many amid the sands ; ¢ 
to wit, the Nerites*’ and the race of the Strombus 
and the Purple-shells themselves and the Trumpet- 
shells and the Mussel and the truly named Razor- 
shell” and the dewy Oysters* and the prickly 
Sea-urchins,’ which, if one cut them in small pieces 
and cast them into the sea, grow together and again 
become alive.* 


4 A. 547b33 φύεται δ᾽ αὐτῶν τὰ μὲν ἐν τοῖς τενάγεσι, τὰ δ᾽ 
ἐν τοῖς αἰγιαλοῖς, τὰ δ᾽ ἐν τοῖς σπιλώδεσι τόποις, ἔνιοι δ᾽ ἐν τοῖς 
σκληροῖς καὶ τραχέσι, τὰ δ᾽ ἐν τοῖς ἀμμώδεσιν. 

7 νηρίτης, στρόμβος, πορφύρα, κῆρυξ all belong to the 
στρομβώδη (A. 528a10, Part. an. 079 Ὁ 14) or spiral-shaped 
Testaceans. vnpirns (A. 530 a7, 547 b 23, εἴς. ; Ael. xiv. 28; 
also called dvapirns Athen. 85d, 86a) and κῆρυξ (A. 528 a 10 
547 Ὁ 2, etc. ; Athen. 86 c-91 6) may be species of Buccinum 
or Trochus. στρόμβος (A. δ488 17, etc. ; Ael. vii. 31, etc.) 
may be Cerithium vulgatum, Ital. strombolo. πορφύρα (A. 
547 a4 εἰσὶ δὲ τῶν πορφυρῶν γένη πλείω, cf. Athen. 88 f ff. ; 
Plin. ix. 130ff.) probably includes Murex brandaris, M. 
trunculus, Purpura lapillus, ete. j 

9 Mytilus edulis, etc., A. 528 ἃ 15, 547b 11, ete. 

ΠΑ bivalve which burrows in the sand; several species, 
Solen siliqua, S. ensis, S. legumen, etc., occur in the 
Mediterranean. A. 547b13, etc.; Plin. x. 192, xi. 139. 
It is ‘‘truly named” as owdAjv=pipe, in reference to the 
long tubular shell. Also called αὐλός, δόναξ, ὄνυξ Athen, 90 ἃ, 
of. Plin. xxxii. 151. * Hi. 164. π. 

7 ἢ. ii. 225 n.; E. Forbes, pp. 149 ff. 

® Ael. ix.47; Phil. 64. 


237 


OPPIAN 


t > 3 aA Ν᾿ 31:5 ΝΜ, 4 
Καρκινάσιν δ᾽ αὐταῖς μὲν ἐπ᾽ ὄστρακον οὔτι 
πέφυκεν 920 
> ~ \ \ A > / \ > \ 
ἐκ γενετῆς, γυμναὶ δὲ Kal ἀσκεπέες Kal ἀφαυραὶ 
/ 
τίκτονται, κτητοὺς δὲ δόμους ἐπιμηχανόωνται, 
ἀβληχροῖς μελέεσσι νόθον σκέπας ἀμφιβαλοῦσαι:" 
εὖτε γὰρ ἀθρήσωσι λελειμμένον ὀρφανὸν αὔτως 
ὄστρακον, οἰκητῆρος ἀνέστιον οἰχομένοιο, 325 
ς᾽ wa “ e 3 3 ,ἷ > 4 
aid’ εἴσω καταδῦσαι ὑπ᾽ ἀλλοτρίοισιν ἐλύτροις 
ἑζόμεναι ναίουσι καὶ ὃν κτήσαντο μέλαθρον" 
τῷ δὲ συνερπύζουσι καὶ ἔνδοθεν ἕρκος ἄγουσιν, 
εἴτε τι νηρίτης ἔλιπε σκέπας εἴτε τι κῆρυξ 
ἢ στρόμβος: στρόμβων δὲ δύ φιλέ ir 
Ἢ στρόμβος" στρόμβων δὲ δύσεις φιλέουσι μάλιστα, 330 
Ὁ > Ἂς / ~ 
οὕνεκεν εὐρεῖαί τε μένειν κοῦφαί τε φέρεσθαι. 
> > (get J > V2 v A A 7A 
ἀλλ᾽ ὅτ᾽ ἀεξομένη πλήσῃ μυχὸν ἔνδον ἐοῦσα. 

/ a » ~ 
καρκινάς, οὐκέτι κεῖνον ἔχει δόμον, ἀλλὰ λιποῦσα 
δίζεται εὐρύτερον κὄχλου κύτος ἀμφιβαλέσθαι. 

λλά δὲ mY a ΄ tA ΄ 
πολλάκι O€ Y αφυρῆς κύμβης πέρι καρκινάδεσσιν 3886 
\ a 
ἀλκὴ καὶ μέγα νεῖκος ἐγείρεται, ἐκ δ᾽ ἐλάσασα 
,ὔ 
κρείττων χειροτέρην δόμον ἄρμενον ἀμφέθετ᾽ αὐτή. 
Y / al 
Ἔστι δέ τις γλαφυρῷ κεκαλυμμένος ὀστράκῳ 
ἰχθύς, 
\ / 
μορφὴν πουλυπόδεσσιν ἀλίγκιος, ὃν καλέουσι 
ναυτίλον, οἰκείῃσιν ἐπικλέα ναυτιλίῃσι" : 
/ A 10 3 A ὃ᾽ ww Ei, > NA 
ναίει μὲν ψαμάθοις, ἀνὰ δ᾽ ἔρχεται ἄκρον ἐς ὕδωρ 
, ", , 2 
πρηνής, ὄφρα κε μή μιν ἐνιπλήσειε θάλασσα: 


940 


* A, δ48 ἃ 14 τὸ δὲ καρκίνιον γίνεται μὲν τὴν ἀρχὴν ἐκ τῆς γῆς 
καὶ ἰλύος, εἴτ᾽ εἰς τὰ κενὰ τῶν ὀστράκων εἰσδύεται, cf. 529b 19: 
Ael. vii. 81 αἱ δὲ καρκινάδες τίκτονται μὲν γυμναί, τὸ δὲ ὄστρακον 
ἑαυταῖς αἱροῦνται ὡς οἰκίαν οἰκῆσαι τὴν ἀρίστην. 


238 


HALIEUTICA, I. 320-349 


The Hermit-crabs have no shell of their own from 
birth, but are born naked@ and unprotected and 
weak ; yet they devise for themselves an acquired 
home, covering their feeble bodies with a bastard 
shelter. For whensthey see a shell left all desolate, 
the tenant having left his home, they creep in below 
the alien mantle and settle there and dwell and take 
it for their home. And along with it they travel 
and move their shelter from within—whether ὃ it be 
some Nerites that hath left the shell or a Trumpet 
or a Strombus. Most of all they love the shelters 
of the Strombus, because these are wide ὁ and light 
to carry. But when the Hermit-crab within grows ὦ 
and fills the cavity, it keeps that house no longer, 
but leaves it and seeks a wider shell-vessel to put 
on. Ofttimes battle arises and great contention 
among the Hermit-crabs about a hollow shell and 
the stronger drives out the weaker and herself puts 
on the fitting house. 

One fish there is covered with a hollow shell, like 
in form to the Poulpe, which men call the Nautilus,¢ 
so named because it sails of itself. It dwells in the 
sands and it rises to the surface of the water face 
downwards, so that the sea may not fillit. But when 


> A, 548.416 αὐξανόμενον μετεισδύνει πάλιν εἰς ἄλλο μεῖζον 
ὄστρακον, οἷον εἴς τε τὸ τοῦ νηρείτου καὶ τὸ τοῦ στρόμβου... πολ- 
λάκις δ᾽ εἰς τοὺς κήρυκας τοὺς μικρούς ; ΑΕΙ. ἰ.6. 

¢ A. δ80 ἃ 6 προμηκέστερα δ᾽ ἐστὶ τὰ ἐν τοῖς στρόμβοις τῶν ἐν 
τοῖς νηρείταις. 

4.Α, δ48 ἃ 19 ὅταν δ᾽ εἰσδύνῃ, συμπεριφέρει τοῦτο καὶ ἐν τούτῳ 
τρέφεται πάλιν" καὶ αὐξανόμενον πάλιν, εἰς ἄλλο μετεισδύνει μεῖζον ; 
Ael. lc.; Plin. ix. 98. ’ 

¢ Argonauta argo L., cf. A. 622b5; Athen. 317 fff., who 
preserves the famous epigram of Callimachus (1, vi.); Ael. 
ix. 34; Antig. 56; Plin. ix. 88. 


239 


OPPIAN 


Ve e / Ψ 3 “ 
ἀλλ᾽ ὅτ᾽ ἀναπλώσῃ ῥοθίων ὕπερ ᾿Αμφιτρίτης, 
5 \ fi 7 > > ip 
αἶψα μεταστρεφθεὶς ναυτίλλεται, ὥστ᾽ ἀκάτοιο 
Ὁ 
ἴδρις ἀνήρ: δοιοὺς μὲν ἄνω πόδας ὥστε κάλωας 84: 
> ry / δὲ ὃ / > oh λ an 
avravver, μέσσος δὲ διαρρέει HITE λαῖφος 
λεπτὸς ὑμήν, ἀνέμῳ τε τιταίνεται' αὐτὰρ ἔνερθε 
/ pee 
dotol ἁλὸς ψαύοντες, ἐοικότες οἰήκεσσι, 
/ & eae of / \ a ἜΦΥΝ ἊΣ 
πομποί τ᾽ ἰθύνουσι δόμον καὶ νῆα καὶ ἰχθύν. 
Μ᾿ 3 
ἀλλ᾽ ὅτε ταρβήσῃ σχεδόθεν κακόν, οὐκέτ᾽ ἀήταιυς 350 
3 la 7 
φεύγει ἐπιτρέψας, σὺν δ᾽ ἔσπασε πάντα χαλινά, 
€ ᾿ὰ > mW / \ 3 > id ” yA 
ἱστία τ᾽ οἴηκάς τε, TO δ᾽ ἀθρόον ἔνδον ἔδεκτο 
a , tee , ¢ ς a 
κῦμα βαρυνόμενός τε καθέλκεται ὕδατος ὁρμῇ. 
> 5 7 « A i a 
ὦ πόποι, ὃς πρώτιστος ὄχους ἁλὸς εὕρατο νῆας, 
yw > > 3 ᾽ὔ 3 , 3 ΕΣ ar is 
εἴτ᾽ οὖν ἀθανάτων τις ἐπεφράσατ᾽ εἴτε τις ἀνὴρ 355 
τολμήεις πρώτιστος ἐπεύξατο κῦμα περῆσαι, 
> A IQ / > / ” ” 
ἢ που κεῖνον ἰδὼν πλόον ἰχθύος εἴκελον ἔργον 
δουροπαγὲς τόρνωσε, τὰ μὲν πνοιῇσι πετάσσας 
3 ~ 
ἐκ προτόνων, τὰ δ᾽ ὄπισθε χαλινωτήρια νηῶν. 
, 2 > ,ὕ ΄ὕ , , 
Κήτεα δ᾽ ὀβριμόγυια, πελώρια, θαύματα πόντου, 360 
> ~ > / / “ \ Ψ 
ἀλκῇ ἀἁμαιμακέτῳ βεβριθότα, δεῖμα μὲν ὅσσοις 
> fe ὌΝ 3 > la / / 
εἰσιδέειν, αἰεὶ δ᾽ ὁλοῇ κεκορυθμένα Avoon, 
Ν \ > Ψ > / ig 
πολλὰ μὲν εὐρυπόροισιν ἐνιστρέφεται πελάγεσσιν, 
te 
ἔνθα Ἰϊοσειδάωνος ἀτέκμαρτοι περιωπαΐί, 
~ A ε , \ la 
TaAvpa δὲ βρηγμίνων σχεδὸν ἔρχεται, ὅσσα φέρουσιν 366 
Dae 7 / ᾿ > > ,ὔ oe 
nidves βαρύθοντα καὶ οὐκ ἀπολείπεται ἅλμης" 
~ Ss id / 
τῶν ἦτοι Kpvepds τε λέων βλοσυρή τε ζύγαινα 


« The list of κήτη μέγιστα Ael. ix. 49 is λέων, ζύγαινα, 
240 


HALIEUTICA, I. 343-367 


it swims above the waves of Amphitrite, straightway 
it turns over and sails like a man skilled in sailing a 
boat. Two feet it stretches aloft by way of rigging 
and between these runs like a sail a fine membrane 
which is stretched,by the wind ; but underneath two 
feet touching the water, like rudders, guide and 
direct house and ship and fish. But when it fears 
some evil hard at hand, no longer does it trust the 
winds in its flight, but gathers in all its tackle, sails 
and rudders, and receives the full flood within and 
is weighed down and sunk by the rush of water. 
Ah! whosoever first invented ships, the chariots of 
the sea, whether it was some god that devised them 
or whether some daring mortal first boasted to have 
crossed the wave, surely it was when he had seen 
that voyaging of a fish that he framed a like work 
in wood, spreading from the forestays those parts 
to catch the wind. and those behind to control the 
ship. 

The Sea-monsters * mighty of limb and huge, the 
wonders of the sea, heavy with strength invincible, 
a terror for the eyes to behold and ever armed with 
deadly rage—many of these there be that roam the 
spacious seas, where are the unmapped prospects of 
Poseidon, but few of them come nigh the shore, those 
only whose weight the beaches can bear and whom 
the salt water does not fail. Among these are the 
terrible Lion ® and the truculent Hammer-head ὁ 


πάρδαλις, φύσαλος, πρῆστις, μάλθη, κριός, ὕαινα. Suid. 5. κῆτος 
omits ὕαινα ; Phil. 85omits ὕαινα and μάλθη. Cf. Plin. ix. 9 ff. 
> Not identified. Ael. xvi. 18 (the sea round Taprobane) 
ἄμαχόν τι πλῆθος καὶ ἰχθύων καὶ κητῶν τρέφειν φασί, καὶ ταῦτα 
μέντοι καὶ λεόντων ἔχειν κεφαλὰς καὶ παρδαλέων καὶ λύκων καὶ 
κριῶν. The λέων θαλάσσιος of ΑΕ]. xiv. 9 seems to be a 

Crustacean, os Hoven sins 
R 24] 


OPPIAN 


πορδαλιές τ᾽ ὀλοαὶ καὶ φύσαλοι αἰθυκτῆρες" 
A \ 
ev δὲ μέλαν θύννων ζαμενὲς γένος, ev δὲ δαφοινὴ 
~ / 
πρῆστις ἀταρτηρῆς τε δυσαντέα χάσματα λάμνης, 370 
a ᾿ ΤᾺ 
μάλθη 7 οὐ; μαλακῇσιν ἐπώνυμος ἀδρανίῃσι, 
tg 3 > 4 \ μὰ ,ὕ y+ e / 
κριοί τ᾽ ἀργαλέοι καὶ ἀπαίσιον ἄχθος ὑαίνης 
καὶ κύνες ἁρπακτῆρες avaiddes: ἐν δὲ κύνεσσι 
Vi , A \ + > AG. 
τριχθαδίη γενεή: TO μὲν ἄγριον ἐν πελάγεσσι 
κήτεσι λευγαλέοις ἐναρίθμιον: ἄλλα δὲ φῦλα 375 
διπλόα καρτίστοισι μετ᾽ ἰχθύσι Swevovrat 
a 9 / A \ , “-“ 
πηλοῖς ἐν βαθέεσσι" τὸ μὲν κέντροισι κελαινοῖς 
,ὔ ᾿Σ ᾽ὕ > 7 + > is fond 
κεντρίναι αὐδώωνται ἐπώνυμοι: ἄλλο δ᾽ ὁμαρτῇ 
κλείονται γαλεοί: γαλεῶν δ᾽ ἑτερότροπα φῦλα 


ς 


1 y.1. μάλθη θ᾽ ἡ. 


“Ἤν. 30:0. 

> Perhaps Physeter macrocephalus L.; the Cachalot or 
Sperm Whale. rh. pp. 28 f. tells of one which was stranded 
at Tenos in 1840, another at Melos, and a young one at 
Tenos in 1857 (ἔῃ. p. 95), Ael. ix. 49. Strabo 145 (of the 
sea off Turdetania) ὡς δ᾽ αὔτως ἔχει καὶ περὶ τῶν κητέων ἁπάντων, 
ὀρύγων τε καὶ φαλαινῶν καὶ φυσητήρων, ὧν ἀναφυσησάντων φαίνεταί 
τις νεφώδους ὄψις κίονος τοῖς πόρρωθεν ἀφορώσι: Plin. ix. 8 
Maximum animal . . . in Gallico oceano physeter ingentis 
columnae modo se attollens altiorque navium velis diluvyiem 
quandam eructans; Phil. 95; Senec. Hippol. 1030. 

¢ Pristis antiquorum (Squalus pristis): A. 566b3 ξῳο- 
τοκοῦσιν, ἔτι δὲ πρίστις καὶ Bots; Plin. ix. 4f.; schol. πρῆστις. 
βασιλίσκος. 4 H. v. 86 πη. 

ὁ Unidentified. Ael. ix. 49 (among κήτη μέγιστα) ἡ πρῆστις 
kal ἡ καλουμένη μάλθη" δυσανταγώνιστον δὲ dpa τὸ θηρίον τοῦτο 
καὶ ἄμαχον : Suid. 5. κῆτος"... πρῆστις, ἡ λεγομένη μάλθη, ὃ 
καὶ δυσανταγώνιστόν ἐστι; 8. πρῆστις" εἶδος κήτους θαλασσίου, ἡ 


242 


HALIEUTICA, I. 368-379 


and the deadly Leopard “ and the dashing Physalus ὃ ; 
among them also is the impetuous black race of the 
Tunny and the deadly Saw-fish ὁ and the dread gape 
of the woeful Lamna? and the Maltha,? named not 
from soft feebleness, and the terrible Rams 7 and the 
awful weight of the Hyaena’ and the ravenous and 
shameless Dog-fish.” Of the Dog-fish there are three 
races ; one fierce race ἦ in the deep seas is numbered 
among the terrible Sea-monsters ; two other races 
among the mightiest fishes dwell in the deep mud ; 
one of these from its black spines is called Centrines,’ 
the other by the general name of Galeus”; and of 
the Galeus there are different kinds, to wit, the 


λεγομένη μάλθη ὃ καὶ δυσανταγώνιστόν ἐστι. Thus to Suidas 
πρῆστις = μάλθη. 

tH, vy. 34.n. 9 H, v. 32 n. 

% Apparently, like M.G. σκυλόψαρο, collective name for 
the Sharks and Dog-fishes. κύων is mentioned once in 
Aristotle where it is included among the γαλεοειδεῖς : A. 
566 a 30 οἱ μὲν οὖν γαλεοὶ καὶ οἱ γαλεοειδεῖς, οἷον ἀλώπηξ καὶ κύων. 
Cy. Ἀεῖν 1, δδ, 

ὁ If this is not one of the Cete just mentioned, it may be 
Selache maxima Cuy., the Basking Shark. 

7 κεντρίνης from κέντρον, spine. Centrina vulpecula Mor. 
(Squalus centrina L.), M.G. γουρουνόψαρο, Fr. La Humantin. 

Aristotle’s γαλεοί (γαλεώδεις) are the long cartilaginous 
fishes, i.e. the Sharks as opposed to the Skates and Rays: 
A. 489 b 6 τὰ σελάχη, γαλεοί τε καὶ βάτοι; 505a3 τῶν σελαχῶν 
τὰ μὲν πλατέα, . .. οἷον νάρκη καὶ βάτος, τὰ δὲ προμήκη . - - 
οἷον πάντα τὰ γαλεώδη ; and the species mentioned are ἀκανθίας 
A. 565627, ἀστερίας A. δ48 4 17, 566417, τὰ σκύλια ods 
καλοῦσί τινες νεβρίας γαλεούς A. δ6δ ἃ 26, ἀλώπηξ A. δ66 8.81, 
565b1, 621a 12, γαλοὶ λεῖοι A. 565b2, De gen. 754. Ὁ 33. 
Of. Athen, 9294 ἃ ᾿Αριστοτέλης δὲ εἴδη αὐτῶν (sc. τῶν γαλεῶν) 
φησιν εἶναι πλείω, ἀκανθίαν, λεῖον, ποικίλον, σκύμνον, ἀλωπεκίαν, 
ῥίνην (the inclusion of the last being due perhaps to mis- 
understanding of A. 565b25. See H. 1. 381 n.). 

243 


OPPIAN 


A 4 ry a 
σκύμνοι καὶ λεῖοι καὶ axavOia ἐν δ᾽ dpa τοῖσι 
ta > ,’ὔ \ ir εἶ ἐς λ ὃ με 
ῥῖναι ἀλωπεκίαι καὶ ποικίλοι" εἴκελα δ᾽ ἔργα 

a ~ / 
πᾶσιν ὁμοῦ φορβή τε σὺν ἀλλήλοις τε νέμονται. 
a > > a Ἂ / 
Δελῴῖνες δ᾽ ἀκταῖς τε πολυρραθάγοισι γάνυνται 
7 
καὶ πελάγη ναίουσι, καὶ οὔποθι νόσφι θάλασσα 
3 te 
δελφίνων: περὶ γάρ σφε ἸΠοσειδάων ἀγαπάζει" 
οὕνεκά οἱ κούρην κυανώπιδα Νηρηΐνην 
/ vA sea Xr / 2A , 
μαιομένῳ φεύγουσαν ἑὸν λέχος ᾿Αμφιτρίτην 
΄ a > > ~ / 
φρασσάμενοι δελφῖνες ἐν ᾿Ωκεανοῖο δόμοισι 
, 
κευθομένην ἤγγειλαν: ὁ δ᾽ αὐτίκα κυανοχαίτης 
παρθένον ἐξήρπαξεν ἀναινομένην τε δάμασσε. 
\ Χ ΕΥ̓ td «ς A / wv 
Kal τὴν μὲν παράκοιτιν, ἁλὸς βασίλειαν, ἔθηκε, 
> ,ὕ 3 + > Ζ Δ 4 
ἀγγελίης δ᾽ ἤνησεν ἐνηέας ods θεράποντας, 
κλή ὃ᾽ > φ / δ EA σι Ay 
npw δ᾽ ἐν σφετέρῳ περιώσιον ὦπασε τιμήν. 
"» 3 3 ‘ / IN ͵ὔ Ψ \ Ψ 
ἔστι δ᾽ ἀμειλίκτοις evi κήτεσιν ἅσσα καὶ ἅλμης 
> \ 5:1 ἢ ix , ” x 
ἐκτὸς ἐπὶ τραφερῆς φυσίζοον ἔρχεται οὖδας" 
δηρὸν δ᾽ ἠϊόνεσσι καὶ ἀγχιάλοισιν ἀρούραις 


* As σκύμνος is given in Athenaeus but not in Aristotle, it 
is perhaps to be equated with Aristotle's σκύλιον and identified 
as Scyllium canicula Cuv., M.G. σκυλί, σκυλόψαρο, which is 
very common in Greek waters (Apost. p. 1). 

» Mustelus laevis Risso, M.G. yadnés. In this species the 
embryo is attached to the uterus by a placenta, as was 
known to Aristotle; A. 565b 1 ff, ὶ 

¢ Acanthias vulgaris, commonest of Greek Plagiostoma, 
M.G. σκυλόψαρο (Apost. p. 5). A. 565029, Ὁ 27, 621 17: 
Athen. 294 d. 

ὦ Rhina squatina or Monk-fish. One of the σελάχη A. 
543 a 14, but not one of the γαλεοί A. 565b 25, Cf. 566.2 20; 
Plin. ix. 161. Aristotle’s references, while rather indefinite, 
associate the ῥίνη rather with the Rays than the Sharks, and 
244 


380 


385 


390 


395 


HALIEUTICA, I. 380-396 


Scymnus,* the Smooth Dog-fish,® the Spiny Dog- 
fish ὁ ; and among them are the Angel-shark,? the 
Fox-shark ¢ and the Spotted Dog-fish’ But the 
works and the feeding of them all is alike and “ 
herd together. 

The Dolphins both rejoice in the echoing suores 
and dwell in the deep seas, and there is no sea with- 
out Dolphins ; for Poseidon loves them exceedingly, 
inasmuch as when he was seeking the dark-eyed 
daughter 9 of Nereus who fled from his embraces, 
the Dolphin marked her hiding in the halls of Ocean 
and told Poseidon; and the god of the dark hair 
straightway carried off the maiden and overcame 
her against her will. Her he made his bride, queen 
of the sea, and for their tidings he commended his 
kindly attendants and bestowed on them exceeding 
honour for their portion. 

There are also those among the stern Sea-monsters 
which leave the salt water and come forth upon the 
life-giving soil of the dry land. For a long space do 
Fels” consort with the shores and the fields beside 


though it is now classed as a Shark, it is ‘intermediate 
between the ordinary Sharks and the Skates and Rays, 
both in external appearance and internal structure, but is 
more Ray-like than Shark-like in its habits,” Cambridge 
N.H. vii. p. 457. It is viviparous. 

¢ Alopias (Alopecias) vulpes, the Thresher Shark, com- 
monest of the larger Sharks on British coasts. It grows to 
a length of 15 feet or more, the tail forming at least one-half, 
Of. Apost. p. 43 A. 566a 31 ἀλώπηξ. Fr. Le Renard. 

1 Scyllium catulus Cuv., the yadeds veBplas of A. 565 ἃ 26. 

9 When Poseidon wished to marry Amphitrite, she hid 
herself. The Dolphin found her, and for this Poseidon gave 
him the highest honours in the sea and set in the sky the 
constellation of the Dolphin. Eratosth. Catast. 31; Hygin. 
Asty. ii. 17. 

Ὁ A, 592a13; Plin. ix, 74. 


245 


OPPIAN 


, 2» 9 2 , Υ 9 wes. 2 
μίσγοντ᾽ ἐγχέλυές τε Kal ἀσπιδόεσσα χελώνη 
oy 9. > A 
“εἰ πτορίδες τ᾽ ὀλοαὶ δυσπενθέες, αἵ τ ἀλεγεινὴν 
ad 4 ΄ 
ΛΕ πε * κροκάλῃσιν ἀπαίσιον ὠρύονται 


ΠΕ 5 a : / 
ONB S~ Ἰδέ Ke γῆρυν ἐ 8 saow ἀλγινόεσσαν 400 
~ ~ A > 7 
. ερῆς τ᾽ ἐνοπῖῆς. κυτὸν ἀκούσῃ, 


axTGle ὍΠΙΤΟΙ 


oe. / 3 wv 3 ᾽ὔ ¢ La 
νάτοιο τάχ᾽ ἔσσεται, ἀλλά οἱ ἄτην 
eee aod 5 27 € 7) , 5 , 
Centf{LOpov αἰνοτάτη κείνη μαντεύεται αὐδή. 
eae ,ὕ \ , 
νομὴν καὶ φάλαιναν ἀναιδέα φασὶ θ- λάσσης 
, ,ὔ " 
ἐκβαίνειν χέροονδε καὶ ἠελίοιο θέρεσυ;,;": 405 
~ / 
φῶκαι δ᾽ ἐννύχιαι μὲν ἀεὶ λείπουσι θαλασσαν, 
͵7ὔ > > / fe oN \ 4 
πολλάκι δ᾽ ἠμάτιαι πέτραις ἐνὶ καὶ ψαμάθοισιν 
2 
εὔκηλοι μίμνουσι καὶ ἔξαλον ὕπνον ἔχουσι. 
nn / 
Ζεῦ πάτερ, és δὲ σὲ πάντα καὶ ἐκ σέθεν ἐρρίζωνται" 
ee Ἂ : 
εἴτ᾽ οὖν αἰθέρος οἶκον ὑπέρτατον εἴτ ἄρα πάντῃ 410 
~ * 2 a 
ναιετάεις" θνητῷ γὰρ ἀμήχανον ἐξονομῆναι. 


* Chelonia cephalo Dussum. “ Die Caguana und nicht, 
wie man sie’ falschlich in Handbiichern findet, Carette 
genannt,” Erh, p. 71. M.G. ἀχελῶνα (generic for all Turtles 
and Tortoises). A. 589a26, 558a11, εἴς. ; Plin. ix. 36 
Ferunt et pastum egressas noctu, etc.; ibid. 37 in terram 
egressae herbis vivunt. 

ὁ Comparison of A. 594b28 ἔνια δὲ τῶν τετραπόδων καὶ 
ἀγρίων ζῴων ποιεῖται τὴν τροφὴν περὶ λίμνας καὶ ποταμούς, περὶ δὲ 
τὴν θάλατταν οὐδὲν ἔξω φώκης. τοιαῦτα δ᾽ ἐστὶν ὅ τε καλούμενος 
κάστωρ καὶ τὸ σαθέριον καὶ τὸ σατύριον καὶ ἐνυδρὶς καὶ ἡ καλουμένῃ 
λάτ' “" ἔστι δὲ τοῦτο πλατύτερον τῆς ἐνυδρίδος, καὶ ὀδόντας ἔχει 
lox ee ἐξιοῦσα γὰρ νύκτωρ πολλάκις τὰς περὶ τὸν ποταμὸν 
κερκίδας ἐκτέμνει τοῖς ὀδοῦσιν. of. A. 487 a 22, leaves no doubt 
that Oppian’s xacropis=Aristotle’s κάστωρ = Castor δον, the 
Beaver, still found in 8. Russia, the various names, acc, to 
Sundevall, keing synonyms for the same animal ; cf. Herod. 
iv. 109. Ael. i:qiti paraphrases vv. 398-408. 

¢ Cf. Ael. Licvtt-1is seems to be merely an expansion of 
A. 589 Ὁ 19 (of the Dolphin) καὶ ἔξω δὲ ζῇ πολὺν χρόνον μύξων 
καὶ στένων. Cf. A, 535 Ὁ 32. 

@ Ael. Lc. καὶ ἡ φάλαινα δὲ τῆς θαλάττης πρόεισι καὶ ἀλεαίνεται 
τῇ ἀκτῖν, Of. xvi. 18. The statement is probably based on 


HALIEUTICA, I. 397-411 


the sea; so too the shielded Turtle? and the woeful, 
lamentable Castorids,? which utter on the sh: ᾿ 
their grievous voice.,° of evil omen. He whee’. 


τι 
JTS ὦ 


in his ears their νος «Ὁ sorrow, shall BO ae le 
far from death, but dread sound τὸ ee 
him doom and déaun. Nay, even the Se NEL ae 


j 


Whale,* they say, leaves the sea for. Pc S2"ts 
and basks in the sun. And Seals ὁ in the night~ init 
always lea)? +he sea, and often in the day-time ν΄ Oy 
abide at “ir ease on the rocks ad on the sands 
and take their sleep outside the sea. 

O Father Zeus, in thee and by thee are all things 
rooted, whether thou dwellest in the highest height 
of heaven or whether thou dwellest everywhere ; 
for that is impossible for, a mortal to declare. With 


such passages as A, 589a10-b 11 which deals with amphi- 
bious animals (τὰ ἐπαμφοτερίζοντα) where both δελφίς and 
φάλαινα are mentioned. The φάλαινα of Aristotle (cf. esp. 
A. 489 Ὁ 4 ἔχει δὲ ὁ μὲν δελφὶς τὸν αὑλὸν (blow-hole) διὰ τοῦ 
νώτου, 7 δὲ φάλαινα ἐν τῷ μετώπῳ) is probably Physeter macro- 
cephalus or, according to A. and W., Delphinus tursio, which 
is rarer than the common Dolphin (Delphinus delphis) and 
more frequent in the S. Mediterranean, particularly off 
Crete (Erh. p. 28). 

4. Ael. Lc. κνεφαῖαι δὲ αἱ φῶκαι ἐξιᾶσι μᾶλλον' ἤδη μέντοι καὶ 
μεσημβρίας οὔσης καθεύδουσι τῆς θαλάσσης ἔξω. τοῦτό τοι καὶ 
Ὅμηρος ἤδει (Hom. Ο. iv. 448). A. 566 b-273_Plin. ix., 41: 
The only Seal found in the Mediterranean appears. _ be 
giebt kaum ein Eiland, grésseres oder kleineres im aigdischen 
Meere, wo nicht ein und mehre Paare dieser Robben ihr 
Standquartier aufgeschlagen hiatten, obwohl man sie nur 
sehr selten, bei ruhigem Wetter oder Tyzeslicht wohl nie, 
zu Gesichte bekémmt. Den Fischern ὦ. «chipels ist sie 
besser bekannt; sie wissen die beinawy. unterseeischen 
Uferschluchten, in denen sie sich verbirgt, wohl zu finden, 
und bezeichnen sie allgemein mitdem Ausdrucke φωκότρυπαι [ἡ 


(Erh, p. 18), 
447 


OPPIAN 


uy > uA 
οἵῃ σὺν φιλότητι διακρίνας ἐκέδασσας 
τ \ Ψ 
‘pa τ᾽ αἰγλήεντα καὶ ἠέρα καὶ χυτὸν ὕδωρ 
3 A “ 
χθόνα παμμήτειραν, ἀπ᾿ ἀλλήλων μὲν ἕκαστα, 
A ς A ~ 
πάντα δ᾽ ἐν ἀλλήλοισιν ὁμοφροσύνης ὑπὸ δεσμῷ 415 
/ > > ᾽ὔ 
ἀρρήκτῳ συνέδησας, ἀναγκαίῃ 8° ἐπέρεισας 
a " \ 52 Χ 
ἀστεμφῆ πάγκοινον ὑπὸ ζυγόν: οὔτε γὰρ αἰθὴρ 
Ὁ 
ἠέρος οὔτ᾽ ἀὴρ ἄτερ ὕδατος, οὐδὲ μὲν ὕδωρ 
Ψ' 
γαίης νόσφι τέτυκται, ἐν ἀλλήλοις δὲ φύονται, 
» ane \ la > , δ᾽ > Ni ll 4 f 420 
πάντα δ᾽ ὁδὸν μίαν εἶσι, μίαν δ᾽ ἀνελίσσετ ἁμοιβήν. 
~ 7 
τοὔνεκα καὶ ξυνῇσιν ὁμηρεύουσι γενέθλαις 
3 a 
audiBiwv: καὶ τοὶ μὲν ἀναστείχουσ᾽ ἐπὶ γαῖαν 
35 » , 3 , 
ποντόθεν, ἄλλοι δ᾽ αὖτε κατ᾽ ἠέρος Apditpirn 
μίσγονται, κοῦφοί τε Adpou στονόεντά. τε φῦλα 
ἁλκυόνων κρατεροί θ᾽ ἁλιαίετοι ἁρπακτῆρες 
+ > "> 3 / ~ > > / ΝΜ 
ἄλλα θ᾽ ὅσ᾽ ἰχθυάᾳ διερῆς τ᾽ ἐπιβάλλεται ἄγρης. 
ἠέρα δ᾽ αὖ τέμνουσι καὶ εἰνάλιοί περ ἐόντες 
τευθίδες ἱρήκων τε γένος βυθίη τε χελιδών: 
ε 3 Ψ 7 e / Ε ΄ > 7 
οἱ δ᾽ ὅτε ταρβήσωσιν ὑπέρτερον ἐγγύθεν ἰχθύν, 
ἐξ ἁλὸς ἀνθρώσκουσι καὶ ἠέριοι ποτέονται. 430 
3 > e A \ ~ A ς fe A] ca 
ἀλλ᾽ αἱ μὲν Kal τῆλε καὶ ὑψόθι ταρσὸν ἱεῖσι 
/ > ΕΣ Ih OA A > \ 
τευθίδες - ἦτε Kev ὄρνιν ὀΐσσεαι οὐδὲ μὲν ἰχθὺν 
» 4 > \ «“2Ω᾽ ες ᾽ὔ ᾽ὔ 
εἰσοράαν, ἀγεληδὸν ὅθ᾽ ὁρμήσωσι πέτεσθαι- 
Ὁ, 3 yw ~ ς f2 /, > ” 
at δ᾽ dpa τῶν ὑπένερθε χελιδόνες οἶμον ἔχουσι" 
A > a 
ἵρηκες δ᾽ αὐτῆς ἅλμης σχεδὸν ἠερέθονται, 
α Ὁ, ii, 217 π. 
ὃ λάρος, M.G. γλάρος, generic for Gulls and Terns. 
° Alcedo ispida L., M.G. ψαροφάγος ete. 
? Pandion haliaétus, the Osprey, or Aquila naevia, or 


Haliaétus albicilla. A. 620 a 1-12 ete. 
* Loligo vulgaris Cuv., the Squid. A. 524430 ete. For 


their flight ¢f Epicharm. ap. Athen. 323 f ποταναὶ τευθίδες : 
Plin. ix. 84 Loligo etiam volitat extra aquam se efferens. 
Oppian’s lines 427-437 are paraphrased Ael. ix. 52. 

7 Mentioned along with χελιδών Epainet, ap. Athen. 329 a. 


248 


425 


435 


HALIEUTICA, I. 412-435 


what loving-kindness, although thou hast marked 
out and divided the bright sky and the air and the 
fluid water and earth, mother of all, and established 
them apart each from the other, yet hast thou bound 
them all one to another in a bond of amity that may 
not be broken and set them perforce under a common 
yoke not to be removed! For neither is the sky 
without air nor the air without water nor is the 
water sundered from the earth, but they inhere 
each in the other, and all travel one path and revolve 
in one cycle of change. Therefore also they pledge 
one another in the common race of the amphibians ; 4 
of whom some come up from the sea to the land; 
others again go down from the air to consort with 
the sea; to wit, the light Gulls ὃ and the plaintive 
tribes of the Kingfisher ὁ and the strong rapacious 
Sea-eagle,? and whatsoever others there be that 
fish and seek their prey in the water. Others again, 
though they are dwellers in the sea, plough the air ; 
to wit, the Calamaries ὁ and the race of Sea-hawks 7 
and the Swallow’ of the deep. These, when they 
fear a mightier fish at hand, leap from the sea and 
fly in the air. But while the Calamarics ply the wing 
high and far—a bird you would think you were seeing, 
not a fish, when they set themselves in shoals to fly 
—the Swallows keep a lower path and the Hawks 


Probably LEwxocoetus volitans Cuv. (E. easiliens Bloch). 
Plin. ix. 82. volat hirundo, sane perquam similis: volucri 
hirundini, item milvus; Ov. Hal. 95 nigro corpore milvi. 

9 Dactylopterus volitans, Cuv. (Trigla volitans L.), the 
Flying Caneatd. M.G. χελιδονόψαρο (Apost. p. 11). A. 
535 Ὁ 26 οἱ κτένες ὅταν φέρωνται ἀπερειδόμενοι τῷ ὑγρῷ ὃ καλοῦσι 
πέτεσθαι ῥοιζοῦσι, καὶ αἱ χελιδόνες αἱ θαλάττιαι ὁμοίως" καὶ γὰρ 
αὗται πέτονται μετέωροι, οὐχ ἁπτόμεναι τῆς θαλάττης : Mare. S. 
ὠκυπέτεια χελιδών. 


240 


OPPIAN 


ἄκρον ἐπιψαύοντες ἁλὸς πόρον, ὅσσον ἰδέσθαι 
ἄμφω νηχομένοισι καὶ ἱπταμένοισιν ὁμοῖοι. 
Ὁ" X a J > > A σ DB. = ooh. 
Αἵδε μὲν ὥστε πόληες ἐν ἰχθύσιν, οἵδε θ᾽ ὅμιλοι 
κεκριμένοι γεγάασιν ἁλιπλάγκτοιο γενέθλης. 
τῶν δ᾽ οἱ μὲν πλάζονται ἀολλέες, αἰόλα φῦλα, 44 
πώεσιν 7 στρατιῇσιν ἐοικότες, OL ἢ, ἀγελαῖοι 
κέκληνται: τοὶ δ᾽ αὖτε κατὰ στίχας" οἱ δὲ λόχοισιν 
εἴκελοι ἢ δεκάδεσσιν: 6 δ᾽ ἔρχεται οἷος ἀπ᾿ ἄλλων 
\ ε / / \ Li + 
μουναδὸν ὁρμηθείς - περόωσι δὲ δίζυγες ἄλλοι" 
4 3 > ~ / > > ,ὔ / 
ot δ᾽ αὐτοῦ θαλάμῃσιν ἐν οἰκείῃσι μένουσι. 446 
Χείματι μὲν δὴ πάντες ἀελλάων στροφάλιγγας 
σμερδαλέας αὐτοῦ τε δυσηχέος οἴδματα πόντου 
ἔξοχα δειμαίνουσιν: ἐπεὶ περιώσιον ἄλλων 
ἰχθυόεντα γένεθλα φίλην πέφρικε θάλασσαν 
μαινομένην- τότε δ᾽ οἱ μὲν ἀμησάμενοι πτερύγεσσι 4δ( 
ψάμμον ὑποπτήσσουσιν ἀνάλκιδες" οἱ δ᾽ ὑπὸ πέτραις 
> / 7 > / ς \ ΄ὔ 
εἰλόμενοι δύνουσιν ἀολλέες οἱ δὲ βάθιστα 
ἐς πελάγη φεύγουσι κάτω μυχάτην ὑπὸ βύσσαν" 
κεῖνα γὰρ οὔτε λίην προκυλίνδεται οὔθ᾽ ὑπ᾽ ἀήταις 
δ 4 ~ \ > ” a” ΕΝ 

πρυμνόθεν εἱλεῦται, διὰ δ᾽ ἔσσυται οὔτις ἄελλα «δ 
ev ς A 22 / / / 2 f 
ῥίζαν ἁλὸς vedrnv: μέγα δέ σφισι βένθος ἐρύκει 


@ A. 610 b4A (list of ἀγελαῖοι), 488 ἃ 8 ἀγελαῖα... , καὶ τῶν 
πλωτῶν πολλὰ γένη τῶν ἰχθύων, οἷον ὧν καλοῦσι δρομάδας. Cf. 
χυτοί ὅ48 8.1, ῥυάδες ὅ84. ἃ 27, εἰς. : Plin. ix. 56 vagantur 
οὐ τ οι fere cuiusque generis squamosi. 

> Ael. ix. 53 ἀλῶνται δὲ dpa ἰχθῦς καὶ πλανῶνται οἱ “μὲν 
ἀθρόοι, ὦ ὥσπερ οὖν ἀγέλαι θρεμμάτων ἢ τάξεις ὁπλιτῶν ἰοῦσαι 
κατὰ ἴλας καὶ φάλαγγας" οἱ δὲ ἐν κόσμῳ κατὰ στοῖχον ἔρχονται" 
οἱ δέ, φαίης ἂν αὐτοὺς εἷναι λόχους" ἠρίθμηνται δὲ εἰς δεκάδας 
ἄλλοι... ἤδη δὲ νήχονται καὶ κατὰ ζεῦγός τινες᾽ ἄλλοι δὲ 
οἰκουροῦσι» Ὁ τοῖς φωλεοῖς καὶ ἐνταυθοῖ καταζῶσιν. μοναδικά uN 
488a1, etc. μονήρης, used by Athen. (ὁ. = 301 6) in quoting 
Aristotle, does not occur in our texts. 


250 


HALIEUTICA, I. 436-456 


fly close to the very sea, grazing the surface of the 
water, seeming, to behold, as if they swam at once 
and flew. 

These are the city-states, as it were, among fishes, 
these the various communities of the sea-wandering 
race. And of these some roam all together in their 
various tribes, like flocks of sheep or like armies, 
and these are called shoaling fishes*; others again 
move in files; others like platoons or sections of 
ten’; another goes on his own course all alone ὁ and 
apart from others; yet others travel in pairs ὁ; 
while some again remain at home ὦ in their own lairs. 

In winter ὁ all dread exceedingly the terrible 
eddies of the storm-winds and the billows of the 
evil-sounding sea itself: for beyond all else the 
fishy tribes abhor their beloved sea when it rages. 
Then do some with their fins scrape the sand f 
together and skulk like cowards beneath it, others 
creep below the rocks ¥ where they huddle together, 
others flee down to the nether depths of the deepest ἢ 
seas ; for those seas neither roll overmuch nor are 
stirred to the bottom by the winds and no blast 
penetrates the nether foundation of the sea; and 


ὁ A. 610b7 ἔνιά ἐστιν οὐ μόνον ἀγελαῖα ἀλλὰ καὶ σύζυγα. 

4 ἐπιδημητικά opp. to ἐκτοπιστικά A. 488 ἃ 18. 

¢ wv. 446-462 are paraphrased Ael. ix. 57. Cf. A. 599 Ὁ 2 
φωλοῦσι δὲ πολλοὶ καὶ τῶν ἰχθύων... τοῦ χειμῶνος : Plin. ix. 
57 Praegelidam hiemem omnes sentiunt .. . itaque his 
mensibus iacent speluncis conditi. 

F A. 599b26 φωλεῖ δὲ τὰ μὲν ἐν TH ἄμμῳ; 537a25 οἱ δὲ 
πλατεῖς ἐν τῇ ἄμμῳ. 

9.Α, 587 ἃ. 98 τὰ δὲ πλεῖστα καθεύδουσι τῆς γῆς ἢ τῆς ἄμμου ἢ 
λίθου τινὸς ἐχόμενοι ἐν τῷ βυθῷ ἢ ἀποκρύψαντες ὑπὸ πέτραν ἢ 
θῖνα ἑαυτούς. 

Ὁ A, 599b8 φωλοῦσι δὲ καὶ οἱ θύννοι τοῦ χειμῶνος ἐν τοῖς 


βαθέσιν. 
251 


OPPIAN 


e A > / A > / / ς »». 
ῥιγεδανὰς ὀδύνας καὶ ἀπηνέα χείματος ὁρμήν. 
᾿ is 
ἀλλ᾽ ὁπότ᾽ ἀνθεμόεσσαι ἐπὶ χθονὸς εἴαρος ὧραι 
πορφύρεον γελάσωσιν, ἀναπνεύσῃ δὲ θάλασσα 
χείματος εὐδιόωσα γαληναίη τε γένηται 460 
” ,ὔ J S69: 0%. LAA θ SAA 
ἤπια κυμαίνουσα, TOT ἰχθύες ἄλλοθεν ἄλλοι 
an / 
πανσυδίῃ φοιτῶσι γεγηθότες ἐγγύθι γαίης. 
ὡς δὲ πολυρραίσταο νέφος πολέμοιο φυγοῦσα 
3 ,ὕ 3 7 ,ὔ / “ ev 4 
ὀλβίη ἀθανάτοισι φίλη πόλις, ἣν pa τε δηρὸν 
δυσμενέων πάγχαλκος ἐπεπλήμμυρε θύελλα, 465 
> xc 3 3 / \ > ΤᾺ / 
ope δ᾽ ἀπολλήξασα καὶ ἀμπνεύσασα μόθοιο 
ἀσπασίως γάνυταί τε καὶ εἰρήνης καμάτοισι 
τέρπεται ἁρπαλέοισι καὶ εὔδιος εἰλαπινάζει, 
ἀνδρῶν τε πλήθουσα χοροιτυπίης τε γυναικῶν" 
Δ ε / J \ a / 
ὡς ot λευγαλέους τε πόνους καὶ φρῖκα θαλάσσης 470 
ἀσπασίως προφυγόντες, ὑπεὶρ ἅλα καγχαλόωντες, 
θρώσκοντες θύνουσι χοροιτυπέουσιν ὁμοῖοι. 
" \ \ > > , 2 , 
εἴαρι δὲ γλυκὺς οἶστρος ἀναγκαίης ᾿Αφροδίτης 
\ ἣν ¢ lA \ 3 pe » 
καὶ γάμοι ἡβώωσι Kal ἀλλήλων φιλότητες 
πᾶσιν, ὅσοι γαῖάν τε φερέσβιον οἵ τ᾽ ἀνὰ κόλπους 475 
ἠέρος οἵ T ἀνὰ πόντον ἐριβρύχην δονέονται. 
” \ an / i > 7 
εἴαρι δὲ πλεῖστον νεπόδων γένος Ἐϊλείθυιαι 
ὠοφόρων παύουσι βαρυνομένων ὠδίνων. 
αἱ μὲν γὰρ γενεῆς κεχρημέναι ἠδὲ τόκοιο 
θήλεες ἐν ψαμάθοισιν ἀποθλίβουσιν ἀραιὰς 480 
γαστέρας" οὐ γὰρ ῥεῖα διΐσταται, ἀλλ᾽ ἐνέχονται 
ὠὰ μετ᾽ ἀλλήλοισιν ἀρηρότα νηδύος εἴσω, 
΄ὔ la ~ 
φύρδην συμπεφυῶτα- τὰ δ᾽ ἀθρόα πῶς κε τέκοιεν; 
ὃ 
στεινόμεναι δ᾽ ὀδύνῃσι μόγις κρίνουσι γενέθλην. 
“ὦ ὔ a 
ὡς οὐ ῥηϊδίην γενεὴν οὐδ᾽ ἰχθύσι Μοῖραι 488 
@racav, οὐδ᾽ ἄρα μοῦνον ἐπιχθονίῃσι γυναιξὶν 
ἄλγεα, πάντῃ δ᾽ εἰσὶν ἐπαχθέες Ἐϊλείθυιαι. 
x > “ a 
ἄρσενες αὖτ᾽ ἄλλοι μὲν ἐπ᾽ ἰχθύσι κῆρας ἄγοντες 
252 


HALIEUTICA, I. 457-488 


the great depth protects the fishes from the pangs of 
cold and the cruel assault of winter. But when the 
flowery hours of spring smile brightly on the earth 
and with fine weather the sea has respite from winter 
and there is calm, water with a gentle swell, then 
from this quarter and from that the fishes come 
trooping joyfully nigh the land. As when, happily 
escaped from the cloud of ruinous war, some city 
dear to the deathless gods, which long time the 
brazen storm of foemen beset as with a flood, at last 
ceases gladly from strife and recovers her breath ; 
she rejoices and takes her delight in the eager labours 
of peace and in calm weather holds festival, full of 
the dancing of men and women; even so the fishes, 
gladly escaped from sorrowful affliction and rough 
seas, rush exultant over the wave, leaping like 
dancers. And in spring the sweet goad of compelling 
desire and mating and mutual love are in season 
among all that move upon the fruitful earth and in 
the folds of air and in the bellowing sea. In spring @ 
the Birth-goddesses deliver most part of the fishes 
from the heavy travail of spawning. The female, in 
their desire to give birth and to bring forth, rub 
their tender bellies in the sand ; for the eggs do not 
part easily but are closely entangled together within 
the belly, confusedly cohering—how could they bring 
forth the mass ?—and, painfully straitened, they 
with difficulty pass their spawn. So not even on the 
fishes have the Fates bestowed easy birth, and not 
alone to women upon earth are there pains, but 
everywhere the birth-pangs, are grievous. As for 
the males, on the other hand, some hasten to approach 


4A, 57011 οἱ δὲ τόκοι γίνονται τοῖς μὲν pudow τοῦ ἔαρος, Kal 
τοῖς πλείστοις δὲ περὶ τὴν ἐαρινὴν ἰσημερίαν. Cf. Plin. ix. 162. 
253 


OPPIAN 


~ vy 
δαυτυμόνες ῥηγμῖσιν ἐπειγόμενοι πελάουσιν" 
ἄλλοι δ᾽ αὖ μετόπισθε διωκόμενοι προθέουσι 490 
/ ” 
θηλυτέραις ἀγέλῃσιν, ἐπεὶ φιλότητος ἔρωτι 
> / ἐν - 
ἑλκόμεναι σπεύδουσι μετ᾽ ἄρσενας ἀσχέτῳ ὁρμῇ. 
bd > 7 
ἔνθ᾽ οἱ μὲν σφετέρας ἐπὶ γαστέρας ἀλλήλοισι 
la 
τριβόμενοι θορὸν ὑγρὸν ἀπορραίνουσιν ὄπισθεν, 
“ he Ἃ - 
αἱ δ᾽ οἴστρῳ μεμαυῖαι ἐπαΐγδην στομάτεσσι 495 
7ὔ 
κάπτουσιν: τοίῳ δὲ γάμῳ πλήθουσι γόνοιο. 
a - ς \ 
πλεῖστος μὲν νόμος οὗτος ἐν ἰχθύσιν: οἱ δὲ Kat 
εὐνὰς - 
A > \ a 
καὶ θαλάμους ἀλόχους τε διακριδὸν ἀμφὶς ἔχουσι 
tA \ ‘A >? > 4 Ψ > ene } ig 
ζευξάμενοι: πολλὴ yap ἐν ἰχθύσιν ἔστ᾽ ᾿Αφροδίτη 
> / ~ / δ / a Ἃ 
Οἷστρός τε Ζηῆλός τε, βαρὺς θεός, ὅσσα τε τίκτει 500 
~ y 
θερμὸς "Epws, ore λάβρον ἐνὶ φρεσὶ κῶμον dpiver. 
A 3 3 Ps A 7 > ~ 
πολλοὶ δ᾽ ἀλλήλοισι διασταδὸν εἵνεκεν εὐνῆς 
μάρνανται, μνηστῆρσιν ἐοικότες, οἵ περὶ νύμφην 
πολλοὶ ἀγειρόμενοι καὶ ὁμοίϊοι ἀντιφέρονται 
” > > whe \ > > 7 > / 
ὄλβῳ τ᾽ ἀγλαΐῃ τε τὰ δ᾽ ἰχθύσιν οὐ παρέασιν, 505 
> 5 > δὴ / SF \ v A Ὁ 
ἀλλ᾽ ἀλκὴ γένυές τε καὶ ἔνδοθι κάρχαρον ἕρκος, 
τοῖσιν ἀεθλεύουσι καὶ ἐς γάμον ὁπλίζονται: 
τοῖσι δ᾽ ὅ κεν προβάληται, ὁμοῦ γάμον εὕρατο νίκῃ. 
καὶ τοὶ μὲν πλεόνεσσιν ὁμευναίαις ἀλόχοισι 
τέρπονται, σάργων τε γένος καὶ κόσσυφος αἴθων: 510 
τοὶ δὲ μίαν στέργουσι καὶ ἀμφιέπουσιν ἄκοιτιν, 
κάνθαροι αἰτναῖοί τε, καὶ οὐ πλεόνεσσι γάνυνται. 


a A. δ41)8 14. περὶ μὲν γὰρ τὴν τῆς ὀχείας ὥραν αἱ θήλειαι 
τοῖς ἄρρεσιν ἑπόμεναι. . . κόπτουσιν ὑπὸ τὴν γαστέρα τοῖς 
στόμασιν, οἱ δὲ θᾶττον προΐενται (τὸν θορὸν) καὶ μᾶλλον ; Plin. 
ix. 157 femina piscis coitus tempore marem sequitur ventrem 
eius rostro pulsans. 

> Plin. dc. pisces attritu ventrium coeunt; A. De gen. 
717 Ὁ 36 οἱ μὲν γὰρ ἰχθύες ὀχεύουσι παραπίπτοντες. 


254 


HALIEUTICA, I. 489-512 


the shores, bringing doom to other fishes on which 
they feast; others again run before the shoals of 
females by whom they are pursued, since drawn by 
the passion of desire the females haste after the 
males * with rush, incontinent. Then the males, 
rubbing belly against belly, discharge behind thera 
the moist milt ; and the females, goaded by desire, 
rush to gobble ὁ it up with their mouths; by such 
mating they are filled with roe. This is the most 
common custom among fishes, but others there are 
which have separate and apart their own beds and 
bridal chambers and wedded wives; for there is 
much Passion among fishes and Desire and Jealousy, 
that grievous god, and all that hot Love brings forth, 
when he stirs fierce tumult in the heart. Many 
quarrel with one another and fight over a mate, like 
unto wooers who about a bride gather many and 
well-matched and contend in wealth and beauty. 
These weapons the fish have not, but strength and 
jaws and sawlike teeth within: with these they 
enter the lists and arm themselves to win a mate; 
and he who excels with these, wins at once both 
victory and mate. And some delight in more mates 
than one to share their bed, to wit, the race of the 
Sargue% and the dusky Merle’; others love and 
attend a single mate, as the Black Sea-bream/’ and 
the Aetnaeus 5 and delight not in more than one. 


¢ A, 54lal1l ἡ δὲ τῶν wordkwy ἰχθύων ὀχεία ἧττον γίνεται 
κατάδηλος" διόπερ οἱ πλεῖστοι νομίζουσι πληροῦσθαι Ta θήλεα τῶν 
ἀρρένων ἀνακάπτοντα τὸν θορόν. ; 

CS Ὁ, τ]. 488 η. 4 ΗΠ. ἵν, 1ἴ8:π. 7 H, iii. 338 π. 

9 Ael. i. 18 ὁ γοῦν αἰτναῖος οὕτω λεγόμενος, ἐπὰν τῇ ἑαυτοῦ 
συννόμῳ οἱονεὶ γαμέτῃ τινὶ συνδυασθεὶς κληρώσηται τὸ λέχος, 
ἄλλης οὐχ ἅπτεται ; of. Phil. ὅ8. Not identified. 


255 


OPPIAN 


tee Yi , 
᾿Αλλ᾽ οὐκ ἐγχελύεσσιν Spotiov οὔτε χελώναις 
> Yq “-“ 
οὔτ᾽ οὖν πουλυπόδεσσι γάμου τέλος οὔτε κελαινῇ 
> ” 
pvpaivn, λεχέων δὲ παράτροπον αἶσαν ἔχουσιν" 
αἱ μὲν γὰρ σπειρηδὸν ἐν ἀλλήλῃσι χυθεῖσαι 
. “- \ 
ἐγχέλυες δέμας ὑγρὸν ἀναστρωφῶσι θαμειαὶ 
ἢ > ~ 
πλεγνύμεναι, τάων δὲ κατείβεται εἴκελος ἀφρῷ 
\ 
ἰχώρ, ev ψαμάθοις τε καλύπτεται- ἡ δέ μιν ἰλὺς 
, 
εξαμένη κυέει TE Kal ἐγχελύων τέκεν ὁλκούς. 
τοίη καὶ γόγγροισιν ὀλισθηροῖσι γενέθλη. 

i δὲ μέγα τρομέουσι καὶ ἐχθαίρουσι χελῶναι 
ὃν γάμον. οὐ γὰρ τῇσιν ἐφίμερος οἷα καὶ ἄλλοις 
\ te \ \ Pa + ” 
τερπωλὴ λεχέων, πολὺ δὲ πλέον ἄλγος ἔχουσι" 
σκληρὸν γὰρ μάλα κέντρον ἐν ἄρσεσιν εἰς ᾿Αφροδίτην, 

ὀστέον οὐκ ἐπιεικτόν, ἀτερπέϊ θήγεται εὐνῇ. 
τοὔνεκα μάρνανταί τε παλιγνάμπτοισί τ᾽ ὀδοῦσιν 
5 a ᾽ὔ 7 A > 4, 
ἀλλήλους δάπτουσιν, ὅτε σχεδὸν ἀντιάσωσιν, 
at μὲν ἀλευόμεναι τρηχὺν γάμον, οἱ δ᾽ ἀεκουσῶν 
εὐνῆς ἱμείροντες ἑκούσιοι, εἰσόκεν ἀλκῇ 
νικήσας ζεύξῃ μιν ἀναγκαίῃ φιλότητι, 
> sh “ὦ » / » 3 LN 
note Anidinv, πολέμου γέρας. εἴκελα δ᾽ εὐνῆς 
ἔργα κυσὶ χθονίοισι καὶ εἰναλίῃσι χελώναις" 

” \ 7 3 A / A ao 
εἴκελα καὶ φώκῃσιν: ἐπεὶ μάλα δηρὸν ἕκαστοι 
ἐξόπιθεν συνέχονται, ἀρηρότες Hite δεσμῷ. 

7 3.9 / 4, AK \ A 

IlovAvmodos δ᾽ ὀλοοί τε γάμοι Kai πικρὸς ὄλεθρος 

συμφέρεται, ξυνὸν δὲ τέλος θανάτοιο καὶ εὐνῆς" 


* Anguilla vulgaris, M.G. χέλυ. For generation of, A. 
570 a3 ff. at δ᾽ ἐγχέλυς οὔτ᾽ ἐὲ ὀχείας γίνονται οὔτ᾽ φοτοκοῦσιν, 
οὐδ᾽ ἐλήφθη πώποτε οὔτε θορὸν ἔχουσα οὐδεμία οὔτ᾽ gd3 Plin. ix. 
160 anguillae atterunt se scopulis ; ea strigmenta vivescunt, 
nec alia est earum procreatio. 

> Plin. ix. 73 longis et lubricis ut anguillis et congris. 

¢ Ael. xv. 19; Plin. ix. 87 Quidam oculis spectandoque 
ova foveri ab his putant, feminas coitum fugere, donec mas 


256 


515 


520 


525 


530 


535 


HALIEUTICA, 1. 513-537 


But neither Eels ¢ nor Turtles nor Poulpes effect 
their mating in this fashion, nor the dark Muraena, 
but they have an unusual mode of union. Eels coil 
round one another and closely entwined they writhe 
their moist bodies, and from them a fluid like foam 
flows and is covered by the sands; and the mud 
receives it and conceives, and gives birth to the 
trailing Eel. Such also is the generation of the 
slippery ὃ Conger. 

The Turtles greatly fear and hate their mating ; ὁ 
for they have no delight or pleasure in union, as other 
creatures have, but they have far more pain. For 
the organ of the male is very hard, an unyielding 
bone, which is whetted in a joyless union. Therefore 
they fight and rend each other with their bent teeth, 
when they come together: the females seeking to 
avoid the rough mating, the males eager to mate, 
willing bridegrooms of unwilling brides ; until the 
male by his strength prevails and makes her perforce 
his mate, like a captive bride, the prize of war. The 
mating of Dogs on land is similar to that of Turtles 
in the sea: similar also is that of Seals %; for all of 
those remain. a long time coupled rearwards, fast 
bound as by a chain. 

For the Poulpe’ his deadly mating goes with 
bitter destruction and union consummated is con- 


festucam aliquam imponat aversae. For mode of mating, 


A. 540a28 τὰ μὲν γὰρ ἐπιβαίνοντα... οἷον χελώνη Kal ἡ 
θαλαττία καὶ ἡ xepoalas Plin. ix. 158 Testudines in coitu 
superveniunt. 


@ A. 540 a 23 ὀχεύεται δὲ καὶ ἡ φώκη καθάπερ τὰ ὀπισθουρητικὰ 
τῶν ζῴων καὶ συνέχονται ἐν τῇ ὀχείᾳ πολὺν χρόνον, ὥσπερ καὶ αἱ 
κύνες" ἔχουσι δὲ τὸ αἰδοῖον μέγα οἱ ἄρρενες : Plin. ix. 41 (vitulus 
marinus) in coitu canum modo cohaeret. 

¢ This passage is paraphrased <Ael. vi. 28. Cf. A. 
622214 ff.; Athen. 316 cif. 


8 257 


OPPIAN 


/ 9Q?> 3 / 
οὐ yap πρὶν φιλότητος ἀπίσχεται οὐδ ἀπολήγει, 
> 7 
πρίν μιν ἀπὸ μελέων προλίπῃ σθένος ἀδρανέοντα, 
\ 
αὐτὸς δ᾽ ἐν ψαμάθοισι πεσὼν ἀμενηνὸς ὄληται: 540 
ὔ 
πάντες γάρ μιν ἔδουσιν, ὅσοι σχεδὸν ἀντιάσωσι, 
\ 
καρκινάδες δειλαὶ Kat καρκίνοι ἠδὲ καὶ ἄλλοι 
ἰχθύες, ods πάρος αὐτὸς ἐδαίνυτο ῥεῖα μεθέρπων" 
an la Yd 
τοῖς ὑπὸ Kal Cwos περ ἐὼν ἔτι κείμενος αὔτως, 
> \ > / Ἁ » γι 
οὐδὲν ἀμυνόμενος, δαιτρεύεται, ὄφρα θάνῃσι. 545 
/ a , + > > 7 
τοίῳ δυστερπεῖ φιλοτησίῳ ὄλλυτ ὀλέθρῳ. 
Δ > » A aA ie > 9 v. vA 
ὡς δ᾽ αὔτως καὶ θῆλυς ὑπ᾽ ὠδίνων μογέουσα 
+ ’ Ν lol > \ e ‘\ + 
ὄλλυται: οὐ yap THow ἀποκριδὸν ofa καὶ ἄλλοις 
vA 4 > Na > > ty 
wa διαθρώσκουσιν, ἀρηρότα ὃ ἀλλήλοισι 
βοτρυδὸν στεινοῖο μόγις διανίσσεται αὐλοῦ. 550 
τοὔνεκα Kal λυκάβαντος ὑπέρτερον οὔποτε μέτρον 
πουλύποδες ζώουσιν: ἀποφθινύθουσι γὰρ αἰεὶ 
αἰνοτάτοισι γάμοισι καὶ αἰνοτάτοισι τόκοισιν. 
>A \ ὃ \ / 4 ΝΜ > > he 
μφὶ δὲ μυραίνης φάτις ἔρχεται οὐκ ἀΐδηλος, 
ἢ 
ὥς μιν ὄφις γαμέει, τε καὶ ἐξ ἁλὸς ἔρχεται αὐτὴ 555 
,ὔ 
πρόφρων, ἱμείρουσα παρ᾽ ἱμείροντα, γάμοιο. 
»” e A / , » ͵ 
τοι ὁ μὲν φλογέῃ τεθοωμένος ἔνδοθι λύσσῃ 
7 ~ 
μαίνεται εἰς φιλότητα καὶ ἐγγύθι σύρεται ἀκτῆς 
\ Yj / A A 
πικρὸς ἔχις" τάχα δὲ γλαφυρὴν ἐσκέψατο πέτρην, 
a 3 3 / 3 
τῇ δ᾽ ἔνι λοίγιον ἰὸν ἀπήμεσε, πάντα δ᾽ ὀδόντων 560 


@ A. 6228 25 ὅταν δὲ τὰ Ba ἐκτέκωσιν, οὕτω καταγηράσκειν 
καὶ ἀσθενεῖς γίνεσθαι ἀμφοτέρους φασὶν ὥστε ὑπὸ τῶν ἰχθυδίων 
κατεσθίεσθαι. 
> A. 6922 417 αἱ δὲ θήλειαι μετὰ τὸν τόκον... γίνονται μωραί 
κτλ. ᾿ 

5.Α. δ44 88 τίκτει τὸ φὸν καθάπερ βοστρύχιον : 549 Ὁ 82 ὅμοιον 
βοστρυχίοις οἰνάνθης ; Athen, 816 ε τίκτει ga βοτρυδόν ; Plin. ix, 
163 Polypi .. . pariunt vere ova tortili vibrata pampino. 

7 A. 550 b13 ἔστι δὲ καὶ ὁ τεῦθος καὶ ἡ σηπία βραχύβιον. 
οὐ γὰρ διετίζουσιν, ... ὁμοίως. δὲ καὶ οἱ πολύποδες. Ch. Α. 
622 ἃ 22; Athen. 323; Ael. 1.6. ; Plin. ix. 93. 


258 


HALIEUTICA, I. 538-560 


summated death: for he does not abstain or cease 
from his desire, until he is spent and strength for- 
sakes his limbs and he himself falls exhausted on 
the sand and perishes. For all that come nigh devour¢ 
him—the timid Hermit-crab and the Crabs and 
other fishes which’ he himself formerly was wont to 
banquet on, easily stealing upon them ; by these he 
is now devoured, still alive but lying helplessly, and 
making no resistance, until he dies.. By such a death, 
the sad fruit of desire, he perishes. And even so 
the female? likewise perishes, exhausted by the 
travail of birth. For their eggs do not issue forth 
separately, as with other fishes, but, clustered 
together like grapes,° they pass with difficulty 
through the narrow channel. Wherefore the Poulpes 
never live beyond the measure of a year ὦ ; for always 
they perish by dreadest mating and dreadest travail 
of birth. 

Touching the Muraena there is a not obscure 
report ὁ that a Serpent mates with her, and that the 
Muraena herself comes forth from the sea willingly, 
eager mate to eager mate. The bitter Serpent, 
whetted by the fiery passion within him, is frenzied 
for mating and drags himself nigh the shore; and 
anon he espies a hollow rock and therein vomits forth 


4 Plin. ix. 76 (Murenas) in sicca litora’ elapsas vulgus 
coitu serpentium impleri putat. Oppian’s lines are para- 
phrased Ael. i. 50, ix, 66. Cf. Nicand. 7. 898 ff. (with 
schol. ad-loc.), whose lines are quoted by Athen. 312d, 
where it is said that the story was rejected by Andreas 
but accepted by Sostratus; Phil. 81. Hence the point of 
the lines of Matron the parodist ap. Athen. 186 μύραιναν 
δ᾽ ἐπέθηκε φέρων... | ζώνην θ᾽ ἣν φορέεσκεν. . . | eis. λέχος 
ἡνίκ᾽ ἔβαινε Δρακοντιάδῃ μεγαθύμῳ:τ: For Murena coming 
ashore, A. .δ48 ἃ.98 ; Plin. ix. 73. 


259 


OPPIAN 


lot / 4 > / 
ἔπτυσε πευκεδανόν, ζαμενῆ χόλον, ὄλβον ὀλέθρου, 
» ΝᾺ Α 3, ih 
ὄφρα γάμῳ mpnis τε Kal εὔδιος ἀντιάσειε. 
nr YA 
στὰς δ᾽ dp’ ἐπὶ pnypivos ἐὸν νόμον ἐρροίζησε 
7 , ~ 3 > "ἢ A 
κικλήσκων φιλότητα" θοῶς, δ᾽ ἐσάκουσε κελαινὴ 
ἐὐγὴν μύραινα καὶ ἔσσυτο θᾶσσον ὀϊστοῦ. 565 
¢ 
ἡ μὲν ἄρ᾽ ἐκ πόντοιο τυταίνεται, αὐτὰρ ὁ πόντου 
ἐκ γαίης πολιοῖσιν ἐπεμβαίνει ῥοθίοισιν: 
» > > vA e Lond ~ 
ἄμφω δ᾽ ἀλλήλοισιν ὁμιλῆσαι μεμαῶτε 
συμπεσέτην, ἔχιος δὲ κάρη κατέδεκτο χανοῦσα 
νύμφη φυσιόωσα᾽ γάμῳ δ᾽ ἐπιγηθήσαντες 570 
¢ A c A 4 > 3 »” \ > > A , 
ἡ μὲν ἁλὸς πάλιν εἶσι μετ᾽ ἤθεα, τὸν δ᾽ ἐπὶ χέρσον 
ὁλκὸς ἄγει, κρυερὸν δὲ πάλιν μεταχεύεται ἰὸν 
λάπτων, ὃν πάρος ἧκε καὶ ἐξήφυσσεν ὀδόντων. 
ἣν δ᾽ ἄρα μή τι κίχῃ κεῖνον χόλον, ὅνπερ ὁδίτης, 
> /, > 4 > vA 7 ͵ 
AT PEKEWS ἐσιδών μιν, ἀπέκλυσεν ὕδατι λάβρῳ, 575 
αὐτὰρ ὃ γ᾽ ἀσχαλόων ῥίπτει δέμας, εἰσόκε μοῖραν 
λευγαλέοιο λάβῃσιν ᾿ἀνωΐστου θανάτοιο, 
9 7 FD 7 ,ὔ by ae > ld 
αἰδόμενος, ὅτ᾽ ἄναλκις ὅπλων γένεθ᾽ οἷς ἐπεποίθει, 
” > 7 ᾽ὔ A / ΝΥ ᾽ὔ A 
ἐμμεν᾽ ὄφις, πέτρῃ δὲ συνώλεσε Kal δέμας ἰῷ. 
~ > ~ 
Δελῴϊνες ὃ ἄνδρεσσιν ὁμῶς γάμον ἐντύνονται 580 
μήδεά τ᾽ ἀνδρομέοισι πανείκελα καρτύνονται" 
δ᾽ DAN \ / y+ 3 ,ὔ ς ᾿ 
οὐδ᾽ αἰεὶ προφανὴς πόρος ἄρσενος, ἀλλά οἱ εἴσω 
κέκρυπται, λεχέων δὲ κατὰ χρέος ἕλκεται ἔξω. 
A ra 
Tota μὲν φιλότητες ev ἰχθύσιν ἠδὲ καὶ εὐναί. 
AAA δ᾽ LAA ff λ vA ε / Ars 
ἄλλος ἀλλοίῃ λεχέων ἱμείρεται ὥρῃ, 585 
\ A 4 a / ae n~ 
καὶ γενεὴν προφέρει" τοῖς μὲν θέρος, οἷσι δὲ χεῖμα, 
aA bees nv / ° 
τοῖς δ᾽ ἔαρ ἢ φθινύθουσα τόκον προὔφηνεν ὀπώρη. 
, A \ / ,ὔ 
καὶ τοὶ μὲν λυκάβαντι μίαν μογέουσι. γενέθλην 


* A. 540b 22; De gen. 756 Ὀ1 ; Plin. ix. 14. 
> A. 570.a 25, 570b 11 ἘΞ, 543 b 18 fF, 3 Plin. ix. 162, 


260 


HALIEUTICA, I. 561-588 


his baneful venom, the fierce bile of his teeth, a 
deadly store, that he may be mild and serene to 
‘meet his bride. Standing on the shore he utters his 
hissing note, his mating call; and the dusky Muraena 
quickly hears his cry and speeds swifter than an 
arrow. She stretches her from the sea, he from the 
land treads the grey surf, and, eager to mate with 
one another, the two embrace, and the panting bride 
receives with open mouth the Serpent’s head. Then, 
exulting over their union, she goes back again to her 
haunts in the sea, while he makes his trailing way 
to the land, where he takes in again his venom, 
lapping up that which before he shed and discharged 
from his teeth. But if he find not that bile—which 
some wayfarer, seeing it for what it is, has washed 
away with torrents of water—then indignant he 
dashes his body, till he finds the doom of a sad and 
unthought-of death, ashamed to be a Serpent when 
he is left defenceless of the weapons. in which he 
trusted, and on the rock with his lost venom he loses 
his life. 

Dolphins * mate after the manner of men, and the 
organs with which they are equipped are quite human- 
like; the male organ is not always visible but is 
hidden within and extended on occasion of mating. 

Such are the loves and mating among fishes. And 
others at other season® they desire to mate and 
bring forth their young ; for some summer, for some 
winter, for others spring or waning autumn brings 
birth. And some—the greatest part—are in travail 
of a single brood a year, but the Basse is twice ὁ 


¢ A. 542632 ὁμοίως δὲ καὶ τῶν ἰχθύων οἱ πλεῖστοι ἅπαξ 
(τίκτουσιν) οἷον οἱ χυτοί. . . πλὴν ὁ λάβραξ" οὗτος δὲ δὶς τούτων 
μόνος. Cf. 567b 18; Plin, ix. 162; Ael. x. 2; Athen. 310 f. 
261 


OPPIAN 


a la ? ΔΛ 
οἱ πλεῖστοι, λάβραξ δὲ δὶς ἄχθεται Ἐϊλειθυίαις - 
> ~ 
τρίγλαι δὲ τριγόνοισιν ἐπώνυμοί εἰσι γονῇσι:" 590 
,ὔ > 7 / 7 3 , 
σκορπίος αὖ τετόρεσσι φέρει βέλος ὠδίνεσσι: 
πέντε δὲ κυπρίνοισι γοναὶ μούνοισιν ἔασιν" 
” 3 Lg Ud / if “ἘΠ 
οἴου δ᾽ οὔποτέ φασι γένος φράσσασθαι ὀνίσκου, 
3 3 Ψ aS > oh > > / if: 
ἀλλ᾽ ἔτι τοῦτ᾽ ἀΐδηλον ἐν ἀνθρώποισι τέτυκται. 
>. 9 nv > > a / / 
Εὐὖτ᾽ ἂν δ᾽ elapwoto περιπλήθωσι γόνοιο 595 
ἰχθύες ὠοτόκοι, τοὶ μὲν κατὰ χῶρον ἕκαστοι 
+ 7 3. ἃ a / 
εὔκηλοι pipvovow ἐνὶ σφετέροισι δόμοισι" 
\ 3 > / iss «ς" C4 tA 
πολλοὶ δ᾽ ἀγρόμενοι ξυνὴν ὁδὸν ὁρμώωνται 
+ \ ,ὔ a2 3, ,ὔ iB / 
Εύξεινον μετὰ πόντον, ἵν᾽ αὐτόθι τέκνα τέκωνται. 
a A 4 ᾽ὔ 3 τ 
κεῖνος γὰρ πάσης γλυκερώτερος ᾿Αμφιτρίτης 600 
κόλπος, ἀπειρεσίοισι καὶ εὐὔδροις ποταμοῖσιν 
ἀρδόμενος, μαλακαὶ δὲ πολυψάμαθοί τ᾽ ἐπιωγαί: 
> / ς > / \ \ > , 3 x 
ev δέ οἱ εὐφυέες τε νομαὶ Kat ἀκύμονες ἀκταὶ 
/ \ \ A i, > / 
πέτραι τε γλαφυραὶ Kal χηραμοὶ ἰλυόεντες 
A \ \ Se oF ΄ / ϑὲ {30 
ἄκραι τε σκιεραὶ καὶ oa ἰχθύσι φίλτατ᾽ ἔασιν" 605 
ev δέ οἱ οὔτε τι κῆτος ἀνάρσιον οὔτε τι πῆμα 
>? ᾽ὔ / 3 ΄, > \ \ Ὁ 
ἐντρέφεται νεπόδεσσιν ὀλέθριον οὐδὲ μὲν ὅσσοι 


δυσμενέες γεγάασιν ἐπ᾽ ἰχθύσι βαιοτέροισιν 


@ A. 543a5 ἡ δὲ τρίγλη μόνη τρίς. Oppian derives τρίγλη 
from τρίς, cf. Ael. x. 2 τρίγλην δὲ καὶ τρὶς κύειν κατηγορεῖ, 
φασί. καὶ τὸ ὄνομα. Cf. ix. 51; Phil. 116; Athen. 334d. 

ὁ But A. 543 a 7 ὁ σκορπίος τίκτει dis; Plin. ix. 162 
scorpaenae bis (anno pariunt) ; Athen. 320 e. 

° A. 568.416 τίκτουσι δ᾽ ἐν τῇ καθηκούσῃ ὥρᾳ κυπρῖνος μὲν 
πεντάκις ἢ ἑξάκις" ποιεῖται δὲ τὸν τόκον μάλιστα ἐπὶ τοῖς ἄστροις. 


262 


HALIEUTICA, I. 589-608 


burdened by the pangs of birth; the Red Mullet 
gets its name Trigla from its triple brood%; the 
Scorpion again endures the pang of four labours ; ὃ 
the Carps alone bear five times ; ° and the Oniscus ὦ 
is the only fish, they say, whose breeding no one has 
ever remarked, but that is still a mystery among 
men. 

When in spring the oviparous fishes are full of roe, 
some of them remain quietly in their homes, each 
tribe in its own place; but many gather together 
and pursue a common path to the Euxine Sea,’ that 
there they may bring forth their brood. For that 
gulf is the sweetest of all the sea, watered as it is 
by infinite rivers of abundant water ; and it has soft 
and sandy bays ; therein are goodly feeding-grounds 
and waveless shores and caverned rocks and silty 
clefts and shady headlands and all that fish most 
love; but no fierce Sea-monster inhabits there nor 
any deadly bane of the finny race nor any of 
those which prey upon the smaller fishes—no coiling 


4 Introd. p. xiv. 

ὁ Black Sea. A. 598a 30 εἰσπλέουσι δ᾽ els τὸν ἸΠόντον διά 
τε τὴν τροφήν (ἡ γὰρ νομὴ Kal πλείων καὶ βελτίων διὰ τὸ πότιμον, 
καὶ τὰ θηρία δὲ τὰ μεγάλα ἐλάττω" ἔξω γὰρ δελφῖνος καὶ φωκαίνης 
[Porpoise] οὐδέν ἐστιν ἐν τῷ ἸΠόντῳ καὶ ὁ δελφὶς μικρός" ἔξω δ᾽ 
εὐθὺς προελθόντι μεγάλοι), διά τε δὴ τὴν τροφὴν εἰσπλέουσι καὶ 
διὰ τὸν τόκον" τόποι γάρ εἰσιν ἐπιτήδειοι ἐντίκτειν καὶ «τὸ πότιμον 
καὶ τὸ γλυκύτερον ὕδωρ ἐκτρέφει τὰ κυήματα. Cf. Ael. iv. 4, 
ix. 59; Plut. Mor. 981 Ὁ; Plin. ix. 49 f.; Arr. Peripl. Huw. 
Pont. c. viii.s A. 567 b 15 ἐν τῷ Πόντῳ περὶ τὸν Θερμώδοντα 
ποταμὸν οἱ πλεῖστοι τίκτουσιν" νήνεμος γὰρ ὁ τόπος καὶ ἀλεεινὸς 
καὶ ἔχων ὕδατα γλυκέα; A. Meteor. 354. ἃ 16 πλείους γὰρ εἰς 
τὸν Εὔξεινον ῥέουσι ποταμοὶ καὶ τὴν Μαιῶτιν ἣ τὴν πολλαπλασίαν 
χώραν αὐτῆς. 


263 


OPPIAN 


ὁλκοὶ πουλυπόδων οὐδ᾽ ἀστακοὶ οὐδὲ πάγουροι-" 
παῦροι μὲν δελφῖνες, ἀκιδνότεροι δὲ καὶ αὐτοὶ 
κητείης γενεῆς καὶ ἀκήδεες ἐννεμέθονται. 
τοὔνεκεν ἰχθύσι κεῖνο πέλει κεχαρισμένον ὕδωρ 
ἐκπάγλως καὶ πολλὸν ἐπισπεύδουσι νέεσθαι. 
στέλλονται δ᾽ ἅμα πάντες ὁμιλαδόν, ἄλλοθεν ἄλλος 
εἰς ἕν ἀγειρόμενοι, μία δέ σφισι πᾶσι κέλευθος 
πομπή τε ῥιπή τε καὶ αὖ παλινόστιμος ὁρμή. 
Θρηΐκιον δ᾽ ἀνύουσι Βοὸς Πόρον αἰολόφυλοι 
ἑσμοὶ Βεβρυκίην τε παρὲξ ἅλα καὶ στόμα Πόντου 
στεινὸν ἀμειβόμενοι δολιχὸν δρόμον ᾿Αμφιτρίτης. 
ὡς δ᾽ ὅτ᾽ ἀπ᾽ Αἰθιόπων τε καὶ Αἰγύπτοιο ῥοάων 
ὑψιπετὴς γεράνων χορὸς ἔρχεται ἠεροφώνων, 
ἴΛτλαντος νιφόεντα πάγον καὶ χεῖμα φυγοῦσαι 


* A. 606 8:10 ἐν μὲν τῷ Πόντῳ οὔτε τὰ μαλάκια γίνεται οὔτε 
τὰ ὀστρακόδερμα εἰ μὴ ἔν τισι τόποις ὀλίγα. Cf. Plin. ix. 52; 
Ael. xvii. 10; Athen. 817 Ε ἐν δὲ τῷ περὶ τῶν κατὰ τόπους 
διαφορῶν ὁ Θεόφραστος πολύποδας οὐ γίνεσθαί φησιν περὶ 
Ἑλλήσποντον. ψυχρὰ γὰρ ἡ θάλασσα αὕτη καὶ ἧττον ἁλμυρά, 
ταῦτα δ᾽ ἀμφότερα πολέμια πολύποδι ; E. Forbes, V.H. of the 
European Seas, p. 203, ‘The deficiencies in the Black Sea 
fauna are remarkable. All those classes of Mollusca which, 
as we have seen, are but poorly represented in the Eastern 
Mediterranean as compared with the Western, are either 
here altogether wanting, or are of rarest occurrence, such 
as Cephalopods, Pteropods, and Nudibranchs. Echino- 
derms and Zoophytes are absent. The composition of the 
water is inimical to all these forms.” 

ὃ πόρον" ἤγουν τὸν “Ἑλλήσποντον schol., but the reference 
can hardly ‘be other than to the strait of Byzantium (Con- 
stantinople) which connects the Propontis (Sea of Marmora 
with the Euxine (Black Sea) and is regularly called the 
Thracian Bosporus: Strabo 125 ἐκδίδωσι δ᾽ αὕτη (ἡ Μαιῶτις 
λίμνη) μὲν εἰς Πόντον κατὰ τὸν Κιμμερικὸν καλούμενον Βόσπορον 
(Strait of Kertch), οὗτος δὲ κατὰ τὸν Θράκιον εἰς τὴν Προποντίδα" 
τὸ γὰρ Βυζαντιακὸν στόμα οὕτω καλοῦσι Θρᾷκιον Βόσπορον, ὃ 


264 


61¢ 


618 


62( 


HALIEUTICA, 1. 609-622 


Poulpe nor Lobster nor Crab; Dolphins, indeed, 
dwell there but few, and feebler even these than 
the Sea-monster breed and harmless. Wherefore to 
fishes that water is pleasant exceedingly and they 
greatly haste to come to it. All together they set 
forth in company, gathering to one place from their 
several haunts, and all have one path, one voyage, 
one course, even as again all have the same impulse 
of return. And the swarms of various tribe make 
the Thracian Ford of the Cow, past the Bebrycian 
Sea ὁ and the narrow mouth ὦ of the Pontus traversing 
a long course of the ocean. And as when? from the 
Ethiopians and the streams of Egypt there comes the 
high-flying 7 choir of clanging Cranes,’ fleeing from 
winter and the snowy Mount of Atlas” and the weak 
τετραστάδιόν ἐστι. Cf. Strab. 319, 566; Dion. P. 140 
Θρηικίου στόμα Βοσπόρου, ὃν πάρος ᾿Τὼ |"Hpns ἐννεσίῃσιν ἐνήξατο 
πόρτις ἐοῦσα. ἀνύουσι: Stat. T. vii. 489 Taurus init fecitque 
vadum. 

¢ Sea of Marmora. The Bebryces are located in Mysia 
or eastward to Chalcedon. Dion. P. 805 Βέβρυκες δ᾽ ἐπὶ τοῖσι 
καὶ οὔρεα Μυσίδος ains; Strab. 541. 

@ Dion. P. 142 στεινότατος δὴ κεῖνος ἁπάντων ἔπλετο πορθμὸς | 
τῶν ἄλλων οἵ 7’ εἰσὶ περικλύστοιο θαλάσσης: Arr. Peripl. Hux, 
Pont. xii. 2 καὶ ἔστι στενότατον ταύτῃ τὸ στόμα τοῦ ἸΠόντου 
καλούμενον, Kab’ ὅτι εἰσβάλλει ἐς τὴν ἸΠΙροποντίδα. 

4 Hom. Jl. iii. 3 ff. ἠύτε περ κλαγγὴ γεράνων πέλει οὐρανόθι 
πρό, | οἵ τ᾽ ἐπεὶ οὖν χειμῶνα φύγον καὶ ἀθέσφατον ὄμβρον, | κλαγγῇ 
ταί γε πέτονται ἐπ᾽ ᾿᾽Ωκεανοῖο ῥοάων | ἀνδράσι ἸΤυγμαίοισι φόνον 
καὶ κῆρα φέρουσαι. But while Homer refers to the Southward 
migration about October (A. 599 a 24 τοῦ Μαιμακτηριῶνος, the 
signal for sowing, Hesiod, W. 448, Aristoph. dv. 710, Theocr. 
x. 31), Oppian means the N. migration in beginning of 
March. Momms. Jahr. p. 267; Milton, P.L. vii. 425 ff. 

7 ὑψόθεν ἐκ νεφέων Hesiod ἰ.6., σύννομοι νεφέων δρόμου Kur. 
Hel. 1488. : 

9 Grus cinerea, M.G. γερανός, γεράνι, and γορίλλα in Attica, 
The much rarer G. virgo is mentioned as a summer visitor in 
the Cyclades, Erh. p. δ. ” In ΝΟ. Africa. Strabo 825. 


265 


OPPIAN 


Πγμαίων “τ᾽ ὀλιγοδρανέων ἀμενηνὰ γένεθλα" 

τῇσι δ᾽ ἄρ᾽ ἱπταμένῃσι κατὰ στίχας εὐρέες ἑσμοὶ 

ἠέρα τε σκιάουσι καὶ ἄλλυτον ὄγμον ἔχουσιν" 625 

ὡς τότε μυριόφυλοι ἁλὸς τέμνουσι φάλαγγες 

Βύξεινον μέγα κῦμα: περιπλήθει δὲ θάλασσα 

πυκνὸν ὑποφρίσσουσα λατυσσομένη πτερύγεσσιν, 

εἰσόκ᾽ ἐπειγόμενοι δολιχὸν στόλον ἀμπαύσωσι 

καὶ τόκον. ἀλλ᾽ ὅτε μέτρα παραστείχῃσιν ὀπώρης, 630 

νόστου μιμνήσκονται, ἐπεὶ κρυερώτερον ἄλλων 

χεῖμα κατασπέρχει κείνην ἅλα δινήεσσαν᾽" 

οὐ γὰρ τηλεβαθής, ῥέα δὲ στυφελίζετ᾽ ἀήταις, 

οἵ μιν ἐπιρρήσσουσιν ὑπερφίαλοί τ᾽ ὀλοοί τε. 

τοὔνεκ᾽ ἀλυσκάζοντες ᾿Αμαζονίης ἀπὸ λίμνης 635 

αὖτις ὁμοῦ τεκέεσσιν ὑποτροπάδην φορέονται, 

κίδνανται δ᾽ ἀνὰ πόντον, ὅπῃ θρέψονται ἕκαστοι. 
᾿Αλλ᾽ ὅσα μὲν μαλάκεια φατίζεται, οἷσί 7” ἀναίμων 


4.Α. δθ7 8 4, ; Strabo 35, εἴς. ; Plin. x. 58. 

> Their flight was in the form of ἃ triangle (γεράνων τὴν ἐν 
τριγώνῳ πτῆσιν Plut. Mor. 979 5), the apex leading, the older 
birds in front and rear, the young in the middle. — Ael, iii. 
13; Plut. Mor. 967 c; Eur. Hel. 1478 ff.; Plin. x. 58. 

° A. 598 b 6 ὅταν δὲ τέκωσι καὶ τὰ γενόμενα αὐξηθῇ, ἐκπλέουσιν 
εὐθὺς μετὰ Πλειάδα, 1.6. after the heliacal rising of the Pleiades. 

4 EK. Forbes, op. cit. p. 201 ‘*Some of the rivers which 
discharge into the Black Sea take their rise in high latitudes, 
in districts annually covered with snow. These rivers also 
are annually frozen, Again, the winter temperature of the 
northern shores of this sea is such that coast ice forms there, 
as also in the Sea of Azof; and hence the waters of the 
Black Sea are much colder than those of the rest of the 
marine province to which it belongs. It is to the combined 
influence of composition and temperature that the great 
difference in the assemblage of animals in the Mediterranean 
and Black Seas must be attributed. The Black Sea is the 
266 


HALIEUTICA, I. 623-638 


race of the feeble Pygmies *%: as they fly in ordered 
ranks ὃ their broad swarms shadow the air and keep 
unbroken line ; even so in that season those myriad- 
tribed phalanxes of the sea plough the great waves of 
the Euxine; and _the sea is full to overflowing and 
rough with the beating of many fins, till eagerly they 
win rest from their long journey and their spawning. 
But when the term of autumn” passes, they bethink 
them of their homeward way, since chillier ὦ than all 
other is the winter that rages on that eddying sea ; 
for it is not deep offshore’ but is easily buffeted 
about by the winds which beat upon it violent 
and deadly. Wherefore they slip away from the 
Amazonian mere?’ and with their young travel home 
again, and scatter over the sea, each tribe to the 
place where they are to feed. 

Now those which are called Molluscs,’ whose 


great ultimate estuary of the rivers which drain one-half of 
the European area.” 

ὁ τηλεβαθής seems to be modelled on ἀγχιβαθής. For 
relative depths of different seas cf. A. Meteor. 354 ἃ 19 καὶ 
τῆς μὲν Μαιώτιδος ὁ ἸΠόντος (βαθύτερος), τούτου δὲ ὁ Αἰγαῖος, 
τοῦ δ᾽ Αἰγαίου ὁ Σικελικός: ὁ δὲ Σαρδονικὸς καὶ ὁ Τυρρηνικὸς 
βαθύτατοι πάντων. 

7 The schol. hesitate between the Euxine (Black Sea) and 
the Λίμνη Madris (Sea of Azov). 

9 In the Aristotelian sense, 2.6. Cephalopods or Cuttles: 
A. 593b 1 περὶ δὲ τῶν ἀναίμων ζῴων νυνὶ λεκτέον. ἔστι δὲ γένη 
πλείω, ἕν μὲν τὸ τῶν καλουμένων parakiwy ταῦτα δ᾽ ἐστὶν ὅσα 
ἄναιμα ὄντα ἐκτὸς ἔχει τὸ σαρκῶδες, ἐντὸς δ᾽ εἴ τι ἔχει στερεόν ... 
οἷον τὸ τῶν σηπιῶν γένος. Aristotle divides the ἄναιμα or 
bloodless animals (Invertebrates) into μαλάκια (Cephalopods), 
μαλακόστρακα (Crustaceans), ἔντομα (Insects, Arachnidae, 
Worms), ὀστρακόδερμα (Mussels, Snails, Ascidians, Holo- 
thurians, Actinia, Sponges). His μαλάκια or ““ Molluscs ” 
are: βολίταινα or ὄζολις, ἑλεδώνη, ναυτίλος πολύπους (3 species), 
σηπία, τευθίς, τεῦθος. Cf. Ael. xi. 37; Plin. ix. 83 Mollia 
sunt loligo, sepia, polypus et cetera generis eius. 

267 


OPPIAN 


> \ Αι , A > “δ o “a 
ἐστὶ dun μελέων καὶ ἀνόστεος, ὅσσα τε φῦλα 
ἢ λεπίσιν πυκινῇσι καλύπτεται, ἢ φολίδεσσι 640 
φρακτά, τὰ δ᾽ ὠοφόροισιν ὁμῶς ὠδῖσι μέλονται" 
> Xi \ / 4 > a~ @ lot 
ex δὲ κυνὸς λάβροιο καὶ αἰετοῦ ὅσσα τε φῦλα 
7 VA \ 3 ῬΑ , 
κλήζονται. σελάχεια καὶ ἰχθυνόμων βασιλήων 
δελφίνων φώκης τε βοώπιδος αὐτίκα παῖδες 
ἐκ γενετῆς ἀνέχουσιν ἐοικότες οἷσι τοκεῦσιν. 645 
Οἱ δ᾽ ἢ τοι πάντες μέν, ὅσοι ναίουσι θάλασσαν 
/ / \ 3 / 7Q) 
ζωοτόκοι, φιλέουσι Kal ἀμφιέπουσι γενέθλην, 
δελφίνων δ᾽ οὔπω τι θεώτερον ἄλλο τέτυκται" 
ὡς ἐτεὸν καὶ φῶτες ἔσαν πάρος ἠδὲ πόληας 


@ A. Part. an. 654a9 τὰ δ᾽ ἔντομα τῶν ξῴων καὶ τὰ μαλάκια 

. . οὐδὲν, . . ὀστῶδες ἔχειν ἔοικεν οὐδὲ γεηρὸν ἀποκεκριμένον, 
ὅτι καὶ ἄξιον εἰπεῖν, ἀλλὰ τὰ μὲν μαλάκια σχεδὸν ὅλα σαρκώδη καὶ 
μαλακά. 

ὃ For the distinction between λεπιδωτά and φολιδωτά of. 
A. 505 a 20 ff. ἔτι δὲ πρὸς τἄλλα ζῷα οἱ ἰχθύες διαφέρουσι . . ." 
οὔτε γὰρ ὥσπερ τῶν πεζῶν ὅσα ζῳοτόκα ἔχει τρίχας, οὔθ᾽ ὥσπερ 
ἔνια τῶν φοτοκούντων τετραπόδων φολίδας, οὔθ᾽ ὡς τὸ τῶν ὀρνέων 
γένος πτερωτόν. ἀλλ᾽ οἱ μὲν πλεῖστοι αὐτῶν λεπιδωτοί εἰσιν, ὀλίγοι 
δέ τινες τραχεῖς, ἐλάχιστον δ᾽ ἐστὶ πλῆθος αὐτῶν τὸ λεῖον. τῶν 
μὲν οὖν σελαχῶν τὰ μὲν τραχέα ἐστί, τὰ δὲ λεῖα, γόγγροι δὲ καὶ 
ἐγχέλυες καὶ θύννοι τῶν λείων. For distinction between λεπίς 
and φολίς cf. A. 490 b 22, ete. The λεπιδωτοί thus include 
the great majority of fishes, while the φολιδωτοί include 
Snakes (ἄποδα ὠοτόκα podwrd)—only the Viper (ἔχις) being 
viviparous (A. 511 a16)—Lizards and Tortoises (τετράποδα 
φοτόκα godidwrd) Cf. ΑΕ]. xi. 37 φολιδωτὰ δὲ σαῦρος, 
σαλαμάνδρα, χελώνη, κροκόδειλος, ὄφις. ταῦτα δὲ καὶ τὸ γῆρας 
ἀποδύεται. πλὴν κροκοδείλου καὶ χελώνης. 

¢ For μαλάκια cf. A. 549 Ὁ 27 τὰ δὲ μαλάκια ἐκ τοῦ συνδυα- 
σμοῦ καὶ τῆς ὀχείας φὸν ἴσχει λευκόν. For λεπιδωτοί cf. A. 
505 Ὁ 2 εἰσὶ δ᾽ αὐτῶν (se. τῶν ἰχθύων οἱ μὲν ᾧοτόκοι οἱ ζῳοτόκοι, 
οἱ μὲν λεπιδωτοὶ πάντες ψοτόκοι τὰ δὲ σελάχη πάντα ζῳοτόκα πλὴν 
βατράχου. For φολιδωτά of. A. Part. an. 733.46 οἱ μὲν γὰρ 


ὄρνιθες καὶ τὰ φολιδωτὰ, . . ῳοτοκοῦσι. 


268 


HALIEUTICA, I. 639-649 


limbs are bloodless and boneless,* and those tribes 
that are covered with close-set scales or armed with 
scutes,? are all alike oviparous ὁ ; but from the fierce 
Dog-fish ὦ and the Eagle-ray ὁ and all the tribes that 
are called Selachians 7 and from the kingly Dolphins 9 
which lord it among fishes and from the ox-eyed 
Seal” spring children who straightway from birth are 
like their parents. 

Now all the viviparous denizens of the sea love and 
cherish their young but diviner than the Dolphin is 
nothing yet created; for indeed they were afore- 
time men and lived in cities along with mortals, but 


ὦ κύων is here either generic, as in H. i. 378, or, if specific, 
is as unidentifiable as in A. 566 a 80 ff. of μὲν οὖν γαλεοὶ καὶ οἱ 
γαλεοειδεῖς, οἷον ἀλώπηξ καὶ κύων [the only case in Aristotle 
of κύων in sing. in connexion with Dog-fish] καὶ oi πλατεῖς 
ixOves .. . ζῳοτοκοῦσιν ῳοτοκήσαντες. 

¢ Myliobatis aquila, M.G. ἀετός. A. 540 Ὁ 18. 

7 2.6. cartilaginous fishes, the Sharks and Rays. A. 5lla5 
καλεῖται δὲ σέλαχος ὃ ἂν ἄπουν ὃν καὶ βράγχια ἔχον <worbKov ἢ. 
Cf. Hesych. s. σελάχιον. Αὐἱδέοι 65. Selachians are: (1) 
προμήκη (A. 505 a5) or γαλεώδη, Sharks and Dog-fishes ; 
ἀκανθίας, ἀλώπηξ doreplas, γαλεὸς ὁ λεῖος, κύων, σκύλια, (2) πλατέα 
καὶ κερκοφόρα (A. 489 Ὁ 31, 540} 8), the Rays; ἀετός, βατίς, 
βάτος, βοῦς, λάμια, λειόβατος, νάρκη, ῥινόβατος᾽ τρυγών. Among 
the Selachians he includes also βάτραχος (see H. ii. 86 n.) and 
ῥίνη (see H. i. 742 n.). ‘In saying that the Selachians are 
viviparous Oppian is following Aristotle, who makes {wordxov 
part of his definition of σέλαχος (see above). Cf. A. 505b3 
τὰ δὲ σελάχη πάντα ζῳοτοκεῖ πλὴν βατράχου; 564 Ὁ 12 ζῳοτοκεῖ 
δὲ τὰ σελάχη πρότερον φοτοκήσαντα ἐν αὑτοῖς καὶ ἐκτρέφουσιν ἐν 
αὑτοῖς πλὴν βατράχου; Degen. 154. ἃ, 28 τὰ δὲ καλούμενα σελάχη 
τῶν ἰχθύων ἐν αὑτοῖς μὲν ὠοτοκεῖ τέλειον ὠὸν ἔξω δὲ ζῳοτοκεῖ, πλὴν 
ἑνὸς ὃν καλοῦσι βάτραχον" οὗτος δὲ ὠοτοκεῖ θύραζε τέλειον. ὠὸν 
μόνος ; Plin. ix. 78 cum ceteri pisces ova pariant, hoc genus 
(sc. cartilaginea=ceddy7n) solum ut ea quae cete appellant 
animal parit excepta quam ranam vocant. 

9 A. 504'b 21, ete. 

b A, 489 a 35, etc. 

269 


OPPIAN 


ναῖον ὁμοῦ μερόπεσσι, Διωνύσοιο δὲ βουλῇ 650 
πόντον ὑπημείψαντο καὶ ἰχθύας ἀμφεβάλοντο 

γυίοις ἀλλ᾽ ἄρα θυμὸς ἐναίσιμος εἰσέτι φωτῶν 
ῥύεται ἀνδρομέην ἠμὲν φρόνιν ἠδὲ καὶ ἔργα. 

εὖτε γὰρ ὠδίνων δίδυμον γένος ἐς φάος ἔλθῃ, 
αὐτίχ᾽ ὁμοῦ τ᾽ ἐγένοντο περὶ σφετέρην τε τεκοῦσαν 655 
νηχόμενοι σκαίρουσι καὶ ἐνδύνουσιν ὀδόντων 

εἴσω καὶ μητρῷον ὑπὸ στόμα δηθύνουσιν- 

ἡ δὲ φιλοφροσύνῃσιν ἀνίσχεται ἀμφί τε παισὶ 
στρωφᾶται γανόωσα καὶ ἔξοχα καγχαλόωσα. 

μαζὸν δ᾽ ἀμφοτέροισι παρίσχεται, οἷον ἑκάστῳ, 600 
θήσασθαι γάλα Aapov: ἐπεί ῥά of ὦπασε δαίμων 
καὶ γάλα καὶ μαζῶν ἰκέλην φύσιν οἷα γυναικῶν. 
τόφρα μὲν οὖν τοίῃσι τιθηνείῃσι μέμηλεν: 

ἀλλ᾽ ὅτε κουρίζωσιν ἑὸν σθένος, αὐτίκα τοῖσι 

μήτηρ ἡγήτειρα κατέρχεται εἰς ὁδὸν ἄγρης 665 
ἱεμένοις θήρην τε διδάσκεται ἰχθυόεσσαν, 

οὐδὲ πάρος τεκέων ἑκὰς ἵσταται οὐδ᾽ ἀπολείπει, 
πρίν γ᾽ ὅταν ἡβήσωσι τελεσφόρα γυῖα καὶ ἀλκήν, 
ἀλλ᾽ αἰεὶ ῥυτῆρες ἐπίσκοποι ἐγγὺς ἕπονται. 

οἷον δὴ τότε θαῦμα μετὰ φρεσὶ θηήσαιο 670 
τερπωλήν τ᾽ ἐρόεσσαν, ὅτε πλώων ἐσίδηαι 

αὔρῃ ἐν εὐκραεῖ δεδοκημένος ἠὲ γαλήνῃ 

δελφίνων ἀγέλας εὐειδέας, ἵμερον ἅλμης" 

οἱ μὲν γὰρ προπάροιθεν ἀολλέες ἠὔΐτε κοῦροι 


-- 


4 The story is variously told (¢f. schol.).. The version of 
Apollod, iii. 5 is: Wishing to cross from Icaria to Naxos, 
Dionysus hired a vessel of some Tyrrhenian pirates. Putting 
him on ‘board, they sailed past Naxos and made all speed 
for Asia, with a view to selling him. He then turned mast 
and sails into snakes and filled the ship with ivy and the 


270 


HALIEUTICA, I. 650-674 


by the devising of Dionysus * they exchanged the 
land for the sea and put on the form of fishes ; but 
even now the righteous spirit of men in them pre- 
serves human thought and human deeds. For when 
the twin ὁ offspring of their travail come into the 
light, straightway;’soon as they are born they swim 
and gambo] round their mother and enter within 
her teeth and linger in the maternal mouth; and 
she for her love suffers them and circles about her 
children gaily and exulting with exceeding joy. 
And she gives them her breasts,? one to each, that 
they may suck the sweet milk; for god has given 
her milk and breasts of like nature to those of women. 
Thus for a season she nurses them ; but, when they 
attain the strength of youth, straightway their 
mother leads them in their eagerness to the way of 
hunting and teaches them the art of catching fish ; 
nor does she part from her children nor forsake them, 
until they have attained the fulness of their age in 
limb and, strength, but always the parents attend ὁ 
them to keep watch and ward. What a marvel shalt 
thou contemplate in thy heart and what sweet 
delight, when on a voyage, watching when the wind 
is fair and the sea is calm, thou shalt see the beautiful 
herds of Dolphins, the desire of the sea ; the young 
go before in a troop like youths unwed, even as if 
noise of flutes.. The pirates, becoming mad, threw them- 
selves into the sea and became Dolphins. Cf. Hom. ἢ. vii. 

> Of, C. iii. 16. 

° A. 566 Ὁ 6 τίκτει δ᾽ ὁ μὲν δελφὶς τὰ μὲν πολλὰ ἕν, ἐνίοτε δὲ 
καὶ δύο; Plin. ix. 21; ΑΕ]. i. 18; Phil. 86. 

4 A. 521 Ὁ 23 τὰ κήτη, οἷον δελφὶς καὶ φώκη καὶ φάλαινα" Kal 
yap ταῦτα μαστοὺς ἔχει καὶ γάλα. Cf. A. δ04. Ὁ 22, 566616; 
ἈΦ]. ν. 4; -Plin. ix. 7. 

.Α, δ66:} 22 παρακολουθεῖ δὲ τὰ τέκνα πολὺν χρόνον, καὶ ἔστι 
τὸ ζῷον φιλότεκνον ; Plin. l.c. 

471 


OPPIAN 


hy % , A 
ἠΐθεοι στείχουσι, νέον γένος, ὥστε χοροῖο 675 
vA 3 ΄ λ δέ λ δί δ 
κύκλον ἀμειβόμενοι πολυειδέα ποικιλοδίνην 
\ > / \ om” ole 3 / θ 
τοὶ δ᾽ ὄπιθεν μεγάλοι τε καὶ ἔξοχοι οὐδ᾽ ἀπάτερθεν 
5 ε a 
ἔρχονται τεκέων, φρουρὸς στρατός, ὥσθ᾽ ἁπαλοῖσι 
, > a 
φερβομένοις ἕσπονται ἐν εἴαρν ποιμένες ἀμνοῖς. 
ς 3 Ψ , wv + to δ 680 
ws δ᾽ ὅτε μουσοπόλων ἔργων ao παῖδες wow 
> , ¢€Q> 7.5.» . τῇ > \ ¢ 
ἀθρόοι, οἱ δ᾽ dp’ ὄπισθεν ἐπίσκοποι ἐγγὺς ἕπονται 
αἰδοῦς τε πραπίδων τε νόου τ᾽ ἐπιτιμητῆρες 
~ ,ὕ 
πρεσβύτεροι: γῆρας γὰρ ἐναίσιμον. ἄνδρα τίθησιν" 
ὡς ἄρα καὶ δελφῖνες ἑοῖς παίδεσσι τοκῆες 
Ὁ 7 / > / 5 va 
ἕσπονται, μή TL σφιν ἀνάρσιον ἀντιβολήσῃ. 685 
Nai μὴν καὶ φώκη κομέει γένος οὔτι χέρειον" 
καὶ γὰρ τῇ palol τε καὶ ἐν μαζοῖσι γάλακτος 
eye dey ¢ x lol > ΕΝ > 3). > > > A / 
εἰσὶ ῥοαί: τῇ δ᾽ οὔτι μετ᾽ οἴδμασιν ἀλλ᾽ ἐπὶ χέρσου 
,ὔ 
λύετ᾽ ἀνερχομένῃ γαστρὸς μόγος, ὥριος ὠδίς- 
, 3 la 4 
μίμνει δ᾽ ἤματα πάντα δυώδεκα. σὺν τεκέεσσιν 690 
“ A ~ a 
αὐτοῦ ἐνὶ τραφερῇ" τρισκαιδεκάτῃ δὲ σὺν ἠοῖ 
͵ὔ 
σκύμνους ἀγκὰς ἔχουσα νεαλδέας εἰς ἅλα δύνει, 
\ > 7 
παισὶν ἀγαλλομένη, πάτρην ἅτε σημαίνουσα. 
« Ἁ XN ,ὕ ,ὕ i A A 
ws δὲ γυνὴ ξείνης γαίης ἔπι παῖδα τεκοῦσα 
> , ΩΝ 
ἀσπασίως πάτρην τε καὶ Ov δόμον εἰσαφικάνει, 695 
aA > 9 3 ’ὔ 
maida δ᾽ ἐν ἀγκοίνῃσι πανηματίη. φορέουσα, 
,, V4 4 , ‘ 
δώματα δεικνυμένη, μητρὸς νομόν, ἀμφαγαπάζει, 
A > / ε 
τερπωλὴν ἀκόρεστον: ὁ δ᾽ οὐ φρονέων περ ἕκαστα 
δ / 
παπταίνει, μέγαρόν τε καὶ ἤθεα πάντα ToK wy" 
Δ + \ / / 
Ws apa Kal κείνη σφέτερον γένος εἰναλίὴ θὴρ 700 


* The reference is to children attended from school by 
their paedagogus. Schol. μουσοπόλων" ἢ σχολῆς, ἀπὸ τῶν 
σχολείων... ἐπίσκοποι" οἱ παιδαγωγοί. Of. Hor. 8. i. 6. 81 
Fase tht custos incorruptissimus omnes | Circum doctores 
aderat. 


272 


HALIEUTICA, I. 675-700 


they were going through the changing circle of a 
mazy dance; behind and not aloof their children 
come the parents great and splendid, a guardian 
host, even as in spring the shepherds attend the 
tender lambs at pasture. As when from the works 
of the Muses α children come trooping while behind 
there follow, to watch them and to be censors of 
modesty and heart and mind, men of older years: 
for age makes a man discreet; even so also the 
parent Dolphins attend their children, lest aught 
untoward encounter them. 

Yea and the Seal also tends her young no less well ; 
for she too has breasts, and in the breasts streams of 
milk.2 But not amid the waves but when she comes 
up on the dry land ὁ is she delivered of the burden 
of her womb in seasonable travail. For twelve days 
in all she remains with her children there upon the 
dry land; but with the thirteenth ὦ dawn she takes 
in her arms her young cubs and goes down into the 
sea, glorying in her children and showing them, as 
it were, their fatherland. Even as a woman that has 
borne a child in an alien land comes gladly to her 
fatherland and to gier own home; and all day long 
she carries her child in her arms and hugs him while 
she shows him the house, his mother’s home, with 
sateless delight ; and he, though he does not under- 
stand, gazes at each thing, the hall and the haunts 
of his parents; even so that wild thing of the sea 


> A. 567 a2 μαστοὺς δ᾽ ἔχει δύο καὶ θηλάζεται ὑπὸ τῶν τέκνων 
καθάπερ τὰ τετράποδα; Plin. ix. 41. 

© A. 566 "98 τίκτει ἐν τῇ γῇ μέν, πρὸς αἰγιαλοῖς δέ: Ael. 
ix. 9; Plin. ix. 41. 

4 A, 567a5 ἄγει δὲ περὶ δωδεκαταῖα ὄντα τὰ τέκνα els τὴν 
θάλατταν πολλάκις τῆς ἡμέρας, συνεθίζουσα κατὰ μικρόν : Plin. 


l.c.; ΔΕ]. ἐ.6. 
Gt Qe 


OPPIAN 


ἐς πόντον προφέρει καὶ δείκνυται ἔργα θαλάσσης. 

Δαίμονες, οὐκ ἄρα μοῦνον ἐν ἀνδράσι τέκνα 
πέλονται 

φίλτατα, καὶ φάεος γλυκερώτερα καὶ βιότοιο, 

ἀλλὰ καὶ οἰωνοῖσιν ἀμειλίκτοισί τε θηρσὶν 

ἰχθύσι τ᾽ ὠμηστῇσιν ἀμήχανος αὐτοδίδακτος 705 

ἐντρέφεται τεκέων δριμὺς πόθος ἀμφὶ δὲ παισὶ 

καὶ θανέειν καὶ πᾶσαν ὀϊζυρὴν κακότητα 

πρόφρονες, οὐκ ἀέκοντες, ἀναπλῆσαι μεμάασιν. 

ἤδη τις κατ᾽ ὄρεσφιν ἐριβρύχην ἐνόησε 

ρητὴρ τεκέεσσιν ὑπερβεβαῶτα λέοντα, 710 

μαρνάμενον σφετέρης γενεῆς ὕπερ" οὐδ᾽ 6 ye πυκνῆς 

χερμάδος ἱπταμένης οὐδ᾽ αἰγανέης ἀλεγίζει, 

ἀλλ᾽ αὔτως ἄτρεστον ἔχει θάρσος τε μένος τε, 

βαλλόμενος καὶ ἐρεικόμενος πάσῃσι βολῇσιν" 

οὐδ᾽ ὃ γε πρὶν θανέειν ἀναδύεται, ἀλλ᾽ ἐπὶ παισὶν 715 

ἡμιθανὴς προβέβηκε, μέλει δέ οἱ οὔτι μόροιο 

τόσσον, ὅσον μὴ παῖδας ὑπ᾽ ἀγρευτῆρσιν ἰδέσθαι 

ἐρχθέντας θήρειον ὑπ᾽ αὐτοκμῆτα καλιήν. 

ἤδη δ᾽ ἀρτιτόκοιο κυνὸς σκυλακοτρόφῳ εὐνῇ 

ποιμὴν ἐγχρίμψας, εἰ καὶ πάρος ἦεν ἑταῖρος, 790 

χάσσατο, ταρβήσας μητρὸς χόλόν ὑλακόεντα, 

οἷον ὑπὲρ τεκέων προφυλάσσεται, οὐδέ τιν᾽ αἰδῶ 

γιγνώσκει, πᾶσιν δὲ πέλει κρυόεσσα πελάσσαι. 

οἷον δ᾽ ἑλκομένας περὶ πόρτιας ἀσχαλόωσαι 

μητέρες οὐκ ἀπάτερθε γυναικείων στενάχουσι 725 

κωκυτῶν, αὐτοὺς δὲ συναλγύνουσι νομῆας. 

καὶ μέν τις φήνης ἀδινὸν γόον ἔκλυεν ἀνὴρ 

ὄρθριον ἀμφὶ τέκεσσ᾽, ἢ ἀηδόνος αἰολοφώνου, 


* Hom. Jl. xvii. 188 ἑστήκει ὥς τίς τε λέων περὶ οἷσι τέκεσσιν | 
ee » ε a 
ᾧ ῥά τε νήπι᾽ ἄγοντι συναντήσωνται ἐν ὕλῃ | ἄνδρες ἐπακτῆρες. 


274 


HALIEUTICA, I. 701-728 


brings her children to the water and shows them all 
the works of the deep. 

Ye gods, not alone then among men are children 
very dear, sweeter than light or life, but in birds also 
and in savage beasts and in carrion fishes there is 
inbred, mysterious’ and self-taught, a keen passion 
for their young, and for their children they are not 
unwilling but heartily eager to die and to endure all 
manner of woeful ill. Ere now on the hills a hunter 
has seen a roaring Lion bestriding his young, fight- 
ing in defence of his offspring ; 5 the thick hurtling 
stones he heeds not nor recks of the hunter’s spear 
but 411] undaunted keeps heart and spirit, though 
hit and torn by all manner of wounds; nor will he 
shrink from the combat till he die, but even half- 
dead he stands over his children to defend them, 
and not so much does he mind death as that he 
should not see his children in the hands of the 
hunters, penned in the rude ὃ wild-beast den. And 
ere now a shepherd, approaching the kennel where 
a bitch nursed her new-born whelps,° even if he were 
acquainted with her before, has drawn back in terror 
at her yelping wrath; so fiercely she guards her 
young and has no regard for any but is fearful of 
approach for all. How, too, around calves when they 
are dragged away do their grieving mothers make 
lament, not unlike the mourning of women, causing 
the very herdsmen to share their pain. Yea and a 
man hears at morn the shrill plaint for her children 
of Gier ὅ or many-noted Nightingale, or in the spring 

> Schol. αὐτοκμῆτα" . .. αὐτοφυῆ ἢ τὸ σπήλαιον λέγει τοῦ 
λέοντος. Of, αὐτόκτιτ᾽ ἄντρα Aesch. P.V. 303. 

ὁ Hom. Od. xx. 14 ὡς δὲ κύων ἀμαλῇσι περὶ σκυλάκεσσι βεβῶσα 
| ἄνδρ᾽ ἀγνοιήσασ᾽ ὑλάει μέμονέν τε μάχεσθαι. 

4 C. iii. 116 n. 

Q75 


OPPIAN 


oA My 3 a λ ὃ Ue > \ 2 σ 
ἠὲ καὶ εἰαρινῆσι χελιδόσιν ἐγγὺς ἔκυρσε 
,ὔ oh 
μυρομέναις ἑὰ τέκνα, τά τε σφίσι ληΐσσαντο 730 
~ ~ 2 4 
ἐξ εὐνῆς ἢ φῶτες ἀπηνέες ἠὲ δράκοντες. 
2 θ τᾷ 3 5" ὃ λ \ A > y ¢ λό 
ἰχθύσι δ᾽ αὖ δελφὶς μὲν ἀριστεύει φιλότητι 
i , 3 , 
παίδων, ὡς δὲ καὶ ἄλλοι ἐὸν γένος ἀμφιέπουσι. 
“ lal A ev 
Θαῦμα δ᾽ ἁλυιπλάγκτοιο κυνὸς τόδε: TH yap ἕπονται 
“ / Y ip 
τέκνα νεοβλαστῆ καί σφιν σάκος ἔπλετο μήτηρ: 735 
, 3, a 
ἀλλ᾽ ὅτε ταρβήσωσι τά τ᾽ ἄσπετα δείματ᾽ ἔασιν 
cal 2) 
ἐν πόντῳ, τότε παῖδας ἔσω λαγόνεσσιν ἔδεκτο 
>? εἶ 5. δὰ > ἣν δό ” θ ὅλ θ 
αὐτὴν εἰσίθμην, αὐτὴν ὁδόν, ἔνθεν ὄλισθον 
a / , la 
γεινόμενοι' τοῖον δὲ πόνον μογέουσά περ ἔμπης 
ἀσπασίως τέτληκε, πάλιν δ᾽ ὑπεχεύατο παῖδας 740 
/ nv + oe) / ΟΣ 5, 9 ’ὔ / 
σπλάγχνοις, ἂψ δ᾽ ἀνέηκεν, ὅτ᾽ ἀμπνεύσωσι φόβοιο. 
Τοίην καὶ ῥίνη τεκέων πορσύνεται ἀλκήν, 
ἀλλ᾽ οὐκ εἰς νηδὺν κείνῃ δύσις, οἷα κύνεσσιν, 
3 / ς > a /, > ,ὔ 
ἀλλά οἱ ἐν πλευρῇσι διασφάγες ἀμφοτέρωθεν 
ces era , Ψ , > ar " 3 
εἰσιν ὕπο πτερύγων, οἵη γένυς ἰχθύσιν ἄλλοις, 745 
τῇσιν ἀτυζομένων τέκνων φόβον ἀμφικαλύπτει. 
ἤΑλλοι δ᾽ αὖθ᾽ ἑὰ τέκνα διὰ στόμα ταρβήσαντα 
/ es 7 3 > / DA / 
δεξάμενοι ῥύονται ἅτ᾽ ἐς δόμον ἠὲ καλιήν: 
e \ \ “ Δ ” id 3 > / 
οἷον δὴ καὶ γλαῦκος, ὃς ἔξοχα τέκν ἀγαπάζει 
πάντων, ὅσσοι ἔασιν ἐν ἰχθύσιν ὠοτοκῆες" 750 
κεῖνος yap μίμνει τε παρήμενος, ὄφρα γένωνται 


* Ael. i. 17 κύων δὲ θαλαττία τεκοῦσα ἔχει συννέοντα τὰ 
σκυλάκια ἤδη καὶ οὐκ εἰς ἀναβολάς" ἐὰν δὲ δείσῃ τι τούτων, εἰς τὴν 
μητέρα εἰσέδυ αὖθις κατὰ τὸ ἄρθρον" εἶτα, τοῦ δέους παραδραμόντος, 
τὸ δὲ πρόεισιν, ὥσπερ οὖν ἀνατικτόμενον αὖθις: A. 565 Ὁ 23 οἱ 
μὲν οὖν ἄλλοι γαλεοὶ καὶ ἐξαφιᾶσι καὶ δέχονται εἰς ἑαυτοὺς τοὺς 
νεοττούς, . . . ὁ δ᾽ ἀκανθίας οὐκ εἰσδέχεται μόνος τῶν γαλεῶν διὰ 
τὴν ἄκανθαν. Cf, Athen. 294e; Plut. Mor. 989 « : Antig. 21; 
Phil. 91. In A. 1.6. the ῥίνη and the νάρκη are said to take 
in their young, while the τρυγών and the βάτος among the 


276 


HALIEUTICA, I. 729-751 


chances on the Swallows wailing for their young, 
which cruel men or snakes have harried from the 
nest. Among fishes again the Dolphin is first in love 
for its children, but others likewise care for their 
young. 

Here is the marvel of the sea-roaming Dog-fish.* 
Her new-born brood keep her company and their 
mother is their shield ; but when they are affrighted 
by any of the infinite terrors of the sea, then she 
receives her children within her loins by the same 
entry,® the same path, by which they glided forth 
when they were born. And this labour, despite her 
pain, she endures gladly, taking her children back 
within her body and putting them forth again when 
they have recovered from their fear. 

A like defence also does the Angel-shark ὁ furnish 
for her young ; but it is not into her womb that her 
children enter, as with the Dog-fish, but on either 
side below her fins she has slits, like the jaws of 
other fishes, wherewith she covers the terror of her 
frightened children. 

Others again protect their children by taking them 
into the mouth as it were into a house or nest; as, 
for example, the Glaucus ὦ which loves its children 
beyond all other fishes that are oviparous. For it 
both remains sitting by until the young come forth 
Rays (τῶν πλατέων) do not διὰ τὴν τραχύτητα τῆς κέρκου, as 
neither does the βάτραχος, διὰ τὸ μέγεθος τῆς κεφαλῆς καὶ τὰς 
ἀκάνθας (cf. De gen. 154229). Even the Dolphin and the 
Porpoise εἰσδέχονται τὰ τέκνα μικρὰ ὄντα A. 566 b 17. 

> Ael.i. 17; but Aristotle doubtless meant ‘‘by the mouth,” 
of. Athen. l.c. εἰς τὸ στόμα ; Plut. lc. διὰ τοῦ στόματος : Antig. 
l.c. κατὰ τὸ στόμα. : 

¢ H.i.381n.; A. 565 b 25 says the ῥίνη takes in its young, 
mode not indicated. 

. 4 Introduction, p. 1xi. 


277 


OPPIAN 


a ,ὔ δυο, 
παῖδες ὑπωάδιοι, καί σφιν παρανήχεται αἰεί: 
> if 
τοὺς δ᾽ ὅτε Kev τρομέοντας ἴδῃ κρατερώτερον ἰχθύν, 

7, a 
ἀμφιχανὼν κατέδεκτο διὰ στόμα, μέσφα κε δεῖμα 
χάσσηται, τότε δ᾽ αὖτις ἀνέπτυσε λευκανίηθεν. 755 

? A 
Θύννης δ᾽ οὔτιν᾽ ἔγωγ᾽ ἀθεμίστερον ἔλπομαι ἰχθὺν 
lf 
οὐδὲ κακοφροσύνῃ προβεβηκότα ναιέμεν ἅλμην" 
ὠὰ γὰρ εὖτε τέκῃσι, φύγῃ δ᾽ ὠδῖνα βαρεῖαν, 
αὐτὴ γειναμένη καταδαίνυται ὅσσα κίχῃσι, 
4, av > ey / ~ ” AQ? 27 
νηλής, 7 θ᾽ ἑὰ τέκνα φυγῆς ἔτι νηΐϊδ᾽ ἐόντα 760 
ἐσθίει, οὐδέ μιν οἶκτος ἐσέρχεται οἷο τόκοιο. 
᾿ ESAS ᾽, if f », - 
ἔστι δ᾽ ὅσ᾽ οὔτε γάμοισι φυτεύεται οὔτε γονῇσι 
τίκτεται, αὐτοτέλεστα καὶ αὐτόρρεκτα γένεθλα, 
ὄστρεα δὴ σύμπαντα, τά γ᾽ ἰλύϊ τίκτεται αὐτῇ: 
κείνων δ᾽ οὔτε τι θῆλυ πέλει γένος, οὔτ᾽ ἐπ’ ἀμοιβῆς 765 
ν 3 θα / \ ” , / 
ἄρσενες, ἀλλ᾽ ὁμόφυλα καὶ εἴκελα πάντα τέτυκται. 
Δ \ \ 3, ὃ “-“ 3 4 5A \ ” 
ὡς δὲ καὶ ἠπεδανῆς ἀφύης ὁ υγηπελὲς ἔθνος 
οὔτινος ἐκγεγάασιν ad’ αἵματος οὐδὲ τοκήων" 
x A > / \ / ” 5 Phi 
εὖτε yap ἐκ νεφέων Ζηνὸς νόος ὄμβρον ἀφύξῃ 
λάβρον ὑπὲρ πόντοιο καὶ ἄσχετον, αὐτίκα πᾶσα 770 
μισγομένη δίνῃσι παλιμπνοίῃσι θάλασσα 
oiler τ᾽ ἀφριάᾳ τε καὶ ἵσταται οἰδαίνουσα, 


* Here generic = ὀστρακόδερμα, Testaceans. Cf. A. 490 b 9 
ἄλλο δὲ γένος ἐστὶ τὸ τῶν ὀστρακοδέρμων, ὃ καλεῖται ὄστρεον. Cf. 
Nicandr. ap. Athen. 92d. For their spontaneous genera- 
tion, A. 547b 18 ὅλως δὲ πάντα τὰ ὀστρακώδη γίνεται καὶ αὐτόματα 
ἐν τῇ ἰλύι, κατὰ τὴν διαφορὰν τῆς ἰλύος ἕτερα, ἐν μὲν τῇ βορβορώδει 
τὰ ὄστρεα (Hhere=bivalve Testaceans), ἐν δὲ τῇ ἀμμώδει κόγχαι 
καὶ τὰ εἰρημένα, περὶ δὲ τὰς σήραγγας τῶν πετριδίων τήθυα καὶ 
βάλανοι καὶ τὰ ἐπιπολάζοντα, οἷον αἱ λεπάδες καὶ οἱ νηρεῖται. 

» ἀφύη (ἀ- neg. and φύω, of. Athen. 324 4) is generic for 
various tiny fishes and fish-fry. Some ἀφύαι are said by 
Aristotle to be spontaneously generated, others are merely 
the young of various fishes lof, ἑψητός or Eng. Whitebait) ; 
278 


HALIEUTICA, I. 752-772 


from the eggs and always swims beside them; and 
when it sees them afraid of a strange fish it opens its 
_ gape and takes them into its mouth until the terror 

has withdrawn, and then again ejects them from its 
throat. 

Than the Tunny I deem there is no fish that dwells 
in the brine more lawless or which exceeds it in 
wickedness of heart ; for when she has laid her eggs 
and escaped from the grievous travail of birth, the 
very mother that bare them devours all that she 
can overtake : pitiless mother who devours her own 
children while yet they are ignorant of flight and 
hath no compassion on her brood. 

There are also those which are not produced by 
bridal or birth—races self-created and self-made : 
even all the Oysters,* which are produced by the 
slime itself. Of these there is no female sex nor, in 
turn, are there any males, but all are of one nature 
and alike. 

So also the weak race of the feeble Fry ὃ are born 
of no blood and of no parents. For when from the 
clouds the wisdom of Zeus draws rain, fierce and 
incontinent, upon the deep, straightway all the sea, 
confounded by the eddying winds, hisses and foams 


A. 569 225 ὅτι μὲν οὖν γίνεται αὐτόματα ἔνια οὔτ᾽ ἐκ ζῴων οὔτ᾽ 
ἐξ ὀχείας, φανερὸν ἐκ τούτων. ὅσα δὲ μήτ᾽ φοτοκεῖ μήτε ζῳοτοκεῖ, 
πάντα γίνεται τὰ μὲν ἐκ τῆς ἰλύος τὰ δ᾽ ἐκ τῆς ἄμμου καὶ τῆς 
ἐπιπολαζούσης σήψεως. οἷον καὶ τῆς ἀφύης ὁ καλούμενος ἀφρὸς 
γίνεται ἐκ τῆς ἀμμώδους γῆς ; 569 b 22 ἡ ἄλλη ἀφύη γόνος ἰχθύων 
ἐστίν, 6.7.» κωβῖτις, Φαληρική, ete. 5 of. Athen. 284 f ff., Badham, 
Fish Tattle, p. 330 ‘* This Greek epithet, aphya, ‘unborn,’ 
translated into the Italian equivalent non-nati, is that 
employed by the lazzaroni of Naples to designate young 
anchovies, and a variety of other piccoli peset of whose origin 
and parentage they are uncertain ”; ¢f. Ael. ii. 22; Phil. 
115; Poll. vi. 51; Hesych. 9.0. and 5. τριχθάδες. 

279 


OPPIAN 


ai δ᾽ ἐν ἀτεκμάρτοισι καὶ ἀσκέπτοισι γάμοισιν - 
ἀθρόαι ἔκ τ᾽ ἐγένοντο καὶ ἔτραφον ἔκ τ᾽ ἐφάνησαν 
, 
μυρίαι, ἀβληχραί, πολιὸν γένος ἐὶς δὲ γενέθλης 775 
οὔνομ᾽ ἐπικλήδην ἀφρίτιδες αὐδώωνται. 
+ > > la ¢ \ / , 
ἄλλαι δ᾽ ἰλυόεντος ὑπὲκ φλοίσβοιο φύονται: 
εὖτε γὰρ ἐν δίνῃσι παλιρροίῃς τε θαλάσσης 
βράσσηται πάμφυρτος ἀφυσγετὸς ἐξ ἀνέμοιο 
σπερχομένου, τότε πᾶσα συνίσταται εἰς ἕν ἰοῦσα 180 
ἰλὺς εὐρώεσσα, γαληναίης δὲ ταθείσης 
ἐξαυτῆς ψάμαθός τε καὶ ἄσπετα φύρματα πόντου 
4 bs Ν vA > / wv ΕΣ an 
πύθεται, ἐκ δὲ φύονται ἀθέσφατοι, εἴκελοι εὐλαῖς. 
οὐ μέν πού τι τέτυκται ἀκιδνότερον γένος ἄλλο 
,ὔ > t yd A ~ wv 
δειλαίης ἀφύης- νεπόδεσσι δὲ πᾶσιν εασι 785 
a > /, “- A ta 4 
dais ἀγαθή" κεῖναι δὲ δέμας περιλιχμάζουσιν 
3 / / / A ,ὔ / ,ὔ 
ἀλλήλων: τό γε δέ σφι βορὴ βίοτός τε τέτυκται- 
a 3 > A 3 ,ὕ ΨΈΝ 
κεῖναι δ᾽ εὖτε θάλασσαν ἀολλήδην ἐφέπωσιν, 
ἠέ νύ που πέτρην ἀμφίσκιον ἠὲ θαλάσσης 
διζόμεναι κευθμῶνας ὑποβρυχίην τ᾽ ἀλεωρήν, 790 
~ Ψ \ / 
πᾶσα τότε γλαυκὴ λευκαίνεται ᾿Αμφιτρίτη. 
ὡς δ᾽ ὁπότ᾽ εὐρύπεδον σκιάσῃ νιφάδεσσιν awry 
ἑσπερίου Ζεφύροιο θοὸν μένος, οὐδέ τι γαίης 
κυανέης ἰδέειν ὑποφαίνεται, ἀλλ᾽ ἄρα πᾶσα 
ἀργεννὴ χιόνεσσιν ἐπασσυτέραις κεκάλυπται: ἈἊἧΤἧΡδ 
,ὕ 
ὡς τότ᾽ ἀπειρεσίῃσι περιπληθὴς ἀγέλῃσι 
, 
φαίνεται ἀργινόεσσα Ποσειδάωνος ἀλωή. 


* Athen. 285 a πάντων δὲ τούτων ἡ ἀφρῖτις ἀρίστη. Cf. A. 
ὅ609 "9 γίνονται δ᾽ ἐν τοῖς ἐπισκίοις καὶ ἑλώδεσι τόποις, ὅταν 


280 


HALIEUTICA, I. 773-797 


and swells up and, by what manner of mating is 
beyond ken or guess, the Fry in shoals are born and 
bred and come to light, numberless and feeble, a 
hoary brood; and from the manner of their birth 
they are nicknamed the Daughters of the Foam.* 
And others of the Fry spring from the alluvial slime ; 
for when in the eddies and tides of the sea a medley 
mass of scum is washed up by the driving wind, then 
all the slimy silt comes together and when calm is 
spread abroad, straightway the sand and the infinite 
refuse of the sea ferment and therefrom spring the 
Fry innumerable like worms. There is not surely 
any other race more feeble than the poor Fry ; for 
all fishes they are a goodly feast, but themselves they 
lick each the body of the other: that is their food 
and livelihood: And when in their shoals they beset 
the sea, seeking haply a shady rock or covert of the 
sea and watery shelter, then all the grey deep shows 


‘ white. As when the swift might of Zephyrus from 


the West shadows with snow-flakes a spacious garden 
and nothing of the dark earth appears to the eye, but 
all is white and covered with snow on snow ; even so 
in that season, full to overflowing with the infinite 


; shoals of Fry, white shines the garden of Poseidon. 


εὐημερίας γενομένης ἀναθερμαίνεται ἡ γῆ, οἷον περὶ ᾿Αθήνας ἐν 
Σαλαμῖνι. . καὶ ἐν Μαραθῶνι" ἐν γὰρ τούτοις τοῖς τόποις γίνεται 
ὁ ἀφρός. . .. γίνεται δ᾽ ἐνιαχοῦ καὶ ὁπόταν ὕδωρ πολὺ ἐξ οὐρανοῦ 
γένηται, ἐν τῷ ἀφρῷ τῷ γιγνομένῳ ὑπὸ τοῦ ὀμβρίου ὕδατος, διὸ καὶ 
καλεῖται ἀφρός" καὶ ἐπιφέρεται ἐνίοτε ἐπιπολῆς τῆς θαλάττης, ὅταν 
εὐημερία ἢ, ἐν ᾧ συστρέφεται, οἷον ἐν τῇ κόπρῳ τὰ σκωλήκια, οὕτως 
ἐν τούτῳ ὁ ἀφρός, ὅπου ἂν συστῇ ἐπιπολῆς. 


281 


AAIEYTIKON TO B 


*QS8e μὲν ἰχθύβοτοί τε νομαὶ καὶ φῦλα θαλάσσης 
“ / a 
πλάζονται" τοιῷδε γάμῳ, τοιῇδε γενέθλῃ 
τέρπονται" τὰ δέ πού τις ἐπιχθονίοισιν ἅπαντα 
/ 

ἀθανάτων onunves τί yap μερόπεσσιν ἀνυστὸν 
νόσφι θεῶν; οὐδ᾽ ὅσσον ὑπὲκ ποδὸς ἴχνος ἀεῖραι, ὅ 

Φ 0... —& > ,ὔ / / (6 
οὐδ᾽ ὅσον ἀμπετάσαι βλεφάρων περιφαέα κύκλα: 
ἀλλ᾽ αὐτοὶ κρατέουσι καὶ ἰθύνουσιν ἕκαστα, 
τηλόθεν ἐγγὺς ἐόντες" ἀναγκαίη δ᾽ ἀτίνακτος 

/ \ > + / / > / > \ 
πείθεσθαι" τὴν δ᾽ οὔτι πέλει σθένος οὐδέ τις ἀλκὴ 
τρηχείαις γενύεσσιν. ὑπερφιάλως ἐρύσαντα 10 
ἐκφυγέειν, ἅτε πῶλον ἀποπτυστῆρα χαλινῶν" 
ἀλλ᾽ αἰεὶ μάκαρες πανυπέρτατοι ἡνία πάντη 

, > ® > 27 eq Ψ 
κλίνουσ᾽, ἣ κ᾽ ἐθέλωσιν, ὁ δ᾽ ἕσπεται ὅστε σαόφρων, 
πρὶν χαλεπῇ μάστιγι καὶ οὐκ ἐθέλων ἐλάηται. 
κεῖνοι καὶ τέχνας πολυκερδέας ἀνθρώποισιν 1ὅ 
δῶκαν ἔχειν καὶ πᾶσαν ἐπιφροσύνην ἐνέηκαν. 
x > > ,ὔ 3 lA μ᾿ / 
ἄλλος δ᾽ ἀλλοίοισιν ἐπώνυμος ἔπλετο δαίμων 

ΓῚ , 
ἔργοις, οἷσιν ἕκαστος ἐπίσκοπον ἤρατο τιμήν. 
\ \ , ~ 3 / / / 

aw μὲν CevyAns τε Bod OTOL 

Δηὼ μὲν ζεύγλης te βοῶν ἀρότοιό τε γαίης 


* ποδὸς ἴχνος is So common a periphrasis for πούς (Eur. 
1. in T, 752 ete.), and αἴρω (Eur. Tr, 342 μὴ κοῦφον αἴρῃ BAW 
és ᾿Αργείων στρατόν) so naturally refers to ‘lifting’ the foot, 
that this seems the safer rendering. Nor does ὑπέκ cause 
any difficulty (Soph. Ant. 224 κοῦφον ἐξάρας πόδα, Anonym. 
Poet. ap. Suid. 5, Ταῦρος... τὸν αὐχένα | κυρτῶς ὑπεξαίροντι). 


282 


δο 


HALIEUTICA, or FISHING 
II - 


Tuus do fishes range and feed, thus roam the tribes 
of the sea; in such mating, in such breeding they 
delight. All these things, I ween, someone of the 
immortals hath showed to men. For what can 
mortals accomplish without the gods? Nay, not 
even so much as lift a foot from the ground ¢ or open 
the bright orbs of the eyes. The gods themselves 
rule and direct everything, being far, yet very near. 
And doom unshakable constrains men to obey, and 
there is no strength nor might whereby one may 
haughtily wrench? with stubborn jaws and escape 
that doom, as a colt that spurns the bit. But ever- 
more the gods who are above all turn the reins all 
ways even as they will, and he who is wise obeys 
before he is driven by the cruel lash unwillingly. 
The gods also have given to men cunning arts and 
have put in them all wisdom. Other god is namesake 
of other craft, even that whereof he hath got the 
honourablé keeping. Deo° hath the privilege of 
The Schol, has τὸν πόδα ἐκ τοῦ ἴχνους, and a possible rendering 
would be ‘‘to move one foot past another. Cf. Hom. J]. ix. 
547 ὀλίγον γόνυ γουνὸς ἀμείβων. ἢ 
> Kor the behaviour of the ἄστομος πῶλος ΟΥ̓́“ unmouthed ” 
colt cf. Aesch. Pers. 195 συναρπάζει Bia, Soph. Hi. 723, Eur. 
Hipp. 1224 Bia φέρουσιν, Aesch. Ag. 1066, Xen. Hq. 3. 5. 
ὁ Demeter. 
283 


OPPIAN 


~ 2. 9. ὔ i. , > an 20 
πυρῶν τ᾽ εὐκάρποιο φέρει γέρας ἀμητοῖο. 
~ “. , ih 
δοῦρα δὲ τεκτήνασθαι ἀναστῆσαί τε μέλαθρα, 
φάρεά τ᾽ ἀσκῆσαι μήλων εὐανθέϊ καρπῷ 
aA ay 
Παλλὰς ἐπιχθονίους ἐδιδάξατο- δῶρα ὃ Ἄρηος 
φάσγανα χάλκειοί τε περὶ ἵμελέεσσι χιτῶνες 
~ e epi ,ὔ 
καὶ κόρυθες καὶ δοῦρα καὶ οἷς ἐπιτέρπετ᾽ ᾿Ενυώ. 25 
A 3 > Ἂν 
δῶρα δὲ Μουσάων τε καὶ ᾿Απόλλωνος ἀοιδαί. 
Ἥ ἢ δ᾽ > 4 2 iA id > ZOY. 
ρμείης ἀγορήν τε. καὶ ἀλκήεντας ἀέθλους 
δ νὰ € , 
ὦπασεν. “Ἡφαίστῳ δὲ μέλει ῥαιστήριος ἱδρώς. 
, 
καὶ τάδε τις πόντοιο νοήματα καὶ τέλος aypns 
πληθύν θ᾽ ὑγροπόρων θεὸς ὦπασε τεκμήρασθαι 80 
ἀνδράσιν, ὃς καὶ πρῶτα μεσορραγέας κενεῶνας 
γαίης ἀγρομένοισιν ἐνιπλήσας ποταμοῖσι 
πευκεδανὴν ἀνέχευε καὶ ἐξέστεψε θάλασσαν, 
ὀφρύσι καὶ ῥηγμῖσι περίδρομον ἀμφιπεδήσας, 
εἴτε μιν εὐρυμέδοντα Ἰ]οσειδάωνα καλέσσαι, 85 
ἌΓ: + A ~ ὕ “5; + , - 
ett apa καὶ Νηρῆα παλαίφατον, εἴτ apa Φόρκυν 
/ wv > y+ (3 A A 2 “- 
βέλτερον, εἴτε τιν᾽ ἄλλον ἁλὸς θεὸν ἰθυντῆρα. 
ἀλλ᾽ « A Ζ ὔ Ψ 9 » + 
ἀλλ΄ οἱ μὲν μάλα πάντες, ὅσοι T Οὔλυμπον ἔχουσι 
δαίμονες οἵ τε θάλασσαν ὅσοι τ᾽ eVdwpov ἄρουραν 
ἠέρα τ᾽ ἐνναίουσι, πανίλαον ἦτορ ἔχοιεν 40 
σοί τε, μάκαρ σκηπτοῦχε, καὶ ἀγλαόπαιδι γενέθλῃ 
καὶ λαοῖς σύμπασι καὶ ἡμετέρῃσιν ἀοιδαῖς. 
᾿Ιχθύσι δ᾽ οὔτε δίκη μεταρίθμιος οὔτε τις αἰδώς, 
» , ig A > if > , 
οὐ φιλότης- πάντες γὰρ ἀνάρσιοι ἀλλήλοισι 
δυσμενέες πλώουσιν: 6 δὲ κρατερώτερος αἰεὶ 45 
’ 9) > » 
δαίνυτ ἀφαυροτέρους, ἄλλῳ δ᾽ ἐπινήχεται ἄλλος 


« Goddess of War. 

Ὁ Hor. C. i. 10. 1 Mereuri facunde nepos Atlantis. 

© Pind. J. i. 60 ἀγώνιος Ἑρμᾶς. 

* Hesiod, W. 276 τόνδε γὰρ ἀνθρώποισι νόμον διέταξε Kpovtwy, 
| ἰχθυσὶ μὲν καὶ θηρσὶ καὶ οἰωνοῖς πετεηνοῖς [ ἐσθέμεν ἀλλήλους, 
284 


HALIEUTIGCA, II. 20-46 


yoking oxen and ploughing the fields and reaping the 
fruitful harvest of wheat. Carpentry of wood and 
building of houses and weaving of cloth with the 
goodly wool of sheep—these hath Pallas taught to 
men. The gifts of Ares are swords and brazen 
tunics to array thé limbs and helmets and spears and 
whatsoever things Enyo ¢ delights in. The gifts of 
the Muses and Apollo are songs. Hermes hath 
bestowed eloquence ὃ and doughty feats of strength.¢ 
Hephaestus hath in his charge the sweaty toil of the 
hammer. These devices also of the sea and the 
business of fishing and the power to mark the multi- 
tude of fishes that travel in the water—these hath 
some god given to men; even he who also first filled 
the rent bowels of earth with the gathered rivers and 
poured forth the bitter sea and wreathed it as a 
garland, confining it about with crags and beaches ; 
whether one should more fitly call him wide-ruling 
Poseidon or ancient Nereus or Phorcys, or other god 
that rules the sea. But may all the gods that keep 
Olympus, and they that dwell in the sea, or on the 
bounteous earth, or in the air, have a gracious heart 
toward thee, O blessed wielder of the sceptre, and 
toward thy glorious offspring and to all thy people 
' and to our song. 

Among fishes neither justice? is of any account 
nor is there any mercy nor love ; for all the fish that 
. Swim are bitter foes to one another. The stronger ὁ 
ever devours the weaker; this against that swims 


ἐπεὶ οὐ δίκη ἐστὶν ἐν αὐτοῖς ; Plut. Mor. 9648 and ibid. 970 B 
ἄμικτα γὰρ ἐκεῖνα (τὰ ἔναλα ζῷα) κομιδῇ πρὸς χάριν καὶ ἄστοργα $ 
Ael. vi. 50. 

¢ Shakesp. Per. ii. 1, Fisherman iii. Master, I marvel 
how the fishes live in the sea. Fisherman i. Why, as men 
do a-land; the great ones eat up the little ones. 


285 


OPPIAN 


/ . + tA δ᾽ ξ΄ τὶ ΝΣ 25 ὃ Ἕ 
πότμον ἄγων, ἕτερος δ᾽ ἑτέρῳ πόῤσυνεν ἐδωδήν. 
οὗ μὲν γὰρ γενύεσσι καὶ ἠνορέῃ βιόωνται ἷ 
an a A 
χειροτέρους" τοῖς δ᾽ ἰὸν ἔχει στόμα" τοῖσι δ᾽ ἄκανθαι 
τύμμασι λευγαλέοισιν ἀμυνέμεναι πεφύασι, 50 
a / 
πικραί τ᾽ ὀξεῖαί τε χόλου πυρόεντος ἀκωκαί. 
ὅσσοις δ᾽ οὔτε βίην θεὸς ὥπασεν οὔτε τι κέντρον 
θήγεται ἐκ μελέων, τοῖς δ᾽ ἐκ φρενὸς ὅπλον ἔφυσε 
βουλὴν κερδαλέην, πολυμήχανον, οἵ τε δόλοισι 
πολλάκι καὶ κρατερὸν καὶ ὑπέρτερον ὥλεσαν ἰχθύν. 55 
Οἷον καὶ νάρκῃ τερενόχροϊ φάρμακον ἀλκῆς 
ἕσπεται αὐτοδίδακτον ἐν οἰκείοισι μέλεσσιν. 
ἡ μὲν γὰρ μαλακή τε δέμας καὶ πᾶσ᾽ ἀμενηνὴ 
νωθής τε βραδυτῆτι βαρύνεται, οὐδέ κε φαίης 
/ ¢ / / Ni Uf / 
νηχομένην opaav: μάλα yap δύσφραστα κέλευθα 60 
εἱλεῦται πολιοῖο δι’ ὕδατος ἑρπύζουσα- 
> / € > i, > / / > 7 
ἀλλά ot ἐν. Aaydvecow ἀναλκείης δόλος ἀλκή" 
κερκίδες ἐμπεφύασι παρὰ πλευραῖς ἑκάτερθεν 
ἀμφίδυμοι" τῶν εἴ τις ἐπιψαύσειε πελάσσας, 
ora ἡ ς / iD ” > / « τς 
αὐτικα OL μελέων σθένος ἔσβεσεν, ἐν δέ οἱ ala 65 
/ ΟΞ, ΨΚ aA / uA > > / 6119 A 
πήγνυται, οὐδ᾽ ἔτι γυῖα φέρειν δύνατ᾽, ἀλλά οἱ ἀλκὴ 
ἧκα μαραινομένοιο παρίεται ἄφρονι νάρκῃ. 
ἡ δ᾽ εὖ γινώσκουσα θεοῦ γέρας οἷον ἔδεκτο, 
ὕπτιον ἀγκλίνασα μένει δέμας ἐν ψαμάθοισι" 
a > 
κεῖται δ᾽ ἀστεμφὴς οἵη νέκυς" ὃς δέ Kev ixOds τὸ 


α Οὐ iv. 25 ff.; A. P.A. 662 Ὁ 33 ff. ; A. 591 b 14 πολλάκις 
δὲ καὶ ἀλλήλων ἅπτονται... καὶ τῶν ἐλαττόνων οἱ μείζους. 

δ The Torpedo or Electric Ray. Three species occur in 
Mediterranean—Torpedo marmorata Risso, M.G. μουδιάστρα 
(Apost. p. 6), 1. narce, T. hebetans; A. 505 a-506 b, 540 b 18, 
οἷς, ΑΘ 6]. tix, ὙΠ εὐ ΘΟ eter Antig. 53; Phil. 86: 
Athen. 314; Plut. Mor. 9788; Plin. ix. 143; Claudian, xlix. 
(xlvi. Gesner). The Torpedo has a pair of large electric 
organs between the pectoral fin and the head, 


286 


HALIEUTICA, II. 47-70 


fraught with doom and one for another furnishes 
food. Some* overpower the weaker by force of 
jaws and strength; others have venomous mouth ; 
others have spines wherewith to defend them with 
deadly blows—bitter, sharp points of fiery wrath. 
And those to whorii God hath not given strength, and 
who have no sharp sting springing from the body, to 
these he hath given a weapon of the mind, even 
crafty counsel of many devices; these by guile 
ofttimes destroy a strong. and mightier fish. 

Thus the Cramp-fish ὃ of tender flesh is endowed 
with a specific of valour, self-taught in its own limbs. 
For soft of body and altogether weak and sluggish it 
is weighed down with slowness, and you could not 
say you 566 it swimming ; hard to mark is its path as 
it crawls and creeps through the grey water. But in 
its loins it hath a piece of craft, its strength in weak- 
ness : even two rays planted in its sides, one on either 
hand. If one approach and touch these, straightway 
it quenches the strength of his body and his blood is 
frozen within him and his limbs can no longer carry 
him but he quietly pines away and his strength is 
drained by stupid torpor. Knowing well? what a 
gift it hath received from God, the Cramp-fish lays 
itself supine among the sands and so remains, lying 
unmoving as a corpse. But any fish that touches its 

° A. 620b25 ἁλίσκονται (βάτραχος, νάρκη, τρυγών) γὰρ 
ἔχοντες κεστρέας πολλάκις ὄντες αὐτοὶ βραδύτατοι τὸν τάχιστον 
τῶν ἰχθύων ; Claudian, 1.6. 3 Illa quidem mollis .segnique 
obnixa natatu | Reptat. 

4 Plin. ix. 143 novit torpedo vim suam ipsa non torpens 
mersaque in limo se occultat piscium qui supernantes 
obtorpuere corripiens; Claudian, /.c. 8 Conscia sortis | 
Utitur ingenio longeque extenta per algas | Attactu confisa 


subit. Immobilis haeret: | Qui tetigere iacent. Successu 
laeta resurgit | Et vivos impune ferox depascitur artus. 


287 


OPPIAN 


ἐγχρίμψῃ λαγόνεσσιν, ὁ μὲν λύτο, κάππεσε δ᾽ αὕτως 
ἀδρανίης αθὺν ὕπνον, ἀμηχανίῃσι πεδηθείς- 
ἡ δὲ θοῶς ἀνόρουσε καὶ οὐ κραιπνή περ ἐοῦσα, 
γηθοσύνη, ζωὸν δὲ κατεσθίει ἢ too θανόντι. 
πολλάκι καὶ κατὰ “λαῖτμα μετ᾽ ἰχθύσιν ἀντιάσασα 
νηχομένοις κραυπνὴν μὲν ἐπειγομένων σβέσεν ὁ ὁρμὴν 
ἐγγὺς ἐπιψαύσασα καὶ ἐσσυμένους ἐπέδησεν" 
ἔσταν δ᾽ αὐαλέοι καὶ ἀμήχανοι, οὔτε κελεύθων 
δύσμοροι οὔτε φυγῆς μεμνημένοι" ἡ δὲ “μένουσα 
οὐδὲν ἀμυνομένους καταδαίνυται οὐδ᾽ ἀΐοντας. 
οἷον δ᾽ ὀρφναίοισιν ἐν εἰδώλοισιν ὀνείρων 
ἀνδρὸς ἀτυζομένοιο καὶ ἱεμένοιο φέβεσθαι 
θρώακει μὲν κραδίη, τὰ δὲ γούνατα παλλομένοιο 
ἀστεμφὴς ἅτε δεσμὸς ἐπειγομένοιο βαρύνει, 
τοίην γυιοπέδην τεχνάζεται ἰχθύσι νάρκη. 

Βάτραχος αὖ νωθὴς μὲν ὁμῶς καὶ μαλθακὸς ἰχθύς, 

α Hom. Zl. xxii. 199 (of Achilles and Hector) ὡς δ᾽ ἐν 
ὀνείρῳ οὐ δύναται φεύγοντα διώκειν" οὔτ᾽ ἄρ᾽ ὁ τὸν δύναται 
ὑποφεύγειν οὔθ᾽ ὁ διώκειν : of. Verg. A. xii. 908 Ac velut in 
somnis, oculos ubi languida pressit | Nocte quies, nequid- 
quam avidos extendere cursus | Velle videmur et in mediis 
conatibus aegri | Succidimus. 

> Lophius piscatorius L., M.G. ¢dacxa at Chalcis, 
σκλεμποῦ and βατραχόψαρο αἱ Patras (Apost. p. 10). Fr. 
Loup de mer, Diable, Crapaud de mer, etc. In this country 
Angler, Sea-devil, etc. It is not infrequently cast ashore in 
Scotland, especially on the E. coast. The attention of the 
present writer was called (by his son J. L. R. M.) to a fine 
specimen ae Largo in Fife, April 1927, where it lay amid 
a crowd of Lump-fish, Cyclopterus lumpus, hen-paidle and 
cock-paidle (Scott, Antiquary c. xi.); of. St. John, V.H. in 
Moray, p. 210; A. 540b 18, 620b 11 ff. βάτραχον τὸν ἁλιέα ; 
De gen. 749 a 28, etc. 9 Ael. ix. 24; Athen. 286 b, 330 a; 
Plin. ix. 78 ranae, 143 nec minor sollertia: ranae quae in 
mari piscatrix vocatur. Eminentia sub oculis cornicula 
turbato limo exerit, adsultantibus pisciculis retrahens, donec 
tam prope accedant ut adsiliat ; Ov. Hal. 126 molles tergore 
288 


75 


80 


85 


HALIEUTICA, II. 71-86 


loins is paralysed and falls even so into the deep sleep 
of weakness, fettered by helplessness. And the 
Cramp-fish, albeit not swift, speedily leaps up in joy 
and devours the living fish as if it were dead. Many 
times also when it,meets with fishes swimming in the 
gulf of the sea, it quenches with its touch their swift 
career for all their haste and checks them in mid 
course. And they stay, blasted and helpless, think- 
ing not, poor wretches, either of going on or of flight. 
But the Cramp-fish stays by and devours them, while 
they make no defence nor are conscious of their fate. 
Even as in the darkling phantoms of a dream,* when 
a man is terrified and fain to flee, his heart leaps, but, 
struggle as he may, a steadfast bond as it were weighs 
down his eager knees: even such a fetter doth the 
Cramp-fish devise for fishes. 

The Fishing-frog ὃ again is likewise a sluggish and 


ranae; Cicero Δ... ii. 125 Ranae autem marinae dicuntur 
obruere sese arena solere et moyveri prope aquam: ad quas 
quasi ad escam pisces cum accesserint confici a ranis atque 
consumi. ‘The first dorsal ray, inserted on the snout, is 
very long, movable in every direction, and terminates in a 
dermal flap, which is supposed to be used by the ‘ Angler’ 
as a bait, attracting other fishes, which are soon ingulfed 
in the enormous gape” C.N.H. vii. p. 718; Aristotle, 
classifying it as a Selachian and holding all Selachians to 
be viviparous, notes the βάτραχος as the one exception (A. 
505b3 τὰ δὲ σελάχη πάντα ζῳοτόκα πλὴν βατράχου: cf. 
564 18, ete., De gen. 749 ἃ 23). In De gen. 754a 26 he 
gives as the reason for this the immense size of its head— 
πολλαπλασίαν τοῦ λοιποῦ σώματος καὶ ταύτην ἀκανθώδη Kal 
σφόδρα τραχεῖαν. διόπερ οὐδ᾽ ὕστερον εἰσδέχεται τοὺς νεοττοὺς 
οὐδ᾽ ἐξ ἀρχῆς ζῳοτοκεῖ. ““ΠῚῪ y avait une bien meilleure réponse 
ἃ faire, c’est que la baudroie n’est pas un cartilagineux et 
d’ailleurs il s’en faut beaucoup que les autres cartilagineux 
soient tous vivipares; enfin, ni les poissons cartilagineux ni 
les autres ne font rentrer leurs petits dans leur corps” 


Cuvier, xii. p. 363. 
U 289 


OPPIAN 


αἴσχιστος δ᾽ ἰδέειν: στόμα δ᾽ οἴγεται εὐρὺ μάλιστα: 
arr’ ἄρα καὶ τῷ μῆτις ἀνεύρατο γαστέρι φορβήν. 
αὐτὸς μὲν πηλοῖο κατ᾽ εὐρώεντος ἐλυσθεὶς 

κέκλιται ἀτρεμέων, ὀλίγην. δ᾽ ἀνὰ σάρκα τιταίνει, 90 
ἡἥ ῥά οἱ ἐκ γένυος νεάτης ὑπένερθε πέφυκε 

λεπτή 7 ἀργεννή τε, κακὴ δέ οἱ ἐστὶν ἀὐτμή:" 

τὴν θαμὰ δινεύει, δόλον ἰχθύσι βαιοτέροισιν' 

οἵ ῥά μιν εἰσορόωντες ἐφορμώωσι λαβέσθαι. 

αὐτὰρ ὁ τὴν ἂψ αὖτις ἐφέλκεται ἀτρέμας εἴσω, 95 
ἦκα μάλ᾽ ἀσπαίρουσαν ὑπὸ στόμα, τοὶ δ᾽ ἐφέπονται 
οὐδὲν ὀϊόμενοι κρυπτὸν δόλον, ὄφρα λάθωσι 
βατράχου εὐρείῃσιν ἔσω γενύεσσι μιγέντες. 

ὡς δ᾽ ὅτε τις κούφοισι πάγην ὄρνισι τιτύσκων, 
πυροὺς τοὺς μὲν ἔρηνε δόλου προπάροιθε πυλάων, 100 
ἄλλους δ᾽ ἔνδον ἔθηκεν, ὑπεστήριξε δὲ τέχνην: 

τοὺς δὲ λιλαιομένους ἕλκει πόθος ὀξὺς ἐδωδῆς, 

εἴσω δὲ προγένοντο, καὶ οὐκέτι νόστος ἑτοῖμος 
ἐκδῦναι, δαιτὸς δὲ κακὴν εὕραντο τελευτήν" 

ὡς κείνους ἀμενηνὸς ἐπέσπασεν ἠπεροπεύσας 105 
βάτραχος, οὐδ᾽ ἐνόησαν ἐὸν σπεύδοντες ὄλεθρον. 
τοῖα καὶ ἀγκυλόμητιν ἐπέκλυον ἐντύνααθαι 

κερδώ:" OT οἰωνῶν ἀγέλην πλήθουσαν ἴδηται, 

δοχμίη ἀγκλινθεῖσα, τανυσσαμένη θοὰ κῶλα, 

ὄμματ᾽ ἐπιμύει, σὺν δὲ στόμα πάμπαν ἐρείδει. 110 
φαίης κ᾽ εἰσορόων ἢ μιν βαθὺν ὕπνον ἰαύειν, 

ἠὲ καὶ ἀτρεκέως κεῖσθαι νέκυν: ὧδε γὰρ ἄπνους 
αἰόλα βουλεύουσα παραβλήδην τετάνυσται" 

οἱ δέ μιν εἰσορόωντες ἀολλέες ἰθὺς ἴενται 

ὄρνιθες, λάχνην δὲ διαψαίρουσι πόδεσσιν, 115 
note κερτομέοντες. ἐπὴν δέ of ἐγγὺς ὀδόντων 


« Pind, 1 iii, 65 μῆτιν δ᾽ ἀλώπηξ, αἰετοῦ ἅτ᾽ ἀναπιτναμένα 


290 


HALIEUTICA, II. 87-116 


soft fish and most hideous to behold, with mouth that 
opens exceeding wide. But for him also craft devises 
food for his belly. Wrapt himself in the slimy mud 
he lies motionless, while he extends aloft a little bit 
of flesh which grows from the bottom of his jaw below, 
fine and bright, and it has an evil breath. This he 
waves incessantly, a snare for lesser fishes which, 
seeing it, are fain to seize it. But the Fishing-frog 
quietly draws it again gently quivering within his 
mouth, and the fishes follow, not suspecting any 
hidden guile until, ere they know it, they are caught 
within the wide jaws of the Fishing-frog. As when a 
man, devising a snare for lightsome birds, sprinkles 
some grains of wheat before the gates of guile while 
others he puts inside, and props up the trap; the 
keen desire of food draws the eager birds and they 
pass within and no more is return or escape prepared 
for them, but they win an evil end to their banquet; 
even so the weak Fishing-frog deceives and attracts 
the fishes and they perceive not that they are hasten- 
ing their own destruction. A like device, I have 
heard, the cunning Fox ὦ contrives. When she sees 
a dense flight of birds, she lies down on her side and 
stretches out her swift limbs and closes her eyes and 
shuts fast her mouth. Seeing her you would say that 
she was deep asleep or even lying quite dead: so 
breathless she lies stretched out, contriving guile. 
The birds, beholding, rush straightway upon her 
in a crowd and tear her fur with their feet, as if in 
mockery. But when they come nigh her teeth, then 
ῥόμβον ἴσχει: ΑΕ]. vi. 24 τὰς δὲ ὠτίδας (Bustards) ἐν τῷ ἸΤόντῳ 
θηρεύουσιν οὕτως: ἀποστραφεῖσαι αὐταὶ καὶ εἰς γῆν κύψασαι τὴν 
κέρκον ἀνατείνουσιν.. . αἱ δὲ ἀπατηθεῖσαι προσίασιν ὡς πρὸς 
ὄρνιν ὁμόφυλον, εἶτα πλησίον γενόμεναι τῆς ἀλώπεκος ἁλίσκονται 
ῥᾷστα, ἐπιστραφείσης καὶ ἐπιθεμένης. aa 


OPPIAN 


ve 
ἔλθωσιν, τότ᾽ ἔπειτα δόλου πετάσασα θύρετρα, 
ἐξαπίνης συνέμαρψε καὶ ἔσπασεν εὐρὺ χανοῦσα 
. > 
ἄγρην κερδαλέην, ὅσσην ἕλεν οἰμήσασα. 
“ 

Kai μὲν δὴ δολόμητις ἐπίκλοπον εὕρατο θήρην 
onmin: ἐκ γάρ οἱ κεφαλῆς πεφύασιν ἀραιοὶ 
ἀκρέμονες προτενεῖς, ὥστε πλόκοι, οἷσι καὶ αὐτὴ 
ὥστε περ ὁρμιῇσιν ἐφέλκεται ἰχθύας ἄγρῃ, 
πρηνὴς ἐν ψαμάθοισιν ὑπ᾽ ὀστράκῳ εἰλυθεῖσα. 
κείναις δὲ πλοκαμῖσι καὶ ἡνίκα κύματα θύει 
χείματι πετράων ἀντίσχεταιυ, ἠῦτε τις νηῦς 
πείσματ᾽ ἐπ᾽ ἀκταίῃσιν ἀναψαμένη σπιλάδεσσι. 

a > 9... \ > a ” A \ > \ 

Kapides δ᾽ ὀλίγαι μὲν ἰδεῖν, ton δὲ καὶ ἀλκὴ 

δ, ΡΣ \ £ \ ” wv > / 
γυίοις, ἀλλὰ δόλοισι καὶ ἄλκιμον ὥὦλεσαν ἰχθύν, 

/ /, 2 Δ, ΄ 
λάβρακα, σφετέρῃσιν ἐπικλέα λαβροσύνῃσιν. 
οἱ μὲν γὰρ σπεύδουσι καὶ ἰθύουσι λαβέσθαι 
καρίδων, ταῖς δ᾽ οὔτε φυγεῖν σθένος οὔτε μάχεσθαι, 
3 (é > 3 {2 \ Δ ,ὔ lod 
ὀλλύμεναι δ᾽ ὀλέκουσι Kal ods πέφνουσι φονῆας. 

> 7 / 
εὖτε yap ἀμφιχανόντες ἔσω μάρψωσιν ὀδόντων, 

® Sepia officinalis L., the Common Cuttle. 

® A. 523621 τῶν μὲν οὖν μαλακίων καλουμένων τὰ μὲν ἔξω 
μόρια τάδ᾽ ἐστίν, ὃν μὲν οἱ ὀνομαζόμενοι πόδες, δεύτερον δὲ τούτων 
ἐχομένη ἣ κεφαλή. 

° i.e. tentacles, προβοσκίδες, πλεκτάναι. Of. A. δ23 Ὁ 29 
ἰδία 7 ἔχουσιν αἵ τε σηπίαι καὶ αἱ τευθίδες καὶ οἱ τεῦθοι δύο 
προβοσκίδας μακράς, ἐπ᾿ ἄκρων τραχύτητα ἐχούσας δικότυλον, αἷς 
προσάγονταί τε καὶ λαμβάνουσιν εἰς τὸ στόμα τὴν τροφήν, καὶ 
ὅταν χειμὼν ἢ, βαλλόμεναι πρός τινα πέτραν ὥσπερ ἀγκύρας 
ἀποσαλεύειν : Plin. ix. 83 sepiae et loligini pedes duo ex his 
longissimi set asperi quibus ad ora admovent cibos et in 
fluctibus se velut ancoris stabiliunt, cetera cirri quibus 
venantur; Athen. 323d τρέφονται δ᾽ αἱ μικραὶ σηπίαι τοῖς 
λεπτοῖς ἰχθυδίοις, ἀποτείνουσαι τὰς προβοσκίδας ὥσπερ ὁρμιὰς καὶ 
ταύταις θηρεύουσαι. λέγεται δ᾽ ὡς ὅταν ὁ χειμὼν γένηται τῶν 
πετριδίων ὥσπερ ἀγκύραις ταῖς προβοσκίσι λαμβανόμεναι ὁρμοῦσι : 
Ael. ν. 41: Plut. Mor. 978 τ». 

4 The Cuttle-fish has no shell. But the σηπίον, or hard 


292 


120 


125 


130 


HALIEUTICA, 11. 117-134 


she opens the doors of guile and suddenly seizes 
them, and with wide gape cunningly catches her 
prey, even all that she takes at a swoop. 

Yea, the crafty Cuttle-fish? also has found a cunning 
manner of hunting. From her head® grow long 
slender branches,°® like locks of hair, wherewith as 
with lines she draws and captures fish, prone in the 
sand and coiled beneath her shell.4 With those locks, 
too, when the waves rage in wintry weather, she 
clings to the rocks even as a ship fastens her cables to 
the rocks upon the shore. 

Prawns ὁ are small to look at and small too is the 
strength of their limbs, yet by their craft they de- 
stroy a valiant fish, even the Basse 7 named? for its 
gluttony. For the Basse are eager and keen to seize 
the Prawns; and these have no strength either to 
flee or to fight, yet as they are destroyed they destroy 
and slay their slayers. When the gaping ” Basse have 
caught them within their teeth, they leap oftentimes 


(internal) part, towards the back of the body, which is 
described A. 524 Ὁ 22 τῇ μὲν οὖν σηπίᾳ καὶ τῇ τευθίδι καὶ τῷ 
τεύθῳ ἐντός ἐστι τὰ στερεὰ ἐν τῷ πρανεῖ τοῦ σώματος, ἃ καλοῦσι 
τὸ μὲν σηπίον τὸ δὲ ξίφος, cf. P.A. 654. 20, was apparently 
sometimes called ὄστρακον, cf. Athen. 323 ς τὴν σηπίαν δὲ 
᾿Αριστοτέλης (φησὶ) πόδας ἔχειν ὀκτώ... ., ἔχει δὲ καὶ ὀδόντας 
δύο. .. καὶ τὸ λεγόμενον ὄστρακον ἐν τῷ νώτῳ. Oppian may 
have misunderstood this, or, equating ὄστρακον with νῶτον, he 
may have meant ὑπ᾽ ὀστράκῳ εἰλυθεῖσα as = “ hunched up.” 
It seems then not advisable to alter the text. 

e A. δδ 8.34 γένη δὲ πλείω τῶν καρίδων. . . al τε κυφαὶ καὶ 
αἱ κράγγονες καὶ τὸ μικρὸν γένος (A. P.A. 684. ἃ 14), probably 
Palaemon squilla, Squilla mantis, and Crangon vulgaris 
(shrimps). Ael. i. 30 gives a similar account of their fight 
with the Basse, and classes them as ἕλειοι, ἐκ φυκίων, πετραῖαι. 

7 Labrax lupus Cuy., M.G. λαυράκι: Apost. p. 12. 

9 2.6. λάβραξ from λάβρος : ἰχθύων ὀψοφαγίστατος, Ael. L.c. 

ἈΠ Ael. Le. κέχηνε δὲ ὁ λάβραξ καὶ μέγα. 


208 


OPPIAN 


aide θαμὰ θρώσκουσι Kal és μεσάτην ὑπερῴην 186 
ὀξὺ κέρας χρίμπτουσι, τό τε σφίσι τέλλεται ἄκρης 
ἐκ κεφαλῆς. λάβραξ δὲ φίλης κεκορημένος ἄγρης 
νύγματος οὐκ ἀλέγει- τὸ δέ μιν νέμεταί τε καὶ ἕρπει, 
εἰσόκε τρυχόμενόν μιν ἕλῃ μόρος ἐξ ὀδυνάων. 
ὀψὲ δὲ γινώσκει νέκυος δεδαϊγμένος αἰχμῇ. 140 
Ἔστι δέ τις πηλοῖσιν ἐφέστιος ὠμοφάγος βοῦς, 
εὐρύτατος πάντεσσι μετ᾽ ἰχθύσιν: ἢ γάρ οἱ εὖρος 
πολλάκις ἑνδεκάπηχυ δυωδεκάπηχύ 7 ἐτύχθη: 
οὐτιδανὸς δὲ βίην καί οἱ δέμας ἄμμορον ἀλκῆς, 
μαλθακόν. ἐν δέ οἱ εἰσὶν ἀείδελοι ἔνδον ὀδόντες 145 
βαιοί τ᾽ οὐ κρατεροί τε" βίῃ δέ κεν οὔτι δαμάσσαι, 
ἀλλὰ δόλῳ καὶ φῶτας ἐπίφρονας εἷλε πεδήσας" 
δαιτὶ γὰρ ἀνδρομέῃ ἐπιτέρπεται, ἔξοχα δ᾽ αὐτῷ 
ἀνθρώπων κρέα τερπνὰ καὶ εὐάντητος ἐδωδή. 
εὖτέ τιν᾽ ἀθρήσῃ νεάτην ὑπὸ βύσσαν ἰόντα 150 
ἀνθρώπων, ὅσσοισιν ὑποβρύχιος πόνος ἅλμης 
μέμβλεται, αὐτὰρ ὁ κοῦφος ὑπὲρ κεφαλῆφιν ἀερθεὶς 
νήχεται ἀστεμφής, μεγάρων ὀρόφοισιν ἐοικώς, 
ἄτροπος ἀμφιταθείς, σὺν δ᾽ ἔρχεται, ἣ κεν ἴῃσι 
δειλὸς ἀνήρ, μίμνοντι δ᾽ ἐφίσταται nite πῶμα. 155 
ὡς δὲ πάϊς δολόεντα μόρον λίχνοισι μύεσσιν 
ἔστησεν" τὸν δ᾽ οὔτι πάγης λόχον ὁρμαίνοντα 


* Ael. 1.0. τὸ ἔξοχον τῆς κεφαλῆς, ἔοικε δὲ τριήρους ἐμβόλῳ καὶ 
μάλα γε ὀξεῖ, καὶ ἄλλως ἔχει δίκην πριόνων. 

> Ael. lc. καὶ καινότατα δήπου ἀποκτείνασα ἀνήρηται. 

° A. δ40 δ 17 σελάχη δ᾽ ἐστὶ τά τε εἰρημένα καὶ βοῦς καὶ λάμια 
καὶ ἀετὸς καὶ νάρκη καὶ βάτραχος καὶ πάντα τὰ yaewdns δ66 Ὁ 2 
δελφὶς καὶ φάλαινα καὶ τὰ ἄλλα κήτη, ὅσα μὴ ἔχει βράγχια 
ἀλλὰ φυσητῆρα ζῳοτοκοῦσιν, ἔτι δὲ πρίστις καὶ Bods; Plin. ix. 
78 Planorum piscium alterum est genus quod pro spina 
cartilaginem habet, ut raiae, pastinacae, squatinae, torpedo, 
et quos bovis, lamiae, aquilae, ranae nominibus Graeci 
294 


HALIEUTICA, II. 135-157 


and fix in the midst of the palate of the Basse the 
sharp horn ¢ which springs from the top of their heads. 
The Basse, glutted with the prey which he loves, 
heeds not the prick. But it spreads and creeps apace, 
until, worn out with pain, doom overtakes him ; and 
too late he knows’that he is stricken by the spear of 
the dead.® 

There is a fish which is at home in the mud, even 
the ravenous Ox-ray,° broadest among all fishes ; for 
indeed his breadth is often eleven cubits or twelve. 
But in might he is a weakling, and his body is devoid of 
strength and soft. The teeth within his mouth are in- 
conspicuous, small and not strong. By might he could 
not overpower anything, but by craft he ensnares and 
overcomes even cunning men. For he greatly delights 
to banquet upon man and human flesh above all is to 
him pleasing and a welcome food. When he beholds 
anyone of those men who have their business in the 
deep waters of the brine descending to the nether 
depths, he rises lightly above his head and swims 
steadfastly, like the roof of a house, stretched about 
him inexorably. Where the wretched man goes, he 
goes, and when the man halts, he stands over him 
like a lid. As a boy sets a guileful doom for greedy 
mice ; and the mouse, not dreaming of the ambush 
of the trap, is driven within by the desire of the belly ; 


appellant. . . . Omnia autem carnivora sunt talia .. . et 
cum ceteri pisces ova pariant, hoc genus solum, ut ea quae 
cete appellant, animal pariat, excepta quam ranam_vocant. 
Cf. Athen. 330a; Ael. i. 19, xi. 37; Phil. 100; Ov. Hal. 
94 Nam gaudent pelago quales scombrique bovesque (Plin. 
xxxii, 152). Clearly one of the Rays—probably Cephaloptera 
Giorna-=Couch’s Ox-ray. Some members of this family 
(Cephalopteridae) attain an incredible size—one taken at 
Messina weighing more than half a ton. 

295 


OPPIAN’ 


~ - 
γαστὴρ ἔνδον ἔλασσε, θοῶς δέ of ἄγγος ὕπερθε 
a 3 ,ὔ ς δ᾽ .] ΄ λλὰ ~ 
κοῖλον ἐπεσμαράγησεν, ὁ δ᾽ οὐκέτι πολλὰ μενοινῶν 
ἐκφυγέειν δύναται στιβαρὸν σκέπας, ὄφρα ἑ κοῦρος 160 
΄ὔ , δῇ > z= , La 
μάρψῃ τε κτείνῃ τε, γέλων δ᾽ ἐπιθήσεται ἀγρῃ" 
ὡς ὅ γ᾽ ὑπὲρ κεφαλῆς βροτέης ὀλοφώϊος ἰχθὺς 
’ 3 3 ΄ 3 7 > 9 > oe δι 
πέπτατ ἐρητύων ἀναδύμεναι, εἰσόκ᾽ ἀὐτμὴ 
~ ,ὕ \ A ’ ε , 
φῶτα λίπῃ, ψυχὴν δὲ μετεκπνεύσῃ ῥοθίοισιν" 
ἔνθα ἑ τεθνηῶτα δυσώνυμος ἀμφιέπει βοῦς 165 
δαινύμενος, τέχνῃσιν ἑλὼν δυσμήχανον ἄγρην. 
Καὶ μέν τις μνιαροῖσιν ἐπὶ πλαταμῶσι νοήσας 
καρκίνον αἰνήσει καὶ ἀγάσσεται. εἵνεκα τέχνης 
ὃ λέ \ ~ A > ΄ yd , 
Kepoadens* καὶ τῷ yap ἐπιφροσύνην πόρε δαίμων 
ὄστρεα φέρβεσθαι, γλυκερὴν καὶ ἄμοχθον ἐδωδήν. 170 
᾿, \ En) > 4 / 
ὄστρεα μὲν KAnidas ἀναπτύξαντα θυρέτρων 
HAV Ua \ Ὁ 3 / 
ἰλὺν λιχμάζουσι καὶ ὕδατος ἰσχανόωντα 
πέπταται, ἀγκοίνῃσιν ἐφήμενα πετραίῃσι:" 
4 > a AY ¢ ~ ϑ:- J 
καρκίνος ad ψηφῖδα παρὰ ῥηγμῖνος ἀείρας 
fp , a 
λέχριος ὀξείῃσι φέρει χηλῇσι μεμαρπώς, 175 
/ 3 3 a 
λάθρη δ᾽ ἐμπελάει, μέσσῳ δ᾽ ἐνεθήκατο λᾶαν 
> / + μὲ 7 > te 
ootpew: ἔνθεν ἔπειτα παρήμενος εἰλαπινάζει 
a / \ 3 
daira φίλην: τὸ δ᾽ ἄρ᾽ οὔτι καὶ ἱέμενόν περ ἐρεῖσαι 
3 ΄ 3 , 
ἀμφιδύμους πλάστιγγας ἔχει σθένος, ἀλλ᾽ ὑπ’ 
ἀνάγκης 
wv + / ~ 
οἴγεται, ὄφρα θάνῃ τε Kal ἀγρευτῆρα κορέσσῃ. 180 


ΠῚ a ” , Tire , € a 
ῳ σα τεχνάζουσι και αστερες ερπυστήρες 


206 


HALIEUTICA, 11. 158-181 


and swiftly the hollow vessel claps too above him 
and, for all his endeavour, he can no more escape 
from the strong cover, till the boy seizes and kills 
him, mocking the while his prey ; even so over the 
man’s head the deadly fish extends, preventing him 
from rising to the surface, until breath leaves him 
and he gasps out his life amid the waves; where 
the Ox-ray of evil name sets about him and feasts 
upon him, having by his wiles captured a difficult 
prey. 

And one who observes a Crab among the mossy 
ledges will praise and admire him for his cunning 
art. For to him also hath Heaven given wisdom to 
feed on Oysters, a sweet and unlaborious food. The 
Oysters open the bars of their doors and lick the 
mud, and, in their desire for water, sit wide open in 
the arms of the rocks. The Crab®@ on the other hand 
takes a pebble from the beach and, moving sideways, 
carries it clutched in his sharp claws. Stealthily he 
draws near and puts the stone in the middle of the 
Oyster. Then he sits by and makes a pleasant feast. 
And the Oyster, though fain, is unable to shut his 
two valves, but gapes perforce until he dies and gluts 
his captor. 

A like craft is practised also by the reptile Star- 


* Cambridge N.H. iii. p. 111 ‘Crabs crush the young 
shells with their claws, and are said to gather in bands and 
scratch sand or mud over the larger specimens, which makes 
them open their shells.” 


297 


OPPIAN 


Dn af \ aA \ 3... 39 - 3. A 
εἰνάλιοι" καὶ τοῖς yap ἐπ᾽ ὄστρεα μῆτις ὀπηδεῖ" 
3 3 2 ~ + / 599 > , 
ἀλλ᾽ οὐ λᾶαν ἄγουσι συνέμπορον οὐδ᾽ ἐπίκουρον 
κεῖνοι, τρηχὺ δὲ κῶλον ἐνηρείσαντο μέσοισι 

/ \ \ οἷ a 2 ς \ / 

πεπταμένοις" TA μὲν ὧδε πιέζεται, οἱ δὲ νέμονται. 

"Ootpaxov αὖ βυθίας μὲν ἔχει πλάκας, ἐν δέ οἱ 

3 \ 
ἰχθὺς 

/ UA , « \ ” 
πίννη ναιετάει κεκλημένος: ἡ μὲν ἄναλκις 

+ ,ὔ > Λ + 7 
οὔτε τι μητίσασθαι ἐπίσταται οὔτε τι ῥέξαι, 
ἀλλ᾽ ἄρα οἱ ξυνόν τε δόμον ἕξυνήν τε καλύπτρην 
καρκίνος ἐνναίει, φέρβει δέ μιν ἠδὲ φυλάσσει" 
τῷ καὶ πιννοφύλαξ κικλήσκεται: ἀλλ᾽ ὅτε κόχλου 
> \ yA ῳ ε 3 > , 3 7 
ἰχθὺς ἔνδον ἵκηται, 6 δ᾽ οὐ φρονέουσαν ἀμύξας 

lé / 7, Ψ ε 3 > / 
δήγματι κερδαλέῳ πίννην ἕλεν: ἡ δ᾽ ὀδύνῃσιν 
+ / \ 23), > ΄ὔ + 
ὄστρακα συμπλατάγῆσε καὶ ἔνδον ἐφράσσατο ἄγρην 


αὑτῇ τ᾽ ἠδ᾽ ἑτάρῳ, Evvov θ᾽ ἅμα δεῖπνον ἕλοντο. 


* A. PLA, 6818 καὶ τὸ τῶν ἀστέρων ἐστὶ γένος" καὶ γὰρ 
τοῦτο προσπῖπτον ἔγχυμίζει πολλὰ τῶν ὀστρέων; Ael. ix. 22 
τὰ μὲν κέχηνε πολλάκις ψύχους δεόμενα καὶ ἄλλως εἴ τί σφισιν 
ἐμπέσοι τούτῳ τραφησόμενα- οἱ τοίνυν ἀστέρες μέσον τῶν ὀστράκων 
διείρουσιν ἕν κοῦλον τῶν σφετέρων ἕκαστος καὶ ἐμπίμπλανται 
τῶν σαρκῶν, διειργομένων συνελθεῖν τῶν ὀστράκων αὖθις. Of. 
C.N.H. 1.6. “Sometimes in a single night a whole bed of 
oysters will be destroyed by an invasion of Star-fish,” where 
different_accounts of the procedure of Star-fish are given : 
1, The Star-fish wraps its turned-out stomach round the 
Oyster, enclosing the mouth of the shell so that the Oyster 
sickens, the hinge-spring relaxes its hold, and the shell 
opening permits the Star-fish to suck the gelatinous con- 
tents. 2. The Star-fish seizes the Oyster with two of his 
fingers, while with the other three he files away the edge 


298 


185 


190 


HALIEUTICA, 11. 182-195 


fishes * of the sea; for these too have a device against 
Oysters. Howbeit they bring no stone as comrade 
nor ally, but insert in the middle of the open Oyster 
a rough limb. Thus the Oysters are overcome, while 
the Starfish feed. 

A shell again keéeps the plains of the deep, wherein 
dwells a fish called Pinna.® The Pinna herself is 
weak and can of herself devise nothing nor do aught, 
but in one house and one shelter with her dwells a 
Crab which feeds and guards her; wherefore it is 
called the Pinna-guard. Now when a fish comes 
within the shell, the Crab seizes the unheeding Pinna 
and wounds her with crafty bite. Then in her pain 
she claps her shells together and so contrives to catch 
within a prey for herself and her companion, and 


of the flat valve until he can introduce an arm. 8. The 
Star-fish suffocates the Oyster by applying two of its 
fingers so closely to the edge of the valves that the Oyster 
is unable to open them; after a while the vital powers 
relax and the shell gapes. 4. The Star-fish pours a 
secretion from its mouth, which paralyses the hinge-muscle 
and causes the shell to open. Cf. Plin. ix. 183; Plut. Mor. 
978 8. 
> A genus of bivalve Molluscs. A. 547b15 ai δὲ πίνναι 
ὀρθαὶ φύονται ἐκ τοῦ βυσσοῦ ἐν τοῖς ἀμμώδεσι καὶ βορβορωδέσιν. 
ἔχουσι δ᾽ ἐν αὑταῖς πιννοφύλακα, αἱ μὲν καρίδιον [prob. Pontonia 
Tyrrhena Latr.], αἱ δὲ καρκίνιον [Pinnotheres veterum Βοβο.] 
οὗ στερισκόμεναι διαφθείρονται θᾶττον ; ibid. Ὁ 28 ἐν ταῖς πίνναις 
οἱ καλούμενοι πιννοτῆραι. Cf. Athen. 83d-e; Ael. iii. 29; 
Phil. 110; Plut. Mor. 980 8; Plin. ix. 115, xxxii, 150; Cic. 
N.D. ii. 48.123; De fin. iii. 19. 63; Soph. fr. 116; Aristoph. 
Vesp. 1510 (of Xenocles, son of Carcinus) ὁ πιννοτήρης οὗτός 
ἐστι τοῦ γένους: Camb. N.H. iii. p. 62 ‘*Several of the 
Crustacea live associated with certain molluscs. Pinnoteres 
lives within the shell of Pinna, Ostrea, Astarte, Petunculus, 
and others. Apparently the females alone reside within 
the shell of their host, while the males seize favourable 
opportunities to visit them there.” 
299 


OPPIAN 


ὡς dpa καὶ πλωτῆρσιν ἐν ὑγρόπόροισιν ἔασι 

τοὶ μὲν κερδαλέοι, τοὶ δ᾽ ἄφρονες, οἷα καὶ ἡμῖν 

ἀνδράσιν, οὐδέ τι πᾶσιν ἐναίσιμόν ἐστι νόημα. 
Φράζεο δ᾽ ἀφραδίῃ προφερέστατον ἡμεροκοίτην 

ἰχθύν, ὃν παρὰ πάντας ἀεργότατον τέκεν ἅλμη. 200 

τοῦ δ᾽ ἤτοι κεφαλῆς μὲν ἄνω τέτραπται ὕπερθεν 

ὄμματα, καὶ στόμα λάβρον ἐν ὀφθαλμοῖσι μέσοισιν- 

αἰεὶ δ᾽ ἐν ψαμάθοισι πανημέριος τετάνυσται 

εὕδων, νυκτὶ δὲ μοῦνον ἀνέγρεται ἠδ᾽ ἀλάληται: 

τοὔνεκα κέκληται καὶ νυκτερίς" ἀλλά μιν ἄτη 205 

γαστρὸς ἀτεκμάρτοιο κακὴ Adyev* οὐ yap ἐδωδῆς 

Ἢ κόρον ἠέ τι μέτρον ἐπίσταται, ἀλλ᾽ ἀτέλεστον 

λυσσομανῆ βούβρωστιν ἀναιδές γαστρὶ φυλάσσει: 

οὐδέ ποτ᾽ ἂν λήξειεν ἐδητύος ἐγγὺς ἐούσης, 

εἰσόκεν οἱ νηδύς τε μέση διὰ πᾶσα ῥαγείη, 210 

αὐτός τε προταθεὶς πέσῃ ὕπτιος, ἠέ τις ἄλλος 

πέφνῃ μιν νεπόδων πυμάτης ἔμφορτον ἐδωδῆς. 

σῆμα δέ τοι τόδε γὰστρὸς ἀειμάργοιο πιφαύσκω" 


* Chrysippus ap. Athen. 83d ἡ πίννη καὶ ὁ πιννοτήρης 
συνεργὰ ἀλλήλοις, κατ᾽ ἴδια οὐ δυνάμενα συμμένειν. ἡ μὲν οὖν 
πίννη ὄστρεόν ἐστιν, ὁ δὲ πιννοτήρης καρκίνος μικρός. καὶ ἡ πίννη 
διαστήσασα τὸ ὄστρακον ἡσυχάζει τηροῦσα τὰ ἐπεισιόντα ἰχθύδια, 
ὁ δὲ πιννοτήρης παρεστὼς ὅταν εἰσέλθῃ τι δάκνει αὐτὴν ὥσπερ 
σημαίνων, ἡ δὲ δηχθεῖσα συμμύει. καὶ οὕτως τὸ ἀποληφθὲν ἔνδον 
κατεσθίουσι κοινῇ : Theophrast. QO. P. ii. 17. 8 (in a discussion 
of Parasitism in general) {a ἐν ξῴοις οἷον τά τε ἐν Ταῖς πίνναις 
ἐστὶ καὶ ὅσα ἄλλα Sworpope?; bid. 9 οὔτε γὰρ ἴσως ταῖς πίνναις 
βίος εἰ μὴ διὰ τὸν κάρκινον. 

Ὁ Uranoscopus scaber, M.G. λύχνος (Bik. p- 81, Adyvos 
Erh. p. 81, while Apost. p. 9 would write λίχνος = gourmand). 
The name οὐρανοσκόπος, referring to the upward direction 
of the eyes, and καλλιώνυμος, euphemistically referring to 
ugliness (¢f. καλλίας =ape), might be applied to various fishes, 
e.g. Lophius piscatorius, but the identification of the 
300 


HALIEUTICA, II. 196-213 


they take a common meal together. Thus even 
among the swimming tribes that travel in the water 
some are crafty and some are stupid, as among us 
men, and not all have a right understanding. 

Mark now a fisly that exceeds all in stupidity, even 
the Day-sleeper,” lazy beyond all that the sea breeds. 
The eyes in his head are turned upward and the 
ravenous mouth between his eyes. Always he lies 
all day stretched in the sands asleep and only at 
night does he awake and wander abroad ; wherefore 
he is also called the Bat. But an evil doom is his for his 
limitless appetite. For he knows no satiety of food 
nor any measure, but in his shameless belly he nurses 
gluttony, rabid and endless, nor would he cease from 
feeding if food were at hand, till his belly itself 
burst utterly in the midst and himself fall flat upon 
his back or some other fish kill him, gorged with his 
latest meal. This sign I tell you of his ravenous 


καλλιώνυμος of Aristotle with Uranoscopus scaber is proved 
by A. 506 b10 ἔχει δὲ Kal ὁ καλλιώνυμος (τὴν χολήν, the gall- 
bladder) ἐπὶ τῷ ἥπατι, ὅσπερ ἔχει μεγίστην τῶν ἰχθύων ws κατὰ 
μέγεθος, which is true of the Uranoscopus, but not of the 
Callionymus of Linnaeus (Cuv. et Val. xii. p. 262). Cf. Ael. 
xiii. 4 who quotes Aristotle, Menander, and Anaxippus for 
this peculiarity; Plin. xxxii. 69 Callionymi fel cicatrices 
sanat et carnes oculorum supervacuas consumit. ΝᾺ] hoc 
piscium copiosius ut existimavit Menander quoque in 
comoedis [= Menand. ap. Ael. l.c. τίθημ᾽ ἔχειν χολήν σε καλλι- 
ὠνύμου πλείω]. Idem piscis et uranoscopus vocatur ab 
oculo quem in capite habet; ibid. 146 callionymus sive 
uranoscopus; Athen. 356 a οὐρανοσκόπος δὲ καὶ ὁ ἁγνὸς Ka- 
λούμενος ἢ καὶ καλλιώνυμος βαρεῖς. Cf. 282 d-e, A. 598a 11 
πρόσγειος, Which suits Uranoscopus as well as the Callionymus 
of Linnaeus. For the gall-bladder of Uranoscopus ef. Cuv. 
iii. 296 La vésicule du fiel est énorme et a la forme d’une 
fiole ἃ long cou, suspendu ἃ un canal cholédoque aussi gros 
que le duodénum. 


301 


OPPIAN 


τ / / ¢ Ἂν 7 3 ͵ὕ 
εἰ γάρ τίς μιν ἑλὼν θήρης ἀποπειρήσαυτο 
χειρὶ βορὴν ὀρέγων, ὁ δὲ δέξεται, εἰσόκεν αὐτοῦ 215 
δ if + 2? ΄ὔ 
λαβροτάτου στόματος νηήσεται ἄχρις ἐδωδή. 
~ \ / ae fe > / 
κλῦτε, γοναὶ μερόπων, οἷον τέλος ἀφραδίῃσι 
᾽ὔ 7 + 3 ,ὔ 3 a 
λαιμάργοις, ὅσον ἄλγος adyndayinow ὀπηδεῖ: 
a > , ᾽ὔ a ᾽ὔ 
τῷ τις ἀεργίην δυστερπέα τῆλε διώκοι 
καὶ κραδίης καὶ χειρός, ἔχοι δέ TL μέτρον ἐδωδῆς" 220 
3 Ce , / / / 
μηδ᾽ ἐπὶ πανθοίνοισι νόον τέρποιτο τραπέζαις" 
πολλοὶ γὰρ τοῖοι καὶ ἐν ἀνδράσιν, οἷσι λέλυνται 
ΓΗ͂Ν " \ / ᾿ ~ / 
ἡνία, γαστρὶ δὲ πάντας ἐπυιτρωπῶσι κάλωας:" 
3 / > / , / ς / 
ἀλλά τις εἰσορόων φεύγοι τέλος ἡμεροκοίτου. 
” \ > / / \ ~ 30. 
ἔστι καὶ ὀξυκόμοισι νοὸς καὶ PNTLS ἐχίνοις, 225 
οἵ τ᾿ ἀνέμων ἴσασι: βίας ζαμενεῖς τε θυέλλας 
> / 7 > > / - 
ὀρνυμένας, νώτοισι δ᾽ ἀνοχλίζουσιν ἕκαστος 
a i / \ , > / 
λᾶαν, ὅσον βαρύθοντα περὶ σφετέρῃσιν ἀκάνθαις 
ς« .Q/ / v9 > / tA € “ 
ῥηϊδίως φορέοιεν, ἵν᾽ ἀντία κύματος ὁρμῇ 
/ ,ὔ \ 
βριθόμενοι pipvwou τὸ γὰρ τρομέουσι μάλιστα, 230 
\ \ pe) Eee, ᾽ὔ τὰ / 
μὴ σφὰς ἐπ᾽ ἠιόνεσσι κυκώμενον οἶδμα κυλίσῃ. 


Πουλυπόδων δ᾽ οὔπω τιν᾽ ὀΐομαι ἔμμεν᾽ ἄπυστον 


SY 


* We take αὐτοῦ, not as=‘‘of him,” but as qualifying 
στόματος, “his very jaws,” ¢f. Hom. Il. xiii. 615 ὑπὸ λόφον 
αὐτόν. 

ὃ Sea-urchins generically, Echinus esculentus, ete. A. 
530 a 34 ἔστι δὲ γένη πλείω τῶν ἐχίνων, ὃν μὲν τὸ ἐσθιόμενον : 
Hesych. 8. ἐχῖνοι. . . καὶ ζῷον θαλάσσιον ἐδώδιμον ; cf. Athen. 
91b. 


302 


HALIEUTICA, II. 214-232 


gluttony. Ifa man capture him and tempt his prey 
by offering him food with his hand, he will take it 
until the food shall be heaped up even® unto the 
most gluttonous jaws of him. Hear, ye generations 
of men, what manner of issue there is to gluttonous 
folly, what pain follows upon excessive eating. Let 
a man therefore drive far from heart and hand 
idleness that delights in evil pleasure, and observe 
measure in eating nor delight in luxurious tables. 
For many such there be among men who hold the 
reins loose and allow all rope to their belly. But 
let a man behold and avoid the end of the Day- 
sleeper. 

Wit and cunning belong also to the prickly Urchins,? 
which know ὁ when the violence of the wind and the 
fierce storms are rising, and lift each of them upon 
their backs a stone of such weight as they can easily 
carry on their spines, that thus weighted they may 
withstand the driving of the wave. For that is what 
they most dread—lest the swelling wave roll them 
on the shore. 

No one, I think, is ignorant of the craft of the 


¢ Plut. Mor. 979 a ἐχίνου γέ τινα χερσαίου διηγήσατο πρό- 
γνωσιν ᾿Αριστοτέλης πνευμάτων (A. 612b4; Μέγαν, 881 « 15; 
Plin. viii. 1388)... ἐγὼ δ᾽ ἐχῖνον μὲν οὐδένα Ἱζυξικηνὸν ἢ 
Βυζάντιον ἀλλὰ πάντας ὁμοῦ παρέχομαι τοὺς θαλαττίους, ὅταν 
αἴσθωνται μέλλοντα χειμῶνα καὶ σάλον, ἑρματιζομένους λιθιδίοις, 
ὅπως μὴ περιτρέπωνται διὰ κουφότητα μηδ᾽ ἀποσύρωνται γενομένου 
κλυδῶνος, ἀλλ᾽ ἐπιμένωσιν ἀραρότως τοῖς πετριδίοις : Plin. ix. 100 
Ex eodem genere sunt echini . . . tradunt saevitiam maris 
praesagire eos correptisque opperiri lapillis mobilitatem pon- 

dere stabilientes. Cf. Ael. vii. 33; Phil. 64, 
303 


OPPIAN 


τέ a / ¢ Vee > ὃ LAA 
xvns, ot πέτρῃσιν ὁμοίϊοι ἰνδάλλονται, 
£ 
τήν κε ποτιπτύξωσι περὶ σπείρῃς τε βάλωνται. 
ἄνδρας δ᾽ ἀγρευτῆρας ὁμῶς καὶ κρέσσονας ἰχθῦς 
Clea ) > / λά a IX 
ῥηϊδίως ἀπάτῃσι παραπλάγξαντες ἄλυξαν. 
3 3 4 ᾽ὔ χζ > A > / 
ἀλλ᾽ ὅτε χειρότερός τις ἐπισχεδὸν ἀντιβολήσῃ, 
> / ͵ὔ Ῥ \ 2 if τὰ , 
αὐτίκα πουλύποδές Te Kal ἰχθύες ἐξεφάνησαν, 
an ‘A 5 tA > ὃ ΑΝ ὃ ὅλ. 
μορφῆς πετραίης ἐξάλμενοι, ἐκ δὲ δόλοιο 
φορβήν τ᾽ ἐφράσσαντο καὶ ἐξήλυξαν ὄλεθρον. 
Ψ 2 A A by 7, ε A A 
χείματι δ᾽ οὔποτε φασὶν ἐπιστείχειν ἁλὸς ὕδωρ 
πουλύποδας" ζαμενεῖς γὰρ ὑποτρομέουσιν ἀέλλας" 
> 3 CA ~ > / f 
ἀλλ᾽ of ye γλαφυρῇσιν ἐνιζόμενοι θαλάμῃσι 
πτήξαντες δαίνυνται ἑοὺς πόδας, ἠὕτε σάρκας 
ἀλλοτρίας οἱ δ᾽ αὖτις ἑοὺς κορέσαντες ἄνακτας 
rs 24 ἣν uA > , 
φύονται: τόδε πού σφι Ποσειδάων ἐπένευσε. 
τοῖον καὶ βλοσυρῇσιν ἀειμάργοισι νόημα 
ἄρκτοις" χειμερίην yap ἀλυσκάζουσαι ὁμοκλήν, 
δῦσαι φωλειοῖο μυχὸν κατὰ πετρήεντα 
a / V4 > vA » + 
ὃν πόδα λιχμάζουσιν, ἐδητύος ἔργον ἄπαστον, 


@ A, 622a8 θηρεύει τοὺς ἰχθῦς τὸ χρῶμα μεταβάλλων καὶ 
ποιῶν ὅμοιον οἷς ἂν πλησιάζῃ λίθοις: P.A. 6194. 12, Mirab. 
832 b 14; Plut. Mor. 918 D τῶν πολυπόδων τῆς χρόας τὴν 
ἄμειψιν ὅ τε Πίνδαρος περιβόητον πεποίηκεν εἰπών ““ ποντίου θηρὸς 
χρωτὶ μάλιστα νόον προσφέρων πάσαις πολίεσσιν ὁμιλεῖ (fr. 43) 
καὶ Θέογνις (215) ὁμοίως ““πουλύποδος νόον ἴσχε πολυχρόου, ὃς ποτὶ 
πέτρῃ τῇπερ ὁμιλήσῃ, τοῖος ἰδεῖν ἐφάνη: Athen. 316 f, 513 ἃ: 
Lucian, De salt. c. 67; Ael. V.H.i.1; Dionys. De A.i. 9; 
Phil. 102.13; Antig. 25 and 30; Plin. ix. 29; Ov. Hal. 30 
At contra scopelis crinali corpore segnis | Polypus haeret et 
hac eludit retia fraude | Et sub lege loci sumit mutatque 
colorem, | Semper ei similis quem contigit. Charles Darwin, 
in his Jowrnal of Researches (H.M.S. Beagle), c. i. tells how 
in 1832 at St. Iago in the Cape de Verd archipelago he was 
interested in observing the habits of an Octopus: ‘* These 


304 


235 


240 


245 


250 


- HALIEUTICA, 11. 233-250 


Poulpes, which make themselves like * in appearance 
to the rocks, even whatsoever rock they embrace 
and entwine with their tentacles. By their deceits 
they easily mislead and escape fishers alike and 
stronger fishes. ,When a weaker fish meets them 
near at hand, straightway they leap forth from their 
stony form and appear as veritable Poulpes and fishes, 
and by their craft contrive food and escape destruc- 
tion. But in winter, they say, the Poulpes never 
travel over the waters of the sea; for they fear the 
fierce storms. But sitting in their hollow chambers 
they cower, and devour their own feet ὃ as if they 
were alien flesh. These feet, when they have glutted 
their owners, grow again: this gift, I ween, Poseidon 
has given them. Such a device is used also by the 
fierce and gluttonous Bears.¢ For they, shunning 
winter’s threat, retreat into the rocky covert of their 
lair, where they lick their own feet, a fasting feast, 


animals also escape detection by a very extraordinary 
chameleon-like power of changing their colour.. They 
appear to vary their tints according to the nature of the 
ground over which they pass; when in deep water their 
general shade was brownish-purple, but when placed on the 
Jand, or in shallow water, this dark tint changed into one of 
a yellowish-green,” etc. 
> Of. C. iii. 176 ff.; Hesiod, W. 524 ἤματι χειμερίῳ ὅτ᾽ ἀνόστεος 
[i.e. ‘the Boneless,” Hesiod’s allusive way of referring to 
the Poulpe, which has no bony skeleton: A. 524 b 28 oi dé 
πολύποδες οὐκ ἔχουσιν ἔσω στερεὸν τοιοῦτον οὐδέν. For such 
allusive expressions, in place of the ordinary name, see 
Hesiod, A. W. Mair, Oxford, 1908, Introd. pp. xv. ff.] ὃν 
πόδα τένδει | ἔν τ᾽ ἀπύρῳ οἴκῳ καὶ ἤθεσι λευγαλέοισι : Plut. 
Mor. 90δἘ: Ael. i. 27, xiv. 26; Antig. 21; Phil. 102. 5 ff. ; 
Athen. 316 (who quotes allusions to the belief by Alcaeus, 
Pherecrat., and Diphilus); Plin. ix. 87; A. 591a4 ὃ δὲ 
λέγουσί τινες, ws αὐτὸς αὑτὸν ἐσθίει, ψεῦδός ἐστιν ἀλλ᾽ ἀπεδηδεμένας 
ἔχουσιν ἔνιοι τὰς πλεκτάνας ὑπὸ τῶν γόγγρων. 
“6, iii. 114. 
Χ 305 


OPPIAN > 


μαιόμεναι δαίτην ἀνεμώλιον, οὐδ᾽ ἐθέλουσι 
προβλώσκειν, εὐκραὲς ἕως ἔαρ ἡβήσειεν. 

ΕΝ > > / > ,ὔ wv ” 

E€oya δ᾽ ἀλλήλοισιν ἀνάρσιον ἔχθος ἔχουσι 
κάραβος ἀϊκτὴρ μύραινά τε͵ πουλύποδές τε, 
5 /, 3 > ,ὔ 3 ,ὔἷ ΄ 
ἀλλήλους δ᾽ ὀλέκουσιν ἀμοιβαίοισι φόνοισιν. 
αἰεὶ δ᾽ ἰχθυόεσσα μετὰ σφίσιν ἵστατ᾽ ἐνυὼ 

A 460 LAA δ᾽ LAA εν >? λ ue ὃ ΄ 
καὶ μόθος, ἄλλου δ᾽ ἄλλος env ἐνεπλήσατο νηδύν. 
ἡ μὲν ὑπὲκ πέτρης ἁλιμυρέος ὁρμηθεῖσα 
φοιταλέη μύραινα. διέσσυται οἴδματα πόντου, 
φορβὴν μαιομένη, τάχα δ᾽ εἴσιδε πούλυπον ἀκτῆς 
ἄκρα διερπύζοντα καὶ ἀσπασίην ἐπὶ θήρην 
ἔσσυτο γηθομένη" τὸν δ᾽ οὐ λάθεν ἐγγὺς ἐοῦσα: 
ἀλλ᾽ ἤτοι πρῶτον μὲν ἀτυζόμενος δεδόνηται 
>? ͵ὔ 0.93 LA ~ wa te 3 / 
es φόβον, οὐδ᾽ dpa μῆχος ἔχει μύραιναν ἀλύξαι 
ἕρπων νηχομένην τε καὶ ἄσχετα μαιμώωσαν. 

> "4 / Ji ere el ͵ὔ 
αἷψα δέ μιν κατέμαρψε γένυν τ᾽ ἐνέρεισε δαφοινήν"᾽ 
πούλυπος αὖτ᾽ ἀέκων ὀλοῆς ὑπὸ μάρνατ᾽ ἀνάγκης, 
3 \ Ἁ ς ,ὔ ΓΑ, eA a+ 
ἀμφὶ δέ οἱ μελέεσσιν ἑλίσσεται, ἄλλοτε ἄλλας 
παντοίας στροφάλιγγας ὑπὸ σκολιοῖσιν ἱμᾶσι 
τεχνάζων, εἴ πώς μιν ἐρητύσειε βρόχοισιν 
3 / 3 3 », “- » yw 9 3 ͵ 
ἀμφιβαλών: ἀλλ᾽ οὔτι κακῶν ἄκος οὔτ᾽ ἀλεωρή: 
ῥεῖα γὰρ ἀμφιπεσόντος ὀλισθηροῖς μελέεσσιν 
ὀτραλέη μύραινα διαρρέει οἷάπερ ὕδωρ." 

> A He ey A , ” \ 
αὐτὰρ ὃ γ᾽ ἄλλοτε νῶτα παναίολα, ἄλλοτε δειρὴν 

3 3 By > 

οὐρήν τ᾽ ἀκροτάτην περιβάλλεται, ἄλλοτε δ᾽ αὖτε 
2 7 J a 
ἐμπίπτει στόματός τε πύλαις γενύων τε μυχοῖσιν. 
ὡς δὲ παλαισμοσύνης γυιαλκέος ἴδμονες ἄνδρες 
δηρὸν ἐπ᾽ ἀλλήλοισιν ἑὴν ἀναφαίνετον ἀλκήν, 


* i.e. the Sea Crayfish or Spiny Lobster: H. i. 261 n. 

> Hi. 142 n. 

° Ael. i. 32 (where the hostilities of Poulpe, Muraena, 
are described) μύραινα μὲν yap ταῖς ἀκμαῖς τῶν ὀδόντων τὰς 


306 


255 


260 


265 


270 


275 


HALIEUTICA, II. 251-278 


seeking an unsubstantial food, and come not forth, 
until the mild spring be in its prime. 

Above all other the dashing Crayfish* and the 
Muraena? and the Poulpes have a bitter feud with 
each other and destroy one another with mutual 
slaughter. Always there is fishy war and strife 
between them, and one fills his maw with the other. 
The raging Muraena comes forth’ from her sea- 
washed rock and speeds through the waves of the 
deep in quest of food. Anon it descries a Poulpe 
crawling on the edge of the shore and rushes gladly 
on a welcome prey. The Poulpe is not unaware that 
the Muraena is at hand. First in terror he turns to 
flee, but he has no means to escape the Muraena, he 
crawling while she swims and rushes incontinently. 
Speedily she catches the Poulpe and fixes her deadly 
teeth in him. The Poulpe, on the other hand, albeit 
unwilling, fights under deadly compulsion and twines 
around her limbs, contriving all manner of twists, now 
this, now that, with his crooked whips, if haply, 
embracing her in his nooses, he may stay her onset. 
But for his evil plight there is no cure nor escape. 
When the Poulpe enfolds her, the nimble Muraena 
with her slippery limbs easily escapes through his 
embrace like water. But the Poulpe twines now 
round her spotted back, now round her neck, now 
round her very tail, and anon rushes into the gates of 
her mouth and the recesses of her jaws. Even as two 
men skilled in valiant wrestling long time display 
their might against each other; already from the 
πλεκτάνας τῷ πολύποδι διακόπτει, εἶτα, μέντοι Kal és THY γαστέρα 
εἰσδῦσα“ αὐτῷ τὰ αὐτὰ δρᾷ καὶ εἰκότως: ἡ μὲν γὰρ νηκτική, ὁ δὲ 
ἔοικεν ἕρποντι᾽ εἰ δὲ καὶ τρέποιτο τὴν χρόαν τὰς πέτρας, ἔοικεν 
αὐτῷ τὸ σόφισμα αἱρεῖν οὐδὲ ἕν τοῦτο᾽ ἔστι γὰρ συνιδεῖν ἐκείνη 
δεινὴ τοῦ ζῴου τὸ παλάμημα. 

307 


OPPIAN 


ἤδη δ᾽ ἐκ μελέων λιαρὸς καὶ ἀθέσφατος ἱδρὼς 
χεύεται ἀμφοτέροισι: τὰ δ᾽ αἰόλα κέρδεα τέχνης 28 
a / 
πλάζονται, χεῖρές τε περὶ χροὶ κυμαίνονται" 
/ 
ὡς Kal πουλύποδος κοτυληδόνες οὐ κατὰ κόσμον 
πλαζόμεναι κενεῇσι παλαισμοσύναις μογέουσιν. 
ἡ δέ μιν ὀξυτόμοισιν ὑπὸ ῥιπῇσιν ὀδόντων 
δαρδάπτει- μελέων δὲ τὰ μὲν κατεδέξατο γαστήρ, 98, 
+ 9: 9909 > ΄ \ / > / 
ἄλλα δ᾽ ἔτ᾽ ἐν γενύεσσι θοοὶ τρίβουσιν ὀδόντες, 
Ν Ya 3 3 ,ὔ \ ΕΥ̓ ΩΝ 7.. 
ἄλλα δέ τ᾽ ἀσπαίρει καὶ ἑλίσσεται ἡμιδάϊκτα, 
εἰσέτι παιφάσσοντα καὶ ἐκφυγέειν ἐθέλοντα. 
ε 3 ἘΝ 3 A ae > / , > f 
ws δ᾽ ὅτ᾽ ava Evddxous ὀφίων στίβον ἐξερεείνων 
7 ” Ὁ va 2 3 ~ 

βριθόκερως ἔλαφος ῥινήλατον ἴχνος ἀνεῦρε, 29 
χειὴν δ᾽ εἰσαφίκανε καὶ ἑρπετὸν εἴρυσεν ἔξω 

/ 3 > ,ὔ ε 3 cy\/ > , ~ 
δάπτει τ᾽ ἐμμενέως- ὁ δ᾽ ἑλίσσεται ἀμφί τε γοῦνα, 
δειρήν τε στέρνον τε" τὰ δ᾽ ἡμίβρωτα κέχυνται 

Ψ \ 3 > ᾽ὔ ς \ 4 
ἅψεα, πολλὰ δ᾽ ὀδόντες ὑπὸ στόμα Sartpevovow- 

Δ i! ,ὔ ,ὔ a4 a 
ὡς Kal πουλύποδος δνοπαλίζεται αἰόλα γυια 29: 
δυσμόρου: οὐδέ ἑ 'μῆτις ἐπιφροσύνης ἐσάωσε 
πετραίης" εἰ γάρ ποτ᾽ ἀλευόμενος περὶ πέτρην 
πλέξηται, χροιήν τε πανείκελον ἀμφιέσηται, 

> > 


I ,ὕὔ ΕΣ ὔ 3 4 ¢€ 4 
a. ov μυραίνης ἔλαθεν κέαρ, ἀλλά ἑ μούνη 
φράζεται, ἄπρηκτον δὲ πέλει κείνοιο νόημα. 30 
> 


ἔνθα μιν οἰκτείρειας ἀκοσμοτάτοιο μόροιο, 

ὡς ὁ μὲν ἐν πέτρῃσιν ὑφέζεται, ἡ δέ of ἄγχι 

not ἐπεγγελόωσα παρίσταται: ὧδέ κε φαίης 
μυθεῖσθαι μύραιναν ἀπηνέα κερτομέουσαν: 

τί πτώσρεις δολομῆτα; τίν᾽ ἔλπεαι ἠπεροπεύειν; 90. 


® Ael. ii. 9 ἔλαφος ὄφιν νικᾷ κατά τινα φύσεως δωρεὰν θαυμα- 
στήν᾽ καὶ οὐκ ἂν αὐτὸν διαλάθοι ἐν τῷ φωλεῷ dv ὁ ἔχθιστος, ἀλλὰ 
προσερείσας τῇ καταδρομῇ τοῦ δακέτου τοὺς ἑαυτοῦ μυκτῆρας, 
βιαιότατα εἰσπνεῖ, καὶ ἕλκει ὡς ἴυγγι τῷ πνεύματι, καὶ ἄκοντα 
προάγει, καὶ προκύπτοντα αὐτὸν ἐσθίειν ἄρχεται: Lucan vi. 673 
cervi pastae serpente medullae ; Plin. viii. 118 Et his (cervis) 


308 


HALIEUTICA, II. 279-305 


limbs of both pours the sweat warm and abundant and 
the varied wiles of their art are all abroad and their 
hands wave about their bodies: even so the suckers 
of the Poulpe, at random plied, are all abroad, and 
labour in vain wrestling. But the Muraena with 
sharp assault of teeth rends the Poulpe; some of 
his limbs her belly receives, while other parts the 
sharp teeth still grind in her jaws, others are still 
quivering and twisting, half consumed, struggling 
still and fain to escape. As when in the woods the 

tag ὦ of heavy horns, seeking out the path of 
serpents, discovers the track by scent and comes 
fo the lair and hales the reptile out and devours it 

main, while the serpent twines about knees and 
neck and breast, and some of its limbs lie half-eaten, 
much yet in the Stag’s jaws the teeth devour: even 
so the coiling limbs of the hapless Poulpe writhe, 
nor does his device of stony craft save him. For 
even if perchance in his endeavours to escape he 
twine about a rock and clothe him in a colour like 
to it, yet he escapes not the wit of the Muraena, 
but she alone remarks him and his cunning is in 
vain. Then thou wouldst pity him for his unseemly 
doom, as he crouches on the rocks, while she stands 
by, as it were mocking him. Thou wouldst say the 
cruel Muraena spoke and mocked him thus. ‘ Why 
dost thou skulk, crafty one ? Whom hopest thou to 


cum serpente pugna. Vestigant cavernas nariumque spiritu 
extrahunt renitentes; Nicand. Zh. 139 ff. ἢ ὁπότε σκαρθμοὺς 
ἐλάφων dxejow ἀλύξας ἀνδρὸς ἐνισκίμψῃ χολόων γυιοφθόρον 
ἰόν. | ἔξοχα γὰρ δολιχοῖσι κινωπησταῖς κοτέουσι | νεβροτόκοι καὶ 
ζόρκες: ἀνιχνεύουσι δὲ πάντῃ | τρόχμαλα θ᾽ αἱμασιάς τε καὶ ἰλύους 
ἐρέοντες, | σμερδαλέῃ μυκτῆρος ἐπισπέρχοντες αὐτμῃῇ. Cf. Phil. 
59, B.M. 5. ἔλαφος. It is a common notion in Scotland that 
Goats destroy Adders. 

309 


OPPIAN 


τ 


ὡς , \ la 
ἢ τάχα Kal πέτρης πειρήσομαι, ἦν σε καὶ εἴσω 
vA 
δέξηται σπιλὰς ἥδε Kal ἠμύσασα καλύψῃ. 
>? > 3 ΄ ¢ > te , 
αὐτίκα δ᾽ ἀγκύλον ἕρκος ἐνιπλήξασα λαφύσσει, 
> ,, 3 
χοιράδος αὖ ἐρύουσα περίτρομον: αὐτὰρ ὅ γ᾽ οὔτι, 
es 3 
οὐδὲ δαϊζόμενος, λείπει πάγον οὐδ᾽ ἀνίησιν, 810 
ἀλλ᾽ ἔχεται πέτρης εἱλιγμένος, εἰσόκεν αὐταὶ 
λείπωνται μοῦναι κοτυληδόνες ἐμπεφυυῖαι. 
ε 3 « th oh ς \ \ / 
ws δ᾽ ὅτε περθομένης δηΐων ὑπὸ χερσὶ πόληος, 
ἑλκομένων παίδων τε δορυκτήτων τε γυναικῶν, 
κοῦρον ἀνὴρ δειρῇ τε καὶ ἀγκάσιν ἐμπεφυῶτα 315 
γειναμένης ἐρύσῃ πολέμου νόμῳ, αὐτὰρ ὁ χεῖρας 
πλέγδην οὐκ ἀνίησιν ἀπ᾽ αὐχένος, οὐδέ € μήτηρ 
κωκυτῷ προΐησιν, ὁμοῦ δέ οἱ ἕλκεται αὐτή" 
Δ \ 7 \ / € J, 
ὡς καὶ πουλύποδος δειλὸν δέμας ἑλκομένοιο 
/ / 4 9.9 Di δ 
λισσάδι μυδαλέῃ περιφύεται, οὐδ᾽ ἀνίησι. 820 
Κάραβος αὖ μύραιναν ἀπηνέα περ μάλ᾽ ἐοῦσαν 
ἐσθίει, αὐτοφόνοισιν ἀγηνορίῃσι δαμεῖσαν. 
ἢ γὰρ ὁ μὲν πέτρης σχεδὸν ἵσταται, ἣ ἔνι ναίει 
3 
oTpadén μύραινα: δύω δ᾽ ἀνὰ κέντρα τιτήνας 
Tae / λί > / 2 aA 
nla φυσιόων προκα (ζεται ες μόθον ἐλθεῖν, 325 
ἶσος ἀριστῆϊ προμάχῳ στρατοῦ, ὅς ῥά τε χειρῶν 
ἠνορέῃ πολέμου τε δαημοσύνῃσι πεποιθὼς 
ie 
ἔντεσι καρτύνας βριαρὸν δέμας, ὀξέα πάλλων 
” / / Ὁ 3 ? ie 
ἔγχεα; δυσμενέων προκαλίζεται ὅς κ᾽ ἐθέλῃσιν 
, Y > 4 
ἀντιάαν" τάχα δ᾽ ἄλλον ἀριστήων ὀροθύνει:" 990 
ἃ ω δ, / / > “- 
ὡς ὃ γε μυραίνης θήγει φρένας, οὐδ᾽ ἐπὶ μῶλον 
δηθύνει, "θαλάμης δὲ διαΐξασα κελαινή, 
Ψ' / Ld / ie 
αὐχένα yupwoaca, χόλῳ μέγα παιφάσσουσα 
3 ~ 
ἀντιάᾳ" τὸν δ᾽ οὔτι περισπέρχουσά περ αἰνῶς 
/ \ ayy) 
βλάπτει τρηχὺν ἐόντα, γένυν δ᾽ ἀνεμώλιον αὔτως 38% 
> , ἐπ 5 μὲ 
ἐγχρίμπτει, στερεοῖσι δ᾽ ἐτώσια μαίνετ᾽ ὀδοῦσιν: 
€ A / ΄ 
οἱ δὲ πάλιν γενύεσσιν ἀπηνέος ὡς ἀπὸ πέτρης 
810 


HALIEUTICA, II. 306-337 


deceive ? Soon shall I assault the rock, if this cliff 
receive thee within it and close and cover thee.”’ And 
straightway she fixes in him the curved hedge of her 
teeth and devours him, pulling him all trembling 
from the rock. But he, even while he is rent, does 
not leave the réck nor let go. Coiling he clings to 
it till only his suckers remain fast. As when a city 
is sacked by the hands of the foemen, and children 
and women are haled away as the prize of the spear, 
a man drags away a boy who clings to the neck and 
arms of his mother ; the boy relaxes not his arms 
that are twined about her neck, nor does the wailing 
mother let him go, but is dragged with him herself ; 
even so the poor body of the Poulpe, as he is dragged 
away, clings to the wet rock and lets not go. 

The Crayfish ¢ again destroys the Muraena,? savage 
though she be, overcome by her valour fatal to her- 
self. He stands near the rock in which dwells the 
nimble Muraena and extends his two feelers and, 
breathing hostile breath, challenges the Muraena to 
battle : even as a chieftain, the champion of an army, 
who, trusting im the prowess of his hands and his 
skill in war, arrays in arms his strong body and 
brandishing his sharp spears challenges any foeman 
who will to meet him, and presently provokes another 
chieftain. Even so the Crayfish whets the spirit of 
the Muraena, and no laggard for battle is the dusky 
fish, but rushing from her lair with arched neck and 
quivering with wrath she goes to meet him. Yet 
for all her terrible rage she hurts not the prickly 
Crayfish ;. vainly and idly she fixes in him her jaw 
and rages with her hard teeth, which in her jaws 
rebound as from a hard rock and grow weary and 


@ ΑΘ]. ix. 25. δ ΑΘ]. i. 32, ix. 25. 
311 


OPPIAN © 


/ / \ > 4 3 a 
παλλόμενοι κάμνουσι Kal ἀμβλύνονται ἐρωῆς. 
τῆς δὲ μέγα φλεγέθει καὶ ὀρίνεται ἄγριον ἦτορ, 


> Ἢ “ε Δ᾽ oh ~ 
εἰσόκε μιν χηλῇσιν ἐπαΐξας δολιχῇσιν 
κάραβος αὐχενίοιο λάβῃ μέσσοιο τένοντος-" 
w+ 


3793 \ , Se 7 
ἴσχει δ᾽ ἐμπεφυὼς χαλκείῃ ὥστε πυράγρῃ, 


,ὕ 292 > 29 7 δ» , 3 
νωλεμές, οὐὸ ανιὴῆσι και εσσυμέενὴν Περ ἀλ 


ὕξαι" 


« A , 7 \ 3 / 3 3 Υ 
ἡ δὲ βίῃ μογέουσα καὶ ἀσχαλόωσ ὀδύνῃσι, 
πάντῃ δινεύει σκολιὸν δέμας, αἷψα δὲ νῶτα 
καράβου ὀξυβελῆ περιβάλλεται ἀμφιχυθεῖσα, 
ἐν δ᾽ ἐπάγη σκώλοισι καὶ ὀξείῃσιν ἀκωκαῖς 
ὀστράκου, ὠτειλαῖς δὲ περιπλήθουσα θαμειαῖς 
wv > La (9 ᾿ > / “ 
ὄλλυται αὐτοδάϊκτος, ὑπ ἀφραδίῃσι θανοῦσα. 
¢ 3 Ψ - > \ / v 
ws δ᾽ ὅτε Onpoddva τις ἀνὴρ δεδαημένος ἔργων, 
/ 


λαῶν ἀμφιδόμοισιν ἐναγρομένων ἀγορῇσι, 


πόρδαλιν οἰστρηθεῖσαν ἐνὶ ῥοίζοισιν ἱμάσθλης 


2 , γ fae \ € ΄ 
EVXELN δέχεται TAVANKEL δοχμὸς πὍυποστας" 
ε 


ἡ δὲ καὶ εἰσορόωσα γένυν θηκτοῖο σιδήρου 
ἄγρια κυμαίνουσα κορύσσεται, ἐν δ᾽ ἄρα λαιμῷ 
note δουροδόκῃ χαλκήλατον ἔσπασεν αἰχμήν: 
ὡς ἄρα καὶ μύραιναν ἕλεν χόλος ἀφραδίῃσι 
δύσμορον, αὐτοτύποισιν ὑπ᾽ ὠτειλῇσι δαμεῖσαν. 
τοίην που τραφερῆς γαίης ἔπι δῆριν ἔθεντο 
ἄμφω ἐνὶ ξυλόχοισιν ὄφις καὶ τρηχὺς ἐχῖνος 
ἀντόμενοι" καὶ τοῖς γὰρ ἀνάρσιος αἶσα μέμηλεν. 


», ε \ oQi\ > Pos “ 
TOL Oo μεν προϊδὼν ὀλοφώϊον ερπυστήρα, 


φραξάμενος πυκινῇσιν ὑπὸ προβλῆσιν ἀκάνθαις 
« aA A 3 oo Cal 
εἱλεῖται σφαιρηδόν, ὑφ᾽ ἕρκεὶ γυῖα φυλάσσων, 


¢€ 


la ¢ 4 ¢< 

ἔνδοθεν ἑρπύζων: 6 δέ of σχεδὸν αὐτίκα θύνων 
“ \ > / 

πρῶτα μέν ἱοτόκοισιν ἐπισπέρχει γενύεσσιν, 


* The reference is to a ludus bestiarius (Senec. 
312 


Ep. viii. 


340 


345 


350 


355 


360 


365 


HALIEUTICA, II. 338-366 


are blunted by their force. Greatly her fierce heart 
burns and is stirred, until the Crayfish rushes on her 
with his long claws and seizes her by the tendon in 
the midst of her throat, and clings and holds her firm 
as with brazen tongs, and lets her not go though eager 
to escape. She, distressed by his violence and vexed 
by pain, wheels every way her crooked body, and 
speedily she throws herself about the prickly back of 
the Crayfish and enfolds him and impales herself on 
the spine and sharp points of his shell, and, full of 
many wounds, perishes self-destroyed, dead by her 
own folly. As when a man skilled in the work of slay- 
ing wild beasts,* when the people are gathered in the 
house-encircled market-place,” awaits the Leopard ὁ 
maddened by the cracking of the whip and with long- 
edged spear stands athwart her path; she, though 
she beholds the edge of sharp iron, mantles in swelling 
fury and receives in her throat, as it were in a spear- 
stand, the brazen lance; even so wrath slays the 
unhappy Muraena in her folly, overcome by self-dealt 
wounds. Such strife, I ween, upon the dry land a 
Serpent and a prickly Hedgehog wage, when they 
meet in the woods; for enmity is their lot also. 
The Hedgehog, seeing in front of him the deadly 
reptile, fences himself with his close-set bristling 
spines and rolls himself into a ball, protecting his limbs 
under his fence within which he crawls. The Serpent, 
rushing upon him, first assails him with his venomous 


i, 22), in which men, bestiarii (Cic. Pro Seat. 64), opposed 
wild beasts in the arena. Plin. viii. 18 ff. 181 ; Juv. iv. 100. 
> In the amphitheatre: schol., ἐν ἀγορᾷ κύκλωθεν οἰκήματα 
ἐχούσῃ. Cf. Poll. vii. 125; Claud. In Ruf. ii. 394. 
¢ Dio Cass. Ixxviii. 21 Λούκιος Πρισκιλλιανός. . . ποτε καὶ 
ἄρκτῳ καὶ παρδάλει λεαίνῃ τε καὶ λέοντι ἅμα μόνος συνηνέχθη. 
313 


OPPIAN 


> > » 7. \ id 3 \ ε ’ 
ἀλλ᾽ αὔτως μογέει κενεὸν πόνον" οὐ γὰρ ἱκάνει 
χρωτὸς ἔσω μαλεροῖσι καὶ ἱέμενός περ ὀδοῦσι" 
τοΐη μιν λάχνη δυσπαίπαλος ἀμφιβέβηκεν: 
αὐτὰρ ὁ κυκλοτερὴς ὁλοότροχος αἰόλα γυῖα 
δινεύων, πυκινῇσι κυλινδόμενος στροφάλιγξιν, 
ἐμπίπτει σπείρῃσι καὶ οὐτάζει βελέεσσι 

a 3 / ᾿ ε δ᾽ ἀλλ wv ἀλλ 
χαίτης ὀξυτόμοισιν" 6 δ᾽ ἄλλοθεν εἴβεται ἄλλος 
ἰχὼρ αἱματόεις, τὸν δ᾽ ἕλκεα πόλλ᾽ ἀνιάζει. 
ἔνθα μιν ἀμφιβαλὼν περιηγέϊ πάντοθεν ὁλκῷ 
ὑγρὸς ὄφις χαλεποῖσι περιπλέγδην ὑπὸ δεσμοῖς 
ἴσχει τ᾽ ἐμπρίει τε χόλῳ τ᾽ ἐνερείδεται ἀλκήν. 
τοῦ δ᾽ εἴσω τάχα πᾶσαι ὀλισθαίνουσιν ἄκανθαι 

᾿ a 3 
ὀξέα πεφρικυῖαι- ὁ δ᾽ ἐν σκολόπεσσι πεπηγὼς 
οὔτε βίην ἀνίησι καὶ οὐκ. ἐθέλων πεπέδηται, 
ἀλλὰ μένει γόμφοισιν ἅτε κρατεροῖσιν ἀρηρώς, 
Μ᾿ θ / \ 3° 3 A > / 0 OF / 
ὄφρα θάνῃ, σὺν δ᾽ αὐτὸν ἀπέφθισε θῆρα πιέζων 

λλά LAA aN δὲ Si \ a / 
πολλάκις, ἀλλήλοις δὲ μόρος Kal πῆμα γένοντο" 

,ὔ ὃ᾽ > AD: \ ” δι ὃὲ A 
πολλάκι δ᾽ ἐξήλυξε καὶ ἔκφυγε δεινὸς ἐχῖνος, 
ἐκδὺς ἑρπυστῆρος ἀλυκτοπέδης τε κελαινῆς, 
εἰσέτι τεθνηῶτος ἔχων περὶ σἄρκας ἀκάνθαις. 
va 
τοίη Kal μύραινα κακόφρονι δάμναται ἄτῃ, 
καράβῳ ἁρπαλέη τε καὶ εὐάντητος ἐδωδή. 
εν A ~ 

dpaBov αὖ καὶ τρηχὺν ὁμῶς καὶ κραιπνὸν ἐόντα 

,ὔ 3 3 ,ὔ / > 
δαίνυτ᾽ ἀφαυρότερός περ ἐὼν καὶ νωθρὸς ἐρωὴν 

vd Cus ἢ 4 
πούλυπος" ἡνίκα yap μιν ὑπὸ σπιλάδεσσι νοήσῃ 

> / \ A 

αὔτως ἀτρεμέοντα καὶ ἥμενον, αὐτὰρ ὁ λάθρη 


* In Hom. 1). v. 340 and 416 ichor means the blood of the 
gods; later the serous or watery part of the blood (A. 
P.A. 651 a 17 τὸ ὑδατῶδες τοῦ αἵματος), the discharge from a 
wound, ete. Cf. Milton, Par. Lost, vi. 331 of Satan’s wound: 
‘from the gash | A stream of nectarous humour issuing 
flow’d | Sanguine, such as celestial Spirits may bleed;” 
Byron, Vision of Judgement, 25 of St. Peter, ‘Of course his 
314 


970 


379 


380 


385 


390 


HALIEUTICA, II. 367-392 


jaws, but his labour is all in vain. For despite his 
eagerness he cannot reach the flesh within with his 
devouring teeth; so rough a pile surrounds the 
Hedgehog ; who, like a round boulder, wheels his 
shifty limbs, rolling turn on turn, and falls upon the 
coils of the Serpent and wounds him with the sharp 
arrows of his bristles ; and here and there flows the 
bloody ichor* and many wounds torment the Serpent. 
Then the clammy Snake girds the Hedgehog all about 
with his circling coil and in the embrace οἵ his 
grievous bonds holds him and bites and puts therein 
the strength of anger. Then swiftly all the sharp- 
bristling spines of the Hedgehog glide into him ; 
yet, impaled upon the prickles, he abates not his 
effort though fettered against his will, but remains 
fast as if held by strong dowels, until he dies ; and 
often by his pressure he destroys the beast as well, 
and they become doom and bane to one another, 
But often, too, the dread Hedgehog gets away and 
escapes, slipping from the reptile and his darksome 
fetter, bearing still upon his spines the flesh of the 
dead Serpent. In like fashion also the Muraena 
perishes by a foolish doom, to the Crayfish an eager 
and welcome feast. 

The Crayfish again, prickly though he be and swift, 
is devoured by the Poulpe,” albeit he is weaker and 
sluggish of motion. For when the Poulpe remarks 
him under the rocks sitting all motionless, stealthily 


perspiration was but ichor | Or some such other spiritual 
liquor.” 

® Ael. ix. 25 κάραβος πολύποδι ἐχθρός᾽ τὸ δὲ αἴτιον, ὅταν αὐτῷ 
τὰς πλεκτάνας περιβάλῃ, τῶν μὲν ἐπὶ τοῦ νώτου ἐκπεφυκότων 
αὐτῷ κέντρων ποιεῖται οὐδεμίαν ὥραν, ἑαυτὸν δὲ περιχέας αὐτῷ 
ἐς πνῦγμα ἄγχει' ταῦτα ὁ κάραβος σαφῶς οἷδεν καὶ ἀποδιδράσκει 
αὐτόν. 


315 


OPPIAN 


νῶτον ἐπαΐξας περιβάλλεται αἰόλα δεσμά, 
ἰφθίμων δολιχῆσι ποδῶν σειρῇσι πιέζων, 

A / 8 3 4 / 7. § \ > ὃ 
σὺν δέ οἱ ἀκραίῃς κοτυληδόσι θερμὸν ἐρείδει 395 
αὐλὸν ἐπισφίγγων στόματος. μέσον, οὐδ᾽ ἀνίησι 

\ > t wv > ” a? 6 ἐν 

πνοιὴν ἠερίην οὔτ᾽ ἔνδοθεν οὔθ᾽ ἑτέρωθεν" 
καὶ γὰρ καὶ νεπόδεσσι παλίρροος ἕλκεται ἀήρ" 
3 > Ῥν > , € A / Ψ ,ὔ 
ἀλλ᾽ ἔχει ἀμφιπεσών-: 6 δὲ νήχεται, ἄλλοτε μίμνει, 
+ 3 > , A \ ~ € 3 EA 
ἄλλοτε δ᾽ ἀσπαίρει, ποτὲ δὲ προβλῆσιν ὑπ᾽ ἄκραις 400 
Ges > \ Ψ > yy , / Ψ 
βήγνυται' αὐτὰρ oy οὔτι βίης μεθίησιν ἄεθλον, 
ὄφρα ἑ τεθνηῶτα λίπῃ ψυχή τε καὶ ἀλκή. 
δὴ τότε μιν προπεσόντα παρήμενος ἐν ψαμάθοισι 

,ὔ oh ~ a 
δαίνυται, Hite κοῦρος ὑπὲκ μαζοῖο τιθήνης 

/ a A 
χείλεσιν αὖ ἐρύει λαρὸν yAdyos: ds ὅ ye σάρκας 405 
λάπτων ὀξυπόροιο κατέσπασεν ἄγγεος ἔξω 

΄ὔ λ lod ὃ \ lo > λ , ὃ tA 

μυζήσας, γλυκερῆς δὲ βορῆς ἐνεπλήσατο νηδύν. 
ὡς δέ τις ἡμερόκοιτος ἀνὴρ ληΐστορι τέχνῃ 
ὁρμαίνων ἀΐδηλα, δίκης σέβας οὔποτ᾽ ἀέξων, 
ἑσπέριος στεινῇσι καταπτήξας ἐν ἀγυιαῖς, 410 
ἄνδρα παραστείχοντα μετ᾽ εἰλαπίνην ἐλόχησε" 

65 16 Ἁ 
καὶ ῥ᾽ ὁ μὲν οἰνοβαρὴς ἕρπει πάρος, ὑγρὸν ἀείδων, 
οὐ μάλα νηφάλιον κλάζων μέλος αὐτὰρ 6 λάθρη 


“ παλίρροος (Kur. J. in T. 1397, Aesch. Ag. 191), παλιρροία 
(Soph. fr. 716, Herod. ii. 28, Diodor. i. 32) are constantly 
used of the ebb and flow of the tide and hence of any ebb 
and flow, 6.9. of fortune (παλιρροία τῆς τύχης Diodor. xviii. 
59). Especially natural is the application to air or breath 
(Tryphiod. 76 παλίρροον ἄσθμα: ef. Theophrast. De vent. 10, 
A. De spir, 482 Ὁ 3, Probl. 940 b 25). As to the breathing 
of Fishes, Aristotle classes them among τὰ μὴ ἀναπνέοντα 
(De sens. 444. Ὁ 7); but the contrary opinion is maintained 
by Pliny, ix. 16 ff. ‘They ... suppose likewise that no 
fishes having guils do draw in and deliver their wind againe 
too and fro . . . Among others I see that Aristotle was of 
that mind . . . For mine owne part... I professe that I 


816 


HALIEUTICA, II. 393-413 


he springs upon his back and casts his various bonds 
about him, oppressing him with the long chains of 
his strong feet and with the ends of his tentacles 
withal he constricts and strangles the warm channel 
in the midst of his mouth and suffers not his airy 
breath to pass either out or in (for fishes too draw 
the tide of air),* but holds him in his embrace. And 
the Crayfish now swims, now halts, and again 
struggles, and anon dashes against the jutting crags. 
But the Poulpe relaxes not the contest of might, 
until life and strength forsake the other in death. 
Then when the Crayfish falls prone, the Poulpe sits 
by him on the sands and feasts, even as a child 
draws with his lips the sweet milk from the breast 
of his nurse ; even so the Poulpe laps the flesh of the 
Crayfish, sucking and drawing it forth from its prickly 
vessel, and fills his belly with sweet food. Even as a 
day-sleeping ὃ man, with predatory craft devising 
dark counsels, never honouring the majesty of justice, 
skulks at evening in the narrow streets and lies in 
wait for one passing by after a banquet; the ban- 
queter, heavy with wine, goes forward, singing drunk- 
enly, bawling no very sober melody ; and the other 


am not of their judgement. For why? Nature if she be so 
disposed, may give insteed of lights [7.¢. lungs] some other 
organs and instruments of breath ” (Holland’s trans.), princi- 
pally on the ground that (1) they are seen to pant in hot 
weather, (2) they sleep—‘ quis enim sine respiratione somno 
locus?” (3) they have the senses of hearing and of smell— 
‘*ex aeris utrumque materia. Odorem quidem non aliud 
quam infectum aera intelligi potest.” 

> From Hesiod, W. 60 μή ποτέ σ’ ἡμερόκοιτος ἀνὴρ ἀπὸ 
χρήμαθ᾽ ἕλητα. Cf. ΜΠ. Μ. 4. ἡμερόκοιτος: ‘Holodos, Μήποτέ 
δ᾽... ἕληται: ὁ τὴν ἡμέραν καθεύδων, τὴν δὲ νύκτα ἀγρυπνῶν, 
τουτέστιν ὁ κλέπτης. Cf. Suid. and Hesych. s.v. ἡμερόκοιτος" 
ὁ κλέπτης. 


817 


OPPIAN 


\ a 
ἐξόπιθε προὔτυψε καὶ αὐχένα χερσὶ δαφοιναῖς 
A Le Ψ 
εἷλεν ἐπιβρίσας, κλῖνέν τέ μιν ἄγριον ὕπνον 415 
“ 3 > / 
od τηλοῦ θανάτοιο καὶ εἵματα πάντ᾽ ἐναρίξας 
“ / \ > ὕ LA 
ᾧχετο, δυσκερδῆ τε φέρων καὶ ἀνέστιον ἀγρην" 
a / 
τοιάδε Kal πινυτοῖσι νοήματα πουλυπόδεσσιν. 
σ' \ 3 , A > ds, wv > ᾿ 
Οἵδε μὲν ἀντίβιοι καὶ ἀνάρσιοι ἔξοχ᾽ ἔασιν 
΄ 
εἰναλίων: μοῦνοι δὲ μετ᾽ ἰχθύσιν αἰολοφύλοις 420 
“-“- a i > ὔ > a 
ποινητῆρες ἔασι καὶ ἀλλήλων ὀλετῆρες. 
$ Yee BE} 
ἔΑλλοι δ᾽ ἰοφόροι νεπόδων, στομάτεσσι δ᾽ ἀεικὴς 
La 
ἰὸς ἐνυτρέφεται στυγερός τ᾽ ἐπὶ δήγμασιν ἕρπει. 
τοῖον καὶ σκολόπενδρα, δυσώνυμον ἑρπετὸν ἅλμης, 
Ss ? ,ὔ ὔ is ~ 3 A / > ” 
ἶσον ἐπιχθονίῳ δέμας ἑρπετῷ" ἀλλὰ τό γ᾽ ἄτην 4595 
κύντερον" εἰ γάρ οἱ τις ἐπιψαύσειε πελάσσας, 
αὐτίκα οἱ κνῆστις μὲν ἐπὶ χροΐ θερμὸν ἔρευθος 
7 7 \ / > oh / 
φοινίσσει, σμώδιξ δὲ διατρέχει ἠῦτε ποίης, 
τὴν κνίδα κικλήσκουσιν, ἐπωνυμίην ὀδυνάων. 
> \ A / / 3 lo 
ἐχθρὴ δὲ σκολόπενδρα πανέξοχον ἀσπαλιεῦσι 430 
> / ? / 3 2 7 , 
ἐμπελάαν- εἰ γάρ ποτ᾽ ἐπιψαύσειε δελέτρου, 
οὐκ ἂν τις νεπόδων κείνου πέλας ἀγκίστροιο 
μὲ a / ε > ,ὔ / rats 
ἔλθοι: τοῖον yap οἱ ἀπεχθέα μίσγεται ἰόν. 
/ \ lon > "4 ’ " 
Toin καὶ βαλιῇσιν ἰουλίσι τέτροφεν ἄτη 


@ Ael. ii. 50 κωβιός, δράκων, χελιδών, τρυγών are venomous, 
the last fatally. 

> A. 505 Ὁ 13 εἰσὶ δὲ καὶ σκολόπενδραι θαλάττιαι, παραπλήσιαι 
τὸ εἶδος ταῖς χερσαίαις, τὸ δὲ μέγεθος μικρῷ ἐλάττους" γίγνονται δὲ 
περὶ τοὺς πετρώδεις τόπους : 621] ἃ 6 ἣν δὲ καλοῦσι σκολόπενδραν, 
ὅταν καταπίῃ τὸ ἄγκιστρον, ἐκτρέπεται τὰ ἐντὸς ἐκτός, ἕως ἂν 
ἐκβάλῃ τὸ ἄγκιστρον" εἴθ᾽ οὕτως εἰστρέπεται πάλιν ἐντόςς βαδί- 
ζουσι δ᾽ αἱ σκολόπενδραι πρὸς τὰ κνισώδη, ὥσπερ καὶ αἱ χερσαῖαι. 
τῷ μὲν οὖν στόματι οὐ δάκνουσι, τῇ δὲ ἅψει καθ᾽ ὅλον τὸ σῶμα, 


318 


HALIEUTICA, 11. 414-434 


darts forth stealthily behind and seizes his neck with 
murderous hands and overpowers and lays him low 
in a cruel sleep not far from death and despoils him 
of all his raiment and goes his way with his booty, 
ill-gotten and unlawful: even such are the devices 
of the cunning Poulpes. 

These above all creatures of the sea are hostile 
and unfriendly and alone among the fishes of varied 
tribe are avengers and slayers one of the other. 

Others of the fishes are venomous? and an ugly 
venom is bred in their mouths and creeps hateful 
into their bite. Such is the Scolopendra,® an ominous 
reptile of the brine, like in form to the reptile of the 
land, but deadlier in its hurt. For if one approach 
and touch it, straightway itch makes a hot redness 
on his flesh and a weal runs over him as from the 
grass which, from the pains which it causes, men call 
the nettle. Most hateful of all is the Scolopendra 
for fishermen to encounter ; for if it touch the bait, 
not a fish will come near that hook; with such a 
hateful venom does the Scolopendra infect it. 

A like bane also is bred in the mouth of the spotted 
ὥσπερ αἱ καλούμεναι κνῖδαι; Ael. vii. 35. Generally supposed 
to be an annelid worm, 6.5. Nereis. Cf. Plin. ix. 145 
Scolopendrae terrestribus similes, quas centipedes vocant, 
hamo devorato omnia interanea evomunt, donec hamum 
egerant, deinde resorbent; Plut. Mor. 5678 ὅσοι δὲ πρό- 
σχημα καὶ δύξαν ἀρετῆς περιβαλόμενοι διεβίωσαν κακίᾳ λανθανούσῃ, 
τούτους ἐπιπόνως καὶ ὀδυνηρῶς ἠνάγκαζον ἕτεροι περιεστῶτες 
ἐκτρέπεσθαι τὰ ἐντὸς ἔξω τῆς ψυχῆς, ἰλυσπωμένους παρὰ φύσιν 
καὶ ἀνακαμπτομένους, ὥσπερ αἱ θαλάττιαι σκολόπενδραι κατα- 
πιοῦσαι τὸ ἄγκιστρον ἐκτρέπουσιν ἑαυτάς. The name σκολό- 
πενδρα was also given to an unknown sea-monster (κῆτος 
θαλάττιον) described by Ael. xiii. 23, to which the reference 
must be in 4.P. vi. 222, vi. 223. 

319 


OPPIAN 


= , "ὦ 
ἂν στόμα" τὰς δὲ μάλιστα βυθῶν διφήτορες ἄνδρες 43% 
“ 7 ie 
δύπται σπογγοτόμοι τε δυηπαθέες στυγέουσιν" 
= A 30 , ᾽ a θ pi 
εὖτε yap ἀθρήσωσιν ἐρευνητῆρα θαλάσσης 
5 ,ὔ , 
σπερχόμενον ποτὶ βυσσὸν ὑποβρυχίοισι πόνοισιν, 
¢€ a 
αἵ δ᾽ ἀπὸ πετράων μάλα μυρίαι ὁρμηθεῖσαι 
/ 
ἄνδρα περιπροθέουσι καὶ ἀθρόαι ἀμφιχέονται 4a 
~ la 
Kal μιν ὁδοῦ βλάπτουσι πονεύμενον, ἄλλοθεν ἄλλαι 
A ff 
κνίζουσαι στομάτεσσιν avaidéow: αὐτὰρ ὁ κάμνει 
Ψ \ ~ > / > a 
ὕδατι Kal στυγερῇσιν ἰουλίσιν ἀντιβολήσας, 
\ > Ὁ tA > / > ,ὔ "ὃ 
χερσὶ δ᾽, ὅσον σθένος ἐστίν, ἐπειγομένοις τε πόδεσσι 
4 > / A / ες 3.8 3 , » 
σεύει ἀμυνόμενος διερὸν στρατόν" αἱ δ᾽ ἐφέπονται 44: 
3 aA , > / [2 es > 9.5 - ιν: 
ἀστεμφεῖς, μυίαις ἐναλίγκιοι, αἵ ῥά τ᾽ ἐπ᾽ ἔργοις 
ἀνέρας ἀμητῆρας ὀπωρινὸν μογέοντας 
Ῥ. 3 9. \ wa , 3 / 
πάντοσ᾽ ἀνιηραὶ θέρεος στίχες ἀμφιπέτονται. 
¢ > a \ ΄, \ > la a 
οἱ δ᾽ ἅμα μὲν καμάτῳ τε Kal ἀκρήτοισι βολῇσιν 
77 ε 7 > / / , 
ἠέρος ἱδρώουσιν, ἀνιάζουσί τε μυίαις ABC 
ἐκπάγλως" at δ᾽ οὐδὲν ἀναιδείης χαλόωσι, 
\ 7 an ¥ > > > / e / 
πρὶν θανέειν ἢ ξουθὸν am ἀνέρος αἷμα πάσασθαι. 
/ » A a my > vA ω 3 ~ 
τόσσος Epws καὶ τοῖσιν ἐν ἰχθύσιν αἵματος ἀνδρῶν. 
A \ > > 
Od μὴν θὴν ἀβληχρὸν ἔχει δάκος εὖτε χαράξῃ 


a 


* Coris iulis, M.G. γύλος (ἰύλος), ““ poisson rusé, d’ou le pro- 
verbe: γύλος εἶμαι σὲ γελῶ, καὶ χάνος εἶμαι Xdvouar” te. “ἢ 
am γύλος (as if= ‘the mocker’) and I laugh at you: Iam 
χάνος (as if=‘the gaper’) and I scoff at VOUS, = fe 
ἐγχάσκω -- mock, Aristoph. Wasps, 721 etc. (Apost. p. 20). 
320 


HALIEUTICA, II. 435-454 


Rainbow-wrasses*; them do men who explore the 
depths of the sea chiefly abhor—divers and toilsome 
sponge-cutters.2. For when they behold the searcher 
of the sea hasting to the depths for his labour under 
the water, in tens,of thousands they spring from the 
rocks and rush around the man and throng in swarms 
about him and stay him in his course as he labours, 
on this side and on that stinging him with relentless 
mouths. He is wearied by his conflict with the water 
and the hateful Wrasses. With hands and hasting 
feet he does all he can to ward off and drive away 
the watery host. But they pursue him stubbornly, 
like unto ,flies, the grievous hosts of harvest, which 
on every side fly about the reapers at their work 
when they toil in autumn; and the reapers sweat at 
once with their toil and the intemperate shafts of 
the air and they are vexed exceedingly by the flies ; 
but these abate nothing of their shamelessness until 
they die or have tasted the reaper’s dusky blood. 
Even such lust have these fishes also for the blood 


of men. ᾿ 
No feeble bite verily hath the reptile Poulpe ὁ when 


‘Equally and even more vivid are the Wrasses, of which 
many gorgeous sorts are common among the rocks close 
to the shore. The Julis Mediterranea [= Coris wlis] is the 
brightest of these painted beauties, exceeding all fishes of 
the Mediterranean for splendour of colour” (‘‘ Beacon” 
Report on E. Mediterranean Fishes ap. Εἰ. Forbes, p. 


196). 
> Ael, ii. 44 αἱ ἰουλίδες ἰχθῦς εἰσι πέτραις ἔντροφοι καὶ ἔχουσιν 
ἰοῦ τὸ στόμα ἔμπλεων. .. λυποῦσι δὲ καὶ τοὺς ἐν ταῖς ὑδροθηρίαις 


ὑποδυομένους τὲ καὶ νηχομένους, πολλαὶ καὶ δηκτικαὶ προσ- 


πίπτουσαι, ὡς αὐτόχρημα ἐπὶ τῆς γῆς αἱ μυῖαι. 
¢ Ael. v. 14d ἣν δὲ ἄρα δηκτικὸν καὶ ὁ ὀσμύλος καὶ ὁ πολύ- 
πους. καὶ δάκοι μὲν ἂν οὗτος σηπίας βιαιότερον, τοῦ δὲ ἰοῦ μεθίησιν 


ἧττον. 
Υ 321 


OPPIAN 
a , 3 A \ 3 a 
πούλυπος ἑρπυστὴρ ἢ σηπίη, ἀλλὰ καὶ αὐτοῖς 
la 3 £ 
ἐντρέφεται βαιὸς μὲν ἀτὰρ βλαπτήριος ἰχώρ. 
2 (3 / 
κέντρα δὲ πευκήεντα pet ἰχθύσιν ὡπλίσσαντο 
12 
κωβιός, ὃς ψαμάθοισι, καὶ ὃς πέτρῃσι γέγηθε 
a 3 7ὔ 
σκορπίος, ὠκεῖαί τε χελιδόνες ἠδὲ δράκοντες 
\ "ν΄ « / 3 / > λέ 
καὶ κύνες οἵ κέντροισιν ἐπώνυμοι ἀργαλέοισι, 


A ΄ oN er 
πάντες ἀταρτηροῖς ὑπὸ νυγμάαᾶσιν ιον ἱέντες. 


@ Ael. lic. ἔχει δὲ δῆγμα ἡ σηπία ἰῶδες καὶ τοὺς ὀδόντας 
ἰσχυρῶς ὑπολανθάνοντας. 
> M.G. κωβιός (γωβιός) is generic for the various species 
of Goby, of which Gobius niger is the commonest in Greek 
waters (Apost. p. 10). A. 598a11, 610b4, etc. The 
identification rests mainly on the use of kw ids in M.G. 
Cuvier, xii. 4 ff., argues against the identification on two 
grounds: 1. A. 508 Ὁ 15 οἱ δ᾽ ἰχθύες (ἀποφυάδας ἔχουσιν, have 
caeca) ἄνωθεν περὶ τὴν κοιλίαν, Kal ἔνιοι πολλάς, οἷον κωβιός, 
γαλεός. . . . Now the Goby has no caeca. But the reading 
is suspect as the γαλεός also is without caeca. 2. Whereas 
Oppian and Aelian speak of the formidable spines of the 
κωβιός, ‘the simple rays of the Gobies are flexible and cannot 
wound.” Cuvier, basing on Athen. 809 ο, where we read 
that the κωβιός was also called «00s, or κώθων, identifies the 
κωβιός with Cottus gobio L., the Bull-head or Miller’s Thumb. 
It is possible that κωβιός was also applied to the fresh-water 
Gudgeon, Gobio fluviatilis, which may be the fish referred to 
Athen. 309 € ποταμίων δὲ κωβιῶν μνημονεύει Δωρίων ἐν τῷ περὶ 
ἰχθύων, although the Goby also enters rivers and lakes, A. 
601 b 21 γίνονται δὲ καὶ οἱ κωβιοὶ πίονες ἐν τοῖς ποταμοῖς, as in 
Latin writers certainly gobio or gobius sometimes means 
Goby, Plin. xxxii. 146 cobio (i.e. gobio) among ‘* peculiares 
maris,” sometimes Gudgeon, Auson. Mosell. 131 Tu quoque 
-flumineas inter memorande cohortes, Gobio, non geminis 
maior sine pollice palmis, Praepinguis (an epithet which 
suggests that even A. 601b 21 may refer to the Gudgeon). 
322 


455 


460 


HALIEUTICA, II. 455-461 


he wounds, nor the Cuttle-fish,* but in them also is 
bred an ichor scanty but noxious. Among fishes 
armed with sharp stings are the Goby ὃ which rejoices 
in the sands and the Scorpion ὁ which rejoices in the 
rocks, and the swift Swallows and the Weevers ὦ and 
those Dog-fish ὁ which are named from their grievous 
spines — all discharging poison with their deadly 
pricks. 


The Goby is probably intended in Ov. Hal. 128 Spina 
necuus non gobius ulla. 

¢ H. 1. 171 n.; Ov. Hal. 116 Et capitis duro nociturus 
scorpius ictu. 

4 Trachinus draco L., the Greater Weever, and allied 
species, 7’. vipera, the Lesser Weever,, 7, radiatus, T. 
araneus, the first two found in British waters: all in M.G. 
δράκαινα. Cf. Ael. ii. 50, v. 37, xiv. 12; A. 598 a11; Phil. 
94; Plin. ix, 82 rursus draco marinus captus atque immissus 
in harenam cavernam sibi rostro mira celeritate excavat; 
xxxii. 148 draco—quidam aliud volunt esse dracunculum 
[prob. 7. vipera], est autem gerriculae [= Gr. μαινίς] amplae, 
aculeum in branchiis habet ad caudam spectantem, sicut 
scorpio laedit dum manu tollitur. Also called araneus, 
Plin. xxxii. 145 Peculiares autem maris ... araneus, ix. 
155 Aeque pestiferum animal araneus spinae in dorso aculeo 
noxius. “115 sont trés redoutés par les pécheurs, leurs 
blessures déterminant quelquefois de graves accidents. 1] 
est généralement admis que les arétes de ces poissons sont 
vénéneuses. Aussi les pécheurs les saisissent-ils avec la 
plus grande précaution ; on les apporte rarement intacts au 
marché; le plus souvent, pour éviter tout danger, on les 
mutile aussitét aprés les avoir capturés” (Apost. p. 9). 
Drayton, Polyolbion xxv. 167 The Weaver, which although 
his prickles venom bee, By Fishers cut away which Buyers 
seldom see. Cf. Day i. 78 ff. It is generally thought that 
the correct spelling of the English name is Weever, O.F. 
wivre, Lat. vipera, cf. the heraldic Wyvern, though the Lat. 
araneus=spider suggests some doubt, Weaver (Wyver) 
being in some places, ¢.g. Banffshire, in familiar use as a 
name for a species of spider. 

¢ Squalus centrina L.; cf. H. i. 378 n. 


323 


OPPIAN 


Τρυγόνι δὲ ξιφίῃ τε θεὸς κρατερώτατα δῶρα 
γυίοις ἐγκατέθηκεν, ὑπέρβιον ὅπλον ἑκάστῳ 
καρτύνας" καὶ τῷ μὲν ὑπὲρ γένυν ἐστήριξεν 
ὄρθιον, αὐτόρριζον, ἀκάχμενον, οὔτι σιδήρου 465 
φάσγανον, ἀλλ᾽ ἀδάμαντος ἰσόσθενες ὄβριμον ἄορ. 
οὐ κείνου κρυόεσσαν ἐπιβρίσαντος ἀκωκὴν 
οὐδὲ μάλα στερεὴ τλαίη λίθος οὐτηθεῖσα" 
τοίη οἱ Cayevns τε πέλει πυρόεσσά τ᾽ ἐρωή. 

Τρυγόνι δ᾽ ἐκ νεάτης ἀνατέλλεται ἄγριον οὐρῆς 410 
κέντρον ὁμοῦ χαλεπόν τε βίῃ καὶ ὀλέθριον ἰῷ. 
οὐδέ κεν οὐ ξιφίαι, οὐ τρυγόνες ἐν γενύεσσι 
φορβὴν πρόσθε πάσαιντο, πάρος βελέεσσι δαφοινοῖς 
οὐτῆσαι ζωόν τε καὶ ἄπνοον ὅττι παρείη. 
ἀλλ᾽ ἤτοι ξιφίην μὲν ἐπὴν προλίπῃσιν ἀὐτμή, 475 
αὐτίκα ot κἀκεῖνο συνέφθυτο καρτερὸν ἄορ, 
αὐτῷ δ᾽ ὅπλον ἄνακτι συνέσβετο, καδδὲ λέλειπται 
ὀστέον οὐδενόσωρον, ἀμήχανον ὅσσον ἰδέσθαι 
φάσγανον" οὐδέ kev ἂν τι καὶ ἱέμενος τελέσειας. 
τρυγονίου δ᾽ οὔπω τι κακώτερον ἔπλετο πῆμα 480 
τρώματος, οὐδ᾽ ὅσα χεῖρες ἀρήϊα τεχνήσαντο 
χαλκήων, οὐδ᾽ ὅσσα φερεπτερύγων em ὀϊστῶν 
ἹΠέρσαι φαρμακτῆρες ὀλέθρια μητίσαντο" 

ἼΗΙ γὰρ. ζωῇ τε βέλος ῥίγιστον ὀπηδεῖ 
εγές, οἷόν πού τις ἀνὴρ πέφρικεν ἀκούων, 48 
Pet τε φθιμένης καὶ ἀτειρέα ῥύεται ἀλκὴν 


* Trygon vulgaris Risso (7΄. pastinaca Cuv.), M.G. τρυγών 
at Paros, μούτρουβα at Chaleis (Apost. p. 6). A long spine 
on the tail represents the dorsal fin. It is sometimes as 
much as eight inches long and is capable of causing a serious 
wound. It is used by the savages of the South Sea Islands 
to tip their spears. Of. A. 598 a 12, ete.; Athen. 880 ἃ : 
Phil. 106; Plin. ix. 155 Sed nullum’ usquam execrabilius 
quam radius super caudam eminens trygonis, quam nostri 


324 


HALIEUTICA, II. 462-486 


For the Sting-ray * and the Swordfish ® God has 
put in their bodies most. powerful gifts, equipping 
each with a weapon of exceeding might. Above the 
jaw of the Swordfish he has set a natural sword, 
upright and sharp, no sabre of iron but a mighty 
sword with the strength of adamant. When he puts 
his weight behind his terrible spear not even the 
hardest rock may endure the wound ; so fierce and 
fiery is the onset. 

In the Sting-ray there springs from below the tail 
a fierce sting, at once grievous in its power and deadly 
with its venom. Neither the Sword-fishes nor the 
Sting-rays will taste any food with their jaws, until 
they have first wounded with their deadly jaws what- 
ever prey is at hand whether it be alive or lifeless. 
But when the breath of life forsakes the Sword-fish, 
his mighty sword straightway perishes with him and 
his weapon is quenched with its master and there is 
left a bone of no account, a great sword only to 
behold and thou couldst do nothing with it if thou 
wouldst. But than the wound of the Sting-ray there 
is no more evil hurt, neither in the warlike weapons 
which the hands of the smith cortrive nor in the 
deadly drugs which Persian pharmacists have devised 
upon their winged arrows. While the Sting-ray lives, 
a terrible and fiery weapon attends it, such, I ween, 
as a man trembles to hear of, and it lives when the 
Sting-ray itself has perished and preserves its un- 


pastinacam appellant, quincunciali magnitudine. Arbores 
infixus radici necat, arma ut telum perforat vi ferri et veneni 
malo letalis trygon; Auson. Lp, xiv. 60; Ael. i. 56, ii. 36, 
ii. 50, viii. 26, xi. 37, xvii. 18. 
ς ° Xiphias gladius, M.G. ξιφίας (Bik. p. 82). A. 505 b 18, 
506 Ὁ 16, 602 a 26; Athen. 314 e; Ael. ix. 40, xiv. 23 and 
26, xv. 6; Plin. iv. 3, 54, and 145, 

G25) 


OPPIAN 


mr ole + ~ 2A Ζ ilo Xr 
ἄτροπον: οὐδ᾽ dpa μοῦνον ἐνὶ ζῴοις ἀΐδηλον 
+ « / > 7 3 \ Wy. 
ἄτην, ὅσσα βάλῃσιν, ἐρεύγεται, ἀλλὰ καὶ ἔρνος 
\ , 3 / A ᾿ - Ψ» 
καὶ πέτρην ἐκάκωσε, καὶ εἴ ποθι κεῖνο πελάσσῃ. 
3 4 ,ὔ 3 > \ > / \ a 
εἰ yap Tis κ᾽ ἐριθηλὲς ἀεξόμενον φυτὸν ὥραις, 490 
A 3 3 / \ 5 ,ὔ a 
θαλλοῖς τ᾽ εὐφυέεσσι καὶ εὐκάρποισι γονῇσι, 
/ Φι \ ev > Fae , , 
νέρθεν ὑπὸ ῥίζῃσιν ἀναιδέϊ τύμματι κείνῳ 
> la 47Q> », ~ ἦν wy 
οὐτήσῃ, τόδ᾽ ἔπειτα κακῇ BeBoAnuevoy ary 
/ \ ἽΝ \ \ Cs 2 hk ΄ 
λήγει μὲν πετάλων, κατὰ δὲ ῥέει HITE νούσῳ" 
an esi | > he \ MA > / a 
πρῶτον am ἀγλαΐης δὲ μαραίνεται, οὐδέ τι τηλοῦ 495 
SN: > 3 , NOP Ese: » » 
αὖόν τ᾽ οὐτιδανόν τε καὶ ἄχλοον ὄψεαι ἔρνος. 
a ΛΔ 3 > id “δ “᾿ ’ 
Κεῖνό ποτ᾽ αἰγανέῃ δολιχήρεϊ κωπηέσσῃ 
Κίρκη Τηλεγόνῳ πολυφάρμακος ὥπασε μήτηρ, 
> ,ὔ oh a / 3 A ε / 
αἰχμάζειν δηΐοις ἅλιον μόρον: αὐτὰρ 6 νήσῳ 
> / /, \ > /, / / 
αἰγιβότῳ προσέκελσε, καὶ οὐ μάθε πώεα πέρθων 500 
\ ς κα ~ \ lf Ae 
πατρὸς ἑοῦ, γεραρῷ δὲ βοηδρομέοντι τοκῆϊ 
αὐτῷ, τὸν μάστευε, κακὴν ἐνεμάξατο κῆρα. 
” \ 3 / > Ls , ,ὔ 
ἔνθα τὸν αἰολόμητιν ᾽Οδυσσέα, μυρία πόντου 
A ’ὔ λ / bas 
ἄλγεα μετρήσαντα πολυκμήτοισιν ἀέθλοις, 
ὃ 
A / a a 
τρυγὼν ἀλγινόεσσα μιῇ κατενήρατο ῥιπῇ. 505 
"4 A , a 
Θύννῳ δὲ ξιφίῃ te συνέμπορον αἰὲν ὀπηδεῖ 


a an δ " >» 5 ἐν 2 2 
πΉμα" TO OUTTOT €XOVOW ἀπότροπον Οὔτε μεθέσθαι 


826 


HALIEUTICA, II. 487-507 


wearied strength unchanged ; and not only on the 
living creatures which it strikes does it belch mys- 
terious bane but it hurts even tree and rock and 
wherever it comes nigh. For if one take a lusty tree 
that flourishes in its season, with goodly foliage and 
fruitful crop, and wound it in the roots below with 
that relentless stroke, then, smitten by an evil bane, 
it ceases to put forth leaves and first droops as if by 
disease and its beauty fades away ; and at no distant 
date thou shalt behold the tree withered and worth- 
less and its greenery gone. 

That sting it was which his mother Circe,® skilled 
in many drugs, gave of old to Telegonus for his long 
hilted spear, that he might array for his foes death 
from the sea. And he beached his ship on the island 
_ that pastured goats; and he knew not that he was 
harrying the flocks of his own father, and on his aged 
sire who came to the rescue, even on him whom he 
was seeking, he brought an evil fate. There the 
cunning Odysseus, who had passed through countless 
woes of the sea in his laborious adventures, the 
grievous Sting-ray slew with one blow. 

The Tunny and the Sword-fish are ever attended 
and companioned by a plague, which they can never 


α The story was told in the Telegony (Kinkel, p. 57). 
Cf. Apollod, epit. vii. 36 Τηλέγονος [son of Odysseus and 
Circe] παρὰ Κίρκης μαθὼν ὅτι παῖς ᾽Οδυσσέως ἐστίν, ἐπὶ τὴν 
τούτου ζήτησιν ἐκπλεῖ. παραγενόμενος δὲ εἰς ᾿Ιθάκην τὴν νῆσον 
ἀπελαύνει τινὰ τῶν βοσκημάτων, καὶ ᾽Οδυσσέα βοηθοῦντα τῷ μετὰ 
χεῖρας δόρατι Τηλέγονος «τρυγόνος» κέντρον τὴν αἰχμὴν ἔχοντι 
τιτρώσκει, καὶ ᾽Οδυσσεὺς θνήσκει : Lycophr. -Alew. 795 κτενεῖ 
δὲ τύψας πλευρὰ λοίγιος στόνυξ | κέντρῳ δυσαλθὴς ἔλλοπος 
Σαρδωνικῆς. According to one interpretation this is the 
reference of the prophecy of Teiresias, Hom. Od. xi. 134 
θάνατος δέ τοι ἐξ ἁλὸς αὐτῷ  ἀβληχρὸς μάλα τοῖος ἐλεύσεται, ὅς 


κέ σε πέφνῃ κτλ. 
327 


2 


OPPIAN 


ovre φυγεῖν, πτερύγεσσιν ἐνήμενον ἄγριον οἷστρον, 

ὅς σφισι, καυστηροῖο κυνὸς νέον ἱσταμένοιο, 

κέντρου πευκεδανοῖο θοὴν ἐνερείδεται ἀλκήν, 510 

ὀξὺ μάλ᾽ ἐγχρίμπτων, χαλεπὴν δ᾽ ἐπὶ ύσσαν opivet, 

θωρήξας ὀδύνῃσιν" ἐπισπέρχει δ᾽ ἀέκοντας 

φουταλέῃ μάστιγι χορευέμεν" οἱ δὲ κελαινῷ 

τύμματι παιφάσσουσι μεμηνότες, ἄλλοτε δ᾽ ἄλλῃ 

κῦμα καθιππεύουσιν, ἀνήνυτον ἄλγος ἔχοντες. 515 

πολλάκι καὶ νήεσσιν ἐῦϊκραίροις ἐνόρουσαν 

ῥιπῇ ἐλαυνόμενοι δυσκραέϊ' πολλάκι δ᾽ ἅλμης 

ἔκθορον ἐς γαῖάν τε κατέδραμον. ἀσπαίροντες 

καὶ μόρον ἠμείψαντο πολυκμήτων ὀδυνάων" 

τοῖον γὰρ δάκος αἰνὸν ἐπιρρέπει οὐδ᾽ ἀνίησι. 

καὶ γάρ τοι καὶ βουσὶν ἀνάρσιος εὖτε πελάσσῃ 

οἶστρος, ἐνιχρίμψῃ δὲ βέλος λαγόνεσσιν ἀραιαῖς, 

οὔτε τί βουφόρβων μέλεται σέβας οὔτε νομοῖο, 

οὔτ᾽ ἀγέλης ποίην δὲ καὶ αὔλια πάντα λιπόντες 

σεύονται λύσσῃ τεθοωμένοι" οὐδέ τις αὐτοῖς 525 

ov ποταμῶν, οὐ πόντος ἀνέμβατος, οὐδὲ χαράδραι 

ῥωγάδες, οὐ πέτρη τις ἀφοίτητος κατερύκει 

ῥιπὴν ταυρείην, oT" ἐπιζέσῃ ὀξὺ κελεύων 

βουτύπος, ὀτρηρῇσιν ἐπισπέρχων ὀδύνῃσι" 

πάντῃ δὲ βρυχή, πάντῃ δέ οἱ ἅλματα ὉΤῈ 530 

εἱλεῖται" τοίη μιν ἄγει δριμεῖα θύελλα. 

καὶ τὸ μὲν ἰχθύσιν ἄλγος ὁμοίϊον ἠδὲ βόεσσι. 
Δελφῖνες δ᾽ ἀγέλησιν ἁλὸς μέγα κοιρανέουσιν, 


σι 
iS) 
oO 


. 

* 602 a 25 of δὲ θύννοι καὶ οἱ ξιφίαι οἰστρῶσι περὶ κυνὸς 
ἐπιτολήν" ἔχουσι γὰρ ἀμφότεροι τηνικαῦτα περὶ τὰ πτερύγια οἷον 
σκωλήκιον τὸν καλούμενον οἷστρον, ὅμοιον μὲν σκορπίῳ, μέγεθος δ᾽ 
ἡλίκον ἀράχνης. ποιοῦσι δὲ ταῦτα πόνον τοσοῦτον ὥστ᾽ ἐξάλλεσθαι 
οὐκ ἔλαττον ἐνίοτε τὸν ξιφίαν τοῦ δελφῖνος, διὸ καὶ τοῖς πλοίοις 
πολλάκις ἐμπίπτουσιν. Cf. 557 ἃ 97: Plin. ix. 54 Animal est 
parvum scorpionis effigie, aranei magnitudine. Hoe 56 et 


328 


HALIEUTICA, II. 508-533 


turn away or escape: a fierce gadfly ¢ which infests 
their fins and. which, when the burning Dog-star is 
newly risen, fixes in them the swift might of its bitter 
sting, and with sharp assault stirs them to grievous 
madness, making them drunk with pain. With the 
lash of frenzy it drives them to dance against their 
will ; maddened by the cruel blow they rush and now 
here, now there ride over the waves, possessed by 
pain unending. Often also they leap into well- 
beaked ships, driven by the stress of their distemper ; 
and often they leap forth from the sea and rush writh- 
ing upon the land, and exchange their weary agonies 
for death ; so dire pain is heavy upon them and 
_abates not... Yea, for oxen ὃ also, when the cruel gad- 
fly attacks them and plunges its arrow in their tender 
flanks, have no more regard for the herdsmen nor for 
the pasture nor for the herd, but leaving the grass and 
all the folds they rush, whetted by frenzy ; no river 
nor untrodden sea nor rugged ravine nor pathless 
. rock stays the course of the bulls, when the gadfly hot 
and sharp impels, urging them with keen pains. 
Everywhere there is bellowing, everywhere range 
their bounding hoofs: such bitter tempest drives. 
This pain the fishes suffer even as do the cattle. 
The Dolphins lord it greatly among the herds of the 


thynno et ei qui gladius vocatur crebro delphini magni- 
tudinem excedenti sub pinna affigit aculeo, tantoque in- 
festat dolore, ut in naves saepenumero exsiliant ; Athen. 
302 b-c. The characteristic parasite of the Tunny is 
Brachiella thynni Cuv., that of the Sword-fish Pennatula 

filosa Gmelin. 
® Apoll. Rh. i. 1265 ws δ᾽ bre ris τε μύωπι τετυμμένος ἔσσυτο 
ταῦρος | πίσεά τε προλιπὼν Kal ἑλεσπίδας, οὐδὲ νομήων | οὐδ᾽ 
ἀγέλης ὄθεται, πρήσσει δ᾽ ὁδὸν ἄλλοτ᾽ ἄπαυστος, | ἄλλοτε δ᾽ 
ἱστάμενος καὶ ἀνὰ πλατὺν αὐχέν᾽ ἀείρων | now μύκημα. κακῷ 
βεβολημένος οἴστρῳ. Uf. Hom. Od. xxii. 299; Verg. G. iti. 146 ff. 
329 


OPPIAN 


mo UA 
ἔξοχον ἠνορέῃ Te Kal ayAain κομόωντες 
~ / 
ῥιπῇ τ᾽ wKvddw: dia yap βέλος ὥστε θάλασσαν 535 
> “ 
ἵπτανται- φλογόεν δὲ σέλας πέμπουσιν ὀπωπαῖς 
/ 
ὀξύτατον: Kal πού τιν᾽ ὑποπτήσσοντα χαράδραις 
i} > « A / 3 ,ὔ ἔδ 2 θ ea 
καί tw ὑπὸ ψαμάθοις εἰλυμένον ἔδρακον ἰχθύν. 
a“ 7 
ὅσσον γὰρ κούφοισι μετ᾽ οἰωνοῖσιν ἄνακτες 
? \ ἽἋ / 3 > lod /, 
αἰετοὶ ἢ θήρεσσι μετ᾽ ὠμηστῇσι λέοντες, δ40 
a ᾽ὔ 
ὅσσον ἀριστεύουσιν ἐν ἑρπυστῆρσι δράκοντες, 
τόσσον καὶ δελφῖνες ἐν ἰχθύσιν ἡγεμονῆες. 
τοῖς δ᾽ οὔτ᾽ ἐρχομένοις πελάσαι σχεδὸν οὔτε τις ἄντην 
ὄσσε βαλεῖν τέτληκεν, ὑποπτώσσουσι δ᾽ ἄνακτος 
τηλόθεν ἅλματα δεινὰ καὶ ἄσθματα. φυσιόωντος. 645 
ς > ε wa £9 ’ / \ / 
οἱ δ᾽ ὁπότ᾽ ἰθύσωσι λιλαιόμενοι μετὰ φορβήν, 
᾽ὔ 3 » , > , ’ὔ if 
πάντ᾽ dpvdis κλονέουσιν ἀθέσφατα πώεα λίμνης, 
, dy ate f Nur ¢ \ / 
παμφύγδην ἐλόωντες ἐνέπλησαν δὲ φόβοιο 
πάντα πόρον" σκιεροὶ δὲ μυχοὶ χθαμαλαί τε χαράδραι 
στείνονται λιμένες τε καὶ ἠϊόνων ἐπιωγαὶ 550. 
/ > ᾿ς ¢ A , i > > vA 
πάντοθεν εἰλομένων' ὁ δὲ δαίνυται ὅν κ᾽ ἐθέλῃσι, 
κρινάμενος τὸν ἄριστον ἀπειρεσίων παρεόντων. 
av. μ᾿ \ a > / > a 
ἔμπης καὶ τοῖσιν ἀνάρσιοι ἀντιφέρονται 
> 4 “a > , la 9.5 3 ve 
ἰχθύες, ods ἀμίας κικλήσκομεν- οὐδ᾽ ἀλέγουσι 
δελφίνων, μοῦναι δὲ κατ᾽ ἀντία δηριόωνται. δδδ 
a A > /, ,ὔ / > \ A , 
ταῖς μὲν ἀφαυρότερον θύννων δέμας, ἀμφὶ δὲ σάρκες 


| 
| 
* As the Eagle (ὥκιστος πετεηνῶν Hom. Il. xxi. 253, ἔστι | 
δ᾽ αἰετὸς ὠκὺς ἐν ποτανοῖς Pind. N. iii, 80) is the type of | 
swiftness in the air, so is the Dolphin (Pind. WV. vi. 64 
δελφῖνέ Kev τάχος δι’ ἅλμας εἰκάζοιμι Μελησίαν) the type of 
swiftness in the sea: Pind. P. ii. 50 θεός, ὃ καὶ πτερόεντ᾽ αἰετὸν 
κίχε καὶ θαλασσαῖον παραμείβεται δελφῖνα. 

> Hom. J1. xxi. 22 ὡς δ᾽ ὑπὸ δελφῖνος μεγακήτεος ἰχθύες ἄλλοι 


980 


HALIEUTICA, II. 534-556 


sea, pluming themselves eminently on their valiance 
and beauty and their swift speed in the water ; for 
like an arrow they fly through the sea, and fiery and 
keen is the light which they flash from their eyes, and 
they desery, I ween, any fish that cowers in a cleft 
or wraps itself beneath the sands. Even as the 
Eagles ὅ are lords among the lightsome birds or Lions 
amid ravenous wild beasts, as Serpents are most 
excellent among reptiles, so are Dolphins leaders 
among fishes. Them as they come no fish dares to 
approach nor any to look them in the face, but they 
tremble from afar at the dread leaps and snorting 
breath of the lord of fishes. When the Dolphins set 
out in quest of food, they huddle® before them all 
the infinite flocks of the sea together, driving them in 
utter rout; they fill with terror every path of the sea, 
and shady covert and low ravine, and the havens and 
the bays of the shore are straitened with fishes 
huddling from every side ; and the Dolphin devours 
whichsoever he will, choosing the best of the infinite 
fishes at hand. 

But, notwithstanding, even the Dolphins have foes 
who meet their encounter, the fish called Amia,¢ 
which care not for the Dolphin but alone fight them 
face to face. These have a weaker body than the 


φεύγοντες πιμπλᾶσι μυχοὺς λιμένος εὐόρμου, | δειδιότες" μάλα γάρ 
τε κατεσθίει ὅν Ke λάβῃσιν ; Hesiod, Sc. 211 δοιοὶ δ᾽ ἀνα- 
φυσιόωντες | ἀργύρεοι δελφῖνες ἐφοίτων ἔλλοπας ἰχθῦς | τῶν δ᾽ ὕπο 
χάλκειοι τρέον ἰχθύες ; Apost. p. 40 “11 est facile de se rendre 
compte de la présence du poisson en écoutant le bruit que 
font les dauphins qui le poursuivent ἃ la surface de 
Veau.” 
¢ Pelamys sarda, M.G. παλαμύδα (Apost. p. 14), the Bonito. 
Of. A. 598 a 22, 601 b 21, etc. ; Athen. 277 e-278d, 324d; 
Plin. ix. 49 Amiam vocant cuius incrementum singulis 
diebus intelligitur. 
331 


OPPIAN 


ἀβληχραΐί, θαμέες δὲ διὰ στόμα adipen ὀδόντες 

ὀξέα πεφρίκασι" τὸ καὶ μέγα θάρσος ἔχουσιν, 

οὐδὲ καταπτώσσουσιν ὑπέρβιον ἡγητῆρα. 

εὖτε γὰρ ἀθρήσωσιν ἀπόσσυτον οἷον ἀπ᾿ ἄλλων 560 
δελφίνων ἀγέλης, αἱ δ᾽ ἀθρόαι ἄλλοθεν ἄλλαι, 

HOO? ὑπ᾽ ἀγγελίης στρατὸς ἄσπετος, εἰς ἕν᾽ ἰοῦσαι 
στέλλονται ποτὶ μῶλον ἀθαμβέες, ὥστ᾽ ἐπὶ πύργον 
δυσμενέων θύνοντες ἀρήϊοι ἀσπιστῆρες. 

deAdis δ᾽ ἠὐγένειος ὑπαντιόωντος ὁμίλου ὅθ 
πρῶτα μὲν οὐκ ἀλέγει, μετὰ δ᾽ ἔσσυται, ἄλλοτε ἄλλην 
ἁρπάγδην. ἐρύων, μενοεικέα δαῦτα κιχήσας. 

ἀλλ᾽ ὅτε μιν πολέμοιο περιστέψωσι φάλαγγες 
πάντοθεν, ἀμφὶ δέ μιν στῖφος μέγα κυκλώσωνται, 

δὴ τότε οἱ καὶ μόχθος ὑπὸ φρένα δύεται ἤδη: 570 
ἔγνω δ᾽ αἰπὺν ὄλεθρον ἀπειρεσίοις ἔνι μοῦνος 
ἐἑρχθεὶς δυσμενέεσσι" πόνος δ᾽ ἀναφαίνεται ἀλκῆς. 

αἱ μὲν γὰρ λυσσηδὸν ἀολλέες ἀμφιχυθεῖσαι 

deAdivos μελέεσσι βίην ἐνέρεισαν ὀδόντων" 

πάντῃ δὲ πρίουσι καὶ ἄτροποι ἐμπεφύασι, 575 
πολλαὶ μὲν κεφαλῆς. δεδραγμέναι, at δὲ γενείων 
γλαυκῶν, αἱ δ᾽ αὐτῇσιν ἐνὶ πτερύγεσσιν ἔχονται, 
πολλαὶ δ᾽ ἐν λαγόνεσσι γένυν πήξαντο δαφοινήν 
ἄλλαι δ᾽ «ἀκροτάτην οὐρὴν ἕλον, αἱ δ᾽ ὑπένερθε 
νηδύν, αἵ δ᾽ ἄρ᾽ ὕπερθεν ὑπὲρ νώτοιο νέμονται, 580 
ἄλλαι δ᾽ ἐκ λοφιῆς, at ὃ: αὐχένος ἠώρηνται. 

αὐτὰρ ὁ παντοίοισι περιπληθὴς καμάτοισι 

πόντον ἐπαιγίζει, σφακέλῳ δέ οἱ ἔνδον ὀρεχθεῖ 
μαινομένη κραδίη, φλεγέθει δέ οἱ ἦτορ ἀνίῃ, 

πάντῃ δὲ θρώσκει καὶ ἑλίσσεται ἄκριτα, θύων, δ8δ. 
παφλάζων ὀδύνῃσι" ᾿κυβιστητῆρι δ᾽ ἐοικὼς 

ἄλλοτε μὲν βαθὺ. κῦμα διατρέχει ἠὔῦτε λαίλαψ, 
ἄλλοτε δ᾽ ἐς νεάτην φέρεται βρύχα, πολλάκι δ᾽ ἅλμης 
332 


> 


HALIEUTICA, 11. 557-588 


Tunny and are clothed in feeble flesh, but in their 
ravenous mouth bristles sharp a dense array of teeth ; 
wherefore also they have great courage and do not 
cower before the mighty lord of fishes. For when * 
they see one thatrhas wandered away alone from the 
rest of the herd of Dolphins, then from this quarter 
and from that, as a great army at command, they 
gather in a body together and set forth to battle 
dauntlessly, like shielded warriors against the tower 
of the foe. And the bearded Dolphin, when the 
crowd meets him, at first recks not of them but rushes 
among them, seizing and rending now one and now 
another, finding a banquet after his heart. But when 
the ranks of war surround. him on every side and 
encircle him with their great and dense array, then 
trouble at length enters his heart and he knows that 
sheer destruction is upon him, hemmed about as he is, 
alone among countless foes; and the toil οὗ Ὁ j 
appears. For furiously they fall iia body about the 
limbs of the Dolphin and fix in him the might of their 
teeth ; everywhere they bite him and cling to him 
relentlessly, many clutching his head, others his grey 
jaws, while yet others cleave to his very fins ; many 
in his flanks fix their deadly teeth, others seize the 
end of his tail, others his belly beneath, others feed 
upon his back above, others hang from his mane, 
others from his neck. And, full of manifold distress, 
he rushes over the sea and his frenzied heart within 
him is racked with agony and his spirit is afire with 
pain. Every way he leaps and turns, rushing blindly 
in the spasms of agony. Like a diver, now he runs 
over the deep waves like a whirlwind, now he plunges 
to the nether deeps ; and often he springs up and 


333 


OPPIAN 


Pin. 8 , 
ἀφρὸν ὑπερθρώσκων ἀναπάλλεται, εἴ € μεθείη 


ἐσμὸς ὑπερφιάλων νεπόδων θρασύς" αἱ δ᾽ ἀλίαστοι δ90 


", , lod € a / er 7 
οὔτι βίης μεθιᾶσιν, ὁμῶς δέ οἱ ἐμπεφύασι, 
, € / a ΄, 

καί οἱ δυομένῳ τε μίαν δύνουσι κέλευθον, 

5 > 5 , \ ” oh 
αὖτις δ᾽ ἀνθρώσκοντι σὺν ἔξαλοι ἀΐσσουσιν 

¢ / / , / 3 ν 
ἑλκόμεναι" φαίης κε νέον τέρας ᾿Βννοσιγαίῳ 

, a / 599 3 td 
τίκτεσθαι δελφῖσι μεμιγμένον ἠδ᾽ ἀμίῃσιν" 

- A > “ “ ΄, 9. 7 

ὧδε γὰρ ἀργαλέῃ ξυνοχῇ πεπέδηται ὀδόντων. 
ς 3 Ψ > \ / a > ᾽ὔ 

ὡς δ᾽ ὅταν ἰητὴρ πολυμήχανος, ἕλκος ἀφύσσων 
> , A \ aa ” a 
οἰδαλέον, TH πολλὸν ἀνάρσιον ἔνδοθεν αἷμα 
ἐντρέφεται, διεράς τε γονάς, κυανόχροα λίμνης 
ἑρπετά, τειρομένοιο κατὰ χροὸς ἐστήριξε, 
δαίνυσθαι μέλαν αἷμα: τὰ δ᾽ αὐτίκα γυρωθέντα 

a | AVE ? “λ ὮΝ oe ἢ 

κυρτοῦται καὶ λύθρον ἐφέλκεται οὐδ᾽ ἀνίησιν, 
εἰσόκεν αἱμοβαρῆ ζωρὸν πότον αὖ ἐρύσαντα 
ἐκ χροὸς αὐτοκύλιστα πέσῃ μεθύουσιν ὁμοῖα" 
Δ > Δ / “ 
ὡς ἀμίαις οὐ πρόσθε χαλᾷ μένος, εἰσόκε σάρκα 


, “ >» © yn ΄, ΄ 
Κεινὴν, Ἢν TOT ἔμαρψαν, ὕπο στομα δαιτρεύσωνται. 


LA > oe 7 x vA A / 
ἀλλ᾽ ὅτε μιν προλίπωσιν, ἀναπνεύσῃ δὲ πόνοιο 
ὃ nr ,ὔ δὴ Me Xr ὮΝ 39 / ε Υ a 

eAdis, δὴ τότε λύσσαν ἐσόψεαι ἡγητῆρος 

a Ν > 

Xwopevov’ κρυερὴ δ᾽ ἀμίαις ἀναφαίνεται ἄτη. 

€ \ A , « > > / oh 
at μὲν yap φεύγουσιν, ὁ δ᾽ ἐξόπιθεν κεραϊζων, 
» / lon Pry 
εἰδόμενος πρηστῆρι δυσηχέϊ, πάντ᾽ ἀμαθύνει, 


ὃ , » δ \ ὃ᾽ “ , ? , 
ATTWV EULMEVEWS, KATO ALLATL TOVTOV ἐρεύθει 


αἰχμάζων γενύεσσι, παθὼν δ᾽ ἀπετίσατο λώβην. 


“ The reference is to the Leech, βδέλλα, Hirudo medi- 
cinalis, Cf. Theocr. ii. 55 τί μευ μέλαν ἐκ χροὸς αἷμα | ἐμφὺς 
ὡς λιμνᾶτις ἅπαν ἐκ βδέλλα πέπωκας; Herod. ii: 68; A. De 
incess. 109 ἃ 29 ; Ael. iii. 11, viii. 25, xii. 15; Plaut. Epid.188 ; 


334 


595 


600 


605 


610 


HALIEUTICA, II. 589-613 


leaps above the foam of the sea, if haply the bold 
swarm of overweening fishes may let him go. But 
they, relentless, no wise abate their violence but cling 
to him all the same ; when he dives, they dive along 
with him; whenvhe leaps up again, they likewise 
spring forth from the sea in his train. You would say 
that the Shaker of the Earth had gotten a new and 
monstrous birth, half Dolphin and half Amia; so 
grievous the bond of teeth wherewith he is bound. 
As when a cunning physician drains a swollen wound, 
within which is gathered much unwholesome blood, 
and he applies to the flesh of the sufferer the watery 
brood, the dark-hued reptiles of the marsh,* to feast 
on his black blood; and straightway they become 
arched and rounded and draw the filth and abate not 
until having drained the strong drink of blood they 
roll of themselves from the flesh and fall like drunken 
men ; even so the fury of the Amia abates not until 
they have devoured with the mouth the flesh which 
they once seized. But when they leave him and the 
Dolphin gets a breathing-space from toil, then shalt 
thou behold the rage of the angry lord of fishes and 
deadly doom appears for the Amia. They flee; and 
he behind working havoc, like hurricane of evil noise, 
lays all waste, devouring them incontinently, and 
with ravening jaws reddens the sea with blood ; and 
he avenges the despite that he suffered. Even so in 


Plin. viii. 29 hirudine quam sanguisugam vulgo coepisse 
appellari adverto. For the Leech in medical use ¢/. Plin. 
xxxli. 123 Diversus hirudinum, quas sanguisugas vocant, 
ad extrahendum sanguinem usus est. Quippe eadem ratio 
earum quae cucurbitularum medicinalium ad corpora levanda 
sanguine, spiramenta laxanda iudicatur; multi podagris 
quoque admittendas censuere. Decidunt satiatae et pon- 
dere ipso sanguinis detractae aut sale aspersae. 


335 


OPPIAN 


ae te 3 - 
ὧδε καὶ ἐν ξυλόχοισιν ἔχει φάτις ἀγρευτήρων 
=| VA 
θῶας ὑπερφιάλους ἔλαφον πέρι ποιπνύεσθαι 615 
b] oh ? 
ἀγρομένους: οἱ μὲν yap ἐπαΐγδην γενύεσσι 
νυ / 
σάρκας ἀφαρπάζουσι καὶ ἀρτιχύτοιο φόνοιο 
θ \ ” χὰ 6 Ss eos 25 , 
ερμὸν ἔαρ λάπτουσιν" ὁ δ᾽ αἱμάσσων ὀδύνῃσι, 
βεβρυχὼς ὀλοῇσι περίπλέεος ὠτειλῇσιν, 
τ 
ἄλλοτ᾽ ἐπ᾽ ἀλλοίων ὀρέων διαπάλλεται ἄκρας" 690 
eae ad > , >\ PETS aN οΥ τῶ 
οἱ δέ μιν οὐ λείπουσιν, ἀεὶ δέ οἱ ἐγγὺς ἕπονται 
ὠμησταί, ζωὸν δὲ διαρταμέοντες ὀδοῦσι 
ῥινὸν ἀποσχίζουσι, πάρος θανάτοιο κυρῆσαι, 
δαῖτα κελαινοτάτην τε καὶ ἀλγίστην πονέοντες. 
5 9 », nn \ > ἣν» " 3 μ 
ἀλλ᾽ ἢ τοι θῶες μὲν ἀναιδέες οὔτιν᾽ ἔτισαν 625 
/ > > > / Ἅ Ὁ SN / > ΄ 
ποινήν, ἐκ δ᾽ ἐγέλασσαν ἐπὶ φθιμένοις ἐλάφοισιν, 
/ 
θαρσαλέαι δ᾽ ἀμίαι τάχα κύντερα δηρίσαντο. 
, ieee , νδ εξ εὶ ἢ 3 ΄ 
Δελφίνων κἀκεῖνο πανέξοχον ἔργον ἀκούων 
hyacdpnv: τοῖς εὖτ᾽ av ὀλέθριος ἐγγὺς ἵκηται 
lo > / \ 3 > / > > > le 
νοῦσος ἀταρτηρή, τοὺς δ᾽ οὐ λάθεν, ἀλλ᾽ ἐδάησαν 630 
/ / / \ \ > , / , 
τέρμα βίου: πέλαγος δὲ καὶ εὐρέα βένθεα λίμνης 
φεύγοντες κούφοισιν ἐπ᾽ αἰγιαλοῖσιν ἔκελσαν" 
” 3 3 / \ 3 \ val Ψ 
ἔνθα δ᾽ ἀποπνείουσι καὶ ἐν χθονὶ μοῖραν ἕλοντο, 
ὄφρα τις ἢ μερόπων ἱερὸν τρόχιν ᾿Εννοσιγαίου 
κείμενον αἰδέσσαιτο χυτῇ τ᾽ ἐπὶ Owi καλύψαι, 68 
μνησάμενος φιλότητος ἐνηέος, ἠὲ καὶ αὐτὴ 
4 7 ὔ ’ / 
βρασσομένη ψαμάθοισι δέμας κρύψειε θάλασσα, 
μηδέ τις εἰναλίων ἐσίδοι νέκυν ἡγητῆρα, 
᾽ς 2 , oh 
μηδέ τις οἰχομένῳ περ ἐνὶ χροΐ λωβήσαιτο 
, a 
δυσμενέων: ἀρετὴ δὲ Kal ὀλλυμένοισιν ὀπηδεῖ 640 
\ + 2Q> > 7 ἜΝ Mf ON ἐᾷ 
καὶ κράτος, οὐδ᾽ ἤσχυναν ἑὸν κλέος οὐδὲ θανόντες. 
336 


HALIEUTICA, Il. 614-641 


the woods, as hunters tell, the terrible Jackals ¢ gather 
and busy themselves about a Stag; they rush upon 
him and rend his flesh with their jaws and lap the 
warm gore of new-shed blood : the Stag bellowing in 
his bloody pain, full of deadly wounds, bounds now to 
this mountain-crag, now to that, but the ravenous 
beasts leave him not but always follow him close, and 
rend him alive and tear off his hide before he finds 
death, making a black and woeful banquet. But 
while the shameless Jackals pay no requital but laugh 
loud over the dead Stags, the bold Amia soon fight a 
less happy fight. 

This other excellent deed of the Dolphins have I 
heard and admire. When fell disease and fatal 
draws nigh to them, they fail not to know it but are 
aware of the end of life. Then they flee the sea and 
the wide waters of the deep and come aground? on the 
shallow shores. And there they give up their breath 
and receive their doom upon the land ; that so per- 
chance some mortal man may take pity on the holy 
messenger ὁ of the Shaker of the Earth when he lies 
low, and cover him with mound of shingle, remember- 
ing his gentle friendship ; or haply the seething sea 
herself may hide his body in the sands; nor any of 
the brood of the sea behold the corse of their lord, 
nor any foe do despite to his body even in death. 
Excellence and majésty attend them even when they 
perish, nor do they shame their glory even when 
they die. 

@-C iii. 338 n. 

> A. 631 Ὁ 2 διαπορεῖται δὲ περὶ αὐτῶν διὰ τί ἐξοκέλλουσιν 
εἰς τὴν γῆν: ποιεῖν γάρ φασι τοῦτ᾽ αὐτοὺς ἐνίοτε, ὅταν τύχωσι, δι᾿ 
οὐδεμίαν αἰτίαν. 


¢ For τρόχις cf, Aesch. P.V. 941 τὸν Διὸς τρόχιν -- Hermes. 
Ζ 337 


OPPIAN 


Κεστρέα δ᾽ ἐν πάντεσσιν ἁλὸς νεπόδεσσιν ἀκούω 
φέρβειν πρηὕὔτατόν τε δικαιότατόν τε νόημα" 
μοῦνοι γὰρ κεστρῆες ἐνηέες ove? ὁμόφυλον 
οὔτέ τιν᾽ ἀλλοίης γενεῆς ἄπο πημαίνουσιν" 645 
οὐδέ ποτε ψαύουσιν ὑπὸ στόμα σαρκὸς ἐδωδῆς, 
οὐδὲ φόνου λάπτουσιν, ἀπημοσύνῃ δὲ νέμονται, 
αἵματος ἄχραντοι καὶ ἀκηδέες, ἁγνὰ γένεθλα" 
φέρβονται δ᾽ ἢ χλωρὸν ἁλὸς μνίον ἠὲ καὶ αὐτὴν 
ἰλύν, ἀλλήλων Te δέμας περιλιχμάζουσι. 650 
τοὔνεκα καί τιν᾽ ἔχουσι μετ᾽ ἰχθύσι τίμιον αἰδῶ" 
οὐ γάρ τις κείνων νεαρὸν τόκον οἷα καὶ ἄλλων 
σίνεται, ὠμοφάγων δὲ βίην ἀπέχουσιν ὀδόντων. 
ὡς αἰεὶ μετὰ πᾶσι Δίκης πρεσβήϊα κεῦται 
αἰδοίης, πάντῃ δὲ γεράσμιον ἤρατο -τιμήν. 655 


4 In Aristotle κεστρεύς is sometimes generic for the Grey 
Mullets (Mugilidae), including κέφαλος : A. 534 Ὁ 14 ἄρχονται 
δὲ κύειν τῶν κεστρέων ol μὲν χελῶνες τοῦ ILocededvos καὶ ὁ 
σάργος καὶ ὁ σμύξων καλούμενος καὶ ὁ κεῴαλος ; sometimes 
specific and contrasted with κέφαλος : A. 570 Ὁ 14 τίκτει δὲ 
πρῶτον τῶν τοιούτων ἀθερίνη. . . κέφαλος δὲ ὕστατος" ὦ 
τίκτει δὲ καὶ κεστρεὺς ἐν τοῖς πρώτοις. As a specific name 
κέφαλος is perhaps Mugil cephalus, M.G. κέφαλος, γομβύλι at 
Chaleis; στειράδια the males and μπάφες the females at 
Missolonghi: they spawn about the month of May, ‘‘de 
leurs ceufs on fait la boutargue ” (Apost. p. 20). κεστρεύς 
is perhaps M. capito, M.G. λαγιάδες at Chalcis, βελάνισες 
at Aitolico (Apost. /.c.). But whatever the original dis- 
tinction, κέφαλος as a name seems to have usurped the 
place of κεστρεύς (Suid. 5. κεστρεύς᾽ ὁ viv λεγόμενος κέφαλος) 
and in the Cyclades is now the generic name for all species 
of Grey Mullet (Erh. p. 89). The making of ‘‘boutargue ”’ 
(Sp. Savengo) Cena excessivement recherché ”” —is 
described by Apostolides, p. 66: ‘La boutargue n’est autre 
chose que les ovaires des poissons, arrivés a l'état de 
maturité regorgeant déja d’ceufs préts ἃ étre pondus et qui 
sont préparés par salaison. Une fois que le poisson sorti de 
Veau, étant encore frais, on incise son ventre et on enléve 


338 


HALIEUTICA, II. 642-655 


The Grey Mullet,’ I hear, among all the fishes of 
the sea nurses the gentlest and most righteous ὃ mind. 
For only the kindly Grey Mullets harm neither one 
of their own kind nor any of another race. Nor do 
they touch with their lips fleshly food nor drink blood, 
but feed harmlessly, unstained of blood and doing no 
hurt, a holy race. Either upon the green seaweed 
they feed or on mere mud, and lick the bodies one of 
the other. Wherefore also among fishes they have 
honourable regard and none harms their young brood, 
as they do that of others, but refrain the violence 
of their ravenous teeth. Thus always and among all 
reverend Justice hath her privilege appointed and 
everywhere she wins her meed of honour. But all 


les ovaires entiers, en tachant de ne pas produire la moindre 
coupure a leur mince enveloppe. On les laisse pendant 
quatre heures dans du sel. Aprés, on les lave, on les place 
entre deux planches pour leur donner la forme sous laquelle 
on les voit habituellement dans le commerce, et on les laisse 
exposés au soleil pendant 4 ἃ 8 jours. Une fois compléte- 
ment secs, ils sont préts 4 étre vendus; mais si on veut les 
conserver pendant longtemps, on les entoure d’une couche 
de cire en les placant pendant un instant dans la εἶτα jaune 
fondue, d’ou on les retire brusquement.” 
> Of. H. i. 111; A. 591a17 ἀλληλοφαγοῦσι δὲ πάντες μὲν 
πλὴν κεστρέως... ὁ δὲ κέφαλος καὶ ὁ κεστρεὺς ὅλως μόνοι οὐ 
σαρκοφαγοῦσιν᾽ σημεῖον δέ, οὔτε γὰρ ἐν τῇ κοιλίᾳ πώποτ᾽ ἔχοντες 
εἰλημμένοι εἰσὶ τοιοῦτον οὐδὲν οὔτε δελέατι χρῶνται πρὸς αὐτοὺς 
ζῴων σαρξὶν ἀλλὰ μάζῃ. τρέφεται δὲ πᾶς κεστρεὺς φυκίοις καὶ 
ἄμμῷ ; Athen. 307; Plut. Mor. 965 ©; Ael. i. 3; Suid. s. 
κεστρεῖς. The teeth in these fishes are either entirely absent 
or very fine. ‘‘In an aquarium it is most interesting to 
observe them suck in the sand, the coarser portion of which 
they almost immediately afterwards expel from their mouths. 
A sifting or filtering apparatus exists in the pharynx, which 
precludes large and hard substances from passing into the 
stomach, or sand from obtaining access to the gills”” Day 
τ 229. 
339 


OPPIAN 


72 
οἱ δ᾽ ἄλλοι μάλα πάντες ὀλέθριοι ἀλλήλοισιν 
ἔρχονται: τὸ καὶ οὔποτ᾽ ἐσόψεαι ὑπνώοντας 
” > > » cal \ y+ A 4 32. 
ἔλλοπας, ἀλλ᾽ ἄρα τοῖσι καὶ ὄμματα καὶ νόος αἰὲν 
> δ 7... > ‘\ / A ϑι. 
ἐγρήσσει πανάὕὔπνος" ἐπεὶ τρομέουσι μὲν αἰεὶ 
φέρτερον ἀντιόωντα, χερειότερον δ᾽ ὀλέκουσι. 660 
~ > “ 
μοῦνον δ᾽ οὔποτε φασὶν ἀνὰ κνέφας ἀσπαλιῆες 
εἰς ἄγρην πεσέειν ἁπαλὸν σκάρον, ἀλλά που ὕπνον 
ἐννύχιον κοίλοισιν ὑπὸ κευθμῶσιν ἰαύειν. 
Οὐ μέντοι τό γε θαῦμα Δίκην ἀπάτερθε θαλάσσης 
ναιετάειν" οὐ γάρ τι πάλαι πρέσβειρα θεάων 665 
> A \ aA a / > \ A 
οὐδὲ μετὰ θνητοῖσιν ἔχε θρόνον, ἀλλὰ κυδοιμοὶ 
ὃ / A ~ aN va ΝΜ 
υσκέλαδοι καὶ θοῦρος “Apevs φθισήνορος ἄτη | 
al > > / / ” 3. / 
μαῖά τ᾽ ἐρικλαύστων πολέμων "Epis ἀλγεσίδωρος 
” λ ε , § Ne , = δὲ θ ~ | 
ἔφλεγον ἡμερίων δειλὸν γένος: οὐδέ τι θηρῶν : 
, , t ” > \ , 
κεκριμενοι πολέες μερόπων ἐσαν, ἀλλὰ λεόντων 670° 
αἰνότεροι πύργους τ᾽ εὐτείχεας ἠδὲ μέλαθρα β 
νηούς τ᾽ ἀθανάτων εὐώδεας αἵματι φωτῶν 
“-“ > ? / / € , 
καπνῷ τ᾽ αἰθαλόεντι κατείνυον ‘Hdatorou, 
εἰσόκε ῥαιομένην γενεὴν ᾧκτειρε Kpoviwr, 
Ξε “ 3 At / > Ψ τ nw > , 
ὑμῖν ὃ ἰνεάδῃσιν ἐπέτραπε γαῖαν ἀνάψας. 675 
> > A \ = vi > > ᾽ὔ - 
ἀλλ᾽ ἔτι καὶ προτέροισιν ἐν Αὐσονίων βασιλεῦσι 
θῦ aN λ la \ 3 ’ὔ wy 
ῦνεν Ἄρης, KedAtTouvs τε καὶ αὐχήεντας "Ἴβηρας 
θωρήσσων Λιβύης τε πολὺν πόρον ἔργα τε ἱῬήνου 
", > ie 
Ἴστρον τ᾽ Eddpyrny τε" τί μοι τάδε δούρατος ἔργα 
~ ~ / 7 
μεμνῆσθαι; viv γάρ σε, Δίκη θρέπτειρα πολήων, 680 
γινώσκω μερόπεσσι συνέστιον ἠδὲ σύνοικον, | 
> ae ἐν aw 
ἐξ οὗ μοι κραίνουσι μέγαν θρόνον ἐμβεβαῶτες | 


* On the contrary A. 536 b 32 ὁμοίως δὲ καὶ τὰ ἔνυδρα, οἷον 
οἵ τε ἰχθύες καὶ τὰ μαλάκια καὶ τὰ μαλακόστρακα, κάραβοί τε καὶ 
τὰ τοιαῦτα" βραχύυπνα μὲν οὖν ἐστι ταῦτα πάντα, φαίνεται δὲ 


καθεύδοντα. OSH ΘΙ ἢ 
340 


HALIEUTICA, II. 656-682 


other fishes come fraught with destruction to one 
another ; wherefore also thou shalt never see fishes 
sleeping * but evermore awake and sleepless are their 
eyes and wits, since always they dread the encounter 
of a stronger and.slay the weaker. Only the tender 
Parrot-wrasse,? as fishermen say, never falls into their 
nets in the darkness but doubtless sleeps 5 by night 
in the hollow ocean caves. 

Yet it is no marvel that Justice should dwell apart 
from the sea. For not long since that first of god- 
desses had no throne even among men, but noisy riots 
and raging ruin of destroying Wars and Strife, giver 
of pain, nurse of tearful wars, consumed the unhappy 
race of the creatures of a day. Nor different at all 
from wild beasts were many among men; but, more 
terrible than Lions, well-builded towers and halls and 
fragrant temples of the deathless gods they clothed 
with the blood of men and dark smoke of Hephaestus: 
until the Son of Cronus took pity on the afflicted race 
and bestowed upon you, the Sons of Aeneas, the 
earth for keeping. Yet even among the earlier kings 
of the Ausonians War still raged, arming Celts and 
proud Iberians and the great space “ of Libya and the 
lands of the Rhine ¢ and Ister and Euphrates. Where- 
fore need I mention those works of the spear? For 
now, O Justice, nurse of cities, I know thee to share 
the hearth and home of men, ever since they hold 
sway together, mounted on their mighty throne—the 


¢ Athen. 320 a Σέλευκος δ᾽ ὁ Tapoeds ἐν τῷ ᾿Αλιευτικῷ 
μόνον φησὶ τῶν ἰχθύων τὸν σκάρον καθεύδειν" ὅθεν οὐδὲ νύκτωρ 
ποτὲ ἁλῶναι. τοῦτο δ᾽ ἴσως διὰ φόβον αὑτῴ συμβαίνει. 

4 For use of πύρον cf. Dion. P. 331 Ἡϑὐρώπης λοιπὸν πόρον. 

¢ For periphrasis cf. H. i. 105 ἔργα τ᾽ ὀνίσκων ; Dion.§P. 
916 Ποσιδήια ἔργα, 


341 


OPPIAN 


ἄμφω θεσπέσιός τε πατὴρ καὶ φαίδιμος ὄρπηξ᾽ 

ἐκ τῶν μοι γλυκὺς ὅρμος ἀνακτορίης πεπέτασται. 
τούς μοι καὶ ῥύοισθε καὶ ἔμπεδον ἰθύνουτε 685 
πολλαῖς ἐν δεκάδεσσιν ἑλισσομένων ἐνιαυτῶν, 

Ζεῦ τε καὶ Οὐρανίδαι, Ζηνὸς χορός, εἴ τις “ἀμοιβὴ 
εὐσεβίης. σκήπτρῳ δὲ τελεσφόρον ὄλβον ἄγοιτε. 


342 


HALIEUTICA, II. 683-688 


wondrous Sire and his splendid scion * : by whose rule 
a sweet haven is opened for me. Them, I pray, O 
Zeus and ye Sons of Heaven, the choir of Zeus, may 
ye keep and direct unfailingly through many tens of 
the revolving years, if there be any reward of piety, 
and to their sceptre bring the fulness of felicity. 


@ Schol. ᾿Αντωνῖνος καὶ Κώμοδος. 


848 


AAIEYTIKON TO Γ 


Νῦν δ᾽ dye μοι, σκηπτοῦχε, παναίολα δήνεα τέχνης 
ἰχθυβόλου φράζοιο καὶ ἀγρευτῆρας ἀέθλους, 

εσμόν τ᾽ εἰνάλιον ξυμβάλλεο, τέρπεο δ᾽ οἴμῃ 
ἡμετέρῃ" σοῖς μὲν γὰρ ὑπὸ σκήπτροισι θάλασσα 
εἰλεῖται καὶ φῦλα [Ποσειδάωνος ἐναύλων, δ 
ἔργα δέ τοι ξύμπαντα μετ᾽ ἀνδράσι πορσύνονται, 
σοὶ δ᾽ ἐμὲ τερπωλήν τε καὶ ὑμνητῆρ᾽ ἀνέηκαν 
δαίμονες ἐν Κιλίκεσσιν ὑφ᾽ Ἕρμαίοις ἀδύτοισι. 
‘Eppeta, σὺ δέ μοι πατρώϊε, φέρτατε παίδων | 
. Αἰγιόχου, κέρδιστον ἐν ἀθανάτοισι νόημα, 1ῦ 
φαῖνέ τε καὶ σήμαινε καὶ ἄρχεο, νύσσαν ἀοιδῆς 
ἰθύνων- βουλὰς δὲ περισσονόων ἁλιήων 
αὐτός, ἄναξ, πρώτιστος ἐμήσαο καὶ τέλος ἄγρης 
παντοίης ἀνέφηνας, ἐπ᾽ ἰχθύσι κῆρας ὑφαίνων. 
Πανὲ δὲ ἹΚωρυκίῳ βυθίην παρακάτθεο τέχνην, ιὅ 
παιδὶ τεῷ, τὸν φασὶ Διὸς ῥυτῆρα γενέσθαι, 


* Schol. Κίλιξ γὰρ ὁ ποιητὴς ἀπὸ τῆς ᾿Αναξάρβου (Ατητη. Marc. 
xiv. 8. 8; Suid. s.v.; Plin. v. 93; Steph. Byz. 8. ᾿Αναζαρβά) | 
ὅπου ἣν Ἑρμοῦ ἱερόν. | 

> Introd. p. xix. 

° The craft of Hermes is proverbial; Hom. H. (Herm.) 
iii. 413 κλεψίῴφρονος, 514 ποικιλομῆτα. φαῖνε seems to be used 
absolutely as in Theocr. ii. 11, Hom. Od. vii. 102, etc. Ont 
may govern νύσσαν, cf. Theoer. ix. 28 βουκολικαὶ Μοῖσαι μάλα 
χαίρετε, φαίνετε δ᾽ ῳδάν. The order of the words is against 
taking νόημα as object to φαῖνε, For νόημα of. Pind, Q, vii. 


344 ἢ 


HALIEUTICA, or FISHING 
III 


Come now, O Wielder of the Sceptre, mark thou 
the cunning devices of the fisher’s art and his adven- 
tures in the hunting of his prey, and learn the law of 
the sea and take delight in my lay. For under thy 
sceptre rolls the sea and the tribes of the haunts of 
Poseidon, and for thee are all deeds done among 
men. For thee the gods have raised me up to be 
thy joy and thy minstrel aes the Cilicians beside 
the shrine of Hermes. nd, O Hermes,* god of my 
fathers,’ most excellent of the children of the Aegis- 
bearer, subtlest mind ὁ among the deathless gods, do 
thou enlighten and guide and lead, directing me to 
the goal of my song. The counsels of fishermen 
excelient in wit thou didst thyself, O Lord, first 
devise and didst reveal the sum of all manner of 
hunting, weaving doom for fishes. And thou didst 
deliver the art of the deep for keeping to Pan of 
Corycus,? thy son,’ who, they say, was the saviour 
71 ἔνθα Ῥόδῳ ποτὲ μιχθεὶς τέκεν | ἑπτὰ σοφώτατα νοήματ᾽ ἐπὶ 
προτέρων ἀνδρῶν παραδεξαμένους παῖδας : P. vi. 28 ἔγεντο καὶ 
πρότερον ᾿Αντίλοχος βιατὰς | νόημα Τοῦτο φέρων ; Hom. Od. viii. 
δ48 νοήμασι κερδαλέοισιν. 
@ ἩΊ. iii. 209 n. 
¢ Schol. Ἑρμοῦ yap καὶ Πηνελόπης ὁ Πᾶν ; Hom. H. xix. 1, 
“Ἑρμείαο φίλον γόνον ; Plin. vii. 204 Pan Mercuri (filius). 
345 


OPPIAN. 


Ζηνὸς μὲν ῥυτῆρα, Τυφαόνιον δ᾽ ὀλετῆρα. 
κεῖνος γὰρ δείπνοισιν ἐπ᾽ ἰχθυβόλοισι δολώσας 
σμερδαλέον Τυφῶνα παρήπαφεν, ἔκ τε βερέθρου 
δύμεναι εὐρωποῖο καὶ εἰς ἁλὸς ἐλθέμεν ἀκτήν: 20 
ἔνθα μιν ὀξεῖαι στεροπαὶ ῥιπαί τε κεραυνῶν 
ζαφλεγέες πρήνιξαν" ὁ δ᾽ αἰθόμενος πυρὸς ὄμβροις 

an / 
κρᾶθ᾽ ἑκατὸν πέτρῃσι περιστυφελίζετο πάντῃ 

‘3 \ 3. > 3... ” > wv 
ξαινόμενος- EavOat δὲ παρ᾽ ἠϊόνεσσιν ἔτ᾽ ὄχθαι 
λύθρῳ ἐρευθιόωσι Τυφαονίων ἀλαλητῶν. 25 
‘Eppeta κλυτόβουλε, σὲ δ᾽ ἔξοχον. ἱλάσκονται 
ἰχθυβόλοι- τῷ καί σε σὺν ἀγροίοισιν ἀΐσας 
δαίμοσιν εὐθήροιο μετὰ κλέος ἔρχομαι οἴμης. 
~ > πλεν li \ A 
Πρῶτα μὲν ἀσπαλιῆϊ δέμας καὶ γυῖα παρεί 
ρῶτα μ i δέμ 

ἀμφότερον καὶ κραιπνὰ καὶ ἄλκιμα, μήτε τι λίην 30 
πίονα μήτε τι σαρκὶ λελειμμένα: δὴ γὰρ ἀνάγκη 
πολλάκι μιν κρατεροῖσιν ἀνελκομένοισι μάχεσθαι 
9. , e ¢ / wv / ἊΣ is Ψ 
ἰχθύσιν, οἷς ὑπέροπλον ἔνι σθένος, εἰσόκεν ἅλμης 
μητρὸς ἐν ἀγκοίνῃσιν ἑλισσόμενοι δονέονται. 
χρειὼ δ᾽ ἐκ πέτρης τε θορεῖν πέτρην τ᾽ ἀνοροῦσαι 35 
ε .ο») \ \ 7 , / 
ῥηϊδίως" χρειὼ δὲ πόνου βυθίοιο ταθέντος 
Cy 4 oe a A / ” v4 
ῥίμφα διϊχνεῦσαι δολιχὸν πόρον ἔς Te βάθιστα 
δῦναι καὶ μίμνοντα μετ᾽ οἴδμασιν ὡς ἐπὶ γαίης 
δηθύνειν ἔργοισι πονεύμενον, οἷς evi πόντῳ 
EA > /, / A ” 
ἄνδρες ἀεθλεύουσι ταλάφρονα θυμὸν ἔχοντες. 40 


i.qg. Typhos (Aesch. P.V. 370; Pind. P. i. 16, viii. 16), 
Typhoeus (Hes. Th. 821), son of Tartarus and Gaia (Hes. /.c.). 
In mythology his birthand life is mostly associated with Cilicia 
(Pind. P. i. 16 Τυφὼς ἑκατοντακάρανος τόν ποτε | Κιλίκιον θρέψεν 
πολυώνυμον ἄντρον, Vill. 16 Τυφὼς Κίλιξ, Aesch. P. V, 861 τὸν 
γηγενῆ τε Κιλικίων οἰκήτορα ἄντρων, Hom, Jl. ii. 784), his 


840 


HALIEUTICA, III. 17-40 


of Zeus—the saviour of Zeus but the slayer of 
Typhon.2 For he tricked terrible Typhon with 
promise of a banquet of fish and beguiled him to 
issue forth from his spacious pit and come to the 
shore of the sea,»where the swift lightning and the 
rushing fiery thunderbolts laid him low ; and, blazing 
in the rain of fire, he beat his hundred heads upon 
the rocks whereon he was carded all about like wool. 
And even now the yellow banks by the sea are red 
with the blood of the Typhonian battle. O Hermes, 
glorious in counsel, thee especially do fishermen 
worship.? Therefore invoking thee with the gods 
who aid their hunt I pursue the glorious song of their 
chase. 

First of all the fisher should have body and limbs 
both swift and strong, neither over fat nor lacking 
in flesh. For often he must fight with mighty fish 
in landing them—which have exceeding strength so 
long as they circle and wheel in the arms of their 
mother sea. And lightly he must leap from a rock ; 
and, when the toil of the sea is at its height, he must 
swiftly travel a long way and dive into the deepest 
depths and abide amongst the waves and remain 
labouring at such works as men upon the sea toil at 
with enduring heart. Cunning of wit too and wise 


death with Sicily (Aesch. P.V. 365 ἱπούμενος ῥίζαισιν Alrvatas 
ὕπο; Pind, P. i. 18 ταί θ᾽ ὑπὲρ Κύμας ἁλιερκέες ὄχθαι Σικελία τ᾽ 
αὐτοῦ πιέζει στέρνα λαχνάεντα). 

» Pan father of Hermes as a νόμιος θεός (Hom. H. xix. 5) 
is patron alike of Hunting, Fishing, cf. A.P. vi. 167 (a 
dedication to Pan) ὦ δισσᾶς ἀγέτα θηροσύνας᾽ | σοὶ yap καστορίδων 
ὑλακὰ καὶ τρίστομος αἰχμὴ | evade καὶ ταχινῆς ἔργα λαγωσφαγίης 
| dixrud τ’ ἐν ῥοθίοις ἁπλούμενα καὶ καλαμευτὰς | κάμνων καὶ 
μογερῶν πεῖσμα σαγηνοβόλων, and Fowling, cf. A.P. vi. 180 
ταῦτά σοὶ ἔκ τ᾽ ὀρέων ἔκ τ᾽ αἰθέρος ἔκ τε θαλάσσας | τρεῖς γνωτοὶ 
τέχνας σύμβολα, Ildv, ἔθεσαν. Cf. ἐδτα. 11-16, 179, 181-187. 


347 


OPPIAN 


᾿ , \ , 
ψυχὴν δ᾽ ἀσπαλιεὺς πολυπαίπαλος ἠδὲ νοήμων 
εἴη: ἐπεὶ μάλα πολλὰ καὶ αἰόλα μηχανόωνται 
ἰχθύες ἐγκύρσαντες ἀνωΐστοισι δόλοισι. 

> \ φ 
τολμήεις δὲ μάλιστα καὶ ἄτρομος ἠδὲ σαόφρων 
A 
ein, μηδ᾽ ὕπνου φιλέοι κόρον: ὀξὺ δὲ λεύσσοι 
Ψ 
ἐγρήσσων κραδίῃ τε καὶ ὄμμασι πεπταμένοισιν. 
εκ ὶ δ , \ a \ \ y Ψ 
εὖ δὲ φέροι καὶ χεῖμα Διὸς καὶ δίψιον ὥρην 
/ 
Σειρίου: ἱμείροι δὲ πόνων, ἐράοι δὲ θαλάσσης" 
o \ / Y 
ὧδε yap εὐάγρης τε Kat “Epweta φίλος εἴη. 
npn δ᾽ ἑσπερίη μὲν ὀπωρινῇσιν. ἐν ὥραις 
/ / \ ε td Ss 9 > / 
καρτίστη τελέθει καὶ ἑωσφόρος εὖτ᾽ ἀνατέλλῃ" 
7 Ces! , A Ψ , 
χείματι δ᾽ ἠελίοιο βολαῖς ἅμα κιδναμένῃσι 
στέλλεσθαι: πᾶν δ᾽ ἦμαρ ἐν εἴαρι τηλεθόωντι 
ἄγραις παντοίῃσιν ὀφέλλεται, ἦμος ἅπαντες 
Μ Dee J 3 / > Δ / 
ἔλλοπες Hidvecow ἐφέστιοι ἐγγύθι γαίης 
ως “-“ / U % 3 7 
ἕλκονται τοκετῶν τε μόγῳ δίψῃ τ᾽ ᾿Αφροδίτης. 
αἰεὶ δ᾽ εἰς ἄνεμον παπταινέμεν, ὅς κεν ἄῃησιν 
” ὃ 7 LA \ ἵλ “ Ἀν 
ἥπιος, εὐδιόων, μαλακὴν ἅλα κοῦφα κυλίνδων- 
λάβρους γὰρ τρομέουσι καὶ ἐχθαίρουσιν ἀήτας 
oe) 4 292 997 ς \ gv , 
ἰχθύες, οὐδ᾽ ἐθέλουσιν ὑπεὶρ ἅλα δινεύεσθαι:" 
εὐκραεῖ δ᾽ ἀνέμῳ περιδέξιος ἵσταται ἄγρη. 
πάντες δὲ πνοιῇσιν ἐναντία καὶ ῥοθίοισι 
~ ς \ 7 > \ / ae / 
πλῶτες ἁλὸς θύνουσιν, ἐπεὶ σφίσιν ὧδε κέλευθος 
ῥηϊτέρη στείχουσιν ἐπ᾽ ἠόνας, οὐδ᾽ ὑπ᾽ ἀνάγκης 
ἐξόπιθε ῥιπῆσιν ἐλαυνόμενοι μογέουσιν. 


4“ He. ν..616 ὕπνῳ τ᾽ οὐχ ἁλιεῦσιν ἐοικότι. 
> Hom. H. xix. 14 (Pan) ὀξέα δερκόμενος. 


° Of. C. iti. 322 κύνα Σείριον : H. i. 152 ὁπωρινοῖο κυνός. 
Sirius, or the Dog-star, the heliacal (morning) rising of which 
in July was associated with extreme heat: Hesiod, S. 397 
ἴδει év ἀκροτάτῳ bre τε χρόα Σείριος ἄζει, of. ibid. 158: W. 
417, 587, 609 : the dies caniculares or dog-days ; cf. Calverley, 
Lines on Hearing the Organ: Neath the baleful star of Sirius, 


348 


45 


65 


HALIEUTICA, III. 41-65 


should the fisher be, since many and various are the 
devices that fishes contrive, when they chance upon 
unthought-of snares. Daring also should he be and 
dauntless and temperate and he must not love 
satiety ¢ of sleep but must be keen of sight,? wakeful 
of heart and open-eyed. He must bear well the 
wintry weather and the thirsty season of Sirius ¢ ; 
he must be fond of labour and must love the sea. 
So shall he be successful in his fishing and dear to 
Hermes. 

In the autumn season fishing is best in the evening 
and when the morning-star rises. In winter the fisher 
should set out with the spreading rays of the sun. 
In bloomy spring the whole day is prosperous in all 
manner of fishing, what time all fishes are drawn to 
haunt the coasts near the land by the travail of birth 
and the thirst of desire. Look always for a wind 
that blows gentle and fair, lightly rolling a tranquil 
sea. For fishes fear and loathe violent winds and 
will not wheel over the sea, but with a temperate 
wind fishing is exceedingly favourable. All the fishes 
that swim the sea speed against wind and wave, since 
this is the easier way for them in their march toward 
the shores, and they do not suffer through being 
driven forcefully by the current. But when the 


When the postmen slowlier jog, And the ox becomes 
delirious, And the muzzle decks the dog. Alcaeus jr, 39 
réyye πλεύμονα οἴνῳ᾽ τὸ yap ἄστρον mepiTédXdeTAL, | a δ᾽ pa 
χαλέπα, πάντα δὲ δίψαισ᾽ tra καύματος. The name Sirius does 
not occur in Homer, but the star is referred to //. v. 4 ἀστέρ᾽ 
ὀπωρινῷ ἐναλίγκιον ὅς τε μάλιστα λαμπρὸν παμφαίνῃσι λελου- 
μένος ᾿Ὠκεανοῖο; xxii. 26 παμφαίνονθ᾽ ὥς τ’ ἀστέρ᾽ ἐπεσσύμενον 
πεδίοιο | ὅς ῥά τ᾿ ὀπώρης εἶσιν ἀρίζηλοι δέ οἱ αὐγαὶ | φαίνονται 
πολλοῖσι μετ’ ἀστράσι νυκτὸς ἀμολγῷ, ὅν τε κύν᾽ ᾿ΩὩρίωνος 
ἐπίκλησιν καλέουσι" | λαμπρότατος μὲν ὅ y ἐστί κακὸν δέ τε σῆμα 
τέτυκται, | καί τε φέρει πολλὸν πυρετὸν δειλοῖσι βροτοῖσιν. 


349 


OPPIAN 


ἀλλ᾽ ἁλιεὺς στέλλοιτο λίνον πνοιῇσι πετάσσας 
οὔριον, ἐς Βορέην μέν, ἐπὴν Νότος ὑγρὸς ἄῃσιν" 
ἐς Νοτίην δὲ θάλασσαν ἐπειγομένου Βορέαο: 
Εὐὔρου δ᾽ ἱσταμένοιο ποτὶ Ζεφύροιο κέλευθα: 


πρὸς δ᾽ Εὖρον Ζέφυρος φορέοι σκάφος" ὧδε γὰρ ἑσμοὶ 70 


ἄσπετοι ἀντήσουσι καὶ εὔβολος ἔσσεται ἀγρη. 
Τέτραχα δ᾽ εἰναλίης θήρης νόμον ἐφράσσαντο 

ἰχθυβόλοι: καὶ τοὶ μὲν ἐπ᾽ ἀγκίστροισι γάνυνται, 

τῶν δ᾽ οἱ μὲν δονάκεσσιν ἀναψάμενοι δολιχοῖσιν 

ὁρμυὴν ἵππειον ἐὕὔπλοκον ἀγρώσσουσιν" 

οἱ δ᾽ αὔτως θώμιγγα λινόστροφον ἐκ παλαμάων 

δησάμενοι πέμπουσιν: ὁ δ᾽ ἢ καθέτοισι γέγηθεν 

ἢ πολυαγκίστροισιν ἀγάλλεται ὁρμιῇσι. 

δίκτυα δ᾽ αὖτ᾽ ἄλλοισι μέλει πλέον ἐντύνεσθαι:" 


τῶν τὰ μὲν ἀμφίβληστρα, τὰ δὲ γρῖφοι καλέονται, 80 


γάγγαμά τ᾽ ἠδ᾽ ὑποχαὶ περιηγέες ἠδὲ σαγῆναι:" 
ἄλλα δὲ κικλήσκουσι καλύμματα, σὺν δὲ σαγήναις 


@ Introd. p. xxxix. 

> Hom. Od. iv. 368 αἰεὶ yap νῆσον ἀλώμενοι ἰχθυάασκον | 
γναμπτοῖς ἀγκίστροισιν, xii. 330 καὶ δὴ ἄγρην ἐφέπεσκον ἀλη- 
τεύοντες ἀνάγκῃ, | ἰχθῦς ὄρνιθάς τε, φίλας ὅτι χεῖρας ἵκοιτο, | 
γναμπτοῖς ἀγκίστροισιν ; A.P. vi. 4. 1 εὐκαμπὲς ἄγκιστρον : Vi. 
5. 2 γυρῶν ἀγκίστρων λαιμοδακεῖς ἀκίδας (barbs); ibid. 27. 6; 
28, 2, εἷς. : Theocr. xxi. 10. 

¢ 4.P. vi. 4. 9 ὁρμειήν ; LM. 8. ὅρμος. . . παρὰ τὸ εἴρω, 
ἐξ οὗ καὶ ὁρμιά, ἡ σειρὰ πρὸς ἣν τὸ ἄγκιστρον ἐπησφάλισται 
δεδεμένον; Hesych. 5. ὁρμιά" σχοινίον λεπτόν ; 8, ὁρμιευτής" 
ἁλιεύς ; Kur. Hel. 1615 ὁρμιατόνοι = fishermen. 

4 4.Ὀ.νὶ. 23. 7 καὶ βαθὺν ἱππείης πεπεδημένον ἅμματι 
χαίτης, | οὐκ ἄτερ ἀγκίστρων, λιμνοφυῆ δόνακα; vi. 192. 8 
γαμψὸν χαίτῃσιν ἐφ᾽ ἱππείῃσι πεδηθὲν ἄγκιστρον. 

¢ A.P. vi. 4. 1 δούρατα δουλιχόεντα 5 vi. 27. 2 ἀγκίστρων 
συζυγίην δονάκων 3 vi. 28. 1 καμπτομένους δόνακας, cf. vi. 29. 4. 
Also called κάλαμοι: Theocr. xxi. 10, and 43, κάλαμος sing. 
ibid. 41. Lat. arundo. 

7 Hom. Il. xvi. 406 ἕλκε δὲ δουρὸς ἑλὼν ὑπὲρ ἄντυγος ὡς bre 


350 


: 
| 


HALIEUTICA, III. 66-82 


fisher puts to sea let him set his sail with the wind— 
Northward when the wet South Wind blows ; South- 
ward when the North Wind drives the sea; when 
the East Wind rises, towards the paths of the West 
Wind ; towards the East let the West Wind bear his 
vessel; for so will infinite shoals meet him and his 
fishing will be blest with luck. 

Fourfold 4 modes of hunting their prey in the sea 


» have fishermen devised. Some delight in Hooks ὃ 
and of these some fish with a Well titted Wass oe ἈΝ 
rse-hair? fastened to long reeds,’ others simply 
east a flaxen cord 7 attached to ‘yet hands, another 
rejoices in leaded lines’ or in lines with many hooks.” 
Others prefer to array Nets?; and of these there are 
those called casting-nets, and those called draw- 
nets—drag-nets and round bag-nets and _ seines. 
Others they call cover-nets, and, with the seines, 


τις φὼς | πέτρῃ ἐπὶ προβλῆτι καθήμενος ἱερὸν ἰχθὺν | ἐκ πόντοιο 
θύραζε λίνῳ καὶ ἤνοπι χαλκῷ. The reference is to what is now 
called ““ hand-lines.” 

9 κάθετος is properly a plummet, Lat. perpendiculum. 
Here of a fishing-line weighted at the end. <A.P. vii. 637 
Πύρρος ὁ μουνερέτης ὀλίγῃ vel λεπτὰ ματεύων | φυκία καὶ τριχίνης 
μαινίδας ἐκ καθέτης ; cf. Apost. p. 48 ‘‘ Pour la péche des serrans 
(xdvous) et celle des pagels on emploie une ligne appelée 
χανικό, καθετή. . . Cet engin porte ἃ son extrémité libre un 
morceau cénique de plomb (μολυβίθρα) ὃ ἃ la partie supérieure 
duquel sont attachés sur des avancées 4 ou 8 hamecons. 1] 
est totalement en crins de cheval tordus; il est employé 
surtout par les amateurs de péche, dans leurs moments de 
loisir. On se rende sur de petites embarcations dans les 
endroits rocheux, on mouille le bateau et l’on commence la 
péche en jetant la ligne, ἃ laquelle le poids du plomb fait 
prendre, dans eau, une direction’ perpendiculaire; une fois 
qu’elle a touché le fond, on la souléve un peu et on la tient 
ainsi disposée pour la péche.” % Introd. p. xxxix. 

+ For the varieties of net mentioned here see Introd. 
pare 

᾿ 351 


OPPIAN 


~ “ 4 
πέζας Kal σφαιρῶνας ὁμοῦ σκολιόν τε πάναγρον" 
/ 3 oe! a λ / At 5X 
μυρία δ᾽ αἰόλα τοῖα δολορραφέων λίνα κόλπων. 
> a , 
ἄλλοι δ᾽ αὖ κύρτοισιν ἐπὶ φρένα μᾶλλον ἔχουσι, 
, . 
κύρτοις, οἱ κνώσσοντας ἑοὺς ηὔφρηναν ἄνακτας 
a es ὰ > A 
εὐκήλους" βαιῷ δὲ πόνῳ μέγα κέρδος ὀπηδεῖ. 
7} 
ἄλλοι δ᾽ οὐτάζουσι τανυγλώχινι τριαίνῃ 
oy 
ἔλλοπας ἐκ χέρσου τε Kal ἐκ νεός, ὡς ἐθέλουσι. 
τῶν πάντων καὶ μέτρον ὅσον καὶ κόσμον ἑκάστου 
ἀτρεκέως ἴσασιν, ὅσοι τάδε τεκταίνονται. 
3 y 3. ΕΣ + ~ > eater ἢ LAA 7΄ / 
Ιχθύσι δ᾽ οὐκ dpa μοῦνον ἐπ᾽ ἀλλήλοισι νόημα 
a \ 
πυκνὸν ἔην καὶ μῆτις ἐπίκλοπος, ἀλλὰ Kal αὐτοὺς 
᾽ 3 los 
πολλάκις ἐξεπάφησαν ἐπίφρονας ἀγρευτῆρας 
/ 
καὶ φύγον ἀγκίστρων τε Bias λαγόνας Te πανάγρων, 
ro > / \ δὲ 7 ἔδ > ὃ ~ 
ἤδη ἐνισχόμενοι, παρὰ δὲ φρένας ἔδραμον ἀνδρῶν, 
βουλῇ νικήσαντες, ἄχος δ᾽ ἁλιεῦσι γένοντο. 
Κεστρεὺς μὲν πλεκτῇσιν ἐν ἀγκοίνῃσι λίνοιο 
ἑλκόμενος δόλον οὔτι περίδρομον ἠγνοίησεν, 
Ψ > > 7 / Ψ » 
ὕψι δ᾽ ἀναθρώσκει, λελιημένος ὕδατος ἄκρου, 
> \ Ψ ΄ 7 f Ψ Ψ, 
ὀρθὸς ἄνω σπεύδων ὅσσον σθένος ἅλματι κούφῳ 
ὁρμῆσαι, βουλῆς δὲ σαόφρονος οὐκ ἐμάτησε: 
πολλάκι γὰρ ῥιπῇσι καὶ ὕστατα πείσματα φελλῶν 


@ Lat. nassa, Sil. Ital. ν. 47, Plin. ix. 132, etc.; a long 
basket of wickerwork (σχοινίδι κύρτῃ Nicand. A. 625, Plat. 
Tim. 79 τ κύρτου πλέγματι, cf. Plin. xxi. 114) with wide funnel- 
shaped mouth and narrow throat, so constructed that once 
the fish has entered, it cannot get out again, Theocr. xxi. 11: 
Poll. x. 182, A:P. vi. 23 πλωτῶν τε πάγην περιδέα κύρτον ; 
of. vi. 192. 

> Plato, Laws 823 πὶ εὕδουσι κύρτοις ἀργὸν θήραν diam ovoupévors. 

¢ A three-pronged fork for spearing fish: Poll. x. 133 
τριόδους, τρίαινα, ἰχθύκεντρον: Plat. Soph. 220 c; Athen. 
323 e; A.P. vi. 30; Hom. Od. x. 124 ἰχθῦς δ᾽ ὡς πείροντες-. 
where Eustath. τριαίναις ἤ τισιν ἑτέροις ἀπωξυμμένοις ὀργάνοις 5 
Plin. ix. 51, 84, 92. 

352 


95 


HALIEUTICA, III. 83-103 


there are those called ground-nets and ball-nets and 
the crooked trawl : innumerable are the various sorts 
of such crafty-bosomed Nets. Others. again have 
their minds set rather upon Weels 4 which bring joy 
to their masters while they sleep ὃ at ease, and great 
gain attends on little toil. Others with the long 
pronged Trident ὁ wound the fish from the land or 
from a ship as they will. The due measure and right 
ordering of all these they know certainly who con- 
trive these things. 

Fishes, it seems, not only against one another 
employ cunning wit and deceitful craft but often 
also they deceive even the wise fishermen themselves 
and escape from the might of hooks and from the 
belly of the trawl when already caught in them, and 
outrun the wits of men, outdoing them in craft, and 
become a grief to fishermen. 

The Grey Mullet,? when caught in the plaited arms 
of the net, is not ignorant of the encircling snare, but 
leaps up, eager to reach the surface of the water, 
hasting with all his might to spring straight up with 
nimble leap, and fails not of his wise purpose. For 
often he lightly overleaps ὁ in his rush the utmost 


4 Hf. ii. 642 n. 

4 The leaping powers of the Grey Mullet (τὸν τάχιστον τῶν 
ἰχθύων A. 620 Ὁ 26) necessitate a special arrangement of nets ; 
Apost. p. 34 ‘‘ Les filets, simples ou compliqués, servent 
ἃ capturer tous les poissons, excepté les muges, qui, sauteurs 
par excellence, peuvent d’un bond passer par-dessus le piege 
tendu. Pour attraper ce poisson, on ajoute aux filets simples 
et placés perpendiculairement a la surface des eaux d’autres 
filets compliqués, lesquels, convenablement tendus par des 
roseaux, se tiennent sur une ligne horizontale ἃ celle de la 
surface méme de l'eau; ainsi le muge en sautant pour 
échapper au piége tombe sur ces autres filets aux mailles 
desquels il se prend en se débattant.” 


2A 353 


OPPIAN 


as! a A τ 
ῥηϊδίως ὑπερᾶλτο καὶ ἐξήλυξε μόροιο. 
~ = x\/ 
ἣν δ᾽ ὅ γ᾽ ἀνορμηθεὶς πρῶτον στόλον αὖτις ὀλίσθῃ 
3 
ἐς βρόχον, οὐκέτ᾽ ἔπειτα βιάζεται οὐδ᾽ ἀνορούει 
V6 ε “ 
ἀχνύμενος, πείρῃ δὲ μαθὼν ἀποπαύεται ὁρμῆς. 
Ε ee > , 
ὡς δ᾽ ὅτε τις νούσῳ πολυκὴδέϊ δηρὸν ἀλύων 
πρῶτα μὲν ἱμείρων τε καὶ ἱέμενος βιότοιο 
πάντα μάλ᾽ ἰητῆρσιν ἐφέσπεται, ὅσσα κέλονται 
ῥέζων: ἀλλ᾽ ὅτε κῆρες ἐπικρατέωσιν ἄφυκτοι 
"Aid 3 φέρ, Nef “λ / LAAG 6 A 
ἴδος, οὐκέτ᾽ ἔπειτα μέλει βίου, ἀλλὰ τανυσθεὶς 
κεῖται ἐπιτρέψας θανάτῳ κεκαφηότα γυῖα, 
” , > Guy ? ΄ , 
ἤδη λοίσθιον ἦμαρ ὁρώμενος ἐγγύθι πότμου: 
ὡς ἄρα καὶ κεστρεὺς ἐδάη τέλος οἷον ἱκάνει, 
κεῖται δὲ προπεσών, μίμνων μόρον ἀγρευτῆρος. 
3 

Μύραιναι δ᾽ ὅτε κέν ποτ ἐνιπλήξωσι λίνοισι, 
διζόμεναι βρόχον εὐρὺν ἐν ἕρκεϊ δινεύονται, 
τοῦ δὲ διαΐγδην ὀφίων νόμον ὁρμηθεῖσαι 
πᾶσαι ὀλισθηροῖσι διεξέπεσον μελέεσσι. 

Λάβραξ δὲ πτερύγεσσι διὰ ψαμάθοιο λαχήνας 

/ a /, εν ,ὔ > > > > \ 
βόθρον ὅσον δέξασθαι ἑὸν δέμας ἠὔτ᾽ ἐς εὐνὴν 
ἐκλίνθη: καὶ τοὶ μὲν ἐπ᾽ ἠϊόνας κατάγουσι 
δίκτυον ἀσπαλιῆες, ὁ δ᾽ ἰλύϊ κείμενος αὔτως 
3 / wy ‘\ ” + > / 
ἀσπασίως ἤλυξε Kal ἔκφυγεν ἄρκυν ὀλέθρου. 

* The corks which both support the net and mark its 
position. Pind. P. ii. 79 dre yap εἰνάλιον πόνον ἐχοίσας βαθὺ 
σκευᾶς ἑτέρας ἀβάπτιστός εἰμι φελλὸς ὡς ὑπὲρ ἕρκος ἅλμας : 
Aesch. Ch. 505 παῖδες γὰρ ἀνδρὶ κληδόνες σωτήριοι | θανόντι " 
φελλοὶ δ ὡς ἄγουσι δίκτυον, | τὸν ἐκ βυθοῦ κλωστῆρα σώζοντες 
λίνου: A.P. vi. 192. 5 ἀβάπτιστόν τε καθ᾽ ὕδωρ  φελλὸν ἀεὶ 
κρυφίων σῆμα λαχόντα βόλων ; Alciphr. Hp. i. 1. 4 μικρὸν δὲ 
ἄπωθεν τῆς ἀκτῆς χαλάσαντες, φεῦ τῆς εὐοψίας, ὅσον ἰχθύων 
ἐξειλκύσαμεν * μικροῦ καὶ τοὺς φελλοὺς ἐδέησε κατασῦραι ὑφάλους 
τὸ δίκτυον ἐξωγκωμένον : Pausan. viii. 12 ᾿Αρκάδων δὲ ἐν τοῖς 
δρυμοῖς εἰσιν αἱ δρῦς διάφοροι, καὶ τὰς μὲν πλατυφύλλους αὐτῶν, 
τὰς δὲ φηγοὺς καλοῦσιν, αἱ τρίται δὲ ἀραιὸν τὸν φλοιὸν καὶ οὕτω 
δή τι παρέχονται κοῦφον, ὥστε ἀπ᾽ αὐτοῦ καὶ ἐν θαλάσσῃ ποιοῦνται 


354 


105 


110 


115 


120 


125 


HALIEUTICA, III. 104-195 


bounds of the corks 4 and escapes from doom. But 
if at his first upward rush he slips back again into the 
net, he makes no further effort and leaps no more 
in his grief but taught by trial, ceases from his 
endeavours. As when a man, long distressed by 
painful disease, at first, in his yearning and desire 
for life, obeys the physicians and does all things that 
they bid him; but when the unescapable fates of 
death prevail, he cares no more for life but lies 
stretched out, giving over to death his exhausted 
limbs, beholding already at hand the final day of 
fate ; even so the Grey Mullet knows what manner 
of end is come upon him and lies prone, awaiting 
doom from his captor. 

The Muraena,’ when they are caught in the net, 
circle about in the enclosure seeking for a wide mesh 
and through it making their way, after the manner 
of snakes, with slippery limbs they all escape. 

The Basse ὁ digs with its fins in the sand a trench 
large enough to admit its body and lays itself therein 
as in a bed. And the fishermen bring down to the 
shore a net but the Basse by simply lying in the mud 
gladly avoids them and escapes the net of destruction. 
᾿ σημεῖα ἀγκύραις Kai dixrbos* ταύτης τῆς δρυὸς [Quercus suber] 
τὸν φλοιὸν ἄλλοι τε ᾿Ιώνων καὶ ᾿Ἑρμησιάναξ ὁ τὰ ἐλεγεῖα ποιήσας 
φελλὸν ὀνομάζουσιν ; Plut. Mor. 127 p ὅπως, κἂν πιεσθῇ ποτε, 
φελλοῦ δίκην ὑπὸ κουφότητος ἀναφέρηται ; Poll. i. 973 x. 138. 

® Ael. i. 33 ὅταν δὲ αὐτὴν τὸ δίκτυον περιβάλῃ, διανήχεται καὶ 
ζητεῖ ἢ βρόχον ἀραῖον ἢ ῥῆγμα τοῦ δικτύου πάνυ σοφῶς καὶ 
ἐντυχοῦσα τοιούτων τινὶ καὶ διεκδῦσα ἐλευθέρα νήχεται αὖθις " εἰ 
δὲ τύχοι μία τῆσδε τῆς εὐερμίας, καὶ αἱ λοιπαὶ ὅσαι τοῦ αὐτοῦ γένους 
συνεαλώκασι κατὰ τὴν ἐκείνης φυγὴν ἐξίασιν, ὡς ὁδόν τινα λαβοῦσαι 
παρ᾽ ἡγεμόνος. 

¢ Plut. Mor. 977 " ὥσπερ τῷ λάβρακι᾽ συρομένην (τὴν 
σαγήνην) γὰρ αἰσθανόμενος βίᾳ διίστησι καὶ τύπτει κοιλαίνων 
τοὔδαφος" ὅταν δὲ ποιήσῃ ταῖς ἐπιδρομαῖς τοῦ δικτύου χώραν, ἔωσεν 
ἑαυτὸν καὶ προσέχεται, μόχρι ἂν παρέλθῃ. ὃ 

35 


OPPIAN 


va AY / A te dN 3 ” 
Tota δὲ τεχνάζει καὶ woppdpos: εὖτ᾽ av és ἄγρην 
,ὔ ὔ e€ \ ὃ , > 10 
φράσσηται προπεσών, ὁ δὲ δύεται ἐν ψαμάθοισι. 
fA a 
AdBpaé δ᾽ ἀγκίστροιο τυπεὶς εὐκαμπέος αἰχμῇ 
ὑψόσ᾽ ἀναθρώσκων κεφαλὴν  ἀζηχὲς ἐρείδει 
a “ ε 
αὐτῇ ἐν ὁρμιῇ βεβιημένος, ὄφρα οἱ ἕλκος 
> 7 , ,ὔ \ > , bl 
εὐρύτερόν τε γένοιτο καὶ ἐκφυγέῃσιν ὄλεθρον. 
Tota καὶ ὄρκυνοι μεγακήτεες ἐφράσσαντο' 
εὖτε γὰρ ἁρπάξωσι γένυν γναμπτοῖο δόλοιο, 
cr la 7 ς A f . 
ῥίμφα τιταινόμενοι νεάτην ὑπὸ βύσσαν ἵενται, 
a Ld Τὰ nv > > t 
χεῖρα βιαζόμενοι θηρήτορος" ἢν δ᾽ ἀνύσωσιν 
> , 77> » , , ᾽ > 
ἐς πέδον, αὐτίκ᾽ ἔπειτα κάρη θείνοντες ἐς οὖδας 
9 \ wv > (2 3 > 7 
ὠτειλὴν ἔρρηξαν, ἀποπτύουσι δ᾽ ἀκωκήν. 
ΤΆΛΑΣ ἜΣ / he if > / 
ὁπόταν καθέτοισι πελώριοι ἀμφιχάνωσιν 
ἰχθύες, οἷα βοῶν τε πέλει προβάτων τε γένεθλα 
ἊΝ \ an \ eee \ / 3 52 2 
ἢ βατὶς ἢ καὶ ὄνων νωθρὸν γένος, οὐκ ἐθέλουσιν 
ἕσπεσθαι, ψαμάθοισι δ᾽ ἐπὶ πλατὺ σῶμα βαλόντες 
ἀθρόοι ἐμβαρύθουσι, μόγον θ᾽ ἁλιεῦσιν ἔθηκαν. 


πολλάκι δ᾽ ἐξώλισθον ἀπ᾽ ἀγκίστροιο λυθέντες. 


* Ο. 1. 14; H. i, 100 π΄; Plut. Mor. 977 τ ἀμφιβλήστροις 
μὲν γὰρ καὶ ὑποχαῖς. . . ἁλίσκονται μόρμυροι κτλ. 

Ὁ Plut. Mor. 977 B ὁ δὲ λάβραξ ἀνδρικώτερον τοῦ ἐλέφαντος 
οὐχ ἕτερον ἀλλ᾽ αὐτὸς ἑαυτόν, ὅταν περιπέσῃ τῷ ἀγκίστρῳ, 
βελουλκεῖ, τῇ δεῦρο κἀκεῖ παραλλάξει τῆς κεφαλῆς ἀνευρύνων τὸ 


τραῦμα καὶ τὸν ἐκ τοῦ σπαραγμοῦ πόνον ὑπομένων, ἄχρι ἂν ἐκβάλῃ 


τὸ ἄγκιστρον. 
° A large-sized Tunny. In M.G. épxtvos=Thynnus 
brachypterus (Apost. p. 14). Cy. Athen. 303 b Ἡ ρακλέων δ᾽ 


356 


130 


135 


140 


HALIEUTICA, III. 126-143 


A like device is practised by the Mormyrus?: 
when it perceives that it has fallen into the net, it 
hides in the sands. 

The Basse,’ when smitten by the point of the bent 
hook, leaps on high and incessantly presses its head 
violently on the line itself, till the wound becomes 
wider and it escapes destruction. 

The mighty Orcynus ὁ employ a similar device. 
For when they have seized the jaw of the guileful 
hook, swiftly they strain and rush to the nether 
depths, putting pressure on the hand of the fisher ; 
and if they reach the bottom, straightway they beat 
their head against the ground and tear open the 
wound and spit out the barb.? 

But when giant fishes swallow the leaded hooks— 
such as the tribes of the Ox-ray ὁ and the Sea-sheep ἢ 
and the Skate 9 or the sluggish race of the Hake *— 
they will not yield to it but throwing their flat bodies 
in the sands they put all their weight upon the line 
and cause trouble to the fishermen, and often they 
get free from the hook and escape. 

ὁ ᾿Εφέσιος «θύννονΣ τὸν ὄρκυνόν φησι λέγειν τοὺς ᾿Αττικούς. 
Σώστρατος δ᾽ ἐν δευτέρῳ περὶ ζῴων τὴν πηλαμύδα θυννίδα 
καλεῖσθαι λέγει, μείζω δὲ γινομένην θύννον, ἔτι δὲ μείζονα ὄρκυνον, 
ὑπερβαλλόντως δὲ αὐξανόμενον γίνεσθαι κῆτος. Cf. Hesych. 5. 
θύννον and 5. dpxuvos; A. δ48 Ὁ 4 οἱ δ᾽ ὄρκυνες (τίκτουσιν) ἐν τῷ 
πελάγει. For the form ὄρκυνες cf. Anaxandr. ap. Athen. 
131 e; Plin. xxxii. 149 orcynus—hic est pelamydum generis 
maximus neque ipse redit in Maecotim, similis tritomi, 
vetustate melior. Cf. P. Rhode, Thynnorum Captura, 
LOS 

4 Ael. i. 40 ὅταν γοῦν περιπαρῇ τῷ ἀγκίστρῳ, καταδύει αὑτὸν 
εἰς βυθὸν καὶ ὠθεῖ καὶ προσαράττει τῷ δαπέδῳ καὶ κρούει τὸ στόμα, 
ἐκβαλεῖν τὸ ἄγκιστρον ἐθέλων᾽ εἰ δὲ ἀδύνατον τοῦτο εἴη, εὐρύνει τὸ 
τραῦμα καὶ ἐκπτύεται τὸ λυποῦν αὐτὸν καὶ ἐξάλλεται. 

¢ Hii. 141 n. 7. Hi. 146 n. 

9 H.i, 103 n. A Hig lS a 


357 


OPPIAN 


> . , 
Λαιψηραὶ δ᾽ ἀμίαι καὶ ἀλώπεκες εὖτ᾽ ἂν ἔχωνται, 
εὐθὺς ἄνω σπεύδουσιν ὑποφθαδόν, αἶψα δὲ μέσσην 
ὁρμιὴν ὑπ᾽ ὀδοῦσι διέτμαγον ἠὲ καὶ ἄκρας 
χαΐτας" τοὔνεκα τῆσιν ἐχαλκεύσανθ᾽ ἁλιῆες 
\ 2529 > 7) 7 EA > / 
καυλὸν ἐπ᾽ ἀγκίστρῳ δολιχώτερον, ἄρκος ὀδόντων. 
Nai μὴν καὶ νάρκη σφέτερον νόον οὐκ ἀπολείπει 
πληγῇ ἀνιάζουσα" τιταινομένη δ᾽ ὀδύνῃσιν 
ὁρμιῇ λαγόνας προσπτύσσεται" αἶψα δὲ χαίτης 
ε / ὩΣ »»ὕ / we > ¢ “ 
immeins δόνακός τε διέδραμεν ἔς θ᾽ ἁλιῆος 
\ ” vA > , + 
δεξιτερὴν ἔσκηψε φερώνυμον ἰχθύος ἄλγος: 
πολλάκι δ᾽ ἐκ παλάμης κάλαμος φύγεν ὅπλα τε 
/ 
θήρης. 
a \ / + ἐᾷ ae , 
τοῖος yap κρύσταλλος ἐνίζεται αὐτίκα χειρί. 


“HH. ii, 554 π. A. 69] ἃ 16, immediately after the 
allusion to the Fox-shark quoted in next note, adds 
συστρέφονται δὲ καὶ αἱ ἄμιαι, ὅταν τι θηρίον ἴδωσι, καὶ κύκλῳ αὑτῶν 
περινέουσιν αἱ μέγισται, κἂν ἅπτηταί τινος ἀμύνουσιν " ἔχουσι δ᾽ 
ὀδόντας ἰσχυρούς, καὶ ἤδη ὦπται καὶ ἄλλα καὶ λάμια ἐμπεσοῦσα 
καὶ καθελκωθεῖσα. ΑΕ]. i. 5 describes ὁ ἰχθὺς ὁ τρώκτης, by 
which he clearly means the Amia: ἁλοὺς ἀγκίστρῳ μόνος ἰχθύων 
ἐς τὸ ἔμπαλιν ἑαυτὸν οὐκ ἐπανάγει ἀλλ’ ὠθεῖται, τὴν ὁρμιὰν 
ἀποθερίσαι διψῶν, οἱ δὲ ἀλιεῖς σοφίζονται τὰ ἐναντία " τὰς γάρ τοι 
τῶν ἀγκίστρων λαβὰς χαλκεύονται μακράς κτλ.: Plut. Mor. 
977 a τῶν δ᾽ ἀγκίστρων τοῖς μὲν στρογγύλοις ἐπὶ κεστρέας καὶ 
ἀμίας χρῶνται μικροστόμους ὄντας " τὸ γὰρ εὐθύτερον εὐλαβοῦνται. 

> Hi. 881 π. Cf. A. 621 16 ἣν δὲ καλοῦσι σκολόπενδραν, 
ὅταν καταπίῃ τὸ ἄγκιστρον, ἐκτρέπεται τὰ ἐντὸς ἐκτός, ἕως ἂν 
ἐκβάλῃ τὸ" ἄγκιστρον" εἶθ᾽ οὕτως εἰστρέπεται πάλιν ἐντός... .. 
τῶν δ᾽ ἰχθύων αἱ ὀνομαζόμεναι ἀλώπεκες ὅταν αἴσθωνται ὅτι 
τὸ ἄγκιστρον καταπεπώκασιν, βοηθοῦσι πρὸς τοῦτο ὥσπερ καὶ ἡ 
σκολόπενδρα " ἀναδραμοῦσα γὰρ ἐπὶ πολὺ πρὸς τὴν ὁρμιὰν ἀποτρώ- 
γουσιν αὐτῆς " ἁλίσκονται γὰρ περὶ ἐνίους τόπους πολναγκίστροις 
ἐν ῥοώδεσι καὶ βαθέσι τόποις : Plin. ix. 145 Scolopendrae .. . 
hamo devorato omnia interanea evomunt, donec hamum 
358 


145 


150 


HALIEUTICA, III. 144-155 


The swift Amia* and the Fox-sharks,’ when they 
are hooked, straightway hasten upward to forestall 
the fisher and speedily bite through with their teeth 
the middle of the line or the extreme hairs. There- 
fore for them the fishermen forge a longer socket on 
the hook, as a protection against their teeth. 

The Cramp-fish,’ moreover, forgets not its cunning 
in the pain of being struck, but straining in its agony 
it puts its flanks against the line, and straightway 
through the horse-hair and through the τοῦ ὦ runs 
the pain which gives the fish its name ὁ and lights 
in the right hand of the fisher ; and often the rod 
and the fishing-tackle escape from his palm. Such 
icy numbness straightway settles in his hand. 


egerant, deinde resorbent. . At vulpes marinae simili in 
periculo gluttiunt amplius usque ad infirma lineae qua facile 
praerodant; Ael. V.H.1. 5 (ἡ ἀλώπηξ ἡ θαλαττία) ἀνέθορε καὶ 
ἀπέκειρε τὴν ὁρμιὰν καὶ νήχεται αὖθις ; Antig. 49 τὰς δὲ καλουμένας 
ἀλώπεκας, ὅταν αἴσθωνται ὅτι τὸ ἄγκιστρον καταπεπώκασιν, 
ἀναδραμούσας ἄνωθεν τῆς ὁρμιᾶς ἀποτρώγειν. But Ael. Δ΄. 4. ix. 
12 ἢ γὰρ οὐ πρόσεισι τῷ ἀγκίστρῳ τὴν ἀρχὴν ἢ καταπιοῦσα παρα- 
χρῆμα ἑαυτῆς τὸ ἐντὸς μετεκδῦσα ἔστρεψεν ἔξω, ὥσπερ οὖν χιτῶνα 
τὸ σῶμα ἀνελίξασα, καὶ τοῦτον δήπου τὸν τρόπον ἐξεώσατο τὸ 
ἄγκιστρον: Plut. Mor. 977 8 ἡ δ᾽ ἀλώπηξ οὐ πολλάκις μὲν 
ἀγκίστρῳ πρόσεισιν ἀλλὰ φεύγει τὸν δόλον, ἁλοῦσα δ᾽ εὐθὺς 
ἐκτρέπεται " πέφυκε γὰρ δι᾽ εὐτονίαν καὶ ὑγρότητα μεταβάλλειν τὸ 
σῶμα καὶ στρέφειν, ὥστε τῶν ἐντὸς ἐκτὸς γενομένων ἀποπίπτειν τὸ 
ἄγκιστρον. 

¢ ἩΊ. ii. 56 n. 

4 Ael. ix. 14 εἴ τις προσάψαιτο τῆς νάρκης ὅτι τὸ ἐκ τοῦ ὀνόματος 
πάθος τὴν χεῖρα αὐτοῦ καταλαμβάνει, τοῦτο καὶ παιδάριον ὧν ἤκουσα 
τῆς μητρὸς λεγούσης πολλάκις, σοφῶν δὲ ἀνδρῶν ἐπυθόμην ὅτι καὶ 
τοῦ δικτύου ἐν ᾧ τεθήραται εἴ τις προσάψαιτο ναρκᾷ πάντως. 
Cf. Plut. Mor. 978 5-ο; Athen. 814 ο. 

¢ 7.6. νάρκη, cramp: cf. Ael. lc, and i. 36 ὁ ἰχθὺς ἡ νάρκη 
ὅτου ἂν καὶ προσάψηται τὸ ἐξ αὐτῆς ὄνομα ἔδωκέ τε kal ναρκᾶν 
ἐποίησεν: Athen. 314. Ὁ ἡ δὲ κλῆσις αὐτῆς καὶ map’ Ὁμήρῳ 
[1]. viii. 328] “" νάρκησε δὲ χεὶρ ἐπὶ καρπῷ." 

859 


OPPIAN 


/ 
Σηπίαι ad toinor δολοφροσύνῃσι μέλονται. 
‘ 
ἔστι τις ἐν μήκωσι θολὸς κείνῃσι πεπηγὼς 
> Tt ς “ 
κυάνεος, πίσσης δνοφερώτερος, ἀχλύος ὑγρῆς 
5Ἃ 7 
φάρμακον ἀπροτίοπτον, ὅ τε σφίσιν ἄλκαρ ὀλέθρου 
3 L δ 2 ORD Ἣν ΕΝ t ΠΣ , 
ἐντρέφεται- τὰς δ᾽ εὖτ᾽ ἂν ἕ n φόβος, QUTLKG KELVOU 160 
\ ,ὔ 
ὀρφναίας ῥαθάμιγγας ἀνήμεσαν, ἀμφὶ δὲ πόντου 
πάντα πέριξ ἐμίηνε καὶ ἠμάλδυνε κέλευθα 
ἰχὼρ ἀχλυόεις, ἀνὰ δ᾽ ἔτραπε πᾶσαν ὀπωπήν" 
αἱ δὲ διὰ θολόεντος ἄφαρ φεύγουσι πόροιο 
ἐ.ὕ \ ~ \ 3, θ / >? θύ 
ῥηϊδίως και φῶτα καὶ εὐ ποῦι φέρτερον ιχσυν. 165 
Tats δ᾽ ἴσα τεχνάζουσι Kat ἠερόφοιτα γένεθλα 
/ τ > “ , \ 3 δ. δ \ 
τευθίδος- οὐ δ᾽ dpa τῇσι μέλας θολὸς ἀλλ᾽ ὑπερευθὴς 
ἐντρέφεται, μῆτιν δὲ πανείκελον ἐντύνονται. 
Τοίοις μὲν φρονέουσι νοήμασιν: ἀλλὰ καὶ eur 
pL οίοις μὲν Pp : le pcb fetes 
ὄλλυνται πυκινῇσιν ἐπιφροσύναις ἁλιήων. 170 
τοὺς μὲν δὴ, πελάγεσσιν ἐν ἠλιβάτοισι θέοντας 
ῥηϊδίως épvovow: ἐπεὶ σφίσιν οὔτι νόημα 
ποικίλον. ἤδη γάρ Tis ἐπέσπασε καὶ κρομύοισι 
γυμνοῖς T ἀγκίστροισιν ἑλὼν πελαγοστρόφον ἰχθύν. 
ὅσσοι δ᾽ αὖ γαίης ἁλιερκέος ἄγχι νέμονται, 175 
a \ 3 4 ΔΛ /, 3 δ᾽ A 3 A 
τοῖσι μὲν ὀξύτερος πέλεται νόος, ἀλλὰ Kal αὐτῶν 


@ Hii. 121 n. 

> A. δ94 1 τοῦτον (sc. τὸν θόλον) δὲ πλεῖστον αὐτῶν (se. 
τῶν μαλακίων) καὶ μέγιστον ἡ σηπία ἔχει " ἀφίησι μὲν οὖν ἅπαντα, 
ὅταν φοβηθῇ, μάλιστα δὲ ἡ σηπία: cof. P.A. 6194 4 But 
it is ποῦ only through fear that it employs this artifice: 
A. 621 Ὁ 28 τῶν δὲ μαλακίων πανουργότατον μὲν ἡ σηπία καὶ μόνον 
χρῆται τῷ θόλῳ κρύψεως χάριν καὶ οὐ μόνον φοβουμένη " ὁ δὲ 
πολύπους καὶ ἡ τευθὶς διὰ φόβον ἀφίησι τὸν θόλον : Plut. Mor. 
978 a; Ael. i. 84; Phil, 105; Plin. ix. 84: Cic. W.D. ἢ: 50, 
127; Ov. Hal. 18 Sepia tarda fugae, tenui cum forte sub 
unda | Deprensa est iam iamque manus timet illa rapaces,— 
Inficiens aequor nigrum yomit ore cruorem | Avertitque 
vias, oculos frustrata sequentes. 


360 


HALIEUTICA, III. 156-176 


The Cuttle-fishes ὦ again practise this craft.? They 
have seated in their heads a dark muddy fluid blacker 
than pitch, a mysterious drug causing a watery 
cloud, which is their natural defence against destruc- 
tion. When fear seizes them, immediately they dis- 
charge the dusky drops thereof and the cloudy fluid 
stains and obscures all around the paths of the sea 
and ruins all the view ; and they straightway through 
ον turbid waters easily escape man or haply mightier 

sh. 

A like craft is practised also by the air-travelling ¢ 
tribes of the Calamary.4 Only their fluid is not 
black but reddish,’ but the device which they employ 
is altogether similar. 

Such are the cunning devices! of fishes ; yet not- 
withstanding they perish by the subtle wiles of fisher- 
men. Those which run in the sheer depths of the 
sea the fishers capture easily, since they possess no 
subtle craft. For ere now one has caught and landed 
a deep-sea fish with onions % or with bare hooks. 
Those on the other hand which range near the sea- 
girding land have sharper wits; yet even of these 


¢ Schol. ἠερόφοιτα " ἀέρι πετόμενα " τὰς τευθίδας φησὶν ἠερό- 
φοιτα γένεθλα ὡς ἐν τῷ ἀέρι φοιτῶντα " πέτονται γὰρ καὶ διὰ τοῦ 
ἀέρος φέρονται ὡς ὑπόπτερα᾽ τευθίδες δ᾽ εἰσὶ τὰ κοινῶς λεγόμενα 
καλαμάρια. One might be tempted to take the sense to be 
ἐς travelling in darkness ” like Homer’s ἠερόφοιτος ’Hpwis (Ll. 
ix. 571), but the reference is no doubt, as the schol. takes 
it, to its flying habits; cf. H.i. 427 ff.; Epicharm. ap. Athen. 
318 e ποταναὶ τευθίδες. 

4 Hi. 428 n. Cf. note on ν. 156 above. 

ὁ Athen. 326 Ὁ ἔχει δὲ (ἡ TevOis) καὶ θόλον. . . οὐ μέλανα 
arn ὠχρόν. But Ov. Hal. 129 Et nigrum niveo portans in 
corpore virus | Loligo. 

ΠΟ iis 

9 On baits in general see A. 84 4 11-534b10; 591 a-b. 

361 


OPPIAN 


Batol μὲν Kapiow ἀφαυροτέραις ἐρύονται, 
πουλυπόδων θυσάνοις ἢ καρκίνῳ ἀμφιχανόντες 
καρκινάσιν τ᾽ ὀλίγῃσι καὶ εἰ κρέας ἁλμυρὸν ἅπτοις 
πετραίαις θ᾽ ἑλμῖσι καὶ ὅττι τοι ἄγχι παρείη 

> tes \ 3 SN / ς ,ἷ 

ἰχθυόεν- βαιοὺς δ᾽ ἐπὶ μείζοσιν ὁπλίζοιο' 

Le A J ? ΄ + 
δείπνοις yap γελόωντες ἐπισπεύδουσιν ὄλεθρον" 

ἢ γὰρ ἀεὶ πλωτῶν σιφλὸν γένος ὑγρὰ θεόντων. 
θύννον μὲν κορακῖνος ἄγει, λάβρακα δὲ καρὶς 
/ ᾽ὔ \ ἐᾷ / 7 
πιαλέη, χάννος δὲ φίλον φάγροισι δέλετρον 
καὶ βῶκες συνόδοντι καὶ ἱππούροισιν ἴουλοι" 

,ὔ 3 > \ a” x ἊΣ / Ψ. 
τρίγλη δ᾽ ὀρφὸν ἔπεφνε καὶ ἔσπασε κιρρίδα πέρκη, 
μαινίδι δὲ χρύσοφρυς ἀνέλκεται: αὐτὰρ ἀνιγραὶ 
μύραιναι μετὰ σάρκας ἐπειγόμεναι φορέονται 
πουλυπόδων: ὅσσοι δὲ δέμας περίμετρον ἔχουσι, 
θύννῳ μὲν κάλλιχθυς ἰαίνεται, αὐτὰρ ὀνίσκοις 
ΝΜ ς 4 > 39. 93, 3 , ¢ , 
ὄρκυνος, λάβρακα δ᾽ ἐπ᾽ ἀνθίῃ ὁπλίζοιο, 

ω ,ὕ i? > ” ,ὔ , 
immoupov ξιφίῃ, γλαύκῳ δ᾽ ἔπι κεστρέα πείροις" 

9-H. i. 320 ff. 

> A. 534a16 ἔτι δὲ πολλοὶ τῶν ἰχθύων διατρίβουσιν ἐν 
σπηλαίοις, ods ἐπειδὰν βούλωνται προκαλέσασθαι πρὸς τὴν θήραν 
οἱ ἁλιεῖς, τὸ στόμα τοῦ σπηλαίου παραλείφουσι ταριχηραῖς ὀσμαῖς, 
πρὸς ἃς ἐξέρχονται ταχέως; ΑΕ]. xiii, 2 περιπείρει τῷ ἀγκίστρῳ 
γλυκόστομον ὄντα ἡμιτάριχον. 

ὁ.Α, 534a 28 ff. 

# One of the Sciaenidae, perhaps Corvina nigra Cuv.; “ἃ 
Chalcis un vieux pécheur m’a dit qu’on L’appelle Σκιὸς 
καλιακούδα, c’est-a-dire Cory. corneille,” Apost. p. 13. 

34 30M, 

ΤῊ. in 194. η. ΟΡ 391 n. 

» Cf. H. i. 110 where ἀμφότεροι Boxes refers to the two 


species Box boops (Box vulgaris), M.G. βώπα or γοῦπα, and 
Bow salpa, M.G. σάλπα (Apost. p. 17). They belong to the 
Sparidae or Sea-breams. 

t H. iii. 610 π. 

* H. ii. 434.n. For tovhos=iovMs of. Eratosth. ap. Athen. 
284 d ἔτι ξζώοντας ἰούλους. 


362 


18! 


18: 


191 


HALIEUTICA, III. 177-193 


the small fishes are caught with the feeble Prawn : 
they swallow tentacled Poulpe or Crab or tiny 
Hermit-crabs“ or bait of salted flesh® or rock- 
haunting Worms or anything of the fishy kind ὁ that 
may be at hand.+»The small fish thou shouldst use as 
bait for the larger; for rejoicing in the banquet 
they speed their own destruction; gluttonous verily 
always is the race of the swimming tribes that roam 
the water. The Crow-fish@ attracts the Tunny, the 
fat Prawn attracts the Basse,¢ the Channus 7 is a bait 
beloved of the Braize,” as the Bogue” is to the 
Dentex? and the Rainbow-wrasse * to the Hippurus /; 
the Red Mullet™ slays the Merou,” the Perch 9 
catches the Cirrhis,? the Gilt-head ¢ is landed by the 
Maenis*; while the baleful Muraena® haste after 
the flesh of the Poulpe.* As for those fishes which 
are of enormous size, the Beauty-fish™ delights in 
the Tunny, the Orcynus ” in the Oniscus”; while for 
the Anthias * thou shouldst array the Basse,” the 
Hippurus * for the Swordfish,? and for the Glaucus ?° 
thou shouldst impale the Grey Mullet.2° To entrap 


1 H, 404 n. POA. G92 Ti. 
% Hy i) 142 ἢ. OFT, 1.124.’ 
? Hui. 129. « H. i. 169 n. 


τ Three species of the genus Maena occur in the 
Mediterranean: M. vulgaris, M. osbeckii, M. jusculum. 
σμαρίς (icuapis), by which the schol. glosses μαινίς here and 
H. i. 108, is an allied genus (M.G. σμαρίς, μαρίς) of the same 
family Maenidae (Apost. p. 18). Cf. Ov. Hal. 120 Fecun- 
dumque genus maenae. 


SUT NA? Th. ei SOOM 

ee ie ἐλ ον τυ μα 
v H. ii 130 ne ds NW 104 ne 
2a H. ii. 462 n. *> Introd. p. Ixi. 


2¢ HT, ii. 642 n. 
363 


OPPIAN 


ἄλλῳ δ᾽ ἀλλοίην. γενεὴν ἐπιτεχνάζοιο, 

κρέσσονι χειροτέρην᾽ ἐπεὶ ἦ μάλα πάντες ἔασιν 195 

ἀλλήλοις φορβή τε φίλη καὶ λίχνος ὄλεθρος. 

ὡς οὐδὲν λιμοῖο κακώτερον οὐδὲ βαρείης 

γαστέρος, ἢ κρατέει μὲν ἐν ἀνθρώποισιν ἀπηνὴς 

καὶ χαλεπὴ δέσποινα συνέστιος, οὔποτε δασμῶν 

ληθομένη, πολλοὺς δὲ παρασφήλασα νόοιο 200 

εἰς ἄτην ἐνέηκε καὶ αἴσχεσιν ἐγκατέδησε" 

γαστὴρ δὲ θήρεσσι καὶ ἑρπυστῆρσιν ἀνάσσει 

ἠερίῃς τὶ ἀγέλῃσι, τὸ δὲ πλέον ἐν νεπόδεσσι 

κάρτος ἔχει: κείνοις γὰρ ἀεὶ μόρος ἔπλετο γαστήρ. 
᾿Ανθιέων δὲ πρῶτα περίφρονα πεύθεο θήρην, 205 

οἵην ἡμετέρης ἐρικυδέος ἐντύνονται 

πάτρης ἐνναετῆρες ὑπὲρ Σαρπηδόνος ἀκτῆς 

ὅσσοι θ᾽ ‘Eppeiao πόλιν, ναυσίκλυτον ἄστυ 

Κωρύκιον, ναίουσι καὶ ἀμφιρύτην ᾿Ελεοῦσαν. 

πέτρας μὲν κείνας τεκμαίρεται ἐγγύθι γαίης 910 

ἴδρις ἀνήρ, otnow ὑπ᾽ ἀνθίαι αὐλίζονται, 

ἀντροφυεῖς, κευθμῶσι διαρρῶγας θαμέεσσι: 

δουρὶ δ᾽ ἀναπλώσας πινάκων ἐριηχέα τεύχει 

δοῦπον ἐπικροτέων' πατάγῳ θ᾽ ἐπιτέρπεται ἦτορ 

ἀνθιέων- καί πού τις ἀνέδραμεν αὐτίκα λίμνης, 215 

παπταίνων ἄκατόν τε Kal ἀνέρα: τῷ δ᾽ ἄρ᾽ ἑτοίμας 

πέρκας εὐθὺς ἵησιν ἐν οἴδμασιν ἢ κορακίνους 


« Hom. Od. vii. 216 οὐ γάρ τι στυγερῇ ἐπὶ γαστέρι κύντερον 
ἄλλο | ἔπλετο. 

> Introd. p. liii. 

¢ Introd. p. xix. 

4 Promontory of Cilicia: Strabo 627 Καλλισθένης δ᾽ ἐγγὺς 
τοῦ Καλυκάδνου καὶ τῆς “Σαρπηδόνος ἄκρας παρ᾽ αὐτὸ τὸ Κωρύκιον 
ἄντρον (φησίν) εἶναι τοὺς ᾿Αρίμους. Cf. 610, 682; Ptolem. v, 8.3; 
Plin. v. 92 mox flumen Calycadnus, promunturium Sarpedon. 

° AP. ix. 91 Ἑρμῇ Κωρύκιον ναίων πόλιν. Of. Hicks, 


364 


HALIEUTICA, III. 194-217 


other fish employ other breeds, the weaker as bait for 
the stronger ; since verily all fishes are welcome food 
to one another and gluttonous destruction. So true 
it is that naught is deadlier than hunger and the 
grievous belly,* which bears harsh sway among men 
and is a stern mistress to dwell with: who never 
forgets her tribute and who misleads the wits of 
many and casts them into ruin and binds them fast 
to shame. The belly bears sway over wild beasts 
and over reptiles and over the flocks of the air, but 
it has its greatest power among fishes; for them 
evermore the belly proves their doom. 

Hear first the cunning mode of taking the Anthias ὃ 
which is practised by the inhabitants of our glorious 
fatherland 5 above the promontory of Sarpedon,# 
those who dwell in the city of Hermes,¢ the town of 
Corycus,’ famous for ships, and in sea-girt Eleusa.2 
A skilful man observes those rocks near the land, 
under which the Anthias dwell: caverned rocks, 
cleft with many a covert. Sailing up in his boat he 
makes a loud noise by striking planks together ; and 
the heart of the Anthias rejoices in the din, and one 
haply rises presently from the sea, gazing at the boat 
and the man. Then the fisher straightway lets down 
into the waves the ready bait of Perch or Crowfish, 


LHS. xii. p. 240 (metrical dedication of statues of Hermes 
and Pan from the Corycian cave). Hermes appears on 
coins of Corycus, Adana, Mallos. 

7 Seaport in Cilicia, N.-K. of Sarpedon, Strabo 670 
Κώρυκος ἄκρα, ὑπὲρ ἧς ἐν εἴκοσι σταδίοις ἐστὶ τὸ Κωρύκιον ἄντρον ; 
Plin. ν. 92 iuxtaque mare Corycos, eodem nomine oppidum 
et portus et specus; Strabo 671 mentions τὴν εὐπορίαν τῆς 
τε ναυπηγησίμου ὕλης καὶ τῶν λιμένων in this region. 

9 Island off Cilicia : Strabo 671 εἶθ᾽ ἡ ᾿Βλαιοῦσσα νῆσος μετὰ 
τὴν Κώρυκον, προσκειμένη τῇ ἠπείρῳ 3 537 τὴν ᾿Βλαιοῦσσαν νήσιον 
εὔκαρπον. Cf. ibid. 535; Plin. ν. 180, 

865 


OPPIAN 


3 , la m2 4 Joe “ 
ἀσπαλιεύς, πρώτης ὀρέγων ξεινήϊα φορβῆς. 
/ 
αὐτὰρ 6 γ᾽ ἁρπάγδην κεχαρημένος εἰλαπινάζει 
daira φίλην σαίνει τε δολόφρονα θηρητῆρα. 290 
,ὔ 
ὡς δὲ φιλοξείνοιο μετ᾽ ἀνέρος οἰκία κέλσῃ 
κλεινὸς ἀνὴρ ἢ χειρὸς ἐν ἔργμασιν ἠὲ νόοιο, 
ἀσπασίως δ᾽ ὃ μιν εἶδεν ἐφέστιον, εὖ δέ ἑ δώροις 
ay 4 > , χὰ Ἂν ΒΝ / 
εὖ τέ μιν εἰλαπίναις Te φιλοφροσύναις τ᾽ ἀγαπάζει 
» > / 
παντοίαις" ἄμφω δὲ γεγηθότες ἀμφὶ τραπέζῃ 225 
τέρπονται κρητῆρος ἀμοιβαίοις δεπάεσσιν" 
ὡς ὁ μὲν ἀσπαλιεὺς κεχαρημένος ἐλπωρῇσι 
μειδιάᾳ, δείπνοις δὲ νέοις ἐπιτέρπεται ἰχθύς. 
ἔνθεν ἔπειθ᾽ ὁ μὲν αἰὲν ἐπημάτιος ποτὶ πέτρην 
/ 2»Q> poets ἘΠ 3 / 509 > ‘2 
στέλλεται, οὐδ᾽ ἀνίησιν ἐὸν πόνον οὐδ᾽ ἀπολείπει 230 
a / ¢ > ἜΡΩΣ ae Ὶ > ,ὔ > ,ὔ 
δαῖτα φέρων" οἱ δ᾽ αὐτίκ᾽ ἀολλέες ἀμφαγέρονται 
δαιτυμόνες κατὰ χῶρον, ἅτε κλητῆρος ἄγοντος. 
αἰεὶ δὲ πλεόνεσσιν ἑτοιμοτέροις τε παρίσχει 
φορβὴν ἁρπαλέην: οὐδέ σφισιν ἄλλα κέλευθα 
Uae - aN / 3 \ Z 
οὐδ᾽ ἄλλοι κεεθμῶνες evi φρεσίν, ἀλλὰ μένοντες 235 
αὐτοῦ δηθύνουσιν, ἅτε σταθμοῖσι νομήων 
πώεα χειμερίοισιν ἐν ἤμασιν αὐλίζονται, 
0.9 357 a ΄ ’ὔ 
οὐδ᾽ ὀλίγον σηκοῖο λιλαιόμενα προνέεσθαι. 
οἱ δ᾽ ὅτ᾽ ἐσαθρήσωσιν ἀειρομένην ἀπὸ χέρσου 
> 
σπερχομένην T ἐλάταις ἄκατον τρόφον, αὐτίκαπάντες 240 
ὀρθοὶ καγχαλόωντες ὑπεὶρ ἅλα δινεύοντες 
ἱμερόεν παίζουσι καὶ ἀντιόωσι τιθήνῃ. 
€ 3 % Lance > / / / > , 
ὡς δ᾽ ὁπότ᾽ ἀπτήνεσσι φέρῃ βόσιν ὀρταλίχοισι 
Ἃ > “ ΄ ,ὔ 
μήτηρ, εἰαρινοῦ ζεφύρου πρωτάγγελος ὄρνις, 
3 “ 
οἱ δ᾽ ἁπαλὸν τρύζοντες ἐπιθρώσκουσι καλιῇ 245 
, \ a 
γηθόσυνοι περὶ μητρὶ καὶ ἱμείροντες ἐδωδῆς 
* Ov. #. ii. 853 Fallimur, an veris praenuntia venit 
hirundo, The Swallow as herald of Spring is proverbial : 
Hes. W. 568; Aristoph. Paw 800, Lig. 419 σκέψασθε παῖδες" 
οὐχ ὁρᾶθ᾽, ὥρα νέα χελιδών. 


866 


HALIEUTICA, III. 218-246 


offering a first meal of hospitality. The fish rejoices 
and greedily feasts on the welcome banquet and 
fawns upon the crafty fisherman. As to the house 
of a hospitable man there comes one famous for deeds 
of hand or head, and his host is glad to see him at his 
hearth and entreats him well with gifts and feast 
and all manner of loving-kindness ; and at the table 
both rejoice and take their pleasure in pledging cup 
for cup; even so the fisher rejoices in hope and 
smiles while the fish delights in new banquets. 
Thenceforward the fisherman journeys to the rock 
every day and relaxes not his labour and ceases not 
to bring food. And straightway the Anthias gather 
all together in the place to feast, as if a summoner 
brought them. Always for more and readier fishes 
he provides the coveted food, and they have no 
thought of other paths or other retreats, but there 
they remain and linger, even as in the winter days 
the flocks abide in the steadings of the shepherds 
and care not to go forth even a little from the fold. 
And when the fishes descry the boat that feeds them 
starting from the land and speeding with the oars, 
immediately they are all alert and guily they wheel 
over the sea, sporting delightfully, and go to meet 
their nurse. As when the mother Swallow, the bird 
that first heralds“ the West Wind ὃ of Spring, brings 
food to her unfledged nestlings and they with soft 
cheeping leap for joy about their mother in the nest 


> The ‘ genitabilis aura Favoni’’ Lucret. i. 11; cf. v. 735 
It ver et Venus et Veneris praenuntius ante | Pennatus 
graditur Zephyrus; Plin, ii. 122 Favonium quidam a.d. viii 
kalendas Martii chelidoniam vocant ab hirundinis visu. The 
Swallow (Hirundo rustica) arrives in Attica about the 
second week of March, Mommsen, Griechische Jahreszeiten, 


p. 254. 
367 


OPPIAN 


- > uA “ δ ἐν “- , 
χεῖλος ἀναπτύσσουσιν, ἅπαν δ᾽ ἐπὶ δῶμα λέληκεν 
ἀνδρὸς ξεινοδόκοιο λίγα κλάζουσα νεοσσοῖς" 
ὡς οἵ γε θρεπτῆρος ἐναντίον. ἐρχομένοιο 

γηθόσυνοι θρώσκουσι, χοροιτύπον ὥστ᾽ ἀνὰ κύκλον. 3250 
τοὺς δ᾽ ἁλιεὺς βρώμῃσιν ἐπασσυτέρῃσι λιπαίνων 
χειρί τ᾽ ἐπιψαύων χειρός T ἄπο Sapa τιταίνων 
mpniver φίλον ἦτορ: ἄφαρ δέ οἱ or ἄνακτι 
πείθονται, καὶ χειρὸς ὅπη νεύσειε μύωπι 
ῥίμφα διαΐσσουσιν: 6 δ᾽ ἄλλοτε νηὸς ὄπισθεν 258 
ἄλλοτε δὲ πρόσσω, ποτὲ δὲ σχεδὸν ἠπείροιο 

/ , A > » 3. oh a 
πέμπει δεξυιτερήν" τοὺς δ᾽ ὄψεαι Hire παῖδας 
ἀνδρὸς ἐπιφροσύνῃσι παλαισμοσύνης ἀνὰ χῶρον : 
τῇ Kal τῇ θύνοντας, ἐπίσκοπος ἔνθα κελεύει. 
ἀλλ᾽ ὅτε οἱ κομιδῆς μὲν ἅλις, θήρη δὲ μέληται, 26 
δή pa τόθ᾽ ὁρμιὴν μὲν ἀναψάμενος “χερὶ λαιῇ 
ἕζεται, ἀγκίστρου δὲ βέλος κρατερόν τε θοόν τε 
ὁπλίζει, καὶ τοὺς μὲν ἀπέτραπε χειρὶ κελεύων | 
πάντας ὁμῶς ἢ λᾶαν ἑλὼν ἔρριψε καθ᾽ ὕδωρ: 
οἱ δ᾽ ἐπὶ τῷ δύνουσιν, ὀϊόμενοι όσιν εἶναι. 26! 
τῶν δ᾽ eva μοῦνον ἔλειπεν ἀἁ ἀπόκριτον, ὃν κ᾽ ἐθέλῃσι, 
δύσμορον, ὑστατίοισι κεχαρμένον ἐν δείπνοισι- 
ἄγκιστρον μὲν ὄρεξεν ὑπεὶρ ἁλός" αὐτὰρ ὃ γ᾽ ἄτην 
καρπαλίμως ἥρπαξεν, ὁ δ᾽ ἔσπασεν ἀμφοτέρῃσι 
θερμὸς a ἀνήρ, ὠκεῖαν ἑλὼν καὶ ἐπίκλοπον ἄ ἄγρην: 51 
λήθει δ᾽ ἀνθιέων ἄλλον χορόν" ἣν γὰρ ἴδωνται | 
ἢ σμαραγὴν ἀΐωσι δυσαγρέος ἑλκομένοιο, 
οὐκέτι of τόσα δεῖπνα παρέσσεται, ὥς κεν ἵκοιντο 
αὖτις ὑποτροπάδην, ἀ ἀπὸ δ᾽ ἔπτυσαν ἐχθήραντες | 
καὶ κομιδὴν καὶ χῶρον ὀλέθριον: ἀλλά τις cin 51 


« Apost. p. 39 ‘* Pour faire tomber les Athérines dans le 
piége le pécheur proméne sur l’eau un morceau d’étoffe noire 


368 | 


HALIEUTICA, III. 247-275 


and open their beaks in their desire for food, and all 
the house of some hospitable man resounds with the 
shrill crying of the mother bird; even so the fishes 
leap joyfully to meet their feeder as he comes, even as 
in the circle of a dance. And the fisherman fattening 
them with dainty after dainty and with his hand strok- 
ing them and proffering them his gifts from his hand, 
tames their friendly heart, and anon they obey him 
like a master, and wheresoever he indicates with his 
finger,? there they swiftly rush. Now behind the boat, 
now in front, now landward he points his hand ; and 
thou shalt see them, like boys in a place of wrestling, 
according to the wisdom of a man, rushing this way 
or that as their master bids. But when he has tended 
them enough and bethinks him of taking them, then 
he seats himself with a line in his left hand and fits 
thereto a hook, strong and sharp. Then all the fishes 
alike he turns away, commanding them with his hand, 
or he takes a stone and casts it in the water, and they 
dive after it, thinking it to be food. One picked fish 
alone he leaves, whichsoever he will—unhappy fish, 
rejoicing in a banquet which is to be its last. Then 
he reaches down the hook over the sea and the fish 
swiftly seizes its doom ; and the bold fisher draws 
it in with both hands, winning a speedy prey by his 
cunning. And he avoids the notice of the rest of 
the company of Anthias ; for if they see or hear the 
din of the unhappy victim being landed, then the 
fisher will never more have banquets enough to tempt 
the fishes to return, but they spurn with loathing 
both his attentions and the place of destruction. 
attaché au bout d’un long roseau, qu’il tient de la main 
droite. Les poissons le suivent en grand nombre, et de la 
main le pécheur leur montre en quelque sorte le chemin ἃ 


prendre.” 
QB 369 


OPPIAN 


ες “- \ th / . 3 “λ 
ἴφθιμος, κρατερῶς δὲ βιησάμενός μιν ἀνέλκοι, 
/ 
ἢ Kal δεύτερος ἄλλος ἐφαπτέσθω καμάτοιο' 
a LA 
ὧδε yap οὐ φρονέοντες ἑὴν δολομήχανον ἄτην 
αὐτοὶ πιανθέντες ἐοικότα πιαίνουσιν: 
ΩΝ 3 Ss > 15. 7. / » " 
αἰεὶ δ᾽, εὖτ᾽ ἐθέλῃσθα, παρέσσεται εὔστοχος ἄγρη. 980 
Ἄλλοι δ᾽ ἰφθίμῳ τε βίῃ καὶ κάρτεϊ γυίων 
πειθόμενοι μέγαν ἄθλον ἐπ᾽ ἀνθίῃ ὁπλίζονται, 
οὐ φιλίην, οὐ σῖτα πονεύμενοι, ἀλλ᾽ ἐς ἀκωκὴν 
ἀγκίστρου σπεύδουσι καὶ ἠνορέῃ βιόωνται. 
χαλκοῦ μὲν σκληροῖο τετυγμένον ἠὲ σιδήρου 285 
ἄγκιστρον πέλεται, δίχα δὲ yAwyives ἔχουσιν 
3 ,ὕἷ / A 4 > MN 3 δι. 39 
ἀμφίδυμοι μέγα πεῖσμα λινόστροφον- ἀμφὶ δ᾽ dp 
αὐτῷ 

λάβρακα ζώοντα παρήλασαν, εἴ σφι παρείη" 

> A / 4, a e \ 2 lot /, 
εἰ δὲ θάνοι, τάχα οἵ τις ὑπὸ στόμα θῆκε μόλιβδον, | 
deAdiv’ dv καλέουσιν: ὁ δὲ βρίθοντι μολίβδῳ 290. 
κλίνει τ᾽ ἀγκλίνει τε κάρη ζώοντι ἐοικώς. | 
θώμιξ δὲ κρατερή τε καὶ εὔπλοκος" ἀλλ᾽ ὅτε δοῦπον 

3 / > oh > Ἁ / 
ἀνθίαι εἰσαΐοντες ἀναθρώξωσι θαλάσσης, 
LAA \ “λ ὔ vi > \ “ δ (82. 
ἄλλοις μὲν μέλεται κώπης πόνος, αὐτὰρ 6 γ᾽ ἄκρης 
ἐκ πρύμνης ἁλιεὺς δόλον ἀγκύλον εἰς ἅλα πέμπει, 998 
HK avadwevav: οἱ δ᾽ αὐτίκα πάντες ἕπονται 

oh \ ΄ / ” 3 \ 
νηΐ τε καὶ φεύγοντι δεδορκότες εἴκελον ἰχθὺν 
σπεύδοντες μετὰ δαῖτα παραφθαδὸν ἀΐσσουσιν 

3 / / 2.3 > tA Jaw + 
ἀλλήλων: φαίης κεν ἐπ᾽ ἀνέρα δήϊον ἄνδρα 
γούνατ᾽ ἐλαφρίζειν πεφοβημένον- οἱ δ᾽ ἄρα νίκης 800. 
ἐσθλῆς ἱβείρουσιν: ὁ δ᾽ ἔξοχον ὅν κεν ἴδηται 
ἀσπαλιεύς, τῷ δαῖτα παρέσχεθεν" αὐτὰρ ὁ λάβρως | 
δῶρα χανὼν δύσδωρα μετέδραμεν" ἔνθεν ἔπειτα | 
> - 
ἀλκὴν ἀμφοτέρων θηήσεαι, οἷος ἄεθλος 
μαρναμένων ἀνδρός τε καὶ ἰχθύος ἑλκομένοιο" 805. 
τοῦ μὲν γὰρ σθεναροί τε βραχίονες ἠδὲ μέτωπα 
870 


HALIEUTICA, III. 276-306 


But the fisher should be a powerful man and land 
his fish by force of strength or else a second man 
should lend a hand in his labour. For so, unwitting 
of their crafty doom, fattened themselves they fitly 
fatten others ; and always when thou wilt, successful 
fishing shall be thine. 

Others trust in their valiant might and strength 
of limb when they array the great adventure against 
the Anthias, not cultivating friendship nor proffering 
food but having recourse at once to the pointed hook 
and overcoming the fish by their valour. The hook 
is fashioned of hard bronze or iron, and two separate 
barbs are attached to the great rope of twisted flax. 
On it they fix a live Basse—if a live one be at hand ; 
but if it be a dead one, speedily one puts in its mouth 
a piece of lead, which they call a dolphin @ ; and the 
fish, under the weight of the lead, moves his head to 
and fro, as if alive. The line is strong and well-woven. 
When the Anthias hear the noise and leap from the 
sea, then some attend to the labour of the oar, while 
the fisherman from the stern-end lets down the 
crooked snare into the sea, gently waving it about. 
And the fishes all straightway follow the ship and 
seeing before their eyes what seems to be a fleeing 
fish, they rush in haste after the banquet, each striv- 
ing to outstrip the other : thou wouldst say it was a 
foeman plying swift knees in pursuit of a routed 
foe: and they are eager for goodly victory. Now 
whichever fish the fisher sees to be best, to it he 
offers the banquet, and with eager gape it rushes 
after the gift that is no gift: Thereupon thou shalt 
see the valour of both, such a struggle there is as 
man and captive fish contend. His strong arms and 


@ Η, ἵν. 81) ns 
371 


OPPIAN 


> ’ > 3 / Ψ id la if, 
ὦμοί τ᾽ αὐχένιοί τε παρασφύριοί τε τένοντες 
lol / 4 
ἀλκῇ κυμαίνουσι καὶ ἠνορέῃ τανύονται:" 
2 N av 3 3 / >) f WA / > θ rd 
αὐτὰρ ὃ γ᾽ ἀσχαλόων ὀδύνης ὕπο μάρναται ἰχθύς, 
> Ψ ~ 
ἕλκων αὖ ἐρύοντα, βιώμενος εἰς ἅλα δῦναι, 910 
lA « fi ? 
ἄσχετα μαιμώων: ὁ δὲ κέκλεται ἄνδρας ἑταίρους 
3 > 4 
ἐμπίπτειν ἐλάτησι- διωκομένης δ᾽ ἀκάτοιο 
> vA ¢ ~ 
ἔμπαλιν ἐκ πρύμνης ὅλος ἕλκεται ἰχθύος ὁρμῇ: 
7,ὔ δ᾿ 
κλάζει δ᾽ ὁρμιή, χειρὸς δ᾽ ἀπολείβεται αἷμα 
/ > aA 
πριομένης" ὁ δ᾽ ἄρ᾽ οὔτι βαρὺν μεθίησιν ἀγῶνα. 315 
~ 3 3 \ 
ws δὲ δύω μεμαῶτες ὑπέρβιοι. ἀνέρες ἀλκὴν 
/ 
ἅμματ᾽ ἐπ᾽ ἀλλήλοισι τιταινόμενοι βιόωνται 
ἑλκῦσαι, ῥιπῆσιν ὀπισθοφόρῤοις ἐρύοντες, 
δηρόν τ᾽ ἀμφότεροι καμάτων ἴσα μέτρα φέροντες 
ἐμμενέως ἕλκουσι καὶ ἐμμενέως ἐρύονται:" 820 
“a a > / A > Tes ~ w+ ' 
ὡς τοῖς, ἰχθυβόλῳ τε Kat ἰχθύϊ, νεῖκος ὄρωρε, : 
τοῦ μὲν ἀπαΐξαι, τοῦ δ᾽ ἑλκέμεν ἱμείροντος. | 
> ,ὔ 3 Ε > 7 La 
ov μέν μιν λείπουσιν ἐν ἄλγεσιν ἰχθύες ἄλλοι | 
> / > 9 > , > / 5 ‘£ ς > ~ 
ἀνθίαι ἀλλ᾽ ἐθέλουσιν ἀμυνέμεν, ἐν δέ οἱ αὐτῷ 
νῶτα βίῃ χρίμπτουσι καὶ ἐμπίπτουσιν ἕκαστος, 895 
ἄφρονες, οὐδ᾽ ἐνόησαν ἑὸν τείροντες ἑταῖρον. 
7 4 » / 7 
πολλάκι καὶ θώμιγγα λιλαιόμενοι γενύεσσι 
ῥῆξαι ἀμηχανόωσιν, ἐπεὶ στόμα τοῖσιν ἄοπλον. 
debe ὃ ,ὔ ᾽ὔ \ 1A: θίζ 
ope δὲ μιν καμάτῳ τε καὶ ἄλγεσι μοχθίζοντα 
a 7 3, 3 in 
πυκναῖς T εἰρεσίῃσι βιώμενος ἔσπασεν ἀνΉρ᾽ 390. 


4 So of a fisherman Theocr. i. 42 f. φαίης κα γυίων νιν ὅσον 
σθένος ἐλλοπιεύειν ~ | GE οἱ ῳδήκαντι κατ᾽ αὐχένα πάντοθεν ives. | 
> dupara is ποῖ -- σχοινία (ropes), as the schol. interprets, | 
but the hold or grasp of the wrestler. Cf. Plut. Alcib. ii. | 
ἐν μὲν γὰρ τῷ παλαίειν πιεζούμενος ὑπὲρ τοῦ μὴ πεσεῖν ἀναγαγὼν 
πρὸς τὸ στόμα τὰ ἅμματα τοῦ πιεζοῦντος οἷος ἣν διαφαγεῖν τὰς 
χεῖρας. ἀφέντος δὲ τὴν λαβὴν ἐκείνου καὶ εἰπόντος " “Δάκνεις, 
ὦ ᾿Αλκιβιάδη, καθάπερ αἱ γυναῖκες,᾽ “Οὐκ ἔγωγε;,᾽᾽ εἶπεν, ““ ἀλλ᾽ 
ὡς οἱ λέοντες ᾿: Fab, xxiii. ὥσπερ ἀθλητὴς ἀγαθὸς ἐπαγωνι- 


372 


HALIEUTICA, III. 307-330 


brows and shoulders and the sinews of his neck and 
ankles swell? with might and strain with valour ; 
while the fish, chafing with pain, makes a fight, 
pulling against the pulling fisher, striving to dive 
into the sea, raging incontinently. Then the fisher 
bids his comrades plunge in their oars ; and as the 
ship speeds forward, he on the stern is dragged 
bodily backward by the rush of the fish, and the 
line whistles, and the blood drips from his torn hand. 
But he relaxes not the grievous contest. As two 
keen men of mighty valour stretch their grasp ὃ 
about one another and endeavour each to pull the 
other, hauling with backward strain ; and long time 
both, enduring equal measure of toil, pull might and 
main and are pulled; even so between those, the 
fisher and the fish, strife arises, the one eager to 
rush away, the other eager to pull him in. Nor do 
the other Anthias fishes desert the captive in his 
agony but are fain to help him ὁ and violently hurl 
their backs against him and fall each one upon him, 
foolishly, and know not that they are afflicting their 
comrade. Often also when they are fain to tear 
through the line with their jaws, they are helpless, 
since their mouth is unarmed.4 At last when the 
fish is weary with labour and pain and the quick 
rowing, the man overpowers him and pulls him in. 
ζόμενος τῷ ᾿Αννίβᾳ καὶ ῥᾳδίως ἀπολυόμενος αὐτοῦ τὰς πράξεις, 
ὥσπερ ἅμματα καὶ λαβὰς οὐκέτι τὸν αὐτὸν ἐχούσας τόνον. 

¢ Ael. i, 4 τούτων (τῶν ἀνθιῶν) γοῦν ἕκαστοι, ὅταν νοήσωσι 
τεθηρᾶσθαι τὸν σύννομον, προσνέουσιν ὥκιστα ᾿ εἶτα ἐς αὐτὸν τὰ 
νῶτα ἀπερείδουσιν καὶ ἐμπίπτοντες ‘kai ὠθούμενοι τῇ δυνάμει 
κωλύουσιν ἕλκεσθαι : Plut. Mor. 977 ὁ οἱ δ᾽ ἀνθίαι τῷ συμφύλῳ 
βοηθοῦσιν ἰταμώτερον " τὴν γὰρ ὁρμιὰν ἀναθέμενοι κατὰ τὴν 
ῥάχιν καὶ στήσαντες ὀρθὴν τὴν ἄκανθαν ἐπιχειροῦσι διαπρίειν τῇ 
τραχύτητι καὶ διακόπτειν. 

@ 2,0... toothless. 


378 


OPPIAN 


3 eA € \ \ ¢ / A » 
εἰ δ᾽ ἄρα οἱ καὶ τυτθὸν ὑπείξεται, οὔ μιν ἔπειτα 
ἑλκύσει: τοῖον γὰρ ὑπερφίαλον σθένος αὐτῷ. 
πολλάκι δ᾽ ase ὑπὲρ ῥάχιν ἔτμαγε ᾿δάψας 
ὁρμιήν, ἀπὸ δ᾽ ἦξε λ ὑπὼν κενὸν ἀγρευτῆρα. 
τοῖον καὶ κάλλιχθυς ἔχει σθένος ἠδὲ γενέθλη 335 
ὀρκύνων ὅσσοι Te δέμας κητώδεες ἄλλοι 
πλάζονται: τοίοις δὲ βραχίοσιν ἀγρώσσονται. 

"AMovus δ᾽ αὖ βρώμῃσι καὶ εἰλαπίνῃσι δολώσας 

ρώμῃ 0 

> 7 ς is > \ δέ ἘΠ: > As 
ἀγρώσσει ἁλιεύς" ἀγαθὸς € οἱ ἔσσεται ἰχθὺς 
κάνθαρος, ὃς πέτρῃσιν ἀεὶ λεπρῇσι γέγηθε. 340 
κύρτον δὲ πλέξαιο περίδρομον ὅττι μέγιστον, | 
τεύχων ἢ σπάρτοισιν ᾿ΙΪβηρίσιν ἠὲ λύγοισι, 

Ἐν κα > ᾽ὔ \ / ε δ A 
ῥάβδους ἀμφιβαλών' λευρὴ δέ οἱ εἴσοδος ἔστω : 
γαστήρ τ᾽ εὐρυχανής" δέλεαρ δέ οἱ ἔνδον ἐ ἐνείης | 
πούλυπον ἑρπυστὴν ἢ 7 KdpaBov, ἐκ πυρὸς ἄμφω 345 
ὀπταλέους- κνίσση γὰρ ἐφέλκεται ἰχθύας εἴσω. 
ὧδε μὲν ἐντύνας πλεκτὸν δόλον ἐγγύθι, πέτρης 
δόχμιον ἀγκλίνοις, ὕφαλον λόχον: αὐτίκα δ᾽ “ὀδμὴ 
κάνθαρον ὀτρυνέει τε καὶ ἵξεται ἔνδοθι κύρτου, 

> ΄ὔ / 7 ¢ ’ > 
οὐ μάλα θαρσαλέος πρώτην ὁδόν, ἀλλὰ τάχιστα 350 
δαισάμενος παλίνορσος dred payer" ἔνθεν ἔ ἔπειτα 
κυρτεὺς μὲν κείνοισιν ἀεὶ νεοτερπέα “φορβὴν 
ἐντίθεται" τοὺς δ᾽ αἶψα δυσώνυμος ἐντὸς ἀγείρει 
γαστήρ, ἄλλον. δ᾽ ἄλλος ἄγει σύνδορπον ἑ ἑταῖρον. | 
ἤδη ὃ ἀτρομέοντες ἀολλέες ἔνδοθι. κύρτου 355) 
ἀγρόμενοι πρόπαν ἦμαρ ἐνήμενοι, ὥστε μέλαθρον 


α« Introd, Ῥ. lvii. Ὁ HAT. iii. 182 n, | 
ὁ Cantharus griseus (Cantharus lineatus), M.G. ἀσκάθαρος, | 
ere at Corfu (Apost. p. 18). | 
4 Day i. p. 26 ** Prefers rocky ground, feeding on the 
finer kinds of seaweeds. It is found in bays and harbours, 
and frequently captured by anglers fishing from the shore, 
rocks, or piers. 


874 | 


HALIEUTICA, III. 331-356 


But if the fisher yield to him even a little, he cannot 
pull him in—so tremendous is his strength. Often he 
tears and cuts the line on his sharp spine and rushes 
away, leaving the fisherman empty-handed. A like 
strength is possessed by the Beauty-fish* and the 
race of the Orcynus ® and others of monstrous body 
that roam the deep ; and even by such arms are they 
captured. 

Others the fisherman catches with the wile of 
food and feast. A good fish will be the Black Sea- 
bream,° which ever rejoices in rough rocks.? Plait 
a round weel ¢ as large as may be, fashioning it with 
Iberian broom’ or withes and putting staves round 
it. Let the entrance be smooth and the belly yawn- 
ing wide. As bait, put within it reptile Poulpe or 
Crayfish, in either case broiled 4 on the fire ; for the 
savour entices the fishes within. Having thus pre- 
pared the plaited deceit, lean it obliquely beside a 
rock, to be an ambush under the sea. And immedi- 
ately the odour will rouse the Black Sea-bream and 
he will come within the weel, not very confident on 
his first journey, but with all haste he makes his 
meal and speeds away again. Thereafter the weel- 
fisher puts in the weel ever fresh pleasant food for 
them and ill-omened gluttony speedily gathers them 
within, and one fish brings another comrade to share 
the banquet. At length without fear they gather all 
together within the weel and remain sitting therein 


© HA. iii. 86 n. 

* C. 1. 156 n. 

9 A, 534022 καὶ ὅλως δὲ πρὸς τὰ κνισώδη πάντες φέρονται 
μᾶλλον. καὶ τῶν σηπιῶν δὲ τὰ σαρκία σταθεύσαντες ἕνεκα τῆς 
ὀσμῆς δελεάζουσι τούτοις " προσέρχονται γὰρ μᾶλλον. τοὺς δὲ 
πολύπους φασὶν ὀπτήσαντες εἰς τοὺς κύρτους ἐντιθέναι οὐδενὸς 
ἄλλου χάριν ἢ τῆς κνίσης. 

375 


OPPIAN 


> 4 V4 
κτησάμενοι, μίμνουσι, κακὴν δ᾽ εὕροντο καλιήν. 
a >? / 
ὡς δ᾽ ὁπότ᾽ ὀρφανικοῖο per’ ἠιθέοιο μέλαθρον 
+ 
οὔτι σαοφροσύνῃσι μεμηλότες ἥλικες ἄλλοι 
Η ’ 
κλητοί τ᾽ αὐτόμολοί τε πανήμεροι ἀγερέθωνται, 
“-“ Ρ ’ 
κτῆσιν ἀεὶ κείροντες ἀσημάᾶντοιο δόμοιο, 
Ψ 
οἷα νέους ἀνίησι χαλίφρονας ἄκρυτος ἥβη, 

/ 
ἐν δὲ κακοφροσύνῃσι κακὴν εὕραντο τελευτήν" 
ὡς τοῖς ἀγρομένοισι παρασχεδὸν ἵσταται ἄτη. 
Regi! \ Xr ,ὔ \ A 7 λέθ, 
ἡνίκα γὰρ πολλοί τε καὶ εὐλιπέες τελέθωσι, 
δὴ τότ᾽ ἀνὴρ κύρτοιο περὶ στόμα πῶμα καλύπτει 

> oe ~ 
εὖ, ἀραρός: τοὺς δ᾽ ἔνδον ἐν ἕρκεϊ πεπτηῶτας 
ς 4 7 3 ,ὔ > \ > »” 
ὑστάτιον κνώσσοντας ἀνείρυσεν: ὀψὲ δ᾽ ὄλεθρον 
φρασσάμενοι σπαίρουσι καὶ ἐκδῦναι μεμάασι, 
΄ a 
νήπιοι, οὐδ᾽ ἔτι κύρτον ὁμῶς εὔοικον ἔχουσιν. 
"Αὃ δ᾽ mh ΄ > \ « / 

wow δ᾽ ἐπι κύρτον ὀπωρινὸν ὁπλίζονται 
ὀΐσυνον, μέσσοισι δ᾽ ἐν οἴδμασιν ὁρμίζουσι, 
νέρθεν ἀναψάμενοι τρητὸν λίθον εὐναστῆρα:" 

\ 9.9 yt Ψ / 3 , ς ath 
φελλοὶ δ᾽ ὀχμάζουσιν ἄνω δόλον" ἐν δέ of αἰεὶ 
τέσσαρας ἀκταίους διεροὺς κάχληκας ἱεῖσι: 
τοῖς δὲ διαινομένοισι περιτρέφεται γλαγόεσσα 

΄ , A 
μύξα θαλασσαίη, τῆς ἵμερος ἰχθύας ἕλκει 
΄ 
βαιούς, οὐτιδανούς, λίχνον γένος. of δ᾽ ἀγέρονται 
[4 > / 
Kuptov ἐπιπροθέοντες ἐν ἀγκοίνῃς τε μένουσιν. 
a 3 5 ae 1 a 
dduwes δ᾽ ὁρόωντες ἔσω κοίλοιο μυχοῖο 
3 ,ὔ ὔ > 
ἀγρομένους Taxa πάντες ἐπί σῴισιν ὡρμήθησαν, 
A >? if 
δαυτὸς ἐελδόμενοι- τοὺς δ᾽ οὐ κίχον, ἀλλ᾽ ὑπόλισθον 
“Ὁ. ε 3 
ῥηϊδίως: of δ᾽ οὔτι καὶ ἱέμενοί περ ἔχουσιν 
~ “- 
αὖτις ὑπεκδῦναι πλεκτὸν λόχον, ἀλλ᾽ ἑτέροισι 


* Admon or Admos, only here. Schol. ἄδμωσι " σνυακίοις, 
κατὰ τῶν ἀδμώνων * ἄδμωνες εἶδος ἰχθύος τῶν λεγομένων συακίων. 
This points to some species of Flat-fish, as in late Greek 


376 


360 


365 


370 


375 


380 


HALIEUTICA, III. 357-384 


all the day, as if they had acquired a house, and 
an evil nest they find it. As when to the house of 
a fatherless youth his age-fellows, who study not 
sobriety, gather all day bidden and unbidden, wast- 
ing evermore the possessions of the masterless house, 
in such practices as foolish young men are incited to 
by the waywardness of youth, and in their folly find 
an evil end; even so for the gathered fishes doom 
stands nigh at hand. For when they become many 
and fat, then the man puts:a well-fitting cover on 
the mouth of the weel and takes captive the fishes 
huddling within the enclosure and sleeping their 
last sleep. Too late they perceive their doom and 
struggle and strive to get out—foolish fishes who find 
the weel no longer so pleasant a home. 

Against the Admon® they prepare in autumn a 
weel of osiers and moor it in the midst of the waves, 
fastening to the bottom a bored stone? by way of 
anchor, while corks ὁ support the trap above. In it 
they always put four wet stones from the beach. 
On the wet stones grows a milky slime of the sea, 
desire for which attracts the wretched little fishes, a 
greedy race, which gather and rush io the weel and 
remain in its embrace. The Admon, seeing them 
gathered within the hollow retreat, all speedily rush 
upon them, eager for a feast. But them they do not 
overtake: they easily slip away: but the Admon 
are nowise able, for all their endeavour, to escape 
again from the plaited ambush, but, preparing woe 


σύαξ, ovdcov=yarra. Cf. Du Cange 5. σιάκιον and s. . 
σύαξ. 

Hom. Od. xiii. 77 πεῖσμα δ᾽ ἔλυσαν ἀπὸ τρητοῖο λίθοιο = 
γρώνης χερμάδος Lycophr. 90. Cf. Hesych. 5. γρώνους. With 
εὐναστῆρα of. ebvat=anchors, Hom, Il. i. 436, etc. 

¢ HT, iii, 108 n. 

STF 


OPPIAN 


πήματα mopovvovres ἐπί σφισιν εὗρον ὄλεθρον. 88 
3 

ὡς δέ τις ἐν ξυλόχοισιν ὀρέστερος ἀγροιώτης 

θηρὶ πάγην ἤρτυνεν, ἀπηνέϊ δ᾽ ἔνδοθι θυμῷ 

hoe κυνὸς σφίγγων ἄπο μήδεα" τοῦ δ᾽ ὀδύνῃσιν 
ἠχήεις ὀρυμαγδὸς ἀπόπροθι τειρομένοιο 
ΕΣ 3 \ / ε ΄, a 2 ε δ᾽ 2 oh 390 
ἔρχεται, ἀμφὶ δέ οἱ στένεται δρίος: ἡ ἀΐουσα 
πόρδαλις ἰάνθη τε καὶ ἔσσυται, ἴχνος atirhs 
μαιομένη: τάχα δ᾽ ἷξε καὶ ἔνθορε- τὸν μὲν ἔπειτα 
ὑψόσ᾽ ἀναρπάζει κρυπτὸς δόλος, ἡ δ᾽ evi βόθρῳ 
εἰλεῖται προπεσοῦσα, μέλει δέ οἱ οὐκέτι δαιτός, 
ἀλλὰ φόβου: τῇ δ᾽ οὔτις ὑπέκδυσίς ἐστιν ἑτοίμη 395 
τοῖα καὶ ἄδμωες δειλοὶ πάθον, ἀντὶ δὲ φορβῆς 
πότμον ἐφωρμήσαντο καὶ Αϊδος ἕρκος ἄφυκτον. 

αἱ μέν τις θρίσσησιν ὁμῶς καὶ χαλκίσιν ἄγρην 

" : 
φράσσατ᾽ ὀπωρινήν, καὶ λαρινὸν εἷλε καὶ ἔθνη : 
τραχούρων, κύρτον μὲν ὑπὸ σπάρτοισιν ὑφήνας 400 
εὐπαγέως, φρυκτῶν δ᾽ ὀρόβων ἐνεθήκατο μάζαν, | 
οἴνῳ μυδαλέην εὐώδεϊ, wife δὲ κούρης : 
δάκρυον ᾿Ασσυρίης Θειαντίδος, Hv ποτέ φασι 
πατρὸς ἐρασσαμένην δυσμήχανον ἔργον ἀνύσσαι 
ἐλθεῖν τ᾽ ἐς φιλότητα χολωσαμένης ᾿Αφροδίτης: 405 

OOF Criva2 li. 

> H. i, 244 n. 

ὁ Schol. λαρινόν᾽ τὸ λεγόμενον κύλας, εἶδος ἰχθύος ; Hesych. 5. 
λαρινός" ἰχθὺς ποιός. Not identified. 

ὦ Schol. τραχούρων" τρίχων andion H. i. 99 τραχούρων᾽ ὅμοια 
πηλαμύσιν καὶ τῶν τριχαίων. Probably Trachurus trachurus | 
Mor. (Scomber trachurus L.), M.G. σαυρίδι : ‘* poisson trés | 
abondant et qui se péche a partir des derniers jours du mois 
. de mai jusqu’ ἃ la fin du mois de juin” (Apost. p. 14), Athen. 
326 a; ΑΕ]. xiii. 27; Hesych. s. σισόρβακος, 5. σκίθακος, 
8. σκίθαρκος: Galen, De aliment. fac. iii. 31 ; cf. σαῦροι H. i. 
106 n. 4 Vicia ervilia. 

7 7.e., myrrh, the resinous exudation of Balsamodendron 
myrrha. ““ δάκρυ᾽" is the regular expression in Greek for 


378 


HALIEUTICA, III. 385-405 


for others, they find destruction for themselves. 
As when some hunter on the hills prepares a trap 
in the woods for a wild beast and with hard heart 
ties up a dog,* fastening him by a cord about his 
private parts ; the loud howling of the dog in pain 
travels afar and the wood resounds about him; the 
Leopard hears and is glad and hastes to track the 
ery ; swiftly she arrives and leaps upon the dog ; 
then a hidden device snatches the dog aloft, while 
the Leopard rolls headlong in the pit, and has no 
more thought of feasting but of flight ; but for it 
there is no escape prepared: even such is the fate 
of the hapless Admon and in place of food they rush 
upon their fate and the unescapable net of Hades. 
In like fashion for the Shad ὃ also and the Pilchard ὃ 
one devises capture in the autumn and so one takes 
the Larinus ¢ and the tribes of the Trachurus.? The 
fisherman weaves compactly a weel of broom and 
therein puts a cake of parched vetches, ὁ moistened 
with fragrant wine, and mixes therewith the tear / 
of the Assyrian daughter of Theias’: who, they 
say, did a deed of ill contrivance for love of her 
father and came into his bed, through the anger of 
such exudation : Herod. ii. 96 τὸ δὲ δάκρυον κόμμι ἐστίν. Cf. 
A. 553 b 28; 623 b 29; Meteor. 388 b 19 τὸ ἤλεκτρον καὶ 
ὅσα λέγεται ws δάκρυα. . . οἷον σμύρνα, λιβανωτός, κόμμι ; 
Theophrast. H. P. ix. 1. 2 ὁ λίβανος καὶ ἡ σμύρνα, δάκρνα καὶ 


ταῦτα. 

9 Apollodor. iii. 14. 4 Θείαντος βασιλέως᾽ Ἀσσυρίων, ὃς ἔσχε 
θυγατέρα Σμύρναν. αὕτη κατὰ μῆνιν ᾿Αφροδίτης . .. ἴσχει τοῦ 
πατρὸς ἔρωτα καὶ ἀγνοοῦντι τῷ πατρὶ. . . συνευνάσθη. ὁ δὲ ὡς 
ἤσθετο, σπασάμενος ξίφος ἐδίωκεν αὐτήν" ἡ δὲ περικαταλαμβανομένη 
θεοῖς εὔξατο ἀφανὴς γενέσθαι. Geol δὲ κατοικτείραντες αὐτὴν εἰς 
δένδρον μετήλλαξαν, ὃ καλοῦσι σμύρναν. In some versions the 
father is called Cinyras, the daughter Myrrha: Ov. WM. x. 
298 ff. She became mother of Adonis: Lycophr. 829 Μύρρας 
ἐρυμνὸν ἄστυ, τῆς μογοστόκους | ὠδῖνας ἐξέλυσε δενδρώδης κλάδος. 

879 


OPPIAN 


> f? 
ἀλλ᾽ ὅτε μιν καὶ δένδρον ἐπώνυμον ἐρρίζωσεν 
a + 
αἶσα θεῶν, yoder τε Kal ἣν ὀλοφύρεται ἄτην, 
“δι > , 
δάκρυσι δευομένη λέκτρου χάριν: ἧς ἐνιμίσγων 
θεῖον ὁπὸν κύρτον μὲν ἐνορμίζει ῥοθίοισιν, 
᾽ \ 3 ἊΣ , ἃ SE λ ΄ 
ὀδμὴ δ᾽ αἶψα θάλασσαν ἐπέδραμε λειριόεσσα, 
3 > / 
κικλήσκουσ᾽ ἀγέλας πολυειδέας" οἱ δ᾽ ἐφέπονται 
A > , 
πνουῇ νηδυμίῃ δεδονημένοι, ὦκα δὲ KUpTOS 
“- ” > Ly 
πίμπλαται, ἀγρευτῆρι φέρων εὔθηρον ἀμοιβήν. 
Σάλπαι δ᾽ ἰκμαλέοις μὲν ἀεὶ φύκεσσι μάλιστα. 
τέρπονται, κείνῃ δὲ καὶ ἀγρώσσονται ἐδωδῇ. 
πλώει μὲν προτέροισιν ἐν ἤμασιν εἰς ἕνα. χῶρον 
ἀσπαλιεύς, αἰεὶ δὲ μετ᾽ οἴδμασι λᾶας ἵησι 
/ ς / / vA λ θό 
χερμάδας, ἁψάμενος πέρι φύκια τηλεθόωντα. 
ἀλλ᾽ ὅτε δὴ πέμπτη μὲν ἴδῃ πόνον ἠριγένεια 
σάλπαι δ᾽ ἀγρόμεναι κεῖνον πόρον ἀμφινέμωνται, 
᾿ τῆμος ἐπεντύνει κύρτου δόλον" ἐν δέ οἱ εἴσω 
"A ? / “" ft > \ \ ᾿ 
φύκεσιν εἰλομένους λᾶας βάλεν, ἀμφὶ δὲ ποίας 
εἰναλίας στομίοισιν ἐδήσατο, τῇσι γάνυνται 
/ > 0.» Ψ / > ΄ Ν 
σάλπαι τ᾽ ἠδ᾽ ὅσσοι βοτανηφάγοι ἰχθύες ἄλλοι: 
ol τότ᾽ ἀγειρόμενοι ποίας φάγον, αὐτὰρ ἔπειτα 
ἐς μυχὸν ἠΐχθησαν: ὁ δ᾽ αὐτίκα κύρτον ἀνέλκει 
ῥίμφα μεταπλώσας- σιγῇ δέ οἱ ἄνυται ἔργον, 
ἀνδράσι τ᾽ ἀφθόγγοισι καὶ ἀσμαράγοις ἐλάτῃσι: 
σιγὴ γὰρ πάσαις μὲν ὀφέλσιμος ἔπλετο θήραις, 


* Box salpa (Gen. Box, Fam. Sparidae), M.G. σάλπα: 
Apost. p. 17; Plin. ix. 68. 

DA. 591 ἃ 15 ἡ δὲ σάλπη (τρέφεται) τῇ κόπρῳ καὶ φυκίοις" 
βόσκεται δὲ καὶ τὸ πράσιον, θηρεύεται δὲ καὶ κολοκύνθῃ [gourd, 


Cucurbita maxima]. μόνη τῶν ἰχθύων; 534 a 15 ena yap 


δελεάζεται τοῖς δυσώδεσιν, ὥσπερ ἡ σάλπη TH κόπρῳ. 
° A. 533 Ὁ 15 ἔτι δὲ ἐν ταῖς θήραις τῶν ἰχθύων ὅτι μάλιστα 
εὐλαβοῦνται ψόφον ποιεῖν ἢ κώπης ἢ δικτύων οἱ περὶ τὴν θήραν 


ταύτην ὄντες, ἀλλ᾽ ὅταν κατανοήσωσιν ἄν τινι τόπῳ πολλοὺς 


380 


410 


415 


420 


425 


HALIEUTICA, III. 406-429 


Aphrodite ; but since the doom of the gods rooted 
her and the tree that bears her name, she wails and 
mourns her woeful fate, wetted with tears for the 
sake of her bed: her holy sap the fisher mingles 
with the rest and*moors his weel in the waves; and 
swiftly the lily fragrance runs over the sea and 
summons the herds of various kind ; and the fishes 
moved by the sweet breath obey the call and speedily 
the weel is filled, bringing to the fisherman a re- 
compense of goodly spoil. 
The Saupes* always delight above all things in 
moist seaweed ὃ and by that bait also they are taken. 
On previous days the fisherman sails to one place 
and always casts in the waves stones of a handy 
size, to which he has fastened fresh seaweed. But 
when the fifth morn sees his toil and the gathered 
Saupes feed about that place, then he arrays his 
crafty weel. Within it he casts stones wrapped in 
seaweed and about the mouth he binds such grasses 
of the sea as Saupes and other plant-eating fishes 
delight in. Then the fishes gather and eat the 
grasses and thereafter speed inside the weel. 
Straightway the fisher sails swiftly to the spot and 
pulls up the weel. His work is done silently, the 
men not speaking and the oars hushed. For silence ¢ 
is profitable in all fishing but above all ὦ in the case 


ἀθρόους ὄντας, ἐκ τοσούτου τόπου τεκμαιρόμενοι καθιᾶσι τὰ δίκτυα, 
ὅπως μήτε κώπης μήτε τῆς ῥύμης τῆς ἁλιάδος ἀφίκηται πρὸς τὸν 
τόπον ἐκεῖνον ὁ ψόφος" παραγγέλλουσί τε πᾶσι τοῖς ναύταις ὅτι 
μάλιστα σιγῇ πλεῖν, μέχρι περ ἂν συγκυκλώσωνται. 

4 The acuteness of hearing of the Saupe is mentioned 
A. 534.4 8 μάλιστα δ᾽ εἰσὶ τῶν ἰχθύων ὀξυήκοοι κεστρεύς, χρέμψ, 
λάβραξ, σάλπη, χρόμις. Cf. Ael. ix.7; Plin. x. 198 produntur 
etiam clarissime audire mugil, lupus, salpa, chromis, et ideo 
in vado vivere. 


381 


OPPIAN 


\ / inl Δ 
ἔξοχα δ᾽ ἐν σάλπῃσιν: ἐπεὶ μάλα Thou νόημα 430 
‘4 » 
πτοιαλέον: πτοίη δὲ πόνον δύσθηρον ἔθηκε. 
/ > a / / > ~ 
TptyAns ὃ οὔτινα, φημί, χερειοτέρῃσιν ἐδωδαῖς 
τέρπεσθαι' πᾶσαν yap dow ἁλός, ἥν κε κίχῃσι, 
φέρβεται- ἱμείρει δὲ δυσαέος ἔξοχα δαιτός" 
σώμασι δ᾽ ἐκπάγλως ἐπιτέρπεται ἀνδρομέοισι 435 
πυθομένοις, εὖτ᾽ ἂν τιν᾽ ἕλῃ στονόεσσα θάλασσα. 
τῷ καί pw δελέασσιν ἀποπνείουσιν ἀϊτμὴν | 
πὸ ἘΞ / Ὁ“ a / > θ \ wa 
ῥηϊδίως ἕλκουσιν, ὅσα πνέει ἐχθρὸν ἄημα. 
“ / 
εἴκελα δὲ TpiyAnow veoot τε, φημί, τετύχθαι 
ἤθεα, φυρομένοισιν ἀεὶ περὶ γαστέρος ὁρμήν" 440 
ἄμφω δ᾽ αἱ μὲν ἔασι διάκριτοι ἐν νεπόδεσσιν, 
οἱ δ᾽ ἐνὶ χερσαίῃσιν ἀριστεύουσ᾽ ἀγέλῃσιν. 
Οὐ μὲν δὴ μελάνουρον ἀποίσεαι οὔτ᾽ ἐνὶ κύρτῳ 
ῥηϊδίως ἀπαφῶν οὔτ᾽ ἐν λινοεργέϊ κύκλῳ" 
wv δ. ΄, > > ΄ 9 A ” 
ἔξοχα yap μελάνουρος εν ἰχθύσιν μεν ἄναλκις 445 
3, \ / / ,ὔ ε ᾽, > 2 \ 
ἠδὲ σαοφρονέων, λίχνη δέ οἱ οὔποτ᾽ ἐδωδὴ 
θυμήρης" αἰεὶ δὲ γαληναίης μὲν ἐούσης 
/ > / \ 3 3 f Ψ 
κέκλιται ἐν ψαμάθοισι καὶ οὐκ ἀναδύεται ἅλμης" 
> 
ἀλλ᾽ ὅτε κυμαίνουσα περισπέρχῃσι θάλασσα 
> / ~ { 
λάβρων ἐξ ἀνέμων, τότε δὴ μοῦνοι μελάνουροι 450. 
κῦμα διαΐσσουσιν ἀολλέες, οὔτε τιν᾽ ἀνδρῶν 
οὔτε τιν᾽ εἰναλίων πεφρικότες" of μὲν ἅπαντες 
> ~ 
ἐς νεάτην κρηπῖδα φόβῳ δύνουσι θαλάσσης, 
¢€ δὲ Lee 2.., λ λ / > / | 
οἱ de ToT ἠϊόνας τε πολυφλοίσβους ἐφέπουσι 
,ὔ > 
πέτραις τ᾽ ἐμπελάουσιν ἀλήμονες, εἴ τιν᾽ ἐδητὺν 455 | 
κοπτομένη δείξειεν ὑπὸ ῥιπῇῆσι θάλασσα: 
᾽7ὔ 
νήπιοι, οὐδ᾽ ἐδάησαν ὅσον πινυτώτεροι ἄνδρες, 
, 
οἱ κείνους καὶ πάμπαν ἀλευομένους ἕλον ἄγρῃ. 
t. 


aC. it, 392 ὯΝ 

» 591 a 12 αἱ δὲ τρίγλαι καὶ φυκίοις τρέφονται καὶ ὀστρέοις καὶ 
βορβόρῳ καὶ σαρκοφαγοῦσιν. 
382 


we 


HALIEUTICA, III. 430-458 


of the Saupes; since their wits are easily scared 
and a seare renders vain the labour of the fisher. 

No fish, I declare, delights in meaner bait than 
doth the Red Mullet’; for it feeds on all the silt ὃ 
of the sea that itrcan find and it loves especially 
evil-smelling food. It delights exceedingly in the 
rotting bodies of men, when the dolorous sea makes 
any man its prey. Wherefore fishers easily take 
them with smelly baits which have a hateful breath. 
Red Mullets and Swine,¢ I declare, have like habits, 
wallowing always in filth for the desire of the belly : 
and the Red Mullets have the same distinction 
among the finny tribes as Swine have among the 
herds of the land. 

The Melanurus ὦ thou shalt not easily beguile and 
carry away either with weel or with the encircling 
net. For the Melanurus among all fishes is eminent 
at once for cowardice and for prudence, and gluttonous 
bait ὁ is never pleasing to it. Always when the sea 
is calm it lies in the sands and rises not from the 
brine. -But when under stress of violent winds the 
sea rages and billows, then do the Melanurus alone 
speed over the sea together, fearing not any man 
nor any creature of the sea. While all the rest for 
fear dive to the nether foundations of the sea, the 
Melanurus haunt the sounding shores or draw to the 
rocks as they roam in search of any food that the 
wind-beaten sea may show them. Foolish fishes ! 
which know not how much more cunning are men, 
who take them captive despite all their endeavour 


¢ A. 595 a 18 εὐχερέστατον πρὸς πᾶσαν τροφὴν τῶν ζῴων ἐστίν 
(ἡ 85). 
4 (ἡ ii. 391 π. Oppian’s account of the habits of the 
Melanurus is paraphrased by Ael. i. 41. 
@ A. 591 a 15 μελάνουρος φυκίοις (τρέφεται). 
383 


OPPIAN 


ἢ A “ », oA , 
χειμερίη πλημμυρὶς ὅταν Cén ᾿Αμφιτρίτης, 
3 ς , / 
ἵστατ᾽ ἐπὶ mpovyovoay ἀνὴρ ἁλιηγέα πέτρην, 460 
~ / 
ὀξύτατον τόθι κῦμα περὶ σπιλάδεσσι μέμυκεν" 
εἴδατα δ᾽ ἀγνυμένοισιν ἐπισπείρει ῥοθίοισι, 

A ς 2: 255 \ 
τυρὸν ὁμοῦ Δήμητρι μεμιγμένον" ot δ᾽ ἐπὶ φορβὴν 
ἀσπασίην θρώσκουσιν ἐπειγόμενοι μελάνουροι. 

3 3 a a / 3 λλέ 3 mr + 
ἀλλ᾽ ὅτε οἱ παρέασιν ἀολλέες ἐς βόλον dypns, 468 
> A \ / λ \ δέ 32, ς 50 
αὐτὸς μὲν τρέπεται λοξὸν δέμας, ὄφρα οἱ ὕδωρ 
μήτι κατασκιάοιτο καὶ ἰχθύσι τάρβος ἐνείη" 
» Ν᾿ € A 
ἔστι δέ οἱ λεπτός τε Sovak μετὰ χερσὶν ἑτοῖμος ὁ 
λεπτή θ᾽ ὁρμιὴ κούφης τριχός, ἄπλοκος αὔτως" 
επτοῖς δ᾽ ἀγκίστροισιν ἀναπλέκεται θαμέεσσι' 470 
τοῖς ἐπέθηκε δέλετρον, ὃ καὶ πάρος ἧκε καθ᾽ ὕδωρ, 
πέμπει δ᾽ ἐς βαθὺ κῦμα κυκώμενον- οἱ δ᾽ ὁρόωντες 
αὐτίκ᾽ ἐπιθρώσκουσι καὶ ἁρπάζουσιν ὄλεθρον. 
0.᾽ ε \ a Ψ / A > 3 / 
οὐδ᾽ ἁλιεὺς εὔκηλον ἔχει χέρα, πυκνὰ δ᾽ ἀνέλκει 
ἐκ δίνης ἄγκιστρα, καὶ εἰ κενὰ πολλάκις εἴη" 41 
οὐ γὰρ βρασσομένης κεν ἐπιφράσσαιτο θαλάσσης 
ἀτρεκέως, εἴτ᾽ οὖν τις ἐνίσχεται εἴτε μιν αὔτως 
κύματ᾽ ἀνακλονέουσιν: ἐπὴν δέ τις ἀμφιχάνῃσι, 
« 3 , » / 3 Ν 7 
ῥίμφα μιν ἐξείρυσσε πάρος δόλον ἐν φρεσὶ θέσθαι, 
πρὶν φόβον οὐτιδανοῖσιν ἐνιπλῆξαι μελανούροις. 480 
τοίην χειμερίην πανεπίκλοπον ἤνυσεν ἄγρην. 


* Hom. Il. xv. 406 ὡς ὅτε τις φὼς | πέτρῃ ἐπὶ προβλῆτι καθήμενος 
ἱερὸν ἰχθὺν | ἐκ πόντοιο θύραζε λίνῳ καὶ ἤνοπι χαλκῷ (se. ἕλκει). 

> The mode of capture here described seems to be identical 
with the modern method as described by Apost. p. 49: 
‘* Pendant l’été on péche, dans les Sporades, les oblades 
[M.G. μελανούρια] et les daurades avec des bouchons de liége 
(φελλάρια). L’appareil est ainsi disposé : on pierce le liége et 
on fait passer une racine anglaise [sheep-gut] a l’un des bouts, 
On attache un hamecon, ἃ l’autre bout un morceau de bois 
pour empécher la racine de sortir. On retire la racine et 
quand le hame¢on vient toucher le li¢ge, on le couvre de pate 


384 


HALIEUTICA, III. 459-481 


to escape. When the sea boils with stormy flood, 
a man stands upon a jutting sea-beaten cliff,“ where 
the wave bellows loudly on the rocks, and scatters 
dainties ὃ in the breaking waves, even cheese mixed 
with flour’; and,the Melanurus rush eagerly upon 
the welcome food. But when they are gathered 
together within range of his cast, he himself turns 
his body aside, that he may not cast his shadow on 
the water, and the fish be frightened. In his hands 
he holds ready a thin rod and a thin line of light 
hair all untwined, whereon are strung numerous light 
hooks. On these he puts the same bait as before 
he cast in the water, and lets it down into the deep 
turmoil of the waves. Seeing it the Melanurus 
immediately rush upon it and snatch—their own 
destruction. Nor does the fisher hold his hand at 
rest, but ever and again draws up his hooks from the 
eddying waters, even if they be often empty. For 
in the seething sea he cannot mark for certain 
whether a fish is hooked or whether it is but the 
waves that shake the line. But when a fish swallows 
the hook, swiftly he pulls him forth, ere he thinks 
of guile, ere he cause fright to the feeble Melanurus. 
In such wise he accomplishes his treacherous fishing 
in stormy weather. 
de farine mélée de fromage [cf. τῦρον ὁμοῦ Δήμητρι μεμιγμένον 
463] et on laisse le liege, amorcé, libre dans la mer. Les 
poissons en venant manger l’appat avalent aussi l’hamecon. 
Lorsqu‘ils se déplacent ils entrainent avec eux le liége, ce 
qu’avertit le pécheur qui vient les ramasser. Cette péche 
est excessivement amusante. Quand on emploie une grande 
quantité de li¢ges et que le poisson mord, c’est un perpétuel 
va-et-vient pour décrocher les poissons qui s’y sont pris et 
amorcer de nouveau les engins.” 

© Δήμητρι: for the metonymy for bread or flour cf. 
C. i. 434 n. and 484 below. 

2c 385 


OPPIAN 


a 3.2 
Nat μὴν καὶ κεστρῆα, καὶ οὐ λίχνον περ ἐόντα, 
ἤπαφον, ἀγκίστροισι περὶ στεινοῖσιν ἕσαντες 
“ > \ / 
εἶδαρ ὁμοῦ Δήμητρι μεμιγμένον ἠδὲ γάλακτος 
a , 
πηκτοῖσι δώροισιν: ἐφυρήσαντο δὲ ποίην 485 
a “- A 
τοῖσιν ὁμοῦ μίνθην εὐώδεα, τήν ποτε κούρην 
φασὶν ὑπουδαίην ἔμεναι, Κωκυτίδα Νύμφην' 
κλίνατο δ᾽ εἰς εὐνὴν ᾿Αἰδωνέος- ἀλλ᾽ ὅτε κούρην 
/ ν > 3 » t fy 
Περσεφόνην ἥρπαξεν ἀπ᾽ Αἰτναίοιο πάγοιο, | 
δὴ τότε μιν κλάζουσαν ὑπερφιάλοις ἐπέεσσι, 490 
7 ,ὔ 3 Af. ,ὔ 
ζήλῳ μαργαίνουσαν ἀτάσθαλα, μηνίσασα 
Δημήτηρ ἀμάθυνεν ἐπεμβαίνουσα πεδίλοις" 
a \ 3 / \ \ fs > , 
φῆ γὰρ ἀγαυοτέρη τε φυὴν καὶ κάλλος ἀμείνων | 


Π ’, » 7 ὃ 3 δέ 3 \ 
ερσεφόνης ἔμεναι κυανώπιδος, ἐς δέ μιν αὐτὴν | 

Yd oe 
εὔξατο νοστήσειν ᾿Αἰδωνέα, τὴν δὲ μελάθρων 406 
> 7 , ες ? \ / / + 
ἐξελάσειν" τοίη οἱ ἐπὶ γλώσσης Odpev ἄτη. 

ia > 3 A \ > / Ψ ,ὔ 
ποίη δ᾽ οὐτιδανὴ καὶ ἐπώνυμος ἔκθορε γαίης, 

\ > / I 2.5 5 ,ὔ / 
τὴν ἐνιφυρήσαντες ἐπ᾽ ἀγκίστροισι βάλοντο. 

Χ > > \ / κυ ee 

κεστρεὺς δ᾽ οὐ μετὰ δηρόν, ἐπεί pa μιν ἷξεν ἀὑτμή, 
> , A \ | 
ἀντιάσας πρῶτον μὲν ἀποσταδὸν ἀγκίστροιο 500 | 


λοξὸν ὑπ᾽ ὀφθαλμοῖς ὁράᾳ δόλον, εἴκελος ἀνδρὶ 


“Η. ii. 642 n. | 

>» H. ii. 643 n. On the other hand A. 591 b 1 λαίμαργος δὲ ' 
μάλιστα τῶν ἰχθύων ὁ κεστρεύς ἐστι καὶ ἄπληστος, where, however . 
the word κεστρεύς is suspect. ἶ 

° i.e, cheese, as in v. 468, Speaking of fishing for, 
amongst others, Grey Mullets (κεφαλόπουλα), Apost. p. 43 
386 


HALIEUTICA, ITI. 482-501 


Yea, and the Grey Mullet,? albeit he is no glutton,® 
they yet deceive by clothing narrow hooks with bait 
mixed with flour and gifts of curdled milk.¢ There- 
with they knead also the sweet-smelling herb of 
mint. Mint, men say, was once a maid? beneath 
the earth, a Nymph of Cocytus, and she lay in the 
bed of Aidoneus ; but when he raped the maid 
Persephone from the Aetnaean hill, then she com- 
plained loudly with overweening words and raved 
foolishly for jealousy, and Demeter in anger trampled 
upon her with her feet and destroyed her. For she 
had said that she was nobler of form and more 
excellent in beauty than dark-eyed Persephone and 
she boasted that Aidoneus would return to her and 
banish the other from his halls: such infatuation 
leapt upon her tongue. And from the earth sprang 
the weak herb that bears her name. Mint, then, 
the fishers mingle with the bait which they put 
upon their hooks. And in no long time the Grey 
Mullet, when the odour reaches him, first approaches 
the hook distantly and regards with eyes askance 
the snare ; like to a stranger who, chancing upon 


says: “ΟΠ amorce aussi simplement avec de la pate de 
pain mélée avec du fromage pour lui donner un peu 
d’odeur.” Cf. A. 591 a 18 ὁ δὲ κέφαλος καὶ ὁ κεστρεὺς ὅλως 
μόνοι οὐ σαρκοφαγοῦσιν᾽ σημεῖον δέ, οὔτε γὰρ ἐν τῇ κοιλίᾳ πώποτ᾽ 
ἔχοντες εἰλημμένοι εἰσὶ τοιοῦτον οὐδέν, οὔτε δελέατι χρῶνται πρὸς 
αὐτοὺς ζῴων σαρξὶν ἀλλὰ μάζῃ. 

4 Strabo 344 πρὸς ἕω δ᾽ ἐστιν ὄρος τοῦ Πύλου πλησίον ἐπώνυμον 
Μίνθης, ἣν μυθεύουσι παλλακὴν τοῦ Αἵδου γενομένην πατηθεῖσαν 
ὑπὸ τῆς Κόρης εἰς τὴν κηπαίαν μίνθην μεταβαλεῖν, ἥν τινες ἡδύοσμον 
[Mentha viridis, spearmint, Theophrast. H.P. vii. 7. 1] 
καλοῦσι ; schol. Nicandr. Alex. 375 Μίνθη Aidov παλλακὴ οὕτω 
καλουμένη, ἣν διεσπάραξεν ἡ Περσεφόνη. ἐφ᾽ ἢ τὴν ὁμώνυμον πόαν 
ἀνέδωκεν ὁ Αἵδης ; Ov. M. x. 728 an tibi quondam | Femineos 
artus in olentes vertere menthas, | Persephone, licuit ? 


387 


OPPIAN 


he 
ξείνῳ, ὃς ἐν τριόδοισι πολυτρίπτοισι κυρήσας 
» 3 / fA / ¢€ BA i 
ἔστη ἐφορμαίνων, κραδίη τέ οἱ ἄλλοτε λαιήν, 
» \ >? 4 > A > ~ 
ἄλλοτε δεξιτερὴν ἐπιβάλλεται ἀτραπὸν ἐλθεῖν" 
παπταίνει δ᾽ ἑκάτερθε, νόος δέ of ἠΐτε κῦμα 
Gwar , 3: σόν PeN Ν δῶ A 
εἱλεῖται, μάλα δ᾽ ὀψὲ μιῆς ὠρέξατο βουλῆς: 
ὡς ἄρα καὶ κεστρῆϊ παναίολα μερμηρίζει 
\ 3... v4 / \ > / ᾽, 
θυμὸς ὀϊομένῳ τε δόλον καὶ ἀπήμονα φορβήν 
ὀψὲ δέ μιν νόος ὦρσε καὶ ἤγαγεν ἐγγύθι πότμου" 
2 2S: \ /, > , , 2: 3) 
αὐτίκα δὲ τρέσσας ἀνεχάσσατο: πολλάκι ὃ ἤδη 
e / , x oe » ε ve 
εἷλε φόβος ψαύοντα καὶ ἔμπαλιν ἔτραπεν ὁρμήν. 
ὡς δ᾽ ὅτε νηπίαχος κούρη πάϊς, ἐκτὸς ἐούσης 
/ a’ / / 2 + 
μητέρος, ἢ βρώμης λελιημένη ἠέ rev ἄλλου, 
αὔσαι μὲν τρομέει μητρὸς χόλον, οὐδ᾽ ἀναδῦναι 
>? / / > / WY / 
ἐλδομένη τέτληκεν: ἐφερπύζουσα δὲ λάθρῃ 
ον € fe , i ee? (2 
αὕτις ὑποτρέπεται, κραδίῃ δέ οἱ ἄλλοτε θάρσος, 
+ > > / A / » 3 ON 
ἄλλοτε δ᾽ ἐμπίπτει δεινὸς φόβος" ὄμματα δ᾽ αἰὲν 
ὀξέα παπταίνοντα ποτὶ προθύροισι τέτανται" 
ἃ La? 3 / > 7ὔ ᾿ > ΄ 
ὡς τότ᾽ ἐπεμβαίνων ἀνελίσσεται ἤπιος ἰχθύς. 


505 


510 


515 


ἀλλ᾽ ὅτε θαρσήσας πελάσῃ σχεδόν, οὐ μάλ᾽ ἑτοίμως 520 


~ “ a \ 7 ,, 

ψαῦσε βορῆς, οὐρῇ δὲ πάρος μάστιξεν ἐγείρων 
/ 7 \ 5 3 .- 
ἄγκιστρον, μή πού τις ἐνὶ χροὶ θέρμετ᾽ ἀὐτμή: 
“ \ A 5 
wov yap κεστρεῦσιν ἀπώμοτόν ἐστι πάσασθαι. 
Y > 

ἔνθεν ἔπειτ᾽ ἄκροισι διακνίζει στομάτεσσι 

aA ἐᾷ \ a 
daira περιξύων: ἁλιεὺς δέ μιν αὐτίκα χαλκῷ 

a ‘4 4 
πεῖρεν ἀνακρούων, ὥστε θρασὺν ἵππον ἐέργων 
ς a , lon 
ἡνίοχος σκληρῇσιν dvayKainor χαλινοῦ, 
ἂν δ᾽ ἔρυσε, σπαίροντα δ᾽ ἐπὶ χθονὶ κάββαλεν ἐχθρῇ 

eee ρ x sess 07) 

* Οἷς. De div. i. 54, 123 Idem etiam Socrates cum apud 
Delium male pugnatum esset, Lachete praetore, fugeretque 
cum ipso Lachete, ut ventum est in trivium, eadem qua 
ceteri fugere noluit. Quibus quaerentibus cur non eadem 


via pergeret, deterreri se a deo dixit. Tum quidem ii qui 
alia via fugerant, in hostium equitatum inciderunt ; Theogn. 


388 


525 


HALIEUTICA, III. 502-528 


much trodden cross-ways,? stands pondering, and at 
one moment his heart is set on going by the left 
road, at another by the right, and he looks on this 
side and on that and his mind. fluctuates like the 
wave and only at long last he reaches a single 
purpose ; even so also the spirit of the Grey Mullet 
ponders variously, now thinking of a snare and now 
of harmless food. At last his mind impels him and 
brings him nigh his doom. And immediately he 
starts back in fear and many times as he touches it, 
terror seizes him and checks his impulse. As when 
a little maiden girl, when her mother is abroad, is 
faint for some eatable or whatever it may be; and 
to touch it she is afraid for the anger of her mother, 
yet, unwilling to withdraw, she dares the deed: 
stealthily she creeps to it and again turns away ; 
now courage, now fear enters her heart ; and always 
her keen eyes are strained watchfully upon the door : 
even so then the gentle fish approaches and retires. 
But when he takes heart and draws nigh, not readily 
does he touch the bait but first lashes with his tail and 
stirs the hook to see whether haply there is any warm 
breath in its body ; for to eat of aught living is for the 
Grey Mullet a thing forsworn. Then he nibbles and 
plucks at the bait with the tip of his mouth; and 
straightway the fisher strikes and pierces him with 
the bronze, even as a charioteer constrains a gallant 
horse by the stern compulsion of the bit, and pulls him 
up and casts him struggling on the loathed earth. 
911 ἐν τριόδῳ δ᾽ ἕστηκα᾽ δύ᾽ εἰσὶ τὸ πρόσθεν ὁδοί μοι" | φροντίζω 
τούτων ἥντιν᾽ ἴω προτέρην : Pind. 'P. x. 38 ἢ ῥ᾽, ὦ φίλοι, κατ᾽ 
ἀμευσίπορον τρίοδον ἐδινήθην, | ὀρθὰν ὁδὸν ἰὼν τὸ πρίν ; Plato, 
Laws, 799 © στὰς δ᾽ ἄν, καθάπερ ἐν τριόδῳ γενόμενος καὶ μὴ 
σφόδρα κατειδὼς ὁδόν, εἴτε μόνος εἴτε μετ’ ἄλλων τύχοι πορευόμενος, 
ἀνέροιτ᾽ ἂν αὑτὸν καὶ τοὺς ἄλλους τὸ ἀπορούμενον. 


389 


OPPIAN 


Καὶ ξιφίην ὀλοοῖσι παρήπαφον ἀγκίστροισιν. 
ἀλλ᾽ οὐ μὲν ξιφίῃ τοῖος μόρος, οὐδ᾽ ἴσος ἄλλοις" 530 
οὐ γὰρ ἐπ᾽ ἀγκίστροισι κατεντύνουσιν ἐδωδήν, 
ἀλλὰ τὸ μὲν γυμνόν τε καὶ ἄκλοπον ἠώρηται, 
μηρίνθου διπλῇσιν ἀκαχμένου ἔμπαλιν αἰχμαῖς" 
τοῦ δ᾽ ὅσσον τριπάλαιστον ἀναψάμενοι καθύπερθε 
μαλθακὸν ἀργεννῶν νεπόδων ἕνα χείλεος ἄκρου δ8ῦ 
δῆσαν ἐπισταμένως: ξιφίης δ᾽ ὅτε θοῦρος ἵκηται, 
αὐτίκα δαιτρεύει δέμας ἰχθύος ἄορι λάβρῳ: 
τοῦ δὲ δαϊζομένοιο καταρρέει ἅψεα δεσμοῦ, 
αὐταῖς δ᾽ ἀγκίστροιο περιστρέφεται γενύεσσιν" 
αὐτὰρ ὅ γ᾽ οὐκ ἐδάη γναμπτὸν δόλον, ἀλλὰ βαρεῖαν 540 
δαῖτα χανὼν ἀγρευτὸς. ἀνέλκεται ἀνέρος ἀλκῇ. 
Πολλὰ δ᾽ ἐπὶ ξιφίῃ θηρήτορες ὁπλίζονται, 
ἔξοχα δ᾽ οἱ Τυρσηνὸν ἁλὸς πόρον ἀγρώσσουσιν 
ἀμφί τε Μασσαλίην, ἱερὴν πόλιν, ἀμφί τε Κελτούς: 
κεῖθι γὰρ ἔκπαγλοί τε καὶ ἰχθύσιν οὐδὲν ὁμοῖοι 545 


4 H. ii. 462 n, 

ὃ The Mare Tyrrhenum, bounded on Εἰ. by Italy, 8. by 
Sicily, W. by Sardinia and Corsica, N. by Gaul. Dion. 
P, 83 Τυρσηνίδος ofdua θαλάσσης; Strabo 55 Τυρρηνικοῦ 
πελάγους ; Plin. 111. 7ὅ ab eo (sc. mari Ligustico) ad Siciliam 
insulam Tuscum, quod ex Graecis alii Notium alii Tyrrenum, 
e nostris plurimi inferum vocant. 

¢ Marseilles, 27 miles E. of the mouth of the Rhone, 
founded about 600 5.6. by colonists from Phocaea (cf. v. 626 
below) in Asia Minor: Strabo 179; Plin. iii. 84. The 
epithet ‘‘holy ” is taken by the schol. as a mere colourless 
epithet (lepqv* μεγάλην), but we rather imagine it to refer to 
the position of Massalia (Massilia) as the great outpost of 
Hellenic culture in the West. Under the Empire especially 
it was, as it were, a great University town: Strabo 181 
πάντες γὰρ οἱ χαρίεντες πρὸς τὸ λέγειν τρέπονται καὶ φιλοσοφεῖν, 
ὥσθ᾽ ἡ πόλις μικρὸν μὲν πρότερον τοῖς βαρβάροις ἀνεῖτο παιδευτήριον 
καὶ φιλέλληνας κατεσκεύαζε τοὺς Γαλάτας ὥστε καὶ τὰ συμβόλαια 


390 


HALIEUTICA, III. 529-545 


The Swordfish 7 also men deceive by deadly hooks. 
But the doom of the Swordfish is not such as that 
of the Grey Mullet nor like that of other fishes. 
For the fishermen do not put bait upon their hooks, 
but the hook hangs from the line naked and without 
deceit, furnished with two recurved barbs, while 
some three palms above it they tie a soft white 
fish, fastening it skilfully by the tip of its mouth. 
When the furious Swordfish comes, straightway he 
rends the body of the fish with his fierce sword, and 
as the fish is rent, its members slip down from the 
fastening and are entangled right about the barbs 
of the hook. But the fish perceives not the crooked 
guile but swallows the grievous bait and is caught 
and hauled up by the might of the man. 

Many are the devices which fishers contrive 
against the Swordfish, and those above all who fish 
the Tyrrhenian ὃ tract of sea and about the holy city 
of Massalia¢ and in the region of the Celts.¢ For 
there, wondrous and not at all like fishes, range 


ἑλληνιστὶ γράφειν, ἐν δὲ τῷ παρόντι [Strabo’s date is c. 63 B.c.- 
23 a.v.] Kal τοὺς γνωριμωτάτους Ῥωμαίων πέπεικεν ἀντὶ τῆς els 
᾿Αθήνας ἀποδημίας ἐκεῖσε φοιτᾶν φιλομαθεῖς ; Tacitus, Agr. 4 
statim parvulus sedem ac magistram studiorum Massiliam 
habuit, locum Graeca comitate et provinciali parsimonia 
mixtum et bene compositum ; id. Ann. iv. 44 (L. Antonium) 
seposuit Augustus in civitatem Massiliensem, ubi specie 
studiorum nomen exilii tegeretur. This on the whole seems 
more likely than that the reference is to the foundation of 
Massalia under the direct guidance of ἴλρτεμις ’Epeola (Diana 
of the Ephesians) whose temple was a conspicuous feature 
of the city (Strabo 179). Cf. Ammian. Marc. xv. 9. 7. 

4 4.¢., the Gauls of Gallia Narbonensis, in which Massalia 
was situated. The reference is to the Mare Gallicum: Plin. 
iii. 74 τὸ Γαλατικὸν καλούμενον (rédayos); A. De mundo 
393 a 27. Cf. Dion. P. 74 Γαλάτης ῥόος, ἔνθα τε γαῖα | 
Μασσαλίη τετάνυσται, ἐπίστροφον ὅρμον ἔχουσα. 


391 


OPPIAN 


” / 7, 3 / 
ἄπλατοι ξιφίαι μεγακήτεες ἐννεμέθονται. 
a oe / 
ot δ᾽ ἀκάτους αὐτοῖσιν ἐϊσκομένας ξιφίῃσι 
A 
καὶ δέμας ἰχθυόεν καὶ φάσγανα τεκτήναντες 
7, 
ἀντίον ἰθύνουσι: ὁ δ᾽ οὐκ ἀναδύεται ἄγρην, 
> 4 \ ~ Dee aN - « Ψ 0 50 
ἐλπόμενος μὴ νῆας ἐυσέλμους ὁράασθαι, 55 
A a 7 
ἀλλ᾽ ἑτέρους ξιφίας, ξυνὸν γένος, ὄφρα μιν ἄνδρες 
3 Ly » 
πάντῃ κυκλώσωνται- 6 δ᾽ ἐφράσαθ ὕστερον ἄτην, 
“ ¢€ > A 
αἰχμῇ τριγλώχινι πεπαρμένος, οὐδέ of ἀλκὴ 
evyew ἱεμένῳ περ, ἀναγκαΐῃ δὲ δαμῆναι. 
πολλάκι μὲν καὶ νηὸς ἀμυνόμενος κενεῶνα 555 
> , 
φασγάνῳ ἀντετόρησε διαμπερὲς ἄλκιμος ἰχθύς, 
οἱ δὲ θοῶς βουπλῆγος ὑπ᾽ εὐχάλκοιο τυπῆσιν 
> 7 7 ν / > > + \ 
cK γενύων npagav ἅπαν ξίφος: ἐν δ᾽ dpa νηὸς 
ν - ᾽ὔ » ς 3. eh: 3 A > ~ 
ἕλκεϊ γόμφος ἄρηρεν: ὁ δ᾽ ἕλκεται ὀρφανὸς ἀλκῆς. 
ὡς δ᾽ ὅτε δυσμενέεσσι δόλον τεύχοντες ἄρηος,Ἠ δ60 
ἱέμενοι πύργων τε καὶ ἄστεος ἔνδον ἱκέσθαι, 
ἔντεα συλήσαντες ἀρηϊφάτων ἀπὸ νεκρῶν 
αὐτοὶ θωρήξαντο καὶ ἔδραμον ἄγχι πυλάων" 
οἱ δ᾽ ὥστε σφετέροισιν ἐπειγομένοις πολιήταις 
,ὔ 
ἀγκλίνουσι θύρετρα καὶ οὐ γήθησαν ἑταίροις" 565 
a ΝΜ \ / wy ν ὁ » ~ 
ws apa καὶ ξιφίην ἴκελον δέμας ἤπαφε νηῶν. 
Kat μὲν δὴ σκολιῇσιν ἐν ἀγκοίνῃσι λίνοιο 
\ , a“ va 3 7 
κυκλωθεὶς ξιφίης μέγα νήπιος ἀφροσύνῃσιν 
ὄλλυται, ὃς θρώσκει μὲν ὑπεκδῦναι μενεαίνων, 
ἐγγύθι δὲ τρομέων πλεκτὸν δόλον αὖτις ὀπίσσω 570 
χάζεται: οὐδέ οἱ ὅπλον ἐνὶ φρεσίν, οἷον ἄρηρεν 
ex γενύων, δειλὸς δὲ μένει κεκαφηότι θυμῷ, 
΄ 
ὄφρα μιν ἐξερύσωσιν ἐπ᾽ ἠόνας- ἔνθα δὲ δούροις 
ἄνδρες ἐπασσυτέροισι καταΐγδην ἐλόωντες 
> / ς 9: νκἉΜὶ 4 / 
κρᾶτα συνηλοίησαν, 6 δ᾽ ὄλλυται ἄφρονι πότμῳ. 575 
> Fi A / 
poovyvn Kat σκόμβρον ἕλεν καὶ πίονα θύννον 
SER Στ Ol ny 


392 


HALIEUTICA, III. 546-576 


monster Swordfishes unapproachable. The fisher- 
men fashion boats in the likeness of the Swordfishes 
themselves, with fishlike body and swords, and steer 
to meet the fish. The Swordfish shrinks not from 
the chase, belieying that what he sees are not 
benched ships but other Swordfishes, the same race as 
himself, until the men encircle him on every side. 
Afterwards he perceives his folly when pierced by 
the three-pronged spear; and he has no strength 
to escape for all his desire but perforce is overcome. 
Many a time as he fights the valiant fish with his 
sword pierces in his turn right through the belly 
of the ship; and the fishers with blows of brazen 
axe swiftly strike all his sword from his jaws, and it 

_remains fast in the ship’s wound like a rivet, while 
the fish, orphaned of his strength, is hauled in. As 
when men devising a trick of war against their foes, 
being eager to come within their towers and city, 
strip the armour from the bodies of the slain and arm 
themselves therewith and rush nigh the gates; and 
the others fling open their gates as for their own 
townsmen in their haste, and have no joy of their 
friends ; even so do boats in his own likeness deceive 
the Swordfish. 

Moreover, when encircled in the crooked arms of 
the net the greatly stupid Swordfish perishes by his 
own folly. He leaps in his desire to escape but near 
at hand he is afraid of the plaited snare and shrinks 
back again and forgetteth what manner of weapon 
is set in his jaws and like a coward remains aghast 
till they hale him forth upon the beach, where with 
downward-sweeping blow of many spears men crush 
his head, and he perishes by a foolish doom. 

Folly slays also the Mackerel 5 and the fat Tunny 


393 


OPPIAN 


“- ΄ὔ 
καὶ ῥαφίδας καὶ φῦλα πολυσπερέων συνοδόντων. 
σκόμβροι μὲν λεύσσοντες ἐν ἕρκεϊ πεπτηῶτας 
+ > 7 ,ὔ 7 ὄλ θ 
ἄλλους ἠράσσαντο λίνου πολύωπον ὄλεθρον 
“ 3: 
ἐσδῦναι" τοίη Tis ἐσέρχεται εἰσορόωντας 580 
τερπωλή: παίδεσσιν ἀπειρήτοισιν ὁμοῖοι, 
At 
οἵ τε πυρὸς λεύσσοντες ἀναιθομένοιο φαεινὴν 
μαρμαρυγὴν ἀκτῖσιν ἰαινόμενοι γελόωσι 
“ fi 32 €, ,ὔ δ, 7 ὅς .4 > , 
ψαῦσαί θ᾽ ἱμείρουσι καὶ ἐς φλόγα χεῖρ᾽ ὀρέγουσι 
4 i / > / > / oN a ~ 
vymenv: τάχα δέ opw ἀνάρσιον ἐξεφάνη πῦρ 585 
ὡς οἵ γ᾽ iwelpovow ἀνοστήτοιο λόχοιο 
~ ~ 3, 
ἐσπεσέειν κευθμῶνα, κακοῦ δ᾽ ἤντησαν ἔρωτος. 
ἔνθ᾽ οἱ μὲν κέλσαντες ἐν εὐρυτέροισι βρόχοισι 
ἔκθορον, οἱ δ᾽ ἐρχθέντες ἐνὶ στεινοῖσι πόροισι 
πικρὸν ἀνέτλησαν σφιγκτὸν μόρον ἐξανύσαντες. 590 
\ > Poe / 3 ,ὔ Li 
πολλοὺς δ᾽ ἠϊόνεσσιν ἐφελκομένοιο λίνοιο 
"» 3 ͵ 2 , 2 oh , Σ 
ὄψεαι ἀμφοτέρωθεν ἀρηρότας Hite γόμφοις, 
\ A μὴ , > Ψ, + > Le 
τοὺς μὲν ἔτι φρονέοντας ἐσελθέμεν ἄρκυν ὀλέθρου, 
» nn ~ 
τοὺς δ᾽ ἤδη μεμαῶτας ὑπεκδῦναι κακότητος, 
UY 
ἔνδοθεν ἰκμαλέῃσιν ἐνισχομένους βροχίδεσσι. 595 
» 3 iO / \ » / > V4 
Θύννοι δ᾽ αὖ σκόμβροις μὲν ἴσον πόνον ἀθλεύουσιν 
> 7 \ a 
ἀφροσύνῃ" καὶ τοῖς γὰρ ὁμοίιος ἵμερος ἄτης 
Ἅ a 
ἐμπίπτει δολίοιο λίνου λαγόνεσσι μιγῆναι: 
3 / 
ἀλλ᾽ οὐ μὲν κείνοισιν ὑπόβρυχα γαστέρος εἴσω 
» aA Α ~ 
ἐσδύνειν, σκολιοῖσι δ᾽ ἐπαΐσσουσιν ὀδοῦσι, 600 
σώματι μηδόμενοι πόρον ἄρκιον: ἐν δ᾽ ἄρ᾽ ὀδοῦσιν 
\ ιν aA 
ὑγρὸν ἐρειδομένοις τέταται λίνον: οὐδέ τι μῆχος 
? / A \ 
ἐκφυγέειν, δεσμῷ δὲ περιστομίῳ μογέοντες 
ij > 
ἕλκονται ποτὶ χέρσον ὑπ᾽ ἀφραδίῃσιν ἁλόντες. 
\ \ \ ¢ / a ΔΛ [} 9. Ὁ / 
Καὶ μὲν δὴ ῥαφίδων τοῖος νόος at δ᾽ ὅτε κόλπον 605 
y 2 f4 . 
δικτύου ἐκπροφύγωσι, πόνου δ᾽ ἔκτοσθε γένωνται, 
804 β 


HALIEUTICA, III. 577-606 


and the Needle-fishes and the tribes of the wide- 
spread Dentex. The Mackerels, when they see 
others crouching in the net, are fain to enter the 
many-meshed snare of destruction—such delight 
possesses them ,-when they behold: like untried 
children who, when they see the bright flashing of 
blazing fire, rejoice in its rays and are fain to touch 
it and stretch a childish hand into the flame, and 
speedily the fire proves unkind; even so the 
Mackerels are fain to rush within the covert of the 
ambush whence there is no return and find their 
fondness fatal. Then some land in the wider meshes 
and leap out, but others, penned in the narrower 
openings, suffer a bitter fate by strangling. When 
the. net is hauled ashore, thou shalt see them in 
multitudes on either side fixed as with nails, some 
still minded to enter the net of destruction, others 
already eager to escape from their evil plight, held 
fast within the dripping nets. 

The Tunnies again suffer like affliction with the 
Mackerel by their foolishness. For they also are 
possessed by a similar fatal desire to come within the 
loins of the crafty net; they do not however essay 
to enter the belly of the net under water but assail © 
it with their crooked teeth, devising to make a 
passage sufficient for their body. The wet net 
becomes stretched about their infixed teeth and they 
have no means of escape, but labouring under the 
entanglement about their mouth they are haled to 
the land, taken by their own witlessness. 

Such also is the counsel of the Needle-fishes.? 
These when they have escaped the bosom of the net 


« The Gar-fish, Belone acus, M.G. Bedovida, fapyava, Cf. 
C, ii. 392 n. 
395 


OPPIAN 


δ᾿ > A / > 9 , 
αὖτις ἐπιστρωφῶσι, λίνῳ δ᾽ ἐπιμηνίουσαι 
a 
δήγματ᾽ ἐνιπρίουσι: τὸ δέ σφισι δύεται εἴσω 
> / 
ἴσχει τ᾽ ἐμμενέως πυκινοὺς ἔντοσθεν ὀδόντας. 
/ 
Αὐτὰρ τοὶ συνόδοντες ἴσοι στείχουσι λόχοισι 610 
a oO > fp 
κεκριμένοι" τοῖς δ᾽ εὖτ᾽ ἂν ἀνὴρ ἄγκιστρον ἐφείη, 
od 
οἱ μὲν ἀποτροπάδην λοξὸν φάος ἀλλήλοισι 
4 
πάντες ἐπικλίνουσι Kat οὐκ ἐθέλουσι πελάσσαι: 
> 35 Ὁ θ A ¢ /, ‘ 5 δέλ 
ἀλλ᾽ ὅτε τις προθορὼν ἑτέρης στιχὸς αἶψα δέλετρον 
la 
ἁρπάξῃ, τότε καί Tis ἐνὶ φρεσὶ θάρσος ἔδεκτο 615 
> 
ἀγκίστρῳ τ᾽ ἐπέλασσε καὶ ἕλκεται: of ὃ ὁρόωντες 
Ὺ 
ἀλλήλους, περὶ δαιτὶ γεγηθότες, ἰαίνονται 
¢€ / vA > ¢ i “ / 
ἑλκόμενοι, σπεύδουσι δ᾽ ὑποφθαδόν, ὅς κε: θάνῃσι 
“ an ὔ 
πρῶτος ἁλούς, ἅτε παῖδες ἀθύρμασι καγχαλόωντες. 
Θύννων δ᾽ αὖ γενεὴ μὲν ἀπ᾽ εὐρυπόροιο τέτυκται 620 
lot \ 
᾽Ωκεανοῦ: στείχουσι δ᾽ ἐς ἡμετέρης ἁλὸς ἔργα 
εἰαρινοῦ μετὰ λύσσαν ὅτ᾽ οἰστρήσωσι γάμοιο. 
‘\ > »᾿ ~ \ 3 ld ” “ 
τοὺς δ᾽ ἤτοι πρῶτον μὲν ᾿Ιβηρίδος ἔνδοθεν ἅλμης 


“Δ curious parallel to this is mentioned in his account of 
the present-day fishing for the Belone by Apost. p. 41: 
‘*quelques-uns effrayés, au début, fuient au large, mais ils 
reviennent aussitot rejoindre la grande bande qui n’a pas 
bougé.’ : 

δ Dentex vulgaris Cuv., one of the Sea-breams (Sparidae), 
M.G. συναγρίδα (Apost. p. 18). Of. A. 591 a 11, Ὁ 5, 10; 
598 a 13; 610 Ὁ 5; Epicharm. ap. Athen. 322 b συνόδοντάς 
τ᾽ ἐρυθροποικίλους ; Marc. 8. 29 κρεῖοι (κιρροί 3) συνόδοντες ; Ov. 
Hal. 107 fulvi synodontes. 

° A. δ48 49 ἡ θυννὶς ἅπαξ τίκτει, ἀλλὰ διὰ τὸ τὰ μὲν πρώια 
τὰ δὲ ὄψια προίεσθαι δὶς δοκεῖ τίκτειν" ἔστι δ᾽ ὁ μὲν πρῶτος τόκος 
περὶ τὸν ἸΤοσειδεῶνα [November-December] πρὸ τρρπῶν [before 
the Winter Solstice, 22 December], ὁ 3’ ὕστερος τοῦ ἔαρος ; 543 
Ὁ 2 αἱ δὲ πηλαμύδες καὶ οἱ θύννοι τίκτουσιν ἐν τῷ Πόντῳ [Black 
Sea], ἄλλοθι δ᾽ οὔ. Cf Plin. ix. 47 (Thynni) intrant e magno 
mari Pontum verno tempore gregatim, nec alibi fetificant; A. 
543 Ὁ 11 (τίκτει) θέρους περὶ τὸν ἱΕἙκατομβαιῶνα [June-July] 
θυννίς, περὶ τροπὰς θερινάς [Summer Solstice, 21 June}; A. 


396 


HALIEUTICA, III. 607-623 


and are gotten free from trouble, turn again ὦ and 
in their anger fix their teeth in the net; and it 
enters into their mouths and holds fast the close-set 
teeth within. 

The Dentex ὃ. travel in separate bands, like 
companies of soldiers. When a man lets down a 
hook for them, they stand aloof and all bend sidelong 
looks on one another and are unwilling to approach. 
But when one leaps forth from another rank and 
swiftly seizes the bait, then also one of them takes 
courage in his heart and draws nigh to the hook and 
is haled in. The Dentex, eyeing one another and 
delighting in their banquet, rejoice even while they 
are being caught, and they vie with one another as to 
which shall die first, like children exulting in their 
sports. 

The breed of Tunnies ὁ comes from the spacious 
Ocean, and they travel into the regions of our sea a 
when they lust after the frenzy of mating in spring. 
First the Iberians who plume themselves upon their 
571 a 11 ὀχεύονται δ᾽ of θύννοι. . . περὶ τὸν ᾿Ελαφηβολιῶνα 
φθίνοντα [about middle of March], τίκτουσι δὲ περὶ τὸν ᾿Ιὐκατομ- 
βαιῶνα ἀρχόμενον [about middle of June]; 598 ἃ 26 θυννίδες 
καὶ πηλαμύδες καὶ ἄμιαι εἰς τὸν Πόντον ἐμβάλλουσι τοῦ ἔαρος καὶ 
θερίζουσιν. 

4 j.¢., they come from the Atlantic into the Mediterranean 
on the way to their spawning-grounds in the Euxine. Cf. 
Theodorid. ap. Athen. 302 ς θύννοι τε διοιστρήσοντι Vadelpwr 
δρόμον, i.e. the Straits of Gibraltar, τὸν Ταδειραῖον πορθμόν 
Plut. Sert. viii.; cf. Plin. iii. 74 in eo maria nuncupantur, 
unde inrumpit, Atlanticum, ab aliis magnum, qua intrat. 
Porthmos a Graecis, a nobis Gaditanum fretum, For 
Gadeira=Gades cf. Plin. iv. 120 Poeni Gadir (appellant) ; 
Strabo 169 ff; Pind. N. iv. 69; fr. 256; Dion. P. 63 ἀφ᾽ 
ἑσπέρου 'Qxeavoio | ἔνθα τε καὶ στῆλαι [Pillars of Hercules] 
περὶ τέρμασιν Ἡρακλῆος | ἑστᾶσιν, μέγα θαῦμα, παρ᾽ ἐσχατόωντα 


Τάδειρα ; ibid. 11 ; 451 ff. 
397 


OPPIAN 


9 , 3. te ,ὔ / Ἢ i 
ἀνέρες ἀγρώσσουσι Bin κομόωντες “IBypes 
a ts -“ 
δεύτερα δὲ “Podavoio παρὰ στόμα θηρητῆρες ὀ 62ὅ 
Κελτοὶ Φωκαίης τε παλαίφατοι ἐνναετῆρες" 
/ / 
TO τρίτον ἀγρώσσουσιν ὅσοι Τρινακρίδι νήσῳ 
” a 
ἐνναέται πόντου τε παρ᾽ οἴδμασι Τυρσηνοῖο. 
w > / >A ’, + La 
ἔνθεν ἀπειρεσίοις evi βένθεσιν ἄλλοθεν ἄλλος 
/ \ a > - 4 ° 
κίδνανται Kal πᾶσαν ἐπιπλώουσι θάλασσαν. 630 
Ni > wv / , 2 ,ὔ 
πολλὴ δ᾽ ἔκπαγλός τε παρίσταται ἰχθυβόλοισιν 
/ 
ἄγρη, ὅτ᾽ εἰαρινὸς θύννων στρατὸς ὁρμήσωνται. 
“-“ fa 
χῶρον μὲν πάμπρωτον ἐπεφράσσαντο θαλάσσης 
> 
οὔτε λίην στεινωπὸν ἐπηρεφέεσσιν ὑπ᾽ ὄχθαις 
»” 7 > / 3 / > \ \ vw 
οὔτε λίην ἀνέμοισιν ἐπίδρομον, ἀλλὰ καὶ αἴθρῃ 635 
καὶ σκεπανοῖς κευθμῶσιν ἐναίσιμα μέτρα φέροντα. 
μὴ > ” ~ \ I'D ΕΣ 4 μὴ 
ἔνθ᾽ ἤτοι πρῶτον μὲν ἐπ᾽ ὄρθιον ὕψι κολωνὸν 
ἴδρις ἐπαμβαίνει θυννοσκόπος, ὅστε κιούσας 
παντοίας ἀγέλας τεκμαίρεται, αἵ τε καὶ ὅσσαι, 


4 ἀ,9.. the sea off the south of Spain (Iberia). Strabo 122 
καλοῦσι δὲ. . . τὸ μὲν (πέλαγος) ᾿Ιβηρικόν, τὸ δὲ Λιγυστικόν, τὸ 
δὲ Σαρδόνιον, τελευταῖον δὲ μέχρι τῆς Σικελίας τὸ Τυρρηνικὸν 3 
Plin. iii, 74 cum intravit, Hispanum (mare nuncupatur) 
quatenus. Hispanias adluit, ab aliis Ibericum aut Baliaricum. 

> The people of Massilia, cf. note on 544 above. Cif. Ael. 
xiii. 16 ἀκούω δὲ Κελτοὺς καὶ Μασσαλιώτας. . . ἀγκίστροις τοὺς 
θύννους θηρᾶν. 

° Sicily. For Tunnies in Sicilian seas cf. Archestr. ap. 
Athen. 302 a ἐν Σικελῶν δὲ κλυτῇ νήσῳ Κεφαλοιδὶς fon N. coast 
of Sicily, Strabo 266 Κεφαλοίδιον, Plin. iii: 90 ephaloedis] 
ἀμείνους | πολλῷ τῶνδε τρέφει θύννους καὶ Tuvdapls ἀκτή {also on 
N. coast, Strabo l.c., Plin. 1.6.1. Of. Hices. ap. Athen. 315d; 
Ael. xv. 6. 

* Dorio ap. Athen. 315 Ὁ Awplwy . . . τοὺς ὀρκύνους (large 
Tunnies) ἐκ τῆς περὶ Ἡρακλέους στήλας θαλάσσης περαιουμένους 
εἰς τὴν Kad’ ἡμᾶς ἔρχεσθαι θάλασσαν" διὸ καὶ πλείστους ἁλίσκεσθαι 
ἐν τῷ ᾿Ιβηρικῷ καὶ Τυρρηνικῷ πελάγει" κἀντεῦθεν κατὰ τὴν ἄλλην 
θάλασσαν διασκίδνασθαι. 


808 


HALIEUTICA, III. 624-639 


might capture them within the Iberian brine ¢; 
next by the mouth of the Rhone the Celts and the 
ancient inhabitants of Phocaea® hunt them; and 
thirdly those who are dwellers in the Trinacrian 
5816 ὁ and by the waves of the Tyrrhenian sea. 
Thence in the unmeasured deeps they scatter ὦ this 
way or that and travel over all the sea. Abundant 
and wondrous is the spoil for fishermen when the 
host of Tunnies set forth in spring. First of all the 
fishers mark a place in the sea which is neither too 
straitened under beetling banks nor too open to the 
winds, but has due measure of open sky and shady 
coverts. There first ἃ skilful Tunny-watcher ὁ 
ascends a steep high hill,’ who remarks the various 
shoals, their kind and size,’ and informs ” his comrades. 


¢ Analogous to the ‘‘ Hooer” in the Cornish Pilchard 
fishing: A. 537 a 19 πολλάκις δὲ καὶ οἱ θυννοσκόποι περιβάλλονται 
καθεύδοντας ; Theocr. iii. 25 f. ἐς κύματα τηνῶ ἁλεῦμαι [ὧπερ 
τὼς θύννως σκοπιάζεται Ὄλπις ὁ γριπεύς. Hence metaphorically 
Aristoph. Mg. 512 f. ὅστις [ἡ.6. Cleon] ἡμῶν τὰς ᾿Αθήνας ἐκκεκώ- 
puxas βοῶν, κἀπὸ τῶν πετρῶν ἄνωθεν τοὺς φόρους θυννοσκοπῶν. 
Cf. Suid. 5.υ. Alciphr. i. 20 ὁ σκοπιωρός in same sense. 

7 The outlook, θυννοσκοπεῖον, Strabo 298 ; 225; 834, etc., 
was sometimes a high mast (Varr. ap. Non. i. p. 493 cf. 
Philostr. Imag. i. 13 σκοπιωρεῖται γάρ τις ἀφ᾽ ὑψηλοῦ ξύλου), 
sometimes a more elaborate platform (Ael. xv. 5). 

9 According to Plut. Mor. 980 a he was helped in his 
computation by the cubical formation of the shoal: ὁ γοῦν 
θυννοσκόπος, ἂν ἀκριβῶς λάβῃ τὸν ἀριθμὸν τῆς ἐπιφανείας, εὐθὺς 
ἀποφαίνεται πόσον καὶ ἅπαν τὸ πλῆθός ἐστιν, εἰδὼς ὅτι καὶ τὸ 
βάθος αὐτῶν ἐν ἴσῳ τεταγμένον στοιχείῳ πρός τε τὸ πλάτος ἐστὶ 
καὶ τὸ μῆκος. 

Ἀ Philostr. Imag. l.c. κἂν ἐμβάλλοντας τοὺς ἰχθῦς ἴδῃ, βοῆς τε 
ὡς μεγίστης [hence the point of 'βοῶν in Aristoph. Hg. 312 
quoted on 638 above] de? αὐτῷ πρὸς τοὺς ἐν τοῖς ἀκατίοις καὶ τὸν 
ἀριθμὸν λέγει καὶ τὰς μυριάδας αὐτῶν : Ael. xv. ὃ ὁ σκοπὸς ἰδὼν 
«ον λέγει μὲν τοῖς θηραταῖς ὁπόθεν ἀφικνοῦνται" .. . ἐρεῖ γε 
μὴν πολλάκις καὶ τὸν πάντα ἀριθμόν. ; 

399 


OPPIAN 


/ ἣν, 
πιφαύσκει δ᾽ ἑτάροισι" τὰ δ᾽ αὐτίκα δίκτυα πάντα 640 
\ \ 
ὥστε πόλις προβέβηκεν ἐν olduacw: ἐν δὲ πυλωροὶ 
δικτύῳ, ἐν δὲ πύλαι, μύχατοί τ᾽ αὐλῶνες ἔασιν. 
ε ΓΕ A ΄, δικεαν , ¢ , i 
ot δὲ θοῶς σεύονται ἐπὶ στίχας, ὥστε φάλαγγες 
“- Ya 
ἀνδρῶν ἐρχομένων καταφυλαδόν- of μὲν ἔασιν 
> SHAN 
ὁπλότεροι, Tol δ᾽ εἰσὶ γεραίτεροι, of δ᾽ ἐνὶ μέσσῃ 645 
ὥρῃ: ἀπειρέσιοι δὲ λίνων ἔντοσθε ῥέουσιν, 
εἰσόκεν ἱμείρωσι καὶ ἀγρομένους ἀνέληται 
,ὔ 3 \ \ \ a “ + 
δίκτυον: ἀφνειὴ δὲ καὶ ἔξοχος ἵσταται ἀγρη. 


* The comparison is easily understood when one reads 
the account in Ael. xv. 5 ὁ τὴν σκοπιὰν φυλάττων μάλα ὀξὺ 
ἐκβοήσας λέγει διώκειν ἐκεῖθι καὶ τοῦ πελάγους ἐρέττειν εὐθύ. οἱ | 
δὲ ἐξαρτήσαντες ἐλάτης τῶν τὸν σκοπὸν ἀνεχουσῶν τῆς ἑτέρας 
[1.6. one of the two πρέμνα ἐλάτης ὑψηλά which support the 
platform of the θυννοσκοπεῖον] σχοῖνον εὖ μάλα μακρὰν τῶν 
δικτύων ἐχομένην, εἶτα ἐπαλλήλοις ταῖς ναυσὶν ἐρέττουσι κατὰ 
στοῖχον ἔχονταί τε ἀλλήλων, ἐπεί τοι καὶ τὸ δίκτυον ἐφ᾽ ἑκάστῃ 
διήρηται, καὶ ἥ γε πρώτη τὴν ἑαυτῆς ἐκβαλοῦσα μοῖραν τοῦ δικτύου 
ἀναχωρεῖ, εἶτα ἡ δευτέρα “δρᾷ τοῦτο, καὶ ἡ τρίτη, καὶ dec καθεῖναι 
τὴν τετάρτην, οἱ δὲ τὴν πέμπτην ἐρέττοντες ἔτι μέλλουσι, τοὺς δὲ 
ἐπὶ ταύτῃ οὐ χρὴ καθεῖναί πω" εἶτα ἐρέττουσιν ἄλλοι ἄλλῃ καὶ 
ἄγουσι τοῦ δικτύου τὴν μοῖραν, εἶτα ἡσυχάζουσι. Cf. Apost. 
p- 31 ‘*Au mois de mai plus de 20 bateaux de Spetzia, 
quelques-uns de Skiathos se livrent .. . a la péche des 
thons. Quand l’arrivée des thons dans les parages de ces 
fles est annoncée, les pécheurs font leurs préparatifs de 


4,00 


HALIEUTICA, III. 640-648 


Then straightway all the nets are set forth in the 
waves like a city,? and the net has its gate-warders 
and gates withal and inner courts. And swiftly 
the Tunnies speed on in line,’ like ranks of men 
marching tribe by tribe—these younger, those older, 
those in the mid season of their age. Without end 
they pour within the nets, so long as they desire 
and as the net can receive the throng of them ; and 
rich and excellent is the spoil.¢ 


campagne. Tous les bateaux ... se placent 4 l’entrée 
du golfe d’Argolide, que les poissons traversent toujours 
pour pénétrer dans V’intérieur de ce golfe; les pécheurs 
approchent de la céte, y jettent l’une des extrémités du 
filet, et, en avancant vers le large, ils y jettent le reste. 
Cela fait, ils enfoncent dans l’eau une poutre et y laissent 
un gardien [the θυννοσκόπος]. Le bateau revient a terre en 
décrivant une courbe et trafnant aprés lui une corde, avec 
laquelle, en tirant l’extrémité placée du cété de la mer, ils 
font décrire au filet une ligne circulaire. Aussit6t que le 
gardien annonce, par des signaux, ἃ ses camarades qu’un 
nombre assez considérable de thons se trouve ἃ leur portée, 
ceux-ci tirent de la terre le filet ot ils englobent les 
poissons.” 

> Philostr. Imag. l.c. νέουσι δὲ οἷον στρατιωτῶν φάλαγξ ἐπὶ 
ὀκτὼ καὶ ἐφ᾽ ἑκκαίδεκα καὶ δὶς τόσοι, . .. ἄλλος ἄλλῳ ἐπινέοντες, 
τοσοῦτον βάθος ὅσον αὐτῶν τὸ εἴρος. 

¢ Philostr. Imag. l.c. οἱ δὲ ἀποφράξαντες αὐτοὺς βαθεῖ καὶ 
κλειστῷ δικτύῳ δέχονται λαμπρὰν ἄγραν. 


t© 
io] 

cs 
fo) 
pa 


AATEYTIKOQN TO A 


“ € 


“AMovs δ᾽ ἀγρευτῆρσιν ὑπήγαγε ληΐδα θήρης 
ὑγρὸς ἔρως- ὀλοῶν δὲ γάμων, ὀλοῆς 7’ ᾿Αφροδίτης 
ἠντίασαν, σπεύδοντες ἑὴν φιλοτήσιον ἄτην. 
ἀλλὰ σύ μοι, κάρτιστε πολισσούχων βασιλήων, 
αὐτός τ᾽, ᾿Αντωνῖνε, καὶ υἱέος ἠγάθεον κῆρ, 
πρόφρονες εἰσαΐοιτε καὶ εἰναλίῃσι γάνυσθε 
τερπωλαῖς, οἵῃσιν ἐμὸν νόον ἠπιόδωροι 
Μοῦσαι κοσμήσαντο καὶ ἐξέστεψαν ἀοιδῆς 
δώρῳ θεσπεσίῳ καί μοι πόρον ὑμετέροισι 
κίρνασθαι γλυκὺ νᾶμα καὶ οὔασι καὶ πραπίδεσσι. 

Σχέτλι᾽ "ἕρως, δολομῆτα, θεῶν κάλλιστε μὲν ὄσσοις 
εἰσιδέειν, ἄλγιστε δ᾽ ὅτε κραδίην ὀὁροθύνεις, 
> / 3 / ς \ / > if Uf 
ἐμπίπτων ἀδόκητος, ὑπὸ φρένα δ᾽ ὥστε θύελλα 
μίσγεαι, ἀσθμαίνεις δὲ πυρὸς δριμεῖαν ὁμοκλήν, 
παφλάζων ὀδύνῃσι καὶ ἀκρήτοισιν ἀνίαις" 
δάκρυ δέ σοι προβαλεῖν λαρὸν γάνος ἠδ᾽ ἐσακοῦσαι 
βυσσόθεν οἰμωγὴν σπλάχνοις θ᾽ ὑπὸ θερμὸν ἔρευθος 
φοινίξαι χρωτός τε παράτροπον ἄνθος ἀμέρσαι 
ὄσσε τε κοιλῆναι παρά τε φρένα πᾶσαν ἀεῖραι 
μαινομένην: πολλοὺς δὲ καὶ ἐς μόρον ἐξεκύλισας, 
ὅσσοις χειμέριός τε καὶ ἄγριος ἀντεβόλησας 
λύσσαν ἄγων" τοίαις γὰρ ἀγάλλεαι εἰλαπίνῃσιν. 20 


@ Introd. p. xx. 

> So, in the famous address to Eros, Soph. Antig. 790 ὁ δ᾽ 
ἔχων μέμηνεν. 
402 


δ9 


HALIEUTICA, or FISHING 
IV 


Oruer fishes doth tender love make for fishermen 
the spoil of their chase, and fatal mating they find 
and fatal their passion, hastening their own ruin 
through desire. But do thou, I pray thee, mightiest 
of kings who have cities in their keeping, both 
thyself, O Antoninus ¢ and thy son of noble heart, 
graciously give ear and take pleasure in these 
delights of the sea wherewith the kindly Muses 
have furnished forth my mind and have crowned me 
with the gift divine of song and given me to mix a 
sweet draught for your ears and for your mind. 

O cruel Love, crafty of counsel, of all gods fairest 
to behold with the eyes, of all most grievous when 
thou dost vex the heart with unforeseen assault, 
entering the soul like a storm-wind and breathing 
the bitter menace of fire, with hurricane of anguish 
and untempered pain. The shedding of tears is for 
‘thee a sweet delight and to hear the deep-wrung 
groan; to inflame a burning redness in the heart 
and to blight and wither the bloom upon the cheek, 
to make the eyes hollow and to wrest all the mind to 
madness.’ Many thou dost even roll to doom, even 
those whom thou meetest in wild and wintry sort, 
fraught with frenzy ; for in such festivals is thy 

408 


OPPIAN 


> 3 \ / 
εἴτ᾽ οὖν ἐν μακάρεσσι παλαίτατος ἐσσὶ γενέθλῃ, 
3. lee τ τον 
ex Xdeos δ᾽ ἀνέτειλας ἀμειδέος, ὀξέϊ πυρσῷ. 
~ > ἊΝ 7 - 
λαμπόμενος, πρῶτος δὲ γάμων ἐζεύξαο θεσμούς, 25 
~ , . 
πρῶτος δ᾽ εὐναίοις ἀρότοις ἐπεθήκαο τέκμωρ 
\ Μ 
εἴτε σε καὶ πτερύγεσσιν ἀειρόμενον θεὸν ὄρνιν 
,, 3 τ 
τίκτε Πάφου μεδέουσα πολυφράδμων ᾿Αφροδίτη, 
. IN Η δ ον 
εὐμενέοις, mpnis τε καὶ εὔδιος ἄμμιν ἱκάνοις 
ν᾿, 
μέτρον ἄγων. οὐ γάρ τις ἀναίνεται ἔργον ἔρωτος. 30 
\ / 
πάντῃ. μὲν κρατέεις, πάντῃ δέ σε καὶ ποθέουσι 
\ , LA ¢ > BA « wv 
Kat μέγα πεφρίκασιν: 6 δ᾽ ὄλβιος, ὅστις ἔρωτα 
“- ΄ 
εὐκραῆ κομέει τε καὶ ἐν στέρνοισι φυλάσσει: 
\ > > τὰς , a “pi » ΄ λ 
σοὶ δ᾽ οὔτ᾽ οὐρανίης γενεῆς ἅλις οὔτε τι φύτλης 
3 / > ~ > / 0.9 a / 
ἀνδρομέης: οὐ θῆρας ἀναίνεαι οὐδ᾽ ὅσα βόσκει 85 
t 
ἀὴρ ἀτρύγετος, vedrns δ᾽ ὑπὸ κεύθεσι λίμνης 
΄ ee Wr \ \ 9 , \ 
δύνεις, ὁπλίζῃ δὲ καὶ ἐν νεπόδεσσι κελαινοὺς 
ἀτράκτους, ὡς μή τι τεῆς ἀδίδακτον ἀνάγκης 
λείπηται, μηδ᾽ ὅστις ὑπόβρυχα νήχεται ἰχθύς. 
σ \ / > > / OM: 
Οἵην μὲν φιλότητα μετ᾽ ἀλλήλοισι ῥύονται 40 
\ / > a \ 4 Φ ΟΣ ἃ bg 
καὶ πόθον ὀξυβελῆ στικτοὶ σκάροι, οὐδ᾽ ἐνὶ μόχθοις 
ἀλλήλους λείπουσιν, ἀλεξητῆρι δὲ θυμῷ 
Ξ N / xcs? > , ~ 
πολλάκι μὲν πληγέντος ὑπ ἀγκίστροιο δαφοινοῦ 


* Hesiod, Th. 116 ff. Frou μὲν πρώτιστα Χάος γένετ᾽, αὐτὰρ 
ἔπειτα | Tat’ εὐρύστερνος, πάντων ἕδος ἀσφαλὲς αἰεὶ [ ἀθανάτων, 
οἱ ἔχουσι κάρη νιῴόεντος ᾿Ολύμπου, Τάρταρά τ’ ἠερόεντα μυχῷ 
χθονὸς εὑρυοσδείης, | ἠδ᾽ “Epos, ὃς κάλλιστος ἐν ἀθανάτοισι θεοῖσι, | 
λυσιμελής, πάντων δὲ θεῶν πάντων τ᾽ ἀνθρώπων | δάμναται ἐν 
στήθεσσι νόον καὶ ἐπίφρονα βουλήν : Aristoph. Av. 683 ff. 
Χάος ἢν καὶ Nvé,”"EpeBbs re μέλαν πρῶτον καὶ Τάρταρος εὐρύς"] 
γῆ δ᾽ οὐδ᾽ ἀὴρ οὐδ᾽ οὐρανὸς ἢν" "EpéBous δ᾽ ἐν ἀπείροσι κόλποις | 
τίκτει πρώτιστον ὑπηνέμιον Νύξ ἡ μελανόπτερος gov, | ἐξ οὗ 
περιτελλομέναις ὥραις ἔβλαστεν "Ἔρως ὁ ποθεινός, | στίλβων νῶτον 


404. 


HALIEUTICA, IV. 23-43 


delight. Whether then thou art the eldest-born α 
among the blessed gods and from unsmiling Chaos 
didst arise with fierce and flaming torch and didst 
first establish the ordinances of wedded love and 
order the rites of the marriage-bed ; or whether 
Aphrodite of many counsels, queen of Paphos,? bare 
thee a winged god on soaring pinions, be thou 
gracious and to us come gentle and with fair weather 
and in tempered measure ; for none refuses the work 
of Love. Everywhere thou bearest sway and every- 
where thou art desired at once and greatly feared ; 
and happy is he who cherishes and guards in his 
breast a temperate Love. Nor doth the race of 
Heaven suffice thee nor the breed of men*; thou 
rejectest not the wild beasts nor all the brood of 
the barren air; under the coverts of the nether 
deep dost thou descend and even among the finny 
tribes thou dost array thy darkling shafts; that 
naught may be left ignorant of thy compelling 
power, not even the fish that swims beneath the 
waters. 

Behold what love for one another and keen 
desire do the spotted Parrot-wrasses ὦ entertain and 
in trouble forsake not one another but in a spirit of 
helpfulness, many a time, when one Parrot-wrasse 
is struck by the deadly hook, another rushes to his 
πτερύγοιν χρυσαῖν, εἰκὼς ἀνεμώκεσι Sivas. Cf. Plato, Symp. 
178 a, Xen. Symp. 8. 1. Otherwise Eros is son of 
Aphrodite and Ares: Simonid. fr. 72 σχέτλιε rat δολόμηδες 
᾿Αφροδίτας, | τὸν “Apex κακομαχάνῳ τέκεν. 

ὃ In Cyprus. 

¢ Soph. Antig. 785 φοιτᾷς δ᾽ ὑπερπόντιος ἔν τ’ ἀγρονόμοις 
αὐλαῖς" καί σ᾽ οὔτ᾽ ἀθανάτων φύξιμος οὐδεὶς | οὔθ᾽ ἁμερίων ἐπ’ 
ἀνθρώπων. Cf. Soph. fr. 856 εἰσέρχεται μὲν ἰχθύων πλωτῷ 
γένει, | ἔνεστι δ᾽ ἐν χέρσου τετρασκελέϊ γονῇ : Lucret. i. 1-23. 

5 1, 1340, 
405 


OPPIAN 


oh, ὔ \ > ~ 
ἄλλος ἐπαΐξας πρόμαχος σκάρος ἰχθὺς ὀδοῦσιν 
ὁρμιὴν ἀπέκερσε καὶ ἐξεσάωσεν ἑταῖρον 
\ / 3 / \ > “a? 5 / 

καὶ δόλον ἠμάλθυνε καὶ ἀσπαλιῆ᾽ ἀκάχησεν. 

3 > > ΄ / ς / 
ἤδη δ᾽ ἐν κύρτοισι παλιμπλεκέεσσιν ἁλόντα 

7 
ἄλλος ὑπεξέκλεψε καὶ ἐξείρυσσεν ὀλέθρου" 

Φ A ? ΄ 7 δε κα 27 > Δ 
εὖτε γὰρ ἐς κύρτοιο πέσῃ λόχον αἰόλος ἰχθύς, 
αὐτίκ᾽ ἐπεφράσθη τε καὶ ἐκδῦναι κακότητος 
πειρᾶται, τρέψας δὲ κάτω κεφαλήν τε καὶ ὄσσε 
ἔμπαλιν εἰς οὐρὴν ἀνανήχεται ἕρκος ἀμείβων: 
ταρβεῖ γὰρ σχοίνους ταναηκέας, at πυλεῶνι 
ἀμφιπεριφρίσσουσι καὶ οὐτάζουσιν ὁπωπὰς 
ἀντίον ἐρχομένοιο, φυλακτήρεσσιν ὁμοῖαι. 
of δέ μιν εἰσορόωντες ἀμήχανα δινεύοντα 
ἔκτοθεν ἀντιόωσιν ἀρηγόνες, οὐδ᾽ ἐλίποντο 
τειρόμενον: καί πού τις ἑὴν ὥρεξε διασχὼν 
οὐρὴν Hite χεῖρα λαβεῖν ἔντοσθεν ἑταίρῳ" 

? \ > \ ni wy ¢ > ” Was » 
αὐτὰρ ὀδὰξ μὲν ἔρεισεν, ὁ δ᾽ ἔσπασεν ἄϊδος ἔξω 
οὐρὴν ἡγήτειραν ὑπὸ στόμα δεσμὸν ἔχοντα. 

/ 4 4 εν », © / 
πολλάκι δὲ προβαλόντος ἑὴν ἔντοσθεν ἁλόντος 

3 \ » ᾿ \ > ,ὔ 7 
οὐρὴν ἄλλος ἔμαρψε καὶ ἐξείρυσσε θύραζε 
ἑσπόμενον- τοιοῖσδε νοήμασι πότμον ἀλυξαν. 

> 
ὡς δ᾽ ὅτε παιπαλόεσσαν ἀναστείχωσι κολώνην 
~ A ~ 
φῶτες ὑπὸ σκιερῆς νυκτὸς κνέφας, ἡνίκα μήνη 
ee 
κέκρυπται, νεφέων δὲ κελαινιόωσι καλύπτραι, 


= Plut, Mor. 977 ὁ ἄλλα δ᾽ ἐπιδείκνυται μετὰ τοῦ συνετοῦ τὸ 
κοινωνικὸν καὶ φιλάλληλον, ὥσπερ ἀνθίαι καὶ σκάροι. σκάρου μὲν 
γὰρ ἄγκιστρον καταπιόντος οἱ παρόντες σκάροι προσαλλόμενοι τὴν 
ὁρμιὰν ἀποτρώγουσιν : Ael. 1. 4 οἱ σκάροι δὲ εἰς τὴν οἰκείαν ἀγέλην 
εἰσὶν ἀγαθοὶ τιμωροί' προίασι γοῦν καὶ τὴν ὁρμιὰν ἀποτραγεῖν 


σπεύδουσιν, ἵνα σώσωσι τὸν ἡρημένον. Of. Phil. 88. 11. 


Ὁ Plut. Mor. 977 c οὗτοι δὲ καὶ τοῖς εἰς κύρτον ἐμπεσοῦσι τὰς 
οὐρὰς παραδόντες ἔξωθεν ἕλκουσι δάκνοντας προθύμως καὶ συνεξ- 


406 


45 


50 


55 


60 


65 


HALIEUTICA, IV. 44-67 


defence and cutting through the line with his teeth ¢ 
rescues his comrade and destroys the snare and grieves 
the fisherman. And ere now, when a Parrot-wrasse 
has been taken in the plaited weel,? another has 
stolen him away, and saved him from destruction. 
For when the dappled fish falls into the ambush of 
the weel, immediately he perceives it and tries to 
escape from his evil plight. Turning down his head 
and eyes he swims back tailwards along the barrier, 
for he dreads the sharp rushes which bristle around 
the entrance and as he comes against them wound 
his eyes, even as if they were warders of the gate. 
The others, seeing him wheeling about helplessly, 
come from the outside to his aid and leave him not 
in his distress. And someone of them, I ween, 
reaches his tail through the weel like a hand for his 
comrade inside to grasp; and he seizes it in his 
teeth and the other pully him forth from death, 
while he holds in his mouth the guiding tail as a 
chain. Often too the fish that is caught in the weel 
puts forth his own tail and another grasps it and 
pulls him forth in its train. By such devices do they 
escape doom. As when under the darkness of 
shadowy night men climb a rugged hill, when the 
moon is hidden and the curtains of the clouds are 


άγουσιν ; Ael, i. 4 ἤδη δὲ καὶ εἰς τὸν κύρτον τὸν σκάρον ἐμπεσεῖν 
φασιν καὶ τὸ οὐραῖον μέρος ἐκβαλεῖν, τοὺς δὲ ἀθηράτους καὶ 
περινέοντας ἐνδακεῖν καὶ εἰς τὸ ἔξω τὸν ἑταῖρον προαγαγεῖν. εἰ 
δὲ ἐξίοι κατὰ τὸ στόμα τῶν τις ἔξω τὴν οὐρὰν παρώρεξεν, ὁ δὲ 
περιχανὼν ἠκολούθησεν : Oy. Hal. 9 sic et scarus arte sub 
undis | Incidit adsumptamque dolo tandem pavet escam. | 
Non audet radiis obnixa occurrere fronte, | Aversus crebro 
vimen sed verbere caudae | Jiaxans subsequitur tutumque 
evadit in aequor. | Quin etiam si forte aliquis dum. pone 
nataret, | Mitis luctantem scarus hune in vimine vidit, | 
Aversam caudam morsu tenet. 

407 


OPPIAN 


οἱ δ᾽ ὄρφνῃ μογέουσι Kai ἀτρίπτοισι κελεύθοις 
a " 
πλαζόμενοι, χεῖράς τε μετ᾽ ἀλλήλοισιν ἔχουσιν, 

3 
ἑλκόμενοί θ᾽ ἕλκουσι, πόνων ἐπίκουρον ἀμοιβήν" 
Δ “ 3 3 7 > ,ὔ λό 
ὡς οἵ γ᾽ ἀλλήλοισιν ἀμοιβαίῃ φιλότητι 
ἀλκτῆρες γεγάασι: τὸ δέ σφισι μήσατ᾽ ὄλεθρον 
δειλαίοις, ὀλοοῦ δὲ καὶ ἀλγινόεντος ἔρωτος 
Ψ , λ θέ > 7 1A ἣν, 
ἡντίασαν, βλαφθέντες ἐπιφροσύναις ἁλιήων. 

> ~ 

τέσσαρες ἐμβεβάασι θοὸν σκάφος ἀγρευτῆρες, 
τῶν ἤτοι δοιοὶ μὲν ἐπηρέτμοισι πόνοισι 
μέμβλονται, τρίτατος δὲ δολόφρονα μῆτιν ὑφαίνει. 
θῆλυν ἀναψάμενος σύρει σκάρον ἀκροτάτοιο 
χείλεος ἐν δίνῃσι λινοζεύκτῳ ὑπὸ δεσμῷ: 

\ \ / > / δ] \ Ww, 
ζωὴν μὲν κέρδιστον ἀνελκέμεν:" ἣν δὲ θάνῃσι, 
ὃ λ a At \ / ὃ ’, / 
eAdivos μολίβοιο μετὰ στόμα δέξατο τέχνην. 

, 3 ΕἸ ΚΑ 2): , », ” 
μηρίνθου δ᾽ ἑτέρωθεν ἐλήλαται ἄλλος ὄπισθεν 
δινωτὸς μολίβοιο βαρὺς κύβος ἅμματος ἄκρου" 
καί p ἡ μὲν ζωῇ ἐναλίγκιος ἐν ῥοθίοισιν 
ε 7 γ Ms , >? ς a 
ἑλκομένη θήλεια τιταίνεται ἐξ ἁλιῆος. 

» > 4, \ 14 > ,ὔ Ὁ 
τέτρατος αὖ κύρτοιο βαθὺν δόλον ἀντίον ἕλκει 
>? 50. a ε ὃς « ’ὔ’ > λλέ DN ΕΣ 
eyyulev* οὐ ὃ ὁρόωντες ἀολλέες ἰθὺς ἴενται 
κραιπνὸν ἐπειγόμενοι βαλιοὶ σκάροι, ὄφρα ῥύωνται 
ἑλκομένην, ἀπάτην δὲ περιπροθέουσιν ἁπάντῃ, 
οἴστρῳ θηλυμανεῖ βεβιημένοι: οἱ δ᾽ ἐλάτῃσι 
νῇα κατασπέρχουσιν ὅσον σθένος" οἱ δ᾽ ἐφέπονται 
> 
ἐσσυμένως: τάχα δέ σφι πανύστατος émder ἀρωγή. 

“ΟἿ. Polyb. ν. 104, Diod. xvii. δδ. 

> ΑΕ]. i. 2 λαγνίστατος δ᾽ dpa ἰχθύων ἁπάντων ἣν (ὁ σκάρος) 
kal ἥ γε πρὸς τὸ θῆλυ ἀκόρεστος ἐπιθυμία αὐτῷ ἁλώσεως αἰτία 
γίνεται. Cf. Phil. 88. 

“ This method is still in use: «La péche du scare, dans 
certaines 7165 des Cyclades, telles que Amorgos, Pholégandre, 
etc. dans les parages desquels sont confinés ces poissons, se 
fait absolument de la méme maniare aujourd’hui. Ainsi on 


tache, avant tout, de pécher une femelle du-scare. Cela fait, 
408 


70 


75 


80 


90 


HALIEUTICA, IV. 68-92 


dark: they labour sorely, wandering in gloom and 
untrodden ways, and hold each the other’s hands? and 
pull and are pulled, a helpful exchange of toil; 
even so those fishes help each other in mutual love. 
But just this devises destruction ὃ for the poor fishes 
and fatal and sorrowful they find their love when 
they are destroyed by the craft of fishermen. Four 
fishers embark on a swift boat, of whom two attend 
to the labour of the oar while the third weaves a 
crafty device. Fastening a female ὁ Parrot-wrasse 
by the tip of the mouth he drags it along in the 
waves by a flaxen cord. A live fish it is best to tow : 
but if she be dead, then she receives in her mouth 
the contrivance of a leaden dolphin.4 On the other 
side of the line another rounded heavy cube of lead 
is hung at the end of the cord. The dead female 
trailing in the waves like a living fish is haled along 
by the fisherman. A fourth fisher tows near at hand 
a deep ensnaring weel facing towards the fish. The 
spotted Parrot-wrasses when they see the trailing 
female rush all together in eager haste to rescue her 
and throng all about the decoy, impelled by the goad 
of frenzied desire. The men with their oars urge on 
the boat with all their might, while the fishes follow 
--eagerly : and soon it proves their last attempt to 


on l’attache, en lui percant l’extrémité du museau, avec une 
ligne portée par un long baton que I’on traine sur l’eau, en 
procédant d’aprés la méme maniére décrite par Oppien” 
(Apost. p. 45). 
εν @ A dolphin-shaped piece of lead. This use of the word 
~-is best known in connexion with warships: Thue. vii. 41 ai 
κεραῖαι. . . αἱ ἀπὸ τῶν ὁλκάδων δελφινοφόροι : Pherecr. "ΑΎριοι 
fr. 12 ὅδε δὴ δελφίς ἐστι μολυβδοῦς δελφινοφόρος τε κεροῦχος ; 
Aristoph. Hq. 162. τοὺς δελφῖνας perewplfov; Suid. 5. δελφίς" 
ννος͵ σιδηροῦν κατασκεύασμα ἢ μολύβδινον εἰς δελφῖνα ἐσχηματι- 
opévov. ΟἹ. Hesych. 9. δελφῖνες ; Poll. i. 85. 
409 


OPPIAN 


εὖτε yap ἀγρομένους τε Kal ἄσχετα μαιμώοντας 

θηλείης ἐπὶ λύσσαν ἴδῃ νόος ἀσπαλιῆος, 

ἐν κύρτῳ κατέθηκεν ὁμοῦ λίνον ἠδὲ μόλιβδον,Ἠ 95 

ὃς σκάρον ἐμβαρύθων εἴσω σπάσεν: οἱ δ᾽ ἄρ᾽ ὁμαρτῆ, 

ὡς ἴδον, ὡς ἐκέχυντο παραφθαδόν, “Aidos ἕρκος 

πλεκτὸν ἐπισπεύδοντες, ἐπειγομένοις δὲ λόχοισι 

στείνονται προβολαί τε λύγων καὶ χάσμα πυλάων 

ἀργαλέον" τοῖοι γὰρ ἐπισπέρχουσι μύωπες. 100 

ὡς δὲ ποδωκείης μέμελημένοι ἄνδρες ἀέθλων, 

στάθμης ὁρμηθέντες ἀπόσσυτοι, ὠκέα γυῖα 

προπροτιταινόμενοι, δολιχὸν τέλος ἐγκονέουσιν 

ἐξανύσαι: πᾶσιν δὲ πόθος νύσσῃ τε πελάσσαι 

νίκης τε γλυκύδωρον ἑλεῖν κράτος ἔς τε θύρετρα 105 

ἀΐξαι καὶ κάρτος ἀέθλιον ἀμφιβαλέσθαι: 

τόσσος ἔρως καὶ τοῖσιν ἐς "Αἴδος ἡγεμονεύει 

ἐσθορέειν κευθμῶνας ἀνοστήτοιο λόχοιο. 

κύντατα δ᾽ ἐς φιλότητα καὶ ὕστατον οἶστρον ἔχοντες 

αὐτόμολοι πιμπλᾶσιν ἐφίμερον ἀνδράσιν ἄγρην. 110 
ἴἤΑλλοι δ᾽ αὖ θήλειαν ἔσω κύρτοιο κελαινοῦ 

ζωὴν ἐγκαθιέντες ὑπὸ σπιλάδεσσι τίθενται 

κείναις, ἧσι μέλει γλαγόεις σκάρος: οἱ δ᾽ ὑπ᾽ ἔρωτος 

αὔρῃ θελγόμενοι φιλοτησίῃ ἀμφαγέρονται, 

ἀμφί τε λιχμάζουσι καὶ ἐξερέουσιν ἁπάντῃ 11ὅ 

μαιόμενοι κύρτοιο κατήλυσιν: αἶψα δ᾽ ἵκοντο 

εἰσίθμην εὐρεῖαν ἀνέκβατον ἕρκος ἔχουσαν, 

ἐς δ᾽ ἔπεσον ἅμα πάντες ὁμιλαδόν, οὐδέ τι μῆχος 

ἐκδῦναι, στυγερὴν δὲ πόθων εὕροντο τελευτήν. 

ὡς δέ τις οἰωνοῖσι μόρον δολόεντα φυτεύων 120 


* Schol. θύρετρα" τέλη: Of. Poll. iii: 147 ἵνα δὲ παύονται, 
τέλος καὶ τέρμα καὶ βατήρ. θύρετρα in this sense seems unique. 
But it is exactly paralleled by the use of fores of the doors of 
the carcer or carceres at the end (usually starting end) of the 


410 


»- 


HALIEUTICA, IV. 93-120 


aid. For when the wit of the fisher perceives them 
thronging and raging incontinently in their lust after 
the female, he puts in the weel line and lead together 
and the weight of the lead pulls the female Parrot- 
wrasse within. Then the males together, soon as 
they see it, so soon they rush in emulous haste, 
speeding to the plaited net of death and with their 
eager troops the withy vestibule and grievous mouth 
of the gates are straitened: such goads of passion 
urge them on. As men who engage in the contest 
of the footrace dart swiftly from the line and forward 
and ever forward strain their speedy limbs and haste 
to accomplish the long course; and the desire of 
every man is to reach the goal and to win the sweet 
triumph of victory and dash within the lists¢ and 
crown them with the athletic prize: even so doth 
like passion lead those fishes to the house of Hades— 
to rush within the coverts of an ambush whence 
there is no return. And, with their fatal and final 
madness of desire, of their own motion they fulfil 
the fishermen’s desire of spoil. 

Others again put a living female within the dark 
weel and place it under those rocks which the milky 
Parrot-wrasse affects. Beguiled by the amorous 
breath of love the Wrasses gather around and lick 
about and search everywhere to find the entrance 
of the weel. And speedily they come upon the 
entry—wide, but with a fence beyond escape— 
and they rush in altogether in a crowd and there is 
no means of getting out, but they find a hateful 
issue to their desires. Even as one who devises a 


racecourse: Lucan, i. 293 quantum clamore iuvatur | Eleus 
sonipes, quamvis. iam carcere clauso | immineat foribus 
pronusque repagula laxet. 

411 


OPPIAN 


,ὔ 
θήλειαν θάμνοισι κατακρύπτει λασίοισιν 
7 
ὄρνιν, ὁμογλώσσοιο συνέμπορον ἠθάδα θήρης" 
> > 
ἡ δὲ λίγα κλάζει ξουθὸν μέλος, of δ᾽ ἀΐοντες 
ΝΣ." 
πάντες ἐπισπέρχουσι, καὶ ἐς βρόχον αὐτοὶ ἵενται, 
~ 2 lol 
θηλυτέρης ἐνοπῆσι παραπλαγχθέντες ἰωῆς" 12. 
al a / ς - 
τοῖς κεῖνοι κύρτοιο πέσον λαγόνεσσιν ὁμοῖοι. 
Toiny δ᾽ αὖ κεφάλοισιν ἔρως περιβάλλεται ἄτην" 
καὶ γὰρ τοὺς θήλεια παρήπαφεν ἐν ῥοθίοισιν 
¢ 4 \ \ / '¢ / ~ 
ἑλκομένη: θαλερὴ δὲ πέλοι λιπόωσά τε γυῖα: 
ὧδε γὰρ εἰσορόωντες ἀπείρονες ἀμφαγέρονται: 18ι 
ie os 3 > Ψ / > 32 7] 
κάλλεϊ δ᾽ ἐκπάγλως βεβιημένοι οὐκ ἐθέλουσι 
λείπεσθαι, πάντῃ δὲ πόθων ἴὥγγες ἄγουσι 
θαλπομένους, εἰ καί σῴιν ἀνάρσιον ἡγεμονεύοις 
Φ ς / ~ / ε > > ᾿ς 
χέρσον ὑπεξερύων θῆλυν δόλον: οἱ δ᾽ ἐφέπονται 
3 ΄ wy / Ψ, +)? ε 7 13: 
ἀθρόοι, οὔτε δόλων μεμνημένοι οὔθ᾽ ἁλιήων" : 
3 3 LA > 24 / x A 
ἀλλ᾽’ ὥστ᾽ ἠΐθεοι περικαλλέος ὄμμα γυναικὸς 
φρασσάμενοι πρῶτον μὲν ἀποσταδὸν αὐγάζονται, 
εἶδος ἀγαιόμενοι πολυήρατον, ἄγχι δ᾽ ἔπειτα 


« The decoy bird, παλεύτρια A. 618 a 23 and 28, Introd. 
Pp. Xxxiv, avis ilew (cf. Plaut. Asin. i, 3. 66 aedis nobis areast, 
auceps sum ego, | Escast meretrix, lectus inlex est, amatores 
aves); σύμῴφυλος ὄρνις Dion. De av. iii. 45 χειροήθεις ὄρνιθες 
δ. iii, 1. Cf. iii, 9: Mart. χίν. 216 (on a Hawk 
captured and trained as a decoy); Praedo fuit volucrum ; 
famulus nunc aucupis idem | Decipit et captas non sibi 
maeret aves; Pallad. x. 12 noctuae ceteraque instrumenta 
capturae. 

ὁ ξουθός, when used of colour, is pretty nearly = ξανθός : 
when it is.used of sound, it is not possible to give more than 
an approximate rendering. 

¢ ἢ.1ϊ. 462 πῃ. 

4 A. 541 ἃ 19 περὶ δὲ τὴν Φοινίκην καὶ θήραν ποιοῦνται δι᾽ 
ἀλλήλων" ἄρρενας μὲν γὰρ ὑπάγοντες κεστρέας τὰς θηλείας περι- 
βάλλονται συνάγοντες, θηλείας δὲ τοὺς ἄρρενας; Plin. ix. 59 
isdem (mugilibus) tam incauta salacitas ut in Phoenice et 
in Narbonensi provincia coitus tempore e vivariis marem 


412 


HALIEUTICA, IV. 121-138 


guileful doom for birds hides in a dense thicket a 
female bird,* his tame companion in hunting birds 
of the same cry; and she shrilly pipes her sweet ® 
song, and the birds, hearing, all hasten towards her 
and rush of themselves into the snare, misled by 
the call of the female cry: like unto them the 
Parrot-wrasses rush into the belly of the weel. 

A like doom does love bring upon the Grey Mullets ¢ 
(Cephalus) ; for they also are beguiled by a female 4 
trailed in the waves. She should be in good condi- 
tion and fat of limb. For so, when they behold her, 
they gather around in countless numbers and 
wondrously overcome by her beauty they will not 
leave her but everywhere the spells of desire lead 
them charmed, yea even wert thou to draw forth 
the female snare from the water and lead them to 
the unfriendly dry land: they follow in a body, and 
heed neither fraud nor fishermen. But even as 
youths when they remark the face of a woman 
exceeding fair first gaze at her from afar, admiring 
her lovely form, and thereafter they draw near and, 


linea longinqua per os ad branchias religata emissum in 
mare eademque linea retractum feminae sequantur ad litus 
rursusque feminam mares partus tempore. The method is 
still practised: Apost. p. 45 ‘*Ce n’est pas le scare seulement 
qui se ‘:péche ainsi, mais aussi les muges, surtout l’espéce 
Capito dans les cétes de Péloponnése, sur les cétes du 
département d’Elide. . . , On opére ainsi: On tache d’abord 
d’attraper soit aux filets, soit a la ligne, une femelle de 
muge, qu’on désigne sous le nom vulgaire de Mraga. On 
l’attache ensuite par l’opercule sur une ligne portée par 
un long roseau, au moyen duquel on la tire sur l’eau; les 
autres muges, les males surtout, la suivent, toujours en 
quantité, un second pécheur, posté derriére celui qui traine le 
poisson sur l’eau, jette sur eux son filet circulaire (πεζύβολον), 
épervier, . . . et en capture le plus grand nombre possible.” 
This fishing is pursued from April to the end of June. 


413 


OPPIAN 


ἤλυθον, ἐκ δ᾽ ἐλάθοντο καὶ οὐκέτι κεῖνα κέλευθα 
ἔρχονται τὰ πάροιθεν, ἐφεσπόμενοι δὲ γάνυνται 140 
“- lol 3 , 
θελγόμενοι λιαρῇσιν ὑπὸ ῥιπῆς ᾿Αφροδίτης" 
ὡς κείνων οἰστρηδὸν ἐπόψεαι ὑγρὸν ὅμιλον 
> , ΄ , 3 , 5 » 
εἰλομένων: τάχα δέ σφιν ἀπεχθέες ἦλθον ἔρωτες" 
> \ > U 9 κα >? A ae ὦ 
αἶψα yap ἀμφίβληστρον ἀνὴρ εὐεργὲς ἀείρας 
κόλπον ἐπιπροέηκε καὶ ἄσπετον ἔσπασε θήρην, 14 
€ Qs £ IA tf > f 
ῥηϊδίως ἁψῖσι περίσχετον ἀμφικαλύψας. 
? > ͵ὔ ΦΩ͂ΣΑ la ” ΝΜ 
Σηπίαι αὖ δυσέρωτες ἐπὶ πλέον ἔδραμον ἀτης" 
οὐ γὰρ τοῖς οὐ κύρτον ὀλέθριον οὔτε λίνοιο 
3 δ > / CNS 3 land 
ἀμφιβολὰς ἐφέηκαν ἁλίστονοι ἀγρευτῆρες, 
3 > 4 > t4 3 td , ” 
ἀλλ᾽ αὔτως ἐρύουσιν ἀναψάμενοι μιαν οἵὴν 160 
> ε ,ὔ CF > 4. 9 vA > / > 7 
ev polio: at δ᾽ εὖτ᾽ av ἀπόπροθεν ἀθρήσωσιν, 
> 4\> > / / > ey 
aia μάλ᾽ ἀντιόωσι, περιπλέγδην δ᾽ ἐνέχονται 
ἐμφύμεναι σπείρῃσιν, ἅτε ξείνηθεν ἰδοῦσαι 
‘ A > vi wn lod . 
παρθενικαὶ δηναιὸν ἀδελφεὸν ἐνετῆρα 
παρθενικαὶ δηι δελφεὸν ἢ γενετῆρ β 
ἤπιον ἐν μεγάροισιν ἀπήμονα νοστήσαντα" 155 
2\ , , G25? FR. OF 2 , 
ἠὲ νέον ζεύγλῃσιν ὑπ᾽ εὐναίης ᾿Αφροδίτης 
κούρη ληϊσθεῖσα γάμων εὐαγρέϊ δεσμῷ 
δ > / 3,...9 > / / H A 
νυμφίον ἀμφέπλεξεν, ἐπ᾽ αὐχένι πάννυχα δεσμὰ 
ἀργεννοῖς ἑκάτερθε βραχίοσι γυρώσασα: 
ὡς τότε κερδαλέαι περὶ σηπίαι εἱλίσσονται 160 
> , δ΄ δ , » » 7 
ἀλλήλαις: οὐδέ σφι μεθίεται ἔργον ἔρωτος, 
εἰσόκεν ἐξερύσωσιν ἐπὶ σκάφος ἀσπαλιῆες:" 
e > 4 rd / PA 7, a 
αἱ δ᾽ ἔτι συμπεφύασι, πόθῳ δ᾽ ἅμα πότμον ἕλοντο. 
\ , 
Tas μὲν καὶ κύρτοισι παρήπαφον εἴαρος ὥρῃ: 


* H. ii. 191 π. For the method of fishing here mentioned 
cf. Apost. p. 51 ‘*Oppien dit que, quand on tire derriére le 
bateau une femelle de seiche, les males, en grand nombre, 


ἐν 


se mettent a la suivre. Les pécheurs greécs modernes 
4.14 


HALIEUTICA, IV. 139-164 


forgetting all, walk no more in their former ways 
but follow her with delight, beguiled by the sweet 
spells of Aphrodite : even so shalt thou behold the 
humid crowd of the Mullets passionately thronging. 
But swiftly with them love turns to hate; for 
speedily the fisher lifts the well-wrought net and 
spreads its lap and takes spoil unspeakable, easily 
enveloping the fishes in the embrace of the meshes. 

The Cuttle-fishes,? again, of unhappy passion run 
to a greater height of infatuation. For them neither 
deadly weel nor encircling net do the toilsome fishers 
of the sea set but merely trail in the waves a single 
female attached to a line. The Cuttle-fishes, when 
they behold it from afar, speedily come to meet it 
and twine about it and cling to it with their arms: 
even as maidens cling about brother or kindly father 
whom after many days they see returned safe to 
his own halls from a foreign land, or as a maid that 
is newly taken captive in the yoke of wedded love, 
the pleasant bond of marriage, embraces her bride- 
groom and all night long twines about his neck the 
bondage of her snowy arms: even so in that hour 
the crafty Cuttle-fishes twine about one another and 
the work of their passion abates not until the fisher- 
men draw them forth upon the boat. And still they 
cling and with desire take death, 

The Cuttle-fishes, indeed, men also beguile with 
weels in the spring season. The weels they cover 


emploient souvent le méme procédé mais quelquefois ils 
remplacent la femelle, que l’on a peine ἃ se procurer, par un 
mannequin de seiche, si je puis m’exprimer ainsi, appareil 
en bois ayant la forme d’une seiche. Sur sa partie convexe 
sont incrustés des morceaux de miroir. On tire cette seiche 
en bois, nommée ξυλόσουπια, σπιγιάλλι, derriére le bateau. 
Les poissons qui la suivent se péchent au haveneau.” 

415 


OPPIAN 


Ν i , 
κύρτους γὰρ σκιάσαντες ὑπὸ πτόρθοισι μυρίκης 
/ 3. \ ” 
ἢ κομάρου πετάλοισι τεθηλόσιν ἠὲ καὶ ἄλλῃ 
- Uy 
λάχνῃ, ἐπ᾽ ἠϊόνεσσι πολυψαμάθοισιν ἔθηκαν" 
a 5 \ \ tL κ« 
ai δ᾽ ἅμα μὲν γενεῆς κεχρημέναι ἠδὲ Kal εὐνῆς 
’ὔ 
κύρτον ἔσω σπεύδουσι καὶ ἥμεναι ἐν πετάλοισιν 
lon vA a 
αὐτοῦ μὲν παύσαντο πόθου, παύσαντο δὲ δειλῆς 
ζωῆς, ἀγρευτῆρσιν ἀνελκόμεναι πινυτοῖσιν. 
οχα δ᾽ ἐκ πάντων νεπόδων ἀλγεινὸν ἔρωτα 
/ > ΄΄ y > > , oy 
κόσσυφος ἀθλεύει, κίχλῃς δ᾽ ἐπιδαίεται ἤτορ, 
wv 7 vd » vd 
οἴστρῳ τε ζήλῳ τε, βαρύφρονι δαίμονι, θύων. 
oP 
κοσσύφῳ οὔτ᾽ εὐνὴ μία σύννομος, οὐ δάμαρ οἴη, 
οὐ θάλαμος, πολλαὶ δ᾽ ἄλοχοι, πολλαὶ δὲ χαράδραι 
κεκριμέναι κεύθουσιν ἐφέστια λέκτρα γυναικῶν" 
τῇσιν ἀεὶ πᾶν ἦμαρ ὑπὸ γλαφυροῖσι μυχοῖσι 
κίχλαι ναιετάουσιν, ἀλίγκιαι ἀρτιγάμοισι 
VA Δ ΕΣ + mw” / / 
νύμφαις, ἃς οὐκ ἄν τις ἴδοι θαλάμοιο πάροιθεν 
? lA 2 / / wv > ’ὔ 
ἐρχομένας" ἐν δέ oft γαμήλιος αἴθεται αἰδώς: 
“ 2 9 3 ΄ ,ὔ ” e / 
ὡς at γ᾽ ἐνδόμυχοι θαλάμων ἔντοσθεν ἑκάστη 
αἰεὶ δηθύνουσιν, ὅπῃ πόσις αὐτὸς ἀνώγει. 
κόσσυφος αὖ πέτρῃσι παρήμενος οὔποτε λείπει, 
ὟΝ 4 LY 7, A 3 ee > + 
αἰὲν ἔχων φυλακὴν λεχέων ὕπερ, οὐδέ ποτ᾽ ἄλλῃ 
/ a ἌΞΩΝ ey\7 + ΨΥ 
. τέτραπται, πᾶν δ᾽ ἦμαρ ἑλίσσεται, ἄλλοτε δ᾽ ἄλλους 


α Tamarix tetrandra. This and κόμαρος, Arbutus unedo, 
are mentioned among evergreens, Theophrast. H.P. i. 9. 

> The κόσσυφος and the κίχλη are mostly mentioned to- 
gether: A. 599 Ὁ 6 κατὰ συζυγίας δ᾽ of πετραῖοι φωλοῦσιν οἱ 
ἄρρενες τοῖς θήλεσιν, ὥσπερ καὶ νεοττεύουσιν, οἷον κίχλαι, κόττυφοι : 
607 b 14 μεταβάλλουσι δὲ καὶ ods καλοῦσι κοττύφους καὶ κίχλας 


ἐνὸν τὸ χρῶμα κατὰ τὰς ὥρας, . .. τοῦ μὲν γὰρ ἔαρος μέλανες 
γίνονται, εἶτα ἐκ τοῦ ἔαρος λευκοὶ πάλιν. Cf. Ael. xii. 28; Diocl. 
ap. Athen. 305 Ὁ οἱ δὲ πετραῖοι καλούμενοι... κόσσυφοι, κίχλαι: 


umen. tbid. μελάγχρων κόσσυφον ἢ κίχλας ἁλιειδέας : Aristot. 
ibid. τὰ μὲν μελανοστικτα, ὥσπερ κόσσυφος, τὰ δὲ ποικιλόστικτα, 


416 


165 
170 
1 


| 
| 
180 
| 


185 


HALIEUTICA, IV. 165-186 


with branches of tamarisk® or green leaves of 
arbutus or other foliage and place them on the sandy 
beaches. And the Cuttle-fishes in their desire for 
breeding and mating hasten within the weel and 
settle amid the foliage and there cease from their 
desire and cease ‘also from their wretched life, being 
haled up by the cunning fishermen. 

Beyond all the finny brood the Merle-wrasse ὃ 
endures a sorrowful love and it is for the Thrush- 
wrasse that he burns his heart, raging with frenzy 
and with jealousy, that grievous god. The Merle 
has neither one marriage-bed nor one bride nor one 
bridal chamber, but many are his spouses and many 
separate clefts hide the home and bed of his wives. 
Therein evermore the Thrushes dwell all day in 
their hollow retreats, like newly wedded brides, 
whom one would never see coming forth from their 
chamber ; but nuptial shame burns in their hearts ; 
even so the Thrushes always abide retired each one 
within her chamber, wherever her husband himself 
commands. The Merle, on the other hand, sits by 
upon the rocks and never leaves them, ever keeping 
watch over his bed, and he never turns otherwhere 
but all day wheels about, now looking to this chamber, 


ὥσπερ κίχλη. The κίχλη 15 mentioned separately Nicandr. 
ap. Athen, 305 d as πολυώνυμος, of. Pancrat. ibid. 305 ὁ ; also 
Epicharm. ibid., A. 605417, 698 a 11; Plin. xxxii. 9 turdus 
inter saxatiles nobilis. The κόσσυφος is mentioned separately, 
Phil. 99; Plin. xxx. 11 merula inter saxatiles laudata; Ov. 
Hal. 114 merulaeque virentes; Ael. i. 14 and 15. They are 
clearly closely allied species of Wrasse (Labridae, M.G. 
πετρόψαρο, xetdos). In M.G. κοτσύφι is Orenilabrus pavo ; 
κίχλα is Coricus rostratus. Oppian seems to take κόσσυφος 
and κίχλη to be merely the male and female of the same 
species, and Aelian, /I. cc., in paraphrasing Oppian, mentions 
the κόσσυφος only. 

2a 417 


OPPIAN 


ἣν; 3 Coe \ 
παπταίνει θαλάμους καί of νόος οὔτ᾽ ἐπὶ φορβὴν 
/ A > + a 7 LAN’ > % 
στέλλεται οὔτε τιν᾽ ἄλλον ἔχει πόνον, &. ἐπὶ 
νύμφαις 
/ ne 
μοχθίζει δύσζηλος ἀειφρούροισι πόνοισι: | 
” 
νυκτὶ δέ of βρώμης τε μέλει καὶ παύεται ἔργων 190 
-“ 9. av / 
τυτθὸν ὅσον φυλακῆς ἀζηχέος" ἀλλ᾽ ὅτε κίχλαι 
-“ D> she 
ὃν τόκον wdivwow, ὃ δ᾽ ἄσχετα τῆμος ἀΐσσει 
3 / > A > yA + ” 
ἀμφιπεριτρομέων, ἐπὶ δ᾽ ἔρχεται ἄλλοτε ἄλλην 
εἰς ἄλοχον, μέγα δή τι περιτρομέοντι ἐοικὼς 
Ξ- ΄ | 
ὠδίνων. οἷον δὲ μετὰ φρεσὶν ἄχθος adver 195 
“- A 
μήτηρ, τηλυγέτοιο θοὴν ὠδῖνα θυγατρὸς 
πρωτολεχοῦς φρίσσουσα- τὸ γὰρ μέγα δεῖμα γυναι- 
κῶν: 
Σ \ > + /, ς va 5 Ψ' 
αὐτὴν δ᾽ οὔτι χέρειον ἱκάνεται Εἰλειθυίης 
κῦμα πόνων, πάντῃ δὲ διὲκ θαλάμων δεδόνηται 
εὐχομένη, στενάχουσα, μετήορον ἦτορ ἔχουσα, 200 | 
εἰσόκε λυσιπόνοιο βοῆς ἔντοσθεν ἀκούσῃ: 
ὡς ὁ περιτρομέων ἀλόχοις μέγα δαίεται ἥτορ. 
τοῖόν που λεχέων ἀΐω νόμον ἐντύνεσθαι 
At ,ὔ « Τί ἔς \ "6 + > a 
σσυρίους, ot liypw ὑπὲρ πόρον dare’ ἔχουσι, 
3 “a - ~ 
Βάκτρων τ᾽ ἐνναετῆρας, ἑκηβόλον ἔθνος ὀϊστῶν.: 205 
καὶ γὰρ τοῖς πλέονές τε γαμήλια λέκτρα γυναῖκες 
κεκριμέναι μεθέπουσι καὶ εὐνάζονται ἅπασαι 
νύκτας ἀμειβόμεναι: μετὰ δέ σῴισι κέντρον ὀπηδεῖ 
ζήλου ἀνιαροῖο, περὶ ζήλῳ δ᾽ ὀλέκονται, 
oN 9 τὸ 5. > 7 \ / + 
atev ἐπ᾽ ἀλλήλοισι βαρὺν θήγοντες ἄρηα. 210 
Ἷ 
as οὐδὲν ζήλοιο κακώτερον ἀνδράσιν ἄλγος | 
>? / λλ \ δὲ if, AAG \ / 
ἐντρέφεται, πολλοὺς δὲ γόους, πολλὰς δὲ τίθησιν 
3 / 7 A aA 
οἰμωγάς: λύσσης yap ἀναιδέος ἐστὶν ἑταῖρος" 
΄ 3 3 ,ὔ A 
λύσσῃ δ᾽ ἀσπασίως ἐπιμίσγεται, ἐς δὲ βαρεῖαν 
» >? A 
ἄτην ἐξεχόρευσε, τέλος δέ οἱ emer” ὄλεθρος. 21ὅ 
“ \ \ 7 e Δ ,ὔ Ψ 
ae τὸν δύστηνον ὑπήγαγε κόσσυφον ἄτῃ 
41 


HALIEUTICA, IV. 187-216 


now to that. And his mind is not set upon foraging 
nor has he any other business, but in unhappy 
jealousy keeps his tedious and eternal vigil over his 
brides : only at night he takes thought of food and 
rests for as short a space as may be from the labour 
of his ceaseless watch. But when the Thrushes are 
in the travail of birth, then incontinently he rushes 
fluttering around and visits now one wife, now 
another, as if he were greatly anxious for the issue 
of their travail. Even as a mother is distraught 
with the burden of her heart when she trembles 
for the sharp pain of her only daughter in travail 
of her first child: for that is the great dread of 
women: and on herself no less comes the wave of 
the pangs of Hileithyia,t and she roams everywhere 
throughout the halls, praying and groaning in 
suspense of heart, until she hears from within the 
ery that delivers from pain: even so the Merle, 
trembling for his wives, burns greatly in his heart. 
Such a custom methinks of marriage I hear that the 
Assyrians practise, who have their cities beyond the 
Tigris stream and the inhabitants of Bactra, a nation 
of archers. For them also severa! different wives 
deal with the marriage-bed and night about all share 
the nuptial couch. And the goad of grievous jealousy 
haunts them and by jealousy they perish, ever one 
against another whetting bitter war. So true it is 
that no more evil bane waxes among men than 
jealousy, which causes much groaning and much 
lamentation. Jealousy is the companion of shameless 
madness and with madness it gladly consorts and 
dances into grievous infatuation; and the end 
thereof is destruction. Jealousy too it is that leads 


« Goddess of Birth. 
Ξ 419 


OPPIAN 


“-. “ ’ , > ~ 
δμηθῆναι, χαλεπῆς δὲ γάμων ἤντησεν ἀμοιβῆς. 
εὖτε γὰρ ἀθρήσῃ σπιλάδων ἔπι δινεύοντα 
ἰχθὺν ἀσπαλιεύς, ἀλόχοις πέρι μόχθον ἔχοντα, 
ἀγκίστρῳ κρατερῷ περιβάλλεται ὅττι τάχιστα 89. 
καρῖδα ζώουσαν, em ἀγκίστροιο δ᾽ ὕπερθε 

\ > va / ΄ 9, \ ¢ / 
βριθὺς ἀνήρτηται μολίβου κύβος: αὐτὰρ ὁ λάθρῃ 
πρὸς πέτραις ἀφέηκε βαρὺν δόλον, ἐγγύθι δ᾽ αὐτῶν 

4 ΄ὔ ες 3 2 / > > > \ 
δινεύει θαλάμων: ὁ δ᾽ ἐσέδρακεν, aia δ᾽ ὀρινθεὶς 
ὡρμήθη, καρῖδα δόμων ἔντοσθεν ἱκάνειν 298 
ἐλπόμενος λεχέεσσιν ἀνάρσιον ἠδ᾽ ἀλόχοισιν: 

3 7-9 , ε \ ” 3 ΄ 

αἶψα δ᾽ ἐπιθύσας ὁ μὲν ἔλπεται ἐν γενύεσσι 
τίνυσθαι καρῖδος ἐπήλυσιν, οὐδ᾽ ἐνόησεν : 
Δ / > 7 € \ / > I 

ὃν μόρον ἀμφιχανών: ἁλιεὺς δέ μιν αἶψα Soxedoas 
χαλκείαις ξυνέπειρεν ἀνακρούων γενύεσσιν 236 
εἴρυσέ τ᾽ ἀσχαλόωντα Kal ὕστατον ἀσπαίροντα, : 
καί πού μιν Tolovow ἐνίπαπε κερτομίοισι" | 
~ ὃ ΄ a ON ΄ ΄ , | 
νῦν δή, viv ἀλόχους τε περιφρούρευε φυλάσσων, __ 
ὦ τάλαν, ἐν θαλάμοις τε μένων ἐπιτέρπεο νύμφαις 
οὐ γάρ τοι μία Kimpis ἐφήνδανεν οὐδὲ pl” εὐνή, 236 
ἀλλὰ μάλ᾽ ἐν τόσσῃσιν ἀγάλλεο μοῦνος ἀκοίτης 

a > 9» ~ "Ἂς 
εὐναῖς: ἀλλ᾽ ἴθι δεῦρο, γάμος δέ τοί ἐστιν ἑτοῖμος, 
νυμφίε, χερσαίοιο πυρὸς λευκάμπυκος αὐγή. 
τοιάδε που νείκεσσε καὶ οὐκ ἀΐοντι πιφαύσκων. 

, 3 4 4 A | 
κίχλαι δ᾽, εὖτε θάνῃ φρουρὸς πόσις, ἐκτὸς ἰοῦσαι 24 

΄, , \ > ὦ > + , 
πλάζονται θαλάμων, ξυνὸν δ᾽ ἕλον ἀνέρι πότμον. 

Καὶ μὴν δὴ φιλότητι καὶ ἀλλήλων ἐπαρωγῇ 
ὄλλυνται γαλεοί τε κύνες καὶ φῦλα κελαινῶν 

By, 

κεντροφόρων" λευκὸς μὲν ἐπ᾽ ἀγκίστρῳ πεπέδηται 
3 ΄ 3 
ἰχθύς, ἀσπαλιεὺς δὲ κιών, ὅθι πηλὸς ἀϊδνὴς 94 

7 a an 
ἐμβύθιος δολιχῇσιν ὑφίζεται ὀργυιῇσιν, 


4 Ἢ, ii. 128 n. > Hi. 819 n. 
420 . 


HALIEUTICA, IV. 217-246 


the unhappy Merle to be the victim of infatuation 
and a bitter requital he finds for his many brides. 
For when the fisherman perceives him wheeling upon 
the rocks in trouble about his wives, with all speed 
he puts upon a strong hook a live Prawn @ and above 
the hook is hung a heavy cube of lead. And 
stealthily he launches his deadly snare beside the 
rocks and dangles it near the very bridal chambers 
of the Merle. He espies it and is straightway roused 
and charges, thinking that the Prawn is coming 
within his halls with hostile intent to beds and brides. 
Straightway rushing he thinks to avenge with his 
jaws the invasion of the Prawn, and perceives not 
that he is swallowing his own doom. The fisher 
watching him straightway strikes home and. trans- 
fixes him with his barbs of bronze, and hales him 
forth indignant and writhing in his last struggle, 
and haply he chides with such mocking words as 
these : ‘‘ Now then, now watch and guard thy wives, 
wretched fish, and abide at home rejoicing in thy 
brides! for one love and one bed did not content 
thee, but thou didst glory, a single husband, in so 
many. Nay, come hither, bridegroom, thy bride is 
ready—the blaze of landward fire wreathed with 
white.”’ So haply he rebukes him, albeit speaking 
to deaf ears. But the Thrushes, when their guardian 
husband dies, wander forth from their chambers 
and share his doom. 

Moreover, through love and mutual help perish 
also the Galeus ὃ Dog-fishes and the tribes of the 
dark Spiny Dog-fishes*; a white fish? is bound 
upon the hook and the fisherman goes where the 
dark mud lies long fathoms deep and lets down his 


9 Η. i. 380 n. 9 Ael, i. 55, 
421 


OPPIAN 


+ , “- , ” ” 
ἄγκιστρον καθέηκε, θοῶς δέ τις ἔσπασεν ἄτην 
[ » 
ἀντιάσας" ὁ μὲν αὐτίκ᾽ ἀνέλκεται, οἱ δέ μιν ἄλλοι 
> \ oe 
φρασσάμενοι μάλα πάντες ἀολλέες ἐγγὺς ἕπονται, 
ὄφρ᾽ αὐτὴν ἐπὶ νῆα καὶ ἀγρευτῆρας ἵκωνται. 250 
~ fee 7 
δὴ τότε τοὺς μὲν ἕλοις ὑποχῆς περιηγέϊ κύκλῳ, 
τοὺς δὲ σιδηρείοισι καταΐγδην στυφελίζων 
αἰχμαῖς τριγλώχισι καὶ ἀλλοίοισι δόλοισιν: 
3 e A 
οὐ yap πρὶν φεύγουσιν ἀπότροποι, εἰσόχ ἑταῖρον 
e / 7 ε ~ > > 7, > a 
ἑλκόμενον λεύσσωσιν, ὁμοῦ δ᾽ ἐθέλουσιν ὀλέσθαι. 255 
οἷον δ᾽ ἀρτιφάτου παιδὸς νέκυν ἐκ μεγάροιο | 
΄ > > ᾽ὔ τ / ~ 
τύμβον ἐς ἀμφίκλαυτον ἑοὶ στέλλουσι τοκῆες 
τηλυγέτου, τῷ πολλὰ μάτην περιμοχθήσωσι:" 
δρυπτόμενοι δ᾽ ὀδύνῃσι τέκος περικωκύοντες 
> ,ὔ > / yt 3 20 “λ “λ 0 
ἡρίῳ ἐμπεφύασι καὶ οὐκ ἐθέλουσι μέλαθρα 260 
νοστῆσαι, ξυνῇ δὲ θανεῖν δυσπενθέι νεκρῷ" | 
“ ΄- 3 > 20) aN > AN la λ / θ | 
ὡς οἱ y οὐκ ἐθέλουσιν ἀνελκομένοιο λιπέσθαι, | 
- | 
εἰσόκεν αὐτὸν ὄλεθρον ὑπ᾽ ἀγρευτῆρσιν ὄλωνται. | 
"AXA ὃ \ Ay \ > 3 / Ψ 
ous δὲ ξεῖνός τε καὶ οὐκ ἐνδήμιος ἅλμης | 
εἷλεν ἔρως, χερσαῖον ἐπ᾽ ἰχθύσιν οἶστρον ἐγείρων 265 
” > ~ 7 / e e /, | 
ἔξαλον: ἀλλοδαπῆς φιλίης βέλος οἷον ἱκάνει 
πουλύποδας σαργῶν τε γένος πέτρῃσιν ἑταῖρον. 
» ἊΨ. A 3 ’ ,ὔ 
ἤτοι πουλύποδες μὲν ᾿Αθηναίης φιλέουσιν 
ἔρνεα καὶ θαλλοῖσιν ἐπὶ γλαυκοῖσιν ἔρωτα | 
” > , A , , , | 
ἔσπασαν" ἢ μέγα θαῦμα πόθῳ φρένα δενδρήεντι 270 
ἕλκεσθαι λιπαροῦ τε φυτοῦ πτόρθοισι γάνυσθαι. 


@ Of. H. iii. 81. . 

ὃ Plato, Soph. 220 κε τοῦ τοίνυν ἀγκιστρευτικοῦ τῆς πληκτικῆς τὸ 
μὲν ἄνωθεν εἰς τὸ κάτω γιγνόμενον διὰ τὸ τοῖς τριόδουσιν οὕτω 
μάλιστα χρῆσθαι τριοδοντία τις, οἶμαι, κέκληται. 

° H. i. 806 π. 

@ Ὅν ii. 433 n. 

4 Ael. 1. 23 οἰκία τῷ σαργῷ τῷ ἰχθύι πέτρα τε καὶ σήραγγες. 

’ i.e., olive-trees which were sacred to Athena, Cf. Ael. | 
422 


HALIEUTICA, IV. 247-271 


hook and swiftly some fish meets it and seizes his 
doom. And he is straightway pulled in and the 
others perceiving it all follow close in a body, until 
they come right to the boat and the fishermen. 
Then one may take them—some with the curving 
circle of the bag-net,* some with downward-sweeping ὃ 
blows of the iron trident or by other devices. For 
they do not turn to flee while they see their comrade 
being haled, but wish to perish with him. Even 
as when parents convey from the house to the tearful 
tomb the body of their newly slain boy—their only 
son for whom they have laboured much and vainly— 
and tearing their cheeks for grief they bewail their 
child and cling to the grave and are unwilling to 
return home but rather would die with the lamented 
dead : even so the fishes will not leave the captured 
fish till they die the same death at the hands of the 
fishers. 

Others are taken by a passion strange and not 
native to the brine, which wakes in fishes a landward 
frenzy foreign to the sea: such as the alien love 
whose shaft smites the Poulpes ὁ and the race of 
the Sargues¢ which companion with the rocks.’ 
The Poulpes indeed love the trees of Athena’ and 
have caught a passion for the grey-green 4 foliage. 
Verily it is a great marvel that their mind should 
be drawn by desire for a tree and delight in the 


i. 87 λέγουσι δὲ ἁλιεῖς καὶ πολύποδας els τὴν γῆν προιέναι, ἐλαίας 
θαλλοῦ ἐπὶ τῆς ἠόνος κειμένου ; ix. 45 ἀγροῦ γειτνιῶντος θαλάττῃ 
καὶ φυτῶν παρεστώτων ἐγκάρπων γεωργοὶ πολλάκις καταλαμβά- 
νουσιν ἐν ὥρᾳ θερείῳ πολύποδάς τε καὶ ὀσμύλους ἐκ τῶν κυμάτων 
προελθόντας καὶ διὰ τῶν πρέμνων ἀνερπύσαντας καὶ τοῖς κλάδοις 
περιπεσόντας καὶ ὀπωρίζοντας κτλ. Cf. Phil. 102. 26 ff. 
9 Pind. O. iii. 13 γλαυκόχροα κόσμον ἐλαίας ; Soph. O.C. 
γλαυκᾶς παιδοτρόφου φύλλον ἐλαίας. 
428 


OPPIAN 


> 2 ΜΝ 
ἔνθα γὰρ ἀγλαόκαρπος ἁλὸς σχεδόν ἐστιν ἐλαίη, 
γείτοσιν ἐν γουνοῖσιν ἐπακταίη τεθαλυῖα, 
aA \ 7 tf ν 2 2 teh Ps 
κεῖθι δὲ πουλύποδος νόος ἕλκεται, ἠὔτ᾽ ἐπ᾽ ἴχνος 
3 3 la 
Κνωσίου εὐρίνοιο κυνὸς μένος, ὅστ᾽ ἐν ὄρεσσι 975 
θηρὸς ἀνιχνεύει σκολιὴν βάσιν ἐξερεείνων 
ῥινὸς ὑπ᾽ ἀγγελίῃ νημερτέϊ καί τέ μιν ὦκα 
μάρψε καὶ οὐκ ἐμάτησεν ἑὸν δ᾽ ἐπέλασσεν ἄνακτα" 
a \ / + 4 > \ >? 7, 
ὡς καὶ τηλεθόωσαν ἄφαρ μάθεν ἐγγὺς ἐλαίην 
πούλυπος, ἐκδύνει δὲ βυθῶν καὶ γαῖαν ἀνέρπει 980 
/ , 8»19 ,ὔ > a 
καγχαλόων, πρέμνοισι δ᾽ ᾿Αθηναίης ἐπέλασσεν" 
ἔνθ᾽ ἤτοι πρῶτον μὲν ἀγαλλόμενος περὶ ῥίζης 
πυθμένας εἰλεῖται στρωφώμενος, Hite κοῦρος, 
ὅστε νέον προμολοῦσαν ἑὴν τροφὸν ἀμφαγαπάζει, 
3 \ la ¢ / /, > oem \ a 3, αν» 
ἀμφὶ δέ οἱ πλέκεται, κόλποις δ᾽ ἐπὶ χεῖρας ἀείρει, 285 
ἱμείρων δειρήν τε καὶ αὐχένα πηχύνασθαι: 
ὡς ὁ περὶ πρέμνοισιν ἑλίσσεται ἔρνεϊ χαίρων. 
ἔνθεν ἔπειτ᾽ ἄκρῃσιν ἐρειδόμενος κοτύλῃσιν 
tyr Pipes ΄ ᾿ , > WE τανε cote a ἢ 
ὑψόσ᾽ ἀνερπύζει λελνημένος, ἀμφὶ δὲ χαίτας 
͵ yA ΕΣ ” vA “͵7 > A 
πτύσσεται, ἄλλοτε ἄλλον ἔχων κλάδον, οἷά τις ἀνὴρ 290 
νοστήσας ξείνηθεν ἑοὺς ἀσπάζεθ᾽ ἑταίρους 
ἀθρόον ἀντιόωντας ἑλισσόμενος περὶ δειρήν" 
av “ λ θ “ VA 3 3 > / 
ἢ ὥστε βλωθρῇσιν ἑλίσσεται aud’ ἐλάτῃσιν 
ὑγρὸς ἕλιξ κισσοῖο, τιταινόμενος δ᾽ ἀπὸ ῥίζης 
¢ 4 4 \ 
ἑρπύζει, πάντῃ δὲ περιρρέει axpeudvecow: 295 
a LA θό λ \ / > > ,ὔ 
ὡς ὁ γε γηθόσυνος λιπαροὺς περιβάλλετ᾽ ἐλαίης 
ὄρπηκας, κυνέοντι πανείκελος" ἀλλ᾽ ὅτ᾽ ἔρωτος 
Ἄ ik > \ 
λωφήσῃ, πάλιν αὖτις ἁλὸς μετὰ κόλπον ἀφέρπει, 
πλησάμενος φιλότητος ἐλαιηροῦ τε πόθοιο. 
a \ 
τοῦ δή μιν καὶ ἔρωτος ἕλεν δόλος, ὡς ἐδάησαν 300 
» / \ \ ς Aa 
ἰχθυβόλοι: θαλλοὺς yap ὁμοῦ δήσαντες ἐλαίης 


* 4,6., Cretan (C. i. 373), from Cnos(s)us, town in Crete. 
424. 


HALIEUTICA, IV. 272-301 


branches of the oily plant. For wherever there is 
near the sea an olive of splendid fruit, which flourishes 
on a shoreward slope neighbouring the sea, thither 
is the mind of the Poulpe drawn, even as to the 
track the spirit of the keen-scented Cnosian® dog, 
which on the hills*searches out the crooked path of 
the wild beast and tracks it by the unerring guidance 
of the nose and swiftly seizes it and fails not of its 
prey but brings it to its master: even so the Poulpe 
straightway knows that a blooming olive is near at 
hand, and he comes forth from the deep and crawls 
upon the land exulting and draws nigh to the trunk 
of Athena’s tree. Then first he coils and twines 
about the base of the trunk exulting, even as a boy 
who welcomes his nurse when she is newly come 
forth and clings about her and lifts his hands to her 
bosom, fain to put his arms about her neck and 
shoulders; even so the Poulpe twines about the 
trunk, rejoicing in the tree. Thereafter he lays 
hold with the tips of his suckers and crawls up 
eagerly and clings about the foliage, grasping now 
one branch, now another, even as a man who has 
come home from a foreign land greets his friends 
who throng to meet him and falls upon their necks ; 
or as the twining ivy tendril clings about the tall 
fir-trees and, reaching forth from the root, climbs 
upwards and overruns the branches everywhere : 
so does the Poulpe joyfully embrace the sleek 
branches of the olive and seems to kiss them. But 
when he has relieved his desire, he crawls back again 
to the bosom of the sea, having satisfied his love and 
longing for the olive. The snare of this same love 
is his undoing, as fishermen know. For they bind 
together branches of the olive as goodly as may be 


425 


OPPIAN 


¢ “Ὰ9 > , , , 25, ᾿ 
ὅττι μάλ᾽ εὐφυέας μόλιβον μέσον ἐγκατέθηκαν, 
ἐκ δ᾽ ἀκάτου σύρουσιν: 6 δ᾽ οὐκ ἀμέλησε νοήσας 
ψ, 3 3 How x > / «ς ,ὔ 
πούλυπος ἀλλ᾽ ἤϊξε καὶ ἀμφέπλεξεν ἑταίρους 
/ DINO Py | 2d) OP, “τ / ΛΑ > + 
πτόρθους. οὐδ᾽ ἔτ᾽ ἔπειτα Kal ἑλκόμενός περ ἐς ἄγρην 305 
δεσμὰ πόθων ἀνίησιν, ἕως ἔντοσθε γένηται 
/ ¢ 3 2 ” Niss89) ΄ / 3 ᾿ 
νηός" ὁ δ᾽ οὐκ ἤχθηρε καὶ ὀλλύμενός περ ἐλαίην. 
Σαργοὶ δ᾽ αἰγείοισι πόθοις ἐπὶ θυμὸν ἔχουσιν, | 
εν ας ὃ᾽ ε , > 5A δὲ a | 
αἰγῶν 0 ἱμείρουσιν, ὀρειαύλοις δὲ βοτοῖσιν | 
ἐκπάγλως χαίρουσι καὶ εἰνάλιοί περ ἐόντες. 310 
> , > cee 7 ¢ os ὃς , 
ἢ σέβας οὐκ ἐπίελπτον, ὁμόφρονα φῦλα τεκέσθαι 
ἀλλήλοις ὀρέων τε πάγους χαροπήν τε θάλασσαν. 
εὖτε γὰρ αἰγονομῆες ἐπὶ ῥηγμῖνος ἄγωσι | 
μηκάδας, ἐν δίνῃσι λοεσσομένας ἁλίῃσιν | 
? / iA \ > lg ov > 7 | 
evdlous, ὅτε θερμὸς ᾿Ολύμπιος ἵσταται aoTHp, 315 
ot δὲ τότε βληχήν τε παρακταίην ἀΐοντες | 
αὐδήν τ᾽ αἰπολίων Bapunyéa πάντες ὁμαρτῇ 
καὶ νωθεῖς περ ἐόντες ἐπειγόμενοι φορέονται 
\ 3 | 
σαργοὶ καὶ θρώσκουσιν ἐπ᾽ ἀνδήροισι θαλάσσης, | 
γηθόσυνοι, κεραὸν δὲ περισαίνουσιν ὅμιλον 820 
> / 4 \ > / > , 
ἀμφί τε λιχμάζουσι καὶ ἀθρόοι ἀμφιχέονται, 
πυκνὰ κατασκαίροντες" ἔχει δ᾽ ἄρα θαῦμα νομῆας 
mpwrodacis: αἶγες δὲ φίλον χορὸν οὐκ ἀέκουσαι 


“ The line is a κάθετος or weighted line (A. iii. 77 n.).,. ‘The 4 | 
modern practice is entirely analogous: Apost. p. 48 ** Pour 
la péche du poulpe on fixe au plomb [μόλιβος, μόλυβδος] de 
engin quatre hamecons, dont les pointes sont dirigées en 
dehors ; autour d’eux on met un morceau d’étoffe blanche, | 
pour attirer l’animal qu’on veut capturer. Le poulpe, croyant 
avoir faire ἃ une bonne proie, allonge ses tentacules pour la 
saisir, mais il s’y raccroche et périt.” Cf. H. iv. 439 n. 

>» Cf. Apost. p. 49 “On ne péche ainsi que les males de ce 
genre de céphalopodes. Cela nous induit ἃ supposer que 
Yanimal, poussé par l’instinct de la reproduction, se colle ἃ 
cet engin qu'il prend pour une femelle de son espéce,” 


426 


HALIEUTICA, IV. 302-323 


and put in the midst thereof the lead, and tow 
them from the boat. The Poulpe, when he remarks 
it, is not unheeding but rushes to embrace his 
branchy comrades. And not even when he is being 
haled to capture does he relax the bonds of desire,? 
till he is within the boat, nor even while he perishes 
does he hate the olive. 

The Sargues have their hearts possessed by affec- 
tion for Goats.¢ Goats they yearn for and they 
rejoice exceedingly in the mountain-dwelling beasts, 
even though they belong themselves to the sea. 
Surely it is a marvel beyond expectation that 
mountain-crags and the flashing sea should give birth 
to tribes that are of one mind together. For when the 
goatherds bring their bleating flocks to the shore, to 
bathe in the eddying waves at noontide, at the 
season when the hot Olympian star ὦ arises, then the 
Sargues, hearing the bleating on the shore and the 
deep murmur of the herds, rush all together in haste, 
sluggish though they be, and leap joyfully on the 
terraces by the sea and fawn upon the horned 
company and lick them and crowd about them with 
many a gambol; and amazement seizes the herds- 
men that learn it for the first time. The goats 
receive the friendly choir not unwillingly and the 


¢ Ael.i. 23 φιλοῦσι δέ πως τῶν ἀλόγων αἶγας ἰσχυρῶς, ἐὰν γοῦν 
πλησίον τῆς ἠόνος νεμομένων ἡ σκιὰ μιᾶς ἢ δευτέρας ἐν τῇ θαλάττῃ 
φανῇ, οἱ δὲ ἀσμένως προσνέουσι καὶ ἀναπηδῶσιν ὡς ἡδόμενοι, καὶ 
προσάψασθαι τῶν αἰγῶν ποθοῦσιν ἐξαλλόμενοι κτλ. 

ἃ Sirius. Olympian=in Olympus=in the sky. Schol. 
ὀλύμπιος οὐράνιος. A common use in late, especially Latin 
poets: Verg. 1. v. 56 Candidus insuetum miratur limen 
Olympi | Sub pedibusque videt nubes et sidera Daphnis ; 
G. i. 450 (sol) emenso cum iam decedit Olympo; den. i. 374 
Ante diem clauso componet Vesper Olympo ; vi. 579 Quantus 
ad aetherium caeli suspectus Olympum. 


427 


OPPIAN 


, ‘ > " ” ΄ὔ 3 , 
δέχνυνται * TOUS ὃ οὔτις EXEL KOPOS εὐφροσυνάων. 
΄, 


> / > a ὔ 
οὐ τόσον ἐν σταθμοῖσι κατηρεφέεσσι νομήων 325 


μητέρας ἐκ βοτάνης ἔριφοι περικαγχαλόωντες 

πολλῇ γηθοσύνῃ τε φιλοφροσύνῃ τε δέχονται, 

ἦμος ἅπας περὶ χῶρος ἀγαλλομένῃσιν ἰωῇς 

νηπιάχων κέκληγε, νόος δ᾽ ἐγέλασσε βοτήρων, 

ὡς κεῖνοι κεραῇσι περισπέρχουσ᾽ ἀγέλῃσιν. 880 

εὖτ᾽ ἂν δ᾽ εἰναλίων ἄδδην ἴσχωσι λοετρῶν, 

αἱ δὲ πάλιν στείχωσιν ἐς αὔλια, δὴ τότε σαργοὶ 

ἀχνύμενοι μάλα πάντες ἀολλέες ἐγγὺς ἕπονται, 

κύματος ἀκροτάτοιο γέλως ὅθι χέρσον ἀμείβει. 

ὡς δ᾽ ὅτε τηλύγετον μήτηρ γόνον ἢ καὶ ἀκοίτην 335 

εὐνέτις ἀλλοδαπὴν τηλέχθονα γαῖαν ἰόντα 

ἀχνυμένη στέλλῃσι, νόος δέ οἱ ἔνδον ἀλύει, 

ὅσση οἱ μεσσηγὺς ἁλὸς χύσις, ὅσσα τε κύκλα 

μηνῶν: ἀκροτάτοισι δ᾽ ἐπεμβαίνουσα θαλάσσης 

κύμασι δακρυόεσσαν ὑπὸ στόμα γῆρυν ἵησι, 840 

σπεύδειν λισσομένη «καί μιν πόδες. οὐκέτ᾽ ὀπίσσω 

ἱεμένην φορέουσιν, ἔχει δ᾽ ἐπὶ πόντον ὁπωπάς" 

ὡς κείνους καί κέν τις ὑπ᾽ ὄμμασι δάκρυα φαίη 

στάζειν οἰωθέντας ἐλαυνομένων πάλιν αἰγῶν. 

σαργὲ τάλαν: τάχα γάρ σε κακὸν πόθον αἰπολίοισι, 345 

φημὶ συνοίσεσθαι" τοῖος νόος ἀσπαλιήων 

εἰς ἀπάτην καὶ κῆρα τεοὺς ἔτρεψεν ἔρωτας. 

πέτρας μὲν κείνας τεκμαίρεται ἐγγύθι γαίης 

πρῶτον ἀνὴρ διδύμοισιν ἀνισταμένας κροτάφοισιν 

ἐγγύθεν, αἱ στεινωπὸν ἁλὸς διὰ χῶρον ἔχουσιν, 860 
ε 


* This account of the capture of the Sargues is para- 
phrased Ἀεὶ. i. 23.. Captain Cook, Last Voyage, describes 
a similar method used by the natives of Nootka Sound: 
‘They sometimes decoy animals by covering themselves 


428 


HALIEUTICA, IV. 324-350 


Sargues know no satiety of joy. No, not so much in 
the roofed steadings of the herdsmen do the kids 
exult about their mothers when they receive them 
home from pasture with great and joyful welcome, 
while all the place around rings with the glad cries 
of the little things, and the heart of the herdsmen 
smiles, as those Sargues fuss about the horned herds. 
And when these have had their fill of bathing in the 
sea, and go back to their folds, then in sorrow do all 
the Sargues together attend them closely to where 
the laughter of the utmost wave skirts the land. As 
when a sorrowing mother speeds her only son, or 
wife her husband, on his journey to a foreign land 
afar, and her heart is distraught within her: so wide 
the waters of the sea that shall lie between, so many 
the circles of the moons; standing in the utmost 
waves of the sea she utters from her lips tearful 
words, praying him to haste ; and her feet carry her 
no more eagerly homeward but she has her eyes 
upon the sea; even so the Sargues, one would say, 
shed tears from their eyes, left desolate, when the 
Goats are driven away. Poor Sargue! anon me- 
thinks thou shalt find thy companioning with the 
herds of Goats a fatal passion. In such wise does 
the wit of the fishermen turn thy love into a snare 
and destruction. First? of all a man marks those 
rocks near the land which rise in twin peaks near 
together with a narrow space of sea between and 


with a skin, and running about on all-fours, which they do 
very nimbly, as appeared from the specimens of their skill 
which they exhibited to us—making a kind of noise or 
neighing at the same time; and on these occasions the 
masks, or carved heads, as well as the real dried heads of 
the different animals, are put on.” Another method used 
by the Carians, Ael. xiii. 2. 

4:29 


OPPIAN 


32 7 3 t? 14 e ov A 
αἰθέρος ἀκτίνεσσι διαυγέας, αἷς ἔνι σαργοὶ 
πολλοὶ ναιετάουσιν, ὁμόκτιτον αὖλιν ἔχοντες" 
ἔξοχα γὰρ πυρσοῖσιν ἐπ᾽ ἠελίοιο γάνυνται. 
> 4Q9> > \ ,ὔ > 4 / > , 
ἐνθάδ᾽ ἀνὴρ μελέεσσιν ἐφεσσάμενος δέρος αἰγός, 

\ 7 , ἰῷ, , Stee 6 
δοιὰ κέρα κροτάφοισι περὶ σφετέροισιν ἀνάψας, 355 
στέλλεται ὁρμαίνων νόμιον δόλον, ἐς δ᾽ ἅλα βάλλει 
κρείασιν αἰγείοισιν ὁμοῦ κνίσσῃ τε λιπήνας 
ἄλφιτα' τοὺς δ᾽ ὀδμή τε φίλη δολόεσσά 7” ἐσωπὴ 

/ 9 ΕΣ ,ὔ 3 ͵ὕ > / 3 LA 
φορβή τ᾽ εὐδώρητος ἐφέλκεται, οὐδέ τιν ἄτην 

> \ ¢ / > / A 7 
ev φρεσὶν ὁρμαίνουσιν, ἀγαλλόμενοι δὲ μένουσιν 860 
αἰγὲ περισαίνοντες ἐοικότα δήϊον ἄνδρα" 
δύσμοροι, ὡς ὀλοοῖο τάχ᾽ ἀντιόωσιν ἑταίρου, 
οὐ φρεσὶν αἰγείῃσιν ἀρηρότος" αὐτίκα γάρ σφιν 
CF. \ 4. / > δὴ ,ὔ 
ῥάβδον τε κραναὴν ὁπλίζεται ἠδὲ λίνοιο 
ὁρμιὴν πολιοῖο, βάλεν δ᾽ ὑπὲρ ἀγκίστροιο 365 
χηλῆς atyeins κρέας ἔμφυτον: of μὲν ἐδωδὴν 
ἐσσυμένως ἥρπαξαν, ὁ δ᾽ ἔσπασε χειρὶ παχείῃ 
αὖ ἐρύων" εἰ γάρ τις ὀΐσεται ἔργα δόλοιο, 

τὰ “” > > , \ > Λ ΕῚ Α 
οὐκ ἂν eT ἐμπελάσειε καὶ εἰ λασιότριχας αὐτὰς 

» Ἢ 3 a 
αἶγας ἄγοι, φεύγουσι δ᾽ ἀποστύξαντες ὁμαρτῇ 81 

καὶ μορφὴν καὶ δαῖτα καὶ αὐτῆς ἔνδια πέτρης- 
εἰ δὲ λάθοι καὶ κραιπνὸν ἔχοι πόνον, οὔ κέ τις ἄγρης | 
, 

λειφθείη, πάντας δὲ δαμάσσεται αἰγὸς ὁπωπή. 

"AMos δ᾽ αὖ ϊ λ ὅθος εἴ D 

os 0 αὖ σαργοῖσι μέλει πόθος εἴαρος ὥρῃ 
Ἂς \ ’ 
ἀλλήλων, εὐνῆς δὲ γάμων πέρι δηριόωνται: 375 

λλ a δ ἣν 1A6 ΄, ΄ A / > a 
πολλαῖς 0 εἷς ἀλόχοις πέρι μάρναται" ds δέ Kev ἀλκῇ 
νικήσῃ, πάσῃσιν ἐπάρκιος ἔπλετ᾽ ἀκοίτης, 
πέτρας δ᾽ εἰσελάει θῆλυν στόλον" ἔνθ᾽ ἁλιῆες 

> 
κύρτον ἐτεχνήσαντο βαθύν, περιηγέα πάντῃ" 
. 
480 


HALIEUTICA, IV. 351-379 


are open to the rays of the sun: wherein dwell 
many Sargues which have their habitation together ; 
for the Sargues delight exceedingly in the beams of 
the sun. Here the man betakes himself, his limbs 
clothed in the skin of a goat and two horns fastened 
to his temples, méditating a rustic trick: and he 
casts into the sea a bait of barley-meal enriched 
with goatflesh and roasted meat together. The 
welcome savour, the deceiving aspect of the man, 
and the goodly boon of food entice the Sargues, and 
they think not in their minds of any harm but 
delighted they remain, fawning round their foeman 
in the guise of a goat. Unhappy fishes! how fatal 
a friend they presently find him, whose mind is no- 
wise goatlike. For straightway he arrays against 
them a rough rod and a line of grey flax and puts 
on the hook the natural flesh of a goat’s hoof. They 
greedily seize the bait and he with stout hand pulls 
and lands them. For if any of them suspect the 
work of guile, no more will he come near, even were 
the fishermen to bring the shaggy goats themselves, 
but together they take to flight, loathing alike the 
form of the man and the feast and the sunny spaces 
of the rock itself. But if the fisher escape their 
notice and do his work swiftly, none will be left 
uncaptured, but the goatlike aspect will overcome 
them all. 

Another passion employs the Sargues in the 
season of spring, even their passion for one another, 
and they contend about the bridal bed. One male 
fights for many wives and he who prevails by his 
valour is sufficient mate for all; and he drives his 
female company among the rocks, where the fisher- 
men contrive a deep weel, rounded on all sides, and 


451 


OPPIAN 


~ , vA 
τὸν δὲ φυτῶν λάχνῃσι περὶ στόμα πάντα πύκασσαν, 38, 
μύρτων ἢ δάφνης εὐώδεος ἠέ τευ ἄλλου 
πτόρθοισιν θαλεροῖσιν ἐπισταμένως σκιάσαντες. 
τοὺς δ᾽ οἶστρος ποτὶ μῶλον ἐπώρορεν εὐνητῆρας 
2 9.59 
μάρνασθαι, πολλὴ δὲ γαβήλιος ἵστατ᾽ ᾿Ενυώ. 
ἀλλ᾽ ὅτ᾽ ἀριστεύσας τις ἕλῃ κράτος, αὐτίκα πέτρην 38 
> ek) A ie . 
παπταίνει γλαφυρήν, ἀλόχοις δόμον, ἐς δ᾽ ἴδε κύρτον | 
κείμενον, εὐφύλλοισιν ἐπηρεφὲ ἀκρεμόνεσσιν, | 
ἔνθ᾽ ἐλάει νυμφεῖον ἑὸν χορόν: at μὲν ἔπειτα 
κύρτον ἔσω δύνουσιν, ὁ δ᾽ ἔκτοθι πάντας ἐρύκει 
Ea 3 L 3 Ψ IA 7 / 
ἄρσενας, οὐδέ Tw’ ἄλλον ἐᾷ νύμφῃσι πελάσσαι. 39 
3 cee / > en \ ae Ψ 3 \ { 
ἀλλ᾽ ὅταν ἐμπλήσῃ πλεκτὸν δόλον, ὕστατος αὐτὸς 
3 / + 3. a” * ϑε 
ἐς θάλαμον προὔτυψεν, ἀνέκβατον "Αϊδος εὐνήν. 
ς eh / > Δ. UA > vA 
ws δ᾽ ὅτε μηλονόμος τις ἀνὴρ βοτάνηθεν ἐλαύνων 
εἰροπόκους ἀγέλας ἀνάγει πάλιν, ἐν δὲ θυρέτροις 
ἱστάμενος σταθμοῖο νόῳ πεμπάζεται οἰῶν 89 
| 
| 
| 


\ > / ” ε / ΄ὔ Ψ 
πληθὺν εὖ διέπων, εἴ οἱ σόα πάντα πέλονται, 

A > > , Ly, \ 3 \ 
πώεσι δ᾽ εἰλομένοισι περιπλήθουσα μὲν αὐλὴ 
στείνεται, ὑστάτιος δὲ μετά σφισιν ἔσσυτο ποιμήν" 
ὡς αἱ μὲν προπάροιθεν ἔσω κοίλοιο μυχοῖο 

f / [ἡ ge ὦ μ > > 7 
θηλύτεραι κατέδυσαν, ὁ δ᾽ ὕστερος ἔνθορ᾽ ἀκοίτης, 40 
δειλαίῃς ἅμα δειλὸς ἐπισπεύδων ἀλόχοισι. 
τοῖα μὲν ἐν νεπόδεσσιν ἔρως ἐστήσατ᾽ ἄεθλα, 
τοίαις δ᾽ ἐξαπάτησιν ἐρωμανέεσσιν ὄλοντο. 

“ 9 κι. 72 3 2) 3 / 

Ἱππουροι δ᾽ ὅτε κέν τι per’ οἴδμασιν ἀθρήσωσι 
πλαζόμενον, τῷ πάντες ἀολλέες ἐγγὺς ἕπονται" 4 
ἔξοχα δ᾽, ὁππότε νῆα διαραισθεῖσαν ἀέλλαις, 
αἰνὰ []οσειδάωνος ἀμειλίκτοιο τυχοῦσαν, 

ὃ te / A ὃ \ » + 
ασσάμενον μέγα κῦμα διακριδὸν ἄλλοθεν ἄλλα 


* Cf. Η. i. 184. Probably Coryphaena hippurus, M.G. 
λαμπούγα, μανάλια: A. 543 a 23; 599 b 3; Plin. ix, δῆ: 


482 


HALIEUTICA, IV. 380-408 


cover it all about the mouth with foliage of plants, 
shadowing it cunningly with green branches of 
myrtle or fragrant bay or some other tree. Now the 
goad of desire rouses the males to the moil of battle 
and the war for brides waxes keen. But when one 
by his prowess wifis the victory, straightway he looks 
for a hollow rock as a dwelling for his wives, and he 
espies the weel lying, roofed with leafy boughs and 
therein he drives his choir of brides. They then 
enter within the weel, while he outside keeps away 
all the males nor suffers any other to approach his 
brides. But when he has filled the plaited snare, last, 
he himself advances into the bridal chamber, a bed 
of Hades without escape. As when some shepherd 
drives from the pasture his fleecy flocks and leads 
them home, and standing in the entrance of the 
steading reckons in his mind the number of his sheep, 
reviewing them well to see if all are safe, and the 
courtyard, full to overflowing, is straitened with the 
huddling sheep, and last the shepherd himself enters 
among them; even so the female Sargues enter 
first within the hollow retreat, and after them their 
spouse leaps in himself, hasting unhappy bridegroom 
with unhappy brides. Such contests does love array 
among the finny tribe and by such snares of amorous 
madness they perish. 

The Hippurus,* when they behold anything floating 
in the waves, all follow it, closely in a body, but 
especially when a ship is wrecked by the stormy 
winds, finding Poseidon terribly unkind, and. the 
great waves break her up and carry hither and 


xxxii. 149; Ov. Hal. 95. Called also κορύφαινα Athen. 

304 c-d, ἀρνευτὴν ἵππουρον Numenius, ibid. Cf. 319p. These 

fishes are popularly, but erroneously, called ** Dolphins.” 
28: 433 


OPPIAN 


δοῦρα φέρῃ AwPBnor πολυσχιδέεσσι λυθέντα. 
τῆμος δ᾽ ἱππούρων ἀγέλαι πινάκεσσι θεούσαις 
ἑσπόμεναι μεθέπουσιν- 6 δ᾽ ἐγκύρσας ἁλιήων 
πολλὴν ῥηϊδίως ἄγρην ἕλεν ἠδ᾽ ἀμέγαρτον. 
ἀλλὰ τὸ μὲν ναύτησιν ἀλεξήσειε Κρονίων 
ἐμβύθιος, νῆες δὲ διὰ πλατὺ κῦμα θέοιεν 
αὔραις εὐκήλοισιν ἀπήμονες ἠδ᾽ ἀτίνακτοι, 
φόρτον ἀμοιβαίοισι μετερχόμεναι καμάτοισιν, 
ἱππούροις δ᾽ ἀλλοῖα νοήματα τεχνήσασθαι 
ἐστίν, ἀπημοσύνῃ δὲ νεῶν μεταβαινέμεν ἄγρην. 
Συμφερτοὺς δονάκων φακέλους ἅμα γυρώσαντες 
δίναις ἐγκατέθηκαν, ἔνερθε δὲ λᾶαν ἔδησαν 
βριθὺν ὑφορμιστῆρα: τὰ μὲν μάλα πάντα καθ᾽ ὕδωρ 
ἀτρέμα δινεύουσι: φιλόσκια δ᾽ αὐτίκα φῦλα 
ἱππούρων ἀγεληδὸν ἀγείρεται, ἀμφὶ δὲ νῶτα 
τερπόμενοι δονάκεσσιν ἀνατρίβουσι μένοντες" 
τοῖς δὲ τότ᾽ ἀσπαλιῆες ἐπιπλώουσιν ἑτοίμην 
εἰς ἄγρην, ἄγκιστρα δ᾽ ὑπ᾽ εἴδασιν ὁπλίσσαντες 
πέμπουο᾽, οἱ δ᾽ ἐρύουσιν ἅμα σπεύδοντες ὄλεθρον. 
ὡς δὲ κύνας βρώμῃσιν ἀνὴρ ἐπὶ μῶλον ὀρίνει 
δινεύων μέσσοισιν ἑλώρια, τοὶ δ᾽ ἐπὶ γαστρὶ 
ἔξοχα μαργαίνοντες ὑποφθαδὸν ἅρπαγι Woon 
ἀλλήλους προθέουσι καὶ ἐς χέρα παπταίνουσιν 
ἀνδρός, ὅπῃ ῥίψειεν, ἔρις δ᾽ ἀναφαίνετ᾽ ὀδόντων. 
ὡς οἵ γ᾽ ἀγκίστροισιν ἐπαΐσσουσιν ἑτοίμως. 
ῥηϊδίως δ᾽ ἀγρευτὸν ἐρύσσεαι ἄλλον én’ ἄλλῳ 
κραιπνὸς ἐών: αὐτοὶ γὰρ ἐπισπεύδουσ᾽ ἁλιήων 
μᾶλλον, ὑπ᾽ ἀφραδίῃσιν ἑὸν μόρον ἐγκονέοντες. 
Toin ἐπιφροσύνῃ καὶ πομπίλον ἀγρώσσονται:" 
καὶ γὰρ τοῖς ἴσον ἦτορ ἐπὶ σκιεροῖσι πόθοισι. 
Τευθίσι δ᾽ ἄτρακτόν τις ἀνὴρ ἐπιμηχανόῳτο, 
9 Hi, 186 n, > HA. 1.428 Ὥς 


484. 


410 


415 


420 


425 


480. 


HALIEUTICA, IV. 409-439 


thither her scattered timbers, loosened by the rending 
assaults of the sea. Then the shoals of the Hippurus 
follow in the train of the drifting planks, and the 
fisherman who chances upon them wins easily great 
and unstinted spoil. But that may the Son of Cronus, 
the lord of the déep, avert from our sailors, and may 
their ships speed over the broad waves with gentle 
breezes, unhurt and unshaken, while they ply to and 
fro for cargo! And for the Hippurus men may 
contrive other devices and without the wreck of ships 
pursue their prey. 

The fishermen gather reeds and tie them together 
in bundles which they let down into the waves and 
underneath they tie a heavy stone by way of ballast. 
All this they let sway gently in the water; and 
straightway the shade-loving tribes of the Hippurus 
gather in shoals and linger about delightedly rubbing 
their backs against the reeds. Then the fishers row 
to them to find a ready prey, and bait their hooks 
and cast them, and the fish seize them, hastening 
therewith their own destruction. Even as a hunter 
excites with meat his dogs to the warfare of the 
chase, waving among them a piece of game, and the 
dogs in a frenzy of appetite with ravenous rage run 
emulous one before the other and look to the man’s 
hand to see where he will throw it, and strife of 
teeth arises: so the fishes rush readily upon the 
hooks. And easily, if active, thou shalt catch and 
land them one after the other; for they are more 
eager than the fishermen themselves and by their 
own folly hasten their doom. 

By like craft are the Pilot-fishes also taken ; for 
their heart equally is set upon desire for shade. 

Against the Calamaries ® a man should devise a 


435 


-OPPIAN 


ἐντύνων κλωστῆρι πανείκελον: ἀμφὶ δ᾽ ἄρ᾽ αὐτῷ 440 
πυκνὰ καταζεύξειεν ἀνακλίνων γενύεσσιν 
ἀγκιστρ᾽ ἀλλήλοισι παρασχεδόν, οἷς ἔπι σῶμα 
ποικίλον ἐμπείρειεν ἰουλίδος, ὕπτια χαλκοῦ 
δήγματ᾽ ἐπικρύπτων, γλαυκοῖς δ᾽ ἐνὶ βένθεσι λίμνης 
τοῖον ἀναψάμενος σύροι δόλον: ἡ δ᾽ ἐσιδοῦσα 445 
τευθὶς ἐφωρμήθη τε Kat ἀμφιέπουσα πιέζει 
ἰκμαλέοις θυσάνοις, ἐπάγη δ᾽ ἐνὶ χείλεσι χαλκοῦ: 
οὐδ᾽ ἔτι καὶ μεμαυῖα λιπεῖν δύνατ᾽, ἀλλ᾽ ἀέκουσα 
ἕλκεται, αὐτόπλεκτον ἐὸν δέμας ἀμφιβαλοῦσα. 

Καὶ μέν τις λιμένεσσι παρ᾽ ἀκλύστοισι θαλάσσης 450 
ἄγρην ἐγχελύων τεχνήσατο κοῦρος ἀθύρων. 
ἔντερον οἰὸς ἑλὼν περιμήκετον ἧκε καθ᾽ ὕδωρ 
ἐκτάδιον, δολιχῇσιν ἀλίγκιον ὁρμιῇσιν" 
ἡ δ᾽ ἐσιδοῦσ᾽ ἐπόρουσε καὶ ἔσπασε: τὴν δὲ χανοῦσαν 
ἔγνω καὶ μήλειον ἄφαρ κύρτωσεν avr 455 
ἔγκατον ἐμπνείων" τὸ δ᾽ ἀνίσταται ἄσθματι λάβρῳ 
οἰδαλέον, πλῆσεν δὲ τιταινόμενον στόμα δειλῆς 
ἐγχέλυος" πνοιῇ δὲ περιστένεται μογέουσα 
ἀνδρομέῃ, δέδεται δὲ καὶ ἱεμένη περ. ἀλύξαι, 
εἰσόκεν οἰδαίνουσα καὶ ἄσχετον ἀσθμαίνουσα 460 
ὑψόσ' ἀναπλώσῃ καὶ ὑπ᾽ ἀγρευτῆρι γένηται. 
ὡς δ᾽ ὅτε τις πλείου πειρώμενος ἀμφιφορῆος 
αὐλὸν ἔχων ἤρεισεν ὑπὸ στόμα φυσητῆρα, 
ἄσθματι δ᾽ αὖ ἐρύει μέθυος ποτὸν ἔμπαλιν ἕλκων 
χείλεσιν ἀκροτάτοις, τὸ δ᾽ ἀνατρέχει ἀνδρὸς ath 465 


v 


* It is amazing to read in Apost. p. 48 ‘* Pour les calmars 
(Loligo) qui pénétrent dans l’intérieur des ports, on donne 
au plomb Ja forme d’un fuseau et l’on dispose, ἃ sa partie 
inférieure, en couronne, un grand nombre @aiguilles ἃ 
coudre, Quand, au contraire, on veut pécher les sepioteuthis, 
436 


HALIEUTICA, IV. 440-465 


rod fashioned after the manner of a spindle.* And 
about it let him fasten close to one another many 
hooks with recurving barbs, and on these let him 
impale the striped body of a Rainbow-wrasse to hide 
the bent teeth of bronze, and in the green depths 
of the sea let him’trail such snare upon a cord. The 
Calamary when it sees it, darts up and grasps it in 
the embrace of its moist tentacles and becomes 
impaled upon the lips of bronze. And no more can 
it leave them for all its endeavour but is haled against 
its will, having of itself entangled its body. 

In havens of the sea beyond the wash of the waves 
some youth in sport contrives a mode of catching 
Eels.? He takes a long sheep-gut and lets it trail its 
length in the water, like a long line. The Eel espies 
it and rushes up and seizes it. The youth perceives 
that the Eel has swallowed the bait and straightway 
blows in the sheep-gut and inflates it with his breath. 
By his vehement blowing the gut swells up and fills 
the straining mouth of the wretched Eel; which is 
straitened and distressed by the human breath, but 
is held a fast prisoner for all its endeavour to escape, 
until, swollen and wildly gasping, it swims to the 
surface and becomes the prey of the fisher. Even as 
one who makes essay of a full jar, takes a blow-pipe 
and puts it in his mouth and by drawing in his breath 
draws with the tip of his lips draught of wine, which 
streams up under the force of his breathing : so the 


revous, θράψαλα vulg., les grands calmars dularge, on remplace 
les aiguilles par des hamegons.” 

δ ΑΕ]. xiv. 8 describes this method of catching Eels as 
used at Vicetia in Cisalpine Gaul. For Hel-catching in 
general of. A. 592a6; Athen. 298 Ὁ; Aristoph. Ky, 864 fia: 
Plin. ix. 74; Walton, Compleat Angler, ¢, xiii, ; Radcliffe, 
p. 246 ff.; Badham, c. XVii. 

437 


OPPIAN 


ὡς αἵ γ᾽ ἐγχέλυες πνοιῆς ὕπο κυμαίνουσαι 
ἕλκονται δολίοιο ποτὶ στόμα φυσητῆρος. 

" / , \ Nog 3). ov 

ἔστι δέ τις νεπόδων δειλὸς καὶ ἄκικυς ὅμιλος, 
5 ~ > / > A / a Δ 
ἀβληχρῆς ἀφύης ἀδινὸν γένος, at καλέονται 
ἐγγραύλεις- ἀγαθὴ δὲ βόσις πάντεσσιν ἔασιν 
> 77 MS / 3 5h \ a / 
ἰχθύσιν: αἰεὶ δέ ofw evi φρεσὶ φῦζα δέδηε, 

/ a” "ὦ Lf \ > 7 \ a 
πάντα δ᾽ ὑποτρομέουσι, σὺν ἀλλήλαις δὲ χυθεῖσαι 
σωρηδὸν μίμνουσι καὶ ἀθρόαι ἐμπεφύασιν, 
not ἀναγκαίοιο βίην δεσμοῖο φέρουσαι: 
οὐδέ κε μητίσαιο διάκρισιν εὐρέος ἐσμοῦ 

> \ » tal Ἂς 3 3 / ” 
οὐδὲ λύσιν: τοῖον yap ἐν ἀλλήλῃσιν ἔχονται. 
πολλάκι μὲν καὶ νῆες ἐν ἕρμασιν ἠὔτ᾽ ἔκελσαν 
κείναις, πολλάκι δέ σφιν ἐνιπλήσσουσιν ἐρετμοῖς 
,κληΐδων ἐλατῆρες, ἐνέσχετο δ᾽ ἱεμένη περ 
κώπη, πετραίης ἅτε χοιράδος ἀντιτυχοῦσα-" 
καί πού τις βουπλῆγα βαρύστομον ἰθὺς ἀείρας 
ἐγγραύλεις ἐτίναξε καὶ οὐ διέκερσε σιδήρῳ 

A 3 a 
στῖφος ἅπαν, βαιὴν «δ᾽ ἀγέλης ἀπεδάσσατο μοῖραν" 
καὶ τῆς μὲν κεφαλὴν πέλεκυς τάμε, τὴν δ᾽ ἐκόλουσεν 

7 ἂν \ > wv / \ > 
οὐρῆς, τὴν δ᾽ ἥμησε μέσην, τὴν δ᾽ εἷλεν ἅπασαν. 
οἰκτρὸν ἰδεῖν μογεροῖσιν ἐοικότα σώματα νεκροῖς. 
αἱ δ᾽ οὐδ᾽ ὡς ἐλάθοντο καὶ οὐκ ἀνέηκαν ἔχουσαι 
δεσμὸν ἐόν" τοῖός τις ἐπί σφισι γόμφος ἄρηρε. 


OMElste Olas 

> Engraulis encrasicholus, M.G. χαψί, a tiny member of 
the Herring family (Clupeidae): A. 569 b 26 ἐκ δὲ μιᾶς ἀφύης, 
οἷον τῆς ἐν τῷ ᾿Αθηναίων λιμένι, (γίνονται) οἱ ἐγκρασίχολοι κα- 
λούμενο. Cf. Athen. 285a, 300f, 899 4; Ael. viii. 18 
ἐγγραύλεις, of δὲ ἐγκρασιχόλους καλοῦσιν αὐτάς, προσακήκοά γε μὴν 
καὶ τρίτον ὄνομα αὐτῶν, εἰσὶ γὰρ οἱ καὶ λυκοστόμους αὐτὰς ὀνομά- 
ζουσιν" ἔστι δὲ μικρὰ ἰχθύδια Kal. πολύγονα φύσει, λευκότατα ἰδεῖν 
κτλ. 

° Ael. 1.0. καθεὶς δὲ τὴν χεῖρα ὡς ἐκ. σωροῦ πυρῶν ἢ κυάμων 


488 


470 


475 


480 


485 


HALIEUTICA, IV. 466-488 


Eels, swollen by the breath of the youth, are drawn 
toward the mouth of the crafty blower. 

There is a certain timid and strengthless company 
of fishes, the thronging race of the feeble Fry ¢ which 
are called Anchovies.? They are a goodly food for 
all manner of fish@s and flight is evermore the burn- 
ing thought of their minds. They are afraid of all 
things and they remain huddled with one another in 
heaps ὁ and cling in crowds together, as if they were 
under the stress of a compelling chain. And thou 
couldst not contrive to separate the broad swarm of 
them or loose them each from each: in such sort 
do they cling to one another. Many a time even 
ships 4 run aground on them as upon a reef and many 
a time the rowers on the benches entangle their oars 
in them and the hasting blade is stayed as if it struck 
a stony rock. And haply someone lifts straight a 
heavy-bladed axe and smites the Anchovies, yet does 
not cleave with the iron the whole mass in twain but 
cuts off only a tiny portion of the shoal. And the 
‘hatchet cuts off the head ὁ of one and maims another 
of its tail and another it cleaves in the midst of the 
body and yet another it utterly destroys. Pitiful it 
is to behold their bodies like wretched corpses. Yet 
not even so do they forget themselves, and they do 
not relax the chain that binds them: so fast a rivet 
holds them together. Encountering those fishes a 


λάβοις ἂν βιαίως ἀποσπάσας, ws καὶ διασπᾶσθαι πολλάκις καὶ τὰ 
μὲν ἡμίτομα τῶν ἰχθυδίων λαμβάνεσθαι, τὰ δὲ ὑπολείπεσθαι. 

4 Ael, lc. τοσαύτη ἡ ἕνωσις γίνεται συνδραμόντων ὡς καὶ 
πορθμίδας ἐπιθεούσας μὴ διασχίζειν αὐτά, καὶ μέντοι καὶ κώπην ἢ 
κόντον εἰ δὶς αὐτῶν διεῖναι θελήσείεν, τὰ δὲ οὐ διαξαίνεται ἀλλ᾽ 
ἔχεται ἀλλήλων ὡς συνυφασμένα. 

4. Ael. 1.6. τὸ μὲν οὐραῖον καθέξεις, μενεῖ δὲ σὺν τοῖς ἄλλοις ἡ 
κεφαλή: ἢ κεφαλὴν κομιεῖς οἴκαδε, μένει δ᾽ ἐν τῇ θαλάττῃ τὸ λοιπόν. 

439 


OPPIAN 


4 40 ,ὔ 
καί κέν τις παλάμῃσιν ἅτε ψαμάθοιο βαθείης 
cA > a 4 
ἀντιάσας κείνῃσιν em ἰχθύσιν ἀμήσαιτο. 49( 
5 , 
τὰς δ᾽ ὁπότε φράσσωνται ἐπί σφισι πεπτηυίας 
J rd 
ἰχθυβόλοι, κοίλῃσι περιπτύσσουσι σαγήναις 
\ ¢ A ΝΜ 
ἀσπασίως, πολλὴν δὲ ποτὶ ῥηγμῖνας ἀγουσιν 
vA > > ΓΦ 
ἄγρην νόσφι πόνοιο καὶ ἄγγεα πάντ ἀφύῃσιν 
os A / 
ἔν τ᾽ ἀκάτους ἔπλησαν, ἐπ᾽ ἠϊόσι δὲ βαθείαις 498 
a , vA + 
Onudvas νήησαν, ἀπειρεσίην χύσιν ἄγρης. 
~ / 
οἷον δ᾽ ἐργατίναι Δηοῦς πόνον ἐκτελέσαντες, 
“ , > ~ 
πνουῆς χερσαίοις τε διακρίναντες ἐρετμοῖς 
ee A ~ > ~ 
καρπόν, étrpoxdAoto μέσον κατὰ χῶρον ἀλωῆς 
\ / 
πολλὸν ἐνηήσαντο, περιπλήθουσα δὲ πάντῃ 500 
7 > load 
πυροδόκος στεφάνη λευκαίνεται ἔνδον ἁλωῆς- 
5 κ 
ὡς τότ᾽ ἀπειρεσίῃσι περιπληθὴς ἀφύῃσιν 
ὀφρὺς ἀγχιάλου λευκαίνεται αἰγιαλοῖο. 
lot , 
Dora δὲ πηλαμύδων ἐκ μὲν γένος εἰσὶ θαλάσσης 
+} a ψ, \ ΄ὔ Ἂ , 
Ἐὐξείνου, ᾿θύννης δὲ βαρύφρονος εἰλείθυιαι:" 505 
Lal V4 ~ Ψ / Ψ 
κεῖναι γάρ, Μαιῶτις ὅπῃ ξυμβάλλεται ἅλμῃ, 
ἀγρόμεναι λιμναῖον ὑπὸ στόμα καὶ δονακῆας 
ὑδρηλοὺς ὠδῖνος ἐπαλγέος ἐμνήσαντο" 
καὶ τὰ μὲν ὅσσα κίχωσι μεταδρομάδην κατέδουσιν 
ὠά, τὰ δ᾽ ἐν δονάκεσσι καὶ ἐν σχοίνοισι μένοντα 510 
vA > , C4 , e 3. Ψ “ 
πηλαμύδων ἀγέλας wpn τέκεν" αἱ δ᾽ ὅτε κῦμα 
πρῶτον ἐπίψαίρωσι πόροιο τε πειρήσωνται, 
~ ¢€ A 7 A / 0.2 > , 
ξεῖνον ἁλὸς σπεύδουσι μετὰ πλόον, οὐδ᾽ ἐθέλουσι 


* Demeter. ὃ 7.9. winnowing fans, cf. Hom. Od. xi. 128. 

5 One-year-old Tunnies; A. 488 a6 among gregarious 
fishes are νοὺς καλοῦσι δρομάδας, θύννοι, πηλαμύδες, 543.a2 the 
θύννος and the πηλαμύς breed once a year; 543b2 ai δὲ 
πηλαμύδες καὶ of θύννοι τίκτουσιν ἐν τῷ Πόντῳ, ἄλλοθι δ᾽ οὔ: 
511 ἃ 1ὅ ὅταν yap τέκωσιν οἱ ἰχθύες ἐν τῷ Πόντῳ, γίγνονται ἐκ 
τοῦ φοῦ ἃς καλοῦσιν οἱ μὲν σκορδύλας, Βυζάντιοι δ᾽ αὐξίδας διὰ τὸ 
ἐν ὀλίγαις αὐξάνεσθαι ἡμέραις" καὶ ἐξέρχονται μὲν τοῦ φθινοπώρου 


ἅμα ταῖς θυννίσιν, εἰσπλέουσι δὲ τοῦ ἔαρος ἤδη οὖσαι πηλαμύδες. 


440 


HALIEUTICA, IV. 489-513 


man might gather of them with his hands as if he 
gathered deep sand. Now when the fishermen behold 
them huddled together, they gladly enclose them 
with their hollow seine-nets and without trouble bring 
ashore abundant booty and fill with the Fry all their 
vessels and their boats and on the deep beaches pile 
up heaps, an infinite abundance of spoil. As when 
the harvesters have finished the work of Deo“ and with 
help of the winds and the landsman’s oars > have 
separated the grain, they pile it abundant in the 
mid space of the round threshing-floor and, full every- 
where to overflowing, the ring that receives the 
wheat shows white within the floor: even so then, 
filled with the infinite Fry, the brow of the beach 
beside the sea shows white. 

The tribes of the Pelamyds ὁ are by birth from the 
Fuxine sea and are the offspring of the female Tunny. 
For these gather by the mouth of the Maeotian Lake? 
where it meets the sea, and there amid the wet reed- 
beds they bethink them of the painful travail of birth. 
And such of their eggs as they find they eat as they 
hurry along, but such as remain among the reeds and 
rushes give birth in due season to the shoals of the 
Pelamyds. These when first they skim the waves and 
make essay of travelling hasten to voyage in alien 
Cf. Plin. ix. 47 Thynni... intrant e magno mari Pontum 
verno tempore gregatim, nec alibi fetificant. Cordyla 
appellatur partus qui fetas redeuntes in mare autumno 
comitatur, limosae vere aut e luto pelamydes incipiunt vocari 
et, cum annuum excessere tempus, thynni; A. 598a 26 
θυννίδες δὲ καὶ πηλαμύδες. . . els τὸν Πόντον ἐμβάλλουσι τοῦ 
ἔαρος καὶ θερίζουσιν 3 671 4. 11 δοκοῦσι δ᾽ ἐνιαυτῷ εἶναι (οἱ θύννοι) 
πρεσβύτεροι τῶν πηλαμύδων. ' 

@ The Sea of Azov: Μαιῶτις λίμνη Aesch. P.V. 419 ; Palus 
Maeotica Plin. ii. 168; Maeotis lacus Plin. iv. 78; Maeotius 
lacus Plin. iv. 76, 

441 


OPPIAN 


, VEO 3 «ἢ Np? , φ 2s 
μίμνειν ἐνθ᾽ ἐγένοντο Kat ἠβαιαί περ ἐοῦσαι. 
Θρηΐκιος δέ τίς ἐστιν ἁλὸς πόρος, ὅντε βάθιστον 

΄ 
φασὶ Ποσειδάωνος ἐνὶ κλήροισι τετύχθαι: 
3 ~ J / / 2 Ae ἃ Ζ 
ἐκ τοῦ καί τε Μέλας κικλήσκεται, οὐδέ ἑ λάβροι 
λίην οὐδ᾽ ὑπέροπλοι ἐπιθρώσκουσιν ἀῆται:" 
ἐν δ᾽ ἄρα οἱ κευθμῶνες ὑποβρύχιοι πεφύασι 

A ͵, 2A? ae » \ 
κοῖλοι, πηλώεντες, ἀθέσφατοι, οἷς ἔνι πολλὰ 

/ ? “-“ ΘΙ >? vA a > ᾽ὔ 
τίκτεται, ἠβαιοῖσιν ὅσ᾽ ἰχθύσι δαῖτας ὀφέλλει. 
ἔνθα καὶ ἀρτιγόνοισι πέλει. πρώτιστα κέλευθα 
πηλαμύδων ἑσμοῖσιν, ἐπεὶ περιώσιον ἄλλων 
εἰναλίων φρίσσουσι δυσαέα χείματος ὁρμήν" 

“ \ , > ἍΝ / y+ 
χεῖμα δὲ πηλαμύδεσσιν ἀπαμβλύνει φάος ὄσσων. 
ἔνθα δ᾽ ἐν εὐρωποῖσιν ἁλὸς λαγόνεσσι πεσοῦσαι 
αὔτως δηθύνουσιν, ἀεξόμεναι δὲ μένουσι 
λαρὸν ἔαρ- τῇ δέ σφι καὶ ἵμερος ἄνεται εὐνῆς" 
πλησάμεναι δὲ τόκοιο παλίμποροι αὖτις ἵενται. 
πατρῷον μετὰ κῦμα, μόγον δ᾽ ἀπὸ γαστρὸς ἔθεντο. 

ἮΝ \ δ᾽ ty M aN \ ς Ν Ni a / 

as ὁ τοι MeéAayos μὲν ὑπὲρ βαθὺ λαῦτμα πόροιο 
Θρήϊκες ἀγρώσσουσιν ἀπηνέϊ χείματος ὥρῃ, 
\ oe low 
θήρην ἀργαλέην καὶ ἁτερπέα, δηϊοτῆτος 
ς fs 7 Noe: > / 
εσμὸν ὑφ᾽ αἱματόεντα καὶ ἄγριον αἶσαν ὀλέθρου. 

la 
ἔστι τις οὐ δολιχὴ μὲν ἀτὰρ πάχος ὅττι μεγίστη, 

A “ τες 
μῆκος ὅσον πῆχυς, στιβαρὴ δοκίς: ἐν δέ οἱ ἄκρῃ 

\ \ 7 
πολλὴ μὲν μολίβοιο χύσις, πολλαὶ δὲ σιδήρου 

> \ 
αἰχμαὶ τριγλώχινες ἐπασσύτεραι πεφύασι: 
πεῖσμα δέ μιν περίμηκες ἐὔπλοκον ἀμφιβέβηκε. 


* The Gulf on which Ainos is situated, lying to the W. 
of the Thracian Chersonese: Strabo, fr. 52 εἶθ᾽ ἡ Χερρόνησος 
ἡ Θρᾳκία καλουμένη, ποιοῦσα τήν τε IIporovrida καὶ τὸν Μέλανα 
κόλπον καὶ τὸν “Πλλήσποντον" ἄκρα γὰρ ἔκκειται πρὸς εὐρόνοτον, 
συνάπτουσα τὴν Ἑὐῤρώπην πρὸς τὴν ᾿Ασίαν ἑπτασταδίῳ πορθμῷ τῷ 
κατὰ "Αβυδον καὶ Σηστόν, ἐν ἀριστερᾷ μὲν τὴν Προποντίδα ἔχουσα, 


442 


515 


520 


' 625 


530 


535 


HALIEUTICA, IV. 514-539 


seas and, tiny though they be, will not abide where 
they were born. There is a tract of the Thracian 
sea which, as men say, is the deepest in all the 
demesne of Poseidon: wherefore also it is called the 
Black Gulf.¢ Thereon no over-fierce or violent winds 
make assault, and in it are coverts under water, 
cavernous, muddy, beyond thought, in which grow 
abundantly such things as provide food for tiny fishes. 
There are the first paths of the new-born swarms of 
Pelamyds ; since beyond all other creatures of the 
sea they dread the stormy onset of winter—for winter 
dulls the light of their eyes. And there in the spacious 
loins of the sea they linger idly and grow in size while 
they await the sweet spring; and there also they 
mate and fulfil their desire. But when they are full 
of roe they hasten to travel back to their native wave 
where they put from them the travail of their belly. 

These the Thracians who dwell above ὃ the deep 
expanse of the Black Gulf capture in the unkindly 
season of winter by a cruel and unpleasant form of 
fishing under the bloody law of war and savage doom 
of death. They have a stout log, not long but as 
thick as may be, about a cubit in length. On the end 
of it are put abundant lead and many three-pronged 
spears set close together ; and about it runs a well- 
twisted cable exceeding long. Sailing up in a boat 
ἐν δεξιᾷ δὲ τὸν Μέλανα κόλπον, καλούμενον οὕτως ἀπὸ τοῦ Μέλανος 
ἐκδιδόντος εἰς αὐτόν. Of. Strab. 28, 92, 124, 323, 331, etc.; 
Plin.iv. 48 A Dorisco incurvatur ora ad Macron tichos cxii. 
passus, circa quem locum fluvius Melas a quo sinus 
appellatur. Oppida... Macron tichos [Μακρὸν τεῖχος] 
dictum quia a Propontide ad Melanem sinum inter duo 
maria porrectus murus procurrentem excludit Cherronesum. 

> 7.6, N. of. 

¢ Ael. xv. 10 describes a method of catching Pelamyds 
which is not identical with either of Oppian’s methods. 


4A3 


OPPIAN 


δουρὶ δ᾽ ἀναπλώσαντες, ἁλὸς πόρος ἔνθα βάθιστος, δά 
ἐς βυθὸν ἠερόεντα περικρατὲς ἧκαν ἔνερθε 

πυθμένος εἰλατίνου κρατερὸν σθένος- αἷψα δὲ ῥιπῇ 
σπερχόμενον, μολίβῳ τε καταρρεπὲς ἠδὲ σιδήρῳ, 
σεύεται ἐς νεάτας ῥίζας ἁλός, ἔνθ᾽ ἀμενηναῖς 
πηλαμύσι προὔτυψεν ἐν ἰλύσι πεπτηυίαις" “Bae 
σὺν δ᾽ ἕλε σύν τ᾽ ἐτόρησεν ὅσον Kixe δειλὸν ὅμιλον. 

ot δὲ θοῶς ἀνέρυσσαν ἐληλαμένας περὶ χαλκῷ 
παλλομένας ἐλεεινὰ σιδηρείῃς ὀδύνῃσι. 

τὰς δέ τις εἰσορόων καί κεν θρασυκάρδιος ἀνὴρ 
οἰκτείραι θήρης τε δυσαγρέος ἠδὲ μόροιο: δδ0 
τῆς μὲν γὰρ λαγόνεσσιν ἐλήλατο δουρὸς ἀκωκή, 
τῆς δὲ κάρη ξυνέπειρε θοὸν βέλος, ἡ δ᾽ ὑπὲρ οὐρὴν 
οὕτασται, νηδὺν δ᾽ ἑτέρης, ἄλλης δ᾽ ἕλε νῶτα 
δριμὺς ἄρης, ἄλλη δὲ μέσον κενεῶνα πέπαρται. 

ὡς δ᾽ ὁπότε, κρινθέντος ἐνυαλίοιο κυδοιμοῦ, δδε 
δουριφάτους κονίης τε καὶ αἵματος ἐξανελόντες 
εὐνὴν ἐς πυρόεσσαν ἑοὶ στέλλωσιν ἑταῖροι 
μυρόμενοι: τὰ δὲ πολλὰ καὶ αἰόλα σώμασι νεκρῶν 
ἕλκεα παντοῖαί τε βολαὶ πλήθουσιν "Αρηος-" 

ὡς καὶ πηλαμύδεσσιν ἐπιπρέπει ἕλκεα πάντῃ, 560 
εἴδωλον πολέμοιο, φίλον ye μὲν ἀσπαλιεῦσιν. 

“Adour δ᾽ αὖ κούφοισι λίνοις ἕλον ἔθνε᾽ ἀφαυρῶν 
πηλαμύδων: αἰεὶ yap ἀνὰ κνέφας, ὅττι κεν ἅλμῃ 
ἐμπίπτῃ, τρομέουσι, φόβον δ᾽ ὀρφναῖον ἔχουσιν" 
ὄρφνῃ δ᾽ ἀγρώσσονται, ἀτυζόμεναι κατὰ βένθος. 565 

ίκτυα γὰρ μάλα κοῦφα λίνων στήσαντες ἐλαφρῶν 
κυκλόσε" δινεύουσι, βίῃ θείνοντες ἐρετμοῖς 
νῶτον ἁλός, κοντοῖς τε καταΐγδην κτυπέουσιν᾽ 
αἱ δ᾽ ὑπὸ μαρμαρυγῆς ταχυήρεος ἠδ᾽ ὁμάδοιο 
φυζαλέα, θρώσκουσι, λίνου δ᾽ εἰς κόλπον ἵενται 570 


444 


HALIEUTICA, IV. 540-570 


to where the gulf is deepest, mightily they launch 
into the murky deep the pine-log’s stubborn strength. 
Straightway with swift rush, weighed down by lead 
and iron, it speeds to the nether foundations of the 
sea, where it strikes upon the weak Pelamyds hud- 
dling in the mud atid kills and transfixes as many as 
it reaches of the hapless crowd. And the fishermen 
swiftly draw them up, impaled upon the bronze and 
struggling pitifully under the iron torture. Behold- 
ing them even a stone-hearted man would pity them 
for their unhappy capture and death. For the spear- 
point has entered the flanks of one, the swift shaft 
has transfixed the head of another ; one is wounded 
over the tail, the groin of this, the back of that is 
victim of the bitter warfare, and yet another is pierced 
in the midst of the belly. As, when the mellay of 
battle is decided, their comrades take up the slain 
out of the dust and blood, and array them for the 
fiery bed, lamenting ; and many and various are the 
wounds on the bodies of the dead and every sort of 
warlike stroke is there: even so on the Pelamyds 
wounds show everywhere—an image of war but 
welcome to the fishers. 

Others again take the tribes of the feeble Pelamyds 
with light nets. For always in the darkness, whatever 
falls upon the sea, they are afraid and they have a 
horror of the night and in the night they are captured 
as they flee in terror through the deep. The fishers 
set up very light nets of buoyant flax and wheel in 
a circle round about while they violently strike the 
surface of the sea with their oars and make a din 
with sweeping blow of poles. ' At the flashing of the 
swift oars and the noise the fishes bound in terror 
and rush into the bosom of the net which stands at 


445 


OPPIAN 


ἀτρέμας ἑστηῶτος, ὀιόμεναι σκέπας εἶναι, 
νήπιαι, at δούποιο φόβῳ μόρον εἰσεπέρησαν. 
ἔνθ᾽ οἱ μὲν σχοίνοισιν ἐπισπέρχουσ᾽ ἑκάτερθε, 
δίκτυον ἐξερύοντες ἐπ᾽ ἠόνας" αἱ δ᾽ ὁρόωσαι 
σχοίνους κινυμένας, ἀνεμώλια δείματ᾽ ἔχουσαι, 
εἰλόμεναι πτήσσουσι καὶ ἀθρόαι ἐσπείρηνται. 
πολλά κεν ἀγραίοισι τότ᾽ ἀρήσαιτο θεοῖσι 
δικτυβόλος, μήτ᾽ οὖν τι θορεῖν ἔκτοσθε λίνοιο, 
μήτε τι κινύμενον δεῖξαι πόρον: ἣν γὰρ ἴδωνται 
πηλαμύδες, τάχα πᾶσαι ὑπὲρ κούφοιο λίνοιο 

ἐς βυθὸν ἀΐσσουσι καὶ ἄπρηκτον λίπον ἄγρην. 
εἰ δ᾽ οὔ σφι μακάρων τις ἁλιπλάγκτων νεμεσήσει, 
πολλάκι καὶ τραφερῆς ὑπὲρ ἠόνος ἑλκυσθεῖσαι 
ἔξαλοι οὐκ ἐθέλουσι λιπεῖν λίνον, ἀλλ᾽ ἐνέχονται, 
αὐτὴν μήρινθον πολυδινέα πεφρικυῖαι. 

ὧδε καὶ ἐν ξυλόχοισιν ὀρέστεροι ἀγρευτῆρες 
εἷλον ἀναλκείην ἐλάφων εὐαγρέϊ τέχνῃ, 

μηρίνθῳ στέψαντες ἅπαν δρίος: ἀμφὶ δὲ κούφων 
ὀρνίθων δήσαντο θοὰ πτερά: ταὶ δ᾽ ἐσορῶσαι 
ἠλέματα πτώσσουσι κενὸν φόβον, οὐδὲ πελάσσαι 
μαψιδίως πτερύγεσσιν ἀτυζόμεναι μεμάασιν, 
εἰσόκε θηρητῆρες ἐπαΐξαντες ἕλωσι. 

Καὶ μέν τις δύπτης ἁλίων εὐμήχανος ἔργων 
νόσφι δόλου παλάμῃσιν ἐπαΐξας ἕλεν αὐταῖς 
ἰχθῦς, nite χέρσον ἀμειβόμενος πόρον ἅλμης, 
σαργόν τε τρέσσαντα φόβῳ δειλήν τε σκίαιναν. 
σαργοὶ μὲν δείσαντες ἀολλέες ἐς μυχὸν ἅλμης 
εἰλόμενοὶ πτήσσουσιν, ἐπ᾽ ἀλλήλαις δὲ κέχυνται, 
δόχμιαι ἀμφιπεσόντες, ἀναφρίσσουσι δ᾽ ἀκάνθαις 


* The ref. is to the Formido, C. iv. 385 n. 
446 


575 


580 


585 


590) 


HALIEUTICA, IV. 571-5990 


rest, thinking it to be a shelter: foolish fishes which, 
frightened by a noise, enter the gates of doom. Then 
the fishers on either side hasten with the ropes to 
draw the net ashore. And, when they see the moving 
rope, the fish, in vain terror, huddle and cower 
together and are oiled in a mass. Then would the 
fisher offer many prayers to the gods of hunting that 
nothing may leap out of the net nor anything make 
a move and show the way ; for if the Pelamyds see 
such a thing, speedily they all bound over the light 
net into the deep and leave the fishing fruitless. 
But if none of the sea-roaming gods be angry with 
the fishermen, then often even when the fishes are 
haled out of the sea upon the solid shore they will 
not leave the net but cling to it, afraid even of the 
eddying rope itself. Even so in the woods the 
hunters of the hill take the timorous deer by happy 
hunting-craft. Encircling all the wood with a rope, 
they bind about it the swift wings * of buoyant birds ; 
and the deer, when they behold it, shrink in vain and 
empty terror and, idly affrighted by the wings, they 
will not approach, until the hunters rush upon them 
and make them their prey. 

Moreover, a diver, skilled in the works of the sea, 
without any snare attacks and captures some fishes 
with his hands alone, traversing the path of the sea 
as if it were dry land: to wit, the Sargue® which 
trembles with terror and the craven Sciaena.° ‘The 
Sargues in their fear cower and crowd together in 
the depths of the sea and they lie in piles athwart 
one another, while their backs bristle with spines 


ΣΟ ἢν ASS τ: 
¢ Probably Umbrina cirrhosa, M.G. σκιός : Apost. p. 13; 
Oy. Hal. 111 corporis umbrae | Liventis; Hesych. 5. oxadevs, 
447 


OPPIAN 


τς " ΓΕ 
νῶτα μετακλίνοντες, ἅτε σκολόπεσσιν ἁπάντῃ 600 
φραξάμενοι πυκινῇσι περίδρομον ἕρκος ἀλωῆς 
ἀγρονόμοι, σίντῃσι μέγαν πόνον: οὐδέ κεν ἄν τις 
ἐσβαίη: σκῶλοι γὰρ ἐρητύουσι κέλευθα" 
2, CS / 
ὡς κείνοις οὐκ ἄν τις ἐνιχρίμψειεν ἑτοίμως, 
a \ 
οὐδ᾽ ἐπὶ χεῖρα βάλοι" περὶ γὰρ φρίσσουσι κελαιναὶ 605 
πρόκροσσαι πυκινῇσιν ὑπὸ σταλίκεσσιν ἄκανθαι. 
> ᾽ὔ > yA Sa 8 e \ / / 
ἀλλά τις ἰδμοσύνῃσιν ἀνὴρ ὑπὸ κεύθεα πόντου 
ἐσσυμένως δύοιτο, περιφράζοιτο δὲ πάντῃ 
σαργούς, ἔνθα κάρη τε καὶ οὐραίη κλίσις αὐτῶν'" 
χεῖρα δ᾽ ὑπὲρ κεφαλῇσι βαλὼν καθύπερθεν ἀκάνθας 610 
ἧκα καταρρέξειεν ἐπικλίνοι τε πιέζων" 
€ > 3, 7 > Vg > , 
of δ᾽ αὔτως μίμνουσιν ἀρηρότες ἀλλήλοισιν 
ἀστεμφεῖς, προβολῇσι πεποιθότες ὀξείῃσιν" 
» ΄ ΄ὔ JN env ΘῈ ἢ 
ἔνθα δύω. παλάμῃσιν ἀνὴρ ἑκάτερθεν ἀείρας : 
αὖτις ἀναπλώει τελέσας πανεπίκλοπον ἔργον. 615 
Il Y δὲ (3 Pre / 5 “ 
ετραίην δὲ σκίαιναν ἐπὴν φόβος ἦτορ ἵκηται, 
ἐσσυμένως σπιλάδεσσιν ἐπέσσυτο καί τινα κοίλην 
χειὴν εἰσεπέρησε περίδρομον ἠὲ χαράδρην, 
ἢ ποίαις ἁλίῃσιν ὑπέδραμεν, ἠὲ καὶ ὑγροῖς 
φύκεσιν" οὐ γάρ οἵ τι μέλει σκέπας, οἷον ἅπασαν en 
δεξάμενον ῥύσαιτο, κάρη δ᾽ dpa δίζεται οἷον 
/ \ Χ 7 » Prd 
φράξασθαι, κεφαλὴν δὲ κατακρύψασα Kal ὄσσε 
μὲ >’ ε / ~ SW, > , 
ἔλπεται οὐχ ὁρόωσα λαθεῖν ὁρόωντος ἐφορμήν. 
¢ , >? “-“ 5 
ὡς δέ τις ὠμηστῆρος ἐπεσσυμένοιο λέοντος 
\ > / / 
βουβαλὶς ἐν λόχμῃσι κάτω τρέψασα κάρηνον 658 
,ὔ 
μαψιδίην φυλακὴν προτιβάλλεται, οὔθ᾽ ὁράασθαι 
ἔλ > / ὃ ἊΨ 3 oh, > A \ 
ἔλπεται, εἰσόκε δή μιν ἐπαΐξας ὀλοὸς θὴρ 
’ io 9 io ε ee 
δαρδάψῃ:- τῆς δ᾽ ἦτορ ὁμοίϊον, οὐδὲ κάρηνον 
44.8 


HALIEUTICA, IV. 600-628 


erect, even as farmers fence all round with close-set 
stakes the hedge that runs about a vineyard: a 
great trouble for robbers ; and none could enter in, 
since the stakes bar the way. Even so no one would 
readily touch the Sargues nor lay a hand upon them, 
for their dark spimes bristle about them with close- 
set jutting points. But the skilful man should dive 
speedily under the hidden places of the sea and 
observe the Sargues all round—where lies the head 
and where the tail—and putting his hand over their 
heads he should gently stroke * their spines above 
and press and bend them down. The Sargues remain 
just as they were, clustered together and unmoving, 
trusting in their sharp defences. Then the man takes 
two of them, one in either hand, and comes to the 
surface again, having accomplished a deed of utmost 
cunning. 

The rock-haunting Sciaena, when fear comes upon 
its heart, rushes eagerly to the reefs and enters some 
hollow round hole or cleft, or creeps under the sea 
grasses or the wet weeds ; for it does not study to 
find such shelter as might admit its whole body and 
protect it, but seeks only to defend its head, and 
hiding head and eyes hopes because it does not see 
to escape the attack of one who sees. Even so in 
the woods the Antelope, when the ravenous Lion 
attacks it, turning down its head protects itself with 
a vain defence and hopes itself unseen, till the deadly 
beast rushes upon it and rends it, while it remains of 
like mind as before nor lifts its head, but even while 


4 Ael. i, 23 θηρῶνται δὲ (οἱ σαργοὶ) Kal ἀπὸ χειρός, ἐάν τις τὰς 
ἀκάνθας, ἃς ἐγείρουσιν εἰς τὸ ἑαυτοῖς ἀμύνειν, εἰς τὸ κάτω μέρος 
ἀπό γε τῆς κεφαλῆς ἡσυχῇ κατάγων εἶτα κλίνῃ, καὶ πιέσας τῶν 
πετρῶν ἐκσπάσῃ, εἰς ἃς ἑαυτοὺς ὑπὲρ τοῦ λαθεῖν ὠθοῦσιν. 


2G 440 


OPPIAN 


> 4 
ἀγκλινει, δοκέει δὲ καὶ ὀλλυμένη περ ἀλύξαι. 
a > / 
τοῖα δὲ καὶ Λιβύης mrepdev βοτὸν ἀγκυλόδειρον 680 
,ὔ 
νήπια τεχνάζει" μελέη δέ οἱ ἔπλετο τέχνη" 
“ > \ / ¢€ 9 > - , 
ὡς ἀταλὴ μελέῃσιν ὑπ᾽ ἐλπωρῇσι σκίαινα 
/ 
κέκρυπται" τάχα γάρ μιν ἐρυσσάμενος παλάμῃσιν 
3 \ > be \ > / ” 
aypevTnp ἀνέδυ τε καὶ ddpaivovoay ἔφηνε. 
Τόσσα μὲν ἰχθυβόλων ἐδάην ἁλιεργέα τέχνης 686 
ὃ \ / 3... 3 / A » 
Ἥνεα, καὶ τοόσσοισιν ἐπ᾽ ἰχθύσι πικρὸν ὄλεθρον" 
\ 3 + ΄ ¢ Tee Ss / 
τοὺς δ᾽ ἄλλους ξύμπαντας ὁμοίϊος αἶσα κιχάνει 
ἊΝ 3 > / ,ὔ , 
κύρτων T ἀγκιστρων τε βαθυπλεκέος τε λίνοιο 
ε ~ / wt 9 > ,ὔ » , 
puis τε τριόδοντος, ὅσ᾽ ἀνδράσιν ἔντεα τέχνης. 
\ \ e ,ὔ \ ) e ,ὔ | 
TOUS [LEV ὑπηματίους, TOUS ὃ ἐσπερος εἷλε δαμέντας, 640 | 
a> ON εν τωι \ ,ὕ 3 fa 
εὔτ ἂν ὕπο πρῶτον νυκτὸς κνέφας ἀσπαλιῆες 
\ > / 
πυρσὸν ἀναψάμενοι; γλαφυρὸν σκάφος ἰθύνοντες, 
> ΄ 3 , owed 3 » 
ἰχθύσιν ἀτρεμέουσιν ἀείδελον αἶσαν ἄγωσιν. 
μ᾿ > (ἡ \ ἊΝ a 
ἔνθ᾽ of μὲν πεύκης λιπαρῇ φλογὶ καγχαλόωντες 
> > > £, 7 lot 
ἀμφ᾽ ἀκάτῳ θύνουσι, κακὸν δ᾽ ἴδον ἑσπέριον πῦρ, 641 
¢ A 7 > | 
ῥιπῆς τριγλώχινος ἀμειλίκτοιο τυχόντες. 


Ἔστι δέ τις θήρης ἕτερος νόμος ἰχθυβόλοισι 


* Ostrich, cf. C. iii. 483 n. 

ἡ This is what is known in Scotland and on the Scottish 
Borders (Solway Firth, etc.) as « burning the water,” the 
harpoon being a three-pronged or five-pronged spear, called 
leister or waster (some say that leister = 3-pronged, waster = 
5-pronged spear): Scott, Guy Mannering, ᾿ς. xxvi. “ This 
450 


HALIEUTICA, IV. 629-647 


it perishes thinks to escape. Such foolish device 
also doth the winged bent-necked beast * of Libya 
practise : but its craft is vain. Even so with vain 
hopes the tender Sciaena hides, for speedily the fisher 
pulls it forth with his hand and comes to the surface 
and shows its foolishness. 

Even so many devices I know of the fishermen’s 
craft in the sea and bitter destruction for so many 
fishes. And all the others a like fate overtakes, by 
weels and hooks and deep-woven net and sweeping 
trident—some in the day-time, but others evening 
takes and slays, when at earliest dusk of night with 
lighted torch © the fishers steer their hollow boat, 
bringing to the resting fishes a darkling doom. Then 
do the fishes exulting in the oily flame of pine rush 
about the boat and, to their sorrow seeing the fire 
at even, meet the stern blow of the trident. 

There is another manner of fishing practised by 


chase in which the fish is pursued and struck with barbed 
spears, or a long-shafted trident, called a waster, is much 
practised at the mouth of the Esk and in the other salmon 
rivers of Scotland. The sport is followed by day and 
night, but most commonly in the latter, when the fish are 
discovered by means of torches or fire-grates, filled with 
blazing fragments of tar-barrels, which shed a strong 
though partial light upon the water.” Burns, Death and 
Dr. Hornbook, v. 31 ‘* 1 there wi’ Something did forgither | 
That pat me in an eerie swither ; | An awfw’ scythe, outowre 
ae shouther, | Clear-dangling, hang; | A three-taed leister 
on the ither | Lay large and lang.” It furnishes.a simile to 
Q. Smyrn. vii. 569 ὡς δ᾽ ἁλιεὺς κατὰ πόντον ἀνὴρ λελιημένος 
ἄγρης | τεύχων ἰχθύσι πῆμα φέρει μένος Ηφαίστοιο | νηὸς ἑῆς 
ἔντοσθε, διεγρομένῃ δ᾽ ὑπ’ ἀυτμῇ ] μαρμαίρει περὶ νῆα πυρὸς 
σέλας, οἱ δὲ κελαινῆς | ἐξ ἁλὸς ἀίσσουσι μεμαότες ὕστατον αἴγλην | 
εἰσιδέειν᾽ τοὺς γάρ pa τανυγλώχινι τριαίνῃ | κτείνει ἐπεσσυμένους, 
γάνυται δέ οἱ ἦτορ ἐπ᾽ ἄγρῃ" | ὡς κτλ. Cf. Ο. iv. 140; Neilson, 
Annals of the Solway (1899), p. 52; Introd. p. xlvii. 


451 


OPPIAN 


φαρμάκταις, ot λυγρὸν ἐπ᾽ ἰχθύσι μητίσαντο 
φάρμακον, ὠκύμορον δὲ τέλος νεπόδεσσιν ἔθηκαν. 
of δ᾽ ἦτοι πρῶτον μὲν ἐπασσυτέραις βολίδεσσι 650 
κοντῶν τε ῥιπῆσι καὶ αἰκίησιν ἐρετμῶν 
εἱλεῦσιν νεπόδων δειλὰς στίχας εἰς ἕνα χῶρον 
κοϊλοφυῆ, κευθμῶσιν ὑπαγνύμενον θαμέεσσιν" 
ἔνθ᾽ οἱ μὲν δύνουσιν ὑπὸ γλαφυρῇς σπιλάδεσσι, 
τοὶ δὲ περιστήσαντο λίνων εὐερκέα, πάντῃ 668 
δίκτυα κυκλώσαντες, ἅτ᾽ ἀνδράσι δυσμενέεσσι 
διπλὰ περιπροβαλόντες ἀνάρσια τείχεα πέτρης. 
καὶ τότ᾽ ἀνὴρ ἄργιλον ὁμοῦ πίειραν ἀείρας 
ῥίζαν θ᾽, ἣν κυκλάμινον ἐφήμισαν ἰητῆρες, 

΄ 


μίξας ἐν παλάμῃσι δύω φυρήσατο μάζας: τ! 660 
i 3 ? , / 4 > 4 > ἃν. 
πόντῳ δ᾽ ἐγκατέπαλτο λίνων ὕπερ, ἀμφὶ δ᾽ ἀρ 
αὐταῖς 


᾿κοιλάσι καὶ θαλάμῃσι Svoada φάρμακ᾽ ἄλεωψε 
μῃ ρμ 


* Philostr. Jmag. i, 13 (speaking of Tunnies): ἰδέαι μὲν 
οὖν καθ᾽ ἃς ἁλίσκονται μυρίαι" καὶ yap σίδηρον (i.e. the trident) | 
ἔστιν ἐπ᾽ αὐτοὺς θήξασθαι Kal φάρμακα ἐπιπάσαι καὶ μικρὸν | 
ἤρκεσε δίκτυον ὅτῳ ἀπόχρη Kal σμικρόν τι τῆς ἀγέλης. Besides 
Cyclamen (659 below) we read of the use οὗ φλόμος (πλόμος), 
Mullein, Lat. verbascwm (Plin. xxv. 120): A. 602b31 
ἀποθνήσκουσι δὲ of ἰχθῦς τῷ πλόμῳ᾽ διὸ Kal θηρεύουσιν οἱ μὲν 
ἄλλοι τοὺς ἐν τοῖς ποταμοῖς καὶ λίμναις πλομίζοντες, οἱ δὲ Φοίνικες 
καὶ τοὺς ἐν τῇ θαλάττῃ, of. Ael. 1. 583 οὗ ᾿Αριστολοχία, 
Birth-wort, Aristolochia rotunda: Plin. xxv. 98. Piscatores 
Campania radicem (aristolochiae) eam quae rotunda est 
venenum terrae vocant, coramque nobis contusam mixta | 
calce in mare sparsere. Advolant pisces cupiditate mira 
statimque,exanimati fluitant:; of κόνυξα, Fleabane, used to 
induce the Poulpe to relax hold of the rocks: A. 534b96 
καὶ οἵ γε πολύποδες οὕτω μὲν προσέχονται ὥστε μὴ ἀποσπᾶσθαι 
ἀλλ᾽ ὑπομένειν τεμνόμενοι, ἐὰν δέ τις κόνυζαν προσενέγκῃ, ἀφιᾶσν. 
εὐθὺς ὀσμώμενοι. Cf. Apost. p. 50 ** A cété des harpons: se 
place une espéce de crochet construit expressément pour la 
péche des poulpes, dont la chair est, comme on sait, trés 


452 | 


HALIEUTICA, IV. 648-662 


fishermen who use poison;* who devise baleful 
poison for fishes and bring to the finny race swift 
doom. First with many missiles and sweep of poles 
and assault of oars the fishermen drive the wretched 
ranks of the finny creatures into one place, some bay 
broken with manf hiding-places. There the fishes 
creep below the hollow rocks and the fishermen set 
goodly nets of flax around, encircling them all about, 
even as if they threw threatening double walls of stone 
around the foemen. Then a man takes rich white clay 
together with the root which mediciners call cyclamen ὃ 
and mixes them in his hands and kneads two cakes.° 
And he leaps over the nets into the sea and about 
_ the very caves and chambers of the fishes he smears 


estimée par les Grecs. C’est un gros hamecon porte par 
une trés longue hampe. Aux. détritus de crabes, aux 
coquilles vides, le pécheur reconnait le nid (θαλάμι) du 
céphalopode. Il cherche, en faisant pénétrer son appareil, 
ἃ décrocher l’animal, qui, fort souvent, sentant le danger, 
se fixe, par ses ventouses, trés solidement contre les. parois _ 
de son nid. Pour le faire lacher prise, on attache alors a 
une hampe un morceau d’étoffe blanche ou des feuilles de 
tabae ou de κονυζό, que l’on approche du trou. L’animal 
sort aussitét et cherche ἃ s’échapper, mais le pécheur Je 
saisit avec son crochet.” : 

> C, hederaefolium or C. neapolitanum, Sowbread: Plin. 
xxv. 116 Mihi et tertia cyclaminos demonstrata est cognomine 
chamaecissos, uno omnino folio, radiae ramosa, qua pisces 
necantur. The root is still used in preparing a paste which 
the Neapolitan fishermen call lateragna, and which is 
either thrown in lumps from a boat or enclosed in a bag 
and then thrust by means of a long pole among the rocks. 
The fish— particularly Grey Mullets and other low swimming 
fish—becoming intoxicated come to the surface and are 
easily taken. Badham, p. 21; Radcliffe, p. 239. 

¢ Of. A. 591 418 ὁ δὲ κέφαλος καὶ ὁ κεστρεὺς ὅλως μόνοι ob 
σαρκοφαγοῦσιν᾽ σημεῖον δέ, οὔτε γὰρ ἐν τῇ κοιλίᾳ πώποτ᾽ ἔχοντες 
εἰλημμένοι εἰσὶ τοιοῦτον οὐδέν, οὔτε δελέατι χρῶνται πρὸς αὐτοὺς 
ζῴων σαρξὶν ἀλλὰ μάζῃ. 

453 


OPPIAN 


a , ,ὔ 
χρίσματος ἐχθοδοποῖο καὶ ἐξεμίηνε θάλασσαν. 
. ΄, 
καὶ τὸν μὲν παλίνορσον ὀλέθρια. φαρμάξαντα 
lon > / 3 \ 
δέξατο ναῦς" τοὺς δ᾽ αἶψα κακὴ καὶ ἀνάρσιος ὀδμὴ 665 
~ fae > 7 
πρῶτα μὲν ev θαλάμῃσιν ἱκάνεται: ἀχλύϊ δ᾽ ὄσσε 
A 7 
καὶ κεφαλὴ καὶ γυῖα βαρύνεται, οὐδὲ δύνανται 
an / 
μίμνειν ἐν κευθμῶσιν, ἀτυζόμενοι δὲ χέονται 
2 AY > A Ado ἥ ε δέ λὺ θάλ 
ἐκτὸς amo σπιλάδων: ἡ δέ σφισι πουλὺ θάλασσα 
πικροτέρη" τοῖον γὰρ ἐν οἴδμασι πῆμα πέφυρται. 610 
- ~ da. a 
ot δ᾽ ὥστ᾽ οἰνοβαρεῖς, ὀλοῇ μεθύοντες AUT LA, 
πάντῃ δινεύουσι καὶ οὔποθι χῶρον ἔχουσι 
λειπόμενον κακότητος, ἐπαΐγδην δὲ λίνοισι 
σπερχόμενοι πίπτουσι, διεκθορέειν μεμαῶτες" 
> 9 ” ~ + / 9Q? > va 
ἀλλ᾽ οὔ τις χαλεπῆς ἄτης λύσις οὐδ ἀλεωρή. βθ78 
πολλῇ δὲ ῥιπῇ τε καὶ ἅλματι κυμαίνονται 
τειρόμενοι" τὸ δὲ πολλὸν ἐπιτρέχει ᾿Αμφιτρίτῃ 
> / tA , 3 > 4 A a 
ὀλλυμένων φύσημα, τό τ᾽ ἰχθύσιν ἔπλετο δειλοῖς 
οἰμωγή: τοὶ δ᾽ ἐκτὸς ἐπ᾽ ἄλγεσιν ἀσπαλιῆες 
τερπόμενοι μίμνουσιν ἀκηδέες, εἰσόκε σιγὴ 680 
΄ 7 Δι οἷ Ni 3 , A 
πόντον ἕλῃ, φλοίσβου τε καὶ ἀργαλέοιο κυδοιμοῦ 
παύσωνται, στονόεσσαν ἀποπνεύσαντες ἀὐτμήν. 
καὶ τότ᾽ ἀπειρέσιον νεκύων ἐρύουσιν ὅμιλον 
ξυνῷ τεθνηῶτας ὁμοῦ λωβήτορι πότμῳ. 
: | 
ws δ᾽ ὅτε δυσμενέεσσιν ἐπιστήσωνται "Apna, 685) 
φροῦδον ἐελδόμενοι ῥαῖσαι πόλιν, οὐδ᾽ ἀνιεῖσι 
/ 4 > ,ὔ > \ \ Ὁ, 
πήματα βουλεύοντες ἐπί σφισιν, ἀλλὰ καὶ ὕδωρ 
4 / > / ε > b Tinea’ ΄ 
κρηνάων φάρμαξαν ὀλέθριον- of δ᾽ ἐπὶ πύργοις 


« κρήνη is properly a spring from which the water hasa _ 
free out-flow (Hom. Od. xvii. 205 ἐπὶ κρήνην ἀφίκοντο | τυκτὴν ὃ 
καλλίροον, ὅθεν ὑδρεύοντο πολῖται 3X. 107 κρήνην καλλιρρέεθρον ; 
Hesiod, W. 595 κρήνης ἀενάου καὶ ἀπορρύτου, ἥ τ’ ἀθύλωτος) as 
opposed to a standing well, but the distinction is not very 
accurately observed. For poisoning or making undrinkable 
454 


HALIEUTICA, IV. 663-688 


the evil-smelling poison of the hateful unguent and 
pollutes the sea. Him when he has done his deadly 
poison the ship takes on board again. But speedily 
the evil and unkindly odour first reaches the fishes 
in their chambers and their eyes are clouded and 
their head and timbs are heavy and they cannot 
remain in their hiding-places but rush in terror from 
the rocks. But the sea is yet more bitter for them : 
such bane is mingled with its waves. And heavy as 
it were with wine, drunk with the deadly fumes, they 
wheel every way but nowhere find_a place free from 
the plague, and they rush furiously upon the nets, 
eager to break through. But there is no deliverance 
from their cruel doom nor any escape. With much 
rushing and leaping they toss in their agony and as 
they perish there runs over the sea a great panting 
_-which for the wretched fishes is their way of 
lamentation. But the fishermen, rejoicing in their 
agonies, remain callously apart until silence reigns 
upon the sea and the fishes cease from their noise 
and grievous tumult, having breathed away their 
lamentable breath. And then the fishers draw forth 
an infinite crowd of dead, slain together by a common 
doom of destruction. As when men bring war upon 
their foes, eager to destroy and raze their city, and 
cease not to devise evil in their hearts but even poison 
with deadly poison the water of their wells :¢ and 


wells in enemy country cf. Aeneas Tact. viii, 4 τὰ κατὰ τὴν 
χώραν στάσιμα ὕδατα ws ἄποτα δεῖ ποιεῖν : Herod. iv. 120 
the Scythians resolved not to fight a pitched battle, but to 
retire and, as they retired, τὰ φρέατα, τὰ παρεξίοιεν αὐτοί, 
καὶ τὰς κρήνας συγχοῦν ; Thue. ii. 48 the plague attacked the 
people in the Peiraeus ὥστε καὶ ἐλέχθη ὑπ᾽ αὐτῶν ws οἱ ILeXo- 
ποννήσιοι φάρμακα ἐσβεβλήκοιεν ἐς τὰ φρέατα" κρῆναι γὰρ οὔπω 
ἦσαν αὐτόθι. 


455 


OPPIAN 


“ 3 > / \ Dae Ζ7.. ,ὔ 

λιμῷ τ᾽ ἀργαλέῳ καὶ ὀϊζύϊ μοχθίζοντες 
ὕδατί 7” ἐχθοδοπῷ στυγερὸν καὶ ἀεικέα πότμον 
+ 7 £ \ 4 / “ 
ὄλλυνται, νεκύων δὲ πόλις πέπληθεν ἅπασα᾽ 
ὡς οἱ λευγαλέῳ τε μόρῳ καὶ ἀδευκέϊ πότμῳ 
3 / Vs € ξ / y+ Ζ 
ἀνδράσι φαρμάκτῃσιν ὑποδμηθέντες ὄλοντο. 


456 


690 


HALIEUTICA, IV. 689-693 


the others within their towers, afflicted by grievous 
hunger and distress and hateful water, perish by a 
sorrowful and unseemly doom, and the whole city 
is full of dead ; so by a sad death and untoward doom, 
overcome by the poison of men, the fishes perish. 


457 


AATEYTIKON TO E 


” ” 3 Doh fi / , 

ἔνθεν ἔπειτ᾽ ἀΐων τεκμαίρεο, κοίρανε γαίης, 
ὡς οὐδὲν μερόπεσσιν ἀμήχανον, οὐκ ἐνὶ γαίῃ 
μητρὶ καμεῖν, οὐ κόλπον ἀν᾽ εὐρώεντα θαλάσσης" 
ἀλλά τις ἀτρεκέως ἰκέλην μακάρεσσι γενέθλην 
ἀνθρώπους ἀνέφυσε, χερείονα δ᾽ ὥπασεν ἀλκήν, 
εἴτ᾽ οὖν ᾿Ιαπετοῖο γένος, πολυμῆτα Προμηθεύς, 5 
ἀντωπὸν μακάρεσσι κάμεν γένος, ὕδατι γαῖαν 
ξυνώσας, κραδίην δὲ θεῶν ἔχρισεν ἀλοιφῇ, 

" 9 δ \ / / 2 / 
εἴτ᾽ ἄρα Kal λύθροιο θεορρύτου ἐκγενόμεσθα 
Τιτήνων" οὐ γάρ τι πέλει καθυπέρτερον ἀνδρῶν 

, a ἼΣΟΝ, oF ς , 3 ΄, 
νόσφι θεῶν: μούνοισι δ᾽ ὑπείξομεν ἀθανάτοισιν. 10 
ὅσσους μὲν κατ᾽ ὄρεσφι βίην ἄτρεστον ἔχοντας 
θῇ ς LA. \ μ᾿ a \ ~ 
ρας ὑπερφιάλους βροτὸς ἔσβεσεν: ὅσσα δὲ φῦλα 
οἰωνῶν νεφέλῃσι καὶ ἠέρι δινεύοντα 
εἷλε, χαμαίζηλόν περ ἔχων δέμας οὐδὲ λέοντα 

> / 

pvoar aynvopin δμηθήμεναι, οὐδ᾽ ἐσάωσεν 15 


* Pind. NV. vi. 1ff. ὃν ἀνδρῶν, ὃν θεῶν yévos* ἐκ μιᾶς δὲ 
πνέομεν | ματρὸς ἀμφότεροι " διείργει δὲ πᾶσα κεκριμένα | δύναμις, 
ὡς τὸ μὲν οὐδέν, ὁ δὲ χάλκεος ἀσφαλὲς αἰὲν ἕδος | μένει οὐρανός. 
ἀλλά τι προσφέρομεν ἔμπαν ἢ μέγαν | νόον ἤτοι φύσιν ἀθανάτοις. 

ὃ Apollod. i. 7. 45 Προμηθεὺς δὲ ἐξ ὕδατος καὶ γῆς ἀνθρώπους 
πλάσας ; Callim. fr. 24 (133) εἴ σε Hpoundeds | ἔπλασε καὶ πηλοῦ 
μὴ ᾽ξ ἑτέρου γέγονας : Lucian, Prom. in v. 2, 

458 


oe 


HALIEUTICA, or FISHING 
V 


Next hear and mark, O lord of earth, that there is 
nothing impossible for men to do, either on mother 
earth or in the vasty gulf of the sea, but of a truth 
someone created men to be a race like unto the 
blessed gods, albeit he gave them inferior strength :4 
whether it was the son of Iapetus, Prometheus ὃ of 
many devices, who made man in the likeness of the 
blessed ones, mingling earth with water, and anointed 
his heart with the anointing of the gods ; or whether 
we are born of the blood divine that flowed from the 
Titans ;° for there is nothing more excellent than 
men, apart from the gods: only to the immortals 
shall we give place. How many monster wild beasts 
of dauntless might doth man quench upon the 
mountains, how many tribes of birds that wheel in 
cloud and air doth he take captive,? though he be 
of lowly stature! His valour prevents not the Lion 
from defeat, nor doth the windswift sweep of his 


4 Schol. τινὲς δέ φασιν ἐκ τοῦ αἵματος τῶν Τιτάνων πολεμούντων 
μετὰ τῶν οὐρανίων θεῶν, μάλιστα δὲ τοῦ Διός, καὶ ἡττηθέντων, 
ὅθεν καί, φασί, βροτὸς ὁ ἄνθρωπος λέγεται ὡς ἀπὸ βρότου ἢ τοῦ 
αἱματηροῦ μολυσμοῦ τῶν Τιτάνων. 

4 Soph. Ant. 342 κουφονόων τε φῦλον ὀρνίθων ἀμφιβαλὼν 
ἄγει | καὶ θηρῶν ἀγρίων ἔθνη | πόντου 7’ εἰναλίαν φύσιν | σπείραισι 
δικτυοκλώστοις | περιφραδὴς ἀνήρ. 


459 


OPPIAN 


αἰετὸν ἠνεμόεις πτερύγων polos, ἀλλὰ καὶ ᾿Ινδὸν 
θῆρα κελαινόρινον ὑπέρβιον ἄχθος ἀνάγκῃ 

κλῖναν ἐπιβρίσαντες, ὑπὸ ζεύγλῃσι δ᾽ ἔθηκαν 
οὐρήων ταλαεργὸν ἔχειν πόνον ἑλκυστῆρα. 90 
κήτεα δ᾽ ὅσσα πέλωρα Ποσειδάωνος ἐναύλοις 
ἐντρέφεται, τὰ μὲν οὔτι χερείονα φημὶ θάλασσαν 
τίκτειν ὠμοφάγων τεκέων χθονός, ἀλλὰ καὶ ἀλκὴν 
καὶ μέγεθος προβέβηκεν ἀναιδέα δείματα πόντου. 
ἔστιν ἐν ἠπείρῳ χελύων γένος, οὐδέ τιν᾽ ἀλκὴν 25 
οὐδ᾽ ἄτην ἴσασι: θαλασσαίῃ δὲ χελώνῃ 

οὐ μάλα θαρσαλέος τις ἐν οἴδμασιν ἀντιβολήσει. 

εἰσὶ δ᾽ ἐνὶ τραφερῇ λάβροι κύνες, ἀλλὰ κύνεσσιν 
εἰναλίοις οὐκ ἄν τις ἀναιδείην ἐρίσειε. 

πορδαλίων γαίης ὀλοὸν δάκος, ἀλλὰ θαλάσσης 30 
αἰνότερον. χέρσον μὲν ἐπιστείχουσιν ὕαιναι, 

πολλῷ δ᾽ ἐν ῥοθίοις κρυερώτεραι. οἱ μὲν ἔασι 
κριοὶ μηλονόμων τιθασὸν: βοτόν, οὐ δὲ θαλάσσης 
κριοῖς μειλιχίοισι συνοίσεται, ὅς κε πελάσσῃ. 


* Elephant: cf. Ov. Tr. iv. 6. 7 Quaeque sui monitis 
obtemperat Inda magistri | Bellua; Mart. v. 37. 5 pecudis 
Indicae dentem. Called 60s Luca by the Romans (Lucret. 
v. 1300, 1337) because first seen by them in Lucania with 
Pyrrhus: Plin. viii. 16 Elephantos Italia primum yidit Pyrrhi 
regis bello et boves Lucas appellavit in Lucanis visos. 

> χελώνη ἡ xepoala A. 540029. Testudo graeca L. (** Auf 
allen Cykladen, selbst das von Tieren beinahe entblésste 
Syra nicht ausgenommen, sehr gemein. Man hiilt sie haufig 
im Hause gezihmt ” Erh. p. 71), and 7. marginata Dumeril, 
which, unlike the other, prefers wet places to dry and is 
fairly common in the fresh-water pools of Naxos (Erh. 1.6.). 
Both are found in Syria, 7. graeca being found everywhere 
in great abundance (Tristram, p. 256). 

° χελώνη ἡ θαλαττία A. δ40 ἃ 29, the marine Tortoise or 
Turtle. See H. i. 397 n. 


460 


HALIEUTICA, V. 17-34 


wings save the Eagle. Even the Indian Beast,* 
dark of hide and of tremendous weight, men make 
to bow to overwhelming force and under the yoke 
set him to do the patient hauling labour of the mule. 
And the huge Sea-monsters that are bred in the 
habitations of P&seidon are, I declare, no whit 
meaner than the ravening children of the land, but 
both in strength and size the dauntless terrors of the 
sea excel. There is upon the mainland the breed of 
Tortoises ® which know no valour nor hurt: but the 
Tortoise ὁ of the sea no man shall confidently con- 
front amid the waves. There are fierce Dogs upon 
the dry land : but not one could vie in shamelessness 
with the Dogs of the sea.¢ Dread is the bite of the 
Leopard of the land ¢ but that of the sea Leopard 7 
is more terrible. Hyenas’ walk upon the dry land, 
but those amid the waves” are deadlier far. The 
Ram of the shepherds is a gentle beast, but he 
who approaches the Rams of the sea‘ shall not find 
them kindly to encounter. What Boar * wields such 


4 Dog-fishes, H. i. 373 n. 

CC iil. Oa Ik, 

7 Wot certainly identified. 

9 C, iii. 263 n. 

% What animal is intended is not known. 

ὁ Generally identified with Orca gladiator, the Grampus 
or Killer Whale, the aries of Plin. ix. 10 arietes candore 
tantum cornibus adsimulatis; ibid. 145 grassatur aries ut 
latro, etnunc grandiorum navium in salo stantium occultatus 
umbra si quem nandi yoluptas invitet expectat, nunc elato 
extra aquam capite piscantium cumbas speculatur occultus- 
que adnatans mergit. Cf. xxxii. 144; Ael. xv. 2 6 ἄρρην 
κριὸς λευκὴν τὸ μέτωπον ταινίαν ἔχει περιθέουσαν . . . κριὸς δὲ 
θῆλυς, ὡς οἱ ἀλεκτρυόνες τὰ κάλλαια, OUTW τοι καὶ οὗτος ὑπὸ τῇ δέρῃ 
ἠρτημένους πλοκάμους ἔχει. 

E CQ. iii. 864. For χλούνης (here =xkampos) of. Hom. Jl. ix. 
539 χλούνην σῦν ἄγριον ἀγριόδοντα. 

461 


OPPIAN 


; id La 7 
τίς δὲ τόσον χλούνης φορέει σθένος, ὅσσον ἄαπτοι 85 
> 7 
λάμναι; τίς δὲ λέοντος ἐνὶ φρεσὶν αἴθεται ἀλκή, 
a , : 
Goon ῥιγεδανῇσιν ἀνισώσαιτο ζυγαίναις; 
φώκην δὲ βλοσυρὴν καὶ ἐπὶ χθονὶ χαυτήεσσαι 
ἄρκτοι πεφρίκασι καὶ ἐς fidbov ἀντιόωσαι 
δάμνανται: τοίοισι μέλει θήρεσσι θάλασσα. 40 
ἀλλ᾽ ἔμπης καὶ τοῖσιν ἐπεφράσσαντο βαρεῖαν 
ἄτην ἡμερίων ἄμαχον γένος, ἐκ δ᾽ ἁλιήων 
ὄλλυνται, κήτειον ὅτ᾽ ἐς μόθον ὁρμήσωνται. 
“ > 7 7 \ te > 3 3... 
τῶν ἐρέω θήρης βριθὺν πόνον" ἀλλ᾽ ἀΐουτε 
a ΄ 
εὐμενέται βασιλῆες, ᾿Ολύμπια τείχεα γαίης. 45 
Κήτεα μεσσοπόροις μὲν ἐνυτρέφεται πελάγεσσι 
πλεῖστά τε καὶ περίμετρα- τὰ δ᾽ οὐκ ἀναδύεται ἅλμης 
ἐν 3 3 4. / ww lal δ 
δηθάκις, ἀλλ ὑπένερθεν ἔχει κρηπῖδα θαλάσσης 
βριθοσύνῃ, μαιμᾷ δὲ βορῆς ἀζηχέϊ λύσσῃ 
αἰεὶ πεινώοντα καὶ οὔποτε νηδύος αἰνῆς δ0 
μαργοσύνην ἀνιέντα" τί γὰρ τόσον ἔσσεται εἶδαρ, 
ὅσσον ἐνιπλῆσαι γαστρὸς χάος, ὅσσον ἄαπτον 
ἐς κόρον ἀμπαῦσαι κείνων γένυν; οἱ δὲ καὶ αὐτοὶ 
3 / > / / / > ~ 
ἀλλήλους ὀλέκουσι, χερείονα φέρτερος ἀλκῇ 
πέφνων, ἀλλήλοις δὲ βορὴ καὶ δαῖτες ἔασι. 55 
πολλάκι Kal νήεσσιν ἄγει δέος ἀντιόωντα 
¢ ͵ \ Δ > / wv , 
εἐσπέριον κατὰ πόντον ᾿ΙΪβηρικόν, ἔνθα μάλιστα 
/ > a A rAd) 3 iL A 
γείτονος ᾿Ωκεανοῖο λελοιπότ᾽ ἀθέσφατον ὕδωρ 


* The λάμια of A. δ40 Ὁ 17 σελάχη δ᾽ ἐστὶ τά τε εἰρημένα καὶ 
βοῦς καὶ λάμια : 621 8.20 ἔχουσι δ᾽ ὀδόντας ἰσχυρούς (ai ἄμιαι), καὶ 
ἤδη ὦπται καὶ ἄλλα καὶ λάμια ἐμπεσοῦσα καὶ καθελκωθεῖσα : Athen. 
806 ἃ Νίκανδρος... τὸν καρχαρίαν καλεῖσθαί φησι καὶ λάμιαν καὶ 
σκύλλαν ; of. Plin. ix. 78. One of the larger Sharks, perhaps 
Lamna cornubica Cuv. or Carcharodon lamia Bp., M.G. 
λάμια, καρχαρίας : ‘“*rare et excessivement dangereux ; 
quelques individus de cette espéce atteignent des proportions 
énormes ” (Apost. p. 4). 

462 


HALIEUTICA, V. 35-58 


strength as doth the invincible Lamna*? What 
valour burns in the heart of the Lion to be likened 
to that of the dread Hammer-head?® Before the 
dread-eyed Seal¢ the maned Bears@ on the land 
tremble and, when they meet them in battle, they 
are vanquished. Stch are the beasts which have 
their business in the sea. But notwithstanding even 
for them the dauntless race of men has devised 
grievous woe, and they perish at the hands of fisher- 
men, when these set themselves to do battle with 
the Sea-monsters. The manner of hunting these 
with its heavy labour 1 will tell. And do ye hearken 
graciously, O kings, Olympian bulwarks of the earth. 

The Sea-monsters that are nurtured in the midst 
of the seas are very many in number and of exceeding 
size. And not often do they come up out of the 
brine, but by reason of their heaviness they keep 
the bottom of the sea below. And they rave for 
food with unceasing frenzy, being always anhungered 
and never abating the gluttony of their terrible 
maw: for what food shall be sufficient to fill the 
void of their belly or enough to satisfy and give a 
respite to their insatiable jaws? Moreover, they 
themselves also destroy one another, the mightier 
in valour slaying the weaker, and one for the other 
is food and feast. Often too they bring terror to 
ships when they meet them in the Iberian 568 ὁ in 
the West, where chiefly, leaving the infinite water 
of the neighbouring Ocean,/ they roll upon their way, 


ὃ Zygaena malleus, M.G. ζύγαινα, a large and fierce Shark, 
common in the Gulf of Messenia (Apost. p. 4. Cf A. 
566 b9 τῶν μακρῶν, . . ζύγαινα. 

¢ A. i. 686 ff. 

400. i12139'n. 

* H. iii. 623 n. 7 Atlantic. 

463 


OPPIAN 


- “4 i a 
εἰλεῦται, νήεσσιν ἐεικοσόροισιν ὁμοῖα. 
, A 7 \ views 3 \ Ν᾽ , 
πολλάκι δὲ πλαγχθέντα Kal ἠόνος ἐγγὺς ἱκάνει 
> “ a ᾽ὔ 3 lA ε λί 
ἀγχιβαθοῦς, ὅτε κέν τις ἐπί σφισιν ὁπλίζοιτο. 
Πᾶσι δ᾽ ὑπερφυέεσσι πέλει θήρεσσι θαλάσσης 
, a , Nek ” "εὐθὰ: 
νόσφι κυνῶν βαρύγυια καὶ οὐκ εὔπρηκτα κέλευθα 
οὔτε γὰρ εἰσορόωσιν ἀπόπροθεν οὔτε θάλασσαν 
πᾶσαν ἐπιστείχουσι βαρυνόμενοι μελέεσσιν 
ἠλιβάτοις, μάλα δ᾽ ὀψὲ κυλινδόμενοι φορέονται. 
τοὔνεκα καὶ πάντεσσιν ὁμόστολος ἔρχεται ἰχθὺς 
\ > aA / / A ᾽ὔ '¢ > , 
φαιὸς ἰδεῖν δολιχός τε δέμας, λεπτὴ δέ οἱ οὐρή, 
” «Ὁ / ¢€ A / ¢ vA 
ἔξοχος ὃς προπάροιθεν ἁλὸς πόρον ἡγεμονεύει 
σημαίνων: τῷ καί μιν ἐφήμισαν ᾿Ηγητῆρα. 
3 , a 
κήτει δ᾽ ἐκπάγλως κεχαρισμένος ἐστὶν ἑταῖρος 
, / / / ae 3 > PA 
πομπός τε φρουρός Te: φέρει δέ μιν ἣ κ᾽ ἐθέλῃσι 
ε (7 Ψ, A b} / ᾿ Tee f 
ῥηϊδίως: κείνῳ yap ἐφέσπεται ἰχθύϊ μούνῳ 
“-- yf - 
πιστῷ πιστὸν ἔχων αἰεὶ νόον" ἐγγύθι δ᾽ αὐτοῦ 
~ 7 aA 
στρωφᾶται, τανύει δὲ παρασχεδὸν ὀφθαλμοῖσιν 
͵ὕ a 
οὐρήν, ἥ οἱ ἕκαστα πιφαύσκεται, εἴτε τιν᾽ ἄγρην 
ἐστὶν ἑλεῖν, εἴτ᾽ οὖν τι κορύσσεται ἐγγύθι πῆμα, 


* For this mode of expressing size cf. Hom. Od. ix. 821 f. 
τὸ [the club of Polyphemus] μὲν ἄμμες ἐίσκομεν εἰσορόωντες | 
ὅσσον θ᾽ ἱστὸν νηὸς ἐεικοσόροιο μελαίνης ; Pind. P, iv. 245 [the 
Dragon guarding the Golden Fleece] ὃς πάχει μάκει τε 


πεντηκόντορον ναῦν κράτει. 


> ἀγχιβαθής, here applied to ἠόνος, is properly applied to 
the sea and the meaning is that even close to the shore the 
water is deep: Hom. Od. v. 418 ἀγχιβαθὴς δὲ θάλασσα καὶ 
οὔπως ἔστι πόδεσσι | στήμεναι ἀμφοτέροισι, where schol. PV 
rightly ἡ ἐγγὺς τῆς γῆς βάθος ἔχουσα. Of. τηλεβαθής Η. i. 


633. 
464 


60 


65 


τί 


HALIEUTICA, V. 59-77 


like unto ships of twenty oars. Often also they 
stray and come nigh the beach where the water is 
deep inshore ὃ : and there one may attack them. 
For all the great beasts of the sea, save the Dog- 
fishes, travelling is heavy-limbed and not easy. For 
they neither see far nor do they travel over all the 
sea, burdened as they are with their vast limbs, but 
very tardily they roll upon their way. Wherefore 
also with all of them there travels a companion 
fish, dusky to the eye and long of body and with a 
thin tail: which conspicuously goes before to guide 
them and show them their path in the sea; for 
which cause men call it the Guide.c But to the 
Whale ® it is a companion that hath found wondrous 
favour, as guide at once and guard; and it easily 
bringeth him whither he will. For that is the only 
fish that he follows, the ever-loyal comrade of a loyal 
friend. And it wheels about near him and close 
by the eyes of the Whale it extends its tail, which 
tells the monster everything—whether there is some 
prey to seize or whether some evil threatens nigh, 


© Naucrates ductor -- πομπίλος H. i. 186 π. H. iv. 437 f., 
the Pilot-fish or Whale-guide, from its habit of attending on 
Ships and “" Whales ” or κήτη. It is thought also to be the 
fish referred to in A. 557 a 29 ἐν δὲ τῇ θαλάττῃ τῇ ἀπὸ Kupiyns 
πρὸς Αἴγυπτόν ἐστι περὶ τὸν δελφῖνα ἰχθὺς ὃν καλοῦσι φθεῖρα 
[Plin. xxxii. 150 phthir: ‘* Louse ᾽7᾽ és γίνεται πάντων πιότατος 
διὰ τὸ ἀπολαύειν τροφῆς ἀφθόνου θηρεύοντος τοῦ δελφῖνος. para- 
phrased Ael. ix. 7. Our present passage is paraphrased 
Ael. ii, 13 τὰ κήτη τὰ μεγάλα ὀλίγου πάντα ἄνευ κυνῶν 
δεῖται τοῦ ἡγεμόνος καὶ τοῖς ὀφθαλμοῖς ἐκείνου ἄγεται. ἔστι δὲ 
ἰχθὺς μικρὸς καὶ λεπτός, τὴν κεφαλὴν προμηκής, στενὸν δὲ αὐτῷ τὸ 
οὐραῖον συμπέφυκεν κτλ. and there is a picturesque account in 
Plut. Mor. 980 F sq. ὁ δὲ καλούμενος "ἡγεμὼν μεγέθει μέν ἐστι καὶ 
σχήματι κωβιῶδες ἰχθύδιον, τὴν δ᾽ ἐπιφάνειαν ὄρνιθι φρίσσοντι διὰ 
τὴν τραχυτῆτα τῆς λεπίδος ἐοικέναι λέγεται. 


ἃ Jntroduction, p. lxvil. 
Qu 465 


OPPIAN 


εἴτ᾽ ὀλίγη πόντοιο πέλει χύσις, ἣν ἀλεείνειν 
βέλτερον: αὐδήεσσα δ᾽ ὅπως ἐνδείκνυται οὐρὴ 
πάντα μάλ᾽ ἀτρεκέως: τὸ δὲ πείθεται ὕδατος ἄχθος: 80 
κεῖνος γὰρ πρόμαχός τε καὶ οὔατα καὶ φάος ἰχθὺς 
θηρὶ πέλει- κείνῳ δ᾽ ἀΐει; κείνῳ δὲ δέδορκεν, 

ἡνί᾽ ἐπιτρέψας σφετέρου βιότοιο φυλάσσειν. 

ὡς δὲ πάϊς γενετῆρα παλαίτερον ἀμφαγαπάζει, 
φροντίσι γηροκόμοισιν ἀπὸ θρεπτήρια τίνων, 85 
τὸν δ᾽ ἤδη μελέεσσι Kal ὄμμασιν ἀδρανέοντα 
ἐνδυκέως μεθέπων προσπτύσσεται, ἔν τε κελεύθοις 
χεῖρ᾽ ὀρέγων καὶ πᾶσιν ἐν ἔργμασιν αὐτὸς ἀμύνων: 
πατρὶ δὲ γηράσκοντι νέον σθένος υἷες ἔασιν" 

ὡς κεῖνος φιλότητι περιπτύσσει δάκος ἅλμης 90 
ἰχθύς, ἠύτε νῆα νέμων οἴηκι χαλινῷ. 

ἢ πού οἱ γενεῆς πρώτης ἄπο σύμφυτον αἷμα 
ἔλλαχεν, ἠέ μιν αὐτὸς ἑλὼν ἑταρίσσατο θυμῷ. 

ὡς οὔτ᾽ ἠνορίης οὔτ᾽ εἴδεος ἔπλετ᾽ ὄνειαρ 

τόσσον, ὅσον πραπίδων: ἀλκὴ δ᾽ ἀνεμώλιος ἀφρων'" 95 
καί τε μέγα βριάοντα κατέσβεσεν ἠδ᾽ ἐσάωσε 
βαιὸς ἀνὴρ εὔμητις- ἐπεὶ καὶ κῆτος ἄαπτον 
ἀπλάτων μελέων ὀλίγον προτιβάλλεται ἰχθύν. 
τοὔνεκά τις πάμπρωτον ἕλοι σκοπὸν ᾿Ἡγητῆρα 


α Plut. Mor. 980 τ' καὶ προνήχεται, τὸν δρόμον ἐπευθύνων, ὅπως 
οὐκ ἐνσχεθήσεται βραχέσιν οὐδ᾽ εἰς τέναγος ἤ τινα πορθμὸν 
ἐκπεσεῖται δυσέξοδον. For stranded Whales in Greece cf. 
H. i. 368 n. In Scotland a remarkable case occurred. in 
1927, when a vast number of Whales (Pseudorca crassidens 
or False Killer) were stranded at Dornoch. The species 
had not been seen alive for 80 years. Scottish Naturalist, 
1997, pp. 161 f. 

> Epic θρεπτήρια (Hom. H. Dem. 168 ἀπὸ θρεπτήρια δοίη s 
ibid. 223; Hesiod, W. 188) or θρέπτρα (Hom. Jl. iv. 477= 
xvii. 301 οὐδὲ τοκεύσι | θρέπτρα φίλοις ἀπέδωκε), Tragedy and 
Prose τροφεῖα (Eur. Jon 852 τροφεῖα δεσπόταις | ἀποδούς. 


466 


HALIEUTICA, V. 78-99 


or if there is a shallow depth ¢ of sea which it were 
better to avoid. Even as if it had a voice, the tail 
declares all things to him truly, and the burden of 
the water obeys. For that fish is to the beast 
champion at once and ears and eye : by it the Whale 
hears, by it he sets, to it he entrusts the reins of his 
life for keeping. Even as a son lovingly entreats 
his aged father, by anxious care of his years repaying 
the price of his nurture,” and zealously attends and 
cherishes him, weak now of limb and dim of eye, 
reaching him his arm in the street and himself in 
all works succouring him—sons ¢ are a new strength 
to an aged sire: so that fish for love cherishes the 
monster of the brine, steering as it were a ship by 
the guiding helm:¢ Surely it had blood akin to his 
from earliest birth or he took it of his own will and 
made it his companion. Thus neither valour nor 
beauty hath such profit as wisdom, and strength 
with unwisdom is vain. A little man of good counsel 
sinks or saves the man of might ; for even the in- 
vincible Whale with its unapproachable limbs takes 
for its friend a tiny fish. Therefore one should first 
capture that scouting Guide, entrapping it with 


Lycurg. 53 οὐκ ἀπέδωκε τὰ τροφεῖα τῇ πατρίδι). Of. Kur. J. m 
Aul. 1280 πόνων τιθηνοὺς ἀποδιδοῦσά σοι τροφάς. 

¢ Pind, O. viii. 70 πατρὶ δὲ πατρὸς ἐνέπνευσεν μένος | γήραος 
ἀντίπαλον': Ο. x. 86 Gre παῖς ἐξ ἀλόχου πατρὶ | ποθεινὸς ἵκοντι 
νεότατος τὸ πάλιν ἤδη; Nem. vii. 100 παίδων δὲ παῖδες ἔχοιεν 
αἰεὶ | γέρας τό περ νῦν καὶ ἄρειον ὄπιθεν ; Proverbs xvii. 6 
Children’s children are the crown of old men; Psalm CXXVii. 
4 As arrows in the hand of a mighty man, so are the 
children of youth. Happy is the man that hath his quiver 
full of them; they shall not be ashamed when they speak 
with their enemies in the gate. 

ἃ Plut. Mor. 981 a ἕπεται yap αὐτῷ τὸ κῆτος, ὥσπερ οἴακι 


ναῦς. 
467 


OPPIAN 


a AY \ fe a 
κεῖνον, ὑπ᾽ ἀγκίστροιο Bin καὶ δαυτὶ SoAwoas: 10( 
/ 
οὐ yap κε ζώοντος ἐπιβρίσας δαμάσαιο 
͵, 3 / δὲ ͵ μὲ > ὄλ θ 
κνώδαλον, οἰχομένου δὲ θοώτερος ἔσσετ᾽ ὄλεθρος. 
οὐ γὰρ ἔτ᾽ οὔὐθ᾽ ἅλμης ἰοειδέος οἶδε κέλευθα 
ἀτρεκέως, οὐ πῆμα παρασχεδὸν ἐξαλέασθαι, 
ἀλλ᾽ αὔτως, ἅτε φορτὶς ὀλωλότος ἰθυντῆρος, 108 
- » 
πλάζεται ἀπροφύλακτον, ἀμήχανον, ἡ κεν ἄγῃσι 
γλαυκὸν ὕδωρ, σκοτίοις δὲ καὶ ἀφράστοισι πόροισιν 
ἐμφέρεται, χηρωθὲν ἀρηγόνος ἡνιόχοιο. 
πολλάκι καὶ πέτρῃσι καὶ ἠϊόνεσσιν ἔκελσε 
λ up 7 / ¢ ewboadh x Ψ' 3 Av 
7. aldpevov: TOLY οὐ ἐπ ομμαᾶσι TETTTATAL AYAUS. 110 
δή pa τότ᾽ ὀτρηροῖσι νοήμασιν ἐς πόνον ἄγρης 
ἰχθυβόλοι. σπεύδουσιν, ἐπευξάμενοι μακάρεσσι 
/, > A < “- / 3 , 
κητοφόνοις ἀλεγεινὸν ἑλεῖν τέρας ᾿Αμφιτρίτης. 
ς > o "4 ‘ / > / 
ὡς δ᾽ ὅτε δυσμενέων βριαρὸς λόχος ἀντιβίοισι 
λάθριος ἐμπελάσῃ, μεσάτην ἐπὶ νύκτα δοκεύσας, 116 
εὕδοντας δ᾽ ἐκίχηδσε. φυλακτῆρας πρὸ πυλάων, 
"K > ’ὔ, > λ 7 δ᾽ > / 
peos εὐμενέοντος, ἐνιπλήξας δ᾽ edduaccer- 
ἔνθεν ἔπειτ᾽ ἄκρην τε πόλιν καὶ τύρσιν ἐπ᾽ αὐτὴν 
θαρσαλέοι σπεύδουσι, πυρὸς βέλος, ἄστεος ἄτην, 
δαλὸν ἐύδμήτων μεγάρων ῥαιστῆρα φέροντες" 190 
ὡς τότε θαρσαλέως ἁλιεὺς στρατὸς ἐγκονέουσιν | 
ΝΜ aN ~ a 
ἄφρακτον μετὰ θῆρα, πεφασμένου ἰθυντῆρος. 
“ 4 lon 
τοῦ δ᾽ ἤτοι πρῶτον μὲν ἐνὶ φρεσὶ τεκμαίρονται 
ov f / A 
ἄχθος ὅσον μέγεθός Te: τὰ δ᾽ ἔπλετο σήματα γυίων" β 
\ \ 
εἰ μὲν γὰρ πόντοιο κυλινδόμενον μετὰ δίναις 198 
βαιὸν ὑπερτέλλοιτο ῥάχιν λοφιήν τε φαεῖνον | 
» Ἣν Ζ aA » ] 
ἄκρην, ἡ μέγα κεῖνο καὶ €Eoxov: οὐδὲ γὰρ αὐτὴ 
ς Qs 
ῥηϊδίως φορέει μιν ἀνοχλίζουσα θάλασσα: 
γ / \ 
εἰ δέ τι καὶ νώτοιο φαείνεται, οὐ τόσον ἄχθος 
468 


HALIEUTICA, V. 100-129 


might of hook and bait ;. for while it lives thou shalt 
never overpower and conquer the monster, but when 
it is gone, his destruction will be swifter. For he no 
longer knows surely the paths of the violet brine 
nor knows to shun the evil that is at hand, but, even 
as a merchant vessel whose steersman has perished, 
he wanders idly, defenceless and helpless, wherever 
the grey water carries him, and is borne in darkling 
and unguessed ways, widowed of his helpful charioteer. 
Many a time in his wandering he runs aground on 
rock or beach: such darkness is spread upon his 
eyes. Thereupon with eager thoughts the fishers 
hasten to the labour of the hunt, praying to the 
blessed gods of whale-killing that they may capture 
the. dread monster. of Amphitrite.t| As when a 
strong company of foemen, having waited for mid- 
night, stealthily approach their enemy and find by 
favour of Ares the sentinels asleep before the gates 
and fall upon them and overcome them: thereupon 
they haste confidently to the high city and the very 
citadel, carrying the weapon of fire, the doom of the 
city, even the brand that wrecks the well-builded 
walls : even so confidently do the fisher host haste 
after the beast, unguarded now that his. pilot is 
slain. First they conjecture in their minds’ his 
weight and size ; and these are the signs that tell 
the measure of his limbs. If, as he rolls amid the 
waves of the sea, he rise a little above it, showing the 
top of his spine and the ridge of his neck, then 
verily he is a mighty beast and excellent ; for not 
even the sea itself can easily support and carry him, 
But if some portion of his back also appears, that 


4 Spouse of Poseidon (Apollod. i. 4): hence metonomy 
for Sea. 


469 


OPPIAN 


πῆμα δόλου προὔθηκαν" ὁ δ᾽ ὡς ἴδε δαῖτα βαρεῖαν, 
ἄλτο καὶ οὐκ ἀμέλησεν ἀναιδέϊ γαστρὶ πιθήσας" 

μάρψε δ᾽ ἐπιθύσας γναμπτὸν μόρον, αὐτίκα δ᾽ εἴσω 
ἄγκιστρον κατέδυ τεθοωμένον εὐρέϊ λαιμῷ, 165 
ἐν δ᾽ ἐπάγη γλωχῖσιν- 6 δ᾽ ἕλκεϊ θυμὸν ὀρινθεὶς 
πρῶτα μὲν ἀσχαλόων ὀλοὴν γένυν ἀντία πάλλει, 
χαλκείην θώμιγγα διαρραῖσαι μενεαίνων" 

ἀλλ᾽ ἄρα οἱ κενεὸς τέταται πόνος" ἔνθεν ἔπειτα 
σπερχόμενος φλογέῃσιν ἐποχθίζων ὀδύνῃσι 170 
δύεται ἐν κόλποισιν ὑποβρυχίοισι θαλάσσης" 

τῷ δὲ τάχ᾽ ἀσπαλιῆες ἐπιτρωπῶσιν ἅπασαν 

ὁρμιήν- οὐ. μὲν. γὰρ ἔνι σθένος ἀνθρώποισιν | 
ὅσσον τ᾽ αὖ ἐρύσαι καὶ ἀναινόμενον δαμάσασθαι | 
- βριθὺ πέλωρ- ῥέα γάρ σφε σὺν αὐτοῖς σέλμασι νηῶν 115. 
AKU tL βυσσόν, ὅθ᾽ ὁρμήσειε φέρεσθαι. : 
ἑλκύσει ποτὶ : ρμή ρ | 
ot δέ οἱ ὁρμυῇ προσαρηρότας εὐρέας ἀσκοὺς | 
πνοίῆς ἀνδρομέης πεπληθότας εὐθὺς ἐς ὕδωρ | 
δυομένῳ πέμπουσιν: 6 δ᾽ ὀχθίζων ὀδύνῃσι | 
ῥινῶν οὐκ ἀλέγει, κατὰ δ᾽ ἔσπασεν οὐκ ἐθέλοντας 180. 
ῥηϊδίως ἄκροιο λιλαιομένους ἁλὸς ἀφροῦ. : 

ἀλλ᾽ ὁπότ᾽ ἐς δάπεδον πελάσῃ μεμογηότι θυμῷ, 

στῆ pa μέγ᾽ ἀφριόων, τετιημένος- ὡς δέ τις ἵππος 
ἱδρῶτ᾽ ἐξανύσας καματώδεα τέρματος ἄκρου 

ἀφρῷ ὑφ᾽ αἱματόεντι, γένυν σκολιοῖσι, χαλινοῖς 185. 
ἐμπρίει, θερμὸν δὲ διὰ στόμα κίδναται ἄσθμα, 


* Hom. Qd. vii. 216 οὐ γάρ τι στυγερῇ ἐπὶ γαστέρι κύντερον 
ἄλλο | ἔπλετο, ἥ τ᾽ ἐκέλευσεν Eo μνήσασθαι ἀνάγκῃ. 
, ἢ Cf. Relation of a Voyage in the North Sea, .. . made 
im the years 1767 and 1768 by M. de Kerguelen Tremarec 
(Pinkerton’s Voyages, vol. i p- 790): ‘*As these poor 
people [the Greenlanders] have but little wood and iron, 
they make use of the precaution of fastening to the middle 
472 


HALIBUTICA, V. 162-186 


launch for the giant beast the fatal snare. And 
when he espies the grievous banquet, he springs 
and disregards it not, obedient to his shameless 
belly, and rushing upon the hookéd death he 
seizes it ; and immediately the whetted hook enters 
within his wide throat and he is impaled upon the 
barbs. Then, roused by the wound, first, indignant, 
he shakes his deadly jaw against them and strives 
to break the brazen cord; but his labour is vain. 
Then, next, in the anguish of fiery pain he dives 
swiftly into the nether gulfs of the sea. And 
speedily the fishers allow him all the length of the 
line ; for there is not in men strength enough to 
pull him up and to overcome the heavy monster 
against his will. For easily could he drag them to 
the bottom, benched ship. and all together, when he 
set himself to rush. Straightway as he dives they 
let go with him into the water large skins ὃ filled with 
human breath and fastened to the line. And he, 
in the agony of his pain, heeds not. the hides but 
lightly drags them down, all unwilling and fain for 
the surface of the foamy sea. But when he comes 
to the bottom with labouring heart, he halts, greatly 
foaming in his distress. As some horse when it has 
accomplished its sweaty labour to the utmost goal, 
in a bloody foam grinds his teeth in the crooked bit, 
while the hot panting breath comes through his 


of every harpoon which they throw the bladder of a sea-dog, Ὁ 
that if the harpoon should not strike the fish or detach itself 
from it, it may float on the water, and be readily found 
again. This experiment was known to the fishermen of the 
Atlantic [sic] Ocean, for Opien in his Halieuticon speaks of 
it: lib. v. 177: ‘They dart,’ says he, ‘large sacks blown 
up by the breath, and fastened to a cord, immediately at the 
fish, as it is about to plunge.’” 

473 


OPPIAN 


πῆμα δόλου προὔθηκαν" ὁ δ᾽ ὡς ἴδε δαῦτα βαρεῖαν, 
ἄλτο καὶ οὐκ ἀμέλησεν ἀναιδέϊ γαστρὶ πιθήσας: 

μάρψε δ᾽ ἐπιθύσας γναμπτὸν μόρον, αὐτίκα δ᾽ εἴσω 
ἄγκιστρον κατέδυ τεθοωμένον εὐρέϊ λαιμῷ, 165 
ἐν δ᾽ ἐπάγη γλωχῖσιν- 6 δ᾽ ἕλκεϊ θυμὸν ὀρινθεὶς 
πρῶτα μὲν ἀσχαλόων ὀλοὴν γένυν ἀντία πάλλει, 
χαλκείην θώμιγγα διαρραῖσαι μενεαίνων" 

ἀλλ᾽ ἄρα οἱ κενεὸς τέταται πόνος" ἔνθεν ἔπειτα 
σπερχόμενος φλογέῃσιν ἐποχθίζων ὀδύνῃσι 170 
δύεται ἐν κόλποισιν ὑποβρυχίοισι θαλάσσης" 

τῷ δὲ τάχ᾽ ἀσπαλιῆες ἐπιτρωπῶσιν ἅπασαν 

wv 

ὁρμιήν' οὐ μὲν γὰρ ἔνι σθένος ἀνθρώποισιν 

οσσον T αὖ ἐρύσαι καὶ ἀναινόμενον δαμάσασθαι | 
- βριθὺ πέλωρ: ῥέα yap ode σὺν αὐτοῖς σέλμασι νηῶν 175 
ἑλκύσει ποτὶ βυσσόν, ὅθ᾽ ὁρμήσειε φέρεσθαι. 

οἱ δέ οἱ ὁρμιῇ προσαρηρότας εὐρέας ἀσκοὺς | 
πνοϊῆς ἀνδρομέης πεπληθότας εὐθὺς ἐς ὕδωρ | 
δυομένῳ πέμπουσιν: 6 δ᾽ ὀχθίζων ὀδύνῃσι | 
ῥινῶν οὐκ ἀλέγει, κατὰ δ᾽ ἔσπασεν οὐκ ἐθέλοντας 180. 
ῥηϊδίως ἄκροιο λιλαιομένους ἁλὸς ἀφροῦ. 

> 3 «ε 4.3 > 7 4 ΝῈ ~ 
ἀλλ᾽ ὁπότ᾽ ἐς δάπεδον πελάσῃ μεμογηότι θυμῷ, 
στῆ pa μέγ᾽ ἀφριόων, τετιημένος- ὡς δέ τις ἵππος 
ἱδρῶτ᾽ ἐξανύσας καματώδεα τέρματος ἄκρου 


. 


> A ape. ace 2 , a a ; | 
ἀφρῷ ὑφ᾽ αἱματόεντι γένυν σκολιοῖσι, χαλινοῖς 186. 


2 / \ \ \ hi / a 
ἐμπρίει, θερμὸν δὲ διὰ στόμα κίδναται ἄσθμα, 


* Hom. Qd. vii. 216 οὐ γάρ τι στυγερῇ ἐπὶ γαστέρι κύντερον 
ἄλλο] ἔπλετο, ἥ τ᾽ ἐκέλευσεν ἕο μνήσασθαι ἀνάγκῃ. 

ὑ Cf. Relation of a Voyage in the North Sea, ... made 
im the years 1767 and 1768 by M. de Kerguelen Tremarec 
(Pinkerton’s Voyages, vol. i: Ρ. 790): ‘*As these poor 
people [the Greenlanders] have but little wood and iron, 
they make use of the precaution of fastening to the middle 
472 


HALIEUTICA, V. 162-186 


launch, for the giant beast the fatal snare. And 
when he espies the grievous banquet, he springs 
and disregards it not, obedient to his shameless 
belly, and rushing upon the hookéd death he 
seizes it ; and immediately the whetted hook enters 
within his wide throat and he is impaled upon the 
barbs. Then, roused by the wound, first, indignant, 
he shakes his deadly jaw against them and strives 
to break the brazen cord; but his labour is vain. 
Then, next, in the anguish of fiery pain he dives 
swiftly into the nether gulfs of the sea. And 
speedily the fishers allow him all the length of the 
line; for there is not in men strength enough to 
pull him up and to overcome the heavy monster 
against his will. For easily could he drag them to 
the bottom, benched ship and all together, when he 
set himself to rush. Straightway as he dives they 
let go with him into the water large skins ὃ filled with 
human breath and fastened to the line. And he, 
in the agony of his pain, heeds not the hides but 
lightly drags them down, all unwilling and fain for 
the surface of the foamy sea. But when he comes 
to the bottom with labouring heart, he halts, greatly 
foaming in his distress. As some horse when it has 
accomplished its sweaty labour to the utmost goal, 
in a bloody foam grinds his teeth in the crooked bit, 
while the hot panting breath comes through his 


of every harpoon which they throw the bladder of a sea-dog, — 
that if the harpoon should not strike the fish or detach itself 
from it, it may float on the water, and be readily found 
again. This experiment was known to the fishermen of the 
Atlantic [sic] Ocean, for Opien in his Halieuticon speaks of 
it: lib. v. 177: ‘They dart,’ says he, ‘large sacks blown 
up by the breath, and fastened to a cord, immediately at the 
fish, as it is about to plunge.’” 

473 


OPPIAN 


Δ ε 22 > / 3 id ἧ i>) / £9 \ 
ὡς ὁ μέγ᾽ ἀσθμαίνων ἀμπαύεται, οὐδέ οἱ ἀσκοὶ 
μίμνειν ἱεμένῳ περ ἐπιτρωπῶσιν ἔνερθεν, 
x > » 7 \o»” dah 
ata δ᾽ ἄνω σπεύδουσι καὶ ἔξαλοι ἀΐσσουσι 
πνοιῇ ἀειρόμενοι" τῷ δ᾽ ἵσταται ἄλλος ἄεθλος. 190 
ἔνθ᾽ ἤτοι πρῶτον μὲν ἐπαΐσσει γενύεσσι 
ε \ , , 5 > ΄ 
ῥιπὴν μαψιδίην, λελιημένος αὖ ἐρύοντα 
ἐέρματ᾽ ἀμύνεσθαι: τὰ δ᾽ ἀνίπταται οὐδέ ἑ μίμνει, 
φεύγει δὲ ζωοῖσιν ἀλευομένοισιν ὁμοῖα: 
> \ a 3 > 4 ua ἣν a ao 
αὐτὰρ ὃ γ᾽ ἀσχαλόων μυχάτην πάλιν ἵεται ἅλμην, 195 
\ \ / εχ, + > > / 
πολλὰς δὲ στροφάλιγγας ἑλίσσεται, ἄλλοτ᾽ ἀνάγκῃ, - 
» Dus 4 oe i ates / y 
ἀλλοθ᾽ ἑκών, ἕλκων τε καὶ ἑλκόμενος παλίνορσος. 
ς > Ψ ΄ A , 3 Ἅὦ 
ὡς δ᾽ ὅτε δουροτόμοι ξυνὸν πόνον ἀθλεύωσι 
πρίονος ἐγκονέοντες, ὅτε τρόπιν ἠέ τιν᾽ ἄλλην 
χρειὼ πλωτήρεσσιν ἐπιοσπεύδουσι τελέσσαι, 900 
ἄμφω δὲ τρηχεῖαν ἐρειδομένοιο σιδήρου 
ἀλκὴν ad ἐρύουσι καὶ ὀὔποτε ταρσὸς ὀδόντων 
τέτραπται μίαν οἶμον, ἐπειγόμενος δ᾽ ἑκάτερθεν 
, 
κλάζει τε πρίει τε: καὶ ἔμπαλιν ἕλκεται αἰεί, 
τοῖον καὶ ῥινοῖσι πέλει καὶ θηρὶ δαφοινῷ 205 
νεῖκος ἀνελκομένῳ τε βιαζομένοις θ᾽ ἑτέρωθεν. 
> 
πολλὴν δ᾽ αἱματόεσσαν ὑπεὶρ ἁλὸς ἔπτυσεν ἄχνην 
παφλάζων ὀδύνῃσιν, ὑποβρύχιον δὲ μέμυκε 
/ 


μαινομένου φύσημα, περιστένεται. δέ of ὕδωρ | 


ἀμβολάδην" φαίης κεν ὑπ᾽ οἴδμασι πᾶσαν ἀὐτμὴν 210 


κευθομένην Βορέαο δυσαέος αὐλίζεσθαι. 

, > / 4 / > \ \ 5 
τόσσον ἀνασθμαίνει λάβρον μένος, ἀμφὶ δὲ πυκναὶ 
δίναις οἰδαλέῃσιν ἑλισσόμεναι στροφάλιγγες 
οἴδματα κοιλαίνουσι διϊσταμένοιο πόροιο. 


* Hom. Od. ix. 384 ὡς ὅτε τις τρυπῷ δόρυ νήιον ἀνὴρ | τρυπάνῳ, 
οἱ δέ τ’ ἔνερθεν ὑποσσείουσιν ἱμάντι | ἁψάμενοι ἑκάτερθε, τὸ δὲ 
τρέχει ἐμμενὲς αἰεί, For simile of “ saw” to express reciprocal 
474 


HALIEUTICA, V. 187-214 


mouth: so, breathing hard, the Whale rests. But 
the skins allow him not, even if he would, to remain 
below but swiftly speed upward and leap forth from 
the sea, buoyed by the breath within them; and a 
new contest arises for the Whale. Then first he 
makes a vain rusti with his jaws, eager to defend 
himself against the hides which pull him up. But 
these fly upward. and await him not, but flee like 
living things seeking escape. And he indignant 
rushes again to the innermost deep of the brine, and 
many a twist and turn he makes, now perforce, now 
of his own will, pulling and being pulledin turn. As 
when woodcutters * labour busily at the joint labour 
of the saw, when they haste to make a keel or other 
needful matter for mariners: both men in turn 
draw to them the rough edge of iron pressing on 
the wood and the row of its teeth is never turned in 
one path, but urged from either side it sings loudly 
as it saws and evermore is drawn the other way : 
even such is the contest between the hides and the 
deadly beast—he being dragged up, while they are 
urged the other way. Much bloody spume he dis- 
charges over the sea as he struggles in his pain, and 
his panting breath as he rages resounds under the 
sea, and the water bubbles and roars around ; thou 
wouldst say that all the blasts of Boreas were housed 
and hidden beneath the waves : so violently he pants 
in his fury. And round about many a swirling eddy 
the swelling waves make a hollow in the waters and 
the sea is divided in twain, As by the mouth of the 
action (cf. Eng. ‘‘see-saw”) of. Aristoph. Vesp. 694 ὡς 
πρίονθ᾽ ὁ μὲν ἕλκει, ὁ δ᾽ dvrevédwxe ; Hippocr. Περὶ Διαίτης. 
i. p. 634 Κύμη πρίουσιν ἄνθρωποι ξύλον, ὁ μὲν ἕλκει, ὁ δὲ 
ὠθέει : ibid. p. 635 ὥσπερ οἱ τέκτονες τὸ ξύλον πρίουσι, καὶ ὁ μὲν 
ἕλκει, ὁ δὲ ὠθέει. 

47 ὅ 


OPPIAN 


οἷον δ᾽ ᾿Ιονίοιο παρὰ στόμα Kat κελάδοντος 21: 
Τυρσηνοῦ πόντοιο μέση πορθμοῖο διαρρὼξ 

εἰλεῖται, λάβροισιν ὑπ᾽ ἄσθμασι Τυφάωνος 
μαινομένη, δειναὶ δὲ τιταινόμεναι στροφάλιγγες 
κῦμα θοὸν κάμπτουσι, πέριστρέφεται δὲ κελαινὴ 
ἑλκομένη δίνῃσι παλιρροίβδοισι Χάρυβδις, 22( 
ὡς τότε κητείοισιν ὑπ᾽ ἄσθμασι χῶρος ἁπάντῃ 
ξαινόμενος βέμβικας ἑλίσσεται ᾿Αμφιτρίτης. 

ἔνθα τις ἰχθυβόλων γλαφυρὸν σκάφος ὠκὺς ἐρέσσων 

ἐς χέρσον κατάγοιτο καὶ ἀκταίης ἀπὸ πέτρης 
ὁρμυὴν ἅψαιτο καὶ αὐτίκα νοστήσειε, 29 
πρυμναίοις ἅτε νῆα κατοχμάσσας ὑπὸ δεσμοῖς. 
τὸν δ᾽ ὅτε παιφάσσοντα λάβῃ κόρος, ἐκ δ᾽ ὀδυνάων 
θὴρ ὀὁλοὸς μεθύῃ, καμάτῳ δέ οἱ ἄγριον ἦτορ 
κλίνηται, ῥέψῃ δὲ μόρου στυγεροῖο τάλαντα, 

ἀσκὸς μὲν πρώτιστος ἀνέ ραμε πείρατα νίκης 2860 
ἀγγέλλων, μέγα δ᾽ ἦτορ ἐν ἀγρευτῆρσιν ἄειρεν. | 
οἷον δ᾽ ἀλγινόεντος ἀνερχόμενον πολέμοιο 

κήρυκ᾽ ἀργυφέοισιν ἐν εἵμασιν ἠδὲ προσώπῳ 

αιδρῷ καγχαλόωντες ἑοὶ μεθέπουσιν ἑταῖροι, 
αἴσιον ἀγγελίην ποτιδεγμένοι αὐτίκ᾽ ἀκοῦσαι, 238 
ὡς οἱ Kayyaddwow ἐσαθρήσαντες ἔνερθε 
ῥινὸν ἀνερχομένην εὐάγγελον- αὐτίκα δ᾽ ἄλλοι 


* The Strait of Messina, Σικελικὸς πορθμός (Strabo 43), 
Siculum fretum (Plin. iii. 92), between Italy and Sicily, 
dividing the Tyrrhenian Sea on the N. from the Ionian Sea 
on the 5. Here were localized the Scylla and Charybdis of 
Hom. Od. xii. 104 ff, Cf. Thue. iv. 24; Strabo 268; | 
Plin. iii. 87 In eo freto est scopulus Scylla, item Charybdis, | 
mare verticosum, ambo clara saevitia. | 

> Strabo 248 ταῦτ᾽ οὖν διανοηθεὶς (Πίνδαρος) τῷ παντὶ τόπῳ.Ἢ 
τούτῳ φησὶν ὑποκεῖσθαι τὸν Τυφῶνα ᾿ νῦν ye μὰν ταί 0 brép 
Κύμας ἁλιερκέες ὄχθαι Σικελία τ᾽ αὐτοῦ πιέζει στέρνα λαχνάεντα 


[=Pind. P. i. 178]. 
476 


HALIEUTICA, V. 215-237 


Ionian and Tyrrhenian seas the dividing waters of 
the Strait α roll raging under the violent panting of 
Typhaon ὃ and dread straining swirls curve the swift 
wave and dark Charybdis circles round, drawn by 
her eddying tides,; even so by the panting blasts 
of the Whale the space of the sea around is lashed 
and whirled about. Then should one of the whalers 
row his hollow skiff and come to land and make fast 
the line to a rock upon the shore and straightway 
return—even as a man makes fast a ship by cables 
from the stern. Now when the deadly beast is 
tired with his struggles and drunk with pain and 
his fierce heart is bent with weariness and the balance 
of hateful) doom inclines, then first’ of all a skin 
comes to the surface, announcing the issue of victory 
and greatly uplifts the hearts of the fishers. Even 
as, when a herald? returns from dolorous war in 
white 6 raiment and with cheerful face, his friends 
exulting follow him, expecting straightway to hear 
favourable tidings, so do the fishers exult when they 
behold the hide, the messenger of good news, rising 
from below. And immediately other skins rise up 


¢ By means of the stern-cables (πρυμνήσια) attached to a 
rock on shore. Hence the Homeric formulae (1) when a 
ship comes to land: ἐκ δ᾽ εὐνὰς (anchors) ἔβαλον, κατὰ δὲ 
πρυμνήσι᾽ ἔδησαν (Hom. II. 1. 436); (2) when a ship puts to 
sea: πεῖσμα (cable) δ᾽ ἔλυσαν ἀπὸ τρητοῖο λίθοιο (Hom. Od. 
xiii, 77); οὐ. Poll. x. 154. 

4 Aesch, Ag. 638 ff. contrasts the messenger of bad news 
(ὅταν δ᾽ ἀπευκτὰ πήματ᾽ ἄγγελος πόλει | στυγνῷ προσώπῳ πτω- 
σίμου στρατοῦ φέρῃ) with the bringer of glad tidings (σωτηρίων 
δὲ πραγμάτων εὐάγγελον | ἥκοντα πρὸς χαίρουσαν εὐεστοῖ πόλιν). 

ὁ The Greeks, like ourselves, associated white with glad- 
ness, black with mourning. Hence the boast of Pericles 
upon his death-bed: ‘‘ Οὐδεὶς yap,” ἔφη, “᾿ δι’ ἐμὲ τῶν ὄντων 
᾿Αθηναίων μέλαν ἱμάτιον περιεβάλετο᾽᾽ (Plut. Per. xxxviii.). 

ATT 


OPPIAN 


ἀσκοὶ ἐπαντέλλουσι καὶ ἀνδύνουσι θαλάσσης, 
\ aN ΄ 7 ¢ δ᾽ ἕλ λό 67 
βριθὺ πέλωρ σύροντες. 6 δ᾽ ἕλκεται οὐ όμενος θὴρ 
“ oe \ > 
οὐκ ἐθέλων, μόχθῳ τε καὶ ἕλκεϊ θυμὸν ἀλύων. 240 
\ ~ 
ἔνθα τότ᾽ ἰχθυβόλων θράσος ἔγρεται, ἄγχι δὲ νῆας 
εὐκώπους ἐλόωσιν ἐπειγομένοισιν ἐρετμοῖς" 

\ \ fe \ > 3 \ / dee \ 
πολλὴ δὲ σμαραγή, πολλὴ δ᾽ ἀνὰ πόντον ἀῦτὴ 
σπερχομένων τέτρηχε καὶ ἀλλήλους ἐς ἄεθλον 

> ~ 

κεκλομένων" φαίης Kev ἐνύαλιον πόνον avdpav οὕ 
δέρκεσθαι" τοίη γὰρ ἐνὶ φρεσὶν ἵσταται ἀλκή, 
τόσσος δὲ φλοῖσβός τε καὶ ἵμερος ἰωχμοῖο. 
τῶν μέν τις καὶ τῆλε δυσηχέα δοῦπον ἀκούσας 

> / EI , 2 wy mee / 
αἰπόλος ἢ βαθύμαλλον ἐν ἄγκεσι TOU κομίζων, 
ἢ δρυτόμος πεύκης ὀλετήρ ἢ θῆρας ἐναίρων 250 
θαμβήσας πόντου τε καὶ ἠόνος ἐγγὺς ἱκάνει, 

\ A \ ~ δι ,ὔ / > ~ 
στὰς δὲ κατὰ προβλῆτος ὑπερφίαλον πόνον ἀνδρῶν 
φυλόπιδος βυθίης θηήσατο καὶ τέλος ἄγρης 

? U3 \ > € A ” + bee “ 
εὐπάγλου" τοὺς δ᾽ ὑγρὸς "Αρης ἄσβεστος ὀρίνει. 
ἔνθ᾽ ὁ μὲν ἐν παλάμῃσι τανυγλώχινα τρίαιναν 255 
πάλλει, 6 δ᾽ ὀξείης ἀκίδος βέλος, of δὲ φέρουσιν 
εὐκαμπῆ δρεπάνην, ὁ δέ τις βουπλῆγα τιταίνει 
ἀμφιτόμον: πᾶσιν δὲ πόνος, πᾶσιν δὲ σιδήρου 

a > / N / + \ lol 
χεῖρας ἐφοπλίζει βριαρὴ yevus, ἄγχι δὲ θῆρα : 
βάλλουσ᾽, οὐτάζουσι, καταΐγδην ἐλόωντες. 260 
αὐτὰρ ὅ γ᾽ ἠνορέης μὲν ὑπερφιάλοιο λέλησται, 
οὐδ᾽ ἔτ᾽ ἔχει γενύεσσι καὶ ἱέμενός περ ἐρύκειν 
νῆας ἐπεσσυμένας, πτερύγων δ᾽ ὑπεραχθέι ῥιπῇ 
3, > > ~ 
ἄκρῃ τ᾽ ἀλκαίῃ βύθιον διὰ κῦμα λαχαίνων 
” A aA 
ἔμπαλιν ἐς πρύμνας ὠθεῖ νέας, ἔργα δ᾽ ἐρετμῶν 265 
> ~ 3 δ 
ἀνδρῶν τ᾽ ἠνορέην γνάμπτει πάλιν, hi ἀήτης 
3 / lot 
ἀντίβιος πρώρῃσιν ἐναντία κῦμα κυλίνδων: 
τῶν δ᾽ ἐνοπὴ κέκληγεν ἐφιεμένων πονέεσθαι, 
κῦμα δ᾽ ἅπαν λύθροιο φορύσσεται ἐκχυμένοιο 
478 


HALIEUTICA, V. 238-269 


and emerge from the sea, dragging in their train the 
huge monster, and the deadly beast is hauled up all 
unwillingly, distraught in spirit with labour and 
wounds. Then the courage of the fishers is roused 
and with hasting blades they row their well-oared 
boats near. And much noise and much shouting 
resound upon the sea as they haste and exhort one 
another to the struggle. Thou wouldst say thou 
wert beholding the toil of men in war; such valour 
rises in their hearts and there is such din and such 
desire for battle. Far away some goatherd hears 
their horrid noise, or some shepherd tending his 
woolly flock in the glens, or woodcutter felling the 
pine, or hunter slaying wild beasts, and astonished 
he draws near to sea and shore and standing on a cliff 
beholds the tremendous toil of the men in this 
warfare of the sea and the issue of the wondrous 
hunt, while quenchless lust of war in the water stirs 
the men. Then one brandishes in his hands the 
long-barbed trident, another the sharp-pointed lance, 
others carry the well-bent bill, another wields the 
two-edged axe. ΑἹ] toil, the hands of all are armed 
with mighty blade of iron, and close at hand they 
smite and wound the beast with sweeping blows. 
And he forgets his mighty valour and is no more 
able, for all his endeavour, to stay the hasting ships 
with his jaws, but with heavy sweep of flippers and 
with the end of his tail he ploughs up the waves of 
the deep and drives back the ships sternward and 
turns to naught the work of the oars and the valour 
of the men, even as a contrary wind that rolls the 
waves against the prow. The cries of the men 
resound as they set themselves to work, and all the 
sea is stained with the gory filth poured forth by 


479 


OPPIAN 


ὠτειλαῖς ὀλοῇσι" τὸ δὲ ζέει ἄπλετον ὕδωρ 270 

αἵματι κητείῳ, γλαυκὴ δ᾽ ἐρυθαίνεται ἅλμη. 

ὡς δ᾽ ὅτε χειμερίοιο κατερχομένου ποταμοῖο 

κόλπον ἐς οἰδματόεντα λόφων ἀπὸ μιλτοκαρήνων. 

ἰλὺς αἱματόεσσα κυλίνδεται ὕδατος ὁρμῇ, 

κιρναμένη δίνῃσιν" ἑκὰς δ᾽ ἐρυθαίνεται ὕδωρ 275 

ξανθῆς ἐκ κονίης, λύθρος δ᾽ ἔχει ὥστε θάλασσαν, 

ὡς τότε ᾿κητείοιο πόρος λύθροιο πέφυρται 

φοίνιος ἐν προχοῇσι δαϊζομένου βελέεσσιν. 

ἐν δέ οἱ ὠτειλῇσιν ἀφυσσάμενοι ῥόον ἄντλου 

πευκεδανὸν στάζουσ᾽" ἡ δ᾽ ἕλκεσι μισγομένη GAs 280 

nite πυρκαϊὴ ὁλοώτατον ἦψεν ὄλεθρον. 

ὡς δὲ Διὸς μάστιγι βαλεῖ τρόπιν αἰθέριον πῦρ 

πόντον ἀμειβομένην, νέμεται δέ “μιν αἰθαλόεσσα 

ῥίπή, τὴν δ᾽ ἔτι μᾶλλον ἐποτρύνουσα κορύσσει 

μισγομένη δίοισιν ὁμοῦ πυρσοῖσι θάλασσα, 288 

ὡς κείνου χαλεπάς τε βολὰς ὀδύνας τε κορύσσει 

ἄντλου πυθομένοιο. δυσαέος ἄγριον ὕδωρ. 

ἀλλ᾽ ὅτε μιν δμηθέντα πολυτμήτοις ὀδύνῃσιν 

ἤδη λευγαλέοιο παρὰ προθύροις θανάτοιο 

μοῖρα φέρῃ, τότε δή μιν ἀναψάμενοι ποτὶ χέρσον 29% 

γηθόσυνοι avpovow: ὁ δ᾽ ἕλκεται οὐκ ἐθέλων περ, 

πολλῇσι γλωχῖσι πεπαρμένος Hite γόμφοις, 

νευστάζων ὀλοοῖο μόρου τέλος οἰνοβαρείων: Ξ Ἢ 

οἱ δὲ μέγαν νίκης παιήονα κυδαίνοντες, | 

εἰρεσίῃ σπέρχοντες ἐπικλάζουσι θαλάσσῃ, 29 
| 
| 
| 


ὀξὺν ἐπειγομέναις ἐλάταις νόμον ἀείδοντες. 
ὡς δ᾽ ὁπότ᾽ εἰναλίοιο διακρινθέντος Ἄρηος 
νῆας ἀναψάμενοι νηῶν ἐπιβήτορας ἄνδρας 
υσμενέας ποτὶ χέρσον ἐπειγόμενοι κατάγωσι 


« Herod. v. 1 νικώντων δὲ τὰ δύο τῶν ἸΤερινθίων, ὡς ἐπαιώ- 


| 
480 | 


HALIEUTICA, V. 270-299 


his deadly wounds. The infinite water boils with 
the blood of the beast and the grey sea is reddened. 
As when in winter a, river comes down from the hills 
of red earth into a billowy gulf and the blood- 
coloured mud is rolled down by the rush of the 
water, mingling with the eddying waves; and afar 
the water is reddened by the ruddy dust and the 
sea is as if covered with blood : even so in that hour 
the gory waters are stained with the blood of the 
beast, rent amid the waves by the shafts of the 
fishermen. Then they draw and drop into his 
wounds a bitter stream of bilge-water; and the salt 
mingling in his sores like fire kindles for him deadliest 
destruction. As when the fire of heaven smites with 
the lash of Zeus a bark that is traversing the sea, 
and the flaming onset that devours the ship is 
stirred and made yet fiercer by the sea mingling 
with the torches of heaven : even so his cruel wounds 
and pains are made more fierce by the cruel water 
of the putrid evil-smelling bilge. But when, over- 
come by the pains of many gashes, fate brings him 
at last to the gates of dismal death, then they take 
him in tow and joyfully haul him to the land; and 
he is dragged all unwilling, pierced with many 
barbs as with nails and nodding as if heavy with 
wine in the issue of deathly doom. And the fishers, 
raising the loud paean of victory,“ while they speed 
the boat with their oars, make the sea resound, 
singing their shrill song to hasting blades. As when 
after the decision of a battle at sea the victors take 
in tow the ships of the vanquished and haste joyfully 
to bring to land the foemen who man the ships, 


νιζον κεχαρηκότες ; Thue. ii. 91 ἐπαιάνιζον τε ἅμα πλέοντες ὡς 
νενικηκότες. 


21 48) 


OPPIAN 


γηθόσυνοι, νίκης δὲ διαπρύσιον βοόωσι 300 
ναυμάχον eipecins’ παιήονα" τοὶ δ᾽ ἀέκοντες 
ἀχνύμενοι δηΐοισιν ἀναγκαίῃ ξονέπονται, 
ὡς οἵ γ᾽ αἰνοπέλωρον ἀναψάμενοι δάκος ἅλμης | 
γηθόσυνοι κατάγουσιν ἐπ᾽ jovas: ἀλλ᾽ ὅτε χέρσῳ 
ἐμπελάσῃ, τότε δή μιν ἐτήτυμος ὦρσεν ὄλεθρος 305 
λοίσθιος ἀσπαίρει τε διαξαίνει τε θάλασσαν β 
σμερδαλέαις πτερύγεσσιν, ἅτ᾽ εὐτύκτῳ περὶ βωμῷ | 
ὄρνις ἑλισσομένη θανάτου στροφάλιγγι κελαινῇ, 
δύσμορος" ἢ μάλα πολλὰ λιλαίεται οἴδμαθ᾽ ἱκέσθαι, 
ἀλλά οἱ ἠνορέης λέλυται σθένος, οὐδέ τι γυα 581. 
πείθεται, ἐς χέρσον δὲ καθέλκεται αἰνὸν ἀΐσθων, 
φορτὶς ὅπως εὐρεῖα πολύζυγος, ἥν τε θαλάσσης 
ἀνέρες ἐξερύουσιν ἐπὶ τραφερὴν ἀνάγοντες 

/ ¢€ / ~ /, 
χείματος ἱσταμένοιο μεταπνεῦσαι καμάτοιο 
ποντοπόρου: βριθὺς δὲ πόνος ναύτῃσι μέμηλεν" ἢ 
ὡς οἵ γ᾽ ὀβριμόγυιον ἐπὶ χθόνα κῆτος ἀγουσι:" 
πλῆσεν δ᾽ ἠόνα πᾶσαν ὑπ᾽ ἀπλάτοις μελέεσσι 
κεκλιμένοις, τέταται δὲ νέκυς ῥίγιστος ἰδέσθαι. | 
τοῦ μέν τις φθιμένοιο καὶ ἐν χθονὶ πεπταμένοιο 
εἰσέτι δειμαίνει πελάσαι δυσδεῤκέϊ νεκρῷ 32¢ 
ταρβεῖ τ᾽ οὐκέτ᾽ ἐόντα καὶ οἰχομένοιό περ ἔμπης. 
πεφρικὼς αὐτοῖσιν ἐνὶ γναθμοῖσιν ὀδόντας. | 
ὀψὲ δὲ θαρσήσαντες ἀολλέες ἀμφαγέρονται, | 
θάμβεϊ παπταίνοντες ἐρείπιον ὠμηστῆρος. | 
ἔνθ᾽ of μὲν γενύων ὀλοὰς στίχας ἠγάσσαντο, ὃ 
δεινοὺς χαυλιόδοντας, ἀναιδέας, ἠῦΐτ᾽ ἄκοντας 


1 yl. εἰρεσίῃς. 


@ Hesiod, W. 624 (when winter comes, marked by the 
setting of the Pleiades) νῆα δ᾽ én’ ἠπείρου ἐρύσαι, πυκάσαι τε 


482 


HALIEUTICA, V. 300-326 


shouting loud to the oarsmen the paean of victory 
in a fight at sea, while the others against their will 
sorrowfully follow their foe perforce: even so the 
fishers take in tow the dread monster of the brine 
and joyfully bring him ashore. But when he comes 
nigh the land, then destruction real and final rouses 
him, and he struggles and lashes the sea with his 
terrible fins, like a bird upon the well-built altar 
tossing in the dark struggle of death. Unhappy 
beast ! verily many an effort he makes to reach the 
waves but the strength of his valour is undone and 
his limbs obey him not and panting terribly he is 
dragged to land: even as a merchant ship, broad 
and many-benched, which men draw forth from the 
sea and haul up”? on the dry land when winter 
comes, to rest from its seafaring toil, and heavy is 
the labour of the sailors: so they bring the mighty- 
limbed whale to land. And he fills all the beach 
with his unapproachable limbs as they lie, and he is 
stretched out dead, terrible to behold. Even when 
he is killed and laid upon the land one still dreads 
to approach his corpse of dread aspect and fears him 
when he is no more, shuddering even when he is 
gone at the mere teeth in his Jaws. At last they 
take courage and gather” about him in a body, 
gazing in astonishment at the ruins of the savage 
beast. Then some marvel at the deadly ranks of 
his jaws, even the dread and stubborn tusks, like 


λίθοισι πάντοθεν, ὄφρ᾽ ἴσχωσ᾽ ἀνέμων μένος ὑγρὸν ἀέντων, | 
χείμαρον ἐξερύσας, ἵνα μὴ πύθῃ Διὸς ὄμβρος. 

δ So when Achilles slays Hector, Hom. Jl. xxii. 869 ἄλλοι 
δὲ περίδραμον υἷες ᾿Αχαιῶν, | οἱ καὶ θηήσαντο φύην καὶ εἶδος ἀγητὸν 
|"Exropos* οὐδ᾽ ἄρα οἵ τις ἀνουτητί γε παρέστη. | ὧδε δέ τις 
εἴπεσκεν ἰδὼν ἐς πλησίον ἄλλον" | ““ ὦ πόποι, ἢ μάλα δὴ μαλακώτερος 
ἀμφαφάασθαι | Ἕκτωρ ἢ ὅτε νῆας ἐνέπρηθεν πυρὶ κηλέῳ. 


488 


OPPIAN 


“a > aA 
τριστοιχεὶ πεφυῶτας ἐπασσυτέρῃσιν ἀκωκαῖς" 
ἄλλοι δ᾽ ὠτειλὰς πολυδηρίτοιο πελώρου 
χαλκοτόρους addwow: ὁ δ᾽ ὀξύπρωρον ἄκανθαν 
θηεῖται σμερδνοῖσιν ἀνισταμένην σκολόπεσσιν- 33 
ἄλλοι δ᾽ ἀλκαίην, ἕτεροι πολυχανδέα νηδὺν β 
" \ > / ¢ , ? / 
καὶ κεφαλὴν ἀπέλεθρον ὁρώμενοι ἠγάσσαντο. 
καί τις ἀνὴρ ὁρόων βλοσυρὸν δάκος ᾿Αμφιτρίτης 
” >? “a 4h / EN, », 
ἤθεσιν ἐν τραφεροῖσι πολὺ πλέον ἠὲ νέεσσι | 
ὃ θ , « ᾿ς fa > \ 7a 
ηϑύνων ἑτάροισι μετέννεπεν ἐγγὺς ἐοῦσι" 838: 
| 
Γαῖα, φίλη θρέπτειρα, σὺ μὲν τέκες ἠδ᾽ ἐκόμισσας 
“ “a / > >. N a 4 
φορβῇ xepoain: κόλποις δ᾽ ἐνὶ σεῖο θάνοιμι, 
> 79 9 , \ ? ” \ , 
nap oT ἀντήσειε TO μόρσιμον: ἔργα δὲ πόντου 
>’ / ων \ / / 
εὐμενέοι, χέρσῳ δὲ [Ποσειδάωνα σέβοιμι- 
ὃ / > > 3 λ / λί ὃ / Ud / , 
μηδὲ μ᾽ ev ἀργαλέοις ὀλίγον δόρυ κύμασι πέμποί, 34: 
δ᾽ ϑὲτ τ ἦν > 7 , 
μηδ᾽ ἀνέμους νεφέλας τε κατ᾽ ἠέρα παπταίνοιμι: 
\ a 
οὐ yap ἁλὸς ῥοθίων τόσσος φόβος οὐδ᾽ ἀλεγεινῆς 
2 ὃ 7, Nu \ ee ΝΣ Δ / 
avopace ναυτιλίης καὶ ὀϊζύος ἣν μογέουσιν, 
PEN 
αἰεὶ δυσκελάδοισι συνιππεύοντες ἀέλλαις, 
οὐδ᾽ ἁλὶς ὀλλυμένοις διερὸς μόρος, ἀλλ᾽ ἔτι τοίους 34 
δαιτυμόνας μίμνουσιν, ἀτυμβεύτου δὲ τάφοιο 


θηρείου λαιμοῖο μυχοὺς πλήσαντο τυχόντες" 


48 4 


HALIEUTICA, V. 327-347 


javelins, arrayed in triple row with close-set points. 
Others feel the bronze-pierced wounds of the monster 
of many battles; another gazes at his sharp spine 
bristling with terrible points; others behold with 
wonder his tail, others his capacious belly and 
measureless head. And, looking on the fierce beast 
of the sea, one who has lingered more in landward 
haunts than among ships says among his comrades 
by his side: O Earth, dear mother, thou didst bear 
me and hast fed me with landward food, and in thy 
bosom let me die, when my destined day arrives ! 
(Be the Sea and the works thereof gracious? unto 
me and on the dry land let me worship Poseidon !) 
And may no tiny bark speed me among the grievous 
waves nor let me scan the winds and the clouds in 
the air! Not enough is the so great terror of the 
waves, not enough for men the terror of distressful 
seafaring and the woe that they endure, ever riding 
with the storm-winds of evil noise, nor enough for 
them to perish by a watery doom: beyond all these 
they still await such banqueters as these, and find 
burial without a tomb, glutting the cavern of a wild 
beast’s throat. I fear her who breeds such woes. 


¢ This is a parenthetical apology, an appeal to the Sea 
and the Sea-god not to be offended by the poet’s preference 
for the land. Cf. C. i. 9, where the poet deprecates the 
offence of Phaethon and Apollo at his comparing Antoninus 
to the sons of Zeus. So in prose, Herod. ii. 45 καὶ περὶ μὲν 
τούτων τοσαῦτα ἡμῖν εἰποῦσι Kal παρὰ τῶν θεῶν καὶ παρὰ τῶν 
ἡρώων εὐμενείη εἴη. So Tennyson, In Memoriam Ἰχχῖὶχ. 1 f. 
«More than my brothers are to me’ [ix, 20]. Let this not 
vex thee, noble heart!” ete. A good example of the 
parenthetic apology is Pind. J. i. 1 ff. Marep ἐμά, τὸ τεόν, 
χρύσασπι Θήβα, | πρᾶγμα καὶ ἀσχολίας ὑπέρτερον | θήσομαι---μή 
μοι κραναὰ νεμεσάσαι | Δᾶλος--ἐν ἃ κέχυμαι, where editors amaz- 

ingly continue to punctuate with a full stop after θήσομαι. 
485 


OPPIAN 


δειμαίνω τοίων ἀχέων τροφόν: ἀλλά, θάλασσα, 
χαῖρέ μοι ἐκ γαίης, ἕκαθεν δ᾽ ἐμοὶ ἤπιος εἴης. 
ἥτεα μὲν τοίοισιν ἐδῃώσαντο πόνοισιν 35( 

ὅσσα δέμας προβέβηκεν ὑπερφυές, ἄχθεα πόντου. 
ὅσσα δὲ βαιοτέρων μελέων λάχε, τοῖσι καὶ ἄγρη 
βαιοτέρη, θήρεσσι δ᾽ ἐοικότα τεύχε᾽ ἔασι, 

7 e / 7 / 3 
μείονες ὁρμιαί, μείων γένυς ἀγκίστροιο, 
φορβὴ παυροτέρη, γενύων δόλος, ἀντὶ δὲ ῥινῶν 35 
αἰγοδόρων ἁψῖδες ἀναπτόμεναι κολοκύντης [ 
ἀζαλέης θήρειον ἄνω δέμας αὖ ἐρύουσι. 

Λάμνης δὲ σκύμνοισιν ὅτ᾽ ἀντήσωσ᾽ ἁλιῆες, 
πολλάκι καὶ τροπὸν αὐτόν, ἐπαρτέα δεσμὸν ἐρετμοῦ, 


* The sense is exactly that of 339 supra χέρσῳ δὲ Ποσειδάωνα 
σέβοιμι and of ἕκαθεν δέ μοι ἤπιος εἴης here. He is willing to 
pay his homage to the Sea, but he wishes no closer acquaint- 
ance. Cf. Plato, Rep. 499 a τὰ δὲ κομψά τε καὶ ἐριστικὰ. . . 
πόρρωθεν ἀσπαζομένων, i.e. ordinary men look distantly upon 
the subtleties and quibbles of the sophist. One is reminded 
of C. S. Calverley’s famous reply to Dr. Jenkyns, when, as 
C. 5. Blayds, he was an undergraduate at Balliol. Dr. 
Jenkyns : ** And with what feelings, Mr. Blayds, ought we 
to regard the Decalogue?” Blayds: ‘* Master, with feelings 
of devotion mingled with awe!” -Cf. Eurip. Hipp. 102 
πρόσωθεν αὐτὴν (sc. ᾿Δφροδίτην) ἁγνὸς dv ἀσπάζομαι. 

Ὁ Of. Hom. Il. xviii. 104 ἐτώσιον ἄχθος ἀρούρης ; Od. xx. 379 
αὔτως ἄχθος ἀρούρης. 

° The use of a gourd as a float is mentioned by Apostolides 
in his account, p. 45f., of fishing for the Great Sea-perch 
(H. i. 142 n.). A strong line with a large hook is employed. 
Baited with small fishes, especially Saupes, this is cast in 
front of the Perch’s retreat among the rocks. When the 
fish is hooked, it withdraws into its hole and, dilating its 
gill-covers, presses against the walls of its retreat in such a 
way that the fisher cannot pull it out. But ‘il mouille, le 
plus loin possible, en ligne droite, l’autre extrémité libre de 
la ligne au moyen d’une pierre et attache au milieu une 
gourde (κολοκύνθη) ou un grand morceau de liége, qui, tiré 


486 


HALIEUTICA, V. 348-359 


Nay, O Sea, I greet thee—from the land,? and— 
from afar—mayst thou be kind to me ! 

Such are the labours by which they slay those 
Sea-monsters which exceed in monstrous bulk of 
body, burdens® of the sea. But those which are 
endowed with lesser limbs are caught by lesser sort 
of hunting and the weapons are suited to the prey : 
smaller the lines, smaller the jaw of the hook, 
scantier the food that baits the barbs, and in place 
of the skins of goats globes of dried gourds ὁ fastened 
to the line pull the body of the beast to the surface. 

When fishermen encounter the whelps of the 
Lamna,? many a time they merely undo the oar- 
thong,’ the strap which fastens the oar, and project 


par les deux bouts, se tire au dessous du niveau de la mer. 
Un ou deux jours aprés, si le cernier, pressé par la faim et 
fatigué de se tenir appuyé contre les parois de son nid, se 
relache un peu, il est aussit6t tiré par la ligne qui tend ἃ 
flotter. N’étant pas assez fort pour entrainer de nouveau le 
liége, il reste en dehors de son nid, et le pécheur, avisé par 
la ligne qui flotte, vient le ramasser ” (Apost. .c.). 

a... 60 Ἦν 

e This refers to the simplest form of rowlock, a pin or 
thole (σκαλμός) in the gunwale to which the oar was fastened 
by a leathern thong (τροπός, tporwrnp): Poll. i, 87 ὅθεν μὲν 
αἱ κῶπαι ἐκδέδενται, σκαλμός᾽ ᾧ δὲ ἐκδέδενται, τροπωτήρ᾽ Kal 
τροπώσασθαι ναῦν. Of. Hom. Od. iv. 782=vili. 53 ἠρτύναντο 
δ᾽ ἐρετμὰ τροποῖς ἐν δερματίνοισι : Aesch. Pers. 375 f, ναυβάτης 
7 ἀνὴρ | τροποῦτο κώπην σκαλμὸν ἀμφ᾽ εὐήρετμον. See further 
Aristoph. Ach. 549, 553; Eur. Hel. 1598; 1.71. 1347; 
Thuc. ii 93; Hom. Hy. vi. 42; Lucian, Catapl. 1; Poll. 
i. 85 ff, x. 1394; H. M. 95. ἐπίκωπος, 8. εὔσκαρθμοι, 8. σκαλμός, 
5. τράφηξ, 8. TPOTWTHPES ; Hesych. 5. τροποί, 5. τροπώσασθαι 3 
Suid. 9. τροπωτῆρες. For the dynamics of the arrangement 
cf. [A.] Mechan. 850 b 10 ff, In Lat. the thong is struppus, 
Liv. Andr. ap. Isidor.. Orig. xix. 4. 9. The pin is scalmus, 
Cic. Brut. 197; De or. i. 174; De offic. iii. 59 ; Vell. Pat. 
ii. 43. 1. In Shetland, where the arrangement is still in use, 
the pin is called kabe, the thong humlaband. ee 


OPPIAN 


, " 2 » τα 5 «ὦ a 
λυσάμενοι προύῦυτεινὰν ἐν οἴδμασιν" Ἶ δ᾽ ἐσιδοῦσα 360 
th 5. \ lal 
ἔσσυτο Kal γενύων προΐει μένος, αἶψα δὲ σειρῇ 
ἐνσχόμενοι μίμνουσιν ἅτ᾽ ἐν δεσμοῖσιν ὀδόντες 
3 ΄ Ψ μ / © fee > / 
ἀγκύλοι: ἔνθεν ἔπειτα πόνος ῥήϊστος ὀλέσσαι 
λάμνην τριγλώχινος ὑπὸ ῥιπῇσι σιδήρου. 
” 7 9 ALS yt aay , 
Εξοχα δ᾽ ἐχθοδοποῖς ἐνὶ ᾿κήτεσι μαργαίνουσι 365 
λαιμῷ λαβροσύνῃ τε κυνῶν ὑπέροπλα γένεθλα- 
Ψ are \ Nua 7 3 7 3, 
ἔξοχα δ᾽ ὑβρισταὶ καὶ ἀγήνορες, οὐδέ κεν ἄν τι 
ἀντόμενοι τρέσσειαν, ἀναιδείην ἀχάλινον 
αἰεὶ κυμαίνουσαν ἐπὶ φρεσὶ λύσσαν ἔχοντες" 
πολλάκι δ᾽ ἰχθυβόλοισι καὶ ἐς λίνον ἀΐξαντες 870 
4, > > ὔ > / > ς “ 
κύρτοις τ᾽ ἐμπελάσαντες ἐδηλήσανθ᾽ ἁλιεῦσιν 
ἄγρην ἰχθυόεσσαν, ἑὴν φρένα πιαίνοντες. 
\ / > Ἂν / 2 Ψ΄. > ~ 
τοὺς δέ τις ἀσπαλιεὺς δεδοκημένος ἰχθύσιν αὐτοῖς, 
πείρας ἀγκίστρῳ, μενοεικέα ληΐδα θήρης, 
ῥηϊδίως ἐρύσει περὶ γαστέρα μαιμώοντας. 375 
ld i 
wKn δ᾽ οὐκ ἄγκιστρα τετεύχαται οὔτε τις αἰχμὴ 
τρίγλυφος ἥ κεν ἕλοι κείνης δέμας" ἔξοχα γάρ μιν 
y+ τὰ 


4 


ῥινὸς ὑπὲρ μελέων στερεὴ λάχεν, ὄβριμον ἕρκος" 
ἀλλ᾽ ὅτ᾽ ἐυπλεκέεσσι λίνοις περικυκλώσωνται 
φώκην ἀσπαλιῆες ἐν ἰχθύσιν οὐκ ἐθέλοντες, 380) 
δὴ τότε τοῖς κραιπνοί τε πόνοι, σπουδή τε καθέλκειν 
δίκτυον ἐς ῥηγμῖνας, ἐπεὶ φώκην μεμαυῖαν 
οὐκ ἂν ἐρητύσειε καὶ εἰ μάλα πολλὰ παρείη 
δίκτυα, ῥηϊδίως δὲ Bin τ᾽ ὀνύχων θ᾽ ὑπ᾽ ἀκωκαῖς 
ρήξει, π΄ ᾿ᾷϊδεν Te καὶ ἔσσεται ἰχθύσιν ἄλκαρ 385, 
εἰλομένοις, μέγα δ᾽ ἄλγος ἐνὶ φρεσὶν ἀσπαλιήων. Ὁ 
ἀλλ᾽ ἦν μιν καθέλωσιν ὑποφθαδὸν ἐγγύθι γαίης, | 
ἔνθα δὲ καὶ τριόδοντι καὶ ἰφθίμοις ῥοπάλοισι | 
dovpaci τὲ στιβαροῖσι καταΐγδην ἐλόωντες | 
* H. i. 373n.; Ael. i. 55. describes a different mode of 
capture. 
488 


HALIEUTICA, V. 360-389 


‘it in the waves. And when the Lamna espies it, 
she rushes and puts forth the strength of her jaws, 
and straightway her crooked teeth are entangled in 
the strap and are held fast as if in chains. There- 
after it is an easy task to kill the Lamna with blows 
of the iron trident. 

Ravenous pre-eminently among the hateful Sea- 
monsters and gluttonous are the monster tribes of 
the Dog-fishes @ ; and they are pre-eminently insolent 
and proud and will fear nothing that they meet, 
having unbridled shamelessness ever swelling like a 
frenzy in their hearts. Often they rush upon the 
nets of the fishermen or attack their weels and 
destroy their fishy spoil, while fattening their own 
hearts. And a watchful fisherman may pierce them 
with the hook in the frenzy of their gluttony and 
land them along with the fishes, a pleasant spoil of 
his fishing. 

For the Seal no hooks are fashioned nor any three- 
pronged spear which could capture it : for exceeding 
hard is the hide which it has upon its limbs as a 
mighty hedge. But when the fishermen have un- 
wittingly enclosed a seal among the fishes in their 
well-woven nets, then there is swift labour and 
haste to pull the nets ashore. For no nets, even if 
there are very many at hand, would stay the raging 
seal, but with its violence and sharp claws it. will 
easily break them and rush away and prove a succour 
to the pent-up fishes but a great grief to the hearts 
of the fishermen. But if betimes they bring it near 
the land, there with trident and mighty clubs and 
stout spears they smite it on the temples® and _ kill 


> A. 567a10 ἀποκτεῖναι δὲ φώκην χαλεπὸν βιαίως, ἐὰν μή 
τις πατάξῃ παρὰ τὸν κρόταφον" τὸ γὰρ σῶμα σαρκῶδες αὐτῆς. 


489 


OPPIAN 


ἐς κροτάφους πέφνουσιν" ἐπεὶ φώκῃσιν ὄλεθρος 
ὀξύτατος κεφαλῆφιν ἱκάνεται οὐταμένῃσι. 

Ναὶ μὴν καὶ χέλυες μάλα πολλάκις ἀντιόωσαι 
θήρην λωβήσαντο καὶ ἀνδράσι πῆμα γένοντο. 
τάων δ᾽ ἔπλετο μόχθος ἑλεῖν ῥήϊστος ἁπάντων 
ἀνέρι. θαρσαλέῳ Kat ἀταρβέα θυμὸν ἔχοντι" 
εἰ γάρ τις καταδὺς κραναὴν χέλυν ἐν ῥοθίοισιν 
ὕπτιον ἀνστρέψειεν ἐπ᾽ ὄστρακον, οὐκέτι κείνη 
πολλὰ καὶ ἱεμένη δύναται μόρον ἐξαλεείνειν" 
ὕψι δ᾽ ἀναπλώει κοῦφον πλόον ἀσπαίρουσα 
ποσσίν, ἁλὸς μεμαυῖα" γέλως δ᾽ ἔχει ἀγρευτῆρας. 
τὴν δ᾽ ὁτὲ μὲν θείνουσι σιδηρείῃσι βολῇσιν, 

» 3 > , > Ue / 
ἄλλοτε δ᾽ ἐν Bpoyidecow ἀναψάμενοι μεθέπουσιν. 
ὡς δ᾽ ὅτε νηπίαχα φρονέων πάϊς οὐρεσίῴφουτον 
3 7 ~ is x / € 2 3. ἃ ~ 
ἀνστρέψῃ τρηχεῖαν ἑλὼν χέλυν, ἡ δ᾽ ἐπὶ νῶτα 

/ Sf, Ν ᾿ς Ss ¢ Bh 
κεκλιμένη μάλα πολλὰ λιλαίεται οὖδας ἱκέσθαι, 
ῥικνὰ ποδῶν σείουσα καὶ ἀγκύλα γούνατα, μόχθῳ 
πυκνὸν ἐπασπαίρουσα, γέλως δ᾽ ἔχει ὅς κεν ἴδηται, 
“ / ¢ 7 ς \ Ψ av Ψ 
ὡς κείνης ὁμόφυλον ἁλὸς δάκος ὕπτιον ἅλμῃ 
ἐμφέρεται λωβητὸν ὑπ᾽ ἀνδράσιν ἰχθυβόλοισι. 

Πολλάκι δ᾽ ἐς τραφερὴν ἀνανίσσεται, ἐκ δὲ βολάων 


OF Pain Gone 

> The main points of vv. 394-415, but rather differently 
combined, are found in two accounts: (1) Plin. ix. 35 f. 
Capiuntur multis quidem modis sed maxime evectae in 
summa pelagi antemeridiano tempore blandito, eminente 
toto dorso per tranquilla fluitantes, quae voluptas libere 
spirandi in tantum fallit oblitas sui ut solis vapore siccato 
cortice non queant mergi invitaeque fluitent opportunae 


venantium praedae, Ferunt et pastum egressas noctu 


avideque saturatas lassari atque, ut remeaverint matutino, 
summa in aqua obdormiscere. Id prodi stertentium sonitu. 


Tum adnatare leviter singulis ternos. A duobus in dorsum 
verti, a tertio laqueum inici supinae atque ita e terra a 


490 


390 
395 


400 


405) 


410) 


HALIEUTICA, V. 390-410 


it: since destruction comes most swiftly upon seals 
when they are smitten on the head. 

Moreover, the Turtles* also very often destroy 
the spoil of the fishermen when they fall in with it 
and become a plague to the men. To capture? it 
is the easiest task of all for a man who is courageous 
and of fearless soul. For if he leap into the waves 
and turn the stony turtle on its back upon its shell, 
no more can it avoid doom, however much it try, 
but it floats on the surface buoyantly, struggling 
with its feet in its desire for the sea; and laughter 
seizes the fishermen. And sometimes they smite it 
with blows of iron, otherwhiles they deal with it by 
towing it with ropes. And as when a boy in childish 
frolic takes a rough mountain-roaming Tortoise and 
turns it over and it lies upon its back and is very 
eager to reach the ground, waving its wrinkled feet 
and wriggling furiously its crooked knees in its 
distress, and laughter seizes all who behold: even 
so its kindred beast of the sea floats on its back in 
the brine, the sport of the fishermen. 

And often it comes up to the dry land and by the 


pluribustrahi ; (2) Diodor. iii. 20, speaking of the Aethiopian 
Chelonophagi (Turtle-eaters), says the Turtles spend the 
night in deep water feeding, but by day they seek the 
sheltered waters among the islands near the shore, where 
they sleep on the surface with carapace towards the sun, 
presenting the appearanee of overturned boats: oi δὲ τὰς 
νήσους κατοικοῦντες βάρβαροι κατὰ τοῦτον τὸν καιρὸν ἠρέμα 
προσνήχονται ταῖς χελώναις᾽ πρὸς ἑκάτερον δὲ μέρος πλησιάσαντες 
οἱ μὲν πιέζουσιν, οἱ δὲ ἐξαίρουσιν, ἕως ὕπτιον γένηται τὸ ζῷον" 
ἔπειθ᾽ οἱ μὲν ἐξ ἑκατέρου μέρους οἰακίζουσι τὸν ὅλον ὄγκον, ἵνα μὴ 
στραφὲν τὸ ζῷον καὶ νηξάμενον τῷ τῆς φύσεως βοηθήματι φύγῃ 
κατὰ βάθους" εἷς δ᾽ ἔχων μήρινθον μακρὰν καὶ δήσας τῆς οὐρᾶς 
νήχεται πρὸς τὴν γῆν καὶ προσέλκεται μετάγων τὸ ζῴον ἐπὶ τὴν 


χέρσον. 
401 


OPPIAN 


ἠελίου. φολίδας mepidaterar, ada δὲ γυῖα 
ἐς πόντον φορέει, τὴν δ᾽ οὐκέτι καὶ μεμαυῖαν 
“- ὔ 
κῦμα μέλαν δέχεται, φορέει δέ μιν ἠδὲ κυλίνδει 
Ψ 4\? ε 7ὕ 4 ¢ / « > ? 7 
ὕψι μάλ᾽ ἱεμένην νεάτης adds: οἱ δ᾽ ἐσιδόντες 
? / / Ca \ > Υ > / 
ἰχθυβόλοι μάλα peta Kal ἀσπασίως ἐδάμασσαν. 
Δελφίνων δ᾽ ἄγρη μὲν ἀπότροπος, οὐδὲ θεοῖσι 
aA ae > / \ / > fe ~ 
κεῖνος ἔτ᾽ ἐμπελάσειε θυτὴρ φίλος οὐδέ Ke βωμῶν 
εὐαγέως ψαύσειεν, ὁμωροφίους δὲ μιαίνει, 
ὅς κεν ἑκὼν Serdiow ἐπιῤράσσηται ὄλεθρον. 
ἶσα γὰρ ἀνδρομέοισιν ἀπεχθαίρουσι φόνοισι 
δαίμονες εἰναλίων ὀλοὸν μόρον ἡγητήρων' 
ἶσα γὰρ ἀνθρώποισι νοήματα καὶ προπόλοισι 
Ζηνὸς ἁλιγδούποιο: τὸ καὶ φιλότητι γενέθλης 
/ / > BTV / > 4 
κέχρηνται, μέγα δ᾽ εἰσὶ συνάρθμιοι ἀλλήλοισιν. 
” A a 2 / > / σ 
ἤδη γὰρ δελφῖνες ἐνηέες ἀνδράσιν οἵην 
Μ᾿ 3 / » 9 > VA ¢ / 
ἄγρην εὐθήρητον ἐπ᾽ ἰχθύσιν ὡπλίσσαντο 
/ 2 ΕἸ ,ὔ X » > , 
νήσῳ ev Εὐβοίῃ μετὰ κύμασιν Aiyatovow: 
εὖτε γὰρ ἑσπερίης θήρης πόνον ἐγκονέωσιν 


* For the Dolphin in Greek religion and mythology see 
Hermann Usener, Die Sintflutsagen (Bonn, 1899), chap. v. 

Ὁ We take the sense of ἀπότροπος here to be ἀπὸ τρόπου, 
“contra morem consuetudinemque civilem” (Cic. De offic. 
i. 41. 148); of. [Phocylic.] 182. μηδὲ κασιγνήτης és ἀπότροπον 
ἐλθέμεν εὐνήν. So εὐναὶ παράτροποι Pind. P. ii. 35. Other- 
wise it may mean ‘‘ abominable.” But the word needs 
more careful consideration than it has yet received. It is 
curious. that. Aristotle speaks of hunting the Dolphin 
without a hint of anything unusual: A. 583 b9 ὃ συμβαίνει 
καὶ ἐπὶ τῆς τῶν δελφίνων Onpas* ὅταν γὰρ ἀθρόως περικυκλώσωσι 
τοῖς μονοξύλοις (canoes), ψοφοῦντες ἐξ αὐτῶν ἐν τῇ θαλάττῃ 
ἀθρόους ποιοῦσιν ἐξοκέλλειν φεύγοντας εἰς τὴν γῆν καὶ λαυβάνουσιν 


409 


415 


420 


HALIEUTICA, V. 411-428 


rays of the sun its scales are burnt about it and it 
carries but withered limbs back to the sea and the 
dark wave receives it no more for all its eagerness 
but carries and rolls it aloft while it yearns for the 
bottom of the sea. And fishermen espying it very 
easily and gladly overcome it. 

The hunting of Dolphins*® is immoral ὃ and that 
man can no more draw nigh the gods as a welcome 
sacrificer nor touch their altars with clean hands 
but poliutes those who share the same roof with him, 
whoso willingly devises destruction for Dolphins. 
For equally with human slaughter the gods abhor 
the deathly doom of the monarchs of the deep ©; for 
like thoughts with men have the attendants of the 
god of the booming sea: wherefore also they 
practise love of their offspring ὦ and are very friendly 
one to another. Behold now what manner of happy 
hunting the Dolphins kindly to men array against 
the fishes in the island of Euboea ὁ amid the Aegean 
waves. For when the fishers hasten to the toil of 


ὑπὸ τοῦ ψόφου καρηβαροῖντας. So Ael. 1. 18 ὅταν δὲ ἁλιεὺς ἢ 
τρώσῃ τὸν παῖδα αὐτῆς TH τριαίνῃ ἢ τῇ ἀκίδι βάλῃ.--- ἢ μὲν axis 
τὰ ἄνω τέτρηται, καὶ ἐνῆπται σχοῖνος μακρὰ αὐτῇ, οἱ "δὲ ὄγκοι 
εἰσδύντες ἔχονται τοῦ θηρός---καὶ ἕως μὲν ἀλγῶν ἔτι ῥώμης ὁ 
δελφὶς ὁ τραυματίας μετείληχεν, χαλᾷ 6 θηρατὴς τὴν σχοῖνον,. 
ὅταν δὲ αἴσθηται καμόντα καί πως παρειμένον ἐκ τοῦ τραύματος, 
ἡσυχῇ παρ᾽ αὐτὴν ἄγει τὴν ναῦν καὶ ἔχει τὴν ἄγραν. 

© Of. infra 441 n. ἡγητήρ, like Latin dux, a poetical 
synonym for king or emperor. 

@ ΑΕ]. i. 18 δελφὶς δὲ ἄρα θῆλυς φιλοτεκνότατος ἐς τὰ ἔσχατα 
ρὸν éorl. Of. v. 6, x. 8; Phil. 86; Plin. ix. 21 gestant 
fetus infantia infirmos. Quin et adultos diu comitantur 
magna erga partum caritate. 5 

4 Oppian’s story is paraphrased by Ael. ii. 8. A similar 
story is told by Plin. ix. 29 ff. who also refers to a similar 
practice ‘‘in Iasio sinu” (in Caria). The fish captured is in 
Pliny the Grey Mullet (mugil). 

408 


OPPIAN 


, : ε , 
ἰχθυβόλοι, νεπόδεσσι πυρὸς φορέοντες ὁμοκλήν, 
» / \ , ς δ᾽ 2 / 
imvov χαλκείοιο θοὸν σέλας, οἱ δ᾽ ἐφέπονται 
deAdives, σύνθηρον ἐπισπεύδοντες ὄλεθρον. 
ἔνθ᾽ of μὲν τρομέοντες ἀποτροπάδην ἀλέονται 
ἰχθύες, οἱ δ᾽ ἔκτοσθεν ἐπαΐσσοντες ὁμαρτῆ 
δελφῖνες φοβέουσι καὶ ἱεμένους ἐπὶ βύσσαν 
τρωπᾶσθαι ποτὶ χέρσον ἀνάρσιον ἐξελόωσι, 
πυκνὸν ἐπιθρώσκοντες, ἅτ᾽ ἀνδράσι θηρητῆρσι 

“ tA ΄ > / ¢€ lol 
θῆρα κύνες σεύοντες ἀμοιβαίῃς ὑλακῇσι. Ξ 

~ \ / > , ~ 
τοὺς δ᾽ ἀγχοῦ ποτὶ χέρσον ἀτυζομένους ἁλιῆες 
€ «Qs / Dee ? ,ὔ 
ῥηϊδίως βάλλουσιν ἐὐγλώχινι τριαίνῃ. 

ΩΝ eed if lol Cag ey / 
τοῖσι δ᾽ ἄφυκτα κέλευθα, διορχεῦνται δ᾽ ἐνὶ πόντῳ, 
καὶ πυρὶ καὶ deAdiow ἐλαυνόμενοι βασιλεῦσιν. 
> > ¢ y, 7 > / ” ” 
ἀλλ᾽ ὁπόταν θήρης εὐαγρέος ἔργον ἄνηται, 


“ The word ὁμοκλή, ““ call,” is used in the vaguest way. 
The schol. here interprets ἀπειλήν, λαμπηδόνα : in H. i. 152 
ἀπειλήν, in H, iv. 14 ἀπειλήν, ὀργήν. Oppian misunderstands, 
as does Aelian, the use of the lantern (not mentioned by 
Pliny) which is not to frighten, but to attract. Apostolides, 
p. 40, gives the following account of the mode of fishing for 
the Gar-fish (Belone acus) practised in the Sporades N. of 
Kuboea: ‘* Pendant les nuits les plus obscures du mois 
d’Octobre, aussitét aprés l’arrivée des poissons, les bateaux 
quittent leur mouillage le soir et se rendent au large. 
Arrivés a l’endroit désigné les pécheurs aménent les voiles 
et marchent lentement a la rame en examinant la mer de 
tous cétés. Il est facile de se rendre compte de la présence 
du poisson en écoutant le bruit que font les dauphins qui 
le powrsuwent ἃ la surface de Teau. Alors, les pécheurs 
allument un grand feu avec du bois résineux sur une espece 
de gril en fer, qwils fixent ἃ la prowe du navire (πυροφάνι 
et πυριά vulg.). Les poissons attirés par la lueur accourent 
vers le bateauw comme pour y chercher un abri contre 
Vennemi [i.e., the Dolphins] qui ne cesse de les décimer. Les 


404 


480 


440 


HALIEUTICA, V. 429-442 


evening fishing, carrying to the fishes the menace 4 
of fire, even the swift gleam of the brazen lantern,® 
the Dolphins attend them, speeding the slaughter of 
their common prey. Then the fishes in terror turn 
away and seek escape, but the Dolphins from the 
outer sea rush together upon them and frighten 
them and, when they would fain turn to the deep 
sea, they drive them forth towards the unfriendly 
land, leaping at them ever and again, even as 
dogs chasing the wild beast for the hunters and 
answering bark with bark. And when the fishes 
flee close to the land, the fishermen easily smite 
them with the well-pronged trident. And there is 
no way of escape for them, but they dance about in 
the sea, driven by the fire and by the Dolphins, the 
kings of the sea.°. But when the work of capture is 


pécheurs ne commence pas aussitét la péche, mais ils con- 
tinuent ἃ ramer lentement, sans bruit, de maniére ἃ faire 
tourner, sur place, le bateau quinze ou vingt fois sur lui- 
méme. Cette opération . . . a pour but, je crois, de réfléter 
la lumiére de tous les cétés de Vhorizon, pour attirer les 
poissons qui se trouveraient ἃ l'arriére du bateau, et qui, 
par conséquent, ne l’auraient pas vue. Les poissons réunis 
autour du bateau ne le quittent presque plus, ils y restent, 
tournant méme avec lui quand les pécheurs le font tourner. 
Cela fait, on dirige le bateau lentement, ἃ l’aviron, vers la 
terre, ou il est suivi par les nombreuses bandes de Bélones. 
On arrive ainsi 4 Ja céte. Laon prend des précautions pour 
que le bateau ne touche terre, le moindre choc faisant 
déguerpir aussitét les poissons. On l’arréte ἃ une distance 
dun ou de deux métres, et, laissant les rames, on prend 
les haveneaux en main, et lon commence a envelopper les 
poissons des deux cdtés du bateau.” 

> Ael. ii. 8 τῆς πρῴρας τῶν ἀκατίων κοίλας τινὰς ἐξαρτῶσιν 
ἐσχαρίδας πυρὸς ἐνακμάζοντος" καὶ εἰσὶ διαφανεῖς ὡς καὶ στέγειν τὸ 
πῦρ καὶ μὴ κρύπτειν τὸ φῶς" ἱπνοὺς καλοῦσιν αὐτάς. 

ο Of. 421 supra; Gregor. Nyss. Or. i. ὁ δελφίς ἐστι τῶν 
νηκτῶν βασιλικώτατος. 


405 


OPPIAN 


δὴ τότ᾽ ἀπαιτίζουσι παρασχεδὸν ἐμπελάσαντες 
3 ’ > 
μισθὸν ὁμοφροσύνης, θήρης ἀποδάσμιον αἶσαν" 
οἱ δ᾽ οὐκ ἠνήναντο, πόρον δ᾽ εὐαγρέα μοῖραν 
δι.) af an / € LA. ἰλί 
ἀσπασίως: ἣν γάρ τις ὑπερφιάλως ἀλίτηται, 
2 / ¢ ~ > / Fin \ Epa | + 
οὐκέτι οἱ δελφῖνες ἀρηγόνες εἰσὶν ἐπ᾽ ἄγρην. 
Καὶ μέν τις Λέσβοιο παλαίφατον ἔργον ἀοιδοῦ 
» Q a b ΄ὔ \ / 
ἔκλυεν, ws δελφῖνος ὀχησάμενος περὶ νώτῳ 
κῦμα μέλαν περάασκε καθήμενος, ἄτρομος ἦτορ, 
ἀείδων, καὶ πότμον ὑπέκφυγε ληϊστήρων 
“| / he ας aN Sy β λῆ ι A , 
αιναρίῃ τ᾽ ἐπέλασσεν ἐπὶ προβολῇσι Λακώνων. 
,ὕὔ Τὰ / 7 / 5 3 {2 
Kat πού τις Λίβυος κούρου πόθον οἶδεν ἀκούων, 
τοῦ ποτε ποιμαίνοντος ἐράσσατο θερμὸν ἔρωτα 
δελφίς, σὺν δ᾽ ἤθυρε παρ᾽ ἠόσι, καὶ κελαδεινῇ 
€ 5» ω) ρ αρ 7) ? εὐ) 
τερπόμενος σύριγγι λιλαίετο πώεσιν αὐτοῖς 
, , A ῃ sts , 
μίσγεσθαι πόντον τε λιπεῖν ξυλόχους τ᾽ ἀφικέσθαι. 


* So Plin. ix. 32 (we give Philemon Holland’s engaging 
version) ‘‘ But after this service perfourmed, the Dolphins 
retire not presently into the deepe again, from whence they 
were called, but stay untill the morrow, as if they knew 
verie well that they had so carried themselves as that they 
deserved a better reward than one daies refection and 
victuals: and therefore contented they are not and satisfied, 
unlesse to their fish they have some sope and crummes of 
bread given them soaked in wine, and that their bellies full.” 

δ Arion’ of Methymna in Lesbos lived at the court of 
Periander tyrant of Corinth (625-585 B.c.). Having amassed 
great wealth in Italy and Sicily he wished to return 
to Corinth. At Tarentum he hired a boat from some 
Corinthians. On the voyage the men, wishing to get his 
money, conspired to throw him overboard. Arion offered 
them all his wealth if they wor'd spare his life, They gave 


496 


445 


450 


455 


HALIEUTICA, V. 443-457 


happily accomplished, then the Dolphins draw near 
and ask the guerdon of their friendship, even their 
allotted portion of the spoil. And the fishers deny 
them not, but gladly give them a share of their 
successful fishing ;. for if a man sin against them in 
his arrogance, no more are the Dolphins his helpers 
in fishing. 

One has heard, moreover, of the feat famous of old 
of the Lesbian minstrel,® how riding on the back of a 
Dolphin he crossed the black waves while he sat 
fearless of heart and singing, and so escaped death 
from the pirates, and reached the land of Taenarus 
on the shores of the Laconians. And one knows, 
methinks, by hearsay the love of the Libyan boy ° 
whom as he herded his sheep a Dolphin loved with 
a burning love and played with him beside the shores 
and for delight in his shrill pipe? was fain to live 
among the very sheep and to forsake the sea and 


him the choice either to kill himself or to jump into the sea. 
He asked to be allowed to don his minstrel’s dress and sing 
to them. This granted, he stood on the deck and sang. 
and then jumped into the sea, when a Dolphin took him on 
its back and carried him ashore at Tacnarus in Laconia. 
Herod. i. 24; Pausan. iii. 25. 7 ἀναθήματα δὲ ἄλλα τέ ἐστιν ἐπὶ 
Ταινάρῳ καὶ ᾿Αρίων ὁ κιθαρῳδὸς χαλκοῦς ἐπὶ δελφῖνος ; Plut. Mor. 
160rnff.; Ael. ii. 6; vi. 15; xii. 45, where he quotes the 
distich inscribed on the memorial at Taenarus and a hymn 
purporting to have been written by Arion as a thank-offering 
to Poseidon; Plin. ix. 28; Philostr. /mag. i. 19; Aul. Gell. 
xvi. 19; Propert. iii. 26.17; Ov. Fast. ii. 83 ff., etc. 9 
K. Klement, Arion, Wien, 1898. 

¢ This probably refers to the Dolphin of Hippo(n) Diar- 
rytus, now Bizerta (38 m. N. of Tunis), the story of which 
is told by Pliny ix. 26, and more ornately by the younger 
Pliny, Ep. ix. 33. 

ἃ For the Dolphin’s love of music: Ael. xi. 12; Plin. ix. 


24, etc. 
2K 497 


OPPIAN 


a , 
ἀλλ᾽ οὐδ᾽ ἠϊθέοιο πόθους ἐπὶ πᾶσα λέλησται 
/ \ / 
Αἰολίς- οὔτι παλαιόν, ἐφ᾽ ἡμετέρῃ δὲ γενέθλῃ:" 
δ, 
δελφὶς ὥς ποτε παιδὸς ἐράσσατο νησαίοιο" 460 
a 
νήσῳ δ᾽ ἐνναίεσκεν, ἀεὶ δ᾽ ἔχε ναύλοχον ὅρμον, 
ἀστὸς ὅπως, ἕταρον δὲ λιπεῖν ἠναίνετο θυμῷ, 
ἀλλ᾽ αὐτοῦ μίμναζε παρέστιος ἐξέτι τυτθοῦ, | 
» \ 
σκύμνος ἀεξηθείς, ὀλίγον βρέφος, ἤθεσι παιδὸς | 
¢ ,ὕ “ | 
σύντροφος: ἀλλ᾽ 60’ ἵκοντο τέλος γυιαλκέος ἥβης, 465. 
+s «ς 1% 
καί ῥ᾽ ὃ μὲν ἠϊθέοισι μετέπρεπεν, αὐτὰρ ὁ πόντῳ 
ὠκύτατος δελφὶς ἑτέρων προφερέστατος ἦεν, 
δή ῥα τότ᾽ ἔκπαγλόν τε καὶ οὐ φατὸν οὐδ᾽ ἐπίελπτον 
θάμβος ἔην ξείνοισι καὶ ἐνναέτῃσιν ἰδέσθαι" | 
\ δ} Ἢ a QUA / ε / : 
πολλοὺς δ᾽ ὥρορε φῆμις ἰδεῖν σέβας ὁρμηθέντας, 470 
ἠΐθεον δελφῖνι συνηβώοντας ἑταίρους" | 
πολλαὶ δ᾽ ἠϊόνων ayopal πέλας ἦμαρ ἐπ᾽ ἦμαρ 
ἱεμένων ἵσταντο σέβας μέγα θηήσασθαι. 
” pr ἘΦ iv 3 \ yy / δ 
ev? ὃ μὲν ἐμβεβαὼς ἄκατον κοίλοιο πάροιθεν 
ὅρμου ἀναπλώεσκε, κάλει δέ μιν οὔνομ᾽ aioas 41 
κεῖνο, τό μιν φήμιξεν ἔτι πρώτης ἀπὸ φύτλης" 
δελφὶς δ᾽ nor ὀϊστός, ἐπεὶ κλύε παιδὸς ἰωήν, 
κραιπνὰ θέων ἀκάτοιο φίλης ἄγχιστος ἵκανε, 
σαίνων τ᾽ οὐραίῃ κεφαλήν τ᾽ ἀνὰ γαῦρος ἀείρων, 
παιδὸς ἐπιψαῦσαι λελιημένος- αὐτὰρ ὁ χερσὶν 480) 
ἧκα καταρρέζεσκε, φιλοφροσύνῃσιν ἑταῖρον | 
ἀμφαγαπαζόμενος, τοῦ δ᾽ ἵετο θυμὸς ἱκέσθαι 
* The reference is to Por(d)oselene on an island of the 
same name near Lesbos (Strabo 618). Ael. ii. 6 tells the 
story somewhat differently from Oppian, and omitting the | 
death of the boy and the Dolphin (see note on 518 infra): | 
λέγει δὲ καὶ Βυζάντιος ἀνήρ, Λεωνίδης ὄνομα, ἰδεῖν αὐτὸς παρὰ τὴν 
Αἰολίδα πλέων ἐν τῇ καλουμένῃ ἸΠοροσελήνῃ πόλει δελφῖνα ἠθάδα 
καὶ ἐν λιμένι τῷ ἐκείνων οἰκοῦντα κτλ. : cf. Pausan. iii. 95. 7 τὰ 
μὲν οὖν ἐς αὐτὸν ᾿Αρίονα καὶ τὰ ἐπὶ τῷ δελφῖνι Ἡρόδοτος εἶπεν 


ἀκοὴν ἐν τῇ Λυδίᾳ συγγραφῇ" τὸν δὲ ἐν Ποροσελήνῃ δελφῖνα τῷ | 
498 | 
| 


HALIEUTICA, V. 458-482 


come to the woods. Nay, nor has all Aeolis¢ for- 
gotten the love of a youth—not long ago but in our 
own generation—how a Dolphin once loved an 
island boy and in the island it dwelt and ever haunted 
the haven where. ships lay at anchor, even as if it 
were a townsman and refused to leave its comrade, 
but abode there and made that its house from the 
time that it was little till it was a grown cub, like a 
little child nurtured in the ways of the boy. But 
when they came to the fullness of vigorous youth, 
then the boy excelled among the youths and the 
Dolphin in the sea was more excellent in swiftness 
than all others: Then there was a marvel strange 
beyond speech or thought for strangers and in- 
dwellers to behold. And report stirred many to 
hasten to see the wondrous sight, a youth and a 
Dolphin growing up in comradeship, and day by day 
beside the shore were many gatherings of those who 
rushed to gaze upon the mighty marvel. Then the 
youth would embark in his boat and row in front 
of the embayed haven and would call it, shouting 
the name whereby he had named it even from 
earliest birth. And the Dolphin, like an arrow, when 
it heard the call of the boy, would speed swiftly and 
come close to the beloved boat, fawning with its tail 
and proudly lifting up its head fain to touch the boy. 
And he would gently caress it with his hands, 
lovingly greeting his comrade, while it would be 
eager to come right into the boat beside the boy. 


παιδὶ σῶστρα ἀποδιδόντα ὅτι συγκοπέντα ὑπὸ ἁλιέων αὐτὸν ἰάσατο, 
τοῦτον τὸν δελφῖνα εἶδον [of. Oppian’s “not long 860 ᾽] καὶ 
καλοῦντι τῷ παιδὶ ὑπακούοντα καὶ φέροντα, ὁπότε ἐποχεῖσθαί οἱ 
βούλοιτο. For other similar stories cf A. 681 88 Ἧι .Δ6]" 
ii. 6, vi. 15, vili. 11; Athen. 606 c; Plin. i. 24 ff. ; Antig. 
55; Aul. Gell. vi. 8. 

499 


OPPIAN 


> > PS. 2, > A 
αὐτὴν εἰς ἄκατον παιδὸς πέλας" ἀλλ᾽ ὅτ᾽ ἐς ἅλμην 
lol 4) > > ων, 7 / 
κοῦφα κυβιστήσειεν, ὃ δ᾽ ἐγγύθι νήχετο κούρου, 
~ ~ \ / 
αὐτῇσι πλευρῇσιν ἀνὰ πλευρὰς παρενείρων, 
~ , ° \ / 
αὐτῇσι γενύεσσι πέλας γένυν, ἠδὲ καρήνῳ 
3 / ς ,ὔ 
ἐγχρίμπτων κεφαλήν: φαίης κέ μιν ἱμείροντα 
~ / 
κῦσσαι Kal στέρνοισι περιπτύξαι μενεαίνειν 
I 7 ε ~ 
ἠϊθεον: τοίῃ yap ὁπάονι νήχετο ῥιπῆ. 
ἀλλ᾽ ὅτε καὶ πελάσειε παρ᾽ ἠόσιν, αὐτίκα κοῦρος 
ἁψάμενος λοφιῆς διερῶν ἐπεβήσατο νώτων- 
/, Ud ~ 
αὐτὰρ ὅ γ᾽ ἀσπασίως παιδὸς δέμας eudpove θυμῷ 
es » 
δεξάμενος φοίτασκεν, ὅπῃ νόος ἠϊθέοιο 
~ if 
ἤλαεν, εἴτ᾽ dpa πόντον ἐπ᾽ εὐρέα τῆλε κελεύοι 
᾿ 3 wf)? » / AY ~ > 4 
στέλλεοθ᾽, εἴθ᾽ αὔτως λιμένος διὰ χῶρον ἀμείβειν, 
ἢ χέρσῳ πελάειν, ὁ δ᾽ ἐπείθετο πᾶσαν ἐφετμήν. 
οὔτε τις ἡνιόχῳ πῶλος τόσον ἐν γενύεσσι 
\ > / > / 58 λ ~ 
μαλθακὸς εὐγνάμπτοισιν ἐφέσπεται ὧδε χαλινοῖς, 
οὔτε τις ἀγρευτῆρι κύων ἐθὰς ὀτρύνοντι 
τόσσον ὑπεικαθέων ἐπιπείθεται, ἣ κεν ἄγῃσιν, 
οὔτ᾽ ἔτι κεκλομένοιο τόσον θεράποντες ἄνακτος 
πειθόμενοι ῥέζουσιν ἑκούσιον ἔργον ἑκόντες, 
i e 3 Dae Ῥ ‘ / > vA 
ὅσσον ὑπ᾽ ἠϊθέῳ δελφὶς φίλος ὀτρύνοντι 
/ 3 » 7 / ~ 
πείθετ᾽ ἄνευ ζεύγλης τε βιαζομένων τε χαλινῶν. 
> / ~ / / > \ \ + 
οὐ μέν μιν μοῦνον φορέειν θέλεν, ἀλλὰ καὶ ἄλλῳ 
πείθετο, τῷ μιν ἄνωγεν ἄναξ ἑός, ἀν δ᾽ ἐκόμιζε 
> 
νώτοις, οὔτινα μόχθον ἀναινόμενος φιλότητι. 
,ὔ A ~ / / > 3 Ψ A 
τοίη μὲν ζωῷ φιλίη πέλεν: ἀλλ᾽ ὅτε παῖδα 
πότμος ἕλε, πρῶτον μὲν ὀδυρομένῳ ἀτάλαντος 
\ w/ lo 
δελφὶς ἠϊόνεσσιν ἐπέδραμεν, ἥλικα κοῦρον 
lA 3 
μαστεύων: φαίης κεν ἐτήτυμον ὄσσαν ἀκούειν 
, - 
μυρομένου: τοῖόν μιν ἀμήχανον ἄμπεχε πένθος" 
>? n~ 
οὐδ᾽ ἔτι κικλήσκουσιν ἐπείθετο πολλάκις ἀστοῖς 
/ ~ 
γησαίοις, οὐ βρῶσιν ὀρεγνυμένην ἐθέλεσκε 
500 


485 


490 


495 


510/ 


HALIEUTICA, V. 483-514 


But when he dived lightly into the brine, it would 
swim near the youth, its side right by his side and 
its cheek close by his and touching head with head. 
Thou wouldst have said that in its love the Dolphin 
was fain to kiss ‘and embrace the youth: in such 
close companionship it swam. But when he came 
near the shore, straightway the youth would lay 
his hand upon its neck and mount. on its wet back. 
And gladly and with understanding it would receive 
the boy upon its back and would go where the will 
of the youth drave it, whether over the wide sea 
afar he commanded it to travel or merely to traverse 
the space of the haven or to approach the land : it 
obeyed every behest. No colt for its rider is so 
tender of mouth and so obedient to the curved bit ; 
no dog trained to the bidding of the hunter is so 
obedient to follow where he leads; nay, nor any 
servants are so obedient, when their master bids, to 
do his will willingly, as that friendly Dolphin was 
obedient to the bidding of the youth, without yoke- 
strap or constraining bridle. And not himself alone 
would it carry but it would obey any other whom 
his master bade it and carry him on its back, refusing 
no labour in its love. Such was its friendship for the 
boy while he lived; but when death took him, first 
like one sorrowing the Dolphin visited the shores in 
quest of the companion of its youth: you would 
have said you heard the veritable voice of a mourner 
—such helpless grief was upon it. And no more, 
though they called it often, would it hearken to the 


island townsmen nor would it accept food when 
501 


OPPIAN 


2 Wee 
δέχνυσθαι, μάλα δ᾽ aia Kal ἐξ ἁλὸς ἔπλετ᾽ ἄϊστος 515 
lj ~ 
κείνης, οὐδέ Tis αὐτὸν ἐπεφράσατ᾽, οὐδ᾽ ἔτι χῶρον 
ἵκετο: τὸν μέν που παιδὸς πόθος οἰχομένοιο 
ἔσβεσε, σὺν δὲ θανόντι θανεῖν ἔσπευσεν ἑταίρῳ. 
᾿Αλλ’ " \ ΄ Ro. , , 
ἔμπης καὶ τόσσον ἐνηείῃ προφέροντας 
καὶ τόσον ἀνθρώποισιν ὁμόφρονα θυμὸν ἔχοντας — 599 
Θρήϊκες ὑβρισταὶ καὶ ὅσοι Βύζαντος ἔχουσιν 
ἄστυ σιδηρείοισι νοήμασιν ἀγρώσσουσιν" 
> ψ 3 3 \ \ > ὔ > 4 / 
ἢ μέγ᾽ ἁταρτηροὶ καὶ ἀτάσθαλοι: οὐδέ κε παίδων, 
οὐ πατέραν φείσαιντο, κασιγνήτους τ᾽ ὀλέκοιεν 
ῥηϊδίως" τοῖος δὲ νόμος δυστερπέος ἀγῥὴς. 525 
μητρὶ μὲν αἰνοτόκῳ δίδυμον γένος ἐγγὺς ὀπηδεῖ 
δελφίνων, ἀταλοῖσιν ἀλίγκιον ἠϊθέοισι: : 
»- ‘he ’ 
Θρήϊκες αὖ ἐπὶ τοῖσιν ἀπηνέες ἐντύνονται, | 
, 56 a δὲν 7 ? , » | 
στειλάμενοι δόρυ κοῦφον ἀτάσθαλον ἐς πόνον &ypns. 
οἱ μὲν δὴ λεύσσοντες ἐπειγόμενον σκάφος ἄντην 530 
> la , \ 
ἄτρεμέες μίμνουσι. καὶ es φόβον ody ὁρόωσιν, 
οὔ TW ὀϊόμενοι μερόπων δόλον, οὐδέ τιν᾽ ἄτην 
7 la 3 > Ἢ > A> €; , 
ἵξεσθαι, caivovor δ᾽ ἐνηέας ἠΐθ᾽ ἑταίρους 
/ 
γηθόσυνοι, χρίμπτοντες ἐὸν χαίροντες ὄλεθρον. 
“A 4 ~ 
ot δὲ θοῶς ἐλάσαντες ἀκοντιστῆρι τριαίνῃ 535 
7 3 > / / 
τήν τ᾽ ἀκίδα κλείουσι, βέλος κρυερώτατον ἄγρης, 
ὕὔ ~ 
δελφίνων ἕνα κοῦρον ἀνωΐστῳ βάλον arn: 
> A a 3 Μ ,ὕ 
αὐτὰρ ὅ γ᾽ ἰδνωθείς, ὀδύνης ὕπο πικρὸν ἀχεύων, 
2517. δὰ ε ,ὔ ” 7 “ 
αὐτίχ ὑποβρυχίης εἴσω καταδύεται ἅλμης, 
4» 
ὀχθίζων ᾿σφακέλῳ τε και ἀργαλέῃσιν ἀνίαις" 540 
ς la ? > "6 “5 
οἱ δέ μιν οὐκ ἐρύουσι βιώμενοι: ἢ γὰρ ἂν ἄγρης 
Ul “ 
μαψιδίως ἅλιον καὶ ἐτώσιον ἔργον ἄροιντο" 


« Byzantium, of which Byzas was the legendary found. : 
Steph. Byz. 5.0. ; Diodor. iv. 49. i 5 τὸ 


502 | 


HALIEUTICA, V. 515-542 


offered it, and very soon it vanished from that sea 
and none marked it any more and it no more visited 
the place. Doubtless sorrow for the youth that was 
gone killed it, and with its dead comrade it had been 
fain to die. 

But notwithstanding, although the Dolphins so 
excel in gentleness and though they have a heart 
so much at one with men, the overweening Thracians 
and those who dwell in the city of Byzas @ hunt them 
with iron-hearted devices—surely wicked men and 
sinful! who would not spare their children or their 
fathers and would lightly slay their brothers born. 
And this is the manner of their unpleasant hunting. 
The mother Dolphin—a mother to her sorrow—is 
closely attended by her twin brood,? like unto boys 
oftenderage. Now against these the cruel Thracians 
array their attack, equipping a light boat for the 
sinful labour of their hunt. The young Dolphins, 
when they see the speeding bark before them, 
remain still and look not to flight, not dreaming 
that any guile or ill would come upon them from 
men, but fawn on them as on kindly comrades with 
delight, rejoicing as they meet their own destruction. 
Then the fishers strike swiftly the hurled trident 
which they call a harpoon, most deadly weapon of 
the hunt, and smite one of the young Dolphins with 
unthought of woe. And shrinking back in the bitter 
anguish of its pain, it straightway dives within the 
nether brine, racked with torture and grievous agony. 
And the fishers do not hale it up by force—else 
would they be undertaking to mo purpose a vain 
and empty. work of hunting—but as it rushes, they 


> A. 566b6 τίκτει δ᾽ ὁ μὲν δελφὶς τὰ μὲν πολλά, ἕν ἐνίοτε δὲ 
καὶ δύο; Ael, i, 18 τίκτει δύο. 
503 


OPPIAN 


ἀλλά of ἱεμένῳ δολιχὴν ἐφιᾶσιν ἄγεσθαι 

μήρινθον καὶ νῆα κατασπέρχουσιν ἐρετμοῖς, 
ἑσπόμενοι δελῴφϊνος ἀτυζομένοιο κελεύθοις. 545 
ἀλλ᾽ ὅτε λευγαλέῃσι κακηπελέων ὀδύνῃσι 

κάμνῃ καὶ γλωχῖσι περισκαίρῃσι σιδήρου, 

δή ῥα τότ᾽ ἀδρανέων ἀναδύεται, ἄλκιμα γυῖα ἢ 
κεκμηκώς, κούφοισιν ἀειρόμενος ῥοθίοισιν, | 
ὕστατα φυσιόων: μήτηρ δέ μιν οὔποτε λείπει, δ 
ἀλλ᾽ αἰεὶ μογέοντι συνέσπεται, ἔκ τ᾽ ἀνιόντι : 
βυσσόθεν, ἀχνυμένῃ τε καὶ αἰνότατον στεναχούσῃ 
εἰδομένη: φαίης κεν ὀδυρομένην ὁράασθαι 

μητέρα περθομένης πόλιος περὶ δυσμενέεσσι 

παίδων θ᾽ ἑλκομένων ὑπὸ ληΐδα δουρὸς ἀνάγκῃ": 555 
ὡς ἥ γ᾽ al” ἀχέουσα δαϊζομένῳ περὶ παιδί, | 
ὥστ᾽ αὐτὴ μογέουσα καὶ οὐτηθεῖσα σιδήρῳ, | 
Owever τὸν δ᾽ ἄλλον ἑῆς ἀπὸ παῖδα κελεύθου 
στέλλει ἐπεμπίπτουσα καὶ ὀτρύνουσα διώκει: 
φεῦγε, τέκος" μέροπες γὰρ ἀνάρσιοι, οὐκέθ᾽ ἑταῖροι 560 | 
ἡμῖν, ἀλλὰ σίδηρον ἐφοπλίζουσι καὶ ἄγρην" 

ἤδη καὶ deAdiow ἐπεντύνουσιν "Apna, 

σπονδάς τ᾽ ἀθανάτων καὶ ὁμοφροσύνην ἀλιτόντες 

ς / \ / RP > ye 2 / 

ἡμετέρην, τὴν πρόσθεν ἐπ᾽ ἀλλήλοις ἐθέμεσθα. 
τοῖα καὶ ἀἄφθογγός περ ὅμως τεκέεσσιν ἐοῖσι 565 
μυθεῦται: Kal τὸν μὲν ἀπέτρεπε τῆλε φέβεσθαι, 

τῷ δ᾽ ἑτέρῳ κρυερῶς μεμογηότι συμμογέουσα 

αὐτῆς ἄγχ᾽ ἀκάτοιο συνέσπεται, οὐδ᾽ ἀπολείπει: 

οὐδέ τις ἱέμενός περ ἀποτρέψειε τεκοῦσαν | 
οὔτε βαλὼν οὔτ᾽ ἄλλο φέρων δέος: ἀλλ᾽ ἅμα παιδὶ 570 
ἑλκομένῳ δύστηνος ἀνέλκεται, ὄφρα πελάσσῃ | 
δυσμενέων ὑπὸ χεῖρας" ἀνάρσιοι, ἢ μέγ᾽ ἀλιτροὶ 

οἵδ᾽, οὔτ᾽ οἰκτείρουσιν ἀτυζομένην ὁρόωντες 

οὔτε νόον γνάμπτουσι σιδήρεον, ἀλλὰ καὶ αὐτὴν 

504 | 


HALIEUTICA, V. 543-574 


let the long line go with it and urge on the boat 
with their oars, following the path of the fleeing 
Dolphin. But when it is weary and in evil case 
with grievous pains and struggles on the barbs of 
iron, then being faint it comes to the surface, its 
strong limbs weary, raised by the buoyant waves, 
gasping its last. And the mother never leaves it 
but always follows with it in its distress and when it 
rises from the depths, like one who grieves and 
mourns terribly. You would say you were beholding 
the mourning of a mother when her city is sacked 
by the foe and her children are haled away perforce 
as the spoil of the spear. Even so she in sore grief 
circles about her wounded. child as: if she herself 
were suffering and wounded by the iron. Her other 
child she falls upon to send it from her path and 
urgently drives it away: “‘ Flee, my child! for men 
are foes, no longer friends to us, but they prepare 
against us iron and capture: now even against the 
Dolphins they array war, sinning against the truce 
of the immortal gods and against the concord which 
formerly we made with one another.” So, voiceless 
though she be, she speaks to her children. And one 
she turns away to flee afar ; but the other, suffering 
with it in its cruel suffering, she attends close to the 
very boat and forsakes it not ; nor could one drive 
away the mother if he tried either by striking her 
or by any other form of terror, but along with the 
child, when it is haled up the unhappy mother is 
haled up also, till she comes into the hands of the 
foe. Unkind and surely greatly sinful, these neither 
have pity upon her when they see her distress nor 
bend their heart of iron, but, smiting her also with 


505 


χαλκείαις ἀκίδεσσι καταΐγδην ἐλάσαντες 51 
παῖδά τε Kal γενέτειραν ὁμῇ συναπέφθισαν ἄτῃ" 
ἔφθισαν οὐκ ἀέκουσαν, ἐπεὶ περὶ παιδὶ θανόντι 
μήτηρ καὶ φρονέουσα καὶ ἱεμένη δεδάϊκται. 

ε > € 7 ν΄) , ‘ , , 
ws δ᾽ ὁπότ᾽ ὀρταλίχοισι 'χελιδόσι νηπιάχοισι 

’, e οὗ > / \ as ΝΜ ,ὔ 
νέρθεν ὑπὲξ ὀρόφοιο τυχὼν ὄφις ἄγχι πελάσσῃ, ὅϑ8 
καὶ τοὺς μὲν κατέπεφνε καὶ ἔσπασεν ἔνδον ὀδόντων, 
μήτηρ. δὲ πρῶτον μὲν ἀτυζομένη δεδόνηται 

,ὔ a / / > > oe a“ 
λοίγια τετριγυῖα φόνου γόον: ἀλλ᾽ ὅτε παῖδας 
ἀθρήσῃ φθιμένους, ἣ δ᾽ οὐκέτι φύξιν ὀλέθρου 
δίζεται, ἀλλ᾽’ αὐτῆσιν ὑπαὶ γενύεσσι δράκοντος 58 
εἱλεῦται, μέσφ᾽ ὄρνιν ἕλῃ παιδοκτόνος ἄτη: 

Δ + \ a ,’ / , | 
ὡς dpa καὶ deAdin νέῳ συναπέφθιτο μήτηρ, | 
χεῖρας ἐς ἰχθυβόλων αὐτάγρετος ἀντήσασα. 

» 5.5 , Fin f)? os ΄ ΄ ] 

ἔθνεα δ᾽ ὀστρακόρινα, τά θ᾽ ἑρπύζουσι θαλάσσῃ, — 
πάντα φάτις μήνης μὲν ἀεξομένης κατὰ κύκλον 59 
σαρκὶ περιπλήθειν καὶ πίονα ναιέμεν οἶκον" 
φθινούσης δ᾽ ἐξαῦτις ἀφαυροτέροις μελέεσσι | 
ῥικνοῦσθαι" τοίη τις evi σφισιν ἐστὶν ἀνάγκη. | 
τῶν de τὰ μὲν δύνοντες ὑπόβρυχα χερσὶ λέγονται 
ἀνέρες ἐκ ψαμάθοιο, τὰ δ᾽ ἐκ σπιλάδων ἐρύουσι 59) 
νωλεμὲς ἐμπεφυῶτα, τὰ δ᾽ ἠόσιν ἔπτυσαν αὐταῖς — 
κύματα καὶ βόθροισι λαχαινομένης ψαμάθοιο. | 

’ Ss Δ 

Πορφύραι αὖ πέρι δή τι μετ᾽ ὀστρείοισιν ἔασι | 
/ , 
λίχναι: τοίη δέ odw ἐτήτυμος ἵσταται ἄγρη. 

/ >? \ tA “a 

κυρτίδες ἠβαιαὶ ταλάροις γεγάασιν ὁμοῖαι, 60) 


* Hom. IJ. ii. 308 ff. | 


OPPIAN 
7 
. 
| 


δ ἢ. 1. 318 π. 

° Ael. ix. 6 τῶν ὀστρακονώτων τε καὶ ὀστρακοδέρμων καὶ τοῦτο 
ἴδιον" κενώτερά πὼς ταῦτα καὶ κουφότερα ὑποληγούσης τῆς σελήνης 
φιλεῖ γίνεσθαι. 

915 τς 

“ Ael. vii. 34 ἡ πορφύρα λίχνον ἐστὶν ἰσχυρῶς :- Athen. 89 a 
δ06 


HALIEUTICA, V. 575-600 


stroke of brazen harpoons, they slay child and mother 
together in a common doom: slay her not unwilling 
to be slain, since over her dead child the mother 
wittingly and willingly meets her death. As when 
a snake ὁ chances upon the young brood of a swallow 
under the eaves and approaches them: and them 
he slays and seizes within his teeth, and the mother 
first circles about distraught, pitifully crying her 
lament for their slaying; but when she sees her 
children perished, no more she seeks escape from 
destruction but flutters under the very jaws of the 
serpent, until the doom that slew the children over- 
takes the mother bird: even so also with the young 
Dolphin perishes the mother, coming a willing prey 
into the hands of the fishermen. 

As for the Testacean ὃ tribes which crawl in the 
sea, report tells that all these in due cycle are full 
of flesh when the moon? is waxing and inhabit a 
rich dwelling, but when she wanes, again. they 
become more meagre and wrinkled of limb: such 
compelling force resides in them. Of these men 
gather some from the sand with their hands, diving 
under the sea; others they pull from the rocks to 
which they stubbornly cling ; yet others the waves 
cast up on the very shores or in trenches digged in 
the sand. ; 

The Purple-shells? again among Shell-fish are 
eminently gluttonous,’ and by gluttony is the true 
manner of their capture. Small weels/ like baskets 


᾿Απολλόδωρος... ἐν τοῖς περὶ Σώφρονος προθεὶς τὰ “λιχνότερα 
ray πορφυρᾶν ᾿" φησὶν ὅτι παροιμία ἐστὶν καὶ λέγει, ὡς μέν τινες, 
ἀπὸ τοῦ βάμματος" οὗ γὰρ ἂν προσψαύσῃ ἕλκει ἐφ᾽ ἑαυτὸ καὶ τοῖς 
προσπαρατεθειμένοις ἐμποιεῖ χρώματος αὐγήν᾽ ἄλλοι δ᾽ ἀπὸ τοῦ 
ζῴου. se 
7 Oppian’s account is paraphrased Ael. vii. 34. 

507 


OPPIAN 


a 3 La a 
πυκνῇσι σχοίΐνοισι τετυγμέναι" ἐν δ᾽ dpa τῇσι 
ig a / 
στρόμβους συγκέλσαντες ὁμοῦ χήμῃσι τίθενται: 
¢ lon vA + 
αἱ δ᾽ ὅταν ἐμπελάσωσι βορῆς μεθύουσαι ἔρωτι, 
~ ς \ θ λ 4 ὃ λ \ LA ὦ ς ὃ \ / 
γλῶσσαν ὑπὲκ θαλάμης δολιχὴν βάλον" ἡ δὲ τέτυκται 
λεπτή τ᾽ ὀξείη τε, διὰ σχοίνων δ᾽ ἐτάνυσσαν 605 
φορβῆς ἱέμεναι, χαλεπῆς δ᾽ ἤντησαν ἐδωδῆς" 
γλῶσσα γὰρ ἐν σχοίνοισιν ἐρειδομένη πυκινῇσιν 
οἰδάνεται, στείνει δὲ λύγων βρόχος, οὐδ᾽ ἔτ᾽ ὀπίσσω 
ἀνδύνει μεμαυῖα, μένει δ᾽ ὀδύνῃσι ταθεῖσα, 
εἰσόκεν αὖ ἐρύσωσι περὶ γλώσσῃ μεμαυίας, 610 
πορφυρέοις κάλλιστον ὑφάσμασιν ἄνθος ἄγοντες. 
Σπογγοτόμων δ᾽ οὔ φημι κακώτερον ἄλλον ἄεθλον 
ἔμμεναι, οὐδ᾽ ἄνδρεσσιν ὀϊζυρώτερον ἔργον. 
οἱ δ᾽ ἤτοι πρῶτον μέν, ὅτ᾽ ἐς πόνον ὁπλίζωνται, 
βρώμῃ τ᾽ ἠδὲ ποτοῖσιν ἀφαυροτέροισι μέλονται, 615 
ὕπνῳ τ᾽ οὐχ ἁλιεῦσιν ἐοικότι μαλθάσσονται. 
ς ς 3 ͵΄5» 5 x + 2 7 3 3 3 ~ 
ὡς δ᾽ ὅτ᾽ ἀνὴρ εὔγηρυν ἐφοπλίζητ᾽ ἐς ἀγῶνα, 
μολπῆς εὐφόρμιγγος ἔχων Φοιβήϊον εὖχος, 
“ ὃ ’ὔ « ‘Nn ὃ 4 ,ὔ ὃ XN λ , 
πᾶσα δέ οἱ μέλεται κομιδή, πάντῃ δὲ φυλάσσει, 
Ψ > y+ / “ 
πιαίνων ἐς ἄεθλα λιγυφθόγγου μέλος αὐδῆς, 620 
ὡς οἵ γ᾽ ἐνδυκέως κομιδὴν εὔφρουρον ἔχουσι, 
ὄφρα ode πνοιή τε μένῃ ποτὶ βυσσὸν ἰοῦσιν 
3 Ls / 3 3 ΠΩ / 
ἀσκηθής, προτέροιο δ᾽ ἀναψύξωσι πόνοιο. 


« Camb. Ν. H. iii. p. 111 “‘ Another dreaded enemy [of 
the Oyster] is the ‘ whelk,’ a term which includes Purpura 
lapillus, Murex erinaceus, Buccinum undatum, and probably 
also Nassa reticulata, All these species perforate the shell __ 
with the end of their radula, and then suck out the contents | 
through the neatly-drilled hole”; dbid. p. 60 ““ Besides the | 
dangers to which they are exposed from other enemies, | 
many of the weaker forms of Mollusca fall a prey to their 
own brethren. . . . Purpura lapillus prefers Mytilus edulis 
to any other food, piercing the shell in about two days’ 
time by its powerful radula, which it appears to employ 
508 


HALIEUTICA, V. 601-623 


are made with close-set rushes, and the fishers gather 
_and place in them Spiral-shells and Clams together. 
Now when the Purple-fishes draw near, drunk with 
the lust of food, they put forth from within their 
chamber their long tongue,* which is thin and sharp, 
and stretch it through the rushes, in quest of food 
and fatal feast they find. For the tongue, fixed in 
the close-set rushes, swells and is straitened by the 
mesh of withes and cannot any more draw back if it 
try but remains stretched in pain, until the fishers 
land the shell-fish while intent upon their tongue, 
bringing a colour most beautiful for purple cloths. 
Than the task of the Sponge-cutters® I declare 
that there is none worse nor any work more woeful 
for men. These, when they prepare themselves for 
their labour, use more meagre food and drink and 
indulge themselves with sleep ὁ unfitting fishermen. 
As when a. man prepares himself for the tuneful 
contest—one who hath Phoebus’ boast of lyric song— 
and he studies all care and every way takes heed, 
nursing for the games the melody of his clear voice : 
so do they zealously take all watchful care that their 
breath may abide unscathed when they go down 
into the depths and that they may recover from 


somewhat in gimlet fashion.” Cf A. 547 Ὁ 4 νέμονται δὲ 
ἐξείροντα τὴν καλουμένην γλῶτταν ὑπὸ τὸ κάλυμμα (operculum), 
τὸ δὲ μέγεθος τῆς γλώττης ἔχει ἣ πορφύρα μεῖζον δακτύλου, ᾧ 
νέμεται καὶ διατρυπᾷ τὰ κογχύλια καὶ τὸ αὑτῆς ὄστρακον : P.A. 
661 4.21 ταῖς γὰρ πορφύραις τοσαύτην ἔχει δύναμιν τοῦτο τὸ 
μόριον ὥστε καὶ τῶν κογχυλίων διατρυπῶσι τὸ ὄστρακον, οἷον τῶν 
στρόμβων οἷς δελεάζουσιν airds; Athen. 89 c; Plin. ix. 128 
Lingua purpurae longitudine digitali, qua pascitur perfor- 
ando reliqua conchylia. 

> For the Sponge-cutter (σπογγεύς, σπογγοθήρας, σπογγο- 
τόμος, etc.) in general cf. H. ii. 435 ff. ; Plin. ix. 151 ff. 

© Cf. A, iii. 45. 

509 


OPPIAN 


; , 
ἀλλ᾽ ὅτ᾽ ἀεθλεύωσι μέγαν πόνον ἐξανύοντες, 

/ ,ὔ 
εὐχόμενοι μακάρεσσιν ἁλὸς μεδέουσι βαθείης 
ἀρῶνται κήτειον ἀλεξῆσαί odio πῆμα, 

,ὔ 
μήτε τιν᾽ ἀντιάσαι λώβην ἁλός" ἣν δ᾽ ἐσίδωνται 
ὔ ¢€ / 
κάλλιχθυν, τότε δή σφι νόον μέγα θάρσος ἱκάνει" 
οὐ γάρ πω κείνῃσι νομαῖς ἔνι κῆτος ἀαπτον, 

> , δέ 3 A Gard av aye 
οὐ δάκος, οὐδέ τι πῆμα θαλάσσιον ἄλλο φαάνθη, 
ἀλλ᾽ αἰεὶ καθαροῖσιν ἀπημάντοις τε πόροισι 
τέρπονται" τῷ καί μιν ἐφήμισαν ἱερὸν ἰχθύν. 
τῷ δ᾽ ἐπιγηθήσαντες ἐπισπεύδουσι πόνοισι. 

an ee 
πείσματι μηκεδανῷ μεσάτης ὑπὲρ ἰξύος ἀνὴρ 
ἔζωσται, παλάμῃσι δ᾽ ἐν ἀμφοτέρῃσιν ἀείρει 
τῇ μὲν ἐριβριθῆ μολίβου χύσιν ἀμφιμεμαρπώς, 
εξιτερῇ δ᾽ ἅρπην εὐήκεα χειρὶ τιταίνει" 

Be 3 3 , ε a! / A y+ 
φρουρεῖ δ᾽ ἐν yevvecow ὑπὸ στόμα λευκὸν ἀλειῴφαρ: 
στὰς δ᾽ dp’ ὑπὲρ πρώρης ἐσκέψατο πόντιον οἶδμα 
¢ ,ὕ fy w \ > / Ὁ 
ὁρμαίνων βριθύν τε πόνον καὶ ἀθέσφατον ὕδωρ. 
οἱ δέ μιν ὀτρύνουσιν ἐπισπέρχουσί τε μύθοις 
θαρσαλέοις ἐπὶ μόχθον, ἅτ᾽ ἐν νύσση βεβαῶτα 
ΕΣ ρ ,ὕ Ἢ x τ ἊΣ > > 7B B ~ 
ἄνδρα ποδωκείης δεδαημένον: ἀλλ᾽ ὅτε θυμῷ 

“ΔΛ ,ὔ A > / \ A / ᾧ 
θαρσήσῃ, δίναις μὲν ἐνήλατο, τὸν δὲ καθέλκει 
ἐν λ ~ Au 46 ἐν , 
ἱέμενον πολιοῦ μολίβου βεβριθότος ὁρμή. 

ΕΣ \ Ὁ Ἐν, 19) A % 3 la 3 3 Ds 
αὐτὰρ ὅ y ἐς βυσσὸν προμολὼν ἐξέπτυσ᾽ aAoudry: 
ἡ δὲ μέγα στίλβει τε καὶ ὕδατι μίσγεται αὐγή, 
my 2 A 9 
ὄρφνης ἠῦτε πυρσὸς ἀνὰ κνέφας ὄμμα φαείνων: 

», > 
πέτραις δ᾽ ἐμπελάσας σπόγγους ἴδεν: of δὲ φύονται 


y 


* Introduction, p. lvii. 

> 4,8... olive-oil: Plut. Mor. 9508 τῶν δ᾽ ἄλλων ὑγρῶν 
διαφανὲς μάλιστα τοὔλαιόν ἐστι, πλείστῳ χρώμενον ἀέρι" τούτου 
δὲ τεκμήριον ἡ κουφότης, δι᾿ ἣν ἐπιπολάζει πᾶσιν ὑπὸ τοῦ ἀέρος 
ἄνω φερόμενον. ποιεῖ δὲ καὶ τὴν γαλήνην ἐν τῇ θαλάττῃ τοῖς 
κύμασιν ἐπιρραινόμενον, οὐ διὰ τὴν λειότητα τῶν ἀνέμων ἀπολι- 


510 


640: 


645¢ 


HALIEUTICA, V. 624-649 


past toil. But when they adventure to accomplish 
their mighty task, they make their vows to the 
blessed gods who rule the deep sea and pray that 
they ward from them all hurt from the monsters of 
the deep and that’no harm may meet them in the 
sea. And if they see a Beauty-fish,* then great 
courage comes into their hearts; for where these 
range there never yet hath any dread Sea-monster 
appeared nor noxious beast nor hurtful thing of the 
sea but always they delight in clean and harmless 
paths : wherefore also men have named it the Holy 
Fish. Rejoicing in it they hasten to their labours. 
A man is girt with a long rope above his waist and, 
using both hands, in one he grasps a heavy mass of 
lead and in his right hand he holds a sharp bill, 
while in the jaws of his mouth he keeps white oil.? 
Standing upon the prow he scans the waves of the 
sea, pondering his heavy task and the infinite water. 
His comrades incite and stir him to his work with 
encouraging words, even as a man skilled in foot- 
racing when he stands upon his mark. But when 
he takes heart of courage, he leaps into the eddying 
waves and as he springs the force of the heavy grey 
lead drags him down. Now when he arrives at the 
bottom, he spits out the oil, and it shines brightly 
and the gleam mingles with the water, even as a 
beacon showing its eye in the darkness of the night. 
Approaching the rocks ὁ he sees the Sponges which 


σθανόντων, ὡς ᾿Αριστοτέλης ἔλεγεν" ἀλλὰ παντὶ μὲν ὑγρῷ τὸ κῦμα 
διαχεῖται πληττόμενον, ἰδίως δὲ τοὔλαιον αὐγὴν καὶ καταφάνειαν ἐν 
βυθῷ παρέχει, διαστελλομένων τῷ ἀέρι τῶν ὑγρῶν᾽ οὐ γὰρ μόνου 
ἐπιπολῆς τοῖς διανυκτερεύουσιν ἀλλὰ καὶ κάτω τοῖς σπογγοθήραις 
διαφυσώμενον ἐκ τοῦ στόματος ἐν τῇ θαλάττῃ φέγγος ἐνδίδωσιν. 

¢ A, 548 a 23 (γίνονται) οἱ σπόγγοι ἐν ταῖς σήραγξι τῶν πετρῶν ; 


Plin. ix. 
8511 


OPPIAN 


ἐν νεάτοις πλαταμῶσιν, ἀρηρότες ἐν σπιλάδεσσι" 660 
καί σφισι καὶ πνοιὴν φάτις ἔμμεναι, οἷα καὶ ἄλλοις, 
ὅσσα πολυρραθάγοισιν ἐνὶ σπιλάδεσσι φύονται. 

αἶψα δ᾽ ἐπαΐξας δρεπάνῃ τάμε χειρὶ παχεΐῃ 

ὥστε τις ἀμητὴρ σπόγγων δέμας, οὐδέ τι μέλλει | 
δηθύνων, σχοῖνον δὲ θοῶς κίνησεν, ἑταίροις 655 
σημαίνων κραιπνῶς μιν aveAKeuev? αἷμα yap ἐχθρὸν 
αὐτίκ᾽ ἀπὸ σπόγγων ῥαθαμίζεται, ἀμφὶ δ᾽ dp’ ἀνδρὶ 
εἱλεῖται, πνοιῇ δὲ δυσαέϊ πολλάκι φῶτα 

ἔσβεσε μυκτήρεσσιν ἐνισχόμενος βαρὺς ἰχώρ. | 
τοὔνεκα λαιψηρῶς ἀναδύεται ὥστε νόῆμ. 660 
ἑλκόμενος" TOV μέν τις ἰδὼν προφυγόντα θαλάσσης. 
ἄμφω γηθήσειε καὶ οἰκτείρων ἀκάχουτο" 

ὧδε γὰρ ἠπεδανοῖσι παριεμένου μελέεσσι 

δείματι καὶ καμάτῳ θυμαλγέϊ γυῖα λέλυνται. 
πολλάκι δ᾽ ἐχθίστης τε τυχὼν καὶ ἀπηνέος ἄγρης EGE 
ἅλμενος ἐς πόντοιο βαθὺν πόρον οὐκέτ᾽ ἀνέσχε, | 
δύσμορος, ἀντιάσας δυσδερκέϊ θηρὶ πελώρῳ" 

καί ῥ᾽ ὁ μὲν οἷς ἑτάροισιν ἐπισείων θαμὰ δεσμὸν 
κέκλεται αὖ ἐρύειν, τὸ δέ οἱ δέμας ἡμιδάϊκτον 


« Oppian is thinking of the sensibility of the Sponge: 
A. 487 Ὁ 9 δοκεῖ δὲ καὶ ὁ σπόγγος ἔχειν τινὰ αἴσθησιν" σημεῖον δὲ 
ὅτι χαλεπώτερον ἀποσπᾶται, ἂν μὴ γένηται λαθραίως ἡ κίνησις, ds 
φασιν : cf. Plut. Mor. 980 c; Plin. ix. 148 intellectum inesse 
his. apparet quia, ubi avulsorem sensere, contractae multo 
difficilius abstrahuntur. 

> The best commentary on all this passage is Plin. ix. 152 f. 
Cum caniculis (Dog-fishes) atrox dimicatio. Inguinaetcaleces | 
omnemque candorem corporum [Ael. xv. 11 says that for | 
this reason divers blacken the soles of their feet and the 
palms of their hands] appetunt. Salus una in adversas eundi 
ultroque terrendi. Pavet enim hominem aeque ac terret, et 
sors aequa in gurgite. Ut ad summa aquae ventum est, ibi 
periculum anceps adempta ratione contra eundi dum conetur 
emergere, et salus omnis in sociis. Funem illi religatum ab 


512 | 


HALIEUTIGA, V. 650-669 


grow on the ledges of the bottom, fixed fast to the 
rocks ; and report tells that they have breath in 
them, even as other things that grow upon the 
sounding rocks. Straightway rushing upon them 
with the bill in his stout hand, like a mower, he cuts 
the body of the Sponges, and he loiters not, but 
quickly shakes the rope,’ signalling to his comrades 
to pull him up swiftly. For hateful blood¢ is 
sprinkled straightway from the Sponges and rolls 
about the man, and many a times the grievous fluid, 
clinging to his nostrils, chokes the man with its 
noisome breath. Therefore swift as thought he is 
pulled to the surface; and beholding him escaped 
from the sea one would rejoice at once and grieve 
and pity : so much are his weak members relaxed 
and his limbs unstrung with fear and distressful 
labour. Often when the sponge-cutter has leapt 
into the deep waters of the sea and won his loathly 
and unkindly spoil, he comes up no more, unhappy 
man, having encountered some huge and hideous 
beast.? Shaking repeatedly the rope he bids his 
comrades pull him up. And the mighty Sea-monster 
umeris eius trahunt. Hunc dimicans, ut sit periculi signum, 
laeva quatit, dextera apprehenso stilo in pugna est. Modicus 
alias tractatus: ut prope carinam ventum est, nisi praeceleri 
vi repente rapiunt, absumi spectant. Ac saepe iam subducti 
e manibus auferuntur, si non trahentium opem conglobato 
corpore in‘pilae modum ipsi adiuvere. Protendunt quidem 
tridentes alii, sed monstro sollertia est navigium subeundi 
atque ita e tuto proeliandi. Omnis ergo cura ad speculandum 
hoc malum insumitur. 

¢ Plut. Mor. 980 Β οὐ yap ἄψυχον οὐδ᾽ ἀναίσθητον οὐδ᾽ ἄναιμον 
ὁ σπόγγος ἐστίν ; Ael. viii. 16; Phil. 93; Plin. ix. 149; χχχί. 
124 aliqui narrant et auditu regi eas contrahique ad sonum 
. . . nec avelli petris posse, ideo abscindi ac saniem emittere. 

@ Such as the Ox-ray described H. ii. 141 ff. and obviously 


meant in Plin. ix. 151. 
ONG, 513 


τ 


OPPIAN 


κητείη τε Bin καὶ ὁμόστολοι ἔσπασαν «ἄνδρες, 670 
οἰκτρὸν ἰδεῖν, ἔτι νηὸς ἐφιέμενον καὶ ἑταίρων" 
of δὲ θοῶς κεῖνόν τε πόρον καὶ λυγρὸν ἄεθλον 
ἀχνύμενοι λείπουσι καὶ ἐς χέρσον κατάγονται 
λείψανα δυστήνοιο περικλὰίοντες ἑταίρου. 

Teas’ ἐδάην, σκηπτοῦχε. διοτρεφές, epya θαλάσσης. 8m 
σοὶ δ᾽ αἰεὶ νῆες μὲν ἀπήμονες ἰθύνοιντο, 
πεμπόμεναι λιαροῖσι καὶ ἰθυπόροισιν ἀήταις, 
αἰεὶ δ᾽ ἰχθυόεσσα περιπλήθοιτο θάλασσα, 
γαίης δ᾽ ἀστυφέλικτα Ποσειδάων ἐρύουτο 
᾿Ασφάλιος ῥιζοῦχα θεμείλια νέρθε φυλάσσων. 680 


* For Τοσειδῶν ᾿Ασφάλειος (᾿Ασφάλιος) EP Plut. Thes. xxxvi. 
καὶ γὰρ Ποσειδῶνα ταῖς ὀγδόαις τιμῶσι. ἡ γὰρ ὀγδοὰς κύβος, 
ἀπ’ ἀρτίου πρῶτος οὖσα καὶ τοῦ πρώτου τετραγώνου διπλασία, 
τὸ μόνιμον καὶ δυσκίνητον οἰκεῖον ἔχει τῆς τοῦ θεοῦ δυνάμεως 
ὃν ᾿Ασφάλειον καὶ Γαιήοχον προσονομάζομεν : Pausan. vii. 21. 7. 
Πελάγιος καὶ ᾿Ασφάλιός τε καὶ Ἵππιος :; Heliodor. vi. 7 Ἑρμῆς 


514 


HALIEUTICA, V. 670-680 


and the companions of the fisher pull at his body 
rent in twain, a pitiful sight to see, still yearning for 
ship and shipmates. And they in sorrow speedily 
leave those waters and their mournful labour and 
return to land, weeping over the remains of their 
unhappy comrade. 

So much I know, O Wielder of the Sceptre, 
nursling of the gods, of the works of the sea. But 
for thee may thy ships be steered free from harm, 
sped by gentle winds and fair ; and always for thee 
may the sea teem with fish; and may Poseidon, 
Lord of Safety, guard and keep unshaken the nether 
foundations which hold the roots of Earth. 


μὲν κερδῷος Ποσειδῶν δὲ ᾿Ασφάλειος; Aristoph. Ach. 682 ois 
Ποσειδῶν ᾿Ασφάλειός ἐστιν ἡ βακτηρία; Suid. 5, Ταίναρον". .. 
ἔνθα καὶ Ποσειδῶνος ἱερὸν ᾿Ασφαλείου and 5. ᾿Ασφάλιος" Ποσειδῶν 
᾿Ασφάλιος ῥιζοῦχα θεμείλια νέρθε φυλάσσων" τελευταῖος οὗτος τοῦ 
€ τῶν ᾿Αλιευτικῶν ᾿Οππιανοῦ. 


515 


CLASSIFIED ZOOLOGICAL 
CATALOGUE 


1. Mammats 


Atyaypos, Wild Goat, Aegoceros pictus, ete, 
Αἴλουρος, Wild Cat, Felis catus, and Domestic Cat, Κ΄. domestica. 
Αἴξ, Goat, Capra hircus. 
--- ᾿Αλώπηξ, Fox, Canis vulpes. 
——"Apxros, Brown Bear, Ursus arctos. 
ΓΑρπαξ, Harrier, species of Wolf (=Képkos), C. iii. 804, 
᾿Ασπάλαξ, Mole-rat (Blind Rat), Spalax typhius. 
᾿Αχαινέη (ἔλαφος), Brocket, C. 11. 426 n, 
~ Βέσων, European Bison (Wisent), Bos bonasus (Bison Ewropaeus). 
BovBados, Cow Antelope, Antilope (Alcelaphus) bubalis. 
— Bods (Ταῦρος), Ox, Bull, Bos taurus. 
Δελφίς, Dolphin, Delphinus delpnis. 
Δορκαλίς (Adpxos), Gazelle, Gazella, doreas. 
*BAados, Red Deer, Cervus elaphus. 
᾿Ἐλέφας, Elephant, Elephas indicus and Fi, africanus. 
Evpuxépws, Fallow Deer, Cervus dama. : 
*"Exivos χερσαῖος, (1) the Common Hedgehog, Erinaceus ewropaeus ; (2) in 
C. ii. 598 the Spiny Mouse, Mus aconvys. 
~ Θώς; either the Jackal, Canis aureus, or the Civet, Viverra civetta. 
Ἰκτῖνος, Kite, species of Wolf, C. iii. 331. 
"Iopxos, Roe Deer, Cervus capreolus. 
"Immaypos, the Nylghau, Boselaphus tragocamelus. 
Ὃς Ἵππος, Horse, Equus caballus. 
ἸΙχνεύμων, Ichneumon, Herpestes ichneumon. 
Καμηλοπάρδαλις, Giraffe, Camelopardalis girafa. 
—~ Κάμηλος, Camel, Camelus bactrianus and C. dromedarius. 
— Κάπρος, Wild Boar, Sus scrofa. 
Kaoropis, Beaver, Castor fiber, H. i. 398 n. 
Kipxos, Hawk, species of Wolt (="Apmaé), C. iii. 304. 
Κριός, Grampus, Killer Whale, Orca gladiator. 
— Κύων, Dog, Canis familiaris. 
™ λαγώς, Hare, Lepus timidus. 
Λέων, Lion, Felis leo. 
_  Avyé, (1) Lynx, Felis lyna, (2) the Caracal, Ε΄. caracal. 
᾿ς Λύκος, Wolf, Canis lupus. 
Μυοξός; Dormouse, Myowus glis, M. nitela, M. dryas. 


SAP 


OPPIAN 


Mis, Mouse, Mus musculus (Common Mouse). 
τς ὍΟις, Sheep, Ovis aries. 
"Ovaypos, Wild Ass, Equus onager. 
~~ Ὄνος, Ass, Eyuus asinus. 
“Opvé, Sable Antelope, Oryx leucorys. 
~— Πάνθηρ, Panther, perhaps the Ounce, C. ii. 572 n. ae 
Πάρδαλις (Πόρδαλις), Leopard (Panther), two species, C. iii. 63 n. 
Πέθηκος, Ape, three species, (1) Ape, Macacus imuus; (2) Monkey, Cerco- 
pithecus ; (3) Baboon, Cynocephalus hamadryas, C. ii. 605 τι. 
Ττώξ -- Λαγώς. 
Ῥινοκέρως, Rhinoceros, Rhinoceros indicus. 
Σκιοῦρος, Squirrel, Sciwrus vulgaris. 
ovBos, species of Sheep? C. ii. 382 n. 
20s = Κάπρος. 
Τοξευτήρ, the Archer, species of Wolf, C. iii. 296, 
— Τίγρις, Tiger, Felis tigris. 
~"Youva, Striped Hyena, Hyavna striata. 
“Ὑστριξ, Porcupine, Hystrix cristata. 
Φάλαινα, Η. i. 404 
Bicados, H. i. 368 \ Whales, Cetacea, 
Φώκη, Seal, Phoca vitulina (Common Seal), Ph. monachus (Monk Seal). 
Χρύσεος, Golden, species of Wolf, C. iii. 517. 


2. Brrps 


~’Aerés, Hagle, generic for species of Aquila and Falco, 
“> ᾿Δηδών, Nightingale, Daulias luscinia (Common N.) and Motacilla luscinia. 
τ ᾿Αλεκτρυών, Domestic Cock, Gallus gallinaceus. 

‘Advateros, Sea-eagle, perhaps Pandion haliaétus, the Osprey, H. i. 425 n. 

᾿Αλκυών, Kingfisher, Alcedo ispida. 

᾿Ατταγήν, Francolin, Tetrao francolinus. 

τς Tépavos, Common Crane, Grus cinerea, 

Tuy, Vulture, (1) Gypaetus barbatus, the Limmergeier ; (2) Vultur fulvus, 
Griffon Vulture ; (3) V. cinereus, Black Vulture : (4) Neophron pereno- 
pterus, 

Kipxos, generic for smaller Hawks and Falcons. 

τ Κορώνη, Crow, Corvus corone L. and C. cornia, the Hooded Crow. 
— Κύκνος, Swan, (1) Whooper, Cygnus musicus ; (2) Mute, C. olor. 

Adpos, Sea-gull, including Gulls (Larus) and Terns (Sterna), 

Πελαργός, Stork, Ciconia alba and C. nigra, 

Πελειάς (Πέλεια), Τρήρων, Stock-dove, Columba oenas, and perhaps the 
Ring-dove, C. palwmbus. 

-- Tee, Partridge, Perdia graeca (P, sacatilis) and. Common Partridge, 
. cinered. 
Στρουθοκάμηλος, Ostrich, Struthio camelus, L. 
τ Tadés, Peacock, Pavo cristatus, 

Φήνη, Lammergeier, Gypaetus barbatus. 

Χελιδών, Swallow, (1) the Chimney Swallow, Hirwndo rustica ; (2) House 
Martin, H. urbica. 

— Ψυττακός, Parrot, Psittacus cubicularis (?). 

‘Oris, Bustard, Otis tarda, L. 


518 


ZOOLOGICAL CATALOGUE 


3. REPriLes 


᾿Ασπίς, Asp or Egyptian Cobra, Naja haje. 

Δράκων, generic for Serpents, Ophidia. 

"Exes -εὌφις, C. i. 381, H. i. 569. 

Κροκόδειλος, Crocodile, Crocodilus vulgaris Cuv. 

Ὄφις, generic for Serpents. 

Χελώνη θαλασσία, Turtle, Chelonia cephalo. 

Χελώνη xepoaia, Tortoise, Testudo graeca and T. marginata. 


4, FisHEs 


᾿Αβραμίς, species of Grey Mullet (Mugit), found in the Nile. 

*Aypropaypos. Not identified, H. i. 140. 

“Aduwv. Not identified, H. iii. 871 n. 

ἔλδωνις --᾽ Ἑξώκοιτος, ἃ Blenny, perhaps Blennius Montagut. 

᾿Αετός, Eagle-ray, perhaps Myliobutis aquila. 

Airvatos. Not identified, H. i. 512. 

’AxavOias, Spiny Dog-fish, Acanthias vulgaris. ; 

᾿Αλώπηξ (᾿Αλωπεκίας), Thresher or Fox-shark, Alopecias vulpes. 

᾿Αλφηστικός = Κίναιδος, a Wrasse, Introd. p. 1. 

"Auta, Bonito, Pelamys sarda. 

᾿Ανθίας. Introd. p. iii. 

᾿Αφρῖτις =Advn. 

᾿Αφύη, generic for various small fish and fish-fry, H. i. 767 n. 

Βασιλίσκοςς. Not identified, H. i. 129 n. 

Baris, Ray, including the Common Skate, Raia batis, ete. 

Bdrpaxos, Fishing-frog or Angler, Lophius piscatorius. 

Βλέννος, Blenny, Blennius; for various species of. Ἡ... 109-n, 

Βούγλωσσος, Sole, Solea vulgaris. 

Bows, Ox-ray, perhaps Cephaloptera giorna. 

Βώξ, Bogue, Bow boops (B. vulgaris) and B. salpa. 

Ταλεός, generic for smaller Sharks (Squalus), H. i. 379 n. 

TAadxos, Introd. p. lxi. 

Τόγγρος, Conger, Conger vulgaris. 

Δράκων, the Weever, Trachinus draco. 

Εγγραυλις, Anchovy, Engraulis encrasicholus. 

Ἔγχελυς, Hel, Anguilla vulgaris. 

"BEwKoutos="Adwris, η.Ὁ. 

᾿Ερυθῖνος, ἃ Sea-perch, Serranus anthias or 5. cabrilla. 

"Exevnis, in H. i, 212 Lamprey, Petromyzon marinus, not Hchenets remora. 

Ζύγαινα, Hammer-head or Balance Shark, Zygaena malleus. ‘ 

᾿ἩἩΗγητήρ, Whale-guide or Pilot-fish, Naucrates ductor. 

Ἡμεροκοίτης = Νυκτερίς, Day-sleeper or ‘‘ Βαῦ,᾽᾿ Uranoscopus scaber. 

Ἥπατος. Not identified, perhaps one of the Cod family (Gadidae), H. i. 
146 n. 

Θρίσσα, Shad, Alosa vulgaris. 

Θύννος, Tunny, Thynnus thynnus. 

Ἱέραξ, Sea-hawk, Exocoetus volitans Cuv. 

*TovAis (Ἴουλος, H. iii. 186), Rainbow-wrasse, Coris ilis. 

"Inmos, Sea-horse, Hippocampus brevirostris Cuv. 

Ἵππουρος, Hippurus, Coryphaena hippurus. 


OPPIAN 


KaAAapias, perhaps one of the Gadidae (Cod family), Introd. p. Ixv. 

Κάλλιχθυς, Introd. p. lvii. 

Κάνθαρος, Black Sea-bream, Cantharus griseus, 

Κεντρίνη (Κεντροφόρος), a Shark,-Squalus centrina L. 

Kepxovpos. Not identified, H. i. 141. 

Κεστρεύς ἡ generic for Grey Mullet (Mugil) ; specifically, perhaps Κεστρεύς 

Κέφαλος J =M. capito, Képados=M. cephalus, H. ii. 642 τι. 

Ki@apos, a Flat-fish (Plewronectid) ; possibly Rhombus luteus Risso. 

Κίναιδος --᾽᾿ Αλφηστικός, gv. 

Κιρρίς, a Wrasse, perhaps Labrus miatus, Introd. p. liti. 

Κίχλη, Thrush-wrasse, Coricus rostratus. 

Κόκκυξ, Cuckoo-fish, a Gurnard, probably the Piper, T'rigla lyra. 

Κολίας, Coly Mackerel, Scomber colias. 

Kopaxtvos, Crow-fish, one of the Sciaenidae, perhaps Corvina nigra Cuv. 

Κόσσυφος, Merle-wrasse, Crenilabrus pavo. 

Κυβεία(ς), a Tunny, H. i. 183 n. 

Κυπρῖνος, Carp, Cyprinus carpis. 

Κύων, generic for smaller Sharks and Dog-fishes (Squalus), H. i. 878 n. 

Κωβιός, Goby, Gobius niger being commonest in Greek waters. 

Λάβραξ, Basse, Labrawx lupus. 

Λάμνη, a large Shark, perhaps Lamna cornubica. 

Λαρινός. Not identified, H. 111. 899. 

Actos, the Smooth Dog-tish, Mustelus laevis Risso. 

Λέων, perhaps a large Shark. Not identified. 

Mauvis, Maena vulgaris and allied species. 

Μάλθη, perhaps a large Shark. Not identified, H. i. 871 n. 

Μελάνουρος, a Sea-bream, Oblata melanura. 

Moppvpos (Μορμύλος), Mormyrus, a Sea-bream, Pagellus mormyrus. 

Μύλος, perhaps Sciaena cirrhosa, H. i. 130 n. 

Μύραινα, the Murry, Mwraena helena. 

Mis θαλάσσιος, Sea-mouse, ὁ.6. File Fish, Balistes capriscus, H. i. 174. 

Νάρκη, Cramp-fish, Torpedo, or Hlectric Ray, Torpedo marmorata, ete. 

Νυκτερίς -- Ἡμεροκοίτης, 9.v- 

Ξιφίας, Sword-fish, Xiphias gladius. 

"OdtoGos, possibly the Sheat-fish, Silwrus glanis, H. i. 118 n. 

*Ovickos and Ὄνος, perhaps (iadidae (Cod family), Introd. Ὁ. lxii. 

“Opxvvos, large Tunny, Thynnus brachypterus, 

*Ophds, Great Sea-perch, the Merou, Serranus (Epinephelus) gigas. 

Πόρδαλις (Πάρδαλις), perhaps a large Shark. Not identified. 

Πέρκη, Perch, either freshwater Perch, Perca Jluviatilis, or a Sea-perch 
e.g. Serranus scriba. 

Πηλαμύς, one-year-old Tunny, A. iv. 504 n. 

Πλατύουρος, unidentified Flat-fish (ὦ, H. i. 99. 

ἸΤοικίλος, Spotted Dog-fish, Scylliwm catulus, 

Πομπίλος -- Ἡγητήρ, g.v. 

πρέπων. Not identified. One of the Gadidae? H. i. 146. 

Πρημάς, young Tunny in its first year, H. i. 183 π. 


Πρῆστις, Sawfish, Pristis autiquorwm. 

Πρόβατον. Not identified, H. i. 146 π΄ 

‘Pais, Gar-fish (Needle-fish), Belone acus, O. ii, 892 τ. 
‘Pévy, Monkfish or Angel-shark, Rhina squatina. 
Σάλπη, Saupe, Box salpa. 

Σαργός, Sargue, Sargus vulgaris. 

2avpos, Horse-mackerel, Caranz sawreus. 

Σῖμος. Not identified, H. i. 170 τ. 


520 


ZOOLOGICAL CATALOGUE 


Σκάρος, Parrot-wrasse, Scarus cretensis, 

Σκέπανος, species of Tunny? H. i. 106 n. 

Σκίαινα, Sciaena, perhaps Umbrina cirrhosa. 

Σκόμβρος, Mackerel, Scomber scomber L. 

aero Scorpion-fish, two species, Scorpaena scrofa and 8. porcus, Η. 
i n. 

Σκύμνος, a Dog-fish, perhaps Scylliwm canicula Cuv. 

Σκυτάλη. Not identified, H. i. 184. 

Zpapis, Smaris vulgaris, H. i. 109 ἢ. 

Σπάρος, a Sea-bream, Sargus Rondeletit or allied species. 

Σύαινα, H. i. 129 n., unidentified Flat-fish (Ὁ). 

rr a Sea-bream, Dentex vulgaris Cuy. 

ὕραινα, H. i. 172, two species, (1) Sphyraena spet (S. vulgaris), the 

ἐΕΙ σα Τα; (2) Esox belone? " ee Beas age) 

Ταινία, Ribbon-fish, Cobitis taenia? H. i. 100 n. 

Tpdyos, the male Maenis, H. i. 108 n. 

Τράχουρος, species of Mackerel, T'rachwrus trachwrus Mor. (Scomber 
trachurus L.). 

TptyAa, Red Mullet, Mullus barbatus, M. surmuletus, ete. 

Τριγλίς --Τρίγλα, Οἷα. 75 n. 

Τρυγών, Sting-ray, Trygon vulgaris Risso (T. pastinaeca Cuv.). 

’Ya.va, an unidentified Sea-monster. 

Φάγρος, a Sea-bream, perhaps Pagrus vulgaris. 

Φυκίς, a Wrasse, perhaps Crenilabrus pavo, Introd. p. li. 

Χαλκεύς, the Dory, Zeus faber. 

Χαλκίς, Pilchard, Clupea sardina Cuv. (Alosa sardina Mor.). 

Χάννος, one of the Sea-perches, perhaps Serranus cabrilla. 

Xdpaé, perhaps one of the Genus Sargus, H. i. 173 n. 

Χελιδών, the Flying Gurnard, Dactylopterus volitans Cuv. (Trigla voli- 
tans L.). 

Xpéuns, one of the Sciaenidae, perhaps Sciaena aquila. 

Χρύσοφρυς, Chrysophrys awrata, Gilt-head. 

Wyrra, a Pleuronectid, possibly the Turbot, Rhombus maximus, 


5. Moxtuscs 


Κῆρυξ, Trumpet-shell, Buccinum in general. 

KoyAos, Sea-snail, undefinable, C. ii. 568. 

Λεπάς, Limpet, Patellu vulgata, ete. 

Mis, Mussel, Mytilus edulis. 

Navridos, Nautilus, Argonauta argo. ; 

Νηρίτης, perhaps species of Trochus and Buccinum. 

᾽Οσμύλος, species of Octopus, perhaps Hledone moschata. 

"Ootpaxov, generic for Testacea, é ᾿ 
Ὄστρεον, generic for Testacea, or specifically the Oyster, Ostrea edulis L. 
Πίννη, Pinna, a genus of bivalve Molluscs. 

Πολύπους, Poulpe or Octopus, Octopus vulgaris. 

Πορφύρα, Purple-shell, Mures brandaris, M. trunculus, ete. 

Σηπία, the Common Cuttlefish, Sepia officinalis, L, 

SrpduBos, spiral shells generally, or specifically Cerithiwm vulgatwm. 
Σωλήν, Razor-shell, Solen siliqua, ete. 

Τευθίς, Squid or Calamary, Loligo vulgaris Cuv. - 

Χήμη, Clam, generic for certain species of bivalves, e.g. Veneraccae. 


52] 


OPPIAN 


6. CrusTracEa 


Αστακός, Lobster, Homarus vulgaris. 

KadpaBos, Spiny Lobster or Sea Crayfish, Palinuwrus vulgaris. 
Kapis, Prawn, Palaemon squilla. 

Καρκινάς, Hermit Crab, Pagurus Bernhardus or P. Diogenes. 
Kapxivos, Crab, Decapoda brachyura in general. : 

Ildyovpos, the common edible Crab, Cancer pagurus L. 
Πιννοφύλαξ, Pinnoteres veterum. 


7. VERMES 
BSéAAa, Leech, Hirudo medicinalis. 
‘EAuis, Worm, unidentified, H. iii. 180. 
Σκολόπενδρα θαλασσία. Not identified, H. i. 307, ii. 424 ff. 
8. Insrcrs 
Μέλισσα, Bee generically, Apis mellifica L. 
Mvia, Fly generically, Musca domestica, ete. 
9. EcHINODERMS 
᾿Αστὴρ θαλάσσιος, Starfish generically, Asterias. 


*Extvos θαλάσσιος, Sea-urchin, Echinus esculentus. 


© 10. Porrrrra 
Σπόγγος, Sponge, Spongia autorum. 


522 


GENERAL INDEX TO OPPIAN 


C. = Cynegetica, 


Abramis, H. i, 244 

Acanthias or Spiny Dog-fish, ἢ. 
i, 880 

Achaean, C. i. 170, 196 

Achaine Stag, C. ii. 426 

Achilles, C, ii. 155 

Adinon (Admos), H, iii. 371 ff. 

Adonis or Exocoetus, H. 1. 157 

Aegean, H. v. 427 

Aegeus, C. iii. 246 

Aeneadae= Romans, C. i, 2, H. ii. 
675 

Aeolis, H. v. 459 

Aeolus, C, iii. 246 

Aetna, C. i. 275, H. iii. 489 

Aetnaeus, ἢ. i. 512 

St (Agasseus), C. i. 471, 
47 


Agave, C. iv. 239, 292 

Agenor, C. iv. 237 

Agriophagrus or Wild Braize, HW. 
i. 140 


Aidoneus, H. iii. 488, 495 

Alopecias = Alopex, H. i, 381 

Alopex, Fox-shark or Thresher, 
H. iii. 144 

Alphestes or Cinaedus, H. i. 127 

Amanus, C, iii. 315 

Amazonian Lake, H. i. 685 


Amia or Bonito, H. i. 112, ii. 553- 


6277, iii. 144 (how escapes hook) 

Amorgos, C, i, 373 

Amphibian, ΟΣ ii, 217, 386, H. i. 
808, 422 

Amphitrite, C. i. 77, H. i. 2, 343, 
etc. 

Amyceus, C. i. 363 

Anchovy, see Engraulis 

Antelope, see Bubalus 


H, = Halieutica. 


Anthias, H.. i. 248 ff., iii, 192, iii. 
205-334 

Antlers, C. ii. 209 ff. 

Antoninus, (1) C. i, 3=Caracalla; 
(2) H. i. 3, iv. 5=Marcus Aurelius 

Aonian, C. i. 25, ii. 96, iv. 250, 276 

Ape, C. ii. 605 ff. 

Aphritides= Aphyae, H. i. 776 


Aphrodite, Ὁ, 11. 187, iii, 158, Η. 


iv. 28, 141 
Aphya, C. ii. 568, H. i. 767 ff., iv. 
468 ff. 


Apollo, C. i. 9, ii. 2 

Arabia, see Erembi; A. Felix, C. 
iii. 30 

Arbutus, H. iv. 166 

Arcadians, C. i. 372, 395 

Archippus, C. ii. 114 

Ares, Ὁ, i. 30, ii. 62, iv. 191, H. ii. 
28, v. 117 

Argive, C. i. 372 

Argo, C. 1. 28, li. 622 

Argonaut, see Nautilus 

Arion, H. v. 448 

Aristaeus, C. iv. 266 

Armenia, C. i. 172, 196, 277, ii. 98, 
ili. 23, iv. 355 

Artemis, C. i. 17, ii. 475 —-= 

Asia, C. i. 235 

Asopus, C, i, 25 

Asp and Ichneumon, (. iii. 433 

Aspalax or Blind Rat, C. ii. 612 ff. 

Asphalios, H. ν. 680 

Ass, see Onager 

Ass-fish, see Onos 

Assyrian, C. i. 7, ii. 152, H. iii. 403, 
iv. 204 

Astacus or Lobster, C. ii. 392, H. 
i, 261, 263, 609 

D235 


a 


OPPIAN 


Asteres or Starfish, H. ii. 181 ff. 
Atalanta, C. ii. 26 


Athamas, C. iii. 246, iv. 
. Athena, 6. i. 126, H. iv.\ 1268 28 
Atherine, A. i. 108 


Atlas, H. i. 622 

Attagas or Francolin, C. ii. 
427 

Attic, C. iii. 247 

Aulopus (Anthias), H. 1. 256 

Ausonian (=Italian), C. 1. 3, 371, H. 
li. 676 

Autonoe, C. iv. 239 

Azov, Sea of, H. i. 635, iv. 506 


405, 


Bacchus, C. iii. 79, iv. 236 f. 
Bactra, ©. iii. 501, Ἢ; iv. 205 
eae various, H. iii. 169-204, C. iv. 


Balistes capriscus, see Mys (1) 

Basiliscus, H. i. 129 

Basse, see Labrax 

Bat, see Hemerocoetes 

Batis or Skate, H. i. 103, iii. 140 

Batrachus or Fishing- frog, Ὥς αἷς 
86 ff. 

Bear, C. i. 74, 308, ii. 466, iii. 139, 
154, 159 (young of), iv. 354 ff, 
(Hunting Of) Hie Way ve 89; 
licks own feet, C, iii. 174, Hi. ii. 
250 

Beaver, see Castorid 

Bebrycian Sea, H. i. 618 

Bee-hives, C. iv. 271 

Bee-nymphs, C. iv. 275 

Bees, C. i. 128 

Bellerophon, C. i. 233 

Bison, C. ii. 160 

Bistonian, C. ii. 161 

Black Gulf, ἢ. iv. 517, 531 

Black Sea, see Euxine and Pontus 

Blenny (Blennus), H. i. 109 

Blind Rat, see Aspalax 

Boar, see Wild Boar 

Boeotia, C. iv. 252 

Bogue, see Box 

Bonito, see Amia 

Boreas, C. ii. 140, 623, H. iii. 676, 
v.21 

Bosporus, Thracian, H. i. 617 

Bous or Ox-ray, H. i. 108, ii. 141 ff, 
iii, 139 

Box or Bogue, H. i. 110, iii. 186 

Boxing, C. iv. 200 ff. 


524 


" 


Braize, see Phagrus 

Braize, Wild, see Agriophagrus 

Breeding of Dogs, C. i. 376 ff. ; of 
Doves, C. i. 349 ff. ; of Horses, C. 
i, 328 ff. 

British Dogs, C. i. 468 

Britons, C. i. 470 

Broad-horn, see Euryceros 

Bromios= Dionysus, C. iv. 295, of. 
iy. 300 

Brotoloigos= Ares, C. i. 29 

Bubalus or Antelope, C. ii. 300 ff. 

Bucephalas, C. i. 230 

Buglossum or Sole, H. i. 99 

Bulls, C. i. 387, 415, ii. 
413 ff., iii. 2 

Burning the water or Leistering, 
C. iv. 140, H. iv. 640 ff., v. 428 ff. 

Bustard, see Otis 

Byzas, ἢ. v. 521 


43-175, 


Cadmean, C. iv. 288, 297 

Cadmus, C. i. 257, iv. 291 

Calais, son of Boreas, C. ii. 623 

Calamary or Squid, see Teuthis 

Callarias, H..i. 105 

Callichthys or Beauty-fish, Ἢ. i. 
185, iii. 191, 335, v. 628 

Calliope, Casali 

Camel, C. iii. 463, 466, 483, 492 

Cantharus or Black Sea-bream, H 
i, 512, iii. 338 ff, 

Cappadocians, C. i. 171, 197 f. 

Carabus or Spiny Lobster, H. i. 
201,.11. 254, 321-418, iii. 345 

Caracalla, see Antoninus q) 

Carcharodont or Saw-toothed, C0 
li. 18, 465, iii. 5, 142, 262 

Carcinas or Hermit-crab, Ἡ. ἃ, 
820 ff., 542, iii. 179 

Careinus or Crab, H. i, 280, 542, 
il, 167 ff, iii, 178 

Carian, C. i. 371, 396 

Carid or Prawn, Ai. 281, ii. 128 ff, 
iii. 177, 184, iv. 221 

Cartilaginous Fishes, see Selachian 

Castor, C. i. 363, ii. 14 

‘Castorid or Beaver, H, i. 398 

Cat, C. ii. 572 

Celts, C. i. 818, H. ii, 677, iii. 544, 


Coutina: H. i. 378, ii. 460, iv. 244 
Centrophorus= Centrina, ἮΝ, eave 
242 ff. 


GENERAL INDEX 


Cephalus or Grey Muilet, H. i. 111, 
iv. 127-146 

Cercurus, H. i. 141 

cae or Trumpet-shell, H. i. 316, 

Cestreus or Grey Mullet, C. iv. 223, 
H. i. 111, 156, ii. 642, iii. 98 ff., 
193, 482-538 

Cete or Sea-monsters, H. i. 
360 ff., 394, v. 21 ff. 

Seep Pueee macrocephalus, H. 
Ve ΤῈ 

Chalceus or Dory, H. i. 133 

Chalcis or Pilchard, H. i. 244, iii. 
398 

Channus, H. i. 124, iii. 185 

Chaos, ἢ. iv. 24 

Charax, H. i. 173 

Charybdis, H. v. 220 

Chauliodont or Tusked, C. ii. 465, 
492, iii. 6, 253 

Cheese as bait, H. iii. 468, 484 f. 

Chelidon, see Swallow 

Chelidon or Swallow-fish, H. i. 428, 
434, 11. 459 

Chelone (Chelys) or Tortoise, H. 
v. 25, 403 ff. 
Chelone (Chelys) or Turtle, H. i. 
397, 613, 522, 533, v. 26, 392 ff. 
Chersonese = Pella = Apameia, C. ii. 
100 

Chimaera, C. i. 233 

Chremes, H. i. 112 

Chrysophrys or Gilt-head, H. i. 
169, iii. 188 

Cichle or Thrush-wrasse, H. i. 126, 
iv. 172-241 

Cilicia, C. iii, 315, H. iii. 8 

Cinaedus, see Alphestes 

Circe, H. ii. 498 

Cireus or Hawk, C. i. 
120 

Cirrhis, H. i. 129, 187 

Cithaeron, C. iv. 317 

Citharus, H. i. 98 ὃ 

Clam or Cockle, H. i. 138, v. 602 

Cnossus, H. iv. 275 

Cock, C. ii. 189 

Cocytus, H. iii. 487 

Colchian, C. iii. 248 

Colias or Coly-mackerel, H. i, 184 

Colour, antenatal determination of, 
C. i, 328 ff. 

Conger, H. i. 113, 251 


48, 


64, 70, iii. 


Coracinus or Crow-fish, H. i. 133, 
iii, 184, 217 

Cordylus, Η. i. 306 

Corks, H. iii. 108, 374 

Corone, C. iii. 117 

Corycus, 4, iii. 15, 209 

Cossyphus or Merle-wrasse, H. i. 
510, iv. 172-241 

Crab, see Carcinus 

Cramp-fish, see Narce 

Crane, Η. i. 621 (flight of) 

Crayfish, Sea, or Spiny Lobster, 
see Carabus 

Cretan, C. i. 170, 300, 878, 395 

Crete, 0. li. 377, iii. 11 

Crocodile and Tchneumon, Ο. iii. 
411 ff. 

Cronus, C. i. 8, 111. 8, 10, 16, iv. 814, 
Η. ii, 674 

ἜΡΟΝ cp a see Malacostraca 

Ctesiphon, C. i. 31 

Cuckoo-fish, ‘Hi. 97 

Curetes, C. iii. 9, 14 

Cuttlefish, see Sepia 

Cybeias, H. i. 183 

Cyclamen or Sowbread, H. iv. 659 

Cyprinus or Carp, H. i. 101, 592 

Cyrene, C. i. 292 

Cythereia (Cytheira)= Aphrodite, 
C. i. '7, 89, 238, 392, ii. 82, iii. 146, 
525 


Day-sleeper, see Hemerocoetes 

Day-sleeping man=thief, H. ii. 408 

Decoy bird, H. iv. 122 

Deer, C. i. 440, ii. 13, 176-292, 404, 
hii. 2, 88, 254, iv. 33, H. ii. 358 ff., 
614 ff.; breathing of, C. ii. 181; eat 
Crabs, C. ii. 284; hate Snakes, C. 
ii. 233, H. ii. 289; swim, C. ii. 218 

Deidameia, C. ii. 155 

Deineter, H. iii. 492, metonomy for 
corn, flour, or bread, C. i. 434, H. 
iii. 463, 484 

Dentex, see Synodon 

Deo= Demeter, H. ii. 19, iv. 497 

Dindymus, C. iii. 283 

Diocleion, C. ii. 123 

Dionysus, C. i. 27, 365, iii. τς iv. 
230 ff, 

Disguised Fishers, H. iv. 804 ff. 

Dog, C. i. 118, 368 ff., 488, 452, 454, 
459, 463, ii. 18, iv. 45, 52, 217, H. 
i. 719, v. 28 


525 


as 


OPPIAN 


Dog, points of good, C. i. 402 ff. 

Dog-breeding, C. i. 436 ff. 

Dog-tish, H. i. 373 ff., 642, 736 ff., ii. 
460, v. 28, 63, 365 ff. (capture of) 

Dog names, C. i. 444 f, 

Dogs, House, C. i. 488, 473; Table, 
C. ἃ. 478 

Dog-star, see Sirius 

Dolphin, C. iii, 118, H. i. 888 ff., 
580, 610, 644 ff., 673, 684, 732, H. 
li. 538-641, v. 416-588 

‘‘Dolphin,” leaden, ἢ. iii. 
iv. 222 

Domna, Julia, C. i. 4 

Dorealis, C. i. 165, 441 

Dorcos, C. ii. 12, 301, 315 ff., 405, 
428, iii. 3, iv. 489 ff. 

Dormouse, C. ii. 574 ff. 

Dory, see Chalceus 

‘‘Double back” of Horse, C. i. 186 ; 
of Oryx, C. ii. 449 

Doves, C. i. 73, 385, iii. 116 ; breeding 
of, Οἱ i. 349 ff. 

Dracon, (1) serpent, C. i. 520, H. i. 
731; (2) fish=Weever, Trachinus 
draco, H. i. 169, ii. 459 

Dreams, H. ii. 81 

Dryads, C. i. 78, iv. 275 


290, 


Hagle, (1) bird, C. i. 68, 11.117, H. 
v. 17; (2) fish, H. i. 642 

Echeneis or Remora (Sucking-fish), 
Hei) 212 

Echinus, (1) Hedgehog, C. ii. 603; 
(2) Sea-urchin, C. i. 70, H. i. 317, 
ii. 225 ff. ; (3) Spiny Mouse, C. ii. 
598 

Echion, C. iv. 243 

Echis (Ophis) or Serpent, H. i. 
559 ff., of. Οἱ i. 381 f. 

Hel, H. i. 120 (habitat), 397 (habi- 
tat), 513 ff. (breeding of), iv. 450 ff. 
(capture of) 

Egypt, C. i. 874, ii. 84, 148, H. i. 620 

Hileithyia (Goddess of Birth), 0. 
iii. 157, 199, H. i. 477, iv. 198 

Elean, C. i. 395 

Electric Ray, see Narce 

Thee C. i. 71, ii, 489-550, H. 
Ved 

Eleusa, H. iii. 209 

Emblonus, C. ii. 115, 124 

Enceladus, C. i. 273 

Engraulis, H. iv. 470 


526 


Enyo, ἢ. ii. 25 

Epean, C. i. 171 

Erembi, C. i. 172, iii. 29 7 

Erigeneia (Dawn), C. i. 15, ii. 158 

Eros (Love), C. ii. 410, H. iv. 11|-=== 

Erytheia, C. ii. 110 oe 

.Eryth(r)inus, H. i. 97 

‘Ethiopian, C. iii. 42, 251, iv. 147, 
149, H. i. 620 

Euboea, C. iv. 265, 276, H. v. 427 

Huphrates, C. i. 276, iv. 112, H. ii. 
679 

Euripus, C. iv. 257 

Euryceros or Broadhorn = Fallow 
Deer, C. ii. 293 ff., iii. 2 

Eurystheus, C. ii. 113 

HWuxine Sea, H. i. 599, iv. 505 

Exocoetus or Adonis, H. i. 158 


Fish, breeding of, H. i. 473 ff., 
584 ff.; hearing of, H. iii. 429 ff. ; 
sense of smell of, H. iii. 346, 410, 
C. iv. 224; wiles of, H. iii. 42, 
92 ff. 

Fish-preserve (Piscina, Vivarium), 
Ἢ. i. 56 ff. 

Fisherman, qualities of, H. iii. 29-49 

Fishing, compared with Hunting 
and Fowling, H. i. 12 ff., 29 18:5 
methods, H. iii. 72-91; times 
suitable for, H. iii. 50-71 

Fishing-frog, see Batrachus 

Formido, C. iv. 385 ff., H. siv. 
588 

Fowling, H. i. 29 ff., ii. 99, H. iv. 
120, C. i. 51, 62 ff. 

Fox, C. i. 483, iii. 450, iv. 448 ff, 
H, ii. 107 ff. 

Fox-shark, see Alopex 

Francolin, see Attagas 

Fry, see Aphya 


Galeus, &. i, 379, iv. 242 ff. 

Ganges, C. iv. 164 

Garfish, see Rhaphis 

Gazelle, see Dorcos 

Geryon(eus), C. 11. 111 

Gilt-head, see Chrysophrys 

Giraffe, C. iii. 461 ff. 

Glaueus, C. iii. 114, H. i. 170, 749, 
ili. 193 

Goat-fish, see Tragus 

Goats, see Wild Goats 


GENERAL INDEX 


Goby, H. i. 174, ii. 458 
Gorgon, C. ii. 8 

Gortyn, C. ii. 378 

Gourds as floats, H. v. 356 
Gull, see Larus 


Hake, see Onos 

Halcyon or Kingfisher, Hy i. 425 

Haliaeétus or Sea-eagle, H. i. 425 

Hare, C. i. 165, 483, 514, ii. 11, iii. 
86, 153, 460, 504, iv. 35, 425 

Harpoon, H. v. 151, 456, 575 


— Harpy, C. ii. 620 


aad 


Hawk, see Circus 

Hawk-fish, see Hierax 

Hedgehog, see Echinus 

Hegeter or Whale-guide, H. v. 67- 
99 


He-goat, see Tragus 

Hemerocoetes or ‘‘ Bat ” (Nycteris), 
Η. ii. 199-224 

Hepatus, H. i. 146 

Hephaestus, H. ii. 28, 673 

Hera, C. ii. 113 


—Heracles, C. ii. 109, 149 


Hermes, H. ii. 27, iii. 9, 49, 208 

Hermit-crab, see Carcinas 

Hibernation or Hiding, H. i. 446 ff. 

Hierax (ipyé) or Hawk-fish, HH. i. 
89 


i) 


Hippagrus or Wild Horse, C. iii. 
ἦν, 252 


Hippocampus, see Hippos 

Hippolytus, C. ii. 24 

Hippos or Hippocampus, H. 1. 97 

Hippurus, ΗΠ. i. 184, iii. 186, 193, 
iv. 404-436 

Holy Fish=Callichthys, H. i. 185, 
v. 632 

Honey, C. i. 128 

Horns, nature of, C. ii. 491 ff. 

Horse, breeds of, C. i. 166 ff.; points 
of good, Οἱ i. 173 ff. ; war-horse, 
Ο. 1.3 6 

Horse-fish, see Hippos 

Horse-mackerel, see Saurus 

Horse-racing, H. v. 183 

Hunter, qualities of, C. i. 81 ff. ; 
dress of, C. i. 91 ff. ; weapons of, 
C. i. 147 ff. 

Hunting compared with Fishing, 
H. i. 12 ff., with Fowling, ΗΠ. 1. 
29 ff. 

Hyacinthus, C. i. 362 


+ 


Hyena, (1) quadruped, C. iii. 263, 
Η. v. 31; (2) sea-monster, ἢ. i. 
872, v. 82 

Hystrix or Porcupine, C. iii. 391 


Iapetus, H. v. 6 

Iason, C. ii, 622 

Iberian, C. i. 278, 284, 371, 397, H. 
li. 677, iii. 624 

Iberian grass or Spanish broom, 
H, iii. 342, C. i. 156 

Iberian Sea, H. v. 57 

Ichneumon, C. iii. 407-448 

Indian, C. ili. 259, iv. 165, H. v. 17 

Indian Beast, see Elephant 

Ino, C. iv. 237-274 

Tocheaera= Artemis, C.i. 109, ii. 367 

Ionian, C. i. 172 

Ionian Sea, H. v. 215 

Ioreus, Roe-deer, C. ii. 296 ff., iii. 8 


_—{~Ister, Οἱ ii. 141, H. ii 679 > 


Iulis or Rainbow-wrasse, A. i. 
124, ii. 434-453 
Tulus=Iulis, H. iii. 186 


Jackal, see Thos 
Jason, see Iason 


Kid (ἔριφος), C. i. 146, 517, 


Labrax or Basse, H. i. 112, 119, 
589, ii. 128 ff., iii. 121 ff., 184, 192, 
288 

Lacedaemonian (Spartan) dogs, C. 
1. 858, 372, 396, ii. 19 

Laconian, C. i. 358, H. v. 452 

Lamia, see Lamna 

Limmergeier, see Phene 

Lamna, ἢ. i. 370, v. 36, 358 ff. 

Larinus, H. iii. 399 

Laros or Sea-gull, C. i. 71, H. i. 424 

Leeches, H. 11. 597 ff. 

Leopard, see Pordalis 

Lepas or Limpet, H. i. 138 

Lesbos, H. v. 448 

Lethe, C, ii. 417 

Leto, C. i. 109 

Libya, C. i. 172, 291, 294, ii. 143, 
258, iii. 85, 41, 42, iv. 48, 111, 322, 
H. ii. 678, iv. 44, 680, v. 453 

Lily baeum, C. i. 272 

Limpet, see Lepas 

Lines, fishing, H. iii. 75 ff. 

Lion, (1) quadruped, C. i. 68, iii. 7- 


527 


OPPIAN 


62, iv. 77 ff. (hunting oP H. i. 
710 ; (2) sea-monster, ἢ. i. 367 

Lobster, see Astacus 

Lobster, Spiny, see Carabus 

Locrian, C. i. 375 

Lynx, C. iii. 85, 94, 97, 153 


Maenis, H. i. 108, iii. 188 

Mackerel, ὙΓΕΙ͂Σ 101, iii. 576 

Mackerel, Coly, see Colias 

Maeotian Lake (Sea of Azov), H. 
iv. 506 

Magnetes, C. i. 171, 373 

Malacostraca or Crustaceans, take ts 
283 

Maltha, H. i. 371 

Marcus Aurelius, 869 Bene (2) 

Maryandeus, C. iv. 

Massalia (Marseilles), a 111. 544 

Mauri ree C. i, 171, 289, 802, 
of. iv. 47 

Mazices, C.i. 170 

Medeia, C. iii. 248 

Medusa, C. iii. 222 

Melanurus, C. ii. 391, H. i. 98, iii. 
443-481 

Μέλας κόλπος, see Black Gulf 

Meleager, C. ii. 28 

Meliboea, C. ii. 120 

Memnon, C. ii. 153 

Meros, C. iv. 241 

Meron, see Orphus 

Messina, Strait of, H. v. 216 

Mint, H. iii. 486 ff. 

Mole (Blind Rat), see Aspalax 

Molluses= Cephalopods, Η. i. 638 

Molossian Dogs, C, i. 375 

Mormyrus (Mormylus), 0. i. 74, H. 
i, 100, iii. 126 

Mouse- -trap, Η. ii. 156 

Mullet, see Cephalus, Cestreus, 
Trigle 

Muraena, C. i. 69, H. i, 142, ii. 189, 254 

Mylus, H. i. 180 

Myoxus, see Dormouse 

Myrrh, Η. iii. 408 

Mys, (1) Sea-mouse, H. i. 1745 (2) 
Mussel, H. i. 316 


Narce, Cramp-fish, Torpedo or 
Electric Ray, H. i, 104, ii. 56-85, 
iii. 149 ff. 

Naucrates ductor, see Pompilus 

Nautilus, H. i. 34 40 


528 


Needle-fish, see Rhaphis 

Nereitae, H. i. 315, 329 

Nereus, C. i. 77, ii. 68, H. ii. 36 

Nesaean (Nisaean) Horses, C. i. 312 

Nets, hunting, C. i. 150, iv. 56; 
fishing, H. iii. 79 ff. 

Nightingale, C. i. 71, H. i. 728 

‘Nile, C. ii. 85, iv. 412 

Nireus, @. i. 362 

Nisaean, see Nesaean 

Nycteris, see Hemerocoetes 

Nysius = Dionysus, C. iv. 308 


Ocean, C. i. 14, 43, ii. 111, H. v. 58 

Oedipus, C. i. 257 

Oeneus, C. ii. 28 

Olisthus, H. i. 118 

Olive oil used by diver, H. v. 638, 
646 

Olympus, C. ii. 414, H, ii. 38 

Onager or Wild ASS, C. iti. 184 

Oniseus, H. i. 105, 593, Ἡ. iii. 191 

Onos, H. ixisl ait: 140 

Orcynus, H. i. 183, iii. 132 ff, 192, 
336 

Me eg a or Mountain Bacchus, 

i, 24 

Orion, C. ii. 29 

Orontes, C. ii. 116, 145 

Orphus or Great ’Sea- “perch, H. i. 
142, iii. 187 

Oryx, a species of Horse, C. i. 
31 


Onyx, C. fi. 12, 446 ff, iii, 8, 88, iv. 


δ, ΤῊΣ Η. i. 307 ff. 

Ostraca, C. ii. 568 

Ostracorhina or Testaceans (Ostra- 
coderms), H. i. 818, v. 589 ff. 

Ostrich, C. iii. 483, H. iv. 630 

Otis or Bustard, οἱ ii, 407, 432 

Ounce, see Panther 

Oviparous Fishes, H. i. 688 ff. 

Ox-ray, see Bous 

“Oysters,” C. ii. 568, H. i. 317, 764, 
ii. 170-198 


Pagurus, H. i. 281 ff., 609 
Paeonia, C. i. 371, 395 
Palestine, C. i. 340 
Pallas, H. ii. 23 

Pan, H. 11]. 15 

Panther, C. ii. 572 
Paphos, Ἢ. iv. 28 


GENERAL INDEX 


Parasite of Sword-fish, H. ii. 506 ff.; 
of Tunny, H. ii. 506 ff. 

Parrot, C. il. 408 ; 

Parrot-wrasse, see Scarus 

Eee, G.. ἃς 31, 277 H.; 802 iii. 

Partridge, C. ii. 317 ff., 406, 428 

Peacock, C. ii. 589, iii. 344 

Pegasus, C. i. 233 

reas H. i, 118, iv. 504 ff., 531- 

Pella= Apameia=Chersonese, C. ii. 
101, 114 

Pentheus, C. iv. 243, 289, 295, 304- 
815 

Perch, Η. i. 124, iii. 187, 217 

Perch, Great Sea, see Orphus 

Persephone, H. ili. 489, 494 

Perseus, C. ii. 9 

Persians, C. i. 235, H. ii. 483 

Phaethon, C. i. 9, ii. 617, 626 

Phagrus or Braize, C. ii. 391, Η. i. 
140, iii. 185 

Phalaena, H. i. 404 

Phene or Limmergeier, C. iii. 116, 
Hi, i. 727 

Philomela, C. 111. 247 

Phineus, Οἱ ii. 616 ff. 

Phoca or Seal (Sea-lion), Ο. iii. 
114, H. i. 406, 534, 644, 686 ff; v. 
38, 376 

Phocaea, H. iii. 626 

Phoebe, C. ii. 1 

Phoebus, C. i. 9, 865, ii, 618, v. 
618 

Pholoe, C. ii. 5 

Phorcys, H. ii. 36 

Phrygians, C. ii. 90 

Phycis, one of the Wrasses, ἢ. i. 
126 

Physalus, H. i. 368 

Pig, C. i. 389, 416 

Pigeon, see Dove 

Pigmy, see Pygmaean 

Pilchard, see Chalcis 

Pilot-fish, see Pompilus 

Pimpleia, C. ii. 157 

Pinna, H. ii, 186-198 

Pinnophylax = Pinnoteres, ἢ, ii. 
186-198 

Platyurus or Broad-tail, H. i. 90 

Poecilus (one of the Cete), H. i. 381 

Poisoning the water, H. iv. 647 ff., 
C. iv. 230, 820 


. 


2M 


Eee: or Pollux, C. i. 368, ii. 
1 


Polypus or Poulpe, C. iii. 177, iv. 
223, H. i. 306 ff., 514, 586, 552, 609, 
ii. 232-820, 455, iii. 178, 190, 345, 
iv. 268-307 

Pompilus or Pilot-fish, H. i. 186, 
iv, 437 

Pontogeneia= Aphrodite, C. i. 33 

Pontus, H. i. 618 

Porcupine, C. iii. 891 

Pordalis (Pardalis) or Leopard, (1) 
quadruped, C. i. 69, 488, iii. 63 ff., 
130, 836, iv. 86, 214, 219, 280 ff. ; 
(2) sea-monster, H. i. 868, v. 30 

Porphyra or Purple-shell, H. i. 315, 
ν. 598 ff. 

Poseidon, H. i. 74, 364, 385, 111. 5, 
iv. 407, 516, v. 21, 339, 679 

Poulpe, see Polypus 

Prawn, see Carid 

Premades or Young Tunnies, ΗΝ. i. 
183 

Prepon, H. i, 146 

Priam, C. 11. 154 

Pristis or Saw-fish, H. i. 370 

Probaton or Sheep, C. i. 488, ii. 326 

Probaton or Sea-sheep, ἢ. i. 146, 
iii. 139 

Proboscis of Elephant, C. ii. 523 

Procne, C. 111. 247 

Prometheus, ἢ. v. 6 

Psetta (Flat-fish, Turbot?), Η. 1. 105 

Purple-shell, see Porphyra 

Pygmaeans, H. i. 623 


Ram, (1) quadruped, H. v. 333 (2) 
sea-monster, H. i. 372, v. 34 

Razor-shell, see Solen 

Red Mullet, see Trigle (Triglis) 

Reptile, C. iii. 110 

Rhaphis or Needle-fish, C. ii, 392, 
H. i. 172, iii. 577 ff., 605 ff. 

Rhea, C. iii. 11, 19 

Rhina.or Angel-shark, H. i. 381, 
742 ff. 

Rhine (river), H. ii. 678 

Rhinoceros, C. i. 70, ii. 551 ff., iv. 35 

Rhone (river), H. ili. 625 

Ribbon-fish, see Taenia 

Rod and line, H. iii. 74 ff. 


Sabazius, C. i, 26 
529 


OPPIAN 


Salaminian broom, C. iv. 222 
Salpa or Saupe, H. i. 125, iii. 414- 
431 


Sargus or Sargue, C. ii. 438, H. i. 
132, 510, iv. 308-403, 593-615 

Sarmatian=Sauromatian, C. i. 397 

Sarpedon (Cape), H. iii. 207 

Saupe, see Salpa 

Saurus or Horse-mackerel, H.. i. 
106, 142 

Sauromatian=Sarmatian, C. i. 373 

Saw, H. v. 199 

Saw-fish, see Pristis 

Saw-toothed, see Carcharodont 

Scarus or Parrot-wrasse, H. i. 134, 
ii, 661-663, iv. 40-126 

Scepanus, H. i. 106 

Schoeneus, C. ii. 26 

School-boys, H. i. 680 

Sciaena, H. i, 132, iv. 616-634 

Scolopendra, ἢ. i. 307, ii. 424 ff. 

Scombros or Mackerel, H. i. 101, 
iii. 578-595 

Scorpius, H. i. 171, 591, ii, 459 

Scytala, H. i. 184 

Scythia, C. i. 171, ii, 141 

Sea-cuckoo, see Cuckoo-fish 

Sea, depth of, H. i. 82 ff. 

Sea-eagle or Osprey, see Haliaeétus 

Sea-gull, see Larus 

- Sea-horse, see Hippos 

Seal, see Phoca 

Sea-monsters, see Cete 

Sea-perch, Great, see Orphus 

Sea-swine, see Suaena 

Sea-tortoise or Turtle, see Chelone 

Sea-urchin, see Echinus 

Selachians or Cartilaginous Fishes, 
Η. i. 648 

Selene, C. i. 7 

Sepia or Cuttle-fish, H, i. 313, ii. 
120 ff., 455, iii. 156 ff., iv. 147-171 

Serpent, see Snake 

Severus (Emperor), C. i. 4, iv. 20 

Shad, see Thrissa 

Sheep, C. i. 78, 145, ii, 827, 330, 
87 . 

Sicily, G. i. 170, 272, 275 f., 802 

Simus, a fish, H. i. 170 

Sirius or Dog-star, C. iii, 322, H. 
i. 152, iii. 48, iv. 315 

Skate, see Batis 

Skins as floats, H. v. 177 

Sleep of Fishes, H. ii, 657 ff. 


530 


Smaris, H. i. 109 

Snake, C. i. 520, H. ii. 859-386 ; Snake 
and Deer, C. ii. 238 ff., H. ii. 289 
ff. ; and Hedgehog, H. ii. 359 ff. ; 
and Muraena, C. i. 381 ff. ; H.i. 
554 ff. ; and Swallow, H. v. 579; 
in Libya, C. ii. 253 ff. 

*Solen or Razor-shell, H. i. 316 

Spartum, C. i. 156, H. iii. 342 

Sparus, ἢ. i. 109 

Spawning of Fishes, ἢ. i. 473 ff 

Sphyraena, H. i. 172 

Spiny Dog-fish, see Acanthias 

Spiny Mouse, C. ii. 601 

Sponge, H. v. 649; blood of, H. v. 
5 


Sponge-fishers, H. ii. 
612-674 

Spontaneous Generation, C ii. 
560 ff., H. i. 762 ff 

Spring, C. i. 378 ff., H. i. 458 ff. 

Squid, see Teuthis (Calamary) 

Squirrel, C, 11, 586 ff. 

Stag, see Deer 

Starfish, see Aster 

Sting-ray, see Trygon 

Stork, C. iv. 392 

Strombus, C. ii, 569, H. i. 315, 330, 
v. 602 

Struthus, see Ostrich 

Suaena or Sea-swine, H. i. 129 

Subus, C. ii. 382 

Superfoetation of Hare, C. iii. 515 ff. 

Swallow, the bird, H. i. 729, iii. 243 
ff., v. 579 

Swallow-fish, see Chelidon 

Swan, C. iv. 392 

Swine, Οἱ i. 889, 416, H. iii. 489 

Sword-fish, see Xiphias 

Synodon or Dentex, H. i. 170, iii. 
186, 610-619 

Syria, C, ii. 100, 187, ef. Assyria 


486 ff., v. 


Taenarus, H. v. 452 

Taenia or Ribbon-fish, H. i. 100 

Tamarisk, HZ. iv. 165 

Tattooing, C. 1. 326 

Taurus (Mt.), C. i. 19%, iii. 314 

Teeth, C. ii. 497 ff. 

Tegean, C. i. 372 

Telegonus, H. ii. 498 

Testaceans, see Ostracorhina 

Teuthis, Squid or Calamary, H. i. 
432, 11]. 16 ff., iv. 439 ff. 


GENERAL INDEX 


Thebes, C. iv. 287 

Theias, H. iii. 403 

Themisto, C. iii. 248 

Theseus, C. iii. 246 

Thos (Jackal [Ὁ], Civet [?]), C. i. 70, 
ii. 11, iii. 338 (origin of), iv. 212 
ff. (hunting of), H. ii. 614 ff. 
(and Stag) 

Thracian, C. i. 172, 371, 396, ii. 161, 
616, iii. 247, H. iv. 515, 582, v. 
521, 528 

Thresher shark, see Alopex 

Thrissa or Shad, H. i. 244, iii. 398 
(capture) 

Thrush-wrasse, see Cichle 

Thyestes, U. iii. 250 

Thyone=Semele, C. i. 27, iv. 285 

Tiger, C. i. 75, 482, iii. 98, 130, 340 
if.; offspring of Zephyrus, C. i. 
828, iii. 354 ff. 

Tigris (river), C. iii. 22, iv. 355, H. 
iv. 204 


Titan, C. i. 9, ii. 617 

Titans, H. v. 10 

Torpedo or Electric Ray, see Narce 

Tortoise, see Chelone 

Tortoise (military), C. i. 214 

Trachurus, H. i. 99, iii. 40 

Tragus or Goat-fish, H. i. 108 

Trident or fish-spear, H. iii. 88, 
iv. 258, v. 151, 255 


——Trigle or Red Mullet, C. ii. 392, H. 


i, 98, 130, 590, iii. 187, 432 ff. 
Triglis, C. i. 75, H. i. 105 
Trinacrian isle=Sicily, H. iii. 627 
Trumpet-shell, see Ceryx 
Trunk of elephant, see Proboscis 
Trygon or Sting-ray, H. i. 104, ii. 

462, 470 ff. 

Tunny, C. i. 72, H. i. 181, 369,756, 
ii, 506 ff., ili, 184, 191, 596 ff., 
620-648 

Tunny-watcher, H. iii. 638 

Turbot, see Psetta 

Turtle, see Chelone 

Tuscan, see Tyrrhenian 

Tusks of elephant, C. ii. 491 ff. 

yphon, H. iii. 19, v. 217 


Tyrian, C. iv. 291 

Tyrrhenian, C. i, 170, 196, 300, 396 

Tyrrhenian Sea, H. iii. 548, 628, 
v. 216 


Uranoscopus scaber, see Hemero- 
coetes 

Uranus, C. iii. 12 

Urchin, Sea-, see Echinus 


Venomous Fishes, H. ii. 482-505; 
venomous horns, C. ii. 454; ven- 
omous tusks, C. iii. 379 

Viviparous Fishes, H. i. 642 ff. 

Voice of Fishes, H. i. 135 

Vulture (yi), C. iv. 392 


Weel (κύρτος), H. iii. 341 ff., 371, 
iv. 47, 95, 148, 165 

Weever, see Draco 

Whale (φάλαινα), H. i. 404 ; (φύσα- 
dos), H. i. 368 

Whale-fishing, H. v. 109-350 

Whale-guide, H. v. 67 ff. 

Wild Ass, see Onager 

Wild Boar, C. i. 76, 309, ii. 382, 457, 
465 : 

Wild Goat, C. i. 71, ii. 888 

Wild Horse, see Hippagrus 

Wild Sheep, C. ii. 326 ff. 

Winnowing, H. iv. 497 ff. 

Wolf, C. i. 72, 482, ii. 408 ff., iif. 293 

Wood-cutters, H. v. 198 


Xanthus, the horse of Achilles, C. 
i. 226 

Xiphias or Sword-fish, H. i. 182, ii. 
462 ff., 506 ff., iii. 193, 592 ff, 


Zephyrus or West Wind, C. i. 328, 
111. 354 

Zetes, C. ii. 623 

Zeus, C. i. 8, 41, ii. 4, 9, 109, 128, 
367, 421, 591, iii, 8, 13, 17, 237, 
464, iv. 20, 238, 242, H. v. 282, 
423. Zeus=Divus, C. i. 8, iv. 20 

Zygaena or Hammer-head Shark, 
Η. i, 867, v. 87 


531 


wR nglands 


ue 
Δ τὰ 


aie, ὡς kd 25, Τῇ eae 
Ῥ ‘ wietecs ἐξ ἘΠ He! re haa 


; ἐν» ἄν πο τ 
3 Ogi} singe 


Aa eA ΡΝ, 


. Ἷ 
hairs emg nee oa ahr 


τᾶν 5: Μὴν 
Sago hinw.- 
Ysa ΣΤῊ Ὁ 
<7 bat AL ammount? 
ats ‘ an x. ὑπ: 


Sel oe att ce iter: 


: igh 
yea 


Ame bei STORE. τὸ puis ET 
5 ΠΝ ΣΕ Ge 


Ὁ 


RM EE AD TREATS wh 


St tao Hse uted ἢ τ 
ee er + > 


P< 


r τ τὸ ila: 
Se ἘΠΕ ἘΠ Ἷ 


ee 


x 
| 
- 


: ¥ J 


Ἢ 


δον ἢ οὐ δ. 


i 
‘ 
; hte 
, 
τὲ - 
. 


INTRODUCTION 


I. Tue Lire or Coiituraus 


For the life of Colluthus we have the following 
authorities : 

1. Suidas s.v. Κόλουθος “of Lycopolis in the 
Thebais [in Egypt: Ptolemy iv. 5. 62, Strabo 812], 
epic poet, who lived [or ‘flourished,’ γεγονώς] in 
the times of the emperor Anastasius [i.e. Anastasius 
I., emperor 491-518], wrote Calydoniaca in six books, 
and Encomia in epic verse, and Persica.”” So Eudocia 
(Villoisin, Anecd. Gr. i. p. 271). 

2. A Life of Colluthus in cod. Ambrosianus Q 5 sup.: 

“Coluthus of Lycopolis in the Thebais, epic poet, 
lived, according to Suidas, in the time of Anastasius, 
surnamed Brachiniis, who succeeded Zeno as emperor 
in Constantinople, and after whom reigned Justinus 
the Thracian, after whom again the emperor was 
divus (ὁ θεῖος) Justinianus, who delivered Italy from 
the servitude of the Goths through Belisarius — 
Justinian being the nephew of Justinus —a little 
over a thousand years ago. He wrote Calydoniaca 
in epic verse in six books and Encoma and Persica. 
To him is ascribed also the present poem, the Rape 
of Helen, a poem familiar and well known in Apulia, 
where also the poetry of the Homeric Quintus [the 
Post-Homerica—tév μεθ᾽ Ὅμηρον λόγοι of Q. Smyr- 
naeus or Calaber] was first discovered in the temple 

535 


COLLUTHUS 


of St. Nicolas of Cassuli [Casoli] outside Hydrumtum 
[Otranto] and which its recoverer, the sainted 
Bessarion, archbishop of Nicaea, cardinal-bishop of 
Tusculum [Frascati], communicated to all concerned. 
And this also which was hidden, shall now be public 


property.” 


Notes.—(1) Zeno was emperor of the East at Con- 
stantinople from a.p. 474 to 491. He was succeeded by 
Anastasius I. who reigned 491-518, He in turn was 
succeeded by Justinus I. who reigned 518-527. He is 
called “the Thracian” because he was a native of Thrace. 
He again was succeeded by his nephew Justinian who 
reigned 527-565. For Belisarius see Gibbon, chap. xli. 

(2) Bessarion (1395 ?-1472), a native of Trapezus 
(Trebizond), was a pupil of Plethon in the Peloponnese, 
became Cardinal and Patriarch of Constantinople, died in 
1472 at Ravenna. In 1446 the Pope committed to him 
the oversight of. the Greek monasteries of the Basilian 
Order to which, before leaving the East, Bessarion 
belonged! The Italian monasteries of this Order were 
in the South of Italy. This circumstance led in 1450 to 
the discovery by Bessarion in the monastery of St. Nicola 
di Casoli (close to Otranto in Calabria), destroyed by 
the Turks in 1480, of various MSS, including Quintus 
Smyrnaeus (hence called Calaber) and Colluthus. He 
bequeathed his MSS. to Venice, where they now form 
ERS the library of St. Mark, founded by Bessarion 
in 1468. 


(8) The Hypothesis preserved in Parisinus 2764 adds 
nothing to (2). 


1 Cf. Ecthesis Chronica ed. Lambros, London 1902, p. 6 
ἦλθον ἅπαντες ἐν Κωνσταντινουπόλει. . . ὁ Νικαίας. Βησσαρίων 
- + 0° φιλόσοφος Temords καὶ ἄλλοι ἐκ τῶν ἀρχιερέων οὐκ 
ὀλίγοι. Ibid. p. 7 ὁ γὰρ Βησσαρίων ἣν πολὺς ἐνὶ τῷ λέγειν καὶ 
ἄκρος φιλόσοφος" γέγονε γὰρ καὶ γαρδινάλιος, ἔχων τιμὴν καὶ 
δόξαν οὐ τὴν τυχοῦσαν" ἠγάπησε γὰρ τὴν δόξαν τῶν ἀνθρώπων 
ἢ τοῦ θεοῦ. 


536 


INTRODUCTION 


II. Tue Text 


The best ms. of Colluthus is— 

M =codex Mutinensis, now Parisinus suppl. graec. 
388. Hall, Companion to Classical Texts, p. 278, 
says it “was never at Modena but was brought by 
the French in the Napoleonic wars at the beginning 
of the 19th century from somewhere in North 
Italy.” 

It is dated Xth or XIth century. 

This ms. was first used by I. Bekker in his edition 
of Colluthus, impensis G. Reimeri, Berlin 1816. 

The only critical edition before that of Bekker 
was: that of John Daniel van Lennep, Leovardiae 
1747, which was founded on collations (given him by 
D’Orville, Ruhnken, Valckenaer) of six Mss. 

V=Vossianus, a collation of which is in the 
library at Leyden; probably to be identified with 
Palatinus 319. 

P = Parisinus 2764. 

Q = Parisinus 2600. 

A= Ambrosianus Q 5 sup. 

L= Laurentianus xxxi. 27. . 

R = Hauniensis 60 (once belonging to Elias Putsch, 
then to J. A. Fabricius, then to H. S. Reimar). 

All these are probably derived from Bessarion’s ms. 

Other late mss. are: 

Neapolitanus ii. F 17. 

Paris. suppl. 109. 

Marcianus viiii. 1. 


537 


BIBLOGRAPHY 
Epirions 


Editio Princeps :—-Aldine, Venice, no date (probably about 
1521), along with Quintus Calaber and Tryphiodorus. 

Coluthi Lycopolitae Thebani de Raptu Helenae ac 
Judicio Paridis Poema nunc primum ab Helio Eobano 
Hesso [1488-1540] latino carmine redditum, Er- 
phurdiae (Erfurt), 1583. 

Coluthi Theb. Rapt. Hel., Iodoco Velaraeo interprete 
[Latin prose], Antuerpiae ap. Jo. Steelsium, 1539. 
Brodaei | Io. ] Annotationes in Col. Theb. de Rapt. Hel. 
librum, Basel, 1552. 

Col. Rapt. Hel. per Renatum Perdrierium ad verbum 
translatus, ὁ. brevibus Bernardi Bertrandi annota- 
tionibus. Ex off. I. Oporini, Basel 1555. Η. 
Stephanus (in Poet. Graec. principes her. carm.), 
Paris 1566. Col. Rapt. Hel. graece, per Sixtum 
Henricp&tri, Basel, 1569 (along with Q. Calaber and 
Tryphiod. “Saepius autem mendas, quae Aldinae 
inerant, fideliter exhibet non tantum, sed ubique fere 
prioribus novas accumulat” van Lennep). Michael 
Neander in Opus Aureum Part ii., Basel 1559 (preff. 
to Coluthus and Tryph. are dated March διῇ 1559). 

Founded ‘on Neander was the edition with short notes 
of Stephanus Ubelus, Franequerae (Franeker), ap. 
Aegid. Radaeum, 1600. Col. Rapt. Hel. in the 
Corpus Poet. Graec. of Jacobus Lectius, Collon. 
Allobr. (Cologne), 1606, founded on Stephanus. 
Col. Rapt. Hel., Aemil. Portus, Geneva, 1609, with 
short extracts from Neander’s notes. Claud. Dausqueii 


538 


INTRODUCTION 


Annot. in Col., Frankfort, 1614... V. E. Loescheri 
Lect. Coluth. Liber singularis, Wittenberg, 1724, 
Col. Hel. Rapt. graece, ap. Janss. Waesbergios, 
Amsterdam, 1735. Col. Rapt. Hel. recens. ad fidem 
codd. MSS. ac variantes lectiones et notas adjecit lo. 
Dan. a Lennep, Leovardiae (Leeuwarden), 1747. 
Rapt. Hel. gr. et lat. Accedit metrica interpretatio 
italica Ant. Mar. Salvini, nune primum edita. 
Recens. var. codd., MSS. lect. et select. annotat. 
adjec. Ang. Mar. Bandinius, Florence 1765. Apart 
from the translation in Italian this is simply van 
Lennep. Bandinius not merely reprints Lennep’s 
text, but, without acknowledgement, reproduces his 
Latin version, his notes, and even his preface (trans- 
lated into Italian). Cf. Buhle’s remarks on Bandini’s 
Aratus. 

Another ed. entirely founded on Lennep is Col. Lycop. 
Theb. de Rapt. Hel. libellus: ex graec. in latina 
carmina conversus, versionibus, variantibus, οἱ 
animadversionibus illustratus opera et studio Philippi 
Scio a S® Michaele. Madrid 1770, which however, 
contains, besides a trans. in Latin verse, a rendering 
in Spanish verse by Antonio Garcia (see below— 
Translations). 

Col. Rapt. Hel., curante Theoph. Christ. Harles, Nurem- 
berg, 1776, likewise entirely founded on Lennep. 

In 1816 appeared Col. Rapt. Hel. ex recensione Immanuel. 
Bekkeri, Berlin 1816. In addition to the mss. of 
Lennep, Bekker had a collation of the Mutinensis 
(containing seven hitherto unpublished lines) and 
cod. Gothanus. 

In 1823 appeared the elaborate edition of A.. Stanislas 
Julien, Paris 1823. This handsome volume contains 
a revised text, translation in French prose, a new 
Latin prose trans., a commentary, index verborum, 
etc., translations in English verse, Italian verse, 
Spanish verse, and German prose (see below Trans- 
lations) and facsimiles of two mss., Parisinus 2764 and 
Parisinus 2600. 


Col. 


— 


539 


COLLUTHUS 


New ed. of Lennep by G. H. Schaefer, Leipzig 1825. 

Lehrs, Didot, Paris 1839. . Crit. ed. E. Abel, Berlin 1880. 

W. Weinberger, Leipzig, 1896 (with Tryphiod.), crit. notes 
and ind. verb. 


TRANSLATIONS 


French :—Charles Dumolard, Paris 1747. Simon de 
Troyes, London, 1790. Cournand, Paris, 1807 
(verse). The author describes his work as an imita- 
tion, not a translation. 

German:—K. A. Kiitner, Mietau and Leipzig, 1772, 
reprinted in Julien ; Alzinger, Weimar, 1785 (verse) 
—superior, according to Julien, to that of Kiitner. 

Spanish:—Phil. Scio a S* Michaele, Madrid, 1770 
(verse). 

Italian :—Corradino dall’. Aglio, Venice, 1741; Ang. 
Teodoro Villa, Milan, 1753; Ant. Maria Salvini in 
Bandini’'s edition, Florence, 1765, reprinted in Julien. 
C. Lanza, Naples, 1881. P. Ambrogio Curti, Milan, 
1882. E. R. Tur, Leghorn, 1886. A. G. Danesi, 
Corleone, 1898. ' 

English:—The Rape of Helen by Edward Sherburne, 
London, 1651 (rhymed verse), reprinted in Julien. 


Orner LireratuRE 


A. Ludwich, Rh. Mus. xlii. (1887). M. Schneider, 
Philologus xlix. (1890). W. Weinberger, Wiener 
Studien xviii. (1896). 


540 


THE RAPE OF HELEN 


KOAAOT®OT TIOIHTOT ATKONOAITOYT 
APITATH ΤῊΣ EAENH> 


Νύμφαι Τρωιάδες, ποταμοῦ Ξάνθοιο γενέθλη, 
αἵ πλοκάμων κρήδεμνα καὶ ἱερὰ παίγνια χειρῶν 
πολλάκι πατρῴῃσιν ἐπὶ ψαμάθοισι λιποῦσαι 
ἐς χορὸν ᾿Ιδαίῃσιν ἐπεντύνασθε χορείαις, 
δεῦτε, θεμιστοπόλοιο νοήματα μηλοβοτῆρος 5 
εἴπατέ μοι, κελάδοντος ἀπορνύμεναι ποταμοῖο, 
2 > / / ἦν >/ / > 4 
ἐξ ὀρέων πόθεν ἦλθεν ἀήθεα πόντον ἐλαύνων 
ἀγνώσσων ἁλὸς ἔργα; τί δὲ χρέος ἔπλετο νηῶν 
ἀρχεκάκων, ἵνα πόντον ὁμοῦ καὶ γαῖαν ὀρίνῃ 
βουκόλος; ὠγυγίη δὲ τίς ἔπλετο νείκεος ἀρχή, τὸ 
ὄφρα καὶ ἀθανάτοισι θεμιστεύσωσι νομῆες; 

/ \ / / ” » tA 
τίς δὲ δικασπολίη; πόθεν ἔκλυεν οὔνομα νύμφης 
᾿Αργείης; αὐταὶ γὰρ ἐθηήσασθε μολοῦσαι 
᾿Ιδαίης τρικάρηνον ὑπὸ πρηῶνα Φαλάκρης 

\ Me >? / > fe tA 
καὶ Idpw οἰοπόλοισιν ἐφεδριόωντα θοώκοις 1ὅ 
καὶ Χαρίτων βασίλειαν ἀγαλλομένην ᾿Αφροδίτην. 

ὡς ὁ μὲν ὑψιλόφοισιν ἐν οὔρεσιν Αἱμονιήων 
νυμφιδίων IInAjos ἀειδομένων ὑμεναίων 
Ζηνὸς ἐφημοσύνῃσιν ἐῳνοχόει Γανυμήδης" 
πᾶσα δὲ κυδαίνουσα θεῶν ἔσπευδε γενέθλη 20 


4 Scamander, a river in the Troad. 
> A mountain in the Troad. 


542 


\ 


THE RAPE OF HELEN 


Ye Nymphs of Troy, children of the river Xanthus,* 
who oft-times leave on your father’s sands the snoods 
that bind your tresses and the sacred toys of your 
hands, and array you for the dance on Ida, come 
hither, leaving the sounding river, and declare to 
me the counsel of the herdsman judge °: say whence 
from the hills he came, sailing the unaccustomed 
deep, albeit ignorant of the business of the sea; and 
what was the occasion of the ships that were the 
spring of woe, that a cowherd should stir heaven 
and earth together; and what was the primeval 
beginning of the feud, that herdsmen should deal 
judgement to immortals : what was the suit: whence 
heard he the name of the Argive nymph@? For ye 
came yourselves and beheld, beneath the three- 
peaked cliff of Idaean Phalacra,’ Paris sitting on 
his shepherd seat and the queen of the Graces, even 
Aphrodite, glorying. So among the high-peaked 
hills of the Haemoniansf the marriage song of 
Peleus was being sung while, at the bidding of 
Zeus, Ganymede’ poured the wine. And all the 
race of the gods hasted to do honour to the white- 


ὁ Paris. @ Helen. 

¢ Peak of Ida, ef. Lyc. 24. 7 Thessalians. 

¢ Son of Tros, for his beauty carried away and made 
cup-bearer to Zeus (Hom. II. xx. 239). 


543 


COLLUTHUS 


αὐτοκασιγνήτην λευκώλενον ᾿Αμφιτρίτης, 

Ζεὺς μὲν ἀπ᾽ Οὐλύμποιο, Ποσειδάων δὲ θαλάσσης" 
ἐκ δὲ Μελισσήεντος ἀπ᾽ εὐόδμου “Ἑλικῶνος 
Μουσάων λιγύφωνον ἀ ἄγων χορὸν ἦλθεν ᾿Απόλλων" 

89 χρυσείοις * δ᾽ ἑκάτερθε τινασσόμενος πλοκάμοισι 

40 βότρυς ἀκερσεκόμης ζεφύρῳ στυφελίζετο χαίτης. 
τὸν δὲ μεθ᾽ ὡμάρτησε “κασιγνήτη Διὸς Ἥρη. 
οὐδ᾽ αὐτὴ βασίλεια καὶ ἁρμονίης ᾿Αφροδίτη 
ἐρχομένη δήθυνεν ἐς ἄλσεα ἹΚενταύροιο. 
καὶ στέφος ἀσκήσασα γαμήλιον ἤλυθε Πειθώ, 
τοξευτῆρος Ἔρωτος ἐλαφρίζουσα φαρέτρην. 
καὶ ῥριαρὴν τρυφάλειαν a ἀπὸ κροτάφοιο μεθεῖσα 
ἐς γάμον ὡμάρτησε γάμων ἀδίδακτος ᾿Αθήνη. 
οὐδὲ κασιγνήτη Λητωιὰς ᾿Απόλλωνος. 
λρτεμις ἠτίμησε καὶ ἀγροτέρη περ ἐοῦσα. 
οἷος δ᾽ οὐ κυνέην, od δήιον € ἔγχος ἀείρων 
ἐς “δόμον “Ηφαίστοιο σιδήρεος ἐ ἔρχεται ἤΑρης, 
τοῖος ἄτερ θώρηκος, ἄτερ θηκτοῖο σιδήρου 
μειδιόων ἐχόρευεν. "Epw δ᾽ ἀγέραστον ἐάσας 
οὐ Χείρων ἀλέγιζε καὶ οὐκ ἐμπάζετο Πηλεύς. 

ἡ δ᾽ ἅτε βησσήεντος ἀποπλαγχθεῖσα νομοῖο 
πόρτις ἐρημαίῃσιν ἐνὶ ξυλόχοισιν ἀλᾶται 
φοινήεντι μύωπι, βοῶν ἐλατῆρι, τυπεῖσα- 
τοῖα βαρυζήλοισιν Ἔρις πληγῇσι δαμεῖσα 
πλάζετο μαστεύουσα, θεῶν πῶς δαῖτας ὀρίνοι. 

: πολλάκι δ᾽ εὐλάιγγος ἀπὸ κλισμοῖο θοροῦσα 
ἵστατο καὶ παλίνορσος epelero: χειρὶ δὲ γαίης 
οὐδεὶ κόλπον ἄραξε καὶ οὐκ ἐφράσσατο πέτρην" 

1.1. 39, 40 were transposed to precede 25 by Graefe. 
@ Thetis. ὃ Daughter of Nereus and Doris (Hes. Th. 248). 


¢ Legendary king of the district of Helicon (schol. 
Nicand. Ther. ii.). 


544 


25 


30 


45) 


THE RAPE OF HELEN 


armed bride,* own sister of Amphitrite’: Zeus from 
Olympus and Poseidon from the sea. Out of the 
(land of Melisseus,? from fragrant Helicon, Apollo 
Jeame leading the clear-voiced choir of the Muses. 
‘On either oe fluttering with golden locks, the 
unshorn cluster of his hair was buffeted by the 
west wind. And after him followed Hera, sister 
of Zeus ; nor did the queen of harmony herself, even 
Aphrodite, loiter in coming to the groves of the 
Centaur.? Came also Persuasion,’ having fashioned 
a bridal wreath, carrying the quiver of archer Eros. 
/And Athena put off her mighty helmet from her 
\brow and followed to the marriage, albeit of marriage 
she was untaught. Nor did Leto’s daughter Artemis, 
sister of Apollo, disdain to come, goddess of the 
, wilds though she was. And iron Ares, even as, 
helmetless nor lifting warlike spear, he comes into 
the house of Hephaestus, in such wise without breast- 
plate and without whetted sword danced smilingly. 
But Strife did Cheiron leave unhonoured: Cheiron 
did not regard her and Peleus heeded her not. 

And as some heifer wanders from the pasture in 
the glen and roams in the lonely brush, smitten by 
the bloody gadfly, the goad of kine: so Strife,f over- 
come by the pangs of angry jealousy, wandered in 

~ search of a way to disturb the banquet of the gods, 
And often would she leap up from her chair, set 
with precious stones, and anon sit down again. She 
smote with her hand the bosom of the earth and 
heeded not the rock. Fain would she unbar the 


4 Cheiron, who had his cave on Pelion. ἢ 
4 Peitho, an attendant goddess of Aphrodite ; οὐ Paus. i. 
22, 3, Hes. W. 73. 
7 Eris, daughter of Night (Hes. Th. 225 ff.). 
2N 545 


COLLUTHUS 


ἤθελεν ὀρφναίων γυάλων κληῖδας ἀνεῖσα, 

ἐκ χθονίων Τιτῆνας ἀναστήσασα βερέθρων 
οὐρανὸν ὑψιμέδοντος ἀιστῶσαι Διὸς ἕδρην. 
ἤθελεν ἠχήεντα πυρὸς πρηστῆρα τινάσσειν, 
᾿Ηφαίστῳ δ᾽ ὑπόεικεν ἀμαιμακέτη περ ἐοῦσα, 
καὶ πυρὸς ἀσβέστοιο καὶ ᾿ὀπτευτῆρι. σιδήρου. 


καὶ σακέων βαρύδουπον ἐμήσατο κόμπον ἀράσσειν, 55 


εἴ ποτε δειμαίνοντες ἀναθρῴσκοιεν ἐ ἰωήν: 
ἀλλὰ καὶ ὁπλοτέρης δολίης ἀνεχάσσατο βουλῆς 
"Ape δειμαίνουσα, σιδήρεον ἀσπιδιώτην. 

ἤδη δ᾽ ᾿Εσπερίδων χρυσέων ἐμνήσατο μήλων: 
γι "Epis, πολέμοιο προάγγελον ἔρνος ἑλοῦσα 
μῆλον, ἀριζήλων ἐφράσσατο δήνεα μόχθων. 
χειρὶ δὲ δινήσασα μόθου πρωτόσπορον ἀρχὴν 
ἐς θαλίην ἔρριψε, χορὸν δ᾽ ὦρινε θεάων. 

Ἥρη μὲν παράκοιτις ἀγαλλομένη Διὸς εὐνῇ 
ἵστατο θαμβήσασα καὶ ἤθελε ληίζεσθαι- 
πασάων δ᾽ ἅτε ᾿ζύπρις ἀρειοτέρη γεγαυῖα 
μῆλον ἐ ἔχειν ἐπόθησεν, ὅτι κτέρας ἐστὶν “Epwtwv: 
Ἥρη δ᾽ οὐ μεθέηκε καὶ οὐχ ὑπόεικεν ᾿Αθήνη. 
Ζεὺς δὲ θεῶν καὶ νεῖκος ἰδὼν καὶ παῖδα καλέσσας 
τοῖον ὑφεδρήσσοντα προσέννεπεν “Eppdwva: 

εἴ τινά που Ξάνθοιο παρ᾽ ᾿Ιδαίοιο ῥεέθροις 
παῖδα Idpw Πριάμοιο, τὸν ἀγλαὸν ἡβητῆρα, 
Τροίης βουκολέοντα κατ᾽ οὔρεα, τέκνον, ἀκούεις, 
κείνῳ μῆλον ὄπαζε: διακρίνειν δὲ θέον 


“--- 


« Sons of Uranus and Ge. 
ὃ The Garden of the Hesperides lay in the far West. 


There the Hesperides, daughters of Night, guard the golden 


apples along with a dragon, son of Phorkys and Ceto; οὐ, 
Hes. Th. 215 ff. 


¢ The apple was a love-symbol and the presentation or 
throwing of an apple (μηλοβολεῖν) was a declaration of love 


546 


60 


65 


70 


THE RAPE OF HELEN 


bolts of the darksome hollows and rouse the Titans ὃ 
from the nether pit and destroy the heaven the 
seat of Zeus, who rules on high. Fain would she 
brandish the roaring thunderbolt of fire, yet gave 
way, for all her age, to Hephaestus, keeper of 
quenchless fire and of iron. And she thought to 
rouse the heavy-clashing din of shields, if haply 
they might leap up in terror at the noise. But from 
_her later crafty counsel, too, she withdrew in fear of 
\ iron Ares, the shielded warrior. ete 

And now she bethought her of the golden apples 
of the Hesperides. Thence Strife took the fruit 
that should be the harbinger of war, even the apple,’ 
and devised the scheme of signal woes. Whirling 
her arm she hurled into the banquet the primal seed 
of turmoil and disturbed the choir of goddesses. 
Hera, glorying to be the spouse and to share the 
bed of Zeus, rose up amazed, and would fain have 
seized it. And Cypris,4 as being more excellent 
than all, desired to have the apple, for that it is 
the treasure of the Loves. But Hera would not 
give it up and Athena would not yield. And Zeus, 
seeing the quarrel of the goddesses, and calling his 
son Hermaon,’ who sat below his throne, addressed 
him thus: 

“If haply, my son, thou hast heard’ of a son of 
Priam, one Paris, the splendid youth, who tends his 
herds on the hills of Troy, give to him the apple; 


(schol. Arist. Nub. 997, Lucian, Dial. Mer. xii. 1, Theocr. 
v. 88). Of. the story of Acontius and Cydippe and 
Solon’s enactment—o Σόλων ἐκέλευε τὴν νύμφην τῷ νυμφίῳ 
συγκατακλίνεσθαι μήλου Ἰζυδωνίου κατατραγοῦσαν (Plut. Praec. 
Coni. 138 d). 

4 Aphrodite. e —Hermes (Hesiod fr. 46). 

f For the type of expression cf. Ap. Rh. iv. 1560, iii. 362. 


547 


COLLUTHUS 


κέκλεο Kat βλεφάρων ξυνοχὴν καὶ κύκλα προσώπων. 75 
ἡ δὲ διακρινθεῖσα φέρειν περίπυστον ὀπώρην 
κάρτος ἀρειοτέρης ἐχέτω καὶ κόσμον ᾿Ερώτων. 
ὡς 6 μὲν Ἑρμάωνι πατὴρ ἐπέτελλε Κρονίων" 
αὐτὰρ ὁ πατρῴῃσιν ἐφημδούνῃσι πιθήσας 
εἰς ὁδὸν ἡγεμόνευε καὶ οὐκ ἀμέλησε θεάων. 80 
πᾶσα δὲ λωιτέρην καὶ ἀμείνονα δίζετο μορφήν. 
Κύπρις μὲν δολόμητις ἀναπτύξασα καλύπτρην 
καὶ περόνην θυόεντα  διαστήσασα κομάων 
χρυσῷ μὲν πλοκάμους, χρυσῷ δ᾽ ἐστέψατο χαίτην. 
τοῖα δὲ παῖδας "Epwras ἀνηὕτησεν ἰδοῦσα: 85 
ἐγγὺς ἀγών, φίλα τέκνα: περιπτύξασθε τιθήνην. 
σήμερον ἀγλαΐαι με διακρίνουσι προσώπων: 
δειμαίνω, τίνι μῆλον ὁ βουκόλος οὗτος ὁπάσσει. 
Ἥρην μὲν Χαρίτων ἱερὴν ἐνέπουσι τιθήνην, | 
φασὶ δὲ κοιρανίην μεθέπειν Kal σκῆπτρα φυλάσσειν" 90 
καὶ πολέμων βασίλειαν ἀεὶ καλέουσιν ᾿Αθήνην" β 
μούνη Kumpis ἄναλκις ἔην θεός. οὐ βασιλήων β 
κοιρανίην, οὐκ ἔγχος ἀρήιον, οὐ βέλος ἕλκω. | 
ἀλλὰ τί δειμαίνω περιώσιον ἀντὶ μὲν αἰχμῆς | 
ws θοὸν ἔγχος ἔχουσα μελίφρονα δεσμὸν ἐρώτων; 95 
κεστὸν ἔχω καὶ κέντρον ἄγω καὶ τόξον ἀείρω, 
κεστόν, ὅθεν φιλότητος ἐμῆς ἐμὸν οἶστρον ἑλοῦσαι | 
πολλάκις ὠδίνουσι Kal od θνήσκουσι γυναῖκες. | 
A > , ς ,ὔ » , | 
τοῖον ἐφεσπομένη ῥοδοδάκτυλος ἔννεπε Κύπρις. | 
of δ᾽ dpa μητρῴης ἐρατῆς ἀΐοντες ἐφετμῆς το 
φοιτητῆρες "ἔρωτες ἐπερρώοντο τιθήνῃ. 
ἄρτι μὲν ᾿Ιδαίην ὑπερέδραμον οὔρεος ἄκρην, | 
ἔνθα λιθοκρήδεμνον ὑπὸ πρηῶνος ἐρίπνην | 
κουρίζων ἐνόμευε Ἰ]άρις πατρώια μῆλα. 
1 So inferior mss., making θυόεντα feminine; πτερὸν 
ἐθυνθέντα Μ. 
548 


THE RAPE OF HELEN 


and bid him judge the goddesses’ meeting brows 
and orbed eyes. And let her that is preferred have 
the famous fruit to carry away as the prize of the 
fairer and ornament of the Loves.” 

So the father, the son of Cronus, commanded 
Hermaon. And he hearkened to the bidding of his 
father and led the goddesses upon the way and 
failed not to heed. And every goddess sought to 
make her beauty more desirable and fair. Cypris 
of crafty counsels unfolded her snood and undid the 
fragrant clasp of her hair and wreathed with gold 
her locks, with gold her flowing tresses. And she 
saw her children the Loves and called to them. 

“The contest is at hand, dear children! embrace 

_ your mother that nursed you. To-day it is beauty 
of face that judges me. I fear to whom this herds- 
man will award the apple. Hera they call the holy 
nurse of the Graces, and they say that she wields 
sovereignty aud holds the sceptre. And Athena 
they ever call the queen of battles. I only, Cypris, 
am an unwarlike goddess. I have no queenship of 
the gods, wield no warlike spear, nor draw the bow. 
But wherefore am I so sore afraid, when for spear 
I have, as it were, a swift lance, the honeyed girdle 
of the Loves! I have my girdle, I ply my goad, 
I raise my bow: even that girdle, whence women 
catch the sting of my desire, and travail often-times, 
but not unto death.” 

- 80 spake Cypris of the rosy fingers and followed. 

/ And the wandering Loves heard the dear bidding of 

‘their mother and hasted after their nurse. 

Now they had just passed over the summit of the 
hill of Ida, where under a rock-crowned cliff’s height 
young Paris herded his father’s flocks. On either 

κ᾿ 549 


COLLUTHUS 


ποιμαίνων δ᾽ ἑκάτερθεν ἐπὶ προχοῇσιν ἀναύρου 108 

νόσφι μὲν ἀγρομένων ἀγέλην πεμπάζετο ταύρων, 

νόσφι δὲ βοσκομένων διεμέτρεε πώεα μήλων" 

καί τις ὀρεσσαύλοιο δορὴ. μετόπισθε χιμαίρης 

ἐκκρεμὲς ἠώρητο καὶ αὐτῶν ἥπτετο μηρῶν, 

ποιμενίη δ᾽ ἀπέκειτο, βοῶν ἐλάτειρα, καλαῦροψ, 11 

τοῖος ἐπεὶ σύριγγος, ἐς ἤθεα βαιὸν ὁδεύων, 

ἀγροτέρων καλάμων λιγυρὴν ἐδίωκεν ἀοιδήν" 

πολλάκι δ᾽ οἰοπόλοισιν ἐνὶ σταθμοῖσιν ἀείδων 

καὶ ταύρων ἀμέλησε καὶ οὐκ ἐμπάζετο μήλων: 

ἔνθεν ἔχων σύριγγα κατ᾽ ἤθεα καλὰ νομήων 118 

Tavi καὶ “Ἑρμάωνι φίλην ἀνεβάλλετο μολπήν" 

οὐ κύνες ὠρύοντο καὶ οὐ μυκήσατο ταῦρος, 

μούνη δ᾽ ἠνεμόεσσα, βοῆς ἀδίδακτος ἐοῦσα, 

᾿Ιδαίων ὀρέων ἀντίθροος ἴαχεν ᾿Ηχώ. | 

ταῦροι δὲ χλοερῆς κεκορηότες ὑψόθι moins, 120 

κεκλιμένοι Bapdyovvov ἐπ᾽ ἰσχίον εὐνάζοντο. | 
ὡς 6 μὲν ὑψορόφοιο φυτῶν ὑπένερθε καλύπτρη 

τηλόθεν “Ἑρμάωνα διάκτορον εἶδε λιγαίνων. 

δειμαίνων δ᾽ ἀνόρουσε, θεῶν δ᾽ ἀλέεινεν ὁὀπωπήν" 

καὶ χορὸν εὐκελάδων δονάκων ἐπὶ φηγὸν ἐρείσας 125 

μήπω πολλὰ καμοῦσαν ἑὴν ἀνέκοπτεν ἀοιδήν. 

τοῖα δὲ δειμαίνοντα προσέννεπε θέσκελος Ἑρμῆς" 
γαῦλον ἀπορρίψας καὶ πώεα καλὰ μεθήσας | 

δεῦρο θεμιστεύσειας ἐπουρανίῃσι δικάζων: | 

δεῦρο διακρίνων προφερέστερον εἶδος ὁὀπωπῆς 180 

φαιδροτέρῃ τόδε μῆλον, ἐπήρατον ἔρνος, ὀπάσσαις. 
τοῖον ἀνηὔτησεν- 6 δ᾽ ἤπιον ὄμμα τανύσσας 

ἦκα διακρίνειν πειρήσατο κάλλος ἑκάστης. 

δέρκετο μὲν γλαυκῶν βλεφάρων σέλας, ἔδρακε 
δειρὴν ἢ 

χρυσῷ δαιδαλέην, ἐφράσσατο κόσμον ἑκάστης 135 

550 


THE RAPE OF HELEN 


side the streams of the mountain torrent he tended 
his herds, numbering apart the herd of thronging 
bulls, apart measuring the droves of feeding flocks. 
And behind him hung floating the hide of a moun- 
tain goat, that reached right to his thighs. But his 
-herdsman’s crook, driver of kine, was laid aside: for 
so, walking mincingly in his accustomed ways, he 
pursued the shrill minstrelsy of his pipe’s rustic 
‘reeds. Often as he sang in his shepherd's shieling © 
he would forget his bulls and heed no more his 
sheep. Hence with his pipe, in the fair haunts of 
| shepherds, he was making dear music to Pan and to 
| Hermaon. The dogs bayed not, and the bull did 
(not bellow. Only windy Echo® with her untutored 
cry, answered his voice from Ida’s hills; and the 
‘bulls upon the green grass, when they had eaten 
their fill, lay down and rested on their heavy flanks. 
So as he made shrill music under the high-roofed 
canopy of trees, he beheld from afar the messenger 
- Hermaon. And in fear he leapt up and sought to shun 
the eye of the gods. He leaned against an oak his 
choir of musical reeds and checked his lay that had 
not yet laboured much. And to him in his fear 
wondrous Hermes spake thus: 

«Fling away thy milking-pail and leave thy fair 
flocks and come hither and give decision as judge of 
the goddesses of heaven. Come hither and decide 
which is the more excellent beauty of face, and to 
the fairer give this apple’s lovely fruit.” 

So he cried. And Paris bent a gentle eye and 
quietly essayed to judge the beauty of each. He 
looked at the light of their grey eyes, he looked on 
the neck arrayed with gold, he marked the bravery 

« Nymph beloved of Pan (Mosch. 6, Long. 3. 23). ἫΝ 


COLLUTHUS 


καὶ πτέρνης μετόπισθε καὶ αὐτῶν ἴχνια ταρσῶν. 
χειρῶν μειδιόωντα δίκης προπάροιθεν ἑλοῦσα 
τοῖον ᾿Αλεξάνδρῳ μυθήσατο μῦθον ᾿Αθήνη: 
δεῦρο, τέκος Πριάμοιο, Διὸς παράκοιτιν ἐάσας 
καὶ θαλάμων βασίλειαν ἀτιμήσας ᾿Αφροδίτην 
ἠνορέης ἐπίκουρον ἐπαινήσειας ᾿Αθήνην. 
φασί σε κοιρανέειν καὶ Τρώιον ἄστυ φυλάσσειν" 
δεῦρό σε τειρομένοισι σαόπτολιν ἀνδράσι θήσω, 
μή ποτέ σοι βαρύμηνις ἐπιβρίσειεν Ἐνυώ. 
πείθεο, καὶ πολέμους τε καὶ ἠνορέην σε διδάξω. 
ὡς ἡ μὲν πολύμητις ἀνηύὔτησεν ᾿Αθήνη. 


\tota δ᾽ ὑποβλήδην λευκώλενος ἔννεπεν Ἥρη: 


εἴ με διακρίνων προφερέστερον ἔρνος ὀπάσσῃς, 
πάσης ἡμετέρης ᾿Ασίης ἡγήτορα θήσω. 
ἔργα μόθων ἀθέριζε- τί γὰρ πολέμων βασιλῆι; 
κοίρανος ἰφθίμοισι καὶ ἀπτολέμοισι κελεύει. 
οὐκ αἰεὶ θεράποντες ἀριστεύουσιν ᾿Αθήνης" 
ὠκύμοροι θνήσκουσιν ὑποδρηστῆρες ᾿Βνυοῦς. 
τοίην κοιρανίην πρωτόθρονος ὥπασεν Ἥρη. 
ἡ δ᾽ ἑανὸν βαθύκολπον, ἐς ἠέρα γυμνώσασα 
κόλπον, ἀνῃώρησε καὶ οὐκ ἠδέσσατο Κύπρις. 
χειρὶ δ᾽ ἐλαφρίζουσα μελίφρονα δεσμὸν ἐρώτων 
στῆθος ἅπαν γύμνωσε καὶ οὐκ ἐμνήσατο μαζῶν. 
τοῖα δὲ μειδιόωσα προσέννεπε μηλοβοτῆρα: 
ἡμετέρην καὶ σκῆπτρα καὶ ᾿Ασίδα κάλλιπιε γαῖαν. 
ἔργα μόθων οὐκ οἶδα- τί γὰρ σακέων ᾿Αφροδίτῃ; 
ἀγλαΐῃ πολὺ μᾶλλον ἀριστεύουσι γυναῖκες. 
ἀντὶ μὲν ἠνορέης ἐρατὴν παράκοιτιν ὀπάσσω, 


@ Paris. > Goddess of War (Hom, 71. vy. 592). 


552 


140 


145 


150 


155 


d€€6 με Kal πολέμων ἐπιλήθεο, δέχνυσο μορφὴν 160 


THE RAPE OF HELEN 


of each; the shape of the heel behind, yea and the 
soles of their feet. But, before he gave judgement, 
Athena took him, smiling, by the hand and spake to 
Alexander @ thus: 

“Come hither, son of Priam! leave the spouse of 
Zeus and heed not Aphrodite, queen of the bridal 


‘bower, but praise thou Athena who aids the prowess 


of men. They say that thou art a king and keepest 
the city of Troy. Come hither, and I will make 
thee the saviour of their city to men hard pressed : 


lest ever Enyo? of grievous wrath weigh heavily 


/upon thee. Hearken to me and I will teach thee 


war and prowess.” 

So cried Athena of many counsels, and white- 
armed Hera thus took up the tale : 

“If thou wilt elect me and bestow on me the 
fruit of the fairer, I will make thee lord of all mine 
Asia. Scorn thou the works of. battle. What has a 
king to do with war? A prince gives command 
both to the valiant and to the unwarlike. Not 
always are the squires of Athena foremost. Swift is 
the doom and death of the servants of Enyo!” 

Such lordship did Hera, who hath the foremost 
throne, offer to bestow. But Cypris lifted up. her 
deep-bosomed robe and bared her breast to the air 
and had no shame. And lifting with her hands the 
honeyed girdle of the Loves she bared all her bosom 
and heeded not her breasts. And smilingly she 
thus spake to the herdsman : 

« Accept me and forget wars: take my beauty 
and leave the sceptre and the land of Asia. I know 
not the works of battle. What has Aphrodite to do 


‘with shields? By beauty much more do women 


excel. In place of manly prowess I will give thee a 
553 


COLLUTHUS 


ἀντὶ δὲ κοιρανίης Ἑλένης ἐπιβήσεο λέκτρων" 165 
/ 
νυμφίον ἀθρήσει σε μετὰ Τροίην Λακεδαίμων. 
οὔπω μῦθος ἔληγεν, ὁ δ᾽ ἀγλαὸν ὦὥπασε μῆλον, 
- / 
ἀγλαΐης ἀνάθημα, μέγα κτέρας ᾿Αφρογενείῃ, 
neva Ki roe 
φυταλιὴν πολέμοιο, κακὴν πολέμοιο γενέθλην. 
lon » \ 
χειρὶ δὲ μῆλον ἔχουσα τόσην ἀνενείκατο φωνὴν 170 
3 / 
“Hpnv κερτομέουσα καὶ ἀντιάνειραν ᾿Αθήνην" 
2 / 
εἴξατέ μοι πολέμοιο συνήθεες, εἴξατε νίκης. | 
> he > / \ > he ὃ / ' 
ἀγλαΐην ἐφίλησα, καὶ ἀγλαΐη με διώκει. 
a bug 
aot σε, μῆτερ “Apyos, ὑπ᾽ wdivecow ἀέξειν 
ἠυκόμων Χαρίτων ἱερὸν χορόν: ἀλλά σε πᾶσαι 175 
- > , 
σήμερον ἠρνήσαντο, καὶ οὐ μίαν εὗρες ἀρωγόν. | 
οὐ σακέων βασίλεια καὶ od πυρός ἐσσι τιθήνη" 
οὔ σοι “Apns ἐπάρηξε, καὶ εἰ δορὶ μαίνεται ἤΑρης, 
οὐ φλόγες ᾿Ηφαίστοιο, καὶ εἰ φλογὸς ἄσθμα λοχεύει. 
yes voToLo, t yos μα Aoxever. 
e \ ΄ὔ 3 7 > ὔ 
οἷα δὲ κυδιάεις ἀνεμώλιος, Ατρυτώνη, 180) 
ἣν γάμος οὐκ ἔσπειρε καὶ od μαιώσατο μήτηρ, | 
> \ / ν A A er / 
ἀλλὰ σιδηρείη σε τομὴ καὶ pila σιδήρου 
πατρῴων ἀλόχευτον ἀνεβλάστησε καρήνων. 
οἷα δὲ χαλκείοισι καλυψαμένη χρόα πέπλοις 
\ 7 , ν » , ἰ 
καὶ φεύγεις φιλότητα καὶ “Apeos ἔργα διώκεις, 185: 
ἁρμονίης ἀδίδακτος, ὁμοφροσύνης ἀδαήμων. 
ἀγνώσσεις, ὅτι μᾶλλον ἀνάλκιδές εἰσιν ᾿Αθῆναι 
τοῖαι, κυδαλίμοισιν ἀγαλλόμεναι πολέμοισι, 
κεκριμένων μελέων οὔτ᾽ ἄρσενες οὔτε γυναῖκες; 
τοῖον ἐφυβρίζουσα προσέννεπε Ἰζύπρις ᾿Αθήνην. 190 
Δ ε A / ΒΟῸΣ ” ~ | 
ws ἡ μὲν πτολίπορθον ἀέθλιον ἔλλαχε μορφῆς | 


Aphrodite. 

> The Graces are generally said to be daughters of Zeus 
and Eurynome (Hes. 7h. 907), but the names of the parents 
are variously given. Here their mother is Hera. 

° ae, Athena sprang from the head of Zeus (who before 
554 


THE RAPE OF HELEN 


lovely bride, and, instead of kingship, enter thou the 
~bed of Helen. Lacedaemon, after Troy, shall see 
Ὁ thee a bridegroom.” 

Not yet had she ceased speaking and he gave her 
the splendid apple, beauty’s offering, the great 
treasure of Aphrogeneia,“ a plant of war, of war an 

~evil seed. And she, holding the apple in her hand, — 
uttered her voice and spake in mockery of Hera and 
(manly Athena : = ἘΞ 

“Yield to me, accustomed as ye be to war, yield 
me the victory. Beauty have I loved and beauty 
follows me. They say that thou, mother of Ares, 
didst with travail bear the holy choir of the fair- 

™tressed Graces.? But to-day they have all denied 

~ thee and not one hast thou found to help thee. 
Queen but not of shields and nurse but not of fire, 
Ares hath not holpen thee, though Ares rages with 
the spear: the flames of Hephaestus have not 
~holpen thee, though he brings to birth the breath of 

~ fire. And how vain is thy vaunting, Atrytone°! 
whom marriage sowed not nor mother bare, but 
-cleaving of iron and root of iron made thee spring 
without bed of birth from the head of thy sire. And 
how, covering thy body in brazen robes, thou dost 
flee from love and pursuest the works of Ares, 
untaught of harmony and wotting not of concord. 
Knowest thou not that such Athenas as thou are the 
more unvaliant —-exulting in glorious wars, with ~ 
limbs at feud, neither men nor women ?” ὦ 

Thus spake Cypris and mocked Athena. So she 
got the prize of beauty that should work the ruin of 
her birth had swallowed her mother Metis) when it was cleft 
by the axe of Hephaestus or Prometheus (Hes. Th. 924, 
Hom. H. 28, Pind. O. vii. 35, Apollod. i. 3. 6). 


4 Of, 302 ff. ih 


COLLUTHUS 


Ἥρην ἐξελάσασα Kat ἀσχαλόωσαν ᾿Αθήνην" 
ἱμείρων δ᾽ ὑπ᾽ ἔρωτι καὶ ἣν οὐκ εἶδε διώκων, 
Δύσπαρις ἀθροίσας ἐπὶ δάσκιον ἤγαγεν ὕλην 
ἀνέρας ἐργοπόνοιο δαήμονας ᾿Ατρυτώνης. 
ἔνθα πολυπρέμνοιο δαϊζόμεναι δρύες Ἴδης 
ἤριπον ἀρχεκάκοιο περιφροσύνῃσι Φερέκλου, 
ὃς τότε μαργαίνοντι χαριζόμενος βασιλῆι 
νῆας ᾿Αλεξάνδρῳ δρυτόμῳ τεκτήνατο χαλκῷ. 
αὐτῆμαρ προβέβουλε καὶ αὐτῆμαρ κάμε νῆας, 
νῆας δ᾽ οὐκ ἐνόησε καὶ οὐκ ἤσκησεν ᾿Αθήνη. 
ἄρτι μὲν ᾿Ιδαίων ὀρέων ἠλλάξατο πόντον 
καὶ λεχέων ἐπίκουρον ἐφεσπομένην ᾿Αφροδίτην 
πολλάκις ἀκταίοισιν ἱλασσάμενος θυέεσσιν 
ἔπλεεν “Ελλήσποντον ἐπ᾽ εὐρέα νῶτα θαλάσσης, 
τῷ δὲ πολυτλήτων σημήια φαίνετο μόχθων. 
κυανέη μὲν ὕπερθεν ἀναθρῴσκουσα θάλασσα 
οὐρανὸν ὀρφναίων ἑλίκων ἐζώσατο δεσμῷ 
εἶθαρ ἀμιχθαλόεντος ἀπ᾽ ἠέρος ὄμβρον ἱεῖσα, 
ἐκλύσθη δέ τε πόντος ἐρεσσομένων ἐρετάων. 
τόφρα δὲ Δαρδανίην καὶ Τρώιον οὖδας ἀμείψας 
᾿Ισμαρίδος μεθέηκε παραπλώων στόμα λίμνης, 
αἶψα δὲ Θρηικίοιο μετ᾽ οὔρεα Παγγαίοιο 
Φυλλίδος ἀντέλλοντα φιλήνορος ἔδρακε τύμβον 


« Athena. 

> The Trojan who built the Wooden Horse (1. v. 59 ££.). 

¢ Athena was patron of all carpentry, but in this case 
she withheld her blessing. 

“In Thrace, between Maroneia and Stryma (Herod. 
vii. 109). 

* Strabo 331 and 680; famous for its mines of gold and 
silver. 

7 Phyllis was daughter of the king of Thrace. When 
Demophoon son of Theseus (the same story is told of his 


556 


195 


200 


205 


THE RAPE OF HELEN 


a city, repelling Hera and indignant Athena. And 
unhappy Paris, yearning with love and pursuing one 
whom he had not seen, gathered men that were 
skilled of Atrytone,* queen of handicraft, and led 
them to a shady wood. There the oaks from Ida of 
_~many tree-trunks were cut and felled by the excel- 
~~ lent skill of Phereclus,’ source of woe; who at that 
time, doing pleasure to his frenzied king, fashioned 
with the wood-cutting bronze ships for Alexander. 
On the same day he willed and on the same made 
the ships: ships which Athena¢ neither planned nor 
wrought, = ee <5 
And now he had just left the hills of Ida for 
the deep, and, after with many a sacrifice upon the 
_ shore he had besought the favour of Aphrodite that 
attended him to aid his marriage, he was sailing the 
_ Hellespont over the broad back of the sea, when 
~ to him there appeared a token of his laborious toils. 
( The dark sea leapt aloft and girdled the heaven 
-with a chain of dusky coils and_straightway poured 
(forth rain from the murky air, and the sea was 
turmoiled as the oarsmen rowed. Then when he 
had passed Dardania and the land of Troy and, 
coasting along, left behind the mouth of the 
Ismarian lake,’ speedily, after the mountains of 
Thracian Pangaeon,’ he saw rising into view the 
tomb of Phyllis’ that loved her husband and the 


brother Acamas) was on his way home from Troy to Athens 
he married Phyllis. When he left for Athens he promised 
to return for her soon. As he failed to return, she went nine 
journeys to the shore to look for his returning ship. Hence 
the place was called Ἐννέα ‘Odol, the site of the later 
colony of Amphipolis (cf. Aeschin. De fals. leg. 31). Phyllis 
cursed Demophoon and hanged herself; cf. Ov. Her. 2, 
Rem. Am. 605. 


Doll 


COLLUTHUS 


uA 
καὶ δρόμον ἐννεάκυκλον ἀλήμονος εἶδε κελεύθου, 
> , 
ἔνθα διαστείχουσα κινύρεο, Φυλλίς, ἀκοίτην 
/ 
δεχνυμένη παλίνορσον ἀπήμονα Δημοφόωντα, 
τὰ N ΄ὔ 
ὁππότε νοστήσειεν ᾿Αθηναίης ἀπὸ δήμων. 
~ \ Vd A \ ε Ve 
τῷ δὲ βαθυκλήροιο διὰ χθονὸς Αἱμονιήων 
όὸὰ , sity >A Τῷ ef r 
ἐξαπίνης ἀνέτελλεν ᾿Αχαιίδος ἄνθεα γαίης, 
Φθίη βωτιάνειρα καὶ εὐρυάγυια Μυκήνη. 
ἔνθεν ἀνερχομένοιο παρ᾽ εἰαμενὰς ᾿Ερυμάνθου 
3 / 
Σπάρτην καλλιγύναικα, φίλην πόλιν ᾿Ατρείωνος, 
κεκλιμένην ἐνόησεν ἐπ᾽ Εϊὐρώταο ῥεέθροις. 
Ay, 
ἄγχι δὲ ναιομένην ὑπὸ δάσκιον οὔρεος ὕλην 
γείτονα παπταίνων ἐρατὴν θηεῖτο Θεράπνην. 
A A ” A / > \ / 
οὔπω κεῖθεν ἔην δολιχὸς πλόος, οὐδὲ γαλήνης 
δηρὸν ἐρεσσομένων ἠκούετο δοῦπος ἐρετμῶν, 
‘ ‘ 5 / 2 49 δὲ αὶ / 
καὶ χθονὸς εὐκόλποισιν ἐπ᾽ ἠιόνεσσι βαλόντες 
πείσματα νηὸς ἔδησαν, ὅσοις ἁλὸς ἔργα μεμήλει. 
αὐτὰρ ὁ χιονέοιο λοεσσάμενος ποταμοῖο 
” 
ᾧχετο φειδομένοισιν ἐπ᾽ ἴχνεσιν ἴχνος ἐρείδων, 
\ / ε vA 
μὴ πόδες ἱμερόεντες ὑποχραίνοιντο κονίης, 
, 
μὴ πλοκάμων κυνέῃσιν ἐπιβρίσαντες ἐθείρας 
3 ᾿ lol 
ὀξύτερον σπεύδοντος ἀναστέλλοιεν ἀῆται. 
” > 
ἄρτι μὲν αἰπύδμητα φιλοξείνων ναετήρων 
UA 
δώματα παπταίνων Kal γείτονας ἐγγύθι νηοὺς 
» 9 a ~ 
ἄστεος ἀγλαΐην διεμέτρεεν, ἔνθα μὲν αὐτῆς 
,ὔ 
χρύσεον ἐνδαπίης θηεύμενος εἶδος ᾿Αθήνης, 
wy 
ἔνθα δὲ ἹΚαρνείοιο φίλον κτέρας ᾿Απόλλωνος 
9 
οἶκον ᾿Αμυκλαίοιο παραγνάμψας Ὑακίνθου, 
hid 
ov ποτε κουρίζοντα σὺν ᾿Απόλλωνι νοήσας 


δῆμος ᾿Αμυκλαίων ἠγάσσατο, μὴ Διὲ Λητὼ 


α Thessalians. > A river in Arcadia. 


558 


ἢ 


21: 


22( 


228 


24 


Ι 


THE RAPE OF HELEN 


nine-circled course of her wandering path, where 
thou didst range and cry, Phyllis, waiting the safe 
return of thy husband Demophoon, when he should 
come back from the land of Athena. Then across 
the rich land of the Haemonians@ there suddenly 
arose upon his eyes the flowery Achaean land, 
Phthia, feeder of men, and Mycene of wide streets. 
Then past the marshes where Erymanthus? rises he 
marked Sparta of fair women, the dear city of the 
son of Atreus, lying on the banks of the Eurotas. 
And hard by, established under a hill’s shady wood, 
he gazed upon her neighbour, lovely Therapne. 
Thence they had not far to sail, nor was the noise of 
the oars rowing in the calm sea heard for long, 


/when they cast the hawsers of the ship upon the 
, shores of a fair gulf and made them fast, even they 


whose business was the works of the sea. 

And he washed him in the snowy river and went 
his way, stepping with careful steps, lest his lovely 
feet should be defiled of the dust; lest, if he 
hastened more quickly, the winds should blow 
heavily on his helmet and stir up the locks of his 
hair. 

And now he scanned the high-built houses of the 
hospitable inhabitants and the neighbouring temples 
hard by, and surveyed the splendour of the city; 


_here gazing on the golden image of native’ Athena 
herself, and there passing the dear treasure of 
\Carneian Apollo, even the shrine of Hyacinthus of 


Amyclae, whom once while he played as a boy with 
Apollo the people of Amyclae marked and marvelled 
whether he too had not been conceived and borne 


¢ See Pausan. iii. 13. 3-4, With ‘‘native” (ἐνδαπία) 
Athena we may compare Carneios Oiketes. 
559 


COLLUTHUS | 


a 9 
κυσαμένη καὶ τοῦτον ἀνήγαγεν: αὐτὰρ ᾿Απόλλων 
> 207 7, re 6 Nd 24 
οὐκ ἐδάη Ledipw ζηλήμονι παῖδα φυλάσσων. 
γαῖα δὲ δακρύσαντι χαριζομένη βασιλῆι 
ἄνθος ἀνηέξησε, παραίφασιν ᾿Απόλλωνος, 
ἄνθος ἀριζήλοιο φερώνυμον ἡβητῆρος. 
» ΄, 
ἤδη δ᾽ ἀγχιδόμοισιν ἐπ᾽ ᾿Ατρείδαο μελάθροις 
ἵστατο θεσπεσίῃσιν ἀγαλλόμενος χαρίτεσσιν. 251 
οὐ Διὶ τοῖον ἔτικτεν ἐπήρατον via Θυώνη- 
ey 7 / ς \ > / 2 ‘Or 
ἱλήκοις, Διόνυσε: καὶ εἰ Διός ἐσσι γενέθλης, β 
καλὸς ἔην καὶ κεῖνος ἐπ᾽ ἀγλαΐῃσι προσώπων. 
ε \ ,ὔ θ λ ,ὔ mY to > a 
ἡ δὲ φιλοξείνων θαλάμων κληῖδας ἀνεῖσα 
> , « ᾿ if ᾽ὔ 3 \ 
ἐξαπίνης ‘EXdevyn perexiabe δώματος αὐλὴν 25: 
καὶ θαλερῶν προπάροιθεν ὀπιπεύουσα θυράων 
ὡς ἴδεν, ὧς ἐκάλεσσε καὶ ἐς μυχὸν ἤγαγεν οἴκου | 
, > , 7 eye ¢ ] 
καί μιν ἐφεδρήσσειν νεοπηγέος ὑψόθεν ἕδρης 
ἀργυρέης ἐπέτελλε: κόρον δ᾽ οὐκ εἶχεν ὁὀπωπῆς | 
+ \ / 3 id ,ὔ 
ἄλλοτε δὴ χρύσειον ὀισαμένη Κυθερείης 26! 
“- > ΄ / 27\ QQ? 9 2 | 
κοῦρον omumevew θαλαμηπόλον-- ὀψὲ δ᾽ ἀνέγνω, | 
¢ > ” ” ,ὔ > 3 S ’ 
ὡς οὐκ ἐστιν "Epws: βελέων δ᾽ οὐκ εἶδε φαρέτρην-- 
/ 3 3 oh > , / 
πολλάκι δ᾽ ἀγλαΐῃσιν ἐυγλήνοισι προσώπων 
παπταίνειν ἐδόκευε τὸν ἡμερίδων βασιλῆα. | 
3 > > ς , \ δῷ 3 Ya | 
ἀλλ᾽ ody ἡμερίδων θαλερὴν ἐδόκευεν ὁπώρην 26 
πεπταμένην χαρίεντος ἐπὶ ξυνοχῆσι καρήνου. 
ὀψὲ δὲ θαμβήσασα τόσην ἀνενείκατο φωνήν" 
ξεῖνε, πόθεν τελέθεις; ἐρατὸν γένος εἰπὲ καὶ ἡμῖν. 
ἀγλαΐην μὲν ἔοικας ἀριζήλῳ βασιλῆι, 
Η ΐ aia 
« The hyacinth was feigned to have sprung from the 
blood of Hyacinthus or of Aias, and to bear on its petals 


either Y, ὁ.6. the initial of Ὑάκινθος, or the letters AT, ἐ.6. the 
initials of AIAI= Alas! or of Aias : Ovid, Met. xiii. 394 f, : 
rubefactaque sanguine tellus 


purpureum viridi genuit de caespite florem, 
qui prius Oebalio fuerat de vulnere natus. 


560 


THE RAPE OF HELEN 


by Leto to Zeus. But Apollo knew not that he was 
keeping the youth for envious Zephyrus. And the 
earth, doing a pleasure to the weeping king, brought 
forth a flower to console Apollo, even that flower α 
which bears the name of the splendid youth. 

And at last by the halls of the son? of Atreus, 
builded near, he stood, glorying in his marvellous 
graces. Not so fair was the lovely βοὴ ὁ whom 
Thyone@ bare to Zeus: forgive me, Dionysus! even 
if thou art of the seed of Zeus, he, too, was fair as 
his face was beautiful. And Helen unbarred the 
bolts of her hospitable bower and suddenly went to 
the court of the house, and, looking in front of the 
goodly doors, soon as she saw, so soon she called 
him and led him within the house, and bade him sit 
on a new-wrought chair of silver. And she could not 
satisfy her eyes with gazing, now deeming that she 
looked on the golden youth that attends on Cythereia® 
—and late she recognized that it was not Eros; she 
saw no quiver of arrows—and often in the beauty of 
his face and eyes she looked to see the king/ of the 
vine: but no blooming fruit of the vine did she 
behold spread upon the meeting of his gracious 
brows. And after long time, amazed, she uttered 
her voice and said : 

“Stranger, whence art thou? declare thy fair 
lineage even unto us. In beauty thou art like unto 


littera communis [= A] mediis pueroque viroque 
inscripta est foliis, haec nominis [4.185], illa querellae [Aiat], 


It is the ‘‘ lettered hyacinth” of Theocr, x. 28 and Milton’s 
‘sanguine flower inscribed with woe,” Lycid. 106. The 
flower seems to be not our hyacinth but a species of lark- 
spur, Delphinium Ajacis. For the myth see Frazer, Adonis, 

Attis, Osiris i. p. 313 ff. > Menelaus. 
° Dionysus. 4 Semele. 4 Aphrodite. 4 Dionysus. 
20 561 


COLLUTHUS 


ἀλλὰ τεὴν οὐκ οἶδα παρ᾽ ᾿Αργείοισι γενέθλην. 270 
πᾶσαν Δευκαλίωνος ἀμύμονος οἷδα γενέθλην" 
οὐ Πύλον ἠμαθόεσσαν ἐ ἔχεις, Νηλήιον οὖδας, 
--᾿Αντίλοχον δεδάηκα, τεὴν δ᾽ οὐκ εἶδον ὀπωπὴν 
οὐ Φθίην χαρίεσσαν, ἀριστήὼν τροφὸν ἀνδρῶν" 
οἶδα περικλήιστον ὅλον γένος Αἰακιδάων, 275 
ἀγλαΐην Indjos, ἐυκλείην Τελαμῶνος, 
ἤθεα Πατρόκλοιο καὶ ἠνορέην ᾿Αχιλῆος. 
τοῖα Πάριν ποθέουσα λιγύθροος ἔννεπε νύμφη" 
αὐτὰρ ὁ “μειλιχίην ἠμείβετο γῆρυν ἀνοίξας" 
εἴ τινά ee Φρυγίης ἐνὶ πείρασι γαῖαν ἀκούεις, 280 
Ἴλιον, ἣν πύργωσε Ἰ]οσειδάων καὶ ᾿Απόλλων- 
εἴ τινά που πολύολβον ἐνὶ Tpoin βασιλῆα 
ἔκλυες εὐώδινος ἀπὸ Kpovidao γενέθλης" 
ἔνθεν ἀριστεύων ἐμφύλια πάντα διώκω. 
εἰμί, γύναι, ἸΤριάμοιο πολυχρύσου φίλος υἱός, 285 
εἰμὶ δὲ Δαρδανίδης: ὁ δὲ Δάρδανος ἐκ Διὸς ἦεν, 
ᾧ καὶ ἀπ᾽ Οὐλύμποιο θεοὶ ξυνήονες ἀνδρῶν 
πολλάκι θητεύουσι καὶ ἀθάνατοί περ ἐόντες" 
ὧν ὁ μὲν ἡμετέρης δωμήσατο τείχεα πάτρης, 
τείχεα μαρμαίροντα, Ποσειδάων καὶ ᾿Απόλλων. 290 
αὐτὰρ ἐγώ, βασίλεια, δικασπόλος εἰμὶ θεάων" 
καὶ γὰρ ἀκηχεμένῃσιν ἐπουρανίῃσι δικάζων 
Κύπριδος ἀγλαΐην καὶ ἐπήρατον ἤνεσα μορφήν, 
ἡ δὲ περικλήιστον, ἐμῶν ἀντάξιον ἐ ἔργων, 
νύμφην ἡ ἱμερόεσσαν ἐμοὶ κατένευσεν ὀπάσσαι, 296 
ἣν “Ἑλένην ἐ ἐνέπουσι, κασιγνήτην ᾿Αφροδίτης, 
ἧς ἕνεκεν τέτληκα καὶ οἴδματα τόσσα περῆσαι. 
δεῦρο γάμον κεράσωμεν, ἐπεὶ Κυθέρεια κελεύει" 
μή με καταισχύνειας, ἐμὴν «μὴ» Κύπριν ἐλέγξῃς. 
« Apollo and Poseidon served Laomedon for a year and 
_ for him the walls of Troy (Apollod. ii. 108, Jl. vii. 452). 
562 


| 
| 


THE RAPE OF HELEN 


a glorious king, but thy family I know not among 
the Argives. I know all the family of blameless 
Deucalion. Not in sandy Pylus, the land of Neleus, 
hast thou thy dwelling: Antilochus I know, but thy 
face I have not seen; not in gracious Phthia, nurse 
of chieftains; I know the whole renowned race of 
the sons of Aeacus, the beauty of Peleus, the fair 
fame of Telamon, the gentleness of Patroclus and 
the prowess of Achilles.” 
So, yearning for Paris, spake the lady of sweet 
And he opened honeyed speech and answered 
er: 
“ If haply thou hast heard of a town in the bounds 
of Phrygia, even Ilios, whereof Poseidon built the 
towers and Apollo: if thou hast haply heard of a 
very wealthy king in Troy, sprung from the fruitful 
race of Cronus: thence am I a prince and pursue all 
the works of my race. I, lady, am the dear son of 
Priam rich in gold, of the lineage of Dardanus am I, 
and Dardanus was the son of Zeus. And the gods 
from Olympus, companioning with men, oft-times 
became his servants,? albeit they were immortal: 
_of whom Poseidon with Apollo built the shining walls 
of our fatherland. And I, O Queen, am the judge 
of goddesses. For, deciding a suit for the aggrieved 
daughters of heaven, I praised the beauty of Cypris 
and her lovely form. And she vowed that she would 
give me a worthy recompense of my labour, even a 
glorious and a lovely bride, whom they call Helen, 
sister of Aphrodite; and it is for her sake that I 
have endured to cross such seas. Come, let us join 
wedlock, since Cythereia bids. Despise me not, put 
not my love to shame. I will not say-—why should 


563 


COLLUTHUS 


th 
οὐκ ἐρέω" τί δὲ τόσσον ἐπισταμένην σε διδάξω; 
5 / 
οἶσθα yap, ὡς Μενέλαος ἀνάλκιδός ἐστι yevebAns: 
a , a 
ov Tota γεγάασιν ἐν ᾿Αργείοισι γυναῖκες, 
/ 
καὶ γὰρ ἀκιδνοτέροισιν ἀεξόμεναι μελέεσσιν 
ἀνδρῶν εἶδος ἔχουσι, νόθοι δ᾽ ἐγένοντο γυναῖκες. 
\ “ 3 \ 
evverrev’ ἡ δ᾽ ἐρόεσσαν ἐπὶ χθονὶ πῆξεν ὁπωπὴν 
> , 
δηρὸν ἀμηχανέουσα καὶ οὐκ ἠμείβετο νύμφη. 
/ 
ope δὲ θαμβήσασα τόσην ἀνενείκατο φωνήν" 
> ~ a / 4 
ἀτρεκέως, ὦ ξεῖνε, τεῆς ποτε πυθμένα πάτρης 
> ? 
τὸ πρὶν ἐδωμήσαντο Ι]οσειδάων καὶ ᾿Απόλλων; 
ἤθελον ἀθανάτων δαιδάλματα κεῖνα νοῆσαι 
καὶ νομὸν οἰοπόλοιο λιγύπνοον ᾿Απόλλωνος, 
ἔνθα θεοδμήτοισι παρὰ προθύροισι πυλάων 
λλ 4 iA "ὃ > / A Ἂν λλ 
πολλάκις εἰλιπόδεσσιν ἐφέσπετο βουσὶν ᾿Απόλλων. 
ἀγρέο νῦν Σπάρτηθεν ἐπὶ Τροίην με κομίζων. 
ἕψομαι, ὡς Κυθέρεια γάμων βασίλεια κελεύει. 
οὐ τρομέω Μενέλαον, ὅταν Τροίη με νοήση. 
τοίην συνθεσίην καλλίσφυρος ἔννεπε νύμφη. 
νὺξ δέ, πόνων ἄμπαυμα μετ᾽ ἠελίοιο κελεύθους, 
ὕπνον ἐλαφρίζουσα, παρήορον ὥπασεν ἠῶ 
> ᾽, % ὃ \ δὲ “λ » > if 
ἀρχομένην" δοιὰς de πύλας weer ὀνείρων, 
τὴν μὲν ἀληθείης-- κεράων ἀπελάμπετο κόσμος--- 
ἔνθεν ἀναθρῴσκουσι θεῶν νημερτέες ὀμφαί, 
τὴν δὲ δολοφροσύνης, κενεῶν θρέπτειραν ὀνείρων. 
αὐτὰρ 6 ποντοπόρων Ἑλένην ἐπὶ σέλματα νηῶν 
? ΤΑ 3 / ΤᾺ ’ὔ 
ἐκ θαλάμων ἐκόμισσε φιλοξείνου Μενελάου, 
΄, Dr 8, ΄ «ς ,ὔ ,ὕὔ 
κυδιόων" δ᾽ ὑπέροπλον ὑποσχεσίῃ Κυθερείης 
φόρτον ἄγων ἔσπευδεν ἐς ἤἵλιον ἰωχμοῖο. 
‘EB / δ᾽ > , > / 7 
ρμιονὴ ὃ ἀνέμοισιν ἀπορρίψασα καλύπτρην 
3 
ἱσταμένης πολύδακρυς ἀνέστενεν ἠριγενείης, 
«. Of 187 Ε᾿ 
ὁ Gates of Horn and of Ivory (Hom. Od. xix. 562 ff.). 
564 


300 


305 


310 


315 


320 


325) 


THE RAPE OF HELEN 


I tell thee who knowest so much? for thou knowest 
that Menelaus is of an unvaliant race. Not such as 
thou are women born among the Argives ; for they 
wax with meaner limbs and have the look of men 
and are but bastard women.” @ 

So he spake. And the lady fixed her lovely eyes 
upon the ground, and long time perplexed replied 
not. But at last amazed she uttered her voice and 
said : 

« Of a surety, O stranger, did Poseidon and Apollo » 
in days of old build the foundation of thy fatherland? 


/ Fain would I have seen those cunning works of the 
_ immortals and the shrill-blowing pasture of shepherd 


Apollo, where by the god-built vestibules of the gates 
Apollo often-times followed the kine of shuffling gait. 
Come now, carry me from Sparta unto Troy. I will 
follow, as Cythereia, queen of wedlock, bids. I do 
not fear Menelaus, when Troy shall have known 
me. 

So the fair-ankled lady plighted her troth. And 
night, respite from labour after the journey of the 
sun, lightened sleep and brought the beginning of 
wandering morn; and opened the two gates? of 
dreams: one the gate of truth—it shone with the 
sheen of horn — whence leap forth the unerring 
messages of the gods; the other the gate of deceit, 


‘nurse of empty dreams. And he carried Helen 


from the bowers of hospitable Menelaus to the 
benches of his sea-faring ships; and exulting exceed- 
ingly in the promise of Cythereia he hastened to 
carry to Ilios his freight of war. 

And Hermione’ cast to the winds her veil and, 
as morning rose, wailed with many tears. And often 


¢ Daughter of Menelaus and Helen. 
565 


COLLUTHUS . 


πολλάκι δ᾽ ἀμφιπόλους θαλάμων ἔκτοσθε λαβοῦσα, 33 
ὀξύτατον βοόωσα τόσην ἀνενείκατο φωνήν" 

παῖδες, πῆ με λιποῦσα πολύστονον ᾧχετο μήτηρ, 
ἢ χθιζὸν σὺν ἐμοὶ ϑαλάμων κληῖδας ἑλοῦσα — 
ἔδραθεν ὑπνώουσα καὶ ἐς μίαν ἤλυθεν εὐνήν; | 

ἔννεπε δακρυχέουσα, συνωδύροντο δὲ παῖδες. 88, 
ἀγρόμεναι δ᾽ ἑκάτερθεν ἐπὶ προθύροισιν ἐρύκειν 
Ἑρμιόνην στενάχουσαν ἐπειρήσαντο γυναῖκες". 

τέκνον ὀδυρομένη, γόον εὔνασον. ᾧχετο μήτηρ, 
νοστήσει παλίνορσος- ἔτι κλαίουσα νοήσεις. 
οὐχ ὁράᾳς; γοεραὶ μὲν ἐπιμύουσιν ὀπωπαί, 84, 
πυκνὰ δὲ μυρομένης θαλεραὶ μινύθουσι παρειαί. 
ἢ τάχα νυμφάων ἐς ὁμήγυριν ἀγρομενάων 
ἤλυθεν, ἰθείης δὲ παραπλάζουσα κελεύθου 
ἵσταται ἀσχαλόωσα, καὶ ἐς λειμῶνα μολοῦσα 
‘Opdwr δροσόεντος ὑπὲρ πεδίοιο θαάσσει, 34: 
ἢ χρόα πατρῴοιο, λοεσσομένη ποταμοῖο 
ᾧχετο καὶ δήθυνεν ἐπ᾿ Edpdrao ῥεέθροις. 

τοῖα δὲ δακρύσασα πολύστονος ἔννεπε κούρη: 
οἶδεν ὄρος, ποταμῶν ἐδάη ῥόον, οἶδε κελεύθους 
ἐς ῥόδον, ἐς λειμῶνα" τί μοι φθέγγεσθε, γυναῖκες; 35¢ 
ἀστέρες ὑπνώουσι, καὶ ἐν σκοπέλοισιν caver | 
ἀστέρες ἀντέλλουσι, καὶ οὐ παλίνορσος ἱκάνει. | 
μῆτερ ἐμή, τίνα χῶρον ἔχεις; τίνα δ᾽ οὔρεα ναίεις; 
πλαζομένην θῆρές σε κατέκτανον; ἀλλὰ καὶ αὐτοὶ 
θῆρες ἀριζήλοιο Διὸς τρομέουσι γενέθλην. 865 
ἤριπες ἐξ ὀχέων χθαμαλῆς ἐπὶ νῶτα κονίης ᾿ | 
σὸν δέμας οἰοπόλοισιν ἐνὶ δρυμοῖσι λιποῦσα; | 
ἀλλὰ πολυπρέμνων ξυλόχων ὑπὸ δάσκιον ὕλην 
δένδρεα παπτήνασα καὶ αὐτῶν μέχρι πετήλων 
σὸν δέμας οὐκ ἐνόησα: καὶ οὐ νεμεσίζομαι ὕλῃ. 860 


566, 


THE RAPE OF HELEN 


taking her handmaidens outside her chamber, with 
shrillest cries she uttered her voice and said : 

“ Girls, whither hath my mother gone and left me 
in grievous sorrow, she that yester-even with me 
took the keys of the chamber and entered one bed 
with me and fell asleep?” 

So spake she weeping and the girls wailed with her. 
And the women gathered by the vestibule on either 
side and sought to stay Hermione in her lamentation : 

“Sorrowing child, stay thy lamentation; thy 
mother has gone, yet shall she come back again. 
While still thou weepest, thou shalt see her. Seest 
not? thine eyes are blinded with tears and thy 
blooming cheeks are marred with much weeping. 
Haply she hath gone to a meeting of women in 
assembly and, wandering from the straight path, 
stands distressed, or she hath gone to the meadow 
and sits on the dewy plain of the Hours, or she hath 
gone to wash her body in the river of her fathers 
and lingered by the streams of Eurotas.” 

Then spake the sorrowful maiden weeping: 
“She knows the hill, she hath skill of the rivers’ 
flow, she knows the paths to the roses, to the meadow. 
What say ye to me, women? The stafs sleep and 
she rests among the rocks; the stars rise, and she 
comes not home. My mother, where art thou ? in 
what hills dost thou dwell? Have wild beasts slain 
thee in thy wandering? but even the wild beasts 
tremble before the offspring of high Zeus. Hast 
thou fallen from thy car on the levels of the dusty 
ground, and left thy body in the lonely thickets ? 
put I have scanned the trees of the many-trunked 
copses in the shady wood, yea, even to the very leaves, 
yet thy form have I not seen; and the wood I do 


567 


COLLUTHUS 
» 

μὴ διεροῖς στονόεντος ἐπ᾽ Εὐρώταο ῥεέθροις 
νηχομένην ἐκάλυψεν ὑποβρυχίην σε γαλήνη; 
ἀλλὰ καὶ ἐν ποταμοῖσι καὶ ὃν πελάγεσσι θαλάσσης 
Νηιάδες ζώουσι καὶ οὐ κτείνουσι γυναῖκας. 

ὡς ἡ μὲν στενάχιζεν: ἀνακλίνουσα. δὲ δειρὴν  ϑ8ϑ0 
ὕπνον ἔπνει, θανάτοιο συνέμπορον: ἢ γὰρ ἐτύχθη 
ἄμφω ἀναγκαίη ξυνήια πάντα λαχόντε 
ἔργα παλαιοτέροιο κασιγνήτοιο διώκειν. 
ἔνθεν ἀκηχεμένοισι βαρυνόμεναι βλεφάροισι 
πολλάκις ὑπνώουσιν, ὅτε κλαίουσι, γυναῖκες. 810 
ἡ μὲν ἀλητεύουσα δολοφροσύνῃσιν ὀνείρων 
μητέρα παπταίνειν ὠίσατο, τοῖα, δὲ κούρη 
ἴαχε θαμβήσασα καὶ ἀχνυμένη περ ἐοῦσα: 

χθιζὸν ὀδυρομένην με δόμων ἔκτοσθε φυγοῦσα 
κάλλιπες ὑπνώουσαν ὑπὲρ λεχέων γενετῆρος. 375 
ποῖον ὄρος μεθέηκα; τίνας προλέλοιπα Koddvas ; 
οὕτω καλλικόμοιο μεθ᾽ ἁρμονίην ᾿Αφροδίτης; 

τοῖα δὲ φωνήσασα προσέννεπε Τυνδαρεώνη- 
τέκνον ἀκηχεμένη, μὴ μέμφεο δεινὰ παθούσῃ: 
ὃ χθιζός με μολὼν ἀπατήλιος ἥρπασεν ἀνήρ. 380 
ἔννεπεν. ἡ δ᾽ ἀνόρουσε καὶ οὐχ ὁρόωσα τιθήνην 
ὀξυτέρῃ πολὺ μᾶλλον ἀνεβρυχήσατο φωνῇ: 
ἠερίης, ὄρνιθες, ἐύπτερα τέκνα γενέθλης, 
εἴπατε νοστήσαντες ἐπὶ Κρήτην Μενελάῳ: 
χθιζὸν ἐπὶ Σπάρτην τις ἀνὴρ ἀθεμίστιος ἐλθὼν 385 
ἀγλαΐην ξύμπασαν ἑῶν ἀλάπαξε μελάθρων. : 

Ὡς ἡ μὲν πολύδακρυς ἐς ἠέρα φωνήσασα, 
μητέρα μαστεύουσα, μάτην ἐπλάζετο κούρη. 
καὶ Ἱζικόνων πτολίεθρα καὶ Αἰολίδος πόρον Ἕλλης 

* Sherburne renders : 


Sleep is death’s twin, and as the younger brother, 
In every thing does imitate the other, 


568 


THE RAPE OF HELEN 


not blame. Have the smooth waters covered thee in 
the depths, swimming in the wet streams of murmur- 
ing Eurotas ? but even in the rivers and in the depths 
of the sea the Naiads live and do not slay women.” 

Thus she wailed, and leaning back her neck 
breathed Sleep who walks with Death ; for verily it 
was ordained that both should have all things in 
common and pursue the works of the elder brother : 4 
hence women, weighed down with sorrowing eyes, 
oft-times, while they weep, fall asleep. And wander- 
ing amid the deceits of dreams she fancied that she 
saw her mother; and, amazed, the maiden, in her 
grief cried out: ; 

“Yesterday to my sorrow thou didst fly from me 
out of the house and left me sleeping on my father’s 
bed. What mountain have I left alone? What hill 
have I neglected? Followest thou thus the love of 
fair-tressed Aphrodite ? 

Then the daughter of Tyndareus? spake to her 
and said : 

“My sorrowful child, blame me not, who have 
suffered terrible things. The deceitful man who 
came yesterday hath carried me away!” 

So she spake. And the maiden leapt up, and 
seeing not her mother, uttered a yet more piercing 
cry and wailed : 

“ Birds, winged children of the brood of air, go 
ye to Crete and say to Menelaus: ‘Yesterday a 
lawless man came to Sparta and hath laid waste all 
the glory of thy halls!’ ”’ 

So spake she with many tears to the air, and 
seeking for her mother wandered in vain. And to 
the towns of the Cicones¢ and the straits of 


> Helen. ¢ Hom. Od. ix. 39; a people of Thrace: 
569 


COLLUTHUS | 


AapSavins λιμένεσσιν ὃ νυμφίος ἤγαγε νύμφην. δ89, 
πυκνὰ δὲ τίλλε κόμην, χρυσέην δ᾽ ἔρριψε καλύπτρην 
Κασσάνδρη νεόφοιτον am ἀκροπόληος ἰδοῦσα. 
Τροίη δ᾽ ὑψιδόμων πυλέων κληῖδας ἀνεῖσα 

δέξατο νοστήσαντα τὸν ἀρχέκακον πολιήτην. 


« Athamas, father of Helle, was son of Aeolus. 


570 


THE RAPE OF HELEN 


Aeolian® Helle, into the havens of Dardania the 
bridegroom brought his bride. And Cassandra on 
the acropolis, when she beheld the new-comer, 
* tore her hair amain and flung away her golden veil. 
But Troy unbarred the bolts of her high-built gates 
and received on his return her citizen that was the 
source of her woe. 


571 


roel siete 


TRYPHIODORUS 


INTRODUCTION 


τ. Tue Lirz or TrypPHioporus 


For the life of Tryphiodorus we have a notice in Suidas 
8.0. Tpugpiddwpos ‘of Egypt, grammarian and epic poet ; 
wrote Marathoniaca, Capture of LIlios (Ἰλίου ἅλωσις), The 
Story of Hippodameia (τὰ καθ᾽ ᾿Ιπποδάμειαν), an Odyssey 
leipogrammatos—this being a poem on the labours (κάματοι) 
of Odysseus and myths concerning him and other things.” 

A second entry in Suidas under the name of Tryphio- 
dorus merely says that he ‘‘ wrote various things in epic 
verse ; a paraphrase of the similes (παραβολαί) of Homer ; 
and very many other things.” 

As to the nature of the lipogrammatic Odyssey we 
have two notes : 


(1) Suidas s.v. Νέστωρ of Laranda in Lycia, epic poet ; 
. . . Ἰλιάδα γράψας λειπογράμματον ἤτοι ἀστοιχείωτον ; in 
similar fashion Tryphiodorus wrote an Odyssey; for in 
the First Book (a) the letter a is not found; and so in 
each rhapsody its (denoting) letter is wanting.” 

(2) Eustathius, Hom. Od. prooem. 1379, in referring to 
freak variations on Homer mentions that one Timolaos 
“ὦ of Larissa or Macedon or both,” wrote a Trica, which 
he composed by inserting a line of his own alternately 
with a line of Homer’s Iliad (παρενέβαλε τῇ Ἰλιάδι στίχον 
πρὸς στίχον), and he goes on say: ‘‘it is said that 
Tryphiodorus wrote an ’Odvocem λειπογράμματος, from 
which he banished sigma.” 


Similarly we are told by Suidas 5.0. Ἰδαῖος Ῥόδιος that 
Idaios παρεμβαλὼν στίχον στίχῳ ἐδίπλασε τὴν ποίησιν 'Ομήρου, 
575 


TRYPHIODORUS 


and 8.0. Πίγρης that Pigres of Halicarnassus, brother of 
the famous Artemisia, τῇ ᾿Ιλιάδι παρενέβαλε κατὰ στίχον 
ἐλεγεῖον, οὕτω γράψας" Μῆνιν ἄειδε, θεά, ἸΤηληϊάδεω ᾿Αχιλῆος, 
Μοῦσα, σὺ γὰρ πάσης πείρατ᾽ ἔχεις σοφίη. Of. K. Lehrs, 
Kleine Schriften, p. 2, who mentions that Joshua Barnes 
published at London in 1679 a Greek poem entitled 
Susias, contaiming the story of Esther in hexameters 
‘* presse ad Iliadis exemplar factis,” thus : Μῆνιν ἄειδε, θεά, 
᾿Αμαληχιάδεω ᾿Αμανῆος | οὐλομένην, ἣ μυρί᾽ Ἑβραίοις ἄλγε᾽ ἔθηκε 
| Περσέων δ᾽ ἰφθίμους κεφαλὰς "Αἵδι προΐαψεν. See Sandys, 
H.C.8. ii. p. 357f. for this and Bentley’s verdict that 


‘* Barnes had as much Greek, and understood it about as 


well, as an Athenian blacksmith.” 
The above is the sum of our meagre information about 
Tryphiodorus. For the rest it is inferred from the fact 


that Tryphiodorus imitates Nonnus (circ. a.p. 400?), and 


is himself imitated by Colluthus, that he lived about the 
middle of the 5th century. 
_ It has been inferred that he was a Christian on the 


very insufficient ground that in v. 604f. he uses the 


phrase καὶ οὐ νοέοντα τοκήων ἀμπλακίας ἀπέτινο. But there 
is nothing specifically Christian about this language. 


From the occurrence of the name of the Egyptian | 


goddess Triphis or Thriphis only in a couple of inserip- 
tions (one of the time of Tiberius, the other of the time 
of Trajan) from the district Athribis it has been argued 
by Letronne that he belonged to that district and that 
the correct spelling of his name is Triphiodorus. 


τ. Tar mss. 


1. The best ms. is F = Laurentianus xxxii. 16, 
written in a.p, 1280, which once belonged to Franciscus 
Philelfus who bought it in Constantinople on 4th January 
A.D. 1423 from the wife of Johannes Chrysoloras. It 


contains, among other things, Nonni Dionysiaca, Apol- | 


lonius Rhodius, Theocritus, Hesiod, Oppian, Moschus, 
Nicander, Tryphiodorus, Gregorius Nazianzenus. 


576 


INTRODUCTION 


2. Inferior mss. (fifteenth-sixteenth cent.) are : 
Ambrosianus Q 5 sup. 
Hauniensis 60 (= Reimerianus = Putschianus). 
Laurentianus xxxi. 27. 
Neapolitanus ii. F 17. 
Parisinus 2600. 
Parisinus suppl. 109. 


m. BrsriogRaPHy 


Editio Princeps: Aldine, Venice (no date, 1521? with 
Colluth. and Q. Smyrn.). Renatus Perdrierius, 
Basel, 1555 (Lat. trans.). F. Jamotius, Paris, 1557, 
1578. H. Stephanus (in Poet. Gr. prince. heroici 
carminis), Paris, 1566. Sixtus Henricpetri, Basel, 
1569. Michael Neander in Part II. of his Opus 
Aureum, Leipzig, 1577. W. H. Xylander, Basel, 
1578 (Lat. verse trans. in his Lat. trans. of Diodorus 
Siculus). Nicodemus Frischlin, Frankfort, 1588. 
Lectius, in Corpus Poet. Gr., Collon. Allobr. 1606. 
Claud. Dausqueius, Annot. in T., Frankfort, 1614. 

J. Merrick, Oxford, 1739 (English trans. in rhymed 
verse), Oxford 1741 (notes and Frischlin’s Lat. verse 
trans.). 

T. Northmore, London, 1791, 1804. 6, H. Schaefer, 

: Leipzig, 1808. Wernicke, Leipzig, 1819. 

W. Weinberger, Leipzig, 1896 (text and crit. notes). 

Translations :—(Besides those mentioned above) : Trifiodoro 
“Lo Sterminio di Troia” by Carlo Lanza (in Atti 
dell’ Accademia Pontaniana 14), Naples, 1881. 

Trojas Intagning. En sang af Tryfiodoros i svensk 
ofversdttning af Carl A. Melander, Progr. Umea, 
1894. 

Other Literature :—H. Koechley, Beitrage zur Kritik u. 
Erklarung des Tryphiodor, Opusc. Philol. 2, Leipzig, 
1882, 

H. v. Herwerden, Ad Poetas graecos, Mnemosyne xiv. 
(1886). Jo. Petersen, Tryphiod. Exe. Tr. 2 in 
Genethliacon Gottingense, Halle, 1888. F. Noack, 


Qp 577 


TRYPHIODORUS 


Die Quellen des Tryphiod., Hermes xxvii. (1892). 
A. Ludwich, Tryphiodorea, Progr. acad. Regimontii, 
1895. 

W. Weinberger, Studien.zu Tryphiodor ἃ. Kolluth., 
Wiener Studien xviii. (1896). 


578 


i γχτὶ ts 


Ba ‘rink TOUALOAOTET 


"ἢ ss Ρ t 


a. we ‘siphon’ WOSYE “Sadie over rnaahor ie 
θα, νὸν ch ἀδτοῖι ἀτετοῦ δἰ pier’ soak: 3A 
oy = mbes Ὁ ake St cOhaws lds, παῖτδο, 
_ Reig Δ Aiea Kae IDA νον κι oe 


osod νουθά te AeF οἷο en nes 2 ag 


KING OF IL os 
“AKING OF Ὦ 
? Ἄρα Τ ϑὰνα sont > “δ ce obs ΕΣ é 23% PM ae sacha ων i 
ἼΦῚ ΤΩΝ & λυ tries ἢ το xcoonpi AH ofrisesa¥lp 
Se ον: ee are MOoDH povaqad τοῦθ (eg τὐποηὰρ 
oe a SOS SED 145 aGswob 


πνᾶν ἄ τὸ {51 

“οὶ ae 8; MOSAATTON wher bh tsa ae 
nthe 549 κυ. fam ἀ3θ09) te τ cx 
‘isonet WORDS SASS τὴ 

; ~sebyrgonutt ποτοβιρίξε, τα τοῦθ 
ΠΈΣ ΜῈ ΜΟΟΆΡΕ Εν ) ΣΧ με 343 a 
peamern’ ὄτϑοῦ Bio Hog, Δ, ἡ ων 


ᾧ,5} ἘΠΕ a6 OTISR 


eye DAG mA 


coe 


χοὸς none 3. 204436 ΠΥ HOt gor TED Ὃ ani hy » δη 
, 2 τ = ΓΝ 
πρλϑαν sOGAS θα 5. vourgond ar 
κα ce peay ee ne — 
eer te qis if iz & ing Ay yd Hise tet Sasod iiehoye ot E Fik ae 
υἷι; eas ave ἂς dendage batleilog ods 3: εὐἰονδο ἡ uk Ὁ 
ἜΑΣΙ ᾧ : : ἐὰν ᾿αϑηλσφο λό wed κατὰ» 
Ὁ} Ἐ εἶ δ Ὺ Ε 
“haa 
¥ ᾿ > 


TPY®IOAQPOYT AAQSIS IAIOY | 


Τέρμα πολυκμήτοιο μεταχρόνιον πολέμοιο 
καὶ λόχον, ᾿Αργείης ἱππήλατον ἔργον ᾿Αθήνης, 
αὐτίκα μοι σπεύδοντι πολὺν διὰ μῦθον ἀνεῖσα 
ἔννεπε, Καλλιόπεια, καὶ ἀρχαίην ἔριν ἀνδρῶν 
κεκριμένου πολέμοιο ταχείῃ λῦσον ἀοιδῇ. δ᾽ 

ἤδη μὲν δεκάτοιο κυλινδομένου λυκάβαντος 
γηραλέη τετάνυστο φόνων ἀκόρητος ᾿Ἑνυὼ | 

pwot te καὶ Δαναοῖσιν" ἐναιρομένων δ᾽ dpa 

φωτῶν | 

δούρατα κεκμήκει, ξιφέων δ᾽ ἔθνῃσκον ἀπειλαί, 
σβέννυτο θωρήκων ἐνοπή, μινύθεσκε δ᾽ ἑλικτὴ 10. 
ἁρμονίη ῥηχθεῖσα φερεσσακέων τελαμώνων, 
ἀσπίδες οὐκ ἀνέχοντο μένειν ἔτι δοῦπον ἀκόντων, 
λύετο καμπύλα τόξα, κατέρρεον ὠκέες ἰοί. 
¢ rene. ον > Oe ea , | 
ἵπποι δ᾽ οἱ μὲν ἄνευθεν ἀεργηλῆς ἐπὶ φάτνης | 
οἰκτρὰ κάτω μύοντες ὁμόζυγας ἔστενον ἵππους, 161 
οἱ δ᾽ αὐτοὺς ποθέοντες ὀλωλότας ἡνιοχῆας. 

κεῖτο δὲ Πηλείδης μὲν ἔχων ἅμα νεκρὸν ἑταῖρον, 
᾿Αντιλόχῳ δ᾽ ἐπὶ παιδὶ γέρων ὠδύρετο Νέστωρ, 

: 

Αἴας δ᾽ αὐτοφόνῳ βριαρὸν δέμας ἕλκεϊ λύσας 
φάσγανον ἐχθρὸν ἔλουσε μεμηνότος αἵματος ὄμβρῳ. 30 


« The wooden horse built by Epeius with help of Athena; 
Kur. Tr, 534 calls it the « polished ambush of the Argives,” 
ξεστὸν λόχον ᾿Αργείων. 

> Patroclus. 


580 


THE TAKING OF ILIOS 


Tue long delayed end of the laborious war and 
the ambush, even the horse” fashioned of Argive 
Athena, straightway to me in my haste do thou tell, 
O Calliopeia, remitting copious speech; and the 
ancient strife of men, in that war now decided, do 
thou resolve with speedy song. 

Already the tenth year was rolling on and old 
had grown the strain of war, insatiate of blood, 
for Trojans and Danaans. With slaying of men the 
spears were weary, the menace of the swords died, 
quenched was the din of breastplate, rent and 
— perishing the coiled fabric of shield-carrying baldricks ; 
the shield endured no more to abide the hurtling of 
javelins, unstrung was the bent bow, the swift arrows 
decayed. And the horses—some apart at the idle 
manger, with heads bowed piteously, bewailed their 
fellow horses, some mourned to miss their perished 
charioteers. 

Low lay the son of Peleus and with him his 
comrade? dead: over his young son Antilochus old 
Nestor mourned: Aias with self-dealt wound had 
unstrung his mighty form, and bathed his foeman’s 
sword in the rain of frenzied blood. The Trojans, 


¢ In Iliad vii. Aias and Hector fight an indecisive duel 
and on parting exchange gifts, Aias giving his belt and 
receiving Hector’s sword (l.c. 303), with which he afterwards 
slew himself; Pind. 1. iii. (iv.), Soph. Aj. 815 f. 584 


TRYPHIODORUS 


Τρωσὶ δὲ λωβητῆρσιν ἐφ᾽ Ἕκτορος ἑλκυθμοῖσι 
μυρομένοις οὐ μοῦνον ἔην ἐπιδήμιον ἄλγος, 
ἀλλὰ καὶ ἀλλοθρόοις ἐπὶ πένθεσι κωκύοντες 
δάκρυσιν ἠμείβοντο πολυγλώσσων ἐπικούρων. 
κλαῖον μὲν Λύκιοι Σαρπηδόνα, τόν ποτε μήτηρ 
ἐς Τροίην μὲν ἔπεμψεν ᾿ἀγαλλομένη Διὸς εὐνῇ, 
δουρὶ δὲ Πατρόκλοιο Μενοιτιάδαο πεσόντα 
αἵματι δακρύσας ἐχύθη πατρώιος ἀήρ. 
καὶ δολίην ὑπὸ νύκτα κακῷ πεπεδημένον ὕπνῳ 
“Ῥῆσον μὲν Θρήικες ἐκώκυον' ἡ δ᾽ ἐπὶ πότμῳ 
Μέμνονος οὐρανίην νεφέλην ἀνεδήσατο μήτηρ ᾿ 
φέγγος ὑποκλέψασα κατηφέος ἤματος ᾿Ηώς. 
αἱ δ᾽ ἀπὸ Θερμώδοντος ἀρηιφίλοιο γυναῖκες 
κοπτόμεναι περίκυκλον ἀθηλέος ὄμφακα μαζοῦ 
παρθένον ὠδύροντο δαΐφρονα Πενθεσίλειαν, 
ἥτε πολυξείνοιο χορὸν πολέμοιο μολοῦσα 
θηλείης ὑπὸ χειρὸς ἀπεσκέδασεν νέφος ἀνδρῶν 
νῆας ἐς ἀγχιάλους" μελίῃ δέ ἑ μοῦνος ὑποστὰς 
καὶ κτάνε καὶ σύλησε καὶ ἐκτερέιξεν ᾿Αχιλλεύς. 
εἱστήκει δ᾽ ἔτι πᾶσα θεοδμήτων ὑπὸ πύργων 
Ἴλιος ἀκλινέεσσιν ἐπεμβεβαυῖα θεμέθλοις, 
ἀμβολίῃ δ᾽ ἤσχαλλε δυσαχθέι λαὸς ᾿Αχαιῶν. 


SSS τοξεις «τες ἔχε πε ξεν κε -aertan Gowen we 


α Iad xvi. 490. Patroclus slays Sarpedon, son of Zeus 
and Laodamia (Jl. vi. 198 f.). Zeus caused a miraculous 
darkness to fall upon the battle (11. xvi. 567), the body of 
Sarpedon was_taken up by Apollo and attended by Sleep | 
and Death to Lycia (ibid. 676 ff.). 

> Ihad x, 435 ff. Rhesus was killed in his sleep by 
Odysseus and Diomedes. 

¢ Memnon, son of Tithonus and Kos (Dawn), is unknown 
to the Iliad: in Od. iy, 188 he is mentioned as slayer of 
Antilochus and xi. 522 as the most beautiful of those who 
fought at Troy. His death at the hands of Achilles was 


582 


THE TAKING OF ILIOS 


lamenting over the shameful dragging of Hector, 
had not only their domestic pain, but groaning for 
the woes of men of alien speech they wept in turn 
for their many-tongued allies. The Lycians wept 
for. Sarpedon® whom his mother, glorying in the 
bed of Zeus, had sent to Troy; howbeit he fell by 
the spear of Patroclus, son of Menoetius, and there 
was shed about him by his sire a mist that wept tears 
of blood. The Thracians wailed for Rhesus ? that in 
the guileful night was fettered by an evil sleep. 
And for the fate of Memnon® Eos, his mother, hung 
aloft a cloud in heaven and stole away the light of 
shamefast day. The women from Thermodon ὦ dear 
to Ares, beating the unripe, unsucked circle of their 
breasts, mourned the warlike maiden Penthesileia, 
who came unto the dance of war, that war of many 
guests, and with her woman’s hand scattered the 
cloud of men back to their ships beside the sea; only 
Achilles withstood her with his ashen spear and slew 
and despoiled her and gave her funeral. 

And still all Ilios stood, by reason of her god-built 
towers, established upon unshaken foundations, and at 
the tedious delay the people of the Achaeans chafed. 


told in the Aethiopis of Arctinus, and is described in Qu. 
Smyrnaeus ii. 542 f., as also the miraculous darkness which 
enabled his friends to recover his body, 550 f. 

᾿ς @ The Amazons, a race of warrior women, whose chief 
home was Themiscyra on the Thermodon in Pontus. They 
were reputed to mutilate one or both breasts to enable them 
better to draw the bow and throw the spear; hence they 
got their name (a + wafés) ** without breasts.” (Here Tryph. 
seems to take the word to mean “ποῖ giving suck.” 
Philostr, Her. xx. 42 makes it ‘‘unsuckled.”) They were in 
art represented usually with right breast bare. Their queen 
Penthesileia was slain at Troy by Achilles, who was smitten 
with love for her as she died and gave her honourable burial. 


583 


TRYPHIODORUS 


καί νύ Kev ὑστατίοισιν ἐποκνήσασα πόνοισιν 
ἀκάματός περ ἐοῦσα μάτην ἵδρωσεν ᾿Αθήνη, 
εἰ μὴ Δηιφόβοιο γαμοκλόπον ὕβριν ἐάσας 
᾿Ιλιόθεν Δαναοῖσιν ἐπὶ ἕένος ἤλυθε μάντις, 
οἷα δέ που μογέοντι χαριζόμενος Μενελάῳ 
ὀψιτέλεστον ὄλεθρον ἐῇ μαντεύσατο πάτρῃ. 
οἱ δὲ βαρυζήλοιο θεοπροπίῃς Ἑλένοιο 
αὐτίκα μηκεδανοῖο μόθου τέλος ἠρτύναντο. 
καὶ Σκῦρον μὲν ἔβαινε λιπὼν εὐπάρθενον ἄστυ 
υἱὸς ᾿Αχιλλῆος καὶ ἐπαινῆς Δηιδαμείης- 
μήπω δ᾽ εὐφυέεσσιν ἰουλίζων κροτάφοισιν 
ἀλκὴν πατρὸς ἔφαινε νέος περ ἐὼν πολεμιστής. 
ἦλθε δὲ καὶ Δαναοῖσιν ἐὸν βρέτας ἁγνὸν ἄγουσα 
ληιστὴ μὲν ἐοῦσα, φίλοις δ᾽ ἐπίκουρος ᾿Αθήνη. 
ἤδη καὶ βουλῇσι θεῆς ὑποεργὸς Ἐπειὸς 
Τροίης ἐχθρὸν ἄγαλμα πελώριον ἵππον ἐποίει. 
καὶ δὴ τέμνετο δοῦρα καὶ ἐς πεδίον κατέβαινεν 
Ἴδης ἐξ αὐτῆς, ὁπόθεν καὶ πρόσθε Φέρεκλος 
ns ῆς, ρ ρ 
νῆας ᾿Αλεξάνδρῳ τεκτήνατο, πήματος ἀρχήν. 
ποίει δ᾽ εὐρυτάτῃς μὲν ἐπὶ πλευρῆῇς ἀραρυῖαν 
γαστέρα κοιλήνας, ὅπόσον νεὸς ἀμφιελίσσης 
ὀρθὸν ἐπὶ στάθμην μέγεθος τορνώσατο τέκτων. 


“ Helenus, son of Priam and Hecuba, had the gift of 
prophecy. After the death of Paris he and Deiphobus, his 
brother, were rivals for the hand of Helen. Deiphobus 
being preferred, Helenus retired to Ida, where he was b 
the advice of Calchas seized and brought to the Gitel 
camp. He advised the Greeks to build the wooden horse 
and to carry off the Palladium, 

> Neoptolemus, son of Achilles, by Deidamia, daughter of 
Lycomedes, king of Seyros. His original name was Pyrrhus, 
and he was called Neoptolemus because he went to war 
when young, or because his father did so (Paus. x. 26. 4). 
Helenus prophesied that Troy would not be taken without 
Neoptolemus and the arrows of Heracles—then in the 


584 


50 


55 ] 


60 


— 


THE TAKING OF ILIOS 


And now Athena, unwearying though she be, would 
have shrunk from her latest labour and all her sweat 
had been in vain, had not the seer® turned from the 
bride-stealing lust of Deiphobus and come from Ilios 
as guest of the Danaans, and, as doing a favour to 
Menelaus in his travail, prophesied the late-fulfilled 
ruin of his own fatherland. And at the prophesying 
of jealous Helenus they straightway prepared an end 
of their long toil. From Scyros, too, leaving that 
city of fair maidens, came the son? of Achilles 
and august Deidameia ; who, albeit he mantled not 
yet on his goodly temples the down of manhood, 
showed the prowess of his sire, young warrior though 
he was. Came, too, Athena to the Danaans with her 
holy image*; the prey of war but a helper to her 
friends. 

Now, too, by the counsel of the goddess her 
servant Epeius? wrought the image that was the 
foe of Troy, even the giant horse. And wood was 
cut and came down to the plain from Ida, even Ida 
whence formerly Phereclus built the ships for 
Alexander *’ that were the beginning of woe. Fitted 
to broadest sides he made its hollow belly, in size as 
a curved ship which the carpenter turns true to the 


possession of Philoctetes. So Neoptolemus was brought 
from Scyrus by Odysseus alone, or with Phoenix (Soph. 
Ph, 343, cf. Philostr. Imag. ii.), or with Diomedes (Quint. 


Smyrn. vii. 169 ff.). 
¢ The Palladium, the ancient image of Athena, said to 


have been given by Zeus to Dardanus, on the possession of | 


which the safety of Troy depended. It was stolen by ~ 


Odysseus and Diomedes. 
4 Epeius, son of Panopeus, built the Wooden Horse by 


means of which Troy was taken. Od. viii. 493, xi, 523, 
Verg. A. ii. 264, 
4 Paris. 


585 


TRYPHIODORUS ᾿ 


αὐχένα δὲ γλαφυροῖσιν ἐπὶ στήθεσσιν ἔπηξε 65 
ξανθῷ πορφυρόπεζαν ἐπιρρήνας τρίχα χρυσῷ" 

ἡ δ᾽ ἐπικυμαίνουσα μετήορος αὐχένι κυρτῷ 

ἐκ κορυφῆς λοφόεντι κατεσφρηγίζετο δεσμῷ. 
ὀφθαλμοὺς δ᾽ ἐνέθηκε λιθώπεας ἐν δυσὶ κύκλοις 
γλαυκῆς βηρύλλοιο καὶ αἱμαλέης ἀμεθύσσου.:. 6 ῸΟ Τὸ 
τῶν δ᾽ ἐπιμισγομένων διδύμης ἀμαρύγματι χροιῆς 
γλαυκῶν φοινίσσοντο λίθων ἑλίκεσσιν ὀπωπαί. 
ἀργυφέους δ᾽ ἐχάραξεν ἐπὶ γναθμοῖσιν ὀδόντας 

ἄκρα δακεῖν σπεύδοντας ἐυστρέπτοιο χαλινοῦ" 

καὶ στόματος μεγάλοιο λαθὼν ἀνέῳξε. κελεύθους 1 
ἀνδράσι κευθομένοισι παλίρροον ἄσθμα φυλάσσων, 
καὶ διὰ μυκτήρων φυσίζοος ἔρρεεν ἀήρ. 

οὔατα δ᾽ ἀκροτάτοισιν ἐπὶ κροτάφοισιν ἄρηρεν 

ὀρθὰ μάλ᾽, αἰὲν ἑτοῖμα μένειν σάλπιγγος ἀκουήν. 
νῶτα δ᾽ ὁμοῦ λαγόνεσσι συνήρμοσε καὶ ῥάχιν ὑγρήν, 80 
ἰσχία δὲ γλουτοῖσιν ὀλισθηροῖσι συνῆψε. 

σύρετο δὲ πρυμνοῖσιν ἐπ᾽ ἴχνεσιν ἔκλυτος οὐρὴ 
ἄμπελος ὡς γναμπτοῖσι καθελκομένη θυσάνοισιν. 

οἱ δὲ πόδες βαλίοισιν ἐπερχόμενοι γονάτεσσιν 
εὔπτερον ὥσπερ ἔμελλον ἐπὶ δρόμον ὁπλίζεσθαι, 85 
οὕτως ἠπείγοντο" μένειν δ᾽ ἐκέλευεν ἀνάγκη. 

οὐ μὲν ὑπὸ κνήμῃσιν ἀχαλκέες ἔξεχον ὁπλαί, 
μαρμαρέης δ᾽ ἑλίκεσσι κατεσφήκωντο χελώνης 
ἁπτόμεναι πεδίοιο μόγις κρατερώνυχι χαλκῷ. 
κληιστὴν δ᾽ ἐνέθηκε θύρην καὶ κλίμακα τυκτήν, 90 
ἡ μὲν ὅπως ἀίδηλος ἐπὶ πλευρῇς ἀραρυῖα 

ἐνθα καὶ ἔνθα φέρῃσι λόχον κλυτόπωλον ᾿Αχαιῶν, 

ἡ δ᾽ ἵνα λυομένη τε καὶ ἔμπεδον εἰς ὃν ἰοῦσα 

εἴη σῴιν καθύπερθεν ὁδὸς καὶ νέρθεν ὁροῦσαι. 

ἀμφὶ δέ μιν λευκοῖο κατ᾽ αὐχένος ἠδὲ γενείων 98 
ἄνθεσι πορφυρέοισι πέριξ ἔζωσεν ἱμάντων 


586 


THE TAKING OF ILIOS 


line. And the neck he fixed to carven breast and 
bespangled the purple-fringed mane with yellow 
gold; and the mane, waving aloft on the arched 
neck, was sealed on the head with crested band. . In 
two circles he set the gem-like eyes of sea-green 
beryl and blood-red amethyst: and in the mingling 
of them a double colour flashed; the eyes were red 
and ringed with the green gems. In the jaws he 
set white rows of jagged teeth, eager to champ the 
ends of the well-twisted bit. And he opened secret 
paths in the mighty mouth to preserve the tide of 
breath for the men in hiding, and through the 
nostrils flowed the life-giving air. Ears were fixed 
on the top of its temples, pricked up, ever ready to 
await the sound of the trumpet. And back and 
flanks he fitted together and supple backbone, and 
joined hip-joint to smooth hip. Unto the heels of 
the feet trailed the flowing tail, even as vine 
weighed down with twisted tassels. And the feet 
that moved with the dappled knees—even as if they 
were about to set them to the winged race, so were 
they eager, yet constraint bade them bide. Not 
without bronze were the hooves that stood below 
the legs, but they were bound with spirals of 
shining tortoise and hardly touched the ground with 
the strong-hoofed bronze. Also he set therein a 
barred door and a fashioned ladder: the one that 
funseen, fitted to the sides, it might carry the 
} Achaean company of the famous horse this way and 
(that; the other that, unfolded and firmly put 
together, it might be for them a path whereby to 
speed upward or downward. And he girt the horse 
about on white neck and cheeks with purple- 
flowered straps and coiling spirals of compelling 
587 


TRY PHIODORUS 


καὶ σκολιῇς ἑλίκεσσιν ἀναγκαίοιο χαλινοῦ 
κολλήσας ἐλέφαντι καὶ ἀργυροδίνεϊ χαλκῷ. 
αὐτὰρ ἐπειδὴ πάντα κάμεν μενεδήιον ἵππον, 
κύκλον ἐυκνήμιδα ποδῶν ὑπέθηκεν ἑκάστῳ, 
ἑλκόμενος πεδίοισιν ὅπως πειθήνιος εἴη 
μηδὲ βιαζομένοισι δυσέμβατον οἶμον ὁδεύῃ. 

ὡς ὁ μὲν ἐξήστραπτε φόβῳ καὶ κάλλεϊ πολλῷ 
3 7 > ς 4 N ? / > , 
εὐρύς θ᾽ ὑψηλός τε- τὸν οὐδέ κεν ἀρνήσαιτο͵ 
εἴ μιν ζωὸν ἔτετμεν, ἐλαυνέμεν ἵππιος "Αρης. 
> \ , , A ΣᾺ 2 SY PRI ΤΡ Τὰ τιν 
ἀμφὶ δέ μιν μέγα τεῖχος ἐλήλατο, μή τις ᾿Αχαιῶν 
πρίν μιν ἐσαθρήσειε, δόλον δ᾽ ἀνάπυστον ἀνάψῃ. 
οὗ δὲ Μυκηναίης ᾿Αγαμέμνονος ἐγγύθι. νηὸς 
λαῶν ὀρνυμένων ὅμαδον καὶ κῦμα φυγόντες 
ἐς βουλὴν βασιλῆες ἀολλίσθησαν ᾿Αχαιῶν. 
ἡ δὲ τανυφθόγγοιο δέμας κήρυκος ἑλοῦσα 

Vd 3 a δ a > v4 

συμφράδμων ᾿Οδυσῆι παρίστατο θοῦρις Αθήνη 
ἀνδρὸς ἐπιχρίουσα μελίχροϊ νέκταρι φωνήν. 
αὐτὰρ ὁ δαιμονίῃσι νόον βουλῇσιν ἑλίσσων 
πρῶτα μὲν εἱστήκει κενεόφρονι φωτὶ ἐοικὼς 
ὄμματος ἀτρέπτοιο βολὴν ἐπὶ γαῖαν ἐρείσας, 
4 > > / > / 3 - 3 Ψ 
ἄφνω δ᾽ ἀενάων ἐπέων ὠδῖνας ἀνοίξας 
δεινὸν ἀνεβρόντησε καὶ ἠερίης ἅτε πηγῆς 
ἐξέχεεν μέγα λαῖτμα μελισταγέος νιφετοῖο- 

> aN ἫΝ \ ΄, δ 5 x 

ὦ φίλοι, ἤδη μὲν κρύφιος λόχος ἐκτετέλεσται 

A > ~ 

χερσὶ μὲν ἀνδρομέῃσιν, ἀτὰρ βουλῇσιν ᾿Αθήνης. 
ὑμεῖς δ᾽, οἵτε μάλιστα πεποίθατε κάρτεϊ χειρῶν, 
mpoppoves ἀλκήεντι νόῳ καὶ τλήμονι θυμῷ 


Yj 
σπέσθε μοι: od yap ἔοικε πολὺν χρόνον ἐνθάδ᾽ ἐόντας 


Sn παν τῷοὄ ΤΙ ee ee σο. 


“ ἵππιος, an unusual title for Ares. Cf. βρισάρματος Hes, 


Se. 441. 


> Ikad iii. 216 Antenor says, “" When Odysseus of many 


588 


100 


105 


110 


115 


THE TAKING OF ILIOS 


bridle inlaid with ivory and silver-flashing bronze. 
And when he had wrought all the warlike horse, 
he set a well-spoked wheel under each of its feet 
that when dragged over the plain it might be 
obedient to the rein, and not travel a difficult path 
under stress of hands. 

So the horse flashed with terror and great beauty, 

wide and high ; not even Ares, lord of horses,“ would 
have refused to drive it, had he found it alive. And 
a great wall was driven about it, lest any of the 
Achaeans should behold it beforehand and fire the 
snare revealed. And beside the ship of Agamemnon 
from Mycenae the kings of the Achaeans gathered 
to council, avoiding the din and tumult of the 
/stirring hosts. Then impetuous Athena took the 
‘likeness of a clear-voiced herald and stood by 
‘Odysseus to counsel him, daubing a man’s voice 
with honeyed nectar. And, revolving his mind in 
godlike counsels, at first he stood like a man of 
empty wits? fixing on the ground the gaze of his 
unturning eye; but suddenly he opened his lips and 
delivered him of everflowing speech and thundered 
terribly, and poured, as from an airy spring, a great 
torrent of honey-dropping snow. 

“0 friends, now is the secret ambush prepared, 
by human hands but by the counsels_of Athena. 
Do ye which have most trust in the might of your 
hands, heartily follow me with valiant mind and 
enduring soul; for it is not seemly that we should 


_ wiles arose, he would stand and look downward, fixing his 
eyes upon the ground, and his staff he moved neither back 
nor fore, but held it steadfast ; thou wouldst have deemed 

-him simply sulky and ae But when he uttered his great 
voice from his breast, and words like snowflakes in winter, 
then could no other mortal vie with Odysseus.” 


589 


TRY PHIODORUS 


, > “λ \ > ,ὔ ΄ 7 
- μοχθίζειν ἀτέλεστα καὶ ἀχρέα γηράσκοντας, 
ΒΓ...) μ᾿ 
ἀλλὰ χρὴ ζώοντας ἀοίδιμον ἔργον ἀνύσσαι 
i > 7 
ἢ θανάτῳ βροτόεντι κακοκλεὲς αἶσχος ἀλύξαι. 
β- 4 ” > + 
ἡμῖν θαλπωραὶ προφερέστεραι ἤπερ ἐκείνοις, 
a ΄ 
εἰ μήπω στρουθοῖο καὶ ἀρχαίοιο δράκοντος 
lol , D2 Ny Δ 
καὶ καλῆς πλατάνοιο καὶ ὠκυμόροις ἐπὶ τέκνοις 
~ 7 - 
μητέρος ἑλκομένης ἁπαλῶν τ᾽ ἐλάθεσθε νεοσσῶν. 
3 / rs 
εἰ δὲ θεοπροπίῃσι γέρων ἀνεβάλλετο(Κάλχας, 
> \ LY aay λέ AN: ὃ Le ETS : Ὃς 
ἀλλὰ καὶ ὡς ένοιο μετήλυδος ὀμφητῆρος 
ΣΝ / 
μαντοσύναι καλέουσιν ἑτοιμοτάτην ἐπὶ νίκην. 
/ δ ᾿ 
τούνεκά. μοι πείθεσθε, καὶ ἱππείην ἐπὶ νηδὺν 
f + 
θαρσαλέοι σπεύδωμεν, ὅπως αὐτάγρετον ἄλγος. 
Τρῶες ἀταρβήτοιο θεῆς ἀπατήνορα τέχνην 
lov εἰσανάγωσιν ἑὸν κακὸν ἀμφαγαπῶντες. 
οἱ δ᾽ ἄλλοι πρυμναῖα μεθίετε πείσματα νηῶν 
“ oA ~ 9 IN ,ὔ ν᾽ 
πῦρ ἴδιον πλεκτῇσιν ἐνὶ κλισίῃσι βαλόντες" 
Tid \ “ 2 ee: VE ἐξρατρὴν 
ιάδος δὲ λιπόντες ἐρημαίην χθονὸς ἀκτὴν 
πλώετε πασσυδίῃ ψευδώνυμον οἴκαδε νόστον, 
εἰσόκεν εὐόρμου τετανυσμένον ἐκ περιωπῆς 
ὔμμι συναγρομένοις ἐπὶ γείτονος αἰγιαλοῖο 
3 A 
σημαίνῃ παλίνορσον ἐπὶ πλόον ἑσπέριον πῦρ. 
καὶ τότε μήτε τις ὄκνος ἐπειγομένων ἐρετάων 
, VRE NATED / , er , 
γινέσθω μήτ᾽ ἄλλο φόβου νέφος, οἷά τε νύκτες 
3 4 / > lel / “- 
ἀνθρώποισι φέρουσιν ἐλαφροῦ δείματα θυμοῦ. 
\ “ 
ἔστω δὲ προτέρης ἀρετῆς ἐμφύλιος αἰδώς, 


130 


—> 


135 


140 


145 


* When the Greek expedition against Troy lay at Aulis, 
as the Greeks were sacrificing, a snake came from under 
the altar and ascended a plane-tree overhead where was a 
sparrow with eight young ones. The snake devoured them. 
all. Calchasy son of Thestor, the seer of the Greeks, 
prophesied that the war would last for nine years and that 

roy would be taken in the tenth. (Hom. JJ. ii. 308 ff. 3 
Qu. Smyrn. vi. 61, viii. 475; Ov. ML. xii. 11 ff.) [ 
590 


THE TAKING OF ILIOS 


abide here a long time labouring and growing old 
without accomplishment or profit. Rather should 
we, while yet we live, do some deed worthy to be 
sung, or by bloody death escape the shameful 
reproach of cowardice. We have better comfort 
-than they—if ye have not forgotten the sparrow % 
and the ancient serpent and the fair plane-tree and 
the mother devoured with her swiftly perishing 
young, and her tender nestlings. ; 
-- “And if old(Calchas? in his soothsaying deferred 
the day of fulfilment, yet even so the prophecies of 
Helenus,® the alien seer, call us to a right speedy 
victory.. Therefore hearken ye to me and let us 
hasten with good courage into the belly of the 
horse, that the Trojans may lead up into Ilios the 
guileful craft of the dauntless goddess, a self-taken 
woe, embracing their own doom.° 
“And do ye others loose the stern cables of the 
ships and yourselves cast fire upon the plaited tents, 
and leaving desolate the shore of the land of Ilios, 
sail ye all together on your pretended homeward 
way, until the hour that to you, gathered on the 
neighbouring beach, a beacon at eventide, stretched 
from a fair-anchoring place of outlook, shall give the 
signal to sail back again.. And then let there be no 
hesitation of hurrying oarsmen nor other cloud of fear, 
such as the nights bring to men to terrify the mobile 
soul. But let each clan respect its former valour, and 


δ Felenus, son of Priam and Hecuba, twin-brother of 
Cassandra. He was taken prisoner by the Greeks on the 
advice of Calchas, and he advised the building of the 
Wooden Horse and the stealing of the Palladium. 

e A reminiscence of Hesiod, W. 58 (of the creation of 
Woman). 


591 


TRY PHIODORUS 


μηδέ τις αἰσχύνειεν ἐὸν κλέος, ὥς Kev ἕκαστος 18 
ἄξιον ὧν ἐμόγησε λάβῃ γέρας ἱπποσυνάων. 

ὡς φάμενος βουλῆς ἐξήρχετο: τοῖο δὲ μύθοις 
πρῶτος ἐφωμάρτησε Νεοπτόλεμος θεοειδής, 
πῶλος ἅτε δροσόεντος ἐπειγόμενος πεδίοιο, 
ὅστε νεοζυγέεσσιν ἀγαλλόμενος φαλάροισιν 155 
ἔφθασε καὶ μάστιγα καὶ ἡνιοχῆος ἀπειλήν. 
Τυδείδης δ᾽ ἐπόρουσε Νεοπτολέμῳ Διομήδης 
θαυμάζων, ὅτι τοῖο; ἔην καὶ πρόσθεν ᾿Αχιλλεύς. 
ἕσπετο καὶ Κυάνιππος, ὃν εὐπατέρεια Κομαιθὼ 
Τυδηὶς θαλάμοιο μινυνθαδίοιο τυχοῦσα 160 
ὠκυμόρῳ τέκε παῖδα σακεσπάλῳ Αἰγιαλῆι. 
ἔστη καὶ Μενέλαος- ἄγεν δέ μιν ἄγριος ὁρμὴ 
Δηιφόβου ποτὶ δῆριν, ἀπηνέι δ᾽ ἔζεε θυμῷ 
δεύτερον ἁρπακτῆρα γάμου λελιημένος εὑρεῖν. 
τῷ δ᾽ ἐπὶ Λοκρὸς ὄρουσεν ᾿Οιλῆος ταχὺς Αἴας, 165 
εἰσέτι θυμὸν ἔχων πεπνυμένον οὐδ᾽ ἐπὶ Kovpais 
μαργαίνων ἀθέμιστον: ἀνέστησεν δὲ καὶ ἄλλον, 
Κρητῶν ᾿Ιδομενῆα μεσαιπόλιον βασιλῆα. 
Νεστορίδης δ᾽ ἅμα τοῖσιν ἔβη κρατερὸς Θρασυμήδης, 
καὶ Τελαμώνιος υἱὸς ἑκηβόλος ἤιε Τεῦκρος: 170 
τοῖσι δ᾽ ἐπ᾽ ᾿Αδμήτοιο πάις πολύιππος ἀνέστη 
Εὔμηλος: μετὰ τὸν δὲ θεοπρόπος' ἔσσυτο Κάλχας) 
εὖ εἰδώς, ὅτι μόχθον ἀμήχανον ἐκτελέσαντες 
ἤδη Τρώιον ἄστυ καθιππεύσουσιν ᾿Αχαιοί. 
οὐδὲ μὲν οὐδ᾽ οἱ ἔλειφθεν ἀποστρεφθέντες ἀρωγῆς 175 
Εὐρύπυλός τ᾽ Ἑὐαιμονίδης ἀγαθός τε Λεοντεύς, 
Δημοφόων τ᾽ ᾿Ακάμας τε, δύω Θησήια τέκνα, 
᾿Ορτυγίδης τ᾽ ἼΑντικλος, ὃν αὐτόθι τεθνειῶτα 
ἵππῳ δακρύσαντες ἐνεκτερέιξαν Ἀχαιοί, 


@ 4.e. marvelling at the likeness of N. to his father Achilles, 
> Aegialeus, son of Adrastus and Demonassa, was the _ 


592 


THE TAKING OF ILIOS 


let no man put to shame his fame, so that each may 
win a recompense for chivalry worthy of his toils.” 

So he spake, leading them in counsel. And first 
godlike Neoptolemus followed his advising, even as 
a colt hastening over the dewy plain, which glories 
in his trappings of new harness and outruns both the 
lash and the threat of his driver. And after Neo- 
ptolemus rose up Diomedes, the son of Tydeus, 
marvelling for that even such aforetime was Achilles.4 
Followed also Cyanippus, whom Comaetho, daughter 
of a goodly sire, even Tydeus, in brief wedlock bare 
to shield-bearing Aegialeus’ whose doom was swift. 
Rose, too, Menelaus; he was driven by a fierce 
impulse to strife with Deiphobus, and his stern heart 
boiled with eagerness to find him who a second 
time stole away his bride. After him rose Locrian 
Aias, the swift son of Oileus, still prudent of mind 
and not filled with lawless passion for women.° 
And he roused up another, even Idomeneus, the 
grizzled king of the Cretans. And with these went 
the son of Nestor, strong Thrasymedes, and Teucer 
went, the archer son of Telamon. After them rose 
up the son of Admetus, even Eumelus of many 
horses. And after him hasted thd seer Calchas,) 
well knowing that accomplishing their difficult 
labour the Achaeans should now at last ride down 
the city of Troy. Nor remained behind, turning 
from the fray, Eurypylus, son of Euaemon, and goodly 
Leonteus, and Demophoon and Acamas, the two 
sons of Theseus, and Anticlus, son of Ortyx—who 
died there and the Achaeans wept for him and buried 
only one of the Epigoni who was killed at Thebes (Pind. 
P. viii. 60f. ; Paus. ix. 5. 7). 

ὁ Aias assaulted Cassandra in the temple of Athena 
(E.G.F., Kinkel, p. 49). See ll. 647 ff. 

2 593 


TRYPHIODORUS 


Πηνέλεώς τε Μέγης τε καὶ ᾿Αντιφάτης ἀγαπήνωρ 

᾿Ιφιδάμας τε καὶ Ὀὐρυδάμας, [eAtao γενέθλη, 

τόξῳ δ᾽ ᾿Αμφιδάμας κεκορυθμένος: ὕστατος αὖτε 
μ΄ τ 3 2 Caryn 3 ΄ 

τέχνης ἀγλαόμητις ets ἐπέβαινεν “Ezretos. 95 
εὐξάμενοι δὴ ἔπειτα, Διὸς γλαυκώπιδι κούρῃ 


ἱππείην ἔσπευδον ἐς ὁλκάδα" τοῖσι δ᾽ ᾿Αθήνη 
> , / ~ > , 5 \ 
ἀμβροσίῃ κεράσασα θεῶν ἐκόμισσεν ἐδωδὴν 


ὃ a a σ πη ῖν τη λ / 
elmvov ἔχειν, ἵνα μή TL πανημέριοι λοχόωντες 
3 / Ps 

τειρόμενοι βαρύθοιεν ἀτερπέι γούνατα λιμῷ. 
ὡς δ᾽ ὁπότε κρυμοῖσιν ἀελλοπόδων νεφελάων 
ἠέρα παχνώσασα χιὼν ἐπάλυνεν ἀρούρας, : 
τηκομένη δ᾽ ἀνέηκε πολὺν ῥόον" οἱ δ᾽ ἀπὸ πέτρης 
ὀξὺ καταθρῴσκοντα κυβιστητῆρι κυδοιμῷ 
δοῦπον ὑποπτήξαντες ὀριτρεφέος ποταμοῖο 
θῆρες ἐρωήσαντες ὑπὸ πτύχα κοιλάδος εὐνῆς 
σιγῇ φρικαλέῃσιν ἐπὶ πλευρῇσι μένουσι, 
πικρὰ δὲ πεινάοντες ὀιζυρῆς ὑπ᾽ ἀνάγκης 

/ ? 7 , "4 + Ὁ 
τλήμονες ἐκδέχαται, πότε παύεται ὄβριμον ὕδωρ: 
ὡς οἵγε γλαφυροῖο διὰ ξυλόχοιο θορόντες 
ἀτλήτους ἀνέχοντο πόνους ἀκμῆτες ᾿Αχαιοί. 
τοῖσι δ᾽ ἐπεκλήισσε θύρην ἐγκύμονος ἵππου 

\ 3 / / A 3 ta 

πιστὸς ἀτεκμάρτοιο δόλου πυλαωρὸς ᾿Οδυσσεύς. 

> A ees loa A LA \ / ον. 
αὐτὸς δ᾽ ἐν κεφαλῇ σκοπὸς ἕζετο: τὼ δέ οἱ ἄμφω 
> A Ν 0 / 2). / θ > \ ἐὰν ὦ 1 
ὀφθαλμὼ ποθέοντες ἐλάνθανον ἐκτὸς ἐόντας. 
3 (ὃ δ᾽ 3 “λ € ὃ lon > A 
Azpeidns δ᾽ ἐκέλευσεν ὑποδρηστῆρας ᾿Αχαιοὺς 
λῦσαι λάινον ἕρκος ἐυγνάμπτοισι μακέλλαις, 
ἵππος ὅπερ κεκάλυπτο: θέλεν δέ ἑ γυμνὸν ἐᾶσαι, 
τηλεφανὴς ἵνα πᾶσιν ἑὴν χάριν ἀνδράσι πέμποι. 
καὶ τὸ μὲν ἐξελάχαινον ἐφημοσύνῃ βασιλῆος. 

ἠέλιος δ᾽ ὅτε νύκτα παλίνσκιον ἀνδράσιν ἕλκων 
> 4, > / ε / 4 TA 
ἐς δύσιν ἀχλυόπεζαν ἑκηβόλον ἔτραπεν ἠῶ, 

1.ν,], ἐόντες. 


594 


180 


185 


190 


196: 


200. 


205 


210 


THE TAKING OF ILIOS 


him in the horse; and Peneleus and Meges and 
valiant Antiphates, and. _Iphidamas and Eurydamas, 
\offspring of Pelias, and Amphidamas armed with a 
bow. Last Epeius of glorious craft set foot in the 
thing he had himself contrived. 


, Then they prayed unto the grey-eyed daughter δ. 
/ of Zeus and hasted into their vessel of the horse. / ) / 


\ ‘And Athena mixed ambrosia and brought them’ the 
\ food of the gods to eat, that in their ambush’ all 
“day long they might not be afflicted and their knees 
-weighed down by unpleasant hunger. And as when 
| with the frosts of the storm-footed clouds the snow 
| freezes the air and besprinkles the fields and melting 
‘sends forth a great stream; and the wild beasts, 
cowering from the din of the mountain-cradled river, 
as it leaps swiftly down from a rock in headlong 
tumult, withdraw. beneath the shelter of their 
hollow lair and abide there silently with shivering 
flanks, and, bitterly anhungered, by grievous con- 
straint patiently await the ceasing of the rain: even 
so the unwearied Achaeans leapt through the carven 
wood and supported travail beyond enduring. And 
for them Odysseus, the faithful warder of the 
unguessed snare, closed the door of the pregnant 
horse, and sat himself in the head as scout ; and 
both his yearning eyes escaped the notice of those 
without. And the son of Atreus bade the Achaean 
servants undo with well-bent. mattecks the fence 
of stone wherewith the horse was hidden. He 
wished to let it be uncovered that, shining afar, it 
might send the message of its beauty unto all men. 
And at the bidding of their king they dug it up. 
But when the sun, drawing on shadowy night 
for men, turned far-shooting dawn to the dusky- 


595 


TRYPHIODORUS 


A la ’ὔ > (ὃ λ \ 3 A 
δὴ τότε κηρύκων ἀπεκίδνατο λαὸν ἀυτὴ 
> 7 VA 
φεύγειν ἀγγελέουσα καὶ ἑλκέμεν εἰς ἅλα κοίλην 
Va a 
νῆας ἐυκραίρους ἀνά τε πρυμνήσια λῦσαι. 
‘ ε A 
ἔνθα δὲ πευκήεντος ἀνασχόμενοι πυρὸς ὁρμὴν. 
᾽ὔ 
ἕρκεά τε πρήσαντες ἐυσταθέων κλισιάων 
4 > “ 
νηυσὶν ἀνεπλώεσκον ἀπὸ Ῥοιτειάδος ἀκτῆς 
4 
ὅρμον ἐς ἀντιπέραιον ἐυστεφάνου Τενέδοιο 
A > va sO 7A@ (ὃ “EAA 
γλαυκὸν ἀναπτύσσοντες ὕδωρ ᾿Αθαμαντίδος nS. 
~ a a \ 
μοῦνος δὲ πληγῇσιν ἑκούσια γυῖα yapaybels 
3 cA 
Αἰσιμίδης ἐλέλειπτο Σίνων, ἀπατήλιος ἥρως, 

4 
κρυπτὸν ἐπὶ Τρώεσσι δόλον καὶ πήματα κεύθων. 
ws δ᾽ ὁπότε σταλίκεσσι λίνον περικυκλώσαντες 
θηρσὶν ὀριπλανέεσσι λόχον πολυωπὸν ἔπηξαν 
ἀνέρες ἀγρευτῆρες" ὁ δ᾽ ἐκκριδὸν οἷος ἀπ᾽ ἄλλων, 
λαθρίδιος πυκινοῖσιν ὑπὸ πτόρθοισι δεδυκώς, 
δίκτυα παπταίνων ἔλαθεν θηροσκόπος ἀνήρ" 
ὡς τότε λωβητοῖσι περίστικτος μελέεσσι 
Τροίῃ λυγρὸν ὄλεθρον ἐμήδετο. κὰδ δέ of ὥὦμους 
ἕλκεσι ποιητοῖσι κατέρρεε νήχυτον αἷμα. 

ς A \ , 3 / ,’ \ 

ἡ δὲ περὶ κλισίῃσιν ἐμαίνετο παννυχίη φλὸξ 
καπνὸν ἐρευγομένη περιδινέα φοιτάδι ῥιπῇ: 

ν΄ Ἂν / 1 WE > \ / 
Ηφαιστος δ᾽ ἐκέλευεν ἐρίβρομος: ἐκ δὲ θυέλλας 
παντοίας ἐτίνασσεν ἐπιπνείουσα. καὶ αὐτή, 


“ Sinon (short form for Sinopos, Maass, Hermes xxiii. 
(1888)) son of Aesimus, who, as son of Autolycus and 
Amphithea, is brother of Anticleia, mother of Otiveiens: 
was left behind when the Greeks sailed to Tenedos, in 
order that he might light a beacon as a signal for them to 
return, and that he might induce the Trojans to drag the 
wooden horse within the walls. There is some variation in 
the accounts of Sinon’s performance, cf. Apollodor. Epitom. 
v. 14 ff. ; Verg. 4. ii, 57 ff. ; Qu. Smyrn. xii. 243 ff, ; Lycophr. 
340 ff. who connects the business with the treason of 
Antenor. 


596 


ae enna iene 


220 


225 


230 


THE TAKING OF ILIOS 


footed setting, then spread abroad the voice of the 
heralds, telling the people to flee and launch in the 
hollow sea their fair-peaked ships and loose the 
cables. Then raising the rush of pinewood fire and 
burning the fences of their well-stablished tents 
they sailed away in their ships from the Rhoeteian 
shore to a haven over the sea in fair-crowned Tenedos, 
ploughing the grey waters of Helle, daughter of 
Athamas. Only Sinon” remained behind, the son of 
Aesimus, his limbs voluntarily scarred with stripes, 
a deceitful hero, concealing a hidden snare and 
sorrow for the Trojans. And even as when hunter 
men cast a net about the stakes and set a meshed 
ambush for the wild beasts that roam the hills, and 
one chosen apart from the others secretly creeps 
beneath the thick branches, a hidden scout of the 
hunt to watch the nets®: even so, his marred limbs 
marked about with stripes, he devised grievous 
destruction for Troy ; and the streaming blood flowed 
over his shoulders from wounds purposely made. 
All night long the flame raged about the tents, 
belching forth smoke that curled in wandering eddy, 
and loud-roaring Hephaestus urged it on. Yea, and 
Hera herself, that gives light to men,’ the mother 


The λινόπτης was the person who watched the nets to 
see what entered them. Pollux v.17, Hesych. s.v. λινόπτης ; 
cf. Aristoph. Peace 1178 ἐγὼ δ᾽ ἕστηκα λινοπτώμενος and 
schol. there. 

ὁ Hera as “‘ bringer of light” is attested by the fact that 
Phosphoros (the i Star or Venus) was sometimes 
regarded as the star of Hera: Aristot. De mundo 2 ὁ τοῦ 
Φωσφόρου ὃν ᾿Αφροδίτης, of δὲ “Ἥρας προσαγορεύουσιν. Pliny, 
N-H. ii. 37 speaking of the ‘‘sidus appellatum Veneris ” 
says ‘“‘in magno nominum ambitu est. Alii enim Tunonis, 
alii Isidis, alii Matris Deum appellavere.” 


597 


TRYPHIODORUS 


ἤδη δὲ Τρώεσσι καὶ ᾿Ἰλιάδεσσι γυναιξὶν 2386, 
ὄρθρον ὑπὸ σκιόεντα πολύθροος ἤλυθε φήμη 

δήιον ἀγγέλλουσα φόβον σημάντορι καπνῷ. 

αὐτίκα δ᾽ ἐξέθορον πυλέων πετάσαντες ὀχῆας ͵ 
πεζοί θ᾽ ἱππῆές τε καὶ ἐς πεδίον προχέοντο . 
διζόμενοι, μή πού τις ἔην δόλος ἄλλος ᾿Αχαιῶν. 40) 
ot δὲ θοοὺς οὐρῆας ὑποζεύξαντες ἀπήναις 

ἐκ πόλιος κατέβαινον ἅμα Πριάμῳ βασιλῆι 

ἄλλοι δημογέροντες: ἐλαφρότατοι δ᾽ ἐγένοντο 
θαλπόμενοι περὶ παισίν, ὅσους λίπε φοίνιος "Apys, 
ὀσσόμενοι καὶ γῆρας (ἐλεύθερον) οὐ μὲν ἔμελλον 2461 
γηθήσειν ἐπὶ δηρόν, ἐπεὶ Διὸς ἤθελε βουλή. 

οἱ δ᾽ ὅτε τεχνήεντος ἴδον δέμας αἰόλον ἵππου, 
θαύμασαν ἀμφιχυθέντες, ἅτ᾽ ἠχήεντες ἰδόντες 
αἰετὸν ἀλκήεντα περικλάζουσι κολοιοί. 

τοῖσι δὲ τετρηχυῖα καὶ ἄκριτος ἔμπεσε βουλή: 
of μὲν γὰρ πολέμῷῳ βαρυπενθέι κεκμηῶτες, 
ἵππον ἀπεχθήραντες, ἐπεὶ πέλεν ἔργον ᾿Αχαιῶν, 
ἤθελον ἢ δολιχοῖσιν ἐπὶ κρημνοῖσιν ἀράξαι 

ἠὲ καὶ ἀμφιτόμοισι διαρρῆξαι πελέκεσσιν- 

οἱ δὲ νεοξέστοιο πεποιθότες ἔργμασι τέχνης 
ἀθανάτοις ἐκέλευον ἀρήιον ἵππον ἀνάψαι, 
ὕστερον ᾿Αργείοιο μόθου σημήιον εἶναι. 
φραζομένοις δ᾽ ἐπὶ τοῖσι παναίολα γυῖα κομίζων 
γυμνὸς ὑπὲρ πεδίοιο φάνη κεκακωμένος ἀνήρ' 


μήτηρ ἀθανάτοιο πυρός, φαεσίμβροτος Ἥρη. 


« Tryphiodorus here imitates Hom. 11. ii, 95 τετρήχει δ᾽ 
ἀγορή, Vil. 846 ἔ. ἀγορὴ. .. δεινὴ τετρηχυῖα. ““ Confused ” is 
perhaps enough as a rendering in Tryphiodorus, but the 
associations of the expression, which cannot be discussed 
here, go much further than that. 

’ According to Tryphiodorus Sinon wounded himself 
and appeals to Priam asa suppliant and willingly tells about 


598 


THE TAKING OF ILIOS 


of immortal fire, breathed thereon and. stirred up 
‘all manner of gusts. And now in the shadowy 
dawn there came to Trojans and to the women of Tlios 
arumour spoken by many tongues, announcing the 
flight of the foe by signal of smoke. Straightway 
they flung open the bars of the gates and rushed 
forth, foot and horse, and poured into the plain, 
seeking whether this were some fresh guile of the 
Danaans. And yoking swift mules to wagons there 
came down from the city with King Priam the other 
elders of the people; and most light of heart were 
they, being comforted for their children whom a 


Ares had spared, and boding of an old age/of freedom }—2— 


but not long were they to rejoice, since the counsel 
of Zeus willed it so... And when they saw the 
flashing form of the. skilfully fashioned horse, they 
thronged about it marvelling, even as chattering 
jackdaws scream about when they see the valiant 
eagle, And confused* and uncertain counsel fell 
among them. Some wearied with dolorous war 
and hating the horse, because it was the work of 
the Achaeans, wished either to dash it on the long 
precipices or to break it up with two-edged hatchets. 
But others, trusting in the new polished work of art, 
, bade dedicate the warlike horse to the immortals, to 
| be in after days a memorial of the Argive war. And as 
' they debated, there appeared unto them, dragging his 
motley limbs over the plain, a naked man in sorry case.? 


the wooden horse. So Tzetz. schol. Lycophr. p. 134, 12 
αἰκισάμενος ἑαυτὸν πλησίον τοῦ δουρείου ἵππου ἐκάθητο. In Verg. 
/ A, ii. 57 ff. he has allowed himself to be captured by the 
(‘Trojans and is brought before Priam as a prisoner in fetters. 
In Qu. Smyrn. xii. 360 ff. he is found by the Trojans beside 
the wooden horse and only speaks after torture, when his 

nose and ears have been cut off, 
599 


c— 


TRYPHIODORUS 


| 
αἵματι δὲ σμώδιγγες ἀεικέϊ βεβριθυῖαι 266) 
~ ε I | 
ἴχνια λωβήεντα θοῶν ἀνέφαινον ἱμάντων. | 
~ ᾽ὔ > A 
αὐτίκα δὲ Πριάμοιο ποδῶν προπάροιθεν ἐλυσθεὶς 
~ σ 4 
ἱκεσίαις παλάμῃσι παλαιῶν ἥψατο γούνων, | 
/ ww “ 
λισσόμενος δὲ γέροντα δολοπλόκον ἴαχε μῦθον" | 
la 7.3 , 
ἄνδρα μὲν ᾿Αργείοισιν ὁμόπλοον εἴ μ ἐλεαίρεις, 368, 
a yw ’ ] 
Τρώων δὲ ῥυστῆρα καὶ ἄστεος εἴ με σαώσεις, 
~ A 4 > A 
Δαρδανίδη σκηπτοῦχε, καὶ ὕστατον ἐχθρὸν 
᾿Αχαιῶν--- | 
4) ὔ θ. ~ + > 1A. 4 Ἶ 
οἷά με λωβήσαντο θεῶν ὄπιν οὐκ ἀ έγοντες 
> , 
οὐδὲν. ἀλυτραίνοντα, κακοὶ καὶ ἀπηνέες αἰεί: | 
a ae a ΄ὔ Ὁ > ΄, ᾿ 
ὡς μὲν ᾿Αχιλλῆος γέρας ἥρπασαν Αἰακίδαο, 210. 
ὡς δὲ Φιλοκτήτην ἔλιπον πεπεδημένον ὕδρῳ, | 
ἔκτειναν δὲ Kal αὐτὸν ἀγασσάμενοι Παλαμήδην. 
καὶ νῦν οἷά μ᾽ ἔρεξαν ἀτάσθαλοι, οὕνεκα φεύγειν 
οὐκ ἔθελον σὺν τοῖσι, μένειν δ᾽ ἐκέλευον ἑταίρους" | 
of δὲ νοοπλήγεσσιν ἀτασθαλίῃσι δαμέντες 275 | 
εἵματα μέν μ᾽ ἀπέδυσαν, ἀεικελίῃσι δ᾽ ἱμάσθλαις 
πᾶν δέμας οὐτήσαντες ἐπὶ ξείνῃ λίπον ἀκτῆ. 
9 , , λ ἢ “7 ε pie 
ἀλλά, μάκαρ, πεφύλαξο Διὸς σέβας ἱκεσίοιο- 
χάρμα γὰρ ᾿Αργείοισι γενήσομαι, εἴ κεν ἐάσῃς 
WA ε 


\ 


χερσίν ὕπο Τρώων ἱκέτην καὶ ξεῖνον ὀλέσθαι, 280 
? 


αὐτὰρ ἐγὼ πάντεσσιν ἐπάρκιος ἔσσομαι ὑμῖν 

μηκέτι δειμαίνειν πόλεμον παλίνορσον ᾿Αχαιῶν. 
ὡς φάτο: τὸν δ᾽ 6 γέρων ἀγανῇ μειλίξατο φωνῇ: 

ξεῖνε, σὲ μὲν Τρώεσσι μεμιγμένον οὐκέτ᾽ ἔοικε 


“ Philoctetes, son of Poeas, king of Malis, having on the 
voyage to Troy been bitten by a water snake and his wound 
having become noisome, was left by the Greeks in Lemnos. 
Afterwards they learned that Troy could not be taken 
without Philoctetes and the arrows which he had received 


from Heracles. So he was brought to Troy by Odysseus, and 
.chaon he slew Paris. Ἷ 


600 —. 


THE TAKING OF ILIOS 


His weals laden with unseemly blood showed the 
ruinous track of the swift lash. Straightway he 
| grovelled before the feet of Priam, and touched his 
ancient knees with suppliant hands; and entreating 
the old man he uttered his craftily woven tale : 
“Sceptred King, son of Dardanus, behold me the 
fellow voyager of the Argives, if thou pitiest me, and 
deliverer of the Trojans and their city, if thou wilt 
save me, and lastly foe of the Achaeans: behold how 
they evilly entreated me who had done no wrong, 
heeding not the regard of the gods, evil and unkind 
always. Even so they snatched away his reward 
from Achilles, son of Peleus, and even so they left 
Philoctetes,? fettered by the bite of the water snake, 
and slew in wrath Palamedes? himself. And behold 
πον what they have done to me in their wicked 
folly, for that I would not flee with them, but bade 
my comrades stay. Overcome by frenzied foolish- 
ness they stripped me of my raiment and wounded 
all my body with unseemly stripes and left me on an 
alien shore. But, blessed one, do thou have regard 
unto the majesty of Zeus, the god of suppliants. 
For I shall be a joy to the Argives, if thou lettest a 
/suppliant and a stranger perish at the hands of the 
Trojans. But I shall be surety unto all of you that 
ye no more dread returning war of the Achaeans.” 
So he spake, and the old man comforted him with 
gentle voice: “Stranger, it befits thee not to be 
afraid any more since thou hast mingled with the 


> Palamedes, son of Nauplius, king of Euboea, exposed 

/ the ruse by which Odysseus tried to avoid the expedition to 
\ Troy. In revenge Odysseus contrived to bury a quantity ) 
of gold in the tent of Palamedes and forged a letter from 
Priam offering bribes for the betrayal of the Greek army. 
Palamedes was found guilty of treason and stoned to death. 


601 


TRYPHIODORUS 


ὲ 3 A 
τάρβος ἔχειν: ἔφυγες yap ἀνάρσιον ὕβριν ᾿Αχαιῶν. 
/ 
αἰεὶ δ᾽ ἡμέτερος φίλος ἔσσεαι, οὐδέ σε πάτρης 
AY ν ¢ A 
οὐδὲ πολυκτεάνων θαλάμων γλυκὺς ἵμερος αἱρεῖ. 
~ /, 
ἀλλ᾽ ἄγε καὶ σύ μοι εἰπέ, τί τοι τόδε θαῦμα τέτυκται, 
\ a 
ἵππος, ἀμειλίκτοιο φόβου τέρας- εἰπὲ δὲ σεῖο 
“ lj 
οὔνομα καὶ γενεήν, ὁπόθεν δέ σε νῆες ἔνεικαν. 
/ oe 
tov δ᾽ ἐπιθαρσήσας προσέφη πολυμήχανος ἥρως" 
~ 4 
ἐξερέω καὶ ταῦτα: od γάρ μ᾽ ἐθέλοντα κελεύεις. 
ww ἃ ΄ > , ,ὔ » A aA ᾿ 
Apyds μοι πόλις ἐστί, Σίνων δέ μοι οὔνομα κεῖται 
Αἴσιμον αὖ καλέουσιν ἐμὸν πολιὸν γενετῆρα: 
“ 9.5 , , a > , 
ἵππον δ᾽ ᾿Αργείοισι παλαίφατον εὗρεν *Emeids: 
εἰ μὲν γάρ μιν ἐᾶτε μένειν αὐτοῦ ἐνὶ χώρῃ, 
be / Vd > ¢ “- / A > ~ 
Τροίην θέσφατόν ἐστιν ἑλεῖν πόλιν ἔγχος ᾿Αχαιῶν" 
3 ,ὔ ¢ A + / A > / 
εἰ δέ μιν ἁγνὸν ἄγαλμα λάβῃ vnotow Αθήνη, 
φεύξονται προφυγόντες ἀνηνύστοις ἐπ᾽ ἀέθλοις. 
of a / 
ἀλλ᾽ ἄγε δὴ σειρῇσι περίπλοκον ἀμφιβαλόντες 
ἕλκετ᾽ ἐς ἀκρόπολιν μεγάλην χρυσήνιον ἵππον" 
LA eee) ,ὔ > / ε v2 
ἄμμι δ᾽ ᾿Αθηναίη. ἐρυσίπτολις ἡγεμονεύοι 
ὃ ’΄ ὔ ~ > if \ 3 ca 
αιδάλεον σπεύδουσα λαβεῖν ἀνάθημα καὶ αὐτή. 
Δ + > τῷνϑΡ \ \ A + > / Ἁ 
ὡς ap’ ἔφη" καὶ τὸν μὲν ἀναξ ἐκέλευσε λαβόντα 
σ a fs ~ ᾽ὔ \ / Υ 
ἕσσασθαι χλαῖνάν τε χιτῶνά τε, τοὶ δέ, βοείαις 
δησάμενοι σειρῇσιν, ἐυπλέκτοισι κάλωσιν 
e € \ ,ἷ ~ > , 7 
εἷλκον ὑπὲρ πεδίοιο, θοῶν ἐπιβήτορα κύκλων, 
-“ 
ἵππον ἀριστήεσσι βεβυσμένον' οἱ δὲ πάροιθεν 
3A \ \ / ε \ 2\7 > 7 
αὐλοὶ καὶ φόρμιγγες ὁμὴν ἐλίγαινον ἀοιδήν. 
,ὕ x > δὲ i? Zz e ey 
σχέτλιον ἀφραδέων μερόπων γένος, οἷσιν ὁμίχλη 
2 A 
ἄσκοπος ἐσσομένων- κενεῷ δ᾽ ὑπὸ χάρματι πολλοὶ 
4 > 
πολλάκις ἀγνώσσουσι περιπταίοντες ὀλέθρῳ. 
σ \ Τ vA / is + 5 
om καὶ Ἰρώεσσι τότε φθισίμβροτος ἄτη 


602 


THE TAKING OF ILIOS 


Trojans ; for thou hast escaped the unkindly violence 
of the Achaeans. _ Evermore thou shalt be our friend 
nor shall sweet desire seize thee for thy fatherland 
or for thy halls of many possessions. But come, 
declare thou to,me what marvel is this, the horse, a 
portent of unappeasable terror. And declare thy 
name and lineage and whence the ships brought 
thee.” 

Then the hero of many devices took heart and 
said: “These things also will I declare ; thou biddest 
me who am myself willing. Argos is my city and 
the name given to me is Sinon, and my grey-haired 
sire they call Aesimus; and the famous horse was 
invented for the Argives by Epeius.. If you allow it 
to abide here in its place, it is decreed that the spear 
of the Achaeans shall capture Troy; but if Athena 
receive it a holy offering in her shrine, then they 
shall flee away with their task unaccomplished. 
But come, cast it about with entwining chains and 
draw to the great acropolis the horse of golden reins, 
and Athena, guardian of the city, be our guide, eager 
to win the carven offering, even she!” 

So he spake, and the king bade him take and do 
on a cloak and a tunic. And they bound the horse 
with chains of oxhide and drew it with well-plaited 
ropes over the plain, mounted on its swift wheels 
and filled with chieftains; and before it flutes and 
lyres made shrill minstrelsy together. Wretched 
generation of heedless mortals! for whom a mist 
which they cannot pierce enwraps the future. By 
reason of ‘empty joy many men many times stumble 
unwittingly on destruction: even as at that time 
ruinous doom for the Trojans rioted on its own way 


« Of, Hesiod, W. 536 f. 
603 


TRYPHIODORUS 


ἐς πόλιν αὐτοκέλευθος ἐκώμασεν: οὐδέ τις ἀνδρῶν 


ἤδεεν, οὕνεκα λάβρον ed 


έλκετο πένθος ἄλαστον. 


ἄνθεα δὲ δροσόεντος ἀμησάμενοι ποταμοῖο 
ἔστεφον αὐχενίους πλοκάμους σφετέροιο φονῆος. 


γαῖα δὲ χαλκείοισιν ἐρει 


΄ \ , 
KO[LEVY) περι κύκλοις 


A e ~ Be” A > 3 a 
δεινὸν ὑπεβρυχᾶτο, σιδήρειοι δὲ δι᾽ αὐτῶν 
τριβόμενοι τρηχεῖαν ἀνέστενον ἄξονες ἠχήν" 
τετρίγει δὲ κάλων ξυνοχή, καὶ πᾶσα ταθεῖσα 


λιγνὺν αἰθαλόεσσαν Er, 
4 


ἀνεκήκιε σειρή. 


Α 97. 16 / > A \ ΄ > 7 
πολλὴ δ᾽ ἑλκόντων ενοπῇ καὶ κόμπος ὀρώρει: 
ἔβρεμε νυμφαίῃσιν ἅμα δρυσὶ δάσκιος Ἴδη, 
ἴαχε καὶ Ἐάνθου ποταμοῦ κυκλούμενον ὕδωρ, 


καὶ στόμα κεκλήγει Σιμ 


, 5 , \ 
O€ELOLOV* οΟυρανιὴ δὲ 


ἐκ Διὸς ἑλκόμενον πόλεμον μαντεύετο σάλπιγξ. 


οἱ δ᾽ ἦγον προπάροιθεν- 


ὁδὸς δ᾽ ἐβαρύνετο μακρὴ 


σχιζομένη ποταμοῖσι καὶ οὐ πεδίοισιν ὁμοίη. 
7 > a7 7 > , 9. ΤΑ, Ay 
εἵπετο. δ᾽ αἰόλος ἵππος ἀρηιφίλους ἐπὶ βωμοὺς 
/ e 4 , iors) v4 > / 
κυδιόων ὑπέροπλα, βίην δ᾽ ἐπέρεισεν ᾿Αθήνη 
χεῖρας ἐπιβρίσασα νεογλυφέων ἐπὶ μηρῶν. 
ὧδε θέων ἀκίχητος ἐπέδραμε θᾶσσον ὀιστοῦ 
Τρῶας ἐυσκάρθμοισιν ὁδοιπορίῃσι διώκων, 


> δ A 4 > 
εἰσόκε δὴ πυλέων é 


πεβή 


σατὸ Δαρδανιάων. 


ε ὃ /4 ἘΔ Ψ , θ , 4 3 / 
Ot Ge οὐ ἐρχομένῳ ϑυρέων πτύχες ἐστείνοντο" 


ἀλλ᾽ “Ἥρη μὲν ἔλυσεν ἐπ᾿ 


ἡ δρόμον αὖθις ὁδοῖο 


πρόσθεν ἀναστέλλουσα, Ποσειδάων δ᾽ ἀπὸ πύργων 
\ 39 
σταθμὸν ἀνοιγομένων πυλέων ἀνέκοπτε τριαίνῃ. 


Τρωιάδες δὲ γυναῖκες ἀν 


ἃ πτόλιν ἄλλοθεν ἄλλαι, 


νύμφαι τε πρόγαμοί τε καὶ ἴδμονες Εἰλειθυίης, 
μολπῇ τ᾽ ὀρχηθμῷ τε περὶ βρέτας εἱλίσσοντο- 


@ All this is closely imita 
Argo in Apoll. Rh. i, 388 ff. 


604 


ted from the launching of the 
‘The rollers groaned as they 


THE TAKING OF ILIOS 


into the city, and none knew that it was fierce sorrow 
unforgettable that they drew. And gathering flowers 
from the dewy river they wreathed the tresses on 
the neck of their slayer. The earth torn about the 
brazen wheels moaned terribly, and the axles of iron, 
grinding in them, groaned with harsh noise. The 
joining of knit ropes creaked and all the taut coiling 
chain sent up a fiery smoke.“ And as they haled, 
loud rose the din and the vaunting. Groaned shady 
Ida _ together with her nymph-haunted oaks: the 
eddying waters of the river Xanthus shrieked, and 
the mouth of Simois rang aloud: and in the heaven 
the trumpet of Zeus prophesied of the war they 
drew. But they haled forward; and the long way 
waxed heavy, torn with rivers and not like plain 
lands. And the flashing horse followed them unto 
the altars dear to Ares, glorying exceedingly ; and 


' Athena set her might thereto, laying her heavy 


hands on the newly carven thighs of the horse. So 


ἢ it sped beyond overtaking, and ran on swifter than 


) an arrow, following the Trojans with lightly prancing 


~ 


feet, until it reached the Dardan gates. And for its 
coming the folding doors were straitened. But 
Hera set it free once more to run its course, with- 

rawing the doors before it, while from the towers 

oseidon with his trident drave back the posts of the 
opening gates. And the Trojan women throughout 
the city, some here, some there, brides and maidens 


‘unwed® and mothers experienced of FEileithyia® 


circled about the image with song and dance. 


were ground under the heavy keel, and round them the dark 
smoky flame (λιγνύς) spurted under the weight.” 
> Verg. A. ii. 238 ‘*pueri circum innuptaeque puellae 
Sacra canunt funemque manu contingere gaudent.” 
¢ Rileithyia, goddess of birth. 
605 


TRYPHIODORUS 


ἄλλαι δὲ χνοόωσαν ἀμελγόμεναι χάριν ὄμβρου 
ὁλκῷ δουρατέῳ ῥοδέους στορέσαντο τάπητας. 
αἱ δὲ θαλασσαίης ἐπιμάζια νήματα μίτρης 
λυσάμεναι κλωστοῖσι κατέπλεκον ἄνθεσιν ἵππον. 
καί τις ἀπειρεσίοιο πίθου κρήδεμνον ἀνεῖσα 
χρυσείῳ προχέουσα κρόκῳ ὅππως οἶνον 
γαῖαν ἀνεκνίσσωσε χυτὴν εὐώδεϊ πηλῷ. 
ἀνδρομέῃ δὲ βοῇ συνεβάλλετο θῆλυς ἰωή, 

καὶ παίδων ἀλαλητὸς ἐμίσγετο γήραος ἠχῆ. 
οἷαι δ᾽ ἀφνειοῖο μετήλυδες ᾿Ωκεανοῖο, 

χείματος ἀμφίπολοι, γεράνων στίχες ἠεροφώνων, 
κύκλον ἐπογμεύουσιν ἀλήμονος ὀρχηθμοῖο 
γειοπόνοις ἀρότῃσιν ἀπεχθέα κεκληγυῖαι- 

ὡς οἵγε κλαγγῇ τε δι’ ἄστεος ἠδὲ κυδοιμῷ 
ἦγον ἐς ἀκρόπολιν βεβαρημένον ἔνδοθεν ἵππον. 
κούρη δὲ Τ]ριάμοιο θεήλατος οὐκέτι μίμνειν 
ἤθελεν: ἐν θαλάμοισι- διαρρήξασα δ᾽ ὀχῆας 
ἔδραμεν ἠύτε πόρτις ἀήσυρος, ἥντε τυπεῖσαν 
κέντρον ἀνεπτοίησε βοορραίσταο μύωπος: 

ἡ δ᾽ οὐκ εἰς ἀγέλην ποτιδέρκεται οὐδὲ βοτῆρι 
πείθεται οὐδὲ νομοῖο λιλαίεται, ἀλλὰ βελέμνῳ 
ὀξέι θηγομένη βοέων ἐξήλυθε θεσμῶν: 

τοίη μαντιπόλοιο βολῆς ὑπὸ νύγματι κούρη 
πλαζομένη κραδίην ἱερὴν ἀνεσείετο δάφνην. 
πάντη δ᾽ ἐβρυχᾶτο κατὰ πτόλιν: οὐδὲ τοκήων 
οὐδὲ φίλων ἀλέγιζε: λίπεν δέ ἑ παρθένος αἰδώς. 


« The γέρανος, or crane-dance, is described by: Pollux iv. 
101, “The crane-dance they danced ina body, one behind 
the other in line, the extremities being occupied by the 
leaders, Theseus’ and his party having first imitated so, 
round the altar in Delos, their escape from the labyrinth.” 
Cf. Plutarch, Thes. 21, Lucian, De salt. 34. A similar dance 
called κανδιωτής is still danced in Greece, It seems likely 


606 


THE TAKING OF ILI10S 


Others culling the fresh bounty of the rain strewed 
a rosy carpet for the wooden trail. Others undid 
the spun girdles of sea-purple about their breasts 
and with woven garlands wreathed the horse. Some 
broaching the seal of a great jar poured forth wine 
mixed with goldéh saffron and made the piled earth 
odorous with fragrant mud. With the shouting of 
men was mingled the cry of women, the huzza of 
boys was joined with the voice of age. And even as 
the denizens of rich Ocean, the attendants of winter, 
the ranks of the cranes® crying in air, align the 
circle of their wandering dance, uttering their notes 
abhorred by the ploughmen who labour the earth: 
even so with crying and with tumult they led to the 
acropolis the horse laden within. And the god- 
driven daughter ὃ of Priam would not abide any more 
in her chamber. Tearing apart the bars she ran, like 
“restless heifer whom the sting of the ox-tormenting 
gadfly has smitten and stung to frenzy: which looks 
no more to the herd nor obeys the herdsman nor 
yearns for the pasture, but whetted by the sharp dart 
she passes beyond the range of oxen: in such wise, 
her heart distraught by the pricking of the shafts of 
prophecy, the maiden shook the holy laurel wreath 
and cried everywhere throughout the city. She 
heeded nor parents nor friends, and maiden shame 
forsook her. Not so doth the pleasant flute of 


enough that Tryphiodorus has in mind also the orderly 
flight of the cranes (Aristotle, H.d. ix. 10; Eurip. Hel. 
1478 ff.). In Greece the bird was a migrant and its passage 
from its nesting-places in the north (Macedonia, etc.) to the 
south (Africa, etc., Hom. 74. iii. 2 ff.) which took place 
about October was the signal for ploughing, Hesiod, W. 
448 ff. 
> Cassandra. 


607 


TRYPHIODORUS 


οὐχ οὕτω Θρήισσαν ἐνὶ δρυμοῖσι γυναῖκα 
νήδυμος αὐλὸς ἔτυψεν ὀρειμανέος Διονύσου, 
ἥτε θεῷ πληγεῖσα παρήορον ὄμμα τιταίνει 

\ > tf 4 7 ~ 
γυμνὸν ἐπισσείουσα κάρη κυανάμπυκι κισσῷ, 
ὡς Hye πτερόεντος ἀναΐξασα νόοιο 


-ῶς οὐ ie τ δὺ ληδὲ 


« Bacchant. 
> Before she gave birth to Paris, Hecabe dreamed that 


608 


THE TAKING OF ILIOS 


| Jionysus raging on ἴῃς Π1]]8 strike the Thracian 

\woman® amid the thickets: who, smitten by the 

_ god, strains a wild eye and shakes her naked head 
dark-garlanded with ivy. So Cassandra, starting 
from her winged wits, raged god-maddened ; and, 
beating ever and again hair and breast, she cried 
with frenzied voice : 

, “0 -wretched men! why rage ye possessed, drag- 
ging this unfriendly horse, hasting to your last night 
and the end of war and the sleep that knows no 
waking? This warlike rout comes from the foemen. — 
Surely now the travail of the dreams of poor Hecabe ὃ 
bears fruit. The long deferred year comes to an 
end with the resolving of the war. Such a company 
of chieftains comes, whom the mighty horse shall 
bring forth in the darkest night, flashing in their 
armour for battle; now shall warriors most perfect 
leap to earth and rush to the fray. For not women 
shall deliver the labouring steed in its travail and 
attend the birth of men, but she that wrought it 
shall herself be its Lady of Deliverance; Athena, 
sacker of cities, midwife of a dolorous birth, shall 
herself undo the pregnant belly and utter her cry. 
Lo! now there is rolled within the towers a purple 
sea of blood outpoured, a wave of death ; about the 
hands of women, sharing the common doom, the 
bonds of bridal are twined: beneath the wooden 
planks lurks hidden fire. Alas! for my woes, alas! 
for thee, city of my fathers, soon shalt thou be 

\fine dust: gone is the handiwork of the immortals, 
gone utterly the foundations of Laomedon. And 
she had borne a firebrand. The seers interpreted this to 
mean that her child would be fatal to Troy and advised 


that it should be put to death (Hyginus, Fab. 91 and 249; 
Apollod. iii. 12. 5; Eur. Troad. 922; Verg. Aen. vii. 320, etc.). 


2R 609 


TRYPHIODORUS 


\ , , \ = > Ἄ ar " 
καὶ σε, πάτερ, καὶ μῆτερ, ὀδύρομαι, οἷά μοι ἤδη 
ἀμφότεροι πείσεσθε- σὺ μέν, πάτερ, οἰκτρὰ δεδου- 
πὼς 

κείσεαι “Epxetowo Διὸς μεγάλου παρὰ βωμῷ: 
μῆτερ ἀριστοτόκεια, σὲ δὲ βροτέης ἀπὸ μορφῆς 
λυσσαλέην ἐπὶ παισὶ θεοὶ κύνα ποιήσουσι. 
δῖα Πολυξείνη, σὲ δὲ πατρίδος ἐγγύθι γαίης 
κεκλιμένην ὀλίγον δακρύσομαι: ὡς ὄφελέν τις 
᾿Αργείων ἐπὶ σοῖσι γόοις ὀλέσαι με καὶ αὐτήν. 
τίς γάρ μοι χρειὼ βιότου πλέον, εἴ με φυλάσσει 
οἰκτροτάτῳ θανάτῳ, ξείνη δέ με γαῖα καλύψει; 
τοιάδε μοι δέσποινα καὶ αὐτῷ δῶρον ἄνακτι 
ἀντὶ τόσων καμάτων ᾿Αγαμέμνονι πότμον ὑφαίνει. 
ἀλλ᾽ ἤδη φράζεσθε-- τὰ δὲ γνώσεσθε παθόντες-.. 
καὶ νεφέλην ἀπόθεσθε, φίλοι, βλαψίῴρονος ἄτης. 
ῥηγνύσθω πελέκεσσι δέμας πολυχανδέος ἵππου 
ἢ πυρὶ καιέσθω" δολόεντα δὲ σώματα κεῦθον 
ὀλλύσθω, μεγάλη δὲ ποθὴ Δαναοῖσι γενέσθω. 
καὶ τότε μοι δαίνυσθε καὶ ἐς χορὸν ὀτρύνεσθε 
στησάμενοι κρητῆρας ἐλευθερίης: ἐρατεινῆς. 

ἡ μὲν ἔφη: τῇ δ᾽ οὔτις ἐπείθετο: τὴν γὰρ 

᾿Απόλλων ᾿ 

ἀμφότερον μάντιν 7° ἀγαθὴν καὶ ἄπιστον ἔθηκεν. 
τὴν δὲ πατὴρ. ἐνένιπεν ὁμοκλήσας ἐπέεσσι: 

« Priam. > Hecabe. 


° Priam was slain by Neoptolemus at the altar of Zeus 
Herceios (Verg. Aen, ii. 506 ff. See ll. 634 ff.). 


p. 50 Kinkel; Apollod, Epitom. v. 23). The name of 
Neoptolemus was given as the sacrificer by Stesichorus, 
Ibycus, and later by Euripides ; ef. schol. Eur. Hee, 41. 


610 


THE TAKING OF ILIOS 


for thee, my father,“ and for thee, my mother,? I 
weep to think what manner of things ye both shall 
suffer. Thou, my father, piteously fallen shalt. lie 
beside the altar of mighty Zeus of the Court.°_ Mother 
of the best of children, thee from human shape the 
gods shall turn into a hound’ maddened over thy 
children. Fair Polyxena,’ for thee lying low near 
to thy fatherland I shall weep but little: would 
that someone of the Argives had slain me too with 
thy lamented fate! For what profit have 1 in life 
any more, if life but keep me for a most pitiful 
death, and an alien soil shall cover me? Such things 
for me and such a doom for King Agamemnon 
himself doth my mistress’ weave, his reward for all 
his labours. But now take ye heed—in suffering 
shall ye learn the truth of my words—and put away, 
my friends, the cloud of infatuate folly. Let the 
\\body of the capacious horse be rent with hatchets or 
“burnt with fire. And hiding crafty persons as it 
does, let it perish and be greatly regretted by the 
“Danaans. And then feast ye and array you for the 
dance, setting up mixing-bowls in honour of dear 
liberty,” ” 

“So she spake; but no one hearkened to her ; for 

| Apollo made her at once a good prophet and 
unbelieved.* And her father spake and rebuked 
her: 

7 1.6. Clytemnestra who treats Cassandra as a slave. Cf. 
Aesch. Ag. 1035 ff. 

9 Hom, Jl. vi. 526, ‘‘if Zeus grant us to set up in our 
halls the mixing-bowl of liberty to the everlasting gods.” 

’ Cassandra, daughter of Priam, obtained from Apollo 
the gift of prophecy. But afterwards she refused to fulfil 
the promise by which she had obtained it. Apollo avenged 
himself by causing her prophecies not to be believed 
(Aesch. Ag. 1208 ff. ). 


611 


TRY PHIODORUS 


» , 
τίς σε πάλιν, κακόμαντι, δυσώνυμος ἤγαγε δαίμων, 420) 


θαρσαλέη κυνόμυια; μάτην ὑλάουσ᾽ ἀπερύκεις. 
οὔπω σοι κέκμηκε νόος λυσσώδεϊ νούσῳ, 
οὐδὲ παλιμφήμων ἐκορέσσαο λαβροσυνάων; 
ἀλλὰ καὶ ἡμετέρῃσιν ἐπαχνυμένη θαλίῃσιν 
ἤλυθες, ὁππότε πᾶσιν ἐλεύθερον ἦμαρ ἀνῆψεν 
ἡμῖν Ζεὺς Ἱζρονίδης, ἐκέδασσε δὲ νῆας ᾿Αχαιῶν. 
οὐδ᾽ ἔτι δούρατα μακρὰ τινάσσεται, οὐδ᾽ ἔτι τόξα 
ἕλκεται, οὐ ξιφέων σελαγή, σιγῶσι δ᾽ ὀιστοί, 
ἀλλὰ χοροὶ καὶ μοῦσα μελίπνοος, οὐδ᾽ ἔτι νείκη, 
οὐ μήτηρ ἐπὶ παιδὶ κινύρεται, οὐδ᾽ ἐπὶ δῆριν 
ἄνδρα γυνὴ πέμψασα νέκυν δακρύσατο χήρη: 
ἵππον ἀνελκόμενον δέχεται πολιοῦχος ᾿Αθήνη. 
παρθένε τολμήεσσα, σὺ δὲ πρὸ δόμοιο θοροῦσα 
ψεύδεα θεσπίζουσα καὶ ἄγρια μαργαίνουσα 
μοχθίζεις ἀτέλεστα καὶ ἱερὸν ἄστυ μιαίνεις. 
ἔρρ᾽ οὕτως: ἡμῖν δὲ χοροὶ θαλίαι τε μέλονται. 
οὐ γὰρ ἔτι Τροίης ὑπὸ τείχεσι δεῖμα λέλειπται, 
οὐδ᾽ ἔτι μαντιπόλοιο τεῆς κεχρήμεθα φωνῆς. 
ὡς εἰπὼν ἐκέλευσεν ἄγειν ἑτερόφρονα κούρην 
κεύθων ἐν θαλάμοισι: μόγις δ᾽ ἀέκουσα τοκῆι 
πείθετο, παρθενίῳ δὲ περὶ κλιντῆρι πεσοῦσα 
κλαῖεν ἐπισταμένη τὸν ἐὸν μόρον: ἔβλεπε δ᾽ ἤδη 
πατρίδος αἰθομένης ἐπὶ τείχεσι μαρνάμενον πῦρ. 
οἱ δὲ πολισσούχοιο θεῆς ὑπὸ νηὸν ᾿Αθήνης 
ἵππον ἀναστήσαντες ἐυξέστων ἐπὶ βάθρων 
ἔφλεγον ἱερὰ καλὰ πολυκνίσσων ἐπὶ βωμῶν: 
ἀθάνατοι δ᾽ ἀνένευον ἀνηνύστους ἑκατόμβας. 
εἰλαπίνη δ᾽ ἐπίδημος ἔην καὶ ἀμήχανος ὕβρις, 
ὕβρις ἐλαφρίζουσα μέθην λυσήνορος οἴνου. 
ἀφραδίῃ τε βέβυστο, μεθημοσύνῃ τε κεχήνει 


612 


THE TAKING OF ILIOS 


“ What spirit of ill name hath brought thee again, 
prophetess of evil, bold dog-fly? Vainly dost thou try 
to stay us with thy barking. Is thy mind not yet 
weary of its plague of madness, and hast thou not 
had thy fill of ill-omened ravings, but thou hast come 
in vexation at our mirth, when Zeus, the son of 
Cronus, hath lighted for us all the day of freedom 
and scattered the ships of the Achaeans? And no 
longer are the long spears brandished, no longer are 
the bows drawn, no longer flash the swords, the 
arrows are silent. But dances and honey-breathing 
music is ours and no more strife: no more wails the 
mother over the child, nor doth the wife send her 
husband to the fray and weep, a widow, over his 
corpse. Athena, guardian of the city, welcomes the 
horse which is drawn along. But thou, bold maiden, 
rushing before the house with false prophecies and wild 
raving, labourest to no purpose and _ pollutest the 
holy city. Goto! but our care is dance and mirth. 
For no longer is terror left under the walls of Troy, 
and no longer have we need of thy prophetic voice.” 

So he spake, and bade lead away the frenzied 
maiden, hiding her in her chamber. And hardly and 
against her will she obeyed her parent, and throwing 
herself upon her maiden bed she wept, knowing her 
» own doom: already she beheld the fire raging on 
the walls of her burning fatherland. But the others 
at the temple of the goddess Athena, guardian of the 
city, set up the horse on well-polished pedestal, and 
burned fair offerings on savoury altars; but the 
immortals refused their vain hecatombs. And there 
was festival in the town and infinite lust, lust 
uplifting the drunkenness of wine that unmans. 
And all the city was filled with foolishness and gaped 


613 


Ae 


TRYPHIODORUS 


¥ , 
πᾶσα πόλις, πυλέων δ᾽ ὀλίγοις φυλάκεσσι μεμήλει" 
» i \ 
ἤδη yap καὶ φέγγος ἐδύετο, δαιμονίη δὲ 
3, 3 / 
Ἴλιον αἰπεινὴν ὀλεσίπτολις ἀμφέβαλεν νύξ. 
ς: ---- 5 2 
᾿Αργείῃ δ᾽ “Ἑλένῃ πολιὸν δέμας ἀσκήσασα 
3 γε ny gas , 3 δύ 
ἦλθε δολοφρονέουσα πολυῴφράδμων ᾿Αφροδίτη, 
μ 7 , Ἢ iol 
ἐκ δὲ καλεσσαμένη mpood n πειθήμονι φωνῇ: 
/ 
νύμφα φίλη, καλέει σε πόσις Μενέλαος ἀγήνωρ 
> \ 3.9. “ 
ἵππῳ δουρατέῳ κεκαλυμμένος, ἀμφὶ δ᾽ ᾿Αχαιῶν 
A ~ 77 
ἡγεμόνες λοχόωσι τεῶν μνηστῆρες ἀέθλων.. : 
ἀλλ᾽ ἴθι, μηδ᾽ ἔτι τοι μελέτω(Πριάμοιο γέροντος 
Σ, / gms =. 
μήτ᾽ ἄλλων Τρώων μήτ᾽ αὐτοῦ Δηιφόβοιο- 
3, / 
ἤδη γάρ σε δίδωμι πολυτλήτῳ Μενελάῳ. 
> , 
ὡς φαμένη θεὸς αὖθις ἀνέδραμεν" ἡ δὲ δόλοισι 
θελγομένη κραδίην θάλαμον λίπε κηώεντα, 
καί ot Δηίφοβος πόσις εἵπετο: τὴν δὲ κιοῦσαν 
Tpwddes ἑλκεχίτωνες ἐθηήσαντο γυναῖκες. 
e€ δ᾽ ες 0᾽ le aN 0 > ¢ A ἦλθ. ἌἊΘθ ,ὔ 
ἢ 9 οποῦ" ὑψιμέλαθρον ἐς ἱερὸν ἦλθεν ἥνης, 
ἔστη παπταίνουσα φυὴν εὐήνορος ἵππου. 
τρὶς δὲ περιστείχουσα καὶ ᾿Αργείους ἐρέθουσα 
πάσας ἠυκόμους ἀλόχους ὀνόμαζεν ᾿Αχαιῶν 
φωνῇ λεπταλέῃ- τοὶ δ᾽ ἔνδοθι θυμὸν ἄμυσσον 
ἀλγεινοὶ κατέχοντες ἐεργμένα δάκρυα σιγῇ. 
” A “λ > \ λ ’ T ὃ » 
ἔστενε μὲν Μενέλαος, ἐπεὶ κλύε Tov αρεώνης, 
κλαῖε δὲ Τυδείδης μεμνημένος Αἰγιαλείης, 
οὔνομα δ᾽ ἐπτοίησεν ᾿Οδυσσέα Πηνελοπείης. 
ΕΩ > iA i. > 2) / 
Αντικλος δ᾽ ὅτε κέντρον ἐδέξατο. Λαοδαμείης, 


“ Lit. ‘received the sting (goad) of Laodameia.” The 
ordinary and natural interpretation is that the wife of 
Anticlus was called Laodameia. She is otherwise unknown, 
and as the famous Laodameia, wife of Protesilaus, is the 
type of the love of husband and wife (‘‘ the wife of Protesilaus 
loved him even after death and made a likeness of him . . . 
and the gods pitied her and Hermes brought him back from 


614 


455 


475 


THE TAKING OF ILIOS 


with heedlessness, and few warders watched the 
gates; for now the light of day was sinking and 
fateful night wrapped steep Ilios for destruction. 
And Aphrodite of many counsels, putting on the 
likeness of hoary;age, came to Argive Helen with 

crafty intent and called her forth and spake to her 
with persuasive voice : 

“ Dear lady, thy valiant. husband Menelaus calls 
thee. He is hidden in the wooden horse, and round 
him lie ambushed the leaders of the Achaeans, wooers 
of war in thy cause. But come and heed no longer 

cancient Priam nor the other Trojans nor Deiphobus 
_ himself. For now I give thee to much enduring 
Menelaus.”’ 

So spake the goddess and ran away again. But 
Helen, her heart beguiled by the craft, left her 
fragrant chamber, and her husband Deiphobus 

“followed her. And as she went, the Trojan women 
of trailing tunics gazed upon her. And when 
| she came to the high-roofed temple of Athena, she 
\ stood and scanned the form of the well-manned 
_ horse. Three times she walked round it and pro- 
-voked the Argives, naming all the fair-tressed wives 

of the Achaeans with her clear voice. And their 
hearts were torn within them with grief and they 
restrained their pent up tears in silence. Groaned 
Menelaus when he heard the daughter of Tyndareus : 


615 


TRYPHIODORUS 


μοῦνος ἀμοιβαίην ἀνεβάλλετο γῆρυν ἀνοίξας" 
ἀλλ᾽ ᾿Οδυσεὺς κατέπαλτο καὶ ἀμφοτέρῃς παλάμῃσιν 
ἀμφιπεσὼν ἐπίεζεν ἐπειγόμενον στόμα λῦσαι. 
μάστακα δ᾽ ἀρρήκτοισιν ἀλυκτοπέδῃσι μεμαρπὼς 480 
εἶχεν ἐπικρατέως: ὃ δ᾽ ἐπάλλετο χερσὶ πιεσθείς, 
φεύγων ἀνδροφόνοιο πελώρια δεσμὰ σιωπῆς. 
καὶ τὸν μὲν λίπεν ἄσθμα φερέσβιον" οἱ δέ μιν ἄλλοι 
δάκρυσι λαθριδίοισι κατακλαύσαντες ᾿Αχαιοὶ 
κοῖλον ἀποκρύψαντες ἐς ἰσχίον ἔνθεσαν ἵππου 485 
καὶ χλαῖναν μελέεσσιν ἐπὶ ψυχροῖσι βαλόντες. 
καί νύ κεν ἄλλον ἔθελγε γυνὴ δολόμητις ᾿Αχαιῶν, 
εἰ μή οἱ βλοσυρῶπις ἀπ’ αἰθέρος ἀντήσασα 
» Παλλὰς ἐπηπείλησε, φίλου δ᾽ ἐξήγαγε νηοῦ | 
\ μούνῃ φαινομένη, στερεῇ δ᾽ ἀπεπέμψατο φωνῇ: 490 
δειλαίη, τέο μέχρις ἀἁλιτροσύναι σε φέρουσι 
καὶ πόθος ἀλλοτρίων λεχέων καὶ Κύπριδος ἄτη; 
οὔποτε δ᾽ οἰκτείρεις πρότερον πόσιν οὐδὲ θύγατρα 
Ἑρμιόνην ποθέεις; ἔτι δὲ Τρώεσσιν ἀρήγεις; 
χάζεο καὶ θαλάμων ὑπερώιον εἰσαναβᾶσα 495 | 
σὺν πυρὶ μειλιχίῳ ποτιδέχνυσο νῆας ᾿Αχαιῶν. ' 
ὡς φαμένη κενεὴν ἀπάτην ἐκέδασσε γυναικός. 
καὶ τὴν μὲν θαλαμόνδε πόδες φέρον. of δὲ χοροῖο 
παυσάμενοι καμάτῳ ἀδδηκότες ἤριπον ὕπνῳ. | 
καὶ δή που φόρμιγξ ἀνεπαύσατο, κεῖτο δὲ κάμνων δ00 
αὐλὸς ἐπὶ κρητῆρι, κύπελλα δὲ πολλὰ χυθέντα 
αὐτομάτως ῥείεσκε καθελκομένων ἀπὸ χειρῶν. 
ἡσυχίη δὲ πόλιν κατεβόσκετο, νυκτὸς ἑταίρη, 
οὐδ᾽ ὑλακὴ σκυλάκων ἠκούετο, πᾶσα δὲ σιγὴ 
εἱστήκει καλέουσα φόνον πνείουσαν ἀυτήν. B05 


616 


THE TAKING = ILIOS 


opened his lips ἀπά: εὐτν οἷ answering speech. But 
Odysseus leapt upon him and fell about him with 
both his hands and restrained him while he strove to 
open his lips, and, seizing his mouth in escapeless 
fetters unbreakable, held him masterfully. And he 
writhed under the pressure of his hands, essaying to 
escape the giant bonds of murderous silence. And 
breath that gives men life forsook him; and the 
other Achaeans wept for him with secret tears and 
hid him away in the hollow flank of the horse, and 
cast a coverlet over his chilly limbs. And now would 
the crafty woman have beguiled another of the 
Achaeans, had not fierce-eyed Pallas met her from 

) the_sky and threatened her and led her forth from 

[ her dear temple, appearing unto her alone,* and sent 
_ her away with stern voice : 

“Wretch, how far shall thy sinfulness carry thee 
and thy passion for alien wedlock and the infatuation 
of Cypris®? And thou hast never any pity for thy 
former husband nor any yearning for thy daughter 
Hermione, but helpest still the ‘Trojans ? With- 
draw and go up into thy upper room in the house 
‘and with kindly fire welcome the ships of the 
\Achaeans.” 

So she spake and shattered the woman’s empty 
deceit. And Helen passed to her chamber, while they 
ceased from the dance, filled with weariness, and fell 
on sleep. The lyre rested, the weary flute lay beside 
the mixing-bowl, and many a cup fell from the 
drooping hand and flowed of itself. Peace, the 
companion of night, browsed about the city ; and no 
baying of dogs was heard but perfect silence reigned, 
inviting slaughter-breathing battle. And now Zeus, 


* Of. Hom, JI, i, 198, ὃ Mphmsodtie. 
617 


TRYPHIODORUS 


ἤδη δὲ Τρώεσσιν ὀλέθριον εἷλκε τάλαντον 
Ζεὺς ταμίης πολέμοιο, μόγις δ᾽ ἐλέλιξεν ᾿Αχαιούς" 
χάζετο δ᾽ ᾿Ιλιόθεν Λυκίης ἐπὶ πίονα νηὸν 
ἀχνύμενος μεγάλοις ἐπὶ τείχεσι Φοῖβος ᾿Απόλλων. 
αὐτίκα ὃ ᾿Αργείοισιν ᾿Αχιλλῆος παρὰ τύμβον 
ἀγγελίην ἀνέφαινε Σίνων εὐφεγγέι δαλῷ. 
παννυχίη δ᾽ ἑτάροισιν ὑπὲρ θαλάμοιο καὶ αὐτὴ 
εὐειδὴς ᾿Βλένη χρυσέην ἐπεδείκνυτο πεύκην. 
ws δ᾽ ὁπότε πλήθουσα πυρὸς γλαυκοῖο σελήνη 
οὐρανὸν αἰγλήεντα κατεχρύσωσε προσώπῳ" 
οὐχ ὅτε που γλωχῖνας ἀποξύνουσα κεραίης 
πρωτοφαὴς ὑπὸ μηνὸς ἀνίσταται ἄσκιον ἀχλύν, 
ἀλλ᾽ ὅτε κυκλώσασα περίτροχον ὄμματος αὐγὴν 
ἀντιτύπους ἀκτῖνας ἐφέλκεται ἠελίοιο- 
Toln μαρμαίρουσα Θεραπναίη τότε νύμφη 
οἴνοπα πῆχυν ἀνεῖλκε, φίλου πυρὸς ἡνιοχῆα. 
οἱ δὲ σέλας πυρσοῖο μετήορον ἀθρήσαντες 
νῆας ἀνεκρούσαντο παλιγγνάμπτοισι κελεύθοις: 
᾿Αργεῖοι σπεύδοντες, ἅπας δ᾽ ἠπείγετο ναύτης 
δηναιοῦ πολέμοιο τέλος διζήμενος εὑρεῖν. 
οἱ δ᾽ αὐτοὶ πλωτῆρες ἔσαν κρατεροί τε μαχηταὶ 
ἀλλήλοις τ᾽ ἐκέλευον ἐλαυνέμεν- af δ᾽ ἄρα νῆες 
ὠκύτεραι κραιπνῶν ἀνέμων ταχυπειθέι ῥιπῇ 
Ἴλιον εἰσανάγοντο Ποσειδάωνος ἀρωγῇ. 

1 μόλις Fy 


* For the Balance of Zeus ef. Hom. 71. viii. 69, xxii, 
209, Milton, Paradise Lost, iv. ad jin. 

: The Eternal, to prevent such horrid fray, 
Hung forth in Heaven his golden scales, etc, 

δ Here (1) both Sinon and Helen give the beacon, 
(2) Sinon gives it from the grave of Achilles. In Apollodor. 
epitom. v. 19 only Sinon gives it and from the grave of 

chilles, i.e. from outside the city. Arctinus, in the Jiiu- 


618 


διο 


δ1ὅ 


520 


THE TAKING OF ILIOS 


dispenser of war, weighed the Balance of destruc- 
tion for the Trojans, and hardly and at last rallied 
the Achaeans. Phoebus Apollo withdrew from 
llios to his rich shrine in Lycia, grieving over his 
mighty walls. And straightway beside the tomb of 
Achilles Sinon ὃ showed his message to the Argives 
with his shining brand. And all night long fair 
Helen herself also displayed from her chamber to her 
friends her golden torch. And even as when the 
moon, full with grey fire, gilds with her face the 
gleaming heaven: not when, sharpening her pointed 
horns, she first shines, rising in the shadowless ¢ dusk 
of the month, but when, orbing the rounded radiance 
of her eye, she draws to herself the reflected rays of 
the sun: even so did the lady of Therapne on that 
night in her radiance lift up her wine-hued arm, 
directing the friendly fire. And when they beheld 
the gleam of the beacon on high, the Argives 
speedily set back their ships on the path of return, 
and every mariner made haste, seeking to find an 
end of the long war. They were at once sailors 
and stout warriors and called each on the other to 
row. So the ships, swifter than the speedy winds, 
with obedient rush sailed unto Ilios by the help of 


persis (Procl. p. 244, Myth. Gr. i. Wagner) says Sinon gave 
the signal πρότερον εἰσεληλυθὼς προσποιητός, 1.6. apparently 
inside the city. In Vergil, A. vi. 517 ff. the signal is given 
by Helen. No signal is given by Sinon, but ἐδ. 256 a signal 
is sent by the Greeks to Sinon who then opens the door of 
the horse. In Quint. Smyrn. xiii. 23 ff. Sinon gives the 
signal and ib. 30 ff. he also opens the door of the horse. 
¢ Aratus says (736) that the moon first casts a shadow 

when she “‘ is going to the fourth day.” Fest. Avien. Progn. 
vi namque facem quarti sibimet profitebitur ignis, 

corpora cum primo perfundens lumine nostra 

in subiecta soli tenuem porrexerit umbram, 


619 


TRYPHIODORUS 


ἐνθάδε δὴ πεζοὶ πρότεροι κίον, οἱ δ᾽ ἐπέλειῴθεν 
ἱππῆες κατόπισθεν, ὅπως μὴ Τρώιον ἵπποι 
λαὸν ἀναστήσωσιν ἀειρομένῳ χρεμετισμῷ. 

οἱ δ᾽ ἕτεροι γλαφυρῆς ἀπὸ γαστέρος ἔρρεον ἵππου, 
τευχησταὶ βασιλῆες, ἀπὸ δρυὸς οἷα μέλισσαι, 
alr’ ἐπεὶ οὖν ἔκαμον πολυχανδέος ἔνδοθι σίμβλου 
κηρὸν ὑφαίνουσαι μελιηδέα ποικιλοτέχναι, 

ἐς νομὸν εὐγυάλοιο κατ᾽ ἄγγεος ἀμφιχυθεῖσαι 
νύγμασι πημαίνουσι παραστείχοντας ὁδίτας" 

ὡς Δαναοὶ κρυφίοιο λόχου κληῖδας ἀνέντες 
θρῷσκον ἐπὶ Τρώεσσι καὶ εἰσέτι κοῖτον ἔχοντας 
χαλκείου θανάτοιο κακοῖς ἐκάλυψαν ὀνείροις. 
νήχετο δ᾽ αἵματι γαῖα, βοὴ δ᾽ ἄλληκτος ὀρώρει 
Τρώων φευγόντων, ἐστείνετο δ᾽ Ἴλιος ἱρὴ 
πιπτόντων νεκύων, οἱ δ᾽ ἀνδροφόνῳ κολοσυρτῷ 
«ἔζεον» ἔνθα καὶ ἔνθα μεμηνότες οἷα λέοντες 
σώμασιν ἀρτιφάτοισι γεφυρώσαντες ἀγυιάς. 
Tpwiddes δὲ γυναῖκες ὑπὲρ τεγέων ἀίουσαι 

αἱ μὲν ἐλευθερίης ἐρατῆς ἔτι διψώουσαι 
αὐχένας ἐς θάνατον δειλοῖς ὑπέβαλλον ἀκοίταις, 
αἱ δὲ φίλοις ἐπὶ παισί, χελιδόνες οἷάτε κοῦφαι, 
μητέρες ὠδύροντο: νέη δέ τις ἀσπαίροντα 
ἠίθεον κλαύσασα θανεῖν ἔσπευδε καὶ αὐτὴ 

οὐδὲ δορυκτήτοισιν ὁμοῦ δεσμοῖσιν ἕπεσθαι 
ἤθελεν, ἀλλ᾽ ἐχόλωσε καὶ οὐκ ἐθέλοντα φονῆα 
καὶ ξυνὸν λέχος ἔσχεν ὀφειλόμενον παρακοίτῃ. 
πολλαὶ δ᾽ ἠλιτόμηνα καὶ ἄπνοα τέκνα φέρουσαι 
γαστέρος. ὠμοτόκοιο χύδην ὠδῖνα μεθεῖσαι 
ῥιγεδανῶς σὺν παισὶν ἀπεψύχοντο καὶ αὐταί. 
παννυχίη & ἐχόρευσεν ἀνὰ πτόλιν, οἷα θύελλα, 
κύμασι παφλάζουσα πολυφλοίσβου πολέμοιο 

1 om. F; ἔζεον Rhodoman, 


620 


THE TAKING OF ILIOS 


horses might not rouse the people of Troy by their 
loud neighing. And those others poured from the 
carven belly of the ‘horse, armed princes, even as bees 
from an oak : which when they have laboured within 
the capacious hive, weaving the sweet honeycomb 
with cunning art, pour from their vaulted nest to the 
pasture and vex the passing wayfarers with their 
stings: even so the Danaans undid the bolts of their 
secret ambush and leapt upon the Trojans and, while 
they still slept, shrouded them in evil dreams of 
brazen death. The earth swam with blood, and a 


and that, like mad lions, bridging the streets with 
new-slain bodies. And the Trojan women heard 
from their roofs and some, still thirsting for beloved 
liberty, submitted their necks to their wretched 
husbands for slaughter: mothers over their dear 
children, like light swallows, made lament: and 
many a young bride wept for her young husband 
quivering in his death struggle and was fain to die 
herself, and willed not to follow in the chains of 
captivity, but roused to anger her unwilling slayer 
and won to share the death-bed that was owing to 
her spouse. And many who bare within them 
breathless children whose months were not yet 
fulfilled, shed untimely the travail of the womb and 
died a chilly death, themselves too, with their 
children. And‘Enyo,% revelling in the drunkenness 
of unmixed blood, danced all night throughout the 


@ Goddess of War, 
621 


TRYPHIODORUS 


αἵματος ἀκρήτοιο μέθης ἐπίκωμος. Ἐνυώ) 

σὺν δ᾽ “Ἐρις)οὐρανόμηκες ἀναστήσασα κάρηνον 

᾿Αργείους ὀρόθυνεν, ἐπεὶ καὶ φοίνιος “Apys 

ὀψὲ μὲν ἀλλὰ καὶ ds πολέμων ἑτεραλκέα νίκην 

ἦλθε φέρων Δαναοῖσι καὶ ἀλλοπρόσαλλον ἀρωγήν. 56 
| 


ἴαχε δὲ γλαυκῶπις ἐπ᾽ ἀκροπόληος ᾿Αθήν 
Α; See ες τὲ TRE ” 3 IA 

αἰγίδα κινήσασα, Διὸς σάκος, ἔτρεμε δ᾽ αἰθὴρ | 
Ἥρης σπερχομένης, ἐπὶ δ᾽ ἔβραχε γαῖα βαρεῖα | 
παλλομένη τριόδοντι ἸΤοσειδάωνος ἀκωκῇ, 
ἔφριξεν δ᾽ ᾿Αίδης, χθονίων δ᾽ ἐξέδρακε θώκων δ1ι 
ταρβήσας, μή πού τι Διὸς μέγα χωσαμένοιο 

πᾶν γένος ἀνθρώπων κατάγοι ψυχοστόλος Ἕ μῆς. 
πάντα δ᾽ ὁμοῦ κεκύκητο, φόνος δέ τις ἄκριτος ἦεν" 
τοὺς μὲν γὰρ φεύγοντας ἐπὶ Σκαιῇσι πύλῃσι 
κτεῖνον ἐφεστηῶτες, ὃ δ᾽ ἐξ εὐνῆς ἀνορούσας 57k 
τεύχεα μαστεύων δνοφερῇ περικάππεσεν αἰχμῇ. 
καὶ τις ὑπὸ σκιόεντι δόμῳ κεκρυμμένος ἀνήρ, 
ξεῖνος ἐών, ἐκάλεσσεν ὀιόμενος φίλον εἶναι: | 
νήπιος, οὐ μὲν ἔμελλεν ἐνηέι φωτὶ μιγῆναι, | 
ξείνια δ᾽ ἐχθρὰ κόμισσεν: ὑπὲρ τέγεος δέ τις ἄλλος δϑί 
μήπω παπταίνων τι θοῷ διέπιπτεν ὀιστῷ. 
καί τινες ἀλγεινῷ κραδίην βεβαρηότες οἴῳ, | 
ἐκπλαγέες ποτὶ δοῦπον, ἐπειγόμενοι καταβῆναι, 
κλίμακος ἐξελάθοντο καθ᾽ ὑψηλῶν τε μελάθρων 
ἔκπεσον ἀγνώσσοντες, ἐπαυχενίους δὲ λυθέντες 588 


4 The trident; cf. Pind. O. ix. 30, Isth. viii. 35. 

> φόνος ἄκριτος is not easy to translate adequately, though 
the sense is clear enough. We write « without discretion ” 
as a reminiscence of Cuddie Headrigg’s remark (Scott, Old 
Mortality, chap. xvii.), “The Whigamore bullets ken unco 
little discretion, and will just as sune knock out the harns | 
o’ a psalm-singing auld wife as a Swearing dragoon”; cf, | 
Bacchylid. v. 129 οὐ γὰρ καρτερόθυμος "Apns κρίνει φίλον ἐν | 
622 j 


THE TAKING OF ILIOS 


city, like a hurricane, turbulent with the waves 
of surging war. And therewithal Strife lifted her , 
head high as heaven and stirred up the Argives; 
since even bloody Ares, late but even so, came and 
brought to the Danaans the changeful victory in war 
and his help that is now for these and anon for 
those. And on the acropolis grey-eyed Athena 
uttered her voice and shook her aegis, the shield 
jof Zeus; and the sky trembled as Hera bestirred 
her, and the heavy earth rang as it was shaken by 
the three-toothed spear® of Poseidon. And ὑπ τὴ 
shuddered and looked forth from his seat under earth, 
afraid lest in the great anger of Zeus Hermes, con- 
ductor of souls, should bring down all the race of 
men. And all things were confounded together and 
there was slaughter without discretion.2 For some in 
flight they slew standing by the Scaean¢ gates: one 
leapt from his bed and, seeking his arms, fell upon a 
darkling spear; one hidden in his shadowy house 
invited as his guest one whom he deemed to be a 
friend : fool! no friendly man was he to meet but 
got hateful gifts of his hospitality; another over his 
roof, while yet he looked not, fell by the swift arrow. 
And some, their hearts weighed down with grievous 
wine, in terror at the din, hasting to come down, 
forgot the ladder? and fell unwitting from the lofty 
roofs and luxed and brake the bones of their necks, 


πολέμῳ: τυφλὰ δ᾽ ἐκ χειρῶν βέλη ψυχαῖς ἔπι δυσμενέων φοιτᾷ 
θάνατόν τε φέρει Τοῖσιν ἂν δαίμων θέλῃ, Appian p. 76 (Bekker), 
an elephant ran amuck and ἀνήρει τὸν ἐν ποσίν, οὐ διακρίνων 
ἔτι φίλιον ἢ πολέμιον, and Byron’s “ friend, foe, in one red 
burial blent ” (Ch. Har, iii. 28. 9). 

¢ For a discussion of the gates of Troy see W. Leaf, Troy, 
pp. 151 ff. 

4 Like Elpenor in Hom, Od. x. 552 ff. 


623 


TRY PHIODORUS 


a 50. 3 
ἀστραγάλους ἐάγησαν, ὁμοῦ δ᾽ ἐξήρυγον οἶνον. 

A 3 3 μέ A > ᾽ὔ > 
πολλοὶ δ᾽ εἰς ἕνα χῶρον ἀολλέες ἐκτείνοντο 
μαρνάμενοι, πολλοὶ δὲ διωκόμενοι κατὰ πύργων 
ἤριπον εἰς ᾿Αίδαο πανύστατον ἅλμα θορόντες. 

a Ξ ᾿ er a 
παῦροι δὲ στεινῆς διὰ κοιλάδος, οἷάτε φῶρες, 

, 3 Jd ” aA id 
πατρίδος ὀλλυμένης ἔλαθον χειμῶνα φυγόντες. 
οἱ δ᾽ ἔνδον πολέμῳ τε καὶ ἀχλύι κυμαίνοντες, 
ἀνδράσιν οἰχομένοισι καὶ οὐ φεύγουσιν ὁμοῖοι, 
πίπτον ἐπ᾽ ἀλλήλοισι" πόλις δ᾽ οὐ χάνδανε λύθρον 
ἀνδρῶν χηρεύουσα, περιπλήθουσα δὲ νεκρῶν. 
οὐδέ τι φειδωλή τις ἐγίνετο: φοιταλέῃ δὲ 
σπερχόμενοι μάστιγι φιλαγρύπνοιο κυδοιμοῦ 

ρ Ψ ag > 4 
\ ~ > A a 
οὐδὲ θεῶν ὄπιν εἶχον, ἀθεσμοτάτης δ᾽ ὑπὸ fur ς 
3 i? ww > ᾽’ ν P 7 
7 
ἀθανάτων ἔχραινον ἀπενθέας αἵματι βωμούς. 
οἰκτρότατοι δὲ γέροντες ἀτιμοτάτοισι φόνοισιν 
3 3 N ὑπ 
3 ,ὔ \ 278 , - 
οὐδ᾽ ὀρθοὶ κτείνοντο, χαμαὶ δ᾽ ἱκετήσια γυῖα 
τεινάμενοι πολιοῖσι κατεκλίνοντο καρήνοις. 
λλὰ δὲ ’ ΄ δί 3 AY ~ 
πολλὰ ὃὲ νήπια τέκνα μινυνθαδίων ἀπὸ μαζῶν 
ε 4 
μητέρος ἡρπάζοντο καὶ od νοέοντα τοκήων 
bs 
ἀμπλακίας ἀπέτινον, ἀνημέλκτου δὲ γάλακτος 
\ / 9 
παιδὲ μάτην ὀρέγουσα χοὰς ἐκόμισσε τιθήνη. 
> U , 
οἰωνοὶ τε κῦνες τε κατὰ πτόλιν ἄλλοθεν ἄλλοι, 
ἌΣ / 
ἠέριοι πεζοί τε συνέστιοι εἰλαπινασταί, 
e aN » 3 ir > 3 ,ὕ 
ayia μέλαν πίνοντες ἀμείλιχον εἶχον ἐδωδήν, 
\ a X \ 
καὶ τῶν μὲν κλαγγὴ φόνον ἔπνεεν, of δ᾽ ὑλάοντες 
ἕ ; 
ἄγρια κοπτομένοισιν ἐπ᾽ ἀνδράσιν ὠρύοντο, 
λ 7 δ᾽ iA ’ὔ Leg 3 tA » 
νήλέες, οὐδ᾽ ἀλέγιζον ἑοὺς ἐρύοντες ἄνακτας. 
A \ , 
τὼ δὲ γυναιμανέος ποτὶ δώματα Δηιφόβοιο 
/ > 
στελλέσθην ᾿Οδυσσεύς τε καὶ εὐχαίτης Μενέλαος 
624 


THE TAKING OF ILIOS 


and therewithal spewed forth wine. And many 
gathered together in one place were slain as they 
fought and many, as they were pursued, fell from the 
towers into the house of Hades, leaping their latest 
leap. And a fewsthrough a narrow hollow, like 
thieves, escaped unnoticed from the storm of their 
perishing fatherland. Others within, in the surge ) 
of war and darkness, like to men gone rather than 
to men fleeing, fell one above the other. And the 
city could not contain the filth, desolate of men 
but over-full of dead. And there was no sparing. 
Driven by the frenzied lash of sleepless turmoil they 
had no regard even to the gods, but with most 
lawless onset they defiled with blood the innocent 
altars of the immortals. And old men most piteous 
were slain in most unworthy slaughter : slain not on 
their feet, but, stretching on the ground their 
suppliant limbs, they had their grey heads laid low. 
/And many infant children were snatched from the 
mother’s breast that had suckled them but a little 
while and, understanding not, paid for the sins of 
their parents, while she that nursed it, offered the 
child the breast in vain, and brought offering of milk 
it might not suck. And birds and dogs, | here and 
/there throughout the city, the fowls of air and the | 
‘beasts that walk the earth, feasted in company and — 
- drank the black blood and made a sav age meal. The 
crying of the birds breathed slaughter, while the 
\ barking dogs bayed wildly over torn corpses of men, 
| pitiless and heeding not that they were rending their 
\own masters. 

And Odysseus and Menelaus of the goodly hair 
set out for the house of woman-mad Deiphobus, like 


@ Pliny, V.H. xxxv. 98. 
2s 625 


TRYPHIODORUS 


’ on 3 Δ " + 6 \ 4 
καρχαλέοισι λύκοισιν ἐοικότες, οἵθ᾽ ὑπὸ νύκτα 8 
χειμερίην φονόωντες ἀσημάντοις ἐπὶ μήλοις 
οἴχονται, κάματον δὲ κατατρύχουσι νομήων. 
ἔνθα δύω περ ἐόντες ἀπειρεσίοισιν ἔμιχθεν | 

> / 
ἀνδράσι δυσμενέεσσι" vén δ᾽ ἠγείρετο χάρμη 
0 
| 


TOV μὲν ἐπορνυμένων, τῶν δ᾽ ὑψόθεν ἐκ θαλάμοιο 
βαλλόντων λιθάκεσσι καὶ ὠκυμόροισιν ὀιστοῖς. 
ἀλλὰ καὶ ὡς ὑπέροπλα καρήατα πυργώσαντες 
ἀρρήκτοις κορύθεσσι καὶ ἀσπίσι κυκλώσαντες 
εἰσέθορον μέγα δῶμα: καὶ ἀντίβιον μὲν ὅμιλον, 
θῆρας δειμαλέους, ἐλάων ἐδάιξεν ᾿Οδυσσεύς, 62 
᾿Ατρείδης δ᾽ ἑτέρωθεν ὑποπτήξαντα διώξας 
Δηίφοβον κατέμαρψε, μέσην κατὰ γαστέρα τύψας 
ἧπαρ ὀλισθηρῇσι συνεξέχεεν χολάδεσσιν. 

ὡς ὁ μὲν αὐτόθι κεῖτο λελασμένος ἱπποσυνάων, 
τῷ δ᾽ ἕπετο τρομέουσα δορυκτήτη παράκοιτις 63 
ἄλλοτε μὲν χαίρουσα κακῶν ἐπὶ τέρματι μόχθων, 
ἄλλοτε δ᾽ αἰδομένη, τοτὲ δ᾽ ὀψέ πῈρ ὡς ἐν ὀνείρῳ 
λαθρίδιον στενάχουσα φίλης μιμνήσκετο πάτρης. 
Αἰακίδης δὲ γέροντα Νεοπτόλεμος βασιλῆα 
πήμασι κεκμηῶτα παρ᾽ “Βρκείῳ κτάνε ye βωμῷ 63, 
οἶκτον ἀπωσάμενος πατρώιον:" οὐδὲ λιτάων 
ἔκλυεν, οὐ ΠΠηλῆος ὁρώμενος ἥλικα χαϊτὴν 
ἠδέσαθ᾽, ἧς ὕπο θυμὸν ἀπέκλασεν ἠδὲ γέροντος 
καίπερ ἐὼν βαρύμηνις ἐφείσατο τὸ πρὶν ᾿Αχιλλεύς. 
σχέτλιος, ἢ μὲν ἔμελλε καὶ αὐτῷ πότμος ὁμοῖος 64! 
ἑσπέσθαι παρὰ βωμὸν ἀληθέος. ᾿Απόλλωνος 


626 


THE TAKING OF ILIOS 


unto wolves of jagged teeth, which in a stormy night, 
lusting for blood, go to attack unshepherded flocks 
and waste the labour of the herdsmen. There, though 
they were but two, they engaged foemen beyond 


- numbering. And‘a new battle arose, as these attacked | 


and those from a chamber overhead hurled stones 


— and arrows which bring speedy death. Yet even so, 


{ 


_fencing their giant heads with helmets unbreakable 
and encircling themselves with shields, they leapt 
into the great house. And Odysseus drave and 
slaughtered the crowd that opposed him, even as wild 
beasts affrighted. And the son of Atreus on the other 
hand pursued Deiphobus who skulked away, and 
overtook and smote him in the midst of the belly and 
poured forth his liver and slippery guts. So he lay 
there and forgot his chivalry. And with Menelaus 
followed, trembling, his spear-won spouse, now 
rejoicing in the end of dire woes, and now ashamed, 
and then again, though late, as in a dream, secretly 
groaning, she remembered her dear fatherland. But 
Neoptolemus, scion of Aeacus, slew beside the altar 
of Zeus of the Court-yard the aged king out-worn 

) with woe. He put from him such pity as his father 
had shown, and hearkened not to his prayers, nor 

‘had compassion when he looked on his hair grey even 
as the hair of Peleus: the hair at which of old 
“Achilles softened his heart and, despite his grievous 
anger, spared the old man.@ Hard of heart! verily 
a like fate was destined afterward to come to him by 
the altar of truthful Apollo, when, as he sought to 

« Hom. Il. xxiv. 616 ff. 
232 627 


TRYPHIODORUS 


ὕστερον, ὁππότε μιν ζαθέου δηλήμονα νηοῦ 
Δελφὸς ἀνὴρ ἐλάσας ἱερῇ κατέπεφνε μαχαίρῃ. 
ἡ δὲ κυβιστήσαντα διηερίων ἀπὸ πύργων -- 
χειρὸς ᾿Οδυσσείης ὀλοὸν βέλος — ἀθρήσασα 
᾿Ανδρομάχη μινύωρον ἐκώκυεν ᾿Αστυάνακτα. 
ασσάνδρην δ᾽ ἤσχυνεν ᾿Οἰλῆος ταχὺς Αἴας 
ΠΠαλλάδος ἀχράντοιο θεῆς ὑπὸ γοῦνα πεσοῦσαν' 
ἡ δὲ βίην ἀνένευσε θεή, τὸ πρόσθεν ἀρηγὼν 
ἀνθ᾽ ἑνὸς ᾿Αργείοισιν ἐχώσατο πᾶσιν ᾿Αθήνη. 
Αἰνείαν δ᾽ ἔκλεψε καὶ ᾿Αγχίσην ᾿Αφροδίτη 
οἰκτείρουσα γέροντα καὶ υἱέα, τῆλε δὲ πάτρης 
ἐγ ον ἧς ἀπένασσε: θεῶν δ᾽ ἐτελείετο βουλὴ 
Ζηνὸς ἐπαινήσαντος, ἵνα κράτος ἄφθιτον εἴη 
παισὶ καὶ viwvotaw ἀρηιφίλης ᾿Αφροϑδίτης. 
τέκνα δὲ καὶ γενεὴν ᾿Αντήνορος ἀντιθέοιο 
᾿Ατρείδης ἐφύλαξε, φιλοξείνοιο γέροντος, 
μειλιχίης προτέρης «τίνων.» χάριν ἠδὲ τραπέζης 
κείνης, ἣ μιν ἔδεκτο γυνὴ πρηεῖα Θεανώ. 
δειλὴ Λαοδίκη, σὲ δὲ πατρίδος ἐγγύθι γαίης 
γαῖα περιπτύξασα κεχηνότι δέξατο κόλπῳ: 


ΤΕ ΤΕ Ξαὶν πάπα eee 


* There are several versions of the death of Neoptolemus 
at Delphi. (1) According to one story he came to plunder 
the temple of Apollo (Paus. x. 7. 1), and was slain at the 
instance of the Pythian priestess by the Delphians (Paus. 
i, 13. 9) or by Apollo’s priest himself (Paus. x, 94. 4). (2) 
According to another version he came to offer to Apollo the 
first-fruits of the spoil of Troy, ‘‘ and there in a quarrel over 
meats a man slew him with a knife ” (Pindar, Nem. vii. 40 f.). 
After his’ death he was buried in the precincts of Apollo’s 


_ temple, and yearly offerings were made to him as a hero by 
_ the Delphians (Paus. x. 24. 6), 


> The fate of Astyanax, son of Hector and Andromache, 
who was hurled headlong from the wall of Troy, is fore- 
shadowed in Hom. Il. xxiv. 735. 


628 


65K! 


66 


THE TAKING OF ILIOS 


harm the divine shrine, a Delphian man smote and 
slew him with a holy knife.¢ ἃ 

And Andromache bewailed short-lived Astyanax,? 
whom she saw dive headlong from the airy towers, 
hurled to death’*by the hand of Odysseus. Swift 
Aias, son of Oileus, assaulted Cassandra when she 
took shelter at the knees of the stainless goddess 
Pallas ; and the goddess rejected his violence, and, 
helper though she had been aforetime, for one man’s 
sake Athena was angered against all the Argives. 

‘Aeneias and Anchises did Aphrodite steal away, 
taking pity on the old man and his son, and far from 
their fatherland established them in Ausonia.¢ 
So the counsel of the gods was fulfilled with 
approval of Zeus, so that imperishable sovereignty 

(should be the lot of the children and the grand- 

(children? of Aphrodite dear ἴο Ares. The 
children and race of godlike Antenor,’ that 
hospitable old man, the son of Atreus saved, in 
gratitude for his former kindness and that table 
wherewith his gentle wife Theauo had welcomed 
him. Poor Laodice’! thee by thy native land 
the enfolding earth took to her yawning bosom, 

¢ Italy. 4 The Romans. 

e Antenor and his wife Theano, sister of Hecabe, had 
entertained Odysseus and Menelaus when they came to Troy 
to ask the restoration of Helen before the war (Hom. JI. 
iii. 205), and subsequently he advised the surrender of Helen 
(Hom. JI. vii. 347 ff.). His friendly attitude to the Greeks 
(“«Troianae suasorem Antenora pacis,” Ovid, 1. iv. 75) led 
later to charges of treachery ; οὐ. Lycophr. 340. 

7 Daughter of Priam and Hecabe, mother of Munitus by 


Acamas, son of Theseus, was, at the taking of Troy, 
swallowed up by the earth; οὐ, Lycophr. 314, 497, 
629 


TRYPHIODORUS 


> 9 A 
οὐδέ σε Θησείδης ᾿Ακάμας οὐδ᾽ ἄλλος ᾿Αχαιῶν 
/ , 
ἤγαγε ληιδίην, aves δ᾽ dua πατρίδι γαίῃ. 
3... ἢ 
πᾶσαν δ᾽ οὐκ ἂν ἔγωγε μόθου χύσιν ἀείσαιμι 
> ,ὔ 
κρινάμενος τὰ ἕκαστα καὶ ἄλγεα νυκτὸς ἐκείνης" 
; 2\7 
Μουσάων ὅδε μόχθος, ἐγὼ δ᾽ ἅπερ ἵππον ἐλάσσω 
3 Ψ, 
τέρματος ἀμφιέλισσαν ἐπιψαύουσαν ἀοιδήν. 
ἄρτι γὰρ ἀντολίηθεν ἀπόσσυτος ᾿᾽Ωκεανοῖο 
Ζ 2» ν 
ἠρέμα λευκαίνουσα κατέγραφεν ἠέρα πολλήν, 
iy ε , > / 
νύκτα διαρρήξασα μιαιφόνον ἱππότις 7Hds: 
ΩΝ Tee 
οὗ δ᾽ ἐπαγαλλόμενοι πολέμων ὑπεραυχέι νίκῃ 
coe ὔ wy + 
πάντοσε παπταίνεσκον ἀνὰ πτόλιν, εἴ τινες ἄλλοι 
Up 7, 3 Δ 
κλεπτόμενοι φεύγουσι φόνου πάνδημον ἀυτήν. 
ἀλλ᾽ οἱ μὲν δέδμηντο λίνῳ θανάτοιο πανάγρῳ, 
ἰχθύες ὡς ἁλίῃσιν ἐπὶ ψαμάθοισι χυθέντες, 
᾿Αργεῖοι δ᾽ ἀπὸ μὲν μεγάρων νεοτευχέα κόσμον 
ἐξέφερον, νηῶν ἀναθήματα, πολλὰ δ᾽ ἐρήμων 
ἥρπαζον θαλάμων κειμήλια: σὺν δὲ γυναῖκας 
ς-. inl > 4 
ληιδίας σὺν παισὶν ἄγον ποτὶ νῆας ἀνάγκῃ. 
, \ Ad θ δεν λ / 6 7 
τείχεσι δὲ πτολίπορθον ἐπὶ φλόγα wpnEavres 
a > ~ 
ἔργα ἸΠοσειδάωνος ἰῇ συνέχευον ἀυτμῇ. 
αὐτοῦ καὶ μέγα σῆμα φίλοις ἀστοῖσιν ἐτύχθη 
” 9 , \ τὺ ’ ” 
Ἴλιος αἰθαλόεσσα- πυρὸς δ᾽ ὀλεσίπτολιν ἄτην 
=) ION ” , ε 2 aA 
Ξάνθος ἰδὼν ἔκλαυσε γόων ἁλιμυρέι πηγῇ, 
ε ,ὔ 3 ¢€ / > / , “o 
Hd¢atorw δ᾽ ὑπόεικεν ἀτυζόμενος χόλον Ἥρης. 


Tht SiS eee ee 


* For this metaphor ef. Lucret. vi. 90 ff. “Tu mihi 
Supremae praescripta ad candida calcis Currenti spatium 
praemonstra, callida Musa Calliope.” We take the sense to 
be: I cannot go into detail (Eur. Ph. 751 ὄνομα δ᾽ ἑκάστου 
διατριβὴν πολλὴν ἔχει). This is poetry. As the charioteer 
tries to graze the turnin -post (‘‘ metaque fervidis evitata 
rotis,” Hor. C. i, 1. 4) and not to run wide, so my song will 
be as brief as may be: Bard δ᾽ ἐν μακροῖσι ποικίλλειν ἀκοὰ 
σοφοῖς, Pind. P. ix. 77, 


630 


675 


680 


685 


THE TAKING OF ILIOS 


and neither Acamas, son of Theseus, nor any other 
of the Achaeans led thee captive, but thou didst 
perish with thy fatherland. 

All the multitude of strife and the sorrows of that Ὁ 
night I could not sing, distinguishing each event. This 
is the Muses’ task; and I shall drive, as it were a horse,* 
a song which, wheeling about, grazes the turning-post. 

Dawn, in her car was just speeding back from 
Ocean in the East and marking great space of sky 
with slowly brightening light, dispelling slaughterous 
night; and they, exulting in their proud victory in 
‘war, looked everywhere throughout the city to find 
if any others were concealed and avoiding the 

murderous warfare that embraced all the people. 
But they were overcome by the all-capturing net 
of death, as fishes poured forth on the shores of 
the sea. And the Argives carried from the halls 
their new bravery to deck their ships and many 
treasured heirlooms did they seize from the desolate 
chambers. And with them they carried off by force 
captive wives and children together unto the ships. 
And having arrayed city-sacking fire against the 
walls, in one flame they confounded all the works 
~of Poseidon.® And even there was smoking LIlios 
made a great monument to her dear citizens. And 
Xanthus, beholding the fiery doom of the city, wept 
with seaward flowing fountain of lamentation, and, 


terrified by the anger of Hera, yielded to Hephaestus. 


ὃ In reference to the building of the walls by Poseidon 
and Apollo. So Verg. A. iii. 3 ““ Ilium et omnis humo fumat 
Neptunia Troia”; ο΄. A. 11, 622, 

Ἵ eae 631 


TRYPHIODORUS 


οὗ δὲ Πολυξείνης ἐπιτύμβιον αἷμα χέαντες, 
ὠῆνιν ἱλασσάμενοι τεθνειότος Αἰακίδαο 
Τρωιάδας τε γυναῖκας ἐλάγχανον, ἄλλα τε πάντα 
χρυσὸν ἐμοιρήσαντο καὶ ἄργυρον: οἷσι βαθείας 
νῆας ἐπαχθήσαντες ἐριγδούπου διὰ πόντου eg 
ἐκ Τροίης ἀνάγοντο μόθον τελέσαντες ᾿Αχαιοί, 


a Eg es τυ. 


* Polyxena, daughter of Priam, was loved by Achilles, 
and it was when he had gone to meet her in the temple of 


632 


- THE TAKING OF ILIOS 


The Achaeans poured the blood of Polyxena‘ 
over the tomb of dead Achilles to propitiate his 
wrath, and took each his lot of Trojan women and 
divided all their other spoil, both gold and silver: 
wherewith they loaded their deep ships and through 
the booming sea set sail from Troy, having made 
an end of the war. 3 
Thymbraean Apollo that he was slain by Paris. On the 


capture of Troy Neoptolemus sacrificed her at the tomb of 
Achilles; schol. Lycophr. 323; Eur, Tr. 261 ff. 


633 


INDEX OF PROPER NAMES 
IN COLLUTHUS AND 
TRYPHIODORUS 


[Ὁ =Colluthus. 


Acamas, T. 177, 662 

Achaeans, ©. 220, Τὶ passim 

Achilles, C. 277, 'T. 89, 52, 158, 270, 
510, 689 

Admetus, T. 171 

Aeacidae, OC. 275 

' Aeacides (1)=Achilles, T, 270, (2)= 

Neoptolemus, T. 634 

Aegialeia, T. 474 

Aegialeus, T. 161 

Aeneias, T. 651 

Aeolian (Helle), C. 389 

Aesimides, “son of Aesimus”= 
Sinon, T. 220 

Aesimus, Τὶ 294 

Agamemnon, T. 108, 409 

Aias (1), son of Telamon, T. 19; (2), 
Son of Oileus, T. 165, 647 

Alexander (Paris), C. 138, 
T. 61 


Amphidamas, Τὶ, 182 
Amphitrite, ©. 21 
Amyclae, C. 243 
Amyclaean (Hyacinthus), C. 241 
Anchises, T, 651 
Andromache, T. 646 
Antenor, T? 656 
Anticlus, Τὶ 178, 476 
Antilochus, C. 273, T. 18 
Antiphates, T. 180 
Aphrodite (Aphrogeneia), C. passim, 

T. 455, 655 
Apollo, passim 

7~—Ares, pussim 

Argives, passim 


—~ 684 


198, 


Nay 


— 


T. = Tryphiodorus. ] 


Argos, T. 293 

Artemis, C. 35 — 

Asia, OC. 149, 161 

Astyanax, T. 646 

Athamas (daughter of) =Helle, T 
218 


Athena, passim ; plur. C. 186 

Atreides (Atreion), “son of Atceus,” 
(1)=Menelaus, Ὁ. 223, 249 ; (2)= 
Agamemnon, T. 204 

Ausonia (Italy), T. 653 


Calchas, T. 132, 172 
Calliopeia, T. 4 
Carneian Apollo, C. 240 
Cassandra, ©. 892, T. 374, 647 
Centaur (Cheiron), C. 29 
Cheiron, Ὁ. 40 
Cicones, ©. 389 
Comaetho, T. 159 
Cretans, T. 168 
Crete, C. 384 
Cronides (Cronion), “son of 
Cronus,” = Zeus, C. 78, 283, Τ᾿ 428 
Cyanippus, T. 159 
[Cypris (Aphrodite), ©. passim, Τ'. 
/ Cythereia (Aphrodite), ©. 260, 298, 
815, 326 


~S 


Danaans, T. 8, 46, 55 
Dardan gates, Τὶ 335 
Dardania, C, 210, 280 
Dardanides, “scion of Dardanus,” 


INDEX OF PROPER NAMES 


(1)= Paris, C. 286 ; (2)=Priam, T. 
267 


Dardanus, C. 286 

Deidameia, T. 52 

Deiphobus, T. 45, 168, 461, 465, 
623, 627 

Delphian slays Neoptolemus, ἐς 


ΠΕΣ C. 216 
Deucalion, ὀ. O71 
Diomedes, T. 152 
Dionysus, C, 252, T. 370 


Echo, C. 119 

Eileithyia, T. 341, 388 

Enyo (War), C. 144, 153, T. 7, 561 
Hos (Dawn), T. 32, "670 

Epeius, T. 57, 183, 295 

Eris (Strife), ©. 39, 44, T. 552 


fh Eros (Love), OC. 2h 67, 77, 85, 95, 


101, 262 
Erymanthus, C. 222 
Euaemon, T. 176 
Eumelus, T. 172 
Eurotas, ©. 224, 347, 361 
Eurydamas, T. 181 
Eurypylus, T. 176 


Ganymede, C. 19 
Graces, 0. 16, 89, 175 


Hades, T. 570, 589 

Haemonian, C. 17, 219 

Hecabe, T. 380 

Hector, T. 21 

Helen, ©. 165, 255, 296, 324, T. 
454, 513 

Helenus, T. 49, 133 

Helicon, C. 23 

Helle, Ὁ, 389, T. 218 

Hellespont, C. 204 

Hephaestus, C. 37, 53, 179, T. 282, 
685 

Hera, passim 

Hermes (Hermaon), C. 70, 78, 116, 
128, 127 

Hermione, C. 328, 337, T. 494 

Hesperides, C, 59 

Hours, Ο. 345 


Ida, C. yf ἫΝ 71, 102, 119, 195, 201, 
T. 60, 8 

pre kaa T. 168 

Ilios, O, 281, 327, T, 41, 46 


Iphidamas, T. 181 
Ismarian lake, C. 211 


Lacedaemon, C. 166 
Laodameia, T. 476 
Laodice, T. 660 


Meges, T. 180 

Melisseus, C. 23 

Memunon, T. 31 

Menelaus, C. 301, 316, 325, 384, T. 
47, 162, 457, 462, 473, 614 

Menoitiades, «son of Menoitios Me 
Patroclus, T. 27 

Muses, C. 24, T. 666 

Mycen(a)e, C. 221, T. 108 


Naiads, C. 364 

Neleus, Ο, 272 

Neoptolemus, T. 153, 157, 634 
Nestor, T. 18, 169 

Nymphs, C. 1 


Ocean, T. 352, 668 

Odysseus, T. 112, 201, 475, 614, 625 

Oileus, T, 165, 647 

Olympus, C, 22, 287 

Ortygides, “son of Ortyx” = Anti- 
clus, T. 178 


Palamedes, T. 272 

Pallas, T. 489, 648 

Pan, C. 116 

Pangaeon, C. 212 

Paris, C. passim 

Patroclus, C. 277, Τὶ 27 

Peitho (Persuasion), C. 30 

Peleides, ‘‘son of Peleus” = Achilles, 
ae 1 

Peleus, C. 18, 40, 276, 'T. 637 

Pelias, T. 181 

Peneleos, T. 180 

Penelope, T. 475 

Penthesileia, T. 35 

Phalacra, C. 14 

Phereclus, Ο. 196, T. 60 

Philoctetes, T. 271 

Phoebus (Apollo), T. 509 

Phrygia, C. 280 

Phthia, C. 221 

Phyllis, O. 221, 274 

Polyxena, T. 403, 686 

Poseidon, O. 22, 281, 290, 309, Ἐ 
838, 529, 569, 681 


635 


“4 


COLLUTHUS AND TRYPHIODORUS 


Priam, ©. 72, 139, 285, T. 242, 262, 


358, 460 
Pylus, C, 272 


Rhesus, T. 30 
Rhoeteian, T, 216 


Sarpedon, Τ. 25 


Telamon, C. 276, T. 170 
Tenedos, Toy 
Teucer, p. 170 
‘Theano, T. 659 


Printed in Great Britain by R. & R. Crakk, 


Therapne, C. 226; 
Therapne= Helen, T. 5: 

Thermodon, T. 23. 

Theseus, T. "177, 662 

Thrace, Ὁ. 212 

Thracians, T. 30; Thracian woman 
=Bacchant, T. 369 

Thrasymedes, T. 169 

Thyone, C. 251 

Titans, C. 50 

Troy, Trojans, passim 

Tydeus, T. 157, 160, 177, 474, 662 

ἘΠ ΩΝ daughter of= Helen, C. 
378, T. 


Xanthus, ©. 1, 71, T, 325, 684 


(lady) of 


Zephyrus, C. 245 
Zeus, passim; Zeus Herceios, TP. 
400, 635 


Limirep, Ladinburgh. 


THE LOEB CLASSICAL 
LIBRARY 


VOLUMES ALREADY PUBLISHED 


LATIN AUTHORS 


APULEIUS. THE GOLDEN ASS (METAMORPHO- 
SES). Trans. by W. Adlington (1566). Revised by 
S. Gaselee. (4th Impression.) 

AULUS GELLIUS. Trans. by J.C. Rolfe. 3 Vols. 

AUSONIUS. Trans. by H. G. Evelyn White. 2 Vols. 

BOETHIUS: TRACTS ann DE CONSOLATIONE 
PHILOSOPHIAE. ‘Trans. by the Rev. H. F. Stewart 
and E. K. Rand. (2nd Impression.) 

CAESAR: CIVIL WARS. Trans. by A. G. Peskett. 
(3rd Impression.) 

CAESAR: GALLIC WAR. Trans. by H. J. Edwards. 
(4th Impression.) 

CATULLUS. Trans. by F. W. Cornish; TIBULLUS. 
Trans. by J. P. Postgate; PERVIGILIUM VENERIS. 
Trans. by J. W. Mackail. (8th Impression.) 

CICERO: DE FINIBUS. Trans. by H. Rackham. (2nd 
Impression.) 

CICERO: DEOFFICHIS. Trans. by Walter Miller. (3rd 
Impression.) 

CICERO: DE REPUBLICA ἀν DE LEGIBUS. Trans. 
by Clinton Keyes. 

CICERO: DE SENECTUTE, DE AMICITIA, DE 
DIVINATIONE. Trans. by W. A. Falconer. (2nd 
Impression.) 

CICERO: LETTERS TO ATTICUS. Trans. by E. O. 
Winstedt. 3 Vols. (Vol. I. 4th, 11. 3rd, and III. 2nd 
Impression.) 

CICERO: LETTERS TO HIS FRIENDS. Trans. by 
W. Glynn Williams. 3 Vols.’ Vols. I. and II. 

CICERO: PHILIPPICS. Trans. by W.-C. A. Ker. 

CICERO: PRO ARCHIA POETA, POST REDITUM IN 
SENATU, POST REDITUM AD QUIRITES, DE 
DOMO SUA, DE HARUSPICUM RESPONSIS, PRO 
PLANCIO. Trans. by N. H. Watts. 

1 


THE LOEB CLASSICAL LIBRARY 


CICERO: PRO CAECINA, PRO LEGE MANILIA, 
PRO CLUENTIO, PRO RABIRIO. Trans. by H. 
Grose Hodge. 

CICERO: TUSCULAN DISPUTATIONS. Trans. by 
J. E. King. pi dee 

CICERO: VERRINE ORATIONS. Trans. by L. H. G. 
Greenwood. 2 Vols. Vol. I. 

CLAUDIAN. Trans. by M. Platnauer. 2 Vols. 
CONFESSIONS OF ST. AUGUSTINE. Trans. by W. 
Watts (1631). 2 Vols. (Vol. I. 4th, Vol. 11. 3rd. Imp.) 
FRONTINUS:. STRATAGEMS anp AQUEDUCTS. 

Trans. by C. E. Bennett. 

FRONTO: CORRESPONDENCE. Trans. by C. R. 
Haines. 2 Vols. : 

HORACE: ODES ann EPODES. Trans. by C. E. 
Bennett. _ (7th Impression revised.) 

HORACE: SATIRES, EPISTLES, ARS POETICA. 
Trans. by H. R. Fairclough. 

JUVENAL anp PERSIUS. Trans. by G. G. Ramsay. 
(4th Impression.) 

LIVY. Trans. by B. O. Foster. 13 Vols. Vols. I-IV. 
(Vol. I. 2nd Impression revised.) 

LUCAN. Trans. by J. D. Duff. 

LUCRETIUS. Trans. by W. H. D. Rouse. (2nd Edition.) 

MARTIAL. Trans. by W. C. A. Ker. 2 Vols. (2nd 
Impression revised.) 

OVID: HEROIDES, AMORES. Trans. by Grant Shower- 
man. (2nd Impression.) 

OVID: METAMORPHOSES. Trans. by F. J. Miller. 
2 Vols. (Vol. 1. 4th Impression, ΤΙ. 3rd Impression.) 

OVID: TRISTIA ann EX PONTO. Trans. by ALi: 
Wheeler. 

PETRONIUS. Trans. by M. Heseltine; SENECA: APO- 
COLOCYNTOSIS. Trans. by W. H. D. Rouse. (4th Imp.) 

PLAUTUS.. Trans. by Paul Nixon. 5 Vols. Vols. I-III. 
(Vol. I. 3rd Impression.) 

PLINY: LETTERS. Melmoth’s translation revised by 
W. ΜΟῚ, Hutchinson. 2 Vols. (3rd Impression.) 

PROPERTIUS. Trans. by H. E. Butler. (3rd Impression.) 

2 


THE LOEB CLASSICAL LIBRARY 


QUINTILIAN. Trans. by H. E. Butler. 4 Vols. 

SALLUST. Trans. by J. C. Rolfe. 

SCRIPTORES HISTORIAE AUGUSTAE. Trans. by 
D. Magie. 3 Vols. Vols. I. and 11. 

SENECA: EPISTULAE MORALES. Trans. iby R. M. 
Gummere. 3 Vols. (Vol. I. 2nd Impression.) 

SENECA: MORAL ESSAYS. Trans. by J. W. Basore. 
3 Vols. Vol. I 

SENECA : TRAGEDIES. Trans. by F. J. Miller. 
2 Vols. (2nd Impression revised.) 

STATIUS. Trans. by J. H. Mozley. 2 Vols. 

SUETONIUS. Trans. by J. C. Rolfe. 2 Vols. (Vol. I. 4th 
Impression revised, Vol. 11. 8rd Impression). 

TACITUS: DIALOGUS. Trans. by Sir Wm. Peterson ; 
and AGRICOLA ἂν GERMANIA. Trans. by Maurice 
Hutton. (3rd Impression.) 

a : HISTORIES. Trans. by C. H. Moore. 2 Vols. 

ol. I. 

TERENCE. Trans. by John Sargeaunt. 2 Vols. (5th 
Impression.) 

VELLEIUS PATERCULUS ann RES GESTAE DIVI 
AUGUSTI.. Trans. by F. W. Shipley. 

VIRGIL. Trans. by H. R. Fairclough. 2 Vols. (Vol. J. 
6th Impression, 11. 3rd Impression.) 


GREEK AUTHORS 


ACHILLES TATIUS. Trans. by S. Gaselee. 

AENEAS TACTICUS, ASCLEPIODOTUS any ONA- 
SANDER. Trans. by The Illinois Greek Club. 

AESCHINES. Trans. by C. D. Adams. 

AESCHYLUS. Trans. by H. Weir Smyth. 2 Vols. 
(Vol. 1. 2nd Impression.) 

APOLLODORUS. Trans. by Sir James G. Frazer. 2 Vols. 

APOLLONIUS RHODIUS. Trans. by R. C. Seaton. 
(3rd Impression.) 

THE APOSTOLIC FATHERS. Trans. by Kirsopp Lake. 
2 Vols. (Vol. I. 4th Impression, 11. 3rd Impression.) 

3 


THE LOEB CLASSICAL LIBRARY 


APPIAN’S ROMAN HISTORY. Trans. by Horace 
White. 4 Vols. (Vols. I. and IV. 2nd Impression.) ; 

ARISTOPHANES. Trans. by Benjamin Bickley Rogers. 
3 Vols. (Verse translation.) (2nd Impression.) i 

ARISTOTLE: THE “ART” OF RHETORIC: Trans. 
by J. H. Freese. , 

ARISTOTLE: THE NICOMACHEAN ETHICS. Trans. 
by H. Rackham. 

ARISTOTLE: POETICS; ‘““LONGINUS”: ON THE 
SUBLIME. Trans. by W. Hamilton F yfe, ann DE- 
METRIUS: ON STYLE. Trans, by W. Rhys Roberts. 

ATHENAEUS: THE DEIPNOSOPHISTS. Trans. by 
C. B. Gulick. 7 Vols. Vols. I. and II. 

CALLIMACHUS ann LYCOPHRON. Trans. by A. W. 
Mair, anp ARATUS, trans. by G. R. Mair. 

CLEMENT OF ALEXANDRIA. Trans. by the Rev. 
G. W. Butterworth. 

DAPHNIS AND CHLOE. Thornley’s translation revised 
by J. M. Edmonds: ayp PARTHENIUS. Trans. by 
S. Gaselee. (2nd Impression.) 

DEMOSTHENES :* DE CORONA anp DE FALSA 
LEGATIONE. Trans. by C. A. Vince and J. H. Vince. 

DIO acca : ROMAN HISTORY. Trans. by E. Cary. 
9 Vols. 

DIOGENES LAERTIUS. Trans. by R. D. Hicks. 2 Vols. 

EPICTETUS. Trans. by W. A. Oldfather. 2 Vols. 

EURIPIDES. Trans. by A. 8. Way. 4 Vols. (Verse trans.) 
(Vols. I. and IV. 3rd, 11. 4th, IIT. 2nd Imp.) 

EUSEBIUS: ECCLESIASTICAL HISTORY. Trans. 
by Kirsopp Lake. 2 Vols, Vol. I. 

GALEN: ON THE NATURAL FACULTIES. Trans. by 
A. J. Brock. (2nd Impression.) 

THE GREEK ANTHOLOGY. Trans. by W. R. Paton. 
5 Vols. (Vol. I. 3rd, 11. 2nd Impression.) 


THE GREEK BUCOLIC POETS (THEOCRITUS, BION, 
MOSCHUS). Trans. by J. M. Edmonds. (5th Imp.) 


HERODOTUS. Trans. by A. Ὁ. Godley. 4 Vols. (Vols. 
1.-Π|. 2nd Impression.) 


4 


THE LOEB CLASSICAL LIBRARY 


HESIOD ann THE HOMERIC HYMNS. Trans. by 
Η. G. Evelyn White. (3rd Impression.) 


HIPPOCRATES. Trans. by W. H. S. Jones and E. T. 
Withington. 4 Vols. Vols. I.-III. 


HOMER: ILIAD. Trans. by A. T. Murray. 2 Vols. 
(Vol. 1. 2nd Impression.) 


HOMER: ODYSSEY. ‘Trans. by A. T. Murray. 2 Vols. 
(3rd Impression.) 


ISAEUS. Trans. by E. S. Forster. 

ISOCRATES. Trans. by G. Norlin. 3 Vols. Vol. I. 

JOSEPHUS. Trans. by H. St. J. Thackeray. 8 Vols. 
Vols. I-III. 

JULIAN. Trans. by Wilmer Cave Wright. 3 Vols. 

LUCIAN. Trans. by A. M. Harmon. 8 Vols. Vols. I.-IV. 
(Vol. I. 3rd, 11, 2nd Impression.) 

LYRA GRAECA. Trans. by J. M. Edmonds. 3 Vols. 
(Vol. I. 2nd Edition revised and enlarged.) 

MARCUS AURELIUS. Trans. by C. R. Haines. (2nd 
Impression.) 

MENANDER. Trans. by F. G. Allinson. 

OPPIAN, COLLUTHUS anv TRYPHIODORUS. Trans. 
by A. W. Mair. 

PAUSANIAS: DESCRIPTION OF GREECE. Trans. 
by W. H. 8. Jones. 5 Vols. and Companion Vol. Vols. 
I. and il. 

PHILOSTRATUS: THE LIFE OF APOLLONIUS OF 
TYANA. Trans. by F. C..Conybeare. 2 Vols. (Vol. I. 
8rd, 11. 2nd Impression.) 

PHILOSTRATUS ayn EUNAPIUS:. LIVES OF THE 
SOPHISTS. Trans. by Wilmer Cave Wright. 

PINDAR. Trans. by Sir J. E, Sandys. (4th Impression.) 

PLATO: CHARMIDES, ALCIBIADES I. and _II., 
HIPPARCHUS, THE LOVERS, THEAGES, MINOS, 
EPINOMIS. Trans. by W. ‘R. M. Lamb. 

PLATO: CRATYLUS, PARMENIDES, GREATER anp 
LESSER HIPPIAS. ‘Trans. by H. N. Fowler. 

PLATO: EUTHYPHRO, APOLOGY, CRITO, PHAEDO, 
PHAEDRUS. Trans. by H. N. Fowler. (6th Impression.) 


5 


THE LOEB CLASSICAL LIBRARY 


PLATO: LACHES, PROTAGORAS, MENO, EUTHY- 
DEMUS. Trans. by W. R. M. Lamb. 

PLATO: LAWS.. Trans. by Rev. R. G. Bury. 2 Vols. 

PLATO: LYSIS, SYMPOSIUM, GORGIAS. Trans. by 
W. R. M. Lamb. 

PLATO: STATESMAN, PHILEBUS. ‘Trans. by Η. N. 
Fowler; ION. Trans. by W. R. M. Lamb. 

PLATO: THEAETETUS, SOPHIST. Trans. by H. N. 
Fowler. (2nd Impression.) 

PLUTARCH: THE PARALLEL LIVES. Trans. by 
B. Perrin. 11 Vols. (Vols. I., II. and VII. 2nd Impression.) 

PLUTARCH: MORALIA. Trans. by F. C. Babbitt. 
14 Vols. Vols. 1. and II. 

POLYBIUS. Trans. by W. R. Paton. 6 Vols. 

PROCOPIUS; HISTORY OF THE WARS. Trans. by 
H. B. Dewing. 7 Vols. Vols. I.-V. 

QUINTUS SMYRNAKEUS. Trans. by A. 5. Way. (Verse 
translation.) 

ST. BASIL: THE LETTERS. Trans. by R. Deferrari. 
4 Vols. Vols. I. and II. 

ST. JOHN DAMASCENE: BARLAAM AND IOASAPH. 
Trans. by the Rev. G. R. Woodward and Harold Mattingly. 

SOPHOCLES. Trans. by F. Storr. 2 Vols. (Verse trans- 
lation.) (Vol. I. 5th Impression, 11. 8rd. Impression.) 

STRABO: GEOGRAPHY. Trans. by Horace L. Jones. 
8 Vols. Vols. L.-V. 

THEOPHRASTUS: ENQUIRY INTO PLANTS. Trans. 
by Sir Arthur Hort, Bart. 2 Vols. 

THUCYDIDES. Trans. by C. F. Smith. 4 Vols. (Vol. I. 
2nd Impression revised.) 

XENOPHON : CYROPAEDIA. Trans. by Walter Miller. 
2 Vols. (Vol. I. 2nd Impression.) 

XENOPHON : HELLENICA, ANABASIS, APOLOGY, 
anp SYMPOSIUM. Trans. by C. L. Brownson and 
O. J. Todd. 3 Vols. 

XENOPHON : MEMORABILIA ann OECONOMICUS. 
Trans. by E. C. Marchant. 

XENOPHON: SCRIPTA MINORA. Trans. by E. C. 
Marchant. εἰ 


6 


THE LOEB CLASSICAL LIBRARY 


VOLUMES IN PREPARATION 


GREEK AUTHORS 


ARISTOTLE: METAPHYSICS, H. Tredennick. 

ARISTOTLE: ON THE MOTION AND PROGRESSION 
OF ANIMALS, E. S. Forster. 

ARISTOTLE: ORGANON, W. M. L. Hutchinson. 

ARISTOTLE : PHYSICS, the Rev. P. Wicksteed. 

ARISTOTLE: POLITICS ann ATHENIAN CONSTI- 
TUTION, Edward Capps. 

ARRIAN: HISTORY OF ALEXANDER anv INDICA, 
the Rev. E. Iliffe Robson. 2 Vols. 

DEMOSTHENES: MEIDIAS, ANDROTION, ARISTO- 
CRATES, TIMOCRATES, J. H. Vince. 

DEMOSTHENES: OLYNTHIACS, PHILIPPICS, LEP- 
TINES, MINOR SPEECHES, J. H. Vince. 

DEMOSTHENES: PRIVATE ORATIONS, G. M. 
Calhoun. 

DIO CHRYSOSTOM, W. E. Waters. 

GREEK IAMBIC AND .ELEGIAC POETS, J. M. 
Edmonds. 

LYSIAS, W. R. M. Lamb, ᾿ 

MANETHO, S. de Ricci. 

PAPYRI, A. S. Hunt. 

PHILO, F. M. Colson and Rev. G. H. Whitaker. 

PHILOSTRATUS: IMAGINES, Arthur Fairbanks. 

PLATO: REPUBLIC, Paul Shorey. 

PLATO: TIMAEUS, CRITIAS, CLITOPHO, MENE- 
XENUS, EPISTULAE, the Rev. R. G. Bury. 

SEXTUS EMPIRICUS, the Rev. R. G. Bury. 

THEOPHRASTUS: CHARACTERS, J. M. Edmonds; 
HERODES; CERCIDAS, etc., A. D. Knox. 


THE LOEB CLASSICAL LIBRARY 


LATIN AUTHORS 


AMMIANUS MARCELLINUS, J. C. Rolfe. 

BEDE : ECCLESIASTICAL HISTORY, J. E. King. 

CICERO: CATILINE ORATIONS, B. L. Ullman. 

CICERO: DE NATURA DEORUM, H. Rackham. 

CICERO: DE ORATORE, ORATOR, BRUTUS, Charles 
Stuttaford. 

CICERO: IN PISONEM, PRO SCAURO, PRO FON- 
TEIO, PRO MILONE, PRO RABIRIO POSTUMO, 
PRO MARCELLO, PRO LIGARIO, PRO REGE 
DEIOTARO, N. H. Watts. 

CICERO: PRO QUINCTIO, PRO ROSCIO AMERINO, 
PRO ROSCIO COMOEDO, CONTRA ROLLUM, 
J. H. Freese. 

CICERO: PRO SEXTIO, IN VATINIUM, PRO CAELIO, 
PRO PROVINCIIS CONSULARIBUS, PRO BALBO, 
D. Morrah, 

CORNELIUS NEPOS, J. C. Rolfe. 

ENNIUS, LUCILIUS, AND OTHER SPECIMENS OF 
OLD LATIN, E. H. Warmington. 

FLORUS, E. S. Forster. 

MINUCIUS FELIX, W. C. A. Ker. 

OVID: ARS AMATORIA, REMEDIA AMORIS, evc., 
J. H. Mozley. 

OVID: FASTI, Sir J. G. Frazer. 

PLINY: NATURAL HISTORY, W. H. S. Jones and 
L. F. Newman. 

ST. AUGUSTINE: MINOR WORKS. 

SIDONIUS, E. V. Arnold and W. B. Anderson. 

TACITUS : ANNALS, John Jackson. 

TERTULLIAN: APOLOGY, T. R. Glover. 

VALERIUS FLACCUS, A. F. Scholfield. 

VITRUVIUS: DE ARCHITECTURA, F. Granger. 

DESCRIPTIVE PROSPECTUS ON APPLICATION 


London ἣ A WILLIAM HEINEMANN LTD 
New York . Ν G. P. PUTNAM’S SONS 
8 


it 


|
