Hesperopithecus, the First Anthropoid Primate Found in America (Henry Fairfield Osborn, 1922)
=============================================================================================
Osborn's April 1922 Novitates paper — the naming of 'Nebraska Man' from a single worn tooth, paleoanthropology's most famous false start. Public domain. Source: Internet Archive (in.ernet.dli.2015.8169) — American Museum Novitates, no. 37.


HESPEROPI THEC US, THE FIRST ANTHROPOID PRIMATE
FOUND IN AMERICA

By Henry Fairfield Osborn

It is hard to believe that a single small water-worn tooth, 10.5 mm.
by 11 mm. in crown diameter, can signalize the arrival of the anthropoid
Primates in North America in Pliocene time. We have been eagerly
anticipating some discovery of this kind, but were not prepared for such
convincing evidence of the close faunal relationship between eastern
Asia and western North America as is revealed by this diminutive speci-
men. The entire credit for the discovery belongs to Mr. Harold J.
Cook, consulting geologist, of Agate, Nebraska, who has been contribut-
ing for many years to our knowledge of the extinct fauna of Nebraska
through both his discoveries and his writings. He wrote to the present
author (February 25, 1922) :

I have had here, for some little time, a molar tooth from the Upper, or Hipparion
phase of the Snake Creek beds, that very closely approaches the human type. It
was found associated with the other typical fossils of the Snake Creek, and is mineral-
ized in the same fashion as they are. 1 sent a brief description of this to Professor
Loomis a short time before the Amherst meeting of this year, with a request that it be
read at that time, if opportunity offered. The manuscript was returned to me here
immediately after the meetings, but with no notation as to whether it was read or not,
or presented at that time in any fashion.

Inasmuch as you are particularly interested in this problem and, in collaboration
with Dr. Gregory and others, are in the best position of anyone to accurately deter-
mine the relationships of this tooth, if it can be done, 1 will be glad to send it on to you,
should you cure to examine and study it. Whatever it is, it is certainly a con-
temporary fossil of the Upper Snake Creek horizon, and it agrees far more closely
with the anthropoid-human molar, than that of any other mammal known.

On receiving the tooth, the author telegraphed (March 14, 1922) :
“Tooth just arrived safely. Looks very promising. Will report im-
mediately. A letter followed the same day:

The instant your package arrived, I sat down with the tooth, in my window,
and I said to myself: “It looks one hundred per cent anthropoid.” 1 then took the
tooth into Doctor Matthew’s room and we have been comparing it with all the books,
all the casts and all the drawings, -with the conclusion that it is the last right upper
molar tooth of some higher Primate, but distinct from anything hitherto described.
We await, however, Doctor Gregory’s verdict tomorrow morning; he certainly has
an eagle eye on Primate teeth. . . .We may cool down tomorrow, but it looks

to me as if the first anthropoid ape of America had been found by the one man entitled
to find it, namely, Harold J. Cook!


2


AMERICAN MUSEUM NOV IT ATE S


[No. 37

On March 22, 1922, the author wrote :

We believe we have found another one of the teeth, very much worn, of the same
animal, which, so far as it goes, is confirmatory. The animal is certainly a new genus
of anthropoid ape, probably an animal which wandered over here from Asia with the
large south Asiatic element which has recently been discovered in our fauna by Mer-
riam, Gidley and others. It is one of the greatest surprises in the history of
Americaii palaeontology and I am delighted that you are the man who found it. Our
specimen is unrecognizable, it is so much worn.

The tooth arrived with the following label :

One Molar Tooth, ?Anthropoid, No. HC425, Collection of Harold J. Cook,
Agate, Nebraska. Found in Upper Phase of Snake Creek Beds, Typical Locality,
in position in gravels with other fossils.

Following the examination by Dr. William D. Matthew and the
author, who determined the tooth as a second or third upper molar of
the right side of a new genus and species of anthropoid, the tooth was
submitted to Curator William K. Gregory and Dr. Milo Heilman, both
of whom have made a special study of the collections of human and
anthropoid teeth in the American Museum and the United States Na-
tional Museum. They reported (March 23, 1922) as follows:

1 . Such a degree of wear is very rarely seen on m 3 , and in view also of the marked
difference in form of in fc , we rather incline to the opinion that it is an m 2 . 2. The kind

of wear shown in this tooth, which has an evenly concave surface (without humps
representing the para- and metacones), has never been seen in an anthropoid tooth,
and we are of the opinion that even in very Old chimpanzees the outer half of the
crown will be unevenly worn. 3. The nearest in point of wearing surface is the
supposed m 2 attributed to Pithecanthropus , also in form of roots. The strong hypo-
cone in “Pithecanthropus ” and the absence of hypoeone in the new specimen is not
positively diagnostic, in view of the immense differences in the hypoeone, both
in apes and man. 4. On the whole, we think its nearest resemblances are with
“ Pithecanthropus ” and with men rather than with apes.

On the basis of these very careful studies, the author decided to make
this tooth the type of the following new genus and species.

Hespsropithecus harolicookii , 1 new species

This second upper molar tooth is very distant from the gorilla type, from the
gibbon type, from the orang type; among existing anthropoid apes it is nearest to m 2
of the chimpanzee, but the resemblance is still very remote. It is excluded from close
affinity to the fossil Asiatic anthropoid apes, such as Dryopithecus punjalncus , PaUe -
opithecus swalensis, and Sivapithecus, recently related to the human stem by Pilgrim.
Its transverse diameter of 11 mm. is greater than its anteroposterior diameter of 10.5
mm. In the corresponding human tooth, m 2 , of an American Indian, with which it
is compared in Fig. 2, the transverse diameter is 12.5 mm., the anteroposterior


‘The names signify an anthropoid of the Western World discovered by Mr. Harold J. Cook.


At


outer anterior


Fig. 1. Type of // esperopithecus hnroldcookii. No. HC425, Collection of Harold J. Cook, Agate,
Nebraska. From the Snake Creek beds, Sioux County, Nebraska. After a drawing of the type tooth
in five aspects by Mrs. L. M. Sterling. Enlarged to twice the natural size.

A, Ai Palate of chimpanzee, m 2 shaded.


Type. Hespe rop it hecu,s M.C.425


Tos te*£or Ouster CZn.tercor Snr/er

tfomo sapiens (A/. CLrn. Sndteuv)


~Pithecanthropzos erectujs , 7?ef-


Fig. 2. Comparison of the superior molar teeth of H esperopithecus type, of Homo sapiens , of
Pithecanthropus erect us ref., to show the similar disposition of the inner and outer fangs. Teeth not
drawn to the same scale.


4


AMERICAN MUSEUM NOVITATES


[No. 37


diameter is 11 mm. Thus the proportions of the molar crown of the H esperopithecus
type are about the same as those in the Homo sapiens mongoloideus type. There is
also a distant human resemblance in the molar pattern of H esperopithecus, as very
skilfully portrayed (Fig. 1) by the artist, Mrs. L. M. Sterling, to the low, basin-
shaped, channeled crown in certain examples of Homo sapiens . But the Hesperopi-
thecus molar cannot be said to resemble any known type of human molar very closely.
The author agrees with Mr. Cook, with Doctor Heilman, and with Doctor Gregory,
that it resembles the human type more closely than it does any known anthropoid
ape type; consequently it would be misleading to speak of this II esperopithecus at
present as an anthropoid ape; it is a new and independent type of Primate, and we


Fig. 3. Superior molar tooth from Suake Greek, Nebraska, Amer. Mus. No. 17736, Collection
from Amer. Mus. Expod. of 193S. Found by William D. Matthew. Provisionally regarded as m 8
of Hesperomth'S’'.u,'i. Spoaies indeterminate. Enlarged to twice the natural size.

A, Ai Palate of chimpanzee, in 3 shaded.


must seek more material before we can determine its relationships. It is certainly
not closely related to Pithecanthropus erectus in the structure of the crown, for Pithe-
canthropus has a single, contracted crown in which the superior grinding surface has a
limited crenulated basin, whereas H esperopithecus has a widely open crown with
broadly channeled or furrowed margins, and a postero-internal crest suggesting the
hypocone of a higher Primate form. The disposition of the roots in II esperopithecus,
in Homo , in Pithecanthropus , is shown to be very broadly similar in comparative Fig.
2. The H esperopithecus molar is three-fanged, the postero-external fang having been
broken off in the type; the internal fang shows a median internal groove and a
tendency to a deep external groove on the outer side.

Since 1908 there has been in the American Museum collection from
this same horizon another small water-worn tooth, discovered by Dr.
William D. Matthew. The specimen belonged to an aged animal and
is so water- worn that Doctor Matthew, while inclined to regard it as a
Primate, did not venture to describe it. It now appears, from close com-
parison with the type of H esperopithecus, to be closely related generically,
even if it is not related specifically. The greatly enlarged drawing


1922]


HESPEROPITHEC US


5


(Fig. 3), reproduced to the same scale as that of the type above de-
scribed, shows that the molar pattern is fundamentally similar. The
crown differs in its much more triangular form and, were it not for
its extremely worn surface, we should unhesitatingly pronounce it as a
third superior molar; it has, therefore, been given this position pro-
visionally in the diagram; it seems to confirm the opinion of Gregory
and Heilman that the type of Hesperopithecus is a second superior mo’ar.

The geologic age of these two specimens is now believed to be the
same as that of Thousand Creek, Nevada, and Rattlesnake, Oregon,
among the fauna of which Pliohippus is very abundant and varied; it
also contains Ilingoceras and other strcpsicerine antelopes of Asiatic
affinity; it is the last American fauna in which occurred the rhinoceros,
preceding the Blanco fauna in which the Asiatic brevirostrinc M. mirificus
first occurs.


AMERI
