Hesperopithecus, the Anthropoid Primate of Western Nebraska (Henry Fairfield Osborn, 1922)
==========================================================================================
Osborn's August 1922 Nature announcement of Hesperopithecus — the claim broadcast to the world before the tooth was re-examined. Public domain. Source: Internet Archive (paper-doi-10_1038_110281a0) — Nature, vol. 110, August 26, 1922.


August 26, 1922]


NATURE


281


Hesperopithecus, the Anthropoid Primate of Western Nebraska.

By Prof. Henry Fairfield Osborn, American Museum of Natural History, New York.


E VERY discovery directly or indirectly relating
to the pre-history of man attracts world-wide
attention and is apt to be received either with too great
optimism or with too great incredulity. One of my
friends, Prof. G. Elliot Smith, has perhaps shown too
great optimism in his most interesting newspaper and
magazine articles on Hesperopithecus, while another
of my friends, Dr. A. Smith Woodward, has shown too
great incredulity in his article in Nature of June 10.
It is in reply to both these extremes that I have
especially prepared for Nature additional information
regarding the fauna and habitat of this new Primate,
and additional figures to show' the comparison between


Book of Job (xii. 8), “ Speak to the earth and it shall
teach thee.” In brief, I advised Mr. Bryan to drop all
his books, as well as his attempts to grasp the meaning
of the diversity of opinion among scientific writers, and
to inquire of the earth only what it had to teach him.
I added that he would not necessarily lose his religion,
but that he. would certainly become an evolutionist.

I presume it is widely known that Mr. Bryan is a
native and prominent citizen of the State of Nebraska,
and it is certainly a humorous coincidence that on
March 14, only nine days after my advice was given,
I received from the western part of the State of
Nebraska the tooth from which has been named the


Fig. i. —Upper Miocene and Pliocene distribution of the Strepsicerine and Hippotragine Antelopes. Known distribution
in black, hypothetical migration area in oblique lines.

X, Region of western Nebraska, Snake Creek beds, site of the discovery of the Hesperopithecus tooth.


the small, water-worn, type tooth of the genus (Fig. 2,
1-4) and the teeth which most nearly resemble it.

First, a word regarding the time and circumstances
of the discovery of this Primate which happen to have
a humorous side. Fresh and very violent attacks on
the Darwinian theory have been made during the last
two or three years all over the United States, especially
under the leadership of William Jennings Bryan, a
man of ingenious and fertile mind and persuasive
powers of oratory, gifted as a politician and as a religious
advocate. As an opponent to Darwinism, Mr. Bryan’s
attack culminated in his very carefully prepared article
in the New York Times of Sunday, February 26, 1922,
in which he ably fortified his position by long quotations
from Prof. W. Bateson’s Toronto address .recently
published in Nature (April 29, p. 553), and by other
critics of Darwinism. The following Sunday, March 5 ,1
replied to Mr. Bryan, and realising that quotations from
the highest scientific authorities in the world would not
have the slightest influence upon him or his followers
I referred him to the writings of St. Augustine, also to
the Holy Scriptures, and especially to a passage in the ]

NO. 2756, VOL. I IO]


Ape of the Western World (Hesperopithecus). This
is the very first evidence, after seventy-five years of
continuous search in all parts of our great western
territory, of a Primate of any kind above the ranks
of the numerous Lemur - like and Tarsius - like lower
Primates which have long been known in our Eocene
beds.

While we have all eagerly looked forward to such a
discovery, and I have always regarded it as possible,
I have never regarded it as probable, for the reason that
the higher Primates, seeking the protection of forests,
never venture out for long distances on the plains ;
moreover, accustomed to a forest fruit supply, they
would have been exposed to great dangers in migrating
from Asia to western North America except by the aid
of a continuous forest belt or of a rather dense forest
and savanna belt bordering a plains belt. In 1910 I
published in my “ Age of Mammals ” (page 336,
Fig. 156) a map, which I now send to Nature for
reproduction (Fig. 1), with indications of such 0 life
belt for animals of the plains—antelopes and horses;
| adding an X to show where Hesperopithecus was found.

I 2


©1922 Nature Publishing Group


282


NATURE


[August 26, 192,2


Since 1910 additional discoveries have been made
which tend to indicate the existence also of a continuous
forest and savanna belt between eastern Asia and
western North America (black area and oblique lines),
for we have found animals related to the strepsicerine
and hippotragine antelopes, to the plains ungulates
remotely related to the kudu, to the sable antelope,
and to the eland (Taurotragus). We have also traced
the migration of two kinds of forest- and savanna¬
living mastodons over this entire region, namely : (1)
of proboscideans closely related to the M. aroernensis
of southern . Europe, to the M. sivalensis of India, and
to the M. mirificus of western Nebraska, specimens of
which have now been found in the very Snake Creek


beds in which Hesperopithecus was discovered ; also
(2) of the true forest-living proboscideans of the genus
Mastodon recently recognised in the Snake Creek beds.
A true elephant ( E. hayi), which resembles the Elephas
planijrons of the Upper Siwaliks of India, has been
found in more recent deposits.

From these relatively new and most significant
discoveries we may characterise the Snake Creek region
of western Nebraska, in Middle Pliocene time, as in
the belt of the south Asiatic forest, savanna, and plains
fauna, which extends two-thirds of the way around the
entire globe, from the region of Britain to the central-
west region of the United States, and probably right
across to the Atlantic coast. The plains element in
this fauna is extremely abundant, especially the
Hipparion; somewhat more rare are the true horses
(Pliohippus), and still more rare are the remains of the

NO. 2756, VOL. IIO]


three kinds of antelopes and of the two kinds of mas¬
todons above mentioned. Finally, of the utmost
rarity are the remains of the Primates, because during
the eight seasons of continuous and expert search we
have only discovered two teeth, namely, the tooth now
regarded as a third superior molar of an old individual
of Hesperopithecus found by Dr. W. D. Matthew in
1908, and the. type tooth of Hesperopithecus haroldcookii
found by the geologist Harold J. Cook in 1921. We
are this season renewing the search with great vigour
and expect to run every shovelful of loose river sand
which composes this deposit through a sieve of mesh
fine enough to arrest such small objects as these teeth.
Even by this most laborious and painstaking method
the probability of finding more
material is not very great, for the
reason that the anthropoid Primates
have always been very clever and
resourceful animals, climbing into
trees in times of flood, avoiding
the low sandy levels and water¬
courses where ungulates are trapped.

Before re-examining the new
figures (Fig. 2) of the Hesperopi¬
thecus tooth, may I quote verbally,
with some unessential omissions,
my own original characterisation
of the tooth, for which I alone
am responsible.

This second upper molar tooth is
very distant from the gorilla type,
from the gibbon type, from the orang
type; among existing anthropoid apes
it is nearest to m 2 of the chimpanzee,
but the resemblance is still very
remote. . . . Thus the proportions
Of the molar crown of the Hespero¬
pithecus type are about the same as
those in the Homo sapiens mongo-
loideus type. There is also a distant
human resemblance in the molar
pattern of Hesperopithecus ... to
the low, basin-shaped, channelled
crown in certain examples of Homo
sapiens. But the Hesperopithecus
molar cannot be said to resemble any
known type of human molar very
closely. The author agrees with Mr.
Cook, with Dr. Heilman, and with
Dr. Gregory, that it resembles the
human type more closely than it does
any known anthropoid ape type;
consequently, it would be misleading to speak of this
Hesperopithecus at present as an anthropoid ape ; it is
a new and independent type of Primate and we must
seek more material before w'e can determine its relation¬
ships. It is certainly not closely related to Pithecanthropus
erectus in the structure of the crown, for Pithecanthropus
has a single, contracted crown in wdiich the superior
grinding surface has a limited crenulated basin, whereas
Hesperopithecus has a wddely open crown with broadly
channelled or furrowed margins, and a postero-internal
crest suggesting the hypocone of a higher Primate
form. . . .

The type description, as published in the American
Museum Novitates, April 25, 1922, requires little or
no modification as a result of two months of inten¬
sive research which has been devoted to this tooth,
detailed results of which will shortly be published
by my colleague, Prof. Gregory. The accompany¬
ing new illustrations (Fig. 2), prepared especially


Fig. 2.—Comparison of the Second Superior Molars of the Right Side of the Upper Jaw in the Primates.
Upper row : crown views of the superior molars.

Middle row : anterior views of the same teeth.

Lower row : posterior views of the same teeth.

(1) Hesperopithecus, the new Nebraska Primate, middle-aged.

(2) Anthropopithecus, a young chimpanzee.

(3} Pithecanthropus, adult Trinil Ape-man.

(4) Hesperopithecus (photographed in a different light).

(5) Homo sapiens mongoloideus , aged North American Indian.

(6) Third superior molar of Anthropopithecus, a young chimpanzee
All photographed to the same scale and natural size.


© 1922 Nature Publishing Group


August 26, 1922J


NATURE


283


for Nature, are photographs of a most convincing
character, in which the Hesperopithecus molar (Fig. 2,
1-4), in three aspects, is placed directly between
corresponding molars of a chimpanzee (right and left)
which most nearly resemble it. It will be seen at once
(1) that the Hesperopithecus molar, although greatly
water-worn, has entirely different proportions from the
chimpanzee molar : it is much broader transversely;
it is much narrower in the fore-and-aft dimensions.
This affords positive evidence that Hesperopithecus
had a shorter facial region than the chimpanzee. In
this respect it approaches the mongoloid human type
(Fig. 2, 5) more closely than it does any of the anthro¬
poid ape types; (2) the roots of the Hesperopithecus
molar are much more robust and more human in pro¬
portion than those of any of the frugivorous apes ; (3)
the upper molar of Hesperopithecus, while resembling
the upper molars of certain American Indians of
mongoloid type in several absolute measurements,
differs widely in the more asymmetrical form of the
crown, which is broader in front and narrower behind,
whereas in the mongoloid human molars the crown is
more symmetrical ; (4) the type upper molar of

Hesperopithecus differs from the corresponding molar
in the Trinil Ape-man (Pithecanthropus) (Fig. 2, 3) in
nearly all its absolute measurements ; but it resembles
the Pithecanthropus molar in the great size of the
internal (lingual) fang, also in the wide separation of
the internal (lingual) and external (anterobuccal) fangs.
It also resembles Pithecanthropus in the evenly concave
depression of the grinding surface, which is quite unlike
the ridged form of the grinding surface observed in a
chimpanzee molar (Fig. 2, 2-6) ; (5) as for the com¬
parison suggested by Dr. Smith Woodward with the
third lower molar of the Pliocene bear (Hyasnarctos),
the differences are so fundamental that it is difficult to
find any single point of agreement; the molar of
Hesperopithecus very clearly conforms to the flattened
tritubercular to quadritubercular type which character¬
ises all the upper molars of anthropoid apes and of man.
Thus, after making due allowance for the characters
resulting from the prolonged natural usage of the
Hesperopithecus molar, also for characters due to long
exposure to erosion and stream action, and to percussion
by the sharp sand of the river bed, there nevertheless
remain five outstanding characters, as well as many


highly significant details of character, which tend to
show that this tooth belongs to one of the higher
Primates, and that this genus ultimately may be
included either within the Simiidee (anthropoid apes), or
near certain ancestors of the Hominid® (human stock).

I desire to summarise with emphasis my original
statements about this tooth, namely, that among exist¬
ing anthropoid apes it is nearest to m 2 of the chimpanzee,
but the resemblance is still very remote . . . that the
proportions of the molar crown of Hesperopithecus are
about the same as in Homo sapiens mongoloideus
(American Indian) type . . . that there is also a distant
human resemblance in the molar pattern of Hespero¬
pithecus to the low, basin-shaped, channelled crown in
certain examples of Homo sapiens . . . that the
Hesperopithecus molar cannot be said to resemble any
known type of human molar very closely. It is certainly
not closely related to Pithecanthropus erectus in the
structure of the molar crown ... it is therefore a new
and independent type of Primate, and we must seek more
material before we can determine its relationships.

My original characterisation and description have
been fully confirmed by the intensive research of the
past two months. I have not stated that Hespero¬
pithecus was either an Ape-man or in the direct line of
human ancestry, because I consider it quite possible
that we may discover anthropoid apes (Simiid®) with
teeth closely imitating those of man (Hominid®), just
as we have discovered in the true Piltdown man
(Eoanthropus) teeth closely imitating those of the
chimpanzee. There are so many crisscross adaptations
of this kind among the mammals that we can never be
sure about the family relationships of an animal until
we secure not only the teeth but considerable parts of
the skeleton as well. No anatomist in the possession
of Pithecanthropus molars only would have discovered
the human resemblance which is indubitably established
by the roof of the cranium, by the shape of the brain,
and by the shape of the thigh bone. For similar skeletal
parts of Hesperopithecus we are making most deter¬
mined and prolonged search in the type locality ; it is
not at all probable that the desired evidence will be
easy to secure. Until we secure more of the dentition,
or parts of the skull or of the skeleton, we cannot be
certain whether Hesperopithecus is a member of the
Simiid® or of the Hominidse.


Science in Egypt.


By Col. H. G.

HE important part which modem science can play
in the economical development of natural re¬
sources is generally recognised to-day, but nowhere
may this be seen more clearly than in Egypt, with its
subtropical climate, its controlled water-supply, and its
immunity from the vagaries of the weather which
affect more northern latitudes. Here a population
which in 1882 was under seven millions has now grown
to more than twelve millions, and inhabits a cultivable
area which does not exceed seven million acres all
intensively cultivated; for much of the area, which
was formerly flooded annually and then furnished a
single crop after the river had fallen, is now under
perennial cultivation with a supply of water at all

NO. 2756, VOL. IIO]


Lyons, F.R.S.

seasons, and consequently up to five crops in two years
are taken from it. Under these conditions the most
economical use of the material resources that science
can devise, and all the improvements that it can
suggest, are of the utmost importance to the country.

During Egypt’s period of financial difficulty the pro¬
vision for scientific work Was very meagre, but with
the reorganisation of the irrigation and the introduc¬
tion of reforms, an improving revenue enabled gradu¬
ally increasing grants to be made to state departments,
and many of them have, during the past thirty years,
established services in which scientific work of value
and importance has been carried on.

Some scientific work had been initiated at a much


©1922 Nature Publishing Group
