An Alabama Student, and Other Biographical Essays
William Osler (1908)
========================================================================

PROVENANCE NOTE (Tower of Babel staging): Osler's 1908 biographical essays on physicians and scientists — the 'Alabama Student' and kindred pieces that made him medicine's chief memorialist. 1908 first edition. This edition is in the public domain.

========================================================================

AN


ALABAMA STUDENT


AND OTHER BIOGRAPHICAL ESSAYS


BY


WILLIAM OSLER, M.D., F.R.S.

REGIUS PROnSSOR OF MEDICINE, OXFORD; HONORARY PROFESSOR OF
MEDICINE, JOHNS HOPKINS UNIVERSITY, BALTIMORE


OXFORD UNIVERSITY PRESS AMERICAN BRANCH

NEW YORK : 29-35 WEST 32WD STREET

LONDON : HENRY FROWDE

1908


• • • • •-•


• • ••


• • \ ' •


• • •

• •• •
,• •.

• ■»


• • •


• •


\\ :<:•♦:-:


• • • • •


• ••


• • •


• • «• • •

• • ••• •

• • - I • •'


•• •


o


i
A


DEDICATED


TO


WILLIAM HENRY WELCH

PROFESSOR OF PATHOLOGY, JOHNS HOPKINS UNIVERSITY

WHOSE UNSELFISH DEVOTION TO SCIENCE

ILLUSTRATES THE SPIRIT THAT IN EVERY AGE

HAS MADE MEDICINE OF SERVICE TO HUMANITY


PREFACE

To a lifelong interest in biography as a recreation
I have added a strong conviction of its value in educa-
tion ; and so it has happened that for the occasional
address a biographical subject was often chosen. Of
those here collected, all of which have already appeared
in the journals, more than half deal with aspects of
the life of physicians in the United States. In what
better way could I show gratitude for the extraordinary
kindness experienced during twenty-one years than
by a constant appeal to the students to take as their
models the great men of the profession of their own
country? In no age and in no land have the Hippo-
cratic ideals been more fully realized than in some of
the lives here portrayed. Pictures such as these, de-
tached as many of them are from each other, have but
one value to the student— to waken that precious
quality of human sympathy which may enable him
to appreciate that in the simple annals of such a career
AS the 'Alabama Student' a life may be as perfect
as in a Harvey or a Locke.

WILLIAM OSLER.


(OdjuS^


CONTENTS

PAGE

An Alabama Student i

Thomas Dover, Physician and Buccaneer . . 19

John Keats, the Apothecary Poet • • • 37

Oliver Wendell Holmes 55

John Locke as a Physician ^8

Elisha Bartlett, a Rhode Island Philosopher . 108

A Backwood Physiologist 159 /

The Influence of Louis on American Medicine . 189

William Pepper 21 1

Alfred Still^ 232

Sir Thomas Browne 248

Fracastorius 278

Harvey and his Discovery 295


AN ALABAMA STUDENT »


I

Chief among the hard sayings of the Gospel is the
declaration, ' He that loveth father or mother or son or
daughter more than Me is not worthy of Me/ Yet the
spirit that made possible its acceptance, and which is
responsible for Christianity as it is— or rather, perhaps,
as it was — is the same which in all ages has compelled
men to follow ideals, even at the sacrifice of the near
and the dear ones at home. In varied tones to all, at one
time or another, the call comes : to one, to forsake all
and follow Him ; to another, to scorn delights and live
the laborious days of a student ; to the third, to renounce
all in the life of a Sunnyasi. Many are the wand-
bearers, few are the mystics, as the old Greek has it,
or, in the words which we know better, 'Many are
called, but few are chosen/ The gifts were diversified,
but the same spirit animated the 'flaming heart of
St. Theresa', the patient soul of Palissy the potter,
and the mighty intellect of John Hunter.

We honour those who respond to the call ; we love
to tell the story of their lives; and while feeling,
perhaps, that we could not have been, with them,
faithful unto death, yet we recognize in the power of

^ Read at the Johns Hopkins Hospital Historical Cittbf January,
1895. Reprinted from the Johns Hopkins Hospital Bulletin^ No. 58,
January, 1896.

^1


2 BIOGRAPHICAL ESSAYS

their example the leaven which leavens the mass of
selfishness about us. These 'mystics' and 'chosen'
are often not happy men, often not the successful men.
They see of the travail of their souls and are not
satisfied, and, in the bitterness of the thought that they
are not better than their fathers, are ready, with Elijah,
to lie down and die.

To-night I wish to tell you the story of a man of
whom you have never heard, whose name is not written
on the scroll of fame, but of one who heard the call and
forsook all and followed his ideal.

When looking over the literature of malarial fevers in
the South, chance threw in my way Fenner's Southern
Medical Reports^ vols, i and ii, which were issued in
1849-50 and 1850-51. Among many articles of interest,
I was particularly impressed with two by Dr. John Y.
Bassett, of Huntsville, Alabama, in whom I seemed to
recognize a 'likeness to the wise below', a 'kindred
with the great of old*. I wrote to Huntsville to ascer-
tain what had become of Dr. Bassett^ and my corre-
spondent referred me to his daughter, from whom
I received a packet of letters written from Paris in
1836. I have her permission to make the extracts
which are here given.

There are a few men in every communitjpwho, from
temperament or conviction, cannot bow to the Baals of
the society about them, and who stand aloof, in thought
at least, from the common herd. Such men tread
a steep and thorny road, and of such in all ages has
the race delighted to make its martyrs. The letters
indicate in Dr. Bassett a restless, nonconforming spirit,
which turned aside from the hollowness'and deceit of
much of the life about him. As a student he had
doubtless felt a glow of enthusiasm at the rapid de-


AN ALABAMA STUDENT 3

velopment of the science of medicine, and amid the
worries and vexations of a country practice his heart
burned with the hope of some time visiting the great
centres of learning. As the years passed, the impulse
grew more and more urgent to go forth and see the
great minds which had controlled his hours of study.
All students flocked to Paris in the fourth decade.
Nowhere else was the pool so deeply stirred, and
Laennec, Broussais, Louis, Andral, Velpeau, and others
dominated the thoughts of the profession. One can
imagine how carefully the plan was laid, and how for
years the little surplus earnings were hoarded for the
purpose. But the trial which demanded the greatest
courage was the leaving of wife and children, and
there are passages in the letters which indicate that the
struggle was hard, not indeed without bitterness. He
apologizes frequently for an apparent cruelty in leaving
them for the sake of his profession ; and the neighbours
did not make it easier for the poor wife, whose desertion
they could not understand. In one of the letters he
says, ' So people say I have left you ? Well, so I have,
and you ought always to put the most charitable con-
struction on such remarks; the same people when
I come back will possibly say I have returned. Some-
times remarks of this sort are made carelessly, as men
tramp upon worms ; sometimes from wantonness, as
boys pull off the wings of flies and pierce them with
pins ; sometimes for sport, as hunters shoot inoflensive
creatures that are of no service ; sometimes for spite, as
we kill fleas ; sometimes for experiment, as philosophers
torture dogs; but seldom from wickedness, as pagans
skin saints, and as Christians skin one another.' And
in another he says, ' My expressions put me in mind of
a sick man's repentance. I know, Isaphaena, you have

B2


4 BIOGRAPHICAL ESSAYS

borne much for and from me, and you will have to do
so again, and I hope you may do it pleasantly ; and if it
is any gratification to you to know, you have a husband
who appreciates your conduct/

The letters begin from Baltimore in the last week
of December, 1835. He had lost his diploma, for he
applied to Dr. James H. Miller, the President and Pro-
fessor of Anatomy of the Washington Medical College,
for a certificate, which is found among the papers,
stating that he is a regular graduate of that institution,
but not mentioning the year.

He took passage by the Roscoe, Capt. Delano in
command, bound for Liverpool. He sailed on Jan. 6,
and in an interesting letter an account is given of the
voyage. They reached the English Channel on the
26th. A glowing description is given of the fine way
in which the passengers lived on these packet-ships.
He entreats his wife to feel sure that all would go well,
though she might not hear from him very regularly,
and he begs her in all matters to remember his motto,
' Peace on earth and good will towards men.' He
expresses great anxiety about the training of his two
children, and bids her not to spare the rod if necessary,
saying, * as the twig is bent the tree inclines.'

The first long letter, descriptive of Manchester, York,
and Edinburgh, is illustrated by very neat little sketches.
He was very much impressed with York, and says that
' if ever I was to be bom again I would like it to be at
York '.

In Edinburgh he visited everything, from the fifteen-
story hovels to the one-story palaces. He gives a de-
scription of some graves at Leith covered with iron
grates and locked to keep the surgeons out; with
a watch kept the entire night. He was enchanted


AN ALABAMA STUDENT 5

with Edinburgh in all matters except one. He says,

' O Scotland ! thou land o' cakes ! O Edinburgh ! thou

city of learning, thou cluster of palaces, thou city with

suburbs in the centre and precincts fit for the residences

of princes, thou modern Athens ! whose candles seem

to emulate the stars in height, if not in lustre ! ! ! Could • \y^

you not invent any other method of getting your coal

out of the mine save on the backs of females ! ! ! ! It is

a fact that there are women whom they call bearers,

whose business it is to carry coal out of the pit/

He was very enthusiastic about the museum of the
College of Surgeons, and the Infirmary, where he
witnessed in the presence of Mr. Syme an operation
by ' Mr. Ferguson, a young surgeon '.

From Edinburgh he proceeded to Glasgow, then to
Belfast and Dublin, and then on to London, where he
spent two weeks, apparently of great misery, as the
weather was atrocious. He shook the mud of England
from his feet at Dover, and departed, hoping never to
be soiled with it again.

He took a through passage from London to Paris
for £\ 185., and he gives an amusing description of the
additional payments. He asked the master of the hotel
to give him some information regarding French travel-
ling, and got, he says» a regular English account, John-
sonian without his wit * Tk^y will cheat you at every
step ; they will rob you ; they will poison yon vWi 4irt ;
everything is filthy; you will get no mutton or beef,
. and nothing but sour wine.' Then he says, * Though
I paid everything in London, I will give you ^ ! ^ of
the little extra charges on the road, and in eight out
of ten cases paid.' He gives an itemized bill of twenty-
eight extra charges in the two days and one night
which he spent in the diligence. One of his items was


6 BIOGRAPHICAL ESSAYS

for walking down a ladder, one shilling. He told this
fellow to go to hell, and jumped over his ladder. * To
the commissioner of one of the hotels, for seeing that
nobody cheated you but himself, six shillings.' ^The
commissioner of the diligence, the most useless of all
damned rascals, for pestering you and telling lie$, one
shilling and sixpence.'

He reached Paris and took lodgings in the Place
Pantheon. He writes, * I am now in the very region of
Voltaire and Rousseau ; and the Pantheon, in which
one set of bigots deposited their bodies, from whence
another set tore their bones, raises its classic front
before my window. I look on it and feel I am not
so much of an infidel as when surrounded by Christians.'

He attached himself at once to the clinic of Velpeau
at La Charity. On his first day he says he did not
understand more than half he said, but he understood
his operations. He says there was a gentleman from
Mobile, Mr. Jewett, who had been there for three years.
Americans were not scarce ; there were four or five
from New York, two from Baltimore, and several from
Boston and Philadelphia. He did not mention their
names, but it is pleasant to think he may have attended
classes at La Piti6 with Bowditch, Holmes, Shattuclq
Gerhard, and Stills. He began dissections at once;
subjects were cheap^six francs apiece — and he secured
a child on the first day for forty sous.

Some of the lectures were in the evening, at seven
o'clock, and he went to hear M. Helmagrande on mid-
wifery. He says, ' The hospitals here are conducted on
the most liberal terms ; there is nothing to pay but for
the private courses, and the fee is small for them. The
facilities for the study of midwifery are astonishing;
there are plenty of cases always on hand, and this


AN ALABAMA STUDENT 7

I determined to profit by/ In a letter of March 16 he
mentions his daily routine : ' I get up in the morning
at six o'clock and am at La Charit6 by seven, follow
Velpeau until eight, see him operate and lecture until
after nine, breakfast at ten at a caf6. At eleven I am at
a school of practical anatomy, where I dissect until two.
Then I attend a class of practical surgery until three ;
then hear Broussais and Andral until five ; then dine.
At seven I attend Helmagrande's class of midwifery,
which lasts until nine; then I come to my room and
read or write until eleven, when I retire.'

He was much impressed by the opportunities for dis-
section. In his letter of July 3 he says :

' There is a dissecting school at Clamart for the
summer on a most extensive scale. There is room
and material for 200 or upwards, though there are but
few there at oresent ; this place was provided for the
inscribed stuaents of the school, and they get their
subjects for a mere trifle. There is not the least pre-
judice existing here against dissections ; even the sub-
jects do not seem to mind it, though they are aware of
their fate, for more than two-thirds of the dead are
carried to the TEcole Pratique or Clamart. I have

Erivate instruction in the use of the stethoscc^ for
eart complaints in La Piti6. The other duv an ^
woman bade me adieu as we passed her bed without
calling, and I stopped to ask if she was going out. Then
she said she was going to Clamart, and that we might
meet again.'

He had evidently occupied his time to good advantage,
as early in July he received from Velpeau the appoint-
ment oiexteme at La Charity. He says in his letter of
July 10 :

* I have a piece of news to communicate that I know
will gratify you; at least I feel very much gratified
myself. This morning I received the appointment of
exteme in La Charit6 under Velpeau. The duties of an


8 BIOGRAPHICAL ESSAYS

externe require him to be at the hospital at six o'clock,
answer to nis name, follow the surgeon round a certain
number of beds, attend to his prescriptions, and dress
the patients. For this service we receive nothing, and
for this privilege we pay nothing; you ought to be

Ktified at this, because it will convince you I have not
xi wasting my time. I was on the eve of starting for
Switzerland, and was only waiting to witness the cele-
brations on the 27th, 28th, and 2Qth ; but when this offer
was made me I did what I have been doing all my life —
made another sacrifice for my profession, and determined
to remain and take the service. I have not been more
gratified since I have been in Europe ; it is a real benefit
and came unsolicited.'

He was very much impressed by the incessant in-
dustry of the French physicians. He says :

' When I look at some of the medical men by whom
I am surrounded, it makes me blush for shame ; old
men daily may be seen mixing their white locks with
boys, and pursuing their pro^ssion with the ardour
of youth. There is not a solitary great man in France
that is idle, for if he was, that moment he would be out-
stripped ; it is a race, and there are none so far ahead
that they are not pressed by others ; many are distanced,
it is true, but there are none allowed to walk over the
course. Witness Broussais, lecturing and labouring
daily to sustain himself, after having elevated himself
to the pinnacle ; Lisfranc, an old bachelor with thousands,
who after making his daily visit and Ufon for ten months
for duty, during the vacation of two months gives from
choice a course of operations ; and old Rollier may be
seen daily supporting himself from bed-post to bed-post
as jolly as if he were not far over sixty. Velpeau, from
a poor bov without money, time, education, or friends,
has by industry made himself one of the first surgeons
in Europe.'

In one of his last letters there is this interesting note
about Broussais, who had just finished his course on
phrenology :

* The pupils of '36 have struck off his head. It is in
bronze, a little less than our old Washington and Franklin •


AN ALABAMA STUDENT 9

in wax. Broussais is a genius, and when he entered life
he saw that something was to be done, or rather that he
must do somethinfif, and he seized the science of medi-
cine as a good old doctor would a bottle of lotion, and
shook it manfully; France, Germany, all Europe, parts
of Asia, and America have felt the a^tation. But
youncjer men also feel the necessity of domg something,
and they are now endeavouring to quiet the commotion
he has raised, and in France they have measurably suc-
ceeded. When the giant dies 1 doubt if he will find
a successor— his conquests, like Alexander's, will be
divided and then fall into insignificance. He fights
well while in the ring against awful odds, for the truth
is against him, but some of her brightest geniuses he
has put to rout or silence. Time is now about to enter
the field, and I have no doubt will place a splendid
monument over him, to prevent him from being for-
gotten.

' I am glad I know what great men are. I am glad
I know of what they are made, and how they made
themselves great, though this knowledge has broken
the last of my household gods ; yet it has taken away
the flaming swords that stood before the gates of this
Paradise, where may still be seen the track of the ser-
pent and of the devil himself, so I will keep out of bad
company.'

Scattered through his long, often closely crossed
letters, there are here and there some choice bits which
indicate the character of the man. For months he did
not hear a word from home ; then letters came at long
intervals. He apparently had been re-reading some of
his wife's letters, in one of which she had been reproach-
ing him for using strong language. He says :

' Isaphaena, you tell me to break myself of swearing,
and not to spend my time about different orofessions of
religion ; that it will make enemies, &c. Now listen to
me while I speak the truth, for on this subject you know
that I always do speak what I think is true. I never
did swear much, and I have quit it almost entirely, for
nobody would understand me, and it would be useless
to waste breath when I know I can put it to a better


lo BIOGRAPHICAL ESSAYS

use. As to religion, there is not much here of any kind,
and I assure you I have not said ten words on the sub-
ject since I left, nor do I expect to ; and here, where
Voltaire, Rousseau, and the whole constellation of
mighty-minded men lived and wrote and died, I feel —
Isaphaena — not so much an infidel as when at home
surrounded by church-going people. Why is this?
I have never for a moment doubtea the sincerity of my
immediate friends, but at home I looked into the evil
more closely than the good effects — there I saw igno-
rance, bigotry, and deceit ever foremost ; they were the
most prominent, therefore the most likely to be seen.
Here I still look on the evil side and find it terrible.
God save me from a countty without religion^ and from
a government with it—\ know you will say Amen also to
the next sentence — and return me safe to a country with
religion and a government without it. I am convinced
that the evils of infidelity are worse— ay, much worse—
than any religion whatever.

' HadI the talents of the above-mentioned men I would
not spend it as they did, nor would they, could they see
the effect produced. Their object was good— to correct
the evils of a corrupt priesthood— but their works were
like edged tools given to children. Human nature is
not penect, and their refined and perfected systems of
morals will not apply, and if we were perfect we would
not need them. 1 speak the words of truth and sober-
ness.'

He evidently was of St. Paul's opinion with reference
to the subjection of the wife. He says in one place :

* What if I have spoken cross to you, scolded at you ;
if it was not my duty it was at least my privilege, and
I expect to have the pleasure of doing it again. Are
we not told, if our rignt hand offends to cut it off, etc. ;
then surely if our better-half offends we ought to have
the liberty of swearing a little.'

His last letter is from Paris, dated October i6, and he
speaks in it of his approaching departure.

I have no information as to the date of his return, but
his intention was, he states frequently in his letters, to


AN ALABAMA STUDENT ii

be back by the first of the year, so that after this date
he probably resumed practice at Huntsville.

The two papers in Tenner's Southern Medical Reports
are the only ones I see credited to him. They are
charmingly written and display in every page the wise
physician ; wise not only with the wisdom of the schools,
but with that deeper knowledge of the even-balanced
soul who ' saw life steadily and saw it whole/

The Report in vol. i deals with the topography,
climate, and diseases of Madison County. Dr. Fenner
states that it was accompanied by a beautiful map drawn
by the author, and a large number of valuable statistics.

In an historical sketch of the settlement he thus
depicts the early border life :

'The most of those who did not procure homes at
that time, belonged to a class who, from taste or com-
pulsion, had separated themselves from the whites, to
live CD the trail of the Indians ; and who, like timers,
and Judases, were not without their use in the mystenous
economv of nature. They surpassed the natives in
physical force and in genius, and equalled them in
ferocity. They had the piratical appetite for gain natural
to the English race, which they nad cultivated among
the whites, and they readily acquired the Indian taste
for blood.

' Thus, without any particular standard of morals of
their own, and having fallen out with that which re-
stndned their Christian brethren, they found their
interest in adopting the ancient one of Moses and of
the savages amone whom they resided — "An eye for an
eye," and " blood Tor blood '*.

' These men, like the fabulous Behemoth that lay in
the reedy fens of the early world, drinking up the
abundant waters and eating down the luxuriant forests,
to make way for civilization, have left little more than
a vague tradition of their existence and exploits, the
latter of which has been so embellished that tne former
already begins to be doubted.

* Such a race leave but short records of their diseases.


12 BIOGRAPHICAL ESSAYS

\yhere bloodshed is always epidemic and every man
his own surgeon, the few that recover feel grateful to
none, and han^ no "votive tablets'* on the natural
columns of their forests ; and when a missionary or
a novelist is the onlv historian, it would puzzle Hippo-
crates himself to collate the cases ; but, as most things,
as well as lions, track the earth in some manner as they
pass over it, these early squatters have also made their
mark/

The good example of Dr. Thomas Fearn, who in the
early days of the regular settlement was the leader of
the profession, is well described.

* The influence of this gentleman's reputation upon
the profession was favourable to the residence of
thoroughbred physicians in the neighbourhood, many
of whom he haa been directly instrumental in educating;
another consequence followed : (juackery and empiricism
abated. Although quackery is indigenous in the human
heart, like thieving and lying, and always will exist, yet
it flourishes in the indirect ratio of the science and
general qualifications of the regular part of the pro-
fession. When regular, and extensively patronised
physicians, armed with all requisite diplomas and the
experience of years, suffer themselves to grow so dull
in diagnosis as to bleed a typhoid patient half an hour
before death in the evening, that they had been stimu-
lating through the day ; or so far forget, or compromise
the dignity of their high calling, as to practise " Mes-
merism," or prescribe " Mother^ Relief 'to a parturient
woman, men of smaller pretensions, and more pro-
fessional pride, or better inlbrmation, should not, ana do
not wonder at quackery springing up around such, like
mushrooms in a spring morning, where a fat cow has
lain over night and warmed the soil for their reception.'

Dr. Fearn is credited with the practice of giving
enormous doses of quinine in the malarial fevers.
Dr. Bassett mentions five or six cases of night blindness
caused by these large doses. Very full accounts are
given of epidemics of scarlet fever and of small-pox, and
a discussion on the cold water treatment of the former


AN ALABAMA STUDENT 13

disease. Dr. Bassett must have had a well-equipped
library, and his references to authors both old and new
are not only very full, but most appropriate.

' In the spring of 1833 we were visited by the scarlet
fever in its most malignant form ; during the prevalence
of this epidemic more than fifty infants perished in
Huntsville, at the only age they are not an annoyance
here. I treated nine bad cases, and four termmated
fatally ; I lost nearly half in almost every instance. An
older practitioner was called in, but I am not certain
that in their own proper practice thev were more fortu-
nate. In more than one instance there lay more than
one dead child in the same house at the same time.
I feel certain that this was a most malignant disease ;
but I do not feel certain that in every case our best
physicians remembered the united counsel of Hippo-
crates and Ovid, that " nothing does c^ood but what may
also hurt ", and which should never be lost sight of by
the man of medicine.'

The following is an extract from the account of the
smallpox epidemic of 1835 :

'My treatment was pretty much that laid down by
Dr. Meade: bleeding, gentle aperients, cool air, sub-
acid drinks, mild anodynes, and vitriolic infusion of
barks. Although the purgative part of this treatment
embroiled the faculty of the early part of the eighteenth
century to such a degree that the like has not been
heard since the days of Gui Patin and Antimony —
shaking the authority even of the celebrated triumvirate.
Mead, Friend and Radcliffe, who, on their part, em-
balmed one Dr. Woodward in their gall ana handed
him down to jposterity, like a "dried preparation", as
a specimen of the foily of small men who attempt to
run against "the throned opinions of the world"— and
a proof that " polite literature does not always polish its
possessors" — ^yet we of Huntsville were too willing
that our brethren should have our cases, to question
each other's practice.'

Dr. Bassett states that among the 30,000 inhabitants
of the county, thirty physicians practised who were paid


14 BIOGRAPHICAL ESSAYS

about $30,000 a year, 'which/ he says, 'is but br$cui,
and scarce at that ' ; and when we contemplate the
50 lb. calomel and 1000 ozs. quinine which they swal-
low, it reminds one of Falstaff's bill of fare : ' But one
half-penny worth of bread to this intolerable deal of
sack.'

There is a very clever discussion on the question,
much debated at that time, of the use of anaesthetics in
labour. The following is a good extract :

' It is truly humiliating to science to have to stop and
rest upon her course until the dullness of the clergy can
frame an excuse for an obvious truth — to see such a man
as Dr. Simpson, of Edinburgh, stopping in the midst of
his labour^ to chop logic by the wayside^ like a monk
of the fifteenth century, to endeavour to prove a truth
at midday, by argument, which he had proven by prac-
tice in the morning, and thereby running at least a risk
of losing by night what he had earned through the day.
Let us examine in plain English his new translation of
the Hebrew authority for the use of chloroform and see
if in getting one dent out of his turtle's egg, he does not
put another in.'


II

At the head of the article by Dr. Bassett in the
second volume of Fenner's Reports stands the quota-
tion, ' Celsus thought it better, in doubtful cases, to try
a doubtful remedy, than none at all ' ^ ; which he quotes
only to condemn in the following vigorous style :

' In giving my individual experience and opinions,
I desire to censure none. In such cases the best in-
formed fear the most, and experience but renders us
charitable. I will therefore only say that I have been
fortunate, in my own practice, in reversing the aphorism


1 <


Satius est enim anceps auxilium ezperiri quam nullum.*


AN ALABAMA STUDENT 15

at the head of this article. That rule of practice has
found favour in the eyes of every generation of both
doctors and patients, and it is not wonderful that the
few able men of every age that have opposed it have
warred in vain,— that the science of French expectancy,
and the quackery of German homoeopathy, have alike
failed ; dying men will have pills and parsons.

'When physicians were required, by public opinion,
to follow tne dictates of Hippocrates, ana his immediate
successors, as closely as Christians now profess to fol-
low the commandments of Moses and the prophets,
they claimed a right to act boldly their faith in these
authorities, and public opinion sustained them ; and
however difficult the task, they found it much easier to
understand the written language of Hippocrates than
the yet more obscure teachings of Nature, between
which and his followers he stood an infallible inter-
preter, makinjg her mysteries so plain that wayfaring
men, though fools, could not err therein. Hippocrates
was but our fellow servant, and we are but ministers of
Nature; our whole art consists in understanding her
language and laws ; our whole practice, in obeying her
mandates : if we do not understand them, it is either
our fault or misfortune; to act as though we did is
quackery. Celsus says of this bold practice of old,yfer^
quos ratio nan restituit temeritas adiuvat ; but shrewdly
remarks, that " Physicians of this sort diet other men's
patients more happily than their own ". I doubt, how-
ever, if, in the present state of medicine, a thorough
physician is ever, in any stage of any disease, so com-
pletely without rational education as to be thus non-
plussed, and driven to the necessity of dealing a blow
m the dark ; where there are no intelligible indications,
it is clear there should be no action.

'Then, if I have not followed the advice of this
master, it has not been lightly laid aside; nor, as
I have stated, without precedent; and if I have, in
a mc^ure, adopted another of his rules, to make food
physic (optimum vera medicamentum est cibus datus), it
has not been upon his mere authority. I revere author-
ity, believing; with the royal preacher, that *' whoso
breaketh a Hedge, a serpent shall bite " ; yet I rejoice
that its fetters are broKen in medicine — that we no
longer ai'e hedged with the eternal cry of " Hippocrates


i6 BIOGRAPHICAL ESSAYS

and reason ". But if, in getting rid of the authority of
the Ancients, we have discarded the example of their
labour and learning, and turned a deaf ear to their
opinions, it is easier to be lamented than corrected. If
the unthinking part of the profession of old, that fol-
lowed authority, and "on the first day of a fever
loosened the belly, on the next opened a vein, on the
third gave a bolus ", etc., are now represented by those
who follow fashion, and give calomel, quinine, and cod-
liver oil every day, we have but changed authority for
fashion, and are yet in bondage ; but fashion, though
indomitable, changes with the wind, and if for a time it
carries the small craft, the weak or designing, in its
current, it soon leaves them stranded, as landmarks, at
which we can at least laugh, without fear of profes-
sional martyrdom.'

Rarely has the crech of a zealous physician been
more beautifully expressed than in the following
words :

' I do not say that the study of nature, human and
comparative, as far as it relates to medicine, is an easy
task; let any one undertake a foreign language, and
when he thinks he has mastered it, let him go into its
native country and attempt to use it among the polite
and well-informed ; if he succeed, let him go among
the illiterate and rude, where slang is current ; into the
lunatic asylum, where the vernacular is babbled in
broken sentences through the mouth of an idiot, and
attempt to understand this ; should he again succeed he
may ^ely say that he knows that language. Let him
then set down and calculate the cost, in labour, time,
and talent ; then square this amount and go boldly into
the study of physiology ; and when he has exhausted
his programme, he wifi find himself humbly knocking
at the door of the temple, and it will be opened ; for
diligence, like the vinegar of Hannibal, will make a way
through frozen Alps ; it is the open sesame of our pro-
fession. When he is satisfied with the beautiful
proportions of the interior, its vast and varied dimen-
sions, the intricate and astounding action of its machinery,
obeying laws of a singular stability, whose very conflict
produces harmony under the government of secondary


AN ALABAMA STUDENT 17

laws— if there be anything secondaiy in nature ! — when
he is satisfied (and such are not satisned until informed),
he will be led to his ultimate object, to take his last
lessons from the poor and suffenng, the fevered and

Ehrenzied, from the Jobs and Lazaruses, — into^^e pest-
ouses and prisons, and here, in these magazines of
misery and contagion, these Babels of disease and sin,
he must not only take up his abode, but following the
example of his Divine Master, he must love to dwell
there ;— this is Pathology.

* When such an one re-enters the world, he is a
physician ; his vast labours have not only taught him
now little he knows, but that he knows this little
well. Conscious of this virtue, he feels no necessity
of trumpeting his professional acquirements abroad,
but with becoming modesty and true dignity, which
constitute genuine professional pride, he leaves this
to the goodsense of his fellow citizens to discover.'

Dr. Bassett developed tuberculosis, and the last letter
in the budget sent to me was dated April i6th, 1851,
from Florida, whither he had gone in search of health.
He died November 2nd of the same year, aged 46.

To a friend he writes on the date of April 5th :

'This world has never occupied a very large share
of my attention or love. I have asked but little of it,
and got but little of what I asked. It has for many
years been CTowing less and less in my view, like
a receding object in space; but no better land has
appeared to my longing vision; what lies behind me
has become insignificant, before me is a vast inter-
minable void, but not a cheerless one, as it is full of
pleasant dreams and visions and glorious hopes. I have
covered it with the landscapes of Claude, and peopled
it with the martyrs of science, the pioneers of truth,
the hound-hunted and crucified of this world, that have
earned and then asked for bread and received a serpent
— all who have suffered for the truth. How glonous
it is to contemplate in the future these time-buffeted
at rest, with their lacerated feelings soothed as mine
have been this day by the tender regard your wife
has manifested for my future well-being.


i8 BIOGRAPHICAL ESSAYS

The saddest lament in Oliver Wendell Holmes's
poems is for the voiceless,

for those who never sing,
But die with all their music m them.

The extracts which I have read show Dr. Bassett to
have been a man of more than ordinary gifts, but he
was among the voiceless of the profession. Nowadays
environment, the opportunity for work, the skirts of
happy chance carry men to the summit. To those
restless spirits who have had ambition without oppor-
tunities, and ideals not realizable in the world in which
they move, the story of his life may be a solace. I began
by saying that I would tell you of a man of whom you
had never heard, of a humble student from a little town
in Alabama. What of the men whom he revered, and
for whom in 1836 he left wife and children ? Are they
better known to us? To-day scarcely one of those
whom he mentions touches us with any firmness from
the past. Of a majority of them it may be said, they
are as though they had not been. Velpeau, Andral,
Broussais, the great teachers whom Bassett followed,
are shadowy forms (almost as indistinct as the pupil),
dragged out to the daylight by some laudator iemporis
acti, who would learn philosophy in history. To have
striven, to have made an effort, to have been true to
certain ideals — this alone is worth the struggle. Now
and again in a generation, one or two snatch something
from dull oblivion ; but for the rest of us, sixty years—
we, too, are with Bassett and his teachers, and

No one asks
Who or what we have been.
More than he asks what waves,
In the moonlit solitudes mild
Of the midmost ocean, have swelled,
Foam'd for a moment, and gone.


19


THOMAS DOVER

PHYSICIAN AND BUCCANEER


As Sir Thomas Browne remarks in the Hydriotaphia :
' The iniquity of oblivion blindly scattereth her poppy,
and deals with the memory of men without distinction
to merit of perpetuity/ Thus it happens that Thomas
Dover, the Doctor, has drifted into our modern life on
^ powder label (to which way of entering the company
of posterity, though sanctified by Mithridates, many
would prefer oblivion, even to continuous immortality
on a powder so potent and palatable as the Pulvis
Ipecacuanhae compositus); while Thomas Dover, the
Buccaneer, third in command, one of the principal
owners, and president of the Council of the Duke and
/?«cA^55— privateers of the ancient and honourable city
of Bristol — discoverer of Alexander Selkirk (the original
Robinson Crusoe), in spite of more enduring claims on
Our gratitude, has been forgotten.

Of the facts of Dover's life very little is known.
Munk {Roll of the Royal College of Physicians^ vol. ii)
states that he was bom in Warwickshire about 1660,
that he was a Bachelor of Medicine of Cambridge, on
the authority of the author of the Athenae Cantabrigienses,
but that his name does not occur on the roll of the
graduates. After taking his degree he settled in Bristol,

^ Read at the Johns Hopkins Hospital Historical Ctub, January,
1895. Reprinted from the Johns Hcfkins Hospital Buttetin, No. 58,
January, 1896.

C 2


20 BIOGRAPHICAL ESSAYS

and having made money, joined with some merchants
in a privateering expedition. *0n Dover's return to
England he resumed practice at Bristol, and from the
number of patients he says he visited each day during
an epidemic of the fever, he must have obtained the
confidence of the inhabitants of that city/ In 1721
he settled in London, and was admitted a Licentiate
of the Royal College of Physicians. He resided in
Cecil Street, Strand, but in the latter part of 1728 he
removed to Gloucestershire, where he lived for four or
five years; finally he settled in London, at first in
Lombard Street, and afterwards in Arundel Street,
Strand, where he died probably in the latter part of
1741 or the beginning of 1742. Essentially the same
details are given by Dr. Norman Moore in the Dic-
tionary of National Biography.

In his work. The Ancient Physician's Legacy ^ he often
speaks with veneration of Sydenham as his Master;
and in his description of the smallpox he says, ' whilst
I lived with Dr. Sydenham,' so that he was probably
a house pupil of the great physician, who was at the
height of his fame at the very time we may suppose
Dover to have been a student of medicine. On the
title-page of the first edition of the Legcuy^ ^73l^t he
speaks of forty-nine years of practice, so that he pro-
bably took his degree in 1683. Apparently he never
proceeded to a doctor's degree, since he speaks of
himself as a * poor Bachelor of physic '. On the title-
page of the first edition, however, the letters M.D. occur
after his name.

We know really nothing of Dover's life until he
appears as one of the promoters of a privateering
expedition to the South Seas in 1708. In this he was
associated with a group of Bristol merchants, among


•A


THOMAS DOVER 21

whom were Alderman Bachelor and Sir John Hawkins.
Two ships, the Duke and the Duchess^ were fitted out
with great care. Dover went as third in command,
being styled Captain Dover, and as owner of a very
considerable share of both vessels he was president
of the Council, and had a double voice in the delibera-
tions. The days of the buccaneers were almost num-
bered, but there was in Bristol at this time one of the
last and one of the most famous of the old South Sea
captains, William Dampier, a man who knew more of
the Spanish Main and of the Pacific than any one living.
He had returned recently from a disastrous voyage, and
agreed to accompany Captain Woodes Rogers as pilot
of the expedition. In October, 1708, the ships

. . . sailed against the Spaniard with his hoard of

plate ana gold.
Which he wrung with cruel torture from tH^ Indian

folk of old-

in which words Charles Kingsley well expresles the
feelings which animated these highwaymen of the sea.
The narrative of the voyage is told by Captain Woodes
Rogers in A Cruising Voyage Round the IVorU, 1708-
ijiif London, 1712.

The expedition was rendered memorable by the dis-
covery of Robinson Crusoe', which is thus told in the
words of Captain Rogers :

'We arrived at the Island of Juan Fernandez on the
first of February, 1710, and having a good observation
the day before when we found our latitude 3^** 10' S.
In the afternoon we hoisted out our pinnance, m which
Captain Dover set off to go on shore, though not less
than four leases from the ship. As it grew dark we
observed a light on shore, wnich some were of the
opinion was from our boat, but it was evidently too
large for that, and we hung up a light to direct our


22 BIOGRAPHICAL ESSAYS

boat, firing our quarter gun, and showing lights in our
mizen and fore shrouds, that our boat might find us, as
we had fallen to leeward of the island. Our boat came
aboard again about two in the morning, having turned
back on seeing the light ashore when within a league,
and we were glad they had cot off so well, as it now
began to blow. We were all convinced that the light
which we had seen was from the shore, and therefore
prepared our ships for an engagement, supposing it
might proceed from some Frencn ships at anchor, which
we must either fight or want water. All this stir and
apprehension, as we afterwards found, arose from one
poor man, who passed in our imagination for a Spanish
garrison, a body of Frenchmen, or a crew of pirates,
and it is increoible what strange notions some of our
people entertained about this light ; yet it served to
show their tempers and spirits, and enaoled us to guess
how our men would behave in case there really were
enemies in the island.

'While under these apprehensions we stood to the
back of the island in order to fall in with the southerly
wind till we were past the island ; then we stood back
for it again, and ran close aboard the land that begins to
form its NE. side. The flaws came heavily off the land,
and we were forced to reef our top-sails when we opened
the middle bay, where we expected to find our enemy,
but all was clear and no ships either there or in the other
bay near the NE. end. These are the only bays in
which ships can ride that come here for refreshments,
the middle one being the best. We now conjectured
that there had been ships here, but that they had gone
awav on seeing us.

'About noon of the 2nd of February we sent our yawl
on shore, in which was Captain Dover, Mr. Fry, and
six men, all armed ; and in the meantime we and the
Duchess kept turning in, and such heavy squalls came
off the lana that we had to let fly our top-sail sheets,
keeping all hands to stand by our sails, lest the winds
should blow them away. These flaws proceed from the
land, which is very high in the middle of the island ; but
when they passedf by we had little or no wind. As our
yawl did not return, we sent the pinnance well armed to
see what had occasioned the yawl to stay, being afraid
there might be a Spanish garrison on the island, who


THOMAS DOVER 23

mieht have seized her and our men. Even the pinnance
delayed returning, on which we put up the sienal for
her to come back, when she soon came off with abun-
dance of crayfish, bringing also a man clothed in goat
skins, who seemed wilder than the original owners of
his apparel. His name was Alexander Selkirk^ a Scots-
man, who had been left here by Captain Stradling of
the Cinque-PofiSf and had lived alone on the island for
four years and four months. Captain Dampier ^ told me
he had been Master of the Cinque-Ports, and was the
best man in that vessel ; so I immediately agreed with
him to serve as a mate on the Duke. During his stay
he had seen several shipjs pass by, but only two came to
anchor at the island, which he found to be Spanish, and
therefore retired from them, on which they nred at him,
but he escaped into the woods. Had they been French
he would have surrendered to them ; but chose rather
to run the risk of dying alone on the island than fall into
the hands of the Spaniards, as he suspected they would
either put him to death, or make him a slave in their
mines. The Spaniards had landed before he knew what
they were, and came so near him that he had much ado
to escape ; for they not only shot at him, but pursued
him into the woods, where he climbed up a tree, at the
foot of which some of them made water and killed
several goats, yet went away without discovering him.

* He told us he was born in Lareo, in the county of
Fife, Scotland, and was bred a sailor from his youth.
The reason of his being left there was a difference with
Captain Stradling, which, together with the ship being
leaky, made him at first rather willing to stay here than
to continue in the ship; and when at last he was
inclined to have gone, the captain would not receive
him. He had been at the island before to wood and
water, when two of the men were left upon it for six
months, the ship being chased awav by two French
South Sea ships; but the Cinque-Pvrts returned and
took them off, at which time he was left. He had with

^ Selkirk had been sailing-master under Captain Dampier in his
expedition which left in May, 1703, and had been put ashore on the
island at his own request. Dampier's expedition was unsuccessful,
and * the merchants were so sensible of his want of conduct, that
they resolved never to trust him any more with a command '.


24 BIOGRAPHICAL ESSAYS

him his clothes and bedding, with a firelock and some
powder and bullets, some tobacco, a knife, a kettle,
a bible, with some other books, and his mathematical
instruments. He diverted himself and provided for his
sustenance as well as he could ; but had much ado to
bear up against melancholy for the first eight months,
and was sore distressed at being left alone in such
a desolate place. He built himself two huts of pimento
trees, thatched with long grass and lined with goat
skins, killing goats as he needed them with his gun
so long as his powder lasted, which was only about
a pound at first. When all this was spent he procured
fire by rubbinjg two sticks of pimento wood together.
He slept in his larger hut ana cooked his victuals in
the smaller, which was at some distance, and employed
himself in reading, praying, and singing psalms, so that
he said he was a better Christian during his solitude
than he ever had been before, and than, as he was
afraid, he would ever be again.

* At first he never ate but when restrained by hunger,
partly from grief, and partly for want of bread and salt.
Neither did he then go to bed till he could watch no
longer, the pimento wood serving him both for fire
ana candle, as it burned very clear and refreshed him
by its fragrant smell. He might have had fish enough,
but would not eat them for want of salt, as they
occasioned a looseness ; except crayfish, which are as
large as lobsters and are very good. These he some-
times boiled, and at other times broiled, as he did his
goat's flesh, of which he made good broth, for they are
not so rank as our goats. Havmg kept an account, he
said he had killed 500 goats while on the island, besides
having caught as many more, which he marked on the
ear and let them go. When his powder failed he ran
down the goats by speed of foot; lor his mode of living
with continual exercise of walking and running cleared
him of all gross humours, so that he could run with
wonderful swiftness through the woods and up the
hills and rocks, as we experienced in catching goats
for us. We had a bull-dog which we sent along with
several of our nimblest runners to help in catching the
goats, but he outstripped our dog and men, caught the
goats, and brought tnem to us on his back. On one
occasion his agihty in pursuing a goat nearly cost him


THOMAS DOVER 25

his life ; as while pursuing it with great eagerness he
caught hold of it on the brink of a precipice, of which
he was not aware, beine concealed by bushes, so that
he fell with the goat down the precipice to a great
depth, and was so bruised and stunned by the fall that
he lay senseless, as he supposed, for twentv-four hours,
and when he recovered his senses found tne goat dead
under him. He was then scarcely able to crawl to his
hut about a mile distant, and could not stir out again
for ten days.

* He came at length to relish his meat well enough
without bread and salt. In the proper season he had
plenty of good turnips, which had been sowed there
by Captain Dampier's men, and had now spread over
several acres of ground. He had also abundance of
cabbage from the cabbage-palms, and seasoned his food
with tne fruit of the pimento, which is the same with
Jamaica pepper, and has a fine flavour. He found also
a species of black pepper called fnalaggta, which was
good for expelling wind and curing gripes.

'He soon wore out his shoes and other clothes by
running in the woods, and beine forced to shift without
them, his feet became so hard that he ran about every-
where without inconvenience, and it was some time
after he came to us before he could wear shoes, as his
feet swelled when he first began to wear them.

* After he had got better of iiis melancholy he some-
tiines amused himself with carvhig his name on the
trees, together with the date of his l^eing there, and
the time of his solitary residence.

* At first he was much distressed with cats and rats,
which had bred there in great numbers from some of
each species which had got on shore from ships that
had wooded and watered at the island. The rats gnawed
his feet and clothes when he was asleep, which obliged
him to cherish the cats by feeding them with goat's
flesh, so that manv of them became so tame that they
used to lie beside him in hundreds, and soon delivered
him from the rats. He also tamed some kids, and for
his diversion would at times sing and dance with them
and his cats ; so that by the favour of Providence and the
vigour of his youth — for he was now only thirty years of
age — he came at length to conquer all the inconveni-
ences of his solitude and to be quite easy in his mind.


26 BIOGRAPHICAL ESSAYS

'When his clothes were worn out he made himself
a coat and a cap of goat skin, which he stitched together
with thongs of the same, cut out with his knife.'

Subsequently the expedition sacked the two cities of
Guaiaquil, in the assault on which Dover led the van.
They took several prizes and cruised about the coast
from Peru to California waiting for treasure ships. Of
one of the largest prizes, which they named the Bachelor^
after the Bristol Alderman doubtless, Dover took com-
mand as chief captain. They then sailed across the
Pacific to Batavia, where they refitted, and in October,
1710, sailed for England, which was reached in 171 1.

Captain Thomas Dover returned from the South Seas
a wealthy man ; the expedition had been unusually suc-
cessful, having realized the enormous sum of ;f 170,000.
To Dover, who is stated to have been the owner of
a very considerable part of both ships, fell a consider-
able share of the spoils. Alexander Selkirk as mate
received £doo prize-money.

Harris (Voyages^ &c.) makes the following comments
on the voj'age : *It has been universally allowed by such
as are proper judges of such expeditions that there
never was any voyage of this nature so happily ad-
justed, so well provided in all respects, or in which the
accidents that usually happen in Privateers were so
effectually guarded against.' This he attributes to the
abilities of the gentlemen of Bristol, and remarks that it
was owing to this expedition that the spirit of privateer-
ing in the South Seas was not totally lost in England.
The large sums realized had evidently made an endur-
ing impression, and Harris adds, ' I might, perhaps, go
too far should I assert that this voyage gave rise to the
South Sea Company, but this much I can safely say,
that the success of this voyage was what the patrons of


THOMAS DOVER 27

that Company chiefly insisted upon in their defence,
when the plan of it was attacked as insufficient and
chimerical/

In 1712 Dover must have been fifty years of age, and
quite ready to enjoy a period of leisure. Where he
settled or what he did we do not know, but it is certain
that three years such as he had spent at sea were no
preparation for practice. Possibly he travelled, and in
the introduction to The Ancient Physician's Legacy he
scoffs at the doctors who have travelled ' far at home * ;
* Let them take a trip to Hungary and see the mines,'
speaking, and describing scenes, as though he had been
there himself. He refers not infrequently to his wide
knowledge of the globe, and in one place says, 'if
travelling be necessary to make an accomplished phy-
sician, I am very sure that I have travelled more than all
the physicians of Great Britain put together.'

In 1721, as mentioned by Munk, he was admitted
Licentiate of the Royal College of Physicians, a qualifi-
cation which enabled a man at that time to practise in
and six miles round Westminster. It is doubtful how
long he remained at this time in London ; at any rate he
states (A. P. L.) that he lived in Gloucestershire in the
years 1728 and 1729. None of the cases which he men-
tions in his books are of this period. His permanent
settlement dates from about 1731. In a 1733 edition of
the A. P. Z., in replying to certain strictures on the use
of quicksilver, he says, * I challenge you to show when
I have lost three patients for the past five years, when
I was first called either in acute or chronic cases (though
I have settled in town about eighteen months).' At this
time Dover was well on in years, about or above seventy,
a late age at which to begin practice in London.

To abet his laudable endeavours he resorted to the


28 BIOGRAPHICAL ESSAYS

time-honoured plan of writing a book. Of the popular
or semi-popular treatises on medical subjects so common
in those days, a few were by very able men. George
Cheyne's Essay on Health and Long Life forms an
exception to Latham's sweeping criticism on books of
this class (quoted by W. A. Greenhill), ' They are all
bad, and many dishonest.' A favourite plan was to
write a treatise on some mineral water, lauding the
virtues of a particular spa. Smollett, who knew so well
the trials, vexations, and disappointments incident to
beginning medical life in London, has sketched in
strong lines the condition of the profession in the fourth
and fifth decades of the century. He, too, had made
an unsuccessful attempt to introduce himself in an
Essay on the External Use of Cold fVater, &c. Dr.
L n with his 'hotch-potch of erudition and ex-
travagance*, and the pedantic doctor in Peregrine
Pickle^ in whom he satirized the learned Dr. Akenside,
were well-known types; while in Dr. Fathom the
'mystery' of the sons of Paean, as he terms them,
is mercilessly exposed. Among the 'means used to
force a trade '^ Smollett mentions 'the insertion of
cures by way of news in the daily papers ', the erection
of a 'hospital, lock, or infirmary, by the voluntary
subscription of his friends ; a scheme which had suc-
ceeded to a miracle with many of the profession, who
had raised themselves into notice on the carcasses of
the poor'. To understand Dover's relations with the
apothecaries (to which subsequent reference will be
made) the reader must know that they were the general
practitioners of that day, and dispensed their own
medicines, but in serious cases always called in a

^ This seems to have been a stock phrase ; Cheyne uses it in his
English Malady^ in an autobiographical note.


THOMAS DOVER 29

physician or a surgeon. Smollett's account of the
practice * parcelled out into small enclosures, occupied
by different groups of personages ', who tossed the
ball [the patient] from one to another, would almost
fit modem usage, in which a patient is sometimes
tossed in a circle from specialist to specialist, until he
returns with an inventory of his local woes to the
consultant from whom he started. In Smollett's days
the patient had to be content with three, except in the
cases requiring a midwife. 'The apothecary being
summoned, finds her ladyship in such a delicate situa-
tion that he declines prescribing, and advises her to
send for a physician without delay. The nomination
of course falls to him, and the doctor being called,
declares the necessity of immediate venesection, which
is accordingly performed by the surgeon of the asso-
ciation/

While meriting the general criticism of Latham, the
work with which Dover trusted to reach practice had
many important qualifications for success. It appealed
directly to the public in a taking way, not only in the
main title. The Ancient Physician's Legacy to His Country ^
being what he has collected himself in Forfy-nine Years of
Practice^ but in asserting that the diseases incident to
mankind are described in so plain a manner ' that any
person may know the nature of his own diseases ; together
with the several Remedies for each Distemper faithfully set
down*. It is expressly issued as a popular work on
medicine, Designed for the Use of all Private Families.

The author's name is given, Thomas Dover, M.D.,
and the work was printed for the author and sold by
A. Bellesworth and C. Hitch in Pater-Noster Row, &c.
(giving the names of two other booksellers), 1732. Price,
stitched. Five Shillings.


30 BIOGRAPHICAL ESSAYS

This is the title-page, date, &c., of the first edition,
a copy of which is in the British Museum. In the
Dictionary of National Biography the date of the first
edition is given as 1733. The mistake is due to the
fact that in this year appeared an edition of the Legacy
not stated on the title-page to be a second edition.
This is the earliest copy in the Library of the Royal
Medical and Chirurgical Society, and in the RadcliiTe
Library. The name is spelt Dovar, and the title-
page is different. Forty-nine years of practice are still
claimed (not fifty), and it is stated that 'the extraordinary
effects of mercury are more particularly considered'*
After the author's name, Thomas Dovar, M.D., are the
words, * with remarks on the whole by a learned physi-
cian.' There is also a translation of a treatise on
mercury * by the learned Belloste '. It was printed for
the relict of the late R. Bradley, F.R.S. The second
and third editions I have not seen ; this was probably
one of them. The fourth and fifth editions also appeared
in 1733; the sixth in 1742; the seventh in 1762, and
the eighth, the last so far as I know, in 1771.

The Ancient Physician's Legacy, in the language of
one of Dover's correspondents, * made a great noise in
London, and was the subject of almost every Coffee-
house.'

It contains a description in plain language of about
forty-two disorders, illustrated by cases, the majority of
which are in some way made to attest the author's
skill. The later editions abound in letters from grateful
patients, extolling his virtues. The pictures of disease
are scarcely such as might have been expected from
a pupil of Sydenham. The account of consumption or
' phtisis ', as he spells it, is very meagre, being as it is
from the hand of a contemporary, possibly a friend, of


THOMAS DOVER 31

the author of the Phthisiologia. There are evidences
throughout that the book was written *for revenue
purposes only', and the spirit of the buccaneer was
not dead in the old man, as no occasion is missed either
to blow his own trumpet, or to tilt a lance at his
colleagues. ' Let me but come to People as early in
this Distemper (dropsy) as they generally apply for relief
from other Physicians, and it shall be cured/ &c.

On page 18, in the section on gout, is given the for-
mula of his famous powder. ' Take Opium one ounce,
Salt-Petre and Tartar vitriolated each four ounces,
Ipocacuana one ounce. Put the Salt-Petre and Tartar
into a red hot mortar, stirring them with a spoon until
they have done flaming. Then powder them very fine ;
after that slice in your opium, grind them to a powder,
and then mix the other powders with these. Dose from
forty to sixty or seventy grains in a glass of white wine
Posset going to bed ; covering up warm and drinking
a quart or three pints of the Posset— Drink while
sweating.' The same formula is repeated in all the
editions. He says that some apothecaries have desired
their patients to make their wills and settle their affairs
before they venture upon so large a dose as from forty
to seventy grains. 'As monstrous as they may represent
this, I can produce undeniable proofs where a patient
of mine has taken no less a quantity than an hundred
grains, and yet has appeared abroad the next day.'

In the treatment of fevers he follows the practice of
the * good Dr. Sydenham ', for whose memory he pro-
fesses 'the greatest veneration'. 'In this Distemper
as in all other Fevers, I prescribe the cool Regimen,
which must be followed in case Mankind prefer Life
to Death ; Ease to Pain ; a short Fit of Illness to a long
and tedious one; a good to a broken and shattered


32 BIOGRAPHICAL ESSAYS

constitution, laying aside Blisters and all heating and
poisonous Powders.' In another place he says, ' I would
have cold bathing grow as universal as inoculation/
He waxes furious against the ' Unhuman Method of
Blistering ', and invokes the authority of Radcliffe and
*the honest Dr. Sydenham* against it When living
with Dr. Sydenham, Dover had small-pox. In the
beginning he lost twenty-two ounces of blood and had
a vomit. He went abroad until he was blind, and then
took to bed. * I had no fire allowed in my room, my
windows were constantly open, my bed-clothes were
ordered to be laid no higher than my waist. He made
me take twelve bottles of small beer acidulated with
spirit of vitriol every twenty-four hours.' The experi-
ences of his travels are referred to frequently, and he
mentions Asia, the East and West Indies, and Hungary,
in connexion with special points in practice. There is
an account of the plague among the sailors of the Duke
and Duchess, * when I took by storm the two cities of
Guaiaquil, under the line, in the South Seas.'

The ' Ancient Physician's ' chief legacy to his country
was quicksilver, which was his specific in almost every
disease, and the use of which is vaunted in a most
forcible manner in letters from patients. He ordered
an ounce or an ounce and a quarter of crude mercury
daily, believing that it freed the patient from all vermi-
cular diseases, opened all obstructions, and made a pure
balsam of the blood. A Captain Harry Coit, who had
lived by the doctor's direction 'on Asses milk. Syrup
of Snails and such stuff', took for his cough and short-
ness of breath an ounce a day, and took altogether an
hundred and twenty pounds' weight. Dover says that
he was called in derision. The Quicksilver Doctor. The
Legacy stirred up an active pamphlet war, and for


THOMAS DOVER 33

twenty years or more the merits of crude mercury were
much discussed.

If Dover's object in writing the work was to gain
publicity, he could not have taken a better way than
in his sharp comments on the physicians and apothe-
caries. The latter he assaults in terms which must
have tickled the frequenters of the coffee-houses, among
whom we are told the book made such a noise.
*I never affronted any apothecary, unless in ordering
too little Physic ; and curing a patient too 30on, is, in
their Way of Thinking, an unpardonable Crime. I must
confess, I never could bring an Apothecary's Bill to
three pounds in a fever ; whereas I have known some
of their bills in this disease amount to forty, fifty, and
sixty Pounds. If they can't cure with less charges,
I can't forbear saying, That I have the same opinion
of their Integrity as I have of their Understanding.'
The doctrine of the apothecary was that, *'7w your
Writing-Physician only who has a Title to a Fee! Dover
takes strong and most reasonable ground against the
constant varsring of prescriptions when there is no
occasion for it. The hostility of the apothecaries to
him, according to his own account, arose from his being
'always inviolably attached to the Interest and Welfare
of my patient and entirely regardless of these Gentle-
men's unwarrantable Gains'. These attacks did not
pass unnoticed, and in 1733 H. Bradley, Surgeon,
criticizes The Ancient Physician's Legacy^ and makes
some ' animadversions on his scurrillous Treatment of
the Professors of Physic in general; with a word or
two on the uselessness of his Legcuy to all Private
Families'.

Daniel Turner, ' of the College of Physicians,' who
in the same year impartially surveys The Ancient


34 BIOGRAPHICAL ESSAYS

Physician's Legacy^ refers to the Guaiaquil incident
in the following terms : ' I think the Doctor had much
better have left out his Bravado of having taken two
cities by storm, unless he thinks it an honour to
a Physician to kill and slay, and after to plunder the
Innocent, those who never wronged him, and to carry
off the spoil ; a good prelude, this, to the blood shed
after among his own men.' (Dover had had them bled
copiously for the plague.) Turner hints that Dr.
D — r's quicksilver did not a little to hasten the end
of the celebrated tragedian. Barton Booth, to whom
he had given, between May 3 and 8, within two ounces
of two pounds of mercury.

Like his master, Dover's only affiliation with the
Royal College of Physicians was through the minimum
qualification of the licence. Sydenham and Morton,
the two most distinguished English clinical physicians
of the seventeenth century, were regarded as innovators
and ' sectaries ' by the heads of the College, who, as
Sydenham remarks, took fire at his attempts to reduce
practice to greater easiness and plainness. The cool-
ness and moderation of the Master were not imitated
by the 'Ancient Physician', who in the sixth edition
attacks the gentlemen of the faculty, and warns unwary
people 'not to take every Graduate for a Physician,
nor a clan of prejudiced Gentlemen for Oracles *. He
added to his Legacy the Stahita Moralia, or as he
terms it on the title-page, *the moral conversation of
the College of Physic, in Latin and English, by way
of Appendix, together with a Digression.' Dover
affirms boldly that the whole purport of the 'Conver-
sation' is to conceal their ignorance and to deceive
their miserable patients, but he avers his desire is
' more to do justice to Mankind than to irritate and


THOMAS DOVER 35

provoke a Set of Gentlemen who, like moles, work
under ground, lest their Practices should be discovered
to the Populace.' He again refers to the relations of
the apothecaries with the physicians in the following
terms :

'The Apothecaries, generally speaking, have it in
their Power to recommend the Physician, which is the
wrongest Step the Patient can possibly take : The
Phvsician, to gratify the Apothecary, thinks himself
obneed to order ten times more Physic than the Patient
real^^ wants, by which means he often ruins his Con-
stitution, and too often his Life; otherwise how is it
possible an Apothecary's Bill in a Fever, should amount
to Forty or Fifty, or more Pounds ? Nay, I have been
creditably inform'd that several of those Apothecaries
have declared they would never call in a Physician,
but what should put in Fifteen or Twenty Shilling
a Day into their Pockets : What must the Conscience
of such Physicians be, that would forfeit their reputa-
tion and every thine that is dear to them, by cheating
for others? 1 would venture to say. Neither Syden-
ham's nor RadcliflTs Bills did ever amount to Forty
Shillings in a Fever, and yet they recover'd their
Patients without the Rule, at present prescribed, of
Vomiting, Bleeding, and multiplying Blisters in all Cases
whatsoever; so since this is to be their Rule of Prac-
tice, they are very indifferent in their Enquiries what
the Patient's Disease is.'

Dover continued to practise in London, and in the
seventh edition of The Ancieni Physician* s Legacy there
is a letter to him from Catherine Hood, dated November
6, 1738, in which she speaks of having consulted him
in 1737.

His reputation seems to have extended to the Con-
tinent, for in the Opera Omnia of Ballonius, edited by
Professor Tronchin, of Geneva, 1762, there is a most
laudatory dedication, in which he is extolled as one of

the most distinguished physicians of the time.

o 2


36 BIOGRAPHICAL ESSAYS

In 1742 appeared the sixth edition of the Legeuy^
which must have been issued by the author, as he
speaks on the title-page of fifty-eight years of practice.
He is stated by Munk to have died in 1741 or 1742,
probably the latter, but his name does not appear in
the register of deaths in the Gentleman's Mc^aeine in
either of those years.

Doubtless the old buccaneer, described as 'a man of
rough temper, who could not easily agree with those
about him ', was a striking figure as he passed along
the Strand to the Jerusalem Coffee House, where he
saw his patients. A good fighter, a good hater, as alas I
so many physicians have been, his weaknesses aod evil
behaviour we may forget, but Captain Thomas Dover,
who, on the 2nd of February, 1710, found ' Robinson
Crusoe', the world should not forget; and we also of
his craft have cause daily to remember with gratitude
the student and friend of the great Sydenham, who had
the wit, in devising a powder, to remember his master's
injunction : Sine papaveribus^ sine opiatis et medicamentis
ex iis confectiSf manca et clauda esset medicina.


37


JOHN KEATS

THE APOTHECARY POET^


We have the very highest authority for the statement
that ' the lunatic, the lover, and the poet, are of imagina-
tion all compact'. In a more comprehensive division,
with a keener discernment, Plato recognizes a madness
which is not an evil, but a divine gift, and the source of
the chiefest blessings granted to men. Of this divine
madness poetry occupies one of the fourfold partitions.
Here is his definition : ' The third kind is the madness
of those who are possessed by the Muses ; which, taking
hold of a delicate and virgin soul, and there inspiring
frenzy, awakens lyrical and all other numbers; with
these adorning the myriad actions of ancient heroes for
the instruction of posterity. But he who, having no
touch of the Muses' madness in his soul, comes to
the door and thinks that he will get into the temple
by the help of art — he, I say, and his poetry are not
admitted; the sane man disappears and is nowhere
when he enters into rivalry with the madman.'

Here, in a few words, we have expressed the very
pith and marrow of the nature of poetry, and a clearer
distinction than is drawn by many modem writers of
the relation of the art to the spirit, of the form to the
thought By the help of art, without the Muses' mad-

^ Read at the Johns Hopkins His/orical Club, October 99, 1895.
Reprinted from the Johts Hopkins Hospital Buiiefin, No. 58,
January, 1896.


38 BIOGRAPHICAL ESSAYS

ness, no man enters the temple. The poet is a ' light
and winged and holy thing', whose inspiration, genius,
faculty, whatever we may choose to call it, is allied to
madness — ^he is possessed or inspired. Oliver Wendell
Holmes has expressed this very charmingly in more
modem terms, speaking of his own condition when
composing the Chambered Nautilus. * In writing the
poem I was filled with a better feeling, the highest state
of mental exaltation and the most crystalline clair-
voyance that had ever been granted to me— I mean
that lucid vision of one's thought and all forms of
expression which will be at once precise and musical^
which is the poet's special gjft, however large or small
in amount or value/ * To the base mechanical of the
working-day world, this lucid vision, this crystalline
clairvoyance and mental exaltation is indeed a madness
working in the brain, a state which he cannot under-
stand, a Holy of Holies into which he cannot enter.

I

When all the circumstances are taken into account,
the English Parnassus affords no parallel to the career
of Keats — Adonais, as we love to call him — whose birth-
day, one hundred years ago, we celebrate to-day.

Bom at the sign of the * Swan and Hoop ', Moorgate
Pavement, the son of the head ostler, his parentage and
the social atmosphere of his early years conspired to
produce an ordinary beer-loving, pugnacious cockney ;
but instead there was fashioned one of the clearest,
sweetest, and strongest singers of the century, whose
advent sets at naught all laws of heredity, as his de-'
velopment transcends all laws of environment.

' In a private letter which is pubh'shed in a notice of Dr. Holmes,
Johns Hopkins Hospital Bulletin^ October, 1894.


JOHN KEATS 39

Keats's father succeeded to * Mine Host of the Swan
and Hoop', but died when the poet was only eight
years old. His grandmother was in comfortable cir-
cumstances, and Keats was sent to a school at Enfield,
kept by the father of Charles Cowden Clarke. Here
among other accomplishments he developed his knuckles,
and received a second-hand introduction to the Greek
Pantheon. He is described by one of his schoolfellows
as ' the pet prize-fighter with terrier courage ', but in the
last two years at school he studied hard and took all
the prizes. The influence of the Clarkes upon Keats
was strong and formative, particularly that of the
younger one, Charles Cowden, who was an usher in
the school. In the poem addressed to him he frankly
acknowledges this great debt, 'you first taught me all
the sweets of song.'

In 1810 his mother died of consumption, and during
a long illness Keats nursed her with incessant devo-
tion.

On the completion of his fifteenth year he was re-
moved from school and apprenticed to Mr. Hammond,
a surgeon at Edmonton. The terms of the old inden-
ture as surgeon's apprentice are quaint enough. I have
one of my uncle, Edward Osier, dated 181 1. The
surgeon, for a consideration of £/{o, without board,
undertook the care and education for five years of the
apprentices, of whom there were often four or five.
The number of specific negatives in the ordinary inden-
ture indicates the rough and ready character of the
Tom Sawyers of that date. The young apprentice
promised not 'to haunt taverns or playhouses, not to
play at dice or cards, nor absent himself from his said
master's service day or night unlawfully, but in all
things as a faithful apprentice he shall behave himself


40 BIOGRAPHICAL ESSAYS

towards his said master and all his during the said
term*.

We know but little of the days of Keats's apprentice-
ship. A brother student said, ' he was an idle, loafing
fellow, always writing poetry.' In 1814, in the fourth
year of his indenture, the pupil and master had a serious
quarrel, and the contract was broken by mutual consent.
It would appear from the following sentence in a letter
to his brother, that more than words passed between
them: 'I daresay you have altered also — every man
does— our bodies every seven years are completely
fresh material'd. Seven years ago it was not this hand
that clinch'd itself against Hammond.'^

At the end of the apprenticeship the student ' walked '
one of the hospitals for a time before presenting himself
at the College of Surgeons or the Apothecary's Hall.
Keats went to the, at that time. United Hospitals of
Guy's and St. Thomas, where he studied during the
sessions of 1814-15 and 1815-16. He became a dresser
at Guy's in the latter year under Mr. Lucas, and on
July 25, 1816, he passed the Apothecary's Hall. The
details of Keats's life as a medical student are very
scanty. In after years one or two of his fellow students
placed on record their impressions of him. He does
not seem to have been a very brilliant student. Poetry
rather than surgery was followed as a vocation ; one of
his fellow students says, * all other pursuits were to his
mind mean and tame.' Yet he acquired some degree
of technical skill, and performed with credit the minor
operations which fell to the hand of a dresser. He
must have been a fairly diligent student to have obtained
even the minimum qualifications of the ' Hall ' before

* The extracts are taken from the edition of the Letters by Mr.
Buxton Forman. Reeves and Turner, London, 1895.


JOHN KEATS 41

the completion of his twenty-first year. In the Bta-
graphical History of Guy's Hospital Dn Wilks states
that Sir Astley Cooper took a special interest in Keats.

What attraction could the career of an apothecary
offer to a man already much ' travelled in the realms of
gold'i who was capable at twenty of writing such
a sonnet as that on Chapman's Homer ? So far as we
know he never practised or made any effort to get
established ; and in 181 7 he abandoned the profession,
apparently not without opposition. In a letter to his
friend Brown, dated September 23, 1819, he says, ' In
no period of my life have I acted with any self-will but
in throwing up the apothecary profession.'

During the next four years he led, to use his own
words, * a fitful life, here and there, no anchor.' While
a student he had made friends in a literary circle, of
which Leigh Hunt and Haydon, the artist, were mem-
bers, and he had a number of intimates— Brown, Taylor,
Bailey, Dilke, and others— among the coming men in
art and science. From his letters to them, to his
brother George (who had emigrated with his wife to
America), and to his sister Fanny, we glean glimpses
of his life at this period. His correspondence reveals,
too, so far as it can, the man as he was, his aspirations,
thoughts, and hopes.

II

The spirit oinegative capability dominated these years—
the capability, as he expresses it, ' of being in uncertain-
ties, mysteries, doubts, without any irritable searching
after fact and reason.' The native hue of any resolution
which he may haVe entertained— and we shall learn
that he had such— was soon sicklied o'er, and he lapsed


42 BIOGRAPHICAL ESSAYS

into idleness so far as any remunerative work was
concerned. A practical woman like Mrs. Abbey, the
wife of the trustee of his mother^s estate, condoned his
conduct with the words ' the Keatses were ever indolent,
that they would ever be so, and that it was bom in
them'. In a letter to his brother he uses the rig^t
word. Here is his confession :

' This momine I am in a sort of temper, indolent and
supremely careless — I lone after a stanza or two of
Thomson's Castle of Indolence — my passions are all
asleep from my having slumbered till nearly eleven
and weakened the animal fibre all over me to a aelightful
sensation about three dee^rees this side of faintness. If
I had teeth of pearl and the breath of lilies, I should
call it languor ; out as I am, especially as I have a black-
eye, I must call it laziness. . . . This is the only happiness
and is a rare instance of the advantage of the body
overpowering the mind.'

The gospel of 'living' as against that of 'doing',
which Milton preached in the celebrated sonnet on his
blindness, found in Keats a warm advocate. ' Let us
not, therefore,' he says, 'go hurry ing about and collecting
honey, bee-like buzzing here and there for a knowledge
of what is not to be arrived at, but let us open our
leaves like a flower, and be passive and receptive,
budding patiently under the eye of Apollo, and taking
truths from every noble insect that favours us with
a visit.' Fatal to encourage in an active man of affairs,
this dreamy state, this passive existence, favours in
'bards of passion and of mirth' the development of
a fruitful mental attitude. The dreamer spins from his
' own inwards his own airy citadel ' ; and as the spider
needs but few points of leaves and twigs from which to
begin his airy circuit, so, Keats says, ' man should be
content with as few points to tip with the fine web
of his soul, and weave a tapestry empyrean, full of


JOHN KEATS 43

symbols for his spiritual eye, of softness for his spiritual

touch, of space for his wanderings, of distinctness for

his luxury.' All the while Keats was 'budding patiently ',

feeling his powers expand, and with the ' viewless wings

of Poesy ' taking ever larger flights. An absorption in

ideals, a yearning passion for the beautiful, was, he

says, his master-passion. Matthew Arnold remarks it

was with him * an intellectual and spiritual passion. It

is ^connected and made one" as Keats declares that

in his case it was " with the ambition of the intellect ".'

It is, as he again says, the 'mighty abstract Idea of

Beauty in all things \ Listen to one or two striking

passages from his letters : * This morning Poetry has

conquered, — I have relapsed into those abstractions

which are my only life.' ' I feel more and more every

day, as my imagination strengthens, that I do not live

in this world alone, but in a thousand worlds. No

sooner am I alone than shapes of epic greatness are

stationed round me, and serve my spirit the office

which is equivalent to a King's body-guard. Then

"Tragedy with scepter'd pall comes sweeping by".'

'What the imagination seizes as beauty must be

truth ' — the expression in prose of his ever memorable

lines.

Beauty is truth, truth beauty,— that is all
Ye know on Earth, and all ye need to know.

Ill

Keats's first published work, a small volume of poems
issued in 181 7, contained the verses written while he
was a student and before he had abandoned the pro-
fession. With the exception of one or two small pieces
it contained nothing of note. The sonnet on Chapman's
Homer, written while he was a pupil at Guy's, was the


44 BIOGRAPHICAL ESSAYS

most remarkable poem of the collection. In 1818
appeared Endymion, a poetic romance, an ambitious
work, which, in the autumn of the year, was mercilessly
* cut up ' in the Quarterly and in Blackwood. Popularly
these reviews are believed to have caused Keats's early
death— a belief fostered by the jaunty rime of Byron :

Tis strange the mind, that very fiery particle,
Should let itself be snuffed out by an article.

The truth is, no event in Keats's life so warmly com-
mends him to us, or shows more clearly the genuine
robustness of his mind, than his attitude in this much-
discussed episode. In the first place, he had a clear,
for so young a man an extraordinarily clear, perception
of the limitation of his own powers and the value of his
work. The preface to Endymion^ one of the most re-
markable ever written, contains his own lucid judgement.
He felt that his foundations were 'too sandy*, that the
poem was an immature, feverish attempt, in which he
had moved, as he says, from the leading-strings to the
go-cart. Did any critic ever sketch with firmer hand
the mental condition of a young man in transition?
' The imagination of a boy is healthy, and the mature
imagination of a man is healthy ; but there is a space
of life between, in which the soul is in a ferment, the
character undecided, the way of life uncertain, the am-
bition thick-sighted ; thence proceeds mawkishness, and
all the thousand bitters which those men I speak ot
must necessarily taste in going over the following
pages.' It cannot be denied that there are in Endymion^
as the Quarterly Review puts it, * the most incongruous
ideas in the most uncouth language,' but the poem has
lines of splendid merit, some indeed which have passed
into the daily life of the people.
Naturally the criticism of the Quarterly and o{ Black-


JOHN KEATS 45

wood rankled deeply in his over-sensitive heart, but
after the first pangs he appears to have accepted the
castigation in a truly philosophic way. In a letter to
his friend Hersey, dated Oct. 9, 1818, he writes, * Praise
or blame has but a momentary effect on the man whose
love of beauty in the abstract makes him a severe critic
in his own works. My own domestic criticism has given
me pain without comparison beyond what Blackwood
or the Quarterly could possibly inflict, — and also when
I feel I am right, no external praise can give me such
a glow as my own solitary reperception and ratification
of what is fine. J. S. is perfectly right in r^;ard to the
slipshod Endymion. That it is so is no fault of mine.
No ! — though it may sound a little paradoxical, it is as
good as I had power to make it— by myself.' And he
adds, ' I will write independently, — I have written inde-
pendently without judgment I may write indepen-
dently, and with judgment hereafter. The Genius of
Poetry must work out its own salvation in a man.'
A young man of twenty-three who could write this,
whatever else he possessed, had the mens sana, and
could not be killed by a dozen reviews.

In June, 1820, appeared Keats's third work. Lamia,
Isabella^ The Eve of St. Agnes, and other poems, which
placed him in the first rank of English writers. I will
quote briefly the criticisms of two masters.

' No one else in English poetry save Shakespeare,'
says Matthew Arnold, 'has in expression quite the
fascinating facility of Keats, his perfection of loveliness.
" I think," he said humbly, " I shall be among the
English poets after my death." He is; he is with
Shakespeare.'

Lowell, speaking of his wonderful power in the
choice of words, says :


46 BIOGRAPHICAL ESSAYS

' Men's thouehts and opinions are in a ereat degree
the vassals of nim who invents a new phrase or re-
applies an old one. The thought or feeling a thousand
times repeated becomes his at last who utters it best . . .
As soon as we have discovered the word for our joy or
our sorrow we are no longer its serfs, but its lords.
We reward the discoverer of an anaesthetic for the
body and make him a member of all the societies, but
him who finds a nepenthe for the soul We elect into the
small Academy of the Immortals.'

And I will add a criticism on the letters by Edward
Fitzgerald :

'Talkincf of Keats, do not forget to read Lord
Houghton s Life and Letters of him ; in which you will
find what you may not have guessed from his poetry
(though almost unfathomably deep in that also), the
strong niasculine sense and humour, etc., of the man ;
more akin to Shakespeare, I am tempted to think, in
a perfect circle of poetic faculties, than any poet since.*


IV

Very few indications of his professional training are
to be found in Keats's letters ; fewer still in the poems.
Referring to his studies, he says, in one of the early
poems (the epistle to George Felton Mathew), 'far
different cares beckon me sternly from soft Lydian
airs.' During the four years from 1817 to 1820 he
made fitful efforts to bestir himself into action, and on
several occasions his thoughts turned toward his calling.
In a letter to his brother, written in February, 1819, he
says, ' I have been at different times turning it in my
head whether I should go to Edinburgh and stud3iLfor
a physician ; I am afraid I should not take kindly to it ;
I am sure I could not take fees— and yet I should like
to do so ; it is not worse than writing poems and bang-


JOHN KEATS 47

ing them up to be fly-blown on the Review shambles.'
In 1818 he wrote to his friend Reynolds, 'Were I to
study physic, or rather medicine, again, I feel it would
not make the least difference in my poetry ; when the
mind is in its infancy a bias is in reality a bias, but when
we acquire more strength, a bias becomes no bias,'
adding that he is glad he had not given away his
medical books, ' which I shall again look over, to keep
alive the little I know thitherwards.' In May^ 1820,
when convalescent from the first attack of haemoptysis^
he wrote to Dilke, ' I have my choice of three things —
or at least two— South America or surgeon to an India-
man, which last will be my fate.' A year before, in
a letter to Miss Jeffreys, he spoke of voyaging to and
from India for a few years, but in June, 1819, he tells
his sister that he has given up the idea of an Indiaman,
and that he 'was preparing to enquire for a situation
with an apothecary '. Allusions to or analogies drawn
from medical subjects are rare in his letters. In one
place, in writing from Devonshire, he says, 'When
I think of Wordsworth's sonnet, " Vanguard of Liberty !
Ye men of Kent ! " (in Wordsworth at all events) the
degraded race about me are ptUvis ipecac, simplex —
a strong dose.'

He played a medical prank on his friend Brown, who
had let his house to a man named Nathan Benjamin.
The water which furnished the house was in a tank
lined with lime, which impregnated the water un-
pleasantly. Keats wrote the following short note to
Brown:

Sir,— By drinking your damn'd tank water I have
got the CTavel. What reparation can you make to me
and my famUy ?

Nathan Benjamin.


48 BIOGRAPHICAL ESSAYS

Brown accordingly surprised his tenant with the
following answer :

Sir, — I cannot offer you any remuneration until your
gravel shall have formed itself into a stone, when i wiH
cut you with pleasure.

C. Brown.

In a letter to James Rice he tells one of the best
maternal impression stories extant: 'Would you like
a true story? There was a man and his wife who,
being to go a long journey on foot, in the course of
their travels came to a river which rolled knee-deep
over the pebbles. In these cases the man generally
pulls off his shoes and stockings and carries the woman
over on his back. This man did so. And his wife being
pregnant, and troubled, as in such cases is very common,
with strange longings, took the strangest that ever was
heard of. Seeing her husband's foot, a handsome one
enough, looked very clean and tempting in the clear
water, on their arrival at the other bank she earnestly
demanded a bit of it. He being an affectionate fellow,
and fearing for the comeliness of his child, gave her
a bit which he cut off with his clasp-knife. Not satis-
fied, she asked for another morsel. Supposing there
might be twins, he gave her a slice more. Not yet
contented, she craved another piece. "You wretch,"
cries the man, "would you wish me to kill myself?
Take that," upon which he stabbed her with the knife,
cut her open, and found three children in her belly:
two of them very comfortable with their mouths shut,
the third with its eyes and mouth stark staring wide
open. "Who would have thought it!" cried the
widower, and pursued his journey.*

The estate of Keats's mother was greatly involved,
and it does not appear that he received much from the


JOHN KEATS 49

trastee, Mr. Abbey. His books were not successful,
and having no love for the ordinary hack work in litera-
ture, he was largely dependent upon the bounty of his
friends, from whom in several of the letters the receipt
of money is acknowledged. Who could resist a charm-
ing borrower who could thus write : ' I am your debtor ;
I must ever remain so ; nor do I wish to be clear of my
rational debt ; there is a comfort in throwing oneself on
the charity of one's friends— 'tis like the albatross sleep-
ing on its wings. I will be to you wine in the cellar,
and the more modestly, or rather, indolently I retire
into the backward bin, the more Faleme will I be at
the drinking.' We must remember, however, that Keats
had reasonable expectations. He says to Haydon,
December 23, 1818, ' I have a little money, which
may enable me to study and to travel for three or four
years.' He had enough wisdom to try to be ' correct
in money matters and to have in my desk ', as he says,
'the chronicles of them to refer to and to know my
worldly non-estate.'

To the worries of uncertain health and greatly embar-
rassed affairs there were added, in the summer of 1819,
the pangs, one can hardly say of disprized, but certainly
of hopeless love. Writing to his friend Reynolds,
M^y 3» 1B18, in comparing life to a large mansion of
many apartments, he says pathetically that he could
only describe two ; the first, the Infant or Thoughtless
Chamber, in which we remain as long as we do not think ;
and the second, the Chamber of Maiden-Thought, in
which at first we become intoxicated with the light and
atmosphere, until it gradually darkens and we see not well
the exit and we feel the ' burden of the mystery '. For
his friends he hopes the third Chamber of Life may be
filled with the wine of love and the bread of friendship.

£


56 BIOGRAPHICAL ESSAYS

Poor fellow I Within a year the younger Aphrodite, in
the shape of Fanny Brawne» beckoned to him from the
door of this third chamber. Through her came no
peace to his soul, and the Muses' inspiration was dis-
placed by a passion which rocked him as the 'winds
rock the ravens on high ' — by Plato's fourth variety of
madness, which brought him sorrow and ' leaden-eyed
despair'. The publication of Keats's letters to Fanny
Brawne can be justified; it must also be regretted.
While there are some letters which we should be loath
to miss, there are others the publication of which has
wronged his memory. Whether of a young poet as
Keats, or of an old philosopher as Swift, such maudlin
cooings and despairing wails should be ruled out of
court with the writings of paranoiacs.


Keats's mother died of consumption in 1810. In the
winter of 1817-18 he nursed his brother Tom through the
same disease. In the spring they spent several months
together in Devonshire, which Keats compares to Lydia
Languish, * very entertaining when it smiles, but cursedly
subject to sympathetic moisture.' In the summer he
took a trip through Scotland, and in the Island of Mull
caught a cold, which settled in his throat. In a letter
dated Inverness, August 6, he speaks of his throat as in
' a fair way of getting quite well '. On his return to
Hampstead we hear of it again ; and in September he
writes *I am confined by Sawrey's mandate in the
house now, and have as yet only gone out in fear of
the damp night'. During the last three months of the
year he again nursed his brother Tom, who died in
December. From this time the continual references


JOHN KEATS 51

to the sore throat are ominous. On December 31 he
complains to Fanny Keats that a sore throat keeps him
in the house, and he speaks of it again in January
letters. In a February letter to his sister he says that
the sore throat has haunted him at intervals for nearly
a twelvemonth. In June and July he speaks of it again,
but the summer spent in the Isle of Wight and at
Winchester did him good, and in September he writes
to one of his friends that he had got rid of his ' haunting
sore throat \ I have laid stress upon this particular
feature, as there can be but little question that the
tuberculosis of which he died began, as is common
enough, with this localization. For more than a year
there had been constant exposure while nursing his
brother, and under conditions, in Devonshire at least,
most favourable to infection. The depression of the
Review attacks in the autumn of 1818 must also be taken
into account. Through the summer of 1818 there are
occasional references to an irritable state of health apart
from the throat trouble— unfitting him for mental exer-
tion. ' I think if I had a free and healthy and lasting
organization of heart and lungs as strong as an ox's, so
as to bear unhurt the shock of an extreme thought and
sensation without weariness, I could pass my life very
nearly alone, though it should last eighty years. But
I feel my body too weak to support me to the height,
I am obliged continually to check myself and be nothing.'
It we may judge by the absence of any references in
the letters, the autumn of the year was passed in good
health, but on December 20 he wrote that he was
' fearful lest the weather should affect my throat, which
on exertion or cold continually threatens me '.

On February 3 the smouldering fires broke out, after
he had been exposed in a stage ride, in an attack of

£ 2


52 BIOGRAPHICAL ESSAYS

haemoptysis. From this date we can trace in the letters
the melancholy progress of the disease. In April and
May the lung symptoms became less pronounced, and
in spite of much nervous irritability and weakness he
was able to direct the publication of his third little
volume of poems. On June 22 he had a return of the
spitting of blood, which lasted several days. The serious
nature of the disease was by this time evident to both
the patient and his physicians. He acknowledges that
it will be a long, tedious affair, and that a winter in
Italy may be necessary. 'Tis not yet consumption,'
he writes Fanny Keats, 'but it would be were I to
remain in this climate all the winter.' This, too> was
a time of terrible mental distress, as he became madly
jealous of his best friend, C. A. Brown. The letters of
this period to Fanny Brawne tell of the 'damned
moments ' of one who ' dotes yet doubts, suspects, yet
fondly loves *.

Preparations were made for his journey to Italy,
which he speaks of 'as marching up to a battery'. He
sailed for Naples, which was reached after a tedious
voyage about the end of October. Severn, the artist,
accompanied him, and has given (Atlantic Monihly^
April, 1863) a touching account of the last months of
his friend's life. Realizing fully the hopelessness of his
condition, like many a brave man in a similar plight, he
wished to take his life. Severn states :

' In a little basket of medicines I had boueht at
Gravesend at his request there was a bottle of laudanum,
and this I afterwaras found was destined by him "to
close his mortal career ", when no hope was left, and
prevent a long, lingering death, for my poor sake,
when the dismal time came, and Sir James Clark was
unable to encounter Keats's penetrating look and eager
demand, he insisted on having the bottle, which I niad


JOHN KEATS 53

already put away. Then came the most touching scenes.
He now explained to me the exact procedure of his
gmdual dissolution, enumerated my deprivations and
toils, and dwelt upon the danger to my life, and cer-
tainly to my fortunes, from my continued attendance
upon him. One whole day was spent in earnest repre-
sentations of this sort, to which, at the same time that
they wrung my heart to hear and his to utter, I was
obhged to oppose a firm resistance. On the second
day, his tender appeal turned to despair, in all the
power of his ardent imagination and bursting heart' *

In Rome, Keats was under the care of Dr. (afterwards
Sir James) Clark, who, with Severn, watched him with
assiduous care throughout the winter months. Unlike
so many consumptives, Keats had none of the spes
phfhisica, which carries them hopefully to the very gates
of the grave. He knew how desperate was his state.

* I feel,' he said, 'the flowers growing over me.' * When
will this posthumous life come to an end?' On
February 14 he requested Severn to have inscribed
on his gravestone the words,

Here lies one whose name was writ in water.

On February 27 he passed away quietly in Severn's
arms.

All lovers of poetry cherish Keats's memory for the
splendour of the verse with which he has enriched our
literature. There is also that deep pathos in a life cut

* In similar circumstances one of the gentlest and most loving
of men whom it has been my lot to attend was more successful,
and when he realized fully that a slow, lingering death awaited
him, took the laudanum with which for months he had been
provided. In such a case, whose heart will not echo the kindly
words with which Burton closes his celebrated section on suicide ?

* Who knows how he may be tempted ? It is his case ; it may be
thine. Quoi sua sors hodie est, eras /ore vestra potest. We ought
not to be so rash and rigorous in our censures as some are ; charity
will judge and hope the best ; God be merciful unto us all ! '


54 BIOGRAPHICAL ESSAYS

oflf in the promise of such rich fruit. He is numbered
among Hhe inheritors of unfulfilled renown*, with
Catullus and Marlowe, with Chatterton and Shelley,
whom we mourn as doubly dead in that they died so
young.

It was with true prophetic insight that he wrote in
1818 to his brother George,

What though I leave this dull and earthly mould,
Yet shall my spirit loftv converse hold

Witn after times.

Shelley, who was so soon to join this ' gentle band *,
and find with Keats ' a grave among the eternal ', has
expressed the world's sorrow in his noble elegy.
I quote in conclusion his less well-known fragment :

Here lieth one whose name was writ on water. .

But, ere the breath that could erase it blew.
Death, in remorse for that fell slaughter.

Death, the immortalizing winter, flew

Athwart the stream,— and time's printless torrent
CTew
A scroll of crystal, blazoning the name

Of Adonais. . . .


55


OLIVER WENDELL HOLMES'


Very fitting indeed is it that be who had lived to be
' the last leaf upon the tree ' should have fallen peace-
fully in the autumn which he loved so well. Delightful,
too, to think that although he had, to use the expression
of Benjamin Franklin, intruded himself these many
years into the company of posterity, the freshness and
pliancy of his mind had not for a moment failed. Like
his own wonderful 'one-boss shay', the end was
a sudden breakdown ; and though he would have
confessed, no doubt, to 'a general flavour of decay',
there was nothing local, and his friends had been
spared that most distressing of all human spectacles,
those cold gradations of decay, in which a man takes
nearly as long to die as he does to grow up, and lives
a sort of death in life, ' ita sine vita vivere, ita sine morte
mori.'

Enough has been said, and doubtless well said, by
those who make criticism their vocation, upon the
literary position and affinities of Oliver Wendell Holmes,
and I shall spare your perhaps already surcharged ears.
He has been sandwiched in my affections these many
years between Oliver Goldsmith and Charles Lamb.
More than once he has been called, I think, the
American Goldsmith. Certainly the great distinction

' Read at the Johns Hopkins Medical Sociefy, October 15, 1894.
Those interested in the medical life of Holmes will find an excel-
lent article on the subject by Dr. J. Mason Knox in the Johns
Hopkins Hospital BuUehn, February, 1907.


56 BIOGRAPHICAL ESSAYS

of both men lies in that robust humanity which has
a smile for the foibles and a tear for the sorrows of
their fellow creatures. The English Oliver, with a
better schooling for a poet (had he not learned in
suflfering what he taught in song?), had a finer fancy
and at his best a clearer note. With both writers one
is at a loss to know which to love the better, the prose
or the poetry. Can we name two other prose-writers
of equal merit, who have so successfully courted the
' draggle-tailed Muses,' as Goldsmith calls them ? Like
Charles Lamb, Holmes gains the affections of his
readers at the first sitting, and the genial humour, th^
refined wit, the pathos, the tender sensitiveness to
the lights and shadows of life, give to the Breakfast
Table Series much of the charm of the Essays of
Elia.

While it is true that since Rabelais and Linacre no
generation has lacked a physician to stand unabashed
in the temple at Delos, a worshipper of worth and merit
amid the votaries of Apollo, I can recall no name in
the past three centuries eminent in literature — eminent,
I mean, in the sense in which Goldsmith is eminent —
which is associated in any enduring way with work
done in the science and art of medicine. Many phy-
sicians, active practitioners — Sir Thomas Browne, for
example — have been and are known for the richness
and variety of their literary work ; but, as a rule, those
who have remained in professional life have courted
the 'draggle-tailed Muses' as a gentle pastime, 'to
interpose a little ease' amid the worries of practice.
Few such have risen above mediocrity; fewer still
have reached it. We know the names of Garth, of
Arbuthnot, and of Akenside, but we neither know them
nor their works. The list is a long one, for the rites


OLIVER WENDELL HOLMES 57

of Apollo have always had a keen attraction for the
men of our ranks, but the names fill at the best a place
in the story of the literature of the country, not a place
in the hearts and lives of the people. Far otherwise
is it with a select group of men, Goldsmith, Crabbe
and Keats, who, at the outset members of our profes-
sion, early broke away from its drudgery. In pride
we claim them, though in reality no influence of their
special studies is to be found in their writings. Two
of these, at least, reached the pure empyrean, and to
use Shelley's words, robed in dazzling immortality, sit
on thrones

built beyond mortal thought.
Far in the Unapparent.

Oliver Wendell Holmes may not be placed in the
same exalted sphere, but he will always occupy a unique
position in the affections of medical men. Not a prac-
titioner, he yet retained for the greater part of his
active life the most intimate connexion with the pro-
fession, and as Professor of Anatomy at Harvard
University kept in touch with it for nearly forty years.
The festivals at Epidaurus were never neglected by
him, and as the most successful combination which the
world has ever seen of the physician and the man of
letters, he has for years sat amid the Aesculapians in
the seat of honour.

During the nineteenth century' three schools in suc-
cession have moulded the thoughts and opinions of the
medical profession in this country. In the early period
English ways and methods prevailed, and (as in the
colonial days) the students who crossed the Atlantic
for further study went to Edinburgh or to London.
Then came a time between 1825 and i860 when
American students went chiefly to Paris, and the pro-


58 BIOGRAPHICAL ESSAYS

fession of the country was strongly swayed by the
teaching of the French school. Since i860 the in-
fluence of German medicine has been all-powerful, but
of late American students are beginning to learn that
their * Wanderjahre ' should be truly such, and that
when possible they should round out their studies in
France and England.

In the thirties a very remarkable body of young
Americans studied in Paris, chiefly under the great
Louis— Oliver Wendell Holmes, James Jackson, Jr.,
Henry I. Bowditch, and George C. Shattuck, from
Boston, Swett, from New York, Gerhard and Stills,
from Philadelphia, and Power, from Baltimore. They
brought back to this country scientific methods of work
and habits of accurate, systematic observation, and they
had caught also, what was much more valuable, some
of his inspiring enthusiasm. So far as I know, one
alone of Louis' American pupils remains, full of years
and honours— Prof. Still6, of the University of Penn-
sylvania.

More than once in his writings Holmes refers to his
delightful student days in France, and the valedictory
lecture to his class in 1882 is largely made up of remi-
niscences of his old Paris teachers.

The fullness of Holmes's professional equipment is
very evident in his first contributions to medicine. In
the years 1836 and 1837 we find him successfully
competing for the Boylston prizes, with essays on
Intermittent Fever in New England, on Neuralgia,
and on the Utility and Improvement of Direct Explora-
tion in Medical Practice. Of these the essay on
intermittent fever is in many ways the most important,
since it contains a very thorough review of the testimony
of the early New England writers on the subject, for


OLIVER WENDELL HOLMES 59

which purpose he made a careful and thorough examina^
tion of the records of the first century of the settlements.
Here and there throughout the essay there is evidence
of his irrepressible humour. Referring to the old writers,
he says, that because indexes are sometimes imperfect,
he has looked over all the works page by page, with
the exception of some few ecclesiastical papers, sermons
and similar treatises of Cotton Mather, * which, being
more likely to cause a fever than to mention one, I left
to some future investigator/ The essay shows great
industry, and is of value to-day in showing the localities
in which malaria prevailed in the early part of the nine-
teenth century, and at the time at which he wrote. The
essay on neuralgia is not so interesting, but it is an ex-
haustive summary of the knowledge of the disease in the
year 1830. The third dissertation, on direct exploration,
of much greater merit, is a plea for the more extended use
of auscultation and percussion in exact diagnosis. The
slowness with which these two great advances were
adopted by our fathers contrasts in a striking manner
with the readiness with which at the present day we
take up with new improvements and appliances. Auen-
brugger's work on percussion dates from 1761, but it
was not until the beginning of the century that the
art of percussion was revived by Corvisart and Laennec ;
while Piorry, as Holmes says, succeeded in creating
himself a European reputation by a slight but useful
modification in the art ; referring to his pleximeter, of
which in another place he says that Piorry 'makes
a graven image'. The great discoveries of Laennec
made their way very slowly to general adoption, and
to this Holmes refers when he says, 'it is perfectly
natural that they (speaking of the older practitioners)
should look with suspicion upon this introduction of


6o BIOGRAPHICAL ESSAYS

medical machinery among the old, hard-working opera-
tives ; that they should for a while smile at its preten-
sions, and when its use began to creep in among them,
that they should observe and signalize all the errors
and defects which happened in its practical application/

Gerhard's work on the diagnosis of diseases of the
chest was published in 1836, and with this essay of
Holmes's opened to the American profession the rich
experience of the French school in the methods of
direct exploration in all disorders of the chest and of
the heart. The essay may be read to-day by the student
with great profit; it is particularly rich in original
references to the older writers. Readers of the Aut(h
crat And of others of Holmes's literary works have been
surprised at the readiness with which he quotes and
refers to the fathers of the profession, a facility readily
explained by these Boylston prize dissertations; and
in their preparation he had evidently studied not
only the modern authors of the day, but had read in
the original the great masters from Hippocrates to
Harvey.

The prize essay does not constitute the most enduring
form of medical literature, and though the dissertation
on Malaria is in some respects one of the very best
of the long series of Boylston essays, yet we could
scarcely have spoken of a medical reputation for Dr.
Holmes had it to rest upon these earlier productions.
A few years later, however, he contributed an article
which will long keep his memory green in our ranks.

Child-bed fever was unhappily no new disorder when
Oliver Wendell Holmes studied, nor had there been
wanting men who had proclaimed forcibly its specific
character and its highly contagious nature. Indeed,
so far back as 1795, Gordon, of Aberdeen, not only


OLIVER WENDELL HOLMES 6i

called it a specific contagion, but said he could predict
with unerring accuracy the very doctors and nurses
in whose practice the cases would develop. Rigby,
too, had lent the weight of his authority in favour of
the contagiousness, but the question was so far from
settled that, as you will hear, many of the leading
teachers scouted the idea that doctors and nurses
could convey the disorder. Semmelweis had not then
begun to make his interesting and conclusive obser-
vations, for which his memory has recently been so
greatly honoured.

In 1843, before the Boston Society for Medical Im-
provement, Dr. Holmes read a paper entitled 'The
Contagiousness of Puerperal Fever', in which he
brought forward a long array of facts in support of
the view that the disease was contagious, conveyed
usually by the doctor or the nurse, and due to a
specific infection. At the time there certainly was not
an article in which the subject was presented in so
logical and so convincing manner. As Sidney Smith
says, it is not the man who first says a thing, but it
is he who says it so long, so loudly, and so clearly
that he compels men to hear him — it is to him that
the credit belongs; and so far as this country is con-
cerned, the credit of insisting upon the great practical
truth of the contagiousness of puerperal fever belongs
to Dr. Holmes. The essay is characterized in places
by great strength of feeling. He says he could not for
a moment consent to make a question of the momentous
fact, which should not be considered a subject for
trivial discussion, but should be acted upon with silent
promptitude. ' No negative facts, no passing opinions,
be they what they may or whose they may, can form
any answer to the series of cases now within the


62 BIOGRAPHICAL ESSAYS

reach of all who choose to explore the records of medical
science/ Just before the conclusions the following elo-
quent paragraphs are found, portions of which are often
quoted : ^

' It is as a lesson rather than as a reproach that I
call up the memory of these irreparable errors and
wrones. No tongue can tell the heart-breaking calami-
ties they have caused ; they have closed the eyes iust
opened upon a new world of life and happiness ; they
have bowed the strength of manhood into the dust;
they have cast the helplessness of infancy into the
stranger's arms, or bequeathed it with less cruelty the
death of its dying parent. There is no tone deep
enough for record, and no voice loud enough for
wammg. The woman about to become a mother, or
with her new-bom infant upon her bosom, should be
the object of trembline; care and sympathy wherever
she bears her tender ourden, or stretches her aching
limbs. The very outcast of the street has pity upon
her sister in degradation when the seal of promised
maternity is impressed upon her. The remorseless
vengeance of the law brought down upon its victims
by a machinery as sure as destiny, is arrested in its
fall at a word which reveals her transient claims for
mercy. The solemn prayer of the liturgy singles out
her sorrows from the multiplied trials of life, to plead
for her in the hour of peril. God forbid that any
member of the profession to which she trusts her life,
doubly precious at that eventful period, should regard
it negligently, unadvisedly, or selnshly.'

The results of his studies are summed up in a series
of eight conclusions, and the strong ground which he
took may be gathered from this sentence in the last
one : * The time has come when the existence ot
a private pestilence in the sphere of a single physician
should be looked upon not as a misfortune but a crime.'
Fortunately this essay, which was published in the
ephemeral New England Quarterly Journal of Medicine ^
was not destined to remain unnoticed. The statements


OLIVER WENDELL HOLMES 63

were too bold and the whole tone too resolute not to
arouse the antagonism of those whose teachings had
been for years diametrically opposed to the conta-
giousness of puerperal fever. Philadelphia was the
centre of the teaching and work in obstetrics in this
country, and if we can speak at all of an American
school of obstetricians it is due to the energy of the
professors of this branch in that city, and for the sake
of the memory of the men we could wish expunged
the incident to which I will now allude.

In 1852 the elder Hodge, Professor of Obstetrics at
the University of Pennsylvania, published an essay on
the non-contagious character of puerperal fever, and in
1854 Charles D. Meigs, Professor of Obstetrics at the
Jefferson Medical College, published a work on the
nature, signs, and treatment of child-bed fevers, in a
series of letters addressed to students of his class. Both
of these men, the most distinguished professors of
obstetrics io America, took extreme ground against
Holmes, and Meigs handled him rather roughly.

Nothing daunted, in the following year (1855) Holmes
reprinted the essay, calling it Puerperal Fever as a
Private Pestilence. He clearly appreciated the character
of the work he was doing, since in the introduction he
says, ' I do not know that I shall ever again have so
good an opportunity of being useful as was granted
to me by the raising of the question which produced
this essay.' The point at issue is squarely put in a few
paragraphs on one of the first pages ; the affirmative in
a quotation from his essay: 'The disease known as
puerperal fever is so far contagious as to be carried
from patient to patient by physicians and nurses ' (1843).
The negative in two quotations, one from Hodge (1852),
who ' begged his students to divest their minds of the


64 BIOGRAPHICAL ESSAYS

dread that they could ever carry the horrible virus';
and of Meigs (1854), who says, ' I prefer to attribute
them (namely, the deaths) to accident or Providence, of
which I can form a conception, rather than to a con-
tagion of which I cannot form any clear idea/

The introduction to the essay, which was reprinted
as it appeared in 1843, is one of the ablest and most
trenchant pieces of writing with which I am acquainted.
There are several striking paragraphs ; thus, in alluding
to the strong and personal language used by Meigs^
Holmes says : * I take no offence and attempt no retort ;
no man makes a quarrel with me over the counterpane
that covers a mother with her new-bom infant at her
breast.' He appeals to the medical student not to be
deceived by the statements of the two distinguished
professors, which seem to him to encourage professional
homicide. One paragraph has become classical : ' They
naturally have faith in their instructors, turning to them
for truth, and taking what they may choose to give
them; babies in knowledge, not yet able to tell the
breast from the bottle, pumping away for the milk of
truth at all that offers, were it nothing better than
a professor's shrivelled forefinger.'

The high estimate in which this work of Holmes's
is held has frequently been referred to by writers on
obstetrics.

Some years ago in an editorial note I commented
upon a question which Dr. Holmes had asked in his
Hundred Days in Europe. Somewhere at dinner he
had sat next to a successful gynaecologist who had
saved some hundreds of lives by his operations, and
he asked, ' Which would give the most satisfaction to
a thoroughly humane and unselfish being, of cultivated
intelligence and lively sensibilities : to have written all


OLIVER WENDELL HOLMES 65

the plays which Shakespeare has left as an inheritance
for mankind, or to have snatched from the jaws of death
more thaii a hundred fellow-creatures, and restored
them to sound and comfortable existence ? ' I remarked
that there was nobody who could answer this question
so satisfactorily as the Autocrat, and asked from which
he derived the greater satisfaction, the Essay on Puerperal
FeveTf which had probably saved many more lives than
any individual gynaecologist, or the Chambered Nautilus,
which had given pleasure to so many thousands. The
journal reached Dr. Holmes, and I read you his reply
to me, under date of January 21, 1889 :

' I have rarely been more pleased than by your
allusion to an old paper of mine. There was a time
certainly in which I would have said that the best paee
of my record was that in which I had fought my batUe
for tne poor poisoned women. I am remmded of that
essay from time to time, but it was published in a peri-
odical which died after one year's life, and therefore
escaped the wider notice it would have found if printed
in tne American Journal of the Medical Sciences. A
lecturer at one of the great London hospitals referred
to it the other day and coupled it with some fine phrases
about myself which made me blush, either with modesty
or vanity, I forget which.

* I thmk I will not answer the question you put me.
I think oftenest of the Chambers Nautilus, which is
a favourite poem of mine, though I wrote it myself.
The essay only comes up at long intervals. The poem
repeats itself m my memory, and is very often spoken
ofby my correspondents in terms of more than ordinary
praise. I had a savage pleasure, I confess, in handling
those two professors — learned men both of them, skilful
experts, but babies, as it seemed to me, in their capacity
of reasoning and arguing. But in writing the poem
I was filled with a better feeling— the highest state of
mental exaltation and the most crystalline clairvoyance,
as it seemed to me, that had ever been granted to me —
I mean that lucid vision of one's thought and all forms
of expression which will be at once precise and musical.


66 BIOGRAPHICAL ESSAYS

which is the poet's special ^ft, however large or small
in amount or value. There is more selfish pleasure to
be had out of the poem— perhaps a nobler satisfaction
from the life-saving labour/

Last year at the dinner of the American Gynaeco-
logical Society in Philadelphia a letter from Dr. Hdmes
was read referring to the subject in very much the
same language as he uses in his letter to me. One or
two of the paragraphs I may quote.

' Still I was attacked in my stronghold by the two
leading professors of obstetrics in this country.

* I defended my position, with new facts and ai]gu-
ments, and not without rhetorical fervour, at which,
after cooling down for half a century, I might smile if
I did not remember how intensely and with what good
reason my feelings were kindled into the heated atmo-
sphere of superlatives.

' I have been long out of the way of discussing this
class of subjects. 1 do not know what others have
done since my efforts ; I do know that others had cried
out with all their might against the terrible evil, before
I did, and I g[ave them full credit for it.

' But I thmk I shrieked my wamine^ louder and
longer than any of them, and I am pleased to remember
that I took my ground on the existing evidence before
the little army of microbes was marched up to support
my position.'

Fortunately, Dr. Holmes's medical essays are re-
printed with his works. Several of them are enduring
contributions to the questions with which they deal;
all should be read carefully by every student of medi-
cine. The essay on Homeopathy remains one of the
most complete exposures of that therapeutic fad.
There is no healthier or more stimulating writer to
students and to young medical men. With an entire
absence of nonsense, with rare humour and unfailing
kindness, and with that delicacy of feeling characteristic


OLIVER WENDELL HOLMES 67

of a member of the Brahmin class, he has permanently
enriched the literature of the race.

Search the ranks of authors since Elia, whom in so
many ways Holmes resembled, and to no one else
could the beautiful tribute of Landor be transferred
with the same sense of propriety :

He leaves behind him, freed from grief and fears.
Far nobler things than tears,
The love of friends without a single foe.
Unequalled lot below.


F2


68


JOHN LOCKE

AS A PHYSICIAN*


Among the great men of the seventeenth century not
one has more enduring claims to our grateful remem-
brance than John Locke — philosopher, philanthropist,
and physician. As a philosopher his praise is in the
colleges. As the apostle of common sense he may be
ranked with Socrates and a few others who have
brought philosophy from the clouds to the working-
day world. Of his special virtues and qualifications as
the typical English philosopher nothing need be said,
but were there time I would fain dwell upon his
character as a philanthropist— in the truest sense of
the word. The author of the Epistle on Toleration, the
Treatise on Education, and the Constitution of Carolina,
the man who pleaded for * absolute Liberty, just and
true Liberty, equal and impartial Liberty ', the man who
wrote the memorable words, ' All men are naturally in
a state of freedom, also of equality,' must be ranked as
one of the great benefactors of the race.

With the faculty Locke's connexion has usually been
described as ' loose and uncertain '. Indeed, we knew
him chiefly as a friend of Sydenham. Until the appear-
ance of Fox-Bourne's Life it had not been recognized
that he was at times an active practitioner, and that

^ Read to the Students* Societies of the Medical Department of
the University of Pennsylvania, January i6, 1900. Reprinted from
The Lancet, October 20, 1900.


JOHN LOCKE 69

throughout the greater part of his long life he was
ready to treat cases and to give advice ; still less was it
known that he was a writer of medical essays, and that
he had left a large body of clinical reports and papers.
I had become familiar with his professional relations
through John Brown's essay, Locke and Sydenham^ and
many additional details are given in the Life just re-
ferred to, but for the more important facts I have made
a careful study of the Locke MSS. in the British
Museum and in the Record Office.

L Life.

Let me first give a brief summary of Locke's life.
He was born in the county of Somerset in 1632, the son
of an attorney who at the outbreak of the civil war
joined the Parliamentary side. Of his boyhood and
early education but little are known. In 1646 he
entered Westminster School under the famous Dr.
Busby, where he had as fellow students Richard Lower,
Walter Needham, and John Mapletoft, who subse-
quently became well-known physicians. In 1652 he
entered Christ Church, Oxford, and received his B.A.
degree in 1655 and the M.A. in 1658. In the following
year he became senior student or Fellow of Christ
Church, in 1660 Lecturer on Greek, and in 1662 Lec-
turer on Rhetoric. In 1665 he served as secretary to
the embassy of Sir Walter Vane to the Elector of
Brandenburg. Until 1660 a student of classics and
rhetoric, Locke appears to have been at a loss to
know exactly what calling to follow. Thoroughly dis-
gusted, he had broken with the old scholastic philo-
sophy and, imbued with the new learning of Bacon and
Descartes, felt what Donne calls ' the sacred hunger of
science '. But what probably turned his attention most


70 BIOGRAPHICAL ESSAYS

actively to medicine was the presence in Oxford of the
celebrated Robert Boyle, who with his associates had
formed a scientific club, the 'invisible college*, which
became the nucleus of the Royal Society. Letters of
this period show Locke to have been busy with experi-
mental physics, working at problems suggested by
Boyle, taking daily notes on the weather (a practice
which he kept up for many years), and gradually be-
coming well versed in the sciences cognate to medicine.
Unfortunately we have very little information as to the
character of his medical studies, which seem, however,
to have been of a rather desultory nature, as he did not
comply with the very easy requirements for the degree.
On these Fox-Bourne makes the following comment:
* All that was expected from an applicant for a bachelor-
ship in physic was regular attendance during three
years at the lectures of the Arabic professor and of the
professors of anatomy and medicine, together with par-
ticipation in a certain number of disputations in the
medical school, and after that little more than a delay
of four years was necessary to qualify him for the
doctorship. The medicine lectures, delivered every
Tuesday and Friday morning during term, were limited
to an exposition of the teaching of Hippocrates and
Galen. For anatomy, the students had in the spring to
attend the dissecting of one human body and to hear
four lectures, each two hours long, upon it, and in the
autumn to hear three lectures on the human skeleton.'
These requirements, however, were not complied with,
and in November, 1666, he att^pted to have a dispen-
sation so that he could obtain the doctorship without
previously becoming a bachelor. The request of Lord
Clarendon, however, was not heeded, owing probably
to the fact that Locke belonged to the Puritan party.


JOHN LOCKE 71

During these years he seems to have been intimately
associated with Dr. David Thomas, at that time a prac-
titioner at Oxford. He writes to Boyle in February,
1666-7 • ' Mr. Thomas presents his humble service to
you. He and I are now upon a new sort of chemistry ;
that is, extracting money out of the scholars' pockets,
and if we can do that, you need not fear but that in
time we shall have the lapis^ for he that can get gold and
silver out of scholars cannot doubt to extract it any-
where else.* Though political influence was unavailing
to procure the doctor's degree without complying with
the regulations, it was potent enough to secure him in
his senior studentship at Christ Church, a position
usually held only by persons in holy orders, and this
post, with the salary attached to it, Locke enjoyed till
his expulsion in 1684.

Locke did not receive the bachelorship of medicine
until 1674, in which year he was appointed to one of
the two medical studentships at Christ Church, and
it was supposed by his friends that this was a step
preliminary to taking the doctor's degree, but to this
he never proceeded. In 1666, when acting as an assis-
tant to Dr. Thomas, Lord Ashley, afterwards the first
Earl of Shaftesbury, the celebrated Achitophel of Dry-
den's satire, came to Oxford to drink the waters of the
Astrop wells. He was the subject of a remarkable
malady of which I shall subsequently give a detailed
account. Dr. Thomas, to whom he had written to have
the waters ready for him, was away but had left word
with Locke to get them, and as there was some trouble
and delay Locke called on Lord Ashley to apologize.
There was a mutual attraction and from this acquain-
tance began a friendship between the two men which
had important results, as in the following year we find


72 BIOGRAPHICAL ESSAYS

Locke installed at Exeter House, the London residence
of Lord Ashley, as physician and literary factotum.

From this date until 1675 Locke lived in Lord
Ashley's family, occupying himself in all sorts of mis-
cellaneous duties, some domestic, as finding young
Anthony Ashley a wife, whom he subsequently attended
on several interesting occasions. One dutj^ which
interests us in America very much is the share which
he took in the Carolina colony. As secretary to the
Lords Proprietors he was appointed one of the Land-
graves and wrote, it is supposed, the celebrated Funda*
mental Constitutions of the Government of Carolina^ the
original draft of which, in his handwriting, with many
alterations and erasures, may be seen in the Record
Office. The celebrated clause, ' No person whatsoever
shall disturb, molest, or prosecute another for his specu-
lative opinions in religion or his way of worship,'
expresses the spirit of toleration for which Locke strove
all through his life. Subsequently, after Lord Ashley
was created Earl of Shaftesbury, Locke became Secre-
tary of Presentations. During all this period he was
deeply interested in medicine, and was in intimate
association with Sydenham, Mapletoft, and other well-
known physicians of the day, though it was not until
1674 that he took his M.B. at Oxford. About this time
he began to suffer much in health, and in 1675 went to
France, where he remained, chiefly at Montpeliier and
Paris, for four years. His journals during this period,
which are very full, indicate his continued interest in
the profession, though, as he writes to Mapletoft, * My
health, which you are so kind to in your wishes, is the
only mistress I have a long time courted, and is so coy
a one that it will take up the remainder of my days to
obtain her good graces and keep her in good humour.


JOHN LOCKE 73

She hath of late been very wayward, but I hope is
coming about again.' In another letter he says :

* For I doubt whether all the ortolans in France be
able to communicate to me one grain of their fat, and
I shall be well enough at my ease if, when I return,
I can but maintain this poor tenement of mine in the
same repair it is at present, without hope ever to find it
much better. For i expect not that Dr. Time should be
half so favourable to my crazy body as it has been
to you in your late disease. Tis a good mark, but
may have other dangers in it ; for usually those whom
that old winged gentleman helps up the hill are not yet
got out of the reach of the winged boy who does such
mischief with his bow and arrows.'

From 1679 to 1684 Locke was again with Lord
Shaftesbury, busily occupied in public business, though
still maintaining an intimate association with Sydenham
and his medical friends. After Lord Shaftesbury's
death Locke himself fell under suspicion of having
taken part in schemes against the Crown, and from 1683
to 1689 found it safer to live in retirement in Holland.
In 1684, by the peremptory order of the king, he was
dismissed from his studentship in Christ Church. At
the Revolution he returned to London and became
actively engaged in literary and political work. Failing
health compelled his retirement to Oates, in the neigh-
bourhood of London, where, with Lady Masham and
her daughter, he found a delightful home. He died
quietly in 1704.

No member of our profession of any age or any
country has made so many important contributions to
philosophy and practical politics as Dr. Locke. Pro-
fessor Fowler remarks that the views published in his
treatises on Government, Religion, Toleration, Educa-
tion, and Finance form new points of departure with
which no writer on the history of these subjects can


74 BIOGRAPHICAL ESSAYS

dispense. The same writer says of the effect of his
writings on the history of progress and civilization :

' In an age of excitement and prejudice he set men
the example of thinking calmly and clearly. When
philosophy was almost synonymous with the arid dis-
cussion of scholastic subtleties he wrote so as to interest
statesmen and men of the world. At a time when the
chains of dogma were far tighter and the penalties
of attempting to loosen them far more stringent than
it is now easy to conceive he raised questions which
stirred the very depths of human thought And all this
he did in a spirit so candid, so tolerant, so liberal, and
so unselfish, that he seemed to be writing, not for his
own party or his own times, but for the future of know-
ledge and of mankind.'

II. Locke and Sydenham

The story of the friendship of these two great men
has been told in a delightful way by the late Dr. John
Brown, but he knew nothing of the Shaftesbury papers
or of several other important manuscripts which have
come to light since his essay was published. Syden-
ham, eight years Locke's senior, had taken the M.B. of
Oxford in 1648, four years before Locke entered Christ
Church. There is no evidence to indicate that these
well-paired friends, as Fox-Bourne calls them, had met
before Locke went to London with Lord Ashley in
1667. In the following year we find them practising
together, Locke accompanying Sydenham on his rounds
and much interested in the new plan of treating small-
pox. In 1668 Sydenham wrote to Boyle: 'I perceive
my friend Mr. Locke hath troubled you with an account
of my practice as he hath done himself in visiting with
me very many of my variolous patients especially.' But
the best evidence of Locke's practice at this time and
of his intimacy with Sydenham is found in his own


JOHN LOCKE 75

handwriting in the British Museum in a bundle of
original medical papers presented by William Seward.
They consist of seventeen small quarto pages, closely
written, containing the reports of interesting cases which
have been well summarized as follows by Fox-Bourne :

* He was attending a kitchen-maid of the Ashley
household who was afflicted with dropsy in September,
1667, and again in January, February, and March,
1667-8, and May and June, 1668. In April and May
he prescribed for a hard cough with which one of his
cousins, a boy of fourteen, and the son of his uncle,
Peter Locke, was troubled, and he cured one young
child of inflammatory fever in June and anotner of
hysterics in November of the same year. He visited
a " sturdy youth " laid up with rheumatism, every day
between August 28th and September 19th, when he
left him to continue using the medicine he had pre-
scribed for him, and on March ist, 166&-9, he was able
to declare him convalescent. In the same March he
treated a girl for fever, besides prescribing for two or
three minor maladies ; and in May, 1669, he cured a case
of angina pectoris. We have no record of any other
medical work done by him in 1669; but he had case$
of erysipelas and gonorrhoea to deal with in January,
1669-70 ; one of quartan ague in March, another malady,
morbilli, with which William Sydenham, apparently the
son of his great friend, was afflicted, in the same month ;
two of dropsy in April and May, 1670 ; one of inflam-
matory fever which he treated nearly every day from
the 20th of June till its fatal issue on the nth of July ;
a case of disease of the kidneys, and another of stricture,
in July; one of colic in August, and one of fever which
occupied him every day from the 19th of August till the
2nd of September, when the patient died.'

The case which Fox- Bourne refers to as angina pec-
toris may have been of this nature, though the disease
was not recognized for a little more than a century
later. The phrase is ' suffbcationem patiebatur et an-
gostiam pectoris et circumcollum.' The report on the
son of Sydenham, a lad, aged 11 years, who had measles,


76 BIOGRAPHICAL ESSAYS

is very complete. The case seems to have been a very
characteristic one : onset with cough, a chill and fever,
and with slight running at the nose. On the fifth and
sixth days a very abundant rash appeared on the face
first, then spread over the whole body. Quite minute
details are given— the state of the tongue, the state of
the rash, and the condition of the eyes. By the ninth
and tenth days the rash had disappeared. The notes
are continued until the thirteenth day. Then follows
a series of interrogations as to points in the case.

Evidence of their friendship exists in the comments
and annotations which Sydenham has made in his own
hand on some of Locke's writings, and the great in-
terest which Locke took in those of Sydenham. In the
second edition of Sydenham's Methodus Curandi Febres
there is inserted after the preface a Latin poem of fifty-
four lines, signed, *J. Locke.' It was Sydenham's pur-
pose at a later date to write a separate work on small-
pox, and for this Locke prepared in 1670 a dedication
and a preface, neither of which was used. They will
be referred to later. Letters written by Locke during
his long residence in France contain frequent references
to Sydenham and frequent inquiries after his health ;
particularly the letters to Mapletoft, who was a common
friend. He also consulted Sydenham about Lady
Northumberland's illness. It was probably before
leaving England that Sydenham gave Locke the advice
in a letter, the original of which is in the Record
Office.

* Sydenham to Locke. — Your age, ill habitt of body and
approach of winter concurring, it comes to pass that the
distemper you complaine of yealds not so soone to
remedies as it woula do under contrary circumstances.
However, you may not in the least doubt but that
a steddy persisting in the use of the following direc-


JOHN LOCKE 77

tions (grounded not on opinion but uninterrupted ex-
perience) will at last effect your desired cure. First,
therefore, in order to the directing and subdueing also
the ichorose matter 'twill be requisite to take your pills
twice a weeke or for example every Thursday and
Sunday about 4 o'clock in the morning and your clyster
the intermitting days about 6, constantly till you are
well In the next place, forasmuch as there is wanting
in bodyes broken with business and dispirited upon the
before-mentioned accounts, that stock of naturell heat
which should bring the matter quickly to digestion 'twill
be highly necessary that you cnerish yourself as much
as possibly you can bv gomg to bed very early at night,
even at 8 o'clock, which next to keepmg bed that is
impracticable will contributt more to your reliefe than
can be imagined. As to diett all meals of easy digestion
and that nourish well may be allowed, provided they be
not salt, sweet or spiced and altho excepting fruits, roots
and such like. For wine a total forbearance thereof if
it could possibly be and in its steede the use of very
mild small beere, such as our lesser houses do afford,
would as near as I could guess be most expedient, for
thereby your body would be kept cool, and consequently
aU accidents proceeding from hot and strange humors
grating upon the part kept off. As to injections, in your
case these things dissuade the use of them — First, your
more than ordinary bothe naturall tenderness and deli-
cacy of sense. Then the blood that has twice already
bin fetched by this operation, which if we are not posi-
tively certaine (as how can we be) that it proceedea not
from the hurt of the instrument will (if often repeted)
endanger the excoriating^ the part and making it liable
to accidents. Besides tney have bin already used (per-
haps as often as is wont to be don) and this is not
a remedy to be long persisted in by the confession of
everybody. Sure I am as I have over and over sayd to
you and you know it to be true by my written observa-
tions which you have long since seen, that I never use
any where I am concerned alone, there being noe
danger nor less certainty of a cure in the omitting and
in relation to this business I have now asked myselfe
the question that I would doe and have resolved that
I would lett them alone.
' This is all that I have to offer to you and I have to


78 BIOGRAPHICAL ESSAYS

thought of it all circumstances relating to your case,
with the same intention of mind as if my life and my
sons were concerned therein.

'Notwithstanding that by this way the cure is cer-
tainly to be effected, yet nevertheless I fear that in
ancient bodyes, especially in the debilitating part of the
year, some little kinde otgleeting or moisture (but voide
of all malignity) will now and then appear by reason of
the weakness of the part and will scarce totally vanish
till the return of the warm spring.'

Sydenham's chief merit is that he taught the pro-
fession to return to Hippocratic methods of careful
observation and study. He and Locke were kindred
spirits in their manner of looking at the phenomena
of disease, and in their methods of work. Nothing
could be more like Sydenham's plan than that which
Locke urges upon his friend Dr. Molyneux :

* I perfectly agree with ^ou concerning general
theories — the curse of the time, and destructive not
less of life than of science— they are for the most part
but a sort of waking dream, with which, when men
have warmed their heads, they pass into unquestionable
truths. This is beginning at the wrong end^ men laying
the foundation in tneir own fancies, and then suiting the

f)henomena of diseases, and the cure of them, to these
iancies. I wonder, after the pattern Dr. Sydenham has
set of a better way, men should return again to this
romance-way of physic. But I see it is more easy and
more natural for men to build castles in the air of their
own than to survey well those that are on the ground.
Nicely to observe the history of diseases in all their changes
and circumstances is a work of time^ accurateness, atten-
tion, and judgement, and wherein if men, through pre-
possession or obstinacy, mistake, they may be convinced
of their error by unerrine nature and matter of fact.
What we know of the worKs of nature, especially in the
constitution of health and the operations of our own
bodies, is only by the sensible effects, but not by any cer-
tainty we can have, of the tools she uses, or the ways she
works by'


JOHN LOCKE 79

In another place he makes use of an apt illustration,
saying : * Whether a certain course in public or private
affairs will succeed well— whether rhubarb will purge
or quinquina cure an ague can be known only by
experience/ Locke in one place gives an excellent
estimate of Sydenham (vol. ii, p. 343, Fox- Bourne):
' I hope the age has many who will follow his example,
and by the way of accurate practical observation which
he has so happily begun, enlarge the history of diseases
and improve the art of physic, and not by speculative
h3rpotheses fill the world with useless though pleasing
visions/

Locke's personal intercourse with Sydenham came
to an end in 1683, ^^^ Sydenham's death in 1689 ter-
minated a friendship of twenty years which, as Fox-
Bourne remarks, * If it may have done much towards
inclining the greatest of English philosophers to pursue
his early studies in physic, cannot but have also had
a considerable effect in quickening the philosophical
temper of the greatest of English physicians/ With
Boyle, also, Locke's relations seem to have been very
intimate from the days when at Oxford he was a member
of the * invisible college '. Boyle was intensely interested
in medicine, and was perhaps the best amateur student
the profession has ever had. There is no work from
which one can gain a better idea of the state of
medicine about the middle of the seventeenth century
than the Experimented Philosophy^ the second part of
which is a review of the state of medicine with many
suggestions for its improvement In 1683 Boyle dedi-
cated his Memoirs for the NaturcU History of the Human
Blood to 'the very ingenious and learned Dr. J. L.', at
whose request he had undertaken the work.


8o BIOGRAPHICAL ESSAYS

III. Locke's Medical Remains

Locke's medical remains consist of (i) the record of
certain remarkable and historic cases; (2) a group of
medical essays ; and (3) certain journals and common-
place books which contain memoranda and notes of
cases. I. Of the notable medical cases two deserve full
consideration, the hydatids of the liver in Lord Shaftes-
bury, and tic douloureux in Lady Northumberland.

Lord Shaftesbury s case. — The case of suppurating
hydatid cyst of the liver is given with unusual fullness
and accuracy. I do not remember in seventeenth-
century literature a more accurately reported case. It
is one of the first instances of operation on hydatid
cyst ; the consultation on draining of the abscess and
the discussion on the propriety of wearing the silver
tube give us a unique symposium of medical opinion
among the leading consultants of the day, and, lastly,
Shaftesbury's tap— as the silver tube was called — has
an interest in the satirical literature of the day. No
single circumstance better illustrates John Locke as
a physician than the elaborate details which he has left
on record of his most celebrated patient, the first Lord
Shaftesbury. This remarkable man is satirized by
Dryden in the well-known lines: —

Of these the false Achitophel was first ;
A name to all succeeding ages curst:
For close designs and crooked counsels fit;
Sagacious, bold, and turbulent of wit ;
Restless, unfix'd in principles and place;
In power unpleas'd, impatient of disgrace :
A nery soul, which, working out its way.
Fretted the pigmv body to decay.
And o'er-inform'cf the tenement of clay.

Fox-Bourne, commenting on the physical description


JOHN LOCKE 8i

of Lord Shaftesbury given by Dryden as a 'pigmy
body ', states that this must have been used by poetic
licence, as 'he was reckoned a handsome man in his
day\

In the fragment of an autobiography^ there is an
account of remarkable attacks of abdominal pain when
Shaftesbury was only eighteen years of age. ' At the
hunting I was taken with one of my usual fits, which
for divers years had hardly missed me one day, which
lasted for an hour, betwixt eleven and one, sometimes
beginning earlier and sometimes later betwixt those
times. It was a violent pain of my left side, that I was
often forced to lie down wherever I was; at last it
forced a working in my stomach, and I put up some
spoonfuls of clear water, and I was well, if I may call
that so when I was never without a dull aching pain
of that side. Yet this never abated the cheerfulness
of my temper ; but, when in the greatest fits, I hated
pitying and loved merry company, and, as they told
me, was myself very pleasant when the drops fell from
my face for pain ; but then, my servant near me always
desired they would not take notice of it, but continue
their diversions, which was more acceptable to me;
and I had always the women and young people about
me at those times, who thought me acceptable to them,
and peradventure the more admired me because they
saw the visible symptoms of my pain, which caused in
all others so contrary an effect.'

Though the special malady which brought Locke and
Shaftesbury into the relations of physician and patient
has an extraordinarily full history, the statements with

^ Memoirs^ Letters^ and Speeches of Anthony Ashley Cooper^ First
Earl of ShafUsburyy Lord Chanced. Edited by W. D. Christiei

x959^P-3a.

G


82 BIOGRAPHICAL ESSAYS

reference to it in the authorities are somewhat meagre.
Fox- Bourne says (Life^ vol. i, p. 197) :

' But it would seem that Lord Ashley being himself
in bad health and suffering from a malady that no phy-
sician could explain, and that was every day becoming
more painful . .^. and having, moreoverf forced a very
high opinion of the mental and moral worth of his new
friend— persuaded Locke to reside with him as physician
to his family.'

Then, again (vol. i, p. 200) :

'The internal malady from which Lord Ashley had
been suffering ever since 1661, and which had been the
accidental ground of his acquaintance with Locke in
1666, now caused him great a^ony, and in spite of all
Locke's efforts to alleviate it l)y medicinal treatment,
threatened to kill him. '' My Lord Ashley is like to
die," wrote Pepys on the 19th of June, 1668, " having
some imposthume in his breast, that he hath been fain
to cut into his body." That operation was performed,
and Ashley's life was saved, by Locke/

It is often referred to as an abscess of the side or as
an empyema and is spoken of as following an accident

In the Record Office there are four transcripts of
the case in Locke's handwriting. The most complete
is in Latin, of which the following is a translation :—*

' The case of the most Noble Lord Anthony Ashley^
Baron of IVinbume^ St. Gtles^ &c.—Th\s most noble
lord, aged 45, of very slight build and delicate constitu*
tion, had been an invalid for many years, and was
exceedingly subject, upon the slightest cause, to a re-
current yeUow jaundice. There was a painless internal
tumour, broad, and slightly projecting, about the an-
terior region of the liver, and his hypochondria was
very apparent to the touch. Although it had been
observed 12 years before, the exact time when the
tumour first began is uncertain. For since the colour
of the skin was unchanged and no swelling was apparent
externally, unless the hand were applied it easily escaped
the eye ; nor through the whole 12 years did it seem
to change in the least. The doctors called into con*


JOHN LOCKE 83

sultation on this point, amongst whom were some from
the excellent London college, were inclined to the
opinion that this firm and unchanging extuberance was
not a morbid tumour, but rather some congenital and
unusual malformation of the liver. However the patient
himself suspects, not without reason, that the tumour
first came into existence in the year 1656, especially as
at that time ... he used to fatigue himself overmuch.
By too frequent over-exercise his blood became so
heated that his skin would immediately be suffused
with a deep redness, and his whole body seemed to be
inflamed, all which gave rise to a burning fever. From
this time on he was conscious of a complete change in
the general condition of his body, ^yhereas before he
was troubled more frequently with pains in the left side,
and other splenic symptoms, from now on he escaped
absolutely free from these troubles, and in their place
acquired a constitution prone to other disorders, and
especially susceptible to morbus reeius '. From the
prolonged languor brought on b^ tnis disease, when
his emaciated body and impaired strength would
threaten death, he was frequently restored by the
timely use of acidulae, by means of which he obtained
relief^ for one or two years, and was carried through so
many vicissitudes of health, scarcely escaping witn his
life, until last summer. Then, happily, an internal
abscess at last broke out, bringing to a head the source
of so many disorders. There is one thing here which
I cannot pass by, and that is that the patient's head
never once achedf thoueh more than fatigued by disease.
This, however, is not tne only marvel displayed by that
head.

* During a bad night about the end of May, 1668,
he was suddenly seized with excessive vomiting, ac-
companied by much disturbance. Everything he had
eaten in the preceding meal was rejected, still raw and
undigested, in repeated vomitings. He was purged
next day by Dr. Glisson, the learned physician-in-
ordinary. On the following morning he appeared
discoloured a rusty red, which the physician tried to
remedy with suitable drugs. But although the face
seemed to return a little to its proper appearance, so

' Jaundice,
G 2


84 BIOGRAPHICAL ESSAYS

that he could go about the ordinary duties of life,
nevertheless, the languor and loss of appetite returned,
anti-icterics and chalybeates being administered in vain.
Moreover, about the beginning of June, since all the
symptoms were running from bad to worse, the phy-
sician prescribed a purginjg^ pill to be taken at bedtime.
When the patient raised himself up in bed to pass his
urine about midnight he was suadenly seized about
the region of the stomach and liver with a most acute
pain which lasted the greater part of an hour and was
finally relieved by resting comfortably in bed. When
after an hour or two he again sat up in bed the same
excruciating pain returned. Again one hour afterwards
he got up, and in the same way when he raised himself
upon his buttocks the pain attacked him for the third
time, and after a like interval left him. Next morning
at 8 o'clock, shortly after taking a purging potion he
vomited it up mixed with viscid phlegm. After a while
he left his feed, his servants taking nim in their arms
and placing him upright on his feet, so that his body
should nowhere be bent. The cathartic had a satis-
factory effect and he was purged. However, though
he turned his body, he did not dare bend it, lest tne
severe pain should come on again. In the evening
he began to suffer most acute pain in the back about
the loins. This ceased after a quarter of an hour, and
at the same there suddenly sprung up below the ensi-
form cartilage a soft tumour the size of an ostrich egg.
It was yielding to the touch, but on being compressed
it did not for a moment retain any traces of the fingers.
The skin was a brown (?) colour. There was hardly
any pain, and no inflammation. This tumour could not
be broken up by the drugs which were administered
for six or seven days. Then physicians and surgeons
were called into consultation and on June 12th it was
opened by the application of cautery. This fact is
worthy of observation : before the opening of the
tumour a somewhat tenacious and flexible plaster
fastened itself so firmly to the skin at the border of the
tumour that it could not be torn away without leaving
behind a large part of its substance ; while, on the other
hand, the top of the tumour, about the width of an
English half-crown or more, was not even discoloured
by It, nor was the plaster at all adherent in that part'


JOHN LOCKE 85

The daily record of the case is in English.

'The I2th of June, 1668, in ye morning a caustick
was applied and ye same opened in ye afternoon, at
wh. dressing besides a large quantity of purulent
matter, many bags and skins came away. The Hke
hapned the next day (being Saturday) both in ye fore
and afternoon. On Sunday morning (being ye 14th)
at ye first drawing out ye tent, a great quantity of
yellow choler gushed out and two or three sluffs, wth
some toUerable matter at ye latter end, for ye evening
only a little matter came forth. And ye like on Monday
both morning and evening.

'On Tuesday morning a great quantity of matter came
forth, with many bags to ye number of at least 80,
for ye afternoon little or nothing, and so also on
Wednesday.

'On Thursday morning we had a new flux, both
of matter and skin, in ye afternoon nothing consider-
able.

* A Friday a wax candle was put deep into ye abscesse,
and after ye drawing it out some matter and divers sluffs
proceeded, in ye afternoon nothing.

' 20. On Saturday morning and eveninge some matter
followed and above 10 bags. The passage could not be
found.

' 21. On Sunday a wax candle put in of four and three-
quarter inches and there left until evening, then dfawn
out without matter.

'22. Monday morning. No running: a sponge tent
put in for ye afternoon 5 iii matter, bags above 20.

' 23. Tuesday aioming;. No running, 5 i of injection
for ye evening 5 iii or liii injection, part whereof wh.
some matter came away ana about 10 bags. About
two hours after more came and so ye next morning,
at my Lds. rising and about 10 bags at both times.

*2L4. At ye dressing in ye morning, nothine came.
Of injections 5 v or vi, about three in ye afternoon
a great flush brought away about 50 sluffs, whereof
most were bags (but not red as formerly by reason
of the injection) and some like ielly. At ye evening
dressing no running. A glove thick spung tent left in
ye orifice.

' 25. Morning. It ran of itselfe a little before dressing.


86 BIOGRAPHICAL ESSAYS

Injection being made there came forth much thin di-
gested looking matter, somewhat foetid with about
12 bags, whereof one very large. A spung tent put in.
In ve evening injection, which came away next morning
before dressing wth four or five sluffs.

* 26. A Friday morning, injection was made & some
thin matter came forth. A short spung tent put in : in
ye afternoon some matter, but no sniffs.

'27. Upon ye drawing out ye spunjg tent matter
followed wth six or seven sluffs. O i mjection being
made whereof much stayed behind, in ye afternoon ye
spung tent being pulled out, a great flush of matter
followed, wth almost 20 sluffs. O i injection was made
whereof a great part staid in. A hemp tent was put in.
Some matter came out in ye night & left a yellow
tincture on ye cloths.

'28. Pulhng out ye tent, some yellow matter came
out wth three or four skins. A spung tent put in.
The like issued in ye afternoon. Oi injection was
made & a flax tent put in.

' 29. It ran in ye night. Next morning after injection
a flush of yellowish matter issued wth 18 sluffs. A
spung tent put in, after injection, whereof a consider-
able part remained. In ye afternoon upon ve drawing
out ye spung tent, much matter gushed forth, being
somewhat fetid, with 12 or 14 sluffs and bags. On
injection being made ye same came freely forth, tinc-
tured with matter. A flax tent was put in.

*3o. In ye morning little matter came out, yellow
tinctured, wth one or two skins. A spung tent was
put in. For ye afternoon a little matter, wth two or
three small sluffs. A flax tent put in.

'July ist. A Wednesday morning. After a second
injection much yellow matter came forth wth three
or four yellow sluffs, & at last a considerable quantity
of whitish well digested matter came out. A flax tent
put in. At ye pulling out whereof in ye afternoon
some thin matter proceeded & after injection more but
little discolored & only two sluffs. A flax tent put in.
My Ld. complained of a little paine, lower towards his
right side.

*2. Upon ye opening on Thursday morning, some
little matter came away, but not fetid, rather of ye
smell of wine, wth one small sluff. A spung tent put


JOHN LOCKE 87

in. In ye evening little came forth, no bags. A spung
tent put in wth one injection*

* Q. The spung tent being pulled out two yellow bags
gusned out, without any considerable injected matter,
and afterward five or six small sluffs with a little
tinged liquor. Injection was made and spung tent
put in.

'4. Saturday morning. Upon pulling out ye tent
little proceeded. After ye putting m ye small catheter
& injection made considerable quantity of matter issued.
A spung tent was put in; fo.r ye afternoon a large
quantity of well digested matter came out. No injec-
tion made. A spung tent put in.

' 5. Yellow matter came forth with four or five sluffs,
whereof one great one suckt into ye end of ye siphon.
After injection a spung tent put in, wh. in ye afternoon
being pulled out a good quantity of matter followed,
well digested, especially through ye small catheter and
siphon. A few sluffs came out, one great one. A spung
tent put in.

' 6. In ye morning ye small catheter & siphon were
put in ; divers sluffs, some after injections, came forth,
whereof three or four large ones. A hollow tent was
put in upon ye pulling out whereof a sluff came forth,
wth divers very little ones; more seemed to stop ye
passage but could not issue, because ye thinner parts
did run out before through ye hollow pipe. Neither
did injection promote their coming forth, though some
matter of a brownish colour came out.

*7. Much yellow matter ran in ye nidit and some
more this morning, with two or three sluffs. Injection
was made, whereof ve greatest part came forth, A spung
tent was put in. At night a sluff stuck to ye tent at
its pulling out & jl or g more where 2 very yellow
came afterwards. No injection. A silver hoUow tent
put in.

'8. It run very much in ye nierht, ye napkin was
stained with yellow and green, one bag. A spung tent
put in. In ye evening 4 or 5 sluffs, some matter. An
open pipe put in.

' 9. Little run all night and sluff stopt ye pipe. One
or two more followed, a considerable quantity of athero-
matous matter. At night two sluffs ; very little athero-
matous matter.


88 BIOGRAPHICAL ESSAYS

' lo.^ A great running through ye hollow pipe, two
or three slufTs. The matter at last being whiter and
more even than before. Much running till night Some
sluffs. Injection made and a hollow pipe put in, after
most of ye injection was discharged. Alter this a pain
supervened in my Ld's. back about ye region of his
liver, & at night he vomited ; and had a cold shivering ;
wh. seemed to proceed from somewhat too liberal diet
that day & catcning some cold.

* 11.^ After a little sweat in ye morning, my Ld. was
better. He was not drest till ye afternoon: ye ulcer
having very much discharged itselfe in ye meantime ;
wth some few sluffs.

*i2.^ A little matter wth few sluffs. Injection
made. A hollow pipe. At night run very little. Two
sluffs.

* 13. Not drest in ye morning. Ran much. At night
little matter, 2 or 3 sluffs.

* 14. It ran much yellowish gleet and matter in ye
night. But upon ye opening no matter nor sluffs issued,
though injection were made. At nig^t one yellow sluff
& a nttle good whitish matter.

' 15. In ye night it ran much yellow matter & about
six small sluffs. Injection made. No meeting in ye
afternoon.

* 16. Upon opening much running of yellow matter
appeared, with 4 or 5 yellow sluffs.

^17. A large flux of yellow liquid, wth 4 or 5 yellow
sluffs, whereof two large ones sticking in ye pipe. In-
jection made.

*i8. It had run somewhat copiously before dressing,
wth ye ejection of one very small yellow bag. Injec-
tion being made brought forth some matter & a con-
siderable quantity of very yellow liquor.

* 19. Little running before dressing, after it none, no
injection.

' 20. Small quantity (?) of lesse yellow liquor run before
dressing, 4 or ^ sluflls. Injection made.

*2i. Yellow liquor has continued running. No sluffs
nor injection.

' 22. Some pretty laudable yellowish matter came out
upon dressing. Injection was made.

^ The sympathetic powder made use of.


JOHN LOCKE 89

'23. A little matter issued upon coughing. No in-
jection.
' 24. The like today.

* 25. A few small sluffs. Little matter & not yellowish.
No injection.'

From the long-standing character of the tumour and
the character of the material which escaped — the in-
numerable bags — there can be no doubt that the disease
was hydatids of the liver, which, remaining quiescent
from 1656, had, as is so often the case, suppurated. It
is one of the first instances on record in which the
abscess was opened. The use of the sympathetic
powder on the loth, i ith, and 12th shows how strongly
popular feeling had affected the profession.

Naturally, from the prominent position of the patient
and the strange character of the disease, the case
attracted unusual attention. The point that concerned
Lord Shaftesbury himself most acutely was whether it
was better to remove the silver drainage-tube or to
keep it in. To get the opinion of the faculty on the
subject, he sent, with Locke's assistance, a circular
letter containing the following questions : —

* r. Which is most advisable, to resolve to keep it
constantly open, or to heal it up as soon as conveniently
may be?

'2. Whether, if it be healed up at all, one of these
two dangers is not like to follow ; either a new collection
of matter, the imposthume lying below ye orifice by
which it vents itself, or a feaver upon stopping of so
considerable an issue?

* 3. Whether if it be to be healed up at all it be not
necessary to keep it open as lonej as any flux of matter
comes through tne pipe more than would be from an
issue of the Depth ana Biepiess of ye pipe ?

*4. Whether the pipe mat is now in be not of the
fittest length and bigness to be worne constantly to
keep it open?


go BIOGRAPHICAL ESSAYS

*5. Whether whilst it is best open it be not best
to dresse it but once in two days, especially in cold
weather ?

* 6. Whether whilst it is best open it be convenient to
use any Injection, how often & of what sort & to what
purpose ?

'7. Whether if it be kept long open it will be in
danger of growing in a worse condition than a simple
issue of that depth, either by turning to a foule ulcer or
a fistula or any other way, and if there be any such
danger how to be prevented ?

* 8. Whether the bare keeping in a Silver pipe will,
without paine, keep it open as long as one pleases ?

' o. Whether I may travel in a coach, ride on horse-
back, boate, or use any such exercise safely with a pipe
in of this len^h ?

* 10. Whether if it be kept long open Nature will not
in time so fortify the parts about the end of the Pipe as
to make the danger it may bring by rubbing upon them
in any exercise, very little or none at all ?

* II. Whether during the time it is kept open frequent
purgeine be necessary and how often ?

' 12. Whether if it should be kept always open it is
not to be feared that a constant flux of matter from it,
especially if it should continue to be of any considerable
quantity, may very much weaken and emaciate the body,
& how to be prevented ? ' (Handwriting not Locke's.)

To this circular there are among the Shaftesbury
papers the replies of Locke, of Sydenham, of Glisson,
of Sir George Ent, of Micklethwaite, of Timothy Clark,
and of the Abb6 Beaupreau of Angers, an eminent
French physician. With the exception of Clark, who
urged that the issue should be healed, the opinions
agree in the main. They are too long to quote at
length, but those of Locke and Sydenham are of
sufficient historical interest to be given.

' Consilium Abscessus (Locke).

' I. It is better to heal it up as soon as it may safely
be done. Because it is not convenient to have a con-


JOHN LOCKE 91

Stant issue of that depth in that place if it might be
remedied.

* 2. To secure from the danger of a new collection of
matter I think it will be

* 3. Convenient not only till the flux of matter be no
more than may be well expected from a flesh issue of
that depth, but after it hath gradually decreased to that
small thing, it be kept open at least three or four
months at what time soever the flux come to that low
ebb, but if it happen after Xmas, as in the spring, that
it be kept open till the beginning of the next winter,
that the flux be constantly and warily observed, and
that it be sometimes diligently searched, so that by
these ways all the security possible may be had that
there is not the least sore or hollow left behind un-
healed up. And to prevent a fever or other disorder in
the blood upon its stopping up, it will be necessary
then and sometimes after to use a spare diet with
frequent purging, till Nature, used to the convenience
of this discharge, may by degrees accustom herself
either to master or vent her humours some other way.

* 4. The pipe now in I conceive to be of the proper
length and Digness that may be to keep it open, which
is not at all to be altered or shortened till you resolve
to heal it up, for if you shorten it sooner you heal it
sooner too, for the flesh will certainly grow up still
& close the end of the pipe, though all is not secure
behind. Nor do I see what harm the pipe can do in
touching the bottom of the issue more than the sides,
where nature equally endeavours to generate flesh to fill
up the cavity as it does at the end. And if the pipe
upon any motion of the body should perhaps grab
a little (which I believe it will not be very apt to do) all
the danger will be the filching a little blood from this
new-grown flesh (for there can be no great vessels in
that which may be in danger to be broken), which is not
of half so much hazard, if any at all more than the pain,
as to let it close up but one minute before the time.
Ajid to prevent any injury from the stiff" silver pipe you
may in travel or exercise use a wax candle tent exactly
of the length and thickness of the silver pipe.

* 5. In cold weather once a day at most will be enough
to dress it, and then the air of the room where it is
dressed to be made as warm as conveniently may be.


■I!


92 BIOGRAPHICAL ESSAYS

'6. In cold weather an injection warming and
strengthening and resisting of putrefaction to prevent
the harm that may come from the cold air may be
convenient to be made use of as often as it may be
dressed, but in warm weather may be wholly omitted.
And certainly all the year once a week or fortnight an
injection to prevent the growing of a fistula, putre-
faction and a fistula being the two great evils that are
to be feared and prevented in the long keeping of it
open, which is also an answer to the
^ Seventh.

suppose the silver pipe that is now in may be
kept in as long as one pleases without danger or pain.

' 9. Travel & exercise with a tent of wax, or any such
matter as will resist the closing of the sides but be

Eliant to the motions of the body, may be not only safe
ut usefuU.

' 10. The longer the parts are used to the pipe the
less danger will be from its hurting it, the parts accom-
modating themselves to the figure of the pipe which it
constantly uses, and by degrees growing stronger and
harder wnere they are pressed by it.

'11. Whilst there is a design of healing of it up
purging once a fortnight may be useful to divert the
humours from flowing to that part, but else in respect of
the health of the body I suppose there would be less
need of purging during this vent (?) than at other timeSi
and perhaps a care of diet will with more advantage to
the health subtract the humours than purging, which
being constant may have other inconvemency ;

' Or, 'tis to be hoped that whilst by careml dressing
and injecting^ the wound is kept in good condition, and
the constitution of the body in good temper by a regular
diet, the flux will rather advantage than injure the health
and strength of the body.'

Sydenham's opinion is one of the few papers in his
own hand. (Some of the words are very difficult to
decipher.)

' I reccomend it by noe meanes saff for his Lordshipp
to stopp up the abscess, triall having once bin made of
the unsuccessfullness of doing it & the flux of matter as
yet seeming too much in proportion to the canale, and


JOHN LOCKE 93

I judge it better to keepe it open with a silver pipe then
a wax candle, in regard that from the use of a candle
the matter will have the less opportunity to issue out
& consequently the passage choak up. But I think
'twere better that the pipe were shorter because by the
present length thereof nis Lordship is liable to dangerous
accidents from any unequal motion of the body which
in process of time may easily happen from nding in
a coach, stouping or the like : nor does it seeme to be
suspected that the matter will not worke itself out when
the orifice shall be kept open. I conceave it may some-
what contributt to the discharge of the matter if my
Lord shall lie on his left side or much as he can in
regard . . . the imposthume is depending it he shall
lie \vith his upper parts low. I hold it very useless to
use irri^tions of any sort because the cavity . . . being
depending, the liauor how agreeablesoever in other
respects will by looging itself in any little cavities beget
new impostumortions to which those irrigations admin-
ister matter and by this means the cavity still enlarged.
I should thinke that a drying^ drinke, constantlye kept
to for ordinary drinke would be more conducible to the
drying up of this flux of matter and sweetening the
whole mass of blood and humors than anything wnatso-
ever. Nor do I conceave that my Loras spare habitt
of body may discourage from this course, out rather
contrary when 'tis notoriouslye known that on drying
diett though used with greater severity than 'twifl be
necessary to put my Lord upon, hath after a while
renderedf bodies that before were very emaciated now
plumper and vigorous. But what 2 draughts in a day
can signifie and those too of a liauor so compounded
that the greater respect is had to the oncerteyne & con-
stiturell virtue of & tne lesser to the certeyne and sensible
qualitie of Driers I canot imagine.

' This therefore with submission to those who know
more I should advise.

' That nothing be done to the part saveing the use of
a pipe that may be made somewhat shorter or to be
lengthened with a wan (?) handle, that it be dressed
once a day if the matter be much, once in 2 days if
little.

' That of the stronger sort of liauor halfe a pint be
taken hott every morning i hour Defore his Lordship


94 BIOGRAPHICAL ESSAYS

riseth and the same quantity at night as soon as he is in
his bedd.

' That the smaller liquor be constantly drunke at his
meales and at other times.

* That he purge or take a clyster every 5** or 6** day.

* Lett his Lpps. diett be in proportion to this way . . .
att least lett ... be avoided.'

Then follow two prescriptions of the stronger and
smaller liquors. The French Abb6, whose opinion is
also given, was evidently very much impressed with
a full report of the case as narrated by Locke. He
says : ' I can hardly determine myself whether I ought
to admire more in it the wise and admirable proceed-
ings of my Lord's physician or the exactness of the
author of the relation both for the elegance of his style
and his judicious remarks with which he hath illustrated
his narrative.'

Locke made inquiries everywhere of his professional
friends as to the existence of similar cases, and among
the papers there are three very interesting reports, one
of a case of empyema opened by making an issue;
another the case of James Oddy, sent on Jan. 22, 1668,
by T. Batteson, was in all probability a hydatid cyst, as
when the side was opened matter like fish skins and
white of eggs to the number of forty and to the amount
of one quart came out. The greater ones had lesser
ones in them, like the seeds of a lemon. A third report
was sent to Locke by Thomas Strickland, of a man who
fell into a languishing with great pain in his side and
stomach, which persisted for a year or so. When death
was expected a great swelling arose in his side with
infinite torment. A neighbour cut upon the head of
the swelling with a penknife, 'then came out several
blathers like winde eggs, some as large as turkey eggs,
others as hen eggs.' It was open for a year, in which


JOHN LOCKE 95

time over 400 of these came out. He afterwards regained
perfect health.

The satirists of the day made great sport of the silver
pipe which Lord Shaftesbury continued to wear for the
rest of his life. The wits of the day called a sort of
vessel with a turncock, constructed for holding wine,
a Shaftesbury^ and his common nickname was ' Tapski \
Duke, an imitator of Dryden, describes him under the
name ' Antonius ' in his lines —

The working ferment of his active mind
In his weak body's cask with pain confined
Would burst the rotten vessel where 'tis bent
But that 'tis tapt to give the treason vent\

In Act III of Dryden's Albion and Albanius the king
was represented by a huge drawing of a man (meaning
Shaftesbury) and several fanatical heads who sucked
poison from him which runs out of a tap in his side.
And again, in a mock account of an apparition stated
to have appeared to Lady Gray, it says: 'Bid Lord
Shaftesbury have a care of his spigot ; if he is tapt all
the plot will run out.'

A satire called The Hypocrite, written by Carryl, con*
eludes thus :

The silver pipe is no sufficient drain
For the corruption of this little man.

Shaftesbury appears to have enjoyed very good health
and lived a very active, energetic life. I find a state-
ment {Raleigh Redivivus, p. 48) that in the year 1672
it (the abscess) was ' opened by Mr. Knolls, the surgeon,
under the direction of Dr. Willis, and an issue inserted
for the regular discharge of the humour'. This pro-
bably refers to a subsequent blocking of the tube. As
to his death, Christie in his Life (vol. ii, p. 455) says :

^ Anderson's Poeis 0/ Great Britain, vi, p. 6a8.


96 BIOGRAPHICAL ESSAYS

*He was taken ill with the gout, from which of late
years he had often suffered, about the end of December.
The malady flew to his stomach ; he suffered excruci-
ating agonies ; and he died in the forenoon of the 21st
of January ' (1683). Missal * mentions of one of the
natural causes of Shaftesbury*s death the sudden cessa-
tion of the discharge from his internal abscess', from
which we may understand that he continued to wear
the silver tube.

Lady NorthuniberlancPs case.— As this has already
been published in full in the European Magazine^ and
as there is a note upon it in The Lancet *, I will only
give a brief abstract. The description is given in letters
to his friend Dr. Mapletoft.

Letter IX, Dec. 4, 1677. After an apology for so
unwelcome an occasion of writing, Locke says :

* On Thursday night last I was sent for to my Lady
Ambassadrice, whom I found in a fit of such violent and
exquisite torment that (though she be, as you know,
a person of extraordinary temper, and I have seen her
in the course of this distemper endure very great pain
with a patience that seemea to feel nothing) it forced
her to such cries and shrieks as you would expect from
one upon the rack, to which I believe hers was an
equal torment, which extended itself all over the right
side of her face and mouth. When the fit came there
was, to use my Lady's own expression, as it were
a flash of Are all of a suddaine shot into all these parts,
and at every one of those twitches which made her
shriek out her mouth was constantly drawn on the
right side towards the right ear by repeated convulsive
movements which were constantly accompanied by her
cries. This was all that appeared outwards in these
fits according to the exactest observation I could make,
having had but too many opportunities to do it. These
violent fits terminated on a suddaine, and then my
Lady seemed to be perfectly well, excepting only a duU

* Vol. ii, 1828-9, p. 367.


JOHN LOCKE 97

pain which ordinarily remained in her teeth on that
side and an uneasiness on that side of her ton^e which
she phansied to be swollen on that side, which when
I loolced on it, as I often did, had not the least alteration
in it in colour, bignesse or any other way, thoueh it
were one of her great complaints that there was scalding
liquor in her fits shot into all that half of the toneue.
She had usually a precaution of the fit by a uttle
throbbing in the upper jaw just over against it. In all
this time of her being ill sne has not found the least
pain in all the other side of her face and teeth, which
has so wholly possessed the right side that it went even
to the very tip of her tongue and the last tooth before
on that side. When all mis torment was over there
was not the least appearance of any alteration anywhere
on her face, no inflammation or swelling in her mouth
and cheeke ; very little defluction of rheum more than
what the disturbance of those parts in these fits might
cause. Speaking was apt to put her into these fits;
sometimes opening her mouth to take anything or
touching her gums, especially in the places where she
used to find those throbbings, pressing that side of her
face by lying on it were also apt to put her into a fit.
These fits lasted sometimes longer, sometimes shorter,
were more or less violent, without any regularity, and
the intervals between them at the longest not half an
hour, commonly much shorter.'

Locke then describes the treatment, topical anodyne
applications to the gums, which gave relief. The next
day the fits returned and she was purged. Bleeding
was considered, but she had been so often and so much
blooded on a like occasion this summer without help
that Locke thought best not to do so again. The next
night she took a quieting cordial, but during the first
part had the fits very severely. He says, * I wish with
all my heart you were here,' as Lady Northumberland
had had so little success with the French physicians
that she would not call them. He asks ' whether you
do not think this to proceed from some affection in the

otLcm H


98 BIOGRAPHICAL ESSAYS

nerves in the place where the tooth was drawn, which
draws all the rest into consent and convulsive motions
on this side?' At one o'clock in the afternoon he
writes again that a blistering plaster has been placed
on the back of the neck (interscapulus). 'She has,
especially when the fits are most violent, a drinesse in
her lips more than ordinary/ On Sunday night he
writes with great satisfaction telling of her improve-
ment, but he asks for the 'best advice you can get*.
Qn the 22nd he writes : ' On reading our friend's
[Sydenham's] letter I was ready to cry out, " The spirit
of the Prophets is upon the sons of the Prophets," I
having in what I have done here not only proceeded by
the same method, but used the very remedys he directed
as to the maine.' He speaks of the diet and says that
he had advised an open-air life to strengthen the genus
nervorum, as he thought that hysterical vapours increase
the tumult and disorders in the nerves, in which he
suspects an ancient fault, as she has extreme and violent
itching in the gums on that side long before the fits.


IV. Medical Writings

These consist of fragmentary papers, the chief interest
of which to-day is that they are from the pen of the
great philosopher. They are among the Shaftesbury
papers in the Record Office, and I have had them copied
with a view to subsequent publication. They are:
(a) Ars Medica or De Arte Medica^ an introduction to
a treatise on the philosophy of medicine. One cannot
read the fragment without feelings of deep regret that
the design was not carried out. The scope of the
intended work may be gathered from the following
summary : * But, not to expatiate into the large field


^ ti o Li A

•JOHN LOCKE 99

of natural philosophy, where perhaps the foundation of
the mischief was first laid, I shall, according to my
design, confine myself at present to that branch of it
which immediately concerns the health of men ; and,
in physic, shall consider : i. The present state of the
faculty of medicine as it now stands, in reference to
diseases and their cure. 2. The several degrees and
steps whereby it grew to that height it is at present
arrived to, which I suppose are these following: (i)
experience ; (2) method, founded upon philosophy and
hypothesis; (3) botanies; (4) chymistry ; (5) anatomy; in
all which I shall endeavour to show how much each
hath contributed to the advancing the art of physic, and
wherein they came short of perfecting it. 3. What yet
may be further done towards the more speedy and
certain cure of diseases ; i. e. by what means and method
the practice of physic may be brought nearer to per-
fection/ {b) Anatomia^ a longer paper, in which Locke
contends * that nature performs all her operations in the
body by parts so minute and insensible that I think
nobody will ever hope or pretend even by the assis-
tance of glasses or other inventions to come to a sight
of them '. From the gross parts he thinks not much
can be learned. We ' see not the tools and contrivances
by which nature works *. ' Though we cut into the
inside we see but the outside of things and make but
a new superficies for ourselves to stare at.' The paper
is a forcible statement against the hope that anatomy
can ever show the true essential causes of disease. It
is quite possible that the article was prepared at Syden-
ham's suggestion, or for his use, as at the top of the
page, in Sydenham's handwriting, is the sentence:
' Others of them have more pomposity and speciously
prosecuted the promoting of this art by searching into

H 2


loo BIOGRAPHICAL ESSAYS

the bowels of dead and living creatures, as well sound
as diseased, to find out the seeds of discharging them,
but with how little success such endeavours have been
or are likely to be attended I shall here in some measure
make appear/ {c) Respirationis Usus, a short paper on
the subject, (d) Tussis^ an essay on coughs, in which
subject Locke took a personal interest. Here, again,
is evidence of Sydenham's hand, in a brief marginal
note on cures done by riding in consumption and morbi
obscuri. (e) A dedication and preface to a proposed
work on small-pox by Sydenham. From the outset of
their friendship Locke took a deep interest in the
writings of Sydenham, and, as I have mentioned, he
contributed a Latin poem in praise of him and of his
methods to the second edition of the Meihodus Curandi
Febres (1668). It would appear that about 1670 Syden-
ham contemplated writing a separate work on small-pox,
in the treatment of which he had had great success, but
the physicians were at first very hostile to his new plan.
Among the Shaftesbury papers are a dedication and
a preface written by Locke. Sydenham had shared
with his friend the professional care of the family of
Lord Ashley, and had tried with happy results his
cooling regimen in cases of small-pox. In the dedica-
tion he (or rather Locke) says :

' At least, my lord, I thought it reasonable to let you
see that I had practised nothing in your family but what
I durst own and publish to the world, and let my
countrymen see that I tell them nothing here but what
I have already tried with no ill success on several in
the family of^one of the greatest and most eminent
personages amongst them.'

The preface is a sharp and stout defence of the new

method, in which Locke does not spare the colleagues

of his friend.


JOHN LOCKE loi

' How much some of my own faculty have fomented
and increased these reports, they themselves know,
and with what design I leave it to their own con-
sciences to tell them, only they must give me leave
to say it would have become them out of common
charity as good men, as well as out of an obligation to
improve their art and save men's lives as physicians,
upon the first intimation of an unusual method of curing
so common a disease as this is, to have inquired more
particularly of the way, observed the circumstances, and
mformed themselves of the events before they cried it
down as dangerous and fatal, and frighted all that came
within their reach from an inquiry mto or trial of his
method by the abhorrency they had given them against
so bold and hazardous a practice/

Evidently Sydenham smarted under the calumnies
and misrepresentations, and the preface speaks of * the
greatest indignities beyond almost the sufferance of
a man, and the endangering not only of my reputation
and livelihood, but even my life itself. The article is
chiefly valuable from the account which it gives of the
steps by which Sydenham was led to adopt his cooling
treatment Neither dedication nor preface was ever
used. The projected work did not appear and many
years later the Observationes Medicae^ which contained
his matured experiences, was dedicated to Mapletoft,
and another preface was used.


V. Journals, Letters, and Commonplace Books

A keen observer, a constant note-taker, and of most
neat and accurate literary habits, Locke has left a large
mass of manuscript, which has been carefully searched
and sifted by Mr. Fox-Bourne, in whose Life^ as well as
in that by Lord King, there are many letters and
extracts illustrating his work as a physician. The
letters to Mapletoft about Lady Northumberland have


I02 BIOGRAPHICAL ESSAYS

been referred to. Of the journals, those of his Holland
sojourn, which are said by Fox-Bourne to contain much
of medical interest, I have not yet seen. In the British
Museum is a very characteristic journal in which one
may follow Locke's medical work for the year 1679.
It is bound with an Ephemeris or Calendar of the year.
He was in Paris during the early months. As usual he
was interested in bills of mortality, and he states
(January 16) that the deaths in Paris were from 19,000
to 20,000 a year. He makes a note to ask if the deaths
of Quakers, Anabaptists, and Jews are recorded in
London. On April 12 he comments on the handbills
set up about town with a receipt to kill lice. There are
many notes on the treatment of diseases and receipts,
to the collection of which he seemed very partial. He
queries whether the sympathetic powder could be of
any use in dentium dolor, indicating that he still had
a lingering belief in it. There are many notes on
various topics and memoranda about books, &c. On
May 8 he sailed from Calais. On June 4 are brief
notes of a Mr. N., sick of a fever, whom he bled, and
afterwards jaundice appeared. Notes on vomiting,
diseases of the eye, icterus, hernia, hysteria, hypo-
chondria, rheumatism, mania, and tussis occur in June.
On August 18 he was sent for in consultation in the
case of Mr. Beavis, of Olanligh, Kent, and for the next
six weeks the journal is very full, containing a detailed
account of the symptoms of Mr. Beavis and the treat-
ment, many notes on the practice of Dr. Jacob, the
attending physician, and a characteristic description of
two attacks of fever with which he was himself attacked.
Mr. Beavis had a long illness, possibly typhoid fever,
and it was not until the end of September that Locke
left for London.


JOHN LOCKE 103

The Bodleian Commonplace Book with the Anecdota
Sydenhami. — This is a small folio, bound in parchment,
which originally contained 400 pages, of which 248 are
torn out. Dr. W. G. Greenhill published a part of the
manuscript in 1845 ^ Anecdota Sydenhami^ and the
following extract from the preface may be quoted :

' They are taken from a MS. in the Bodleian Library
at Oxford (Rawl. C. 406), very neatly (and for the most
part very legibly) wntten, apparently about the end of
the seventeenth century. Tne name of the writer is not
mentioned nor is anything known of the history of the
MS., except that it once belonged to Dr. Richard
Rawlinson and forms part of the collection of MSS.
bequeathed by him to the University of Oxford about
the middle of the last century. At the beginning of the
volume (of which about two-thirds have been torn away)
are these words : " Extracts of Sydenham's Physick Books
and some good Letters on Various Subjects." This is
the whole of the external evidence respectm^ the genuine-
ness of the following Anecdota ; and perhaps, if there
were nothing more to say in their favour, it might be
doubted how far the editor was justified in giving them
to the world under the sanction of the name of Syden-
ham: the internal evidence, however, is much more
conclusive, and indeed to his own mind perfectly satis-
factory. The writer professes to have been acquainted
with bydenham himself, and to have originally written
the following Notes, partly from his dictation in the
years 1682, 1683, and partly from some of his MSS.
written chiefly m 1670. These Notes he appears to
have revised and written out correctly in their present
form £|/?^ri685 (as he refers to the edition of Sydenham's
Work published in that year), and (if the editor's conjec-
ture at p. 69 be correct) before 1692, as that is the date of
the first edition of the Processus Integri!

Apparently it was not until Mr. Fox-Bourne examined
the manuscript that it was recognized as belonging to
Locke, whose handwriting is most distinctive. While
largely made up of extracts from Dr. Sydenham's physic
books, the excerpta ex ore Sydenhami, dated 1682-3, show


I04 BIOGRAPHICAL ESSAYS

the maintenance at this date of an intimate professional
relationship between the two great men,

The other medical papers in the volume illustrate the
wide scope of Locke's inquiries. There are statements
about the Peruvian bark and the best methods of its
preparation. But the chief interest after the Sydenham
notes relates to a sort of collective investigation which
Locke instituted on public health. He seems to have
a deep conviction that much good would follow a careful
study of the bills of mortality. His circular letter con-
tains the following inquiries (MS., p. 68):

' I. What bills of mortality are kept in foreign coun-
tries, either as to the diseases of which persons die, or
the number who die weekly or yearly in the most
capital cities or towns of Europe or other parts of the
world, as Paris, Madrid, Amsterdam, Venice, Hamburg,
Rome, Constantinople, Smyrna, Dublin, Edinburgh, &c.,
as also in New Enig^land, Barbadoes, Jamaica, and other
Plantations. 2. The aire of different countries, with the
temper and alteration of the same at the different seasons
of the year, and the diseases those countries are subject
to and the time when. 3. The opinion physicians have
of Jesuit's bark, and the best account they can give of it.
4. The esteem which physicians have had of Dr. Syden-
ham and his works. 5. The order observed in foreign
countries as to physicians, surgeons, apothecaries, and
herbalists for the improvement of travellers and young
students.'

There are answers from several correspondents. Dr.
Willoughby of Dublin (April 17, 1691) gives a tabular
account of the bills of mortality between 1682-90 (in-
clusive), and a description of the air of the country. He
speaks of the Peruvian bark as ' the only specific I know
in nature \ Of Dr. Sydenham he says, ' he has been
very honest in rescinding from Physick all the unneces-
sary pomp of alteratives and preparatives, and reducing
it to the use of the grand remedies which in Physick do


JOHN LOCKE 105

justly fill both sides of the loafe.' In another place is
an account of Dr. Willoughby's proposal for the im-
provement of agriculture in Ireland, the important part
of which was that every proprietor who will not improve
his waste land shall make over four-fifths of it to the
Crown. There is a brief statement of the Amsterdam
bills of 1691 and 1693, and an account of Dr. Bett's
proposal to the Lord Mayor for the improvement of the
returns in London. There are letters from James
Young of Plymouth about various diseases, and one
from Dr. Eales(?) giving an account of Dr. Morton's
books, in which ' he has improved the hints of our good
friend the great Dr. Sydenham admirably well'. Dr.
Patrick Dun sends a full statement about the mortality
bills of Dublin, and pp. 93-6 of the MS. contain in
extenso the death-rates from January, 1695, to April, 1698.
Pages 110-357 are torn out, but from the index,
pp. 369-71, we can glean the contents of the missing
leaves — books whose authors are unknown, 'books to
be wrote,* and ' books wrote in defence of the murder
of King Charles I ', with a long list of the authors, and
about the Eikon Basilike and the various controversies
upon it, extending from pp. 199-236.

Though qualified and deeply interested in both the
science and the art of medicine Locke never became,
as Fox-Bourne says, *in any orderly way a physician.*
Until he left England in 1683 ' he was still waiting for an
opportunity of devoting himself steadily to his favourite
occupation. He was still generally spoken of by his
friends as Dr. Locke, and he still regarded himself
as before everything else a doctor.' Hereafter ques-
tions of philosophy, finance, education, trade, theology,
&c., occupied his busy life, but through it all, and to
the very end, there are references in his letters aad


io6 BIOGRAPHICAL ESSAYS

journals to show that his first love was not forgotten.
In the memorable and oft-quoted letter to Dr. Thomas
Molyneaux in praise of Sydenham's method, January
20, 1692-3, he speaks of himself as one who wishes
well to the practice of physic * though he meddles not
with it ', yet in the same year we find him prescribing
for a friend's wife. In 1694 he is corresponding with
Dr. Hans Sloane on medical matters. In January,
1697-8, King William consulted him, believing that
they suffered from similar diseases. In 1701 he writes
again to Sloane about a patient with an obstinate fever,
and in the following year he gives very wise advice
to his old friend Lomborch, who was ill. Evidently
Locke's clear, strong judgement was valued by his
friends in all relations of life, and as Somers and
other politicians turned to him for instruction in ques*
tions of trade and finance, so his friends and others
insisted upon utilizing his medical knowledge. Syden-
ham, Boyle, Thomas, Mapletoft, and Molyneaux had
been his intimate associates. In Montpellier, in Paris,
and in Holland he had been a welcome guest in medical
circles, and in London we have met him in consultation
with the most eminent practitioners of the day upon a
most important case, and handing in a written opinion
as their colleague and equal.

For each one of us there is still a 'touch divine'
in the life and writings of John Locke. A singularly
attractive personality, with a sweet reasonableness of
temper and a charming freedom from flaws and defects
of character, he is an author whom we like at the first
acquaintance, and soon love as a friend. Perhaps the
greatest, certainly, as Professor Fowler says, the most
characteristic, English philosopher, we may claim Dr.
Locke as a bright ornament of our profession, not so


JOHN LOCKE 107

much for what he did in it, as for the methods which
he inculcated and the influence which he exercised
upon the English Hippocrates. He has a higher claim
as a really great benefactor of humanity, one of the
few who 'reflected the human spirit always on the
nobler side.' One of Locke's earliest writings was
a translation for Lady Shaftesbury of Pierre Nicole's
Essays, in one of which, on the 'Way of Preserving
Peace with Men ', Locke seems to have found a rule
of life which I commend to you : * Live the best life
you can, but live it so as not to give needless offence
to others; do all you can to avoid the vices, follies,
and weaknesses of your neighbours, but take no
needless offence at their divergences from your ideal '
(Fox-Bourne).


io8


ELISHA BARTLETT

A RHODE ISLAND PHILOSOPHERS


Rhode Island can boast of but one great philosopher
—one to whose flights in the empyrean neither Roger
Williams nor any of her sons could soar— the immortal
Berkeley, who was a transient guest in this State,
waiting quietly and happily for the realization of his
Utopian schemes. Still he lived long enough in Rhode
Island to make his name part of her history; long
enough in America to make her the inspiration of his
celebrated lines on the course of empire. Elisha
Bartlett, teacher, philosopher, author, of whom I am
about to speak, whom you may claim as the most
distinguished physician of this State, has left no deep
impression on your local history or institutions. Here
he was born and educated, and to this, his home, he
returned to die; but his busy life was spent in other
fields, where to-day his memory is cherished more
warmly than in the land of his birth.

I

Born at Smithfield in 1804, Bartlett was singularly
fortunate in his parents, who were members of the
Society of Friends, strong, earnest souls, well endowed
with graces of the head and of the heart. The gentle

' An address delivered before the Rhode Island Medical Society,
December 7, 1899. Reprinted from the Transactions oftlu Rhode
Island Medical Society,


ELISHA BARTLETT 109

life, the zeal for practical righteousness, and the sim^
plicity of the faith of the followers of Fox, put a hall-
mark on the sensitive youth which the rough usage
of the world never obliterated. No account of Bartlett's
early life and school-days exists — an index that they
were happy and peaceful. We may read in his poem
called An Allegory^ certain autobiographical details,
transferring the

Meadow and field, and forest, dale, and hill;
Orchards, green hedgerows, gardens, stately trees,

from the old England which he describes to the banks
of Narragansett Bay. Paraphrasing other parts of the
poem, we may say that auspicious stars shone over
his cradle with the kindliest light and promise, and
amid the genial air of a New England home, goodness,
truth, and beauty were his portion. He tells of the
wonder and delight stirred in his young soul by the
thousand tales of ' fairies and genii, giants, dwarfs, and
that redoubtable and valiant Jack who slew the giants '.
Then, as the days lengthened, he came under the
spell of The Arabian Nights and of Robinson Crusoe.
Looking back in after years, he compared this hearty,
wholesome life to some bounteous spring that wells
up from the deep heart of the earth. Addison, Gold-
smith, and Washington Irving filled his soul with
freshness like the dawn.

And led by love and kindness, ran the hours
Their merry round till boyhood passed away.

In the ruder discipline and strife of school and college
he grew to manhood with (as he expressed it) 'a fine
free healthfulness ', and with faculties self-poised and
balanced.
At Smithfield, at Uxbridge, and at a well-known


no BIOGRAPHICAL ESSAYS

Friends' institution in New York, Bartlett obtained
a very thorough preliminary education. Details of his
medical course are not at hand, but we know that
after studying with Dr. Willard, of Uxbridge, Drs.
Greene and Hey wood, of Worcester, and Dr. Levi
Wheaton, of Providence, and attending medical lectures
at Boston and at Providence, he took his doctor's
degree at Brown University in 1826, a year before
the untimely end of the medical department \

In June, 1826, Bartlett sailed for Europe, and the
letters to his sisters, which, with other Bartlett papers,
have been kindly sent me by his nephew, the Hon.
Willard Bartlett, of the New York Court of Appeals,
give a delightful account of his year as a student
abroad. He remained in Paris until December; then,
in company with his fellow student, Dr. Southwick, he
visited the chief cities of Italy, returning to Paris early
in March. The month of May, 1827, was spent in
London, and he sailed from Liverpool June 8. Un-
fortunately the letters to his sisters contain very few

* Parsons closes his Historical Tract on the Brown Unwersi/y
Medical School with the sentence, * Whether this city, the second
in New England, shall become the seat of such a school (that is,
a revived department of medicine) must depend very much on the
zeal, persistence, and ability of its physicians.' May I be permitted
to remark, Mr. President, that the existing conditions are singularly
favourable for a small first-class school. Here are college labora-
tories of physics, chemistry,and biology, and here are well-equipped
hospitals with some three hundred beds. What is lacking ? Neither
zeal, persistence, nor ability on the part of the physicians, but
a generous donation to the University of a million of dollars with
which to equip and endow laboratories of anatomy, physiology,
pathology, and hygiene. These alone are lacking ; the prdimintury
scientific school is here ; the clinical school is at your doors ; the
money should be the least difficult thing to get in this plutocratic
town. The day has come for small medical schools in university
towns with good clinical facilities.


ELISHA BARTLETT in

references to his medical studies, but I have extracted
a few memoranda from them.

Writing August 24, 1826, he says :

'The celebrated Laennec died at his country resi-
dence on the 13th of the present month. The pub-
lication in 181Q of a new metnod of ascertaining diseases
of the chest forms an era in the history of medicine.
M. Laennec fell a victim to one of those diseases the
investigation of which by himself has enriched the field
of science, contributed to the alleviation of human suf-
fering, and given his own name a high rank among the
great and good men of his age.'

He asked that this memorandum should appear in
the Providence papers.

Writing September 4, he speaks of attending every
day at the Jardin des Plantes to hear the lectures of
Cloquet and Cuvier.

One of the professors at the medical school, he
says, looked more like a jolly stage-driver or a good-
natured, blustering butcher than anything else.

' He lectures sometimes standing, and sometimes
leaning against a post, or straddling over a high stool,
flourishing a lancet in one hand and a snuff-box in the
other, on the contents of which he is continually laying
the most inordinate contributions. He wears during
the time an old nistv-looking black cap. The familiarity
of the distinguished surgeons and physicians with their
students struck me at first sight very forcibly, being in
such perfect contrast to the proud port and haughty
carriage of some of our New England professors.
I wish they might step into the Hdtel Dieu and La
Charit6, and take a lesson or two of Boyer and Dupuy-
tren, barons of the Empire, and two of the most dis-
tinguished surgeons in tne world.'

In the letter of October loth, he says :

*The public lectures opened this week, and we are
continually enspi^ed from half-past six in the morning
till bed-time. Visits are made at all the hospitals by


112 BIOGRAPHICAL ESSAYS

candle-light, and a lecture delivered at most of them
immediately after the visit/

He speaks of attending the lectures of Geoffroy
St. Hillaire, who, he says, 'lectures very badly; his
gestures, though he is a Frenchman, are exceedingly
awkward, and he has a sing-song tone like that which
one often hears in a Methodist or Quaker preacher/

Like Oliver Wendell Holmes, Bartlett probably ac*
quired in Paris three principles : * Not to take authority
when I can have facts ; not to guess when I can know ;
not to think a man must take physic because he is sick/ ^

Strangely enough, I find no reference in these Paris
letters to the man of all others who influenced Bartlett
most deeply. In Louis, even more than in Laennec,
the young American students of that day found light
and leading. The numerical method, based on a pains-
taking study of all the phenomena of disease in the
wards and in the dead-house, appealed with peculiar
force to their practical minds, and Louis' brilliant ob-
servations on phthisis and on fevei*s constituted, as
Bartlett remarked, a new and great era in the history
of medical science. I cannot find any definite state-
ment of Bartlett's relations with Louis in 1826-7, at
which period the latter was still working quietly at
La Charity. His monograph on phthisis had been
published in 1825, and had at once given him a repu*
tation as one of the great lights of the French school.
He was at this time very busy collecting material for
his still more important work on typhoid fever, and
it is scarcely possible that Bartlett could have fre-
quented La Charit6 without meeting the grave, unob-
trusive student, who, with notebook in hand, literally
lived in the wards and in the dead-house. Secluded

^ Morse's Lift of Holmes^ vol. i, p. X09.


ELISHA BARTLETT 113

froni the world, living as a voluntary assistant to Chomel
in this quiet haven of observation, apart from the turbid
seas of speculation which surged outside, Louis for
seven years pursued his remarkable career. Whether
or not Bartlett came into personal contact with him
at this time I do not know, but however this may be,
subsequently the great French clinician became his
model and his master, and to him he dedicated his first
edition of the Fevers, and his Essay on the Philosophy
of Medical Science.

For a young man of twenty-two, these letters —
written off-hand — show an unusually good literary style,
and many incidental references indicate that he had
received a general education much above the average.
The strong Christian spirit which he felt all through
life is already manifest, as may be gleaned from one
or two expressions in the letters. Writing on Sept. 4,
1826, to his sisters, he refers to the death of a dear
friend and her little sister: 'There is a cheering con-
solation in the reflection that ** of such is the kingdom
of heaven *\ and that their spirits have gone in perfect
and sinless purity to their home of bliss, and we may
believe that they in their turn have become guardian
angels to those who cherished and protected them

here:

They were their guardan angels here.
They guardian angels now to them.'

In 1827, shortly after completing his twenty-third year,
Bartlett settled at Lowell, then a town of only 3,500
inhabitants, but growing rapidly, owing to the establish-
ment of numerous mills. This was his home for nearly
twenty years, and to it, and later to Woonsocket, he
returned in the intervals between his college work in
different sections of the country. As Dr. D. C. Patterson

OCLSII I


114 BIOGRAPHICAL ESSAYS

remarks, ' He became at once the universal favourite,
and began to take a deep interest in the physical welfare
of the townsmen.* In 1Q28 he delivered lectures before
the Lowell Lyceum on contagious diseases, and he gave
frequent popular lectures on sanitation and hygiene.
In 1828 he was the orator on the Fourth of July, In
1836 he delivered a course of popular lectures on
physiology.

Evidently Bartlett had the ' grace of favour ' in a re-
markable degree. Bishop Clark pictures him in those
days in the following words :

* Some twenty-five vears aero, I used to meet a young
man in the town 01 LoweU, whose presence carried
sunshine wherever he went: whose tenderness and skill
relieved the darkness of many a chamber of sickness,
and whom all the community were fast learning to love
and honour. Life lay before him. full of promise ; the
delicate temper of his soul fitting him to the most exqui-
site enjoyment of all the pure delights of nature, and
his cheerful temperament giving a genial and generous
glow to the refined circles of which he was one of the
chiefest ornaments.'

When only thirty-two, before he had been in Lowell
ten years, he was elected by a respectable majority as
the first mayor of the city, and he was re-elected the
following year. A letter from the Hon. Caleb Cushing,
dated April 20, 1841, gives us an idea of the estimate
which a clear-headed layman placed upon him. • Dr.
Bartlett enjoys in the city of Lowell the unqualified
respect of that community, and its affectionate esteem —
respect and esteem due alike to his public relations to
that city, as formerly its popular and useful chief magis-
trate, and at all times one of its most patriotic and
valued citizens; to his unblemished integrity of character
and amenity of deportment ; to his eminence in his pro-


ELISHA BARTLETT 115

fession ; to the endearments of private friendship ; and
in general to his talents, accomplishments, manners, and
principles/

To two interesting episodes in his life at Lowell I may
refer at greater length. The rapid growth of the in-
dustries in Lowell had brought in from the surrounding
country a very large number of young girls as operatives
in the mills, and their physical and moral condition had
been seriously impugned by writers in certain leading
Boston papers. These charges were investigated in
a most thorough way by Bartlett, who published in the
Loivell Courier in 1839, and republished in pamphlet
form (1841) his well-known Vindication of the Character
and Condition of the Females Employed in the Lowell
MiUs. This very strong paper, based on careful
personal investigations, really proved to be what the
title indicated. It did not, however, escape adverse
criticism, and among the Bartlett papers there is a re-
view of the Vindication by a citizen of Lowell in
1842, which presents the other side of a picture, by no
means a pleasant one, of the prolonged hours of the
operatives and their wretched life in boarding-houses.

One of the most interesting incidents of his life at
this period was the reception to Dickens, whose visit to
Lowell occurred during Dr. Bartlett's mayoralty. In
the American Notes Dickens speaks of the girls as
' healthy in appearance, many of them remarkably so,
and had the manners and deportment of young women,
not of degraded brutes of burden.' Oliver Wendell
Holmes says, referring to this occasion : * I have been
told a distinguished foreign visitor (Charles Dickens),
who went through the whole length and breadth of the
land, said that of all the many welcomes he received
from statesmen renowned as orators, from men whose

I 3


F=


ii6 BIOGRAPHICAL ESSAYS

profession is eloquence, not one was so impressive and
felicitous as that which was spoken by Dr. Bartlett,
then mayor -of Lowell, our brother in the silent
profession, which he graced with these unwonted
accomplishments.*

In 1840 he was elected to the Legislature of the State
of Massachusetts and served two terms. In 1845 he
was nominated by the Governor a member of the Board
of Education of the State in the place of Jared Sparks.
Holmes, who was familiar with Bartlett in this period
of his career, has left on record the following charming
description :

'It is easy to recall his ever-welcome and gracious
resence. On his expanded forehead no one could
ail to trace the impress of a large and calm intelligence.
In his most open and beaming smile none could help
feeling the warmth of a heart which was the seat of all
generous and kindly affections. When he spoke his
tones were of singular softness, his thoughts came in
chosen words, scholarlike, yet unpretending, often play-
ful, always full of lively expressions, giving the idea of
one that could be dangerously keen m his judgements,
had he not kept his fastidiousness to himself, and his
charity to sheathe the weakness of others. In familiar
intercourse— and the writer of these paragraphs was
once under the same roof with him for some months —
no one could be more companionable and winning in all
his ways. The little trials of life he took kindly and
cheerily, turning into pleasantry the petty inconveniences
which a less thoroughly good-natured man would have
fretted over.'

II

For many years there was in this country a group of
peripatetic teachers who went from town to town, like
the Sophists of Greece, staying a year or two in each,
or divided their time between a winter session in a large
city school and a summer term in a small country one.


ELISHA BARTLETT 117

Among them Daniel Drake takes the precedence, as he
made eleven moves in the course of his stirring and
eventful life. Bartlett comes an easy second, having
taught in nine schools. Dunglison, T. R. Beck, Willard
Parker, Alonzo Clark, the elder Gross, Austin Flint,
Frank H. Hamilton, and many others whom I could
name, belonged to this group of wandering professors.
The medical education of the day was almost exclusively
theoretical; the teachers lectured for a short four
months' session, there was a little dissection, a few
major operations were witnessed, the fees were paid,
examinations were held— and all was over. No wonder,
under such conditions, that many of the most flourishing
schools were found amid sylvan groves in small country
towns. In New England there were five such schools,
and in the State of New York the well-known schools
at Fairfield and at Geneva. As there was not enough
practice in the small places to go round, the teachers
for the most part stayed only for the session, at the end
of which it was not unusual for the major part of the
faculty, with the students, to migrate to another institu-
tion, where the lectures were repeated and the class
graduated. T. R. Beck's introductory lecture, in 1824,
at Fairfield, On the Utility of Country Medical Institutions^
pictures in glowing terms their advantages. One
sentence brought to my mind the picture of a fine old
doctor, on the Niagara peninsula, a graduate of Fairfield,
who possibly may have listened to this very address.
Dr. Beck asks : ' What is the clinical instruction of the
country student? It is this — after attending a course of
lectures on the several branches of medicine and be-
coming acquainted with their general bearing, he during
the summer repairs to the office of a practitioner;
attends him in his visits to his patients; views the


ii8 BIOGRAPHICAL ESSAYS

diseases peculiar to the different districts; observes
the treatment that situation or habits of life indicate,
and from day to day verifies the lessons he has received.
Here, then, is a direct preparation for the life he intends
to pursue/ And I may say that it was just this training
that made of my old friend one of the best general
practitioners it has ever been my pleasure to know.

In the letters we can follow Bartlett's wanderings
during the next twenty years, from the time of his
appointment to one of the smallest of the schools to his
final position as one of the chief ornaments of the leading
school of New York. In 1832 he held his first teaching
position, that of professor of pathological anatomy and
of materia medica in the Berkshire Medical Institute,
at Pittsfield. The following is an extract from a letter
to Dr. John Orne Green, dated Pittsfield, November 25,
1833:

' The character of the class is said to be superior even
to that of last year. We have a large number of excellent
students. Parker is as popular as ever, and Professor
Childs has the credit of having improved very much in
his manner of teaching. The members of the class are
attentive to their studies, eager for knowledge, and
regular in their attendance on the lectures. I have
lectures, most of the time, twice a day, at 10 a.m. and at
2 p.m. I shall finish my course on materia medica by
the middle of this week, and the remainder of my time
will be occupied with lectures of medical jurisprudence
and pathological anatomy. The commencement will be
on Wednesday of week after next.'

He held the chair at Pittsfield for eight sessions.
Among his colleagues were Childs, Dewey, and Willard
Parker, who was a very special friend. In a letter of
October 2, 1836, he says : * Parker, with his sunny face
and his hearty welcome, was in a few minutes after my
arrival. It does one good to meet such men.*


ELISHA BARTLETT 119

In i^ he was appointed to the chair of practice in
Dartmouth College, Hanover, N.H., the school founded
by Nathan Smith in 1798. In a letter to his friend,
Green, dated September 8, he gives brief sketches of
some of his colleagues, among them a delightful
account of Oliver Wendell Holmes, then a young
man of thirty.

* Dr. Holmes you know something of. As a teacher
there is no doubt of his success, although he will not
show himself during this his first course. He has his
anatomy — some of it at least — to study as he goes on,
and he has not yet got the whole hang of the lecture-
room — he does not give himself his whole swing. His
attainments in medical science are extensive and accu-
rate, and his intellectual endowments are extraordinary.
His mind is quick as lightning and sharp as a razor.
His conversational powers are absolutely wonderful.
His most striking mental peculiarities consist in a power
of comprehensive and philosophical generalization on
all subjects, and in a fecunditv of illustration that is
inexhaustible. His talk at taSle is all spontaneous,
unpremeditated, and he pours himself forth — ^words and
thoughts— in a perfect torrent. His wit and humour
are auite lost in the prodigal exuberance of his thoughts
and language.'

In this same letter is the following characteristic
memorandum, illustrating his desire to see the school-
houses beautified and adorned.

'One word about the High School House. Pray,
don't forget in the planning of the rooms my plan for
some embellishments. Even if we should get some
busts I do not know that niches would be any better
than suitable stands or shelves. I hope we shall raise,
by a fair, from five hundred to one thousand dollars
for pictures, &c., for ornaments to the two principal
rooms.'

It is quite possible that Bartlett lectured both at
Woodstock and at Pittsfield, as the terms were pur-


I20 BIOGRAPHICAL ESSAYS

posely arranged so as not to clash, and in the catalogue
of the Vermont Medical College, 1844, there is an
advertisement of the Berkshire school. The names of
Bartlett and Holmes occur only in the 1839-40 and
1840-1 announcements.

In X841 he accepted the chair of the theory and
practice of medicine in the Transylvania University,
Lexington, at that time the strongest and best equipped
school in the West.^ On his way to Lexington he
visited New York, Philadelphia, Washington, and Balti-
more, and in a letter to Green, of September 7, 1841,
he gives an interesting account of the men he met in
these cities. One item is of interest to Baltimoreans : —

' Day before yesterday I spent with Dr. Nadimn R.
Smith, at Baltimore, on my return from Washington.
I found him very attentive and hospitable. He took
me into his gig and went to see some of his patients.
He has a pretty large surgical practice, and is, I should
think, a man of excellent sound sense, industrious and
devoted to his profession — not so great a man as his
father, but a very capital good fellow. He speaks
well of Lexington and the school— says it is the best
appointed school in the country.'

In his letters there are interesting descriptions of his
life in Lexington, some of which are worth quoting :

* In the school we are getting on very well The
class is of a good size, rather larger than last year,
worth a little over ¥2,000, intelligent, attentive, well-
behaved. I have given fifty-eight fectures, and we have
just six weeks more. My own success has been good
enough, I think. So far as I have means of Judging,
niy instruction is entirely satisfactory, to say the least
My colleagues— Dudley, you know, is the great man
here. He has many peculiarities. He is very much
pleased with me. He teaches singular doctrines, and

^ History of the Medical Department of Transylvania Univirsify
and its Faculty^ by Dr. William J. Calvert, /oAms Hopkins Hospital
Bulletin^ August, September, 1899.


ELISHA BARTLETT 121

follows, in many things, a practice very peculiar to
himself. The other day he tied the common carotid
before the class in an anastomosing aneunsm in the
orbit; patient from St. Louis. Day before yesterday
he cut for the stone; patient a lad from Mississippi.
He has two more cases of stone here for operation.
He is exceedingly cautious ; sends many patients, of all
sorts, away without operation. Uses the bandage for
everything almost in surgery — tart. ant. and starvation,
or low diet, in most diseases. He had a pretty large
property, " a earden " as he calls it, of 150 acres or so,
a mile from tne city. Richardson, in obstetrics, boards
with me, a plain common-sense man, who fought a duel
in early life with Dudley; has made a pretty large
fortune here in practice, and now lives in the country
eight miles or so from here, on a farm of 500 acres.
The style of lecturing here is quite different from what
it is in the East — more emphatic, more vehement. It is
quite necessary to fall somewhat into the popular style.
We stand, in the lecture room, on an open platform
with only a little movable desk, or table, on which to lay
our notes. On the whole I like it better than being
seated in a desk, as they are in Boston.' (December 21,
1841.)

In March, 1843, ^^ writes to Green that his receipts
for the session have been more than $2,000.

'There are a few good families who send for me,
and I get occasionally a consultation. We never make
a charge less than a dollar ; and consultation visits in
ordinary cases — the first visit — are $5.00. These few
enable me, situated as I am, to make even a small and
easy business somewhat profitable. I have made one
visit twenty-five miles distant, for which the fee was
$25; and 1 saw a second patient, at the same time,
incidentally, for $5.00 more. You see from all this,
that my place gives me rather more money than I could
earn in Lowell, for a much smaller amount of responsi-
bility and labour. I have hardly, indeed, been called
out of bed during the winter. In a business point of
view I feel quite content with my situation.*

From an interesting account of a consultation in the


122 BIOGRAPHICAL ESSAYS

country we can gather how the planters of those days
did their own doctoring :

'Col. Anderson belongs to a class of men, pretty
large, I think, in this State, — rather rough, with a hmited
school education, but intelligent, shrewd, clear-headed,
and enterprising. He has a farm, entirely away from
any travelled road, of 500 acres ; but his principal busi-
ness is that of bagging and soap manufacturing, his
farm serving; only to feed his family. This consists of
about one Hundred, eiehty or more of which are his
negroes. He has no physician, whom he is willing to
trust, nearer than Lexington ; and in nearlv all common
acute diseases treats the patient himself, rlis daughter,
Mrs. Breck, was seized with acute pleurisy, soon after
miscarriafi^e, and her father had bled her twice, pretty
freely, and given calomel and antimony, before any phy-
sician had seen her. He had followed the same course
a year ago in the case of his wife.* (February 18, 1844.)

In the same letter he says :

'Typhoid fever has been very widely prevalent in
many parts of Kentucky for tne past year. There
were, it is said, 200 deatns in an aqjacent county last
summer and fall. It is evidently the common fever of
this country, with all the features so familiar to us at
the East.'

In the autumn of 1844 he accepted the chair of the
theory and practice of medicine at the University of
Maryland. Among the letters I find but one from
Baltimore, and that is to Oliver Wendell Holmes about
a review of his book. The Philosophy of Medical Science^
which had appeared that year.

In 1844 he accepted the chair of materia medica and
obstetrics in the Vermont Medical College, the session
of which began in March and continued for thirteen
weeks. Among his colleagues were Alonzo Clark,
Palmer, and Edward M. Moore, and later John C,
Dalton. Bartlett's name occurs in the catalogues of
the school until 1854, the year before his death.


ELISHA BARTLETT 123

In May, 1845, he and Mrs. Bartlett sailed for Europe.
In a letter to Green, July 12, there is an interesting
reference to Louis and James Jackson, jun. :

* I have seen a good deal of Louis, who has been very
civil and attentive. I dined with him soon after my
arrival, and met there, amongst others, Leuset and
GrisoUe, two of his most intimate medical friends.
I never see him that he does not 'speak of youne
] ^Lckson— ce pauvre Jackson f as he calls him. Me told
me, with a great deal of feeling, that Jackson, the last
night that he spent in Paris, wrote him a letter from his
hotel, which was moistened with his tears, and that he
thought Jackson was almost as much attached to him
as to his father.'

In another letter he speaks, too, of his very cordial
reception by Louis.

They spent the winter on the Continent, travelling
about, chiefly in Italy, and in the spring went to
London. In a letter dated June 17, 1846, there is an
interesting sketch of a magnetic stance at the house
of Professor Elliotson, of University College, who sub-
sequently came to such grief over hypnotism.

' And then he ran full tilt off upon his hobbv, " animal
magnetism," calling it one of the most sacred and holy
of all subjects, one of the greatest truths, and so on.
Dr. Forbes, the editor, he spoke of as "a wretch ", all
because the doctor has shown up some of EUiotson's
magnetic operations. Dr. E. afterwards invited me to
see some mametic phenomena at his house. I went
about 3 o'clock in the afternoon, and found his spacious
and elegant drawing-room quite filled with well-dressed

fentlemen and ladies, assembled for the same purpose,
'he doctor had two subjects, one a young, delicate-
looking girl/ and the other a damsel of a certain age,
upon whom he performed the standard and stereotyped
experiments — putting them into the magnetic sleep,
stinening their limbs, leading them round the room
with a common magnet, exciting their phrenological


124 BIOGRAPHICAL ESSAYS

organs, and so on. I can only say that I was not
specially deliehted with Elliotson's manner, and that
it I was to cnoose a man by whom I should swear,
without using my own eyes, certainly it would not be
him.'

In the same letter he speaks of having seen a great
deal of Forbes, editor of the Medtco'Chirurgical Review ;
of Marshall Hall, of Walshe, ' a young man and a good
fellow'; of Sir Henry Holland, and of that interesting
American physician, who lived so long in England,
Dr. Boott, and of Dr. Southwood Smith at the Fever
Hospital.

On his return from Europe we find him during the
session of 1846-7 in his old chair at Lexington, whence
he writes on March 18, 1847, to his friend Green, from
which a paragraph relating to the second edition of his
book on Fevers may be quoted :

' I have been drudging away all winter at my second
edition. I do not feel any great interest in it, though
I hope and intend to make a good book of it. The first
edition, for a monograph, has sold very well, mosdy at
the South and West ; so well at least that Lea & clan-
chard propose publishing the second edition and paying
also something for the right to do so.'

The sessions of 1847-8-9 were spent at the Transyl-
vania University. In the spring of 1848 there is a letter
from Pliny Earle, dated April 16, saying that he had
received a catalogue of the Medical Department of
Transylvania University, from which he had received
his first intimation of Bartlett's resignation of the pro-
fessorship. He asks Bartlett's advice as to the propriety
of applying for the position.

On March 13, 1849, Bartlett received the appointment
as professor of the theory and practice of medicine in the
University of Louis\alle. At this time, in a letter from


ELISHA BARTLETT 125

Dr. J. Cobb, we have the first intimation in the letters
of ill health, as there is the sentence : ' Accept my best
wishes for your complete restoration to health/ The
University of Louisville had drawn heavily upon the
classes of the other Western schools, chiefly at the
expense of Lexington, and the Faculty when Bartlett
joined it was very strong, comprising such well-known
men as the elder Gross, the elder Yandell, Rogers,
Benjamin Silliman, jun., and Palmer.

The condition of medical politics at that time in
the town of Louisville was not satisfactory; a new
school had been started in opposition to the University,
and among the Bartlett letters are a number from the
elder Yandell which show a state of very high tension.
Bartlett spent but one session in Louisville. He and
Gross accepted chairs in the University of New York.
The appointment of the former to the chair of the
institutes and practice of medicine is dated Sept. 19,
185a From some remarks in a letter from Yandell it
is evident that Bartlett did not find the position in New
York very congenial. Gross found his still less so,
and returned to Louisville the following year. J. W.
Draper, the strong man of the University School, had
secured Bartlett, and in a letter dated Aug. 12, 1850,
he promised him a salary of at least $3,500. The same
letter shows how thoroughly private were the medical
schools of that day :

' It perhaps may be proper to repeat what is the con-
dition of the real estate. The college building is owned
equally by the six professors. Its estimated value when
Dr. Dickson left us in the spring was $78,600, and there
is a mortgage upon it of 948,000, bearing interest of
six per cent. Excluding this mortgage the share of
each professor is therefore $5,000, and a mutual
covenant exists among us that on the retirement or


126 BIOGRAPHICAL ESSAYS

decease of one of the Faculty his investment shall be
restored to him or his heirs— the new-comer starting in
all respects in the position he occupied.'

During these years Bartlett seems to have been very
busy at work at the microscope, and there is a letter
from Alonzo Clark, dated June 15, 1848, descriptive of
a fine new Oberhauser (the Zeiss of that day), and in
1851 there is an interesting letter from Jeffries Wyman,
giving a list of the most important works on inverte-
brate zoology,

Among his colleagues in the University were Draper,
Martyn Paine, and Granville Sharp Pattison. Things
do not seem to have worked very smoothly. In the
spring of 1851 overtures were made to him from the
College of Physicians and Surgeons of New York, in
which Faculty were his warm friends, Alonzo Clark and
Willard Parker, and he was elected to the chair of
materia medica and medical jurisprudence in the follow-
ing year, 1852. Here he lectured during the next two
sessions until compelled by ill health to retire.

I may fittingly conclude this section of my address
with a sentence from a sketch of Bartlett's life by his
friend Elisha Huntington :

* Never was the professor's chair more gracefully
filled than by Dr. Bartlett. His urbane and courteous
manners, his native and simple eloquence, his remark-
able power of illustration, the singular beauty and
sweetness of his style, all combined to render him one
of the most popular and attractive of lecturers. The
driest and most barren subject, under his touch, became
instinct with life and interest, and the path, in which
the traveller looked to meet with briars and weeds only,
he was surprised and delighted to find strewn with
flowers, beautiful and fragrant. There was a ma|^c
about the man you could not withstand ; a fascination
you could not resist.*


ELISHA BARTLETT 127

III

Bartlett began his career as a medical writer with the

Monthly Journal of Medical Literature and American

Medical Students' Gazettef only three numbers of which

were issued. He says in the introductory address,

dated Oct. 15, 1831, that there are plenty of practical

journals of high character and extensive circulation, but

he wishes to see one devoted to

' medical history, medical literature, accounts of medical
institutions andf hospitals, medical biography, including
sketches of the character, lives, and wntings of the chief
masters of our art, and of all such as have in any way
influenced its destinies and left the deep traces of their
labours on its history. • . , To the meciical student and
the young practitioner, to all those who aspire to any
higher acauisitions than the knowledge that calomel
purges ana salivates, and that tartarizea antimony occa-
sions vomiting, who are not willing to rest supinely
satisfied in a routine familiarity with doses and symptoms
.—a familiarity which practice and habit render in the
end almost mechanical— we cannot but think these
matters must be interesting.'

And he adds :

' The devotion of an occasional hour to such pursuits
must have a tendency to enlarge and liberalize the mind.
It will help to keep alive and stimulate in the young
medical scholar the sometimes flagging energies of
study. By calling his attention and directing his desires
to high standards of acquisition and excellence, it will
urge nim on towards their attainment. Delightful and
fascinating, in many respects, as the study of his pro-
fession may be to him, there are many hours which
must be occupied with mental and bodily drudgery.
He must make what to others would be loathsomeness
pleasure to himself. Amid the wear and tear, the toil
and fatigue of such pursuits, he needs at times some
intellectual recreation and stimulus, and where can he
find one pleasanter or more appropriate than in sur-
veying the career, and studying the characters of those
who have trodden before him the same laborious path,


128 BIOGRAPHICAL ESSAYS

and who have followed it on to its high and brig:ht
consummation ? If our profession ever vindicates its
legitimate claim to the appellation of liberal, it must be
cultivated with some other than the single aim of obtain*
ing patients for the sole purpose of getting for services
renaered an equivalent in fees/

In the first number there is a statement that on a
future occasion the Journal will give a 'detailed con*
sideration of the character of the old physician of Cos —
the venerable father of physic, and of the reform which
he effected in medical science', a promise which was
not fulfilled to the profession for many years, as Bart*
lett's well-known lecture on Hippocrates, the last, indeed,
of his professional writings, was not issued until 1852.
The literature of science, its philosophy, its history, the
history of the lives and labours of the founders and
cultivators — these he believed it important for the
student to cultivate.

Among the articles in these three numbers there are
some of special merit. One signed S. N., On the Claims
of Medicine to the Character of Certainty ^ may have sug-
gested to Bartlett his well-known essay. On the Degree
of Certainty in Medicine. The enterprise was not a
success, and as Bartlett had said in his introductory
address, 'of all weakly things we most heartily pity
weakly periodicals/ he had the good sense after three
numbers had been issued to give up a publication which
the profession did not sustain.

In July, 1832, he became associated with A. L. Pierson
and J. B. Flint in a much more pretentious and im-
portant journal, the Medical Magazine^ a monthly publi-
cation which continued for three years. It was a very
well-conducted periodical, with excellent original articles
and strongly written editorials. John D. Fisher^s
original paper on The Cephalic Brain Murmur occurs


ELISHA BARTLETT 129

in volume ii, and in the same one is an excellent paper
by E. Hale, jun., on The Typhoid Fever of this Climate^
which is of special interest as containing very accurate
statements of the differences between the common
New England autumnal fever and the typhus as de-
scribed by Armstrong and Smith. There are also
reports of three autopsies giving an account of ulcera-
tion in the small intestine, among the first to be pub-
lished in this country. There are in addition numerous
well-written critical reviews. Among the latter is one
of the most virulent productions of that most virulent of
men, Dr. Charles Caldwell. It is entitled Medical Lan-
guage of Literature. I have heard it said in Philadelphia
that Dr. Samuel Jackson never forgave the bitterness of
the attack in it upon his Principles of Medicine.

In volume iii there was the interesting announcement
that a dollar a page would be paid for all original com-
munications.

In 1831 appeared a little work entitled Sketches of the
Character and Writings of Eminent Living Surgeons and
Physicians of Paris, translated from the French of
J. L. H. Peisse. Of the nine lives, those of Dupuytren
and Broussais are still of interest to us, and there is
no work in English from which one can get a better
insight into the history of medicine in Paris in the early
part of the nineteenth century. One little sentence in
the translator's preface is worth quoting :

'After making all reasonable allowance for natural
tact or talent, and for the facilities and advantages of
instruction to be had in extensive medical establish-
ments, it will be found that study, intense, untiring, un-
remitted study^ is the only foundation of professional
worth and distmction.'

A great stimulus had been given to the study of
phrenology by the visit of Spurzheim to this country.

OSLES K


I30 BIOGRAPHICAL ESSAYS

He gave a course of six lectures on the anatomy of the
brain and spinal cord at one of the apartments of the
Medical College in September of that year, and subse-
quently a popular course of lectures on phrenology.
In 1832 he died in Boston of typhus fever. His brain,
it is stated, was in the possession of the Boston Phreno-
logical Society, before which, in January, 1838, Bartlett
gave an interesting address on scientific phrenology.

In 1839 Bartlett edited Paley's Natural Theology ^ that
delightful book, dear especially to those of us who were
trained in religious colleges. To some of us at least
the freshness of the natural theology, which in Pale^s
hands was really a delightful commentary on anatomy
and physiology, was a happy change from artificial
theology, or even from the Horae Paulinae of the same
author.

Bartlett's claim to remembrance, so far as his medical
writings are concerned, rests mainly on his work on
Fevers, issued first in 1842, and subsequently in the
years 1847, 1852, and 1857. It remains one of the most
notable of contributions of American physicians to the
subject. Between the time of Bartlett's visit to Paris
and 1840, a group of students had studied under Louis,
and had returned to this country thoroughly familiar
with typhoid fever, the prevalent form in the French
capital at that time. In another place ^ I have told in
detail how largely through their labours the profession
learned to recognize the essential differences between
the two prevalent forms of fever, typhoid and typhus.
The writings on fever chiefly accessible to the American
reader of that day were the English works of Fordyce,

^ * Influence of Louis on American Medicine,' Johns Hopkins
Hospital Btdletin, August-September, 1897 (printed at p. 289 of this
volume).


ELISHA BARTLETT 131

Armstrong, South wood Smith, and Tweedie, in which,
as Bartlett says, ' they describe a fever or form of fever
(that is typhus) rarely met with in this country,' and the
writings did not actually represent the state of our
knowledge upon the subject. Indeed, for a number of
years later a chaotic condition of mind prevailed among
writers in Great Britain, and it was not until 1849-50
that William Jenner, by a fresh series of accurate
observations, brought the British medical opinion into
line. As the British and Foreign Medico-Chirurgical
Review, in a most complimentary notice of Bartlett's
work, said, * A history of British fevers such as Louis
has furnished to France, or such as given in the volume
under discussion, did not exist.' Still, even at that
date, 1844, the Review expressed the ultra-conservative
opinion held in England, that the common continued
fever, or the low nervous fever of Huxham, was only
a mild form of typhus fever. The work is dedicated to
his friends, James Jackson, of Boston, and W. W.
Gerhard, of Philadelphia; it is, he states, 'a history
of two diseases, many points of which they, especially
among his own countrymen, have diligently and success-
fully studied and illustrated.'

The chief interest of the work to-day lies in the
remarkably accurate picture which is given of typhoid
fever— a picture the main outlines of which are as well
and firmly drawn as in any work which has appeared
since. It is written with great clearness, in logical order,
and he shows on every page an accurate acquaintance
with the literature of the day, and, as the author of the
review already mentioned remarks, a knowledge also of
that best of books, the book of nature.

The practical character of Bartlett's mind is indicated
by the briefness with which he discusses the favourite

K 2


132 BIOGRAPHICAL ESSAYS

topic of the day, namely the theory of fever. He
acknowledged at the outset that the materials for any
satisfactory theory of typhoid fever did not exist He
went so far as to claim that the fundamental primary
alteration was in the blood, and that the local lesion was
really secondary, and he refers to the prevalent theory
of fever as ' wholly a creation of fancy ; the offspring of
a false generalization and of a spurious philosophy.
What then can its theory be but the shadow of a shade ?'
This work immediately placed Bartlett in the front rank
of American physicians of the day. It had a powerful
influence on the profession of the country. Among his
letters there is an interesting and characteristic one
from James Jackson, already referred to in the dedi-
cation. Acknowledging the receipt of a copy, he says :

• I am now writing to express to you the great satis-
faction the book has given me. I think that it entirely
answers the end that you proposed. It, in fact, trans-
lates to the common reader, in a most clear style and
lucid method, the acquisitions which science has made
on its subjects within the last few years. Nowhere else
can the same comprehensive view of those subjects be
found. What may be the conclusions of medical men
in regard to essential fevers twenty years hence I would
not pretend to say. It is certain their views have
changed very much within a shorter period, and if new
discoveries are made in ten years to come I doubt not
you will be ready to change yours. We must take
to-day the truth so far as we know it, and add to it day
by day as we learn more.'

It is evident from his letters that the success of the
work on fevers was a great gratification to Bartlett.
The second edition was issued in 1847, and while the
history of typhoid and typhus fever remained much in
the same state, with certain additions and developments,
the subject of periodical and yellow fevers was greatly


ELISHA BARTLETT 133

extended. The third edition was issued in 1852. The
fourth edition was edited by Bartlett's friend, Aionzo
Clark, of New York. The dedication of the second,
third, and fourth editions was to Dr. John Orne Green,
of Lowell, * with whom the early and active part of the
writer's life was passed ; in a personal friendship which
no cloud, for a single moment, ever shadowed or chilled ;
and in a professional intercourse whose delightful har-
mony no selfish interest or personal jealousy ever
disturbed.'

From every standpoint Bartlett on Fevers may be
regarded as one of the most successful works ever
issued from the medical press, and it richly deserves
the comment of the distinguished editor of the fourth
edition :

' The question mav be fairly raised whether any book
in our profession illustrates more clearly the beauties
of sound reasoning and the advantages of vigorous
generalization from carefully selected facts. Certainly
no author ever brought to his labour a more hi^h-
minded purpose of representing the truth in its sim-
plicity and in its fullness, while few have been possessed
of higher gifts to discern, and gracefully to exnibit it.'

An Essay on the Philosophy of Medicine^ 1844, a classic
in American medical literature, is the most characteristic
of Bartlett's works, and the one to which in the future
students will turn most often, since it represents one of
the most successful attempts to apply the principles of
deductive reasoning to medicine, and moreover illus-
trates the mental attitude of an acute and thoughtful
observer in the middle of the century. The work con-
sists of two parts : in the first science is defined and its
canons laid down. Ascertained facts, with their rela-
tions to others, obtained by observation or experience,
and generalized into laws and principles— this constitutes


134 BIOGRAPHICAL ESSAYS

science. He dwells upon the hurtfulness of theories,
and sketches in an interesting manner Newton's position
as an observer and as a theorist : ' If he (Newton) bowed
at any time or in any degree his strong neck to the yoke
of hypothesis, it was always with a perfect consciousness
of his ability at will to shake it off, as the lion shakes
the dew-drop from his mane/ He quotes from Sir
Humphrey Davy: *When I consider the variety of
theories that may be formed on the slender foundation of
one or two facts, I am convinced that it is the business
of the true philosopher to avoid them altogether.'

Bartlett is the strongest American interpreter of the
modern French school of medical observation, which

'is characterized by its strict adherence to the study
and analysis of morbid phenomena and their relation-
ships ; by the accuracy, tne positiveness, and the minute
detail which it has carried into this study and analysis ;
and by its rejection as an essential or legitimate element
of science of all a priori reasoning or speculation. The
spirit which animates and guides and moves it is ex-
pressed in the saying of Rousseau, " that all science is
in the facts or phenomena of nature and their relation-
ships, and not in the mind of man, which discovers and
interprets them." It is the true protestant school of
medicine. It either rejects as apocryphal, or holds as
of no binding authority, all the traditions of the fathers,
unless they are sustained and sanctioned by its own
experience.'

There are weak points in his arguments, some of
which are well pointed out in an able article in the
British and Foreign Medico-Chirurgical Review Quly,
1845), bu^ i^ is ^^^ work of a strong and thoughtful
mind, and for a time, at least, it had a powerful in-
fluence in the profession. A contemporary writer,
Samuel Henry Dickson \ speaks of it in the following
terms :

* Gross, American Medical Biography y 1861, p. 750.


ELISHA BARTLETT 135

' It was particularly well-timed, and addressed effec-
tively to the requirements of the profession, at the period
of its publication, It breathes a spirit of thoughtful and
considerate scepticism, which was then needed to temper
the headlong habit of confident polypharmacy prevalent
over our country. . . . When addressed, however, by
Bartlett, on this side of the Atlantic, and on the other
by Forbes, he (the orthodox disciple) stopped to listen
and consider. These gifted men spoke with authority ;
they pleaded impressively, eloquently, wisely. If, in
the natural ardour of controversy, they went somewhat
too far, let that slight fault be forgiven for the great
good they accomphshed. Nay, let them be honoured
tor the courage and frankness with which they attacked
prevalent error, and risked their popularity and position
by assailing modes of practice rendered familiar by
custom, ana everywhere adopted and trusted to.*

In 1848 appeared one of Bartlett's most characteristic
works, a little volume of eighty-four pages, entitled,
An Inquiry into the Degree of Certainty of Medicine^ and
into the Nature and Extent of its Power over Disease.
The iconoclastic studies of Louis and certain of the
Paris physicians, and the advocacy of expectancy by
the leaders of the Vienna school, had between 1830
and 1850 disturbed the profession not a little, and in
1846 appeared an article by Dr. Forbes, in which, as
Bartlett said, were drawn *in strong and exaggerated
colours the manifold imperfections of medical science
and the discouraging uncertainties of medical art.'
These circumstances had combined to shake and disturb
the general confidence in the profession, with the effect
that 'the hold which medicine has so long had upon
the popular mind is loosened; there is a widespread
scepticism as to its power of curing diseases, and men
are everywhere to be found who deny its pretensions
as a science, and reject the benefits and blessings which
it proffers them as an art.' To Bartlett it appeared


13^ BIOGRAPHICAL ESSAYS

high time to speak a clear and earnest word for the
science which we study and teach, and for the art
which we inculcate and practise, and in this essay he
set himself the task of vindicating the claims of medicine
to the regard and confidence of mankind. In his en-
deavour 'to show how far and with what measure of
certainty and of constancy we are able to control, to
mitigate, and to remove disease' Bartlett occupied at
the outset very advanced ground for that date. We
must remember that the general body of the profession
had the most implicit confidence in drugs, and poly-
pharmacy was almost as much in vogue as in the
seventeenth and eighteenth centuries. The reception
of the essay in certain quarters indicates how shocking
its tone appeared to some of the staid old conservatives
of the day. I have a review of it in the Medical
Examiner y November, 1848, from which I give the
following extract:

' This is a curious production, the like of which we
have seldom seen from the pen of any one who had
passed the age of a sophomore. What makes it the
more remarkable is the circumstance that the writer
is a gentleman of education and experience, and the
author of works which have given nim a wide repu-
tation.'

The force of the rebound sufficiently indicates the
intensity with which the attack was felt. Bartlett's
position, however, reminds one somewhat of the sermon
of the liberal Scotch Presbyterian on 'things which
cannot be shaken ', in which he proceeded at the outset
to shake off three-fourths of the cherished beliefs of
Evangelical Christianity.

After a preliminary discussion on anatomy and physi-
ology, and on the remarkable rapidity with which these
sciences were progressing, he proceeds to speak of


ELISHA BARTLETT 137

the state of pathology and therapeutics as illustrated
in the well-known disease pneumonia. Time will not
permit me to do more than to refer to the result of
his analysis of the evidence. He classifies the cases
into, first, those which terminate naturally and spon-
taneously, quite independent of any active medical treat-
ment, a proportion 'probably large'; second, a group
which will terminate fatally notwithstanding any assis-
tance which art may furnish ; they are, as Sir Gilbert
Blane said of the worst forms of yellow fever, * deter-
minedly fatal ' ; and, finally, a third class, ' not tending
necessarily either in one direction or the other,' in
which the issue depends upon the treatment of the
disease. * In these cases, art, judiciously applied, saves
the life of the patient ; the issue of the cases, in death
or in recovery, is dependent upon the treatment of the
disease.' Then follows a discussion on the nature and
limits of the medical art in the various groups of
diseases, and he concludes with a section on the
triumphs of preventive medicine.

The initials *A. S.' at the end of a review in the
American Journal of the Medical Sciences, October, 1848,
enables us to estimate the impression which the book
made upon a kindred spirit. Professor Alfred Stills,
of the University of Pennsylvania (still with us, I am
happy to say), wrote, * He has done a good work,
a work for which he deserves the respect and grati-
tude of the medical profession, and of all sound-hearted
men, whatever their pursuits, who fight under the
banner of truth, and are the sworn foes of all imposture,
the determined opponents of all error.'

At times, and in degrees differing with our tem-
peraments, there come upon us bouts of depression,
when we feel that the battle has been lost, and that


138 BIOGRAPHICAL ESSAYS

to fight longer is not worth the effort, periods when,
amid the weariness, the fever and the fret of daily
practice, things have gone against us; we have been
misunderstood by patients, our motives have been
wrongly interpreted, and smitten perhaps in the house
of our friends, the worries of heart to which we doctors
are so subject make us feel bitterly the uncertainties
of medicine as a profession, and at times make us
despair of its future. In a voice that one may trust
Bartlett concludes his inquiry with these memorable
words, which I quote, in the hope that they may
soothe the heartache of any pessimistic brother:

' There is no process which can reckon up the amount
of good which the science and art of medicine have
conferred upon the human race; there is no moral
calculus that can grasp and comprehend the sum of
their beneficent operations. Ever since the first dawn
of civilization and learning, through **the dark back-
ward, and abvsm of time , they have been the true
and constant friends of the suffenng sons and daughters
of men. Through their ministers and disciples, they
have cheered the desponding; they have lightened
the load of human sorrow; they have dispelled or
diminished the gloom of the sick-chamber; tn^ have
plucked from the pillow of pain its thorns, and made
the hard couch soft with the poppies of delicious rest ;
they have let in the light of ioy upon dark and desolate
dwellings ; they have rekinoied the lamp of hope in the
bosom of despair; they have called back the radiance
of the lustreless eye and the bloom of the fading
cheek ; they have sent new vigour through the failing
limbs ; and, finally, when exhausted in all their other
resources, and baffled in their skill — handmaids of phi-
losophy and religion— they have blunted the arrows of
deatn, and rendered less rugged and precipitous the
inevitable pathway to the tomb. In the circle of human
duties, I do not know of any, short of heroic and perilous
daring, or religious martyrdom and self-sacrifice, higher
and nobler than those of the physician. His daily round
of labour is crowded with beneficence, and his nightly


ELISHA BARTLETT 139

sleep is broken, that others may have better rest. His
whole life is a blessed ministry of consolation and hope.*

The last of Bartlett's strictly medical publications
was a little monograph on the History^ Diagnosis^ and
Treatment of Edematous Laryngitis^ published in Louis-
ville at the time he held the chair of practice at the
University, in 1850. It is a carefully prepared mono-
graph, based largely on the studies of Valleix ; a fresh
interest in the subject had been given him by the
observations of Dr. Gurdon Buck, of New York, who
had cured several cases by directly scarifying the
oedematous membranes.

IV

Naturally studious, fond of poetry, history, biography,
and literature in general, and not for long tied and
bound in the chains of general practice, Bartlett had
ample opportunities to cultivate his mind. He says in
one of his letters to Green (dated Pittsfield, Nov. i,
i^) : ' I P^ss a good deal of my time here quite alone,
so that I find myself whiling away the hours in medita-
tion much oftener than when engaged in the more
varied and active affairs of business at home. I think
that I always leave Pittsfield with the better and purer
part of my being somewhat strengthened.' Burton con-
cludes his immortal treatise with the advice : ' Be not
solitary, be not idle ', but the true student, in some part
of his life at least, should know the 'fruitful hours
of still increase*. For many years Bartlett enjoyed
a leisure known to-day to few professors of medicine,
the fruits of which are manifest in his writings. Among
his contemporaries in the profession there were brilliant
writers— Samuel Henry Dickson, Jacob Bigelow, J. K.
Mitchell— but in a style so uniformly high and polished.


I40 BIOGRAPHICAL ESSAYS

yet withal so plain, not one of them approached Bartlett.
Compare, for example, Samuel Jackson's Principles of
Mediciney written in 1832, with the first edition of the
Fevers (1842) — the one pompous, involved, obscure;
the other clear, direct, simple. For style in his medical
writings Bartlett may be called the Watson or the
Trousseau of America.

Bartlett was at his best in the occasional address,
and, as we have noticed already, this talent was culti-
vated very early in his career, since we find him giving
the Fourth of July oration before his fellow citizens
when he had been scarcely a year in Lowell. All of
the lectures and addresses illustrate, as Holmes said,
' that easy flow of language, that facility of expression,
that florid warmth when occasion offers, which commonly
marks the prose of those who are bom poets.' Among
these addresses there are four or five worthy of a per-
manent place in our literature. Perhaps the most
characteristic is one entitled. The Head and the Hearty
or the Relative importance of Intellectual and Moral Edu-
cation^ which is a stirring plea for a higher tone in
social and political morality. In the same clear, ringing
accent he speaks in his address on Spurzheim of the
dangers of democracy. In a lecture on The Sense of
the Beautiful, delivered in 1843, Bartlett appears as an
apostle of culture, pleading in glowing language for the
education of this faculty. One short fragment I must
quote :

'Amongst the Hebrews, and in the aee of Moses,
it was linked to religion ; it dwelt amidst the mysteries
of Worship and Faith. It brought costly offerings to the
costlier altar ; it hun^ the tabernacle with its curtains of
fine twined linen, and blue, and purple, and scarlet ; and
with cherubim of cunning work ; it arrayed the high
priest of Jehovah in his gorgeous and consecrated gar-


ELISHA BARTLETT 141

ments, and on the mitre of pure gold upon his forehead,
it graved, like the engravinc; of a signet — Holiness to the
Lord. At a later day, ana amongst a widely different
people, it became the handmaid of a refined and luxu-
rious sensuality. It lapped the soul of Greece in
a sensual elysium. Its living impersonations were
Pericles and Aspasia. It called the mother of love
from the froth of the sea, and bound her zone with
its cestus ; it filled the hills of Arcady with fleet Oreads ;
it graced with half-naked Naiads the fountains and the
rivers. It crowned the Acropolis with the Parthenon,
and it embodied its highest conceptions of physical
grace and beauty in the Venus and the Apollo. At
other periods during the history of our race, it has
manifested itself in other forms than these ; under other
circumstances, aspects, and influences, and with other
results.*

In 1848 he delivered the Fourth of July oration
before his old friends in Lowell. At the opening he
refers to the fact that twenty years before he had
occupied the same position.

* It was the dewy morning of my manhood ; " time
had not thinned my flowing hair " ; life, with its bound-
less hopes and its golden visions, spread far and fair
before me ; and cheered by your words of encourage-
ment, and aided by your helping hands — ^your associate
and co-worker, and in your service; a stranc^er, but
welcomed with frank confidence and trust— I nad just
entered upon its arduous and upward pathway.'

In 1849 appeared a Brief Sketch of the Lije^ Character,
and Writings of IVilliam Charles IVells, the South Caro-
linian Tory, who subsequently became a distinguished
man of science in London, and who was well known for
his researches on the phenomena of dew.

One of the last of Bartlett's publications was A Dis-
course on the Times, Character, and Writings of Hippo-
crates, delivered as an introductory address before the
trustees, faculty, and medical class of the College of


142 BIOGRAPHICAL ESSAYS

Physicians and Surgeons, at the opening of the session
of 1852-3. The three pictures^ which he gives of
Hippocrates, as a young practitioner in the Isle of
Thasos, at the death-bed of Pericles, and as a teacher
in the Isle of Cos, are masterpieces worthy of Walter
Savage Landor. In no words of exaggeration the late
George D. Prentice said, * There are but few word pic-
tures in the English language that exceed the grandeur
and loveliness of that one called into being by Dr. Bart-
lett, in which he imagines Pericles upon his death-bed
with Hippocrates in attendance/

It is remarkable how many physicians write poetry,
or what passes as such. I have been told of a period
in the history of the Royal College of Physicians of
London when every elect (censor), as they were called,
had written verses. Some begin young, as did Bartlett ;
others become attuned in the deep autumnal tone of
advancing years, when, as Plato tells us in the Phaedo^
even Socrates felt a divine impulsion to make verses
before quitting the prison house. Those of us who
have read the epic of the late distinguished Professor
George B. Wood, of the University of Pennsylvania,
entitled First and Last^ published when he was sixty-
four, will devoutly hope that professors of medicine,
when afflicted with this form of madness, will follow his
example and publish their poems anonymously and in
another country. Jacob Bigelow, too, when nearly
seventy, 'darkened sanctities with song' with his
American Rejected Addresses (Eolopoesis).

Dr. Bartlett had poetical aspirations early in life.
In a letter to his sister of Dec. 3, 1826, he speaks of
having seen in New York, in the Garland^ * two fugitive

^ The reader will And these pictures in an appendix to this
lecture.


ELISHA BARTLETT 143

pieces which some months before I had made use of to
fill up the corner of a newspaper, but what sense they
might have contained had been turned into nonsense,
and I blushed for my wandering orphans, notwith-
standing they had been so well dressed, and though
they had found their way into pretty respectable com-
pany. I should have blushed for myself had they been
exhibited to the public as my offspring.' In another
letter of the same period we see how completely he
had passed beneath the yoke of Byron.

In December, 1854, Bartlett issued a little volume
entitled, Simple Settings in Verse, for Six Portraits and
Pictures from Mr. Dickens*s Gallety, the inditing of
which had been, as he says, a pleasant occupation which
had helped to while away and fill up many an hour
which would otherwise have been weary or vacant in
his invalid life. I have already spoken of one. An
Allegory, in which are autobiographical details. I cannot
do better than quote from an appreciative notice which
his friend Oliver Wendell Holmes wrote of the little
volume.

' When, to the friends he had loved, there came a fare-
well eift, not a last effort of the learning and wisdom
they nad been taught to expect from him, but a little
book with a few sones in it, songs with his whole warm
heart in them, they knew that his hour was come, and
their tears fell fast as they read the loving thoughts that
he had clothed in words of natural beauty and melody.
The cluster of evening primroses had opened and the
night was close at hand.

Of a warm, affectionate nature— a manhood fused
with female grace— to judge from the statements of
contemporaries and friends, to know Bartlett was to love
him. Alonzo Clark writes to him always as 'Dear
Brother ', and says in one place, ' We all wish that you


144 BIOGRAPHICAL ESSAYS

were among us — not to work unless you choose, but
that we might see that face of yours, and feel the influ-
ence of the mind that shines through it.' His confreres,
John Ome Green and Alonzo Clark, are invariably
addressed as *Dear Brother'. Among the letters is
one of sympathy to Dr. Green, the desire of whose eyes
had been taken away at a stroke. In it Bartlett unlocked
his heart in a most touching and human appeal to the
afflicted soul. It seems almost too sacred to quote, but
after listening you will forgive me :

' Mv DEAR Brother : What shall I say to the melan-
choly allusion, in the close of your letter, to the death
of our dear Minerva? What poor words of mine can
be of any service to one on whom the hand of the Great
Chastener has been so heavily laid? How shall I,
whose life has been comparatively so cloudless and
serene^ come, with the message of solace and encourage-
ment, mto the presence of one whose meridian sun has
been shrouded in such utter and dreadful eclipse ? But
why should I not ? Am I not a brother and a man ?
Has not bereavement been a guest in the dwelling of
my childhood; has not death been a familiar visitor
amid the scenes of my early friendships and happiness
and hopes ? And where, too, is the tuture— for us all
—for me, as well as for yourself? We but follow each
other through the furnace of aflliction, as we follow
each other to the grave. Who of us has so hedged in
his earthly treasures that the spoiler cannot easily break
through tne frail enclosure, and rifle him, in a moment,
of the choicest and best ? The lines of the Christian
poet, familiar to me, chiefly, from the lips of a now
sainted mother, occur to my memory here :

The spider's most attenuated thread

Is cord, is cable, to man's tender tie

On earthly bliss; — it breaks at every breeze.

We are brothers, then, in all the liabilities and con-
tingencies and uncertainties of the future. Let us be
brothers and fellow helpers, also, in its hopes and its
duties. There can be no entire and hopeless wretched-
ness for the soul of man, except that which arises from


ELISHA BARTLETT 145

its self-inflicted degradation. The sweet sister, the
affectionate daughter, the beautiful bride, and the young
mother, was taken away in the clear, unclouded morning
of her life— taken away, but where ? And by whom ?
The flower was transplanted from an earthly garden —
a fair and sunny one, it is true, but from an earthly
garden— to be set forever, where no worm can feed on
Its root, where no decay can ever dry up its bloom — in
the Paradise of God. By whom? Taken away — by
her Father, from a far-off country, where she was only
a sojourner or a pilcrrim — to her beautiful and eternal
home. Take these thoughts into your heart, and they
shall lighten up, or drive away, the darkness of the past,
and, what is better, they shall again cheer your future
with the once familiar forms and faces of'^ Happiness
and Hope. How can we know what, even of present

food, our indulgent Father may have in store lor us?
le may have allotted to you many long years, to be
filled up first with duty, and, if filled with duty, to be
crowned, also, with the cheerful light of social and
domestic joy. You may say, perhaps, that this is all
very well for me to say, but that I know nothing about
it. But I do know something of the mutability of all
earthly things. This uncertainty has long been to me
a daily theme of meditation ; so I am not wholly a
stranger. But I have found an antidote to the gloom
and sadness which would otherwise occasion in remem-
bering that all things are in the hands of a Wise Dis-
poser, and the surest way to please Him, as well as to
secure our own present as well as future peace, is to
submit to His dispensations and to follow on in the
course of active ana cheerful duty to Him, to our fellows,
and to ourselves.'

When at Louisville some obscure nervous trouble,
the nature of which I have not been able to ascertain,
attacked Dr. Bartlett. Against it in New York he fought
bravely but in vain, and after the session of 1853-4
retired to Smithfield, his native place. The prolonged
illness terminated in paralysis, but, fortunately, did not
impair his mental faculties in the slightest degree. He
died on July 19, 1855.


OSLkM


146 BIOGRAPHICAL ESSAYS

From the many eulogies which appeared after Bart-
lett's death, I select a portion of one written by his
dearest friend, Alonzo Clark, as the preface to the
fourth edition of the Fevers.

'Sixteen months ago, he closed his brilliant profes-
sional career, after years of growing bodily weakness
and pain ; his mind not dimmed by his physical infirmi-
ties, but bright and comprehensive, glowinjg; with the
memories of the past, and the visions of the future. He
died too soon for the profession he adorned. The clock
had hardly marked twelve at noon, on the dial plate of
life, when its pendulum strokes grew faint and emdually
fainter to the ear ; and now, at lenjgth, when all is still,
the hand that notes the hours pomts sadly upward, to
indicate how much of daytime still remained to reap the
harvest of affection ana honour, in those fields from
which he had already garnered up so many golden
sheaves. He died, alas I too soon. The whole pro-
fession are his mourners ; for conspicuous as he had -
become by his medical writings and his extended pro-
fessional labours, his acknowledged worthiness, his
innate gentleness and modesty disarmed envy. He left
no enemies. His mind and purpose were pure, almost
beyond example. His high mental endowments were
controlled and directed by a considerate judgement and
an earnest, benevolent heart ; and as the laws of refrac-
tion, wrought out into mathematical formulae, enable
the lapidary to construct the facets which open the
fountains of the many-coloured diamond, so, for him,
cultivation and elegant taste had brought out the varied
and winning native lights of his rich, intellectual, moral,
and social nature/

In translating the Lives of Eminent French Physicians^
Bartlett said he had a twofold object : ' First, the delinea-
tion of distinguished professional character and attain-
ment, and, secondly, by the influence of such high
examples to awaken in the younger members of the
medical body a more devoted and worthy emulation
of the great masters of our art.* In this spirit I appear ^


ELISHA BARTLETT 147

before you to-day, glad to tell over the story of your
countryman— the story of ' a life in civic action warm ',
one that all 'the muses deck't with gifts of grace*,
a distinguished teacher, an author of widespread in-
fluence and distinction, a serene philosopher, but above
all a man in whom you may recognize, even from the
brief and imperfect sketch which I have given,

A likeness to the wise below,
A kinship with the great of old.


APPENDIX

A SKETCH OF HIPPOCRATES*

In one of the yeau^ of the eighty-eighth Olympiad, in the
island of Thasos, fronting the Thracian city of Abdera, there
was sadness in the house of Silenus, for its young master had
been seized with sudden and alarming illness — the fiery causus
of the climate. The year had been marked by some meteoro-
logical and epidemic peculiarities. A little before the rising
of Arcturus— that is, just previous to the autumnal equinox,
and while this constellation was still upon the horizon — there
had been heavy and frequent rains, with winds from the
north. Towards the equinox, and up to the setting of the
Pleiades^ there were light rains with southerly winds. During
the winter* the winds were cold, strong, and dry from the
north, with snow. Towards the vernal equinox, there were
violent storms. The spring was cold and rather wet, with
winds from the north. Towards the summer solstice, there
were light rains^ and the temperature was cool till near the
approach of the dog-days. After the dog-days and until the
rising of Arcturus, the summer was marked by great heat ;
not at intervals, but constantly. There was no water. Summer-

* From A Discourse an the Ttmes, CkaracUr, and Writings of
Hippocrates, by Elisha Bartlett.

L a


148 BIOGRAPHICAL ESSAYS

etesian-winds were prevalent. From the rising of Arcturus
to the time of the equinox, there were rains with the wind
from the south.

During the winter, the general health of the Thasians was
good, excepting an epidemic prevalence of paralysis. At the
opening of spring, the causus showed itself, and continued to
prevail up to the autumnal equinox. During the early part
of the season, the disease was mild ; but after the autumn
rains, it became more severe, and carried off a great many of
its subjects. . . . Dysenteries prevailed also during the
summer ; and some patients with fever even, who had had
hemorrhages, were attacked with dysentery : this happened
to the slave of Eraton, and to Myllus. . . . There was much
sickness amongst the women. . . . Many had difficult labors,
and were sick subsequently ; this was the case with the
daughter of Telebolus, who died on the tenth day after her
confinement. . . . When the causus proved fatal, death
commonly took place on the sixth day, as in the cases of
Epaminondas, Silenus, and Philiscus, son of Antagonas. • • •
The parotid glands suppurated in the case of Cratistonax,
who lived near the temple of Hercules ; and also in that of
the servant of Scymmus, the fuller.

But omitting any further details of the prevailing diseases
of the year, let us return to the bedside of the young patient
in Abdera. It is the third day of his disease; he has had
a restless and distressed night, with some wandering of the
mind ; the symptoms are all worse in the morning, and his
family and neighbors are anxious and alarmed. The occupa-
tions and order of that old Thasian household are interrupted
and broken up. A fresh offering has been placed on the altar
of the household Jove, standing in the centre of the inner
court. The sound of the flute and the cithara has ceased ;
there is no animated talk of the last winners at the Isthmian
or the Olympian games ; the clatter of the loom and the
domestic hum of the spinning wheel are no longer heard ;
the naked feet of the slaves and the women fall carefully and
silently upon the uncarpeted floors, and an unwonted stillness
reigns throughout the numerous apartments of the dwelling.
There is no savory steam of roasting wild boar from the


ELISHA BARTLETT 149

kitchen, and the fragrant Thracian wine stands untasted on
the table, with a few plain barley-cakes and a little salt fish.

Silenus lies in his sleeping-chamber, in the quiet interior
part of the house, adjoining the apartments of the women,
farthest from the vestibule, and near to the garden. By the
bed of the sick man, there is a small tripod stand, with
a circular top, and upon it there is a statuette of Hercules,
a bowl of warm barley-water, and a cup of oxymel.

Leaning her head on the foot of the bed and sobbing, sits,
on a low stool, a young Greek woman, beautiful in her
features, and graceful in the flowing outlines of her person,
as the Thessalian maidens of Homer. There is a picturesque
combination of barbarian rudeness and Grecian elegance in
her appearance, not an unfitting type and expression of the
age and state of society, in the midst of which she lived.
Her feet and ankles are bare; she wears only a single
garment — the long Ionic chiton of linen — with large sleeves
reaching only a little below the shoulders, leaving uncovered,
in their snowy whiteness, arms that might have rivalled those
of the jealous queen of Olympus. A girdle fastens the rot^
loosely round a waist, like that of the Medicean Venus,
innocent of the deformities of buckram and whalebone.
The light auburn hair is simply parted and carried back
from the forehead, gathered in a knot on the crown of the
head, fastened with a golden grasshopper, and held by a coif
of golden network.

At the head of the bed, watching steadfastly and earnestly
the appearance of the patient, is seated his physician, the
already celebrated son of Heraclides and Phenarete, Hippo-
crates of Cos. He has just entered the apartment, to make
his morning visit. His sandals have been taken off, and his
feet washed by a slave in the vestibule. He wears over his
linen tunic a large flowing mantle of light fine woolen, suited
to the season, not unlike the later toga of the Romans,
fastened at the neck with a cameo of ^sculapius, and falling
in graceful folds nearly to his feet His hair is long, and
both this and his beard are kept and arranged with scrupulous
neatness and care. He is thirty years oM, in the very prime
and beauty of early manhood. His features^ through these


ISO BIOGRAPHICAL ESSAYS

misty shadows of many centuries, we cannot clearly dis-
tinguish, but we see that his face is dignified, thoughtful, and
serene ; and his whole aspect, manner, and expression are
those of high, antique breeding, of refined culture, and of
rather studied and elaborate elegance.

His examination of his patient was long, anxious, and
careful. He saw at once that the gravity and danger of the
disease had increased since his last visit He inquired very
minutely into the manner in which the night had been passed ;
and was told by the watchers that the patient had had no
sleep, that he had talked constantly, had sung and laughed,
and had been agitated and restless. He found the hypo-
chondria tumefied, but without much hardness. The stools
had been blackish and watery, and the urine turbid and dark
colored. He noticed the temperature and feel of the skin,
and he studied for a long time and with great solicitude the
general manner and appearance, the decubitus, the breathing,
the motions, and especially the physiognomy of the patient
The only circumstance in the examination that would have
particularly attracted the attention of a modem witness of
the scene, would have been his omission to feel the pulse.
With this exception, no examination of the rational symptoms
of disease could have been more thorough and methodical.

Having satisfied himself as to the state of his patient, he
retired to an adjoining room, followed by some of the atten-
dants, to give directions in regard to the few simple remedies
that he intended to use. The patient had already been bled,
and had had a purgative of black hellebore. Hippocrates
directed, that instead of the strained decoction of barley, which
had been the patient's drink, he should now have honey and
water — the favorite hydromel— that the bed should be made
softer—the windows of the room still farther darkened, and
that a warm flax-seed poultice, softened with olive oil, should
be applied to the abdomen.

With a sad but decided expression of his fears as to the issue
of the case, and a few kindly and pious words to the weeping
wife, about the dignity, the solace, and the duty, in all our
trials, of submission to the will of the gods, he gathered his
mantle gracefully about him, had his sandals refitted by the


ELISHA BARTLETT 151

slave who waited in the vestibule, and proceeded on his daily
round of visits among the houses of the city.


And now, leaving the sterile island of Thasos, let us follow
the young physician to another sick chamber — to a scene of
domestic life, still further illustrative of that remote and
wonderful period, with which we are concerned.

The time is a year or two later — it is the house of Pericles
that we enter, and we stand by the death-bed of the great and
venerable Archon. Everything in the spacious apartment
indicates the pervading presence — not of obtrusive grandeur,
or of showy and ostentatious wealth — but of stately elegance,
and of high, various, many-sided luxury, culture, and refine-
ment. Philosophy, letters, and art breathe in the quiet
atmosphere of the room ; and the taste of Aspasia sheds an
Asiatic grace over its furnishing and its decorations. In one
comer stands a statue of Minerva, from the chisel of Phidias ;
and the walls are covered with pictures, fresh from the pencils
of Pansenus and Polygnotus, illustrating the legendary and
historic glories of Greece. There might have been seen
Thfiseus, bearing off from the field of victory, on the banks
of the Thermodon, the masculine and magnificent queen of
the Amazons— half willing, perhaps, to be the captive of such
a victor ; Jason, in his good ship Argo, with his fifty selectest
heroes, convoyed by the queen of love, the awful H^re, and
Apollo, winds his various and adventurous voyage, crowded
with poetic imagery and romantic incident, and brings back
the golden fleece from Colchis; — Helen, at her loom, is
weaving into her ' golden web ' the story of the Trojan
wars;— the chaste Penelope, by the light of her midnight
lamp, undoes the delusive labors of the day;— Ulysses,
returned from his long wanderings, surveys once more, with
boyish pride and delight, the dear old bow, which no arm but
his could bend.

The central figure on that old historic canvas that I have
endeavored to unroll before you, is that of the dying states-
man. Raised and resting, in solemn and august serenity,
upon its last pillow, lies that head of Olympian grandeur,


T52 BIOGRAPHICAL ESSAYS

which — I may say it without presumption — after the lapse of
nearly twenty-three centuries, now finds, for the first time,
its fitting representative and likeness — as the character and
career of the great Athenian find their counterparts also— in
that illustrious orator and statesman, who now walks in
solitary majesty amongst us— the pride, the strength, the
glory, of the Republic — the Pericles of our Athens — whose
Acropolis is the Constitution of his country —whose Propylsea
are the freedom and the federation of the States.

Added to the calamities of that long and disastrous inter-
necine struggle between the two rival cities of Greece, which
had just begun, Athens was now afflicted with that terrible
visitation of the plague, the history of which has been left to
us by Thucydides; and Pericles was sinking under a pro-
tracted and wearing fever— the result of an attack of the
disease.

His long and glorious life is about to close. He had been,
for more than an entire generation — if never the first Archon,
and not always the most popular— by common consent the
most eminent citizen, statesman, and orator of the republic —
the great defender of her constitution— the champion of her
freedom and her rights— the upholder and the magnifier of
her renown. Political rivals, disappointed partisans, and
a few malignant personal enemies, and professional libellers
and satirists, had been hostile to his career, and had en-
deavored to blacken his fair fame; but his strong and
unshaken democratic faith— his far-seeing sagacity — his firm-
ness and moderation — his enlarged, liberal, humanizing,
conservative, and pacific policy — his moral courage and inde-
pendence, and his high public probity, had triumphed over
them all; and although by braving the prejudices of his
friends and supporters, in his devotion to the general weal,
he had gathered over his declining sun some clouds of public
disfavor— the sense of justice, and the feeling of gratitude in
the minds of his countrymen were quick to return— the clouds
were already scattered, or they served only to deepen and
reflect the setting splendor which, for a moment, they had
intercepted and obscured.

Many of his near personal friends and relatives had already


ELISHA BARTLETT 153

fallen victims to the pestilence. Both his sons had perished,
and the young Pericles— the child of Aspasia — had been sent
away, with his mother, for safety, into Thessaly. Phidias,
and his old teacher, Anaxagoras, his 'Guide, philosopher,
and friend ', had died a little while before the breaking out
of the epidemic. Those who were left had now gathered
around the bed of the dying Archon, to receive the rich
legacy of his parting words, and to pay to him the last
solemn and kindly offices of life.

Not often in the world's history has there met together
a more august and illustrious company. These are a few of
those whom we are able to recognize amongst them. Resting
his head on the shoulder of Socrates, and sobbing aloud in
unrestrained and passionate sorrow, leans the wild and reck-
less Alcibiades— just in the first bloom of that resplendent
personal beauty which made him seem to the eyes, even of
the Greeks, more like the radiant apparition of a young
Apollo, than any form of mere earthly mould — subdued, for
the first time in his life, and probably for the last— by the
spectacle before him, of his dying relative and guardian — to
reverence, tenderness, and truth. Sophocles, his old com-
panion in arms, is there ; and near him, in his coarse mantle,
and with unsandaled feet, may have stood a grandson of
Aristides, still poor with the honorable poverty of his great
ancestor.

Conspicuous amidst this group of generals, admirals, states-
men, orators, artists, poets, and philosophers, — in rank and
fortune, in social position, in reputation, in learning, culture,
and refinement, their equal and associate, sits the young
physician of Cos. Already had his rising fame reached
Athens, and when the city, overcrowded with the inhabitants
of Attica, driven from their homes by the armies of Sparta,
was smitten with the pestilence, he was summoned from his
island home in the iEgean, to stay, if he could, the march of
the destroying angel, and to succor with his skill those who
had fallen under the shadow of its wings.

On a gentle declivity, looking toward the south-west, in the
small island of Cos, lying in the JEgtan sea, a few stadia


154 BIOGRAPHICAL ESSAYS

from the coast of Asia Minori stands the temple of ^sculapius.
Its Ionic columns, and its ornamented friezes of Pentelican
marble, glitter and flash in the sunlight, as we watch them
through the swaying branches of the ancient oaks, chestnuts,
and elms, that make the sacred grove of the temple. In the
centre of the principal room, or cella, of the temple, and
fronting the entrance, stand statues of iEsculapius, and his
daughters, Hygiea and Panacea. On each side of the
entrance are marble fonts of lustral water, for the preliminary
purification of the sick visitors to the temple.

Near a column of the temple, and holding a roll of papyrus
in his left hand, stands Hippocrates. Gathered about him,
in picturesque little groups, there is a company of Greek
youths. Their tasteful and elegant costumes, their earnest
and intelligent faces, and their general air and bearing, all
show plainly enough the superior refinement and culture of
the class to which they belong. They are medical students,
young Asclepiades, who have assembled here from the several
states of Greece, to acquire the clinical skill and experience
of the great surgeon and physician of Cos, and to listen to
the eloquent lessons of the illustrious professor.

Thirty years have gone by since we met him at the bedside
of the dying Pericles. The lapse of this generation has
thinned his flowing hair, and sprinkled his beard with silver.

It would be gratifying if we could know something of his
personal history during this long and active period of his life.
We know but little, however, and this little is dim and
shadowy. That he had led a life of activity and usefulness,
and of growing reputation, and that he had visited various
portions of Greece, is certain. What he himself had wit-
nessed, and must have felt, we know well enough. He had
seen, for this whole period, his country torn and distracted
by civil war — state arrayed against state, city against city;
he had mourned over the disastrous expedition of Athens
against Syracuse ; and shooting athwart all the murky dark-
ness of this troubled and stormy period — instead of the
benignant sun of Pericles—the baleful rays of the star of
Alcibiades, setting at last, but too late for his country, in
ignominy and blood.


ELISHA BARTLETT 155

I have not departed from the strictest limits of historical
probability, in assigning to Hippocrates the high powers of
didactic and persuasive oratory. One of the most potent
agencies in the development of Greek intellect, and the ad-
vancement of Greek civilization, consisted in the general pre-
valence of public teaching and recitation. For many successive
centuries, it was from the living lips of bards and rhapsodists,
kindled with coals from the glowing altars of patriotism and
religion, — and not through the medium of any cold and silent
written records, that the immortal strains of the Iliad and
the Odyssey rang through the land, and were made literally
familiar as household words. Even up to an advanced period
of Grecian culture, the art of writing was but little practised ; /
and it was by speech, and not by reading, that statesmen,
poets, orators, philosophers, and historians acted upon their
disciples and the public. Then, the evidence derived from
his writings is full and conclusive, that Hippocrates was not
merely a skilful physician, but that he was learned in all the
philosophy and literature of his age. Plato speaks of the
Asclepiades, his cotemporaries, as men of elegant and
cultivated minds, who, in the explanations they give to their
patients, go even to the heights of philosophy. It is no
violation, then, of historic probability, to presume that the
great philosophic and practical physician — who had been
trained in this unrivalled school of human speech — who had
listened to the eloquence of Pericles in the public assemblies,
or been charmed by the ' colloquial magic of Socrates ', in
the market-place, should have been himself, also, a master
of this high power of instructive and persuasive speech. It
is by no forced or illegitimate exercise of the fancy, that we
look back to the scene I have endeavored to sketch. And
with little danger of departing far from the truth, we may
imagine what would be likely to constitute the theme of his
discourse, especially if the occasion was one of unusual
interest or solemnity, such as the opening or closing of one
of his courses of instruction — the Introductory Lecture — or
the Valedictory Address to the graduating class of the
school of Cos, at the term of the first year of the ninety-fifth
Olympiad.


156 BIOGRAPHICAL ESSAYS

The character of Hippocrates, his position, his close obr
servation of nature, his knowledge, his philosophy, the times
in which he lived, the circumstances which surrounded him,
all conspired to make him a polemic and a reformer. He
would probably take such an occasion as that of which I am
speaking, to lay down and to vindicate the great principles of
his system ; and he would be likely to begin with an exposi-
tion of the errors of medical doctrine and practice, most
important and most generally prevalent. I do not suppose
that our illustrious historical father was wholly exempt from
the infirmities of our common nature ; and it is very possible
that in his animadversions upon the system of his Cnidian
neighbors, there were mingled some ingredients more spicy
than Attic salt ; and he may have indulged, perhaps, in some
allowable self-congratulation, that the class of Cos was so
much larger than that at Cnidus.

I suppose, however, that as President of the college, he
would, in a graceful and dignified exordium, give his greeting
and welcome to the members of the class ; he would express
his gratification at seeing so numerous an assemblage from
so many of the states of Greece — from the North and the
South, the East and the West — from Attica, and Boeotia, and
the Peloponnesus — from distant Sicily, and even from Egypt.

After this, or some similar appropriate introduction, he
would probably continue by warning his hearers against the
subtle and dangerous errors of superstition^ of the old
theurgic faith. He would speak of the great revolution that
had so recently taken place in the Greek mind, even then
only partially accomplished ; he would describe in colors
such as only he could use, who had felt this change in his
own spirit, and who had witnessed it all about him — the
gradual dawn and the final rising of the central, solar idea of
a simple spiritual theism, of fixed laws, of invariable relations
and sequences of events, in the economy of nature. As he
sketched the outlines of this great and pregnant history, he
could hardly fail to linger for a moment, with something of
the passionate enthusiasm of his early years, and with some*
thing also of their strong and simple faith, upon thatgoi^geous
theurgic and mythological creation of the Greek mind, which


ELISHA BARTLETT 157

marked its legendary and religious period. He would speak
of this mythology, and its various and beautiful legends, in
no cynical or bigoted tone, but with philosophical toleration,
and with something even of loving sympathy and admiration.
He would say it was the genial and natural product of the
quick, susceptible, many-sided Greek mind, in the period
of its childhood and adolescence. Kindling with his old
enthusiasm, he would have likened that early age, peopled
with its gods and demi-gods, its beautiful women and heroic
men, to its own young Apollo — the bloom of immortal youth
on his beaming forehead, his flowing locks sweet with the
ambrosia of the dewy morning of life, and all his form radiant
with a divine beauty. He would have said that the present
high civilization of his country was in a great degree the
growth of seed planted in that genial soil, and nurtured by
that genial sun ; that Greek character, and art, and philo-
sophy, are all still steeped in the glorious light of the old
Homeric age.

In the third place, he would have warned his hearers
against the seductive but dangerous influences of the philo-
sophers. These men, he would have said, are, for the most
part, idle dreamers, and they are nothing else. I know them
well. They affect superior wisdom, and they look down
disdainfully upon the physician, and the patient observer of
nature. They seem to think that the economy of the universe,
including the human system, in health and disease, can be
ascertained and understood by a sort of intellectual divina-
tion, which they call wisdom and philosophy, but which is in
reality only empty hypothesis and idle speculation. He
would then have entered into an examination of these
systems ; he would have exhibited their radical errors and
defects — he would have compared them with the humbler
philosophy of observation and experience, and he would have
shown that they had accomplished nothing, and that in the
very nature of things they could accomplish nothing, for the
advancement of real knowledge.

As he gazed upon that most impressive spectacle before
him,— so many of his young countrymen, gathered at the
peaceful summons of science and humanity from all portions


iS8 BIOGRAPHICAL ESSAYS

of the Grecian territory, filled with hoi>e, with ardor, with
promise, life's full and radiant future stretching &r and fair
before them, — a cloud of sadness could hardly fail to throw
its shadow over his features, as he remembered the long thirty
years of civil discord, of deadly internecine strife, through
which his country had just passed ; and his closing words
could hardly fail to rise into a patriotic and Pan-Hellenic
hymn, the burden of which should be, that the glory, and
happiness, and safety of Greece, were to be found in the
union of her states ; that they whom he addressed — his young
friends and disciples— were the common and equal heirs of
the glory of Marathon and Thermopylae ; that they all spoke
the language of Homer ; that while they need not forget, but
might be proud even, that they were Spartans, or Athenians^
or Thebans, or Thessalians, they ought to remember with
a higher pride, that they were also, and more than all,
Greeks ; that they had a common country, and that a common
destiny awaited them.


159


A BACKWOOD PHYSIOLOGIST »


Come with me for a few moments on a lovely June
day in 1822, to what were then far-off northern wilds,
to the Island of Michilimacinac, where the waters of
Lake Michigan and Lake Huron unite and where stands
Fort Mackinac, rich in the memories of Indian and
voyageur, one of the four important posts on the upper
lakes in the days when the rose and the fleur-de-lis
strove for the mastery of the western world. Here the
noble Marquette laboured for his Lord, and here beneath
the chapel of St. Ignace they laid his bones to rest.
Here the intrepid La Salle, the brave Tonty and the
resolute Du Luht had halted in their wild wanderings.
Its palisades and block-houses had echoed the war-
whoops of Ojibwas and Ottawas, of Hurons and Iro-
quois, and the old fort had been the scene of bloody
massacres and hard-fought fights ; but at the conclusion
of the War of 1812, afler two centuries of struggle, peace
settled at last on the island. The fort was occupied by
United States troops, who kept the Indians in check
and did general police duty on the frontier, and the
place had become a rendezvous for Indians and voy-
ageurs in the employ of the American Fur Company.
On this bright spring morning the village presented an
animated scene. The annual return tide to the trading
post was in full course, and the beach was thronged with

^ An Address before the St. Louis Medical Society, October 4,
1902.


i6o BIOGRAPHICAL ESSAYS

canoes and batteaux laden with the pelts of the winter's
hunt. Voyageurs and Indians, men, women, and chil-
dren, with here and there a few soldiers, made up
a motley crowd. Suddenly from the compan^s store
there is a loud report of a gun, and amid the confusion
and excitement the rumour spreads of an accident, and
there is a hurrying of messengers to the barracks for
a doctor. In a few minutes (Beaumont says twenty-five
or thirty, an eyewitness says three) an alert-looking
man in the uniform of a U. S. Army surgeon made his
way through the crowd, and was at the side of a young
French Canadian who had been wounded by the dis-
charge of a gun, and with a composure bred of an
exceptional experience of such injuries, prepared to
make the examination. Though youthful in appearance,
Surgeon Beaumont had seen much service, and at the
capture of York and at the investment of Plattsburgh
he had shown a coolness and bravery under fire which
had won high praise from his superior officers. The
man and the opportunity had met— the outcome is my
story of this evening.

I. The Opportunity— Alexis St. Martin

On the morning of June 6 a young French Canadian,
Alexis St. Martin, was standing in the company's store,
* where one of the party was holding a shotgun (not a
musket), which was accidentally discharged, the whole
charge entering St. Martin's body. The muzzle was
not over three feet from him— I think not more than
two. The wadding entered, as well as pieces of his
clothing; his shirt took fire; he fell, as we supposed,
dead.'

* Doctor Beaumont, the surgeon of the fort, was im-
mediately sent for, and reached the wounded man in


A BACKWOOD PHYSIOLOGIST i6i

a very short time, probably three minutes. We had
just gotten him on a cot, and were taking off some of
his clothing. After the doctor had extracted part of the
shot, together with pieces of clothing, and dressed his
wound carefully, Robert Stuart and others assisting,
he left him, remarking, "The man cannot live thirty-
six hours; I will come and see him by and by." In
two or three hours he visited him again, expressing
surprise at finding him doing better than he had anti-
cipated. The next day, after getting out more shot and
clothing, and cutting off ragged edges of the wound, he
informed Mr. Stuart, in my presence, that he thought
he would recover." * *

The description of the wound has been so often quoted
as reported in Beaumont's work, that I give here the
interesting summary which I find in a * Memorial ' pre-
sented to the Senate and House of Representatives by
Beaumont :

'The wound was received just under the left breast,
and supposed, at the time, to have been mortal. A large
portion of the side was blown off, the ribs fractured, and
openings made into the cavities of the chest and abdo-
men, throuigh which protruded portions of the lungs
and stomach, much lacerated and burnt, exhibiting alto-
gether an appallinjg^ and hopeless case. The diaphra^
was lacerated, anda perforation made directly mto uie
cavity of the stomach, through which food was escaping
at the time your memorialist was called to his relief.
His life was at first wholly despaired of, but he very
unexpectedly survived the immediate effects of the
wound, and necessarily continued a long time under
the constant professional care and treatment of your

^ Statement of G. G. Hubbard, an officer of the company, who
was present when St. Martin was shot, quoted by Dr. J. R. Baily,
of Mackinac Island, in his address on the occasion of the Beaumont
Memorial Exercises, Mackinac Island, July lo^ 190a Thi Pkysictan
and Surgeon^ December, 190a


OSLKR


i62 BIOGRAPHICAL ESSAYS

memorialist, and, by the blessing of God, finally re-
covered his health and strength.

'At the end of about ten months the wound was
partially healed, but he was still an object altogether
miserable and helpless. In this situation he was de-
clared "a common pauper/' by the civil authorities of
the county, and it was resolved by them that they were
not able, nor required, to provide for or support, and
finally declined taking^ care of him, and, in pursu-
ance of what they probably believed to be their public
duty, authorized by the laws of the territory, were about
to transport him, in this condition, to the place of his
nativity m lower Canada, a distance of more than fifteen
hundred miles.

' Believing the life of St. Martin must inevitably be
sacrificed if such attempt to remove him should be
carried into execution at that time, your memorialist,
after earnest, repeated, but unavailing, remonstrances
against such a course of proceedings, resolved, as the
only way to rescue St. Martin from impending misery
andf death, to arrest the process of transportation and
prevent the consequent suffering, by taking him into his
own private family, where all the care and attention were
bestowed that his condition required.

* St. Martin was, at this time, as before intimated, alto-
gether helpless and suffering under the debilitating
effects of his wounds — naked and destitute of every-
thing. In this situation your memorialist received, kept,
nursed, medically and surgically treated and sustained
him, at much inconvenience and expense, for nearly two
years, dressing his wounds daily, and for considerable

Eart of the time twice a day, nursed him, fed him, clothed
ini, lodged him and furnished him with such neces-
saries and comforts as his condition and suffering
required.

' At the end of these two ^ears he had become able
to walk and help himself a little, though unable to pro-
vide for his own necessities. In this situation your
memorialist retained St. Martin in his family for the
special purpose of making physiological expenments/

In the month of May, 1825, Beaumont began the ex-
periments. In June he was ordered to Fort Niagara,


A BACKWOOD PHYSIOLOGIST 163

where, taking the man with him, he continued the
experiments until August. He then took him to Bur-
lington and to Plattsburgh. From the latter place St.
Martin returned to Canada, without obtaining Dr. Beau-
mont's consent. He remained in Canada four years,
worked as a voyageur, married and had two children.
In 1829 Beaumont succeeded in getting track of St.
Martin, and the American Fur Company engaged him
and transported him to Fort Crawford on the upper
Mississippi. The side and wound were in the same
condition as in 1825. Experiments were continued
uninterruptedly until March, 1831, when circumstances
made it expedient that he should return with his family
to lower Canada. The 'circumstances', as we gather
from letters, were the discontent and homesickness of
his wife. As illustrating the mode of travel, Beaumont
states that St. Martin took his family in an open canoe
' via the Mississippi, passing by St. Louis, ascended the
Ohio river, then crossed the state of Ohio to the lakes,
and descended the Erie and Ontario and the river
St. Lawrence to Montreal, where they arrived in June*.
Dr. Beaumont often lays stress on the physical vigour of
St. Martin as showing how completely he had recovered
from the wound. In November, 1832, he again engaged
himself to submit to another series of experiments in
Plattsburgh and Washington. The last recorded ex-
periment is in November, 1833.

Among the Beaumont p>apers, for an examination of
which I am much indebted to his daughter, Mrs. Keim
(Appendix A), there is a large mass of correspondence
relating to St. Martin, extending from 1827, two years
after he had left the doctor's employ, to October, 1852.
Alexis was in Dr. Beaumont's employ in the periods
already specified. In 1833 he was enrolled in the

M 2


i64 BIOGRAPHICAL ESSAYS

United States Army at Washington as Sergeant Alexis
St. Martin, of a detachment of orderlies stationed at the
War Department. He was then twenty-eight years of
age, and was five feet five inches in height.

Among the papers there are two articles of agree-
ment, both signed by the contracting parties, one dated
Oct 19, 1833, and the other November 7 of the same
year. In the former he bound himself for a term of
one year to

'Serve, abide and continue with the said William
Beaumont, wherever he shall go or travel or reside in
any part of the world his covenant servant and diligently
and faithfully, etc., . . . that he, the said Alexis, will at
all times during said term when thereto directed or re-
quired by said William, submit to assist and promote
by all means in his power such philosophical or medical
experiments as the said William shall direct or cause to
be made on or in the stomach of him, the said Alexis,
either through and by means of the aperture or opening
thereto in the side of him, the said Alexis, or otherwise,
and will obey, suffer and comply with all reasonable and
proper orders of or experiments of the said ^yilliam in
relation thereto and in relation to the exhibiting and
showing of his said stomach and the powers ana pro-
perties thereto and of the appurtenances and the powers,
properties, and situation and state of the contents tnereof.'

The agreement was that he should be paid his board
and lodging and S150 for the year. In the other agree-
ment it is for two years, and the remuneration $400.
He was paid a certain amount of the money down.

There are some letters from Alexis himself, all written
for him and signed with his mark. In June, 1834, he
writes hat his wife was not willing to let him go, and
thinks than he can do a great deal better to stay at
home. From this time on Alexis was never again in
Dr. Beaumont's employ.

There is a most interesting and protracted correspon-


A BACKWOOD PHYSIOLOGIST 165

dence in the years 1836, 1837, 1838, 1839, 1840, 1842,
1846, 1851 and 1852, all relating to attempts to induce
Alexis to come to St. Louis. For the greater part of
this time he was in Berthier, in the district of Montreal,
and the correspondence was chiefly conducted with
a Mr. William Morrison, who had been in the north-
west fur trade, and who took the greatest interest in
Alexis, and tried to induce him to go to St. Louis. (See
Appendix B.)

In 1846 Beaumont sent his son Israel for Alexis, and
in a letter dated August 9, 1846, his son writes from
Troy : ' I have just returned from Montreal, but without
Alexis. Upon arriving at Berthier I found that he owned
and lived on a farm about fifteen miles south-west of the
village.* Nothing would induce him to go.

The correspondence with Mr. Morrison in 1851 and
1852 is most voluminous, and Dr. Beaumont offered
Alexis 8500 for the year, with comfortable support for
his family. He agreed at one time to go, but it was too
late in the winter and he could not get away.

The last letter of the series is dated Oct. 15, 1852,

and is from Dr. Beaumont to Alexis, whom he addresses

as Mon Ami. Two sentences in this are worth quoting :

'Without reference to past efforts and disappoint-
ments—or expectation of ever obtaining your services
again for the purpose of experiments, etc., upon the

froposals and conditions heretofore made and suggested,
now proffer to you in faith and sincerity, new, and
1 hope satisfactory, terms and conditions to ensure your
prompt and faithful compliance with my most fervent
desire to have you again with me — not only for my
own individual gratification, and the benefits of medidu
science, but also for your own and family's present good
and future welfare.* He concludes witn, '1 can say no
more, Alexis— you know what I have done for vou many
years since— what I have been trying, and am still
anxious and wishing to do with and for you — what


i66 BIOGRAPHICAL ESSAYS

efforts, anxieties, anticipations, and disappointments I
have suffered from your non-fulfilment of my expecta-
tions. Don't disappoint me more nor forfeit the bounties
and blessings reserved for you/

So much interest was excited by the report of the
experiments that it was suggested to Beaumont that
he should take Alexis to Europe and submit him there
to a more extended series of observations by skilled
physiologists. Writing June lo, 1833, he says: 'I
shall engage him for five or six years if he will
agree, of which I expect there is no doubt He has
always been pleased with the idea of going to France.
I feel much gratified at the expression of Mr. Living-
ston's desire that we should visit Paris, and shall duly
consider the interest he takes in the subject and make
the best arrangements I can to meet his views and
yours.' Mr. Livingston, the American minister, wrote
from Paris, March 18, 1834, saying that he had sub-
mitted the work to Orfila and the Academy of Sciences,
which had appointed a committee to determine if addi-
tional experiments were necessary, and whether it
was advisable to send to America for Alexis. Nothing,
I believe, ever came of this, nor, so far as I can find,
did Alexis visit Paris. Other attempts were made to
secure him for purposes of study. In 1840 a student
of Dr. Beaumont's, George Johnson, then at the Uni-
versity of Pennsylvania, wrote saying that Dr. Jackson
had told him of efforts made to get Alexis to London,
and Dr. Gibson informed him that the Medical Society
of London had raised ;^3oo or ;^4oo to induce St. Martin
to come, and that he, Dr. Gibson, had been trying to
find St. Martin for his London friends. There are
letters in the same year from Dr. R. D. Thomson, of
London, to Professor Silliman, urging him to arrange


A BACKWOOD PHYSIOLOGIST 167

that Dr. Beaumont and Alexis should visit London.
In 1856 St. Martin was under the observation of Dr.
Francis Gurney Smith, in Philadelphia, who reported
a brief series of experiments, so far as I know the only
other report made on him.*

St. Martin had to stand a good deal of chaffing about
the hole in his side. His comrades called him 'the
man with a lid on his stomach'. In his memorial
address, Mr. C. S. Osbom, of Sault Ste. Marie, states
that Miss Catherwood tells a story of ^tienne St. Martin
fighting with Charlie Charette because Charlie ridiculed
his brother, j^tienne stabbed him severely, and swore
that he would kill the whole brigade if they did not stop
deriding his brother's stomach.

At one time St. Martin travelled about exhibiting
the wound to physicians, medical students, and before
medical societies. In a copy of Beaumont's work, for-
merly belonging to Austin Flint, Jr., and now in the
possession of a physician of St. Louis, there is a photo-
graph of Alexis sent to Dr. Flint. There are statements
made that he went to Europe, but of such a visit I can
find no record.

My interest in St. Martin was of quite the general
character of a teacher of physiology, who every session
referred to his remarkable wound and showed Beau-
mont's book with the illustration. In the spring of
1880, while still a resident of Montreal, I saw a notice
in the newspapers of his death at St. Thomas. I im-
mediately wrote to a physician and to the parish priest,
urging them to secure me the privilege of an autopsy,
and offering to pay a fair sum for the stomach, which
I agreed to place in the Army Medical Museum in

' Medical Examiner^ 1856, and Experiments on Digestion^ Phila-
delphia, 1856.


i68 BIOGRAPHICAL ESSAYS

Washington, but without avail. Subsequently, through
the kindness of the Hon. Mr. Justice Baby, I obtained
the following details of St. Martin's later life. Judge
Baby writes to his friend, Prof. D. C. MacCallum of
Montreal, as follows :

' I have much pleasure to-day in placing in your
hands such information about St. Martin as Kevd. Mr.
Chicoine, Cur6 of St. Thomas, has just handed over to
me. Alexis Bidigan, dit St. Martin, died at St Thomas
de Joliette on the 24th of June, 1880, and was buried in
the cemetery of the parish on the 28th of the same
month. The last sacraments of the Catholic church
were ministered to him by the Revd. Cur6 Chicoine,
who also attended at his burial service. The body was
then in such an advanced stage of decomposition that it
could not be admitted into the church, but had to be
left outside during the funeral service. The family
resisted all requests — most pressing as they were— on
the part of the members of the medical profession for
an autopsy, and also kept the body at home much
longer than usual and during a hot spell of weather, so
as to allow decomposition to set in and baffle, as they
thought, the doctors of the surroundinjg^ country and
others. They had also the grave dug eight feet below
the surface of the ground in order to prevent any
attenipt at a resurrection. When he diea St. Martin
was 03 years of age, and left a widow, whose maiden
name was Marie Joly. She survived him by nearly
seven years, dying at St. Thomas on the aoth of April,
1887, at the very old age of 90 years. They left four
children, still alive— Alexis, Charles, Hennette, and
Marie.

*Now I may add the following details for myself.
When I came to know St Martin it must have been
a few years before his death. A lawsuit brought him
to my office here in Joliette. I was seized with his
interests; he came to my office a good many times,
during which visits he spoke to me at great length of
his former life, how his wound had been cau.<;ed, his
peregrinations through Europe and the United States,
etc. He showed me his wound. He complained


A BACKWOOD PHYSIOLOGIST 169

bitterly of some doctors who had awfully misused him,
and had kind words for others. He nad made con-
siderable money during his tours, but had expended
and thrown it all awav in a frolicsome way, especially
in the old country, when I came across him he was
rather poor, living on a small, scanty farm in St. Thomas,
and very much aadicted to drink, almost a drunkard one
might say. He was a tall, lean man, with a very dark
complexion, and appeared to me then of a morose
disposition.'


II. The Book

In the four periods in which Alexis had been under
the care and study of Beaumont a large series of
observations had been recorded, amounting in all to
238. A preliminary account of the case, and of the
first group of observations, appeared in the PhilcuUlphia
Medical Recorder in January, 1825. During the stay
in Washington in 1832 the great importance of the
observations had become impressed on the Surgeon-
General, Dr. Lovell, who seems to have acted in a most
generous and kindly spirit. Beaumont tried to induce
him to undertake the arrangement of the observations,
but Lovell insisted that he should do the work himself.
In the spring of 1833 Alexis was taken to New York,
and there shown to the prominent members of the
profession, and careful drawings and coloured sketches
were made of the wound by Mr. King. A prospectus
of the work was issued and was distributed by the
Surgeon-General, who speaks in a letter of sending
them to Dr. Franklin Bache and to Dr. Stewart of Phila-
delphia, and in a letter from Dr. Bache to Dr. Beaumont,
acknowledging the receipt of a bottle of gastric juice,
Bache states that he has placed the prospectus in
Mr. Judah Dobson's store and has asked for sub-


I70 BIOGRAPHICAL ESSAYS

scribers. Beaumont did not find New York a very
congenial place. He complained of the difficulty of
doing the work, owing to the vexatious social inter-
course. He applied for permission to go to Plattsburgh,
in order to complete the book. After having made
inquiries in New York and Philadelphia about terms
of publication, he decided, as the work had to be issued
at his own expense, that it could be as well and much
more cheaply printed at Plattsburgh, where he would
also have the advice and help of his cousin, Dr. Samuel
Beaumont. In a letter to the Surgeon-General, dated
June lo, 1833, he acknowledges the permission to go to
Plattsburgh, and says : ' I shall make my arrangements
to leave here for PI. in about a week to rush the
execution of the Book as fast as possible. I am now
having the drawings taken by Mr. King engraved here.'

The summer was occupied in making a fresh series
of experiments and getting the work in type. On
December 3 he writes to the Surgeon-General that the
book will be ready for distribution in a few days, and
that 1,000 copies will be printed.

The work is an octavo volume of 280 pages, entitled
Experiments and Observations on the Gastric Juice and
the Physiology of Digestion, by William Beaumont, M.D.,
Surgeon in the United States Army. Plattsburgh.
Printed by F. P. Allen, 1833. While it is well and
carefully printed, the paper and type are not of the
best, and one cannot but regret that Beaumont did not
take the advice of Dr. Franklin Bache, who urged him
strongly not to have the work printed at Plattsburgh,
but in Philadelphia, where it could be done in very
much better style. The dedication of the work to
Joseph Lovell, M.D., Surgeon-General of the United
States Army, acknowledges in somewhat laudatory


A BACKWOOD PHYSIOLOGIST 171

terms the debt which Beaumont felt he owed to his
chief, who very gratefully acknowledges the compli-
ment and the kindly feeling, but characterizes the dedi-
cation as ' somewhat apocryphal '.

The work is divided into two main portions ; first,
the preliminary observations on the general physiology
of digestion in seven sections : Section I, Of Aliment ;
Section II, Of Hunger and Thirst; Section III, Of
Satisfaction and Satiety; Section IV, Of Mastication,
Insalivation, and Deglutition ; Section V, Of Digestion
by the Gastric Juice ; Section VI, Of the Appearance
of the Villous Coat, and of the Motions of the Stomach ;
Section VII, Of Chylification and Uses of the Bile and
Pancreatic Juice. The greater part of the book is
occupied by the larger section of the detailed account
of the four series of experiments and observations.
The work concludes with a series of fifty*one inferences
from the foregoing experiments and observations.

The subsequent history of the book itself is of in-
terest, and may be dealt with here. In 1834 copies of
the Plattsburgh edition, printed by F. P. Allen, were
issued by Lilly, Wait & Co., of Boston.

In the Beaumont correspondence there are many
letters from a Dr. McCall, in Utica, N.Y., who was an
intimate friend of a Mr. Wm. Combe, a brother of the
well-known physiologist and popular writer, Dr. Andrew
Combe of Edinburgh. Doubtless it was through this
connexion that in 1838 Dr. Combe issued an edition
in Scotland, with numerous notes and comments.
(Appendix C.)

The second edition was issued from Burlington, Vt.,
in 1847, with the same title-page, but after Second Edition
there are the words. Corrected by Samuel Beaumont^
M.D,, who was Dr. William Beaumont's cousin. In


172 BIOGRAPHICAL ESSAYS

the preface to this edition the statement is made that the
first edition, though a large one of 3,000 copies, had
been exhausted. This does not agree with the state-
ment made in a letter of Dec. 3, 1833, to the Suiigeon-
General, stating that the edition was to be 1,000 copies.
Of course more may have been printed before the type
was distributed. While it is stated to be a new and
improved edition, so far as I can gather it is a verbatim
reprint, with no additional observations, but with a good
many minor corrections. In an appendix (D) I give an
interesting letter from Dr. Samuel Beaumont with refer-
ence to the issue of this edition.

A German edition was issued in 1834, with the fol-
lowing title : Neue yersuche und Beobachtungen Uber den
Magensaft und die Physiologie der Verdauung^ auf eine
hochst merkwurdige Weise wdhrend einer Reihe von 7
Jahren an einem und demselben Subject angestelli. Beau-
mont's earlier paper, already referred to, was abstracted
in the Magazin der ausldndischen Litteratur der gesamm-
ten Heilkunde^ Hamburg, 1826, and also in the Archives
generates de Medecine^ Paris, 1828. I cannot find that
there was a French edition of the work.

The Experiments and Observations attracted universal
attention, both at home and abroad. The journals of
the period contained very full accounts of the work, and
within a few years the valuable additions to our know-
ledge filtered into the textbooks of physiology, which
to-day in certain descriptions of the gastric juice and of
the phenomena of digestion copy even the very language
of the work.

III. The Value of Beaumont's Observations

There had been other instances of artificial gastric
fistula in man which had been made the subject of


A BACKWOOD PHYSIOLOGIST 173

experimental study, but the case of St. Martin stands
out from all others on account of the ability and care
with which the experiments were conducted. As Dr.
Combe says, the value of these experiments consists
partly in the admirable opportunities for observation
which Beaumont enjoyed, and partly in the candid and
truth-seeking spirit in which all his inquiries seem to
have been conducted. ' It would be difficult to point
out any observer who excels him in devotion to truth,
and freedom from the trammels of theory or prejudice.
He tells plainly what he saw and leaves every one to
draw his own inferences, or where he lays down con-
clusions he does so with a degree of modesty and fair-
ness of which few perhaps in his circumstances would
have been capable.*

To appreciate the value of Beaumont's studies it is
necessary to refer for a few moments to our knowledge
of the physiology of digestion in the year 1832, the date
of the publication. Take, for example, ' The Work on
Human Physiology ' (published in the very year of the
appearance of Beaumont's book), by Dunglison, a man
of wide learning and thoroughly informed in the litera-
ture of the subject. The five or six old theories of
stomach digestion, concoction, putrefaction, trituration,
fermentation, and maceration, are all discussed, and
William Hunter's pithy remark is quoted, * some physio-
logists will have it, that the stomach is a mill, others,
that it is a fermenting vat, others, again, that it is a stew-
pan ; but, in my view of the matter, it is neither a mill,
a fermenting vat, nor a stew-pan ; but a stomach, gentle-
men, a stomach.'

The theory of chemical solution is accepted. This
had been placed on a sound basis by the experiments
of Reaumur, Spallanzani, and Stevens, while the studies


174 BIOGRAPHICAL ESSAYS

of Tiedemann and Gmelin and of Prout had done much
to solve the problems of the chemistry of the juice.
But very much uncertainty existed as to the phenomena
occurring during digestion in the stomach, the precise
mode of action of the juice, the nature of the juice itself,
and its action outside the body. On all these points
the observations of Beaumont brought clearness and
light where there had been previously the greatest
obscurity.

The following may be regarded as the most important
of the results of Beaumont's observations : First, the
accuracy and completeness of description of the gastric
juice itself. You will all recognize the following quota-
tion, which has entered into the textbooks and passes
current to-day :

' Pure gastric juice, when taken directly out of the
stomach of a healthy adult, unmixed with any other
fluid, save a portion of the mucus of the stomach with
which it is most commonly and perhaps always com-
bined, is a clear, transparent fluia ; inodorous ; a little
saltish, and very perceptibly acid. Its taste, when
applied to the toneue, is similar to this mucilaginous
water slightly acidulated with muriatic acid. It is readily
diffusible in water, wine, or spirits ; slightly effervesces
with alkalis ; and is an effectual solvent of the tnateria
alimentaria. It possesses the property of coagulating
albumen, in an eminent degree ; is powerfully antiseptic,
checking the putrefaction of meat ; and effectually re-
storative of healthy action, when applied to old, fetid
sores and foul, ulcerating surfaces.'

Secondly, the confirmation of the observation of Prout
that the important acid of the gastric juice was the
muriatic or hydrochloric. An analysis of St. Martin's
gastric juice was made by Dunglison, at that time
a professor in the University of Virginia, and by Ben-
jamin Silliman of Yale, both of whom determined the
presence of free hydrochloric acid. A specimen was


A BACKWOOD PHYSIOLOGIST 175

sent to the distinguished Swedish chemist, Berzelius,
whose report did not arrive in time to be included in
the work. In a letter dated July 19, 1834, he writes
to Professor Silliman that he had not been able to make
a satisfactory analysis of the juice. The letter is pub-
lished in Silliman's Journal, vol. xxvii, July, 1835.

Thirdly, the recognition of the fact that the essential
elements of the gastric juice and the mucus were separate
secretions.

Fourthly, the establishment by direct observation of
the profound influence of mental disturbances on the
secretion of the gastric juice and on digestion.

Fifthly, a more accurate and fuller comparative study
of the digestion in the stomach with digestion outside
the body, confirming in a most elaborate series of
experiments the older observations of Spallanzani and
Stevens.

Sixthly, the refutation of many erroneous opinions
relating to gastric digestion, and the establishment of
a number of minor points of great importance, such as,
for instance, the rapid disappearance of water from the
stomach through the pylorus, a point brought out by
recent experiments, but insisted on and amply proved
by Beaumont.

Seventhly, the first comprehensive and thorough
study of the motions of the stomach, observations on
which, indeed, is based the most of our present know-
ledge.

And lastly, a study ol the digestibility of different
articles of diet in the stomach, which remains to-day
one of the most important contributions ever made to
practical dietetics.

The greater rapidity with which solid food is digested,
the injurious effects on the stomach of tea and coffee,


176 BIOGRAPHICAL ESSAYS

when taken in excess, the pernicious influence of alco-
holic drinks on the digestion, are constantly referred to.
An ail-important practical point insisted on by Beaumont
needs emphatic reiteration to this generation :

*The system reauires much less than is generally
supplied to it. Tne stomach disposes of a definite
quantity. If more be taken than the actual wants of the
economy require, the residue remains in the stomach
and becomes a source of irritation and produces a conse-
quent aberration of function, or passes into the lower
bowel in an undigested state, ana extends to them its
deleterious influence. Dyspepsia is oftener the eflect
of over-eating and over-dnnking than of any other
cause.'

One is much impressed, too, in going over the experi-
ments, to note with what modesty Beaumont refers to
his own work. He speaks of himself as a humble
'inquirer after truth and a simple experimenter'.

' Honest objections, no doubt, are entertained against
the doctrine of digestion by the gastric juice. That they
are so entertained by these gentlemen 1 have no doubt.
And I cheerfully concede to them the merit of great
ingenuity, talents, and learning, in raising objections to
the commonly received hypothesis, as well as ability in
maintaining their peculiar opinions. But we ought not
to allow ourselves to be seduced by the ingenuity of
argument or the blandishments of style. Truth, like
beauty, is "when unadorned adorned the most"; and in

Prosecuting these experiments and inquiries, I believe
have been guided by its light. Facts are more per-
suasive than arguments, however ingeniously made, and
by their eloquence I hope I have been able to plead for
the support and maintenance of those doctrines which
have had for their advocates such men as Sydenham,
Hunter, Spallanzani, Richerand, Abemethy, broussais,
Philip, Paris, Bostock, the Heidelbere and Paris pro-
fessors, Dunglison, and a host of other luminaries in the
science of physiology.'

In reality Beaumont anticipated some of the most


A BACK WOOD PHYSIOLOGIST 177

recent studies in the physiology of digestion. Doubt-
less many of you have heard of Professor Pawlow*s, of
St. Petersburg, new work on the subject. It has been
translated into German, and I see that an English
edition is advertised. He has studied the gastric juice
in an isolated pouch, ingeniously made at the fundus of
the stomach of the dog, from which the juice could be
obtained in a pure state. One of his results is the very
first announced by Beaumont, and confirmed by scores
of observations on St. Martin, viz. that, as he sajrs, ' the
gastric juice never appears to be accumulated in the
cavity of the stomach while fasting.' Pawlow has shown
very cleariy that there is a relation between the amount
of food taken and the quantity of gastric juice secreted.
Beaumont came to the same conclusion : ' when aliment
is received the juice is given in exact proportion to its
requirements for solution.* A third point on which
Pawlow lays stress is the curve of secretion of the
gastric juice, the manner in which it is poured out
during digestion. The greatest secretion, he has shown,
takes place in the earlier hours. On this point hear
Beaumont : * It (the gastric juice) then begins to exude
from the proper vessels and increases in proportion to
the quantity of aliment naturally required and received.'
And again : ' When a due and moderate supply of food
has been received it is probable that the whole quantity
of gastric juice for its complete solution is secreted and
mixed with it in a short time.' A fourth point, worked
out beautifully by Pawlow, is the adaptation of the juice
to the nature of the food ; I do not see any reference
to this by Beaumont, but there are no experiments
more full than those in which he deals with the influence
of exercise, weather, and the emotions on the quantity
of the juice secreted.

OSLKJI N


178 BIOGRAPHICAL ESSAYS

IV. Man and Doctor

Sketches of Dr. Beaumont's life have appeared from
time to time. There is a worthy memoir by Dr. T. Rey-
burn in the St Louis Medical and Surgical Joumalf 1854,
and Dr. A. J. Steele, at the first annual commencement
of the Beaumont Medical College, 1887, told well and
graphically the story of his life. A few years ago Dr.
Frank J. Lutz, of this city, sketched his life for the
memorial meeting of the Michigan State Medical Society
on the occasion of the dedication of a Beaumont monu-
ment.

Among the papers kindly sent to me by his daughter,
Mrs. Keim, are many autobiographical materials, par-
ticularly relating to his early studies and to his work as
a surgeon in the War of 1812. There is an excellent
paper in the handwriting, it is said, of his son, giving
a summary of the earlier period of his life. So far as
I know this has not been published, and I give it in full :

*Dr. William Beaumont was born in the town 01
Lebanon, Conn., on the 21st day of November, a.d. 1785.
His father was a thriving farmer and an active politician
of the proud old Jeffersonian school, whose highest
boast was his firm support and strict adherence to the
honest principles he advocated. William was his third
son, who, in the winter of 1806-7, in the 22nd year of
his age, prompted by a spirit of independence and
adventure, left the oaternal roof to seek a fortune and
a name. His outnt consisted of a horse and cutter,
a barrel of cider, and one hundred dollars of hard-earned
money. With this he started, laying his course north-
wardfy, without any particular destination. Honour his
rule of action. Truth nis only landmark, and trust placed
implicitly in Heaven. Traversing the western part of
Massachusetts and Vermont in the sprine of 1807 he
arrived at the little village of Champlain, N. Y.. on the
Canada frontier — an utter stranger, fnendless and alone.
But honesty of purpose and true energy invariably work
good results. He soon gained the people's confidence,


A BACKWOOD PHYSIOLOGIST 179

and was entrusted with their village school, which he
conducted about three years, devoting his leisure hours
to the study of medical works from the library of Dr.
Seth Pomerov, his first patron. He then went over to
St. Albans, Vt., where he entered the office of Dr. Ben-
jamin Chandler and commenced a regular course of
medical reading, which he followed for two years, gaining
the utmost confidence and esteem of his kmd preceptor
and friends. About this time the war of 1812 commenced,
and he applied for an appointment in the U.S. Army,
successfully. He was appointed assistant-surgeon to
the Sixth Infantry, and joined his regiment at Pitts-
burgh, N.Y., on the 13th of September, 1812. On the
19th of March, 1813, he marchea from Plattsburgh with
the First Brigade, for Sackett's Harbour, where they
arrived on the 27th inst Here he remained in camp
till the 22nd of April, when he embarked with the troops
on Lake Ontario. His journal will best tell this portion
of his history :

' "April 22, 181^.— Embarked with Captain Humphreys,
Walworth and Muhlenburg, and companies on board the
schooner Julia. The rest of the brieade, and the Second,
with Foresith's Rifle Regiment and the Eighth Artillery
—on board a ship, brig, and schooner — remain in the
harbour till next morning.

' "23rd.— II o'clock a.m.— Weighs anchor and put out
under the impression we were going to Kingston. Got
out 15 or 20 miles—encountered a storm — wind ahead
and the fleet returned to harbour.

'"24th.- 6 o'clock a.m. — Put out with a fair wind —
mild and pleasant — the fleet sailing in fine order.

* "26th.— Wind prettv strong— increasing — ^waves run
high, tossing our vessels roughly. At half-past four pass
the mouth of Niagara river. This circumstance baffles
imagination as to where we are going — first impressed
with the idea of Kinc^ton — then to Niafi;ara — but now
our destination must be ' Little York '. At sunset came
in view of York Town and the Fort, where we lay ofl
some 3 or 4 leagues for the night.

'" 27th.- -Sailed into harbour and came to anchor
a little below the British Garrison. Filled the boats and
effected a landing, though not without difficulty and the
loss of some men. The British marched their troops
down the beach to cut us off as landing, and, though

N a


i8o BIOGRAPHICAL ESSAYS

they had every advantage, they could not effect their
design. A hot engagement ensued, in which the enemy
lost nearly a third of their men, and were soon compelled
to quit the field, leavingtheir dead and wounded strewn
in every direction. They retired to the Garrison,
but from the loss sustained in the engafi;ement the
undaunted courajg^e of our men, and the brisk firing
from our fleet, with the 12 and 32-pounders, they were
soon obliged to evacuate it and retreat with all possible
speed. Driven to this alternative, they devised the in-
human project of blowing up their magazine, containing
300 pounds of powder, the explosion of which had
wellnigh destroyed our army. Over 300 were wounded
and about 60 killed on the spot, by stones of all dimen-
sions falling, like a shower of hail, in the midst of our
ranks. A most distressing scene ensues in the hospital.
Nothing is heard but the agonizing jg^roans and suppUca*
tions oT the wounded and the (Wing. The surgeons
wade in blood, cutting off arms and legs and trepanning
heads, while the poor sufferers cry, 'O, my God!
Doctor, relieve me from this misery! I cannot live I*
Twas enough to touch the veriest heart of steel and
move the most relentless savage. Imagine the shocking
scene, where fellow beings lie mashed and mangled—
legs and arms broken and sundered— heads and bodies
bruised and mutilated to disfigurement! My deepest
sympathies were roused— I cut and slashed for 36 hours
without food or sleep.

'"29th. — Dressed upwards of 50 patients — from simple
contusions to the worst of compound fractures — more
than half the latter. Performed two cases of amputation
and one of trepanning. At 12 p.m. retired to rest my
fatigued body and mind."

'One month after the taking of York he witnessed
the storming of Fort George. The troops were trans-
ported from York to " Four-Mile Creek "(in the vicinity
of Ft. George), where they encamped from the loth of
May to the 27th, when they advanced to the attack.
His journal runs thus :

' " May 27 (1813).— Embarked at break of day — Col.
Scott with 000 men, for the advanced guard, supported
by the First Brigade, commanded by General Boyd,
moved in concert with the shipping to the enemy's shore
and landed under their batteiy and in front of their fire


A BACKWOOD PHYSIOLOGIST i8i

with surprising success, not losing more than 30 men
in the engagement, though the enem/s whole force was
placed in the most a(^antageous situation possible.
We routed them from their chosen spot— drove them
from the country and took possession of the town
and garrison."

' On the nth of September, 181^, he was at the Battle
of Pittsburgh, still serving as assistant-surgeon, though
doing all the duty of a full surgeon. At the close of the
war, in 1815, when the army was cut down, he was
retained in service, but resigned soon after, deeming
himself unjustly treated by the jg^ovemment in having
others, younger and less expenenced, promoted over
him.

' In 1816 he settled in Plattsburgh and remained there
four years in successful practice. In the meantime his
arm^ friends had persuaded him to join the service
agam, and, having applied, he was reappointed, in 1820,
and ordered to Ft. Mackinac as post-surgeon. At the
end of the first year he obtained leave of absence, re-
turned to Plattsburgh, and married one of the most
amiable and interestmg ladies of that place. (She still
survives her honoured husband, and in her green old age
is loved devotedly by all who know her.) He returned
to Mackinac the same year, and in 1822 came in posses-
sion of Alexis St. Martin, the subject of his Experiments
OH the Gastric Juice. By the accidental discharge of his
gun, while hunting, St. Martin had dangerously wounded
himself in the abdomen and came under tne treatment of
Dr. Beaumont, who healed the wound (in itlelf a triumph
of skill almost unequalled) and in 182s commenced a senes
of experiments, the results of which have a world-wide
publication. These experiments were continued, with
various interruptions, for eight years, during which time
he was ordered from post to post — now at Niagara, N.Y.,
anon at Green Bay, Mich., and finally at Fort Crawford,
on the Mississippi. In 1834 he was ordered to St. Louis,
where he remained in service till 1839, when he resigned.
He then commenced service with the citizens of St
Louis, and from that time till the period of his last
illness, enjoyed an extensive and distinguished practice,
interrupted only by the base attacks of a few disgraceful
and malidous knaves (sel^deemed members of the
medical profession) who sought to destroy a reputa*


i82 BIOGRAPHICAL ESSAYS

tion which they could not share. They gained nothing
except some little unenviable notoriety, and they have
skulKed away like famished wolves, to die in dieir
hiding-places.'

The dates of Beaumont's commissions in the army
are as follows : Surgeon's Mate, Sixth Regiment of In-
fantry, December 2, 1812; Cavalry, March 27, 1819;
Post-Surgeon, December 4, 1819 ; Surgeon First Regi-
ment and Surgeon, November 6, 1826.

From the biographical sketches of Reybum, Steele,
and Lutz, and from the personal reminiscences of his
friends, Drs. J. B. Johnson, S. Pollak, and Wm.
McPheeters, who fortunately remains with you, full of
years and honours, we gather a clearly defined picture
of the latter years of his life. It is that of a faithful,
honest, hard-working practitioner, doing his duty to
his patients, and working with zeal and ability for the
best interests of the profession. The strong common
sense which he exhibited in his experimental work
made him a good physician and a trusty adviser in cases
of surgery. Among his letters there are some interest-
ing pictures of his life, particularly in his letters to his
cousin, Dr. Samuel Beaumont. Writing to him April 4,
1846, he says :

' I have a laborious, lucrative, and increasing practice,
more than I can possibly attend to, though 1 nave an
assistant. Dr. Johnson, a youne man who was a pupil of
mine from 1835 to 1840. He then went to Philadelphia
a year or two to attend lectures, and graduated, and
returned here again in 1842, and has been very busy
ever since, and is so now, but notwithstanding I decline
more practice daily than half the doctors in the city get
in a week. You thought when you were here before
that there was too much competition for you ever to
think of succeeding in business here— there is ten times
as much now, and the better I succeed and prosper for
it. You must come with a different feeling from your


A BACKWOOD PHYSIOLOGIST 183

former — with a determination to follow in my wake and
stem the current that I will break for you. I am now in
the grand climacteric of life, three-score years and over,
with equal or more zeal and ability to do good and con-
tribute to professional service than at forty-five, and I now
look forward with pleasing anticipation of success and
greater usefulness— have ample competence for our-
selves and children, and no aoleful or dreaded aspect
of the future — to be sure I have to wrestle with some
adverse circumstances of life, and more particularly to
defend myself against the envious, mean, and professional

{ealousies and the consequent prejudices of some men,
)ut I triumph over them all and go ahead in defiance of
them.' *

His professional work increased enormously with the
rapid growth of the city, but he felt, even in his old age,
that delicious exhilaration which it is your pleasure
and privilege to enjoy here in the west in a degree
rarely experienced by your eastern confreres. Here is
a cheery paragraph from a letter dated Oct. 20, 1852 :
' Domestic affairs are easy, peaceable, and pleasant.
Health of community good— no severe epidemic diseases
prevalent — weather remarkably pleasant— business of
all kinds increasing— product of the earth abundant —
money plenty— railroads progressing with almost tele-
graphic speed— I expect to come to Plattsburgh next
summer all the way by rail/

But work was becoming more burdensome to a man
nearing threescore years and ten, and he expresses it
in another letter when he says : ' There is an immense
professional practice in this city. I get tired of it, and
have been trying hard to withdraw from it altogether,
but the more I try the tighter I seem to be held to it

> He had evidently hopes that when his cousin and son arrived
with Alexis they would arrange and plan for another series of
experiments, and in another year or two make another book, better
than the old one.


i84 BIOGRAPHICAL ESSAYS

by the people. I am actually persecuted, worried, and
almost worn out with valetudinarian importunities and
hypochondriacal groans, repinings, and lamentations —
Amen/

He continued at work until March, 1853, when' he
had an accident— a fall while descending some steps.
A few weeks later a carbuncle appeared on the neck,
and proved fatal, April 25. One who knew him well
wrote the following estimate (quoted by Dr. F. J. Lutz
in his sketch of Beaumont) :

* He was gifted with strong natural powers, which,
working upon an extensive experience m life, resulted
in a species of natural sagacity, which, as I supi>ose.
was something peculiar in him, and not to be attained
by any course 01 study. His temperament was ardent,
but never got the better of his instructed and disciplined
judgement, and whenever or however employed, he ever
adopted the most judicious means for attaining ends
that were always honourable. In the sick room he was
a model of patience and kindness; his intuitive per-
ceptions, guiding a pure benevolence, never failed to
inspire confidence, and thus he belonged to that class
of physicians whose very presence affords Nature a
sensible relief*

You do well, citizens of St. Louis and members of
our profession, to cherish the memory of William
Beaumont. Alive you honoured and rewarded him,
and there is no reproach against you of neglected
merit and talents unrecognized. The profession of the
northern part of the state of Michigan has honoured
itself in erecting a monument to his memory near the
scene of his disinterested labours in the cause of
humanity and science. His name is linked with one
of your educational institutions, and joined with that of
a distinguished labourer in another field of practice.
But he has a far higher honour than any you can give


A BACKWOOD PHYSIOLOGIST 185

him here— the honour that can only come when the
man and the opportunity meet— and match. Beaumont
is the pioneer physiologist of this country, the first to
make an important and enduring contribution to this
science. His work remains a model of patient, perse-
vering investigation, experiment, and research, and the
highest praise we can give him is to say that he lived
up to and fulfilled the ideals with which he set out,
and which he expressed when he said: 'Truth, like
beauty, is "when unadorned, adorned the most", and, in
prosecuting these experiments and inquiries, I believe
I have been guided by its light.*

Appendix A

The Beaumont papers in the possession of his
daughter, Mrs. Keim. of St. Louis, consist of (i) in-
teresting certificates from his preceptors. Dr. Pomeroy
and Dr. Chandler, the licence from the Third Medical
Society of Vermont, the commissions in the U.S. Anny,
several certificates of honorary membership in societies,
and the parchment of the M.D. d^rce conferred upon
him, honoris causa^ by the Columbian University of
Washington, 1833 » (^) ^ journal containing his experi-
ences in the War of 1812, from which I have given an
extract, a journal of his trip to Fort Mackinac, a journal
containing the reports of many cases, among them that
of St. Martin (in addition there is a protocolof the case
in loose folio sheets), a journal of the experiments, and
a commonplace book of receipts and jottines; (3) an
extensive correspondence relating to St. Martin and
the book, and many rough draf& of sections of the
book; (^ a large mass of personal correspondence,
much of It of interest as relating to conditions of practice
in St. Louis.

The family has a miniature of him in his army
uniform; the only picture which has been repro-
duced is of an older man from a daguerreot>rpe.
It is satisfactory to know that the ultimate destina-
tion of this most valuable collection of papers is


i86 BIOGRAPHICAL ESSAYS

the Surgeon-General's Library of the United States
Army, ofwhich Dr. Beaumont was so distinguished an
ornament.


Appendix B

On Oct. 20, 1852, he writes to his cousin, Dr. Samuel
Beaumont, on the subject of * that old, fistulous Alexis \
as he calls him. ' Alexis' answer to ^ours is the very
facsimile or stereotype of all his Jesuitical letters to me
for the last fifteen years. His object seems only to be
to get a heavy bonus and undue advance from me and
then disappomt and deceive me, or to palm and impose
himself and whole family upon me for support for me.

' I have evaded his designs so far ; but I verily fear
that the strong and increasing impulse of conscious
conviction of the great benefits and important useful-
ness of further and more accurate physiological investi-
gation of the subject will compel me to still further
efforts and sacrifices to obtain him. Physiological
authors and most able writers on dietetics and gastric
functions generally demand it of me in trumpet tones.

* I must have him at all hazards, and obtain the
necessary assistance to my individual and private efforts
or transfer him to some competent scientific institution
for thorough investigation and report — I must retrieve
my past ignorance, imbecility, ana professional remiss-
ness of a quarter of a century, or more, by double
diligence, intense study, and untiring application of soul
andbody to the subject before I die —

Should posthumous Time retain my name,
Let historic truths declare my fame.

' Simultaneous with this I write to Mr. Morrison and
Alexis my last and final letters — perhaps, proposing to
///;w, as bribe to his cupidity, to give him 5500 to come
to me without his family, for one year— ^300 of them for
his salary, and 2^200 for the support and contentment of
his family to remain in Canada in the meantime— with
the privilege of bringing; them on here another year,
upon my former proposition of 8300 a year, at his own
expense and responsibility, and support them himself
after they get here out of his 8^00 salary— I think he
will take the bait and come on this fall, and when 1 get


A BACKWOOD PHYSIOLOGIST 187

him alone again into my keeping and engagement, I will
take good care to control him as I please/

Appendix C

Letter from Dr. Andrew Combe, May i, 1833:

*My Dear Sir — May I beg your acceptance of the
accompanying volumes as a small expression of my
respect for your character and scientific labours. I need
not detain you bv repeating in this note the hig^h
estimation in which I hold you. The volumes herewith
sent will, I trust, convince you of the fact, and that it
will not be my fault if vou do not receive the credit
[ustly due to your valuable and disinterested services.

remain. My Dear Sir,

' Very respectfully yours,

'Andw. Combe.'


Appendix D

Letter from Dr. Samuel Beaumont, March 16, 1846 :

* Your letter of the ist of February arrived here in
the course of mail, and I have attendee to the business
which you authorized me to do. I am afraid, however,
that you will be disappointed, and perhaps dissatisfied
with the arrangement. Mr. Goodrich came here some
five or six days after I received your letter, and made
his proposal, which was to give you every tenth copy
for tne privilege of publishing an edition. The number
he proposed to publish was fifteen hundred, which
would give you 150 copies. I did not like to close the
bargain on this condition, and he was not disposed to
give any more. This was in the evening. I told him
to give me time till the next morning, andl would make
up my mind. In the morning, after consultation, I con-
cluded to offer him the copyright for the unexpired time
(only one year) for two hundred copies. After some
demurring, we closed the bareain. 1 then thous^ht and
I still think it was not enough ; but it was all I could
§et. In making up my mind the following considera-
tions presented themselves : First, that the copyright
would expire in one year, and he would then have the


i88 BIOGRAPHICAL ESSAYS

right to print it without consulting the author ; second,
that it would be somewhat mortifying to the author not
to have his work republished, even if no great pecuniary
benefit was to be obtained by such a republication ; and
it appeared to me to be quite certain that a new edition
WQuld not be soon printed, if I let this opportunity slip ;
third, I have been long anxious, as I presume you have
been, to see the work gotten up in a better dress than
it originally had, ana in a way which will give it
a general credit and more notoriety among all classes
of the reading public than it has heretofore possessed —
in fact, make it a standard work ; fourth, it has given us
a chance to g[ive it a thorough correction, a thing which
was very desirable. The work, you recollect, was got
up in a great hurry, and a great many errors escaped
our notice. You may also recollect that the Philadelphia
reviewer spoke of the inaccuracies in the work. And
he had reason enough for it. In looking over the work
critically with a view of correction, I have been perfectly
astonished at the errors that occur on almost every
page. And although we understood perfectly what we
meant to say, the reader would find it somewhat difficult
to decipher our meaning. In the first 140 paf es I made
nearly 300 corrections. These are practiciuly merely
verbal alterations or change of phrases or sentences so
as to make them more accurate or persi)icuous. I have
in no case so changed the text as to eive it a different
meaning. I flatter myself that it wUl now be more
worthy the public patronage ; and if for no other, this
chance for correction I consider alone almost a sufficient
remuneration for the brief limits of the copjrri^ht.
I have also written a preface for the second edition,
making quotations from American and European autho-
rities in praise of the merits of the work. From delicacy
I have written this as from the publisher. I think it is
pretty well done. The work will probably be published
in the course of about a month, and those designed for
you will be delivered to me, when I shall send them to
you. He guarantees not to sell in the state of Missouri,
or the states south and west of that state. But that, of
course, is all gammon. The book will be thrown into
market, and he cannot control the direction in which it
will go.'


i89


THE INFLUENCE OF LOUIS ON
AMERICAN MEDICINE*


Harvey and Sydenham, types of the scientific and
the practical physician, though contemporaries, were
uninfluenced, so far as we know, by each other's work
or method. Harvey had little reputation as a practical
physician, and Sydenham cared little for theories or
experiment. Modern scientific medicine, in which these
two great types meet, had its rise in France in the early
days of this century. True, there had lived and worked
in England the greatest anatomist and medical thinker
of modern times ; but John Hunter, to whose broad
vision disease was but one of the processes of nature to
be studied, was as a voice crying in the wilderness to
the speculative, theoretical physicians of his day.

Bichat's Anatomie Generale laid the foundation of the
positive or modern method of the study of medicine, in
which theory and reasoning were replaced by observa-
tion and analysis. Laennec, with the stethoscope, and
with an accurate study of disease at the bedside and in
the post-mortem room, almost created clinical medicine
as we know it to-day.

The study of fevers occupied the attention of all the
great physicians of the time. Fever, what it was, how
it should be treated. What a vast literature exists

> Read before the Stills Society of the Medical Department of
the University of Pennsylvania. Reprinted from The Johns
Hopkins Hospilal Bulietin^ Nos. 77-78, August-September, 1897.


igo BIOGRAPHICAL ESSAYS

between Sydenham and Broussais! What a desolate
sea of theory and speculation !

No one had been more influenced by Bichat's brilliant
teachings than Broussais, who ruled supreme in the
medical world of Paris in the early decades of the nine-
teenth century. A strong believer in careful observations
at the bedside and in the post-mortem room, he was led
into hopeless error in attributing fevers and many other
disorders to irritation in the stomach and intestines —
his gastro-enteritis.

Writing in the American Medical Recorder^ July, 1821,
an American student, Dr. F. J. Didier, said of the Paris
professors of that date, 'They were always talking of
Hippocrates, Galen, Celsus, &c., as if not a particle had
been added to the stock of knowledge since their time.'
And again, ' The doctrines of John Brown, mixed up
with the remnants of humoral pathology, form the basis
of the present system.*

The same mixture prevailed early in the fourth decade,
as you may see from Broussais' Pathology^ the American
edition of which was issued in 1832, and from Jackson*s
(Samuel) Principles of Medicine, published in the same
year.

Upon this scene, when Broussais was at the height
of his fame, came Louis. He, with his friends Andral
and Chomel, were very important factors in substituting
Anally in the study of medicine, for speculation and
theory, observation and method.

The chief facts in Louis' life may be thus briefly
stated. He was bom in 1787 at At. He began the
study of law, but abandoned it for that of medicine.
He seems not to have been of a very strong constitu-
tion, as he did not pass the inspection for military
service. He began the study of medicine at Rheims,


LOUIS 191

and completed his course in Paris, where he graduated
in 1813, in the twenty-seventh year of his age. While
waiting at home, hesitating what he should do, M. le
comte de Saint-Priest, who occupied an official position
in Russia, happened to stay for a few hours in the town
of A*i to see Louis' family, and it was suggested that the
young physician should accompany him to Russia. He
consented, and in St. Petersburg obtained a diploma to
practise. For three years he seems to have had no
settled abode, but wandered about with his friend, who
was governor of one of the provinces. He then settled
in Odessa, where he remained for four years and prac-
tised with great success. In the last year of his stay in
Odessa he was very much disturbed by the high rate
of mortality in children with diphtheria, and this appears
to have determined him to abandon for a time the
practice of medicine and to devote himself to study.
With this object in view he returned to Paris, and for
six months attended the practice at the Children's Hos-
pital. Among the younger physicians in Paris he found
an old fellow pupil, Chomel, physician to La Charit6,
who offered him opportunities for work in his wards.
Louis at this time was thirty-four years of age. Here
for six years uninterruptedly he set himself to work to
study disease in the wards and in the post-mortem room.
At first he appears to have occupied the position simply
as a voluntary assistant and friend of Chomel, but sub-
sequently he became his chef-de'clinique^ and during
this period he occupied a room in the entresol of the
hospital. He was a voluminous note-taker and collected
in this time an enormous number of important facts.

This remarkable feature in Louis' life has scarcely
been dwelt upon sufficiently. I know of no other
parallel instance in the history of medicine. It is worth


192 BIOGRAPHICAL ESSAYS

while reading the brief extract from Dr. Cowan's intro-
duction to his translation of the work on Phthisis.

* He entered the hospital of La Charity as a clinical
clerk^ under his friend, Professor Chomel. For nearly
seven yearSf including the flower of his bodily and mental
powers (from the age of thirty-three to forty), he con-
secrated the whole of his time and talents to rigorous^
impartial observation. All private practice was relin-
quished, and he allowed no considerations of personal
emolument to interfere with the resolution he had
formed. For some time his extreme minuteness of
inquiry and accuracy of description were the subjects
of sneerine and ridicule, and "To what end?" was not
infrequently and tauntingly asked. The absence of any
immediate result seemed lor a time to justify their con-
tempt of a method involving; too much labour and per-
sonal sacrifice to be generally popular or easily imitated ;
and M. Louis himself, at moments, almost yielded to
the increasing difficulties of the task he had undertaken.
No sooner, however, were his facts sufficiently numerous
to admit of numerical analysis than all doubt and hesi-
tation were dissipated, and the conviction that the path
he was pursuing could alone conduct him to the dis-
covery of truth became the animating motive for future
perseverance. Many of the results to which he arrived
soon attracted general attention, and among those who
had formerly oerided his method while they admired
his zeal, he found many to apolaud and a few to imitate.
From this moment may be aated the presence of that
strone impression of the necessity of exact observation
by which the school of Paris has been since so dis-
tinguished, and which is now gradually pervading the
medical institutions of the continent and our own country;
it is undoubtedly to the author of the present volume
that we ou^ht to ascribe the practical revival of that
system, which had for ages been verbally recognized
but never before rigorously exemplified.'

The following works appeared as a direct result of
his studies during these six years : ^

' Brie/ Memories of Louis and some of his OmUmporaries.
H. L Bowditch, Boston, 1872.


LOUIS 193

^ In 1823, a memoir on perforation of the small intes-
tines, in acute diseases ; a second, on croup in the adult ;
a third, on the communications between the right and
left cavities of the heart (Archives de m^decine).

* In 1824, two memoirs on the pathological anatomy
of the mucous membrane of the stomach ; another on
pericarditis.

' In 1826, a memoir on abscess of the liver; another
on the condition of the spinal marrow in Pott's disease ;
a third on sudden and unforeseen deaths ; a fourth upon
slow but anticipated deaths, which anatomy will not
explain ; a fifth on the treatment of taenia by tne Darbon
potion (Archives de m^decine).

' In 1825, his Anatomical Researches^ &c., on Phthisis
(i vol. 8vo) ; reprinted with many additions in 1843.

' In 1828, Researches on the Typhoid Affection or
Fever (2 vols. 8vo); reprinted with many additions
in 1841.'

Louis introduced what is known as the Numerical
Method, a plan which we use every day, though the
phrase is not now very often on our lips. The guiding
motto of his life was ' Ars medica tota in observationi-
bus', in carefully observing facts, carefully collating
them, carefully analysing them. To get an accurate
knowledge of any disease it is necessary to study a large
series of cases and to go into all the particulars— the
conditions under which it is met, the subjects specially
liable, the various symptoms, the pathological changes,
the effects of drugs. This method, so simple, so self-
evident, we owe largely to Louis, in whose hands it
proved an invaluable instrument of research. He re-
marks in one place that the edifice of medicine reposes
entirely upon facts, and that truth cannot be elicited
but from those which have been well and completely
observed.

American medicine felt the influence of Louis through
two channels, his books and his pupils. Let us speak


OSLU


194 BIOGRAPHICAL ESSAYS

first of the former. No French writer of the nineteenth
century has had such a large audience in this country ;
all of his important works were translated and widely
read. The work on phthisis, the first important outcome
of five years* hard work at La Charit6 in Chomel's wards,
was published in 1825. Much had already been done by
physicians of the French school on this subject Bayle*s
important Recherches had been issued in 1810, and
Laennec had revolutionized the study of phthisis by the
publication of his treatise on auscultation. I cannot enter
into any detailed analysis of the work, but it is one which
I can commend to your notice as still of great value,
particularly as a model of careful observation. The work
was based upon the study of 123 cases observed in
Chomel's clinic. The lesions observed at autopsy are first
described under the different organs, with great accuracy
and detail, and then summarized, following which is an
elaborate description of the symptomatology. I do not
know of any single work on pulmonary tuberculosis
which can be studied with greater profit to-day by the
young physician. The eighty years which have elapsed
since its publication, and the changes which have taken
place in our ideas of tuberculosis, diminish naught from
the value of his careful anatomical and clinical presen-
tation of the subject.

In 1829 appeared his second great work. Anatomical^
Pathological and Therapeutical Researches upon the disease
/mown under the name of gastro-enterite^ putrid^ adynamic^
ataxic^ typhoid fever^ &c.y compared with thi most common
acute diseases. It was based upon 138 observations
made between 1822 and 1827. He analysed and deter-
mined the lesions found in fifty patients who had died
of the typhus fever, and compared these with alterations
found in other acute diseases. Altogether for this work


LOUIS 195

he states that he analysed the changes in the viscera
of 133 subjects and the symptoms of nearly 900. In
his introduction to this work he quotes a sentence from
Rousseau which is always to be kept in mind : ' I know
that truth lies in the facts, and not in the mind that
judges of them, and that the less I introduce what is
merely my own into the deductions I make from them,
the more certain I shall be of approaching the truth/
This work was translated by Dr. H. I. Bowditch in 1836.
At the time of Louis' observations, although diflferences
were recognized between the various forms of continued
fevers, the profession had no accurate knowledge of the
subject. It so happened that at this period the disease
prevailing at Paris known as typhus was almost entirely
what we now call typhoid fever, so that the anatomical
lesions found by Louis in his fifty autopsies were chiefly
in the intestines ; in all the Peyer's glands were diseased.
His method was to analyse carefully the appearances
found in the different organs in the series of fever cases,
and compare them with patients who had died of other
acute diseases ; thus of course the contrast was striking
in the very matter of involvement of Peyer's glands,
which were more or less seriously changed in structure
in all the patients with the fever, while in the persons
who died of other acute diseases the elliptical patches
had no special redness or softening.

The symptomatology was also given in great detail,
and the same painstaking comparisons were instituted
between the subjects of the typhoid affection and those
of other acute diseases. Louis' work convinced a
majority of the members of the Paris school that
the essential lesions in continued fevers were in the
intestines, and Louis himself appears not to have had
any idea whatever that the disease which he was

o a


196 BIOGRAPHICAL ESSAYS

Studying was in any way different from the disease
prevailing in other parts of Europe which we now know
as typhus fever.

The next important memoir, the essay on Blood-
letting, had a very potent influence on professional
opinion in this country. It appeared in Paris in 1835
and was translated by G. C. Putnam, with an introduc-
tion and appendix by Dr. James Jackson. As this
learned physician remarks in his preface, * If anything
may be regarded as settled in the treatment of disease,
it is that blood-letting is useful in the class of diseases
called inflammatory, and especially in inflammations of
the thoracic viscera.' When one reads the reports of
the treatment by bleeding up to about the year 1840,
one is almost forced to ask the question. Are the diseases
the same ? or surely the patients must have possessed
much more powerful constitutions than those which we
are now called upon to treat.

At the time of Louis' return to Paris, under the influ-
ence of Broussais' doctrine of irritation, local and general
blood-letting was practised more extensively than at any
previous period in the history of medicine. As an
interesting illustration it may be mentioned that the
trade in France and Spain in leeches had developed to
proportions which assumed really those of a national
industry, and even in this country I believe one of the
medical societies offered a prize for the best demonstra-
tion of the practical method of cultivating leeches for
medicinal purposes.

It must have been a terrible shock to Broussais and
his adherents when Louis attacked the subject of blood-
letting in pneumonia with his numerical method. For
this purpose he analysed 78 cases, 28 of which proved
fatal, and in a second series 29 cases with 4 deaths.


LOUIS 197

Among his conclusions were, that pneumonitis is never
arrested at once by blood-letting, and that the supposed
happy effect on the progress of the disease was very
much less than was commonly believed. Incidentally
he remarks with reference to the practice of blistering
which was in vogue at the time, that he had rejected
the practice after the treatment of 140 cases of pleurisy
without losing a case. I would refer you particularly to
Putnam's translation of this article, which you can
obtain in any of the libraries, not only for Louis' work,
but for the excellent introduction by Dr. Jackson t)n
the value of the numerical method in medicine, and also
for the appendices, analysing the pneumonia cases of
the Massachusetts General Hospital from 1824 to 1834
(inclusive).

To American students one of Louis' most valuable
works is his Research on the Yellow Fever in 1828.
On November i, 1828, Louis, with Chervin and Trous-
seau, left for Gibraltar, where the disease prevailed.
They made a very careful study of the symptoms and
morbid anatomy, and on their return to Paris made
a report to the Academy of Medicine, but the work
remained in manuscript until Dr. Geo. C. Shattuck
translated it into English and it was published by the
Massachusetts Medical Society as vol. x of their Library
of Practical Medicine. The work did not appear in
French until 1844. It is chiefly valuable as a very
accurate and careful record of a series of cases studied
clinically and anatomically.

Powerful as was the effect of Louis' writings on
American medicine, it cannot compare with the in-
fluence which he exerted through his pupils, who
'caught his clear accents, learned his great language,
made him their model'. Of the great triumvirate of


iqb biographical essays

the French school of the fourth decade, Louis pos-
sessed a singular power of attracting hard-working,
capable men, and this in spite of the fact that his
rivals and friends, Chomel and Andral, possessed more
brilliant gifts of a certain kind. As a writer in the
Lancet said (1872, ii), 'Year by year fresh bands of
students came to imbibe from his lips the instruction
which their predecessors had abandoned with reluc-
tance, till his academic progeny knew no distinction
of race or even colour, but coalesced into a noble
band of enthusiasts in the cause of medicine, of science,
and of humanity/ In this academic progeny Louis'
American pupils take a very unusual position. Among
the thousands in the profession of this country who have
during the nineteenth century sought light and learning
in the older lands, the group of young men who studied
in Paris, between 1830 and 1840, had no predecessors
and have had no successors. Partly because the time
was ripe and they were active agents in bringing the
new art and science to the New World, partly owing
to inherent capabilities, but not a little because the
brightest minds among them fell under the influence
of Louis— they more than any others gave an impetus,
which it still feels, to the scientific study of medicine
in the United States.

There had been, of course, in Paris, many students
from this country prior to 1830, but they do not form
a school recognizable to us at present. One name
comes to my mind, that of the Rhode Island philo-
sopher, Elisha Bartlett, a peripatetic of the peripatetics,
in the days when men moved from city to city, like
the Sophists of ancient Greece. I do not know whether,
when in Paris in 1828, he came personally under Louis'
influence — probably not, as Louis spent part of that


LOUIS 199

year in Spain— but he brought back recent French
methods, with Gallic lucidity and a keen appreciation
of the value of the numerical method. His well-known
work on Typhus and Typhoid Fever, issued in 1842,
is in itself a lasting witness to the intelligence and
progressive character of the younger teachers of that
day. With a clear separation of Typhus, Typhoid, the
Periodic, and Yellow Fevers, it had at the date of its pub-
lication no counterpart in European literature, and is in
remarkable contrast to the chaotic treatises of Armstrong,
Fordyce, Tweedie, Southwood Smith, and others.

The following were among the American students in
Paris between 1830 and 1840 (this list does not aim at
completeness) :

From Boston : James Jackson, jun., H. I. Bowditch,
Oliver Wendell Holmes, George C. Shattuck, jun.,
John D. Fisher, J. C. Warren (then past middle age),
and J. Mason Warren.

From New York : John A. Swett, Abraham Dubois,
Alonzo Clark, Charles L. Mitchell, Charles D. Smith,
Valentine Mott, sen., and John T. Metcalfe.

From Philadelphia : Geo. W. Norris, W. W. Gerhard,
Caspar W. Pennock, Thomas Stewardson, Alfred Stills,
Thomas D. Matter, E. Campbell Stewart, Charles Bell
Gibson, John B. Biddle, David H. Tucker, Meredith
Clymer, Wm. P. Johnston, W. S. W. Ruschenberger,
Edward Peace, William Pepper (primus).

From Baltimore: William Power.

From the South: Peter C. Gaillard, Gibbes, and
Peyre Porchcr, of Charleston; J. L. Cabell, L. S.
Joynes, Selden, and Randolph, of Virginia.

'And many more whose names on earth are dark'
->men of the stamp of Dr. Bassett of Alabama, who
felt the strong impulsion to know the best that the


200 BIOGRAPHICAL ESSAYS

world offered, every one of whom has left a deep and
enduring impression in his sphere of work.

It would be impossible to tell in detail how Louis*
students brought back his spirit and his methods to
their daily work, and of the revolution which they
gradually effected in the study and in the treatment of
disease. I can best, perhaps, fulfil my object by refer-
ring somewhat fully to two of the most distinguished
among them, James Jackson, jun., and W. W. Geriiard.
James Jackson, jun., is the young Marcellus among
the physicians of this country, 'the young Marcellus,
young, but great and good.' I do not know in our
profession of a man who died so young who has left
so touching a memory. He was the son of Dr. James
Jackson, of Harvard, one of the most distinguished
of New England's physicians, a man to whom our
generation owes a heavy debt, since he, with Jacob
Bigelow, was mainly instrumental in bringing about
more rational ideas on the treatment of disease. Of
Louis' pupils from this side of the water, young Jackson
seems to have been his special favourite. After taking
the B.A. degree at Cambridge in 1828, Jackson at-
tended the medical lectures at Harvard, and in the
spring of 1831 went to Paris, where he remained until
the summer of 1832. Returning home in 1833, he
graduated in medicine at Harvard in 1^4. In the
two years and a half of his studies in this country
before going abroad he had had exceptional oppor-
tunities with his father at the Massachusetts General
Hospital, and showed his early industry and ability
by taking one of the Boylston Prizes before the com-
pletion of his second year of study.

In Paris he attended the practice of La Piti6 and
St. Louis. He soon became devoted to Louis, and by


LOUIS 20I

him was utilized to the full in the cholera epidemic
in 1832. Two letters from Louis to James Jackson,
sen., show how important he thought a prolonged
period of study was for a young man. He says :

' I pointed out to him (James Jackson, jun.) the ad-
vantage it would be for science and for himself if he
would devote several years exclusively to the obser-
vation of diseases. I now retain the same opinion,
and am strengthened in it; for the more I become
acquainted with, and the more I notice him applying
himself to observation, the more I am persuaded that
he is fitted to render real service to science, to promote
its progress. I find that he would be well pleased
to follow for a certain period the vocation for which
nature has fitted him; but he has stated to me that
there are many difficulties which would prevent his
devoting himself exclusively to observation for several
years. But can these difficulties be insurmountable?*

And again : —

* Let us suppose that he should pass four more years
without engaging in the practice of medicine. What a
mass of positive knowledge will he have acquired!
How many important results will he have been able to
publish to the world during that period ! After that he
must necessarily become one of the bright lights of his
country ; others will resort to him for mstruction, and
he will be able to impart it with distinguished honour
to himself. If all things be duly weighed, it will appear
that he will soon redeem the four years, which men of
superficial views will believe him to have lost'

In another letter, the following year, just before

young Jackson's departure from Paris, he refers again

to this question, and urges Dr. Jackson to allow his

son to devote himself exclusively to observation for

several years in Boston. The extract from this letter

is worth quoting.

'Think for a moment, sir, of the situation in which
we physicians are placed. We have no legislative
chambers to enact laws for us. We are our own law-


202 BIOGRAPHICAL ESSAYS

givers ; or rather, we must discover the laws on which
our profession rests. We must discover them and not
invent them ; for the laws of nature are not to be in-
vented. And who is to discover these laws? Who
should be a diligent observer of nature for this purpose,
if not the son of a physician, who has himself expe-
rienced the difficulties of the observation of disease,
who knows how few minds are fitted for it, and how
few have at once the talents and inclination req^uisite
for the task? The inclination especially, for this re-
quires that the observer should possess a thorough
reeard for truth, and a certain elevation of mind, or
rather of character, which we rarely meet with. All
this is united in your son. You ought — for in my
opinion it is a duty— you ought to consecrate him for
a few years to science. This, sir, is my conviction, and
I hope it will be yours also. I know very well that
every one will not be of the same opinion ; but what
matters it, if it be yours ?— if you look upon a physician,
as I do, as holdmg a sacred office, which demands
greater sacrifices than are to be made in any other
profession.'

Young Jackson's letter to his father, just as he was
quitting Paris, indicates on what affectionate terms he
had lived with Louis.

* In two hours I am out of Paris. I will not attempt
to describe to you the agonv it rives me to quit Louis.
He is my second father, and God knows that is a name
I of all men cannot use lightly. I may not persuade you
to look upon him with my eyes exactly as a scientific
man ; but in your heart he must have the share of
a brother ; for he almost shares my affection with you.
From one upon whom I had no claims but those wnich
my life and mind and habits ^ave me, I have expe-
rienced a care, an affection which I never could dare
expect from any but my dear father, and which I shall
ever feel to be the most honourable and truly worthy
prize of my life.'

He seems to have inspired the same tender feelings
in all his American students. In the Memoir of Dr.


LOUIS 203

Bowditch, to which I have already referred, he speaks
of Louis' fatherly kindness to him during a prolonged
attack of rheumatic fever lasting for many weeks.

Young Jackson was one of the founders, in 1832, of
the Society for Medical Observation, which consisted
of the ablest of the students of Louis, Chomel, and
Andral. During his stay in Paris he made an important
study of cholera, which was published in this country
in 1832. It was most timely, as it gave the profession
here a very clear and accurate description of the disease,
of which up to that time they had had no experience.
Jackson's name, too, will always be associated with the
studies upon emphysema, and he is the discoverer of the
prolonged expiration in early pulmonary tuberculosis.

Returning to Boston in the autumn of 1833, he spent
the winter preparing for his degree and elaborating the
notes which he had taken in Paris. In March he fell
ill with a dysentery, which proved fatal on the twenty-
seventh of the month, in the twenty-fifth year of his
age. I know of no young man in the profession
who had given pledges of such exceptional eminence.
His influence in extending Louis' methods and views
throughout New England was chiefly through his
father, who, though a man approaching his sixtieth
year, became an ardent follower of Louis and the nu-
merical method.

In Oliver Wendell Holmes's recently issued Biography
you will And a delightful description of life at the Me-
dical School of Paris at this period. He bears witness
to the good effect which Jackson's warm friendship with
Louis had had in. promoting the interests of American
students. I may conclude with a quotation from Dr.
Jackson's, sen., memoir :

'At the suggestion and request of one of my most


s


204 BIOGRAPHICAL ESSAYS

judicious brethren I shall add that my son's influence
on the profession here, in the short time he was with
us, was of a very salutary description. This gentleman
states that my son not only caused others, who had not
et read the works of M. Louis, to study them with care,
ut that he induced among the rising members of the
profession in our own city the habits of thorough obser-
vation of the phenomena of disease in the living and in
the dead, which he had learned from the same great
pathologist. He also taught us much in respect to Uie
physical signs of disease in the thorax, with which we
were imperfectly acquainted before ; at least I may say
this was true as to myself. Indeed I ought to say more,
for he aided me very much in regard to the diagnosis of
the more obscure cfiseases of that region, derived from
the combination of the physical and rational sijgns. On
emphysema of the lungs ne threw, for me, quite a new
light.'

W. W. Gerhard was the most distinguished of the
American pupils in Paris between 1830 and 1840. When
you call to mind the men whom I have mentioned, this
may seem a strong statement, but I feel certain that
could we take their suffrages they would accord him the
place of merit in consequence of the character of his
work. Dr. Gerhard was born in Philadelphia in 1809,
and was graduated from the University of Pennsylvania
in 1831. Early in the year he went to Paris and attached
himself to Louis at La Pitie. In one of his letters* to
his brother, dated January 18, 1832, he says :

'Dr. Louis is delivering an interesting clinic at La
Piti6 ; he is a remarkable man, very different from the
physicians of England or America, and remarkable even
at raris by the strict mathematical accuracy with which
he arrives at his results ; he is not a brilliant man, not
of the same grade of intellect as his colleague at La
Piti6, Andral.^

' I am indebted to members of Dr. Gerhard's family for the
letters from which these extracts are taken.


LOUIS 205

In another letter he gives an account of his day's work :

'The morning from seven to ten is occupied with the
visit and clinic at the hospital ; there are several distinct
clinics now in actual progress; each of them has its
advantages. I shall vary my attendance at the different
hospitals and select those lecturers who are of real
merit. At this moment we are following Piorry at the
Salpetrifere, a very distant hospital, two or three miles
from our lodgings ; his patients are all old women, and
not interesting. M>^ object in following his course is to
obtain some interesting information on the best mode of
investigating the diseases of the chest. M. Piorry has
devoted special attention to this subject. From Sal-
petrifere we hurry to La Piti6 ; we hear a surgical lecture,
reach home to breakfast, and then to the school of
medicine. The lectures at the school, with a private
course of anatomy during the hour of intermission, fill
up the remainder of the day until four. Fortunately
a private clinic at La Charite introduces me to a set of
very interesting cases, especially on pectoral cases. Dr.
Daeneau has a class who pay nim ten francs a month
and enjoy the privilege of examining the patients much
more conveniently than is practicable during the morn-
ing visit in the midst of a crowd of students. We dine
at five-thirty and then lectures again until eight o'clock.
Imagine the facilities, the delightful advantage of acquir-
ing positive information, and what is at least as impor-
tant, of learning the mode of obtaining these positive
results. We see and hear the men who are so well
known to us in America, learn to form a correct estimate
of their relative worth-— in short, one of the most striking
advantages of a medical visit to Europe is to acquire the
sort of lioeral professional feelins^ which is rarely secured
by the continued intercourse witn the same men, and the
unpleasant medical politics which divide the profession
in America,'

Evidently Broussais made no special impression on

Dr. Gerhard. He says,

* Broussais is the best known, his reputation is uni-
versal, and the benefits he has conferred on medicine
are immense, but unfortunately he is a wretched lecturer.
His own opinions are given in the most awkward.


2o6 BIOGRAPHICAL ESSAYS

clumsy manner ; the manner and style of lecturing are
coarse and vulgar/

In another letter of February 3, 1832, he tells how he
induced Louis to give them private instruction. To his
brother he writes :

'I must write you at least a few days before the
excitement has passed off: can you imagine how for-
tunate I am—devinez si vous pouvez — two or three days
^^o, Jackson, Pennock, and myself were talking of hos-
pitals and morbid anatomy, when the idea occurred of
attempting the study of patnology in a particular manner.
It was this : to obtam the specimens and study them, the
authors in our hand, exactly and carefully comparing
authorities with the subject oefore us. We addressed
ourselves to two of the internes at La Piti6 attached to
the salles of Louis and Andral, and they ajgree to procure
all facilities in their power and communicate their own
information for the compensation of 60 francs from each
of us ; we accordingly visit La Piti6 on three afternoons
of the week and examine the parts at the hospital, after-
wards carrying home such portions as require minute
investigation. Our first success in this opening of new
sources of instruction emboldened us to attem[)t some-
thinjg of higher importance. We were all desirous of
studying auscultation, of studying it in such a manner as
to be sure of our ground on our return, and to be
capable of appreciating the advantages of the art. Louis'
public instructions were valuable, but his private lessons
upon a subject demanding minute and patient inquiry
we knew would be infinitely more so. I therefore in
the name of my friends addressed him a polite note,
accompanied by a handsome pecuniary oflfer: we did
this with little hopes of success, but happily for us he
accepted our proposition, and next week we are his
private pupils at La Piti6. We are, I believe, the first
who have made this arrangement with M. Louis, and
you may estimate its importance when I tell you that he
IS considered in excellence of diagnosis the successor of
Laennec. Our advantages for the study of pathology
and the diagnosis of diseases of the chest are now
superior; they are indeed the very best in the woiid,
and our eagerness to embrace them will, I hope, render


LOUIS ao7

them of real utility ; of course they involve an additional
expenditure of 400 or 500 fr., but I should be happy to
shorten mv stay at Paris a month to improve tne re-
mainder of my time in this manner, if such were neces-
sary for me. Pennock and myself are very happy to
have become intimate with Jackson; he has superior
talents, and his excellent education, conducted by his
father, unquestionably the first physician in America, has
cultivated his mind and developea an ardent attachment
to medicine/

Few American students have occupied their time
abroad to greater purpose than Dr. Gerhard. He
appears to have been an indefatigable worker, and
the papers which he published based upon material
collected in Paris are among the most important which
we have from his pen. Thus with Pennock he described
Asiatic cholera in 1832. Devoting himself particularly
to the study of diseases of children, he issued a very
interesting paper on small-pox, and two papers of very
special value, the first on tuberculous meningitis and
the other upon pneumonia in children. Both of these
papers mark a distinct point in our knowledge of these
two diseases. He is usually accorded the credit of the
first accurate clinical study of tuberculous meningitis.

Late in the year 1833 he returned to Philadelphia,
and at his suggestion his friends had secured him the
appointment as resident physician at the Pennsylvania
Hospital, which he took early in 1834. This step indi-
cated how carefully he had weighed the important
influence in Louis' career of the years of quiet work at
La Charity. At the Pennsylvania Hospital he had an
opportunity to study the common continued fever of the
country, and determined that it was identical, clinically
and anatomically, with the typhoid fever of Louis, and
characterized by a special lesion in the glands of Peyer.
I do not know exactly how long he remained resident


2o8 BIOGRAPHICAL ESSAYS

physician at the Pennsylvania Hospital, but he was soon
after appointed one of the physicians at Blockleyi and
here in 1836 he was able to carry out his most important
piece of work. The general opinion prevailed that the
fever which Louis described and which had the lesions
in the small bowel was only a modification of the
ordinary typhus fever which at that time prevailed so
extensively, particularly in Great Britain and Ireland:
In London, Edinburgh, and Dublin the intestinal lesions
were regarded as only accidental, and not indicative of
a special affection. Dr. Gerhard knew the typhoid
fever of Louis well, and had had an opportunity of
studying it again at the Pennsylvania Hospital, so that
when the epidemic of typhus fever developed in 1836
he was in a very good position to make an accurate
study of the disease. Two hundred and fourteen cases
were observed, and as a result of his study he declared
positively that the typhus fever, which was similar to
the disease which he had also seen in Edinburgh, was
a different affection altogether from the typhoid fever
with intestinal lesions. These observations, you must
remember, were made in 1836, at a time when the
greatest confusion existed as to the forms of fever. It
took a great many years in Great Britain before the
duality of the prevalent fever was recognized, but
owing to the influence of Gerhard's paper, and to the
accurate knowledge of fever brought to this country by
Louis' pupils, the differentiation of the two diseases was
here quickly recognized, since, as already mentioned,
Bartlett in 1842 considered them apart.

Gerhard's work influenced his Paris friends greatly,
and this was strengthened by the papers read before the
Society for Medical Observation by George C. Shattuck
and Alfred Still6, of whom the former had had oppor-


LOUIS 209

tunities of studying typhus fever in Great Britain, while
the latter had been one of Gerhard's house physicians
in the typhus epidemic at Blockley. Shattuck's paper
is published in the Medical Examiner for 1840. I have
always regretted that Dr. Still6's paper has never been
printed yet. He was kind enough to let me see it,
and, as I have mentioned elsewhere, the differential
points between typhus and typhoid fever are nowhere
more clearly laid down.

The University of Pennsylvania early took advantage
of Gerhard's training, and utilized him as clinical lecturer
at the Philadelphia Hospital. He soon acquired a special
reputation in diseases of the heart and lungs. In 1842
appeared the first edition of his work on Diseases of the
Chest, which ran through four editions, and is still a
valuable work of reference. One of his fellow students
in Paris, Stewardson, has given a very pleasing picture
of him as a clinical teacher :

'As a clinical teacher he was remarkably successful
and exerted a powerful and commanding influence.
Without any pretension to eloquence, he nevertheless
riveted the attention of his hearers and stimulated their
enthusiasm. Himself deeply interested in his subject,
he communicated this interest to his audience by the
sheer force of truth. Students saw that truth was his
object, not display; the advancement of science, and
not the gratification of personal feelinjgs, whether of
vanity or ambition ; in snort, that in his mind, a deep
interest in his subject and a thorough conscientiousness
in the pursuit of it were the overmastering motives. In
an easy and conversational style he presented to his
hearers a graphic portraiture of the case before them,
bringing into relief its most important symptoms ; im-
pressing upon their minds the most striking features in
Its history; pointing out, by a few clear and practical
expressions, the bearing of any particular fact upon
interesting medical questions, out avoiding long and
laboured arguments, or general disquisitions uponi the


OfcLLR


2IO BIOGRAPHICAL ESSAYS

nature of diseased action. He neither stimulated the
fancy by the flowers of rhetoric, nor amused the intellect
with episodes upon theoretical questions, but confined
himself to drawmg such practical conclusions as were
clearly deducible from the facts presented. No man
of his day enjoyed so high a reputation as a clinical
teacher, and not only did he succeed in an eminent
degree in arousing the enthusiasm of students and
putting them in sympathy with himself, by infusing into*
them his own ardour m his favourite study, but he
produced an influence upon the profession here which
is felt still, which has fostered the establishment of
clinical teaching among us, and done much to give it
that rank which it now occupies here as a branch of
medical instruction.'

Of the work of Louis' other students in this country
time would fail me to tell —of the influence of Bowditch,
Holmes, and Shattuck in Boston, of Swett, Clark, and
others in New York, of Pennock, Stewardson, Still6 in
Philadelphia, and of Power in Baltimore. To them all
we owe a heavy debt of gratitude. They brought from
Paris enthusiasm, faith in the future, faith in the pro-
fession of their choice, accurate methods, and a loyal
love of truth. Endowed with the spirit and zeal of
their master, they carried his great message to the New
World ; and more than this, touched with those finer
qualities which made Louis so lovable, they have become
bright ideals for all future generations of American
students.

There remain, so far as I know, three only of the
Paris students of whom I have spoken, John T, Metcalfe,
Meredith Clymer, and your honoured patron, Alfred
Stille. They, too, must soon go the way of all the
earth ; but among the consolations of old age what
greater solace can they feel than that the lives of the
men whose fathers and grandfathers they taught are
made better by their presence ?


211


WILLIAM PEPPER'


In Rugby Chapel, that noble poem in memory of his
father, Matthew Arnold draws a strong contrast, on the
one hand, between the average man, who eddies about,
eats and drinks, chatters and loves and hates — and then
dies, having striven blindly and achieved nothing ; and,
on the other, the strong soul tempered with fire, not
like the men of the crowd, but fervent, heroic, and good,
the helper and friend of mankind. Dr. William Pepper,
whose loss we mourn to-day, while not a Thomas Arnold,
belonged to this group of strong souls, our leaders and
masters, the men who make progress possible.

There are two great types of leaders ; one, the great
reformer, the dreamer of dreams— with aspirations com-
pletely in the van of his generation— lives often in
wrath and disputations, passes through fiery ordeals,
is misunderstood, and too often despised and rejected
by his generation. The other, a very different type, is
the leader who sees ahead of his generation, but who
has the sense to walk and work in it. While not such
a potent element in progress, he lives a happier life,
and is more likely to see the fulfilment of his plans. Of
this latter type the late Professor of Medicine at the
University of Pennsylvania was a notable example^the
most notable the profession of this country has offered
to the world.

> This address was prepared to be delivered at the opening of
the session of the Johns Hopkins Medical Sehod, October, 189B;
but I was ill at the time.

P 2


212 BIOGRAPHICAL ESSAYS

I

William Pepper began life under conditions which are
very often unfavourable to success. His father, a dis-
tinguished physician, the professor of medicine in the
school in which his son was educated, belonged to
a family of position and influence. For the young man
there were none of those tempering ' blows of circum-
stance*, no evil star with which to grapple and grow
strong. Quite as much grit and a much harder climb
are needed to reach distinction from the top as from
the bottom of the social scale, and to rise superior to
the res abundans domt has taxed to the uttermost many
young men in this country. We have heard enough of
the self-made men, who are always on top ; it is time
now to encourage in America the young fellow who
is unhappily born ' with a silver spoon in his mouth *.
Like the young man in the Gospels, he is too apt to
turn away sorrowfully from the battle of life, and to
fritter his energies in Europe, or to go to the devil in
a very ungentlemanly manner, or to become the victim
of neurasthenia. To such the career I am about to
sketch should prove a stimulus and an encouragement

At the age of 21, in 1864, the year of his father's
death, Pepper graduated from the Medical Department
of the University of Pennsylvania, having previously
taken the B.A. degree. What now were the influences
which sent this youngster bounding up the ladder three
rungs at a time? In the first place, the elder Pepper
was a clinical physician of exceptional abilities; but
more than this, intellectually he was a son of the great
Louis, one of that band of much loved American
students, whom Louis sent to their homes with high
ideals, with good methods of work, and with a devoted


WILLIAM PEPPER 213

admiration of their chief. The talk at home while young
Pepper was a medical student must often have been of
the old teacher, of his ways and works, of his noble
character and of his loving heart. The father's mental
attitude had been moulded finally by Louis, and the
son's early work shows deep traces of the same in-
fluence. Indeed, all through life the clinical manner
and habits of thought of the younger Pepper were
much more French than English or German. In this
respect he differed widely from his contemporaries, who
became dominated by the Vienna and Berlin Schools.
Dr. Pepper, sen., died a few months after his son's
graduation, leaving him a moderate competency, and
the example of a life devoted to all that was highest
in our profession. It is interesting to note that the two
diseases portrayed most skilfully by Louis, typhoid
fever and phthisis, were those which both the elder and
the younger Pepper studied with special ardour.

For more than a century the Pennsylvania Hospital
has been the nursing mother— the pia mater— oi the
kings of the clinic in Philadelphia, but in the long list
of medical officers given in Morton's history of that
institution you can find no young man who made his
connexion with the hospital so immediately productive
as William Pepper. In it I find the second potent
factor in his rapid professional development. In the
summer following his graduation he served temporarily
as apothecary. In 1865 he was elected one of the
resident physicians, and had as a colleague his friend,
Edward Rhoads. On the completion of his service he
was appointed pathologist to the Hospital and curator
of the Museum, positions which he held for four year&
He immediately threw all his energies into the study of
morbid anatomy, and in 1868 was appointed lecturer


214 BIOGRAPHICAL ESSAYS

on the subject in the University. Making autopsies,
working in the Museum, studying tumours and micro-
scopic specimens, his time could not have been more
fortunately spent, for in these early years he thus
obtained a knowledge of morbid anatomy which stood
him in good stead when time became more precious
and engagements numerous. Throughout his entire
career this work lent accuracy and firmness to his
diagnosis. He never forgot the value of morbid
anatomy, nor the debt which he owed to it. I have
known few practitioners more keen (or more successful)
in obtaining permission for autopsies. Very often he
would send an especially interesting specimen to my
laboratory, knowing that I would gladly get it ready
for his clinic. Quite early in my association with him
I saw that he had served an apprenticeship in the dead-
house. He could come into the clinic and pick up
a heart which he had never seen, but only felt and
heard, and go at once to the seat of the disease.

The descriptive catalogue of the Pathological Museum
at the Pennsylvania Hospital was issued in 1869, and
while a large portion was from the pen of Dr. Morton,
every page bears witness to the careful and thorough
manner with which Dr. Pepper had worked over the
specimens. The early volumes of the Transactions of
the Pathological Society attest his zeal in this study.

As the third powerful element in his progress I place
his association with Dr. John Forsyth Meigs, in the
revision of the well-known work, The Diseases of
Children, The third edition had appeared in 185^.
The fourth edition, by Meigs and Pepper, was prac-
tically a new work. Dr. Meigs was an exceedingly
busy man, and the bulk of the revision fell to his
junior. The descriptions of disease were admirablei


WILLIAM PEPPER 215

the pathology well up to date, and the authors broke
away in a remarkable manner from many of the tradi-
tions and routines of old-time practice. If you compare
Meigs and Pepper of 1870 with the third edition, or
with the contemporary books on the same subject, you
will see what a radical work it was for that date. To
one section of the edition we may turn with special
interest, namely, to diseases of the caecum and appendix.
Nowhere in literature, I believe, before 1870, is the
importance of the appendix so fully recognized, or is
there so good a description of the results of perforation.
One cannot but regret that no edition of this work
appeared after the sixth, in 1877. The experience
gained by Pepper, while still a very young man, in
the preparation of this work, was of incalculable value:
It familiarized him with the literature, gave him ah
insight into the art of book-making, brought him into
close personal contact with a man with remarkable
medical instincts, and altogether was a circumstance
which, I think, may be justly regarded as one of the
three most powerful influences during the formative^
period of his career. Indeed, in many quarters, Dr.
William Pepper, jun., as he used to be called, really
never got the credit for the association with Meigs in
the work on Diseases of Children. For years I had the
impression that it was his father who was the joint
author of the work; and even quite recently, smce
Dr. Pepper^s death, I heard a man well versed in
medical literature and interested in diseases of children;
express great surprise that the Pepper of Meigs and
Pepper was the late Provost of the University.

In 1870 The PhUaMpkia Medical Times was started,
but the health of Edward Rhoads, who had been
selected as editor, had failed so rapidly that the opening


2i6 BIOGRAPHICAL ESSAYS

of the new enterprise was entrusted to his friend,
William Pepper, who brought out the first twelve
numbers of the journal, and then transferred the editor-
ship to the late James H. Hutchinson. I have glanced
over vol. i, to glean indications of Pepper's early work.
Among five or six contributions two are of particular
interest, as they indicate the sort of work this young
man was doing in clinical medicine. At page 274 is
recorded a case of scirrhus of the pylorus with dilatation
of the stomach, an ordinary enough case nowadays, but
one which has gone into literature and is often quoted
on two counts : first, the accurate study of the peristalsis
of the stomach-wall, which was visible, and made the
subject of very careful electrical experiment; and,
secondly, the practical point of using the stomach-tube,
at that date a novel procedure, and, so far as I know,
not previously practised in America in cases of the
kind. The other contribution, still frequently referred
to in the literature, on Progressive Muscular Atrophy
of the Pseudo-h)T)ertrophic Type, is one of the most
exhaustive contributions to the subject made up to that
date, and is a model of accurate clinical and anatomical
study.

An advertisement in a supplement to one of the
numbers gives us an idea of the sort of work he was
doing at this time in teaching. In conjunction with
H. C. Wood, jun., he announces a course of practical
medicine at the Philadelphia Hospital, to extend through-
out the months of April, May, and June. They announce
that between them they have 1 75 patients under their
care. Dr. Pepper was to meet the class at 8 a.m. on
Tuesday, and Dr. Wood at 9.30 a.m. on Friday.

It seems to me that for so young a man. Pepper had
a great deal of good sense to have avoided the pitfalls


WILLIAM PEPPER 217

of medical journalism. He must have seen at an early
date that to be successful in it meant practically the
sacrifice of everything else.

By the end of December, 1870, young Pepper, tlien
only a little past twenty-seven years of age, already had
a well-established reputation as a teacher and worker.
I do not know of another instance in the profession in
which a man at his time of life had made so favourable
a start. From this date on we may divide his life into
three periods— to 1881, when he was appointed Provost
of the University, his Provostship, 1881-94, and the
short period since his resignation from that office.

II

The decade from 1871-80 demonstrated that a man
of men, to use a phrase of Milton's, had arisen in the
profession in Philadelphia, a man with both ' Geist and
go ', one who could not only blow a trumpet-blast loud
enough to awaken the slumbering conservatives of his
native city, but could command a following which
enabled him, in spite of all opposition, to set on foot
much-needed reforms. As illustrating his activity during
this period, I can allude, and only briefly, to three im*
portant pieces of work. The removal of the University
to West Philadelphia doubtless made her friends aware
of the possibilities of the situation. In the Medical
School, then a relatively much more important section^
the plans had been organized for well-equipped build-
ings and laboratories in West Philadelphia. An ex-
ceedingly judicious plan, for which I do not know
whether Pepper was solely responsible, but one in
which he had his whole heart, was the organization of
a hospital to be under the control of the faculty and
trustees. Blockley was within a stone's throw of the


2i8 BIOGRAPHICAL ESSAYS

new buildings of the Medical School, and its rich stores
of material were available, but it was a very wise and
far-seeing scheme which regarded the clinical equip-
ment as an integral part of a medical school which
should be under the immediate supervision of the
faculty. For many years it was a hard struggle to
make both ends meet, and even when I joined the
faculty of the University in 1884 ^he hospital was
constantly in need of funds (and much besides). One
thing it never lacked, hopefulness on the part of
Dr. Pepper, who never for a moment consented to
look at the dark side of the picture, always saw a few
years ahead, predicted success in the days when the
debt was the greatest; and with many other schemes
on hand he never let an opportunity slip of forwarding
the interests of that part of the institution which he
loved, perhaps, better than any other. In 1881 the
Vice- Provost, in an address at the inauguration of
Dr. Pepper as Provost, expressed the popular feeling
as follows : ' To him who has pleaded for mercy to the
helpless sick, as a lover would plead his own cause;
who, working with other men of goodwill, took by tacit
election the headship among them; who has touched
with a master hand the springs of influence — to him
public esteem has given the wreath as the moral archi-
tect of our Hospital.' It is gratifying to think that he
lived to see it placed on a solid basis of success, with
the maternity department splendidly organized, the
Pepper Clinical Laboratory', which he himself gave in
memory of his father, the centre for high-class work,
and the new Nurses' Home and the Agnew Wing in
full operation.

Were I asked to name the most satisfactory single
piece of work in Dr. Pepper's life, I should say un-


WILLIAM PEPPER 219

hesitatingly that which related to the promotion of
higher medical education. This little volume^ contains
two addresses, one delivered October i, 1877, the other
October 2, 1893. They represent a forecast and a retro-
spect. At the time of the removal of the University to
West Philadelphia the University Faculty was a strong
one, but it contained a number of men who were satu-
rated with old-time prejudices, and who were bitterly
opposed to any change in the methods of medical
education. Once before, in 1846, the University had
made an attempt to elevate the standard of medical
education, but unsuccessfully. In 1871 the Harvard
Medical Faculty had been taken in hand and re-
organized, so that the example had been set, but there
was probably no school in the Union in which the out-
look for reform was thought to be less hopeful than at
the University. The struggle was a hard one; the
brunt of it fell upon the young men, more particulariy
upon Pepper, who was the very head and front of the
new movement. The plan of reorganization was not
carried without much bitterness ; indeed, it looked at
one time as though the faculty would split, as Professor
Rogers, who did resign, very nearly carried with him
several strong colleagues. As Dr. Pepper says in his
second address, speaking of the inauguration of the new
system in 1877 : ' We thought, too, alas, of the long and
painful controversy, lasting almost five years, over the
proposition to again elevate our standard of medical
education, and of how the end had been attained only
at the cost of old friendships and of the allegiance
of valued associates, whose convictions remained un-
changed as to the injury that would be Worked to the


' Higher Medical EAuatkm : Two Addresses, by Williun Pepper.
Lippincott & Co., 1894.


220 BIOGRAPHICAL ESSAYS

University by the proposed advance/ The movement
was immediately successful, and the changes then made
were but precursors to other more radical advances.
It was always a source of great gratification to Pepper
to feel that the plans for which he had worked so hard
had been crowned with such success. Years hence
these two addresses, with their appendices, will be
regarded as perhaps the most valuable single contribu-
tions to the literature of the phenomenal educational
movement through which we have lived during the last
quarter of the nineteenth century.

The third event of which I spoke was the organization
of the medical department of the Centennial Exposition
of 1876. I only mention it as one which gave him an
opportunity to demonstrate how strong were his execu-
tive abilities.

In 1881 Pepper was elected Provost of the University
of Pennsylvania. The feeling was unanimous that he
was the man in whose hands the destiny of the institu-
tion would at any rate be safe, but no one could have
predicted such a decade of development as took place
under his management. The material progress is indi-
cated by an increase in the acreage in West Phila-
delphia, from fifteen to fifty-two ; the number of students
increased from 981 to 2,180, and the fees of the students
during the same period more than trebled. I do not
know that there has been an instance of such remark-
able growth in any University in this country, unless it
has been in a newly established one, such as the Uni-
versity of Chicago. That the University to-day occupies
a position in the very first rank of educational institu-
tions is due to the energy of William Pepper.

Passing without further comment the work of his
Provostship, since this has been dwelt upon with great


WILLIAM PEPPER 221

fullness in various obituary notices, I may here refer
to several important undertakings during this period.
There had never been published in this country a com-
posite work by native writers, corresponding to the
System of Medicine by Reynolds or to Ziemssen's
Encyclopaedia. A circular was issued in November,
1881, to the joint authors, but it was more than three
years subsequently before the first volume of the
system was issued ; the five volumes were then pub-
lished in rapid succession, the fifth appearing in 1886.
While unequal, as all such systems must necessarily be,
it remains a great work, and contains articles which
have become classical in American literature. It proved
to be perhaps the most successful venture ever made
in this country by a medical publishing company, and it
extended widely the reputation of the editor.

For many years those of us whose work lay in the
special field of medicine had felt that a society was
needed in which we could meet our fellows in the
same line of work. As early as 1881 I had written to
Dr. Tyson, shortly after my first visit to Philadelphia,
urging the organization of such a body, but it was not
until the winter of 1885-6 that the initial steps were
taken to form the ' Association of American Physicians'.
I remember well in the preliminary meetings how by
tacit consent Dr. Pepper assumed the headship, and in
formulating the details and in arranging the final organi-
zation his executive abilities made the work very easy.

A few years later a much more difficult scheme was
engineered by him to a successful issue, in the welding
of the various special societies into the Triennial Con-
gress of American Physicians and Surgeons. Much of
the success of the first meeting in 1888 was due to the
admirable manner in which, as Chairman of the Execu-


222 BIOGRAPHICAL ESSAYS

tive Committee, he shaped the policy of the organization^
One astonishing feature in his character was the intense
energy and enthusiasm with which he threw himself
into these and similar schemes. Letters of suggestion
here, of advice in another quarter, conferences, caucuses,
—as if, indeed, he had nothing else on his mind, nothing
to do but the business on hand. He always appeared at
a meeting prepared, knowing exactly what was needed,
and, as I have said, took the headship by tacit consent ;
and the business was * put through' in a way not always
seen in gatherings of medical men.

For many years Dr. Pepper had advocated a closer
union between the United States and the Latin-American
republics, the commercial and intellectual relations of
which he maintained should be with this country rather
than with Europe. He gave practical expression to
the conviction by organizing the first Pan-American
Medical Congress (of which he was President), and by
interesting the governments of the South American
States in his Commercial Museum.

Though a chief promoter both of the Association of
American Physicians and of the Congress of American
Physicians and Surgeons, he was a warm advocate of
the claims of the National Association, the meetings of
which he very often attended, and in the success of which
he was deeply interested. Of late years the extra-
ordinary calls upon his time made attendance upQn
medical societies very difficult, and more than once he
has expressed to me his deep regret that unavoidable
engagements either prevented it altogether or made his
visits hurried and unsatisfactory.

For some years before his formal resignation of the
Provostship, Dr. Pepper had felt that he had done as
much as any one man could, and that it was in the


WILLIAM PEPPER 223

interest of the University that he should give way to
some one else. It was his hope, I know, to be able
to resign at the end of his ten years* service, but cir-
cumstances delayed his action until 1894.

But it was not for rest, or for any warning that he
was doing too much, that he asked to be relieved from
the cares of the University. Other great schemes had
been absorbing his energies. For years he had been
impressed with the importance of museums and collec-
tions. The Wistar Museum of Anatomy had been
a source of great satisfaction. In 1891 he undertook
the establishment of the Archaeological and Palaeon-
tological Museums. The strong personal interest which
he took in Archaeology encouraged his friends to hope
that he had at last found a hobby which might divert
him from more trying duties. He could talk on the
outlook in Babylonia, button-holing some local Dives»
and impressing him with the needs of their last Uni-
versity expedition, as though he had no other interest
in life. To the next man it was of the wonderful ' finds*
in Florida or Peru, and of their great importance in the
history of the early races of this continent. It was
extraordinary how he could warm up in talking of these
and allied subjects, and his quick, receptive mind and
retentive memory enabled him to grasp the important
points in the problems to be attacked.

For a quarter of a century he devoted his marvellous
energies to the University of Pennsylvania, believing
that in serving her he could best serve hb city and
State. The last years of his life were given to promote
the material and intellectual welfare of his native town.
The success of the museum schemes gave courage to
his ambition, and he htgsu^i the oi{;ani»tion of the
Commercial and Economic Museumi of which he was


224 BIOGRAPHICAL ESSAYS

president at the time of his death. His desire was to
see about the University of Pennsylvania a great group
of museums which would not only illustrate the past
and present history of man in all his relations, but which
would reflect the commercial and economic aspect of
his present activities, and particularly one in which the
raw and manufactured products of the world would be
represented, a place in which the business man of Penn-
sylvania could be put in touch with producer or con-
sumer in any country. An immense scheme, involving
millions of dollars, it has advanced to a stage in which
not only is success assured, but in which people are
beginning to appreciate what a boon has been bestowed
on a great manufacturing city.

And then, as if such a colossal enterprise were not
sufficient to keep him busy, he undertook the organiza-
tion of a Free Library for Philadelphia. It was no
doubt through his influence that his uncle had given
a quarter of a million dollars for the purpose. This
library was very near to his heart, and its remarkable
success in so short a time was, he has told me, a source
of the keenest pride. Not long before his death he
secured a bequest of a million dollars for a public art
gallery.

From this hurried sketch you may get an idea of the
ceaseless energy and activity of his life, but it would be
very incomplete without some specific reference to his
work as a practising physician. The medical profession
in every country has produced men of affairs of the
first rank, men who have risen high in the councils of
nations, but with scarcely an exception the practice
of medicine has not been compatible with such duties.
So absorbing are the cares of the general practitioner
or the successful consultant, that he has but little time


WILLIAM PEPPER 225

to mingle in outside af&irs, and the few v^o enter
public life do so with many backward glances at the
consulting-room, and with well-grounded forebodings of
disaster to professional work. But Dr. Pepper main-
tained to the end the closest relations with the profession,
both as a consultant and a teacher. To me one of the
most remarkable features of his life is the conscientious-
ness with which he attended to a large and exacting
practice. That amid such multifarious cares and duties
he should have been able to maintain an undiminished
activity in his calling is perhaps the greatest tribute to
his genius. As a teacher his forte was in the amphi-
theatre, where he displayed precision in diagnosis, great
lucidity in the presentation of a complicated case, and
a judicious and thorough knowledge of the resources of
our art.

Naturally, as he became more and more involved in
outside affairs, he became less able to contribute impor-
tant papers to medical literature, but a glance through
the files of the American Journal cfthe M^ical Sciences^
and the Tranm^ians of the Association of American Phy-
sicians^ shows during the past ten years a lai^ number
of very valuable contributions, many of them in colla-
boration with younger men. The journal literature of
the same period is full of more ephemeral contributions
in the form of clinical lectures.

I have already referred to several important eariy
contributions. Among others of special importance
I may mention his studies on pernicious anaemia, the
first made, I believe, by any physician in this country,
and his contributions to Addison's disease. In tuber-
culosis he always took a very warm interest For many
years he was supposed to be a victim of pulmonary
tuberculosis, and indeed the autopsy showed that he

OMXS


226 BIOGRAPHICAL ESSAYS

had a healed patch of the disease in one lung. In lee-
tures and in numerous general articles he dwelt upon
the great importance of the disease. One of his most
interesting contributions was on the local treatment of
cavities in the lungs. He also made an extensive in-
vestigation into the subject of pulmonary tuberculosis
in the State of Pennsylvania. Diseases of the stomach
and intestines were always favourite subjects of study.
His papers on appendicitis were of special value, par-
ticularly those upon the relapsing form of the dis^ise.
His work on pulmonary tuberculosis early led him to
make careful inquiries into the climate of different sec-
tions of the country, and few members of the profession
had a more accurate knowledge of the subject He
was a strong believer in the value of the mineral springs
of this country, and some years ago, with Dr. Dabmd,
he collected an enormous amount of material which
was the basis for his Report on the Mineral Springs of
America. In 1893 he edited the American Text-Book of
Medicine, which had a large sale, and served to keep his
name prominently before the profession.

Ill

As a man the late Provost formed a most interesting
study, and as I had such a warm appreciation of his
character I may, in the privilege of friendship, say a few
words of a more personal nature.

I remember as though it were yesterday the occasion
of our first meeting in 1881. I had come to Philadelphia
to look over the museums and hospitals. I was much
impressed with his cordiality, the ease of his manner,
the freshness and elasticity of his mind. He was just
starting to his lecture, and I was delighted to accompany
him. For years I had not listened to a clinic so well


WILLIAM PEPPER S27

and so artistically planned, and conducted with such
readiness. I did not see him again until I became his
colleague. In five years of pleasant fellowship in the
Faculty of the University of Pennsylvania I remember
to have been seriously vexed with him but once, and
that was on account of my confrere, Howard Kelly.
A number of us had backed that Kensington colt —
as we called him in those days — I forget for what
appointment I only remember that I was very keen
about it at the time. At the last moment Pepper entered
a dark horse, who won easily, to our great chagrin. To
my warm expostulations he listened with great patience,
but after about five minutes of that delightful persuasive-
ness which was so freely at his command, I left him, not
only with all bitterness assuaged, but almost sorry that
I had not supported his candidate. In Athens he would
have been called a sophist, and I do not deny that he
could, when the occasion demanded, play old Belial, and
make the worse appear the better cause, to perplex and
darken maturest counsel— but how artistically he could
doit!

His faults ? I am not here either to portray or to
defend them.

They say, best men are moulded out of faults :
And, for the most, become much and more the better
For being a little bad.

He was human, and to those of a man he added the
failings of a college president To some sedate Phila-
delphians he seemed a modem Machiavelli, but a man
engaged in vast schemes with many clashing interests is
sure to be misunderstood, and to arouse sharp hostility
in many quarters. The average citizen^ if he does noC
understand, is very apt to dread or to dislike a new
Ulysses,

Q3


228 BIOGRAPHICAL ESSAYS

In many ways the American is the modern Greek,
particularly in that power of thinking and acting, which
was the strongest Hellenic characteristic. Bom and
bred in one of the most conservative of cities, sur-
rounded by men who loved the old order, and who
hated change, or even the suggestion of it, Pepper
displayed from the outset an adaptability and flexibility
truly Grecian. He was pre-eminently a man of felicities
and facilities, to use a somewhat flash but most suitable
phrase. Matthew Arnold's comment upon the happy
and gracious flexibility which was so incarnate in
Pericles has often occurred to me in thinking of the
character of the late Provost : ' Lucidity of thought,
clearness and propriety of language, freedom from
prejudice, freedom from stiffness, openness of mind,
and amiability of manner.' There was another Grecian
feature which must not be lost sight of. You remember
in the Timaeus how the Egyptian Priest said to Solon :
' You Hellenes are never anjrthing but children ; there
is not an old man among you ... in mind you are all
young.' To the very last there was a youthful hope-
fulness and buoyancy of spirits about Pepper that
supported him in many trials and troubles. I never
knew him despondent or despairing. If things looked
dark, if plans and projects on which his heart was set
had miscarried, he met the disappointment with a smile,
which robbed it of half its power. The persistency of
this buoyant hopefulness often wore out the most
obstinate opposition ; in fact, it was irresistible. Nor
was it the hopefulness which we condemn as visionary,
but a resourceful hopefulness, based on confidence in
himself, and, most valuable quality of all, capable of
inspiring confidence in others.

Nor must I neglect to bear testimony to his inherent


WILLIAM PEPPER 229

kindliness of heart. Busy and prosperous, and so much
absorbed in large projects and with the care of lives
very important in a community, a great physician is apt
to slight the calls of the poor and needy, whose lives are
of importance only to themselves. Necessarily his con-
tact with such is in the hospital wards. The family
physician has not a monopoly of the charity work. The
consultant has often to take a share, and with his large
and varied associations, Pepper had an unusual number
of calls upon his time and sympathy, as well as upon
his purse, and to all he responded with a gracious
liberality. Only a year or two ago an instance came
to my notice which illustrated his kindness. From one
of the lower counties of Maryland one of those sad
wrecks which' * the little red school-house * is apt to
make of women had been under Pepper's care at the
University Hospital. She had improved very much,
had been able to return to work, but after a time had
again broken down. She had written to him for advice.
In reply he urged her to put herself under my care at
the Johns Hopkins Hospital, which was much more
accessible, and he oifered to give her a note of intro-
duction to me. I was much impressed by the kindly
tone of the letter, which was written with his own hand
(an unusual event in his later years), and full of con-
sideration and sympathy.

Not endowed, it was supposed, with a very strong
constitution, the wonder is that he should have been
able to do so much and to live so long. The ' bridle of
Theages ', an inherited or acquired delicateness which
has often proved in its possessor a blessing to the race,
was no check-rein to him ; and I have heard him say that
he preferred the life of a salmon to that of the turtle.
Though premature in one sense, his death came after


230 BIOGRAPHICAL ESSAYS

he had seen fulfilled the desire of his eyes, and to the
rich life which he had lived the future could have added
but little, though doubtless his restless spirit would
have driven him into fresh fields. The reformation of
medical education, the reorganization of the University
of Pennsylvania, the establishment of a great Com-
mercial Museum and a Free Library— these and a score
of minor plans he had either seen completed or well
under way. Surely if ever a man could sing a Nunc
Dimittis it was William Pepper ! But as no man liveth,
so no man dieth to himself, and we may mourn with
those who shared his inner life, and who so generously
gave so much of it to us of the profession and to the
public. For them we feel his loss to be irreparable, his
death to be premature. For them we could have wished
an extension of his time to the Psalmist's limit.

I have no desire to criticize the method of his life.
Exceptional men cannot be judged by ordinary stan-
dards. The stress and strain of thirty years told
severely on his arteries, and for two or three years
there had been unmistakable warnings in attacks of
angina pectoris. He kept at work with vigour un-
abated until the spring, when he had signs of dilatation
of the heart, with bronchitis and dyspnoea. The last
time I saw him, in May, 1898, I think, he was in bed,
improving rapidly, he said, and very cheerful, talk-
ing much of his plans, particularly of the Commercial
Museum and of the Library. He spoke of a proposed
visit to the Pacific Coast, and of the good it was sure
to do him. Then came the sad announcement of his
death in California— a shock to all his friends, since,
with the discretion which we doctors often exercise,
the secret of his serious attacks had been well kept.
I ma^' be permitted to quote one or two extracts from


WILLIAM PEPPER 231

a letter from his physician, who was with him at the
time:

' He died at eight in the evening with a copy of
Treasure Island in his hands. At seven I had left him
gazing upon Mount Diabolo, shadowed in the gathering
darkness. I was called at eight and found him in the
attitude and with the expression of angor animi^ from
which he never roused. He had suffered a few months
before with cardiac dilatation ; at the time of his death
he was recovering the lost compensation, and appeared
on the clear road to recovery. He had said a few days
before "the battle has been won". Throughout his
illness he exhibited the most perfect disposition and the
greatest patience and forbearance. . . . The fatal attack
was, I think, about the seventh, extending over a period
of three years ; the last previous attack was in April, at
the time he was lectunng upon aneina pectoris. He
knew that the end must come some oay, but he did not
expect it so soon. I have never seen so beautiful a nature
in sickness ; his conduct and disposition were worthy of
Marcus Aurelius.'

With such a book as Treasure Island in his hand, we
can imagine that the great Enchanter of the Pacific had
filled his mind with the possibilities of peace and quiet
(so long denied him)— possibilities turned instantly to
realities with the summons to the peace and quiet of an
eternal rest. Some lines of the same writer express
both the spirit in which William Pepper utilized his
time in the service of his fellow men, and the chief
lesson of his life to us who survive :

Contend, my soul, for moments and for hours;
Each is with service pregnant, each reclaimed
Is as a Kingdom conquered, where to reign.


ALFRED STILL6'


I DOUBT not that every Fellow of this College had
a feeling of thankfulness, mingled with a sort of pride,
that Alfred Still6 was spared so long to grace and
adorn our Society. His venerable presence was itself
a sort of benediction ; his culture a refining influence ;
and there was about him ' a certain niceness of nature,
an honest haughtiness and self-esteem', which well
became his position and his years.

The College has had Fellows more distinguished-
men who have filled a wider space in our annals, and
who have been more closely identified with her history
— but it would be hard to name a Fellow in the past
half-century who was more deeply interested in her
welfare, more appreciative of her needs, or one upon
whom was a richer anointing of the spirit of the
fathers.

I feel it a special privilege to be allowed to act as
the mouthpiece of my colleagues in expressing our
sense of the value of his work and the lessons of his
life. The physician of the last century, whose ' floruit '
came in the fourth, fifth, and sixth decades, is of all
men the most to be envied. Coming out of the wil-
derness in which we had wandered for two thousand
years, he entered the promised land, and, under the

' Read at the meeting of the College of Physicians of Phila-
delphia, April 2, 1902. Reprinted from the Utttversify of PenH'
sylvania Medical Buiiftin, June, 1902.


ALFRED STILLE 233

leadership of Laennec and Louis, of Skoda and of
Virchow, he saw the heathen dispossessed, and the
profession at last enter upon a heritage of scientific
medicine.

I

Bom in 1815, Dr. Still6 began his life-work with the
generation which saw the new pathology and the new
clinical methods. To this accident of the time of birth
were added favouring social and local surroundings.
Like Sir Thomas Browne, he could * lift up one hand
to heaven that he was bom of honest parents, and that
modesty, humility, patience, and veracity lay in the
same egg and came into the world with him*. With
Milton, he could feel that his endowments were happily
not the worse for forty degrees of northern latitude.
Among his papers are several interesting autobiogra-
phical fragments relating to this period. After joining
in the * conic section' rebellion at Yale, which led to
the retirement of one-half of the class, he seems to
have had for a time a leaning toward the law.

' During the years of probation,' he says, ' I tested
the strength of my partiality for a medical career by
some medical reading, including Bell's Anatomy and
Bichat's General Anatomy, and attending the anatomical
instruction at the Jeiferson Medical College. In this
last I was joined by my friend Mandeville, who was
at that time already a student of law. I was induced
to pursue these anatomical studies at the Jeiferson
College by Dr. George McClellan, who was then at-
tending my sister Sarah for a tedious ailment, and
also by the reputation of the professor of anatomy in
that institution. Dr. Granville Sharpe Pattison. He
was certainly a most eloauent teacher, and he made
the dry subject interesting by mixing with pure anatomv
a good deal of physiology and surgery, and even a dash
of poetry. I shall never forget nis lecture upon the


234 BIOGRAPHICAL ESSAYS

skull, in which he recited with admirable feeling the
famous lines of Byron beginning, " Is this a place
where a god might dwell r' Indeed, the charm of
Pattison's lectures was his enthusiasm, tempered and
guided by cultivation. His voice was flexible and sono-
rous, though not loud, and his manner intensely earnest,
but never violent. While I attended his lectures I also
began the study of practical anatomy in the new and
admirably constructea dissecting-room of the same col-
lege, and pursued it with much enthusiasm in company
with Mandeville.'

The best of luck awaited him when, in 1^35-6, he
became house physician at Blockley, under W. W.
Gerhard, a clinical teacher of the very first rank, and
fresh from the wards of the great French phsrsician,
Louis.

He was much indebted, too, to Pennock, of whom
he has left the following appreciative sketch:

' Meanwhile. I studied physical exploration and dia-
gnosis with Dr. Pennock, who, besides having been
associated with Dr. Gerhard in his fever studies, sdso
devoted himself specially to diseases of the heart. I had
assisted him in or been present at some of the experi-
ments on sheep which he performed to demonstrate the
mechanism of the heart's action, and now at the hospital
I was instructed by him in the clinical diagnosis of heart
disease by physical methods. He was a man who united
with a rare enthusiasm in the study of the heart's func-
tions and diseases— and, indeed, in whatever he under-
took—a transparent honesty and innocency of character,
and a generous ardour of benevolence, that made him
beloved as well as admired. He was in nearly all
respects in contrast with his friend Gerhard, who was
frequently satirical, devoid of sentiment or imagination,
and equally so of strong personal attachments. No
doubt Gerhard was the more intellectual man, but
Pennock was the nobler of the two. His chief con-
tribution to medical literature, besides his collaboration
with Gerhard in the essay on Typhus^ was an edition
of Hope's Treatise on the Hearty to which he added


ALFRED STILLE 235

much that was valuable, including the experiments
performed by Moore and himself. It is remarkable
that both of these men were arrested in their pro-
fessional career not by death^ but disease ; from about
1850 Gerhard suffered from disease within the cranium,
which, although it did not render him a paralytic or an
imbecile, extinguished every spark of his ambition, and
caused a permanent halt in his acquisition of knowledge.
He repeated over and over again his old lectures, but
added to them nothing new. In 1863 he did^ indeed,
record his observations of epidemic meningitis; but
this was, I think, the only occasion of his revivaJ/

In remarks made at the dinner given on the occasion
of his retirement from the Chair of Medicine, Dr. Stills
referred to his two teachers in the following words :

'While still a medical student two of my fellow
townsmen returned from abroad glowing with the fire
they had caught in Paris, the then acknowledged centre
of medical science. Gerhard and Pennock were the
apostles of the school of observation, under whose
preaching I became a zealous convert. As soon as it
was possible, I hastened to the enchanted scene of their
European labours.'

I have written much and talked more on the subject
of Louis and his band of American pupils, of whom
Stille was a good representative. The mantle of Laennec
fell upon Louis, who seems to have had in singular
measure the gift of inspiring enthusiasm in his students
and a touching personal devotion. No European teacher
has ever appreciated more highly his transatlantic pupils,
and not one has ever had a more distinguished band of
followers. Oliver Wendell Holmes said that he had
learned three things in Paris: 'Not to take authority
when I can have facts, not to guess when I can know,
and not to think a man must take physic because he is
sick.' It seems to me that this group of young fellows
brought back from Paris, first, an appreciation of the


236 BIOGRAPHICAL ESSAYS

value of method and accuracy in the study of the
phenomena of disease; secondly, a profound, and at
the time a much needed, distrust of drugs ; and, thirdly,
a Gallic refinement and culture which stamped them,
one and all, as unusual men. Let me name the list over
as given to me by Still6 himself :

' From Boston : James Jackson, jun., H. I. Bowditch,
O. W. Holmes, George C. Shattuck, jun., John C.Wamen
(then past middle ag^. John Mason Warren, and John
D. Fisher. From Philadelphia: George W. Norris,
William W. Gerhard, Caspar W. Pennock, Thomas
Stewardson, Alfred Still6, Tnomas D. Matter, E. Camp-
bell Stewart, Charles Bell Gibson, John B. BidcUe,
David H. Tucker. Baltimore: Wiluam Power (see
biography of Charles Frick, in Gross's Lives). Charles-
ton: G. S. Gibbes, Peter C. Gaillard, Peyre Porcher.
Virginia : J. L. Cabell, L. S. Joynes, Kanaolph. New
York : John A. Swett, Abraham Dubois, Alonzo Clark,
Charles L. Mitchell, Punnett, Charles D. Smith, Valen-
tine Mott, sen. In addition, Edward Peace, Meredith
Clymer, William P. Johnston, W. S- W. Ruschenberger,
and John T. Metcalfe.'

There were many others, of course— some before
Louis' day, as Samuel G. Morton, who was Laennec's
most distinguished American pupil, and some of those
mentioned, as Meredith Clymer (ultimus Romanomm ')
and Metcalfe, just gone, who did not come so directly
under Louis' influence, but were pupils of Chomel and
Andral.

II

Method and accuracy were from the first character-
istic of Dr. Stint's work. He played an interesting
part in that splendid contribution of American medicine
to the differentiation of t3rphus and typhoid fever. I

^ Died April 20, 1902.


ALFRED STILLlfc 237

will let him tell the story in his own words. In a manu-
script he says :

'The year 1836 is memorable for an epidemic of
typhus (t. petechialis) which prevailed in the district of
the city which is the usual seat of epidemics caused
or aggravated by crowding, viz. south of Spruce and
between Fourth and Tentn streets. A great many of
the poor creatures living in that overcrowded region,
and who were attacked with typhus, were brought to
the Philadelphia Hospital, where I had charge of one
of the wards assigned to them. I had the ereat goond
fortune to study these cases under Dr. Gernard. His

Permanent reputation rests upon the papers published
y him in Hays's Journal^ in which he fully established
the essential differences between this disease and ty-
phoid fever. All the original material he obtained m
this country for determining the symptomatology of
typhus was gathered by him during tnis epidemic ; but
his first stuoies of the disease had been made in Great
Britain. The contrasted picture of typhoid fever was
composed of the features he had become familiar with
while studying that disease as a favoured pupil of Louis,
in Paris, so that he may be said to have been the first
to meet the two diseases face to face with a full ac-
quaintance with one of them and a daily increasing
knowledge of the other. On a small scale I went
through the same experience, for I had grown familiar
with typhoid fever while following Geniard's clinical
instructions in the Pennsylvania Hospital the year
before, and at every step of my study of typhus in the
wards and post-mortem revealed new contrasts between
the two diseases, so that I felt surprised that the British
physicians should have continued to confound them.
I was very diligent in making clinical notes and dissec-
tions, spending many hours every day in the presence
of the aisease. I, however, escapled its contagion, while
several others of the resident physicians suffered attacks
of it, one of which, I think, ended fatally. I look upon
that arduous and even dangerous experience as one of
my most valuable clinical lessons.'

In the drafl of a letter dated February, 186a, found
among his papers, entitled Refutation of A. F. Stewarfs


230 BIOGRAPHICAL ESSAYS

he had seen fulfilled the desire of his eyes, and to the
rich life which he had lived the future could have added
but little, though doubtless his restless spirit would
have driven him into fresh fields. The reformation of
medical education, the reorganization of the University
of Pennsylvania, the establishment of a great Com-
mercial Museum and a Free Library— these and a score
of minor plans he had either seen completed or well
under way. Surely if ever a man could sing a Nunc
Dimitfis it was William Pepper! But as no man liveth,
so no man dieth to himself, and we may mourn with
those who shared his inner life, and who so generously
gave so much of it to us of the profession and to the
public. For them we feel his loss to be irreparable, his
death to be premature. For them we could have wished
an extension of his time to the Psalmist's limit.

I have no desire to criticize the method of his life.
Exceptional men cannot be judged by ordinary stan-
dards. The stress and strain of thirty years told
severely on his arteries, and for two or three years
there had been unmistakable warnings in attacks of
angina pectoris. He kept at work with vigour un-
abated until the spring, when he had signs of dilatation
of the heart, with bronchitis and dyspnoea. The last
time I saw him, in May, 1898, I think, he was in bed,
improving rapidly, he said, and very cheerful, talk-
ing much of his plans, particularly of the Commercial
Museum and of the Library. He spoke of a proposed
visit to the Pacific Coast, and of the good it was sure
to do him. Then came the sad announcement of his
death in California — a shock to all his friends, since,
with the discretion which we doctors often exercise,
the secret of his serious attacks had been well kept.
I ma^' be permitted to quote one or two extracts from


WILLIAM PEPPER 231

a letter from his physician, who was with him at the
time :

'He died at eight in the evening with a copy of
Treasure Island in his hands. At seven I had left him
eazing upon Mount Diabolo, shadowed in the gathering
darkness. I was called at eight and found him in the
attitude and with the expression of angor animi, from
which he never roused. He had sufferM a few mon^s
before with cardiac dilatation ; at the time of his death
he was recovering the lost compensation, and appeared
on the clear road to recovery. He had said a few days
before "the battle has been won". Throughout his
illness he exhibited the most perfect disposition and the

greatest patience and forbearance The fatal attack

was, I think, about the seventh, extending over a period
of three years ; the last previous attack was in April, at
the time he was lectunng upon angina pectoris. He
knew that the end must come some &y, but he did not
expect it so soon. I have never seen so beautiful a nature
in sickness ; his conduct and disposition were worthy of
Marcus Aurelius.'

With such a book as Treasure Island in his hand, we
can imagine that the great Enchanter of the Pacific had
filled his mind with the possibilities of peace and quiet
(so long denied him)— possibilities turned instantly to
realities with the summons to the peace and quiet of an
eternal rest. Some lines of the same writer express
both the spirit in which William Pepper utilized his
time in the service of his fellow men, and the chief
lesson of his life to us who survive :

Contend, my soul, for moments and for hours;
Each is with service pregnant, each reclaimed
Is as a Kingdom conquered, where to reign.


232


ALFRED STILL6*


I DOUBT not that every Fellow of this College had
a feeling of thankfulness, mingled with a sort of pride,
that Alfred Still6 was spared so long to grace and
adorn our Society. His venerable presence was itself
a sort of benediction ; his culture a refining influence ;
and there was about him ' a certain niceness of nature,
an honest haughtiness and self-esteem \ which well
became his position and his years.

The College has had Fellows more distinguished —
men who have filled a wider space in our annals, and
who have been more closely identified with her history
—but it would be hard to name a Fellow in the past
half-century who was more deeply interested in her
welfare, more appreciative of her needs, or one upon
whom was a richer anointing of the spirit of the
fathers.

I feel it a special privilege to be allowed to act as
the mouthpiece of my colleagues in expressing our
sense of the value of his work and the lessons of his
life. The physician of the last century, whose ' floruit *
came in the fourth, fifth, and sixth decades, is of all
men the most to be envied. Coming out of the wil-
derness in which we had wandered for two thousand
years, he entered the promised land, and, under the

' Read at the meeting of the College of Physicians of Phila-
delphia, April 2, 1902. Reprinted from the Upiiversify of Fttm--
syl%H»wa Medical Bulletin y June, 1902.


ALFRED STILLE 333

leadership of Laennec and Louis, of Skoda and of
VirchoWi he saw the heathen dispossessed, and the
profession at last enter upon a heritage of scientific
medicine.

I

Bom in 1815, Dr. Stills began his life-work with the
generation which saw the new pathology and the new
clinical, methods. To this accident of the time of birth
were added favouring social and local surroundings.
Like Sir Thomas Browne, he could * lift up one hand
to heaven that he was bom of honest parents, and that
modesty, humility, patience, and veracity lay in the
same egg and came into the world with him'. With
Milton, he could feel that his endowments were happily
not the worse for forty degrees of northem latitude.
Among his papers are several interesting autobiogra-
phical fragments relating to this period. After joining
in the 'conic section' rebellion at Yale, which led to
the retirement of one-half of the class, he seems to
have had for a time a leaning toward the law.

' During the years of probation,' he says, ' I tested
the strenfith of my partiality for a medioil career by
some medical reading, including Bell's Anatomy and
Bichat's General Anatomy^ and attending the anatomical
instmction at the Jefferson Medical College. In this
last I was joined by my friend Mandevilfe, who was
at that time already a student of law. I was induced
to pursue these anatomical studies at the Jefferson
College by Dr. Geoiige McClellan, who was then at-
tending my sister Sarah for a tedious ailment, and
also by the reputation of the professor of anatomy in
that institution. Dr. Granville Sharpe Pkttison. He
was certainly a most eloauent teacher, and he made
the dry subject interesting by mixing with pure anatomy
a gooQ deal of physiology and suigeiy, and even a dasn
of poetry. I shall never foiiget nis lecture upon the


234 BIOGRAPHICAL ESSAYS

skull, in which he recited with admirable feeling the
famous lines of Byron bejnnning, '' Is this a place
where a fod might dwell?" Indeed, the charm of
Pattison's lectures was his enthusiasm, tempered and
guided by cultivation. His voice was flexible and sono-
rous, though not loud, and his manner intensely earnest^
but never violent. While I attended his lectures I also
began the study of practical anatomy in die new and
admirably constructea dissecting-room of the same col-
lege, and pursued it with much enthusiasm in company
with Mandeville.'

The best of luck awaited him when, in 1^35-6, he
became house physician at Blockley, under W. W.
Gerhard, a clinical teacher of the very first rank, and
fresh from the wards of the great French physician,
Louis.

He was much indebted, too, to Pennock, of whom
he has left the following appreciative sketch:

' Meanwhile. I studied physical exploration and dia-
gnosis with Dr. Pennock, who, besides having been
associated with Dr. Gerhard in his fever studies, also
devoted himself specially to diseases of the heart. I had
assisted him in or been present at some of the experi-
ments on sheep which he performed to demonstrate the
mechanism of the heart's action, and now at the hospital
I was instructed by him in the clinical diagnosis of heart
disease by physical methods. He was a man who united
with a rare enthusiasm in the study of the heart's func-
tions and diseases— and, indeed, in whatever he under-
took—a transparent honesty and innocency of character,
and a eenerous ardour of benevolence, that made him
beloved as well as admired. He was in nearly all
respects in contrast with his friend Gerhard, who was
frequently satirical, devoid of sentiment or imagination,
and equally so of strong personal attachments. No
doubt Gerhard was the more intellectual man, but
Pennock was the nobler of the two. His chief con-
tribution to medical literature, besides his collaboration
with Gerhard in the essay on Typhus^ was an edition
of Hope's Treatise on the Heart , to which he added


ALFRED STILLE 235

much that was valuable, including the experiments
performed by Moore and himselfT It is remarkable
that both of these men were arrested in their pro-
fessional career not by death^ but disease ; from about
i^ Gerhard sufferedffrom disease within the cranium,
which, although it did not render him a paralytic or an
imbecile, extinguished every spark of his ambition, and
caused a permanent halt in his acquisition of knowledge.
He repeated over and over again his old lectures, but
added to them nothing new. In 1863 he did^ indeed,
record his observations of epidemic meningitis; but
this was, I think, the only occasion of his revivd.'

In remarks made at the dinner given on the occasion
of his retirement from the Chair of Medicine, Dr. Stills
referred to his two teachers in the following words :

'While still a medical student two of my fellow
townsmen returned from abroad glowing witii the fire
they had caught in Paris, the then acknowledged centre
of medical science. Gerhard and Pennock were the
apostles of the school of observation, under whose
preaching I became a zealous convert As soon as it
was possible, I hastened to the enchanted scene of their
European labours.'

I have written much and talked more on the subject
of Louis and his band of American pupils, of whom
Stills was a good representative. The mantle of Laennec
fell upon Louis, who seems to have had in singular
measure the gift of inspiring enthusiasm in his students
and a touching personal devotion. No European teacher
has ever appreciated more highly his transatlantic pupils,
and not one has ever had a more distinguished iMtnd of
followers. Oliver Wendell Holmes said that he had
learned three things in Paris : ' Not to take authority
when I can have focts, not to guess when I can know,
and not to think a man must take physic because he is
sick.' It seems to me that this group of young fdiomz
brought back from Pkris, first, an appreciation of the


236 BIOGRAPHICAL ESSAYS

value of method and accuracy in the study of the
phenomena of disease; secondly, a profound, and at
the time a much needed, distrust of drugs ; and, thirdly,
a Gallic refinement and culture which stamped them,
one and all, as unusual men. Let me name the list over
as given to me by Stills himself :

' From Boston : James Jackson, jun., H. I. Bowditch,
O. W. Holmes, George C. Shattuck, jun., John C.Warren
(then past middle age), John Mason Warren, and John
D. Fisher. From Philadelphia: George W. Norris»
William W. Gerhard, Caspar W. Pennock, Thomas
Stewardson, Alfred Stills, Tnomas D. Matter, E. Camp-
bell Stewart, Charles Bell Gibson, John 0. Biddle,
David H. Tucker. Baltimore: Wiluam Power (see
biography of Charles Frick, in Gross's Lives). Charies-
ton: G. S. Gibbes, Peter C. Gaillard, Peyre Porcher.
Virginia : J. L. Cabell, L. S. Joynes, Kanaolph. New
York : John A. Swett, Abraham Dubois, Alonzo Clark,
Charles L. Mitchell, Punnett, Charles D. Smith. Valen-
tine Mott, sen. In addition, Edward Peace, Meredith
Clymer. William P.Johnston, W. S. W. Ruschenbei^ger,
and John T. Metcalfe.'

There were many others, of course— some before
Louis' day, as Samuel G. Morton, who was Laennec's
most distinguished American pupil, and some of those
mentioned, as Meredith Clymer (ultimus Ramanarum^)
and Metcalfe, just gone, who did not come so directly
under Louis' influence, but were pupils of Chomel and
Andral.

II

Method and accuracy were from the first character-
istic of Dr. Still^'s work. He played an interesting
part in that splendid contribution of American medicine
to the differentiation of typhus and typhoid fever. I

' Died April 20, 1902.


ALFRED STILLfe 237

will let him tell the story in his own words. In a manu-
script he says :

'The year 1836 is memorable for an epidemic of
typhus (t. petechialis) which prevailed in the district of
tne city which is the usual seat of epidemics caused
or aggravated by crowdinc^, viz. south of Spruce and
between Fourth and Tenth streets. A great many of
the poor creatures living in that overcrowded re^on,
and who were attacked with typhus, were brought to
the Philadelphia Hospital, where I had charge of one
of the wards assignee! to them. I had the fijeat good
fortune to study these cases under Dr. Gerhard. His

Permanent reputation rests upon the papers published
y him in Hays's Journal^ in which he fully established
the essential differences between this disease and ty-
phoid fever. All the original material he obtained m
this country for determining the symptomatology of
tj^hus was gathered by him during tnis epidemic ; but
his first stumes of the disease had been made in Great
Britain. The contrasted picture of typhoid fever was
composed of the features he had become familiar with
while studying that disease as a fovoured pupil of Louis,
in Paris, so that he may be said to have been the first
to meet the two diseases face to face with a full ac-
quaintance with one of them and a daily increasing
knowledge of the other. On a small scale I went
through the same experience, for I had grown fiuniliar
with typhoid fever while following Geniard's clinical
instructions in the Pennsylvania Hospital the year
before, and at every step of my study of typhus in the
wards and post-mortem revealed new contrasts between
the two diseases, so that I felt surprised that the British
physicians should have continued to confound them.
1 was very diligent in making clinical notes and dissec-
tions, spending many hours every day in the presence
of the disease. I, however, escaped its contagion, while
several others of the resident physicians suffimd attacks
of it, one of which, I think, ended fatally. I look upon
that arduous and even dangerous experience as one of
my most valuable clinical lessons.*

In the draft of a letter dated Fdbruary, 1868, found
among his papers, entitled R^UMum ^A. F. Skwarfs


238 BIOGRAPHICAL ESSAYS

Claims about Typhus and Typhoid Fevers, there is the

following account :

'It is known that the question had already been
conclusively solved by Drs. Pennock and Gerhardi of
Philadelphia, in 1837, whose essay upon it was pub-
lished in the February and August numbers for that
year of the American Journal of the Medical ScUnces^
republished in the Dublin Journal of Medical Science,
September, 1837, p. 148, analysed in the London Medico-
Chirurgical Review for October, 1857^ p. 553, and trans-
lated in a Parisian medical journal, fExpirtence, in 183B.
The writer of the present communication, having had
the advant^e of observing the typhus epidemic m the
Blockley Hospital under the physicians just named,
afterward made a special study of typhoid fever in die
wards of M. Louis, in Paris, and had opportunities of
observing typhus with Vulpes in Naples, Tweedie in
London, Alison in Edinburgh, and uraves in Dublin.
The results of these observations were contained in
a paper, of which Valleix speaks as follows: ''In an
unpuolished memoir of Dr. Stills, an interne of Dr.
Gerhard during the prevalence of the epidemic in Phila-
delphia, which was read before the Medical Society of
Observation (September 14 and 28, 1838), and which we
have before us, tine two diseases are compared, symptom
by symptom and lesion by lesion ; and, apart from the
phenomena of fever common to all febrile affections,
the opposite of what is observed in the one is sure to
be presented in the other " (Arch, gen., February, 1839,
p. 213). Among other conclusions reached by valleix
is the following: "English and American typhus is
a different disease from typhoid fever." A few months
later (Arch, gen., October, 1839, p. 25 and p. 129) the
same physician published an analysis of thirteen cases
of typhus observed in London by Dr. G. C. Shattuck, of
Boston, fully confirming the conclusion just stated.
A paper founded on the same cases is also contained
in the Philadelphia Medical Examiner for February,
1840, p. 133. It was after the whole of these publica-
tions—viz. in April, 1840 — that Dr. Stewart first com-
municated his observations to the Parisian Medical
Society, and they were not published until October ot
the same year. His apparent want of candour, there-^


ALFRED STILLE 939

fore, in the paragraph above quoted from his com-
munication to the Ttmes and GaeeUe is» for his own
sake, very much to be regretted.'

I am fortunately able to show you the manuscript of
Dr. Still^'s paper, which, with that of Shattuck, made
a strong impression on the French physicians, who still
clung to the view that there was but one disease. It is
a pity that this admirable paper has never been printed.
A casual glance over the headings will give you an idea
of the fullness and accuracy with which these able
young fellows had worked out the diflferences between
these two great diseases. Geiiiard and Pennock, StiUe
and Shattuck, appear to have been the first to fully grasp
their essential clinical distinctions, and to appreciate
their merit one has only to read the British writings
on fever at this period. Some years later A. F. Stewart
did good work in the same line, and later still Jenner
made his important study ; but that in the first edition
of Bartlett on Fevers, 1842, the two diseases should have
been considered apart is the best testimony to the
rapidity with which the new views were received in
this country.

Between two and three years of study in Europe
gave Dr. Stille a fine training for his life-work. Re-
turning to Philadelphia, he began practice, wrote for
the journals, taught students, and gradually there came
to him reputation and recognition. After lecturing on
pathology and the practice of medicine in the Phila-
delphia Association for Medical Instruction, he was
elected, in 1854, to the Chair of Practice in the Pennsyl-
vania Medical College. In 1864 he succeeded Dr.
Pepper (primus) in the Chair of Medicine at the Uni-
versity of Pennsylvania. While always a student, he
was no hermit, but from the start took a deep interest


240 BIOGRAPHICAL ESSAYS

in the general welfare of the profession. He was the
first Secretary of the American Medical Association,
and President in 1867. The local societies recognized
his work and worth, and he became President of the
Pathological and of the County Medical Societies, and
in 1885 h^ ^ook ^^^ Chair of our ancient and honourable
body. He was from the outset of his career a strong
advocate for higher medical education, and from 1846--
the date of his first address on the subject— to 1897 —
the date of his last— he pleaded for better preliminary
training and for longer sessions. No one rejoiced
more in the new departure of the University in 1876^
and he was a consistent advocate of advanced methods
of teaching.

Dr. Still6's medical writings show on every page the
influence of his great master. His first important work,
The EUfnetits of General Pathology^ 1848, was based on
the modern researches, and every chapter echoed with
his favourite motto, ' Tota ars medica est in observationi-
bus.' I must quote one sentence from the Introductory
Essay on Medical Truth :

* But we assert that there is a genius, not a speculative,
not a poetical, not a mere fantastic faculty, but a practical
genius, which is, to say the least, a far more rare endow-
ment than that just mentioned ; '' a power which is
capable of penetrating into all things within our reach
and knowledge and of distinguishmg their essential
differences." It creates nothing, it does not even
invent anything; it only sees things as they are and
discovers truth in what it sees; for the truth, as we
are told by Rousseau, is in things and not in our
minds, and the less of ourselves we introduce into our
judgements the nearer we shall approach to truth. Such
was the genius of Hippocrates, of Sydenham, of Mor-
gagni, of Haller, of Laennec, of Abercrombie, of Hunter,
of bichat, of Sir Astley Cooper; such is that of Andrei,
of Chomel, of Louis, of Cruveilhier, of Brodie, of


ALFRED STILL6 241

Graves. These men saw relations among the phe*
nomena of disease which were invisible to less gifted
men ; and having seen them by virtue of their genius
they did not stop there and build up a theory upon
them, assumine them to be true, out immediately
applied themselves to discover whether they had seen
carrectiy; they tested their inspirations by observation
and experiment, and when they found them unable to
bear these tests they rejected them as delusions, as idle
dreams not even wortn remembering ; but wnen, on
the other hand, they found them confirmed, they gave
credit, not to the original penetration which had gucised
at the truth, but to the series of &cts which had
established it'

Apart from numerous smaller articles in the journals,
there are two important monographs by Dr. Stills —
one on Cerebrospinal MeningiHs and the other on
Cholera. In addition, two minor studies were on
Dysentery, in the publications of the United States
Sanitary Commission, and on Etysipdas. The work
on cerebro-spinal fever is a model of accurate, systematic
study based on a large series of cases seen in the
Philadelphia Hospital, and upon an exhaustive analysis
of the literature. The work on cholera is of the
same kind. To a generation of lesser writers they
have served as unfailing sources of trustworthy in-
formation.

Estimated by bulk, the most important of Dr. Still^'s
works are the Materia Medka and Therapeutics and
the National Dispensatofy. It was always a mystery
to me how a man with his training and type of mind
could have undertaken such colossal and, one would
have thought, uncongenial tasks. He was not so
deeply imbued with scepticiim as some of his con*
temporaries. Of him it could scarcely have been said,
as of Jacob Bigdow by Professor Peabody, that his


ottn


234 BIOGRAPHICAL ESSAYS

skull, in which he recited with admirable feeling the
famous lines of Byron bejnnning, '' Is this a place
where a fod might dwell?" Indeed, the charm of
Pattison's lectures was his enthusiasm, tempered and
guided by cultivation. His voice was flexible and sono-
rous, though not loud, and his manner intensely earnest,
but never violent. While I attended his lectures I also
began the study of practical anatomy in the new and
admirably constructea dissecting-room of the same col-
lege, and pursued it with much enthusiasm in company
with Mandeville/

The best of luck awaited him when, in 1^35-6, he
became house physician at Blockley, under W. W.
Gerhard, a clinical teacher of the very first rank, and
fresh from the wards of the great French physician,
Louis.

He was much indebted, too, to Pennock, of whom
he has left the following appreciative sketch:

' Meanwhile. I studied physical exploration and dia-
gnosis with Dr. Pennock, who, besides having been
associated with Dr. Gerhard in his fever studies, also
devoted himself specially to diseases of the heart. I had
assisted him in or been present at some of the experi-
ments on sheep which he performed to demonstrate the
mechanism of the heart's action, and now at the hospital
I was instructed by him in the clinical diagnosis of heart
disease by physical methods. He was a man who united
with a rare enthusiasm in the study of the heart's func-
tions and diseases— and, indeed, in whatever he under-
took—a transparent honesty and innocency of character,
and a s;enerous ardour of benevolence, that made him
beloved as well as admired. He was in nearly all
respects in contrast with his friend Gerhard, who was
frequently satirical, devoid of sentiment or imagination,
and equally so of strong personal attachments. No
doubt Gerhard was the more intellectual man, but
Pennock was the nobler of the two. His chief con-
tribution to medical literature, besides his collaboration
with Gerhard in the essay on Typhus^ was an edition
of Hope's Treatise on the Heart , to which he added


ALFRED STILLIE 235

much that was valuable, including the experiments
performed by Moore and himself. It is remarkable
that both of these men were arrested in their pro-
fessional career not by death^ but disease ; from about
18^ Gerhard suffered from disease within the cranium,
whichj although it did not render him a paralytic or an
imbecile, extinguished every spark of his ambition, and
caused a permanent halt in his acquisition of knowledge.
He repeated over and over again his old lectures, out
added to them nothing new. In 1863 he did^ indeed,
record his observations of epidemic meningitis; but
this was, I think, the only occasion of his revival/

In remarks made at the dinner given on the occasion
of his retirement from the Chair of Medicine, Dr. Stills
referred to his two teachers in the following words :

'While still a medical student two of my fellow
townsmen returned from abroad glowing with the fire
they had caught in Paris, the then acknowledged centre
of medical science. Gerhard and Pennock were tiie
apostles of the school of observation, under whose
preaching I became a zealous convert As soon as it
was possible, I hastened to the enchanted scene of their
European labours.'

I have written much and talked more on the subject
of Louis and his band of American pupils, of whom
Stills was a good representative. The mantle of Laennec
fell upon Louis, who seems to have had in singular
measure the gift of inspiring enthusiasm in his students
and a touching personal devotion. No European teacher
has ever appreciated more highly his transatlantic pupils,
and not one has ever had a more distinguished iNind of
followers. Oliver Wendell Holmes said that he had
learned three things in Paris: 'Not to take authority
when I can have &cts, not to guess when I can know,
and not to think a man must take physic because he is
sick.' It seems to me that this group of youog fellnirs
brought back from Pkris, first, an q>preciation of the


236 BIOGRAPHICAL ESSAYS

value of method and accuracy in the study of the
phenomena of disease; secondly, a profound, and at
the time a much needed, distrust of drugs ; and, thirdly,
a Gallic refinement and culture which stamped them,
one and all, as unusual men. Let me name the list over
as given to me by Stille himself :

' From Boston : James Jackson, jun., H. I. Bowditch,
O. W. Holmes, George C. Shattuck, jun., John C.Warren
(then past middle ag^, John Mason Warren, and John
D. Fisher. From rhiladelphia : George W. Norris^
William W. Gerhard, Caspar W. Pennock, Thomas
Stewardson, Alfred Still6, Tiiomas D. Matter, E. Camp-
bell Stewart, Charles Bell Gibson, John B. Biddle,
David H. Tucker. Baltimore: William Power (see
biography of Charles Frick, in Gross's Lives). Charies-
ton: u. S. Gibbes, Peter C. Gaillard, Peyre Porcher.
Virginia : J. L. Cabell, L. S. Joynes, Kanaoiph. New
York : John A. Swett, Abraham Dubois, Alonzo Clark,
Charles L. Mitchell, Punnett, Charles D. Smith. Valen-
tine Mott, sen. In addition, Edward Peace, Meradith
Clymer. William P. Johnston, W. S. W. Ruschenberger,
and John T. Metcalfe/

There were many others, of course— some before
Louis' day, as Samuel G. Morton, who was Laennec's
most distinguished American pupil, and some of those
mentioned, as Meredith Clymer (ultimus Romanarum^)
and Metcalfe, just gone, who did not come so directly
under Louis' influence, but were pupils of Chomel and
Andral.

II

Method and accuracy were from the first character-
istic of Dr. Still^'s work. He played an interesting
part in that splendid contribution of American medicine
to the differentiation of typhus and typhoid fever. I

^ Died April 20, 1902.


ALFRED STILLfe 237

will let him tell the story in his own words. In a manu-
script he says :

'The year 1836 is memorable for an epidemic of
typhus (t. petechialis) which prevailed in the district of
tne city which is the usual seat of epidemics caused
or aggravated by crowdinc^, viz. south of Spruce and
between Fourth and Tenth streets. A great many of
the poor creatures living in that overcrowded rc^on,
and who were attacked with typhus, were brought to
the Philadelphia Hospital, where I had charge of one
of the wards assignee! to them. I had the fijeat good
fortune to study these cases under Dr. Gerhard. His

Eermanent reputation rests upon the papers published
y him in Hays's Journal^ in which he fully established
the essential differences between this disease and ty-
phoid fever. All the original material he obtained m
this country for determining the symptomatology of
typhus was eathered by him during tnis epidemic ; but
his first stuoies of the disease had been made in Great
Britain. The contrasted picture of typhoid fever was
composed of the features he had become familiar with
while studying that disease as a favoured pupil of Louis,
in Paris, so that he may be said to have been the first
to meet the two diseases face to face with a fiill ac-
quaintance with one of them and a daily increasing
knowledge of the other. On a small scale I went
through the same experience, for I had grown fiuniliar
with typhoid fever while foUowing Geniard's clinical
instructions in the Pennsylvania Hospital the year
before, and at every step of my study of typhus in the
wards and post-mortem revealed new contrasts between
the two diseases, so that I felt surprised that the British
physicians should have continued to confound them.
1 was very diligent in making clinical notes and dissec-
tions, spending many hours every day in the presence
of the disease. I, however, escaped its contagion, while
several others of die resident physicians suffered attacks
of it, one of which, I think, ended fatally. I look upon
that arduous and even dangerous experience as one of
my most valuable clinical lessons.*

In the draft of a letter dated Februaryi 1868, found
among his papers, entitled R^UMkm ^A. F. Skwarfs


238 BIOGRAPHICAL ESSAYS

Clamis about Typhus and Typhoid Fevers, there is the

following account :

' It is known that the question had already been
conclusively solved by Drs. Pennock and Gerhard, of
Philadelphia, in 1837, whose essay upon it was pub-
lished in the February and August numbers for that
year of the American Journal of the Medical Sciences,
republished in the Dublin Journal of Medical Science,
September, 1837, p. 148, analysed in the London Medico-
Chirurgical Review for October, 1857^ p. 553, and trans-
lated in a Parisian medical journal, ^Expinence^ in iQ^.
The writer of the present communication, having had
the advantage of observing the typhus epidemic m the
Blockley Hospital under the physicians just named,
afterward made a special study ol typhoid fever in the
wards of M. Louis, in Paris, and had opportunities of
observing typhus with Vulpes in Naples, Tweedic in
London, Alison in Edinburgh, and uraves in Dublin.
The results of these observations were contained in
a paper, of which Valleix speaks as follows: ''In an
unpuolished memoir of Dr. Stille, an interne of Dr.
Gerhard during the prevalence of the epidemic in Hiila-
delphia, which was read before the Medical Society of
Observation (September 14 and 28, 1838), and which we
have before us, the two diseases are compared, symptom
by symptom and lesion by lesion ; and, apart from the
phenomena of fever common to all febnle affections,
the opposite of what is observed in the one is sure to
be presented in the other " {Arch, gen., February, 1839,
p. 213). Among other conclusions reached by Valleix
IS the following: ''English and American typhus is
a different disease from typhoid fever." A few months
later {Arch, gen., October, 1839, p. 25 and p. 129) the
same physician published an analysis of thirteen cases
of typhus obser\-ed in London by Dr. G. C. Shattuck, of
Boston, fully confirming the conclusion just stated.
A paper founded on the same cases is also contained
in the Philadelphia Medical Examiner for February,
1840, p. 133. It was after the whole of these publica-
tions—viz. in April, 1840 — that Dr. Stewart first com-
municated his observations to the Parisian Medical
Society, and they were not published until October ot
the same year. His apparent want of candour, there^


ALFRED STILLE 939

fore, in the paragraph above quoted from his com-
munication to the T$mes and uaeeUe is» for his own
sake, very much to be regretted/

I am fortunately able to show you the manuscript of
Dr. Still^'s paper, which, with that of Shattuck, made
a strong impression on the French physicians, who still
clung to the view that there was but one disease. It is
a pity that this admirable paper has never been printed.
A casual glance over the headings will give you an idea
of the fullness and accuracy with which these able
young fellows had worked out the diflferences between
these two great diseases. Gerhard and Pennock, Stills
and Shattuck, appear to have been the first to fully grasp
their essential clinical distinctions, and to appreciate
their merit one has only to read the British writings
on fever at this period. Some years later A. F. Stewart
did good work in the sanie line, and later still Jenner
made his important study ; but that in the first edition
of Bartlett on Fevers, 1842, the two diseases should have
been considered apart is the best testimony to the
rapidity with which the new views were received in
this country.

Between two and three years of study in Europe
gave Dr. Stille a fine training for his life-work. Re-
turning to Philadelphia, he began practice, wrote for
the journals, taught students, and gradually there came
to him reputation and recognition. After lecturing on
pathology and the practice of medicine in the Phila-
delphia Association for Medical Instruction, he was
elected, in 1854, to the Chair of Practice in the Pennsyl-
vania Medical College. In 1864 he succeeded Dr.
Pepper (primus) in the Chair of Medicine at the Uni-
versity of Pennsylvania. While always a student, he
was no hermit, but from the start took a deqp interest


240 BIOGRAPHICAL ESSAYS

in the general welfare of the profession. He was the
first Secretary of the American Medical Association,
and President in 1867. The local societies recognized
his work and worth, and he became President of the
Pathological and of the County Medical Societies, and
in 1885 h^ ^^^^ ^h^ Chair of our ancient and honourable
body. He was from the outset of his career a strcHig
advocate for higher medical education, and from 1846—
the date of his first address on the subject — to 1897 —
the date of his last— he pleaded for better preliminary
training and for longer sessions. No one rejoiced
more in the new departure of the University in 1876,
and he was a consistent advocate of advanced methods
of teaching.

Dr. Still6's medical writings show on every page the
influence of his great master. His first important work,
The EUfneftts of General Pathology^ 1848, was based on
the modem researches, and every chapter echoed with
his favourite motto, ' Tota ars medica est in observationi-
bus.' I must quote one sentence from the Introductory
Essay on Medical Truth :

' But we assert that there is a genius, not a speculative,
not a poetical, not a mere fantastic faculty, but a practical
genius, which is, to say the least, a far more rare endow-
ment than that just mentioned ; '' a power which is
capable of penetrating into all things wUhin our reach
and knowledge and of distineuishmg their essential
differences." It creates nothing, it does not even
invent anything; it only sees thttigs as they are and
discovers truth in what it sees; for the truth, as we
are told by Rousseau, is in things and not in our
minds, and the less of ourselves we introduce into our
judgements the nearer we shall approach to truth. Such
was the genius of Hippocrates, of Sydenham, of Mor-
gagni, of Haller, of Laennec, of Abercrombie, of Hunter,
of bichat, of Sir Astley Cooper; such is that of Andral,
of Chomel, of Louis, of Cruveilhier, of Brodie, of


ALFRED STILL6 241

Graves. These men saw relations among the phe«
nomena of disease which were invisible to less gifted
men ; and having seen them by virtue of their genius
they did not stop there and build up a theory upon
them, assumine them to be true, out immediately
applied themselves to discover whether they had seen
correctly; they tested their inspirations by observation
and experimenti and when they found them unable to
bear these tests they rejected them as delusions, as idle
dreams not even wortn remembering ; but wnen, on
the other hand, they found them confirmed, they gave
credit, not to the original penetration which had guessed
at the truth, but to the series of facts which had
estid>lished it'

Apart from numerous smaller articles in the joumals,
there are two important monographs by Dr. Still6-*
one on Cerebro-spineU MeningiHs and the other on
Cholera. In addition, two minor studies were on
Dysentery, in the publications of the United States
Sanitary Commission, and on Etysipdas. The work
on cerebro-spinal fever is a model of accurate, systematic
study based on a large series of cases seen in the
Philadelphia Hospital, and upon an exhaustive analysis
of the literature. The work on cholera is of the
same kind. To a generation of lesser writers they
have served as unfailing sources of trustworthy in-
formation.

Estimated by bulk, the most important of Dr. Still6's
works are the Materia Medka and Therapeutics and
the National Dispensatory. It was always a mystery
to me how a man with his training and type of mind
could have undertaken such colossal and, one would
have thought, uncongenial tasks. He was not so
deeply imbued with scepticism as some of his con-
temporaries. Of him it could scarcely have been said,
as of Jacob Bigelow by Professor Peabody, that his


Mum


242 BIOGRAPHICAL ESSAYS

qualifications to teach therapeutics were on a par with
those of a learned Mohammedan to teach Christian
exegesis. Dr. Still^'s attitude on the question of thera-
peutics was very sane. In illustration, let me quote
one or two sentences.

* Of therapeutics we may say what has been said of
the legislative powers of a State. We cannot assign
definite and immutable limits to them or lay down
inflexible rules for their use. The treatment of every
case of sickness must be determined ultimately for and
by itself, tentatively by skilled men and as their practical
sagacity may determme, while they bear in mmd that
the virtues of a medicine depend less upon its intrinsic
properties and powers than on the sagacity of the phy-
sician who administers it, just as the efficiency of fire-
arms depends less upon the explosives and the missile
they contain than on the judgement and accuracy of aim
of the man who discharges them.'

He had grasped the great truth that the art as an
art has its true and only foundation in clinical medicine.
In his Valedictory Address, 1884, he said :

* I have devoted whatever knowledge and skill I pos-
sessed to the simple, if difficult, task of knowing and
curing diseases, i have striven, in season and perhaps
out of season, to impress upon you that medicine is,
first of all, an art, but an art that can only be success-
fully practised when the physician is able to recognize
the individual diseases he must meet with in practice,
and distinguish from one another those which are similar
in appearance, but unlike in nature.'

Again:

' But every observant practitioner knows that he treats
patients rather than diseases. He does not regard the
former as the chemist does his crucibles, retorts, and
test-glasses, which have no reaction upon their contents,
but he knows that every substance talcen into the body
acts upon it and is itself acted upon by it, and in
innumerable modes and degrees, according to the
existing condition of the body and the quantity, com-
bination, and form of administration of ttie meaicine ;


ALFRED STILL6 243

so that there is some ^und for the sarcastic comment
that ** the art of medicme consists in introducing a body
of which we know little into another of which we know
still less."'

And yet again :

' It is quite as necessary for the physician to know
when to abstain from Uie use of medicine as it is for
him to prescribe when medication is necessary; that
he must, as far as possible, see the end of a disease
from its beginning; that ne must never forstet that
medical art nas a far higher range and aim than the
prescription of drues, or even of food and hygienic
means ; and that when neither of these avails to ward
off the fatal ending, it is still no small portion of his
art to rid his patient's path of thorns if he cannot make
it bloom with roses/

III

On the roll of our Fellows will be found the names
of at least half a dozen distinguished bibliophiles to
whom we are deeply indebted, as they have kept alive
in this society the interest of the average Fellow in
books, and have made possible a great library. Dr. Stills
was not only a book-lover, but a discriminating and
learned student Our shelves testify not less to his
liberality than to his taste for rare and important mono-
graphs, while the Still6 Library of the University of
Pennsylvania will remain a monument to his love of the
literature and history of our profession.

But it was neither as a teacher nor as a writer that
Dr. Alfred Still6's influence was most deeply felt In
a long career several generations of students and phy-
sicians were influenced by an earnest, real man, whose
life was true and sincere, whose ideals were lofty, and
whose devotion to duty came from pure and unselfish
motives. 'A life of probity, a hig^ sense of honour,
uniform courtesy,' as Dr. Da CostiL remarked, endeared

R 2


244 BIOGRAPHICAL ESSAYS

him to the profession, and crowned his declining years
with all the things which should accompany old age.
Nothing in his life, which was one calling for courage
of a high order, became him more than the graceful
way in which he grew old. So far as I know, the
chapter on the old man in the profession has not yet
been written. To-day, as in the sixteenth century, the
bitter mot of Rabelais is true: 'There be more old
drunkards than old physicians/ Take the list of Fel-
lows of our College, look over the names and dates of
graduation of the practitioners of this city, and the men
above seventy years of age form, indeed, a small remnant
All the more reason that we should cherish and rever-
ence them. It interested me greatly in Dr. Still6, and
I only knew him after he had passed his seventieth
year, to note the keenness of his mind on all questions
relating to medicine. He had none of those unpleasant
senile vagaries, the chief characteristic of which is an
intense passion for opposition to everything that is new.
He had that delightful equanimity and serenity of mind
which is one of the most blessed accompaniments of old
age. He had none of those irritating features of the
old doctor, who, having crawled out of the stream about
his fortieth year, sits on the bank, croaking of mis-
fortunes to come, and, with less truth than tongue,
lamenting the days that have gone and the men of the
past. He was not like the sage of Agrigentum, of whom
Matthew Arnold sings :

Whose mind was fed on other food, was train'd
By other rules than are in voeue to-day;
Whose habit of thought is fix'd, who will not change,
But, in a world he loves not, must subsist
In ceaseless opposition.

From this unhappj' attitude of mind he was saved bj*

a serene faith in the future of the profession. Naturally


ALFRED STILLS 245

he did not approve of much that is unpleasant in our
modern ways. In some of his last letters there is a
touch of the old vigour with which he was wont to rap
the pretensions of the ignorant or the half-educated.
In a letter to me dated February 7, 1900, he writes :

* I never supposed the Louis methods would be ac-
cepted by the profession generally. They were too
laborious, and tney gratified too little the thirst for
popular applause and personal exaltation that contani-
mates so many, even men of merit. Not even their
adoption and illustration by a certain number of phy-
sicians who drew their inspiration from the Pansian
fount has sufficed to prevent their being overwhelmed
by the deluge of German speculation on pathology and
therapeutics.'

And again, in the last letter I had from him, June 27,
1900, referring to Bartlett's sketch of Hippocrates, which
he says :

* I read and enjoyed, as I do whatever helps to strip
Truth of her gauds and present her in ner native
simplicity. It seems inseparable from all progress in
knowledge that it shall not be administered in too con-
centrated a form, lest it produce repugnance and in-
digestion. This has been found necessary in religion,
and how could philosophy escape it? Our medical
principles and doctrines are found insipid by the vulgar
unless they are confectioned to suit the po'pular palate,
with a large seasoning of human invention.*

Not the least important service of Dr. Stille was his
persistent emphasis on lofty professional ideals, of which
his own life was in reality the best exemplar; for, to
use his own words, he was loyal to science and truth,
loyal to his art, loyal to the history and traditions of his
profession, loyal to the principles and precepts which
the peculiar relations of medical men to one another,
to the public, and to their patients impose upon them.
On the occasion of the dinner given to him in 1884,


246 BIOGRAPHICAL ESSAYS

Dr. Stills told an interesting incident, which I quote
here as his credo:

' During one of my summer holidays, while abroad, it
was my lot — less vulgar then than now — to climb the
Alps and observe the expedients used by the moun-
taineers in ascending the icy peaks. I noted the labo-
rious industry with which tney cut for Uiemselves
footholds on the slippery steep, and so mounted slowly
to their destination. This method profoundly impressed
me at the time, and I said to myself, '' Surely m such
wise must one hew his way to fame and fortune ; and
whether the point to be attained be the highest peak of
all, or only some humbler hill-top by the wav, it was
clear that whatever else might win, improbus labor omnia
vtnctV What seemed revealed to me then among the
sublime solitudes of nature has been echoed by a Uiou-
sand voices along the whole pathway of my life. It
came to me also, like a voice from the tomb, in the
words of an old family motto, Innocenter^ paHenter^ con-
stanter^ and it was repeated in the history of all the men
I have known who secured for themselves a steadfast
place in their day and generation. I cannot doubt that
in the bosom of everyone who hears my voice there is
felt a silent attestation of its truth. It has been the key-
note of my teaching as well as the euide of my actions,
and, therefore, how little soever of the good that has
been attributed to me by your partial voices may in
reality be mine, I owe it all to the lessons of steady
industry and undaunted perseverance that I learned
from the Alpine mountaineer.'

Among his papers is a most interesting and touching
letter of advice to his brother Moreton, whose brilliant
career was cut short in his thirty-third year. I cannot
refrain from quoting the concluding sentences, which
express admirably his relations to his students and his
general attitude toward the profession he loved:

'It would be useless for me at this time to go into
a more detailed development of the system of instruc-
tion I wish you to follow. It will be cradually unfolded
as you advance, and may be modified oy circumstances ;


ALFRED STILL6 247

and in all your intercourse with me I wish you to look
upon me merely as an older student than yourself, who,
having trod the same path, has a greater knowledge of
its dimculties, and pleasures, and dangers ; who will be
proud to be your guide, and glory in inspiring you with
an ardent love of the profession vou have chosen. I feel
deeply impressed with the belielthat your character and
talents are such as eminentlv to qualify you for attaining
distinction as a medical philosopher and gaining the
respect and affection of those among your fellow men
who may require your professional services. I will not
conceal from you that tnere is much before you to make
even a strong resolution waver. You must toil for years
to fit you for the guardianship of the health and lives of
men ; and yet again you must toil, lone and diligently,
to reap the reward of your labour. But if you have
a spark of benevolence m your heart ; if you nave that
only ambition which is not a vice — to excel others in
doing good ; if you think that the gratitude and the affec-
tion of those you may relieve from sickness is a sufficient
recompense for much self-denial and self-sacrifice, then
you will not be disappointed. You will be richly repaid
for your days of laoour and your nights of watching;
you will learn to cultivate a spirit of charity toward
others, and of justice toward vourself, which will make
your station in life respectaole and your social and
domestic relations hallowed by the light of an unbroken
peace.'

Hear the conclusion of the whole matter— the lesson
of a long and good life. It is contained in a sentence of
his Valedictory Address : ' Only two thiftgs are essential^
to live uprightly and to be wisely industrious.'


240 BIOGRAPHICAL ESSAYS

in the general welfare of the profession. He was the
first Secretary of the American Medical Association,
and President in 1867. The local societies recognized
his work and worth, and he became President of the
Pathological and of the County Medical Societies, and
in 1885 he took the Chair of our ancient and honourable
body. He was from the outset of his career a strong
advocate for higher medical education, and from 1846--
the date of his first address on the subject — to 1897 —
the date of his last — he pleaded for better preliminary
training and for longer sessions. No one rejoiced
more in the new departure of the University in 1876,
and he was a consistent advocate of advanced methods
of teaching.

Dr. Stille's medical writings show on every page the
influence of his great master. His first important work,
The Elements of General Pathology ^ 1848, was based on
the modem researches, and every chapter echoed with
his favourite motto, ' Tota ars medica est in observationi-
bus/ I must quote one sentence from the Introductory
Essay on Medical Truth :

' But we assert that there is a genius, not a speculative,
not a poetical, not a mere fantastic faculty, but a practical
genius, which is, to say the least, a far more rare endow-
ment than that just mentioned ; ** a power which is
capable of penetrating into all things wtViin our reach
and kftowledge and of distineuishmg their essential
differences." It creates notnin^, it does not even
invent anything; it only sees things as they are and
discovers truth in what it sees; for the truth, as we
are told by Rousseau, is in things and not in our
minds, and the less of ourselves we introduce into our
judgements the nearer we shall approach to truth. Such
was the eenius of Hippocrates, of Sydenham, of Mor-
gagni, of Haller, of Laennec, of Abercrombie, of Hunter,
of Bichat, of Sir Astley Cooper; such is that of Andral,
of Chomel, of Louis, of Cruveilhier, of Brodie, of


ALFRED STILL6 241

Graves. These men saw relations among the phe«
nomena of disease which were invisible to less gifted
men ; and having seen them by virtue of their genius
they did not stop there and build up a theory upon
them, assuming them to be true, out immediately
applied themsdves to discover wMker they had seen
correctly) they tested their inspirations by observation
and experiment, and when they found them unable to
bear these tests they rejected them as delusions, as idle
dreams not even wortn remembering ; but wnen, on
the other hand, they found them confirmed, they gave
credit, not to the original penetration which had guessed
at the truth, but to the series of &cts which had
established it'

Apart from numerous smaller articles in the journals,
there are two important monographs by Dr. Still6-*
one on Cerebro-sfnnal MeningMs and the other on
Cholera. In addition, two minor studies were on
Dysentery, in the publications of the United States
Sanitary Commission, and on Erysipelas. The woric
on cerebro-spinal fever is a model of accurate, systematic
study based on a large series of cases seen in the
Philadelphia Hospital, and upon an exhaustive analysis
of the literature. The woric on cholera is of the
same kind. To a generation of lesser writers they
have served as unfailing sources of trustworthy in-
formation.

Estimated by bulk, the most important of Dr. Still6's
works are the Materia Meekca and Therapeutics and
the National Dispensatofy. It was always a mystery
to me how a man with his training and type of mind
could have undertaken such colossal and, one would
have thought, uncongenial tasks. He was not so
deeply imbued with scepticism as some of his con-
temporaries. Of him it could scarcely have been said,
as of Jacob Bigdow by Professor Peabody, that his


Mum


242 BIOGRAPHICAL ESSAYS

qualifications to teach therapeutics were on a par with
those of a learned Mohammedan to teach Christian
exegesis. Dr. Still6's attitude on the question of thera-
peutics was very sane. In illustration, let me quote
one or two sentences.

' Of therapeutics we may say what has been said of
the legislative powers of a State. We cannot assign
definite and immutable limits to them or lay down
inflexible rules for their use. The treatment of every
case of sickness must be determined ultimately for and
by itself, tentatively by skilled men and as their practical
sagacity may determme, while they bear in mmd that
the virtues of a medicine depend less upon its intrinsic
properties and powers than on the sagacity of the phy-
sician who administers it, just as the efficiency of fire-
arms depends less upon the explosives and the missile
they contain than on the judgement and accuracy of aim
of the man who discharges them.'

He had grasped the great truth that the art as an
art has its true and only foundation in clinical medicine.
In his Valedictory Address, 1884, he said :

* I have devoted whatever knowledge and skill I pes*
sessed to the simple, if difficult, task of knowing and
curing diseases. I have striven, in season and perhaps
out of season, to impress upon you that medicine is,
first of all, an art, but an art that can only be success-
fully practised when the physician is able to recognize
the individual diseases he must meet with in practice,
and distinguish from one another those which are similar
in appearance, but unlike in nature.'

Again :

' But every observant practitioner knows that he treats
patients rather than diseases. He does not regard the
former as the chemist does his crucibles, retorts, and
test-glasses, which have no reaction upon their contents,
but he knows that every substance talcen into the body
acts upon it and is itself acted upon by it, and in
innumerable modes and degrees, according to the
existing condition of the body and the quantity, com-
bination, and form of administration of ttie medicine ;


ALFRED STILL6 243

so that there is some ^und for the sarcastic comment
that '' the art of medicme consists in introducing a body
of which we know little into another of which we know
still less."'

And yet again :

' It is quite as necessary for the physician to know
when to abstain from the use of medicine as it is for
him to prescribe when medication is necessary; that
he must, as far as possible, see tihe end of a disease
from its beginning; that he must never fora;et that
medical art nas a far higher range and aim than the
prescription of drues, or even of food and hygienic
means ; and that when neither of these avails to ward
off the fatal ending, it is still no small portion of his
art to rid his patient's path of thorns if he cannot make
it bloom with roses/

III

On the roll of our Fellows will be found the names
of at least half a dozen distinguished bibliophiles to
whom we are deeply indebted, as they have kept alive
in this society the interest of the average Fellow in
books, and have made possible a great library. Dr. Stills
was not only a book-lover, but a discriminating and
learned student. Our shelves testify not less to his
liberality than to his taste for rare and important mono-
graphs, while the Still6 Library of the University of
Pennsylvania will remain a monument to his love of the
literature and history of our profession.

But it was neither as a teacher nor as a writer that
Dr. Alfred Still6's influence was most deeply felt In
a long career several generations of students and phy-
sicians were influenced by an earnest, real man, whose
life was true and sincere, whose ideals were lofty, and
whose devotion to duty came from pure and unselfish
motives. 'A life of probity, a hig^ sense of honour,
uniform courtesy,' as Dr. Da CostiL remarked, endeared

R 2


244 BIOGRAPHICAL ESSAYS

him to the profession, and crowned his declining years
with all the things which should accompany old age.
Nothing in his life, which was one calling for courage
of a high order, became him more than the graceful
way in which he grew old. So far as I know, the
chapter on the old man in the profession has not yet
been written. To-day, as in the sixteenth century, the
bitter mot of Rabelais is true: 'There be more old
drunkards than old physicians.' Take the list of Fel-
lows of our College, look over the names and dates of
graduation of the practitioners of this city, and the men
above seventy years of age form, indeed, a small remnant
All the more reason that we should cherish and rever-
ence them. It interested me greatly in Dr. StiU6, and
I only knew him after he had passed his seventieth
year, to note the keenness of his mind on all questions
relating to medicine. He had none of those unpleasant
senile vagaries, the chief characteristic of which is an
intense passion for opposition to everything that is new.
He had that delightful equanimity and serenity of mind
which is one of the most blessed accompaniments of old
age. He had none of those irritating features of the
old doctor, who, having crawled out of the stream about
his fortieth year, sits on the bank, croaking of mis-
fortunes to come, and, with less truth than tongue,
lamenting the days that have gone and the men of the
past. He was not like the sage of Agrigentum, of whom
Matthew Arnold sings :

Whose mind was fed on other food, was trained
By other rules than are in voeue to-day;
Whose habit of thought is fix'd, who will not change,
But, in a world he loves not, must subsist
In ceaseless opposition.

From this unhapp}* attitude of mind he was saved bj*

a serene faith in the future of the profession. Naturally


ALFRED STILLS 245

he did not approve of much that is unpleasant in our
modern ways. In some of his last letters there is a
touch of the old vigour with which he was wont to rap
the pretensions of the ignorant or the half-educated.
In a letter to me dated February 7, 1900, he writes:

* I never supposed the Louis methods would be ac-
cepted by the profession generally. They were too
laborious, and tney jjratified too little the thirst for
popular applause ancT personal exaltation that contam-
mates so many, even men of merit. Not even their
adoption and illustration by a certain number of phy-
sicians who drew their inspiration from the Pansian
fount has sufficed to prevent their being overwhelmed
by the deluge of German speculation on pathology and
therapeutics.'

And again, in the last letter 1 had from him, June 27,
1900, referring to Bartlett's sketch of Hippocrates, which
he says :

' I read and enjoyed, as I do whatever helps to strip
Truth of her gauds and present her in ner native
simplicity. It seems inseparable from all progress in
knowledge that it shall not be administered in too con-
centrated a form, lest it produce repugnance and in-
digestion. This has been found necessary in religion,
and how could philosophy escape it? Our medical
principles and doctrines are found insipid by the vulgar
unless they are confectioned to suit the po'pular palate,
with a large seasoning of human invention.*

Not the least important service of Dr. Stille was his
persistent emphasis on lofty professional ideals, of which
his own life was in reality the best exemplar; for, to
use his own words, he was loyal to science and truth,
loyal to his art, loyal to the history and traditions of his
profession, loyal to the principles and precepts which
the peculiar relations of medical men to one another,
to the public, and to their patients impose upon them.
On the occasion of the dinner given to him in 1884,


246 BIOGRAPHICAL ESSAYS

Dr. Stills told an interesting incident, which I quote
here as his credo:

' During one of my summer holidays, while abroad, it
was my lot — less vulgar then than now — to climb me
Alps and observe the expedients used by the moun-
taineers in ascending the icy peaks. I noted the labo-
rious industry with which tney cut for themselves
footholds on the slippery steep, and so mounted slowly
to their destination. This method profoundly impressed
me at the time, and I said to myself, '' Surely m such
wise must one hew his way to fame and fortune ; and
whether the point to be attained be the highest peak of
all, or only some humbler hilUop by the way, it was
clear that whatever else might win, improbus Imor omnia
vincity What seemed revealed to me then among the
sublime solitudes of nature has been echoed by a thou-
sand voices along the whole pathway of my life. It
came to me also, like a voice from the tomb, in the
words of an old family motto, Innocenter^ fatienUr^ con-
stanfer, and it was repeated in the history of all the men
I have known who secured for themselves a steadfast
place in their day and generation. I cannot doubt that
in the bosom of everyone who hears my voice there is
felt a silent attestation of its truth. It has been the key-
note of my teaching as well as the euide of my actions,
and, therefore, how little soever of the good that has
been attributed to me by your partial voices may in
reality be mine, I owe it all to the lessons of steady
industry and undaunted perseverance that I learned
from the Alpine mountaineer.'

Among his papers is a most interesting and touching
letter of advice to his brother Moreton, whose brilliant
career was cut short in his thirty-third year. I cannot
refrain from quoting the concluding sentences, which
express admirably his relations to his students and his
general attitude toward the profession he loved :

'It would be useless for me at this time to go into
a more detailed development of the system of mstruc-
tion I wish you to follow. It will be cradually unfolded
as you advance, and may be modified oy circumstances ;


ALFRED STILLfe 247

and in all your intercourse with me I wish you to look
upon me merely as an older student than yourself, who,
having trod the same path, has a greater knowledge of
its difficulties, and pleasures, and dangers ; who will be
proud to be your euide, and glory in inspiring you with
an ardent love of the profession vou have chosen. I feel
deeply impressed with the belief that your character and
talents are such as eminently to quality you for attaining
distinction as a medical philosopher and gaining the
respect and affection of those among your fellow men
who may require your professional services. I will not
conceal from you that tnere is much before you to make
even a strong resolution waver. You must toil for years
to fit you for the g]uardianship of the health and lives of
men ; and yet again you must toil, lone and diligently,
to reap the reward of your labour. But if you have
a spark of benevolence in your heart; if you nave that
only ambition which is not a vice — to excel others in
doing good ; if you think that the gratitude and the affec-
tion ofthose you may relieve from sickness is a sufficient
recompense for much self-denial and self-sacrifice, then
you will not be disappointed. You will be richly repaid
for your days of laoour and your nights of watchmg ;
you will learn to cultivate a spirit of charity toward
others, and of justice toward yourself, which will make
your station in life respectable and your social and
domestic relations hallowed by the light of an unbroken
peace.*

Hear the conclusion of the whole matter— the lesson
of a long and good life. It is contained in a sentence of
his Valedictory Address : ' Only two things are essential,
to live uprightly and to be wisely industrious'


248


SIR THOMAS BROWNE'


As a boy it was my good fortune to come under the
influence of a parish priest of the Gilbert White type,
who followed the seasons of Nature no less ardently
than those of the Church, and whose excursions into
science had brought him into contact with physic and
physicians. Father Johnson, as his friends loved to call
him, founder and Warden of the Trinity College School,
near Toronto, illustrated that angelical conjunction (to
use Cotton Mather's words) of medicine and divinity
more common in the sixteenth and seventeenth centuries
than in the nineteenth. An earnest student of Sir
Thomas Browne, particularly of the Religio Medici^ he
often read to us extracts in illustration of the beauty of
the English language, or he would entertain us with
some of the author's quaint conceits, such as the man
without a navel (Adam), or that woman was the rib and
crooked piece of man. The copy which I hold in my
hand (J. T. Fields's edition of 1862), my companion ever
since my schooldays, is the most precious book in ray
library. I mention these circumstances in extenuation
of an enthusiasm which has enabled me to make this
almost complete collection of the editions of his works
I show you this evening, knowing full well the com-
passionate feeling with which the bibliomaniac is
regarded by his saner colleagues.

* An Address delivered at the Physical Society, Guy's Hoq>ital,
October 12, 1905. Reprinted from The Library^ January, 1906.


SIR THOMAS BROWNE 249

I— The Man

The little Thomas was happy in his entrance upon
the stage, October 19, 1605. Among multiplied acknow-
ledgements, he could lift up one hand to Heaven (as he
sajTs) that he was bom of honest parents, ' that modesty,
humility, patience, and veracity lay in the same egg, and
came into the world ' with him. Of his father, a London
merchant, but little is known. There is at Devonshire
House a family picture which shows him to have been
a man of fine presence, looking not unworthy of the
future philosopher, a child of three or four years, seated
on his mother's knee. She married a second time, Sir
Thomas Dutton, a man of wealth and position, who gave
his stepson every advantage of education and travel.
We lack accurate information of the early years — of the
schooldays at Winchester, of his life at Broadgate Hall,
now Pembroke College, Oxford, and of the influences
which induced him to study medicine. Possibly he got
his inspiration from the Regius Professor of Medicine,
the elder Clayton, the Master of Broadgate Hall and
afterwards of Pembn^e College. That he was a dis-
tinguished undergraduate is shown in his selection at
the end of the first year in residefioe to deliver an
oration at the opening of Pembroke Ccdlege. Possibly
between the years 1606^ when he took the BA., and
1629, when he commenced MA., he may have been
engaged in the study of medicine; but Mr. Charles
Williams, of Norwich, who is perhaps more fiuniliar
than any one living with the history of our author, does
not think it likely that he b^;an until he went abroad.
In these years he could at least have 'entered upon the
physic line * and could have proceeded to the M.B. He
was too early to participate in the revival of science in


250 BIOGRAPHICAL ESSAYS

Oxford, but even after that had occurred Sydenham flung
the cruel reproach at his Alma Mater that he would as
soon send a man to her to learn shoemaking as practical
physic. It was possible, of course, to pick up a little
knowledge of medicine from the local practitioners and
from the Physic Garden, together with the lectures of
the Regius Professor, who, as far as we know, had not
at any rate the awkward failing of his more distinguished
son, who could not look upon blood without fainting, and
in consequence had to hand over his anatomy lectures to
a deputy.

Clayton's studies and work \yould naturally be of
a somewhat mixed character, and at that period even
many of those whose chief business was theology were
interested in natural philosophy, of which medicine
formed an important part. Burton refers to an address
delivered about this time by Clayton dealing with the
mutual relations of mind and body. The Anatomy of
Melaucholyy which appeared in 162 1, must have proved
a stimulating bonne-bouche for the Oxford men of the
day, and I like to think of the eagerness with which so
ardent a student as Browne of Pembroke would have
pounced on the second and enlarged edition which
appeared in 1624. He may, indeed, have been a friend
of Burton, or he may have formed one of a group of
undergraduates to watch Democritus Junior leaning
over the bridge and laughing at the bargees as they
swore at each other. It is stated, I know not on
what authority, that Browne practised in Oxford for
a time.

After a visit to Ireland with his stepfather he took the
grand tour — France, Italy, and Holland— spending two
years in study. Of his Continental trip our knowledge
is very meagre. He went to Montpellier, still famous,


SIR THOMAS BROWNE 251

but failing, where he probably listened to the teaching
of Riviere, whose Praxis was for years the leading
textbook in Europe— thence to Padua, where he must
have heard the celebrated Sanctorius of the Medicina
Statica — then on to Leyden, just rising into prominence,
where it is said he took his doctor's degree in 1633. Of
this, however, there is no certainty. A few years ago
I looked through the register of that famous University,
but failed to find his name. At the end of two years'
travel he may have had cobwebs in his pocket, and the
Leyden degree was expensive, as that quaint old con-
temporary of Browne, the Rev. John Ward, of Stratford-
on-Avon, tells us {Diary) : ' Mr. Burnet had a letter out
of the Low Countries of the charge of a doctor's degree,
which is at Leyden about ;Ci6, besides feasting the pro-
fessors ; at Angers in France, not above £gf and feasting
not necessary neither.' No doubt the young Englishman
got of the best that there was in the teaching of the
day, and from the Religio one learns that he developed
from it an extraordinary breadth of culture, and a charity
not always granted to travellers. He pierced beneath
the shell of nationalism into the heart of the people
among whom he lived, feeling at home everywhere and
in every clime ; hence the charity, rare in a Protestant,
expressed so beautifully in the lines : ' I can dispense
with my hat at the sight of a cross, but scarce with the
thought of my Saviour.'

He must have made good use of his exceptional
opportunities; as he was able to boast, in a humble
way it is true, that he understood six languages.

Returning to England in 1634 he settled at Shibden
Dale, close to Halifax, not, as Mr. Charles Williams
has pointed out, to practise his profession, but to recruit
his health, somewhat impaired by shipwreck and disease.


252 BIOGRAPHICAL ESSAYS

Here, in Upper Shibden Hall, he wrote the Rdigio
Medici, the book by which to-day his memory is kept
green among us. In his travels he had doubtless made
many observations on men, and in his reading had culled
many useful memoranda. He makes it quite clear— and
is anxious to do so— that the book was written while he
was very young. He says : * My life is a miracle of
thirty years.' * I have not seen one revolution of Saturn.*
* My pulse hath not beat thirty years.' Indeed, he seems
to be of Plato's opinion that the pace of life slackens after
this date, and there is a note of sadness in his comment,
that while the radical humour may contain sufficient oil
for seventy, ' in some it gives no light past thirty/ and
he adds that those dying at this age should not complain
of immaturity. In the quiet Yorkshire valley, with
'leisurable hours for his private exercise and satisfac-
tion ', the manuscript was completed, ' with,' as he says,
' such disadvantages that (I protest) from the first setting
pen to paper I had not the assistance of any good book.'
' Communicated to one it became common to many,' and
at last in 1642, seven years after its- completion, reached
the press in a depraved form.

In 1637, at the solicitation of friends, Browne moved
to Norwich, with which city, so far as we know, he had
had no previous connexion. At that date the East
Anglian capital had not become famous in the annals of
medicine. True, she had given Caius to the profession,
but he had only practised there for a short time and
does not seem to have had any special influence on her
destinies. Sir Thomas Browne may be said to be the
first of the long list of worthies who have in the past
two and a half centuries made Norwich famous among
the provincial towns of the kingdom. Here for forty-
five years he lived the quiet, uneventful life of a student-


SIR THOMAS BROWNE 253

practitioner, absorbed, like a sensible man, in his family,
his friends, his studies, and his patients. It is a life of
singular happiness to contemplate. In 1641 he married
Dorothy Mileham, ' a lady of such a symmetrical propor-
tion to her worthy husband— that they seemed to come
together by a kind of natural magnetism.' In the Religio
he had said some hard things of the gentle goddess and
had expressed himself very strongly against Nature's
method for the propagation of the race. He believed,
with Milton, that the world should have been populated
' without feminine ', and in almost identical words they
wish that some way less trivial and vulgar had been
found to generate mankind. Dame Dorothy proved
a good wife, a fruitful branch, bearing ten children.
We have a pleasant picture of her in her letters to her
boys and to her daughter-in-law, in a spelling suggestive
of Pitman's phonetics. She seems to have had in full
measure the simple piety and the tender affection
mentioned on her monument in St Peter^s Church.
The domestic correspondence (Wilkin's edition of the
Works) gives interesting glimpses of the family life,
the lights and shadows of a cultured English home.
The two boys were all that their fiuher could have
wished. Edward, the elder, had a distinguished career,
following his father's footsteps in the profession and
reaching the dignity of the Presidency of the Royal
College of Physicians. Inheriting his fiuher's tastes, as
the letters between them prove, his wide interests in
natural history and archaeology are shown in his well-
known book of Travels^ and I am fortunate in possessing
a copy of the Hydriotaphia with his autograph.

Edward's son, the 'Tommy' of the letters, the
delight of his grandfather, also became a physician,
and practised with his father. He died in 1710 in


254 BIOGRAPHICAL ESSAYS

rather unfortunate circumstances, and with him the
male line of Sir Thomas ended. Of the younger son
we have, in the letters, a charming picture— a brave
sailor-lad with many of his father's tastes, who served
with great distinction in the Dutch wars, in which
he met (it is supposed) a sailor's death. The eldest
daughter married Henry Fairfax, and through their
daughter, who married the Earl of Buchan, there are
to-day among the Buchans and Erskines the only
existing representatives of Sir Thomas.

The waves and storms of the Civil War scarcely
reached the quiet Norwich home. Browne was a
staunch Royalist, and his name occurs among the
citizens who in 1643 refused to contribute to a fund
for the recapture of the town of Newcastle. It is
astonishing how few references occur in his writings
to the national troubles, which must have tried his
heart sorely. In the preface to the Religio he gives
vent to his feelings, lamenting not only the universal
tyranny of the Press, but the defamation of the name
of his Majesty, the degradation of Parliament, and the
writings of both 'depravedly, anticipatively, counter-
feitedly, imprinted '. In one of the letters he speaks of
the execution of Charles I as ' horrid murther ', and in
another he calls Cromwell a usurper. In civil wars
physicians of all men suffer least, as the services of
able men are needed by both parties, and time and
again it has happened that an even-balanced soul, such
as our author, has passed quietly through terrible trials,
doing the day's work with closed lips. Corresponding
with the most active decades of his life, in which his
three important works were issued, one might have
expected to find in them reference to the Civil War,
or, at least, echoes of the great change wrought by the


SIR THOMAS BROWNE 255

Commonwealth, but, like Fox, in whose writings the
same silence has been noticed, whatever may have been
his feelings, he preserved a discreet silence. His own
rule of life, no doubt, is expressed in the advice to his
son : * Times look troublesome, but you have an honest
and peaceable profession which may employ you, and
discretion to guide your words and actions/

Busy with his professional work, interested in natural
history, in archaeology, and in literature, with a wide
circle of scientific friends and correspondents, the
glimpses of Browne's life, which we have from the
letters, are singularly attractive. He adopted an ad-
mirable plan in the education of his children, sending
them abroad, and urging them to form early habits of
independence. His younger boy, Thomas, he sent at
the age of fourteen to France, alone, and he remarks
in one of his letters to him : ' He that hath learnt not
in France travelleth m vain.' Everywhere in the cor-
respondence with his children there is evidence of good,
practical sense. He tells one of the boys to ' cast off
pudor rtisfiais, and to have a handsome garb of his
body.' Even the daughters were taken to France. In
his souvenir of Sir Thomas Browne, Mr. Charles
Williams has given an illustration of his house, a fine
old building which was unfortunately torn down some
years ago, though the handsome mantelpiece has been
preserved.

An interesting contemporary account has been left
by Evelyn, who paid a visit to Sir Thomas in 1673.
He says :

"... the whole house being a paradise and a cabinet
of rarities, and that of the best collections, especially
medails, books, plants, and natural things. Amongst
other curiosities, Sir Thomas had a collection of me
eggs of all the foule and birds he could procure, that


256 BIOGRAPHICAL ESSAYS

country, especially the promintory of Norfolck, being
frequented, as he said, by several kinds which seldom
or never eo further into the land, as cranes, storices,
eagles, and a variety of other foule/

After Dr. Edward Browne was established in London,
the letters show the keen interest Sir Thomas took in
the scientific work of the day. Writing of his son's
lecture on anatomy at the Chirurgical Hall, he warns
him that he would have more spectators than auditors,
and after that first day, as the lecture was in Latin,
'very many will not be earnest to come here-after/
He evidently takes the greatest interest in his son's
progress, and constantly gives him suggestions with
reference to new points that are coming up in the
literature. Here and there are references to. important
medical cases, and comments upon modes of treatment.
It is interesting to note the prevalence of agues, even of
the severe haemorrhagic types, and his use of Peruvian
bark. In one of the letters a remarkable case of
pneumothorax is described : ' A young woman who had
a julking and fluctuation in her chest so that it might be
heard by standers-by.* Evidently he had a large and
extensive practice in the Eastern Counties, and there
are numerous references to the local physicians. There
is a poem extolling his skill in the despaired-of case of
Mrs. E. S., three or four of the lines of which are worth
quoting :

He came, saw, cur'd ! Could Caesar's self do more ;

Galen, Hippocrates, London's four-score

Of ffamous Colledge . . . had these heard him read

His lecture on this Skeliton, half dead ;

And seen his modest eye search every part,

judging, not seeing.

The correspondence with his son is kept up to the
time of his death. Only part of the letters appear in


SIR THOMAS BROWNE 257

Wilkin's Life^ and there are many extant worthy of

publication.

In 1671 he was knighted by Charles II. In 1664 he

was made an honorary Fellow of the Royal College of

Physicians, with which, through his son, he had close

affiliations. His name does not appear in the roll of

the Royal Society, with the spirit and objects of which

he must yet have had the warmest sympathy. He was

in correspondence with many of the leading men of the

day— Evelyn, Grew, Elias Ashmole, Dugdale, Paston,

Aubrey, and others. The letters deal with a remarkable

variety of subjects — natural history, botany, chemistry,

magic and archaeology, &c. The Pseudodoxia Epu

demica (1646) extended his reputation among all classes

and helped to bring him into close relationship with

the virtuosi of the period. There is in the Bodleian

a delightful letter from Mr. Henry Bates, a wit of the

court, a few extracts from which will give you an idea

of the extravagant admiration excited by his writings :

* Sir,— Amongst those great and due acknowledge-
ments this horizon owes you for imparting your sublime
solid phansie to them m that incomparable piece of
invention and judgement, R. M. gives mee leave, sir,
here at last to tender mv share, which I wish I could
make proportionable to tne value I deservedly sett upon
it, for truly, sir, ever since I had the happiness to know
your religion I have religiously honoured you; hug'd
your Minerva in my bosome, and voted it my ikuU
niecum, ... I am of that opinion still, that next the
Legenda Dei, it is the master piece of Christendome ;
and though I have met sometimes with some omnes sic
ego vero fwn sic men, prejudicating pates, who bogled at
snadowes in 't, and carpt at atoms^ and have so strap*
padoed me into impatience with their senseless censures,
yet this still satisfied my zeal toward it, when I found
Hon intelligunt was the nurse of theire vHuferanft and
they onely stumbled for want of a lanthome. ^

' Wilkin voL i, p. 1^53.

OftLBK S


258 BIOGRAPHICAL ESSAYS

While interested actively in medicine, Browne does
not seem to have been on intimate terms ;i¥ith his
great contemporaries— Harvey, Sydenham, or Glisson—
though he mentions them, and always with respect
He was a prudent, prosperous man, generous to his
children and to his friends. He subscribed liberaUy to
his old school at Winchester, to the rebuilding of the
Library of Trinity College, Cambridge, and to the
repairs at Christ Church, Oxford. A life placid, un-
eventful, and easy, without stress or strain, happy in
his friends, his family, and his work, he expressed in it
that harmony of the inner and of the outer man which
it is the aim of all true philosophy to attain, and which
he inculcated so nobly and in such noble words in the
Religio Medici and in the Christian Morals,

A description of him given by his friend, the Rev.
John Whitefoot, is worth quoting:

' He was never seen to be transported with mirth or
dejected with sadness ; always cheerful but rarely merry,
at any sensible rate ; seldom heard to break a jest, and
when he did he would be apt to blush at the levity of it.
His gravity was natural, without aflfectation.'

The end came unexpectedly in his seventy-seventh
year, after a sharp attack of colic, on his birthday,
October 19, 1682— a curious possibility of which he
speaks in the Letter to a Friend:

' But in persons who outlive many years, and when
there are no less than 365 days to determine their lives
every year— that the first dav should make the last, that
the tail of the snake should return into its mouth pre*
cisely at that time, and they should wind up upon the
day of their nativity— is, mdeed, a remarkable coin-
cidence, which, though astrology hath taken witty pains
to solve, yet hath it oeen very wary in making predic-
tions of it.'


SIR THOMAS BROWNE 259

There are three good portraits of Sir Thomas ; one
in the College of Physicians, London, which is the
best known and has been often reproduced, and from
which is taken the frontispiece in Greenhill's edition
of the Religio Medici] a second is in the Bodleian,
and this also has frequently been reproduced; the
third is in the vestry of St. Peter's Mancroft, Norwich.
Through the kindness of Mr. Charles Williams, it is
here reproduced. In many ways it is the most pleasing
of the three, and Browne looks in it a younger man,
closer to the days of the Religio. There is a fourth
picture, the frontispiece to the fifth edition of the
Pseudodoxia^ but it is so unlike the others that I doubt
very much if it could have been Sir Thomas. If it
was, he must have suffered from the artist, as did
Milton, whose picture in the frontispiece to the Paefns,
1645, is a base caricature; but Browne has not had
the satisfaction of Milton's joke and happy revenge.


II_The Book

As a book the Religio Medici has had an interesting
history. Written at * leisurable hours and for his
private exercise and satisfaction ', it circulated in manu-
script among friends, ' and was by transcription suc-
cessively corrupted, until it arrived in a most depraved
copy at the press'. Two surreptitious editions were
issued by Andrew Crooke in 1642 (hce p. 259), both in
small octavo, with an engraved frontispiece by Marshall
representing a man falling from a rock (the earth) into
the sea of eternity, but caught by a hand issuing from
the clouds, under which is the legend, A Coelo Solus

s a


26o BIOGRAPHICAL ESSAYS

Johnson suggests that the author may not have been
ignorant of Crooke's design, but was very willing to
let a tentative edition be issued — ' a stratagem by which
an author panting for fame, and yet afraid of seeming
to challenge it, may at once ^tify his vanity and
preserve the appearance of modesty*.

There are at least six manuscripts of the Religio in
existence, all presenting minor diflferences, which bear
out the author's contention that by transcription they
had become depraved. One in the Wilkin collectioHi
in the Castle Museum, Norwich, is in the author^s
handwriting. Had Browne been party to an innocent
fraud, he would scarcely have allowed Crooke to issue
within a year a second imperfect edition— not simply
a second impression, as the two differ in the size and
number of the pages, and present also minor differences
in the text. The authorized edition appeared in the
following year by the same publisher and with the
same frontispiece, with the following words at the foot
of the plate : ' A true and full copy of that which was
most imperfectly and surreptitiously printed before
under the name of Religio Medici' (face p. 260). It was
issued anonymously, with a preface, signed 'A, B/;
'To such as have or shall peruse the observations
upon a former corrupt copy of this Booke/ A curious
incident here links together two men, types of the in-
tellectual movement of their generation — both students,
both mystics— the one a quiet observer of nature, an
antiquary, and a physician ; the other a restless spirit,
a bold buccaneer, a politician, a philosopher, and an
amateur physician. Sir Kenelm Digby, committed to
Winchester House by the Parliamentarians, had heard
favourably from the Earl of Dorset of the Religio
Medici. Though late in the day, 'the magnetic


SIR THOMAS BROWNE 261

motion/ as he says, 'was impatience to have the
booke in his hands/ so he sent at once to St. Paul's
churchyard for it. He was in bed when it came.

* This good natur'd creature I could easily perswade
to be my bedfellow and to wake me as long as I had
any edge to entertain myselfe with the delights I sucked
in from so noble a conversation. And truly I closed
not my eyes till I had enricht myselfe with (or at least
exactly surveyed) all the treasures that are lapt up in
the folds of those new sheets.'

Sir Kenelm holds the record for reading in bed;
not only did he read the Reltgio through, but he wrote
Observations upon it the same night in the form of
a letter to his friend, which extends to three-fourths
of the size of the Reltgio itself. As Johnson remarks,
he 'returned his judgement of it not in the form of
a letter but of a book '. He dates it at the end ' the
22nd (I think I may say the 23rd, for I am sure it
is morning and I think it is day) of December, 1642.'
Johnson says that its principal claim to admiration is
that it was written within twenty-four hours, of which
part was spent in procuring Browne's book and part
in reading it. Sir Kenelm was a remarkable man, but
in connexion with his statements it may be well to
remember the reputation he had among his contem-
poraries, Stubbs calling him 'the Pliny of our age
for lying '. However this may be, his criticisms of the
work are exceedingly interesting and often just. This
little booklet of Sir Kenelm has floated down the
stream of literature, reappearing at intervals attached
to editions of the Religion while his weightier tomes
are deep in the ooze at the bottom.

The Reltgio Medici became popular with remarkable
rapidity. As Johnson remarks, 'It excited attention


262 BIOGRAPHICAL ESSAYS

by the novelty of paradoxes, the dignity of sentiment,
the quick succession of images, the multitude of abstru-
sive allusions, subtility of disquisition, and the strength
of language/ A Cambridge student, Merryweather,
travelling in Europe, translated it into Latin, and it
was published in 1644 by Hackius at Leyden in a very
neat volume. A second impression appeared in the
same year, and also a Paris edition, a reprint of the
Leyden. The continental scholars were a good deal
puzzled, and not altogether certain of the orthodoxy
of the work. Merryweather, in a very interesting
letter (1649) ^^Y^ ^^^^ ^^ ^^^ some difficulty in getting
a printer at Leyden. Salmasius, to whom Haye, a book
merchant, took it for approbation, said ' that there Was
in it many things well said, but that it contained also
many exorbitant conceptions in religion and would
probably find much frowning entertainment, especially
amongst the ministers*. Two other printers also re-
fused it. The most interesting continental criticism
is by that distinguished member of the profession,
Gui Patin, professor in the Paris Faculty of Medicine.
In a letter to Charles Spon of Lyons, dated Paris,
October 21, 1644, he mentions having received a little
book called the Religio Medici^ written by an English*
man, 'a very mystical book containing strange and
ravishing thoughts.' In a letter, dated 1645, he says,
'the book is in high credit here; the author has wit,
and there are abundance of fine things in the book.
He is a humorist whose thoughts are very agreeable,
but who, in my opinion, is to seek for a master in
religion may in the end find none/ Patin thought
the author in a parlous state, and as he was still alive
he might grow worse as well as better. Evidently,
however, the work became a favourite one with him,


SIR THOMAS BROWNE 263

as in letters of 1650-3-7 he refers to it again in
different editions. It is remarkable that he nowhere
mentions the author by name, but subsequently, when
Edward Browne was a student in Paris, Patin sends
kindly greetings to his father.

Much discussion occurred on the Continent as to the
orthodoxy of the Religio. It is no slight compliment to
the author that he should have been by one claimed as
a Catholic, by another denounced as an Atheist, while
a member of the Society of Friends saw in him a likely
convert. The book was placed on the ^ Index \ In
England, with the exception of Digb/s Observations^
there were no adverse criticisms of any note. Alexander
Ross, that interesting old Southampton schoolmaster,
who seems always to have been ready for an intellectual
tilt, wrote a criticism entitled Medicus Medicatus^ or
the Physiaan*s Religion cured by a Lenitive or Gentle
Potion,

In England there were two reprints in 1645, and it
appeared again in the years 1656, 1659, 1669, 1672, and
in 1682, the year of Browne's death. A comparison of
the early editions shows that all have the same frontis-
piece and are, with slight variations, reprints of that of
1643. The work also began to be reprinted with the
Pseudodoxia Epidemica (third edition, 1659). The Latin
editions followed each other rapidly. As I mentioned,
it first appeared at Leyden in 1644, and was reprinted
the same year there and in Paris; then in 1650 in
Leyden again, in 1652 in Strassburg, and in the same
place in 1665 and 1667. The most important of these
editions was that of Strassburg, 1652, with elaborate
notes by Moltkius, of which Gui Patin speaks as
' miserable examples of pedantry \ and indeed stigma-
tizes the commentator as a fool. The Dutch translation


264 BIOGRAPHICAL ESSAYS

appeared in 1655 and a French in 1668, so that altogether
during the author's lifetime there were at least twenty
editions of the work.

In the seventeenth century there were in all twenty-
two editions. In the eighteenth century there were
four English editions, one Latin, and one German.
Then a long interval of seventy-seven years elapsed,
until in 1831 Thomas Chapman, a young Exeter College
man, brought out a neat little edition, my own copy of
which is made precious by many marginal notes by
S. T. Coleridge, who was one of the earliest and most
critical among the students of Sir Thomas. In the
same year the first American edition was published,
edited by the Rev. Alexander Young, of Boston. In
1838 appeared an excellent edition by J. A. St. John,
* traveller, linguist, author, and editor,' and in 1844
Longmans' edition by John Peace, the librarian of the
City Library, Bristol. This edition was republished
in America by the house of Lea & Blanchard \ Phila-
delphia, the only occasion, I believe, on which the
Religio has been issued by a firm of medical publishers.
In 1845 appeared Pickering's beautiful edition, edited,
with many original notes, by the Rev. Henry Gardiner,
in many ways the most choice of nineteenth-century
issues. In 1862 James Ticknor Fields, the well-known
Boston scholar and publisher, brought out a very hand-
some edition, of which, for the first time in the history
of the book, an edition de luxe was printed on larger
paper. In 1869 appeared Sampson Low & Co.'s edi-
tion by Willis Bund ; and in 1878 Rivingtons' edition
edited by W. P. Smith. Then in 1881 there came what
must always remain the standard edition, edited by

' They did not issue an edition in 1848, as is stated by Greenhill
on the authority of J. T. Fields.


Pieudodoxia Epidemica:

O R.

ENQUIRIES

INTO

Very many reonvtd

T E N E N T &

And commwijr pctfiiiiic4

TRUTHS.


By Thomas Browns Dr.ofPhyfick*

IttL. SCALIOt


Printed by T. H, for B/iford 1>oi,§ai an

lobeibUiaMbLm. ■tf4i>


266 BIOGRAPHICAL ESSAYS

Dr. Greenhill for the Golden Treasury Series, and
reprinted repeatedly by Macmillan & Co. To his
task Dr. Greenhill brought not only a genuine love of
Sir Thomas Browne, but the accuracy of an earnest,
painstaking scholar. Since the year 1881 a dozen or
more editions have appeared, of which I may mention
the excellent one by Dr. Lloyd Roberts, of Manchester.
I may finish this dry summary by noting the contrast
between the little parchment-covered surreptitious edi-
tion of 1642 and the sumptuous folio of the Vale Press.
In all, including those which have appeared with the
collected works, there have been about fifty-five editions.
Browne states that the work had also been translated
into High Dutch and into Italian, but I can find no
record of these editions, nor of a German translation,
1680, mentioned by Watt.

Space will allow only a brief reference to Browne's
other writings. Pseudodoxia Epidemica: or^ Enquiries
into very many received Tenents and commonly presumed
Truths^ appeared in 1646 in a small folio. In extent
this is by far the most pretentious of Browne's works.
It forms an extraordinary collection of old wives' fables
and popular beliefs in every department of human know-
ledge, dealt with from the standpoint of the science of
that day. In a way it is a strong protest against general
credulity and inexactness of statement, and a plea for
greater accuracy in the observation of facts and in the
recording of them. Walter Pater has drawn attention
to the striking resemblance between Browne's chapter
on the sources of Error and Bacon's doctrine of the
Idola— shams which men fall down and worship. He
discusses cleverly the use of doubts; but, as Pater
remarks, * Browne was himself a rather lively example
of entertainments of the Idols of the Cave — Idola


SIR THOMAS BROWNE 267

Specus— and, like Boyle, Digby, and others, he could
not quite free himself from the shackles of alchemy and
a hankering for the philosopher's stone/ The work
was very popular, and extended the reputation of the
author very widely. Indeed, in 1646 Browne was not
known at large as the author of the Religio, as his name
had not appeared on the title-page of any edition issued
at that date. The Pseudodoxia was frequently reprinted,
a sixth edition being published in 1672, and it appeared
in French both in France and in Holland.

Equalling in popularity among certain people the Re-
ligio, certainly next to it in importance, is the remarkable
essay known as Hydriotaphia — Ume-Buriall: or, A Dis-
course of the Sepulchrall Umes lately found in Norfolk
(1658). Printed with it is The Garden of Cyrus, a learned
discourse on gardens of all forms in all ages. Naturally,
when an unusual number of funeral urns were found at
Walsingham, they were brought to the notice of Browne,
the leading antiquary of the county. Instead of writing
a learned disquisition upon their date — he thought them
Roman, they were in reality Saxon — with accurate
measurements and a catalogue of the bones, he touches
upon the whole incident very lightly, but, using it as
a text, breaks out into a noble and inspiring prose poem,
a meditation upon mortality and the last sad rites of
all nations in all times, with learned comments on modes
of sepulchre, illustrated with much antiquarian and his-
torical lore. Running through the work is an appro-
priate note of melancholy at the sad fate which awaits
the great majority of us, upon whom 'the iniquity of
oblivion must blindl}' scatter her l>oppy \ 'The greater
part must be content to be as though they had not been,
to be found in the register of God, not in the record of
man.'


iHYDRIOtAPHIAi

OR,

A Difcourfe of the Sepulchraill

times htdy fitand in

3^ O'R F L Ki

Togeiherwhh

ThcGardcnof C'^^'U^.

OR TH£

Quincunciall> Lozenge, or

Net* work Plantacionsofthc; An*
citnts, Artificiallyy Naturally,

MyftioUly Confi<k:fed.

With Sundry Obfenfationi,
By Thomas Bromm D.of Phyiick*


L o Tf^'D ON,

Printed for He». Brgme, at the Signe of the I
CuQ io Ivj/'lane, 1 658.


A


LETTER


TO A


FRIEND,

Upon occaHon of die

DEATH


OF RIS


Intimate Friend.


By the Learned

Sir THOMAS BROWN, Kn0it,

Dodor of Phyfick, late of :f*(erxMcb.


LONDON'.

Printed tor Charles 'Brom at the gm at the Weft-End
ol S. TomTs Church-yari 1690*


270 BIOGRAPHICAL ESSAYS

Nowhere in his writings does the prose flow with
a more majestic roll. Take, for example, this one
thought :

' If the nearness of our last necessity brought a nearer
conformity unto it, there were a happiness in hoary
hairs and no calamity in half senses. But the long
habit of living indisposeth us for dying, when avarice
makes us the sport of death, when even David grew
politically cruel, and Solomon could hardly be said to
be the wisest of men. But many are too early old and
before the days of age. Adversity stretcheth our days,
misery makes Alcemena's nights, and time hath no wings
unto It.'

Closely connected in sentiment with the Um-Burial
is the thin folio pamphlet— the rarest of all Browne's
works, printed posthumously in 1690—^ Letter to a
Friend upon Occasion of the Death of his Intimate Friend.
It is a splendid dissertation on death and modes of
dying, and is a unique study of the slow progress to
the grave of a consumptive. It is written in his most
picturesque and characteristic vein, with such a charm
of diction that some critics have given it the place of
honour among his works. Pater, in most enthusiastic
terms, speaks of it with the Urn-Burial as 'the best
justification of Browne's literary reputation '.

The tender sympathy with the poor relics of humanity
which Browne expresses so beautifully in these two
meditations has not been meted to his own. 'Who
knows the fate of his bones or how often he is to be
buried?' he asks. In 1840, while workmen were re-
pairing the chancel of St. Peter Mancroft, the coffin of
Sir Thomas was accidentally opened, and one of the
workmen took the skull, which afterwards came into
the possession of Dr. Edward Lubbock, who deposited
it in the Museum of the Norfolk and Norwich Infirmary.


SIR THOMAS BROWNE ^^l

When I first saw it there in 1872 there was on it a printed
slip with these lines from the Hydriotaphia : 'To be
knaved out of our graves, to have our skulls made
drinking-bowls, and our bones turned into pipes, to
delight and sport our enemies, are tragical abomina-
tions escaped in burning burials.' The skull has been
carefully described by Mr. Charles Williams, to whoni
I am indebted for the loan of photographs.

In addition to the Letter to a Friend^ there are three
posthumous works, Certain Miscellany Tracts (1684),
edited by Archbishop Tenison, and Posthumous Works
(17 12), containing chiefly papers of antiquarian interest.
In the same year, 17 12, appeared the Christian Morals^
edited by Archdeacon Jeffrey of Norwich, from a manu-
script found among Browne's papers. Probably a work
of his later life, it forms a series of ethical fragments
in a rich and stately prose which, in places, presents
a striking parallelism to passages in the Hebrew poetry.
The work is usually printed with the Religio^ to which
in reality it forms a supplement.

Of the collected editions of Browne's works, the first,
a fine folio, appeared in 1686. In 1836, Simon Wilkin,
himself a Norwich man, edited the works with the de-
votion of an ardent lover of his old townsman, and with
the critical accuracy of a scholar. All students of Sir
Thomas remain under a lasting debt to Mr. Wilkin, and
it is pleasant to know, that through the kindness of his
daughter-in-law, Mrs. Wilkin, of Sidmouth, a Sir Thomas
Browne Library has been founded in connexion with
the Castle Museum, Norwich, in which Mr. Simon
Wilkin's collections have been placed.


272 BIOGRAPHICAL ESSAYS

III —Appreciation

Critics from Johnson to Walter Pkter have put on
record their estimate of Browne and of his place in
literature. Among these for keenness of appreciation
Pater takes the first rank. Lamb and Coleridge deariy
loved the old Norwich physician, in whom they found
a kindred spirit. In America the New England writers,
Ticknor, Fields, Holmes, and Lowell, were ardent
students of his works. Lowell in particular is fond of
apt quotations from him, and in one place speaks of him
as ' our most imaginative mind since Shakespeare'. But
no one has put so briefly and so clearly the strong
characters of our author as the French critic, Taine :

' Let us conceive a kindred spirit to Shakespeare's,
a scholar and an observer instead of an actor and a

Eoet, who in place of creating is occupied in conipre-
ending, but who, like Shakespeare, applies himself to
living tilings, penetrates their internal structure, puts
himself in communication with their actual laws, im*
prints in himself fervently and scrupulously the smallest
details of their figure ; who at the same time extends
his penetratine surmises beyond the region of observa-
tion, discerns Behind visible phenomena a world obscure
yet sublime, and trembles with a kind of veneration
before the vast, indistinct, but populous abyss on whose
surface our little universe hangs quivering. Such a one
is Sir Thomas Browne, a naturalist, a philosopher, a
scholar, a physician, and a moralist, almost the last of
the generation which produced Jeremy Taylor and
Shakespeare. No thinker bears stronger witness to
the wandering and inventive curiosity of the age. No
writer has better displayed the brilliant and sombre
imagination of the North. No one has si>oken with
a more elegant emotion of death, the vast night of
forgetfulness, of the all-devouring pit of human vanity
which tries to create an immortality out of ephemeral
glory or sculptured stones. No one has revealed in
more glowine and original expressions the poetic sap
which flows uirough all the minds of the age/


SIR THOMAS BROWNE 273

The growing popularity of Browne's writings testifies
to the assured position he holds, if not in the hearts of
the many, at least in the hearts of that saving remnant
which in each generation hands on the best traditions ot
our literature. We, who are members of his profession,
may take a special pride in him. Among physicians, or
teachers of physic, there is, perhaps, but one name in
the very first rank. Rabelais stands apart with the
kings and queens of literature. Among the princes ot
the blood there are differences of opinion as to rank, but
Sir Thomas Browne, Holmes, and John Brown of Edin-
burgh, form a group together high in the circle. Of the
three, two were general practitioners ; Oliver Wendell
Holmes only in the early part of his life, and for forty
years a teacher of anatomy ; but all three have far closer
ties with us than Goldsmith, Smollett, or Keats, whose
medical affiliations were titular rather than practical.

Burton, Browne, and Fuller have much in common —
a rare quaintness, a love of odd conceits, and the faculty
of apt illustrations drawn fi:'om out-of-the-way sources.
Like Montaigne's— Burton's even more— Browne'sbook-
ishness is of a delightful kind, and yet, as he maintains,
his best matter is not picked from the leaves of any
author, but bred among the ' weeds and tares ' of his
own brain. In his style there is a lack of what the
modems call technique, but how pleasant it is to follow
his thoughts, rippling like a bum, not the stilted for-
mality of the technical artist in words, the cadencies
of whose precise and mechanical expressions pall on
the ear.

As has been remarked, the Rdigio Medici is a tour de

force, an attempt to combine daring scepticism with

humble faith in the Christian religion. Sir Thomas

confesses himself to be ' naturally inclined to that which


OtLUt


274 BIOGRAPHICAL ESSAYS

misguided zeal terms superstition'. He 'cannot hear
the Ave Maria bell without an elevation '. He has no
prejudices in religion, but subscribes himself a loyal
son of the Church of England. In clear language he
says, ' In brief, where the Scripture is silent the Church
is my text ; where that speaks- it is but my comment
When there is a joint silence of both, I borrow not the
rules of my religion from Rome or Geneva, but from
the dictates of my own reason.* He is hard on the
controversialist in religion — * every man is not a proper
champion for truth, nor fit to take up the gauntlet in
the cause of verity *, &c. While he disclaims any ' taint
or tincture' of heresy, he confesses to a number of
heretical hopes, such as the ultimate salvation of the
race, and the efficacy of prayers for the dead. He
freely criticizes certain seeming absurdities in the Bible
narrative. His travels have made him cosmopolitan and
free from all national prejudices.

' I feel not in myself those common antipathies that
I can discover in others, those national repugnancies
do not touch me, nor do I biehold with prejudice die
French, Italian, Spaniard, or Dutch ; but where I find
their actions in balance with my countrymen's, I honour,
love, and embrace them in the same degree. I was
born in the eighth climate, but seem for to be framed
and constellated unto all. I am no plant that will not
prosper out of a garden ; all places, all airs, make unto
me one country; I am in England, everywhere, and
under any meridian.'

Only the * fool multitude ' that chooses by show he
holds up to derision as ' that numerous piece of mon-
strosity, which, taken asunder, seem men, and the
reasonable creatures of God; but confused together,
make but one great beast, and a monstrosity more pro-
digious than Hydra '. He has a quick sympathy with


SIR THOMAS BROWNE 275

the sorrows of others, and, though a physician, his
prayer is with the husbandman and for healthful seasons.
No one has put more beautifully the feeling which each
one of us has had at times about patients :

' Let me be sick myself, if sometimes the malady of
my patient be not a disease unto me ; I desire rather
to cure his infirmities than my own necessities ; where
I do him no good, methinks it is scarce honest gain ;
though I confess 'tis but the worthy salary of our well-
intended endeavours/

He has seen many countries, and has studied their
customs and politics. He is well versed in astronomy
and botany. He has run through all systems of philo-
sophy but has found no rest in any. As death gives
every fool gratis the knowledge which is won in this
life with sweat and vexation, he counts it absurd to take
pride in his achievements, though he understands six
languages besides the patois of several provinces.

As a scientific man Browne does not take rank with
many of his contemporaries. He had a keen power of
observation, and in the Pseudodoxia and in his letters
there is abundant evidence that he was an able naturalist.
He was the first to observe and describe the peculiar
substance known as adipocere, and there are in places
shrewd flashes, such as the suggestion that the virus of
rabies may be mitigated by transmission from one animal
to another. But we miss in him the clear, dry light of
science as revealed in the marvellous works of his con-
temporary, Harvey. Busy as a practical physician, he
was an obser\'er, not an experimenter to any extent,
though he urges : ' Join sense unto reason and experi*
ment unto speculation, and so give life unto embryon
truths and verities yet in their chaos.' He had the
highest veneration for Harvey, whose work he recog-

T 2


276 BIOGRAPHICAL ESSAYS

nized as epoch making— 'his piece, De Circul. Sang.^
which discovery I prefer to that of Columbus/ He
recognized that in the faculty of observation the old
Greeks were our masters, and that we must return to
their methods if progress were to be made. He had
a much clearer idea than had Sydenham of the value of
anatomy, and tells his young friend, Power of Halifax,
to make Autopsia his fidtis Achates,

That he should have believed in witches, and that he
should have given evidence in 1664 which helped to
condemn two poor women, is always spoken of as a blot
on his character ; but a man must be judged by his
times and his surroundings. While regretting his
credulity, we must remember how hard it was in the
sixteenth and seventeenth centuries not to believe in
witches— how hard, indeed, it should be to-day for any
one who believes implicitly the Old Testament! — and
men of the stamp of Reginald Scot and Johannes Wierus,
who looked at the question from our point of view, were
really anomalies, and their strong presentation of the
rational side of the problem had very little influence on
their contemporaries.

For the student of medicine the writings of Sir Thomas
Browne have a very positive value. The charm of high
thoughts clad in beautiful language may win some
readers to a love of good literature ; but beyond this
is a still greater advantage. Like the 'Thoughts of
Marcus Aurelius ' and the Enchiridion of Epictetus, the
Religio is full of counsels of perfection which appeal to
the mind of youth, still plastic and unhardened by con-
tact with the world. Carefully studied, from such books
come subtle influences which give stability to character
and help to give a man a sane outlook on the complex
problems of life. Sealed early of this tribe of authorSy


SIR THOMAS BROWNE 277

a student takes with him, as compagnons de vcyage^ life-
long friends whose thoughts become his thoughts and
whose ways become his ways. Mastery of self, con-
scientious devotion to duty, deep human interest in
human beings — these best of all lessons you must learn
now or never : and these are some of the lessons which
may be gleaned from the life and from the writings
of Sir Thomas Browne.


278


FRACASTORIUS


I

Upon few pictures in literature do we dwell with
greater pleasure than that of Catullus returning to his
home near Verona, wearied with the pleasures of the
Capital, sick at heart after the death of his much be-
loved brother, and still, we may fancy, aching with the
pangs of misprized love ; but at the sight of ' Paeninsu-
larum Sirmio insularumque ocellus', he breaks out into
joyful song, and all his cares vanish.

Fifteen centuries later another ' Bard of Sirmio * sang
the joys of the Lago di Garda, ' mid Caphian hills', and
while we cannot claim for Fracastor a place beside his
immortal townsman, he occupies a distinguished posi-
tion in our annals as the author of the most successful
medical poem ever written, and as the man from whom
we date our first accurate knowledge of the processes
of infection and contagion. The facts relating to the
life of Fracastorius are to be obtained from the Venice
edition of his works, 1584, and from the remarkably full
and critical study by Mencken.' The best account in
English is by Greswell.^

He was born in 1483 at Verona, of an ancient family,
the Fracastoria (the name is also spelt Frastorius).
There are related of his early days two marvellous

^ Read before the Charaka Club, December, 1904. Reprinted
from the Procadings of the Charaka Ciitb, vol. ii.
' De VHay 6r*c.^ Hieronymi Fracastorii, Lipsiae, MDCCXXXI.
' Memoirs ofAngelus PoliHanus^ &c., and ed. Manchestefi 18051


HIERONYMI FRACASTORll
VERONENSIS.

DE SYMPATHIA BT ANTIf ATBU ftBKTM
LIBIK TNYf

DE COHTASIONB BT COHTAGIOtlt

MORBII BT CTKATIONB

LIBRI III


VEHETltt. « O XlTt


28o BIOGRAPHICAL ESSAYS

stories — that he was born with his lips so united that
a surgeon had to be called in to separate them; and
that, while an infant in his mother's arms, he escaped
unhurt, while she was killed by a lightning stroke.
He early gave signs of unusual ability, and was sent to
Padua, at that time well deserving the encomium of
Shakespeare : ' Fair Padua, nursery of the arts/ Here
he made warm friends with many brilliant young men
with whom in after life he remained on terms of close
intimacy, and to some of whom his poems were dedi*
cated. It is uncertain how long he resided at Pkdua,
but at the outbreak of war he joined the Venetian
forces under the command of his friend Livianus, at
whose defeat and capture Fracastor returned to his
native town. There is no information as to his teachers
in medicine, but Mencken suggests that from Hier-
onymus Turrianus he got his most important training.
He seems very quickly to have gained reputation as
a physician, and his services were sought by rich
and poor alike. It is stated that he practised without
pecuniary reward. Poetry, astronomy, cosmography,
and natural philosophy shared with medicine his time
and his labours. He kept up an extensive correspon-
dence with many distinguished men in science and in
letters.

' He performed wonders by his exact knowledge of
herbs and simples, by searching the best books ^ the
ancients. The most excellent antidote, Dtascordium^
was of his preparing. . . . The age in which he lived
saw nothing equal to his learning but his honesty.'

So writes the author of the Life prefixed to the
English translation of the Morbus Gallicus. He lived
for the greater part of the time in the country near
Verona, amid the hills overlooking the Lago di Garda.


FRACASTORIUS 281

* Here/ says his biographer, 'after a moderate ascent,
is seen the Villa of Fracastor in the midst of a level

ff round, yet so elevated as to command a view of the
ake. The house is plain and has little to boast from
artificial ornament, but much from the natural beauty of
the situation. It is of square form with an open aspect
on every side except the north. On the east, on which
part the Adige rolls its rapid current, hastening from
the interior of Germany, and laves the foot of the
mountain, it commands a view of Verona, with in-
numerable villas scattered here and there in the sub-
jacent plain. . . . On the west the appearance of the
Lago di Garda is no less pleasing. Here hills rising in
alternate succession meet the view; here the some-
times disturbed and tumultuous billows of the lake—
the charming peninsula of Catullus; vessels with ex-
tended sails ; and fishing barks seen approaching from
remote distances; and numerous towns and hamlets
seated on the sunny promontories. . . . Here our
Girolamo was accustomed to enjoy the conversation of
his friends. Here he found that tranquillity and rural
seclusion, equally propitious to the muses ana to severer
studies; and here he produced many of those works
which spread his celebrity throughout Europe and
covered his brow with the wreath of fame.'

In a poem addressed to Turrianus, Fracastor has
himself celebrated the beauties of his home 'mid
Caphian hills'.

He died of apoplexy in 1553, aged seventy-one.
Monuments to his memory were erected at Padua by
his friend Rhamnusius and by his fellow citizens.

* He was of low stature, but of good bulk, his
shoulders broad, his hair black and long, his face
round, his eyes black, his nose short and turning
upwards by nis continual contemplation of the stars ;
a livelv air was spread over his countenance, that dis-
played the serenity and ingenuity of his mind.'

Mencken makes fun of this description, particularly


HIERONYMI FRACASTORII

SYPHILIS
SIV£ MORBVS GALLICVS


Vtroutty M D X X X , mmfc Atigiifio «


fJottfine PriuiUgiOf muWtf^ peeufMtt fj t%ct*
munuatiottif pcena : fro ut in Vriudeg^s ewtmetMrt


FRACASTORIUS a8^

of the snub nose, and certainly the pictures give a fine
Roman nose of full proportions.

The important works of Fracastor are the two of
which I shall speak. An astronomical work, Homo-
centrica, with a discussion of the old question of critical
days, appeared in 1539. The work on SytPipathia and
Antipathia, Bk. I, appeared in 1546 in the same volume
with De Contagione. Many fine editions of the collected
works appeared after his death, and in the seventeenth
century there were six or seven editions. The minor
poems are to be found in all of them.

II

The scientific reputation of Fracastorius rests upon
the work De Contagiotu^ &c., the title-page of which is
here reproduced. It contains among other things three
contributions of the first importance— a clear statement
of the problems of contagion and infection, a recognition
of t3rphus fever, and a remarkable pronouncement on
the contagiousness of phthisis.

In the sixteenth century, and indeed for a much later
period, following the views of Hippocrates and Galen,
the fevers were thought to be due to a corruption or
putridity of the humours, and no very clear ideas had
been expressed as to their mode of propagation, still
less of their origin. The simple classification into
ephemeral, putrid, and hectic forms was maintained,
though the recognition by the Arabians of ^>ecific
varieties, such as small-pox and measles, had stimulated
greatly the study of fevers. In the course of an active
professional life, Fracastorius had witnessed the rapid
spread of syphilis and repeated outbreaks of the plague
and exanthematic typhus, so that he had had excep-
tional opportunities to study the problems presented by


284 BIOGRAPHICAL ESSAYS

them. In answer to the question, What is contagion ?
he replies: 'As the name indicates, contagion is an
infection passing from one individual to another', and
the infection is absolutely the same and the virus is the
same in him who receives and in him who gives. A fire
in one house destroying an adjoining one does not do
so by contagion, as in the sense in which the word is
used it is not a wholesale destruction, but a change in
the elements of which the body is composedi brought
about by particles of such minuteness that they do not
come within range of our senses.

There are three fundamentally distinct classes of
infections: (i) Diseases infecting by contact alone;
(2) those infectious by means of an intermediate agent
— fomites, as garments, &c. ; and (3) those which
infect at a distance through the air, as the pestilent
fevers, &c.

He draws an analogy between the diseases of the
first class and the putrefaction passing by contact
from one grape or pear to another, the seeds of con-
tagion — seminaria contagionum — passing from one to
another.

The contagion through fomites is the same in reality
as in the direct; the virus remains intact and is as
active as in the body from which it came, and it may
be preserved two or three years just as odours are kept
by small particles which retain their activity. The
whole question of fomites he discusses with a clearness
new to medicine ; indeed I do not know that the word
was used by any previous writer.

More curious and more astonishing, he thinks, are
the contagions of the third class, which act at a distance,
and seem indeed to be of a different nature and to act
on a different principle. The germs are more powerful


FRACASTORIUS 285

and more subtile, with a greater facility in penetrating
bodies. They differ extraordinarily among themselves :
some attack trees and grains, others animals; some
attack men only, others oxen ; some the old, others
only the young; some males, others only females.
The different germs attack different organs ; some the
eyes, others the deeper organs, as the lungs.

Fracastorius draws a remarkable parallel between
the processes of contagion and the fermentation of
wine. It is not the same as putrefaction, which differs
in the absence of any new generation, and is accom-
panied with an abominable smell. Certain poisons
resemble contagions in their action, but they differ
essentially in not producing in the individual a principle
or germ capable of acting on another person.

In the second book the special fevers are con-
sidered under the two divisions of non-pestilent and
pestilent, the former, characterized by a milder course,
embracing chiefly small-pox and measles, between
which, however, he does not draw a very clear distinc-
tion. In 1505 and 1528 there appeared for the first
time in Italy a disease characterized by high fever,
early loss of consciousness, and a copious petechical
and lenticular rash. Fracastorius gives an excellent
description of it as a disease quite distinct from the
other pestilent fevers, particularly the plague, with
which it had been confounded, and we have no diffi-
culty in recognizing it as epidemic or exanthematic
typhus.

The chapter de phthisi cantagtasa is of special interest
to us as one of the earliest and clearest statements on
the subject. He says that previous writers have
spoken of phthisis as originating in catarrh attacking
the lungs, or the rupture of a blood-vessel, or an


286 BIOGRAPHICAL ESSAYS

abscess in the lung, or the sequence of a pleurisy or
a pneumonia ; but very few have spoken of contagion
as an all-important cause. Habitual residence with
a consumptive he regards as one of the most common
sources of the disease, the germs of which may remain
attached to clothing and rooms for a year or more. He
recognizes the similarity of the hereditary and the
contagious forms.

The third book, devoted to treatment, is not very
satisfactory, though there is a modem flavour in the
statement that the germs, which must be first attacked,
may be scattered or broken or chased away or dis-
pelled by antipathy. In the section on the treatment
of phthisis he has not progressed beyond Galen or
Celsus.

By far the best chapter in the book is devoted to
syphilis, an extended consideration in prose of the
subject the poetical consideration of which as a younger
man had made him famous.

Ill

The countless contributions on the subject of syphilis
in the fifteenth and sixteenth centuries belong now to
the musty volumes of forgotten lore ; only two, possess-
ing perennial interest, appear and reappear as witnesses
to the vigour and vitality of the minds which produced
them. Both were written by poets, but the better poet
wrote in prose, and, while not a physician, gave one of
the most realistic pictures of the disease which exists in
literature. Ulrich von Hutten, poet, satirist, soldier,
reformer, the greatest name after Luther and Erasmus
in the Reformation, suffered with the new disease for
many years. The famous treatise on Guaiacum (1519)
is an account of his own case and those of his friends^


FRACASTORIUS 287

and of their weary sufferings until relieved by the new
drug, guaiacum (lignum sanctum\ the mode of prepara-
tion.of which and the indications for use he lays down
with the skill of an artist. Apart altogether from the
unique interest attaching to von Hutten as a man, his
little book is well worth reading, as giving a graphic
first-hand account of sjrphilis as it appeared early in the
sixteenth century. German editions are easy to pro-
cure. One, edited by Oppenheimer, was recently pub-
lished by Hirschwald, Berlin, 1902.^

The other contribution is the celebrated poem of
Fracastorius, the title-page of which is here reproduced
(p. 282). Next to the famous Regitnen Sanitatis of the
School of Salemum, it ranks as the most popular poem
in medical literature. The original edition is a small
quarto, issued from a Verona press, and not a very good
example of the printing of the period. To its enduring
popularity the numerous editions in the Surgeon-
General's Library, Washington, and in the British
Museum bear witness, and every few years a new
translation appears in French, German, or Italian. An
English translation by Nahum Tate in 1686 was pub-
Hshed afterwards as a sort of supplement— with separate
pagination— to Dryden's Examen Poeticum^ or Miscellany
Poems, 1693, third part. A little quarto, of seventy
pages, in Latin verse, it brought to the author both
literary and professional fame. His contemporaries ex-
hausted the resources of the language in praise of
a performance whose Virgilian beauties excelled any-
thing that had been written since classical days. Modem
commentators have been more critical and have not

^ Only two English editions have appeared, one by Thomas
Paynell, 1533, ^^^ other by Daniel Turner, 1790 (Paynell's edition

revised).


288 BIOGRAPHICAL ESSAYS

found the poem so full of ' divine graces '. A well-
known scholar whose judgement I asked sent the
following :

' I am frankly disappointed with Fracastorius's poem.
The Latin and the metrical propriety are admirable, but
there seems to me to be an mtolerable amount of ^' gas **
in it, and I think he attached more importance to the
form than to the matter. I had hoped he would have
been more definite about the form in which the disease
showed itself in the sixteenth century, and the remedies
he proposes seem to me to be used more as an oppor-
tunity of introducing a number of sounding words of
trees and places in a setting of classical mythology than
as a series of well-considered prescriptions, out per-
haps I do him injustice. Lucretius with his account
of the plague at Athens would have given him a better
model.

Following the example of von Hutten, who dedicated
his treatise to the Archbishop of Mayence, Fracastorius
inscribed his work to his friend Bembo, a Prince of the
Church and Secretary to Pope Leo X. As at this time
the disease was not thought to be wholly of venereal
origin, such a dedication would not be deemed inappro-
priate. Apart altogether from the poetical interest,
which after all is subsidiary, the work is of the greatest
value as a contemporary picture of the disease, embody-
ing the opinions of an intelligent observer upon its
origin. In one other point it is notable. The word
syphilis, invented by Fracastor for the disease, occurs
in the poem as the name of one of the characters.
Nowhere in the poem does he say why the disease
is called after the shepherd or why he invented it, but
in his section on Me mal Fran9ais' in de Con/agume,
1546, he says : ' In my poem I gave it the name syphilis.*
It had been known by many names — morbus gallicus,
mal Fran^ais, the French pox, the Neapolitan disease,


FRACASTORIUS 289

and morbus venereus, &c. ; but from this time the
new name became common, and gradually came into
general use.

To appreciate the rapid popularity of the poem, it is
to be remembered that in the early part of the sixteenth
century S3rphilis was regarded as a mysterious epidemic,
hitherto unknown, which had struck terror into all
hearts by the rapidity of its spread, the ravages it made,
and the apparent helplessness of the physicians to
cure it.

The poem is an exposition of Fracastor's views on
the origin, symptomatology, and cure of the new disease
which had seized astonished Europe. He accepts the
usual statement that it first appeared in the French army
before Naples about 1495.

To Naples first it came
From France, and Justly took from France his name,
Companion of the War.

He discussed the American origin, the popular one of

the day :

Say^ Goddess, to what cause we shall at last
Assign this plague, unknown to ages past;
If from the western climes 'twas wafted o'er.
When daring Spaniards left their native shore;
Resolv'd beyona th' Atlantick to descry
Conjecturecf worlds, or in the search to dye.

More probable is it, he thinks, that the malign influence
of the planets, particularly the conjunction of Mars
and Saturn, had brought about conditions favourable
for the outbreak of the plague which had existed for
ages but slumbered at intervals.

Long since he scatter'd his infernal flame.
And always being had, though not a name.

Our elements are slaves to the 'rabble of the sky',
and when a planet enters a new course some mighty

OSLSt U


290 BIOGRAPHICAL ESSAYS

work of Fate is to be expected. Two hundred yfeais
ago, when Mars and Saturn were last in conjunction,
an unknown fever raged through the East, and similar
plagues were predicted by the astronomers as a result
of their recent position in the skies.

The description of the symptoms is very complete,
and there is no difficulty in recognizing the disease.
There is a period of incubation — 'the moon four
monthly rounds shall steer ' — before the appearance of
convincing symptoms, and all this time the malady
lurks within and grows confirmed. Gradually the
victim begins to feel depressed, the roses fade from
his cheeks, a leaden hue spreads over his face, and
then local sores appear on the genitalia. Fracastor,
with a majority of the writers of that date, thought
the disease had very often an extra-genital origin.
'When night's ungrateful shades arise' then begin
the execrable pains in arms, shoulders, and legs. Soon
foul blotches spread over the skin and pustules form.
The muscles are attacked, deep ulcers form, and the
bones are laid bare. Instead of tuneful speech im-
perfect sounds result from involvement of the vocal
cords. In places the humour grows fixed and ' hardens
to a node'. He then pictures a fair and beautiful
youth, full of the pride of life and the joys of health,
stricken with the terrible plague and deformed out
of all recognition ; and it reminds him of the state of
his beloved Italy, torn with strife and at the mercy
of foreign foes.

Now for our second task, and what relief
Our age has found against this raging grief.

The patient's constitution and the temper of his
blood must be considered. Get out in the open air,
awa)' from fens and lakes ; take to the chase, but not


FRACASTORIUS 291

too actively; the boar but not the stag may be at-
tempted. Even the plough, the rake, and the axe are
not to be despised. The very house yields exercise,
the hall has room for fencing and the bounding ball.
Minerva, not Venus, may be sought.

Diet is all-important. Avoid fish, as they convert
more to humours than to nourishment: pork may be
eaten and poultry, but all coarser foods must be
spumed. Milk is the best drink; wine as a rule is
to be avoided ; plenty of fresh vegetables are to be
taken.

If strength suffices, the patient may be bled, par-
ticularly in the spring. A bitter tonic of fennel and
hops is to be ordered.

The greater part, and with success more sure,
By mercury perform the happy cure;
A wondrous virtue in that mmeral lies.

Its healing power was revealed to one Ilceus, a hunts-
man, who was afflicted with the disease in Syria.
Callirrhoe, a goddess, directed him how to get the
precious metal from 'the spacious voids and sub-
terranean roads', and after bathing in the lakes of
liquid silver he was healed. Full directions for in-
unction are given. The 'lard of swine' is used for
a vehicle, mixed with larch gum and turpentine. The
whole body is to be smeared except the head and
breast, and then the patient is to sweat profusely under
thick bed-clothing. The course is to be repeated for
ten days until

The mass of humours now dissolved within,
To purge themselves by spittle shall begin.

Victorious health is now at hand, and all that remains
is to take a bath with rosemary and lavender, vervain
and yarrow, to wash all the dregs away.

u 2


292 BIOGRAPHICAL ESSAYS

But the virtues of the ' sacred tree ' must also employ
his muse to tell of blessing never seen or sung before.
The tree is first described, growing in a spacious isle,
with branches ever green. So hard is the substance
that it makes a saw toothless and scarcely receives a flaw
from the axe. In variegated hue the wood resembles
the ^ gaudy bow ', and the natives, conscious of its use,
plant it on the hills and vales. The mode of preparation
and administration is as follows :

Or break in splinters, which they steep a while
In fountains, and when soak'd, in vessels boil,
Regardless how too fierce a fire may make
The juice run o'er, whose healing froth they take,
With which they bathe their limbs where pustles

breed,
And heal the breaches where dire ulcers feed.
Half boird away the remnant they retain.
And adding hony boil the chips again:
To use no liquor when they dine,
Their countries law and greater priest enjoyn :
The first decoction with the rising light
They drink, and once again at faU of night;
This course they strictly hold when once begun,
Till Cynthia has her monthly progress run.
Housed all the while where no offensive wind,
Nor the least breath of air can entrance find.

It is interesting to compare the account of the cure
with that given by Ulrich von Hutten. While not so
full in detail, it agrees in the main, and particularly in
the last injunction, to 'house' the patient during it, so
that no fresh air can reach him, and to restrict the diet
to 'just so much food as can bare life preserve*. In
both the cure was to last for thirty days. As Foumier
remarks in a note in his translation of the Aforbus
Gallicus^ the identity of the directions in these two
writers, pharmacological and general, speak for a fixed


FRACASTORIUS 293

and consecrated plan which was followed with scrupu-
lous exactness.

There is told the story of the discovery of the New
World by Columbus, and the joy of the sailors in its
wonders. Unhappily they shot some beautiful birds,
beloved of the Sun-God, and a prophecy of dire ills was
uttered by one of the birds which escaped :

Nor end your suflferings here ; a strange disease,
And most obscene, sh3l on your bodies seize.

By chance, before they left the natives held the great
festival to the Sun-God, but grief was on all faces—' all
languished with the same obscene disease'; but the
priest in snowy robes displayed the boughs of healing
guaiacum with which he purged the tainted ground.
This the native prince assured the Spanish General was
the disease the holy bird had predicted would attack his
men, and he told the story of the origin of the plague,
and the discovery of guaiacum as a cure.

A shepherd once (distrust not ancient fame)
Possest these downs, and Syphilus his name.

He kept the flocks of King Alcithous, and one year the
drought was so extreme that the cattle perished for
want of water. So incensed was Syphilus that he
blasphemed the Sun-God in good set terms and de-
cided from henceforth to offer no sacrifices to him, but
to worship King Alcithous. The shepherd won all the
people to his way, and the king was overjoyed and
proclaimed himself * in Earth's low sphere to be the only
and sufficient deity ' But the Sun-God, enraged, darted
forth infection on air, earth, and streams, and Syphilus
became the first victim of the new disease.

He first wore buboes dreadful to the sight,

First felt strange pains and sleepless past the night ;

From him the malady received its name.


294 BIOGRAPHICAL ESSAYS

Becoming a general pestilence, the Sun-God was ap-
pealed to, and his priests promised a cure if a proper
sacrifice was made to appease the offended deity. The
lot fell on Syphilus, who was bound on the altar with
his throat laid open to the uplifted knife, but at the last
moment Juno interceded and commanded them to slay
a heifer in his stead. An annual sacrifice in commemora-
tion of this event was held, and a swine bound to the
altar *to witness Syphilus his crime*. The guaiacum
was given as a cure for the disease. The afflicted
sailors learned of the natives how to prepare the
remedy, and not forgetful of their country's good,
freighted their largest ships with the rich wood.

Iberian coasts, you first were happy made
With this rich plant, and wonder'cf at its aid;
Known now to France and neighbouring Germany,
Cold Sc3^thian coasts, and temp rate Italy,
To Europe's bounds all bless the vital tree.

Joseph^ the other long poem of Fracastorius, was
translated into English by Josuah Sylvester, with the
following remarkable title: 'The Maiden's Blush: Joseph,
Mirror of Modesty, Map of Pietie, Maze of Destinie, or
rather Divine Providence. From the Latin of Fraca-
storius. Translated and dedicated to the High-Hopefull
Charles Prince of Wales. London, 1620. i2mo.'


HARVEY AND HIS DISCOVERY^

1

Only those of us, Mr. President and Fellows, who
have had the good fortune to hold the distinguished
position which by your kind grace, Sir, I hold to-day,
only those of us who have delivered the Harveian Oration,
can appreciate the extraordinary difficulties besetting a
subject, every aspect of which has been considered, very
often too, by men who have brought to the task a com-
bination of learning and literary skill at once the envy
and the despair of their successors. But I take it, Sir,
that in this Ambarvalia or commemorative festival for
blessing the fruits of our great men, ordained definitely
as such by him whose memory is chiefly in our minds
to-day, our presence here in due order and array,
confers distinction upon an occasion of which the
oration is but an incident. But, honour worthy of such
a theme should be associated with full knowledge of
the conditions under which these great men lived and
moved ; and here comes in the real difficulty, because it
is rarely possible to bring the fruits of independent
critical investigation into their lives and works. Par-
ticularly hard is it for those of us who have had to live
the life of the arena : our best efforts bear the stamp of
the student, not of the scholar. In my own case, a deep
reverence for the mighty minds of old, and a keen
appreciation of the importance to our profession of

' Being the Harveian Oration delivered at the Royal College of
Physicians, London, October i8, 1906.


296 BIOGRAPHICAL ESSAYS

a study of history, may be put in the scales against
defects for the appreciation of which I have still re-
maining sufficient self-detachment. The lesson of the
day is the lesson of their lives. But because of the
ever-increasing mental strain in this age of hurry, few
of us have the leisure, fewer still, I fear, the inclination,
to read it thoroughly. Only with a knowledge of the
persistency with which they waged the battle for Truth,
and of the greatness of their victory, does the memory
of the illustrious dead become duly precious to us.

History is simply the biography of the mind of man ;
and our interest in history, and its educational value to
us, is directly proportionate to the completeness of our
study of the individuals through whom this mind has
been manifested. To understand clearly our position in
any science to-day, we must go back to its beginnings,
and trace its gradual development, following certain
laws, difficult to interpret and often obscured in the
brilliancy of achievements— laws which everywhere
illustrate this biography, this human endeavour, working
through the long ages; and particularly is this the case
with that history of the organized experience of the
race which we call science.

In the first place, like a living organism, Truth grows,
and its gradual evolution may be traced from the tiny
germ to the mature product. Never springing, Minerva-
like, to full stature at once, Truth may suffer all the
hazards incident to generation and gestation. Much of
history is a record of the mishaps of truths which have
struggled to the birth, only to die or else to wither in
premature decay. Or the germ may be dormant for
centuries, awaiting the fullness of time.

Secondly, all scientific truth is conditioned by the
state of knowledge at the time of its announcement.


HARVEY 297

Thus, at the beginning of the seventeenth century, the
science of optics and mechanical appliances had not
made possible (so far as the human mind was con-
cerned) the existence of blood capillaries and blood
corpuscles. Jenner could not have added to his Inquiry
a discourse on immunity ; Sir William Perkin and the
chemists made Koch possible ; Pasteur gave the condi-
tions that produced Lister ; Davy and others furnished
the preliminaries necessary for anaesthesia. Every-
where we find this invariable filiation, one event follow-
ing the other in orderly sequence — ' Mind begets mind/
as Harvey says; 'opinion is the source of opinion.
Democritus with his atoms, and Eudoxus with his chief
good, which he placed in pleasure, impregnated Epi-
curus; the four elements of Empedocles, Aristotle;
the doctrine of the ancient Thebans, Pythagoras and
Plato ; geometry, Euclid ' (De Generatione),

And, thirdly, to scientific truth alone may the hofno
mcnsura principle be applied, since of all mental treasures
of the race it alone compels general acquiescence. That
this general acquiescence, this aspect of certainty, is
not reached per salium^ but is of slow, often of difficult,
growth — marked by failures and frailties, but crowned
at last with an acceptance accorded to no other product
of mental activity — is illustrated by every important
discovery from Coi>ernicus to Darwin.

The growth of Truth corresponds to the states of
knowledge described by Plato in the 77r«i^(^5— acquisi-
tion, latent possession, conscious possession. Scarcely
a discovery can be named which does not present these
phases in its evolution. Take, for example, one of the
most recent : Long years of labour gave us a full know-
ledge of syphilis; centuries of acquisition added one
fact to another, until we had a body of clinical and


298 BIOGRAPHICAL ESSAYS

pathological knowledge of remarkable fullness. For
the last quarter of a century we have had latent posses-
sion of the cause of the disease, as no one could doubt
the legitimate inference from discoveries in other acute
infections. The conscious possession has just been
given to us. After scores of investigators had struggled
in vain with the problem, came Schaudinn with an
instinct for truth, with a capacity to pass beyond the
routine of his day, and with a vision for the whole
where others had seen but in part. It is one of the
tragedies of science that this brilliant investigator, with
capabilities for work so phenomenal, should have been
cut off at the very threshold of his career. The cancer
problem, still in the stage of latent possession, awaits
the advent of a man of the same type. In a hundred
other less important problems, acquisition has by slow
stages become latent possession ; and there needs but
the final touch — the crystal in the saturated solution —
to give us conscious possession of the truth. But when
these stages are ended, there remains the final struggle
for general acceptance. Locke's remark that 'Truth
scarce ever yet carried it by vote anywhere at its first
appearance ' is borne out by the history of all discoveries
of the first rank. The times, however, are changing;
and it is interesting to compare the cordial welcome of
the pallid spirochaete with the chilly reception of the
tubercle bacillus. Villemin had done his great work,
Cohnheim and Salmonson had finally solved the prob-
lem of infectivity, when Koch published his memorable
studies. Others before him had seen the bacillus, but
the conscious possession of the truth only came with
his marvellous technique. Think of the struggle to
secure acceptance! The seniors among us who lived
through that instructive period remember well that


HARVEY 299

only thpse who were awake when the dawn appeared
assented at once to the brilliant demonstration. We are
better prepared to-day ; and a great discovery like that
of Schaudinn is immediately put to the test by experts
in many lands, and a verdict is given in a few months.
We may have become more plastic and receptive, but
I doubt it ; even our generation — that great generation
of the last quarter of the nineteenth century, had a
practical demonstration of the slowness of the accepta-
tion of an obvious truth in the long fight for the aseptic
treatment of wounds. There may be present some who
listened, as I did in October, 1873, to an introductory
lecture at one of the largest of the metropolitan schools,
the burden of which was the finality of surgery. The
distinguished author and teacher, dwelling on the
remarkable achievements of the past, concluded that
the art had all but reached its limit, little thinking
that within a mile from where he spoke, the truth for
which thousands had been striving — now a conscious
possession in the mind of Joseph Lister— would revo-
lutionize it. With scores of surgeons here and there
throughout the world this truth had been a latent posses-
sion. Wounds had healed per primam since Machaon's
day; and there were men before Joseph Lister who
had striven for cleanliness in surgical technique; but
not until he appeared could a great truth become
so manifest that it everywhere compelled acquiescence.
Yet not without a battle — a long and grievous battle, as
many of us well knew who had to contend in hospitals
with the opposition of men who could not — not who
would not — see the truth.

Sooner or later—insensibly, unconsciously — the iron
yoke of conformity is upon our necks; and in our
minds, as in our bodies, the force of habit becomes


300 BIOGRAPHICAL ESSAYS

irresistible. From our teachers and associates, from
our reading, from the social atmosphere about us, we
catch the beliefs of the day, and they become ingrained
— part of our nature. For most of us this happens in
the haphazard process we call education, and it goes on
just as long as we retain any mental receptivity. It
was never better expressed than in the famous lines
that occurred to Henry Sidgwick in his sleep:

We think so because all other people think so;
Or because — or because— after all, we do think so ;
Or because we were told so, and think we must

think so ;
Or because we once thought so, and think we still

think so;
Or because, having thought so, we think we will

think so.

In departing from any settled opinion or belief, the
variation, the change, the break with custom may come
gradually; and the way is usually prepared; but the
final break is made, as a rule, by some one individual,
the masterless man of Kipling's splendid allegory, who
sees with his own eyes, and with an instinct or genius
for truth, escapes from the routine in which his fellows
live. But he often pays dearly for his boldness.
Walter Bagehot tells us that the pain of a new idea
is one of the greatest pains to human nature. * It is, as
people say, so upsetting ; it makes you think that, after
all, your favourite notions may be wrong, your firmest
beliefs ill-founded ; it is certain that till now there was
no place allotted in your mind to the new and startling
inhabitant ; and now that it has conquered an entrance,
you do not at once see which of your old ideas it will
not turn out, with which of then, it can be reconciled,
and with which it is at essential enmity.' It is on this
account that the man who expresses a new idea is very


HARVEY 301

apt to be abused and ill-treated. All this is common
among common men, but there is something much
worse which has been illustrated over and over again
in history. How eminent soever a man may become
in science, he is very apt to carry with him errors
which were in vogue when he was young — errors that
darken his understanding, and make him incapable of
accepting even the most obvious truths. It is a great
consolation to know that even Harvey came within the
range of this law— in the matter of the lymphatic system ;
it is the most human touch in his career.

By no single event in the history of science is the
growth of truth, through the slow stages of acquisition,
the briefer period of latent possession, and the period,
so glorious for us, of conscious possession, better shown
than in the discovery of the circulation of the blood.
You will all agree with me that a Fellow of this college
must take his courage in both hands who would, in this
place and before this audience, attempt to discuss any
aspect of this problem. After nearly three centuries of
orations the very pictures and books in this hall might
be expected to cry out upon him. But I have so taken
my courage, confident that in using it to illustrate
certain aspects of the growth of truth I am but obeying
the command of Plato, who insists that principles such
as these cannot be too often or too strongly enforced.
There is a younger generation, too, the members of
which are never the worse for the repetition of a good
story, stale though it may be in all its aspects to their
elders ; and then there is that larger audience to be
considered to which the season is never inappropriate
to speak a word.


302 BIOGRAPHICAL ESSAYS

II

The sixteenth century, drawing to a close, had been
a period of acquisition unequalled in history. Brooding
over the face of the waters of mediaevalism, the spirit of
the Renaissance brought forth a science of the world
and of man which practically created a new heaven and
a new earth, and the truths announced by Copernicus
and Galileo far transcended

the searching schoolmen's view
And half had staggered that stout Stagyrite.

Among other things, it had given to medicine a new
spirit, a new anatomy, and a new chemistry. In the
latter part of the fifteenth century Hippocrates and
Galen came to their own again. A wave of enthusiasm
for the fathers in medicine swept over the profession ;
and for at least two generations the best energies of its
best minds were devoted to the study of their writings.
How numerous and important is that remarkable group
of men, the medical humanists of the Renaissance, we
may judge by a glance at Bayle's Biographic Medicate^
in which the lives are arranged in chronological order.
From Garbo of Bologna, surnamed the expositor, to
Rabelais, more than 150 biographies and bibliographies
are given, and at least one-half of these men had either
translated or edited works of the Greek physicians. Of
our founder, one of the most distinguished of the group,
and of his influence in reviving the study of Galen and
so indirectly of his influence upon Harvey, Dr. Payne's
story still lingers in our memories. Leonicenus, Linacre,
Gonthier, Monti, Koch, Camerarius, Caius, Fuchs^
Zerbi, Cornarus, and men of their stamp not only
swept away Arabian impurities from the medicine of


HARVEY 303

the day, but also revived Greek ideals and introduced
scientific methods.

The great practical acquisition of the century was
a new anatomy. Vesalius and his followers gave for
the first time an accurate account of the structure of
the human body, and while thus enlarging and. correct-
ing the work of Galen contributed to weaken the
almost divine authority with which he dominated
the schools. Nearly another century passed before
chemistry, in the hands of Boyle and others, reached
its modern phase, but the work of Paracelsus, based on
that of the * pious Spagyrist ', Basil Valentine, had by
showing its possibilities directed men's minds strongly
to the new science. But the new spirit alone was
essential ; since it established the intellectual and moral
freedom by which the fetters of dogma, authority, and
scholasticism were for ever loosened from the minds
of men.

Into this world, we may say, stepped a young Folke-
stone lad, when, on the last day of May, 1593, he
matriculated at Cambridge. Harvey's education may
be traced without difficulty, because the influences
which shaped his studies were those which had for
a century prevailed in the profession of this country.
We do not know the reason for selection of Caius
College, which, so far as I can gather, had no special
connexion with the Canterbury school. Perhaps it was
chosen because of the advice of the family physician, or
of a friend, or of his rector ; or else his father may have
known Caius ; or the foundation may already have
become famous as a resort for those about to 'enter
on the physic line '. Or, quite as likely, as we so often
find in our experience, some trivial incident may have
turned his thoughts towards medicine. When he came


304 BIOGRAPHICAL ESSAYS

up i" i593» there were those of middle age who could
tell racy stories of Caius, the co-founder of the college,
against whose iron rule they had rebelled. 'Charged
not only with a show of a perverse stomach to the
professors of the Gospel, but with Atheism/ the last
days of Caius's noble life were embittered by strife and
misunderstanding. Doubtless the generous souls among
them had long since learned to realize the greatness of
his character, and were content to leave * the heat of his
faith to God's sole judgement, and the light of his good
works to men's imitation ', with which words, half
a century later, the inimitable Fuller concludes a short
sketch of his life. I like to think that, perhaps, one
of these very rebels, noting the studious and inquisitive
nature of Harvey, had put into the lad's hand the little
tractate, De libris propriis, from which to glean a know-
ledge of the life and works of their great benefactor.

The contemplation of such a career as that of Caius
could not but inspire any young man with enthusiasm.
No one in the profession in England had before
that time reached a position which can be called
European. An enthusiastic student and the friend of
all the great scholars of the day ; a learned commentator
on the works of the Fathers ; the first English student
of clinical medicine ; a successful teacher and practi-
tioner ; a keen naturalist ; a liberal patron of learning
and letters ; a tender and sympathetic friend — ^Johannes
Caius is one of the great figures in our history. Nor
need I, before this audience, dwell on his devotion to
our interests, except to say that the memory of no
Fellow on our roll should be more precious to us.
Four years hence, on October 6, will occur the quater-
centenary of his birth. As well in love as in gratitude,
we could celebrate it in no more appropriate manner,


HARVEY 305

and in none that would touch his spirit more closely,
than by the issue of a fine edition of his principal works
(including the manuscript annals of the College). For
the preparation of this there are those among us well
fitted, not less by veneration for his memory than by
the possession of that critical scholarship which he
valued so highly.

When Harvey set out on the grand tour, Italy was
still the mater gloriosa studiorumf to which one hundred
years earlier, so tradition says, Linacre on leaving had
erected an altar. The glamour of the ideals of the Re-
naissance had faded somewhat since the days when
John Free, an Oxford man, had made the ancient learn-
ing his own ; and had so far bettered the instruction of
his masters that he was welcomed as a teacher in
Padua, Ferrara, and Florence. In a measure, too, the
national glory had departed, dimmed amid the strife and
warfare which had cost the old republics their indepen-
dence. Many years earlier Fracastorius, one of our
medical poets, had sung of her decadence :

To what estate, O wretched Italy,
Has civil strife reduc'd and moulder'd Thee!
Where now are all thy ancient elories hurl'd ?
Where is thy boasted Empire of the world ?
What nook m Thee from oarbarous Raee is freed
And has not seen thy captive children bleed ? *

And matters had not improved but had grown worse.
In the sixteenth century Italian influence had sunk
deeply into the social, professional, and commercial life
of England, more deeply, indeed, than we appreciate ; ^
and it was not until a generation or two later that the
candlesticks were removed from the Cisalpine towns to

> Syphilis. Englished by N. Tate, 1686.

^ Italian Rettaissance in England^ Einstein. Macmillan, 190a.


UbLbM


3o6 BIOGRAPHICAL ESSAYS

Montpellier, Paris, and Leyden. In 1598 a well-to-do
young Englishman who wished to study medicine
thoroughly went to North Italy, and most naturally to
Padua — ' fair Padua, nursery of the arts ' — whose close
affiliations with us may be gathered from the fact that
she has given us more Presidents than any university
save Oxford and Cambridge. In the years that had
passed since Vesalius had retired in disgust, the fame
of its anatomical school had been well maintained
by Fallopius, Columbus, and Fabricius, worthy succes-
sors of the great master. Of each may be said what
Douglas says of the first named : * In docendo maxime
niethodicusy in medendo /elicissimus, in secando expertissi-
miis' While the story of Harvey's student life can
never be told as we could wish, we know enough to
enable us to understand the influences which moulded
his career. In Fabricius he found a man to make his
life-model. To the enthusiastic teacher and investigator
were added those other qualities so attractive to the
youthful mind, generous sympathies and a keen sense
of the wider responsibihties of his position, as shown in
building, at his own expense, a new anatomical theatre
for the University. Wide as was the range of his
master's studies, embracing not anatomy only, but
medicine and surgery also, the contributions by which
he is most distinguished are upon subjects in which
Har\^ey himself subsequently made an undying reputa-
tion. The activity of his literary Ufe did not begin until
he had been teaching nearly forty years, and it is
a fact of the highest significance that, during the very
period of Harvey's stay in Padua, Fabricius must have
been deep in the study of embryology and of the
anatomy of the vascular system. His great work on
generation was the model on which Harvey based his


HARVEY 307

own, in some ways more accurate, studies— studies in
which, as my colleague Professor Brooks of the Johns
Hopkins University has pointed out, he anticipated
Wolf and von Baer.

The work of Fabricius which really concerns us here
is the de Venarum Ostiolis. Others before him had
seen and described the valves of the veins, Carolus (one
of the great Stephani), Sylvius, and Paul Sarpi. But
an abler hand now attacked the subject, and has left us
a monograph which for completeness and for accuracy
and beauty of illustration has scarcely its equal in
anatomical literature. If we compare Plate VH, for ex-
ample, with the illustrations of the same structures in
the Bidloo or the Cowper Anatomy^ published nearly
one hundred years later, we can appreciate the ad-
vantages which Harvey must have enjoyed in working
with such a master. Indeed, it is not too far-fetched to
imagine him, scalpel in hand, making some of the very
dissections from which these wonderful drawings were
taken. But here comes the mystery. How Fabricius,
a man who did such work — how a teacher of such wide
learning and such remarkable powers of observation,
could have been so blinded as to overlook the truth
which was tumbling out, so to speak, at his feet, is to
us incomprehensible. But his eyes were sealed, and to
him, as to his greater predecessors in the chair, clear
vision was denied. The dead hand of the great Per-
gamite lay heavy on all thought, and Descartes had not
yet changed the beginning of philosophy from wonder
to doubt. Not without a feeling of pity do we read of
the hopeless struggle of these great men to escape from
slavish submission to authority. But it is not for us in
these light days to gauge the depth of the sacred venera-
tion with which they regarded the Fathers. Their

X 2


3o8 BIOGRAPHICAL ESSAYS

mental attitude is expressed in a well-known poem of
Browning's :

those divine men of old time
Have reached, thou sayest well, each at one point,
The outside verge that rounds our faculty,
And where they reached who can do more than reach?

Willing to correct observations or to extend anatomy
by careful dissection, it was too much to expect from
them either a new interpretation of the old facts or
a knowledge of the method by which those facts could
be correctly interpreted.

The ingenious explanation which Fabricius gave of
the use of the valves of the veins— to serve as dams or
checks to the flow of the blood, so that it would not
irrigate too rapidly and overflow the peripheral vessels
to the deprivation of the upper parts of the limbs —
shows how the old physiology dominated the most
distinguished teacher of the time in the most distin-
guished school in Europe. This may have been the
very suggestion to his pupil of the more excellent way.
Was it while listening to this ingenious explanation of
his master that, in a moment of abstraction— dimly
dreaming, perhaps, of an English home far away and
long forsaken— there came to Harvey a heaven-sent
moment, a sudden inspiration, a passing doubt nursed
for long in silence, which ultimately grew into the great
truth of i6i6?^

The works of Vesalius, of Fallopius, and of Fabricius
effected a revolution in anatomy, but there was not at
the close of the sixteenth century a new physiology.
Though he had lost an anatomical throne, Galen ruled
absolutely in all conceptions of the functions of the

* Boyle states that in the only conversation he ever had with
him, Harvey acknowledged that a study of the valves of the veins
had led him to the discovery of the circulation of the blood.


HARVEY 309

body, and in no department more serenely than in that
relating to the heart, the blood and its movements.
Upon his views I need not dwell further than to remind
you that he regarded the liver as the source of the
blood, of which there were two kinds, the one in the
veins, the other in the arteries, both kinds in ceaseless
ebb and flow, the only communication between these
closed systems being through pores in the ventricular
septum. He knew the lesser circulation, but thought
it only for the nutrition of the lungs. The heart was
a lamp furnished with oil by the blood and with
air by the lungs. Practically until the middle of
the seventeenth century Galen's physiology ruled the
schools, and yet for years the profession had been in
latent possession of a knowledge of the circulation.
Indeed, a good case has been made out for Hippocrates,
in whose works occur some remarkably suggestive sen-
tences.^ In the sixteenth century the lesser circulation
was described with admirable fullness by Servetus and
by Columbus, and both Sarpi and Caesalpinus had
Hippocratic glimmerings of the greater circulation.
These men, with others doubtless, were in latent posses-
sion of the truth. But every one of them saw darkly
through Galenian glasses, and theirs was the hard but
the common lot never to reach such conscious posses-
sion as everywhere to make men acquiesce. One must
have the disinterestedness of the dead to deal with
a problem about which controversy has raged, and in
which national issues have been allowed to blur the
brightness of an image which would be clear as day to
those with eyes to see. Nor would I refer to a matter
long since settled by those best competent to judge, had
not the well-known work of Luciani, the distinguished

* Willis's HqmHy^ pp. ai-a.


3TO BIOGRAPHICAL ESSAYS

Professor of Physiology at Rome, appeared recently in
German dress\ and spread broadcast views to which,
with a chauvinism unworthy of their history, our Italian
brethren still adhere. It has been well said 'that he
alone discovers who proves', and in the matter of the
circulation of the blood this was reserved for the
pupil of Fabricius. Skipping many arduous years, we
next meet him as Lumleian Lecturer to the College.


Ill

The really notable years in the annals of medicine
are not very numerous. We have a calendar filled with
glorious names, but among the saints of science, if we
know an era it is as much as can be expected — perhaps
because such men are less identified with achievements
than representative of the times in which they lived.
With many of our greatest names we cannot associate
any fixed dates. The Greeks who made Hippocrates
possible are associated by tradition with some theory,
or a small point in anatomy, or merely with the place
of their birth ; and the * floruit ' cannot always be
fixed with accuracy.

Hippocrates himself, Erasistratus, Galen, and Araetius
have no days in our calendar. We keep no festival in
their honour, as the churches honour St. Jerome and
St. Chrysostom. It is not until after the Renaissance
that certain years (aunt mirabiies) stand out in bold
relief as connected with memorable discoveries, or with
the publication of revolutionary works. Nevertheless,
only a few in each century; even the sixteenth, so rich
in discoveries, has not more than five or six such years,
and not one of them is connected with work done in

* Edited by Professor Verworn.


HARVEY 311

this country. In the seventeenth century it is hard to
name four made memorable by the announcement of
great discoveries or the publication of famous works ;
in the eighteenth century there are barely three; while
in the century just completed, though it is replete with
extraordinary discoveries, one is hard pressed to name
half a dozen years which flash into memory as made ever
memorable by great achievements. Of the three most
important, anaesthesia, sanitation, and antiseptic surgery,
only the first can be dated (1846) ; and that for its practical
application. For the other two discoveries, who will
settle upon the year in which the greatest advance
was made, or one which could be selected for an anni-
versary in our calendar ?

There is one dies mtrabilis in the history of the
College— in the history, indeed, of the medical profes-
sion of this country, and the circumstances which made
it memorable are well known to us. At ten o'clock on
a bright spring morning, April 17, 1616, an unusually
large company was attracted to the New Anatomical
Theatre of the Physicians' College, Amen Street. The
second Lumleian Lecture of the annual course, given
that year by a new man, had drawn a larger gathering
than usual, due in part to the brilliancy of the demon-
stration on the previous day, but also it may be because
rumours had spread abroad about strange views to be
propounded by the lecturer. I do not know if at the
College the same stringent rules as to compulsory
attendance prevailed as at the Barber Surgeons' Hall.
Doubtless not,^ but the President, and Censors, and
Fellows would be there in due array ; and with the help

* Mr. William Fleming, the College Bedell, calls my attention
to the Statutes of that period. Under penalty of a fine all Fellows
and candidates were commanded to attend for at least five years.


312 BIOGRAPHICAL ESSAYS

of the picture of ' The Anatomy Lecture by Bannister ',
which is in the Hunterian collection, Glasgow, and
a photograph of which Dr. Payne has recently put in
our library, we can bring to mind this memorable
occasion. We see the 'Anatomy*, one of the six an-
nually handed over to the College, on the table, the
prosector standing by the skeleton near at hand, and
very probably on the wall the very Tabulae of dissection
of the arteries, veins, and nerves that hang above us
to-day. But the centre of attention is the lecturer —
a small dark man, wand in hand, with black piercing
eyes, a quick vivacious manner, and with an ease and
grace in demonstrating, which bespeaks the mastery of
a subject studied for twenty years with a devotion that
we can describe as Hunterian. A Fellow of nine years'
standing, there was still the salt of youth in William
Harvey when, not we may suppose without some
trepidation, he faced his auditors on this second day —
a not uncritical audience, including many men well
versed in the knowledge of the time and many who had
heard all the best lecturers of Europe.

The President, Henry Atkins, after whose name in
our Register stands the mysterious word ' Corb *, had
already had his full share of official lectures, less
burdensome three hundred years ago than now. Let
us hope the lecture of the previous day had whetted
his somewhat jaded appetite. The Censors of the year
formed an interesting group : John Argent, a Cambridge
man, a 'great prop of the college', and often President,
of whom but little seems known ; Richard Palmer, also of
Cambridge, and remembered now only for his connexion
with Prince Henry's typhoid fever, as Dr. Norman
Moore has told us; Mathew Gwinne of Oxford, first
Professor of Physic at Gresham College and a play*


HARVEY 313

Wright of some note in his day ; and Theodore Goulston
of Merton College, one of our great benefactors, and
for 267 years past and gone purveyor-in-chief of reputa-
tion to the younger Fellows of the College. Mayerne
would be there, not yet a Fellow, but happy in his escape
from the Paris Faculty; still dusty with conflict, he
would scent the battle afar in the revolutionary state-
ments which he heard. Meverell, fresh from incorpora-
tion at Cambridge, also not yet a Fellow; Moundeford,
often President, whose little book Vir Bonus sets forth
his life. Paddy, a noteworthy benefactor, a keen stu-
dent, still gratefully remembered at Oxford, would have
strolled in with his old friend Gwinne ; Baldwin Harney
the elder, also a benefactor, would be there, and perhaps
he had brought his more interesting son, then preparing
to enter Leyden, whose memory should be ever green
among us. Let us hope Thomas Winston, probably an
old fellow student at Padua, and later appointed Pro-
fessor of Physic at Gresham College, was absent, as we
can then be more charitable towards the sins of omission
in his work on Anatomy^ published after his death,
which, so far as I can read, contrary to the statement of
Munk (Roll of the CoUeg^, contains no word of the new
doctrine. As an old Paduan, and fresh from its ana-
tomical school, the younger Craige would not be absent.
Fludd, the Rosicrucian, of course, was present; attracted,
perhaps, by rumours 6f anti-Galenian doctrines which
had served to keep him out of the Collie ; nor would
he be likely to be absent at the festival of one whom he
calls his ' physicall and theosophicall patron '. And
certainly on such an occasion that able Aberdonian,
Alexander Reid, would be there, whose li^iumypa^
had just appeared,^ with an extraordinarily full account

' Copy in Bodleian Library.


314 BIOGRAPHICAL ESSAYS

of the vascular system. Reid was a good anatomist,
one of our most distinguished Medico - Chirurgical
Fellows, and a liberal benefactor. If, as has been
stated, he was not a convert on account of his age, it
was on account of his youth, for the Harveian doctrine,
if in meagre form, is to be found in the later editions
(5th) of his Manual, But we would miss Lodge, the
poet, * cried up to the last for physic,* as he had recently
started for the Continent. And we may be sure that
Harvey's old fellow students at Padua — Fortescue, Fox,
Willoughby, Mounsell, and Darcy — would honour their
friend and colleague with their presence ; and Edward
Lister, also a fellow Paduan, the first of his name in
a family which has given three members to our pro-
fession — two distinguished and one immortal.^ It
was not a large gathering, as the Fellows, members,
licentiates, and candidates numbered only about forty ;
but as the lecture was a great event in the community,
there would be present many interested and intelligent
laymen, of the type of Digby, and Ashmole, and Pepys —
the * curious *, as they were called, for whom throughout
the seventeenth century the anatomy lecture equalled
the play in attraction. As it was delivered in Latin,
only interspersed here and there with English words
and illustrations, there were probably more who heard
than who comprehended, as Sir Thomas Browne in-
dicated to his son Edward when he lectured at
Chirurgeons* Hall.

It is a fortunate and perhaps a unique circumstance
in bibliography that the manuscript of this course of
lectures should have been preserved, and that we

^ I followed Munk*s Roll^ but Lord Lister tells me that he does
not know of a relationship. I am sorry, as Martin Lister deserves

the honour.


HARVEY 315

should be able to follow the demonstration step by
step— a long and formidable procedure, as the whole
anatomy of the thoracic organs was discussed. I dare say
there was a prolonged break between the morning and
the afternoon lecture ' for a fine dinner *, such as Pepys
described, when, on February 27, 1663, he went with
Harvey's pupil, Scarborough, to Chirurgeons' Hall and
was used with * extraordinary great respect '. Towards
the close, after discussing, in novel and modem terms,
the structure and action of the heart, Harvey summed
up in a few sentences the conclusion of the matter.
They stand as follows in the Praelectiones (published
by the College in 1886):

W. H. constat per fabricam cordis sanguinem
per pulmones in Aortam perpetuo
transferri, as by two clacks of a
water bellows to rayse water
constat per ligaturam transitum sanguinis
ab artenis ad venas
unde perpetuum sanguinis motum
in circulo fieri pulsu cordis.

Probably few in the lecture hall appreciated the full
meaning of these words, which to some must have
seemed a blot on the whole performance ; while others,
perhaps, all with the feelings of the fishes after St.
Anthony's well-known sermon.

Much delighted were they.
But prefeired the old way,

returned to their homes wondering what he would say
on the morrow when the ' divine banquet of the brain '
was to be spread before them.

One thing was certain -the lecture gave evidence of
a skilled anatomist of remarkably wide experience and
well versed in literature from Aristotle to Fabricius.
While Harvey could agree with John Hunter, who


3t6 biographical ESSAYS

states in a manuscript introductory lecture in the College
library — * I deliver nothing I have not seen and observed
myself — he could not add with him, * I am not a reader
of books/ Nearly one hundred references to some
twenty authors occur in the manuscript of the thorax,
or, as he calls it, the ' parlour * lecture.

It is a great pity that we have no contemporary
account of the impression on such men as Mayeme or
Reid of the new doctrines, for which we have the
author's statement that they were taught annually and
elaborated. So far as I know there is no reference to
show that the lectures had any immediate influence in
the profession, or indeed that the subject-matter ever
got beyond the circle of the college. We are not with-
out a first-hand account by the author of his reception :

* These views as usual pleased some more, others less ;
some chid and calumniated me, and laid it to me as
a crime that I had dared to depart from the precepts
and opinions of all anatomists ; others desired further
explanation of the novelties.*

It is difficult for us to realize the mental attitude of
the men who listened year by year as the turn of the

* Parlour Lecture ' came. Their opinions, no less firmly
held than is our positive knowledge, did not get much
beyond : ' The great dictator Hippocrates puts us in
mind of it, Galen has a thousand times inculcated the
same, the prince of the Arabian tribe, Avicen, has set
his seal unto it/ This expresses their mental state, and
such a heresy as a general circulation could scarcely be
appreciated ; and in a man of such good parts as Harvey
would in pity be condoned, just as we overlook the
mild intellectual vagaries of our friends.

Bootless to ask, impossible to answer, is the question
why Harvey delayed for twelve years the publication


HARVEY 317

of his views. He seems to have belonged to that
interesting type of man, not uncommon in every age,
who knows too much to write. It is not a little remark-
able that this reticence of learning has been a strong
mental feature in some of the greatest of discoverers.
Perhaps it was the motive of Copernicus, who so
dreaded the prejudices of mankind that for thirty years
he is said to have detained in his closet the Treatise of
Revolutions. From what Harvey says, very much the
same reasons restrained the publication of his work*
To the lesser circulation, with the authority of Galen
and Columbus to support it, men 'will give their
adhesion', but the general circulation 'is of so novel
and unheard-of character that I not only fear injury to
myself from the envy of a few, but I tremble lest I have
mankind at large for my enemies, so much doth wont
and custom, that has become as another nature, and
doctrine once sown and that hath struck deep root and
rested from antiquity, influence all men '. He felt, as he
says to Riolan, that it was in some sort criminal to call
in question doctrines that had descended through a
long succession of ages and carried the authority of the
ancients; but he appealed unto Nature that bowed to
no antiquity and was of still higher authority than the
ancients. Men have been for years in conscious posses-
sion of some of the greatest of truths before venturing
to publish them. Napier spent twenty years developing
the theory of Logarithms ; and Bacon kept the Novum
Organum by him for twelve years, and year by year
touched it up— indeed, Rowley states that he saw
twelve copies. Two other famous discoveries by
Englishmen have the same curious history— the two
which can alone be said to be greater than the demon*
stration of the circulation of the blood. Zachariah


3i8 BIOGRAPHICAL ESSAYS

Wood speaks of Harvey as the surmiser of the little
world, to distinguish him from another Englishman
who first went about the greater world. But a greater
than both — Isaac Newton— had grasped the secret of
a cosmic circulation, and brooded in silence over the
motion of the spheres for more than twenty years before
publishing the Principia. Between the writing of the
rough sketch in 1842 and the appearance of the Origin
of Species seventeen years elapsed ; and from the date
of the journal notes, 1836, in which we have the first
intimation of Darwin's theory, more than twenty years.
In Harvey's case this intellectual reticence, this hesita-
tion * to quit the peaceful haven ', as he says, has cost us
dear. Only a happy accident gave us the De Genera-
Hone, and the College can never be too grateful to Sir
George Ent for that Christmas visit, 1650, so graphically
described, to which we owe one of the masterpieces
of English medicine. How many seventeenth-century
treatises we could have spared to have had the Practice
of Medicine conformable to his Thesis of the Circulation of
the Blood \ How instructive his prospective Medical
Observations would have been we can gather from the
remarkable series of cases scattered through the manu-
script notes and his published writings. His ' treatise
apart* on Eventilation or Respiration; the Medical
Anatomy^ or Anatomy in its Application to Medicine^
as he says, * I also intend putting to press ' ; the work
* from observations in my possession * on Organs of
Motion in Animals— all of these, with the work on
Generation in Insects, and others mentioned by Dr.
Merrett,* then library keeper (1667), were probably
dispersed when those sons of Belial ransacked his
chambers at Whitehall.

' Munk, Roll of Ike College, vol. i, p. 132.


HARVEY 319

' Still the die is cast, and my trust is in the love of
truth and the candour that inheres in cultivated minds/
With these words he consoles himself, knowing from
experience that the publication of even a portion of the
work would raise a tempest. Zachariah Wood in the
preface to the English edition, 1673, expresses what many
of his contemporaries must have felt, ' Truly a bold man
indeed, O disturber of the quiet of physicians ! O se-
ditious citizen of the Physical Commonwealth ! who first
of all durst oppose an opinion conformed for so many
ages by the consent of all/ De Bach of Amsterdam
describes the dilemma in which teachers found them-
selves : * This new thing I did examine, which the first
entrance did seem very easily to be refuted, but being
weighed in a just balance, and having added to reason
my own ey-sight it was found inexpugnable, nay (the
very prick of truth enforcing) to be embraced with both
arms. What should I doe? Must Hippocrates be left,
Galen slighted ? No, if we follow the truth senced
with reason and our sense, we are still Hippocrates his,
we are still Galen's ' (English edition, 1653).

The history of the next thirty years illustrates the
truth of Locke's dictum in the struggle for acceptance.
Not the least interesting part of the story, it should be
told at greater length and with more detail than it has
yet received— more than I am able to give it That the
repeated demonstrations, aided by the strong personal
influence of the man, brought the College, as a body, to
the new views is witnessed rather by the esteem and
aflection the Fellows bore to Harvey than by any direct
evidence. The appearance of the book in 1626 made
no great stir; it was not a literary sensation— a not
uncommon fate of epoch-making works, the authors of
which are too far ahead of their contemporaries to be


320 BIOGRAPHICAL ESSAYS

appreciated. The same thing happened to Newton's
Principia ; as Sir William Petty remarks, ' I have not
met with one man that put aa extraordinary value on
the book/

Among Englishmen, Primrose alone, brought up
among the strictest sect of the Galenists, and at the
time not a Fellow— wrote a criticism from the old.
standpoint (1632), and remained unconvinced twelve
years later, as his controversy with Regius shows;
And only one special treatise in favour of the circula-
tion was written in England — that of Sir George Ent,
a pupil and friend of Harvey, who wrote (1641) specially
against Parisanus, a Venetian, a foeman quite unworthy
of his quill. In the universities the new doctrine
rapidly gained acceptance— in Cambridge through the
influence of Glisson, while in part to Harvey's work.
and influence may be attributed that only too brief but
golden renaissance of science at Oxford. A little inci*
dent mentioned in the autobiographical notes of the
celebrated Wallis shows how the subject was taken up
quite early in the universities : * And I took into it the
speculative part of physick and anatomy as parts of
natural philosophy, and, as Dr. Glisson has since told
me, I was the first of his sons who (in a public disputa-
tion) maintained the circulation of the blood, which was
then a new doctrine, though I had no design of
practising physick.' This was in the early * thirties \
But the older views were very hard to displace, and
as late as 1651 we find such intelligent members of
the ' invisible college ' as Boyle and Petty carrying
out experiments together in Ireland to satisfy them-
selves as to the truth of the circulation of the blood.

It took much longer for the new views to reach th«
textbooks of the day. From no work of the period


HARVEY 321

does one get a better idea of the current anatomical and
physiological teaching in London than from Crooke's
Body of Man (1615 and 1631). Collected out of Vesalius,
Plantinus, Platerius, Laurentius, Valverda, Bauchinus,
and others, it is an epitome of their opinions, with the
comments of the professor who read the anatomy lecture
to the Company of the Barber Surgeons. In the preface
to the first edition he speaks of the contentment and
profit he had received from Dr. Davies's Lumleian
Lectures at the College of Physicians. There is no indi-
cation in the second edition that he had benefited by the
instruction of Dr. Davies's successor. Galen is followed
implicitly, with here and there minor deviations. The
views of Columbus on the lesser circulation are men-
tioned only to be dismissed as superfluous and erro-
neous. The Gresham Professor of the day, Dr. Winston,
makes no mention of the new doctrine in his Anatomy
Lectures which were published after his death, 1651, and
are of special interest as showing that at so late a date
a work could be issued with the Galenian physiology
unchanged. In Alexander Reid's M annate the popular
textbook of the day, the Harveian views are given in
part in the fifth edition, in which, as he says in the
preface, * the book of the breast ' is altogether new — ^an
item of no little interest, since he was a man advanced
in years, and, as he says, ' the hourglass hasteneth, and
but a few sands remain unrun.' Highmore, the distin-
guished Dorsetshire anatomist, and a pupil of Harvey,
in his well-known Anatomy published in 1651, gives the
ablest exposition of his master's views that had appeared
in any systematic work of the period, and he urges his
readers to study the de Motu Cordis as ' fontem ipsum '
from which to get clearer knowledge. He quotes an
appropriate motto for the period — laudamus veteres : sed


OSLH


314 BIOGRAPHICAL ESSAYS

of the vascular system. Raid was a good anatomist,
one of our most distinguished Medico - Chirurgical
Fellows, and a liberal benefactor. If, as has been
stated, he was not a convert on account of his age, it
was on account of his youth, for the Harveian doctrine,
if in meagre form, is to be found in the later editions
(5th) of his Manual. But we would miss Lodge, the
poet, * cried up to the last for physic,* as he had recently
started for the Continent. And we may be sure that
Harvey's old fellow students at Padua — Fortescue, Fox,
Willoughby, Mounsell, and Darcy— would honour their
friend and colleague with their presence ; and Edward
Lister, also a fellow Paduan, the first of his name in
a family which has given three members to our pro-
fession — two distinguished and one immortal.^ It
was not a large gathering, as the Fellows, members,
licentiates, and candidates numbered only about forty ;
but as the lecture was a great event in the community,
there would be present many interested and intelligent
laymen, of the type of Digby, and Ashmole, and Pepys —
the * curious*, as they were called, for whom throughout
the seventeenth century the anatomy lecture equalled
the play in attraction. As it was delivered in Latin,
only interspersed here and there with English words
and illustrations, there were probably more who heard
than who comprehended, as Sir Thomas Browne in-
dicated to his son Edward when he lectured at
Chirurgeons* Hall.

It is a fortunate and perhaps a unique circumstance
in bibliography that the manuscript of this course of
lectures should have been preserved, and that we

* I followed Munk's 7?o//, but Lord Lister tells me that he docs
not know of a relationship. I am sorry, as Martin Lister deserves
the honour.


HARVEY 315

should be able to follow the demonstration step by
step— a long and formidable procedure, as the whole
anatomy of the thoracic organs was discussed. I dare say
there was a prolonged break between the morning and
the afternoon lecture ' for a fine dinner *, such as Pepys
described, when, on February 27, 1663, he went with
Harvey's pupil, Scarborough, to Chirurgeons* Hall and
was used with ' extraordinary great respect '. Towards
the close, after discussing, in novel and modern terms,
the structure and action of the heart, Harvey summed
up in a few sentences the conclusion of the matter.
They stand as follows in the Praelectiones (published
by the College in 1886):

W. H. constat per fabricam cordis sanguinem
per pulmones in Aortam perpetuo
transferri, as by two clacks of a
water bellows to rayse water
constat per ligaturam transitum sanguinis
ab artenis ad venas
unde perpetuum sanguinis motum
in circulo fieri pulsu cordis.

Probably few in the lecture hall appreciated the full
meaning of these words, which to some must have
seemed a blot on the whole performance ; while others,
perhaps, all with the feelings of the fishes after St
Anthony's well-known sermon.

Much delighted were they,
But preferred the old way,

returned to their homes wondering what he would say
on the morrow when the ' divine banquet of the brain '
was to be spread before them.

One thing was certain -the lecture gave evidence of
a skilled anatomist of remarkably wide experience and
well versed in literature from Aristotle to Fabricius.
While Harvey could agree with John Hunter, who


3t6 biographical ESSAYS

states in a manuscript introductory lecture in the College
library — * I deliver nothing I have not seen and observed
myself — he could not add with him, * I am not a reader
of books/ Nearly one hundred references to some
twenty authors occur in the manuscript of the thorax,
or, as he calls it, the * parlour ' lecture.

It is a great pity that we have no contemporary
account of the impression on such men as Mayeme or
Reid of the new doctrines, for which we have the
author's statement that they were taught annually and
elaborated. So far as I know there is no reference to
show that the lectures had any immediate influence in
the profession, or indeed that the subject-matter ever
got beyond the circle of the college. We are not with-
out a first-hand account by the author of his reception :

* These views as usual pleased some more, others less ;
some chid and calumniated me, and laid it to me as
a crime that I had dared to depart from the precepts
and opinions of all anatomists ; others desired further
explanation of the novelties.*

It is difficult for us to realize the mental attitude of
the men who listened year by year as the turn of the

* Parlour Lecture * came. Their opinions, no less firmly
held than is our positive knowledge, did not get much
bej^ond : * The great dictator Hippocrates puts us in
mind of it, Galen has a thousand times inculcated the
same, the prince of the Arabian tribe, Avicen, has set
his seal unto it.* This expresses their mental state, and
such a heresy as a general circulation could scarcely be
appreciated ; and in a man of such good parts as Harvey
would in pity be condoned, just as we overlook the
mild intellectual vagaries of our friends.

Bootless to ask, impossible to answer, is the question
why Harvey delayed for twelve years the publication


HARVEY 317

of his views. He seems to have belonged to that
interesting type of man, not uncommon in every age,
who knows too much to write. It is not a little remark-
able that this reticence of learning has been a strong
mental feature in some of the greatest of discoverers.
Perhaps it was the motive of Copernicus, who so
dreaded the prejudices of mankind that for thirty years
he is said to have detained in his closet the Treatise of
Revolutions. From what Harvey says, very much the
same reasons restrained the publication of his work.
To the lesser circulation, with the authority of Galen
and Columbus to support it, men 'will give their
adhesion ', but the general circulation * is of so novel
and unheard-of character that I not only fear injury to
myself from the envy of a few, but I tremble lest I have
mankind at large for my enemies, so much doth wont
and custom, that has become as another nature, and
doctrine once sown and that hath struck deep root and
rested from antiquity, influence all men '. He felt, as he
says to Riolan, that it was in some sort criminal to call
in question doctrines that had descended through a
long succession of ages and carried the authority of the
ancients; but he appealed unto Nature that bowed to
no antiquity and was of still higher authority than the
ancients. Men have been for years in conscious posses-
sion of some of the greatest of truths before venturing
to publish them. Napier spent twenty years developing
the theory of Logarithms ; and Bacon kept the Novum
Orgamtm by him for twelve years, and year by year
touched it up— indeed, Rowley states that he saw
twelve copies. Two other famous discoveries by
Englishmen have the same curious history— the two
which can alone be said to be greater than the demon*
stration of the circulation of the blood. Zachariah


3i8 BIOGRAPHICAL ESSAYS

Wood speaks of Harvey as the surmiser of the little
world, to distinguish him from another Englishman
who first went about the greater world. But a greater
than both — Isaac Newton— had grasped the secret of
a cosmic circulation, and brooded in silence over the
motion of the spheres for more than twenty years before
publishing the Principia. Between the writing of the
rough sketch in 1842 and the appearance of the Origin
of Species seventeen years elapsed ; and from the date
of the journal notes, 1836, in which we have the first
intimation of Darwin's theory, more than twenty years.
In Harvey's case this intellectual reticence, this hesita-
tion *to quit the peaceful haven', as he says, has cost us
dear. Only a happy accident gave us the De Genera-
Hone, and the College can never be too grateful to Sir
George Ent for that Christmas visit, 1650, so graphically
described, to which we owe one of the masterpieces
of English medicine. How many seventeenth-century
treatises we could have spared to have had the Practiu
of Medicine conformable to his Thesis of the Circulation of
the Blood\ How instructive his prospective Mediccd
Observations would have been we can gather from the
remarkable series of cases scattered through the manu-
script notes and his published writings. His * treatise
apart' on Eventilation or Respiration] the Medical
Anatomy^ or Anatomy in its Application to Medicine^
as he says, * I also intend putting to press ' ; the work
* from observations in my possession ' on Organs of
Motion in Animals— all of these, with the work on
Generation in Insects, and others mentioned by Dr.
Merrett,' then library keeper (1667), were probably
dispersed when those sons of Belial ransacked his
chambers at Whitehall.

* Munk, Roll of the College, vol. i, p. 13a.


HARVEY 319

' Still the die is cast, and my trust is in the love of
truth and the candour that inheres in cultivated minds/
With these words he consoles himself, knowing from
experience that the publication of even a portion of the
work would raise a tempest. Zachariah Wood in the
preface to the English edition, 1673, expresses what many
of his contemporaries must have felt, * Truly a bold man
indeed, O disturber of the quiet of physicians ! O se-
ditious citizen of the Physical Commonwealth ! who first
of all durst oppose an opinion conformed for so many
ages by the consent of all.' De Bach of Amsterdam
describes the dilemma in which teachers found them-
selves : ' This new thing I did examine, which the first
entrance did seem very easily to be refuted, but being
weighed in a just balance, and having added to reason
my own ey-sight it was found inexpugnable, nay (the
very prick of truth enforcing) to be embraced with both
arms. What should I doe? Must Hippocrates be left,
Galen slighted ? No, if we follow the truth senced
with reason and our sense, we are still Hippocrates his,
we are still Galen's ' (English edition, 1653).

The history of the next thirty years illustrates the
truth of Locke's dictum in the struggle for acceptance.
Not the least interesting part of the story, it should be
told at greater length and with more detail than it has
yet received— more than I am able to give it. That the
repeated demonstrations, aided by the strong personal
influence of the man, brought the College, as a body, to
the new views is witnessed rather by the esteem and
affection the Fellows bore to Harvey than by any direct
evidence. The appearance of the book in 1628 made
no great stir; it was not a literary sensation— a not
uncommon fate of epoch-making works, the authors of
which are too far ahead of their contemporaries to be


320 BIOGRAPHICAL ESSAYS

appreciated. The same thing happened to Newton's
Principia ; as Sir William Petty remarks, ^ I have not
met with one man that put an extraordinary value on
the book/

Among Enghshmen, Primrose alone, brought up
among the strictest sect of the Galenists, and at the
time not a Fellow— wrote a criticism from the old
standpoint (1632), and remained unconvinced twelve
years later, as his controversy with Regius shows;
And only one special treatise in favour of the circula-
tion was written in England — that of Sir George Ent,
a pupil and friend of Harvey, who wrote (1641) specially
against Parisanus, a Venetian, a foeman quite unworthy
of his quill. In the universities the new doctrine
rapidly gained acceptance — in Cambridge through the
influence of Glisson, while in part to Harvey's work
and influence may be attributed that only too brief but
golden renaissance of science at Oxford. A little inci*
dent mentioned in the autobiographical notes of the
celebrated Wallis shows how the subject was taken up
quite early in the universities : ^ And I took into it the
speculative part of physick and anatomy as parts of
natural philosophy, and, as Dr. Glisson has since told
me, I was the first of his sons who (in a public disputa*
tion) maintained the circulation of the blood, which was
then a new doctrine, though I had no design of
practising physick.' This was in the early * thirties'.
But the older views were very hard to displace, and
as late as 1651 we find such intelligent members of
the ' invisible college ' as Boyle and Petty carrying
out experiments together in Ireland to satisfy them-
selves as to the truth of the circulation of the blood.

It took much longer for the new views to reach the
textbooks of the day. From no work of the period


HARVEY 321

does one get a better idea of the current anatomical and
physiological teaching in London than from Crooke's
Body of Man (1615 ^^^ 1631)- Collected out of Vesalius,
Plantinus, Platerius, Laurentius, Valverda, Bauchinus,
and others, it is an epitome of their opinions, with the
comments of the professor who read the anatomy lecture
to the Company of the Barber Surgeons. In the preface
to the first edition he speaks of the contentment and
profit he had received from Dr. Davies's Lumleian
Lectures at the College of Physicians. There is no indi-
cation in the second edition that he had benefited by the
instruction of Dr. Davies's successor. Galen is followed
implicitly, with here and there minor deviations. The
views of Columbus on the lesser circulation are men-
tioned only to be dismissed as superfluous and erro-
neous. The Gresham Professor of the day, Dr. Winston,
makes no mention of the new doctrine in his Anatomy
Lectures which were published after his death, 1651, and
are of special interest as showing that at so late a date
a work could be issued with the Galenian physiology
unchanged. In Alexander Reid's Manual^ the popular
textbook of the day, the Harveian views are given in
part in the fifth edition, in which, as he says in the
preface, ' the book of the breast ' is altogether new — an
item of no little interest, since he was a man advanced
in years, and, as he says, ' the hourglass hasteneth, and
but a few sands remain unrun.' Highmore, the distin-
guished Dorsetshire anatomist, and a pupil of Harvey,
in his well-known Anatomy published in 1651, gives the
ablest exposition of his master's views that had appeared
in any systematic work of the period, and he ui^s his
readers to study the de Motu Cordis as ' fontem ipsum '
from which to get clearer knowledge. He quotes an
appropriate motto for the period — laudamus veteres : sed


OSLER


322 BIOGRAPHICAL ESSAYS

nosfris iitimtir annis. But even so late as 1671 the old
views were maintained in the English edition of Riolan.
And yet the knowledge of Harvey's views must have
spread widely, not only in the profession, but in that
large outside circle of distinguished men who felt the
new spirit of science working in their veins. From
converse or from the Lumleian lectures, which no doubt
he often attended, Kenelm Digby must have had the
information about Harvey's views on generation, as at
the date of the issue of his Two Treatises^ i644> ^^y
had not been published anywhere. Though he knew
well the motion of the blood as expounded by Harvey,
and had, in making his great antidote, studied the action
of the viper's heart, Digby, like Descartes, could not
emancipate himself from the old views, as shown in the
following passage : * But if you desire to follow the
blood all along every steppe, in its progresse from the
hart round about the body, till it returne back againe to
its center. Doctor Harvey, who most acutely teacheth
this doctrine, must be your guide. He will show you
how it issueth from the hart by the arteries ; from whence
it goeth on warming the flesh, untill it arrive to some of
the extremities of the body : and by then it is grown so
coole (by long absence from the fountaine of its heate ;
and by evaporating its owne stocke of spirits, without any
new supply) that it hath need of being warmed anew ;
it findeth itself returned backe againe to the hart, and
is there heated againe, which returne is made by the
veines, as its going forwardes, is performed only by the
arteries.'

Sir William Temple well expresses the attitude of
mind of the intellectual Philistine of the time, who
looked for immediate results. Speaking of the work of
Har\'ey and of Copernicus he says : * Whether either of


HARVEY 323

these be modern discoveries or derived from old founda-
tions is disputed; nay, it is so too, whether they are
true or no ; for though reason may seem to favour them
more than the contrary opinions, yet sense can hardly
allow them, and to satisfy mankind both these must con-
cur. But if they are true, yet these two great discoveries
have made no change in the conclusions of Astronomy
nor in the practice of Physic, and so have been but little
use to the world, though, perhaps, of much honour to
the authors/^ It is pleasant to notice that our old friend,
Sir Thomas Browne, with his love of paradox, declared
that he preferred the circulation of the blood to the
discovery of America.

Of the reception of Harvey's views in Holland and
Germany there is nothing to add to the admirable
account given by Willis. The early and strenuous
advocacy of Descartes must have influenced the Dutch
physicians ; but in this, as in so many other things, the
infection of his early years proved too powerful, and he
could not get rid of the * ancient spirits '. Of the dis-
covery of the circulation he says * it is ' la plus belle et la
plus utile que Ton pOt faire en m^decine \ ' Tout k fait
contraire au sein {sic) touchant le mouvement du coeur/
which he held to be due to an ebullition of the spirits —
a sort of ferment {espece de levain) existing in it. The
theory was more actively discussed in Holland than else-
where; and the writings of Drake, Walaeus, Regius,
Plempius, Sylvius, de Bach, Conringius, T. Bartholin!
(the Dane), and others, threshed out the whole question
very thoroughly, and their views, with those of Hoffman,
Slegel, and others, are referred to by Willis and given
in greater detail by Riolan.^

^ PVorkSj 1814, vol. iii, p. 293. * Cousins's edition, vol. ix, p. 159.
' OpMscula A$9aiamica. London, 1649.

Y 2


324 BIOGRAPHICAL ESSAYS

In the oft-quoted statement that Harvey, 'conquering
envy, hath established a new doctrine in his lifetime/
Hobbes was right so far as England and Holland are
concerned. But it was far otherwise in France, where
he met with a bitter and protracted hostility. The
Medical School of the University of Paris, at the time
one of the best organized and most important in Europe,
declined to accept the circulation of the blood during
his lifetime and for some years after his death. The
history of the period is pictured for us in vivid colours
in thsit joumal intime which Gui Patin kept up with his
friends, Spohn and Falconet of Lyons and the Belins
{pere et fils). With all his faults, particularly his scan-
dalous lack of charity, one cannot but feel the keenest
sympathy with this dear old man. Devoted to his
saints, Hippocrates and Galen, Femel and Duret, and
to his teachers, Pietre and Riolan, to him the circulation
of the blood was never more than an ingenious paradox.
To such a lover of books and of good literature every-
thing can be forgiven, and in his letters we follow with
deepest interest his vigorous campaign against his dear
enemies, the Cuisiniers arabesques^ who had enslaved
people and physicians alike, the haemophobes, the
chemists, the astrologers, and the stibiate, or as he calls
it, the Stygiate group. To him the Koran was less
dangerous than the works of Paracelsus, the appearance
of the new Geneva edition of which he deeply deplores.
Reverence for Galen and friendship with Riolan, rather
than any deep interest in the question, inspired his
opposition. To him the new doctrine was ridiculous,
and it was he who called the partisans of it cirmlakHrs
in allusion to the Latin word circulator, meaning char*
latan. In 1652 he writes to Spohn that the question is
still open whether the blood passes through the septum


HARVEY 325

of the heart or through the lungs. In 1659 he promises
to send him a work of Vinean against the circulation.^
More extraordinary still is the fact that as late as 1670,
twelve years after Harvey's death, the thesis of one
Cordelle, a bachelor of medicine, publicly discussed the
circulation of the blood, and Gui Patin, who presided,
decided in the negative. The fiction of an ingenious
narrator, le doux songe of Harvey, are the terms in
which he speaks of it. The whole passage is worth
quoting as possibly the last public denouncement of what
seemed a rank heresy to the old Galenists : ' Supposer
que le sang se meut toujours circulairement, que de la
veine cave ascendante il tombe dans Toreillette droite du
coeur, que de 1^ il aille traverser toute la substance du
poumon pour retomber de \k dans Toreillette gauche en
passant par la veine pulmonaire, et qu'enfin de \k il soit
projete dans Taorte et toutes les artferes qui le feront
passer dans les veines et dans le coeur, lui faisant par
ce moyen suivre un circuit, voili le doux songe de
Harvey, la fiction d'un narrateur ing^nieux, mais nuUe-
ment prouvee par T^vidence. La circulation du sang,
son transport circulaire par les vaisseaux, c'est Tenfante*
ment d'un esprit oisif, un vrai nuage qu'embrassent les
Ixions pour procr6er les Centaurs et les monstres.' *

As I said, we can forgive a great deal to the man who
has left us such a picture of seventeenth-century life,
drawn, all unconsciously, with a master hand ; and
through the mists of prejudice and hate we can recognize
the good sense which had the courage to protest against
the forfanterie arabesqtie et bezoardesque in much of the
therapeutics of the day.


* Lettres^ vol i, p. 324, Edition 16$^.

* Gut Patin, par F61lx Larriea. Paris, 1889.


326 BIOGRAPHICAL ESSAYS

Though a professor in the Paris Faculty and a
brilliant lecturer, Patin at that time did not occupy such
a distinguished position, nor was his opposition of such
importance as that of Riolan — 'John Riolan, the Son,
the most experienced Physician in the Universitie of
Paris, the Prince of Dissection of Bodies, and the
King's professor, and Dean of Anatomic and of the
knowledge of simples, chief physician to the queen-
mother of Louis XI I r — as he is quaintly, but very truly,
described by Harvey.^ Brought up by his father to
regard Hippocrates and Galen as the sources of all
wisdom, the intensity of his zeal increased with his
years until at last * to see the physic of Galen kept in
good repair * became the passion of his life. The deep
pity of it all is that such mental blindness should have
stricken a really great man, for he was a brilliant ana-
tomist and teacher, the author of the best anatomical
textbook of its day, a man of affairs, profoundly versed
in literature, a successful practitioner, and for years the
head of the profession in France.

The opposition of such a man was serious, and natu-
rally had a profound influence. Not content with the
comparatively brief statement in the Encheiridion, 1648,
Riolan published in England the following year his
OpHscula Anatomica nova^ one very large section of
which is taken up with the problem of circulation. It
was this probably as much as a present of the Enchei-
ridion that induced Har\^ey to break his long silence
and to reply. After a report of a discussion upon a
thesis in 1645 and a statement of objections, a most
interesting discussion follows of the literature, in which
the opinions of various writers are examined, particu-

* Title-page of English edition of the Letter.


HARVEY 327

larly those of Cartesius, Conringius, Walaeus, and
Plempius.

It is quite possible that the second Disquisition of
Harvey to Riolan, published with the first in duodecimo
form at Cambridge in 1649, was brought out by Riolan's
latter publication, though it is not directly referred to.
Little did Harvey appreciate that his old friend was both
blind and deaf— incapable of seeing obvious facts. It was
not a question of being conversant with anatomy or of
having had experience, on both of which points Harvey
dwells at length. Riolan knew his anatomy as well as,
or better than, any man of his generation. It was not
that he would not — but that he could not— see the truth
which was staring him in the face. As Reynaud^
mentions, an occasional thesis (Fagon, 1663; Mattot,
1665) supporting the circulation did slip through the
Faculty : but the official recognition in France did not
come until 1673, when Louis XIV founded a special
Chair of Anatomy at the Jardin des Plantes for the
propagation of the new discoveries.

The satire of Moli^re and the Arret burlesque of
Boileau completed the discomfiture of the ' anticircula-
teurs', but it had taken nearly half a century to overcome
the opposition of those who saw in the new doctrines
the complete destruction of the ancient system of
medicine.


IV

Even when full grown in the conscious stage Truth
may remain sterile without influence or progress on any
aspects of human activity. One of the most remarkable

^ Les Medecins au temps de Motiire, 1863.


328 BIOGRAPHICAL ESSAYS

of phenomena in mental biography is the failure of the
Greeks to succeed after giving the world such a glorious
start. They had every essential for permanent success :
scientific imagination, keen powers of observation ; and
if in the days of Hippocrates the mathematical method
of interrogating Nature prevailed rather than the experi-
mental, Galen carried the latter to a degree of perfection
never again reached until the time of Harvey. Only
when placed in its true position in relation to Greek
religion and philosophy, as has been done so skilfully
by Gomperz,^ do we realize the immensity of the debt
we owe to those *our young light-hearted masters'.
And Gomperz makes clear the nature of the debt of
Greek thought to the practical sense of the ph3rsicians.
But alas ! upon the fires they kindled were poured the
dust and ashes of contending philosophies, and neither
the men of the Alexandrian school nor the brilliant
labours of the most encyclopaedic mind that has ever
been given to medicine sufficed to replenish them.
Fortunately, here and there amid the embers of the
Middle Ages glowed the coals from which we have
lighted the fires of modern progress. The special dis-
tinction which divides modern from ancient science is
its fruitful application to human needs — not that this
was unknown to the Greeks; but the practical re-
cognition of the laws of life and matter has in the
past century remade the world. In making knowledge
effective we have succeeded where our masters failed.
But this last and final stage, always of slow and painful

' The three volumes of his Greek Thinkers, now in English dress,
should be studied by every young man who wishes to get at the
foundations of philosophy. The picturesque style of Pn»fessor
Gomperz and his strong sympathy with science add greatly to the
interest of the work.


HARVEY 329

consummation, is evolved directly from truths which
cannot be translated into terms intelligible to ordinary
minds. Newton's great work influenced neither the
morals nor the manners of his age, nor was there any
immediate tangible benefit that could be explained to
the edification or appreciation of the ' ordinary man ' of
his day ; yet it set forward at a bound the human mind,
as did such truths as were proclaimed by Copernicus,
by Kepler, by Darwin, and others. In a less conspicuous
manner Harvey's triumph was on the same high plane.
There was nothing in it which could be converted
immediately into practical benefit, nothing that even
the Sydenhams of his day could take hold of and use.
Not so much really in the demonstration of the fact of
the circulation as in the demonstration of the method—
the Inventum mirabile sought for by Descartes, the
Novum Organum of Bacon— lies the true merit of
Harvey's work. While Bacon was thinking, Harvey
was acting; and before Descartes had left his happy
school at La Fl^che Harvey was using la nouveiie
methode ; and it is in this way that the de Motu Cordis
marks the break of the modem spirit with the old
traditions. No longer were men to rest content with
careful observation and with accurate description ; no
longer were men to be content with finely spun theories
and dreams, which ' serve as a common subterfuge of
ignorance ' ; but here for the first time a great physio*
logical problem was approached from the experimental
side by a man with a modem scientific mind, who could
weigh evidence and not go beyond it, and who had the
sense to let the conclusions emerge naturally but firmly
from the observations. To the age of the hearer, in
which men had heard, and heard only, had succeeded
the age of the eye, in which men had seen and had been


330 BIOGRAPHICAL ESSAYS

content only to see. But at last came the age of the
hand — the thinking, devising, planning hand ; the hand
as an instrument of the mind, now reintroduced into
the world in a modest little monograph of seventy-two
pages, from which we may date the beginning of
experimental medicine.

No great discovery in science is ever without a corre-
sponding influence on medical thought, not always
evident at first, and apt to be characterized by the
usual vagaries associated with human effort Very
marked in each generation has been the change wrought
in the conceptions of disease and in its treatment by
epoch-making discoveries as to the functions of the
body. We ourselves are deeply involved to-day in
toxins and antitoxins, in opsonins, tulases, and extracts
as a direct result of the researches in bacteriology and
in internal secretion. There were sanguine souls in
Harvey's day, who lamented with Floyer that the dis-
covery had not brought great and general innovations
into the whole practice of physic. But had the old
Lichfield physician lived he would have seen the rise
of a school based directly upon the studies of Harvey
and Sanctorius, the brilliant reasonings of Descartes
and the works of Bellini and Borelli. The mechanical
school rose in its pride on solid foundations which ap-
pealed to practical men with singular force. Very soon
that ' beatific epitome of creation ', man, was ' marked
out like a spot of earth or a piece of timber with rules
and compasses', and the medical terminology of the
day became unintelligible to the older practitioners who
could make nothing of the * wheels and pulley, wedges,
levers, screws, cords, canals and cisterns, sieves and
strainers', and they cracked their jokes on 'angles,
cylinders, celerity, percussion, resistance, and such-like


HARVEY 331

terms which they said had no more to do with physic
or the human body than a carpenter has in making
Venice treacle or curing a fever*. Once accepted, men
had a feeling that so important a discovery must change
all the usual conceptions of disease. As has been said
before, Harvey tells that he had in preparation a Practice
of Medicine conformable to his Thesis of the Circulation of
the Blood, and it soon became customary to put in the
title-pages of worics some reference to the new doctrine.
Even Riolan's Opuscula Anatomia makes an allusion to
it. Walaeus, a keen defender of Harvey, published in
1660 a little compendium of practice ad circtUationem
sanguinis adornata, but there is nothing in it to suggest
any radical change in treatment. Rolfinck's Disserta-
tiones Anatomicae, 1650, embracing the older and more
recent views in medicine are ad circulationem accommo-
datae, and even as late as 1690 the well-known anatomy
of Dionis was suivant la circulation. With the loss of
his work on the Practice of Medicine it is impossible to
say whether Harvey's own practice was modified in any
way. To part from the spirits and humours must have
left his attitude of mind very sceptical, and that his
' therapeutic way ' was not admired (as Aubrey tells us)
speaks for a change which may have set many against
him. More important than any influence upon treat-
ment was the irresistible change in the conceptions of
disease caused by destruction of the doctrine of spirits
and humours, which had prevailed from the days of
Hippocrates. While Harvey, as he sa3rs, had in places
to use the language of physiology, that is, the language
of the day, he makes it very clear, particularly in the
second letter to Riolan, that he will have none of the
old doctrine to which the de Motu Cordis dealt the death*
blow.


332 BIOGRAPHICAL ESSAYS

But the moving hand reminds your orator, Mr. Presi-
dent, of a bounden duty laid upon him by our great
Dictator to commemorate on this occasion by name all
of our benefactors; to urge others to follow their
example ; to exhort the Fellows and Members to study
out the secrets of Nature by way of experiment ; and,
lastly, for the honour of the profession, to continue in
love and affection among ourselves. No greater tribute
to Harvey exists than in these simple sentences in which
he established this lectureship, breathing as they do the
very spirit of the man, and revealing to us his heart of
hearts. Doubtless, no one more than he rejoices that
our benefactors have now become so numerous as to
nullify the first injunction ; and the best one can do is to
give a general expression of our thanks, and to mention,
here and there, as I have done, the more notable among
them. But this is not enough. While we are praising
famous men, honoured in their day and still the glory of
this College, the touching words of the son of Sirach
remind us : * Some there be that have no memory, who
are perished as though they had never been, and are
become as though they had never been bom.* Such
renown as they had, time has blotted out ; and on them
the iniquity of oblivion has blindly scattered her poppy.
A few are embalmed in the biographical dictionaries;
a few are dragged to light every year at Sotheby's, or
the memory is stirred to reminiscence as one takes down
an old volume from our shelves. But for the immense
majority on the long roll of our Fellows^ names I
names ! names !— nothing more ; a catalogue as dry and
meaningless as that of the ships, or as the genealogy of
David in the Book of Chronicles. Even the dignity of
the Presidential chair does not suffice to float a man down
the few centuries that have passed since the foundation


HARVEY 333

of the College. Who was Richard Forster ? Who was
Henry Atkins ? Perhaps two or three among us could
tell at once. And yet by these men the continuity and
organic life of the College has been carried on, and in
maintaining its honour, and furthering its welfare, each
one in his day was a benefactor, whose memory it is our
duty, as well as our pleasure, to recall. Much of the
nobility of the profession depends upon this great cloud
of witnesses, who pass into the silent land— pass, and
leave no sign, becoming as though they had never been
bom. And it was the pathos of this fate, not less pathetic
because common to all but a few, that wrung from the
poet that sadly true comparison of the race of man to
the race of leaves I

The story of Harvey's life, and a knowledge of the
method of his work, should be the best stimulus to the
Fellows and Members to carry out the second and third
of his commands ; and the final one, to continue in love
and affection among ourselves, should not be difficult to
realize. Sorely tried as he must have been, and naturally
testy, only once in his writings, so far as I have read,
does the old Adam break out. With his temperament,
and with such provocation, this is an unexampled record,
and one can appreciate how much was resisted in those
days when tongue and pen were free. Over and over
again he must have restrained himself as he did in the
controversy with Riolan, of whom, for the sake of old
friendship, he could not find it in his heart to say
anything severe. To-day his commands are easier to
follow, when the deepened courtesies of life have made
us all more tolerant of those small weaknesses^ inherent
in our nature, which give diversity to character without
necessarily marring it. To no man does the right spirit
in these matters come by nature, and I would urge upon


334 BIOGRAPHICAL ESSAYS

our younger Fellows and Members, weighing well these
winged words, to emulate our great exemplar, whose
work shed such lustre upon British Medicine, and
whom we honour in this College not less for the scien-
tific method which he inculcated than for the admirable
virtues of his character.


OXFORD

PRINTED AT THE CLARENDON PRESS

■Y HORACE HART, If JL

PUNTER TO THE UNIVERSITY
