Democracy and the Organization of Political Parties, Vol. 1: England (M. Ostrogorski (Frederick Clarke, trans.), 1902)
==========================================================
The first scientific study of party machines; the caucus system dissected. Public domain. Internet Archive full text (democracyandorg01clargoog).

Google 


This  is  a  digital  copy  of  a  book  that  was  preserved  for  generations  on  library  shelves  before  it  was  carefully  scanned  by  Google  as  part  of  a  project 

to  make  the  world's  books  discoverable  online. 

It  has  survived  long  enough  for  the  copyright  to  expire  and  the  book  to  enter  the  public  domain.  A  public  domain  book  is  one  that  was  never  subject 

to  copyright  or  whose  legal  copyright  term  has  expired.  Whether  a  book  is  in  the  public  domain  may  vary  country  to  country.  Public  domain  books 

are  our  gateways  to  the  past,  representing  a  wealth  of  history,  culture  and  knowledge  that's  often  difficult  to  discover. 

Marks,  notations  and  other  maiginalia  present  in  the  original  volume  will  appear  in  this  file  -  a  reminder  of  this  book's  long  journey  from  the 

publisher  to  a  library  and  finally  to  you. 

Usage  guidelines 

Google  is  proud  to  partner  with  libraries  to  digitize  public  domain  materials  and  make  them  widely  accessible.  Public  domain  books  belong  to  the 
public  and  we  are  merely  their  custodians.  Nevertheless,  this  work  is  expensive,  so  in  order  to  keep  providing  tliis  resource,  we  liave  taken  steps  to 
prevent  abuse  by  commercial  parties,  including  placing  technical  restrictions  on  automated  querying. 
We  also  ask  that  you: 

+  Make  non-commercial  use  of  the  files  We  designed  Google  Book  Search  for  use  by  individuals,  and  we  request  that  you  use  these  files  for 
personal,  non-commercial  purposes. 

+  Refrain  fivm  automated  querying  Do  not  send  automated  queries  of  any  sort  to  Google's  system:  If  you  are  conducting  research  on  machine 
translation,  optical  character  recognition  or  other  areas  where  access  to  a  large  amount  of  text  is  helpful,  please  contact  us.  We  encourage  the 
use  of  public  domain  materials  for  these  purposes  and  may  be  able  to  help. 

+  Maintain  attributionTht  GoogXt  "watermark"  you  see  on  each  file  is  essential  for  in  forming  people  about  this  project  and  helping  them  find 
additional  materials  through  Google  Book  Search.  Please  do  not  remove  it. 

+  Keep  it  legal  Whatever  your  use,  remember  that  you  are  responsible  for  ensuring  that  what  you  are  doing  is  legal.  Do  not  assume  that  just 
because  we  believe  a  book  is  in  the  public  domain  for  users  in  the  United  States,  that  the  work  is  also  in  the  public  domain  for  users  in  other 
countries.  Whether  a  book  is  still  in  copyright  varies  from  country  to  country,  and  we  can't  offer  guidance  on  whether  any  specific  use  of 
any  specific  book  is  allowed.  Please  do  not  assume  that  a  book's  appearance  in  Google  Book  Search  means  it  can  be  used  in  any  manner 
anywhere  in  the  world.  Copyright  infringement  liabili^  can  be  quite  severe. 

About  Google  Book  Search 

Google's  mission  is  to  organize  the  world's  information  and  to  make  it  universally  accessible  and  useful.   Google  Book  Search  helps  readers 
discover  the  world's  books  while  helping  authors  and  publishers  reach  new  audiences.  You  can  search  through  the  full  text  of  this  book  on  the  web 

at|http: //books  .google  .com/I 


LIBRARY 

UNIVERSITY  OF 
CALIFORNIA 
SANTA  CRUZ 


I 


.CD,  Google 


7F 

OSS' 


D,  Google 


.CD,  Google 


.CD,  Google 


.CD,  Google 


DEMOCRACY 
ORGANIZATION  OF  POLITICAL  PARTIES 


D,g,l,i.aD,  Google 


•Tlg?/^"- 


D,g,l,i.aD,  Google 


DEMOCRACY 


OKGANIZATION   OF   POLITICAL   PAKTIES 

]^  OSTROGORSKIj 

vs.   TWO  VOLUMES 
VOL.  I 

TRANSLATED    FROM   THE   FRENCH 
FREDERICK   CLARKE,  M.A. 

TOBIUBLT  TATLOBIAK  SCHOLAR  tH  THK  DNlVBBsnT  OP  OXtOKD 


WITH  A  PREFACE  BT 
THE  RIGHT   HON.   JAMES  BRYCE,  M.P. 


NriD  gork 
THE  MACMILLAN   COMPANY 

LONDON:  HA.CUILLAN  &  CO.,  Vro. 
1902 


.coy  Google 


L,' 

,- 

'■U'^ 

3^f 
Os' 


Bt  the  HACUILLAN  OOUPAITT. 


'I        i 


*Ac«hin,»i».- — - 


Digitizecoy  Google 


Kn  ffs  JFatiire 


DigiiiLOD,  Google 


.CD,  Google 


CONTENTS   OF  THE  FIRST  VOLUME 


PSEFACE    Bf   JaHBS  BKTCB,  M.P. 
AUTHOb's   PSBFiCB      . 


The  problem  of  GoTemment  raised  by  the  advent  of  demo- 
cracy in  (ace  ol  the  WTerance  of  the  old  social  ties  and  the 
supremacy  accorded  to  numbers  in  the  State.  Attempt  at 
solution  offered  by  extra-constitutional  organization  of  the 
electoral  masses.  Scientific  and  practical  importance  of 
the  study  of  this  attempt.  Why  England  Is  the  best  start- 
ing-point for  that  study.    General  plan  of  the  work     . 

FIRST   PART 
FIRST  CHAPTER 

The  Old  IjMrrT 

L  A  single  ruling  class.  The  sources  of  its  power.  The  landed 
property  of  the  squires,  the  influence  which  tbey  derive  from 
it,  and  the  public  authority  which  they  exercise.  United  by 
the  feelings  summed  up  in  the  idea  of  ffentleman,  they  alone 
Constitul«  society.  Although  exclusive,  it  is  not  closed  to 
outsiders.  Subject  to  this  limitation  it  holds  undivided 
sway,  and  meets  with  no  opposition  in  the  middle  class, 
sunk  in  a  dull  life  and  unconscious  of  its  strength ;  nor 
among  the  lawyers,  confined  to  the  exercise  of  their  pro- 
fession, which  is  kept  alive  bj  aristocratic  clients ;  nor  In 
local  self-government,  which  is  devoid  of  vitfility  j  nor 
among  the  clergy,  who,  by  their  origin,  aspirations  and 
tastes  consUtute  only  a  branch  of  the  ruling  class 
XL  The  structure  of  the  body  politic  exhibits  the  same  uitiLy  under 
another  aspect.  The  whole  hierarchy  of  institutions  and  func- 
tions is  built  up  in  sucb  manner  that  local  administration,  as 
well  as  the  central  government  and  even  the  government  of  the 
Church,  are  exercised  by  the  same  men.  The  spirit  and  the 
mode  of  working  of  the  various  public  institutions  emphasize 
the  character  of  unity  which  runs  through  the  political  and 
social  sphere.  Monarchy,  Parliament,  supreme  government, 
local  administration,  and  the  Church,  in  the  variety  of  their 


.coy  Google 


CONTENTS  OF  THE  FIRST  VOLUME 


preTogAtJTes  and  powers,  each  and  all  repreaeat  the  one  and 
indlviaible  State  blended  with  societ;  into  a  single  eziatence. 

III.  The  lot  of  the  individual  in  this  Stale  and  Bociaty.  He  m  in- 
vaiiablj  only  as  anonymous  traction  of  the  whole,  a  liumble 
aervant  of  the  community,  whether  it  is  a  question  of  civic 
boDOUTS  OT  duties,  of  the  exercise  of  private  oi  public  rights. 
What  has  become  of  the  "natural  liberties"  of  primitive 
hmnanit;  saved  from  the  delnge  in  the  ark  of  England. 
How  the  human  personality  is  kept  down  in  the  regular 
manifestations  of  the  individual's  existence  and  crushed  in 
others.  The  individual  Is  still  less  able  to  "be  himself" 
in  social  life  than  in  the  legal  sphere 

TV.  Nevertheless  the  institutions  afford  the  individoal  opportunities 
for  displaying  his  powers,  and  they  develop  a  social  current 
by  means  of  the  j^ivic  co-operation  which  they  imply  or  en- 
force. Freed  from  legal  restraint,  this  current  permeates 
Uie  Bi^lish  community,  and  to  a  ceriiun  extent  succeeds, 
even  without  a  complete  moral  unity  of  the  various  elements 
of  English  society,  in  making  them  rally  round  leadera  and 
admit,  as  a  coosequeace,  their  authority  in  the  StAla.  Cul- 
minating, as  they  both  do,  in  the  leadership,  society  and  the 

Stat«  are  once  more  reunited  in  it 

T.  How  this  situation  facilitates  -the  worliing  of  parliamentary 
government.  The  leadership  of  the  aristocracy  is  empha- 
dzed  by  the  fact  that  it  disposes,  in  one  way  or  another, 
of  the  great  majority  of  the  seats  in  the  House  of  Com- 
mons, and  that  the  members  belong  to  the  same  society 
of  gentlemen,  so  that  social  discipline  ensures  parliamentary 
discipline.  The  dlviuon  into  parties  only  countenances  it. 
Outside  influences  being  still  too  feeble  to  upset  them, 
parties  remain  homogeneous  and  steadfast,  to  the  greater 
stability  of  the  govenment 


SECOND  CHAPTER 
Briak-up  of  tbb  Old  Socibtt  .... 


I.  Wbat  the  solidity  of  the  old  political  and  social  r^me  really 
was ;  narrowness  of  the  fabric  and  want  of  air ;  the  masses 
left  outside,  and  man  in  general  repressed.  The  signal  for 
emaucipacion  given  by  the  religious  revival.  Wesley's  appeal 
to  the  individual  conscience,  taken  up  by  tlie  Evangelicals 
and  carried  by  them  into  practical  life,  introduces  "man" 
on  the  political  and  social  scene  of  England  .  ... 
II.  Religious  emotion  is  followed  by  the  sentimentalism  of  dilet- 
tantes, which  helps  to  raise  the  moral  ideal  and  man  who 
is  the  possessor  of  it 


.CD,  Google 


CONTENTS   OF  THE   FIRST  VOLUME 


HL  Ilie  criterion  ol  duty  transported  from  private  into  public  life 
leads  the  moralizing  pbilosopliers  to  maintain  thai  the  duty 
ot  the  State  liea  in  the  direction  of  ntility  and  of  the  happi- 
ness of  its  membera,  of  which  they  are  ilie  best  judges 
(Paley,  Priestley),  This  conclusion  supported  by  the  new 
science  of  political  economy.  Adam  Smith  demands  free 
plaj  for  the  individual's  activity.  The  foundation  of  the 
American  Republic  and  the  l>eclaration  of  the  Rights  of 
Man  extend  and  exalt  the  idea  of  the  independence  of  the 
individual.  Paine  and  Godwin  comment  on  it  and  popu- 
larize it.  It  escapes  and  survives  the  violent  reaction  against 
the  French  Revolution  and  its  principles,  which  are  quietly 
taken  up  by  the  ulililarian  philosophy  of  which  Paley  and 
Priestley  had  laid  the  foundations 

IV.  How  Bentham  gave  the  finishing  touches  to  the  work.    After 

having  relentlessly  striven  to  decompose  the  existing  legal 
order  of  things  with  the  criterion  of  utility,  he  usea  thiscrite- 
rion  for  the  construction  of  a  new  system.  Rejecting  the  moral 
conscience  of  man  and  natural  right  as  the  foundations  of  mor- 
als and  politics,  he  substitutes  for  them  the  principle  of  utility 
appraised  scientifically  by  a  calculation  of  consequences.  As 
egoism  identifies  itself  with  altruism  in  order  to  better  gratify 
its  desire  for  happiness,  society  founded  on  the  individual's 
own  interest  is  natural  and  solid.  The  intervention  of  the 
State  is  consequently  useless  and  even  dangerous,  except  for 
the  protection  of  the  rights  of  tbo  individual.  But  as  the 
rulers,  foilowingthe  natural  bias  towards  selfishness,  exercise 
pnblic  authority  only  in  their  own  interest,  which  Is  contrary 
to  the  general  interest,  this  authority  ought  to  be  taken  out 
of  the  hands  of  (A«  few  and  placed  in  those  of  (Ae  mnay,  in 
other  words,  to  realize  the  greatest  happiness  of  the  greatest 
number  universal  suffrage  must  be  introduced  into  the  State. 
How  this  synlheais,  far  from  being  experimenlsl  and  scien- 
tific, is  constructed  throughout  by  abstract  reasoning,  like 
that  of  the  French  ideologiste,  and  how  Bentham  was  led 
to  conclusions  identical  with  theirs  and  doomed  to  the  same 
impotence  ] 

V.  The  twofold  actJon  which  opened  the  way  tor  the  new  concep- 

tion of  the  supremacy  of  the  individual  superseding  the  com- 
munity. The  creation  of  a  new  stale  of  mind  favourable  to 
the  new  ideas ;  it  is  due  to  the  ruthless  criticism  of  the  ex. 
isting  order  of  things  pursued  by  Bentham  and  his  disciples, 
the  Philosophical  Radicals,  to  more  frequent  intercourse 
with  foreign  countries,  and  to  new  currents  in  literature  .  ! 
VI-  How  the  revolution  in  the  domain  of  ideas  is  reinforced  by  the 
effects  of  the  industrial  transformation.  Mechanical  inven- 
tions.   The  outbreak  and  triumph  of  the  spirit  of  enterprise 


.coy  Google 


CONTENTS  OF  THE   FIRST   VOLUME 


and  of  individual  effort.  The  middle  olaas  taken  out  of  its 
mediocrit;  denuuids  Ita  place  in  society,  and  aucccMtully 
aaeaults  the  dominant  position  of  the  arist4Mracy  in  the 
State.  Bow  the  numerous  legislative  reforms  of  the  years 
182S-1648,  which  abolish  tlie  political,  economical  and  social 
monopoly  of  the  old  ruling  clasn,  tngpther  with  the  Established 
Church,  sever  the  old  ties  and  shatter  the  ancient  founda- 
tions of  society 

Vn.  The  individual  reaps  the  benefit  of  the  change.  Endowed 
henceforth  with  a  conscience  of  his  own  and  with  acknow- 
ledged interests  and  rights,  he  completes  his  emancipation 
through  the  new  economical  conditions  and  material  pro- 
grees  in  general,  although,  on  the  other  hand,  these  same 
conditions  occasioni^ly  overwhelm  and  crush  him.  How- 
ever, freed  from  the  old  restrictions  and  left  to  himself  or 
relying  on  himself,  the  individual  Is  somewhat  isolated.  This 
result  is,  to  a  great  extent,  simply  the  inevitable  intermedi- 
ary term  In  the  proceas  of  emancipation,  which  begins  by 
untying  and  separating  the  repressed  individuals  ;  then,  iso- 
lated and  dissolved  Into  general  and  abstract  categories,  they 
tend  to  become  less  unlike  one  another ;  and  the  ground 
being  levelled  and  a  common  stand  provided,  they  obtain 
fresh  facilities  for  drawing  near  each  other  again  In  new, 
generalized,  social  relations.  How  this  pflychological  pro- 
cess of  abstraction  and  generalization  was  working  In  real 
life  on  the  individual  and  on  society,  by  changing  ideas  and 
roles  of  conduct  and  establishing  them  on  general  and  com- 
prehensive principles.  Resemblance  of  the  process  to  that 
of  the  ideologists.  Limitations  under  which  it  was  to  take 
effect  In  reality ' 

Vlll.  How  the  same  logical  process  of  decomposition  which  paved 
the  way  for  the  general  was  going  on  in  the  State.  Its  sepa- 
ration from  the  Church  and  society  makes  it  more  personal, 
but  deprives  it  of  some  of  its  cohesion  by  disconnecting  local 
self-government  from  parliamentary  government,  both  of 
them  being  taken  out  of  their  old  common  groove.  How  the 
process  of  disa^^gation  continues  in  the  second  Instance 
within  each  separately.  The  reforms  in  local  administr^ 
tion,  inspired  by  the  new  ideas  or  the  new  requirements, 
but  partial  and  without  system  or  comprehensive  plan, 
scatter  it  out  among  numerous  and  varied  authorities  and 
departments,  which  bring  in  offlcialism  and  bureaucratic 
centralization,  and  keep  back  the  representatives  of  society 
who,  especially  In  the  middle  class,  are  inclined  to  shirk  their 
public  duties.  Disraeli  denounces  the  "new  ruling  class 
which  does  not  rule."  In  consequence  of  the  final  collapse 
of  the  old  society,  in  1846,  the  old  motive  force  of  parlla- 


.coy  Google 


CONTENTS  OF  THE  FIBST  VOLUME 


mentary  ftovemment  1b  abated,  the  historic  dualism  of  par- 
ties la  shattered,  the  time -hoQOD red  bonds  of  discipline  are 
loosSDSd,  and  the  individual  asserts  his  independence  within 
the  nails  ot  Parliament  as  nell.  Unfounded  complaints  of 
political  TBterans.  Being  a  mere  reflection  of  society  which 
wu  going  through  the  crisis  of  the  generalization  of  social 
relations  between  man  and  man,  Parliament  could  not  sub- 
dst  on  the  old  political  virtue  of  personal  loyalty,  which  was 
at  the  bottom  of  party  government,  but  required  a  more 
comprehensive  guiding  principle  and  a  wider  sphere  of  action    GO 

THIRD  CHAFTEB 

ATTBMprs   AT    RsACTtOR 59 

L  The  alarm  aroused  at  the  new  direction  given  to  society  by 
iDdividualist  philosophy  and  the  industrial  transformation. 
AttempU  to  restore  the  old  unity.  The  Oxford  movement 
tries  to  bring  back  the  old  religious  unity  by  a  romantic 
return  to  primitive  faith,  to  the  Christianity  of  the  early  cen- 
turies restored  on  the  basis  of  tradition,  and  of  the  sovereign 
authority  of  the  Catholic  and  universal  Church.  How  the 
Oxford  leaders  fail  in  their  object,  forced  as  they  are,  both 
(or  the  propaganda  and  the  defence  of  their  doctrines,  to 
appeal  themselves  to  free  opinion  and  the  right  of  private 

judgment 6S 

II.  The  romantic  school  In  the  Chnrch  is  followed  by  the  romantic 
school  of  country  gentlemen  who  seek  to  restore  the  old  politi- 
cal creed  which  united  classes  and  individuals.  Disraeli  pro- 
poeee  to  recast  the  scattered  elements  of  the  nation  by  the 
power  of  sentiment,  and  not  by  that  of  reason,  by  rekindling 
the  attachment  to  the  Monarchy  and  the  Church,  and  reviv- 
ing social  sympathy  between  the  people  and  its  natural  lead- 
ers. The  Young  England  party  tries  the  experiment.  Its 
idyllic  proceedings  are  powerless  to  resuscitate  the  past,  and 

come  to  nothing 61 

HL  Carlyle's  denunciations  of  the  materialism  of  a  mechanical  age 
and  of  the  anarchy  of  laiBsez-faire  meet  with  more  success. 
He  opposes  to  them  the  sentiment  of  duty  of  which  you  have 
only  to  be  thoroughly  convinced,  and  calls  for  a  new  aristoc- 
racy, not  of  birth  but  of  the  heart ;  for  men  need  to  be 
guided  and  governed  by  their  superiors,  whether  they  like  it 
or  no.  In  spite  ot  the  delusive  doctrines  of  democracy  which 
ends  In  xtro,  and  is  made  up  only  of  the  shadows  of  things, 
of  Benthamite  formulas  barren  as  the  east  wind.  Why  this 
appeal  to  the  nerves  had  so  much  success  and  produced  so 
little  effect 63 


.coy  Google 


C0STENT8  OF  THE  FIBST  VOLUME 


IV,  The  Christian  Socialists  alone  come  fomard  with  a  positive 
solution.  They  endeaTOur  t*  cure  the  morbid  Individual- 
ism in  economic  life  by  co-operation  inspired  b;  a  Christian 
spirit,  by  the  Chrifltianity  of  Christ.  Tlie  nobie  and  coura- 
geous practical  eSons  of  Kiiigsley,  Maurice,  Ludlow,  and 
their  friends  meet  with  varying  success.  Eventually  theii 
dream  of  making  society  an  ori^aaic  whole  instead  of  a  col- 
lection of  warring  atoms,  by  means  of  universal  co-operation, 
is  condemned  by  their  own  experience.  They  had  over-esti- 
mated the  efficacy  of  co-operation  and  the  power  of  Chris- 
tianity. 
How  these  four  movements  of  reaction  against  individualism 
orlatitudinarianism,  difiering  in  their  origin  and  conception, 
but  resembling  each  other  in  spirit,  all  lead  to  the  same  nega- 
tive result,  owing  to  disregard  of  the  reality 

FOURTH  CHAPTER 

DannrriTB  Teidhpr  or  the  Nbw  RfcowB 

1.  The  uneaginesa  caused  by  the  sentimental  attacks  on  Individu- 
alism proceediTig  from  different  quarters  is  not  lasting.  The 
growing  prosperity  due  to  Free  Trade  confirms  the  belief 
In  the  superiority  of  a  system  resting  on  the  unfettered 
play  of  interests.  The  "  Manchester  School "  erects  it  into 
a  doctrine.    The  philosophy  of  Free  Trade.    Not  so  narrow 

as  It  is  now  the  fashion  to  believe 

II.  John  Stuart  Mill  definitively  proclaims  the  idea  of  the  sovereign 
individual  as  an  eternal  verity  reposing  on  reason.  He  de- 
rives It  from  Beiitham's  principle  of  utility,  from  the  desire 
of  pleasure,  estimated,  however,  not  only  by  quantity  but  by 
quality,  from  egoism  identifying  itself  with  altruism  through 
the  association  of  ideas.  It  is  utility  which  bids  society  grant 
the  Individual  liberty  in  the  widest  sense  of  the  term,  espe- 
cially in  the  economic  sphere,  and  which  makes  a  foregone 
conclnsion  of  the  form  of  government  which  must  be  demo- 
cratic and  representative.  These  conclusions  are  arrived  at, 
as  In  Bentham's  case,  by  atistract  reasoning  and  in  complete 
Bgraement  with  the  French  rationalists  of  the  eighteenth  cen- 
tury. The  modillcations  made  by  Mill  in  Bentham's  doctrine 
in  regard  to  morals,  politics,  and  especially  political  economy, 
do  not  alter  it  to  any  great  extent.  Mill  only  gives  it  a  loftier 
aspect  both  in  lis  essence  and  by  the  generous  tone  of  his  writ- 
ings. What  was  Mill's  great  achievement,  which  gave  htm 
control  over  opinion,  and  eapecially  of  the  rising  generation, 
and  enabled  him  to  enforce  radical  individualism  with  its 
destructive  and  levelling  tendencies  more  empliatically  than 


.coy  Google 


CONTENTS  OF  THE  FIBST  VOLUME 


m.  Tbe  doctrine  of  IndiviiluaUsm  in  possession  of  (he  Held.  It 
monopolizes  thought,  And  ia  free  from  counteracting  forces 
in  the  practical  itphere.  This  ie  due  to  the  want  of  pulitlcal 
education  in  the  country  (neglected  by  the  new  ruling  class 
even  more  than  elementary  education,  which  is  lamentably 
inadequate)  and  also  to  the  languid  condition  of  political  life 
in  tbe  concluding  years  of  the  Palmeraton  rfigime  under  a 
Huccessfnl  and  self-indolgent  middle  class    .... 

IV.  The  apathy  and  slaguatiou  in  politics  tend  rather  to  favour 
the  rise  of  ratlooalist  individualism  by  turniug  tbe  ^lite  of 
societyi  who  are  precluded  from  action,  toward  thought.  A 
rationalist  "Young  England."  The  spirit  of  criticism  in- 
vades even  theology.  Rationalist  enthusiasm  aupptementod 
by  fashionable  scepticism.  The  Press,  the  power  of  which 
increases  day  by  day  (abolition  of  the  stamp  duties),  becomes 
more  aggressive  and  helps  to  diffuse  "  contempt  for  the  old 
institutions  and  a  wish  to  ape  continental  democracy." 
Ideological  tone  of  political  talk.  The  Individualist  principle 
of  antonomy  finds  iU  way  into  colonial  and  foreign  politics. 
Individoaliat  radicalism  grows  enthusiastic  while  awaiting 
tbe  realization  of  its  hopes,  kept  in  abeyance  by  tbe  prestige 

of  Palmerston  

Y.  Tbe  action  after  Palmerston's  death  centres  in  the  question  of 
the  extension  of  the  suffrage.  The  enemy's  forces  weak- 
ened beforehand :  the  Whigs  bound  by  heedless  promises, . 
the  Tories  demoralized  by  their  reverses  in  politics,  and  by 
the  accession  of  the  middle  classes.  Having  no  deep  convic- 
tions, they  are  powerless  to  resist  the  zeal  of  the  reformers. 
The  political  parties  intervene  like  the  third  tliief  in  the 
table.  Mortally  wounded  since  1846,  living  from  hand  to 
mouth,  at  one  tjme  on  the  expedients  of  parliamentary 
intrigue,  at  another  on  Palmerston's  credit,  tbey  both, 
WhigB  first,  and  Tories  afterwards,  come  to  look  on  the 
extension  of  the  suffrage  as  a  means  of  retrieving  their  posi- 
tion. Their  race  for  power.  Nevertheless  Disraeli's  Reform 
Bill  takes  its  stand  on  "  national  customs  and  traditions." 
But  all  the  "  checks  and  balances  "  devised  by  him  give  way 
one  after  another,  and  "  abstract  principles  "  triumph  along 
the  whole  line,  with  the  result  that  electoral  rights  are  placed 
on  a  rational  basis  and  the  reign  of  democracy  formally 
inaugurated.  Their  victory  had  been  preparing  for  a  century 
as  in  France.  Ideas  in  their  victorious  course  make  no  dis- 
tinction between  peoples.  Tbe  idea  of  "man,"  introduced 
toto  England  by  moral  principles,  into  France  by  logic,  and 
aided  by  events,  pursues  tbe  same  rectilineal  course  on  both 
sides  of  the  Channel  and  runs  into  the  same  "impasse"  of 
tbe  "  geometric  theory  of  society  " ! 


.coy  Google 


CONTENTS  OF  THE  FIEST  VOLUME 


TI,  The  triumph  of  the  Benthamites  not  wiChont  alloy.  Grot« 
and  especially  Hill  preoccupied  with  the  dangers  of  en- 
tTUating  power  to  a  "numerical  majority  "  in  democracies. 
Proepecl  of  the  individual  being  crasbed  by  individualism. 
Hill  bellevefl  tbat  he  has  found  a  remedy  in  "  personal 
representatiou."  The  grandeur  of  the  object  and  (he 
inadequacy  of  the  means  presented  by  the  plan.  Uow  the 
original  Bin  of  BenthamiBm  left  Mill  no  alternative.  He  sub- 
mils  the  proposal  to  Parliament,  but  without  success.  Un- 
expected but  juBtiflable  support  from  Viscount  Craobome, 
who  is  preoccupied  with  the  fate  of  the  remnant  of  the  old 
society  in  danger  of  being  Hwamped  by  democracy.  Repre- 
sentation of  minorities  passed  by  the  House  of  Lords.  Their 
amendment  vtolenlly  opposed  in  the  House  of  Commons  as 
tending  to  curb  democracy  and  paralyze  party  government. 
Brigbtstandsupfor  the  "  ancient  ways  of  the  Constitution. " 
This  twofold  and  COnSicUng  anxiety,  on  the  one  hand,  for 
the  Individual  menaced  by  the  triumph  of  individualism,  by 
the  advent  of  numbers  to  power,  on  the  other  hand,  for  the 
prcflerratlon  by  force  of  numbers  of  the  old  system  of  party 
government  doomed  by  the  emancipating  process  of  indi- 
vidualism, foreshadows  a  stirring  drama  on  the  political 
stage  of  England. 
In  consequence  of  the  adoption  of  the  minority  clause  the 
electoral  masses  are  Invited  to  combine  for  resistance  on 
extra-constitaCional  lines,  this  combination  to  supply  at  the 
same  time  a  permanent  form  of  organization  for  the  demo- 

8EC0ND  PART 
FIRST  CHAPTER 

Thb  Orioirs  op  PoMTTCiL  Absociaiions i; 

L  Precedents  of  extra-constitutional  political  oiganization  in 
England  under  George  HI.  Public  opinion  rising  against 
the  corrupt  Parliament  tries  to  oi^nize  itself  by  means  of 
Societies  and  Committees  for  the  free  expression  of  its  griev- 
ances and  its  wiahes.  The  "  Society  for  upholding  the  Bill 
of  Rights"  formed  in  connection  with  Willtes'  case.  The 
'■  Corresponding  Committees  "  called  into  being  by  the  agita- 
tion for  economic  and  parliamentary  reforms.  The  appre- 
hensions which  they  excite.  The  American  precedent  for 
the  Committees  and  the  Boston  Caucus.  The  del^ates  of 
the  Committees  aasemble  in  London.  Their  petition  to  Par- 
Uament.  Great  debate  in  the  House  on  the  legality  of  the 
Assnciationa  and  of  the  meetings  of  the  delegatts.  Speeches 
of  Fox,  Burgoyne,  and  Dunning II 


.coy  Google 


COHTENTS  OF  THE   FIE8T  VOLUME 


II.  The  democntfc  Societies  for  demanding  nniTersal  suffrage  are 
due  to  the  impulse  given  by  the  Freoch  Revolution.  Their 
noisy  the&trical  proceedings.  The  moderate  "Society  of 
the  Friends  of  the  People."  The  political  associations  be- 
come discredited  and  call  forth  repressive  meaauree  on  the 
part  of  the  goverument.  The  secret  Societies.  Their  ezten- 
BiTedevelopmentafter  1S15.  "  Hampden  Clubs,"  "Spencean 
Clubs."    Fresh  measures  of  repression  against  the  Societies  124 

IIL  The  Reform  movement  is  taken  up  again  b;  the  "Politi- 
cal Unions,"  with  the  co-operation  of  the  middle  class. 
The  Political  Union  of  Birmingbam.  After  the  passing  of 
the  Reform  Act  the  middle  classes  leave  the  Unions,  but  the 
masses  who  had  not  been  admitted  to  the  franchise  renetv 
the  agitation  by  means  of  AsBOciations.  Chartism.  A  num- 
ber of  Societies  for  obtaining  Parliamentary  Reform  spring 
into  life  during  tbe  subsequent  period,  and  continue  to  exist 
until  the  ne\t  Reform  Act  of  1&6T  deprives  them  of  their 
object 128 

IT.  The  spirit  of  reaction  also  lays  its  hand  on  the  weapon  of 
association.  '■  Society  against  Republicans  and  Levellers." 
"Constitutional  Associations."  Associations  of  fanatical 
Protestants  led  by  Lord  George  Gordon.  Orange  Lodges. 
The  Catholic  Association  in  Ireland  ;  it  forces  the  English 
Government  to  grant  Catholic  emancipation  .  .  .  129 
T.  The  Antl-Com-Law  League  and  its  pereuative  agitation.  Un- 
like the  Catholic  Association  and  the  Political  Unions,  it 
brings  about  the  surrender  of  the  constitution^  authorities 
to  an  extra-constitutional  organization  by  the  sole  force  of 
opinion  which  It  enlists  in  its  service 130 

VL  But  none  rtf  these  citraH:onstitutianail  organizations  aimed  at 
becoming  a  regular  and  permanent  power  in  the  Stal«i  their 
intervention  was  looked  on  as  exceptional,  and  enforced  by 
circumslanccH ;  their  agitation  was  directed  not  so  much 
against  the  established  plan  of  represenlaUve  government 
as  against  the  selBsh  parties  which  had  monopolized  it. 
Anxiety  of  the  League  and  of  Cobden  to  lift  the  straggle 
for  free-trade  above  parliamentary  parties.  Cobden's  appeal 
to  Sir  Eobert  Peel  to  put  an  end  to  party  govemmeut .        .  132 

SECOND  CHAPTER 

The  BaanniniQS  of  P^atr  Oroanizatioks 136 

L  The  political  parties  who  were  aimed  at  by  the  extra-constitu- 
tional oi^anizacions  in  purenit  of  reforms,  have  recourse 
to  extra-parliamentary  organizations  themselves.  Before 
■1832  they  bad  no  organization  outside  Parliament,  and  had 


.coy  Google 


CONTENTS  OF  THE  FIBST  VOLUME 


no  need  of  one,  territorial  influence  or  electoral  corruption 
being  sufficient  for  gettinj;  tliem  vol«a.     It  ia  only  by  the 

purchase  of  seats  and  hy  aubveutiuna  to  candidates  that  the 
party  organizations  inside  Parliament  make  their  influence 

felt  ill  the  coantry 1. 

IL  Study  of  this  organization.  Tbe  Whips.  Electoral  operations 
of  the  Patronage  Secretary  and  the  Opposition  Whips  in  the 
country 1< 

III  Regular  party  organizations  not  introduced  Into  the  country 
until  after  1833.  The  defective  proviiiionB  in  the  Reform 
Act  for  the  preparation  of  electoral  IIkIa  leave  it  to  private 
initiative,  and  so  give  rise  U>  the  formation  of  Registration 
Societies,  nblch  cover  the  country  with  a  network  of  organi- 
zation and  get  bold  of  tlie  election  business  .  .        .  1' 

IT.  At  the  same  time  central  party  organizations  arise  in  the  Lon- 
don political  cluba.  The  early  history  of  political  clubs  in 
tbe  seventeenth  and  eighteenth  centuries.  Tbe  Cnrlton  and 
tbe  Reform  Club  Inaugurate  tlie  political  action  of  clubs  and 
provide  the  party  Whips  with  centres  for  directing  election- 
eering operations  In  the  provinces t 

T.  The  Whips  are  assisted  in  this  task  by  general  agents  of  the 
parties  and  their  local  correspondents.  The  Liberal  Whip 
Brand  starts  a  special  central  organization  on  more  method- 
ical lines,  outside  the  Club.  Tbe  duties  of  the  centnl 
Association  as  regards  registration,  outvoters,  and  recom- 
mendation of  parliamentary  candidates.  Tbe  Conservatives 
follow  the  example  of  the  Liberals.  The  central  Asso- 
ciations drive  the  clubs  into  the  background  in  all  matters 
connected  nitli  party  organization.  Their  local  correspon- 
dents tbe  solicitors         .  .        .  .        ■         .   1 

VL  The  development  of  tbe  system  of  Registration  Societies  before 
and  after  18W.  Sir  Robert  Peel's  exhortations :  Register, 
Register,  Register  1  The  Conservative  Associations  In  Lan- 
cashire. The  impulse  given  by  the  A  nti-Com-Law  League 
to  the  formation  of  Registration  Societies.  After  IS4S  the 
movement  slackens  down 1 

TIL  Varying  importance  of  the  part  played  by  tbe  UegistT&lion 
Societies  In  electioneering  operations.  They  bad  not  much 
to  do  with  tbe  selection  of  candidates.  How  this  was  man- 
aged. The  play  of  living  social  forces  which  marked  men 
out  and   thrust  thera  on  tbe  public.     "  Hole-and-corjier" 

management 1 

Vlll.  The  action  of  the  Associations  was  somewhat  more  important 
in  tbe  canvass.  Description  of  camassing  in  the  good  old 
days.  The  Whartons;  the  Grenvilles,  the  Duchesses  of  Dev- 
onshire. The  extension  of  the  suffrage  did  not  make  canvass- 
ing fall  into  disuse ;  on  the  contrary,  henceforth  It  requirad  a 


.coy  Google 


CONTENTS   OF  THE   FIRST   VOLUME 


more  metbixlical  organization.  How  the  Regietralion  Socie- 
ties leDt  their  machinery  for  canvaflsing  operations  .  1S3 
IX.  The  action  of  the  Associaliune  was  moBt  conBiderable  in  regis- 
tration operations,  and  v/aa  conducted  in  each  a  way  as  to 
impede  the  legitimate  exercise  of  electoral  rights,  thanks  to 
the  devices  of  lodging  unfounded  clahna  and  objections. 
Severe  comments  made  by  parliamentary  committees  and 
even  by  some  representatives  of  the  Associations  Ihenuittvas, 
both  of  them  holding  that  the  party  Associations  had  an 

unbealtliy  effect 166 

X.  The  ezi«nston  of  their  sphere  of  activity  and  influence  viewed 
with  apprehension,  as  tending  to  interfere  with  the  natural 
expTcssion  of  public  opinion.  This  pointof  view  considered 
with  regard  to  all  the  electoral  reforms  before  the  public. 
The  action  of  party  organizations,  however,  was  about  to 
assume  vast  proportions  in  conseqence  of  the  opposition  of 
the  Birmingham  Radicals  to  the  representation  of  miaoriUes  169 

THIRD  CHAPTER 

TBB    ESTABLtSHHENT   OP  THB   CaDCUB 161 

L  The  BInningham  Liberals  start  a  plan  of  electoral  organization 
with  the  object  of  nullifying  the  "minority  clause."     Voteai 

j/ou  are  told 161 

n.  Messrs.  Schnadbonit  and  Chamberlain  appear  on  the  scene. 
Sphere  of  municipal  activity  offered  by  the  town  of  Birming- 
ham. Mr.  Chamberlain  and  his  friends  take  in  hand  the 
work  to  be  done.  The  great  results  of  their  activity  &  la 
f auMtnonn 163 

UL   The  support  given  by  the  Liberal  Association.    Its  o^aniza- 

tlon.     Its  real  and  pretended  base  of  operatjona    .         .        .  166 

IT.  The  spirit  in  which  the  Association  wns  managed.  It  becomes 
a  centre  of  public  life.  The  peculiar  industrial  character  of 
Birmingham  presents  special  facilities  for  tlie  development 
of  public  life.  The  brilliant  services  rendered  by  Mr.  Cham' 
berliuii  and  his  friends  revive  the  old  social  leadership.  -The 
Liberal  Association  reaps  the  benefit  of  it.  Its  partisan  char- 
acter becomes  intensiUed.  and  it  shows  a  relentless  energy 
in  excluding  the  Conservatives  from  all  share  in  local  public 

life.     lis  success  in  this 167 

V.  The  propaganda  of  the  "  Birmingham  plan  "  in  the  country. 
■    How  it  found  the  grnund  pretty  well  prepared  owing  to  the 
introduction  of  secret  voting  and  the  Liberal  defeat  at  the 
general  election  of  1874 171 

TI.  The  appearance  of  new  Liberal  Organizations  in  national  poll- 
tics  on  the  occasion  of  the  anti-Turkish  agitation  of  the 


.coy  Google 


COMTENTS  OF  THE   FIRST  VOLUME 


years  1876-18TS.  I'he  idea  of  giviog  pennanenc;  lo  Iheir 
joint  action,  and  directiug  it  lonarda  a,  single  aim  by  meaiu 
of  a  central  Organ izalioD.  Conference  at  Birmingh&m  for 
the  purpose  of  founding  a  Federation  of  the  ABBOclations. 
Taking  ita  stand  on  the  right  of  the  "  people  "  to  control  the 
policy  of  the  party  and  on  the  deposition  of  the  traditional 
leaders  involved  therein,  the  new  Orgauiialiou  claims  to  mod- 
ify the  action  of  Liberalism  uut  ho  much  in  re  aa  in  modo.  It 
would  be  a  Liberal  parliament  ontsid*  the  Imperial  Legisla- 
ture, and  an  inatruuient  of  general  agitation  at  the  disposal  of 
Liberal  opinion,  which  would  find  its  real  representation  in 
this  parliament.  Aflera  veiy  summary  discussian  the  scheme 
of  the  Liberal  Federation  is  adopted  by  ttie  Conference  .  1 
TEL  The  inauguration  of  the  Federation  hy  Mr.  Gladstone,  The 
special  position  held  by  him  at  this  time  in  the  Liberal  party. 
Final  stage  of  bis  evolution  as  popular  leader,  and  climax  of 
his  power  over  the  minds  of  the  maaaes.  The  secret  of  this 
power.  How  the  Federation,  by  virtue  of  the  patronage  ex- 
tended to  it  by  Mr.  Gladstone,  reaps  the  beneiit  of  his 
immense  prestige  with  the  people,  and  of  his  pre-eminence 
In  the  Liberal  party  as  opposed  to  the  official  leaders    .       .  I 


FOURTH  CHAPTER 
Thb  Growth  op  thb  Caucus      .... 


L  The  Biiiningbam  group  continue  the  propaganda  of  tbe  caucus 
system  with  the  aid  of  Mi.  Gladstone.  Different  reception 
accorded  to  the  plan  in  different  localities  both  by  the  masses 
and  by  the  old  ruling  classes.  In  a  good  many  places  the 
old  r^me  holds  ita  ground.  Nevertheless  the  province  of 
the  old  Whig  Organization  is  more  and  more  invaded  by  tie 

Caucus 11 

n.  The  Caucus  takes  up  and  accentuates  the  traditional  antago- 
nism between  Whigs  and  Radicals.  The  aspect  which  the 
conflict  had  assumed;  two  worlds  confronting  each  other     .  11 

III.  The  old  Liberalism.     It£  stock  of  opinions  and  its  temper. 

How  Birmingham  Radicalism,  wliich  was  the  absolute  nega- 
tion of  it,  fastens  on  the  pTlnciples,  Uie  rules  of  conduct,  and 
iJie  habits  and  proprieties  of  the  old  Liberals.  The  argu- 
ments by  which  the  Radicals  justify  the  attack;  the  defence 
made  by  the  old  Liberals.  How  Radicalism  aiming  at  the 
traditional  leadera  hit  the  Moderates  as  well,  how  it  launched 
the  bolte  of  the  Caucus  at  both 1 

IV.  The  temper  of  tlie  contingents  brought  into  the  field  by  the 

new  Organizations.  Their  weak  and  strong  polnls.  The 
necessity  fur  leadership.    The  materials  for  leadership  among 


.coy  Google 


COBTENTS  OF  THE  FIEST  VOLUME 


die  Radical  set  and  the  men  of  the  old  ruling  classes.  How 
their  inadequacy  combined  with  tlie  tendencies  of  the  masses 
often  fftToured  the  introduction  of  a  sectarian  and  intoierant 

spirit  within  the  organizations 192 

T.  This  spirit  displayed  in  the  preteDsions  of  the  Cancus  vritb 
regard  to  the  choice  of  candidates.  Conflict  tietneen  the 
Bradford  caucus  aud  W.  E.  Forsler.  Forst^r'a  posjtion  and 
the  animosity  nhich  lie  had  aroused,  owing  to  his  share  in  the 
organiiation  of  primary  instruction,  among  the  Nonconform- 
ists who  abounded  in  ihe  Caucus IM 

TI.  The  Bradford  caucus  calls  on  Forster  to  submit  to  the  rule 
which  gives  the  Association  the  right  of  deciding  without 
i^ipeat  on  the  candidates  or  on  Members  who  seelc  re^Ieo- 
lion.  Foraler  disputes  the  right  of  the  Caucus  to  intervene 
between  the  candidate  and  the  constituency,  and  to  usurp 
the  place  of  the  latter.  The  campaign  conducted  by  the 
oancns  against  FoiBter  at  Bradford.  The  feeling  aroused 
In  the  country  by  the  conflict.  Mr.  Gladstone's  interven- 
tion. Lame  solution  of  the  aSaJr.  The  other  caucuses 
adopt  a  similar  line  of  conduct  (Sir  John  Simon's  case), 
modemted  occBsionoiiy  by  the  intervention  of  the  principal 
leaders  of  the  Caucns 197 

FIFTH   CHAPTER 

TBb  Capcds  m  PowiR ,        ,204 

L  The  Liberal  victory  at  the  general  election  of  18B0,  Mr.  Cham- 
berlain attributes  it  to  the  Caucus.  His  elevation  to  the 
Miaistr;  interpreted  as  an  official  acltnowledgment  of  the 
influence  of  the  Caucns.  What  was  really  the  case.  The  fac- 
tors of  the  Liberal  victory.  The  Caucus  nevertheless  imposes 
on  the  public,  and  a  new  conventional  force  confronting  real 
toTcee  penetrates  into  English  political  life  ....  204 
II.  The  twofold  mission  which  the  Caucus  assumes  with  regard  to 
the  Government  in  pointing  out  to  it  the  wishes  of  the  con- 
Btitaeociea  and  helping  it  to  get  them  recognized  by  Parlia- 
ment. How  the  first  of  these  tasks  was  superfluous,  at  any 
rate,  and  the  second  contrary  to  the  fundamental  ideas  of. 
parliamentary  government.  Hovr  the  Caucus  kept  the  ma- 
jority in  the  House  in  a  state  of  obedience  to  the  Ministry 
by  means  of  continuous  pressure  of  the  Associations  on  the 
Uembere.  How  the  Caucus  worked  public  opinion  throu^- 
out  the  conntry  from  Birmingham  by  its  maclijnery  .  207 

m.  Hie  Caucus  reveals  itself  most  completely  in  these  aspects  by 
intervention  in  the  reform  of  the  Procedure  of  the  House  of 
Commons.     It  interferes  t>etween  the  majority  and  the  mi- 


.CD,  Google 


CONTENTS  OF  THE  FIRST  VOLUME 


nority  in  Parliament,  betweeo  tbe  leider  of  the  patty  luid  his 
followerH,  between  the  Member  and  bis  consUtuenta,  between 

FaTliamenl  and  public  opinion 2 

IV.  How  tbe  Caucus,  which  seek*  to  tbnut  itself  on  the  country  on 
the  pretext  of  giving  expresaion  to  the  opinion  of  tbe  puty, 
does  not  allow  this  opinion  to  display  itself  when  it  is  unfo- 
von^ble  to  the  Miniati?  and  iu  too  docile  majority,  especially 
In  the  conjuncture  created  by  the  unfortunalA  foreign  policy 

of  the  Gladstone  Cabinet 2 

V.  Liberal  Organizations  founded  in  a  different  spirit  to  that  of 
the  Caucus.  National  Beform  Union  of  Manchester.  Di»- 
turt>ed  by  the  success  of  tbe  Caucus  it  gradually  adopts  lis 
mode  of  action.  The  contrast  which  at  Srst  exisUd  between 
the  conceptions,  methods,  and  procedure  of  both  orgkniza- 
tiona  is  obliterated  in  favour  of  the  Caucus.  Another  proof 
of  the  same  kind  ia  supplied,  amid  different  social  conditions, 
by  the  London  and  Counties  Liberal  Union.  It  also  con- 
siders its  duty  to  be  not  tbe  manipulation  of  the  electors  but 
the  political  education  of  the  maBses,  undertaken  in  an  hon- 
est, sincere,  and  disinterested  spirit.  Little  appreciated  and 
badly  supported,  it  disappears  and  ita  place  is  taken  by  the 
Caucus.  Tbe  noisy  activity  displayed  by  tbe  latter  Anally 
places  It  at  the  head  of  eitra'parliamenlary  Liberalism         .  2 


SIXTH  CHAPTER 

Th»  Caucus  ra  Powbh  {Continutd) 227 

I.  The  local  Associations  in  theii  own  homes.  Theit  relations 
with  tbe  Members  of  Parliament.  The  Caucus  insists  on  tbe 
Bubotdinatjon  of  the  Member.    Tbe  Forster  conflict  renewed 

on  this  occasion 227 

n.  Is  the  attach  delivered  on  this  ground  by  the  Radical  Caucus 
levelled  only  against  moderatism  or  against  the  independ- 
enoe  of  the  Membera?  Mr.  Joseph  Cowen's  case  supplies 
on  answer  to  the  question.     The  character  and  the  past  of 

Cowen 280 

in.  The  struggle  of  tbe  Newcastle  Caucus  with  Cowen.    Triumph 

of  tbe  Caucus 284 

IV.  The  defeat  of  Cowen  marks  the  eclipse  of  classic  Radicalism. 
The  " substitution  of  machinery  for  individuality."  Vain 
exhortations  or  protasis  of  the  last  of  the  old  Radicals  .  240 

V.  Moderate  Liberalism,  the  special  object  of  tbe  attacks  of  the 
Caucus,  gives  way  chiefly  since  the  year  1880.  How  the  un- 
stable equilibrium  between  the  moderate  element  and  Uie 
Radical  element  in  tbe  "hundreds"  was  destroyed,  and  bow 


.coy  Google 


CONTENTS  OF  THE   FLB8T  VOLUME 


the  CftQCUS  placed  the  moderates  in  the  dilemma  of  either  fol- 
lowing it  or  being  wiped  out.  They  are  out  of  the  running 
SB  Liberals.  Their  unwillingneBS  to  cut  themselves  adrift. 
Bound  by  their  ties  to  official  Liberalism,  the  leaders  of  the 
moderates  themselves  discourage  their  adherents*  Inclinations 
towards  resistance,  a  resistance  doomed  to  failure  owing  to 
the  temperament  of  its  promoters,  which  was  too  doctrinaii« 
and  too  judicious  for  tlie  masses.  In  the  meanwhile  Mr. 
Cbamberlatu'a  "unauthorized  programme"  gives  the  mod- 
et&te  Liberals  a  shock,  and  makes  them  turn  their  eyes  in 
the  direction  of  the  Conservatives 2 


SEVENTH  CHAPTER 

Tub  Coksbbtativb  OaoAHiKATioy SCO 

L  The  outbnrat  of  organization  in  consequence  of  the  Reform 
Act  of  1867.  A  new  representative  and  elective  central 
authority.  The  local  development  of  party  organization.  It 
is  placed  under  the  auspices  of  popular  Toryism  .        .  2G0 

n.  The  origin  of  popular  Toryism.  Diaraell's  doctrine  and  prac- 
tice. They  do  not  agree.  The  real  foundation  of  the  new 
CoDservatism.    In  the  long  run  "  popular  Toryism  "  is  only 

UL  How  the  party  Organizations  Interpret  popular  Toryism.  The 
Conservative  Working-men's  Associations.  Disraeli  does  not 
recc^ize  them.  The  victory  of  1674  raises  the  "Conaerva' 
live  working-man  "  without  makmg  the  party  Associations 
acquire  a  truly  popular  character  and  real  inSuence.  The 
woric  assigned  to  the  Organization  by  the  leaders.  Exhor- 
tation to  discipline 2SG 

IV.  Party  reorganization  engrosses  attention  after  the  defeat  of  1680 
and  the  death  of  Lord  BeaconsReld.  The  impatience  of  the 
younger  men.  The  "Fourth  Party."  The  resentment  of 
the  plebeians.  The  manifesto  against  the  aristocratic  leader- 
ship, and  its  conclusion  as  regards  the  organization  of  the 

party 2S0 

T.  The  need  for  its  reorganization  on  popular  lines  Is  not  felt  by 
Uie  plebeians  only.  In  the  large  towns  this  work  bad  been 
already  started  by  the  force  of  circumstances.  The  vanity 
of  the  Tory  tien  itat  is  gratified  by  it.  The  final  result 
is  that  the  Tories  imitate  the  Caucus.  This  movement  is 
Stimulated  by  the  "  Fourth  Party  " 265 

VL    Part  played  by  Lord  Randolph  Churchill.     His  propaganda  of 
Tory  democracy.    Elijah's  mantle,  and  the  rt    "  " 
Young  England.    The  Primrose  League 


.coy  Google 


CONTENTS  OF  THE  FIRST  VOLUME 


EIGHTH  CHAPTER 

Thb  ComBKViTiTB  OKaAHizATioa  (Continued)  ....  27S 
L  The  "Fourth  Party"  tries  to  make  the  National  Union  the 
lever  of  the  Neo-ToiyiBin,  and  to  take  it  out  of  the  hands  of 
Che  leaden.  Rupture  with  Loid  Soliahiur.  InterveDtioii  of 
the  democratized  Asaociatioits  of  the  party.  Eatablisbment 
of  a  modus  vivendi  between  the  leaders  and  the  Tor;  demo- 
crats. Counter-movement  of  the  followers  of  the  leaders  at 
the  Sheffield  Conference.  Triumph  of  the  popular  principle, 
at  all  events  In  the  Organization  of  the  party  .  273 

XL  The  popular  principle  in  the  politics  of  the  party.  The  Neo- 
Torlea  of  Liverpool  come  forward  as  pioneere  of  the  new 
policy.    Their  interpretation  and  practical  application  of  it    278 

IIL  ConservatlBm  ia  shaken  in  its  very  theory.  Hon  Neo-Tory- 
lam,  built  up  with  the  old  T0T7  creed  on  the  democratized 
Organization  of  the  party,  ends  in  a  sort  of  plebiscitary 
Cnsarism.  How  the  difficulty  of  preserving  the  creed  aide 
by  side  with  the  new  Oi^nizatJon  drives  the  Tories  into 
a  policy  of  opportunlsDi  verging  on  demagogism  .  .  281 

IV.  Signs  of  this  evolution  in  the  qaestlon  of  electoral  reform  and 
In  the  policy  of  the  first  Salisbury  Ministry.  "  The  Tories 
in  office,  th«  Radicals  in  power."  The  position  of  the  mod- 
erate Liberals  between  the  "  Conservatives  "  and  the  Radicals 
of  the  Caucus 283 


NINTH  CHAPTER 
r  1888,  AWD  ra«  Fihai.  DBTBLOPHEirr  of  P*»tt  Ob- 


L  The  split  in  the  Liberal  party  breaks  out  at  last  In  consequence 
of  Mr.  Gladstone's  conversion  to  Home  Rule  for  Ireland. 
When  brought  before  public  opinion,  the  conflict  becomes  a 
sonice  of  great  perplexity  to  the  would-be,  mouthpiece  of 
that  opinion,  the  Caucus.  Being  called  on  by  the  Birming- 
ham leaders  to  make  up  their  minds,  the  Associations, 
placed  between  Mr.  Chamberlain,  the  maater  of  the  Caucus, 
and  Mr.  Gladstone,  the  leader  of  the  party,  only  display 

their  confusion 2i 

n.  He  meeting  of  the  delegates  of  the  Liberal  AssoctatJons  takes 
Mr.  Gladstone's  side.  The  factors  which  brought  about  Mr. 
Chamberlain's  defeat  within  the  Caucus,  and  notably  the 
provincial  jealousies  aroused  by  Birmingham.  Having  re- 
ceived tbeir  orders,  the  Associations  take  a  decided  line.  The 
pressure  exerted  by  them  on  the  Liberal  members  who  are 


.coy  Google 


CONTENTS  OF  THE  FIRST  VOLUME 


hostile  to  Home  Role,  and  tlieir  opposition  to  them  at  tbe 

general  election  after  the  rejection  of  the  Irish  Bill  in  the 
Hoose  of  CommoDB.  The  Liberal  Unionista  auEfereTa  in 
the  caose  of  "the  right  of  private  jndgment."  Thecaucusea 
drive  them  out  of  tbe  ranks  of  the  historic  Liberal  party, 
for  their  different  views  on  the  Iriuli  question,  and  at  the  same 
time  convert  the  naljonal  deliberation  into  a,  personal  pUbU- 
eiU  for  or  against  Mr.  Gladstone.  How  Mr.  Gladstone's  de- 
teat  was  partly  due  to  misplaced  confidence  in  the  Cauciu, 
and  how,  on  the  other  hand,  the  latter  saved  b:m  from  an 


m.   Tbe  line  taken  by  tbe  Caucus  was  the  best  in  Its 

Mr.  Chamberlain's  secession  hailed  as  a  guarantee  of  the 
future  of  the  Organization,  and  even  of  democracy  In  Eng- 
land. The  delight  of  the  young  Radicals  and  the  adhesion 
of  several  Associations  which  were  holding  aloof.  Revision 
of  the  statutes  of  the  Federation  in  a  decentralizing  sense 
to  emphasize  its  return  to  orthodox  democracy.  The  trans- 
fer of  its  head  office  to  London.  How  the  compulsory  with- 
drawal of  tbe  FederaUon  from  Birmingham,  coming  after 
its  separation  from  Mr.  Chamberlain,  as  well  as  the  resig- 
nation of  the  moderate  membeis  of  the  local  Associations, 
far  from  weakening  tbe  Caucus,  added  to  its  strength  and 
its  importance 

rv.  The  price  which  had  to  be  paid  for  this  increase  of  power. 
Owing  to  the  close  relations  of  the  Caucus  with  the  official 
leadeis  of  tbe  party,  their  InQnence  penetrates  into  the 
counsels  of  tbe  popular  Organization  to  tbe  detriment  of  its 
independence.  The  Federation  is  acting  rather  as  tbeir 
mouthpiece  than  as  a  free  parliament  of  public  opinion. 
The  meeting  of  the  delegates  reduced  to  registering  cnt-and- 
dried  resolutions  arranged  beforehand  with  the  leadere. 
How  the  relations  between  public  opinion  and  tbe  party 
leaders,  of  the  kind  Implied  by  parliamentary  government, 
are  warped  by  this.  The  proper  divislou  of  powers  is  Ig- 
nored, and  responsibility  thrown  on  the  wrong  shoulders  if 

not  destroyed  altogether 

V.  Another  effect  of  the  too  close  connection  between  the  popular 
Organization  of  the  party  and  the  parliamentary  leaders,  is 
to  make  the  former  stick  to  the  position  of  the  latter  at  the 
risk  of  Impeding  tbe  regular  evolution  of  the  party.  The 
criterion  of  Liberalism  being  reduced  to  a  strict  and  blind 
adherence  to  tbe  policy  of  the  Liberal  leaders,  intolerance  is 
exalted  into'a  political  virtue.  The  chiefs  of  the  Caucus  set 
the  example ;  Lord  Rosebery  rebuked.  The  local  Associa- 
tions get  rid  of  the  remaning  dissentient  elements.  Gratify- 
ing exceptions  presented  by  some  caucuses.    All  the  others, 


.coy  Google 


CONTENTS  OF  THE  FIRST  VOLUME 


however,  try  to  widen  the  gulf  between  the  orthodox  and 
the  dissentient  Liberals.    Uow  this  line  of  conduct,  Etdopted 

in  lbs  interests  of  Home  Rule,  U  fatal  to  the  Irish  cause  .  3( 
TL  The  expurgation  of  the  Liberal  part;  is  hardly  completed  when 
ft  begins  to  show  signs  of  disunion.  Attempt  to  reunite  the 
different  sections  under  the  mended  "old  umbrella"  of  Lib- 
eral and  Radical  AssociaLions.  Far  from  being  soothed, 
advanced  Badicaliam  becomes  more  and  more  aggreBsive  and 
incensed  against  the  Oi^nizatlon  of  the  party.  Its  outburat 
of  wrath  on  the  formation  of  a  central  caucus  for  the  me- 
tropolis. The  "caucusians"  are  accused  of  tieing  oppor- 
tunists trying  to  poach  on  the  democratic  preserves,  and  the 
extension  of  the  caucns  to  London  is  alleged  to  be  a  fresh 
danger  for  Radicalism,  tbrea(«ned  with  the  despotism  of 
oiBcial  Liberalism  or  even  with  the  process  of  being  "  ground 
to  powder"  bj  the  "Schnadhorst  maciiine."  A  group  of 
"new  Kadicals"  asserts  ilaalf  in  the  House  of  Commons  .  3. 
Til.  Liberal  officialism  is  confronted  with  a  more  formidable  foe  in 
the  person  of  the  "Labour  Party,"  which  takes  its  stand  on 
social  reform  outside  the  political  parties.  The  old  politi- 
cal Liberalism  is  arraigned  by  some  representatives  of  the 
Liberal  middle  class  as  well.  Their  ideal  of  iVeu  Lit>eralf»m. 
But  the  supporters  of  ttie  various  political  reforms  stick  to 
them.  The  Caucus  then  starts  the  XetBcastle  Frogramrae 
and  Its  omnibus,  which  carries  ofi  the  official  leaders  ipso 
facto  by  compelling  them  to  admit  even  measures  of  State 
socialism.     The  labour  movement,  however,  does  not  lay 

down  Its  arms 3 

VIIL  The  general  election  of  1892  results  in  a  victory  for  the  Liber- 
als, but  their  majority,  being  split  up  into  groups  represent- 
ing the  varied  claims  embodied  In  the  Newcastle  Programme, 
holds  its  ground  only  by  means  of  log-rolllnf;,  without  suc- 
ceeding in  checkmating  the  Opposition.  To  secure  a  united 
majority  iu  the  country,  the  Liberal  Ministry  attempts  a 
diversion  ag^nst  the  House  of  Lords.  The  Rosebery  Gov- 
ernment, being  manifestly  unable  to  carry  on  the  work  of 
legislation,  retires.  The  Liberal  party  going  to  the  country 
with  just  as  little  unity  in  itn  programme,  sustains  a  formi- 
dable defeat.  All  the  devices  of  organization  and  wire- 
pulling had  been  of  no  avMl 3 

IX.  The  Conservative  parly  was  more  fortunate.  The  new  Impulse 
given  to  the  Tory  party  owing  to  the  Irish  crisis  and  the 
alliance  with  tiie  Liberal  Unionists.  Tlie  attempt  at  a  pro- 
nuneiamUnto  by  Lord  Randolph  Churchill  only  reooQs  on 
Its  author.  The  attitude  observed  by  the  democratized  Asso- 
ciations in  this  conjuncture.  After  I^ord  Kandotph  Cbnrch- 
lll's  eclipse,  the  prestige  of  the  popular  Tory  Organization 


.coy  Google 


CONTENTS  OF  THE   FfflST  VOLUME 


Is  dtmmed.  The  riae  of  the  leaderahlp.  Nevertheleea  the 
process  of  democratization  of  Torylam  continu«e.  To  what 
extent  tbis  is  due  to  the  action  and  reactioD  of  the  Coiuemt- 
tive  caucuses,  of  the  Tory  democracy  in  the  lerge  towns, 
combined  with  the  ezigencles  of  the  alliance  with  Mr. 
Chamberlain 891 


THIED   PART 

FIRST  CHAPTBa 

Taa  U&oHimRT  or  thb  Caucus 329 

I,  Stad7  of  the  working  of  the  Caucos,  of  the  conditions  and  the 
methods  of  its  action  on  the  bulk  of  the  electorate.  The 
coDstltnent  parts  of  the  machinery  of  the  Caucus  and 
the  men  who  set  it  in  motion.  Organization  In  the  ward. 
How  members  are  recmited.  The  periodical  ward  meetings, 
their  object  and  their  utility.  The  pnblic-house  as  a  rally- 
ing centre.  The  members  are  not  numerous,  and  the  regu- 
lar aUendants  at  the  ward  meetings  etlll  less  so.  Ever3rthing 
is  managed  by  a  coterie  of  which  the  ward  secretary  Is  the 
prompter,  lite  powers  of  the  ward  secretary,  and  the  part 
played  by  him 32Q 

II.  He  next  scale  In  the  O^anization  —  the  Council.  The 
co-opted  members  and  the  large  subscribers.  The  pecnniary 
resources  of  the  Association.  The  great  majority  of  mem- 
bers do  not  contribnte  to  it  at  all SM 

m.  The  executlTe  committee  of  the  "  Hundreds."  Its  rSle  and  its 
preponderant  influence.  The  "  Inner  circle  "  which  arises 
witiiin  it.  The  concentration  of  power  in  the  hands  of  a 
few  reaches  its  climax  in  the  large  towns  with  several  elec- 
toral DIti^ods       337 

IV,  The  secretary  of  the  Association  factotum  of  Uie  Organization. 
The  honorary  secretary.  The  President;  "the  man  who 
can  tell  the  biggest  lies ; "  bis  "  respectability  "   .        .        .  340 

T,  The  social  composition  of  the  Associations.  The  aristocracy 
hardly  Mpreaented.  The  very  slight  participation  of  the 
upper  middle  class  in  the  daily  life  of  the  Associations.  The 
influence  of  its  leadiug  representatives  on  the  choice  of  can- 
didates. The  indifference  of  the  working  classes.  The  lower 
middle  class  alone  is  left  to  take  an  interest  in  the  Cancus. 
The  alacrity  with  which  it  does  so.  Being  a  victim  of  social 
exclusiveness,  it  floda  social  and  political  distinction  in  the 
openings  afforded  by  the  Caucus.  The  less  prominent  part 
play^  by  the  lower  middle  class  in  the  Tory  Caucus    .         .  344 


.coy  Google 


CONTENTS   OF  THE   FIRST   VOLUME 


VL  The  intellectual  standard  of  the  Caacus-men. 

of  tbelr  political  horizon  and  Cbeir  ideal  of  a  politician. 
Tbeir  temperament ;  the  restless  and  the  staid  membere. 
How  in  both  categories  this  lemperameat  shows  itself  in  a 
readiness  to  submit  to  the  impulse  given  by  leaders,  u>  cul- 
Urate  an  unbending  political  orthodoxy,  and,  finally,  to 
exclude  spontaneity  and  independence  of  actJon  and  tbe 
spirit  of  criUcIsm.  Disappearance  of  the  deliberative  char- 
acter of  the  large  Caucus  meetings.  The  special  style  of 
eloquence  which  they  encourage.  The  "hnndreds"  come 
to  be  simply  registering  assemblies  in  nhicb  everything  is 
presented  "cut  and  dried  "  by  a  hierarchy  of  wire-puiiera  .  3' 
TZI.  Analysis  of  the  viial  force  of  the  Caucus.  The  motive  power 
which  briugB  together  and  sets  going  tbe  varied  elements 
compoBing  it  is  supplied  by  the  sense  of  duty  and  by  amour- 
propre.  How  the  Oi^anization  of  tbe  party  cultivates  and 
develops  them  and  makes  them  subserve  its  ends.  Ideal 
worship  of  the  party.  The  riles  prescribed  for  the  rank  and 
file.  The  systematic  meetings  and  the  "resolutions."  Tbe 
satisfactions  of  self-esteem  which  the  Caucus  provides  for 
Its  followers  in  a  gradation  adapted  to  their  various  tastes 
and  requirements.  The  necessity  of  flattering  vanities  and 
smoothing  susceptibilities  is  counterbalanced  by  the  devotion 
of  the  caucus-men  to  the  Organization,  by  discipline.  The 
limitations  to  which  the  latter  is  subject  The  general  result 
Is  to  make  Ae  Caucus  a  body  little  calculated  to  attract  the 
best  elements  of  society.    The  decline  in  tbe  quality  of  tiie 

Cancos  officials 31 

Tm.  Organization  in  the  "counties."  Distinction  between  the 
"  borough  "  and  "  county  "  constituencies.  Party  organiza- 
tion in  the  counties  before  1885.  Impulse  given  by  the  Re- 
form Act  of  18B6.  The  difflcnlties  of  organization  in  the 
oountiesspecially  feltbythe  Liberals,  who  are  checked  by  the 
ascendency  of  the  squire  and  the  parson.  But  aFter  all,  want 
of  public  spirit  is  a  greater  impediment  than  social  intimida- 
tion, which  is gredualiy  diminishing.  Tbe  villagecorrespond- 
ent.  The  weakness  of  the  elective  element  in  the  county 
o^auizations.  Wire-pulling  Is  of  a  more  patriarchal  char- 
acter in  them.  Levelling  effect  of  the  new  county  organi- 
zations. The  Tory  organizations  in  the  counties.  The 
cathedral  towns.  Attempts  at  combioing  all  the  county  or- 
ganizations into  County  Federations  or  Councils  .  .31 


.coy  Google 


CONTENTS  OF  THE  FIRST  VOLUME 


SECOND  CHAPTER 

l^iB  Action  of  tbb  Cacodb 8' 

I.  The  means  by  wblch  the  Caucus  gets  a  bold  on  the  elMtonte. 
RegiBtnitiOD  o(  voters.  How  the  reriaioD  of  the  SegisteT, 
yihiah  is  highly  complicated  owing  to  the  nnmerooa  electoral 
qualificUiona  and  the  legal  controvenles  to  which  the  law 
and  judicial  opinion  on  the  matter  give  rise,  euppties  the 
party  orgaDlzations  with  a  pretext  for  exerting  themHClTes 
on  behalf  of  the  voters 3; 

IL  The  reglBtratiou  canvass  cooducted  by  the  "workers"  of  the 
Caucus  to  find  out  the  qualiflcatioDB  of  the  Inhabitants  and 
their  "politics."  The  duel  of  theagenlsof  the  caucuses  in 
the  Registration  Court  fought  with  claims  and  objections ; 
their  chicanery  ;  their  bargaining  (pairing  oft).  How  crafty 
voters  parry  the  attacks  of  the  rival  caucus.  Passive  atti- 
tude of  the  Revising  Barrister.  How  the  inlerrention  of  the 
caucuses,  while  making  it  easier  for  the  voters  to  exercise 
their  right,  has  the  effect  of  putting  the  interests  of  the 
parties  tiefore  it,  of  making  the  suffrage  an  "  artillcial  fran- 
chise "and  the  Register  a  "triumph  of  manceuvres  and  party 
trickery."  The  advantages  which  the  intervention  of  the 
Caucus  in  registration  secures  to  the  parties  .  .3' 

m.  The  political  education  of  the  electorate.  The  meetings.  Their 
value  as  a  mode  of  action  under  an  extended  aufliage.  The 
conditions  of  success.  The  gift  of  oratory  is  now  highly 
appreciated.  The  craving  for  political  speeches.  The  ora- 
tors supplied  by  the  party  organizations         .       .       .       .3) 

IV,  The  character  of  their  eloquence.  Addressed  more  to  the  emo- 
tions than  the  judgment.  Platform  oratory  contrasted  with 
the  old  types  of  popular  political  apealcing.  The  changes 
undergone  by  political  eloquence  during  the  last  century 
from  Chatham  to  Gladstone.  How  tlie  latter  became  the 
classic  platform  orator,  and  how  his  imitatois  have  acclima- 
tized "stump"  oratory  in  England 3i 

V.  The  extent  to  which  platform  oratory  actually  contributes  to 

the  political  education  of  the  masses.  The  real  object  pur- 
sued by  the  oigaoizers  of  meetings,  which  is  to  "  raise  enthu- 
siasm," is  accentuated  by  a  special  ni£«e-e>)-s(;Sn«,  —  singing, 
open-air  meetings,  demonstrations.  Meetings  in  the  country 
districts.    Travelling  vans S 

VI.  Lectures.    Their  decline.    How  much  of  this  is  due  to  the 

Csncos  preferring  to  "raise  enthusiasm,"  and  how  much 
to  the  indiSerence  of  the  public.  The  causes  of  the  latter. 
The  strictly  partisan  character  of  the  lectures.  The  absence 
of  intelligent  curiosity  about  political  matters  among  Ul« 


.coy  Google 


CONTENTS  OF  THE  FIRST  VOLUME 


maeses.  Is  there  progress  or  tha  reverae  from  the  stand- 
point of  a  Utoughtiul  inWrest  taken  in  politics?  How,  sod 
with  what  effect,  the  preceding  generation  tried  to  improve 
its  mind.  The  cheap  newspaper.  The  rival  attractions  of 
sport,  of  the  luuslc-hijl ;  the  impediments  created  by  industri- 
alism. The  value  of  the  intellectual  revival  produced  by  the 
propaf^nda  of  socialism.  How  ttie  great  mass  ol  the  people 
assimilaWA  political  knowledge.  How  their  mental  condition 
UDitea  with  the  Caucus  in  preferrin;;  methods  of  propaganda 
whlob  appeal  rather  to  the  nerves  than  to  the  reason.  The 
comparative  success  of  lectures  In  country  districts.  The 
supply  of  lecturers.     The  "political  missionaries"  supplant 

the  lecturers S 

VII.  "Political  literature."  Ita  educational  value.  The  party  pub- 
lications are  for  the  moat  part  simply  proapectoses  and  elec- 
tioneering claptrap.  The  success  and  the  usefulness,  from 
the  pnlnt  of  view  of  the  parties,  of  the  pamphlets  and  leaflets 
distribui«d.  Political  iconography.  A  few  reading-rooms 
here  and  there  attached  to  the  party  Organizations.  The 
circulating  libraries  organized  by  the  central  clubs  .  .  4 
Fill.  The  party  Press.  To  what  extent  it  is  ei^ual  to  its  duties, 
especially  that  of  enlightening  the  voter.  The  violent  tone 
and  the  strong  bias  of  moat  of  the  party  newspapers.  How 
they  have  perverted  the  taate  of  the  public.  Beginnings  of 
a  reaction  against  the  political  fanaticism  of  the  Press.  The 
special  societies  for  political  propaganda  limlwd  to  particu- 
lar questions i 

IX.  The  Idea  of  supplying  political  education  independently  of 
all  political  organization.  It  takes  shape  in  the  Social  and 
Political  Education  League.  Its  success  almost  nil.  The 
eSorts  of  the  Universities  are  powerless  against  the  compe- 
tition ol  the  moiiopniizing  parties  and  the  general  indiffer- 
ence  to  disinterested  political   culture.      Attitude   of    the 

M.  F.'s  in  particular 4 

Z.  The  organizations  for  general  culture  which  admit  politics  into 
their  programmes.  Mechanics'  Institutes,  University  Exten- 
sion, Reading  Unions,  and,  above  all,  the  Mutual  Improve- 
ment Societies 4 

XL  Debating  Societies.  Local  Parliaments.  Their  members  taken 
from  all  classes  of  society.  The  educational  value  of  the  par- 
liaments limited  by  their  strictly  copying  the  great  Parlia- 
ment with  its  parties.  It  is  nevertheless  real.  But  the  life 
of  the  local  parliaments  is  lacking  in  steadiness.  What  has 
become  of  the  atiibitioua  views  clierished  for  them.  The 
National  Association  of  Local  Parliaments  .  .       .4 


.coy  Google 


CONTENTS  OF  THE  FIRST  VOLUME 


THIBD  CHAPTER 

The  Action  of  tbe  Cauccb  (Continued) 420 

I.  How  the  Intellectual  propngnnda  carried  on  by  the  Organizar 
tloiw  of  the  parties  is  sapplemented  by  blending  the  attrac- 
tiooB  of  goclabillty  with  politics.  The  political  clubs.  Their 
origin.  The  part  played  lDy  the  great  political  clube  as  party 
manageie.  How  it  has  been  taken  from  them  .  .  .  420 
II.  The  clDbs  as  places  of  resort  for  IceRpiiig  up  and  cultivating 
party  sentiments.  The  success  of  the  Tory  clube.  The 
efforts  of  the  Liberals  who  had  been  outstripped  by  their 
opponents,  since  1874.  The  founding  of  the  National  Lib- 
eral Clah  and  its  success.  How  it  is  that  In  spit«  of  this  the 
Tory  clubs  are  more  effective  political  instruments        .         .  422 

m.  The  "  working-men's  clubs."  Their  origin  due  to  the  efforts 
of  philanthropists  independent  of  all  party  preoccupation. 
The  "great  misfortune"  apprehended  by  Lord  Camarron 
comes  to  pass,  the  working-men's  clubs  become  political  party 
machines 424 

TV.  The  material  importance  of  the  working-men's  clubs,  the  social, 
moral,  and  intellectual  standard  of  their  members.  Theclubs 
In  which  liquoiB  are  sold  and  the  temperance  clubs.  Drunk- 
enness in  the  clubs.  Their  financial  dependence  on  tbe  party 
organizations  and  on  self-seeking  politicians.  The  slight  in- 
terest taken  in  politics  by  most  of  the  members  of  the  clubs. 
They  shirk  "political  work,"  and  do  not  patronize  the  read- 
ing-room and  the  lectures.  Working-men's  clubs  which  are 
too  exclusively  political ;  the  Metropolitan  Radical  Federa- 
tion, its  hoatillty  to  the  Cancus 42T 

V.  What  is,  under  these  circumstances,  th^  ase  of  working-men's 
clubs,  from  the  party  point  of  view.  They  make  ignorant  and 
indifierent  voters  follow  in  the  wake  of  the  parties,  they 
"preserve  young  people."  Why  the  poor  political  return 
yielded  by  the  working-men's  clubs  does  not  stop  their 
principals  and  their  financial  supporters.  In  the  long  run 
the  Conservatives  derive  more  advantage  from  the  working- 
men's  clubs  than  their  rivals.  The  federation  of  Conserva- 
tive  clubs 431 

VX  Tbe  value  of  clubs  as  a  laboratory  of  political  opinion.  How 
their  too  close  connection  with  the  official  parties  prevents 
them  from  becoming  one.  The  intolerance  that  has  made 
its  way  into  the  Liberal  clubs  In  cnnnequence  of  the  Home 
Rule  controverey.  The  special  ditfiouliies  in  the  way  of  the 
working-men's  cinbe  becoming  a  centre  of  enlightenment ; 
how  they  are  left  to  shift  for  themselves  by  gentlemen 
politicians 433 


.coy  Google 


CONTENTS  OP  THE  FIRST  VOLUME 


Vn.  The  extr&ordlnary  forms  assumed  by  the  "  mixture  of  politics 

uid  pleasure"  nhich  the  Organizattons  provide  for  the  "socit^ 
leDdenciea"  of  the  Toiera.  The  social  ineetings.  Smoking 
concerts.  Tea  meetings,  etc.  Fartioipation  of  women.  How 
the  proceedings  at  the  "  Social  meetings"  amount  to  a  pur- 
chase of  votes  in  advance.  The  opinion  of  the  judges  on 
these  practices  and  on  the  dangerous  part  which  ttie  Asaoci- 
«tian£  play  in  them.  The  success  of  social  meetings  in 
different  latitudes  and  wiih  different  parties,  especially  the 
Tories,  Tiie  eBorls  of  the  Primrose  Eeague  to  "aocialize 
politics" ,       .  i 

FOUETH  CHAPTER 

ClKDIDlTES   AND   ELBCTIOHEIBniO .4 

I.  How  the  party  feelings  developed  by  the  Organization  asanme 
a  concrete  form  in  regard  to  the  person  of  the  parliamentary 
candidate  selected  by  It,  ana  reveal  their  final  cause  in  the 
election  of  this  candidate.  The  qualities  of  a  good  candidate  : 
the  profession  of  the  creed  of  the  party  in  all  iis  fulness  and 
"up  to  date,"  as  well  as  that  of  the  special  political  sects 
which  flourish  in  the  constituency  ;  popularitv  in  the  various 
aspects  capable  of  impressing  the  English  voter.  Coalitions 
of  political  conventions  with  living  forces.  How  the  rela- 
tion, varying  from  one  conUituency  to  another,  between 
social  forces  and  political  forces,  determii^es  the  selection  of 

the  candidate 4 

IL  The  importance  of  the  investiture  conferred  on  the  candidate 
by  the  Caucus.  The  "adopted  candidate."  His  monopoly 
is  ensured  by  the  prevailing  fear  of  "dividing  the  party." 
The  personal  Interest  which  the  Association  often  has  in 
adopting  a  candidate  beforehand.  How  the  "adopted  can- 
didate "  nurses  his  popularity 4 

m.  How  at  the  approach  of  the  election  the  candidate  is  adver- 
tised to  the  individual  voter  by  means  of  the  electoral  cao- 
Tass.  What  makes  the  operation  of  the  time-honoured 
canvass  more  complicated  in  the  present  day.  How  the 
Caucus  meets  the  difficulty  by  providing  a  large  body  of 
ToluDtary  canvassers  who  also  form  a  connect! ng-t ink  with 
the  various  groups  of  the  population.  The  canvassing  visits; 
the  check-canvass  ajid  the  crMS-canvass.  The  fetching  of 
voters  to  the  poll  by  the  "  workers."  The  real  conversions 
made  by  the  canvass  and  the  professional  proselytes.  The 
principal  effect  of  the  canvass  consists  In  securing  the  gteat 
body  of  voters  who  have  no  definite  political  opinions.  In 
what  sense  "  everj-thing  depends  on  organization,"     How, 


.coy  Google 


CONTENTS' OF  THE  FIBST   VOLUME 


thinks  to  this  exceptional  part  pUyed  by  it,  the  canrass 
commandB  the  whole  political  position  in  electoral  life,  that 
of  the  Association,  of  tbe  candidate,  and  of  the  "  workers." 
The  Importance  which  these  latter  take  credit  for  in  it ;  their 
labour  and  its  reward.  The  annoyance  caused  to  the  voters 
by  the  canvasH,  and  the  eBect  which  it  produces  on  public 
manners 163 

IV.  The  "  stump  "  conducted  on  parallel  lines  with  tbe  canvass  at 
election  time.  The  principal  object  of  the  speeches  is  to 
raise  ■'  enthusiasm.'*  The  sporting  character  of  tbe  emotions 
of  the  election  campaign.  Political  advertising  during  the 
campaign,  and  tbe  posters  in  particular  ....  464 
V,  The  share  of  corruption  in  electioneering.  The  long-standing 
nature  of  corrupt  practices  in  English  political  life  and  the 
unavailing  struggle  of  the  Ian  with  tliem  during  the  last  haJf- 
century.  The  appearance  of  the  Caucus  on  the  scene  in  no 
way  changes  the  aspect  of  aSaiiB,  many  Associations  even 
being  compromised  iu  the  illicit  proceedings  at  the  elections 
of  18B0.  The  great  reform  of  the  Corrupt  Practices  Act  of 
1863.  How  this  Act  has  not  produced  its  full  effect  owing 
lo  the  interposition  of  tbe  Associations,  whose  permanent 
existence  and  anonymous  and  collective  character  make 
them  a  screen  for  illegal  electioneering  operations.  The 
shsenco  of  any  precise  definition  in  the  Act  of  the  candi- 
date's responsibility  for  the  doings  of  the  Association,  and 
tbe  practical  difBculties  of  establishing  it  in  law.  How  the 
permanent  and  independent  organization  of  the  Associations 
enables  them  to  paralyze  the  preventive  clause  of  the  Act, 
which  limits  electioneering  expenses,  by  producing  a  solution 
of  continuity  between  its  disbursements  for  the  election  and 
the  "  election  expenditure  "  of  the  candidate  ;  the  special 
expedients  resorted  to  for  this  purpose  ;  the  distinction  t>e- 
tween  tbe  "prospective  candidate  "  and  the  "  actual  candi- 
date." How  the  Cancus  has  contributed  to  the  changes  in 
the  forms  and  modes  of  corruption,  which  has  become  rather 
indirect  and  is  practised  in  a  wholesale  fashion.  Collective 
treating  at  "social  meetings."  The  preliminary  outlay  in- 
curred by  the  candidate  with  the  same  view.  Tbe  promises 
of  special  legislation,  in  which  the  candidate  and  the  Asso- 
ciation combme,  give  tbe  finishing  touch  to  indirect  and 
collective  corruption 468 

TL  Tbe  periodical  rehearsals  of  the  operations  of  the  parties  at  local 
elections.  The  introduction  of  politics  into  local  contests  is 
of  old  standing.  How  it  was  practised  by  the  oligarchical 
corporations  of  tbe  era  preceding  I63S,  and  after  tbe  great 
municipal  and  parliamentary  reforms ;  the  pnrrliase  of  mu- 
nicipal voles  in  view  of  the  parllameniary  elections  and  the 


.coy  Google 


CONTENTS  OF  THE   FIBST  VOLUME 


■ystematic  contamination  of  local  pablic  life  by  the  importa- 
tion of  politics  into  municipal  affairs.  Ah  time  goes  on  the 
practice  begins  to  decline,  but  the  Birmingham  Caucus 
appears  on  the  scene,  importing  fresh  life  to  it  and  T^lng  it 
to  the  leTel  of  a  principle.  Mr.  Chamberlain's  theory.  How 
the  Birmingham  method,  after  some  opposition,  gains  a 
footing  throughout  the  countiy,  but  soon  proves  destructive 
of  healthy  political  life  ;  it  has  not  afiected  the  integrit;  of 
monicipal  administration,  and  why,  although  disclosing  ob- 
jectionable symptoms  of  the  subordination  of  tiie  interests 
of  the  town  to  those  of  a  politics!  pany ;  but  it  has  already 
succeeded  in  driving  good  citlEeni  away  from  municip^  life. 
In  lowering  the  standard  of  local  assemblies,  and  in  malting 
animosity  between  the  citisens  a  fixture :  "  there  is  no  cool- 
ing time."  Things  are  growing  worse.  The  experience  of 
the  city  of  Birmingham  Itself.  Why  the  party  organiza- 
tions are  not  at  liherty  to  give  up  the  System,  the  need  tor 
keeping  the  Organization  in  good  order,  and  the  opposition 

of  the  "workers" 4B2 

TIL  The  relations  of  the  Association  with  the  member  elected  by 
its  efforts.  The  successive  stages  of  the  electoral  depend- 
ence of  the  M.P.,  which  kept  pace  with  the  extension  of  tbe 
suftr^e  and  of  means  of  communication,  and  with  the  grow- 
ing ascendency  of  free  opinion.  How  the  permanent  organ- 
ization of  the  Caucus  gave  this  dependence  a  rigid  character, 
by  assuraJDg,  in  pursuance  of  its  representative  pretensions, 
a  formal  authority  and  a  continuous  supervision  over  the 
M.P.  The  abortive  attempts  at  resistance  to  the  Caucos. 
The  various  servitudes  of  the  M.P.  affecting  his  person,  his 
Influence,  and  his  political  conscience.  Tbe  pressure  put  on 
the  parliamentary  conduct  of  the  M.P.  by  the  Associations 
makes  him  a  delegate  instead  of  a  representative.  The  obli- 
gations of  the  M.P.  are  not  to  the  Caucus  alone,  bnt  the 
Caucus  has  the  first  mortgage  over  his  political  conscience  .  403 

FIFTH  CHAPTER 

THB    SnrREKG   GOVEsailBNT    IN   TBE   Caucds GOS 

The  central  organizations  of  the  parties.  I.  Tbe  oentral 
Liberal  Orgtuization  ;  its  constituent  parts ;  the  Publication 
Department ;  the  great  provincial  branches  ....  602 
n.  The  twofold  mission,  local  and  national,  of  the  central  Oi^ani- 
zation.  How  it  intervenes  in  the  work  of  the  Associations 
and  prepares  the  local  forces  of  the  party  for  the  electoral 
battie.     Its  rftle  in  tbe  selection  of  candidates ;  to  what 


.coy  Google 


C0NTBNT8  OF  THE  FIRST  VOLUME 


extent  wlic-poUing  pTeviila ;  the  oompolsory  preference 
which  it  haa  for  wealth;  c&itdid&tea.  Tlie  pecuniMT  re- 
eoDicM  of  the  central  OrganizaUon 606 

nL  How  the  Organization  ensures  the  unity  of  movement  of  all 
the  contiDgenie  of  the  party  by  means  of  its  federative 
mecbaniem.  The  annual  meetings  of  the  delegates.  How 
the  resolations  are  put  into  shape  and  voted ;  no  discussion ; 
no  adequate  control  left  for  the  opinion  of  the  party.  The 
attacks  of  the  advanced  Liberals  on  the  Federation  dno 
to  its  fusion  with  the  special  Oi^anization  of  the  "ofBcial 
leaders."  The  discontent  invades  the  precincts  even  of  the 
Federation,  in  wblch  demands  are  put  forward  that  its 
machinery  should  be  made  more  representative  and  more 
democratic.  These  demands  meet  with  only  slight  satis- 
faction    GOB 

IV.  llie  limitations  Imposed  on  the  power  of  the  chie&  of  the 
Federation  and  of  the  "official  leaders"  b;  the  authority  of 
opinion.  The  nature  of  opinion  and  its  doable  part ;  it  is  a 
capricioos  despot  and  a  docile  slave.  Analysis  of  the  rela- 
tions of  the  leaders  with  opinion.  How  the  leaders  try  to 
follow  it  and  hovr  tbeir  conduct  is  determined  by  electoral 
preoccupations.  How,  in  compliance  with  these  preoccupa- 
Ijons  or  out  of  solicitude  tor  the  public  interest,  they  fashion 
opinion ;  the  edueatioa  of  opinion.  How  and  with  what 
object  they  keep  it  on  the  alert  In  regard  to  current  politics  614 
V.  How  the  central  Organization  of  the  party,  in  stirring  up  Its 
adherents,  influences  alike  the  bulk  of  its  own  party,  the 
electorate  in  general,  and  Parliament.  Opinion  growing 
like  an  avalanche.  How  this  effect  Is  contrived.  The  part 
which  the  local  Associations  play  in  it.  Tbe  conditions 
under  which  opinion  is  turned  out  at  will  and  under  which 
it  takes  eflect.  How  the  reaction  of  the  factitious  demon- 
Btratlons  aifecta  their  authors  or  instigators  themselves.  The 
psychological  reason,  the  branching-ofi  of  feelings  produced 
by  the  sole  fact  of  their  manifestation.  The  pressure  of  the 
central  Organization  on  the  M.P.  's.  Tbe  real  range  of  influ- 
ence of  the  central  Organization  and  Its  limits       .  .  617 

VL  The  central  Conservative  Oi^anization.  Its  double  mechan- 
ism prodnoed  by  the  political  evolution  of  Toryism.  The 
federation  of  the  popular  Associations.  The  Central  Office 
of  the  leaders.  Their  mutual  relations.  All  the  power  is 
in  the  hands  of  the  Central  Office.  Its  provincl^  ^ents 
and  tbe  provincial  Federations.  How  everything  converges 
in  tbe  Central  OfBce.  The  annual  meetings  of  the  delegates 
of  the  popular  Associations ;  the  gentleman  element  and  tbe 
plebelsD  element.  Debate  in  free  in  these  assemblies,  hut 
their  decisious  have  no  binding  force.    While  lacking  iniUa- 


.coy  Google 


CONTENTS  OF  THE  FIRST  VOLUME 


tiTe  and  autborit;  of  ita  own,  the  popular  Toiy  OiganlEa- 
tioD,  none  the  leas,  bringti  about  the  pUy  of  opinion  in  the 
intoreal  of  the  party.  Uow  Uie  econou;  of  the  Tory  eystem 
does  but  accentuate  the  traits  peculiar  to  each  Organization .  6 

SIXTH  CHAPTER 

ADXILIABV   and   RiTAL  OSOAHIZATIOHS 6 

L  Political  organ  izatiuns  of  women.  The  antecedents  of  toe 
iniervendon  of  women  in  politics  from  Uie  cluse  of  the 
eigbteentli  century  down  to  the  Reform  of  1807.  The 
impetus  given  since  1898 ;  women  canvasseri  and  speakeiB 
at  electoral  meetings,  eapeoially  at  the  general  election  of 

1880 6 

U  The  women  politicians  fighting  at  tlie  outset  as  free  lances  are 
regularly  enroled,  for  the  fir^t  time,  in  tbe  Primrose  League, 
founded  by  tiie  Tories  as  a  Luilitia  uf  "  mural  order,"  appeal- 
ing to  all  tbe  living  forces  of  aocieiy  without  distinction  of 
Tank.  llie  principles  of  the  League  ajid  tile  unfounded 
pretensions  which  it  extracts  from  them  to  pose  as  inde-, 
pendent  of  poUtical  parties ;  It  la  in  the  aerrlce  of  the  Tory 
party  6: 

m.  The  organization  of  the  League.  The  grades  of  its  knights 
hood.  The  badges.  Tbe  local  Habitationa  and  the  Grand 
Habitation  with  tbe  Grand  Council.  The  relations  of  the 
Habitations  with  the  Conaervative  Associations.  How  tbe 
members  of  tbe  League,  and  the  women  in  particular,  work 
up  the  districts  for  the  good  of  the  "  cause '' ;  their  co-opera- 
Uor.  in  the  Regiatration  canvass;  their  daily  propaganda ;  the 
distribution  of  political  pablicationa ;  the  lectures  and  their 
general  tendency 51 

IV.  The  real  weapon  of  the  League  is  the  social  action  of  its 
Qpper-clasB  members.  The  "  social  meetings  "  and  the  fStes 
organized  by  the  League  for  the  benefit  of  tbe  masses ;  the 
"union of  classes"  completed  by  the  union  of  aexes.  The 
skilful  exploitation  of  self-love  and  vanity  along  the  whole 
line  of  society  on  the  principle  of  "  Do  not  argue,  but  take 
them  In  aocially."  How  the  permanent  supply  of  gocial 
connideratiiin  provided  hy  tbe  League  replaces  the  time- 
honoured  practices  of  electoral  corruption  hampered  by  the 
new  law.  The  controversy  on  the  use  of  social  influence  by 
the  League  as  an  offensive  weapon  against  Its  opponents ; 

boycotting 6- 

V.  The  women  who  make  tbe  League  a  aucceaa  are  by  no  means 
the  controllers  of  it ;  the  real  power  is  wielded  by  men.  In 
general  the  government  of  the  League  is  autoritarian,  the 


.coy  Google 


CONTENTS  OF  THE   FIRST  VOLUME 


Grand  Habitation  la  only  a  show  aaaembl;,  the  local  Babl- 
tMioDfl  hare  no  life  of  tlieir  own,  and  are  prevented  from 

developiog  ona M7 

VI.  Hie  gratification  of  anobber;  and  the  attraction  of  the  feetiri- 
ties  offered  by  the  League  are  not  enough  to  account  for  its 
extraordinary  snccess,  Thia  is  due  to  other  and  deeper 
cauBea :  to  the  levelling  of  barriers  Iwtween  class  and  class, 
which  it  hu  managed  to  bring  about  to  a  certain  extent, 
and  to  its  appearing  to  meet  the  want,  long  felt  b;  society, 
of  a  politicaJ  cement  lesa  artiUcial  than  that  of  the  machinery 
of  party  organization.  Do  the  instruments  and  tbe  methods 
employed  to  produce  these  eflecta  contribute  to  a  healthy 
political  life  ?  Is  it  true  that  Uie  Primrose  League  has  a  bene- 
ficial influence  on  manners,  develops  pnblic  Bpirit,  and  pre- 
vents the  advent  of  a  mechanically  wire-pulled  democracy  ?  U8 
VlL  The  Liberals  combat  the  Primrose  league  with  Liberal  Asso- 
ciations of  women.  The  autonomist  basis  of  their  organiza- 
tion. The  lofty  social  ideal  with  which  the  Women's  Liberal 
Associations  started.  The  composition  of  their  contingenta. 
Their  meetings.  Wherein  their  modu*  operandi  differs  from 
that  of  the  Primrose  League ;  the  poinu  of  resemblance. 
What  baa  become  of  the  ideaJ  of  action  conceived  by  the 
Liberal  women ;  the  serioos  efforts  made  to  put  it  into 
practice.  The  relations  of  the  Women's  Liberal  Aaeocia- 
Uona  with  the  Liberal  party.  The  canvassers  and  platform 
speakers  supplied  by  the  Women's  Associations  to  the  party. 
Their  co-operation,  however,  is  lees  useful  to  it  than  that  of 
the  Primrose  Dames  to  the  Tory  party.  The  difference  of 
opinion  among  Liberal  women  on  tlie  question  of  female  par- 
liamentary suffrage  leads  to  the  establishment  of  two  central 
organizations,  the  Liberal  Federation  and  the  Liberal  Asso- 
ciatJon.  The  different  temperament  of  tbe  rival  sifters. 
Tbe  Liberal  Unionist  Women's  Organization  .  .  .  6SS 
VUL  The  participaUoB  of  women  in  the  struggles  of  parties,  sanc- 
tioned by  the  necessities  of  the  war  which  tliey  wage  on  each 
other,  does  not  as  yet  meet  with  the  nnanimous  upprobation 
of  men.  The  complaints  against  "women's  electioneering." 
What  the  husbands  think.  The  electioneering  extravagances 
in  which  women  indulge :  tbe  singing  of  couplets.  Tbe  readi- 
ness of  women  to  rush  into  militant  politics ;  it  becomes  for 
them  B  new  source  of  moral  emotions,  which  strike  the  imagi- 
nation and  give  more  scoi*  even  to  their  domestic  virtues ; 
eabotiuage  is  also  satififled  thereby 667 


.coy  Google 


CONTEMTS  OP  THE  FIBST  VOLUME 


SEVENTH  CHAPTER 
AnxiLiART  uiB  RiTAL  OROiniziTiONi  (continued)         .               .  661 
I.   Special  organizations  of  political  speakers.     Tbe  Eight;  Clab ; 
how  this  association  formed  for  tbe  free  propaganda  of  Lib- 
eral principles  has  become  a  piece  of  tbe  machinery  of  the 
part;.    The  United  Club  on  the  Tory  side.    These  "speak- 
ing clubs  "  are  also  nurseries  of  candidates   ....  661 
IL   NoD-polltical  organizations  allied  with  the  party  organizations 
for  the  defence  of  special  interoBts.     The  most  important 
are  connected  with  the  Church  and  the  public-house  ;   tbe 
Liberation  Society  and  the  Church  Defence  Institution  ;  the 
Licensed  Vicuiallera'  Association  and  tbe  United  Kingdom 
AllUnce 563 

m.  Political  organizations  which  emulate  the  ofBcial  party  organi- 
zations. Their  abortive  attempts  to  obtain  a  footing.  The 
examples  of  the  Liberal  League  and  tbe  National  Cooserva- 
tive  League.  The  position  of  the  National  Reform  Union, 
which  tries  to  provide  an  organization  for  advanced  and 
independent  Liberals.  The  proved  impossibility  of  tbe 
existence  witliin  tbe  limits  of  the  party  of  rival  and  inde- 
pendent oiganizations 607 

IV.  An  independent  org^nizalion  has  lately  been  created  only 
through  a  revolt  against  tbe  historic  parties,  in  the  interests 
of  "Labour."  Confined  at  the  outset  to  efiorts  lo  bring 
"Labour  Members"  into  the  House,  without  any  idea  of 
class  antagonism  or  hostility  towards  the  orthodox  parties, 
the  movement,  upheld  mainly  by  Trades  Unionists,  in  mo- 
nopolized, after  1800,  by  tlie  Socialists,  who  declare  war  on 
the  regular  parties  because  they  are  all,  without  distinction, 
tools  of  capitali«m.  Even  the  doctrinaire  Socialists  of  the 
Fabian  Society  are  up  iti  arms  against  tbe  Liberal  party, 
which  becomes,  in  a  special  degree,  the  target  of  the  "  labour 
party."  Attacks  on  the  "  Labour  Members"  of  tbe  Liberal 
party  and  on  its  Organization,  which  is  accused  of  making 
away  with  labour  representation  in  the  distribution  of  candi- 
datures. Tbe  independents  engage,  without  much  success, 
in  the  electoral  contest  of  1802,  and  set  up  an  organization 
throughout  tbe  country  called  the  Independent  Labour  Party. 
The  collectivist  programme  of  the  I.  L.  P, ;  its  contingents 
from  a  social  and  intellectual  point  of  view.  Its  ethical 
tendencies.  The  reliRious  feeling  which  animates  it  finds  its 
highest  expression  in  tbe  "  Labour  Church."  The  fervour 
of  the  I.  L.  P.  men,  who  are  the  only  ones  who  "pay  for 
their  own  politics."  Thci-  aninur  in  diffiisinc  political  cul- 
ture.    Sectarian  in  their  docrines,  they  are  autoritadan  in 


.coy  Google 


CONTESTS   OF  THE  rmST  VOLUME 


tbeir  oigantzation ;  their  inflexible  disdpliDe.  "LkbouT 
cuididateB "  in  Uie  looal  asseinbliee.  The  I.  L.  P.  in  the 
general  electloa  of  ISSfi.  Without  obtaining  any  immediate 
snccees  for  their  party,  they  exert  a  disaolveut  action  on  the 
two  great  parties  in  the  Siat« & 

EIGHTH  CHAPTER 

Sdhkart .6 

L '  General  view  of  the  rOle  of  the  Caucus.  Its  design  tending 
to  make  party  government  more  democratic  obtained  but 
a  very  limited  auccesB,  which  ilea  more  In  form  than  in 
easence.  How  the  application,  essayed  by  the  Caucus,  of 
the  democraUc  principle  in  all  Its  strictneBS,  even  to  extra- 
constitutional  political  relations,  has  but  accentuated  the 
inevitable  divergence  between  inatitutloiia  and  manners  pro- 
duced by  the  electoral  reform  of  1867,  and  has  offered  only 
the  mechanical  contrivance  of  organization  for  reconciling 
them.  Deposed  in  theory,  the  middle  class  recovers  power 
by  surreptitioua  devices,  in  spite  of  the  democratized  organi- 
zation of  the  party.  However,  from  other  points  of  view, 
this  organization  has  really  enhanced  the  importance  of  small 
folk  in  the  party  counsels,  and  has  contribated  especially  to 

their  rise  in  the  social  scale fi 

n.  But  (be  Caucus  has  done  nothing  to  nuse  the  pnblic  spirit  of 
the  masses.  Its  radical  inability  to  serve  as  an  instmment 
of  political  education.  Far  from  stimulating  the  exercise  of 
political  judgment,  it  tended  to  stereotype  opinion,  though 
In  this  it  was  co-operating  with  a  general  movement,  the 
effect  of  which  was  to  obliterate  individuality;  "we  now 
think  in  battalions."  How  the  Caucus,  by  making  the 
unity  of  the  party  an  object  of  pious  devotion  dispensing 
with  the  necessity  of  professing  reasoned  principles,  devel' 
,oped  impatience  of  dlscueeion,  fanaticism,  and  intolerance, 
while  inclining  men's  minds  towards  moral  and  intellectual 
opportunism,  towards  a  policy  of  "quarterly  dividends." 
How  these  properties  of  the  Caucus  made  it  an  admliable 
vehicle  for  the  new  political  tendencies,  for  Radicatiam, 
started  after  1868,  which  brought  with  it  formal  an4  senti- 
mental democracy G 

in.  How  this  democracy  was  also  furthered  by  the  modttt  operandi 
of  the  Caucus,  which  appealed  by  preference  to  the  emotions 
and  which  employed  wholesale,  rigidly  acting  proceaaea,  regu- 
lated beforehand  by  cut-and-dried  methods.  How  these 
methods  worked  on  behalf  of  an  external  orthodoxy  had 
the  effect  of  settling  all  the  political  relations  aimed  at  by 


.coy  Google 


CONTENTS  OF  THE  FIEST  VOLUME 


the  Caucos,  wbetlier  m&nifuUtionB  of  ceuon  of  demonslra- 
tioDB  of  political  feeling  vere  involved,  in  a  mecb&nical  mj  587 
IV.  How  the  dwindling  of  individaality  and  the  development  of 
formalism  in  political  relations  culminated  in  the  sphere  of 
tbe  leadership ;  how  the  too  rigid  application  of  tho  principle 
of  autonomy  in  the  oi^aniz^ion  of  the  party  bas  parcelled 
oat  the  leadership  for  the  benefit  of  local  mediocrity,  and 
how  unqualified  tidhesion  to  the  party  creed,  converted  into 
the  supreme  political  virtue  and  ascertained  by  the  ma- 
chinery of  the  Organization,  lias  given  importance  especially 
to  conventional  and  external  qualities  in  pultllc  men.  Fat 
from  having  eliminated  the  plutocratic  element  and  the 
influence  of  social  rank,  the  Caticus  make*  use  of  them 
Itaeif.  The  monopoly  of  leadership  has  only  changed  its 
aspect;  being  more  manufactured,  it  is  more  divided  and 
less  responsible.  The  groning  influence  of  the  "worker." 
"Electioneering  is  now  quite  a  business."  To  what  ezten 
the  Caucus  favotire  the  rise  of  the  profesrional  politician. 
Bow  it  comes  ationt,  in  the  long  nm,  that  the  design  formed 
by  the  Caucus  of  accelerating  the  democratic  process  in 
political  society  and  of  oigauizing  public  life  into  a  moral 
whole  lias  failed,  and  that  it  tends  rather  to  set  up  a  govern- 
ment by  machine  instead  of  a  respoDsible  government  by 
human  beings,  and  offers  society  in  quest  of  a  new  pUitical 

synthesis  a  purely  mechanical  one 600 

V.  The  rOle  of  the  Caucus  in  the  proper  sphere  of  parties.  To 
what  extent  it  ensured,  by  means  of  its  organization,  a  real 
representation  to  the  various  elements  of  the  party  and 
proved  iuelf  able  to  serve  as  a  faithful  and  independent 
mouthpiece  of  opinion.  How  the  Caucus  sometimes  bnrried 
the  party  and  at  others  prevented  it  from  moving  on  freely. 
How  it  maintained  cohesion  in  the  ranks  of  the  party,  not 
so  much  by  its  intrinsic  force  as  by  the  ofGce  of  standaid- 
bearer  of  the  party  which  it  assumed.  Yet  it  swelled  the 
contingents  of  the  party  by  attracting  into  it  the  "  blanks  " 
through  its  Organizatjon,  which  popularized  the  style  and 
title,  the  abstract  notion  of  the  party,  so  slow  t«  lay  hold 
of  the  popular  mind.  But  eventually  the  Caucus  proved 
powerless  to  stop  party  divisions,  they  being  an  inevitable 
effect  of  the  growing  complexity  of  sociai  relations,  which 
has  long  since  smitten  and  doomed  the  classic  dualism  of 
parties  with  their  old  cohesion.  Being  intent  on  the  idea  of 
restoring  this  cohesion,  and  having  none  but  mechanical 
means  and  methods  at  its  dlspoeal  for  reuniting  the  incon- 
gruous elements,  the  Caucus  was  of  necessity  led  to  pave 
the  way  for  government  by  machine.  Being  unable  to  set 
the  old  party  system  on  its  legs  again,  the  Caucus  has 


.coy  Google 


CONTENTS  OF  THE  FmST   VOLUME 


even  aggravated  Its  evils  bj  liiTeetiDg  party  tTrana;  with 
l^al  claima,  by  doing  awa;  with  freedom  of  ciuididatuieB, 
and  by  usurping  the  monopoly  of  party  orthodoxy,  and 
drawing  tbeiefrom  a  power  of  moral  coercion  over  lis  fol- 
lowers. No  refuge  from  the  ineiorable  party  orthodoxy  save 
in  acbiim  ;  no  place  tor  free  or  independent  organizations  .  & 
TL  The  Caucus  has  not  improved  the  working  of  parliamentary 
government  either ;  on  the  contrary,  it  has  helped  U)  warp 
its  representative  principle,  to  disturb  the  equilibrium  in 
the  relationa  between  the  parliamentary  leaders  with  the 
Members  and  in  those  between  Parliament  and  public  opin- 
ion. It  has  diminished  the  element  of  personal  confidence 
in  the  rela^ons  of  the  electors  with  the  candidates,  and 
ei;>ecially  with  the  Members,  and  has  appropriated  the  obU- 
gaUons  of  the  M.P.  to  his  conatituents.  The  Member  having 
been  transformed  by  the  Caucus  Into  a  delegate  with  dimin- 
ished responsibility  and  independence,  the  great  parliamen- 
tary leadeis  leaning  directly  on  the  electoral  body  have  only 
become  more  powerful  and  more  autocratic,  to  the  detriment 
of  the  equilibrium  which  Cabinet  government  presupposes  as 
between  Members  and  party  leaders ;  more  than  this,  Ihe 
leaders  can  make  use  of  the  Caucus  to  force  the  hand  of  the 
Hembers  in  the  House  without  compromising  themselveB 
peisonally.  Tlie  help  given  b;  the  Caucus  to  tiie  parlia- 
mentary leaders,  however,  imposes  obligations  on  tbem, 
sometimes  of  an  onerous  kind.  How  the  arbitrament  of 
opinion  has  more  ditBculty  In  making  itself  felt  in  the  par- 
liamentary sphere,  owing  to  the  interposition  of  the  Caucus. 
The  general  reservation,  subject  to  which  the  deterioration 
of  parliamentary  government,  as  well  as  the  other  political 
eSects  credited  to  the  Caucus,  are  attribntable  to  It,  inas- 
much as  the  "Caucus"  represents  but  one  of  the  aspects  in 
the  complex  whole  formed  by  the  currents  constituting  the 
"democratic  movement,"  and  Is  the  mirror  as  well  as  the 
focus  of  the  phenomena  which  it  has  raaniteated  .  .  .6 
TIL  How  the  dlraolvent  action  of  the  forces  represented  by  the 
Caucus  has  been  attenuated  In  practice  b;  opposing  intluences 
of  a  sentimental  kind, — such  as  the  traditional  authority 
of  the  landlords,  of  the  Church  ;  the  fascination  which  rank 
Btili  exercises,  even  over  the  Radical  masses ;  the  excep- 
tional prestige  of  Illustrious  leaders ;  the  personal  ascendency 
of  character  and  knowledge, — as  well  as  by  local  considera- 
tions and  prosaic  anxieties  about  material  Intetests.  The 
Caucus  has  not  made  sufficient  allowance  for  the  living 
forcM  of  society.  Again,  the  progress  of  the  Caucus  has 
been  hampered  by  the  slendemess  of  Its  material  r 
and  bj  the  shortcoming,  as  wll  as  the  merits,  of  Us  o 


.coy  Google 


CONTENTS  OF  THE  FIBST  VOLUME 


pertonnd.      Aft«r  all,  the  Cancua  is  atlll   far  from  being 

"  enthroned  OD  the  miiiB  of  the  British  CoDSlitntion".  .  S12 
VUL  Still,  the  living  forces  which  hold  the  Caociia  in  check  tend  to 
decline.  The  personal  Infiuences  of  rank,  aa  well  as  of  char- 
acter and  knowledge,  have  more  and  more  difficulty  in  com- 
ing forward,  owing  to  the  exceaslve  exiension  of  the  towna 
and  the  growing  urban  abeenweiam  which  Mtrangea  men 
from  each  otber,  especially  the  rich  and  the  poor,  not  to 
mentloD  the  obetaclee  raiied  by  the  Caucus,  which  invariably 
Insists  on  the  shibboleth  of  Ihe  party  and  by  Its  organiza- 
tion rather  favours  the  rise  of  local  mediocrity.  "  Defer- 
ence" is  declining  and  will  continue  to  decline,  the  Caactu 
contributing  thereto,  even  on  the  Tory  side.  With  tbe 
solidarity  of  the  great  religious  bodies,  which  is  growing 
weaher  by  the  help  of  liberty,  another  old  living  force  is 
passing  away.  At  the  same  time  political  apathy  la  infecting 
society,  and  is  tending  to  drive  away  the  cultivated  clases 
from  public  life  without  bringing  Uie  new  strata  into  it. 
This  dawn  of  a  separation  between  society  at  lai^  and  the 
minority  engaged  in  polities  Is  accompanied  by  the  oblitera- 
tion of  the  distinctive  principles  which  divided  the  parties, 
so  that  the  latter  will  be  reduced  to  the  condition  of  simple 
aggregates  with  nothing  but  a  mechanical  oi^nlzation  for  a 
vital  system.  The  vacuum  created  owing  to  the  Caucus  will 
be  filled  by  the  Caucus  itself,  and  instead  of  being  a  means, 
the  party  Oi^tanizations,  henceforth  representing  nothing  but 
convention,  wilt  become  an  end  U>  which  evei^thlng  will  be 
subordinated.  In  defiance  of  real  interests  and  to  the  det- 
riment of  the  purity  of  public  manners.  Premonitory  symp- 
toms of  this  state  of  things,  in  mnnicipal  life  for  instance, 
and  apprehensions  excited  from  this  point  of  view  by  the 
proposed  payment  of  Members  of  Parliament.  Symptoms 
which  bid  fair  to  slightly  hamper  the  upward  movement 
of  the  Oi^nizations,  such  as  the  growing  scepticism  with 
regard  to  political  parties  or  the  Socialist  secesHion.  The 
light  wbicb  can  be  thrown  on  all  these  data  and  all  these 
forecasts  and  in  general  on  the  whole  problem  of  the  organi- 
zaUon  of  the  electoral  masses  by  the  more  ample  experience 
of  the  American  section  of  the  Anglo-Saxon  world  .  618 


.coy  Google 


PREFACE 

Although  political  parties  are  as  old  as  popular  govern- 
ment  itself,  their  nature,  their  forces,  and  the  modes  in  which 
they  have  been  organized  have  received  comparatively  little 
attention  either  from  historians  or  from  writers  on  what  is 
beginning  to  be  called  political  science.  Something  has  been 
said,  and  by  no  one  perhaps  so  well  as  by  Edmund  Burke, 
npoQ  the  theory  and  aim  of  Party,  and  the  functiona  which  it 
ought  to  discharge;  and  historical  accounts,  though  seldom 
either  full  or  philosophical,  have  been  given  of  the  develop- 
ment and  career  of  the  two  great  parties  in  England  and  in 
the  American  Union.  But  no  one  ha^,  so  far  as  I  know,  pro- 
duced any  treatise  containing  a  systematic  examination  and 
description  of  the  structure  of  parties  as  organizations  gov- 
erned by  settled  rules  and  working  by  established  methods. 
Even  in  the  United  States,  where  party  organization  early 
attained  a  completeness  and  effective  power  unapproached  in 
any  other  country,  I  could  not  find,  when  in  1883  I  began  to 
study  and  was  seeking  to  portray  the  institutions  of  that  coun- 
try, any  account  of  the  very  remarkable  and  well-compacted 
scheme  of  oi^anization  which  had  been  at  work  there  for  forty 
or  fifty  years ;  and  noted  that  among  even  the  best-educated 
men  there  were  few  who  had  mastered  its  details.  The  his- 
torical action  of  the  parties,  their  principles  or  tenets,  their 
local  distribution,  the  social  infiuences  that  pervaded  them, 
the  characters  of  the  men  who  had  led  them,  —  these  were  the 
matters  on  which  attention  had  been  fised,  to  the  neglect  of 
the  less  attractive  and  less  conspicuous  questions  connected 
with  the  machinery  by  which  they  worked.  There  was  no 
book  on  which  one  could  draw,'  and  the  persons  whom  I  in- 
terrogated usually  seemed  surprised  that  a  stranger  should 
feel  interested  in  enquiries  of  the  kind.     Still  less  has  any 

1 1  note  idtta  interest  that  M.  OstrngorBkl  sayn  In  bis  preface  that  he  was 
tUaek  by  tbe  same  fact  when  he  began  to  study  the  anbject. 


.coy  Google 


xl  PREFACE 

attempt  been  made  in  Europe  to  handle  the  topic  as  a  whole. 
There  is  room,  therefore,  for 'a  treatise  which  shall  take  Party 
Oi^anization  and  Party  Machinery  for  its  specific  subject,  and 
shall  endeavour  to  treat  the^e  phenomena  of  modern  politics 
with  a  fulness  commensurate  to  the  importance  of  the  part 
which  they  play  to-day  in  popular  governments. 

They  have  indeed  now  become  so  apparently  essential  a  part 
of  democratic  institutions  in  the  country  which  has  seen  their 
most  complete  development  that  the  traveller  in  the  United 
States  is  disposed  to  ask  how  it  happens  that  they  are  of  snch 
recent  appearance  in  history,  and  how  democracies  in  other 
ages  and  countries  got  on  without  them,  seeing  that  in  all 
popular  governments  there  have  been  active  and  often  ex- 
tremely fierce  and  violent  parties.  The  answer  is  that  popular 
governments  have  within  the  last  hundred  years  entered  upon 
a  new  phase,  which  is  marked  by  two  remarkable  facts.  The 
number  of  participants  in  the  business  of  government  is  im- 
mensely greater,  and  the  method  of  participation  is  much 
more  pacific.  The  republics  of  antiquity,  as  well  as  those  of 
medieval  Germany  (including  Switzerland)  and  Italy,  were 
each  of  them  with  few  exceptions  composed  of  an  exceedingly 
small  number  of  citizens  participating  in  the  control  of  the 
state  as  compared  with  those  modem  democracies  which  we 
see  in  the  United  States,  in  Britain  and  in  her  8elf.^ovemiDg 
colonies,  in  France,  in  Belgium,  in  Norway.  And  in  the  second 
place,  these  republics  consisted  of  men  accustomed  to  the  use 
of  arms,  and  r^idy  to  resort  to  arms  on  slight  occasion,  eo  Ibat 
when  party  feeling  rose  above  a  certain  temperature,  physical 
force  settled  the  dispute.  Modern  democracies  consist  of  hun- 
dreds of  thousands  or  even  millions  of  voters,  and  their  method 
of  action  is  by  dropping  into  boxes  pieces  of  paper  bearing  the 
names  of  candidates.  These  absolutely  new  conditions  re- 
quired new  methods,  and  the  inventive  genius  of  man  was  not 
long  in  devising  the  methods. 

In  England,  the  oldest  example  in  the  modem  world  of  a 
large  community  whose  government,  though  far  from  demo- 
cratic, had,  at  any  rate  since  the  seventeenth  century,  a  sensi- 
ble infusion  of  the  popular  element,  parties  had  existed  for 
some  two  hundred  years  before  the  great  extensions  of  the 
suffrage  which  came  in  1867  and  1884.     But  the  parties  had 


.coy  Google 


PREFACE  Ji\i 

little  or  no  o^anization  in  the  sense  we  now  give  to  the  term. 
The  members  of  a  party  were  linked  together  by  ties  of  reli- 
gious sympathy,  or  of  economic  intei-est,  or  of  belief  in  a  few 
broad  ideas,  or  of  attachment  to  particular  families.  The 
only  occasions  on  which  parties  could  act  together  by  pacific 
methods  were  afforded  by  parliamentary  elections.  Down  till 
1832,  the  number  of  voters  in  nearly  aM  the  boroughs  was  so 
small,  and  the  control  of  one  person,  or  a  few  persons,  was 
so  effective  in  most  of  those  boroughs,  that  so  organization  of 
the  voters  was  needed,  while  in  the  counties  the  influence  of  a 
few  great  landowning  families  supplied  the  necessary  leader- 
ship when  an  Section  arrived.  Political  clubs,  which  after  all 
touch  only  a  small  number  of  voters,  were  little  known  and 
unimportant  before  the  Keform  Bill  of  1832.  Local  party 
associations  are  practically  the  growth,  in  their  present  activity 
and  power,  of  the  last  thirty-five  years. 

In  the  United  States  the  need  of  collecting  and  disciplining 
the  voting  power  in  which  the  strength  of  the  parties  lay,  was 
sooner  felt,  first,  because  the  number  of  voters  was,  in  propor- 
tion to  the  total  population,  much  larger  than  in  England,  and 
elections  were  much  more  frequent;  secondly,  because  there 
existed  a  completely  popular  elective  system  of  local  govern- 
ment; thirdly,  because  elections  of  all  kinds  came  oftener;  and 
fourthly,  because  the  number  of  offices  given  by  popular  elec- 
tion was  larger.  Yet  in  the  United  States  it  was  not  till  the 
extensions  of  the  electoral  sufFrage  in  the  several  States,  which 
mark  the  period  between  1810  and  1840,  together  with  the 
corresponding  democratization  of  the  administrative  and  judi- 
cial machinery  of  State  government,  had  greatly  increased  the 
niunber  and  power  of  voters  and  the  number  of  elective  of&ces 
that  the  portentous  fabric  of  party  organization  which  we  see 
to-day  began  to  be  built  up,  Its  foundations  were  laid  be- 
tween 1820  and  1830.  Its  completion  can  hardly  be  placed 
earlier  than  1860.  And  it  rose  so  quietly  and  gradually  that 
the  keen  eye  of  Toequeville,  whose  philosophic  study  of 
American  democracy  was  published  in  1834,  had  not  noted 
its  appearance,  much  less  foreseen  the  tremendous  power  it 
was  destined  to  exert.  Not  indeed  do  I  know  of  any  Euro- 
pean visitor  to  the  United  States  down  to  very  recent  times 
who  seems  to  have  been  struck  by  it,  or  to  have  appreciated 


.coy  Google 


zlii  PREFACE 

its  importance.  It  has  now  grown  to  be  a  secoDd  ruling  force 
in  the  country,  in  some  respects  fully  as  powerful  as  the  offi- 
cial admiaistratioDS  wMch  the  Constitutions  of  the  Nation  and 
of  the  several  States  have  established.  It  has  become  a  sort  of 
link  between  the  legislative  and  the  executive  departments  of 
the  Federal  Governmeut,  and  may  (in  some  aspects)  almost  be 
called  a  secoud  and  parallel  govemmeat,  directing  that  which, 
the  Constitution  creates.  Its  unit,  the  Primary  meeting,  has 
in  some  States  obtained  a  statutory  rect^nition  which  aston- 
ishes English  lawyers.' 

This  system  of  party  organization  in  America,  and  the  in* 
comparably  simpler,  ruder,  and  less  effective  system  which  the 
last  thirty-five  years  have  created  in  Great  Britain,  have  now- 
found  in  M.  Ostrc^oraki  a  singularly  painstaking  and  intelli- 
gent studeut.  He  is  both  scientific  in  method  and  philosophi- 
cal in  spirit.  He  has  examined  the  facts  with  exemplary 
diligence.  He  has  described  them  with  a  careful  attention  to 
the  smallest  details  of  the  structure  and  working  of  the  two 
systems,  the  English  and  the  American.  He  has  brought  to 
the  investigation  of  their  phenomena  a  breadth  of  view  which 
recognizes  the  large  historical  causes  by  which  institutions  are 
moulded,  as  well  as  an  impartiality  which  shows  no  more  leni- 
ency to  the  faults  of  the  Bepublicans  than  to  those  of  the 
Democrats  in  the  United  States,  to  the  errors  of  the  Tories 
than  to  those  of  the  Liberals  in  England.  Leniency  is  indeed 
the  last  thing  he  shows  to  any  party ;  and  it  is  only  in  respect 
to  the  Rbadamantliine  attitude  he  preserves  throughout  that  I 
feel  bound  to  utter  a  note  of  mild  dissent.  It  is  for  American 
readers  rather  than  for  an  Englishman  to  say  how  far  his 
picture  of  the  party  machinery  of  the  United  States  is  over- 
charged with  gloom,  for  gloomy  it  unquestionably  is.  As  re- 
gards Great  Britain,  I  can  hardly  doubt  that  his  description,  a 
minute,  and  on  the  whole  accurate,  as  well  as  fair  description, 
—  though  here  and  there  his  generalizations  seem  to  me  open 
to  question, —  will  make  upon  a  reader  in  some  other  country 
an  impression  darker  than  the  realities  of  the  case  warrant. 
Taken  one  by  one,  the  particular  facts  and  incidents  he  states 

'  TbiB  side  of  party  goTemmeat  has  been  iiigeDiouel;  and  Instmctively 
handled  by  Mr,  Henry  Jonea  Ford  In  his  SUe  and  (iroieih  of  American 
FoliCia  (189S). 


.coy  Google 


PREFACE  xliii 

are  (so  far  as  I  can  judge)  almost  always  correctly  stated.  It 
is  the  tendency  to  assume  these  facts  and  incidents  to  be  more 
generally  typical  of  English  political  methods  as  a  whole  than 
I  believe  them  to  be,  and  the  omission  of  qualifying  considera- 
tions, such  as  perhaps  only  an  Englishman  can  fully  appre- 
ciate, that  may  make  his  account  suggest  to  those  who  do  not 
possess  an  indepeudent  knowledge  of  England  a  judgment  too 
unfavourable.  I  am  myself  an  optimist,  ahnost  a  professional 
optimist,  as  indeed  politics  would  be  intolerable  were  not  a 
man  grimly  resolved  to  see  between  the  clouds  all  the  blue  sky 
be  can.  But  apart  from  all  professional  optimism,  and  allow- 
ing for  the  natural  tendency  of  a  citizen  to  view  even  the 
deficiencies  of  his  own  country  with  indulgent  eyes,  I  cannot 
but  think  that  M.  Ostrogorski  exaggerates  the  power  and  the 
poison  of  what  he  calls  the  Caucus  in  England,  and  that  he 
does  not  quite  sufficiently  allow  for  the  healthy  influences  that 
are  at  work  to  correct  whatever  dangers  its  growth  may  in- 
volve. Party  organization  is  a  totally  different  thing  in  Eng- 
land from  what  it  is  in  the  United  States.  It  is  in  the  hands 
of  a  different  class  of  men.  It  is  almost  wholly  free  from  the 
more  sordid  elements  which  may  enter  into  the  interest  men 
take  in  their  party.  M.  Ostrogorski  knows  this,  and  indeed 
says  it  But  he  seems,  when  he  comes  to  judge  English  phe- 
nomena as  a  whole,  and  when  he  pronounces  that  English 
parl^  organization  is  on  the  road  to  becoming  what  American 
party  organization  has  become,  to  have  been  scarcely  sufBciently 
influenced  by  it. 

It  is  chiefly  to  readers  in  America  and  in  the  British  Colo- 
nies that  this  word  of  caution  needs  to  be  addressed.  English- 
men will  judge  for  themselves  with  how  few  or  how  many 
deductions  they  must  take  what  M.  Ostrogorski  says  of  them. 
They  will  all  be  the  better  for  knowing  what  a  diligent,  careful, 
and  eminently  honest  foreign  observer  thinks  of  their  party 
system,  and  they  may  find  in  his  description  warnings  far  from 
uoneeded  of  the  mischiefs  which  a  wider  and  ranker  growth  of 
that  system  may  breed.  Tet  they  may  draw  some  encourage- 
ment from  the  reflection  that  in  the  British  self-governing  colo- 
nies, including  those  Australasian  colonies  which  seem  to  have 
gone  farther  towards  a  pure  democracy  than  any  other  communi- 
ties, the  party  system  has  not  developed  upon  American  lines. 


.coy  Google 


xliv  PREFACE 

Fopalar  governments  do  aot  in  all  countries  follow  the  same 
paths,  HOT  show  the  same  evils  in  equal  measure.  M.  Ostro- 
gorski  has  wisely  chosen  to  concentrate  the  attention  of  his 
readers  upon  the  forces  rather  than  the  forms  of  democracy, 
since  it  is  the  forms  that  have  hitherto  been  more  largely  dis- 
cussed. He  has  made  a  valuable  contribution — perhaps  the 
most  valuable  we  have  had  in  recent  years  —  to  what  may  be 
called  the  patholt^y  of  party  government  But  there  are  other 
maladies  also  to  which  democracy  is  liable.  ^Vhen  the  time 
comes  for  a  scientific  study  of  democratic  government  in  gen- 
eral, the  phenomena  of  Switzerland,  of  the  British  self-govern- 
ing colonies,  and  of  Prance  will  throw  much  additional  light 
upon  the  problems  which  free  countries  are,  so  far  with  imper- 
fect success,  endeavouring  to  solve. 

To  estimate  the  chances  that  those  mischiefs  will  arrive,  or 
to  discuss  the  means  of  averting  them,  is  no  part  of  my  duty 
in  this  preface,  which  is  meant  solely  to  call  attention  not  only 
to  the  merits  of  these  volumes,  but  also  to  the  high  signifi- 
cance of  their  subject,  as  being  at  once  an  interesting  branch 
of  political  science  and  also  an  important  branch  of  politics 
as  an  art.  It  is,  moreover,  a  branch  likely  to  receive  further 
development  in  Europe,  for  in  the  United  States  it  has  been 
already  pushed  so  far  that  one  can  hardly  imagine  what  more 
even  American  ingenuity  can  effect.  Whatever  may  be  thought 
of  its  value,  —  and  I  suppose  that  most  sensible  men  would 
have  preferred  to  leave  parties  unorganized,  since  their  or- 
ganization involves  enormous  labour  and  expenditure  of  an 
un-reproductive  kind,  —  Party  Organization  is  a  logical  and 
inevitable  consequence  of  party  government  in  a  large  democ- 
racy. Where  votes  rule,  and  where  great  issues  turn  on  the 
results  of  voting,  and  most  of  all  where  (as  in  America)  a  party 
victory  means  pecuniary  gain  or  loss  to  a  multitude  of  men, 
every  effort  will  be  made  to  attract  the  voters  to  the  party 
flag,  to  keep  them  united  under  it,  to  bring  them  up  to  vote 
when  the  polling  day  arrives.  The  extent  to  which  it  becomes 
necessary  to  do  this  is,  in  the  case  of  each  political  community, 
measured  by  the  degree  in  which  that  community  falls  below 
the  level  of  the  ideal  democracy.  In  the  ideal  democracy 
every  citizen  is  intelligent,  patriotic,  disinterested.  His  sole 
wish  is  to  dis(;over  the  right  side  in  each  contested  issue,  and 


.coy  Google 


PBEFACB  llv 

to  fix  upon  the  best  man  among  competing  candidates.  His 
common  sense,  aided  by  a  knowledge  of  ihe  constitution  of 
hia  country,  enables  him  to  judge  wisely  between  the  aigu- 
mente  submitted  to  him,  while  hie  own  zeal  is  sufficient  to 
carry  him  to  the  polling  booth.  Though  it  is  usually  assumed 
in  platform  speeches  that  the  audience  addressed  are  citizens 
of  this  attractive  type,  everybody  knows  that  in  all  communi- 
ties, not  only  in  Chicago,  but  even  in  Liverpool,  let  us  say,  or 
in  Lyons,  or  iu  Leipzig,  a.  large  proportion  of  the  voters  are  so 
indifferent,  or  so  ignorant,  that  it  is  necessary  to  rouse  them, 
to  drill  them,  to  bring  them  up  to  vote.  The  party  leader  who 
first  sees  what  the  new  circumstances  of  the  time  call  for  gains 
an  advantage,  and  the  other  party  is  obliged  to  follow  suit. 
Once  the  business  of  organization  is  entered  upon,  each  party 
has  the  strongest  motive  for  endeavouring  tu  make  its  own 
system  effective,  and  to  form  its  adherents  into  disciplined 
l^ttalions.  But  this  carries  the  community  still  further  away 
from  the  democratic  ideal  of  the  intelligent  independence  of 
the  individual  voter,  an  ideal  far  removed  from  the  actualities 
of  any  Statd.'  Organization  and  discipline  mean  the  command 
of  the  leaders,  the  subordination  and  obedience  of  the  rank  and 
file;  and  they  mean  also  the  growth  of  a  party  spirit  which  is 
in  itself  irrational,  impelling  men  to  vote  from  considerations 
which  have  little  to  do  with  a  love  of  truth  or  a  sense  of  justice. 
These  are  deviations  from  the  democratic  ideal  which  are  bad 
enough;  and  if  the  motive  of  pecuniary  advantage  is  added,  a 
■widely  spread  motive  where  the  so-called  Spoils  System  of  the 
United  States  prevails,  the  state  of  things  will  evidently 
become  still  worse. 

If  it  is  impossible  to  arrest  the  development  of  party  organi- 
zations, what  can  be  done  ■  to  cheek  their  incidental  evils  ? 
The  most  drastic  remedy  would  be  to  get  rid  of  party  govern- 
ment altogether,  but  though  many  political  philosophers  have 
called  for  this  change,  none  has  shown  how  it  can  be  effected. 
M.  Ostrogoraki  feels  the  importance  of  the  question,  and  essays 
to  answer  it  in  the  concluding  chapters  of  his  book.  I  have 
not  the  space  to  summarize  or  to  examine  the  interesting  sug- 
gestions which  he  puts  forward  on  this  topic.     Practical  poli- 


ce .yGoOgle 


ilvi  PBEFACB 

ticiaas  will,  as  he  himself  foresees,  be  disposed  to  think  his 
scheme  either  impossible  to  introduce,  because  too  much  op- 
posed to  esisting  notions  and  habits,  oi  impossible  to  work, 
or  perhaps  open  to  both  these  objections.  Nevertheless,  the 
suggestions  made  ought  to  be  read  and  considered,  for  no 
one  who  is  sensible  of  the  evils  that  exist  will  lightly  dismiss 
what  comes  from  a  wiit«r  whose  acuteness  and  knowledge  he 
will  have  recognized  when  he  has  perused  the  earlier  descrip- 
tive parts  of  the  treatise. 

Few  books  of  our  time  show  equal  appreciation  of  the  prob- 
lems democracy  has  to  solve,  or  brii^  more  useful  materials 
and  more  acute  criticism  to  their  discussion.  Reverting  to  the 
general  question,  let  it  be  noted  that  there  are  three  kinds  of 
influence  which  an  organization  may  employ  to  attract  and  hold 
voters.  One  is  the  sordid  inducement  of  personal  gain,  whether 
in  the  form  of  a  money  bribe,  or  in  the  hope  of  obtaining  a  place. 
From  this  our  English  party  organizations  are  happily  free,  and 
it  should  be  a  prime  aim  of  those  who  work  them  to  avoid  the 
least  lapse  towards  such  a  dangerous  quagmire.  Another  is 
social  pressure,  whether  in  the  form  of  a  coercion  by  the  land- 
lord or  the  customer  on  the  one  hand,  or  in  that  of  an  appeal 
to  snobbishness  on  the  other.  M.  Ostrogorski  Ends  this  kind 
of  influence  largely  used  in  England,  and  what  he  says  of  it 
deserves  to  be  pondered.  The  third  is  an  appeal  to  the  intel- 
lect and  conscience  of  the  voters  through  speeches  and  litera- 
ture. The  making  of  such  appeals  bears  a  larger  ratio  to  the 
total  work  done  by  political  organizers  in  Qreat  Britain  than 
it  does  in  America,  though  of  course  it  is  done  there  also  on  a 
large  scale.  It  is  obviously  the  safest  channel  into  which  the 
efforts  of  party  workers  can  be  turned,  and  if  organizations 
made  it  their  chief  business,  and  did  it  with  reasonable  fair- 
ness, they  would  justify  their  existence  and  render  a  service 
to  that  diffusion  of  an  intelligent  interest  in  public  affairs  on 
which  the  welfare  of  democratic  governments  depends.  There 
is  perhaps  no  way  of  reducing  the  evils  that  necessarily  flow 
from  organized  partisan  activity  so  effective  as  that  the  public 
opinion  of  the  community  and  the  sense  of  public  honour  and 
duty  in  the  chiefs  of  the  parties  should  guide  the  subordinate 
workers  of  an  organization  towards  this  form  of  activity,  and, 
as  far  as  possible,  away  from  the  two  other  forms. 

I  have  referred  to  public  ojiinion.     After  all,  it  is  public 


.coy  Google 


PREFACE 


opinion  which  must  keep  the  party  organizations  in  check. 
There  has  happily  been  always,  both  in  Britain  and  in  Ametica, 
a  large  body  of  voters  who  refuse  to  be  "roped  in"  by  the 
"  workers  "  of  the  organ! zationsj  and  who  retain  aufficient  inde- 
pendenccj  not  only  to  think  for  themselves,  bnt  also  to  vote  as 
they  please  and  not  as  their  party  bids  them.  The  love  of 
truth,  the  disposition  to  apply  moral  standards  to  public  ques- 
tions, the  unselfish  preference  of  national  to  sectioual  or  party 
interests,  are  always  to  he  found  in  a  certain  number  of  inde- 
pendent citizens,  and  the  tone  of  public  opinion  depends  upon 
the  influence  which  such  citizens  esert.  Others  are  not  keenly 
interested  in  politics,  nor  perhaps  very  intelligent,  yet  they 
prefer  to  follow  their  own  impressions  rather  than  submit 
to  party  dictation.  These  independent  citizens  (of  both  types) 
are  sometimes  the  victims  of  error,  and  are,  of  course,  like  all 
citizens,  liable  to  be  misled  by  the  press,  which  cannot,  even  in 
the  freest  countries,  be  trusted  to  present  both  sides  of  a  case 
vrith  fairness,  because  one  side  may  have  a  far  larger  command 
of  the  social  and  economic  forces  which  —  not  perhaps  in  any 
corrupt  way,  but  by  the  necessities  of  the  case  —  affect  the 
press,  and  because  writers  in  the  press,  like  other  men,  are 
naturally  disposed  to  say  what  will  please  their  readers,  to  fall 
in  with  and  intensify  the  passion  of  the  moment,  and  to  extol 
their  country  even  where  they  would  serve  her  better  in  points 
ing  ont  her  mistakes.  Still,  it  is  among  these  independent 
citizens  that  the  reaction  against  the  misdeeds  of  a  dominant 
party  begins  to  be  effective.  It  is  they  who  keep  the  parties 
in  order  by  casting  their  weight,  now  on  the  side  of  one  party, 
now  on  the  other,  according  to  their  judgment  of  the  merits  of 
each.  It  is  they  who  at  all  times  hold  in  check,  not  only  the 
spirit  of  faction,  but  also  the  tendency  of  party  organizations 
to  push  to  excess  methods  with  which,  used  in  moderation, 
modem  democracies  seem  unable  to  dispense.  In  the  United 
States,  formidable  as  the  organizations  are,  the  independent 
citizens  are,  I  think,  more  active  and  more  sensible  of  their 
duty  at  this  moment  than  they  were  thirty  years  ago.  In  Eng- 
land, happily  for  England,  the  organizations  have  not  ceased 
to  be  controlled  by  men  occupying  a  position  which  m^es 
them  amenable  to  public  opinion,  nor  have  they  as  yet  de- 
parted far  from  those  traditions  in  which  the  strength  of 
English  free  government  resides.  james  bryce. 


.coy  Google 


.CD,  Google 


NOTE  BY  THE  TRANSLATOR 

The  difficulties  of  this  truislation  have  been  tightened  by 
the  kind  co-operation  of  the  author,  who  has  not  only  responded 
most  readily  to  alt  my  requests  for  information  and  help,  but 
has  also  been  good  enough  to  read  the  proofs  of  the  transla- 
tion and  to  favour  me  with  a  number  of  ot)8ervations  and 
suggestions  which,  owing  to  his  grasp  of  the  subject  and 
remarkable  knowledge  of  the  English  langu^e,  have  proved 
of  great  service.  Many  of  the  linotty  points  have  been  care- 
fnJly  discussed  between  us,  and  in  no  instance  has  he  failed 
to  make  his  meaning  perfectly  clear  to  me.  For  this  valuable 
assistance  I  desire  to  express  my  warm  acknowledgments. 


.coy  Google 


.CD,  Google 


AUTHOR'S  PREFACE 


"  n  faul  tina  science  politique  nouvelle  b  un  monde  i 

*'  Mais  c'eei  k  quol  nous  ne  eongeong  gu6re ;  placto  au  milieu  d'un 
fleuvc  rapide,  nous  fixons  obstin^meDt  lea  yeux  vera  quelques  debris 
qu'on  apergok  sur  le  rivage,  tandls  que  le  courant  noua  entralne  et  nous 
poDaseireculoDH  versiesablmeB."'  — TocQCEviLLB,  Be  la  Dimocratie  en 
Amiriqve,  Introduction. 

Ik  this  book  I  investigate  the  vorhing  of  democratic  gov- 
ernment. But  it  is  not  institutions  which  are  the  object  of 
m;  research:  it  is  not  on  political  forms,  it  is  on  political 
forces  that  I  dwell.  Hitherto  attention  has  been  too  exchi- 
sively  directed  to  the  study  of  political  forms.  The  method 
of  observation  itself,  introduced  into  political  science  with  the 
Eiq>rit  de»  Lois,  was  practised  more  on  institutions,  on  laws, 
the  concrete  individuals  who  create  and  apply  them  being,  for 
a  long  time,  wholly  neglected.  The  very  idea  of  political 
forces  as  distinct  from  political  forms  was  not  suiEcieutly 
clear  to  men's  minds.  Concealed  at  first  by  the  relative  sim- 
plicity of  political  life,  in  which  forma  and  forces  appeared  to 
blend  into  one  another,  it  had  some  difficulty  in  emerging  even 
after  the  great  outburst  of  political  thought  and  the  advent  of 
liberty  in  the  eighteenth  century ;  that  century  was  too  much 
dominated  by  the  metaphysical  notion  of  man  in  the  abstract, 
considered  as  the  universal  and  unchangeable  basis  of  the 
political  order,  and  by  the  mechanical  conception  of  the  moral 
order.  Again,  the  experience  and  the  practice  of  liberty  were 
needed  for  the  part  played  by  active  wills  and  by  their  varied 
combinations  in  political  life  to  assert  itself  and  stand  out  in 

I  "A  npn-  polllicnl  science  Is  wanted  for  an  entirely  new  world. 

"But  cbis  Is  what  we  tbink  very  little  about;  placed  in  the  middle  of  a 
rapid  stream,  we  fix  our  gaze  obntlnately  on  a  few  di^bris  that,  are  aeen  apoo 
Che  bank,  while  the  current  Is  aweeping  iia  aluog  and  driving  u3  backwards 
towards  the  abyss." 

U 


.coy  Google 


lii  AUTHOR'S  PREFACE 

clear  relief.  In  proportion  as  democratic  govemmeat  developed 
and  made  political  life  more  complex,  the  free  play  of  political 
forces  also  developed  and  gained  iu  complexity,  and  it  became 
more  and  more  neceasary,  for  the  best  fulfilment  of  the  objects 
of  the  body  politic,  to  acquire  an  exact  knowledge  of  the 
working  of  these  forces. 

How  ia  this  knowledge  of  political  forces  to  be  acquired  ? 
In  the  same  way  that  the  forces  of  nature  are  ascertained; 
both  of  them  are  apprehended  only  in  a  state  of  motion  which 
must  be  observed.  The  method  of  observation  must  be  applied 
to  political  action,  the  manifestations  of  this  action  must  be 
watched,  and  they  will  disclose  to  us  the  moods,  the  mental 
tendencies,  the  workings  of  the  wills  which  set  political  society 
going.  These  observations  will  increase  in  value  as  they  arc 
brought  to  bear  on  acts  which  occur  under  more  or  less  regu- 
lar aspects,  in  a  more  or  less  methodical  manner.  In  other 
words,  the  beet  way  to  study  political  forces  is  to  study  politi- 
cal methods.  Of  course,  to  be  successful,  this  investigation 
cannot  be  confined  to  a  purely  formal  investigation  of  those 
methods.  In  that  case  it  would  scarcely  have  an  academic 
interest,  and,  from  a  practical  point  of  view,  would  at  the  most 
be  serviceable  only  to  political  wire-pullers  in  search  of  useful 
notions.  To  really  understand  the  character  of  social  action, 
its  modes  of  procedure  must  be  studied  iu  the  light  of  the 
character  of  iJiose  who  apply  them,  and  of  the  social  and 
political  conditions  in  which  their  wills  are  formed  and  mani- 
fested. It  is  only  in  this  sense  that  the  investigation  of 
political  methods  will  have,  in  addition  to  a  philosophical 
value,  a  genuine  practical  value.  It  is  a  study  of  the  methods 
of  democratic  government  conceived  in  this  spirit,  a  study  of 
social  and  political  psychology,  based  on  observation,  that  I 
have  tried  to  undertake,  and  it  is  that  which  is  the  aim  of 
this  book. 

To  accomplish  this  purpose  it  was  necessary  in  the  first 
place  to  find  in  political  life  a  field  where  the  modes  of  action 
are  in  a  way  concentrated  and  systematized,  a  field  offering 
a  clearly  defined  sphere  for  observation  and  a  firm  vantage- 
ground  for  the  observer.  These  seemed  to  me  to  be  presented 
by  the  life  of  organized  political  parties.  I  mean  parties 
oi^anized  not  only  inside  Parliament,  which  is   henceforth 


.coy  Google 


AUTHOR'S  PREFACE  liii 

merely  the  gmat  sta^  on  which  the  action  prepared  elsewhere 
is  unfolded,  but  organized  In  the  country  Itaelf  on  a  more  or 
less  wide  and  comprehensive  basis.  Wherever  this  life  of 
parties  is  developed,  it  focusses  the  political  feelings  and  the 
active  wills  or  the  citizens;  it  is  essentially  the  continuous 
application  of  the  jnethods  of  action  of  political  society.  The 
material  organization  of  parties  appeared  to  me  to  offer  the 
rpquired  post  of  observation,  and  its  historical  growth  the. 
landmarks  for  tracing  the  development  of  the  political  ten- 
dencies and  forces  themselves,  which  would  enable  me  to 
ascend  from  the  present  to  the  past,  from  the  effects  to  the 
causes,  and  to  consider  the  working  of  democratic  government 
as  a  whole,  not  in  the  inanimate  fabric  of  political  forms,  but 
in  the  midst  of  living  society. 

The  various  countries  living  under  the  democratic  regime 
were  not  all  equally  suited  for  this  study  of  political  forces 
within  the  sphere  of  organized  parties,  because  the  life  of  the 
parties  and  their  organization  do  not  everywhere  exhibit  the 
Siime  fulness  and  the  same  regularity.  In  almost  every 
country  of  the  European  continent  the  organization  of  parties 
working  regularly  outside  Parliament  is  still  but  little  de- 
veloped ;  the  cadres  of  the  parties  are  formed  on  the  eve  of 
the  elections,  and  break  up  soon  afterwards,  their  contingents 
oft«n  present  only  floating  masses.  Two  countries  are  in 
advance  of  all  the  others  in  this  respect.  They  are  England 
and  the  United  States,  which  the  greater  development  that 
liberty  has  attained  there  has  already  placed  at  the  head  of 
political  humanity  on  other  grounds.  The  study  of  political 
phenomena  which  I  had  in  view  could  consequently  be  pursued 
with  most  advantage  in  those  two  countries,  and  in  truth 
could  not  be  pursued  with  the  desired  comprehensiveness 
save  in  those  countries.  It  is  they  in  fact  which  have  pro- 
vided me  with  the  materials  of  my  investigation.  Yet  the 
range  of  this  investigation  is  not  confined  to  the  countries  of 
the  Anglo-Saxon  world;  mutatis  mutandis  it  extends  also  to 
the  other  countries  under  a  democratic  form  of  government. 
To  admit  this,  there  is  no  need  to  accept  in  all  its  strictness 
the  theory  of  Augusts  Comte,  according  to  which,  at  every 
moment  of  history,  the  people  whose  evolution  is  most  ad- 
vanced  represents  the  whole  of  humanity.      The  variety  of 


.coy  Google 


liT  AUTHOB'S  P&BFACB 

national  characterB  and  of  hiatorical  antecedents  ought  not  to 
be  ignored,  but  the  traits  common  to  different  bountries  pre- 
dominate in  existing  civilization,  where  political  Inatitutions 
are  nearly  everywhere  framed  on  the  same  model,  where  the 
social  conditions  produced  by  the  economic  evolution  are  the 
same,  and  where,  consequently,  men  are  subjectred  to  similar 
iuiliiences  and  move  on  parallel  lines. 

Owing  to  the  nature  of  the  investigation  whicb  I  undertook, 
the  greater  part  of  the  materials  had  to  be  gathered  from  real 
life  and  not  from  libraries.  If  the  organization  of  parties  has 
blossomed  abundantly  in  the  Anglo-Saxon  world,  this  was  not 
the  case  with  the  documents  on  the  subject,  either  as  regards 
the  present  or  the  past  of  that  organization.  In  this  respect  I 
found  myself  confronted  with  a  void  when,  about  fifteen  years 
ago,  T  began  my  work.  The  fiicts  relating  to  it  were  evidently 
not  deemed  worthy  of  the  attention  of  historians  and  political 
thinkers.  In  the  press  they  were  relegated  to  unimportant 
paragraphs,  unless  they  happened  to  be  connected  with  politi- 
cal scandals  or  abuses,  ('omprohensive  writings  on  the  sub- 
ject were  non-existent.  The  information  which  might  have 
been  discovered  in  the  files  of  old  newspapers,  in  magazine 
articles,  in  pamphlets,  or  even  in  more  or  less  important 
works  or  otllcial  documents,  had  never  been  treated  scientifi- 
cally. What  had  to  be  done  was  to  bring  all  this  category 
of  facts  for  the  first  time  within  the  purview  of  science. 
After  having  cast  a  glance  at  the  organization  of  the  English 
parties,  I  turned  my  attention  to  America,  where  the  already 
lengthy  career  of  the  democratic  regime  and  of  the  popular 
organization  of  parties  promised  more  abvmdant  sources  of 
information  and  a  more  extensive  view  of  the  phenomena 
which  I  wanted  to  observe.  I  approached  the  subject  on  its 
historical  side,  and  endeavoured  to  trace  the  development  of 
the  regime  of  parties  and  of  their  organization  in  the  coun- 
try, during  the  first  century  of  the  American  Republic  The 
result  of  my  labours  was  given  to  the  public  in  the  form  of  a 
series  of  articles  inserted  in  the  Annales  des  Sdencea  Poli- 
tiques  of  1888-1889.  Just  as  the  publication  of  these  articles 
was  coming  to  an  end,  Mr.  Kryce's  monumental  work,  The 
American  Commonwealth,  appeared,  containing  the  first  me- 
thodical desetiption  of  the  existing  party  system,  which  was 


.coy  Google 


AUTHOR'S  PREFACE  iT 

a  revelation,  not  only  to  readers  in  the  Old  World,  but  to  the 
Americans  themselves. 

Id  England  the  organization  of  parties  founded  on  a  popular 
basis  was  of  very  recent  creation,  and  its  study  presented  far 
greater  difficulties  than  that  of  the  American  parties.  To 
obtain  the  data  for  it,  I  have  had  to  enga^  in  a  long  and 
minute  enquiry,  carried  out  in  England  itself,  and  based  to  a 
great  extent  on  personal  testimony  and  on  dii'eet  observation 
of  political  life  in  general  and  of  the  working  of  party  organi- 
zation in  particular.  I  have  often  had  to  collect  by  my  own 
exertions  the  raw  material  that  was  to  serve  for  genei-aliza- 
tionsj  to  search  for  it  in  one  town  after  another,  to  make  en- 
quiries on  both  sides  in  order  to  elicit  the  truth,  which  was 
obscured  by  political  strife  or  simply  by  local  rivalry.  The 
facts  and  the  impressions  as  well  as  the  few  documents  which 
I  obtained  led  me  to  generalizations  which  I  constantly  veri- 
fied by  putting  myself  in  touch  with  men  and  things.  I  broke 
up  my  generalizations  into  concrete  and  often  very  matter-of- 
fact  questions  which  I  put  to  my  interlocutors,  whom  I  treated 
not  only  as  witnesses,  but  also  as  subjects  of  direct  observa- 
tion, whether  they  belonged  to  the  staff  of  the  party  oi^aniza- 
tioD  or  to  other  classes  of  the  community.  Then  I  recast  my 
generalizations  by  addipg  to  them  or  pruning  them  in  accord- 
ance with  my  new  impressions.  After  operating  in  this  way 
for  years  in  yarious  parts  of  the  country,  without  neglecting 
the  literary  reseai'oh  required  for  the  historical  part  of  the 
subject,  I  seemed  to  have  arrived  at  conclusions  worthy  of 
being  presented  to  the  public.  I  mention  these  details  because 
I  hold  that  I  owe  the  public  an  account  of  my  method,  to 
enable  it  to  fix  my  lesponsibility,  which  is  certainly  a  heavy 
one.  I  can  seldom  shelter  myself  behind  authorities,  quote 
my  authors,  in  the  contemporary  part  of  my  work ;  all  the 
information  which  has  been  given  me,  all  the  impressions 
which  have  been  conveyed  to  me,  have  been  accepted  by  me 
for  what  they  were  worth ;  I  made  what  appeared  to  me  the 
best  use  of  them,  in  all  liberty  and,  1  venture  to  say,  in  all 
honesty.  I  alone  am  responsible  for  all  the  comments  on  the 
facts  which  I  have  put  forward,  and  often  for  the  authen- 
ticity of  the  facts  themselves,  for  in  my  turn  I  appear  as  a 
witness  before  the  public.     I  acknowledge  the  responsibility 


.coy  Google 


Ivi  AUTHOR'S   PREFACE 

which  rests  upon  me,  and  I  accept  it  in  its  entirety.  What  I 
have  just  said  of  course  applies  also  to  the  American  part  of 
my  enquiry,  which  I  undertook  after  having  exhausted  ray 
subject  in  England.  Having  mastered  the  method  which  I 
tested  in  my  English  researches,  I  began  the  study  of  America 
over  again  and  pursued  it  on  that  method  in  the  United  States. 

In  this  way  I  have  succeeded  in  putting  together  a  whole, 
which,  under  the  form  of  a  scientific  investigation,  alike  his- 
torical and  critical,  of  the  regime  of  organized  parties,  is  in 
reality  an  investigation  of  the  working  of  government  in  de- 
mocracy and  of  the  vital  problems  which  it  puts  before  existing 
society,  and  which  involve  the  whole  futijre  of  our  political 
civilization.  The  miscellaneous  facts  which  hitherto  have 
been  disdainfully  thrown  into  the  rubbish-heap  of  history  and 
of  the  political  news  of  the  day  have  enabled  me  to  rise  step 
by  step  to  the  highest  generalizations  of  political  speculation 
and  of  the  political  art.  If  the  well-nigh  religious  respect 
with  which  we  are  accustomed  from  our  youth  to  surround  the 
names  of  those  who  have  made  tlieir  mark  as  thinkers  allowed 
the  curreut  use  of  the  forms  of  language  which  they  employed 
to  describe  their  works,  if  it  were  permissible  to  apply  their 
formulas  to  a  modest  undertaking,  I  might  have  recalled  the 
expression.  Proles  sine  vtatre  areata.  \  do  not  say  this  by  way 
of  boast:  a  student  of  political  phenomena,  having  observed 
them  in  real  life,  amid  the  perpetual  fiux  of  things  as  difficult 
to  grasp  as  the  running  stream,  I  have  received  many  a  lesson 
of  humility.  1  do  not  say  it  either  by  way  of  excuse,  to  ex- 
tenuate the  divergence  which  there  is  between  my  design  and 
the  execution  of  it:  I  have  honestly  done  what  I  could. 

The  object  of  my  ambition  being  a  scientific  investigation, 
that  is  to  say  a  calm,  unbiassed  one,  my  chief  concern  was 
absolute  independence  of  mind  in  observation  and  perfect  sin- 
cerity in  the  statement  of  its  results.  I  have  said  all  that 
appeared  to  me  to  be  true,  without  allowing  myself  to  be  influ- 
enced by  any  exti-aneons  consideration,  without  being  afraid 
of  the  constructive  charges  which  might  be  brought  against 
me,  without  fearing  either  to  be  incmisisteiit,  in  pointing  out 
the  good  and  the  bad  in  the  same  community,  in  the  same  sets, 
in  the  same  category  of  political  conceptions  or  aspirations. 
The  only  fear  which  I  might  have  felt  on  this  score  was  that 


.coy  Google 


AUTHOB'S  PREFACE  Ivii 

of  becoming,  or  at  least  of  appearing  to  be,  the  mouthpiece  of 
a  party,  the  Bpokesman  of  a  sect.  But  I  hope  that  I  hare 
escaped  this  c^ger,  and  it  is  with  conviction  that  I  borrow 
the  words  of  a  celebrated  writer  who  was  also  a  man  of  action : 
*'  I  send  this  book  into  the  world  with  the  hope  that  it  will 
displease  all  political  sects." ' 

Before  laying  down  my  pen  I  must  refer  to  the  help  which 
I  have  received  from  many  persons,  in  England  as  well  as  the 
United  States,  in  the  performance  of  my  task.  It  could  never 
have  been  brought  to  a  satisfactory  conclusion  without  this 
assistance,  which  I  have  met  with  on  all  sides  and  which  has 
been  extended  to  me  both  liberally  and  straightforwardly,  and 
in  the  most  varied  forms,  such  as  personal  interviews,  com- 
munication of  documents,  written  answers  to  lengthy  inter- 
rogatories, notes  written  specially  for  me  on  certain  questions, 
etc.  As  the  names  of  all  the  persons  who  have  been  good 
enough  to  place  themselves  at  my  disposal  would  have  made 
a  very  long  list,  I  am  obliged,  to  my  great  regret,  to  mention 
only  a  few  of  them  here.  Several  of  these  persons  I  have 
been  grieved  to  see  pass  away,  and  I  can  only  pay  a  grateful 
tribute  to  their  memoiy.  First  and  foremost  among  them 
comes  Thomas  Ificols  Roberts,  Esq.,  formerly  chief  agent  of 
the  Liberal  party  in  England.  A  veteran  of  the  Liberal  organi- 
zation, who  supervised  the  electoral  registration  department 
of  the  Anti-Corn  Law  League,  he  placed  at  my  disposal  his 
professional  knowledge  and  his  connections  in  the  country 
with  a  kindness  only  equalled  by  his  simplicity.  I  am  glad 
to  be  able  to  tender  my  thanks  to  several  other  persons  whose 
assistance  was  not  less  valuable  to  me.  I  am  under  great  obli- 
gations, in  England,  to  Arthur  G,  Syraonds,  Esq.,  M.  A.,  of  the 
if  ational  Reform  Union,  I  also  owe  warm  acknowledgments 
to  R.  W.  E,  Middleton,  Esq.,  of  the  Central  Conservative  Office, 
to  George  Lane-Fox,  Esq.,  of  the  Primrose  League,  and,  last 
bnt  not  least,  to  several  members  of  Parliament  of  the  differ- 
ent parties,  among  whom  I  am  anxious  to  mention  Mr.  James 
Bryce  and  Sir  John  Gorst,  who  initiated  me  into  several  points 
of  English  political  life  and  gave  me  valuable  introductions. 
The  persons  from  whom  I  have  received  help  in  the  United 


.coy  Google 


Iviii  AUTHOE'S   PEEFACB 

States  and  from  whom  I  continued  to  receira  it  after  leaving 
the  great  American  Kepublic  were  not  lesa  numerous.  I  would 
like  to  mention  a  few  namea  with  the  expi-ession  of  my  warmest 
gratitude;  R,  R.  Eowker,  Esq.,  Roger  Foster,  Eaq.,  Hon.  Fred- 
erick William  UoUs,  George  McAneuy,  Esq.,  Hon.  John  de 
"Witt  Warner,  of  Kew  York  City ;  Hon.  Andrew  D.  White,  of 
Ithaca,  N.Y.;  Hon.  William  F.  Harrity,  Herbert  Welsh,  Esq,, 
Hon.  Clinton  Rogers  WoodrufE,  of  I'hiladelphia ;  Moorfield 
Storey,  Esq.,  and  Edmund  M.  Wheelwright,  Esq.,  of  Boston ; 
Roger  W.  Cull,  Esq.,  of  Haitimore ;  Edwin  Burritt  Smith,  Esq., 
of  Chicago;  Frederick  W,  Dewart,  Esq.,  of  St.  Louis,  Mo.,  now 
at  Spokane,  Wash.;  Hon.  James  M.  Allen,  of  San  Francisco; 
Professor  Henry  Dickson  Bnins,  M.D.,  of  New  Orleans;  Hon. 
P.  \V.  Meldrim,of  Savannah,  Ga,;  the  Secretaries  of  State  of 
thirty-five  States  of  the  Union  and  the  United  States  Civil 
Service  Commission,  who  have  sent  me  important  official 
documents. 

While  I  was  writing  the  last  chapters  of  this  book  and  it 
was  passing  through  the  press,  events  occurred  in  the  political 
sphere  and  in  the  domain  of  legislation  which  naturally  could 
not  be  commented  on  here  or  mentioned.  But  as  these  new 
facts  do  not  alter  the  conclusions  at  which  I  have  arrived, 
there  is  no  need,  either  for  the  reader  or  for  me,  to  trouble 
about  them. 


Fabis,  March,  HHB. 


.coy  Google 


FIKST  PART 


.CD,  Google 


.CD,  Google 


The  adyent  of  democracy  shattered  the  old  framework  of 
political  society.  The  hierarchy  of  classes  and  theli  internal 
cohesion  were  destroyed,  and  the  time-honoured  social  tiea 
which  bound  the  individual  to  the  community  were  severed. 
As  the  old  fabric  had  to  be  replaced  by  a  new  one,  the  prob- 
lem was  to  find  out  bow  the  individual  could  be  reunited  to 
society,  in  what  new  organization  both  could  be  incorporated, 
M  as  to  assure  form  and  permanency  to  their  esistence.  The 
supremacy  accorded  to  numbers  in  the  State  complicated  mat- 
ters by  raising  the  question  how  the  promiscuous  crowd  of  old 
and  young,  of  learned  and  unlearned,  of  rich  and  poor,  who 
were  all  declared  collectively  arbiters  of  their  political  desti- 
Dies,  would  be  able  to  discharge  their  new  function  of  "sover- 
eign." The  representative  form  of  government  adopted  by 
modem  democracies  simplifies  the  problem  in  appearance  only 
without  touching  its  essence,  for  after  all  national  representa- 
tion proceeds  from  the  great  mass  of  the  people. 

Without,  perhaps,  having  considered  this  problem  in  its 
general  aspect,  or  having  defined  all  its  factors,  some  modem 
democracies  have  endeavoured  to  solve  it  amidst  the  march  of 
events  ajid  in  a  somewhat  empirical  fashion.  This  solution 
consists  in  a  methodical  organization  of  the  electoral  masses,  by 
extrarconstitutional  means  and  in  the  form  of  disciplined  and 
permanent  parties.  The  experiment  has  been  carried  to  con- 
siderable lengths  in  the  Anglo-Saxon  countries  of  Europe  and 
America,  and  the  experience  gained  incontestably  possesses 
great  importance.     Under  what  conditions  has  it  been  inaugu- 


.coy  Google 


4  DEMOCRACY  AND  THE  ORGANIZATION  [first 

rated  ?  What  has  been  its  progress  and  development,  and  its 
influence  on  political  life  ?  Does  it  bring  us  nearer  the  posai- 
bility  of  embracing  the  political  society  which  issued  from  the 
democratic  revolution  in  a  new  synthesis  ?  In  a  word,  what  are 
the  results  which  it  has  given  or  which  it  holds  out  ?  The 
answer  to  these  questions  will  be  as  interesting  to  the  histo- 
rian as  to  the  political  thinker  and  the  thinking  politician. 

Both  the  historian  and  the  politician,  the  former  in  order 
to  bring  this  answer  into  distinct  relief,  and  the  latter  in 
order  to  arrive  at  a  better  comprehension  of  it,  must  begin 
by  forming  a  clear  idea  of  all  the  factors  of  the  problem  in 
their  successive  development.  This  can  be  done  more  easily 
in  England  than  in  any  other  country  with  a  democratic 
government,  France  not  excepted.  In  the  French  democracy, 
which  sprang  from  the  Eevolution,  the  new  order  of  things 
has  been  more  than  once  called  in  question  and  its  progreu 
violently  interrupted.  These  interruptions,  with  the  disap< 
pointments  and  hopes  to  which  they  alternately  gave  rise, 
made  the  old  order  appear  far  more  remote  from  ua  on  the 
stage  of  history  than  it  was  in  reality.  And  as,  in  addition  to 
this,  it  underwent  a  long  agony  before  it  suooumbed,  the 
break-up  of  the  old  society  and  the  evolution  of  the  new  one 
do  not  always  exhibit  a  direct  and  distinct  connection  of  cause 
and  efFect  to  the  investigator.  In  this  respect  the  England  of 
our  days  presents  incomparable  advantages.  Hardly  two  gen- 
erations back  she  was  still  an  aristocratic  and  feudal  society ; 
at  the  present  moment  she  is  completely  drawn  into  the  demo- 
cratic current,  with  no  inclination  to  retrace  her  steps  or  to 
wrangle  about  the  results  obtained.  Compressed  into  a  more 
limited  space  of  time  and  uninterrupted  in  its  progress,  the 
democratic  evolution  of  England  pursues  its  course  before  the 
spectator,  working  out  its  logical  development  under  his  eyes 
and  presenting  an  orderly  sequel  of  premise  and  conclusion. 

This  is  especially  the  case  with  the  problem  which  we  pro- 
pose to  study.  We  shall  begin  with  England  for  this  reason, 
and,  in  accordance  with  the  plan  sketched  out,  start  by  con- 
sidering the  unity  of  the  old  English  society  with  its  spontB>- 
neous  connection  and,  so  to  speak,  organic  cohesion  j  we  shall 
take  note  of  its  disintegration  and  then  deal  with  the  endeav- 
ours to  restore  unity  to  it  in  the  sphere  of  poliiiCB ;  this  will 


.coy  Google 


piBT]  OF  POLITICAL  PARTIES  5 

briug  us '  eventually  to  the  attempts  to  create  a  metliodical 
organization  of  tlie  electoral  masses ;  we  sbaJl  make  a  special 
study  of  that  organization  and  pursue  its  evolution  as  far  as 
possible ;  arrived  at  its  extreme  limit,  we  shall  return  to  the 
starting-point  in  order  to  survey  the  horizon  and  ascertain  from 
this  vantage^ound  the  direction  of  the  paths  opened  in  the 
country  traversed,  with  the  view  of  discovering,  if  possible, 
the  line  of  the  main  road  leading  to  the  goal. 


.coy  Google 


FIRST  CHAPTER 

THE   OLD   UNITY 


The  state  of  political  society  in  England  on  the  eve  of  its 
transformation  may  be  summed  up  in  a  single  sentence :  it  was 
the  absolute  domination  of  an  aristocratic  class.  The  Eaglish 
aristocracy  did  not  exercise  its  power  by  virtue  of  caste  privi- 
leges, it  was  not  divided  from  the  rest  of  the  population  by 
any  legal  barriers.  Its  authority  rested  almost  entirely  on  its 
property  and  its  social  influence,  As  owner  of  the  soil,  it  con- 
centrated the  public  wealth  in  its  own  hands,  personal  property 
being  still  very  far  from  possessing  the  importance  which  it 
has  since  attained.  The  invention  of  the  steam-engine  and  the 
other  mechanical  discoveries  of  the  second  half  of  the  eighteenth 
century  only  helped  at  the  outset  to  consolidate  the  economical 
supremacy  of  the  gentry,  the  money  made  in  the  early  days 
of  manufacturing  industry  being  employed  in  buying  up  small 
estates,  which  were  thus  eventually  lost  in  the  great  mass  of 
large  holdings.  Thanks  to  its  wealth,  the  landed  aristocracy 
monopolized  all  the  approaches  to  public  power.  Puhlic  func- 
tions were  mostly  honorary  posts,  carrying  no  salary.  Pesides 
this,  a  considerable  income  was  necessary  to  qualify  for  them. 
A  property  qualification  varying  from  a  few  pounds  to  several 
hundreds  was  required  for  the  parliamentary  vote,  for  a  seat 
in  Parliament,  for  the  appointments  of  magistrate,  coroner,  and 
sheriff,  for  serving  on  a  jury,  for  a  commission  in  the  army  or 
even  in  the  militia.  Legislation,  local  administration,  and 
armed  forces  were  thus  under  the  exclusive  control  of  men  of 
leisure  and  fortune. 

As  the  towns  were  few  in  number,  and  as  a  rule  without 
importance,  being  inhabited  for  the  most  part  by  traders  and 
artdsans,  the  leading  type  of  these  men  of  leisure  and  fortune 


.coy  Google 


ns»  OH&p.]  THE  OLD  XJimT  7 

was  the  great  rural  proprietor,  the  squire.  The  Court  and 
the  capital  did  not  attract  him  as  they  did  the  corresponding 
class  in  France  under  the  ancien  rSgiioe.  He  lived  on  his 
estate  for  the  greater  part  of  the  year,  and  consequently  had 
not  the  same  opportunities  of  impoverishing  himself  as  the 
French  nobility.  Being  exempt  by  law  from  seizure  for  debt 
and  protected  from  possible  caprices  of  its  owner  by  the  prac- 
tice of  entail,  landed  property  was  handed  down  intact  from 
generation  to  generation.  This  stability,  while  it  secured  the 
owner  uninterrupted  enjoyment  of  the  property,  enhanced  his 
prestige  and  was  alone  sufficient  to  make  him  the  centre  of 
attraction  for  the  whole  neighbourhood.  He  farmed  out 
his  estate  to  a  more  or  less  considerable  number  of  tenants, 
^nerally  without  a  lease.  They  might  receive  notice  to  quit 
at  any  moment,  but  as  a  matter  of  fact  they  stayed  with  him 
all  their  life  and  left  their  children  in  their  place.  A  farm 
would  hardly  change  hands  once  in  the  course  of  half  a  century. 
The  ties  which  were  formed  between  landlord  and  tenant  under 
these  circumstances  made  them  a  sort  of  family,  with  a  feeling 
of  paternal  regard,  kindly  but  at  the  same  time  autocratic,  on 
the  one  side,  and  of  devotion  and  respect  on  the  other. 

This  influence  of  a  private  nature  was  very  frequently  re- 
inforced by  an  extensive  authority  of  a  public  kind,  due  to 
the  squire's  participation  in  local  administration,  in  the  gov- 
emment  of  the  county  entrusted  to  the  local  notables  as  an 
honorary  function  by  the  Crown.  Police  powers  for  keeping 
the  King's  peace,  the  right  of  issuing  warrants  of  arrest  and 
of  trying  persons  guilty  of  misdemeanours  or  even  of  felonies, 
preparation  of  criminal  cases  coming  within  the  jurisdiction 
of  the  Assizes,  inspection  of  prisons  and  of  work-houses, 
administration  of  the  rates,  power  to  deal  with  appeals  in 
assessment  cases  and  to  try  offences  gainst  the  revenue, 
inspection  of  roads,  supervision  of  the  public  health,  relief  of 
the  poor,  church  patronage,  —  were  all  exercised  or  controlled 
by  the  squires  in  their  capacity  of  magistrates,  within  the 
sphere  of  self-government.  To  deal  with  the  business  of  gen- 
eral administration,  the  magistrates  of  the  locality  met  once 
a  fortnight  in  petty  sessions  or  in  special  sessions.  Once  every 
three  months  they  assembled  in  greater  numbers  to  hold  the 
Qoarter  Sessions  in  the  chief  county  town,  attended  by  all  the 


.coy  Google 


S  DEMOCEACT  AND  POLITICAL  PARTIES    [mit  Pun 

functionaries  of  self'^Ternment,  the  sheriff  or  the  nnder-eheriff, 
the  coroners,  the  bigh-coDstables  of  hundreds,  the  district 
biutiffs,  the  governors  of  prisons  and  the  masters  of  work- 
houses,  and  the  members  of  the  ^and  juiy  and  the  special 
jury.  It  was  the  regular  rendezvous  of  a  ruling  ciasa.  Coram 
populo  it  could  feel  a  consciousness  of  its  individuality,  of  its 
rflle  in  public  life,  and  of  its  rank. 

The  sentiments  which  the  position  of  this  class  inspired  were 
transported  by  it  into  its  every-day  life,  and  from  tbem  it  took 
its  ideas,  of  politics  and  society  and  its  rules  of  conduct  in  mat- 
ters small  and  great  The  fact  of  sharing  these  ideas  and  fol- 
lowing these  rules  qualified  for  membership  of  the  class  and  was 
the  passport  for  admittance  into  it,  or,  what  amounted  to  the 
same  thing,  constituted  the  gentleman.  Incapable  of  exact 
definition,  the  notion  of  gentleman  was  the  social  charter  of 
the  ruling  class,  an  unwritten  charter  like  the  constitution 
of  the  Realm,  Gentle  birtii  gave  a  good  claim  to  the  title, 
but  property  and  the  noble  use  made  of  it  were  indispensable 
to  make  the  gentleman.  He  was  supposed  to  possess  an 
independent  income  derived  from  his  estate  and  not  from 
speculations  or  from  a  salary.  The  landed  proprietors  were 
considered  the  only  people  really  interested  in  the  welfare 
of  the  country,  they  alone  had  a  stake  in  it.'  People  who  had 
no  estate  or  who  only  possessed  personal  property  might  at 
any  moment  shake  the  dust  off  their  feet  and  leave  their  local- 
ity or  their  country  with  its  permanent  interests ;  they  were 
only  adventurers.  Thus  the  landowners,  considering  them- 
selves as  the  only  gentlemen,  formed  a  society  apart,  or  rather 
the  society.  A  man  who  was  in  business,  even  if  he  was  a 
banker,  did  not  belong  to  it.  In  the  country  people  were  not 
on  visiting  terms  with  him,  in  town  he  could  not  obtain  ad- 
mittance into  a  club.  The  ease  was  the  same  with  persons 
belonging  to  liberal  professions,  excepting  those  at  the  summit 
of  the  hierarchy.  Literary  men  and  artists  were  not  admitted 
into  society  as  a  matter  of  course.     But  if  a  man  of  the  middle 

1  "Tlie  landed  Interest  alone  hu  t,  rl)cht  to  be  repreMnted ;  u  for  tfae 
rabble  who  bave  nothing  but  pertonal  property,  what  hold  has  the  natloa 
ol  themf  "  mM  the  Lord  ■luatlce  Clerk  in  bis  aummliifi-up  to  Ibe  jury  in  tba 

HiKb  Court  of  Justii'e  at  E'liiiliiir^ih,  nt  the  famous  trial  ol  Hulr  In  1T93  (Col- 
UcHon  0/  Slate  Trialt,  by  Howell,  XXUI,  231,  L.  1817). 


.coy  Google 


Ttm  cB*p.]  THE  OLD  UNITY  « 

cIhss  rose  in  the  social  scale  by  hie  intelligence  and  bis  indnstry, 
or  throngh  bis  connections,  and  if  he  lived  like  a  gentleman, 
there  was  nothing  to  prevent  Ms  being  admitted  into  the  circle 
of  the  ruling  class,  the  reason  being  that  there  were  no 
l^al  barriers  between  the  variona  classes.  And  if  he  knocked 
at  the  door,  it  was  opened  but  shut  again  immediately  behind 
him,  and  in  this  way  the  members  of  the  ruling  class  always 
kept  to  themselves. 

There  was  no  jostling,  however,  on  the  threshold.  The 
Ei^lish  middle  class  of  those  days  was  not  afflicted  with  the 
vanity  of  the  French  race,  and  experienced  none  of  the  humilia- 
tions to  which  the  Hera  4tat  was  a  martyr.  It  was  by  no  means 
on  a  level  with  the  gentlemen  ae  regards  enlightenment,  and 
still  less  was  it  their  superior  in  point  of  fortune,  as  was  the 
case  with  the  tiers  in  France.  Besides,  it  had  none  of  the 
social  bnlliancy  of  the  French  bourgeoisie  in  the  eighteenth 
century ;  its  tastes  were  unrefined,  its  existence  was  dull,  not 
to  say  vulgar.  Hard-working  and  full  of  the  vigorous  instincts 
of  home  life,  it  enjoyed  its  modest  pleasures  in  peace  and 
qniet  and  kept  its  aspirations  within  due  limits.  To  rise  a 
step  in  the  social  scale,  to  better  one's  self,  this  was  an  ambi- 
tion which  might  be  indulged  in,  and  not  unfrequently  it  was 
realized  by  dint  of  industry  and  perseverance.  But  as  for  as- 
suming the  rank  and  position  of  the  gentry,  nobody  wasted  his 
time  in  bestowing  a  thought  on  such  a  thing.  The  noblemen 
and  gentlemen,  who  seemed  to  occupy  their  exalted  position  by 
virtue  of  the  natural  order  of  things,  were  only  regarded  with 
feelings  of  reverence  and  admiration.  Even  up  to  a  somewhat 
advanced  period  in  this  century,  at  the  county  ball,  which 
took  place  in  the  winter  in  the  county  town  and  was  attended 
by  tbe  local  gentry  and  the  leading  middle  class  people,  the 
^ntlefolk  danced  among  themselves  in  a  separate  part  of 
the  room,  and  the  rest  of  the  company  in  their  own  corner, 
bnt  the  latter  were  all  the  time  flattered  at  the  idea  of  being 
under  the  same  roof  with  these  superior  beings  and  almost  in 
physical  contact  with  them,  and  their  wives  were  only  too 
glad  to  be  able  to  gaze  at  the  grand  ladies  with  their  splendid 
dresses  and  their  aristocratic  partners. 

Sentiments  of  this  kind  as  well  as  the  absence  of  enlighten- 
ment were  not  calculated  to  make  the  middle  class  acquire  a 


.coy  Google 


10  DEUOCRACT  AMD  POUTICAL  PARTIES    [fust  fakt 

consciousness  of  its  importance  and  consider  Itself  as  a  social 
group  antagonistic  to  the  gentry  in  its  interests  and  aspirations. 
It  did  not  contfun  the  element  of  agitation  supplied  in  France 
by  the  lawyers.  The  lawyer  class  never  rose  to  political  im- 
portance in  England.  The  work  of  legislation  and  central 
administration  was  performed  by  the  members  of  the  landed 
aristocracy  in  Parliament.  The  members  of  the  same  class 
alflo  undertook  the  gratuitous  discharge  of  all  the  important 
functions  of  local  government  and  of  the  administration  of 
justice.  'In  so  doing  they  cut  the  ground  from  under  the  feet 
of  the  lawyers  in  the  sphere  of  public  life.  In  the  sphere  of 
private  life,  that  is  to  say  in  the  practice  of  their  profession, 
the  lawyers  were  actually  dependent  on  the  gentry  for  their 
livelihood,  for  this  was  the  propertied  class  with  all  the  trans- 
actions and  disputes  to  which  property  gave  rise  and  which 
required  the  assistance  of  men  learned  in  the  law.  Deeds  of 
entail  of  real  property,  marriage  settlementa,  leases  for  tenant- 
farmers  and  the  disputes  arising  out  of  them  —  the  attorneys 
and  Bolicitore  were  ready  to  perform  all  this  kind  of  work.  Id 
important  cases  a  higher  class  of  lawyers,  the  members  of 
the  Bar,  assisted  them  Thus  the  lawyers  in  England  only 
served  to  swell  the  landlord's  train  and  never  dreamed  of 
imdermining  his  privileged  position,  or  of  fomenting  animosily 
and  rancour  against  him  and  his  order  and  of  constituting 
themselves  the  mouthpiece  of  these  feelings,  as  was  the  case 


Nor  was  parochial  self-government  in  a  position  to  encour- 
age tendencies  of  this  description,  for  it  had  long  ceased  to  be 
a  reality.  In  boroughs  which  had  obtained  a  charter  of  in- 
corporation municipal  government  was  the  appanage  of  a  small ' 
hereditary  oligarchy.  In  places  which  had  not  received  a 
charter  and  in  rural  districts,  the  self-government  of  the  parish 
was  in  a  languishing  condition  since  the  concentration  of  the 
land  in  the  hands  of  the  gentry  and  the  disappearance  of  the 
small  proprietors,  who  are  the  materials  of  which  really  free 
communities  are  constituted.  The  gentry  took  care  not  to 
arouse  public  spirit  in  the  lower  strata  of  the  nation ;  they 
were  not  inclined  to  part  with  their  power. 

There  remained  the  clergy,  but  they  were  the  least  capable 
of  standing  in  the  way  of  the  ruling  class.     The  Church  of 


.coy  Google 


FiUT  CHAF.]  THE   OLD  UNITT  11 

England  was  simply  a  bFanch  establishment  of  this  class.  The 
clergymen  often  came  of  the  same  stock,  being  younger  sons 
or  relatives  or  dependents  of  good  families.  Associating  with 
the  gentry  as  magistrates  in  local  self-government,  they  were 
still  more  ready  to  join  in  the  social  life  of  the  landlords, 
participating  even  in  their  pictures  and  amusements.  The 
clergyman  was  not  unfrequently  an  ardent  sportsman,  a  bold 
rider,  a  keen  fisherman,  a  bit  of  an  epicure,  and  a  good  hand 
at  the  bottle. 

The  power  and  the  social  hom<^aeousne88  of  the  mling 
class  were  thus  complete. 

n 

The  structure  of  the  political  organization  presided  over  by 
this  class  contributed  another  element  of  unity.  The  villa^ 
was  linked  to  the  capital,  and  the  local  to  the  central  admin- 
istration, by  an  unbroken  series  of  living  ties  and  not  by 
the  fetters  of  a  centralized  bureaucracy.  In  the  country  the 
justice  of  the  peace,  who  ia  the  principal  functionary  of  the 
system  of  self-government,  combines  the  of&ces  of  adminis- 
trator and  judge.  His  jurisdiction  extends  to  every  part  of 
public  life  in  the  locality.  Independent  of  a  central  bureau- 
cracy, this  self-government  possesses  its  own  hierarchy,  but 
each  superior  grade  is  only  an  amplification  of  the  livii^  ele- 
ments which  form  the  lowest  one,  and  in  spite  of  the  ascending 
scale  they  all  remain,  at  each  stage,  at  the  same  distance  from 
the  men  and  the  things  with  which  they  have  to  deal.  The 
ladder  leads  directly  to  the  supreme  power  iu  the  State  and 
throughout  presents  the  same  optical  impression.  Three-fourths 
of  the  Members  of  Parliament  have  taken  part  in  the  self-gov- 
ernment of  the  county,  or  still  do  so.  The  peers  of  the  realm, 
the  leaders  of  the  aristocracy  who  constitute  the  House  of  Lords 
immediately  below  the  King,  occupy  the  position  of  Lord- 
Lieutenant  in  the  counties,  command  the  militia  and  discharge 
other  honorary  functions  belonging  to  local  self-government. 
Finally,  the  government  of  the  Church  itself  is  drawn  into  this 
endless  administrative  network.  The  bishops,  as  heads  of  the 
clergy,  meet  the  leaders  of  the  aristocracy  in  the  House  of 
Lords  and  there  vote  with  them  on  temporal  as  well  as  spiritual 
matters. 


.coy  Google 


13  DEMUCRACr  ASD  PULITICAL  PABTIES     [nuT  part 

Thus,  from  whatever  point  of  view  it  is  regarded,  the  whole 
political  fabric  always  presents  itself  in  all  its  grandeur,  and 
the  ruling  class  seems  to  rise  from  it  as  from  a  pedestal  com- 
posed of  a  single  huge  block. 

The  vast  impression  of  unity  conveyed  by  this  spectacle 
gains  in  bread^  and  height  when  wb  have  cast  a  glance  at 
the  internal  arrangement  of  the  political  structure.  The  same 
leading  idea  emanates  from  each  of  its  parts. 

The  monarchy,  which  is  at  the  apex,  is  the  first  to  exhibit 
this  unity.  With  the  triumph  of  the  parliamentary  regime 
the  King  is  reduced  to  impotence.  The  centre  of  gravity 
in  the  government  is  transferred  from  the  King  in  Council 
to  the  King  in  PaHiament,  but  this  centre  is  always  the  King. 
The  ministers,  who  owe  their  appointment  to  the  favour  of  the 
Houses  of  Parliament,  are  his  Frivy  Councillors.  In  local 
administration,  all  the  lupaid  functionaries  representing  society 
hold  their  power  from  him  and  not  from  the  people.  Thus 
the  monarchy  always  appears  as  the  one  point  in  which  all  the 
rays  of  the  life  of  the  State  are  focussed.  And  the  more  the 
royal  power  dwindles  in  reality,  without  losii^  a  single  prerog- 
ative as  a  matter  of  right,  the  more  it  assumes  an  impersonal 
character,  the  more  strikingly  does  it  symbolize  the  moral 
conception  of  the  supreme  power  which  in  its  unity  per- 
vades all  the  manifestations  of  public  life  without  dominating 
them,  from  which  all  authority  proceeds  but  only  to  converge 
on  the  one  object  which  is  the  raison  d'itre  of  a  politicsLl 
society. 

The  real  power  is  in  the  hands  of  Parliament,  with  the 
always  implied  sanction  of  the  Crown.  As  direct  representa- 
tive of  the  nation,  it  exercises  every  attribute  of  sovereignty 
on  its  behalf.  Legislative  and  executive  functions  meet  and 
are  blended  in  it  The  body  which  has  received  the  name  of 
the  Cabinet  is  only  a  committee  of  the  two  Houses.  The 
power  of  making  laws,  regulations  and  orders,  is  not  entrusted 
to  a  separate  authority  in  each  case.  Every  high  act  of  govern- 
ment proceeds  from  the  Lords  and  Commons  united  to  the 
Crown,  from  the  King  in  PaHiameiU,  that  is  to  say,  from 
society  and  the  State  fused  into  a  single  whole. 

Local  administration  with  its  self-government  is  only  a  freah 


.coy  Google 


man  cbaf.]  THE  OLD  UNITT  18 

manifeatation  of  this  whole.  Besides  the  local  business  traas- 
acted  nowadays  by  elective  assemblies  such  as  municipalities, 
district  councils,  etc.,  the  self-gOTemnient  of  the  county  in- 
cludes judicial  and  administrative  powers,  in  other  words, 
attributes  of  political  sovereignty.  The  great  landowners  who 
combine  all  these  varied  functions  do  not  derive  them  fi-om 
any  hereditary  right  nor  from  any  mandate  conferred  on 
them  by  this  or  that  group  of  the  population  under  their 
jurisdiction.  They  are  chosen  from  the  ranks  of  the  society 
whose  habite,  needs,  and  aspirations  they  more  or  less  faith- 
fully reflect  But  they  are  appointed  by  the  Crown  which 
represents  the  State.  Holding  their  powers  from  this  source, 
they  simply  exercise  as  delegates  the  authority  entrusted  to 
them  by  the  chief  of  the  State,  the  supreme  depositary  of  its 
sovereignty. 

The  mark  of  the  one  and  indivisible  State  is  thus  stamped 
on  every  o^an  of  public  life,  however  great  its  distance  from 
the  centre)  the  State  covers  the  whole  ground  occupied  by 
the  political  fabric,  and  to  complete  the  unity  it  absorbs  the 
spiritual  province  by  making  religion  a  State  religion.  It 
adopts  its  dogmas  and  professes  them  as  not  only  the  truth 
but  the  whole  truth ;  it  makes  adhesion  to  them  the  criterion 
of  a  sound  judgment  and  an  upright  heart,  and  rejects  all  who 
do  not  admit  them.  Public  posts,  elective  ofiBces,  whether  in 
Parliament  or  in  local  assemblies,  can  only  be  filled  by  mem- 
bers of  the  Established  Church.  The  Universities  are  open 
only  to  those  who  formally  embrace  the  State  religion.  Even 
secondary  education  is  practically  denied  to  the  children  of 
Catholics  and  Dissenters,  for  all  the  grammar  schools  are  in  the 
hands  of  the  Anglican  clergy.  Thus  identifying  itself  with 
the  Church,  the  State  sets  the  crowning  seal  of  moral  unity 
on  political  society. 

in 

What  was  the  position  of  the  individual  in  this  State  and 
society?  The  experience  we  have  just  g^ned  conveys  the 
idea  that  it  was  not  an  exalted  one.  As  a  matter  of  fact,  the 
whole  public  life  of  the  England  of  old  days,  from  one  end 
to  the  other,  marks  the  subordination  of  the  individual  to 
society.    A  member  of  the  House  of  Commons,  "elected  to 


.coy  Google 


M  BEHOCBACT  AND  POLITICAL  PARTIES    [piur  pakt 

serve  in  Parliament,"  cannot  reaign  before  the  legal  expiration 
of  his  mandate ;  even  ill  health  is  not  accepted  as  an  excuse, 
and  he  is  obliged  to  have  recourse  to  an  expedient  in  order  to 
retire  into  private  life  —  to  apply  for  the  post  of  steward  and 
bailiff  of  the  Chiltem  Hundreds.'  In  the  county  the  sheriff, 
who  is  the  acting  representative  of  public  authority,  cannot 
decline  to  serve.  In  the  administration  of  the  parish  offices 
are  conferred  by  election,  but  acceptance  of  them  is  obligatory 
on  the  persons  elected.  The  other  parishioners  are  also  often 
reminded  that  they  are  only  anonymous  items  of  a  whole.  The 
whole  attitude  of  the  revenue  department  towards  the  taxpayer 
makes  him  feel  this.  It  ignores  the  individual  and  never 
addresses  him.  Taxation  is  not  personal  but  real.  The  rev- 
enue authorities  never  consider  the  relations  of  properties  with 
persons ;  the  rates  are  demanded  not  from  the  owner  but  from 
the  occupier,  from  whoever  happens  to  be  in  possession.  The 
moral  personality  of  the  rate-payer  is  treated  with  just  as  little 
consideration ;  payment  of  the  rates  for  the  Established  Church 
is  demanded  from  the  Dissenters  on  the  same  grounds  as  from 
the  members  of  the  Anglican  Church.  The  religious  scruples 
of  this  or  that  individual  are  of  no  consequence,  he  has  prop- 
erty in  the  parish,  and  that  is  a  sufficient  reason  for  making 
him  pay  the  Church  rates  as  well  ss  the  other  rates  assessed 
on  the  parish. 

It  is  not  only  in  the  discharge  of  obligations  that  the  indi- 
vidual suffers  in  this  way  for  the  benefit  of  the  community. 
The  social  and  political  constitution  bears  traces  of  the  same 
spirit  in  regard  to  the  exercise  of  rights.  First  of  all  in  the 
family.  Among  the  gentry,  as  soon  as  a  man  attains  his  ma- 
jority and  comes  into  his  property,  he  renounces  his  right  in 
favour  of  his  eldest  son  by  a  deed  of  substitution.  This  child 
is  perhaps  not  yet  bom,  but  that  is  of  no  consequence;  it  is 
not  his  personality  which  is  in  question,  but  the  new  generation 

'  SeTsral  centuilea  ago  the  Chiltem  Hundreds,  a,  dlitrict  in  Buckingbiim- 
shire,  were  InfeatedwithbriKstidi,  tuid  an  officer  ww  appointed  to  provide  for 
the  ncurltf  of  the  inhabitants  ot  the  locality.  The  brigandage  was  bimd  put 
doffo,  bat  the  officie  remaioRd,  and  as  it  waa  a  post  ol  "  bonoiir  and  profit 
nndei  the  Crowti,"  the  membei*  ol  Parllainent  who  accepted  It  lost  bis  aeat 
<o  iplo.  SiDce  then  membeni  of  the  House  who  wish  lo  retire  obtain  the 
stewardship  of  the  Chilleni  Hnndieda,  and  resign  it  the  same  evening,  to 
make  «m;  toi  uiotber  nember. 


.coy  Google 


nUT  CHAP.]  THE  OLD  UKITT  16 

of  which  he  will  become  the  representative.  He,  in  his  turn, 
will  waive  hia  rights  in  the  sajne  way,  with  the  same  object  of 
keeping  the  property  intact  and  thereby  preserring  in  future 
ages  the  prestige  of  the  family,  of  which  he  is  only  a  fraotloa 
in  the  march  of  time. 

When  he  exeroiees  his  rights  of  cilazenship,  it  is  also  not  on 
Ma  own  account.  He  belongs  to  a  free  country  governed  by  a 
representative  assembly,  but  it  is  not  he  who  is  primarily  rep- 
resented. The  assembly  is  not  the  "  Chamber  of  Deputies " 
but  the  "  House  of  Commons,"  of  the  counties  and  boroughs, 
living  members  of  the  State.  As  they  alone  possess  political 
individuality,  they  are  represented  without  reference  to  popu- 
lation, just  as  human  bodies,  be  their  stature  great  or  small, 
perform  the  same  vital  functions.  And  it  is  only  as  a  part  of 
the  electoral  entity  that  the  individual  obtains  representation 
in  Parliajnent.  No  doubt  the  act  of  election  can  only  be  ac- 
complished by  individuals  who  inhabit  the  county  or  boiough, 
but  when  it  is  on  the  point  of  taking  place  they  are  detached 
from  their  own  conscience  by  being  made  to  record  an  open 
vote,  under  the  watchful  supervision  of  their  neighbours,  and, 
so  to  speak,  as  their  representative  and  agent. 

Even  the  sphere  of  private  life  does  not  escape  the  tendency 
to  subordinate  the  individual.  This  is  difficult  to  reconcile 
with  accepted  notions,  for  it  is  in  this  sphere  above  all  that 
the  Englishman  is  supposed  to  enjoy  complete  freedom.  He 
possesses,  as  Blackstone  says  in  the  jargon  of  the  eighteenUi 
century, " natural  Uberties."  "These  were  formeriy  the  rights 
of  all  mankind ;  but  in  most  other  countries  of  the  worid,  being 
more  or  less  debased  or  destroyed,  they  at  present  may  be  said 
to  remain,  in  a  peculiar  and  emphatic  manner,  the  rights  of  the 
people  of  England.  And  they  may  be  reduced  to  three  princi- 
pal or  primary  articles :  the  right  of  personal  security,  the 
right  of  personal  liberty,  and  the  right  of  private  property." 
Chatham  emphasizes  the  same  point  in  magnificent  langu^e; 
"The  storm  and  rain  may  beat  into  the  cottage  of  the  poor  man, 
but  the  King  cannot  enter  it."  Beyond  a  doubt,  these  "natu- 
ral liberties  "  of  the  individual  existed  and  were  respected  so 
long  as  they  did  not  directly  or  indirectly  interfere  with  the 
community.  As  soon  a^  this  conflict  of  interests  appears, 
htunan  individuality  is  crushed,  and  occasionally  with  refine- 


.coy  Google 


16  DEMOCBACT  AND  POLITICAL  PAKTIES    [nuT  rxrt 

ments  of  cruelty.  UodeF  the  Settlement  Act'  the  inhabitant 
of  a  parish  cannot  leave  it  for  the  term  of  his  whole  life ;  he 
remains  in  it  like  a  bondsman  attached  to  the  soil,  because  it  he 
were  free  to  go  where  he  liked  he  might  move  into  another  lo- 
cality, where,  if  he  found  no  means  of  livelihood,  he  would  have 
to  be  maintained  by  the  parish.  Poor  people  coming  into  an- 
other parish  conceal  themselves  like  crimiiials  hunted  by  the 
police.  When  discovered,  they  are  sent  back  at  once  into  their 
parish,  even  if  they  are  suffering  from  a  dai^erous  illness 
which  unfits  them  for  the  journey.  A  poor  man  who  will  not 
work  is  made  to  do  so  by  force,  for  here  again  the  parish  would 
be  obliged  to  keep  him  from  starvation.  He  is  confined  in  a 
work-house  for  the  whole  of  his  life,  on  the  mere  order  of  an 
overseer  of  the  poor.  His  children  are  taken  from  him  and 
apprenticed  in  another  parish,  perhaps  at  the  other  end  of  the 
country,  where  they  will  remain  separated  from  him  as  if  by 
the  grave.  The  persons  with  whom  these  apprentices  are 
placed  are  obliged  to  take  them  aud  keep  them.  If  a  work- 
man left  the  country,  there  would  be  no  fear  of  his  coming  on 
any  parish,  but  he  would  inflict  injury  on  the  larger  community 
to  which  he  belongs,  on  his  country,  by  taking  his  professional 
skill  abroad  with  him ;  consequently  the  law  forbids  artisans 
to  leave  the  Kingdom.  Workmen  are  not  allowed  the  right  of 
combination.  Freedom  of  contract  is  not  complete ;  wages  are 
fixed  by  the  authorities. 

Being  treated  with  such  scant  consideration  by  the  com* 
munity  in  the  lawful  course  of  his  existence,  the  individoal 
forfeits  all  claim  to  the  respect  due  to  him  as  a  human  being 
directly  he  comes  into  conflict  with  the  law.  Under  the  bank- 
ruptcy law  the  insolvent  debtor  is  thrown  into  prison  on  the 
simple  application  of  the  creditor.  The  same  treatment  is 
meted  out  to  a  man  who  is  accused  by  a  woman  with  child  of 
being  the  cause  of  her  pregnancy.'  The  persons  called  vaga- 
bonds and  beggars  by  the  law  —  and  their  number  is  a  lai^ 
one* — are  publicly  whipped  until,  aa  the  old  statutes  say, 

1  Act  ot  1662, 14  Chss.  n,  c.  12 1  Itt  severity  te  to  a  certain  extent  mltlgatad 
by  the  Act  o[  1790,  3S  Gm.  Ill,  c.  lUl,  and  or  1809,  49  Geo.  m,  c.  12*. 

iBaslardy  Acts  ot  1733  (6  Qeo.  II,  c.  31)  and  ol  U09  (49  Geo.  m, 
0.68). 

■  Tlie  TagniDt  Act  ot  1744  (IT  Geo.  U,  e.  0). 


.coy  Google 


mar  fflup.]  THE  OLD  CNTTT  17 

"their  body  becomes  bloody." '  If  after  this  they  do  not  go 
back  to  their  parieh  they  are  whipped  in  every  place  conaecu- 
tirely  until  they  are  brought  home.'  A  theft  of  five  shillinga 
is  punished  with  death,  and  protracted  efforts  of  philanthro- 
pists were  required  to  raise  ihe  price  of  human  life  to  forty 
shillings  and  afterwards  to  five  pounds.  The  law  becomes  less 
rigorous  when  the  vindication  of  human  personality  is  con- 
cerned ;  the  severest  penalties  of  the  code  apply  to  ofFencee 
against  property  and  not  to  those  (gainst  the  pereon. 

So  much  for  the  legal  sphere.  In  the  domain  of  social  life 
the  importance  of  the  individual  is  relatively  still  further 
diminished.  Here  a  man  can  never  "be  himself."  Society 
forces  on  him  a  crowd  of  obligations  from  which  he  cannot 
escape  without  prejudicing  his  claim  to  the  title  of  gentleman. 
Invisible  and  pervading  every  corner  of  life,  the  notion  of 
gentleman  brings  every  member  of  society  under  the  yoke  of 
a  general  and  nniform  law,  and  subjects  him  to  a  pitiless  disci- 
pline, leaving  no  field  for  his  personal  preferences,  from  his 
religious  opinions  down  to  his  dress.  It  is  ungentlemanlike 
to  be  a  Dissenter,  just  as  it  is  ungentlemanlike  to  wear  a  white 
hat,  as  those  Katlical  fellows  are  so  fond  of  doing. 

The  cult  of  the  individual,  the  apotheosis  of  man  in  the 
abstract,  were  consequently  very  far  from  ever  having  existed 

in  Rnglmlii. 

rv 

Bat  if  in  the  political  society  of  England  the  individual  was 
only  an  atom  in  the  general  mass,  he  was  not  always  an  atom 
isolated  in  space.  Apart  from  the  representative  institutions, 
in  every-day  life  many  an  Englishman  was  led  by  local  self- 
government  to  work  for  a.  common  object  possessing  a  general 
interest.  By  this  continual  co-operation  in  the  sphere  of  the 
immediate  needs  of  the  population  men  learned  to  know  each 
other,  to  come  to  an  understanding  and  to  pursue  in  concert 
an  aim  which  rose  above  their  own  personid  concerns.    The 

>  "Till  Ua  bodjr  b«  bloody  by  rBMOU  at  Boch  whipping"  (23  Hen.  Tin, 
c  12,  us.  U30-3I). 

*  "Be  openly  whipped  nntil  bis  or  her  body  be  bloody"  .  .  ■  "in  every 
pUce  to  be  whipped  UUauch  person  be  repaired  to  the  place  Iimlt«d"(3SEllz. 

e.  4.  u.  um-m). 


.coy  Google 


18  DEMOCRACY  AND  POLITICAL  PARTIES     [fibst  part 

iodependent  fortuDe  ajid  the  social  rank  of  the  magistrates 
who  took  part  in  the  self-government  of  the  couDty  made  theit 
public  labours  more  an  affair  of  honour  and  social  duty.  In 
discharging  their  functions  tliey  very  often  displayed  class 
prejudice  and  a  domineering  spirit;  still  they  gave  tbeii  time 
and  their  money  to  the  serrice  of  the  public.  In  doii^  so  they 
set  a  daily  example  which  showed  that  private  persons  had 
duties  towards  the  community,  and  that  it  was  not  right  for 
the  individual  to  hold  aloof  from  public  life.  Service  on  the 
grand  jury  and  on  special  juries  very  often  brought  together 
people  of  lower  social  position  and  made  them  feel  a  common 
bond  of  union.  Moreover  the  system  of  taxation  of  real  prop- 
erty in  the  counties  kept  the  members  of  the  parish  in  close 
contact,  the  total  required  being  fixed  in  a  lump  sum  for  each 
parish  and  then  apportioned  amongst  each  oUier  by  the  parish- 
ioners themselves. 

In  this  way  a  social  current  was  formed  which,  starting  from 
the  heights  of  political  society,  penetrated  low  euou^  to  reach 
the  level  ground  occupied  by  the  mass  of  the  population  and 
parching,  so  to  speak,  under  a  restricted  parliamentary  fran- 
chise, an  oligarchical  municipal  administration,  and  an  anemic 
system  of  parochial  self-government  The  power  and  the  range 
of  this  social  force  have  no  doubt  been  exaggerated  by  the 
retrospective  enthusiasm  of  writers  who  have  sung  the  pimses 
of  the  England  of  old  days,  such  as  Gneist  and  others,  who 
readily  ascribed  to  it  the  merit  of  having  completed  the  organic 
unity  of  English  society  and  of  having  once  and  for  all  secured 
the  co-ordination  of  its  component  parts.  It  was  impossible 
to  complete  the  organic  unity  in  question,  because  it  never 
existed.  We  have  just  seen,  merely  from  the  lot  of  the 
individual  in  this  society,  that  he  was  too  much  repressed 
to  be  really  an  organic  part  of  it,  and  that  the  moral  entity 
of  the  community  was  too  often  identified  with  a  single 
class,  to  which  the  rest  of  the  nation  was  only  adjusted,  in 
many  cases  even  simply  by  a  turn  of  the  screw.  But  nar- 
row as  was  the  social  current  in  the  England  of  old  times, 
it  was  not  dammed  up  by  barriers  of  privilege  like  those 
which  divided  the  nation  into  small  isolated  groups  in  France, 
and  it  could  flow  unchecked  through  the  whole  English  com- 
munity, while  gradually  shrinking  in  volume.     In  tins  way  it 


.coy  Google 


ran  chap.]  THE  OLD  nSITT  10 

concealed  the  lines  of  cleavage  in  political  society,  and  readily 
conveyed  the  impression  of  a  complete  o^anic  unity.  This 
social  current  wa8  sometimes  a  perception  of  the  common  wel- 
fare and  a  reasoned  determination  to  advance  it,  not  without 
an  admixture  of  selfishness;  at  others  a  v^^e  and  spon- 
taneous idea  of  the  duties  prescribed  by  the  general  interest ; 
very  frequently  the  necessity  or  social  propriety  of  not  sepa- 
rating from  the  leading  men ;  still  more  often  a  sort  of 
traditional,  almost  automatic,  adhesion  to  the  chiefs  whom 
the  public  was  always  accustomed  to  see  in  the  front  rank ;  but 
whatever  its  aspect,  the  current,  within  its  narrow  bed,  con- 
tinually carried  the  members  of  the  community  aloi^  with 
it,  and  made  them  unite  in  the  psychological  order  just  indi- 
cated. This  process,  unceasing  in  its  nature  like  the  forma- 
tion of  solid  strata  under  the  waves  of  the  sea,  ensured  the 
cohesion  of  the  body  politic  and  brought  its  dominant  organs 
into  relief.  Their  position  as  leaders  of  society  made  them 
leaders  of  men  in  ihe  State.  Their  political  authority  was 
simply  another  expression  for  their  social  power,  which  rested 
on  the  attachment  of  man  to  man.  Since  the  primitive  period 
of  the  Middle  Ages,  which  produced  the  lord  and  his  vassal, 
the  relations  of  life  had  become  far  more  complicated,  but 
they  had  not  become  differentiated  in  the  same  proportion, 
partly  in  consequence  of  the  large  infusion  of  social  feeling 
which  pervaded  the  English  community.  Powers  had  in- 
creased in  number,  but  the  necessity  of  a  corresponding  divi- 
sion of  functions  made  itself  but  slowly  felt.  And  even  close 
upon  the  period  of  reforms  not  only  was  society  an  avenue  to 
politics,  but  people  combined  political  power  and  social  func- 
tions even  of  the  purely  fashionable  hind.  Thus  the  great 
Lord  Chesterfield  was  leader  of  fashion  and  political  leader 
at  the  same  time.'  Political  and  social  life  met  and  blended 
once  more  in  the  leadership ;  society  was  completely  reflected 
in  its  leaders. 

V 

Under  these  circumstances  the  political  system  worked  with 

extreme  simplicity.     For  parliamentary   elections  the  most 

>  Wallington,  when  dltcnssiug.  in  183T.  tbe  cbancM  of  the  Tory  party,  drew 
kttenUou  lo  the  dlBadvantaga  at  which  It  was  placed  owlDg  to  Ita  leaden: 
"  Peel  ha*  no  tnaanen  and  I  have  no  small  talk." 


.coy  Google 


so  DEUOCRACT  ASS  POUTICAL  PARTIES    [nut  fam 

influential  squires  in  the  county  met  in  an  infonnal  manner 
and  selected  a  candidate.  AU  the  members  of  their  class 
accepted  him  from  motivee  of  confidence  or  propriety.  The 
other  electors,  who  were  few  in  number  owing  to  the  high 
qualification,  and  accustomed  all  their  life  to  gravitate  in  the 
orbit  of  the  great  landlords,  could  onlj  follow  their  habitual 
tendency.  The  urban  constituencies  ^Bo  were  subject  to  the 
influence  of  the  landed  aristocracy.  Many  boroughs  were 
imder  the  direct  patronage  of  the  great  proprietors  in  their 
capacity  of  owners  of  the  soil  on  which  the  urban  f^lomera- 
tions  had  arisen.  They  obtained  control  of  other  boroughs  hy 
making  their  tenants  become  members  at  their  expense  of  the 
municipal  corporations  which  possessed  a  monopoly  of  the 
franchise.  In  case  of  need  the  electors  in  the  towns  could  be 
secured  by  bribery ;  the  votes  of  freemen  were  openly  bought, 
not  to  mention  the  pocket  or  rotten  boroughs,  by  which  a  seat 
in  the  House  could  be  purchased  right  out.  In  one  way  or 
another  the  members  nearly  all  belonged  to  the  aristocratic 
class,  being  sons  of  lords  or  their  near  relatiTCs,  or  other  per- 
sons on  whom  the  magnates  who  procured  them  admittance 
into  Parliament  could  depend.  According  to  a  table  prepared 
about  1815,  the  House  of  Commons  contained  471  members 
who  owed  their  seats  to  the  good-will  and  pleasure  of  144 
peers  and  123  commoners,  16  Government  nominees,  and  only 
171  members  elected  by  popular  suffrages.' 

Having  gained  a  seat  in  Parliament  through  the  same  influ- 
ences, and  belonging  nearly  all  to  the  same  social  sphere,  they 
brought  with  them  the  same  habita  of  mind  and  feelings,  and 
were  perfectly  re^dy  to  obey  the  instinct  which  impels  men  to 
form  a  group  and  accept  the  control  of  a  chief.  Social  etprit 
de  corps  compelled  each  member  to  follow  his  set,  his  party. 
To  desert  it,  even  for  a  moment,  was  an  act  of  treachery, 
or,  what  was  perhaps  still  worse,  ungentlemanly.  And  why 
should  he  take  a  Hue  of  his  own?  The  voice  of  his  con- 
science might  prompt  such  a  course,  but  did  not  the  other 
and  louder  voice  of  his  surroundings  and  his  party  bid  him 
follow  his  leaders?     Was  a  fraction  to  set  itself  above  the 

>T.  H.  B.  OldBetd,  ITtt  Eeprenntative  Hittory  of  Oreat  Britain  and 
jTtlattd,  Lond.  1818,  Vol.  VI,  Appendix:  Correct  table*  ot  parllunentarj 
patronage. 


.CD,  Google 


nuT  OBAP.]  THE  OLD  UNITT  St 

whole  ?  "  Yon  go  with  your  family,  air,  like  a  gentleman ; 
you  aie  aot  to  consider  youi  opioionB  like  a.  philosopher 
01  a  political  adventurer,"  says  Lord  Monmouth  to  his  graad- 
son  in  one  of  Disraeli's  novels.'  Independent  members  wen 
consequently  very  rare.  Social  discipline  enforced  disci- 
pline in  Parliament.  The  House  was  "  the  best  gentlemen's 
club,"  and  if  any  one  of  its  members  took  it  into  his  head  to 
disturb  the  general  harmony,  he  was  disposed  of  in  the  same 
way  as  a  bore  in  a  drawing-room.  To  accuse  a  member  of  this 
was  equivalent  to  tellii^  him  that  he  was  not  a  gentleman. 
Pitt,  when  Prime  Minister,  in  1798,  was  obliged  to  fight  a  duel 
with  Tiemey  because  he  had  reproached  him  with  obstructive 
conduct,  liie  feeling  of  members  towards  their  leaders  was 
not  only  the  professional  devotion  of  a  soldier  to  his  chief,  but 
even  more  the  respect  and  absolute  confidence  inspired  by  men 
of  honour.  Confidence  in  their  wisdom  and  in  their  experience 
of  affairs  occupied  the  second  placa  These  sentiments  consti- 
tuted the  atmosphere  of  the  House  for  years  after  1S32.  On 
one  occasion  during  the  discussion  of  the  Reform  Bill  Groker 
moved  an  amendment  which  he  supported  in  an  able  and  con- 
clusive speech.  Lord  Althorp  rose  and  simply  said  that  he  had 
made  calculations  and  arrived  at  results  which  told  against  the 
amendment,  that  unfortunately  he  had  mislaid  the  papers,  but 
that  if  the  House  would  leave  it  to  him  they  would  reject  the 
amendment.  And  the  House  voted  against  the  amendment,  for 
the  reasons  which  Lord  Althorp  had  forgotten  but  which  had 
seemed  to  him  conclusive  at  the  time.'  A  Minister,  as  Robert 
Lowe  stated  in  1867,  defeated  a  motion  to  appoint  a  parliament- 
ary committee  by  simply  saying :  "  I  cannot  grant  such  a  com- 
mittee."* "  When  I  first  entered  Parliament,"  once  remarked 
Sidney  Herbert,  who  was  a  member  of  Peel's  and  Palmerston's 
Cabinets,  "  the  House  of  Commons  was  divided  into  two  camps. 
A  leader  guarded  both ;  a  leader  whom  no  man  questioned,  and 
whom  every  man  on  his  side  followed.  His  party  acquiesced 
in  everything  he  thought  best;  and  five  minutes  after  his  deei- 
Bion  was  announced  to  them,  they  were  heart  and  soul  eng^ed 


'  Spttchet  and  Lttten  on  Beform,  Loud.  1S6T,  p.  9 


.coy  Google 


n  DBHOCEACT  Ain>  POLITICAL  PAKTIBS    [riuT  nxt 

in  it,  clamorous  that  it  was  the  only  one  that  could  be  arrived 
at" ' 

The  division  into  political  parties  in  no  way  impaired  the 
homogeneousness  of  the  whole  body,  it  only  facilitated  the  for- 
mation of  the  two  groupa  and  preserved  cohesion  in  the  tanks. 
Subdivisions  as  they  were  of  the  same  society,  separated  by 
rivalries  and  grudges  and  to  a  slight  extent  by  principles,  Whigs 
aad  Tories  in  Parliament  were  animated  by  the  same  spirit  and 
the  same  passions.  It  was  a  struggle  of  Gapulete  and  Monta- 
gues. Social  discipline  made  each  party  into  a  living  chain 
which  nothing  could  break :  afSux  of  ideas,  pressure  of  public 
opinion,  revolte  on  the  part  of  individuals,  were  not  strong 
enough  for  the  purpose.  A  very  considerable  number  of 
members  of  the  House  were  anything  but  "philosophers." 
Younger  sons  of  peers,  and  a^  a  rule  young  men,  principally 
attracted  by  the  pleasures  and  amusements  of  society  and  the 
clubs,  country  gentlemen  who  accepted  a  seat  because  it  had 
become  the  fashion  to  spend  a  few  months  each  year  in  London, 
they  took  but  a  slender  interest  in  the  debates,  and  seldom 
came  te  the  House,  except  on  the  great  field-days  when  every 
member  of  the  party  was  whipped  up  to  make  a  majority,  and 
even  then  they  only  arrived  at  the  last  moment,  just  in  time 
to  learn  how  they  should  vote.  Members  of  a  more  serious 
turn  of  mind  were  not  likely  to  be  much  troubled  with  ideas. 
The  questions  in  dispute  were  few  in  number  and  not  of 
recent  date;  in  those  days  people  were  slow  in  rising  prob- 
lems and  a  long  time  in  solving  them.*  A  man  could  make  up 
a  programme  to  last  all  his  life  at  the  outset  of  his  political 
career.  It  was  seldom  that  he  was  taken  unawares  by  an 
unforeseen  question  which  would  oblige  him  to  adopt  a  fresh 
attitude  on  the  spur  of  the  moment. 

The  pressure  of  public  opinion,  apart  from  exceptional  cases, 
was  still  less  felt  by  the  politician.  There  hardly  existed  any 
opinion  outside  parliamentary  circles  and  the  drawing-rooms 

1  The  TimeM  of  Oct.  29,  tSSS.    Speech  U.  the  Warminstw  Atbentenin. 

'  Lord  Joba  Riusell  once  remarked  in  the  House  of  Commoiis  that  Lord 
ChBtham,  the  moet  powerful  HioUter  of  the  eighteenth  century,  had  Dot  paswid 
a  Blogle  IsKllltttive  measure.  Duriug  the  twenty  yean  which  followed  the 
Reform  Bill  many  more  Important  laws  ware  enacted  than  during  tlie  hun- 
dred Bud  twenty  preceding  years  (quoted  by  Bagehot,  Etlaj/t  on  S^arm, 
Lond.  1883,  p.  109). 


.coy  Google 


FiUT  OBAF.]  THE  OLD   UNTTT  28 

connected  with  them.  Outdoor  opinion  had  no  means  of  ex- 
pressing itself;  the  platform  and  public  meetings  scarcely 
existed;  the  means  of  communicatiOQ  were  difficult;  the 
Press,  which  was  crushed  by  heavy  duties,  had  a  very  limited 
circulation.  The  price  of  a  copy  of  a  newspaper  rose  as  high 
as  seven  pence  (in  1815  ait«r  the  new  stamp  duties).  At  the 
beginning  of  the  century  (1801),  the  yearly  sale  of  newspapers 
was  leas  than  a  copy  and  a  half  per  head  of  the  popula- 
tion, and  with  a  few  variations  it  remained  at  this  figure  up 
to  1835.'  The  general  public  pwd  little  heed  to  politics.  It 
was  the  pet  hobby  of  a  select  group,  the  sport  of  an  aristocracy. 
And  it  wsa  only  in  this  latter  capacity  that  it  interested  the 
English  masses,  who  were  full  of  a  deferential  admiration  for 
all  the  doings  of  their  nobility.  There  were  a  few  eccentric 
individuals  who  followed  and  discussed  the  policy  of  the  Gov- 
ernment, but  they  were  looked  on  as  armchair  strategists,  who 
spend  their  time  in  criticising  the  coram audei's-in-chief.  The 
knowledge  of  what  went  on  in  Parliament  was  slight  and 
inaccurate;  the  reports  of  the  proceedings  were  of  the  most 
summary  description;  the  division-lists  were  never  published, 
except  on  great  occasions,  when  private  copies  of  them  were 
circulated.  It  was  consequently  difficult  for  the  constituents 
to  follow  the  conduct  of  their  members,  even  if  they  wished  to 
do  so.  The  latter,  for  their  part,  were  by  no  means  anxious  to 
be  under  control,  and  opposed  the  publication  of  their  votes  in 
the  House,  being  of  opinion  that  secrecy  was  essential  to  their 
independence. 

The  further  removed  they  were  from  the  control  of  public 
opinion,  the  more  close  became  the  ties  which  bound  them  to 
their  party  and  its  leaders.  Independent  tendencies  in  a  pri- 
vate member  died  out  of  themselves.  The  only  alternative 
was  to  go  over  to  the  other  side.  In  what  quarter  could  he 
have  found  even  moral  support  when  the  door  of  public  opin- 
ion was  closed  ?  Consequently  there  was  no  field  for  the 
formation  of  a  third  party  holding  the  balance  between  the 

>  In  the  United  State!  tbe  ciicnl&tion  of  the. Press  nwe  dnrlng  the  same 
p«Had  rrom  3|  copies  per  bead  to  E  or  61-  It  U  tnie  that  to  addition  to  the 
Runped  DewBpapera,  the  statistics  ol  which  are  the  basis  of  these  calcD- 
UfioDs,  QUU17  eouOaband  Journals  were  dKulated  In  England  at  certain 


.coy  Google 


M  DEMOCRACY  AND  POLITICAL  PARTIES     [pikit  mrt 

two  great  parties,  and  they  always  remained  compact  and  in 
perfect  discipline.  A  Cabinet  supported  by  the  majority  was 
sure  of  the  immediate  future,  the  policy  of  the  Government 
was  marked  by  continuity,  and  the  State  enjoyed  the  advantage 
of  stability. 


.coy  Google 


BECOND  CHAPTER 

BBEAE'ITP  OF   THE   OLD   eOOISTT 


Solid  and  oolietent  ae  the  political  and  social  fabric  of 
England  was,  it  was  too  narrow  to  contain  the  national  life. 
Everything  in  it  was  oramped :  the  private  individual,  begin- 
ning his  career  vith  a  fairly  sound  but  very  incomplete  educa- 
tion; society,  drawn  from  a  limited  circle,  its  every-day  life 
ruled  by  conventions  and  piejudices,  its  mental  culture  derived 
from  a  literature  modelled  on  the  formal  lines  of  classic  art, 
its  spiritual  sustenance  supplied  by  a  religion  free  from  mysti- 
oism  but  also  devoid  of  enthusiasm,  and  reduced  by  the  homi- 
lies of  the  pulpit  to  arguments  in  which  the  existence  of  God 
was  demonstrated  by  his  utility  ;  the  Church  a  branch  of  the 
State;  the  State  reposing  solely  on  a  single  class  supposed  to 
be  the  only  one  with  a  stake  in  the  country.  The  great  mass 
of  the  nation  received  hardly  a  ray  of  light  or  warmth  from 
this  society  of  gentlemen,  from  this  aristocratic  Church,  from 
tJ)is  State  religion  embodied  in  paragraphs,  from  this  exdu- 
live  political  system.  True,  the  individual  was  not  molested 
as  in  continental  countries;  the  restrictions  on  freedom  of 
labour  were  falling  into  disuse ;  the  fundamental  rights  of  the 
citizen  were  under  the  protection  of  the  tribunals;  the  admin- 
istration, invested  with  a  judicial  character  in  the  person  of 
the  magistrates  and  controlled  by  settled  laws,  was  not  exposed 
to  the  arbitrary  proceedings  of  a  bureaucracy  and  was  free 
from  the  shifting  influences  of  parliamentary  patties ;  the  mate- 
rial condition  of  the  people  was  not  unbearably  wretched  before 
the  industrial  revolution ;  the  feelings  of  the  ruling  class  to- 
wards the  lower  classes  were  characterized  by  anything  but  111- 
wUl.  But  this  ruling  class  did  nothing  to  lift  the  masses  out 
of  the  slough  of  ignorance  in  which  they  were  sunk,  to  enlai^e 
their  mental  horizon,  to  make  them  feel  that  they,  too,  had  a 


.coy  Google 


DEMOCRACY  AND  POLITICAL  PARTIES     [fi 


stake  in  the  country ;  it  took  no  at«p  to  enroll  the  n 
the  political  and  social  system  of  England,  to  admit  them  to 
a  sphere  of  civic  action  in  which  the  indiyidual  might  find 
scope  for  his  enei^es  and  rise  to  higher  things.  The  Church 
treated  them  with  equal  indifference  both  in  the  matter  of 
general  instruction  and  religious  edification.  The  represent- 
atives of  the  Established  Chuich,  who  were  ecclesiastical 
officials  rather  than  servants  of  Qod,  seldom  penetrated  to 
the  hearts  of  the  people,  and  the  people  went  their  own  way, 
comhining  with  their  torpid  existence  a  state  of  complete  irre- 
ligion,  "They  live  precisely  like  brutes  to  gratify  the  appe- 
tites of  their  uncultivated  bodies,  and  then  die,  to  go,  tiiey 
have  never  thought,  cared,  or  wondered  whither." 

Thus  the  larger  nation,  still  more  than  the  small  nation  com- 
posed of  the  ruling  class,  presented  the  aspect  of  a  confused 
and  colourless  mass,  in  which  the  individual  was  hardly  percep- 
tible and  the  soul  had  no  consciousness  of  its  existence.  But 
the  human  beii^  created  in -the  image  of  God  was  still  there, 
with  all  its  needs  and  instincts,  not  dead  but  only  sleeping,  and 
when,  towards  the  middle  of  the  eighteenth  century,  John 
Wesley's  appeal  to  the  human  soul  rang  through  the  Anglo- 
Saxon  world,  a  thrill  passed  over  the  masses.  "  Overwhelmed 
with  misery,  laden  with  sin,  doomed  to  perdition,  you  can 
obtain  your  deliverance  at  once  by  descending  into  your 
soul,  to  perceive  the  living  God  by  faith.  As  soon  as  you 
feel  this  faith  you  are  purified,"  "Bat  what  is  faith?  It 
is  not  an  assent  to  any  opinion  or  number  of  opinions.  A 
man  may  assent  to  three  or  three-and-twenty  creeds,  he  may 
assent  to  all  the  Old  and  New  Testament,  and  yet  have  no 
Christian  futh  at  all.  .  .  .  It  is  the  internal  evidence  of 
Christianity,  a  perpetual  revelation  directly  from  God  into  the 
believing  soul."  If  all  do  not  possess  it,  that  is  because  it  is  a 
free  gift  of  God.  But  there  is  no  need  of  merit  or  virtue  to 
obtain  it  from  Him.  "  His  pardoning  mercy  supposes  nothing 
in  us  but  a  sense  of  mere  sin  and  misery."  ...  "  This 
justifying  faith  implies  not  only  the  personal  revelation,  the 
inward  evidence  of  Christianity,  but  likewise  a  sure  and  firm 
confidence  in  the  individual  believer  that  Christ  died  for  hit 
sins,  loved  Am  and  gave  His  life  for  hivu" '    But  who  or  what 


.coy  Google 


p.]     BREAK-UP  OF  THE  OLD  SOCIETT 


will  show  that  the  individual  has  attained  to  faith,  that  he  has 
risen  above  the  herd  of  sinners,  that  he  has  become  "per- 
fect"? He  will  feel  it  himself,  he  is  himself  judge  of  his 
own  soul.  The  Protestant  dogma  of  justification  by  faith, 
which  had  become  obsolete  in  England,  is  thus  revived,  and, 
pushed  to  its  extreme  cDncluaione,  is  launched  into  general 
circulation.  Freed  from  all  tranunels,  given  up  to  his  im- 
pulses, the  Wesleyaa  becomes  intoxicated  with  spiritual  pride 
and  not  unfreguBntly  loses  his  moral  equilibrium.  A  shock 
is  felt  in  society  and  in  family  life ;  the  new  doctrine  leads  to 
antinomiaaism,  to  the  belief  that  the  moral  taw  as  such  is  not 
binding  on  the  Christiaiu'  Soon,  however,  the  individual  be- 
comes once  more  a  prisoner.  Puritanism,  revived  by  Wesley, 
disparages  all  the  pleasures  of  life  which  give  expansion  to 
human  personality.  Continually  directing  the  thoughts  towards 
the  examination  of  the  soul,  Wesleyanism  isolates  man  from 
the  external  world,  and  closes  the  avenues  to  social  and  politi- 
cal life.  At  the  same  time  Wesley,  who  has  appealed  to  the 
individual  conscience  to  draw  men  from  their  evil  mode  of 
life,  to  make  things  doubly  sure  bids  his  followers  walk  to- 
gether in  the  new  fsith,  for  mutual  aid  and  supervision  and 
in  order  uot  to  swerve  from  the  path.  Weekly  meetings, 
"  classes,"  are  instituted,  to  which  each  member  comes  to  con- 
fess his  thoughts  and  actions.  He  lays  bare  the  state  of  his 
soul,  and  there  is  not  a  comer  left  in  which  he  can  be  alone 
with  himself.  He  is  suxrounded  day  and  night  by  a  system 
of  mutual  espionage,  and  can  only  elude  the  vigilance  of  his 
co-religionists  by  assuming  a  conventional  mask  and  becoming 
the  slave  of  an  abject  hypocrisy. 

But  the  appeal  to  the  individual  conscience,  which  Wesley 
was  the  first  to  put  forth,  had  time  to  spread  and  find  an  echo. 
People  belonging  to  the  middle  and  upper  classes  were  also 
touched  with  emotion,  and,  without  separating  from  the  Es- 
tablished Church,  took  upon  themselves  to  bring  back  to  it  in 
triumph  the  creed  of  the  Gospel,  the  religion  of  the  heart.  To 
the  frigid  and  well-bred  mor^ity  of  the  Church,  the  Evangel- 

1  See  tba  dlkli^fne,  quoted  bj  Lecky  {Bittory  of  tlte  Eighteenth  Centvry,  11, 
p.  990),  betwMn  Wesley  and  tbe  antlDoiniiuilst  pce»cber  of  BinuiDgbam,  who 
MBoneliini  that  nuu,  being  DO  loDgeT  under  the  Uws.ia  the  heir  to  all  thiogs, 
and  an  take  whatever  goods  and  lie  with  wbatoTer  woman  he  pleases. 


.coy  Google 


28  DEHOCRACT  AND  POLITICAL  PARTIES    [rtBarptn 

icals,  as  they  were  called,  opposed  personal  piety,  the  individ- 
ual responsibility  of  each  soul  to  its  Creator.  Faasing  from 
feeling  to  practice,  they  inav^ujated  a  great  phllanthropical 
moTcment  in  the  England  of  the  second  half  of  the  eighteenth 
century.  Founding  a  number  of  pious  institutions,  establishing 
miaaionary  and  Bible  societiea,  for  the  greater  glory  of  Chmt, 
the  Erangelicala  were  also  full  of  compassion  for  the  misery 
in  the  social  system.  The  ignorance  in  which  the  masses  were 
plunged,  the  barbarous  provisions  of  the  penal  code,  the  piti- 
able state  of  the  prisons,  in  which  men  rotted  away  alive,  and 
above  all,  man  enslaved  by  his  fellows  touched  their  hearts. 
They  set  on  foot  a  vast  public  agitation.  For  this  purpose 
they  systematized  and  almost  invented  the  methods  of  propa- 
ganda employed  to  iufiuence  opinion  in  modem  times — 
pamphlets,  public  meetings,  platform  speeches,  monster  peti- 
tiouB  to  PaTliament.  At  all  times  and  in  ail  places  they  ap- 
pealed from  the  miserable  reality  to  the  human  conscience. 
In  the  criminal  they  pointed  out  the  man,  and  in  the  negro 
the  brother.  A  new  character  —  the  fellow-creature,  the 
"  man  "  —  was  ushered  from  thti  platform  into  the  social  and 
political  world  of  aristocratic  England,  and  was  destined  to 
remain  there,  "  Man  bom  free  and  in  chains,"  as  J.  J.  Rous- 
seau puts  it,  begins  to  take  hold  of  the  English  imagination 
in  the  person  of  the  negro.  Societies  for  the  suppression 
of  the  slave-ti-ade  and  for  preaching  the  Gospel  to  the  negroes 
spring  up  on  all  sides.  More  than  one  humble  family  —  old 
and  young  together  —  experience  a  delightful  emotion  in 
contributing  the  contents  of  their  money-box.  Three  hun- 
dred thousand  persons  pledge  themselves  to  abstain  from  the 
use  of  sugar,  to  avoid  tasting  a  product  due  to  slave  labour. 
The  Evangelicals  make  their  way  into  Parliament,  and  their 
voice  rises  louder  and  louder  in  the  halls  of  Westminster  to 
vindicate  the  claims  of  outraged  hiunanity.  Although  few  in 
number,  they  possess  great  influence  in  the  House.  Belonging 
nominally  to  the  Tory  party,  they  separate  from  it  whenever 
their  conscience  does  not  permit  them  to  vot«  with  it,  for 
they  fear  the  living  God.  This  novel  spectacle  of  the  individ- 
ual conscience  taking  its  own  course  in  politics  commands 
respect  j  they  are  not  styled  "  philosophers  "  or  "  adventurers," 
but  "  the  party  of  saints." 


.coy  Google 


DEOomoUP.]    BBEAK-UF  OF  THE  OLD  SOCIETT 


n 

Simultaneously  with  the  spread  of  the  philanthropic  move- 
ment another  stream  from  a  difEerent  quarter  flows  into  it  and 
swells  its  volume.  Religious  emotion  is  reinforced  by  the 
emotion  of  thought.  Good  society  has  grown  weary  of  con- 
Teutionalism  and  longs  to  experience  genuine  sensations. 
And  as  it  has  sufficient  time  and  money  t^  indulge  in  the  lus- 
nry  of  fine  sentiments,  its  principal  object  is  to  enjoy  emotion. 
The  man  of  feeling  makes  his  appearance  and  is  welcomed 
on  all  sides.  "  The  literature  of  the  day  may  be  called  the 
library  of  the  man  of  feeling." '  The  heroes  of  the  fashion- 
able novels  of  Richardson,  Sterne,  and  Mackenzie  have  a  soul, 
they  shed  tears  at  everything  and  nothing,  "  they  give  way  to 
emotion  five  or  sis  times  a  day,  and  fall  into  consumption 
through  excess  of  sensibility."  *  Then  comes  J.  J,  Rousseau 
with  his  fervid  and  emotional  p^aiis  to  nature.  Society  is 
touched  and  begins  to  sigh  for  "the  return  to  nature."  It 
goes  into  ecstasies  over  beautiful  scenery,  which  can  now  be 
easUy  admired,  the  recent  introduction  of  post-chaises  having 
facilitated  travelling.  People  take  pleasure  in  the  thought 
that  they  have  sentiment  and  a  heart,  and  let  their  imagina- 
tion range  beyond  their  native  country  in  order  to  find  subjects 
of  emotion.  Public  sensibility  goes  out  to  savages,  to  the 
heathen,  to  the  ill-treated  Oaribees  in  the  island  <^  St  Law- 
rence ;  the  public  conscience  arraigns  Warren  Hastings  for  his 
oppression  of  the  rajahs  of  India.  Subscriptions  are  collected 
in  aid  of  the  Corsicans,  who  are  defending  their  independence 
against  the  French,  assistance  is  sent  to  the  Poles,  who  are 
trying  to  protect  the  last  shreds  of  their  political  existence 
from  rapacious  neighbours.  For  they  too  are  fellow-creatures, 
just  like  the  negro,  the  prot^g4  of  the  middle  classes,  the  con- 
crete object  1^  means  of  vrhich  the  latter  have  obtained  a 
clearer  grasp  of  the  conception  of  "man,"  a  conception  of  too 
abstract  a  nature,  in  its  metaphysical  nudity,  for  the  English 
mind. 

For  the  same  reason,  perhaps,  the  political  and  social  con- 
clusions which   ideologists  in  France  developed  from   this 

1  Tklne,  Hittoin  de  la lU.  angl.  IV,  237.  *iUd. 


.coy  Google 


30        ■         DEMOCRACY  AKD  POLITICAL  PARTIES     [mmt  Piw 

conception  do  not  strike  the  English  at  the  first  bluslij  but 
people  arrive  at  them  in  England  just  as  in  France,  oo\j  by 
another  route,  or  rather  hy  a.  lateral  path  which  soon  leads 
into  the  main  road  followed  by  ideology. 

rn 

By  mftking  man  look  into  his  own  sonl  the  religions  TevlTal 
and  sentimental  ism  bring  him  face  to  face  with  the  problem 
of  his  duty.  He  has  not  far  to  seek.  Christian  piety  and 
the  dictates  of  the  heart  at  once  prescribe  the  path  to  be  fol- 
lowed—  that  of  "morality."  But  does  this  "morality"  ex- 
haust all  the  duties  of  man  ?  No,  replies  the  moat  popular 
moralist  of  the  century,  Paley  :  "  The  part  a  member  of  the 
commonwealth  shall  take  in  political  contentiouB,  the  vote  he 
shall  give,  the  counsels  he  shall  approve,  the  support  he  shall 
afford,  or  the  opposition  he  shall  make,  to  any  system  of  pub- 
lic measures,  —  is  as  much  a  question  of  personal  duty,  as 
much  concerns  the  conscience  of  the  individual  who  deliber- 
ates, as  the  determination  of  any  doubt  which  relates  to  the 
conduct  of  private  life." '  Ihe  subject  of  politics  is  conse- 
quently identical  with  that  of  monUity;  in  both  cases  it  is 
man  interrogating  his  conscience.  Nor  is  their  object  differ- 
ent; it  merely  expands  in  proportion  to  the  new  limits  pre- 
scribed. On  the  one  side,  in  the  restricted  sphere  of  morality^ 
Uie  peace  of  the  individual  soul  is  concerned;  on  the  other, 
within  the  province  of  a  morality  conceived  on  a  larger  scale, 
the  happiness  of  man  living  in  society  is  at  stake.  "  All 
people,"  says  Priestley,  "live  in  society  for  their  mutual 
advantage,  so  that  the  good  and  happiness  of  the  members, 
that  is,  the  majority  of  the  members  of  any  state,  is  the  great 
standard  by  which  everything  relating  to  that  state  must 
finally  be  determined." '  And  who  is  the  judge  of  the  good 
of  the  members  ?  But  this  is  equivalent  to  asking  who  knows 
his  own  interest  beat.  The  answer  is  obvious, — the  members 
themselves,  each  member.  It  was  the  inevitable  conclusion. 
Aided  by  the  force  of  events,  it  was  destined  to  alter  the 
political  and  social  aspect  of  England.     Half  a  century  elapsed 


.coy  Google 


■■cosD  cou-.]    BBEAE-UP  OF  THE  OLD  SOCIETr  31 

before  the  transition  from  theory  to  practice  took  place. 
During  tbie  interval  English  thinkers  were  inceseantly  en- 
gaged in  defining  and  developing  the  tenas  of  Priestley's 
proposition  and  in  drawing  conclasions  from  it  both  in  the 
domain  of  speculation  and  practioe. 

Several  other  factors  contributed  to  the  same  result  First 
of  all,  the  nsw  science  of  political  economy  acting  as  the 
spokesman  of  new  interests.  Towards  the  middle  of  the  eigh- 
teenth century  England  was  stirred  by  an  extraordinary  devel- 
opment of  commerce  and  industry.  It  had  been  preceded,  at  a 
much  earlier  date,  by  a  munber  of  isolated  and  independent 
efforts,  which  marked  out  the  line  of  the  future  individualist 
r^me  in  the  economical  life  of  the  nation,  and  which  suc- 
ceeded by  their  own  strength,  so  loi^  as  they  were  not  tram- 
melled by  State  regulation.  The  mercantile  genius  of  the 
nation,  which  had  shed  such  a  lustre  on  the  two  hemispheres 
in  the  reign  of  Elizabeth,  now  awoke  with  fresh  vigour.  The 
leserve  of  moral  force  accumulated  for  centuries  in  the  Anglo- 
Saxon  race  supplied  it  with  tenacity  of  will,  indefatigable 
f^oergy,  and  bold  initiative.  Give  us  elbow-room  and  the  world 
will  be  ours !  This  idea,  which  was  fermenting  in  the  caldron 
of  national  energies,  took  definite  shape  under  the  pen  of  Adam 
Smith.  Without  actually  stating  the  French  formula  of  "  lais- 
sez  faire  laissez  passer,"  Adam  Smith  propagated  it  in  all 
his  writings.  Taking  his  stand  on  facts,  he  pleaded  for  free- 
dom of  tiade  and  commerce,  pointed  out  all  the  mischief 
caused  by  State  interference  with  economic  activity,  and  ex- 
posed all  the  narrowness  of  Colbert's  system  of  tutelage,  "  so 
opposed  to  the  generous  policy  enjoined  by  equality,  justice, 
and  liberty  of  letting  every  man  manage  his  own  business  as 
he  thinks  proper."  He  attacked  the  customs  of  entul  and 
primogeniture  and  everything  which  weakened  or  fettered 
the  individual  in  his  natural  aspirations  towards  well-being. 
Society,  he  argued,  could  only  gain  by  the  economic  liberty 
of  the  individual,  for  their  interests  are  identical,  and  free 
trade  could  not  fail  to  become  a  source  of  wealth  for  each 
and  all. 

These  ideas,  which  were  so  nearly  akin  to  the  general  con- 
ception of  natural  liberty,  a  kinship  which  Adam  Smith  was 
far  from  disavowing,  produced  a  still  greater  effect  by  their 


.coy  Google 


St  DBHOCBACT  AND  POLITICAL  PABTIES    [naaiPAKr 

eminently  practioal  English  character;  they  were  couched  in 
the  language  of  interests  and  appealed  to  interests.  They 
penetrat«d  into  the  public  mind,  and  in  time  grew  into  a  oui- 
rent  of  opinion  which  carried  "  the  individual "  forward  with 
constantly  increasing  forc«. 

In  grander  and  loftier  accents  the  genius  of  France  pleaded 
the  same  cause  of  the  oppressed  individual  before  the  bar  t^ 
assembled  humanity,  appealing  to  natural  ri^t,  to  reason,  and 
to  justice. 

The  founding  of  the  AmerieaD  Bepublio  and  the  Frenoh  ' 
Revolution  converted  the  idea  into  a  reality.  The  DedaratUm 
of  the  Bights  of  Man  proclaimed  it  to  the  world.  The  good 
tidings  were  received  with  enthusiasm  in  more  than  one  quarter 
in  England.  Thomas  Paine  expounded  them  in  "The  Bights 
of  Man,"  which  obtained  an  enormous  circulation  and  remained 
for  many  years  the  text-book  of  the  ^lite  of  the  working  classaa. 
The  rights  of  men  all  equal  by  nature,  the  State  owing  its  ez- 
istenoe  to  their  free  consent,  the  superiority  of  a  democratio 
republic,  Uie  moral  deformity  of  kings  and  priests,  who  are  the 
source  of  all  the  misfortunes  of  mankind  —  all  these  dootrines 
were  stated  in  vehement  language  which  appealed  rather  to 
the  passioDB  than  to  the  intelligeuoe. 

In  William  Oodwin  deductive  ratioualism  found  a  muoh 
more  powerful  advocate.  His  book  on  "Political  Justice" 
develops  it  with  a  pitiless  logic  which  does  not  shrink  from 
the  most  extreme  conclusions,  and  reaches  a  point  which 
Bousseau  himself  did  not  arrive  at.  Man,  as  conceived  itj 
Qodwin,  a  being  of  pure  reason,  is  compelled  by  his  very 
nature  to  follow  the  eternal  decrees  of  justice;  all  constraint 
is  therefore  useless ;  laws  and  government  are  only  an  encroach- 
ment on  the  liberty  of  the  individual,  and  on  these  grounda 
Godwin  declines  to  recognize  the  validity  of  the  control  aociaL 
In  spite  of  its  exaggerations  Godwin's  book  took  hold  of  the 
public  mind  by  its  intense  feeling  of  individualism,  by  its 
hatred  of  every  obstacle  to  the  expansion  of  human  person- 
ality, by  its  faith  in  man  and  in  reason.  The  excesses  of  the 
French  Revolution  supplied  a  refutation  of  this  optimism  and 
stirred  up  a  violent  reaction  against  "  French  ideas  "  in  Eng- 
lish society,  developed  to  the  point  of  paroxysm  by  the  long 
implacable  war  waged  by  Pitt  against  France.     But  "  Frenoh 


.coy  Google 


p.]    BBEAK-UP  OF  THE  OLD  SOCIETT 


ideas,"  i.e.  ideaa  of  liberty,  found  a  resting-plaoe  in  the  very 
heart  of  England ;  they  penetrated  thither  under  cover  of  the 
utilitarian  philosophy,  so  well-suited  to  the  positive  English 
mind  ae  re^ids  its  principle  but  so  highly  revolutionary  in  its 
application.  It  is  in  vain  that  its  representatives  from  Paley 
onward  endeavour  to  refute  the  amtrat  social  and  deny  the 
existence  of  natural  rights ;  it  is  of  no  use  their  filling  their 
writings  with  a  profusion  of  judicious  and  sensible  maxims,  a 
collection  of  which  would  make  an  admirable  hand-book  if 
good  sense  in  politics  were  a  branch  of  iustruotion;  their 
ntilitananiam  is  destined  to  make  a  formidable. breach  in  the 
old  political  fortress.  Priestley  and  Faley  began  this  work  of 
destouotion ;  Beutham  gave  the  finishing  touches  to  it. 

IV 

Combining  a  rare  power  of  analysis  with  consummate  skill 
in  olaasification  and  a  passion  for  detail,  Bentham  subjected 
sevetal  departments  of  English  legislation  to  a  minute  ezaminsr 
tion.  He  took  each  institution  to  pieces  as  a  clockmaker  does 
the  vorka  of  a  clock.  Applying  the  criterion  of  utility  in 
every  case,  he  contrasted  the  end  with  the  means,  and,  guided 
aolely  by  logic,  pronounced  hia  sentence  of  condemnation ;  for 
the  province  which  he  was  exploiing  presented  a  vast  chaos  of 
enactments  heaped  together  at  random  and  placed  one  on  the 
top  of  the  other  without  method  oi  guiding  principle.  Bentham 
"laid  bare  this  mass  of  rubbish  and  called  on  mankind  to  throw 
off  the  tyranny  of  authority  and  to  reject  the  wisdom  of  our 
ancestora  in  the  sphere  of  law.'"  Then,  by  means  of  the  same 
principle  of  utility  which  he  had  used  foe  his  analysis,  Bentham 
constructed  a  synthesis  of  morals  and  of  politics  culminating 
in  the  individual  conscience  sovereign  jud^  of  all  things  and 
in  each  citizen  "his  own  legislator." 

The  moral  conscience  of  man  to  which  philanthropy  appealed, 
as  well  as  the  justice  springing  from  natural  right  to  which  the 
French  philosophers  had  recourse,  seemed  to  Bentham  inade- 
quate and  dangerous  supports  for  propping  up  the  social  system. 
For  what  is  natural  right  or  the  law  of  nature?  A  fiction,  a 
metaphor  which  each  man  can  interpret  as  he  likes.  And 
'  Preface  to  tbe  Fragment  on  Oovemmenl,  'id  ed. 


.CD,  Google 


U  DEMOCBACT  AND  POLITICAL  PARTIES    (fxmt  PiRT 

moral  conscience  ?  Simply  an  arbitrary  distinction  between 
good  and  ill,  resting  in  reality  on  unreasoning  feelings  of 
sympathy  or  antipathy.  Bentham  rejects  a  priori  rationaliam 
and  claims  to  have  discovered  in  experience  that  nature  has 
placed  maa  under  the  sway  of  pleasure  and  pain,  that  we  owe 
all  our  ideas  to  them,  that  we  refer  to  them  all  our  judgments 
and  all  the  decisive  steps  of  our  life.  This  tendency  to  seek 
for  pleasure  and  avoid  p^,  both  of  a  physical  and  moral  de- 
seriptiou,  being,  as  it  is,  eternal  and  irresistible,  constitutes  our 
rule  of  conduct :  each  man  must  follow  his  interest  and  take 
utility  for  the  criterion  of  his  actions,  arriving  at  the  value  of 
their  results  by  a  simple  arithmetical  calculation  which  strikes 
the  balance  of  pains  and  pleasures.  "  No  subtlety,  no  meta- 
physics; no  need  to  consult  Plato  or  Aristotle.  Pain  and 
pleasure  are  felt  as  such  by  every  man,  by  the  peasant  as  well 
as  the  monarch,  by  the  unlearned  man  as  well  as  the  philoso- 
pher." *  As  each  man  possesses  the  common  measure  of  utility, 
so  "each  is  judge  of  his  own  utility;  this  is  and  must  be  so, 
otherwise  man  would  not  be  a  rational  agent."  The  only  thing 
to  do  is  to  let  him  alone.  To  apprehend  a  bellum  omnium  oontra 
omnes  is  to  mistake  the  real  motives  of  human  actions ;  given 
the  mutual  dependence  of  men  in  a  social  state,  not  only  for 
the  sstis^tion  of  their  material  wants,  but  also  for  the  equally 
natural  enjoyment  of  the  esteem  and  afFectiou  of  their  fellow- 
creatures,  egoism  is  necessarily  converted  into  altruism.  "  So- 
ciety is  so  constituted  that  in  working  for  our  own  happiness 
we  work  for  the  general  welfare." '  What  is  the  use  of  intei^ 
ference  by  the  State  ?  And  Bentham  is  never  weary  of  sa3riitg 
to  the  legislator :  "  leave  us  alone,  be  quiet,  get  out  of  my  light" 
The  dictates  of  prudence  will  suffice  of  themselves  in  the  case 
of  actions  which  only  concern  the  individual.  The  law  should 
only  intervene  to  prevent  men  from  injuring  each  other.  Its 
aid  is  necessary  in  cases  of  this  sort  because  the  majority  of 
mankind  are  not  sufficiently  enlightened  to  grasp  the  connec- 
tion between  personal  and  general  interest.    Every  law  is  an 

I  Prineipes  de  Ugtilalion,  Ch.  I.  (N.B.  Most  of  the  pasgagei  qnot«d  hen 
are  taken  from  tbe  Preocb  edition  at  Bencbam'a  works  by  Dnmont ;  being  to 
a  Kreat  extent  complied  from  Bentham'a  DiiuiiiBcriptB  uid  havlpg  been  pab- 
llstied  before  the  Engliah  edition,  the  French  version  is  thus  sometilneB  the 
real  oHginjtl  edIUon).  >  Ibid.  Cb.  X. 


.coy  Google 


sccoiTD  CHAF.]     BREAK-UP  OF  THE  OLD  SOCIETY  8fi 

evil  in  itself,  because  it  is  an  infraction  of  the  liberty  of  the 
iodiTidual,  and  it  can  only  be  justified  when  it  serves  to  pre- 
vent or  restrain  a  larger  infraction  of  liberty  than  it  consti- 
tutes in  itself,  that  is  to  say,  when  the  safety  of  individuals  ia 
endangered.  "  It  ia  in  this  way  that  poisona  admioiatered  in 
proper  doaes  come  to  be  remediea." 

How  can  we  enaure  the  administration  of  the  proper  dose 
of  poison,  how  ought  government  to  be  constituted  ?  Approach- 
ing this  question  after  having  spent  years  in  defending  the 
individual  against  the  importunities  of  the  legislator,  Bentham 
retuns  his  principle  of  personal  interest  as  a  motive  for 
action  only  in  its  strict  senae  of  pure  egoism.  The  persons 
who  rule,  being  men,  are  necesaarily  egoiate;  they  therefore 
inevitably  puraue  their  own  interest  and  not  that  of  the 
ruled.  In  fact,  the  object  of  government  in  fdl  its  forms  has 
always  been  not  the  greatest  happiness  of  those  for  whom  but 
that  of  those  by  whom  it  is  carried  on,  the  happiness  of  the  few 
(the  ruling  interest),  and  not  of  the  many.  The  Monarchy, 
the  House  of  Lords,  the  Established  Church,  are  all  examples 
of  the  ruling  interest  which  is  hostile  to  the  interest  of  the 
many.  To  prevent  this  clashing  of  interests  in  the  future, 
power  must  be  placed  in  the  hands  of  the  greatest  number. 
It  is  only  by  thia  means  that  we  can  ensure  the  greatest  happi- 
ruM  of  the  greatest  numfcer,  which  is  the  aim  and  object  of 
morals  and  politics.  Accordingly  Bentham  demands  the  intro- 
duction of  universal  suffrage,  vote  by  ballot  and  annual  parlia- 
ments  into  England. 

These  conclusions  are  the  same  as  those  which  French  ideal- 
ly had  arrived  at,  and,  as  a  matter  of  fact,  they  were  obtained 
by  the  same  method.  Although  wearing  the  English  garb  of  em- 
pirical moralist,  Bentham,  in  oonstnicting  his  synthesis  (which 
must  not  be  confounded  with  the  analytical  portion  of  his  work, 
aa  is  usually  done),  adopts  the  same  mode  of  procedure  as  the 
French  metaphyaicians,  that  of  a  priori  reasoning.'    Discard- 

1  In  fact  Bentham'B  premlsw,  tlwt  plessim  and  pkin  an  mao's  only  mdb&- 
tiont,  uid  that  ntillty  is  the  mBliupiiDg  of  human  actions,  are  in  no  way 
derived  from  experience.  Even  Bnppoaing  that  utility  is  the  only  motive  of 
Inmiaii  actloDB,  how  does  It  follow,  aa  a  matter  ol  experience,  that  It  ought  to 
be  the  rule  of  conduct  ?  Evidently  this  eonclusloD,  vhlch  has  been  arrived  at 
by  an  abrnpt  mental  transition,  ia  only  a  postulate.  And  In  that  caae  how 
can  tlie  principle  of  utility  terve  as  a  nnlveraal  and  Infallible  criterion  f    U 


.CD,  Google 


8S  DEHOCBACr  AND  POLITICAL  FABTIB8    [nssr  fast 

iug,  like  them,  the  teaching  of  history,  because  "the  paat  is  of 
no  use"  (Bentham's  own  remark  made  in  the  coarse  of  a  oon- 
versation  with  Philarfete  Chasle,  and  related  by  the  latter  in 
bis  Memoirs),  ajid  seeing  in  social  man  only  "  what  essentially 
appertains  to  man,"  according  to  the  expression  of  Rousseau, 
to  wit,  human  nature  in  general,  be  completely  identifies  him 
with  one  of  his  attributes.  Bentbam's  man  never  follows  bis 
impulses  or  bis  habits;  he  is  always  deliberating,  always  en- 
gaged in  calculation,  just  as  the  personage  of  the  ideologists 
does  nothing  but  indulge  in  abstract  reasoning.  Consequently, 
in  his  system  men  appear  perfectly  like  each  other  in  ail  lati- 
tudes.  The  government  suited  to  tbem  is  the  same  every- 
where—  a  representative  democracy.  Humanity  is  one  and 
indivisible  for  Bentbam,  just  as  for  the  French  ideolo^ts. 

It  Is  a  qaMtion  o(  Dtlllty  In  Its  mdliiar;  senM,  then  tbe  imiia«qnenaM  of 
actlODB  consldend  from  this  point  of  view  will  ii1vk;h  toll  below  theii 
t«al  scope ;  for  In  tbe  mont  world  acta  ore  prolonged  by  tbeir  effects,  tatd 
owing  to  tbe  reoctfonB  caused  by  the  phenomena  with  which  they  come  is 
OODtaot  OD  their  path  they  cxxitloually  form  new  combinations  producing  new 
effects,  wbiob  combine  Id  their  turn.  If  the  criterion  of  utility  risea  higher 
than  tbe  Immediate  coosequenoes,  U  ft  Is  meant  to  include  every  possible  con- 
sequence, to  consider  acts  done  by  men  living  In  a  state  of  society  in  the  llglit 
of  ft  remote  future  (People,  observes  Beutham,  wbo  liave  not  a  clear  Idek  of 
the  nsef nl  often  quote  the  remark  of  Aristldee ;  "  Tbemlstooles'  plan  is  very 
advantageoos  but  it  is  very  unjust."  Arlstides  might  have  said:  Themisto- 
cIbh'  plan  would  be  useful  for  the  moment  and  detrimental  for  focuro  ages, 
what  it  offers  lists  nothingincomparlson  with  what  it  deprives  us  of.  —  PrinH- 
pU«^LegUlation,Cb.'V),tbBn  it  borders  on  tbe  infinite,  and  Is  on  a  par  with 
every  ideal  standard  set  up  by  the  intellect  for  Judging  things  tub  qMcie  sMer- 
nj(a(i»  — thejust,  the  good,  the  bfatit^ul  —  in  short  with  every  term  by  which 
the  mind  can  conceive  of  the  absolute.  Beutham  himself  declares  that  the  uaef  al 
viewed  in  Its  larger  applloation  and  not  in  tbe  vulgar  sense  is  in  no  way  opposed 
to  the  just,  that  it  even  coincides  with  the  Just.  But  Oodwla,  the  antborixod 
representative  of  ldeo1o)t7,  mahes  no  scrnple  of  admitting  that  jostlce  coincides 
with  utility.  Bentbam  therefore  did  not  do  away  with  the  absolute ;  he  only 
rejected  all  the  other  forms  of  it  ae  false  gods;  he  repudiated  them  in  order 
to  proclaim  Ibat  bis  absolute  was  the  only  true  one  and  tMt  the  world  wm 
governed  by  It.  No  doubt,  every  one  claims  this  attribute  tor  his  god  ;  bnt 
who  ban  seen  Ihese  gods?  Do  tbey  not  eiclst  only  In  the  imagination  of  tboae 
who  vrorship  tliem?  Whereas  Bentham's  sovereign  principle,  according  to 
him,  can  be  touched,  so  to  speak,  and  be  seen  at  work.  We  cannot  estimata 
the  value  of  the  jutt,  but  we  can  estimate  the  value  of  the  lu^ul;  in  other 
words,  Bentbam's  principle  is  alone  susceptible  of  a  scientific  method  Id  ita 
application.  The  objection  will  be  made  that  pleasures  and  pains  are  not  ho- 
mogeneous quantities.  Be  it  so,  but  as  they  eventually  take  the  form  of  8«n- 
satlona,  all  that  yon  have  t«  do  is  to  compare  tbe  sensations.  It  is  true  that 
tbey  vary  according  to  tlie  character  of  tbe  person  who  feels  tbem  and  aococd- 


.coy  Google 


noovDCBAP.]    BREAK-UP  OP  THE  OLD  SOdETT  3T 

For  BeitthEim,  too,  patriotism  is  botmd  to  give  way  to  it.  "I 
should  repudiate  with  horror,"  he  declared,  "  the  imputation 
of  patriotism,  if  being  a  friend  of  my  country  involved  being 
an  enemy  of  the  human  race," — because,  as  the  French  ideolo- 
gists would  have  said,  the  human  race  is  composed  of  the 
same  "  men,"  because,  says  Bentham,  the  permanent  interests 
of  all  peoples  are  identical.' 

This  synthesis  of  Bentham's,  obtained  by  the  same  logical 
process  as  the  synthesis  of  the  French  ideologists,  was,  like 
it,  doomed  to  failure,  but  not  because  it  originated  in  an  ideal 
conception.  Bentham's  attempt,  if  it  were  a  final  one,  would 
alone  suffice  to  show  how  difficult  or  even  impossible  it  is  to 
discover  a  governing  principle  of  life  in  the  facts  supplied  by 
experience.     Starting  from  a  tangible  fact  and  obliged  to  take 

iDg  to  tbe  external  circainM«ncta  which  react  on  hU  seDBlblUty .  TfevertheleBs, 
everjr  sensation  contains  an  objecttve  elament  which  can  be  sepaTsted  from 
tha  othen.  Bclenca  might  make  UatB  of  these  objective  elementa  obtained 
by  meAQB  of  analysis,  and  so  compile  general  Inventories  ot  senutlona  which 
would  Bhow  us  how  to  act  with  certainty,  and  even  how  to  reduce  the  most 
difflculi  problems  Involved  in  the  choice  of  acts  conducing  to  happiness  Ui  a 
sort  lit  mecbaDical  operation. 

Bentham.  however,  while  recommending  a  mathematical  appraisement  of 
sensations,  admits  that  of  "  two  categorlea  ot  circumstaucea  "  which  react  on 
the  sanslblUt;  oat;  one  can  be  observed  In  all  Its  partleolars,  that  the  "  clr- 
nmutances  of  the  first  order,"  aoch  as  temperament,  strength,  cunatancy  of 
mind,  natural  and  acquired  habits,  etc.,  are  beyond  the  reach  of  calculation, 
and  that  we  mnit  therefore  be  content  with  "circumstances  of  the  second 
order,"  sncb  as  axe,  sei,  rank,  elo.  But  bow  can  the  total  lay  claim  to  cor- 
rectness if  we  are  obliged  to  omit  several  items,  and  those  the  most  Important 
ones,  from  the  account?  In  that  case  U  not  the  value  o(  these  items  left  to 
the  arbitrary  and  varying  estimate  of  the  person  who  makes  the  valnatlon? 
Bentham's  criterion  Is  consequently  no  more  experimeatal  Id  Its  application 
than  in  its  origin.  The  scientific  conscience  which  was  to  take  the  plaoe  ot 
the  moral  conscience  is  no  scientific  conscience  at  all,  and  yet  it  preserves  the 
antborlty  with  which  Bentham  had  invested  It  on  the  strength  ol  its  imaginary 
qoalitles;  It  Is  made  the  soTeralgn  judge  of  good  and  evil,  Jnat  like  the  Judge  in- 
stalled by  the  right  ot  nature.  In  both  cases  an  unconscious  Ideal  transition  Inim 
the  relative  to  the  absolute  has  given  the  appearance  nC  a  reality  to  what  after 
all  was  only  a  conception  of  the  Intellect.  The  criterion  of  utility  which  at 
one  time  takes  Into  consideration  the  immediate  consequences  and  nothing 
more,  as  we  are  In  the  habit  ot  believing,  and  at  another  weighs  all  the  conse- 
quences of  actions,  as  Bentham  pretends.  Is  a  fallacy  which  only  facilitates 
Uie  step  from  the  relative  to  the  absolute.  It  Is  the  sop  thrown  to  the  positive 
mind  ot  England,  to  that  ot  Bentham  bimselt  and  his  lellow-countrymen.  in 
order  to  loll  them  into  security. 

1  rKimont's  "  disconn  prflimlnaire  "  prefixed  to  the  Taetiqti^  4e4  attembUei 


.coy  Google 


SB  DEHOCRACT  AND  FOLITICAL  PASTIES    [nuT  rAxt 

the  toad  of  ideology  in  spite  of  Mmaelf,  Bentham  repeated 
the  error  of  the  French  ideologists,  who,  having  eet  up  an  ideal 
controlling  principle  of  social  life,  made  no  allowance  fot  the 
counter-operation  of  social  facts,  but  drew  on  it  ad  injinitum, 
like  a  univeTsal  legatee  taking  a  mistaken  view  of  the  rights 
oonfened  on  him  by  his  legal  title.  In  like  mtumer  Bentham 
took  for  his  starting-point  man  not  in  the  relative  aspect  which 
he  bears  in  real  life  but  in  his  abstract  nature,  and  transformed 
him  into  a  being  complete  in  itself.  Society  consequently  waa 
reduced  to  an  aggregate  of  atoms,  to  a  sum  total  of  interests 
requiring  only  to  be  left  to  themselves.  The  ratson  <Fetre  of 
a  power  set  over  individual  interests  was  nothing  but  the 
protection  of  their  unfettered  development.  Henceforth  the 
State  was  bound  to  be  only  a  wateh-dog,  and  not  an  active 
factor  in  the  moral  development  of  society.  To  prevent  the 
d<^  from  biting  those  whom  he  is  set  to  guard,  he  must  have  a 
good  stroi^  muzzle  on;  the  powers  of  the  State  must  be  strictly 
limited ;  the  freedom  of  the  individual  can  only  be  obtained 
on  this  condition. 


AH  these  doctrines  —  political  economy,  empirical  utilitarK 
anism,  the  rights  of  man  in  their  French  dress  or  in  their 
English  garb  of  Bentham's  utilitarian  philosophy  —  coavei^ 
on  one  centre  and  tend  to  form  a  new  social  cosmogony,  in 
which  the  starting-point  as  well  as  the  goal  is  the  individual 
and  not  society,  in  which  it  is  not  the  community  which  iin* 
parts  light  and  heat  to  the  individual,  but  the  latt«r  which  is 
the  source  of  both.  Attaining  its  final  expression  in  Bentham, 
this  idea  constantly  ran  through  English  thought  since  man 
and  his  rights  and  duties  had  become  a  subject  of  study. 
Writers  frequently  stated  it  in  language  of  great  precision 
without  realizing  its  political  significance.  "Although,"  re- 
marks the  highly  conservative  Faley,  "we  speak  of  com- 
munities as  of  sentient  beings ;  although  we  ascribe  to  them 
happiness  and  misery,  desires,  interests,  and  passions;  nothing 
really  exists  or  feels  but  individuals.  The  happiness  of  a 
people  is  made  up  of  the  happiness  of  single  persons.  .  .  . 
The  riches,  strength,  and  glory  of  nations,  the  topics  which 
history  celebrates,  and  which  alone  almost  engage  the  praises 


.coy  Google 


■  i»co»i>  CHi.rO    BBEAK-UP  OP  THE  OLD  SOCIETY  39 

and  possess  the  admiration  of  mankind,  have  no  valne  farther 
than  as  they  contribute  to  this  end  "  (to  the  greater  happiness 
of  individuals).'  Godwin  denies  that  society  has  any  existence. 
of  its  own.  "  Society  is  an  ideal  existence  and  not  on  its  own 
account  entitled  to  the  smallest  regard.  The  wealth,  prosper- 
ity, and  glory  of  the  whole  are  nnintelligible  chimeras.  Set 
no  value  on  anything  but  in  proportion  as  you  are  convinced 
of  its  tendency  to  make  individual  men  happy  and  virtuous."  * 
"  Let  there  be  no  doubt  about  it,"  cries  Bentham ;  "  the  inter- 
ests of  individuals,  it  is  said,  must  give  way  to  the  public 
interests.  But  what  is  the  meaning  of  that?  Is  not  each 
individual  as  much  a  part  of  the  public  as  any  other  ?  Indi- 
vidual interests  are  the  cmly  real  interests.  Take  care  of  in- 
dividuals. Iton't  meddle  with  them,  and  don't  allow  any  one 
else  to  meddle  with  them,  and  you  wiU  have  done  enough  for 
the  public." 

These  notions,  which  were  so  opposed  to  the  spirit  of  the 
traditional  order  of  things,  could  not  have  forced  them- 
selves on  the  public  mind  if  that  order  itself  had  not  been 
vehemently  assailed  from  several  points  at  the  same  time.  A 
social  idea,  however  great  its  intrinsic  upward  force,  caji  only 
advance  in  proportion  as  a  vacuum  is  formed  in  ft^ont  of  it 
by  the  psychological  action  of  material  or  moral  facts.  Eng- 
lish society  in  the  first  quarter  of  the  century  came  under 
the  influence  of  both  kinds  of  reaction.  The  first  was  brought 
about  by  the  industrial  revolution  to  which  I  shall  refer  later 
on.  In  the  moral  sphere  it  was  Bentham  again  who  most  con- 
tributed to  the  formation  of  a  state  of  mind  ready  to  welcome 
new  ideas.  By  making  a  detailed  examination  of  English 
institations,  and  showing  what  a  quantity  of  refuse  had  ac- 
cumulated in  them  for  centuries,  he  broke  the  charm  of  histor- 
ical continuity,  shattered  people's  belief  in  the  perfection  of 
those  institutions,  and  lowered  the  insular  pride  of  his  fellow- 
countrymen.  These  results  were  obtained  as  much  by  Ben- 
tham's  personal  action  as  by  that  of  his  disciples  who  propa- 
gated the  master's  doctrine,  the  original  sources  of  which  were 
little  known  to  the  great  mass  of  the  public.  These  disciples, 
a  small  group  of  remarkable  men,   who  called  themselTes 


.coy  Google 


40  DEMOCRACY  AND  POLITICAL  PAETIES    [mmt  TAaa   ■ 

" Philosophioal  Badioals,"  "offered  an  uncompromisiDg  oppo- 
sition to  many  of  the  generally  received  opinions.'"  Under 
their  direct  inspiration  "  an  incessant  tire  "  was  opened  in  the 
daily  Frees  "  against  the  wretched  superstitioa  that  the  Et^lish 
institutions  were  models  of  excellence,  exposing  the  absurditiefl 
and  vices  of  the  law  and  the  courts  of  justice,  paid  and  unpaid, 
until  they  forced  some  sense  of  them  into  people's  minds.'" 
In  the  Westminster  Review,  "which  made  considerable  noise 
in  the  wotid,"  the  Fbiloaopbical  BadlcaU  attacked  the  landed 
aristocracy,  the  unpaid  magistracy,  the  Established  Church, 
and  every  institution  which  promoted  the  domination  of  a 
class,  the  happiness  of  a  few  as  opposed  to  the  "  happiness  of 
the  greatest  number."  They  sang  tjie  praises  of  personal  prop- 
erty and  of  the  middle  class  which  held  it.  The  economisto, 
especially  Bicardo,  joined  in  the  strain  and  glorified  capital, 
wealth  wliicli  paaaes  to  the  bearer,  to  "  man,"  and  depreciated 
property  in  land,  the  ariatocratic  form  of  wealth  which  dom- 
ineers over  man  and  keeps  the  individual  in  a  subordinate 
position.  Confining  the  sphere  of  the  State  to  the  protection 
of  persons  and  the  security  of  property,  the  Philosophical 
Radicals  were  indefatigable  in  agitating  for  the  liberty  of  the 
individual  in  every  department  and  against  every  one,  even 
going  so  far  as  to  reject  the  system  of  co-operation  in  the 
economical  sphere.  In  conjunction  with  the  Economists  they 
vehemently  opposed  protection  and  advocated  free  trade. 
Finally,  as  the  principal  article  of  their  political  creed,  tiiey 
demanded  a  democratic  suffrage,  protestir^  at  the  same  time 
that  their  demand  for  it  was  not  based  on  the  rights  of  man, 
but  that  it  was  claimed  "as  the  most  essential  of  securities 
for  good  government."' 

These  ideas  made  a  breach  in  the  public  conscience  which 
grew  wider  and  wider  as  time  went  on.  Young  men  of  a 
thoughtful  turn  of  mind,  the  rising  generation  who  were  enter- 
ing into  public  life  and  embracing  liberal  professions,  discussed 
the  radical  doctrines  with  ardour.*  All  classes  were  affected 
by  them  in  the  long  run,  not  with  the  result  that  political  par- 
tisans were  conveited  and  went  over  to  the  opposite  side,  but 

1  John  Stuart  Mill,  AulobiographVi  Loud- 1873,  p.  100. 

'Ibid.  p.m.  'Ibid.  p.  107. 

•  Perwonal  Lift  of  Qvrrge  Qrote,  by  Hn.  Oiote,  Loud.  18T3,  p.  31. 


.coy  Google 


ucon)  OHtp.]     BREAK-UP  OF  THE  OU)  SOCIETT  41 

that,  while  "  retainmg  their  old  distinctire  names,  men  reasoned 
after  a  new  fashion  and  according  to  principles  wholly  different 
from  thoee  to  which  they  had  been  previously  accustomed."' 

The  morement  waa  accentuated  by  contact  with  foreign 
countriea,  which  became  much  closer  after  the  war.  When 
the  ports  of  the  kingdom  were  opened  on  the  conclusion  of  the 
peace,  travellers  thronged  to  the  Continent  in  never-ending 
crowds.  A  constant  traffic  to  and  fro  arose  between  the  two 
shores  of  the  Channel,  and  every  vessel  which  brought  trav- 
ellers home  brought  with  them  feelinga  of  commiseration  for 
insular  institutions  and  ideas. 

With  the  commenoement  of  the  century  another  force,  less 
obtrusive  but  extremely  penetrating,  appears  on  the  scene  to 
give  a  new  impulse  to  thought — literature,  already  invaded 
by  the  spirit  of  revolt,  by  romanticism.  Classic  formalism  is 
discarded,  and  henceforth  inspiiation  is  sought  in  the  depths 
of  the  soul,  and  not  in  the  outside  world,  the  routine  of  which 
veigbs  like  lead  oa  the  individual.  The  mere  contact  with 
tiiis  atmosphere  of  cant,  the  pestilent  fumes  of  which  stifle  all 
personal  initiative,  is  sufficient  to  scare  away  the  choicer  spirits, 
and  the  leaders  of  the  new  literary  movement,  the  Southeye, 
the  Coleridges,  and  the  Wordsworths,  take  refuge  in  the  North, 
in  the  Lake  country,  to  probe  the  depths  of  their  hearts  amidst 
the  tranquillity  of  natiue.  Byron  begins  I^  frequenting  the 
foahionable  world  and  leading  its  empty,  frivolous  life,  only 
to  end  by  regarding  it  with  increased  contempt  and  disgust. 
Each  of  his  poems  which  reaches  the  shores  of  his  native  coun- 
try from  the  distant  scenes  of  his  voluntary  exile  fills  the  air 
with  doubt  and  fans  the  fiame  of  revolt  in  the  hearts  and  minds 
of  his  fellow-countiymen. 

When  we  arrive  at  the  second  quarter  of  the  century  every 
principle  is  called  in  question,  and  every  department  of  life  is 
invaded  by  the  spirit  of  doubt  and  negation.  The  system  of 
which  England  was  the  embodiment  is  doomed  to  destruction. 

VI 

About  the  same  time  that  the  revolution  in  the  sphere  of 
ideas  was  taking  place,  another  revolution  of  a  material  kind 
g  Miiiiitry  of  1830  Ut  tbe  passing  ot 


.coy  Google 


DBHOCRACT  AND  POLITICAL  PARTIB8    [fowt  »h 


ms  in  full  awing,  which  had  run  a  parallel  course  with  the 
first,  atarting  from  the  middle  of  the  eighteenth  century  — 
the  industrial  transformation  of  the  country  effected  by  the 
great  mechanical  inventiooB,  the  spinning-jenny,  with  its  numer- 
ous improvements,  and  the  steam-engine.  It  shook  the  ancient 
edifice  from  top  to  bottom,  and  produced  a  general  shifting  of 
poaitions  throughout  it  Induatry,  which  up  to  this  time  had 
been  carried  on  at  home  by  workmen  dispersed  throughout  the 
country  districts  and  in  small  towns,  was  concentrated  in  large 
factories  and  carried  on  by  machinery  which  gave  work  to  hun- 
dreds and  thousands  of  hands.  Country  life  and  agriculture 
were  deserted  for  the  towns.  In  the  north  of  England^  hitherto 
aparaely  populated,  but  abounding  in  coal  auitable  for  feeding 
the  furnacea,  huge  a^lomerationa  of  men  engaged  in  indus- 
trial labour  Bprang  into  e»stence.  The  raw  material  was  trans- 
formed as  if  by  the  wand  of  the  m^cian,'  the  manufacturers 
turned  out  goods  incessantly,  daily  displaying  fresh  resources, 
securing  the  markets  of  the  world  and  flooding  them  with  their 
products.' 

In  this  marvellouB  outburst  of  industry  individual  efFort  and 
the  spirit  of  enterprise  met  with  unexampled  success.  Men 
belonging  to  the  lower  strata  of  society  rose  to  high  positions 
in  the  world.  Personal  initiative  waa  constantly  stimulated, 
and  daring  action  often  found  its  reward.  It  seemed  as  if 
everything  might  be  within  the  reach  of  all ;  every  man  tried 
to  rise  and  to  extend  the  circle  of  his  activity.  These  aspira- 
tions eventually  asaumed  a  morbid,  feverish  character ;  the 
wild  speculation  of  the  years  1824-1825  supplied  striking 
proof  of  this ;  in  fact  the  passion  for  individual  expansion  waa 
not  a  less  powerful  factor  than  the  greed  of  gain.*  However 
this  may  be,  a  considerable  number  of  men  mani^ed  to  rise 
from  the  ranks.  Some  took  the  lead  in  producing  fresh 
wealth,  others  helped  to  develop  it,  others  again  benefited  by 

I  Thna  Sir  John  Tbrogmorloo  was  able  U>  weHr  &t  dlaner  a  suit  th«  cloih  at 
which  cftme  from  wool  which  had  been  on  the  backs  of  sheep  tlut  very  mom- 
ing  (Past  and  Preseot  State  of  the  CooDtiy,  Qtiarterty  Revieu,  ]S2S,  Vol.  32, 
p.n4). 

*  In  less  than  half  a  cenCnry  the  value  of  cotton  exported  increased  more 
thao  fifty-three  times  over,  from  £81.4,000  in  1785  to  £4(1,000,000  In  1833. 

■  "  It  was  not  altottether  rapacity,  with  many  the  charm  was  In  the  eidte- 
Dient,  — in  the  pleasure  ol  sympaUiy  iolatKeeuterprlsee,  — in  the  rousmgof 


.coy  Google 


racoiTD  cHip.]    BREAK-UP  OF  THE  OLD  SOCIBTT  48 

it — manufacturers,  factory  managers,  traders,  contractors,  pro 
fessional  men  who  made  fortunes.  They  acquired  new  tastes 
and  new  ideas,  and  above  all  new  desires  and  new  ambitions. 
The  monotonous  and  colourless  existence  of  the  middle  class, 
of  which  we  have  caught  a  glimpse  in  the  last  century,  was 
replaced  by  a  more  refined  mode  of  life.  Members  of  the  new 
aristocracy  of  capital,  whose  wealth  rivalled  and  often  sur- 
passed that  of  the  old  aristocracy  of  race,  were  anxious  to  min- 
gle with  the  latter.  At  the  close  of  the  Kapoleonic  wars,  in 
which  immense  fortunes  were  made,  a  great  struggle  took 
place ;  several  of  the  new  men  managed  to  force  their  way  into 
"  society,"  uid  its  ranks  were  thrown  into  confusion.  It  was 
in  vain  that  society  endeavoured  to  entrench  itself  behind  the 
barriers  of  aristocratic  exclusiveneBs.  It  was  assailed  at  an- 
other point,  that  of  its  position  of  ruling  class  in  the  State. 
Here  it  held  power  by  its  monopoly  of  the  parliamentary 
sn&age,  which  was  in  the  hands  of  certain  fixed  groups.  All 
the  new-comers,  and  especially  the  inhabitants  of  the  great 
towns  created  or  developed  by  the  rise  of  industry,  were  conse- 
quently excluded  from  the  franchise.  The  contrast  between 
their  real  power  in  the  new  society  and  their  legal  position  in 
the  Stat«  flashed  upon  them.  Like  their  first  parents  in  the 
Bible,  they  eat  of  the  fruit  of  the  tree  of  knowledge  and 
knew  that  they  were  naked.  They  demanded  their  share  of 
power,  for  they  too  were  men  and  Englishmen :  "  We  claim 
the  birthright  of  our  sires,  by  union,  justice,  reason,  law."' 
The  aspirations  of  the  new  social  strata,  their  consciousness  of 
their  strength,  were  reinforced  by  a  conviction  of  their  right. 
The  ideas  which  had  been  fermenting  in  England  since  the 
middle  of  the  eighteenth  century  now  had  the  material  power 
the  fscnltlea  of  ImsglnatioD  and  conception  when  their  field  of  commerce  ex- 
tended over  the  Pampas  and  the  Andes,  and  befonij  the  farthest  aeas  and 
among  the  Ice-rocks  o(  the  pulea."  (Hiiiory  of  the  Thirty  Ytars'  Ptacf,  by 
H.  Martinean,  1.  352.) 

Cr.  iii.  Bryi;e'8  remarks  on  the  halo  o(  Idealism  which  the  ima^natlon  iil 
the  Americans  at  the  far  West  throws  around  their  mad  race  for  wealtb:  "  It 
i>  not  really  or  at  least  It  is  not  wholly  aordld.  These  people  are  iutoxicated 
bf  the  majestic  scale  of  the  nature  in  which  their  lot  is  cast,  enormous  mineral 
deposits,  boundless  prairies,  forests  which,  even  Hquandered,  will  snpply  tim- 
ber to  the  United  States  for  centuries  ..."  (The  AtnatiisanCommonieeaUh, 
Sd  ed.  Vol.  n,  Ch.  CXVn,  The  Temper  of  the  West.) 

'  From  the  reformist  hymn  sung  at  Birmingham  and  etsewbeie  bj  tlie 
members  of  the  popular  organizations  kaowu  as  Political  Union*. 


.CD,  Google 


U  DEHOCRACT  AND  POLITICAL  PABTIBS    [nmn  fam 

of  tJie  urban  populatiooa  as  their  ally,  and  the  old  ruling 
class  surrendered.  By  the  Bill  of  1832  the  frauohiae  was  cod- 
ferred  oa  every  inhabitant  of  a  borough  with  a  certain  property 
qualification,  and  the  monopoly  of  parliamentary  representa- 
tion was  thus  taken  out  of  the  hauds  of  the  aristocracy.  The 
reforms  which  followed  that  of  1832  had  the  same  tendency; 
their  effect  was  to  break  up  the  old  system  and  sever  tlie 
traditionary  bonds  which  united  society.  The  ties  which 
bound  the  Established  Church  to  the  State  were  loosened  in 
1828,  and  gradually  relaxed  still  further  as  years  went  on.  The 
repeal  of  the  Test  and  Corporation  Acts,  in  1828,  opened  the 
public  offices  and  Parliament  to  Dissenters.  The  Emancipa- 
tion of  the  Catholics,  in  1829,  admitted  the  detested  Papists  to 
political  life.  The  reformed  Parliament  completed  these  meas- 
ures by  authorizing  the  Dissenters  to  celebrate  marriages  in 
their  chapels,  and  by  making  the  registration  of  births  and 
deaths  a  purely  civU  function  independent  of  ecclesiastical 
ceremonies.  The  municipal  lefonn  of  1836  abolished  the  oli- 
garchical corporations  under  the  control  of  the  territorial  mag- 
nates, and  entrusted  the  government  of  the  towns  to  the  great 
body  of  ratepayers.  The  relief  of  the  poor,  which  had  been 
managed  by  the  landlords  in  their  capacity  of  magistrates,  was 
reorganized  by  the  introduction  of  representatives  elected  by 
the  population  and  of  a  large  staff  of  salaried  officials  under  a 
central  board  in  London.  The  reform  of  the  Poor  Laws,  by 
which  these  changes  were  effected,  diminished  the  importanca 
of  the  "  great  unpaid "  in  the  principal  branch  of  local  self- 
government.  The  sucoeBsive  formation  of  new  administrative 
departments,  as  that  of  public  health  and  others,  with  officials 
controlled  by  boards  in  London,  deprived  the  gentry  still  more 
of  their  sphere  of  action  in  local  public  life  and  of  their  oppor- 
tunities of  daily  contact  with  the  population.  The  abolition  of 
the  protectionist  system,  begun  under  Hnskisson  and  completed 
by  the  repeal  of  the  Com  Laws  in  1846,  gave  the  finishing 
stroke  to  the  landlords'  ascendancy,  not  only  from  the  economic 
but  also  from  the  social  point  of  view.  It  weakened  their  feudal 
power  with  the  rights  and  duties  involved  in  it.  Sir  Robert 
Peel,  before  he  became  a  convert  to  free  trade,  opposed  the 
repeal  of  the  duties  on  corn  for  the  very  reason  that  the 
landovmers,   when  reduced  to  commercial   competition   and 


.coy  Google 


p.]    BRBAE.UP  OF  THE  OU}  SOCIETT 


forced  to  adopt  a  purely  business  line  of  conduct,  would  no 
longer  be  able  to  cultivate  the  moral  aad  social  relations  vluch 
had  existed  for  centuries  between  landlords,  farmoTs,  and  la- 
boorers,  and  that  the  measure  "  would  alter  the  character  of 
the  country." '  The  reduced  incomes  of  the  landlords  pre- 
vented them  from  displaying  their  old  hospitality  and  liberal- 
ity, and  their  attractive  power  ceased  to  exist  in  the  same 
degree.  The  new  means  of  locomotion  and  of  communication, 
introdaoed  in  the  years  1830-1840,  altered  the  old  relations 
between  Hie  different  classes  still  more.  In  the  relative  state 
of  isolation  which  prevailed  before  the  era  of  railways,  the 
great  landlords  irradiated  the  whole  neighbourhood  and  made 
it  gravitate  with  all  its  interests  in  their  orbit  The  shop- 
keepers and  artisans  of  the  neighbouring  town  lived  on  their 
custom.  Their  entry  into  a  town  with  a  string  of  coaches  and 
oarriagea  was  an  event  which  set  all  the  population  agog. 
These  relations,  with  theii  element  of  prestige  on  the  one  side 
and  of  depeodeace  on  the  other,  came  to  an  end  when,  owing 
to  the  constmotioQ  of  ndlways,  people  could  travel  with  less 
expense  to  the  great  centres  of  population,  where  they  found 
all  that  the  most  capricious  taste  could  desire.  The  moral 
effect  which  increased  facility  of  communication  produced  by 
revealing  new  worlds  and  opening  up  fresh  horizons  proved  a 
still  stronger  dissolvent 

vn 

The  aucoessor  to  the  system  which  was  thus  perishing  bit 
by  bit,  a  result  which  t^e  representatives  of  ideology  had 
demanded  for  half  a  century,  was  the  very  personage  of  whom 
they  had  constituted  themselves  the  champions  —  the  individ- 
oaL  The  religious  revival  had  told  him  that  he  had  a,  soul  of 
his  own ;  the  laws  of  religious  emancipation  acknowledge  the 
fact.  Political  economy  and  philosophy  had  declared  that  he 
had  his  own  interests  and  consequently  his  own  rights;  the 
Bill  of  1832  recognizes  them  by  placiug  the  electoral  qualifica- 
tion on  an  elastic  and  rational  basis  and  thus  making  the  fran- 
chise a  security  payable  "to  bearer."  The  reform  of  the  Poor 
I>aws  introduces  the  same  principle  in  the  administration  of 
relief  to  the  poorer  classes.  The  abolition  of  restrictive  duties 
1  Batuard,  3d  series.  Vol  CXXXI,  p.  3T& 


.coy  Google 


46  DEMOCRACY  AND  POLITICAL  PARTIES    [kmt  Pimr 

delivers  man  from  all  impediments  to  his  activity  and  etarts 
him  on  the  wild  career  of  free  competition.  Railways,  the 
telegraph  and  the  penny-post,  by  uniting  and  separating  people 
and  things  at  will,  complete  the  emancipation  of  the  individ- 
ual. Formerly,  when  means  of  communication  were  difficult, 
slow,  and  irregular,  every  oae  waa  confined  within  the  narrow 
range  of  his  own  home  and  compelled  to  submit  to  all  its 
material  and  moral  servitudes;  people  resigned  themselves 
to  it  beforehand,  and  considered  themselves  at  the  mercy  of 
an  inevitable  destiny  which  baffled  all  human  combinations.' 
But  now  the  obstacles  of  space  and  time  seemed  to  melt  away 
before  them;  they  had  only  to  express  a  wish,  and  they  were 
transported  with  rapidity  to  a  distance  of  a  hundred  miles ; 
they  could  hold  a  conversation  with  the  antipodes ;  the  forces 
of  nature  were  always  at  hand  ready  to  obey  their  behests. 

It  is  true  that  this  exaltation  of  the  individual  had  found 
scope  mostly  in  the  middle  class,  and  that  some  of  the  very 
phenomena  which  had  contributed  to  his  emancipation  soon 
began  to  impose  restrictions  on  it.  The  development  of  indus- 
try did  much  to  open  a  field  for  the  individual,  but  the  same 
movement  created  the  industrial  serf  aide  by  side  with  the  in- 
dustrial baron.  The  workmen  who  flocked  into  the  factories, 
uprooted  from  the  soil,  obliged  to  give  up  work  in  their  own 
homes,  bound  like  slaves  to  the  machinery,  fell  into  a  state  of 
complete  dependence  on  the  capitalist  class,  which  constituted 
anew  sort  of  feudalism  in  the  transformed  social  system.  The 
railways  which  destroyed  the  old  local  relations  of  vassalage 
substituted  for  them  a  new  kind  of  dependence  by  centralizing 
the  markets  of  the  country  and  the  circulation  of  wealth.  The 
post-office  and  the  telegraph,  by  contributing  to  centralization, 
also  helped  to  make  the  individual  a  satellite  of  the  system  of 
which  the  capital  or  the  great  provincial  town  "was  becoming 
the  centre. 

In  more  than  one  way  then  man  was  once  more  caught  in 

■Sj'dDeySmitb  raj's.  r«calUiighU  travels  in  tlie'good old  day>:  "Ingoing 
Iram  TaaDtoii  to  Bath  I  Buffered  between  10,000  and  12,000  severe  ooDtusiona, 
before  etone-breaklng  HBcadam  was  born  .  .  .  and  whatevei  miseries  I  suf- 
fered, 1  bad  no  post  ti>  whisk  my  c^nmplainla  tor  a  single  penny  to  the  lemot- 
est  comers  uf  the  empire ;  and  yei  In  spite  of  all  these  privations,  1  lived  on 
qnlstlf ,  and  am  now  ashamed  that  1  was  not  more  discontented."  {Modem 
Change*,  Works,  p.  ti78.) 


.coy  Google 


ncOND  CHAP.]     BREAK-UP  OF  THE  OLD  SOCIETY  47 

the  toila ;  another  hierarchy,  aod  with  it  a  new  species  of  sub- 
ordination, arose  in  the  industrial  world.  But  the  new  ties, 
being  of  a  purely  mechanical  kind,  and  having  none  of  the 
binding  force  which  held  the  old  society  together,  not  only  did 
not  check  the  movement  but  accelerated  it  They  revealed  the 
process  of  individualist  expansion  which  was  at  work  in  Eng- 
land in  a  new  light,  and  showed  how,  the  traditional  relations 
between  man  and  man  having  ceased  and  the  social  horizon 
being  enlarged,  the  individual  was  becoming  isolated  in  the 
society  which  had  undergone  transformation.  When  manu- 
facturing industry  took  die  place  of  domestic  labour,  direct 
intercourse  between  the  owners  of  factories  and  the  shifting 
masses  of  workmen  became  impossible ;  henceforth  their  only 
points  of  contact  were  work  and  wages,  governed  by  the  stem 
law  of  supply  and  dem^id ;  they  became  anonymous  abstrac- 
tions one  to  the  other ;  they  came  ti^ether  and  parted  without 
seeing  each  other.  The  workmen,  herded  together  in  the  fac- 
tories, had  no  bond  of  union  but  that  of  chance  promiscuity; 
their  only  approach  to  an  organic  existence  was  an  ephemeral 
combination  for  purposes  of  revolt,  such  as  that  of  the  Chartists, 
for  instance.  Agricultural  labour  itself  was  also  affected  by 
the  new  order  of  things;  it  assumed  a  nomadic  impersonal 
character.  The  introduction  of  machinery  in  agricultural 
operations  by  substituting  work  in  gangs  for  individual  labour 
led  to  farming  on  a  large  scale,  just  as  it  had  created  industiy 
on  a  large  scale  in  towns.  Conducted  on  the  same  principle  of 
division  of  labour,  agricultural  production,  to  which  nature  has 
set  bounds  in  point  of  quantity,  ceased  to  provide  continuous 
employment ;  there  was  no  need  to  spend  t^e  winter  in  thrash- 
ing by  hand  the  com  which  had  been  reaped ;  everything  could 
be  done  by  the  machine  almost  at  the  same  time.  It  was  no 
longer  necessary  to  engage  men  permanently,  and  so  the  agri- 
cultural labourer  was  hired  by  the  week  instead  of  by  the 
year.  Wandering  troops  of  labourers  provided  by  contractors 
or  agents  travelled  from  county  to  county  (gang  system),  just 
like  the  factory-hands  who  migrated  from  town  to  town.  The 
changes  in  the  world  of  commerce  also  altered  the  relations 
between  man  and  man  1^  substituting  fluctuations  in  custom 
for  the  old  fixity  of  connection  between  buyer  and  seller. 
Even  in  the  staff  of  commercial  houses,  offices,  and  shops,  men 


.coy  Google 


48  DEMOCRACY  AND  POLITICAI.  PAETEES     [rowt  p*«t 

were  too  often  Btraugers  to  each  other  ^  the  time  had  gone  by 
when,  as  before  the  second  half  of  the  eighteenth  oentuiy, 
master  and  workman,  employer  and  employee,  formed  a  sli^^le 
family.  They  now  belonged  to  different  strata  of  society.  The 
more  refined  mode  of  life  which  grew  up  in  the  middle  class  in 
consequence  of  the  industrial  revolution  was  marked  by  dis- 
tinctions which  varied  according  to  the  income  of  its  members, 
and  each  distinction  constituted  a  new  line  of  demarcation  and 
separation. 

Thus  the  second  sb^  in  the  movement  which  broke  up 
English  society  was  completed;  by  destroying  the  old  hier- 
archy it  set  free  the  individual;  in  setting  him  free  it  isolated 
him.  But  the  change  did  not  stop  there ;  the  process  of  isola- 
tion and  separation  gave  rise  in  its  turn  to  a  fresh  develop- 
ment of  the  individualist  movement,  which  formed,  as  it  were, 
its  synthesis :  it  became  a  levelling  process  as  well.  In  de- 
composing the  concrete,  the  logic  of  facts  as  well  as  that  of 
ideas,  opened  the  door  to  the  geoeraL  Here  as  elsewhere 
indiistrialism  gave  the  first  impulse.  In  the  eyes  of  the  manu- 
facturer the  mass  of  human  beings  who  toiled  in  the  factory 
were  only  workmen,  and  the  workman  associated  the  factory- 
owner  only  with  the  idea  of  capitalist  or  master.  Not  being 
brought  into  immediate  contact,  they  formed  a  conception  of 
each  other  by  mentally  eliminating  tiie  special  characteristics 
of  the  individual  and  retaining  only  what  he  had  in  common 
with  the  other  members  of  his  class.  In  proportion  as  the 
new  conditions  of  existence  enlai^ed  the  social  horizon  in 
the  sphere  of  life,  just  as  it  expanded  by  means  of  thought, 
the  process  of  abstraction  extended  to  all  social  relations. 
The  rapid  growth  of  large  towns  destroyed  the  old  neigh- 
bourly intercourse,  or  at  all  events,  its  intimate  character.  The 
extension  of  markets  again  stripped  buyers  and  sellers  of  their 
concrete  individuality,  and  resolved  them  into  the  general  cate- 
gories of  tradesmen  and  customers.  Bailwaya,  by  bringing  to- 
gether for  half  an  hour  men  who  saw  each  other  for  the  first 
and  perhaps  the  last  time,  reduced  theni  to  the  general  notion 
of  travellers,  all  placed  on  an  equal  footing  by  a  imiform  ticket, 
a  piece  of  pasteboard  printed  wholesale  for  all  present  and 
future  travellers.  In  great  industrial  enterprises  creative 
energy  and  active  will  associated  in  the  form  of  sfiares,  negoti- 


.coy  Google 


ucoiTD  CBip.]    BBSAK-UP  OF  THE  OLD  SOCIETT  49 

able  secuiitieB,  transferable  to  an  infinite  series  of  potential 
entities  existing  only  as  shareholders.  Even  the  feelings  which 
take  their  rise  in  the  depths  of  the  soul,  such  as  the  love  of 
one's  neighbour  and  pity,  were  obliged,  when  projected  over  a 
larger  area,  to  conform  to  abstract  notions ;  the  guniliar  figure 
of  the  wretched  Jim  or  Tom,  who  had  been  the  regular  recip- 
ient of  relief,  gave  place  to  the  idea  of  the  poor  man,  the 
poorer  dmsea. 

The  change  of  ideas  involved  a  ohange  in  principles  of  con- 
duct. It  is  difficult,  in  fact,  to  feel  a  regard  for  a  number  of 
workmen  whom  one  hardly  knows  by  sight ;  you  cannot  be  on 
cordial  terms  with  all  your  fellow-travellers  in  a  railway  car- 
riage; you  can  be  charitable  to  poor  individuals  but  not  to  the 
poorer  classes.  They  can  only  be  enveloped  in  a  more  general 
sentiment.  Being  henceforth  confined  to  particular  cases  only, 
the  feelings  of  regard,  of  cordiality,  of  charity,  aa  they  assumed 
a  general  character,  resolved  themselves  into  an  inclination  to 
be  correct  and  just  towards  all,  and  to  respect  the  human  ele- 
ment with  its  material  and  moral  needs  in  the  humblest  and 
most  wretched  members  of  society.'  This  applied  equally  to 
the  moral  sanction  of  the  duties  of  man  in  a  social  state  which 
oonsists  of  the  feeling  of  responsibility  to  his  fellow-creatures. 
Confined  hitherto  to  the  narrow  range  of  his  social  circle,  it 
now  spread  further  and  further  beyond  these  limits ;  the  tribu- 
nal of  public  opinion  sat  in  judgment  wherever  cognizance 
eould  be  taken  of  the  individual's  conduct;  at  the  bar  of  his 
conscience  man  became  responsible  not  only  to  his  own  society 
in  the  restricted  sense  of  the  word,  but  to  society  in  general,  to 
his  country,  to  the  nation,  even  to  humanity.  Thus  a  readjust- 
ment of  forces  took  place  in  man's  social  existence  between  the 
particular  which  constituted  nearly  all  his  being  and  the  general 
which  occupied  but  a  small  portion  of  it.     Destined  as  he  is 

1  In  csMs  wbera  the  moral  obllgatloaa  of  social  InteTcoarM  are  BDppl»- 
metitod  by  those  of  the  law,  us  In  the  relleC  of  tbe  poor,  the  legislature  eooD 
Intervened  to  divert  the  legal  obligations  o(  their  concrete  character.  A  poor 
niaii  was  entitled  to  relief  only  when  he  belonged  to  the  parish.  An  Ac(  of 
Sir  Robert  Feel,  passed  in  ISltl,  prescribes  that  ever;  poor  person  who  happens 
to  be  liring  In  the  parish  shall  be  relieved,  wherever  he  comes  from.  SnbM- 
qeent  lei^slation  on  this  subject  only  develoiie  Ihis  principle  by  "  investing  the 
Mlief  ol  the  poor  more  aiid  more  with  the  character  of  an  abstract  obligation,"* 

*  AHknU,  Am  AtglUok4  ATtHnHHHta.  p.  US,  LcLpi.  IWi. 


.CD,  Google 


60  DEHOCRACr  AND  FOLITICAI.  PABTIES    [ratCT  paki 

by  bis  finite  and  limited  frame  to  cling  to  tbe  concrete  and 
the  particular  as  his  starting-poist  and  strongest  support,  man 
nevertheless  launched  on  all  sides  into  the  general,  witJi  the 
result  that  henceforth  his  social  relations  were  bound  to  be 
guided  not  so  much  by  sentiment,  which  expresses  the  percep- 
tion of  tbe  particular,  as  by  general  principles,  less  intense  in 
their  nature  perhaps,  but  sufficiently  comprehensive  to  take  in 
the  shifting  multitudes  of  which  the  abstract  social  groups  were 
henceforth  composed,  groups  continually  subject  to  expansion 
by  reason  of  their  continual  motion.  In  a  word,  in  passing 
from  the  concrete  to  the  abBtract,  social  relations  exhibited  a 
natural  tendency  towards  the  principle  which  is  commonly 
designated  by  the  name  of  equality. 

The  psycholt^caJ  process  which  social  relations  were  under^ 
going  led  therefore  to  tbe  same  conclusions  as  rationalism  and 
hy  the  same  l<^ical  path  —  that  of  abstraction  and  generali- 
zation. But  while  the  latter  moved  in  the  untenanted  world 
of  speculation,  the  former  operated  in  a  living  society,  amid 
inveterate  habits,  traditions,  prejudices  and  interests  consti- 
tuting so  many  centripetal  forces  which  check  and  often 
neutralize  the  most  powerful  centrifugal  movements.  Conse- 
quently each  of  tbe  various  stages  of  the  former  process  was 
destined  to  be  completed  with  a  slowness  which  will  often 
leave  the  actual  situation  a  long  way  behind  its  logical  postu- 
lates. The  divergence  that  will  thus  arise  between  the  decom- 
position of  the  old  society  and  the  generalization  of  the  new 
social  relations  will  constitute  the  drama  of  the  history  of 
modern  English  society  and  of  the  State  which  is  its  political 
embodiment. 

Tm 

Naturally  united  to  society  by  the  closest  ties,  the  State  iu 
fact  was  passing  through  the  same  crisis.  At  one  time  serving 
as  a  target  for  the  ideas  and  facts  which  assailed  society,  at 
another  reflecting  the  movement  which  operated  directly  within 
it,  the  State  underwent  every  phase  of  the  logical  process 
which  we  have  just  been  considering  in  the  case  of  society  and 
the  individual.  The  Reform  of  1832  took  the  State  out  of  the 
narrow  groove  of  a  single  ruling  class.  The  series  of  Acts  of 
a  secularizing  tendency  which  were  passed  from  and  after  the 


.coy  Google 


aicowDCH*,F.]    BEEAK-UP  OF  THE  OLD  SOCIETY  61 

year  182S  dissolved  the  compound  existence  of  Church  and  State 
and  restored  to  the  State  its  proper  function.  The  numerous 
administrative  reforms  which  followed  the  Bill  of  1832  defined 
the  sphere  of  the  State  and  the  powers  and  operation  of  its 
organs,  and  made  it  clearly  distinguishable  from  the  old  rep- 
resentatives of  self-government  recruited  from  the  ranis  of 
society.  The  State  ceased  to  be  a  spirit  pervading  every  mani- 
festation of  public  and  social  life ;  its  figure  began  to  assume  a 
distinct  outline ;  it  became  more  human,  more  personal.  But  as 
it  was  no  longer  one  and  indivisible  with  society,  which  consti- 
tnted  alike  its  foundation  and  its  cohesive  power,  it  ceased  to 
be  one  and  indivisible  itself.  Its  own  cohesion  and  that  of  its 
constituent  parts  became  impaired.  Local  self-government  was 
no  longer  linked  to  parliamentary  government  by  the  unbroken 
chain  of  a  single  and  united  ruling  class.  Henceforth  each  of 
them  had  its  own  existence  with  its  own  special  authorities, 
its  means  and  method  of  action  which  tended  to  isolate  it  in 
the  great  world  of  national  life.  Severed  one  from  the  other, 
local  self-government  and  parliamentary  government  lost  their 
homt^eneous  character  in  the  new  conditions  under  which 
they  had  to  work;  they  crumbled  away  in  their  turn,  thus 
establishing  in  the  second  degree  the  great  fact  of  the  sepa- 
ration of  the  emancipated  State  and  society. 

Self-government  was  the  first  to  supply  the  demonstration  of 
this.  It  lost  its  consistency  and  was  subjected  to  a  systematic 
process  of  dismemberment.  The  habit  of  piecemeal  legislation 
which  prevails  in  England  no  doubt  had  a  great  deal  to  do  with 
this  result.  The  movement  of  reform  which  triumphed  in  the 
Bill  of  1832  did  not  abolish  government  by  the  gentry  in  local 
administration,  it  merely  curtailed  it :  side  by  side  with  the 
magistrates,  elective  offices  were  created  for  certain  branches  of 
local  self-government.  But  even  this  qualified  homage  paid  to 
the  democratic  principle  only  went  half  way :  in  the  constitu- 
encies which  elected  the  local  officers,  the  rich  electors  were 
given  an  increasing  number  of  votes  in  proportion  to  the  amount 
of  the  rates  paid  by  them.  This  double  moral  enclave,  however, 
vaa  as  nothing  compared  with  the  matenal  endavea  created 
by  the  multiplicity  and  vaiiety  of  the  elective  bodies  imported 
one  after  another  into  the  system  of  self-government,  without 
a  shadow  of  a  plan  aud  irrespective  of  all  unity  of  conception. 


.coy  Google 


OS  DEHOCRACT  A»D  POUTICAL  FABITES    [mn  rjMt 

The  reform  of  the  Poor  Laws  divided  the  country,  for  purpoBM 
of  Poor  Law  adminiBtration,  into  Unions  (composed  of  so  many 
parishes),  which  each  elected  a  Board  of  Ouardians.  The 
fourteen  thousand  parishes  of  England  and  Wales  were  dis- 
tributed into  about  six  hundred  Unions,  without  the  slightest 
consideration  for  the  old  historical  and  eoonomio  divisions,  so 
that  a  Union  was  often  in  two  counties  and  included  urban 
and  rural  parishes,  etc.  What  was  done  for  Poor  Law  admin- 
istration has  been  repeated  at  different  intervals,  whenever 
the  need  of  reforming  a  public  service  or  creating  a  new  one 
made  itself  felt :  new  electoral  powers  were  conferred  (for  the 
maintenance  of  roads,  for  sanitary  matters,  etc)  with  new 
districts,  the  boundaries  of  which  in  no  way  coincided  with 
the  other  divisions  of  local  government.  The  districts  carved 
out  for  the  various  elective  authorities  sometimes  met,  some- 
times divei^ed,  sometimes  overlapped  and  sometimes  inter- 
sected each  other.  Each  authority  taxed  those  within  its 
jurisdiction  separately,  and  had  its  independent  budget  of 
receipts  and  expenditure.  "It  prevents  the  possibility  of 
anything  like  a  local  budget.  It  is  impossible  to  make  out 
what  is  the  total  expenditure  for  any  given  locality.  The  rate- 
payer who  essayed  the  task  could  only  give  it  up  in  bewildered 
disgust.'"  The  inevitable  result  was  that  interest  in  local 
affaire  and  habits  of  co-operation  were  discouraged.  There 
was  no  fixed  unit  of  local  administration  with  a  centre  in 
which  all  the  good-will  and  energy  of  the  locality  could  be 
focussed.  The  old  administrative  unit,  the  parish,  was 
swamped  in  the  chaos  of  districts,  authoritieB,  and  assess- 
ments. The  vestry,  which  was  composed  of  the  ratepayers 
of  the  parish,  continued  to  exist,  but  its  most  important  func- 
tions were  transferred  little  by  little  to  the  new  elective 
bodies.  Even  in  the  privileged  towns  described  as  "municipal 
boroughs,"  in  which  the  reform  of  1835  gave  all  the  ratepayers 
a  share  in  the  administration  of  the  borough,  the  sphere  of 
action  conceded  to  the  municipalities  was  not  an  extensive  one. 
On  the  other  hand,  the  Unions,  which  gradually  monopolized 
several  departments  of  local  government  besides  the  relief  of 
the  poor,  were  too  large  to  serve  as  a  field  for  the  discharge 
of  civil  duties.  In  the  rural  districts  the  difficulties  were  still 
i  H.  D.  Chtlmen,  LociU  QovamiMtU,  Loud.  1883,  p.  39. 


.coy  Google 


•sown  ORir.)    BBKAE-UP  OF  THE  01S>  BOCIETT  68 

graater ;  there  the  Unioa  ptesented  a  still  more  bloated  and 
tlie  pariBh  a  more  emaciated  appearance.  There  wa?  hardlj 
anything  left  to  keep  the  public  interest  alive.  The  village 
vestry  oeased  to  meet,  for  vant  of  current  business,  and  the 
villagers,  as  a  fanner  put  it,  never  had  "a  chance  of  looking 
tato  each  other's  mind." ' 

At  the  same  time  the  giowii^  complexity  of  modem  civiliza- 
tion multiplied  the  functions  of  local  administration  and  led  to 
the  introdactioD,  as  in  industry,  of  the  principle  of  the  division 
of  labour.  To  meet  the  new  requirements  of  the  situation, 
the  Legislature  thought  fit  to  introduce  into  the  local  de- 
partments a  luge  staff  of  salaried  ofiicialsj  and  for  the  sake 
of  greater  security  it  placed  them  under  the  control  of  the 
authorities  in  London,  the  Poor  Lav  Board,  etc.  In  this  vay 
officialism  and  centralization  penetrated  into  local  govern- 
ment and  pushed  the  representatives  of  society  out  of  it. 
The  latter  made  no  resistance,  either  because  setf^vem- 
ment  in  its  new  aspect,  as  we  have  just  seen,  did  not  offer  a 
suitable  field  for  action,  or  because  they  were  indifferent  on 
the  subject  In  his  famous  speech  on  the  Chartist  petition,  Dis- 
raeli demonstrated  with  impassioned  eloquence  that  the  Chart- 
iata  were  the  victims  of  the  new  political  and  social  system, 
which  had  placed  in  power  a  new  governing  class  which  did 
not  govern.  "  The  old  constitution  invested  a  small  portion  of 
the  nation  with  political  rights.  Those  rights  were  entrusted 
to  that  small  class  on  certain  conditions  —  that  they  should 
guard  the  civil  rights  of  the  great  multitude.  It  was  not  even 
left  them  as  a  matter  of  honour,  society  was  so  constituted  that 
they  were  entrusted  with  duties  which  they  were  obliged  to 
fulfil.  They  had  transferred  a  great  part  of  that  political 
power  to  a  new  class,  whom  they  had  not  invested  with  those 
great  public  duties.  Great  duties  could  alone  confer  great 
station,  and  the  new  class  which  had  been  invested  with  po- 
litical station  had  not  been  bound  np  with  the  great  mass  of  the 
people  by  the  exercise  of  social  duties.  For  instance,  the  ad- 
ministration of  justice,  the  regulation  of  parishes,  the  building 
of  roads  and  bridges,  the  command  of  the  militia  and  police, 
the  employment  of  labour,  the  distribution  of  relief  to  the 
u  VilligcB,"  Forl- 


.coy  Google 


U  DEMOCRACY  AND  POLITICAL  PARTlEa     [fimt  FiRT 

destitute  —  these  were  great  duties  which  ordinarily  had  been 
confined  to  that  body  in  the  nation  which  enjoyed  and  exer- 
cised political  power.  But  now  they  had  a  class  that  had  at- 
tained that  great  object  that  all  the  opuleDt  desired  —  political 
power  without  the  conditions  annexed  to  its  possession  and  with- 
out fulfilling  the  duties  which  it  should  impose.  What  was 
the  consequence  ?  Those  who  thus  possessed  power  without 
dischai^ng  its  conditions  and  duties  were  naturally  ansious  to 
put  themselves  to  the  least  possible  expense,  they  were  anxious 
to  keep  it  without  any  appeal  to  their  pocket  and  without  any 
cost  of  their  time.  To  gain  this  object  they  raised  the  cry  of 
cheap  government  that  served  the  first,  to  attain  the  second 
they  called  for  the  constant  interference  of  the  government." ' 

In  point  of  fact,  when  the  middle  class  had  obtained  politi- 
cal power  its  civic  ardour  soon  cooled  down.  The  remnant  of 
its  enthusiaam  was  spent  in  the  struggle  against  the  Com  Laws, 
in  which  its  material  interests  were  involved.  Having  carried 
the  day  against  the  landed  aristocracy,  the  middle  class  stood 
aside  from  the  game  of  politics  and  devoted  all  its  energies  to 
amassing  wealth  and  enjoying  it.  Thus  both  the  substance  and 
the  spirit  of  the  old  self-government  died  away. 

In  the  centre  of  political  life,  in  Parliament,  the  old  springs 
of  action  soon  began  to  give  way  as  well.  The  ominous 
date  of  1846,  which  marked  the  eclipse  of  the  old  society, 
brought  this  fact  into  strong  relief.  In  thrusting  the  repeal  of 
the  Com  Laws  on  his  followers.  Sit  Robert  Peel  shattered  the 
historic  Tory  party.  That  party  represented  the  opposition 
of  the  landed  interest,  which  was  the  embodiment  of  the  old 
England,  to  the  new  industrial  classes.  The  abolition  of  the 
Com  Laws,  following  on  so  many  other  reforms,  obliterated 
this  antagonism.  At  the  same  time  a  considerable  section 
of  the  Tory  party,  faithful  to  its  traditions  and  its  feelii^s, 

1  Eaniard,  3d  Mries,  Vol.  XLIX,  p.  248  (Sitting  of  tlie  lath  of  Jul]',  1839) . 
Cf.  Qneist's  ylews  on  the  process  of  destraction  which  ihe  old  bmtia  of  the 
English  State  (die  Innere  C«hiirenz  der  Com  ni  units  tea)  was  nndergoing.  The 
learned  arguineDt  of  the  illastrlous  jurist  is  on  tbe  same  lines  as  the  fervid 
language  of  Disraeli.  Recently  Qneist  has  once  more  stated  bis  favourite 
argument  (Die  bentlge  Lageder  Englisrlieti  Verfassiing  nach  den  drei  Reform- 
bills  1832, 186T,  IBSfi,  Deuttrhe  Stitiie,  18BT,  1. 1.).  His  last  worh,  Bit  naliiy. 
nale  AecAtftcfasiioniimSrdndsn,  Berlin,  1891,  contains  several  passages  glviiig 
'n  to  identical  views. 


.coy  Google 


■EwsD  CH4P.]    BREAK-UP  OF  THE  OLD  SOCIETY  66 

refused  to  follow  Peel  in  his  evolutdoD  and  formed  an  inde- 
pendent group,  equally  hostile  to  Peel  and  to  the  Whigs.  The 
dual  system  of  party  government  at  once  lost  its  historical  raiaon 
tPitre  and  its  material  basis.  Henceforth  there  was  no  homo- 
geneous majority  in  Parliament.  The  House  of  Commons  con- 
tinned  to  split  up  into  groups.  The  irreconcilable  Tories,  the 
"  Protectionists,"  could  not  forgive  Peel  for  his  "great  treason." 
The  Peelites,  divided  by  a  great  gulf  from  the  bulk  of  the  Tory 
party,  remained  in  a  suspended  state  between  it  and  the  Liberal 
party.  The  latter  was  torn  by  internal  dissensions  which  had 
been  gathering  ever  since  1832.  Forming  a  coalition  of  aris- 
tocratic Whigs,  of  representatives  of  the  middle  class,  of  Ben- 
thamite Radicals  and  Manchester  Radicals,  they  had  united 
in  a  fashion  to  lay  siege  to  the  Tory  fortress,  but  when  once 
the  stroi^hold  was  taken,  the  allies  had  no  reason  for  conciliat- 
ing each  other,  and  their  dive^encies  of  origin,  of  temperament, 
of  habits  and  aspirations  were  allowed  full  swing.  Soon  the 
traditional  party  ties  slackened  all  along  the  parliamentary  line ; 
discipline  ceased  to  exist,  and  no  one  conld  depend  on  his  fol- 
lowers. This  became  a  subject  of  general  complaint.  "  I  am 
told,"  writes  to  Croker  one  of  bis  correspondents,  "that  the 
House  of  Commons  is  becoming  more  unnmnt^eable  every  ses- 
sion, that  no  division  can  be  calculated  upon,  that  so  many  of 
the  town  members  owe  no  allegiance  and  vote  for  popularity." ' 
Croker  himself  writes  to  Lord  Brougham ;  "  Phrase  it  as  you 
will,  —  a  House  of  Commons  unmanageable  or  the  country  un- 
.  governable,  —  the  indisputable  fact  is  that  our  representative 
system  is  not  only,  as  you  say,  likely  to  be  brought  into  disre- 
pute, but  is  actually  so,  and  will  every  session  become  more 
and  more  notoriously  incompatible  with  what  was  called  our 
constitution."*  This  is  not  merely  the  peevish  utterance  of  a 
splenetic  Tory.  The  Greville  Memoirs  are  full  of  observations 
of  the  same  kind.  Greville  sums  up  the  session  of  1854  as  fol- 
lows :  "The  whole  conduct  of  the  session  and  the  relations  of  the 
government  with  the  House  of  Commons  presented  something 
cert^nly  very  different  from  what  had  ever  been  seen  before 
in  the  memory  of  the  oldest  statesman,  implied  a  total  dissolu- 
tion of  party  ties  and  obligations,  and  exhibited  the  Queen's 


.coy  Google 


H  DEHOCRACT  AND  POLITICAL  PARTIES    [>imt  mbt 

gOTeinmeQt  and  the  House  of  Commons  as  resolved  into  their 
separate  elements  and  acting  towards  each  other  in  independ- 
ent and  often  ant^onistic  capacities." '  In  1856  GrevUle  notes : 
"  Nobody  owes  allegiance  or  even  any  part^  ties  or  seems  to 
care  for  any  person  or  anything."*  The  Journal  of  1856  re- 
peats Graham's  remarks  to  the  effect  that "  there  is  not  one 
man  in  the  House  of  Commons  who  has  ten  followers,  neither 
Gladstone,  nor  Disraeli,  nor  Falmerston."  * 

Every  day,  in  fact,  the  difference  between  the  two  great 
historii^  parties  grew  less  marked.  Yon  oonld  not  tell  a 
moderate  Tory  from  a  Whig.*  Personal  considerations  inevi- 
tably became  factors  of  importance  in  parliamentary  combina- 
laons.  A  policy  was  combated  one  day  and  adopts]  the  next 
by  the  victorious  coalition;  ministers  left  ofSce  by  one  door 
and  crept  in  at  another.  Members  of  Parliament  transferred 
their  allegiance  to  another  leader  without  being  false  to  their 
political  convictions,  because  they  had  none  to  speak  of ;  others 
withheld  their  support  because  they  entertained  opinions  which 
they  were  not  disposed  to  sacrifice  to  calculations  of  parlia- 
mentary strategy.  From  one  motive  or  another  the  individual 
asserted  his  independence  within  the  halls  of  Parliament  as 
well  as  elsewhere. 

Political  veterans  deplored  the  perversity  of  the  new  gen- 
eration, and  were  at  a  loss  for  words  to  denounce  the  incon- 
sistency and  insincerity  displayed  by  members  of  all  parties. 
These  censors,  like  all  laudatorea  UmporU  acti,  little  dreamed, 
in  clinging  to  their  traditional  ideas,  that  they  were  applyii^ 
old  principles  to  a  new  society,  or  at  all  events  to  a  society 
in  course  of  transformation.  However  much  the  decline  in 
political  force  of  character  and  the  weakening  of  political  con- 

'  Th«  OrmUle  Memotn,  Longmuis'  edition  in  8  vols.,  Lond.  1S88,  VII,  181. 

^  Ibid.  mi.  'Ibid.  VIU,«. 

'  A  foreign  obaervec  who  hu  since  acquired  a  cert^n  celebtUy,  Herr 
Lotbsr  Bncher,  defined  the  two  psrtiea  as  tollows:  A  Wblg  is  a  man  who 
dMoands  from  John  Buuell'B  gnndmother,  a  Tory  one  who  alu  behind  Dis- 
raeli (Dtr  ParianieMarismiii  ui«  er  Ul,  13&4,  p.  113).  A  few  years  later  an 
analogoiu  definition  was  given  by  an  old  English  parliamentarian.  "  What  is 
a  LtbM>1?  A  g:entl«aiBn  who,  If  Lord  Derby  were  to  Issue  a  clrenlar  reqnesl- 
iog  all  those  members  who  were  disposed  to  aocord  to  him  any  ooofldanoe 
would  do  him  the  favour  to  meet  in  St.  James'  Square  to  bear  his  proiframne. 
would  not  respond  to  the  tDvltalioii.  Other  test  I  know  none,"  (Sir  Joho 
Walsh,  TAe  Practieal  Beaull  of  (As  Oe/ortii  Act,  Loud.  UKiO,  p.  SS.) 


.coy  Google 


acom  VBAt.]     BBEAE-UF  OF  THE  OU)  BOCIETT  57 

Tictions  may  hare  contributed  to  the  result,  the  relaxation  of 
diBcipline  and  the  break-up  of  parliamentary  life  were  not  due 
to  them  alone.  Parliament  ceased  to  exhibit  its  old  consist- 
ency because  society  had  lost  it.  The  constant  multiplication 
of  degrees  in  the  social  scale,  the  variety  of  nev  aapirationa,  the 
change  of  social  relations  from  the  concrete  to  a  generalized 
standard,  all  found  their  way  into  the  House,  narrow  as  the 
entrance  to  it  was  at  that  time.  Many  a  member  of  Parliament 
had  to  reckon,  not  with  this  ot  that  magnate  who  disposed  of  a 
seat  in  his  own  dining-room,  or  with  the  small  clique  which 
enjoyed  a  similar  power,  but  with  a  constituency  composed  of 
raried  elements.  He  could  no  longer  follow  the  advice  of  the 
I>uke  of  Monmouth :  "  You  go  with  your  family,  sir."  Political 
duties  and  responsibilities,  just  like  the  rules  for  private  con- 
duct, were  passing  out  of  the  concrete  stage  into  that  of  the 
abstract  and  the  general.  In  the  old  days  political  virtue  con- 
sisted of  loyalty  to  a  chief;  the  oath  of  fealty  taken  by  the 
vassal  to  Ms  lord  was  an  epitome  of  this  ideal.  There  was 
nothing  dishonouring  even  in  fighting  f^aiuat  one's  native 
country,  as  long  as  it  was  a  loyal  combat  under  the  banner 
of  the  accepted  chief;  it  was  impossible  to  be  untrue  to  one's 
country  if  one  remained  faithful  to  one's  chief.  Great  cap- 
buns  hare  been  often  known  to  offer  their  sword  to  one  coun- 
try after  another.  Cond^  and  Turenne  take  up  arms  against 
France;  during  the  Revolution  the  hnigris  join  the  enemies 
of  their  country  without  a  shadow  of  scruple,  because  they 
are  fighting  for  their  Roi/.  In  England  the  King  is  soon 
eclipsed  by  Parliament.  A  corporate  body  representing  the 
community  gradually  becomes  supreme,  but  its  exercise  of 
power  is  really  based  on  the  old  idea.  There  are  only  two 
rival  chiefs  followed  by  their  retainers  who  contend  for  the 
mastery,  euphemistically  described  as  two  parties  representing 
the  natural  dualism  of  political  thought  and  alternately  taking 
the  helm  of  the  State.  When  the  new  generalized  social  rela- 
tions widened  the  circle  of  duty  and  responsibility,  the  loyalty 
of  the  vassal  ceased  to  be  a  virtue  for  the  politician,  and  the 
inelastic  fabric  of  government  by  historical  parties,  which  were 
supposed  to  contain  between  them  every  political  tendency  and 
aspiration,  became  too  narrow  for  the  varied  and  varying  rela- 
tions of  political  life,  while  too  large  for  the  old  order  of 


.coy  Google 


6B  DEHOCRA.CT  AND  POLITICAL  PABTIE8     [piut  pari 

things  which  had  shrunk  under  the  pressure  of  events.  The 
break-up  of  the  old  Ei^lish  society  was  therefore  Ic^cally 
bound  to  culminate  in  the  downfall  of  party  government, 
which  was  its  highest  expression  in  the  sphere  of  politics. 
Henceforth  the  political  life  of  the  nation,  which  had  been 
identified  with  parliamentary  institutions,  demanded,  like 
society,  a  more  comprehensive  guiding  principle  and  a 
wider  channel.  In  both  cases  the  question  at  isBue  was 
whether  this  result  would  be  obtained  with  more  oi  less  pro- 
longed friction  between  the  old  habits  and  the  new  require- 
ments, and  more  or  less  violent  collisions  between  particular 
interests  and  the  general  interest;  whether  the  break-up  in 
society  and  Parliament  would  only  be  a  period  of  transition,  a 
sort  of  wilderness  between  Egypt  and  the  land  of  Canaan,  lead- 
ing to  the  adoption  of  principles,  rules,  and  forms  capable  of 
reuniting  society  and  the  State  in  a  new  synthesis.  The  solu- 
tion of  this  twofold  problem  was  reserved  for  the  future,  but 
one  thing  was  clear:  the  exodus  had  commenced,  the  English 
people  were  on  the  march. 


.coy  Google 


THIED    CHAPTEE 

ATTEUPTS  AT   BSAXniOH 


The  exodus  liad  commenced.  But  whether  it  was  that  the 
monntain  from  which  the  promised  land  could  be  descried  was 
too  distant  and  too  lofty  for  some,  ot  that  others  saw  the  paths 
leading  to  the  new  Canaan  blocked  by  the  rising  torrent  of 
individualism  and  were  afraid  of  perishing  in  the  wilderness 
with  their  kith  and  kin,  cries  of  alarm  and  distress  were  raised 
in  various  quarters,  and  retrograde  movements  were  attempted 
after  several  stages  ot  the  journey  had  been  passed. 

The  first  attempt  at  reaction  came  from  the  Church.  It  waa 
the  Church  which,  identified  with  the  State  and  inextricably 
bound  up  with  the  ruling  class,  beat  symbolized  the  old  one  and 
indivisible  order  which  covered  the  whole  surface  of  society. 
And  it  was  against  the  Church  that  was  directed  the  first  revolt 
of  the  repressed  individuat,  of  the  individual  conscience  bent 
on  asserting  its  relations  with  the  Creator.  From  the  second 
half  of  the  eighteenth  century  the  contending  sects  Mid  the 
spirit  of  doubt  and  negation  which  invaded  educated  society 
worked  continual  havoc  in  the  Church,  When  the  State  itself 
was  obliged,  from  and  after  the  year  1828,  to  sever  one  by  one 
the  legal  ties  which  bound  the  citizen  to  the  Church,  the  illusion 
even  of  external  conformity  waa  destroyed,  and  the  confusion 
in  the  spiritual  sphere  became  only  too  visible.  It  was  then  that 
champions  of  the  Church  arose  at  Oxford  who  sought  to  restore 
the  old  unity,  men  like  Newman,  Pusey,  Keble,  and  Froude, 
subtle  theologians  and  refined  and  tender  poet^.  Their  ardent 
imi^nation  made  them  see  the  vast  structure  of  the  Estab- 
lished Church  totter  to  its  base,  the  crash  of  its  falling  ruins 
seemed  to  smite  upon  their  ears,  and  they  rocoiled  in  mental 
affright,  like  a  rider  who  reins  in  with  a  jerk  on  the  brink  of 


.coy  Google 


60  DEMOCHACr  AND  POLITICAL  PARTIES     [wrbi  rxn 

a  precipice.  Leaving  out  of  consideration  the  seciilar  process 
which  was  differentiating  and  individualizing  the  religious  idea, 
a  process  which  they  would  fain  have  regarded  aa  a  disagreeable 
incident,  as  a  bad  dream,  the  Oxford  group  took  a  single  step 
back  to  the  lirst  throe  centuries  of  Christianity.  They  per- 
formed wonders  of  theological  casuistry  to  prove  that  in  spite  of 
the  Reformation,  the  Anglican  Church  differed  in  no  way  from 
the  primitive  Church,  that  it  wonld  only  be  resuming  possessioa 
of  its  heritage  in  reverting  to  the  tradition  of  the  Catholic  uni- 
versal Church,  to  the  apostolical  body  of  doctrine  as  transmitted 
by  the  Fathers  of  the  Church,  with  belief  in  the  regenerating 
virtue  of  baptism,  in  the  Real  Presence  of  Our  Lord  in  the  Com- 
munion, in  itie  sacraments  which  convey  grace,  in  the  power  of 
the  priests  who  administer  them  to  lead  the  soul  to  salvation 
and  pronounce  the  absolution  of  sins.  Exhorting  men  to  return 
to  dogmas  of  this  kind,  which  appeal  to  the  believer's  imag- 
ination and  stir  his  feeling  for  the  marvellous,  the  authors  of 
the  Oxford  movement  surrounded  public  worship  with  ritnal 
and  ornament  which  flatter  and  lull  the  senses  and  through 
them  cast  a  spell  over  the  soul.  For  reason  they  substituted  ' 
sentiment;  to  the  inward  faith  which  justifies  tbey  opposed 
the  visible  Church,  communiOD  with  which,  by  means  of  ob- 
servance of  external  and  uniform  rites,  suffices  to  obt^n  sal- 
vation ;  between  the  individual  conscience  and  God,  whom  it 
beholds  face  to  face,  they  interposed  the  priesthood  aa  the 
depository  of  the  traditions  and  the  authority  of  the  Church, 
and  mercifully  spared  man  the  use  of  reason  and  all  the 
mental  distress  which  it  involvea 

To  ensure  the  acceptance  of  their  doctrines,  however,  they 
too  were  obliged  to  appeal  to  public  opinion,  and  they  im- 
pressed their  views  on  every  thinking  mind  by  means  of  small 
pamphlets  called  "  tracts,"  to  which  they  owe  their  name  of 
Tractariana.  They  who  aimed  at  placing  restrictions  on  or 
even  suppressing  individual  judgment  were  forced  in  the  end 
to  admit  its  jurisdiction.  The  State,  with  its  intervention  in 
the  affairs  of  the  Church  for  the  purpose  of  withdrawing  this 
or  that  privilege,  appeared  a  tyrant  in  their  eyes,  and  they 
were  reduced  to  plead  the  cause  of  liberty  gainst  authority 
on  behalf  of  the  Church  as  opposed  to  the  State.  When  their 
doctrines  were  published  to  the  world,  a  storm  arose;   the 


.coy  Google 


ranD  OHir.]  ATTEHPT8  AT  REACTION  61 

exercise  of  private  judgment  which  they  had  provoked  rent 
the  Church  itaelf  aaunder,  —  one  party  taking  their  side  aod 
aoother  deolaring  against  them.  The  Tractarians,  when  at- 
tacked, and  Pusey  at  their  head,  took  their  stand  on  the 
right  of  free  disousaion.  The  whole  controversy  made  relig- 
ious unity  more  remote  than  ever,  but  at  the  same  time  it 
stimulated  the  ardour  of  the  combatante  and  intensified  the 
Teligious  life  of  the  various  groups  into  which  believers  were 
divided.  The  Oxford  sect  was  the  first  to  derive  vital  force 
from  the  movement,  although  it  had  failed  in  its  ambitious 
attempt  to  restore  religious  unity.  Having  started  under  the 
banner  of  authority  and  tradition,  the  Tractarians  only  suc- 
ceeded in  proving  that  liberty  is,  after  all,  the  safest  principle 
of  conduct  in  modem  society. 

n 

The  agitation  against  latitudinarianism  in  religion  promoted 
by  the  Oxford  movement  had  hardly  calmed  down  when 
another  campaign  was  started  against  "political  infidelity," 
to  combat  the  destruction  of  the  old  political  creed  which  knit 
classes  and  individuals  together.  Disraeli,  who  was  then  at  the 
threshold  of  his  career,  placed  himself  at  the  head  of  this 
movement  By  descent  a  stranger  to  the  traditions  of  English 
society,  but  profoundly  imbued  with  the  genius  of  his  own  race, 
in  wUch  the  idealist  element  struggles  for  mastery  with  the 
realist,  he  declared  war  against  the  social  atomism  which  he 
saw  supreme  on  all  aides.  In  his  eyes,  all  was  disorganization 
and  demoralization :  "  a  mor^^ed  aristocracy,  a  gambling 
foreign  commerce,  a  home  trade  fotmded  on  a  morbid  competi- 
tion, and  a  degraded  people."  The  Queen  of  England  reigns 
over  "  two  nations,  the  rich  and  the  poor."  Class  is  set  against 
class,  "  In  the  manufacturing  districts  there  is  no  society  but 
only  an  a^regation."  "  How,  Disraeli  asked  himself,  are  the 
elements  of  the  nation  to  be  again  blended  together  ?  "  By  a 
new  distribution  of  political  power  ?  No,  this  would  be  a  repe- 
tition of  the  old  error  which  consists  in  believing  that  national 
content  can  necessarily  be  found  in  political  institutions.  X 
political  institution  is  only  a  machine;  the  motive  power  is 
the  national  character.  The  character  of  the  English  nation 
was  declining,  and  it  is  this  which  must  be  worked  upon.    But 


.coy  Google 


«2  DEMOCRACY  AND  POLITICAL  PARTIES    [ptUT  pah 

in  what  way  ?  Since  the  Peace  there  had  been  an  attempt  to 
reconstnict  society  on  a  purely  rational  foundation,  on  a  basis 
of  material  motives  and  calculations,  on  the  principle  of  utility. 
The  experiment  had  failed,  as  it  wae  bound  to  do,  for  the  power 
of  reason  is  limited.  "  We  are  not  indebted  to  the  Reason  of 
man  for  any  of  the  great  achievementa  which  are  the  landmarks 
of  human  action  and  human  progress.  Man  is  only  truly  great 
when  he  acts  from  the  passions;  never  irresistible  but  when 
he  appeals  to  the  imagination.  Even  Mormon  counts  more 
votaries  than  Bentham.  The  surest  means  to  elevate  the 
character  of  a  people  is  to  appeal  to  their  affections." 

Disraeli,  therefore,  looking  at  the  English  society  of  his  day, 
came  to  the  conclusion  that  it  was  necessary  to  rekindle  the 
old  feelings  in  men's  hearts  —  attachment  to  the  Throne  and 
to  the  Church,  and  social  sympathy  between  the  people  and 
its  natural  leaders.  The  Whigs,  in  setting  up  an  oligarchy  for 
their  own  benefit,  had  turned  the  King  into  a  Doge,  and  had 
separated  the  sovereign  from  the  people,  and  two  great  exist- 
ences had  been  blotted  out  of  English  history — the  Monarch 
and  the  Multitude.  The  new  class  which  had  been  invested  with 
political  power  in  t^'S'2  was  not  linked  to  the  masses  by  the 
performance  of  social  duties  as  under  the  old  "territorial 
coDstitution,"  in  which  the  fulfilment  of  great  public  duties 
alone  conferred  a  great  position.  Wealth  had  been  allowed 
to  accumulate  on  a  principle  which  ignored  "the  duty  to 
endow  the  Church,  to  feed  the  poor,  to  guard  the  land  and  to 
execute  justice  for  nothing."  "I  see  no  other  remedy,"  con- 
cluded Disraeli,  "for  that  war  of  classes  and  creeds  which 
now  agitates  and  menaces  us  but  in  an  earnest  return  to  a 
system  which  may  be  described  generally  as  one  of  loyalty 
and  reverence,  of  popular  rights  and  social  sympathies."  In 
this  system  "  the  Venetian  oligarchy "  and  plutocracy  would 
be  eliminated  to  make  way  for  a  king  acting  as  real  leader  of 
the  nation,  and  for  a  people  cherished  by  their  betters  and 
repaying  them  by  devotion  and  affection.  Salvation  lies  in  a 
return  to  these  ideas  which  are  identical  with  the  old  Tory 
principles  upheld  by  the  great  Tory  statesman  Bolingbroke 
and  revived  by  that  other  great  statesman,  Pitt.  Modem  con- 
servatism, which  gathered  round  it  a  selfish  coalition  of  in- 
terests and  was  itself  the  offspring  of  latitudioariamsm,  was 


.coy  Google 


THiBD  CHAP.]  ATTEMPTS  AT  REACTION  68 

powerless  to  give  England  a  political  creed  which  should  be 
a  permanent  source  of  inspiration. 

To  turn  this  progranune  of  popular  Toryism  to  account,  the 
"Young  England"  party  was  formed,  in  which  Disraeli  was 
joined  by  several  young  men  of  good  family  full  of  romantic 
ideas.  Under  their  inspiration  solicitude  for  the  humbler 
classes  became  the  fashion  among  the  landed  aristocracy,  in 
an  autocratic  and  sentimental  form.  The  landlords  provided 
generously  for  the  wants  of  their  peasants,  promoted  their 
welfare,  and  organized  popular  fetes ;  largess  was  distributed 
at  fixed  times  at  the  doors  of  baronial  halls;  daughters  of 
noble  houses  made  "  pilgrimages  of  charity  "  through  the  vil- 
lages ;  young  lords  played  at  cricket  with  the  villagers.  In 
return  for  this  kind  treatment  the  peasants  were  expected  to 
be  docile  and  submissive  to  their  landlords  in  every  relation 
of  life.  The  movement  did  not  go  very  far  beyond  these 
idyllic  proceedings.  The  old  flame  which  Young  England 
wished  to  rekindle  proved  simply  a  display  of  fireworks. 
Sentiment  was  no  match  for  facts,  imagination  was  powerless 
to  alter  reality.  English  society  was  no  longer  in  the  feudal 
condition  characterized  by  the  class  relations  which  Young 
England  wished  to  see  re-established.  England  had,  so  to 
sp^ik,  passed  out  of  the  phase  of  sentiment  and  entered  on 
that  of  general  principles.  And  Disraeli,  who  stood  up  for  the 
Chartists,  whom  he  regarded  as  victims  of  the  social  atomism, 
might  have  read  the  answer  to  his  policy  on  the  banners  which 
they  carried  in  their  processions  and  which  bore  among  others 
the  motto:  "We  demand  justice  before  charity."  The  prob- 
lem with  which  society  was  confronted  was  to  know  "  how  are 
the  elements  of  the  nation  to  be  again  blended  together;  in 
what  spirit  is  that  reorganization  to  take  place,"  it  being  ad- 
mitted that  the  spirit  of  feudalism  was  dying,  and  that  a 
breath  of  liberty  and  independence  was  passing  over  society. 
Ignoring  this  main  factor  of  the  problem,  the  solution  proposed 
by  Young  England  was,  to  use  a  logical  term,  simply  ^petitio 
priruHpii,  which  left  things  as  they  were. 

Ill 
A  far  greater  measure  of  success  attended  another  cham- 
pion, who  also  waged  war  against  the  new  social  system  bred 


.coy  Google 


M  DEMOCRACT  AND  POLITICAL  PARTIES     [fimt  fast 

of  Benthamism  and  industrialism  —  Thomas  Carlyle.  Like 
Disraeli,  he  deplored  the  loss  of  the  old  Bocial  creed,  conaid- 
ered  constitutional  changes  as  only  paltiy  espedients,  and 
saw  no  hope  of  reform  but  in  the  re-eslablishment  of  a  social 
leadership  based  on  a  conviction  of  duty  in  governors  and 
governed.  But  unlike  Disraeli,  the  man  of  action,  Carlyle,  a 
hermit  centred  in  himself,  Ms  mind  steeped  in  Scotch  Pur- 
itanism, lived  the  whole  crisis  of  his  time  in  his  inward  soul. 
His  heart  welled  over  in  vehement  invective  and  solemn  warn- 
ings addressed  to  his  fellow-oounbymen.  For  many  a  year 
his  utterances  were  an  endless  recitative  on  the  theme  "Ah 
nation  of  sinners,  people  laden  with  iniquity,"  aiter  the 
fashion  of  the  prophets  of  Israel,  always  excepting  their 
style,  for  that  of  Carlyle,  when  it  was  not  entirely  incom- 
prehensible, was  more  like  the  language  of  the  Apocalypse, 
Carlyle,  too,  bad  hia  beast  with  seven  heads  and  ten  homa, 
which  was  Mechanism ;  "  The  huge  demon  of  Mechanism 
smokes  and  thunders,  panting  at  his  great  task,  in  all  sections 
of  English  land;  changing  his  diape  like  a  very  Proteus,  and 
infallibly  at  every  change  of  shape  ov^aeUing  whole  multi- 
tudes of  workmen,  and  as  if  with  the  waving  of  his  shadow 
from  afar,  hurling  them  asunder,  this  way  and  that,  in  their 
crowded  march  and  course  of  work  or  trafBo,  so  that  the 
wisest  no  longer  knows  his  whereabout."  ...  "  Cash  payment 
had  grown  to  be  the  universal  sole  nexus  of  man  to  man."  ,  .  . 
"  It  is  said  that  society  exists  for  the  protection  of  property. 
And  now  what  is  thy  property?  That  parchment  title^eed, 
that  purse  thou  buttonest  in  thy  breeches  pocket?  Is  that  thy 
valuable  property  ?  Unhappy  brother,  most  poor  insolvent 
brother.  I,  without  parchment  at  all,  with  purse  oftenest  in 
the  flaccid  state,  imponderous,  which  will  not  fling  t^ainst 
the  wind,  have  quite  other  property  than  that !  I  have  the 
miraculous  breath  of  life  in  me,  breathed  into  my  nostrils  by 
Almighty  God.  I  have  afEections,  thought,  a  God^iven  capa- 
bility to  be  and  do;  rights,  therefore — the  right,  for  instance, 
to  thy  love  if  I  love  thee,  to  thy  guidance  if  I  obey  thee  .  .  . 
rights  stretching  high  into  Immensity,  far  into  Eternity." 
Opposing  the  spiritual  nature  and  requirements  of  man  to 
the  materialist  tendencies  of  a  "mechanical  age,"  asserting 
the  need  of  an  ideal  for  every  society  which  aspires  to  live. 


.coy  Google 


nnp  CHAT.]  ATTEMPTS  AT  BE  ACTION  66 

Carlyle  urged  Ms  fellow-countrymeD  to  imbue  themselves  with 
the  sentimeDt  of  duty.  The  rest,  that  is  to  say  the  practical 
solntioii  of  the  social  crisis,  will  come  of  itself,  as  in  the  GospeL 
The  new  conception  of  the  State  placidly  adopting  the  doo- 
trine  of  "  laiaaex^aire,"  was  the  priacipal  obatacle  to  improve- 
ment aa  well  as  the  source  of  all  the  mischisf  in  Carlyle's 
eyes.  It  waa  a  "false,  heretical,  and  damnable  principle,  if 
ever  aught  was."  Society  and  the  State  have  no  right  to  re- 
main IndifFerent  to  the  welfare  of  their  members.  The  masses 
cannot  lire  without  being  reaUy  led  and  governed.  "What 
are  all  popular  commotions  and  maddest  bellowings  from 
P«t«rloo  to  the  Flace-de-Gi^ve  itself?  Bellowings,  inarticu- 
late cries  a8  of  a  dumb  creature  in  rage  and  pain;  to  the  ear 
of  wisdom  they  are  inarticulate  prayers:  Guide  me,  govern 
mel  I  am  mad  and  miserable  and  cannot  guide  myself. 
Surely,  of  all  rights  of  man  this  right  of  the  ignorant  man  to 
be  guided  by  the  wiser,  to  be,  gently  or  forcibly,  held  in  the 
true  course  by  him,  is  the  indisputablest.  Becognized  or  not 
recognized  a  man  has  his  superiors,  a  regular  hierarchy  above 
him ;  extending  up,  degree  above  degree,  to  heaven  itself  and 
God  the  Maker,  who  made  His  world  not  for  anarchy  but  for 
rnle  and  order."  Before  cash  payment  had  grown  to  be  "  the 
universal  sole  nexus  of  man  to  man,"  the  lower  classes  had  a 
^nide  and  a  ruler  in  the  aristocracy.  "  It  waa  something  ^ther 
than  money  that  the  high  then  expected  from  the  low,  and 
could  not  live  without  getting  from  the  low.  Kot  as  buyer 
and  seller  alone,  of  land  or  what  else  it  might  be,  but  in  many 
senses  still  as  soldier  and  captain,  as  clansman  and  head,  as 
loyal  subject  and  guiding  king,  was  the  low  related  to  the 
hi^.  With  the  supreme  triumph  of  Cash,  a  tihanged  time 
has  entered;  there  must  a  changed  aristocracy  enter."  This 
aristocracy  must  not  be  an  aristocracy  of  birth  or  privilege, 
bnt  of  the  mind  and  the  heart.  How  are  we  to  distinguish 
it,  by  what  token  are  we  to  recognize  the  real  aristocrats  in 
order  to  entrust  them  with  the  government?  —  to  this  ques- 
tdoQ  Carlyle  vouchsafes  no  answer.  He  contents  himself  with 
pouring  out  his  sarcasm  on  the  suffrage  and  giving  vent  to  his 
contempt  tor  and  hatred  of  democracy-  "  The  English  people 
are  used  to  suffrage ;  it  is  their  panacea  for  all  that  goes  wroDg 
with  them ;  they  have  a  fixed  idea  of  suffrage.  .  .  .     Houae- 


.coy  Google 


66  DEMOCRACT  AND  POLITICAt  PARTIES    [fimt  fabt 

ho]d  Suffr^e,  Ballot  Question,  'open'  or  not:  not  things  but 
shadows  of  things;  Benthamee  formulas;  barren  as  the  east- 
wind  ! "  "  The  thing  everywhere  passionately  clamoured  for  at 
present  is  Democracy,"  what  is  called  'self-government '  of  the 
multitude  by  the  multitude."  But  "  democracy  is  by  the  nature 
of  it  a  self-cancelling  business,  and  gives  in  the  long  run  a  net 
result  of  zero."  A  stroi^  man,  a  despot,  yes,  even  a  despot, 
would  be  better  able  to  cope  with  the  task  than  the  anarchic 
multitude. 

The  effect  produced  by  Carlyle's  denunciations  was  immense. 
The  English  soul,  with  its  religious  fibre  and  its  reserve  of 
repressed  emotion,  is  never  insensible  to  the  appeals  addressed 
to  it;  only  they  must  be  couched  in  a  loud  and  forcible  tone, 
and  convey  the  impression  that  the  person  who  makes  them 
feels  what  he  says.  Appeals  of  this  kind  are  more  likely  to 
find  a  hearing  at  certain  seasons  than  at  others.  The  state  of 
mind  produced  by  indifferentism  —  brought  to  a  pitch  either 
by  the  moral  apathy  which  plunges  men  into  a  sort  of  torpor, 
or  by  the  atrophy  which  attacks  a  community  sunk  in 
materialism  or  again  by  the  scepticism  which  scatters  to  the 
winds  what  until  lately  waa  the  general  creed  and  rule  of 
conduct  —  offers  the  most  favourable  psychological  moment 
for  thrilling  the  soul  of  a  community,  and  of  Englishmen 
in  particular,  with  the  accents  of  a  commanding  voice.  The 
middle  of  the  eighteenth  century,  in  which  Wesleyanism  and 
Evangelicalism  made  their  appearance,  was  an  epoch  of  this 
kind,  and  so  was  the  period  from  183O-1S40,  which  combined 
the  two  last-named  aspects  of  social  indifferentiam.  It  was 
then  that  Carlylc  stepped  on  the  scene  and  produced  a  sort  of 
nervous  crisis  in  society,  and  especially  among  the  younger 
members  of  it,  who  in  their  emotion  repeated  his  own  words : 
"  Guide  me,  govern  me !  I  am  mad  and  miserable  and  cannot 
guide  myself."  The  new  prophet,  however,  did  not  vouchsafe 
any  revelation  or  point  out  the  right  path,  but  only  continued 
to  rouse  the  heart  and  stir  the  inner  man.  His  appeals  [tower- 
fully  impressed  the  imagination,  but  hardly  touched  the  reason, 
and  the  nervous  tension  soon  relaxed.  To  arrest  the  movement 
which  was  drawing  society  into  the  current  of  individualism, 
it  was  after  all  not  enough  to  cry  in  a  voice  of  thunder  that  the 
Benthamite  formulas  were  "barren  aa  the  east  wind." 


.coy  Google 


ATTEMPTS  AT   REACTION 


IV 


The  only  positive  propoBal  which  was  made  for  restoring 
organic  life  to  society  came  from  certain  reformers  who  had 
been  particularly  struck  with  the  effects  of  the  industrial  r^ 
gime  on  the  material  existence  of  the  working  classes.  They 
saw  that  the  principle  of  free  competition,  so  dear  to  political 
eeonoiuy,  increased  the  power  of  the  strong  and  diminished 
that  of  the  weak,  with  the  result  that  the  latter  were  at  the 
mercy  of  the  former,  who  knew  neither  justice  nor  pity ; '  and 
they  conceived  the  idea  of  combating  competition  on  practical 
lines.  The  campdgn  was  opened  by  Frederick  Denison  Maur- 
ice and  Charles  Kingsley,  clergymen  of  the  Established  Church, 
hut  generous-hearted  and  large-minded  men,  to  whom  Chris- 
tianity was  the  equivalent  of  humanity.  Their  belief  was  that 
in  the  universe  as  it  had  issued  from  the  hand  of  God  selfishness 
was  not  the  ruling  principle,  and  that  the  spint  of  devotion, 
self-sacrifice,  and  cooperation  could  alone  reconcile  the  conflict 
of  interests.  Applying  this  idea  to  the  economic  system  of  the 
day,  they  arrived  at  the  conclusion  that  competition,  which  di- 
vides man  and  sets  him  against  his  fellow,  must  be  opposed  by 
asaociation.  la  their  own  country  Robert  Owen  had  already 
endeavoured  to  put  the  idea  of  industrial  association  into  prac- 
tice. In  France,  also,  the  various  socialistic  schools  had  advo- 
cated this  method.'  But  "  the  Parisian  ouvrier  so  often  forgets 
Him  whose  everlasting  Fatherhood  is  the  sole  ground  of  all 
human  Brotherhood,  whose  wise  and  loving  will  is  the  sole 
source  of  all  perfect  order  and  government."  Association, 
however,  could  never  defeat  competition  without  fraternal 
coK)peration,  without   self-sacrifice,  without    subordination   of 

'  "Svreetcompetltionl  Heavenly  maid  I  Nowadayahymnedallkebypeniiy- 
»-l<nerB  nnd  pbllosophere  as  the  ground  of  all  society  —  the  only  real  preserver 
of  tlie  etitb '.  Why  not  of  Ue»ven  too  ?  Perhaps  there  is  competition  among 
the  angpls,  and  Gabriel  and  Raphael  have  won  tbeir  rank  by  doing  Uie  max- 
imum of  worehip  on  the  minimnni  of  grace !  We  shall  know  some  day.  In 
the  mesDirhile  '  these  are  thy  works,  tboii  parent  of  all  good  I '  Mao  eating 
man,  eaten  by  man,  In  every  variety  of  degree  and  method  I  Why  does  nut 
some  enthusiastic  political  economist  write  an  epic  on  the  '  Conservation  ot 
Cannibalism '  7  "    IChfap  Clothei  and  Natty,  by  Charles  Kingsley.) 

*Tbe  principal  collabimtot  ot  Kingsley  and  Manrice,  J.  M.  Ludlow,  wm 
■ell  acquainted  with  the  associations  o(  French  workmen  and  followed  the 
muvemeni  of  1848  on  the  spot,  after  having  passed  bis  youth  In  France,  where 
he  was  brought  into  close  association  witb  tbe  doctrines  of  Bocbet. 


.CD,  Google 


08  DEU0CRAC7  AND  POLITICAL  PARTIES    [nUT  rui 

the  individual,  and  Christianity  alone  had  the  power  to  com- 
municate this  motive  force,  —  not  dogmatic  Christiamty,  bat 
moral  Christianity,  the  Christiamty  of  Chriat.  Undertaking 
the  emancipatioa  of  the  poorer  classes  on  the  basis  of  Chm* 
tianity,  Kingsley,  Maurice,  and  their  frienda  themselveB  ac- 
cepted the  name  of  Chiistian  Sooialists.  The  association  of 
Christianity  and  socialism  seemed  to  them  natural  and  imper- 
ative ;  in  their  eyes,  the  one  was  only  the  development  and  the 
expression  of  the  other.  The  Bible  was  the  book  of  the  poor, 
of  the  downtrodden,  the  voice  of  God  against  the  oppressor ; 
and  the  most  sacred  duty  of  the  representatives  of  the  Church 
was  to  raise  the  condition  of  the  poor  and  not  to  preach  to  them 
obedience  and  resignation.  The  socialism  of  the  Cbiistiac 
Socialists,  however,  had  nothing  rerolutionarj  about  it:  "We 
are  teaching  them  .  .  ,  that  true  sooialiam,  true  liberty,  brother- 
hood, and  true  equality  (not  the  oamal,  dead  level  equality  of 
the  Communist,  but  the  spiritual  equality  of  the  Church  idea, 
which  gives  every  man  an  equal  chance  of  developing  and 
using  God's  gifts,  and  rewards  every  man  according  to  his  work, 
without  respect  of  persons)  is  only  to  be  found  in  loyalty  and 
obedience  to  Christ."'  Nor  did  the  Christian  Socialists  call 
for  the  intervention  of  the  State ;  they  considered  it  a  delusion 
and  a  snare  to  look  to  legislative  enactments  for  social  reform. 
To  the  Chartists,  who  demanded  universal  suSrage  and  the 
other  "points"  from  Parliament,  they  said;  "Do  you  believe 
that  the  Charter  will  make  you  free?  The  Charter  is  good  if 
the  men  who  use  it  are  good."  Society  cannot  be  reconstructed 
by  Acts  of  Parliament ;  everything  depends  upon  man  himself 
finding  his  path  in  God.  Let  all  who  are  convinced  of  these 
truths  unite,  and  they  will  be  invincible. 

In  this  spirit  the  Christian  Socialists  founded  the  co-operative 
tailors'  association  in  London,  in  which  wages  were  paid  in 
proportion  to  the  work  done  and  in  accordance  with  the  capac- 
ity of  the  workman,  but  profits  shared  equally  among  all  so 
long  as  each  member  had  worked  his  best  in  the  opinion  of 
his  comrades.  The  success  of  this  association  led  to  the  for- 
mation of  several  others.  Kingsley,  Maurice,  and  their  friends 
laboured  devotedly  for  them,  and  were  unremitting  in  their 
4  Hf«,  3d  edit.  Loud. 


.coy  Google 


wntt  oup.]  ATTBMKrS  AT  REACTION  <• 

endeaTours  to  propagate  the  idea  of  co-operation  by  means  of 
lectures,  pampUets,  oewspapers,  and  works  of  fiction.  Preju- 
dices and  animosities  arose  against  them  on  all  aides,  from 
the  ranks  of  the  Church,  from  the  orthodox  school  of  political 
economy,  from  the  middle  class,  who  were  frightened  at  the 
vord  "  socialism  "  and  alarmed  by  the  events  of  June,  1848,  in 
Paris.  They  met  every  attack  with  nnehaken  courage  and 
pursued  their  labours.  They  obtained  the  legal  recognition 
of  cooperative  sooieties  from  Parliament.  Associations  multi- 
[^ed  under  the  auspices  of  the  central  society  managed  by 
Kingsley  and  his  fiends.  Their  dream  was  to  gradually 
oover  the  whole  country  with  co-operative  associations  and 
make  a  reality  of  the  principle  inscribed  at  the  head  of  their 
constitution ; '  "  The  human  society  is  a  body  consisting  of  many 
members,  not  a  collection  of  warring  atoms."  The  results 
obtained  by  the  societies  brought  about  a  reaction  in  their 
6ivour.  But  before  long  they  b^an  to  decline,  especially 
thoee  formed  for  the  purposes  of  production,  and  they  eventu- 
ally ended  in  a  complete  fiasco.  The  egoism  inherent  in 
homan  nature  showed  itself  there  as  elsewhere;  jealousy  and 
rivalry  broke  out  among  the  members ;  every  one  followed  his 
om  selfish  impulses.  The  associations  fell  to  pieces,  some 
passing  into  the  hands  of  a  master  spirit,  others  disappearing 
or  splitting  up  into  smaller  bodies  controlled  by  the  detested 
principle  of  competition. 

The  experiment  made  by  the  Christian  Socialists  forms  a 
touching  episode  in  the  social  history  of  England,  which  will 
never  f^  to  evoke  feelings  of  admiration  and  gratitude  towards 
the  men  who  did  not  despair  of  humanity.  But  in  making 
association  the  sovereign  and  absolute  principle  of  social  organi- 
zation in  despite  of  the  selfish  propensities  of  mankind,  and  in 
believing  that  Christianity,  which  had  ceased  to  be  the  general 
creed,  could  supply  the  requisite  motive  power,  they  turned 
their  tucks  upon  the  reality  and  doomed  their  plan  of  social 
synthesis  to  inevitable  failure. 

The  four  movements  of   revolt  gainst  individualism  or 
latitudinarianism    which   I  have   just  described   took   place 
n  »t  the  "  AssocialdoQ  for  promotiug  Indiu- 


.CD,  Google 


70  DEMOCEACT  AND  POLITICAL  PARTIES    [fumt  pam 

about  the  same  time.'  Proceeding  from  different  sources 
and  acting  on  different  sections  of  society,  they  exhibited  a 
close  affinity  with  one  another,  not  only  In  the  aim  which  the; 
pursued  but  in  their  spirit  and  methods  of  action,  which  con- 
ducted them  to  the  same  negative  result  Taking  their  rise 
in  a  nation  considered  the  moat  practical  and  positive-minded 
on  the  face  of  the  earth,  they  were  marked  by  a  disregard  of 
the  reality  of  things  and  a  tendency  in  the  direction  of  the 
absolute,  as  indeed  was  Benthamism  against  which  they  waged 
war.  Inspired,  not  by  pure  reason  like  Bentham,  but  by  im- 
agination and  inward  impulse,  their  adherents  also  ignored 
the  primary  factor  of  the  problem  before  them :  some  held  that 
salvation  could  only  be  found  in  a  return  to  theocracy,  although 
the  emancipation  of  the  religious  conscience  had  become  an 
accomplished  fact;  others  proposed  to  reunite  the  separate 
atoms  of  society  by  means  of  feudal  sentiment,  although  the 
feudal  spiiit  had  passed  out  of  it;  others  launched  into  violent 
invective  against  democracy  and  proclaimed  that  it  was  a 
"  zero  "  when  it  was  already  beginning  to  manifest  its  power ; 
others  again  met  the  absolute  principle  of  self-interest  as  the 
basis  of  social  equilibrium  with  the  no  less  absolute  principle 
of  self-sacrifice  and  abnegation  in  order  to  bring  about  the  same 
equilibrium.  One  and  all  imf^ned  that  they  were  prescribing 
an  antidote  for  the  malady,  whereas  they  were  only  putting  for- 
ward its  antithesis.    The  synthesis  was  still  to  be  discovered. 

Coming  straight  from  the  heart,  the  appeals  of  Oarlyle, 
Kingsley,  Dickens,  who  preached  to  the  public  in  his  novels, 
and  nimibers  of  others  found  an  echo  in  the  heart,  and 
contributed  in  no  small  measure  to  raise  the  moral  tone  of 
society,  to  soften  class  prejudices  and  animosities,  to  fill  the 
gulf  between  rich  and  poor;  on  the  whole,  they  influenced 
the  feelings  of  the  community,  but  did  not  mo<lify  its  ideas, 
which  had  already  taken  the  definite  impress  of  individualism. 


I  The  Oxford  moveuent  m&y  be  placed  about  1833-1S4S;  tb«  Yoaog  Eng- 
land movement  Id  the  yeare  1S3T-1S46;  Carlyle'e  actioD  extended  over  the 
same  period  and  went  bejoud  It ;  and  the  Chriatian  Socialiat  movement  covers 
the  yean  1UB-18S3. 


.coy  Google 


FOURTH  CHAPTBE 


DEFUriTITE  TBIUMFH   OF  THE  SEW  0BD8B  OF  THraOS 


Nbtbrtheless  the  times  were  undoubtedly  critical  for  the 
new  conception  of  social  order  of  which  we  have  traced  the 
origiQ  and  development;  for  the  sentimental  reaction  pro- 
voked by  the  exceBses  of  industrialism  had  left  deep  down  in 
the  heart  one  of  those  uneasy  states  of  feeling  which,  how- 
ever vague,  daily  and  hourly  preys  upon  the  mind,  and  pre- 
pares the  way  for  new  and  it  may  be  still  undefined  con- 
victions by  undermining  the  old  ones.  Yet  man  is  only  too 
pleased  to  be  reassured  on  the  subject  of  his  opinions,  and  a 
single  word  uttered  with  authority  is  often  sufficient  to  dispel 
his  doubts.  The  England  of  the  years  1848-1860  received 
more  than  this ;  it  obtained,  or  thought  that  it  obtained,  con- 
vincing proof  that  it  was  on  the  right  path.  The  abolition  of 
the  duties  on  com  in  1846,  and  the  other  great  free  trade 
meaaure,  the  repeal  of  the  Navigation  Laws,  passed  in  1849, 
were  followed  by  an  unprecedented  rise  of  commerce  and 
industry,'  The  enthusiasm  produced  by  this  upward  move- 
ment of  the  economic  forces  of  England  infected  even  for- 

I  The  eipoils  doubled  in  &ve  yeara ;  thetr  total  rose  from  00  to  100  milUona 
■terllng  a  year.  Frofitg  Increased  with  still  more  BuipriBiiig  rapidity.  "Id 
the  ten  years  from  1M2  to  18G2  the  taxable  income  of  the  coaotry  increased 
by  6  per  cent,  but  ia  the  eight  years  from  1853  to  1861  the  income  of  the  coon- 
try  increased  by  20  per  cent.  That  is  a  fact  u>  singular  and  striking  as  to 
seem  almost  iccreditile.  .  .  .  Besides  the  development  of  mechanical  power 
and  of  locomotion,  there  is  another  canse  nblch  has  been  actively  at  work 
during  the  lifetime  of  our  generstlon,  and  which  especially  belongs  to  the 
history  of  the  last  tweuty  years.  I  mean  the  wise  legislation  of  Parliament 
wbich  has  sought  tor  every  opportunity  of  abolishing  restrictions  upon  the 
applicallod  of  capital  and  die  exercise  of  Industry  and  skill,  and  has  made  it 
a  cupital  object  of  its  policy  to  give  full  and  tree  scope  to  the  energies  of  the 
British  nation.  To  this  special  canse  appears  especially  to  belong  most  ot 
what  is  pecnliartn  the  experiences  of  the  period  I  have  named  so  far  as  regards 
the  increase  ot  the  national  wealth"  (Speech  of  Mr.  Gladstone,  Chancellor 
ot  the  Bxcbeqaer,  on  the  Budget  ot  1863,  Hantard,  CLXX,  p.  244) . 
71 


.coy  Google 


13  DEUOCRACY  AND  POLITICAL  PABTIES     [fikbt  PABt 

eignerB,'  and  the  prosperity  which  It  diffused  in  every  section 
of  the  community,  the  working  classes  included,  allay»l  discon- 
tent and  proved  the  value  of  a  system  based  on  the  unfettered 
play  of  interests. 

Theory  in  its  turn  supplied  a  doctrinal  consecration  of  the 
facts.  The  Manchester  School  undertook  to  bring  this  home 
to  the  middle  class.  The  "  Manchester  men  "  belonged  to  the 
trading  and  manufacturing  classes,  and  were  by  no  means 
given  to  abstract  ideas ;  but  the  economic  aspect  of  the  doctrine 
of  "laissez-faire"  recommended  it  to  them,  and  being  under 
the  impression  that  this  maxim  supplied  a  general  solution  of 
all  practical  wants  they  made  it  their  exclusive  theory  of  life. 
According  to  the  Manoheeter  School  unrestrained  competition, 
the  abstention  of  the  State  from  all  interference  with  the  pro- 
duction and  distribution  of  wealth,  whether  in  favour  of  the 
rich  or  the  poor,  in  other  words  free  trade  between  citizens  and 
nations,  was  in  the  nature  of  a  divine  law,*  extending  its  bene- 
ficial influence  to  the  material  and  moral  sphere,  to  the  intAmol 
life  of  a  country  and  its  international  relations.  By  allowing 
every  man  to  make  the  most  lucrative  use  of  his  abilities,  free 
competition  would  foster  self-confidence,  manly  independence 
and  self-respect  in  the  individual.  In  directing  human  effort 
toward  a  pacific  rivalry  in  the  field  of  industry,  free  trade 
would  ensure  peace  between  the  nations  to  the  greater  glory 
of  civilization  and  its  uninterrupted  development.'    The  policy 

1  L^D  Faucher,  in  his  £tudei  tw  I'AngUlerre,  indulges  In  these  transports 
fta  follows ;  "  It  U  said  tbat  when  Montbnin's  cuirassiers  poured  through  the 
breach  Into  the  redoubt  of  Borodino,  whtuh  the  Russians  had  defended  so  des- 
perately, an  English  officer,  who  was  looking  on  at  the  carnage  as  an  amateur, 
was  so  CArried  awa;  by  hia  admiration  that  he  forgot  the  hon-oni  of  the  soene 
and  the  intensity  of  the  struggle,  and  exclaimed,  'Well  done,  FieDcbinenl 
this  ia  a  sight  one  only  sees  once  In  a  lifetime.'  And  we  too  may  lay  aaide 
the  rivalry  of  war  and  industry  In  order  to  heartily  appland  this  eipanaion 
of  commercial  genius  which  has  exacted  tribute  from  every  nation.  There  is 
a  sympathetic  farce  In  the  gteat  and  beautiful  which  fascinatea  the  mind  in 
spite  of  itself,  and  makes  man  feel  that  he  belongs  to  humanity  first,  and  to 
his  country  afterwarda"  (Vol,  I,  p.  190). 

>  The  "  International  law  of  the  Almighty,"  according  to  Cobden'*  expree. 

•"Freetradel  what  is  it?  Why,  breaking  down  the  barriers  thatseparate 
nations;  thoae  barriers  behind  which  nesiJe  the  feelings  of  pride,  revenge, 
hatred,  and  jealonsy,  which  every  now  and  then  burst  their  bounds,  and  deluge 
whole  countrlss  with  blood ;  those  feelings  which  noorlih  the  poison  of  war 
and  conquest,  which  assert  that  without  conquest  we  can  have  no  trade,  which 


.CD,  Google 


tojjxia  cHiP]     TRIUMPH  OF  THE  HEW  ORDBE  78 

of  States  was  therefore  clearl;  prescribed,  and  might  be  summed 
up  in  the  words  "  peace,  retrenchment,  economy " ;  to  live  in 
peace  with  one's  neighbours ;  not  to  meddle  with  the  affairs  of 
otber  countries  on  the  high-sounding  pretext  of  national  dignity 
find  intemational  rank  ;  not  to  crush  the  subject  with  taxation 
and  to  let  him  grow  rich  in  his  own  way.' 

A  philosophy  of  sordid  manufacturers  and  shopkeepers, 
according  to  the  opponents  of  the  Manchester  School,  it  was 
less  narrow  than  people  are  geflerally  inclined  to  admit  in  our 
day.  Its  exaggerated  faith  in  the  moral  force  of  industry 
was  shared  by  idealists  and  lofty  dreamers  like  the  Saint- 
Simonians,  who  looked  on  industry  as  a  religious  function  and 
applied  the  word  "cult"  to  its  organization.  "Everything  by 
and  for  industry  "  was  Saint-Simon's  motto.  In  his  view,  as 
well  as  in  that  of  his  adherents,  industry  emphasized  the  law 
of  progress  and  established  the  reign  of  work  in  place  of  idle- 
ness, privilege,  and  brute  foree.  It  was  therefore  natural  that 
the  Manchester  School  should  ^ree  with  the  formulas  of  Saint- 
Simonism :  "  to  each  man  according  to  his  capacity,  to  each 
capacity  according  to  its  work;"  "organization  of  industry 
and  consequently  no  more  war."  The  two  schools  differed  as 
to  the  best  method  of  organizing  industry,  the  Saint  Simonians 
advocating  universal  association  founded  on  love  and  the  Man- 
chester School  looking  to  universal  competition ;  but  the  final 
result  was  intended  to  be  the  same,  —  the  happiness  of  man- 
kind. Full  of  love  and  good-will  towards  men  in  general,  a 
sworn  enemy  of  national  chauvinism,  waging  war  against  aris- 
tocratic privileges  and  the  "landlord  spirit"  in  the  political 
and  social  life  of  England,  in  order  to  set  the  free  development 
of  the  individual  on  an  impregnable  basis,  the  Manchester 
School  was,  on  the  whole,  far  more  of  a  democratic  than  a 
"  bourgeois  "  movement.*    Its  doctrines  were,  in  fact,  the  viil- 

bwlcr  that  love  for  conqaest  and  domlnioD  wbicb  seDds  lortb  foar  warrior 
ehtsb  to  «Mtl«r  devagtailun  tbrouKbout  other  lands,  and  then  calls  ihem  back 
thst  ibej  may  be  enthroned  eenirely  in  your  passions,  but  only  to  harasB  and 
oprrass  yon  at  home  "  (Cobden'i  Speediei,  edit,  in  one  vol.,  by  John  Bright, 
Loud,  1S7S,p.40I). 

'  "  I  don't  (eel  eyinpathy  for  a  great  nation  or  tbose  who  desire  the  great- 
Mas  of  a  people  by  tb«  vast  eiiensloDB  of  empire.  Wbat  I  like  t«  see  is  the 
growlb,  development,  and  elevation  of  tba  individual  man  "  {Ibid.  467) , 

'Cobden  writu  (in  a  leiMr  ot  the  Gtb  of  January,  1S49,  addressed  to 
J-  Cmnbe):  "It  is  this  moral  sentiment  more  than  the  £  s.  d.  view  of  tile 


.coy  Google 


74  DBHOCRACT  ANR  FOUTICAI.  PASTIES    [fust  rut 

gate  of  the  gospel  of  rationalist  individualism  for  the  as«  of 
traders  and  maDufacturere.' 


About  the  same  time  a  fresh  Tersion  of  that  gospel  was  put 
forth  which  seemed  like  a  new  revelation.  From  the  lofty 
realms  of  thought  came  a  message,  delivered  in  a  tone  which 
seemed  to  brush  aside  all  doubt  for  the  future,  that  the  inde- 
pendence of  the  individual  in  the  State  was  an  eternal  verity 
reposing  on  the  foundations  of  reason.  The  intellectual  ^lite 
of  the  nation,  who  had  been  somewhat  unsettled  by  Carlyle 
and  others,  recovered  or  rather  were  confirmed  in  their  creed, 
and  hailed  the  man  to  whom  they  were  indebted  for  this  relief, 
—  John  Stuart  Mill.  For  more  than  a  quarter  of  a  century  he 
kept  them  under  the  spell  of  bis  eloquence  and  logic,  and 
having  once  acquired  a  hold  on  their  mind  he  in^uenced  it  for 
many  years  to  come. 

Mill's  doctrine  was  in  substanse  the  same  as  Bentham's. 
He  started  with  the  same  utilitarian  theory  of  life,  and  took 
bis  stand  on  the  same  method  of  observation  and  experience. 
In  his  eyes  too  man  can  only  desire  and  pursue  what  is  pleas- 
ant to  him.  But,  he  maintains  in  opposition  to  Bentbam,  to 
arrive  at  a  correct  estimate  of  pleasures  they  ought  not  to  be 
valued  only  by  their  quantity,  but  by  their  quality  as  well.  It  is 
better  to  be  a  discontented  man  than  a  satisfied  h<%.  The  most 
perfect  pleasures  being  those  which  are  the  most  elevated  in 
their  nature,  the  path  which  the  individual  must  take  to  attain 
his  own  happiness  is  that  which  leads  to  the  welfare  of  the  hu- 
man race.     In  this  sense  personal  happiness  can  only  be  fully 

inatMr  whkh  Impels  me  to  onderttke  the  ftdvocacj  of  •  redoction  of  our 
forces.  It  was  a  kludred  sentiment  (moTe  than  the  materi&l  view  of  the  ques- 
tion) whfch  nctualed  roe  on  the  Com  Law  and  free  trade  qncetion.  It  wonld 
enable  me  to  die  happy  If  I  could  feel  the  satisfaction  of  having  in  soma 
degree  ooDtiibui«d  to  ihe  partial  disarmament  of  the  world"  (L^eqf  Coiden, 
byJ.  Mortey.  n,  42).  « 

■  "  Cobdenlsm  waa  an  intnidei  in  the  line  of  legitimate  sticceselon  "  of  the 
Radicalism  which  has  been  con  tin  aally  drivlog  In  an  anti-"  laissez-faire  "  direc- 
tion if  we  are  to  )>elleve  an  English  poblicist  of  the  "  Fabian  soclallM  "  Bchool 
("Socialism  In  Engllsli  Politics,"  by  W.  Clarke,  PoUt.  Science  Quarterly, 
N.Y.,  December,  1889).  It  Is  haidly  necessary  to  point  out  tbe  Incorrectness 
of  this  assertion,  which  merely  supplies  a  fresb  instance  of  tbe  mania  which 
p«Tvenu8  have  for  proTidIng  themselves  with  a  line  of  anceatry. 


.coy  Google 


IP.]      TRIUMPH  OF  THE  NEW  OEDEE 


realized  in  the  general  welfare,  and  egoism  to  become  a  realif? 
must  identify  itself  with  altrnism.  There  is  aotbing  impossi- 
ble in  this ;  for  a  state  of  society  is  so  natural,  so  indispensable, 
and  BO  habitual  to  man  that,  by  virtue  of  the  psychological 
process  of  association  of  ideas  peculiar  to  him,  he  cannot  help 
linking  the  conception  of  bis  own  destiny  to  that  of  society, 
and  eventually  feels  a  sort  of  intellectual  inability  to  keep  them 
apart.  This  association,  of  which  man's  intelligence  is  at  once 
the  seat  and  the  instrument,  grows  stronger  and  stronger  in 
proportion  as  mankind  progresses.  "  In  the  comparatively 
eaily  state  of  human  advancement  in  which  we  now  live,  a 
person  cannot  indeed  feel  that  entireness  of  sympathy  with  all 
others,  which  would  make  any  real  discordance  in  the  general 
direction  of  their  conduct  in  life  impossible."  But  this  state 
of  civilization  is  only  a  step  in  the  scale  which  mankind  will 
ascend  in  its  continual  progress  towards  perfection. 

Pending  the  arrival  of  the  millennium,  in  which  the  individ- 
ual will  consider  hi^  own  happiness  as  inseparable  from  the 
general  welfare,  what  line  of  conduct  should  society  pursue 
with  regard  to  the  individual  ?  Society,  replies  Mill  in  his 
essay  on  Liberty,  must  leave  the  individual  to  himself  in  all 
that  concerns  bim ;  it  can  only  interfere  with  hb  freedom  of 
action  on  the  ground  of  self-protection  ;  his  own  good,  either 
physical  or  moral,  is  not  a  sufficient  warrant  for  interference ; 
"over  himself,  over  bis  own  body  and  mind,  the  individual 
is  sovereign."  The  reasons  for  restricting  individual  Iil>erty 
which  might  commend  themselves  to  society  can  only  be  used 
as  ailments  for  reasoning  with  and  persuading  the  individ- 
ual, bat  wot  for  compelling  him.  It  is  all  the  same  whether 
the  compulsion  is  moral  and  not  material.  Again,  liberty  does 
not  consist  only  of  political  liberty,  as  we  have  been  accustomed 
to  understand  it ;  that  is  only  one  aspect  of  liberty.  Side  by 
side  with  the  despotism  of  the  State  there  is  another  tyranny 
of  a  not  less  oppressive  kind,  that  of  opinion  and  of  manners 
and  customs,  and  it  is  from  the  undue  pressure  of  their  yoke 
just  as  much  as  from  the  bondage  of  institutions  that  Mill 
wishes  to  deliver  the  individual.  And  he  puts  forward  these 
demands  not  on  the  ground  of  abstract  reason,  of  some  cate- 
gorical imperative,  but  on  that  of  interest.  Just  as  the  mere 
operation  of  satisfying  the  individual  desire  for  pleasure  ought 


.coy  Google 


78  DEMOCRACT  AND  POLITICAL  PABTIES    [mmt  p*»t 

to  make  for  the  general  happiness,  so  liberty  ought  to  be  Touch- 
safed  to  the  individual  on  account  of  ite  utility :  "  Mankind  are 
greater  gainers  by  sufFering  each  other  to  lire  as  seema  good  to 
themselves,  than  by  compelling  each  to  live  as  seems  good  to 
the  rest" 

If  the  independence  of  the  individual  determined  by  his 
interest  in  all  that  concerns  him  is  the  proper  basis  of  the 
moral  and  social  existence  of  man,  there  is  at  least  equally 
good  reason  for  treating  it  as  the  guiding  principle  of  his 
material  existence  in  the  pursuit  of  wealth  and  its  production 
and  distribution.  As  an  economist  Mill,  vhlle  be  pays  far 
more  attention  than  his  predecessors  to  society,  to  the  whole 
community,  and  to  the  sacrifices  which  the  individual  owes  to 
it,  none  the  less  sets  up  as  a  matter  of  principle  that  "  letting 
alone  should  be  the  general  practice :  every  departure  from  it, 
unless  required  by  some  great  good,  is  a  certain  evil."  Mill 
considers  competition  as  "  not  pernicious,  but  useful  and  indis- 
pensable." lie  is  opposed  to  large  properties,  to  entail,  and 
generally  to  every  institution  in  the  economic  sphere  which 
is  a  hindrance  to  the  individual  and  impedes  the  free  play  of 
activity  in  the  humblest  members  of  society. 

The  principle  which  thus  prescribes  the  relations  of  men  in 
a  state  of  society  makes  ttie  political  form  of  that  society,  the 
form  of  its  government,  a  foregone  coucluaion.  If  "  each  is  the 
only  safe  guardian  of  his  own  rights  and  interests,"  it  is 
clear  that  all  ought  to  have  a  share  in  the  sovereign  power.  If 
any  memljera,  whoever  they  may  be,  are  excluded  therefrom, 
their  interests  are  left  witiiout  the  guarantee  accorded  to  the 
others,  and  they  themselves  have  less  scope  and  encourage- 
ment for  their  energy  and  fewer  opportnjnities  for  displaying 
their  individuality.  But  as  the  whole  pop\ilation  cannot  per- 
sonally take  part  in  public  affairs,  it  follows  that  the  ideal 
type  of  a  perfect  government  is  representative  government. 

The  method  adopted  by  John  Stuart  Mill  in  arriving  at  these 
conclusions,  which  bear  the  stamp  of  the  purest  Benthamism, 
was  in  reality  precisely,  as  in  Bentham's  case,  that  of  abstract 
reasoning.  The  tendency  of  all  men  towards  a  happinees 
realized  in  the  general  welfare  is  simply  a  postulate  foreign  to 
all  experience.  The  bridge  of  association  of  ideas  which  con- 
nects the  happiness  of  the  individual  with  the  general  welfare, 


.coy  Google 


p.]     TRIUMPH  OF  THE  NEW  ORDBB 


however  ingeniously  constructed,  is  nevertheless  outirely  built 
of  ideal  pieces  of  timber,  intended  to  support  imaginary  pas- 
aengera.  In  point  of  fact,  perfect  association  of  idea«  implies 
a  perfect  intelligence.  The  appeal  to  a  more  advanced  state 
of  civilization,  required  for  the  complete  realization  of  these 
hypotheses,  is  merely  a  fresh  development  of  abstract  reason- 
ing, B[)eculating  on  man  not  as  he  is  but  as  he  may  be  some 
day.  He  will  indubitably  become  so,  according  to  Mill,  thanks 
to  education  which  is  all-powerful  and,  like  a  seal  with  melting 
wax,  can  mould  man  to  any  shape  required.  But  is  this,  again, 
an  induction  supplied  by  experience  ? 

Not  only  in  the  domain  of  morals,  but  in  the  political  sphere, 
which  from  one  end  to  the  other  is  pre-eminently  that  of  the 
relative,  Mill's  subject  is  invariably  man,  viewed  through  the 
optimist  medium  of  infinite  perfectibility,  whom  free  discus- 
sion suffices  to  enlighten  in  the  pursuit  of  his  own  happiness, 
and  whose  aptitude  for  seeking  it  givea  him  the  right  to  inde- 
pendence in  society.  Composed,  therefore,  of  individual  inter- 
ests coexisting  in  a  somewhat  mechanical  combination,  but  too 
numerous  to  be  directly  adjusted  to  each  other,  Hill's  political 
society  ends  by  being  a  joint-stock  company  provided  with  an 
electoral  machinery  for  its  government,  just  as  individual 
morality  is  brought  by  Mill  under  a  mechanism  of  ideas  which 
effects  their  association  and  "constitutes  the  moral  faculty  in 
man."  The  better  the  afsociation  of  ideas,  the  nearer  man  will 
be  broaght  to  his  moral  ajm.  In  the  same  way,  the  more  per- 
fect the  electoral  machinery,  the  more  perfect  will  be  the  gov- 
ernment of  States.  This  ia  why  Mill  waa  overjoyed  when  the 
improvement  of  the  electoral  machinery  proposed  by  Hare,  the 
author  of  proportional  representation,  was  brought  to  his  notice. 
The  very  destiny  of  mankind  was  involved  in  his  eyes:  "This 
great  discovery,"  he  relates,  "  inspired  me  with  new  and  more 
sanguine  hopes  respecting  the  prospects  of  human  society." 

Thus  John  Stuart  Mill,  while  rejecting  the  notion  of  right 
as  a  basis  for  society,  so  as  to  avoid  falling  into  the  error  of 
the  French  ideologists,  none  the  leas  constructed  a  system 
which  resembled  theirs.  It  could  hardly  be  otherwise,  for  in 
both  cases  the  materials  used  were  the  same.  Mill's  French 
predecessors  in  utilitarianism,  the  Helvetiuses  and  the  Hol- 
hachs,  who  had  also  adopted  personal  interest  as  the  social 


.coy  Google 


78  DEMOCRACY  ANB  POLITICAL  PABTIES    [fibst  exxr 

principle,  arrived  at  the  same  political  conclusions  as  Rousseau 
aud  his  followers,  from  whom  they  were  separated  by  a  gulf 
in  morals  and  psychology ;  for  both  schools  reasoned  by  way  of 
deduction  on  "  loan,"  on  the  human  monad.  The  co-ordination 
of  all  particular  interests  with  the  general  interest,  demanded 
by  the  materialists,  or  the  absorption  of  all  individual  wills 
into  one  general  will,  advocated  by  Jean  Jacques,  came  to  the 
same  thing  for  the  constitutional  legislator,  there  being  only 
one  person  in  whom  the  "  particular  intereste  "  and  the  "  indi- 
vidual wills"  are  vested,  that  is  "man,"  the  human  monad. 
Bentham,  therefore,  who  operated  on  the  same  subject,  and 
used  the  same  method  of  abstract  reasoning,  found  himself 
after  all,  in  spite  of  his  protests,  in  complete  agreement  with 
the  French  rationalists  of  the  eighteenth  century,  and  his  dis- 
ciple, John  Stuart  Mill,  who  had  criticised  the  "  geometric  or 
abstract  method"  so  sharply,  was  in  his  turn  landed  in  the 
same  result. 

While  thus  reproducing  Bentham's  doctrine  with  absolute 
fidelity,  Mill  tempered  it  with  certain  elements  which,  without 
taking  from  it  much  of  its  essence  and  practical  significance  or 
remedjring  its  defects,  gave  it  an  aspect  which  was  of  supreme 
importance  for  its  success  with  the  public  Taking  the  desire 
for  pleasure  as  the  starting-point  of  human  actions,  Mill  imports 
into  it  the  loftier  standard  of  qnaltiy,  justifies  it  by  the  "  sense 
of  dignity  all  human  beings  possess  in  one  form  or  other,"  and 
ends  by  placing  the  criterion  of  utilitarian  morality  not, 
like  Bentham,  in  the  i^ent's  own  greatest  happiness,  but  in 
the  greatest  amount  of  happiness  altt^ther,  and  this  not  be- 
cause the  general  welfare  is  the  concomitant  of  the  welfare  of 
the  individual,  because  there  is  a  material  identity  between 
them,  so  that  man  has  only  to  follow  his  inclination  and  har- 
mony will  come  of  itself,  but  because  man  himself  enthrones 
this  harmony  in  his  own  inteiligence,  because  he  creates  the 
association  of  the  individual's  happiness  with  the  general  wel- 
fare in  his  own  mind. 

Inheriting  all  the  doctrines  of  individualist  political  economy. 
Mill  inaugurates  his  succession  by  throwing  the  doors  wide 
open  to  his  opponents,  without,  however,  allowing  them  to  take 
up  their  abode  within  the  precincts ;  he  tones  down  the  strict- 
ness of  the  principle  of  "laissez-faire";  he  goes  beyond  all 


.coy  Google 


wwrmrH  cbap.]     TRIUMPH  OP  THE  HEW  ORDER  79 

his  predecessors  in  admitting  exceptions  to  the  dogma  of  the 
orthodox  economists,  and  comes  forw&rd  himself  as  the  expo- 
nent of  them.  He  even  goes  so  f&i  as  to  embrace  the  heresy 
which  denies  the  sanctity  of  property ;  he  declines  to  rect^nize 
it  in  the  case  of  land,  but  admits  it  spontaneously  in  the 
case  of  income  derived  from  labour  and  from  capital;  the 
rsTtt  of  land,  the  unearned  increment  of  the  soil,  due  to  social 
causes  independent  of  man,  ought,  according  to  Mill,  to  be  used 
for  the  good  of  the  conununity,  whereas  income  derived  from 
labour  and  capital  is  created  by  man's  eEForts  and  is  a  mani- 
festation of  human  personality.  Finally,  as  a  crowning 
indulgence  to  hia  adverBaries,  tixe  socialists,  he  admits  that 
private  property  is  only  one  of  the  possible  types  of  distri- 
bution of  wealth,  and  that  it  may  disappear  some  day  or 
other. 

Mill  is  more  uncompromising  in  regard  to  the  ideal  form  of 
government ;  for  every  people  that  has  passed  the  stage  of 
infancy  representative  democracy  is  the  best  possible  govern- 
ment, but  he  himself  admits  its  "  infirmities  and  dangers,"  and 
tries  to  discover  remedies  for  them. 

In  every  department,  in  politics,  in  morals,  in  political 
economy,  Mill  makes  extensive  concessions  to  Ms  adversaries, 
and  by  these  very  inconsistencies  in  his  doctrine  he  accentuates 
its  success ;  he  not  only  conveys  to  the  public  the  seductive 
impression  of  impartiality  and  sincerity,  of  boldness  and 
openness  of  mind,  but  he  allays  discontent  and  silences  the 
misgivings  aroused  by  the  uncom promising  character  of  Ben- 
tham's  doctrine,  and  wins  the  sympathy  which  was  being 
attracted  towards  his  opponents. 

In  spite  of  all  the  concessions  and  advances  made  by  Mill, 
which  were  more  in  the  nature  of  embroidery  on  the  surface  of 
the  Benthamite  pattern,  his  criterion  in  the  moral,  social,  and 
political  sphere  still  remained  the  individual ;  aJl  social  and 
political  relations  are  viewed  by  Mill  with  reference  to  their 
power  of  acting  on  the  individual ; '  but  the  interest  of  the  indi- 

■  The  ludlvidiuU  pnraoea  the  geaeral  weltsie  In  his  own  bapplnen,  becftnae 
thit  !■  the  patb  wMcb  wUlcondoct  h<m  to  an  "  Ideal  noblUty  ol  wilt  and  con- 
dnct."  liberty  onght  to  be  the  leading  principle  in  society,  for  "  it  is  only 
tbe  cnltlTatton  of  individuality  which  produces  or  can  produce  well-devel- 
oped human  beluga."  And  when  Mill  advocates  the  Inteivention  ot  tbe  Stale, 
as  for  InataDce  to  enlorce  on  parents  the  obllgatiou  of  odocatinK  their  chil- 


.CD,  Google 


80  DEMOCEACT  AND  POLITICAL  PABT1E8    [fimt  p**r 

vidtial  is  presented  in  a  new  light,  far  more  attractive  than 
Bentham's,  the  taint  of  selfishness  which  clung  to  it  disappears, 
and  Bentham's  rude  fetish '  appears  henceforth  enciTcled  with 
a  halo  of  idealism. 

The  transformation  thus  wrought  in  the  body  of  the  doctrine 
is  Btill  further  set  oS  by  a  charm  peculiar  to  the  writer,  by  a 
spirit  glowing  with  geneiouB  affection  foi  the  masses,  for 
obscuie  and  humble  folk.  All  Mill's  writings  are  permeated 
by  a  deep  sympathy  for  the  working  classes,  and  an  intense 
desire  to  raise  them  in  the  material  and  the  moral  scale.  As 
the  Bible  was  the  book  of  the  poor  and  oppressed  in  the  eyes 
of  the  Christian  Socialists,  so  under  Mill's  pen  political  economy 
became  the  worker's  book,  instead  of  being  a  cold  and  unre- 
lenting  exposition  of  "  general  laws,"  under  which  the  weak 
were  to  be  crushed  as  under  the  car  of  Juggernaut.  Every- 
where between  the  lines  of  Mill's  writings,  under  the  smooth 
and  tranquil  surface  of  his  logic,  there  is  the  same  sympathetic 
and  loving  spirit  flowing  like  a  strong  current.  The  imagina- 
tion is  at  home  in  them  as  well  as  the  reason.  The  treatise 
on  UlUitarianism  may  be  called  the  philosophic  hymn  of  a 
mystery  resembling  the  Ghiistian  Sacrament  of  Transubstan- 

dnu,  it  l£  with  ft  viev  to  the  final  result;  for  "ItiEtructioii,  when  it  la  really 
■nch  .  .  .  BtrengthenB  as  well  aa  enlarges  the  active  (acuities:  In  whatever 
miDDer  acquired,  Its  effect  nn  the  mlod  Is  favorable  to  the  spirit  of  indepen- 
dence." Hill  allows  unrestricted  competition  in  theeconamlc  sphere,  becauM 
"  to  be  protected  agaloat  competition  is  to  be  protected  In  Idleness,  in  mental 
dallueas."  He  coDdemna  the  aristocratic  form  of  property  because  It  checks 
the  ezpanBlon  o(  individaalitj' ;  and  be  extols  tbe  system  of  small  landed 
properties  because  it  makes  men,  and  inspires  the  peasant  proprieuiF  with 
tlie  coDsciousneas  that  "be  is  a  tree  human  being,  and  not  perpetually  a 
child,  which  seems  to  be  the  approved  condition  of  the  labomlng  c4a»se8 
according  to  tbe  prevailing  philanthropy,"  The  various  forma  of  government 
ate  appraised  by  the  same  standard,  "The  firat  qaestlon  In  reepect  to  any 
political  iDaUtutioD  is.  How  far  they  tend  to  foster  In  the  members  of  the 
community  the  various  desirable  qualities,  moral  and  Intellectual."  The 
answer  to  this  question  la  decisive  as  to  the  merits  of  democracy.  Under 
a  syitem  of  absolute  government  what  sort  of  human  Ir^nga  can  be  formed, 
in  what  way  can  their  faculties  of  reHectlon  and  action  be  developed?  "  The 
mBiimum  of  the  invigorating  effect  of  freedom  upon  tbe  character  is  only 
obtained,  when  the  person  acted  on  either  Is,  or  Is  looking  forward  to  becom- 
ing a  citizen  as  fully  privileged  as  any  other." 

1  "No  subtlety,  no  metaphysics!  no  need  to  consnlt  Plato  or  Aristotle. 
Taia  aod  pleasure  are  felt  as  such  by  every  man,  by  the  peasant  as  well  as 
the  monarch,  by  Ute  unlearned  man  as  well  as  the  phUosopber"  (qnot«d 
above,  p.  34). 


.coy  Google 


rorvTH  CBAF.]     TKIUMPH  OF  THE  HBW  OBDEB  81 

tiation:  just  as  the  Christian  communicates  with  Christ,  with 
His  soul  and  His  godhead  by  means  of  the  elements  of  bread 
and  wine  which  satisfy  the  gross  bodily  appetites,  so  man  fol- 
lowing bis  own  interests  ends,  by  means  of  the  association  of 
ideas,  in  realizing  the  general  happiness,  the  welfare  of  man- 
kind. The  essay  on  Liberty  is  another  bymn,  and,  like  the 
Song  of  Solomon,  an  anthem  of  love,  in  which  the  lover  and 
his  beloved  are  man  and  freedom  of  tbougbt,  and  certainly  the 
attractions  of  this  freedom  are  not  set  forth  with  less  eloquence 
in  Mill's  syllogisms  than  are  the  charms  of  the  Shulamite  in 
the  stanzas  of  the  royal  poet.  But  to  enjoy  the  happiness 
proffered  by  Mill  there  is  no  need  of  Christian  grace  or  of  the 
favour  of  the  daughter  of  Jerusalem ;  it  is  sutQcient  to  be  man. 
Mill  invariably  speaks  as  a  cosmopolite;  his  subject  is  "man 
and  his  fellows,"  "man,"  and  "mankind." 

The  entire  formula  of  the  French  Revolution — Liberty, 
Equality,  and  Fraternity  —  was  expressed  by  Mill's  writings, 
but  in  the  old  English  fashion,  without  pathetic  gestures,  or 
loud  tones,  or  sentimental  outpourings ;  simply  arguments 
presented  with  all  the  semblance  of  scientific  exactness,  lan- 
guage remarkable  for  lucidity  and  distinctness,  and  with  noth- 
ing metaphysical  about  it;  general  propositions  always  linked 
to  reflections  taken  from  the  sphere  of  reality  and  plentifully 
supported  by  facts,  and  a  constant  attention  to  practical  con- 
siderations, to  results.  In  a  society  which  prides  itself,  or  at 
all  events  used  to  pride  itself,  on  controlling  its  emotions  by 
reason,  and  verifying  reason  by  experience,  Mill's  language 
proved  the  best  conductor  of  the  new  social  and  political  fluid. 
The  feelings  awakened  by  Carlyle,  Dickens,  and  others  were 
led  by  Mill  into  the  channels  of  logic  and  science.  This  was 
his  great  achievement,  and  this  was  what  gave  him  his  power 
over  opinion,  and  in  particular  his  influence  with  the  rising 
generation,  which  combines  the  enthusiasm  of  the  intellect  and 
of  the  heart,  or,  to  put  it  in  another  way,  thinks  it  is  following 
reason  while  it  is  really  only  obeying  its  emotional  impulses. 
Mill  sustained  and  exalted  its  impulses  by  providing  food  for 
its  reason,  and  vice  versa.  "The  younger  generation,"  as  a 
contemporary  observer  remarks,  "were  a  good  deal  stirred  by 
Carlyle ;  but  Carlyle,  after  all,  woke  people  up,  and  made  them 
look  out  of  the  window  to  see  what  was  the  matter,  after  which 


.coy  Google 


B3  DEMOCBACT  AND  POLITICAL  PABTIBS    [pimt  pam 

most  of  them  went  to  bed  again  and  slept  comfortably.  His 
cries  were  rather  too  inarticulate  to  furnish  anything  like  a  new 
gospel,  and  he  never  took  hold  of  the  intellectuid  class.  But  Mill 
did."  *  With  induction  for  his  sail,  and  catching  the  humaoi- 
tarian  breeze  which  was  "  moving  upon  the  face  of  the  waters," 
he  brought  abstract  rationalism  with  faith  in  reason  and  confi- 
dence in  theory  safely  to  their  moorings,  and  he  made  English 
society  renew  its  alliance  with  radical  individualism,  thus  forc- 
ing it  BtiU  further  in  the  direction  whither  this  individualism 
was  tending,  that  is,  towarda  disbelief  in  the  traditional  order 
of  things  and  a  general  levelling  of  political  and  social  con- 
ditions. 

Ill 

Everything  conspired  to  give  an  impulse  to  this  intellectual 
movement.  Contemporary  thought  produced  no  doctrines  to 
compete  with  those  of  Mill,  and  individualism  was  left  without 
a  rival  in  the  domain  of  speculation.  The  only  opposition 
which  it  encountered  came  from  sentimentalism  in  its  various 
aspects,  ecclesiastical,  feudal,  and  social.  The  weapons  used 
by  the  latter  had  a  sharper  edge,  but  were  too  short  to  reach 
its  powerful  adversary,  entrenched  behind  a  rampart  of  ideas 
and  facts.  Slightly  touched,  but  in  no  way  overcome  by  these 
appeals  to  sentiment,  public  opinion  barely  paid  them  an  occa- 
sional  tribute,  of  which  the  factory  legislation  was  the  most 
important  practical  manifestation.  These  emotional  outbreaks 
and  legislative  enactments  were  only  exceptions  confirming  the 
rule.  The  English  mind  was  engrossed  by  individualism,  and 
remained  inaccessible  to  all  other  teaching  for  years  to  come. 
Profound  disillusions  and  terrible  shocks  produced  by  events 
in  the  outer  world  were  required  to  make  English  society  probe 
its  conscience  afresh.* 

I  Eogliah  corrMpondeDt  a(  the  New  York  Kation,  18T3,  VoL  1(1,  p.  350. 

*lt  U  Dot  till  srt«r  1668,  vhen  tbe  early  years  of  the  official  reign  of 
IJberallmn  have  dUappointed  the  umgolae  hopes  of  radical  eDthuslasm  which 
preceded  them,  — It  la  nut  till  a[t«r  the  war  of  18T0  that  John  Stuart  Hill's 
political  docUinea  and  Che  philosophy  ot  iDdividualUm  are  seriously  disputed, 
and  "the  paltry  cum mon places  (ot  liberty,  equality,  and  traternity),  which 
•re  eo  popular  amongst  ua"  (in  England),  are  contrasted  with  "the  well- 
regulated,  dleclplloed  ene^y  which  planted  tbe  Qerman  flags  on  tbe  walla  ot 
Paris."  This  Is  the  way  in  which  8ir  James  Steplipn,  who  made  the  first  vigor- 
ous attack  on  Hill  In  bis  Libtrty,  EguuUly,  and  fraternity  (Lond.  1S73), 


.coy  Google 


TOtntTB  OBJLr.]     TRIUMPH  OF  THE  NEW  ORDER  83 

EDJoying  a  monopoly  in  the  province  of  thought,  individ- 
ualism was  no  less  free  from  counteracting  forces  in  the  prac- 
tical sphere.  The  latter  were  suppressed  or  prevented  from 
operating  by  the  lukewarmness  which  characterized  public  life 
after  the  triumph  of  the  middle  class  and  by  the  want  of  polit- 
ical education  in  the  country.  Instead  of  impeding  the  rise  of 
rationalist  individualism,  as  might  be  supposed  at  the  first  blush, 
this  state  of  things  rather  assisted  it  than  otherwise :  the  moral 
vacuum  which  it  created  supplied  a  field  for  abstract  idea^. 

The  political  education  of  the  masses  in  fact  was  not  in  a 
much  more  advanced  condition  than  it  had  been  before  the 
Reform  BilL  While  displaying  more  intelligence  and  gener- 
osity in  this  respect  than  the  aristocracy,  the  middle  class 
which  attained  power  after  1832  did  not  modify  the  general 
aspect  of  things.  From  the  second  quarter  of  the  century  pri- 
vate initiative  no  doubt  made  laudable  efforts  to  diffuse  instruc- 
tion among  adults  by  means  of  Mechanics'  Institutes  and  other 
agencies  for  organizing  classes  and  lectures  as  well  as  by  cheap 
publications.  But  when  they  were  not  paralyzed  by  the  clergy 
or  the  orthodox  folk  whom  it  stirred  up,  these  efforts  missed 
their  mark  in  two  ways :  they  did  not  reach  the  mechanics  and 
the  masses  for  whom  they  were  destined,  it  was  the  lower 
middle  class  alone  which  benefited  by  them ;  besides  this  the 
teaching  provided  was  often  too  technical,  too  utilitarian,  with 
too  slight  an  admixture  of  real  mental  culture  and  no  political 
instruction  at  all.  As  for  the  latter,  there  was  no  one  anxious 
to  promote  it,  nor  was  the  ground  sufBciently  prepared  for  it 
by  general  instruction.  In  1807,  when  the  Whitbread  Bill, 
which,  proposed  to  establish  a  system  of  popular  instruction, 
was  being  debated,  the  least  reactionary  of  its  opponents  said : 
"  The  increase  of  this  sort  of  introduction  to  knowledge  would 
only  tend  to  make  the  people  study  politics  and  lay  them  open 
to  the  arts  of  designing  men."'  The  Whigs,  who  filled  the 
political  stage  after  1832,  did  not  propound  maxims  of  this 
kind,  but  they  certainly  were  not  disinclined  to  believe  in  the 
mischief  which  would  result  if  the  people  took  to  "  studying 

eomnuiDtB  on  his  own  book  in  a  letter  to  hla  OennsD  IranBlator  (published  in 
the  0«rtnan  edition  Die  SchtaffKSrler  Freikeit,  GUichheit,  Bnderlichkeit  Id 
Ihrer  ethischen,  soclalen,  und  politlichen  Anwendnng,  Berlin,  1814). 
>  Hanmrd.  IX,  H8,  Speech  ol  Hi.  Wlndhsm. 


.coy  Google 


M  DEMOCRACY  AND  POLrnCAI,  PARTIES    [niir  p««t 

politica."  Several  of  tbero,  it  ia  true,  talked  from  time  to  time 
of  the  political  education  of  the  masses,'  but  took  scarcely  any 
steps  to  carry  out  the  idea.*  A  small  ^lite  of  workingmeu  in 
the  towns  succeeded,  by  dint  of  individual  energy,  in  reaching 
the  tree  of  knowledge,  from  which  they  hastily  plucked  the 
unripe  fruit  of  general  ideas  and  flung  tbem  at  the  governing 
classes,  whose  rule  was  attended  by  bo  much  misery  among  the 
people :  "  Ail  men  are  bom  free  "  —  "  God  has  given  men  equal 
liberties  and  equal  rights"  —  "We  demand  justice  before 
charity."'  The  masses  had  no  opportunity  of  acquiring  even 
elementary  knowledge.  There  were  not  many  schools  in  the 
country,  and  they  were  attached  to  the  Churches  or  kept 
by  private  individuals.  The  State  paid  as  good  as  no  heed 
to  public  instruction;  its  intervention  was  confined  to  grants 
amounting  to  £20,000  a  year,  since  the  year  1833.  The  few 
schools  which  existed  were  in  a  wretched  stat«,  both  aa  regards 
houaing  and  teaching.*    Public  instruction  did  not  form  part 

>LoTd  Brougbftm  8^;  "Wbj  Bhonld  not  political,  as  well  aa  all  otbet 
wotka,  be  pabllshed  in  a  cheap  form,  ftnd  in  Nainbers?  ...  It  1b  Mghly  use- 
ful to  the  community  that  the  true  principles  of  the  constitution,  eccleaUgtical 
and  civil,  should  be  well  understood  by  every  man  who  lives  under  it  "  {Prae- 
tical  Obtervalimu  Upon  the  Education  of  the  People,  Lond.  1H2S,  pp.  4,  B). 
Thirty  years  afterwards  Lord  Aberdeen,  alarmed  at  the  dictatorial  power 
aesnmad  by  the  Pre**  over  the  pnbllo,  returned  to  the  charge ;  "  We  must 
educate  by  all  the  means  In  our  power,  and  we  shall  be  able  to  trust  the 
people  more  sately  with  their  own  concerns  "  (Letter  ot  the  6th  of  January, 
1866,  to  Groker,  Oojfcer  Paper*,  m,  3S0).  Just  aa  twelve  years  later,  Robert 
Lowe,  alarmed  in  his  torn  by  the  admis^on  ot  the  urban  populationa  to  polit- 
ical power,  exclaimed :  "  We  must  educate  our  masiera." 

'Owing  to  Lord  Bmngbaia's  efForta,  assisted  by  leading  Whigs,  a  great 
"Society  tor  the  Propagation  of  Useful  Knowledge"  wa«  [oanded,  for  the 
publication  and  circulation  of  sbort  popular  treatises.  The  numerous  vol- 
umes wbtch  it  poblisbed  related  to  physics,  chemistry,  mechanics,  astronomy, 
but  not  to  politics,  past  or  present,  "  on  which  it  was  impossible  to  tanch 
without  provoking  angry  dlscostion."  A  long  time  afterwards  and  solely  at 
the  request  ot  its  president.  Brougham,  It  decided  to  bring  otit  a  political 
series,  inaugurated  by  a  work  ot  Lord  Brougham  himself.  This  was  his 
Political  Philosophy  (Lond.  1842),  which,  apart  from  tbe  intrinsic  value  ot 
the  book,  presepte  a  curious  example  ot  an  error  common  to  many  educators 
of  the  lower  classes,  which  cuoelsta  In  addreeslng  themaslt  tbeyhad  received 
a  literary  traiulDg,  with  the  result  that  the  teaching  ia  entirely  lost  upon  them. 
The  "  political  series  "  did  not  get  beyond  this  work. 

>  These  were  the  mottoea  on  the  hautierunderwblch  the  Chartist  procestion 
marched  to  Parliament  wltb  the  monster  petition. 

*  The  following  is  taken  trom  a  liuscriplion  of  Ihe  Btate  ot  the  elementary 
•choola  about  the  year  lUO:  "A  minimum  education  has  been  given  at  a 


.coy  Google 


rookTH  CHAT.]      TRIUMPH  OF  THE  NEW  ORDER  8S 

of  the  traditions  of  the  Tory  party.  The  Whig  party,  who 
claimed  to  be  the  friend  of  the  people  and  of  enlightenment, 
was  largely  composed  for  the  moat  part  of  NonconformiEta, 
divided  into  rival  sects.  Not  being  able  to  agree  as  to  what 
religious  education  should  be  given,  that  is  to  say,  whether  the 
Bible  should  be  read  with  or  without  commentary,  they  pre- 
ferred not  to  open  any  schools  at  all.  Here  and  there  one  or 
two  public  men,  who  were  not  blinded  by  party  passion  and 
spite,  were  deeply  pained  by  this  state  of  things,  but  their  isola- 
tion rendered  them  powerless,  "The  greatest  of  all  causes," 
exclaimed  Bichard  Cobden,  "has  no  locus  standi  in  Parlia- 
ment." '  A  few  years  afterwards,  when  the  Liberal  party  was 
again  agitating  for  the  extension  of  the  suffr^^,  Cobden,  who 
was  in  favour  of  a  radical  reform,  wondered  what  would  be  the 
result  in  view  of  the  ignorance  of  the  masses.  "Without  the 
cordial  sympathy  ^d  the  co-operation  of  the  masses,  our  elec- 
toral system  will  become  as  soulless  a  thing  as  that  which  lately 
existed  in  France." ' 

"Sot  was  the  practical  school  for  learning  this  co-operation, 
that  supplied  by  institutions,  within  the  reach  of  the  general 
public  or  frequented  by  those  who  had  access  to  it.  The  old 
local  self-government,  as  we  have  seen,  had  been  taken  to  pieces 
and  had  not  been  reconstructed  or  completely  recast.  The  middle 
class  rather  turned  away  from  public  life.    Ifot  only  munici- 

tninimnm  coat.  Babies  of  eight  and  ten  jresrs  old  were  «et  to  t«ach  other 
babies  of  tbe  ume  age;  .  ■  ■  wrlting-deeki  were  tew,  scanty,  and  fixed  to 
the  walls.  ...  01  apparatus  there  was  little  but  a  few  slates;  of  maps  there 
was  perhaps  one,  a  meagre  map  of  Palestine ;  of  books  there  were  scaruely 
•ny  bnt  the  Holy  Bible.  In  the  Holy  Bible  used  as  a  primer,  little  children 
were  drilled  in  spelliug  and  reading ;  and  their  arithmetic  was  too  often  drawn 
from  the  same  source.  ...  In  order  to  give  tbe  children  a  reverence  for 
sacred  things,  the  buiub  set  were  drawn  from  historical  statemeats  of  numbers 
in  tbe  Holy  Scriptures.  '  There  were  12  patriarchs,  12  apostles,  and  i  evaa- 
gelisla;  add  the  patriarchs  and  evangelists  together;  subtract  tbo  apostles; 
what  is  (lie  remainder ? '  'Solomon  liad  so  man;  wives  and  so  many  concu- 
bines; add  the  concubines  to  tbe  wives,  and  sta<«  the  resuU.'  . .  .  The  bulld- 
IngB  were  low,  thin,  dingy,  ill-dralued,  often  without  means  of  warming,  often 
witbont  proper  conveniencM ;  with  no  famiture  bnt  a  teacher's  desb.  a  few 
rickety  forms,  a  tod,  a  cane,  and  a  fool's  cap.  The  floor  was  almost  iuvarl- 
ftbty  ot  tirick,  tbe  worst  kind  of  floor  "  (Addrea  on  Jfationat  Education  by 
Harry  Chester,  quoted  in  J.  Hole's  "Light ,'  more  Liyhl! "  Ou  the  present  state 
of  education  amongst  the  working  classes  of  Leeds.    Lond.  1860). 

'  Letter  from  Cobden  to  3.  Combe,  dated  Nov.  5, 18M)  (Morley's  Life.  II,  84). 

*  Letter  fvun.  Cobden  to  John  Br^ht,  dated  Not.  0,  lliBS  (Ibid.  p.  UT). 


.coy  Google 


86  DEMOCRACY  AND  POLITICAL  PARTIES    [hmt  i-ab» 

pal  business,  but  parliamentary  elections,  had  little  interest  for 
them.  This  was  particularly  the  case  with  the  higher  strata 
of  the  new  ruling  class,  —  the  upper  middle  class.  Absten- 
tion from  voting,  which  was  very  common  in  the  constituen- 
cies, increased  in  proportion  to  the  wealth  of  the  voters. 
"They"  (the  rich),  we  read  in  an  official  inquiry,  "think  it 
beneath  their  dignity  to  go  and  vote." '  And  why  should  they 
trouble  their  heads  ?  Did  not  the  Palmerston  Ministry,  under 
which  parties  were  grouped  in  a  sort  of  truce,  provide  them 
with  "  a  strong  government "  and  "  a  safe  government,"  which 
would  take  care  not  to  start  schemes  of  reform  or  raise  other 
awkward  questions  worthy  of  philosophers  and  theorists  ?  To 
prevent  the  calm  degenerating  into  stagnation,  there  was  the 
foreign  policy  of  Falmerstoii,  who  had  long  become  a  passed 
master  in  the  art  of  addressing  arrogant  challenges  to  neigh- 
bouring countries  and  tyrannizing  over  the  weak.  There  waa 
enough  to  stir  the  blood  of  the  Briton  and  flatter  "  the  egre- 
gious vanity  of  the  beast,"  as  Cobden  said.  With  the  refrain 
of  Oivis  Romamis  sum  resounding  in  their  ears,  the  ruling 
classes  of  England  sat  quietly  under  their  vines  and  their  fig- 
trees.  The  House  of  Commons  enjoyed  a  calm  and  peaceable 
existence.  Nothing  was  taken  tragically  or  seriously  in  it,  as 
befits  an  assembly  of  well-bi-ed  people,  of  "  gentlemen,"  of 
whom  Palmerston  was  the  perfect  type  and  model.  The 
debates  led  to  no  loss  of  temper,  and  very  often  the  sittings 
came  to  an  end  for  want  of  a  quorum ;  "  counting  out  has  now- 
become  a  regular  institution,"  said  Sir  W.  Molesworth  in  1862. 
Even  the  advanced  Radicals  laid  down  their  arms  and  waited 
for  the  death  of  Palmerston,  who  appeared  to  incarnate  in  his 
person  the  England  of  the  past  and  in  whom  it  seemed  to 
survive  itself. 

IV 

These  intervals  of  apathy  and  indifference  in  the  life  of  a 
nation  are  the  most  favoiurable  of  all  for  "philosophers  and 
theorists,"  who  fill  the  unoccupied  space,  which  they  find 
before  them,  with  their  philosophy  and  their  theories,  what^ 

1  From  the  evidence  of  an  election  agent  before  a,  committee  of  the  House 
ot  Lords  (Blue  Bookt,  18m,  Reports  trom  Committees,  XII,  171).  Other  evi- 
dence to  tbe  same  effect  whh  given  before  the  committee  {Ibid.  pp.  T3,  240). 


.CD,  Google 


roDBTH  CHAP.}     TRIUMPH  OF  THS  NEW  OBDEB  87 

ever  tlie  intrinsic  value  of  these  may  be ;  the  horror  vacui  is 
still  more  true  of  the  moral  than  of  the  physical  world.  Just 
as  in  the  latter  the  force  of  penetration  of  a  body  is  in  the 
direct  ratio  of  its  mass,  and  in  the  inverse  ratio  of  the  con- 
sistency of  the  substance  which  it  enters ;  so  the  greater  the 
weakness  of  the  mind  the  greater  the  facility  with  which  it 
admits  an  idea,  and  the  more  comprehensive  the  idea  the  more 
easily  it  takes  possession  of  the  mind.  Accordingly  in  the 
social  sphere  the  less  firmDess  t.here  is  in  the  public  mind  and 
the  less  intensity  in  public  life,  the  more  society  is  exposed  to 
the  invasion  of  general  ideas,  provided  that  there  is  sufficient 
motive  force  behind  them.  This  force  is  often  created  by  the 
very  condition  of  stE^^ation  which  it  is  about  to  attack ;  for 
want  of  action  the  ^lite  of  the  nation  turns  to  the  world  of 
thought,  and  there  prepares  and  gathers  the  explosive  material 
destined  to  produce  a  more  or  less  marked  upheaval  of  society. 
This  was  the  very  process  at  work  in  England  during  the 
years  1846-1865,  and  under  particularly  favourable  conditions. 
Although  the  boundaries  of  the  political  system  had  been  con- 
siderably extended  since  1832,  although  it  occupied  a  much 
lai^r  area,  public  spirit,  as  we  have  seen,  had  not  expanded 
in  proportion.  The  result  was  that  with  a  greater  number 
of  persons  brought  into  political  life,  there  was  relatively 
less  political  activity  than  in  the  former  period.  The  State 
was  no  longer  uppermost  in  the  thoughts  of  society.  The 
sphere  of  social  influence  covered  by  politics  was  contracting, 
and  at  the  same  time  the  importance  of  the  principles  at  stake 
in  political  warfare,  as  well  as  its  emotional  attraction,  dwin- 
dled in  proportion  as  the  grave  questions  which  had  exercised 
the  minds  of  succeeding  generations,  such  as  parliamentary 
reform,  religious  liberty,  and  free  trade,  were  disposed  of. 
The  ^ite  of  the  community,  relieved  so  to  speak  of  their 
functions,  had  recourse  to  thought  Consequently  when 
John  Stuart  Mill  -entered  the  field  with  his  great  writ- 
ings, he  found  a  far  more  numerous  public  to  listen  to  and 
applaud  him  than  the  Fhilosophical  Radicals  of  five-and- 
twenty  or  thirty  years  back  could  have  addressed.  A  Young 
England  party  was  in  process  of  formation,  but  different  to 
that  imagined  by  Disraeli,  with  aspirations  turned  not  towards 
the  past  but  towards  the  future,  with  faith  in  the  vivifying 


.coy  Google 


88  DEMOCBACT  AKD  POLITICAL  PARTIES    [Fikst  mrt 

power,  not  of  social  traditions,  but  of  the  "  Season  of  Man," 
which  really  indicatee  the  "landmarkB  of  human  action  and 
human  progress."  A  new  spirit  passed  over  the  old  Univer- 
sities, their  medifBval  atmosphere  underwent  a  change,  the 
outer  air  of  philosophy,  of  criticism,  of  true  science  entered 
by  their  Crothic  windows.  Oxford,  till  lately  the  stronghold 
of  orthodoxy,  the  home  of  Tractarianism,  became  a  hot-bed 
for  the  new  ideas.  Young  men  of  good  family  were  among 
their  most  zealous  devotees.  The  influence  of  philosophy 
and  of  the  new  science  of  sociology  readily  accepted  as  such 
was  reinforced  by  natural  science  with  its  methods  of  exact 
observation  and  uncompromising  analysis,  which  rejected 
every  authority  and  every  idea  incapable  of  making  good 
its  title,  and  of  allowing  it  to  be  verified  at  any  moment 
before  the  permanent  tribunal  of  reason.  John  Stuart 
Mill  and  Professor  Goldwin  Smith,  Darwin  and  Huxley, 
Herbert  Spencer,  who  was  on  the  threshold  of  his  great  philo- 
sophical career,  Buckle,  and  many  other  thinkers  of  less  emi- 
nence conjointly  exercised  an  intellectual  dictatorship  over 
English  society.  Foreign  influences,  notably  Positivism  and 
its  religion  of  humanity,  added  their  quota.  Each  working  in 
his  own  sphere,  they  all  helped  to  discredit  the  past,  to  sub- 
stitute the  power  of  reason  for  that  of  tradition,  to  diffuse 
enthusiasm  for  ideas  with  belief  in  a  continual  advance  towards 
a  better  state  of  things,  and  in  the  final  triumph  of  the  cause 
of  progress  in  spite  of  the  obstacles  which  tend  to  block  its 
path.  The  new  spirit  of  investigation  and  criticism  invaded 
regions  which  seemed  forever  closed  to  it,  as  for  instance 
that  of  theology.  Members  of  the  University,  Doctors  of 
Divinity,  clergymen  of  the  Established  Church,  Bishops  even 
applied  the  canons  of  scientific  criticism  to  the  Scriptures  as 
to  any  other  book.  In  vain  did  scandalized  orthodoxy  protest 
and  call  for  punishment  of  the  destroyers  of  the  faith,  the 
representatives  of  the  secular  power  itself  eitlier  refused  to 
interfere  or  treated  them  with  sarcasm  and  contempt.'     Very 

1  The  case  which  made  the  most  stir  in  thlti  respect  was  tbkt  of  the  rollec- 
tlon  of  E»»ayt  anil  S'viem,  written  by  several  clerlKal  and  l«r  membera  ot 
the  Uolversit}'  of  Oxford.  The  freedom  and  broad-tniDdednen  of  their  the- 
ology created  a  Beosstion.  The  champions  of  orthodoxy  took  iegti  procaed- 
Ingeag^nst  gome  of  these  wrlierg  in  the  eccleBlaBilcal  courts,  but  were  defeated 
on  appeal  to  tin  Jndioial  Committiie  of  the  Privy  Conncll.    ErenCually  they 


.coy  Google 


MVkTH  OHiP.]      TBIDUPH  OF  THE  HEW  ORDER  80 

soon  nothing  vras  safe  from  doubt.  Eveiy  principle  was  im- 
pugned, every  subject  discussed.  BritiBh  phlegm  inTeated  this 
intellectual  process  with  something  of  the  impassive  Btemness 
irhich  attends  the  operations  of  the  dissecting-room.  The 
existence  of  Gkid  was  put  to  the  vote  without  fuss  and  without 
animation.  The  spirit  of  tolerance  appeared  in  society  to  an 
extent  hitherto  unknown ;  the  boldest  flights  of  thought,  the 
most  daring  speculations  of  the  intellect,  ranged  unmolested. 
For  the  bulk  of  society  this  freedom  was  attributable  far  more 
to  the  decay  of  the  old  faith  than  to  the  progress  of  the  new 
one,  as  is  generally  the  case  in  situations  of  this  kind,  which 
are  characterized  by  a  sort  of  moral  truce  of  God,  due  not 
so  much  to  the  elevation  as  to  the  relaxation  of  the  public 
mind.  In  England  after  the  year  1855,  as  in  France  a  century 
before,  the  doubt  and  negation  produced  by  the  earnest  medi- 
tations and  settled  convictionB  of  a  small  group  of  leading 
spirits  spread  over  society  like  a  noxious  vapour,  blighting 
the  old  creeds  which  had  lost  the  vivifying  principle  of  true 
faith.  Lacking  the  strength  of  mind  to  discard  its  old  ideas 
and  prejudices,  and  without  the  force  of  character  to  uphold 
them,  society  let  them  slumber  on,  while  assuming  to  out- 
ward appearances  an  air  of  coaventioual  indifference.  The 
focetious  and  frivolous  tone  of  which  Falmerston  set  the 
fashion  in  Parliament  and  which  extended  outside  its 
walls,  contributed  to  that  atmosphere  of  amiable  scepticism 
which  constitutes  the  charm  of  periods  of  transition,  and 
which  gave  rise  to  Talleyrand's  saying:   "Celui  qui  n'a  pas 

•Dceeeded  Id  gstting  the  book  condoiiined  by  ConTocatioD,  the  repmeiitative 
mssembl;  ot  the  EetabUehed  Chiuch.  The  decislone  ot  CodtocMIod  being 
SDbject  to  the  approval  nt  the  Ctowd,  the  OoTemmeDt  was  Interrogated  tn  the 
HoDie  ot  Lordg  a$  to  the  cootm  which  the;r  proposed  to  pnnue.  The  Lord 
Cbftacellor,  who  la  the  "  keeper  ol  the  Kinjt'H  conaclence,"  of  the  conscience 
o(  the  "defender  ot  the  faith,"  replied  that  the  excommoulcatioD  launched 
by  Convocation  did  not  bo  much  as  deserve  the  attention  of  the  OoveniineDt. 
"There  are  three  modes,"  be  explained,  "of  dealing  witli  Convocation  when 
it  is  permitted  to  come  into  action  and  transact  real  hnainess.  The  first  ie, 
while  thay  are  harmlessly  busy,  to  take  no  notice  ot  their  proceedlogs ;  the 
■eeond  is,  when  they  seem  Ukely  to  get  Into  miscliief,  to  prorogoe  and  pot  an 
end  to  tlieir  proceedings;  and  the  third,  when  they  have  done  something 
elakil;  beyond  tlielr  powers,  is  to  bring  them  before  a  court  of  justice  and 
pnnlah  tbem."  The  "sjnodical  condemnation"  of  a  work,  prononnoed  by 
Convocation,  appeared  to  the  Lord  Chancellor  to  belong  to  the  category  ot 
hafinleaa  acta  ot  which  no  notice  need  tie  taken. 


.coy  Google 


90  DEHOCRACT  AND  POLITICAI,  PARTIES    [vibbt  pah 

v^u  dans  les  derai^res  aon^B  de  rancien  regime  n'a  pas 
coanu  la  douceur  de  vivre." 

The  fashionable  scepticism  which  inraded  society  and  the 
st^nation  arising  from  the  decrepitude  of  political  parties 
we^ened  the  leading  section  of  the  ruling  classes  just  as  the 
increase  of  wealth  enervated  the  rank  and  file.  While  their 
strength  of  character  departed  and  their  capacity  for  resistance 
declined,  the  tide  of  radicalism  continaed  to  moimt  The  un- 
toward events  and  the  disappointments  of  the  Crimean  War 
provoked  a  series  of  attacks  on  the  existing  regime  and  the 
spirit  which  it  embodied.  The  public  demanded  that  full  light 
should  be  thrown  on  the  military  administration,  that  the 
reign  of  aristocratic  faTouritiBm  should  come  to  an  end,  and 
that  personal  merit,  irrespective  of  birth,  should  be  rec<^nized 
as  the  sole  qualification  for  public  honours  and  appointments. 
The  language  of  the  Press  became  umiaually  violent ;  it  attacked 
everything  and  everybody  in  the  most  unsparing  manner.'  The 
repeal  of  the  paper  duties,  in  1860,  gave  a  considerable  impulse 
to  the  growth  of  the  cheap  Press  and  at  the  same  time  to 
the  spirit  of  opposition  and  criticism.  Literature  reflected  the 
same  tendency.  "It  is  incontestable,"  notes  Montalembert, 
"  that  bitter  and  violent  abuse  of  aristocratio  ideas  and  habits 
is  gradually  becoming  the  dominant  note  in  political  discussion 
and  histo^cal  study."'  "We  must  not  disguise  the  fact," 
insists  the  same  observer,  "that  a  whole  literary  and  political 
school  is  endeavouring  to  imbue  the  English  people  with  a 
dislike  for  their  time-honoured  institutions  and  with  a  desire 
to  ape  Continental  democracy."* 

Tinged  as  they  are  with  bitterness,  these  impressions  of  the 
famous  Catholic  champion  none  the  less  faithfully  reflect  the 
intellectual  movement  of  the  time.  A  feeling  entered  men's 
minds,  like  a  thorn  penetrating  the  flesh,  that  England  was  far 
behind  other  nations,  that  from  head  to  foot  there  was  some- 
thing antiquated  and  mouldy  about  her.  It  made  no  difference 
that  this  or  that  old  institution  was  workii^  well,  ea^tediejicg 

'OreTllle,  alumed  at  the  attitude  of  the  Press,  ezcUlmi:  "The  Preas, 
with  the  Timet  at  its  head,  Is  Htriving  to  throw  everything  Into  eoofiuion. 
.  .  .  Tbey  dlSose  through  the  coontiy  a  nuua  of  InAamnatoiy  iQ«tt«i" 
(Jfewioir«,Vn.247). 

*  Dt  I'avtJtirpoHtiqM  dt  rAitgUt«Frt,  Puis,  1896,  p.  51. 

•  Ibiii.  p.  Bfl. 


.coy  Google 


niniB  CBAr.j     TRIUMPH  OF  THE  NBW  OBDER  01 

was  no  longer  the  national  divinity  to  whom  exclusive  honours 
were  pud,  the  people  had  run  after  "  strange  gods,"  and  their 
eyes  were  opened  to  the  pecception  of  anomalies.  A  new  tone 
became  observable  in  the  language  of  politics.  At  one  time, 
under  the  influence  of  the  scientific  methods  of  the  day, 
the  jargon  of  science  was  applied  to  politics.  At  another 
time,  writers  in  the  Press  and  speakers  at  public  meetings 
affected  the  style  of  natural  right.  "  Men  of  Birmingham,  if 
I  can  call  you  men,  who  do  not  possess  the  sufErage,"  were  the 
words  with  which  John  Bright  began  one  of  his  speeches  in 
1859.  Mr.  Gladstone  himself,  who  was  at  that  time  a  sort  of 
hostage  of  the  advanced  Liberals  in  the  Palmerston  Ministry, 
spoke  in  similar  terms:  "Eveiy  person,"  he  declared,  in  1863, 
"not  presumably  incapacitated  by  some  consideration  of  per- 
sonal unfitness  or  political  danger,  is  morally  entitled  to  come 
within  the  pale  of  the  Constitution."  Three  years  afterwards, 
he  was  more  outspoken  in  combating  those  who  opposed  the 
grant  of  the  suffrage  to  the  working  classes :  "  They  are  our 
fellow-Christians,  and  of  the  same  fiesh  and  blood  as  ourselves." 
Pending  their  admission  into  the  inner  political  life  of 
England,  the  ideas  of  Kadical  individualism  penetrated  its 
approaches;  they  found  their  way  into  colonial  government 
and  international  relations.  The  colonies,  it  was  asserted, 
were  entitled  to  manage  their  own  affairs;  and  all  that 
England  had  to  do,  for  her  own  honour  and  their  advan- 
tage, was  to  recognize  their  individuality,  and  treat  them  as 
responsible  communities.  People  even  went  so  far  as  to  contest 
England's  right  to  her  possessions  beyond  the  seas,  on  the 
ground  that  she  had  acquired  them  by  violence,  by  fraud,  and 
by  crimes  against  justice  and  humanity.  These  ideas,  so  closely 
related  to  the  doctrines  of  the  Manchester  School,  especially 
as  regards  their  premises,  were  propagated  with  the  greatest 
energy  by  philosophical  Radicals,  and  especially  by  Goldwin 
Smith,  who  at  that  time  almost  rivalled  John  Stuart  Mill  in 
influence  on  the  rising  generation.  They  created  quite  a  cur- 
rent of  opinion,  and  made  their  power  felt  by  the  Government. 
One  colony  after  another  received  autonomy  on  the  pattern  of 
the  system  of  responsible  government  introduced  for  the  first 
time  into  Canada  in  1847.  The  same  individualist  principle, 
transported  into  the  international  sphere  under  the  name  of 


itizecoy  Google 


98  DEMOCRACY  AND  POLITICAL  PARTIES    triwT  PiRT 

the  principle  of  nationalities,  made  the  English  Government 
take  a  step  which  was  without  precedent  in  British  annala :  it 
restored  the  Ionian  Islands  to  Greece  spontaneously  and  with- 
out compensation.  A  little  more,  and  Gibraltar  would  have 
been  sacrificed  on  the  same  altar. 

In  their  heart  of  hearts,  the  ruling  classes  cinng  to  their 
old  opinions,  which  occasionally  showed  themselves  in  the  ' 
crudest  form.  Thus,  when  civil  war  broke  out  in  the  United 
Stat«s,  they  took  the  side  of  the  slave-holding  South  against 
the  North,  and,  believing  that  the  American  Republic  was 
doomed,  were  overjoyed  at  the  idea  that  democracy  had  thus, 
as  they  thought,  proved  its  impotence.  This  attitude  of  the 
ruling  classes,  as  well  as  the  general  state  of  dull  immobility 
in  which  the  political  world  gathered  round  Falmerston  re- 
mained, far  from  cooling  the  radical  ardour  of  the  rising  gen- 
eration, gave  it  an  additional  stimulus.  The  idea  prevcdled 
that  it  was  impossible  to  strike  too  hard  in  order  to  overcome 
this  inert  mass,  upheld  by  aristocratic  tradition  and  sentiment, 
and  fed  by  a  spirit  of  privilege  and  selfish  domination,  and  that 
it  was  therefore  useless  to  count  the  blows,  or  select  the  points 
suitable  for  attack.  Most  of  the  English  institutions,  thought 
the  Kadicals,  were  fit  only  for  destruction.  They  became  eon- 
firmed  in  this  view,  and  indulged  in  anticipations  of  the  most 
sanguine  kind,  all  the  more  easily  because  it  was  not  necessary 
to  begin  the  process  of  demolition  at  once,  or  calculate  the 
force  of  resistance  which  might  have  to  be  encountered. 
Palmerston's  immense  prestige  in  Parliament  and  in  the 
country  and  his  dogged  opposition  to  reform  alone  sufQced  to 
render  all  attempt  at  change  abortive.  The  popular  minister 
having  Ijecome,  so  to  speak,  the  embodiment  of  the  existing 
order  of  things,  the  reformers,  in  their  turn,  ended  by  making 
Falmerston  the  incarnation  of  all  the  oListacles  which  blocked 
their  path. 


Consequently  when  Falmerston  died  in  I860  the  advanced 
school  thought  that  their  time  had  come,  and  that  now,  at  last, 
the  ilood-gates  of  progress  could  be  opened.  But  which  direc- 
tion was  progress  to  take  ?    How  were  they  to  set  about  realiz- 


.coy  Google 


TODBTH  CHAF.I      TRIUMPH  OF  THE  IfEW  OBDEB  (tt 

ing  the  new  social  and  political  ideal  ?  In  point  of  fact,  theie 
waa  more  enthusiasm  than  clearness  of  views  on  the  subject  of 
the  new  ideals  and  the  mode  of  converting  them  into  practice. 
Since  the  days  of  the  Chartists,  who  naively  advocated  uni- 
versal suffrage  as  a  remedy  for  the  sufferings  of  the  people, 
advanced  opinion  was  bent  on  the  extension  of  the  parlia- 
mentary franchise.  Radical  enthusiasm,  without  looking  fur- 
ther afield,  now  took  up  this  question  and  devoted  all  its 
energies  to  it.  The  anti-reforming  tendencies  of  the  ruling 
classes  were  the  same  as  ever;  they  were  still  opposed  to 
all  fresh  extension  of  the  suffrage.  At  the  general  election 
which  bad  just  been  held  (in  1865)  they  had  returned  much 
the  same  men  to  Parliament.  The  people  themselves  were 
indifferent ;.  except  in  the  industrial  centres  of  the  north  there 
was  now  none  of  the  enthusiasm  which  animated  the  masses  in 
1832.  But  beneath  the  surface  a  profound  change  had  taken 
place.  Beforming  zeal,  confined  for  years  to  the  sphere 
of  speculation,  had  acquired  consistency,  and  now  that  the 
period  of  grace  seemed  to  have  expired  with  Falmerston's 
death,  it  demanded  payment  of  its  account  The  ruling  classes, 
who  were  sunk  in  stagnation,  had  no  resistance  to  offer ;  they 
were  without  ideas,  without  strong  convictions,  and  consequently 
without  strength,  fiesistance  pure  and  simple  is  never  a  force 
in  itself;  it  can  only  derive  power  from  the  spirit  and  from  the 
inward  faith  of  the  combatant.  To  proclaim  one's  hostility  to 
an  idea,  vrithout  being  able  to  meet  it  on  equal  terms,  only 
gives  it  a  fresh  stimulus.  It  is  just  as  useless  to  ignore  it;  ii 
you  do  ignore  it,  or  retire  from  it,  it  advances';  if  you  halt 
before  it  in  a  neutral  attitude,  it  fixes  and  hypnotizes  you;  if 
you  pay  it  the  formal  tribute  of  recognition,  you  at  once  be- 
come its  slave.  While  the  ruling  classes  sank  deeper  into  their 
aelfishness,  Reform  crept  in  imperceptibly ;  very  soon  its  pres- 
ence was  felt.  "It  was  in  the  air."  And  many  a  politician, 
penetrated  with  the  amiable  scepticism  of  the  time,  had  no 
objection  to  giving  Reform  a  Platonic  adhesion,  with  the  men- 
tal rider  that  nothing  serious  was  involved  thereby.  After  a 
time  several  Whig  members  of  Parliament,  in  addition  to  the 
earnest  reformers,  found  themselves  committed  t«  it,  and  were 
extremely  embarrassed  as  the  agitation  for  the  extension  of 
the  suffrage  grew  more  vehement.     Before  long  even  the  most 


.coy  Google 


H  DEMOCRACY  AND  fOLITICAL  FABTIES    [fimt  rxmr 

old-fa.shioned  Whigs  came  to  the  coDclusion  that  it  was  difficult, 
if  not  impossible,  to  avoid  a  aew  measure  of  Parliamentary 
Reform. 

The  same  events  and  the  same  intellectual  movement  made 
a  breach  in  the  Tory  party,  in  a  different  way,  but  quite  as 
effectively.  After  the  catastrophe  of  1846  the  Tories,  who  had 
been  "  betrayed  "  by  their  leader,  bad  lost  confidence  in  every- 
body and  everything.  They  gave  way  to  a  profound  discourage- 
ment, and  to  a  fear  so  intense  and  so  little  concealed  that  those 
who  witnessed  it  must  have  been  divided  between  compassioD 
and  amusement.  The  rising  tide  of  new  ideas  convinced  the 
Conservatives  that  all  hope  was  lost,  that  a  relentless  fatality 
was  drawing  England  towards  the  abyss  of  radicalism  and 
democracy,  and  they  went  so  far  as  to  repeat  the  line  of  Homer 
which  the  blind  child  recited  to  Mummius  after  the  taking  of 
Corinth,  "  Happy  an  those  who  are  in  the  tomb." '  Tories  of 
a  less  imaginative  stamp  gave  themselves  up  prosaically  to 
despondency  and  apathy.  Parliamentary  life,  with  its  sterile 
contests  and  the  simulated  warmth  of  its  debates,  only  served 
to  nourish  and  intensify  these  sentiments.  It  was  in  vain 
that  Disraeli  tried  to  restore  the  failing  coun^e  of  his  fol- 
lowers by  incessant  attacks  on  the  governments  of  the  day. 
Even  his  successes  were  ephemeral.  He  was  "compelled  to 
fight  battles  without  profit,  and  to  take  office  without  power," 
as  a  devoted  biographer  admits.*  It  is  true  that  the  Conserva- 
tive pariy  had  increased  in  size  to  a  cert^n  extent ;  the  great 
prosperity  of  the  country  since  the  year  1846,  which  had 
created  in  the  urban  middle  class  a  large  category  of  prosper- 
ous people  contented  with  things  as  they  are,  had  driven 
many  of  them  into  the  Conservative  camp.    This  accession 

'  WeUingitoa  when  bidding  farewell  to  Croker,  whom  he  believed  to  be  at 
the  point  of  death  (but  vho  snrvived  him  by  sfewireekB),  said  to  him  :  "But 
at  least,  mj  dear  Croker,  It  Is  some  consolation  to  us  who  are  so  neat  the  end 
of  oarcareei  that  we  shall  be  spared  seeing  the  coDaiunmatioQ  of  the  min 
that  U  ^thering  aliout  us"  {Croker  Pnpera,  III.  363}.  The  whole  corrtk- 
spondence  coliected  In  these  three  TolomeB  betrays  the  same  meotal  praoccn- 
patloo  in  the  CoDservatlve  ranks.  I,ord  Stran^ford  writes,  in  a  letter  of  the 
2l8t  October,  1804  :  "  Chateaubriand  sometimes  speaks  troth,  and  never 
more  so  where  be  says :  '  Noas  aommes  sut  le*  bords  d'nn  monde  qui  flnit  «t 
d'nn  autre  monde  qui  commeace.'  Wbat  a  frightful  thing  this  '  commence- 
ment'  will  bel  "    {Ibid.  343). 

>  T.  E.  Kebbel,  Life  of  lord  BeaeoiuJUld  (18B8).  p.  92. 


.coy  Google 


K.CHIH  CHip.]     TBIUMPH  OF  THE  SEW  OEDER  96 

of  strength  from  the  middle  class,  wMle  widening  the  basis  of 
Conaetvatism  throughout  the  country,  also  acted  as  a  dis- 
solvent The  Tories  of  the  old  school  had  lost  faith  in  the 
strength  of  their  cause,  and  the  new  men  had  never  possessed 
it.  The  crowd  of  wealthy  manufacturers,  merchants,  and  shop- 
keepers who  called  themselves  ConservatiTes  had  no  traditions 
to  cling  to  or  defend  with  resolution.  But  in  return  they  ■ 
brought  with  them  the  business  mind  which  urged  that  the  cus- 
tomer must  be  kept  in  a  good  humour;  that  it  was  more  prudent 
to  come  to  terms,  and  save  what  cduld  be  saved  from  the  wreck 
— in  a  word,  the  complete  philosophy  of  the  counting-house. 

Between  these  two  states  of  mind — of  demoralization  on  the 
one  hand,  and  aggressive  enthusiasm  on  the  other  —  an  arbiter 
interposed  under  the  pretext  of  bringing  about  a  settlement, 
but  in  reality  with  the  object  of  seizing  the  property  in  dis- 
pute, like  the  third  thief  in  the  fable.  This  arbiter  was 
the  political  parties.  Having  exhausted,  from  the  year 
1846,  all  the  great  qnestions  which  divided  them,  they 
were  living  from  hand  to  mouth  and  wastii^  their  existence 
in  sterile  conflicts  devoid  of  all  principle.  They  played  with 
every  political  question  which  circumstances  brought  to  the 
front  or  which  they  invented  themselves  for  the  requirements 
of  the  game  which  was  henceforth  their  sole  resource.  ITot 
that  public  life  no  longer  presented  a  field  for  genuine  activ- 
ity; on  the  contrary,  the  transitional  state  of  society  issuing 
from  a  feudal  condition  created  pressing  needs  which  im- 
periously demanded  the  attention  of  the  legislator :  the  educa- 
tion of  the  masses,  "the  greatest  of  all  causes,"  according  to 
Cobden ;  the  recasting  of  local  self-government  for  the  repair 
of  the  civic  machinery  which  brought  citizens  together  in  the 
dischai^e  of  a  daily  task  undertaken  for  the  furtherance  of 
common  interests,  which  invited  and  to  a  certain  extent  com- 
pelled them  to  study  the  general  interest  and  to  feel  them- 
selves live  in  it.  The  parties  in  the  State  were  indifferent  to 
these  reforms ;  for  they  were  not  "  political  questions,"  which  by 
means  of  the  natural  or  artificial  antagonism  created  by  them 
give  the  victory  to  this  or  that  side.  Being  in  their  nature 
unconnected  with  party  interests,  the  great  measures  of  social 
reconstruction  would  only  have  benefited  the  country  at  large. 
Things  however,  were  not  going  smoothly  for  these  exhausted 


.coy  Google 


M  DEMOCRACY  Ain>  POLITICAL  PABTIES    Zmn  rxn 

factions;  there  was  no  vigour,  no  cohceion,  especially  in  the 
Liberal  party.  The  advanced  section,  which  alone  had  ideas 
as  representing  the  views  of  the  Philosophical  Radicals  and 
the  radicalism  professed  by  the  ^te  of  the  workingmen  in  the 
towns,  became  more  and  more  refractory.  Harassed  by  the 
Tories  on  one  side  and  by  the  Radicals  on  the  other,  the  old 
Whigs  agreed  with  the  latter  to  reopen  the  question  of  a  fresh 
extension  of  the  suffrage.  They  complied  reluctantly  and 
without  the  faintest  wish  for  the  success  of  the  reform,  which 
inspired  them  with  more  feat  than  hope  for  their  future.  From 
1862  onward  plan  after  plan  was  brought  forward,  but  all  were 
8till-bo;-n.  When  the  Tories  came  into  power  in  1868  with  no 
psrticnlar  policy,  they  took  up  the  question  of  the  suffrt^  on 
their  own  account,  but  with  as  little  sincerity  and  success  as 
the  Whigs.  For  both  sides  Parliamentary  Reform  was  a  good 
pretext  for  overthrowing  the  government  of  the  day  in  order 
to  take  its  place.  When  the  truce  of  Falmerston,  "  the  Tory 
chief  of  a  Radical  Cabinet,"  was  established  in  the  House  of  Com- 
mons, the  two  sides  came  to  the  conclusion  that  the  farce  bad 
lasted  long  enough,  and  the  question  of  Keform  was  dropped. 
Bat  after  the  death  of  the  illustrious  statesman  broke  the 
spell  which  kept  parties  in  a  state  of  immobility  and  the  latter 
had  to  resume  tJieir  position,  the  problem  of  the  electoral 
franchise  was  taken  up  ^ain  and  with  it  that  of  the  future  of 
political  parties.  Worn-out,  well-nigh  ruined,  they  had  lived 
on  Palmerston's  credit  for  the  last  few  years.  What  were  they 
to  live  on  now  ?  Feeling,  in  spite  of  the  bluntness  of  their  per- 
ceptions,— as  is  the  case  with  all  ultra-moderate  parties, — that 
"  Reform  was  in  the  air,"  the  Whigs  thought  that  the  extension 
of  the  suffrage  might  after  all  contain  an  element  of  good ;  that 
it  might  be  a  sort  of  plank  thrown  out  in  the  shipwreck  of  his- 
torical parties ;  and  that  if  the  new  electors  were  indebted  to 
the  Whigs  for  the  right  of  voting  they  would  swell  their  train, 
strengthen  their  position  in  the  country,  and  give  the  efFete 
Whig  party,  as  it  were,  a  renewal  of  youth.  But  it  was  just 
this  probability  which  threw  the  Conservatives  into  despair; 
it  seemed  to  sound  their  death-knell.  Thereupon  their  inge- 
nious leader  Disraeli  resolved  as  a  last  resort  to  dish  his  oppo- 
nents :  his  plan  was  to  offer  the  franchise  to  the  masses  on 
behalf  of  the  Conservative  party  after  having  previously  fashr 


.coy  Google 


FOCBTH  CHAP.]     TRIUMPH  OF  THE  NEW  ORDBB  97 

ioDed  it  in  a  conservative  spirit.  "  You  cannot,"  he  explained 
to  his  followers,  "  foim  a  party  of  resistance  pure  and  simple, 
because  change  la  inevitable  in  a  progressive  country;  the 
question  is  whether  Reform  shall  be  carried  out  in  the  spirit  of 
the  national  customs  and  traditions,  or  whether  you  will  follow 
abstract  principles  and  general  doctrines."  The  dilemma  was 
well  stated;  ae  in  the  time  of  the  Young  England  party,  a 
quarter  of  a  century  before,  Disraeli  had  a  luminous  vision  of 
the  situation,  of  the  causes  which  had  conduced  to  it,  and  of 
the  conflicting  elements ;  but  on  this  occasion  too  he  miscalcu- 
lated their  respective  forces  by  imagining  that  Reform  would 
be  carried  out  "  in  the  spirit  of  the  national  customs  and  tra- 
ditions "  if  the  Tory  party  were  entrusted  with  the  preparation 
of  the  Bill.  These  customs  and  traditions  were  mere  phantoms, 
and  at  the  first  summons  of  Radicalism  Disraeli  himself  con- 
signed them  to  the  nether  world.  The  popular  demonstrations 
in  favour  of  Reform,  which  were  got  up  soon  after  the  Conserv- 
ative government  came  into  o£Sce,  created  a  regular  panic  in 
the  Tory  ranks.  The  country  aa  a  whole  remained  tranquil 
and  almost  indifferent.  Even  the  disturbances  in  Hyde  Park, 
where  the  agitators  had  assembled  a  monster  meeting,  did  not 
exceed  the  limits  of  the  kind  of  riot  which  the  London  mob 
liked  to  indulge  in.  But  this  display  of  physical  force  was 
enough  to  intimidate  the  members  of  Parliament  who  were 
opposed  to  Eeform.  Believing  that  the  triumph  of  Radicalism 
was  inevitable,  both  Tories  and  Whigs  rushed  to  meet  it  half- 
way, in  a  wild  race  in  which  each  tried  to  outstrip  the  other. 

In  bringing  in  his  Reform  Bill  Disraeli  expressly  stated  that 
Parliament  ought  to  represent  not  numbers  but  interests ;  that 
to  give  a  faithful  reflection  of  the  country  the  dominant  char- 
acteristic of  the  suffrage  should  be  not  uniformity  but  variety 
of  electoral  qualifications ;  that  England  was  and  would  remain 
a  country  of  classes  which  balanced  each  other,  and  that  each 
class  was  entitled  to  an  influence  in  Parliament  corresponding 
not  to  the  number  of  heads  which  it  counted,  but  to  its  social 
worth,  its  intelligence,  and  its  wealth,  so  that  no  class  should 
be  able  to  crush  the  others  by  mere  numerical  superiority. 
To  carry  out  these  ideas  Disraeli's  plan,  while  lowering  the 
ratii^  electoral  qualification,  gave  votes  irrespective  of  the  rat- 
ing franchise  to  various  groups  of  individuals  who  had  proved 


.coy  Google 


«8  DEMOCKACY  AlO)  FOLTTICAL  PARTIES    [nur  pamt 

their  capacity  either  t^  their  education  or  their  practical  activ- 
ity (for  instance  to  graduates  of  universitieB  and  otherB,  to 
depositors  of  £30  in  the  Bavinga-bank,  to  persone  possessing 
£S0  in  the  public  funds  or  paying  20«.  in  direct  taxes).  If 
the  20a.  taxpayers  occupied  a  dwelling  which  gave  a  right 
to  the  suffice,  they  were  to  have  a  double  vote.  In  the 
towns  the  rating  qui^fication  was  to  be  lowered  from  £10  to 
£6,  but  the  payment  of  a  rent  of  £6  would  not  secure  a  vote 
unless  the  occupant  of  the  dwelling  paid  the  poor-rate  himself, 
so  that  the  "compound  householders"  would  have  been  ex- 
cluded from  the  franchise.  On  the  other  hand,  the  Bill 
rejecting  all  "artificial  symmetry"  in  the  arrangement  of  the 
constituencies,  only  gave  seats  to  a  few  large  towns  which  had 
remained  unrepresented,  while  preserving  all  the  unimportant 
boroughs  which  already  had  the  right  to  return  a  member. 

Kot  one  of  these  "checks  and  balances"  against  demo- 
cracy conceived  by  Disraeli  withstood  the  assault  of  parties. 
The  Liberals,  who  had  not  the  slightest  intention  of  being 
taken  in  tow  to  pass  a  reform  which  they  considered  a  patent 
of  their  own,  maintained  that  all  the  "  safeguards  "  provided 
by  the  Bill  were  unjust  and  vexatious.  They  threatened  to 
give  up  the  question  of  the  extension  of  the  suffrage  rather 
than  accept  it  under  such  conditions.  The  Tories,  in  their 
turn,  did  not  wish  to  throw  up  the  game  and  were  afraid  of 
alienatii^  the  new  electors  by  a  too  uncompromising  attitude. 
"Educated  by  events,"  according  to  Disraeli's  expression,  they 
made  one  concession  after  another  under  the  guidance  of  their 
adroit  chief.  "  We  have  no  longer,"  as  Kobert  Lowe  pointed 
out,  "  a  party  of  attack  and  a  party  of  resistance.  We  have 
instead  two  parties  of  competition,  who,  like  Cleon  and  the 
saus^e-seller  of  Aristophanes,  are  both  bidding  for  the  sup- 
port of  Demos,"  All  the  safeguards  were  abandoned.  The 
.special  franchises,  contemptuously  styled  "  fancy  franchises," 
were  given  up  without  a  struggle.  The  double  vote  shared 
the  same  fate.  Disraeli  spontaneously  threw  over  the  £6 
qualification  for  urban  electors  in  spite  of  the  adverse  opin- 
ion of  several  Liberals  who  inclined  towards  a  £5 qualification, 
and  household  suffrage  pure  and  simple  was  adopted.  The 
condition  of  personal  payment  of  the  poor-rate,  which  was  the 
backbone  of  the  Bill,  was  simply  dro])i)ed.     The  franchise  was 


.coy  Google 


rorvTB  CHAF.]     TRIUMPH  OF  THE  NEW  ORDER  BQ 

giaated  not  only  to  all  householders  in  towns,  but  Etlso  to 
lodgers  payit^  a  yearly  rent  of  £10.  In  the  tedistribntion  of 
seats  the  criterion  of  population  was  applied  on  a  much  more 
extended  scale  than  in  the  original  BUI,  which  was  a  protest 
against  "  artificial  symmetry." 

Whatever  may  have  been  the  motives  and  calculations  which 
mingled  in  the  brains  of  Conservatives  and  Liberals,  the  spirit 
which  presided  over  their  legislation  was  from  one  end  to  the 
other  a  levellii^  one.  The  variety  of  electoral  qualifications 
was  sacrificed  and  as  much  uniformly  introduced  as  possible ; 
instead  of  maintaining  the  traditional  "  balance  of  power "  by 
emphasizing  the  distinctions  between  the  constituent  elements 
of  the  electoral  body,  they  were  well-nigh  obliterated.  Prop- 
erty qualifications  being  almost  abolished  for  electors  in  towns, 
and  the  suffrage  being  extended  to  lodgers.  Parliament  ceased 
to  reflect  interests  and  became  simply  the  representative  of 
numbers ;  the  urban  masses  obtained  the  largest  share  of  polit- 
ical power,  and  England  became  a  democracy.  It  was  of 
no  consequence  that  one  or  two  more  stages  had  to  be  passed 
before  universal  suffrage  was  reached;  those  who  were  not 
-  admitted  to  the  franchise  were  bound  in  logic  to  obtain  it 
sooner  or  later,  as  there  was  no  longer  an  immovable  limit  to 
keep  them  out  of  it.  The  Reform  Bill  of  1832  had  already 
pushed  it  bach,  by  adding  a  rational  qualification  for  the  fran- 
chise to  the  historical  electoral  right.  People  endeavoured  to 
minimize  the  significance  of  that  Bill  and  to  persuade  them- 
selves that  it  had  only  readjusted  the  "balance  of  power" 
without  making  any  "  concession  to  the  principle  of  numbers." 
This  was  not  the  case ;  there  was  no  longer  a  balance,  but  an 
incline,  which,  when  once  stepped  upon,  had  to  be  descended 
to  the  end-  The  Bill  of  1867  supplied  a  demonstration  of  this, 
and  by  establishing  the  fact  in  an  emphatic  manner  it  opened 
the  era  of  democracy  in  the  English  State. 

The  "abstract  principles  and  general  doctrines"  to  which 
Disraeli  wished  to  oppose  "national  customs  and  traditions" 
were  consequently  triumphant  all  along  the  line.  We  have 
followed  their  victorious  progress  in  these  pages  for  a  century, 
and  have  seen  how,  with  the  powerful  aid  of  circumstances, 
one  success  after  another  led  them  to  a  decisive  triumph.  A 
time-honoured  prejudice  insists  that  the  English  are  inac- 


.coy  Google 


100  DEMOCBACT  AHD  POLITICAL  PARTIES    friiiHi  p*bt 

cesaible  to  general  ideas,  as  if  these  ideas  were  a  sort  of 
contagious  malady  against  which  the  robust  Ajiglo^axon  con- 
stitution is  proof.  On  the  other  side  of  the  Channel  Hie  Eng- 
lish were  often  congratulated  on  this,  thej  became  objects  of 
.  envy,  and  they  themselves  were  only  too  ready  to  believe  that 
they  could  not  catch  the  "French  complaint."  If  this  had 
really  been  the  case,  the  English  would  have  been  outside 
humanity  and  would  not  have  shared  in  its  greatness  and  its 
wretchedness.  Driving  individuals  and  nations  from  Bublimity 
to  folly,  the  power  of  an  idea  strikes  indiscriminately  and  takes 
possession  of  the  whole  being.  The  outward  semblance  alone 
varies.  One  people  embraces  ao  idea  with  rapture,  another 
tries  to  bargain  with  it,  like  the  countryman  who,  in  order 
to  beat  down  the  price,  pretends  not  to  care  about  the 
article  which  he  is  sure  to  buy  in  the  end,  as  he  has  left  home 
for  that  very  purpose.  From  the  moment  when  the  individ- 
ual soul  awoke  and  claimed  to  assert  itself  before  God  and 
society,  the  conception  of  "  man "  entered  the  social  and  po- 
litical life  of  England  once  and  for  ail.  It  penetrated  into 
England  by  the  path  of  morality  as  it  did  into  France  by 
that  of  logic.  An  idea  finds  its  way  into  the  intell^ence  hy  ■ 
the  door  which  is  easiest  to  open,  here  by  one  and  there 
by  another;  but  this  does  not  make  it  change  its  character 
or  its  postulates,  and  if  these  latter  are  developed  by  similar 
methods  and  under  similar  circumstances,  they  are  bound  to 
assert  themselves  with  equal  force.  In  England,  as  in  France, 
the  individual  was  for  a  long  time  repressed  and  sacrificed  to 
the  community,  or  rather  to  what  usurped  its  plaoe.  At  last  he 
demanded  justice.  Opinion  on  both  sides  of  the  Channel  ad- 
vancing towards  him  could  see  nothing  but  him ;  absorbed  in  its 
task  of  emancipation,  it  rushed  straight  on  without  looking  to 
the  right  or  to  the  left.  As  soon  as  it  had  brought  its  prot^g^ 
out  of  the  crowd,  it  gave  him  and  each  of  his  feUows  the  power 
of  governing  themselves,  with  the  result  that  the  community 
which  they  formed  became  the  sum  total  of  their  persons  and 
their  powers,  a  democracy  as  it  is  generally  called,  an  arithmo- 
cracy,  as  it  has  been  more  accurately  described.  To  become 
realities  these  conceptions  needed  the  co-operation  of  events,  and 
this  was  not  denied  them.  What  the  destroyers  of  the  Bastille 
did  in  France  was  accomplished  by  the  spinning- jenny  and  the 


.coy  Google 


touwrm  CHAP.]      TRIDBiIPH  OF  THE  NEW  ORDER  101 

Bteam-engine  in  England;  both  ga.ve  a  helping  hand  to  the 
conclusioDB  of  philosophy.  The  fact  that  the  new  ideas  did 
not  find  vent  in  England  by  means  of  a  violent  explosion,  but 
made  their  way  little  by  little,  rendered  their  efEect  on 
the  public  mind  all  the  more  certain.  Their  conversion 
into  practice  having  devolved  on  the  political  parties  in 
the  State,  the  latter  in  their  passionate  rivalry  only  thrust 
them  deeper  into  the  narrow  channel  marked  out  by  thought 
A.11  forms  of  mental  narrowness,  whether  in  the  sphere  of 
speculation  or  that  of  action,  conspire  together.  Like  the 
"  geometric  theory  of  society," '  which  recognizes  only  one 
cause  of  all  social  phenomena  and  only  one  property  of  human 
nature,  and  disregards  all  the  others,  so  political  parties  in 
their  uudeviating  pursuit  of  the  object  which  secures  them  a 
brief  period  of  power  compress  into  it  as  into  a  sort  of  Pro- 
crustean bed  all  the  phenomena  of  the  political  and  social 
situation  with  their  causes  and  their  consequences.  In  their 
anxiety  to  carry  Beform  over  the  heads  of  their  opponents, 
English  politicians  not  only  brought  their  legislative  enact- 
ments to  the  level  occupied  by  the  postulates  of  ideology, 
but  unconsciously  agreed  with  its  arguments  and  its  inmost 
thoughts.  "  Not  till  this  question  of  Befonn  has  disappeared 
amongst  the  subjects  of  controversy,"  said  Mr.  Gladstone  in 
1866,  "  can  we  hope  to  see  the  people  of  England  what  they 
once  were,  and  what  we  ought  to  be  desirous  they  should  ever 
continue  to  be,  —  a  united  people."*  Subsequently,  after  the 
passing  of  the  Bill  of  1867,  John  Bright  in  calling  attention  to 
its  merits  remarked;  "The  Bill  of  1832  was  a  great  Bill;  but 
still  it  left  two  nations  among  the  people — a  small  minority 
included,  and  a  large  majority  excluded."  °  Beverting  to  the 
division  into  two  nations  of  Disraeli's  "  Sybil,"  Gladstone  and 
Bright  evidently  suggested  the  inference  that  the  extension  of 
the  suffr^e  put  an  end  to  it,  that  this  reform  had  the  power 
to  restore  the  moral  unity  of  a  disintegrated  society,  that  it  was 
the  bearer  of  the  long-expected  synthesis.     But  if  equal  right 

1  To  QM  the  Kno  ot  J,  S,  Mill  {System  of  Logic,  Bk.  Tl,  Cbsp.  Tin,  of  the 
geometrical  or  abBtract  method) . 

»  Hamard,  3d  series,  Vol.  185,  p.  248. 

■  Ptiblic  Addrtutt  of  John  Bright,  ed.  by  J.  E.  Thorold  Rogsra,  Lond. 
1879,  p.  193. 


.coy  Google 


108  DBHOCRACT  AND  POLITICAI.  FARTIES    [rnn  past 

of  voting  18  enough  to  make  a  nation  united,  it  is  becaiue 
society  is  simply  the  arithmetical  total  of  the  individuals  who 
compose  it.  Keither  Bentham  nor  his  French  predecessors  of 
the  e^hteeoth  century  went  farther  than  this. 

VI 

At  the  moment  therefore  when  the  Reform  Bill  of  1867  was 
about  to  become  lav,  Benthamism  might  have  repeated  to 
itself :  Nunc  dimittit  aervwm  tuum.  Its  most  illustrious  repre- 
sentatives, J.  S.  Mill  and  G.  Giote,  lived  to  witness  the  triumph 
of  rationalist  individualism  in  the  sphere  of  politics.  But 
their  satisfaction  was  very  far  from  being  without  alloy.  For  a 
long  time  their  minds,  especially  that  of  Uill,  had  been  gravely 
preoccupied  with  the  future  destiny  of  the  individual  in  society. 
They  demanded  the  political  emancipation  of  the  individual, 
but  if,  by  virtue  of  the  right  on  which  they  took  their  stand, 
it  was  granted  indiscriminately  to  all  members  of  society,  if 
the  whole  body  of  individuals  was  invested  with  it,  how  would 
the  particular  individual  be  able  to  preserve  his  independence 
against  them ;  would  not  the  freedom  become  a  delusion  and  a 
snare  and  the  individual  be  at  the  mercy  of  a  tyranny  just  as 
oppressive  as  that  from  which  he  was  liberated  ?  The  result 
then  was  to  create  a  Frankenstein — to  adopt  the  illustration 
of  which  the  English  are  so  fond — like  the  hero  of  the  cele- 
brated story,'  the  young  student  Frankenstein  who  plunged  so 
deep  into  the  study  of  alchemy  that  one  day  a  quasi-hiuuan 
creature  stepped  out  of  the  crucible  in  his  laboratory,  but  inas- 
much as  divine  skill  had  not  been  vouchsafed  te  tjie  human 
artificer,  instead  of  a  man  he  created  a  frightful  monster  to 
which  he  himself  fell  a  victim  after  protracted  agony.  The 
emancipated  individual  crushed  by  individualism,  what  a  pros- 
pect !  Grote,  who  throughout  his  whole  life  advocated  the  ballot, 
or  system  of  secret  voting,  to  insure  the  independence  of  each 
elector,  contemplated  with  feelings  akin  to  melancholy  the  ap- 
proaching accomplishment  of  the  reform  of  which  he  had  consti- 
tuted himself  the  champion.  He  thought  that  the  advantages 
conferred  by  the  ballot  would  be  lost  with  the  enormous  esten- 


.coy  Google 


FOCRTB  CHAF.] '    TRIUMPH  OF  THE  NEW  OBDER  108 

sion  of  the  electorate  introduced  by  the  Bill  of  1867.  For  "the 
English  mind,"  said  the  illustrious  historian,  "  is  much  of  one 
pattern,  take  whatsoever  class  you  will," '  and  with  great  masses 
of  electors  the  tendency  to  advance  in  one  direction  and  to  crush 
by  weight  of  numbers  would  only  increase.  Even  a  republican 
form  of  government,  which  was  his  ideal,  was  no  longer  a  safe- 
guard in  his  eyes.  "  I  have  outlived,"  said  Grote  in  1867,  d.  pro- 
pot  of  the  United  States, "  my  faith  in  the  efficacy  of  republican 
government  regarded  as  a  check  upon  the  vulgar  paasions  of  a 
majority  in  a  nation,  and  I  recc^nize  the  fact  that  supreme 
power  lodged  in  their  hands  may  be  exercised  quite  as  mis- 
chievously as  by  a  despotic  ruler  like  the  first  Napoleon."* 
Mill  did  not  wait  till  the  end  of  his  life  to  indulge  in  similar 
reflections.  They  began  in  his  case  with  the  perusal  of 
"Democracy  in  America"  by  de  Tocqueville,  just  as  in  his 
early  days  another  French  book,  the  life  tf  Turgot  1^  Condor- 
cet,  inspired  him  with  the  faith  in  the  infinite  perfectibility  of 
man  which  made  him  adopt  Bentham's  theories  of  democracy. 
"  In  that  remarkable  work  "  (of  de  Tocqueville),  says  Mill  him- 
self, "the  excellences  of  democracy  were  pointed  out  in  a  more 
conclusive,  because  a  more  specific,  manner  than  1  had  ever 
known  them  to  be,  even  by  the  most  enthusiastic  democrats; 
while  the  specific  dangers  which  beset  democracy,  considered 
as  the  government  of  numerical  majority,  were  brought  into 
equally  strong  light,  and  subjected  to  a  masterly  analysis." ' 
The  more  Mill's  mind  outgrew  the  narrow  formulas  of  the 
Benthamism  of  Bentham  and  of  his  father,  James  Mill,  the 
more  uneasy  he  became  about  the  individual  confronted  by 
numbers.  Examining  his  master's  doctrine,  Mill  asked  him- 
self "is  it  at  all  times  and  places,  good  for  mankind  to  be 
under  the  absolute  authority  of  the  majority  of  themselves," 
ajid  he  came  to  the  conclusion  that  Bentham  had  not  turned 
his  genius  to  the  best  account  when,  "  not  content  with 
enthroning  the  majority  as  sovereign  by  means  of  universal 
suffrage  without  King  or  House  of  Lords,  he  exhausted  all  the 
resources  of  ingenuity  in  devising  means  for  riveting  the  yoke 
of  public  opinion  closer  and  closer.  .  .  .  Wherever  all  the 
forces  of  society  act  in  one  single  direction,  the  just  claims  of 


.coy  Google 


104  DEMOCRACY  AND  POLITICAL  PARTIES     [mbht  pi.bt 

the  individual  huiEan  being  ai-e  in  extreme  peri!.  The  power 
of  the  majority  is  salutary  so  far  as  it  is  used  defensively  not 
offensively,  as  its  exertion  ia  tempered  by  respect  for  the  per- 
sonality of  the  individual,  and  deference  to  superiority  of  cul- 
tivated intelligence,"'  But  how  is  the  majority  to  be  armed 
for  the  defensive  and  to  be  made  powerless  for  the  offensive  ? 
Mill  thought  that  "  Montesquieu  with  the  lights  of  the  present 
age  would  have  done  it;  and  we  are  possibly  destined  to  re- 
ceive this  benefit  from  the  Montesquieu  of  our  times,  M.  de 
Tocqueville."  * 

The  years  rolled  on,  and  there  was  no  sign  of  a  remedy  in 
the  direction  of  France.  At  last  Mill  thought  that  he  had 
discovered  it  in  the  plan  of  his  fellow-countryman,  Thomas 
Hare,  for  personal  representation.  "  I  saw  in  this  great  prac- 
tical and  philosophical  idea  the  greatest  improvement  of 
which  the  system  of  representative  government  ia  susceptible ; 
an  improvement  which,  in  the  most  felicitous  manner,  exactly 
meets  and  cures  the  grand,  and  what  before  seemed  the  in- 
heient,  defect  of  the  representative  system ;  that  of  giving 
to  a  nimierical  majority  all  power,  instead  of  a  proportional 
power  to  its  numbers,  and  enabling  the  strongest  party  to 
exclude  all  weaker  parties  from  making  their  opinion  heard 
in  the  assembly  of  the  nation,  except  through  such  opportu- 
nity as  may  be  given  to  them  by  the  accidentally  unequal  dis- 
tribution of  opinions  in  different  localities.  To  these  great 
evils  nothing  more  than  very  imperfect  palliations  had  seemed 
possible ;  but  Mr.  Hare's  system  affords  a  radical  cure.  This 
great  discovery,  for  it  is  no  less,  in  the  politicaJ  art,  inspired 
me,  as  I  believe  it  has  inspired  all  thoughtful  persons  who 
have  adopted  it,  with  new  and  more  sanguine  hopes  respect- 
ing the  prospects  of  human  society;  by  freeing  the  form 
of  political  institutions  towards  which  the  whole  civilized 
world  is  manifestly  and  irresistibly  tending,  from  the  chief 
part  of  what  seemed  to  qualify,  or  render  doubtful,  its  ulti- 
mate benefits.  Minorities,  so  long  as  they  remain  minorities, 
are,  and  ought  to  be,  outvoted ;  but  under  arrangements  which 
enable  any  assemblage  of  voters,  amounting  to  a  certain  num- 
ber, to  place  in  the  legislature  a  representative  of  its  own 
choice,  minorities  cannot  be  siippressed.  Independent  opin- 
1  DUtertatioTu  and  DUetinioiit,  1,  :«il.  >  Ibid.,  p.  382. 


.coy  Google 


MtJMH  CHiP.]     TRroMPH  OF  THE  NEW  OBDER  lOS 

ions  will  force  their  way  into  the  coancil  of  the  nation  and 
make  themselves  heard  there,  a  thing  which  often  cannot 
happen  in  the  existing  forma  of  representative  democracy ; 
and  the  legislature,  instead  of  being  weeded  of  individual 
peculiarities  and  entirely  made  up  of  men  who  simply  repre- 
sent the  creed  of  great  political  and  religious  parties,  will 
comprise  a  large  proportion  of  the  most  eminent  individual 
minds  in  the  country  placed  there,  without  reference  to  party, 
by  voters  who  appreciate  their  individual  eminence." ' 

Hare's  idea  was  not  an  entirely  new  one,'  but  as  conceived 
and  stated  by  him  and  expounded  by  Mill  it  was  really  a  great 
landmark  in  the  history  of  political  thought  and  in  the  art  of 
political  legislation.  It  was  the  first  and  still  remains  the 
most  important  practical  attempt  that  has  been  made  to  or- 
ganize numbers  in  democracies.  It  was  the  first  proposal 
which  grasped  the  new  material  and  moral  conditions  under 
which  representative  government  would  have  to  work  in  the 
future,  which  recognized  the  necessity  of  replacing  the  old 
social  ties  now  snapped  asunder  by  Bpontaneoua  and  deliber- 
ate ones,  of  protecting  the  individual  against  his  new  master, 
the  sovereign  people,  of  establishing  politics  on  an  ethical  basis 
by  paying  attention  to  justice  in  the  distribution  of  power 
among  the  units  of  the  sovereign,  and  of  introducing  a  moral 
criterion  in  the  choice  of  the  men  appointed  to  govern  the 
State  by  lifting  electoral  life  out  of  the  narrow  and  corrupt 

I  Autobioipvphv  of  J.  S.  Hill,  pp.  2)8,  2S9. 

'  As  early  as  tbe  debates  od  the  firat  Reform  Bill  ne  find  germs  of  It,* 
which  were  sabseqaently  developed  in  some  wrltlnga.t  and  iucorporated  In  a 
elaaie  at  Lord  John  SnsBetl's  Beforni  Bill  ot  IHM.  On  the  continent  Victor 
ConsldiraDt,  the  celebrated  Fourierist,  raised  the  question  as  far  back  as 
1S34.  At  Qeoeva.  where  he  was  living,  he  pointed  out  at  public  meetings  the 
drltcts  n(  the  system  ot  majorities,  and  recommeiidod  the  substitution  of 
a  melbod  of  election  based  on  a  prellminar?  groapinic  of  eleclora  in  "con- 
Ntinencies  of  opinion"  and  even  submitted  bis  plan  to  tbe  Orand  Council 
of  Geneva  in  1846.) 

Id  .\merlca  tbe  question  of  minority  representation  was  broached  for  the  first 
time  in  a  pamphlet  ot  Thomas  Qllpln  on  "  Tbe  representation  of  minorities  o( 
electora  to  act  with  the  majorities  in  Elerted  Assemblies."    PhUadelpMa,  ISM. 

•  Pnad'i  DMtlaB  In  I8»t  (ffntm-rd.  Vol.  1*«,  p.  10IB>. 

tJ.  O.  MviluU.  On  jrOMHfiMKNd  JT'ifaHIiM,  Loud.  lBaS:5i>«Kaeor,  lea;  AMn- 
fturir*  SeelKc,  July.  ISU. 

1  Bit  nrjIitwcMlDg  drcDlu-oD  thla  anblKt,  wldnSKd  tn  tba  nwmbartafttac  Ormsd  Conn- 
dL  ud  anailHl "  De  la  dnc^riti  do  Rouvsmsment  repreiX'nUurou  eipoalUuD  da  rilMtlan 
•Mdlf Be."  bu  bveu  reprinted  it  ZUrlch,  lo  lS»1f  ( [niprlnicrie  de  li  SocMte  auitse  du  Oriklll). 


.coy  Google 


106  DEMOCBACT  AND  POLITICAL  PARTIES     [rtsat  fabt 

groove  of  traditioDal  partieB.  Unfortunately  there  was  a  dis- 
proportion between  the  end  in  view  and  the  means  suggested. 
The  improvement  proposed  in  the  electoral  machinery,  ingen- 
ious as  it  was,  could  not  of  itself  alone  supply  the  moral 
force  of  which  the  new  political  society  stood  in  need;  the 
justice  which  it  claimed  to  secure  in  political  relations  was 
chiefly  an  arithmetical  justice;  the  psychological  reaction 
which  the  new  electoral  system  was  intended  to  produce  in  the 
electors,  however  probable  and  salutary,  could  only  be  of  a  very 
indirect  and  consequently  very  limited  kind,  in  any  event  too 
limited  to  cover  the  whole  field  of  political  life  and  become 
its  motive  power.  Viewed  with  reference  to  the  effect  which 
it  held  out,  the  plan  of  "  personal  representation  "  inevitably 
laid  itself  open  to  the  criticism  which  Milt  himself  passed  on 
Bentham  in  a  sentence  pregnant  with  meaning  in  spite  of  its 
apparent  truism :  "  Nobody's  synthesis  can  be  more  complete 
than  Mb  analysis." '  Confined  to  electoral  arrangements,  the 
political  synthesis  which  it  was  supposed  to  offer  was  not  a 
synthesis  at  all.  Mill  was  all  the  less  able  to  see  the  weak- 
ness of  his  position  because  there  was  no  other  alternative 
open  to  him.  Led  by  the  principle  of  utility  to  install  num- 
bers as  the  supreme  power  in  the  State,  and  perceiving  sub- 
sequently that  the  individual  ran  the  risk  of  being  crushed 
by  numbers  which  had  become  master,  the  philosopher  had 
nowhere  to  look  for  protection  for  his  unfortunate  client ;  for, 
laden  with  the  original  sin  of  Benthamism,  he  had  repudiated 
the  sovereignty  of  right  in  politics  just  as  he  had  rejected  that 
of  duty  in  the  moral  sphere.  As  only  material  forces  remained 
to  be  brought  into  play,  there  was  nothing  whatever  to  interfere 
between  the  individual  interest  and  the  multiplied  interest  of 
numbers,  unless  some  new  dynamical  combination  could  be  de- 
vised to  enable  the  weak  to  bold  Its  own  £^ainst  the  strong.  In 
proportional  representation,  Mill  believed  that  he  had  at  last 
hit  on  this  undiscoverable  combination,  and  hence  his  delight 
("  this  great  discovery  inspired  me  with  new  and  more  san- 
guine hopes  respecting  the  prospects  of  human  society "), 
which  under  the  circumstances  strikes  us  as  excessive  for  such 
a  powerful  intellect.  He  fastened  on  it  with  all  the  resources 
of  his  genius,  as  a  shipwrecked  man  clings  with  all  his  strength 
to  the  plank  that  comes  within  his  reach.  He  matte  Hare's 
1  DU»ertalioju  aad  DUcuttimu,  1, 300. 


.CD,  Google 


PODKTB  oup.]      TRIUMPH  OF  THE  NBW  ORDER  107 

plan  Ms  own,  laid  it  before  public  opinion,  enforced  general 
attention  to  it  by  the  prestige  of  his  name,  brought  the  question 
within  the  category  of  the  great  problems  of  polities,  and 
finally  submitted  it  to  Parliament,  to  which  he  had  in  the 
meanwhile  been  elected. 

When  the  debates  on  the  Reform  Bill  were  drawing  to  an 
end,  Mill  moved  the  insertion  of  a  clause  relating  to  per- 
sonal representation.  According  to  the  amendment  which  he 
brought  forward  with  this  object,  in  the  sitting  of  the  30th 
May,  1867,  the  total  number  of  votes  recorded  throughout  the 
Kingdom  in  the  same  election,  divided  by  658  (the  number  of 
members  to  be  elected),  was  to  determine  the  minimum  of  votes 
necessary  for  the  election  of  a  candidate,  and  all  the  votes 
given  to  a  candidate,  even  in  more  than  one  constituency,  hav- 
ing been  added  up  and  credited  to  him,  any  candidate  who 
received  the  above-mentioned  quotient  of  votes,  whether  in 
his  own  constituency  or  in  several  taken  together,  would  be 
declared  elected.  The  electors  were  to  have  the  power  of 
speci^ng  several  candidates  in  the  order  of  preference  which 
they  assigned  to  them,  but  an  elector's  vote  would  only  count 
for  one  candidate;  if  the  candidate  had  already  obtained  a 
nnmber  of  votes  exceeding  the  quotient  necessary  t»  secure 
election,  the  surplus  would  be  transferred  to  the  candidates 
who  had  not  attained  the  quotient  at  the  first  start,  always 
following  the  order  of  preference  indicated,  until  the  num- 
ber of  658  members  was  completed.  In  the  speech  which 
Mill  delivered  in  support  of  the  amendment,  he  painted  out 
with  much  force  that  the  proposed  enactment  was  not  inspired 
by  any  considerations  of  party ;  that  far  from  allowing  one  party 
to  lord  it  over  all  the  others,  its  result  would  be  to  save  those 
which  were  in  danger  of  being  overwhelmed;  that  it  would 
remedy  the  inherent  defect  of  representative  government,  which 
ia  that  minorities  defeated  in  elections  are  left  without  any  rep- 
resentation and  that  local  majorities  themselves  are  not  faith- 
fnlly  represented,  the  voter  being  obliged  to  choose  between 
the  candidates  of  the  two  great  parties,  who  are  often  selected 
by  intrigue  and  thrust  upon  the  constituency  by  corruption. 
'Oie  exclusion  of  minorities  on  the  pretext  that  the  opinion  of 
the  minority  defeated  in  one  constituency  is  successful  in 
another  is  not  in  accordance  with  the  representative  system, 


.coy  Google 


lOe  DEMOCBACT  AND  POLITICAL  PARTIES    [nmr  hm 

the  object  of  which  is  to  insure  the  representation  not  of 
paxties,  but  of  citizens.  Every  opinion  entertained  by  a  rea- 
sonable number  of  electors  ought  to  be  directly  represented, 
and  the  sentiments,  opinions,  and  interests  of  a  community 
must  not  be  subordinated  to  party  considerations-  The  option 
irhich  the  electors  would  be  allowed  of  giving  their  votes  to 
persons  other  than  local  candidates,  far  from  destroying  the 
local  character  of  representation,  would  enable  it  to  express 
itself  with  greater  deliberation.  The  plan  proposed  would 
suit  the  Oonservatives,  who  are  anxious  that  variety  in  repre- 
sentation should  be  maintained,  and  it  is  just  as  much  in 
harmony  with  democratic  principles,  which  demand  that  every 
one  should  be  represented  and  to  an  equal  extent  The  plan 
would  allow  the  representation  of  the  working  classes,  but  it 
would  be  a  safeguard  against  the  predominance  of  these 
classes  as  well  as  that  of  any  other  class,  and  in  this  way 
the  principles  of  spurious  democracy  would  be  opposed  by 
the  principles  of  genuine  democracy. 

This  speech  of  Mill's  was  lost  on  the  House,  the  Liberal 
members  included,  and  the  observations  presented  by  the 
greatest  thinker  of  the  time  were  on  the  point  of  being  passed 
over  amid  general  silence,  when  a  young  member,  who  already 
held  a  prominent  position  in  Parliament,  rose  from  the  Tory 
benches  to  support  Mill's  amendment.  This  was  Viscount 
Granbome,  who  has  since  become  Prime  Minister  of  England 
under  the  name  of  the  Marquis  of  Salisbury.  He  agreed  that 
the  danger  pointed  out  by  Mill  really  existed ;  that  the  result 
of  conferring  the  suffrage  on  the  multitude  would  be  to  swamp 
local  influence  and  substitute  for  it  that  of  committees  aiid 
professional  politicians,  although  he  could  not  refrain  from 
observing  that  the  mischief,  as  well  as  the  remedy  proposed, 
was  due  to  a  certain  extent  to  Mill  himself  and  to  the  school 
to  which  he  belonged.  The  philosophers  had  led  them  into 
the  difficulty ;  if  the  country  was  landed  in  household  suffrage, 
it  was  not  in  order  to  meet  a  practical  necessity,  but  to  comply 
with  philosophical  arguments.  Noting  that  power  was  after 
all  about  to  be  entrusted  not  to  philosophers,  but  to  persons 
who  were  anything  but  philosophers,  the  speaker  viewed  with 
the  greatest  apprehension  that,  after  the  non-philosophical  Eng- 
lish mind  had  been  carried  a  certain  distance,  people  shrai^ 


.coy  Google 


wovtrH  CRAP.]     TBIUMPH  OF  THE  NEW  ORDER  109 

from  adopting  the  remediee  which  the  philosophere  tecom- 
meuded  for  preveuting  the  evils  inhereat  in  the  advanced 
political  condition  of  society.  They  were  putting  new  wine 
in  old  bottles.  Household  sufEr^e  bad  just  been  granted 
on  purely  theoretical  principles ;  why  then  should  they  reject 
a  purely  theoretical  cure  for  evils  due  to  the  extension  of  the 
suffrage  on  the  ground  that  it  was  utterly  unpractical  ?  Mill's 
amendment  therefore  deserved  most  serious  consideration. 

This  agreement  of  a  high-and-dry  Tory  like  Lord  Cranborne 
with  the  apostle  of  Kadicalism  was  piquant  enough,  but  never- 
theless logical.  Mill  was  preoccupied  with  the  fate  of  the 
abstract  individual  who  was  in  danger  of  being  overwhelmed 
by  numbers }  the  Tories  were  thinking  of  their  old  constitu- 
ents, that  is,  of  the  concrete  individuals  who  would  probably 
be  swamped  by  the  new  mass  of  voters.  Since  electoral 
reform  had  come  to  the  front  again,  they  had  exercised 
their  ingenuity  in  trying  to  discover  some  means  of  partially 
neutralizing  the  consequences  of  the  extension  of  the  suffrage. 
Their  efforts  were  directed  to  two  points,  —  the  variety  of  the 
&aochise  and  secondly  and  especially  the  homogeneily  of  the 
constituencies,  in  order  to  preserve  as  much  as  possible  of  the  old 
unity  and  social  cohesion  on  which  the  power  of  the  old  ruling 
dass  had  rested.  As  early  as  the  Bill  of  1859  Disraeli  had  en- 
deavoured to  keep  the  country  electors  separate  from  those  of 
the  towns,  and  on  this  point  Mill  found  himself  in  agreement 
with  the  Tories  when  he  too  declared  for  the  exclusion  of  urban 
voters  from  the  county  constituencies  in  order  "  to  enable  the 
agricultural  population  to  hold  its  fair  share  of  the  representa- 
tion.'" I>uring  the  debate  on  the  Eeform  Bill  of  1866  the 
Tories  took  up  the  same  attitude  with  regard  to  the  introduc- 
tion of  urban  agglomerations  into  the  old  county  constituencies 
and  denounced  "  the  urbanizing  tendency  which  ran  through 
the  whole  of  this  Bill."  *  The  Conservatives  offered  an  equally 
determined  opposition  to  the  grouping  of  boroughs,  which  had 
hitherto  been  independent  constituencies,  into  more  or  less 
equal  electoral  districts,  for  the  result  would  be  to  destroy  the 
individuality  of  these  boroughs  and  put  an  end  to  the  time- 
honoured  social  and  political  relations  which  had  grown  up 

1  Thoughts  on  Parliamentary  Stf(yrm,  LoDd.  18G9,  p.  IS. 
*  Hantard,  Vol.  163,  p.  1S3&. 


.coy  Google 


110  DEMOCRACY  AND  POLITICAL  PARTIES    [Fnm  fait 

with  them.  With  unerring  inatinct  the  Tories  discerned  that 
the  break-up  of  the  old  society,  with  all  its  political  conse- 
quences, would  be  consummated  by  an  electoral  reform  which 
tended  in  the  direction  of  a  uniform  suffrage  and  equal  electo- 
ral districts.  "  Such  a  system  was  about  the  most  destructive 
Butgical  operation  you  could  put  a  country  through ;  it  would 
be  a  severing  of  the  limbs  from  the  trunk,  and  cutting  through 
the  muscles  and  sinews  of  the  body  politic."  ...  "If  they  left 
the  people  under  their  natural  leaders,  and  if  they  had  natu- 
rally selected  districts,  there  was  no  fear  that  the  people  would 
choose  improper  men,  and  there  would  be  no  need  of  checks  or 
counterpoises  to  defend  the  minority." '  Lord  Cranbome  saw 
clearly  that  all  these  pious  wishes  could  be  nothing  but  wishes 
in  a  society  with  its  old  unity  gone  and  with  its  traditional 
relations  irrevocably  destroyed,  and  that  the  old  political  weap- 
ons had  grown  rus^ ;  consequently  he  boldly  laid  his  hand  on 
the  armour  forged  by  Mill  for  the  use  of  the  abstract  individual 
in  order  to  arm  his  own  followers  with  it. 

Lord  Craubome's  speech  made  a  considerable  impression, 
and  he  was  thanked  for  having  saved  the  House  from  a  great 
disgrace  by  his  intervention,  but  in  view  of  the  hostile  attitude 
of  Parliament,  Mill  withdrew  his  amendment. 

A  month  later  the  question  came  before  the  House  again  in 
consequence  of  an  amendment  moved  by  Robert  Lowe,  who 
proposed  that  in  every  constituency  with  more  than  one  seat 
the  elector  who  had  to  record  a  number  of  votes  equal  to  the 
number  of  seats  might  give  them  all  to  one  candidate  or  dis- 
tribute them  among  several  candidates.  In  the  debate,  which 
on  this  occasion  was  a  lengthy  one,  the  speakers  on  one  side 
dwelt  on  the  necessity  of  giving  minorities  the  means  of  making 
themselves  heard  in  Parliament,  of  defending  themselves  and. 
of  protecting  their  interests,  and  at  the  same  time  of  insuring 
a  certain  variety  in  the  national  representation ;  while  on  the 
other  side  every  measure  for  the  representation  of  minorities 
was  regarded  as  a  spoliation  of  the  majority  and  an  attack  on 
the  true  principles  of  representative  government.  This  last 
position  was  upheld  by  John  Bright,  the  famous  orator  and  a,t 
that  time  one  of  the  leaders  of  advanced  Liberalism.  Warmly 
protesting  his  devotion  to  "  the  ancient  ways  of  the  Constita- 
1  Bantaril,  Vol.  186.  pp,  B75, 5T6. 


.coy  Google 


FOTOTH  CHAP.]      TRIUMPH  OF  THE  NEW  ORDER  111 

tdon,"  a  devotion  of  which  people  hardly  suspected  him  capa- 
ble, he  adjured  the  House  not  to  allow  itself  to  be  led  away 
by  "new-fangled  ideas."  The  amendment  was  rejected.  But 
the  friends  of  minority  representation  were  more  Buccesaful  in 
the  House  of  Lords,  On  the  motion  of  Lord  Cairns  the  Upper 
Chamber  inserted  a  clause  in  the  Reform  Bill  enacting  that  in 
the  twelve  three-cornered  constituencies  the  elector  could  not 
vote  for  more  than  two  candidates,  and  in  the  city  of  London, 
which  returned  four  members,  for  more  than  three ;  then  the  re- 
maining seat  was  bound  to  revert  to  the  minority  if  it  amounted 
to  one-third  (or  to  one-fourth  in  the  city  of  London)  of  the 
constituency.  When  the  Bill  was  sent  back  to  the  House  of 
Commons,  the  new  clause  inserted  by  the  Lords  was  strongly 
attacked.  John  Bright  once  more  exerted  himself  vigorously 
and  undertook  to  move  its  rejection.  The  effect  might  be, 
he  asserted,  not  to  confer  a  representation  on  minorities,  but 
to  curb  the  democracy,  to  defraud  the  population  of  the  large 
towns  of  a  part  of  their  representation ;  by  guaranteeing  a  seat 
to  the  minority  beforehand,  the  contest  was  nullified  for  the 
majority  and  st^nation  introduced  into  political  life ;  the  side 
which  had  a  majority  was  cheated  not  only  by  withdrawing  a 
Beat  from  it,  but  by  neutralizing  the  vote  of  a  member  of  the 
majority  by  that  of  the  member  for  the  minority;  henceforth 
each  constituency  would  have  two  voices,  of  which  one  will 
say  white  and  the  other  black,  like  a  conjuror  who  produces 
port,  champagne,  milk,  or  water  out  of  the  same  bottle;  it 
vraa  difficult  to  Imagine  a  principle  more  calculated  to  destroy 
the  vitality  of  the  elective  system.  Every  plan  of  this  kind 
-would  enfeeble  and  finally  destroy  the  authority  and  strength 
of  the  executive  government  Some  of  these  arguments  had 
already  been  used  by  Disraeli  in  the  debate  on  Lowe's  amend- 
ment 

In  1832,  when  the  rotten  boroughs  were  about  to  be  abol- 
ished, Wellington  asked  with  nalive  dismay :  "  How  will  the 
King's  government  be  carried  on  ?  "  Bright  now  aaid  much 
the  same  thing:  How  could  you  have  your  snug  majority  if 
yott  took  so  much  care  of  the  minority.  It  was  the  cry  of 
the  old  party  system,  which  had  been  suffering  from  an 
acute  internal  malady  since  1846,  and  was  now  touched 
to  the   quick   by  the   proposed  scheme   of   personal  repre- 


.coy  Google 


112  DEMOCBACT  AKD  POLITICAL  FABTIES    [nur  fam 

s«ntatioD.  That  a  great  party  leader  like  Disraeli  should 
join  in  this  out«ry  was  nattiral  enough.  But  that  Bright 
should  constitute  himself  the  mouthpiece  of  it  was  perhaps 
somewhat  inconsistent  with  the  reputation  of  political  icono- 
clast which  his  opponents  had  conferred  on  him  during  the 
first  half  of  his  public  career.  In  reality  he  was  nothing 
of  the  kind.  When  Bright  protested  his  attachment  t»  the 
"  ancient  ways  of  the  constitution,"  he  was  perfectly  sincere, 
more  so  even  than  he  imbued  himself.  Id  spite  of  his  de- 
meanour of  a  tribune  of  the  people,  Bright  was  nerer  a  demo- 
crat; his  generous  and  passionate  temperament  gave  him  a 
cert^n  afQnity  with  the  people,  but  he  wasathoroi^h  boargeoU 
in  mind.  Unlimited  freedom  for  trade  and  labour,  endless  de- 
velopment of  manufactures,  the  destruction  of  the  landlords' 
"  hereditary  privileges,"  and  the  permanent  exclusion  of  the 
Tory  party  from  power  was  enough  for  his  ideal.  In  Brighfs 
eyes  democracy  was  a  party,  the  good  and  the  right  party,  to 
which  he  belonged  and  for  which  he  laboured,  and  which  now, 
thanks  to  the  extension  of  the  franchise,  would  be  placed  on  a 
solid  basis  throughout  the  country.  Any  measure  tending  to 
limit  the  power  of  the  majority  wovild  undermine  this  founda- 
tion, would  be  an  unfair  blow  levelled  at  the  democracy,  a 
dodge  of  the  Tories  brought  to  bay,  and  an  invention  of  the 
philosophers.  The  great  mass  of  members,  whose  political 
horizon  waa  not  wider  than  Bright's,  were  only  too  ready  to 
adopt  this  point  of  view,  that  of  party  interests. 

Thus  as  England  was  about  to  cross  the  very  threshold  of 
democracy  a  singular  antagonism  broke  out :  on  the  one  side 
people  wanted  to  protect  the  individual  from  the  oppression 
of  numbers  which  owed  their  supremacy  to  the  individual- 
ist movement,  while  on  the  other  side  they  were  anxious  to 
defend  numbers  in  order  to  maintain  the  old  system  of  party 
governnieot  which  the  same  movement  was  breaking  up.  Each 
of  these  propositions  presented  a  problem  of  the  utmost  gravity 
for  the  future  of  England.  If  the  individual  had  to  defend 
himself  against  democracy,  and  if  democracy  could  only  be 
founded  ou  the  uncontrolled  dominion  of  numbers,  would  it 
not  he  like  a  new  Saturn  devouring  its  children  ?  If  in  order 
to  consolidate  itself  it  clung  to  the  old  party  system  which  had 
decayed  under  the  action  of  the  very  forces  which  had  given 


.coy  Google 


roDBTn  CHA1'.]      TRIUMPH  OF  THE  NEW  ORDER  113 

democracy  life,  would  it  not  impaii  the  vigour  of  this  life  and 
perliapa  dry  up  its  source,  or,  to  apply  Lord  Cranborne's  homely 
simile  in  a  wider  sense,  would  not  the  new  wine  be  irretriev- 
ably spoiled  by  putting  it  in  old  bottles  ?  AVhatever  was  des- 
tined to  be  the  outcome  of  the  impending  conflict,  the  first  act 
of  a  stirring  drama  was  evidently  beginning  on  the  political 
stage  of  England. 

The  opposition  of  Br^ht  and  of  several  other  members  to ' 
Lord  Cairns'  clause  was  not  successful  in  Parliament;  the 
Houae  of  Commons,  after  an  animated  debate,  agreed  to  the 
amendment  voted  by  the  Lords.  The  principle  of  the  repre- 
sentation of  minorities  obtained  the  sanction  of  the  law,  al- 
though in  a  qualified  form  and  to  a  limited  extent.  But  the 
opposition  which  it  aroused  did  not  come  to  an  end.  Bright, 
in  particular,  was  irreconcilable.  He  appealed  to  the  elector^ 
body  with  all  the  vehemence  of  whiclk  he  was  capable,  and 
this  was  considerable.  "  An  odious  and  infamous  clause,"  "  the 
most  outrageous  heresy  against  a  popidar  representative  sys- 
tem which  was  ever  propounded  in  the  legislature,"  "  a  clause 
which  ought  to  have  come  not  from  the  honest  representation 
of  the  people,  but  from  Bedlam  or  a  region  like  that "  —  these 
were  the  terms  in  which  Bright  described  the  minority  clause 
to  his  constituents  in  Birmingham.  This  town  was  one  of 
those  to  which  the  new  system  of  voting  was  to  be  applied. 
"  Every  Liberal  throughout  the  United  Kingdom,"  said 
Bright^  "is  asking:  'What  is  Birmingham  going  to  do  with 
the  minority  clause  ? ' " 

Birmingham  was  not  long  in  returning  an  answer.  It 
created  the  "  Caucus,"  a  permanent  electoral  combination  for 
fighting  the  battle  of  majorities  under  the  banner  of  the  demo- 
cratic Liberal  party.  The  new  institution,  which  was  soon  ex- 
tended to  the  whole  country,  became  the  starting-point  of  a 
movement  which  is  still  far  from  being  exhausted,  and  which 
will  perhaps  exercise  a  decisive  influence  on  the  destinies  of 
English  democracy.  Started  in  opposition  to  the  minority 
clause,  which  was  a  partial  attempt  at  organizing  electoral 
opinion,  the  more  successful  Birmingham  movement  has  in 
point  of  fact  undertaken,  in  a  fashion,  the  organization  of  the 
electoral  masses.  Arising  at  the  very  moment  when  the  great 
extension  of  the  suffrage  made  the  need  for  it  peculiarly  felt. 


.coy  Google 


lU  DEMOCBACT  AND  POIJTICAL  PABTIE8    [fimt  past 

it  has  put  forward  a  Bolution  of  the  problem  stated  at  the 
commeDcemeiit  of  this  work,  and  of  which  we  have  just  fin- 
iaKed  analysing  the  historical  factors.  What  is  the  economy, 
the  efficacy,  and  the  bearing  of  this  solution  ?  To  form  a 
proper  estimate  of  them  we  must  turn  to  the  movement  inau- 
pirated  at  Birmingham  and  follow  its  evolution  closely.  We 
shall  therefore  quit  the  high  road  of  English  history  and  enter 
the  8ide>path  of  extia-parljamentary  electoral  orgamzation. 


.coy  Google 


SECOND  PART 


D,g,l,i.aD,  Google 


.CD,  Google 


FIRST  CHAPTER 


E  OBIGEKB   OF   POLITIC AI. 


The  form  of  the  combination  started  at  Birmingham  for 
fighting  the  battle  of  democracy — political  asaociaiion  and  ita 
basis — party  organization,  were  already  familiar  to  English 
pablic  life.  A  short  survey  of  the  precedents  of  extra-con- 
stitutional political  organization  in  England  may  therefore 
assist  us  in  foUowii^  its  subsequent  development. 


Before  liberty  had  become  the  basis  of  government,  popular 
opposition  and  discontent  found  vent  in  riots  and  civil  wars. 
In  proportion  as  the  regime  of  opinion  took  the  place  of  that 
of  bmte  force,  internal  conflicts  assumed  another  character. 
The  adjustment  of  differences  was  henceforth  left  to  the  free 
play  of  the  moral  forces  of  the  nation ;  conspiracies  were  to 
give  way  to  a  union  of  convictions,  and  revolts  to  the  manifes- 
tation of  these  convictions.  But  the  transition  was  a  long 
one.  England  succeeded  sooner  than  other  nations  in  creating 
a  constitutional  organ  for  making  the  voice  of  the  country 
heard.  Nevertheless  she  had  to  struggle  for  centuries,  and 
often  sword  in  hand,  in  older  to  convert  constitutional  govern- 
ment into  a  reality.  The  Crown,  defeated  in  its  duel  with  the 
nation  represented  by  Parliament,  endeavoured  to  obtain  con- 
trol of  Parliament  by  corruption,  and  succeeded.  But  public 
opinion  rose  up  once  more  against  it  for  a  final  stru^le.  This 
is  the  drama  which  occupies  the  first  half  of  the  long  re^n  of 
George  III.  The  beginning  of  this  reign  was  particularly 
disturbed.  The  populace,  injured  in  its  immediate  interests, 
which  were  neglected  by  Parliament,  or  affected  by  the  gen- 
eral grievances  of  the  country,  whether  real  or  imaginary, 


.coy  Google 


118  DEMOCRACY  AND  POLITICAL  PARTIES     [i»coiiti  paht 

resorted  to  riots,  in  the  old  fashion.'  The  ^ite  of  the  nation, 
on  the  other  hand,  were  so  convinced  of  the  justice  of  their 
cause  that  they  deemed  it  sufficient  to  combat  the  corruption 
of  Parliament  with  the  moral  force  of  opinion. 

Bat  as  this  very  Parliament  happened  to  be  the  constitu- 
tional mouthpiece  of  opinion,  it  was  necessary  to  look  about 
for  another  instrument  to  give  general  expreasiOD  to  popular 
aspirations.  The  Press,  still  in  its  Infancy,  was  deficient  in 
authority.  The  right  of  petitioning,  one  of  the  glorious  con- 
quests of  English  liberty,  has  generally  been  used,  —  except 
during  the  period  of  the  Revolution, — as  a  means  of  obtain- 
ing redress  for  individual  or  local  grievances.  To  make  an 
impression  on  the  Government,  in  the  general  interest,  the 
cooperation  of  the  masses  was  necessary.  Public  meetings 
are  destined  to  supply  the  first  weapon  for  securing  this. 
The  resolutions  voted  in  them  will  be  transmitted  to  Parlia- 
ment by  means  of  petitions.  But,  in  order  that  these  petitions 
should  carry  weight,  they  must  be  numerous,  and  agree  in 
their  demands.  This  result  can  only  be  achieved  if  the  move- 
ment is  organized  and  controlled.  Committees  and  associa- 
tions will  therefore  be  formed  for  this  purpose. 

The  disturbances  caused  by  Wilkes'  case  gave  the  signal 
for  these  manifestations.  The  House  of  Commons  expelled 
Wilkes,  a  journalist  and  pamphleteer  who  was  obnoxious  to 
Ministers,  and  then,  altiiough  he  was  re-elected  several 
times  in  succession,  declared  his  election  null  and  void  each 
time,  and  finally  gave  his  seat  to  a  rival  candidate,  who 
had  been  brought  forward  against  him,  but  who  had  been 
defeated  at  the  polls.  Indignant  at  the  expulsion  of  their 
member,  Wilkes'  constituents  subscribed  large  sums  to  defray 
the  expense  of  a  fresh  election,  an(kforwarded  petitions  and 
remonstrances  to  the  King.  In  several  counties  meetings  were 
organized  to  support  the  protest  ^^nst  the  violation  of  law 
committed  by  Parliament  From  this  time  forward  the  hold- 
ing of  public  meetings  became  a  regular  practice  in  England, 
and  they  soon  developed  into  a  national  institution.  At 
one  of  tiie  meetings  held  in  London  in  consequence  of  the 
invalidation  of  Wilkes'  re-election,  those  who  took  part  in  it, 
people  of  note,  formed  themselves  into  a  "  Society  for  support- 

<  Weaver'a  rtota  In  ITSS,  riots  olrant  WUkM  in  1T68,  Ooidoa  riots  In  ITSO,  «te. 


.coy  Google 


MB8T  CHAP.]     ORIOraS  OF  POLITICAL  ASSOCLATIONS  119 

ing  the  Bill  of  Rights." '  In  this  way  the  first  political  asso- 
ciation was  founded.  The  significance  of  the  new  institution 
which  was  making  its  way  into  political  life  was  appreciated  at 
once.  "  This  was  deemed,"  we  read  in  the  "  Memoirs  "  of  one  of 
the  principal  promoters  of  the  Society,  Home  Tooke,  "  a  favour- 
able conjuncture  to  organize  a  new  as  well  as  formidable  species 
of  opposition,  and  by  means  of  political  associations  to  concen- 
trate the  hitherto  unheeded  resentments  and  influence  of  a  num- 
ber of  scattered  individuals  into  one  formidable  mass  whicb, 
without  either  the  forms  or  restraints  of  a  body  politic,  should 
produce  all  the  spirit,  zeal,  and  effect  of  a  great  corporation."' 
The  Society  proposed  to  assist  every  one  affected  by  the  arbi- 
trary conduct  of  the  authorities,  and  by  its  meetings,  its  speeches 
and  its  pecuniary  sacrifices,  it  did  a  great  deal  to  keep  ^e  pub- 
lic mind  on  the  alert  and  to  reassert  the  discredited  principles  of 
law  and  public  liberties  in  more  than  one  individual  case.  The 
famous  author  of  the  "  Letters  of  Junius,"  in  beaiing  testimony 
to  the  services  which  the  Society  was  rendering  to  the  common 
weal,  recommended  the  formation  of  similar  societies  through- 
out the  Kingdom.  The  "Society  for  supporting  the  Bill  of 
Rights"  soon  fell  to  pieces  owing  to  the  action  of  Wilkes' 
friends,  who  wanted  to  make  it  an  instrument  for  securing 
his  personal  ends.  The  other  members  parted  company  with 
Wilkes'  friends,  and  founded  a  new  society  (Constitutional 
Society),  which  was  shortily  followed  by  other  associations  of 
small  importance.' 

A  few  years  later,  in  consequence  of  the  shock  given  to  the 
public  mind  by  the  secession  of  the  American  colonies,  the 
movement  gathered  force.  When  the  expenses  of  the  war 
which  was  still  going  on  increased  the  waste  of  money  caused 
by  bribing  members  of  Parliament  and  keeping  up  the  numer- 
ous sinecures  by  which  their  creatures  were  maintained,  public 
opinion  arose  and  demanded  that  the  scandals  connected  with 
the  administration  of  the  finances  should  be  put  an  end  to.  It 
was  resolved  to  get  up  a  number  of  petitions  to  demand  economic 
reforms,  to  which  was  soon  added  the  reform  of  parliamentary 

I  MetTioirt  of  John  Home  Tooke.  by  Alel.  Stephens,  Loud.  ISl-3.  Vol.  I,  p. 
IS] ;  Tti€  Ci>rre»potulence  of  John  Wilke»  and  Memotrt  qf  hit  Hfe,  bj  Jabn 
AlmoD,  Loud.  1809,  Vol.  IV,  pp.  7-14. 

*  Uemoiri  of  Bon\i  Tooke,  1, 161.  *  VtiA.  \  ITS. 


.coy  Google 


120  DBMOCHACT  AND  POLmCAL  Pi3'nE8    [fBcom  fut 

representation,  which  was  considered  the  surest  means  of  effect- 
ing the  suppression  of  abuses  and  preventing  their  recurrence. 
A  "corresponding  committee"  was  appointed  in  each  county, 
with  power  to  control  the  movement  Yorkshire  set  the  ex- 
ample. At  a  great  meeting  of  the  gentry,  clei^y,  and  free- 
holders of  the  county  a  petition  was  drawn  up  and  a  committee 
appointed  with  the  duty  of  corresponding  on  the  subject  of  the 
petition  and  of  "  preparing  a  plan  of  an  association,  on  legal 
and  constitutional  grounds,  to  support  the  laudable  reform 
and  such  other  measufe  as  might  conduce  to  restore  the  free- 
dom of  Parliament." '  The  zeal  of  the  reformers  wasgreat;  the 
baneful  influence  of  the  Crown  was  denounced  in  all  quarters; 
petitions  were  covered  with  signatures.  In  some  counties,  how- 
ever, doubts  arose  as  to  the  expediency  of  the  committees. 
The  mere  term  "  corresponding  committee  "  evoked  unpleasant 
memories,  for  it  was  the  name  of  the  popular  organizations 
which  had  prepared  the  revolution  in  the  American  colonies. 
These  organizations  had  arisen  at  Boston,  through  the  efforts  of 
a  group  of  influential  men  who  had  taken  up  public  affairs  and 
who  formed  themselves  into  a  small  informal  body  styled  "  Cau- 
cus.'"   When  the  relations  with  the  mother-country  became 

1  Anntial  RegUler,  1780,  p.  85. 

'  Tbii  word  has  been  adopted  in  American  political  termlnolOKT  (rom  tbe 
18th  vHDturf  onward,  to  denote  a  amall  committee  ot  men  who  Bettte  electoral 
aSalra  privately  beforeliaTid.  The  nickname  "caacua"  has  had  a  wotiderfiil 
success.  It  has  become  the  synoDj'ai  (or  a  political  Byitem,  and  a  name  tor 
extra-parliamentary  part;  orf^nizations,  btoufiht  about  by  the  advent  of 
radical  democracy  in  tbe  Uaited  Statea,  and,  In  our  day,  in  England.  In  Ibis 
Bcnse  the  expresalon  "  cuucua  "  will  often  tecnr  In  this  book. 

The  origin  of  this  word  which  has  come  Into  SDcb  ganeral  ose  Is  very  niicer- 
tain.  Several  theoHea  have  been  advanced  on  the  subject.  According  to  some 
the  term  "caucus"  is  supposed  to  come  (torn  Ibe  Norlh  American  Indians, 
from  the  word  kaa-ka-iB-icaa.  which  In  their  langnage  meant  to  talk,  to  gl*« 
advice,  to  Instigate,  and  b;  a  transition  denoted  tbe  persons  who  performed 
these  acts  as  well ;  substantives  with  the  satne  root  are  also  quoted,  coicoiu- 
tciutougliei,  used  to  denote  the  elders  ot  a  tribe  or  family,  and  caiicDrouw. 
which  was  the  equivalent  of  "chief"  or  "captain."  Another  theory,  backed 
by  the  authority  ot  well-known  lexicographers,  such  as  Webster,  Worcester, 
and  Pickering,  derives  "caucus"  from  the  English  word  "calker"  or 
"cautker,"  tbe  proper  pronunciation  of  which  is  supposed  to  have  been 
altered  in  the  expressions  "  caulker's  meeting  "  or  "  caolker's  club."  Accord- 
ing to  some  it  tWerred  to  the  calkera  Id  the  Boston  dockyards,  wbo,  when 
seeking  radrees  against  the  English  soldiers  with  wliom  they  came  In  conflict, 
assembled  In  meetings  at  which,  as  it  would  appear,  delegates  were  oboMn 
to  bring  their  griBvaiioes  before  tbe  authorities.     Pickering,  who  In  his 


.coy  Google 


rjut cHip]      OBIGINS  OF  POLITICAL  ASSOCIATIONS  121 

particularly  strained,  the  members  of  the  Caucus,  in  order  to 
stimulate  the  spirit  of  resistance,  procured  (in  1772)  the  ap- 
pointment by  the  people  of  Boston  of  a  corresponding  eom- 
mittee  of  twenty-one  members,  whose  duty  was  to  enter  into 
communication  with  the  inhabitants  of  all  the  other  places  in 
Massachusetts.  This  example  was  followed  by  Virginia  and 
other  colonies.  The  consequence  was  that  in  Eilgland,  in  1780, 
many  persons  who  had  great  sympathy  for  the  petitioning 
movement  against  the  Crown  and  a  venal  Parliament,  were 
afraid  that  tlie  committees  and  associations,  when  once  formed, 
might  be  launched  on  an  incline  which  it  would  be  difBcult  to 
reascend ;  and  in  four  counties  no  committees  were  appointed. 
Wiile  the  petitions  from  the  counties  which  had  been  lodged 
in  the  House  of  Commons  were  awaiting  their  turn  to  be 
examined,  and  Burke  was  delivering  his  famous  speech  on  the 
plan  of  economic  reform,  the  chairmen  of  several  committees 
who  had  come  up  to  London  invited  the  county  associations  to 
send  delegates  to  deliberate  on  the  best  mode  of  ensuring  the 
success  of  the  petitions  and  on  other  matters  of  importance. 
A  letter  enclosed  with  the  convening  circular  expressed  the 
hope  that  "  each  county,  city,  and  town,  having  first  associated 
separately  and  apart,  on  grounds  which  have  received  the 
general  approbation,  the  whole  body  of  the  petitioners  in  due 
time  may  be  collected  and  firmly  consolidated  in  one  great 
'National  Association.'  The  obvious  consequence  of  ^ich 
must  be  certain  and  complete  success  to  the  constitutional 
reform  proposed  by  the  people." '  The  delegates  arrived  and 
by  a  considerable  display  of  energy  succeeded  in  creating 
alarm  in  more  than  one  quarter.  "  The  Committees  of  Asso- 
ciation began  to  give  great  alarm.    They  voted  themselves  a 

DKiioneay  also  derives  "  caucus  "  from  the  calkers,  explains  that,  accontiDg 
to  a  vereloD  transmitted  to  hlin  b;  persons  living  at  the  time,  the  term 
"  vaacoa  "  was  applied  (o  political  meetiugs  in  an  Invidious  sense  in  order  to 
connect  them  with  the  lowest  claa»  of  men  in  the  social  stale  who  attended 
the  meetings  ol  cullterB,  or  met  In  the  calking  houle  or  caulk/ioiae.  Accord- 
ing lo  others  the  Diokiiame  o[  "caurus"  is  supposed  to  have  been  ((Iven  to 
private  gatherings  of  politicians  in  Boston,  In  this  case  also  by  a  modifica- 
tion o(  the  word  "  canlker,"  because  they  held  their  meptinija  in  the  caulker'* 
c/u().  or  In  a  room  which  had  formerly  been  used  as  a  meeting-place  for  the 
talkers  (c(.  Ripley  and  Dana's  American  C'ycli'pKdia,  and  a  dIacuseloD  on 
the  subject  in  Kolet  and  Queriei.  1865,  Vol.  XI,  pp.  309  and  4.'>1 ;  Vol.  XU, 
pp.  U,  l'J4,  and  336).       ■  Chr.  Wyvill,  Political  Paptr;  Yotk,  I7UG,  1, 114. 


.coy  Google 


122  DEMOCRACT  AND  POLITICAL  PARTIES     [ikcomd  pabt 

right  of  considering  and  deciding  on  questions  pending  in 
Parliament,  and  of  censuring  or  approving  the  part  taken 
by  particular  members,"  writes  Horace  Walpole  in  his 
"Journal,"',  The  attitude  of  the  delegates  was  anything  but 
conducive  to  the  aucceas  of  the  petitions,  which  in  the  end  were 
put  on  one  side.  But  the  county  associations  would  not  give 
up  the  struggle,  and  in  the  following  year,  under  a  new  Par- 
liament, they  returned  to  the  charge.  On  this  occasion  several 
members  of  Parliament  on  the  Oitposition  side  of  the  House, 
such  as  Fox  and  General  Burgoyiie,  were  among  the  delegates. 
When  the  plan  of  economic  reform  proposed  for  a  second  time 
by  Burke  was  rejected  by  the  House  of  Commons,  the  dele- 
gates, or  rather  a  section  of  them,  appeared  on  the  scene  in 
person  with  a  petition  to  Parliament.  Many  of  the  dele- 
gates recoiled  before  the  apprehensions  which  had  already 
been  aroused  by  the  presence  in  the  capital  of  a  representa- 
tive delegation  deliberating  side  by  side  with  Parliament 
To  allay  these  misgivings,  the  other  delegates  who  had  signed 
the  petition  presented  it  in  their  own  name,  dropping  the  title 
of  delegates.  In  spite  of  this  precaution,  the  legality  of  the 
petition  gave  rise  to  a  very  animated  debate  in  the  House. 
Besides  the  Ministerial  majority,  which  of  course  vehemently 
denounced  the  committees  and  the  delegates,  several  indepen- 
dent members  expressed  the  opinion  that  the  associations  and 
the  meetings  of  the  delegates  were  unconstitutional ;  that  the 
members  of  the  House  were  the  proper  delegates  of  the  people; 
that  all  plans  of  reform  should  emanate  from  the  House ;  that, 
apart  from  the  extremely  laudable  object  of  the  petition  and 
the  undoubted  respectability  of  the  delegates,  the  bolder  course 
would  be  to  take  the  earliest  opportunity  of  resisting  an  extra- 
constitutional  intervention  of  this  kind  rather  than  allow  the 
creation  of  a  dangerous  precedent.*  Fox,  iu  a  show  speech,  de- 
livered a  paiiej^yric  on  the  assoctiations,  by  connecting  them  with 
the  time-honoured  struggles  for  liberty,  and  pronounced  the 
action  of  the  delegates  not  only  legal  but  highly  meritorious  con- 
sidering the  circumstances  under  which  it  had  taken  place.  Ad- 
dressing himself  to  the  legal  aspect  of  the  case,  he  asked  to  be 

i  Jovrnai  of  the  Rrign  of  King  George  111.,  Lnnil,  1R.W,  Tol.  11,  p.  378. 
*  See  the  apeecbea  ut  Coke.  Piivyg,  Sir  UuriKe  Muiu.  Rulle  ^F<a^iamenlat1/ 
Hittory,  Vol,  XXII.  pp.  144, 1.W,  196). 


.coy  Google 


»:mt  ch*p.]      origins  OF  POLITICAL  ASSOCIATIONS  123 


shown  the  law  which  prohibited  the  people  from  appointing 
delegates  to  live  in  London  for  the  purpose  of  watching  the 
conduct  of  their  representatives.  We  are  told,  he  remarked, 
that  the  committees,  the  asso<.'iation8,  and  the  delegates  want 
tooTerthrow  the  Constitution,  but  the  contrary  is  the  truth; 
for  are  not  the  delegates  rendering  homage  to  the  Sovereign 
and  to  the  omnipotence  of  Parliament  by  applying  to  them  for 
the  redress  of  their  grievances  '!  '  The  reply  was  an  adroit  one, 
but  it  was  obviously  somewhat  beside  the  real  question,  which 
was  not  whether  the  estra-constitutiona!  organization  was  con- 
trary to  or  in  conformity  with  the  letter  of  the  law,  but  whether, 
in  view  of  its  consequences,  and  of  the  reaction  which  it  might 
bring  about  in  political  life,  it  was  compatible  with  the  regu- 
lar working  of  the  representative  system.  General  Burgoyne, 
without  specifying  the  point  in  this  way,  bluntly  took  his 
stand  on  political  ground:  he  declared  that  there  were  mo- 
ment when  resistance  to  the  supreme  power  was  a  duty, 
that  cases  of  the  kind  had  esisted  in  times  when  the  encroach- 
ments of  the  Crown  were  avowed  and  obvious,  that  in  the 
present  case  the  Crown  was  aiming  at  absolute  power  by  clan- 
destine methods,  and  that  the  only  point  to  be  considered  was 
whether  the  delegates  conscientiously  believed  that  they  were 
doing  their  duty  in  promoting  the  plan  of  associations-'  The 
great  lawyer  Dunning  (afterwards  the  first  Lord  Ashburton) 
summed  up  the  debate.  In  his  opinion,  the  right  of  form- 
ing associations  was  a  corollary  of  the  right  of  petitioning ;  if 
the  citizens  had  the  right  of  forwarding  petitions  to  the  Leg- 
islature, they  were  entitled  to  unite  for  this  purpose.  To  de- 
scend to  particular  cases,  this  or  that  association  was  lawful  or 
not  according  to  the  intention  with  which  it  had  been  formed 
or  the  aim  which  it  pursued.  There  might  of  course  be  illegal 
or  criminal  associations,  but  even  these  latter  might  under  cer- 
tain circumstances  be  justifiable.  If  the  House  of  Commons, 
forgetful  of  its  origin  and  of  its  duty,  became  the  slave  of  the 
Crown  and  the  Lords  or  of  one  of  these  powers,  it  would  be 
perfectly  legal  for  the  people  of  Great  Britain  to  resume  their 
just  shMe  in  the  Legislature ;  and  the  means  employed  for  this 
purpose,  whether  associations,  remonstrances,  or  force,  would  be 
not  only  lawful  but  meritorious.  On  this  particular  occasion 
>  PaHiam.  Hitorv,  Vol.  XXU,  ff.  U4,  ITti.  *  Ibid.  p.  1S7. 


.coy  Google 


124  DEMOCRACY  AND  POLITICAL  PARTIES     [bbcoitd  p»aT 

all  the  proceedings  had  been  conducted  with  calm  and  dignity ; 
the  sole  object  of  the  members  of  the  associations  was  to  sup- 
port, by  legal  aud  constitutional  measures,  the  contents  of  the 
petitions  presented  to  Parliament  for  the  redress  of  grievances. 
As  for  tlie  dele^^ates,  their  action  was  conhued  to  the  mission 
entrusted  to  them,  namely  that  of  maintaining  the  definite 
objects  of  the  petition ;  if  they  went  beyond  this  they  would 
exceed  their  powers  and  lose  their  character  of  delegates.' 

n 

Parliament  refused  to  examine  the  petitions  promoted  by 
the  "corresponding  committees,"  and  the  latter  soon  vanished 
from  the  seene.  But  when  the  triumph  of  the  Revolution  in 
France  revived  ideas  of  liberty,  the  movement  for  the  Reform 
of  the  House  of  Commons  reappeared,  and  associations  were 
again  formed  for  the  purpose  of  carrying  it  to  a  successful 
issue.  Theae  societies,  composed  chiefly  of  workmen,  soon  be- 
came the  organ  of  the  extreme  section  of  opinion,  and  the  in- 
strument of  a  democratic  agitation  throughout  England.  They 
spent  a  good  deal  of  their  time  in  exchanging  congratulatory  ad- 
dresses with  the  French  Convention,  the  Commune  of  Paris,  and 
the  French  clubs.  The  English  associations  imitated  the  French 
revolutionists  in  everything.  Their  members  took  the  name 
of  "  citizens,"  and  they  manufactured  the  word  "  citizeness  " 
in  order  to  give  the  same  appellation  to  women.'  Their  pro- 
grammes and  their  declarations  were  couched  in  the  same  high- 
flown  style,  decked  with  the  flowers  of  the  political  language 
of  the  day :  tyranny,  national  will,  hwaaoity,  nature,  etc.^    The 

"  Parliam.  Hiltory,  Vol.  XXII,  p.  198. 

*  Id  the  Untied  StateB,  whetH  tha  eame  republican  msuiqnetade  was  then 
still  more  freely  Indulged  In,  tbe  variation  citets  was  Introduced  ("  Both  men 
and  women  seemed  tot  the  time  («  have  pot  away  theii  wits  and  gone  mad 
with  republicanism.  .  .  .  At  Boston  every  man  was  soon  calling  his  neighbor 
Citizen  and  his  wife  Cltess."  — J.  B.  McMasler,  J  i/(»(ory  0/ (Ae  People  </ (fta 
United  States,  N.Y.  1893,  Vol.  II,  p.  94). 

*  The  tollowing  U  a  specimen  taken  from  the  manaal  o[  the  "Birming- 
ham Society  for  Coostitutiuiial  Inturmation"  (PrinUd  tot  the  Society, 
UDCCXCII) :  "  In  order  to  do  away  with  privilege  and  oppression,  tbe  inten- 
tion of  DDc  meeting  Is  to  establish  a  brotherhood  of  affection  with  the  whols 
hnman  race  for  tbe  promotion  of  knowledge,  and  to  eslahllsh  love  and  good- 
will smonK  all  men,  thu  free  cillKenB  of  the  earth.  ...  We  ...  call  to 
nkind  the  sentiments  which  nature  has  eugravad  iu  tbe  heart  al  every  citizen. 


.CD,  Google 


FiMT  CHAP.]      ORIGINS  OF  POLITICAL  ASSOCUTIONS  126 

avowed  obje^^t  of  these  organizations  waa  still  parliamentary 
reform,  but  they  declined  to  admit  it  on  any  basis  other  than 
that  of  universal  suffrage.'  The' moderat«s,  whose  views  were 
becoming  more  and  more  disregarded  in  the  reformist  camp, 
did  not,  however,  abandon  the  cause  of  reform.  They  founded 
the  "  Society  of  the  Friends  of  the  People  "  on  their  own  account, 
but  refused  to  co-operate  with  the  democratic  organizations 
which  invited  them  to  join  a  national  convention.  The  extreme 
moderation  of  the  "  Friends  of  the  People "  did  not  protect 
them  from  the  general  disapproval  incurred  by  the  political 
associations.  Fos  himself  repudiated  them  from  his  seat  in 
Parliament,  while  remaining  faithful  to  the  reform  of  the  rep- 
resentation. They  were  all  the  more  strongly  denounced  by 
Pitt  and  Burke,  who  waged  war  against  "  French  principles." 
The  extravagant  and  occasionally  somewhat  seditious  language 
of  the  "coiTesponding  societies"  alarmed  the  ruling  classes  and 
contributed  not  a  little  to  make  them  plunge  headlong  into  re- 
action. The  Government  adopted  a  repressive  .policy ;  it  com- 
menced proceedings  against  the  members  of  the  societies  and 
directed  prosecution  after  prosecution  again.st  the  Press.  After 
an  enquiry  into  the  societies,  conducted  by  a  secret  committee 
of  the  House  of  Commons,  Pitt  obtained  the  suspension  of 
the  Habeas  Corpus  Act  from  the  House  (1794).  In  tlie  follow- 
ing year  the  Government  can'ied  a  Bill  restricting  the  liberty 
of  public  meeting.'  The  popular  organizations,  hampered  in 
their  operations  by  this  law,  took  refuge  in  mystery.  A  net- 
work of  secret  associations  spread  over  England.  They  main- 
tained an  active  correspondence,  organized  a  secret  system  of 
publication,  distributed  writings  clandestinely,  and  posted  up 
seditious  placards.  Pitt  passed  a  bill  suppressing  some  asso- 
aod  irhk'h  take  a  neir  force  when  solemnly  recognized  by  all ;  for  a  nation  to 
tiive  liberty  it  is  Bufflcieut  that  sbe  knows  it,  aud  U>  be  free  it  is  Buffioient 
tbat  she  vllts  it." 

1  In  the  Parliament  thns  rerormed.  declared  the  "London  CorreBponding 
Society,"  "  there  would  be  no  party  dubatea,  the  intereatB  of  the  people  being 
one;  lou);  npreches  mnch  diminished,  honest  men  seekloK  reason  not  oratory.'' 
The  rest  ia  on  a  par  wtlh  this. 

I  No  meeting  of  more  than  fifty  peraona  (except  county  and  boroucb  meet- 
ings duly  called)  should  be  held  for  consiilerlug  pelitiuns  nnd  addrea^tea.  tor 
alterations  of  matters  in  Church  and  State,  or  for  discusHing  any  grievance, 
without  previooB  notice  to  a  Magistrate,  tvho  should  attend  to  prevent  any 
proposition  or  dlBcoDrsa  tending  to  bring  into  hatred  or  contempt  the  Sovereign 
or  tbegovemnkeot  andcoostitutiou  (Seditloua  Meetings  Aut, :j(i  (ieo.  Ill,  c.S). 


.coy  Google 


126  DBHOCRACT  AMD  POUTICAI.  PARTIES    [ucohb  fast 

ciations  by  name  and  declaring  illegal  all  societies  the  members 
of  which  had  to  take  an  oath  not  required  by  law,  all  those 
with  members  or  committees  unknown  to  the  whole  society  and 
not  entered  on  its  books,  and  all  those  which  were  composed  of 
distinct  sections  or  branches. 

When,  towards  the  close  of  the  war  with  Napoleon,  and  in 
the  years  which  immediately  followed  it,  the  distress  produced 
by  l^e  fall  in  wages  and  the  high  price  of  com  rekindled  dis- 
content among  the  masses,  they  took  it  into  their  heads  that 
the  remedy  ia;  in  the  introduction  of  universal  suffrage  and 
annual  Parliaments.  To  obtain  these  reforms,  a  vast  organiza- 
tion was  set  on  foot  in  the  form  of  clubs  which  were  started 
in  almost  every  village,  "  Hampden  clubs,"  "  Spencean  clubs," 
etc.'  The  Legislature  intervened  once  more,  and  the  repressive 
measures  directed  against  the  "  corresponding  societies  "  were 
followed  (in  1817)  by  new  ones  placing  obstacles  in  the  way  of 
the  appointment  and  the  cooperation  of  delegates  of  various 
societies  .* 

ni 

The  political  organizations  were  not  rooted  out.  The  move- 
ment retired  below  the  surface,  but  only  until  the  next  occasion 
for  popular  disturbances.  When  the  price  of  bread  was  rising, 
the  starving  masses  began  to  move,  the  demands  for  parlia^ 
mentary  reform  reappeared,  and  with  them  the  secret  associa- 
tions. In  1830,  a  great  economic  crisis  broke  out.  The  middle 
class,  having  become  conscious  of  its  importance  through  its 
wonderful  success  in  the  field  of  industry,  on  this  occasion 
joined  the  masses  in  the  agitation  for  reform.  Organizations 
were  formed  in  broad  daylight,  the  membership  of  which  was 
no  longer  confined  to  workmen,  and  which  boldly  confronted 
monopoly  and  aristocratic  privileges  with  right  and  justice. 
Their  idea  was  that  "  they  may  have  the  reform  which  haa 
been  proposed,  if  they  will  show  that  they  really  desire  to 
have  it;  and  to  show  this  desire  they  must  form  themselves 
into  unions,  and  endeavour  to  procure  as  many  petitions 
to  Parliament  and  memorials  to  the  King  as  they  can."* 

>  Report  of  the  Secret  Committee  o(  the  House  of  Commons,  of  the  KKh 
February,  IS  IT  (Hamiard,  X  XXV,  43»-445) .  '  BT  Qso.  Ill,  c.  19. 

■Letter  uf  Francis  Plwu  lo  U.  Grote  {Pernmat  Lift  of  Hr.  6n)te,  p.SS, 
Load.  1BT3). 


.coy  Google 


FiMT  CH*p.]     ORIGINS  OF  POLITICAL  ASSOCIATIONS  127 

Binniiighaia  became  the  centre  of  the  agitation.  It  was  there 
that  arose,  in  1830,  the  first  "  general  political  union  between 
the  lower  and  the  middle  classes  of  the  people,"  which  was  soon 
imitated  in  all  the  large  towns  of  the  Kisgdoin,  The  Birming- 
ham Union  repudiated  all  notion  of  violence,  it  simply  claimed 
to  "  produce  the  peaceful  display  of  an  immense  organized 
moral  power,  which  cannot  be  despised  or  disregarded." '  The 
Union  aent  up  petitions  to  the  King;  it  asked  him  to  dis- 
miss the  Ministry,  which  was  hostile  to  reform.  During  the 
discussion  of  the  Reform  Bill  in  Parliament  it  oi^anized 
demonstrations  in  which  members  marched  in  procession  wear- 
ing their  special  badges,  and  preceded  by  bands  of  music.  The 
Unions  kept  up  the  citation  in  every  quarter  vith  the  great- 
est enei^y.  At  a  meeting  held  in  London  it  was  resolved,  in 
order  to  bring  the  various  Unions  in  the  country  into  line,  to 
form  a  confederation,  the  "  National  Political  Union,"  with  a 
political  council  sitting  in  the  capital.  But  the  central  organi- 
zation, which  was  controlled  by  representatives  from  the  work- 
ing classes,  speedily  fell  into  the  hands  of  men  of  extreme 
Opinions,  and  they  very  soon  seriously  compromised  it.  The 
Government  became  alarmed,  and  a  Boyal  proclamation 
{of  the  22d  November,  1831)  declared  as  illegal  and  un- 
constitutional all  "  political  associations  composed  of  separate 
bodies  with  various  divisions  and  subdivisions  under  leaders 
with  a  gradation  of  rank  and  authority  and  subject  to 
the  general  control  and  direction  of  a  superior  commit- 
tee or  council."*  The  Unions  then  gave  up  their  system  of 
affiliation,  but  none  the  less  continued  their  agitation  until 
the  Lords  had  yielded  and  the  Reform  Bill  had  become  law. 
At  one  moment  the  Birmingham  Union  threatened  to  march 
on  London,  if  the  Lords  persisted  in  their  opposition. 

After  the  victory  the  middle  class  hastened  to  leave  the 
Unions,  and  they  soon  died  out.  Their  atmosphere  was  too 
democratic  for  the  middle  classes,  who,  moreover,  had  obtained 
their  object.  The  great  Whig  leaders  now  spoke  of  their  old 
popular  allies,  the  "  Birmingham  fellows,"  with  a  touch  of  dis- 
dun,*  and  they  turned  up  their  noses  when  reminded  of  the 

J  J.  A.  LaneTard,  A  Ctnlury  of  Birmingham  Life,  Lond.  1868, 11, 638. 

»  Annual  Regiattr,  18.11,  p.  297. 

*  QreBilU  Memoin,  1th  ed.  Vo).  U.  p.  21G. 


.coy  Google 


128  DEMOCRACY  AND  POLITICAL  PARTIES     [second  part 

orgauizations  which  had  helped  to  secure  for  them  Reform  and 
power.'  The  working  classes  having  been  left  out  of  the  fran- 
chise, found  themselves,  moreover,  in  no  better  material  condi- 
tion. Their  sufferings  were  intense,  and,  with  a  naive  belief  in 
political  panaceas,  tliey  recommenced  the  agitation  for  universal 
suffn^.  A  "  U'orkiugmen's  Association  "  was  started,  and,  with 
the  aid  of  the  Radical  members  of  the  House  of  Commons,  they 
framed  "  The  People's  Charter,"  and  carried  the  agitation  into 
the  country.  The  movement  assumed  enormous  dimensions, 
and  has  become  famous  under  the  name  of  "Chartism." 
The  politicat  Union  of  Birmingham,  as  well  as  those  of  sev- 
eral other  towns,  was  revived.  The  (Jhartists  sent  delegates 
to  London  from  all  the  great  manufactuiiog  centres;  they 
formed  themselves  into  a  national  convention  (in  1839)  and 
the  "  People's  Parliament,"  as  it  was  styled,  held  its  sittings 
side  by  side  with  the  Parliament  of  the  Realm.  The  conven- 
tion eagerly  got  up  the  great  petition  with  1,200,000  signatures. 
In  1840,  the  Cliartist  organization  underwent  a  fresh  develop- 
ment; at  Manchester  the  "National  Charter  Association"  was 
founded,  which  was  soon  joined  by  four  hundred  affiliated 
societies,  with  a  very  large  number  of  members.  However,  the 
triumph  of  the  extreme  party  and  its  violent  propaganda  had 
alienated  public  opinion  from  Chartism  ;  the  movement  had  no 
effect  whatever  on  the  constituted  authorities,  and  wasted  its 
strength  in  futile  efforts.  The  success  of  the  Revolution  of 
1848  in  France  gave  for  a  while  fresh  life  to  the  hopes  of  the 
Chartists.  They  played  their  great  card  of  the  monster 
petition  with  6,000,000  signatures,  the  ignominious  failure  of 
which  is  a  matter  of  history.  After  Parliament  had  refused  to 
take  it  into  consideration,  the  Chartist  convention,  which  was 
sitting  in  London,  moved  to  Birmingham,  Soon  afterwards 
it  disappeared  in  the  break-up  of  the  Chartist  movement. 

But  the  agitation  for  a  freali  extension  of  the  franchise  sur- 
vived, Birmingliam  still  remaining  the  prime  mover  in  it.  A 
network  of  societies  for  keeping  up  the  propaganda  spread 
from  this  centre.     Under  the  titles  of  "  Household  Suffrage 

1  See  the  converaation  between  Lord  Grey  and  the  painter  Haydon,  who 
proposed  to  paint  a  picture  of  a  public  meetitii;  held  by  the  political  Union 
<J.ifp.of  B.  Wnj/rfon,  Vol.  II,  p.  344,  qutftediDBimce,  ififioru  of  tht  Corpora- 
tion of  Birmingham,  1, 130). 


.coy  Google 


riMT  CB*!-,]     OEIQINS  OF  POLITICAL  ASSOCIATIONS  129 

Societies,"  "Complete  Suffrage  Societies,"  "Reform  Associar 
tioDB,"  etc.,  these  organizations  existed  in  varioos  places,  with 
more  or  less  vitality.  But  they  were  very  far  from  possessing 
the  importance  of  the  "Political  Unions."  Their  influence 
was  not  very  great,  except  in  some  parts  of  the  North. 
Eventually  the  Reform  Act  of  1867  deprived  them  of  their 
raison  d'&re. 

IV 

The  reformers  had  not  been  alone  in  using  the  weapon  of 
association ;  their  opponents  had  done  the  same  on  more  than 
one  occasion.  About  1793,  when  the  democratic  prop^andawas 
in  full  swing,  many  societies  had  been  formed  for  assisting  the 
Government  in  discovering  and  punishing  seditious  writings 
or  speeches.  They  acted  by  means  of  spies  and  informers. 
The  first  of  ttiese  associations  was  the  "  Society  for  the  Protec- 
tion of  Liberty  and  Property  against  Republicans  and  Level- 
lers." '  In  1820,  the  "  Constitutional  Association  "  was  founded 
for  a  similar  object."  Subsequently,  when  the  agitation  assumed 
a  more  peaceful  character,  there  arose  "constitutional  associa- 
tions" which  opposed  the  extension  of  the  franchise  by  less 
reprehensible  methods. 

It  was  chiefly  religious  passions,  however,  which  supplied  a 
pretext  for  reactionary  organizations.  In  consequence  of  an 
Act  of  Parliament  which  conceded  a  certain  amo\mt  of  tolera- 
tion to  the  Catholics  (in  1778),  fanatical  Protestants  started  an 
agitation  for  obtaining  the  repeal  of  the  law.  A  lai^e  number 
of  Protestant  associations  and  committees  were  formed.  They 
became  a  hotbed  of  an  odious  propaganda  among  the  lower 
orders,  carried  on  by  speeches,  sermons,  and  incendiary  hand- 
bills. It  was  as  if  political  association,  which  had  barely 
sprung  into  life,  was  anxious  to  show  that,  if  it  could  serve  as 
the  mouthpiece  of  enlightened  opinion,  it  could  still  more 
easily  become  the  tool  of  base  passions  and  of  a  malignant 
fanaticism.  The  Protestant  associations  foriDed  a  sort  of  con- 
federation, with  Lord  George  Gordon  at  its  head,  and  spread 
over  the  whole  country.     After  a  meeting  of  the  Association  in 

'  J.  Adolpbns,  HUtory  of  England  from  the  Aect»iion  qf  Oeorge  III  la 
I7S3,  Land.  1802,  Vol.  V,  p.  226. 

*  Spencer  Walpole,  HUtory  of  England,  II.  19;  Erskiae  May,  The  Contti- 
tWtOnoJ  Hilton/  of  England,  Load.  1H(m,  TI,  30e. 


.coy  Google 


180  DEMOCRACY  AND  POLITICAL  PARTIES     [bicobd  p, 


London,  at  which  Gordon  presided,  a  frenzied  mob  marched  on 
the  Houses  of  Parliament,  broke  Into  the  lobbies,  and  nearly 
forced  its  waj  into  the  House  of  Goinmons  while  it  was  sitting. 
Then  for  the  spai^e  of  a  week  the  rioters  made  barbarous  havoc 
in  the  capital,  burnt  the  chapels  of  the  Catholic  embassies, 
broke  open  the  prisons,  and  destroyed  private  houses. 

A  few  years  later  a  similar  movement  arose  in  Ireland. 
Bands  of  Protestants,  over-zealous  for  their  religion,  took  up 
arms  i^mnst  their  Catholic  fellow-citizens.  After  defeating 
their  opponents  they  kept  up  their  oi^anization  and  formed 
themselves  into  societies  for  maintaining  Protestant  ascendency. 
These  associations,  known  as  "Orange  Lodges,"  spread  into 
England  and  multiplied  there  to  a  great  extent 

The  Irish  Catholics  in  their  turn  resorted  to  oi^anization,  and 
after  many  attempts,  which  were  continually  hampered  by  the 
English  Government,  created  a  formidable  organization  for  up- 
holding the  disregarded  and  vio)at«d  rights  of  their  nation  and 
their  religion.  This  was  the  "  Catholic  Association,"  formed  in 
182.^.  Possessing  ramifications  throughout  the  country,  it  set 
up  as  a  rival  power  to  the  Government  and  assumed  all  its 
powers.  Its  ascendency  over  the  Catholic  population  was 
complete,  and  it  openly  defied  the  English  authorities.  The 
latter  were  finally  obliged  to  yield,  and  the  Act  of  Emancipa- 
tion was  carried  in  1829. 


Thia  was  the  first  time  that  a  great  legislative  measure  was 
forced  on  the  country  through  the  pressure  of  a  political  or- 
ganization. But  it  bad  only  achieved  thia  result  by  a  demon- 
stration of  the  material  strength  which  it  bad  succeeded  in 
bringing  into  the  field:  the  English  Government  had  yielded 
when  confronted  by  the  prospect  of  a  civil  war.  Three  years 
afterwards,  in  the  agitation  for  the  Reform  Bill,  the  Political 
Unions  were  an  important  factor,  and,  like  the  Catholic  Asso- 
ciation, helped  to  incline  the  scale  towards  their  own  side  by 
intimidation,  by  a  display  of  physical  force.  It  was  only  in  the 
agitation  which  led  to  the  third  great  reform,  the  repeal  of  the 
Corn  Laws,  that  the  political  Association  which  took  the  lead  in 
the  movement  used  moral  force  as  its  main  weapon,  the  power 
of  convictions  which  it  brought  home  to  the  miud.    In  the  field 


.coy  Google 


FiMT  ciui-.]     ORIGINS  OF  POLITICAL  ASSOCIATIOKS  181 

of  philanthropy,  associatioa  had  already  succeeded  in  winning 
peaceful  victories.  The  "  Anti-Slavery  Association,"  one  of  the 
greatest  ever  known  in  England,  had  converted  public  opinion 
and  the  constituted  authorities  simply  by  its  indefatigable 
prop^anda.  It  was  this  body  which  brought  about  the  aboli- 
tion of  the  slave  trade  and  afterwards  of  slavery  itself.  But 
in  the  sphere  of  politics,  the  Anti-Corn  Law  League  was  the 
first  and  is  still  the  greatest  example  of  a  political  association 
contributing  to  the  legislative  triumph  of  an  idea  by  instil- 
ling it  into  the  national  conscience.  The  masses  remained 
indifferent  to  the  movement  during  the  early  years  of  its 
existence.  The  workmen,  still  engrossed  in  the  pursuit  of  the 
panacea  of  universal  suffrage,  looked  on  all  other  agitation  as 
an  unfair  competition.  The  leaders  of  the  League,  on  their 
side,  although  very  favourable  to  the  introduction  of  univer- 
sal suffrage  in  principle,  deemed  it  expedient  to  limit  the 
agitation,  to  keep  the  question  of  ecouomio  liberty  distinct  be- 
fore the  public  mind.  Consequently  the  League,  not  having 
the  passions  of  the  masses  at  its  disposal  and  not  making 
any  appeal  to  them,  was  obliged  to  lean,  materially  and 
morally,  on  the  middle  class,  which  was  directly  interested  in 
the  question  of  commercial  freedom,  and  to  conduct  the  cam- 
paign by  means  of  discussion  alone.  It  was  this  last  point 
which  gave  the  League  its  distinctive  character.  In  fact,  its 
labours  constituted  an  immense  persuasive  agitation.  It  sent 
forth  a  body  of  public  speakers  to  carry  on  the  free-trade 
propaganda,  who  traversed  the  country  in  all  directions.  Cob- 
den,  Bright,  and  the  other  leaders  of  the  League  were  indefati- 
gable; they  travelled  unceasingly  from  one  end  of  the  country 
to  the  other,  wherever  there  were  minds  to  be  convinced  or 
consciences  to  be  won.  At  the  instigation  of  the  League  asso- 
ciations were  formed  in  all  the  manufacturing  centres,  meetings 
of  delegates  were  held  in  every  district,  the  question  was  dis- 
cussed in  all  its  aspects  and  on  every  occasion.  At  the  same 
time,  the  Le^ue  was  engaged  in  condncting  a  vast  economic 
enquiry.  Its  agents  and  adherents  had  to  collect  infor- 
mation on  the  state  of  trade,  the  rate  of  wages,  the  growth 
of  pauperism,  and  generally  on  everything  which  affected  the 
means  of  subsistence.  As  this  information  poured  unceasingly 
into  headquarters,  an  immense  provision  of  facts  and  argu- 


.coy  Google 


132  DEMOCRACT  AND  POLITICAL  PAETIES    [sBCOiti)  FiBi 

meuta  accumulated  at  Manchest«r,  which  the  Le^ue  took  care 
to  turn  to  the  best  account  in  its  propaganda.  The  more  stub- 
born the  resistance  of  the  Protectionists,  the  greater  became 
the  zeal  of  the  Leaguers  in  their  missionary  effort  They  under- 
took "a  campaign  against  every  elector  in  the  Kingdom"  by 
literature  distributed  from  house  t«  house,'  and  by  lectures. 
From  the  towns  they  passed  into  the  country  districts,  and 
there  they  endeavoured  to  drive  the  idea  of  free  trade  into  the 
heads  of  the  fanners.  The  Protectionists  tried  to  counteract 
the  League  by  the  same  methods,  by  founding  associations, 
hut  they  lacked  vitality  and  spontaneity ;  the  farmers  attended 
the  meetings  of  these  associations  as  if  by  compulsion;  the 
stewards  and  agents  of  the  landlords  used  to  come  to  their 
bouses  and  fetch  them  to  the  meetings.* 

The  landlords,  entrenched  behind  the  majority  in  Parlia- 
ment, continued  to  resist;  but  the  mind  of  the  country  was 
made  up,  thanks  to  the  League,  and  only  a  shock  was  needed 
to  make  the  fruit  drop  from  the  tree.  The  bad  harvest  which 
supervened  in  Ireland  supplied  this.  The  inevitable  famine 
and  the  determination  of  the  League  not  to  dissolve  until  the 
duties  on  corn  were  abolished  made  the  Protectionists  give 
way,  and  legislative  sanction  was  accorded  to  the  measure 
which  had  already  been  approved  by  the  national  conscience. 

VI 
Thus  the  three  great  reforms  which  have  renovated  England, 
religious  freedom,  parliamentary  reform,  and  economic  liberty, 
were  obtained  under  pressure  from  extraK^onstitutlonal  organi- 
zations. On  each  occasion  their  interference  with  the  legislature 
assumed  the  aspect  of  an  exceptional  case  justified  by  the  qiiasi- 
revolutionary  features  of  the  situation':  that  is  that  public 

'  In  184a,  nOO  attents  were  enjwged  In  diatribntiiiB  pamphlets  throuBhout 
the  inwHB :  they  vixlied  24  counties  and  1ST  tvwns,  kad  dialribuled  mare  Uian 
9,000,000  printed  pnpera. 

»  A.  Preiilice,  HiatniT/  of  the  Anii-Coni  Laic  League,  11,218,219. 

•  AdiI  even  those  who  led  the  BtrngKle  or  rallied  the  inaBseB  to  it  were  tho 
first  to  plead  eitenuating  cireumBtaiiues.  We  are  altead;  ai'quainted  with 
the  nbHervatloiiii  submiitod  lo  Parliament  on  thle  point  in  1780.  Fifty  yean 
later,  u'iiuti  eitra-parliameutary  agitation  bad  had  lime  to  heivrae  familiar 
to  Eneliah  political  life,  in  1K:1'>,  the  champions  of  Ketorm  admitted  that  the 
formatiou  o[  the  Political  Uiilons  was  uQcoiutltutioDBl,  but  that  the  refotmers 


.CD,  Google 


fiBSTCUJF.]     ORIGINS  OF  POLITICAL  ASSOCIATIONS  1S3 

opinion  was  not  allowed  to  assert  itself  freely  and  fully  within 
the  boundaries  of  the  coustitutiou.  The  object  of  ea«h  move- 
ment was  the  redress  of  a  grievance ;  its  aim  was  specified 
and  limited ;  and  the  combination  formed  was  consequently  a 
provisioual  organization  destined  to  come  to  an  end  with  the 
triumph  of  the  particular  cause  which  had  called  it  into  life. 
The  organization  of  opinion  in  the  country  did  not  tend  to  sup- 
plant its  constitutional  organ.  On  the  contrary,  the  object  of 
the  first  attempts  at  extrarconstitutional  organization  was  to 
make  Parliament  more  independent;  and  the  latter,  when  once 
rehabilitated  and  raised  to  its  ideal  level,  was  to  remain  undis- 
puted master  of  the  situation.  The  movement  of  opinion  was 
directed,  not  against  Parliament  and  constitutional  government, 
but  against  the  factions  which  had  monopolized  them.  In  fact, 
at  the  first  awakening  of  opinion  under  George  III,  combination 
is  resorted  to  as  a  means  of  forming  a  patriotic  pai-ty  with  the 
object  of  reminding  the  coterie  which  has  a  majority  in  Pai'lia- 
luent  and  a  monopoly  of  power,  of  their  duty.  Corruption 
disappears  from  Parliament;  the  basis  of  national  represen- 
tation is  widened  by  the  Reform  Act  of  1832,  but  the  ap- 
proaches to  Government,  to  the  Legislature,  are  guarded  by 
parties  which  do  not  reflect  opinion  with  its  unceasing  aspira- 
tions towards  an  improved  moral  and  material  existence,  but 
are  more  in  the  nature  of  traditional  sets,  stereotyped  iu  their 
petty  ideas  and  their  paltry  passions,  against  whicli  every  new 
current  of  opinion  is  powerless.  The  struggle  for  economic 
liberty  brought  out  this  situation  in  all  its  clearness,  and  all 
the  efforts  of  the  League,  from  the  verj'  first  day,  were  in  the 
direction  of  keeping  the  question  outside  parliamentary  parties, 
of  lifting  it  above  them.  The  organ  of  the  League,  the  "Anti- 
Oorn  Law  Circular,"  roundly  declared  that  all  political  factions 
were  equally  dishonest  and  corrupt,  that  the  a<lhei'ents  of  the 
abolition  of  the  duties  on  corn  would  never  allow  their  great 
cause  to  be  converted  into  an  official  cry,  that  they  would  con- 
tinue, without  swerving  from  their  path,  to  appeal  to  tlie  na- 

bad  been  proToked.  See  with  reference  to  this  the  History  rff  the  Thirty 
Tears'  Peace  of  H.  Haniaeau,  whose  position  in  the  Eeform  camp  is  well 
known  ("  There  was  no  question  about  tlie  (act  but  only  about  tbe  Justifica- 
tion of  it.  No  one  denies  that  oeculont  may  and  do  oocnt  when  the  assertion 
of  a  nation's  will  against  either  a  corrupt  ^vernmeDt  or  a  tynnnk'Hl  parly 
ia  Tirtoona  and  absolutely  required  by  patrioliu  duty."    Vol.  II,  p.  35). 


.coy  Google 


134  DBMOCRACT  AND  POLITICAL  PABTIES    [ucoin>  pxmr 

tion  at  lai^e,  conviuced  as  they  were  that  the  repeal  of  the 
protective  duties  would  oever  be  granted  by  the  one  or  the 
other  set  of  "  pettif o^ers,"  of  whom  the  counti-y  was  alter- 
nately the  Tictini.'  Cobden  held  identical  opinions.  While 
fighting  the  Tory  Giovenunent  with  the  utmost  energy,  he 
wrote  to  his  brother,  in  1842 :  "  The  worst  danger  is  of  the 
Whigs  coming  in  again  too  soon.  The  hacks  woulil  be  up  on 
their  hind  legs,  and  at  their  old  prancing  tricks  t^ain,  imme- 
diately they  smelt  the  Treasury  crib." '  The  fall  of  the  Min- 
istry might  have  put  the  country  on  the  wrong  scent,  whereas 
it  would  only  have  been  the  substitution  of  one  coterie  for  an- 
other; and  the  object  was  to  strike  a  blow  at  cliques  in  general. 
John  Bright  had  the  same  preoccupation.*  Cobden  was  never 
weary  of  declaring  that  he  was  just  as  ready  to  accept  reform 
from  the  hands  of  Sir  Robei-t  Peel  as  from  Lord  John  Russell. 
And  when  Peel  was  on  the  point  of  yielding,  and  the  Whigs 
broke  out  into  exultation,  Cobden  could  not  help  exclaiming: 
"  What  a  bold  farce  it  is  now  to  attempt  to  parade  the  Whig 
party  as  the  Free  Traders  jxtr  excellence !  I  will  be  no  party 
to  such  a  fraud  as  the  attempt  to  build  up  its  ruined  popularity 
upon  a  question  in  which  the  Whig  aristocracy  and  proprietors 
in  the  counties  either  take  no  int«rest,  or,  if  so,  only  to  resist 
it  I  see  no  advant^e,  but  much  danger,  to  our  cause  from  the 
present  efforts  to  set  up  the  old  party  distinctions."' 

In  the  end  the  law  for  the  complete  alwlition  of  the  corn 
duties  was  passed.  It  was  a  triumjih  of  extra-constitutional 
organization  over  parliamentary  parties  representing  a  small 
fraction  of  the  nation.  As  the  special  object  of  the  League 
was  attained,  its  dissolution  was  at  hand.  But  Cobden  saw 
with  regret  that  the  fountain-head  of  the  abuse  which  he  had 
striven  gainst  would  be  untouched  if  the  old  party  system 
survived.  He  applied  to  Peel,  his  enemy  of  the  day  before. 
He  approached  him  for  the  first  time  in  his  life.  In  an  urgent 
appeal,  he  implored  him  to  put  an  end  to  party  govei-nment 
by  placing  himself  at  the  liead  of  the  whole  middle  class: 
"There  must  be  an  end  of  the  ju^le  of  parties,  the  mere 
representatives  of  tradition." ' 

>  J.  Morley,  Lift  of  S.  Cobden,  Lond.  1S81,  Vol.  1,  p.  161. 

*  Ibid.  p.  241.         '  Prentice,  Hiniorji  q/"  the  Anti-Corn  Laa  Ltagut,  n,  26. 

*  J.  Motley,  L(ft  o/  Cobden,  I,  JiB.  *  Ibid.  395. 


.coy  Google 


SECOND  CHAPTEK 

THK  BEttlNNINGB   OF   PARTY   OBHANIZATIONa 


Thb  parties,  however,  had  laid  hands  on  the  very  weapon 
which  was  being  used  gainst  them,  eztra'partiamentary  or- 
ganization. The  movement  bad  begun  somewhat  late.  For 
a  long  time  parties  had  no  distinct  life  of  their  own  save 
in  Parliament;  in  the  country  they  barely  existed  as  moral 
entities  independently  of  the  personages  or  families  which 
were  the  emtwdiment  of  them.  The  language  of  the  day  only 
testified  to  the  facts  in  using,  instead  of  "Tory"  and  "Whig," 
such  expressions  as  "the  Rutland  interest,"  "the  Bedford 
interest,"  etc.  The  voters  simply  represented  tlie  personal 
following  of  the  rivals  who  fought  tlie  electoral  duel;  they 
were  their  retainers  or  sold  themselves  to  them  on  the  polling- 
day  for  money.  In  the  counties  the  tenant  followed  his  land- 
lord. When  the  estate  changed  hands,  all  the  tenants  changed 
their  political  complexion,  if  the  new  landlord  did  not  belong 
to  the  same  party  as  his  predecessor.  This  occurred  very  often, 
even  after  the  parliamentary  reform  of  1832.'  The  rural  free- 
holders, who  were  more  independent,  generally  gravitated  iu 
the  orbit  of  the  great  nobleman  who  irradiated  the  neighbour- 
hood. Of  the  boroughs,  several  were  directly  dependent  on 
territorial  magnates,  who  owned  them  as  private  property  or 
exerted  a  hereditary  influence  over  them.  Most  of  the  other 
towns  sold  themselves  at  the  elections,  wholesale  or  in  lots. 
The  operations  of  sale  and  purchaae  were  often  conducted 
through  the  agency  of  organized  bodies,  sometimes  public 

I  Even  stterl832,  tbe  ciutomof  ukiDg  the  landlord's  permiaBion  McanvMa 
Ua  tenants  had  b««n  cootlDued.  Thli  permission  was  seldan  KTtuited  (Report 
(Tom  the  Select  Committee  on  Bribery,  183S,  Bine  Books  of  183G,  Vol.  TIQ. 

p-aas). 


.coy  Google 


136  DEMOCBACT  AND  POLITICAL  PARTIES     [sbcowdpabt 

bodies,  such  as  municipalities,  whiuh  made  money  out  of 
their  boroughs,  sometimes  voluntary  organizations,  which 
acted  in  the  guise  of  non-political  societies  or  even  as  societies 
without  auy  legal  existence.'  Side  by  side  with  these 
juntas  theve  sprang  up  occasionally,  in  a  sporadic  fashion 
■and  with  an  ephemeral  existence,  bona  Juie  political  organi- 
zations, in  the  form  of  clube  or  committees,  for  supporting 
a  particular  candidate. 

But  whatever  the  organs  of  electoral  action,  secret  or 
avowed,  municipal  corpoi-ations,  clubs  or  private  agents, 
they  repi-esented  local  divisions  and  rivalries  more  than 
anything  else.  The  only  party  organization  on  a  basis 
approaching  a  national  basis  was  in  Parliament.  Its 
efforts  were  felt  essentially  within  the  walls  of  Parliament 
itself.  The  members  who  had  secured  election  through  the 
territorial  influence  or  that  of  their  patrons,  or  who  bought 
their  seats  for  ready  money,  were  practically  independent  of 
their  constituencies.  The  parliamentary  parties  would  there- 
fore have  wasted  their  time  in  trying  to  influenc*  the  electors. 
It  was  the  members  that  the  Government  or  the  Opposition  had 
to  make  sure  of  at  all  hazards.  When  the  parliamentary  cliques 
did  not  supply  a  sufficient  number  of  followers  to  the  Gov- 
ernment or  the  Opposition,  the  latter  bought  parliamentary 
boroughs  directly  on  their  own  account,  or  assisted  political 
friends  engaged  in  electioneering  with  their  own  money.  It 
is  in  this  way  that  party  organizations  confined  within  the 
walls  of  Parliament  came  to  extend  their  action,  in  a  sub- 
sidiary fa.shion,  over  the  country.  After  1832  their  inter- 
vention increased  to  a  considerable  extent.  It  helped  to 
cover  the  country  with  a  network  of  organizations  which 
were  destined  to  completely  alter  the  balance  of  power 
inside  the  parties  themselves. 

I  Thus  (he  first  committee  to  enquire  Into  electoral  matters  appointed  in 
virtue  ot  the  4irenvl1)e  \n  (of  ITTH)  discloeed  the  eilatence  In  a  oertain  town 
of  a  Chrittian  C'fub,  formed  ustoOHlbl;  tor  parposea  of  charity,  but  which  waa 
really  engaged  in  selHnK  tlie  borongh  at  electlou  ttniea  to  the  tiighest  bidder, 
and  which  aftenrards  divided  the  muucy  amongst  its  memberB,  Another 
Instance  discovered  during  the  electoral  enquiry  of  1S3S.  is  the  Bluf 
Club  at  Commillff,  al  BriBlnl.  which,  in  return  for  voles,  used  its  infiuenoe 
with  the  Oovemment  to  obtain  /avours,  appoinlmenls,  and  even  pardons  foi 
offences  against  the  revenue  (Report  on  Bribery,  IS.T5,  p.  377), 


.coy  Google 


FARTT   ORGANIZATIONS 


u 


The  stttdy  of  party  organization  in  FftrliameDt  must  therefore 
engage  our  attention  in  the  first  place.  It  was  represented  at 
that  time,  afi  in  our  own  day,  by  the  "  Whips  "  which  each  party 
has  in  the  House  of  Commons.  In  fox-hunting  language 
"  Whip "  denotes  the  huntsman's  assistant  who  whips  in  the 
pack  of  hounds;  applied  by  analogy  to  the  parliamentary 
hunting-field,  this  sporting  term  has  in  political  language  ac- 
quired a  more  complicated  meaning,  and  one  which  is  not  so 
easy  to  explain.  The  shortest  and  most  accurate  definition  of 
"  Whips  "  would  perhaps  be  the  following :  etage-manageis  of 
companies  who  unite  in  acting  the  parliamentary  play;  stage- 
managers,  and  not  directors.  This  la£t  office  is  filled  by  the 
leaders,  the  Prime  Minister  or  one  of  his  colleagues,  if  he  does 
not  sit  in  the  House  of  Commons  himself,  and  the  leader  of 
the  Opposition.  The  two  chiefs  act  in  broad  daylight,  and  are 
responsible  to  the  public;  the  Whips  wort  in  the  dark,  and 
are  unknown  to  the  mass  of  the  public.  The  leaders  lay  down 
the  main  line  of  action,  and  exert  themselves  actively  on  great 
occasions.  The  Whips,  who  are  initiated  by  the  leaders  into 
all  the  secrets  of  the  plan  of  action,  see  that  it  is  carried  out, 
and  keep  an  eye  on  the  actors  so  as  to  ensure  that  each  man  is 
at  his  post  and  ready  to  play  the  part  which  has  been  allotted  to 
him,  whether  it  is  a  minor  part  or  even  that  of  a  supernumerary. 
Being  constantly  in  touch  with  the  members  in  the  lobbies,  etc. 
of  the  House,  the  Whip  is  id  a  position  to  follow  the  current  of 
opinion  in  the  party ;  he  reports  thereon  to  the  leader,  nips  in- 
cipient revolts  in  the  bud,  retails  the  leader's  views  to  the  mem- 
bers of  the  party,  and  communicates  to  them  the  plans  into  which 
the  leader  thinks  it  expedient  or  necessary  to  initiate  them. 
The  authority  of  the  Whip  is  of  a  purely  moral  nature ;  it  is 
derived  solely  from  the  prestige  of  his  position  and  from  his 
tact.  He  roust  be  acquainted  with  each  member,  know  his 
weak  and  strong  points,  be  able  to  talk  him  round,  to  coax 
him  by  smiles,  by  exhortations,  by  friendly  remonstrances,  by 
promises  or  other  devices,  such  as  invitations  to  the  entertain- 
ments of  the  dukes  and  marquises  of  the  party  which  he  gets 
for  members  and  their  wives.  Every  day  he  must  perform 
wonderB  of  affability,  of  patience,  and  of  tirmness,  in  view  of 


.coy  Google 


138  DEMOCRACY  AND  POLITICAL  FAETIES    [ucomd  put 

the  object  which  U  the  dream  of  a  Whip's  whole  existence : 
to  beep  the  party  united,  compact,  and  in  fighting  order. 

When  state  policy  and  parly  strategy  do  not  demand  the 
attention  of  the  Whip,  he  has  his  daily  drudgery  to  perform, 
which  is  to  mount  guard  over  his  men  from  one  sitting  to 
another.  If  be  is  the  Government  Whip,  he  is  specially  respon- 
sible for  the  regular  working  of  the  parliamentary  machine. 
He  must  take  care  "to  make  a  House"  and  "keep  a 
House,"  so  that  the  Government  bills  or  motions  of  the 
day  can  be  discussed.  He  must  have  a  reserve  of  members 
in  the  lobbies  or  in  the  smoking-room  to  take  the  place  of  those 
who  have  left  the  House,  so  as  to  stop  the  attempts  of  the 
other  side  to  count  it  out.  Still  more  necessary  is  it  for  him 
to  have  all  his  followers  ready  for  the  divisions.  For  the 
enemy  is  treacherous,  and  may  plan  a  surprise  and  call  a  divi- 
sion unexpectedly.  The  Whip  must  act  as  watch-dog,  and  not 
allow  members  who  want  to  dine  out  to  leave  the  House.  In 
any  event  he  must  know  where  to  find  them  in  case  of  need, 
and  be  able  to  warn  them  by  telegram  or  special  messenger. 
The  fate  of  a  ministry  sometimes  depends  on  the  accuracy  of 
his  information  of  this  kind,  and  on  his  rapidity  of  action.  To 
prevent  the  debate  from  languishing  the  Whip  must  have  a 
reserve  of  fluent  speakers  who  can  talk  by  the  clock  to  enable 
those  who  are  late  to  come  in  time  for  the  division.  The 
Whips  of  both  parties  often  have  to  come  to  an  understanding, 
as  the  parliamentary  play  is  a  piece  with  two  dramatis  per- 
towB.  On  great  field-days  they  'settle  the  order  in  which 
speakers  are  to  address  the  House,  fix  the  number  of  sittings 
to  be  devoted  to  the  debate,  etc. 

The  performance  of  these  duties  requires  uncommon  sup- 
pleness, but  is  compatible  with  perfect  honesty  in  our  day. 
In  the  beginning,  on  the  other  hand,  this  quality  was  a  fatal 
objection ;  for  the  post  was  created  for  the  corruption  of  mem- 
bers in  the  criminal  sense  of  the  word.  Ministers  bou|^t  their 
majority  by  payment  of  actual  cash ;  they  had  a  window  in 
the  House  itself  where  members  came  to  be  paid  for  their  votes 
after  the  division.  The  First  Lord  of  the  Treasury,  having  too 
much  to  do,  created,  in  1714,  the  office  of  political  secretary  to 
the  Treasury  to  aid  him  in  these  financial  operations.  This 
official  was  called  the  Patronage  Secretary,  because,  in  his 


.coy  Google 


8HCONi>  CHAP.]  PABTY  ORGANIZATIONS  139 

capacity  of  agent  of  corruption,  he  disposed  of  the  patron^e, 
that  is  to  say,  of  appointments  to  Government  ofBces.  Places 
in  the  Custom  House,  the  Post  Of&ce,  and  the  Excise  were  the 
small  electoral  change  which  the  Government  distributed  at 
the  request  of  members  to  their  electors.  The  Patronage  Sec- 
retary had  another  name  —  that  of  "Secretary  for  Political 
Jobs."  This  was  in  fact  his  principal  business.  "  It  is  rather 
a  roguish  office,"  as  Wllberforce  remarked  in  the  presence  of 
Steele,  just  as  the  latter  wag  about  to  take  up  the  appointment. 
Distributing  their  allowance  among  the  members  of  the  party, 
the  Patronage  Secretary  brought  them  up  to  the  vote  like  a  flock 
of  sheep,  goaded  them  on,  and  had  become  their  "Whipper-in." 
The  opposite  party  had  to  adopt  a  similar  mode  of  discipline, 
and  it  also  introduced  the  office  of  Whip  or  liVTiipper-in.  The 
Patronage  Secretary  had  to  supply  the  Government  with  a 
majority  as  cheaply  as  possible.  For  a  long  time,  at  any  rate 
up  to  Pitt's  accession  to  power,  he  worked  directly  on  the 
members,  and  bought  each  of  them  individually,  ^lien,  owiug 
to  the  improvement  in  Parliamentary  manners,  these  transac- 
tions perceptibly  diminished  or  disappeared  altogether,  the  Pat- 
ronage Secretary  and  his  vis-d^vts  on  the  other  side,  the  Opposition 
Whip,  bought  constituencies,  that  is,  seats  in  Parliament,  for 
friends  who  were  to  vote  as  they  were  told.  The  Whippers-in 
negotiated  with  corporations  or  private  individuals  who  had 
seats  to  sell,  or,  in  "contested  "elections,' sent  down  their  candi- 
dates well  supplied  with  the  sinews  of  war.  The  Government 
\Vhip  was  in  the  best  position  for  operations  of  this  kind.  He 
had  secret  service  money  at  bis  disposal.  George  III  contrib- 
nted  largely  to  it  from  his  civil  list.  The  amelioration  of  man- 
ners made  itself  felt  here,  too,  and,  after  the  elections  of  1806, 
Lord  Granville  was  able  to  publicly  announce  that  not  a  guinea 
of  public  money  had  been  spent  on  the  election  campaign. 
The  Patronage  Secretary  had  discovered  another  expedient. 
He  had  bought  boroughs  cheap,  below  the  market  price,  from 
friends  of  the  Government,  paying  them  the  difference  in  titles 
or  other  favours  at  the  disposal  of  the  Government.  Then  he 
f 
'  A  vote  U  not  always  taken  at  elections;  It  there  ts  onlj  one  candidate,  be 
is  declared  elected  withonl  a  poll.  A  poll  is  beld  only  when  there  la  more 
than  one  candidate  for  the  seat.  la  the  former  case,  the  election  is  called 
"  uncontested  " ;  In  the  latter,  It  la  styled  "  contested." 


.CD,  Google 


IM  DBMOCRACT  AND  FOLITICAI.  PARTIES    [bbcokd  past 

had  resold  his  seats  at  the  price  of  the  day,  and  with  the  well- 
understood  obligation  for  the  buyers  to  vote  with  the  Govem- 
nient.  The  money  made  in  this  speculation  was  used  to  buy 
additional  seats  or  to  help  friendly  candidates  engaged  in  con- 
tested elections.  As  long  as  the  purchase  and  sale  of  seats  in 
the  market  and  the  traffic  with  corporations  lasted,  the  Patron- 
age Secretary  and  the  Opposition  ^Vhip  took  an  active  share 
in  it  on  behalf  of  their  respective  parties.  This  is  how  the 
organization  of  parliamentary  parties  as  represented  hy  the 
Whips  worked  outside  Parliament 

in 

It  was  not  till  after  the  Reform  that  regular  party  organi- 
zations arose  in  the  country.  The  Act  of  1832  was  the  direct 
occasion  of  them.  The  Reform  Bill,  which  had  altered  the 
constitutional  machinery,  also  prescribed  new  methods  for  its 
working;  but  in  spite  of  all  the  care  bestowed  on  the  point,  sev- 
eral gaps  were  left,  especially  as  regards  the  preparation  of  the 
electoral  lists.  Before  1832,  there  was  no  register  of  electors  at 
all,  and  no  documents  of  any  kind  to  prove  their  qualification. 
The  official  who  presided  over  the  elections  (returning  oflicer) 
checked  the  claims  of  persona  who  came  forward  to  vote  at 
the  poll  itself.  Consequently  the  polling  for  the  election  of  a 
member  to  Parliament  lasted  for  months.  But  as  this  proced- 
ure became  impossible  with  the  increase  in  the  number  of 
electors  entailed  by  the  Eefonn  Act,  the  Legislature,  when 
sanctioning  the  extension  of  the  suffrage,  made  arrangements 
for  the  formation  of  electoral  lists.  This  matter  having  Iweii 
settled  in  great  detail,  the  Act  of  1832  left  the  execution  of  the 
provisions  to  the  representatives  of  parochial  self-government. 
The  parish  overseers  of  the  poor,  who  were  selected  annually 
from  among  its  inhabitants  by  the  justices  of  the  peace,  for 
the  assessment  and  collection  of  the  poor  rate  of  the  locality, 
were  entrusted  by  the  law  with  the  duty  of  keeping  the 
electoral  lists.  The  Legislature  thought  they  would  he  able  to 
dischai^  this  duty  satisfactorily,  bec^se  in  their  capacity  of 
local  taxation  i^ents  they  had  information  concerning  every 
person  entitled  to  the  vote  by  his  property  qualification. 

This  was  only  partly  the  case.   True,  every  holding  situated  in 


.coy  Google 


amcoyia  cbik]  PARTT  ORGANIZATIONS  Ul 

the  parish  being  ratable  to  the  poor,  the  occupiers  of  hoIdiDgg  of 
the  letting  value  of  at  lea^t  £10,  to  whom  the  Reform  Bill  had 
just  granted  the  Bu£Erage,  necessarily  figured  on  the  overseers' 
lists.  But  the  occupation  of  a  holding  was  not  the  sole  condition 
attached  to  the  right  of  voting;  there  were  other  electoral  qual- 
ifications besides.  To  find  out  the  holders  of  them,  the  overseer 
had  to  call  on  them  by  public  notice  to  make  themselves  known. 
The  electoral  register  having  been  prepared  in  this  way,  on  the 
strength  of  informatioa  which  reached  the  overseers  from  vari- 
ous sources,  was  corrected  by  the  representations  of  private 
individuals  if  the  latter  thought  fit  to  make  them.  E^ach  elector 
had  the  right  to  lodge  with  the  overseer  a  claim,  if  his  name 
had  been  left  out,  or  an  objection  to  the  admission  on  the  register 
of  the  fellow-citizens  who  appeared  to  him  not  to  possess  the 
necessary  qualifications.  The  disputes  to  which  this  gave  rise 
were  referred  to  the  Revising  Barrister,  a  member  of  the  Bar 
appointed  annually  by  the  judge  of  the  circuit  to  hold  the 
registration  court,  in  which  the  parties  appeared  as  in  a  court 
of  law  for  a  civil  suit  The  Kevising  Barrister  was  empowered 
to  settle  the  register  by  admitting  well-founded  claims  and  ob- 
jectioDs.'  An  appeal  lay  from  his  decision  to  a  parliamentary 
committee,  and  since  1843  to  the  Court  of  Common  Pleas. 

This  system,  which  rested  to  such  a  large  extent  on  private 
initiative,  was  evidently  framed  on  the  assumption  that  this 
initiative  would  be  sufficiently  active  to  secure  the  regular 
preparation  of  the  electoral  register.  In  practice,  the  electors 
displayed  the  most  complete  indifference  on  the  subject.  The 
electioneering  manners  and  customs  before  1832  were  little  cal- 
culated to  develop  a  sentiment  of  electoral  duty  or  the  habit 
of  spontaneous  action  in  the  voter.  The  rank  and  file  of  the 
voters,  ignored  and  slightly  iespised  by  the  ruling  classes, 
became  all  at  once  an  object  of  their  solicitude  when  election 
time  came  on.  Then  they  were  canvassed,  wheedled,  or  intim- 
idated on  behalf  of  some  grand  seigneur  or  of  a  wealthy  candi- 
date who  spent  money  lavishly.  As  soon  as  the  voting  was 
over,  the  voter  sank  back   into  political   obscurity^  until  he 

1  Before  Rafonn  was  csnied,  tbe  retarnlog  officer  who  bad  to  ezamiiie  the 
quallfiottioiu  of  the  rotera  ftt  llie  poll  need  to  codbuU  a  barrister  on  doabtfnl 
points.  Tbe  Act  of  1832  ool;  legalized  the  iaterveutloa  of  lawyers  in  a  way 
by  provldlitK  tor  the  appointment  of  revising  barristers. 


.coy  Google 


Ii2  DEMOCRACY  AKD  POLITICAL  PARTIES     [second  fart 

was  ODce  more  fetched  to  be  digged  to  the  poll.  The  mere 
promulgatioa  of  the  Reform  Bill  could  not  alter  manners  and 
customs  on  the  spot.  All  that  the  new  electoral  machinery 
could  do  and  ought  to  have  done,  was  to  make  the  material 
conditions  attached  to  the  right  of  rotiug  easy  of  fulfilment. 
The  Act  of  1832  did  just  the  contrary  by  letting  the  State 
remain  a  stranger  to  the  preparation  of  the  register  and  leav- 
ing the  duty  to  private  individuals.  A  voter  who  had  not 
known  bow  to  comply  with  the  requii-ed  formalities,  who  had 
not  replied  in  good  time  to  the  objection  which  a  fellow-citizen 
took  it  into  his  head  to  lodge  against  him  in  the  overseer,  or 
who  had  not  thought  fit  to  waste  a  day  in  supporting  his  claim 
before  the  Revising  Barrister  lost  his  right  of  voting  ipso /ado, 
for  the  year.  And  the  following  year  he  had  to  begin  over 
again.  In  addition  to  this,  the  law  had  prescribed  a  registra- 
tion fee  of  one  shilling,  and  many  electors  objected  to  it. 

The  State  had  trusted  to  private  initiative ;  private  individ- 
uals did  not  trouble  their  beads  about  the  matter ;  so  the  only 
persons  left  to  take  an  interest  in  the  register  were  the  members 
of  Parliament  or  the  candidates  who  were  contesting  the  con- 
stituency. Clearly,  it  would  have  been  of  no  use  to  them  to 
make  converts,  to  recruit  adherents  if  these  latter  were  pre- 
vented from  voting  for  them  because  they  had  not  established 
their  right  to  vote  in  good  time,  owing  to  the  complicated  pro- 
cedure of  registration.  It  was  therefore  in  the  interest  of  the 
rival  candidates  to  help  the  electors  to  get  over  the  formalities 
which  lay  between  them  and  the  vote.  In  doing  so  they  not 
only  secured  the  attendance  of  their  thick-and-thin  partisans 
at  the  poll,  but  also  made  recruits  among  the  lukewarm,  who 
naturally  were  inclined  to  give  their  vote  to  those  who  had 
procured  it  for  them.  Politicians  soon  grasped  the  new  situ- 
ation created  by  the  Act  of  18.^2,  and  from  and  after  this  time 
party  8])irit  fastened  on  the  electoral  register.  Left  to  itself 
by  the  constituted  authorities,  registration  became,  so  to  speak, 
a  gap  through  which  the  parties,  hitherto  conlined  to  Parliap 
ment,  made  their  way  into  the  constituencies  and  gradually 
covered  the  whole  country  with  the  network  of  their  organi- 
zation. 

The  party  machinery  which  was  started  for  this  purpose 
after  1832  was  not  of  a  uniform  character.     In  some  places  the 


.coy  Google 


SBCOSD  CBiP.]  PARTY  ORGANIZATIONS  H3 

business  of  registration  was  for  a  long  time  left  to  the  Inter- 
vention of  private  individuals,  under  the  hap-hazard  operation 
of  local  circumstances,  generally  at  the  instigation  and  on  behalf 
of  memberB  or  interested  candidates.  But  in  several  districts 
" Begistratioii  Societies"  made  their  appearance.  There  were 
some  of  them  in  various  places  as  early  as  1832.  These  soci- 
eties were  composed  of  adherents  of  the  party  who  paid  a 
subscription  to  defray  the  expenses  of  registration  operations. 
The  bigwigs  of  the  party  of  course  headed  the  list,  and  it  was 
they  who  supplied  the  greater  part  of  the  funds.  The  staff  of 
the  Registration  Societies  collected  information  relating  to  the 
legal  qualifications  of  the  electors,  placed  themselves  in  com- 
munication with  the  overseers  and  appeared  before  the  Revising 
Barristers  to  support  the  claims  of  their  friends  and  oppose 
those  of  their  political  antagonists.  The  earliest  Registration 
Societies  do  not  seem  to  have  had  a  very  large  number  of 
members.  A  good  many  electors,  especially  those  engaged  in 
trade,  did  not  lilte  to  parade  political  preferences  for  fear  of 
losing  customers  belonging  to  the  opposite  party.  The  threat 
of  withdrawing  custom  from  shop-keepers  if  they  voted  for  the 
other  side  was  one  of  the  commonest  and  most  effective  weap- 
ons of  political  propaganda  at  that  time.  This  was  why  the 
Registration  Societies  had  secret  members  who  paid  the  sub- 
scription, but  who  were  not  entered  on  the  lists.'  For  the 
same  reason,  a  good  many  electors  declined  to  be  placed  on  the 
electoral  register  and  chose  to  forego  their  right  of  voting.* 

IV 
The  period  which  immediately  succeeded  the  Reform  Bill 
was  also  marked  by  the  appearance  of  central  party  organiza- 
tions, the  influence  and  activity  of  which  were  destined  to 
radiate  from  London  over  the  whole  country.  The  first  of  them 
was  the  Carlton  Club,  founded  by  the  Conservatives.  Political 
clubs  were  not  unknown  in  England  before  this.  Their  origin 
goes  back  to  the  seventeenth  century ;  it  is  almost  contemporary 
with  the  introduction  of  the  use  of  coffee  into  England  and  witb 
the  establishment  of  coffee-houses,  which  speedily  became  places 
for  social  meeting  and  for  political  and  other  intercourse.  In 
I  Report  on  Bribeiy,  1S36,  p.  183,  t  Ibid.  p.  400, 


.coy  Google 


144  DEMOCRACT  AND  POLITICAL  PARTIES    [sbcowb  pi»T 

1669  the  club  "Rota"  was  founded  in  one  of  tbeee  coffee- 
houses; its  frequenters,  Bepublicaos  bent  on  free  discus- 
sion, indulged  in  regul&t  political  debates  followed  by  voting 
by  ballot.  Harrington,  the  author  of  "Oceana,"  was  a  leading 
figure  at  these  meetings,  and  apparently  it  was  his  favourite 
scheme  of  rotation  in  office  which  gave  the  club  its  name. 
This  club  as  well  as  those  of  other  shades  of  political 
opinion  (the  "  Bump  Clubs "  of  the  Jacobites,  the  "  Calf's 
Head  Clubs"  of  the  Whigs,  etc.)  did  not  live  long.  But  at 
the  beginning  of  the  eighteenth  century,  in  the  great  outburst 
of  clubs  under  Queen  Anne,  political  clubs  reappeared.  They 
were  composed  of  a  Itnot  of  political  friends  who  met  in  certain 
taverns  to  dine  well  and  drink  hard.  During  the  second  half 
of  the  eighteenth  century  they  assumed  a  more  definite  polit- 
ical character  on  the  pattern  of  party  divisions  in  Parliament 
One  famous  tavern  was  frequented  by  the  Opposition,  another 
was  a  resort  of  the  Ministerialists.  Gibbon,  who  belonged  to 
the  latter,  has  left  a  not  very  edifying  description  of  the  con- 
vivial gatherings  of  the  Tory  club  which  met  at  the  "  Cocoa 
Tree  Tavern"  in  St,  James'  Street.  These  clubs,  however, 
like  the  non-political  clubs,  had  no  separate  existence  in  the 
present  sense  of  the  word  "  club  " ;  they  had  no  premises  of  their 
own,  and  nu  fixed  number  of  members  paying  a  subecriptioa 
in  order  to  procure  the  advantages  of  a  decent  common  es- 
tablishment. They  were  meetings  of  a  more  or  less  open  and 
casual  character.  Keal  clubs,  as  we  understand  them  nowa- 
days, that  is,  clubs  on  the  basis  of  subscription  and  formal 
admission  of  members,  did  not  make  their  appearance  till  the 
nineteenth  century.  Established  in  the  first  instance  to  meet 
the  requirements  of  sociability  and  the  demand  for  comfort  in 
a  permanent  fashion,  clubs  in  this  new  aspect  were  soon  des- 
tined to  supply  a  base  of  operations  for  politicians.' 

During  the  Reform  Bill  a^tation,  when  the  advanced  Re- 
formers started  their  "Political  Unions,"  the  Tories  felt  the 
need  of  closing  their  ranks  and  uniting  for  a  common  object. 

1  Cf.  E,  F.  Roblnsoo,  The  Early  Hletory  of  Coffee  Houit*  in  England,  Lond. 
1893 :  W.  C.  SIdDev,  Social  Life  in  England  tmm  the  Restoration  ta  the  Revo- 
lution, Lond.  \mi,  pp.  40!M21.  433 ;  W.  C.  Sidney,  England  and  Oe  EngliA 
in  the  ISth  Century,  Lond.  1891,  Vol.  I,  p.  218;  W.  Fraaer  Rae,  "Political 
Cluba"  {yineletnlh  Gentvry,  May,  18T8). 


.coy  Google 


ticoKD  CHAP.]  PARTY  ORGANIZATIONS  H6 

With  this  view,  a  number  of  leaders  of  the  party,  ex-Ministers 
and  ex-ambasBadors,  assisted  by  several  Tory  country  notables, 
founded  the  Carlton  Club,  in  ISSl,  which  was  intended  to  com- 
bine the  purpose  of  a  social  club  and  of  a  centre  for  rallying 
tlie  party  and  for  political  action  in  general. 

The  plan  of  the  club  succeeded.  Members  of  Facliament 
belonging  to  both  Houses,  from  the  leaders  down  to  the  most 
obscure  members,  met  at  the  Carlton,  laid  theii  heads  together 
there,  and  gave  or  received  the  word  of  command.  The  local 
leadeis,  the  provincial  notables  who  came  up  to  London  and 
wished  to  see  the  great  men  of  the  party,  were  sure  to  find  them 
at  the  Carlton,  and  there  they  could  approach  them  on  a  foot- 
il^!  of  equality  and  even  of  intimacy.  The  relations  to  which 
this  gave  rise  and  the  influences  resulting  therefrom  linked 
the  constituencies  to  the  Carlton  aJl  the  more  strongly  because 
the  tie  was  invisible.  The  note  struck  at  the  Carlton  Club 
was  invariably  and  faithfully  re-echoed  in  the  country,  because 
Uiere  too,  in  every  locality,  the  local  leaders  and  the  mass  of 
electors  were  united  by  the  same  imperceptible  ties  of  social 
influences.  '  A  political  committee  formed  in  the  club  itself 
kept  up  constant  relations  with  the  local  associations  or  agents, 
and  stimulated  the  work  of  electoral  registi-ation.  The  Liber- 
als were  not  long  in  discerning  the  part  played  by  the  Carlton 
Club,  and  about  1836  they  founded  a  similar  institution  with 
the  name  of  the  Reform  Club,  which  in  its  turn  soon  became 
tlie  headquarters  of  the  Liberal  party.  It  also  had  its  politi- 
cal committee,  which  discharged  tiie  same  duties  as  that  of  the 
Carlton. 

In  both  clubs  the  threads  were  held  by  the  party  Whips. 
There  they  had  all  their  parliamentaiy  following  ready  to  hand, 
and  from  there  too  they  could  work  the  provinces.  They  could 
no  longer  do  it  as  in  the  days  when  they  bought  parliamen- 
tary boroughs  and  sold  and  resold  them;  the  market  had 
ceased  to  exist;  but  a  sort  of  electoral  labour  exchauge  grew 
up  in  the  clubs.  The  aspirants  to  parliamentary  honours 
generally  belonged  to  the  Carlton  or  the  Reform  Club,  —  the 
politicians  were  not  so  very  numerous,  —  and  the  Whips  knew 
them  all,  their  ambitions  as  well  as  their  abilities.  Provincials 
who  had  no  candidates  could  recruit  t!hem  in  London,  at  the 
clubs,  with  the  aid  of  the  Whips. 


.coy  Google 


DEMOCHACT  AND  POLITICAL  FABTIES     [sicohd  f. 


The  Whip  was  assisted  by  a  general  agent  of  the  party  whose 
special  business  was  to  watch  the  electoral  situation  in  the 
constituencies.  This  chief  agent  had  correspondents  through- 
out the  Kingdom.  In  places  where  there  were  associations 
their  secretaries  conununicated  with  him.  The  information 
being  concentrated  in  bis  hands,  he  in  his  turn  was  in  a  posi- 
tion to  assist  the  Whip  and  the  leaders  of  the  party  in  general 
with  bis  suggestioos.  At  a  time  when  the  provincial  Press 
possessed  but  little  importance,  and  when  it  was  credited  in 
London  with  much  less  than  it  really  posseesed,  local  life 
was  imperfectly  known.  Besides,  public  feeling  on  politics 
had  few  opportunities  for  displaying  itself  in  the  intervals 
between  the  elections.  Consequently  the  electoral  situation  in 
different  parts  of  the  country  appeared  somewhat  hazy,  even 
to  politicians.  The  general  agent  of  the  party  was  supposed  to 
be  able  to  see  through  it,  and  he  enjoyed  the  same  respect  in 
party  circles  as  country  folk  have  for  the  local  bone-setter.  A 
Prime  Minister,  before  risking  a  dissolution  of  Parliament, 
closeted  himself  with  the  agent  of  the  party  to  consult  him 
on  the  chances  of  a  general  election.  When  he  appeared  in 
the  lobbies  of  the  House,  at  times  when  a  dissolution  was 
in  the  air,  people  pressed  round  him;  journalists  hung  upon 
his  utterances  as  if  they  were  those  of  the  Delphic  Oracle. 

As  time  went  on,  this  somewhat  empirical  fashion  of  maot^ 
ing  electoral  matters  became  inadequate;  the  necessity  for 
more  methodical  action  made  itself  felt,  and,  at  the  same 
time,  it  became  inconvenient  to  attend  to  party  business  in  the 
club  itself,  over  one's  wine,  so  to  speak.  The  Liberal  Whip 
Brand  (afterward  Viscount  Hampden)  thereupon  started  about 
1861  an  independent  central  organization  called  the  "  Liberal 
Kegistration  Association,"  composed  of  members'  elected  by 
the  committee  and  paying  a  subscription  of  a  few  pounds.  Its 
principal  business,  as  its  name  indicates,  was  to  see  after  the 
register.  It  promoted  the  formation  of  B^stration  Societies, 
sent  them  instructions  and  circulars,  gave  them  opinions  on 


.coy  Google 


ucoND  CB*p.]  PABTY  0E0ANIZAT10N8  1*7 

knotty  points  of  law,  and  looked  up  non-resident  electora  (out- 
voters)  throughout  the  Kingdom  and  sent  them  to  the  poll  in 
their  respective  constituencies.  The  residence  qualification 
in  England  is  different  for  voters  in  boroughs  and  for  those  in 
counties.  While  the  former,  in  order  to  exercise  their  right  of 
voting,  must  reside  within  a  radius  of  not  more  than  seven  miles 
from  the  borough,  persons  qualified  to  vote  in  counties  may 
vote  at  an  election  oven  if  they  never  live  in  their  county.  They 
can  reside  abroad,  and  yet  preserve  their  right  of  voting  if  they 
like  to  exercise  it  Non-resident  electors  were  always  a  valu- 
able contingent  in  electoral  contests.  Before  1832,  when  the 
suffrage  was  extremely  restricted  and  the  relative  value  of  a 
vote  was  much  greater,  voters  were  occasionally  fetched  from 
abroad,  from  Holland  and  France.'  The  reimbursement  of  the 
outvoters'  travelling  expenses  was  one  of  the  regular  forms  of 
electoral  corruption ;  the  real  expense  was  exaggerated.  The 
Legislature  was  obliged  to  intervene,  and  in  1858  the  payment 
of  travelling  expenses,  whether  in  cash  or  in  any  other  shape, 
was  prohibited  i  the  law  only  allowed  the  candidate  or  his 
agent  to  supply  the  voter  with  the  conveyance  required  to  take 
him  to  the  polling  station.'  The  Registration  Societies  and  the 
election  ^ents  thereupon  undertook  to  treat  with  the  carriage 
proprietors  or  the  railway  companies.  The  negotiations  with 
the  various  railway  companies  were  no  easy  matter  for  a  local 
Association.  But  the  difficulties  did  not  end  there ;  the  great 
thing  was  to  get  bold  of  the  absent  voter,  to  perauade  him  to 
undertake  the  journey,  and  then  supply  him  with  the  carriage 
or  the  railway  ticket.  And  these  outvoters  were  very  numerous, 
at  least  fifteen  per  cent  of  the  total  number  of  electors.*  The 
central  oi^anization  which  had  just  been  formed  in  1861  was 
destined  to  render  signal  service  to  the  local  organizations  in 
all  these  matters.  The  Liberal  Registration  Association  cen- 
tralized all  the  work  relating  to  outvoters.    Being  in  posses- 

1  Report  on  Bribery,  1S3S,  p.  123;  Report  from  the  CommlasloDers  on 
Mnnicipnl  Corporatluns  Id  England  and  Walea,  1834.  Appeiidix,  Part  IV, 
p.  2310  (BlDG  Boofcl,  lean.  Vol.  XXXIV). 

«  22  Mid  23  Vict.  c.  87,  a.  1. 

■  The  (ollowli^  &re  some  fieoi^B  by  way  of  example :  the  dlvliion  of  We»l 
Kent  had,  in  1808,  out  ot  flOOO  electors,  1300  outvoters  dispersed  throughout 
the  KJogdom :  for  the  county  ot  Mlddleeei,  out  ot  14,SO0  voters  od  the  regUtet 
o/ 1866,  300O  lived  ont  ot  the  county. 


.coy  Google 


14B  DEMOCEACT  AND  FOLTTICAL  PARTIES    [sacoint  put 

sion  of  the  electoral  registers  of  the  whole  Kingdom  it  made 
separate  lista  of  all  persona  who  were  entered  on  them  as  resid- 
ing elsewhere,  and,  with  the  aid  of  its  local  correspondents, 
placed  itself  in  communication  with  the  outvoters  in  each  local- 
ity and  offered  them  railway  tickets.'  The  railway  companies 
received  the  fares  on  returning  the  tickets  which  had  been 
used '  to  the  Central  Association,  and  the  money  was  refunded 
the  Association  in  its  turn  by  the  candidate  on  whose  behalf 
the  outvoters  had  made  the  journey. 

Besides  the  management  of  registration  and  of  the  outvoters, 
the  Association  also  undertook  the  recommendation  of  parliar 
mentary  candidates.  Men  who  wished  to  stand  for  Parliament 
applied  to  the  Association.  The  Whip  took  note  of  their  polit- 
ical opinions,  if  they  had  any,  and  especially  of  the  pecuniary 
sacrifices  which  they  were  disposed  to  make  for  the  electoral 
struggle.  He  entered  them  in  the  candidates'  book  and  classed 
them.  A  good  Whip,  after  a  talk  with  a  candidate,  could  see 
at  once  whether  he  would  do  for  any  constituency,  and  fixed  on 
the  constituency  which  would  probably  suit  him.  Then,  when 
there  was  an  application  for  a  candidate,  the  Association  sent 
down  a  name  to  its  local  agent.  The  t^ent,  who  was  frequently 
the  secretary  of  the  Registration  Socie^,  called  a  meeting  of  the 
party  leaders,  the  most  influential  men,  and  submitted  the  can- 
didate's name  to  t^em.  Very  often  a  deputation  came  up  to 
London,  and  an  interview  was  arranged  between  it  and  the 
candidate  in  the  office  of  the  Association.  If  they  did  not  come 
to  terms,  the  Association  offered  another  candidate;  it  always 
had  a  supply  of  all  shades  of  opinion  and  suited  to  all  tastes. 
The  Association  did  not  put  pressure  on  the  constituencies  in 
the  choice  of  candidates,  it  only  acted  the  part  of  houest  broker. 
The  Association  did  not  spend  any  money  on  the  elections,  it 
was  the  candidate  who  had  to  defray  all  the  expense.  If  he 
was  a  poor  man  and  if  his  presence  in  Parliament  was  desirable 
in  the  interest  of  the  party,  the  Whips  supplied  bim  with  money ; 
they  had  funds  subscribed  by  the  wealtliy  men  of  the  party 
which  they  used  at  their  discretion.     That  a  portion  of  these 

1  A  flnt-claBs  ticket  WM  »lways  given,  a'en  to  workmen ;  the  voter  conald- 
ered  It  beneath  hl»  dignity  to  travel  Becond  or  third  on  this  occa^oD. 

*  As  a  rule,  about  fifty  per  cent  of  the  outvoters  consented  to  nndertake 
the  Journey. 


.CD,  Google 


noonD  aurO  PARTY  OBGASIZATIONS  MO 

funds  was  employed  in  bribing  voters  when  tbe  candidate  was 
not  rich  enough  to  do  it  himself,  is  not  improbable.  The  inter- 
vention from  London  haunted  people's  minds  in  the  provinces, 
even  when  it  never  took  place ;  and,  in  accordance  with  the  old 
tradition,  it  was  attributed  to  the  Carlton  dub  or  to  the  Ke- 
fonn  Club.  In  reality,  the  clubs  had  no  share  in  it,  they  had 
lost  their  influence,  especially  the  Eeform  Club;  all  the  electoral 
operations  of  the  party  were  henceforth  mani^ed  from  the  office 
of  the  Central  Association.  The  Conservative  party  founded 
one  on  the  same  basis  as  the  Liberal  organization  which  I  have 
jost  described.  After  having  been,  at  its  start,  under  the  con- 
trol of  a  well-known  firm  of  solicitors,  it  was  soon  placed  in  the 
hands  of  special  agents.  Devoting  itself  particularly  to  the 
cultivation  of  social  relations,  which  were  the  electoral  main- 
spring of  the  Conservative  party,  the  central  Tory  office  kept 
in  close  touch  with  the  Carlton  Club ;  if  they  had  not  the  same 
body,  they  were  animated  hy  the  same  spirit 

The  local  correspondents  of  the  central  associations  were 
generally  solicitors.  They  were  at  the  same  time  the  movii^ 
spirits  of  the  Registration  Society,  if  there  was  one  in  the  local- 
ity. They  were  not  pud  for  these  services,  but  it  was  to  their 
interest  to  render  them ;  either  because  their  activity  on  behalf 
of  the  party  gave  them  a  connection  and  increased  their  prac- 
tice, or  because  this  activity  marked  them  out  beforehand  for 
the  appointment  of  election  agent,  who  conducted  the  election 
campaign  for  a  candidate,  and  this  was  an  extremely  lucrative 
employment  Besides  the  very  ample  remuneration  which  he 
received  directly,  the  ^ent  made  a  good  deal  of  money  out  of 
the  election  expenses,  which  in  the  old  days  reached  an  enor- 
mous total  and  all  passed  through  his  hands.' 


The  movement  set  on  foot  after  the  Reform  Bill  for  the  for- 
mation of  local  party  associations  continued  with  a  strength 
which  varied  according  to  the  times  and  the  localities.     The 

1  The  BccoDDts  irhlcb  the  a^eot  sent  in  after  the  election  to  the  candidate 
tot  whom  be  bad  been  working,  were  almost  alvaye  of  a  tancirnl  and  occa- 
tfonallj  of  a  hnmoront  description.  Thns  one  agent  entered  among  the  vari- 
001  election eqMQBes :  "mental  anxiety,  ££00." 


.CD,  Google 


150  DEHOCBACT  AHD  POLITICAX.  PABTIBS    [■■ooud  pa» 

Liberals  set  the  example.  The  Conservatives  followed  when 
they  had  sbakeo  off  the  torpor  in  which  they  had  been  plunged 
by  Reform.  Tbeir  leading  stateaman,  Sir  Robert  Peel,  more 
than  once  called  the  attention  of  his  party  to  the  importance 
of  registration.  "The  battle  of  the  Oonstitation,"  he  said, 
"  will  be  fought  in  the  registration  cotirts."  Consequently,  he 
excIaJmed  on  another  occasion,  the  watchword  of  the  day 
should  be:  "Register,  register,  register!"*  Following  this 
advice,  the  Consetvatives  also  set  to  work  to  form  societies  for 
attending  to  the  registration  and  giving  cohesion  to  the  party. 
The  principal  scene  of  their  activity  was  Lancashire,  where, 
thanks  to  the  assiduity  vrith  which  their  organizations  devoted 
themselves  to  the  register,  the  Conservatives  succeeded  in 
making  up  their  lost  ground  in  the  county  constituencies.' 
One  feature  which  must  be  noticed  aud  borne  in  mind  in  con- 
nection with  these  Lancashire  organizations,  is  that  they  were 
divided  into  two  categories,  one  for  gentlemen  and  the  other 
for  the  lower  orders  who  had  their  own  associations,  under  the 
name  of  "Conservative  Operatives'  Societies."  The  Liberal 
organizations  were  generally  called  "  Liberal  Registration  Soci- 
eties "  or  sometimes  "  Liberal  Associations."  The  Conservative 
organizations  were  partial  to  the  title  of  "Loyal  and  Constitu- 
tional Associations."*  The  agitation  against  the  duties  on 
com  gave  a  great  impulse  to  the  formation  of  Registration  Soci- 
eties. When  the  campaign  of  persuasion  undertaken  by  Cob- 
den  and  his  friends  was  in  an  advanced  stage,  the  League  set 
about  transforming  the  accumulated  moral  force  into  political 
force  by  pi-eparing  the  mobilization  of  the  electoral  army  for 
the  next  general  election.  But,  as  the  exercise  of  the  suf- 
frage depended  on  the  correctness  of  the  electoral  register,  and 
the  preparation  of  this  register  was  left  more  or  less  to  private 
initiative,  the  lists  were  in  a  state  of  great  confusion  in  many 
places.*    The  League  decided  to  intervene  for  the  purpose  of 

<  Speech  at  the  Tamnorth  elaction  diDDer.  T  An);.  IS-tT,  28  Jnly  ISll,  etc. 

*  The  Tory  Reform  Act,  by  a  member  of  tbs  Council  of  the  IfatloniJ  Union 
ot  CnDservalire  and  Constitutional  ABSoclalloDs.  Lend,  18SB. 

■  The  first  tnuies  of  a  Conservative  organization  In  the  matrapalli  which 
I  have  discovered  relate  to  tbe  Loyal  and  CoDBtitntloDal  Association  of  Um 
borongh  of  Marylebone,  abont  the  year  1834  (Report  on  Bribery,  1830,  p.  4^. 

*  See  in  oonnectlon  wjth  this  Prentice,  History  of  (As  AWA-Corn  Xoia 
Ltagve,  II,  221. 


.coy  Google 


swoKD  CHAP.}  PABTT  OBGAKIZATIONS  161 

placing  all  its  adherents  on  the  register.  A  legistration  de- 
partment was  instituted  in  the  offices  of  the  League  at  Man- 
chester; it  started  committees  and  registration  societies  in  the 
constituencies,  which,  assisted  by  legal  advice  and  other  in- 
structions from  headquarters,  devoted  their  efforts  to  getting 
the  followers  of  the  League  on  the  register.  Several  of  the 
Registration  Societies  founded  on  this  occasion  outlived  the 
free-trade  agitation  and  became  instruments  of  the  Liberal 
party. 

After  1846,  the  contests  in  the  registration  courts  became 
less  keen.  Owing  to  the  indifference  of  the  voters  and  the 
insufficiency  of  funds,  a  good  many  associations  fell  into  a  lan- 
guishing state.  Sometimes  also  a  sort  of  truce  grew  up  between 
parties,  and  then  they  disbanded  their  forces ;  they  dissolved 
the  Registration  Societies,  and  left  the  register  to  its  fate.'  Or, 
again,  when  one  side  had  an  overwhelming  majority  in  a  con- 
stituency, the  other  side  gave  up  the  struggle,  and  Registration 
Societies  were  considered  of  no  use.'  But  in  constituencies 
where  parties  were  evenly  balanced,  or  where  the  opponent's 
prospects  were  improving,  the  Associations  still  confronted  each 
Other.  The  member  and  his  agent  did  not  always  like  t«  be 
encumbered  with  an  Association ;  in  that  case  they  did  not 
encourage,  or  discouraged,  its  formation;  the  agent  took  sole 
charge  of  the  register,  and  collected  subscriptions  to  meet  the 
expenses  of  registration  proceedings.*  Lastly,  in  certain  dis- 
tricts, especially  in  the  counties,  a  territorial  magnate  would 
order  one  of  his  dependents  to  look  after  the  register,  and 
would  defray  all  the  expenses  himself.' 

VII 
In  the   electoral    proceedings   which  followed  the  settle- 
ment of  the  register,  viz.  in  the  selection  of  candidates,  and 
in  electioneerii^  operations,  the  part  played  by  the  Associ- 

1  Select  Committee  on  RegtatratioD  of  Voten  In  Coaaties  (Blue  Books  of 
1870,  Vol.  VI,  p.9n,  S21«). 

*  BepoTt  from  the  Select  Committee  of  the  House  ot  Lords  (Blue  Books  of 
I860,  Vol.  Xn,  P.6B). 

*  Select  Committee  on  Registrstton  of  County  Voters  (Blue  Books  of  1861, 
Vol.  X.  p.  «)■ 

*  Committee  on  the  Corrupt  Practices  Act  (Blue  Books  of  1860,  Vol.  X,  p,  2B0). 


.coy  Google 


l&S  DEMOCRACY  AND  POLITICAL  PARTIES    [ncoim  pam 

atdons  varied  in  importance.  In  the  choice  of  oandidates  theii 
share  was  slight.  It  waa  more  the  play  of  living  social  forces, 
still  highly  important,  that  marked  men  out  and  thrust  them 
upon  the  public.  The  Associations  or  their  committees  ex* 
amincd  the  names  submitted  by  the  central  organization  in 
London,  or  by  a  few  private  individuals,  or  even  by  the  candi- 
dates themselves  who  came  forward,  and  laid  them  before  the 
electors.  Strictly  apealiing,  the  committee  only  represented 
itself;  its  members  had  no  mandate  conferred  on  them  by  for- 
mal vote  but  held  it  by  the  tacit  acquiescence  of  the  electorate. 
The  whole  Association  also  only  represented  the  subscribers 
who  had  thought  fit  to  combine  together.  The  Associations 
and  the  committees  had  no  mandate  and  did  not  lay  claim  to 
one.  They  merely  recommended  the  candidates,  and  their 
recommendation  carried  the  same  weight  as  the  personal  influ- 
ence of  their  members  and  no  more.  This  influence  was 
derived  from  their  social  rank,  their  wealth,  their  intelli- 
gence, or  their  adroitness.  Good  or  bad,  they  were  the  natoral 
leaders  of  the  society  of  the  time.  Their  small  number  of 
course  made  them  an  oligarchy,  and  encouraged  the  formation 
of  coteries  and  of  "  hole-and-cornei  management."  But  in 
spite  of  this,  the  selections  of  candidates  were  not  at  all  bad, 
while  not  unfrequently  open  to  criticism.  These  leaders  were 
not  devoid  of  a  sense  of  responsibility. 

A  candidate  rejected  by  the  Association  did  not  consider  him- 
self, and  waa  not  considered,  bound  by  this  decision;  the  com- 
mittee did  not  take  the  place  of  the  electorate.  A  candidate 
who  did  not  accept  the  decision  of  the  committee  came  before 
the  electors  supported  by  a  committee  of  his  own.  To  ensure 
union  in  face  of  the  enemy,  the  whole  party  was  sometimes 
consulted  beforehand  upon  the  rival  candidates.  The  procedure 
employed  to  fake  the  sense  of  the  electors  varied :  a  circular 
was  forwarded  to  the  electors  asking  them  to  state  in  reply 
by  post  which  of  the  candidates  they  preferred ; '  or  the  agenbi 
of  the  rival  candidates  called  on  each  voter  and  took  down 
the  replies,  then  they  compared  their  lists  and  the  less 
favoured  candidates  withdrew;  sometimes  again  a  prelimi- 
nary vote  was  arranged,  a  non-official,  full-dress  rehearsal  of 
D  the  Corrupt  Practlcea  Pr«v«uUoo 


.coy  Google 


•■COHS  cuF.]  PARTY  ORGANIZA'nONS  I6S 

the  polling.'  Another  mode  of  preventing  the  multiplication 
of  candidatures,  by  which  the  opposite  party  could  benefit, 
was  arbitration.  The  arbittatora  weighed  the  chances  of  the 
rivals,  and  decided  which  should  retire.  The  party  Whip 
also  took  up  cases  of  this  kind;  by  dint  of  tact  and  skilful 
ai^ument  he  would  induce  one  of  the  competitors  to  with- 
draw. 

vin 

The  operations  during  election  time  for  winning  the  seat 
were  conducted  in  accordance  with  the  old  traditions  and  cen- 
tred chiefly  in  the  canvass.  The  canvass  consisted  of  the 
visits  which  the  candidate  and  bis  friends  who  possessed  in- 
fluence in  the  locality  paid  to  each  voter  in  the  district  just 
before  the  poll,  to  get  him  to  promise  his  vote.  In  the  rural 
districts,  where  territorial  influences  were  firmly  established  and 
made  the  elections  a  foregone  conclusion,  a  canvass  was  not 
very  necessary.  But  in  urban  constituencies  these  visits  were 
indispensable.  They  were  a  duty  from  whicti  the  grand  sei- 
gneur himself  could  not  escape.  At  a  time  when  political  convic- 
tions counted  for  little  or  nothing  with  the  great  mass  of  voters, 
the  art  of  canvassing,  of  talking  a  voter  over,  was  of  paramount 
importance  in  electioneering  contests.  Like  every  art,  canvass- 
ing had  its  great  masters.  But  they  were  not  formed  in  a 
school,  they  were  bom,  like  poets.  Among  the  fine  old  types  of 
canvassers  produced  by  the  eighteenth  century,  the  Marquis  of 
Wharton  is  the  most  famous.  His  biographer  relates  how  he 
canvassed  on  behalf  of  one  of  his  candidates  in  the  borough  of 
Wicomb ;  "  Wharton  was  going  up  and  down  the  town  with 
his  friends  to  secure  votes  on  their  side.  Entering  a  shoe- 
maker's shop  he  asked  '  where  Dick  was  ? '  The  good  woman 
said  her  husband  was  gone  two  or  three  miles  oS  with  some 
shoes,  but  his  lordship  need  not  fear  for  him, — she  would 
keep  him  tight  '  I  know  that,'  says  my  lord,  '  but  I  want  to 
see  Dick  and  drink  a  glass  with  him.'  The  wife  was  very  sorry 
Dick  was  out  of  the  way.  '  Well,'  says  his  lordship, '  how  does 
all  thy  children?  Molly  is  a  brave  girl,  I  warrant,  by  this 
time.'     '  Yes,  I  thank  ye,  my  lord,'  says  the  woman,  and  his 


.coy  Google 


164  DEMOCRACY  AND  POLITICAL  PARTIES     [««coi.i>  faiit 

lordship  continued, ' is  not  Jemmy  breeched  yet ? '"  A  friend 
of  the  rival  candidate,  who  had  slipped  into  Wharton's 
train,  could  stand  it  no  longer  ^  he  rushed  ofF  to  his  friends 
and  told  them  that  the  contest  was  hopeless,  that  nothing  could 
make  way  against  a  great  peer  who  knew  the  age  of  Molly  and 
Jemmy  go  well.' 

The  poet  Cowper  has  left  a  curious  description  of  a  canvass- 
ing visit  which  Grenville  had  paid  him :  "  We  were  sitting 
yesterday  after  dinner,  the  two  ladies  and  myself  very  com- 
posedly ,  .  .  when,  to  our  unspeakable  surprise,  a  mob  appeared 
before  the  window,  a  smart  rap  was  heard  at  the  door,  and  the 
maid  announced  Mr.  Grenville.  In  a  minute  the  yard,  the 
kitchen,  and  the  parlour  were  filled.  Mr.  Grenville  advancing 
towards  me  shook  me  by  the  hand  with  a  degree  of  cordiality 
that  was  extremely  seducing.  As  soon  as  he  and  as  many 
more  as  could  find  chairs  were  seated,  he  began  to  open  the 
intent  of  his  visit.  I  told  him  I  had  ifo  vote,  for  which  he 
readily  gave  me  credit  I  assured  him  I  had  no  influence, 
which  he  was  not  equally  inclined  to  believe,  and  the  less  no 
doubt,  because  Mr.  Ashburner,  the  draper,  addressing  himself 
to  me  at  this  moment  informed  me  that  I  had  a  great  deal. 
Supposing  that  I  could  not  be  possessed  of  such  a  treasure 
without  knowing  it,  I  ventured  to  confirm  my  first  assertion 
by  saying  that,  if  I  had  any,  I  was  utterly  at  a  loss  to  imagine 
where  it  could  be  or  wherein  it  consisted.  Thus  ended  the  con- 
ference. Mr.  Grenville  squeezed  me  by  the  hand  again,  kissed 
the  ladies,  and  withdrew,  lie  kissed  likewise  the  maid  in  the 
kitchen,  and  seemed  upon  the  whole,  a  most  loving,  kissing, 
kindliearted  gentleman." ' 

Ladies  also  occasionally  joined  in  the  canvass  and  they  were 
just  as  expajisive  when  it  was  a  question  of  securing  a  vote. 
There  is  the  well-known  story  of  the  beautiful  Duchess  of 
Devonshire  who,  when  canvassing  for  Fojc,  allowed  a  butcher 
to  give  her  a  kiss  in  return  for  a  promise  to  vote  for  the  great 
Whig  orator. 

'  MenMirt  of  the  Lift  of  the  Moat  XobU  Thomai,  late  Marqvtit  of  Wharton, 
Lond.  ITin,  p.  :t4. 

*  Qaoted  in  llie  article  ol  the  Quarlrrly  Revira  of  1867.  Vol. CO,  '•  Blection- 
eerlog,"  apparently  vritten  by  Tbnckeray  (see  Joa.  Gregii,  A  HMorj/  of  Par' 
liamtntarv  Election!  atid  Electioneering  tri  the  Old  Day;  Lond.  1S8T). 


.coy  Google 


SECOND  CHAP.]  PARTY   ORGANIZATIONS  156 

The  Wliartons,  the  Duchess  of  Devonshire,  who  introduced 
artistic  touches  of  one  kind  or  another  into  their  canvassing, 
were  rare ;  and  as  time  went  on,  especially  after  the  extension 
of  the  franchise,  canvassing  lost,  so  to  speak,  its  i>oetry,  its 
pictiiresqueness ;  but  it  none  the  less  remained  the  great  elec- 
tioneering weapon.  People  still  continued,  and  probably  rightly 
so,  to  rely  more  on  direct  personal  influence  than  on  principles 
aud  pro^aiunies.  Only,  owing  to  the  increase  in  the  number 
of  voters,  it  was  necessary  to  bring  this  action  to  bear  with 
more  method,  to  have  an  organization.  The  Registration  Socie- 
ties supplied  the  framework  of  it.  Having  made  their  way 
into  the  political  life  of  the  nation  through  the  gap  left  by  the 
defects  in  the  registration  laws,  the  Societies  and  Associations 
acquired  a  fresh  hold  on  the  electorate  by  means  of  the  can- 
vassing system. 

The  canvassing  machinery  was  set  in  motion  whenever  the 
period  of  electioneering  commenced.  The  most  important 
members  of  the  Associations  formed  themselves  into  a  central 
committee,  into  which  they  also  admitted  persons  who  did  not 
belong  to  the  Association  but  whose  connections  might  make 
them  of  use.  Then  they  established  committees  in  the  various 
districts  composed  of  persons  who  were  full  of  energy  and 
resource  in  electoral  matters.  The  district  committees  con- 
ducted the  canvass,  each  member  separately  or  in  groups.  The 
canvassers  of  the  rival  candidates  ma<le  their  expeditions  at 
the  same  time,  one  party  in  one  street,  the  other  in  the  next; 
it  was  considered  fair  to  agree  as  to  the  opening  day  of  the  elec- 
toral shooting  season,  and  the  two  armies  of  canvassers  started 
simultaneously.  The  canvassers  visited  all  the  voters  indis- 
criminately, even  those  who  notoriously  belonged  to  the  opposite 
side.  They  noted  down  all  the  replies  of  the  voters,  and  were 
in  a  position  to  forecast  the  probable  result  of  the  polling  Ijefore 
the  election.  After  the  canvass,  the  next  great  business  of  the 
committees  was  to  get  the  voters  to  the  poll.  Besides  these 
official,  acknowledged  duties,  the  committees  were  more  or  less 
eng^ed  in  the  work  of  electoral  corruption.  The  district  com- 
mittees generally  sat  in  the  public-houses.  It  was  here  that 
people  came  to  receive  the  password,  and  here,  too,  they  were 
supplied  with  food  and  drink  gratuitously,  that  i.s  to  say,  at 
the  candidate's  expense,  during  the  whole  c 


.coy  Google 


DEMOCRACT  AMD  POLITICAL  PARTIES    [»com>  part 


IX 

In  all  this  the  party  aesociatiotis  only  continued  the  old 
practices ;  they  had  simply  followed  up  tlie  electioneering  sys- 
tem created  in  the  old  days  and  developed  by  the  maimers  and 
customs  of  the  nation.  'VVhere  the  motive  power  really  ema- 
nated from  the  Associations,  as  was  the  case  with  the  registrar 
tion  operations,  it  was  not  long  before  they  incurred  a  grave 
responsibility.  Their  activity  in  this  important  department  of 
electoral  life  was  marked  by  exclusive  party  spirit  to  such  an 
extent  as  to  warp  the  electoral  machinery  far  more  than  keep 
it  in  proper  working  order.  The  defects  in  the  system  of 
registration  established  by  the  law  of  1S32  set  a  premium  on 
party  manoeuvres.  True,  the  Legislature  had  tried  to  remedy 
them;  it  had  abolished  the  registration  fee  of  one  shilling, 
it  had  empowered  the  Revising  Barristers  to  allow  costs  for 
unfounded  objections.  But  these  slight  attempts  at  reform 
eould  not  overcome  the  indifference  of  the  electors  who  did 
not  care  whether  they  were  on  the  register  or  not,  nor  the 
ignorance  and  carelessness  of  the  tradesmen  appointed  over- 
seers for  the  year,  nor  the  dishonesty  of  the  parties  repre- 
sented by  the  organizations.  The  latter  set  to  work  to  strike 
properly  qualified  persons  off  the  register,  or  to  prevent  their 
opponents  from  being  entered  on  it,  and  to  get  their  own  fol- 
lowers who  had  no  right  to  vote  admitted.  Every  year  the 
Registration  Societies  started  thousands  of  objections  to  the 
claims  lodged  by  the  electors.  They  calculated,  and  rightly, 
that  many  of  those  who  were  opposed  would  not  or  could  not 
appear  in  the  registration  court  to  uphold  their  right  to  rote, 
or  even  that  they  would  receive  no  notice  of  opposition  owing 
to  removal,  etc ;  and  the  legal  consequence  of  the  non-disallow- 
ance of  an  objection  was  that  the  name  was  struck  off  the  list. 
By  these  manceuvres  they  could  easily  manage  to  transfer  the 
majority  from  one  side  to  the  other.  The  Associations  had 
therefore  made  a  regular  business,  "  a  trade," '  of  lodging  objec- 
tions. At  the  same  time  they  started  unfounded  claims,  which 
had  to  be  allowed  if  no  one  objected  to  them;  the  overseers 


.coy  Google 


ucoKD  CHAP.]  FABTT  ORGANIZATIONS  157 

had  not  the  means  or  the  wish  to  check  them,  and  the  Revising 
Barristers  had  no  right  to  do  so  if  an  appeal  was  not  made  to 
them.  "  Improper  claims  originate  chiefly  with  the  Registra- 
tion Societies.  Voters  very  seldom  make  claims  of  their  own 
head ;  they  are  generally  got  to  do  so  by  the  agent  of  the  Regis- 
tratiou  Society."' 

It  is  true  that  the  societies  of  the  rival  parties,  in  supervis- 
ing and  controlling  each  other,  helped,  as' they  maintained,  to 
purify  the  register.  But,  out  of  the  mass  of  objections  and 
claims  with  which  the  parties  assailed  each  other,  a  good  many 
unfounded  ones  slipped  through  and  well-founded  ones  were 
unsuccessful.  Id  any  event,  the  methods  by  which  the  recti- 
fication of  the  register  was  effected  destroyed  all  the  benefit 
of  the  result.  Ait  elector  whose  right  was  unjustly  attacked 
by  one  party  association  reasserted  it  by  the  help  of  another, 
which  had  an  eye  on  his  vote,  and  always  at  the  cost  of  wasted 
time  and  of  trouble  to  the  persons  engaged  in  the  proceedings. 
The  special  parliamentary  committee,  appointed  in  186S  to 
inqiure  into  the  registration  of  electors  in  boroughs,  took  a 
quantity  of  evidence  on  Registration  Societies  and  came  to  the 
conclusion  that  "the  action  of  such  associations  is  necessarily 
prejudicial  to  the  independence  of  a  constituency,  and  not  only 
affords  the  means,  but  supplies  a  grave  temptation  to  illegiti- 
mate practices  and  corrupt  inducements,  whilst  at  the  same 
time  the  imperfect  operation  of  the  responsible  registration 
authority  justifies  their  existence  and  forms  an  excuse  for  their 
operations."  * 

It  is  remarkable  that  this  opinion  was  shared  by  repre- 
sentatives of  the  organizations  themselves.  There  were  en- 
lightened men  among  them  who  did  not  hesitate  to  denounce 
the  intervention  of  associations  in  political  life.  And  they  did 
so  under  circumstances  which  gave  their  statements  a  peculiar 
importance,  especially  in  the  great  parliamentary  enquiries  into 
electoral  matters  during  the  years  1860-18T0.  The  secretary  of 
the  Liberal  Association  of  the  City  of  London,  when  giving 
evidence  before  the  Committee  of  the  House  of  Lords,  said 

1  Select  Committee  on  Begistratiou  o(  Voters  tu  Ckinaties  (Blue  Books  ot 
lS70,Vol.VI,p.l22,S26»T). 

■  Report  from  the  Select  Comtnittee  on  Begistratlon  of  Voters  In  BoroDghs 
(Blue  Books  of  186B-9,  Vol.  VII,  p.  6). 


.coy  Google 


168  DEMOCRACY  AND  POLITICAL  PARTIES     [sbcomd  PiBT 

that  the  abandonment  of  registration  to  asso<:iatious  "  was  a 
very  great  political  evil.  Of  tourae  I  ought  not  to  speak 
against  that  which  employs  myself;  but  I  thiuk  it  a  most 
unconstitutional  thing.  ...  If  the  suffrage  were  extended,  au 
election  would  depend  to  a  much  greater  ext«nt  than  it  does 
at  present  (and  it  does  too  much  now)  upon  political  organiza- 
tions. It  would  increase  the  power  of  those  political  Associa- 
tions .  .  .  and  would  pro  tanlo  disturb  the  natural  expression 
of  public  opinion." ' 

Before  the  Select  Committees  on  registration,  many  repre- 
sentatives of  tlie  organizations  expressed  the  opinion  that  an 
ofKcial  system  of  registration  should  be  instituted,  in  order  to  cut 
the  ground  from  under  the  feet  of  the  "  Societies." '  The  founder 
of  the  central  Association  of  the  Liberal  party,  Mr.  Brand 
(raised  to  the  peerage  with  the  title  of  Lord  Hampden  for  his 
signal  services  at)  Speaker  of  the  House  of  Commons),  at  a 
committee  of  enquiry  of  which  he  was  a  member,  also  emphati- 
cally condemned  the  associations  which  he  had  liimself  helped 
to  develop  to  meet  the  exigencies  of  the  party.  He  considered 
that  the  party  associations  had  an  unhealthy  effect* 

>  Blue  Books  ot  ISnO,  Vol.  XII,  pp.  76,  226. 

>  Evidence  o(  Mr.  Temple  before  tbe  Comniittee  of  1869  (Blue  Books  ot 
1868-9,  Vol,  VII,  p.  134),  of  Mr.  T.  N.  Roberta  before  lli8  Committee  ot  1870 
(Bine  Books  of  1S70,  Vol.  VI,  f  762). 

*  The  Blue  Book  on  tbe  parliamentary  enquiry  of  I8J0  contains  a  cuiious 
dialogue  betireeD  Mr,  Brand  and  a  witness,  a  clerk  of  the  peace.  The  clerks 
of  the  peace  had  to  work  at  the  electoral  register  In  ibe  counties,  bnt,  as  the 
parties  had  taken  posaeHslon  ol  the  registration,  the  clerks  trusted  to  the  Asso- 
ciations. The  clerk  who  was  giving  bis  evidence  before  tbe  parliamentary 
committee  considered  tbe  Assoelations  useful. 

Mr.  Brand.  The  character  ot  tbe  legislature  depends  on  tbe  registration, 
tbe  component  pans  ot  the  House  ot  Comtuons  depend  for  their  character  on 
reKistratlon,  do  they  not,  and  the  registration  depends  lor  Its  success  in  tbe 
counties  on  the  activity  of  certain  wealthy  partisans  on  each  side  — is  it  a 
desirable  state  of  things?  You  gave  it  as  your  uplnlon  that  rsgistratloa  asso- 
ciations had  a  healthy  effect  on  the  constituencies. 

Witnfs».     Yes. 

Mr.  Brand.  I  have  beeu  trying  to  prove  (o  yon  that  they  have  not;  do 
you  still  consider  that  registration  associations  have  had  a  healtby  effect  on 
constituencies? 

Witness.  I  do  consider  that  Registration  Societies  have  a  health;  effect  on 
the  purity  of  tbe  register  ,  .  ,  I  think  tbe  political  parties  on  each  side  are 
the  best  check. 

Mr.  Brand.  You  are  tborougbly  enamoured  with  political  associations. 
(Coinniittee  on  Rcgixtration  1870,  Blue  Books  of  18T0,  Vi>1.  VI,  p.  119, 120.) 


.coy  Google 


PARTY  ORGANIZATIONS 


Yet  the  activity  of  the  party  associationa,  which  gave  rise  to 
these  criticisms,  was  only  a  beginning  of  interposition  between 
the  electorate  and  the  Constitution.  The  extension  of  the  sphere 
of  action  and  of  the  influence  of  party  organizations  was  often 
viewed  with  apprehension.  It  was  one  of  the  aspects  under 
which  people  considered  the  probable  consequences  of  the  many 
electoral  reforms  which  had  stirred  public  opinion  from  and 
after  the  second  half  of  the  century :  of  the  extension  of  the 
franchise,  of  the  representation  of  minorities,  of  the  introduction 
of  the  ballot.  The  extension  of  the  suffrage  was  opposed  be- 
cause "  with  a  widely  enlai^d  suffrage  the  candidate  would  find 
himself  less  and  less  able  to  come  face  to  face  with  his  constitu- 
ency, and  would  be  compelled  in  consequence  "  ..."  to  rely 
more  and  more  on  the  aid  of  the  election  agent,  and,  as  in 
America,  of  that  of  committees  and  canvassers  whose  mouth- 
piece and  delegate  he  would  have  to  make  himself." '  Secret 
voting,  in  the  opinion  of  some  of  its  opponents,  was  bound  to 
entail  the  same  untoward  consequences :  with  open  voting  the 
electors  could  follow  the  fluctuations  of  the  poll  and  during  its 
progress  make  up  their  minds  how  to  vote ;  with  the  absolute 
secrecy  of  the  ballot,  tliey  thought,  it  would  be  necessary  to 
trust  to  the  previous  arrangements  of  organizations  to  make 
sure  of  the  success  of  the  party  candidate.*  When  the  idea  of 
the  representation  of  minorities  was  put  forward  by  Hare  and 
supported  by  J.  S.  Mill,  protests  were  raised  against  this  innova- 
tion because  it  was  likely  to  lead  to  the  formation  of  a  [lowerful 
party  organization  with  ramifications  throughout  the  country.' 
This  argument  was  reverted  to  when  the  discussion  of  propor- 
tional representation  was  resumed,  either  in  Parliament,'  or  in 
the  Press.*     The  adherents  of  Hare's  plan,  on  the  otlier  hand, 

1  Baruard'i  Parliam.  Debalta,  Vol.  CLXXXVII,  p.  811.  Cf.  the  observa- 
tiooB  to  Ibe  same  effect  In  the  Quarterly  Revieti),  Jao.  1869,  "  Politics  as  a 
Profession,"  p.  '2Stt. 

*Cf.  B.  Uaitland,  "  Misrepresentation  ol  Majorities,"  J^orfnt^Affy  Review, 

Vol.  vm,  1S70. 

*  O.  O.  Trevelyan,  "  A  Few  Remarks  on  Mr.  Hare's  Scheme  of  Bepresenta- 
lion,"  Xacniiitaii'e  ifafiazine,  April,  1862. 

*  Hantard,  Vol.  CLXXXIX,  p.  468  and  elsewhere. 

'Leslie  Stephen,  "Tlie  Value  of  Political  Machinery,"  Fortnightly  Review, 
Dec.  1H73,  p.  844. 


.coy  Google 


leo  DBMOCRACT  AITD  POLITICAL  PASTIES    [•bcord  past 

were  convinced  that  when  once  this  electoral  reform  was  real- 
ized, party  organizations  would  lose  their  power.  "  They  may 
return,  but  they  will  come  as  suppliants  to  beseech,  instead  of 
as  masters  to  command." ' 

The  increased  activity  of  the  party  organizations  which  had 
been  apprehended,  came  t«  pass.  The  movement  was  carried 
out  under  the  auspices  of  the  Radical  democracy  of  Birming- 
ham in  conaequeuce  of  the  campaign  against  the  represen- 
tation of  minorities  undertaken  in  that  city. 

r   aod   Political   Li(«,"  ForMghtiv 


.coy  Google 


THIRD  CHAPTEE 

THB  ESTABLISEMEXT   OF   THE  CAUOVB 


The  Birmingham  Eadicale  who  regarded  the  minority  clause 
of  the  Reform  Bill  of  1867  as  antidemocratic,  were  very  anx- 
ious to  Diillify  its  effect.  Their  idea  was,  that  this  might 
perhaps  be  accomplished  by  means  of  an  electoral  scheme 
adopted  beforehand,  bnt  that  a  formidable  organization  would 
be  necessary  for' the  purpose.  The  old  organization  of  the 
Liberal  party  seemed  to  them  too  lax,  too  feeble.  The  Re^s- 
tration  Societies,  the  Reform  or  Liberal  Associations  which 
bad  sprung  up  since  1832,  were  groups  of  subscribers,  of  ama- 
teurs, and  were  in  the  hands  of  traditional  leaders  incapable 
of  getting  at  the  masses  who  had  just  been  brought  on  the 
political  stage  by  the  extension  of  the  franchise.  Birming- 
ham received  30,000  new  electors.  The  opponents  of  the 
minority  clause  believed  that  to  ensure  the  victory,  the 
party  organization  ought  to  reach  all  these  voters,  to  make 
them  feel  that  they  were  about  to  fight  pro  arts  et  facte,  that 
the  Liberal  party  was  their  own  party,  the  party  of  each 
cue  of  them.  To  meet  these  views,  one  of  the  Radical  lead- 
ers, Mr.  W.  Harris,  architect,  man  of  letters,  and  secretary  of 
the  Birmingham  Liberal  Association,  proposed  a  plan  of  organ- 
ization according  to  which  alt  the  Liberals  of  the  locality  were 
to  meet  in  every  ward,  and  elect  representatives  to  manage  the 
affairs  of  the  party.  Being  nominated  directly  by  the  people 
and  keeping  in  constant  communication  with  the  inhabitants  of 
the  wards,  the  delegates  would  be  able  to  decide  authoritatively 
on  the  general  direction  to  be  given  to  the  party,  as  well  as  on 
all  the  important  questions  of  the  day,  and  especially  on  the 
choice  of  candidates  for  the  elections.  For  this  latter  piirpose 
in  particular  "  a  more  popular  body  must  be  provided — a  body 
which  should  not  only  be  a  reflex  of  popular  opinion,  but 

VOL.    I— M  161 


.coy  Google 


162  DEMOCBACT  AND  POLITICAL  PARTIES    [iecokd  i-AmT 

should  be  so  manifestly  a  reflex  of  that  opinion  that  none 
could  duuht  it."  The  representatives  appointed  with  this 
object,  "  eletited  ojwnly  and  freely  by  the  burgesses,  without 
dictation  or  suggestion  from  the  central  body  or  anybody  else," 
will  select  the  candidates.  "  Gentlemen  aspiring  to  the  honour- 
able position  of  representing  Birmingham  must  abide  by  the 
vote  of  the  selecting  body,  and  the  Liberal  electors  must  do 
so." ' 

This  plan,  which  was  indefatigably  urged  in  every  ward 
and  at  one  meeting  after  another,  was  adopted.  The  Liberal 
committee  formed  in  consequence  selected  candidates  for  all 
three  seats  in  view  of  the  impending  general  election  {in 
18(>8).  Hut  as  each  elector  could  only  vote  for  two  candidates, 
owing  to  the  minority  clause,  the  committee  hit  upon  the  fol- 
lowing device :  by  a  preliminary  canvass  the  central  committee 
ascertained  the  exact  number  of  Liberal  electors  in  each  ward 
and  the  minimum  of  votes  necessary  to  obtain  the  majority 
at  the  poll,  then  distributed  the  three  candidates  by  twos 
among  the  electors  of  the  ward,  in  such  fashion  that  each  can- 
didate would  only  receive  the  number  of  votes  strictly  neces- 
sary to  obtain  the  majority  at  the  poll,  and  the  votes  over  and 
above  this  would  be  given  to  one  of  the  two  other  candidates 
so  that  each  of  them  should  eventually  have  a  majority.  One 
ward  voted  for  A  and  B,  another  for  A  and  C,  a  third  for  B 
and  (',  a  fourth  for  A  and  B,  etc.  The  voter,  who  had  left  the 
selection  of  the  three  candidates  to  the  general  committee,  was 
also  to  renounce  the  privilege  of  selecting  from  among  them 
the  two  which  he  preferred.  "  Vote  as  you  are  told  "  was  the 
password.  This  was  the  price  which  had  t-o  be  paid  for  the 
victory  over  the  toes  of  democracy.  Each  voter  received  a 
ticket  with  the  two  names  which  he  had  to  declare  at  the 
poll.  Soiue  Conservatives  were  ill-advised  enough  to  counter- 
feit and  cireulate  tickets  with  the  same  names  of  Liberal 
candidates,  but  differently  distributed  among  the  wards.  If 
any  numl>er  of  electors  hail  voted  in  accordance  with 
these  forged  tickets  the  Liberal  committee's  game  would 
have  been  completely  spoilt.  The  fraud  was  discovered  in 
time,  and  the  tendency  to  vote  in  implicit  obedience  to  orders 
only  grew  all  the  more  marked  in  the  Liberal  camp.     The 

>  ItiriaiiighuM  Daily  Poal,  2\  DeremWr,  ISIiT. 


.coy  Google 


THIRD  ca»p.]      ESTABLISHMENT  OF  THE  CAUCUS  183 

enthusiasm,  however,  was  not  unanimous ;  a  wurkingmau's 
party,  small  in  numbers  and  with  no  iufiuence,  distiusted  the 
champioQE  of  the  vote-as-you-are-told  democi-aoy.  Some  Radi- 
cals of  the  old  school,  survivors  of  the  "glorious  days  "of  1831- 
1832,  who  had  fought  for  the  extension  of  the  suffrage,  were 
grieved  to  see  that  their  fellow-citizens  were  about  to  exercise 
it  not  as  free  men  but  as  puppets.'  But  the  immense  jnajority 
of  the  electors  "  voted  as  they  were  told,''  and  the  three  Lib- 
eral candidates  were  elected  in  spite  of  the  restricted  voting 
clause  passed  for  the  benefit  of  minorities. 


II 

The  "  enemies  of  democracy  "  and  the  "  philosophers  "  who 
introduced  the  limited  voting  system,  refused  to  profit  by  the 
lesson  which  Birmingham  had  given  them,  and  they  took  the 
first  opportunity  of  extending  the  application  of  the  principle 
of  minority  representation.  The  law  of  1870  on  primary  edu- 
cation, which  placed  the  management  of  schools  supported 
by  the  ratepayers  in  the  hands  of  elected  Boards,  provided 
that  the  elections  should  be  held  on  the  cumulative  voting 
system.*  The  Birmingham  Radicals  once  more  started  a  cam- 
paign to  nullify  the  cumulative  vote  as  they  had  done  with  the 
limited  vote.  But  the  elaborate  distribution  of  votes  among 
the  candidates,  which  was  too  complicated  on  this  occasion, 
did  not  succeed ;  and  instead  of  capturing  the  whole  Board,  as 
they  intended,  the  Radicals  were  left  in  a  minority. 

The  prestige  of  the  Liberal  Association  suffered  from  this ; 
its  organization  broke  up,  but  only  to  reunite  soon  afterwards 
with  fresh  strength  and  enter  upon  a  career  of  striking  inter- 

I  A  friend  and  eompanloD  of  Atwood  Id  the  Political  Union  of  IS-tl.  wrote: 
"Yon  must  vole  as  yon  are  toW!  We  who  liaie  flattered  and  petted  yon 
vfaen  you  had  no  vote  —  stating  over  and  over  again  our  entire  cotitidence  in 
your  ability  rightly  to  oae  It  — now  cannot  trUBt  yoii !  I  say  It  la  an  Inault, 
and  the  Beouring  of  any  onil,  no  mntter  how  desirable,  will  not  justify  it.  I, 
even,  the  bosom  friend  of  Atwooil,  have  had  this  deifradiiig  proposition  put  to 
me.  .   .  ."     (ISirmingham  Daily  Oaielte,  27  Oct.  1S(>8.) 

*  The  system  of  cumulative  voting  conalBts  in  allowing  the  elector  who  has 
to  vote  for  several  CRDdldales,  tor  Ave  or  ten  lor  Instance,  to  )[lve  Ave  or  len 
votes  to  a  single  candidate,  so  that  a  small  group  of  electors  cuncentratiiig 
Ibeir  votes  on  a  single  person  can  ennnre  his  election  and  make  their  voice 
heani  in  the  teeth  of  the  dominant  majority. 


.coy  Google 


104  DEMOCRACY  AND  POLITICAL  PARTIES     [mcohd  paki 

est  and  pregnant  with  consequences  for  the  political  life  of 
the  whole  country.  This  was  in  1873.  About  that  time  two 
men  appeared  on  the  scene  at  Birmingham.  Very  dissimi' 
lar  in  peisonal  weight,  in  ambition,  and  in  abilities,  and  des- 
tined to  very  different  futures,  they  helped  more  than  any  one 
else  to  alter  the  character  of  extra-parliamentary  political  life. 
One  was.  Mr.  Schnadhorst,  the  new  secretary  of  the  Liberal 
Association,  and  the  other  Mr.  Joseph  Chamberlain,  who  be- 
came the  inspirer  of  the  organization.  Elected  mayor  of  Bir- 
mingham in  1873,  Mr.  Chamberlain  was  the  most  brilliant 
representative  of  a  group  of  remarkable  men  whom  chance 
brought  together  there.  They  were  all  very  advanced  Radi- 
cals. Their  Radicalism  had  nothing  speculative  about  it.  For 
the  most  part  active  and  intelligent  men  of  business,  they  were 
not  much  encumbered  with  reading.  They  had  a  few  men 
of  literary  education  among  them,  but  little  inclined  to  philo- 
sophio  doubt.  The  picture  of  the  Athenian  democracy  drawn 
by  Q.  Grote  had  imbued  them  with  a  Radical  enthusiasm  of  an 
uncompromising  stamp ;  they  did  not  understand  the  scruples 
of  a  John  Stuart  Mill,  who  tried  to  discover  counter-checks 
for  democracy ;  for,  they  believed,  if  democratic  government 
is  a  good  thing,  it  is  so,  without  restriction,  without  reserve. 
A  very  important  position  in  this  group  was  held  by  some 
Unitarian  ministers,  animated  with  a  generous  and  over- 
flowing enthusiasm  which  lifted  every  question  into  the 
higher  regions  of  morality  and  civilization.  The  humanitarian 
zeal  and  public  spirit  of  one  section  as  well  as  the  desire  of 
others  to  make  their  mark  in  public  life  after  having  suc- 
ceeded in  business,  found  a  sphere  of  activity  in  the  munici- 
pality of  Birmingham.  A  quarter  of  a  century  ago  the 
capi^  of  the  Midlands  was  anything  but  a  well-ordered 
city.  It  still  bore  the  stamp  of  the  great  manufacturing 
centres  which  bad  developed  with  extraordinary  rapidity  in 
the  north  of  England  and  which  exhausted  their  energies  in 
huge  buildings  with  tall  chimneys  vomiting  forth  clouds  of 
smoke  from  dawn  to  sunset;  absorbed  in  the  task  of  produc- 
tion, the  inhabitants  were  not  only  little  open  to  intellectual 
and  artistic  ideas,  but  were  even  indifferent  to  the  material 
well-being  of  their  city.  In  spite  of  the  growing  prosperity 
of  Birmiugham,  everything  in  the  town  was  in  an  unsatisfao- 


.coy  Google 


raiBD  CHAP.]     ESTABLISHMENT  OF  THE  CAUCUS  166 

tory  state,  from  the  street  pavements  to  the  sanitary  condition 
of  the  dwellings.  The  men  who  gathered  round  Mr.  Joseph 
Chamberlain  conceived  the  ambition,  under  the  special  inspira- 
tion of  the  Unitarian  ministers  above-mentioned,'  of  taking  in 
hand  the  improvement  of  the  town;  and  to  accomplish  this 
object  they  decided  to  make  themselves  masters  of  the  Town 
Council.  Aft«r  a  vigorous  electoral  campaign  they  carried  the 
day. 

Once  installed  in  the  Town  Hall,  Mr.  Chamberlain  and  his 
friends  undertook  a  whole  series  of  public  works  for  the  sani- 
tation and  embellishment  of  Birmingham.  Their  activity  was 
of  the  Haussmann  order.  Like  the  famous  prefect  of  Napo- 
leon III,  the  new  municipality  opened  new  streets;  demolished 
the  alums  in  the  heart  of  the  town ;  erected  m^nilicent  build- 
ings; organized  a  system  of  drainage  and  sanitary  inspection 
and  paved  the  streets ;  founded  public  libraries,  baths,  hos- 
pitals; opened  out  squares;  made  the  town  owner  of  the  gas 
and  water  supply.  The  cost  of  the  transformation  was  consid- 
erable, but  the  results  were  still  more  so.' 

Ill 

In  the  execution  of  this  work  Mr.  Chamberlain  and  his 
friends  were  supported  in  the  Council  by  a  compact  and  de- 
voted majority.  This  waa  provided  by  the  organization  of  the 
Liberal  party,  which  was  brought  to  a  rare  degree  of  perfection 
by  the  efforts  of  Mr.  Schnadhorst,  a  born  organizer,  a  master 
in  the  art  of  "wire-pulling,"  to  use  the  political  language  of 
the  day.  Every  inhabitant  of  the  town,  whether  a  voter  or 
not,  could  join  the  Association.  Payment  of  a  subscription 
was  not  absolutely  required.  It  was  fixed  at  a  minimum  of  a 
shilling  a  year,  but  might  be  dispensed  with  by  "  signifying 
adhesion  to  the  objects  and  to  the  organization  of  the  Associa- 
tion." All  the  members  of  the  Association  in  each  ward  ap- 
pointed a  committee  of  as  many  persons  as  they  liked  in  public 
meeting.    These  elected  members  could  add  to  their  number 

1  Cl.  Heruy  W.  Croukey,  Bii  Life  and  Work,  by  R,  A.  ArmatroDg,  Btnn. 
189S,  lot  the  poalUoD  of  the  Rev.  George  Dawson  aod  the  Rev.  Henry  CroMkey  ' 
among  the  municiptil  retormers  of  Birmiogham. 

I  On  tbll  lut  point  cf.  Fred.  Dolm&n,  3lxinicipatitiei  iit  Work,  Lond.  189B, 
Chftp.L 


.coy  Google 


166  DEMOCBACY  AND  l-ULITICAL  PARTIES     [bboohu  rAUT 

to  ail  unlimited  exteut  Above  the  ward  cominitteea  was  an 
execuUee  commillee  for  tlie  whole  town,  coinpoaed  of  the  chair- 
men and  Hecretaries  of  the  ward  ooiuinittees  as  ex  affido  mem- 
bers, plus  three  delegates  for  each  ward  chosen  uul  hoc  in  pnblic 
meeting ;  that  is  to  say,  each  wai-d  was  represented  on  the  exec- 
utive coiauiittee  by  five  delegates,  which  made  eighty  members 
for  the  sixteen  wards  of  the  eity  of  JMrmiiigham.  These  eighty 
liad  tlie  right  of  adding  thirty  persona  to  their  niuuber.  Side 
by  aide  with  this  executive  authority  there  was  a  deliberative 
assembly,  the  general  committee,  which  was  composed  of  all 
the  members  of  the  executive  committee  (SO  +  30}  and  of 
thirty  meml)ers  for  each  ward,  elected  ad  hoc  in  public  meeting 
(30  X  If)  =  480).  Finally,  to  crown  the  pyramid,  the  general 
committee  appointed  a  committee  of  four  persons,  to  which  the 
executive  committee  added  seven  of  its  members,  forming  the 
mans^ug  sub-committee  of  eleven  persons.  This  body  of  594 
persons  became  popular  under  the  name  of  the  "  Six  Himdred." 
They  were  supposed  to  be  the  embodiment  of  the  democracy  of 
Birmingham.  The  management  of  the  Liberal  party  was  said 
to  be  entrusted  to  them  because  there  was  confidence  in  the 
people.  In  reality  the  confidence  was  not  so  boimdless  as  they 
tried  to  make  out.  The  elaborate  constitution  of  the  Associ- 
ation even  contained  some  precautions  against  the  "people." 
The  coiustituted  authorities  of  the  Association  did  not  emanate 
directly  from  the  people.  The  "Six  Hundred"  only  appointed 
four  members  out  of  eleven  of  the  managing  committee,  and 
two-thirds  of  this  latter  were  nominated  by  the  executive  com- 
mittee, which  was  itself  in  part  a  co-o})(aliLv  body.  In  fact, 
thirty  of  its  members  were  chosen  by  the  eighty  elected  mem- 
bers, and  of  these  latter  two-fifths  owed  their  appointment  to 
the  ward  committees  in  which  the  co-opted  members  were  un- 
limited ill  number.  No  doubt,  it  the  ward  meetings  which 
were  at  the  base  of  the  organization  elected  delegates  of  in- 
tractable independence,  all  attempts  at  manipulating  them 
from  above  would  have  failed.  The  adroitness  of  the  leading 
organizers  consisted  precisely  in  obtaining  control  of  the  ward 
meetings  and  in  making  them  elect  delegates  who  could  be 
relied  on.  In  addition  to  all  kinds  of  influences  employed  to 
bring  alwiit  this  result  the  Association  also  introduced  practices 
sneh  as  the  use  of  travelling  companies,  who  went  from  one 


.coy  Google 


TuiRi.cH»p.]      ESTABLISHMENT  OK  THE  CAUCUS  167 

ward  to  another  to  atteud  the  public  lueetiuga  iu  which  the 
delegates  were  elected,  and  wlio  ensured  the  success  of  certain 
caudidatea  by  the  aid  of  their  votes.  This  manffiuvre  was  all 
the  more  easy  of  execution  because  the  elections  of  delegates 
in  the  various  wards  did  not  take  place  simidtaneously  but 
■were  spread  over  a  period  of  four,  five  or  even  six  weeks.'  The 
final  upshot  was  that  the  "  Kix  Hntidred  "  consisted  of  men  de- 
voted to  Mr.  Chaiuberlain  and  his  friends,  and  who  worked  for 
them  at  the  elections. 

IV 

Having  obtained  control  of  the  A.ssociation,  Mr,  Chamberlain 
and  his  friends  did  not,  however,  convert  it  into  a  mere  instni- 
ment  of  personal  domination ;  they  imparted  to  it  a  real  and 
fairly  vigorous  life.  Following  their  lead  and  esi)ecially  at  the 
entreaties  of  Mr.  Chaml)erlain,  the  best  men  of  the  I^ilieral  party 
joined  the  Association,  consented  to  serve  as  delegates  to  the 
"  Six  Hundred."  They  maintained  uninterrupted  relations  with 
the  masses  by  means  of  public  assemblies,  informal  meetings, and 
personal  communications  on  questions  of  general  interest,  and 
thus  kept  up  a  current  of  public  spirit.  The  schemes  and  meas- 
ures which  were  coming  before  the  Town  Council  were  often 
explained  at  meetings  of  the  Association  with  the  best  results  for 
the  political  education  of  the  citizens.  Mr.  Chamberlain  set  the 
example.  At  the  meetings  of  the  "  Six  Hundred"  and  at  other 
gatherings  he  displayed  the  style  of  oratory  which  has  since,  in  a 
larger  sphere  of  action,  placed  him  in  the  front  rank  of  debaters,  a 
style  marked  by  clearness,  incisiveness,  and  an  inexorable  logic 
which  goes  straight  to  the  point  and  oi>ens  out  wi<le  vistas  in 
the  driest  and  most  complicated  subjects,  as  the  backwoods- 
man's axe  hews  a  path  through  the  tangle  of  a  virgin  forest. 
The  speeches  and  personal  communications  on  municipal  affairs 
were  supplemented  by  articles  and  pamphlets  which  were 
widely  distributed  among  the  public.  The  members  of  the 
Association  were  equally  active  in  promoting  several  other 
matters  of  general  interest  which  were  outside  the  province 
of  the  Town  Council. 

The  knot  of  men  who  were  working  together  under  Mr.  Cham- 


.coy  Google 


DEMOCRACT  AND  FOLtTICAL  PARTIES    [iboomd  pakt 


berlain  not  only  made  all  these  personal  sacrifices,  but  were  just 
as  ready  to  mtUie  pecuniary  sacrifices  as  well.  In  erery  public 
subscription  they  invariably  headed  the  Hat  and  with  consider- 
able sums.  All  schemes  for  the  public  good  were  sure  to  meet 
with  their  sympathy  and  interest  In  this  way  they  supplied 
striking  proof  that  the  social  leadership  which  had  been  the 
greatness  of  the  England  of  former  days  could  be  exercised  for 
the  general  welfare  by  others  as  well  as  landlords,  and  in  a 
spirit  differing  widely  from  the  paternal  condescension  of  an 
aristocracy.  It  is  true  that  of  all  the  large  manufacturing 
towns  Birmingham  was  the  most  favourably  situated  for  the 
establishment  of  relations  of  this  kind  between  the  upper 
middle  class  and  the  masses.  Thanks  to  the  special  character 
of  its  industrial  life  Birmingham  did  not  exhibit  the  usual  con- 
trast and  antagonism  between  enormously  wealthy  employers  of 
labour  and  a  wretchedly  poor  manufacturing  population,  it  was 
not  inhabited  by  the  "  two  nations  "  of  Disraeli's  "  Sybil."  This 
fact,  which  was  peculiar  to  this  manufacturing  centre,  attracted 
the  attention  of  observers  at  an  early  period.  IA)n  Faucher, 
who  had  visited  the  district  during  the  agitation  against  the 
Com  Laws,  remarked  that  Birmingham  was  a  "  manufacturing 
democracy  in  a  great  city,  this  being  the  case  even  in  the  work- 
shops where  steam  is  the  motive  power.  .  .  .  While  in  Great 
Britain  generally  the  tendency  of  capital  is  towards  concentra- 
tion, in  Birmingham  it  is  more  and  more  in  the  direction  of  sub- 
division. The  manufacturing  industry  of  this  town,  like  the  cul- 
tivation of  the  soil  in  Prance,  is  parcelled  out  into  small  divisions. 
There  are  few  large  fortunes  and  hardly  any  big  establishments. 
.  .  .  This  industrial  organization  is  due  to  the  actual  nature 
of  the  work.  ,  .  .  At  Birmingham  labour  is  purely  manual. 
Machines  are  used  as  an  accessory  to  manufacture,  but  every- 
thing depends  on  the  skill  and  the  intelligence  of  the  work- 
man." '  If  this  state  of  things  has  more  or  less  changed  during 
the  quarter  of  a  century  which  followed  the  repeal  of  the  Com 
Laws,  it  was  nevertheless  true  that  the  gradation  of  classes 

■  Sttidea  mr  I'Angtetem.  Paris,  1856,  I,  502,  603. 

Quite  recently  {In  ISM)  Mr.  Joseph  CfaamberlBln  bai  recalled  the  fact  tbat 
when  be  came  to  Birmingham  as  a  young  man,  there  were  only  three  privaU 
carriages  in  the  whole  uiwn,  and  that  when  one  of  them  passed  in  the  streets 
everybody  could  pve  Ihe  name  of  Its  owner. 


.CD,  Google 


THIRD  OHAP.]     ESTABLISHMENT  OF  THE  CAUCUS  169 

in  the  manufacturing  community  of  Birmingham  remained  a 
gentle  one,  and  that  consequently  it  was  easy  for  the  leaders 
to  reach  the  masses.  The  statutory  meetings  of  the  Associa- 
tion and  its  branches  only  supplied  an  opportunity  or  a  pre- 
text. 

But  as  the  Liberal  Association  waa,  so  to  speak,  the  firm 
under  which  Mr.  Chamberlain  and  his  friends  carried  on  their 
operations,  it  reaped  the  benefit  of  the  legitimate  and  well- 
deserred  influence  which  they  had  acquired.  The  persons 
who  stood  behind  the  Association  having  assimied  the  direction 
of  every  public  enterprise,  in  the  Town  Council  and  elsewhere, 
a  confusion  readily  grew  up  in  the  public  mind.  Everything 
seemed  to  be  focussed  in  the  Association  and  its  organs,  they 
were  appealed  to  on  every  occasion,  their  intervention  was 
solicited  in  things  small  and  great.  Mr.  Chamberlain  and  his 
friends,  far  from  clearing  up  this  misunderstanding,  tried  to 
give  currency  to  the  idea  that  the  Association  was  the  source 
and  the  necessary  instrument  of  the  public  prosperity. 

In  politics  the  identification  of  the  interests  of  the  town 
with  the  work  carried  on  by  the  Association  had  a  much  more 
serious  effect.  The  Association  being  a  Liberal  organization, 
could  only  invite  the  co-operation  of  those  who  belonged  to  the 
Liberal  persuasion.  Hence,  the  Conservatives  were  excluded 
from  public  life  in  Birmingham.  It  is  true  that  they  Iiad  them- 
selves been  clumsy  enough  to  supply  the  Radicals  with  a  pre- 
text for  making  the  local  administration  a  party  affair.  Ousted 
from  representation  in  Parliament  by  the  vote.as-you-are-toId 
arrangement,  from  the  share  of  it  which  the  minority  clause 
would  have  given  them,  the  Conservatives  tried  to  storm  the 
political  stronghold  of  Birmingham  by  means  of  the  municipal 
elections;  they  fought  the  battle  on  political  lines  but  were 
defeated.  Long  after  they  had  been  reduced  to  impotence  in 
the  Town  Council,  the  Liberal  Association  continued  to  oppose 
them  with  the  utmost  bitterness  at  the  annual  municipal  eleo- 
tioDB.  The  majority  'obtained  by  the  Liberals  became  an  over- 
whelming one ;  eventually  they  won  nearly  every  seat  on  the 
Council ;  but  their  rancour  against  the  Conservatives  was  not 
appeased.  The  latter  were  dislodged  from  every  position  in 
the  local  government,  from  every  representative  body  even  of 
an  entirely  non-political  chaiacter,  from  charitable  institutions, 


.coy  Google 


170  DEMOCRACY  AND  POLITICAL  PARTIES     [bbcokd  wkt 

from  the  governing  boards  of  schools.  Ignored  and  thrust  out 
of  public  life,  the  Conservatives  in  their  turn  soon  came  to 
identify  the  interests  of  Biimingham  with  those  of  the  Liberal 
party,  and  to  regard  the  former  with  lukewarmnesB,  almost 
with  complete  indifference.  The  Liberals  of  the  Association, 
who  were  for  making  a  clean  sweep  of  the  Conservatives,  of 
course  disclaimed  all  responsibility  for  this  ;  it  was  the  electoral 
body  which  preferred  Liberals  to  Conaervatives,  the  Liberals 
could  not  be  expected  to  start  and  support  Conservative  candi- 
dates. And  then,  they  argued,  the  transformation  of  the  town 
could  only  have  been  accomplished  by  a  municipality  sure  of  an 
overwhelming  majority,  with  no  fear  of  having  its  grand  plans 
thwarted  by  petty  cliques.'  The  real  truth  was  that  the  over- 
whelming majorities  in  the  elections  for  the  Town  Council 
were  required  by  the  prompters  of  the  Association  for  some- 
thing else  as  well,  for  the  parliamentary  elections.  The  con- 
version of  their  Conservative  fellow-citizens  to  their  municipal 
schemes  wonld  not  have  quite  suited  them.  The  conciliatory 
spirit  which  would  have  resulted  therefrom  would  have  dimin- 
ished the  keenness  of  the  political  contests  for  the  parliamen- 
tary seats,  all  of  which  they  meant  to  keep  for  themselves. 

Driven  out  of  the  common  abode,  the  Conservatives  were 
pursued  into  their  own  ground.  Referring  to  them  invariably 
as  "the  enemy,"  the  Liberals  set  the  populace  at  them  and 
made  it  resort  to  violence.  Hands  of  adherents  of  the  Liberal 
Association  broke  into  the  Conservative  meetings  and  created 
distui'bances  in  them.  This  was  carried  on  so  methodically 
that  the  Conservatives  were  obliged  to  give  up  holding  public 
meetings  in  Birmingham.  These  rowdies  did  not  receive  for- 
mal orders  from  the  Liberal  Association,  but  the  latter  did 
nothing  to  stop  them ;  and  it  was  considered  an  accomplice  in, 
if  not  an  instigator  of  the  disorderly  proceedings  of  which  its 
opponents  were  the  victims.  The  Conservatives  of  course  were 
greatly  exasperated.  Years  passed  on,  the  irony  of  political 
fate  converted  the  old  enemies  into  allies  at  the  time  of  the 

'  Thie  rear  wm  perhaps  eiaggernt«d,  for  Mr.  ChamberlaiD  himself  has  ad- 
mtttM  that  the  great  lihiags  sccompllahed  by  the  municipality  were  done  with 
the  cordial  approval  of  the  bulk  of  the  population,  ineliiding  a  large  DumbeT  of 
CiiiiservaliveH  ("  The  CaDcua."  by  J.  Chamberlain,  M.P.,  Forlaig/illy  Reviea, 
November,  18TS). 


.coy  Google 


tuiRii  CHiP.]      ESTABLISHMENT  OP  THE  CAUCUS  171 

Unionist  coalition  against  the  Gladstonian  Home  Rulers,  but 
in  the  breasts  of  the  ConservatiTea  the  injuries  rankled  as 
deeply  as  ever. 

V 
The  political  services  which  the  Liberals  expected  from  the 
Association  were  faithfully  performed:  its  candidates  came  in 
at  the  pai-liamentary  elections  with  flying  colours.  Mr.  Cham- 
berlain himself  was  returned  in  1876.  The  discipline  in  the 
electoral  body  was  perfect,  "  the  forces  at  the  disposal  of  the 
Liberal  Association  were  not  hordes  of  wayward  free  lances : 
they  were  armies  of  disciplined  men,  well  accustomed  to  stand 
side  by  side  and  to  move  in  unbroken  battalions,"  as  the  lead- 
ers of  the  organization  declared  with  satisfaction.  But  Bir- 
mingham was  not  to  be  the  only  city  to  benefit  by  this  highly 
perfected  instrument.  Its  advantages  were  to  be  extended  to 
the  whole  country  for  the  greater  triumph  of  the  Liberal  cause. 
A  campaign  of  propaganda  was  started  with  this  object  by  the 
Birmingham  group.  Their  Association  was  proposed  as  a  model 
which  had  only  to  be  imitated.  Did  not  the  results  obtained  by 
its  aid  speak  volumes  for  it:  "This  Association  lias  succeeded 
in  rendering  municipal  and  political  life  a  consistent,  earnest, 
true  and  enthusiastic  life  among  the  vast  population  in  which 
it  labours,  instead  of  a  spasmodic  electioneering  impulse."  By 
the  introduction  of  politics  into  all  local  aSmrs,  "  by  this  exten- 
sion of  the  idea  of  Liberalism  the  Association  connected  itself 
with  the  development  of  the  general  life  of  the  town."  There 
is  no  town  in  which  democracy  has  been  so  largely  interpreted 
as  "  the  life  of  the  people  at  an  organized  whole,"  and  "  to  the 
Liberal  Association  the  acceptance  of  this  interpretation  is 
chiefly  due."  "The  Association  is  an  agency  through  which 
men  who  believe  in  the  possibility  of  4  higher  state  of  civili- 
zation than  now  exists  —  who  have  faith  in  realizable  ideals 
—  have  attempted  and  are  attempting  to  carry  out  clear  and 
definite  plans  for  the  culture,  happiness,  and  prosperity  of  the 
community." ' 

Mr.  Chamberlain  and  Mr.  Schnadhorst,  especially  the  latter, 
visited  the  important  towns  of  the  Kingdom  one  after  another 


.coy  Google 


172  DEHOCBACT  AHD  POLITICAL  PABTIE8    [«MOin>  rt*T 

to  propose  the  "  Birmingham  plan."  After  holding  small  pri- 
vate meetings  composed  of  the  most  influentia],  or  the  most 
active,  people  of  the  locality,  they  explained  the  plan  in  public 
meetings.  The  propaganda  was  carried  on  with  great  activity. 
Along  with  prominent  members  of  the  Association  the  latter 
despatched  emissaries  who  kept  their  mission  a  secret  so  as  to 
work  with  greater  freedom.  The  Association  had  a  small  band 
of  them,  recruited  from  among  persons  such  as  are  found  knock- 
ing about  great  towns,  men  who  dislike  the  routine  of  regular 
work  and  prefer  a  varied  existence,  or  who  have  seen  better 
days  and  so  fallen  out  of  the  ranks.  There  were  not  very 
many  of  them,  barely  twenty,  and  they  were  well  paid.  All 
of  them  had  the  gift  of  the  gab,  some  of  them  could  wield  a 
pen,  compose  a  good  "letter  to  the  editor"  of  a  newspaper,  or 
at  a  pinch  even  write  a  pamphlet.  They  worked  sometimes  at 
Birmingham,  sometimes  in  the  other  towns,  always  of  course 
preserving  their  incogjiito. 

Pot  the  rest,  the  Birmingham  propaganda  found  the  ground 
pretty  well  prepared  in  the  country.  The  introduction  of  the 
ballot  in  1872,  shortly  after  a  considerable  increase  in  the 
number  of  electors  who  were  henceforth  left  to  their  own 
inspirations  on  the  day  of  the  poll,  made  it  very  difficult 
to  manage  the  elections  without  preliminary  arrangements, 
without  a  more  or  less  closely  knit  organization.  But  a  still 
stronger  argument  for  the  "  Birmingham  plan  "  was  the  defeat 
sustained  by  the  Liberals  at  the  general  election  of  1874,  which 
had  returned  an  enormous  Conservative  majority  to  the  House 
of  Commons  for  the  first  time  since  1841.  The  Liberals,  who 
imagined  that  the  country  had  given  them  a  perpetual  lease  of 
power,  could  notget  overit;  and,  as  generally  happens  to  beaten 
parties,  they  looked  outside  their  own  conduct  for  the  cause  of 
the  electoral  catastrophe  and  found  it  chiefly  in  the  fact  that 
they  were  badly  organized.  The  "  Birmingham  plan  "  claimed 
to  supply  a  perfect  remedy  for  this  deficiency.  The  defeated 
candidates  took  a  special  interest  in  it,  they  accepted  it  with 
the  najve  confidence  of  certain  gamblers  who  swallow  puffs  of  an 
"infallible  method  of  winning"  at  rouge  et  noir.  They  did  not 
realize  the  peculiar  situation  of  Birmingham,  nor  the  potency 
of  the  social  leadership  exercised  by  Mr.  Chamberlain  and  his 
friends  in  that  city :  they  thought  that  the  whole  secret  lay  in 


.coy  Google 


ntmo  coir.]      ESTABLISHMENT  OF  THE  CAUCUS  178 

the  patent  Associatioii  of  Birmingham.  Consequently  there 
was  a  rush  to  create  "hundreds"  on  the  Birmingham  pattern 
in  a  good  many  towns,  the  "Three  Hundred,"  the  "Four 
Hundred,"  etc. 

VI 

Profoundly  impressed  with  the  importance  ot  their  part,  the 
"hundreds"  took  the  earliest  opportunity  of  performing  it 
This  was  given  them  by  foreign  politics.  The  Eastern  ques- 
tion, having  come  to  the  front  again  in  consequence  of  the 
insurrection  in  Herzegovina,  was  engrossing  the  attention  ot 
Europe,  and  of  England  in  particular.  Disraeli's  government, 
following  the  then  traditional  policy  of  England,  was  in  favour 
of  Turkey  ag^nst  Russia,  who  had  taken  up  the  cause  of  her 
oppressed  Slav  co-religionists.  The  news  of  the  Bulgarian 
atrocities  aroused  a  loud  cry  of  borror  in  England,  and  the 
country  resounded  from  one  end  to  the  other  with  vehement 
protests  against  Turkish  barbarity.  The  new  Liberal  organiza- 
tions eagerly  made  themselves  the  instrument  of  this  agitation, 
which  they  turned  at  the  same  time  j^ainst  their  political  op- 
ponents in  power.  They  accused  the  Conservative  government 
of  moral  complicity  with  the  Turks.  The  chiefs  of  the  Liberal 
Opposition  in  the  House  of  Commons,  who  according  to  the 
rules  of  the  game  ought  to  lead  every  assault  on  the  rival 
party,  were  more  guarded  in  their  attacks  on  the  Government. 
Whetiier  it  was  that  their  patriotic  ansiety  made  them  think 
that  foreign  politics  was  not  a  proper  field  for  the  display  of 
the  usual  party  animosity,  or  that  their  (perhaps  exaggerated) 
feeling  of  responsibility  as  statesmen  as  well  as  their  unsan- 
guine  temperament  prevented  them  from  rushing  into  decisive 
action,  they  held  back.  The  enthusiasts  and  busybodies  out- 
side Parliament  only  bestirred  themselves  all  the  more  en- 
ergetically. The  "  hundreds  "  were  indefatigable  in  holding 
anti-Turkish  meetings,  and  in  voting  resolutions  hostile  to  the 
^tlinistry.  The  Birmingham  Association  encouraged  and  even 
incited  them.  At  its  instigation  the  other  Associations  got  up 
more  than  a  hundred  and  fifty  "  indignation  meetings "  in  a 
few  days.  It  was  also  on  its  initiative  that  delegates  from 
several  Associations  met  in  conference  at  Sheffield  and  Bir- 
mingham to  bring  about  a  National  Convention  on  the  Eastern 


.coy  Google 


174  DEMOCRACY  AND  POLITICAL  I'ARTIES     [secord  fart 

question.  No  convention  took  place,  but  a  monster  meeting 
waa  held  in  London  with  the  co-operation  of  many  provincial 
delegates. 

The  unanimity  with  which  the  Liberal  Associations  joined  in 
all  this  movement  gave  a  vague  impression  of  what  their  action 
might  attain  if  it  was  always  combined  and  if  it  obeyed  a 
single  impulse.  Ideas  of  this  kind  were  germinating  in  the 
minds  of  the  Birmingham  leaders,  who  had  already  on  one 
or  two  occasiona  promoted  collective  action  on  the  part  of 
the  Associations.  And  when  the  "  plan "  had  been  adopted 
in  a  sufficient  number  of  localities,  Mr.  Schnadhorst  thought 
that  the  time  had  come  to  link  the  Associations  together 
by  permanent  ties  and  assure  unity  of  action  by  a  cen- 
tral organization.  All  the  Liberal  organizations  formed  on  a 
"representative  basis"  were  invited  by  a  circular  from  the 
Birmingham  Association  to  send  delegates  to  that  town  for 
the  purpose  of  considering  the  plan  of  a  federation.  A  hun- 
dred Associations  responded  to  the  appeal,  and  on  the  Slat  of 
May,  1877,  the  conference  was  opened  at  Birmingham  under 
the  presidency  of  Mr.  Joseph  Chamberlain.  In  an  able 
si>eech,  which  led  off  the  discussion,  he  vindicated  the  utility 
and  necessity  of  the  new  organization,  and  showed  how  it 
was  about  to  open  a  new  chapter,  nay  a  new  era  in  the  des- 
tinies of  English  Liberalism,  by  establishing  a  new  basis  and 
introducing  new  methods  of  action.  In  the  new  conditions  of 
politics,  "  it  has  become  necessary,  as,  indeed,  it  was  always 
desirable,  that  the  people  at  large  should  be  taken  into  the 
counsels  of  the  party,  and  that  they  should  have  a  share  in  its 
control  and  management."  ...  "  Hence  the  new  constitution 
upon  which  the  Liberal  Association  of  Birmingham  is  founded, 
according  to  which  every  Liberal  in  the  town  is  ipm  facto  a 
member  by  virtue  of  his  Liberalism,  and  vrithout  any  other 
qualification.  The  vote  of  the  poorest  member  is  equal  to  that 
of  the  richest.  It  is  an  Association  based  on  universal  suf- 
frage." After  reminding  his  audience  of  the  success  of  the 
Association  and  indulffing  in  a  few  hits  at  his  opfionents, —  Lib- 
erals "  ignorant  of  what  are  the  first  elements  of  Liberalism, 
and  whose  lingering  distrust  of  the  good  sense  and  the  patriot- 
ism of  the  people  has  found  expression  in  machinery  — cumula- 
tive vote,  minority  representation,  and  I  know  not  what  of  the 


.coy  Google 


THiBD  CHAP.]     ESTABLISHMENT  OP  THE  CAUCUS  176 

sajn'e  kind,  which  tends  to  divide  the  party  of  action  in  face  of 
the  ever  united  party  of  obstruction,"  —  Mr.  Chamberlain  held 
out  the  prospect  of  a  number  of  new  associations  founded  on 
the  same  basis  and  all  united  by  a  central  oi^anization  which 
would  form  a  truly  Liberal  Parliament  outside  the  Imperial 
Legislature  and  elected  not  as  it  is  elected,  but  by  universal 
guSr^e.  Its  duty  would  be  not  so  much  to  lay  down  a  new 
Liberal  creed,  as  to  make  the  Liberal  policy  more  definite  and 
Liberal  action  more  decisive.  The  events  of  the  last  few  yeais 
had  shown  only  too  clearly  that  the  official  leaders  were  the 
last  persons  to  realize  public  opinion.  The  object  and  the 
merit  of  the  new  o^anization  woiUd  be  to  lend  expression  and 
force  to  opinion  and  obtain  for  it  a  better  hearii^  than  it  had 
hitherto  enjoyed. 

The  two  main  points  of  this  speech — the  right  of  the  "peo- 
ple" to  a  direct  initiative  in  the  selection  of  men  and  measures 
and  the  deposition  of  the  traditional  leaders  —  were  empha- 
sized more  strongly  in  the  fiery  harangue  delivered  by  the  next 
speaker,  Mr.  W.  Harris,  the  author  of  the  "  Birmingham  plan," 
who  reflected  the  sincere  but  ^gressive  enthusiasm  with  which 
several  of  the  leading  members  of  the  Association  were  inspired. 
Now  that  the  suffrage  has  been  extended  to  the  urban  masses, 
it  was,  urged  Mr.  Harris,  no  longer  possible  for  the  leaders  in  - 
London  to  draw  upon  the  people  of  the  country  and  say  two 
months  after  date  pay  to  our  order  in  the  country  for  an  agi- 
tation on  a  particular  purpose.  The  people  themselves  onght  to 
decide  what  the  agitation  should  be  aud  when  it  should  begin. 
The  people  have  shown  their  power  by  forcing  the  Government, 
over  the  heads  of  the  official  leaders  of  the  Liberal  party,  to 
stop  short  in  its  iniquitous  and  scandalous  philo-Turkish  policy. 
But  if  a  special  agitation  were  set  on  foot  for  each  political 
question,  what  an  enormous  wast«  of  energy,  of  time  and  abil- 
ities, would  be  entailed.  Instead  of  having  an  Educational 
League  to  promote  national  education,  a  Reform  Union  to 
secure  Parliamentary  reform,  a  Liberation  Society  to  obtain 
religious  equality,  instead  of  all  these  organizations  would  it 
not  be  better  to  form  once  and  for  all  a  federation  which  by 
focussing  the  opinions  of  the  majority  of  the  population  in 
great  centres  of  political  activity  would  be  able  to  speak  on 
any  question  that  might  arise,  with  all  the  authority  of  the 


.coy  Google 


176  DEMOCRACY  AND  POUTICAL  PARTIES    [skcoio  fam 

voice  of  the  nation.  The  organization  proposed  by  the  speaker 
and  his  friends  would  supply  this  very  iustrument 

Such  were,  as  expounded  by  the  principal  authors  of  the 
Bcheme,  the  spirit,  the  character,  and  the  aim  assi^ed  to  the 
federation.  The  great  extra^onstitutional  organizations,  which 
have  made  their  appearance  at  different  intervals  on  the  political 
stage  of  England,  were  now  about  to  enter  on  a  new  departure 
with  the  Birmingham  federation :  a  "  Pai'liament  outside  the 
Imperial  Legislature  "  was  being  created  on  a  permanent  foot- 
ing, confronting  the  national  power  establishiMl  by  the  consti- 
tution and  founded  on  a  basis  wider  even  than  that  of  the  House 
of  Commons  elected  by  a  restricted  suffrage.  At  one  time  the 
mouthpiece,  at  another  the  instigator,  of  opinion,  the  free  Par- 
liament was  taking  up  the  general  business  of  political  agitation 
on  all  questions  present  and  to  come ;  to  the  organs  of  govern- 
ment and  legislation  it  was  adding  a  new  organ  —  that  of  agi- 
tation—  in  the  political  constitution  of  the  cotintry. 

The  scheme  of  organization  which  involved  such  profound 
changes  in  the  working  of  the  constitution,  was  hardly  dis- 
cussed at  all.  The  delegates  had  only  been  made  acquainted 
with  the  scheme  and  the  statement  of  objects  and  reasons  on 
that  very  morning.  However,  as  soon  as  it  was  propounded 
and  explained  by  its  authors,  a  section  of  the  delegates  inti- 
mated that  their  only  feeling  for  it  was  one  of  admiration,  that 
their  adhesion  was  given  already.  They  bore  witness  to  it  as 
persona  taking  part  in  religious  meetings  testify  with  abun- 
dance of  asseverations,  for  the  edification  of  the  audience,  how 
they  have  found  salvation.  In  the  same  tone  delegates  bore  wit- 
ness to  the  conference  how  elections  were  won,  "simply  by 
trusting  the  people."  Thus  one  delegate  had  innumerable 
powers,  all  the  powers  of  darkness,  arrayed  against  him  at  the 
election:  "a  Lord-Lieutenant  whose  land  surrounded  the  place 
for  miles;  and  there  was  magisterial  influence,  aristocratic 
influence,  legal  influence,  and  nearly  all  influences  against  him 
(the  speaker) ;  but  it  was  simply  by  trusting  to  the  people  that 
he  was  successful.  .  .  .  And  without  a  farthing  of  any  legal 
expense,  simply  by  throwing  himself  upon  the  people,  they  not 
only  secured  the  seat,  hut  they  secured  it  by  a  majority  of 
nearly  100  votes.  He  was  only  telling  them  this  in  order  that 
they  might  never  be  disheartened  in  fighting  for  Liberalism 


.coy  Google 


THiu>  csAP.]     ESTABLISHMENT  OF  THE  CAUCUS  ITT 

if  tbey  trusted  to  the  people.  In  nine  cases  out  of  ten  the 
people  were  right,  and  they  would  not  trust  in  the  people  in 
vain." 

This  note  of  enthusiasm  was  not  the  only  one  heard  at  the 
conference.  In  the  course  of  the  debate  or  rather  of  the 
remarks  of  the  delegates,  some  exceptions  were  taken.  While 
giving  their  full  adhesion  to  the  federation  scheme,  several  of 
them  nevertheless  betrayed  apprehensions  lest  the  Federation 
would  encroach  on  the  independence  of  the  local  Associations. 
Besides  the  legitimate  preoccupations  inspired  by  this  subject, 
many  of  the  delegates  felt  a  touch  of  parochial  jealousy  of  Bir- 
mingham taking  ^e  lead.  The  statement  of  objects  and  reasons 
of  the  Federation  anticipated  these  misgivings  by  declaring 
that  "  no  interference  with  the  local  independence  of  the  Fed- 
erated Associations  is  proposed  or  contemplated."  Several 
delegates  took  note  of  tJiis  with  eagerness  and  emphasis.  It 
was  mentioned  by  way  of  illustration  that  they  did  not 
intend  to  submit  to  the  Birmingham  practice  of  turning 
all  the  local  elections  into  political  contests.  The  admission 
of  all  comers  to  membership  of  the  Association  without  any 
aubscriptioD  also  gave  rise  to  an  exchange  of  observations. 
One  delegate  demanded  that,  in  conformity  with  the  prin- 
ciple of  consulting  the  people,  invoked  at  the  conference 
itself,  the  scheme  should  be  submitted  in  the  first  instance 
to  the  local  Associations  which  were  to  he  brought  within  the 
Federation.  But  the  authors  of  these  proposals  were  not 
allowed  to  dwell  on  the  subject,  and  the  proposals  were  sum- 
marily rejected.  Finally  the  scheme  was  adopted,  and  the 
"National  Federation  of  Liberal  Associations,"  known  since 
under  the  shorter  title  of  "N^ational  Liberal  Federation,"  was 
founded.  Its  object  was  according  to  the  statutes,  firstly,  to 
assist  in  the  organization  throughout  the  country  of  Liberal 
Associations  based  on  popular  representation,  and  secondly,  to 
promote  the  adoption  of  Liberal  principles  in  the  govenunent 
of  the  country.  The  constituted  authorities  of  the  Federation 
were :  a  council  formed  of  delegates  of  the  local  Associations, 
which  each  nominated  five  to  twenty  of  them, — according  to  the 
population,  — and  a  general  committee  composed  of  a  smaller 
number  of  delegates,  plus  twenty-five  members  to  be  added  by 
the  committee  itself.     Being  entrusted  with  the  realization  of 


.coy  Google 


178  DEMOCBACT  AND  POLITICAL  PARTIES    [becobd  pi«* 

the  "  objects  "  of  the  Federation,  the  special  duty  of  the  com- 
mittee was  to  "submit  to  the  Federated  Associations  the 
political  questions  and  measures  as  to  which  united  action 
might  appear  desirable." 

vn 

The  formalities  of  the  constitution  of  the  Federation  were 
completed,  but  this  was  only  the  first  part  of  the  programme. 
The  chief  piece  was  to  be  given  that  very  evening,  as  the  cir- 
cular which  summoned  the  delegates  to  Birmingham  took  care 
to  announce:  a  public  meeting  with  Mr.  Gladstone  as  princi- 
pal orator.  The  illustrious  statesman  was  coming  himself  to 
stand  godfather  to  the  Federation.  The  sponsorship  derived 
special  importance  from  the  exceptional  position  which  Mr. 
Gladstone  held  at  that  time. 

Soon  after  the  defeat  of  the  Liberal  party  at  the  general 
election  of  1874,  Mr.  Gladstone  gave  up  the  leadership  of  it, 
baring  decided  to  bring  his  long  political  career  to  a  close  and 
to  employ  the  rest  of  his  days  in  preparing  for  the  great 
moment  when  he  would  appear  before  the  Eternal  Judge. 
A  successor  was  given  him,  Lord  Hartington,  who  formally 
assumed  the  control  of  the  Liberal  party.  But  with  the 
rigid  organization  of  English  parliamentary  parties  each  led 
by  a  single  chief  for  the  term  of  his  natural  life,  toward 
whom  all  eyes  ate  constantly  directed,  it  was  by  no  means 
easy  for  one  who  had  for  years  filled  the  office  of  leader 
in  a  brilliant  fashion,  to  retire  into  political  obscurity.'  For 
the  Liberal  party  and  the  country  he  always  remained  Mr. 
Gladstone,  as  a  king  who  has  abdicated  always  remains  His 
Majesty,  Sire  I  Besides  he  himself  had  some  difficulty  in  be- 
coming reconciled  to  his  self-imposed  effacement;  penance  and 
prayer  could  no  more  fill  up  his  existence  than  they  could  that 
of  Charles  V  in  the  monastery  of  St.  Juste.  His  tempestuous 
soul,  haunted  by  the  memories  of  a  thousand  battles,  only  re- 
quired an  opportunity  to  burst  forth,  The  opportunity  came : 
the  Bulgarian  atrocities  drew  Mr.  Gladstone  from  his  retreat. 
Overflowii^  with  wrath  and  imlignation  he  denounced,  in  a 
series  of  fiery  harangues  which  stirred  the  English  people  to 
its  depths,  the  cruelties  of  the  Turk  and  the  wretched  system 
of  government  which  left  Christians  a  prey  to  the  violence  of 


.coy  Google 


ranncflu.]     ESTABLISHMENT  OF  THE  CAUCUS  17fi 

savHge  hordes.  In  this  oratorical  campaign  Mr.  Gladstone, 
who  has  passed  through  so  many  successive  and  simultBJieous 
iacamations,  asserted  himself  once  and  for  all  and  with  more 
emphasis  than  ever  in  that  of  popidar  leader.  The  temperament 
of  dem^ogue  (in  the  etymological  meaning  of  the  word)  which 
contended  with  many  others  in  this  complex  natuie,  had  at 
last,  after  long  years  of  growth,  found  its  fullest  expression. 
At  the  moment  when  Falmerston's  death  was  closing  one 
epoch  and  ushering  in  another  in  the  history  of  England,  a 
shrewd  observer  referring  to  Mr.  Gladstone  as  future  leader  of 
the  Liberal  movement  in  spite  of  some  reactionary  tendencies 
displayed  by  him,  foreshadowed  that  if  he  did  attain  tHat 
position,  it  would  be  not  as  a  party  favourite  but  as  a  popular 
leader,  and  added:  "From  the  time  I  first  heard  Gladstone 
speak  when  carried  beyond  himself  by  the  passion  of  debate, 
I  came  to  the  conclusion  that  nature  meant  him  for  a  popu- 
lar deni^<^ue,  and  that  the  scholarhke  moderation  that  his 
University  training  had  imparted  to  his  habitual  utterances 
was  a  matter  of  education,  not  of  instinct." ' 

His  generous  and  impulsive  instincts  and  strong  religious 
temperament  readily  inclined  him  towards  all  aspirations  which 
were  derived  from  an  ideal  sense  of  goodness  and  justice,  and 
which  at  the  same  time  served  his  political  ends.  He  embraced 
them  with  ardour  directly  events  brought  them  across  his  path. 
His  im^nation  conjured  them  up  as  facing  him  when  he  walked 
straight  before  him,  as  turning  to  the  left  when  he  turned  to  the 
left,  and  to  the  right  when  he  turned  to  the  right.  But  why 
should  they  prevent  him  from  advancing,  asked  an  inward  voice. 
Was  he  their  enemy?  No;  they  even  had  a  place  deep  down  in 
his  heart,— beyond  a  doubt  they  had  a  place  there  and  a  legiti- 
mate place ;  —  does  not  reason  itself  in  fact  plead  their  cause  ? 
And  thereupon  the  marvellous  flexibility  of  Mr.  Gladstone's  in- 
telligence suggested  to  him  one  argument  after  another  which 
converted  the  gratification  of  these  unsatisfied  aspirations  into 
an  irresistible  postulate  of  the  l<^ic  of  men,  an  imperious  com- 
mand of  the  logic  of  things.  But  as  his  dialectic,  which  was 
often  too  admirable,  succeeded  in  carrying  conviction  to  his 
own  mind  rather  than  to  that  of  others,  he  turned  by  an  uncon- 
scious impulse  towards  the  source  of  his  opinions,  towards  the 
•  New  York  Nation,  1865,  Vol.  I.  p.  686,  "  Utier  ttom  Gnglud." 


.coy  Google 


IBO  DEMOCRACr  AND  POLITICAL  PARTIES    [bkcoxd  fait 

impetuous  feeling  which  brought  him  ia  doser  touch  with  the 
people's  hearts.  Placing  himself  in  unison  with  them  he 
evoked  eries  of  approbation  which  mounted  like  fuiious  waves, 
surging  gainst  each  other,  rising  above  one  another,  and  finally 
blending  in  a  might;  roar  of  the  ocean.  With  a  single  stroke 
he  loosed  the  wallet  of  Molas,  and  if  the  foolish  and  the 
blind  did  not  choose  to  take  tiie  same  course  as  the  liber- 
ated winds,  so  much  the  worse  for  them.  He  called  the 
people  to  witness,  he  made  them  the  judge,  the  supreme  judge 
supposed  to  have  a  sound  judgment  because  endowed  with  an 
upright  heart  Logicians  might  wrangle  about  the  lines  of  de- 
marcation between  politics  and  ethics,  tiiB  people  were  delighted 
with  the  confusion  of  the  two  or  the  identification  of  the  one 
with  the  other  which  Mr.  Gladstone  made  in  form  as  well  as  in 
substance.  The  tone  of  his  harangues,  always  pitched  in  the 
key  of  uprightness,  of  justice,  lifted  his  hearers  into  a  region 
in  which  the  people,  perennial  victim  of  injustice,  likes  to  be 
transported,  if  only  in  imagination.  The  respectful  intimacy 
with  the  Almighty  which  Mr.  Gladstone  was  in  the  habit  of 
affecting  stamped  him  in  the  eyes  of  the  people  as  the  blessed 
man  of  the  Fsalra  who  walketh  not  in  the  counsel  of  the  un- 
godly, but  whose  delight  is  in  the  law  of  the  Lord,  and  in  his 
law  doth  he  meditate  day  and  night.  Merely  listening  to  him 
one  felt  as  it  were  brought  nearer  to  the  face  of  the  Lord. 
The  tone  of  profound  emotion  and  the  fiery  passion  which  ran 
through  all  Mr.  Gladstone's  speeches,  supplied  the  masses  with 
the  strong  sensations  which  they  thirst  for,  and  his  fighting 
temperajnent,  which  found  free  vent  in  his  eloquence,  flattered 
even  the  less  elevated  instincts  of  combativeness  common  to 
all  crowds  and  to  English  crowds  mora  than  any  others.  Thus 
he  came  to  hold  the  people  by  a  power  almost  hypnotic,  and 
to  him  might  be  applied  the  saying  in  the  East  anent  a  cele- 
brated imam,  a  military  and  religious  leader :  "  by  his  mere 
breath  he  aroused  a  tempest  in  the  sonl,  and  the  heart  of  a  man 
hung  upon  his  lips." 

The  prestige  arising  from  this  immense  power  was  bestowed 
on  the  Federation  by  the  patronage  which  Mr.  Gladstone  ex- 
tended to  it,  and  that  too  at  the  moment  when  his  popularity 
bad  reached  its  climax,  in  consequence  of  his  campaign  i^ainst 
the  Bulgarian  atrocities-     The  inauguration  by  him  of  the  new 


.coy  Google 


TBUt>  OKAP.]     ESTABUSHMBirr  OF  THB  CAUCUS  161 

oTganization  impartfld  to  this  provincial  association  a  national 
significance,  and,  what  was  not  less  essential  under  the  circum- 
stances, gave  it  the  stamp  of  authentic  Liberalism.  In  setting 
up  an  organization  for  the  general  supervision  of  Liberalism, 
independently  of  those  who  controlled  it  by  virtue  of  a  formal 
delegation  from  the  Liberal  members  of  Parliameut,  the  crea- 
tors of  the  Federation  practically  denied  the  authority  of  the 
ofBcial  leaders  of  the  party ;  but  with  Mr,  Gladstone  on  their 
side  they  had  with  them  the  real  leader  of  Liberalism.  Mr. 
G-ladstone's  peculiar  situation  after  his  abdication  of  the  lead- 
ership alone  enabled  the  Birmingham  Radicals  to  get  into  this 
fortunate  position.  Thus  in  this  as  in  every  other  respect  the 
visit  of  Mr.  Gladstone,  arranged  by  Mr.  Chamberlain  and  his 
friends,  was  a  master-stroke  on  their  part. 

Addressing  an  enormous  meeting  estimated  at  30,000  per- 
sons, Mr.  Gladstone  commended  the  new  organization  and 
eulogized  the  popular  principle  introduced  at  Birmingham. 
"As  the  law  of  popular  election,"  he  said,  "is  the  founda- 
tion of  the  British  House  of  Commons,  so,  if  I  understand  you 
aright,  it  is  the  principle  and  practice  of  your  great  town  that 
local  organization  shall  be  governed  by  the  same  principle,  and 
that  free  popular  choice  shall  be  its  basis  and  its  rule.  1  re- 
joice not  merely  that  you  are  about  to  inculcate  this  lesson,  but 
that  the  large  attendance  here  to-day  of  many  hundreds  of 
representatives  of  the  eonstitnencies  of  the  country,  met  to- 
gether to  consider  this  subject  and  to  join  in  counsel  with  you, 
testifies  to  the  disposition  which  exists  to  adopt  this  admirable 
principle  of  which  you  have  given  the  example,  and  of  which, 
if  it  be  freely  and  largely  adopted,  I,  for  one,  am  sufficiently 
sanguine  to  predict  with  confidence  the  success."  After  hav- 
ii^  pointed  out  that  the  Liberal  party  stood  in  greater  need 
of  organization  than  the  Tories,  who  represented  immobility 
in  politics,  Mr.  Gladstone  recalled  in  eloquent  language  the 
share  of  Birmingham  in  carrying  the  Beform  Bill  and  com- 
plimented the  town  on  having  once  more  "raised  the  banner 
of  order  in  the  Liberal  party."  On  the  part  to  be  played  by 
the  Federation  which  he  had  come  to  inaugurate,  on  the  pro- 
gramme which  it  was  framing,  on  the  sphere  of  influence 
which  it  assigned  to  itself,  on  the  attitude  which  it  was  assuming 
towards  the  leaders  of  the  party  and  towards  the  Constitution 


.coy  Google 


189  DEMOCRACT  AND  POLITICAL  PABTIBS    [ucovd  fart 

in  general,  Mr.  Gladstone  Touchsafed  do  explanations.  He 
turned  to  the  Eastern  question,  and  soon  the  whole  audience 
forgot  itself  in  the  wild  enthusiasm  which  each  of  his  speeches 
habitually  produced. 

For  the  Federation  there  remained  the  great  fact  that  the 
leader  of  English  Liberalism  had  come  forward  as  its  sponsor. 

Public  opinion  soon  directed  its  attention  to  this  organization 
and  to  the  whole  political  situation  which  it  entailed;  and 
before  long  an  animated  discussion  arose  in  the  Press  and  on 
the  Platform.  It  was  perfectly  natural  that  party  polemics 
should  be  among  the  tirst  to  seize  on  the  subject  The 
authors  of  the  Birmingham  system  claimed  for  it  the  power 
of  making  the  Liberal  party  victorious  and  put  it  forward 
aa  an  engine  of  war  against  the  Conservatives.  This  was 
enough  to  make  the  latter  look  upon  It  with  very  unfavourable 
eyes.  Lord  Beaconstield  in  a  sarcastic  attack  on  his  opponents 
flung  the  American  nickname  of  "  Caucus  "  at  the  new  orgaoiza- 
tion,  a  word  which  had  long  been  associated  in  the  history  of 
American  pai'ties  with  the  intrigues  and  devices  of  unscrupulous 
electoral  wire-pullers  and  with  political  corruption.  Launched 
by  the  Prime  Minister,  a  master  of  epigram,  the  appellation  of 
"Caucus"  at  once  passed  into  general  use  in  England  and 
became  the  ordinary  designation  of  the  new  Liberal  organizft- 
tious.  The  Birmingham  politicians,  after  exhibiting  some 
signs  of  ill-humour  on  the  point,  thought  it  would  be  "  better 
frankly  to  accept  the  word  while  trusting  to  time  and  experi- 
ence to  attach  new  and  more  attractive  meanings  to  it,"' 
They  flattered  themselves  that  it  might  become  a  glorious 
epithet  like  that  of  Whig  and  Tory.  I  shall  follow  their 
example  here  and  in  future  use  the  word  "Caucus,"  if  only 
for  the  sake  of  its  brevity,  to  denote  the  represcTitative  party 
organizations  started  at  Birmingham.    ^ 

>  The  Caiteut,  hj  J.  Chamberlkln,  quoted  above. 


.coy  Google 


FOURTH  CHAPTEE 

THE  GROWTH  OF  THB  CAUCUS 
I 

However  great  may  have  been  the  stir  made  by  the  ap- 
pearance of  the  Federation  on  the  stage,  and  imposing  as 
was  the  ceremony  of  giving  the  finishing  touch  to  the  work 
of  popular  organization,  its  solidity  and  its  duration  were 
to  depend  on  the  broadness  of  its  basis  in  the  country.  The 
Associations  of  93  places  which  sent  delegates  to  tiie  Bir- 
mingham function  evidently  did  not  present  an  adequate  sup- 
port Consequently  the  leaders  of  the  Federation  zealously 
kept  up  the  propaganda  extra  muroa.  Mr.  Schnadhorst  contin- 
ued to  travel  about  the  country  to  advertise  the  model  associa- 
tion and  recommend  the  adoption  of  it,  which  he  did  in  the 
most  inviting  terms ;  "  No  subscription.  No  opinion,  creed,  or 
position  shut  a  man  out  So  long  as  the  minority  are  content 
to  submit  to  the  majority,  no  matter  what  opinion  upon  any 
particular  question  a  man  held,  he  was  not  excluded.  Free 
discussion  was  granted  to  all  so  long  as  perfect  loyalty  to  each 
other  existed.  The  object  of  their  meetings  was  that  they 
should  be  thoroughly  representative  in  their  character.  The 
next  business  was  the  election  of  committees  in  each  ward; 
every  man  was  qualified,  and  those  who  were  willing  to  serve 
were  elected." '  Mr.  Gladstone,  too,  was  inexhaustible  in  praise 
of  the  Birmingham  system.  "  I  venture  to  say  it  is  admirable, 
it  is  sound,  it  is  just,  it  is  liberal,  it  is  popular.  ...  A  man 
is  not  bound  by  ^le  Birmingham  plan  to  subscribe  to  any  list 
of  political  articles.  That  is  one  of  the  rocks  on  which  we 
have  split.  At  Birmingham  you  know  they  are  tolerably  ad- 
vanced, but  they  don't  attempt  to  exclude  the  most  moderate."  * 

>  Speech  or  Ht.  Scbnadhorst  at  the  Cambridfte  RefonD  Clab,  Jannarr,  18T8. 

*Speech  ot  the  2Ttb  September.  1S7T,  at  Nottiiig:hani.  Cf.  his  speech  at 
BOQthwark,  ot  the  2l)th  Julf ,  IHTS,  and  hia  letter  □(  the  lOtb  September,  187S, 
abont  tbe  election  at  Newcastle-nnder-Lyrae. 


,0,  Google 


184  DEMOCRACY  AND  POUTICAL  PARTIES    tsBCOitt.  past 

The  Caucus  spread  from  one  town  to  another,  that  is  to  say, 
representative  Associations  were  established  in  them  in  due 
form.  Very  often  they  were  started  amid  complete  indiffer- 
ence on  the  part  of  the  masses.  Sometimes  the  latter  did 
not  care  for  the  direct  participation  of  the  people  in  the  affairs 
of  the  party,  or  for  the  grand  speeches  in  which  it  was  claimed ; 
sometimes  they  looked  on  the  "  plan  "  with  suspicion,  having 
no  confidence  in  the  sincerity  of  the  "bourgeois"  who  had 
undertaken  the  conduct  of  it  But  in  several  places  the  sys- 
tem was  well  received  by  the  masses  and  they  hastened  to  turn 
it  to  account.  The  attitude  of  the  traditional  leaders  who  be- 
longed to  the  old  ruling  classes  also  varied  a  great  deal.  Some, 
considering  the  new  Associations  a  real  means  of  restoring  the 
fortunes  of  the  party,  gave  them  their  unqualified  adhesion. 
Others,  although  with  little  enthusiasm  for  democratic  Or- 
ganizations, thought  it  wiser  not  to  make  a  fuss  and  joined  the 
new  Associations  or  actually  helped  to  establish  them,  and  nat- 
urally became  their  leaders.  Others,  again,  were  averse  to  ab- 
dicating in  favour  of  the  masses  and  opposed  the  formation  of 
the  "hundreds."  Sometimes  a  compromise  was  arrived  at 
which  was  highly  characteristic  of  the  English  political  tem- 
perament. The  masses  offered  to  divide  the  power  with  the 
traditional  leaders.  For  instance,  instead  of  electing  all  the 
"  300  "  by  the  people,  as  they  would  have  liked  to  do,  they  were 
satisfied  with  200  delegates  chosen  directly  in  the  ward  public 
meetings,  and  allowed  the  leaders  to  appoint  the  remaining 
100  delegates  themselves.'  In  so  doing  the  masses  acknow- 
ledged in  a  way  that  the  representatives  of  the  old  ruling 
classes  possessed  vested  interests  in  the  exercise  of  politi- 
cal power  and  influence,  and  consented  to  the  mixed  form 
of  government  which  was  the  ideal  of  the  classic  theorists  of 
the  art  of  politics.  Lastly,  in  several  towns  the  old  leaders 
offered  an  energetic  resistance  to  the  introduction  of  the 
Caucus.  In  places  where  their  influence  was  not  paramount 
they  were  disregarded,  and  an  Association  was  founded  on  the 
Birmingham  plan,  but  this  was  not  always  sufQcient  to  anni- 

I  Tfa«  example  qaoted  here  retera  to  the  Liberal  AsioclfttloD  of  Chester,  the 
clreumBtancea  attending  the  formation  of  vhlch  are  related  In  a  psrliameDiaty 
electoral  enquiry  (Blue  Booki,  1881,  Vol.  XXVI,— Report  ol  the  Commla- 

^onera). 


.coy  Google 


iroDHTB  CHAP.}        GROWTH  OP  THE  CAUCUS  186 

hilate  the  leaders,  nor  to  do  away  with  the  old  Begistration 
Societies  or  Liberal  Associations  which  existed  in  the  lo- 
cality, and  ia  more  than  one  case  the  constituency  was 
left  with  two  rival  Associations  each  having  ita  own  special 
adherents. 

In  the  central  organization  the  same  dualism  was  still  more 
strongly  accentuated.  The  Birmingham  Federation  claimed  to 
control  the  affairs  of  the  party,  but  the  old  institution  of  parlisr 
mentary  Whip  with  its  offices  (Central  Liberal  Association)  still 
subsisted.  Great  as  was  its  confidence  in  its  traditional  author- 
ity, it  could  not  help  seeing  that  a  new  rival  power  had  sprung 
up,  and  instinctively  it  retreated  before  it  as  before  the  rising 
tide.  By  a  tacit  agreement  it  abandoned  to  the  Federation  all 
the  Midland  counties  of  which  Birmingham  is  the  capital ;  it 
bad  also  given  up  London,  but  the  Federation  had  no  idea  of 
being  confined  within  this  line  of  demarcation,  it  invaded  the 
other  parts  of  the  Kingdom,  hoisted  its  flag  in  them,  and  left 
its  garrisons  in  them  in  the  form  of  representative  Associations. 
Closely  pressed  by  the  Caucus,  the  parliamentary  "WTiip's  or- 
ganization retired  within  its  shell,  and  subsided  more  and  more 
into  the  essentially  Whig  character  which  the  very  history  of 
the  English  Liberal  party  has  stamped  on  it  Every  step  in 
advance  taken  by  the  Birmingham  system  was  so  much  ground 
won  from  the  old  Liberalism ;  every  gesture,  every  act  of  the 
new  Organization,  was  a  threat  or  an  attack  directed  against 
the  venerable  figure  of  Whiggism.  The  Birmingham  move- 
ment everywhere  brought  out  the  more  or  less  latent  or  patent 
ant^onism  between  Whigs  and  Radicals  and  accentuated  it. 

II 

The  differences  within  the  Liberal  party  were  not  of 
recent  date.  It  has  never  been  a  homogeneous  party  and  it 
could  not  be  so  considering  that  it  represented  the  party  of 
movement,  of  changes  which  are  conceived  or  displayed  in  a 
thousand  different  ways.  United  in  attack  against  the  com- 
mou  enemy,  it  was  always  destined  by  its  very  nature  to  relax 
its  discipline  after  the  victory  was  won.  As  soon  as  the  Par- 
liamentary Reform  of  1831'  bi-ongUt  a  certain  uumber  of  frankly 
Radical  members  into  the  House,  friction  began  between  them 


.coy  Google 


186  DEMOCRACr  AND  FOLITICAI,  PARTIES     [seconb  paut 

and  the  Whiga.  The  quarrels  and  reconciliations  which  fill 
up  the  existence  of  every  disunited  household  brought  the  his- 
toric Liberal  party  to  the  ominous  date  of  1867.  The  exten- 
sion of  the  suffrage  to  the  urban  masses  effected  by  the  second 
Reform  Bill  inspired  the  Radicals  with  great  hopes ;  they 
would  no  longer  be  dragged  at  the  heels  of  the  AVhigs,  plunged 
in  political  languor  as  under  Melbourne,  or  in  torpor  as  under 
Falmerston ;  on  the  contrary,  it  would  be  they,  the  Radicals, 
who  would  give  the  tone  to  the  policy  of  the  Liberal  party,  and 
that  policy  would  assume  a  frank,  dehnite  character,  free  from 
pusillanimous  hesitation  and  compromise.  Great  disappoint- 
ments were  in  store  for  them.  The  new  reformed  Parliament, 
elected  in  1S68,  contained  an  enormous  Liberal  majority,  but 
it  was  very  far  from  being  a  Radical  one.  The  Gladstone 
Ministry,  which  came  triumphantly  into  power,  soon  wore  out 
its  prestige.  It  dissatisfied  everybody,  alarmed  the  Conserva- 
tives, and  irritated  its  Radical  adherents.  Toward  the  close  of 
its  administration,  in  1873,  the  advanced  section  of  the  Liberal 
party  was  almost  in  a  state  of  revolt.  It  was  in  vain  that  Mr, 
Gladstone,  to  coax  it  into  submission,  took  John  Bright  into 
the  Cabinet.  The  discontent  was  not  coufined  to  the  halls 
of  Parliament,  it  was  very  strong  in  the  country  itself  where, 
owing  to  the  extension  of  the  suffrage,  Radicalism  henceforward 
had  a  broader  base  of  operations  than  it  baa  ever  possessed  in 
England,  And  it  was  from  this  quarter,  from  the  provinces, 
that  protests  proceeded.  One  of  the  most  violent  was  made 
by  Mr.  Joseph  Chamberlain,  As  yet  quite  unknown  outside 
Birmingham,  he  delivered  a  regular  attack  on  the  leaders  of 
the  party,  not  sparing  Mr.  (.iladstone  himself.  He  accused  the 
Liberal  Government  of  refusing  to  grapple  with  reforms,  of 
amusing  the  democracy  by  bringing  forward  insignificant  Bills, 
of  producing  half-measures,  of  ignoring  the  just  demands  of  the 
working  classes,  etc,'  The  collapse  of  the  Lilieral  majority  at 
the  general  election  of  1874,  lent  a  melancholy  tone  to  these 
recriminations,*  but  they  were  far  from  coming  to  an  end. 
The  sul)stitution  of  Lord  Hartington  for  Mr.  Gladstone  as  head 

'  "The  Ubeml  Party  and  its  Leaders,"  Fortnightly  Reviea,  September, 
18T3. 

>  Cf.  the  attlcle  bj  Mr.  Chamberlain,  "  The  Next  Page  on  the  Libera)  Pn>- 
gramme,"  IbUI,,  October.  18T4. 


.CD,  Google 


FODRTH  CH*p,]  GROWTH  OF  THE   CAUCUS  187 

of  the  party,  a  genuine  representative  of  aristocratic  Whig- 
gism,  filled  the  young  Radicals  with  suspicion  and  appre- 
hension, which  soon  developed  into  vehement  and  indignant 
protests  in  consequence  of  the  attitude  adopted  by  Lord 
Hartington  and  his  colleagues  on  the  front  bench  with  regard 
to  Eastern  affairs. 

It  was  at  this  moment  that  the  popular  Liberal  Associations 
appeared  on  the  scene.  Having  rushed  at  once  and  with  great 
ardour  into  the  anti-Turkish  campaign,  and  having  thus  taken 
up  an  attitude  distinctly  opposed  to  that  preserved  by  the  lead- 
ers of  the  party  and  their  moderate  followers,  their  intervention 
was  forthwith  invested  with  a  significance  which  was  out  of 
proportion  to  the  affair  which  had  been  the  pretext  or  occasion 
of  it.  While  the  moderates  remained  calm  and  apathetic^  the 
Associations  stormed  and  raged  throughout  the  country.  "  You 
see,"  exclaimed  the  Radicals,  "  it  is  there  in  the  ineetingSj  in  the 
Associations  that  the  pulse  of  true  Liberalism  beats."  The  for- 
mation of  the  Associations,  in  the  midst  of  the  anti-Turkish 
agitation,  having  set  in  motion  the  ardour,  the  enthusiasm,  the 
advanced  political  feeling  of  each  locality,  these  manifesta- 
tions gave  the  impression,  to  the  Radicals  at  all  events,  that  a 
numerical  majority  of  the  nation  was  behind  them.  "  Yon  Bee," 
they  said,  "that  all  the  real  Liberals  are  on  our  side."  The 
visible  organization  of  the  Associations  even  presented,  for  the 
first  time  in  the  history  of  the  party,  the  illusion  of  a  tangible 
line  of  demarcation,  of  a  boundary.  Those  who  were  outside 
it,  the  moderates,  the  lukewarm,  were  no  longer  real  Liberals. 
liiis  was  the  great  conclusion  which  required  a  practical  solu- 
tion, a  solution  concisely  expressed  by  the  demand  that  they 
should  clear  out.  Such  indeed  was  the  cry  which  resounded 
through  the  Radical  camp.  Ifevei  had  the  Whigs  had  to  face 
such  a  formidable  Radical  onslaught,  nor  had  such  direct  aim 
ever  been  taken  at  the  very  heart  of  their  being  and  of  their 
whole  existence,  which  was  identilied  with  the  destinies  of 
English  political  society  as  moulded  and  fashioned  by  them. 
In  fact,  it  was  no  longer  a  conflict  of  two  rival  factions,  it  was 
a  collision  of  two  worlds  —  the  one  composed  of  old  and  more 
or  less  dried  up  strata,  the  other  rising  fi-om  the  waves  after 
the  democratic  storm  of  1868  and  consolidating  itself  in  the 
Caucus. 


.coy  Google 


DEMOCRACY  AND  POLITICAL  PARTIES     [be 


III 

In  the  first  of  these,  in  the  world  of  old  Liberalism,  there  were 
two  fundajnental  strata,  —  parUamentarisni  and  individualism. 
The  one  was  contributed  by  the  historic  Whigs,  the  other  was 
due  to  political  economy,  to  philosophy  and  to  the  industrial 
revolution.  In  combating  the  abaolutfl  power  of  the  Cfowq, 
the  Whigs  had  strengthened  the  fabric  of  parliamentarism, 
with  the  support  of  their  aristocratic  followers,  who  were 
arrayed  behind  them  and  kept  in  good  otder  by  social  dis- 
cipline. When  the  middle  class,  being  desirous  of  a  share  of 
power,  joined  their  ranks,  the  Whigs  had  to  come  to  terms 
with  them,  to  compromise  with  their  character  and  the  ten- 
dencies of  their  mind  trained  in  ideas  or  notions  of  individual 
liberty  and  commercial  freedom.  The  Whig  aristocrats  reno- 
vated their  old  historic  claims  with  these  "principles,"  while 
the  Liberal  middle  class  acknowledged  their  traditional  posi- 
tion of  leaders,  and  readily  confiding  in  their  political  experi- 
ence and  prestige,  also  insensibly  fell  within  the  sphere  of 
their  social  influence.  This  fusion  gave  rise  to  a  body  of 
opinion  and  to  a  political  temperament  which,  extending  in 
numerous  successive  shades  almost  to  the  confines  of  Toryism 
on  the  one  side  and  of  liadicalism  on  the  other,  presented  an 
average  type  equidistant  from  both  extremes,  free  from  their 
defects  but  sometimes  also  devoid  of  their  virtues. 

The  fundamental  creed  of  Whiggism  elaborated  in  the  con- 
tests with  the  Crown,  that  is  to  say  that  no  person,  no  body 
has  absolute  power,  justified  in  the  mind  of  the  Liberal  his 
admiration  for  the  balanced  and  harmonized  government  which 
he  called  the  "English  Constitution,"  and  filled  bira  with  dis- 
gust for  the  Jacobin  spirit.  Authoritarianism,  in  all  its  forms 
and  all  its  consequences,  whether  they  affected  the  State  or 
the  individual,  was  an  abomination  to  him.  It  offended  not 
only  his  ideas  but  bis  sensibility  still  more.  His  love  of 
liberty  being  derived  from  education  and  habit,  he  was  not  so 
much  a  passionate  lover,  like  the  classic  Radical,  as  a  dilettante 
one.  Liberty  appealed  more  to  his  aesthetic  sense  as  a  man  of 
refinement  than  burst  into  a  flame  within  his  heart.  The  fire 
which  gave  warmth  to  his  soul  was  a  slow  fire,  well  kept  np 
because  covei-ed  with  embers,  never  a  red-hot  one.     Reflective 


.coy  Google 


TocBiii  CH*p.]         GROWTH   OF   THE   CAUCUS  188 

without  being  exactly  a  thinker,  but  above  all  sedate,  he  was 
not  easily  carried  away.  Calm  and  reserved,  he  often  ap- 
peared cold  and  frequently  haughty  with  all  the  haughtiness  of 
his  aristocratic  pedigree  or  of  the  fortune  which  he  had  amassed 
in  business.  Endowed  in  addition  to  this  with  a  robust  confi- 
dence in  sound  principles,  especially  those  of  political  economy, 
"  some  of  which  are  susceptible  of  mathematical  demonstration," 
he  combined  with  aristocratic  haughtiness  or  plutocratic  arro- 
gance the  intellectual  pride  of  the  doctrinaire  or  the  dull  con- 
ceit bred  of  a  little  knowledge.  These  sentiments,  joined  to 
a  genuine  spirit  of  individual  independence,  made  him  little 
accessible  to  the  mobile  influences  of  "opinion."  In  any  event 
he  did  not  admit  its  absolute  power,  for  this  he  refused  to  con- 
cede to  any  one.  All  the  more  was  it  repugnant  to  him  to  look 
for  inspiration  or  to  pretend  to  take  it  in  the  street,  in  the 
market-place.  The  feeling  of  personal  dignity  which  kept  him 
back  was  mingled  also  with  a  shade  of  contempt  for  and  fear 
of  the  crowd,  of  the  mob.  On  the  other  hand,  being  trained  in 
the  proprieties  of  society  or  in  the  compromises  of  business 
life,  he  naturally  fell  in  with  party  combinations  and  readily 
submitted  to  party  exigencies.  The  mild  and  somewhat  vi^ue 
tolerance  which  constituted  the  groundwork  of  his  character, 
thoroughly  imbued  him  with  the  opportunism  and  the  flexibil- 
ity which  are,  as  it  were,  the  essence  of  old  parties.  But  at 
the  same  time  this  easy  sluggish  temper  surrounded  him,  so  to 
speak,  with  a  rampart  against  attacks  from  outside,  a  sort  of 
slope  which  he  could  descend  with  ease,  but  which  did  not  per- 
mit every  one  to  come  to  close  quarters  with  him,  so  that  while 
following  others  he  could  honestly  say  to  himself  that  he  was 
not  dragged  along  by  them.  Balance  of  mind,  self-possession, 
moderation,  a  taste  for  or  a  habit  of  compromise,  all  these  val- 
uable political  qualities  —  which  alone  had  been  able  to  raise 
the  fabric  of  liberty  on  the  aristocratic  soil  of  England,  bris- 
tling with  privileges,  monopolies,  selfish  interests,  traditions, 
and  class  prejudices  —  the  Whig  Liberal  was  only  too  conscious 
of  having  them,  and  he  was  in  consequence  only  too  much 
disposed  tj)  consider  himself  bom  for  the  work  of  government 
and  to  look  on  power  as  a  right  and  a  duty  at  the  same  time. 
In  order  to  enjoy  the  right  he  indulged  in  concessions  which 
he  readily  viewed  as  sacrifices  to  duty,  and  being  naturally 


.coy  Google 


190  DEMOCRACY  AND  POLITICAL  PARTIES    [skcomp  pi«t 

anxious  to  spare  himself  the  sacriiicea,  he  guarded  the  enjoy- 
iDent  with  a  jealousy,  with  a  spirit  of  exclusiveness,  which 
tended  to  keep  bores  and  intruders  at  a  distance. 

But  this  barrier  with  which  Whig  Liberalism  surrounded 
itself  rather  invited  attack,  and  instead  of  serving  as  a  defence 
it  exposed  it  to  danger.  The  Eirmingham  Radicalism,  which 
broke  through  it,  engaged  the  old  Liberalism  along  the  whole 
line.  All  the  gods  which  the  old  Liberalism  venerated  and 
adored,  the  other  was  ready  to  burn ;  everything  which  was 
abhorred  and  feared  by  the  former  was  extolled  and  exalted 
by  the  latter.  Proclaimiug  the  depositiou  of  leaders  of  every 
kind  and  transferring  to  the  masses  the  immediate  duty  of 
governing  themselves,  demanding  for  the  "  people  "  the  right  of 
deciding  without  appeal  on  the  policy  to  be  adopted,  of  mark- 
ing out  the  lines  of  it  themselves,  the  new  Liberalism  repudi- 
ated the  whole  Whig  doctrine  which  holds  that  in  a  free 
country  no  one,  no  individual  nor  body  however  numerous, 
wields  an  absolute,  undivided,  direct  power;  it  overthrew  the 
imposing  and  ingeniously  constructed  fabric  of  government 
in  which  all  the  parts  balance  each  other  and  are  carried  for- 
ward in  a  harmonious  and  unbroken  movement;  it  made  the 
people  not  only  the  primary  source  of  power,  but  the  authority 
which  pi-escribed  the  acts  of  the  supreme  government,  follow- 
ii^  only  its  own  will  and  obeying  only  its  own  inspirations 
of  the  moment ;  for  the  regular  working  of  established  organs, 
controlled  by  principles  and  traditions  supplied  by  experience, 
it  substituted  the  irregular  action  of  extra-cons titutioufd  bodies, 
on  which  the  former  would  only  have  to  model  their  move- 
ments. In  one  word,  it  laid  sacrilegious  hands  on  the  holy 
ark  of  parliamentary  institutions  which  contained  the  whole 
Whig  law. 

Rejecting  the  principles  of  the  Whigs  as  too  narrow  and 
unbending,  Bradicalism  condemned  their  conduct  as  too  faint- 
hearted ;  for  the  latitudinarianism  of  their  political  conscience 
it  substituted  a  jealous  and  exclusive  creed  expressed  in  the 
formula,  "  trust  in  the  people " ;  those  who  would  not  con- 
fess the  faith  of  "confidence  in  the  people"  had  do  place 
in  the  fold  of  the  new  Liberalism;  and  the  sincerity  of  the 
believer's  faith  was  proved  only  by  following  the  numerical 
majority  of  the  "  people,"  or  those  who  were  supposed  to 


.coy  Google 


TODHTH  cHAF.]         GROWTH   OF   THE  CAUCUS  1»1 

represent  it.  W'itli  little  relish  for  the  discipline  wbich  was 
demauded  in  consequence,  the  Whigs  had  a  still  greater  dis- 
like to  the  uninterrupted  stream  of  enthusiasm  turned  on 
by  the  "hundreds"  and  their  meetings.  The  sentimental 
note  on  which  Mr.  Gladstone  played  with  a  skill  which  was 
all  the  more  masterly  because  it  was  natural  to  him,  did 
not  vibrate  within  them;  they  mistrusted  sentimental  ism  in 
politics,  or,  as  their  detractors  asserted,  they  ignored  the 
influence  of  moral  sentiment  in  the  sphere  of  politics.  The 
loud  tones,  the  noisy  ways,  the  exuberant  gestures  of  the 
Caucus  people  were  quite  enough  to  jar  on  them;  by  their 
placid  temperament  and  their  social  i-elations  they  were,  or 
considered  themselves,  too  much  of  gentlemen  to  be  able  to 
put  up  with  the  "want  of  sobriety  in  language  and  of  dig- 
nity in  demeanour"  which  offended  them  in  the  advanced 
section  of  the  party.  The  old  Whig  Liberals  were  thus 
attacked  in  their  principles,  in  their  conduct,  in  their  habits 
and  their  ideas  of  decorum.  They  were  woimded  in  their 
faults  as  well  as  in  their  virtues.  And  there  was  no  chance 
of  the  latter  securing  forgiveness  for  the  former;  in  politics 
virtues  are  often  expiated  even  more  than  faults. 

The  Whigs  received  notice  to  quit,  they  had  held  their 
position  only  too  long ;  they  had  been,  they  were  told,  simply 
a  clique  engaged  in  the  selfish  pursuit  of  power,  they  were  out 
of  sympathy  with  all  the  aspirations  of  the  nation,  they  did 
not  understand  its  requirements,  they  were  incapable  of  direct- 
ing it.  In  vain  did  the  moderates  protest  that  they  still  had 
a  great  part  to  play;  that  the  leadership  in  the  Liberal  party 
was  their  natural  function;  that  no  proof  existed  that  the 
democratic  spirit  had  developed  to  a  point  which  justified  the 
placing  of  Radicalism  in  power.  It  was  of  no  avail,  they  said, 
hoisting  the  red  flag  of  democracy;  the  old  social  conditions 
bad  not  disappeared  and  England  was  still,  politically  speak- 
ing, a  nation  of  tradei-s  governed  for  the  most  part  by  landed 
proprietors,  or  of  shopkeepers  whose  one  ambition  was  to  be 
raised  to  the  class  of  landed  proprietors.  England,  to  quote 
the  saying  applied  to  France,  was  Left  Centre,  equally  hostile 
to  Tory  stagnation  and  to  the  Utopias  of  men  of  extreme 
opinions.  The  divergent  attitude  of  the  leaders  and  of  the 
masses  in  the  Eastern  question,  which  had  been  triumphantly 


.coy  Google 


192  DEMOCRACY  AND  POLITICAL  PARTIES     [sbcond  rxn 

turned  to  account  gainst  the  moderates,  in  no  way  marked 
the  difFerence  between  aristocratic  tendeacies  and  demo- 
cratic aspirations;  it  was  not  Whiggism  but  statesmanship 
and  good  sense  to  keep  cool  in  times  of  popular  excitement, 
to  distrust  the  capacity  of  indignation  meetings  to  conduct 
foreign  policy.  The  crime  of  the  moderates  or  of  the  Whigs, 
as  their  opponents  affected  to  call  them,  consisted  in  holding 
fast  to  principles,  in  looking  beyond  the  democratic  passions 
of  the  moment  and  fising  their  attention  on  the  liberties  and 
the  permanent  interests  of  the  nation.  "  For  ua  the  question 
is  not  to  know  what  is  popular,  but  what  is  reasonable  and  just, 
and  we  consider  it  one  of  the  duties  of  statesmen  to  combat 
popular  illusions  even  at  the  sacrifice  of  place  and  power."' 
All  these  grounds  of  defence  pleaded  by  the  Whigs  were  so 
many  confessions  of  guilt  in  tiie  eyes  of  the  Radicals,  they 
seemed  to  them  only  to  corroborate  the  charge  that  the  official 
leaders  were  no  longer  in  touch  with  the  feelings  and  ideas 
of  the  nation,  and  as  the  leaders  were  moderates  and  repre- 
sentatives of  moderates,  both  were  confounded  in  one  common 
reprobation.  The  war-cry  raised  by  the  "  Birmingham  plan  " : 
doum  iuilh  the  leaders,  and  up  wUh  the  people,  being  converted 
in  these  circumstances  into  the  cry  :  down  with  the  Whigs,  war 
on  the  moderates,  up  with  the  Radicals,  the  popular  movement 
inaugurated  in  the  Midlands  inevitably  turned  gainst  the 
moderates  with  redoubled  force.  And  for  hurling  its  shafts 
the  permanent  Organizations  on  a  representative  basis  sup- 
plied it  with  a  perfected  and  hitherto  unknown  engine  of  war. 

IV 

The  Eastern  question  remained  to  the  end  up  to  the  Berlin 
Congress,  the  sheet-anchor  of  the  Caucus.  Its  central  organ, 
fastening  on  the  foreign  policy  of  the  Government,  deemed  it 
necessary  to  take  up  an  attitude,  whether  of  blame  or  approval, 

'  Among  the  numerous  writiDgs  to  which  this  oontroversj  gave  rise  in  the 
PrcBB,  may  be  qnoted,  besldea  the  two  articles  by  Mr.  Chamberlain  already 
mentioned :  "  Whigs  and  Liberals."  by  Ooldwln  Smith  (Fortnightly  Revita, 
18T8,  vol. 23) ;  "Uberalsand  WhlKs."  by  Geo.  Brodrick  (Ibid.);  "A  Word 
tor  Indignation  Meetings,"  by  Goldniu  Smith  (Ibid.  vol.  24)  ;  "  The  Oovem- 
ment  and  tbe  Opposition"  (Edinburgh  Rrvtetn,  January,  1879);  "Whigs, 
Radicals,  and  Conservatives  "  (Quiirlerly  Sevlea,  1680,  vol.  100). 


.coy  Google 


rovwiB  CHAP.]        GROWTH  OF  THE  CAUCUS  198 

in  all  the  inoideiita  of  the  crisis ;  at  one  time  with  reference  to 
the  aiunmoning  of  troops  from  l^dia,  at  another  in  regard  to 
the  participation  of  England  in  the  Congress.  In  the  local 
Associations  the  anti-Turkish  movement,  which  was  tolerably 
spontaneous  and  genuine  at  the  start,  soon  lost  this  charac- 
ter ;  the  emotion  aroused  by  Mr.  Gladstone's  agitation  had  time 
to  calm  down,  and  the  meetings  and  demonstrations  of  the 
caucuses  were  kept  up  rather  by  via  inertiae  and  at  the  instiga^ 
tion  of  Birmingham.  But  this  did  not  make  them  display 
greater  wisdom.  For  the  inauguration  of  the  direct  influence 
of  the  masses  on  public  affairs  it  was  if  anything  to  be  re- 
gretted that  their  first  appearance  should  have  been  in  the  prov- 
vince  of  foreign  policy,  in  which  popular  emotion,  the  ardour, 
and  the  enthusiasm,  nay  even  the  excellent  intentions  of  the 
multitude,  are  not  indispensable  or  useful  factors.  It  is  there- 
fore not  surprising  that  in  their  anti-Turkish  campaign  the 
Associa^ons  should  have  given  striking  proof  of  their  want  of 
discernment  on  more  than  one  occasion.  The  speeches  made  and 
the  resolutions  adopted  were  often  characterized  by  extrava- 
gance and  ignorance  of  the  first  conditions  in  which  the  English 
political  system  works,  as,  for  instance,  the  resolutions  relating 
to  the  impeachment  of  Lord  Beaconsfleld  and  other  moves  of 
the  same  kind. 

It  is  beyond  a  doubt  that  in  several  localities  the  new  Organ- 
izations, apart  from  the  Eastern  question  which  appealed  to 
the  generous  instincts  of  the  masses,  had  called  forth  a  great 
deal  of  civic  enthusiasm  and  of  honest  and  genuine  interest 
in  the  public  weal.  But  it  is  no  less  true  that  these  impulses 
stood  in  need  of  guidance,  and  that  this  guidance  was  very 
often  non-existent.  It  was  easy  enough  to  copy  the  Birming- 
ham Organization,  but  it  was  not  so  easy  to  reproduce  the 
merits  of  the  men  who  controlled  it,  the  public  spirit  which  they 
contrived  to  create  and  maintain.  The  Badical  leaders  who 
joined  in  the  movement  lacked,  as  a  rule,  the  first  quality  of 
leaders  —  a  sense  of  the  fitness  of  things,  and  more  than  one 
extravagant  act  of  the  Associations,  during  the  Eastern  crisis 
for  instance,  and  afterwards,  must  be  attributed  wholly  to 
them.  On  the  other  hand,  the  men  with  more  balance  who 
possessed  influence  in  the  locality,  and  who  hastened  to  accept 
the  Caucus,  often  had  not  sufficient  enthusiasm  or  sincerity  to 


.coy  Google 


IM  DEHOCRACr  ABD  POLITICAL  PARTIES     [second  pabt 

exercise  a  beneficial  influence  on  the  masses.  Belonging  for 
tlie  most  part  to  the  old  riding  classes,  they  were  more  anxious 
about  preserving  the  reality  of  the  power  which  they  had  had 
to  relinquish  in  appearance.  In  any  event  their  mind,  im- 
prisoned in  the  narrow  circle  of  party  ideas,  could  not  take 
in  the  real  grandeur  of  the  work  implied  in  the  political  educa- 
tion of  the  masses,  and  even  if  they  could  do  so,  these  traders 
or  manufacturers  who  thought  themselves  Liberals  because  they 
swore  by  Xr.  Gladstone  were  incapable  of  taking  the  lead  in  it. 
In  the  most  favourable  circumstances,  the  old  leaders  who  had 
joined  the  Caucus  succeeded  by  dint  of  moderation  and  tact  in 
restraining  the  aggressive  zeal  of  the  enthusiasts  and  in  keeping 
the  peace  between  the  different  Bections  of  the  party.  In  places 
where  this  was  not  the  case,  where  men  of  this  kind  were  not 
forthcoming,  or  the  new  electors  were  of  a  less  conciliatory  tem- 
per, the  Caucus,  which  rallied  round  it  the  advanced  and  ardent 
spirits  of  the  party,  soon  became  the  stronghold  of  %  faction 
imbued  with  a  sectarian  spirit  and  all  the  mote  intolerant  and 
imperious  because  the  popular  form  of  its  constitution  gave  it 
a  pretext  for  putting  itself  forward  as  the  only  true,  legitimate 
representative  of  the  Liberal  party 


In  the  Caucus,  this  spirit  speedily  displayed  itself  in  the 
discharge  of  its  Brst  duty,  which  was  the  choice  of  candidates 
for  the  parliamentary  elections.  Conformably  to  the  Birming- 
ham doctrine,  no  candidate  could  henceforth  stand  for  Parlia- 
ment irrespective  of  the  Caucus.  In  order  to  be  true  to  the 
democratic  spirit,  the  caucuses  did  not  make  a  selection  in  the 
real  sense  of  the  word,  but  organized  a  sort  of  public  competi- 
tion among  the  candidates  by  requiring  from  them  complete 
submission  beforehand.  The  members  whom  the  Caucus  found 
in  possession  had  to  submit  to  the  same  process  if  they 
aspired  to  re-election.  The  fact  that  the  Caucus  often  rep- 
resented only  a  fraction  of  the  party,  and  that  the  most 
passionate,  the  most  ardent,  was  not  calculated  to  secure  it 
adhesion  in  every  quarter,  and  the  pretensions  of  the  new 
Organizations  aroused  vehement  protests.  One  of  these  cases 
made  a  great  stir  throughout  the  country,  owing  to  the  emi- 


.coy  Google 


tooxm  CUP.]        GROWTH  OF  THE  CAUCUS  166 

nence  of  the  protesting  party.  The  conflict  arose  at  Bradford 
between  the  Caucus  and  one  of  the  members  for  the  town, 
W.  £.  Forster,  the  well-known  statesman. 

Forster  had  represented  Bradford  in  Parliament  for  eighteen 
years.  Having  been  returned  in  consequence  of  his  local 
notoriety,  he  was  not  long  in  achieving  a  considerable  position 
in  the  House,  and  soon  rose  to  the  first  rank  of  statesmen  in 
the  Liberal  party.  The  brilliance  of  his  political  career, 
being  reflected  on  the  town  which  he  represented,  accentuated 
the  feelings  of  devotion  and  affection  which  had  bound  him  to 
his  constituents  from  the  very  first.  But  for  some  time  past, 
a  small  fraction  of  the  constituency,  inspired  by  religious 
passions,  had  pursued  Forster  with  unrelenting  animosity.  It 
could  not  foi^ve  him  the  part  which  he  had  played  in  the 
creation  of  a  system  of  popular  instruction.  When  Forster 
became  Minister  of  Education  in  Gladstone's  first  Cabinet 
(1868-1874),  England  was  still  without  a  system  of  primary 
instruction,  the  introduction  of  which,  as  will  be  remembered, 
ran  counter  to  the  fanaticism  of  the  various  religious  sects, 
especially  of  the  Nonconformists,  who  could  not  ^lee  as  to 
what  religious  teaching  should  be  given.  Forster  boldly 
grappled  with  the  question  and  passed,  by  way  of  compromise, 
an  organic  law  of  primary  education  which  made  instruc- 
tion obligatory  and  undenominational  to  the  extent  that  all 
religion  was  excluded  wherever  the  population  so  desired  it, 
and  which  allowed  the  reading  of  tJie  Bible  in  the  schools, 
without  any  dogmatic  instruction  or  a  catechism,  in  cases  where 
the  School  Boards  elected  by  the  ratepayers  did  not  pro- 
hibit all  religious  teaching.  The  law  also  provided  that  the 
Treasury  should  continue  its  grants  to  the  establishments  for 
primary  education  by  distributing  them  among  the  Board 
schools  as  well  as  the  denominational  schools,  on  condition, 
however,  that  they  should  submit  to  Government  inspection, 
and  that  religious  instruction  should  only  be  ^ven  before  or 
after  school  hours  and  be  optional  for  the  schoolchildren. 

Hardly  was  the  law  passed  (in  1870)  when  the  extreme 
Radicals  denounced  it  as  contrary  to  "  logic  "  because  it  only 
permitted  the  introduction  of  obligatory  instruction,  but  did 
not  enforce  it  gainst  the  will  of  the  population.  Again,  the 
provisions  of  the  law  relating  to  the  denominational  schools 


.coy  Google 


IM  DEMOCRACY  AND  POLITICAL  PARTIES     [iBCOND  taut 

exaspe rated  an  important  aection  of  the  Liberal  party,  —  the 
Nonconformists,  who  considered  that  the  Act  showed  too 
much  favour  to  the  Established  Church  by  keeping  up  the 
grants  to  its  schools  while  not  prohibiting  them  from  giving 
religious  instruction.  In  reality,  it  was  not  hostility  to  re- 
ligion which  inspired  the  opposition  of  the  Dissenteis,  far 
from  it :  as  a  general  rule,  the  adherents  of  the  various 
Nonconformist  sects  can  vie  with  the  followers  of  the  Estab- 
lished Church  in  bigotry  and  fanaticism,  but  being  separated 
from  their  great  rival  by  an  irreconcilable  jealousy  and  by  the 
memory  of  the  persecutions  which  it  has  inflicted  on  them  in 
the  past,  their  one  object  is  to  "icraser  rinfAme."  Joining  the 
extreme  Radicals,  the  militant  Nonconformists  began  an  agi- 
tation against  the  law  of  1870  and  its  author  throughout  the 
country.  The  agitation  was  directed  from  Birmingham  by 
the  same  men  who  were  destined  to  lead  the  Caucus  two  or 
three  years  later,  —  Mr.  Cbamberiaiii,  Mr.  Schnadhorst  (who  had 
entered  public  life  aa  secretary  of  the  "  Central  Nonconform- 
ist Committee"),  and  other  Radical  Dissenters.  The  con- 
nections which  the  Birmingham  group  formed  on  this  occasion 
were  subsequently  of  great  assistance  to  them  for  the  Caucus, 
for  it  was  precisely  the  Nonconformists  brought  into  the  field 
gainst  Forster's  Act  who  nearly  everywhere  formed  the  rank 
and  file  of  the  caucuses. 

The  mode  of  election  of  the  School  Board  established  by  the 
law,  especially  the  cumulative  vote,  which  gave  minorities  the 
power  of  getting  on  the  Board,  also  met  with  an  unfavourable 
reception  from  the  opponents  of  the  Act  of  1870,  and  they  de- 
voted their  energies  to  nullifying  it  by  devices  of  electoral 
organization.  We  have  already  seen  the  Birmingham  group 
at  this  work ;  the  tactics  of  "  vote  as  you  are  told  "  failed  on 
ttiis  occasion,  but  met  with  success  in  other  places  where  the 
calculations  were  more  accurately  made,  at  Leeds  for  instance.' 
Although  in  more  than  one  case,  especially  in  London,  the  oppo- 

^  FonWr  was  mnch  dletresBed  by  this.  "  We  do  not  want  party  llneg  In 
these  elactiops,"  he  enid ;  "  we  want  everybody,  whether  be  belungs  to  a  big 
party  or  to  a  tittle  one,  to  have  hia  fair  say  1q  the  choice  of  the  people  who 
sta  to  manage  tbe  edacatloa  of  bis  children:  and  I  tbinli  yon  Liberals  of 
Leeds  iiave  behaved  very  badly  in  upaettiiiK  [be  original  latentloo  of  Par- 
liament when  it  passed  the  BiU  "  (T.  W.  Held,  Life  af  W.  E.  Forster,  Lood. 
1K88, 1,  517). 


.coy  Google 


FocBTH  CHAP.]        QEOWTH  OP  THE  CAUCUS  197 

nents  of  Forater's  Act  had  been  among  those  who  had  obtained 
a  seat  on  the  Board  by  means  of  the  cumulative  vote,  they  none 
the  less  made  a  grievance  of  it  against  Forster.* 

After  Gladstone's  retirement  Forster  vas,  next  to  the  new 
leader  of  the  party,  Lord  Hartington,  the  most  conspicuous 
statesman  on  the  Liberal  staff,  and  in  this  capacity  he  shared 
in  the  policy  of  reserve  which  the  chiefs  of  the  Liberal  Opposi- 
tion in  Parliament  maintained  during  the  Eastern  crisis,  and 
which  brought  on  them  so  many  attacks  from  the  Radicals. 

VI 

Such  was  Forster's  situation  when  Bradford  was  provided 
with  a  proper  Caucus,  which  was  at  once  iilled  with  fanatical 
Nonconformists  and  Radicals  of  more  enthusiasm  than  sober- 
mindedness.  In  the  statutes  which  it  adopted  in  1878  it 
incorporated  the  whole  Birmingham  doctrine,  written  and 
unwritten.  It  took  up  the  provision  which  placed  candidates 
and  members  under  the  orders  of  the  Caucus,  and  it  hastened 
to  demand  from  Forster  recognition  of  this  rule.  Article  15 
of  the  statutes,  which  soon  became  quite  famous  through- 
out England,  provided  that  it  should  be  "  required  from  the 
proposer  of  any  intending  candidate  for  the  representation 
of  the  borough  in  Parliament,  that  he  should,  before  the 
time  of  making  such  proposal  (having  previously  obtained  the 
consent  of  such  intending  candidate),  give  an  assui-ance  to 
the  General  Committee  of  the  Association  that  the  candidate 
he  proposes  will  abide  by  their  decision."  The  Chairman  of 
the  "300 "of  Bradford,  a  Nonconformist  of  a  highly  militant 
type,  who  had  opposed  Forster  tooth  and  nail  at  his  last  re- 
election (in  1874),  now  held  out  the  olive-branch  to  him  by 
offering  to  propose  him  to  the  Caucus  as  candidate,  only  he 
mildly  added  as  a  condition  that  Forster  should  undertake  to 
submit  to  the  Caucus.  Forster  refused,  he  was  not  prepared 
to  be  adopted  by  the  Caucus  at  this  price.  "I  cannot  bind 
myself  to  a  rule  which  even  theoretically  enables  any  Associ- 
ation to  stand  between  me  and  the  constituency  I  have  so  long 
represented.  I  am  a  member  for  the  borough,  and  I  cannot 
think  it  right  to  m^e  myself  the  nominee  or  the  delegate  of 
>  CI.  Font«c'B  letter  of  the  Tth  H&rch,  1871,  U>  John  Bright  (/6i(I.,B27-S29). 


.coy  Google 


1S8  DEMOCRACy  AND  POLITICAL  PARTIES     [wcohd  pabt 

any  organization  within  the  constituency,  however  important 
that  organization  or  however  I  may  agree  with  it  in  political 
opinion."  Criticising  the  rule  of  Article  15  from  a  general  point 
of  view,  Forster  pointed  out  how  little  it  was  in  accordance 
with  good  sense :  "  it  might  be  that  the  committee  might  be  mis- 
taken in  the  grounds  of  their  decision.  It  is  possible  that  the 
member  might  be  able  to  persuade  not  merely  the  majority  of 
the  constituency,  but  the  majority  of  his  party,  that  he  is  right, 
and  yet  the  condition  to  which  this  rule  would  bind  him  would 
prevent  him  from  appealmg  to  his  constituents  or  to  his  party 
or  even  to  second  thoughts  of  the  committee.  If  such  a  rule 
became  general,  it  would  greatly  injure  the  political  life  of 
the  country.  Imagine  a  wave  of  prejudice  overwhelming  the 
constituencies,  as  for  instance,  at  the  time  of  the  Crimeai\ 
War ; '  would  it  be  desirable  that  the  Cobdens  and  Brights 
and  Milner-Qil}sons  of  the  future  should  be  bound  not  to  offer 
themselves  for  re-election,  and  should  be  forced  to  hold  their 
tongues  and  submit  to  ostracism  in  silence  because  they  bad 
undertaken  not  to  stand  if  the  majority  of  a  committee  dis- 
agreed with  them  ?  "  The  Chairman  of  tiie  "  300  "  replied  in  an 
arrogant  tone  that  with  a  candidate  who  ventured  to  ignore  or 
thwart  the  decisions  of  the  party  in  order  to  follow  his  personal 
interest,  his  own  duty  was  to  support  the  Association;  that  a 
candidate  had  no  right  to  appeal  to  the  whole  constituency; 
that  he  owed  obedience  to  his  party  and  to  its  committee 
appointed  in  due  form ;  and  that  if  Forster  respected  himself 
be  would  bow  to  the  rule  laid  down  in  Article  15.  This 
attitude  of  the  Caucus  was  aggravated  by  the  fact  that  the 
Chairman  of  the  Bradford  "  300  "  liad  himself  admitted  that 
there  was  no  diSerence  of  opinion  between  Forster  and  the 
Association  at  that  time.  If  this  was  so,  if  there  was  no 
doubt  as  to  the  views  of  the  constituents  and  the  member 
being  in  unison,  what  was  the  object  and  the  meaning  of  the 
ordeal  to  which  he  was  being  subjected  ?  There  could  be  only 
one :  to  make  Forster  pass  under  the  yoke  of  a  committee 
which  claimed  to  represent  the  people,  to  assert  the  power  of 

■  Tha  Crlmeui  War  uooaed  the  combatlTe  iDHtincts  of  Ui«  ntttlon,  Mid  In 
tha  Brat  genenl  election  which  followed  It  (of  tSGT)  the  members  who  pn>- 
teited  agalDit  the  agfcreiilve  foreign  policy  of  Palmeraton  were  defeated  at 
the  polls.  la  this  diaaeter  of  (lie  peace  patty  C  )bden  aod  Bright  themaelves 
loet  tbelr  seats. 


.coy  Google 


FoniiTn  CHAP.]        GROWTH  OF  THE  CAUCUS  199 

the  Caucus  over  every  one  who  desired  to  take  part  in  public 
life,  however  high  the  position  eonferi-ed  on  him  by  hia  char- 
acter and  talents  and  however  honourable  his  past  Mr. 
Schnadhorst  himself,  with  the  authority  which  t)elonged  to 
him  in  these  particular  matters,  had  propounded  this  maxim 
when  explaining  the  "Birmingham  plan":  "John  Bright 
himself,"  he  said,  "  would  have  to  be  nominated  and  stand  or 
fall  by  the  voting." ' 

The  publication  in  the  newspapers  therefore  of  the  corre- 
spondence between  the  OhaJtman  of  the  Caucus  and  Forster 
produced  a  great  impression  throughout  the  country.  The 
public  grasped  the  fact  that  it  was  not  a  merely  local  matter, 
that  a  new  tendency  was  seeking  admittance  into  political 
life  and  degrading  the  representative  of  the  people  in  Farlia- 
ment  to  the  status  of  a  clerk  at  the  mercy  of  a  committee  tak- 
ing the  place  of  the  whole  body  of  electors  and  usurping  its 
rights  and  its  powers.  The  Thaea  only  expressed  the  views  of 
a  considerable  section  of  opinion  when  it  said  that  this  corre- 
spondence was  a  warning  which  ought  not  to  be  disregarded. 
If  a  public  mau  like  Forster  could  be  forced  to  submit  to  the 
yoke  of  the  Association,  what  must  be  expected  from  less  con- 
spicuous and  less  independent  politicians  ?  "  We  have  to 
thank  the  Bradford  '  300,' "  said  the  great  newspaper,  "  for 
pving  us  clearly  to  understand  the  conditions  to  which,  in 
the  opinion  of  the  'organizing'  party,  public  life  in  England 
must  henceforward  be  subject." ' 

lu  the  meanwhile  the  town  of  Bradford  was  plunged  in  pro- 
found agitation.  Forster  possessed  many  friends  and  admirers 
in  his  constituency.  The  Caucus  set  to  work  to  detach  his  adhe- 
rents, to  estrange  the  masses  from  him  and  to  isolate  him.  A 
violent  campaign  was  started,  he  was  denounced  from  house  to 
house,  and  stigmatized  in  meetings  as  a  traitor  to  the  cause  of 
Liberalism.  The  watchword  given  by  the  leaders  of  the  Cau- 
cus was  taken  up  ia  the  ward  meetings  by  worthy  folk  who 
thought  that  the  triumph  of  the  popular  cause  was  really  at 
stake,  and  each  tried  to  shout  his  loudest  against  Forster.' 

I  Carnbridgt  Indepeiidtiit  Pren,  12th  uf  Jaooary,  18T8. 

>  Tima,  12th  of  August,  IBT8. 

*  In  the  conrae  of  the  enquiry  Into  theCnucus  which  I  undertook  at  Bradford 
one  ot  theae  ward  oratorB,  vbo  bad  learnt  vlgdom  b;  time  and  events,  aaid  U> 
Bw  In  a  deprecatory  tone :  "  1  was  one  o(  these  shoaters." 


.CD,  Google 


200  DEMOCBACT  AND  POLITICAL  PAETIES     [bicohb  pahi 

Hia  firm  attitude  won  him  aympathy  all  over  the  country ;  poli- 
ticians belonging  to  all  parties  congratulated  him  and  thanked 
him  for  fighting  the  good  fight.  Mr.  Gladstone  thought  fit  to 
interpose  in  the  conflict  and  offered  bis  services  to  his  old 
colleague  in  order  to  put  an  end  to  it.  Forster  intimated  to 
Mr.  Gladstone  that  there  was  nothing  to  arbitrate  about  under 
the  circumstances,  but  that  he  would  have  been  very  glad  to 
see  him  express  his  opinion  on  the  question  of  the  organization 
in  general,  because,  he  wrote  to  him,  "  I  think  the  advocates  of 
some  such  rule  as  the  Bradford  one  have  a  lurking  hope  that 
you  are  on  their  side.  The  Birmingham  people  disavow  this 
rule ;  *  but  I  am  not  quite  sure  that  I  have  as  much  faith  as 
you  have  even  in  the  Birmingham  system,  mainly  for  the 
reason  that  I  doubt  any  permanent  committee,  or  any  com- 
mittee annually  elected  in  quiet  times,  thoroughly  representing 
the  party  when  an  election  is  imminent.  Birmingham  itseli 
may  be  an  exception,  political  interest,  not  to  say  excitement, 
there  beiug  both  strong  and  abiding ;  but  generally  I  suspect 
the  men  who  elect  the  committees  are  themselves  but  a  small 
part  of  the  party.  And  is  not  this  likely  to  happen  —  either 
that,  being  thus  small,  they  would  degenerate  into  ivi re-pullers, 
as  in  the  States ;  or,  as  in  Bradford,  represent  the  agitation  for 
disestablishment,  or  some  such  special  question?  In  either 
case  there  is  a  chance  of  the  committee  being  disavowed  by 
the  party  when  the  election  really  comes.  ...  I  therefore 
rather  prefer  the  old  system  of  our  towns ;  namely,  a  perma- 
nent committee  to  look  after  the  registration,  but  a  choice 
of  candidates  by  the  whole  party  just  before  the  election.  It 
seems  to  me  one  of  the  best  safeguards  against  the  wire-pullers 

—  that  is,  gainst  the  real  danger  besetting  large  constituencies 

—  is  to  80  frame  the  machinery  as  to  keep  members  as  much  as 
possible  in  communication  and  contact  with  the  whole  constit- 
uency, and  candidates  as  much  as  possible  with  the  whole 
party."* 

The  Bradford  Caucus,  which  did  not  expect  that  its  preten- 

'  The  disavowal  iraa  moro  torniBl  than  rent.  Mr.  Schnadhorst  wasof  oplnloo 
that  "  the  objectioD  to  the  Bradlotd  rule  seems  to  be  that  it  embodies  Id  a  law 
a  principle  ot  the  very  greatest  value  but  whieh  sbould  be  applied  with  modera- 
tion and  discretion,  and  with  a  due  regard  toclrcumstanceiaDdpenoiia"  (Let- 
ter to  the  Timu,  'iSd  of  AiijjUBt.  ItlTS). 

=  Life  <if  W.  E.  i'oriier,  II,  2ia. 


.coy  Google 


vooBTH  OHAP.}         GROWTH  OF  THE  CAUCUS  201 

siona  would  gire  rise  to  proteats  in  the  whole  country,  was  at 
last  obliged  to  make  a  concession  which  put  an  end  to  the  con- 
Met,  fot  the  moment  at  all  events  ;  the  wording  of  the  famous 
paragraph  16  aa  to  the  undertaking  to  be  demanded  from  the 
candidate  waa  altered  in  an  optional  sense,  "  may  be  required" 
being  substituted  for  the  imperative  "  shall  be  required." 
Forster  thereupon  agreed  to  be  nominated  by  the  Association. 
In  reality  the  concession  made  by  the  Caucus,  being  almost 
entirely  one  of  form,  was  not  very  great,  and  if  any  one  it  was 
Forster  who  gave  way.  All  his  firmness  was  spent  in  solemn 
protests  and  high-sounding  declarations.' 

The  stni^le  between  Forster  and  the  Bradford  Caucus  gave 
a  most  powerful  impulse  to  the  controversy  raised  by  the  Bir- 
mingh^  system  and  delinitively  made  the  Caucus  one  of  the 
questions  of  the  day  for  a  long  time  to  come.' 

The  discussions  on  the  Caucus  started  in  the  Press  did  not 
produce  a  great  effect  on  the  life  of  the  new  Organizations. 

1 W.  H.  C.  Torreat,  the  dUttDgoiihed  Liber»l  member  of  Pirllament, 
lemarka  od  thlB  Bnbject  In  his  Hemoin  {Tiaenly  Tears  in  Fariiament,  Lond. 
]8B3,  p.  3SS)  :  "  Alter  the  passing  of  the  Education  and  the  Ballot  Acta,  Hr. 
Forster  beliered  himBsU  strong  enough  to  set  the  Canciu  at  defiance,  but  by 
degrees  the  instinct  of  expediency  which  was  Btrong  within  him,  thongh 
■aduiously  kept  ont  of  notice  by  his  blontness  of  manner,  pravaiied,  and  to 
the  regret  of  all  who  respected  him,  he  conseDted  to  be  pot  Dp  with  others  as 
a  candidate  at  the  next  election,  on  the  suppressed  assurance  that  no  attempt 
would  be  made  in  reality  to  oust  him  io  tavonr  of  a  stranger." 

>Cf.  Edw.  D.  J.  Wilson,  "The  Caacui  and  Its  Consequences"  (Nimlnenth 
CnUupy,  October,  18T8) ;  Geo.  Howell,  "  The  Caucus  System  and  the  Liberal 
Party  "  (JV™  Qvarlerljf  MagotiTU.  October,  1878) ;  W.  Fraiar  Hae,  "  Political 
Clubs  and  Party  Organizations"  iNinetcenth  Cenlury,  May,  1878);  0«o. 
Brodrick,"  liberal  Organizatioa"  (in  the  collection  at  articles  publiBbedandet 
the  title  Political  Studita,  Lond.  1ST9) ;  Th.  Hare,  "  The  Reform  Bill  of  tba 
Fatnre  "  {Fortnightly  RevKW,  1878,  vol.  23) ;  L.  Courtney,  Speech  in  the  Hoosa 
of  Ck>mmons  of  the  8tfa  May,  18TS  {Hanaard,  CCXXXVlll,  1010) ;  Time; 
31st  of  July  and  12th  of  Atigust.  1878 ;  "  The  Goyemment  and  the  Opposition  " 
(B^viiurgh  Rteiva,  January,  1879} ;  Montague  Cooluon,  "  The  Nation  before 
Party  "  (Nineteenth  Century,  May,  1879) ;  Goldwln  Smith,  "  Decline  of  Party 
Qovemoient "  {Macmillan't  Magaxine,  July,  18TT);  Joseph  Chamberlain, 
"A  Now  Political  Organization"  {FortnigkUy  Sevievi,  July,  1877);  "The 
Caucus"  {Ibid.,  Noveml>er,  1878)  both  reprinted  in  pamphlet  form,  Birming- 
ham, 1879;  H.  W.  Crosskey,  "  The  Binuiogham  Liberal  Association  and  ita 
AsaaitaQts"  {Macmiltan'i  Magaziju,  December,  1378);  Speeches  of  J.  Cham- 
berlain at  the  annual  meetings  of  the  Council  of  the  National  Liberal  Federa- 
tion, of  the  22d  January,  1879,  and  3d  February,  1880;  Letter  from  him  to 
ibe  Times,  let  August,  1678;  Letters  of  Mr.  Schnadhorst  to  the  limtt  of  the 
20th  and  23d  Ancutt,  187a 


.coy  Google 


S02  DEHOCRACT  AND  POUTICAI,  PASTIES    [ncoHS  fast 

They  followed  the  impulse  ^ven  them  from  Birmii^bam  with- 
out paying  heed  to  the  attacks  of  the  opponents  of  tixe  system. 
The  lesson  conveyed  by  the  Forster  incident  was  almost  lost  on 
the  Associations,  and  in  other  places  besides  Bradford  the  can- 
didates or  the  old  members  who  sought  re-election  were  sum- 
moned to  undertake  beforehand  to  submit  to  the  decisions  of 
the  Caucus.'  These  tactics,  perhaps,  in  some  places,  as  at 
Bradford,  served  to  conceal,  by  means  of  general  principles 
and  rules,  the  hostility  of  a  section  of  the  party  towards  cer- 
tain candidates  and  groups  of  electors  who  supported  them. 
But  it  is  possible  that  they  were  adopted  in  all  sincerity,  aa 
the  logical  result  of  the  "  plan  "  of  populai  organization,  and 
cases  occurred  in  which,  at  the  request  of  the  candidates  con- 

1  It  may  not  be  amiu  to  quote  the  eue  of  Hr.  (ilnce  Sir)  John  Simon,  mem- 
bal  tor  Dembnry,  who,  like  Fontsr,  refiued  to  labmlt  to  the  demands  at  the 
C^Dciu.  Anticipating  the  reproaches  levelled  at  Forster  of  wUbing  to  be 
retiuned  vlth  the  help  of  Tory  votes,  Simon  declitrad  himself  ready  to  with- 
draw hia  candidature  In  case  a  majority  of  the  liberal  electors,  consulted 
beforebaod.  decided  against  him ;  bnt  he  refosed  lo  recognize  any  authority 
other  than  that  of  the  Uberals  themselves.  The  reasons  which  he  gave  loi 
this  completed  in  some  points  the  aignmcDts  already  used  by  Forster  and  hia 
friends,  "I  object  to  It,"  he  said,  "as  an  lofrlogenient  of  the  electoral 
[reedooi  ot  the  oonatltuency.  It  would  virtually  transler  from  them  the 
whole  electoral  power  ot  the  borongh,  so  lu  at  least  u  the  Llbaral  electors 
are  ooncemed,  t<i  the  Association  or  its  committee.  It  would,  In  effect,  re- 
store the  old  system  of  nomlnatloD  boroughs.  .  .  .  For  a  body  of  gentlemen 
to  form  theiuselvee  Into  an  association,  In  order  to  Introduce  a  candidate  of 
their  choice,  and  to  nse  all  lawful  influence  to  secure  his  return,  Is  a  perfectly 
fair  and  legitimate  object:  but  It  la  quite  anotbei  thing  for  them  to  call  upon 
a  candidate  to  bind  himself  beforehand  to  a  possible  ostracism,  and  by  so 
narrowing  the  field  of  choice,  to  deprive  a  whole  constituency  or  a  whole 
political  party,  of  the  opportunity  ot  exercising  their  tmdoubled  right  to 
retnm  the  man  they  would  most  prefer."  And  what,  according  l«  Mr. 
Simon,  increased  the  impropriety  ot  the  pretension  put  forward  by  the  Can- 
cuSi  was  that  the  engagement  required  from  the  candidate  waa  not  a  reciprocal 
one ;  the  Association  could  not  guarantee  him  the  votes  ot  all  Its  members. 
In  fact,  the  statutes  of  the  Association  of  his  constltneney,  as  well  ai  those 
ot  several  others,  provided  that  It  the  members  did  not  wish  to  vote  for 
the  candidate  adopted  by  the  Caucus,  they  were  lo  abst^n  from  voting  or 
resign  before  taking  any  hostile  step  against  the  candidate  selected  by  tJi« 
committee.  While  this  rule  made  the  support  to  be  given  to  the  candidate  an 
optional  matter,  whereas  the  candidate  bound  himself  unconditionally,  on  the 
other  hand  It  Increased  the  servitude  of  the  electors.  "I  unhesitatingly 
declare  It  aa  my  opinion,  that  a  rule  binding  electors  to  vote,  or  to  abstain 
from  voting.  In  a  particular  way,  or  practically  compelling  tbem  to  make 
known  bow  they  vote  Is  a  violation  of  Uie  spirit  and  object  of  the  Ballot  Aot. 
That  Act  was  Intended  by  mtant  of  teirtcy  to  secare  to  the  elector  oompleta 
freedom  in  the  exercise  of  the  franchise  "  (Timat,  September,  1879). 


.CD,  Google 


FOURTH  CBAP.]        GROWTH  OF  THE  CAUCUS  203 

cerned,  the  chiefs  of  the  Organization,  Mr.  Chamberlain  for  io- 
Btance,  intervened  and  advised  the  local  caucuses  to  adhere  less 
strictly  to  principle  and  not  to  insist  upon  the  submission  of 
the  candidates.  At  the  approach  of  the  general  election  in 
which  the  combined  forces  of  the  Liberal  party  were  about  to 
deliver  the  final  assault  to  dislodge  the  Tories  from  power,  the 
attitude  of  the  caucus  leaders  became  somewhat  more  concilia- 
tory, and  Mr.  Chamberlain  was  anxious  to  give  assurances  that 
"  there  was  no  intention  of  ignoring  their  moderate  friends,  that 
though  out  of  sight  they  were  never  out  of  mind."  "The  Rad- 
icals," Mr.  Chamberlain  remarked,  "are,  I  venture  to  say,  the 
majority  of  the  Liberal  party.  Yet  sufferance  is  the  badge  of 
all  our  tribe,  and  we  have  conceded  — we  are  conceding — we 
will  concede  to  our  moderate  friends,  to  their  convictions,  even 
to  their  prejudices,  if  they  will  meet  us  somewhere  on  the  road 
in  a  similar  spirit"  "  We  feel  we  want  the  aid  of  every  man 
who  is  opposed  to  the  policy  of  the  present  government," ' 


.coy  Google 


FIFTH  CHAPTEE 

THB  CAUCUS   IN   POWBB 
I 

Shortly  afterwards  Parliament  was  diBsolved,  electioneer- 
ing began,  and  Mr.  Gladstone  commenced  his  famous  Midlo- 
thian campaign.  The  Tory  seats  went  down  one  after  another, 
and  finally  the  Conservative  majority  was  replaced  by  an  enor- 
mous Liberal  majority.  Mr.  Chamberlain  thereupon  uttered  a 
shout  of  triumph  and  defiance :  "  By  this  token  know  ye  the 
power  of  the  Caucus  and  bow  before  it ! "  This  was  the  pur- 
port of  the  proclamation  which  he  issued  in  the  form  of  a  letter 
to  the  Times.  Mr.  Chamberlain  pointed  out  that  in  almost 
every  borough  which  possessed  representative  Liberal  Associa- 
tions, "  sometimes  called  the  '  Caucus '  by  those  who  have  not 
taken  the  trouble  to  acquaint  themselves  with  the  details  of 
the  Birmingham  system,"  the  Liberal  candidates  had  been  vic- 
torious. "This  remarkable  success  is  a  proof  that  the  new 
Organization  has  succeeded  in  uniting  all  sections  of  the  party, 
and  it  is  a  conclusive  answer  to  the  fears  which  some  timid 
Liberals  entertained  that  the  system  would  be  manipulated  in 
the  interest  of  particular  crotchets.  It  baa  on  the  contrary 
deepened  and  extended  the  interest  felt  in  the  contest,  it  has 
fastened  a  sense  of  personal  responsibility  on  the  electors,  and 
it  has  secured  the  active  support,  for  the  most  part  voluntary 
and  unpaid,  of  thousands  of  voters,  who  have  been  willing  to 
work  hard  for  the  candidates  in  whose  selection  they  had  for 
the  first  time  had  an  influential  voice."  The  candidates  chosen 
were  Liberals  of  a  firmer  and  more  decided  stamp;  a  well-filled 
purse  was  not  a  sufficient  passport;  preference  was  accorded 
to  candidates  who  had  won  their  spurs  in  political  contests 
and  had  given  proof  of  loyalty  to  their  principles  and  of  ca- 
pacity to  uphold  them.     "Altogether,"  concluded  Mr.  Chamber- 


.coy  Google 


PIPTH  CHAP.]  THE   CAUCUS   IN  POWER  206 

lain, "  for  good  or  for  evil,  the  Organization  has  now  taken  firm 
root  in  this  country,  and  politicians  will  do  well  to  give  it  in 
future  a  leas  prejudiced  attention.'"  Mr.  Sohnadhorst  pro- 
claimed in  hia  turn  that  "it  could  be  no  longer  denied  that  the 
Caucus  waa  a  great  fact" 

A  few  days  afterwards  Mr>  Chamberlain  went  stnught  into 
the  new  Gladstone  Uinistiy,  with  a  seat  in  the  Cabinet,'  with- 
out having  ever  held  a  subordinate  ministerial  office,  and  with 
barely  four  years  of  parliamentary  life  behind  him.  Among 
the  comments  to  which  this  rapid  elevation  gave  rise,  some 
accounted  for  it  by  the  services  which  Mr.  Chamberlain  had 
rendered  to  the  Liberal  party  by  the  introduction  of  the  Cau- 
cus, and  which  Mr.  Gladstone  was  anxious  to  acknowledge. 
This  was  supposed  to  be  the  opinion  of  Mr.  Chamberlain  him- 
self.' In  reality,  there  was  not  much  foundation  for  Mr. 
Chamberlain's  remarks  on  the  glorious  part  played  by  the  Cau- 
cus, and  still  leas  for  the  view  that  Mr.  Gladstone  so  far 
admitted  the  truth  of  them  as  to  feel  bound  to  give  the  leader 
of  the  new  Organization  a  place  in  his  Ministry.  Mr.  Cham- 
berlain's elevation  was  due  to  considerations  unconnected 
with  hia  electoral  activity.*  As  to  the  part  which  the  Caucus 
was  supposed  to  have  played  in  the  elections  of  1880,  it  was 
very  far  from  having  been  as  important  as  Mr.  Chamberlain 
tried  to  make  out.  The  factors  which  had  brought  about  the 
defeat  of  Lord  Beaconsfield  were  many  and  various.  First  of 
all  came  the  immense  popularity  of  Mr.  Gladstone,  hia  pas- 
sionate eloquence  which  stirred  the  masses  as  in  the  time  of 
the  agitation  against  the  "  Bulgarian  atrocities  " ;  the  adventur- 
ous foreign  policy  of  Disraeli  which  kept  the  country  continn- 

1  Tlmen,  I3th  of  April,  1880, 

I  In  England,  as  Is  well  known,  the  HtniBtry  or  Admintittvtion  U  dUtln- 
gulsbed  from  tbe  Cabinet.  The  latMr  contaloB  onlj  the  moat  Importaot 
members  of  the  Sfiniitry,  selected  by  tbe  Premier,  ao  that  not  oal;  the 
Under-Secretaries  of  State  and  tbe  great  officers  of  tbe  Royal  Household 
vbo  change  witb  the  Hiniitry,  but  even  some  heads  of  departmeata,  are  or 
may  be  outside  the  Cabinet, 

•  Cf.  Frazer  Rae,  "  Tbe  Gancos  tn  Elngland,"  InternatUmal  Seinta,  M.Y., 
Aagnat,  1880. 

*  It  appears  that  Mr.  Qladstone,  wisbloK  to  take  a  repreoeDtatiTe  of  the 
advanced  section  into  tbe  MiDlstry,  selected  Mr.  Chamberlain  by  a  proeesa 
of  ellmlnatloQ,  all  the  other  candidates  having  been  rejected  for  various 


.CD,  Google 


206  DEMOCRACY  AND  POLITICAL  PARTIES    [sscond  part 

ally  in  an  unsettled  state  and  affected  the  stability  and  security 
of  the  immediate  future,  so  necessary  to  a  mercantile  nation, 
had  lost  the  Conservative  Ministry  a  good  many  votes;  many 
moderates  had  voted  for  the  Liberals  not  so  much  from  a  visb 
to  bring  them  into  power  as  with  the  object  of  turning  out 
the  too  enterprising  Disraeli.  The  economic  crisis  of  the  pre- 
ceding year  also  weighed  very  heavily  in  the  balance  against 
the  Tories;  for  however  limited  may  be  the  sphere  of  influence 
of  the  Government,  the  lower-class  voter  is  always  ready  to  lay 
the  blame  on  it,  to  make  it  responsible  for  a  bad  harvest  and  for 
bad  times.  Not  that  he  is  sure  that "  the  other  side  "  will  bring 
good  times  with  them,  but  the  experiment  can  always  be  tried. 
This  line  of  argument,  which  is  very  familiar  to  the  English 
elector,  caused  a  displacement  of  many  votes  in  the  elections  of 
1880.  And  what  finally  turned  the  electoral  scale  waa  the  al- 
tc^ether  extraordinary  number  of  new  voters  who  took  the 
Liberal  side.'  The  Caucus  seized  on  these  voters  in  the  large 
towns.  There  it  rendered  real  service  by  stimulating  their 
enthusiasm  and  bringing  them  up  in  compact  battalions  to  the 
poll.  But  the  electoral  arrangements  made  by  the  Liberal  Whip 
were,  as  the  other  side  admitted,  not  less  effective;  the  well- 
known  Whip  Adam,  who  had  grown  grey  in  office,  succeeded 
in  bringing  the  whole  strength  of  moderate  Liberalism  into  the 
field*  As  regards  the  rural  constituencies,  the  Caucus  could 
not  even  put  forward  any  pretensions,  the  Birmingham  system 
was  only  just  being  introduced  into  the  counties,  and  yet  the 
success  of  the  Liberals  was  not  less  marked  in  that  quarter; 
they  won  about  fifty  seats  in  the  counties.  As  for  the  claim 
that  the  Caucus  had  ensured  the  triumph  of  a  new  class  of 
candidates  by  curbing  the  power  of  the  "well-filled  purse,"  the 
Caucus  did  not  succeed  in  this,  to  judge  by  the  fact  that  the 
elections  of  1880  rank  in  the  electoral  annals  of  England  as 
among  those  moat  tainted  with  corruption.  The  trial  of  elec- 
tion petitions  even  disclosed  the  fact  that  certain  Associations 
of  "hundreds  "  had  been  privy  to  acts  of  corruption :  the  old 

I  Ct.  foi  ths  aUtfstlci  of  the  electioDS  Political  Parties,  their  Present  Poii- 
tlon  and  Protpeeti,  an  argumentative  comparison  □[  the  BgnrsB  of  the  laat 
two  jyeneral  elections,  by  Gallowsy  RifCi;,  Lond.  1881. 

>  cr.  Die  speech  by  Sir  H.  Stafford  Moitbcote,  the  llloMrionB  Conservative 
leader,  of  the  4th  October,  ISSS,  at  Qlaagow. 


.coy  Google 


nrra  cbip.]  THE  CAUCUS  IN  POWER  207 

political  manners  and  customs  vera  stronger  than  the  fine 
programmes  and  the  professions  of  faith  of  the  Caucus.  The 
powerful  contingent  contributed  tyy  the  moderate  Liberals 
in  the  electoral  battle  to  a  certain  extent  again  confirmed 
the  view  of  the  Whigs,  who  maintained  that  the  old  social 
conditions  of  England  and  the  old  influences  had  not  disap- 
peared. 

Nevertheless  the  audacity  and  noisy  assurance  with  which 
the  power  of  the  Caucus  was  paraded,  did,  under  the  circum- 
stances, make  an  impression  on  public  opinion  and  give  it  a 
greaterndea  of  the  importance  of  the  Birmingham  system  than 
the  latter  really  possessed.  The  Tories,  who  were  loud  in 
attributing  their  defeat  to  the  Caucus,  naively  did  their  beat  to 
contribute  to  the  system  of  advertisement  with  which  the  Bir- 
mingham group  were  indefatigably  and  boldly  pushing  their 
Oi^nization,  and  which  became  one  of  their  great  weapons. 
If  I  refer  here  to  these  tactics  of  the  leaders  of  the  Caucus,  it 
is  not  so  much  to  convict  them  of  resorting  to  the  methods  of 
puffery  employed  by  modem  business  men  as  to  draw  attention 
to  the  appearance  with  the  Caucus  in  English  political  life  of 
a  conventional  force  confronting  real,  living  forces ;  and  it  is 
in  order  to  point  out  the  distance  which  separates  the  former 
from  the  latter  in  this  particular  case  that  I  have  examined  the 
various  factors  which  decided  the  elections  of  1880.  Present- 
ing all  the  appearance  of  real  forces,  conventional  forces  act 
like  them  on  the  conscience  and  the  will ;  we  admit  that  they 
have  an  existence  of  their  own,  we  take  this  into  account,  we 
attach  importance  to  it,  and  shape  our  conduct  accordingly. 
Just  as  in  the  financial  market  bills  issued,  endorsed,  and 
discounted,  though  possessing  no  real  value,  nevertheless  dis- 
chai^  all  the  functions  of  exchange,  at  all  events  until  the 
next  settlement  or  the  first  crash. 


After  the  acoeasioD  to  power  of  the  Liberal  Ministry  a  good 
many  Liberals  thought  that  the  work  of  the  Oi^anization  was 
at  an  end,  now  that  the  power  of  the  Tory  party  was  destroyed 
and  that  Parliament  contained  an  enormous  Liberal  majority 
which  faithfully  reflected  the  feeling  of  the  country.     This  was 


.coy  Google 


208  DEMOCRACY  AND  POLITICAL  FABTTES    [fsoon>  pakt 

not  the  opinioD  of  the  leaders  of  the  Caucus,  on  the  oontrar; 
they  believed  that  its  career  was  only  beginning.*  Considering 
itself  to  be  the  most  genuine  depository  of  the  wishes  and  ideas 
of  English  Liberalism,  the  Organization  held  that  it  was  its 
duty  to  bring  them  to  the  knowle(^e  of  the  Gorernment  and 
to  aid  it  in  carrying  them  into  effect  The  first  part  of  this 
mission,  which  was  undertaken  by  the  central  organ  of  the 
Caucus,  the  National  Liberal  Federation,  did  not  present  much 
difBculty  and  was  of  little  use.  The  legislative  reforms  rec- 
ommended by  the  Federation  (the  extension  of  the  suffrt^e 
to  rural  populations,  the  reform  of  the  land  laws,  more 
stringent  measures  against  electoral  corruption)  had  long  been 
before  the  Liberal  party,  and  the  only  practicEil  object  of  the 
resolutions  of  the  Caucus,  voted  at  intervals  with  much 
pomp,  was  to  call  the  attention  of  the  Government  to  the 
l^slative  duties  incumbent  on  it,  to  serve  as  a  reminder  to 
it,  and  at  the  same  time  to  invest  these  reforms  with  popular 
sanction,  or,  at  all  events,  to  convey  the  impression  of  this 
by  constantly  setting  in  motion  the  machinery  of '  extra-parlia- 
mentary organization. 

If  the  Caucus  did  in  fact  possess  the  power  and  the  authority 
to  give  the  Government  these  hints  or  this  sanction,  how  could 
it  discharge  the  second  duty  which  it  assumed,  that  is,  help  the 
Ministry  to  make  these  measures  go  down  with  the  majority  ? 
According  to  the  traditional  notions  of  English  parliamentary 
government,  the  co-operation  of  the  Ministry  with  the  majority 
is  based  on  mutual  confidence,  and  if  this  is  non-existent, 
no  power  on  earth  can  create  it;  there  remains  only  the 
heroic  remedy  of  separation,  of  an  appeal  to  the  country  by 
means  of  fresh  elections.  The  Caucus  held  that  between  the 
Government  and  its  supporters  there  was  room  for  a  third  body. 
The  parliamentary  situation  which  grew  up  soon  after  Mr.  Glad- 
stone's accession  to  office  seemed  to  it  to  demand  this  interven- 
tion. The  Liberal  majority  of  1880,  like  that  of  1868,  was  not 
homogeneous,  and  Mr.  Gladstone's  legislative  proposals  soon 
created  alarm  among  his  moderate  followers.  To  pacify  Ire- 
laud,  he  proposed  a  sweeping  reform  of.  the  land  laws,  which, 
to  a  certain  extent,  upset  the  received  ideas  regarding  rights  of 


.coy  Google 


FIFTH  CHAP.]-  THE   CACCDS  IN   POWER  209 

property  and  freedom  of  contract,  hy  empowering  the  judicial 
authorities  to  fix  a  fair  rent  for  the  land,  in  spite  of  the  land- 
lords and  of  existing  contracts.  This  measure  opened  a  door 
to  all  kinds  of  apprehensions  on  the  part  of  the  moderates;  it 
seemed  to  them  to  create  a  most  dangerous  precedent  for  Eng- 
land itself.  On  the  other  hand,  the  Irish  members  led  b; 
Famell  demanded  Home  Rule  and  made  all  progress  in  Parlia- 
ment well-nigh  impossible  by  systematic  otstruction.  In  these 
circumstances  the  Caucus  considered  that  it  "had  an  obvious 
duty  to  dischai^e"  in  invitiog  the  local  Organizations  of  the 
party  to  bring  the  refractory  members,  who  did  not  follow  the 
Government  with  sufficient  docility,  to  their  senses.  The  Com- 
mittee of  the  Federation  sent  out  a  circular  to  all  the  federated 
Associations,  in  which  it  vehemently  denounced  the  lukewarm 
members  of  the  majority.  "  Within  a  few  weeks  of  their  ac- 
cession to  office,"  ran  the  document,  "  it  became  apparent  that 
among  the  members  of  the  House  of  Commons  who  had  secured 
Liberal  seats,  there  were  some  who  were  not  heartily  loyal  to 
their  leaders.  .  .  .  During  the  present  session  the  same  dis- 
loyalty has  reappeared  and  has  threatened  the  Government  with 
very  serious  embarrassments.  .  .  .  Liberal  members  recently 
supported  an  amendment  hostile  to  the  Irish  Bill  of  the  Gov- 
ernment or  intentionally  abstained  from  voting  against  it." 
Declaring  such  a  state  of  things  to  be  intolerable,  the  Com- 
mittee of  the  Federation  called  on  the  Associations  to  take  the 
measures  required  by  the  situation.' 

"This  circular  produced  the  effect  which  the  Committee  hoped 
to  secure,"  it  soon  announced  with  satisfaction.  Telegrams 
or  letters  from  the  local  Associations  poured  in  on  the  mem- 
bers ;  in  more  or  less  courteons  terms  they  were  ordered  to  vote 
for  the  Irish  Bill  as  it  stood,  not  to  move  or  support  amend- 
ments, to  co-operate  more  loyally  with  the  Government.  At 
Birmingham,  in  a  formal  meeting  of  the  "800,"  notice  was 
given  that  all  the  disloyal  Liberal  members  would  be  turned 
out  of  their  seats.  Some  of  them  accepted  the  warning  and 
obediently  fell  into  line  behind  the  Government  Encouraged 
hj  this  success,  the  Caucus  took  the  reins  and  especially  the 
whip  firmly  in  hand.  As  soon  as  the  Ministry  met  with  re- 
sistance or  with  a  display  of  hostile  feeling  in  either  House, 
ClrcnUr  of  the  2gth  June,  18S1. 


.coy  Google 


810  DEMOCRACY  AND  POUTICAL  PARTIES    Cwco""" "" 

the  managers  of  the  central  Caucus  let  loose  the  AssooiatioDB, 
urged  them  to  hold  meetingB,  to  send  monster  petitions  to 
Parliament,  to  vote  resolutions  of  protest  or  indignation,  to 
remonstrate  with  their  members  or  even  to  give  them  direct 
orders.  "  We  ask  you,"  ran  the  Birmingham  circulars  some- 
times, "to  put  yourselves  at  once  in  communication  with 
your  representatives  in  the  House  of  Commons,  strongly 
urging  tiiem  to  be  in  their  places  on  .  .  .  next  and  to  vot« 
for.  ..."  As  the  legislative  measures  in  regard  to  which 
this  interventiOD  was  demanded  seemed  in  themselves  worthy 
of  support  to  a  large  section  of  opinion,  the  Associations  had 
no  difficulty  in  complying  with  the  proposals  which  came  from 
Birminghiuu ;  without  exactly  wishing  to  honoor  or  obey  the 
Conunittee  of  the  Federation,  they  co-operated  in  a  common 
cause.  The  mode  of  action  recommended  to  them  provoked 
all  the  fewer  scruples  because  the  Associations  were  chiefly 
composed  of  militant  politicians,  and  then  it  invested  them 
with  a  power,  with  an  authority,  the  exercise  of  which  is 
always  welcome.  Every  little  Feddlington  Association  liked 
to  indulge  in  the  idea  that  the  fate  of  great  measures  de- 
pended on  the  energy  of  its  attitude,  that  the  great  departments 
of  the  State  had  to  reckon  with  it 

By  force  of  habit  the  co-operation  of  the  local  Associations 
with  Birmingham  became,  so  to  speak,  automatic ;  those  who 
were  jealous  of  their  independence  asserted  it  by  paraphras- 
ing the  resolutions  sent  from  Birmingham,  but  they  voted  them 
all  the  same,  convened  public  meetings,  inveighed  against  the 
members  who  were  not  loyal  to  Mr.  Gladstone,  etc.  A  mere 
telegram  from  the  bigw^  of  the  Caucus  was  enough  to  set  the 
Associations  in  motion  throughout  the  country,  and  the  lion 
growled,  screamed,  roared,  with  pleasure  or  with  anger,  aa 
occasion  required.  It  will  be  recollected  that  when  the  Fed- 
eration was  inaugurated,  in  1877,  one  of  its  founders,  when 
giving  a  glimpse  of  the  new  vistas  which  this  Organization 
opened  to  the  democracy,  exclaimed :  "  It  is  no  longer  possible 
for  the  leaders  in  London  to  draw  upon  the  people  of  the 
country  and  say  two  months  after  date  pay  to  our  order  in 
the  country  for  an  agitation  on  a  particular  purpose."  The 
Caucus,  in  fact,  had  changed  matters;  henceforth,  the  bill 
was   drawn   at   Birmingham   on   behalf  of  the   people  and 


.coy  Google 


WTTH  CHip.]  THE  CAUCUS  IN  POWER  211 

at  two  days'  sight  instead  of  two  months'.'  The  rapidity 
with  which  the  demonstrations  of  the  caucuses  followed  the 
parliamentary  events  that  served  them  aa  a  pretext  was  alone 
sufficient  to  prove  how  little  thej  were  due  to  spontaneous 
movements  of  opinion.  Mr.  Chamberlain's  remarks  on  people 
who  "assume,  without  rhyme  or  reason,  the  existence  in  tjiis 
country  of  maQufactories  of  political  opinion,  where  zeal  and 
unanimity  are  produced  to  order"'  sounded  less  sarcastic  as 
they  came  to  correspond  more  and  more  with  the  facts.  The 
whole  process  of  agitation  which  was  methodically  applied 
throughout  the  country,  all  the  resolutions,  circulars,  etc, 
emanated  from  three  or  four  persons  in  the  offices  of  the  Federa- 
tion. It  was  supposed  that  Mr.  Chamberlain  was  acting  with 
these  persons  or  rather  standing  behind  them,  that  it  was  he 
who  was  pulling  the  strings :  being  a  member  of  a  government 
which  needed  the  support  of  public  opinion  as  well  aa  head  of 
the  extrarparliamentary  Organization  engaged  in  setting  this 
opinion  in  motion  it  was  evidently  he  who  touched  the  springs 
from  his  place  in  the  Cabinet,  for  the  benefit  of  the  latter. 
Plausible  as  this  conclusion  seemed,  Mr.  Chamberlain  pro- 
tested against  it;  he  asseiled  tiiat  since  he  had  joined  the 
Ministry,  his  connection  with  the  Caucus  had  ceased ;  that  he 
was  only  a  subscriber  to  the  Birmingham  Liberal  Association} 
that  he  paid  his  subscription  and  that  was  all.' 

i  Wth  refcard  U>  Hi.  QladatoDe's  Irish  Bill  the  Houm  of  Lords  ordered  an 
enqoirr  which  vim  viewed  b;  a  good  man;  Liberals  u  a  msnltestation  of 
hottlUty  against  the  Ministry,  Hardly  had  the  decision  ot  the  Upper  HoDse 
been  taksD  when  the  Caucus  convened  a  meeting  by  telegraph,  ot  delegates  ot 
Associatlona  thronghout  the  Kingdom  for  the  next  day  bat  oue ;  thslr  protest 
against  the  enquiry  waa  intended  to  intimidate  the  House  ot  Lords,  aod  check 
Its  tendencies  towards  Independence.  The  delegates  flocked  to  the  meeting 
from  all  quarters,  and  the  Caucns  boasted  that  its  summons  had  been  obeyed 
with  such  alacrity  that  the  Scotch  members  had  not  hesitated  to  do  violence 
to  their  Presbyterian  scruples  by  traTelling  on  Sunday,  in  order  to  get  to 
the  meeting  In  time. 

s  I^  CouciM,  p.  21. 

I  ••  The  noble  Lord  (Randolph  Charchlll)  says  I  am  the  Birmingham  caucns. 
Again  I  am  much  flattered  by  this  description  ot  my  Influencs  and  ablUtif, 
but  it  is  a  total  mistake.  Except  that  I  am  a  subscriber,  although  I  believe 
not  one  ot  the  largest  sabacriben.  .  .  ."  {Hajuard,  VoL  CCXCm,  p.  073, 
aoth  October,  1884). 


.coy  Google 


DEMOCRACY  AND  POLITICAL  PAETIES    [ai 


III 

Among  the  many  questions  by  means  of  whicb  the  Gauons 
interfered  in  the  working  of  the  Constitution,  none  gave  it  an 
opportunity  of  appearing  in  so  many  aspects,  of  showing  how  far- 
reaching  and  penetrating  its  intervention  could  become,  as  the 
reform  of  the  Procedure  of  the  House  of  Commons  undertaken 
in  1882.  Party  tactics  in  Parliament  had  long  since  introduced 
habits  of  obstruction  in  debate  in  order  to  hamper  the  Govern- 
ment, to  impede  their  work  of  legislation  by  starting  useless 
and  futile  discussions  which  simply  wasted  the  time  of  the 
House.  After  the  extension  of  the  suSri^,  which  brought 
into  Parliament  representatives  of  a  more  democratic  stamp 
who  were  anxious  to  keep  themselves  before  the  public,  the 
loquacity  of  the  members  of  the  House  perceptibly  increased 
and  contributed  in  no  small  measure  to  the  useless  prolonga- 
tion of  debate.  This  obstruction,  which  was  sometimes  delib- 
erate, sometimes  spontaneous,  reached  its  climax  when  the 
Irish  Home  Rulers  led  by  Pamell  converted  it  into  a  system 
and  began  to  practise  it  with  extraordinary  zeal  and  skill.  It 
was  impossible  to  stop  them,  for  the  old  Procedure  allowed 
the  debate  to  go  on  as  long  as  there  were  orators  ready  to 
speak  and  able  to  command  an  audience  large  enough  to  form 
the  quorum  required  by  the  rules.  If  the  speaker  could  only 
secure  thirty-nine  indulgent  listeners,  it  was  impossible  to 
silence  him.  To  put  down  the  obstructionists,  Mr.  Gladstone 
proposed  a  new  Procedure  which  imposed  serious  restrictions 
on  the  unlimited  freedom  of  speech  in  parliamentary  debate, 
the  most  important  being  the  introduction  of  the  closure.  In 
future  the  majority  was  to  be  empowered  on  certain  conditions 
to  close  the  debate  when  it  thought  fit  This  proposal  created 
great  excitement  not  only  among  the  Tory  Opposition  but  in 
the  ministerial  ranks.  Several  Liberal  members,  including 
representatives  of  the  extreme  Radical  section,  held  that  too 
little  discussion  was  still  more  fatal  than  too  much,  that  the 
"  right  of  free  speech  was  more  valuable  than  all  the  measures 
in  the  ministerial  portfolio."  Besides,  three  years  had  not 
elapsed  since  Mr.  Gladstone  himself,  under  the  Beaconsfield 
Ministry  which  had  to  put  up  with  a  good  deal  from  the  ob- 
structive tactics  of  its  opponents,  defended  obstruction  as  a 


.coy  Google 


nriB  cuF.]  THE  CAUCUS  IN  POWEB  SIS 

legitimate  weapon  for  minorities  and  as  a  necessary  erll.  "  The 
House  of  Commons,"  he  said,  "  is,  and  we  must  hope  will  con- 
tinue to  be,  above  all  and  before  all  a  free  assembly ;  and  if 
this  is  the  case,  it  must  submit  to  pay  for  its  freedom.'" 
The  obstructionist  practices  of  the  Irish  io  1880-Sl,  which 
passed  all  bounds,  had  made  Mr.  Gladstone  change  his  mind. 
Kor  did  the  Liberals  and  the  old  Radicals  refuse  to  take  them 
into  account,  but  they  deemed  it  necessary  to  surround  the 
disoretioiiary  power  which  the  Ministry  demanded  for  its 
majority  with  serious  guarantees. 

Hardly  had  the  opposition  to  the  plans  of  the  Ministry 
broken  out  within  the  walls  of  Parliament  than  the  Caucus 
interrened.  An  imperious  circular  from  Birmingham  de- 
nounced it  to  the  federated  Associations  and  urged  them  to 
declare  to  all  whom  it  might  concern  "  in  the  most  energetic  form 
and  without  the  slightest  delay  "  that  they  expected  the  Govern- 
ment to  be  supported  by  the  whole  of  the  Liberal  party  in  this 
conjuncture.  The  centeal  Caucus  pointed  out  that  the  closure 
was  indispensable  for  getting  the  various  measures  in  which  the 
Federation  was  interested  passed  by  the  House.  These  ezpla> 
nations  only  confirmed  the  apprehensions  and  suspicions  as  to  the 
real  significance  of  the  proposed  Procedure.  Rightly  or  wrongly, 
people  feared  that  it  was  to  be  used  more  for  paralyzing  the 
Opposition  than  for  preventing  obstruction;  that  in  deference 
to  the  militant  Radicals  a  whole  series  of  measures  wonld 
be  placed  before  Parliament  and  that  they  would  be  forced 
through  the  House,  by  means  of  the  closure.  The  idea  pre- 
vailed that  the  latter  was  "  part  of  a  vast  scheme  of  political 
manipulation"  set  on  foot  by  the  Birmingham  group,  that  it 
would  be  the  counterpart  of  the  Caucus  in  Parliament,  and 
that  it  would  enable  the  former  to  control  the  latter  and 
transform  it  into  a  chamber  for  registering  the  decrees  of  the 
Caucus  and  of  the  Press  of  the  party.  To  dispel  these  appre- 
hensions, Mr.  Gladstone  stated  in  the  House  that  the  Liberals 
would  never  make  a  party  weapon  of  the  closure ;  that  they 
would  not  use  it  against  the  constitutioual  Opposition.  On 
the  contrary,  rejoined  a  spokesman  of  the  "yoimg  Radicals," 

'  "  Tbe  CoDQCrj  and  the  Government,"  Nijieteenth  Ctnlury,  Angnat,  1879. 
Cf.  Hr.  Qladstone'a  speech  a^inxt  the  closure  delivered  in  the  House  ot 
Commons  od  the  Slth  of  Februry,  1B80  {Hantard,  Vol.  CCL,  p.  Vm). 


.coy  Google 


SU  DEMOCRACT  AND  POLITICAL  PARTIES    [ucam  fa.bt 

Mr,  Laboucfaere,  if  this  were  so,  it  would  not  be  worth  while 
coming  down  to  the  House  to  vote  for  the  ministerial  proposal. 
In  "stating  the  views  ot  the  democracy  on  this  point,"  Mr. 
Labouchere  expressed  the  hope  that  the  Government  would 
consider  it  its  first  duty  to  use  the  closure  in  the  interests  of 
the  party.  This  pleasing  contingency  was  supplemeuted  in 
his  mind  by  the  prospect  of  elections  held  as  frequently  as 
possible,  in  which  measures  would  be  submitted  to  t^  people, 
and  after  the  people  had  come  to  the  conclusion  that  they 
ought  to  be  adopted  and  that  the  Ministry  representing  the 
majority  had  an  imperative  mandate  to  pass  them,  all  dis- 
cussion in  the  House  would  be  needless,  for  it  would  have 
taken  place  befordiand.  By  proceeding  in  this  way  the  Liberal 
party  would  very  soon  bring  the  country  into  harmony  with  the 
"  spirit  of  the  a^."  * 

if  the  apprehensions  of  old  Badicals,  who  thought  that  the 
closure  meant  the  end  of  liberty  of  speech,  were  as  exaggerated 
as  the  hopes  of  "young  Radices,"  who  considered  it  the  be- 
ginning of  the  "  Radical  democratic  Millennium  "  in  which  the 
functions  of  Parliament  would  be  reduced  to  those  of  a  regis- 
trar of  the  people's  decrees,  the  attitude  of  the  Caucus  justified 
the  one  and  encour^ed  the  other.  The  appeal  issued  by  the 
central  Caucus  found  a  hearing,  all  the  Associations  complied 
with  its  request  and  gave  notice  to  their  members  to  discon- 
tinue all  opposition  to  the  ministerial  plan,  and  members 
who  had  already  taken  up  a  position  in  public  against  the 
closure  e^erly  recanted  and  informed  their  Associations  that 
they  would  not  fail  to  vote  for  the  Government.  When  the 
debate  on  the  new  Procedure  began,  a  Liberal  member  (Mar- 
riott) moved  an  amendment  hostile  to  the  principle  of  clos- 
ure by  a  simple  majority.  He  was  imniediat«ly  summoned 
to  appear  before  the  Liberal  Association  of  the  borough  which 
he  represented  in  the  House  to  justify  his  conduct.  A  con- 
siderable number  of  his  Liberal  colleagues  approved  of  the 
amendment.  But  the  Ministry  threatened  to  dissolve  if  it 
was  carried.  If  a  dissolution  took  place,  members  would 
have  to  run  the  risk  of  a  new  election,  with  the  Caucus  lying 
in  wait  for  those  who  were  not  loycd  to  the  Ministry.  Placed 
between  two  fires,  most  of  the  Liberal  members  surrendered, 
1  Hantard,  Vol.  CCLXXIV,  pp.  678  seq. 


.coy  Google 


FUTB  CHiP.]  THE  CAUCUS  IN  POWER  215 

and  the  hundred  or  bo  of  members  of  the  majority  who  were 
supposed  to  be  in  favour  of  Marriott's  amendment  dwindled 
to  five  on  a  division,  without  counting  sixteen  who  took  ref- 
uge in  abatentioii.  Although  the  amendment  waa  rejected, 
the  Government  was  still  far  from  having  won  the  day ;  it  was 
ooly  a  negative  victory.  The  united  forces  of  the  Consecva- 
tiveB,  independent  Liberals,  and  individualist  Radicals  con- 
tinned  to  attack  the  Government  plan.  Mr.  Gladstone  made 
some  concessions  in  favour  of  minorities.  But  the  Caucus 
considered  them  inopportune;  it  insisted  on  the  majority 
pure  and  simple.  The  Associations  spent  the  parliamentary 
recess  in  stirring  up  the  country  on  behalf  of  the  closure; 
they  organized  meetings,  voted  resolutions,  got  up  a  quantity 
of  petitions.  Thereupon  Mr.  Gladstone,  believing  that  pub- 
lic opinion  was  on  Ms  side,  withdrew  the  concessions  be  had 
made,  demanded  the  closure  by  a  simple  majority  and  carried 
it  by  the  vote  of  almost  the  whole  of  the  Liberal  members. 

Whether  the  ministerial  measures  -on  behalf  of  which  the 
party  Organization  exerted  itself  so  actively  were  excellent 
and  necessary  or  dangerous  and  useless,  —  we  have  not  to 
discuss  the  point  in  this  work, — the  fact  of  the  intervention 
of  the  Caucus  and  the  circumstances  under  which  it  took 
place  threw  a  very  crude  light  on  the  Caucus  itself:  they 
revealed,  so  to  speak,  its  nature,  its  tendencies,  its  methods 
of  action.  Conceived  with  the  design  of  opposing  minori- 
ties in  the  constituencies  and  having  from  its  birth  adopted 
as  a  maxim  that  a  minority  is  made  to  be  domineered  over  if 
not  crushed  by  the  majority,  the  Caucus  now  interposed  be- 
tween the  majority  and  the  minority  in  Parliament  and  set 
one  against  the  other.  Within  the  ranks  of  the  majority 
hesitation  is  expressed,  several  of  its  members  scrutinize  their 
opinions,  examine  their  conscience  to  see  if  they  can  follow 
the  leaders  of  the  party.  "  What  an  idle  question,"  exclaims 
the  Caucus;  "as  members  of  the  majority  you  owe  obedience 
to  its  chief;  look  sharp  or  I'll  dismiss  you  as  imfaithful  ser- 
vants ! "  A  parliamentary  party  leader  is  thus  converted  into 
a  party  dictator.*    But  how  is  be  to  assert  his  dictatorship  ? 

1  "  WhsD  Ht.  Qladatone  and  tbe  QoTernnent  m«t  the  House  of  Commona 
uid  said  It  was  Impossible  (or  them  to  ooDduct  tbe  busiueBs  with  the  present 
aDtlqn»ted  tdIm  .  .  .  there  was  only  one  course  open  to  eveiy  loykl  member 


.coy  Google 


2ie  DBMOCRACr  AND  POLITICAL  PARTIES    [bbcorv  past 

The  members  of  the  party  are  not  appointed  by  him ;  they 
derive  their  authority  from  the  free  choice  of  the  electors. 
"No  doubt,  but  I  am  the  electors,  the  constituency,"  rejoins 
the  Caucus,  "  and  it  is  me  that  you  will  have  to  deal  with." 
But  after  all,  cannot  the  Ministry  and  the  majority,  the  Got- 
emment  and  the  House,  come  to  an  understanding  by  means 
of  mutual  concessions,  which  are  the  essence  of  all  parliamen- 
tary life  ?  "  Sheer  waste  of  time,"  observes  the  Caucus ;  "  we 
have  already  voted  resolutions  on  the  point-in  onr  meetings; 
no  hf^ling,  it's  a  case  of  Hobson's  choice."  Relations  be- 
tween majorities  and  minorities,  of  the  leader  of  the  party 
with  its  members,  of  a  member  of  Parliament  with  its  con- 
stituents, between  Parliament  and  outside  opinion  —  in  all 
these  the  Caucus  intervened  as  an  arbiter  if  not  as  a  master. 


IV 

In  interfering  on  all  important  occasions,  for  the  purpose  of 
supporting  the  Government,  the  Liberal  Associations  controlled 
by  the  Birmingham  Caucus  considered  that  they  were  simply 
discharging  their  duty  of  serving  aa  the  organ  of  public  opinion. 
Devoting  themselves  to  it  with  such  zeal  that  occasionally 
some  of  them  gave  their  approval  to  Government  measures  of 
which  they  did  not  even  know  the  main  features,  the  Associa- 
tions nevertheless  kept  in  the  background  in  cases  in  which  it 
would  have  been  not  less  important  to  know  the  public  feel- 
ing of  which  they  were  supposed  to  be  the  mouthpiece.  This 
abstention  was  most  remarkable  in  connection  with  the  highly 
dramatic  incidents  of  the  foreign  policy  of  the  Gladstone  Min- 
istry. As  is  well  known,  this  policy  was  not  attended  with 
success.  Drifting  from  indecision  to  hesitation,  from  weak- 
ness to  feebleness,  the  Cabinet  met  with  one  disaster  after 
another,  in  every  quarter,  in  the  Transvaal,  in  Egypt,  in  the 
Soudan,  in  Afghanistan.  The  Liberal  Associations  and  the 
Birmingham  Federation,  which  during  the  Eastern  crisis 
fretted  and  fumed  throughout  the  country  and  denounced 
the  Turcophil  attitude  of  Disraeli  as  an  insult  to  civilization 


ot  tha  Ubaral  party,  t«  iaer^e«  hit  pertoual  amvietioia  in  order  to  tuppoH 
Mr.  Gladttane "  —  said  Mr.  SchnadhorBt  st  a  meeting  in  Brighton,  Mt. 
MurrioU'i  conatilneucy,  ua  the  etb  of  June,  1882. 


.coy  Google 


TiTTB  CB*p.]  THE  CAUCUS  IN  POWEK  217 

and  a  disgrace  to  Christianity,  what  were  they  doing  now  in 
face  of  all  the  carnage  in  which  the  British  armies  were 
engaged  ?  They  remained  silent  "  in  order  not  to  embarrass 
Mr.  Gladstone."  When  the  tragic  death  of  General  Gordon, 
who  was  sent  by  the  Government  to  Khartoum  and  afterwards 
left  to  his  fate,  extorted  a  loud  cry  of  indignation  from  the 
public,  some  members  of  Liberal  Associations  in  the  north  of 
England  wished  to  unburden  themselves.  They  met  in  the 
city  of  York  and  having  considered  the  situation  came  to  the 
conclusion  that  it  was  expedient  to  provoke  a  general  mani- 
festation of  public  feeling  on  the  affairs  of  the  Soudan.  They 
applied  to  the  official  organ  of  the  party,  to  the  National  Lib- 
eral Federation,  asking  it  to  summon  a  conference  of  repre- 
sentatives of  the  federated  Associations.  The  Federation 
refused,  "in  order  not  to  embarrass  Mr.  Gladstone."  Those 
who  had  taken  part  in  the  meeting  at  York  threatened  to 
leave  the  Federation.  Before  this  threat  the  Birmingham 
Caucus  gave  way  and  convened  a  conference  in  which  after 
much  discussion  a  mongrel  resolution  was  voted  protesting  the 
confidence  of  the  Liberals  in  Mr.  Gladstone  and  his  govern- 
ment, assuring  him  of  their  support  in  the  future  and  regret- 
ting that  military  operations  hiid  been  deemed  necessary. 

Thus  the  body  ostensibly  created  for  giving  regular  and 
free  expression  to  opinion,  for  making  the  voice  of  the  country 
heard  by  its  rulers,  proved  powerless  to  discharge  its  function 
in  circumstances  of  the  most  critical  kind.  It  was  fit  only  to 
stand  guard  over  a  party  in  power. 


The  Birmingham  Federation  was  not  the  only  central  Organ- 
ization of  the  Liberal  party.  Besides  that  of  the  Whip  with 
his  correspondents  in  the  provinces  there  was  another  popular 
Organization  with  Manchester  for  its  headquarters.  Among 
the  many  Associations  founded  in  former  days  for  obtaining 
the  extension  of  the  parliamentary  franchise  (Reform  Societies, 
Beform  Associations,  etc.),  one  had  been  formed  at  Man- 
chester, in  1864,  on  a  national  basis,  that  is  to  say  with  numer- 
ous branches  in  the  country,  under  the  name  of  the  National 
Reform  Union,  with  the  co-operation  of  several  old  and  leading 


.coy  Google 


218  DEMOCRACY  AKD  FOUTICAL  PABTIES     [secohd  fibt 

membera  of  the  famous  Anti-Corn  Law  League.  ^Vhile  it  never 
attained  to  the  importance  of  Oobden's  League,  the  Naiional 
Seform  Unimi  had  a  fairly  large  share  in  the  reformist  agita- 
tion which  preceded  the  Reform  Bill  of  1867.  As  booq  as 
the  extension  of  the  suffrage  was  carried,  the  members  of  the 
Natwnal  Reform  Union  were  of  opinion  that  its  task  was  at  an 
end.  Nevertheless  it  was  not  formally  dissolved  and  several 
members  tried  to  keep  it  alive  after  1868  hy  taking  up  great 
questions  of  current  politics,  such  as  for  instance  the  Disestab- 
lishment of  the  Irish  Church.  But  they  were  stopped  by  the 
indifference  of  their  old  adherents,  and  the  traditional  aversion 
to  permanent  ot^anizations  on  a  national  basis.  Consequently 
the  National  Be/orm  Union  had  become  extinct  after  1870. 
After  the  Liberal  defeat  in  the  general  election  of  1874,  when 
Birmingham  uttered  the  cry:  "Organize!  organize!"  several 
Lancashire  "Liberals,  uneasy  at  seeing  that  "  the  tree  of  po- 
litical life  appeared  to  be  transplanted  to  Birmingham,"  and 
anxious  that  Manchester  should  not  be  too  late  in  the  field, 
thought  that  the  organization  of  the  National  Reform  Union 
might  be  made  use  of  and  decided  to  resuscitate  it  The 
plan  was  submitted  to  John  Bright,  whose  name  had  be- 
come a  household  word  in  Lancashire  since  his  exploits  at 
the  time  of  the  Anti-Com  Law  Le^^ue.  He  approved  the 
idea  of  the  Union,  but  insisted  that  it  should  confine  its  pro- 
gramme to  one  point,  to  a  single  reform,  and  recommended 
the  reform  of  the  land  laws.  Id  this  he  adhered  to  the  old 
conception  of  popular  Organizations  formed  for  the  realization 
of  a  distinct  and  specified  object;  in  the  pursuit  of  which  men 
differing  in  opinion  ou  other  points  might  unite,  resinning  com- 
plete liberty  of  action  as  soon  as  the  object  was  attained.  A 
great  conference  of  delegates  of  several  Liberal  Associations, 
clubs,  and  societies  held  at  Manchester  sanctioned  the  reorgan- 
ization of  the  Union,  adopting  a  programme  of  four  specified 
points,  four  i-efonns  to  be  carried.'  The  new  Organization  thus 
became  a  society  of  propatranda  and  agitation  in  favour  of  cer- 
tain reforms.  Its  principal  mode  of  action  consisted  of  distrib- 
uting pamphlets  and  books,  of  sending  lecturers  into  different 

'The  eitenaiOD  of  the  Bnffrs^  to  tlie  niral  popiilntltma ;  disest^bllghment 
ot  the  Church  ol  Englaod  i  retonn  of  the  land  laws ;  regulation  of  the  sate  ol 
liquora  by  the  people. 


.coy  Google 


riFTH  CHAP.]  THE  CAUCUS  IN  POWER  219 

parts  of  the  country,  of  organizing  meetings  for  the  discussion 
of  questions  relating  to  the  prc^ramme  of  the  Union.  From 
the  very  commencement  of  its  new  existence  (from  1876)  it 
had  the  good  fortune  to  secure  the  services  as  manager  of  a 
University  man,  a  gentleman  of  literary  training  who  gave  a 
powerful  impulse  to  the  work  of  the  political  education  of  the 
masses  undertaken  by  the  Union. 

When,  in  1877,  the  Birmingliam  group  also  started  a  national 
Organization  in  their  town,  the  National  Reform  Union  declared 
tliat  they  were  in  no  way  offended,  the  sphere  of  action  of  each 
being  distinct  although  directed  towards  the  same  ultimate 
object;  "the  task  of  reorganizing  the  Liberal  party  is  now 
divided  into  two  parts,  both  tending  to  the  same  end ;  and  while 
the  Union  continues  to  teach  the  people  what  to  fight  for,  the 
Federatioa  will  instruct  them  how  to  fight.  Each  is  necessary 
to  and  supplements  the  other." '  Nevertheless  the  Union  w:is 
gradually  tempted  beyond  its  programme;  the  Birmingham 
laurels  evidently  disturbed  its  repose,  and  it  began  to  imitate 
its  rival  by  agitating  on  a  large  scale,  first  of  all  on  the 
Eastern  question  and  then  ou  other  problems  of  the  day.  The 
programme  which  confined  it  within  the  "four  points"  grew 
irksome  to  it  and,  after  the  victory  of  1880  which  the  Caucus 
attributed  to  organization,  it  exchanged  them  for  the  following 
general  v^ue  definition;  "The  Union  shall  have  two  objects, 
viz.:  1.  the  dissemination  of  political  knowledge,  and  the  fur- 
therance of  organization,  especially  in  the  county  constituencies; 
2.  the  promotion  and  agitation  of  any  leading  question  which 
the  Government,  or  any  impoi-tant  section  of  the  party,  may 
from  time  to  time  place  before  the  nation,  and  in  regard  to 
which  it  may  be  thought  desirable  to  move  and  instruct  the 
members  of  the  party  throughout  the  country."  The  meaning 
of  this  change  in  the  constitution  of  the  Union  was  well  ex- 
plajned  by  an  authorized  interpreter :  "  The  Union  is  so  con- 
stituted that  it  can  do  any  amount  of  needful  work.  It  can 
organize  the  party  —  instruct  the  party  —  arouse  the  party  — 
guide  the  party."'  It  was  simply  the  programme  of  ^e  Cau- 
cus.    The  Union  was  very  anxious  not  to  be  confounded  with 

1  Report  of  the  Eiecntlve  Committee  ol  the  National  Refonn  Unfon  Inr  tho 
year  IST7, 

'  The  Northern  Pioneer,  3d  of  March,  1S80,  "  The  National  Kefonn  Union-" 


.coy  Google 


DEMOCRACY  AND  POLITICAL  PARTIES     [sbcoko  P4W 


it  and  proclaimed  that  it  was  not  "a  caucus  in  the  narrow  and 
vulgar  3eD£e  of  the  tfirm" ;  that  it  had  do  leaninge  towards  dic- 
tatorship ;  that  it  did  not  wish  to  turn  the  members  of  Parlia- 
ment into  delegates.  Several  of  the  most  influential  members 
of  the  Union  however  considered  that  the  Organizations  "  ought 
to  act  as  political  barometers  which  members  could  consult  and 
by  which  they  might  to  a  certain  extent  steer  their  course  " ; 
that  "it  was  useful  that  there  should  be  some  organization 
which  should  from  time  to  time,  not  put  the  screw  on,  but  use 
a  certain  amount  of  influence,  or  else  theie  might  be  more 
Marriotts  and  more  Cowens '  than  there  were  at  that  moment "  * 
—  which  in  ^lain  English  meant  that  there  would  be  more 
independent  members  than  there  were  already.  Beyond  a 
doubt,  the  Birmingham  spirit  was  "  moving  upon  the  face  of 
the  waters"  of  English  Liberalism. 

In  fact,  apart  from  the  work  of  political  education  which  it 
continued  to  cany'on  very  zealously,  the  Reform  Union  was 
falling  into  line  behind  the  Birmingham  Federation ;  it  took 
part  in  all  the  agitation  initiated  by  the  latter ;  like  it  sent  cir- 
culars to  the  local  Organizations  and  to  the  members,  enjoining 
the  one  to  convene  meetings,  to  get  up  petitions,  and  urging  the 
others  to  be  in  their  place  in  the  House  and  to  vote  with  the 
main  body  of  the  party.  It  was  the  same  tune  which  was 
sung  at  Birmingham,  only  the  voice  was  a  different  one ;  it  was 
of  no  use  for  the  Reform  Union  to  force  it;  it  could  never  hit 
off  the  arrogant  and  comminatory  tone  of  the  real  Caucus  and 
it  did  not  produce  the  same  effect.  It  was  well  known  that 
there  were  no  important  party  personages,  let  alone  Cabinet 
Ministers,  behind  the  Union,  and  that  its  direct  influence  on 
the  local  Associations  was  more  or  less  conflned  to  the  radius 
of  Manchester.  To  sum  up,  as  long  as  it  was  engaged  in  dif- 
fusing ideas  throughout  the  country  by  means  of  its  lecturers 
and  its  publications,  the  Union  occupied  the  position  of  well- 
behaved  women  who  are  not  talked  about,  and  when  it  tried 

1  HessTB.  Harriott  and  Cowen,  the  one  a  moderate  Uberal,  the  other  an 
advanced  Radical,  were  the  inenibers  □[  the  Houae  of  Cummons  who  had 
declared  with  energy  against  the  closure  by  a  simple  majority  pwposed  by 
the  Gladstone  Ministry. 

>  Chairman's  speech  at  the  annual  meeting  of  1883.  Of.  also  tbe  other 
speeches,  especially  those  of  Ru«sell,  Kgaew,  and  Richards  (MunduMer  £zam- 
tner,  31lh  of  January,  1883). 


.coy  Google 


warn  CHIP.]  THE  CAUCUS  IN  POWEB  S21 

to  make  a  noise  the  Caucus  shouted  twenty  times  as  loud  and 
made  more  impression  on  the  galleiy.  It  was  therefore  natu- 
ral that  the  Reform  Union,  far  from  attaining  the  popularity 
of  the  Birmingham  Federation  and  its  influence  in  the  manage- 
ment of  the  party,  was  if  anything  effaced  by  it. 

This  effacement  extended  also  to  the  principles  on  which 
the  Reform  Union  had  been  founded,  and  it  is  in  this  point  that 
lies  the  interest  which  its  history  possesses  for  us  in  the  move- 
ment of  party  organization.  Having  adopted  the  realization 
of  one  or  more  well-defined  legislative  measures  as  its  object, 
and  the  methodical  enlightenment  of  public  opinion  thereon  as 
its  means  of  attaining  that  object,  the  Jieform  Union  presented 
as  it  were  the  counter-current  of  the  tendencies  embodied  in 
the  Caucus.  On  the  one  aide  was  the  conception  of  the  old 
Liberalism  and  Radicalism  with  its  firm  belief  that  ideas  and 
principles  constituted  the  ratlying-point  in  party  strife;  that 
all  the  combatants  ought  to  know  beforehand  what  they  were 
going  to  fight  for  and  when  they  would  lay  down  their  arms; 
and  that  the  real  struggle  consisted  in  instilling  these  ideas 
into  unconverted  minds,  in  achieving  the  conquest,  slow  and 
laborious  perhaps,  but  all  the  more  durable,  of  convictions,  of 
consciences.  The  tendency  of  the  new  method  was  to  confine 
opinion  for  good  and  all  within  fixed  limits  under  a  general 
and  unchangeable  banner ;  to  impart  strength  to  it  by  the  per- 
manence of  the  organization  and  the  unlimited  duration  of  the 
term  of  enlistment ;  to  bring  would-be  stra^Iers  into  line  by 
pressure  from  the  whole  body ;  to  form  an  army  which  would 
follow  its  leaders  in  measured  step,  subject  to  the  formality  of 
preliminary  ratification  of  the  appointment  of  these  leaders  by 
popular  choice;  to  teach  this  army  only  to  fight,  to  charge  the 
enemy  at  the  first  signal,  on  the  general  conviction  that  it  is 
fighting  and  will  always  fight  for  a  glorious  cause  whoever 
is  or  may  be  the  enemy.  The  effacement  of  the  NationcU 
Reform.  Union  behind  the  Caucus,  the  attempts  which  it  made 
to  adapt  itself  to  the  methods  and  procediire  of  the  Caucus, 
to  walk  in  its  footsteps,  meant  that  tii&  counter-current  which 
it  represented  in  its  early  days  was  being  more  and  more 
driven  out  of  the  political  life  of  England  and  was  making 
way  for  the  new  stream  issuing  from  the  rock  of  Birming- 


.coy  Google 


222  BEMOCBACY  AND  POLITICAL  PARTIES    [ibcohd  past 

Highly  instructive  proof  of  this  was  also  supplied  by  aa- 
other  Organization  which,  amid  different  social  conditions, 
attempted  to  establish  Liberalism  on  the  basis  of  principles 
similar  to  those  on  which  the  Nalional  Reform  Union  took 
its  stand.  This  was  the  London  and  Counties  Liberal  Union, 
created  after  the  elections  of  1880  for  London  and  the  neigh- 
bouring counties.  The  southern  counties  were  and  still  are 
one  of  the  most  backward  parts  of  England.  An  agricult- 
ural region,  the  principal  abode  of  large  landed  proprietors, 
the  south  remained  to  a  certain  extent  untouched  by  the  social 
revolution  brought  about  by  the  rise  of  industry,  which  derived 
all  its  impetus  from  the  north.  The  electoral  qualification  be- 
ing still  pretty  high  in  the  counties,  up  to  1885,  the  great  mass 
of  the  rural  population  was  not  only  deprived  of  the  suffrage 
but  also  destitute  of  all  political  culture.  The  fanners  in  these 
parts  followed  the  lead  of  the  landowners  more  submissively 
than  elsewhere,  and  the  latter  were  bound  to  the  Conservative 
party  by  tradition  and  to  some  extent  by  their  interests.  Con- 
sequently if  the  Liberal  candidates  ventured  into  these  coun- 
ties (known  as  the  Home  Counties),  they  were  generally  de- 
feated. In  the  general  election  of  1880  of  the  28  members 
returned  for  these  counties  only  one  was  a  Liberal,  and  he 
owed  his  seat  to  the  minority  clause  of  the  Reform  Bill  of 
1867.  London,  on  the  contrary,  had  a  Liberal  past.  But  in 
proportion  as  the  metropolis  enlarged  its  area  with  the  alarm- 
ing rapidity  familiar  to  us,  it  lost  its  sense  of  individuality,  its 
esprit  de  corps;  indifference  to  the  public  welfare  took  per- 
manent root,  ^ded  by  the  growth  of  comfort  which  swells  the 
Toaks  of  materialism;  and  the  immense  i^glomeration  of  Lon- 
don slipped  away  more  and  more  from  Liberalism.  Caucuses 
were  no  doubt  established  in  most  of  the  metropolitan  boroughs, 
but  they  did  not  much  advance  the  cause  of  the  Liberal  party. 
In  the  neighlxiuring  counties  the  organization  was  a  good  deal 
weaker,  although  there  were  here  and  there  Associations  with 
a  more  or  less  permanent  organization,  but  practically  their 
operations  were  reduced  to  those  of  the  committees  in  the  old 
days,  which  were  formed  on  the  eve  of  the  elections  and  dis- 
solved soon  afterwards.  Social  influences  were,  as  in  the  past, 
the  great  organizing  power  in  these  districts.  The  Birming- 
ham Federation  which,  especially  in  its  early  days,  worked 


.coy  Google 


FiTTH  OHiP.]  THE  CAUCUS  IM   POWEB  228 

chiefly  the  urban  a^lomerations,  had  not  included  the  Home 
Counties  in  its  sphere  of  action ;  it  reached  them  indirectly  by 
the  Liberal  oases  which  were  scattered  over  them,  without  de- 
TOtii^  itself  specially  to  their  organization,  a  somewhat  thank- 
less taak  owing  to  the  social  condition  of  the  country.  The 
Ixmdon  atui  CouiUies  Liberal  Union  was  intended  to  fill  this  gap 
by  supplying  a  great  local  Organization  which  would  bring  all 
ite  strength  to  bear  on  this  part  of  England. 

But  for  the  founders  of  this  Union  the  gap  did  not  consist 
of  "bad  organization,"  but  in  the  fact  that  the  population  waa 
ignorant,  imprisoned  within  a  narrow  horizon,  without  capacity 
for  public  life.  To  bring  light  into  this  darkness,  to  open  the 
mind  of  the  rural  population,  to  awaken  in  it  an  interest  in 
the  public  welfare,  became  the  great  object  of  the  Union  from 
the  very  beginning.  Organization  was  on  the  second  plane,  and 
formed  a  subsidiary  means  of  action.  The  Union  endeavoured 
to  drag  the  existing  Associations  from  their  lethargy  and  to 
bring  about  the  formation  of  new  ones,  but  it  wished  them 
to  have  a  spontaneous  life  of  their  own.  It  repelled  interfer- 
ence in  the  affairs  of  the  local  Associations  with  energy  and 
almost  with  indignation.'  Its  notion  was  that  it  was  to  be  not 
the  master  but  the  servant  of  the  local  Organizations  by  offer- 
ing them  the  advantages  of  concentrated  action  for  obtaining 
lecturers,  publications  at  reduced  rates,  information  and  advice, 
on  legal  points  connected  with  electoral  registration  matters  so 
.  full  of  intricacy  in  England,  etc.  Lectures  on  political  and 
historical  topics  and  the  distribution  of  small  publications  — 
pamphlets  and  leaflets  —  became  the  great  weapons  of  the 
Union.  The  tone  in  which  its  representatives  as  well  as  those 
of  the  local  Associations  addressed  the  masses  often  contrasted 
with  the  habits  of  violent  controversy  and  of  abuse  of  oppo- 
nents by  which  the  Caucus  was  distinguished.'    Undertaking 

1 "  loterlei-etice  was  not  in  the  least  degree  coDtemplated.  They  held  It  t« 
be  nothlnjc  less  than  impertinence  lo  attempt  to  enter  Into  any  district  where 
tbeli  co-operation  would  not  be  thoroughly  welcome ' '  —  said  the  Chairman  at 
the  opening  meeting. 

*  At  one  of  the  general  conferences  In  which  the  delegates  of  the  local 
ABBoclaUons  exchanged  their  views  and  Impreaslona,  one  ot  them  character- 
ized the  mode  ot  action  adopted  In  hU  locality  as  follows:  "  We  have  aimed, 
not  at  stirring  up  party  strife  aud  iU.feellng  among  nelghbonrs  by  violent 
attacks  upon  oar  political  opponents,  but  rather  at  setting  forth  the  podtlve 


.CD,  Google 


S24  DEMOCRACT  AND  FOLITICAI.  PASTIES    [utcoim  run 

the  political  education  of  the  masses,  the  Union  held  that  the 
buainesB  of  its  own  staff  in  their  turn  was  to  make  a  constant 
study  of  the  political  questions  which  came  or  were  shortly 
about  to  come  before  public  opinion,  and  to  do  so  in  a  spirit 
absolutely  free  from  all  party  preoccupations.  A  result  vas 
the  formation  in  London,  which  was  the  seat  of  the  Union,  of 
a  sort  of  club  for  mutual  improvement,  in  which  the  members 
read  papers  on  problems  of  legislation  or  politics  which  they 
had  investigated,  followed  by  a  discussion  int£nded  solely  to 
enlighten  the  audience  and  not  to  end  in  a  vote.  Distinguished 
men  who  had  already  or  have  since  made  themselves  a  name  in 
politics  or  literature  took  a,  very  active  part  in  these  meetings.' 
The  idea  had  also  been  started  of  making  these  discussions  at 
head-quarters  find  an  echo  in  the  other  localities :  the  represen- 
tatives of  the  local  Associations  who  attended  the  meetings  in 
London  were  in  their  turn  to  reopen  discussion  in  the  local 
meetings  on  the  topics  debated,  inviting  to  the  conferences 
not  only  members  of  the  Association  but  neutrals  and  Tories, 
so  that  every  one  could  take  sides  on  the  question  after  due 
reflection  and  not  before  it. 

The  Union  occasionally,  although  in  a  discreet  fashion,  joined 
in  the  agitation  promoted  by  Birmingham  (for  instance,  tiiat  in 
favour  of  the  extension  of  the  franchise  to  the  rural  popular 
tion).  One  clause  in  its  statutes,  which  brought  it  nearer  to  the 
programme  of  the  Caucus,  imposed  on  it  the  very  general  obli- 
gation of  "securing  the  adoption  of  Liberal  principles  in  the 
government  of  the  country."  But  in  practice  the  Union  waa 
very  anxious  not  to  preserve  a  vague  and  ambiguous  attitude, 
and  being  preoccupied  with  its  "chief  duty  of  stimulating  and 
promoting  political  education  and  organization,"  it  was  con- 
vinced "  that  this  end  would  be  most  effectually  attained  by 
the  advocacy  of  some  definite  objects  as  the  immediate  goal  of 
their  efEorts."  It  adopted  two  :  the  reform  of  local  self-govern- 
ment and  that  of  the  laud  laws,  and  made  them  a  platform  at 

advuitages  which  flov  from  Liberal  Rovemment,  uid  the  lubitanlial  gains 
to  be  hoped  tor  (rom  ibese  changes  for  which  Ihe  country  is  now  ripe  " 
(London  and  Conntlea  Liberal  Union,  Report  of  the  ContereDce  ot  ofBoets 
of  Liberal  .\Mooiationii,  7  Nov.  1882,  p.  ■i'l). 

1  For  InstaDce,  H.  Amold-Forster,  Geo.  Brodrlck,  James  Bryoe,  Sjrdnej 
Buiton,  W.  8.  Caine,  Arthur  Coheo,  Q.C.,  A.  V.  Dioey,  Sir  John  Lnhboek, 
H.  8.  Tremenheere,  and  othen. 


.CD,  Google 


rma  caip.]  THE  CAUCUS  IN  POWER  226 

the  general  election  of  1886.  These  elections  were  the  first 
and  also  the  last  in  which  the  Union  took  part.  Its  work  and 
its  methods  of  action  were  not  properly  appreciated.  It  waa 
badly  supported  and  always  short  of  funda ;  the  magnates  of 
the  party  opened  their  purses  only  just  on  the  eve  of  the  elec- 
tions, not  understanding  that  a  long  preparation  of  the  public 
mind  is  required  to  win  votes  by  honest  means.  In  vain  did 
the  Union  proclaim  that  "  political  education  is  the  life-blood 
of  Liberalism."  Such  an  ungrateful  soQ  as  that  of  the  south- 
ern rural  counties  demanded  not  only  a  special  kind  of  culti- 
vation, but  also  the  patient  work  of  years  before  it  could  yield 
a  crop.  Party  spirit,  engrossed  in  the  present  and  never  bestow- 
ing a  thought  on  the  future,  was  incapable  of  comprehending 
this  simple  truth,  and  when  the  general  election  of  1885,  in 
which  the  Union  took  part  for  the  first  time,  resulted  unfavour- 
ably for  the  Liberals  within  its  sphere  of  operations,  the  ver- 
dict was  that  the  Union  had  not  gone  the  right  way  to  work ; 
it  was  dissolved  and  not  long  after  the  Home  Counties  were 
annexed  to  the  Caucus  so  that  the  latter  might  bring  its  superior 
methods  to  bear  on  them.' 

Thus  the  counter-currents  represented  by  the  other  central 
Oi^aoizations  receded  before  that  identified  with  the  Birming- 
ham Federation.  The  latter  soon  drove  into  the  background  or 
took  in  tow  all  its  rivals.  The  London  and  Counties  Union  in 
the  south  was  still  dragging  out  its  existence  and  the  JVodono/ 
Reform  Union  in  the  north  continuing  its  own,  aa  it  was  des- 
tined to  do  for  years  to  come,  when  the  Birmingham  Feder- 
ation came  to  the  front.  Claiming  to  be  the  direct  depository 
of  the  will  of  the  people  and  the  regular  mouthpiece  and 
supporter  of  the  Ministry,  it  identified  itself  ofHcially  with 
the  Liberal  party  and  Government.  Always  occupying  the 
stage  of  extra-parliamentary  political  life,  it  assumed  the  air 
of  being  the  chief  actor.  The  signal  for  all  agitation  in  the 
country  emanated  from  it ;  every  great  question  before  the 
public  served  it  as  a  pretext  for  manifestations ;  to  every  Gov- 

1  The  (ollovtng  answer  was  kItbd  to  a  queation  put  to  a  membei  of  the 
■tafl  at  the  National  Liberal  Faleration  aa  to  the  caoBOB  of  the  want  of  BOo- 
COBS  of  the  London  and  Counties  Cniun  :  "  Perhaps  it  may  be  ascribed  to  the 
tact  that  tlie  limits  of  Its  work  were  too  confiaed,  and  to  an  overwhelming 


.CD,  Google 


SH  DEMOCRACY  AKD  POUTICAL  PASTIES    [ucomd  hk* 

enunent  measure  it  affixed  its  imprimatur.  Its  resolutions 
were  proclaimed  urbi  et  urbi  in  general  meetings  of  delegates, 
either  periodical  or  extraordinary,  which  were  intended  to 
represent,  aa  it  were,  the  Grand  Assizes  of  English  Libend- 
ism.  The  Federation  held  them  in  different  towns  in  turn. 
Great  as  the  stir  made  by  them  might  be,  the  significaoce  of 
these  meetings  waa  not  a  real  one,  they  lacked  spontaneity. 
ETerythliig  was  cut  and  dried  by  the  Birmingham  group,  the 
resolutions  to  be  voted,  the  orators  who  were  to  speak.  It  was 
more  of  a  grand  orchestral  performance  than  a  gathering  of 
representaiaves  of  opinion  assembled  for  the  purpose  of  throw- 
ing light  upon  or  putting  forward  their  views  on  the  qnestions 
of  the  day  or  their  aspirations.  The  Birmingham  set  could  not 
brook  contradiction  or  divergence  of  views.  Those  delegates 
who  chanced  to  become  the  mouthpiece  of  it  were  looked  on  as 
wet  blankets.  They  were  greeted  in  the  lobbies  with  ironical 
remarks :  "  How  do  you  do,  you  have  brought  with  you  an 
amendment  to  the  resolutions,  have  you  not?"  Sometimes 
these  delegates  happened  to  be  the  representatives  of  very 
large  towns  which  had  a  history.  Intoxicated  with  their  suc- 
cess, the  Birmingham  leaders  were  not  careful  to  avoid  wound- 
ing susceptibilities.  The  Kational  Liberal  Federation  aspired 
not  only  to  influence  in  the  party  but  to  power. 


.coy  Google 


SIXTH  CHAPTER 
THE  CAUCUS  IS  powBB  {cotaifiued) 


After  having  followed  the  movements  of  the  Federation  on 
the  political  stage,  let  us  transport  ourselves  for  a  brief  space 
amid  the  local  Associations.  Since  we  became  acquainted  with 
them  at  the  time  of  their  first  appearance  under  Disraeli's  gov- 
ernment, we  have  seen  them  on  more  than  one  occasion  in  the 
train  of  the  central  Caucus,  contributing  to  its  impressivenesB 
by  their  numbers  and  swelling  the  noise  which  it  made.  Fol- 
lowing the  lead  of  Birmingham,  they  tried  their  hand  at  politics 
on  a  laige  scale,  and  interfered  demonstratively  in  the  work  of 
Parliament.  But  they  could  only  carry  out  their  will  in  Par- 
liament through  their  members.  The  question,  therefore,  of 
the  relations  between  the  member  and  the  party  Association 
soon  assumed  a  prominent  position  as  that  of  the  relations 
between  the  Association  and  parliamentary  candidates  had  pre- 
viously done.  The  solution  which  the  Caucus  gave  to  the  new 
problem  was  still  more  decisive.  It  did  not  consider  the  gen- 
eral authority  with  which  it  had  invested  the  member  by  the 
fact  of  nominating  him  as  sufficient;  it  held  that  in  the  actual 
discharge  of  bis  duties  he  was  bound  to  follow  the  opinions  of 
the  party  Organization  on  every  occasion.  We  have  already 
seen  the  caucuses,  in  the  agitations  got  up  by  Birmingham, 
send  their  members  communications,  resolutions,  and  injunc- 
tions to  vote  in  such  and  such  a  way,  to  support  this  and 
oppose  that  As  in  the  case  of  those  standing  for  Parliament, 
most  of  the  members  preferred,  to  avoid  making  a  fuss, 
not  to  insist  on  the  question  of  principle  raised  by  this  atti- 
tude of  the  caucuses.  Some  hastened  with  exemplary  docility 
to  assure  their  Caucus  that  they  were  quite  ready  to  vote  in 
the  manner  required;  others  complied  in  silence,  whether  they 
yielded  to  the  demands  of  the  Caucus  or  that  these  demands 


.coy  Google 


2S8  DEHOCRACT  AND  POLITICAL  PABTIES    [ucom  r^n 

coincided  with  their  own  coDvictiODS.  The  division  lists  in  the 
House  showed  few  Libera!  votes  recorded  in  opposition  to  the 
policy  of  the  Caucus,  and  when  such  a  thing  took  place  it  sel- 
dom forgave  the  members  who  assumed  this  independent 
attitude.  It  called  on  them  imperiously  for  explanations,  or 
still  more  often,  without  having  heard  them,  the  Association 
passed  a  vote  censuring  or  branding  the  delinquent  The  in- 
dependent members  adhered  firmly  to  their  attitude,  and  the 
Caucus  persisted  in  its  own  while  continuing  to  "  brand "  the 
recalcitrants.  In  some  cases  these  conflicts  became  extremely 
acute  and  produced  an  extraordinary  sensation.  This  time 
i^ain,  that  is  to  say  in  the  relations  between  members  and  the 
party  Organization  just  as  in  regard  to  the  tatter's  dealings 
with  the  candidates,  it  was  reserved  for  W.  E.  Forster  to  be 
in  the  front  rank  of  those  who  asserted  their  independence  as 
against  the  Caucus. 

After  the  period  of  bis  conflict  with  the  "400"  of  Bradford 
on  the  subject  of  Article  15,  Forster  once  more  had  an  opportu- 
nity of  being  one  of  the  official  leaders  of  Liberalism ;  with  the 
return  of  Mr.  Gladstone  to  power,  he  entered  the  Cabinet  as 
Chief  Secretary  for  Ireland.  But  two  years  afterwards,  in 
1882,  disapproving  the  new  policy  adopted  with  regard  to  the 
Irish  Home  Rulers,  he  left  the  Ministry.  This  act  of  indepen- 
dence isolated  him  in  his  own  party,  and  although  as  a  rule  he 
freely  gave  it  his  support  he  became  a  "  suspect."  Thereupon 
the  Bradford  Caucus  laid  hands  on  him  as  an  executioner  does 
on  a  man  under  sentence  of  death.  It  indulged  in  the  most 
violent  attacks  on  Forster,  abused  htm  at  gatherings  and  meet- 
ings, and  branded  him  with  resolution  after  resolution,  at  one 
time  with  regard  to  his  attitude  on  a  specified  question,  at 
another  with  reference  to  an  expression  which  he  had  used  in 
speaking  of  the  policy  of  the  leader  of  the  party,  or  again  on  ac- 
count of  "  his  conduct  during  the  present  session,  not  only  for 
withholding  his  support  from  the  Government  in  the  recent  vote 
of  censure,  but  in  making  speeches  on  more  than  one  occasion 
which  could  only  have  the  effect  of  damaging  their  position 
and  strengthening  the  hands  of  the  opposition."  Forster  re- 
mfuned  calm  and  unmoved  in  face  of  the  storm,  while  not 
ceasing  to  assert  the  right  of  a  member  to  speak  and  vote  in 
accordance  with  his  conscience.      Between   Forster  and  the 


.coy  Google 


iixTH  CHIP.]  THE  CAUCUS  IN  POWER  229 

Bradford  Cancns  it  was  not  even,  properly  speaking,  a  question 
of  divergence  of  views ;  for  if  Forster  had  ideas  on  the  question 
of  the  day,  the  Caucus  had  none.  "But  the  committee  may  tell 
me,"  remarked  Forater  to  the  400,  "your  opinion  on  this  Egyp- 
tian question  is  not  ours,  in  this  matter  you  do  not  represent 
us,  and  of  this  fact  we  must  inform  the  electors  of  Bradford 
and  of  the  country.  Certainly  this  would  be  both  their  right 
and  their  duty,  but  I  must  venture  most  respectfully  to  state 
that  the  committee  have  not  given  me  their  opinion." '  What 
was  demanded  from  him  was  not  a  particular  policy,  but  to  abide 
by  that  which  the  leader  of  the  party  would  eventually  adopt. 
Forster's  crime,  therefore,  was  tJiat  he  would  not  follow  him 
blindly.  Those  electors  of  Bradford  who  were  devoted  to  Fora- 
ter were  quite  convinced  that  it  was  the  central  Caucus  which 
was  pulling  the  atrit^s  throughout  the  whole  of  this  affair. 
Apart  from  the  old  accounts  which  the  Birmingham  group  had 
to  settle  with  the  author  of  the  Education  Ai^  of  1870,  Mr. 
Chamberlain,  who  had  entered  the  Gladstone  Cabinet,  was  sup- 
posed to  have  conceived  an  aversion  for  his  moderate  colleague 
who  was  curbing  the  Radical  tendencies  of  the  inspirer  of  the 
Cancus.  Consequently  Forster's  friends  at  Bradford  imagined 
that  the  whole  campaign  against  him  was  planned  at  Birming- 
ham, and  they  saw  the  hand  of  the  central  Caucus  everywhere. 
Its  hand  was  not  everywhere,  but  it  was  a  fact  that  Birming- 
ham inspired  and  approved  the  campaign  of  the  Bradford  Cau- 
cus, and  that  the  latter  to  a  great  extent  derived  its  power 
of  defying  independent  opinion  from  this  support  of  the 
Oi^anization. 

When,  in  pursuance  of  the  Redistribution  of  Seats  of  1884— 
1885,  the  borough  of  Bradford  was  divided  into  three  divisions, 
the  local  Caucus  was  converted  into  three  associations  on  the 
same  pattern,  but  this  did  not  put  an  end  to  the  opposition  to 
Forster.  On  the  eve  of  parting  from  his  constituents  of  the 
whole  borough,  whom  he  had  represented  in  Parliament  for 
more  than  a  quarter  of  a  century,  Forster  wished  to  give  them 
an  account  of  his  stewardship.  The  Caucus  did  all  in  its  power 
to  prevent  him  from  meeting  his  electors  face  to  face.'    How- 

1  Tima,  2Zd  May,  1884. 

*  Cf .  tho  TitaeB.  16tli  November,  188B, "  PoUtlc«l  Org«iiiiatione  " ;  Leala  and 
Bradford,  aod  T.  W.  Reid,  U,  516. 


.coy  Google 


230  DEMOCRACY  AND  POLITICAL  PABTIB8    [«cond  Pisr 

ever  the  meeting  took  place  and  Forster  concluded  hia  speech 
with  the  following  words,  the  last  which  he  utt«red  in  public : 
"  I  thank  you  for  this  more  than  for  anything  else,  —  that  for  the 
longtime  I  have  been  your  member,  the  time  that  I  have  taken 
part  in  the  governineat  of  the  nation  or  in  the  deliberations  of 
Farliaraent,  I  have  been  not  your  mere  delegate,  not  your  mere 
mouthpiece;  but  your  representative,  doing  what  I  thought  to 
be  right;  and  uiK>n  no  other  condition  will  I  serve  you  in  the 
future." '  The  passionate  cries  of  approval,  the  euUiusiasm  of 
the  enormous  crowd  which  tilled  the  building,  proved  that  in  the 
heart  of  the  people  there  was  plenty  of  room  for  admiration  of 
and  respect  for  political  uprightness  and  honesty,  for  men  who, 
instead  of  flattering  the  masses,  t«ll  them  the  truth.  But  it 
soon  appeared  that  the  people  were  not  complete  masters  of 
their  actions.  Forster  stood  for  one  of  the  three  new  divisions. 
The  Caucus  set  tp  work  to  defeat  him,  and  its  influence  proved 
too  great  to  be  disregarded.  Stricken  with  a  mortal  disease, 
Forster  left  his  election  in  the  hands  of  friends.  The  latter, 
being  anxious  to  spare  him  the  bitterness  of  a  last  struggle. 
Opened  negotiations  with  the  Caucus  and  arrived  at  a  compro- 
mise which  put  a  stop  to  hostilities.  Beyond  a  doubt  Oiey 
would  have  soon  broken  out  again  if  Foratev's  death  had  not 
supervened  a  few  months  later  and  t«rminated  the  contest ;  for, 
in  spite  of  the  weaknesses  which  have  been  referred  to  alwve, 
Forster  was,  as  Mr.  Gladstone  said  in  the  funeral  oration  on  his 
old  colleague  delivered  in  the  House  of  Commons,  "  a  man 
upon  whom  there  could  be  no  doubt  that  Nature  had  laid  her 
hands  for  the  purpose  of  forming  a  thoroughly  genuine  and  in- 
dependent character,'" 

II 

But,  after  all,  was  the  war  which  the  Bradford  Caucus  had 
waged  for  years  against  Forster,  really  a  war  on  the  inde- 
pendence of  members '/  Was  it  not  more  a  contest  of  opinions, 
Forster  being  a  moderate,  almost  a  Whig,  whereas  the  Caiicus 
represented  the  advanced  Radicalism  which  was  daily  gaining 

'T.  W.  Kei<l,/6iil. 

9  Sittiug  of  tbe  House  of  Coramana  of  Ihe  eth  April,  ISSfl  {Hnnaard,  Vol. 
CCCIV,  p.!l7(i). 


.coy  Google 


■IXTB  CHAP.]  THE   CAUCUS  IN  POWER  231 

ground  in  the  country  ?  If  there  had  beeu  a  Badical  in  Fors- 
ter's  place  would  there  hare  been  any  pretext  or  cause  for 
opposition  ? 

A  peremptory  answer  was  returned  to  these  questions  at  'Sew- 
castle-on-Tyne,  whei-e  the  local  Caucus  was  confronted  by  a 
Badical,  a  real  Badical,  if  ever  there  was  one,  —  Joseph  Cowen. 

Devoted,  body  and  soul,  to  the  cause  of  the  people  from  his 
youth  upwards,  he  laboured  incessantly  for  their  moral  and 
material  elevation,  lavishing  on  them  the  resources  of  his  high 
culture  acquired  by  severe  study  and  by  meditation,  of  his  en- 
ergy, of  his  ardent  democratic  faith,  and  also  of  his  large  fort- 
une. Full  of  solicitude  for  the  workmen  of  the  factories  owned 
by  him,  Cowen  extended  it  to  the  whole  hardworking  popular 
tion  of  the  Tyne  district;  introduced  co-operative  societies 
among  them ;  organized  libraries,  classes,  lectures ;  turned  lect- 
urer, schoolmaster,  secretary  himself;  took  part  in  every  social 
movement  tending  to  the  welfare  of  the  people.  An  intimate 
friend  of  several  Chartist  leaders,  he  resumed  the  political 
propi^anda  in  the  north  by  his  speeches  and  his  writings,  in 
the  Palmerston  days;  that  is  to  say,  at  a  juncture  when,  in 
consequence  of  the  defeat  of  Chartism  and  the  success  of  a 
prosperous  middle-class,  the  political  pulse  had  almost  ceased 
to  beat  in  the  nation.  Assisted  by  a  group  of  friends  recruited 
chiefly  from  among  intelligent  workmen,  Cowen  carried  his 
propaganda  into  every  little  town  and  vill^fe  of  the  district, 
appealing  to  workmen  in  the  towns,  to  the  labourers  in  the 
fields,  and  to  the  toilers  underground,  not  in  order  to  cry  up  re- 
volt to  them,  but  tu  enlighten  their  minds,  to  awaken  the  human 
being  in  them,  and  to  prepare  them  for  civic  life.  An  ardent 
lover  of  liberty,  Cowen  longed  for  and  laboured  for  its  triumph 
in  other  countries  besides  his  own.  When  still  a  young  man,  he 
formed  a  connection  with  Mazzini  and  through  him  with  other 
leaders  of  the  European  Eevolution  who  had  taken  refuge  in 
England  after  the  victory  of  reaction  in  1848  and  the  coup  d'etat 
of  Uie  2d  of  December.  Kossuth,  Louis-Blanc,  Ledni-BoUin, 
Pierre  Leroux,  Alexander  Herzen,  and  many  others  penetrated 
into  the  far  north  to  visit  the  young  English  democrat  whose 
overflowing  enthusiasm  and  invincible  faith  consoled  their 
aching  hearts.  He  also  assisted  them  actively  to  continue  the 
struggle.     Bred  in  the  school  of  the  old  masters  of  rationalist 


.coy  Google 


332  DEMOCRACT  AND  POLITICAL  PARTIES    [uookd  pi.bt 

indiTidualism,  from  Godwin  and  Faine  onwards,  and  inspired 
by  their  descendants,  the  "  Philgsophic  Radicals,"  Cowen  had 
the  passion  for  individual  liberty  in  the  highest  degree,  with- 
out, however,  falling  into  the  narrow  views  of  the  Manchester 
school,'  and  a  veneration  for  "principles"  without  being  in- 
fected with  doctrinaire  fanatieiam.'  He  was  profoundly  con- 
vinced that  spontaneous  individual  effort,  ensuring  independ- 
ence of  thought  and  energy  in  action,  was  the  sole  basis  of 
really  strong  communities,  while  principles  supplied  ideas 
which  alone  gave  a  meaning  to  the  existence  of  communities, 
and  provided  a  conductor  and  a  proper  aim  for  the  policy  of 
States.  He  had  a  horror  of  the  opportunism  which  seeks 
inspiration  in  the  interest  of  the  moment,  in  the  passions  or 
the  follies  of  the  day,  in  the  prejudice  in  vogue,  or  in  the  com- 
plicity of  hatred,  animosity,  or  greed.  "  Every  man,"  he  said, 
"  must  act  according  to  his  convictions.  They  are  his  safest 
and  ought  to  be  his  only  guide.  Upon  matters  of  detail  he 
may  subordinate  his  opinion  to  his  associates.  The  majority 
in  such  cases  may  guide  him,  but  upon  questions  of  principle 
he  must  stand  firm  even  if  he  be  as  one  against  one  thousand." 
"  The  working  classes  have  achieved  their  personal  independ- 
ence, they  must  now,"  said  Cowen  to  them,  "  devote  themselves 
to  their  intellectual  emancipation ;  let  them  think  for  themselves 
and  not  be  put  in  swaddling-clothes  or  leading-strings  by  crafty 
advisers."  *  Democrat  to  the  backbone,  he  was  for  a  "  robust, 
high-spirited,  magnanimous  Democracy,  —  the  Democracy  of 
Pericles,  not  of  Cleon."  ♦ 

After  a  quarter  of  a  century  of  work  on  the  banks  of  the 
Tyne,  Cowen  was  aaked  to  represent  Newcastle  in  Parliament, 
and  he  entered  the  House  in  1S74.    There  he  soon  proved  one 

1  "  t  am  not  uid  never  wm  ku  adherent  ot  what  it  popnlarly  known  as  the 
Uaocbester  school.  ..."  (Speech  of  the  31st  January,  18S0,  at  Newcactle, 
Lift  and  Speech^t  of  Jottph  CoUKit,  edited  by  E.  R.  Jones,  Lond.,  IS8B,  p. 
193.)  "I  am  a  tree-trader  and  always  have  been.  I  have  no  aDpeiBtltiooa 
regard  tor  the  principles  of  political  economy,  howeyer.  .  .  ."  (SpeerJi  ot 
the  mlh  November,  ISaS,  at  Nevcaslle,  Speedier  at  tht  Oeneral  SItcHon  ISSi, 
Newcastle.oti-Tyae,  jms.  p.  wa.) 

I  "  Id  the  application  ol  a  priticiplo  there  ma;  be  opportunity  and  necessity 
tor  concession,  LeglsUcloa  Is  a  practical  science,  and  It  Is  modified  by  tra- 
ditions, CQStoms,  and  institutions  "  (Speech  ot  the  3d  January,  1881,  at  New- 
castle, Li/e  and  aptechtt,  p.  160). 

»  Lift  and  apttcha.  *  lAft  and  Spteekei,  279. 


.coy  Google 


HXTH  CHAP.]  THE  CAUCUS  IN  POWBR  288 

of  the  greatest  orators  that  contemporary  England  has  pro- 
duced. But  at  the  same  time  he  showed  himself  incapable  of 
following  the  lead  of  a  party  or  of  any  one  whatever.  Some- 
times he  opposed  the  Disraeli  Ministry  with  the  utmost  vigour, 
sometimes  he  gave  it  the  support  of  his  great  abilities;  an 
advanced  Kadical,  he  occasionally  came  to  the  rescue  of  the 
Tories,  especially  in  the  Eastern  question  in  which  the  Liberals 
seemed  to  him  to  be  ioSuenced  by  party  considerations,  by  the 
wish  to  embarrass  the  Tory  government,  when  they  vented 
their  rage  against  Turkey  and  encouraged  the  autocracy  of 
Bussia,  which,  in  his  eyes,  was  as  wretched  a  government  as 
that  of  Constantinople.  When  the  Conservatives  seemed  to 
him  in  the  wrong,  he  disagreed  with  them ;  when  he  thought 
they  were  in  the  right  path,  he  agreed  with  them.  That  right 
should  always  be  on  one  side  of  the  House  and  wrong  always 
on  the  other  appeared  to  him  a  false  and  often  pernicious  con- 
vention. After  the  fall  of  the  Tories  he  observed  the  same 
independent  attitude  with  regard  to  the  Liberal  government; 
he  gave  it  his  support,  but  not  on  all  occasions.  Whenever  he 
thought  it  infringed  the  principles  of  Liberalism,  Oowen  had 
no  hesitation  in  opposing  it.  The  policy  of  coercion  adopted 
by  Mr.  Gladstone  towards  Ireland  found  in  him  an  unrelenting 
opponent  He  had  the  whole  Liberal  party  against  him,  but 
he  none  the  less  continued  to  defend  the  cause  of  Ireland.  He 
opposed  the  restriction  of  free  speech  in  Parliament,  and  pre- 
dicted that  the  undeniable  evil  of  obstruction  would  be  in  no 
way  prevented  by  it.  Sympathizing  with  the  movement  of 
national  regeneration  attempted  in  Egypt  by  Arabi  Pasha  on  the 
basis  of  Egypt  for  the  Egyptians,  Coweu  feared  that  the  inter- 
ference of  a  European  power  would  lead  to  bloodshed,  to  much 
bloodshed.  He  also  warned  the  Government  that  if  the  Eng- 
lish, after  having  entered  the  land  of  the  Pharaohs,  hesitated 
to  defend  it  against  the  Mahdi,  they  would  expose  themselves 
and  the  country  to  disaster.  Most  of  the  Liberal  members, 
onlike  Cowen,  thinking  themselves  bound  to  silence  and  dis- 
cipline by  party  ties,  followed  their  leader.  Lines  of  conduct 
of  the  most  opposite  character  were  approved  with  docility  in 
accordance  with  the  orders  of  the  day.  And  having  sowed 
the  wind,  they  reaped  the  whirlwind.  "  Principles,"  which  are 
so  contemptible  in  the  eyes  of  "  practical  politicians,"  were  in 


.coy  Google 


231  DEUOCRACr  AND  POUTICAL  PARTIES    [hcohd  put 

the  right  as  against  them  and  the  "  party  interests  "  which  the 
latter  claim  to  serve.  But  as  a  rule  parties  leave  the  task  of 
gleaning  the  lessons  conveyed  to  them  by  events  to  history ; 
no  one  opposed  to  them  is  ever  right.  Cowen  was;  conse- 
quently he  was  in  the  wrong. 

The  position  of  an  independent  member  in  the  House  of 
Commons  had  for  some  time  past  become  a  delicate  one,  since 
the  ranks  had  closed  up  on  both  aides  after  the  appearance  of 
the  masses  on  the  political  stage,  in  1868.  Two  great  armies 
reformed  into  line  with  two  powerful  leaders,  Gladstone  and 
Disraeli,  the  contest  between  whom  assumed  the  character  of 
a  duel,  of  an  epic  struggle.  But  if  a  man  of  great  force  of 
character  were  to  maintain  an  independent  position  in  Farliar 
ment,  would  it  not  be  possible  for  him  to  hold  his  own  by 
relying  on  the  confidence  of  his  fellow-citizens  merited  by  a 
genuine  devotion  to  the  popular  cause,  by  leaning  on  the 
very  masses  who  supply  the  fighting  material  of  politics,  by 
appealing,  so  to  speak,  from  the  weakness  of  the  democracy 
to  its  strength  ?  Cowen's  attitude  raised  this  question.  The 
Caucus  undertook  to  answer  it.    The  reply  was  in  the  n^ative. 

lU 

The  branch  of  the  Caucus  established  at  N^ewcastie,  as  in 
other  towns,  began  a  merciless  opposition  to  Cowen.  The 
latter  bad  not  welcomed  the  introduction  of  the  Caucus,  which 
had  no  distinctive  creed  or  recognized  principles,  but  which 
required  simply  "  adhesion  to  the  Organization,"  and  he  took 
no  notice  of  the  new  institution.  The  Caucus  on  its  side, 
having  set  up  from  the  outset  as  the  defender  of  Liberal 
orthodoxy,  was  ofEehded  with  Cowen's  attitude  in  the  Eastern 
crisis.  Nevertheless,  being  aware  of  his  immense  influence  in 
the  Tyne  country,  it  did  not  venture  to  oppose  him  at  the 
general  election  ^f  1880,  but  tried  to  make  him  accept  his  seat 
from  them,  as  was  the  wont  of  the  "representative  Organiza^ 
tion."  Cowen  did  not  fall  in  with  this,  and  explained  that 
as  a  divergence  of  views  had  bi-oken  out  between  himself  and 
the  "  oi^anized  Liberals,"  he  was  anxious  to  respect  their  opin- 
ions by  coming  before  the  electors  on  his  own  responsibility. 
When  in  the  new  Parliament  Cowen  showed  that  he  meant 


.coy  Google 


SIXTH  OHiP.]  THE   CAUCUS   IN  POWER  286 

to  preserve  his  indepeEdence  under  the  Liberal  government  as 
he  had  done  under  Disraeli's,  the  rage  which  ha^  been  smoul- 
dering in  the  breasts  of  the  Caucus  leaders  at  Newca,3tle,  burst 
forth.  They  almost  got  it  into  their  heads  that  Cowen'a  sole 
preoccupation  was  to  create  obstaclea  for  the  Liberal  govern- 
mect.  For  what  other  explanation  is  there  of  his  conduct  ?  He 
defends  these  Irish,  these  Home  Rulers  who  prevent  Mr.  Glad- 
stone from  governing.  Not  only  does  he  speak,  but  he  even 
occasionally  votes  ^;ainst  the  Ministry.  It  is  all  very  well 
his  being  out  of  sympathy  with  the  aristocratic  composition 
of  the  House  of  Lords  and  regretting  its  reactionary  conduct, 
but  he  none  the  less  maintains  that  it  is  acting  on  its  rights, 
although  with  little  wisdom,  and  he  censures  the  violen^  lan- 
guage and  the  threats  directed  against  it  in  this  respect.  Was 
^is  the  attitude  of  a  Liberal  ?  Certainly  not.  It  was  not 
official  Liberalism.  And  thereupon  the  Newcastle  Caucus 
set  itself  up  as  a  sort  of  Holy  Inquisition  with  the  mission  of 
watching  every  word  that  fell  from  Cowen  and  examining  into 
"ts  motives.  The  most  unfriendly  construction  for  him  was 
Evariably  placed  upon  them  before  the  electors.  The  old 
inhabitants  of  Newcastle,  who  had  witnessed  his  whole  life 
and  were  almost  sharers  in  his  labours,  knew  the  rights  of  the 
matter,  but  the  rising  generation  or  the  new-comers,  who  knew 
nothing  of  Cowen's  past,  listened  more  readily  to  the  insinua- 
tions of  the  Caucus. 

The  prestige  attaching  to  Cowen'a  personality  remaining 
considerable  in  spite  of  this,  the  Caucus  thought  that  as  a  new 
love  drives  out  an  old  one,  another  eminent  man  introduced 
into  the  political  life  of  Newcastle  might  be  the  means  of  oust- 
'ing  Cowen.  And  when  one  of  the  two  parliamentary  seats  as- 
signed to  the  borough  became  vacant  in  1882  owing  to  the  resig- 
nation of  the  sitting  member,  the  Caucus  offered  it  to  Mr.  John 
Morley.  A  brilliant  writer,  an  eminent  thinker,  a  journalist 
of  talent  and  knowledge,  well  versed  in  political  questions,  a 
man  of  lofty  character,  Mr.  Morley  undoubtedly  was  a  member 
of  a  stamp  which  is  unfortunately  too  rare  in  the  English  Par- 
liament as  well  as  in  all  Parliaments.  But  being  introduced 
to  Newcastle  by  the  Caucus,  he  was  unlucky  enough  to  serve 
as  a  screen  for  its  mancenvres.  The  very  manner  of  his  nom- 
ination seemed  rather  suspicious  to  independent  opinion  and 


.coy  Google 


Saa  DBHOCRACT  AND  FOLITICAL  PARTIES     [bbcond  pam 

had  tlie  appearance  of  being  directed  ^^inst  it.  In  the  morn- 
ing the  telegram  announcing  the,  to  the  public  at  all  events, 
unexpected  resignation  of  Mr.  Cowen's  coUe^ue  arrived  at 
Newcastle;  in  the  evening  Mr.  Morley,  who  had  been  sum- 
moned from  London  b;  telegraph,  was  on  the  spot,  and  all 
the  formal  proceedings  for  the  selection  of  a  candidate  —  con- 
sideration of  his  claims  by  the  executive  committee,  discussion 
of  its  report  in  the  meeting  of  the  "hundreds,"  and  finally 
the  introduction  of  the  candidate  to  a  special  meeting  of  elec- 
tors—  waa  got  through  by  the  next  day.  For  the  candidature 
of  a  stranger,  even  a  distinguished  one,  in  a  place  where  local 
feelii^  is  highly  developed,  and  where  there  were  possible  can- 
didates who  were  well-known  and  respected  in  the  neighbour- 
hooif  this  rapid  action  was  certainly  extraordinary.  The 
desired  efFect  of  the  fait  accompli,  intended  to  discourage 
any  other  serious  candidature,  was  produced,  and  the  candidate 
of  the  Caucus  was  elected.  Eucourf4^  by  this  success,  the 
Caucus  became  still  more  intolerant  and  intractable  with  re- 
gard to  its  grievances  i^ainst  the  too  independent  member. 
These  grievances  were  many:  Mr.  Cowen  was  not  loyal  to 
the  Liberal  party;  he  would  not  admit  the  authority  of  the 
Organization  representing  local  Liberalism  in  its  relations  with 
the  electors ;  he  paid  no  attention  to  it  in  his  votes  in  the  House ; 
and  lastly  he  repelled  all  interference  of  the  Caucus  in  the 
policy  of  the  newspaper  which  he  published  at  Newcastle 
(yeiocattle  Chroiiide).  The  Caucus  held  that  in  its  capacity 
of  official  representative  of  local  Liberalism  it  ought  to  con- 
trol all  the  political  utterances  of  the  Liberal  members  of  the 
locality,  whether  on  the  platform  or  in  the  Press.  Subse- 
quently, at  the  time  of  the  enquiries  made  by  the  author  of  this 
work,  the  leaders  of  the  Caucus  observed  not  without  bitter- 
ness :  "  Why,  Mr.  Morley  assured  us  that  he  was  responsible 
to  us  for  what  appeared  in  his  newspaper,  and  he  (Cowen)  de- 
clined all  responsibility."  The  XewcaMle  Chronicle,  a  pioneer 
of  English  democracy  (it  had  existed  tor  more  than  a  century) 
had  never  been  the  servant  of  any  party,  and  Cowen  took  care 
to  keep  up  the  tradition.  To  compete  with  him  in  this  line  as 
well,  the  Newcastle  Caucus  started  an  orthodox  paper  with  a 
subsidy  from  the  headquarters  of  the  party.  In  its  war  a^nst 
Cowen  the  Caucus  made  extensive  use  of  public  meetings,  of 


.coy  Google 


■IXTH  CHIP.]  THE  CAUCUS  IN  POWER  2S7 

gatherings  of  the  "hundred,"  in  which  the  charges  just  re- 
ferred to  were  constantly  brought  a^inat  him,  and  in  which 
resolutions  of  censure,  of  indignation,  of  denunciation,  were 
inrariably  voted.  At  the  same  time  they  secretly  worked  on 
the  electors  by  means  of  the  old  but  always  successful  device, 
that  if  you  only  throw  enough  mud,  some  of  it  is  sure  to  stick. 
Cowen  was  in  league  with  the  Tories  —  this  was  the  awful 
truth  revealed  to  the  electors  who  in  the  ingenuousness  of 
their  hearta  had  placed  their  confidence  in  a  traitor.  Cowen 
paid  no  heed  to  the  attacks  of  the  Caucus  and  did  not  even 
condescend  to  reply  to  them  as  did  Forster  for  instance,  who 
met  the  Liberal  Association  of  Bradford  with  courteous  expla- 
nations "  due  to  so  important  a  section  of  the  constituency," 

At  the  general  election  of  1885  the  Caucus  made  a  final  effort 
against  Cowen  while  affecting  a  complete  neutrality  with  regard 
to  him.  The  minions  of  the  Caucus  scoured  the  district,  appeal- 
ing to  every  susceptibility,  to  every  prejudice,  to  every  malig- 
nant feeling.  "  What,"  they  said  to  the  electors,  "  you  are 
going  to  vote  for  this  sworn  friend  of  the  Irish,  of  the  Papists, 
the  enemies  of  our  Protestant  religion  and  of  the  English 
race ! "  The  Catholics  were  addressed  in  another  fashion : 
"Just  consider  what  this  man  is,  a  friend  of  Garibaldi,'  of 
the  tormentor  of  the  Pope."  "  He  assumes,"  they  went  on, "  the 
attitude  of  an  independent  politician  who  only  follows  his  con- 
victions and  listens  to  the  voice  of  his  conscience,  but  it  is  only 
a  mask  for  hiding  his  disloyally  to  Liberalism."  At  the  elec- 
tion meetings  they  turned  up  with  scores  of  questions  prepared 
beforehand  and  requested  Mr.  Cowen  to  answer  them  on  the 
spot,  in  the  hope  that  in  the  shower  of  questions  he  would 
lose  his  balance  and  commit  himself.  He  replied  with  calm- 
ness and  dignity.  In  a  series  of  admirable  speeches,'  full  of 
facts  and  ideas,  he  initiated  his  audiences,  as  in  fact  he  always 
did,  into  the  political  questions  which  had  come  before  Parlia- 
ment. While  pointing  out  the  solution  which  he  thought  they 
required  and  for  which  he  had  voted,  he  left  the  electors  to  de- 

>  CowoD  had  been  B  frisnd  of  GttrilMldl  who  pkld  biro  a  vlglt  U  New- 
cutla  BDd  ha  gavs  the  Italian  patriot  much  help  in  Ms  efforts  on  beluUt  of 
Italian  niiit;. 

'They  have  bona  pnbllghed  In  book  form:  SpeechtM  delivered  by  Jairpk 
Cmcen  tu  Candidate  /or  A'eiccoifJe-upon-TV'x  at  Vit  Oeneral  Election  issb, 
Newcaatle-OD-Tyne.  ISBfi. 


.coy  Google 


388  DEMOCHA.CY  AND  POLITICAL  PARTIES     [second  past 

cide  on  hia  cooduct.  Avoiding  all  controversy,  all  recrimination 
against  the  Newcastle  Caucus,  he  to\iched  on  all  the  questions 
of  principle  which  were  at  stake  in  the  conflict  with  the  eleva- 
tion of  views,  the  dignified  language,  and  the  manly  frankness 
which  distinguished  him,  —  questions  of  the  relations  between 
a  member  and  his  constituents,  of  party  ties,  of  political  organ- 
izations. Referring  to  his  OTfn  particular  case,  he  said :  "  I  will 
in  a  sentence  or  two  summarize  my  grounds  of  difference.  I 
put  first  Liberal  principles.  They  put  first  the  Liberal  party. 
I  care  most  for  measures.  They  care  more  for  men.  In  this 
lies  all  the  quarrel.  .  .  .  Party  is  simply  a  means  to  an  end. 
It  is  not  the  end.  Leaders  are  all  very  well  in  their  place,  but 
none  of  them  are  infallible,  and  I  will  surrender  my  jui^ment 
in  matters  of  principle  to  no  man,  however  powerful,  and  to 
no  body  of  men,  however  numerous." ' 

This  bold  attitude,  if  it  did  not  convert  the  masses  roused 
to  fanaticism  by  the  Caucus,  filled  Cowen's  old  electors  with 
pride,  extorted  the  admiration  of  his  Tory  opponents,  and 
found  an  echo  outside  Newcastle  in  Radicals  of  the  old  school. 
Cooper,'  the  last  survivor  of  the  great  Chartist  leaders,  wrote 
to  Cowen :  "  I  am  delighted  to  ace  your  noble  determination 
to  have  no  committee  and  to  defy  the  hateful  Caucus.  Here 
my  hearts  grieves  to  see  what  they  have  done "  (here  follows 
an  account  of  tlie  doings  of  tlie  Caucus  of  the  locality,  which 
had  ousted  a  veteran  of  the  democracy  from  the  seat,  to  bring 
in  a  big  manufacturer  whose  emjtioy&t  were  among  the  leaders 
of  the  Caucus).  "Go  on,  my  dear  friend,  keep  your  noble 
and  independent  way,  and  may  you  conquer  every  foe.  Alas ! 
for  the  poor  '  workies,'  they  do  so  fail  in  gratitude.  But  we 
must  not  heed  that.  They  are  otirs,  my  friend.  We  are  sworn 
to  their  cause,  let  the  sacrifice  be  what  it  will  —  only  we  will 
not  he  their  tiftvea."' 

The  caucuses  of  the  whole  northern  district  were  anxiously 

1  ^echa,  p.  136. 

1  Thomas  Cooper,  who  paid  for  the  part  which  he  played  In  tha  Chartist 
movemeat  by  long  years  of  imprisoumeut.  pretierved  up  to  (he  close  of  his 
Itte  the  pure  and  ardent  love  fur  the  [teople  which  animated  liiin,  and  was  an 
example  of  one  of  the  noblest  types  vhkh  militant  democracy  has  produced 
In  our  a^e.  He  was  the  author  of  a  remarkable  po«m  entitled  The  Piirgalory 
of  Suiciilei.  but,  as  was  observed  on  ihe  o.-casioii  of  bi«  death  (in  1892),  bis  Ufa 
was  his  be9t  poera.  ■  Sptechei,  p.  2U1. 


.CD,  Google 


MXTH  CHAf.]  THE  CAUCUS  IN  POWEK  239 

awaiting  the  issue  of  the  conflict  at  Newcastle.  Each  of  them 
considered  Cowen  as  a.  personal  enemy.  They  gave  the  New- 
castle Association  their  moral  support  and  even  more.  The 
Caucus  of  the  town  of  Sunderland,  to  help  in  exhorting  the 
electors,  sent  it  a  gang  of  ene^etic  and  roughish  men  who 
accentuated  the  tone  of  the  electoral  campaign  in  their  own 
fashion.  Things  reached  such  a  pitch  that  Cowen  was  mobbed 
in  the  streets,  and  had  ^ud  and  stones  thrown  at  him.  On 
hearing  of  this  outrage,  the  leader  of  the  Caucus,  a  man  re- 
spected and  respectable  in  his  private  capacity,  was  much 
distressed.  He  and  his  lieutenants,  at  least  those  who  stood 
nearest  to  him,  were  far  from  having  provoked  not  only  the 
personal  violence,  but  even  the  abuse  of  which  Cowen  was 
the  victim,  but  they  had  let  loose  the  party  fanaticism  of  the 
mob,  had  stimulated  it  to  fury  by  means  of  organization,  and 
eventually  they  were  overborne. 

At  the  election  Cowen  headed  the  poU,  but  the  number  of 
electors  who  would  not  vote  for  him  was  enoriffous.  There 
could  be  no  doubt  about  it,  his  position  waa  to  a  great  extent 
undermined.  He  felt  the  blow  and  when  thanking  his  sup- 
porters for  having  returned  him  once  more  he  declared  that  he 
would  never  stand  for  Newcastle  again.  And  when  the  Parlia- 
ment elected  in  1885  was  dissolved  (in  1886),  Cowen  did  not 
come  forward-  In  reply  to  invitations  to  stand,  he  explained 
that  it  was  impossible  for  him  to  accept  the  position  which  the 
Caucus  imposed  on  a  member.  He  reminded  his  constituents 
that  he  readily  submitted  to  party  requirements  except  when 
his  conscience  bade  him  take  up  an  independent  attitude,  and 
pointing  out  how  this  claim  to  think  for  himself,  and  vote 
in  accordance  with  his  convictions,  had  drawn  upon  him  the 
hatred  and  the  persecution  of  the  Caucus,  he  said:  "This  con- 
duct did  not  concern  me  greatly  while  it  was  confined  to  a  body 
of  bilious  party  zealots,  but  at  the  last  election  their  proceed- 
ings were  endorsed  by  upwards  of  TOGO  Liberal  electors,  who 
not  only  voted  against  me,  but  some  of  them  accompanied 
their  opposition  by  acts  of  personal  violence  which  I  have  cer- 
taioiy  not  forgotten,  and  (I  fear)  not  forgiven.  After  such  a 
demonstration,  there  was  no  other  course  but  retirement  open 
to  an  honourable  and  independent  man.  I  am  willing  to  do 
my  duty  in  any  sphere,  however  high  or  however  humble,  to 


.coy  Google 


240  DEMOCRACV  AND  1*0LITICAL  PABTiES     [secoku  p*m 

-which  my  fellow-citizens  call  me;  but  I  am  uuder  no  obli- 
gation to  become  a  party  slave,  or  subject  myself  to  spiteful 
persecution  for  no  useful  purpose.  What  the  Caucus  wants  is 
a  political  machine.     I  am  a  man,  not  a  machine.  ,  ,  ,"  * 

Joseph  Cowen  retired  from  political  life. 

The  Caucus  had  won  the  day. 

rv      • 

The  defeat  which  it  inflicted  on  Oowen  was  more  than  a  per- 
sonal defeat;  it  marked  in  a  striking  way  the  overthrow  of  the 
political  tendency  which  Cowen  personified,  of  the  old  Radical- 
ism which  relied  solely  on  principles  as  a  motive  of  action, 
for  which  private  judgment  was  not  only  the  first  of  rights  but 
even  the  first  of  duties,  in  the  eyes  of  which  all  subjection,  all 
dependence,  whether  it  came  fi-om  above  or  from  below,  waa 
equally  contemptible,  and  which,  deaf  to  the  seductions  of 
power,  had  too  much  faith  in  the  influence  of  well-propagated 
ideas  to  take  unfair  advantage  of  the  material  strength  of  the 
masses  and  too  much  moral  and  intellectual  pride  to  win  them 
by  flattery  and  cajolery.  The  representatives  of  the  old  Radi- 
calism left  standing  after  the  advent  of  the  Caucus  felt  and 
saw  that  the  latter  was  scattering  their  ideals,  their  political 
and  moral  conceptions  to  the  winds,  and  they  shouted  a  warning 
to  all  within  hearing.  The  pretext  that  the  Caucus  was  serv- 
ing the  cause  of  Liberalism  did  not  allay  the  anxiety  even  of 
such  of  these  Radicals  as  were  closely  connected  with  ofiBcial 
Liberalism.  Thus  Mr.  Leonard  Courtney  was  not  stopped  by 
his  position  as  Under-Secretary  of  State  in  the  Gladstone 
Ministry  from  putting  the  democracy  on  their  guard  f^ainst 
the  new  tendencies.  Addressing  his  electors  on  the  occasion 
of  the  inauguration  of  a  political  Association  of  workmen,  he 
pointed  out  that  the  first  care  of  such  societies  should  be  to 
make  their  members  think.  "Teach  them,"  he  said,  "to  dis- 
cuss and  examine  and  criticise  and  probe  to  the  bottom  the  dif- 
ferent problems  set  before  them.  Do  not  bring  working-men 
together  simply  for  the  purpose  of  passing  a  prearranged  vote." 
While  warning  them  against  those  who  pretend  that  Working- 
men's  Associations  have  no  concern  with  education,  but  that 
1  Times,  2d  of  Julr,  1886. 


.coy  Google 


HXTB  OBir.]  THE  CAUCUS  IN  POWEB  241 

the  object  of  them  is  "  to  make  use  of  the  force  that  working* 
men  poasess,  to  bring  it  into  play,  to  prevent  its  being  wasted, 
to  use  it  in  the  most  powerful  manner  when  occasion  arises  for 
its  employment,"  Mr.  Courtney  observed  that  machinery  was 
useless  if  it  lacked  motive  power,  that  it  waa  idle  if  it  did  not 
preserve  and  develop  individual  force,  and  that  it  might  even 
become  daogeroua  by  reducing  men  to  the  level  of  automa- 
tona,  "Now  you  may  ask,"  added  Mr.  Courtney,  "  why  is  il 
I  have  suggested  these  things  for  your  reflection  to-day  ?  Is 
there  any  danger  that  the  Association  we  are  inaugurating  to- 
night or  corresponding  Associationg  that  have  been  established 
throughout  the  country  may  be  affected  in  this  manner?  I 
think  there  is.  I  think  we  see  in  our  country  a  tendency  of 
machinery  to  supersede  individuality,  and  a  tendency  on  the 
part  of  tiie  people  to  trust  to  machinery  instead  of  maintain- 
ing individual  activity.  There  are  creeping  among  us  some 
of  the  signs  of  a  detestable  demagogism  ...  so  that  we  are 
in  danger  through  the  popularization  of  our  institutions  of 
degrading  our  political  life."  ' 

^Exhortations  of  this  kind  did  not  find  much  echo  in  the 
country  nor  men  to  bestow  them  on  the  public.  Those  who 
uttered  them,  those  who  still  confessed  and  professed  the 
creed  of  old  Radicalism,  daily  appeared  with  more  distinctness, 
both  to  themselves  and  to  others,  like  the  survivors  of  an 
extinct  race.  Mr.  Joseph  Cowen  noted  it  with  melancholy: 
"  Radicalism  as  expounded  by  these  Fathers  of  the  Futh  has 
become  a  tradition  merely.  .  .  .  Here  and  there  a  Radical  of 
the  old  type  may  be  found,  but  he  lives  in  the  midst  of  a  popu- 
lation that  does  not  understand  him,  A  Fifth-monarchy  Man 
would  hardly  be  more  out  of  place.  .  .  .  When  the  'dew  of 
youth  was  fresh  upon  me,'  I  espoused  the  principles  and  be- 
came enamoured  of  the  teachings  of  these  apostles  of  philo- 
sophic democracy.  Amidst  every  vicissitude  of  fortune  and 
life,  I  have  striven  to  be  faithful  to  their  traditions  and  to 
uphold  —  I  only  know  too  well  at  how  great  a  distance — their 
policy  and  to  expound  their  creed.  But  a  generation  has 
arisen  that  'does  not  know  Joseph.'  They  conceive  all  inde- 
pendent thought  heresy,  all  generosity  to  opponents  weakness, 
and  are  puzzled  and  alarmed  when  praise  or  blame  is  dispensed 
>  speech  M  LlBheard,  Tiniea,  25th  of  November,  1881. 


.coy  Google 


242  DEMOCRACY  AND  POLITICAL  PABTIES    [bbcokd  part 

diBcrimiDately,  when  a  man's  principles  don't  turn  with  the 
tide  and  the  times,  when  more  regard  is  shown  for  measures 
than  for  men,  for  truth  than  for  victory," ' 

Divided  by  a  guif  from  the  Liberal  middleKilass,  from  the 
plutocracy  with  the  Liberal  trade-in  ark,  the  old  Kadicals  were 
just  as  unable  to  appeal  to  the  militant  elements  of  Liberalism, 
to  the  progressives.  The  Caucus,  with  all  the  tendencies  which 
it  embodied,  absorbed  most  of  these  elements,  except  a  few 
groups  of  irreconcilables  and  extremists,  and  the  classic  Radi- 
cals remained,  so  to  speak,  in  the  air.  There  was  no  longer 
room  for  them  under  the  Caucus.  Cowen's  case  showed  with 
startling  clearness  that  there  conld  be  no  exception  to  the  gen- 
eral rule ;  it  was  no  use  trying  to  combine  the  thoughtful  and 
independent  Radical  with  the  tribune  and  the  man  of  action 
capable  of  rousing  the  masses;  the  one  excluded  the  other. 

The  old  Radicalism  was  dead,  quite  dead. 


Classic  Radicalism  was  already  breathing  its  last  when  the 
Caucus  came  into  power,  and  the  latter  in  reality  was  only  its 
undertaker  and  its  grave-digger.  The  case  was  not  the  same 
with  moderate  Liberalism,  which  the  Caucus  found  still  erect  and 
on  which  it  fastened  in  a  special  way.  Of  less  purer  metal  than 
classic  Radicalism,  with  a  considerable  admixture  of  alloy,  it 
stood  wear  and  tear  better.  It  was  not  dead  toward  the  end 
of  Gladstone's  second  Ministry,  but  it  also  was  hard  hit,  and 
in  its  best  points.  The  old  Liberalism  was  not  represented 
merely  by  aristocratic  Whigs  of  reactionary  tendencies  and  plu- 
tocrats engendered  by  the  successful  middle-class.  It  included 
a  good  many  men  who  without  attaining  to  the  moral  grandeur 
of  the  classic  Radicals,  whose  spirit  had  the  temper  of  steel, 
were  sterling  characters,  with  genuine  popular  sympathies, 
with  a  broad-minded  faith  in  mankind  and  in  liberty,  of  manly 
independence  allied  to  wise  moderation.  They  did  not  repre- 
sent so  much  a  caste  or  a  class,  ai  a  real  political  temperament, 
the  moderate  temperament  in  tlie  best,  that  is  to  say,  in  the 
true  sense  of  the  word.  Forstir'a  case  proved  that  they  too 
I  ot  January,   1881  (Li/t  and 


.coy  Google 


BiXTH  CBAP.]  THE   CAUCUS   IN   POWER  243 

could  not  find  favour  in  the  eyes  of  the  new  Radicalism,  and 
as  it  happened,  not  because  of  the  failings  of  the  aristocratico- 
plutocra^ic  Whiggiam,  from  which  they  were  more  or  leas  free, 
but  owing  to  their  qualities  of  tirm  and  sober  moderation  and 
independence  of  mind,  which  were  particularly  odious  to  the 
new  Radicalism.  Even  if  it  had  a  liking  for  them,  ita  machine, 
the  Caucus,  with  its  rigidly  uniform  action,  was  not  suited  for 
the  logical  or  ethical  operations  of  sorting  or  selection;  it 
crushed  or  threw  out  everything  that  did  not  fit  into  its 
mould. 

There  was  a  collision  and  an  explosion  when  men  of  great 
force  of  character  like  Forster  were,  in  question ;  the  process 
went  on  more  quietly  in  the  immense  majority  of  instances 
in  which  the  material  was  more  malleable,  as  is  generally  the 
case  with  men  of  moderate  opinions ;  they  were  assimilated  or 
eliminated  without  much  friction  or  noise.  This  double  opera- 
tion, which  we  have  been  able  to  observe  from  the  first  appear- 
ance of  the  Caucus  Associations,  was  perceptibly  accentuated 
by  the  victory  of  1880  and  by  the  impression  which  it  gave, 
rightly  or  wrongly,  of  the  strength  of  the  new  Radicalism 
represented  by  the  Caucus.  In  reality,  as  has  been  proved 
above,  the  Whig  contingents  had  not  fought  this  battle  with 
less  success,  or  demonstrated  their  existence  in  a  less  conclu- 
sive fashion.  Mr.  Gladstone  made  allowance  for  this.  Often 
as  he  exerted  himself  to  evoke  the  democracy,  be  none  the 
less  remained,  owing  to  his  education  and  the  connections  of 
his  early  career,  as  it  were  a  Conservative  brake  on  the  new 
Liberalism,  especially  in  regard  to  forms  handed  down  by  tra- 
dition which  left  a  deep  impression  on  his  character.  Conse- 
quently when  he  returned  to  power  he  felt  bound  to  give  the 
Whigs  their  proper  share  in  the  government,  and  he  adorned 
his  Ministry  with  a  goodly  number  of  lords,  half  of  whom  had 
seats  in  the  Cabinet  The  Whigs  were  not  much  better  off  for 
this.  In  the  Cabinet  the  Radicals  were  in  a  small  minority, 
but  in  the  country  they  soon  managed  to  reverse  the  propor- 
tions, chiefly  by  means  of  the  new  Oi^nization. 

The  equilibrium  between  the  moderate  and  the  Radical  ele- 
ment in  the  "hundreds,"  which  at  first  was  preserved  after  a 
fashion,  was  destroyed  after  1880.  The  advanced  element  be- 
gan to  press  the  moderates  closely,  being  excited  by  the  victory 


.coy  Google 


iU  DEMOCRACY  AND  POLITICAL  PARTIES    [sicowd  fiBT 

at  the  geueral  election  and  by  the  decisive  tone  of  the  policy  of 
the  Gladstone  Ministry,  which  seemed  to  show  that  the  tide 
was  flowing  on  the  side  of  the  militants.  Their  propelling 
force  was  at  the  same  time  considerably  increased  by  a  change 
of  seeming  insignificance,  in  the  external  conditions  of  the 
Associations,  —  the  abolition  of  the  subscription.  According  to 
the  "  Birmingham  plan  "  it  was  optional,  but  in  several  Associa- 
tions, especially  in  those  which  had  been  formed  out  of  the  ele- 
ments of  the  old  registration  societies,  it  was  still  compulsory. 
The  extreme  smallness  of  the  sum  —  two  shillings  or  one  shil- 
ling a  year  —  could  not,  it  would  appear,  keep  any  one  out;  it 
was  not,  strictly  speaking^a  qualification.  However,  it  did  not 
find  favour,  and  after  1880  the  subscription  was  no  longer  de- 
manded in  almost  all  the  caucuses-  The  Associations  w^re 
soon  filled  with  members  who  paid  nothing  but  held  forth  a 
good  deal.  Being  swamped  by  numbers,  the  members  who 
belonged  to  the  old  political  staff  carried  a  rule  in  several  local- 
ities that  no  one  could  be  on  the  council  or  the  committee  with- 
out paying  a  trifling  subscription,  but  this  remained  a  dead 
letter.  A  moderate  and  conciliatory  spirit  was  not  the  distin- 
guishing mark  of  the  non-paying  members;  they  were  rather 
inclined  to  display  the  contrary,  if  only  for  the  purpose  of 
asserting  their  equality  with  those  who  paid.  Among  the 
moderates  gome,  of  a  politic  turn,  let  them  act  or  rather  shout 
as  they  pleased,  in  the  expectation,  which  was  correct  up  to  a 
certain  point,  that  they  would  expend  their  energy  in  vehement 
language  and  demeanour.  Others,  less  Machiavellian  or  less  in- 
dulgent, feeling  more  and  more  out  of  their  element  in  the  Asso- 
ciations, left  them  without,  however,  breaking  with  the  party. 
The  Caucus,  or  what  came  to  the  same  thing,  the  militant  ele- 
ment which  made  the  Caucus  its  stroughold,  only  assumed 
greater  authority  in  consequence ;  it  spoke  in  the  name  of  the 
party,  and  appeared  all  the  more  entitled  to  do  so  because  it 
invariably  supported  the  policy  of  tlie  great  leader  of  the 
party,  of  Mr.  Gladstone,  at  whose  shrine  all  the  Liberals  wor- 
shipped. All  of  them  more  or  less,  therefore,  followed  the 
skirmishers.  The  timid  and  sulky  ones  grumbled,  but  never- 
theless followed,  as  did  their  representatives  in  the  House. 
Others  again,  and  there  were  a  great  many  of  them,  let  them- 
selves go  with  their  eyes  shut,  buoyed  up  by  their  faith  in  Mr. 


.coy  Google 


aizTB  CBAr.]  THE  CAUCUS  IN  POWBR  245 

Gladstone.  Finally  l^e  rest,  more  critical  or  more  timorous, 
would  have  much  liked  to  resist,  but  what  were  they  to  do  ? 
They  bad  no  organization  of  their  own.  The  Associations  of 
the  old  type  (Begiatration  Societies  and  others),  which  survived 
and  which  supplied  the  old-faahioned  Liberals  with  a  base  of 
operations,  hastened  after  1880,  in  order  to  coniply  with  practi- 
cal requirements  or  with  f aohion,  to  remodel  themselTes  on  the 
"  Birmii^ham  plan,"  and  after  having  chatted  their  skin  they 
soon  worked  themselves  up  to  Cancus  pitch.  Then  what  fl^ 
were  the  moderate  Liberals  to  hoist,  or  what  cry  could  they 
adopt?  Were  they  to  proclaim  themselves  the  real  and  only 
depositaries  of  historic  Liberalism  ?  This  was  perhaps  a 
demonstrable  proposition  for  the  learned  in  history,  but  the 
bulk  of  the  party  flocked  towards  the  sign,  and  this  was  out- 
side the  door  of  the  Caucus,  brand-new  and  with  flaming  let- 
ten  :  The  Liberal  500,  the  Liberal  600,  the  Liberal  800 !  aod  all 
"  representative,"  "  strictly  representative  "  of  the  Liberal  party, 
all  recognized  and  quoted  on  the  great  exchange  of  Liberalism 
where  ^eir  bills  were  readily  accepted  and  they  themselves 
were  drawn  upon  even  more  readily.  No  doubt,  tiie  moderates 
always  had  the  resource,  so  important  in  English  electoral  life 
even  in  our  own  day,  of  fortune  and  social  relations.  But  they 
could  only  aval  themselves  of  it  in  exceptional  eases ;  for  their 
own  plutocrat  relatives,  following  the  bent  of  their  opportunist 
temperament,  had  gathered  round  the  new  sign  in  order  to 
have  a  second  string  to  their  bow,  just  as  on  the  turf  a  man 
backs  two  horses  in  the  saine  race  to  make  more  certain  of 
winning.  Consequently,  if  the  moderates  would  not  follow, 
they  were  bound  to  keep  in  the  background.  Under  either  alter- 
native the  organization  of  the  Caucus,  because  it  was  the  or- 
ganization of  the  Liberal  party  commanded  by  Mr,  Gladstone, 
disqualified  them  as  Liberals. 

As  Liberals,  yes,  but  you  can  preserve  the  grace  of  the  mod- 
erate state  as  Conservatives ;  why  don't  you  join  us  then,  cried 
the  Conservatives.  Since  the  Gladstone  Ministry  (of  1880) 
had  set  to  work  and  had  adopted  a  Radical  policy  by  its  reform 
of  the  land  laws  in  Ireland,  the  Tories  had  not  ceased  to  warn 
the  Whigs,  to  point  out  the  depth  of  the  abyss  into  which  they 
were  plunging  after  the  BadicaJs,  who  were  carried  away  hy  the 
demon  of  subversion  and  destruction.     By  way  of  Apologue 


.coy  Google 


24S  DEHOCBACT  AHS  POLITICAL  PARTIES    [aBOOND  pah 

they  quoted  Voltaire's  story  of  the  two  philosophers  who  when 
ordering  a  dish  of  aspara^s  at  an  ion  could  not  ^ree  as  to 
whether  it  should  be  cooked  with  butter  or  plain.  While  they 
were  waiting  for  the  dish  and  beguiling  their  hunger  with  a 
discussion  of  high  metaphysics,  one  of  the  two  philosophers, 
being  heated  by  the  dispute,  had  a  stroke  of  apoplexy,  where- 
upon the  other  rushed  into  the  kitchen  Gr3dng  out :  The  whole 
of  it  plain !  The  same  thing  would  happen  to  the  Whigs  and 
the  Radicals  feasting  togetiier ;  the  end  would  be  the  death  of 
Liberalism  dressed  with  melted  butter,  and  Radicalism  would 
be  served  up  quite  plain. 

"  Cut  yourself  adrift" — the  advice  was  easy  to  give  but  not 
so  easy  to  follow.  They  were  tolerably  near  the  Conservatives 
in  point  c^  feeling,  no  doubt ;  but  what  a  gap  was  placed  be- 
tween the  two  by  the  memory  of  long  struggles  and  of  rival- 
ries, of  traditiouEil  and  hereditary  grudges ;  by  the  amour-propre 
of  a  man  with  a  house  of  his  own,  to  whom  it  would  be  worse 
than  death  to  take  up  an  abode  in  a  lodging  in  his  old  age. 
His  old-fashioned  mansion  is  heavily  mortgaged,  it  seems  to 
sink  under  the  weight  of  encumbrances  and  lawsuits,  but  it 
still  bears  his  name,  and  it  is  there  that  everybody  comes  to  see 
htm.  If  the  worst  comes  to  the  worst,  if  fate  is  inexorable,  well 
then  ...  in  any  event  there  will  always  be  time  to  leave  the 
old  home.  The  Whiga,  therefore,  in  great  perplexity  and  de- 
moralized by  the  sight  of  the  tide  of  Radicalism  submerging 
their  venerable  principles  and  their  liabits,  did  not  flatly  reject 
the  advances  made  to  them,  but  replied  that  the  time  had  not 
yet  arrived  and  perhaps  would  never  arrive,  that  the  advent  of 
a  revolutionary  party  was  not  at  present  a  suiScient  reason  for 
discarding  the  good  elements  of  Liberalism,  and  that  their 
position  was  not  so  desperate;  that  Whigs  and  Radicals  could 
still  fight  side  by  side  for  many  years  to  come ;  that  it  could  not 
even  be  otherwise,  for  "they  (the  Whigs)  could  do  nothing 
without  the  Radicals,  and  the  Radicals,  in  spito  of  all  their 
bluster,  could  do  nothing  without  them." '    And  if,  they  said 

'"The  WblgB,"  yintli^'Jtlh  Century,  Jaiy,  1883,  by  Lord  Cowper  (wbo  bad 
Jost  lett  th«  QIadstone  Mlolstry  with  W,  E.  Foriter,  Id  consequence  of  the 
" EllmBinham  treaty"  made  with  Parnell).  CI.  also  "The  Rerolotioaary 
Party,"  by  Lord  Dunraven  (Ibid.,  August,  ISSl) ;  "  The  Uberal  Victory  from 
a  CoQseivative  Point  of  View,"  by  Allr«d  Austin  (Foriniahllu  Rtvitw,  Ut 


.coy  Google 


tixTB  CHAP.]  THE  CAnCUS   IN   POWER  247 

to  themselves,  there  is  a  dissolution  of  partnership,  what  is  to 
become  of  the  firm,  and  how  are  the  customers  to  be  kept  ? 
This,  in  fact,  was  the  great  preoccupation  of  the  Whigs,  which 
made  them  follow  with  many  a  grumble  or  groan.  It  was  still 
the  question  of  the  sign,  though  looked  at  from  another  point  of 
view.  And  it  was  not  only  considerations  of  interest  tliat  were 
involved  for  them  ;  responsibility  and  dul^  were  also  at  stake. 
The  authority  of  the  Whig  partners  was  impaired  in  the  estab- 
lishment and  even  disregarded  by  a  great  number  of  customers, 
but  still  they  were  able  to  sign  for  the  firm;  thanks  to  the  deli- 
cate attention  of  Mr.  Gladstone,  they  had  a  numerical  majority 
in  the  Cabinet  This  contradictory  position  of  the  Whig 
leaders  made  them  repress  the  anxiety  and  the  apprehension 
aroused  by  Radicalism  with  its  great  engine  of  war,  the  Cau- 
cus, and  even  check  tendencies  towards  resistance  among  their 
followers. 

Tendencies  of  this  kind  showed  themselves  here  and  there 
in  the  provinces.  Liberals  of  sincere  convictions  but  thor- 
oughly moderate  temperament  came  to  the  conclusion  that  the 
game  was  up,  and  they  wished  to  have  an  open  rupture  with 
the  Caucus  and  start  a  moderate  Organization  against  it.  The 
great  Whig  chiefs  in  London  to  whom  the  scheme  was  sub- 
mitted replied  that  they  quite  sympathized  with  the  views  of 
their  moderate  friends,  that  they  shared  their  opinions  only 
too  strongly,  but  in  the  end  they  pronounced  against  the  plan 
of  a  new  Organization  in  order  not  to  break  up  the  Liberal 
party.'  It  was  still  the  question  of  the  firm  that  preoccupied 
them.  This  advice  was  deferred  to,  and  the  scheme  for  an 
independent  Organization  of  moderates  was  given  up.  It  is 
very  doubtful  moreover,  for  the  reasons  stated  above,  whether 
they  would  have  succeeded  in  stemming  the  Caucus.  They 
were  too  doctrinaire,  too  sober  for  the  masses,  as  may  be  seen 
from  the  analysis  of  one  of  these  draft  schemes  which  has  been 
communicated  to  me,  the  programme  of   a  Moderate   Liberal 

June,  1880)  ;  "WhIgB,  RadlcaU,  and  ConaervBtiveB"  (Quarlfrlu  flcpteto.Vol. 
CL.  1880) ;  "  Tbe  Position  of  tbe  Whigs."  by  C.  M.  Qaskell  [NinefKnlh  Cen- 
lurv, December,  ISSl);  "  A Wbig Retort"  (i'd.nfttirffftfieitieuj,  January,  1882}; 
'■  Future  of  Parties  and  Politics  "  ( Quarlerlji  RevitiB.  Vol.  CLVI.  1883). 

'  I  have  been  made  acquainted  with  a  correspou deuce  exchanged  on  tUs 
BObJect,  in  1SK4,  between  some  modernte  Libprals  of  one  of  the  largest  towns 
In  LAncashite.  and  Lord  Uartingtoii  and  Mr,  Goschen. 


.CD,  Google 


248  DGMOCBACT  AND  POLmCAL  FABTIES    [bboimd  fam 

Union.  Paragraph  2  of  this  document  ran  as  follows :  "  Since 
it  is  a  fact  that  in  political  contention  only  those  triumphs  are 
enduriug  which  result  in  an  admission  by  the  conquered  of  the 
justice  of  the  victor's  cause,  and  that  political  action  can  only 
be  permanently  successful  where  reaction  is  barred,  this  Asso- 
ciation shall  rather  strive  to  undermine  and  slowly  extirpate 
adverse  opinion  and  convert  its  professors  than  attempt  to 
stifle  utterance  and  imperiously  coerce  its  professors."  Stipu- 
lating that  the  Association  would  be  open  to  every  Liberal, 
however  radical  his  views,  the  scheme  declared  that  the  very 
fact  of  his  joining  the  Association  would  mean  on  their  part 
"  both  a  readiness  to  accept  compromise  and  an  abandonment 
of  all  effort  to  force  on  premature  measures  by  violent  language 
and  fanatical  agitation;"  "the  Association  does  not  pledge 
itself  to  support  any  delinite  Liberal  principle  nor  to  uphold 
or  seek  to  establish  any  delinite  Liberal  political  system ;  but 
it  is  a  confederacy  of  Liberals  of  a  particular  temperament 
and  cast  of  mind  to  support  the  political  action  of  other  Lib- 
erals of  the  same  moral  and  intellectual  character.  For  such 
as  these  there  is  uo  need  to  lay  down  principles  or  formnlate 
political  creeds ;  for  from  where  Liberals  assemble  to  consult 
for  the  public  good  and  moderation  prevails,  Truth,  Reason, 
and  Justice  cannot  be  absent." ' 

Prevented,  in  spite  of  their  inmost  feelings,  from  leaving  the 
ranks  of  official  Liberalism,  the  moderates  were  anything  but 
reassured.  And  before  long,  on  the  eve  of  the  general  election 
(of  1885)  when  the  principal  representative  of  the  new  Radi- 
calism and  the  creator  of  the  Caucus,  Mr.  Chamberlain,  issued 
his  "  unauthorized  programme,"  a  panic  took  place  among  the 

'The  priDt«iI  cop;  of  the  draft  sctaeme  placed  at  my  disposal  was  anno- 
Uted  bj-  tta  aathon  with  a  freedom  ol  laoKiuigo  and  style  wblcb  reSeelod  the 
Inmoit  thouKbts  of  ttaelr  political  co-rellKlDnUtB  much  belter  than  tbe  stale 
and  prnsy  document  wblrh  we  have  just  analyzed,  and  fur  Ihia  reason  snioe 
Interest  may  attach  to  the  reproduction  of  these  annotntlona.  Paragraph  1, 
which  proclaims  that  the  object  of  the  Association  irill  be  the  ilefence  of  Ub- 
eral  principles,  tbe  diffusion  of  Lllieral  iietta,  and  the  maintenance  of  the  Lib- 
eral party  In  power,  Is  commented  on  by  the  remark :  '.*  Avoid  accusatioa  ol 
Torylim."  The  other  parSKniphs  analyiod  above  are  accompanied  by  the  fol- 
lowing annotations :  "  Liberal  party  used  to  be  the  party  of  freedom ;  dow  Llb- 
srals  are  becoming  a  parly  o(  coercion ;  "  "  The  chief  character  toietstlon  — 
even  Chamberlain  admissible  if  he  were  not  so  violent  and  domineering;" 
"  No  horse  onght  to  be  ridden  to  death  ;  "  "  Temperament  tbe  bond  of  Qolnn." 


.coy  Google 


BiiTB  CH*p.]  THE  CAUCUS  IN  POWER  MB 

moderate  Liberals.  It  was  no  loDger  from  benevolent  Tories, 
it  was  from  their  own  camp  that  a  cry  went  forth  that  the 
time  had  come,  that  there  was  only  one  thing  to  be  done,  —  to 
go  over  to  the  Conservatives. 

The  Conservatives  might  take  them  in,  but  could  they  offer 
a  shelter,  a  real  shelter  for  their  principles  and  their  habits  ? 
Was  the  ground  which  was  quaking  beneath  their  feet  in  the 
old  abode  of  Liberalism  more  solid  in  the  not  less  old-fashioned 
dwelling  of  Conservatism  ?  \Vhat  was  going  on  behind  the  door 
at  which  the  fugitives  would  demand  admittance  ?  This  is  what 
I  propose  to  investigate  by  returning  to  the  Organization  of  the 
Conservative  party,  which  we  have  left  at  the  moment  when  the 
great  democratio  Beform  of  1867  was  about  to  take  place. 


.coy  Google 


SEVENTH  CHAPTER 

THE  CONSEBTATIVE   OROANIZATION 


The  extension  of  the  parliamentary  Buffri^  to  the  urban 
masses  conceded  by  tlie  Act  of  1867  looked  very  threateniDg 
for  the  Conservative  party.  The  boroughs,  which  had  always 
been  the  stronghold  of  Liberalism,  were  now  about  to  throw  the 
counties  definitively  into  the  shade.  When  taking  the  "leap 
in  the  dark,"  or  rather  after  having  taken  it,  the  Tories,  and 
Disraeli  in  particular,  entertained  the  hope  that  the  popular 
tions  of  the  towns  would  supply  them  as  well  as  the  other 
side  with  an  electoral  contingent,  that  they  could  not  be  deaf 
to  Tory  influences  and  principles.  Whether  this  calculation 
was  a  fanciful  one  or  not,  it  was  clear  that  the  future  of  the 
Conservative  party  would  henceforward  depend  on  the  urban 
voters.  To  lay  hands  on  them  forthwith  became  the  main 
preoccupation  of  the  Conservatives.  They  hastened  to  form 
organizations  for  enlisting  the  new  electors.  As  after  the  year 
1832,  it  was  Lancashire  which  took  the  lead.  In  several 
manufacturing  towns  of  this  county  the  old  "Constitutional 
Societies"  were  revived,  or  new  ones  were  founded.  This 
example  was  followed  in  various  other  places,  but  not  to  any 
very  great  extent.  The  organizing  movement  thus  inaugu- 
rated, which  was  in  a  way  a  new  and  enlarged  edition  of  that 
which  had  been  started  thirty  years  before,  in  consequence  of 
Sir  Robert  Peel's  cry  of  "Register,  Register,  Register!"  was 
characterized  by  a  novel  and  highly  significant  feature:  the 
Conservative  Associations  scattered  throughout  the  country 
were  combined  into  a  confederation,  entitled  the  NtUiotial 
Union  of  Conservative  ajtd  Constitutional  Associations,  repre- 
sented by  a  body  of  delegates  to  be  renewed  from  year  to  year. 
The  business  of  the  Union  was  to  stimulate  and  direct  the 


.coy  Google 


SBTEiTTi]  CHAF.}    THE  CONSERVATIVE  ORGANIZATION  251 

organizing  movement  in  the  country,  by  bringing  about  the  for- 
mation of  new  Associations,  by  helping  the  existing  Oi^aniza- 
tions  with  advice  and  information,  providing  them  with  lectur- 
era  and  speakers  for  their  meetings,  publishing  pamphlets  and 
reprinting  speeches  delivered  on  important  political  questions. 

The  part  assigned  to  the  new  institution  was,  to  be  sure,  not 
of  high  political  importance,  while  the  local  Associations  which 
formed  the  basis  of  the  Union  were  only  voluntary  combina- 
tions of  partisans,  devoid  of  a  representative  character,  mod- 
elled on  the  usual  pattern  of  Registration  Societies.  None  the 
less  the  fact  remained  that  a  new  central  authority,  invested 
with  an  elective  mandate  and  representing,  although  in  an 
indirect  and  incomplete  fashion.  Conservative  opinion  in 
the  country,  was  taking  its  place  in  the  organization  of  the 
Conservative  party  side  by  side  with  the  Whip  appointed  by 
the  parliamentary  leader  of  the  party.  The  power  of  the 
new  authority  could  not  become  a  reality  so  long  as  Con- 
servative opinion  had  no  independent  existence  in  the  true 
sense  of  the  word.  The  body  of  Conservative  opinion  which 
represented  all  that  was  left  standing  after  the  break-up  of 
the  old  society  —  traditions,  interests,  prejudices  —  the  whole 
knit  together  by  ties  of  social  subordination,  continued  as  in 
the  past  to  look  for  and  obey  the  word  of  command  proceeding 
from  above,  from  the  great  chief  of  the  party.  The  Whip  and 
his  colleagues  of  the  Central  Conservative  Office,  who  mantled 
the  electoral  business  of  the  party,  had  therefore  nothing  to 
fear  from  the  Union  which  had  been  set  up  towards  the  end 
of  1867.  They  looked  on  it,  with  some  condescension,  as  an 
auxiliary  which  might  render  service  to  the  cause.  A  few 
years  later,  to  prove  their  good-will  to  the  Union,  they  accom- 
modated it  in  the  rooms  of  the  head  ofBce  of  the  party.  But 
the  new  Organization  took  care  not  to  forget  its  plac«.  "  The 
Union  has  been  organized  rather  as  a  handmaid  to  the  party 
than  tA  usurp  the  functions  of  party  leadership,"*  as  the  presi- 
dent of  the  Union  (H.  Cecil  Raikes)  said  at  one  of  its  first 
annual  meetings.  Although  representative  in  point  of  form, 
the  organization  of  the  Union  was  profoundly  imbued  with  the 
aristocratic  spirit  which  was  the  essence  of  the  old  Toryism. 
Apart  from  the  usual  hierarchy  of  President,  Vice-President, 

•  Report  0/  Fneeedingt  at  the  Sevtnih  Aaniml  Conference,  1873,  p,  10, 


.coy  Google 


268  DEHOCBACY  AND  POLITICAL  PARTIES    [■■cohii  pa» 

etc.,  it  had  Patrons  and  Vice-Patrons,  who  were  generally 
noblemen  and  often  of  the  first  rank,  dukea.  The  Council, 
which  wielded  executive  power,  contained  in  addition  to  the 
delegates  of  local  Associations  a  conaideiable  number  of  oon- 
elected  members. 

The  formation  of  the  local  Associations,  which  at  firat  pro- 
ceeded somewhat  slowly  outside  Lancashire,  received  a  marked 
impulse  after  the  year  1870,  when  Disraeli  entrusted  the  task 
of  organization  to  a  young  barrister  who  has  since  become  one 
of  the  most  conspicuous  of  the  Tory  statesmen,  Mr.  (now  Sir) 
John  Gorst  Devoting  himself  zealously  to  the  discharge  of  his 
duties,  he  looked  out  for  the  energetic  men  of  Tory  views  in 
the  constituencies,  formed  them  into  groups,  stimulated  them 
to  action,  started  Associations,  and  in  a  few  years  succeeded  in 
considerably  extending  the  system  in  the  towns.  Great  pains 
were  taken  to  attract  the  masses  to  the  Organizations.  The 
men  of  action  in  the  party  admitted  that  they  had  "  outlived 
the  time  of  great  family  influences,  and  also  that  period  which 
succeeded  the  Arst  Reform  Bill,  which  might  be  called  the 
period  of  middle-class  influence  in  boroughs,"  and  that  they 
were  "  living  in  a  day  in  which  the  people  were  to  be  applied 
to  in  a  much  more  direct,  clear,  and  positive  manner  than  was 
the  caae  under  the  old  forms  of  the  constitution." '  Besides, 
had  not  the  line  of  the  new  route  been  marked  out  by  the  great 
leader  of  the  party,  by  Mr.  Disraeli  ?  Was  it  not  he  who  had 
long  ago  raised  the  standard  of  popular  Toryism  ? 

n 

Popular  Toryism  was  in  fact  the  bridge  which  Disraeli  built 
for  himself  when  he  passed  from  Radicalism  to  Conservatism 
at  the  beginning  of  his  career.  Throwing  in  his  lot  with  the 
latter,  he  set  to  work  to  clear  Toryism,  in  his  own  mind,  from 
the  stigma  of  being  the  reactionary  party  which  was  generally 
held  to  attach  to  it.  His  subtle  reasoning,  aided  by  a  powerful 
im^natioi),  supplied  him  with  the  historical  theory  that  hos- 
tility to  progress  and  to  civil  and  religious  liberty  was  the  out- 
come of  a  degenerate  Toryism,  demoralized  by  a  long  spell  of 
power  under  exceptional  circumstances ;  that  the  old  Toryism, 
'  Report  qf  Profeedings  qaot«d  abOTe. 


D,g,l,i.aD,  Google 


KTBHTH  CBUP.]    THE  C0N8BBVATIVB  ORGABIZATION  258 

that  of  the  beginning  of  the  eighteenth  century,  far  from  being 
an  exclusive  party,  was  anxious  to  take  in  the  whole  nation  in 
all  the  variety  of  its  constitueat  elements  from  the  Throne 
down  to  the  lowest  strata  of  the  people,  that  it  was  Whiggism 
which  had  monopolized  power  for  the  benefit  of  an  aristocratic 
oligarchy  and  thereby  warped  the  institutions  of  England,  the 
basis  of  which  is  equality,  not  a  levelling  and  destructive  but  an 
elevating  and  constructive  equality,  not  like  that  of  France 
where  the  law  invests  every  citizen  with  equality  to  prevent 
the  elevation  of  his  neighbour,  but  one  which  allows  every 
subject  to  rise  if  he  has  claims  to  distinction.  Every  English- 
man in  fact,  Disraeli  found,  is  born  to  civil  equality  and  can 
aspire  to  the  highest  positions.  With  democratic  liberties 
England  seemed  to  him  to  have  combined  the  advantages  of 
monarchy,  by  having  set  up  a  popular  throne,  and  the  secori^ 
of  an  aristocracy,  by  having  invested  certain  orders  of  citizens 
with  legislative  functions  without  conferring  on  them  exclu- 
sive privileges. 

The  very  genuine  sympathy  for  the  people  which  ran  in  the 
veins  of  Disraeli  the  plebeian,  the  descendant  of  outcasts,  and 
the  admiration  for  grandeur  and  magnificence  in  which  hie 
imagination  indulged,  combined  in  him  to  produce  the  odd 
conception  of  a  popular  throne  and  an  unprivileged  aris- 
tocracy. The  romanticism  of  the  day  sanctioned,  if  it  did  not 
contribute  to  inspire,  the  theory  of  primitive  Toryism;  and 
reinforced  by  the  sentiments  of  revolt  which  the  triumph  of 
the  Liberal  middle  class  in  the  state,  and  of  individualism  in 
the  economic  life  of  the  nation,  had  aroused  in  feeling  minds, 
this  theory  acquired  consistency  and  found  expression  in  the 
Young  England  movement.  The  aroma  of  sentimentalism 
exhaled  by  Young  England  soon  evaporated,  but  Disraeli  re- 
tained his  conception  of  popular  Toryism.  It  remained  his 
creed  iip  to  the  end  of  his  life,  although  he  did  not  put  it  into 
practice. 

To  the  man  of  romance,  living  by  imagination,  he  united  the 
lighting  politician,  contending  amid  the  realities  of  life.  For 
years  an  isolated  gladiator,  then  after  endless  ordeals  leader 
of  a  group,  and  finally  a  great  eondoUiere,  he  had  but  one  pre- 
occupation—  to  parry  blows  and  to  deliver  them;  he  observed 
but  one  rule  of  conduct,  that  which  led  to  success,  even  if  it 


.coy  Google 


SU  DEHOCRACT  AND  POLTTICAI^  PARTIES    [ibcoiid  part 

entailed  leaving  his  professions  and  his  engagements  behind 
him.  Dragging  his  party  along  with  him,  Disraeli  brought  it, 
by  a  succession  of  steps,  by  one  leap  after  another,  to  the  very 
threshold  of  democracy,  and  in  the  course  of  this  wild  race 
made  it  discard  its  reactionary  ways.  The  new  departure,  far 
from  being  a  development  of  "  popular  Toryism,"  which  was 
only  an  idealization  of  the  old  days,  was  entirely  due  to  the 
opportunism  introduced  by  Disraeli.  It  was  by  swerving  from 
the  creed,  by  teaching  the  Tories  not  to  stand  on  ceremony 
with  the  "institutions  "  which,  accordii^  to  the  orthodox  doc- 
trine, ought  to  form  the  unaaslulable  foundations  of  Toryism, 
that  Disraeli  rejuvenated  the:  decrepit  Tory  party  and  procured 
it  a  fresh  lease  of  power. 

But  while  making  the  Conservatives  wheel  in  the  direction 
of  a  levelling  type  of  democracy,  Disraeli,  in  his  anxiety  to 
justify  his  opportunism,  placed  this  evolution  under  the  au- 
spices of  his  old  aristocratico-popular  creed.  From  it  as  from 
a  sacred  spring  he  drew  the  holy  water  with  which  he  be- 
sprinkled his  career  of  condotHere.  Taking  good  care  not  to 
use  the  langu^e  of  the  democrat  pure  and  simple,  or  of  the 
demagogue,  not  to  convey  the  idea  that  the  government  for 
the  people  which  he  prized  ought  to  be  also  a  government  by 
the  people,  he  maintained  that  the  reforms  carried  by  the  Tories 
were  in  the  spirit  of  the  national  traditions,  that  the  appar- 
ently hazardous  measures  which  he  had  passed  were  really  in 
harmony  with  the  venerable  institutions  of  England  and  the 
conceptions  of  primitive  Toryism.  And  taking  himself,  30  to 
speak,  at  his  word,  the  condoUiere  disappeared  in  the  man  of 
romance,  reverting  to  his  doctrine  of  a  sublimated  Toryism 
embodying  the  old  national  character.  "  The  Tory  part;y,"  re- 
peated Disraeli,  "  is  nothing  if  it  is  not  a  national  party.  It 
is  not  a  confederation  of  nobles,  nor  is  it  a  democratic  mob,  it 
is  a  party  composed  of  all  the  numerous  classes  in  the  King- 
dom." The  principles  of  which  the  Tory  party  is  the  champion 
because  they  alone  can  give  security  to  England,  the  principles 
of  liberty,  of  order,  of  law,  and  of  religion,  cannot  be  aban- 
doned to  private  judgment  or  to  the  caprices  or  passions  of  the 
masses.  In  Disraeli's  eyes  the  bulwark  of  English  liberty  re- 
mains the  landed  interest,  which  supplies  the  community  with 
its  natural  leaders.,  "The  liberty  of  England  rests  upon  the 


.coy  Google 


siTBNTH  cs*p.]    THE  CONSERVATIVE  ORGANIZATION  265 

fact  that  there  is  a  class  which  bids  defiance  alike  to  despots 
and  to  mobs,  and  round  which  the  people  can  always  rally," 
declared  Disraeli,  fo^etting  that  the  author  of  the  Reform 
Act  of  1867  had  himself  helx>ed  to  supplant  these  "natural 
leaders  of  the  people." 

Thus  the  "  popular  Toryism  "  of  Disraeli,  viewed  as  a  sin- 
cere and  consistent  doctrine,  had  nothing  really  popular  or 
democratic  about  it  within  the  ordinary  political  meaning  of 
the  words,  and  when  his  policy  did  contain  these  elements  he 
denied  it.  In  the  long  run,  then,  "popular  Toryism"  rested 
on  an  illusion  or  a  verbal  juggle  which  could  hardly  be  dis- 
pelled or  explained  away  by  the  fact  that  from  1868  onwards 
Disraeli  and  his  lieutenants  were  fond  of  giving  a  prominent 
place  to  the  "  improvement  of  the  condition  of  the  people  "  in 
the  Tory  programme  side  by  side  with  the  "  maintenance  of 
institutions  "  and  the  "  preservation  of  the  Empire  " ;  for  devo- 
tion to  the  material  welfare  of  the  masses  can  be  practised 
under  any  political  regime,  including  those  of  the  most  reac- 
tionary or  even  despotic  character.  Lacking  political  sub- 
stance, the  "  popular  Toryism  "  which  was  brought  out  under 
Disraeli's  auspices  was  in  reality  only  a  name.  It  is  true  that 
in  politics  a  name  is  often  of  greater  importance  than  the 
thing,  and  that  of  "  popular  Toryism  "  was  destined  to  furnish 
a  fresh  proof  of  this. 

Ill 

The  interpretation  which  the  oi^anizers  of  the  party  gave 
to  the  notion  of  "  popular  Toryism "  was  as  simple  as  its  real 
meaning  was  vague  and  undiscemible.  For  them  to  enter  on 
the  path  of  popular  Toryism  marked  out  by  Disraeli  meant  to 
run  after  the  votes  of  the  multitude  for  the  Tory  candidates ; 
to  appeal  to  the  people  signified  for  them  to  enlist  it  directly 
in  the  electoral  army  of  the  Tory  party.  In  the  days  of  re- 
stricted suffrage  when  a  committee  of  local  notables  was 
formed  for  the  occasion  just  before  the  election,  to  attract  the 
popular  voter  one  or  two  artisans  were  added  to  it,  or  a  special 
"  committee  of  workingmen  "  was  even  created,  without,  how- 
ever, allowing  them  the  slightest  influence  in  the  choice  of 
candidates  or  in  the  management  of  the  electoral  campaign. 


.coy  Google 


260  DBUOCRACT  AND  POLITICAL  FARTIGS    [UCOKV  pam 

This  tradition  vae  reverted  to,  and  the  proTisional  arraDge- 
mentfl  were  replaced  by  a  permanent  organization,  in  which  as 
many  workingmen  as  possible  were  enrolled,  and  no  longer 
merely  isolated  individuals  to  represent  their  class.  The  Asso- 
ciations which  were  thus  formed  were  often,  In  reality  if  not 
in  name,  clubs  which  had  not  much  that  was  political  about 
them  except  the  fact  that  their  members  bound  themselves  to 
Tote  at  elections  for  the  Tory  candidate.  Ihe  ways  of  English 
society  and  particularly  of  the  Tory  section  of  it  not  being 
favourable  to  daily  intercourse  between  men  of  different  classes 
on  a  footing  of  equality,  the  popular 'element  was  left  to  itself 
in  those  clubs.  Besides,  very  often  the  organizations  of  the 
Conservative  party  derived  this  exclusive  character  from  their 
official  constitution  under  which  the  workingmen  were  grouped 
separately  in  Conservative  Workingmen's  Associations  or 
CIuIm,  just  as  in  the  old  days,  in  the  early  organizations  of 
LEincashire  which  were  constructed  in  two  compartments,  one 
for  the  gentlemen  and  the  other  for  the  common  herd  brought 
tt^ether  in  the  Conservative  Operatives'  Societies. 

This  creation  of  electoral  regiments,  composed  exclusively 
of  workingmen,  did  not  exactly  correspond  with  Disraeli's 
grand  theory,  according  to  which  the  Tory  party  was  the 
national  party,  embracing  all  the  elements  of  society  with 
all  the  variety  of  their  respective  conditions  and  of  their 
aspirations  in  one  organic  coexistence.  Consequently  Disraeli 
could  not  help  disavowing,  on  the  first  opportunity,  the  way  in 
which  "  popular  Toryism  "  had  been  applied  jn  the  organiza^ 
tion  of  the  party.  In  1873,  at  Glasgow,  when  receiving  the 
representatives  of  the  Association  of  Conservative  Working- 
men  among  many  other  deputations,  he  began  by  telling  them 
that  he  had  never  consented  to  meet  any  separate  body  entitled 
"Conservative  workingmen."  "I  have  never,"  he  said,  "been 
myself  at  all  favourable  to  a  system  which  would  lead  Con- 
servatives who  are  workingmen  to  form  societies  merely  con- 
fined to  their  class.  In  the  Church  and  in  tlie  polling-booth  all 
are  equal,  and  all  that  concerns  ConBervative  workingmen  and 
interests  them  concerns  and  interests  the  great  body  of  Con- 
servatives of  whom  they  form  a  portion.  Therefore,  it  is  to 
the  Conservative  Association  I  see  before  me,  of  whom  a  very 
considerable  majority  consists  of  workingmen,  it  is  to  that 


.coy  Google 


CHAP.]     THE  CONSERVATIVE  ORGANIZATION  26T 

Aasociation  that  I  address  myself." '  The  Conservative  Work- 
ingmeu's  Asewiations  none  the  less  continued  to  exist,  and 
more  new  ones  were  founded.  The  organizers  evidently 
thought  that  theory  was  one  thing  and  practice  another, 
that  the  beat  way  of  imparting  cohesion  to  the  electoral 
forces  was  to  arrange  the  voters  in  the  order  in  which  they 
were  grouped  in  daily  life,  where  classes  were  very  deeply 
d'vided.  The  community  of  interests  and  even  of  political 
views  subsisting  between  the  different  social  strata  of  the 
Conservative  party  was  however  insisted  on  with  much  empha^ 
sis.  This  was  the  great  argument  advanced  by  Disraeli,  who 
affirmed  that  the  Reform  of  1S67,  of  which  he  was  the  author, 
had  been  framed  with  the  conviction  that  the  majority  of  the 
nation  and  the  workingmen  in  particular  were  Conservatives. 
He  never  wearied  of  repeating  that  the  workingmen  were 
undoubtedly  Conservatives,  that  they  understood  that  the 
"  greatness  and  the  Empire  of  England  were  due  to  the  ancient 
institutions  of  the  country."  The  Liberals  greeted  these  asser- 
tions with  a  merry  scepticism,  and  they  had  all  the  more  diffi- 
culty in  forming  an  idea  of  the  lower-class  Tory  because  he 
had  not  come  to  the  front  in  the  general  election  of  1868  ;  for 
it  was  precisely  in  the  towns  where  the  masses  voted  for  the 
first  time  that  the  Conservatives  were  defeated.  The  Associa- 
tions which  the  Tories  founded  in  and  after  1868,  succeeded 
however  in  enlisting  a  good  many  artisans  who  joined  with  a 
will  in  the  electoral  contest  in  which  the  Conservatives  won  a 
brilliant  victory  (in  1874).  To  the  delight  of  the  Tories  and 
to  the  dismay  of  the  Liberals,  the  fact  appeared  to  be  proved 
that  the  Conservative  workingman  was  not  a  myth,  but  a 
reality.  The  winning  side  in  their  transports  ascribed  all  the 
honour  to  Disraeli,  who  with  his  gift  of  divination  had  dis- 
cerned the  Conservative  workingman,  who,  like  a  Cuvier,  had 
discovered  this  unknown  genus,  this  new  political  apecies.' 

I  Speech  ta  the  Worklngnieii'B  Coneervfttive  Assoclatlona.  at  Qla«gow, 
32d  NovembsT,  18T3. 

'  Oil  this  subject  the  Timei,  wben  Lord  BeacoDsfield'*  sUtae  was  inaDKo- 
Tate<I.  on  the  second  siiDlver»ary  of  hia  death,  rlalng  to  the  level  of  the  occa- 
■lon,  ai«d  the  followiDg  language :  "  In  the  inarticulate  mass  of  the  English 
populace  he  dilcerued  the  Conservative  worUnsman  as  the  sculptor  perceives 
the  Bugel  prisoned  in  a  block  of  marble  "  (leading  article  ol  the  18tb  April, 
1SS3). 


.coy  Google 


S6S  DEMOCRACT  AND  FOLITICAI,  PARTIES    [■■ooro  pam 

The  triumph  of  the  Conaervatives  naturally  reacted  on  the 
local  organization  of  the  party  and  gave  a  stimulus  to  the 
creation  of  Tory  Associations  and  Clubs  in  places  where  none 
existed.  But  the  activity  and  the  influence  of  the  0^;aniza- 
tions  did  not  increase  with  their  number,  it  declined  rather 
than  otherwise.  Without  spontaneous  life  of  their  own, 
having  been  set  up  as  electoral  machinery,  tliey  began  to 
languish  as  soon  as  victory  had  deprived  them  of  the  incentive 
to  effort  "The  National  Union  of  Constitutional  and  Con- 
servative Associations"  exhibited  just  as  little  vitality,  its 
annual  meetings  were  dull  and  insignificaRt  The  profound 
calm  of  the  early  years  of  the  Tory  administration  was  fol- 
lowed by  the  Eastern  question,  which  made  the  whole  country 
hang  on  the  doings  of  Disraeli  (now  Lord  Beaconsfield).  He 
himself,  absorbed  in  great  affairs  of  State,  lost  sight  of  the 
local  life  of  the  party  and  of  the  Associations.  He  was  not 
reminded  of  them  until  his  triumphal  return  from  the  Berlin 
Congress,  when  nearly  fifteen  hundred  delegates  of  "  Constitu- 
tional and  Conservative  Associations"  and  of  "Conservative 
worhingmen"  came  to  London  to  pay  him  their  respects.  The 
language  in  which  he  addressed  them  threw  a  somewhat  crude 
light  on  the  part  which  the  leaders  of  the  party  assigned  to 
Associations  supposed  to  represent  the  free  opinion  of  English 
Conservatism  in  which  the  Government  sought  its  inspirations. 
The  gist  of  Lord  Beaconsli eld's  harangue  amounted  to  a  single 
sentence :  your  duty  is  to  supply  us  with  fighting  mat«rial  for 
the  elections,  mind  you  do  not  forget  it.  The  actual  expres- 
sions which  he  used  were  not  much  more  toned  down.  He 
borrowed  his  a^uments  and  his  metaphors  from  military 
history,  which  in  bis  eyes  embodied  for  the  occasion  "  the  ex- 
perience of  mankind  in  all  ages,"  "  All  men  have  agreed,"  he 
said,  "  that  in  the  conduct  of  public  affairs  there  is  nothing 
more  precious  than  discipline,  and  it  is  a  great  mistake  that 
discipline  is  incompatible  with  the  deepest  convictions  and 
even  with  the  most  piassionate  sentiments.  Whether  we  look 
into  military  affairs  in  ancient  or  modem  times,  we  see  many 
illustrations  of  that  principle.  I  suppose  there  never  was  a 
body  of  men  animated  by  a  higher  degree  of  patriotism  or  who 
extended  their  influence  through  a  longer  period  than  the  Ro- 
man legion ;  and  the  Boman  legion  was  a  model  of  discipline. 


.coy  Google 


IP.]    THK  CONSERVATIVE  ORGANIZATION  259 

So  again  when  the  Macedonians  contemplated  conquering  the 
world,  they  formed  their  phalanx ;  and  though  they  were  ani- 
mate by  so  great  an  idea,  still  no  one  can  deny  that  it  waa  the 
discipline  of  the  Macedonian  phalanx  which  contributed  to  the 
conquest  of  Asia."  Passing  from  antiquity  to  modem  times, 
the  speaker  dwelt  on  the  discipline  of  Cromwell's  soldiers 
and  Wellington's  troops.  Then,  turning  his  attention  to  the 
universe,  he  discerned  that  even  there  discipline  was  the 
sovereign  law:  "Kature  herself  is  organized;  and  if  there 
were  not  a  great  directing  force  which  controls,  guides,  and 
manages  everything,  you  have  nothing  but  volcanoes,  earth- 
quakes, and  deluges.  In  public  life  without  discipline  — 
organization  —  similar  effects  would  be  produced."  Breakii^ 
off  in  this  discourse  on  military  history  and  cosmic  philosophy 
to  which  he  was  treating  the  "Conservative,  Constitutional, 
and  Workingmen's  Associations,"  he  said :  "  I  wish  to  say  one 
word  upon  Workingmen's  Associations.  I  favoured  them 
from  the  beginning  [he  had  evidently  forgotten  his  own  speech 
at  Glasgow  in  1873],  and  always  had  oonfidence  in  their 
future,  though  they  have  been  subjected,  as  many  have  been 
in  their  infancy,  to  taunts  about  their  character  and  influence. 
I  have  been  asked  often  why  should  workingmen  be  Conserva- 
tives? And  I  reply, — of  all  men,  workingmen  should  be  most 
Conservative.  It  is  no  light  thing  to  belong  to  a  nation  where 
liberty  and  order  coexist  in  the  greatest  degree.  That  must 
benefit  all  classes,  and  most  particularly  it  must  benefit  the 
workingmen."  Then,  after  this  digression,  he  reverted  to  the 
necessity  of  discipline.  "  It  is  for  you  now,"  he  said  to  the  del- 
egates, "the  assembled  ofBcera  of  the  great  constitutional  army 
that  you  hare  formed,  to  feel  convinced  of  these  views.  .  .  . 
Act  upon  these  views  of  organization.  ...  It  is  only  by  en- 
couraging discipline  that  you  will  be  able  to  maintain  your- 
self in  that  power  which  you  have  obtained.'"  Perhaps  Lord 
Beaconsfleld's  speech  was  accentuated  in  consequence  of  the 
challenge  proceeding  from  the  opposite  camp,  where  the 
Caucus  was  being  noisily  established.  The  day  after  his 
return  from  Berlin,  when  the  frenzied  shouts  of  the  crowd 
which  had  dragged  him  in  triumph  like  a  victorious  general 
throi^h  the  streets  of  London  had  scarcely  died  away,  the 

1  Ttmei,  Ttli  of  August,  1ST8, 


.coy  Google 


2fl0  DEMOCRACY  AND  POLITICAL  PARTIES    [ibcobd  p*bt 

mighty  voice  of  his  illuatriouB  rival,  Mr.  Gladstone,  was  heard, 
summoning  the  Liberals  to  organize  themselves  on  the  "  Bir- 
mingham plan,"  for  an  attack  on  the  Tory  position.'  Disraeli's 
first  impulse  was  to  reply  by  sarcasm,  by  the  nickname  of  the 
Caucus.  Then,  bethinking  himself,  of  the  contest,  the  old  can- 
doUiere  apoke  of  discipline.  The  day  of  battle  arrived,  and 
in  spite  of  the  discipline  of  his  troops,  they  were  beaten  and 
routed.  Evidently  there  were  forces  still  more  powerful  than 
the  Roman  legion  and  the  Macedonian  phalanx. 

IV 

The  day  after  the  defeat,  the  Tories  vere  confronted  with 
the  usual  question :  who  is  to  blame  ?  The  simplest  explan^ 
tion  which  occurred  to  many  minds  was,  exactly  as  with  the 
Liberals  in  1874,  that  the  Conservatives  had  been  beaten 
because  they  were  badly  organized,  while  their  opponents 
possessed  the  perfected  weapon  of  the  Caucus.  The  Tories 
unhesitatingly  rejected  even  the  idea  of  borrowing  this  in- 
stitution from  the  latter,  they  had  repudiated  it  with  virtuous 
indignation  from  its  first  appearance.  In  fact,  at  the  begin- 
ning of  the  year  1878  the  Central  Conservative  Office  unbur- 
dened its  conscience  in  a  circular  to  the  adherents  of  the  party 
which  held  up  the  Birmingham  system  to  their  reprobation. 
Then  at  the  height  of  the  discussion  aroused  in  the  country 
by  Forster's  conflict  with  the  Bradford  Caucus  the  Tory  head- 
quarters took  advantage  of  it  to  point  out  to  the  public, 
through  the  medium  of  the  TVmes,  that  the  Conservative  paring 
did  not  resort  to  the  odious  practices  of  the  Caucus,  so  deroga- 
tory to  the  freedom  of  members  of  Parliament,  that  the  Tory 
Organization  did  not  impose  its  authority  by  force,  but  left 
complete  liberty  to  all,  etc.*  Having  become  still  more  hostile 
to  the  Radical  Caucus  after  their  rout  in  1880,  the  Tories  none 
the  less  thought  that  they  needed  an  equally  strong  Organizar 
tion,  and  they  were  very  anxious  to  create  one,  to  hit  upon  a 
sort  of  caucus  which  however  would  not  be  the  Caucus.' 

WTiile  these  views  and  wishes,  of  a  more  or  less  definite  or 

I  The  Sonthwark  speecb  mentioned  above,  p.  183,  note. 

*  Timtt,  lotb  ot  AuituA,  1ST8. 

*  CI.  tlie  artii-le  "  Cotixervative  Reorganizntion  "  {Blackwood's  Magatine, 
June,  1880),  una  ot  the  first  ot  the  many  expreaiions  of  opinion  of  this  kind. 


.coy  Google 


8XTIKTH  OBAP.]    THE  C0K8ERTATIVB  OROANIZATIOH  981 

va^e  character,  were  agitating  tlie  ConBeiratires,  the  death 
of  Lord  Beaconsfield  supervened,  in  1881.  The  confusion  in 
the  Tor;  camp  became  complete.  Lord  Beaconsfield  seemed 
to  have  carried  to  the  grave  all  the  courage  and  hope  with 
which  he  had  managed  to  inspire  the  Tory  party  during  their 
long  years  of  wandering  in  the  wilderness  of  opposition,  Dis- 
cipline  became  relaxed,  and  a  mutiny  broke  out  among  the 
rank  and  file.  Flying  in  the  face  of  all  the  proprieties  of 
Tory  society  and  its  traditions  of  discipline  and  of  deference 
to  its  leaders,  the  malcontents  openly  defied  their  authority, 
treated  them  with  contempt,  charged  them  with  being  the  cause 
of  the  distress  of  the  party.  This  revolt  against  the  chiefs 
was  produced  by  the  mingling  of  two  currents  —  the  impa- 
tience of  the  hot-blooded  younger  members  and' the  ambition 
of  the  plebeians  of  the  pajty.  The  old  leaders  seemed  to  the 
former  too  feeble,  too  easy-going,  nay,  actually  incapable  of 
heading  a  victorious  attack  on  the  Liberal  Ministry.  Resolu- 
tion and  repeated  doses  of  audacity  were  wanted,  they  thought, 
to  revive  the  drooping  courage  of  the  Tories,  and  to  strike  ter- 
ror into  the  hearts  of  their  rivals.  The  leader  of  the  Opposi- 
tion, Sir  Stafford  Northcote,  a  parliamentary  statesman  of  the 
old  school,  and  a  genuine  Conservative  in  the  best  sense  of 
the  word,  did  not  consider  a  reckless  dare-devil  policy  the  best 
suited  for  restoring  the  fortunes  of  a  party  or  the  most  worthy 
of  the  Conservative  party  in  particular.  The  rebels,  four  in 
number,  formed  themselves  into  a  group  of  free-lances,  called 
the  "  Fourth  Party,"  and  waged  a  pitiless  war  alike  against  the 
Liberal  Ministers  and  the  official  leaders  of  the  Conservative 
party.  The  audacity  and  the  violent  language  of  the  asstul- 
ants  more  than  made  up  for  their  small  number,  and  the  two 
front  benches  had  much  to  put  up  with  from  the  Tory  guerilla. 
The  position  of  Sir  Stafford  Northcote  and  his  lieutenants,  con- 
tinually attacked  on  their  own  flank,  was  very  like  that  in 
which  Lord  Hartington,  the  leader  of  the  Liberal  Opposition 
after  the  defeat  of  1874,  was  placed  by  Mr.  Chamberlain  and 
his  friends.  The  analogy  was  destined  to  become  more  com- 
plete. The  Tory  rebels  were  not  content  with  harrying  the 
leaders  in  the  discharge  of  their  duties :  they  fastened  on 
the  leadership,  and  just  as  the  Birmingham  Radicals  charged 
the  Liberal  leaders  with  the  original  sin  of  Wbiggism,  so  the 


.coy  Google 


262  DEMOCBACT  AND  POLITICAL  PARTIES    (»«coin>  Pi»T 

young  Tories  held  up  their  chiefs  to  public  reprobation  as 
aristocrats. 

This  grievance  which,  stated  by  Tories  and  to  Tories,  was 
certainly  extraordinary  and  well-nigh  inconceivable,  had  its 
hidden  source  in  the  recent  events  of  the  inner  life  of  the 
party,  Disraeli's  last  Ministry,  like  all  the  preceding  Tory 
Cabinets,  was  composed  almost  entirely  of  grands  seigneurs. 
In  the  House  of  Commons  there  were  a  good  many  men  of 
plebeian  origin  belonging  to  the  party,  especially  among  the 
borough  members.  But  the  old  Tory  tradition  made  them 
rank  somewhat  as  an  auxiliary  force  of  the  great  Conservative 
army  supplied  by  the  counties,  where  the  electors,  who  were 
not  numerous  before  the  year  1885,  vot«d  obediently  for  the 
great  landlords.  The  urban  constituencies,  which  were  more 
dif&cult  to  carry,  were  left  to  the  "  new  men,"  while  the  coun- 
ties remained  a  sort  of  preserve  for  the  aristocrats,  for  the 
gentlemen  of  England.  It  was  the  latter  too  who  generally 
divided  the  spoils  of  office,  without  however  shocking  anybody 
thereby ;  it  was  in  the  nature  of  things.  It  was  all  very  well 
for  the  Beform  Bill  of  1867  to  act  as  a  readjustment  of  politi- 
cal power  between  the  boroughs  aiid  the  counties  for  the  bene- 
fit of  the  former,  and  for  the  Tory  majority  of  1874  to  be 
indebted  for  part  of  its  strength  to  the  borou^  constituencies 
which  had  just  been  wrested  from  the  Liben^s,  thanks  to  the 
efforts  of  the  organizers  referred  to  above ;  in  spite  of  this, 
when  the  Ministry  tvas  constituted  and  the  subordinate  offices 
distributed,  the  plebeians  of  the  towns  were  forgotten,  including 
even  those  whose  energy  had  helped  to  win  the  victory.  This 
inspired  some  of  them  with  keen  resentment  against  the  "  aris- 
tocratic clique"  which  "monopolized  all  the  places,"  which 
"  took  to  themselves  all  the  good  things,"  and  in  their  heart  of 
hearts  they  swore  a  sort  of  Hannibal's  oath  gainst  them.  On 
the  eve  of  the  elections  of  1880  Lord  Beaconsfield  remembered 
the  forgotten  ones,  and  having  sent  for  one  of  them  said  to 
him :  "  Why  didn't  you  come  and  see  me  and  remind  me  of  your 
existence?  It  is  impossible  for  me  to  think  of  everybody, 
especially  when  there  are  so  many  who  are  pushing  themselves  " 
The  offer  of  reparation  came  too  late,  there  was  too  much  bit- 
terness in  the  hearts  of  the  plebeians,  and  they  were  not  slow 
in  giving  vent  to  it  after  the  disappearance  of  the  great  leader 


.coy  Google 


p.]    THE  CONSERVATIVE  ORGANIZATION  283 

for  whom  they  had  retained  affection  and  respect  in  spite  of 
all  their  grievances.  The  attitude  which  the  malcontents  were 
about  to  take  up  was  fraught  with  important  consequences  for 
the  fortunes  of  the  Tory  party  and  even  for  the  future  of  Con- 
servatism in  England.  One  might  perhaps  parody  the  mot  of 
Pascal  that  if  Cleopatra's  nose  had  been  longer  the  face  of  the 
world  would  have  been  changed,  and  say  that  if  the  "good 
things"  had  been  more  widely  distributed  in  1874,  the  move- 
ment caused  by  the  Yoimg  Tory  revolt  which  broke  out  after 
Lord  Beaconstield's  death  would  not  have  arisen  till  later, 
some  years  later ;  but  at  the  pace  at  which  things  have  been 
going  in  England  since  the  year  1867  a  few  years  means  a  very 
long  stage.  Discontented  plebeians,  or  at  all  events  persons 
who  entirely  shared  their  views,  were  the  very  men  who 
formed  the  "Fourth  Party,"  "taking  as  a  sign"  a  young 
nobleman  who  had  broken  with  his  own  class,  Lord  Ran- 
dolph Churchill.  From  the  House  of  Commons  the  cam- 
paign was  carried  into  the  country,  at  first  by  the  agency  of 
the  Press,  Under  the  somewhat  transparent  vei!  of  "  Two 
Conservatives"  (who  were  Mr.  Drummond  Wolf  and  Mr. 
Gorst),  the  malcontents  published  a  sort  of  manifesto  which 
from  one  end  to  the  other  was  a  violent  indictment  of  the  Tory 
leaders  in  general.  "  If  the  Tory  party,"  they  declared,  "  is  to 
continue  to  exist  as  a  power  in  the  State,  it  must  become  a 
popular  party.  .  .  .  Unfortunately  for  Conservatism,  its  lead- 
ers belong  solely  to  one  class;  they  are  a  clique  composed 
of  members  of  the  aristocracy,  landowners,  and  adherents 
whose  chief  merit  is  subserviency.  The  party  chiefs  live  in 
an  atmosphere  in  which  a  sense  of  their  own  importance  and 
of  the  importance  of  their  class  interests  and  privileges  is 
ex^gerated,  and  to  which  the  opinions  of  the  common  people 
can  scarcely  penetrate.  They  are  surrounded  by  sycophants 
who  continually  offer  up  the  incense  of  personal  flattery  under 
the  pretext  of  conveying  political  information.  They  half  fear 
and  half  despise  the  common  people,  whom  they  see  only 
through  this  deceptive  medium."  The  Associations  which 
had  been  formed  throughout  the  country  during  the  years 
1868-1874  "complained  that  they  were  not  patronized  by  the 
aristocratic  members  of  the  party.  It  was  fortunate  that  they 
were  not.    There  was  no  temptation  to  waste  time  and  energy 


.coy  Google 


BM  DBMOCRAcr  AND  POUTICAL  PARTIES    [hgohp  fast 

in  organizing  demonstrations  to  which  no  great  man  would 
come.  They  were  thus  driven  to  devote  themselves  to  regis- 
tration and  the  machinery  necessary  for  an  election  contest. 
The  viutory  of  1874,  which  waa  totally  unexpected  by  the 
aristocratic  section  of  the  party,  was  the  result.  As  soon  as 
success  was  achieved,  the  men  who  had  stood  aloof  since  1868 
rushed  in  to  share  the  spoils.  A  ministry  was  formed  com- 
pOBed  almost  exclusively  of  peers  and  county  members.  Those 
by  whom  the  campaign  had  been  planned  and  fought  were 
forgotten.  .  .  .  The  distinction  between  county  and  borough 
members  was  revived.  .  .  .  Social  influence  bwame  predomi- 
nant. Independence  of  political  thought  was  visited  with 
the  severest  punishment  ...  In  legislation  the  interests  of 
boroughs  were  subordinated  to  those  of  the  counties.  .  .  . 
The  Conservative  Associations  as  a  natural  consequence 
steadily  declined;  those  by  whom  the  work  was  performed 
gradually  withdrew  to  make  way  for  noisier  partisans  whose 
main  purpose  was  to  recommend  themselves  to  the  leaders  of 
the  party.  Defeat  was  not  long  in  coming.  .  .  .  Some  con* 
stituencies  doubtless  still  possess  associations  composed  of 
earnest  workers,  with  nnselfish  leaders,  who  labour  for  the 
good  of  the  cause.  .  .  .  The  entire  organization  of  the  Tory 
party  must  undei^  a  radical  revolution  before  it  can  afford 
ground  for  any  well-founded  satisfaction.  In  its  existing 
shape  it  is  manned  by  a  committee  in  London  whose  names 
are  unknown  to  the  people  at  large,  and  who  act  without  any 
mandate  fi-om  the  constituencies.  The  complaint  of  the  indi- 
vidual Associations  prior  to  1874  that  they  were  not  patronized 
by  the  privileged  class  can  no  longer  be  made.  They  are  cor- 
rupted by  patronage  and  few  escape  its  baneful  influence.  The 
object  for  which  a  great  number  of  the  Associations  exist  is  to 
hold  periodical  demonstrations  at  which  some  member  of  the 
late  Cabinet  may  exhibit  his  oratorical  talents  before  the 
admiring  crowd.  When  this  has  been  accomplished,  when 
the  local  leaders  have  had  the  satisfaction  of  shaking  hands 
with  the  great  man,  their  zeal  collapses  and  the  Association 
languishes  until  there  is  a  fresh  opportunity  of  catching  a 
lion.  ...  In  the  great  person's  speech  the  masses  catch  no 
word  of  sympathy  for  themselves,  nothing  to  show  that  it  is 
their  rights,  their  privileges,  their  liberties  that  he  is  jealous 


.coy  Google 


sevBKTH  CHiP.]    THE  CONSERVATIVE  ORGANIZATION  866 

to  maintain.  He  is  a  being  made  of  a  different  clay  and  living 
in  a  different  atmospliere  from  theirs.  If  these  are  the  means 
on  which  the  Conservative  leaders  rely  for  bringing  themselves 
back  to  power,  they  have  a.  long  time  to  wait." ' 

Such  language  as  this  in  the  moiith  of  Tories  astonished  and 
perhaps  delighted  people  by  its  audacity,  but  it  was  too  deeply 
tainted  with  acrimony  and  personal  rancour  to  be  a  true  picture 
of  the  real  state  of  things.  The  aristocratic  devil,  although 
doubtless  of  a  very  deep  hue,  was  perhaps  not  so  black  as  they 
painted  him ;  in  any  event  it  was  not  the  fact  that  it  was  his 
contact  with  the  Associations  which  threw  a  spell  over  them. 
They  were  not  wholly  destitute  of  aristocratic  patrons  before 
the  year  1874 ;  the  "  Union  of  Conservative  and  Constitutional 
Associations "'  owned  a  fairly  good  collection,  while  the  local 
Associations,  created  somewhat  recently,  had  not  had  the 
opportunity  nor  the  time  to  acquire  the  importance  which  pro- 
cures relatione  with  and  visits  from  persons  in  a  prominent 
position.  And  if  "  admiring  crowds  "  thronged  round  "  great 
men"  from  London,  it  was  not  so  much  to  gratify  the  latter  as 
for  their  own  enjoyment ;  for  the  "  multitudes  "  took  a  pleasure 
and  always  do  take  a  pleasure  in  gazing  on  a  lord  or  a  great 
personage.  As  a  matter  of  fact,  the  great  majority  of  the 
Tories  in  the  country  were  far  from  sharing  the  passion  fgr 
equality  and  the  rancour  of  the  revolted  pleljeians.  Their 
appeal,  therefore,  did  not  produce  the  effect  of  the  tocain  of  a 
Saint  Barth^lemy.  But  it  did  not  die  away  in  space ;  other 
cries  which  met  it  soon  blended  with  it  and  swelled  its  volume. 


The  deposition  of  the  aristocratic  leaders  demanded  by  the 
members  of  the  "Fourth  Party"  involved  the  "radical  revolu- 
tion" in  the  organization  of  the  party,  and  that  in  a  popu- 
lar direction.  This  last  point  coincided  with  the  preoccupa- 
tions which  had  engrossed  attention  from  the  very  day  after 
the  elections  of  1880,  and  it  presented  in  a  way  the  solution 
of  the  problem.  Whether  from  reasons  unconnected  with 
or  akin  to  the  motives  which   inspired  the  Fourth   Party, 

1  "  CoDMrvative  Disorganization,"  FoHnighlly  Review,  1882,  Vol.  32  (new 


.coy  Google 


266  DEMOCRACY  AND  POLITICAL  PARTIES     [secohd  part 

several  Tories  occupying  different  positions  in  the  social  scale 
joined  or  agreed  with  them  in  their  proposals  relating  to  the 
orgfiniiation  of  the  party.  The  view  began  to  prevail  even 
among  the  aristocratic  members  of  the  party,  who  were  more 
enlightened,  that  the  party  machinery  was  antiquated,  quite 
unsuited  to  the  "  spirit  of  the  times."  "  Mr.  Chamberlain," 
they  pointed  out, "  introduced  a  system  of  organization  founded 
on  a  popular  basis,  and  greatly  benefited  his  party  and  himself. 
It  is  true  he  also  inflicted  great  damage  on  the  nation,  but  that 
is  owing  chiefly  to  the  manner  in  which  the  machinery  is 
worked,  not  to  the  nature  of  the  machine.  I  am  far  from 
recommending  the  Birmingham  Caucus  as  a  model  to  be  closely 
followed  by  the  Tory  party.  But  they  must  take  it  as  a  model, 
accepting  what  is  good  and  discarding  what  is  bad  in  it.  The 
idea  is  good.  Organization  to  be  successful  must  originate  in 
the  people.  The  people  must  be  made  interested  in  party 
politics.  The  active,  pushing  local  men  must  be  utilized,  must 
be  given  an  outlet  for  their  energy  and  a  field  for  the  exercise 
of  their  talent.  .  .  .  The  people  must  be  interested  and  taught 
to  feel  that  they  can  do  something  more  than  merely  record 
their  votes."  • 

So  far  as  they  were  addressed  to  the  built  of  the  party,  these 
Qjhortations  often  reached  the  ears  of  people  already  half  con- 
vinced of  their  truth.  In  more  than  one  great  manufacturing 
town  the  Tories  were  already  engaged  in  extending  the  party 
organization,  or  in  creating  one  on  a  wide  basis,  in  order  to 
cope  with  the  Radical  Caucus.  The  home  of  the  latter,  Bir- 
mingham, was  among  the  first  of  the  towns  which  imparted 
this  movement  to  the  Tory  party.  Prostrated  by  the  organi- 
zation of  Messrs.  Chamberlain  and  Schnadhorst,  the  Birming- 
ham Tories  gradually  recovered  themselves  and  set  to  work 
with  much  patience  and  method  to  form  an  army.  They 
created  a  permanent  organization  in  every  district  and  ward 
in  the  form  of  local  Associations  and  district  committees, 
which  by  a  successive  delegation  of  authority  eventually 
merged  in  the  central  Association.  Its  leaders  sought  oppor- 
tunities for  making  the  personal  acquaintance  of  the  promi- 
nent people  in  the  wards,  and  by  means  of  meetings,  lect- 


.cy  Google 


p.]    THE  CONSERVATIVB  ORGANIZATION  267 

ures,  banquets,  and  picnics  they  endeavoured  to  bring  the 
electors  together  as  much  as  possible,  and  to  accustom  them  to 
close  their  ranks  and  keep  step  with  one  another.  Contesting 
every  municipal  election  under  the  party  flag,  the  Conservative 
Association  trained  its  forces  to  warfare.  In  a  word,  the 
Conservatives  set  about  following  the  methods  of  their  oppo- 
nents very  closely. 

And  it  was  not  only  the  needs  of  the  party,  the  practical 
requirements  of  the  struggle  for  existence,  which  drove  the 
Tories  into  this  path.  As  in  most  human  affairs,  personal 
interest,  ambition,  or  vanity  were  not  wanting  here  too.  The 
great  manufacturing  towns  which  had  always  been  the  seat  of 
Liberalism,  witnessed  the  gradual  formation  of  a  Tory  society 
in  their  midst.  In  former  days  there  had  been  no  Tory  society 
in  the  industrial  centres,  but  only  a  Tory  following  recruited 
almost  entirely  among  the  populace  and  attracted  by  the  two- 
fold power  of  "  beer  and  Bible."  In  proportion  as  the  political 
and  commercial  claims  of  the  middle  class  were  satisfied  and 
it  had  to  defend  its  own  position  against  new  assailants,  its 
Liberalism  evaporated  and  it  became  Conservative ;  it  joined 
the  Tory  party.  In  this  way  there  were  many  manufacturers, 
doctors,  barristers,  and  other  professional  men  who  hoisted  the 
Tory  Sag.  Inhabiting  large  towns  not  subject  to  the  territorial 
influences  around  which  gathered  the  traditional  Tory  society, 
and  made  more  independent  or  more  proud  by  their  social 
status,  they  were  not  so  ready  as  the  classic  Tory  to  submit 
tamely  to  exteraal  influences.  Shaking  hands  with  the  big- 
wigs of  the  party  who  occasionally  visited  their  town  was  not 
enough  for  them ;  they  aspired  to  gratifications  of  a  less  ephem- 
eral kind.  The  hole-and-corner  management  of  the  affairs  of 
the  party,  so  long  in  vogue  with  the  Tories  as  with  the  Liberals, 
if  it  offered  a  prospect  of  real  and  continuous  influence,  procured 
it  only  for  a  handful  of  persons  who  formed  the  small  manag- 
ing coterie,  but  this  latter  was  materially  and  morally  too  nar- 
row to  afford  scope  to  all  the  ambitions  which  were  now  coming 
to  the  front.  To  penetrate  within  the  charmed  circle  it  was 
necessary  to  show  one's  credentials,  and  a  good  many  Tories 
who  wanted  to  have  a  share  of  influence  had  no  other  title 
than  their  personal  qualities.  In  a  word,  the  Tory  party, 
which  had  hitherto  been  composed  mainly  of  the  aristocracy 


.coy  Google 


268  DEMOCRACY  AND  POLITICAL  PARTIES    [ssoohd  Pi«T 

and  the  populace,  henceforth  possessed  a  tiers  knt  in  the  large 
towns,  and  this  "  third  estate  "  wished  to  be  of  importance  like 
its  historic  namesake.  The  local  autonomy  entailed  by  the  re- 
organization of  the  party  on  pO])ular  lines  held  out  the  desired 
sphere  of  influence  to  the  Tory  tiers ;  while  at  the  same  time  the 
representative  machinery  of  the  new  organization  with  its  elec- 
tions, public  meetings,  and  speeches  helped  to  a  eertain  extent 
to  satisfy  the  desire  for  publicity  inseparable  from  the  life 
of  large  a^lomerations  of  individuals.  Led  by  these  varied 
motives,  the  Tories,  sometimes  reluctantly,  sometimes  with  a 
good  grace,  borrowed  their  model  of  organization  fi-om  the 
Liberals,  while  continuing  to  revile  the  Caucus  in  public. 
Without  making  too  much  fuss,  they  set  up  representative 
Associations  in  one  town  after  another,  which  bore  a  consider- 
able reaeniblance  to  the  genuine  Caucuses.  Beginning  during 
the  period  of  1880-1886,  this  evolution  was  destined  to  become 
more  and  more  marked.  It  coincided  with  the  movement  of 
the  mutineers  of  the  Fourth  Party,  and  both  of  them  helped 
each  other  to  a  considerable  extent.  Entering  on  a  path  which 
Tory  foot  had  never  trod,  the  provincial  movement  had  need  to 
be  reassured  as  to  the  course  which  it  was  taking,  to  be  en- 
couraged, nay  to  be  roused.  The  '•  Fourth  Party  "  and  especially 
one  of  its  members,  Lord  Bandolph  Churchill,  supplied  it  with 
the  required  stunulus. 

VI 
Lord  Randolph  Churchill  had  speedily  eclipsed  his  colle^^ea 
in  the  eyes  of  the  great  mass  of  the  public.  He  had  forced 
himself  on  their  attention  by  his  extraordinary  conduct  in  the 
House.  The  son  of  a  Tory  duke,  of  a  Marlborough,  he  broke 
his  political  allegiance ;  setting  every  one  at  defiance,  he  took 
up  a  position  by  himself  and,  what  was  still  more  remarkable, 
he  did  wonders  in  it.  Full  of  imperturi>able  aelf-confidence, 
with  a  vehement  audacity  under  perfect  control,  always  in  the 
breach,  he  laid  about  him  with  the  ferocious  resolution  of  an 
inverted  Deciua  Mus,  devoting  his  opponents  to  the  infernal 
gods.  Quickwitted  and  going  to  the  point,  he  combined  fairly 
close  reasoning  with  incisive  and  caustic  language,  which, 
however,  had  no  resemblance  to  the  poisoned  irony  of  Lord 
Salisbury  or  the  biting  sai-casm  of  UiaraelL     Churchill'a  elo- 


.cy  Google 


tivBSTH  CHAP,]    THE  CONSERVATIVE  ORGANIZATION  869 

qiience  was  not  so  much  stinging  as  burning,  of  a  coarse 
combustible  matter  like  the  bitumen,  the  darting  flames  of 
which  are  thought  a  grand  sight  by  the  crowds  at  country 
fairs.  This  was  juat  the  effect  which  his  virulent  style 
produced  on  the  small  townspeople  who  were  the  mainstay 
of  the  new  party  organization,  commercial  einployis,  clerks, 
newspaper-reading  artisans.  They  applauded  him  frantically. 
The  young  lord  talking  Billingsgate  impressed  their  imagi- 
nations; the  champion  of  the  people's  cause,  in  which  char- 
acter he  posed,  won  their  hearts.  His  temperament  was  a 
wonderful  help  to  him  in  achieving,  almost  without  loss  of 
sincerity,  this  success  with  the  Tory  lower  class;  for  he  waa  un- 
questionably endowed  with  a  popular  instinct  genuine  enough 
to  place  him  in  sympathy  with  the  masses  although  not  deep 
enough  to  take  him  out  of  the  traditional  surroundings  of 
Toryism  which  he  made  his  base  of  operations.  To  the  classic 
type  of  popular  aristocrat  so  familiar  from  the  Gracchi  down- 
wards, Clmrchill  united  the  feeling  of  religions  i-espect  of  his 
race  for  "  property  "  and  the  cant  of  his  caste  with  regard  to 
"  institutions."  The  history  of  English  Toryism  even  pre- 
aent«d  a  precedent,  of  a  somewhat  vague  resemblance  it  is  true, 
for  a  similar  anomalous  political  combination  which  brought 
success  to  its  author.  Thus,  his  mind  haunted  by  the  recol- 
lection of  Lord  lieacons field's  wonderful  career,  and  dreaming 
of  "  Elijah's  mantle  " '  falling  on  him,  Lord  Randolph  adopted 
for  his  own  use  Disraeli's  youthful  methods  as  well  as  his 
creed  of  popular  Toryism.  But  he  discarded  the  reservations 
of  the  great  deceased  leader  which  wrapped  the  latter'a  doc- 
trine in  obscurity ;  his  would-be  successor  threw  light  on  it  in 
his  own  fashion.  In  an  oratorical  campaign  which  he  made  in 
the  country,  during  I883-I884,  he  went  about  proclaiming  that 
Radicalism  was  nothing  but  humbug;  that  the  Tories  whom 
he,  Chiirchill,  represented  were  the  most  genuine  democrats  in 
existence,  and  the  best  friends  of  the  people,  "The  well- 
known  proverb  '  Voxpopnli,  vox  Dei'  is  to  the  Whig  as  sound- 
ing brass  and  tinkling  cymbals,  for  they  have  always  existed 
by  corrupting  and  deceiving  the  people.  To  the  Radicals  it 
is  a  fetish  of  the  lowest  order,  for  they  esist  by  driving  and 
"  Eli]fth'a  HantU,"  Fort- 


.coy  Google 


270  DEMOCRACY  AND  POLITICAL  PARTIES    [sbcon:.  pabt 

tTrannizing  over  the  people.  But  to  the  Tories  '  Vox  populi, 
vox  Dei'  is  an  ever-springinff  faith,  a  vivifying  principle,  an 
undying  truth,  without  which  their  politics  would  be  as  naught, 
without  a  future  and  without  a  hope.  ,  ,  ,  The  Tory  party 
of  to<lay  exists  by  the  favour  of  no  caucus,  nor  for  the  selfish 
interests  of  any  class.  Its  motto  is  —  Of  the  people,  for  the 
people,  by  the  people." '  "  I  have  long  tried  to  take  as  my 
motto  the  phrase  used  recently  by  Mr.  Gladstone, '  Trust  the 
people.'  There  are  few  in  the  Conservative  party  who  have 
still  that  lesson  to  learn,  and  who  do  not  yet  understand  that 
the  Tory  party  of  to-day  can  no  longer  be  dependent  upon  the 
small  and  narrow  class  identified  with  the  ownership  of  land; 
but  that  its  strength  must  be  found  and  developed  in  our  targe 
towns  as  well  as  in  our  country  districts.  Trust  the  people, 
and  they  will  follow  us  in  the  defence  of  the  Constitution 
{gainst  any  and  every  foe.'"  Up  in  London,  at  the  party 
headquarters,  "  they  regard  with  some  apprehension  the  popu- 
lar voice,  but  I  have  no  doubt  the  popular  voice  will  soon  sub- 
side. I  look  to  the  Associations  to  popularize  the  organization 
of  our  party.  Our  object  is  to  obtain  a  representative  execu- 
tive who  will  hold  itself  responsible  to  the  electors  who  ap 
point  it.  In  fact  my  idea,  and  it  is  the  idea  of  my  friends, 
is  that  the  Tory  party  shall  be  like  the  English  people  — 
a  self-governing  party."* 

This  langu^e  was  a  spur  to  the  young  Tories  in  the  large 
towns.  Lord  Randolph  Churchill  and  his  friends  of  the  Fourth 
Party  felt  in  their  turn  that  they  had  support  in  the  country ; 
in  their  stru^^le  with  the  leaders  of  the  Torj-  party  they 
could  count  upon  public  opinion  organized  in  and  identified 
with  the  popular  Associations.  The  latter  thus  supplied  the 
Neo-Toriea  with  an  engine  for  overthrowing  the  stronghold  of 
the  official  leaders  just  as  the  Neo-Radicals  had  found  one  in 
the  Birmingham  Caucus,  which,  moreover,  inspired  Lord  Ran- 
dolph with  great  admiration.^  It  was  the  same  game,  the  same 
methods,  and  the  same  style. 

1  speech  delivered  at  Blackpool,  S4Ui  Januair,  1SS4. 

'  Speech  at  BirmlDKham,  IMh  April,  1884.  *  Ibid. 

•  Ae  be  acknowledged  afterwards,  in  his  Biieecb  the  SOth  of  Jntie,  1886,  at 
Uancbestor,  "I  moBt  coateu  to  havlot;  always  bad  a  sneaking  admlratiou 
tor  tbe  [Blrmlogham  Liberal]  Urbanization." 


.CD,  Google 


caip.]    THE  CONSERVATIVE  ORGANIZATION  271 

They  were  destined,  however,  to  be  reinforced  by  an  inno- 
vation of  an  original  kind.  In  Lord  Beaconsfield's  political 
inheritance  Lord  Eandolph  Churcliill  and  his  fellow- workers 
had  found,  among  a  number  of  valuable  examples  and  pre- 
cepts, the  maxim  that  to  secure  victory  the  imagination  of 
the  people  must  be  acted  on,  that  the  appeal  must  be  made  to 
its  sentiments,  to  its  emotions.  Disraeli  had  himself  endeav- 
oured to  give  shape  to  these  ideas  in  Young  England,  without 
much  success,  however.  His  successors  and  continuators  de- 
cided to  go  to  work  in  a  more  practical  way.  Coming  down 
from  the  dreamland  in  which  the  young  Disraeli  dwelt,  their 
idea  was  to  adapt  themselves  to  the  conditions  of  society  as  it 
was.  Breaking  loose  from  the  landlords  who  were  the  princi- 
pal personages  in  the  drama  of  Young  England,  they  aspired 
to  bind  all  classes  of  the  nation  in  a  sentimental  alliance,  by 
appealing  to  popular  emotions  which  would  be  converted  into 
political  energy  by  the  impulse  given  to  the  im^nation.  The 
modem  method  of  organization  would  provide  a  form  for  the 
alliance,  would  supply  it  with  its  framework  and  secure  the  play 
of  its  forces.  By  placing  the  alliance  on  a  wide  national  basis 
political  energy  would  be  made  to  circulate  through  the  Tory 
party  like  the  blood  throughout  the  body,  and  the  leaders  would 
be  reduced  to  impotence,  the  haughty,  selfish  aristocrats  who 
monopolized  power  and  bestowed  all  the  good  things  on  their 
friends  and  relations.  Having  planned  this  new  coup  against 
the  chiefs,  the  Fourth  Party  were  much  afraid  that  the  latter 
would  get  wind  of  it  and  frustrate  it  Its  authors,  therefore, 
wrapped  it  in  the  deepest  secrecy.  It  was  in  a  comer  of  the 
Carlton  Club  itself,  the  whole  atmosphere  of  which  is  saturated 
with  respect  for  the  leaders,  that  they  met  to  mysteriously  lay 
the  foundations  of  a  new  political  cult  for  the  Tories.  Wor- 
shipping at  the  same  shrine  of  personal  honour  and  national 
pride,  the  members  of  the  new  Association  were  to  form  a  new 
chivalry.  Just  as  mediteval  chivalry,  animated  by  the  senti- 
ment of  honour,  made  itself  the  champion  of  every  good 
cause,  so  the  members  of  the  Tory  brotherhood  were  to  devote 
themselves  to  the  defence  of  Conservative  principles,  to  the 
maintenance  of  religion,  of  the  Estates  of  the  Realm,  and  of 
the  imperial  supremacy  of  the  British  Empire.  They  were  to 
bind  themselves  by  an  engagement  and  to  form  companies 


.coy  Google 


272  DEMOCSACr  AND  POLITICAL  PARTIES    [sboohp  piar 

which  they  vould  enter  first  as  ec/mres,  rising  afterwards  to 
the  rank  of  knights.  The  favourite  flower  of  the  illustrious 
departed  chief,  of  Lord  Beaconsfield,  the  primrose,  was  to  be 
the  symbol  of  their  alliance,  which  would  take  the  title  of 
"The  Primrose  Tory  I^eague."  The  romanticism  of  the  Mid- 
dle Ages  did  not  supply  any  appropriate  methods  for  making 
the  le^ue  known  and  for  enlisting  members,  and  its  founders 
were  obliged  to  resort  to  those  of  our  own  day  and  to  insert 
advertisements  in  the  newspapers.  The  future  squires  and 
knights  were  asked  to  send  in  their  names  to  a  bank  at  which 
Lord  Kandolph  Churchill  kept  his  account.  The  appeal  issued 
in  this  manner  was  anonymous,  none  of  the  promoters  of  the 
league  signed  it,  to  prevent  the  secret  being  discovered.  The 
plan  met  with  the  support  of  a  few  Tory  members  of  Parlia- 
ment who  did  not  belong  to  the  Fourth  Party,  and  also  of  the 
leading  men  of  the  Tory  tiers  itat  in  the  provincial  towns. 
Verj'  unpretending  at  the  beginning,  the  movement  in  a  short 
time  developed  to  an  extraordinary  extent.  While  departing 
from  the  lines  laid  down  for  it  by  its  founders,  the  Primrose 
League  achieved  an  unprecedented  success,  and  soon  became, 
as  we  shall  see,  a  most  powerful  factor  in  the  organization  of 
the  Tory  party. 


.coy  Google 


EIGHTH  CHAPTER 

THE  CONSERVATIVE   ORGANIZATION    (cOllttntied) 
I 

Whatever  were  the  hopes  placed  in  the  Primrose  League 

by  its  initiators,  the  movement  was  yet  in  its  infancy,  and 
their  principal  resource  in  the  way  of  organization  still  re- 
mained the  Associations.  Encouraging  and  stimulating,  there- 
fore, the  democratization  of  the  local  Associations  which  were 
to  serve  as  a  lever  for  the  Neo-Toryism,  the  Fourth  Party 
tliought  that  the  fulcrum  of  this  lever  might  be  supplied  by 
the  Council  of  the  "National  Union  of  Conservative  and  Con- 
stitutional AssociatiouH."  Not  in  its  actual  condition,  how- 
ever ;  for  it  lacked  vitality,  had  no  material  resources  or  moral 
authority,  and  was  simply  a  show  institution,  a  shadow  of  a 
representative  body  of  (Conservative  opinion  side  by  side  with 
the  small  coterie  of  oHicial  leaders  who  wielded  real  power  in 
the  party.  Immediately  after  Lord  Beacon sfield's  death, 
before  the  leadership  had  been  filled  up,  an  attempt  was  made 
to  transfer  the  supreme  authority  to  the  "  Council  of  the 
National  Union."  It  was  proposed  that  the  Council  should 
appoint  Lord  Beaconsfield's  successor  to  the  leadership  of  the 
party  in  I'arliament.  The  plan  was  a  bold  one,  it  was  equiva- 
lent to  forcing  a  chief  for  life  on  the  Tory  members  of  both 
Houses  from  outside.  But  it  fell  through,  and  the  peers  and 
members  elected  their  respective  leaders  themselves  —  Lord 
Salisbury  for  the  Upper  House  and  Sir  Stafford  Northcote  for 
the  House  of  Commons.  When  the  movement  of  the  demo- 
cratic Associations  acquired  consistency  in  the  country  and 
Lord  Randolph  Churchill's  ascendancy  grew  more  marked,  the 
Fourth  Party  returned  to  the  charge.  At  its  instigation,  in  the 
annual  meeting  of  delegates  of  the  Associations,  held  at  Bii- 
mingham  in  1883,  the  Conference  gave  instructions  to  the  Council 


.coy  Google 


274  DEMOCRACY  AND  POLITICAL  PARTIES     [secoto  part 

of  the  Union  to  "  obtain  for  this  body  its  legitimate  share  in  the 
control  of  the  organization  of  the  party."  Elected  President 
on  the  first  renewal  of  the  Council,  Lord  Randolph  Churchill 
demanded  the  exclusive  management  of  the  affairs  of  the  party 
for  the  Union.  The  official  leaders  were  called  upon  to  resign. 
They  had  their  own  Organization  which,  as  in  the  old  days  on 
the  Liberal  aide,  waa  a  development  of  the  oflice  of  Whip  — 
that  is  to  aay,  the  Whips  and  some  other  members  of  the  party 
appointed  for  this  purpose  by  the  leaders  formed  a  small  C«i- 
tTcU  Committee  which  disposed  of  the  party  funds,  looked  after 
parliamentary  candidatures  and  other  matters  connected  with 
the  organization  of  the  party  in  the  country.  The  Union  of 
Associations  demanded  the  dissolution  of  the  Central  Commit- 
tee, and  the  transfer  to  itself  of  all  the  latter's  powers.  The 
official  leaders,  Lord  Salisbury  and  Sir  Stafford  Northcote,  were 
naturally  not  much  inclined  to  part  with  their  influence,  espe- 
cially in  favour  of  the  Fourth  Party,  which  had  seized  on  the 
Union.  They  negotiated  -,  and,  while  declaring  their  readiness 
to  enter  into  the  Union's  views,  demanded  that  the  Whips 
should  be  made  ex  officio  members  of  the  Council  of  the 
Union  with  the  right  of  voting,  but  Lord  Randolph  Churchill 
insisted  on  the  Council  being  a  strictly  representative  body. 
The  Marquis  of  Salisbury  at  last  broke  off  the  negoti- 
ations rather  abruptly.  He  gave  the  Union  notice  to  quit 
the  rooms  which  it  was  occupying  in  the  office  of  the  head- 
quarters of  the  party,  and  intimated  that  the  leaders  de- 
clined all  further  responsibility  for  the  acts  of  the  Union. 
Lord  Randolph  replied  to  the  Marquis  in  a  very  deter- 
mined letter,  for  which  he  obtained  the  approval  of  a  ma- 
jority of  the  Council,  and  in  which  he  reproached  him  with 
wishing  that  "  the  Council  of  the  Union  should  be  completely 
and  permanently  reduced  to  its  old  position  of  dependence  on 
and  servility  towards  certain  irresponsible  persons  who  found 
favour  in  his  [Lord  Salisbury's]  eyes."  "  It  is  quite  clear  to 
us,"  remarked  Lord  Randolph,  "that  in  the  letters  we  have 
from  time  to  time  addressed  to  you,  and  in  the  conversations 
which  we  have  had  the  honour  of  holding  with  you  on  this 
subject,  we  have  hopelessly  failed  to  convey  to  your  mind 
anything  like  an  appreciation  either  of  the  significance  of  the 
movement  which  the  National  Union  commenced  at  Birming- 


.coy  Google 


■lOHTH  CHAP.]    THE  CONSERVATIVE  ORGANIZATION  276 

ham  in  October  last,  or  of  the  unfortunate  effect  which  a  neg- 
lect or  repression  of  that  movement  by  the  leaders  of  the  party 
would  have  upon  the  Conservative  cause.  The  resolution  at 
the  Conference  at  Birmingham  .  .  .  signified  that  the  old 
methods  of  party  organization,  namely,  the  control  of  parlia- 
mentary elections  by  the  leader,  the  Whips,  the  paid  i^ents 
drawing  their  resources  from  secret  funds,  which  were  suit- 
able to  the  manipulation  of  the  t«n-pound  householder,  were 
utterly  obsolete,  and  would  not  secure  the  confidence  of  the 
masses  of  the  people  who  were  enfranchised  by  Mr.  Disraeli's 
Reform  Bill,  and  that  the  time  had  arrived  when  the  centre 
of  organizing  energy  should  be  an  elected,  representative,  and 
responsible  body.  The  delegates  at  the  Conference  were  evi- 
dently of  opinion  that  if  the  principles  of  the  Conservative 
party  were  to  obtain  popular  support,  the  organization  of  the 
party  would  have  to  become  an  imitation,  thoroughly  real  and 
bona  Jide  in  its  nature,  of  that  popular  form  of  representative 
organization  which  had  contributed  ao  greatly  to  the  triumph 
of  the  Liberal  party  in  1880,  and  which  was  best  known  to  the 
public  by  the  name  of  the  Birmingham  Caucus.  The  Caucus 
may  be,  perhaps,  a  name  of  evil  sound  and  omen  in  the  ears  of 
aristocratic  or  privileged  classes,  but  it  is  undeniably  the  only 
form  of  political  organization  which  can  collect,  guide,  and  con- 
trol for  common  objects  large  masses  of  electors."  Alluding 
to  the  negotiations  which  had  taken  place.  Lord  Randolph 
Churchill  said :  "  The  Council  committed  the  serious  error  of 
imagining  that  your  lordship  and  Sir  Stafford  Northcote  were 
in  earnest  in  wishing  to  become  a  real  source  of  usefulness  to 
the  party.  .  .  .     The  Council  has  been  rudely  xmdeceived." 

The  orthodox  Tories  were  scandalized  at  this  attitude  of  Lord 
Randolph,  and  accused  bim  of  wishing  to  make  the  Union  a 
caucus  not  only  in  the  sense  of  a  representative  organization 
but  for  the  purpose  of  dictating  to  members  of  Parliament 
and  to  local  Associations  like  the  Birmingham  Caucus.  The 
Tory  instincts  of  deference,  or,  to  adopt  the  language  of  Lord 
Randolph  Churchill,  of  servility  toward  the  leaders,  reasserted 
themselves  even  among  the  members  of  the  majority  of  the 
Council  of  the  Union,  and  retracing  its  steps  it  decided  to  seek 
a  modus  vivendi  with  the  leaders.  Interpreting  this  decision 
as  a  vote  of  censure  on  himself,  and  thinking  that  he  was  left 


.coy  Google 


27S  DBMOCBACT  AND  POLITICAL  PARTIES    [becohd  f*bt 

in  the  lurch,  Lord  Randolph  resigned  the  chairmanship  of  the 
Council  and  gave  out  that  he  was  going  abroad  for  a  time.  For 
the  moment  he  seemed  to  have  the  worst  of  it,  but  in  reality 
his  position  wa«  an  excellent  one;  for  whatever  may  have  been 
his  personal  motives,  in  the  eyes  of  the  public  he  embodied, 
at  this  particular  juncture,  the  popular  principle  as  against  the 
domineering  spirit  of  aristocratic  exclusivenesa,  the  very  real 
need  for  a  wider  basis  of  party  organization  which  the  inter- 
ested adherents  of  the  old  "  hole-and-corner  "  style  of  manage- 
ment refused  to  satisfy.  The  excitement  produced  by  Lord 
Randolph  Churchill's  resignation  was  very  great  in  the  Tory 
party  in  general  and  especially  among  his  admirers,  the  repre- 
sentatives of  popular  Toryism  in  the  provinces.  The  Associa- 
tions of  the  great  towns  set  to  work  at  once,  their  Chairmen 
met  in  London  and  drew  up  a  declaration  of  principles  which 
put  forward  the  basis  of  a  compromise  between  Loi-d  Salisbury 
and  Randolph  Churchill,  between  the  traditional  leadership 
and  the  voice  of  the  people  aspiring  tn  be  master  of  its  desti- 
nies, and  at  the  same  time  dispelled  the  apprehensions  that 
the  Union  might  become  a  tyrannical  caucus  like  the  Radical 
machine.  The  memorandum  declared  the  following  to  be 
"  fundamental  principles  in  any  Conservative  organization  " : 
"non-interference  on  the  part  of  political  associations  with 
the  direction  of  matters  incident  to  the  duties  and  policy  of 
our  members  in  Parliament;"  the  right  of  every  Association 
to  "  full  independence  of  action  in  the  management  of  its  local 
political  matters";  the  necessity  of  having  a  "thoroughly 
representative  central  elective  council  sitting  in  London." 
Pointing  out  that  the  National  Union  presented  the  outline  of 
such  a  Council,  the  memorandum  demanded  that  a  reorganiza- 
tion of  this  body  on  a  wider  basis,  which  would  make  it 
thoroughly  representative  of  the  Conservative  party  in  the 
country,  should  be  taken  in  hand  at  once.  B\it  at  the  same 
time  the  authors  of  the  Declaration  agreed  to  admit  two  repre- 
sentatives of  the  leaders  on  the  Council,  aa  ex  o_gicio  members, 
and  left  the  finances  of  the  party,  the  questions  of  general 
policy,  and  the  selection  of  candidates  in  cases  in  which  the 
constituencies  desired  it,  entirely  in  their  hands.  Lord  Salis- 
bury, lowering  his  tone,  consented  somewhat  ill-humouredly  to 
the  proposed  compromise.     Lord  Randolph  Churchill  accepted 


.coy  Google 


■lOHTH  CHIP.]    THE  CONSEKVATIVE  OHGAHIZATION  277 

it  much  more  enthusiastically,'  and  was  eventually  elected 
Chainnan  by  a  unanimous  vote. 

This  dhioAment  was  undoubtedly  a  considerable  success  for 
the  principle  of  popular  Organization,  for  it  was  to  this  prin- 
ciple that  Lord  Salisbury  bowed ;  it  was  in  its  favour  that  he 
relinquished  some  of  the  pretensions  of  the  leadership  whicli 
he  had  hitherto  maintained  with  UDCompromising  haughtiness. 
It  is  not  very  likely  that,  as  some  people  thought,  it  was  a 
wish  not  to  divide  the  Opposition  forces  in  the  House  and  to 
present  a  united  front  in  the  impending  conflict  with  the 
Liberals,  which  overcame  the  Marquis  of  Salisbury's  resist- 
ance, for  the  influence  of  the  Fourth  Party  in  the  House  itself 
was  extremely  slight.  Great  as  was  the  valour  of  these  doughty 
knights,  they  were  only  four  in  number — no  more  and  no  less. 
It  was  more  their  position  outside  Parliament,  their  popularity 
in  the  country,  the  enthusiasm  with  which  Lord  Kandolph 
Churchill  inspired  the  members  of  the  democratic  Organiza- 
tions, which  forced  Lord  Salisbury's  hand.  The  domestic 
quarrel  which  had  just  ended  showed  that  the  Associations 
would  have  to  be  reckoned  with  in  the  future,  although  they 
represented  only  a  section  of  Conservative  opinion,  and  that 
with  them  a  new  factor  was  gaining  admittance  into  the  daily 
lite  of  the  Tory  party.  The  space  assigned  to  it  was  still 
limited,  as  the  compromise  proposed  by  the  representatives  of 
the  local  Associations  themselves  proved;  in  spite  of  all  their 
jealousy  of  the  leaders  who  were  accustomed  to  exercise  auto- 
cratic power,  they  gave  up  to  the  latter  a  fairly  extensive 
Sphere  of  influence  of  their  own  free  will.  Evidently  Tory 
society  was  not  yet  ripe  for  democratic  self-government,  from 
the  lowest  to  the  highest  rung  in  the  ladder ;  the  prestige  of 
the  aristocratic  chiefs  was  still  a  power  among  so  many  other 
social  forces  which  Tories  submitted  to  as  to  those  of  nature. 
Not  making  allowances  for  tikis  stale  of  things,  and  remem- 
bering only  their  oath  to  be  revenged  on  the  leaders.  Lord 
Randolph  Churchill's  colleagues  of  the  Fourth  Party  were, 
it  would  appear,  highly  dissatisfied  with  the  solution  given 
to  the  conflict ;  they  thought  that  Lord  Kandolph  was  wrong 

1  Ct.  the  letters  writtea  In  rep);  to  the  memoraiidam  which  wu  eabmltted 
to  tbem  by  Lord  Salisbury,  Sir  Stafford  Nonbcote,  and  Lord  Baudolpb 
CborchiU  (Timet,  19tb  Mar,  1B^}> 


.coy  Google 


278  DEMOCRACY  AHV  POLITICAL  PARTIES    [sBcotm  fart 

in  not  figtiting  the  matter  out  and  in  not  pinning  Lord 
Salisbury  to  the  wall  of  the  democratic  organization  of  the 
party;  that  he  had  left  them  in  the  lurch,  and  that,  in  fact,  he 
had  "  gone  over  to  the  other  aide."  It  ia  qiiite  possible  that 
Churchill  may  have  been  guided  by  personal  considerations  in 
making  peace  with  the  aristocratic  leaders,  and  that  if  he  had 
not  been  In'  sucli  a  hurry  to  return  to  the  aristocratic  fold,  he 
might  have  been  able  to  get  more,  for  people  Boon  come  to 
terms  with  the  popular  spectre.  But  the  compromise  waa  so 
little  of  a  failure  that  the  adherents  of  the  leaders  were  burn- 
ing to  take  their  revenge,  and  at  the  first  annual  meeting  of 
delegates  of  the  Associations,  which  took  place  at  Sheftieid, 
they  gave  battle  to  Lord  Randolph  Churchill  and  the  demo- 
cratic section.  With  signal  clumsiness  they  ostentatiously  dis- 
played their  motto  of  "  loyaJty  and  unity  of  the  Conservative 
party  under  its  recognized  leaders,"  They  were  beaten  in 
every  encounter,'  and  the  principle  of  democratic  organization 
issued  from  the  struggle  more  triumphant  than  ever.  With 
the  complete  local  autonomy  which  the  leaders  themselves  had 
conceded  to  the  Associations,  and  with  an  elective  and  repre- 
sentative central  organ,'  it  was  now  for  them  to  assert  them- 
selves, and  even  to  try  and  supplant  the  leaders  in  the  latt«r's 
own  preserve.  Theoretically  at  least  it  had  been  established 
that  the  Conservative  party  was  a  "  self-governing  body  " ;  no 
more  "  natural  leaders  "  of  whom  Disraeli  used  to  dream,  no 
more  landlords  round  whom,  according  to  him,  the  people 
could  always  rally.  At  last  one  distinct  point,  clearly  visible 
to  the  naked  eye,  could  be  made  out  through  the  haze  of 
"popular  Toryism";  the  "popular"  character  of  the  Tory 
party  was  showing  itself  in  tiie  democratic  organization  which 
it  adopted. 

II 

But  was  the  new  Toryism  to  stop  there  ?  Was  it  enough 
to  provide  the  Tory  party  with  a  popular  organization  to  make 
it  a  popular  party  ? 

1  Cf.  the  report  of  the  Conference  in  the  Timf»,  at  the  24th  Jul;,  1884. 

•  The  CoancU  of  the  Union  had  only  24  elected  members,  who  added  12  Ifl 
their  nomber.  At  the  SbelHeld  Conference  It  vu  decided  that  "  co-optation  " 
should  be  abolished  and  that  all  the  311  memben  of  the  Council  ahoold  be 
chosen  by  the  genentt  meeting  of  dslegates. 


.coy  Google 


BioBTH  CHAP.]     THE  CONSERVATIVE  ORGANIZATION  270 

When  the  Tory  party  set  to  irork  to  interrogate  itself 
directly  after  the  defeat  of  1880,  it  was  recognized  that  besides 
the  reform  of  organization  the  party  also  needed  a  aew  clearly 
defined  policy,  of  a  positive  and  not  merely  negative  character, 
a  progressive  policy  capable  of  solving  the  rising  problems  of 
the  day.  The  Tory  party,  it  was  said,  ought  no  longer  to  be 
a  party  of  resistance,  but  it  should  acquiesce  in  and  promote 
all  the  timely  reforms  for  which  society  is  already  ripe.  This 
is  the  traditional  function  of  the  Liberal  party,  but  true 
Liberalism  haa  no  place  iu  the  Liberal  party  as  it  now  exists ; 
the  o^anization  of  this  party  is  in  the  hands  of  the  Radicals 
and  they  are  not  likely  to  lose  control  of  the  "  machine."  The 
spirit  of  true  Liberalism  is  not  extinct,  but  it  is  a  spirit  without 
a  body.  The  body  of  Conservatism  exists,  but  it  lacks  a  soul. 
Would  it  not  be  possible  to  blend  the-  two  into  one  vigorous 
whole  and  form  a  constitutional  party  taking  in  both  Tories 
and  Liberals,  which  would  be  the  champion  of  liberty  and  the 
opponent  of  equality,  which  would  recognize  that  despotism 
is  always  despotism  whether  it  is  exercised  by  an  individual 
or  by  a  mob  ?  It  was  a  programme  of  enlightened  Conserva- 
tism, clearly  outlined  and  logical,  which  assigned  an  extremely 
honourable  if  not  a  brilliant  r61e  to  the  Tory  party.  But  it 
did  not  suit  the  young  Tories ;  they  wanted  their  party  to  be, 
not  the  buffer  or  the  safety-valve  of  the  steam  engine,  but  its 
furnace  and  boiler.  And  so  far  as  they  were  concerned,  they 
boldly  adopted  democratic  Toryism  as  their  programme.  As 
in  the  case  of  Disraeli's  "  popular  Toryism,"  the  question  arose 
—  What  would  it  consist  of,  what  would  be  the  fruit  of  the 
union  of  Toryism  and  democracy?  The  town  of  Liverpool 
conceived  the  ambition  of  bringing  the  new  political  species 
into  the  world.  "  Birmingham  has  taken  the  lead  in  the  coun- 
try of  the  party  aiming  at  revolutionary  changes;  in  like 
manner  the  Conservatives  of  Liverpool  aspire  to  bead  the 
phalanx  of  men,  who,  while  sound  upon  constitutional  princi- 
ples, are  yet  alive  to  the  necessity  for  such  national  progress 
as  the  growing  intelligence  of  the  s^e  demands." '  As  in  the 
home  of  the  Caucus,  here,  too,  it  was  the  municipality,  and 
especially  the  mayor,  the  author  of  the  passage  just  quoted, 
).  Forwood,  CoMemporary  Rtviea,  Feb- 


.cy  Google 


280  DEMOCRACT  AND  POLITICAL  PARTIES     [bbcond  PiM 

who  headed  the  movement.  The  principies  which  he  pro- 
fessed for  himself  and  on  behalf  of  his  political  coreligion- 
ists were  those  of  the  stereotyped  creed  of  'f  oiyism,  —  Throne, 
House  of  Lords,  Church  and  State,  unity  of  the  British  Empire. 
The  Tories  of  Liverpool  met  the  progress  demanded  by  the 
enlightenment  of  the  age,  chiefly  by  introducing  and  keeping 
up  pleasant  relations  with  the  masses.  Any  one  who  had 
businesB  with  the  municipality  waa  received  in  the  moat 
amiable  way,  services  were  rendered  most  obligingly  on  all 
sides,  the  leading  Tories  had  no  objection  to  taking  part 
in  popular  gatherings,  they  were  "not  the  least  proud,"  they 
mingled  unaffectedly  with  the  "people,"  and  did  not  even 
take  offence  at  the  turbulence  which  it  too  often  exhibited, 
—  a  natural  characteristic  of  the  populace  of  a  great  seaport 
town.'  This  attitude  waa  all  the  more  successful  in  winning 
the  people's  hearts,  because  the  Whigs  of  Liverpool  were  one  of 
the  most  disagreeable  types  of  the  species ;  merchant  princes 
of  three  or  four  generations,  with  a  positively  dynastic  dig- 
nity, stiff,  atuck-up,  they  were  cordially  deteated."  Their  polit- 
ical rivals,  the  Tories,  on  the  other  hand,  had  "  confidence  in 
the  people,"  and  the  people  "reciprocated  the  sentiment." 
They  urged  the  "leading  citizens"  of  the  great  towns  to  fol- 
low their  example,  and  to  make  some  exertions  to  meet  the 
wish  of  the  workingmen  for  "  common  political  association " 
with  them.  For  the  experience  of  the  promoters  of  Tory 
democracy  in  Liverpool  made  them  believe  and  assert  that 
the  "  workingmen  are  far  from  sympathizing  with  the  radical 
shibboleth  for  aboli:jhing  class  distinctiona ;  nor  are  they  advo- 
cates of  the  doctrine  of  equality  and  fraternity  in  a  republi- 
can sense."  They  understood  the  need  of  being  governed  by 
men  of  a  superior  stamp,  and  their  only  complaint  waa:  "the 
leadtTs  do  not  come  amongst  ua  sufficiently  often,"' 

Lord  Randolph  Churchill  developed  the  same  views  with  all 
the  authority  which  now  attached  to  his  name;  on  behalf  of 

>  Later  on  when,  at  Liverpool  as  nell  fts  elsewbere,  the  Liberal  UaioalsU 
jiilned  the  Toriefl,  owing  to  the  Liberal  aplit  on  the  Home  Rule  question  in 
1886,  tiiey  were  RBtoTilBhed  and  even  scnndiillzed  nt  the  turbulence  displayed 
by  the  loner-class  Tory  voters  at  political  meetintca  and  at  the  tolersDce 
shown  by  (he  leading  Conservatives  in  these  circumslanceR. 

*  Their  demeanour  i^t  tbetn  the  nickname  of  "  red  curtaat  Jelly." 

*  CL  the  article  "Democratic  Toryism"  ]aatquot«d. 


.coy  Google 


KiaHTncHip.]    THE  CONSERTATIVB  ORGANIZATION  2SI 

the  Tory  democracy  he  proclaimed  his  "  reverence  and  sffection 
for  the  inBtitiitions  of  the  country  which  the  Radicals  regard 
with  aversion  " ; '  he  would  not  abate  one  jot  of  the  political 
inequalities  which  they  enahrined ;  the  House  of  Lords,  for 
instance,  was  "  the  nucleus  of  the  Tory  party  "  in  his  eyes ; 
"  the  existence  of  the  party  is  inseparable  from  the  existence 
of  an  hereditary  Chamber ;  as  inseparable  as  the  latter  is  from 
the  existence  of  an  hereditary  monarchy." '  Without  troub- 
ling himself  to  provide  formulas,  he  repeated  after  Disraeli : 
"  Rally  the  people  around  the  Throne,  unite  the  Throne  to  the 
people,  a  loyal  Throne  and  a  patriotic  people  —  this  is  our 
policy  and  this  is  our  creed."*  "The  social  progress  of  the 
people  by  means  of  legislative  reform  in  the  lineft  and  carried 
under  the  protection  of  the  (aucient)  institutions  .  .  .  that 
must  be  the  Conservative  cry,  as  opposed  to  the  foolish  scream 
for  organic  change  by  the  Radicals,  who  waste  their  time  in 
attacking  institutions  whose  destruction  would  only  endanger 
popular  freedom."*  This  programme  of  social  reform  or 
rather  these  protestations  of  devotion  to  the  material  welfare 
of  the  masses  were  interspersed  with  compliments  paid  to  the 
latter.  They  had  all  the  virtues,  they  were  the  fountain-bead 
of  political  wisdom,  their  judgment  was  infallible:  "Vox 
popnli,  vox  I)ei  —  that  is  only  too  common;"  "govemmenta 
will  go  wrong,  parliaments  will  go  wrong,  olasses  will  go 
wrong,  London  society  and  the  Pall  Mall  clubs  always  go 
wrong;  but  the  people  do  not  go  wrong."* 

Ill 
Loading  the  people  in  this  way  with  attentions,  the  promot- 
ers of  Tory  democracy  nevertheless  refused  to  concede  t«  them 
what  is  the  very  essence  of  democracy,  viz.,  political  equality; 
they  withheld  it  inside  the  Constitution  while  granting  it  out- 
side the  Constitution  in  the  form  of  a  democratic  oi^nization 
of  the  party.     There  was  a  contradiction  in  this  which,  if  it 
might  be  used  as  a  basis  for  the  i>articular  species  of  "Tory 
• 
t  Speech  at  BinninghBm,  16tb  April,  ISM, 

*  "  Elijah's  Mantle,"  Fori nigli  III/  Review,  1883,  Vol.  33. 

'  Sjieech  at  BirmioKtiam  quoted  above.  <  Ibid. 

*  Bpeech  at  Blackpool,  24th  January,  18Si. 


.coy  Google 


282  DEMOCRACY  AND  POLITICAL  PARTIES    [sbcokd  p*mT 

democracy,"  not  only  undermined  the  foundations  of  Toryism 
but  still  more  those  of  Conservatism,  of  real  Conservatism. 
When  numbers  were  proclaimed  the  sole  arbiter,  when  their 
shifting  will  was  the  only  guide  of  the  party's  existence,  how 
woidd  the  party  be  able  not  only  to  keep  the  "  ancient  insti- 
tutions "  intact,  but  to  regulate  or  check  the  political  progress  of 
the  nation  in  accordance  with  the  dictates  of  reason  and  experi- 
ence, while  opposing  the  reactionary  prejudices  or  unreflecting 
impulses  of  the  mob  ?  how  would  the  party  be  able  to  with- 
draw this  or  that  institution,  which  is  to  be  mainlined  or 
abolished,  from  the  clamour  of  tlie  market-place,  after  having 
made  it  the  seat  of  all  power?  Were  not  the  "Tory  demo- 
crats" unsettling  even  the  theoretical  foundations  of  Con- 
servatism which  Disraeli,  to  whose  authority  they  were  con- 
tinually appealing,  was  anxious  to  preserve  throughout  all 
his  twists  and  turnings?  Although  his  popular  sympathies 
were  far  deeper  than  those  of  the  C'hurchilla,  he  did  not  contrast 
the  "  classes  "  who  always  go  wrong  with  the  "  maases  "  who 
do  not  go  wrong,  he  did  not  offer  their  nostrils  the  savour  of  a 
holocaust  of  leaders,  he  did  not  identify  the  nation  with  the 
"  people  "  whose  voice  is  the  voice  of  God,  but  regarded  it.  In 
conformity  with  true  Conservative  ideas,  as  a  apontaneoua 
union  of  classes  placed  side  by  side.  Having  driven  the 
Tory  party  into  the  arms  of  democracy,  Disraeli  vehemently 
denied  the  fact,  from  a  remnant  of  scrupulousness,  in  order 
to  keep  up  appearances.  His  would-be  successors  noisily 
paraded  the  irregular  union  of  Toryism  and  democracy.  Even 
if,  as  the  "  Tory  democrats "  assert«d,  it  were  intended  only 
to  make  the  old  home  safer,  yet  they  were  setting  up  there  in 
the  place  of  Conservatism  a  new  kind  of  plebiscitary  Cassarism 
exercised  not  by  an  individual  but  by  a  huge  syndicate :  by 
means  of  well-adjusted  legislation  the  people  will  get  itspanem 
(the  circenttes  will  soon  follow)  aucl  in  return  will  allow  the 
Tory  party  to  govern  with  its  Lords,  Established  Church,  and 
landed  interest;  the  Tory  party  will  not  assume  this  mandate 
itself,  the  aristocratic  leaders  will  not  be  allowed  to  invest 
themselves  with  it,  but  the  people  ass^ibled  in  the  gather- 
ings of  the  party,  in  the  caucuses,  will  confer  it  on  the  men  of 
its  choice. 
But  suppose  the  people  is  not  satisfied  with  delivering  the 


.coy  Google 


BioHTH  CHAP.]    THE  CONSBBVATIVE  ORGANIZATION  263 

mandate,  suppose  it  takes  it  into  its  head  to  alter  the  tenor 
thereof,  can  it  be  prevented  from  doing  so  ?  In  demanding  a 
Radical  revolution  in  the  oi^anization  of  the  party,  bad  not 
the  "  Tory  democrats  "  themselves  declared  that  "  rights  of 
property,  the  Established  Church,  the  House  of  Lords,  nay 
even  the  Crown,  could  only  be  maintained  in  so  far  as  the  peo- 
ple considers  them  necessary  and  useful  for  the  preservation 
of  liberty  ?  " '  The  existence  of  the  Tory  party  however,  being 
bound  up  with  political  inequalities,  according  to  the  "Tory 
democrats  "  themselves,  how  would  the  latter  be  able  to  pre- 
serve them  and  at  the  same  time  retain  the  favour  of  the 
masses  who  are  continually  being  tempted  by  alluring  offers 
coming  from  the  other  aide  ?  -  Being  powerless  to  hold  the 
balance  between  these  conflicting  exigencies,  they  will  have 
nothing  but  expedients  of  equilibrists  to  fall  back  upon.  In 
order  not  to  be  beaten  by  Radical  competition,  they  will  part 
with  the  political  inequalities  one  after  another,  in  the  fashion 
inaugurated  by  Disraeli,  This  will  be  their  connecting  link 
with  him.  On  the  opportunist  Toryism,  of  which  be  was  the 
founder,  they  will  have  grafted,  by  means  of  the  Caucus  bor- 
rowed from  the  Radicals  and  of  fervent  professions  of  popular 
faith,  the  democratic,  and,  to  a  certain  extent,  dem^ogic 
Toryism,  which  by  the  power  of  sic  voto  sw  jubeo  inherent  in 
the  nature  of  democracy  will  sanction  every  kind  of  tergiver- 
sation and  every  change  of  front  with  more  authority  than  all 
the  arguments  of  Disraeli. 

IV 

This  evolution  was  not  long  in  coming :  it  showed  itself  im- 
mediately in  a  startling  way,  in  the  first  political  crisis  brought 
on  by  the  question  of  the  extension  of  the  suffrage  to  the  rural 
population.  This  question  was  before  Parliament  during  the 
whole  of  1884,  the  same  year  in  which  democratic  Toryism  de- 
finitively gained  a  footing  in  the  country.  The  Tory  leaders, 
who  had  been  so  terribly  scandalized  by  the  democratic  attitude 
of  the  Neo-Tories,  soon  adopted  it  on  their  own  account.  Being 
unwilling,  for  fear  of  the  rural  voter,  to  oppose  the  actual 
principle  of  extension  of  the  suffrage  in  the  counties  which 
1  "CongeTvUlve  Disorfcanlzatlon,"  qiiot«d  above. 


.CD,  Google 


2B4  DEHOCBACr  AND  POLITICAL  PARTIES    [sbcohd  piu 

seemed  to  them  inevitable,  they  concentrated  their  resietaDce 
on  the  question  of  the  redtstribulion  ofaeaU.  As  had  been  the 
case  at  every  preceding  electoral  reform,  the  creation  of  new 
categories  of  electors  was  to  be  accompanied  by  a  rearrange- 
ment of  the  constituencies  to  amend  the  old  distribution  of 
seats  which  had  been  settled  in  a  rather  arbitrary  way,  and 
not  in  accordance  with  the  importance  of  the  population.  In 
the  interest  of  their  party,  the  Tories  were  very  anxious  that 
the  traditional  constituencies,  which  varied  greatly  in  area  and 
population,  should  be  preserved,  with  their  old  social  influ- 
ences, to  as  gi'eat  an  extent  as  possible,  while  the  Liberals 
wished  to  swamp  them  in  electoral  districts  carved  out  in 
a  uniform  manner  according  to  the  population.  The  Tory 
minority  of  the  House  of  Commons,  supported  by  the  majority 
of  the  House  of  Lords,  declined  to  vote  for  the  extension  of 
the  suffrage  before  seeing  the  schedule  of  new  constituencies, 
which  would  be  submitted  for  their  consideration  when  too 
late.  The  conflict  between  the  two  Houses  looked  very 
threatening  for  a  moment;  but  when,  in  order  to  terminate 
it,  the  leaders  of  both  parties  agreed  to  negotiate,  the  con- 
cessions spontaneously  made  by  the  Tory  leader  threw  the 
Liberals  into  a  state  alike  of  jubilation  and  stupefaction; 
their  rivals  unhesitatingly  accepted  a  plan  of  redistribution 
of  seats  on  an  almost  arithmetical  basis.' 

When  the  conflict  about  the  redistribution  of  seats  was  in 
full  swing,  the  Radical  Caucus  set  all  its  machinery  in  motion 
to  excite  public  opinion  against  the  Tories  by  making  the  Asso- 
ciations pass  angry  resolutions,  by  organizing  meetings  of  pro- 
testation and  processions,  etc.  Lord  Salisbury  could  not  find 
words  strong  enough  to  denounce  this  way  of  settling  the  dif- 
ferences between  the  two  branches  of  the  legislature.  "  They 
descend  into  the  streets,"  he  exclaimed;  "they  call  for  pro- 
cessions. They  imagine  that  30,000  Radicals  going  to  amuse 
themselves  in  London  on  a  given  day  expresses  the  public 
opinion  of  the  country.    This  is  not  the  way  in  which  a  pro- 

'  A  pulilicint  who  hkd  occheIoii  to  see  one  of  the  Liberal  ne)!otialDrB,  a  lead- 
ing MinistLT,  ill  privacj  on  the  Mlowing  day  said:  "Tha  Minister'*  mood 
will  slva^  remain  In  my  memory  ai  a  meaanre  at  the  vaet  rhanee  effected 
by  Lord  SallBbury's  sudden  adoption  o[  the  democratic  principle'*  ("The 
Electoral  Futuie,"  by  Edward  R.  Ruasell,  Coniemporary  Reviea,  February, 

lass). 


.coy  Google 


BioHTii  CHIP.]    THE  CONSBBVATIVE  ORGANIZATION  286 

gressive,  cultured,  aad  civilized  State  determines  the  opinion 
of  its  citizens,  .  .  .  They  appeal  to  the  streets ;  the;  attempt 
legislation  by  picnic.  But  that  has  its  dangerous  sida  There 
is  so  more  hopeless  condition  in  which  a  popularly  governed 
Stat«  can  be  plunged  than  when  ita  policy  is  decided  by 
demonstrations  held  in  the  streets  of  the  metropolis." '  On 
the  following  day,  in  Sheffield  itself,  where  these  words  were 
uttered,  at  the  meeting  of  the  National  Union  of  Conservative 
Associations,  was  fought  the  battle  between  the  followers  of 
the  leaders  and  the  disciples  of  democratic  Toryism.  The 
latter,  as  we  have  seen,  won  the  day,  The  Conservative 
organization,  in  its  turn,  set  its  machinery  going  to  retort  upon 
the  Radical  Caucus,  and  Lord  Salisbury  hastened  to  cooperate 
in  this  campaign  of  "picnics."  A  fortnight  after  his  speech  at 
Sheffield  he  paraded  his  connection  with  Randolph  Churctiill, 
and,  appearing  on  the  game  platform '  with  him,  before  an 
enormous  crowd,  which  had  flocked  together  from  "the 
streets,"  took  democratic  Toryism  and  its  boldest  champion 
to  his  bosom.  Before  long  he  honoured  them  with  a  still 
more  emphatic  recognition:  when  a  parliamentary  surprise 
brought  him  into  power,  in  1885,  he  offered  Lord  Randolph 
Churchill  a  leading  place  in  his  Cabinet;  and  to  crown  his 
attentions  to  the  "  Tory  democrats,"  he  sent  the  illustrious  Sir 
Stafford  Northcote,  whose  truly  Conservative  conduct  had  a 
.knack  of  exasperating  them,  to  the  House  of  I-ords.  The  Min- 
istry in  which  Lord  Randolph  Churchill  and  his  friends  took 
their  places  launched  out  at  once  into  a  policy  of  State  Social- 
ism, so  that  Mr.  Chamberlain  was  able  to  say,  with  some  degree 
of  truth,  that  "  the  Tories  were  in  office,  but  the  Kadicals  in 
power."  *  At  the  same  time,  the  "  Tory  democrats  "  and  Lord 
Randolph  Churchill  kept  on  proclaiming  that  Radicalism, 
if  it  had  its  way,  would  plunge  England  into  the  abysses  of 
demago^'ism,  and  they  called  to  the  raoderate  Liberals  to  come 
over  and  join  them.  "  It  is  possible,"  replied  Lord  Harting- 
ton, "  that  there  are  some  subjects  upon  which  there  exists  less 
difference  of  opinion  between  some  members  of  the  Conserva- 


1  .Speech  of  the  31st  July,  ISSTi,  at  Hackney. 


.coy  Google 


286  DEMOCRACY  AND  POLITICAL  PARTIES     [second  piht 

tive  party  and  myself  than  between  iDyself  and  some  of  the 
more  irresponsible  and  advanced  members  of  my  own  party. 
But  I  confess  that  I  still  find  some  difficulty  in  understand- 
ing what  Conservative  policy  is,  and  what  I  am  invited  to 
come  over  to  help  the  Conservative  party  to  do.  .  .  ,  I  am 
obliged  to  confess,  in  reply  to  that  invitation  addressed  to  me 
by  Lord  Randolph  Churchill,  that  in  the  leaders  of  .the  Con- 
servative party  I  feel  no  confidence  whatever,"  '  The  moder- 
ate Liberals,  who  were  awamped  by  the  Radicals,  and  were 
asking  themselves  in  despair  if  the  moment  had  not  come  to 
shake  the  dust  off  their  feet,  were  bound  to  ponder  Lord  Har- 
tington's  words.  The  same  wimi,  in  fa«t,  was  blowing  from  the 
Tory  side  as  on  the  heights  of  Radicalism :  it  waa  tearing  the 
leaves  from  the  old  trees,  and  by  sweeping  along  their  trunks 
was  dooming  them  to  speedy  destruction.  And  as  a  climax, 
in  the  large  gaps  which  were  already  appearing  at  intervals  on 
Tory  ground,  the  Caucus  was  seen  to  rise,  —  the  same  Caucus 
which  had  done  so  much  to  make  the  position  of  the  moderates 
in  the  old  abode  of  Liberalism  untenable.  If  they  were  to  go 
over  to  the  other  side,  would  they  not  be  exchanging  Charybdis 
for  Scylla  ?  A  thunder-clap  which  bui-st  in  the  political  sky 
suddenly  relieved  them  from  the  perplexity  in  which  they 
were  plunged.  This  waa  the  crisis  brought  on  by  the  question 
of  Home  Eule  for  Ireland. 

1  Speed)  of  the  lOtli  October,  1S8S,  at  Rawtenstall. 


.coy  Google 


NINTH   CHAPTER 


Ireland,  which  had  long  been  like  a  thorn  planted  in  the  body 
politic  of  England,  had  at  last  worted  its  way  into  the  heart  of 
her  parliamentary  system.  The  representatives  of  irreconcil- 
ahle  'Irish  opinion  had  gradually  become  so  numerous  in  the 
House  of  Commons  that  they  stopped  the  regular  working  of 
the  old  party  system  by  interposing  between  the  two  parties,  or 
even  paralyzed  the  activity  of  Parliament  by  their  systematic 
obstruction.  The  price  which  they  demanded  was  Home  Rule, 
the  political  autonomy  of  their  country.  But  nearly  the  whole 
of  English  opinion  and  English  statesmen,  Conservative  and 
Liberal,  would  not  hear  of  it.  Mr.  Gladstone,  therefore,  at  the 
general  election  of  1885  asked  the  country  to  return  a  Liberal 
majority  strong  enough  to  deal  with  the  Conservatives  and  the 
Irish  together,  and  thus  make  the  latter  powerless.  This  wish 
was  not  gratiiied ;  the  Irish  Home  Rulers  came  back  in  greater 
numbers  than  ever,  and  it  was  only  by  the  aid  of  their  votes  that 
the  Liberals  would  be  able  to  overcome  the  Conservatives  and 
dislodge  them  from  power,  which  they  had  held  for  some  time. 
Mr.  Gladstone  then  took  a  sudden  resolution  in  which,  as  was 
always  the  case  with  him,  the  calculations  of  a  parliamentary 
tactician  and  of  a  party  impresario  coincided  with  the  impulses 
of  a  generous  nature  and  tlie  aspirations  of  a  lofty  mind :  he 
decided  to  offer  the  Irish  Home  Rule  in  order  to  secure  a 
majority  and  put  an  end.  to  the  enmity  between  the  two  nations. 
But  would  he  be  followed  in  this  abrupt  change  of  front  ? 
Would  his  great  authority  and  the  wonderful  prestige  of  his 
name  be  strong  enough  to  carry  with  him  the  whole  body  of 


.coy  Google 


2H8  DEMOCRACY  AND  POLITICAL  PARTIES     [becohd  part 

those  who  up  to  this  point  fullowed  him  inside  and  outside 
Parliament  ?  , 

The  vague  rumours  as  "to  t/ir.  Gladstone's  plans  which  began 
to  circulate  directly  after  the  elections  were  quite  enough  to 
produce  such  a  deep  impression  in  the  Liberal  camp  that  a 
split  seemed  inevitable.  The  Conservative  Ministry,  which 
had  not  obtained  a  majority  at  the  elections,  was  placed  in  a 
minority  in  the  House  on  the  first  opportunity,  and  Mr.  Glad- 
stone was  entrusted  with  the  task  of  forming  the  new  Adminis- 
tration. The  moderates,  the  Whigs,  declined  for  the  first  time 
to  join  it;  Lord  Hartington,  Mr,  Goschen,  Sir  Henry  James, 
all  i-efused  to  take  oflice;  they  had  a  presentiment  that  the 
time  was  drawing  near  when  they  would  be  obliged  rather 
to  cut  themselves  adrift.'  In  fact,  directly  Mr.  Gladstone  pro- 
duced his  Home  Rule  scheme  the  moderate  Lil>erals,  led  by 
Lord  Hartington,  parted  company  with  him.  In  face  of  jihat 
they  considered  as  endangering  the  unity  of  the  Empire  and 
the  very  foundation  of  the  English  constitutional  system,  thoy 
no  longer  hesitated  to  combine  with  the  Conservatives  against 
the  man  who  had  been  the  great  representative  of  Liberalism, 
but  who,  in  their  eyes,  had  become  simply  the  leader  of  a  de- 
structive type  of  Radicalism.  The  situation  became  strangely 
complicated,  owing  to  the  fact  that  Mr.  Gladstone  was  unable 
to  obtain  the  unanimous  approval  of  his  own  Ministers  for  his 
new  Irish  policy.  In  spite  of  their  proved  Radicalism,  two  of 
them,  of  whom  Mr.  Chamberlain  was  one,  taking  up  a  purely 
Imperial  standpoint,  preferred  to  forego  power  ratlier  than  co- 
operate in  a  measure  which,  in  their  opinion,  made  for  the 
disintegration  of  the  Empire.  Mr.  Gladstone  then  had  to  face 
a  resistance  within  his  own  party  which  was  all  the  more  for- 
midable because  he  could  not  set  up  the  will  of  the  electorate 
against  it  to  justify  the  granting  of  Home  Rule,  for  the  ques- 
tion was  not  laid  before  the  constituencies.  An  appeal  was 
now  to  be  made  after  the  event  to  Liberal  opinion,  but  the 
latter  was  for  the  most  part  identified  with  tlie  caucuses  which 
acknowledged  and  obeyed  the  leadership  of  Mr.  (.Ihamberlain. 
The  party  Organization  which  ha<l  been  constructed  with  so 

^  The  cancns  ot  the  town  which  Sir  H,  .lameB  represented  connlrued  thil 
retuial  u  on  &ct  ot  "insubordination  "  SKHlast  Mr.  UladBtona  and  pustid  m 
severe  censure  on  the  member  wbo  declined  tu  take  oftlce. 


.CD,  Google 


NINTH  CHAP.]     CRISIS  OF  1880  AND  PARTY  ORGANIZATION    2Sfi 

much  labour  was  about  to  undergo  a  terrible  ordeal.  Was  it 
to  forsake  the  man  who  had,  so  to  speak,  called  it  into  existr 
fince,  and  who  was  the  most  authoritative  representative  of  the 
democratic  Radicalism  to  which  it  appealed ;  or  was  it  to  follow 
the  old  chief  of  the  Liberal  party  in  Ins  strugf^le  for  a  measure 
which  was  in  the  strict  logic  of  Radicalism  ?  If  it  revolted 
against  Mr.  Chamberlain,  would  it  not  run  the  risk  of  shatter- 
ing its  fabric,  by  causing  a  split  in  its  own  ranks?  If,  on 
the  other  hand,  it  took  sides  against  Mr.  Gladstone,  would  it 
not  be  exposed  to  the  same  danger  ?  Or,  to  put  the  question 
in  another  way,  would  the  authority  of  the  illustrious  states- 
man be  strong  enough  to  deprive  the  Caucus  of  its  followers  ? 
would  the  traditional  leadership  embodied  in  Mr.  Gladstone  pre- 
vail against  the  representative  Organization  which  was  intro- 
duced on  the  pretext  of  destroying  the  power  of  the  leaders, 
however  great  and  influential  they  might  be  ?  Thus  side  by 
side  with  questions  of  persons  and  of  circumstances,  the  funda- 
mental problem  of  the  Organization  itself  waa  being  debated. 

On  the  eve  of  the  Home  Rule  debate  in  the  House  of  Com- 
mons the  Liberal  Federation  Committee  requested  all  the  affili- 
ated Associations  to  consider  the  question  and  to  forward  it 
the  resolutions  which  they  might  adopt,  after  which  a  general 
meeting  of  delegates  was  to  decide  on  the  Bill  on  behalf  of 
the  Liberal  party.  Opinion  was  much  divided  in  the  Associa- 
tions ;  the  members  had  or  still  wished  to  have  confidence  in 
Mr.  Gladstone,  but  on  the  subject  of  Home  Rule  there  was  a 
good  deal  of  wavering  and  irresolution  which  Mr.  Chamber- 
lain's resistance  by  no  means  helped  to  dispel.  The  perplexity 
of  the  Associations  was  further  enhanced  by  the  fact  that  the 
Federation,  realizing  the  division  of  opinion,  confined  itself 
on  this  occasion,  contrary  to  its  usual  practice,  to  a  simple 
statement  of  the  problem  without  suggesting  to  the  local  Asso- 
ciations what  answer  should  be  given.  Left  to  their  own  in- 
spiration, the  Associations  for  the  most  part  did  not  know 
what  line  to  take.  They  who  were  supposed  to  have  the  power 
of  giving  expression  to  public  opinion  and  of  pointing  out  the 
policy  to  be  pursued  by  their  riilers,  could  do  nothing  but 
stammer.  True,  they  voted  resolutions,  and  lengthy  ones,  but 
without  giving  a  plain  answer:  Yes  or  No,  for  or  against  the 
Home  Rule  Bill.     And  it  was  left  to  Mr.  Chamberlain  to  utter 


.coy  Google 


290  DEMOCBACY  AND  POLITICAL  PARTIES     [sbcondpaet 

the  feeling  cry :  "  Why  are  you  here  ?  Why  are  you  formed  ? 
Why  do  you  remain  an  Association  for  Birminghaia  ?  "  '  After 
having  been  drilled  into  being  ouly  a  daque,  it  was  no  easy 
matter  for  them  to  blossom  suddenly  into  art  critics. 


II 

While  in  Parliament  preparations  were  being  made  for  the 
great  battle  between  those  who  had  followed  Mr.  Gladstone's 
example  in  becoming  converts  to  Home  Rule  and  those  who  ad- 
hered to  the  old  views  of  the  Liberal  party  on  the  Irish  ques- 
tion, the  country  was  iti  a  state  of  suppressed  agitation.  Mr, 
Gladstooe's  mighty  voice  was  making  its  way  into  the  natioual 
conscience,  and  in  face  of  the  Gladstonian  flood  which  began 
to  rise  in  the  Associations, ,  a  good  many  of  their  members 
withdrew  from  them  or  were  ready  to  go.  In  the  midst  of 
all  this  the  delegates  of  the  Literal  Associations  met  in  London 
and  there,  at  the  Westminster  Palace  Hotel,  was  fought  the 
first  battle  between  Mr.  Gladstone  and  Mr.  Chamberlain.  The 
encounter  was  a  desperate  one,  and  ended  disastrously  for  Mr. 
Chamberlain  and  his  friends.  The  veneration  with  which  Mr. 
Gladstone  was  regarded,  the  belief  which  had  taken  root  among 
his  admirers  that  he  could  not  do  wrong  or  swerve  from  the 
right  path,' the  divergence  of  opinions  on  the  merits  of  the 
question  of  Home  Rule,  were  reinforced  by  all  the  animosity, 
jealousy,  and  rancour  which  had  gathered  round  the  Birming- 
ham set  during  the  period  of  their  omnipotence.  A^  was  re- 
marked above,  they  had  not  been  able  or  willing  to  spare  the 
amour-propre  of  the  other  towns;  they  were  too  prone  to  dis- 
pl9,y  dictatorial  tendencies,  and  by  means  of  the  Federation 
which  they  had  called  into  being,  they  established  the  suprem- 
acy of  Birmingham  over  the  provinces.  The  pride  of  the  other 
great  towns,  however,  was  hurt ;  they  were  always  jealous  of  ■ 
each  other,  and  in  a  fashion  which  had  no  resemblance  to  the 
feeling  which  made  the  cities  of  Greece  contend  for  the  honour 
of  being  the  birthplace  of  Homer,  lieing  all  of  recent  origin 
and  prosperity,  a.U  parvenva,  they  possessed  the  dignity  and  the 
aspirations  peculiar  to  ptirvenux.     To  cut  out  their  neighbours, 

le  Birmingham  Assoclatlou,  Times,  22d 


.coy  Google 


NiKTH  CHAP,]     CRISIS  OF  1886  AND  PARTY  ORGANIZATION    291 

if  only  by  the  dimensions  of  their  town  hall,  was  the  aim  and 
object  of  every  one  of  them.  Birmingham,  therefore,  had  po- 
litic&l  rivals.  At  one  of  these  —  Leeds  —  important  meetings  of 
delegates  of  the  Liberal  Associations  were  occasionally  held, 
but  this  was  not  much  of  a  consolation.  When  Mr.  Chamberlain 
refused  to  countenance  the  new  Irish  policy  of  the  great  leader 
of  the  party,  the  rivals  of  Birmingham  felt  that  the  Lord  had 
delivered  it  into  their  hands.  At  the  general  meeting  of 
delegates  convened  to  give  their  verdict  on  Home  Rule,  the 
Leeds  contingent  opened  fire.  They  roundly  declared  Mr. 
Chamberlain  a  traitor  to  the  Liberal  cause,  although  it  was  not 
yet  known  which  side  the  bulk  of  the  Liberal  party  would  take, 
the  Irish  question  being  still  in  suspense.  In  vain  did  the 
oflScers  of  the  Federation,  who  were  Birmingham  men,  pro- 
pose by  way  of  compromise  a  resolution  accepting  the  prin- 
ciple of  Home  Rule  for  Ireland,  but  ui^ng  Mr.  Gladstone  not 
to  insist  on  the  exclusion  of  the  Irish  representatives  from  the 
House  of  Commons,  an  exclusion  which  in  the  eyes  of  a  good 
many  Liberals  denoted  a  complete  separation  of  the  two  coun- 
tries. The  Chairman  of  the  meeting,  a  Leeds  man,  refused  to 
put  this  resolution,  which  had  been  drafted  by  the  ofHcers  of 
the  Federation  Committee,  and  declared  purely  and  simply, 
without  reserve  or  exception,  for  Mr.  Gladstone's  plan.  A 
heated  debate  ensued;  the  Birmingham  party  was  worsted, 
and  the  Caucus  pronounced  for  Mr.  Gladstone  by  a  very  large 
majority.  The  consequences  of  this  rupture  were,  as  we  shall 
see,  of  decisive  importance  for  the  future  of  the  Organization 
and  of  the  Libera!  party. 

As  soon  as  the  word  of  command  had  been  issued  from  above, 
the  local  Associations  threw  aside  all  their  doubt  and  hesitation 
and  plunged  into  the  fray  with  their  usual  ardour.  The  resolu- 
tions which  they  now  voted  had  nothing  ambiguous  about  them. 
They  called  on  their  members  to  support  Mr.  Gladstone's  Bill 
in  its  entirety.  When  letters  and  telegrams  did  not  attain 
their  object,  delegations  from  the  caucuses  came  up  to  London 
to  ply  their  representatives  with  arguments  ad  hominem,  and  the 
lobbies  of  the  House  were  the  scene  of  a  very  active  campaign 
on  these  lines.  The  unanimity  and  enthusiastic  energy  dis- 
played by  the  caucuses  made,  as  it  would  appear,  an  impression 
Specially  on  Mr.  Gladstone.     He  inferred  that  the  whole  Lib- 


.coy  Google 


2eS  DEMOCRACY  AND  POLITICAL  PARTIES    [(bcoitd  part 

eral  strength  of  the  couDtiy  was  with  him  and  that  all  he  bad 
to  do  was  to  overcome  the  resistance  of  the  members  who  had 
been  led  away  by  Lord  Hartington,  John  Bright,  and  Mr.  Cham- 
berlain. In  the  meanwhile  the  second  reading  of  the  Bill  and 
the  division  were  delayed  in  an  unusual  way.  Lord  Hartington 
maintained  that  the  Government  was  adopting  these  dilatory 
tactics  in  order  to  give  the  caucuses  time  to  carry  out  their  con- 
versions among  the  members  opposed  to  the  Bill.  Mr.  Glad- 
stone emphatically  repudiated  this  charge.  However  this  may 
have  been,  the  caucuses  managed  to  convert  a  certain  number 
of  Members,  but  not  enough  to  ensure  the  success  of  the  Home 
Bule  Bill.  Many  Liberal  Members  remained  deaf  to  the  re- 
monstrances and  threats  of  the  caucuses.  They  voted  with  the 
Gonservativea  and  threw  out  the  Irish  Bill.  Mr.  Gladstone 
would  not  accept  his  defeat,  and  dissolved  Parliament  in  order 
to  appeal  to  the  country. 

The  rejection  of  the  Home  Rule  Bill  in  the  House  of  Com- 
mons, by  separating  the  Qladstoman  Liberals  once  and  for  all 
from  the  Liberal  Unioniata,  completed  the  dismemberment  of 
the  Liberal  Associations  which  had  begun  when  the  crisis  broke 
out.  Several  of  them  lost  their  Chairmen  or  Secretaries,  who 
did  not  want  to  be  borne  away  by  the  current  which  was  driv- 
ing  all  the  caucuses  in  the  direction  of  Home  Bule.  The 
vacancies  caused  by  these  resignations  were  quickly  filled,  and 
the  Organization  drew  up  in  battle  array  with  a  united  front. 
Mi.  Chamberlain  and  his  friends,  who  had  already  withdrawn 
from  the  Federation  after  their  defeat  at  the  Westminster 
Palace  Hotel,  hurriedly  started  a  new  Organization  to  conduct 
the  impending  electoral  campaign,  entitled  the  "  Badical  Union," 
with  its  headquarters  at  Birmingham  and  a  certain  number  of 
branches  in  the  country.  It  adopted  as  its  programme  the 
single  question  of  local  government,  which  it  proposed  to  ex- 
tend on  a  very  large  scale  to  everj-  part  of  the  Kingdom,  not 
excepting  Ireland,  which  would  thus  enjoy  exactly  the  same 
amount  of  autonomy  as  England,  Scotland,  and  Wales.  The 
Caucus  Organization,  which  was  left  in  the  hands  of  the  Glad- 
stonians,  refuse4  to  follow  it  on  to  this  ground ;  in  taking  up 
the  cudgels  for  Home  Rule  it  held,  and  in  this  it  was  backed 
by  the  parliamentary  chiefs  of  the  Gladstonian  party,  that 
the  divergence  brought  about  by  this  problem  was  a  general 


.coy  Google 


KUTB  OBxp.]    CB18I8  OF  1880  AND  PARTT  OSOANIZATION    209 

teat  of  Liberalism;  in  other  words,  that  it  was  not  a  differ- 
euce  of  opinion  between  Liberals  which  the  coantry  was  asked 
to  decide  upon,  but  a  conflict  between  Liberals  and  men  who 
were  no  longer  such.  In  so  doing  the  Oaucua  at  one  blow 
drove  out  of  the  party  all  the  Liberal  Unionists,  led  by  such 
men  as  John  Bright,  Joseph  Chamberlain,  Leonard  Coiutney, 
etc.  In  refufiing  to  recognize  them  as  Liberal  belligerents,  the 
Caucus  t^ated  the  Liberal  members  who  bad  voted  against 
Home  Rule  more  as  rebels.  The  Associations  condemned  them 
beforehand  without  allowing  them  to  come  to  an  explanation 
with  their  constituents,  whose  business  it  now  was  to  give  the 
verdict,  or  they  sent  them  imperious  summonses  to  appear  be- 
fore the  Caucus.'  The  mere  fact  of  appealing  to  the  voters  over 
the  heads  of  the  caucuses  was  viewed  by  the  latter  as  an  act  of 
high  treason  against  Liberalism.  Their  great  and  legitimate  ad- 
miration for  Mr.  Gladstone  made  them  forget  that  he  himself 
was  defending  a  cause  and  not  his  own  person  or  his  power;  and 
making  Mr.  Gladstone's  glorious  name  a  sort  of  shibboleth,  they 
converted  the  great  national  deliberation  in  which  the  country 
was  invited  to  take  part  into  a  personal  plebiscite.  The  methods 
of  warfare,  the  character  of  the  campaign,  could  not  help  being 
influenced  by  this,  contests  conducted  on  personal  lines  being 
always  marked  by  a  greater  display  of  acrimony  and  intoler- 
ance against  the  opposing  side.  The  policy  pursued  by  the 
caucuses  drew  the  following  remarks  from  John  Bright:  "The 
action  of  our  clubs  and  associations  is  rapidly  engaged  in  mak- 
ing delegates  of  their  members,  and  in  insisting  on  their  forget- 
ting all  principles  if  the  interests  of  a  party  are  supposed  to  be 
at  stake.  What  will  be  the  value  of  party  when  its  whole 
power  is  placed  at  the  disposal  of  a  leader  from  whose  authority 
no  appeal  is  allowed  ?  " '  It  was  only  too  natural  that  counsels 
of  moderation  and  appeals  to  tolerance  should  not  be  listened 
to  in  the  thick  of  the  tight.  Having,  so  to  speak,  taken  the 
bit  between  their  teeth,  the  caucuses  were  bent  on  one  thing, 

1  A  Radical  Tet«raii,  Peter  Rjriands,  who  bad  voted  agninst  the  Home  Rnle 
BUI,  was  BDmiDOned  on  the  (oIIowIiik  day  to  appear  before  the  Association 
irithin  /orty^ight  hours.  Afterwards  the  Caucus  thought  better  ot  It  and 
Kraciously  allowed  the  member  op  to  the  end  ot  the  parllamentai;  seasloii 
(which  was  drawing  to  a  close). 

'  Letter  to  Mr.  Calae,  Timet,  34tb  June,  1886. 


.coy  Google 


2M  DEMOCKACT  AND  POLITICAL  PARTIES     [sBcoitD  p4BT 

to  overthrow  and  trample  on  every  one  that  crossed  their  path. 
The  Liberal  Unionista  were  not  always  able  to  argue  their  case; 
on  more  than  one  occasion  they  were  not  allowed  a  hearing  in 
electoral  gatherings,  their  voice  waa  drowned  by  the  clamour 
of  packed  meetings.  The  caucuscB  therefore  gave  the  Liberal 
Unionists  a  plausible  reason  for  exclaiming  gainst  the  tyranny 
of  official  Liberalism  and  for  saying  with  Mr.  Goschen  that 
"they  were  fighting  for  the  right  of  private  judgmeat  and  the 
right  of  Independent  action." ' 

The  final  result  of  the  elections  was  unfavourable  to  Mr.  Glad- 
stone and  to  Home  Kule.  He  resigned  at  once,  without  waiting 
for  the  meeting  of  Parliament.  The  victory  of  the  Conservsr 
tive  and  Liberal  Unionist  coalition  was  in  fact  complete.  A 
large  number  of  Liberals  voted  against  Mr.  Gladstone,  and  a 
still  greater  number  of  old  adherents  of  the  Liberal  leader 
abstained  from  voting,  and  in  so  doing  greatly  helped  to  turn 
the  scale  in  favour  of  the  opponents  of  Home  Rule.  This  re- 
sult showed  only  too  clearly  that  the  Caucus  was  far  from  rep- 
resenting the  opinions  of  the  bulk  of  English  Liberalism,  as  the 
Chairman  of  the  executive  committee  of  the  Federation  had  the 
good  grace  to  admit  by  saying,  after  the  event,  it  is  true,  that 
"the  enthusiasm  for  Mr.  Gladstone  and  his  measure  in  the 
Associations  was  in  reality  not  a  correct  refiex  of  the  attitude 
of  the  whole  mass  of  the  party." '  The  Caucus  Associations 
therefore  misled  Mr.  Gladstone,  confirmed  him  in  his  attitude 
by  their  noisy  demonstrations,  and  made  hira  pull  the  string  so 
tight  that  it  snapped  asunder. 

Nevertheless  Mr.  Gladstone  showed  his  appreciation  of  the 
services  rendered  by  the  Caucus  in  the  campaign  which  had 
just  terminated.  On  leaving  office,  he  made  the  President  of 
the  Caucus  a  liaronet  and  conferred  a  knighthood  on  the  Chair- 
man of  the  executive  committee  of  the  Liberal  Federation.  In 
so  doing  he  was  more  just  than  the  bulk  of  the  party,  who,  in 
trying  to  discover  the  reasons  of  their  defeat,  attributed  it  ia 
the  inadequate  arrangements  of  the  Caucus :  it  had  been  thrown 
out  of  gear  by  the  split  and  had  not  done  what  was  expected 

1  Times,  7th  July,  1886. 

'  Letter  from  Sir  B.  Walter  Foster  iti  the  Ifew  Liberal  Programme  edlt«d 
by  Andi.  R«<d,  Loud.  1S86,  a  cnllertioii  oC  opinions  OH  the  cauaes  of  the  Liberal 
defeat  iu  1S86  aad  on  the  aew  policy  to  be  adopted. 


.coy  Google 


MiNTH  CHiP.]     CRISIS  OF  1886  AND  PARTY  OEGANIZATION    296 

of  it.  The  contrary  was  nearer  the  truth.  Although  it  lost  a 
certain  number  of  distinguished  members,  the  Caucus  had  kept 
all  the  macbinerj  of  organization,  and  what  was  juBt  as  im- 
portant, the  head  machinist,  Mr.  Schnadhorat,  the  only  one  of 
the  Birmingham  group  who  went  over  to  the  other  side.  All 
the  threads  of  the  Organization  being  in  his  hands,  the  machine 
worked  on  without  a  moment's  interruption.  In  the  same  way 
the  local  Associations,  which  were  now  Gladstonian,  kept  all 
the  books,  the  lists,  the  funds,  and,  above  all,  most  of  the  agents 
who  were  used  to  manipulating  the  constituencies.  The  ma- 
jority of  the  leading  people,  the  men  of  wealth  and  culture, 
and,  generally  speaking,  most  of  the  "influences,"  having  left 
the  Gladstonians,  the  voters  who  had  voted  for  Mr.  Gladstone 
and  Home  Rule  belonged  to  the  masses  and  to  the  lower 
middle  class,  many  of  whom  were  brought  to  the  poll  by  the  * 
exertions  of  the  Caucus.  And  these  exertions  were  so  far  from 
being  of  no  avail  that  in  the  English  boroughs,  for  instance, 
where  the  Gladstonian  candidates  suffered  most,  their  minori- 
ties were  more  than  respectable.  Next  to  the  magic  of  Mr. 
Gladstone's  name,  the  Caucus  was  undoubtedly  the  most  powers 
ful  influence,  and  it  would  be  by  no  means  rash  to  affirm  that 
without  the  support  of  the  Caucus  the  defeat  of  the  Gladsto- 
nians would  have  been  an  utter  rout. 


Ill 

If  the  assistance  rendered  by  the  Caucus  was  very  useful 
to  the  Gladstonians,  it  must  be  admitted  that  from  the 
point  of  view  of  the  Organization  the  Caucus  was  very  well 
advised  in  taking  Mr.  Gladstone's  side.  It  may  be  that,  as 
was  generally  supposed,  Mr.  Chamberlain,  in  parting  from 
Mr.  Gladstone,  hoped  to  have  the  last  word,  thanks,  among 
other  things,  to  the  Caucus,  of  which  he  was  the  master  and 
the  guiding  spirit.  If  this  was  so,  the  calculation  was  a  mis- 
taken one.  The  Caucus  had  been  called  into  being  on  behalf 
of  the  sovereignty  of  the  people ;  it  was  baaed  on  the  formal  ap- 
plication of  the  principle  of  local  autonomy';  and  its  machinery 
was  kept  going  not  so  much  by  sober-minded  persons,  as  by  the 
enthusiasm  and  political  ardour  which  naturally  follpw  the  direct 


.coy  Google 


296  DEMOCRACT  AND  POLITICAL  PASTIES    [iwcomd  exta 

lines  of  political  thought.  The  solution  of  the  Irieh  problem  put 
forward  by  Mr.  Gladstone,  combining  u  it  did  all  these  logical 
and  psychological  elements,  exactly  suited  the  intellectual  and 
political  temperament  of  the  contingents  of  the  Caucus,  and  if 
the  latter  bad  tried  to  force  them  in  an  opposite  direction,  it 
would  have  broken  its  mainspriDg.  The  result  would  have 
been  such  a  dismemberment,  not  only  of  its  staS  (which 
actually  did  take  place),  but  of  the  rank  and  file,  as  to  break 
it  up,  reduce  it  to  the  level  of  an  organization  of  a  Liberal  frac- 
tion (aa  was  the  case  with  the  Ot^anizations  started  by  the 
Liberals  opposed  to  Home  Bule),  and  prevent  it  from  keeping 
up  even  the  appearance  of  being  a  more  or  less  complete  repre- 
sentative of  the  party.  Mr.  Gladstone  being  still  the  official 
chief  of  the  Liberal  party,  the  head  of  orthodox  Liberalism,  the 
Caucus  was  able  to  preserve  this  appearance  by  followii^  in  his 
wake.  In  so  doing  it  also  escaped  the  danger  of  having  its  rep- 
resentative authority  contested  by  that  of  the  supteme  leader, 
of  the  anointed  of  the  party.  If  things  had  reached  this  point, 
the  old  political  factor  of  the  leadership  which  the  Caucus  had 
taken  on  itself  to  supplant,  but  which  was  still  a  livii^  force 
in  English  life,  would  have  risen  up  against  it  with  a  power 
all  the  more  formidable,  because  on  this  occasion  the  leader 
appeared  as  a  Radical  champion.  On  the  other  hand,  by  walk- 
ing in  the  footsteps  of  the  great  chief,  the  Caucus  was  strength- 
ened with  all  his  strength  and  enhanced  by  all  his  importance. 
WhetKer  all  the  consequences  involved  in  the  decision  taken 
by  the  Federation  were  clearly  realized  or  not,  its  immediate 
and  personal  effect  was  easily  grasped,  viz.  the  deposition  of 
the  powerful  master  of  the  Caucus.  The  defeat  inflicted  on 
Mr.  Chamberlain  at  the  Westminster  Palace  Hotel  was  hailed 
with  delight  by  many  Liberals.  They  held  that  the  Federation 
had  rescued  the  freedom  of  the  Liberal  Organization  which 
was  in  the  hands  of  a  single  man,  and  more  than  this,  that 
the  democracy  of  England  had  won  its  spurs  on  this  occa- 
sion. The  rising  generation  in  particular  was  infected  by 
these  views.  Having  arrived  at  the  age  of  discretion  under 
Lord  Beacon sfield's  government,  its  political  opinions  were 
formed  under  the  special  influence  of  that  period.  The  un- 
expected return  of  the  Tories  to  power  with  an  enormous 
majority  a^r  a  long  Liberal  reign  which  seemed  destined 


.coy  Google 


MiKTU  CHAP.]    CBISIS  OF  1680  AND  PABTT  ORGANIZATION    107 

to  laat  indefinitely,  had  affected  people's  imaginations,  and 
witli  the  exag(;etation  of  language  peculiar  to  party  polemioa, 
Beaconsfield  was  represented  as  a  sort  of  political  Anti- 
christ, and  tlie  Liberal  victory  of  1880  as  a  victory  over 
the  forces  of  darkness.'  The  political  ardour  which  young 
Liberals  imbibed  under  these  circumBtances  was  marked  not 
so  much  by  a  rationalist  enthusiasm,  like  that  which  grew  up 
in  the  tatter  years  of  the  Palinerston  epoch,  as  by  a  jealous 
and  irritable  belief.  The  attacks  which  were  being  made  by 
the  Tories  on  Mr.  Chamberlain  and  the  Caucus,  which  they 
liked  to  describe  as  a  tool  of  an  ambitious  and  unscrupulous 
politician,  gave  a  painful  shock  to  the  minds  of  youthful 
Radicals  and  inspired  them  with  grave  suspicions.  The  spec- 
tacle of  Membei-s  of  unquestioned  Eadic^ism  swelling  Mr, 
Chamberiain's  train,  and  of  Liberal  Associations  at  his  beck 
and  call,  filled  many  young  men  with  apprehensions  as  to  the 
destiny  of  the  English  democracy,  not  yet  arrived  at  maturity, 
but  with  the  springs  of  its  existence  already  poisoned.  Conse- 
quently when  Mr.  Chamberlain  was  thrown  over  by  the  Feder- 
ation, they  thought  that  the  English  democracy  had  recovered 
itself,  and  that  the  Caucus,  in  its  odious  aspect,  was  a  thing 
of  the  past.  The  young,  ardent  democrats,  moreover,  were  not 
alone  in  attaching  this  importance  to  the  crisis  which  the  Fed- 
eration had  just  gone  through.  There  were  still  a  certain 
number  of  Associations  in  the  country  which  held  aloof  from 
the  Birmingham  Federation  and  had  refused  to  join  it,  for 
fear  of  losing  their  independence.  Mr.  Chamberlain's  ^1 
overcame  their  scruples,  and,  one  after  another,  they  gave  in 
their  adhesion. 

To  remove  all  the  apprehensions  of  the  local  Associations, 
the  Fed.eration  hastened  to  modify  its  statutes  in  a  decentraliz- 
ing direction.  In  the  Council  of  the  Federation  they  were 
given  a  representation  proportioned  to  the  number  of  voters, 
and  in  the  general  committee  three  delegates  to  each  Associa- 
tion whatever  its  importance,  just  as  in  the  federative  republics, 

1  EMn-ard  Pi^Emnn,  tbe  liistorinn.  for  Itiatnnce.  ortiiall?  compared  the  cteo 
tlrins  o(  1S«0,  whith  hroiight  Mr.  Gladstone  Into  power  In  place  ol  Dlsrteli, 
to  the  ciin(|uest  ol  Magna  Chnrla.  and.  alludinK  to  BeBconsSeld's  torel^ 
policy,  aildcil  lliat  the  advent  of  Ihe  Liberals  would  be  s  Boiirce  o(  joy  "wher- 
e-ver  Ihe  name  ot  ChrlHt  Is  named  in  the  Innds  where  the  misbeliever  BtUI  bolde 
thaChiistlaD  aahiB  Irandsmau"  (Contemporary  Hevieur,  1880,  Vol.  3T). 


.coy  Google 


298  DEMOCRACY  AND  POLITICAL  PARTIES     [second  p^bt 

in  the  United  States,  or  in  Switzerland,  the  States  or  Cantons 
are  represented  in  proportion  to  tlieir  population  in  the  lower 
chamber,  whereas  in  the  other  branch  of  the  federal  Legislature 
they  all  have  the  same  nuuilier  of  representatives.  The  new 
statutes  of  the  Caucus  also  allowed  the  creation  of  Distrirt 
federations  with  representatives  in  the  central  bodies  of  the 
Organization.  But  the  most  impoi'tant  point,  the  point  most 
pregnant  with  consequences,  of  the  constitutional  revision 
adopted  by  the  Caucus,  waa  the  transfer  of  its  head  office.  It 
was  impossible  to  stay  at  Birmingham,  for  Mr.  Chamberlain's 
inflnence  was  still  all-powerful  there;  and  the  Federation  was 
now,  so  to  speak,  in  the  middle  of  a  hostile  camp.  It  being 
necessary  to  move  somewhere  else,  Leeds  waa  proposed  as  head- 
quarters; but  the  Leeds  politicians,  who  had  done  all  they  could 
to  overthrow  Mr.  Chamberlain,  declined  the  offer,  being  afraid 
of  inspiring  the  great  provincial  centres  with  the  jealousy  which 
had  caused  the  downfall  of  Birmingham.*  Thereupon  London 
was  clearly  marked  out  as  the  home  of  the  Liberal  Organiza- 
tion. Installed  in  the  capital  of  the  Empire,  the  Federation 
at  once  rose  in  public  estimation,  llivested  of  its  provincial 
origin,  which  was  a  drawback  to  it  in  spite  of  all  the  influence 
which  it  wielded  in  the  Birmingham  period  of  its  existence,  it 
now  shed  its  rays  over  the  whole  country  from  the  centre  of 
political  life.  The  dream  of  its  founders  to  make  it  a  Liberal 
Parliament  side  by  side  with  the  Imperial  Legislature  was  real- 
ized in  a  material  sense  now  that  it  had  its  offices  in  Parlia- 
ment Street.  The  popular  association  of  ideas  which  magnifies 
and  exalts  alt  that  goes  on  in  the  capital,  even  in  countries 
which  are  not  highly  centralized,  forthwith  clothed  the  Fed- 
eration with  a  new  authority.  This  authority  was  speedily 
enhanced,  and  to  as  great  an  extent,  by  the  fact  that  the  Fed- 
eration became  the  regular  organ  of  the  chiefs  of  the  party, 
with  Mr.  Gladstone  at  their  bead.  The  alliance  of  the  popular 
Organization  with  the  leadership,  contracted  during  the  elec- 
toral crisis  of  1886,  was  thus  placed  on  a  permanent  footing, 
and  its  effect,  as  analyzed  above,  only  became  more  striking 
and  more  fruitful  in  consequences  for  the  Federation.  It  could 
no  longer  be  said  that  it  obeyed  the  inspirations  of  a  single 


.coy  Google 


KiHTH  CHAF.]     CRISIS  OF  1886  AND  PARTY  OBGANIZATION    200 

mau,  that  it  ministered  exclusively  to  his  interests,  as  Mr. 
Chamberlain'a  victorious  adversaries  retrospectively,  but  per- 
haps somewhat  tardily,  made  out.'  It  was  now  supposed  to 
unite  all  the  elements  of  Liberalism,  to  be,  as  it  were,  its 
visible,  catholic,  universal  church.  The  poor  young  men  who 
in  the  innocence  of  their  hearts  rejoiced  over  Mr,  Chamber- 
lain's fall  as  betokening  the  end  of  the  Caucus  had  no  idea  that 
its  power  was  only  beginning. 

Nor  did  the  commotion  created  in  the  local  Associations  by 
the  Home  Rule  crisis  prove  disadvantageous  to  them.  True, 
they  had  lost  some  members,  whose  importance  was  due  not 
so  much  to  their  number  as  to  their  positioa,  their  wealth,  and 
their  influence  in  the  locality.  Respectable  people  as  they  were 
for  the  most  part,  their  respectability  was  of  use  to  the  Asso- 
ciations which  they  had  joined  out  of  party  loyalty ;  they  went 
bail,  so  to  speak,  in  the  popular  Organizations  for  the  too  impul- 
sive and  noisy  elements,  not  to  mention  the  more  or  less  large 
subscriptions  which  their  means  enabled  them  to  contribute. 
Their  departure  was  no  doubt  a  serious  blow  to  the  Liberal 
Associations.  But  their  respectability  was  not  infrequently 
accompanied  by  the  haughtiness  and  arrogance  with  which  a  cer- 
tain class  of  Whigs  treated  people  of  small  means  or  low  birth. 
In  this  respect,  therefore,  the  retirement  of  these  personages 
from  the  IjiberaJ  Associations  was  more  a  gain  than  a  loss  to 
the  latter ;  their  moral  atmosphere  was  decidedly  cleared  by  it. 
Then,  the  presence  of  the  moderates  in  the  Associations  having 
acted  as  a  check  and  a  counterpoise,  or,  as  the  ardent  spirits  of 
the  Caucus  termed  it,  as  an  impediment,  an  obstacle  to  the 
advance  of  the  party  in  the  path  of  progress,  their  departure 
had  the  effect  of  removing  the  friction  between  the  moderate 
and  the  Badical  element  and  of  enhancing  the  propelling  force 
of  the  latter  by  bringing  more  cohesion  into  tlie  ranks  of  the 
Caucus,  by  introducing  greater  unity  of  views  and  aspirations 
among  its  members,  for  a  while  at  least,  until  the  inevitable 
growth  of  conflicting  opinions  and  feelings  would  once  more  give 
birth  to  a  group  of  "  reactionaries."    In  the  meanwhile  the  cau- 

>  "They  bad  no  lan^raone-man  society.  ■  .  ■  AttemptB  were  made  to  dbb 
that  Organization  tor  the  parpoaea  of  one  man  "...  (Speech  of  the  Presi- 
dent of  the  Caacua,  Sli  James  KItsoD,  at  the  aonnal  meeting  o(  the  Feder>- 
tioD,  Oct.  18,  ISST). 


.coy  Google 


SOD  DBMOCRACT  AND  POLITICAL  PARTIBS    [ucond  pakt 

cuses  obtained  more  elbow-room.  Just  as  great  a  mistake  was 
therefore  made  by  those  who,  at  the  opposite  political  pole 
to  the  "  stalwarts  "  and  to  the  rising  generation  which  hailed 
Mr.  Ghamberlain's  fall  aa  the  fall  of  the  Caucus,  held  with 
Mr.  Qoldwin  Smith  that  the  retirement  of  the  men  who  lent 
respectability  to  the  Caucus  had  dealt  this  "political  devil- 
fish" a  fatal  blow.*  The  real  upshot  was  that  the  circum- 
stances which  had  the  appearance  of  weakening  the  Caucus  — 
the  separation  from  its  creator  and  prompter,  Mr.  Chamberlain, 
the  compulsory  desertion  of  its  stronghold  at  Birmingham,  the 
loss  of  many  of  its  impoitant  members  —  all  conspired,  on 
the  contrary,  to  enhance  its  power  and  extend  its  influence. 


IV 
But  the  yery  incidents  which  contributed  to  this  result  soon 
thrust  new  duties  upon  the  Organization,  and  imposed  on  it 
new  obligations.  The  first  marked  effect  of  the  altered  situ- 
ation appeared  in  the  relations  of  the  Organization  with  the 
party  chiefs.  Being  indebted  for  its  accession  of  prestige  to  its 
closer  connection  with  the  parliamentary  leaders  of  the  party, 
it  speedily  fell  under  their  direct  influence.  These  leaders  — 
it  is  enough  to  mention  a  single  name,  that  of  Mr.  Gladstone 
—  held  too  exalted  a  position  for  the  representatives  of  the 
Caucus,  who,  after  all,  were  unimportant  people,  to  be  able, 
when  brought  into  continual  contact  with  them,  to  resist  them 
and  take  up  an  independent,  let  alone  a  divergent,  attitude  in 
regard  to  the  common  cause,  of  which  the  parliamentary  chiefs 
of  the  party  were  the  devoted  and  indefatigable  champions. 
This  state  of  things,  which  grew  up  after  the  transfer  of  the 
headquarters  of  the  Caucus  to  London,  was  not  altogether 
unforeseen.  When  the  Federation  was  obliged  to  move  from 
Birmingham,  after  the  disastrous  general  election  of  1880, 
the  proposal  to  transport  the  Organization  to  London  met  with 
opposition  among  its  members  for  the  very  reason  that  the 
independence  of  the  popular  Organization  might  be  exposed 
to  danger.     "Without  actually  pointing  out  the  leaders  of  the 

1  "  The  Caucui  has  lost  moit  at  the  men  who  lent  It  respectabilit;,  and  we 
ms;  hops  that  this  political  devil-fish  has  recelveil  a  sevars  woilud  "  ("  Elec- 
tion Notes,"  Itiuomillaii'l  MagaziTie,  August,  13BU). 


.CD,  Google 


msTH  CB*p.]    CRISIS  OF  1886  AND  PARTY  ORGANIZATION    301 

party,  —  which  no  one  would  have  ventured  to  do,  —  fearg  were 
expressed  that  the  official  atmosphere  of  the  capital  would 
lob  the  Organizatiun  of  the  popular  spirit  which  animated  or 
ought  to  animate  it;  cut  ofF  from  the  provincial  centres,  it 
would  no  longer  be  able  to  interpret  their  political  views  with 
ease  and  accuracy.  Mr.  John  Morley  (who  at  that  time  was 
not  connected  with  Liberal  official  cii'cles  by  the  close  ties  since 
formed  in  the  course  of  years  of  common  struggles)  dwelt 
with  much  force  on  these  considerations,  but  they  were  dis- 
regarded. The  anxiety  to  uphold  the  independence  of  the 
Organization  as  opposed  to  the  official  leaders  of  the  party  was 
also  very  great  among  the  manners  of  the  Caucus  who  had 
joined  the  Gladstonians,  and  they  came  up  to  London  with 
the  firm  intention  of  keeping  as  much  as  possible  aloof  from 
these  leaders.  But  they  were  very  soon  caught  in  the  official 
toils. 

One  special  fact  contributed  greatly  to  this  result.  It  will 
be  remembered  that  long  before  the  creation  of  the  Caucus  the 
Liberals  had  a  central  office  m^iaged  by  the  Whips  (the  Cen- 
tral Liberal  Association).  The  Whip  himself  was  only  an 
agent  of  the  leader  of  the  party ;  the  Organization  which  he 
controlled  had  no  policy  of  its  own,  it  obeyed  that  of  the  party 
chief.  The  Central  Association,  therefore,  although  it  had  a 
long  Whig  past,  followed  Mr.  Gladstone  in  the  Home  Rule 
campaign  of  1886,  but  without  making  a  great  impression  or 
achieving  much  success.  Being  gradually  driven  back  by  the 
rising  tide  of  the  popular  Organization  of  Birmingham,  the 
Association  which  represented  the  leaders  lost  its  vitality  and 
energy  with  the  ground  which  was  slipping  from  beneath  its 
feet.  After  the  defeat  of  1886,  the  leaders  of  the  Liberal 
party  wanted  to  bring  some  fresh  blood  into  it,  and  considered 
this  all  the  more  feasible  because  it  was  now  as  Radical  as 
the  representative  Organization.  They  thought  of  Mr.  Schnad- 
horst  as  the  man  to  conduct  this  delicate  operation.  But  he 
preferred  to  remain  at  the  head  of  the  Cauciis,  especially  as  its 
headquarters  were  about  to  be  transferred  to  London,  where  a 
fresh  era  of  activity  awaited  him.  Being  unable  to  entice  away 
the  skilful  organizer,  the  leaders  discovered  another  means  of 
obtaining  his  services ;  as  he  was  taking  up  his  abode  in  London 
on  behalf  of  the  Caucus,  why  should  he  not,  while  continuing 


.coy  Google 


S02  DBMOCRACT  AND  POLITICAL  PARTIES    [bbcohd  pabt 

to  look  after  it,  keep  an  eye  on  their  Ot^^anizatiou,  which  was 
close  by.  Mr.  Schnadhorst  yielded  to  these  entreaties  and 
accepted  the  title  of  Honorary  Secretary  to  the  Central  Liberal 
Association,  that  is,  he  added  It  to  his  office  of  secretary  of  the 
National  Liberal  Federation.  As  sole  manager  of  both  Organi- 
zations, he  became  their  maid-of-all-work :  as  secretary,  of  tbe 
Central  office,  he  was  the  factotum  of  the  leaders ;  as  secretary 
of  the  Caucua,  he  was  the  servant  of  the  popular  Organizations. 
The  field  of  action  of  both  being  the  same,  a  fusion  of  the  two 
Organizations  practically  took  place. 

Of  course  the  influence  of  the  official  leaders  on  the  affairs 
'  of  the  Federation  was  brought  into  play  behind  the  scenes 
SO  to  speak,  but  it  was  none  the  less  real.  The  Caucus  con- 
tinued to  hold  its  Grand  Assizes  coram  popvlo;  thousands  of 
delegates  representing  all  tlie  constituencies  in  the  country 
flocked  to  these  meetings ;  but  the  proceedings  were  arranged 
beforehand  down  to  the  minutest  details.  The  items  of  the 
programme,  measures  or  demands  to  be  submitted  to  the  Leg- 
islature, resolutions  approving  or  censuring  the  policy  of  the 
day,  were  discussed  and  drafted  in  private  by  the  leaders 
of  the  party  and  the  managers  of  the  Caucus.  The  list  of 
business  of  the  Federation  meetings  being  fixed  by  them 
beforehand  down  to  the  names  of  the  speakers,  independent 
utterances  had  great  difficulty  in  obtaining  a  hearing.  In 
the  first  place,  the  mere  proposal  of  a  motion  not  anticipated 
or  eliminated  by  the  authorities  was  a  piece  of  courage  or 
audacity  on  the  part  of  a  small  provincial  delegate.  In  the 
hall  which  was  still  resounding  with  the  loud  cheers  evoked 
by  the  appearance  of  Mr,  Gladstone,  where  he  was  going  to 
speak  or  had  spoken,  where  the  accents  of  his  magic  voice  was 
still  vibrating  in  every  ear  and  in  every  heart,  how  was  a  hum- 
ble delegate  to  rise  and  oppose  the  persons  who  surrounded 
Mr.  Gladstone  on  the  platform  and  whom  he  addressed  as  his 
dear  friends,  whom  he  described  as  the  pillars  of  Liberalism, 
of  the  great  cause  for  which  they  were  doing  battle  ?  And  if 
any  one  had  the  hardihood  to  do  it,  the  President  was  there 
ready  to  rule  the  delegate's  motion  or  amendment  "out  of 
order"  without  further  ado,  and  to  refuse  him  a  hearing, 
while  making  up  for  this  treatment  by  retrospective  denun- 
ciations of  the  unholy  dictatorship  which  Mr,  Chamberlain 


.coy  Google 


HiKTH  CHAP.]    CRISIS  OF  IBM  AND  PARTY  ORGANIZATION    303 

wielded  over  the  Federation  before  it  had  regained  ita  free- 
dom in  the  crisis  of  1S86. 

No  great  amount  of  perspicacity  was  required  to  perceive 
that  under  tlieae  circumstances  the  Federation  had  become  a 
quasi-official  institution,  that  it  represented  only  official  Liber- 
alism, that  of  the  regular  leaders,  and  in  no  way  the  aspirations 
of  the  masses.  The  managers  of  the  Caucus  took  offence  at 
remarks  which  began  to  be  made  on  this  point  and  protested 
vehemently  gainst  all  imputation  of  officialism.  "  The  Feder- 
ation," they  declared,  "  embodies  and  expresses  the  profound 
and  unshaken  loyalty  of  the  Liberal  party  to  its  great  chief, 
and  the  confidence  felt  in  his  colleagues.  At  the  same  time 
the  Federation  has  never  been,  and  if  it  be  consistent  with  the 
principles  upon  which  it  was  established  can  never  become,  a 
merely  official  organization.  It  receives  its  inspiration  from 
the  people." '  Tlie  authors  of  these  words  were  so  Impressed 
with  them  that  they  took  them  for  a  motto,  which  they  repro- 
duced on  the  first  page  of  their  annual  reports.  A  good  many 
influential  representatives  of  local  Associations,  however,  promi- 
nent members  of  the  central  committee  of  the  Caucus,  were 
not  so  profoundly  convinced  of  the  absolute  independence  of 
the  Federation,  and  in  the  confidences  in  which  they  indulged 
before  foreign  enquirers  they  pointed  out  with  some  bitterness 
that  the  Federation  was  too  much  under  the  thumb  of  this  or 
that  big-wig  of  the  party.  As  for  what  went  on  at  the  great 
annual  meetings  of  the  Caucus,  they  let  drop  the  singularly 
piquant  admission  that  "there  waa  much  more  lilierty  at  Bir- 
mingham." 

Each  succeeding  year  brought  fresh  confirmation  of  this 
state  of  things.  Many  a  member  of  the  Liberal  party  real- 
ized it  and  grumbled;  but  they  did  not  dare  to  protest  out 
loud;  this  was  left  to  the  enfants  terriblea  of  the  party,  to  men 
like  Mr.  Henry  Labouchere,  who  said  bluntly :  "  A  feeling  is 
growing  amongst  Liberals  that  the  wire-pullers  of  the  National 
Liberal  Federation  are  taking  too  much  on  themselves,  and  that 
the  Federation  does  as  much  harm  as  it  does  good.  A  great 
meeting  of  delegates  is  annually  held.  A  programme  is  sub- 
mitted to  it,  but  by  whom  the  programme  is  framed  is  shrouded 


.coy  Google 


8M  DEMOCRACY  AND  POLITICAL  PARTIES    [smowd  nwi 

in  myBtery.  The  delegates  are  asked  to  accept  it  or  to  reject  it. 
All  amendments  and  all  additional  '  planks '  are  ruled  out  of 
order.  This  deprives  the  meeting  of  any  real  represeDtativ^ 
character.  Some  things  that  they  might  desire  to  see  in  the 
programme  are  not  there,  others  which  they  —  or  a  good  many 
of  them — deem  of  doubtful  acceptance  by  the  entire  party 
are  puahed  into  the  front.'"  To  the  rejoinder  of  the  Caucus 
officials,  who  referred  him  to  the  statutes  of  the  Federation, 
Mr.  Labouchere  replied:  "Yes,  this  is  all  very  well,  but  it 
does  not  alter  the  fa£t  that  there  is  a  growing  feeling  among 
Liberals  that  the  Federation  is  becoming  somewhat  of  a  clique. 
,  .  .  Putting,  however,  criticism  of  detail  aside,  1  still  assert, 
firstly,  that  the  Federation  should  be  independent  of  the  official 
party  Organization ;  secondly,  that  its  annual  general  meeting 
should  be  more  of  a  Liberal  Parliament  and  less  of  a  meeting 
oalled  together  to  express  approval  of  cut  and  dried  resolu- 
tions." * 

Even  if  it  had  wished  to  follow  this  advice,  it  was  no  easy 
matter  for  the  Federation  to  do  so;  its  connection  with  "official 
Liberalism"  was  too  firmly  cemented  by  Mr.  Gladstone's  pow- 
erful individuality,  and  then,  however  strong  may  have  been 
the  domineering  spirit  attributed  to  the  "wire-pullers,"  they 
were  sincerely  convinced  that  it  was  a  clear  gain  to  the  party 
to  maintain  close  relations  with  the  official  leaders  and  to  con- 
fine discussion  to  the  arena  into  which  these  responsible  chiefs 
could  venture.  But  whatever  may  have  been  the  motives  for 
this  policy,  it  none  the  less  had  the  effect  of  giving  an  utterly 
wrong  bias  to  the  relations  between  public  opinion  and  the 
party  leaders  under  parliamentary  government. 

Parliamentary  government  reposes  on  a  division  of  labour 
and  an  apportionment  of  powers  between  public  opinion  and  the 
leaders,  the  rulers,  — an  apportionment  prescribed  by  the  very 
nature  of  both.  While  public  opinion  by  a  sort  of  volcanic 
process  upheaves  and  hurls  forth  one  problem  after  another, 
the  party  leaders  who  alternately  come  into  office,  the  rulers, 
fasten  on  those  problems  the  solution  of  which  appears  to 
them  necessary  and  possible;  they  are  not  to  meddle  with 
the  others,  and  it  is  a  crime  on  their  part  to  pla}'  with 
them.  Taking  up  the  questions  which  await  solution  on  their 
>  Tntlh,  of  Jan.  3, 1S90.  ■  Ibid.,  of  Jan.  9  and  le,  1890. 


.coy  Google 


MiiTTB  CMP.]     CRISIS  OF  1B86  AND  PARTY  ORGANIZATION    806 

own  responsibility,  they  muflt  not  shirk  it  or  let  their  hand 
be  forced,  no  more  than  they  may  arrest  or  dam  the  current 
of  opinion  which  fertilizes  the  soil  of  every  free  political  com- 
munity. It  ia  this  which  conBtitutes  the  real  separation  of 
power  on  which  parliamentary  government  rests,  rather  than 
that  meclianicai  separation  which  Montesquieu  fancied  he  had 
discovered  in  English  constitutionalism,  and  which  has  since 
been  nafvely  copied  in  various  countries. 

In  getting  their  programme  given  them  by  the  delegates 
after  having  carefully  composed  it  in  private  themselves 
and  adapted  it  to  their  aims  and  their  resources,  the  leaders 
of  the  party  shifted  the  responsibility.  In  like  manner,  by 
not  allowing  the  representatives  of  the  party,  who  had  come 
from  all  parts  of  the  country,  to  speak  on  this  or  that 
question  because  it  was  not  ripe  for  solution  and  could  only 
hamper  the  lea<.lers  of  the  party  who  have  to  carry  out 
its  policy,  the  managers  of  the  Caucus  inverted  the  parts 
and  consequently  did  away  with  responsibility.  The  judg- 
ment which  they  pronounced  on  the  questions  raised  was 
perhaps  quite  right  in  itself,  but  it  did  not  admit  of  being 
enforced  aa  they  enforced  it.  For  instance,  in  1891  the  author- 
ities of  the  Caucus  would  not  allow  a  discussion  or  a  division 
on  the  "eight  hours  question,"  which  was  already  stirring  the 
country.  They  alleged  that  from  information  in  their  posses- 
sion (which  they  kept  to  themselves)  only  a  few  local  Associa- 
tions were  in  favour  of  the  "  eight  hours."  It  is  quite  possible 
that  the  question  of  introducing  a  compulsory  maxiuunn  of 
eight  hours'  labour  in  every  industry  was  not  ripe  for  discus- 
sion, and  perhaps  even  that  it  may  never  become  so  from  tlie 
)>oint  of  view  of  good  sense.  But  the  mere  elimination  of 
the  question  was  not  a  proof  of  this.  It  was  only  a  means  of 
saving  the  leaders  from  the  necessity  of  speaking  out  on  the 
question,  as  it  was  their  duty  to  do  if  they  wished  to  be  true 
to  the  spirit  of  parliamentary  government,  even  if  they  found 
themselves  at  variance  witli  the  majority  of  their  party ;  it  was 
simply  a  device  to  avoid  giving  offence  to  any  section  of  their 
supporters,  to  prevent  the  loss  of  votes  at  elections,  and  to 
enable  them,  while  protected  by  the  temporizing  instructions 
of  the  council  of  the  party,  to  wait  quietly  to  see  which  way 
the  oat  would  jump. 


.coy  Google 


DEMOCRACY  AND  POLITICAL  PARTIES    [es 


The  effects  and  consequences  of  the  complete  identity  which 
grew  np  between  the  popular  Organization  of  Liberalism  and 
the  official  leaders  of  the  party,  did  not  stop  here.  It  was  not 
only  the  general  economy  of  parliamentary  government  which 
was  disturbed;  the  concrete  existence  of  the  party,  the  free 
play  of  its  forces  and  even  of  its  feelings,  was  also  affected  by  it. 
Having  affirmed  its  community  of  interests  with  the  official 
leaders  on  the  Home  Rule  question,  the  popular  Organization 
followed  them  so  implicitly  in  this  direction  that  it  became  a 
fixture  there.  It  became  engrossed,  and  made  the  whole  body 
of  Libemls  become  engrossed,  in  the  single  question  of  Ireland. 
For  the  parliamentary  leaders  of  a  party  that  is  a  logical  and 
almost  obligatory  position  to  take  up  on  great  political  ques- 
tions. In  contracting  as  it  were  to  solve  particular  ques- 
tions, the  official  leaders  of  the  party  stake  their  all  on  the 
result ;  they  stand  or  fall  by  their  definite  programme.  The 
party,  on  the  other  hand,  cannot  Immure  itself  in  a  single 
question,  however  great  the  imiwrtance  which  it  attaches 
to  it.  Representing,  under  the  time-honoured  system  of  party 
dualism,  manifold  and  varied  interests,  it  cannot  sacrihce 
itself  on  the  altar  of  one  of  them.  Its  government,  its  official 
leaders  of  the  moment,  have  to  play  the  part  of  scapegoat. 
The  party  which  aup[M»rted  them  in  the  country  does  not  on 
that  account  abandon  the  beaten  cause;  it  continues  to  keep 
it  in  view ;  but  with  the  freedom  of  a  body  cjarporate  unfet- 
tered by  pledges,  by  feelings  of  amour-pruprp,  by  points  of 
honour,  it  can  relax  any  over-tension,  retreat  or  advance  a  few 
paces,  and  while  remaining  tnie  to  itself  in  re,  change  its  ac- 
tion in  modo,  and  quietly  create  a  qiiasi-new  situation  in  rfhich 
the  old  defeated  leaders,  released  by  the  authority  of  sovereign 
opinion  from  the  stringency  of  their  former  professions  of  faith, 
will  be  able  to  lead  the  party  in  new  order  of  battle  to  coml)at 
and  to  victory.  But  if  the  party  in  the  country  completely 
identifies  itself  with  the  defeated  leaders,  if  it  follows  them 
with  all  its  baggage  and  intrenches  itself  with  them  in  rear 
of  the  lost  Bill,  then  its  regular  evolution  becomes  singularly 
difficult,  if  not  impossible.  The  mntual  pledges  of  the  leaders 
and  their  supporters  make  them  really  each  other's  prisoners. 


.coy  Google 


iciNTH  CHAT.]     CRISIS  OF  1886  AND  PARTY  ORGANIZATION    307 

like  convicts  fettered  in  couples,  and  even  the  example  ttiey 
set  of  reciprocal  loyalty,  edifying  as  it  is  in  theory,  fails 
to  be  so  under  the  circumstances;  for  this  feeling,  when 
carried  to  its  extreme  limits  in  the  relations  between  chiefs 
and  followers,  Is  apt  to  oscillate  between  sublime  devotion  and 
servility. 

Having  followed  the  example  of  the  official  leaders  of  the 
party  in  their  immovable  attachment  to  the  question  of  Home 
Rule  for  Ireland,  the  next  step  for  the  popular  Organization  of 
Liberalism  was  to  consider  adhesion  to  Home  Rule  as  the  dis- 
tinguishing mark  of  Liberalism,  and  not  only  adhesion  to  the 
principle  of  increasing  the  political  power  of  the  Irish  people, 
but  to  Home  Rule  as  it  would  be  eventually  proposed  by  the 
leader  of  the  party.  The  Liberal  creed  having  been  set  up  in 
such  a  simple  way  with  a  profession  of  faith  so  easy  of  recogni- 
tion, the  notion  of  rpolitical  orthodoxy  penetrated  the  Liberal 
Organization  from  one  end  to  the  other,  and  with  this  notion 
its  corollary  of  heterodoxy.  All  dissent  on  the  Irish  question 
was  regarded  within  the  Liberal  Associations  as  a  heresy  in 
regard  to  which  tolerance  became  cowardice  and  intolerance  a 
virtue.  This  view  was  stated  in  almost  so  many  words  by  the 
principal  leaders  of  the  Caucus,  who  proved  far  more  intolerant 
than  some  of  the  official  chiefs  of  the  party,  and  were  strongly 
opposed  to  all  moderate  and  conciliatory  language.  Lord 
Eosebery,  a  member  of  Mr.  Gladstone's  last  Cabinet  and  his 
future  successor,  was  sharply  rebuked  by  the  President  of  the 
Caucus  for  having  said  that  the  Liberals  would  assume  a  grave 
responsibility  if  they  let  the  split  in  the  party  become  a  per- 
manent one.  In  the  opinion  of  the  President  of  the  Liberal 
Federation,  this  "  was  not  lajiguage  that  should  be  used  "  when 
one  had  a  majority.  Having  proved  by  arithmetical  calcula- 
tion that  the  number  of  new  Associations  affiliated  since  the 
Home  Rule  crisis  showed  a  clear  gain  of  25  per  cent,  he  ex- 
pressed indignant  astonishment  that  any  one  should  propose  to 
them,  as  Lord  Eosebery  did,  to  "make  a  pontoon  to  bring 
over  those  members  of  the  party  who  were  standing  on  the 
other  side  of  the  gulf." ' 

The  conclusion  to  which  this  language  pointed  was  evidently 
n  November, 


.coy  Google 


308  DEMOCRACY  AND  POLITICAL  PARTIES     [sbconu  paut 

that  it  would  be  rather  a  deserving  aet  than  otherwise  to  widen 
the  gulf,  and  in  justice  to  the  local  Associations,  it  must  be 
said  that  they  did  their  best  to  bring  this  about.  When  the 
crisia  of  188G  broke  out,  the  withdrawal  of  the  difisentient  Lib- 
erals from  the  Caucua  Associations  was  not  complete ;  they  had 
everywhere  resigned  the  offices  they  held  in  the  Associations, 
but  in  several  localities  they  kept  their  names  on  the  list  of 
members,  in  the  hope  that  when  the  Home  Rule  storm  bad 
spent  its  force,  they  would  all  be  able  to  co-operate  once  more 
in  the  cause  of  Liberalism.  But  this  did  not  suit  the  Gladsto- 
nian  Liberals;  they  preferred  to  get  rid  of  traitors  at  once,  and 
they  succeeded.  As  a  general  rule,  the  formal  expulsion  of  the 
dissentient  Liberals  was  not  necessary ;  their  position  in  the 
Associations  was  made  so  unpleasant  that  they  were  obliged  to 
withdraw  altogether.  The  same  thing  took  place  in  most  of  the 
Libera!  clubs.  The  mixed  character  of  these  establishments, 
which  were  clubs  first  and  political  organizations  afterwards, 
would  have  allowed  the  Liberals  of  both  persuasions  to  meet  on 
the  neutral  ground  of  the  dining-room  and  the  smoking-room 
without  being  false  to  their  political  convictions.  But  the 
Gladstonian  members,  who  were  in  a  majority  almost  every- 
where, thought  fit  to  introduce  the  ordeal  of  the  true  Liberal 
faith,  which  consisted  of  Home  Bule  for  Ireland,  into  the  clubs 
as  well.  The  dissentient  Liberals  were  even  ottsted  from  some 
Associations  in  which  they  had  a  majority.  By  means  of 
packed  meetings  the  Gladatonians  always  put  them  in  a 
minority;  having  once  obtained  control  of  the  meeting,  they 
.carried  resolutions  hostile  to  the  dissentients;  and  eventu- 
ally the  latter  gave  up  the  game.  This  is  what  would  have 
taken  place  in  the  Liberal  Unionist  citadel  of  Birmingham, 
as  Mr.  J.  Chamberlain,  whom  events  had  converted  into  a 
complainant  against  the  Caucus,  stated  with  indignation.  But 
in  places  where  the  Gladstonian  members  of  the  Associations 
were  in  a  majority,  tliey  had  no  need  to  resort  to  underhand 
practices,  but  displayed  an  honest  fanaticism.  In  some  local- 
ities, however,  the  caucuses  in  their  weeded  state  contained 
sober-minded  men  of  broad  and  lofty  views,  who  did  what 
they  could  to  combat  the  sectarian  and  intolerant  spirit  of 
their  fellow-Gladstonians,  and  it  was  owing  to  their  efforts 
and  their  tact  that  the  malignant  attitude  of  the  caucuses 


.coy  Google 


KiHTD  CBAP.]    CBISIB  OF  188«  AND  PARTY  OBOANIZATtON    306 

towards  their  old  dissentient  members  did  not  become  tlie  rule. 
And  it  was  the  salutary  Influence  of  these  persons  that  enabled 
Bome  Liberal  Associations  to  congratulate  themselves  "  that  the 
right  of  private  judgment  has  not  been  called  in  question 
amongst  us,  and  that  no  intolerance  has  been  manifested  to- 
wards  the  minority.  .  .  .  Looking  to  the  future,  we  are  in  a 
far  better  position  (for  the  reunion  of  the  party)  than  the 
Liberals  in  many  places,  owing  to  the  admirable  forbearance 
of  our  party  with  the  dissentient  Liberals."* 

The  men  who  used  this  language  would  even  be  entitled  to 
speak  with  less  modesty,  to  contrast  their  own  conduct  with 
that  of  the  Liberals  not  only  in  many  but  in  most  places ;  for 
the  Associations  which  showed  tolerance  towards  the  dissentient 
minorities  were  few  in  number.  All  the  other  Associations 
thought  that  in  acting  as  they  did  they  were  only  in  more 
complete  agreement  with  the  party  leaders  and  deserving  better 
of  tiie  Home  Rule  cause,  but  in  reality  they  were  working 
against  it.  It  is  not  necessary  to  take  sides  for  qf  against 
Home  Bule  to  acknowledge  that  the  Irish  problem  demanded  a 
solution,  whether  in  the  direction  of  agrarian  or  political  re- 
form. But  in  view  of  the  many  interests,  passions,  and  preju- 
dices which  the  Irish  claims  evoked  on  both  sides,  the  question 
was  not  one  of  those  the  settlement  of  which  could  be  thrust  on 
the  country  by  a  Ministerial  majority  of  a  few  votes ;  it  was 
more  one  of  those  cases  in  which  the  formal  vote  ought  to  ex- 
press the  assent  of  the  national  conscience  conveyed  in  a  spirit 
of  concord  and  exalted  justice.  By  envenoming  the  controversy, 
by  embittering  men's  minda  and  exasperating  differences  on 
matters  of  opinion,  the  Associations  prevented  an  understand- 
ing being  arrived  at.  It  is  true  that  in  so  doing  tliey  were 
supported,  and  powerfully  supported,  by  the  great  parliamen- 
tary leaders  without  distinction  of  party,  who  vied  with  each 
other  in  abusive  language  and  rancorous  imputations.  But  if 
the  responsibility  of  the  caucuses  is  lessened  by  this,  it  none 
the  less  remains,  and  whatever  may  be  the  share  which  ought 
to  be  attrit|iited  to  them,  they  will  always  bo  chargeable  with 
having  helped  to  prevent  or  delay  the  solution  of  the  Irish 
problem. 

'  Extract  [rom  tbe  minute  book  of  a  Yorkaliire  Liberal  Assoclatloa, 


.CD,  Google 


DEMOCRACY  AND  POLITICAL  PARTIES     [se 


VI 

In  any  event,  the  caucuses  might  flatter  themselves  that  they 
had  secured  the  unity  of  the  party,  that  they  had  set  up  a. 
political  conformity,  so  that  henceforth  there  was  only  one  fold 
and  one  shepherd.  But  it  soon  turned  out  that  everything  had 
to  be  begun  over  again.  The  whole  body  of  Liberalism  would 
not  fit  into  the  narrow  groove  of  a  single  question  of  Home 
Rule.  The  spokesmen  of  several  other  Radical  claims  which 
made  use  of  the  name  of  the  party  or  wanted  to  thrust 
themselves  on  it,  held,  and  rightly  enough,  that  if  every  Radi- 
cal was  a  Home-Ruler,  every  Home-Ruler  did  not  constitute 
a  Eadical.  Far  from  consenting  to  keep  in  the  background  or 
to  sacrifice  themselves  to  Home  Kule,  they  maintained  that  it 
was  only  by  giving  full  satisfaction  to  their  demand  that  the 
party  of  progress  would  justify  its  name  and  its  raison  d'Hre. 
The  caucuses  were  destined  to  learn  to  their  cost  the  old  truth 
that  one  is  always  a  reactionary  in  the  eyes  of  somebody.  It 
was,  in  fact,  in  this  somewhat  general  and  vague  shape  that 
the  first  signs  of  revolt  against  the  Organization  and  the  ofScial 
leaders  of  the  party  appeared :  they  were  not  considered  ad- 
vanced enough,  they  were  said  to  have  kept  a  "Whig  tail," 
and  a  pretty  long  one  according  to  the  thorough-going  Radi- 
cals. The  caucuses,  in  their  anxiety  to  stifle  all  discontent, 
at  first  could  only  hit  on  the  device  of  bringing  out  the  old 
Whig  implement,  of  opening  the  "grand  old  Liberal  um- 
brella" under  which  all  the  elements  of  the  party  formerly 
gathered  in  a  spirit  of  compromise,  the  favourite  plan  of  the 
weak-kneed  Liberals,  whom  the  caucuses  had  been  fortunate 
enough  to  get  rid  of  in  1886.  It  was  supposed  that  after 
their  withdrawal  the  umbrella  had  been  thrown  into  the 
dust-heap,  but  evidently  it  still  had  some  wear  left  in  it. 
All  that  was  done  was  to  lengthen  the  handle  a  little,  and 
when  mended  in  this  way  it  was  to  serve  as  a  support  and 
a  shelter  to  Liberals  and  Radicals  of  all  shades  whatsoever. 
This  ingenious  contrivance  consisted  simply  of  adding  a  couple 
of  words  to  the  title  "Liberal  Associations"  and  converting 
them  into  "Liberal  and  Radical  Associations."  Childish  as 
this  method  of  reconciling  differences  of  opinion  may  seem,  it 
was  not  wholly  so  in  practice,  since  in  some  cases  the  Radicals 


.coy  Google 


BisTH  CHAP.]    CRISIS  OF  1886  AND  PARTY  ORGANIZATION    311 

were  satisfied  or  appeared  to  be  satisfied  with  it,  while  in  others 
they  cried  out  that  it  was  robbery  to  take  their  name.'  These 
latter  were  more  numerous  or  at  any  rate  more  demonstrative, 
and  they  were  destined  to  become  more  and  more  a^ressive 
every  day.  Endless  troubles  and  difficulties  were,  therefore,  In 
store  for  the  party  Organization. 

It  had  a  foretaste  of  them  as  early  as  the  year  1887,  in  Lon- 
don. As  the  metropolis  was  slipping  more  and  more  away 
from  Liberalism,  and  had  inflicted  a  crushing  defeat  on  the 
Gladstonians  at  the  last  general  election,  the  Organization  de- 
cided to  reinforce  the  Caucus  in  London.  With  this  object  it 
reorganized  the  local  Associations  of  the  various  parliamentary 
boroughs  into  which  the  capital  is  divided,  and,  as  a  finishing 
touch,  conceived  the  plan  of  combining  them  all  into  a  central 
caucus  for  the  whole  metropolis,  which  should  hold  the  repre- 
sentatives of  every  shade  of  the  Opposition.  The  London 
woikingmen's  clubs  not  only  declined  to  join  the  combination, 
biit  were  opposed  to  the  new  London  Caucus  taking  the  title  of 
Liberal  and  Radical  Union,  which  its  founders  bestowed  on  it 
in  conformity  with  the  new  formula  of  political  chemistry. 
The  representatives  of  the  clubs  attended  the  meeting  held  for 
constituting  this  Union  to  uphold  the  protest,  and  to  claim  for 
tlie  members  of  the  clubs  the  exclusive  right  to  the  appellation 
of  bona  fide  Radicals.  They  moved  an  amendment  to  omit  the 
words  and  Radical  from  the  title  of  the  Caucus.  The  matter 
stopped  here ;  the  holders  of  the  meeting,  true  to  the  intolerant 
ways  of  the  (Caucus,  would  not  allow  the  authors  of  the  amend- 
ment a  hearing,  in  spite  of  the  efforts  of  Mr.  John  Mortey,  who 
was  in  the  Chair.  The  protest,  moreover,  did  not  derive  great 
importance  from  the  numl>er  of  those  who  originated  it;  the 
Radical  clubs,  although  they  had  some  tens  of  thousands  of 
members,  did  not  represent  any  great  political  force  in  the  enor- 
mous metropolis.  But  all  these  incidents  were  highly  charac- 
teristic, from  the  st<ate  of  feeling  disclosed  in  the  conflicts  they 
produced  between  the  irreconcilable  Radicals  and  the  Liberals 
of  the  official  Organization,  which  the  former  regarded  with 
profound  distrust.    TJie  nltra-Radical  Press  was  still  more  out- 

'  In  some  places,  on 'the  other  hiind,  It  it 
change  iu  the  sign  of  the  Associatioo  so  as 
tion  with  the  "  extremists." 


.coy  Google 


AVi  DEUOCRACV  AND  POLITICAL  PARTIES    [second  pibt 

epoken  on  this  occaeion  in  stating  the  views  of  the  true  Radi- 
cals oil  the  Caucus  and  its  alliance  with  the  official  leaders  of 
the  party.  "The  Radical  clubs,"  remarked  the  old  organ  of 
extreme  popular  Radicalism,  "have  a  miagion  to  fulfil  which 
is  certainly  imperilled  by  absorption  in  the  great  Schnadhorst 
'  machine '  .  -  - ;  the  Brummagem  machine  will  infallibly  grind 
the  Radicals  to  powder  if  they  are  not  awake."  Impugning  the 
character  and  the  past  of  the  Liberal  Federation,  the  paper 
showed  that  the  "  Caucusians  "  were  only  sham  democrats,  im- 
postora.  "  The  Caucusians  know  that  if  they  avow  themselves 
mere  party  opportunists,  which  they  really  are,  the  democratic 
tish  would  give  their  net  a  wide  berth." '  Other  Radical  organs, 
less  violent  in  point  of  form,  also  considered  the  influence  of 
the  Organization  a  danger  for  Badioalism.  The  creation  of 
the  London  central  Caucus  was,  according  to  Mr.  Labouchere, 
"merely  an  attempt  to  place  all  the  London  constituencies 
under  the  lash  of  the  Liberal  Whip.  .  .  .  What  I  want  to  see 
in  fact,"  he  concluded,  "  is  a  Radical  patty  in  contradiction  to 
ft  Liberal  party." '  This  conclusion  exactly  expressed  the  pre- 
occupations and  wishes  of  the  advanced  Radicals,  and  soon 
afterward  it  was  realized  to  a  certain  extent.  Under  the  lead- 
erahip  of  the  same  Mr.  Labouchere,  a  group  was  formed  in  the 
House  of  Commons  which  affected  complete  independence  of 
the  Whips  and  of  ofticial  Liberalism  and  its  leaders  in  general. 
These  "  new  Radicals "  often  followed  Mr.  Gladstone,  but  they 
had  no  scruple  about  votinff  against  him  when  they  thought  fit 
to  pay  this  tribute  to  their  Radical  views.  They  undoubtedly 
enjoyed  a  good  deal  of  sympathy  in  the  country,  hwt  their 
Radicalism,  which  was  essentially  of  a  political  nature  and  was 
prompted  by  politicians,  was  soon  eclipsed  by  the  social  Radi- 
calism which  was  beginning  to  rise  above  the  horizon. 

VII 

The  distrust  of  the  Organization  of  the  Liberal  party  and  its 
official  leaders,  which  the  advanced  Radicals  professed  and  dif- 
fused throughout  the  country,  coincided  with  the  desire  grow- 
ing up  among  the  working  classes  to  use  their  newly  acquired 
political  power  in  improving  their  material  welfare.  As  the 
'  Reynolds'  XewnpapT,  .Tan.  Ifi.  ISRT.  *  Tnith,  Feb.  2D,  ISST. 


.coy  Google 


HiNTH  CHAF.]    CRISIS  OF  1886  AND  pARTr  ORGANIZATION    313 

official  Liberal  party  seemed  to  the  leaders  of  the  workingmen 
as  selfish  and  as  insiDcere  iu  their  profession  of  devotion  to  the 
popular  cause,  as  much  a  tool  of  the  capitalists,  as  the  other 
party,  champions  of  labour  despaired  of  political  parties  ever 
promoting  legislation  calculated  to  bring  about  an  economic 
readjustment  of  society  in  the  interests  of  the  masses.  They 
thereupon  conceived,  or  rather  reverted  to  the  idea  of  cutting 
themselves  adrift  from  political  parties  and  of  organizing  the 
labour  contingents  into  an  independent  force  for  the  conquest 
of  the  Legislature,  of  accepting  in  the  meanwhile  social  reforms 
from  whatever  quarter  they  came,  and  of  fighting  every  one 
who  happened  to  cross  their  path,  whether  they  went  by  the 
name  of  Liberals,  Radicals,  or  Tories.  The  Jahour  party  formed 
on  this  basis  would  adopt  the  same  attitude  in  Parliament  as 
the  Irish  party  under  Parnell  had  maintained  with  such  good 
results  to  the  Irish  cause ;  in  giving  its  support  to  the  highest 
bidder  it  would  wrest  one  concession  after  another  from  the 
rival  parties,  who  were  accustomed  to  sell  themselves  by  auc- 
tion, and  so  bit  by  bit  construct  the  new  social  fabric.  This 
plan  having  been  sanctioned  by  a  labour  Congress  which  met 
at  Bradford  in  1888,  the  organization  of  a  labour  party  was 
forthwith  set  on  foot  tliroughout  the  country ;  Associations 
with  local  branches,  annual  meetings  of  delegates,  etc.,  were 
formed  on  the  model  of  the  Caucus.  Some  old  Organizations, 
socialist  societies,  or  ultra-radical  bodies,  in  their  turn  eserted 
themselves  in  exhorting  the  workmen  to  vote  only  for  labour 
candidates  at  all  elections,  whether  for  Parliament  or  for  local 
assemblies.  The  material  success  of  the  new  Organization  was 
not  very  marked,  in  its  early  years  at  all  events ;  the  new  Asso- 
ciations were  far  from  causing  uneasiness  in  the  ranks  of  the 
two  great  parties,  and  their  annual  congresses  in  no  way  pos- 
sessed the  representative  importance  which  they  tried  to  make 
out  by  adding  up  an  imposing  total  of  adherents  with  a  long 
string  of  noughts.  But  the  spirit  which  underlay  this  move- 
ment gained  ground  daily ;  the  tendency  to  disregard  political 
quarrels,  which  kept  parties  alive,  and  to  demand  the  improve- 
ment of  their  lot  from  legislation,  extended  among  the  working 
classes.  It  invaded  even  the  trades-unions,  the  professional 
labour  federations  which  carefully  held  aloof  from  politics  and 
had  never  made  but  one  request  to  the  Legislatiire,  to  the 


.coy  Google 


814  DEMOCRACY  AND  POLITICAL  PARTIES     [mcomb  Pi«T 

State ;  Get  out  of  our  light,  leave  ub  alone  to  attend  to  our 
buainesst  The  old  orthodox  Tradea-UnionUm  was  driven  back 
by  the  New  (Inhnism  with  its  socialistic  spirit  The  profound 
pity  for  the  poor  and  needy  which  seized  on  the  community 
and  became,  as  it  were,  its  publiu  religion,  gave  life  and  im- 
petus to  the  tendencies  represented  by  the  New  Unionism, 
while  a  great  upheaval  of  the  lowest  strata,  of  labour,  the 
London  dockers'  strike  in  1890,  was  a  solemn  inauguration 
of  its  career. 

This  movement  had  not  reached  a  high  degree  of  intensity 
when  several  Liberals,  who  were,  nevertheless,  stirred  by  it, 
proceeded  to  interrogate  their  conscience  and  to  ask  them- 
selves if  their  party  really  understood  the  needs  of  contem- 
porary society,  if  it  realized  the  new  aspirations  which  were 
at  work  within  it  and  if  it  cared  to  gratify  them.  The  reply 
which  they  gave  to  these  questions  was  in  the  negative : 
the  Liberal  party  held  itself  out  as  the  party  of  the  masses 
as  opposed  to  the  classes  (Mr.  Gladstone's  formula  at  the  time 
of  the  crisis  of  1886),  but  in  reality  it  bad  not  gained  the 
affection  of  the  people  while  it  had  alienated  the  middle 
classes ;  the  official  leaders,  almost  all  of  them  survivors  of 
an  old  order  of  things,  were  quite  out  of  touch  with  the 
masses  ;  the  latter  were  indifferent  to  the  political  preoccupa- 
tions of  the  leaders,  they  took  no  interest  in  Home  Rule,  to 
which  these  leaders  were  so  attached ;  they  would  not  follow 
them  until  the  sterile  controversies  of  party  had  been  replaced 
by  questions  dealing  with  the  people's  daily  subsistence ;  the 
party  would  only  return  to  power  on  condition  of  adapting  its 
policy  to  the  requirements  of  the  masses  and  of  thus  rec(^- 
nizing  tlie  transformation  of  the  old  int«  the  new  Liberalism; 
it  was  no  use  appealing  to  the  party  programme  which  met 
with  unanimous  approval  at  the  last  conference  of  the  Lib- 
eral Federation ;  this  programme  was  not  the  outcome  of  the 
deliberations  of  the  conference,  nor  of  any  other  representa- 
tive assembly  of  Liberals ;  it  was  evidently  the  offspring  of 
the  small  committee  that  meets  in  Parliament  Street  (the 
headquarters  of  the  (lauciis),  and  then  no  discussion  of  it  was 
allowed,  all  the  amendments  were  practically  excluded  ;  there 
was  no  great  enthusiasm  among  the  people  for  measures,  no 
doubt  valuable  in  themselves,  such  as  Disestablishment  of  the 


.coy  Google 


HiHTH  CH1.P.]     CRISIS  OF  1886  AND  FARTY  ORGANIZATION    SIG 

Welsh  Church,  the  abolition  of  primogeniture,  etc. ;  but,  on  the 
other  hand,  the  masses  feel  that  they  have  wants,  and  that  a 
possible  satisfaction  must  be  found  for  them ;  these  feelings 
are  inarticulate,  but  "  with  the  statesman  rests  the  responsi- 
bility to  devise  and  formulate  those  reforms  by  which,  with- 
out violence  to  persons  or  shock  to  the  principles  o£  public 
morality,  there  may  be  compassed  for  the  people  a  wider  dif- 
fusion of  physical  comfort,  and  thus  a  loftier  standard  of 
national  morality ;  this  is  the  new  Liberalism." ' 

But  the  measures  which  constituted  the  old  Radical  stock-in- 
trade,  such  as  Disestablishment  of  the  Church,  abolition  of 
primogeniture,  et«.,  although  they  did  not,  as  the  "  new  Liber- 
als "  pointed  out,  arouse  the  enthusiasm  of  the  masses,  none 
the  less  still  had  their  fanatical  supporters.  After  the  first 
intoxication  of  Home  Rule  had  passed  away,  they  all  bethought 
them  of  their  pet  schemes  and  pressed  them  on  the  party 
Organization  and  the  leaders.  Eaeh  section  demanded  priority 
for  its  little  or  great  reform,  and  each  reform  bad  its  own  group 
of  members  in  the  House  and  of  voters  in  the  country.  The 
crumbling  process  which  had  afflicted  the  Liberal  party  for 
years  past  once  more  became  conspicuous.  The  Caucus  from 
the  first  undertook  to  root  out  this  disease,  and  with  this  object, 
as  we  have  seen,  fell  upon  the  moderates,  whom  it  considered 
as  the  source  of  the  mischief,  — it  was  mouldy  Whigs  who 
stood  in  the  way  of  the  harmony  of  the  party.  The  moderates 
had  been  got  rid  of,  but  complete  unity  was  as  far  off  as  ever. 
Mr.  J.  Chamberlain,  when  he  was  master  of  the  Caucus,  had 
pointed  out  to  the  detractors  of  this  Organization  that  they 
were  wasting  their  time  in  opposing  it,  that  the  Caucus  was 
like  the  fabled  hydra,  whose  heads  grew  f^in  as  fast  as  they 
were  cut  off.'  Now  its  adherents  could  see  that  it  was  the 
Caucus  itself  which  had  to  face  the  hydra.  New  Radicalism, 
new  Unionism,  new  Liberalism,  were  so  many  new  heads  added 
to  those  against  which  it  had  been  long  contending  without 
possessing  any  resemblance  to  a  Hercules.     It  was  of  no  use 

•Cf.  "The  New  Liberalism,"  by  L.  Atherley  Jones  {Kineteenth  Century, 
Au([ust,  1880) ;  "The  New  Liberalism  "  :  aresponseby  O.  W.  E.  KnagelKibJrf. 
September,  1889);  "Mr.  Morley  and  the  New  Radicalism,"  by  a  "  Sociatlet 
Radical "(JVeic  Reniew,  18KH). 

■  Speech  at  Blnnlngham  on  the  9th  of  January,  1880  (Time*,  J»n.  6, 1880). 


.coy  Google 


31«  DEMOCRACY  AND  POLITICAL  PARTIES     [»«com>  p*at 

going  on  serving  up  Home  Rule  to  the  public.  The  GaucoB 
was  obliged  to  admit  in  the  end  that  the  latter  was  not  so  fond 
of  the  dish  as  In  1886  and  in  the  years  which  immediately 
followed  it.  Lookiag  at  the  situation  from  the  point  of  view 
which  was  most  natural  to  it,  from  an  electioneering  standpoint, 
the  Caucus  came  to  the  conclusion  that  the  party  could  not  go 
to  the  country  on  Home  Rule  alone.  Thereupon,  unlike  the 
captain  of  a  ship  id  peril,  who  throws  all  his  ballast  overboard, 
the  Caucus  set  to  work  to  take  in  more.  By  piling  up  the 
Radical  demands  in  the  course  of  two  or  three  years,  it  man- 
aged, before  1892,  to  frame  a  lengthy  programme  which,  in  the 
eyes  of  its  friends,  would  last  the  Liberal  party  well  up  to  the 
end  of  the  century,  or,  according  to  its  opponents,  to  the  end 
of  all  time.  In  this  catalogue  of  desirable  reforms,  the  most 
complete  edition  of  which  was  laid  before  the  annual  confer- 
ence of  the  party  at  Newcastle  in  November,  1891,  and  which 
became  historic  under  the  name  of  the  "  Newcastle  Programme," 
there  was  enough  to  satisfy,  if  not  everybody,  whom  it  is  im- 
possible to  please,  at  all  events  a  good  many  people.  To  some 
the  list  offered  Home  Rule,  to  others  the  Disestablishment  of 
the  Church  and  electoral  reform,  to  others,  again,  local  veto 
of  the  drink  traffic,  the  taxation  of  ground  rents,  the  abolition 
or  transformation  of  the  House  of  Lords,  etc.,  etc.  All  this 
was,  perhaps,  not  very  new ;  several  of  these  measures,  of  older 
standing  even  than  Home  Rule,  had  long  been  demanded  by 
the  different  sections  of  Radical  opinion;  but  they  now  all 
simultaneously  received  the  solemn  sanction  of  the  supreme 
organs  of  the  party  by  virtue  of  a  general  undertaking  which 
conferred  on  each  of  these  sections  the  benefits,  coupled,  of 
course,  with  the  obligations,  of  a  mutual  insurance.  How  and 
when  were  they  to  discharge  these  reciprocal  obligations  and 
to  come  by  their  own — the  future  atone  could  reply  to  this 
indiscreet  question.  In  the  meanwhile  all  could  indulge  in 
hope.  Huddled  together  in  the  same  omnibng'  programme, 
demands  of  the  most  varied  character  were  required  to  com- 
bine and  so  ensure  the  unity  of  the  party.    The  omnibus  was 

1  The  largeit  mbdivislca  ot  Ibe  proicramme  was  proposed  and  voted  at  the 
annual  conterences  ol  the  Liberal  Federation  under  Ihe  name  ot  "omnlbiu" 
resolutinii  (Pmreedlniin  in  rnnnerliDn  with  the  [nurl«eDtb  annual  meeting  of 
the  Federatiun,  held  in  Newcaetle  on  Tyne,  pp.  S  and  9i). 


.coy  Google 


RnrraCHiP.]    CRISIS  OF  1B86  AND  PARTY  ORGANIZATION    817 

to  take  the  place  of  the  old  umbrella,' &qA  with  all  the  more 
success  because  it  contained  schemes  of  reform  which  met  the 
social  claims  that  had  become  so  strong  in  the  last  few  years. 
The  Caucus,  on  behalf  of  the  Liberal  party,  abjured  as  a  heresy 
the  old  creed  of  laisxz-faire  and  laissez-pasaer,  and  led  it  into 
the  path  of  Stale  socialism.  The  official  chiefa  of  the  party, 
who  wei-e  accused  of  being  "  out  of  touch  with  modem  Liberal 
thought,"  were  really  anything  but  socialist  reformers.  Some 
of  them,  above  at)  Mr.  Gladstone,  were  cast  more  in  a  Conserv- 
ative mould,  especially  as  regards  social  organization ;  others, 
bred  in  the  rationalist  individualism  of  the  Mill  school,  held 
fast  to  their  philosophic  creed,  and,  so  far  as  they  personally 
were  concerned,  were  even  ready  to  sacrifice  themselves  to  it ; 
others  again,  being  not  much  troubled  with  convictions,  could 
not  for  that  very  reason  feel  any  heartfelt  attachment  to  or  real 
enthusiasm  for  social  reforms.  But  they  were  all  obliged  to 
adopt  the  programme  of  the  Federation  more  or  less  explicitly, 
bound  band  and  foot  as  they  were  to  the  party  Organization  and 
forced  to  follow  each  other  like  the  Siamese  twins.  Formerly 
the  Organization,  falling  into  line  behind  the  official  leaders, 
was  dragging  the  whole  party  into  the  Home  Rule  question  at 
the  risk  of  cutting  off  its  retreat  and  its  supplies ;  now,  sud- 
denly shifting  its  sails  to  catch  the  new  breeze,  it  was  taking 
in  tow  the  leaders,  who  were  resigned,  perhaps  rallied,  but  not 
convinced. 

Laying  themselves  open  to  suspicion,  the  Caucus  and  the 
official  leaders  had  not  disarmed  the  forces  which  confronted 
them,  and  especially  those  which  were  ranged  under  the  ban- 
ner of  socialism.  Their  good  faith  was  suspected  far  more 
than  it  deserved ;  every  step  they  took  in  the  direction  of  the 
new  social  demands  was  looked  on  rather  as  a  snare  or  as 
a  dodge  to  circumvent  the  voters.  The  alarm  was,  therefore, 
still  sounded  against  "  fossil  official  Liberalism, "  which  took 
the  part  of  stage  villain  played  by  the  Whigs  before  1886 ; 
"  independent  labour  parties  "  were  still  formed,  and  working- 
men  candidates  brought  forward,  who  were  destined  really  to 
give  official  Liberalism  serious  trouble,  as  was  proved  by  the 
general  elections,  one  after  the  other,  in  which  independent 
candidates  of  this  kind,  without  achieving  any  brilliant  suc- 
cess on  their  own  account,  succeeded,  in  a  good  many  con- 


.coy  Google 


818  DEMOCRACY  AND  POLITICAL  PARTIES     [bbcosd  nta 

stitueacies,  in  detaching  a  sufficiently  large  number  of  votes 
from  the  Liberals  to  ensure  tbeir  defeat  by  their  Tory  rivals. 

VIII 

Kevertheless  the  general  election,  which  took  place  a  few 
months  after  the  adoption  of  the  Newcastle  Programme, 
ended  in  a  victory  for  official  Liberalism.  The  Liberals  came 
back  to  the  House  with  a  very  small  and  above  all  a  very 
heterogeneous  majority ;  it  was  more  a  collection  of  different 
groups  whose  varied  aspirations  and  demands  were  entered 
in  the  famous  omnibus  programme  of  Newcastle.  The  mem- 
bers who  represented  these  mouifold  and  not  always  harmo- 
nious interests,  none  the  less  formed  a  compact  array  behind 
Mr.  Gladstone  on  his  return  to  ofBce,  which  remained  such 
during  the  whole  of  this  Parliament  (1892-1895).  Invariably 
presenting  a  united  front,  it  followed  Mr.  Gladstone  steadily, 
impelled  alike  by  fear  and  by  calculation,  or  if  the  expression 
is  preferred,  by  duty  and  by  hope.  The  Liberal  Associations 
which  had  returned  the  members  of  the  majority  and  which 
held  their  re-election  in  their  hands,  were  determined  that  they 
should  vote  obediently  for  Mr.  Gladstone.  This  express  obli- 
gation was  reinforced  by  the  agreement  implied  in  the  New- 
castle Pr<^Tamme,  which  bound  each  group  to  vote  —  whether 
they  approved  them  or  not — for  the  measures  demanded  by 
the  other  groups,  on  condition  that  they  did  the  same  —  the 
practice  known  in  political  slang  by  the  name  of  log-rolling. 

To  carry  out  the  ^reement  their  common  agent,  the 
Ministry,  prepared  and  presented  to  the  House,  with  exem- 
plary diligence,  one  measure  after  another  intended  to  satisfy 
each  group  in  turn.  But  it  had  great  difficulty  in  passing  its 
Bills ;  for  not  only  was  it  confronted  by  an  extremely  numer- 
ous and  very  resolute  Opposition,  but  not  one  of  the  important 
measures  of  the  composite  programme  which  it  had  received 
from  the  Caucus  was  backed  by  a  body  of  opinion  strong  enough 
to  overawe  the  Opposition  and  overcome  the  resistance  of  the 
House  of  Lords,  where  the  Liberal  government  was  in  a  minor- 
ity. Refraining,  for  this  reason  perhaps,  from  appealing  to 
the  highest  court,  to  the  country,  from  submitting  to  it  the 
questions  in  dispute,  from  taking  its  opinion  specially  on  this 


.coy  Google 


HMTH  CHAP.]     CRISIS  OF  1880  AND  PARTY  ORGANIZATION    319 

or  that  important  measure  left  in  suapense,  such  as  Home 
Eule  or  the  Employers'  Liability  Bill,  the  GoTernment  thought 
it  was  cleverer  to  follow  the  plan  of  advocites  who  address 
their  arguments  to  points  of  procedure  instead  of  to  the 
merits  of  the  case.  It  impugned  the  attitude  of  the  House  of 
Lords,  alleging  that  it  hampered  the  work  of  progressive  legis- 
lation, of  reforms.  All  who  desired  these  reforms,  however 
different  they  might  be,  ought,  so  to  speak,  to  club  together 
their  resentment  against  the  Lords  and  presenting  the  sem- 
blance of  having  a  common  platform,  already  provided  by  the 
elaborate  combination  of  the  Newcastle  Programme,  give  the 
Libeial  Ministry  a  fresh  lease  of  strength.  In  consequence 
the  Caucus  started  a  campaign  in  the  country  gainst  the 
House  of  Lords  and  ita  legislative  prerogatives,  hut  without 
offering  a  clear  and  precise  solution  falling  within  the  range  of 
constitutional  logic.  The  object,  indeed,  was  rather  to  bring 
about  a  atate  of  feeling  in  the  country  on  which  it  appeared 
easier  to  reunite  the  majority  of  the  electorate  than  on  some 
definite  legislative  measures.  With  the  same  object  the  Min- 
istry, in  their  anxiety  to  prove  the  wickedness  of  the  Lords  and 
the  purity  of  their  own  intentions,  went  on  zealously  bringing 
in  bills  without  any  prospect  of  being  able  to  carry  them. 
They  were  aware  that  it  was  "  ploughing  the  sands  of  the  sea- 
shore," '  but  tliey  calculated  that  the  defeat  by  the  Opposition 
of  all  these  bills,  which  promised  so  many  things  to  so  many 
people  (and  some  of  which,  taken  on  their  own  merits,  will  per- 
haps, together  with  the  administrative  achievements  of  the 
Ministry,  —  the  point  need  not  be  discussed  in  this  work, — 
have  a  very  creditable  place  in  the  history  of  English  legisla- 
tion and  administration)  would  "  fill  up  the  cup," '  and  make 
the  exasperated  electors  go  over  in  a  body  to  the  Liberal  side 
at  the  next  general  election. 

This  expectation  was  disappointed.  The  masses  did  not  boil 
over  into  wrath  against  the  Lords,  as  indeed  had  been  fore- 
shadowed by  the  slight  effect  produced  on  public  opinion  by 
the  stirring  appeal  which  the  Liberal  Fedeiation  issued  after 
the  rejection  of  the  Home  Rule  Bill  in  the  Upper  House. 
Worn  out  by  its  barren  labour  of  "  ploughing  the  sands,"  the 


.coy  Google 


3£0  DEMOCRACY  AND  FOLITICAX  PARTIES     [ibcoiid  nbt 

Liberal  Ministry,  of  whic-h  Lord  Bosebery  had  become  chief 
since  Mr.  Gladstone's  retirement  in  1894,  was  obliged  to  resign 
iu  1895,  And  when  the  electors  were  asked  to  return  a  new 
Parliament  immediately  afterward,  the  Liberal  party  found 
itself  almost  as  much  split  up  in  the  country  as  it  had  been 
in  the  House  by  the  various  demands  for  which  it  solicited 
general  popular  support,  relying  in  one  place  on  local  veto,  in 
another  on  the  reform  of  the  House  of  Lords,  or  again  on  Dis- 
establishment, and  so  on.  But  the  niceties  of  log-rolling,  which 
could  be  practised  with  a  certain  amount  of  success  among 
groups  of  an  assembly,  had  not  so  good  a  chance  of  influencing 
the  bulk  of  the  electorate,  and  the  less  so  because  the  attempts 
at  fulfilling  the  promises  of  the  Newcastle  Programme  had  not 
only  given  rise  to  disappointment  among  those  who  had  placed 
their  hopes  on  them,  but  had  also  created  apprehension  in  the 
minds  of  a  good  many  others  whose  interests  were  threatened 
by  one  or  the  other  of  the  proposed  Radical  reforms.  The 
result  was  that  a  certain  number  of  desertions  at  the  poll  was 
enough,  in  the  precarious  state  of  the  Liberal  majority,  to  upset 
the  balance  of  parties,  and  with  the  aid  of  the  electoral  system 
in  force  which  enables  a  smalt  majority  of  voters  distributed 
over  a  number  of  constituencies  to  sweep  them  all  off  for  the 
benefit  of  the  winner,  as  at  a  gaming-table,  this  Liberal  reverse 
was  converted  into  a  catastrophe.  The  cleverly  concocted  com- 
pound of  the  Newcastle  Programme,  this  masterpiece  of  the 
wire-pullers,  instead  of  concentrating  on  Itself  a  Liberal  ma- 
jority, helped  to  disperse  it.  After  the  event  the  eyes  of  the 
great  leaders  of  the  party  were  opened;  they  were  now  of 
opinion  that  the  Newcastle  Programme  was  too  long  to  arrest 
the  minds  and  the  consciences  of  the  electors,'  or  they  even 
went  so  far  as  to  regret  having  accepted  this  programme  from 
the  hand  of  the  Liberal  Federation  and  to  almost  disavow  the 
campaign  against  the  Lords.*  These  regrets  were  idle,  the 
phantom  of  unity  which  it  was  sought  to  retain  by  means  of 
the  exorcisms  of  the  Caucus  was  a«  far  off  as  ever;  all  that 
was  left  for  the  moment  was  a  great  historical  party  over- 
thrown. 

1  Speech  of  Ixird  Roseber;  at  the  Eitrbty  Club.  July  3,  1896,  Bt  the  time 
when  he  was  making  over  offire  In  tbe  Marquis  of  Saiifbury. 
'  Speech  ot  Lord  Rosebery  at  Huddersfleld,  March  2T,  1898. 


.coy  Google 


CRISIS  OF  186S  AND  PARTY  0HGANI2ATI0N    321 


IX 

While  the  Liberal  party  had  to  contend,  during  these  years, 
188C--lSd5,  alike  with  the  regular  Opposition  and  the  cen- 
trifugal tendencies  in  its  own  ranks  which  it  endeavoured  to 
overcome  by  devices  ot  organization,  the  Conservative  patty 
had  the  good  luck  to  find  a  more  favourable  battle-ground 
than  that  of  its  opponents,  and  to  be  well-nigh  free  from  the 
anxieties  caused  by  internal  divisions.  It  will  be  recollected  how 
"  Tory  democracy  "  had  given  a  new  direction  to  the  Conservative 
party.  The  boldness  and  ease  with  which  it  had  adopted  this 
policy  did  not  make  the  position  of  the  Conservative  pajiy  in  its 
competition  with  the  Kadicals  in  Radicalism  a  less  awkward 
one.  The  Irish  crisis  rescued  it  from  this  situation.  It  was  a 
real  windfall  for  the  party ;  while  its  old  hand  was  left  intact, 
it  received  a  number  of  tnimp  cards  which  enabled  it  at  one 
time  to  pause  and  be  more  cautious  in  its  play,  at  another  to 
pursue  the  game  with  all  the  appearance  of  Deceaeity  and 
almost  of  decorum.  Mr.  Gladstone's  attempt  to  grant  Home 
Rule  to  Ireland  allowed  the  Tories  to  assume  the  part  of 
champions  of  the  integrity  of  the  Empire,  to  reappear  in  a 
Conservative  r81e.  They  recovered  their  raison  d'itre,  so  to 
speak,  and  the  consciousness  that  they  had  one  gave  them 
cohesion  and  buoyancy  in  the  struggle  for  existence.  There 
was  no  need  whatever  to  revive  them  with  the  heroic  reme- 
dies prescribed  by  Lord  Randolph  and  his  school.  The  beat 
of  their  pulse  was  once  more  spontaneous  and  normal.  And 
they  could  flatter  themselves  that  they  were  genuine  Conserva- 
tives without  reactionary  tendencies.  The  best  proof  of  this 
was  their  alliance  with  Liberals  and  even  with  Radicals,  like 
Mr.  Chamberlain,  who  joined  their  ranks  to  defend  the  national 
inheritance.  To  keep  this  alliance,  they  would  make  conces- 
sions to  the  policy  of  their  allies,  and  assent  to  measures 
which  would  have  seemed  almost  revolutionary  to  the  Con- 
servatives of  the  day  before;  but  the  extent  of  the  sacrifices 
■  made  would  only  be  more  striking  evidence  of  their  self-denial 
and  boundless  devotion  to  the  great  cause  of  the  maintenance 
of  the  Empire.  They  would  do  evil  for  the  sake  of  good; 
they  would  break  with  the  traditions  of  the  Tory  party  in 
order  to  preserve  its  ancient  virtue. 


.coy  Google 


322  DEMOCRACY  AND  POLITICAL  PARTIES     [«kcomi>  nxr 

The  Tory  party  baviDg  recovered  its  proper  position,  it 
was  BO  longer  possible  to  draw  it  on  by  a  policy  of  dash; 
grand  demonstrations  i^inst  the  leaders  or  pronunciamtentos 
carried  out  with  the  aid  of  the  popular  Organizations  were, 
for  the  moment  at  least,  out  of  place  and  useless,  even 
for  urging  Toryism  farther  on  the  path  of  democracy.  Lord 
Randolph  Churchill  failed  to  grasp  this,  and  he  paid  for  bis 
mistaken  view  of  the  situation.  In  the  Salisbury  Ministry, 
which  came  into  office  after  the  general  election  of  1886,  Lord 
Bandolph  obtained  the  second  place,  not  only  on  account  of 
bis  personal  weight  hut  out  of  consideration  for  the  urban 
democracy  of  which  he  was  the  acknowledged  chief  and  which 
had  contributed  so  much  to  the  victory  at  the  polls.  His  mere 
presence  in  the  Cabinet  with  the  rank  of  leader  of  the  House 
of  Commons  evidently  ensured  democratic  Toryism  a  lai^ 
share  in  the  counsels  of  the  Government.  But  hardly  had 
a  few  months  elapsed  when  he  suddenly  left  the  Ministry  on 
the  pretext  that  it  did  not  sufficiently  consult  the  interests  of 
the  taxpayer  in  its  financial  policy.-  This  retirement  created 
a  great  sensation  in  the  country,  but  that  was  all.  The  popu- 
lar Organizations  which  had  risen  in  Churchill's  defence  a 
few  years  before  now  kept  quiet.  What  appeared  to  be  in 
danger  for  the  moment  was  not  so  much  the  cause  of  the 
people  threatened  by  the  aristocratic  leaders,  as  the  cause  of 
the  Union  for  which  these  very  leaders  had  fought  with  so 
much  distinction  and  success.  The  immediate  future  of  the 
party  being  bound  up  with  this  cause,  the  provincial  Associa- 
tions felt  instinctively  that  all  they  had  to  do  was  to  rally 
round  Lord  Salisbury  and  his  colleagues.  And  they  did  so 
in  silence,  leaving  Lord  Bandolph  Churchill  to  sulk  in  his 
tent  The  leaders  issued  victorious  from  this  incident,  which 
looked  like  a  grave  crisis  for  a  moment,  and  thanks  to  the 
success  of  their  administration,  which  defied  the  onslaughts 
of  the  Opposition  for  years,  they  saw  their  authority  and 
prestige  grow  daily  higher  in  the  party.  Their  brilliance, 
as  well  as  the  eclipse  of  the  promoter  of  democratic  Toryism,  . 
had  the  natural  consequence  of  dimming  the  lustre  of  popular 
Organization  which  had  just  risen  above  the  horizon  opposite 
the  leadership.  Instead  of  l>eing,  as  Randolph  Churchill  and 
his  friends  wished,  the  sun  of  the  party's  planetary  system, 


.coy  Google 


NINTH  CRIP.]    CRISIS  OF  IS86  AND  PARTY  ORGANIZATION    323 

the  representative  Organization  became  almost  a  satellite  of 
the  leaders.  It  performed  all  its  movements  and  reappeared 
every  year  in  the  conferences  of  delegates  of  the  federated 
Associations,  but  it  was  far  from  regulating  the  course  of  the 
party,  even  in  appearance,  as  the  Radical  Caucus  did.  The 
resolutions  passed  at  these  conferences  did  not  become  ipso 
facto,  and  were  not  supposed  to  become,  items  in  the  Tory  pro- 
gramme. While  the  delegates  of  the  Radical  caucuses  formed 
deliberative,  if  not  deliberating,  assemblies,  the  conferences  of 
the  Conservative  Associations,  democratized  as  they  were,  only 
discharged  consultative  functions.  The  leaders,  the  ofificiEil 
chiefs  of  the  party,  had  the  last  word,  and  the  popular  dele- 
gates made  no  serious  attempt  to  deprive  them  of  it.  A  com* 
bination  of  circumstances  favourable  to  the  rise  of  the  leader- 
ship was  thus  sufficient  to  show  how  great  its  strength  still 
was,  what  a  hold  it  still  had  on  the  public  mind,  how  it 
swayed  the  imagination ;  in  a  word,  how  deep-rooted  were 
the  traditional  influences  of  which  the  Tory  party  was  the 
great  depositary  in  the  body  politic  of  England.  The  logic 
of  this  situation,  which  Lord  Randolph  Churchill  failed  to 
appreciate,  made  a  severe  example  of  him;  not  only  did  he 
learn  to  his  cost  that  it  was  not  enough  to  pronounce  against 
the  leaders  to  make  the  people  flock  round  him  like  Israel 
round  Absalom,  but  when  after  leaving  office  be  thought  fit 
to  occasionally  remind  his  old  colleagues  in  the  Government 
of  his  existence  by  scathing  criticism  of  their  measures,  the 
Union  of  the  Conservative  Associations,  into  which  he  had 
breathed  almost  a  new  life,  repudiated  him  by  turning  him 
out  of  the  Council  at  the  annual  elections  of  1890. 

But  aft«r  all,  in  spite  of  the  rise  of  the  leadership  and  the 
eclipse  of  Lord  Randolph  Churchill,  which  showed  the  per- 
sistent force  of  the  old  influences,  the  latter  were  very  far  from 
being  absolute  masters  of  the  situation.  The  impress  made  by 
democratic  Toryism  was  too  deep  to  be  obliterated  by  them, 
Churchill's  work  did  not  disappear  with  him;  by  simple  vis 
inerCicB  the  democratization  of  Toryism  went  on,  quietly  and  un- 
obtrusively, but  without  interruption.  The  progressive  policy 
of  the  Salisbury  Ministry  was  doubtless  to  a  great  extent  due 
to  the  fact  that  it  was  kept  in  power  by  the  votes  of  the 
Liberal  Unionists.     Consideration  for  this  alliance  not  only 


=y  Google 


a,U  DBMOCRACY  A.SD  POLITICAL  PARTIES    [becond  pabt 

prevented  it  from  indulging  in  a  reactionary  policy,  but  it  was 
even  obliged  to  give  proof  of  its  Liberalism  ;  for  the  Liberal 
Unionists,  who  were  continually  denounced  by  the  Gladatonian 
Liberals  as  traitors  to  the  Liberal  cause,  were  anxious  to  show 
the  country  that  "Unionism  was  in  no  way  incompatible  with 
measures  of  a  very  liberal,  broad  character.  Mr.  Chamberlain, 
a  thoroughbred  Radical,  who  had  parted  company  with  ortho- 
dox or  official  Radicalism,  was  specially  preoccupied  with  this. 
The  Government  met  their  views;  it  introduced  one  reform 
after  another.  The  old  Tories,  who  were  too  well  disciplined 
to  protest  aloud,  were  in  consternation,  and,  fastening  on  the 
most  obvious  cause,  mentally  cursed  Mr.  Chamberlain  for  lead- 
ing the  Tory  party  astray.  In  point  of  fact,  the  Salisbury 
Ministry,  while  listening  to  the  advice  of  its  Liberal  allies, 
followed  with  no  less  alacrity  the  impulse  coming  from  its 
own  party  fermenting  under  the  democratic  leaven  introduced 
into  it.  This  process  did  not  go  on  as  a  matter  of  course,  it 
met  with  many  an  obstacle  in  class  prejudices,  in  the  hie- 
rarchical spirit  of  the  community,  in  the  indifference  and 
ignorance  of  the  masses ;  but  it  none  the  less  continued  in  an 
undemonstrative  but  unfailing  way.  Its  principal  centre  and 
its  prime  agent  was  precisely  the  Organization  of  the  party, 
the  Conservative  caucuses.  So  that  in  spite  of  the  retiring 
part  played  by  the  Union  of  Conservative  Associations,  and 
its  slight  official  influence,  the  local  Organizations,  by  their 
daily,  hourly  imperceptible  action,  indirectly  affected  the  policy 
of  the  party  and  the  attitude  of  its  chiefs.  In  fact,  the  main- 
stay of  the  Ministry  in  the  House  was  now  the  Tory  members 
for  the  large  towns,  most  of  whom  represented  the  middle  class 
and  the  workmen  identified  with  the  democratized  Associations. 
The  loss  of  power,  in  1892,  and  the  wish  to  obtain  another  and 
a  more  favourable  verdict  from  the  mass  of  voters  was  in  no 
way  calculated  to  alter  these  tendencies  of  the  Tory  leaders, 
nor  to  lessen  the  influences  to  which  they  were  now  subjected. 
The  return  of  the  Tories  to  power,  which  has  lately  taken  place 
(in  1895)  with  the  indispensable  assistance  of  the  Liberal 
Unionists,  gives  these  influences  a  fresh  lease  of  life. 

We  have  now  come  to  the  end  of  the  distance  traversed  by 
the  English  party  Organization  known  by  the  name  of  the 


.coy  Google 


BiNTH  CHAP.]    CRISIS  OF  188*  AND  PAHTV  ORGANIZATION    826 

Caucus.  From  its  appearance  on  the  scene  of  history  we  have 
followed  its  fortunes ;  we  have  pursued  it  in  all  its  great  mani- 
festatioDs,  letting  ourselves  rather  be  guided  by  it,  so  as  to 
discover  what  it  would  reveal  of  itself,  with  the  liberty,  of 
course,  of  seeing  with  our  own  eyes.  Its  career,  up  to  the 
present  relatively  short,  and  above  all  the  fact  that  in  conse- 
quence of  the  method  which  I  have  adopted  as  being  more 
scientific,  we  have  only  been  able  to  watch  the  Caucus  on  the 
stage  and  on  the  move  so  to  speak,  have  prevented  us  from 
giving  a  complete  picture  of  it  But  now  that  it  has  stopped, 
or  rather  appears  to  have  done  so  to  the  observer  obliged  to 
stop  himself,  it  may  be  possible  to  supplement  the  impression 
derived  from  the  Caucus  by  considering  it  in  a  state  of  repose. 
After  having  observed  it  to  a  certain  extent  in  its  dynamic, 
we  may  now  study  it  in  its  static  condition.  This  is  what  I 
now  propose  to  undertake  by  means  of  a  systematic  analysis 
of  its  component  parts,  of  their  co-ordination  and  their  daily 
working. 


.coy  Google 


.CD,  Google 


THIRD   PART 


.CD,  Google 


.CD,  Google 


FIRST  CHAPTER 

THE   BU.CHINERY   OF  THE 


The  history  of  the  establishment  of  the  Birmingham  Caucus 
which  was  tie  starting-point  of  the  movement  which  we  are 
considering,  has  supplied  ua  with  an  outline  of  the  machinery 
of  the  representative  Associations.  It  will  be  remembered  that 
according  to  the  theory  of  the  Caucus  all  the  inhabitants  of  the 
locality  belonging  to  either  party  assemble  in  public  meetings 
to  settle  the  affairs  of  the  party,  directly  or  through  delegates 
elected  at  these  meetings  and  constituting  deliberative  bodies 
outside  those  which  owe  their  existence  to  the  Constitution. 
Their  duty  and  their  work  consist  in  upholding  and  developing 
in  the  constituency,  and  consequently  in  the  kingdom.  Liberal 
or  Conservative  principles,  as  the  case  may  be,  and  in  securing 
the  election  of  Sfembers  belonging  to  the  same  party.  The 
success  of  these  Members  at  the  polling-booth  is  intended  to 
procure  the  party  preponderance  in  Parliament,  which  i^ain  is 
toensure  the  triumph  of  the  principles  of  the  parties  styled  Lib- 
eral or  Conservative,  supposed  to  be  alone  capable  of  making 
the  country  great  and  happy  in  times  present  and  to  come. 
The  main,  the  real,  business  of  the  Caucus  Associations  thus 
amounts  to  manipulating  the  electorate  in  the  interest  of  the 
party,  with  the  pretension  of  doing  this  on  behalf  of  and  by 
the  people.  How  do  they  set  about  it,  how  do  they  discharge 
the  duty  they  have  undertaken,  and  what  is  really  the  part 
played  and  the  advantage  derived  by  the  people —  this  is  what 
we  are  about  to  examine  point  by  point. 

Starting  from  the  principle  that  the  whole  electoral  popula- 
tion is  divided  into  two  sections,  into  Liberals  and  Tories,  the 
organization  of  the  parties  expects  that  in  each  locality  the 


.coy  Google 


aSO  DEUOCRACT  AND  FOLITICAI.  PARTIES     [tHUB  put 

Liberal  Association  shall  include  all  the  Liberals,  and  the  Con- 
servative Association  all  the  Conservatives.  This  is  the  theory. 
The  practice  is  very  far  removed  from  it.  In  reality  the  Asso- 
ciation embraces  only  a  very  small  fraction  of  the  "party." 
This  is  the  first  of  the  points  which  command  the  situation, 
and  to  find  one's  bearings  it  is  necessary  to  take  not«  of  it  at 
once.  The  study  of  the  daily  working  of  the  Caucus  will  con- 
sequently consist  in  ascertaining  the  reaction  of  this  fraction  on 
the  whole,  in  considering  their  respective  forces,  the  active 
power  of  the  one  and  the  resisting  power  of  the  other,  the 
methods  and  mode  of  action  employed  by  the  former  and  their 
application. 

We  shall  begin  by  studying  the  machinery  of  the  Organiza- 
tion and  the  men  who  set  it  in  motion. 

The  basis  of  the  organization  of  the  party  in  the  boroughs  is 
the  ward  or  polling-district,  where  the  local  adherents  of  the 
party  assembled  in  general  meetings  constitute  the  electorate  of 
the  Organization ;  from  these  original  electors  proceeds  the  rep- 
resentation of  the  party.  The  delegates  elected  by  the  wards 
form  the  central  Association  of  the  electoral  division,  which  is 
destined  to  be  as  it  were  the  local  parliament  of  the  party  with 
the  executive  committee  for  ministry.  To  be  a  member  of  the 
ward  Association  or  of  the  central  Association  it  is  sufficient, 
according  to  the  Birmii^ham  doctrine,  to  declare  one's  ad- 
herence to  the  party.  The  practice  in  this  respect,  as  well  as 
in  regard  to  several  other  points  of  organization,  is  not  abso- 
lutely uniform.  In  a  good  many  places  the  new  member  must 
be  introduced  by  one  or  two  persons,  or  a  formal  vote  be  taken 
on  his  admission,  or  he  must  sign  a  declaration  of  adhesion  to 
the  Association  and  receive  a  ticket  of  membership.  In  point 
of  fact  new  recruits  are  warmly  welcomed,  and  no  difficulty  is 
made  about  admitting  them,  especially  on  the  Liberal  side. 
Partly  from  a  feeling  of  "confidence  in  the  people"  which 
they  affect,  and  partly  owing  to  certain  easy-going  ways  which 
characterize  them,  the  Liberals  suffer  every  one  to  come  freely 
to  them,  whereas  the  Tories,  who  are  more  particular,  and  who 
are  still  in  their  democratic  apprenticeship,  take  elaborate  pre- 
cautions by  admitting  only  members  "duly  enrolled,"  and 
sometimes  by  reserving  to  themselves  the  right  to  expel  mem- 
bers whose  political  conduct  may  be  held  incompatible  with 


.coy  Google 


piBsr  CBAP.]     THE   MACHINERY  OF   THE   CAUCUS  331 

the  title  of  Conservative.  They  stipulate  further,  in  their 
rules  at  all  events,  that  the  members  of  the  Association  are 
to  respect  the  authority  of  the  "recognized  chiefs"  of  the 
party,  etc.  In  spite  of  these  grand  precautions  "traitors" 
creep  into  the  Tory  ward  Organizations,  who  are  abandoned 
enough  to  supply  the  Kadical  newspaper  with  reports  of  their 
meetings.  When  they  are  discovered  they  are  expelled.  The 
possession  of  a  Parliamentary  vote  ia  seldom  required  as  a 
qualification  for  membership  of  the  Association.  And  thei'e  is 
hardly  any  limit  of  age ;  when  the  minimum  age  is  stated  it  is 
fixed  at  twenty,  eighteen,  or  even  at  sixteen  or  fifteen  years, 
so  aa  to  enlist  people  as  early  as  possible. 

The  statutory  powers  of  the  ward  meetings  consist  in  ap- 
pointing their  permanent  committee  (with  as  many  members  as 
they  like),  in  electing  the  delegates  to  the  central  Association, 
that  is  to  say  to  the  "  hundreds,"  and  finally  in  nominating 
candidates  for  the  annual  municipal  elections,  in  which  the 
ward  is  the  unit.  The  importance,  however,  of  these  ward 
meetings  does  not  lie  so  much  in  this  formal  business,  which, 
moreover,  requires  only  two  or  three  sittings  a  year,  as  in  the 
relations  which  they  establish  among  the  adherents  of  the 
party.  In  the  first  place  it  is  there  that  goes  on  the  process 
of  natural  selection  of  influential  persons  destined  to  become 
leaders  in  their  street  or  block.  The  mani^ers  of  the  Caucus 
of  the  division  keep  an  eye  on  the  rise  and  growth  of  these 
local  infiuences;  in  attending  the  ward  meetings  they  notice 
the  good  speakers,  the  ardent  spirits,  the  men  of  action,  and 
become  acquainted  with  them.  For  it  is  they  who  will  be  the 
pillars  of  the  Organization.  Then  the  ward  meetings  are  a 
means  of  maintaining  cohesion,  of  keeping  up  party  ties  among 
their  frequenters,  just  as  they  present  an  opportunity  for  mak- 
ing recruits.  When  there  are  no  elections  or  statutory  business 
on  hand,  members  meet  for  the  purpose  of  meeting,  to  be 
together.  Sometimes  the  Caucus  sends  some  one  to  make  them 
a  brief  political  speech.  Sometimes  it  is  the  great  question 
of  the  day  or  the  passing  of  an  important  law  which  provides 
matter  for  discussion  or  conversation.  Besides,  the  great 
familiarity  of  every  Englishman  with  the  procedure  of  delib- 
erative assemblies  and  the  imperturbable  gravity  with  which 
he  moves  or  seconds  proposals,  motions,  amendments,  almost 


.coy  Google 


832  DEMOCRACY  AND  POLITICAL  PA.tTIES      [tbisd  pibt 

without  an  object,  easily  enables  a  meeting  to  kill  the  time 
fairly  decently.  If  the  ward  meetings  are  lield,  a^  ia  generally 
the  case  with  the  Conservatives,  in  the  public-houses,  the  ca^ 
rent  business  is  provided :  drinking  goes  on.  The  public-bouses 
are  to  a  certain  extent  the  base  of  operations  of  the  Tory  or- 
ganization of  the  ward.  The  latter  is  divided,  for  the  needs  of 
the  cause,  into  a  certain  number  of  sections  with  a  public-house 
for  centre.  The  ward  group  holds  its  meetings  by  turns  in 
each  of  these  ten  or  twelve  public-houses  where  the  people  of 
the  neighbourhood  gather  round  the  small  permanent  group 
which  forms  the  nucleus  of  all  the  meetings.  The  publican  on 
his  side  tries  to  bring  people  to  them  for  the  good  of  the  house. 
He  invites  those  who  are  not  yet  members  of  the  Association, 
offers  to  stand  sponsor  for  them,  and  to  procure  their  admis- 
sion as  members. 

Important  as  the  groundwork  of  the  Organization  of  the 
party,  the  ward  association,  in  spite  of  its  democratic  const!' 
tution,  really  has  an  extremely  narrow  base;  for  its  meetings 
are  very  little  attended.  Of  some  twelve  or  fifteen  hundred 
electors  in  a  ward  only  a  very  slender  minority  is  affiliated  to 
the  Associations.  The  others  do  not  want  to  be  on  the  list; 
they  refrain  from  displaying  their  political  sympathies  in 
order  not  to  lose  customers  in  their  business,  or  not  to  get  into 
bad  odour  with  their  master,  who  is  on  the  other  side ;  but  the 
majority  of  the  non-affiliat«d  consists  simply  of  the  indiffer- 
ent, who  do  not  care  an  atom  for  politics,  at  least  between 
the  parliamentary  elections.  Even  in  places  where  the  politi- 
cal pulse  has  always  beaten  strongly,  and  where  the  Caucus 
has  been  a  decided  success,  as  at  Birmingham,  the  proportion 
of  those  affiliated  to  the  party  Organizations  does  not  exceed 
eight  or  ten  per  cent  of  the  total  number  of  electors.  But,  few 
as  they  are,  not  nearly  all  of  them  come  to  the  meetings  of  their 
ward  committees.  In  the  beginning  the  ward  meetings  attracted 
people  in  certain  towns ;  in  others  the  attendance  of  members 
varied  a  good  deal,  until  eventually  the  situation  became  the 
same  everywhere,  that  is  to  say,  the  ward  meetings  are  deserted, 
as  the  agents  of  the  Caucus  themselves  admit  frankly  enough.' 

1  To  the  question  it  the  ward  meetinES  yten  (attly  well  atteoded,  an  Auo- 

clatioQ  Wfireiary  \o  a  Unjo  town  in  I^ncasbiro  replied;  "Yea,  very  well;- 
the;  coald  all  get  into  this  room  (a  very  small  one)  Just  as  the  study  of  my 


.CD,  Google 


PIMT  CHIP.]     THE   MACHINERY   OF  THE   CAUCUS  S38 

And  it  is  in  these  meetings,  which  contain  two  to  three  per  cent 
of  the  whole  electorate,  that  the  delegates  are  chosen  who  are  to 
invest  the  Caucus  with  its  representative  authority.  It  has  been 
my  lot  to  attend  ward  meetings  where  there  were  not  even  twenty 
persons  to  elect  seventy-five  delegates.  In  these  conditions  the 
election  of  delegates  is  simply  a  farce.  Generally,  a  list  pre- 
pared beforehand  is  submitted  to  the  meeting  and  voted  in  a 
lump.  Often,  to  curtail  the  proceedings,  even  the  semblance  of 
a  vote  is  dispensed  with ;  the  old  list  is  adopted  again.  The 
Inevitable  result  is  that  all  the  work  falls  to  a  handful  of  men, 
who  are  willing  to  attend  to  it.  At  their  head  is  the  ward 
secretary,  who  is  the  mainspring  of  the  ward  Organization. 
Gathering  round  him  more  or  less  active  personages,  whom  he 
and  the  leading  Caucus-men  have  singled  out  from  the  crowd,  or 
who  have  become  aware  of  their  vocation  themselves,  he  forms 
in  conjunction  with  them  a  coterie,  which  manages  all  the 
political  business  in  the  district.  Coming  to  an  understand- 
ing beforehand,  and  always  acting  in  concert,  they  are  able 
to  manage  even  meetings  of  some  size  without  difficulty,  and 
to  have  the  last  word  in  the  choice  of  committee-men  or 
delegates,  who  in  consequence  follow  them  implicitly.  An 
artisan  or  small  clerk  by  profession,  the  ward  secretary  knows 
all  his  men,  he  speaks  their  language,  he  has  lived  for  years 
in  constant  contact  with  them,  he  knows  how  to  lay  his 
hand  upon  them.  At  meetings  be  speaks  little  or  not  at  all, 
but  it  is  he  who  inspires  those  who  do,  beginning  with  the 
chairman.  At  the  election  of  delegates  to  the  "hundreds," 
he  "  suggests  "  "  good  names  " ;  and  his  list,  settled  before- 
hand, is  generally  adopted  without  modifications.  He  mod- 
estly leaves  the  addition  of  a  few  names  to  the  wisdom  of  the 
meeting ;  if  there  are  fifty  persons  to  be  elected,  he  gives  only 
forty-five  names.  The  secretary,  as  well  as  the  chairman,  is 
appointed  by  the  meeting  of  the  ward  members,  but  in  prac- 
tice it  is  the  Caucus  which  more  often  than  not  has  "sug- 
gested" him  in  its  turn.  For  the  Caucus  it  is  a  matter  of 
primary  importance  to  have  an  adroit  and  energetic  secretary 

excellent  collea^e  od  tbe  otber  side  is  la,tge  eooogb  to  hold  all  those  irho 
come  to  the  ward  meetings  of  his  Organ Izaliun."  To  keep  op  appearance! 
■evetal  agents  ol  the  Caucus  raplieil  that  the  ward  meetings  were  "  fairly 
aiieoded,"  but  on  enquiry  In  the  town  It  turned  oat  that  there  wae  room  lot 
the  whole  meeting  oq  a  sofa. 


.CD,  Google 


884  DEMOCRACT  AND  KIUTICAL  PARTIES      [thied  bxki 

dowB  iu  the  ward ;  otherwise  it  is  literally  paralyzed,  so  far  as 
this  ward  is  concerned.  For  the  Caucus  the  ward  secretary  is 
at  once  an  E^ent  for  supplying  information,  and  an  executive 
officer.  He  receives  instructions  from  the  secretary  of  the 
Caucus;  he  is  guided,  controlled  by  him,  responsible  to  him. 
The  latter  can  always  come  and  inspect  the  books  of  the  ward, 
which  are  kept  by  the  ward  secretary,  and  in  which  is  entered 
all  the  busineaa  relating  to  the  Association  and  to  the  elec- 
toral matters  of  the  locality.  In  a  word,  there  is  the  closest 
possible  co-operation  between  the  ward  Organizations  and  the 
Caucus;  and  it  could  not  be  otherwise.  The  Oonserratives, 
who  had,  not  without  grave  misgiving,  introduced  the  repre- 
sentative principle  into  the  Organization  of  the  party,  had 
thought  proper,  in  more  than  one  place,  to  exorcise  the  demo- 
cratic spirit  or,  what  was  the  equivalent  of  it  in  their  eyes,  the 
spirit  of  insubordination.  By  means  of  provisions  in  the  rules 
which  undoubtedly  testify  to  a  great  faith  in  the  efficacy  of 
written  or  printed  matter,  they  saddled  the  ward  committees 
with  the  duty  of  "being  responsible,"  of  "acting  under  autho- 
rity," of  "referring,"  of  "reporting"  to  the  executive  Com- 
mittee of  the  central  Association. 

II 

The  delegates  of  all  the  wards,  plus  the  chairmen  and 
the  secretaries  of  ward  committees,  constitute  the  Council 
or  General  Committee  of  the  division  (often  known  on  the 
Liberal  side  by  the  name  of  "hundreds,"  the  "200"  or  the 
"  300,"  etc.).  Nevertheless  this  representative  assembly  is  far 
from  being  derived  in  its  entirety  from  the  popular  source, 
even  in  theory.  In  the  first  place,  as  we  have  seen  in  the 
Birmingham  model,  it  contains  besides  the  members  elected  in 
the  popular  gatherings,  a  certain  number  of  co-opted  members. 
The  delegates  have  power  to  add  to  their  number,  in  accord- 
ance with  the  oligarchic  method  of  appointment  of  the  old 
days,  of  the  corporative  system  of  tlie  Middle  Ages,  which  has 
been  preserved  down  to  this  day  in  the  municipal  institutions 
of  England.'  In  borrowing  this  featui-e  from  the  municipal 
composed  aa  lo  two-thirds  of  members  elected  by 
the  remalnliiK  third  of  aldenueo  choiuia  by  the 
e  same  sjstem  has  been  adopted  for  tbe  Coant; 
Connclls  esUbllshed  In  1K8H. 


.coy  Google 


p.]    THE  MACHINEBY  OF  THE  CAUCUS 


constitution,  the  Caucus  was  evidently  not  quite  sure  that  the 
pure  elective  piinciple  would  suit  it,  although  it  was  never 
weary  of  proclMming  ita  merits.  The  result  proved  that  the 
creators  of  the  Caucus  were  right.  The  Council  of  the  Associar  ■ 
tion  has  often  been  able  to  rectify  the  choice  of  the  wards  by 
means  of  the  coaptation  rule.  Men  who  did  not  commend 
themselves  to  the  ward  politicians  but  who  could  render  ser- 
vices to  the  party  were  admitted  as  co-opted  members.  Some- 
times they  were  leaders,  persons  who  brought  with  them 
experience  of  men  and  affairs,  a  conciliatory  disposition  and  a 
balanced  temperament.  More  often  perhaps  they  were,  and 
still  are,  important  subscribers  to  the  funds  of  the  Association 
for  whom  a  place  is  found  in  the  Council  as  a  reward  for  their 
liberality.  The  proportion  of  co-opted  members  varies  in  differ- 
ent Associations ;  it  is  3,  6,  or  10  per  cent  of  the  total  number 
of  members  and  sometimes  reaches  even  a  higher  figure,  A 
good  many  Associations,  however,  have  given  up  co-optation  in 
order  to  conform  to  the  strict  democratic  doctrine. 

Certain  Associations,  without  having  recourse  to  the  expedi- 
ent of  co-optation,  admit  without  election  and  as  ex  officio  mem- 
bers people  of  position  or  large  subscribers.  Thus  in  several 
Associations  {especially  on  the  Tory  aide)  the  rules  give  a  seat 
on  their  governing  bodies  to  all  the  Magistrates,  to  the  mem- 
bers of  town  councils  and  other  local  elective  assemblies,  such 
as  School  Boards,  Boards  of  Guardians,  who  belong  to  the  polit- 
ical party  in  question.  To  them  are  added,  and  on  the  same 
footing,  the  managers  or  other  representatives  of  clubs,  socie- 
ties, and  institutions  which  wear  tlie  party  colours.  There 
are  also  Associations  which  take  into  their  councils  and  com- 
mittees every  one  who  pays  a  higher  subsci-iption,  the  mini- 
mum of  which  is  fixed  by  the  rules.  This  minimum  varies 
from  one  guinea  to  a  few  pounds,  but  some  Associations  are 
ready  to  accept  half  a  guinea  a  year.  Cei-tain  Associations 
bestow  on  the  generous  donors  even  the  title  of  Vice-President, 
which  can  thus  be  got  for  cash.  Other  Associations,  without 
putting  all  the  big  subscribers  in  a  lump  on  the  committees, 
provide  that  this  or  that  proportion  of  the  committee  shall  be 
chosen  from  among  them,  but  as  their  number  is  not  large, 
the  selection,  if  there  ia  one,  is  very  limited. 

The  Organizations  resort  to  these  methods  of  swelling  their 


.coy  Google 


SSa  DBMOCBACT  AND  POLITICAL  PARTIES      [tbib»  piW 

budget  because  they  are  much  in  want  of  moaey.  We  already 
know,  from  the  history  of  the  Caucus  sketched  above,  that 
the  Bubscription  has  been  practically  abolished  in  most  of  the 
Liberal  Associations.  The  Conservatives  generally  require  it 
in  their  rules,  even  in  very  format  terms,  but  they  too  are 
obliged  in  practice  to  deviate  from  this  strictness.  Some 
Associations,  while  giving  up  compulsory  subscription,  stipu- 
late that  complete  membeiship,  especially  the  right  of  voting 
at  meetings,  shall  be  granted  only  on  condition  of  paying  the 
subscription,  but  this  does  not  help  them,  for  their  adherents 
care  more  tor  their  money  than  for  complete  membership.  It 
will  be  remembered  also  that  in  several  places  an  attempt  was 
made,  but  without  success,  to  require  payment  of  the  sub- 
scription at  least  from  the  members  of  the  Council  or  Executive 
Committee.  Practically  payment  is  optional.  Sometimes  the 
number  of  paying  members  of  the  Council  is  one  half,  some- 
times less;  in  certain  Associations  for  one  member  of  the 
Council  who  contributes  a  small  amount  there  are  nineteen  who 
do  not  pay,  and  there  are  Organizations  in  which  nobody  pays. 
In  places  where  the  Organization  does  not  work  with  great 
regularity,  as  for  instance  on  the  Liberal  side  in  the  constitu- 
encies of  the  vast  metropolis,  care  is  even  taken  to  reassure  the 
dignitaries  of  the  Caucus.  In  the  printed  notices  sent  to  in- 
form them  that  they  have  been  appointed  members  of  the 
Council  there  is  a  memo  to  the  effect  that  no  pecuniary  contri- 
bution is  attached  to  the  office.  Under  these  circumstances  it 
not  infrequently  happens  that  the  caucuses  depend  on  a  few 
individuals  for  their  pecuniary  resources,  wealthy  men  who 
supply  the  greater  part  of  the  income  of  the  Organization  of 
their  party.  Often  half  or  more  than  half  of  this  income  comes 
from  three  or  four  or  five  people.  The  non-paying  members 
are  however  supposed  to  contribute  their  share  in  the  form  of 
"  work "  which  they  are  to  bring  to  bear  on  the  elector  (by 
ways  and  means  which  will  be  explained  later  on).  And  it  is 
in  view  of  this  "  work  "  that  they  consider  themselves  fully  en- 
titled to  refuse  to  pay  anything,  even  a  shilling  a  year  only ; 
they  think  that  it  is  quite  enough  to  make  a  personal  without 
a  pecuniary  sacrifice. 


.coy  Google 


t  CHAP.]     THE   MACHINERY   OF  THE   CAUCUS 


III 

Theoretically  the  Council  or  General  Committee  is  the  most 
important  and  influential  body  iu  the  Oi^nization.  As  this 
assembly  is  supposed  to  embody  the  mind  and  the  will  of  the 
adherents  of  the  party,  it  has  consequently  to  presciibe  its 
policy,  to  notify  it  to  the  great  ones  of  the  realm,  the  Minis- 
ters and  Members  of  Parliament,  for  their  guidance,  and  finally 
to  select  the  parliamentary  candidates'  for  whom  the  members 
of  the  party  are  bound  to  vote  on  the  polling-day.  But  in 
reality  the  Executive  Committee  of  the  Association  holds  all 
the  power.  Composed,  as  we  have  seen,  of  the  office-bearers 
of  the  Association  (president,  vice-president,  treasurer,  secre- 
tary), of  the  ward  chairmeo  and  secretaries,  and  of  a  certain 
number  of  leaders  elected  in  the  ward  meetings  or  sometimes 
introduced  by  co-Ojitaiioii,  the  Committee  includes  the  most 
active  and  influential  men  of  the  Organization.  Not  only 
does  it  set  the  machine  in  motion,  but  it  regulates  all  the 
details  of  its  working,  it  controls  everything  that  goes  on  and 
everything  which  makes  up  the  life  of  the  Association  and  of 
its  ward  branches.  The  selection  of  the  candidates  practically 
rests  with  it.  Sometimes  this  is  formally  entrusted  to  it  by 
the  regulations  (on  the  Tory  side).  As  a  general  rule  the  Asso- 
ciation adopts  the  candidate,  but  the  Executive  Committee 
proposes  him,  and  in  most  cases,  not  only  de  facto  but  even 
de  jure,  the  Association  cannot  deal  with  a  candidature  if  it 
has  not  been  previously  submitted  to  and  considered  by  the 
Executive  Committee.  Even  when  it  consults  the  Council 
before  acting,  it  still  dictates  the  latter's  decisions.  Contain- 
ing all  the  leaders  of  the  local  branches  to  whose  influence 
the  delegates  to  the  "  hundreds "  have  become  amenable  in 
the  wards,  it  is  bound  to  carry  with  it  the  assembly,  which 
moreover  is  too  large  to  take  its  own  line.  Constituting  an 
inner  circle  in  the  "hundreds,"  the  Executive  Committee  is 
itself  again  too  large  to  hold  undivided  power.  Consequently 
an  inner  circle  of  the  second  degree  is  formed  within  it,  at 

1  O^cBslonalljr,  but  very  seldom,  the  name  ci(  tbe  oandidale  adopted  is 
aubmilted  [or  ratification  to  a  ■peclnl  niaetinjt  of  electors  convened  ari  hoc. 
Again,  while  giving  tbe  Council  full  power  to  elioase  the  candidates,  certain 
Associaliona  r^uire  on  these  occasinni  a  two-thirds'  instead  of  a  simple 
uiai<trily. 


.CD,  Google 


338  DEMOCBACY  AND  POLITICAL  PARTIES      [TBino  Piar 

one  time  by  a  process  of  natural  selection,  at  another  by  means 
of  the  rules  which  establish  "  parliauientary,"  "  financial," 
"organizing"  sub-committees.  One  of  these  sub<:ommittees 
engrosses  all  the  powers.  For  deciding  delicate  points  and 
taking  exceptional  measures,  in  regard  to  expenditure  for  in- 
stance, which  are  sometimes  shrouded  in  mystery,  at  election 
time  when  the  decisive  struggle  is  being  fought,  the  innermost 
inner  circle  is  even  a  necessity. 

In  the  large  towns  the  concentration  of  power  in  the  hands 
of  a  few  reaches  its  extreme  limit,  in  spite  of  the  autonomist 
doctrine  of  the  Caucus,  and  exhibits  in  the  most  striking  way 
its  tendency  towards  oligarchic  government.  Since  the  last 
redistribution  of  seats  in  1885,  the  large  towns  do  longer  form 
single  electoral  districts  with  a  common  representation  for  the 
whole  borough,  but  are  cut  up  into  Divisions  of  almost  equal 
dimensions,  with  a  Member  for  each.'  To  be  true  to  demo- 
cratic principles,  the  caucuses  of  large  towns  had  to  allow  the 
new  divisional  constituencies  the  right  of  acting  inde)>endently 
in  the  affairs  of  the  party,  a  right  which  they  had  formerly 
asserted  with  such  energy  for  the  constituencies  of  the  old  type, 
the  representation  of  which  they  had  taken  upon  themselves. 
In  consequence  each  Division  obtained  an  autonomous  party 
organization.  Nevertheless  the  old  single  Associations  were 
unwilling  to  part  with  their  power  and  tried  to  live  on  by  the 
side  of  or  rather  above  the  new  Divisional  Associations.  The 
redistribution  of  seats  was  hardly  passed  when  the  leaders  of 
the  Caucus,  and  especially  Mr.  Chamberlain,  looking  to  the 
future  of  the  institution,  recommended  the  preservation  of  the 
old  organization  for  such  action  as  concerned  the  whole  town, 
while  setting  up  an  Association  with  the  usual  powers  in  each 
constituency.  Birmingham  at  once  put  this  combination  into 
practice  by  grouping  the  "hundreds"  of  newly  created  Divis- 
ions into  one  body  of  2000,  which  to  all  appearance  was 
simply  a  federation  of  independent  units  of  divisional  "  hun- 
dreds." Its  powers  were  very  va^juely  defined ;  to  give  ad- 
vice to  the  local  Associations,  to  organize  political  meetings 
for  the  whole  town,  etc.  But  almost  everywliere  else  this  plan 
met  with  a  determined  resistance  in  which  the  moderates  and 


.coy  Google 


FIRST  CHAP.]     THE   MACHINERY   OF  THE   CACCUS 

the  pure  democrats  agreed.  The  former  were  of  opinioD  that 
the  maintenance  of  a  central  organization  would  only  perpetu- 
ate the  dictatorial  practices  of  the  Caucus  and  prevent  the 
growth  of  a  spontaneous  political  life  in  the  constituencies,' 
Aa  for  the  "  stalwarts,"  they  were  against  a  general  organi- 
zation for  the  whole  town,  out  of  democratic  jealousy.  In  the 
face  of  this  opposition  the  single  Association  has,  in  some 
towns,  entirely  given  way  to  the  new  divisional  Associations. 
In  places  where  it  managed  to  hold  its  ground,  in  the  form 
of  a  Union  or  federated  Association,  or  with  the  more  modest 
title  of  United  Council  or  United  Committee,  consisting  only  of 
a  few  representatives  of  local  Associations,  it  had  to  encounter 
severe  attacks  from  the  autonomists  at  the  beginning.  But 
gradually,  thanks  to  the  healing  action  of  time  and  above  all 
to  the  excitement  produced  by  the  Home  Rule  crisis,  which 
threw  all  other  controveraies  into  the  background,  the  objec- 
tions raised  to  the  general  Associations  diminished  in  energy 
and  persistency,  and  the  latter  asserted  themselves  and  gained 
a  firm  footing,  as  if  nothing  had  happened.  In  places  where 
they  had  been  abolished  they  were  quietly  started  afresh, 
always  with  the  modest  duty  of  giving  advice  when  they  might 
be  asked  for  it,  of  organizing  meetings,  etc.  But  all  the  essen- 
tial powers  of  the  new  divisional  Associations  were  soon  more 
or  less  surreptitiously  transferred  to  the  Unions  or  United  Gom- 
mittees,  and  before  long  there  arose  in  all  the  large  towns  an 
unstable  equilibrium  between  the  mongrel  general  organization 
which  wields  real  power,  of  course  with  the  necessary  formal 
precautions,  and  the  Divisional  Associations  to  which  power 
belongs  as  a  matter  of  right  Three,  four,  five,  or  seven  Divis- 
ions are  practically  governed  by  a  small  party  committee. 

The  Tory  organization  of  the  large  towns  has  been  landed 
in  the  same  result,  and  with  all  the  more  ease  and  certainty 
because  it  was  not,  like  its  rival,  upset  by  the  crisis  brought 
about  by  the  change  in  the  electoral  system.     The  Conservar 

'  The  anxiety  with  regard  to  the  Caucus  wag  raoreovet  not  without  its 
Influence  on  the  vote  ot  the  redistributltin  of  sesla.  Moderate  Liberals  m 
well  as  a  good  mauj'  Tories  in  the  House  bad,  as  it  would  appear,  decided  to 
adopt  the  system  of  splitting  Ihv  large  constltneiicies  into  a  number  of  elec- 
toral divisions,  In  the  hope  that  it  would  decapitate  the  Caucus.  U  Mr. 
Chamberlain's  advice  were  followed  ererf  where,  this  advanta^  would  be  less 


.coy  Google 


340  BEMOCRACT  AND  POLITICAL  PABTIGS     [thud  pimr 

tires  have  not  meddled  vith  their  old  single  Associations. 
By  way  of  confonning  to  the  principle  of  autonomy  in  the 
government  of  the  party,  which  they  now  profess,  they  have 
conceded  home  rule  .to  their  adherents  in  the  Divisions,  but 
only  on  paper.  Consequently,  they  have  divisional  Associa- 
tions, witJi  all  the  usual  parade  of  presidents,  vice-presidents, 
executive  committees,  etc. ;  but  nothing  is  done  in  them  with- 
out the  advice  of  the  general  Organization,  especially  of  its 
executive  committee.  According  to  the  rules,  sometimes  they 
"  shall "  and  aometimea  they  "  may  "  consult  it  on  importjtnt 
matters,  but  this  practically  amounts  to  the  same  thing,  the 
option  being  really  a  duty. 

IV 

In  examining  the  constituent  elements  of  the  Caucus,  from 
the  ward  meetings  up  to  its  innermost  inner  circle,  a  passing 
notice  only  has  been  given  to  two  persons,  who  are,  neverthe- 
less, the  pillars  of  the  temple  of  the  Organization,  —  the  sec- 
retary and  the  President  of  the  Association.  The  secretary  ia 
an  official  appointed  by  the  executive  committee  and  working 
under  its  orders.  His  duties  are  of  the  most  varied  descrip- 
tion. In  the  first  place  he  is  a  sort  of  epitome  of  the  ward 
secretaries.  He  performs  on  a  large  scale  for  the  division  or 
the  whole  town  all  the  operations  which  the  latter  carry  out  on 
a  email  scale  in  their  little  respective  departments.  He  gives 
them  instructions,  he  assists  them  with  his  advice,  he  checks 
and  supervises  them ;  he  is  careful  to  get  good  secretaries  ap- 
pointed in  the  ward ;  he  does  his  best  to  ensure  the  election  by 
the  ward  meetinga  of  good  delegates  to  the  "  hundreds,"  active 
men  and  skilled  in  canvaasiug  the  voter;  he  looks  after  the 
uninterrupted  working  of  the  ma<;hine,  he  sees  that  the  ward 
committees  do  not  go  to  sleep,  but  act,  that  is  to  say,  meet  and 
hold  forth  for  the  greater  glory  of  the  party ;  he  goes  from  one 
ward  to  another  to  attend  meetings ;  in  a  large  town  he  some-' 
times  has  more  than  one  meeting  an  evening ;  he  arrives,  satis- 
fies himself  at  a  glance  that  all  is  going  on  welt,  and  rushes  off 
to  another  meeting  \  he  encourages  here,  makes  remarks  there ; 
he  allays  susceptibilities  or  local  jealousies,  he  stiflea  or  quells 
mutinies;  he  has  constantly  to  display  energy  and  tact;  above 


.coy  Google 


HBSTCHAP.]     THE   MACaiNEEY   OF  THE  CAUCUS  841 

all,  he  must  not  give  himself  airs,  and  he  must  keep  his  "head 
clear,"  —  that  is,  not  muddled  by  drink.  Concentrating  in  his 
hands  all  the  intelligence  which  reaches  him  from  the  wards 
or  which  he  gathers  himself  as  he  goes  along,  he  supplies  the 
committee  with  the  information  of  which  it  stands  in  need, 
and  keeps  the  member  or  candidate,  with  whom  he  maintains 
a  regular  correspondence,  posted  up  in  the  situation.  To  these 
functions  of  political  newsmonger  he  adds  those  of  tactician 
and  consulting  strategist  if  he  is  a  bit  of  a  philosopher,  capable 
of  drawing  a  moral  from  the  facts  which  he  accumulates,  and 
consequently  of  pointing  out  the  ways  and  means.  He  attends, 
in  the  interest  of  his  party,  to  the  electoral  register,  a  highly 
complicated  piece  of  work,  as  wo  have  already  seen ;  he  argues 
before  the  Registration  court  in  support  of  the  electoral  claims 
of  members  of  his  patty  and  against  those  of  his  political 
opponents.  He  has  many  other  duties  which  recur  at  more  or 
lesslengthyiutervals,  but  which  are  none  the  less  of  importance. 
He  organizes  the  great  party  meetings  convened  from  time  to 
time,  the  public  demonstrations  held  on  account  of  an  important 
Bill  or  this  or  that  political  event,  the  receptions  given  to  the 
big  men  of  the  party,  who  do  the  town  the  honour  of  bringing 
it  their  "  authorized  eloquence."  He  is  master  of  the  ceremo- 
nies at  banquets  of  the  party,  umpire  of  sports  oi^anized  under 
its  auspices.  At  election  time  he  is  here,  there,  and  everywhere. 
He  has  to  set  the  "  workers  "  going,  to  receive  their  reports,  to 
give  them  instructions,  to  attend  to  the  printing  and  distribution 
of  bills  and  posters,  to  organize  electoral  meetings,  to  see  this 
man,  write  to  that,  to  settle  endless  details,  to  cope  with  end- 
less incidents.  Accountable  to  the  Association,  he  is  also  re- 
sponsible to  the  law,  for  he  is  generally  the  election  agent, 
whom  every  candidate  is  bound  by  law  to  employ  for  the  pur- 
pose of  conducting  the  election  in  conformity  with  the  enact- 
ments directed  against  bribery  and  corruption. 

The  perfect  discharge  of  all  these  duties  by  the  secretary 
is  not  of  very  common  occurrence  in  practice,  the  burden 
is  too  heavy  to  be  borne  by  everybody.  It  undoubtedly 
demands  a  natural  bent  and  a  long  apprenticeship.  The 
Caucus  and  the  conditions  which  had  brought  it  into  exist- 
ence are  still  of  too  recent  a  date  in  England  for  the  type 
of   a  perfect  secretary  to  be  often  met  with  as  yet;    but 


.coy  Google 


842  DEMOCRACY  AND  POLITICAL  PARTIES     [re 


the  prooesa  of  reproduutioo  of  the  species  goes  on  and  ad- 
vances from  day  to  day.  The  great  difficulty  of  many  Asso- 
ciations is  their  inability  to  afford  a  secretary,  the  expense  is 
too  great  for  their  slender  budget,  and  they  are  obliged  to  put 
up  with  the  voluntary  services  of  the  "  honorary  secretary," 
who  is  one  of  tlieir  electi  ve  officers.  He  is  not  a  "  professional " 
but  an  amateur  or  a  zealot  of  the  party.  Generally  absorbed  in 
his  own  business  or  profession,  he  cannot  devote  much  time  to 
the  Association.  Even  if  he  has  no  work,  if  he  is  simply  a 
"  gentleman,"  he  cannot  be  expecte<l  to  put  his  shoulder  to  the 
wheel,  which  however  is  a  sine  qua  non  for  the  proper  working 
of  a  party  Organization. 

The  President  of  the  Association,  ou  the  other  hand,  need 
not  put  his  shoulder  to  the  wheel.  He  is  more  a  show  person- 
age. If  the  secretary's  part  somewhat  recalls  Figaro,  the  chair- 
man has  that  of  the  heavy  father  in  the  play.  He  must  be 
eminently  respectable,  very  well  known  in  the  town,  influen- 
tial, and,  what  is  always  an  advantage,  pretty  rich  or  at  all 
events  wel!  off.  The  name  of  the  President  is  a  flag,  a  standard. 
It  is  his  personal  prestige,  the  respect  and  confidence  that 
he  inspires,  which  carry  the  members  of  the  Association,  the 
"workers,"  and  keep  them  loyal  and  devoted  to  the  Organiza- 
tion. For  the  voters  who  are  outside  the  Organization,  but 
whose  votes  have  to  be  secured,  the  name  of  the  President 
is  also  a  sort  of  guarantee;  for  them  it  has  the  importance 
of  the  signature  of  the  firm.  But  it  is  not  enough  for  him 
to  lend  his  name,  he  must  exert  himself  personally  as  well. 
He  has  to  show  himself  and  speak  on  every  occasion  of  at 
all  a  solemn  description,  at  the  annual  gatherings  of  the  Asso- 
ciation, at  the  big  meetings,  etc.  He  opens  the  meetings  and 
closes  them  by  addresses  in  whi<^h  he  delivers  himself  with 
dignity  of  platitudes  on  the  great  cause,  the  old  and  glorious 
institutions,  the  unity  of  the  empire,  the  union  of  classes  (on 
the  Tory  side) ;  on  progress,  on  war  against  privileges  and  mo- 
nopolies, on  the  selfishness  of  the  "classes,"  and  their  odious 
resistance  to  all  popular  reform  (on  the  Libera!  side).  Refer- 
ring to  this  eloquence  of  the  chair,  a  Tory  Caucus  secretary 
once  defined  the  chairinan  as  the  "  man  who  can  tell  the  biggest 
lies."     His  respei^tability  covers  everything  and  adorns  it. 

The  Tories,  who  pay  marked  attention  to  respectability,  are 


.coy  Google 


riBSTCHAP.]     THE   MACHINERY   OF   THE  CAUCUS  M3 

of  course  never  at  a  loss  for  men  qualified  to  fill  this  position  , 
of  pompous  mediocrity.  The  Liberals  have  a  good  supply  of 
them  too.  It  will  be  borne  in  mind  that,  at  the  time  of  the 
Home  Rule  crisis  in  1886,  the  hope  was  expi-essed  that  the 
Caucus  of  the  Gladstonian  party  would  not  be  able  to  hold  its 
ground  after  having  lost  its  respectable  members,  who  had 
become  Unionists.  This  hope,  as  we  know,  has  not  been 
realized;  and,  in  so  far  as  it  was  based  on  the  desertion  of 
the  respectables,  it  was,  as  may  be  pointed  out  here,  not  well 
founded.  For  respectability  has  nothing  absolute  or  individ- 
ual about  it ;  the  somewhat  inferior  moral  qualities  and  virtues 
of  which  it  is  the  outcome,  or  the  generalization,  however  rela- 
tive they  may  be,  are  found  in  every  sphere  of  society.  They 
constitute,  in  every  socia!  organization,  an  inexhaustible  store 
which  supplies,  in  the  desired  form  and  quantity,  the  where- 
withal for  equipping  the  men  who  serve  as  an  example  to 
their  fellows,  who  set  them  the  fashion,  who  make  them  follow 
in  their  train.  It  is,  therefore,  perfectly  justifiable  to  parody 
the  saying,  that  one  is  always  a  reactionary  in  some  one's  eyes, 
by  the  dictum  that  one  is  always  somebody's  ideal  of  respecta- 
bility. When  the  respectable  class  has  resigned  or  lost  power, 
its  place  is  soon  taken  by  the  next  succeeding  layer  of  respec- 
tability, which  becomes  the  respectable  one  with  all  the  attri- 
butes attaching  to  its  influence  on  the  layers  below  it  There 
may  be  an  interregnum,  but  it  is  never  of  long  duration. 
Just  as  in  society  a  great  disturbance  may  displace  the  forces 
revolving  therein,  but  very  soon  these  forces  or  others  will 
fall  into  position,  and  so  long  as  the  machinery  is  not  broken, 
it  will  continue  to  work  with  other  men,  with  new  respectables, 
—  perhaps  not  so  well  as  before,  —  but  still  it  will  work. 
WJieu,  in  consequence  of  the  Home  Rule  crisis,  in  1886,  the 
respectables  had  withdrawn  from  the  Liberal  Associations,  a 
new  category  of  respectables  insensibly  was  evolved  by  or  arose 
within  them,  which  became  the  fulcrum  of  the  Organization  of 
the  party.  Besides,  the  Liberal  respectables  of  a  prior  date 
had  not  all  withdrawn  to  a  man ;  some  of  them  had  remained, 
being  held  back  either  by  their  genuine  sympathy  for  Home 
Rule,  or  by  their  devotion  to  Mr.  Gladstone,  and  by  the  diffi- 
culty of  breaking  old  ties,  or  again  by  antbition. 

However  much  the  quality  of   respectability  may  prepon- 


.coy  Google 


844  DEHOCRACT  AND  POLITICAL  PARTIES      [tuibd  Pin 

derate  in  the  Pre»icleiit  of  the  Association,  it  is  not  necessarily 
his  sole  title  to  the  office.  Sometimes  he  unites  with  it  the 
qualification  of  a.  fighting  politician.  In  accordance  with  his 
temperament  and  his  abilities  he  directs  the  attack,  leads  the 
troups  into  action,  or,  as  strategist,  sketches  the  plan  of  cam- 
paign and  organizes  victory,  in  his  study.  If  the  President 
does  not  possess  any  of  these  qualities  his  place  can  be  sup- 
plied by  the  honorary  secretary,  who  under  this  more  modest 
title  is  often  the  real  inspirer  and  manager  of  the  Association. 
A  clever  and  hard-working  paid  secretary,  an  intelligent  and 
energetic  honorary  secretary,  and  an  influential  and  wealthy 
President  form  a  trio  at  the  apex  of  the  Association  which  is 
the  ideal  of  every  party  UrganizatioD. 


The  President  with  his  qualifications  of  respectability  and 

wealth  leads  the  Association  also  from  the  point  of  view  of 
social  rank.  He  represents  the  well-to-do  middle  class  which, 
owing  to  the  well-nigh  complete  abstention  of  the  aristocracy,' 
is  almost  always  the  superior  social  element  in  the  party  Or- 
ganization. The  numerical  importance  of  this  element  is  not 
great.  It  may  be  said  of  the  middle  class,  especially  so  far  as 
its  upper  strata  are  concerned,  that  it  pays  little  or  no  heed  to 
the  daily  life  of  the  Caucus.  All  it  does  is  to  supply  the  party 
Organizations  with  a  portion  of  their  staff,  on  the  Conservative 
side  to  a  greater,  perhaps  even  a  preponderating  extent,  on  the 
Liberal  side  in  a  lesser  degree.  But  it  ia  almost  always  the 
middle-class  men  who  are  the  financial  supporters  of  the  Organi- 
zations. Consequently  the  power  of  the  rich  over  the  Asso- 
ciations would  be  immense  if  it  were  not  diminished  by  theit 
own  indifference  or  their  political  lukewarmness.  A  good 
many  of  them  in  fact  are  satisfied  with  paying  their  subscrip- 
tion, from  a  sense  of  duty  to  their  party  or  a  feeling  of  self- 
respect,  and  attend  only  the  big  meetings  of  the  party,  for  the 
pleasure  of  seeing  their  name  in  the  paper  the  next  day  among 
the  "  influential  and  eminent  gentlemen  who  were  on  the  plat- 

'  Od  the  Liberal  side  ia  very  rare  eases,  on  the  Tory  side  more  often,  the 
■neiDberg  of  the  arhtocracy  consent  to  All  honorary  posts  In  the  AssociMiooa, 
bnt  they  da  not  take  an  Active  share  in  tbeic  laboars. 


.CD,  Google 


vniBTCBiP.]    THE  HACHINERT  OF  THE  CAUCUS  34& 

form."  Leaving  the  small  fry  of  the  Caucus  to  themselves  in 
the  daily  existence  of  the  Organization,  the  bigwigs  appetir  on 
the  scene  when  the  parliamentary  candidate  has  to  be  selected, 
and  on  these  occasions  they  weigh  more  or  less  heavily  on  the 
Associations,  especially  in  the  Liberal  camp,  to  such  an  extent 
that  they  may  be  considered  the  real  masters  of  the  Organizar 
tion.  In  the  Tory  Organizations  the  inherited  docility  of  their 
members  prevents  them  from  feeling  this  weight,  while  on  the 
Liberal  side  the  more  timorous  political  views  and  the  class 
feeling  of  the  plutocrats  naturally  conflict  with  the  more 
radical  inclinations  of  the  rank  and  file  of  the  party.  Never- 
theless, there  is  seldom  a  rupture  in  the  Liberal  Associations, 
both  because  the  rank  and  file  are  perfectly  well  aware  that 
without  the  money  of  the  middle-class  members,  the  Associa- 
tion of  the  party,  in  one  of  which  they  are  interested,  could 
not  be  carried  on,  and  aJso  owing  to  the  tendency  of  most  of 
the  members  of  the  Caucus  to  gravitate  in  the  social  orbit  of 
these  middle-class  people,  a  tendency  which  the  latter  carefully 
foster,  as  we  shall  see  before  long. 

When  one  speaks  of  the  bulk  of  the  Caucus  members,  it  is 
not  popular  masses  that  are  really  in  question.  Considering 
their  enormous  numerical  preponderance  and  the  democratic 
basis  of  the  Caucus,  it  is  they  who  ought  to  supply  its  main 
contingents  and  constitute  its  motive  power;  but,  in  reality,  this 
is  not  the  case.  True,  every  Association  includes  many  mem- 
bers who  are  workmen  by  trade,  often  even  they  form  the 
majority  in  the  "  hundreds,"  but  they  are  hardly  representative 
of  the  working  classes,  who,  taken  as  a  whole,  give  the  Caucus 
a  decidedly  wide  berth.  The  ward  meetings  or  the  meetings  of 
the  "  hundreds  "  and  all  that  goes  on  there  have  absolutely  no 
attraction  for  them.  The  consciousness  of  themselves,  of  their 
interests,  of  their  wants,  which  for  some  years  past  has  begun 
to  take  a  more  or  less  definite  shape  among  the  workmen,  dis- 
plays itself  more  in  the  sphere  of  social  claims  and  makes  even 
the  most  quick-witted  of  them  look  with  distrust  on  the  politi- 
cal Organizations  which  labour  exclusively  for  the  benefit  of 
their  respective  parties  or,  as  some  say,  of  the  capitalist  class. 
The  majority  who  think  little  or  not  at  all  cannot  or  will  not 
rouse  themselves  from  their  habitual  not  to  say  normal  condi- 
tion of  political  indifference.     In  short,  the  general  fact  is  that 


.coy  Google 


348  DEMOCRACY  AND  POLITICAL  PARTIES      [TBiRBPiRi 

the  great  mass  of  workingmen  come  into  contact  with  the 
Caucus  at  election  time  only. 

Having  thus  dealt  with  tlie  various  social  classes,  all  of 
which  we  have  seen  take  little  or  no  part  in  the  Caucus,  there 
remains  only  the  lower  middle-class  to  supply  the  framework 
of  its  oi^anization ;  and  as  a  matter  of  fact,  it  is  from  this  class 
that  the  men  who  keep  it  going  are  mainly  recruited.  Shop- 
keepers, clerks,  and  superior  artisans,  this  is  the  sphere  from 
which  most  of  the  active  members  of  the  Caucus  are  taken. 
Their  greater  eagerness  to  join  in  it  has  a  good  deal  to  do  with 
their  moral  position  in  English  society.  In  the  absence  of 
legal  barriers  between  the  classes,  the  social  life  of  England 
divides  them  in  a  harder  and  faster  way  than  any  legislation 
could  have  done.  The  gradations  of  wealth  and  of  social  rela- 
tions, so  long  considered  as  almost  physical  lines  of  demarca- 
tion in  England,  are  still  far  from  having  lost  this  meaning  in 
the  English  society  of  the  present  day,  engaged  though  it  be 
in  democratizing  its  institutions.  The  parliamentary  Reform 
of  18^2,  and  the  great  rise  of  industry  and  commerce  from  and 
after  1846,  had  thrown  open  the  doors  of  "society"  to  the 
upper  section  of  the  middle  class,  to  the  manufacturers  and 
the  merchants.  Those  who  came  next  to  them  in  the  social 
scale,  especially  the  small  tradesmen,  the  shopkeepers,  were 
left  out  in  the  cold  and  treated  rather  as  social  pariahs.  The 
shopkeeper  was  despised  in  the  first  place  because  he  was  only 
a  shopkeeper,  then  because  as  such  he  was  bound  to  have  bad 
manners,  and  again  because  he  bad  not  even  a  decent  religion ; 
he  was  almost  always  a  Dissenter,  he  attended  the  services  of 
&  man  who  was  not  a  gentleman,  who  had  not  in  his  young 
days  taken  honours  at  Oxford  or  joined  in  athletic  sports  with 
young  men  of  good  family  at  Cambridge,  like  the  Rector  or 
Vicar  of  the  parish.  In  proportion  as  political  reforms  made 
him  the  equal  of  this  privileged  order  in  the  State  and  the 
levelling  tendencies  of  economic  life  decreased  the  distance 
between  them  in  society,  the  shopkeeper  grew  more  and  more 
anxious  to  step  across  the  social  barrier  which  confronted  him, 
or,  to  use  the  English  expression,  to  "force  himself  into 
society."  The  Reform  Bill  of  1867,  by  giving  him  the  parlia- 
mentary franchise,  undoubtedly  raised  him  in  the  social  scale, 
but   the  exercise   of  his   electoral  right  was  necessarily  an 


.coy  Google 


ptBiTCBAP.]     THE   MACHINEBT  OF  THE   CAUCCS  S4T 

isolated  act  r  the  opportunity  of  voting  recurs  only  once  every 
five  or  six  years.  The  sphere  and  the  duration  of  the  activity 
offered  by  the  Caucus  was  much  more  extensive:  it  set  up  a 
miniature  parliament,  the  members  of  which  were  always  in 
full  view  of  their  feliow-citizens  and  invested  with  powers  of 
some  importance,  extending  to  politics  in  its  higher  aspects. 
The  sm^  middle-class  man  therefore  readily  availed  him- 
self of  the  opportunity  of  rising  and  he  speedily  manc^ed  to 
acquire  a  constantly  increasing  share  in  the  government  of  the 
party  Associations.  It  is  by  no  means  uncommon  to  see,  both 
in  England  and  Scotland,  the  caucuses  of  large  towns  controlled 
by  men  who  only  yesterday  were  nobodies,  and  whose  claims 
to  the  distinction  it  would  be  very  difficult  to  specify.  Their 
ofBce  soon  gives  them  a  certain  social  position,  even  their  name 
gains  in  syllabic  importance,  from  the  Tom  Brown  or  Bill 
Smith  which  they  were  for  the  neighbours  of  their  ward  or 
street  they  blossom  out  into  Thomas  Robinson  Brown,  Esq.,  or 
William  Wellworth  Smith,  Esq.  Once  raised  to  the  rank  of 
local  notables  they  are  ripe  for  municipal  honours,  and  through 
the  Caucus  they  obtain  easy  admittance  into  the  Town  Council 
or  other  local  elective  bodies. 

In  the  Tory  Caucus  the  lower  mitMIe  class,  important  as  its 
position  is,  plays  a  more  retiring  pari;  than  in  the  Liberal  Or- 
ganization, The  Organization  of  the  Tories  having  been  pre- 
eminently centralizing  and  aristocratic  in  the  old  days,  not 
only  the  lower  middle  class,  but  even  the  upper  stratum  of  that 
class  was  left  outside ;  it  was  therefore  its  turn  to  come  in  first, 
and  it  did  so,  as  we  have  seen  from  the  historical  sketch  of  the 
Tory  Democratic  movement,  partly  by  the  channel  of  the  new 
representative  Organizations.  Then  the  lower  middle  class  is 
much  weaker  numerically  in  the  Tory  than  in  the  Liberal 
camp,  for  the  condition  of  social  inferiority  in  which  it  was 
kept  threw  it  into  the  arms  of  the  party  of  attack,  of  the 
Liberals  rather  than  of  the  Conservatives.  Finally,  there  is 
a  reason  of  another  kind  for  the  smaller  importance  of  the 
lower  middle  class  in  the  Tory  Organization :  to  outstrip  the 
Liberals,  the  Tories  take  a  great  deal  of  trouble  to  secure 
the  workingmen  and  are  ready  to  give  the  artisans  who  influ- 
ence their  surroundings  a  large  share  in  the  Associations. 


.coy  Google 


DEMOCBACT  AND  POLITICAL  PARTIKS      [ti 


VI 

The  station  of  life  from  which  the  great  majority  of  the 
caucus-men  are  taken  is  enough  to  show  that  their  intellectual 
standard  is  not  a  very  high  one.  For  the  most  part  worthy 
people,  earning  their  livelihood  honestly  and  laboriously  as 
shopkeepers  or  in  trades,  they  are  generally  devoid  of  enlight- 
enment. Their  political  horizon  ia  estremely  narrow,  and  they 
can  scarcely  widen  it  by  common  efforts  and  reciprocal  influ- 
ence, for  the  display  and  practice  of  which  the  Association 
should  offer  an  opportunity,  as  the  circle  formed  by  the  ward 
meetings  is  deserted  by  people  of  higher  rank.  Called  upon  to 
produce  or  single  out  the  men  who  are  to  govern  the  Organiza- 
tion of  the  party,  they  bring  to  the  discharge  of  the  task  a 
criterion  which  presents  a  curious  mixture  of  notions  of  re- 
spectability and  political  devotion.  Their  aspirations  in  private 
life,  their  daily  struggles  of  small  tradespeople  with  the  ambi- 
tion of  becoming  a  little  better  off  and  acquiring  the  dignity 
conferred  thereby,  incline  them  to  look  with  respect  and  admi- 
ration on  those  who  are  a  few  steps  higher  than  themselves. 
The  common  political  creed  enhances  these  feelings,  and  sup- 
plies, so  to  bpeak,  a  rational  justification  for  them.  Conse- 
quently in  the  e^  cs  of  many  a  member  of  the  ward  meeting, 
the  most  eminent  individual  is  the  local  bigwig  who  com- 
bines the  requisite  qualities  of  respectability  with  loyalty 
to  the  I'arty,  nho  has  jierhaps  a  narrow  mind,  but  an  open, 
hand,  who  subscnbes  liberally  to  the  local  charities,  and  whom 
the  "party  can  depend  upon."  They  "look  up  to  him,"  to 
use  the  characteristic  English  expression,  quite  spontaneously, 
and  are  convinced  that  nature  herself  meant  him  for  their 
chairman  or  president.  As  regards  the  other  leading  members 
of  the  Organization,  such  a  combination  of  excellences  cannot, 
of  course,  he  expected  in  their  case,  but  they  are  bound  at  all 
events  to  display  a  quality  which  is  all  the  more  strictly  in- 
sisted on,  viz.  political  zeal.  The  conception  and  estimate  of 
this  quality  vary  with  the  different  temperament  of  those  who 
form  an  opinion  of  it,  presenting  tliemselves  especially  under 
two  a.spects  which  reflect  the  mental  condition  of  two  main' 
catogories  into  which  most  of  the  frequenters  of  ward  meetings 
are  divided.    The  one  is  composed  of  restless  beings  who  court 


.coy  Google 


uttsrcHAP.]    THE  MACHINERY  OF  THE  CAUCUS  819 

opportunities  of  acting,  of  holding  forth,  of  imitating,  on  no 
matter  what  subject,  and  for  whom  this  is  not  only  a  pleasure 
but  a  necessity.  This  category  produces  the  militants,  the  fight- 
ing men,  the  orators.  Endowed  with  an  inexhaustible  flow  of 
words  and  with  an  imperturbable  assurance,  they  intervene  at 
every  turn,  and  do  not  fail  to  make  au  impression  on  a  good  many 
of  their  colleagues.  Side  by  side  with  them  there  is  the  calm 
and  sedate  section.  Their  political  creed  is  more  internal  than 
external,  and  encompassing  it  with  the  uniform  and  regular 
devotion  of  a  cult,  they  really  mingle  with  it  something  of  theii 
Church  religiousness,  which  is  made  up  of  a  certain  amount  of 
sentiment  and  a  good  deal  of  ritual  routine,  the  strict  observ- 
ance of  which  constitutes  the  just  and  God-fearing  man  in  their 
eyes.  Being  attuned  to  this  moral  pitch,  they  are  naturally 
disposed  to  consider  the  turners  of  the  party  praying- wheels, 
who  are  to  be  found  in  every  Organization,  as  the  most  worthy 
priests  of  the  political  divinity.  These  are  first  and  foremost 
the  persons  who  attract  attention  by  their  assiduity;  they 
never  mias  a  meeting,  they  are  always  there  as  if  on  duty,  one 
is  sure  to  find  them  in  their  places,  in  the  front  row.  They 
follow  the  proceedings  of  the  meetings,  and  intervene  in  them 
with  the  regularity  of  automatons.  Does  somebody  make  a 
proposal  which  in  accordance  with  established  practice  must 
be  seconded  by  another  member,  one  of  this  assiduous  con- 
tingent rises  as  if  touched  by  a  spring,  and  declares  with  his 
most  solemn  air  that  he  seconds  it.  Is  there  a  motion  to  be 
brought  forward  or  other  business  of  a  formal  nature  to  be 
taken  up,  these  personages  can  invariably  be  depended  on. 
This  alacrity  and  assiduity  commend  themselves  to  many  of 
the  frequenters  of  the  ward  meetings  as  much  as  the  passionate 
ardour  of  the  others;  in  their  eyes  it  is  unimpeachable  proof 
of  political  zeal  and  the  criterion  of  an  "  earnest  politician." 

These  two  main  categories  which  the  ward  meetings  put  for- 
ward to  serve  in  the  "  hundreds  "  and  in  the  committees  of  the 
Organization,  the  restless  and  the  staid  members,  supply  the 
Caucus,  the  small  group  of  leaders  which  arises  within  it,  with 
a  material  which  is  most  valuable  Ijecause  it  is  mouldable  in 
the  highest  degree.  Different  and  even  diametrically  opposed 
temperaments,  they  have  this  property  in  common,  that  they 
are  ready  to  receive  an  impulse  and  not  to  give  it.    The  former, 


.coy  Google 


360  DEMOCRACY  AND  POLITICAL  PARTIES     [thihd  Pi»T 

who  are  only  too  delighted  to  start,  gu  off  at  full  gallop  at  the 
first  touch  of  the  spur,  prepared  to  run  down  and  trample  on 
everything  which  crosses  their  path.  The  latter,  whose  mood 
is  anything  bnt  adventurous  aixl  headstrong,  are  never  safer 
than  when  walking  in  the  beaten  track.  Men  of  these  types, 
when  brought  together  in  fixed  grooves  and  for  a  public  object, 
spontaneously  create  an  atmosphere  eminently  favourable  to 
the  growth  of  an  uncompromising  and  inflexible  political  ortho- 
doxy. Hut  their  orthodoxy,  springing  as  it  does  from  their 
temperament,  is  not  immured  in  an  unchangeable  creed,  in  a 
series  of  unalterable  propositions,  to  which  the  mind,  with  more 
or  less  discernment,  binds  itself  in  perpetuity.  It  is  rather  a 
mental  condition,  a  constant  inclination  towards  conformity 
with  the  attitude  of  those  who  are  supposed  to  be  the  deposi- 
taries of  the  faith.  It  is  like  a  river-bed  with  steep  banks 
which  receives  and  holds  the  streams  descending  from  the 
heights  above.  Uubendiug  in  its  course,  the  orthodoxy  is 
variable  as  regards  its  contents.  A  fresh  strong  current  can  re- 
new and  change  them  to  such  an  extent  as  to  make  the  devotees 
burn  their  idols  of  the  day  before,  in  the  very  name  of  this 
orthodoxy.  To  take  an  example  in  the  recent  life  of  the  cau- 
cuses :  before  1886  all  the  Liberal  Associations  were  opposed 
to  the  Irish  claims.  Sympathy  for  Ireland  in  a  public  man  was 
an  unpardonable  crime  in  their  eyes,  as  we  know  by  the  history 
of  Joseph  Cowen.  The  question  of  self-government  for  Ire- 
land could  hardly  be  discussed  even.  In  a  large  town  of  the 
north,  at  the  "  Liberal  900 ,"  a  member  of  Irish  extraction  one 
day  brought  forward  a  motion  in  favour  of  Home  Rule,  and, 
with  the  exception  of  his  seconder,  not  a  single  person  was 
found  in  the  whole  assembly  to  support  it.  A  few  months 
afterwai-ds  all  the  caucuses  were  fighting  for  Home  Rule  with 
a  veritable  frenzy,  and  denouncing  every  opponent  of  the  Irish 
Bill  as  a  traitor  to  Liberalism  and  almost  to  humanity. 

When  imbued  with  party  orthodoxy,  this  twofold  tempera- 
ment, impulsive  and  inert,  makes  spontaneity  and  independence 
of  movement  as  well  as  the  spirit  of  initiative  and  criticism  out 
of  the  question.  All  tlie  more  strongly  does  it  kick  against 
criticism  from  others,  against  opposition.  Opposition  irritates 
and  offends  one  section  like  an  obstacle  which  stops  them  in 
their  course;  it  destroys  the  peace  of  mind  of  the  others  by 


.coy  Google 


riisTciiAf.]    THE  MACHIMBRT  OF  THE  CAUCUS  361 

exposing  them  to  the  risk  of  having  to  take  their  own  line. 
Consequently,  as  we  have  also  seen  from  examples  of  the  in- 
tolerance and  the  unfouipromising  ways  of  the  caucuses  on 
many  occasions,  contradiction  or  free  criticism  had  and  still 
.  have  difticulty  in  obt^uing  a  hearing.  A  man  who  adopts  an 
independent  attitude  or  looks  at  things  from  his  own  point  of 
view  in  the  Caucus  genei-atly  finds  himself  in  such  an  extremely 
small  minority  that  he  only  succeeds  in  making  himself  ridicu- 
lous. If  he  does  not  yield  to  discouragement  himself,  he  is 
easily  and  quickly  made  to  do  so.  The  turners  of  the  party 
pray ing-w heels  of  a  higher  rank  in  the  "hundreds,"  the  peremp- 
tory henchmen  of  the  Caucus,  make  short  work  of  him,  and  the 
rest  add  their  Amen  with  the  conviction  of  regular  worshippers 
or  of  crowds  which  re-echo  the  cheer  which  has  burst  from  the 
foremost  ranks. 

The  caucuses,  however,  were  and  are  true  to  the  situation 
in  looking  on  objectors  as  wet  blankets,  for  a  gathering  of 
the  "hundreds"  cannot  be  a  debating  arena,  it  is  too  large 
for  that  A  collection  of  several  hundreds  of  persons  like 
that  of  ward  delegates  whose  intellectual  discipline  and 
dialectical  habits  necessarily  leave  a  good  deal  to  be  desired, 
sinks  inevitably  into  a  crowd,  a  mob.  It  is  only  capable 
of  showing  approval  or  disapproval  and  can  never  elaborate 
ideas.  Consequently,  as  soon  as  the  "  hundreds "  felt  their 
way,  they  lost  the  quality  of  deliberative  bodies  with  which 
they  were  invested  by  theory  and  became  demonstrative 
assemblies. 

This  character  of  the  "hundreds"  naturally  communicates  it- 
self to  the  eloquence  of  the  speakers  at  these  meetings,  they 
aim  more  at  efEect  and  at  strength  of  language  than  at  the  per- 
suasive efficacy  of  argument.  The  elements  of  which  the  meet- 
ings are  habitually  composed  help  to  pitch  the  key  of  the 
speeches :  as  the  personages  high  in  the  social  scale  who  belong 
to  the  Organization  hardly  ever  come  to  the  ordinary  meetings, 
the  rank  and  file  can  throw  off  all  restraint  and  they  give  free 
vent  to  their  ardour  and  expend  it  in  language  which  is  all  the 
more  forcible  because  as  often  as  not  they  will  have  to  carry 
out  the  wishes  of  the  magnates  who  hold  the  purse-strings  of 
the  Organization.  In  addition  to  this,  in  the  Liberal  caucuses 
there  is  a  special  element  which  cultivates,  by  vocation  so  to 


.coy  Google 


362  DEMOCRACY  AND  POLITICAL  PARTIES       [third  rtn 

speak,  a  veli^ment  and  aggressive  style,  to  wit,  the  Noncon- 
formist deacons  and  preachers,  who  are  generally  laymen  with 
a  small  shop  or  in  some  other  humble  walk  of  life  and  who 
preach  on  Sundays  or  at  religious  evening  meetings.  Ranking 
amongst  the  most  conspicuous  speakers  at  the  Caucus,  they 
serve  it  with  the  sharp*dged  oratorical  weapons  which  they 
are  accustomed  to  use  against  their  professional  enemy,  the 
devil. 

Given  these  intellectual  and  moral  tendencies  of  most  of  the 
members  of  the  "  huudreda,"  so  unfavourable  to  spontaneous 
and  independent  actios,  this  obliteration  of  the  deliberative 
character  of  great  Caucus  gatherings  unable  to  stand  the  shock 
of  ideas,  and  finally  the  organization  of  authority  in  the  Asso- 
ciations resulting  in  "inner  circles"  formed  by  an  unceasing 
process  of  filtiation  or  natural  selection,  it  is  hardly  possible 
for  the  "  hundreds "  to  be  really  anything  but  registering  as- 
semblies, for  their  proceedings  not  to  be  arranged  beforehand, 
or,  to  adopt  the  slang  political  term  used  to  describe  them, 
"  cut  and  dried."  In  the  ward  we  have  already  seen  the  ward 
secretary  surrounded  by  his  ring  of  associates  concocting  the 
business  of  the  party  behind  the  scenes.  The  same  thing  is 
repeated  at  every  stage  of  the  Organization;  throughout  it  is 
regularly  done  by  a  handful  of  persons  known  in  the  language 
of  the  day  by  the  name  of  wire-pullers.  The  ward  secretary 
is  their  prototype  who  attains  his  highest  development  at  the 
centre  of  the  Caucus,  where  Ike  wire-pullers,  those  who  almost 
alone  deserve  this  signiticant  title,  conduct  their  operations. 
They  lean  on  the  ward  wire-pullers  while  they  themselves  are 
linked  to  the  central  London  Organization  as  it  were  by  elec- 
tric currents  which  the  wire-pullers  of  the  Great  Caucus  set  in 
motion  in  their  turn.  Thus  the  whole  O^anization  eventually 
ends  in  being  a  hierarchy  of  wire-pullers. 

VII 

But  being,  as  they  are,  of  different  rank  and  social  position, 
what  induces  them  to  combine  for  common  action  ?  What  is 
it  that  impels  them  to  draw  near  to  each  other,  the  middle- 
class  magnat«s,  the  head  wire-pullers,  and  the  small  fry  of  the 


.coy  Google 


riUToBAP.]    THE  MACUINEKY  OF  THE  CAUCUS  868 

wards  ?  Where  is  the  motive  power  which  seta  them  going  ? 
It  resides  in  the  two  feelings  which  between  them  generally  fill 
the  human  mind  —  the  feeling  of  duty  and  that  of  self-love. 
We  have  already  obtained  glimpses  of  this  among  the  oaucus- 
nien  when  studying  their  temperament^  their  natural  tendencies. 
The  Organization  fosters  and  develops  these  feelings  so  as  to 
make  them  a  living  and  acting  force.  To  the  solicitude  for 
interests  other  than  one's  own,  to  the  devotion  to  something 
higher  than  one's  self  which  every  human  being  feels  the  need 
of  displaying,  the  political  Organization  offers  the  party  for  an 
object,  as  alone  able  to  make  the  country,  the  nation,  happy. 
And  this  premise  being  accepted  by  the  elector  through  the 
fact  of  his  joining  the  Association,  the  latter  converts  his 
natural  feeling  of  duty  into  political  duty,  and  having  con- 
stituted itself  the  guardian  thereof,  extracts  from  it  obliga- 
tions towards  itself.  The  members  of  the  party  higher  in 
the  social  scale  who  are  supposed  to  have  political  convic- 
tions, or  even  political  knowledge,  derive  more  or  less  spon- 
taneously from  them  the  stimulus  to  action  on  behalf  of  the 
party,  the  willingness  to  devote  themselves  to  the  work  of 
the  Organization,  including  even  the  least  attractive  jobs  of  the 
party;  but  for  the  average  individual  who  forms  the  bulk  of 
the  Caucus  contingents,  the  abstract  notion  of  duty  would  not 
be  enough.  The  Organization  of  the  party  supplements  it 
therefore  after  the  fashion  of  ecclesiastical  Organizations, 
of  Churches,  which  in  order  to  keep  the  faithful  in  the  proper 
path  make  them  join  in  observances  instituted  for  their  sake. 
Similarly  the  Caucus  inculcates  their  duty  on  its  members  by, 
to  use  a  more  profane  term,  regular  performances.  Tbese  are 
in  the  first  place  the  periodical  gatherings;  then  the  extra- 
ordinary meetings  on  questions  which  come  before  Parliament 
or  public  opinion,  or  for  the  reception  of  a  political  personage 
who  is  visiting  the  locality,  or  of  the  Member  for  the  constitu- 
ency who  is  to  make  a  speech ;  demonstrations  organized  in  con- 
nection with  an  important  event ;  or  fetes  and  cutertainmenta. 
We  already  know  by  what  we  have  seen  in  the  first  grade  of 
the  Organization,  in  the  wards,  what  great  importance  the 
Caucus  attaches  to  its  members  assembling  methodically,  how 
it  encourages  them  to  meet  simply  for  the  purpose  of  being 
together.    The  same  system  is  pursued  with  regard  to  the 


.coy  Google 


aw  DEMOCRACY  AND  POLITICAL  PARTIES      [thibd  paki 

"hundreds."  Every  Organization  which  works  well  tries  to 
multiply  the  opportunities  and  pretexts  for  meetings,  and  their 
frequency  is  one  of  the  beat  proofs  of  its  vitality.  It  is  of  no 
consequence  if  the  discussion  does  not,  as  has  been  pointed 
out,  fuliil  the  required  conditions;  the  great  thing  for  those 
present  is  not  to  exchange  ideas  or  engage  in  di^ectical  en- 
counters, but  to  feel  that  they  are  a  crowd,  to  lead  each  other 
on,  to  rouse  and  excite  one  another. 

The  great  difficulty  which  the  caucuses  experience  in  carry- 
ing out  this  mental  drill  is  in  the  first  place  the  apathy  of  the 
electors,  with  which  every  political  organization  has  to  con- 
tend ;  but  it  lies  above  all  in  the  fact  that  the  normal  duties 
of  the  Associations  do  not  take  up  enough  time  to  adequately 
serve  the  purpose.  And  it  is  partly  from  the  natural  necessity 
of  filling  the  vacuum,  and  not  only  from  infatuation,  that  the 
Associations  do  not  rest  content  with  the  work  of  organi- 
zation proper,'  but  meddle  with  politics  on  a  large  scale.  On 
the  pretext  of  giving  expression  to  the  ideas  of  the  party  on 
the  questions  of  the  day,  they  had  at  axk  early  stage  begun 
to  seize  every  opportunity  of  sitting  in  judgment  and  pro- 
nouncing sentence.  At  one  time  the  subject  is  supplied  them 
by  the  attitude  of  the  Ministry  on  this  or  that  question,  at 
another  by  the  conduct  of  the  Opposition;  sometimes  it  is 
the  speech  delivered  by  one  statesman,  sometimes  the  Bill 
brought  forward  by  another.  A  meeting  is  held,  a  debate, 
confined  to  what  is  needful  or  travelling  beyond  it,  takes 
place,  and  a  resolution  is  solemnly  passed.  This  performance 
is  one  of  the  favourite  pastimes  of  the  caucuses.  It  helps 
them  to  fill  up  their  spare  moments  and  at  the  same  time 
feeds  within  the  members'  breasts  the  sacred  flame  of  the 
party  interests  which  they  think  are  entrusted  to  their  keep- 
ing. The  passing  of  the  resolution,  which  generally  does  not 
mince  matters,  furnishes  them  and  everybody  else  with  evi- 
dence of  their  acuteness  and  their  energy,  and  imbues  them 
with  the  pleasing  consciousness  of  having  discharged  an  im- 
portant duty. 

For  even  among  the  least  self-seeking  members  of  the  Caucus 
the  preoccupations  of  amour-propre  are  closely  connected  with 
the  feeling  of  duty,  just  as  with  the  general  run  of  men  the 
two  feelings  are  grafted  on  and  intertwined  with  one  anothei 


.coy  Google 


riRNCHAP.]     THE  MACHINERY  OF  THE  CAUCUS  366 

when  it  is  not  the  first  which,  as  is  more  often  the  case,  alone 
supplies  the  sap  and  produces  the  plant.  In  like  manner, 
when  it  is  not  by  the  bait  of  a  duty  to  be  performed  ot  by  the 
illusion  of  a  duty,  it  is  by  procuring  its  members  satisfactions 
of  amour^ropre,  which  eaGoura:ge  or  flatter  their  more  or  less 
legitimate  or  more  or  less  frivolous  and  vulgar  pretensions 
and  aspirations,  that  the  Caucus  keeps  a  hold  on  its  men. 
These  satisfactions  of  different  kinds  form  a  sort  of  scale,  cor- 
responding with  the  grades  into  which  the  staff  of  the  Caucus 
is  divided.  First  comes  the  enjoyment  of  power,  of  influence, 
of  the  pleasure  of  dabbling  in  important  ^airs.  While  very 
fond  of  it  themselves,  the  head  wire-pullers,  in  order  to  suo< 
ceed,  are  obliged  to  let  the  small  locaJ  leaders  have  a  taste  of 
it.  And  with  this  view  they  "consult"  them,  and  by  asking 
their  advice  and  their  consent  on  matters  generally  decided 
beforehand  by  a  few  persons,  they  give  them  the  illusion  that 
it  is  they,  the  small  leaders  of  wards,  who  are  the  real  masters. 
To  the  enjoyment  of  power  often  wielded  behind  the  scenes 
are  added  the  visible  ifistinctions  which  it  procures  or  confers. 
For  the  higher  order  of  wire-pullers  these  consist  of  public 
dignities,  for  some,  perhaps,  of  admission  to  the  House  of 
Commons,  with  the  two  magic  letters  "M.P."  after  their 
name;  but  much  more  often  it  is  two  other  letters,  of  more 
modest  appearance,  which  are  the  reward  of  a  prominent  local 
wire-puller,  —  "  J.P.,"  —  which  stands  for  Justice  of  the  Peace. 
For  some  time  past,  in  fact,  this  honorary  ofBce  has  been  & 
sort  of  political  current  coin  for  recompensing  party  services, 
and  it  is  sometimes  demanded  as  a  due  or  even  made  a  con< 
dition  of  the  applicant's  co^Jperation.'  Although  more  com- 
mon, the  title  of  "J.P."  cannot  be  very  widely  distributed 
(the  number  of  Justices  of  the  Peace  appointed  every  year 
is  barely  a  thousand),  but  for  one  person  who  wins  the  prize 
there  are  five-and-twenty  who  hope  to  get  it.  The  great  ob- 
ject of  the  party  Organization  is,  of  course,  to  raise  hopes 

1  In  the  towns  the  appolntmentg  ol  Jaaticea  ot  the  Peace  have  kliraya  been 
aCFecled  by  political  conalderntions,  hut  party  spirit  did  not  mn  so  high  oa 
the  subject  as  it  hsa  done  for  the  last  ten  rears.  The  appolntmentg  tor  the 
towns  were  often  made  alter  tnkiuj;  the  opiniaD  ot  the  Town  Council.  Th« 
Town  CouQclls  are  no  longer  consulted,  and  it  is  the  recommendations  ot 
the  part;  Organizations  which  determine  the  choice  made  b;  Uie  Lord  Chan- 
cellor (who  changes  wltb  the  party  in  power). 


.coy  Google 


sea  DEMOCRACY-  AMD  POLITICAL  PARTIE8      [thibo  Pabt 

in  the  breasts  of  as  many  people  as  posaible.  Their  veraion 
of  the  classic  divide  el  im}>era  is:  hold  out  hopes  if  you  wiah 
to  reign. 

The  dignity  of  J. P.  is  generally  reserved,  even  in  the 
towns,  where  there  is  no  property  qualification  for  it  as  in  the 
counties,  for  the  members  of  the  well-to-do  middle  class  which 
load  the  Organization  of  the  party  (the  last  Lii>eral  Goveru- 
ment  raised  several  workiugmen  to  this  oSicc).  To  the  others, 
and  esi)rcially  to  the  lower  middle  class,  whose  important  posi- 
tion in  the  Caucus  we  have  noticed,  the  latter  brings  consider- 
ation in  a  less  direct  but  very  real  way.  In  examining  the 
social  elements  which  go  to  make  up  the  Caucus,  we  have  seen 
how  the  small  middle-class  man  grows  in  importance,  mounts 
the  social  ladder  in  his  own  fashion,  develops  from  Bill 
Smith  into  ^Villiam  Wellworth  Smith,  Esq.,  or  even  becomes  a 
Town  Councillor,  thanks  to  the  Caucus  which  introduces  him 
into  public  life. 

Besides  the  influence,  genuine  or  illusory,  and  the  consider- 
ation which  the  caucus-man  derives,  or  thinks  he  derives, 
directly  from  his  title  of  member  of  the  "hundreds,"  the  bulk 
of  his  colleagues  appreciate  just  as  much  the  satisfaction  of 
being  in  good  company  within  the  Association,  which  perhaps 
contains  more  than  one  person  belonging  to  the  upper  ranks 
of  the  middle  class,  and,  generally  speaking,  leading  men. 
Hence  the  importance  (exhibited  on  the  occasion  of  the  crisis 
of  liJSG),  for  the  Association  of  having  some  respectable  mem- 
bers,—  they  are  a  sort  of  magnet  which  draws  the  vul^ra 
pecus.  And  this  is  also  why  it  has  been  noted  that  the  personal 
position  of  the  President,  with  his  qualities  of  respectability, 
is  all-important  for  ensuring  the  loyalty  of  the  members  to  the 
Association. 

Even  these  motives,  however,  are  of  too  abstract  a  nature 
for  many  of  the  members  of  the  Association;  in  their  case 
there  is  added  the  attraction  of  personal  contact  with  the 
local  swells  of  the  party,  into  which  they  are  brought  by 
virtue  of  their  position  in  the  Caucus.  This  contact  arises, 
perhaps,  at  very  long  intervals,  and  is  not  always  direct;  but 
that  makes  it  all  the  more  appreciated.  To  stimulate  the  zeal 
of  its  "workers,"  the  Association  puts  them  in  the  way  of 
such  meetings.     It  invites  them  on  certain  days  or  gives  them 


.coy  Google 


viBaToup.J     THE  MACHIHBRT  Or  THE  CAUCUS  367 

a  permanent  ticket  of  admission,'  to  tlie  great  local  club  of 
the  party  frequented  by  the  richest,  consequently,  in  their 
eyes,  the  most  eminent  Liberals  or  Conservatives;  and  not 
only  by  those  who  belong  to  the  Association,  but  by  a  good 
many  others  who  do  not  deign  to  take  an  interest  in  the  hum- 
bler work  of  the  party,  but  who  use  the  club  for  the  sake  of 
the  comfort  and  other  advantages  which  it  offers.  The  small 
folk  of  the  ward  —  office-bearers  of  the  Caucus  —  can  thus 
breathe  the  atmosphere  of  this  highly  select  circle,  and,  dressed 
in  their  best  clothes,  sit  in  a  good  armchair  and  smoke  their 
cigarette  on  even  terms  with  the  real  members  of  the  club, 
or  even  do  bo  in  their  immediate  society,  "  have  a  smoke  with 
them,"  and  exchange  a  few  remarks  with  them  into  the  bai^ 
gain.  Finally,  from  time  to  time  the  members  are  entertained 
at  receptions  or  parties  given  specially  and  excluBively  for 
their  benefit,  such  as  the  "soirees,"  or  "teas,"  which  the  Presi- 
dent of  the  Association  graciously  offers  in  his  drawing-room 
or  in  his  garden,  or  iiiefitea  and  picnics  organized  by  the  Abso- 
ciatiOQ. 

AH  these  satisfactions  of  amour-propre  have  the  effect  of 
overcoming  in  people  who  are  alive  to  them  their  indifference 
or  lukewarmness  in  regard  to  the  affairs  of  the  party,  which 
forthwith  become  tbeir  affairs,  or  of  intensifying  the  zeal  of 
those  who  are  "  politicians  "  by  temperament.  The  honour  con- 
ferred on  both  sections,  the  dignity  with  which  they  are  in- 
vested, put  them  under  obligations  to  the  party,  saddle  them 
with  responsibility  to  its  Organization.  It  is  this  combination 
of  feelings  that  the  managers  of  the  Caucus  trade  upon.  And 
if  the  Councils  of  the  Associations  are  so  large  as  to  reach  the 
total  of  six  hundred  or  eight  hundred  members  and  more,  if 
their  numbers  have  been  repeatedly  increased  it  is  due  to  this 
calculation  that,  by  bringing  honours  within  the  reach  of  a 
great  many  people,  their  services  are  likely  to  be  obtained. 

It  is  true  that  satisfactions  springing  from  gratified  self- 
esteem  or  from  the  fulfilment  of  public  duties  are  not  the 
only  advantages  which  the  personages  of  the  Caucus  gain  from 

'  SomelimM  known  by  Ibe  Dame  of  "  speciml  menibenibip  ticket,"  notablj 
among  tbe  Tories  n-ho  are  fond  of  smM  demarcations  nod  labeU,  and  dis- 
tributed pxnlculBrty  to  the  members  ot  llje  Caucus  who  perform  tbe  important 
dutla  o(  ward  BocreUries, 


.CD,  Google 


35B  DEMOCRACY  AND  POLITICAL  PARTIES      [ihibd  part 

their  position.  In  the  case  of  many  of  them  this  position  gives 
them  a  gratuitous  advertisement  in  their  business;  by  their  ac- 
tivity in  the  Caucus  they  form  useful  connections  which  they 
would  not  have  acquii-ed  by  other  means.  Some  of  the  members 
of  the  "  hundreds  "  derive  more  direct  and  tangible  profits  from 
it  by  the  orders  which  they  receive  from  the  Association  itself. 
These  are  the  printers  and  other  trades-people,  such  as  licensed 
victuallers  and  purveyors  who  contract  for  the  fltes  and  picnics 
of  the  Organization.  Finally,  there  is  a  class  of  members  who 
make  a  little  money  in  a  still  less  indirect  way.  The  ward 
secretaries,  especially  among  the  Tories,  are  often  paid  a  little 
and  also  get  small  perquisites  out  of  the  money  allowed  them  for 
ofiRce  expenses,  etc.  A  greater  number,  as  will  be  seen  later  on, 
are  paid  by  the  day,  at  a  modest  rate,  for  the  work  done  for  the 
Association  and  the  party.  Here  f^iu  it  is  the  Tories,  much 
richer  than  their  rivals,  who  spend  the  most  money  in  this 
legitimate  or  illicit  manner.  But  when  all  is  said  and  done, 
the  members  of  the  English  Caucus  who  reap  material  benefit 
from  it,  in  one  form  or  another,  are  only  a  minority.  Most  of 
the  members  of  the  hundreds,  and  of  their  fellow-workers  in 
the  wards,  are  governed  by  considerations  which  are  more 
of  a  sentimental  description. 

The  task  of  the  wire-pullers,  who  are  expected  to  satisfy 
and  flatter  the  self-esteem  of  the  caucns-men,  has  also  its  in- 
verse side :  no  less  care  must  be  taken  not  to  offend  suscepti- 
bilities. Not  only  is  it  necessary,  as  in  every  human  society, 
to  reckon  with  the  moods,  the  passions,  the  individual  idiosyn- 
crasies, which  now  and  again  find  full  scope,  but  with  the  spe- 
cial touchiness  which  is  the  pendant  of  the  very  sentiments 
with  which  the  Caucus  inoculates  these  people  in  order  to 
keep  a  firmer  hold  on  them.  The  more  small  vanities  are 
flattered,  the  more  they  are  inclined  to  raise  their  heads.  The 
caucus-man  who  takes  himself  seriously,  or  thinks  himself  of 
importance,  is  naturally  jealous  of  his  dignity,  and  prompt  to 
take  offence.  In  the  great  towns  the  position  of  the  wire-pullers 
of  the  Caucus  in  this  respect  has  became  much  more  delicate 
since  1885,  in  consequence  of  the  subtlivision  o£  the  Organiza- 
tion into  several  divimonal  Associations,  because  this  transfor- 
mation hasincreased  the  number  of  small  important  personages 
who  have  to  be  managed.     It  appears  that  it  is  the  members 


.coy  Google 


FIRST  CHAP.]    THE   MACHINERY  OF  THE   CAUCUS  859 

belonging  to  the  working  class  who  exhibit  the  most  auscepti- 
bilityj  always  afraid  of  being  trifled  with  and  conscious  of 
the  strength  which  numbers  give  them  in  the  electorate,  they 
are  more  inclined  than  the  others  to  be  restive  without  rhyme 
or  reason.  To  cope  with  the  self-asserting  members  the  wire- 
pullers need  a  great  deal  of  skill,  tact,  and  sometimes  energy 
as  well.  They,  and  especially  the  Secretary  of  the  Organiza- 
tion, who  is  the  drudge  of  these  membera,  must  often  let  people 
talk  without  ever  allowing  them  to  go  further,  must  not  get 
angry  at  the  wrong  moment,  not  provoke  any  one,  and  in  gen- 
eral not  be  fussy.  It  is  the  inevitable  price  to  be  paid  for 
the  authority  wielded  by  them  over  the  members  of  the  Asso- 
ciation, just  as  the  latter  in  their  turn  cannot  escape  from 
the  obligations  inciunbent  on  them  with  regard  to  the  Caucus. 
There  is  a  tacit  agreement  between  them,  founded,  like  every 
contract,  on  the  principle  of  do  ul  des.  The  one  have  the 
uninterrupted  enjoyment  of  the  rights  corresponding  to  these 
obligations,  in  the  form  of  manifold  satisfactions  which  the 
Caucus  procures  them,  while  the  others,  the  managers  of  the 
Caucus,  receive  on  its  behalf  the  return,  which  is  the  absolute 
devotion  of  the  caucus-men  in  regard  to  the  Organization,  or, 
to  use  the  proper  term,  discijdine.  Here  we  have  the  gist,  the 
binding  clause  of  the  contract  in  question.  The  long  flowery 
preamble,  and  the  grand  oratorical  developments  of  the  agree- 
ment about  the  influence  of  the  masses,  the  autonomy  of  the 
party,  etc.,  as  well  as  the  commentaries  made  thereon  by  its 
skilful  expounders,  only  led  up  to  this  result.  There  is  no 
difference  in  this  respect  between  the  Liberal  and  the  Tory 
Organization,  except  perhaps  that  in  the  former  it  is  discipline 
witii  phrases,  and  in  the  latter  discipline  without  or  with  few 
phrases.  The  discipline,  in  fact,  is  almost  military.  Once  in 
the  ranks  the  caucus-man  must  obey  orders  and  faithfully  per- 
form the  part  assigned  to  him,  otherwise  he  is  summarily  dealt 
with ;  he  is  flung  back  into  the  crowd  from  out  of  which  the 
Caucus  had  taken  him. 

Discipline,  however,  cannot  be  absolute  in  the  Caucus.  First 
of  all  must  be  deducted  all  those  who  are  not  amenable  to  it 
by  temperament  as  opposed  to  the  majority  who  are  naturally 
disposed  to  submit  to  it  Some  of  them,  without  exactly  wish- 
ing to  stop  the  coach,  belong  to  the  category  of  individuals 


.coy  Google 


MO  DEHOCRACT  AND  POLITICAZ,  PARTIES     [thud  pibt 

who  can  never  be  satiBfied,  and  who  inBtiDctively  run  counter 
to  the  general  opinion.  The  others  are  men  of  really  inde- 
pendent mind  who  find  their  way,  although  in  exceptional 
instances,  into  the  "  hundreds,"  and  Bometimes  even  spring  up 
in  the  executive  oommitteeB-  If  these  disturbers  of  the  gen- 
eral harmony  oannot  be  brought  to  terms  or  silenced,  an  effort 
is  made  to  get  rid  of  them,  and  it  is  left  to  the  ingenuity  of 
the  wire-pullets  to  find  the  means  of  doing  it.  Both  catego- 
ries, however,  are  only  a  minority,  Bometimes  a  very  small 
one.  .  The  real  question  of  discipline  arises  in  regard  to  the 
majority.  Based  as  it  is  on  the  reciprocity  of  real  or  imagi- 
nary services  or  advantages,  discipline  here  too  oannot  be  so 
pe^ect  as  not  to  be  infringed.  There  can  always  be  per- 
sons who  consider  that  the  reciprocity  is  not  complete,  that 
the  saorifluBs  which  are  demanded  of  them  are  too  great.  No 
doubt  the  uncritical  and  sluggish  temperament  of  the  great 
majority  of  the  oaucus-men,  as  already  known  to  us,  is  not 
calculated  to  make  them  keep  their  eyes  fixed  on  the  oscilla- 
tion of  the  two  scales,  but  on  the  other  hand  there  is  too  large 
a  crop  of  local  jealousies,  petty  susceptibihties,  and  vulgar 
vanity  in  the  Cauous  for  these  not  to  show  themaelvea.  Ac- 
cordingly the  Caucus  has  its  mutinies,  which  break  out  from 
time  to  time  in  the  wards,  even  among  the  Tories  in  whom  the 
spirit  of  subordination  is  however  deeply  rooted.  The  acta  of 
indiscipline  or  attempts  at  revolt  sometimes  assume  a  general 
character,  being  committed  in  the  name  of  principles,  as  for 
instance  was  the  case  with  the  disputes  between  the  head  wire- 
pullers and  the  divisional  Associations  of  large  towns.  Some- 
times, and  more  often,  they  do  not  go  beyond  personal  dissatis- 
faction and  pique  breaking  out  in  a,  trivial  form,  which  reveals 
only  too  clearly  the  smallness  of  miud  and  obtuse  infatuation 
of  the  ordinary  caucus-man.  For  instance,  a  Chairman  of  a 
local  branch  of  the  Association  appears  at  a  great  meeting  of 
the  party  without  his  ticket,  which  he  has  obligingly  given  to 
a  friend ;  being  refused  admittance  by  the  doorkeeper,  who 
Sticks  to  his  orders,  he  flies  into  a  rage  with  the  Caucus  and 
sends  in  his  resignation.  Another  oauous-man  leaves  the 
Association  because  his  parliamentary  candidate  has  not  shaken 
hands  with  him.  But  after  all,  these  small  incidents  and  the 
quarrels  of  a  more  serious  nature  which  arise  in  the  Cauous  are 


.coy  Google 


wmtcbak]      the   machinery  OF  THE   CAUCUS  36] 

rather  the  exception  confiiming  the  rule  which  makes  discipline 
the  basis  of  the  Organization  and  the  principle  of  its  existence. 

This  iDtellectual  and  moral  temperament  of  most  of  the 
caucus-men  and  the  necessity  of  squaring  them  does  not  of 
course  make  the  Caucus  very  attractive  to  men  of  delicate  feel- 
ing, no  more  than  its  cut  and  dried  type  of  proceedings  has  any 
charm  for  independent  minds.  When  the  machine  of  the  Cau- 
cus began  to  work  with  a  certain  amount  of  regularity,  the 
position  of  supernumeraries  assigned  to  the  great  majority  of 
the  members  of  the  Association  soon  struck  men  of  an  inde- 
pendent  and  thoughtful  turn  of  mind,  especially  in  the  Libera] 
camp,  where  the  Organization,  being  of  older  standing,  devel- 
oped to  a  greater  extent  at  an  earlier  stage,  and  where  the  spirit 
of  criticism  and  of  doubt  is  more  widely  diffused.  At  the  same 
time  the  small  fry  of  the  wards  were  continually  rising  to  the 
surface.  The  consciousness  of  their  isolation  and  the  dislike 
of  promiscuity  felt  by  several  men  of  higher  position  made 
them  leave  the  Caucus,  and,  with  the  cooperation  of  events,  in 
most  localities  a  real  deterioration  in  the  quality  of  the  staff  of 
the  Organization  set  in,  including  even  the  wire-pullers  them- 
selves, to  such  an  extent  that  at  the  present  time  it  often  repre- 
sents, according  to  the  description  of  an  honorary  secretary  of 
an  Association,  "  anything  but  the  cream  of  society." 

The  events  which  had  contributed  to  this  result  were,  as  has 
been  said,  of  a  manifold  kind.  There  was  the  Home  Rule 
crisis,  which  served  as  a  more  or  less  plausible  pretext  to  many 
people  for  withdrawing  from  active  political  life.  Then  again 
in  the  large  towns  there  was  the  subdivision  of  the  party  Or- 
ganization into  several  divisional  Associations,  which  arose,  as 
we  have  already  seen,  out  of  the  establishment  of  single  mem- 
ber constituencies.  The  friction  which  ensued  on  this  occ* 
sion,  especially  on  the  Liberal  side,  between  the  new  Associa- 
tions and  the  general  Association  (of  the  town)  deprived  the 
caucuses  of  several  wire-pullers  of  a  superior  intellectual  and 
moral  stamp.  Some  retired  to  their  tents  disgusted  at  the  sus- 
picion with  which  they  were  regarded  by  the  politicians  of 
Dtviaions.  Others  did  the  same  because  they  considered  that 
their  position  in  the  Organization  was  not  good  enough ;  after 
having  dealt  with  the  affairs  of  the  party  for  the  whole  town 


.coy  Google 


8S2  DEMOCRACT  AND  POLITICAL  PARTIES      [thiid  fibt 

they  thought  it  a  come-down  to  take  the  same  place  in  a  Divia- 
ion.  All  these  withdrawals  left  the  local  element,  that  is  the 
ward  people,  whom  the  mere  subdivision  of  the  Organization 
invested  with  a  new  and  very  considerable  importance,  in  pos- 
session of  the  field.  This  tiansfonnation  at  once  raised  every 
ward  leader  from  being  tenth  or  fifteenth  at  Rome  to  being 
first  in  his  village.  Instead  of  one  Chairman  of  Association 
there  were  now  four,  five,  or  seven,  and  a  corresponding  num- 
ber of  Vice-Chairmen,  honorary  secretaries,  etc.  This  set  of 
small  personages  admitted  to  a  share  in  the  manj^ment  of 
the  party,  and  full  of  their  own  importance,  gave  a  marked 
impulse  to  a  parochial  spirit  of  a  narrow,  petty,  and  illiberal 
kind,  measuring  everjrtbing,  men  and  things,  by  its  own 
standard. 

VIII 
The  description  of  the  Organization  of  parties  which  has 
just  been  given  was  concemeii  with  its  predominant  type  aa 
developed  especially  in  the  "parliamentary  boroughs."  The 
towns  known  by  this  name  form,  as  we  are  aware,  a  class  of 
electoral  divisions  distinct  from  that  of  the  "  counties."  This 
duality  of  electoral  constituencies  is  an  outcome  of  the  special 
conditions  amid  which  popular  representation  grew  up  in  Eng> 
land.  When  summoning  representatives  from  the  shires,  which 
were  from  time  immemorial  the  great  local  politico-adminis- 
trative unit,  "  to  serve  in  Parliament,"  the  kings  also  singled 
out  certain  towns  which  were  to  return  members  to  the  House 
on  the  same  footing  aa  the  counties.  The  boroughs  which  were 
the  object  of  the  royal  favour  became,  at  the  end  of  the  parlia- 
mentary elections,  independent  of  the  counties  of  which  they 
geographically  formed  part.  All  the  other  towns  were  included 
in  the  "county  constituency,"  composed  of  the  geographical 
county  minus  the  "parliamentary  boroughs"  situated  within 
its  area.  When  the  Reform  Bill  of  1832  attacked  the  old 
electoral  edifice,  it  not  only  lowered  the  voting  qualification  but 
it  also  effected  a  readjustment  of  political  power  between  the 
towns  directly  represented  in  Parliament  and  those  which  were 
not  so;  by  means  of  a  "redistribution  of  seats"  it  gave  a 
special  representition  to  a  good  many  towns  which  had  become 
(^  importance,  notably  in  consequence  of  the  wonderful  rise 


.coy  Google 


MMTCH»p.]    THE  MACHINERY  OF  THE  CAUCUS  363 

of  industry,  and  disfranchised  the  insigniBcant  and  decayed 
boroughs  (rotten  boroughs)  which  had  returned  Members 
by  virtue  of  their  historic  right.  Stiipped  of  their  repre- 
sentation, these  boroughs  were  "  merged  in  the  counties,"  that 
is  to  say  annexed  to  the  county  constituencies.  The  further 
extension  of  the  suffrage  by  the  subsequent  Reform  Bills  of 
1867  and  1884-5  was  effected  on  each  occasion  in  the  same 
manner:  the  qualification  was  once  more  lowered  while  several 
towns  were  raised  to  the  rank  of  "parliamentary  boroughs" 
with  a  special  representation;  or  "parliamentary  boroughs" 
already  in  possession  of  the  franchise  as  well  as  "counties" 
obtained  an  additional  number  of  Members,  corresponding  to 
the  enhanced  importance  of  their  popnlation,  and  this  at  the 
expense  of  small  towns  which  were  ruthlessly  merged.  Thus, 
in  spite  of  the  levelling  character  of  the  Reform  Bills,  the 
double  type  of  electoral  constituencies  has  been  preserved :  of 
"  boroughs,"  that  is  to  say,  exclusively  urban  constituencies, 
and  of  "counties,"  i.e.  rural  constituencies  with  a  more  or  less 
considerable  addition  of  more  or  less  important  urban  E^glom- 
erations.  Even  the  introduction,  in  1885,  of  the  system  of 
one-member  constituencies,  in  pursuance  of  which  each  county ' 
as  well  as  each  large  parliamentary  borough  which  had  hitherto 
been  single  electoral  divisions  with  a  varying  number  of  Mem- 
bers were  divided  into  almost  equal  parliajnentary  Divisions, 
did  not  obliterate  this  duality.  It  is  preserved  not  only  prac- 
tically by  the  difference  in  the  economic  and  social  conditions 
of  the  "  boroughs "  and  the  "  counties,"  but  also  by  the  law, 
which  gives  the  right  of  voting  on  conditions  which  are  not 
identical  in  both. 

The  result  is  that  the  organization  of  parties  in  the 
"  counties  "  is  still,  even  since  188,'5,  on  quite  a  different  footing 
to  that  of  the  "boroughs."  The  principal  peculiarities  wbich 
give  the  "  county "  constituencies  their  special  character  are 
the  great  extent  of  their  area  combined  with  the  very  unequal 
and  sparse  distribution  of  the  population,  the  heterogeneous 
nature  of  the  electorate,  and  the  political  youthfulness,  not  to 
say  infancy,  of  the  rural  section  of  it,  admitted  only  yesterday 

>  It  is  tme  thftt  several  counties  w 
divisions,  to  tbe  nnmber  ot  (wo  or 
Blltuenciea. 


.coy  Google 


8M  DEMOCBACT  AND  POLITICAL  PABTIES    [thibd  past 

to  public  life  —  all  conditions  unfavourable  to  the  growth  of  a 
robust  extra-constitutional  political  organization.  Neverthe- 
less, the  Caucus  tried  to  introduce  the  "  Birmingham  plan " 
into  the  counties  before  1885,  but  the  experiment  was  not  very 
successful.  The  Association  started  for  each  county  on  a 
vould-be  representative  basis  often  amounted  merely  to  a  com- 
mittee with  its  head-quarters  in  the  county-town.  Its  members 
were  gentlemen,  landed  proprietors,  men  in  liberal  professions, 
with  a  small  sprinkling  of  trades-people.  Instead  of  elective 
branches  which  the  Association  ought,  in  conformity  with  the 
docti-ine,  to  have  had  in  each  locality,  very  often  there  was  only 
one  person  who  consented  to  look  after  the  affairs  of  the  party 
in  a  spirit  of  self-sacrifice.  This  person  was  a  tradesman,  a 
schoolmaster,  occasionally  a  Magistrate.  The  members  of  the 
committees  were  assisted  in  the  routine  duties  of  organization  by 
a  few  paid  agents  attached  to  the  Association  of  the  county  and 
who  went  about  from  one  village  to  another.  The  gentlemen 
residing  in  the  locality  did  not  take  an  active  part  in  the  work 
of  the  Organization.  The  Organization  of  the  Conservatives 
was  still  less  democratic.  Their  Associations  were  simply  small 
committees  which  represented  almost  exclusively  the  old  rul- 
ing classes.  True,  the  Tories  had  "  Workingmen'a  Associar 
tion3"in  the  large  villages  with  the  squire  as  chairman  and  his 
steward  as  secretary.  But  the  most  obvious  result  of  their 
political  activity  consisted  of  an  annual  dinner  honoured  with 
the  presence  of  the  local  gentry.  In  small  villages  it  was  the 
clergyman  and  schoolmaster  by  themselves,  or  even  one  of  the 
two,  who  represented  the  whole  Organization  of  the  Tory  party. 
The  work  of  checking  the  register,  of  attending  to  electoral 
claims,  etc.,  was,  as  in  the  good  old  days,  in  the  hands  of  a 
solicitor  who  made  it  over  to  his  clerk.  It  must  not  be  for- 
gotten, however,  that  in  spite  of  the  great  extent  of  the  county 
constituencies  it  was  easier,  up  to  1885,  to  deal  with  the  voters 
in  them,  owing  to  their  limited  number. 

The  year  1885  opened  a  new  political  era  in  the  "  counties." 
The  Reform  Act,  by  lowering  the  qnalihcation,  added  nearly 
two  millions  of  rural  voters  to  the  electorate ;  every  occupier  of 
a  rottn;.:o  obtained  a  vote.  Of  course  the  labourer  invested  with 
full  political  rights  forthwith  became  an  object  of  deep  interest 
to  the  Organizations  of  the  parties.     The  Liberals,  who  had 


.coy  Google 


riB>T  CHAF.]    THE  MACHINERY  OF  THE  CAUCUS  3U 

carried  the  extension  of  the  suffrage  to  the  tutal  masses,  lost 
DO  time  in  proposing,  through  the  medium  of  the  Caucus,  to 
complete  it  by  conceding  to  them  a  voice  in  the  management 
of  the  party,  by  means  of  representative  Associations.  With- 
out denying  the  difficulties  of  applying  the  representative 
principle  to  the  county  districts,  they  expressed  the  opiuion 
that  "  the  organization  could  be  brought  to  the  same  symmetry 
and  perfection  in  them  as  in  the  towns,"  aa  Mr.  Schnadhorst 
observed.'  It  must  be  said  at  once  that  up  to  the  present  time 
experience  is  far  from  having  converted  these  expectations 
into  a  reality ;  it  has  only  demonstrated  more  forcibly  that  the 
representative  and  elective  principle  has  no  inherent  efBcacy. 
No  doubt  the  subdivision  of  the  single  constituency  of  the 
county  into  several  electoral  divisions  has  greatly  facilitated 
the  labours  of  the  Organization,  it  is  more  easy  to  grasp  the 
new  Division,  but  even  its  more  limited  area  does  not  present 
sufBcient  elements  for  an  electoral  extra^constitutional  organiza- 
tion. In  a  good  many  parishes  it  is  not  only  impossible  to 
start  an  elective  Association,  but  there  is  hardly  the  where- 
withal for  forming  a  small  committee.  One  rural  Division,  for 
instance,  has  more  than  a  hundred  parishes,  the  majority  of 
which  possess  barely  forty  or  fifty  voters  apiece.  Another 
Division  is  almost  as  familiar  with  political  life  and  electoral 
strife  aa  if  it  formed  part  of  the  Muscovite  empire.  There  are 
Divisions  in  which  there  have  not  been  more  than  two  con- 
tested elections  in  the  space  of  half  a  century.*  In  these 
backward  districts,  where  stagnation  and  social  tradition  reign 
supreme,  the  position  of  the  Liberal  Organization  was  a  pecul- 
iarly delicate  one  up  to  a  very  recent  period,  if  it  is  not  so 
still.  If  its  adherents  in  the  villages  were  demonstrative,  they 
incurred  the  animosity  of  the  representatives  of  the  old  ruling 
classes,  almost  all  Tories.  The  economic  condition  of  the  small 
farmer  or  day-labourer  is  too  precarious  for  him  to  wantonly 
jeopardize  it  by  defying  the  squire  and  the  parson.  Often 
he  has  no  habitation  of  his  own,  all  the  cottages  tielong  to  the 
landlord,  who  lets  them  without  a  lease  and  can  turn  out  his 
tenants  at  any  moment.     Consequently  in  places  where  the 

I  County  Orftaniiation.  by  F.  Schnadhnrat,  Birmingham,  18BS  (7). 
t  Fnr  iiiRtanre.  the  Riit1nTi<l  Dhiiiion  hna  been  contested  twice  since  1841. 
(Sea  F.  H.  MacalmoDt'B  Poll  Book.) 


.coy  Google 


306  DEMOCRACY  AND  POLITICAL  FABTIES     [thibd  fist 

materials  of  a  Liberal  committee  exist  it  is  sometimes  a  very 
knotty  point  to  decide  whether  to  form  one  or  abandon  the 
idea  in  order  not  to  expose  its  members  to  social  ostracism.  In 
a  good  many  Divisions  the  Liberals  consider  systematic  ab- 
stention the  most  prudent  course,  to  prevent  theii  most  zeal- 
ous adherents  from  becoming  known.  The  representative  of 
a  Liberal  Association,  alluding  to  this  position  of  affairs,  de- 
scribed it  as  follows;  "Our  Association  is  a  secret  society." 
Of  course  this  state  of  things  is  rather  the  exception  than  the 
rule,  and  even  as  an  exception  it  is  becoming  a  reminiscence  of 
the  past  When  making  my  first  rounds,  in  1888-1889, 1  often 
heard  complaints  of  the  political  terrorism  exercised  by  the 
squire  and  the  parson,  to  the  extent  that  the  electors  were 
afraid  of  attending  the  Liberal  meetings  or  went  to  them  by 
night,  one  by  one,  like  conspirators.  But  during  my  last  trip 
to  the  country  districts  (in  1895)  I  was  able  to  ascertain  that 
this  was  no  longer  the  case.  The  labourer  has  grown  inde- 
pendent and  makes  no  secret  of  it  before  the  farmer,  who  ac- 
cepts the  new  situation  and  placidly  tells  people  himself  on 
marketday  that  so  many  of  his  labourers  have  voted  "^lunst 
him,"  that  is  against  the  party  he  prefers.  It  appears  that 
the  incessant  migration  of  young  people  into  the  towns  with 
which  rural  England  is  afilicted,  and  the  agricultural  distress, 
have  had  a  good  deal  to  do  with  this  small  political  revolution: 
the  number  of  agricultural  labourers  having  perceptibly  dimin- 
ished, the  farmer  is  glad  to  get  any  and  takes  good  care  not 
to  worry  them  about  their  "  politics  " ;  similarly  the  landlords, 
who  now  have  so  much  difficulty  in  letting  their  farms,  no 
longer  intimidate  those  of  their  tenants  who  are  inclined  to 
vote  "against  them." 

The  difficulty  of  forming  regular  party  organizations  in  the 
country  districts  is  due  in  a  greater  degi'ee  to  the  absence  or 
the  want  of  public  spirit  than  to  the  intimidation  practised  by 
squires  and  parsons.  It  being  impossible,  for  one  reason  or 
another,  to  have  village  committees,  the  Organization  of  the 
party  falls  back  on  secretaries,  unpaid  correspondents  in  each 
place.  It  is  always  some  one  who  is  well  acquainted  with  his 
locality  and  with  the  inner  history  of  each  of  his  neighbours, 
"a  knowledgeable  man,"  as  the  phrase  goes  in  some  parts. 
Without  attracting  attention,  the  correspondent  watches  the 


.coy  Google 


WMTCHAi-.]    THE  MACHINEBT  OF  THE  CAUCUS  367 

political  situatioD  in  his  village  and  keeps  the  secretary  of  the 
Association  informed  of  everything  that  can  interest  him. 
The  latter  controls  him,  sends  him  questions,  gives  him  lists 
or  other  papers  to  prepare,  or  entrusts  him  with  commis- 
sions of  a  less  formal  kind.  In  plates  where  the  Liberals 
have  reason  or  think  they  have  reason  for  apprehending  boy- 
cotting on  the  part  of  their  political  opponents,  the  secretary 
of  the  Association  sends  all  his  communications  to  his  corre- 
spondent by  letter  post,  even  when  he  wants  to  forward  him 
a  printed  document,  a  circular,  or  a  form.  If  the  village  is 
not  far  from  the  town,  the  correspondent  himself  brings  the 
secretary  the  desired  information  on  market-day,  adding  a 
basket  of  eggs  or  vegetables  aa  a  personal  tribute.  It  is 
needless  to  say  that  as  all  the  work  of  the  party  is  entrusted 
to  the  correspondent,  much  discernment  is  required  in  select 
ing  him.  In  this  respect  the  Liberals  exhibit  more  tact  than 
their  rivals:  their  correspondent  in  the  village  is  the  shoe- 
maker, the  tailor,  the  farrier  of  the  locality,  or  an  intelligent 
farmer,  occasionally  the  postman.'  Being  a  man  of  the  people, 
this  correspondent  has  the  ear  of  his  neighbours,  he  is  "  one  of 
themselves,"  he  can  turn  them  round  his  finger,  so  that  he  makes 
a  firstrate  electoral  agent  The  Tory  correspondent,  on  the  other 
hand,  is  generally  a  "  superior  "  man,  the  clergyman,  the  school- 
master,  a  farmer,  whose  devotion  to  Church  and  State  is  unim- 
peachable and  who  is  very  good  at  keeping  the  books,  but  who 
does  not  "  understand  "  the  people.  When  the  Tories  form  a 
committee  of  the  party  in  the  village  their  first  thought  is  to 
put  "  a  leading  man  "  at  its  head.  It  is  only  in  default  of  him 
that  they  fall  back  on  an  "  intelligent  workingman."  Being 
still  behind  their  fellow  Tories  of  the  large  towns,  they  do  not 
realize  or  they  forget  that  not  only  is  the  hour  at  hand  but 
that  it  has  come. 

If  the  parish  cannot  supply  the  groundwork  of  the  Organi- 
zation of  the  party,  several  of  them  are  grouped  together  into 
local  "  centres,"  which  thereupon  serve  as  a  basis  for  the  Asso- 
ciations or  district  committees.  Their  delegates  often  hold 
their  authority  from  themselves.  Often  instead  of  the  district 
Associations  there  are  only  committees,  which  are  also  self- 
«licem&D  as  one  ol  tbe  corre- 


.CD,  Google 


868  DEMOCRACT  AND  POLITICAL  PARTIES    [rnnt>  Piw 


appointed.  The  powers  of  these  committees  are  sometimes 
exercised  by  party  clubs  which  are  to  be  fouud  in  certain 
Tillies.  In  parts  of  the  country  where  either  party  it  very 
weak  numerically,  as  for  instance,  in  the  case  with  the  Liberals 
in  southern  England  or  the  Tories  in  Scotland,  the  rules  of  the 
Association  themselves  anticipate  the  impossibility  of  obtain- 
ing representatives  selected  by  popular  vote,  and  authorize  the 
executive  committees  of  the  Associations  to  appoint  the  local 
delegates  of  their  own  accord. 

All  these  difBculties  of  organization  scarcely  exist  in  the 
urban  sections  of  county  Divitiant.  Consequently  the  dim*- 
tonal  Association  generally  has  branches  in  all  the  small 
towns,  and  d  fortiori  in  the  larger  towns,  which  sometimes 
form  part  of  county  constituencies.  Some  of  these  towns, 
which  are  "  merged  "  boroughs,  have  even  been  familiar  with 
the  procedure  of  the  Caucus  for  a  considerable  time,  having 
possessed  an  independent  Association  before  1885.  There  are 
villages,  too,  which  are  in  no  way  behind  the  towns  as  regards 
the  development  of  the  Organization  of  the  party.  This  ia 
precisely  the  case  with  rural  non-^ricultural  districts.  In 
the  north  of  England  as  well  aa  in  Scotland,  rural  a^lomera* 
tions  are  found,  which  are.  pre-eminently  manufacturing  and 
industrial.  In  several  of  these  villages  the  inhabitants  are 
counted  by  thousands  j  and,  in  point  of  fact,  they  are  more  in 
the  nature  of  towns. 

But  apart  from  these  urban  islets,  the  non-elective  element 
(self-appointed  or  introduced  under  the  rules),  always  fills  a 
considerable  place  in  county  Organizations.  Besides,  the  pluto- 
cratic element,  that  of  the  large  subscribers,  holds  a  still  more 
important  position  in  them  than  in  the  town  caucuses.  Con- 
sequently, wire-pulling  becomes  fn  a  way  a  foregone  conclu- 
sion and  almost  a  legitimate  proceeding.  The  activity  of  the 
wire-pullers  operates  in  a  more  direct,  a  more  patriarchal, 
manner,  so  to  speak.  They  are  not  obliged  to  go  through  all 
the  forms  and  ceremonies  of  the  genuine  town  Caucus,  although 
they  have  to  sway  their  people  by  the  same  considerations,  by 
appealing  to  feelings  of  duty  and  self-esteem,  as  modified 
by  the  snrroundinga.  The  subordinate  wire-puller  of  the 
county  Organization,  who  is  the  village  correspondent  of  the 
Association,  works  on  his  neighbours  by  his  personal  and  im- 


.coy  Google 


TiRST  CHAP.]    THE   MACHINERY   OF   THE   CAUCUS  36fl 

mediate  iuflueuce,  and  lie  himself  is  Bpontaneously  affected 
by  the  prestige  of  persoas  in  the  county  town  who  have 
assumed  the  position  of  wire-pullers,  and  who  are  adorned 
with  the  titles  of  chairman  or  members  of  the  executive  com- 
mittee of  the  Association, 

But  however  far  the  counties'  Organization  may  be  from 
theoretical  perfection,  it  has  none  the  less  by  its  series  of 
branches,  committees,  and  volunteer  correspondents  brought 
about  in  the  counties  a  certain  decentralization  in  the  man- 
agement of  the  affairs  of  the  party.  And,  what  Is  equally 
important,  slack  and  defective  as  is  the  chain  of  the  county 
Organization,  it  is  composed  in  the  main  of  small  people,  from 
the  village  shoemaker  up  to  the  tradesman  of  the  towns,  who 
formerly  held  aloof  or  were  pushed  aside  to  make  way  for  the 
gentlemen. 

These  results  have  been  obtained  in  a  lesser  degree  in  the 
Tory  Organizations ;  the  Conservative  county  Associations  are 
often  less  democratic  than  their  rivals  of  the  other  side,  they 
do  not  feel  the  need  of  it  to  the  same  extent.  For  it  is  not 
only  out  of  pure  love  for  the  elective  principle  that  the  Liberals 
have  introduced  it.  into  their  Organization,  but  in  order  to  get 
at  the  new  voter  more  easily ;  they  have  framed  their  machinery 
with  the  special  object  of  "  reaching  the  masses."  The  Tories, 
who  are  the  heirs  or  legatees  of  the  old  order  of  things  with  its 
time-honoured  social  relations  which  ensured  the  ascendency 
of  the  landlords  in  everyday  life,  have  more  natural  connections 
in  the  country  districts.  There  the  squire  and  the  parson  form 
the  living  nucleus  of  a  political  organization  spontaneously 
joined  by  all  the  country  folk  who  have  not,  by  their  intelli- 
gence or  by  their  interests  and  their  cupidity,  yet  emancipated 
themselves  from  their  influence.  True,  in  a  good  many  ])laces 
the  ground  is  undermined  beneath  the  squire  and  the  parson, 
but  the  surface  is  still  pretty  firm.  A  landlord  who  deservedly 
enjoys  a  good  reputation  is  always  follow^ed,  as  in  the  old  days, 
by  everybody,  without  reference  to  personal  political  preferences. 
And  then  there  are  still  many  localities  where  the  agricultural 
labourers  are  so  backward  and  so  childishly  nafve  that  the 
Tory  leaders  have  no  need  to  stand  on  ceremony  and  to  pre- 
tend to  observe  the  elective  principle  in  governing  the  party. 
Hence  there  are  Conservative  county  Associations  which  are 


.coy  Google 


370  DEMOCRACY  AND  POLrnCAL  PARTIES     [thibd  rAHr 

mere  names.  All  the  party  work  in  the  Division  is  performed 
from  a  solicitor's  office,  which  is  the  real  latwratory  of  the 
party.  In  it  this  lawyer  and  his  clerks  mysteriously  manipu- 
late the  electoral  busineas.  In  short,  the  old  order  of  things 
is  still  in  full  swing  there.  These  oases  are  found  mostly  in  the 
south  of  England,  in  remote  rural  districts,  or  even  within 
the  radius  of  old  episcopal  towns,  where  under  the  shadow  of 
the  cathedral  the  whole  population  is  half  asleep  and  plunged 
in  some  hazy  ilream  of  the  past. 

To  ensure  unity  of  action  among  all  the  divisional  Organiza- 
tions in  the  county,  which  may  be  necessary  or  useful  in  cer- 
tain cases,  county  Federations  or  Councils  have  been  started  in 
several  parts  of  the  country,  on  the  pattern  of  the  United 
Committees  or  Councils  of  large  towns.  They  have  not  attained 
the  importance  of  the  general  Associations  of  towns.  The  dis- 
similarity of  political  conditions  in  the  different  parts  of  the 
county  and  its  large  area  are  by  no  means  favourable  to  the 
formation  of  a  strong  central  organization  to  take  the  place  of 
the  divisitynal  Associations,  when  the  latter  find  it  very  hard  to 
cope  with  these  difficulties,  which  are  considerably  less  in  their 
case. 


.coy  Google 


SECOND  CHAPTER 

THE  ACTION   OF   THE  CAUCUS 


The  Organization  of  parties  which  we  have  been  studying 

has  (Jiselosed  to  ua  a  structure  which  may  be  described  as 
ingenious ;  the  living  wheels  of  which  its  mechanism  is  com- 
posed are,  we  may  admit,  well  co-ordinated  and  adjusted,  and 
their  regular  working  is  fairly  ensured.  The  forces  which  pet 
them  in  motion  are  perhaps  highly  effective,  and  constitute  & 
propelling  power  of  an  exceedingly  strong  yet  very  simple 
nature.  Intended  to  tight  the  battles  of  fiercely  competing 
parties,  Lhis  Organization  combines,  it  may  also  be  admitted, 
all  the  essential  conditions  of  success,  by  providing  men  accus- 
tomed to  obey  orders,  well  disciplined,  and  following  freely 
acknowledged  leaders,  who  in  their  turn  possess  in  a  high 
degree  such  qualities  as  energy,  skill,  and  strategical  and  tac- 
tical ability.  But,  after  all,  this  valiant  army  commanded  by 
first-rate  chiefs  is  really  only  a  small  battalion  confronting 
the  bulk  of  the  electorate.  How  is  it  possible  for  such  a  hand- 
ful of  men  to  capture  the  formidable  fortress  of  a  well-nigh 
universal  suffrage  ?  This  question,  which  naturally  occurs  to 
the  mind,  brings  us  to  an  exaihination  of  the  various  methods 
by  which  the  Caucus  reaches  and  acta  upon  the  great  mass  of 


In  the  old  days,  when  the  electorate  was  far  more  limited, 
there  was  a  gap  in  the  constitutional  wall  which  surrounded 
it;  this,  as  will  be  remembered,  was  electoral  registration,  the 
keeping  of  the  lists  of  voters,  which  was  almost  entirely  left 
to  private  initiative  by  the  authorities.  It  will  also  be  recol- 
lected that  the  necessity  of  making  up  for  the  shortcomings 
of  the  State  had  even  led  to  the  formation  of  Registration 


.coy  Google 


872  DEMOCRACY  AND  POLITICAL  PARTIES      [third  pa et 


Societies.  Since  then  this  wall  has  been  repeatedly  lengthened 
to  take  in  an  ever-increasing  number  of  citizens.  But  nothing 
has  been  done  to  repair  the  gap,  and  widened  in  its  turn  as 
time  went  on  it  was  the  first  to  let  in  the  Caucus.  With  the 
extension  of  the  suffrage  the  interest  of  private  individuals  in 
registration  became  a  still  more  pressing  political  need,  and  the 
Caucus  Associations  wbicli  ousted  the  old  Registration  Societies 
hastened  to  take  up  their  business  and  at  once  found  in  it  a 
sphere  of  legitimate  activity  and  a  source  of  influence. 

To  form  an  idea  of  this  activity,  and  of  the  position  which 
it  gives  the  Caucus,  it  is  indispensable  to  go  somewhat  closely 
into  the  details  of  the  onerous  task  of  registration.  The  proper 
keeping  of  the  register,  which  is  of  such  paramount  importance 
for  the  exercise  of  the  vote,  is  really  a  most  complicated  piece 
of  business.  The  legislative  provisions  on  the  subject  are  con- 
tained in  more  than  a  hundred  statutes,  to  which  must  be 
added  a  vast  and  obscure  mass  of  judicial  decisions.  The 
electoral  qualifications  alone,  i.e.  the  conditions  as  to  property 
and  residence  which  give  the  right  to  be  put  on  the  register 
and  to  vote  afterwards,  are  singularly  numerous,  varied,  and 
confused.  In  accordance  with  the  usual  practice  of  English 
legislation,  which  does  not  creat«  anew,  which  does  not  make 
a  clean  sweep  of  old  enactments,  but  patches  them  up  or  adds 
to  them,  every  new  Heform  Bill  which  extended  the  franchise 
set  up  a  new  group  of  voters  with  special  qualifications.  Thus 
to  the  several  fianchises  which  existed  before  18S2  the  great 
Beform  Bill  added,  in  the  boroughs,  persons  occupying  rateable 
tenements  of  the  annual  value  of  £10,  aud  in  the  counties, 
freeholders  of  the  clear  annual -value  of  £10,  copyholders  of 
£10  per  annum,  leaseholders  of  the  annual  value  of  £10  when 
the  lease  was  for  sixty  years,  or  of  the  annual  value  of  £50  for 
a  term  of  twenty  years,  and,  finally,  tenants  at  will  paying  not 
less  than  £">()  a  year.  The  Act  of  18(>7,  while  lowering  the 
minimum  of  £10  to  £5  for  the  counties,  introduced  new  elec- 
toral qualifications  by  enfranchising,  in  addition  to  the  persons 
qualified  as  above  mentioned,  in  the  counties  all  occupiers  of 
lands  or  tenements  of  the  rateable  value  of  £12  and  upwanls, 
and  in  the  boroughs  alt  inhabitant  occupiers  of  a  separate 
dwelling-house  of  whatever  value,  and  lodgers  paying  an  an- 
nual rent  of  not  less  than  £10.     The  Keform  Act  of  1884  has 


.coy  Google 


■BCONDCHAP.]       THE   ACTION   OF  THE   CAUCUS  878 

iotroduced  these  last  two  categories  of  voters  in  the  counties 
as  well.  By  the  same  Act,  construed  in  a  very  liberal  way  by 
judicial  decisions,  a  vote  has  been  allowed  to  service  men  (such 
as  coachmen,  gardeners,  shop  assistants  living  on  the  premises, 
etc.)  not  residing  under  the  same  loof  as  their  masters.  Legal 
opinion  has  conceded  a  vote  also  to  sub-tenants  of  a  house  let 
or  sublet  in  parts,  even  in  single  rooms,  by  a  non-resident 
owner,  without  any  condition  as  to  minimum  rent. 

To  these  conditions  which  confer  the  franchise  the  law  adds 
others  for  the  exercise  of  the  right,  to  wit,  the  payment  of  the 
poor-rate  for  the  tenements  the  ownership  or  occupation  of 
which  constitutes  the  electoral  qualification,  and  the  occupa- 
tion of  the  premises '  for  a  certain  period,  generally  twelve 
months  before  the  annual  closing  of  the  register.  The  voter 
who  has  changed  his  residence  during  this  twelvemonth,  while 
remaining  in  the  same  borough  or,  in  the  case  of  counties,  in 
the  same  electoral  division,  retains  his  right  to  be  put  on  the 
register  if  he  is  a  householder;  but  if  he  is  only  a  lodger  auo- 
ceasive  occupation  is  of  no  use  to  him ;  the  mere  fact  of  removal 
into  the  ailjoining  building,  into  the  next  number  in  the  same 
street,  deprives  him  of  his  right  of  appearing  on  the  register 
until  he  has  spent  the  statutory  twelvemonth  in  his  new  resi- 
dence, so  that  he  may  remain  without  a  vote  for  two  years  or 
more.  In  any  case  lodgers  are  only  put  on  the  register  on 
their  formal  application  renewed  every  year  and  supported  by 
proof,  while  the  other  voters  are  entered  in  it  as  a  matter  of 
course  once  for  all  until  proof  is  forthcoming  that  they  have 
lost  their  electoral  capacity  or  their  right  to  exercise  it.  The 
franchise  is  lost  by  death,  by  promotion  to  the  Peerage,  and 
by  naturalization  in  a  foreign  country ;  it  lapses,  at  all  events 
during  the  period  for  which  the  register  is  made  up,  by  the 
loss  of  the  property  qualification,  by  change  of  residence  be- 
yond the  permitted  limit  of  successive  occupation,  by  non-pay- 
ment of  the  poor-rate,  and  by  receipt  of  relief  under  the  Poor 
Law. 

Thna  to  bring  a  voter  on  the  register  or  to  keep  him  there 
in  case  his  right  is  disputed  it  is  necessary  to  establish  a  num- 

'  Eicept  lor  owners  in  the  counties,  who  are  not  bound  by  aoy  coudition  of 
resideDce,  nnd  can  come  and  vote  even  l[  tbey  live  abroad.  Ttiese  are  ths 
outvoters  wbo  have  been  referred  to  above  (p.  14T). 


.coy  Google 


874  DEMOCBACY  AND  POLITICAL  PARTIES      [tbibb  pab* 


ber  of  facts  and  legal  points  wliieh  often  give  rise  to  doubt 
and  raise  questions  of  great  complexity.  Has  he  the  franchise 
and  on  wliat  kind  of  property  or  occupancy  can  he  rest  his 
right  ?  can  he  claim  it  under  such  or  such  an  Act  ?  can  he  appeal 
to  the  law  of  King  Henry  VI  in  the  fifteenth  century  ?  is  he 
aifected  by  this  or  that  later  statute  ?  —  all  occasionally  very 
knotty  points.  Is  the  voter  on  the  register  or  applying  to  be 
put  on  it  an  Englishman  or  an  alien  ?  —  the  problem  may  be 
anything  but  a  simple  one.  The  applicant  is  of  foreign  extrac- 
tion and  has  never  been  naturalized ;  but  that  need  not  prove 
anything  against  him,  for  perhaps  he  is  a  descendant  of  a 
Hanoverian  settled  in  England  before  1837,  when  Englishmen 
and  Hanoverians  were  subjects  of  the  same  King.  Does  he 
inhabit  a  "  house  "  or  not  ?  That  depends.  If  there  are  sev- 
eral apartments  or  rooms  all  let  or  sublet,  each  of  these  tenants 
"  inhabits  a  house  "  ;  but  if  the  person  to  whom  they  pay  rent 
oecTipies  one  of  the  apartments  of  the  house  in  question,  they 
are  merely  "  tenants  "  and  can  claim  the  franchise  only  as  duly 
qualified  lodgers.  The  lodger's  qualification  is  fixed  at  £10  clear 
annual  rent,  but  if  the  claimant  takes  the  room  furnished  he 
must  prove  a  higlier  rent,  but  up  t«  what  amount  ?  It  varies 
with  the  importance  of  the  borough.  £ut  apart  from  the  ap- 
praisement of  the  rental  qualification  the  simple  capacity  of 
lodger,  clear  aa  it  may  appear,  is  often  very  difficult  to  establish 
from  the  point  of  view  of  electoral  law.  Does  the  tenant  share 
his  room  with  others  ?  Is  his  bed  separated  from  the  other  beds 
by  a  partition?  Can  he  use  the  room  to  the  exclusion  of  every 
one  else  ?  For  instance,  a  son  living  with  his  father  can  claim 
the  right  to  vote  as  a  lodger,  but  if  the  door  of  the  room  has 
no  lock  to  it  or  If  he  has  shared  his  bedroom  with  a  visitor, 
he  has  no  right  tu  a  vote,  for  the  room  is  not  used  exclusively 
by  him.  The  occupier  of  a  "  house,"  who  is  bound  to  prove 
an  occupancy  of  a  twelvemonth,  may  have  occupied  several 
dwellings  one  after  another  during  this  time,  but  if  it  is  in 
London  the  question  arises  whether  the  adjoining  street  into 
which  he  has  moved  is  in  the  same  "borough"  or  not;  if  not, 
he  loses  his  right  to  vote,  whereas  at  Birmingham  or  at  Liver- 
pool he  may  have  moved  from  one  end  of  the  city  to  the  other 
without  forfeiting  his  electoral  privilege,  for  ISirmingham  and 
Liverpool,  although  split  up  into  several  electoral  divisions. 


.coy  Google 


aicosDCHAP.]      THE  ACTION  OF  THE  CAUCUS  376 

are  each  only  a  single  city.  The  receipt  of  parochial  relief 
by  the  voter  or  his  wife  or  his  children  deprives  him  of  a  vote. 
This  is  clear,  to  all  appearances,  but  is  the  relief  received  to 
be  always  considered  as  such  ?  For  instance,  a  voter  troubled 
with  a  drunken  wife  loses  patience  and  turns  her  out  of  doors; 
driven  by  hunger  she  applies  for  and  obtains  relief  from  the 
parish;  ought  her  husband  to  be  struck  off  the  register  or 
not  ?  A  voter  suffering  fi-om  the  small-pox  has  been  placed 
by  order  of  the  authorities  in  the  hospital  set  apart  for  this 
disease,  where  he  has  been  nursed  and  fed.  He  has  therefore 
received  relief  in  food,  but  then  he  was  obliged  to  eat  to 
recover.    Can  he  be  kept  on  the  register  ? 

To  these  manifold  questions  and  difRculties  connected  with 
the  application  of  the  law  on  the  franchise,  of  which  barely 
a  few  examples  have  been  given,  are  added  the  endless  formali- 
ties prescribed  for  the  making  up  and  revising  of  the  register 
of  voters  of  every  description,  which  in  their  turn  entail  in 
practice  numerous  proofs  of  fact,  arguments  on  points  of  law, 
or  simply  pettifogging  disputes.  As  almost  all  the  work  in- 
volved in  keeping  up  the  register  has,  in  the  state  of  things 
with  which  we  have  become  acquainted,'  been  left  to  private 
initiative,  to  the  political  parties,  all  three  —  proof,  legal  argu- 
ment, and  pettifogging  —  devolve  upon  the  Caucus  Associations. 


II 

Being  anxious  to  get  their  adherents  on  the  register,  in  view 
of  the  election  which  may  take  place  in  the  course  of  tho  year, 
the  Associations  require  to  know,  in  the  case  of  every  voter, 
all  the  particulars  by  virtue  of  which  his  entry  or  omission 
can  be  claimed  or  objected  to.  To  obtain  this  information  the 
Association  institutes  a  canvass,  a  general  census  of  the  con- 
stituency carried  out  by  its  members,  who  make  their  first  ap- 
pearance here  in  the  capacity  of  "  workers  "  of  the  Organization. 
Each  committee  of  a  ward  parcels  it  out  among  its  members 
by  streets  or  sections  of  streets.  Over  each  block  is  set  a 
member  of  the  committee  (often  called  "  captain  "  of  the  block) 
to  supervise  the  census  taken  by  the  canvassers,  outsiders 
1  or.  above,  pp.  Ill,  142. 


.coy  Google 


370  DEMOCKACV  AND  POLITICAL  PABTIE8      [tbikd  p*»t 

or  members  of  the  Association,  both  paid  as  a  rale,  but  at  a 
very  moderate  rate,  five  or  six  shillings  a  day  (this  is  one  of 
the  opiMrt unities  of  making  money  for  the  caucus-men  which 
were  alluded  to  above).  The  canvasser  goes  to  all  the  houses 
in  turn  with  the  list  of  voters,  to  fiud  out  the  inaccuracies  or 
errors  which  require  correction  and  the  additions  which  have 
to  be  made.  He  takes  down  the  surname  and  Christian  uames 
of  the  householder  with  their  exact  spelling,  the  old  address 
of  the  man  who  has  moved  iu,  the  new  residence  of  the 
man  who  has  moved  out,  the  date  of  each  of  these  removals ; 
the  letting  value  of  all  premises  not  used  as  dwellings,  such  as 
shojis,  uttices,  warehouses ;  he  tries  to  find  out  all  the  lodgers 
and  to  ascertain  if  they  have  taken  their  rooms  furnished  or 
not,  the  weekly  rent  they  pay,  tlieir  landlord's  address,  the  date 
on  which  they  came  into  the  house,  etc.  This  census  is  a 
work  of  great  labour.  A  single  house  often  has  to  be  visited 
more  than  once.  On  an  average,  three  visits  are  paid  to  each 
bouse.  The  lodgers  make  the  canvass  particularly  difficult  in 
the  large  towns.  An  eminently  floating  population,  they  fre- 
quently change  their  address,  and  it  is  not  always  easy  to  dis- 
cover their  new  abode,  especially  if  it  is  a  case  of  people  who 
flit  from  one  quarter  to  another  or  are  even  in  the  habit  of 
decamping  secretly.  And  they  must  absolutely  be  found, 
for  even  if  they  are  old  voters,  they  have  to  be  entered  afresh 
eveiy  year  or  at  any  rate  it  is  necessary  to  prove  the  fact  of 
their  removal  into  another  house,  which  dei>rive3  them  of  the 
right  of  being  put  on  the  register  for  the  current  year.  All 
tlie  information  collected  by  the  canvassere  and  checked 
by  the  local  members  of  the  Association  is  reported  to  the 
secretary  of  the  ward,  who  transmits  it  to  the  secretary  of 
the  Caucus  of  the  division.  There,  in  the  office  of  the  Caucus, 
the  data  supplied  by  the  registration  canvass  are  combined 
with  the  particulars  from  the  parish  as  to  voters  in  arrears 
with  their  rates  and  those  who  have  been  relieved  under  the 
Poor  Law,  to  become  as  many  weapons  for  defending  political 
friends  and  combating  antagonists.  Every  voter  being  invited 
by  the  law  to  lodge  with  the  Overseers  of  the  Poor  in  the  parish 
who  ai'O  entrusted  with  the  preparation  ()f  the  register,  a  claim  to 
be  put  on  it  if  he  has  been  left  out,  as  well  as  nhjcrlioiiit  against 
wrong  entries,  the  Associations,  stepping  into  the  shoes  of  the 


.coy  Google 


BBCOMD  CBAP.]      THE  ACTION  OP  THE   CAUCUS  877 

iadividual  voters,  try  to  get  as  many  of  their  followers  on  the 
register  as  they  can  by  uieaiis  of  claims,  and  to  strike  off  as  many 
of  their  opponents  as  possible  by  means  of  objections.  But  how 
are  they  to  know  friends  from  enemies  ?  This  is  ascertained  in 
the  course  of  the  registration  canvass,  and  ia  perhaps  the  most 
difficult  part  of  its  work.  Besides  the  information  mentioned 
above,  the  special  busiuess  of  the  canvasser  is  to  find  out  the 
voter's  "politics,"  i.e.  with  which  political  party  he  is  inclined 
to  vote,  and  very  often  it  is  no  easy  matter  to  extracfthia  from 
him.  If  the  canvasser  is  a  paid  agent,  a  poor  devil  who  wants 
to  earn  a  few  shillings,  he  has  not  much  chance  of  being  the 
recipient  of  these  confidences.  A  neighbour  or  a  business 
friend  is  in  a  much  better  position  for  this,  but  he  is  not  sure 
of  succeeding  either.  For  some  time  past  the  Associations  have 
been  in  the  habit  of  entrusting  these  missions  to  the  women 
who  belong  to  the  party  Organizations  and  who  manage  to 
worm  the  voter's  political  opinions  out  of  him  more  easily. 
But,  after  all,  the  "  politics  "  of  a  good  many  voters  remains  a 
secret  or  a  riddle,  and  they  have  to  be  entered  in  the  third 
column  of  the  canvassing-books  which  specify,  firstly,  say  the 
Liberals,  secondly  the  Conservatives,  and  thirdly  the  doubtful. 
The  secretary  of  the  Caucus  always  considers  tie  "  doubtful " 
ones  as  opponents,  and  he  launches  objections  against  them  to  get 
them  struck  off  the  Hats  on  some  pretext,  good  or  indifferent 
Sometimes  a  voter  whose  right  has  been  challenged  in  this  way 
writes  an  indignant  letter  to  the  secretary  of  the,  let  us  say. 
Liberal  Caucus,  complaining  of  the  attack  made  on  him,  a  life- 
long Liberal,  whose  ardent  Liberalism  is  beyond  all  suspicion, 
etc.  The  secretary^  writes  him  a  humble  apology  and  joyfully 
enters  him  among  the  voters  on  whom  he  can  depend,  good 
erat  demonstrandum. 

The  objections,  numerous  as  they  are,  generally  proceed  from  a 
single  person  acting  as  objector-general  on  behalf  of  the  Caucus, 
whereas  the  claims  have  to  be  lodged  by  each  claimant  individ- 
ually. Practically  it  is  the  party  Association  which,  after 
having  found  out  the  person  entitled  to  make  the  claim,  draws 
it  up.  The  Association  sees  that  a  printed  slip  containing  all 
the  detaila  relating  to  the  particular  voter  is  handed  to  him ;  he 
has  only  to  sign  it  and  return  it  to  the  secretary  of  the  Caucus, 
who  forwards  it  to  the  Overseer  of  tlie  Poor  in  charge  of  the 


.coy  Google 


878  DEMOCRACT  AND  POLITICAL  PARTIES     [tbi»»  mm 

register.  The  latter  takes  down  all  claims  and  objections  sent 
to  him  without  adjudicating  on  their  validity.  The  decision 
rests  with  the  Bevising  Barrister,  who  holds  a  registration 
court  in  each  place  every  year  for  this  purpose,  and  it  is 
there  that  the  rival  caucuses  have  a  regidar  fight  over  the 
names  of  the  voters  who  ai'e  on  or  off  the  register.  They  sift 
them  thoroughly  by  starting  all  manner  of  possible  and  im- 
possible objections  to  the  qualifications  of  their  presumed 
political  opponents.  The  very  brief  outline  of  the  legislation  on 
this  subject  which  has  been  given  above  has  shown  how  easy 
it  is  to  raise  disputed  points.  The  party  agents  devote  all  the 
resources  of  tlieir  professional  knowledge  to  multiplying  them 
in  order  to  deprive  as  many  persons  on  the  other  side  as  pos- 
sible of  the  right  to  vote.  They  leave  no  stone  untui-ned. 
Nothing  is  more  common  for  them  than  to  object  to  the  spelling 
of  a  proper  name.  For  instance,  a  man  named  John  Thomson, 
a  shoemaker  by  trade  and  a  Kadicat  in  politics,  has  been  put 
on  tlie  register  as  Thompson,  with  a  j)  added.  The  Tory  agent 
applies  to  have  his  name  struck  off  and  succeeds,  because  there 
is  no  Thompson  at  the  address  given,  the  house  is  inhabited  by 
another  person  called  Thomson.  The  slightest  omission  in  the 
wording  of  the  objection  or  of  the  claim  may  prove  a  fatal 
flaw,  thanks  to  the  highly  technical  view  which  the  Revising 
Barristers  and  the  courts  of  appeal  take  of  these  matters.  For 
instance,  aji  objecting  party  while  giving  his  exact  address  has 
omitted  to  state  the  name  of  the  parish  in  which  he  lives  ;  at 
once  he  is  put  out  of  court  and  his  objection  against  the  illegal 
entry  of  perhaps  hundreds  of  names  effected  by  the  manoeuvres 
of  the  other  side  becomes  ipso  facto  null  anjJ  void.  Claims  are 
lodged  and  objections  made  which  ai-e  wittingly  unfounded  or 
are  sometimes  even  fraudulent :  to  support  a  claim  qualifying 
property  is  shown  which  in  reality  has  never  been  occupied  by 
the  claimant  The  democratic  Associations  have  in  the  matter 
of  registration  reverted  to  all  the  bad  traditions  of  the  old 
system  and  have  even  carried  them  further.  For  instance,  the 
plan  adopted  in  former  days  by  certain  Registration  Societies 
of  starting  thousands  of  objections,  without  rhyme  or  reason, 
has  become  a  regular  practice  of  the  caucuses.  A  citizen  whose 
claim  to  a  vote  is  unimpeachable  is  oft«n  obliged  to  go  before 
the  Registration  Court  and  uphold  his  right  to  have  his  name 


.coy  Google 


SECOND  CHIP.]       THE   ACTION  OF   THE   CAUCUS  870 

ou  the  register,  which  is  disputed  solely  in  a  factious  apirit. 
A  voter  of  a  cunning  turn  of  mind  defends  himself  by  strata- 
gem ;  he  gets  himself  put  ou  the  register  through  the  Associa- 
tion of  the  opposite  party  while  taking  care  to  let  the  secre- 
tary of  the  Caucus  on  his  own  side  into  the  secret,  so  that 
neither  Caucus  disputes  his  claim.  Not  long  ago  in  London  (iu 
the  Islington  Kegistration  Court)  a  Kevising  Barrister  suggested 
this  mode  of  procedure  in  open  court  amid  general  laughter  testi- 
fying to  the  easy  indifference  with  which  everybody  looks  on 
these  practices.'  Sometimes  a  similar  course  is  followed  by  a 
voter  whose  claim  is  defective ;  for  instance,  a  Liberal  who  has 
not  completed  his  twelve  months'  residence  tells  the  registration 
canvasser  of  the  Conservative  Association  that  he  is  a  Conser- 
vative. If  the  Association  tinds  out  afterwards  that  he  has 
not  occupied  the  premises  for  the  statutory  twelvemonth,  it 
takes  good  care  not  to  draw  the  attention  of  the  Revising 
Barrister  to  the  fact. 

Nor  does  this  official  raise  all  these  points  wliich  may  affect 
the  right  to  a  vote  of  his  own  initiative,  the  Revising  Barrister 
is  as  a  rule  merely  the  umpire  between  the  contending  politi- 
cal parties.  Although  actually  the  representative  of  the 
Law,  of  the  State,  he  is  by  no  means  the  vigilant  guardian  of 
the  public  interest  which  is  at  stake.  The  fact  that  the  suffr^e 
was  for  a  long  time  a  personal  privilege,  the  property  of  a  few 
favoured  individuals,  has  dimmed  or  obscured  the  notion  of 
a  vote  as  a  public  right  exercised  in  the  general  interest.  The 
intervention  of  the  political  parties,  who  flung  themselves  on  the 
exercise  of  the  suffrage  to  serve  their  own  ends,  has  completed 
the  conversion  of  the  vote  almost  into  a  private  right  within 
the  meaning  of  the  civil  law,  a  piece  of  property,  benefiting 
however  not  the  rightful  holder  of  it,  but  the  "  party."  When 
the  right  to  a  vote  is  challenged  in  the  registration  courts,  it  is 
the  political  parties  who  are  the  real  litigants,  and  not  the 
individual  voters  who  appear  in  court  only  as  witnesses  to 
be  cross-examined  by  the   representatives  of  the   rival   cau- 

'  The  following  dialogue  took  place  between  the  officials  of  the  Court,  the 
Revising  BarriBter  and  the  Vestry  Clerk.  Ttie  Revising  Burrisler :  •■  A  wis© 
man  would  send  his  claim  through  both  parties."— TOe  Veslry  Clerk:  "or 
claim  through  his  political  opponeiite."  —  The  Reviling  Barritlfr:  "  and  give 
notice  to  his  friends."  —  The  Vettrti  Clerk :  "  and  use  his  opponeat's  eoiivej- 
ani-es  at  elections." 


.CD,  Google 


880  DEMOCRACT  ASD  POLTTICAL  PARTIES     [thud  p*mi 

cuses.  The  caucuses,  who  irrangle  over  electors'  rights  for 
their  own  benetit,  also  make  ba^aining  counters  of  them, 
as  ia  the  case  of  all  property  subject  to  litigation  and  com- 
promise, Thus  not  unfrequently  the  agents  of  both  caucuses, 
to  clear  the  ground,  "  pair  olf,"  i.e.  agree  among  themselves 
to  withdraw  an  equal  number  of  claims  and  objections  on  each 
side.  Without  having  consulted  the  voters  interested,  they 
sacrifice  their  more  or  less  well-founded  rights,  taking  care  only 
to  see  that  the  chances  of  the  parties  are  equal.  If  a  Revising 
Barrister  is  found  to  remind  them  that  by  acting  in  this  way 
they  allow  persons  to  get  on  the  register  who,  perhaps,  have  no 
right  to  a  vote,  or  vice  versa,  the  agents  of  the  Caucus  in  their 
turn  imperturbably  remind  him  of  the  regular  practice  accord- 
ing to  which  all  points  are  admitted  on  which  the  parties 
are  agreed.  When  a  party  Association  is  taken  unawares  by 
the  unexpected  number  of  claims  lodged  by  its  rival,  it  sallies 
forth  to  search  for  fresh  claims  so  as  to  be  a  mat«h  for  the  other 
side.  The  constituency  is  scoui-ed  in  every  direction  to  ferret 
out  "  political  friends  "  who  can  claim  to  be  put  on  the  register. 
As  long  as  it  was  supposed  that  they  were  not  wanted,  no  heed 
was  paid  to  them,  no  trouble  was  taken  to  make  the  exercise 
of  their  constitutional  right  easier  for  them,  to  give  these  indif- 
ferent voters  the  means  of  participating  in  civic  life,  to  arouse 
their  public  spirit;  it  was  only  when  the  party  was  in  danger 
that  the  Association  set  to  work  to  hunt  up  new  claims,  just  as 
in  war-time  on  the  approach  of  a  superior  force  of  the  enemy 
a  fresh  levy  of  troops  is  hastily  raised  to  procure  combatants, 
to  provide  food  for  powder. 

Thus,  thanks  to  the  complexity  and  intricacy  of  the  law, 
to  the  confusion  and  occasional  incoherence  of  the  judicial 
decisions  on  the  subject,  and  to  the  utterly  selfish  and  unscru- 
pulous activity  of  the  party  Associations,  England  still  has,  in 
spite  of  the  great  extension  of  the  right  of  voting,  equivalent 
almost  to  universal  suffrage,  an  "  artificial  instead  of  a  natural 
franchise."  as  has  been  more  than  once  noted  under  the  old 
regime.'  A  well-known  Conservative  election  agent,  whose 
double  capacity  of  Caucus  spcretary  and  Tory  clears  him  from 
all  sus]>icion  of  hostility  to  the  party  Associations  and  of  exces- 
sive i)artiality  for  the  widest  possible  exercise  of  the  vote,  testi- 

1  Blue  Booki,  lB6»-ia69,  Vol.  V!I.  §  1312. 


.coy  Google 


p.]      THE  ACTION  OF  THE  CAUCUS 


fies  to  this  state  of  things  in  eloquent  language  which  breathes 
an  honest  indignation :  "  The  franchise  has  been  made  a  mock- 
ery and  we  must  clear  away  the  endless  scandals  of  the  Eevi- 
sion  Courts.  The  law  on  the  subject  is  a  sealed  hook  except  to 
a  few,  and  those  who  are  neither  Tories  nor  Radicals  —  the 
neutrals  —  political  outcasts  —  suffer  most,  for  the  partj'  agents 
neglect  to  claim  for  them  if  let  off  the  list,  and  if  on,  each  side  is 
anxious  to  get  them  off,  as  neither  side  trusts  them.  The  prac- 
tical administration  of  the  law  should  not  be  made  the  toy  of 
any  political  party.  To  get  your  right  as  a  voter  you  have  to 
plead  before  barristers  (many  of  whom  api>arently  never  take 
the  trouble  to  study  the  law)  as  if  you  are  a  criminal,  or  leave 
it  to  party  agents,  some  of  whom  delight  to  squabble  indefi- 
nitely over  procedure  as  absurd  in  practice  as  in  theory  —  and 
even  then  you  are  liable  to  be  juggled  out  of  your  vote  by  legal 
quibble.  In  any  case  the  register,  when  complete,  is  a  trophy 
of  party  trickery  and  manipulation." ' 

The  Caucus  Associations  through  whom  this  "  party  trickery 
and  manipulation  "  is  practised  partly  cannot  help  it,  being  in 
a  way  driven  to  it  by  the  law  which  makes  straightforward  and 
open  action  a  difficult  matter.  Interfering,  as  they  do,  in  the 
making  up  of  the  register,  they  render  services  to  many  a 
voter  who,  left  to  his  own  resoui-cea,  would  never  have  been 
able  to  make  his  way  through  the  dense  jungle  of  law  and 
judicial  decision.  But  to  a  great  estcnt  the  Associations  are, 
as  we  have  been  able  to  see,  the  deliberate  authors  of  the 
state  of  things  which  the  Tory  secretary  rightly  describes  as 
scandalous.  For  in  it  they  try  to  find  influence  for  their  respec- 
tive parties  and  discover  a  justification  of  their  own  existence. 
On  the  pretext,  made  plausible  by  their  own  "  trickery  and  ma- 
nipulation," of  helping  the  voter  to  maintain  his  right,  the  cau- 
cuses worm  themselves  into  his  confidence  and  mark  out  in  his 
very  feelings,  so  to  speak,  the  lines  of  their  future  action,  of  the 
attempts  which  they  mean  to  make  on  him  when  election  time 
comes  round.  The  voters  who  have  got  on  or  kept  on  the 
register  with  the  help  of  tlie  Association  naturally  feel  under 
an  obligation  to  it.  If  they  were  old  adherents  of  the  party, 
they  are  confirmed  in  their  devotion  to  it;  if  they  were  hold- 
ing aloof  they  are  led  towards  it,  connections  and  ties  are 
I  Sammkry  of  a  speech  by  J.  H.  Botturuley  {England,  Till  Detwmbet,  IBS!*). 


.CD,  Google 


382  DEMOCRACY  AND  l-OLITICAL  PARTIES     [tuibd  pakt 

formed  between  them  and  it.  To  obtain  this  result,  those  who 
are  indifferent  or  iieiitrat  in  politics  are  sometimes  even  made 
to  believe  that  the  right  of  voting  has  been  secured  for  them 
by  the  exertions  of  the  Association  of  one  or  other  of  the 
parties,  when  in  reality  it  has  not  been  impugned  by  anybody.' 
Other  voters  whose  sympathies  are  entirely  with  the  party  in 
general,  are  obliged  to  its  concrete  represeutative,  the  Associa- 
tion, for  seeing  that  they  are  on  the  register,  while  not  at  all 
anxious  as  to  their  right,  and  they  get  into  the  habit  of  looking 
on  the  Association  with  a  friendly  eye  and  of  listening  to  its 
proposals.  In  any  event,  whatever  may  be  the  effects  on  the 
voters'  minds,  the  annual  campaign  of  registration  gives  the 
Caucus  an  opportunity  of  converting  it  into  a  regular  reeon- 
noissance.  The  Caucus  penetrates  into  their  conscience,  pries 
into  their  political  opinions,  in  defiance  of  the  secrecy  of  the 
vote,  and  having  ascertained  their  feelings  towards  itself,  is 
able  to  decide  on  the  nature  and  the  amount  of  the  influence 
which  must  be  brought  to  bear  on  the  voters  in  view  of  the 
great  battle  on  the  polling-day. 


Ill 

The  census  of  friends  and  of  enemies  having  been  taken,  the 
next  point  is  to  convert  the  latter,  if  possible,  to  keep  and  con- 
firm the  former  in  their  friendly  feelings  and  to  decide  the 
"doubtful"  ones  and  the  waverers.  The  only  fair  way  of 
doing  this  is  to  imbue  them  with  a  belief  in  the  creed  of  the 
party,  in  the  excellence  of  its  doctrines,  and  in  the  superiority 
of  its  conduct  over  that  of  the  rival  pai'ties.  The  efforts  which 
must  be  made  in  this   direction   constitute  the  second    great 

'  For  Instance,  a[i«r  tbe  close  □[  the  reK'^^'^t''"'  p">ceMlineg.  the  secreiaiy 
of  the,  we  will  say,  Uberal  Cnucas,  writes  the  follnwing  letter  to  a  Dumber  ut 
voters  whose  cases  have  not  come  before  the  Registration  Court  at  all :  "Dear 
9fr,  1  have  much  pleasure  In  iDforniing  you  that  In  spite  of  the  determined 
apposition  of  the  Tories  we  have  siirri^ed  in  keeping  your  name  OD  the  reg- 
ister." The  first  Impulse  of  the  recipient  of  this  note  la  to  fly  into  a  pession 
with  the  Tories  for  having  attacked  him  without  aof  provocation  on  his  part, 
as  ha  has  no  politics.  But  when  reason  reasserts  her  lights,  he  retlecls  that 
1/  the  Tories  wanted  to  deprive  him  of  his  vote,  he  must  be  their  political 
opponent,  and  if  this  is  so  it  follows  that  he  is  a  Liberal.  And  by  a  process  ot 
reasoning,  the  logical  strictness  of  which  is  nneiceptional.  he  thus  arrives 
at  the  concluBioQ  which  the  secretary  of  the  Caucus  was  driving  at. 


.CD,  Google 


BKCONBCiup.]       THE   ACTION   OP  THE   CAUCUS  883 

task  of  the  Associations,  that  of  the  political  editcation  of  the 
electorate. 

The  party  OrganizatioDS  supply  this  education  in  three  forms : 
public  meetings  and  other  large  gatherings,  lectures,  and  politi- 
cal literature  gratuitously  distributed.  Public  meetings  became 
from  the  outset  the  favourite  resource  of  the  caucuses.  They 
corresponded  with  the  idea  of  the  Caucus  that  political  prog- 
ress could  be  achieved  only  by  incessant  agitation,  and  that 
agitating  was  educating  the  country.  Besides,  the  old  method 
of  individual  conversion  seemed  impracticable  after  the  vast 
increase  in  the  number  of  voters  effected  by  successive  Re- 
form Bills,  whereas  meetings  presented  a  ready  means  of 
carrying  wholesale  the  masses  who  might  have  been  attracted 
to  them.  They  were  to  produce  the  same  result  as  steam  and 
machinery  taking  the  place  of  individual  labour  in  industry. 
In  any  event  meetings  serve  to  keep  up  a  noise  about  the  party, 
for  the  purpose  of  showing  that  it  is  alive  and  well.  If  only 
for  this  object,  therefore,  the  Cauciis  tries  to  organize  great 
party  gatherings  as  often  as  possible  without  waiting  for  them 
to  occur,  as  in  the  old  days,  more  or  less  spontaneously  and 
at  irregxdar  intervals.  But  to  make  a  good  show  of  the  party's 
strength,  which  the  meetings  are  intended  to  do,  they  must  not 
only  take  place  frequently  but  be  a  "  success,"  i.e.  get  together 
an  "  influential  platform,"  fluent  speakers,  and  of  course  a  large 
public.  If  the  meetings  were  not  held  often,  it  would  convey 
the  impression  that  the  party  is  losing  ground ;  but  if  they 
are  not  a  ''  success,"  the  party  is  none  the  better  for  them,  "it 
gives  a  bad  tone  to  your  party,"  as  an  expert  has  put  it. 

Practically  the  frequency  of  meetings  varies  a  good  deal 
with  the  localities.  In  small  places  there  are  not  always  large 
assembly  rooms  to  be  had ;  in  others  there  is  a  want  of  go ; 
in  others  again  the  reverse  is  the  case,  one  meeting  is  held 
after  another.  Sometimes  they  are  public  in  the  strict  mean- 
ing of  the  word,  sometimes  admittance  is  obtained  only 
through  tickets  distributed  by  the  Association.  Ticket  meet- 
ings are  in  vogue  especially  with  the  Tories,  who  have  not  yet 
quite  outgrown  their  traditional  distrust  of  the  people.  Their 
political  opponents,  however,  undertake  to  provide  them  with 
an  excuse  for  it;  for  when  the  Tories  organize  jinfi/ic  meetings, 
these  are  often  invaded  by  rowdies  from  the  opposite  camp. 


.coy  Google 


884  DBMOCRACT  AND  POLITICAL  PARTIES    [thibd  past 

It  will  be  remembered,  with  what  success  this  device  was  prac- 
tised at  Birmingham  under  the  paternal  eye  of  the  Liberal 
Association.  The  decline  of  habits  of  freedom  which  is  becom- 
ing more  and  more  a  characteristic  of  great  party  gatherings 
in  England  does  not  protect  even  ticket  meetings  from  disorder, 
especially  at  election  time. 

The  success  of  the  meeting  depends  first  and  foremost  on  the 
merit  of  the  speakers,  especially  in  the  absence  of  any  great 
political  event  or  of  an  incident  which  happens  to  stir  pul>- 
lic.opinion  and  to  draw  the  masses.  The  social  position  of  the 
speaker  is  an  important  claim  to  the  attention  of  the  public, 
but  his  oratorical  ability  is  far  more  so.  In  the  old  days  there 
was  no  need  to  be  an  orator  to  make  an  impression  on  an  Eng- 
lish audience ;  all  that  it  asked  for  was  sincerity  of  tone  and 
common  sense,  which  went  straight  not  only  to  its  homely 
intelligence  but  to  its  heart.  Form  was  of  no  account;  if  it 
was  somewhat  brilliant  it  even  raised  doubts  as  to  the  speaker's 
straightforwardness ;  he  was  suspected  of  being  like  an  actor 
who  has  learnt  his  part  and  who  wants  to  take  in  honest  folk. 
To  gain  the  ear  of  the  audience  it  was  even  not  amiss  to  tone 
down  one's  natural  volubility  a  little,  to  approximate  as  much  as 
possible  to  the  ordinary  style  of  speaking,  which  Lytton  Bulwer 
has  eulogized  as  follows :  "  Hesitating,  Humming,  and  Drawling 
are  the  three  Graces  of  our  conversation."  '  But  the  extension 
of  the  social  refinement  which  is  euphemistically  styled  culture 
and,  on  the  other  hand,  the  advent  of  democracy  have  changed 
all  this.  In  the  course  of  the  usual  process  of  a  surface  civili- 
zation which  develops  the  Eesthetic  feeling  of  the  common  herd 
by  giving  them  a  taste  rather  for  tan-driness  and  glaring  tints, 
and  in  consequence  of  the  efforts  made  to  win  the  new  master, 
the  sovereign  people,  who  is  even  more  naive  and  credulo<is  than 
imperious  and  infatuated,  by  oratorical  devices,  the  rhetoric 
of  politicians  has  rapidly  become  a  treat  for  the  masses  and 
the  clever  speaker  the  popular  favourite.  The  thirst  for  po- 
litical oratory  is  now  really  e xtrao I'd i nary  in  the  country. 
Some  time  ago  Lord  Salisbury  advised  his  followers  to  train 
themselves  to  be  able  to  meet  this  demand,  in  the  following 
terms  :  "  In  these  days,  whether  we  like  it  or  not,  the  power  is 
with  the  tongue,  the  £>ower  is  with  those  who  can  speak,  whether 
1  England  and  the  Eii-jlith,  Bouk  U,  Cb.  U. 


.coy  Google 


■BCOHDOHAP.]      THE  ACTION  OF  THE  CAUCUS  886 

on  the  platform  or  in  Farliament.  I  am  not  boldii^  up  tliis 
state  of  things  as  the  ideal  of  political  esistence,  but  as  a  fact 
with  which  we  are  confronted  now.  I  have  known  very  dis- 
tinguished orators  who  were  perfectly  incompetent  men,  and  I 
have  known  very  competent  men  who  could  not  put  two  sentences 
— two  grammatical  sentences  —  together.  But  in  spite  of  that 
fact,  it  remains  still  true  that  the  desire  for  oratory,  for  speak- 
ing on  every  platform  and  in  every  portion  of  the  country,  is 
intense,  and  seems  to  be  growing  in  intensity  every  year." ' 

The  Caucus,  on  its  side,  helps  to  gratify  this  craving  for 
oratory  and  to  stimulate  it.  To  some  who  are  always  dying 
to  speak  and  who  get  excited  and  intoxicated  with  their  own 
words,  it  supplies  a  pretest  for  airing  their  eloquence  in  the 
private  gatherings  of  the  Organization  and  then  in  the  public 
meetings.  To  others  the  Caucus  procures  opportunities  of 
hearing  good  speakers,  or  even  celebrated  orators,  who  come 
down  to  deliver  a  speech  by  invitation  of  the  Association.  A 
good  many  members  of  the  Association  join  them,  or  even  get 
elected  to  the  "hundreds"  simply  for  the  purpose  of  having  a 
good  place  at  the  large  meetings.  For  them  it  is  like  having 
a  box  at  the  opera.  Hence  the  importance  for  the  Association 
of  obtaining  for  its  public  meetiugs  speakers  who  can  make  an 
impression,  who  can  carry  away  the  audience;  otherwise  people 
would  not  come  to  them. 

The  usual  speakers  of  the  Association  are  its  own  members, 
the  President  and  other  ofRt'e-bearers,  who  are  sulficient  for 
every-day  requirements,  or  even  for  special  occasions  in  the 
wards  or  in  small  places  of  rural  constituencies.  Then  comes 
the  local  M.P.,  the  Member  of  Parliament  for  the  Division, 
who  is  obliged  to  appear  before  his  constituents  as  often  a^ 
possible  to  make  speeches  to  them.  But  the  great  attraction 
consists  in  the  speakers  imported  from  London,  the  "  big  guns." 
The  Association  communicates  with  them  directly  or  through 
the  central  Organization  of  the  party,  which  is  far  better  able 
to  induce  speakers  who  are  in  great  request  to  go  down  to 
the  place.  The  local  Associations  always  ask  for  an  M.P.  at 
least  to  be  sent  to  them,  if  they  cannot  aspire  to  the  honour  of 
obtaining  a  Cabinet  Minister  or  an  ex-Minister.  It  is  not  easy 
with  the  best  will  in  the  world  to  procure  them  this  last  article, 
I  Speech  □(  the  15th  July,  lS9t,  at  the  ULited  Clab. 


.coy  Google 


386  DEMOCRACT  AND  POLITICAL  PARTIES     [thirb  part 

for  England  liaa  oot  yet  got  as  far  as  some  contioeutal  countries 
in  whieh  parliamentary  government  has  had  the  effect  that 
nearly  everybody  has  beea  a  Minister.  English  Ministers  con- 
sist of  two  smaJl  groups  of  men  who  come  into  power  alter- 
nately for  a  whole  generation.  They  are  therefore  doled  out 
to  the  popular  audiences  in  the  provinces.  But  plain  M.P.'s 
aie  supplied  to  the  Associations  pretty  liberally.  It  is  in 
fact  on  them  that  the  duty  mostly  devolves  of  satisfying  the 
passion  for  oratory  with  which  their  fellow-citizens  are  afflicted. 
Formerly  a  Member  of  Parliament  seldom  spoke  even  in  his  own 
constituency;  a  special  occasion  was  required  for  it,  the  annual 
meeting  of  an  agricultural  society  or  some  other  similar  event. 
To  go  into  a  fellow-member's  constituency  and  harangue  his 
electors  was  considered  almost  a  breach  of  etiquette.  Nowa- 
days M.P.'s  do  very  little  else  ;  they  are  always  talking,  in  ses- 
sion and  out  of  it ;  no  rest  is  allowed  them.  They  are  legislators 
in  the  second  place  only  ;  their  main  function  is  to  be  commercial 
travellers  for  their  party  in  the  employ  of  the  Associations. 
Next  to  the  M.P.'s,  Associations  in  search  of  speechmakers 
have  a  very  valnable  resource  in  the  embryo  politicians,  most 
of  whom,  young  men  who  have  or  think  they  have  a  career 
before  them,  are  collected  in  London  in  special  chibs  with  the 
particular  object  of  providing  the  Organizations  of  their  re- 
spective parties  with  speakers.  ^Ve  shall  have  an  opportunity 
of  reverting  in  more  detail  to  these  "  speaking  clubs  "  later  on. 


IV 

However  much  the  social  and  intellectual  position  of  the 
speakers  may  differ,  the  eloquence  which  they  contribute  to 
the  meetings  has  something  in  common  which  gives  it  a  special 
stamp  in  spite  of  its  endless  variety.  With  but  few  exceptions 
their  speeches  are  fighting  harangries,  the  tone  of  them  is  po- 
lemical, marked  by  an  aggressive  ardour,  and  spiced  with  an 
ever-increasing  amount  of  epigram.  It  is  this  last  feature 
which  is  becoming  the  great  attraction  for  audiences  at  meet^ 
ings,  and  which  in  their  eyes  constitute.'!  the  true  orator.  The 
men  who  are  gifted  iii  a  high  degree  with  a  slashing  style  of 
eloquence,  the  smart  speakers,  are  at  a  premium  on  the  plat- 


.coy  Google 


SECOND  CHAP.]       THE   ACTION   OF  THE   CAUCUS  887 

form.  The  thirst  for  applause  is  too  great  for  them  not  to 
yield  to  the  temptation  to  put  themselves  on  a  level  with 
the  audience,  with  its  new  ideas  of  the  beautiful  and  also  of 
the  good.  For  at  the  same  time  that  a  smattering  of  culture 
was  developing  new  aesthetic  tastes  among  the  masses  in  the 
manner  juat  described,  the  progress  of  enlightenment  waa  ele- 
vating their  moral  taste.  Their  minds  began  to  be  more  keenly 
sensitive  to  every  aspiration  in  the  direction  of  justice  and 
goodness ;  every  lofty  aim  found  a  louder  echo  in  their  hearts ; 
in  a  word,  the  faculty  of  moral  enthusiasm  had  reached  a 
higher  point  in  the  multitude  than  it  had  ever  done  before. 
But  with  the  imperfect  culture  which  the  dawn  of  know- 
ledge brought  in  its  train,  this  enthusiasm  lacked  the  moderating 
influence  of  judgment.  Far  from  being  guided  by  discrimina- 
tion themselves,  from  undertaking  the  often  thankless  task  of 
commending  it  to  popular  audiences,  the  speakers  at  meetings 
are  inclined  to  trade  on  the  new  tendencies  of  the  popular 
mind.  Their  language,  breathing  a  spirit  which  sets  the  heart 
aglow,  and  interspersed  with  hits  at  their  opponents,  forms  a 
highly  seasoned  dish  which  agreeably  tickles  the  Eesthetic  and 
moral  palate  of  their  listeners.  The  platform  speakers  amuse 
and  edify  them  at  the  same  time.  The  anxiety  to  achieve 
this  double  result  prevents  the  most  cultivated  orators  from 
being  careful  in  the  choice  of  their  expressions  and  arguments, 
and  often  tempts  them  not  to  be  too  particular  even  about 
the  facts.  Those  who  are  on  the  highest  nings  of  the  political 
ladder,  the  responsible  statesmen,  are  not  always  able  to  resist 
this.  The  glare  of  the  footlights  dazzles  them,  and  the  im- 
mediate effect  produced  on  the  audience  carries  them  away. 
More  or  less  unconsciously  they  aim  at  the  imaginations  of 
their  listeners;  they  try  to  make  the  springs  of  enthusiasm 
within  them  gush  forth,  to  draw  out  their  emotions,  in  order 
to  enlist  them  in  the  service  of  the  party.  Through  the 
oratorical  electricity  which  they  discharge  on  the  masses, 
they  steep  them  in  the  party  spirit  with  which  they  them- 
selves are  profoundly  imbued.  This  spirit,  as  it  spreads  by 
contagion  through  the  assembled  masses,  inspires  them  with 
that  feeling  of  being  in  the  right  which  makes  the  disparage- 
ment of  opponents  a  meritorious  act,  which  lends  a  ceremonial 
dignity  to  the  cheers  and  laughter  that  emphasize  the  words 


.coy  Google 


8SS  DEMOCRACY  AND  POLITICAL  PARTIES     [thihd  nrr 

of  the  speaker,  and  which,  in  perfect  good  faith,  stifles  contrsr 
diction  whenever  it  ventures  to  raise  its  head.  The  great 
increase  in  the  number  of  meetings  due  to  party  neoessities 
tends  to  convert  this  style  of  eloquence  into  a  canon  and  a 
model.  Being  obliged  to  exert  himself,  that  is  to  say  his  tongue, 
too  often,  the  speaker  has  not  the  time,  even  if  he  haa  the  wish, 
to  think  out  his  speeches,  to  prepare  them.  He  is  compelled 
to  almost  improvise  them.  Having  to  prove  unceasingly  that 
his  party  is  invariably  right  and  to  crush  the  other  side  at  all 
hazards,  he  is  forced  to  lay  about  him  indiscriminately.  The 
inevitable  result  is  that  poverty  of  thought  takes  refuge  under 
strong  language  and  that  emptiness  of  matter  is  disguised  by 
rhetoric. 

True,  platform  eloquence,  as  developed  under  the  auspices  of 
the  caucuses,  marks  a  great  advance  on  that  of  the  hustings' 
of  the  preJemocratic  period.  However  hollow,  claptrap,  con- 
ventional, and  sectarian  the  langui^e  of  platform  speakers  may 
be,  it  claims  to  convince  the  audience,  it  makes  a  show  of 
bringing  forward  arguments  and  facte,  it  states  a  ca^e,  it  crltt- 
oises,  it  appeals  to  the  moral  feelings ;  whereas  the  hustings' 
speakers,  without  ti-oubling  their  heads  about  reasoning  and 
sentiments,  tried  to  win  the  applause  of  the  populace  gathered 
beneath  them  by  the  audacily  of  their  language  and  by  wit, 
often  of  a  vulgar  kind,  displayed  at  the  expense  of  political 
opponents.  The  platform  eloquence  of  the  present  day  is  also 
of  a  more  elevated  character  than  the  old  popular  eloquence  in 
vogue  at  the  time  of  great  political  movements,  such  as  the 
agitation  of  the  years  1816-1819,  or  Chartism.  But  while  the 
comparison  is  in  favour  of  the  public  meetings  of  our  own  day, 
yet  in  itself  it  is  perhaps  not  appropriate.  The  violent  and 
declamatory  language  of  the  Chartist  oratoi-s,  or  of  their  pre- 
decessors, was  simply  the  temporary  and  exceptional  effect  of 
popular  commotion  let  loose  by  misery  and  ignorance.  Nor 
was  the  hustings'  style,  which  was  of  more  regular  and  even 
of  periodical  occurrence,  a  model  for  extra-parliamentary  elo- 
quence.    In  the  public  existence  of  those  days  the  hustings' 

1  Before  the  introdurtion  of  the  ballot,  In  IRT2.  rAndldates  who  itood^or 
Parliament  appeared  before  the  electora  on  a  wooden  erection  called  "  hnat- 
iDgB,"  which  vaa  put  up  tor  the  oiTasion  by  the  authorities  in  one  ol  the  prin- 
dpal  pabllo  plaoei. 


.coy  Google 


ucoHU  CHAP.]      THE  ACTION  OF  THE  CAUCUS  889 

period  was  a  time  of  political  carnival  in  which  the  proprieties 
of  ordinary  life  were  in  a  way  suspended.  The  populace  took 
its  revenge  for  its  politic&l  and  social  inferiority  by  often 
amusing  itself  at  the  expense  of  the  candidates  tfaemselvea| 
who  were  obliged  to  enter  into  the  spirit  of  it.  It  was  the 
price  which  they  paid  for  their  election.  Their  eloquence  had 
to  adapt  itself  to  the  mind  and  the  mood  of  the  crowds  which 
surrounded  them,  and  of  course  its  level  was  not  a  high  one. 
But  this  was  of  no  consequence,  and  on  a  different  platform 
to  the  hustings  the  same  politician  spoke  a  different  lan- 
guage; he  had  another  model  of  eloquence  to  follow, — that  of 
the  parliamentary  arena.  Along  with  all  the  profound  changes 
which  parliamentary  eloquence  underwent  in  the  course  of  the 
last  century  of  the  pre-democratic  era,  it  always  preserved  a 
certain  elevation.  It  had  its  golden  a/ge,  under  the  two  last 
Georges,  from  Chatham  down  to  Canning,  in  the  period  which 
constituted  its  "  grand  si^cle  " ;  it  was  then  a  grand  style  of  elo- 
quence, majestic  and  thrilling,  aristocratic  and  refined.  With 
the  advent  of  the  middle  class  it  assumed  a  homely  garb ;  it 
became  a  commercial,  business  kind  of  eloquence,  not  brilliant, 
but  substantial  and  solid;  in  other  words,  honest.  It  still  bore 
this  character  as  it  passed  on  to  the  platform  when  the  ques- 
tions of  the  day  began  to  be  discussed  there,  especially  from 
the  time  of  the  agitation  against  the  Corn  Laws.  John  Bright 
appeared,  and  in  speeches  which  were  faultless  in  form  poured 
the  emotion  which  welled  up  from  the  depths  of  hia  inner  being 
over  the  hard  figures  and  the  facts  of  the  economic  controversy 
which,  in  the  mouth  of  Cobden  and  his  lieutenants,  appealed 
patiently  and  conscientiously  to  reason  and  to  judgment  He 
made  an  epoch,  but  left  no  school ;  his  oratory  was  not  a 
"manner"  which  could  be  learnt.  In  a  narrower  field  which 
was  confined  to  the  north  of  England,  another  great  popular 
orator,  Joseph  Cowen,  combined  the  old  and  the  new  style  of 
eloquence  in  language  marked  by  profound  thought,  full  of 
startling  imagery,  clearly  cut,  of  almost  monumental  concise- 
ness, expanded  on  the  one  hand  by  the  intense  heat  of  the 
speaker's  glowing  democratic  sympathies,  and  on  the  other  by 
the  abundance  of  ideas  and  facts  which  his  speeches  contained. 
But  they  were  too  polished  and  they  pre-supposed  far  more 
culture  and  intellectual  honesty  than  the  platform  admits  of, 


.coy  Google 


8»  DEMOCRACY  AND  POLITICAL  PARTIES     [third  pibt 

to  become  a  model.  It  was  reserved  for  the  illustvious  rival 
in  eloquence  of  Bright  and  of  tJowen,  for  Mr.  Gladstone,  to 
become  the  master,  the  elasaio  of  the  platform.  He  took  to  it 
rather  late  in  life,  after  a  political  career  of  more  than  thirty 
years,  but  be  did  so  at  the  psychological  moment  when  Eng- 
land was  on  the  eve  of  passing  into  democracy,  and  he  brought 
to  it,  besides  his  wonderful  talent,  certain  special  qualities 
which  particularly  commended  his  oratory  to  the  taste  of  the 
masses  and  made  it  a  sort  of  ideal.  Mr.  Gladstone's  language, 
which  was  generally  prolix,  met  the  popular  intelligence,  which 
lacks  discipline  and  likes  to  be  always  returning  to  the  charge 
in  its  reasoning,  half-way ;  the  consummate  art  with  which  he 
marshalled  facts  and  ideas  and  made  them  say  just  what  he 
wanted,  turned  the  masses  round  and  round  like  a  top  without 
giving  them  time  to  reflect;  the  torrents  of  passion  which, 
springing  from  the  depths  of  his  sincerity  and  conviction, 
flowed  through  his  oratory,  carried  them  completely  away. 
The  majority  of  platform  speakers  followed  this  great  model, 
exaggerating  especially  its  defects,  just  as  shadows  on  the  can- 
vas of  a  master  are  transformed  into  coarse  patehes  in  vulgar 
chromo  reprodiictions.  Aided  by  the  new  conditions  of  Eng- 
lish political  life  and  under  the  auspices  of  the  caucuses,  who 
have  made  themselves  as  it  were  contractors  for  public  meet- 
ings, this  chromolithoKraph  oratory,  with  its  verbiage,  its  facile 
sophisms,  and  its  real  or  simulated  passion,  has  become  only 
too  common  and  recalls  the  style  of  eloquence  which  has 
grown  up  amid  the  democracy  of  America  under  the  name  of 
"  stump  "  oratory.' 


However  unfounded  the  claim  of  the  meetings  to  supply 
the  masses  with  political  education  may  appear,  it  cannot  be 

>  In  the  w«Ht  ot  the  United  Sintes.  in  the  midst  of  settlements  run  up  on 
grouiid  bnrelf  cleared,  Htuinps  of  trues  served,  during  the  first  election  cam- 
paign, SM  a  platlorm  from  which  the  ad  venturers  who  solicited  the  suffrajMS  at 
their  casual  fellow-cllizens  haran$;ued  them  vUb  all  the  resources  of  an  un- 
scrupulous fluency.  In  conseqiienfie.  "  stump  "  has  become  a  term  o[  political 
slang,  meanlUK  mob  platform,  and  the  expressions  "  stamp  oratory,"  "  stump 
orator  "  became  synonymous  for  political  eloquence  of  a  hollow,  declamatory 
and  misleading  kind,  trading  on  the  credulity  and  passions  of  popular  audi- 
ences. The  vurd,  however,  is  now  used  in  unlluary  parlance,  without  haviug 
nec;.'ssarlly  an;  Invidious  meaning. 


.CD,  Google 


iicoNDCHAP.)       THE   ACTION  OP  THE  CAUCUS  891 

absolutely  disallowed;  for,  after  all,  scraps  of  information  and 
of  argument  do  fall  from  the  platform  which  may  now  and 
then  enlighten  the  audience  on  the  questions  of  the  day 
and  perhaps  make  them  reflect  on  such  matters.  But  the 
extent  to  which  these  effects  are  producible  can  only  be  very 
slight,  not  merely  on  account  of  the  tone  and  character  of  the 
eloquence  of  the  meetings,  but  also  because  both  parties  are 
not  heard  and  those  present  being  all,  as  a  rule,  of  the  same 
persuasion  see  only  one  side  of  the  shield.  At  meetings  of 
less  importance  it  is  often  allowable  to  ask  the  speakers  for 
explanations  by  means  of  brief  questions,  but  there  is  never 
any  discussion  or  debate.  Dissentients  may  speak,  that  is 
to  say  the  chairman  would  allow  them  to  do  so,  but  the 
audience  will  not  listen  to  them.  The  tolerant  frame  of  mind 
with  which  in  former  days  a  statement  of  views  manifestly 
opposed  to  the  general  sense  of  the  meeting  was  silently 
and  patiently  listened  to,  is  a  thing  of  the  past.'  It  is  true 
that  the  speakers  of  the  different  parties  often  reply  to  each 
other  in  the  respective  meetings  organized  by  their  political 
friends,  and  that  their  speeches,  reproduced  in  the  newspapers, 
can  be  read  and  compared.  But  this  publicity  falls  to  the  lot 
only  of  speakers  who  have  a  natitonal  reputation  and  whose 
sayings  and  doings  interest  public  opinion ;  the  speeches  of 
less  important  persons  can  iind  a  place  only  in  the  local  press, 
where  the  speech  of  the  political  opponent  is  smothered  in  a 
few  lines.  Even  if  the  speech  were  reported  at  greater  length 
the  reasoning  of  the  speaker  on  the  other  side  is,  in  this  form, 
only  a  piece  of  literature ;  it  no  longer  has  anything  in  common 
with  a  gathering, at  which  people  argue  face  to  face.  After 
all,  the  fact  is  that  in  the  meetings  it  is  a  case  of  preaching 
to  converts,  and  that  their  sole  object  is  to  besprinkle  the 
audience  with  the  magnetic  party  fluid,  to  kindle  the  ardour 
which  is  smouldering  within  them,  or,  to  use  the  favourite  term 
by  which  the  leaders  of  the  caucuses  express  their  favourite 
idea,  to  "  raise  ei]thuaiasm,"  or  at  least  to  convey  the  illusion 
of  it  to  the  public. 

Here  we  have  the  dominant  thought  which  prescribes  the 
choice  of  the  sjieakers  as  well  as  the  style  of  eloquence  con- 


.coy  Google 


S92  DEMOCRACY  AND  POLITICAL  PARTIES     [ihibd  p*bt 

tributed  to  tlie  meetings,  and  even  the  mise-en-nc^ne  of  these 
gatherings.  The  great  meetings  organized  by  the  Associations 
generally  admit  of  a  musical  part  in  their  programme;  songs 
composed  for  the  uae  of  parties  are  sung  at  them,  with  the 
accompaniment  of  an  orchestra.  The  mere  fact  of  singing  at 
political  gatherings  is  no  novelty,  but  formerly  it  occurred  only 
in  times  of  great  political  agitations,  and  consequently  the  songs 
were  then  songs  for  a  special  occasion  inspired  by  a  cause,  by 
a  particular  claim  which  had  the  power  of  stirring  the  heart. 
Of  this  kind  were  the  hymn  of  the  Birmingham  Political 
Union  demanding  Parliamentary  Reform,  the  Anti-Corn  Law 
hymns,  and  the  Poor  Men's  Songs  composed  on  the  occasion 
of  the  agitation  against  the  Corn  Laws.  After  1868,  especially 
under  the  auspices  of  the  caucuses  of  both  parties,  political 
songs  were  introduced  to  serve  as  a  liturgy,  so  to  speak,  to 
exalt,  not  so  much  a  particular  cause,  as  the  church  and  the 
saints  of  the  party,  the  great  leaders  on  each  side.  At  first 
there  was  a  rather  strong  opposition  to  it,  to  wit,  in  the  Liberal 
camp,  where  a  good  many  were  of  opinion  that  political  meet- 
ings were  not  "music-halls."'  But  people  soon  got  used  to 
it.  In  the  extreme  north  of  England  and  in  Scotland  singing 
was  not  a  success ;  the  cold  and  more  thoughtful  temperament 
of  the  population  does  not  lend  itself  suDiciently  to  it.  The 
object  of  most  of  the  songs  is  to  foster  general  party  virtues, 
such  as  devotion  to  and  admiration  for  the  leaders  and  a  re- 
solve to  march  shoidder  to  shoulder  a^inst  the  enemy.  Some- 
times stanzas  composed  for  the  occasion  are  introduced.*    The 

1  It  is  not  wlthont  interest  tn  oompare  this  pralast,  wb<ch  proceeded  from 
man  belongiDic  rallier  to  the  cuUivaled  classes,  with  a  nlmilat  maul  tea  tation 
of  leaders  uf  labour  at  a  distant  and  memorable  date.  It  occurred  duriue  ths 
years  I81A-IHI9.  wbeo,  at  the  time  of  the  political  awakening  of  the  masitei 
which  had  led  to  ao  many  public  and  secret  meetlnfm.  a  proposal  was  alao 
made  to  introdace  the  stimulant  of  Tocal  music  (Samuel  Bamford,  Fattaget 
infAc  £(/'«o/aAa(Jicn2,  new  edition,  18.'!^,  p.  I3r>). 

■  The  following  are  some  specimens  of  soiigH  suuk  at  meetings ; 
Eakl  Bbacohsfibld  is  a  Rrharkablb  Uax 

(Tune  -  Jfff  Gri,i,d.f-ithrr  ,r.„  a  M..M   WomtirX„l  ItOO'l 

Earl  Bcaconstield  is  a  remarkable  man. 
The  best  one  to  lead  the  Conservative  van ; 

Then  flock  to  the  poll,  all  Couservativea  qnick, 
And  make  ilie  Kads  h<dd  the  wnnii!  end  of  the  ttKk, 
Astoniah  the  niinils  of  Kreat  William  and  Bright, 
As  the;  see  lor  themselves  their  deplorable  dight ; 


.CD,  Google 


8BCOBDCHAP.]       THE   ACTION  OF  THE   CAUCUS  SOS 

extracts  given  below  -prove  that  the   tyre  of  the   party  Tyr- 
tEBuses  is  remarkable  not  so  much  for  its  poetic  beauties  as 

While  Harcourt  and  Chamberlaia,  Pamell  and  Biggar, 
Look  pale  as  a  inmlp,  ur  black  as  a  Digger! 
And  give  the  beat  aid.  as  you  certainly  can. 
To  BeacuoaQeld,  who's  a  remarkable  man, 
To  Beacongfleld,  who's  a  remarkable  mani 

Then  &i  him  in  office  and  keep  out  the  Etads, 

And  all  the  roogh  lot  of  Political  Cods ; 

Old  Eaglaod  through  them  must  receive  do  more  hart, 

Be  snabb'd  throughoat  Europe,  and  dragg'd  in  the  dirt. 

Our  trae  British  Queen  with  her  people  so  free 

Must  be  first  of  all  nations  o'er  land  and  o'er  sea  I 

And  so  abe  will  iLBep  if  the  reign's  not  a  span 

Of  Beaconslield,  who's  a  remarkable  manI 

Of  BeacoDSiield,  who's  a  remarkable  man  t 

{Contentative  Election  Songi,  Loud.  1880.) 

Th*  Uniowihts'  8ono  (of  recent  dale) 
{Mj—niMtrmnid) 
Don't  you  think  that  the  Badicala  have  meddled  quite  enough 
With  the  Army,  and  the  Navy,  and  the  Church? 
About '  three  acres  and  a  cow '  they  made  a  grand  old  rotr. 
But  they  Ml  the  British  workman  in  the  lurch,  the  Inrcb,  the  lurch, 
They  left  the  British  workman  in  the  lurch. 

Chorut 
For  Harcourt  and  John  Horley  now  may  roar, 

And  the  Grand  Old  Man  may  crow. 

But  we  jolly  Unionists  will  head  the  poll  again, 

And  the  Radicals  will  all  be  down  below,  below,  below, 

The  Radicals  will  all  be  down  below ! 

(Puhliflhed  by  the  Central  Contervative  Qfflet.) 
The  Libbkal  Maecr 
Hen  and  Liberals  I  ye  whose  acUon 
Put  to  tout  the  Tory  taction. 
Follow  still  the  chiefs  wbo  led  ye. 
Keep  your  ranks  still  firm  and  steady. 
In  their  ratiks  spread  wild  distraction 
Vanquished  all  their  bands. 
Keep  your  swords  still  sharp  and  ready. 
Ready  to  your  hands. 

Shoulder  press  to  shoulder, 
Ouward  march  and  bolder. 
Triumphs  more  we  yet  shall  see 
Before  we  are  much  older. 


.coy  Google 


3M  DBHOCRACr  AND  FOLITICAL  1>ABT1£S     [thikd  fabt 

for  the  ardour  of  its  sentiments.     The  music  of  the  songs  is 
taken  in  preference  from  well-known  airs,'  which  flatter  the 

GlHdstDDfi'a  goreniineDt  thiill  tale  oa, 
Man  like  these  will  lead,  not  Bchool  ns, 
Tory  Peers  no  more  sliall  fool  us. 

We've  a  better  way  I 
Equal  rigliu  all  shall  be  sbaiiog, 
Equal  burdena  all  be  bearing; 
Each  for  all,  tor  all  each  caring  — 

Hail  the  bapp;  day. 

Trb  Grand  Old  Man 
O  batk!    O  heart  how,  far  and  near 
Through  all  this  ancient  land. 
The  annles  ot  Reform  have  made 
Their  last  brave  aland. 

A  icraud  old  cause  have  we, 
A  Grand  Old  Man. 
He  knows  the  way  to  victory. 
The  Grand  Old  Han '. 

{Songi  for  lAberaU.) 
Thk  Gband  Old  Standard 
Rise,  ye  tuning  suns  of  labour. 

Crush  oppression  strong. 

Uberty  and  Pn^tress  brighten 

At  your  thrilling  song.      ' 

Baise  It  up,  the  grand  old  standard, 

Flaunt  the  banners  wide. 
Join  the  mighty  march  for  Freedom, 

Victory's  on  our  side. 

Btand  and  view  the  glorious  programme 

Which  is  to  he  won. 
Loudly  greet  the  grand  old  leader 

Till  his  days  are  done. 

See  the  Tories,  they  are  nowhere 

'Midst  our  tcirci'  arrayed  ; 
When  the  victory  i«  "i^f 

Won't  they  look  disraayedl 
{Songt  inufd  by  the  IahuIou  Liberal  and  RaHeal  I7hi«n.) 


.coy  Google 


smcosDCHAP.]      THE  ACTION  OF  THE  CAUCUS  306 

ear  of  the  audience  and  even  enable  them  to  sing  in  chorus.  If 
everybody  cannot  speak,  everybody  can  sing.  Moreover,  they 
are  all  allowed  to  join  personally  in  the  proceedings  outside 
the  musical  part,  and  to  contribute  to  it  in  other  ways  besides 
applause  and  shouts ;  voting  goes  on  as  well,  and  everybody 
can  lift  up  his  hand ;  after  every  couple  of  speeches  delivered 
a  resolution  is  generally  put  to  the  meeting,  declaring,  approv- 
ing, or  censuring  something  or  somebody.  Finally,  when  all 
the  regular  speeches  are  at  an  end,  thanks  are  voted  to  the 
Chairman  of  the  meeting,  on  a  motion  made  with  moi'e  or  less 
brevity  but  always  by  a  couple  of  speakers,  the  proposer  and 
the  seconder. 

For  some  time  past  it  has  become  a  common  practice  to  hold 
party  meetings  out-of-doors  (open-air  meetings),  in  a  public 
place,  a,  garden  or  a  park.  The  masses  are  more  easily  at- 
tracted there,  especially  in  the  summer  time,  anil  the  expense  of 
hiring  a  large  room  is  saved.  In  the  field  of  religious  propa- 
ganda dissent  long  ago  popularized  outdoor  meetings.  The 
great  founders  of  Methodism,  John  Wesley  and  \V!iit«fieId, 
deserting  the  consecrated  places  of  worship  and  the  respect- 
able people  who  frequented  them,  preached  in  the  open  air, 
amid  the  fields,  to  thousands  of  brutalized  miners,  and  it  was 
there  that  they  achieved  their  greatest  successes  by  plunging 
the  assembled  multitudes  into  nervous  crises,  by  exciting  to 
the  point  of  hyst«ria  the  religious  enthusiasm  which  they 
awakened  in  these  rude  and  untutored  souls.  Since  then 
preaching  in  the  streets  has  become  a  regular  feature  of  Eng- 
lish life,  as  any  foreigner  taking  a  walk  on  Sunday  can  see ; 
but  this  has  not  made  it  more  respectable,  for  it  is  addressed 
to  the  dregs  of  the  population  collected  from  the  street- 
crossings.  The  temperance  propaganda,  which  is  also  carried 
on  in  the  streets,  is  addressed  to  the  same  social  class. 
Political  outdoor  gatherings,  not  having  even  the  possible 
excuse  of  saving  souls,  were  in  bad  odour  up  to  a  recent  date ; 
they  had  something  at  once  common  and  revolutionary  about 
them.  True,  in  the  old  days,  under  the  Georges,  "  county 
meetings  "  occasionally  assembled  in  the  open  air  on  a  green ; 


.coy  Google 


SOe  DEMOCRACY  AND  POLITICAL  PARTIES     [thied  p*»t 

but  their  accessories  were  not  so  much  vulgar  as  rustic,  the 
political  life  of  the  natiou  being  at  that  time  concentrated  not 
in  the  towns,  but  in  the  rural  part  of  the  country,  in  the 
counties.  These  gatherings,  at  which  freeholders  alone  could 
speak,  and  which  the  rest  attended  only  as  spectators,  were 
almost  official  functions ;  they  were  presided  over  by  the 
sheriff.  Occasionally,  mostly  at  times  of  agricultural  crises, 
they  discussed  the  ecoaomic  situation  and  incidentally  politics 
as  well.'  It  was  only  in  the  towns,  amid  vast  agglomerations 
of  people  brought  together  by  the  great  outburst  of  industry, 
that  outdoor  political  assemblages,  with  their  character  of 
menace  to  public  order,  came  into  fashion,  when  the  first 
mutteriugs  of  revolt  were  heard  among  the  working  classes. 
The  disappearance  of  great  popular  agitations,  completed  by 
the  extension  of  the  suffrage  to  the  urban  masses,  has  deprived 
gatherings  of  this  kind  of  their  revolutionary  acuteness,  while 
the  patronage  bestowed  on  them  by  the  party  Associations, 
anxious  to  attract  the  multitude,  made  open-air  meetings  if  not 
respectable,  at  all  events  acceptable.  At  the  outset,  many  an 
influential  memlier  of  the  Caucus,  even  among  its  founders  at 
Birmingham,  felt  scruples  about  encouraging  them,  but  the 
great  organizer  asserted  that  they  were  "excellent  for  raising 
enthusiasm,"  and  they  let  things  take  their  course.  Nowadays 
no  speaker  or  politician,  even  of  the  highest  rank,  would  refuge 
to  address  an  open-air  meeting;  even  the  "last  Whigs"  are 
obliged  to  subu;iit  to  it  to  get  at  the  masses,  just  like  the 
ultra-Radical  speakers,  ranting  in  public  thoroughfares,  who 
are  called  and  who  humorously  style  themselves  "  gutter  poli- 
ticians." The  Tories  are  not  less  ready  to  take  to  open-air 
meetings.* 

1  Ct.  H.  Jephson,  T^e  Flat/orm,  1.  BT5,  aod  the  p«SM(C«  qooM  from  tbe 
Ltttnt  tur  VAngteUrre,  in  182S,  b;  SUel-HoUuln,  tba  husboad  of  Madune 
de  9t>el. 

» In  the  Tory  party,  but  outside  Its  official  orgaiilratlon,  a  special  leatroe 
baa  recently  been  fminded  to  compete  with  the  Radical  propaganda  In  tbe 
streets  of  Loudon.  Thi*  oreanlzation,  whlrli  has  taken  the  title  of  The  Con~ 
ililiilionul  Opi^ii-Air  Lfaf/tie,  Is  composed  ol  worklngmen,  who  on  Sunday 
"hold  open-alt  meetlnKS  in  places  which  were  hitherto  left  to  the  Radical 
and  Socialist  demaKoKues."  Thereupon  orthodox  Muuists  rftlled  the  question 
whether  the  Fonrtb  Commandment  was  not  broken  l>y  talking  politica  on  tbe 
Sabbath,  to  which  other  casui.ita  trlampbanlly  rejoined  that  there  could  be  no 
barm  In  preventing  "  a  poor  workingman  from  tailing  into  tbe  Socialist  pit  on 


.coy  Google 


■BCOMOCHAP.]       THE   ACTION   OF  THE   CAUCUS  897 

With  the  meetings  are  connected  the  p&rty  demongtrationt. 
These  are  large  extraordinary  gatherings,  the  principal  object 
of  which  is  to  convey  an  impression  of  the  numerical  strength 
of  the  party  and  of  its  enthusiasm.  The  display  of  these 
forces  is  intended  again  to  stimulate  the  zeal  of  the  rank 
and  file,  to  give  confidence  to  the  leaders,  and  finally  to  carry 
away  the  waverers,  to  win  them  by  the  contagion  of  en- 
thusiasm. The  mue-en-sc^ne  here  consequently  comes  before 
the  oratory.  Those  who  take  part  in  the  demonstration  arrive 
in  a  procession  with  flags  and  banners,  to  the  sound  of  drums 
-  and  fifes.  Special  trains  are  organized  to  bring  people  from 
the  neighbourhood  at  reduced  fares.  If  the  meeting  is  a 
particularly  large  one,  improvised  speakers  address  the  crowd 
which  has  not  been  able  to  get  into  the  hall,  in  another  build- 
ing or  even  on  the  staircase  (overflow  meeting).  When  the 
demonstration  takes  place  out  of  doors,  several  platforms  are 
erected  from  which  the  orators  speak  simultaneously.  The 
voting  of  the  resolutions  is  sometimes  accompanied  by  blasts 
from  a  trumpet.  Evening  open-air  demonstrations  present  an 
opportunity  for  lighting  torches  and  marching  with  lanterns  in 
the  hand.  The  proportions  and  the  programme  of  demonstra- 
tions, however,  vary  a  good  deal.  Every  meeting  of  exceptional 
importance  assumes  the  character  of  a  demonstration,  even  if 
there  is  no  great  display,  so  that  it  is  not  always  easy  to  draw 
the  line  l>etween  a  demonstration  and  a  meeting;  a  "mass 
meeting,"  a  meeting  with  "  big  guns  "  imported  from  London, 
fully  answers  the  purpose  aimed  at  by  demonstrations.  The 
peripatetic  gatherings  of  the  general  meetings  o£  the  Grand 
Caucus  with  its  thousands  of  delegates,  or  even  of  its  district 
branches,  belong  to  the  same  category.  The  great  demonstra^ 
tions,  being  difficult  to  organize  and  entailing  considerable 
expense,  are  comparatively  rare.  To  a  certain  extent  they  fol- 
low the  lead  of  political  events;  when  the  latter  stir  up  party 
spirit,  or  when  the  managers  of  the  caucuses  want  to  raise  it 
to  a  higher  pitch,  the  demonstrations  serve  to  make  it  break 
out;  sometimes,  on  the  other  hand,  when  a  complete  calm 
prevails,  they  are  administered  as  a  heroic  remedy,  to  rouse 

Che  Sabbath  Day,"  and  that  ibe  members  of  the  LeaRiie  ought  to  caotlaue 
to  "  (w  forlh  on  the  Sabbath  to  speak  for  their  Ood,  their  Qaeen,  and  their 
coaatry"  {England,  3a.D.  Itt92). 


.CD,  Google 


898  DEHOCRACT  AND  POLITICAL  PARTIES    [tbird  pakt 

aa  apathetic  and  sluggish  constituency  on  which  the  ordinary 
Btimulanta  of  the  Caucus  have  had  no  effect. 

lu  the  rural  districts  with  their  scattered  population,  utterly 
indifferent  to  politics,  meetings  have  not  been  able  to  develop 
to  the  same  extent  as  in  the  towns.  Besides,  it  is  not  always 
easy  to  find  a  room,  or,  occasionally,  an  audience.  Sometimes 
people  are  afraid  of  attracting  notice  by  going  to  a  meeting  of 
either  party,  and  of  offending  the  landlord  or  the  employer  who 
holds  dilTerent  political  views.  But  this  is  the  esception.  As  a 
general  rule,  everybody  goes  to  the  meetings  as  they  would  to 
a  play.  For  some  time  past  the  Organizations  liave  tried  to 
make  the  performance  attractive  as  well  as  effective,  especially 
by  means  of  travelling  vans  provided  with  speakers.  These 
latter  travel  about  like  hawkers  or  gypsies,  in  carts  which  serve 
them  as  a  house  and  have  a  kitehen,  bedroom,  etc.  The  ring- 
ing of  a  bell  or  the  blowing  of  a  trumpet  announces  the  entry  of 
the  van  into  the  village,  where  it  at  once  attracts  general  atten- 
tion by  its  exterior,  the  ornaments,  the  flags,  the  portraits  of 
the  great  leaders  of  the  party  covering  the  panels  of  the 
vehicle,  A  notice  sent  round  from  house  to  house  invites  the 
inhabitatits  to  the  meeting  in  the  evening.  Sometimes  it  is 
circulated  by  the  village  children,  to  whom  handbills  with  pict- 
ures are  distributed.  The  meeting  takes  place  indoors,  like 
ordinary  meetings,  with  a  committee  oi  at  all  events  a  chair- 
man who  introduces  the  speaker  to  the  audience,  or  out-of-doors 
on  the  village  green.  In  the  latter  case  the  van  supplies  the 
platform  from  which  the  speaker  addresses  the  crowd.  Ke 
often  illustrates  his  speech  with  pictures  from  a  magic  lan- 
tern ;  portraits  of  party  celebrities  or  scenes  relating  to  po- 
litical events.  The  van  is  provided  for  tliis  purpose  with 
compressed  gaa  and  other  accessories  required  for  making 
projections  on  a  screen.  The  meetings  are  not  the  only 
opportunity  which  the  speaker  has  of  carrying  on  his  proi>a- 
ganda;  he  accosts  persons  he  meets  on  the  road,  he  stops 
before  the  smallest  crowd.  He  calls  on  people  to  catechise 
them  in  private.  At  the  meetings  and  on  every  other  occasion 
he  distributes  political  pamphlets  gratuitously.  This  method 
of  propaganda  has  a  good  deal  of  success  in  the  villages,  owing 
to  the  attraction  of  novelty  which  it  offers  and  to  the  curiosity 
which  it  excites;  but  it  is  too  expensive  for  party  organiza- 


.coy  Google 


SECOND  CH*p.]      THE  ACTION   OF  THE   CAUCUS  391) 

tions,  which  are  always  in  want  of  funds,  to  be  able  to  make 
much  use  of  it. 

VI 

Next  to  the  meetings  come  the  lectures,  as  an  instrument 
of  party  propaganda.  While  the  speeches  at  the  meetings 
are  by  their  nature  muie  or  less  polemical,  the  lectures  are 
supposed  to  be  above  all  didactical.  Being  more  objective  both 
in  form  and  substance,  their  aim  is  to  instruct  the  audience  on 
particular  subjects  connected  with  politics.  This  character 
no  doubt  should  give  the  lectures  the  first  place  in  the  logical 
order  of  instruments  of  political  education,  but  in  practice 
they  come  far  behind  the  platform.  The  number  of  political 
lectures  delivered  to  popular  audiences  is  continually  decreas- 
ing in  the  country.  This  phenomenon  is  due  to  two  causes: 
the  party  Organizations  are  sparing  of  lectures,  and  the  pub- 
lic does  not  appreciate  them  enough,  does  not  take  to  them. 
In  fact,  the  share  assigned  to  lectures  in  the  labours  of  the 
official  Organizations  has  never  been  considerable.  The  Tories 
have  only  recently  become  propagandists,  at  a  time  when, 
being  unable  to  hold  their  own  by  means  of  "influences,"  they 
found  themselves  obliged  to  appeal  also  to  the  public  intelli- 
gence. With  the  Liberals,  on  the  other  hand,  lectures  were 
formerly  much  in  vogue,  but  when  the  Caucus  began  to  take 
up  the  work  of  political  propaganda,  it  directed  its  main 
efforts  to  "organization"  and  agitation  by  meetings,  and 
thrust  lectures  into  the  background.  This  was  the  very  point 
in  which  it  differed  from  the  Liberal  Organizations  of  the 
opposite  type,  such  as  the  Naiional  Reform  Union  and  the 
London  and  Couiities'  Union,  which  held,  as  we  are  aware, 
that  the  future  of  the  Liberal  party  depended,  not  ou  the 
management  of  voters,  but  on  the  development  of  political 
education  in  the  true  meaning  of  the  word.  "Ignorance  is 
the  mother  of  Toryism,"  exclaimed  the  organ  of  the  Reform 
Union,  "and  the  present  generation  is  lamentably  ignorant." ' 
The  Reform  Union,  as  well  as  the  London  Union  during  its 
short  existence,  held  one  lecture  after  another,  whereas  the 
Birmingham  Caucus  (with  its  branches)  started  twenty  or 
1  Ma'ic/ie$ter  Critic.  2ah  JaQuary,  1879. 


.coy  Google 


400  DEMOCRACY  AND  POLITICAL  PARTIES    [thibd  pm 

thirty  meetings  in  wliioh  "enthusiasm  was  raised"  for  one 
lecture.  Having  become,  after  1886,  master  of  the  organiza- 
tion of  the  party  tliroughout  the  country,  the  Liberal  Caucus 
has  not  changed  its  ways;  it  has  even  become  more  engrossed 
in  demonstrations  and  electioneering. 

On  the  other  haud,  it  is  only  just  to  poiat  out  that  the  very 
moderate  zeal  of  the  caucuses  for  lectures  is  in  no  way  stimu- 
lated by  the  public.  There  are  not  many  people  who  care  for 
the  political  lectures  which  are  provided :  sometimes,  it  would 
appear,  the  lecturers  do  not  know  how  to  inte}-eat  their  audi; 
ences;  at  others  their  language  is  above  the  heads  of  the  public 
which  they  address;  or  agaiu  their  subjects  are  not  happily 
chosen.  There  is  doubtless  a  large  element  of  truth  in  these 
explanations,  but  the  great,  the  primary,  reason  which  over- 
shadows all  the  others  is  that  by  far  the  greater  part  of  the 
English  masses  are  still  unable  to  take  an  intelligent  interest 
in  political  questions.  They  lack  the  rudiments  of  culture 
and  the  mental  discipline  necessary  to  concentrate  their  atten- 
tion for  half  an  hour  oil  a  subject  outside  the  preoccupations 
of  their  daily  life.  It  is  needless  to  add  tliat  there  is  a  mi- 
nority, very  small  it  is  true,  to  wiiich  this  remark  is  not 
applicable.  There  are  exceptions,  there  are  even  exceedingly 
brilliant  ones.  In  Lancashire,  and  higher  up  in  the  north 
of  England,  as  well  as  in  Scotland,  workmen  can  be  found 
who  possess  a  political  culture  very  superior  to  that  of  many 
a  member  of  the  House  of  Commons.  But  the  vast  majority 
of  the  people  have  no  interest  in  or  intelligence  for  political 
matters.  Kept  by  the  old  ruling  classes  in  ignorance,  partly 
by  design,  partly  through  neglect,  they  have  been  abruptly 
"  brought  within  the  pale  of  the  Constitution "  by  the  cal- 
culations and  the  manceuvres  of  the  parties,  in  their  head- 
long race  for  power.  After  the  event  people  saw  that  they 
must  "educate  their  masters,"  and  they  set  to  work  to  teach 
them  the  alphabet.  In  tliis  respect  the  Education  Act  has 
produced  important  results,  —  it  has  spread  instruction  far 
and  wide  in  the  country.  The  number  of  illiterate  persons 
has  fallen  remarkably  low,  but  the  intellectual  standard  of 
the  masses  has  scarcely  risen.  One  might  almost  say  that  it 
has  rather  declined;  for  they  turn  out  a  smaller  proportion  of 
people  who  take  a  really  tbouglitful  interest  in  politics  than 


.coy  Google 


»BCOKDCH*p.]     THE  ACTION  OF  THE  CAUCUS  401 

formerly.  In  fact,  there  is  more  reading  bat  less  thinking, 
mnch  leas  than  there  used  to  be,  "Twenty  or  thirty  years 
^o,"  as  a  veteran  of  the  ^lite  of  the  working  class  remarked, 
"the  people  read  one  book;  now  they  only  read  ephemeraj 
things."  Even  in  popular  circles  where  people  plume  them- 
selves on  advanced  ideas,  where  they  talk  of  principles,  of 
rights,  they  read  little  or  nothing,  and  conline  themselves  to 
retailing  stereotyped  phrases  which  hare  l>ecome  common 
property.  In  its  somewhat  pathetic  form,  the  following  ex- 
clamation of  an  old  working-man  was  only  a  true  picture  of 
the  real  state  of  things :  "  In  my  time,  sir,  no  one  talked  of  the 
'Rights  of  Man '  without  having  read  Thomas  Painel  Every- 
body who  laid  claim  to  be  a  Radical  had  read  Paine,  had  read 
Ernest  Jones."  In  fa«t,  they  were  read  and  other  authors 
besides.  The  fervour  of  the  fiery  American  apostle  and  the 
lyrical  effusions  of  the  English  agitator  were  far  from  monopo- 
lizing the  people's  minds;  even  the  rigid  dialectic  of  Bentham 
penetrated  into  these  circles.  Societies  of  working-men 
bought  books  wholesale  at  a  reduced  price,  to  retail  them  to 
their  members  at  cost  price.  Clubs  for  study  were  formed, 
composed  of  twenty  or  thirty  persona,  in  which  political 
works  were  read  and  discussed,  as,  by  the  way,  used  to  be 
done  at  a  more  remote  epoch,  full  of  gloomy  memories  for  the 
people,  during  the  years  which  followed  the  Peaee  of  1S15, 
in  the  Hampden  Clubs,  the  members  of  which  met  regularly 
once  a  week  for  reading  and  discussion.'  At  the  present  time 
the  principal,  if  not  the  only,  political  pabulum  of  the  great 
majority  of  the  people  is  the  newspapers,  and  even  they  are 
read  in  another  way,  and  different  things  are  read  in  them 
than  used  to  be  the  case.  Formerly,  before  the  repeal  of  the 
paper  duty  in  1860,  a  working-man  could  not  afford  to  buy  a 
newspaper;  the  whole  workshop  subscribed,  they  took  in  a 
paper  at  a  penny  an  hour;  one  of  them  read  it,  and  the  rest 
listened  to  htm  in  solemn  silence  and  with  nntlagging  atten- 
tion. Then  the  comments  began;  the  cleverer  ones  discussed 
and  explained  the  subject,  and  every  one  learnt  something. 
Now,  with  the  development  of  the  cheap  Press,  a  workman 
can  buy  a  newspaper  all  to  himself  for  a  halfpenny,  and  can 
read  it  alone  and  take  what  he  likes  from  it.  Being  full  of 
'  Bam  ford.  T. 


.CD,  Google 


403  DBMOCBACT  AND  POLITICAL  PARTIES    [tbibd  pakt 

small  items  of  news,  the  paper,  instead  of  concentrating  tbe 
attention  of  tlie  reader,  makes  it  flit  from  paragraph  to  para- 
graph, and  in  the  long  run  brings  more  weariness  than  rest 
or  food  to  the  mind.  As  a  rule,  there  is  only  one  part  of  the 
paper  which  is  read  with  serious  attention,  — the  columns  de- 
voted to  sport.  The  interest  in  sport,  including  betting,  has 
become  a  regular  endemic  disease,  which  ravages  the  country. 
If  people  do  not  lose  their  money  over  it,  they  squander  their 
capacity  for  curiosity  on  it;  in  the  workshop  sport  is  talked, 
during  the  meals  which  are  eaten  in  common  tbe  last  match 
is  discussed,  in  the  groups  standing  about  in  the  streets  of  an 
evening  or  on  Sunday  football  remains  the  topic  of  conversa- 
tion, in  nine  cases  out  of  ten.  Not  to  mention  the  public- 
houses,  the  music-halls  and  concert-rooms  in  the  large  towns 
have  their  share  in  diverting  the  workmen  from  improving 
their  minds,  The  conditions  of  labour  in  modem  industry, 
to  which  the  opponents  of  industrialism  impute  all  the  mis- 
chief, do  in  fact  tend  to  the  same  result.  Bound  like  a  slave 
to  his  machine,  isolated  amidst  the  great  mass  of  operatives  in 
the  factory,  the  worker  is  prevented  not  only  from  getting  into 
touch  with  bis  comrades'  ideas,  but  from  having  ideas  himself, 
from  thinking  of  anything  whatever.  After  his  cmshingly  mo- 
notonous day's  work,  he  leaves  the  factory  worn  out,  incapable 
of  paying  attention  to  anything  that  demands  a  mental  effort. 
Of  late  years  no  doubt  the  active  Socialist  propaganda  has 
produced  a  certain  intellectual  awakening  in  popular  circles. 
Economic  questions  are  much  discussed;  they  have  become  a 
subject  of  arduous  study  for  many  an  artisan  and  many  a 
small  employ^.  Just  as  their  predecessors  of  forty  or  fifty 
years  back  got  as  far  as  Bentham,  they  grapple  with  Karl 
Marx.  But  a  different  spirit  animates  the  two  generations, 
and  it  does  not  fail  to  produce  different  effects.  The  former, 
inspired  by  rationalist  individualism,  had  no  belief  other  than 
reason,  and  professed  no  dogmas  which  could  prejudge  its  con- 
clusions, whereas  tbe  men  of  the  present  generation,  provided 
with  a  definite  ideal  of  social  organization,  'With  the  coUectivist 
ideal,  make  this  an  immutable  creed,  and  it  is  only  within  the 
four  corners  of  it  that  they  admit  free  enquiry,  in  which  they 
indulge  solely  for  the  puriwse  of  building  themselves  up  more 
strongly  in  their  faith.     The  one,  if  it  is  permissible  to  put 


.coy  Google 


MWOHB  CB*P.]      THE   ACTION  OF  THE   CAUCUS  403 

it  in  tbis  way,  reflected  the  scientific  spirit  which  emancipates 
and  elevates,  the  other  is  imbued  with  the  theological  spirit 
which  enslaves  and  degrades,  the  intellect. 

This  intellectual  movement,  however,  started  by  economic 
problems,  and  coiitined  to  those  problems,  affects  only  a  small 
fraction  of  the  masses,  a  small  sect.  For  the  great  majority, 
what  has  been  said  above  of  its  intellectual  condition  still 
remains  true.  No  doubt,  the  cheap  Press  and  tlie  political 
agitation  carried  on  by  the  parties  have  brought  into  general 
circulation  many  facts  and  ideas  which  in  their  career  Imve 
reached  a  number  of  people  who  before  that  never  came  across 
them.  The  questions  of  the  day  which  divide  the  parties  have 
consequently  become  much  more  familiar  to  the  people  than 
they  have  ever  been,  which  leads  a  good  many  persons  to  say 
that  working-men  are  now  "well  up  in  politics."  But  in  the 
great  majority  of  cases  they  assimilate  the  facts  and  the  argu- 
ments by  an  absolutely  automatic  process,  which  is  in  a  way 
thrust  on  them  hy  the  very  conditions  in  which  these  facts  and 
arguments  are  presented,  and  it  is  more  by  the  senses  that  they 
take  them  in.  Their  want  of  intellectual  discipline  predis- 
poses them  still  more  than  tlie  other  strata  of  society  to  the 
momentary  and  fugitive  impressions  of  the  feverish  and  agi- 
tated existence  which  is  the  feature  of  the  age,  and  which  has 
infected  even  the  phlegmatic  temperament  of  the  English  race. 
The  paltry  rudiments  of  culture  diffused  among  the  masses 
have  rather  been  instrumental,  for  the  moment,  in  developing 
a  state  of  nervousness,  of  excitement,  which  at  one  time  fosters 
a  continuous  dissatisfaction,  at  another,  and  more  often,  tries 
to  find  a  vent  in  strong  and  constantly  recurring  sensations. 

The  character  of  the  lectures  provided  by  the  party  Organi- 
zations v/aa  by  no  means  calculated  to  soothe  this  restlessness. 
The  lectures  being  never  objective,  but  being  always  intended, 
in  more  or  less  guarded  language,  to  enforce  the  catechism  of 
the  party,  the  logic  of  instinct  told  the  masses  tliat  it  was  not 
worth  while  beating  about  the  bush,  that  it  was  better  to  strike 
home  and  hit  hard  than  to  bore  them  with  a  sermon.  Turning 
almost  invariably  on  party  politics,  and  always  with  an  apolo- 
getic purpose,  the  lectures  harped  on  the  same  ideas,  repro- 
duced the  same  formulas.  "  They  have  nothing  new  to  say," 
is  a  remark  I  have  often  heard.     In  contrast  to  this,  the 


.coy  Google 


<04  DEMOCRACY  AND  POLITICAL  PARTIES     [third  p*bt 

meetings  with  their  fiery  harangues,  the  demonstrations  with 
&11  their  accessories,  offered  the  multitudes  a  show,  a  distrac- 
tion, amounting  to  a  kind  of  sport.  The  Caucus,  which,  being 
anxious  above  all  to  succeed,  thought  it  more  easy,  looking  to 
the  intellectual  condition  of  the  masses,  to  "  raise  enthusiasm  " 
than  to  appeal  to  reason,  consequently  found  itself  in  perfect 
touch  with  the  popular  tendencies.  Tims,  through  the  con- 
nivance of  the  public  and  the  Caucus,  the  form  of  political 
prop^anda  best  suited  for  disciplining  the  mind  and  storing 
it  has  given  way  to  methods  which  act  mainly  on  the  imagina- 
tion, on  the  nerves ;  the  quiet  lecture-rooms  are  deserted  for 
the  exciting  meetings.' 

In  the  country  districts  lecturing  is  more  developed  and 
meets  witli  more  success,  relatively  speaking.  As  the  news- 
papei'S  are  read  but  little  or  not  at  all  by  the  villagers,  and 
as  political  meetings  occur  only  at  rare  intervals  in  rural 
localities,  the  Associations  endeavour,  with  more  or  less  zeal, 
to  make  good  the  deficiency  by  lectures,  especially  in  the  south 
of  England.  The  quieter  life  and  the  absence  of  distractions 
among  the  village  peo'pla  make  them  more  inclined  for  lectures 
than  the  townsfolk.  At  village  lectures  the  audience  is  gener- 
ally composed  of  adherents  of  both  parties;  curiosity  attracts 
to  them  Liberals  and  Tories  alike;  but  there  is  never  any  dis- 
cussion, and  it  is  very  seldom  that  questions  are  put  to  the 
lecturer;  from  timidity  or  prudence,  in  order  not  to  betray 
their  political  preferences,  people  hold  their  tongue.  Some- 
times the  schoolmaster  or  some  other  strong-minded  member 
of  the  party  opposed  to  that  of  the  lecturer  ventures  to  draw 
attention  to  the  "pernicious"  doctrines  laid  down  by  the 
latter.  But  this  is  the  exception;  as  a  rule,  there  are  no  more 
manifestations  of  opinion  at  the  lectures  than  at  the  meetings 
and  the  visits  of  the  travelling  vans.  The  mind  of  the  rustics, 
like  the  soil  which  they  cultivate,  does  not  show  the  effect 
produced  till  later  on. 

'  MaktQK  allowance  for  this  Btat«  of  thlQES.  tb«  London  and  Counliei 
Liberal  Union  resorted,  in  the  last  montha  nf  its  existence,  in  ISSA,  to  amall 
stratagems  to  procure  aodleaces  For  its  lecturers ;  It  requested  them  to  adver- 
tise their  lecture  as  a"  political  address"  or  even  to  snimnon  meelings,  with 
their  usual  accesaories,  for  the  delivery  of  the  letture,  in  which  case  the  lec- 
turer iippeared  In  I  he  disjiiilse  o[  a  "I>epulation  of  Ibe  lAUdon  and  Cngnlies 
Liberal  Union." 


.CD,  Google 


THE   ACTION   OF  THE   CAUCUS 


The  lectures  organized  by  the  clubs,  as  well  aa  by  the  Aaeo- 
ciations,  are  delivered  partly  by  local  amatuurs,  partly  by 
peraouB  invited  from  outside,  and  also  by  professional  lec- 
turers. The  tirst  and  the  second  give  their  services  gratui- 
tously ;  the  strangers  are  only  allowed  their  travelling  expenses, 
when  they  are  not  obliging  enough  to  pay  them  themselves. 
The  professional  lecturers  are  paid.  The  Association  of  the 
constituency,  the  Caucus,  contributes  the  fees,  while  the  people 
of  the  locality  iu  which  the  lecture  is  held  defray  the  cost  of 
advertising  and  the  hire  of  the  room.  As  in  the  case  of  the 
meetings,  the  organizers  of  lectures  on  the  look-out  for  lec- 
turers communicate  with  them  directly  or  through  the  medium 
of  the  central  organizations.  One  of  the  obligations  of  the 
latter  in  regard  to  the  affiliated  Associations  consists  precisely 
in  supplying  them  with  lecturers,  either  voluntary  or  at  all 
events  paid.  In  the  tatter  case  the  central  Organizations  act 
as  registry  offices.  The  big  party  Organizations,  with  regular 
lectuTCFB  whom  they  send,  spontaneously  or  on  application, 
to  say  a  word  in  season,  are:  on  the  Conservative  side,  the 
Kational  Union  of  Conservative  and  Constitutional  Associa- 
tions and  the  Primrose  League;  on  the  Liberal  side,  the 
National  Liberal  Federation  and  the  National  Reform  Union 
(of  Manchester),  which  from  its  first  appearance  had  made 
the  development  of  political  education  the  aim  and  object  of 
its  existence. 

In  re-reading  the  above  pages  in  proof-sheete,  I  note  that 
since  they  were  written,  some  years  ago,  the  importance  of 
the  lectures  given  by  the  party  Organizations,  which  I  have 
had  to  qualify  so  much,  has  stilt  further  diminished;  at  the 
present  moment  they  are  at  the  lowest  ebb.  Even  the  activity 
of  the  Manchester  Beform  Union  has  t>ecome,  in  the  matter 
of  lectures,  almost  non-existent. 

For  some  time  past  the  Organizations  hare  employed  politi- 
cat  educators  of  a  different  kind  to  the  lecturers,  — "political 
missionaries."  Sometimes  these  missionaries  are  professionals, 
■who  work  all  the  year,  travelling  from  place  to  place  to  deliver 
political  addres.ses  or  speeches  at  open-air  meetings.  Thus 
the  Central  Conservative  Office  has  in  its  pay  a  group  of 
"missionaries"  of  this  kind.  Sometimes,  and  more  often, 
they  are  secret  emissaries  who  have  another  regular  employ- 


ee .yGoOglc 


400  DEMUCRACY  AND  POLITICAL  PARTIES      [iiurd  paut 

meat  and  aceept  temporary  missiona  for  a  few  weeka.  Gener- 
ally workmen  by  trade,  they  penetrate  into  popular  circles  to 
advertise  the  party  wliich  employs  them,  to  defend  its  pro- 
gramme in  quasi-spontaneous  conversations.  The  Liberals 
and  the  Conservatives  both  make  use  of  emissaries,  but  with 
the  latter  this  practice  is,  it  would  appear,  much  more  devel- 
oped and  systematized.  The  moduB  operandi  of  the  emissaries 
in  the  Tory  organization  is  as  follows.  Sent  by  the  represen- 
tative of  the  Central  Conservative  OfBce  of  the  district,  the 
emissary  arrives  in  a  Division  with  a  letter  of  introduction 
for  the  Chairman  of  the  local  Tory  organization.  This  letter 
accredits  hinit  gets  him  the  assistance  of  this  organization, 
and  at  the  same  time  places  him  under  its  supervision.  His 
chief  who  has  despatched  him  hears  about  him  from  the  local 
Tory  Chairmen  as  the  missionary  gradually  makes  his  way 
through  the  district.  He  never  speaks  at  meetings,  but  works 
privately  and  incognito;  he  conducts  his  operations  in  public- 
bouses,  or  wherever  he  can  find  a  group  of  persons  and  start  a 
conversation  on  politics  as  if  by  chance.  He  tries  to  challenge 
a  Badical  leader  who  is  present  to  a  debate,  he  fastens  on  the 
"  bombastic  Radical "  of  the  village,  and  if  he  comes  off  best 
in  the  dialectical  encounter,  he  destroys  the  latter's  prestige 
and  his  political  influence  with  his  neighbours.  Of  course  the 
missionaries  are  always  sent  into  parts  of  the  country  where 
they  are  not  known.  After  having  discharged  their  mission, 
they  return  to  their  regular  occupations.  The  party  Organi- 
zations find  a  sufficient  number  of  them  to  meet  their  re^uire- 
ments. 

vn 

After  the  meetings,  the  lectures,  and  the  missionaries,  which 
furnish  methods  of  collective  propaganda  among  more  or  less 
large  gatherings  of  citizens,  the  party  Organizations  engage 
in  individual  political  education  by  means  of  the  gratuitous 
distribution  of  "political  literature,"  that  is  to  say,  pamphlets 
and  other  printed  matter  relating  to  politics.  The  greater  part 
of  this  "literature"  is  made  up  in  I^udon  by  the  central 
party  Organizations.  A  large  number  of  copies  being  printed, 
the  publications  are  sold  to  the  local  Associations  by  hundreds 


.coy  Google 


BBCoiiDCH*p.]     THE  ACTION  OF  THE  CAUCUS  407 

or  tbousaoda  at  a  cheap  rate.  The  latter  have  the  "litera- 
ture" diatributed  at  the  meetings  which  they  organize,  or 
sometimes,  in  the  villages  for  instance,  send  them  round  from 
house  to  house.  It  has  been  stated  above  that  this  operation 
forma  part  of  tlie  duties  of  the  itinerant  speakers  of  travelling 
vans.  Dealing  with  the  questions  of  the  da;  which  divide  the 
parties,  or  those  about  which  they  fought  in  the  past,  the 
pamphlets,  whether  they  are  reprints  of  speeches  or  of  lectures 
by  the  party  orators,  or  are  written  for  the  occasion,  almost 
always  have  an  electioneering  twang  about  them.  Finance, 
legislation,  foreign  politics,  —  every  topic  is  treated  not  for  its 
own  sake,  but  to  induce  the  reader  to  vote  for  this  particular 
party  and  not  for  another.  While  some  of  these  publications 
handle  their  subjects  with  more  or  less  fulness  and  propriety 
in  tone  and  form,  the  others  are  simply  electioneering  pro- 
spectuses, which,  if  they  do  not  prove  it,  assert  that  every  good 
thing  comes  from  their  party  whereas  the  other  party  has 
never  done  the  country  anything  but  harm.  Not  that  these 
pamphlets  are  wholly  made  up  of  general  clap-trap,  there  are 
plenty  of  facts  and  figures  in  them,  but  they  prove  rather  that 
there  is  a  different  history  and  statistics  for  the  special  use  of 
each  party.  Figures  are  quoted  to  demonstrste  that  pauperism 
and  crime  become  rife  directly  this  or  that  party  returns  to 
power.  Care  is  also  taken  to  give  these  prospectuses  an  argu- 
mentative appearance  by  presenting  them  in  the  form  of  "  70 
good  reasons  why  yon  should  vote  tor  the  Liberals,"  but  their 
logic  is  anything  but  strict! '  Along  with  the  pamphlets,  which 
form  the  substantial  element  of  tlie  literature,  a  great  number 
of  leaflets  are  published,  small  sheets  of  two  or  three  pages, 
intended  for  readers  who  would  not  be  able  to  tackle  anything 
of  greater  length  or  with  more  argument.  The  political  ques- 
tion and  its  solution  or  the  catch-word  of  the  party  are  stated 

1  Thus,  [or  ioatance,  tbis  last  pamphlet,  after  hartog  gtveu  "  more  tban  TO 
good  leuoDB,"  broaches  the  queatiou  why  "  the  couDtrjr  is  more  prosperous 
under  a  Liberal  than  under  a  Conservative  Gorernment?"  aud  replies  as  [ol- 
lows:  "  Because  the  Liberals,  by  a  f[ood  policy,  improve  good  times,  and  alle- 
viate the  bad;  while  tbe  Conservatives,  by  a  bad  policy,  make  bad  times 
worse.  How  is  Ibatf  A  bad  poDcy  produces  uneasiness  and  wane  of  enter- 
prise. Une^uinesa  and  want  of  enlerpriae  produce  depressiou  la  trade  and 
want  of  employment.  Depression  iu  trade  and  want  of  employment  produce 
an  increase  of  Taxation,  Debt,  Misery,  Pauperism,  and  Crime  "  (  Why  I  ihatt 
voU  for  the  Liberal  Candidalet.ljiai.  188S,  p.11). 


.coy  Google 


408  DEMOCRACY  AND  POLl  IICAL  PARTIES      [reiRH  rin 

altogether  groaso  modo  to  make  them  elnk  more  readily  into 
the  mind. 

It  is  somewhat  difficult  to  form  an  opinion  on  the  effect  of 
the  "literature"  distributed  by  the  Organizations,  but  the 
assertion  may  confidently  be  made  that  it  is  far  less  consider- 
able than  the  latter  imagine.  <Fhe  pamphlets  are  little  read. 
They  are  of  use  rather  to  second-rate  speakers,  who  take  their 
arguments  from  them.  The  leaflets  are  read  a  great  deal,  and 
some  of  them  are  liked.  During  the  election  campaign  they 
are  distributed  by  millions.'  The  prodnotious  of  politicEil 
iconography  brought  in  durii^  the  last  few  years  by  the 
Organizations  are  also  much  appreciated,  the  coloured  pict- 
ures with  political  subjects  which  not  only  take  the  eye  but 
appeal  directly  to  the  emotions.  Of  this  kind,  for  instance, 
are  the  compositions  relating  to  recent  events  in  Ireland, 
by  means  of  which  the  Qladstonians  represented  the  cruel 
conduct  of  the  police  in  the  pay  of  the  Unionist  Govern- 
ment, while  the  Unionists  portrayed,  with  a  similar  abundance 
of  chromolithography,  scenes  of  assassinations  committed  by 
the  moonlighters  on  tenants  who  had  refused  to  join  the 
Land  League.  The  struggle  of  labour  against  capital,  ^^inst 
the  landlords,  also  furnishes  subjects  for  pictures.  They  make 
a  deep  impression,  especially  on  women,  who  know  how  to 
pass  them  on  to  the  men  with  the  naive  and  passionate  power 
of  persuasion  which  Michelet  ha«  described  with  his  poet's 
penetration.* 

Beyond  the  "  literature"  which  they  manufacture  themselves, 
and  which  they  supplement  by  a  few  publications  issued  else- 
where, the  Organizations  of  the  parties  do  not  offer  the  voters 
other  resources  in  the  way  of  reading.  As  a  rule,  in  England 
the  Associations  have  no  libraries  or  reading-rooms.  On  the 
Other  hand,  in  Scotland  reading-rooms  established  by  the 
Associations  are  common.  It  is  worthy  of  notice  that  it  is 
the  Tories  who  startled  the  reading-rooms,  and  that  the  Liberal 
Associations  have  only  followed  their  lead,  In  their  efforts 
to  emerge  from  the  condition  of  a  small  minority,  to  which 

>  For  instance,  the  central  XibaTsI  OrgBnlzatlon  dittiibuled  more  than 
twenty-three  inillionB  of  leaflets  during  tbe  election  campatfin  ul  I80G. 

'  See  bis  chapter  on  "  Le  Pri-tre,  la  femne  ec  la  Vend&i "  In  L'ffiifotre  d* 
la  StvolutionfraitqaUe,  liv.  VIIL 


.coy  Google 


p.]     THE   ACTION  OF   THE   CAUCUS 


they  are  reduced  in  Scotland,  the  Conservatirea  are  more  on 
the  look-ont  for  possible  methods  of  propaganda.* 


VIII 

Thus  when  all  is  said  and  done,  after  having  carefully 
pointed  out  all  the  forms  in  which  the  Organizations  of  the 
official  parties  distribute  political  education,  or  what  they  are 
pleased  to  call  by  that  name,  the  result  is  that  the  amouitt  of 
it  which  they  proTiJe  is  altogether  insignificant,  and  that  the 
little  which  they  do  give  is  poisoned  by  party  spirit.  In  any 
event,  their  supply  is  far  below  existing  requirements,  and  the 
latter  would  have  remained  even  more  unsatisfied  than  they  are, 
if  they  had  not  other  aids  at  their  disposal.  Of  these  some  are 
of  a  political  nature,  and  others  not.  In  the  front  rank  we 
must  place  the  Press,  i.e.  the  organs  of  the  parties,  which  the 
latter  themselves  consider  as  their  most  valuable  auxiliaries, 
A  good  many  representatives  of  Associations  even  hold  that 
the  Press  explains  political  questions  to  the  electorate  so  com- 
pletely and  satisfactorily  as  to  make  it  unnecessary  for  them 
to  take  any  tliought  for  political  education.  In  reality  it  is 
only  as  a  channel  of  political  information  that  the  newspapers 
contribute  to  the  enlightenment  of  the  public,  and  even  this 
Statement  requires  qualification.  But  as  for  improving  the 
political  judgment  of  their  readers,  the  great  majority  of  the 
newspapers  utterly  fails  to  do  so.  No  doubt,  if  the  standpoint 
of  the  Organizations  is  adopted,  for  whom  the  education  of  the 
voters  consists  in  crying  up  the  doings  of  the  party  in  question 
to  them,  and  in  inspiring  hatred  and  disgust  for  the  opposite 
party,  it  must  be  admitted  that,  with  a  certain  number  of 
exceptions,  the  Press  performs  its  task  very  creditably.  But 
that  very  fact  evidently  disqualifies  it  from  discharging  its  real 
duty,  which  is  to  enlighten  the  reader.     This  is  above  all  the 

1  Of  late,  undei  the  auspices  of  tha  political  parties,  circalatitig  lending 
UbrsiiM  bave  liecD  oreaalzed  which  dlBtrihnt«  bookg  in  the  provinces  free 
ot  charge.  On  the  Lil>eral  side  this  duty  has  beeo  undertaken  by  the 
Katiunal  Club  of  London,  whicii  sendB  boxes  of  boohs  into  the  villages  with 
penniggion  to  keep  them  for  «  few  months.  The  Club  has  about  a  hundred 
bores  in  ciraiilatlon.  The  Association  of  tbe  Conservative  clubs  recently 
(ouudod  in  London  follows  this  example.  In  each  boi  containing  thirty  to 
tifty  volumes  there  is  always  a  certain  nnmbet  ol  wotka  ou  poLtics. 


.CD,  Google 


410  DEMOCRACY  AND  POLITICAL  PARTIES     [thikd  paht 

caae  with  tlie  papers  written  for  the  masses,  the  evening 
journals  especially,  which,  by  dint  of  offering"  their  public 
highly  spiced  stuff  that  tickles  the  palate  of  the  multitude, 
have  80  far  perverted  their  taste  as  to  make  them  think  every 
political  article  written  with  moderatiou  insipid.'  Of  course 
the  controversial  violence  and  the  habitual  parli-pris  of  the 
newspapers  disgust  the  more  intelligent  readers,  and  already 
the  exaggerations  in  whicli  tlie  Press  indulges  are  seen  to  turn 
against  it.  In  fact,  the  public  no  longer  has  its  old  belief  in 
the  leading  article,  and  the  number  of  persons  who  systemati- 
cally abstain  from  reading  it,  knowing  beforehand  that  it  ia  out- 
rageously biassed,  is  rapidly  increasing.  People  read  the  paper 
for  its  non-political  news,  and  often  vote  with  its  opponents. 
I  liave  frequently  had  occasion  to  note  that  in  a  locality  where 
the  Press  of  the  party  ia  prosperous,  where,  for  instance,  the 
latter  has  three  papers  with  a  good  circulation  to  one  of  the 
opposite  political  persuasion,  the  party  ia  beaten  at  the  elec- 
tions, sometimes  badly  beaten,*  I  have  noticed  similar  facts  in 
Yorkshire,  in  Lancashire,  and  in  the  Midlands,  in  manufact- 
uring towns  as  well  as  in  rural  districts.  The  country  voter 
often  again  haa  special  reasons  for  distrusting  the  newspaper; 
he  considers  it  "very  clever,"  and  is  afraid  of  being  taken 
in  by  it;  he  trusts  more  to  intelligent  friends  or  neighbours;  he 
is  sure  that  Jim,  his  pal,  will  not  set  a  trap  for  him,  will  tell 
him  the  real  truth,  will  show  him  exactly  how  to  vote.  Yet, 
if  from  a  certain  point  of  view  the  political  Press  is  losing 
ground,  it  none  the  less  remains  a  formidable  power;  if  the 
voter  does  not  take  his  politics  from  the  paper,  it  confirms 
hira  in  his  party  preferences  or  prejudices,  and,  by  an  action 
analogous  to  that  of  water  dripping  on  a  stone,  keeps  him 
loyal  to  the  party;  in  any  event  the  newspapers  provide  the 
parties  and  their  organizations  with  a  highly  effective  means 
of  publicity. 

1  In  a  town  in  the  east  of  England,  where  I  toniid  ft  newspaper  edited  with 
real  reganl  for  dignity  in  langn^e  and  in  controversj  with  opponents,  1  com- 
plimented the  people  of  the  locality  on  It.  "  Ah.  air.  it  would  be  belter  tor  ua 
not  to  have  a  paper  at  all  than  to  have  that  one !  "  "  How  so  ?  "  "  Wh;^,  It's 
not  a  paper ;  it's  milk  and  water." 

"  The  awretary  i>f  a  caucus  remarked ;  "  While  the  only  newspaper  of  our 
political  opponents  exists  simply  on  the  sniisidles  of  the  party,  we  have  thT«a 
and  all  doing  well,  but  I  will  make  a  bet  that  these  three  papers  have  not 
secured  iis  three  voters." 


.CD,  Google 


SECOND  CHAP.]     THE  ACTION  OF  THE  CAUCUS  411 

Next  to  the  Press,  in  the  series  of  instruments  of  political 
prop^anda  other  tlian  the  Organizations  of  the  two  great 

parties,  come  various  political  societies  and  associationsj  each 
of  which  pursues  a  particular  object,  either  to  bring  about  a  cer- 
tain legistatire  reform  in  the  State,  or  to  oppose  it.  Such,  for 
instance,  are  the  Land  Restoration  League,  to  ohtain  the 
nationalization  of  the  soil;  the  Free  Land  League,  to  secure 
agrarian  refonns  of  a  less  radical  description  j  the  United 
Kingdom  Alliance,  to  pass  prohibitive  measures  against  the 
consumption  of  alcoholic  drinks;  the  Liberation  Society,  to 
compel  the  separation  of  Church  and  State ;  the  Church  Defence 
Institution,  to  defend  the  Church  against  the  attacks  of  the 
Liberationista ;  the  Liiterty  and  Property  League,  to  resist 
socialistic  tendencies  in  legislation;  the  Fabian  Society,  to 
carry  on  a  Socialist  propaganda,  etc.  -  All  these  societies  stir 
up  the  country,  appeal  to  public  opinion  hy  means  of  lectures 
and  publications  on  the  cause  which  they  have  at  heart.'  Un- 
like the  official  party  Organizations,  they  are  not  hampered  by 
a  general  party  creed,  do  not  make  it  a  condition  of  adhesion 
to  the  ideas  which  tliey  profess,  but  recommend  the  latter  for 
their  own  sake,  although  in  point  of  fact  they  are  nearly  all 
allied  with  one  or  the  other  party.  In  any  event,  however 
useful  the  intellectual  action  brought  to  bear  by  these  societies 
may  be,  their  educational  activity  none  the  les.s  lielongs  to 
the  category  of  selfish  propaganda,  so  to  speak. 


IX 

Several  broadminded  men  have  therefore  come  to  the  con- 
clusion that  political  education,  to  be  really  worthy  of  the 
name  and  to  answer  its  purpose,  ought  to  be  unconnected 
with  any  political  Organization,  and  a/orKori  with  the  Organi- 
zations of  the  regular  parties.  Attempts  have  been  made  to 
give  shape  to  this  idea.     Thus,  soon  after  186S,  when  the 

1  The  Fabi&n  Socletj'  Is  specially  remathabl«  tor  the  considerable  efforts 
wtalcb  it  niakefl  on  behalf  of  economic  educntion  by  means  o(  leclarex.  lending 
libraries,  and  corresponclenre  rlassea,  in  whicb  people  are  told  what  to  read 
on  a  particular  qneslion,  are  given  blbliograpbical  and  other  Doles,  and  are 
Inrtied  to  send  to  ihe  commiitee  of  the  society  a  abort  paper,  which  is  re- 
turned lo  them  with  coriectlons. 


.CD,  Google 


41S  DEMOCRACr  AND  POLITICAL  PAHTIK8      [third  p*bt 

party  politicians  flung  theinselves  on  the  urban  masses  who 
had  received  tiie  franchise,  like  a  wild  beast  on  its  prey,  a 
few  disinterested  friends  of  the  new  voters  founded  a  "  League 
for  the  political  education  of  working-men,"  which  proposed, 
by  means  of  classes,  lectures,  and  debates,  to  give  the  men  of 
the  people  a  political  culture  devoid  of  party  spirit.  But  it 
did  not  meet  with  the  sympathy  necessary  to  make  the  under- 
taking a  success.  Some  time  afterwards  a  few  distinguished 
University  men,  with  the  historian  J.  R.  Seeley  at  their  head, 
gave  their  co-operation  to  the  Leslie  which,  under  the  name 
of  "Social  and  Political  Educational  League,"  pursues  its 
work  by  striving  to  "  promote  the  formation  of  public  opinion 
in  reference  to  Politics,  Government,  Land,  Capital  and 
Labour,  Finance,  Colonies,  and  national  well-being  generally, 
upon  the  basis  of  History,  Social  Science,  and  Political  Phi- 
losophy." The  League  declines  to  favour  any  party  whatever 
or  to  proselytize  in  any  other  way.  Its  object  is  the  cultiva- 
tion of  the  political  mind.  The  principal  mode  of  action  of 
the  League  consists  of  lectures,  which  it  provides  gratuitously 
by  voluntary  lecturers  (belonging  mostly  to  the  Universities 
of  Cambridge  and  Oxford).  The  audience  is  invited  to  put 
questions  to  the  lecturer  and  to  start  a  discussion  with  the 
co-operation  of  persons  of  different  parties  and  diverse  opinions. 
The  success  of  the  League,  however,  leaves  a  great  deal  to 
be  desired.  Apart  from  its  good  int^entions,  it  is  short  of 
everything,  of  material  resources,  of  lecturers,  and  of  audi- 
ences. The  parties  absorb  all,  —  money,  men  of  action,  and  the 
public.  The  number  of  lectures  which  it  manages  to  give 
declines  rather  from  year  to  year.  Without  having  ever 
reached  the  figure  of  six  hundred,  it  has  fallen  of  late  years 
below  fifty.  The  area  over  which  the  lecturers  of  the  League 
conduct  their  operations  rarely  extends  beyond  London  with 
its  suburbs.  Having  only  absurdly  small  sums  at  its  disposal, 
—  from  forty  pounds  to  eighty  pounds  a  year, —  it  cannot  set 
up  an  organization  of  its  own ;  in  the  matter  of  lecturers  it 
has  to  be  satisfied  with  volunteer  helpers,  and  to  find  audiences 
it  is  obliged  to  apply  to  those  who  are  already  enrolled  in  other 
organizations,  political,  religious,  or  economic.  In  the  vast 
majority  of  cases  it  meets  only  with  indiiference.  The  first 
look  on  the  activity  of  the  League,  if  not  Jia  a  disloyal  compe- 


te .yGoOglc 


p.]   THE  ACTION  OF  THE  CAUCUS 


titioD  or  an  unwholesome  propaganda  of  scepticism  or  political 
dilettante  ism,  at  all  events  as  useless;  —  for  are  they  not  en- 
gaged in  "  educating  "  the  voters  themselves,  and,  of  course,  in 
the  best  possible  way  ? — the  second  are  too  prone  to  distrust  all 
instruction  given  outside  them  and  their  regular  friends,  they 
scent  heresy  and  heterodoxy  in  every  quarter;  the  third  are 
too  preoccupied  with  their  dividends  when  their  interest  in 
political  questions  has  not  been  exhausted  in  the  "politics" 
of  the  parties  with  which  tliey  are  connected  in  their  capacity 
of  voters.  In  these  conditions  the  University  spheres  which 
give  the  impulse  to  the  undertaking  carried  on  by  the  League, 
spheres  foreign  to  the  social  strata  upon  which  it  wishes 
to  work,  add  nothing  to  its  strength,  and  the  presence  at  its 
head  of  historians,  of  thinkers,  of  eminent  scholars,'  is  not 
so  useful  to  it  as  would  be  the  patronage  of  the  plutocrats 
and  the  politicians  who  are  all-powerful  in  the  electoral  con- 
stituencies. But  these  latter  would  be  the  last  to  take  an 
interest  in  a  work  of  this  kind,  not  excepting  the  official  politi- 
cal leaders  of  the  people,  the  Members  of  Parliament.  Of 
670  Members  of  Parliament,  not  half  a  dozen  subscribe  to  the 
League.  In  fact,  the  object  and  the  utility  of  its  labours  are 
beyond  the  intelligence  of  the  majority  of  the  Honourable 
Members.  In  their  eyes  politics  is  a  race  between  two  crews 
called  Liberals  and  Tories;  everything  else  digniiied  with  the 
name  is  "philosophy,"  and  is  it  necessary  to  make  philoso- 
pliers  of  the  voters,  when  all  they  need  is  to  know  whom  to  vote 
for,  for  the  Tories  or  for  the  Liberals,  and  in  this  respect  they 
certainly  get  plenty  of  information  and  advice  of  an  equally 
convincing  and  urgent  character?  Party  spirit  has  not  spared 
the  lecturers  of  the  League  even,  and  In  1886  its  managers  had 
to  weed  them  out  and  require  from  them  a  written  engagement 
not  to  treat  subjects  from  the  standpoint  of  a  particular  party. 
It  is  the  business  of  the  League  to  combat  party  spirit,  which 
has  poisoned  the  whole  atmosphere  of  English  political  life 
with  its  miasma,  but  it  has  all  the  more  difficulty  in  driving 
it  out  because  its  lecturers  generally  address  audiences  belong- 
ing to  the  same  party,  mostly  in  Liberal  and  Radical  clubs. 

'  The  list  of  (orniBr  rresfdanls  of  the  L«a((ue  Includes  MoBsrs.  James  Bryco, 
A.  V.  Dicey,  J,  A.  Froude.  R.  R.  Oardiner,  Fredaric  Harrlsiiri,  T.  H.  Hiiiley, 
J,  R.  Seeley,  Lealln  Stephen. 


.coy  Google 


414  DEMOCBACY  AND  I'OLITICAL  PARTIES     [thibd  part 

The  Conservative  OrgauJzatious  will  not  accept  the  services 

of  the  League.     In  a  few  rare  cases  iion- political  organiza- 
tions, such  as  co-operative  or  religious  societies,  apply  to  it. 


After  having  exhausted  the  slender  resources  provided  by  the 
political  Organizations  and  agencies  (such  as  the  Organizations 
and  the  Press  of  the  parties,  as  well  as  the  associations  for 
promoting  particular  objects)  and  by  the  organizations  which 
aim  at  political  culture  and  are  independent  of  the  parties  (such 
as  the  Social  and  Political  Education  League),  there  remains 
for  the  improvement  of  tlte  political  education  of  the  voters  a 
third  and  last  resource,  whicli  is  by  no  means  the  least  impor- 
tant one.  This  consists  of  the  manifold  organizations  for  the 
general  culture  of  adults,  in  which  more  or  less  attention  is 
paid  to  subjects  connected  with  politics.  Besides  the  educa- 
tional establishments  of  this  kind,  which  give  evening  classes, 
such  as  the  Mechanics'  Institute,  the  University  Extension 
groups,  the  Beading  Unions,  etc.,  which  sometimes  discuss 
questions  of  government,  of  history,  or  of  political  economy, 
or  recommend  books  or  chapters  of  works  bearing  thereon, 
special  mention  must  be  made  of  the  popular  societies,  the 
members  of  which  study  in  common  questions  of  general  in- 
terest, including,  with  letters,  science,  and  art,  political  or 
social  problems,  of  course  on  a  somewhat  modest  scale.  In 
their  meetings  the  members  communicate  to  each  other  the 
result  of  their  reading  and  their  reflections  in  the  form  of 
essays  or  papers,  which  are  often  discussed.  The  most  com- 
mon type  of  tliese  associations  for  study  is  known  under  the 
name  of  Mutual  Improvement  Societies.  As  a  rule  they  are 
connected  with  the  Church  organizations.  To  keep  a  hold  on 
their  congregations,  or  to  recover  it,  the  cliurches  in  England 
try  to  satisfy  not  only  their  spiritual  needs,  they  have  charge 
not  only  of  their  souls,  but  also  of  their  bodies  and  their 
minds;  they  get  up  lay  classes  and  lectures,  wholesome  amuse- 
ments, gymnastic  establishments,  clubs  and  societies  of  various 
kinds  for  them.  Thus  to  a  good  many  Nonconformist  chapels, 
to  Christian  Young  Men's  Associatiojis  under  the  patronage  of 
the  Established  Church,  etc.,  there  are  often  attached  Mutual 


.coy  Google 


aBCON»CH*p.]      THE   ACTION   OF  THE   CAUCUS  416 

Improvement  Societies.  Although  free  to  all  ai>i>earancefl  in 
their  inner  life,  and  especially  in  the  choice  of  the  subjects  of 
Study,  these  societies  submit  spontaneously,  bo  to  speak,  to 
clerical  influence  which  does  not  fail  to  give  a  certain  im- 
press to  theli  manners  as  well  as  to  their  mind,  which  is 
loth  to  venture  into  untrodden  paths.  But  still  the  pai)ers, 
on  political  subjects  among  others,  read  in  them  avt^  none  the 
leas  means  of  instruction.  In  Scotland  these  societies  are 
found  mostly  iu  the  villages;  in  the  towns  they  have  some 
difficulty  in  meeting  the  competition  of  music-halls  and  similar 
places  of  amusement.  Having  often  an  existence  of  their 
own,  independent  of  the  churches,  the  Iroprovenieiit  Societies, 
which  sometimes  affect  the  more  pretentious  title  of  phtlosoplii- 
cal  or  literary  TnittUutes,  recruit  their  members  from  all  politi- 
cal and  ecclesiastical  parties.  Liberals  and  Tories  meet  in 
them,  and,  keeping  on  the  best  of  terms,  observe  perfect  toler- 
ance towards  each  other,  even  in  political  discussions,  which 
under  these  circumstances  produce  excellent  results  for  the 
members  of  these  societies. '  The  communications  received  and 
the  impressions  gathered  by  the  author  on  the  spot  when  pro- 
paring  this  work  are  unanimous  on  this  point. 

XI 

The  debates  which  constitute  one  of  the  forms  of  intellectual 
training  practised  in  the  Mutual  Improvement  Societies  are 
the  exclusive  object  of  other  bodies,  known  in  consequence  by 
the  name  of  Debating  Societies.  The  origin  of  these  institu- 
tions, which  could  only  have  arisen  in  a  time-honoured  land 
of  liberty,  dates  from  the  eighteenth  century.     After  having 

1  The  Mutual  Improvement  Society  in  .Scitiand  is  somelimes  the  reotre  of 
BQlighlenment  for  a  whole  rural  distrint.  This  was  especially  true  ol  the  past, 
ot  the  first  half  of  the  ViclflHan  era,  as  may  be  seen  from  tha  history  of  a  soci- 
ety of  this  kind  narrated  in  a  small  book  called  Ait  Abe,nlpiiiia/iirf.  tillage 
Propagaiiilii  KoHy  Yenm  ago,  by  R.  H.  Smith,  EdiiihurKh.  IHHQ.  The  society 
In  qnesClon,  the  Rhynio  Mutual  luBlriictlon  Class,  started  in  an  out-of-lhe-way 
vIllBKe  with  a  dozen  members,  tradesmen  and  farmers,  endeavoured  lo  im- 
prove their  minds,  and,  having  arrived  at  satisCaclory  results,  continued  ita 
labours  lealoualy,  trying  " 'o  train  its  members  as  writers  and  speakers." 
At  the  same  time,  ihroujih  the  agency  of  a  corresinndence  committee,  the 
Rhynle  Society  founded  sister  societies  around  It,  forming  a  Union  n-bich  pub- 
lished its  monthly  review. 


.coy  Google 


41«  DEMOCRACY  AND  POLmCAL  PAETIES      [tbikd  mh 

played  a  certain  part  in  the  democratic  agitatioB  of  the  years 
1793-1795  caused  by  the  French  Revolution  in  England,  the 
debating  societies  have  ^ain  become  a  peaceful  school  of  the 
art  of  oratory.  With  the  development  of  town  life  which 
followed  the  great  outburst  of  industry,  the  debating  socie- 
ties spread  in  the  manufacturing  cities,  where  they  attracted 
meiiibei'9  of  the  middle  class,  and  in  no  small  degree  con- 
tributed to  it9  culture  and  to  the  training  in  its  ranks  of  men 
who  know  how  to  speak  in  public,  of  debaters.  From  the 
middle  class  ttie  taste  for  debating  societies  liaa  descended  a 
few  steps  lower  in  the  social  scale.  In  fact,  debate  gratifies 
not  only  the  love  of  free  discussion,  but  also  the  combative 
instinct  of  the  English.  For  them  it  is  another  sort  of  prize- 
fight, a  spectacle  which  procures  violent  sensations.  In  sev- 
eral localities  the  publicans  provide  it,  to  increase  their  custom, 
on  market  days,  which  bring  in  people  from  the  neighbour- 
hood; they  give  five  shillings  to  a  good  talker,  who  opena  the 
delsate.  In  many  large  business  establishments  or  factories 
with  a  numerous  staff,  the  latter  form,  side  by  side  with  a 
chess  club  or  a  cricket  club,  a  debating  society  among  them- 
selves. The  same  thing  takes  place  in  certain  religious  organi- 
zations, such  as  the  Young  Men's  Gliristian  Associations,  which 
have  dettating  classes.  But  apart  from  these  more  or  less  pri- 
vate gatherings,  there  are  many  debating  societies  regularly 
organized  and  numbering  each  hundreds  of  memi^ers  admitted 
by  introduction  and  on  payment  of  a  yearly  subscription.  In 
all  these  societies  there  are  periodically  "political  nights," 
i.e.  evenings  devoted  to  political  discussion. 

Of  late  years  the  old  institution  of  debating  societies  has 
given  rise  to  a  new  and  very  interesting  species,  to  the  local 
parliaments.  These  are  delating  societies  which  confine  them- 
selves to  politics  and  conduct  their  discussions  in  accordance 
with  all  the  rules  and  all  the  miae-en-scine  of  the  House  of 
Commons.  Ttie  members  fall  into  party  groups  just  as  at 
Westminster.  They  also  have  their  leaders  and  their  Whips. 
The  Cabinet  taken  from  the  majority  is  subject  to  the  same 
rules  of  ministerial  responsibility.  'The  session  opens  by  a 
"Queen's  Speech,"  announcing  the  bills  which  will  be  brought 
forward  by  the  Government.  The  whole  procedure,  in  a  word, 
is  copied  from  that  of  tlie  House  of  Commons,  with  the  for- 


.coy  Google 


p.]     THE  ACTION  OP  THE  CAUCUS 


tunate  modification  that  the  length  of  the  speeches  is  limited. 
The  great  originality  of  these  parliamentary  debating  clubs, 
which  are  not  altogether  unknown  on  the  Continent,  in  Paris 
for  instance,  consists  in  the  fact  that  the  local  parliameDts  are 
not  composed  exclusively  of  young  men.  Side  by  side  with 
the  latter  may  be  seen  grey-headed  men,  magistrates,  sober 
tradesmen,  manufacturers.  In  a  parliament  of  the  West  End 
of  London,  I  have  seen  a  (morganatic)  cousin  of  the  Queen, 
a  naval  officer,  on  the  Treasury  bench,  holding  the  office  of 
First  Lord  of  the  Admiralty,  while  in  a  parliament  in  the 
north  of  the  metropolis  I  have  found  a  shoemaker  discharging 
the  analogous  functions  of  Minister  of  War.  Imitating  their 
models  at  Westminster,  the  members  put  questions  to  the 
ministers,  bring  forward  motions  and  resolutions,  introduce 
bills,  debate,  attack,  and  defend  with  all  the  weapons  of 
parliamentary  warfare,  reaaouing,  a^ument,  flashes  of  wit, 
sarcasm,  indignation. 

No  doubt  the  conventional  character  of  their  labours,  which 
after  all  are  only  play,  weighs  heavily  on  the  local  parlia- 
ments; it  lessens  their  value  as  instruments  of  political  edtuM' 
tion,  by  accustoming  their  members  to  play  a  part,  to  strike 
an  attitude  for  the  gallery.  And  what  makes  things  wo":;e  is 
that  they  have  not  even  got  to  create  their  parts;  for  the 
pieces  which  they  act  are  exactly  the  same  as  those  performed 
on  the  great  national  stage  of  the  House  of  Commons,  and 
they  simply  copy  the  actors  on  that  stage  and  imitate  their 
gestures,  their  tones,  making  them  still  more  emphatic  if  pos- 
sible. Divided  into  closed  and  permanent  parties,  on  the 
model  of  the  House  of  Commons,  the  members  of  local  parlia- 
ments take  up  a  line  beforehand  on  public  questions,  espouse 
a  cause  before  they  have  studied  it,  and  then  try  to  become 
enamoured  of  it  afterwards.  In  spite  of  these  grave  defects, 
the  local  parliaments  are  none  tlie  less  a  factor  of  politicfd 
education  which  is  not  to  be  despised.  They  force  their  mem- 
bers to  follow  the  political  problems  of  the  day,  to  deal  with 
political  facts  and  ideas,  and  they  enable  them  to  do  this  to 
a  greater  extent  and  with  more  freedom  than  there  is  room 
for  in  the  caucuses.  Besides,  by  bringing  men  of  different 
opinions  face  to  face  to  dismiss  both  sides  of  a  question,  they 
give  tliem  the  opportunity  of  knowing  each  other,  and  of  find- 


.coy  Google 


418  DEMOCRACY  AND  POLITICAL  PARTIES      [thikd  p*bt 

ing  out  tha.t  their  political  opponents  are  not  so  black  as  the 
Organizations  of  the  parties  paint  them  for  the  requirements 
of  their  electioneering  business.  It  is  only  to  be  regretted 
that  the  local  parliaments  are  not  as  a  rule  rery  long-lived, 
for  after  a  more  or  less  brilliant  career  of  a  few  years  they  die 
out.  At  one  time,  tired  of  their  part  or  engrossed  by  their  regu- 
lar work,  tha  leading  actors  retire  and  the  companies  disperse; 
at  another  time,  after  a  few  sessions,  the  Conservatives,  who 
up  till  recently  had  not  been  in  the  habit  of  scrutinizing  their 
own  opinions  or  those  of  other  people,  are  quite  played  out, 
so  that  the  victorious  Liberals  are  left  in  possession  of  the 
field,  and  the  combat  comes  to  an  end  for  want  of  combatants ; 
sometimes,  again,  personal  feeling,  questions  of  amour-jtropre, 
or  social  i)rejudices  get  in  the  way.  The  movement  of  local 
parliaments  has  therefore  not  attained  the  dimensions  and  the 
political  importance  which  several  persons  predicted  for  it  in 
the  beginning.  Some  eminent  men  had  hailed  the  new  insti- 
tution as  destined  to  exert  a  stronger  and  healthier  influence 
on  the  course  of  political  life  than  "that  Birmingham  creation 
known  as  the  Caucus,"  for  "the  new  departure  in  the  national 
political  life  has  this  moat  hopeful  aspect, —  it  is  a  free,  manly, 
and  open  educational  moTement."'  Inside  the  local  parlia- 
ments still  greater  aspirations  for  their  future  were  indulged 
in :  they  would  not  only  serve  to  train  young  people  in  debate, 
and  to  instruct  members  in  the  political  questions  of  the  day, 
but  they  would  deliver  their  verdicts  on  the  great  political 
and  social  reforms,  the  consideration  of  which  is  demanded 
by  the  welfare  of  the  country;  like  the  federated  Chambers  of 
Commerce,  the  local  parliaments  would  also  form  a  federation 
of  "chambers  of  politics,"  which  would  wield  the  same  influ- 
ence in  the  State  as  the  former  in  commercial  questions.* 
These  hopes  have  not  been  realized,  which  is  rather  a  matter 
for  congratulation  than  for  regret;  for  if  in  a  free  country  the 
sources  of  political  opinion  ought  to  be  of  infinite  variety,  po- 
litical authority  can  only  have  a  single  oi^an;  in  the  matter 
of  "  chambers  of  politics  "  there  can  only  l>e  the  chamber,  the 
House  established  by  the   Constitution  and   formed   by  the 

1  BlanchBrd  Jerrold, "  On  the  uanufactare  at  pnbllc  oploloD,"  Ifiaelttnlh 
Cenlury.iane.lSSS. 

'  Speech  of  the  SydeDbam  Premier,  quoted  ibid.,  pp.  lOSS,  1069. 


.coy  Google 


8E0OBD  CHAP.]      THE   ACTION   OF   THE   CAUCUS  418 

free  suffrages  of  the  nation.  The  Federation  of  Local  Parlia- 
ments was  created  a  few  years  ago  (in  1892),  under  the  name 
of  National  AsBociation  of  Local  Parlianients,  but  it  wisely 
confines  itself  to  the  modest  task  of  developing  the  movement 
and  helping  the  existing  and  rising  local  parliaments  by  advice 
on  points  of  procedure  and  organization,  by  forwarding  them 
political  papers,  forms  of  bills  and  of  ministerial  declarations, 
etc.  To  prevent  the  local  parliaments  from  dying  out  for  want 
of  combatants,  the  National  Association  communicates  with 
the  central  party  Organizations  and  informs  them  that  in  this 
or  that  local  parliament  the  respective  political  party  is  break- 
ing up,  in  order  that  the  Organization  of  the  party  may,  for 
the  good  of  the  cause,  use  its  authority  to  stir  up  its  political 
coreligionists  of  the  locality  and  exhort  them  to  take  a  mora 
active  part  iu  the  debates  of  their  parliament.  The  National 
Association  of  Local  Parliaments  has  secured  the  patronage  of 
several  leading  political  notabilities,  with  the  Lord  Chancellor 
at  their  head,   who  fill  the  posts  of  President  and   Vice- 


.coy  Google 


THIRD  CHAPTEE 
THE  ACTION  uF  THE  CAUCUS  (continued) 

I 

The  propagandist  efforts  displayed  by  the  party  O^aniza- 
tions  in  the  forms  which  hare  been  examined  are  far  from 
reaching  the  whole,  or  even  the  majority,  of  the  electorate. 
Everybody  does  not  go  to  the  meetings,  attend  the  lectures, 
and  read  the  "political  literature."  It  is  not  certain  that  the 
effect  produced  even  on  those  who  are  drawn  into  them  is 
of  a  permanent  nature.  What  is  to  be  done?  Attempts  were 
made  to  enlighten  the  political  conscience  of  the  voters,  to 
act  on  the  zoon  poUtikon.  Tliis  action  proving  inadequate,  it 
is  sought  to  make  good  the  deficiency  by  appealing  to  the 
animal  side  of  man,  to  his  instinct  of  sociability,  with  the 
joys  and  pleasures  which  are  connected  with  it,  or  which  be- 
come enlianced  by  it.  Being  provided  by  the  Organizations 
or  through  their  agency,  they  are  destined  to  produce  an  asso- 
ciation of  feelings  between  all  those  who  are  invited  to  share 
them  and  the  political  parties.  As  they  can  be  enjoyed  only 
by  a  number  of  persons  assembled  together,  they  supply  the 
Organizations  with  an  opportunity  and  a  means  at  the  same 
time  of  sweeping  into  this  association  and  carrying  the  voters 
wholesale,  in  a  lump. 

Among  the  varied  forms  in  which  the  "social  tendencies  of 
human  nature  are  made  subservient  to  the  higher  interests" 
of  politics,  the  most  important  is  provided  by  party  clubs. 
The  reader  is  aware  of  the  origin  of  political  clubs  and  will 
recollect  that  it  dates  from  tlie  seventeenth  century,  and  that 
for  a  long  time  they  were  only  friendly  gatherings  of  people 
with  the  same  political  opinions,  who  met  periodically  to  enjoy 
the  pleasures  of  the  table;  that  it  was  only  with  the  founding 


.coy  Google 


THimocHiP.]       THE  ACTION  OF  TUB  CAUCUS  421 

of  the  Carlton  Club  (in  1831),  and  its  Liberal  rival  the  Reform 
Club,  that  cluliB  became  genuine  political  institutions  in  which 
the  head-quarters  of  the  parties  were  established,  from  which 
issued  the  word  of  command  for  political  circles  in  London  as 
■well  as  for  the  provinces.'  The  two  great  clubs  gradually  lost 
this  position  in  proportion  as  a  special  organization  with  a 
central  registration  Association  and  local  Associations  grew 
up  under  the  Whip  of  each  party.  The  same  fate  overtook 
the  clubs  founded  in  the  provinces  on  the  model  of  the  Carlton 
and  the  Reform.  In  truth,  the  part  played  by  the  great  pro- 
vincial clubs  in  the  organization  of  tiia  party  depended  more 
CD  the  personal  position  of  their  members  than  on  the  fact  of 
their  belonging  to  the  club,  which  was  only  the  meeting-place 
of  the  local  leaders.  Being  used  as  head-quarters  by  the  latter, 
who  met  there  to  settle  parliamentary  candidatures  among 
themselves,  the  clubs  were  included  in  the  same  disfavour  by 
the  advanced  Liberals,  who  demanded  the  introduction  of  the 
popular  principle  into  the  management  of  the  party.  And  in 
the  midst  of  the  controversy  raised  by  the  establishment  of 
the  Caucus,  there  resounded  the  cry  among  others:  "Down 
with  the  clubs  and  up  with  the  Caucus! " '  Exa^erating  the 
power  of  tlie  clubs  somewhat,  the  advanced  party  looked 
on  them  as  a  liotbed  of  anti-democratic  "social  influences," 
hostile  to  true  Liberalism.  At  the  present  moment  the  official 
club  of  the  party  is  the  centre  and  instrument  of  the  Organi- 
zation only  in  places  where  there  is  no  regular  Association. 
Being  the  only  collection  of  the  adherents  of  the  party,  it  is 
in  that  case  just  the  body  to  take  in  hand  matters  of  oi^uiza- 
tion.  In  places  where  there  is  an  Association,  —  and  this  is 
in  the  vast  majority  of  cases,  —  the  club  exists  side  by  aide 
with  it,  at  one  time  with  an  absolutely  independent  position, 
at  another  as  its  social  branch,  the  executive  committee  of 
the  caucus  being  the  managing  committee  of  the  club  and  the 
secretary  of  the  Association  obligingly  discharging  the  func- 
tions of  manager  of  the  club.  On  the  Tory  side  the  ties 
between  the  club  and  the  Association  are  much  closer,  the 
clubs  are  always  represented  on  the  Councils  and  the  com- 

1  ride  lupra,  the  origin  of  political  fUsociatioDs,  and  ol  part;  OrgaoiZB- 
tions,  p.  14G. 

»  Times.  Ang.  22, 1878. 


.coy  Google 


422  DEMOCRACY  AND  PdLiriCAL  PARTIES      [ii 


mittees  of  the  Associations  by  special  delegates,  under  tbe 
statutes.  la  reality  it  is  even  rather  the  club  which  pulls  the 
strings  of  the  local  organization  of  the  paity.  Associations 
of  course  had  been  set  up  in  accordance  with  all  the  rules  of 
the  doctrine  of  representative  Organizations,  but  it  was  often 
done  against  the  grain,  and  in  a  good  many  cases  they  are  only 
a  make-believe.  Generally  speaking,  it  may  be  said  tltat  in 
the  management  of  the  Liberal  party  the  clubs  have  given  way 
to  the  Associations)  that  among  the  Tories  the  Associations 
have  less  political  vigour,  while  the  clubs  are  more  powerful 
than  those  of  their  rivals. 

U 

But  throughout  their  varying  fortunes  as  leading  party 
o^ans,  the  clubs  preserved  and  developed  their  character  as 
places  of  resort  for  the  members  of  the  party,  where  the  latter 
associated  on  a  footing  of  equality  in  spite  of  the  difference  in 
their  extraction  and  education,  where  by  a  daily  contact  they 
spontaneously  kept  each  other  true  to  the  political  sentiments 
which  formed  their  connecting  link.  The  Carlton  and  the 
Eeform  Club  discharged  this  function  on  a  large  scale  in  the 
capital,  white  their  imitations  in  the  provinces  repeated  it  on 
their  own  account  by  bringing  together  the  local  gentry  and 
the  middle  class  and  clothing  them  in  the  party  atmosphere. 
The  Conservatives,  being  by  their  temperament  more  depen- 
dent on  social  surroundings,  and  consequently  attaching  more 
importance  to  social  tics,  for  a  long  time  showed  more  readi- 
ness to  set  up  clubs  than  the  Liberals.  The  Tories  proBted  so 
much  by  this  that  the  Liberals,  attributing  with  some  show  of 
reason  tlie  success  of  their  rivals  to  the  co-o])eration  of  the 
clubs,  adopted  the  same  policy,  after  1874,  with  more  energy 
than  before.  The  Liberal  ehihis  were  not  only  less  numerous, 
but  many  a  one  liad  lost  its  active  political  spirit  and  had 
remained  simply  as  a  social  centre.  This  was  the  case  in 
particular  with  the  great  stronghold  of  Liberalism  in  the  capi- 
tal, with  the  Reform  Club.  The  lukewarm  Liberalism  of  the 
Palmerstonian  era  ma<Ie  its  political  atiuospheie  much  milder, 
and  of  its  great  traditions  the  principal  remnant  is  its  old  and 
glorious  reputation  for  good  cookery,  which  artists  from  the 


.coy  Google 


p.]        THE   ACTION  OF   THE   CAUCUS 


other  side  of  the  Chaonel  had  won  for  it,  and  which  attracted 
to  it  members  without  much  reference  to  their  political  opin- 
ions. Consequently,  "to  infuse  new  blood"  into  Liberalism, 
after  several  important  clubs  had  been  started  in  the  provinces, 
a  new  general  centre  for  the  party  was  founded  in  London, 
in  1882,  iinder  the  name  of  the  National  Liberal  Club,  in- 
tended, according  to  Lord  Derby's  definition  repeated  by  Mr. 
G-ladstone,  to  serve  as  the  great  exchange  of  the  Liberal  party, 
in  which  infoimattou  and  impressions  as  to  the  condition  of 
Liberalism  in  the  country  would  pass  between  the  members, 
where  the  Liberals  of  the  provinces  would  meet  those  of  the 
metropolis,  where  the  leaders  would  receive  deputations,  etc. 
In  a  few  years  the  club  has  in  fact  attained  this  position,  and 
it  is  now  in  the  first  rank  of  English  political  clubs.  If  its 
sumptuous  premises  are  not  quite  up  to  the  Carlton,  it  has 
the  greater  number  of  members,  as  many  as  6500  (including 
country  members,  who  amount  to  nearly  4000),  and  its  annual 
budget  exceeds  £70,000.  This  rapid  success  of  the  Liberal 
club  is  accounted  for  inter  alia  by  the  fact  that  it  has  opened 
its  doors  wide.  The  number  of  members  being  limited  in  all 
the  principal  political  clubs  of  London,  the  limit  is  fixed  at  a 
much  lower  figure  in  the  Tory  clubs,  while  the  subscription 
and  entrance  fee  are  higher.  Thus  the  Carlton  Club  has  only 
1600  members;  but  as  against  that  more  than  8000  candidates 
are  waiting  their  turn  to  be  admitted,  and  it  is  the  custom,  as 
in  several  large  non-political  clubs,  to  enter  candidates  at  an 
early  age,  in  order  that  when  they  have  arrived  at  man's 
estate  they  may  not  have  long  to  wait  for  a  vacancy.  This 
applies  also  to  the  Junior  Cai'lton  Club,  and  will  soon  be  the 
case  with  their  juniors,  with  the  clubs  of  more  recent  creation. 
As  each  of  them  admits  only  a  limited  number  of  members, 
the  Tory  clubs  increase  to  meet  the  demand.  While  the 
Liberals  have  in  the  matter  of  big  clubs,  without  counting  the 
old  Keform  and  Brooks',  now  devoid  of  political  importance, 
only  the  National  Liberal  Club  and  the  City  Liberal  Club, 
the  Conservatives  have,  besides  the  Carlton,  which  is  still 
their  great  politico-social  centre,  the  Junior  Carlton,  the  City 
Carlton,  the  St.  Stephen's,  the  Constitutional,  and  the  Junior 
Constitutional.  The  comparative  paucity  of  members  admis- 
sible, and  the  large  number  of  candidates  waiting  to  be  elected. 


.coy  Google 


4M  DEMOCEACY  AND  POLITICAL  PARTIES    [thibd  taxt 

added  to  the  nature  of  the  social  sphere  from  which  they  are 
recruited,  have  the  natural  effect  of  makiug  the  Tory  clubB 
more  exclusive,  of  forming  stronger  ties  between  their  mem* 
bers,  and  of  spreading  their  e^ftril  de  coTpt  even  beyond  them. 
A  man  has  not  yet  joined  the  club,  he  is  still  on  the  long  list 
of  candidates ;  but  while  he  is  waiting  for  election  he  has  caught 
the  tone  which  prevails  in  it,  he  has  become  imbued  with  the 
sentiments  which  animate  the  members,  ]ie  is  already  a  link 
in  the  living  chain  which  they  form  in  social  and  political 
life.  The  big  Tory  olubs  in  the  provinces  exhibit  the  same 
character.  In  the  Liberal  dabs  this  esprit  de  corps  has  never 
existed,  for  want  of  conditions  to  keep  it  alive;  there  were 
too  many  different  shades  of  opinions  and  too  much  variety 
la  the  social  extraction  of  the  Liberal  clubmen,  so  that  to 
strengthen  the  bonds  of  union,  to  ensure  the  political  loyalty 
of  the  members  of  the  club  as  such,  it  was  necessary  to  depend 
rather  on  the  allurements  in  the  way  of  comfort  which  it 
offered  them,  and  which  after  all  are  by  no  means  irresistible, 
as  events  had  proved.'  Neveitheless,  the  Liberal  clubs  do 
serve,  although  in  a  much  smaller  degree  than  the  Tory  estab- 
lishments of  the  same  kind,  as  a  political  cement  for  their 
members,  by  keeping  up  the  feeling  of  respect  for  society 
which  compels  the  individual  to  fall  in  behind  his  fellow- 
men,  which  prevents  him  from  taking  a  line  of  his  own. 

Ill 

Whether  they  perform  their  part  with  more  or  less  success, 
all  these  clubs  —  the  Carlton,  the  ^National  Liberal,  with  their 
provincial  imitations  —  bring  together  only  members  of  the 

1  Whsa  the  dlvergenoes  nl  opialnu  In  the  Mcond  Qlad«tone  MlaUtry.  t«- 
tween  the  Radical  fraction  representod  by  Mr.  Chamberlaiu  whti  had  Just 
launched  liis  "  unaiitborixed  proKrumme,"  anil  his  more  moderate  collea^cuM, 
nave  rise  to  apprehension  that  they  ml^ht  be  (ullnwed  by  a  formal  split  in  the 
Liberal  party,  a  "  member  ol  the  Cabioet  of  Kreat  expetlence  and  sagacltj  " 
remarkad :  "  I  don't  believe  that  there  can  be  any  break-up  In  the  liberal 
raake,  because  ot  the  existence  of  otir  ^reat  politii^al  clubs ;  a  man  learns  to 
loTe  his  favourite  cliibineourseof  time,  and  he  will  submit  to  aiiythlnR  rather 
than  to  exclude  himself  from  It."  ("The  Liberal  Split  and  Liberal  Clilba." 
The  Spmkcr,  1st  March.  ISDO.)  A  year  had  hardly  pasKe.l  when  the  Libet«l 
larty  was  torn  asunder  owin^;  to  the  Irish  Home  Rule  Bill  at  Mr.  Gladstone, 
and  In  mnre  than  one  "  favourlie  club  "  there  tras  an  eiodo»  of  dissentients. 


.coy  Google 


tHimn  ca*p.]       THE  ACTION  OF  THE  CAUCUS  426 

upper  and  middle  classes,  and  present  merely  an  improved 
form  of  the  reaction  of  society  which  always  gave  cohesioa  to 
the  ruling  classes.  Bat  these  classes  are  henceforth,  from 
1868  and  1884  onwards,  but  a  small  minority  of  political 
society.  The  reaction  therefore  can  only  be  strictly  local  and 
the  cohesion  extremely  partial;  the  great  mass  of  the  elec- 
torate remains  outside.  Consequently,  immediately  after  1868 
steps  were  taken  to  bring  the  new  popular  voters  into  party 
clubs  as  well,  and  Liberal  and  Conservative  "working-men's 
clubs"  were  started.  The  politicians  had  no  need  even  to 
create  them  altogether.  For  ten  years  or  so  before  this  fate- 
ful epoch,  under  the  inspiration  of  philanthropists  of  every 
shade  of  political  or  religious  opinions,  a  movement  had  been 
in  progress  for  organizing  popular  places  of  meeting  and 
recreation  of  a  more  elevated  kind  than  the  public -houses. 
On  the  principle  of  rich  men's  clubs,  small  folk,  workmen, 
shopkeepers,  employ^,  formed  societies,  with  unpretending 
premises,  where  for  a  trifling  subscription  of  a  few  shillings  a 
year  the  members  could  spend  their  leisure  time  in  reading,  in 
conversation,  in  games,  and  obtain  refreshments,  or  even  meals. 
Soon  this  movement  received  a  powerful  impulse  in  conse- 
quence of  the  establiahment  (in  1862)  of  a  "  Union  of  Work- 
ing-men's Clubs  and  Institutes,"  in  which  persons  belonging 
to  the  cultivated  classes  took  the  lead.  Promoting  and  assist- 
ing in  the  formation  of  new  clubs  on  the  basis  described,  the 
Union  had  two  great  objects  in  view,  — to  make  these  clubs 
not  only  a  factor  of  moral  elevation,  but  an  educational  instru- 
ment, spreading  enlightenment  among  the  masses,  and  on  the 
other  hand  to  utilize  them  for  drawing  all  classes  nearer  to 
each  other,  for  levelling  the  barriers  which  divided  English 
society.  On  a  somewhat  modest  scale,  it  is  true,  these  inten- 
tions were  realized  in  more  than  one  club,  the  promoters  of 
which  succeeded  in  organizing  lending  libraries,  meetings  for 
discussion,  French,  drawing,  and  music  classes,  in  wliich 
"gentlemen,"  i.e.  persons  belonging  to  the  cultivated  and 
wealthy  ranks  of  society,  made  not  only  pecuniary  but  per- 
sonal sacrifices  by  coming  down  to  the  clubs  to  take  part  in 
the  conversation,  the  reading,  and  even  in  the  games  of  the 
labour  members.  The  better  class  of  working-men  grasped 
the  advantages  of  the  clubs  at  once,  but  tlie  great  mass  of  the 


.coy  Google 


DEMOCRACY  AND  POUTECAL  PARTIES     [thied  p 


people  did  not  like  giving  up  the  public-liouses,  tlie  result  of 
which  waa  that  moat  of  the  working-inen's  clubs  had  Dot  a 
sufficient  number  of  members  to  make  both  ends  meet  and  to 
dispense  with  the  pecuniary  assistance  of  gentlemen  philan- 
thropists. ^Nevertheless  the  movement  made  progress,  and 
in  a  few  years  several  hundred  of  clubs  affiliated  to  the  Union 
were  scattered  over  the  Kingdom,  always  remaining  perfectly 
neutiul  from  a  political  and  religious  standpoint.  Referring 
to  this  point,  one  of  the  pati-ons  of  the  Union,  Lord  Carnarvon, 
the  eminent  Minister  of  the  Derby  and  Disraeli  Cabinets  (who 
was  on  the  Council  of  the  Union  with  genuine  Whigs,  like 
Lord  Brougham,  and  advanced  Radicals),  remarked  at  one  of 
the  annual  meetings  of  the  Union :  "  How  far  should  politics 
enter  into  the  life  of  these  societies?  If  they  meant  party 
politics  —  polities  which  would  give  a  colour  and  complexion 
to  the  cluts  —  I  should  hold  that  to  be  a  great  misfortune.  If 
this  politics  were  so  to  come  in  that  clubs  should  be  composed 
of  one  side  or  the  other  —  Conservative  or  Liberal  —  I  should 
hold  that  that  was  ruin  to  their  system.  But  if  by  politics 
they  meant  only  to  the  extent  that  their  discussion  was  in 
common  with  political  and  social  questions,  that  was  differ- 
ent."' The  "great  misfortune"  apprehended  by  Lord  Car- 
narvon was  already  lying  in  wait  for  the  working-men's  clubs, 
and  before  long,  at  the  instigation  of  the  politicians,  most  of 
these  clubs  hoisted  party  colours.  It  is  hardly  necessary  to 
say  that  this  transformation  dealt  a  heavy  blow  at  the  original 
conception  of  working-men's  clubs.  Instead  of  serving  the 
moral  and  intellectual  welfare  of  the  masses,  promoted  in  an 
absolutely  disinterested  spirit,  they  became  party  machines. 
The  parties  seized  on  them  to  secure  and  extend  their  electoral 
connection.  Everybody  who  might  have  been  attracted  into  a 
club  labelled  Liberal  or  Conservative  was  to  become  their  vas- 
sal from  the  fact  of  his  habitually  frequenting  an  exclusively 
Liberal  or  Conservative  circle  which  had  been  made  pleasant 
for  him.  A  competition  arose  between  the  parties  as  to  which 
should  start  the  greater  number  of  institutions  of  the  kind. 
These  efforts  have  attained  extraordinary  proportions  during 
the  twelve  years  extending  from  1883-1884. 

'  Sixth  BDnual  meeting  of  the  Working-men's  Clubs  and  loatitutes  Dnloa. 


.CD,  Google 


D  CHAP.]         THE  ACTION  OF  THE   CAUCUS 


IV 

All  over  the  country,  even  in  the  villages,  there  are  now 
political  working-men's  clubs.  In  the  large  towns  there  are 
dozens  of  them.  Their  individual  importance  varies  a  good 
deal;  some  —  that  is,  in  London,  and  even  in  a  few  provincial 
towns  —  do  credit  to  the  spirit  of  co-operation  displayed  by 
English  workmen;  they  are  housed  in  their  own  premises, 
built  for  the  purpose,  and  hare  as  many  as  1500  or  1800  mem- 
bers; the  others  hire  a  whole  house,  or  simply  two  or  three 
rooms,  and  have  a  hundred  or  even  fifty  on  their  list.  Nor  is 
the  social  standard  of  the  members  absolutely  uniform;  some 
are  mostly  filled  by  small  middle-class  people,  shopkeepers, 
clerks,  whereas  the  very  great  majority  of  popular  clnbs  are 
really  recruited  from  tbe  class  of  manual  labourers.  A  dis- 
tinction of  greater  importance  for  the  inner  life  of  the  clubs 
arises  according  as  they  do  or  do  not  allow  the  consumption 
of  alcoholic  drinks.  In  the  vast  majority  of  clubs,  including 
nearly  all  the  Conservative  ones,  wine  and  spirits  can  be 
obtained  with  even  greater  facility  than  in  the  public-houses, 
which  are  closed  for  part  of  Sunday  and  after  a  certain  hour 
in  the  evening,  whereas  the  clubs  remain  open  later,  and  the 
whole  day  on  Sunday.  Consequently,  drinkers  highly  appre- 
ciate clubs,  and  the  scenes  witnessed  in  them  are  not  always 
of  an  edifying  description.  The  complaints  of  their  demoral- 
izing action  are  numerous  and  very  loud.  It  is  not  impossible 
that  they  are  somewhat  exaggerated,  but  in  the  main  they  are 
well  founded.  The  managers  of  the  clubs  cannot  even  wish 
for  less  drinking  to  go  on  in  tbem,  for  the  bar  is  their  great 
source  of  income.  Yet  there  are  a  good  many  clubs  in  the 
country  on  a  temperance  basis  which  manage  to  get  on  without 
this  resource.  The  fact  is  worthy  of  note;  it  is  not,  however, 
the  rule.  In  the  interest  of  the  party,  which  is  anxious  to 
attract  as  many  people  as  possible  to  the  club,  the  subscription 
is  fixed  at  a  very  low,  often  almost  nominal,  rate,  and  neces- 
sarily it  is  the  bar  and  the  games  which  keep  the  club  in 
funds.  The  net  profit  from  the  liquors  generally  constitutes 
more  than  a  third  of  the  receipts,'  and  even  with  that  the 

1  In  the  cluba  ol  wliicli  I  have  eiamhied  tlie  book.q.  It  amoimied  to  3B  per 
cent,  40  per  cent,  and  even,  in  Conservative  clnbs,  tu  SU  per  cent. 


.CD,  Google 


428  DEMOCBACr  AND  TOLITICAL  FAETIES      [ibibd  PiBt 

yearly  balance-sheet  of  the  club  often  shows  a  deficit,  which 
makes  it  dependent  on  the  Organizations  or  on  rich  members 
of  the  pai'ty,  who  pay  the  debts  until  they  get  tired  of  so 
doing.  In  addition  to  the  full  members  the  clubs  generally 
have  honorary  members,  leading  men  in  the  party  who  sub- 
scribe a  guinea  or  two  a  year.  Besides  this,  a  good  many 
clubs  are  regularly  subsidized  by  the  Associations,  or  even 
kept  up  by  parliamentary  candidates.  It  sometimes  happens 
that  working-men's  clubs  start  up  all  at  once  in  a  constituency, 
like  mushrooms,  just  as  they  are  apt  to  disappear  suddenly 
and  simultaneously  after,  for  instance,  the  local  M.P.  retires 
into  private  life.  Their  birth  and  their  death  were  due  to  a 
private  individual.  There  are  seasons  for  the  outburst  of 
clubs;  it  takes  place  especially  after  a  general  election  and  at 
its  approach.  The  candidates  who  have  just  been  beaten,  or 
who  are  going  to  enter  the  lists,  cover  the  constituency  with 
clubs  to  prepare  or  retrieve  their  fortunes.  Tlie  great  number 
of  working-men's  clubs  in  existence,  and  the  facility  with 
which  new  clubs  of  this  kind  are  formed,  is  not  due  solely  to 
the  co-operation  of  the  party  Organizations  and  the  candidates, 
they  also  multiply,  thanks  to  the  operation  of  the  "  tied-house 
system,"  of  which  they  accept  the  benefits  and  the  obligations, 
like  most  of  the  public -ho  uses.  This  system  consists  in  rich 
brewers  letting  the  retail  vendors  have  a  certain  quantity  of 
beer  on  credit,  and  not  demanding  payment  for  it  as  long  as 
the  latter  remain  their  customers.  The  landlords  of  public- 
bouses  are  thus  always  tied.  In  granting  the  same  terms  to 
the  working-men's  clubs,  the  brewers  procure  theiu  a  great 
part  of  their  stock-in-trade,  which  they  have  all  the  less  appre- 
hension in  placing  at  their  dis]iosal  because  they  count  on  tlie 
Organization  of  the  party  concerned  or  its  rich  members  not 
to  leave  the  club  in  the  lurch. 

But  the  worst  of  all  this,  according  to  the  party  politicians, 
is  that  the  members  of  the  working-men's  clubs  do  not  care 
an  atom  for  politics,  that  they  join  them  simply  for  the  sake 
of  the  social  advantages  which  these  institutions  offer  them. 
When  hands  are  wanted  for  the  various  jobs  which  devolve 
on  the  Organizations,  as  for  instance  electoral  registration 
work,  or  tlie  elei^tion  canvass  or  fetching  voters  to  the  poll,  the 
Association  applies  as  a  matter  of  right  to  the  members  of  the 


.coy  Google 


TRiBDosAP.]       THE  ACTION  OF  THE  CAUCUS  «2e 

clubs  of  the  party,  but  the  latter  turn  a  deaf  ear  to  the  appeal ; 
they  prefer  remaining  in  the  bar,  or  in  the  billiard- room  to 
watch  the  performances  of  the  crack  players.  This  indifFerence 
of  the  members  to  politics  is  accounted  for  not  only  by  their 
crass  egoism,  but  by  a  hazy  feeling  which  they  have  that  it  is 
not  so  much  for  their  good  as  in  the  interest  of  the  party  or 
of  the  parliamentary  candidate  that  they  are  invited  to  join 
these  institutions,  and  they  unconacioualy  meet  the  demands 
made  upon  them  with  wliat  is  called  in  law  exceptio  turpUitdinia. 
The  "earnest  politicians  "  who  belong  to  the  club  rarely  show 
their  faces  in  it ;  the  company  is  beneath  them,  the  bulk  of  the 
members  being  taken  from  the  lower  strata  of  the  electorate, 
and  these  on  their  side  have  a  greater  respect  for  the  good 
billiard- player  or  cricketer;  it  is  he  who  gives  the  tone  to  the 
club.  In  some  clubs  there  are  groups  of  "politicians,"  who 
work  zealously  for  their  party ;  but  they  could  have  done  it 
just  as  well  without  being  members  of  the  club.  The  political 
newspapers  to  be  found  in  more  or  less  greater  number  in  every 
club  are  little  read,  the  reading-room  is  never  crowded.  It  ie 
often  at  the  further  end  of  the  building,  and  before  getting 
there  one  is  easily  stopped  in  the  bar  or  in  the  rooms  for 
games.  On  more  than  one  occasion  I  have  happened  to  note 
that  it  was  not  lighted  of  an  evening,  and  that  it  was  lit  up 
for  the  occasion,  to  show  the  room  to  the  visitor.  The  pro- 
gramme of  every  club  includes  lectures,  but  they  are  thinly 
attended.  In  the  London  working-men's  clubs  there  are  lect- 
ures every  Sunday,  but  save  in  exceptional  cases  the  lecturer 
speaks  to  benches  which  are  more  than  half  empty.  Of  sev- 
eral hundreds  of  members,  barely  two  or  three  dozen  come  to 
the  lecture.  How  often  does  it  not  happen  that  the  lecturer, 
who  is  generally  unpaid,  after  a  long  and  tiring  journey  in 
omnibuses  and  trams,  or  even  by  rail,  at  last  lands  in  the  club 
to  which  he  has  been  invited,  to  find  the  room  empty.  In 
vain  does  the  secretaiy  rush  from  one  apartment  to  another, 
from  the  bar  to  the  billiard-table,  from  the  billiard-table  to 
the  bagatelle -room,  to  entreat  the  members  to  go  and  hear  the 
lecturer.  After  waiting  for  half  an  hour  the  latter  begins  his 
address  before  a  few  scattered  recruits  brought  in  by  the 
unfortunate  secretary,  who  is  profuse  in  expressions  of  regret 
and  apology.     Formerly  the  lecture  took  place  on  Sunday 


.coy  Google 


480  DEMOCKACY  AND  POLITICAL  FARTIES      [tbibd  pabt 

eveniiig  and  was  supposed  to  be  the  principal  distraction  of 
the  day  of  rest.  Now  it  is  generally  moved  back  into  the 
forenoon  or  the  afternoon,  to  leave  the  evening  free  for  musi- 
cal and  dramatic  entertainments,  at  which  the  families  of  the 
members,  women  and  children,  are  present.  In  a  few  large 
working-men's  clubs  in  London  classical  plays  are  performed, 
Shakspeare,  for  instance,  but  in  most  of  the  clubs  another 
kind  of  repertoire  is  in  favour,  that  of  the  music-halls;  "nig- 
ger melodies  "  and  comic  songs  are  sung,  to  the  great  scandal 
of  the  Puritans,  who  consider  it  a  shocking  violation  of  the 
Sabbath. 

If  in  the  great  majority  of  clubs  "  earnest  politicians  "  dis- 
appear like  a  drop  in  the  ocean  of  the  Indilferent,  to  make  up 
for  it  there  are  clubs  the  members  of  which  are  too  serious 
politicians,  in  which  there  would  appear  to  be  no  other  interest 
on  earth  but  that  of  militant  politics.  These  are  the  ultra- 
Badical  clubs,  somewhat  few  and  far  between  in  the  provinces, 
but  numerous  in  London.  Of  course,  with  a  considerable  sec- 
tion of  their  members,  the  interest  in  the  bar  and  the  billiard- 
room  comes  first,  as  is  the  case  in  every  popular  crowd,  but 
the  "politicians"  arc  a  strong  contingent,  and  it  is  they  who 
give  the  tone  to  the  club.  If  the  coherence  of  their  ideas 
and  their  political  judgment  are  not  beyond  criticism,  the 
sincerity  of  their  convictions,  and  in  general  their  political 
honesty,  are  undeniable.  The  most  important  working-men's 
clubs  of  the  metropolis  belong  to  this  very  category.  Several 
of  them  have  a  large  number  of  members  and  enjoy  a  real 
prosperity.  This  enables  them,  and  the  uncompromising 
fierceness  of  tlieir  Hadicalism  enjoins  on  them,  to  hold  aloof 
from  the  official  parties,  that  is,  from  official  Liberalism,  for 
which  they  have  an  unbounded  contempt;  for  all  its  repre- 
sentatives are,  in  their  eyes,  simple  reactionaries,  and  hypo- 
crites into  the  bargain.'  Of  course  they  do  not  recognize  the 
Liberal  Organization;  they  have  their  own,  which  is  called  the 
Metropolitan  Radical  Federation,  and  which  is  at  d^^gers 
drawn  with  the  Liberal  Caucus.' 

1  The  reader  will  recollect  that  the  opposition  to  the  wtahllehment  of  a 
special  branch  o(  the  Caiicns  for  the  matropolU  came  from  the  Radical  fed- 
erated cluba.    Ct.  tiipra,  p.  311. 


.coy  Google 


p,]         THE  ACTION   OF  THE   CAUCUS 


Thus  the  working-men's  clubs  oscillate  between  two  ex- 
tremes; some  are  too  much  absorbed  in  politics,  the  others 
display  an  almost  absolute  indifference  to  them.  The  former 
being  independent  of  the  official  parties,  and  the  latter  forming 
the  very  great  majority  of  these  institutions,  the  question 
arises  —  What  is  the  use  of  them  to  the  parties?  It  consists 
above  all  in  this,  that  most  of  the  members  who  do  not  know, 
and  do  not  care  to  know,  anything  about  politics  vote  unhesi- 
tatingly in  accordance  with  the  hints  given  them  by  the 
■'politicians"  of  the  club,  or  even  by  the  best  billiard  or 
cricket  players,  to  whom  they  pay  a  tribute  of  personal  esteem 
and  of  good-fellowship  in  complying  with  their  request  to  vote 
for  the  candidate  of  the  party.  Then  the  clubs  supply  the 
party  Organizations  with  contingents  for  the  demonstrations, 
which  have  become  an  amusement  for  their  members  like  any 
other.  Another  service  which  the  clubs  are  supposed  to  render 
is  to  "  preserve  young  men  "  from  political  perdition.  With 
the  inexperience  and  innocence  of  their  age,  the  latter  might 
easily  fall  a  prey  to  the  opposite  party,  be  seduced  into  voting 
with  it  by  the  example  of  their  companions  or  by  other  influ- 
ences, whereas  if  enrolled  at  an  early  stage  in  tlie  clulis  of  the 
relatives  or  of  the  political  friends  who  lay  claim  to  them, 
they  would  be  withdrawn  from  these  influences  and  made  to 
walk  in  the  right  path.  This  sort  of  prophylactic  treatment 
by  means  of  isolation  is  an  equally  important  factor  in  the 
policy  of  the  middle-class  political  clubs,  in  which  it  is  in 
still  greater  request  for  keeping  the  rising  generation  in  the 
political  traditions  of  the  family. 

Altogether  the  services  which  the  clubs  known  as  working- 
men's  clubs  render  to  the  parties  by  no  means  correspond  to 
the  efforts  and  the  great  pecuniary  sacrifices  made  by  the 
Organizations,  by  the  parliamentary  candidates  or  the  M.P.'s 
and  other  party  zealots  to  start  these  establishments  and  keep 
them  going.  The  persons  concerned  are  under  no  illusion  on 
this  point,  and  yet  they  go  on  with  the  game  because  it 
has  been  begun,  and  because  with  their  eagerness  of  players 
they  wait  to  see  what  may  turn  up,  and,  finally,  because  it 
would  not  be  always  prudent  to  throw  up  their  hand  and 


.coy  Google 


4SS  DEMOCRACY  AND  POLmCAL  PASTIES     [thibb  pakt 

make  enemies  of  the  members  of  the  clubs,  who  have  votes  to 
give  at  the  elections.  It  is  only  when  the  financial  or  moral 
difficulties  become  intolerable  that  they  make  up  their  minds 
to  sever  the  connectiou.  It  ie  from  considerations  of  the  same 
nature  that  people  are  careful  not  to  be  outspoken  with  the 
clubs,  not  to  remind  them  of  their  proper  functions  and  their 
duty;  in  public  nothing  but  compliments  and  flatt«ry  is 
bestowed  on  them.  Statesmen  on  a  visit  enjoying  the  hos- 
pitality of  the  big  club  of  the  party,  and  receiving  deputations 
from  the  others,  lavish  eulogistic  epithets  on  them;  they  are 
"admirable  institutions,"  "beneficial,"  "full  of  hope  in  the 
future,"  "a  large  portion  of  the  intellectual  and  moral  ad- 
vancement which  we  all  feel  is  going  on  around  us  comes 
from  the  clubs." 

Of  the  two  historic  parties,  the  Conservatives,  who  in  pri- 
vate, just  like  their  rivals,  often  speak  of  the  working-men's 
clubs  in  severe  terms,  have,  perhaps,  fewer  reasons  for  con- 
sidering them  as  of  no  account,  and  this,  of  course,  in  no  way 
from  tlie  standpoint  of  "  intellectual  and  moral  advancement," 
which  is  not  a  factor  in  the  question.  As  the  gentlemen's 
club  in  the  county  town  frequently  serves  the  Tories  as  a 
centre  of  organization  of  the  party,  in  the  same  way  the  work- 
ing-men's clubs  supply  them  in  a  good  many  places  with  the 
regiments  for  their  army.  The  local  branches  of  their  Organi- 
zation are  very  often  represented  solely  by  clubs,  which  in 
their  eyes  have  the  advantage  of  not  requiring  to  the  same 
extent  the  application  of  the  principle  of  autonomy  which  is 
supposed  to  be  the  basis  of  the  "Associations,"  and,  above  all, 
of  providing  by  the  development  of  "social  tendencies"  a 
modus  operandi  alike  more  effective  and  better  suited  to  the 
traditions  of  the  Tory  party  than  the  typical  meetings  of  the 
Caucus.  The  federation  of  Conservative  clubs,  the  recent 
establishment  of  which  has  been  already  referred  to,  is  in- 
tended to  accentuate  the  action  of  the  clubs  in  this  direction; 
it  tries  to  form  subsidiary  recreation  clubs,  as  adjuncts  to 
established  clubs,  such  as  cricket  and  cycling  clubs,  and  to 
bring  about  the  "interaffiliation"  of  clubs,  which  consists  in 
the  member  of  an  interafflliated  club  enjoying  rights  of  mem- 
bership in  all  the  other  interattiliated  clubs. 


.coy  Google 


THiBDCHAP.]       THE  ACTION  OF  THE  CAUCUS  433 

VI 

Inadequate  for-  party  purposes,  the  clubB  might  be  of  great 
value  for  the  forniatioa  of  public  opinion  in  general,  owing  to 
their  character  of  social  centres  where  persons  representing 
the  manifold  varieties  of  one  and  the  same  political  tempera- 
ment meet  on  neutral  ground,  and  where  divergences  of  view 
show  themselves  in  the  freedom  of  private  conversation.  But 
for  this  beneficial  exchange  of  opinions  to  take  place  in  the 
clubs  two  elementary  conditions  are  necessary, — that  there 
should  be  different  views,  a  variety  of  shades  of  opinion,  and 
that  they  should  have  free  play.  The  existence  of  these  con- 
ditions, already  limited  by  the  division  into  parties  which  lies 
at  the  root  of  political  clubs,  has  been  much  impaired  of  late 
years.  For  a  long  time  great  political  tolerance  and  a  real 
breadth  of  views  governed  the  selection  of  members,  especially 
in  the  Libera!  clubs  (the  Conservative  clubs  were  inclined  to 
be  homogeneous  by  their  nature)  which  toot  in  the  whole 
gamut  of  what  is  s^led  Liberal  opinion,  from  the  most  timor- 
ous Whigs  down  to  the  very  advanced  Radicals.  But  the  too 
close  connection  of  the  clubs  with  the  official  party  eventually 
made  them  forget  that  a  club  is  an  or^aii  of  opinion  and  not 
of  action,  and  they  set  up  practically  a  rigid  creed.  The 
Home  Rule  Bill  of  1886  was  the  starting-point  for  it.  At  the 
outset,  when  hostilities  broke  out  in  the  Liberal  ranks  on 
the  Irish  question,  the  Liberal  clubs  proclaimed  their  neu- 
trality. Having  been  draped  for  so  long  at  the  heels  of  the 
Oi^anization  of  the  party,  they  were  soon  hurried  into  the 
fray.  In  London  the  old  clubs,  the  Reform  and  Brooks', 
remained  faithful  to  their  traditions  of  tolerance,  but  the  great 
official  club  of  the  party,  the  National  Liberal  Club,  after 
having  declared  its  neutrality,  withdrew  its  declaration  and 
threw  in  its  lot  with  the  particular  measure  which  caused  the 
Liberal  divisions.  The  members  of  the  club  who  belonged  to 
the  Liberal  minority  in  the  House  of  Commons  would  not 
consent  to  accept  a  toleration  amounting  only  to  a  permission 
to  take  their  meals  or  read  the  newspapers,  and  they  resigned 
in  a  body.  In  the  Liberal  clubs  of  the  provinces  the  majority 
of  the  party  displayed  still  less  tact,  the  dissentients  on  the 
Irish  question  were  subjected  to  inquisitorial  proceedings;  they 


.coy  Google 


434  DEMOCRACY  AND  POLITICAL  PARTIES     [third  exa^t 

were  expelled  for  having,  for  iostaQce,  cousented  to  become 
an  anti-Home  Rule  candidate.'  The  Liberal  Unionists  with- 
drew, but  their  number  was  often  too  great  in  a  good  many 
provincial  clubs,  when  they  were  not  in  a  majority  as  at 
Birmingham,  for  their  departure  not  to  seriously  affect  the 
financial  position  of  these  estalilishments,  and  In  more  than 
one  case  ttiey  had  to  be  wound  up.  A  certain  number  of  clubs 
coQtinuo  to  take  in  both  sections  of  the  party,  but  the  old 
cordial  terms  no  longer  exist. 

The  example  thus  set  by  the  great  clubs,  the  gentlemen's 
clubs,  is  certainly  not  calculated  to  encourage  toleration  and 
independence  of  opinions  in  the  working-men's  clubs,  and  the 
less  so  because,  as  a  rule,  the  latter  have  been  and  are  estab- 
lished for  the  requirements  of  the  Organization  of  the  party, 
or  even  to  push  a  particular  candidate.  But  even  this  does 
not  constitute  the  great  difficulty  which  the  working-men's 
clulis  hare  in  becoming  a  centre  of  enlightenment,  a  laboratory 
of  opinion.  Even  supposing  that  the  party  yoke  did  not  weigh 
heavily  on  the  working-men's  chtbs,  their  members,  who  hare 
only  a  slight  smattering  of  culture,  would  be  unable  to  enlighten 
each  other  by  their  unassisted  efforts;  the  club  life  in  itself 
would  be  of  little  or  no  use, — several  blind  men  do  not  make 
one  who  can  see.  Their  eyes  can  be  opened,  their  intellectual 
standard  raised,  and  their  political  judgment  improved  only 
by  the  daily  effective  co-operation  of  men  of  a  higher  culture. 
The  latter  must  make  personal  exertions,  must  come  to  the 
clubs  and  associate  with  their  members,  not  in  a  spirit  of  con- 
descension of  superiors  towards  inferiors,  but  with  the  kindly 
feeling  and  the  sympathy  of  the  stronger  for  the  weaker. 
Their  unobtrusive  presence  would  raise  the  moral  tone  of  the 
club,  their  efforts  would  rouse  the  lethargic  minds,  contact 
with  them  would  kindle  the  flame  of  intt'lligont  ruriosity. 
And  perhaps  there  is  no  country  in  which  this  intervention  of 
men  of  a  higher  culture  would  be  accepted  with  greater  alacrity 
and  gratitude  and  with  loss  class  jealousy  and  suspicion  than 
among  the  English  working-men.  Butthe  maintenance  of  such 
relations  with  the  working-men's  clubs  jiresuppoaes  infinitely 
more  good-will,  self-sacrifice  and  disinterestedness  than  the 

1  C(.  the  article  alresdy  quoterl,  "Tlie  Liberal  Split  and  Liberal  Clnba." 


.coy  Google 


tBiRucHip.]        TEE  ACTION  OF  THE  CAUCUS  «5 

politiciaas  have  at  their  disposal.  In  point  of  fact,  the  moral 
and  intellectual  welfare  of  the  workiug-men's  clubs  has  no 
intei'est  for  them,  so  long  as  they  supply  voting  power,  party 
combatants.  Except  at  election  time  they  never  come  near 
tliem,  nor  do  they  show  their  interest  in  the  clubs  in  any  other 
way ;  they  think  they  have  done  their  duty  by  them  in  signing 
a  cheque.  It  is  true  that  a  good  many  of  them,  and  especially 
the  M.F.'a,  even  if  they  wislied  to  maintain  closer  relations 
with  the  working-men's  clubs,  would  not  be  able  to  do  it. 
Their  "stumping"  engagements,  their  duties  as  commercial 
travellere  for  the  party,  occupy  almost  all  the  time  not  taken 
up  by  their  work  in  the  House,  and  it  would  often  be  anything 
but  a  welcome  request  to  ask  them  to  spend  one  or  two  even- 
ings a  week  in  the  working-men's  clubs  of  their  constituency. 
The  result  none  the  less  is  that  the  clubs,  being  left  to  them- 
selves except  for  party  discipline,  cannot  be  a  factor  of  political 
culture  for  ttie  masses.  Like  the  gentlemen's  clubs,  but  with 
somewhat  different  accessories,  their  sole  mission  is  to  culti- 
vate party  spirit  in  the  bar  and  the  billiard  room. 

VII 

The  clubs,    which   are   the   "social"   counterpart  of  the 

Associations,  serve,  like  tlieta,  as  a  permanent  organization 
for  receiving  and  keeping  the  adherents  of  the  parties.  But 
outside  both  there  is  also  a  vast  floating  electoral  population, 
having  no  connection,  even  of  a  nominal  kind,  with  the  par- 
ties, and  which,  moreover,  does  not  care  a  fig  whether  it  votes 
for  a  Tory  or  for  a  Radical.  To  draw  these  voters  out  of  their 
indifference,  as  well  as  to  rekindle  the  ardour  of  the  others, 
the  Organizations  offer  their  "social  tendencies"  satisfactions 
of  an  exceptional  kind,  just  as  in  the  preceding  phase  of  their 
action,  when  they  appealed  to  the  intelligence,  they  had 
recourse  to  measures  of  a  stronger  description  than  those 
afforded  by  the  routine  of  the  ordinary  meetings  of  wards  or 
of  Hundreds,  which  were  suitable  only  for  the  initiated. 
These  more  heroic  measures  were  the  great  meetings  and 
demonstrations.  In  that  case  they  had  to  deal  with  "  brainy  " 
people,  and  they  treated  them  with  high-sounding  speerihes. 
Here  they  are  confronted  by  people  of  another  kind,  and 


.coy  Google 


434  DEMUCRAC7  AND  I'ULITICAL  PARTIES     (thiU)  mm 

instead  of  political  meetiogs  invitations  are  issued  to  "social 
meetings,"  in  wtiich  people  sing,  dance,  eat,  drink,  in  wbich 
they  amuse  themselves  in  a  number  of  other  ways,  and  ^  po- 
litical address,  a  bit  of  party  claptrap,  is  slipped  in  inciden- 
tally between  the  acts  to  make  it  go  down.  Experience  had 
shown  the  majiagers  of  the  Organizations  that  politics  pure 
and  simple  were  powerless  to  draw  the  masses  after  this  or 
that  party,  that  it  was  necessary  to  make  allowances  for  the 
dispositions  and  tastes  of  men  as  they  are  in  social  life,  that 
it  was  therefore  advisable  to  "socialize  politics."  The  idea 
was  that  this  result  would  be  attained  by  a  happy  mixture  of 
"  politics  and  pleasure,"  offered  to  the  inhabitants  of  towns  as 
well  as  to  country  people,  "If,"  as  a  popular  Conservative 
paper  remarks  in  reference  to  the  extension  of  this  system  to 
the  country  districts,  "  if  we  only  give  a  little  amusement  to 
the  rustic,  the  rustic  will  then  drink  in  tlie  instruction  which 
we  offer  him.  Even  ae  in  a  Kindergarten,  instruction  and 
amuseinent  must  go  hand  in  hand." 

Ho  much  for  the  theory.  As  for  the  practice,  it  is  of  a  still 
less  abstract  nature.  It  consists  in  giving  the  people  fetes 
and  entertainments  calculated  to  amuse  them,  and  consequently 
to  advertise  the  party,  or  more  particularly  the  candidate  or 
member,  who  behaves  bo  nicely  to  honest  folk.  That  is  the 
object  of  all  the  varied  forms  of  amusement  devised  by  the 
ingenuity  of  the  organizers.  Practice  has  not  failed  to  sanc- 
tion a  certain  number  of  them  which  have  come  into  general 
use.  These  are  smoking -concerts,  social  evenings  or  conversa- 
ziones, ffites,  picnics,  garden-parties,  tea-meetings,  etc.  The 
smoking -con  certs,  which,  as  their  naine  indicates,  are  musical 
soirees  at  which  smoking  goes  on,  are  particularly  popular. 
Following  the  procedure  of  meetings  a  Chairman  opens  the 
evening  with  the  gravity  of  the  heavy  father  in  the  play  by  a 
short  address,  in  which  he  expresses  tlie  hope  that  those  pres- 
ent will  derive  as  much  pleasure  as  political  edification  from 
the  proceedings.  After  which  the  musical  part  is  begun,  con- 
sisting generally  of  songs  or  ballads  or  even  comic  ditties. 
Between  two  items  of  the  programme  is  inserted  a  short 
political  speech,  very  short,  but  humorous,  making  the  public 
laugh,  and  of  course  at  the  expense  of  the  ])oIitical  opponents. 
Tlie  oratorical  interlude  is  performed  by  tlie  usual  representa- 


.cy  Google 


THIBDOHAP.]         THE   ACTION   OF  THE  CAUCUS  487 

tives  of  political  eloquence,  beginning  with  the  Members  of 
the  House  of  Commons.  They  speak  either  on  the  question 
of  the  day  which  is  engrossing  the  country,  or  on  the  policy 
of  the  parties  in  general,  without  spoiling  the  effect  of  the 
oomic  song  which  has  just  expired  on  the  lips  of  their  artistic 
oolleagues  or  of  the  ditty  which  will  be  struck  up  as  soon  as 
they  have  finished  their  political  disquisitious.  Thus  passing 
from  "  two  musical  farces,  with  a  political  address  sandwiched 
between,"  to  a  couple  of  monologues  of  "Irish  humour"  with 
the  same  interlude,  and  from  these  to  shoTt  dramatic  perform- 
ances, the  evening  is  spent  to  the  general  satisfaction,  and, 
it  must  be  supposed,  to  the  greater  welfare  of  the  party. 

The  "conversaziones"  and  the  "social  evenings"  are  large 
evening  parties,  at  which  the  programme  often  includes, 
along  with  the  musical  pact  and  the  political  interludes,  danc* 
log,  tableaux  vivants,  thought-reader's  experiences,  etc.,  be- 
sides the  handing  round  of  refreshments,  which  takes  place  in 
all  the  "social"  meetings,  and  which  is  not  the  smallest 
attraction  for  many  people.  It  is  even  the  principal  and  only 
one  in  less  important  gatherings  from  which  the  artistic  part 
is  absent.  The  most  simple  type  of  "social"  meetings  are 
the  tea-meetings,  where  a  cup  of  tea  and  bread  and  butter  con- 
stitute the  only  political  stimulant.  Being  less  expensive  they 
are  more  common,  and  are  often  held  even  in  the  wards,  where 
they  serve  to  fulfil,  on  a  small  scale,  alt  the  purposes  of  "  social 
meetings"  in  general.*  In  the  summer-time  picnics,  pleasure 
parties  in  the  country,  and  more  or  less  distant  excursions  by 
rail  or  boat  are  organized.  The  Presidents  of  Associations, 
candidates,  or  other  big-wigs  of  the  party  who  have  parks  or 
large  gardens,  give  political  garden-parties  in  them,  with  a 
band,  political  speeches,  and  refreshments.  To  make  a  great 
hit  a  "  fSte  "  is  organized,  with  a  most  varied  programme  of 
amusements;  the  ordinary  attractions  aro  reinforced  by  the 
performances  of  conjurers,  acrobats,  "contortionists,"  clowns, 

'  An  AsBociatioD  has  recorded  an  opinion  on  the  usefulneBa  ol  tea-meetln(^ 
In  the  tollowing  terms:  "They  attract  the  young  to  our  ranlcB;  the;  enlist 
the  Interest  of  the  numerous  ladies  who  asatat  (in  making  and  pouring  out  the 
tea)  and  ol  those  who  are  present  at  the  meetinKH,  and  they  help  in  maintaio- 
ItiK  pleasant  and  cordial  rehttiong  between  members  and  their  coustitueota  " 
(Extract  from  the  minute-book  of  a  liber^  AsBoolatioD  In  the  north  of 


.coy  Google 


438  DEMOCRACY  AND  POLITICAL  PARTIES      [thiiid  pabt 

by  sports  for  meu  and  women,  witli  prizes,  the  wliule  preceded 
by  a  political  part,  after  despatching  which  and  shaking  off 
the  cares  of  State,  the  company  indulges  to  its  heart's  content 
in  innocent  pleasures.  These  pleasures  are  enhanced  by  the 
presence  of  women.  In  fact,  the  organizers  welcome  them  most 
warmly  at  all  the  social  meetings,  because  they  attract  the 
men.  A  water-party  or  a  picnic  with  good-looking  young 
women  is  sure  of  success,  as  are  the  tea-meetings  at  which 
they  sing;  each  of  them  ensures  the  presence  at  the  meeting 
of  several  young  men, —  her  brothers  come  as  in  duty  bound 
to  applaud  her,  her  admirers  for  flirtation  or  amusement. 
And  it  is  all  so  much  gain  for  the  party,  as  the  young  men 
get  into  the  habit  of  walking  in  the  right  path.  For  this 
reason,  in  many  localities  women  are  in  request  even  for 
purely  political  meetings,  and  a  portion  of  the  room  is  set 
apart  for  them ;  "  but, "  as  the  managers  of  a  caucus  ex])lained, 
"we  encourage  them  rather  to  sit  with  the  men."  The  other 
great  attraction  of  a  less  aesthetic  kind  is  the  more  than 
moderate  cost  of  admission  to  these  fgtes  and  entertainments. 
If  it  is  an  excursion,  even  less  than  the  price  of  the  railway 
ticket  is  paid;  if  it  is  a  simple  social  meeting,  "  a  social,"  as 
it  is  called  for  short,  a  ticket  can  be  bought  for  a  few  pence 
entitling  the  holder  to  refreshments  worth  at  least  double  the 
amount.  The  difference  is  paid  by  the  Association,  or  by  the 
candidate  who  is  nursing  the  constituency  for  the  next  general 
election,  or  again  by  wealthy  members  of  the  party,  who  are 
asked  to  cover  the  deficit  for  the  good  of  the  cause.  Thanks 
to  their  generosity,  it  is  even  possible  to  distribute  tickets  to 
poor  people  quite  gratuitously. 

Although  committed  out  of  election  time,  and  often  long 
before  it,  and  perhaps  even  independently  of  the  candidate, 
these  acts  of  liberality  none  the  less  have  in  view  the  votes 
of  the  electors,  and  constitute  de  facto  if  not  dejure,  a  pur- 
chase of  votes  in  advance.  The  "social  meetings"  organized 
by  the  Associations  have  therefore  not  failed  to  attract  the 
attention  of  the  judges  who  try  election  petitions.'  WTiile 
admitting  that  tlie  smoking -concerts,  conversaziones,  social 

1  In  England  it  is  ni>t  the  House  of  Commoiis  which  adJudirnlM  nn  tha 
Taliillty  o(  couteated  elections,  but  the  jiidtte^  of  the  Hiijireme  Cunrl  in  accont- 
nnce  with  the  ordinary  rules  o(  judicial  procedure. 


.CD,  Google 


THIRD  CHAP.]       THE  ACTION  OF  THE  CAUCU8  439 

suppers,  etc.,  organized  by  the  Associations  are  not  in  them- 
aelves  necessarily  illegal,  the  judges  have  laid  down  as  a  general 
proposition  that  they  "  are  dangerously  akin  to  corrupt  treat- 
ing," and  that,  in  any  event,  "they  tend  to  engender,  on  the 
part  of  those  who  are  liable  to  be  affected  by  such  considera- 
tions, an  expectation  that  they  are  going  to  get  free  drink,  or 
practically  free  drink,  at  the  expense  of  other  people,  and  so 
to  induce  tbem  to  join  these  Associations,  and  in  that  way  to 
join  the  party  which  these  Associations  are  formed  to  pro- 
mote." The  judges  came  to  the  conclusion  that  the  Associa- 
tions were  a  source  of  real  danger  in  this  respect.'  "People 
have  a  right  to  associate  together  in  order  to  persuade  their 
fellow-countrymen  to  adopt  those  views  of  politics  which  they 
are  persuaded  are  the  best  and  most  wholesome;  and  so  long 
as  in  doing  that  they  resort  solely  to  tilings  which  are  likely 
to  produce  an  effect  upon  the  reason  of  those  to  whom  they 
are  addressed,  no  fault  whatever  can  be  found  with  their 
aetion ;  it  is  otherwise  when  they  endeavour  to  go  beyond  that 
and  to  acquire  popularity  for  political  principles  of  a  particular 
kind  by  endeavouring  to  secure  the  adhesion  of  those  voters 
who  take  a  less  strong  view  of  political  matters,  by  addressing 
themselves  not  to  their  reason,  but  to  less  praiseworthy 
methods,  by  giving  them  treats  and  entertainments  for  the 
purpose  of  inducing  them  to  join  one  or  other  of  the  great 
political  parties  into  which  the  country  is  divided."' 

The  effect  of  tlie  severe  admonitions  of  the  judges,  "that 
the  practices  of  the  local  Associations  may  tie  amended  for 
the  future,"  is  and  will  be  a  long  time  in  making  its  appear- 
ance, for  the  danger  of  coming  within  the  arm  of  tlie  law,  of 
seeing  smoking-concerts  and  conversaziones  pronounced  illegal, 
is  not  very  great  (they  are  only  "akin  to  corrupt  treating"), 
and  the  election  petitions  are  not  frequent,*  while  the  "prac- 

■  Jadgmants  delivered  b;  the  juslices  selected  for  the  trial  of  election  peti- 
tions (Blue  Boojfcj,  18U3,  CoutraverUid  ElectiotiB,  pp.  11,  81,  84). 

^  Ibid.  S,  81.  CI.  the  opiniua  eipresaed  subsequently,  nfter  the  KBneral 
election  of  18^>,  by  the  Jadges  in  tbe  Ijincasler  and  Tower  Hamlets  (St. 
Geoi^'s  Division)  election  petitions,  wbere  they  take  a  much  more  lenient 
View  ot  BinokitiK.concerts  (Blue  Boukt,  1H96,  Controverted  Elecllons,  Fart  1, 
pp.  6.  S :  Part  II,  pp.  10,  II). 

■The  cost  or  an  election  peiiticin  is  too  high  — about  J^SOOO  on  an  average  — 
(or  it  to  be  resorted  to  frequently. 


.CD,  Google 


440  DEMOCBACT  AND  POLITICAL  PARTIES     [tuihi>  fabi 

tiees  "  reffltred  to  have  become  for  "  these  local  Associations  " 
an  essential  element  of  their  action  on  the  electorate.  Of 
course  their  iuiportance  is  not  the  same  everywhere.  It  varies 
first  of  all  with  the  latitude.  lu  the  extreme  north  of  Eng- 
land, and  especially  in  Scotland,  the  "  social  meetings  "  have 
much  less  success  than  elsewhere.  The  Scot  is  too  methodical 
a  being  to  take  to  the  mixture  of  politics  with  amusements,  and 
too  unsentimental  to  be  moved  by  music,  dancing,  or  tableaux 
vivants.  The  variation  is  not  less  considerable  with  the 
political  party.  It  is  the  Tories  who  are  past  masters  in  the 
organization  of  "social  meetings"  and  in  the  art  of  making 
them  attractive.  The  Liberals  have  had  to  learn  from  them; 
while  giving  them  credit  for  the  fact  that  all  beginnings  are 
difficult,  it  must  be  admitted  that  they  have  already  made 
considerable  progress.  Their  political  relations,  however, 
with  the  Temperance  party  do  not  always  permit  them  to  give 
their  "social  meetings"  all  the  fulness  that  the  latter  have 
with  their  rivals;  to  avoid  scandalizing  their  teetotal  friends 
they  are  often  obliged  to  fall  l)ack  upon  tea,  whereas  the  Tories, 
who  are  the  political  allies  of  the  publicans,  would  be  the  last 
persons  to  refuse  their  guests  refreshments  of  a  more  stimu- 
lating kind.  But  apart  from  the  drinks,  the  Tory  social 
meetings  hold  out  powerful  attractions  owing  to  the  pains 
which  the  Conservative  organizations  take  with  them.  It  is, 
in  fact,  one  of  their  great  preoccupations.  Not  only  do  their 
regular  Associations  devote  themselves  to  the  work,  but  also, 
and  above  all,  the  innumerable  branches  of  the  Primrose 
League.  Kefereuce  has  already  been  made  to  the  beginnings 
of  this  League,  founded  by  the  members  of  the  Fourth  Party 
as  an  engine  of  war  of  Tory  democracy.  Later  on,  in  the 
chapter  dealing  with  auxiliary  party  organizations,  it  will  be 
related  how  the  League  i>ussed  out  of  their  control  and  became 
an  instrument,  or  at  least  an  auxiliary,  of  the  head-quarters  of 
the  official  party,  and  in  what  its  activity  and  its  rSle  consist. 
Suffice  it  to  say  in  the  meanwhile  that  the  League  is  among 
other  things  the  great,  the  greatest,  promoter  of  the  "sociali- 
zation'^ of  politics,  and  that  it  performs  its  task  principally 
by  constantly  getting  up  politico-social  meetings,  with  the 
assistance  of  "entertainers"  of  the  most  varied  kind,  con- 
jurers, ventriloquists,  etc.     There  is  no  end  to  the  amusements 


.coy  Google 


p.]        THE   ACTION   OF  THE   CAUCUS 


whioh  it  offers  the  public.  Great,  iininense,  as  ia  the  siiceesa 
of  the  League,  it  has  nevertheless  to  be  always  making  fresh 
efforts  in  the  same  direction;  for  the  voter  is  a  frivolous  being, 
he  soon  gets  tired.  "  Our  great  difficulty,"  the  representative 
of  a  Tory  organization  confided  to  me,  "is  to  keep  them 


.coy  Google 


FOUKTH  CHAPTEE 


CANDIDATES    AND   ELECTIONEBBINO 


However  strongly  the  action  of  the  Organizations  may  in- 
fluence the  minds  and  the  "social  tendencies"  of  the  voters, 
its  effect  cannot  be  complete  unless  the  liking  for  the  party, 
developed  in  them  by  these  efforts,  centres  in  a  concrete  fashion 
on  particular  persons  whom  the  Organization  ia  anxious  to  get 
into  Parliament  —  for  that  is  its  ultimate  object.  To  bring 
al>out  this  result,  the  Association  must  obtain  what  is  called 
a  good  candidate.  Here,  therefore,  is  a  new  factor  added 
to  those  with  which  we  are  already  acquainted. 

But  what  is  a  good  candidate?  In  general,  one  may  say  that 
it  18  the  man  who  is  likely  to  conciliate  the  greatest  number 
of  the  predominating  influences  in  the  locality.  As  we  already 
have  an  idea  from  the  description  of  the  modes  of  action  of  the 
Caucus,  the  influences  which  sway  the  voters  are  manifold. 
Party  feeling,  loyalty  to  the  flag,  while  powerless  to  inspire 
all  of  them,  is  at  all  events  capable  of  carrying  a  good  many 
in  each  constituency.  With  some,  more  or  less  reasoned  con- 
victions lead  tbera  to  prefer  one  party  to  the  otlier.  With 
others,  devotion  to  tlie  party  is  of  a  sentimental  order;  at  one 
time  it  is  merely  the  outcome  of  atavism,  a  tradition  inherited 
from  the  family;  at  another  simply  a  habit  which  has  been 
contracted  of  hoisting  certain  political  colours  and  which  ha^ 
become  an  integral  partof  their  existence.  These  feelings  are, 
perhaps,  displayed  only  at  intervals;  overlaid  by  the  political 
apathy  which  seizes  on  the  majority  of  the  voters  between  one 
general  election  and  another,  they  nevertheless  subsist  in  a 
latent  condition.  Idea  or  simple  feeling,  flashing  brightly 
forth  or  smouldering  under  the  embers  of  the  last  electoral 
battle,  it  is  a  sort  of  religion,  resembling  that  of  the  Church, 
442 


.coy  Google 


p.]     CANDIDATES   AND   ELECTIONEEHING  4*8 


with  its  devotees  of  varying  fervour,  from  the  regular  church- 
goers dowii  to  those  who  cross  the  threshold  of  the  sacred  edi- 
fice only  once  a  year,  to  receive  the  communion  on  the  day  of 
the  great  Christian  festival.  The  religion  of  the  political 
party,  in  like  manner,  hrings  together  all  its  followers  on  the 
solemn  day  of  the  poll,  to  make  them  communicate  and  to 
affirm  their  creed  in  the  person  of  the  candidate. 

This  quasi-spiritual  need,  this  duty  sanctioned  by  habit 
and  decorum,  makes  the  believers  accept,  for  the  particular 
occasion,  the  ministrations  of  the  Caucus,  which  is,  as  a 
rule,  ignored  by  the  great  bulk  of  the  electorate.  In  fact,  an 
we  already  know,  the  Association  is  in  reality  only  a  handful 
of  meu  deriving  their  authority  from  a  scarcely  greater  number 
of  political  co-religionists;  its  elective  character  proceeds 
solely  from  the  sham  elective  procedure  used  in  its  forma- 
tion; and  its  representative  value  is  confined  to  the  militant 
members  of  the  party.  But  the  Caucus  has  stepped  forward 
as  the  officiating  minister  of  the  party  religion,  as  the  guar- 
dian of  the  feelings  engraved  on  so  many  hearts,  and  by  that 
means,  although  made  up  of  usurpation  and  convention,  it 
acquires  a  real  and  almost  legitimate  power.  The  services 
which  it  holds  may  not  be  much  frequented  in  ordinary  times, 
yet  the  public  is  aware  that  they  do  take  place,  that  the  di- 
vinity of  the  party  is  glorified  in  them,  and  when  the  time 
for  prayer  arrives  it  knows  where  to  go  and  where  to  look  for 
the  depositary  of  the  creed,  the  orthodox  candidate. 

It  follows  that  the  first  quality  required  in  a  candidate  is 
that  he  should  profess  the  creed  of  the  party  in  all  its  fulness, 
and  that  his  opinions  should  give  complete  satisfaction  to  the 
Caucus,  wliich  vouches  for  his  orthodoxy.  And  since  the  lat- 
ter is,  as  a  rule,  composed  of  the  most  ardent  members  of 
the  party,  the  programme  which  the  candidate  has  to  endorse 
represents  not  so  much  the  average  opinion  of  the  constituency 
as  the  views  of  the  most  advanced  section.  In  fact,  the  creed 
of  parties  no  longer  consisting  of  fixed  dogmas,  the  candidate 
must  prove  his  adhesion  to  the  political  creed  of  the  day,  ac- 
cording tolhe  latest  quotation,  so  to  speak;  his  political  con- 
victions must  be  "  up  to  date. "  If,  on  the  spur  of  the  moment, 
a  programme  is  issued,  however  voluminous,  like  the  Newcastle 
Programme,  the  candidate  must  be  prepared  to  subscribe  to  it 


.coy  Google 


Ui  DEMOCBACT  AND  POLITICAL  PASTIES     [tdiw>  pam 

in  a  lump.  And  if  the  Organization  should  think  fit  to  add  a 
few  big  items  to  it,  tb«  candidate  is  bound  to  swallow  these  as 
well. 

Having  set  himself  right  with  the  general  body  of  the  adher- 
ents of  the  party,  tlie  candidate  has  to  face  the  particular  sects 
which  flourish  in  profusion  among  the  voters.  One,  anxious 
to  put  a  stop  to  the  drinking  which  is  a  curse  of  the  country, 
wishes  to  prohibit  the  sale  of  spirituous  liquors  by  law ;  another 
has  sworn  not  to  bold  its  hand  until  compulsory  vaccination  is 
abolished;  a  third  believes  that  the  autution  of  the  social 
questioti  is  to  be  found  in  "  the  restitution  of  the  land  to  the 
people  " ;  another  group  of  voters  is  mainly  interested  in  the 
strict  observance  of  the  Sabbath  Day  throughout  the  kingdom ; 
etc.  The  followers  of  these  various  sects  may  lean  towards 
eitlier  of  the  political  parties,  and  profess  its  creed  in  all  sin- 
cerity, but  their  own  particular  claim  is  none  the  less  in  their 
minds  the  point  on  whicli  tlie  problems  of  political  and  social 
life  couverge.  Consequently,  in  constituencies  where  these 
sects  have  many  adherent*  the  good  candidate  will  be  the  man 
who  can  give  pledges  and  rally  round  him  the  greatest  number 
of  these  groups  or  the  most  important  of  them.  In  other 
words,  the  programme  of  the  candidate  must  be  as  comprehen- 
sive as  possible. 

To  urge  the  adopted  programme  on  the  voters,  and  to  prove 
that  he  is  up  to  it,  the  candidate  requires  to  be  a  good  plat- 
form ape.ikerj  he  must  be  fluent  and  copious,  and  quick  at 
repartee.  At  a  pinch,  if  he  possesses  all  the  remaining  quali- 
ties in  a  high  degree,  eloquence  will  not  be  insisted  on,  others 
"will  speak  to  the  people  for  him";  the  Organization  will 
support  his  candidature  with  experienced  orators  who  will 
turn  a  flood  of  talk  on  the  constituency. 

But  this  is  not  nearly  all.  The  electorate  is  not  composed 
solely  of  Iwlievers  and  sectaries  who  can  be  won  by  profes- 
sions of  faith  and  programmes.  Perhaps  they  are  only  the 
minority.  In  any  event,  whatever  their  numerical  importance, 
there  are  always  thousands  of  voters  who  in  choosing  between 
rival  candidates  are  influenced  by  considerations  unconnected 
with  any  notion  of  Liberalism  or  Conservatism  or  with  any 
programme  whatsoever.  In  one  place  workmen  vote  in  a  body 
for  tlieir  employer  because  he  pays  well,  without  caring  a  rap 


.coy  Google 


FODBTHCBAP.]     CANDIDATES   AND   ELECTIONBERINO  446 

whether  he  goes  to  the  House  to  swell  the  ranks  of  the  Tories 
or  to  reinforce  the  Liberals.  In  another,  a  rich  man  is  voted 
for  because  he  is  rich,  or  because  he  has  a  reputation  for  gen- 
erosity, because  he  subscribes  handsomely  to  charitable  insti- 
tutions and  si^s  cheques  withont  hesitation  in  favour  of  every 
society  and  cUib  which  applies  to  him.  Another  large  group 
is  guided  solely  by  influences  springing  from  its  religious 
claims  or  passions,  which  convert  it  into  a  single  body  with 
one  "conscience,"  one  will.  To  carry  the  votes  of  the  electors 
belonging  to  these  categories,  it  is  the  person  of  the  candidate 
which  is  all-important  The  qualities  which  he  must  combine 
in  this  connection  are  not  the  same  in  all  cases,  they  are  varied 
and  manifold,  but  all  of  them  may  be  reduced  to  a  single  term 
^  populariti/.  The  candidate  must  be  a  popular  man  —  here 
is  a  new  condition  to  be  fulfilled  by  him,  which  is,  perhaps, 
even  more  important  than  all  the  preceding  ones,  for  the  tho- 
roughgoing party  devotee  himself  is  also  a  man  swayed  by  less 
abstract  and  less  general  constderations- 

The  first  postulate  of  the  popular  candidate  is  his  position 
of  locai  man,  which  ensures  his  being  known  to  everybody. 
But  often  this  is  a  drawback,  or  even  a  reason  for  disqualifica- 
tion. In  his  contact  with  local  life  he  has,  perchance,  made 
many  enemies.  As  employer  of  labour  he  has,  it  may  be, 
aroused  the  discontent  of  his  workmen,  there  has  perhaps  been 
a  strike  in  his  factory  or  his  workshop,  and  thus  his  political 
prospects  are  spoilt  beforehand,  however  great  his  political  or- 
thodoxy and  however  considerable  the  services  which  he  has 
rendered  to  the  party.  In  that  case  a  stranger  would  be  more 
acceptable,  even  if  he  were  a  lawyer,  on  condition,  of  course, 
that  he  has  an  aptitude  for  becoming  popular.  With  good 
means  the  popular  candidate  should  unite  a  reputation  for  gen- 
erosity and  for  affable  manners,  and,  in  genera!,  a  sympathetic 
character  or  special  qualities  capable  of  impressing  the  ordi- 
nary voter  in  his  favour.  Among  these  special  qualities  there 
are  some  which  one  would  never  dream  of  requiring  from  a  can- 
didate in  any  other  country.  Thus  a  good  "athlete,"  an  adept 
at  games,  is  a  very  good  candidate ;  if  he  is  a  good  cricketer, 
most  of  the  cricketers  in  the  constituency  —  and  their  name 
is  legion  —  might  find  it  difficult  to  resist  the  admiration  with 
which  he  inspires  them  so  far  as  not  to  give  him  their  votes- 


.coy  Google 


UO  DEMOCKACr  AND  l-OLITICAL   PARTIES      [thibd  p^et 

The  combative  spirit,  which  is  a  mark  of  the  race,  assigns 
almost  a  moral  excellence  to  fightiug  qualities  and,  from 
a  deviated  ethical  sentiment,  the  deference  shown  to  the 
crack  football  or  cricket  player  is  in  fact  rather  a  homage 
paid  to  the  character  of  the  man.  It  is  for  the  same  reason 
that  the  platform  speaker  carries  away  the  audience^  telling 
blows  are  admired  and  cheered,  whether  they  are  delivered 
with  words  or  with  the  cricket-bat.  The  candidate,  therefore, 
must  be  a  good  talker,  not  only  to  win  those  who  are  able  to 
follow  his  line  of  argument,  but  also  those  who  pay  atten- 
tion only  to  form,  without  understanding,  or  wishing  to  un- 
derstand, the  subject-matter.  The  person  of  the  speaker, 
his  .pluck,  is  capable  of  silencing  political  considerations  in 
the  mind  of  many  a  voter  even  with  a  relative  amount  of  cul- 
tivation.' After  all,  it  ia  only  a  question  of  degree,  of  more 
or  leas  elevated  iesthetic  feeling;  what  forcible  language  is  to 
some  athletic  feats  are  to  others.  Duller  minds  are  attracted 
by  still  less  stirring  qualities  in  the  candidate,  by  the  simple 
attribute  of  "  good  fellow,"  which  assumes  so  many  forms  in 
daily  life,  from  a  natural  kindliness  toward  one  and  all  down 
to  a  readiness  to  have  a  drink  with  everybody. 

Thus  the  elements  of  the  candidate's  popularity  with  the 
voters  are  composed  of  a  whole  string  of  feelings  suggested 
by  his  jierson  or  flowing  from  his  character,  apart  from  his 
politics.  It  is  the  action  of  man  on  man  which  asserts  it^ 
self  triumphantly  here;  living  realities  confront  the  conven- 
tions of  politics,  the  artihcial  distinctions  of  parties.  And 
the  latter  can  win  the  day  only  by  means  of  an  alliance  or  a 
coalition  with  these  live  forces.     It  is  no  good  defying  them. 

'  I  once  told  an  EngUBbmsn  an  electioneering  sU>ry  belonging  to  the  bast- 
ings period.  The  canilldate  on  the  plattoriD,  s  very  younK  man,  li>oked  almost 
a  youth.  A  wag  In  the  crowd  called  out  to  him :  "  Dues  your  mother  know 
you're  out  7  "  "  Yes,"  leplit-d  th«  taudldate,  "  and  on  Tuesday  [the  day  fixed 
for  the  poll]  she  will  know  that  I  am  in."  "  I  would  plump  for  such  a  man," 
Biclaimed  my  interlocutor  with  cold-blooded  determination. 

A  borough  111  Yorkshire,  which  bad  always  l>een  represented  In  the  House 
by  a  Liliiiral.  returned  a  Tory  a  fen  years  ago.  On  vlsltlnff  the  town  wune 
time  after  the  election,  I  made  enquiry  as  (o  the  oause  of  this  chaufre.  The 
reply  was  that  it  was  partly  to  be  accounted  for  by  the  tact  that  the  Tory 
candidate  bad  contested  the  seat  at  tour  consecutive  elections ;  a  good  many 
Lilwral  voters  are  suppn.sed  to  have  said  to  themselves :  he  Is  a  plucky  fellow, 
he  deserves  to  win,  and  to  have  voted  for  bim. 


.CD,  Google 


rouETHCaip.]     CANDIDATES   AND   ELECTIONEERING  W7 

A.  conventional  factor  can  never  make  any  way  if  it  does  not 
throw  in  its  lot,  were  it  only  aa  a  parasite  or  by  fraud,  with 
a  teal  force.  Thus  we  have  seen  the  Caucus  climb  into  power 
in  the  rear  of  that  great  living  force  called  party  feeling,  with 
which  so  many  members  of  the  body  politic  are  animated.  It 
matters  tittle  that  in  a  good  many  cases  this  feeling  itself  has 
a  purely  conventional  origin.  Every  notion  which  produces 
devotion,  love,  hatrwl,  strife  among  men,  is  in  itself  a  living 
fact  and  a  real  force.  By  appearing  before  the  voters,  who 
ai'e  inspii'e<l  by  party  feeling,  with  a  candidate  who  is  the 
mouthpiece  of  it,  the  Caucus  has  seen  its  small  battalion 
forthwith  transformed  into  an  army  corps.  This  junction  of 
two  forces  effected  on  the  person  of  the  candidate  not  being 
sulficient,  in  the  majority  of  cases,  to  carry  the  election,  the 
operation  is  repeated  over  and  over  ^ain;  by  a  series  of 
simultaneous  coalitions,  invariably  centring  on  the  person  of 
the  candidate,  every  factor  capable  of  joining  in  the  fight — 
influences,  social  passions  and  prejudices,  interests  —  is  en- 
listed to  win  the  constituency.  Starting  from  a  pure  conven- 
tion, the  Caucus  takes  in  blood  and  life  at  each  contact  with 
these  realities.  It  selects  as  candidate  a  great  factory-owner  who 
employs  thousands  of  hands ;  a  rich  brewer  who  has  under  his 
thumb  all  the  publicans  of  the  locality,  who  control  their  cus- 
tomers i  or,  on  the  other  hand,  a  leader  of  the  temperance  move- 
'ment,  a  respectable  mediocrity,  who  is  a  tower  of  strength 
in  the  Nonconformist  chapels,  a  man  with  a  well-filled  purse 
and  an  open  hand;  in  a  word,  any  one  who,  thanks  to  his  per- 
sonal position,  is  likely  to  jioll  a  great  many  votes,  and  who,  in 
addition  to  this,  of  course,  is  ready  to  don  the  party  uniform. 
The  more  qualifications  of  this  kind  the  nominee  of  the  Caucus 
combines,  the  more  closely  will  he  correspond  to  the  ideal  of 
a  good  candidate. 

The  Associations,  therefore,  need  all  their  sagacity  to  find 
their  man;  the  occasion  is  one  in  which  the  skill  of  the  wire- 
pullers of  the  Caucus  is  put  to  a  particularly  severe  test  The 
task  of  selection  is  all  the  more  difficult  because  the  qualifica- 
tions of  the  good  candidate  are  not  only  of  many  kinds,  but  vary 
a  good  deal  from  one  constituency  to  another,  according  to  the 
relation  which  exists  in  them  between  social  forces  and  politi- 
cal forces,  between  the  nature  and  the  composition  of  the  for- 


.coy  Google 


448  DEMOCRACT  AND  KILITICAL  PARTIES      [thibo  past 

mnr  and  the  degree  of  inteusity  of  the  latter.  On  a  more  lerel 
kind  of  ground,  where  the  social  influences  or  the  particular 
groups  are  we^  or  few  in  number,  the  party  Organization  has 
more  scope.  Party  feeling  having,  in  these  cases,  no  serious 
rivals  to  speak  of  among  the  living  forces,  it  becomes  (Ac  liv- 
ing force,  and  bears  away  the  crowd,  like  the  wind  which  lifts 
the  grains  of  dust  into  space  and  drives  them  straight  before 
it.  Under  cover  of  such  a  situation,  the  caucus  can  easily 
thrust  on  the  constituency  a  politician  pure  and  simple,  a 
stranger  with  no  local  connection,  a  "  carpet-bagger, "  whose 
sole  claim  is  the  confidence  with  which  he  has  managed  to  in- 
spire the  lea<Ung  members  of  the  Organization.  In  places,  on 
the  other  hand,  where  groups  and  sects,  each  prosecuting 
their  special  claims,  have  to  be  reckoned  with,  the  ingredients 
capable  of  producing  the  good  candidate  must  be  mixed  with 
skill;  they  may  not  amalgamate,  or  they  may  perhaps  be 
mutually  destructive.  For  instance,  in  a  locality  where  the 
group  of  temperance  men,  who  demand  the  prohibition  of  the 
sale  of  liquors,  is  very  numerous,  a  brewer,  were  he  the  best 
"Liberal"  in  the  world,  the  most  generous  of  men,  the  most 
ardent  of  Nonconformists,  will  never  be  a  good  candidate  for 
the  Liberal  patty,  which  has  long  been  allied  with  the  tem- 
perance men,  and  the  caucus  which  adopted  him  would  prob- 
ably be  courting  a  defeat.  As  against  this,  a  temperance  man, 
were  he  a  Conservative  to  his  finger-tips,  is  a  bad  candidate  for 
the  Conservative  party,  which  derives  its  strongest  support 
from  the  publicans. 

n 

In  consequence  the  procedure  laid  down  by  the  rules  for  the 
selection  of  the  candidate,  described  above  in  the  account  of  the 
powers  of  the  Caucus  committees,  is  simply  a  formality  which 
just  puts  the  finishing  touch  on  the  work  of  the  wire-pullers 
—  a  work  which  has  perhaps  been  a  long  time  in  preparation. 
But  this  fonnalityaccomplished  by  the  Organization  is  in  itself 
of  great  importance :  it  confers  on  the  candidate  an  incontes- 
table superiority  over  all  bis  competitors  of  the  same  party; 
he  becomes  in  truth  the  anointed  of  tlic  party,  and  the  Spirit 
of  the  party  is  "upon  him  from  that  time  forth."     He  is  "the 


.coy  Google 


rouHTH  CHip.J     CANDIDATES   AND   ELECTIONEERING  4W 

adopted  candidate."  Independent  candidates  may,  of  course, 
come  forward,  but  he  alone  is  considered  the  orthodox  candi- 
date. For  this  reason,  therefore,  and  for  another  reason  of  a 
less  doctrinal  order,  which  will  be  mentioned  later  on  in  its 
proper  place,  it  very  rarely  happens  tliat  independent  parlia- 
mentary candidatures  arise  in  the  ranks  of  the  party,  in  oppo- 
sition to  that  which  has  been  adopted  by  the  caucus  j  and  their 
success  is  still  more  rare.  The  prestige  bestowedon  the  parlia- 
mentary candidate  through  the  investiture  given  him  by  the  cau> 
cus  is  one  of  the  most  striking  manifestations  of  the  influence 
which  this  factor,  bred  of  conventions,  manages  to  acquire  in 
taking  on  itself  the  representation  of  the  party  in  the  locality. 
When  grappling  with  the  living  forces  of  society,  we  have  seen 
it  bow  before  them  and  come  to  terms  with  them^  here  the  for- 
mal forces  have  their  revenge.  It  is  their  second  triumph; 
their  first  was  to  impose  on  the  candidate  the  programme  of 
the  Organization,  which  reflects  only  the  views  of  a  small 
group  of  militant  politicians;  in  that  case,  however,  they  were 
dealing  with  an  individual  made  of  a  special  kind  of  clay, 
which  is  only  too  ready  to  foe  moulded,  whereas  the  formal 
proclamation  of  the  candidate  of  the  party  impresses  the  im- 
aginations of  thousands  and  places  their  wills  under  restraint 
£ven  the  sitting  member  would  not  stand  again  if  the  cau- 
cus were  to  start  another  candidate  in  opposition  to  him.  His 
position  with  regard  to  his  party  would  somewhat  resemble 
that  of  an  excommunicated  sovereign  in  the  Middle  Ages, 
whose  subjects,  so  devoted  to  him  the  day  before,  are  released 
from  their  loyalty  to  him.  In  practice,  things  rarely  get  so 
far  as  this.  As  a  general  rule,  the  sitting  member  is  eo  ip»0 
the  candidate  of  the  Association  for  the  next  election;  it 
recognizes  his  vested  rights;  even  if  he  has  proved  his  utter 
incompetence  in  the  House  or  on  the  platform,  he  is  not  offered 
the  atfront  of  a  notice  to  quit,  unless  his  party  orthodoxy  is 
called  in  question.  On  this  point  there  is  no  compromise.  In 
the  case  of  serious  diiferences  of  opinion  arising  between  the 
Association  and  the  member,  he  himself  gives  up  seeking  re- 
election, if  he  does  not  wish  to  break  with  the  party.  If  he 
were  to  appeal  to  the  constituency,  he  wo»ild  no  doubt  be  in 
a  better  predicament  than  an  independent  candidate  who  had 
not  been  a  mpmber,  but  he  would  be  very  unlikely  to  obtain  a 


.coy  Google 


DEMOCRACY  AKD  POLITICAL  PARTIES     [n 


majority  again;  at  the  most  he  would  succeed  in  briDging  in 
the  candidate  of  the  rival  party,  which  would  be  the  lucky 
third  thief  in  the  fable;  in  any  event,  he  would  be  the  cause 
of  a  split  in  the  party,  and  i>arty  morality  knows  no  more 
odious  crime  than  this.  The  Caucus  trades  precisely  on  these 
feelings  to  ensure  the  monopoly  of  its  candidate;  it  relies  on 
the  reprobation  with  which  fomentei-s  of  schisms  are  viewed 
by  the  general  body  of  believers,  and  on  the  fear  that  the  divi- 
sions in  tlie  party  caused  by  them  may  benelit  the  candidate  of 
the  opjwsite  party,  which  presentsaunited  front.  This  being  so, 
the  announcement  of  the  candidate  adopted  by  the  Caucus  puts 
him,  as  it  were,  in  possession,  and  has  the  immediate  effect  of 
discouraging  possible  competitors,  of  nipping  their  candidat- 
ures in  the  bud.  To  stop  them  more  effectively,  the  Organiza- 
tion generally  selects  its  candidate  a  good  long  time  before 
the  election,  sometimes  several  years  beforehand.  This  pre- 
caution offers  certain  otiier  advantages  besides:  it  enables  the 
Organization  to  connect  its  propagandist  action  with  the  name 
of  the  candidate  at  an  early  st^e,  and  gives  the  latter  time 
to  prepare  his  candidature.  The  Association  itself  profits  by 
it  as  well;  as  it  does  not  receive  many  subscriptions,  and  is 
always  hard  up,  it  cannot  exist  without  subsidies  from  rich 
political  friends.  The  candidate  is  marked  out  as  the  princi- 
pal support  of  the  Association,  and  the  sooner  it  finds  one, 
and  in  easy  circumstances,  the  sooner  will  it  get  out  of  its 
financial  difficulties.  The  gifts  which  the  candidate  makes 
to  the  Association  sometimes  run  into  respectable  figures.' 
When  returned  to  Parliament,  he  continues  his  donations, 
because  he  means  to  stand  again.'  If  he  decides  not  to  seek 
re-election,  the  Association  feels  the  effect  of  it  at  once;  the 
member,  who  was  erewhile  so  demonstrative,  begins  to  treat 
it  with  marked  coolness,  and  it  is  bound  to  find  a  successor 
to  him,  not  only  for  the  seat  in  the  House,  but  also  for  the 
donations  which  he  was  in  the  habit  of  making  it.  The  anxiety 
about  ways  and  means  sometimes  makes  the  Association  act 
with  undue  haste  and  adopt  a  candidate  who  is,  perhaps,  not 

1  A  eood  many  candidates  spend  from  £400  to  £600  a  year.  Tbe  average 
amount  of  this  eipendltiire  mielit  be  fixed  at  £230  a  year. 

'  There  nro.  Tiovrf  ver,  randiilalen  am)  members  wlio  do  Dot  subscribe  any- 
tbiog  to  tbe  lauds  of  ibelr  reBi)ective  AEisciciBUoDB. 


.CD,  Google 


rODRTHCHAF.]     CANDIDATES   AND   ELECTIONEERING  461 

the  best  available;  the  reason  is  that  the  stomach  cries  cup- 
board, and  that  somebody  must  be  found  with  all  speed  to 
administer  nourishment,  or  "keep  the  Association  going,"  as 
is  said  in  the  political  slang  of  the  day. 

The  choice  of  the  local  candidate  by  the  wire-pullers  is 
arrived  at,  to  a  certain  extent,  by  a  process  of  natural  selec- 
tion. Often  it  falls  on  the  President  of  the  Association  him- 
self; for,  as  we  are  already  aware,  he  has  been  placed  in  this 
position  precisely  for  his  qualities  of  "popularity,"  which 
make  a  good  candidate.  If  it  is  necessary  to  have  recourse  to 
outsiders,  the  task  is  more  laborious,  unless  the  head  mana- 
gers in  London  recommend  a  candidate,  and  a  strong  one  too, 
who  is  accepted  at  once.  But  if  the  Association  has  to  lind  the 
man  by  its  own  efforts,  it  looks  round  and  feels  its  way.  It 
is  not  uncommon  for  it  to  open  a  sort  of  competition,  applying 
to  one  person  after  another,  getting  them  to  state  their  politi- 
cal views,  and  coming  to  a  decision  after  having  inspected 
them  all  in  succession.  First  of  all,  the  wire-pullers  examine 
them.  Then  the  candidates  for  a  seat  in  Parliament  are 
invited  to  speak  before  the  "Hundreds,"  and  often  at  a  public 
meeting  into  the  bargain.  The  impression  which  they  make 
on  the  audience  is  of  great  weight  for  the  future  of  their  can- 
didatures; they  undergo  an  ordeal  similar  to  that  of  the  tenor 
at  trial  performances  on  the  provincial  sti^e.  The  success 
obtained  by  the  candidate  at  these  rehearsals  is  the  beginning 
of  the  popularity  which  he  has  to  win.  Even  the  candidate  of 
local  origin,  who  is  well  known  already,  has  to  give  his  mind  to 
it;  all  the  more  is  he  bound  to  do  so  if  he  is  a  stranger  to  the 
locality,  and  this  is  the  case  with  a  large  number  of  candi- 
dates, both  in  the  boroughs  and  in  the  county  constituen- 
cies. In  fact,  of  the  total  of  electoral  Divisions,  more  than 
SO  per  cent  are  represented  by  persons  brought  in  from  out- 
side. The  popularity  of  the  non-local  candidate  has  to  he 
built  up  from  the  beginning,  but  this  is  not  a  very  difficult 
matter,  if,  in  addition  to  the  aid  of  the  caucus,  he  has  a  little 
tact  and  a  good  deal  of  money.  Guided  by  the  advice  of  the 
wire-pullers,  the  imported  candidate  will  employ  both  to  ad- 
vantage; he  will  gain  adherents  by  his  engaging  manners  and 
by  bis  munificence. 

The  interval,  often  of  long  duration,  between  the  a 


.coy  Google 


4(Q  DEMOCRACY  AND  POLITICAL  PARTIES      [tbikd  par 

ment  of  the  candidature  and  the  election  is  actively  spent  in 
doing  this.  The  sitting  member's  term  has,  perhaps,  a 
good  long  time  to  run,  but  the  "  adopted  candidate  "  assumes 
from  that  moment  the  part  of  the  Lord's  anointed.  He 
attends  all  the  important  gatherings,  from  religious  or 
charitable  meetings  to  outdoor  shows  at  which  performing 
dogs  are  exhibited.  He  tries  to  connect  himself  with  all 
the  events  which  interest  the  local  population,  down  to  the 
changes  of  the  seasons  almost.  He  "identities  himself  with 
local  institutions  "  by  subscribing  to  them,  by  accepting  the 
title  of  honorary  member  of  this  or  that  society,  of  honorary 
president  of  this  or  that  club,  of  honorary  vice-president  of 
this  or  that  association,  In  order  not  to  do  things  by  halves, 
a  good  many  candidates  even  belong  to  some  of  the  numerous 
benefit  societies  with  the  picturesque  titles  of  "  Ancient  Shep- 
herds," "Hearts  of  Oak,"  "Odd  Fellows,"  "Druids,"  etc.,  all 
the  members  of  which  call  each  other  brothers,  and  meet  to 
enjoy  fraternal  feasts.  Generally,  the  candidate  is  obliged  to 
carry  his  "  identification  with  local  institutions  "  much  farther 
than  he  likes.  As  soon  as  he  takes  this  title  he  is  beset  on 
all  sides  with  demands  for  money;  not  an  "institution"  but 
what  requests  his  assistance  for  its  "  work  " ;  churches,  chapels, 
hospitals,  asylums,  clubs,  musical  societies,  societies  for  sport, 
for  all  kinds  of  amusement,  for  every  description  of  edifica- 
tion. Every  group  of  individuals  who  take  it  into  their  heads 
to  assume  a  collective  title  of  some  kind  or  other,  to  organize 
themselves,  even  for  the  most  fanciful  of  objects,  tries  to  screw 
a  subscription  out  of  him,  by  hinting  that  they  represent 
influential  electors,  people  who  have  a  vote.  It  is  nothing  less 
than  a  regular  blackmail  levied  on  the  candidate,  who  would 
deserve  sincere  pity  if  he  had  not  laid  himself  open  to  it  be- 
forehand. He  is  bound  to  submit  to  it  in  order  not  to  make 
enemies,  and  to  increase  the  number  of  his  adherents.  Be- 
sides this,  he  works  the  constituency,  in  concert  with  the 
Association,  on  the  approved  methods,  by  means  of  speeches, 
lectures,  and  "social  "  gatherings.  He  gives  political  garden- 
parties,  at  homes,  he  takes  the  chair  at  tea-meetings,  he  pays 
visits  to  the  workingmen's  clubs,  he  attends  the  ward  meet- 
ings, and  speaks  at  them,  as  well  as  at  the  large  public  meet- 
ings organized  by  the  Association.     In  the  rural  constituencies 


.coy  Google 


P.3     CAMDIDATES   AND   ELECTIONEERING 


the  task  is  a  still  more  arduous  one,  if  only  on  account  of  the 
way  in  which  the  voters  are  scattered  over  the  country ;  the 
county  Divisions,  in  fact,  are  composed  of  fifty,  sixty,  or  even 
a  hundred  parishes.  A.n  active  candidate  visits  them  all,  and, 
perhaps,  moi-e  than  once,  and  he  does  not  contine  himself  to 
speaking  at  the  erening  meetings  held  in  them;  he  goes  from 
house  to  liouse,  from  cottage  to  cottE^e,  to  see  the  inhabitants 
individually,  and  to  invite  them  iu  person  to  the  meeting 
which  he  proposes  to  address. 

Ill 
Thus,  if  time  allows,  if  the  election  does  not  come  unawares, 
— owing  to  an  unexpected  dissolution  or  to  a  vacancy  occurring 
during  the  term  of  the  Parliament, —  the  ground  for  the  coming 
election  is  prepared  L>eforehaud  by  the  action  of  the  Aasooiation 
and  of  tlie  candidate.  But  in  striving  to  create  a  current  of 
opinion  in  their  favour,  they  acted  —  however  divided  and  dif- 
ferentiated the  efforts  may  have  been  —  on  groups  of  voters, 
on  masses.  When  election  time  comes  at  the  close  of  which 
the  voters  are  to  record  their  votes,  one  by  one,  on  the  polling- 
day,  the  aspect  of  the  political  stage  changes;  instead  of 
groups,  of  masses,  it  is  the  individual  voter  who  becomes  the 
protagonist.  At  tlie  first  blnsh,  perhaps,  the  distinction  will 
seem  purely  logical  and  no.t  to  admit  of  practical  consequences ; 
for  are  not  the  groups  composed  of  individiials,  and  does  not 
action  on  the  one  involve  action  on  the  other?  It  is  not 
always  so  in  reality.  The  inference  which  each  one  of  the 
voters  is  intended  to  draw  on  his  own  account  from  the 
demonstration  of  the  candidate's  claims  made  to  them  in  a 
body,  often  turns  out  to  be  beyond  his  moral  and  intellectual 
grasp.  In  that  case  the  proof  has  to  be  presented  in  a  still 
more  concrete  form,  the  quality  of  good  candidate  has  to  be 
brought  home  to  each  voter  individually.  Thus  the  OiganiEa- 
tion  is  confronted  with  the  necessity  of  recapturing  the  voter, 
singly,  of  catechizing  and  exhorting  him  iu  private.  This 
applies  also  to  those  who  have  never  been  reached  at  all  hy  any 
of  the  forms  of  tjie  propaganda  set  in  motion  by  the  Organiza- 
tion: they  have  not  come  to  it,  and  it  goes  to  t)\em,  to  each 
one  oE  them.  At  the  decisive  moment  of  the  vote  it  knocks  at 
every  door  to  recommend  its  candidate. 


.coy  Google 


DEMOCRACY  AND  FULITICAL  PARTIES      [ti 


These  practices  of  tlie  Caucus  no  doubt  bring  distinct  recol- 
lections to  the  reader's  luind;  he  has  recognized  in  tliem  tlie 
electoral  canvass  of  bygone  days,  that  instrument  of  the  old 
order  of  tilings  which  was  the  most  perfect  mirror  of  it,  and 
even  more,  its  living  soul.  Having  stepped  in  with  the 
pretension  of  aiibstitutiiig  the  efficacy  of  principles  for  the 
baneful  tyranny  of  sociitl  influences,  the  Caucus  tinds  itself 
obliged  once  more  to  supplement  the  inadequacy  of  the  former 
by  the  latter,  and  to  resort,  in  this  instance,  to  the  action  of 
man  on  man  in  its  least  dignified  form.  In  fact,  witliout  the 
canvass  the  aspect  of  tlie  electoral  battlefields  would  be  radi- 
cally changed,  a  very  large  section  of  the  electorate  would  not 
put  in  an  appearance,  and  the  political  parties  would  lose  many 
of  their  contingents.  The  most  optimistic  calculations  put 
the  number  of  electors  likely  to  vote  more  or  less  spontaneously 
at  50  per  cent.  The  projwrtion  should  perhaps  be  reduced  to 
40  or  even  35  per  cent  to  be  nearer  the  truth. 

Having  lost  none  of  its  im[)ortance  from  the  standpoint  of 
the  political  parties,  the  operation  of  the  canvass  has  become 
far  more  complicnt'd.  The  extension  of  the  suifrage  effected 
during  the  last  thirty  years  has  increased  the  number  of  voters, 
that  is  to  say,  the  numlrer  of  persons  wlio  have  to  be  hunted 
up;  instead  of  1, 200,000  citizens  who  [Kissessed  the  right  of 
voting  in  Great  Britain  before  1867,  there  are  now  {in  1895) 
nearly  5,600,000.  Again,  owingtotha  differentiation  of  opinion 
and  of  social  groups,  the  motives  and  influences  capable  of  act- 
ing on  the  voters  have  multiplied  in  projiortion.  The  argu- 
mentum  ad  hominent,  with  which  the  canvasser  operates,  has 
oonseiiuently  to  assume  a  variety  of  shapes  unknown  in  former 
days.  Besides,  the  parties  have  not  at  their  dis])osal  the  old 
body  of  canvassers,  which  included,  along  with  the  frieiids  of 
the  candidate,  paid  agents.  The  law  enacted  in  188.3  against 
corrupt  and  illegal  practices  at  elections  prohibited  the  em- 
ployment of  paid  canvassers,  for  this  was  one  of  the  devices  for 
disguising  the  purchase  of  votes;  it  was  customary  to  engage, 
ostensibly  as  canvassers,  a  number  of  voters  ready  to  sell 
themselves,  so-called  "  doubtful  "  voters  who  hesitateil  between 
the  rival  candidates,  or  else  persons  wlio,  through  the  influence 
which  they  wielded  over  their  ndations  and  their  friends,  were 
able  to  secure  a  eertivin  number  of  votes.     Thus  the  canvassers 


.coy  Google 


FOL-sTu  OHxr.]     CANDIDATES   AND   ELECTIONEERING  465 

must  now  be  at  once  voluntary  workers,  numerous  enough  to 
cope  with  the  large  number  of  voters,  and  with  as  strong  a 
hold  as  possible  ou  all  the  varied  groups  of  which  the  elector- 
ate is  made  up. 

Being  an  elective  body  of  numerous  and  unpaid  members, 
the  caucus  is  placed  in  a  position  to  meet  most  of  these 
new  exigencies,  to  provide  the  staff  suited  for  the  canvass, 
in  spite  of  the  restrictions  laid  down  by  the  Act  of  1883. 
The  members  of  the  "  Hundreds  "  and  of  their  committees  al- 
most all  turn  into  canvassers  during  election  time.  It  is,  in 
fact,  the  principal  service  which  the  Organization  expects  from 
its  members,  especially  from  those  who  do  not  lend  it  their 
name  or  their  financial  support.  If  payment  of  a  subscription 
is  not  insisted  on  in  the  Associations,  as  we  have  seen,  it  is  for 
the  very  reason  that  the  non-paying  members  are  supposed  to 
give  their  tooric  in  place  of  it,  to  become  workers  of  the  Organi- 
zation. They  appear  on  the  scene  in  this  capacity  on  the 
occasion  of  the  electoral  registration  canvass;  but  there  the 
business  is  more  of  a  mechanical  kind,  and  may  be  en- 
trusted, without  infringing  the  law,  to  paid  agents;  In  any 
event,  it  does  not  require  a  large  staff.  The  real  part  played 
by  the  "workers"  begins  with  the  election  canvass.  With  a 
view  to  this  important  and  delicate  "work,"  the  wire-pullers, 
who  arrange  the  composition  of  the  "  Hundreds  "  and  of  their 
committees  beforehand,  try  to  get  experts  into  them.  How- 
ever, unselfish  devotion  does  not  supply  the  caucuses  with 
all  the  assistance  they  need,  and  they  think  themselves 
bound  to  employ,  in  spite  of  the  law,  a  good  many  paid  can- 
vassers, in  the  strictest  secrecy  of  course.  The  importance  of 
a  more  or  less  numerous  body  of  canvassers  is  twofold :  they 
bring  to  the  caucus  not  only  their  "  work,"  but  also  the  connec- 
tions which  they  possess  in  their  respective  spheres.  Foremen 
of  factories  or  workshops;  active  members  of  Trade  Unions 
or  other  working-men's  societies;  followers  of  religious  com- 
munities; representatives  of  associations  for  instruction  or 
edification,  such  as  Bible  classes  (for  adults)  or  Young  Men's 
Christian  Associations,  and  other  organizations  of  various 
kinds,  bringing  together  a  certain  number  of  persons  for  some 
purpose  or  other;  they  are  introduced,  on  the  initiative  of  the 
wire-pullers,  into  the  committees  of  the  Association.     Indebted 


.coy  Google 


IW  DEMOCRACY  AND  POLITICAL  PARTIES       [tbiiu>  paet 

for  this  distiuctiuu  to  tlie  clever  manoeuvres  of  tlie  uiauagers  of 
the  caucus,  aud  in  no  way  to  the  suffrages  of  tlie  masseE  who, 
as  the  reader  knows,  hold  aloof,  they  none  the  less  form,  poten- 
tially, living  links  which  connect  the  Organization  with  the 
various  groups  of  the  population  to  which  tliey  belong  in  tlieir 
private  capacity.  The  moment  of  the  canvass  (which,  for  some 
of  these  members  of  the  caucus,  is  the  beginning  of  the  effec- 
tive exercise  of  the  authority  supposed  to  be  delegated  to  them) 
makes  the  power  pass  into  action.  Coming  out  as  party  can- 
vassers, they  deal  with  persons  to  whom  they  are  no  strangers, 
and  wlio,  perhaps,  are  in  the  habit  of  following  them.  At  any 
rate,  tlie  Urganization  does  its  best  to  match  the  canvassers 
and  the  canvassed  in  this  way. 

A  reconnoissance  of  the  ground  is  made  long  before  the 
election,  during  the  annual  registration  canvass  in  which  the 
polUiw  of  the  voter  are  taken  down  as  well  as  the  details 
required  for  the  revision  of  the  register.  ^Vith  the  help 
of  the  information  thus  obtained,  the  electoral  canvass  is 
started  on  the  registration  method.  That  is  to  say,  each 
ward  of  the  borough '  is  divided  into  small  blocks  made  over 
to  canvassers  who,  furnished  with  canvass  books  containing 
the  electoral  record  of  the  locality,  call  on  every  one,  without 
distinction  of  party,  on  this  occasion  with  the  sole  and  formal 
mission  of  obtaining  a  promise  of  the  vote  or,  at  all  events, 
a  flat  refusal.  The  nature  and  the  extent  of  the  negotiations 
are  endlessly  varied.  Sometimes  they  are  limited  to  a  simple 
exchange  of  a  question  and  au  answer,  which  the  canvasser 
has  only  to  make  a  note  of,  especially  if  it  is  favourable.  At 
other  times  it  is  a  long  conversation,  In  which  the  cauvasser 
has  to  display  all  his  persuasive  power  or  personal  charm.  If 
the  voter  has  any  Bcruples  about  the  programme  or  the  person 
of  the  candidate,  it  is  the  canvasser's  business  to  overcome 
them,  to  prove  that  the  candidate  is  the  best  of  all  possible 
ones,  and  that  his  programme  is  excellent  in  every  respect. 
In  case  of  partial  differences,  the  canvasser  dwells  on  the 
importance  of  the  points  on  which  the  voter  and  the  candidate 
are  agreed  and  the  conipai-ative  Insignificance  of  the  remain- 
ing ones.  If  the  canvasser  does  not  succeed  in  obtaining  the 
18  is  less  nec^BSftry, 


.CD,  Google 


soDBtacBAF.]    CANDIDATES  AND  ELECTIONEERING  467 

voter's  adhesion,  tie  asks  him,  at  all  events,  to  remain  neutral, 
to  abstain  from  voting.  The  voter  full  of  certain  aspirations, 
absorbed  in  special  claims,  is  made  to  believe  that  the  candi- 
date will  be  the  best  mouthpiece  and  the  beat  chauipiou  of 
them;  the  canvasser  gives  pledges  in  his  name,  is  lavish  of 
promises  in  his  behalf.  At  the  same  time,  he  makes  no  scruple 
of  abusing  the  rival  candidate.  The  charges,  true  or  false, 
reflecting  on  the  latter's  public  or  private  life,  often  due  to 
the  feitile  imagination  of  the  wire-pullers,  find  an  obliging 
retailer  and  an  authoritative  commentator  in  the  canvasser. 
If  the  voter  claimed  by  the  party  shows  a  tendenoy  towards 
independence,,  the  canvasser  recalls  him  to  the  right  path 
by  bringing  before  his  eyes  the  dangerous  incline  on  which 
he .  is  venturing,  and  perhaps,  also,  the  fate  of  backslider 
and  renega<le  which  awaits  him.  If  the  voter  is  accessible 
only  to  considerations  of  a  less  abstract  kind,  it  is  again  the 
canvasser's  business  to  find  the  arguments  suited  to  the 
occasion. 

Thus,  according  to  the  degree  of  intelligence  and  morality 
of  the  voter,  and  the  level  of  his  own  moral  standard,  the 
canvasser  in  turn  argues,  persuades,  insinuates,  promises, 
intimidates,  or  even  goes  farther.  He  does  not  always  succeed 
at  the  first  attempt.  The  voters  styled  doubtful  in  political 
slang,  that  is  to  say,  those  who  have  no  party  preferences  or 
who  have  not  given  any  positive  pledge  for  or  against,  are 
canvassed  several  times  over  by  diiferent  people.  Sometimes 
even  before  the  local  canvasser  goes  his  rounds  the  "  doubtful " 
ones  are  put  on  one  side  and  are  reserved  for  persons  who  have 
influence  over  them.  At  the  general  meeting  of  the  canvassers 
a  personal  appeal  is  made  as  to  who  shall  canvass  this  man 
and  who  take  charge  of  that.  If  those  who  have  accepted  the 
mission  do  not  succeed  in  extorting  the  required  promise,  fresh 
canvassers  return  to  the  charge.  It  sometimes  happens  that 
a  dozen  visits  are  paid  in  this  way  to  a  single  voter.  In  places 
where  the  canvass  is  well  managed,  no  voter  is  left  unvisited, 
even  if  he  has  given  a  formal  promise  at  the  start.  If  only 
for  checking  purposes,  the  Association  repeats  the  canvass 
from  house  to  house.  Sometimes  it  does  not  stop  at  this 
check-canvass,  but  resorts  to  a  cross-canvass  ostensibly  made 
on  behalf  of  the  rival  candidate.     For  instance,  a  canvasser  of 


.coy  Google 


168  DEMOCRACY  AND  POLITICAL  PARTIES      [thibd  i-iM 

the  Tory  Association  appears  as  envoy  of  the  Liberal  Oi^aniza- 
tion  and  asks  for  votes  for  the  Liberal  candidate;  he  notes  the 
refusals  with  pleasure,  and  discovers  among  the  consenting 
ones  those  who  bad  promised  the  Tory  canvasser  to  vote  for 
the  Tory  while  intending  really  to  support  his  opponent.  In 
the  boroughs  where  every  one  knows  each  other,  a  cross-canvass 
is  almost  impossible,  but  in  the  country  constituencies,  made 
up  of  a  good  many  scattered  localities,  it  can  be  carried  out  , 
with  impunity.  An  element  of  uncertainty  no  doubt  always 
attaches  to  the  best-conducted  and  best-checked  canvass :  one 
is  never  sure  that  the  promises  made  will  be  kept,  if  only  by 
reason  of  the  Ballot,  the  secret  voting  introduced  in  1872, 
under  cover  of  which  the  voter  runs  no  risk  of  being  convicted 
of  breaking  his  word.  But  if  the  people  of  the  Organization 
know  tlieir  business,  they  can  calculate  the  loss  befoi-ehand 
with  almost  mathematical  accuracy.  If  in  a  coustitnency  of 
ten  to  twelve  thousand  voters  they  cannot  predict  the  exact 
result  to  within  150-250  votes,  the  Organization  is  considered 
very  inefficient. 

Still,  the  expected  result  will  be  obtained  on  one  condition 
only:  that  of  not  leaving  the  voters  to  themselves  on  the 
polling-day,  A  very  large  number  of  electors  would  vote 
ttraight  when  once  they  are  inside  the  polling-booths,  but  if 
left  te  themselves  they  would  not  take  the  trouble  to  move, 
either  fi-om  carelessness,  or  owing  to  infirmities  or  advanced 
age,  or  to  save  themselves  further  fatigue  after  a  hard  day's 
work.  To  ensure  their  presence  at  the  poll,  the  workers  of 
both  caucuses  fetch  them  in  carriages  and  take  them  there 
bodily.  This  operation  completes  the  work  of  the  canvass 
after  having  been  carefully  prei>ared  by  it.  Each  canvasser 
in  the  course  of  his  visits  makes  a  note  of  the  voters  whose 
Spontaneousness  cannot  be  relied  on,  takes  down  the  time  at 
which  the  particular  voter  is  free  and  the  place  where  he  is 
to  be  found,  the  workshop  or  the  factory,  the  tavern  or  the 
public-house,  or  his  own  home.  -  Those  who  have  been  left  to 
their  own  zeal  are  also  made  to  feel  the  spur  of  the  workers  at 
the  decisive  moment  of  the  vote,  to  wit,  those  who  are  some- 
what tardy  in  going  to  vote.  Tliese  laggards  are  discovered 
by  the  following  metho<l ;  on  tlie  eve  of  the  polling-day  the 
Organization  sends  each  voter  a  card  to  obligingly  inform  him 


.coy  Google 


FOURTH  ca*P.]     CANDIDATES   AND  ELECTION  EEUING 


of  his  number  on  the  electoral  list.  At  the  door  of  the  poll- 
ing-place stand  agents  of  the  Uigauizations,  who  ask  each  voter 
as  he  leaves  the  room,  after  having  voted,  to  state  Lis  numbcr 
or  even  to  hand  over  his  card.  The  latter  complies,  and  often 
delivers  his  card  to  the  agent  wearing  the  colours  of  his  party 
before  the  assembled  crowd.  The  numbers  which  have  come 
out  are  communicated  at  very  short  intervals  to  the  lociil 
branches  of  the  Association  established,  for  the  day,  in  eacli 
voting  section  (commit  tee -rooms).  Tliere  the  names  of  those 
who  have  promised  their  vote,  but  have  not  voted,  are  picked 
out  aa  the  numbers  are  brought  in,  and  they  are  fetched  with 
all  speed. 

The  principal  result  of  this  very  laborious  operation  of  the 
canvass,  completed  by  the  transport  of  the  voters  to  the  poll, 
is  to  secure  for  the  party  the  voters  without  definite  political 
opinions.  Real  conversions  from  one  political  opinion  to 
another  are  anytHing  but  numerous,  —  the  proportion  of  prose- 
lytes is,  in  fact,  very  slight;  in  certain  places  it  is  estimated 
at  one  per  cent  only,  exclusive  of  the,  so  to  speak,  profes- 
sional proselytes,  who  always  vote  against  the  Government, 
whatever  its  political  complexion  may  be.  Among  these  are 
the  small  stm^ling  tradesmen,  for  instance,  who  hope  for 
better  times  under  a  new  government.  If  it  is  the  Toriea 
who  are  trying  to  dislodge  the  government  of  the  day, 
they  vote  against  it  with  enthusiasm  from  tlie  widely  held 
belief  that  trade  always  flourishes  under  a  Tory  government, 
although  they  are  unable  to  explain  this  mystery  of  nature. 
But  the  presence  of  the  Tories  in  power  does  not  prevent  the 
majority  of  this  category  of  voters  from  pinning  their  faith  on 
the  advent  of  a  Liberal  government.  Other  electors  vote 
sometimes  for  the  one,  sometimes  for  tlie  other  party,  from  a 
superior  feeling  of  distributive  justice,  in  order  to  "give  them 
a  chance."  Without  neglecting  these  groups,  who,  however, 
are  not  numerous,  the  caucuses  act  mainly  on  the  floating  mass 
of  voters  who  inhabit  the  confines  of  the  regular  parties  and 
who  vote  on  no  system  —  to-day  with  the  one  and  the  next  time 
with  the  other.  In  the  electoral  duel  the  main  point  is  to 
know  which  of  the  two  rival  caucuses  will  be  the  first  to  lay 
its  hand  on  the  voters  of  this  description,  or,  rather,  which 
will  enlist  the  greatest  possible  quantity  of  them;  for  it  is  these 


.coy  Google 


MO  DEMOCRACY  AND  POLITICAL  PABTIES     [raiKD  mm 

voters  who,  by  their  number,  decide  the  issue  of  the  electoral 
battles.  And  it  is  only  by  the  canvass  that  they  can  be  got 
at;  by  it  alone  can  the  forces  which  they  represent  be  mobil- 
ized. From  this  point  of  view  the  canvass  is  more  important 
than  the  platform  and  the  other  modes  of  action,  and  in  the 
contests  of  the  rival  oandidates  the  chances  of  success  are  to  be 
found  rather  on  the  aide  of  the  man  who  has  a  highly  perfected 
canvassing  machinery  to  back  him;  it  can  often  obtain  the 
victory  for  a  candidate  who  is  personally  little  known  and  a 
poor  speaker  over  a  candidate  who  is  a  man  of  mark,  a  good 
platform  orator,  a  pillar  of  the  party,  etc.  It  is  in  this  sense 
that "  everything  depends  on  organization, "  that  "  organization 
is  everything." 

This  exceptional  part  played  by  the  canvass  and  the  "organi- 
zation" work  which  prepares  and  completes  it  makes  it  a  sort 
of  keystone  of  the  electoral  edifice;  everything  is  connected 
with  it,  everything  hangs  on  it,  everything  def Ives  its  value  uid 
its  practical  object  from  it.  Association,  candidates,  workers, 
the  position  of  all  is  defined  by  the  canvass.  The  Associa- 
tion is  important  because  it  alone,  thanks  to  its  permanent 
eadrea,  which  include  all  the  zeal,  ardour,  party  fanaticism, 
and  political  dexterity  that  exist  in  the  locality,  can  provide 
the  regiment  of  canvassers.  It  is  by  their  number  and  not  by 
that  of  the  adherents  of  an  Association  that  the  latter's  power 
is  measured.  An  Association  with  five  thousand  members  and 
fifty  canvassers  is  of  less  value  than  an  Association  of  five 
hundred  canvassers  with  no  other  adherents  on  its  list.  The 
more  or  less  considerable  number  of  canvassers  may  decide 
the  fate  of  the  electoral  battle  not  only  in  their  own  constitu- 
ency, but  in  the  neighbouring  Ones  if  they  come  to  their  assist- 
ance. It,  therefore,  not  unfrequently  happens  that  an  attempt 
is  made  to  lock  up  the  canvassers  of  the  rival  party,  to  "keep 
them  at  home"  by  starting  a  sham  tight  when  there  is  no 
chance  of  success  for  the  party  which  resorts  to  this  stratagem 
and  consei^uently  no  good  reason  for  contesting  the  constitu* 
ency.  For  the  candidate,  the  possibility  or  impossibility  of 
using  the  corps  of  canvassers  settles  the  fate  of  his  candidature 
beforehand,  and  herein  lies  tlie  second  reason  (along  with  the 
fact  that  the  candidate  adopted  by  the  caucus  is  alone  supposed 
to  represent  the  orthodoxy  of  the  party),  the  reason  of  a  leas 


.coy  Google 


TODBTHCHAP.]     CANDIDATES   AND  ELECTIONEERING  461 

doctrinal  order  alluded  to  above,  which  prevents  an  indepen- 
dent candidate  from  having  any  chance  of  eucoess:  if  he  were 
to  come  foTward  in  opposition  to  the  nominee  of  the  caucus, 
he  would  not  get  any  canvassera  outside  his  personal  friends, 
all  of  them  being  already  engaged,  swept  up  by  the  caucuses 
of  one  party  or  the  other.  Even  if  the  independent  candidate 
managed  to  raise  a  battalion  of  his  own,  they  would  only  be 
raw  recruits  facing  an  army  of  veterans. 

This  being  the  case  the  canvass  confers,  as  a  matter  of  right, 
peculiar  claims  on  those  who  conduct  it,  especially  on  the 
"workers"  who  contribute  their  gratuitous  services  to  the 
Organization.  Being  only  too  well  aware  of  the  importance 
of  their  part,  these  men  claim  an  exceptional  position  in  the 
moral  hierarchy  of  the  Organization,  especially  the  working- 
men  members  of  the  oaucus  who  compose  the  largest  con- 
tingent of  "workers."  They  refuse  to  concede  this  title  to 
the  big-wigs  of  the  Association  wtio  take  no  part  in  the  can- 
vass, and,  considering  them  as  nonentities,  call  them,  con- 
temptuously, "ornamental  members"  or  "House  of  Lords." 
This  feeling  is  all  the  more  readily  accounted  for  because  the 
task  of  canvassing  is,  in  fact,  often  a  highly  disagreeable  one. 
The  canvasser  is  obliged  to  visit  each  of  the  voters  assigned 
to  him  in  their  homes.  Shopkeeper  or  workman,  he  can  do  it 
only  of  an  evening,  when  he  would  prefer  to  rest  after  his  day's 
labour.  He  has  to  go,  maybe,  into  remote  parts  of  the  town,  to 
wander  about  there  in  the  darkness  with  a  lantern.  In  this  or 
that  house  there  are  perhaps  big  dogs  ready  to  spring  on  the 
unexpected  visitor.  Their  master  does  not  always  give  him  a 
better  reception.  The  voter  whom  he  comes  to  lecture  does 
notcarealig  for  politics  and  insists  on  being  let  alone.  Some- 
times, on  the  other  hand,  the  canvasser  drops  on  a  man  who 
knows  how  to  talk  politics,  and  who,  from  a  liking  for  the 
subject  or  simply  to  amuse  himself,  starts  a  discussion  with 
him  from  which  the  emissary  of  the  caucus  retires,  perhaps, 
defeated.  Sometimes  he  has  to  put  up  with  worse  insults:  lie 
is  snubbed,  or  turned  into  ridicule.  These  extreme  cases, 
however,  are  not  required  to  place  the  canvasser  begging  for 
votes  too  often  in  a  humiliating  predicament  for  a  man 
conscious  of  his  dignity,  especially  when  it  is  borne  in  mind 
that  over  and  over  again  he  has  to  deal  with  people  who  are 


.coy  Google 


402  DBHOCRACT  AND  POLITICAL  PARTIES     [thibd  past 

at  the  opposite  pole  to  respectability.  A  good  many  persons, 
therefore,  refuse  to  belong  to  the  caucus  in  order  not  to  hare 
to  canvass  the  "  residuum."  Neyertheleas,  in  a  certain  number 
of  places  the  principal  dignitaries  of  the  Association,  begin- 
ning with  the  most  respectable  ones,  set  an  example  of  duty; 
they  canvass  in  person  and  even  enlist  their  wives  and  their 
daughters,  who  devote  themselves  to  the  good  cause  by  going 
from  house  to  house  with  their  sweetest  smile  to  ask  for  votes. 
The  consciousness  of  haviug  discharged  a  great  duty  is  not 
the  only  reward  of  the  canvasser.  Apart  from  those  who,  as  the 
rcEider  already  knows,  are  paid  in  money,  the  bulk  of  the  other 
canvassers  are  not  swayed  either  by  considerations  of  a  senti- 
mental order.  The  most  important  among  the  members  of  the 
caucus  who  "work,"  establish  a  claim  to  be  brought  on  the 
Town  Council  by  the  Organization  to  which  they  have  done 
good  service,  or  even  to  be  recommended  for  the  honorary 
position  of  Magistrate.  For  a  good  many  others  the  title  of 
"  worker  "  serves  as  a  testimonial  for  getting  one  of  the  numer- 
ous small  subordinate  posts  at  the  disposal  of  the  municipali- 
ties in  places  where  the  party  in  question  controls  the  Town 
Couneil.  The  small  fry  find  their  remuneration  in  the  refresh- 
ments to  which  the  canvassers  are  treated  during  election  time 
on  canvassing  nights  when  they  come  in  from  their  rounds. 

If  the  party  Organizations  achieve  a  signal  success  with  the 
canvass  and  if  their  most  active  members  get  some  profit  out 
of  it  for  themselves,  it  is  impossible  to  say  as  much  of  the 
electorate  and  of  political  manners  in  general.  The  voters 
are  in  many  respects  victims  of  the  system  of  the  canvass. 
In  the  first  place,  it  is  a  source  of  great  personal  annoyance  to 
them.  As  soon  as  election  time  begins,  the  voter  becomes 
the  prey  of  canvassers  belonging  to  all  the  jiarties,  of  every 
condition  and  sex.  The  rule  expressed  by  the  saying  "my 
house  is  my  castle"  is  practically  suspended  during  the 
whole  duration  of  the  canvass.  There  is  not  an  hour  in  the 
daytime  or  in  the  evening  when  the  voter  is  safe  from  the  can- 
vasser; the  luckless  possessor  of  a  vote  may  be  at  dinner  or 
on  the  point  of  going  to  bed,  it  is  all  the  same  to  the  worker 
of  the  Association.  Just  as  the  village  peddler  has  all  hia 
travelling  stock  displayed  on  the  table  when  he  has  barely 
crossed  Uie  threshold  of  the  house,  so  tlie  canvasser,  without 


.coy  Google 


«>nBTHCH*p.]     CANDIDATES   AND  ELECTIONEERING  483 

losing  a  moment,  lays  hold  of  his  man  and  retails  his  claptrap 
to  him.  It  would  be  no  use  following  the  example  of  a  voter 
in  a  metropolitan  borough  in  whose  window  I  have  seen  a 
placard  with  "No  canvasser  need  apply";  the  canvasser  is  a 
tenacious  creature  who  is  not  to  be  got  rid  of  so  easily. 

Interfered  with  in  the  proprieties  of  their  private  life,  the 
voters  are  injured  far  more  seriously  by  the  practices  of  the 
canvass  in  their  moral  existence,  in  their  capacity  of  men  and 
of  citizens.  The  canvass  is,  in  fact,  a  systematic  attack  on 
their  dignity  and  their  integrity.  Degrading  himself,  drain- 
ing, at  times,  the  cup  of  humiliation  to  the  dregs,  the  can- 
vasser degrades  those  before  whom  he  lowers  himself.  He 
strips  them  of  the  moral  defence  with  which  the  Legislature 
has  invested  them.  By  asking  voters  to  give  pledges  in  favour 
of  this  or  that  candidate,  the  law  on  secret  voting  is  made  a 
dead  letter.  Won  after  a  long  and  arduous  struggle,  the 
Ballot  was  intended  to  protect,  in  the  political  sphere,  the  in- 
dividual conscience  against  interested  and  corrupting  attempts. 
The  canvass  erects  them  into  a  system.  To  extort  the  promise 
from  the  voters,  the  canvasser  rarely  appeals  to  their  reason, 
whatever  the  official  theory  of  the  canvass  may  say,  which 
represents  the  canvasser  as  a  sort  of  travelling  professor  of 
political  science,  who  brings  it  within  everybody's  reach  by 
going  from  house  to  house  to  enlighten  the  civic  faith  of  the 
voters.  In  certain  cases  this  may  be  true,  though  in  an 
entirely  relative  sense:  ivhen  he  is  confronted  by  an  open- 
minded  voter  who  wants  to  be  convinced,  the  canvasser  makes 
some  display  of  reasoning,  and  does  vouchsafe  a  certain  amount 
of  political  argument  and  information  if  he  has  any.  But  in 
the  vast  majority  of  cases,  he  addresses  himself,  not  to  the 
intelligence  of  the  voters,  but  to  their  ignorance,  to  their 
credulity;  he  appeals  to  their  least  elevated  and  most  easily 
roused  feelings,  such  as  vanity  and  self-love,  which  are  worked 
on  by  low  flattery,  vulgar  prejudices  of  class,  of  caste,  of  reli- 
gious sects,  mean  local  spite,  to  the  less  reprehensible  senti- 
ments of  fear  of  the  employer  or  foreman,  of  anxiety  about  the 
daily  bread  of  the  family,  or,  on  the  other  hand,  to  shame- 
ful cupidity,  to  the  base  passions  of  personal  interest  When 
the  canvasser  does  not  act  as  an  agent  of  corniptiou  himself,  he 
paves  the  way  for  it;  he  scatters  its  seeds  among  the  voters  as 


.coy  Google 


*U  DBUOCRACr  AMD  POLTnCAL  PASTIES     [nnn  rut 

he  goes  along.  Spreading  demoraliEation  around  it,  the  can- 
vass nltimately  strikes  at  the  whole  political  life  of  the 
country.  Stepping  down  into  the  mire  of  the  electorate,  it 
lifts  out  of  it  elements  which,  left  to  themselves,  would,  for 
the  most  part,  have  remaioed  in  the  depths  of  their  civio 
indifference.  It  almost  makes  them  the  arbiters  of  the  na- 
tion j  for  when  a  large  number  of  them  shift  from  one  side 
to  the  other,  they  turn  the  scales  in  &vour  of  this  or  that 
political  party. 

IV 

While  conduotiog  the  election  oampaigo  with  the  time- 
honoured  canvass,  which  it  has  developed  and  perfected,  the 
Caucus  not  only  does  not  abandon  the  new  modes  of  action,  of 
which  it  is  the  author  or  at  least  the  responsible  editor,  but 
brings  them  up  to  the  highest  possible  pressure.  The  most 
important  of  these  methods  is  the  stump;  worked  on  parallel 
lines  with  the  canvass,  they  complete  one  another.  It  would 
not  be  using  too  bold  a  metaphor  to  say  that  when  election 
time  begins  every  constituency  is  inundated  with  platform 
eloquence.  From  all  points  of  the  compass  flock  speakers  of 
both  sexes,  especially  at  bye-elections  (tolerably  frequent  in 
England),  when  they  can  be  concentrated  on  a  single  place. 
The  constituency  is  then  literally  invaded  by  two  bodies  of 
combatants  containing  a  motley  crew  of  Members  of  Parlia- 
ment, "adopted  candidates"  of  the  district,  secretaries  and 
agents  of  neighbouring  and  distant  Associations,  professional 
lecturers,  lady  politicians,  amateurs  of  every  description.  One 
and  all  set  upon  the  electorate  by  speechifying  from  morning 
till  night  in  covered  enclosures,  in  parks  or  squares,  in  pub- 
lic places,  at  street-crossings,  wherever  and  whenever  a  cer- 
tain number  of  listeners  can  be  got  together.  Eloquence  is 
as  much  lavished  on  a  small  group  of  twenty  persons  as 
on  a  gathering  of  two  thousand.  Every  evening  there  are 
several  simultaneous  meetings  in  different  parts  of  the  town,  so 
much  so  that  sometimes  even  tlie  best-equipped  newspapers  run 
short  of  i-ejwrters  for  the  speeches.  In  this  monster  concert  the 
rival  candidates  are  of  course  meant  to  take  the  part  of  first 
tenor.  But  if  they  have  no  voi(ie,  the  position  is  by  no  means 
lost,  others  will  sing  for  themj  there  is  no  lack  ot  performers. 


.coy  Google 


(orKTii  CHAP.]     CANDIDATES  AKD  ELECTION EE RING  M6 

ISut  catiilidates  of  this  stamp  are  becoming  rarer  and  rarer; 
tliey  fail  to  get  an  engagement  unless  tliey  are  prepared  to 
spend  a  handsome  sum.  Generally  the  candidates  have  a  fair 
voice, —  if  not  musical,  at  all  events  strong  and  shrill, —  and 
they  lead  the  stump  in  person  with  more  or  less  maeetria. 

The  immense  oratorical  efforts  exerted  during  the  election 
campaign  are  intended,  not  so  much  to  bring  conviction  home 
to  the  mind  as  to  strengthen  the  favourably  disposed  will,  to 
provoke  a  thirst  for  victory,  and  drive  it  to  the  verge  of  pas- 
sion, of  frenzy,  and  to  impress  the  crowd  to  the  same  pur- 
pose. Tlie  unceasing  rattle  of  the  torrent  of  words  falling 
from  the  platform  ends  by  plunging  the  more  impression- 
able voter  into  a  state  of  quasi- unconsciousness,  in  which 
he  reproduces,  like  a  hypnotized  subject,  all  the  gestures  re- 
quired; his  head  is  crammed  with  phrases,  with  tirades,  with 
exhortations,  with  invective  taken  in  at  the  meetings,  and  It 
is  almost  a  physical  necessity  for  him  to  vent  them  on  every 
one  who  comes  near  him.  In  a  word,  the  meetings  serve  to 
turn  on  "enthusiasm,"  which  is  now  more  than  ever  the  main 
preoccupation  of  the  Organizations.  Small  gatherings,  large 
meetings,  demonstrations,  torchlight  processions,  unharness- 
ing of  the  horses  which  draw  the  candidate's  carriage,  all  is 
intended  to  help  to  "raise  enthusiasm"  and  to  spread  it  by 
contagion.  Many  voters,  iu  fact,  are  carried  away  by  these 
material  feats,  which  give  them  the  semblance  of  power,  of  the 
superiority  of  nuratfers,  the  only  one  which  they  are  capable  of 
grasping.  In  reality  the  monster  meetings  and  the  demonstra- 
tions prove  nothing  at  alt ;  each  party,  aided  by  the  experience 
of  the  local  wire-pullers,  succeeds  in  organizing  "  most  enthusi- 
astic "  meetings,  in  getting  "  full  houses."  Even  the  overflow 
meetings,  which  seem  to  furnish  aucfa  evident  proof  of  the 
"  enthusiasm  "  inspired  by  the  candidate,  are  often  only  a  de- 
ception. All  the  places  in  the  hall  are  occupied  beforehand  by 
adherents  of  the  party  provided  with  tickets  by  the  caucus, 
and  when  the  interrupters  and  rowdies  of  the  opposite  camp 
arrive,  another  meeting  is  forthwith  obligingly  organized 
for  them,  and  a  few  speakers  held  in  reserve  are  told  oS  to 
them,  who  "amuse"  their  audience  while  in  the  other  room 
the  candidate  and  his  friends  can  talk  at  their  ease,  inter- 
rupted only  by  outbursts  of  "  indescribable  enthusiasm."    The 


.coy  Google 


460  DEMOCRACY  AND  POLITICAL  PARTIES      [tbibdf^bt. 

rival  party  may  product;  the  same  effect.  Just  as  in  the  can- 
vass the  point  was  vhicfa  of  the  two  parties  would  be  the 
first  to  get  hold  of  the  indiiferent  voters,  so  here  the  whole 
question  is  at  which  of  the  two  fountain-heads  of  contagion  the 
latter  will  take  a  draught  of  "enthusiasm,"  and  then  follow 
the  fortunes  of  the  supposed  conquerors  or  "  go  for  the  win- 
ning horse,"  as  is  often  said  in  England.  This  turf  expres- 
sion, in  faut,  suits  the  occasion  better  than  any  other.  The 
campaign  of  meetings,  etc.,  which  precedes  the  voting,  no  doubt 
does  plunge  the  population  into  a  state  of  great  excitement, 
but  the  emotions  aroused  are  decidedly  of  a  rather  sporting 
character;  it  is  not  the  consciousness  of  the  public  interests 
at  stake  which  produces  them  with  the  vast  majority,  but  the 
anxiety  of  the  race-course.  Many  a  time  at  elections  I  fancied 
myself  more  at  the  Derby  (whereas  on  the  Epsom  Downs  it 
seemed  to  me  that  the  fate  of  the  State  was  being  decided). 
To  the  women  and  children  the  polling-day  brings  all  the 
excitement  of  a  fair.  Standing  in  groups  in  the  streets,  with 
rosettes  or  ribbons  of  the  colour  of  the  party  to  which  their 
husbands  or  their  fathers  belong,  they  shout,  cheer,  or  hoot, 
and  wave  their  handkerchiefs  as  each  election  carriage  goes  by. 
First  of  all  conies  the  candidate,  accompanied  by  his  wife,  driv- 
iog  about  the  town  in  an  open  landau,  proceeding  from  one 
committee-room  to  another  like  a  general  going  along  the 
ranks  when  the  battle  is  on  the  point  of  t>eginning.  Old  and 
young  make  themselves  hoarse  with  shouting  hurrah,  with 
giving  three  cheers  for  the  candidate  and  another  three  for  his 
wife.  Then  come  the  voters,  who  are  brought  up  to  the  poll 
often  in  their  workaday  dress,  the  butclier  or  the  grocer  in  his 
white  apron,  the  chimney-sweep  in  his  sooty  habiliments.  On 
the  other  hand,  the  horses  and  carriages  are  always  made  to 
look  smart,  being  adorned  with  the  colours  of  the  party  and 
with  posters  bearing  tinal  appeals  couched  in  the  tersest  of 
styles:  "Vote  for  Smith  and  good  wages,"  "Vote  for  Jones,  the 
working-man's  friend, "  "  Robinson  and  prosperity  in  trade  for- 
ever." The  street  urchins  organize  processions  in  honour  of 
the  candidate  of  their  party  or  against  his  rival,  putting  more 
olism  into  the  expression  of  their  feelings.'    The 


.coy  Google 


FonRTHOHjiP.]     CANDIDATES   AND  ELECTIONEERING  467 

day  must  be  made  the  most  of,  as  on  the  following  morning 
complete  calm  will  once  more  reign,  and  the  remembrance 
even  of  the  election  will  fade  away. 

Side  by  side  with  the  canvass  and  the  stump  an  important 
share  is  assigned  to  "  political  advertising,"  which  forms  the 
last  link  in  what  may  be  called  the  trilogy  of  electoral  action. 
The  political  printed  matter  completes  the  canvass  and  the 
stump  by  assuming  a  certain  aspect  of  both.  At  one  time  it 
is  meant,  like  the  canvass,  to  act  on  the  individual  voter, 
and  it  consists  of  pamphlets  and  leaflets  known  by  the  ge- 
neric name  of  political  literature.  At  another  it  is  addressed, 
like  the  stump,  to  the  voters  in  a  body,  by  means  of  posters. 
We  are  already  acquainted  with  the  natui-e  of  political  lit- 
erature. The  principal  distribution  of  this  class  of  printed 
matter  is  made  precisely  at  election  time;  small  packets  of  it 
are  forwarded  by  post  to  each  voter,  and  stocks  are  kept  in  the 
committee -room  for  supplying  all  comers.  Care  is  especially 
taken  to  circulate  leaflets,  among  which  a  place  of  honour  is 
given  to  sheets  made  up  on  the  spot  for  the  occasion,  and  con- 
taining appeals  to  particular  groups  of  voters  signed  by  per- 
sonages known  to  them,  manifestoes  by  the  candidate,  adorned 
perhaps  with  his  portrait  reproduced  with  more  or  less  accu- 
racy and  art. 

The  posters  in  their  endless  variety  of  form  and  subject  are 
a  sort  of  quintessence  of  the  election  campaign,  condensing 
and  summing  up  the  canvass  and  the  stump  for  the  least  com- 
prehensive minds.  Solemn  rhetoric,  familiar  language  of  the 
humorous  order,  rows  of  figures,  sketches  of  sorts,  caricatures 
with  appropriate  explanations,  are  all  so  many  forms  of  iu- 
stracting,  arguing,  attacking,  abusing,  slandering,  of  appeal- 
ing to  reason,  to  passions,  to  prejudices,  to  ignorance  and 
credulity,  of  raising  hopes  or. fears,  of  setting  in  motion  egoism 
and  personal  interest.  The  latter  is  generally  put  forward  in 
its  most  material  aspect,  reduced  to  its  monetary  expression, 
or  to  a  still  more  primitive  one  when  rudimentary  minds  and 
simple  cliaracters  like  the  rural  populations  have  to  be  dealt 

out  of  tbe  dast-beap,  with  the  label  "  Smith's  bag,"  in  procession  about  tbe 


.coy  Google 


46S  DEMOCRACY  AND  POLITICAL  PARTIES      [thibd  piet 

witli.  Ah  may  be  seen  from  the  postiif  reproduced  below,'  the 
victory  or  the  defeat  of  the  candidate  is  presented  to  them  as  a 
question  of  more  or  less  bacon  in  the  houseliold. 


Does  the  appeal  addressed  to  the  voters'  own  interest  dangle 
before  them  only  the  indirect  advantages  which  are  to  accrue 
to  them  as  citizens,  as  an  ultimate  consequence  of  their  vote; 
or  does  it  also  include  otfers  of  dii-ect  and  immediate  personal 
gratification?  In  a  word,  is  corruption  in  the  legal  sense  of 
the  term  resorted  to  in  the  election  campaigns  managed  by  the 
caucuses?  In  the  account  given  of  their  action  some  passing 
allusions  or  insinuations  were  made  with  reference  to  this  sub- 
ject.    They  require  an  explanation. 

It  is  well  known  that  bribery  has  long  been  the  general 
feature  and  the  curse  of  English  political  life.  In  course  of 
time,  and  owing  to  the  modifications  introduced  in  the  compo- 
sition of  the  electorate,  it  changed  its  character,  but  it  con- 

I  The  tollowlng  poster  la  from  s  rural  conBtltuenc;  In  Lincolnshire  :  — 


0.  (name  of  tht  Conierva-  Dear  Suo*b 

tive  candidate)  Low  Waobb 

Laaa  Bacok 

P.  (Liberal  candidalt) 

Cheap  Allothents.    Fkke  Eddcaiiok 
Local  Mamaoembht  of  Chabitibs 

EVEBT  ONE  wno  THINKS  THAT  A   WuBKUfO-AtAM 


Remember,  i(  Mr.  P.  la  elected,  he  will  devote  himself  to  IMFROVTNa 
YOrR  COSniTION  and  Hint  of  lliB  country  Renerally.  There's  no  selflsh- 
neiis  about  Mr.  P.  Be  sure  and  put  your  cross  agaJusl  lh«  bottom  muoe  on 
the  voting  paper. 


.CD,  Google 


PODRTHCHAP.]     CANDIDATES   AND   ELECTIONEERING  469 

tinued  to  exist  in  spite  uf  tlie  laws  enacted  for  its  prevention 
or  repression.  As  far  back  as  before  1832,  in  the  days  of  the 
rotten  boroughs,  parliamentary  seats  were  knocked  down  to 
the  highest  bidder,  or  bought  from  the  oligarchical  municipal 
corporations  which  were  in  posaession  of  the  franchise.  In 
places  with  a  larger  number  of  voters  the  latter  were  bought 
individually,  that  is  to  say,  those  who  were  for  sale.  The 
abolition  of  rotten  boroughs  and  the  extension  of  the  suffrage 
brought  about  by  the  great  Reform  Bill  have  generalized  this 
last  method.  The  Corrupt  Practices  Prevention  Act  of  1854 
(17  &  18  Vic,  c.  102),  with  its  minute  provisions  and  severe 
penalties,  made  no  change  in  political  manners.  The  new 
and  greater  extension  of  the  suffrage  in  1867,  which  was  to 
make  bribery  difficult  by  reason  of  the  excessive  number  of 
persons  who  would  have  to  be  bought,  has  not  been  attended 
with  better  results.  On  the  contrary,  the  new  electors  belong- 
ing to  the  less  fortunate  classes  have  only  swelled  the  con- 
tingent of  voters  who  are  ready  to  sell  themselves.  The  effect 
simply  was  that  prices  went  down  with  a  run,  especially  after 
the  Ballot  Act  of  1872,  which,  by  introducing  secret  voting, 
made  it  impossible  to  ascertain  whether  the  voter  who  had  taken 
a  bribe  had  really  carried  out  his  bargain,  and  therefore  reduced 
the  value  of  the  promise  that  was  bought.  The  exorbitant 
prices  which  used  to  be  paid  just  at  the  close  of  the  poll  to 
electors  whose  vote  might  turn  the  scale,  have  passed  into  the 
region  of  history  and  almost  of  legend.  But,  on  the  other 
hand,  the  milder  or  disguised  forms  of  bribery,  such  as  the  dis- 
tribution of  silver  coins  and  of  refreshments  in  solid  and  liquid 
form,  or  the  fictitious  employment  of  numerous  voters  under 
the  designation  of  canvassers,  messengers,  clerks,  bill-posters, 
etc.,  had  increased  to  a  considerable  extent.  In  consequence, 
at  the  general  election  of  1868  corrupt  practices  prevailed  to 
a  greater  degree  than  at  all  the  elections  of  the  preceding  half- 
century.  The  election  of  1874,  in  spite  of  the  first  application 
of  the  Ballot,  was  no  purer,  and  that  of  1880  surpassed  them 
both  in  illicit  expenditure  incurred  by  the  candidates.  It  was 
estimated  at  as  much  as  £3,000,000.'  This  was  the  first 
general  election  in  which  the  Caucus,  founded  at  Birmingham, 
took  part,  and  its  participation  was  thoroughgoing,  extending 
1  C(.  Bantard,  Vol,  CCXXIX,  p.  1672. 


.coy  Google 


170  DEMOCRACY   AND   POLITICAL   PARTIES     [third  pa et 

to  acts  of  corruptioD  as  well.  It  will  be  recollected  tliat  on 
its  appearance  on  the  scene  the  Caucus  had  announced,  some- 
what grandiloquently,  that  it  was  going  to  purify  political 
life,  and  it  was  undoubtedly  sincere  in  its  aspirations.  But 
when  brought  face  to  face  with  i-eality,  a  number  of  Asso- 
ciations fell  into  the  old  practices.  In  a  good  many  places 
the  election -mongers  of  the  old  regime  joined  the  caucuses  and 
slipped  even  into  their  executive  committees,  where  they  acted 
as  tempters  and  suggested  recourse  to  the  time-honoured 
methods  on  pretence  of  making  the  triumph  of  the  good  cause 
more  secure.  Again,  the  "Man  in  the  Moon,"'  the  classic 
agent  of  electoral  corruption,  was  only  too  ready  to  recommence 
his  operations  and  had  no  scruples  about  offering  his  services. 
They  were  accepted  more  often,  far  more  often,  than  was 
desirable  for  the  reform  of  political  manners.  If  the  Con- 
servatives of  Birmingham  were  to  be  believed,  the  Liberal 
Association  of  that  town,  the  celebrated  prototype  of  the 
Caucus,  had  been  the  first  to  resort  to  corrupt  practices.'  The 
charge  was  not  proved,  perhaps  because  no  opportunity  had 
presented  itself  of  ascertaining  if  it  was  true.  But  such 
opportunities  did  occur  in  several  other  constituencies,  owing 
to  the  petitions  presented  against  the  retnrn  of  members  elected 
in  1880.  The  disclosures  made  at  the  hearings  seriously  com- 
promised some  Liberal  Associations,  as  well  as,  by  the  way, 
some  Conservative  Organizations.*  They  also  established  the 
fact  that  the  Associations  which  dabbled  in  electoral  corruption 
were  able,  thanks  to  their  collective  and  anonymous  character, 
to  practise  it  under  far  more  dangerous  conditions  than  pre- 
vailed in  the  old  days.  The  masters  of  the  art  sheltered  them- 
selves behind  the  Associations  witli  a  coolness  which  had  a 

1  At  one  place  a  mysterlom  person  lued  to  arrire  with  cash,  known  as  tfao 
"  MaD  In  the  Moon,"  who  appro&i^hed  at  nlKhtfall  and  was  at  once  met  with 
"  What  news  frnni  the  moon  ?  "  The  nickname  of  the  "  man  in  the  moon," 
alludiDg  to  tnysteiious  beings,  onme  to  ^e  applied  ^nerall;  to  secret  >£ents 
(or  bribery. 

*  Cf.  the  letter  of  the  Vice-President  of  Ihe  Conservative  AsBociaUon  ot 
BlrmlnghaiD  in  the  Timet  o(  April  21,  ISHO.  in  wliich  he  says  :  "  Thl»  [secret 
bribery  and  treating]  has  been  done  at  all  elections  by  the  Liberals  since  the; 
introduced  the  Caucus  Into  BirminKham,  not  excepting  the  late  election." 

■  Of.  the  enquiries  into  electoral  ciirruptlon  at  Bewtllcv,  Boston.  Canterbury, 
Chester.  Macclesfield,  Sandwich,  etc.  {Blue  Books.  18si,  Vols.  XXVI,  XXVII, 
XXIX,  XXXI). 


.coy  Google 


VODHtaoHAP.]     CANDIDATES   AND  BLECTIONEEBmG  4T1 

dash  alike  of  cynicism  and  of  ingennouaneas ;  for  instance, 
having  got  the  candidate  and  his  election  agent  to  sever  their 
connection  with  the  Association  by  means  of  official  resig- 
natioQB,  they  quietly  indulged  in  corrupt  practiceB,  in  the  be- 
lief that  as  the  former  had  ceased  to  belong  to  the  Association 
they  could  not  be  held  responsible  for  its  acts  however  illicit, 
or  for  the  manoeuvres  of  its  numerous  members.' 

On  the  other  hand,  it  is  only  just  to  point  out  that  the 
Associations  were  still  more  often  victims  of  the  prevailing 
corruption  i  they  were  constantly  exposed  to  interested  offers 
and  requests  which  they  would  have  been  gla.d  to  decline  if 
they  could  have  done  so  without  endangering  the  success  of 
their  candidates.  Many  voters  were  in  the  habit  of  joining 
the  Associations  in  the  hope  of  establishing  a  claim  to  fictitious 
employment  as  messengers,  distributers  of  handbills,  etc., 
when  the  elections  came  round.  The  pretensions  of  a  crowd 
of  people  who  claimed  to  have  "  helped "  or  "  worked  "  in 
the  election  had  the  effect  of  swelling  the  candidate's  ex- 
penditure to  an  unheard-of  degree.  When,  therefore,  in 
consequence  of  the  scandals  of  the  1880  elections,  the  Gov- 
ernment submitted  a  new  and  much  more  stringent  Bill 
against  corrupt  practices  to  the  House,  the  Liberal  Caucus 
gave  very  serious  and  useful  help  towards  putting  it  into  shape, 
and  its  co-operation  was  all  the  more  sincere  because  the  reali- 
zation of  the  objects  aimed  at  by  the  new  Act  was  in  its  per- 
sonal interest,  so  to  speak.  In  the  war  which  the  Birmingham 
Caucus  was  waging  on  the  moderate  Liberals  throughout  the 
country,  the  Whigs,  whose  ranks  had  already  been  broken 
all  along  the  line,  remained  standing  here  and  there,  thanks 
to  their  great  wealth,  which  gave  them  the  advantage  at 
the  elections  over  their  poorer  rivals  of  the  Radical  Cau- 
cus. The  latter  therefore  might  have  been  able  to  fight  on 
more  equal  terms  if  electoral  expenditure  were  reduced,  spon- 

1  The  report  of  the  parliaiaentary  commissioaera  on  the  Chester  election 
MUbllsbes  this  peculiar  gwrf  faith  of  the  bribers :  "  It  was  arranged  that  the 
candidate!  and  their  agenteshoaid  sever  themselTes  from  the  Liberal  Aaaocla- 
tlon  with  a  view  of  escaping  from  reapooalblllty  for  the  acta  of  the  membeca 
ol  w>  large  a  body.  .  .  .  The  severance  was  thought  so  complete,  and  on  the 
annouQcement  of  the  dissolution  of  FarliameQl,  a  general  notion  seems  to 
bave  been  abroad  In  the  city  that  the  Liberal  Association  might  bribe  and 
treat  without  endangering  the  seats  of  the  candidates  "  {Bltie  Bookt,  1881, 
Vol.  KXVI,  p.  Ti). 


.coy  Google 


472  DEMOCRACY   AND   POLITICAL   PARTIES     [thib»  PiBr 

taneoualy  or  under  compulsion,  to  a  reasonable  fignre.  The 
new  Corrupt  Practices  Act,  passed  in  188t{,'  made  this  possible 
by  the  two  great  changes  which  it  introduced:  it  prohibited 
the  fictitious  employment  of  voters  for  the  election  campaign 
and  fixed  a  maximum  amount  of  expenses  beyond  which  a 
candidate  cannot  go  without  being  unseated.*  To  enforce 
these  provisioas,  the  Act  added  another  innovation,  a  clause 
forbidding  the  making  of  any  payment  connected  with  the 
election  otherwise  than  by  an  "election  agent"  formally 
appointed  for  that  purpose  by  the  candidate  and  bound  to 
prove  by  his  accounts  that  the  election  exijenditure  had  not 
exceeded  the  legal  maximum.  Expenses  incurred  on  behalf 
of  the  candidate  by  any  other  person  or  body  bad  consequently 
to  be  entered  in  the  election  agent's  account,  on  pain  of  being 
treated  as  incurred  with  a  corrupt  object. 

This  provision  as  well  as  tlie  general  very  severe  tone  of  the 
Act  seemed  to  threaten  everybody  taking  part  in  electioneer- 
ing. Some  people  hoped,  while  others  were  afraid  that  the 
caucuses  would  not  be  able  to  work  under  the  new  law.  A  few 
Associations,  which  evidently  had  a  heavy  burden  of  electoral 
sins  on  their  conscience,  were  so  frightened  that  they  put  an 
end  to  themselves  by  dissolution.  But  experience  very  soon 
showed  the  groundlessness  of  both  hopes  and  fears.  The 
caucuses  work  perfectly  well  and,  while  continually  sailing 
very  near  the  (Corrupt  Practices  Act,  do  not  run  much  risk  of 
losing  the  fruit  of  their  labours  with  the  unseating  of  their 
candidate  through  their  dubious  practices.  For  it  is  extremely 
difficult  to  furnish  legal  proof  of  the  candidate's  responsibility 
for  acts  of  the  Association  which  he  has  not  instigated  or  known 
of  beforehand  or  which  are  not  formally  connected  with  his 
election.  Strictly  speaking,  the  candidate  comes  into  being 
only  with  the  election  period,  whereas  the  Association  lias  a 
permanent  existence,  independent  of  the  candidatures  which 
arise  at  indefinite  intervals;  it  acts  on  the  electorate  perhaps 
for  years  before  the  candidate  is  selected.  Can  the  latter  be 
made  responsible  for  the  previous  doings  of  the  Caucus,  and 

I46i47  Vic,  0.  D6. 

iThis  amoant  varies,  according  to  thenambeTot  voters  in  the  cciiutltuency, 
tiom  £350  to  £tBO  fn  tbe  borougbs,  and  (torn  £630  to  £1790  iu  Die  I'oiiDtieB, 
plus  £tOO  for  tbe  candidate's  pett?  ex|<eiisrs. 


.coy  Google 


rooBTncBAP.]    CANDIDATES  AND  ELECTIONEERING  473 

would  he  not  be  able  to  set  up  a  convincing  alibif  With  all  the 
more  reason,  can  the  expenses  which  the  Association  has  in- 
curred in  preparing  the  ground  for  the  eventual  candidature  be 
included  in  the  maximum  amount  of  expenditure  allowed  to  the 
candidate?  Without  replying  to  these  questions,  the  law  has 
reproduced  the  old  provision  as  to  the  candidate's  responsi- 
bility for  the  illegal  practices  committed  by  his  agents,  while 
leaving  the  fact  of  agency  to  be  determined  by  the  courts  in  each 
pai-ticular  instance.  But  the  question  of  agency  has  always 
been  one  of  the  thorniest  in  electoral  jurisprudence,  and  the 
collective  and  anonymous  character  of  the  Caucus  Associa- 
tions certainly  does  not  make  it  easier  to  bring  home  agency  to 
them  in  the  absence  of  express  provisions  in  the  law.  The  very 
loose  legal  definition  of  the  relations  between  the  Associations 
iind  the  candidates '  has  therefore  not  stood  the  test  of  experi- 
ence xinder  the  new  law  better  than  it  did  before,  and  altogether 
the  Associations,  owing  to  their  permanent  existence,  rather 
paralyse,  to  some  extent,  the  effect  of  the  Act  than  aie  held 
in  check  by  it. 

>  The  law  omitted  to  ^ve  a  stricter  dsflnltioo  of  the  relations  between  the 
Associations  and  the  candidates  from  the  above  points  o(  view  almost  deliber- 
ately. During  the  discussion  at  the  Act  of  ISHS  urgent,  even  veheiuent,  rep- 
resentations were  made  to  the  Legislatare  to  take  special  measures  againat 
the  caucuses.  The  attention  ot  the  Government  was  drawn  to  the  fact  that 
the  BUI  brought  in  hy  it  did  not  touch  the  expenditure  made  bj  the  Assocla- 
tlooa  wllh  a  corrupt  abject,  iodependentl;  ot  the  candidates,  and  previously 
to  the  election :  that  the  draft  contained  no  provisions  against  clubs  started 
wilhan  almost  nominal  subscription,  and  provided  with  billiard-rooras,  dining- 
rooms,  etc.,  with  the  sole  object  o(  obtaiuiug  the  votes  of  their  members  (or 
the  party ;  a  demand  was  made  that  the  Associations,  or  at  all  events  their 
managing  committees,  shonid  be  punished  (or  Illicit  acts  committed  by  the 
members  of  these  Assoclatloos ;  it  was  actually  proposed  even  that  every 
candidate  who  came  forward  as  the  nominee  of  a  political  orpmlzatlon  shonid 
be  made  liable  to  the  penalties  attaching  to  corruption.  These  proposals  and 
several  others  of  an  analogous  character,  coming  mostly  from  members  of  the 
Oppi>silion  and  accompanied  by  virulent  attacks  on  ttie  Radical  caucuses, 
coupled  with  the  name  of  their  patron.  Mr.  Chamberlain,  who  waa  a  member  of 
the  Cabinet,  had  not  disposed  the  Oovetnment  to  acce)>t  the  amendments 
moved ;  It  rejei^ted  them  as  useless  or  suggested  that  they  should  be  examined 
at  a  later  stage,  no  doubt  In  the  belief  that  the  Bill  as  it  stood  already  increased 
the  stringency  of  the  law  too  much  to  be  overloaded  with  fresh  details  which, 
perhaps,  would  not  readily  bear  a  lei^l  construction  (cf.  Hnntard.  Vol. 
CCLXXIX,  pp.  lliST,  1H70,  16«i,  1«ST.  ItiHO,  Speechea  of  Stuart  Wortley, 
Joseph  Cowen,  Cecil  Raikes.  Sir  K.  Cms.-);  Vol.  CCLXXX,  pp.  3fJ2,  39B,  [lt<7. 
H10-6in,  I45!l,  Speeches  of  J.  Cowpn,  O'Donnell,  Stanley  Leighton.  Randolph 
Chnrchill;  Vol.  CCl.XXXI,  pp.  -Ill,  1133,  1142,  Speeches  of  Lord  Oeoige 
Hamilton  and  Newdegaie), 


.coy  Google 


474  DEMOCRACY  AND  POLITICAL  PABTIES    [raiai)  Piar 

This  state  of  things  becomes  manifest  in  the  application  of 
the  law,  firstly  with  regard  to  the  provision  which  places  a 
statutory  limit  on  electoral  expenditure  in  order  to  cut  off  the 
supplies  of  corruption  and  which  is  consequently,  as  it  were,  the 
keystone  of  the  Act.  A  considerable  amount  of  the  expenses 
which  promote  a  candidature,  but  which  haviug  caused  the  legal 
maximum  to  be  exceeded  might  have  invalidated  the  election, 
can  be  incurred  exclusively  for  the  Association  in  the  normtd 
exercise  of  its  functions.  The  Organizations  can  pass  off  illicit 
outlay  in  the  guise  of  expenditure  as  legitimate  to  all  appear- 
ance as,  for  instance,  that  relating  to  the  making  up  of  the 
register.  The  payment  of  "  workers  "  at  elections  being  pro- 
hibited, the  caucuses  can  pay  them  in  anticipation  by  nomi- 
nally entrusting  the  future  election  canvassers  with  the 
registration  canvass,  remuneration  for  which  is  not  for- 
bidden by  the  law.  In  reality,  in  the  vast  majority  of  cases 
the  number  of  registration  canvassers  is  not  unduly  swollen, 
but  in  several  places  it  is  so,  and  sometimes  even  to  a  scanda- 
lous degree;  for  instance,  hundreds  of  persons  are  engaged 
who  are  supposed  to  take  the  electoral  census  of  an  average- 
sized  borough,  or  this  operation  is  carried  on  throughout  the 
whole  year  by  instructing  paid  emissaries  to  call  on  ttie  voters 
again  and  again  on  pretence  of  collecting  information  for 
checking  the  lists.'  The  Association  can  embark  on  prelimi- 
nary expenditure  for  the  benefit  of  the  candidate  with  all  the 
less  scruple  that  the  courts  are  very  ready  to  accept  the  period 
in  which  it  had  been  incurred  as  the  criterion  ot  "election  ex- 
penses "  and  to  limit  it,  if  not  to  election  time  in  the  strict 
sense  of  the  words,  at  all  events  to  a  lapse  of  time  immediately 
preceding  that  period,* 

Even  before  this  very  indulgent  ruling  was  laid  down  subse-^ 

I  Cf.  Blot  Book,  1693,  already  quoted,  pp.  H,  91, 92. 

^  "  I  am  not  quite  satlsfled  Cliat  the  runstruotive  doctriae  of  ageacj  ll  to  bo 
carried  back  to  a  period  Iodk  before  the  actual  contest  is  Imminent  ■  ■  ." 
declared  one  of  the  judges  in  his  decision  on  tiie  election  at  HagKsrstOD  (Slue 
Bmki,  1S96,  ControTerted  Elections.  Part  I,  p.  30).  SlmiUrlf  Id  an  election 
case  Id  Scotland,  ooe  ot  the  Judjces  expressed  Ihe  opinion  that  the  incriminated 
period  "  waH  a  period  at  least  not  much  anterior,  1  will  not  aay  to  the  date  of 
Domination,  but  to  the  group  or  series  of  events  which  Immediately  pracede 
the  nomination,  and  which,  as  ve  all  know,  begin  In  the  case  of  a  general 
election  with  the  announcement  of  the  Dissolution,  and  in  tlie  case  ot  a  bye- 
election  with  the  announcement  of  the  vacancy  "  (iliid.,  Part  II,  p.  3G]. 


.coy  Google 


ronmTHCHjvp.]     CANDIDATES   AND   E  LECTIO  NEE  KING  475 

quent  to  the  last  general  election  (of  1895),  several  Organiza- 
tions hit  upon  various  expedients  for  eatablishiag  in  a  tangible 
manner  the  solution  of  continuity  between  their  acts  and 
expenses  and  those  of  the  election  period.  Sometimes  the 
"election  agent"  of  the  candidate  buys  from  the  Association 
its  citnvass  books  and  other  Information  constituting  the  mate- 
rial of  war  accumulated  for  years  back,  for  the  modest  sum  of 
five  or  six  pounds,  which  he  enters  with  scrupulous  accuracy 
in  the  account  of  the  expenditure  to  be  eventually  submitted 
to  the  authorities.  Some  Associations  resoi-t  to  a  more  radi- 
cal device  to  throw  the  courts  off  the  scent  iu  regard  to  the 
continuity  of  the  electioneering  operations  carried  on  before 
and  after  the  election  period;  they  lie  low  during  the  whole 
of  this  period;  the  moment  it  begins  they  "suspend  their 
activity  "  and  disband  their  followers,  who  fight  as  free  lances. 
Acting  inversely,  but  always  with  the  same  object  of  guarding 
against  the  danger  of  agency,  of  getting  rid  of  the  continuity 
in  the  acts  committed  for  the  benefit  of  the  candidate,  certain 
Associations  come  forward  only  in  a  semi-ofQcial  way  with 
their  candidates  before  election  time  begins.  They  do  not 
"adopt"  a  candidate  beforehand,  they  only  make  "overtures 
to  him  in  view  of  the  next  vacancy  which  may  occur,"  and 
he,  without  giving  a  reply,  visits  the  constituency  repeat- 
edly, under  the  auspices  of  the  Association,  in  a  aeries  of 
meetings  and  "social  gatherings"  in  order  to  feel  the  public 
pulse  and  make  up  his  mind  after  full  enquiry.  The  announce- 
ment of  the  election  puts  an  end  to  his  hesitation ;  he  accepts 
and  is  adopted.  Up  to  that  time  he  was  only  a  "  prospective 
candidate,"  whose  acts  could  not  bind  the  "actual  candidate," 
who  is  a  different  person  in  law.  Ihe  latest  judicial  decisions 
have  almost  sanctioned  this  status  of  "prospective candidate" 
created  by  the  party  Organizations  and  enjoying  every  im- 
munity.' 

Thus,  through  the  interposition  of  the  Associations,  dis- 
bursements for  the  election  may  not  be  considered  as  "elec- 
tion expenditure,"  and  the  candidate  to  whom  they  would  he 
chargeable  can  be  one  without  coming  out  as  such. 

The  great  preventive  measure  for  the  limitation  of  expendi- 


.coy  Google 


476  DEMOCRACY   AND   POLITICAL   PARTIES     [third  pabt 

ture  not  having  produced  its  full  effect,  the  repression  and  sup- 
pression of  actual  corrupt  practices  has  not  succeeded  either, 
and  here  again  ttie  Associations  have  liad,  and  still  have,  some- 
thing to  do  with  it.  At  the  outset,  following  on  the  electiODS 
of  1885  and  1886,  the  new  Act  seemed  to  have  the  effect  of 
those  marvellous  remedies  which  act  like  a  charm,  but  gradu- 
ally it  became  apparent  that  nothing  of  the  kind  had  really 
taken  place,  that  the  forms  alone  had  changed.  The  tra- 
ditional purchase  of  votes  as  a  commodity,  already  on  the 
wane  before  1883,  has  considerably  decreased,  but  it  still  goes 
on  and  not  without  the  co-operation  of  the  caucuses,  although 
it  sliould  be  added  at  once  that  the  Associations  as  such  are 
far  from  being  an  important  factor  in  this  method  of  corrup- 
tion. The  Act  of  1883  has  no  doubt  purged  the  caucuses 
of  their  corrupt  elements,  but  there  are  still  some  remaining 
here  and  there,  sometimes  even  among  the  chairmen  or  other 
high  dignitaries  of  the  Associations,  who  make  themselves 
indispensable  by  their  great  qualities  as  workers.  The  "  Man 
in  the  Moon,"  although  growing  more  and  more  rare,  cannot 
yet  be  classed  among  the  fossil  mammifers.  He  is  generally 
taken  from  the  ranks  of  third  or  fourth  rate  turfmen.  Begular 
agents  of  the  Caucus  sometimes  "  work  "  in  conjunction  with 
them.  For  instance,  of  the  cloud  of  caucus-men  who  descend 
from  far  and  wide  on  the  constituency  in  which  a  parliamen- 
tary election  is  about  to  be  held,  all  do  not  spend  their  time  in 
charming  the  crowd  with  their  eloquence  from  the  top  of 
waggonettes  or  in  giving  their  assistance  in  the  offices  of  the 
local  Association  and  in  the  candidate's  committee-rooms, 
some  of  them  accept  "special  missions" — they  go  and  "see 
somebody."  They  have  no  need  to  resort  to  tlie  mysterious 
practices  of  the  "Man  in  the  Moon;"  as  representatives  of 
Associations  with  a  legitimate  status,  they  attract  no  attention 
even  in  broad  daylight;  like  so  many  other  politicians,  they 
have  just  come  to  "help  in  the  election." 

But  the  real  changes  have  taken  place  not  so  much  in  the 
character  of  the  agents  as  in  the  forms  and  modes  of  corrup- 
tion, changes  to  some  of  which  the  Caucus  has  contributed  in 
a  special  degree.  Corruption  has  become  less  direct,  bargains 
for  ttie  purchase  and  sale  of  votes  have  diminished  and  made 
way  for  more  disguised  methods  hinted  at  rather  than  expressly 


.coy  Google 


FociTHCHAP.]    CAKDIDATBS  AND  ELECTIONEERING  477 

stated.  At  the  same  time,  the  mode  of  operation  has  been 
altered:  the  individual  corruption  of  former  days,  with  the 
numerous  special  negotiations  implied  by  it,  has  been  suc- 
ceeded, to  a  great  extent,  by  wholesale  corruption,  so  to 
speak,  which  the  vast  increase  in  the  electorate  has  made 
well-nigh  imperative.  The  two  time-honoured  types  of  Eng- 
lish electoral  corruption,  bribery  and  treating,  adapted  them- 
selves to  the  new  state  of  afEairs.  Thus  bribery  has  given 
way  to  practices  which  may  be  described  as  corruption  by 
cousequence,  and  of  which  the  most  refined  is  the  betting 
which  takes  place  on  parliamentary  candidates  as  on  race- 
horses. A,  partisan  of  a  certain  candidate,  makes  a  bet  with 
B  that  the  candidate  in  question  will  be  beaten;  to  win  the  bet 
B  makes  a  point  of  voting  for  that  candidate,  Q.E.D.  This 
ingenious  plan  soon  became  a  lever  for  lifting  a  considerable 
number  of  voters  at  a  single  blow.  A  partisan  of,  let  us  say, 
the  Conservative  candidate  promises  a  large  sum  to  the  leading 
man  of  the  betting  community  in  the  event  of  this  candidate 
being  returned.  The  other  thereupon  lays  on  him  in  all  the 
bets  which  he  makes.  Besides,  the  great  authority  which  he 
enjoys  among  betting  men  makes  them  take  the  name  of  the 
Conservative  candidate  as  an  excellent  tip;  they  hasten  to 
back  their  leading  man'e  favourite,  and  of  course  all  vote  solid 
for  him,  and  try  to  make  tlieir  friends  do  the  same.  The 
Q.E.D.  is  at  once  multiplied  by  the  total  number  of  all  these 
persons,  and  a  single  "  special  mission  "  discharged  with  tact 
has  been  suflScient  to  bring  about  this  result. 

The  election  house-to-house  canvass,  which  used  to  be  one  of 
the  great  opportunities  for  bribery,  now  constitutes  only  an  in- 
direct channel  of  corruption,  it  only  affords  a  clue  which  will 
perhaps  be  followed  up  afterwards  by  the  emissaries  of  the 
Organization.  In  the  present  day  the  unpaid  canvasser,  a 
member  of  the  caucus,  a  devout  partisan,  often  has  too  much 
respect  for  the  law  to  offer  money  or  its  equivalent,  but  he. 
makes  a  note  of  the  voters  who  are  open  to  particular  atten- 
tions and  gives  their  names  to  the  wire-pullers  of  the  inner 
circle.  The  latter  find  suitable  intermediaries  to  determine 
these  voters,  perhaps  by  means  of  a  drink  or  two,  perhaps  by 
some  other  civility.  With  this  object  a  good  many  canvassers 
of  the  caucus  draw  up  in  the  course  of  their  visits  a  list  simi- 


le .yGoOglc 


478  DEMOCRACY  AND  POLITICAL   PARTIES     [tbibd  fast 

lar  to  that  which  has  been  preserved  for  the  edification  of 
posterity  by  the  trial  of  an  election  petition :  "  A  wants  change 
of  air.  B  very  favourable,  but  poor.  C  promises,  but  wants 
a  little  drop.     D  —  wife  wants  liquoring  up." ' 

Standing  "little  drops,"  "liquoring  up"  and  other  grati- 
fications of  the  same  kind  (kuowii  by  the  generic  term  of 
"treating")  increased  in  importance  in  proportion  as  bribery 
became  more  difficult  to  practise,  but  they  could  not,  how- 
ever, be  carried  out  with  advantage  in  the  old  rudimentary 
fashion.  The  voters  being  now  too  numerous  not  only  to  be 
bought,  but  even  to  be  entertained  one  by  one,  treating  called 
for  a  new  modus  operandi  of  a  more  comprehensive  character. 
The  plan  resorted  to  by  the  party  Organizations  for  "work- 
ing on  the  social  tendencies  of  human  nature  "  happened  to  be 
admirably  adapted  to  the  new  requirements,  and  they  became, 
not  generally,  but  often,  an  instrument  of  the  collective  cor- 
ruption which  the  new  conditions  of  political  life  demanded. 
In  the  series  of  judgments  on  the  election  petitions  of  1S92, 
tlie  judges  have  brought  out  very  clearly  the  two  terms  of 
this  equation,  that  is  to  say,  the  newly  arisen  importance 
of  corrupt  ti'Cating  and  the  tendency  of  the  party  Organiza- 
tions to  practise  it,  "It  must  be  borne  in  mind,"  says  the 
judgment  on  the  Hexham  election,'  "that  treating  is  the  par- 
ticular form  of  corruption  which  can  be  practised  with  advan- 
tage at  the  present  time.  Now  that  the  constituencies  are  so 
large  it  becomes  impossible  successfully  to  bribe.  .  .  .  But 
with  reference  to  treating  it  is  far  otherwise;  a  very  small 
amount  is  sufficient  to  procure  a  great  deal  of  popularity,  be- 
cause there  is  in  every  constituency  now,  looking  at  the  very 
wide  extension  of  the  franchise,  a  considerable  number  of  men 
who  do  not  make  politics  their  serious  business  at  all,  or  even 
attach  much  importance  to  one  side  or  the  other.'  They  are 
perfectly  ready  to  vote  for  the  man  who  is  popular;  and  if  by 
reason  of  treats  and  picnics  and  things  of  that  kind  you  can 
produce  a  general  feeling  that  the  particular  candidate  is  a 
good  fellow,  aud'that  he  is  willing  to  give  a  poor  man  a  supper 

1  Baniard,  Vol.  CCLXXIX,  p.  1662. 

'  Blue  Booke,  1893, Controverted  Elactloai  (Jud^fmenU). 

■  Or,  in  the  words  of  a  Birmingham  woiliiiie-raaa,  nho  lammed  np  the 
situation  to  me  in  a  more  graphic  yrttj:  "Politics  ia  an  abstraction,  while  a 
quart  of  ale  la  a  tajigibis  thing," 


.CD,  Google 


roDRincHAP.]     CANDIDATES  AND   ELECTIONEERING       '       479 

or  a  treat,  or  an  entertainment  of  this  kind  and  the  other,  and 
that  gets  generally  spread  over  the  division,  an  enormous 
amount  of  popularity  is  produced  by  that  which,  as  against  an 
Association  which  did  not  resort  to  the  same  sort  of  thing, 
would  have  a  very  large  effect  when  the  polling  came  to  take 
place."*  On  the  other  hand,  the  Associations,  while  having 
quite  a  legitimate  purpose,  "are  liable  always  to  be  diverted 
towards  illegitimate  means,  and  that  is  the  danger  of  them."  * 
The  "  social  meetings  "  lavished  by  the  Organizations  give  sub- 
stance and  consistency  to  this  danger,  not  that,  as  the  judges 
remark,  smoking-concerts,  conversaziones,  etc.,  are  in  them- 
selves necessarily  corrupting,  but  because  they  "  easily  degener- 
ate into  corrupt  treating, "  and  attract  corruptible  persons  to  the 
Associations  by  the  bait  of  refreshments.*  While  displaying 
great  severity '  towards  Associations  convicted  of  practices  of 
this  kind,  the  judges  do  not  always  push  the  proposition  laid 
down  by  them  to  its  extreme  logical  consequences,  at  one 
time  declaring  that  this  "  practice  of  giving  entertainments, 
picnics,  dances,  suppers,  teas,  sports,  and  what  not,  would 
certainly  amount  to  corrupt  treating  if  indulged  in  by  the 
candidate,"'  at  another,  that  the  opinion  cannot  be  endorsed 
that  every  act  done  by  the  Association  and  its  immediate  agents 
(after  election  time  has  begun  and  the  candidate  has  been 
nominated)  must  be  taken  to  be  the  act  of  the  candidate,  as  if  it 
were  done  by  an  agent  of  his.'  So  that,  if  the  Association  and 
the  candidate  only  take  care  not  to  compromise  themselves 
blether  too  openly,  to  be  prudent  in  their  intercoui-se,  it  can 
screen  him  from  the  consequences  of  electoral  corruption,  even 

>  Blua  Books,  IB(I3,  Juat  quoted,  p.  6. 

*  Ibid.,  p.  81.  Bocheawr  election. 
»  Ihid.,  pp.  81,  84. 

*  The  later  declalone,  given  on  the  election  petitions  of  ISSS,  are  not 
tn&rked  bj'  thiB  severity,  and  take  a  much  more  indulgent  view  of  the  smok- 
ing-concerts, in  which  the  candidate  or  his  friends  or  the  Association  supply 
drinks  to  electors  who  would  eventually  liave  to  vote  for  or  against  him- 
"  One  has  heard,"  says  one  of  the  judges,  "  even  of  very  learned  societies  of 
whom  it  has  been  said  that,  with  all  their  learning,  with  all  the  wisdom  ol 
their  lectures,  tbey  would  not  entirely  succeed,  unless  there  was  a  little  con- 
vereaalone,  ladies  heing  present,  and  tea,  coffee,  and  other  amenities,  which  to 
these  people  are,  perlups,  at  len.il  as  agreeable  aa  the  beer  is  to  the  others" 
iBlue  Book,  1896,  quoted  above,  Part  1,  p.  96).  Of.  the  same  Blue  Book, 
Part  II.  pp.  10, 11. 

»  Blue  Books,  1893,  p,  11.  •  Ibid.,  p.  83. 


.coy  Google 


DEMOCRACY   AND   POLITICAL  PARTIES     [t» 


should  it  expose  a  few  of  its  members,  and  maybe  the  least  im- 
portant ones  whom  the  judges  perhaps  would  not  have  the  heart 
to  condemn,  to  the  rigour  of  the  law.'  The  fact  is,  that  neither 
the  law  courts  nor  the  Legislature  iu  England  have  been  able 
to  eotirely  divest  themselves  of  the  old  conception  which  looked 
on  a  seat  in  Parliament,  if  not  aa  a  commodity  for  the  Member's 
personal  use,  which  has  only  to  be  honestly  paid  for,  at  all 
events  as  a  prize  which  is  competed  for  and  of  which  it  would 
be  unjust  to  deprive  the  competitor  who  has  won  the  race  if 
neither  he  nor  his  agent  have  employed  or  caused  the  employ- 
ment of  fraudulent  methods  for  outstripping  their  opponents. 
Matters  of  essentially  public  concern  are  influenced  by  consid- 
erations belonging  to  the  private  sphere,  down  to  the  legal 
procedure  in  electoral  corruption  cases,  which  follows  the 
rules  of  the  civil  action  where  the  beaten  candidate  is  the 
plaintiff  and  his  more  fortunate  rival  the  defendant.* 

The  cases  of  corrupt  treating  brought  home  to  the  Associa- 
tions by  the  judges  are  not,  it  is  true,  very  numerous,  but  that 
is  because  corrupt  doings  rarely  see  the  light  in  England,  proof 
of  them  being  extremely  difficult  to  obtain  and  the  legal  ex- 
penses of  an  election  [>etition  enormous,  as  much  as  £5000. 
Besides,  in  party  circles  it  has  never  been  considered  quite 
fair  to  present  these  petitions;  for  the  parties  all  more  or  less 
resort  to  the  practices  which  come  within  the  reach  of  the  law, 
and  they  are  not  forgetful  of  the  adage  kodie  miki  eras  tibi. 
As  for  the  authorities,  it  has  just  been  reiuarked  that  they  are 
in  no  way  concerned  if  the  parties  interested  do  not  come  for- 
ward, even  if  the  electoral  operations  were  marked  by  the 
most  shameless  corruption.  This  being  so,  the  cases  brought 
to  light  by  the  courts  may  be  taken  not  as  isolated  facts,  but 
as  in  the  nature  of  types. 

But  apart  from  these  cases,  of  rare  or  frequent  occurrence, 
patent  or  not,  which  are  liable  to  legal  penalties,  the  Associa- 

1  Cf.  (Blue  Book),  1893,  Vol.  XXV,  p.  8S)  the  groundt  ot  the  Jndgment  in 
the  Rochester  election,  with  reference  to  the  reaponsibility  oF  the  representa- 
tives ol  the  Constitutional  Asiiocialion.  and  ot  one  of  tbem  In  partlcalsr,  Mr. 
W..  "  who  baa  undoubtedly  been  —  I  will  tiot  say  the  cntspaw,  although  I  think 
I  mlffht  Almost  be  justified  in  sayin);  it —  bnt  ivlio  lias  been  the  agent  of  per- 
Bons  behind,  wlio  are  far  worse  than  hlmaelt.  I  hesitate  to  report  a  man  wbo 
Is  in  such  a  position  as  that." 

^  The  '■  Public  Prosecutor  "  has  Ibe  riglit  Co  intervene,  but  only  in  a  col- 
lateral way,  tike  a  third  party  in  a  lawsuit. 


.coy  Google 


IP.]    CANDIDATES  AND  ELECTIONEERING 


tiona  certainly  practise  the  collective  treating,  winch  easily 
evades  the  clutches  of  the  law  to  a  far  greater  extent,  especially 
through  the  "  social  meetings  "  which  they  get  up  iu  the  inter- 
val between  the  elections.  From  a  legal  point  of  view  these 
but  rarely  contain  the  technical  elements  of  a  breach  of  the 
law;  but  as  regards  the  demoralizing  effects  which  they  pro- 
duce on  the  somewhat  too  "  sociable  "  voters,  the  result  is  the 
same.  At  the  approach  of  the  elections  the  satisfactions  pro- 
vided for  the  "social  tendencies"  of  this  section  of  the  elec- 
torate are  already  a  thing  of  the  past  and  cannot  be  detected. 
The  Organizations  go  to  work  exactly  like  the  domestic  pois- 
oners who  administer  arsenic  in  anodyne  doses  for  months  or 
years  until  they  get  the  better  of  the  gradually  enfeebled 
organism;  and  theu  when  the  medical  officer  makes  the  post 
mortem  examination,  he  finds  nothing  or  next  to  nothing  to 
set  the  public  prosecutor  in  motion. 

In  a  still  more  disguised  fashion  does  the  Association  prac- 
tise a  sort  of  corruption  on  the  voters  from  day  to  day  and  for 
years  together,  by  procuring  various  favours  for  them,  by  try- 
ing to  find  them  places,  work,  getting  patients  into  hospitals, 
obtaining  letters  of  introduction  to  persons  who  can  be  useful 
to  them.  The  Association,  in  the  words  of  a  caucus  secretary, 
is  the  "freemasonry  of  the  humble  voter."  The  distribution 
of  help  in  money  by  charitable  persons  has  for  a  long  time 
past  been  often  made  to  serve  party  purposes,  especially  in 
Tory  circles,  where  an  electoral  following  was  secured  by  "a 
judicious  use  of  charities."  These  practices  have  met  with 
valuable  support  from  the  Organization  of  the  Caucus,  which 
in  many  places  cleverly  controls  the  dispensation  of  charity 
with  a  political  object,  by  drawing,  with  its  unerring  profes- 
sional knowledge,  the  attention  of  charitable  coreligionists  to 
needy  persons,  by  getting  lady  adherents  of  the  party  to  visit 
the  sick  poor,  etc.  Later  on,  the  candidate  of  the  party  reaps 
this  crop,  discreetly  sown  by  or  with  the  help  of  the  Associa- 
tion, in  the  form  of  votes  at  the  election. 

But  the  candidate  does  not  always  leave  everything  to  the 
Association;  he  also  often  embarks  on  preliminary -expendi- 
ture, to  capture  the  voters  in  advance.  "Prospective  "  candi- 
date or  even  only  candidate  in  petto,  he  quietly  steps  through 
the  meshes  of  the  Corrupt  Pi-actices  Act  and  begins  at  an  early 


.coy  Google 


482  DEMOCRACY   AND   POLITICAL  PARTIES     [third  PiBt 

atage  to  load  the  coiiBtitiiency  with  his  favours.  In  addition 
to  the,  so  to  speak,  obligatory  subscriptions  to  local  charities 
and  others,  which  constitute  "nursing  the  constituency,"  a 
good  many  candidates,  well  supplied  with  the  sinews  of  war, 
present  their  constituents  in  ape  with  a  park  or  a  museum, 
with  land  for  building  working-men's  clubs,  or  grounds  for 
athletic  sports,  ewimming  baths,  etc.  These  tactics,  which 
have  long  been  resorted  to  and  are  known  as  "salting  the 
constituency,"  are  supplemented  by  concerts,  eveuing-parties, 
teas,  and  picnics  provided  by  the  Association. 

Finally,  passing  from  the  material  sphere  to  an  apparently 
more  elevated  one,  the  candidate  and  the  Association  unite  in 
an  od  cafAandum  operation  which  is  the  climax  of  indirect 
and  collective  corruption,  while  quite  beyond  the  reach  of  the 
arm  of  the  law.  This  consists  of  the  offers  and  pledges  to 
legislate  in  favour  of  particular  interests,  of  a  certain  social 
class  or  of  a  certain  professional  group.  It  has  often  been 
pointed  out  that  these  practices  simply  take  the  place  of  the 
individual  corruption  of  the  pre-democratic  era.  In  fact,  they 
are  another  instance  of  a  system  of  bargaining  in  which  votes 
are  bought  by  promises  which  are  not  less  corrupting  because 
they  are  often  fallacious.  In  vouching  for  these  promises, 
the  party  Organizations  give  the  final  touch  to  their  share  in 
the  disguised  and  wholesale  corruption  to  the  development  of 
which  they  had  contributed. 


VI 

The  electoral  campaign,  the  principal  phases  of  which  1  have 

just  described,  occurs  only  once  in  several  years,  when  a  new 
Parliament  has  to  he  elected  (except  in  cases  when  a  constitu- 
ency has  to  fill  up  a  seat  unexpectedly,  owing  to  the  death  or 
resignation  of  the  Member  or  hia  elevation  to  the  Peerage). 
But  the  Organizations  by  no  means  suspend  hostilities  in  the 
interval;  not  only  do  they  perfect  their  armaments,  and  in 
general  continue  their  warlike  preparations,  but  every  year  at 
a  fixed  date  they  eng^e  in  contests  with  the  enemy,  which 
are  a  sort  of  general  rehearsal  of  the  preat  battle  of  the  parlia- 
mentary elections.     These  encounters  take  place  at  the  annual 


.coy  Google 


FOEBTH  CHiP.]     CANDIDATES  AND  ELECTIONEERING  488 

municipal  elections,  in  which  local  qneations  almost  invariably 
give  way  to  a  passage  of  arms  between  Liberals  and  Conserva- 
tives. It  will  be  remembered  how  the  Birmingham  Caucus  by 
"widening  the  idea  of  Libcraliam,"  developed  this  custom. 
The  Caucus,  however,  did  not  make  an  innovation.  The  mu- 
nicipal elections  in  a  good  many  English  boroughs  had  for  a 
long  time,  one  might  almost  say  from  time  immemorial,  been 
tainted  with  political  considerations.  Under  the  old  regime 
the  oligarchical  municipal  corporations  which  possessed  the 
parliamentary  franchise  were  engrossed  in  their  political 
privileges,  which  they  turned  to  account,  like  a  stock-in-trade, 
for  the  benefit  of  their  members,  and  entirely  neglected  the 
municipal  Interests  of  their  boroughs.  They  were  purely  and 
simply  political  machines  at  the  disposal  of  a  party  or 
of  a  great  family,  of  a  patron,  who  bought  them.  The 
choice  of  the  members  of  the  corporation,  the  municipal 
administration,  the  current  expenditure,  even  the  control  of 
the  police  which  is  supposed  to  protect  all  citizens  indis- 
criminately, and  the  dispensation  of  public  charity,  were 
subordinated  to  the  one  idea  of  establishing  or  perpetuating 
the  ascendency  of  a  party  or  the  political  influence  of  a  patron. 
The  great  enquiry  made  by  the  Royal  Commission  of  1834  on 
the  working  of  municipal  institutions  threw  a  fiood  of  light  on 
the  Sagrant  abuses  of  this  system,  of  "this  perversion  of 
municipal  privilege  to  political  objects,"*  After  the  Reform 
Bill  of  1832,  which  extended  the  parliamentary  suffrage  and 
abolished  the  pocket  boroughs,  and  the  municipal  reform  of 
1835,  which  entrusted  municipal  administration  to  the  large 
body  of  ratepayers,  it  became  impossible  to  extract  the  par- 
liamentary vote  from  the  municipal  privilege  with  the  same 
facility,  but  the  exploitation  of  the  latter  for  the  benefit  of  the 
former  was  far  from  being  at  an  end.  The  municipal  vote, 
even  when  exercised  by  a  considerable  number  of  electors, 
being  easier  to  secure,  owing  to  its  smaller  importance  and  its 
local  limitation,  the  election -mongers,  who  were  on  the  look- 
out for  parliamentary  suffrages,  fastened  on  this  vote,  and 

1  Report  on  Hnnlctpsl  CorporatioDs  In  EnHland  and  Walea,  Blue  Bookt, 
tSSe,  Vol.  XXXin,  p.  U,  $  TS.  Cf.  also  }§  76,  TT,  121 ;  Appendix,  Part  I  (SIu« 
Bookt,  Vol.  XXXIV),  pp.  14,  440,  030;  Part  II,  pp.  9ie,  9911,  103S;  Part  m, 
p.  19SB  ;  Fait  IV,  pp.  2094,  Sill,  21T4,  3486,  24<)S,  2499,  2S38,  2S4T,  eto. 


.coy  Google 


4M  DEMOCRACY  AND  POLITICAL  PARTIES    [thibd  pait 

in  most  of  the  boroughs  they  fought  the  municipal  ele«tioDS 
on  political  Haes,  arraying  the  voters  aa  Whiga  and  Tories, 
and  thus  preparing  the  order  of  the  parliamentary  battles 
beforehand.  In  consequence  it  became  the  custom  to  bring 
the  electoral  corruption,  which  was  the  great  lever  of  English 
electoral  life,  to  bear  on  the  municipal  elections.  The  voter 
whose  municipal  vote  was  bought  considered  himself  in  a  way 
bound  in  honour  to  vote  for  the  same  political  party  at  the 
parliamentary  elections,  so  much  so  that  the  rival  party  did 
not  even  try  to  buy  his  parliamentary  vote.'  The  local  elec- 
tion agents  therefore  had  a  saying  that  "£10  spent  at  a 
municipal  is  better  and  more  advant^eous  than  £100  spent 
at  the  parliamentary  contest."'  Where  the  political  parties 
were  evenly  matched,  as  in  Lancashire,  for  instance,  politics 
was  the  rule  in  municipal  elections  and  with  politics  corrup- 
tion. On  the  other  hand,  in  a  good  many  boroughs  politics 
were  not  imported  into  the  municipal  elections,  even  in  large 
towns  like  Bradford,  for  instance;*  but  directly  the  plan  of 
municipal  elections  on  party  lines  was  adopted  in  a  borough, 
corruption  took  up  its  permanent  abode  there.* 
The  improvement  of  political  manners  began  to  tell  on  this 

1 "  Tbs  bribe  raceiTod  *t  ft  manicipftl  election  It  a  sort  of  consideration  (or 
his  giving  a  vote  to  the  name  polittcnl  party  at  tbe  parllunentarj  election  " 
(Report  froQi  tbe  Select  Committee  on  the  Corrupt  Practices  Preveotiou  Act, 
Blue  Book*.  1660,  Vol.  X,  p.  16).  "  Yon  bribe  *  roan  at  the  mnnicipal  election, 
and  be  hai  lome  sort  of  gratitade  tovard  you,  perhaps,  or  you  expect  It.  and 
yon  secare  bli  vote  at  the  general  election  "  (Ibid.,  p,  25U). 

*  From  the  evidence  of  the  principal  agent  of  the  Conservative  party,  Bo«e, 
g^tven  before  the  Select  Committee  referred  to  above.  The  same  witness  said 
In  his  deposition:  "The  real  nursery  of  the  evil  (of  corruption)  is  in  the 
mnnicipal  conteEts;  and  theseoft-recurrinKconteBtsbuveled  to  the  establish- 
ment of  what  I  might  almost  term  an  organized  system  of  corruption  in  the 
mnnicipal  borongbs  throughout  tbe  kingdom,  wblcb  provide!  a  machinery 
ready  made  to  hand,  available  when  the  parliamentary  contests  arrive" 
{Ibiil.,  p.  90). 

*  Report  from  tbe  Select  Committee  on  Parliamentary  and  Municipal  Elec- 
tions, Blue  Bookf,  1868-lWi9,  Vol,  VIH.  §  2795. 

'  CI.  by  way  of  example  tbe  depasltion  relating  to  'Windsor,  which  states 
bow  the  borough,  at  one  time  "perfectly  pnre,"  even  before  18,19,  under  the 
regime  of  close  corporations,  became  corrupt  In  consequeuce  of  the  introduc- 
tion of  politics  Into  municipal  elections:  "The  system  of  corruption  was 
Introduced  tor  the  purpose  of  one  politii'al  party  getting  tbe  predominance. 
I  do  not  hesitate  to  say  tliat  I  trace  Ibe  whole  pnlltli-al  demoralization,  it  it  be 
so  iu  our  li',irout!;h,  entirely  to  that  sysleoi  utfcctiug  the  virtue  of  the  con- 
stituency ■■  (Ibid.,  55  71'J-7M), 


.coy  Google 


poDRTBCBtF.]    CANDIDATES  AND  ELECTIONEERIKQ  486 

state  of  things,  and  the  habit  of  applying  the  divisions  of 
political  parties  to  municipal  elections  was  growing  lesa  com- 
mon and  was,  perhaps,  about  to  gradually  become  extinct.' 
But  at  this  point  the  Caucus  appeared  ou  the  scene,  and  it 
gave  the  old  practice  a  fresh  lease  of  life;  it  raised  it  to  the 
level  of  a  piineiple  justifiable  by  the  general  welfare  and 
even  to  be  founded  on  reason.  "Political  principle,  where 
it  is  sincere, "  declared  Mr.  Chamberlain  in  his  apologia  for 
the  Caucus,  "  is  to  a  great  extent  a  prevalent  habit  of  mind 
—  the  Conservative  being  naturally  inclined  to  keep  things 
as  they  are  for  fear  they  should  be  made  worse,  and  the 
Liberal  eagerly  embracing  change  in  the  hope  of  making  them 
better.  This  permanent  distinction  shows  itself  as  much  in 
municipal  as  in  national  affairs;  it  affects  our  judgment  and 
conduct  wliether  we  are  considering  the  removal  of  nuisances 
or  the  disestablishment  and  the  disendowmeut  of  the  English 
Church.  It  should  also  be  remembered  that  the  exclusion 
from  local  affairs  of  the  higher  issue  only  leaves  the  door  open 
to  lower  influences.  If  the  battle  be  not  fought  on  political 
grounds,  there  will  none  the  less  be  party  divisions,  though 
these  will  turn  on  personal  claims  or  petty  local  objects.  Men 
are  no  longer  chosen  because  they  are  Liberals  or  Conserva- 
tives, —  in  other  words,  because  they  belong  to  one  or  other  of 
the  great  orders  of  political  thought,  —  but  because  they  are 
popular  with  a  faction,  or  because  they  will  promote  some 
sectional  object  which  interests  an  active  clique;  and  in  this 
way  the  administration  of  the  affairs  of  a  great  community 
sinks  to  the  level  of  an  unintelligent  and  selfish  parochial- 
ism."' The  reader  will  recollect  the  success  with  which  the 
Birmingham  Caucus  "widened  Liberalism"  by  introducing 
politics  into  all  the  local  elections,  as  well  as  the  grievances 
of  the  Conservatives  ousted  from  the  town  council.  He  will 
also  remember  that  at  the  time  of  the  foundation  of  the 
Liberal  Federation  several  delegates  who  attended  the  open- 

1 ".  .  .  The  thing  la  breaking  up  rathei  more  now ;  tt  Is  graduall)'  getting 
less"  (Report  from  the  Select  Committee  on  Parliamentary  and  Manicipal 
Electiong,  Blue  Book*.  1868-1809,  Vol.  VHI,  S  «3)- 

".  .  .  less  polltii.'al  excitement  in  poiinection  with  the  mnnlcipal  elections 
in  recent  jears:  desire  to  enter  the  town  council  iireeiMictlTBl;  of  politics " 
(/6id.,S5  1053-1058). 

■  Tht  Caucut,  p.  19. 


.coy  Google 


486  DEMOCRACY  AND  POLITICAL  PARTIES    [thibd  part 

ing  meetiug  took  strong  exception  to  tlie  pra<;tioe  favoured 
by  the  Birmingham  Caucus  of  converting  the  municipal  elec- 
tions into  a  political  contest.  But  before  long,  at  the  instiga- 
tion of  the  caucuses,  the  example  of  Birmingham  was  followed 
in  most  of  the  English  boroughs,  and  with  the  same  abject 
of  making  municipal  elections  a  preparation  for  the  parlia- 
mentary elections,  of  setting  up  in  the  mind  of  the  voter  a 
psychological  continuity  between  his  municipal  vote  and  his 
parliamentary  suffrage.  Under  the  old  system  it  was  estab- 
lished by  means  of  the  corniption  which  appealed  to  the  feel- 
ing of  honour  and  gratitude  of  the  person  bribed;  for  this 
peculiar  ethics  was  substituted  the  no  less  peculiar  logic  that 
it  was  absurd  to  be  guided  by  certain  considerations  at  munici- 
pal elections  and  by  other  considerations  at  jmrliamentary  elec- 
tions. It  is  true  that  a  number  of  good  citizens  who  were 
outside  the  Caucus  also  preferred  the  political  order  of  battle 
in  municipal  elections.  They  no  doubt  rejected  Mr.  Chamber- 
lain's singular  theory,  according  to  which  a  man  who  wants 
to  preserve  the  establishment  of  the  Church  of  England  cannot 
help  wishing  to  keep  the  dirt  in  the  streets  and  public  places; 
they  were  aware  of  the  fact,  admitted  even  by  a  good  many 
representatives  of  the  Caucus,'  that  there  are  plenty  of  Con- 
servatives who  have  very  liberal  ideas  on  the  subject  of  mu- 
nicipal administration ;  but  they  held,  in  agreement  with  Mr. 
Chamberlain,  that  municipal  elections  conducted  on  a  political 
basis  would  lift  the  contest  above  wretched  parochial  squab- 
bles and  personal  jealousy. 

These  hopes  were  destined  to  disappointment.  In  the 
meanwhile  each  year  marked  a  fresh  stage  in  the  custom 
which  was  transforming  municipal  elections  into  a  battle  of 
political  parties.  It  often  met  with  opposition;  in  not  a 
few  towns  the  Caucus  had  to  return  to  the  charge  more  than 
once  before  it  succeeded  in  establishing  it.  On  my  first  long 
provincial  tour  (in  1889)  I  found  it  already  in  vogue  in  all 
the  chief  places  I  visited  from  Ix)ndon  northwards  up  to  the 
Tyne  country.  At  that  time  this  was  a  sort  of  frontier  be- 
tween political  municipalities  and  non-political  municipalities. 

I  One  of  my  corre<ipoDdeiits  amonj;  tbe  represent Ht Ives  of  the  LlbrrR] 
Caucus  eipreswd  hiiiisHlf  &.«  follows  on  this  subjert:  "  Mnny  so-called  Toilea 
are  quite  as  Liberal  in  local  politica  u  Bome  so-called  LiberaU." 


.CD,  Google 


FOURTBCHAP.]     CANDIDATES   AND  ELECTIONEERING  4S1 

Farther  north,  aud  especially  in  Scotland,  the  mixing  up  of 
politics  with  municipal  matters  was  vehemently  repudiated. 
There  were  barely  a  few  Scotch  boroughs  which  formed  an 
exception.  As  a  rule,  people  followed,  as  some  of  my  corre- 
spondents or  interlocutors  phrased  it,  the  "  Scotch  principle 
according  to  which  local  affairs  ought  to  be  considered  as  non- 
political."'  If  the  Liberals  are  to  be  believed,  the  Tories, 
who  were  in  a  minority  in  Scotland,  sometimes  secretly 
infringed  the  rule  by  voting  at  municipal  elections  for  their 
political  coreligionists,  but,  at  all  events,  in  public  no  one 
put  forward  the  Birmingham  doctrine.  At  the  present  time  (in 
1896),  after  an  interval  of  a  few  years,  the  situation  is  com- 
pletely changed:  polities  in  local  elections  are  now  the 
rule  in  all  the  important  towns.  And  it  is  all  the  more  so 
in  England.  To  be  successful,  a  candidate  for  the  town  coun- 
cil must  be  adopted  and  presented  by  the  Association  of  the 
one  or  the  other  party.'  It  is  tnie  that  a  man  who  enjoys 
great  local  notoriety,  or  a  working-man  candidate  in  a  popu- 
lar constituency  with  somewhat  socialistic  tendencies,  might 
enter  the  lists  against  the  Organizations  of  the  regular  parties 
with  better  prospects  of  success  than  at  the  parliamentary 
elections,  but  these  are  exceptional  cases  which  only  confirm 
the  rule.  The  Organizations  sometimes  also  spontaneously 
refrain  from  bringing  forward  party  candidatures  when  they 
are  confronted  with  very  respectable  independent  candidates, 
so  that  the  election  ceases  to  be  in  any  way  political,  but  this 
contingency  is  becoming  more  and  more  uncommon,  and  it  is 
the  Birmingham  system  which  prevails. 

Experience  has  not  vindicated  it  but  has  proved  that  this 
method  which,  pushed  to  its  extreme  consequences,  gives  an 
ardent  Liberal  or  a  zealous  Conservative  the  preference  over  a 
good  and  honest  administrator,  is  rather  destructive  of  healthy 
public  life.     While  from  some  points  of  view  the  regrettable 

1  Some  of  my  ScoUh  correapODdenls  were  almost  offended  when  I  oaked 
tbem  if  they  made  a  political  figbt  ot  mimlclpal  elections,  and  they  replied ; 
"  Politics  are  extraneous  matter  altogetbet  at  local  electloDB,  and  do  Dot  affect 
Hucb  issues  in  the  sIlKblest  deKree." 

'  In  tbeicreatmajorityof  cases  the  rule  Is  thattbe  ward  Organization  selects 
the  candidate  for  tbe  town  council.  9ometimea  the  cbolce  la  made  by  the 
"  hundreds."  bat  in  any  event  the  executive  committee  of  tbe  Caucus  has  a 
band  in  It. 


.CD,  Google 


488  DEMOCRACT  AND   POLITICAL  PARTIES     [thied  past 

effect  of  mixing  up  politics  with  municipal  affairs,  which  is 
unquestionable,  has  not  assumed  a  very  grave  aspect,  at  least 
for  the  moment,  from  other  points  of  view  it  appears  In  a 
more  threatening  light.  So  far  as  tiie  integrity  of  municipal 
administration  is  concerned,  it  may  be  said  in  a  general  way 
that  municipal  interests  are  not  sacrificed  to  those  of  the 
})olitical  parties  or  of  the  politicians.  This  fortunate  result 
is  due  tu  two  causes,  the  salutary  action  of  which  is  of  uni- 
form strength;  the  comparatively  elevated  tone  of  English 
public  life,  the  vigilance  of  public  opinion  which  strongly 
condemns  all  improper  dealings  with  public  money,'  and 
secondly,  the  fact  that  the  principal  officials,  the  chiefs  of  the 
municipal  departments,  are  ap|)ointed  irrespective  of  all  party 
considerations  and  solely  for  their  special  competence.  True, 
the  subordinate  posts  have  become  the  electoral  change  which 
the  councillors  distribute  to  the  adherents  of  the  party,  but 
being  phtcod  under  n on- political  chiefs  the  holders  of  these 
situations  forget  their  political  origin  when  they  cross  the 
tlireshold  of  the  town  hail,  and  all  the  more  so  because 
they  do  not  change  with  the  majority  of  the  town  coun- 
cil. Thus  in  the  office-rooms  there  are  no  political  par- 
tics.  It  is  not  uncommon  for  Badical  municipalities  to 
have  Tory  employes  in  the  principal  posts.  Generally  men 
of  large  experience,  of  professionaj  knowledge,  these  officers 
keep  a  jealous  eye  on  the  public  money  and,  to  a  certain  extent, 
make  up  for  the  incompetence  of  the  members  of  the  municipal 
assemblies.  The  latter,  if  not  always  competent  to  manage 
the  affairs  of  the  town,  are  generally  honest,  and  their  adminis- 
tration is  not  marked  by  flagrant  abuses;  in  England  there  is 
no  direct  plundering  of  tlie  municipal  coffers,  and  it  Is  not 
often  that  illicit  profit  is  derived  from  them  in  indirect  ways. 
Of  course,  as  in  all  cases  where  large  expenditure  has  to  be 
incurred,  contracts  and  orders  to  be  adjudged,  which  naturally 
invite  jobbing,  as  the  flame  attracts  the  moth,  the  possibility, 

1  Not  lotiK  SKO,  in  a  very  lar^  Uivm  nl  the  Mldlnnds,  %  town  councillor 
was  suBpecteii  <it  ha  vine  bought  Home  land  on  (he  assumption  that  it  might  b« 
wanteil  for  a  tramirny  line,  and  that  he  ml|{ht  be  able  to  resell  it  to  the  town 
at  a  profit.  The  calculalion  did  not  prove  wBll-founiled,  but  the  eonncil  none 
the  less  passed  a  resolulion  cenaurine  the  spei'nialor.  The  result  o(  this 
Tesoliitiiin  iraa  thnt  tlie  couucillor  who  was  the  Buh}ect  of  it  felt  obliged  to 
teaign  his  neat  and  retire  from  public  iife. 


.CD,  Google 


FOURTH  CHAP.]     CANDIDATES   AND   ELECTIONEERING  480 

or  even  the  probability,  of  unduly  swollen  expenditure,  by 
which  private  individuals  benefit,  is  not  excluded  in  English 
municipalities,  but,  all  things  considered,  corruption  is  un- 
known in  them. 

Nevertheless,  amid  these  eminently  favourable  conditions 
there  appear  symptoms  which  cannot  be  ignored  or  which 
are  even  of  a  decidedly  disquieting  nature.  The  rule  which 
makes  competence  the  sole  test  of  candidates  for  responsible 
municipal  offices  meets  with  exceptions  in  practice.  It  gives 
way  to  the  temptation  which  besets  the  members  of  the  politi- 
cal party  in  a  majority  on  the  council  to  get  places  at  all 
hazards  for  political  friends.  My  enquiries,  which  have  only 
extended  in  an  incidental  way  to  municipal  administration, 
have  none  the  less  disclosed  facts  in  connection  with  it  which 
are  much  to  be  deplored.  Thus,  in  the  very  heart  of  England, 
in  two  towns  of  the  first  rank,  the  one  in  Lancashire,  the  other 
in  Yorkshire,  the  sanitary  service  is  sadly  neglected  in  certain 
wards  which  are  conspicuous  for  their  high  rate  of  mortality 
and  in  which  small  epidemics  of  typhoid  fever  or  other  con- 
tagious maladies  break  out  from  time  to  time.  The  reason  is 
stated  to  be  that  "an  incompetent  partisan  had  been  appoint«d 
instead  of  a  hygienist."  In  other  departments  a  good  many  ap- 
pointments oi  zealous  party-men,  little  qualified  for  the  dis- 
charge of  their  duties,  have  also  been  brought  to  my  notice; 
some  of  them  recognized  their  unfitness  themselves  and  hon- 
estly acknowledged  it  by  resigning  a  few  weeks  after  their 
appointment.  In  not  a  few  town  councils  the  division  into 
political  parties  introduced  during  the  election  campaign  con- 
tinues practically,  if  not  formally,  in  the  council  itself,  and  the 
result  is  that  the  objections  of  the  minority  cannot  be  raised 
with  advantage;  for  the  political  party  in  a  majority,  being 
inclined  to  look  on  criticism  as  a  political  manoeuvre,  invari- 
ably stifles  opposition  by  a  "party  vote."  Being  practically 
unchecked,  the  majority  plunges  into  heedless  expense,  —  in- 
volves the  town  in  too  heavy  a  debt,  perhaps. 

Although  cases  of  this  kind  are,  it  would  seem,  becoming 
more  common,  they  are  far  from  assuming  a  really  grave 
aspect  from  their  special  point  of  view  and  compelling  at- 
tention. But  beneath  them  there  already  appears  a  general 
phenomenon,  the  gravity  of  which  is  much  more  incontesta- 


.coy  Google 


iW  DEMOCRACY   AND   POLITICAL   PARTIES     [thibd  paht 

ble  —  the  indifference  to  municipal  matters  which  ia  grow- 
ing up  among  the  citizens.  They  inevitably  leave  the 
burden  of  their  duty  to  the  common  weal  to  be  borne  by  the 
political  parties  who  have  monopolized  local  public  life  and 
imported  into  it  their  purely  conventional  criterion,  the  blind 
formaliam  of  which,  far  from  drawing  out,  tends  rather  to 
repress  all  genuine  and  living  interest.  The  first  effect  of 
this  state  of  things  is  strikingly  manifested  in  the  decline  of 
the  intellectual  and,  to  some  extent,  moral  standard  of  the 
perionnetot  the  town  councils.  Instead  of  raising  it,  as  was 
promised  by  the  advocates  of  "politics"  in  municipal  elec- 
tions, politics  have  lowered  it,  and  all  the  more  easily  because 
the  first  postulate  of  their  thesis,  according  to  which  the 
political  character  imparted  to  local  contests  would  ennoble 
them,  would  surround  them  with  a  halo  of  great  principles, 
was  erroneous.  For  politics,  while  appealing  to  lofty  princi- 
ples, are  not  free  from  vulgar  ambition  and  cupidity  and  petty 
self-esteem,  and  very  often  only  conceal  them  more  success- 
fully under  the  grand  language  of  which  they  have  such  a 
plentiful  supply.  Politics,  to  repeat  another  old  truism,  have 
no  virtue  of  their  own;  they  are  what  the  men  who  engage  in 
them  make  them.  And  the  men  who  had  to  be  busy  in  the 
municipal  elections  were  tlie  men  of  the  Caucus,  the  ward 
people  whose  elevation  of  mind  and  character  we  are  already 
acquainted  with. 

Devotion  to  the  party  being,  under  the  Birmingham  system, 
the  first  qualification  for  admission  to  municipal  honours, 
inevitably  became  before  long  the  principal  condition  of  such 
admission.  Too  often  these  honours  were  simply  the  reward 
of  the  most  active  "  workers  "  of  the  caucuses.  The  men  who 
were  competent  to  deal  with  public  affairs,  but  who  belonged 
to  the  opposite  political  party,  were  shut  out  beforehand. 
Among  the  adhei-ents  of  the  party  the  moderate  men,  the  men 
of  business,  shrank  from  going  through  all  the  nauseating 
incidents  of  an  electoral  campaign  conducted  under  the  aus- 
pices of  the  residuum  of  their  own  party  and  under  a  running 
6re  from  the  residuum  of  the  opposite  one,  and  from  don- 
ning the  party  livery  for  a  contest  with  which  politics 
have  nothing  to  do.  The  good  citizens  therefore,  far 
from  being  attracted  by  politics,  were  rather  deterred  by  them 


.coy  Google 


FOERTHCBfcP.]     CAKDIDATES   AND   ELECTIONEERING  481 

from  taking  part  in  municipal  life.  It  appears  that  iu  this 
respect  the  situation  has  become  much  worse  io  the  course  of 
the  last  few  years,  Id  proportion  as  politics  have  penetrated 
more  deeply  into  the  muoicipal  elections.  On  the  occasion  of 
my  first  tour  in  the  provinces  (in  1889),  I  pretty  often  heard 
it  said  that  "  good  men  (the  Tories  said  "  gentlemen  ")  would 
not  staud  for  the  town  conncil " ;  but  on  visiting  the  same  towns 
after  an  interval  of  six  yearB  I  was  much  struck  by  the  tone 
of  melancholy  and  sometimes  of  exasperation  in  which  the 
effects  of  the  introduction  of  politics  into  municipal  affairs 
were  spoken  of.  I  no  longer  heard,  as  I  formerly  did,  the 
specious  argument  that  they  created  a  purer  electoral  atmos- 
phere, that  they  raised  the  character  of  the  local  contests,  etc. 
In  one  of  the  most  important  towns  of  the  kingdom,  with  a 
glorious  municipal  past,  one  of  its  leading  citizens  complained 
bitterly  of  the  degradation  of  tlie  town  council,  explain- 
ing that  this  was  bound  to  be  so  "with  the  present  system 
which  limits  the  choice  to  members  of  the  dominant  political 
party.  It  is  impossible  for  the  quality  of  the  members  not  to 
decline.  In  our  council  barely  a  third  of  the  members  are  men 
of  average  ability;  the  rest  are  nonentities.  Luckily,  they 
follow  their  abler  colleagues.  But  what  will  this  bring  us  to? 
The  only  hope  is  that  in  twenty  years'  time  the  deterioration  of 
the  council  will  be  such  that  the  system  will  bring  its  own  de- 
struction; the  sickened  and  disgusted  population  will  rise  in  re- 
volt." I  will  depart  in  this  instance  from  the  rule  which  I  have 
adopted  of  not  naming  the  towns  referred  to  for  facts  of  a  gen- 
eral description ;  for  the  town  in  question  is  the  very  one  which 
was  the  instigator  of  the  introduction  of  politics  into  municipal 
elections,  which  revived  this  practice  of  the  old  r^siine  and  pro- 
moted itto  the  dignity  of  a  principle  of  government.  I  mean  the 
city  of  Birmingham.  And  I  must  add  thnt  tlie  author  of  the 
remarks  just  quoted  is  by  no  means  a  discontented  member  of 
the  minority,  but  a  representative  of  the  dominant  party,  and 
even  more,  one  of  the  leaders  of  its  Organization.  The  name 
having  been  given,  I  see  no  objection  to  completing  the  quotation 
by  the  sentences  wliich  contain,  as  it  were,  a  synthesis  of  the 
working  of  this  system  at  Birmingham:  "  At  the  outset  Mr. 
Chamt)erlain,  by  his  example  and  his  prestige,  induced  a  good 
many  intelligent  men  to  enter  the  municipality.     But  since 


.coy  Google 


402  DEMOCRACY   AND   POLITICAL  PARTIES     [thiii.  p*Br 

matters  have  been  left  to  the  natural  play  of  the  system,  it 
has  only  deteriorated  municipal  representation." 

Outside  tlie  municipal  council  the  mischievous  effects  of  the 
syatem  in  question  are  not  less  felt  both  during  the  election 
period  and  after  it.  The  political  importance  attached  to  the 
municipal  eleetious  makes  the  contest  particularly  keen,  as 
was  the  ease  in  the  pre-caucus  era,  but  with  this  serious  differ- 
ence, that  in  the  old  days,  when  corruption  was  the  great 
weapon  at  municipal  elections,  the  fierceness  of  the  combatants 
was  that  of  condottieri,  whereas  now  the  Caucus  sets  bigoted 
partisans  by  the  ears.  It  is  less  expensive  and  is  always 
more  effective  to  capture  people's  minds,  eveu  by  fraudulent 
means,  than  to  buy  their  consciences.  Corruption  has  not  on 
that  account  disappeared  from  municipal  elections;  it  fills  a 
smaller  place  in  them  than  formerly,  as  in  Englisli  electoral 
life  in  general,  but  it  is  still  practised  enough  to  involve 
municipal  candidates  in  an  expenditure  amounting  to  £200 
and  more  in  a  ward  of  a  moderately  important  town  where  the 
electoral  machinery  {offered  by  the  Caucus)  is  ready  to  hand. 
In  the  majority  of  cases  corruption  is  only  a  subsidiary  or 
even  an  accidental  resource;  the  principal  incentive  is  sup- 
plied by  party  passion,  which  is  never  allowed  to  die  out. 
From  year  to  year,  even  when  there  are  no  parliamentary  elec- 
tions, the  party  fight  is  resumed  on  the  occasion  of  the  renewal 
of  the  town  councils.  And  there  is  more  truth  at  the  preeent 
time  in  the  remark  made  in  the  great  enquiry  of  1JJ34  into 
municipal  corporations  by  a  witness  who  was  explaining  the 
evil  efFects  of  politics  always  turned  on  even  at  municipal 
elections;  "There  is  no  cooling  time."'  In  the  present  day 
there  is  tlie  Caucus  to  add  fuel  to  the  flame.  Animosity  be- 
tween fellow-townsmen  has  become  a  fixture;  they  are  bound 
to  fly  at  each  other's  throats  in  everyday  life  about  their 
local  affairs,  because  they  happen  to  differ  on  certain  questions 
which  are  being  discussed  in  Parliament. 

The  representatives  of  the  party  Organizations  are  perfectly 
well  aware  of  the  effects  of  introducing  politics  into  municipal 
affairs  and  they  make  no  secret  whatever  of  them.  But  they 
are  not  at  liberty  to  give  up  the  system  because  it  is  eminently 
useful  and  even  necessary  for  keeping  the  machine  of  the  Caucus 
1  Op.  cit..  Appendix,  IV,  3199. 


.coy  Google 


WiTBTH  OH»p.]     CANDIDATES  AND  ELECTIONEERING  493 

in  order.  It  would  get  rusty  for  want  of  use,  it  would  fall  to 
pieces  if  it  were  set  in  motion  only  once  in  five  or  six  years, 
on  the  occasion  of  the  parliaraeutary  elentions ;  the  zeal  of  the 
"workers"  would  die  out  in  the  interval,  and  the  discipline 
of  the  followers  of  the  party  would  grow  lax.  They  must  be 
kept  moving,  be  drilled  continually,  be  made  to  rehearse  the 
part  which  they  have  to  perform  during  the  parliamentary  elec- 
tion campaign.  The  annual  municipal  elections  supply  the 
pretext  and  the  means  of  "keeping  the  thing  going."  And 
even  if  the  leaders  of  the  caucus  wished  to  suspend  party 
animosity  at  the  municipal  elections,  they  are  prevented  from 
doing  so  by  their  "workers,"  who  look  on  these  contests  not 
only  as  an  opportunity  for  gaining  distinction,  for  establish- 
ing claims,  but,  owing  to  their  temperament,  also  lind  in  them 
a  sort  of  moral  gymnastics.  It  has  happened  many  a  time 
that  the  leaders  of  the  caucus  have  given  up  opposing  an 
excellent  municipal  councillor  and  very  respectable  individual 
solely  on  account  of  his  "politics,"  or  have  settled  with  the 
leaders  of  the  rival  party  to  exclude  politics  from  the  munici- 
pal elections,  and  that  these  intentions  and  arrangements  have 
beendefeatedby  the  opposition  ofthe"  workers,"  who  declared 
that  they  would  not  "  work  "  at  all  at  the  parliamentary  elec- 
tion if  a  truce  were  observed  at  the  municipal  elections.  In 
this  connection  there  is  no  distinction  to  be  made  between  the 
parties,  no  reason  for  incriminating,  for  instance,  the  party 
which  first  introduced  the  Caucus;  for  one  case  chargeable  to 
the  Liberal  Organization  I  could  cite  another  implicating  the 
Tory  Organization;  it  is  in  the  nature  of  the  "machine." 

The  municipal  election  being  considered  as  a  preparation  and 
a  weapon  for  the  parliamentary  elections,  the  interest  of  the 
party  Organizations  in  the  former  is  generally  exhausted  with 
the  elections;  they  pay  very  little  or  no  heed  to  the  way  in 
which  the  municipal  councillors  discharge  their  duties,  which 
are  in  themselves  non -political.  Very  different  is  the  attitude 
of  the  Associations  towards  those  for  whom  they  obtain  a  seat 
in  Parliament. 

VII 

The  preponderating  part  played  by  the  Association  in  the 
election  of  the  Member  naturally  gives  it  special  claims  on 


.coy  Google 


4M  DEMOCRACY   AND   POLITICAL   PARTIES     [thibd  paht 

him.  It  is  the  Association  which  has  to  a  certain  extent  made 
the  Member,  and  it  ia  that  body  which  is  the  reciiiient,  in  the 
same  proportion,  of  what  the  M.P.  owes  to  his  constituents. 
Interposing  between  him  and  his  electors,  the  Caucus  not  only 
intercepts,  so  to  speak,  the  deference  which  the  electors  have 
a  right  to  expect  from  their  representative,  but  imposes  on 
him  .additional,  or,  at  any  rate,  stricter  duties  towards  itself. 
The  dependence  of  the  M.P.  on  those  who  elected  him  was 
pretty  considerable  before  the  advent  of  the  Caucus;  it  had 
been  continually  on  the  increase  for  half  a  century,  since  IXU, 
Directly  the  great  electoral  reform  had  installed  free  opinion 
in  the  place  of  aristocratic  oligarchy,  the  former  set  up  the 
pretension  of  controlling  the  men  who  governed  or  legislated 
in  its  name.  The  very  year  of  the  Keform  Bill  witnesses 
attempts  at  giving  peremptory  instructions  to  Members. 
The  electors  of  the  city  of  London  set  tlie  example,'  which 
is  immediately  followed  in  several  large  provincial  towns.* 
However,  the  movement  does  not  gather  strength  in  this 
extreme  aspect  and  practically  amounts  to  a.  manifestation 
more  formal  than  otherwise,  which  only  heralds  the,  new 
order  of  things.  But  from  year  to  year  the  control  ex- 
ercised by  the  electors  over  their  Members  extends  with 
the  development  of  means  of  communication  and  of  the 
Press.  When  there  were  no  railways  or  telegraphs,  and 
when  a  letter  or  a  newspaper  took  days  and  days  to  travel  a 
few  hundred  miles,  and  the  cheap  Press  was  not  in  existence 
to  keep  the  public  informed  of  the  sayings  and  doings  of  Par- 
liament, the  Member  was,  by  the  force  of  things,  free  from 
the  supervision  of  his  constituents;  he  was  a  real  plenipoten- 
tiary and  in  a  still  higher  degree  than  the  diplomatist  of  the 
days  before  the  telegraph.  Steam  and  electricity  in  reduc- 
ing distances  had  not  failed  to  bring  the  Member  under  the 
very  eyes  of  his  electors,  and  the  penny  morning  paper,  con- 

1  The  '■  I^ndnti  WBoliitionB  "  of  the  ilth  October,  IKH.  are  lo  this  effwl : 
.  .  .  Sercinclly,  "That  Members  rhciseQ  lo  lie  repieitcnlatives  In  Parliament 
ought  lodo  Buchlhinesas  their  oinstitiietits  wish  and  direct  them  to  do ''  .  .  . 
Fourthly,  "That  a  signed  enuairement  "hould  be  exacted  from  the  Member 
that  he  vould  at  all  times  and  in  all  things  act  con (onii ably  to  the  wishes 
of  his  constituents  (teliberfttelj  expressed,  or  would  at  their  request  resign  the 
trust  with  whiuhlhej  honoured  him"  (Annual  Jiegim  fr.lSa.  p.  300). 

*  A.  Alison,  Hinlory  of  Europe  from  1815  M  l>fSS,  Vol.  V,  p,  336. 


oy  Google 


FOURTH  CHAP.]     CANDIDATES  AND   ELECTIONEERING  406 

taining  the  report  of  the  sitting  of  the  House  which  had  finished 
overaiglit,  enabled  them  to  follow  events  in  all  their  kaleido- 
scopic changes.  The  electors  could  now  form  an  idea  of  tlie 
possible  solution  of  the  questions  under  discussion  before  the 
time  came  for  taking  a  decision  on  them,  and  watch  their 
Member  to  see  if  he  took  what  seemed  to  them  the  right  path. 
The  next  step  witli  many  electors  was  a  wish  to  show  him  the 
way.  The  communications  on  this  subject  addressed  to  M.P.'s 
became  more  and  more  common;  on  the  eve  of  important  divi- 
sions they  received  letters,  or  even  telegrams  begging  them  to 
vote  in  this  or  that  manner.'  For  a  long  time,  however,  the 
restrictions  on  the  Member's  freedom  to  do  as  he  liked  were 
weakened  by  the  fact  that  be  owed  his  seat,  in  a  great  measure, 
to  his  own  purse  and  to  the  efforts  of  his  personal  friends, 
who  swept  up  votes  for  him  by  fair  means  or  foul.  Besides, 
the  pressure  put  upon  the  M.P.'s  was  only  intermittent  and 
irregular. 

But  when  the  second  Reform  Bill  flung  millions  of  new 
voters  into  the  political  arena,  and  ideas  were  more  widely 
propagated  throughout  the  country  by  the  ever-spreading 
power  of  the  Press  and  by  other  means,  the  electoral  de- 
pendence of  Members  once  more  made  a  great  advance :  the 
growth  in  the  number  of  voters  who  watched  the  course  of 
events,  with  or  without  discernment,  meant  an  increase  of  the 
number  of  judges  whom  the  M.P.  had  to  face  in  the  person 
of  his  electors.  But  this  salutary  result,  while  imparting 
more  genuineness  to  representative  government,  of  which 
the  jealous  authority  of  public  opinion  is  the  very  essence, 
was  profoundly  affected  by  the  permanent  electoral  (Jrgan- 
izations  which  were  launched  about  the  same  time  under 
the  representative  and  democratic  fla^.  They  inevitably 
gave  a  rigid  form  to  the  new  relations  between  electors 
and  Members,  which  they  directed  into  an  uninterrupted 
and  regular  channel.  Constituting  themselves  guardians  of 
those  relations,  the  democratic  party  Organizations  assumed 
over  the  Members  and  even  over  the  candidates  for  Parlia- 
ment a  formal  authority,  which  tended  to  substitute  the 
supervision  of  warders  for  the  moral  control  of  free  opinion. 


.coy  Google 


tm  DBMOCHACT   AND   TOLmCAL   PARTIES     [third  part 

And  as  they  disiwsed  of  the  miicliinery,  the  assistance  of  which 
is  henceforth  imUspeiisable  to  all  those  who  court  the  popular 
suffrages,  they  were  able  to  muke  themselves  respected.  It 
will  be  remembered  that  there  was  opposition  at  the  outset. 
Powerful  personalities,  resolute  characters,  the  Forsters  and 
the  Cowens,  refused  to  bow  to  the  yoke,  but  the  great  mass  of 
politicians,  who  were  not  strong  enough  to  resist,  tacitly  acqui- 
esced in  it.  Then  on  the  first  important  occasion,  in  the  crisis 
caused  by  Mr.  Gladstone's  Home-Rule  Bill  (of  1886),  the  right 
which  the  Caucus  had  assumed  over  the  Members  was  again 
ehalleuged  for  a  time,  to  wit,  by  the  dissentient  Liberals  who 
appealed  from  the  Associations  to  the  electors.  Whatever  may 
have  been  the  success  of  the  Liberal  Unionists  at  the  poll,  they 
were  ail  turned  out  of  the  official  Lil>eral  party,  and  within 
its  precincts  the  caucuses  remained  supreme.  Their  authority 
is  now  recognized  and  accepted,  and  they  make  the  M.P.'s 
feel  it  to  a  degree  and  within  limits  which  vary  according  to 
the  persons  concerned  and  acconlhig  to  the  nature  of  the  elec- 
toral obligations  incumbent  on  or  imi>osed  on  the  Members. 

The  personal  servitudes,'  so  to  speak,  of  the  Members 
towards  their. constituents  are  of  three  kinds:  one  affects  the 
person  of  the  M. P.;  another  his  political  influence;  the  third 
his  political  conscience.  For  the  va.st  majority  of  electors  the 
deference  which  the  Member  owes  them  consists  of  appearing 
before  them  as  often  as  possible.  Formerly  the  Member,  after 
having  shaken  hands  with  almost  everybody  and  kissed  the 
babies  during  his  canvass,  was  free  for  the  whole  term  of  the 
Parliament,  and  disappeared  from  the  horizon  until  the  next 
general  election.  Xow,  the  electors,  more  imjireased  with 
their  own  imjwrtance,  require  tlie  M.P.  to  descend  from  his 
Uh'ni])us  and  come  amongst  them.  They  insist  upon  it  no 
doubt  from  a  desire  to  keep  in  political  touch  with  him,  but 
especially  from  feelings  of  pride  and  vanity  which  delight  in 
receiving  the  homage  of  persona  who  put  in  an  appearance  as 
at  a  court,  as  well  as  from  a  yearning  felt  by  many  a  bumble 
voter  for  material  possession,  so  to  speak.  They  want  ocular 
demonstration  that  the  Meml>er  really  belongs  to  them;   he 

'  We  arc  alrendy  acqualnteil  with  the  real  ac^rx'itddea :  thay  consist  of  Ihe 
■nbncrlplinns  10  th«  1<>cb1  inMitutians  of  pohllc  ntililvunil  to  the  Orgsaizalinn 
o[  tbe  parly,  cspeHally  towarda  regislrallou  exiiensva. 


.CD,  Google 


FOURTH  CH*p.]     CANDIDATES  AND  ELECTIONEERING  497 

must  exhibit  himself  to  them  in  flesh  and  blood,  talk  to  them 
for  hours  together,  exert  himself  physically  and  intellectually 
for  them.  And  the  Member  had  better  not  try  to  shirk  it,  the 
electors  are  not  accommodating  on  this  point  —  "  he  must  come 
down,"  "we  will  have  him."  The  Caucus  tries  to  gratify  them 
by  inviting  the  Member  to  meetings  or  "social"  gatherings 
which  it  organizes  for  this  purpose,  and  all  the  more  readily 
because  this  is  for  its  own  beneiit:  these  performances  of  the 
M.r.  stimulate  the  zeal  of  the  members  of  tlie  Association, 
rouse  their  "enthusiasm,"  strengthen  their  power  of  cohesion, 
apart  from  their  usefulness  in  cementing  the  relations  between 
the  electors  and  their  JVtember,  and  consequently  in  facilitating 
the  task  of  the  Organization  at  the  next  election. 

Far  more  important  is  the  share  of  the  Caucus  in  the  second 
servitude  to  which  the  Member  is  subject,  and  wJiich  consists 
in  rendering  personal  services  to  the  electors.  The  applica- 
tions made  to  the  M.P.'s  in  this  connection  are  rather  a  new 
trait  in  political  manners  due  to  the  extension  of  the  suffrage 
and  to  the  suppression  of  the  coarser  forms  of  electoral  corrup- 
tion. Giving  his  vote  gratuitously,  many  an  elector  holds  that 
it  is  only  right  that  his  Member  should  do  him  a  small  service 
when  opportunity  offers.  England  not  being  pre-eminently 
a  bureaucratic  and  centralized  country,  the  intervention  of  the 
Member  in  favour  of  his  constituents  has  not  the  same  weight 
as  in  certain  countries  of  the  Continent,  but  it  does  carry 
some.  The  fact  remains  that  the  M.P.'s  are  often  appealed 
to  for  assistance,  and  from  year  to  year  in  an  ever-increasing 
degree.  Their  correspondence  has  attained  alanning  propor- 
tions in  the  last  decade.  A  good  many  of  these  correspondents 
write  to  them  on  political  questions  of  the  day  or  on  local 
business,  but  the  majority  address  them  about  their  private 
affairs.  In  most  of  these  requests  the  caucus  of  the  locality 
intervenes  in  one  way  or  another.  The  caucus  often  backs 
up  the  applicant  and  gets  him  the  ear  of  the  Member.  An 
elector  who  is  in  trouble  invokes  the  good  offices  of  one  of  the 
high  dignitaries  of  the  Association,  of  the  President  or  Chair- 
man, or  if  he  is  not  acquainted  with  them  he  aaks  for  the 
secretary's  recommendation  in  his  capacity  of  adherent  of  the 
party.  If  the  elector  applies  direct  to  the  Member,  it  is  still 
the  caucus  which  very  often  gives  its  opinion  on  his  request; 


.coy  Google 


498  DEHOCRACr   AND   POLITICAL  PARTIES     [tbikdfakt 

for  the  M.P.  asks  it  for  particulars  of  the  applicant,  his  posi- 
tion in  the  party,  his  political  influence,  etc.  Nothing  can  be 
got  out  of  a  good  many  Members  without  the  caucus,  not  even, 
it  appears,  tickets  for  the  Strangers'  Gallery  in  the  House  of 
Commons.  Whenever  the  caucus  itself  takes  the  initiative  in 
asking  for  a  favour  for  one  of  its  members  or  adherents,  the 
M.P.  has  of  course  to  pay  it  particular  attention. 

But  it  is  mainly  in  the  sphere  of  politics,  of  the  political 
line  of  conduct  to  be  followed,  that  the  dependence  of  the 
Member  on  the  Organization  shows  itself  in  its  strictest  form- 
To  be  adopted  as  a  candidate,  he  has  already  had  to  give  the 
caucus  guarantees  of  his  orthodoxy,  to  sul»cribe  to  all  the 
items  in  its  programme.  But  agreement  on  principles  is  not 
enough  for  the  Organization,  it  does  not  allow  the  Member  a 
free  liaud  in  their  application;  he  must  comply  with  their 
wishes  on  points  of  detail  as  well.  The  zealots  of  the  caucus 
do  not  lose  sight  of  him  for  a  moment;  they  scrutinize  his 
votes;  they  weigh  his  words.  Composed  of  people  whose 
political  faith  is  more  ardent  than  reflective,  the  caucus  is 
almost  always  ahead  of  the  Member  in  the  matter  of  opinions, 
and  it  often  feels  the  need  of  stimulating  him,  of  keeping  him 
up  to  the  mark.  On  important  occasions  the  caucus  does  this 
with  some  solemnity;  it  passes  a  formal  "resolution"  request- 
ing the  M.F.  to  vote  in  such  and  such  a  manner,  to  take  up 
this  or  that  attitude.  However  extravagant  the  resolution 
may  be,  no  Member  can  venture  to  disregard  it.  He  must 
have  it  out  with  his  Association,  give  his  reasons  and  obtain 
approval  of  them.*  The  friendly  relations  which  the  Member 
maintains  with  the  big  men  in  the  local  caucus  make  this 
dependence  less  onerous;  sometimes  it  is  almost  disguised 
by  the  (mtente  cordiaie  between  the  Association  and  its 
nominee,  but  it  none  the  less  continues  to  exist  intact  and 

■  Some  tlm«  ago,  In  coDoection  with  a  measure  of  Ritghi  Importance,  but 
which  stirred  np  democratln  passlODS,  a  Member  who  bears  one  of  the  moM 
illustriouH  names  in  the  contemporary  hiflory  of  Liberalism,  received  fmm 
hit  Association,  like  many  t>[  liis  colieHKues  in  the  House,  an  Injunction  to 
vote  against  the  Bill.  Id  grvnt  embarrassment  he  consnlted  an  eminent 
pablii^Ut.  who  knew  his  constituency :  "  What  answer  am  I  to  send  them  ?  " 
—  "No  answer  at  all;  that's  the  beat  thing  yon  can  do."  Hie  advice  was 
followed.  "  He  could  afford  It,"  remarked  the  publicist  in  (elUag  me  the 
story,  "being  the  son  of  his  father;  bnt  anyone  else  would  not  hare  been  able 
to  do  It." 


.coy  Google 


FOCRTHCHiP.]     CANDIDATES  AND   ELUCTrONEERIKO  409 

inexorable,  ready  to  break  forth  at  the  first  shock.  The  pres- 
sure put  on  the  Member  seems  to  the  caucus-mea  all  the  more 
anobject  ion  able  because  they  are  not  promoting  any  personal 
interest  by  it  and  think  they  are  serving  a  oauae;  and  all 
the  more  legitimate  in  regard  to  the  particular  M.P.  be- 
cause he  owes  his  election  to  their  disinterested  exertions  as 
"workers"  made  for  reasons  of  the  same  order;  having  lent 
him  their  moral  resources,  they  consider  themselves  entitled 
to  a  mortgage  over  liis  conscience.  And  as  they  have  power 
to  foreclose,  the  Member  who  wants  to  be  re-elected  cannot  take 
a  high  tone,  the  instinct  of  self-preservation  restrains  him. 
From  time  to  time  he  perhaps  chafes  at  his  hit,  but  he  takes 
care  not  to  kick  over  the  traces;  for,  as  I  have  often  heard  it 
remarked,  "  to  quarrel  with  the  caucus  is  to  quarrel  with  the 
constituency."  The  times  of  heroic  resistance  have  gone  by; 
if  the  Member  finds  himself  hopelessly  at  variance  with  the 
caucus,  he  quietly  gives  up  the  game,  he  does  not  seek  re- 
election, at  least  in  the  same  constituency,  "  in  order  not  to 
go  against  his  party," 

Gases  of  serious  difference  on  points  of  opinion  and  conduct 
are,  however,  becoming  uncommon.  Being  no  longer  able  to 
l>e  master  of  his  ideas,  of  his  convictions,  the  Member  is  more 
and  more  inclined  to  do  without  them,  or  at  all  events  to  await 
an  impulse  from  outside  before  giving  them  shape  and  consist- 
ency. Tlie  habit  which  he  contracts  of  obeying  this  impulse 
makes  it  particularly  easy  for  the  M.P.  to  be  converted  to 
ideas  of  wiiich  he  was  or  thought  he  was  an  opponent  the  day 
before.  Hence  in  the  last  twelve  or  fifteen  years  the  Caucus 
has  been  able  on  many  occasions  to  record  conversions,  the 
number,  thoroughness,  and,  above  all,  rapidity  of  wliich  are 
sufficient  to  inspire  a  missionary  with  jealousy.  Dragged  at 
the  heels  of  the  Caucus,  with  but  little  space  left  for  his  own 
movements,  the  M.P.  is  getting  more  and  more  stripped  of 
his  old  character  of  representative  and  becoming  a  simple 
delegate,  a  clerk.  Tliis  is  especially  true  of  the  Lil)eral  party. 
In  tlie  Tory  party  more  latitude  is  allowed  to  the  M.P.'s;  the 
Conservative  Associations  do  not  dictate  their  votes  to  them 
in  a  peremptory  way.  They  refrain  from  this  probably  not  so 
much  out  of  philosophic  respect  for  political  freedom  of  con- 
science, as  from  a  feeling  of  hierarchical  deference  which  has 


.coy  Google 


000  DEUOCRACY   AND  POLITICAL    PARTIES      [thibd  fabt 

lingered  in  Tory  circles  longer  than  elsewhere.  But  there, 
too,  the  new  Organizations  which  hold  the  key  of  the  con- 
stituencies have  powerfully  contributed  to  lower  the  prestige 
of  the  M.  P.,  to  make  him  docile  and  submissive.  There  are  of 
course  constituencies  with  a  slack  political  life,  in  which  the 
pressure  put  on  the  MP.  is  confined  to  attacks  on  his  purse, 
to  frequent  applications  for  subscriptions  to  "  local  institu- 
tions," but  even  there  he  is  not  safe  from  contingencies  in 
which  his  political  conduct  would  be  challenged. 

Like  all  servitudes,  that  of  the  Caucus  has  its  compensations 
for  the  Member.  Long  before  the  Caucus  there  were  always 
in  every  constituency  some  personages,  very  few  in  number, 
who  exercised  a  commanding  influence  and  were  in  a  way 
the  makers  of  the  Member.  Much  freer  with  regard  to  them 
in  his  political  conduct,  he  was  less  so  in  his  personal  rela- 
tions, whereas  now,  thanks  to  the  considerable  number  of  the 
caucus-men  and  to  the  conditions  of  publicity  in  which  their 
authority  is  exercised,  the  personal  yoke  of  the  M.P.  is,  per- 
haps, less  burdensome  in  a  certain  sense.  Another  effect,  and 
a  more  important  one,  of  the  new  predicament  of  the  Member 
is  that  the  caucus  in  interposing  between  him  and  the  electors 
serves  him  as  a  shield.  It  does  not  allow  any  faultfinding 
with  the  Member  who  enjoys  its  confidence  within  the  ranks 
of  the  party.  Independent  criticism  by  isolated  persons  is 
Stifled  by  the  trusty  followers  of  the  caucus;  organized  as 
they  are,  they  constantly  mount  guard  around  their  man, 
preventing  discontent  from  breaking  out,  baflling  intrigues 
directed  against  the  M.F.  The  latter  reaps  the  benefit  of 
this  on  the  usual  terms  of  certain  despotic  governments:  less 
moral  dignity  but  more  security. 

Such  is  the  authority  which  the  Caucus  wields  over  the 
Member  as  far  as  its  power  goes.  Seeing  that  the  Caucus  is 
not  the  sole  factor  of  extra- parliamentary  political  life,  that  it 
is  far  from  covering  its  whole  area,  it  does  not  of  itself  exhaust 
the  outside  pressure  to  which  the  M.P.  has  been  subjected  since 
the  extension  of  the  suffrage  and  the  development  of  the  Press 
and  of  means  of  communication.  Public  opinion  which  weighs 
on  the  Member  acts  also  through  other  channels,  which  are  not 
always  very  distinct.  Exposed  on  all  sides,  the  M.P.  feels 
every  breeze,  from  whatever  quarter  it  comes.    An  individual 


.coy  Google 


FOitBTHCHAP.]     CANDIDATES   AND   ELBCTIONEEBING  601 

elector  who  writes  in  bis  own  name  to  the  Member  to  state  hia 
views  on  the  questions  of  the  day  —  and  the  case  is  not  an 
uncommon  one  —  is  by  no  means  considered  as  a  negligible 
quantity  by  the  M.P. ;  the  latter  will  not  throw  his  letter 
into  the  waste-paper  basket.  A  fortiori  any  group,  even  if 
non-politieal  in  character  and  objects,  commends  itself  to 
him,  impresses  his  mind,  and  perhaps  influences  his  conduct. 
Currents  of  opinions,  as  yet  perhaps  ill  defined,  do  not  pass 
over  the  constituency  without  an  attentive  Member  trying  to 
catch  them  and  take  them  into  consideration  if  need  be.  But 
however  manifold  and  varied  the  influences  brought  to  bear  on 
the  Member's  mind  may  be,  that  of  the  Caucus  is  the  moat  pal- 
pable and  the  most  considerable.  Whoever  has  a  vote  to  give 
can  press  claims  on  the  U.P.,  but  the  Caucus  is  his  principal 
creditor ;  it  holds  the  first  mortgage  over  this  heavily  involved 
debtor. 


.coy  Google 


FIFTH  CHAPTER 

THE  SUPREME  OOVEENHENT  IN  THE  CAUCUS 

While  generally  superintending  the  party  in  the  constituency 
and  wielding  in  it  supreme  authority,  which  aims  even  at  its 
constitutional  representative,  the  M.  P.,  the  Association  is 
nevertheless  not  an  autonomous  power.  It  forms  part  of  a  vast 
federation  which  extends  over  the  whole  country  and  which 
rises  on  the  base  of  the  local  Associations  with  a  central 
Organization  in  London  for  its  apex.  The  Federation  lives 
by  them,  but  the  force  which  it  derives  from  them  gives  an 
impulse  to  each  of  them.  The  ties  which  bind  them  to  the 
central  Organization,  as  well  as  the  nature  and  effects  of 
the  impulse  which  they  receive  from  it,  will  appear  from  the 
investigation  of  the  working  of  the  great  central  party  Organi- 
zations on  which  we  are  about  to  enter. 


The  Liberal  Federation  —  which  we  will  examine  the  first, 
as  the  moat  developed  type  of  the  English  caucus  system  — 
has  preserved,  with  a  few  unimportant  modifications,  the 
machinery  with  which  it  had  been  provided  from  its  start 
at  Birmingham:  the  deliberative  power  is  represented  in 
the  first  instance  by  the  Council,  or  general  assembly  of  the 
delegates  of  all  the  federated  Associations  and  of  the  Lib- 
eral Members  of  the  House  of  Commons  meeting  once  a 
year  and  constituting  the  parliament  of  the  party;  in  the 
second  place,  by  the  General  Committee,  formed  on  the 
same  basis,  but  composed  of  a  smaller  number  of  dele- 
gates, its  principal  duty  being  to  appoint  the  executive 
committee,  with  the  power  of  giving  it  instructions  from 
time  to  time  and  of  bringing  before  the  federated  Asso- 
ciations the  political  questions  and  measures  on  which  it  is 
desirable  to  unite  the  party.     The  Executive  Committee,  which 


.coy  Google 


yiFTBCiiAP.]     SUPREME   GOVERNMENT  IN  TOE   CAUCUS       503 

ninnages  the  business  of  the  Federation,  is  composed  of  some 
twenty  members  elected  by  the  "Genei-al  Committee,"  plus 
the  President  and  the  Treasurer  of  the  Federation  chosen  in 
the  plenary  assembly  of  the  delegates.  Side  by  side  with  the 
secretary's  office,  which  is  the  driving-wheel  of  the  Federa- 
tion (and  which  up  to  the  recent  retirement  of  its  celebrated 
founder,  Mr.  Schnadliorst,  was  the  Federation  personified), 
there  is  a  Publication  Department,  already  mentioned  above. 
Established  for  superintending  the  making-up  and  the  distribu- 
tion of  the  literature  of  tbe  party,  of  late  years  it  has  developed 
to  a  considerable  extent ;  while  continuing  to  publish  pamphlets 
and  leaflets,  it  has  become  an  office  of  political  information 
for  the  active  members  of  the  party.  It  is  a  sort  of  literary 
arsenal  which  supplies  them  with  ammunition,  for  defence  as 
well  as  attack.  The  speakers  of  the  party,  including  the  can- 
didates, when  at  a  loss  for  information  or  arguments,  apply  to 
the  Publication  Department,  which  refers  them  to  the  exist- 
ing publications,  and  especially  to  its  monthly  review  7%e 
Liberal  Magazine.  Cleverly  edited,  this  review  gives,  besides 
the  political  events  of  the  day,  extracts  from  speeches,  analy- 
ses of  Bills  laid  before  Parliament,  as  well  as  of  Blue  Books 
and  other  official  publications  with  figures  and  statistics;  re- 
plies to  questions  of  correspondents;  comments  on  speeches 
and  articles  in  the  Tory  Press,  etc.,  all  arranged  with  a  view 
to  the  interests  of  the  party.  To  arm  its  champions  with 
more  direct  weapons,  the  Publication  Department  supplies 
the  candidates  of  the  Associations  with  the  parliamentary 
record  of  every  Member  whom  they  may  have  to  fight.  These 
records,  which  state,  in  the  case  of  all  important  divisions,  if 
the  Member  has  voted  with  the  Ayes  or  the  Noes  or  if  he  has 
been  absent,  also  comment  on  the  vote  itself,  dwelling  especially 
on  the  pernicious  nature  of  the  vote  of  the  rival  party.'  At  by- 
elections  the  Department,  having  more  time  at  its  disposal, 
gives  the  candidates  of  the  party  more  extensive  assistance;  it 
provides  them  with  quotations,  sometimes  of  a  compromising 

'The  total!  of  the  majority  and  the  minority  are  accompanied  by  >ucb 
reflections  as  the  tolloTritig:  "  the  minurlt;  (Tury)  thns  votln);  for  Riving  an 
axceptional  piiTilege  to  landowners";  "  the  miaorltf  (Tory)  thus  voting  (or 
orippllng  the  powers  o(  the  Pariah  Council " ;  or,  '■  the  majority  <Tory)  thiu 
TotlDg  i^afnst  a  simplificatioD  of  the  law  mnch  desired  by  many  working- 


.CD,  Google 


(M  DEMOCRACY   ASD   POLITICAL  PARTffiS     [TniHD  pabt 

nature,  from  the  speeclies  of  their  political  competitors ;  it 
makes  up  with  all  speed  "political  literature"  auited  to  the 
occasion  and  to  the  particular  circumstances  of  the  constitu- 
ency, etc.  Occasionally  the  Publication  Department  gives  the 
voters  explanations  and  interpretations  of  new,  important 
laws,  in  the  form  of  publications  or  even  of  replies  to  private 
letters.* 

Besides  its  central  committees  and  its  Londoa  offices,  the 
Federation  has  a  dozen  or  so  district  agents,  each  placed  at  the 
head  of  a  group  of  local  Associations  as  supervisors  and  ad- 
visers on  party  organization.  Being  taken  from  among  the 
secretaries  of  the  local  Associations,  they  have  not  enough 
authority  nor  leisure  to  wield  any  real  influence. 

Legally  speaking,  this  Organization  does  not  extend  beyond 
England  proper  and  Wales.  Scotland  has  its  own  independent 
organization,  formed  on  national  lines,  of  the  same  type  as 
the  English  one :  the  local  Associations  are  combined  into 
a  separate  Federation,  with  the  title  of  Scottish  Liberal  Asso- 
ciation. The  strong  particularist  feeling  of  the  Scotch  has  not 
yet  allowed  the  National  Liberal  Federation  to  absorb  the 
organization  of  Scotland,  but  the  latter's  co-operation  can 
always  be  depended  on. 

Another  provincial  oi^anization  of  the  party  established  on 
a  national  basis  is  supplied  by  Wales  i  it  forms,  however, 
expressly  a  "divisional  branch"  of  the  National  Liberal  Fed- 
eration, In  England  proper,  there  are  also  three  or  four  local 
federations  covering  portions  of  the  territory  of  the  party 
Organization,  and  established  for  political  reasons  peculiar 
to  each  of  the  regions  in  question.  They  are;  The  London 
Liberal  and  Radical  Union,  which  includes  the  62  electoral 
divisions  of  the  metropolis  and  its  suburbs^  The  Home  Coun- 
ties Division,  comprising  the  eight  agricultural  counties  of 
southern  England,  known  by  the  name  of  the  Home  Counties; 
and,  lastly,  The  Midland  Liberal  Federation,  recently  created 
for  laying  siege  to  the  impregnable  fortress  of  Mr.  Chamber- 
lain, who  commands  all  the  Jlidland  counties.     But  all  the 

<  Tbii  ima  done  in  tbe  ca»e  of  the  Parlshea  Couacil  Act.  HsriiiK  pnbUabed 
a  Parish  Councillor's  Gnlde,  the  Publication  Department  tnvlted  readera  to 
write  to  It  [nr  iaformalinn.  and  this  offer  brought  it  more  tban  two  tbonauid 
letters.  The  Liberal  O^ptnization  alaogot  np  district  conferenoai  f or  ezplmin- 
in?  the  Act  lo  tbe  village  delegates  coDVened  [or  this  pllrpose. 


.CD,  Google 


FiPTHOBAP.]     SnPREMB   GOVERNMENT  IN   THE   CAUCUS      506 

federations  just  enumerated,  being  closely  affiliated  to  the 
National  Liberal  Federation  or  even  mere  branches  of  it,  fol- 
low its  lead  to  such  an  extent  that,  so  far  as  the  study  of  the 
working  of  the  central  Urganization  of  the  Liberal  party  is 
concerned,  they  can  all  be  brought  under  the  N.  L.  F.  with 
its  office  in  Parliament  Street. 

II 

The  Federation  has  undertaken,  it  will  be  remembered,  to 
serve  as  an  extra-parliamentary  organ  of  public  opinion,  to 
give  it  a  voice  and  thereby  force  it  upon  the  constituted  author- 
ities. Flowing  from  the  electorate,  the  currents  of  opinion 
are  to  gather,  in  the  first  instance,  within  the  local  Associa- 
tions representative  of  the  party,  to  be  finally  united  in  the 
central  Organization  which  is  representative  in  its  turn  of  the 
local  Associations.  While  taking  upon  itself  the  second  of 
these  two  successive  operations,  in  the  formation  of  public 
opinion,  the  central  Organization  has  to  help  to  bring  about 
the  first  so  far  as  is  necessary  for  the  better  attainment  of  its 
object.  In  consequence,  the  Federation  assumes  a  double 
part  —  local  and  national. 

Acting  locally,  the  central  Caucus  points  ont  to  the  Associa- 
tions, with  the  authority  attaching  to  its  position  and  to  the 
experience  of  its  staff,  the  beat  modes  of  action,  ofEers  advice 
on  their  formation,  on  improvements  to  be  introduced  into 
the  machinery  ;  it  gives  opinions  on  the  points  of  electoral 
law,  so  complicated  in  England,  which  crop  up  in  the 
practice  of  tiie  Associations.  It  does  not  wait  for  the  local 
Associations  to  apply  for  its  services,  it  forestalls  them, 
it  stimulates  their  zeal  for  the  good  of  the  cause  j  it  con- 
stantly draws  their  attention  to  the  necessity  of  being  ready 
for  the  electoral  contest,  to  the  paramount  importance  of 
registration  work,  and  to  the  need  of  unremitting  applica- 
tion to  the  propaganda  of  the  party  by  means  of  meetings, 
lectures,  and  distribution  of  literature.  If  the  local  Associa- 
tions were  full  of  energy,  the  intervention  of  the  central 
Organization  would  be  without  pretext  or  object;  but  a  good 
many  Associations  are  deficient  in  ardour  and  even  display  an 
apathy  which  ill  befits  militant  bodies.    Some  of  them  require 


.coy  Google 


50e  DEMOORACr   AND   POLITICAL   PARTIES     [raiW)  pabt 

to  he  constantly  pushed  on  and  stirred  up;  by  their  inaction 
they  justify,  from  the  standpoint  of  the  interests  of  the  party, 
the  intervention  of  the  grand  Caucus,  and  drive  it  into  exchang- 
ing the  part  of  friendly  adviser  for  that  of  regular  monitor. 
It  thruata  itself  also  on  the  other  Associations,  who  are  full 
of  zeal,  but  often  at  a  loss  for  means  of  action.  The  grand 
Caucus  provides  them  with  these  in  the  form  of  speakers, 
lecturers,  and  literature,  or  even,  on  rarer  occasions,  money 
subsidies.  There  are  but  few  constituencies  who  can  supply 
all  their  own  wants  of  this  kind.  The  local  speakers  are  not 
always  numerous;  anyhow,  they  have  not  always  prestige 
enough  to  please  the  audience.  Its  critical  taste  requires 
speakers  from  London,  real  M.  P.'s,  at  the  very  least.  The 
central  Caucus  procures  them  for  the  local  Association  at  its 
big  meetings.  It  also  supplies  it,  either  gratuitously  or  more 
often  at  a  reduced  price,  with  the  pamphlets  and  leaflets  which 
form  the  literary  stock-in-trade  of  the  propaganda.  It  has  a 
staff  of  lecturers  at  its  disposal;  it  despatches  the  travelling 
vans  over  the  country.  Lastly,  in  case  of  need,  the  Caucus 
can  even  get  the  Association  a  parliamentary  candidate,  and, 
if  the  latter  cannot  afford  to  pay  the  election  expenses,  fur- 
nishes him,  perhaps,  with  the  sinews  of  war. 

These  services  which  the  central  Organization  renders  or  is 
able  to  render  to  the  local  Associations  only  transform  them 
with  greater  certainty  into  satellites  of  the  big  Caucus. 
It  is  the  same  when  they  are  under  no  direct  obligations  to  it, 
for  knowing  it  to  be  up  above  watching  over  the  interests  of 
the  party,  they  become  imbued  with  a  feeling  of  gratitude  and 
of  confidence  towards  it,  which  is  only  enhanced  by  the  inertia 
peculiar  to  the  majority  of  those  whose  existence  is  passed 
within  a  limited  horizon.  Thus,  without  legal  subordination 
of  any  kind,  there  arise  between  the  central  Organization  and 
the  local  caucus  relations  of  authority  and  of  deference. 

The  intervention  of  the  central  Organization  in  the  choice 
of  the  candidates  takes  plaee  at  the  present  time  under  con- 
ditions differing  somewhat  from  those  of  the  old  days,  when 
the  organization  of  the  party,  prc^sided  over  by  the  Whip,  kept 
a  sort  of  depot  of  candidates.  Now,  as  with  the  development 
and  extension  of  the  political  market,  direct  relations  between 
candidates  and  constituencies  have  grown  up,  London  is  not 


.coy  Google 


FtrtaoHAp.]     SUPREME   GOVERNMENT  IN   THE   CAUCUS      607 

80  often  applied  to  foi  this  article.  Kevertheless,  the  paxt  of 
intermediary  played  by  tbe  central  Organization  is  still  very 
important;  one  candidate  out  of  two  is  recommended  from 
London.  The  qualities  which  go  to  make  a  good  candidate 
are  so  numerous,  and  are  complicated  by  so  many  local  con- 
ditions, that  they  are  not  easily  found  on  the  spot.  When  the 
party's  chances  of  success  are  not  very  great,  and  there  are  no 
looal  amateurs  —  as  the  state  of  affairs  is  only  too  well  known 
—  ready  to  engage  in  a  difficult  or  even  desperate  contest,  the 
good  offices  of  the  central  Organization  are  invariably  ap- 
pealed to.  The  rivalries  and  the  local  competitions  which 
prevent  the  Association  from  agreeing  on  a  candidate  also 
demand  the  intervention  of  head -quarters,  which  assume  the 
part  of  arbitrator. 

It  is  of  course  difficult  for  the  interposition  of  the  London 
organizers  to  confine  itself  modestly  to  these  duties.  In- 
stinctively inclined  to  extend  the  sphere  of  their  action  and 
of  their  influence,  they  try  to  go  beyond  the  limits  defined 
by  the  need  of  assistance  felt  by  tbe  local  Associations.  They 
are  lavish  of  their  advice,  abound  in  exhortations,  despatch 
one  circular  after  another.  But  it  is  especially  in  the  choice 
of  the  candidates  that  their  anxiety  to  run  the  party  manifests  ' 
itself.  The  central  Organization  always  has  candidates  to 
provide  for,  men  who  have  rendered  or  are  capable  of  render- 
ing services  of  one  kind  or  another  to  the  party,  and  it  seizes 
every  opportunity  of  introducing  them  into  the  constituencies. 
It  has  no  legal  power,  so  to  speak,  to  thrust  them  on  it,  for 
in  law  the  Associations  are  independent;  but  by  dint  of  clever 
manoeuvring,  of  wire-pulling,  it  often  succeeds  in  doing  so. 
Keeping  up  a  close  connection  with  the  local  wire-pullers,  it 
"  suggests  "  an  "  excellent  candidate  "  to  them  and  makes  them 
accept  him.  There  have  even  been,  it  appears,  cases  in  which 
the  central  Organization  haa  brought  regular  pressure  to  bear 
to  obtain  the  assent  of  the  influential  personages  in  the  Asso- 
ciation. Among  the  candidates  provided  for  by  the  wire- 
pullers of  the  central  Organization,  and,  for  the  most  part, 
strangers  to  the  constituencies  whose  interests  they  are  called 
on  to  represent,  there  are  eminent  men  who  cut  a  very  decent 
figure  in  the  House  in  the  discussion  of  general  questions  and 
who  certainly  contribute  to  the  reputation  of  Parliament.     But 


.coy  Google 


508  DEMOCRACy   AND   POLITICAL  PARTIES    [thihdpah* 

far  more  often  the  central  Organization  brings  into  the  House 
mediocrities  whose  sole  qualitications  are  their  wealth  and 
their  willingness  to  yield  a  blind  obedience  to  the  party  and 
ite  leader.  Amply  provided  with  the  sinews  of  war,  they  are 
not  only  formidable  opponents  for  their  competitors  on  the 
other  side,  but  they  can  contribute  handsomely  to  the  expenses 
of  the  central  Organization. 

The  latter  always  stands  in  great  need  of  this,  for  its  regular 
resources  which  tigure  in  its  official  accounts  are  extremely 
limited ;  each  affiliated  Association  has  to  pay  an  annual  sub- 
scription of  a  guinea;  in  addition  the  official  budget  of  the 
Whip  contains  a  certain  number  of  subscribers  at  four  guineas 
a  year.  The  total  of  these  receipts  barely  comes  up  to  seven 
OT eight  thousand  pounds;  again,  a  good  many  payments  made 
to  these  funds  are  only  nominal,  because  certain  Associations 
receive  from  the  central  Organization  subsidies  several  times 
greater  than  their  subscription.  In  any  event,  the  regular 
receipts,  while  perhaps  sufficient  for  defraying  current  ex- 
penses, can  never  be  adequate  for  intervening  with  efEect  in 
the  elections.  It  being  impossible  to  provide  all  the  constitu- 
encies with  rich  candidates,  the  Organization  has  to  contribute 
more  or  leas  heavy  sums  to  the  election  expenditure  of  the  can- 
didates who  are  poor,  but  whom  it  does  not  like  to  part  with, 
either  because  they  have  special  chances  of  carrying  hostile 
positions  and  of  swelling  the  ranks  of  the  party  in  the  Houae, 
or  because  they  can  be  useful  to  it  by  tiieir  talent  or  their 
reputation,  or,  again,  because  they  represent  more  or  less  un- 
common types,  as,  for  instance,  "Labour  Members."  Conse- 
quently, the  electioneering  fund  of  the  central  Organization 
must  necessarily  be  a  large  one,  and  it  is  so  more  or  less.  It 
is  impossible  to  form  an  idea  of  its  real  resources,  for  both 
receipts  and  expenditure  are  kept  a  strict  secret,  into  which 
a  handful  of  persons  only  are  initiated.  It  consists  of  dona- 
tions made  by  the  candidates  as  well  as  the  M.  F.'s  and  other 
wealthy  supporters,  of  whom  many  are  more  or  less  interested 
in  establishing  claims  on  the  head  organizers  of  the  party. 
The  Members  do  not  require  the  assistance  of  the  cen- 
tral Organization  as  much  as  the  candidates,  and  the  private 
patrons  of  the  party  have  no  need  of  it;  but  the  Organization 
is  able  to  procure  titles  for  all  of  them  when  the  party  is  in 


.coy  Google 


WWHOHAP.]     SUPREME  GOVERNMENT  IN  THE   CAUCUS      609 

power,  a  knighthood,  a  baronetof,  or  even  a  peerage.  There 
is  no  Radical  in  England  so  austere  as  to  be  able  to  resist  the 
temptation  of  a  handle  to  his  name,  no  more  than  his  Frenoh 
congener  can  withstand  the  seduction  of  a  red  ribbon.  If  the 
generous  zealot  of  the  party  does  not  himself  care,  or  per- 
suades himself  that  he  does  not  care,  for  the  prefii  of  "Sir" 
to  his  Christian  name,  his  wife  is  always  dreaming  of  eschang- 
ing  the  homely  appellation  of  "  Mrs."  for  the  two  raagio  sylla- 
bles of  "Lady," 

While  interfering  often  more  than  is  necessary  with  the 
local  Associations,  the  central  Organization  does  not  exert 
itself  enough  for  some  of  them.  Not  being  adapted  for 
missionary  work,  but  rather  for  pursuing  the  immediate 
and  tangible  success  of  the  party,  it  is  almost  obliged  to 
neglect  the  constituencies  in  which  the  chances  of  the  party 
are  nil  or  indifferent.  It  is  unable  to  find  candidates  for 
these  constituencies  or  speakers  available  for  addressing  their 
meetings.  Leaving  them  to  stew  in  the  juice  of  their  politi- 
cal infidelity,  it  directs  all  its  efforts  to  the  constituencies 
where  the  enemy  can  be  dislodged  or  his  majority,  at  all  events, 
pulled  down  enough  to  justify  raising  a  shout  of  "moral  vic- 
tory "  and  impress  the  crowd  by  the  noise  made  about  it. 

Ill 

Next  to  the  assistance  given  in  organizing  the  constituencies 
for  the  contest,  the  second  and  principal  duty  of  the  central 
Caucus  consists  in  ensuring  the  co-operation  and  the  unity  of 
action  of  all  the  contingents  of  the  party.  The  Caucus  under- 
takes to  produce  and  establish  these  by  means  of  its  federative 
machinery.  For  this  purpose  it  convenes  the  delegates  of  the 
affiliated  Associations  to  periodical  meetings,  in  which  they 
have  to  settle  the  programme  of  the  party,  to  recast  it,  to 
complete  it,  to  express  their  views  on  the  way  in  which  the 
government  of  the  country  is  being  conducted;  in  a  word,  to 
take  up  a  decided  line  with  regard  to  everything  that  concerns 
the  affairs  of  the  State.  These  national  assizes  of  the  party  are 
held  once  a  year  —  sometimes  in  one,  sometimes  in  another, 
provincial  town.  The  meeting  alone,  independently  of  the  de- 
cisions, important  or  not,  which  are  taken,  is  a  great  event 


.coy  Google 


610  DEMOCRACY  AND  POLITICAL  PARTIES    [tbibb  pi»t 

in  the  organized  party  life;  it  ia  tht  "demonstration"  to 
which  it  treats  itself  and  the  country.  It  attracts  not  only  a 
very  large  auinber  of  persons  flocking  from  all  parts  of  Eng- 
land, as  many  as  two  thousand  delegates,  but  the  "  bluest 
guDB  "  which  the  party  can  command.  The  great  leaders  of 
the  party  —  when  it  is  in  power,  the  Prime  Minister,  accom- 
panied by  some  members  of  the  Cabinet  —  do  nut  fail  to  en- 
hance the  importance  of  these  solemnities  with  their  presence 
and  to  procure  their  adherents  the  opportunity  of  affirming 
their  union  in  personal  loyalty  before  it  is  vouchsafed  to  them 
to  realize  it  in  the  domain  of  principles  and  of  ideas.  In  this 
last  sphere  an  agreement  is  arrived  at  by  means  of  rotes,  and 
in  no  way  by  discussion.  The  meetings  of  the  delegates,  sup- 
posed to  form  a  parliament  of  the  party,  are  not  deliberative 
assemblies;  they  simply  register,  ratify  decisions  taken  out- 
side them.  The  Executive  Committee  brings  up  the  resolu- 
tions to  be  voted,  which  it  drafts  of  its  own  authority  after 
having  ascertained  the  views  of  the  local  Associations.  At 
the  approach  of  the  annual  meeting  the  Committee  invites 
them  to  communicate  their  wishes,  to  be  used  as  a  basis  of 
the  resolutions  which  it  will  lay  before  the  general  assembly, 
where  they  have  only  to  be  "adopted  or  rejected."  The  fed- 
erative Associations  cannot  put  any  definite  proposal  on  the 
list  of  business,  and  the  assembled  delegates  have  still  less 
power  of  displaying  any  initiative.  In  the  view  of  the  leaders 
of  the  Caucus  the  sole  object  of  the  meetings  of  the  dele- 
gates is  to  proclaim  to  the  country  what  the  party  is  agreed 
on.  "It  is  not,"  explained  the  President  of  the  Federation, 
at  the  famous  meeting  at  Newcastle,  —  "  and  I  wish  to  be  par- 
ticularly clear  upon  this  point — a  meeting  for  the  discns- 
sion  of  subjects;"  the  delegates,  he  declared,  attend  not  to 
express  their  opinions,  but  to  ascertain  what  are  the  ques- 
tions which  the  Liberal  leader  can  take  up  with  the  certainty 
of  finding  the  Liberal  party  united  as  one  man  behind  him  ; 
the  subjects  for  discussion  have  been  sufficiently  elucidated 
beforehand  in  meetings  of  smaller  size  and  consequently 
better  suited  for  debating  purposes,  such  as  the  General 
Committee,  not  to  mention  the  local  Associations.' 

1  ProceedlnK*  of  the  National  Liberal  Federatioo,  1891,  pp.  42,  43.  tht 
Mme  declaratiaaa  have  been  repeated  oa  several  occaalona  b;  the  Preatdent  of 
th«  Federation . 


.coy  Google 


»1FTHCHAP.]     SUPREME  GOVERNMENT  IN  THE   CAUCUS      611 

This  system  of  preliminary  discussion,  whatever  may  be  its 
intrinsic  value,  has  not  worked  in  practice,  because  the  Gen- 
eral Committee  is  rarely  convened,  because  its  list  of  business 
is  settled  by  the  Executive  Committee,  and  because  the  local 
Associations  which  send  their  delegates  to  the  General  Com- 
mittee are  not  informed  of  the  matters  which  are  to  come 
before  it.*  Similarly,  the  annual  consultation  of  the  local 
Associations  to  which  the  Executive  Committee  applies  itself, 
and  by  which  it  pretends  to  be  guided  in  drafting  the  resolutions 
which  it  submits  to  the  big  assembly  of  delegates,  is  not  sub- 
ject to  the  free  control  of  the  party :  the  replies  of  the  Associ- 
ations are  not  published;  they  are  analyzed,  classified,  and 
interpreted  in  private;  the  power  of  the  Executive  Commit- 
tee which  undertakes  this  duty  is  therefore  a  discretionary 
one.  And  it  is  not  even  exercised  with  complete  independence 
of  mind.  Owing  to  the  constant  pieoccupation  about  the 
questions  which  the  "  Liberal  leader  will  be  able  to  deal  with," 
the  Committee  is  naturally  inclined  to  eliminate  the  opinions, 
the  views,  the  aspirations  which  are  perhaps  making  way  in  the 
country,  but  which  do  not  fit  into  the  groove  of  the  leaders. 
Hence  the  independent  Liberals  continue,  with  yearly  increas- 
ing vehemence,  to  set  forth  the  grievances  against  the  central 
Organization  which  have  been  already  referred  to';  to  wit,  that 
the  Liberal  Federation,  far  from  being  the  free  organ  of  the 
opinion  of  the  country,  is  dragged  at  the  heels  of  "of&cial 
Liberalism "  ;  that  it  simply  registers  decisions  taken  by  a 
handful  of  wire-pullers  in  Parliament  Street;  that  all  the 
resolutions  are  cut-and-dried  ;  that  discussion  is  stifled  at  the 
annual  meetings. 

The  reproach  which  is  continually  levelled  in  certain  ad- 
vanced liberal  circles  against  the  Federation  of  beiug  a  creature 
of  "  ofBoial  Liberalism,"  which  they  picture  to  themselves  in  the 
darkest  light,  rests  on  the  fact  that  it  is  formally  yoked  with 
the  factotums  of  the  "ofhcial  leaders."  In  fact,  the  central 
Organization  has  two  sign-boards  with  the  names  of  two  differ- 
ent masters.  It  will  be  remembered  that  in  the  course  of  the 
crisis  of  1886  the  popular  Organization  of  the  party,  having 

1  Since  IS9B,  the  Hit  ot  bnsiDesa  of  the  General  CoDiniittee  hu  been  communi- 
cated to  the  local  AuoclatioDB  a  short  time  before  It  meets. 
>  Bee  above.  Vol.  I,  pp.  W3,  3M. 


.coy  Google 


612  DEMOCRACT   AND   POLITICAL   PARTIES     [THimn  PiBT 

separated  from  Mr.  Chamberlain,  entered  into  a  coalition  witli 
the  leadership  represented  by  Mr.  Gladstone  and  the  other 
official  chiefs,  and  that  tliis  alliance,  which  brought  the  Cau- 
cus an  accession  o£  strength  and  prestige,  was  cemented  by  a 
material  arrangenient  which  placed  the  office  of  the  leaders, 
managed  by  the  Whip  of  the  party  and  known  by  the  name  of 
Central  Liberal  Association,  and  the  office  of  the  central  Cau- 
cus, under  one  and  the  same  general  secretary.  The  inde- 
pendent existence  of  both  organizations,  which  has  lasted  up 
to  the  present  day,  is  in  reality  a  fiction  (I  hav^e  therefore  in 
describing  them  used  the  single  term  of  central  Organiza- 
tion). Living  under  the  same  roof,  they  engage  in  the  same 
work,  under  the  same  inspiration,  not  only  in  concert  but 
identically.  The  splitting  of  the  official  title  only  serres  to 
save  appearances  for  acting  now  in  the  name  of  the  one,  now 
in  that  of  the  other,  and  also  for  procuring  certain  funds  more 
easily.  When  it  is  necessary  to  work  on  popular  feeling, 
to  bring  democratic  susceptibilities,  passion,  or  daty,  into 
play,  or  when  the  routine  of  the  organization  proper  is  con* 
cerned,  then  the  representative  Federation  signs  the  circu- 
lars or  the  instructions  addressed  to  the  local  Associations. 
When  it  is  a  question  of  "  suggestions,"  which  are  quite  out- 
side the  province  of  the  Federation,  or  of  cases  ad  Jtominem, 
in  a  word,  of  matters  which  cannot  bear  the  full  light  of  pub- 
licity, then  the  central  Association  is  supposed  to  spe^  or 
exert  itself.  Thus  the  candidatures  are  hatched  under  the 
wing  of  the  central  Association.  It  is  that  body  which  dis- 
tributes the  election  subsidies  to  the  champions  of  the  party. 
It  also  receives  the  secret-service  money  of  the  party,  without 
rendering  an  account  of  it,  whereas  the  Federation  has  its 
modest  budget  of  receipts  and  expenditure  audited  by  char- 
tered accountants^  and  publishes  the  figures  of  it  down  to  the 
pence  column.  Being  indivisible  in  the  public  mind,  which 
naturally  takes  its  cue  more  from  the  real  facts  than  from 
formal  distinctions,  the  influence  wielded  by  this  Oi^nization 
is  all  the  stronger  for  it:  having  two  strings  to  its  bow,  it  car- 
ries, without  their  being  aware  of  it,  one  set  by  the  authority 
of  the  leadersliip,  and  the  other,  which  is  refractory  to  it,  by 
the  prestige  of  the  democratic  Organization. 

It  is  evident  that  from  the  standpoint  of  electioneering  pre- 


.coy  Google 


?i»THCH*p.]    8DPRBMB  GOVERNMENT  IN  THE  CAUCUS      518 

occupations  the  party  lias  every  reason  to  be  satisfied  with  this 
arrangement;  that,  events  having  brought  about  the  eiiatenoe 
within  it  of  two  central  organizations,  both  possessing  their 
own  sphere  in  the  political  world,  it  is  better  that  they  should 
be  united  than  that  each  should  go  its  own  way.  But  it  is  no 
less  clear  that  it  is  ditHcult  for  two  organizations,  differing 
in  origin  and  temperament,  having  to  act  through  the  same 
central  organ,  to  be  each  perfectly  free  in  its  movements. 
Hence  in  practice  the  confusion  of  the  relations  between  the 
"official  leaders  "and  the  popular  Organization  shows  itself 
in  a  sort  of  irregular  see-saw:  at  one  time,  as  we  have  seen, 
it  is  the  leaders  who  influence  the  acts  of  the  Federation,  at 
another  it  is  the  Federation  which  weighs  upon  the  conduct 
of  the  leaders. 

However  this  may  be,  the  opposition  to  the  present  state  of 
things  in  the  central  Organization  is  growing  stronger,  and 
has  just  invaded  the  precincts  of  the  Federation  itself.  Em- 
boldened or  warned  by  the  defeat  of  the  party  at  the  general 
election  of  1895,  voices  were  raised  within  it  demanding  that 
"the  machinery  of  the  Federation  should  be  made  more  repre- 
sentative and  more  democratic. " '  To  meet  these  requirements, 
some  amendments  were  introduced  into  the  statutes,  with  the 
object  of  making  the  committees  and  the  Council  of  the  Fed- 
eration a  little  more  accessible  to  the  light  of  public  opinion, 
but  the  practical  import  of  these  concessions  can  only  be  felt 
as  time  goes  on.  In  any  event,  they  have  not  succeeded  in 
silencing  criticism  or  allaying  misgivings  even  among  otBcial 
representatives  of  the  local  Associations,  who,  at  the  last 
annual  meeting  of  the  Federation  (in  1897),  made  declarations 
to  this  effect,  the  moderate  terms  of  which  gave  them  still 
greater  significance.*  The  attempts  in  the  direction  of  getting 
the  Executive  Committee  chosen  by  the  general  vote  of  the 
delegates,  and  of  ensuring  full  liberty  of  discussion  for  all 

1  Proceedings  of  the  Bnna&l  meeting  of  the  N.  L,  F.,  IS96,  p.  32. 

'  "  .  .  .It  wAj  apparent  that  there  vaa  a  certain  desire  for  change  In  Ibe 
ranks  of  the  party  and  it  wsa  desirable  that  the  Executive  Commltfee  should 
oonsldei  whether  it  was  not  possible  (o  make  that  assembly  the  real  Parlla- 
maat  ot  the  Liberal  parly.  .  .  .  There  was  a  feeling  thtDUgb  tbe  coontry 
that  the  Federated  Associations  had  not  so  much  opportnnlty  as  they  onghC 
to  have  to  bring  nuilters  before  these  gatherings"  {Proceeding*,  1S9T,  pp. 
78,79). 

VOL.  I— 2l 


.coy  Google 


514  DEMOCRACY  AND  POLITICAL  PARTIES    [tbikd  pibt 

proposals  emanating  from  the  local  Associations,  have  up  to 
the  present  been  foiled  by  the  opposition  of  the  committees 
of  the  Federation,  whose  position  is  still  a  preponderant  one. 

IV 

This  absolute  power  of  the  heads  of  the  Federation,  and  their 
allies  the  "official  leaders,"  over  the  opinion  of  the  party  is 
nevertheless  considerably  impaired  in  practice,  for  this  twofold 
and  elementary  reason,  — that  opinion  can  never  be  usurped 
or  held  down.  When  once  it  has  reached  years  of  discre- 
tion, opinion  cannot  be  coerced;  it  surrenders,  it  yields  to 
seduction,  it  may  be  caught,  it  may  be  circumvented,  bat 
always  as  an  openly  or  tacitly  consenting  party.  On  the  other 
hand^  opinion  is  anything  but  steadfast  and  unchangeable. 
Headstrong  and  fickle  by  nature,  opinion  cannot  be  brought 
to  take  any  course  but  that  for  which  it  has  inclinations,  at 
all  events  of  a  latent  kind.  JHo  doubt  these  tendencies,  being 
of  the  moral  order,  can  be  and  are  fashioned  or  modified  by 
the  force  of  the  human  will  acting  on  men's  minds.  The 
different  intellectual  standard  and  political  energy  of  the  dif- 
ferent societies  offer  a  varying  resistance  to  this  action  from 
outside,  but  none  escape  it,  while  again  opinion  which  has  at- 
tained to  some  consciousness  of  its  strength  is  never  absolutely 
passive.  It  always  obeys  various  impulses;  at  one  time 
spontaneous,  at  another  external  and  more  or  less  artificial. 
It  is  at  once  a  capricious  despot  and  a  docile  slave.  Its 
mouthpieces  and  its  guides,  in  order  to  lead  it,  are  under 
the  necessity  of  following  it;  they  give  it  the  impulse  while 
receiving  it. 

The  present  state  of  English  political  society  implies  this 
twofold  play  of  forces  in  a  special  degree.  As  we  have 
already  realized,  with  the  great  mass  of  the  electorate  inde- 
pendence of  mind  is  far  from  being  the  predominant  qual- 
ity; an  Englishman  is  always  ready  to  look  up  to  "superior" 
men  who  impress  him  for  various  reasons.  But  we  have 
also  seen  the  progress  which  the  democratic  spirit  had  made 
in  the  wake  of  the  political  and  industrial  transformation;  we 
have  been  able  to  note  that  if  this  spirit  has  not  yet  made 
serious  inroads  on  the  national  character,  it  has  none  the  less 


.coy  Google 


FIFTH  CHAP.]    SUPREMK  GOVERNMENT  IN  THE  CAUCUS      ei6 

pTofonndly  affected  the  political  relations,  by  imparting  to 
them  an  aspect  of  equality  which  speedily  demanded  formal 
recognition,  beyond  the  limits  of  the  Constitution.  This 
was  precisely  the  import  of  the  movement  of  the  Caucus. 
If,  therefore,  the  passiveness  of  the  majority  leaves  the  taen 
who  have  taken  the  leaA  in  the  Organization,  the  wire-pullers, 
considerable  scope  In  the  management  of  the  party,  they  are 
no  less  compelled,  as  regards  the  use  to  be  made  of  their 
power,  to  feel  every  inch  of  the  ground  on  which  they  stand, 
to  regulate  their  pace  by  the  mood  of  their  adherents.  Con- 
sequently they  watch  the  state  of  feeling  in  the  ranks  of  the 
party;  they  follow  the  play  of  opinion  to  catch  its  decisive 
movemeots;  they  scrutinize,  they  appraise,  they  gauge,  the 
needs  and  the  aspirations  which  agitate  the  country,  to  enlist 
them  iu  the  service  of  the  party,  if  need  be,  and  to  introduce 
them  into  its  "platform."  Amid  the  incessant  fluctuation  of 
opinion  they  are  careful  to  distinguish  the  currents  which  may 
bring  an  accession  of  strength  to  their  side,  to  note  the  claims 
which  may  win  adherents  for  the  party  which  is  the  first  to 
admit  them  or  which  has  sympathized  with  them  in  any  way. 
This  ultimate  result  is  the  invariable  criterion  which  guides  the 
wire-pullers.  The  genuine  solicitude  for  the  public  interest, 
of  which  they  are  by  no  means  devoid,  inevitably  clashes  in 
their  mind  with  the  anxiety  inspired  by  the  next  general 
election:  being  in  charge  of  an  Organization,  they  consider 
every  political  problem  not  only  in  its  intrinsic  significance, 
but  also  and  above  all  from  the  electioneering  standpoint.  In 
this  delicate  task  which  devolves  on  the  wire-pullers,  the  ap- 
paratus of  the  Associations  with  their  successive  delegations 
is  but  of  little  use  to  them.  The  clear-sightedness,  the  strate- 
gic divination  and  conception,  and  the  resolution  of  the  big 
wire-pullers  point  out  to  them  their  line  of  conduct  in  a  far 
.  more  unerring  and  peremptory  way  than  do  the  Associations 
whose  democratic  forms  and  pretensions  they  use  only  as  a 
screen  for  their  operations.  It  is  their  own  initiative,  their 
perhaps  intuitive  penetration,  that  suddenly  rouses  a  question 
which  was  slumbering  in  the  political  conscience  of  the  nation, 
and  makes  an  electioneering  "cry  "of  it.  It  is  their  fertile 
brain  that  conceives  and  puts  into  execution  tactical  move- 
ments which  can  carry  votes  wholesale,  by  binding  to  the 


.coy  Google 


516  DEMOCRACY  AND  POLITICAL  PARTIES    [tbiid  pabt 

part;  a  whole  social  group,  a  whole  "  interest,"  through  an 
unexpected  stroke  which  becomes  a  maater-atroke  when  it 
succeeds;  as,  for  iustaace,  the  couveiiing  in  the  capital  of  the 
kingdom,  under  the  auspices  of  the  party,  of  a  congress  of 
rural  labourers  with  claims  and  grievances  to  urge  and  also 
votes  to  dispose  of. 

While  following  the  trend  of  opinion,  the  big  wire-pullers 
nevertheless  depart  from  it,  sometimes  unconsciously  and 
sometimes  consciously.  In  the  first  instance,  because  it  is 
not  possible  to  coincide  with  it  exactly,  its  path  being  any- 
thing but  clear  and  visible.  The  wire-pullers  who  follow  it 
are  inevitably  obliged  to  feel  their  way  to  a  certain  extent, 
and  are  liable  to  deviate  from  the  line  in  one  direction  or 
another.  Necessarily  they  complete  of  (hemselves  the  im- 
perfect data  supplied  by  information,  without,  perhaps,  being 
aware  of  it.  But,  on  the  other  hand,  they  anticipate  opinion 
deliberately ;  sometimes  the  public  interest  as  they  understand 
it,  or  considerations  of  party  strategy,  bid  them  introduce  into 
the  policy  of  the  party  elements  which  have  not  yet  found  their 
way  into  its  conscience  or  have  not  yet  taken  root  there.  Be- 
sides, with  the  great  majority  of  voters  nothing  ever  happens 
to  he  implanted  in  the  mind  at  the  right  moment,  ens  is 
always  too  soon  for  them.  And  yet,  in  all  these  cases,  what- 
ever may  be  the  cause  of  the  divergence  l>etween  the  real  state 
of  the  public  mind  and  the  policy  decided  on  by  the  wire- 
pullers, success  is  impossible  without  the  assent  or  complicity 
of  opinion:  if  they  do  not  meet  with  sufBcient  eucour^ement 
from  it,  the  problems  or  solutions  put  forward  may  damage 
rather  than  promote  the  unity  and  cohesion  of  the  party,  and 
even  throw  its  ranks  into  confusiou.  To  secure  the  agreement 
that  is  lacking,  or  at  least  to  pi-esent  a  semblance  of  it,  the 
central  Organization  undertakes,  when  time  allows,  what  is 
called  the  education  of  opinion  on  the  matter.  This  process 
consists  of  starting  an  agitation  on  the  points  in  question. 
The  means  of  action  are  the  ordinary  ones  of  the  propaganda 
of  the  Caucus,  only  worked  at  higher  pressure.  The  Organiza- 
tion, which  is  a  fighting  machine,  likes  to  hit  hard,  and,  above 
all,  to  make  a  great  noise  so  as  to  deeply  impress  the  public 
mind  and  imagination.  It  uses,  on  the  one  hand,  the  ma- 
chinery of  the  local  Associations  by  making  them  hold  simul' 


.coy  Google 


FiifTiieiiAP.]     SUPREME  GOVERNMENT   IN   THE   CAUCUS      617 

taneouB  meetings,  rote  resolutions,  etc.;  od  the  other  hand, 
it  acts  by  itself  in  addressing  the  public  directly;  it  launches 
manifestoes;  organizes  great  demonstrations  with  the  fore- 
moat  speakers  of  the  party  as  chief  performers,  or  stump  tours 
ot  the  great  leaders  of  whom  it  constitutes  itself  in  a  way 
the  showman;  convenes  special  conferences  of  the  local  dele- 
gates, etc. — all  this  irrespective  of  the  political  literature 
devoted  to  the  questions  at  issue  and  distributed  in  the  usual 
fashion. 

The  agitation  thus  carried  on  from  above  does  not  revolve 
solely  around  great  problems,  of  an  organic  nature  so  to  speak, 
which  constitute  the  platform  of  the  party.  While  establish- 
ing unity  by  a  common  programme,  in  which  are  represented 
the  various  fractions  of  Liberal  opinion  with  their  claims  to  be 
realized  at  a  more  or  less  early  date,  the  central  Organization 
endeavours  to  produce  the  same  unanimity  in  the  party,  and  by 
the  same  means,  on  tlie  questions  of  the  moment,  on  the  events 
of  the  day.  Standing  on  high  ground  and  observing  the 
march  of  afEairs,  the  Organization  mounts  guard  over  the  in- 
terests of  the  party.  It  watches  all  the  doings  of  the  rival 
party  and,  on  the  first  serious  incident,  gives  the  alarm  for 
raising  its  adherents  throughout  the  country. 


By  strengthening  and  bringing  into  prominence  the  una- 
nimity of  political  sentiments  within  the  party,  the  Organiza- 
tion tends  ipso  facto  to  exert  pressure  on  the  conduct  of  those 
who  are  outside  its  ranks,  on  the  body  of  the  voters  in  general, 
and  eventually  on  Parliament,  on  the  majority  and  the  Op- 
position with  their  respective  leaders.  Indeed,  the  action  is 
the  same,  it  is  indivisible,  and  it  is  only  logically  that  it  can 
be  decomposed  according  to  its  objectives,  which  are  mani- 
fold. For  it  is  the  property  of  opinion  to  grow  like  an 
avalanche.  But  besides  the  first  impulse  which  starts  it, 
there  is,  with  regard  to  the  human  substance,  another  factor, 
to  wit,  the  conscience  of  the  living  beings  who  constitute  it 
and  who  require  to  sefe,  to  feel  the  mass  gather  and  ac- 
cumulate before  they  adhere  to  it.  The  sole  object  of  the 
agitation  carried  on  by  the  Organization  is   to  demonstrate 


.coy  Google 


618  DEMOCRACT  AXD  POLITICAL  PARTIES    [third  pa«t 

this  over  and  over  again  ;  that  is  to  say,  to  make  the  nu- 
merical strength  of  the  party  felt  by  all  those  whom  it  has 
in  view,  beginning  with  its  native  surroundings  which  it 
looks  on  as  its  private  preserves,  and  ending  with  the  upper 
spheres  of  the  rulers  and  the  legislators.  In  proportion 
as  it  unfolds  itself,  the  demonstration  gradually  increases 
in  volume  aUd  effectiveness.  To  the  factors  which  are  striv- 
ing on  the  spot,  in  each  constituency,  to  close  up  the  ranks  of 
the  party  and  to  make  the  "enthusiasm  "  in  them  more  intense 
and  more  conspicuous,  the  central  Organization,  extending  its 
operations  above  the  whole  country,  brings  its  own  prestige 
with  that  of  the  leaders  of  the  party  who  publicly  connect 
themselves  with  it.  Cleverly  worked  np  with  the  leaven  of 
"enthusiasm,"  the  various  manifestations,  inspired  or  directed 
hy  the  head  wire-pullers  and  started  in  several  places  at  once 
or  on  a  very  large  scale,  are  calculated  to  rouse  the  great 
mass  of  the  indifferent  and  the  neutral  throughout  the  country. 
The  appearance  of  a  display  of  strength,  obtained  mainly  by 
the  noise  produced.  Impresses  the  waverers,  the  apathetic,  the 
men  with  no  oonvictions,  the  cowards  who  always  side  with 
the  strong,  and  even  intimidates  avowed  opponents.  If  these 
latter  are  but  rarely  converted,  they  can  be  easily  made  to 
stand  aside  or  slacken  their  speed  under  the  bewildering  din 
of  invective  and  threats  of  the  popular  verdict,  which  often 
nobody  can  state  or  foresee.  The  smaller  the  power  of  clearly 
distinguishing  the  voice  of  the  people  to  which  everybody  ap- 
peals, the  greater  the  readiness  to  be  influenced  by  the  huhbab 
amid  which  it  is  supposed  to  speak.  The  great  point  is  to 
make  the  uproar  as  loud  as  possible.  For  producing  this 
effect  the  caucuses  are  invaluable.  From  the  standpoint  of 
the  London  wire-pullers  that  is  the  raisoa  d'itre  of  the  Asso- 
ciations scattered  over  the  face  of  the  country.  Being  accus- 
tomed to  obey  the  impulse  of  the  central  Organization,  they 
answer  it  as  an  echo  answers  the  voice.  The  wire-pullers  can 
thus  open  lire  along  the  whole  line  at  a  given  moment;  they 
"slip"  the  Associations  to  produce  "national  protests,"  "na- 
tional declarations,"  "popular  mandates."  The  Associations 
need  not  even  exert  their  literary  powers;  often  they  receive 
from  head-quarters  the  actual  draft  of  the  resolution  about  to 
be  voted  with  enthusiasm.     In  a  very  short  time  the  post  or 


.coy  Google 


PIFTUCHAP.]     SUPREME   GOVERHMENT  IN  THE  CAUCUS      619 

the  telegraph  will  have  brought  back,  in  a  lump,  the  resolu- 
tions voted,  and  then  it  can  be  said,  in  a  tone  of  triumph,  that 
the  "country  has  spoken,"  that  the  "great  voice  of  the  nation 
has  given  forth  no  uncertain  sound." 

Opinion  is  thus  turned  out  at  will  by  the  parties  in  propor- 
tion to  the  requirements  of  the  war  which  they  wage  on  each 
other,  and  of  which  it  is  the  sinews.  In  the  days  when  power 
was  gained  and  kept  by  material  force  alone,  it  was  the  old- 
fashioned  sinews  of  war  which  supplied  it;  and  when  cash 
ran  short  it  was  provided'  either  by  debasing  the  currency, 
or,  later  on,  as  civilization  progressed,  by  issuing  paper 
money.  Nowadays,  mercenary  troops  are  powerless  to  uphold 
a  government.  Swiss  guards  can  no  longer  protect  a  regime. 
It  is  by  the  play  of  opinion  that  policies  are  settled.  But 
here  again  we  -find  the  leaders  trying  to  obtain  the  new 
sinews  of  war  as  expeditiously  as  the  old:  they  manufacture 
opinion  just  as  paper  money  was  issued,  only  by  a  much 
improved  process.  The  Caucus  with  its  branch  establish- 
ments is  the  bank  of  issue  of  this  new  paper  currency, 
which  supplements  and  reinforces  the  operations  of  the  other 
modem  circulating  medium  of  moral  energy,  the  Press.  The 
success  of  these  issues  is  ensured  by  the  very  conditions 
governing  the  formation  and  play  of  opinion,  in  which  reality 
and  convention  interpenetrate,  engender  each  other,  and 
blend  into  one  another.  By  the  mere  fact  of  proclaiming 
views,  whether  genuine  or  not,  you  create  them  in  others,  nay 
more,  you  express  the  opinions  of  a  number  of  people  who 
have  none  at  all  and  who  hasten  to  acknowledge  them  as  their 
own  directly  they  are  put  forward.  The  source,  the  real 
nature  and  tiie  value  of  the  mass  of  floating  views  may  not  be 
discerned,  at  least  not  by  the  common  herd.  However,  to 
keep  to  the  language  of  tinance,  when  put  in  circulation  they 
are  like  the  paper  currency  supposed  to  represent  specie. 
The  sole  point  is  to  get  as  much  of  it  as  possible  taken  up,  in 
other  words,  to  make  the  strongest  impression  on  the  crowd. 
True,  the  limits  of  the  operation  are  marked  by  the  relation 
in  which  the  real,  genuine  opinion  stands  to  the  artificial, 
machine-made  element  which  the  aforesaid  manifestations 
present.  If  the  divergence  between  these  is  too  great,  the 
agitation  started  may  fall  flat  and  the  wire-pullers  perceive 


.coy  Google 


620  DBMOCRACT  AND  POLITICAL  PARTIES    [ntiw.  pam 

when  too  late  that  they  had  presumed  too  much  on  machinery, 
or,  to  revert  to  the  currency  metaphor,  that  they  bad  made  a 
larger  issue  thaa  the  market  could  stand  in  apite  of  its  power 
and  habit  of  absorption. 

Subject  to  this  reservation,  the  machine-made  manifestations 
of  opioioa  always  take  effect  more  or  less.  And  what  is 
more  remarkable,  they  impose  not  only  on  the  mob  but  on 
the  party  cliiefs,  bo  much  so  that  the  latter,  Ministers  or 
leaders  of  the  Opposition,  seek  in  them  a  stimulant  for  their 
energy  and  their  will.  Often,  to  "strengthen  the  hands  of 
the  leaders,"  the  wire-pullers  set  the  machine  of  the  Organiza- 
tion in  motion,  and  produce  manifestations  in  their  favour. 
At  a  signal  given  from  head-quarters  the  addresses  and  resolu- 
tions voted  by  the  local  caucuses  begin  to  pour  in,  all  protest- 
ing their  "unabated  confidence,"  their  "unswerving  loyalty," 
their  strong  condemnation  of  their  opponents,  and  urging  the 
leaders  to  persevere  in  the  course  adopted,  to  pursue  the  enemy 
into  his  last  intrenchments,  etc.  At  the  first  blush  it  seems 
odd  that  the  leaders,  who  know  what's  what,  should  attach 
importance  to  factitious  demonstrations.  If  there  is  no  logi- 
cal reason  why  they  should  be  impressed  with  manifestations 
brought  about  by  themselves,  there  are  psychological  reasons, 
residing  in  the  sensitiveness  peculiar  to  men  who  are  hahitn* 
ally  before  the  public.  It  is  a  well-known  fact  that  several 
artists  who  have  earned  undying  fame  on  the  stage  bad  an 
imperious  need  of  the  accompaniment  of  the  daque  to  keep 
up  to  their  usual  level  of  performance.  In  the  present  con- 
ditions of  political  life  politicians,  who  are  not  always  great 
artists,  are  still  less  able  to  dispense  with  this  sort  of  applause. 
Tlie  organization  of  the  Caucus  supplies  it,  in  this  instance 
again  concurrently  with  the  Press  of  the  party.  The  nervous 
reaction  which  it  produces  in  the  party  leaders  is,  in  their 
case  especially,  the  effect  of  the  play  of  the  machinery  of 
opinion,  already  repeatedly  noticed;  that  is  to  say,  of  the 
branching  off  of  the  feelings  to  which  its  manifestation  gives 
rise.  Aroused  at  the  instigation  of  the  leaders,  these  feel- 
ings to  a  considerable  extent  lose  their  real  character  in  their 
conscience  as  soon  as  they  break  forth.  It  is  no  longer  the 
applause  of  the  claque  that  the  chiefs  think  they  hear,  but  the 
beating  of  hearts  which  throb  spontaneously  and  freely  in  uni- 


.coy  Google 


riFTHCHAP.]    SUPREME  GOVERNMENT  IN  THE  CAtTCnS      521 

son  with  their  own.  In  all  sincerity  they  become,  in  a  great 
measure,  dupes  of  the  illusion  which  they  had  helped  to  create, 
under  the  influence  of  the  same  reflex  movement  which  runs 
through  the  whole  of  opinion,  presenting,  in  the  caprice  and 
confusion  of  its  undulations,  its  sole,  unvarying  phenomenon, 
perhaps  its  only  rule,  and  which,  after  having  swayed  the  mul- 
titude hither  and  thither,  achieves  its  greatest  triumph  in  the 
mind  of  the  leaders.  It  is  then  evident  that  the  greater  the 
ease  with  which  the  leaders  can  set  in  motion  the  apparent  play 
of  opinion,  the  more  easily  is  this  psychological  effect  with  all 
its  illusory  and  chance  character  produced  in  themselves.  The 
machinery  of  the  Caucus  has  supplied  them  with  both  facilities 
in  an  unprecedented  degree ;  for  in  endeavouring  to  enclose  and 
dam  up  the  vague  and  floating  elements  of  opinion,  it  seemed 
to  provide  a  means  of  gauging  it  without  possibility  of  error. 
The  history  of  the  Caucus  in  England  has  shown  us,  however, 
that  mistakes  might  none  the  less  occur.  It  will  be  remem- 
bered how  Mr.  Gladstone  learnt  this  to  his  coat,  when  he  con- 
cluded from  the  noisy  manifestations  of  the  caucuses  in  favour 
of  his  Home-Bule  Bill  of  1886  that  the  whole  of  Liberal  opin- 
ion in  the  country  was  on  his  side. 

The  pressure  which  the  Organization  exerts  by  bringing  the 
force  of  opinion,  which  it  is  supposed  to  command,  to  bear  on 
the  great  mass  of  the  party,  then  on  the  body  of  the  electors 
in  general,  and  lastly  on  the  leaders,  attains  its  climax  when 
it  reaches  the  M.P.'s,  the  Members  of  Parliament  belonging 
to  the  party.  More  or  less  indirect  and  moral  up  to  that 
point,  it  here  becomes,  one  may  say,  immediate  and  almost 
mechanical.  The  mode  of  procedure  ia  the  same :  the  central 
Organization  in  important  cases  sets  the  local  Associations, 
the  respective  caucuses,  on  the  M.P.'s.  Singled  out  from 
the  multitude,  the  Member  finds  himself  alone  with  his 
Association  and  made  to  stand  and  deliver,  so  to  speak. 
Holding  his  parliamentary  mandate  from  it  in  the  first  in- 
stance, he  is  driven,  by  a  feeling  of  self-preservation,  more 
or  less  automatically  into  obedience,  when  at  a  signal  from 
head-quarters  the  "  hundreds  "  or  their  committee  direct  him 
to  take  one  side  or  the  other  in  the  House,  to  vote  for  this  or 
that.  It  will  be  remembered  how  successful  the  Caucus  has 
been,  on  many  occasions,  in  bringing  refractory  or  wavering 


.coy  Google 


G22  DEMOCRACY  AND  POLITICAL  PARTIES     [thim>pabt 

Members  to  reason.  Completely  identified  with  the  official 
leaders,  the  Organization  exerts  this  pressure  for  their  benefit, 
sometimes  on  the  iaitiatire  of  the  Whip,  both  as  regards  the 
whole  body  of  Members  belonging  to  the  party,  in  serious 
emei^ncies,  as  well  as  the  individual  M.F.'s  whose  loyalty 
has  fallen  off.  It  helps  io  this  way  to  maintain  discipline  in 
the  parliamentary  party,  "to  keep  them  in  order,"  that  is  to 
say,  obedient  to  the  leader,  and  gives  the  last  touch  to  the 
unity  of  the  party,  which  it  constantly  keeps  in  view  from  one 
end  of  it  to  the  other,  beginning  with  the  lowest  grade,  the 
ward  or  the  polling  section  in  the  electoral  Division. 

Developed  and  wielded  behind  the  scenes,  and  being  a  sort 
of  occult  power,  the  influence  of  the  central  Organization  is 
naturally  not  acknowledged  to  its  full  extent  by  those  con- 
cerned; and  sometimes  even  in  spheres  other  than  those  of 
the  wire-pullers  there  is  a  proneness  to  deny  or  underrate  it. 
Some,  whose  personal  position  in  politics  protects  them  from 
all  confiict  or  friction  with  the  Organization  of  the  party  and 
keeps  them  at  a  distance  from  the  wire-pulling  manipulations, 
sincerely  believe  its  influence  to  be  less  troublesome  and  less 
encroaching  than  it  really  is;  whereas  others  put  it  below  its 
real  value  from  the  feeling  of  lofty  disdain  by  which  people, 
more  or  less  consciously,  take  revenge  on  the  power  of  rank, 
of  influence  or  wealth,  which  must,  however,  be  bowed  to 
when  met  face  to  face,  and  perhaps  obsequiously.  The  truth 
is,  that  up  to  a  very  recent  period  the  Federation  profited 
largely  by  the  unexampled  influence  of  Mr.  Gladstone's  leader- 
ship, as  a  member  of  the  great  firm  in  which  the  illustrious 
chief  was  the  senior  partner;  and  that,  on  the  other  hand, 
considered  in  itself,  the  O^anization  reposes  on  an  "unstable 
equilibrium,"  due  to  its  having  been  in  existence  for  so  short  a 
time,  and,  above  all,  to  the  varying  source  of  its  influence, 
which  proceeds  from  the  acquiescence  of  opinion.  But  as  long 
as  this  is  dammed  up  in  the  local  Associations,  the  Federation 
is  pretty  well  able  to  regulate  the  flow  of  it,  at  least  in  times 
of  calm.  In  the  hour  of  storm,  when  the  national  mind  is 
deeply  moved  in  a  particular  direction,  the  Federation  would 
be  powerless  to  breast  the  current,  all  its  wire-pulling,  all  its 
prestige  with  the  caucuses  would  be  exerted  in  vain. 


.coy  Google 


riTTHciiJLP.]    SUPREME  GOVERNMENT  IN  THE  CAUCUS      528 

VI 

Almost  all  that  has  just  been  said  about  the  central  Organi- 
zation of  the  Liberal  party  is  equally  true  of  that  of  the  Cod- 
servative  party.  There  are,  however,  considerable  differences 
both  in  form  and  substance.  The  machinery  of  the  central 
Tory  Organization  is  constructed  on  the  same  type;  first 
of  all,  a  federal  assembly  and  a  federal  council  which  repre- 
sent the  federated  local  Associations,  to  wit,  the  National 
Union  of  Constitutional  and  Conservative  Associations.  The 
former  meets  once  a  year;  the  other  is  permanent.  Both  of 
them  emanate,  by  election  and  through  successive  delegations, 
from  Conservative  opinion  in  the  country  aa  embodied  in  the 
Associations  and  the  clubs,  beginning  with  those  of  the  ward 
or  the  polling  section.  But  side  by  side  with  these  popular 
powers  there  is  another  which  is  not  elective  and  which  holds 
a  very  important  position  in  the  head-quarters  of  the  party, 
as  is  the  case  in  the  Liberal  Organization.  An  analogous  his- 
torical process  has  brought  about  the  same  dualism  in  both 
organizations.  As  long  as  the  parliamentary  leaders  of  the 
Conservative  party  held  undivided  sway  in  the  country,  they 
ruled  it  from  London,  from  the  Central  Conservative  Office 
managed  under  their  authority  by  the  Whip.  When  the 
democratic  principle  penetrated  the  provincial  organizations 
and  the  latter  were  reformed  or  established,  at  the  instigation 
of  Lord  Randolph  Churchill  and  hie  friends,  on  an  elective 
and  popular  basis,  their  central  organ,  the  National  Union, 
arose  as  a  rival  to  the  Central  Conservative  Office  and  disputed 
the  management  of  the  party  with  it.  It  will  be  remembered 
that  the  struggle  between  the  leaders  and  the  democrats  did 
not  produce  a  decisive  victory  for  either,  and  ended  by  a  com- 
promise which  divided  the  influence  in  the  government  of  the 
party  outside  Parliament  between  them.  The  policy  of  the 
party  remained  in  the  hands  of  the  leaders,  while  local  organi- 
zation had  devolved  on  the  popular  Associations  with  their 
Union.  The  power  formally  conceded  to  the  latter  and  up- 
held by  the  democratic  tendencies  of  the  large  provincial  towns, 
soon  received,  however,  a  formidable  blow,  caused  by  iiie  fall 
of  Lord  Randolph  Churchill.  His  split  with  Lord  Salisbury 
and  his  colleagues  on  the  Treasury  Bench  having  turned  to  the 


.coy  Google 


524  DEMOCRACT  AND   POLITICAL  PARTIES     [roraD  part 

advantage  of  the  leaders,  the  star  of  the  National  Union  paled 
and  the  Central  Conservative  Office  resumed  the  reins  of  the 
government  of  the  party  with  renewed  vigour. 

Following  the  arrangement  adopted  in  the  Liberal  head- 
quarters, both  organizations  hare  been  united  in  the  person  of 
a  common  general  secretary  ^  the  head  of  the  Central  OfBce, 
known  in  ordinary  parlance  as  the  "chief  Conservative  agent," 
is  honorary  secretary  of  the  Federation  of  Conservative  Associ- 
ations. But  there  has  not  grown  up  such  a  close  connection 
between  the  two  as  that  which  exists  in  the  Liberal  O^aniza- 
tioD  between  the  popular  Federation  and  the  leaders.  The 
Tory  leadership  is  still  in  the  hands  of  supercilious  aristocrats 
who  dislike  identifying  themselves  completely,  even  in  appear" 
anoe  only,  lowering  themselves  (to  use  an  expression  which 
reflects  their  sentiments)  with  the  popular  Organization.  If 
they  And  themselves  obliged  to  adopt  a  democratic  poUoy,  in 
order  to  meet  the  Radical  competition,  they  indemnify  them- 
selves  somewhat  by  their  behaviour  to  the  members  of  their 
party.  They  can  largely  afford  it,  considering  the  prestige 
which  the  leadership  still  enjoys  in  Tory  circles.  True,  they 
are  no  longer  able  to  disregard  the  new  forces  embodied  in  the 
caucuses  of  their  party ;  they  are  bound  to  take  them  into  seri- 
ous account,  even  in  matters  of  form,  but  after  all  their  own 
strength  still  weighs  heavy  in  the  balance.  The  great  leaders 
of  the  party  and  their  agents  of  the  Central  Office  are  there* 
fore  only  too  ready  to  regard  the  Union  with  a  certain  con- 
descension, as  a  not  precisely  subordinate  but  more  or  less 
auxiliary  organization,  good  for  helping  in  the  rough  work 
of  organization  proper.  All  the  more  important  business 
is  transacted  in  the  Central  Office  alone,  the  representatives 
of  the  Union  not  being  initiated  into  or  consulted  upon  it.  It 
is  there  that  the  candidatures  are  concocted,  that  decisions  are 
taken  on  the  personal  rivalries  and  the  divergences  which  arise 
here  and  there  within  the  party,  always,  however,  subject  to 
the  submissive  inclinations  of  the  constituencies  concerned, 
where  the  new  spirit  of  independence,  developed  with  the  popu- 
lar Associations,  assigns  limits  to  intervention  from  above.'    It 

1  The  local  resistance  offered  to  head-quartors  sometimes  breaks  out  with  a 
flercenesa  ot  which  the  old  Tory  leaders  o(  Hie  pre-caiicufi  period,  verj  recent, 
bovever,  coald  not  have  lormed  an  Idea.    An  ekiquent  example  of  tUa  wu 


.coy  Google 


FIFTH  cnip.]     SCPREME  GOVERNMENT  IN   TUE   CAUCUS      520 

is  also  th«  Central  Office  whioli  receives  the  secret  funds  and 
spends  them  in  the  same  way  as  its  counterpart  on  the  Liberal 
side.  There  is,  however,  a  perceptible  difference  between  the 
tendencies  which  inspire  and  direct  the  two  head-quarters  in 
their  operations.  In  the  selection  of  candidates  whom  it  sup- 
plies to  the  constituencies,  the  ConserTatire  Office  shows  itself 
less  democratically  inclined;  it  does  not  care  about  having 
"Labour  Members,"  even  for  show  purposes;  while  in  the  way 
of  financial  supporters  it  is  not  very  fond  of  the  plutocrats 
whom  the  Central  Liberal  Association  welcomes  so  warmly. 
In  order  not  to  be  under  too  great  obligations  to  them,  which 
would  give  a  few  wealthy  m.en  or  parvenus  special  claims  at  the 
expense  of  the  aristocratic  element  in  the  party,  the  Conser- 
vative Office  has  fiied  a  sort  of  sumptuary  rate  for  their  sub- 
scriptions; it  does  not  accept  more  than  £100  from  a  single 
person  (except  for  special  funds).  It  can  easily  practise  such 
self-denial,  because  the  vast  majority  of  the  large  fortunes 
happen  to  be  in  the  hands  of  the  Conservatives. 

sapplled,  not  long  ago  (In  ISWt) ,  by  the  attitude  of  tbe  CoiiBeiv«tlTe  AiaocUtlon 
o[  Warwick  and  Leamlugton,  where  a  Member  had  to  be  returned  In  the  place 
of  Mr.  Peel,  the  Speaker  of  tbe  UouBe  ot  Commons,  on  his  elevation  to  tbe 
Peerai^.  B;  the  compact  coDcluded  Id  18H6  between  tbe  ConMrvativea  and 
the  D^Dsentlent  liberals  allied  agalnat  Irish  Home  Rule,  they  agreed  to  give 
Dp  all  electoral  competlllun  among  (Jiemselveii,  Had  stipulated  reclprocallj  for 
tbe  right  to  select  the  caniliilate  to  fill  the  pa rli am eutar;  vacancy  according  as 
the  seat  had  been  occapled  by  a  political  adherent  of  either  eeclion.  Mr.  Feel 
having  belonged  to  the  Liberal  Unionist  Bronp,  the  Liberal  Uniouists  of  War- 
wick hastened  to  select  a  candidate  of  their  own  political  complexion.  The 
local  ConserTative  Association  started  a  Tory  candidate  agalost  him,  pretend- 
ing that  the  compact  in  question,  having  been  concluded  by  the  leaders,  could 
not  bind  it.  Id  vtilu  did  the  CeDtral  Office  trj'  to  brlog  It  to  reason.  The 
leaders,  and  notably  Mr.  Arthur  BalfoDr,  thereupon  exerted  tbeir  persoDal 
InHuence.  It  was  ot  no  aiall.  The  AssoclatiuD  replied  by  retosala  couched  Id 
resoiutitma  breathing  an  Intractable  independence :  ",  .  .  while  admitting  the 
great  services  rendered  by  Mr.  Arthur  Balfour  to  the  Conservative  cause,  this 
meeting  protests  most  empbatlcally  aglllnst  the  recent  pressure  ot  the  leaders 
of  the  party  .  .  .  against  the  exercise  of  this  pressure  as  depriving  the  con- 
(tituency  of  Its  constitntional  right  to  return  the  member  who  may  locally 
be  considered  to  represent  tbe  political  views  of  the  constituency."  The  meet- 
ing, adds  the  Timei,  from  which  this  qnoiatlon  ta  taken,  was  slated  to  be  ot 
«  most  nnlted  and  enthusiastic  character. 

An  analogous  case  arose  at  Birmingham,  in  1888,  about  the  parliamentary 
vacancy  created  by  the  death  ot  John  Bright.  And  Mr.  Baltour ,  tbeD  Secretary 
of  State  for  Ireland,  had  to  leave  his  post  at  one  of  the  moat  troublous  periods 
in  the  history  ot  AJiglo-Irish  relations,  and  travel  all  the  w^  to  Birmlngban. 
le  the  resistance  of  the  local  Tories. 


.coy  Google 


626  DEMOCHACT  AND  POLITICAL  PABTIES    [thtbbpam 

Between  the  central  Organization  and  the  local  Associations 
of  the  Tory  party  there  is  an  intermediate  grade  in  the  form 
of  Provincial  Unions.  England  and  Wales  are  divided  for 
this  purpose  into  ten  provinces  (the  metropolis,  Lancashire 
and  Cheshire,  Midland  Counties,  etc.).  As  for  Scotland,  the 
Tory  organization  there  is  established  on  the  same  basis  as 
that  of  the  Liberal  party,  that  is  to  say,  it  is  supposed  to  have 
au  existence  of  its  own,  and  it  also  forms  a  national  Federa- 
tion with  a  council  of  delegates  meeting  in  Edinbu^h.  Inde- 
pendent in  theory,  the  Tory  federation  of  Scotland  gravitates 
altogether  in  the  orbit  of  the  English  head  office,  as  is  the  case 
with  the  Liberals.  The  Provincial  Unions  of  England  and  of 
Wales,  created  in  1886  in  a  spirit  of  decentralization,  have 
not  succeeded  in  developing  an  autonomons  life.  The  head- 
quarters of  the  party  were  not  anxious  for  them  to  take  a  high 
flight,*  and  the  Central  Conservative  Office  has  even  managed 
by  a  clever  contrivance  to  get  them  into  its  toils.  Over  this 
provincial  organization  it  has  placed  agencies  of  ita  own,  the 
territorial  iurisdiction  of  which  exactly  coincides  with  that  of 
the  Provincial  Unions.  By  offering  them  the  gratuitous  use 
of  their  offices  and  staff,  the  agencies  soon  managed  to  get  a 
footing  in  the  Unions,  and  they  rapidly  became  the  main- 
spring of  the  Conservative  organization  down  to  the  electoral 
Divisions.  Without  possessing  any  formal  power  in  them,  the 
provincial  agent  of  the  Central  Office  nevertiieless  controls  all 
the  local  Associations  in  the  Union,  thanks  to  the  fact  that  he 
represents  the  Central  Office  not  only  with  its  prestige  as  organ 
of  the  great  leaders,  but  also  with  its  resources  of  which  the 
Associations  so  often  stand  in  need  —  speakers  for  the  meet- 
ings, political  literature,  and  last,  but  not  least,  money;  an 
Association  which  does  not  try  to  conciliate  the  agent  of  the 
Central  Office  would  not  obtain  any  assistance.  To  this  mate- 
rial power  it  adds  the  seduction  of  civility  to  the  secretaries  of 
the  local  Associations.  Thus,  without  even  resorting  to  much 
wire-pulling,  the  Central  Office  ensures  the  organization  of  the 

'Tbus,  when  It.wupropoted  tosivetbePrOTlncl&]Utilonithem«»LgemeDt 
of  ths  work  of  oritaiilzlng  meetlDK*  and  lectareg  In  their  Teipnctiva  dJitricti, 
tfae  representatlrea  of  the  CentTRl  Office  opposed  It,  alleging  that  thia  extension 
ot  the  powers  of  the  Unioni  "  would  weaken  the  hiaDdH  of  the  ceotral  Execu- 
tive "  (CoDfereoce  of  the  Natioaal  UdIoii  ot  Constltutlooal  and  ConMlratlTa 
A«aoclatloDa,  alttlog  ot  the  22d  Nov.,  ISST). 


.coy  Google 


TtFTHcmF.]    SUPREME  GOVERNMENT  IN  THE  CACCUS      527 

party  a  complete  nnity  of  management  which  makes  all  the 
threads  converge  iu  the  London  office  and  utilizes  the  popular 
Associations  for  its  own  ends,  so  as  to  get  hold  of  the  voters 
all  the  more  easily.  PosacBsing  the  reality  of  power,  the  Or- 
ganization of  the  leaders  looks  on  that  of  the  popular  Union 
as  harmless  and  as  even  serving  the  puipose  of  "  a  safety-valve 
to  let  off  the  gas." 

In  fact,  the  Union  of  Constitutional  and  Conservative  As- 
sociations is  rather  a  show  body,  but  it  none  the  less  has  a 
certain  demonstrative  value.  The  annual  conferences  of  the 
Union  are  held  with  the  same  display  of  representation  as  on 
the  Liberal  side;  they  also  attract  tlie  attention  of  the  whole 
country;  the  great  leaders  of  the  party  attend  them  and  speak 
at  them.  They  enable  the  representatives  of  various  elements 
in  the  party  to  come  in  contact,  it  is  true,  for  a  sliort  time 
only.  The  "gentleman"  element  at  first  rather  objected  to 
sitting  with  the  "paid  agents"  sent  as  delegates,  the  secreta* 
ries  of  the  local  caucuses,  who  had  the  great  demerit  of  getting 
their  living  by  work.  Disliking  the  physical  promiscuity,  the 
gentlemen  were  by  no  means  inclined  to  come  into  intellectual 
contact  with  them,  to  submit  their  ideas  to  their  judgment  and 
to  listen  to  their  speeches.  But  of  late  years  the  professional 
element,  on  the  activity  of  which  the  electoral  destinies  of  the 
party  more  and  more  depend,  and  in  general  the  plebeian  ele- 
ment, has  increased  in  importance  in  the  formal  meetings  of 
the  Union.  The  professionals  have  carried  a  rule  which  con- 
cedes to  all  the  secretaries  of  Associations  dejure  membership 
of  this  parliament  of  the  party  Organization,  without  having 
to  solicit  their  appointment  as  local  delegates  on  each  occasion. 
They  command  more  attention;  they  are  listened  to  when  they 
speak. 

As  regards  exchange  of  views,  the  conferences  of  the  Con- 
servative Organization  offer  more  &cilities  than  those  of  the 
Liberal  Caucus,  because  there  is  more  freedom  of  discussion 
in  them;  it  is  not  stifled  as  under  the  Liberal  wire-pullers  in 
the  meetings  of  their  party.  The  material  conditions  are  also 
more  favourable  in  the  conferences  of  the  Conservative  Union 
because  they  are  much  smaller  than  the  meetings  of  the 
National  Liberal  Federation.  But  with  this  greater  freedom 
of  debate  the  decisions  of  the  parliament  of  the  Tory  party 


.coy  Google 


52«  DEMOCRACY  AND  POLITICAL  PARTIES    [ramD  Pi»T 

are  devoid  of  effeot,  as  we  are  already  aware  from  the  his- 
toriciki  account  of  tlie  positioa  created  for  the  Union  by  the 
revival  of  the  leadership  after  the  fall  of  Lord  Randolph 
Churchill.  Unlike  the  Liberal  leaders,  the  chiefs  of  the  Tory 
party  do  not  consider  themaelves  tied  and  bound  by  the  reso- 
lutions adopted  at  the  meetings  of  the  delegates ;  these  resolu- 
tions do  not  become  ipso  facto  planks  in  the  platform  of  official 
Conservatism.  In  the  course  of  the  last  few  years  the  Union 
has  more  than  once  passed  reBolutions  which  would  have  most 
seriously  embarrassed  the  leaders,  if  they  had  been  obliged 
to  comply  with  them  —  as,  for  instance,  the  motions  inde- 
fatigably  levelled  against  free  trade,  which  might  have 
threatened  the  alliance,  8o  important  for  the  Tory  leaders, 
with  the  Liberal  Unionists,  Mr.  Goachen  and  bis  friends,  for 
whom  commercial  liberty  is  a  dogma  of  their  political  creed. 
To  denounce  free  trade  was  equivalent  to  denouncing  the  alli- 
ance and  sending  the  Tory  pai-ty  adrift  on  the  ocean.  The 
danger,  therefore,  would  have  been  great  if  the  Union  had  fol- 
lowed up  its  resolutions  by  starting  an  agitation  in  their  favour 
throughout  the  country.  But  it  could  only  have  done  this 
through  the  federated  Associations,  whose  local  leaders  are 
still  under  the  spetl  of  the  prestige  wielded  by  the  big  men  of 
the  party  in  London.  The  manifestations  of  the  Union  never- 
theless still  inconvenience  the  official  leaders  of  the  party, 
and  in  order  to  "  give  them  a  free  hand,"  attempts  have  been 
made  to  induce  the  conferences  of  the  Union  to  confine  them- 
selves to  the  business  of  electoral  organization  proper,  and 
not  to  take  up  questions  of  general  policy,  or  at  all  events 
to  discuss  them  without  recording  a  formal  vote.  They  would 
thus  be  allowed  to  amuse  themselves  for  a  moment  with  great 
aifairs,  "to  debate  for  a  while,"  and  then,  like  good  children, 
they  would  give  up  their  plaything.  The  plan  has  naturally 
not  found  more  favour  with  the  delegates  than  it  does  with 
ohildren ;  the  standing  orders  have  not  been  modified  in  this 
sense,  but  since  then  in  more  than  one  particular  case  the  as- 
sembly has  followed  the  procedure  In  question,  by  "deciding 
to  allow  the  discussion  to  lapse  without  taking  a  vote." 

If  the  influence  of  the  Union  is,  for  the  present,  of  moder- 
ate importance  in  tlie  management  of  the  Tory  party,  if  it 
oannot  boast  of  manufacturing  opinion  like  the  Liberal  Fed- 


.coy  Google 


FirrHCHAp.]     SUPREME   GOVERNMENT  IN  THE  CAUCUS      629 

eration,  nor  of  being  able  to  force  itself  on  the  official  leaders 
of  the  pu.rty,  the  Organization  at  the  head  of  which  it  is 
supposed  to  be  nevertheless  does  discharge,  for  the  play  of 
opinion,  functions  analogous  to  tliose  which  are  the  raison  d'Slre 
of  its  rival  of  the  Liberal  party.  Only  the  impulse  comes 
from  another  point;  it  ia  not  the  Conservative  Union  which 
pulls  the  strings,  but  the  Central  Office.  It  is  this  body  which 
has  succeeded  in  laying  band  on  the  new  machinery  of  the 
party,  and  which  makes  it  execute  all  the  movements  required 
for  picturing  the  spontaneous  outburst  of  the  feelings  of  the 
party.  At  a  signal  given  by  the  Central  Office  the  local 
Associations  vote  resolutions  on  the  policy  of  the  day,  send 
addresses  to  the  foremost  leaders  to  "  strengthen  their  hands  " ; 
on  the  eve  of  an  important  division  in  the  House  it  is  at  the 
request  of  the  Central  Office  that  the  chairmen  of  the  local 
caucuses  telegraph  to  their  Menil)ers  to  "vote  straight."  At 
the  Liberal  head-quarters  the  wire-pullers  of  the  Federation, 
conjointly  with  the  representatives  of  official  Liberalism,  make 
the  machine  go,  whereas  here  the  henchmen  of  the  leaders 
alone  set  it  in  motion.  The  working  of  the  Tory  system 
therefore  simply  accentuates,  gives  point  to  the  traits  peculiar 
to  both  organizations,  the  government  of  which  is  really  mo- 
narchical or  oligarchical  under  a  republican  and  democratic 
constitution,  in  which  a  wide  and  more  or  lesa  popular  base  is 
crowned  at  the  summit  by  the  power  of  a  few  wire-pullers, 
forming  together  a  quasi-organic  whole. 


.coy  Google 


SIXTH  CHAPTEE 

AUXILIARY   AND   RrVAL 


Alongside  or  behind  the  regular  armies  of  the  party  Oi^u- 
izatiuns  there  are  irregular  troops  as  well,  also  formed  into 
regiments  and  disciplined,  but  interreuing  only  as  auxiliaries. 
Among  them  the  first  place  belongs  to  a  variety  remarkable 
alike  for  the  exceptional  importance  of  its  effective  forces  and 
for  their  composition.  These  are  the  battalions  of  Amazons, 
party  Associations  made  up  exclusively,  or  to  a  great  extent, 
of  women,  and  offering  them  a  field  of  political  activity  which 
they  do  not  possess  elsewhere  and  a  sphere  of  influence  which 
they  had  hitherto  never  enjoyed  in  the  English  State  nor  in 
any  other  country. 

Under  the  Constitution  of  England  women  have  always  been 
excluded  from  political  life.  And  it  is  in  vain  that  a  vast 
amount  of  erudition  baa  been  expended  in  trying  to  prove  that 
they  enjoyed  the  parliamentary  franchise  in  the  sixteenth  and 
seventeenth  centuries,  In  a  judgment  of  the  Court  of  King's 
Bench,  of  1739,  it  was  noted  incidentally  that  women  had  no 
right  to  vote ;  for,  according  to  the  remark  of  one  of  the  judges, 
"the  choice  of  Members  of  Parliament  requires  an  improved 
understanding  which  women  are  not  supposed  to  have." '  This, 
no  doubt,  was  the  general  opinion.  The  mere  idea  of  women 
politicians  occurred  to  men's  minds  only  at  times  of  great 
constitutional  disturbance;  the  public  imagination  had  to  he 
greatly  unsettled  by  the  force  of  events  to  oonceivo  such  a 
notion  even  with  a  malicious  intention.  It  was,  in  fact,  under 
this  aspect  that  the  political  rfile  of  women  was  viewed,  as  is 
proved  by  the  pamphlets  and  caricatures  of  the  time  of  the 
Commonwealth  in  the  seventeenth  century,*  and  afterwards  of 

1  Modern  Rtporf,  VII,  case  ot  logiain  v.  Olive, 

'Id  the  collection  ot  political  painphlets  presented  tij  Oeoige  in.  to  the 
British  Museum  there  U  a  small  vulume  called  "An  ciaet  DiurnaU  of  tht 


.coy  Google 


siiTii  CHip.]    AUXILIARY  AND  RIVAL  ORGANIZATIOKS      631 

the  period  following  the  great  Reform  Bill.*  And  it  was  only 
in  the  second  half  of  our  century  that  public  opinion  regularly 
took  up  the  question,  which  has  since  become  one  of  the  prob* 
lenis  of  the  day,  continually  agitated  in  the  country  and  fre- 
quently discussed  in  Parliament,  but  still  unsolved. 

However,  women  had  not  waited  so  long  as  this  to  descend 
into  the  arena  and  demonstrate  or  act  in  one  fashion  or  an- 
other. First  of  all,  the  woman  of  the  lower  orders  appear  on 
the  scene.  The  popular  societies  founded  about  the  year  1792 
under  the  impulse  of  the  French  Revolution,  in  imitation  of 
the  Paris  clubs,  had  members  of  both  sexes,  cUizena  and  citi- 
zeneaaes.  In  the  secret  associations  which  swarmed  during  the 
years  1815-1820  women  attended  the  meetings  in  large  num- 
bers and,  on  the  initiative  of  Bamford,  were  allowed  to  vote.* 
Before  long  their  share  in  the  movement  became  so  consider- 
able that  Associations  composed  exclusively  of  women  were 
formed  with  all  the  apparatus  of  committee- women,  chair- 
women, etc.  The  Female  Reform  Society  of  Blackburn  near 
Manchester  took  the  lead.  It  distributed  a  circular  in  the 
manufacturing  districts  inviting  the  wives  and  daughters  of 
working-men  "to  form  sister  societies  for  the  purpose  of  co- 
operating with  the  men  and  of  instilling  into  the  minds  of 
their  children  a  deep-rooted  hatred  of  our  tyrannical  rulers." 
A  deputation  from  this  Society  attended  the  Reform  meeting 
convened  at  Blackburn,  and  presented  a  cap  of  liberty  and  an 
address  to  the  assembly.  At  the  great  meeting  of  the  Ifith 
of  August,  1819,  at  Manchester,  which  gave  rise  to  the  "  Man- 
chester Massacre,"  two  women's  clubs  arrived  in  a  body  with 

Parliament  of  Ladyei,  Printed  anno  Dom.  IMT,"  with  &  vignette  on  the  title- 
page  Tepreaenting  the  interior  of  the  House  of  Commona  with  the  lAdy  Speaker, 
Lady  Sergeant  at  Arms,  and  the  Lady  Hemben  on  the  benchea  (Collection  of 
PamphlelH,  an.  1»IT,  E  386  310). 

1  A  coloured  print,  ot  the  year  l&'HB,  portrays  a  meeting  ol  women  engaged 
In  electing  a  Member  ot  Parliament.  Two  candidates  are  before  them,  of 
irhom  one,  Darling,  young  and  good-looking,  is  In  the  attitude  ot  a  dancing- 
master,  and  surrounded  by  a  bevy  ot  pretty  women ;  the  second,  Uie  potilical 
economtil,  ot  a  more,  solemn  than  pleiiennt  e^iterior,  is  kicking  Ue  heels  alone 
In  a  corner.  "  Do  not  vote  tor  ugly  old  stingy  "  Is  inscribed  on  a  board  raised 
In  the  air,  while  Capid  or  his  representative  holds  up  another  appeal :  "  Vote 
foi  Darling  and  parliamentary  balls  once  a  week."  A  reproduction  of  this 
print  Is  inserted  in  the  work,  already  quoted,  ol  Orego,  Old  PariiamtnlaTy 
Elecliont. 

>  Samuel  Bamford,  PaMaget  in  (As  Llfs  of  a  Radical,  p.  134. 


.CD,  Google 


532  DEMOCRACY   AND   TOLITICAL   PARTIES     [tbikd  past 

a  wliite  silk  flag.*  A  few  years  later,  at  the  time  of  the  agi- 
tation for  the  Reform  Bill,  the  woiuea  of  tlie  town  of  Birming- 
ham,  which  was  the  head-quarters  of  it,  made  their  little 
manifestation.  Not  to  be  behindhand,  the  Tories  of  Nor- 
wich also  applied  to  the  women,  adjuring  them  to  use  theii 
influence  against  the  Reform  Bill.* 

The  women  of  the  upper  ranks,  of  the  aristocracy  and  the 
middle  class,  for  a  long  time  displayed  no  interest  in  politics 
save  in  so  far  as  they  affected  their  narrow  circle  or  even  the 
persons  closely  connected  with  them.  Sometimes  they  are 
seen  to  exert  themselves  on  their  behalf  as  canvassers,  but  not 
often.  One  of  these  ladies,  the  Duchess  of  Devonsliire,  ob- 
tained celebrity  by  the  zeal  with  which  she  canvassed  for  her 
friend,  the  illustrious  Whig  orator  Fox;  she  even  allowed  a 
butcher  a  kiss  in  exchange  for  a  promise  to  vote  for  the  can- 
didate whom  she  was  patronizing.  The  political  and  social 
revolution  effected  in  1832  for  the  benefit  of  tbe  middle  class 
did  not  give  an  impetus  to  women  politicians.  During  the 
Anti-Corn  Law  agitation  the  women  of  the  Liberal  middle 
classes  no  doubt  co-operated  zealously  in  the  immense  adver- 
tising work  organized  by  Cobden's  League,  but  they  did  not 
appear  in  public  except  at  the  banquets,  at  the  teas  of  the 
League,  where  they  discharged  their  traditional  functions  of 
presiding  over  the  tea-table.  In  the  election  contests  they 
did  not  intervene  much  oftener  than  before  1832;  they  are 
hardly  remarked  in  the  canvass.*  Still  less,  of  course,  are 
they  seen  on  tbe  hustings.  After  a  considerable  time,  at  a 
period  very  near  our  own,  they  appear  there  occasionally  for 
a  moment  to  apologize  to  the  audience  for  their  huskinds 
when   detained   by  illness  or  business.     The  special  aroma 

1  Annual  Reginter  tat  the  year  1810.  Load.  1820,  pp.  104,  106. 

'  Id  theit  appeal  lo  tbs  "  ladie»  of  Norwich."  thej  expressed  tbemKlvea  u 
follows:  "U  ever  jou  felt  for  the  mln  and  diiKrace  of  Engl&nd.  and  tor  the 
minriei  and  dipraDitia  of  the  oliQoxioaa  Reform  Bill,  you  are  called  on  bj 
the  most  tender  and  affectionate  tie  in  nature  to  enert  your  per^uuive  Influ- 
ence on  the  minds  of  a  father,  brother,  husband,  or  lover;  tell  tbem  not  to  seek 
fllial  duty,  couj^nlal  regard,  matrimonial  comfort,  uor  (tnder  compliance  till 
they  have  saved  your  country  from  perdition,  posterity  from  llavery" 
(Quoted  In  Q.  J.  Holyoake's  Sixty  Yrari  of  an  Agilalor't  Life,  Loud.  1899,  J, 
29). 

*  Bliie  Bookt.  183.%  Report  on  Bribery,  p.  66.  — Canvassing  by  women,  how- 
ever, spread  to  a  certnin  extent,  and  In  rural  dUtrlcta  the  wives  or  daughten 
of  country  gentlemen  went  about  soliciting  votes  for  their  hoabaods  or  pueni«. 


.coy  Google 


SIXTH  ciup.]     AUXILIARY   AND   RIVAL   ORGANIZATIOSS       538 

which  pervades  family  life  for  Englishmen  made  them  rather 
appreciate  this  display  of  conjugal  devotion  and  give  an  in- 
dulgent reception  even  to  the  little  puff  which  the  wife  occa- 
sionally, in  the  innocence  of  her  heart,  slipped  in  on  behalf 
of  her  absent  husband,  when  she  vouclied,  for  instance,  to  the 
electors  for  his  political  integrity;  for,  "knowing  him  better 
than  any  one  else,  she  could  say  one  thing,  — that  he  always 
kept  his  promise." 

After  the  advent  of  the  democracy  in  1867  the  situation 
changed  considei-ably,  both  in  consequence  of  the  propaganda 
of  the  political  equality  of  women,  which  made  signal  progress, 
thanks  to  John  Stuart  Mill,  and  owing  to  the  vast  extension 
of  the  suffrage,  wliicli  demanded  new  modes  of  action  on  the 
more  numerous  voters.  The  co-operation  of  women  became  of 
value,  and  at  the  general  election  of  1808  they  took,  for  the 
first  time,  a  very  important  part  in  the  canvass.  "The  new 
class  of  voters,"  we  read  in  a  parliamentary  enquiry  of  the 
year  1869,  "  were  most  tremendously  squeezed  at  the  last  elec- 
tion," especially  by  ladies  of  the  upper  classes,  who,  by  their 
social  position,  impressed  the  working-men,  the  shopkeepers, 
and  other  small  folk  who  had  just  been  invested  with  the  suf- 
frage.' At  the  same  time  another  habit  was  introduced: 
women  spoke  at  public  meetings,  at  first  to  advocate  the  elec- 
toral rights  of  their  sex,  and  afterwards  on  party  politics. 
At  the  first  meeting  they  did  not  venture  to  look  in  the  face 
of  the  audience,  who  would  perhaps  have  given  them  a  bad 
reception,  and  they  read  their  speeches,  which,  however,  did 
not  save  them  from  the  violent  rebuke  levelled  at  them  from 
the  House  of  Commons  "of  having  disgraced  themselves  and 
their  sex."  '  In  the  meanwhile,  women  obtained  the  right  to 
vote  at  municipal  elections  (in  1869)  and  at  the  elections  of 
school  boards  (in  1870).     At  the  general  election  of  1880  they 

>  Bbte  Books,  18C8, 1869,  Vol.  Till  (Report  on  Parliamantary  and  Mnnicl- 
pal  ElectioiiBl,  p.  238.  One  nt  the  wltnesBes  BammoDed  before  the  parlia- 
mentary comniiBsioners,  speaking  of  the  electoral  pressure  eierted  by  women, 
mentioned  the  fuct  of  a  counleBS  who  spent  bull  a  day  with  the  beeper  of  a 
level  croastng,  trying  to  persuade  him  tu  rote  her  way.  To  understantt  the 
tenacity  displayed  on  botb  sides,  it  shoald  be  added  that  the  incident  took 
place  In  Scotland. 

»  M.  G.  Fawcett,  The  Women'i  Suffrage  Mtmemtnt,  In  Th,  Stanton's  col- 
lection of  essays,  Tht  Woman  Quttlion  in  Btiropt,  Lond.  1884. 


.CD,  Google 


634  DEMOCRACY   AND   POLITICAL   PARTIES     [thibd  part 

joined  in  the  fray,  with  great  rigour,  as  canvassers  and  as 
speakers  at  election  meetings.  Mr.  Gladstone,  although  an 
avowed  opponent  of  female  suffrage,  addressed  a  very  senti- 
mental appeal  to  them  begging  them  to  help  him  to  combat  and 
vanquish  his  Conservative  rivals.'  'I'he  appeal  was  responded 
to,  but  the  Tories  also  found  help  among  the  women.  They 
fought  on  both  sides  as  free  lances,  as  isolated  combatants, 
without  any  organization.  The  Conservatives  were  the  first 
to  enroll  the  female  contingents,  and  it  was  the  Frimrose 
League  which  served  as  regiments. 

II 

The  reader  will  recollect  the  circnmstances  in  which  this  Or- 
ganization had  been  founded.  The  members  of  the  "  Fourth 
Party,"  headed  by  Lord  Randolph  Churchill,  being  anxious  to 
emancipate  Toryism  from  the  aristocratic  camarilla  and  to 
instil  fresh  life  into  it  by  bringing  it  nearer  the  heart  of  the 
people,  hit  on  the  idea  of  establishing  a  sentimental  alliance 
between  the  masses  and  Toryism,  by  means  of  a  League  founded 
outside  tlie  orthodox  organization  of  the  party  and  appealing 
frankly  to  popular  affections  and  emotions.  The  Le^ue  was 
to  cover  the  country  with  a.  network  of  brotherhoods  composed 
of  men  deeply  imbued  with  the  honour  and  the  glory  of  the 
fatherland,  and  united  among  themselves,  under  the  auspices 
of  the  revered  memory  of  Lord  Beaconsfield,  in  the  cult  of  the 
true  Conservative  principles  of  which  the  illustrious  deceased 
was  the  champion  and  the  propagator.  The  beginnings  of  the 
League  formed  with  such  lofty  aims  were  unassuming.  Re- 
cruits did  not  flock  to  it  in  large  numbers.  But  in  proportion 
as  its  ranks  widened,  the  spirit  of  hostility  to  the  aristocratic 
leaders  which  animated  the  small  group  of  men  of  the  Fourth 
Party,  instead  of  gradually  infecting  the  members,  rather 
evaporated.  The  surrounding  atmosphere  was  evidently 
charged  with  the  feelings  of  respect  and  the  traditional  preju- 

1  "  It  would  be,"  said  Mr.  Gladatone,  "  the  performBiice  of  the  dntjr  the 
oaglect  of  wbicb  would  be  tn  tuiure  time  a  source  ol  pain  aud  mortlfiration 
and  the  KcompllBhmeDt  of  which  would  serve  to  gild  your  own  (mure  yeare 
with  sweet  remembraucee,  aud  to  warrant  you  in  hoping  tbat  each  In  your 
own  place  and  sphere  has  raised  your  voice  tor  Justice  and  has  striven  to 
mitigate  the  sorrows  and  miBfortuneB  of  mankind  "  (Ibid). 


.CD,  Google 


SIXTH  CHAP.]     AUXILIARY   AND  BIVAL  ORGANIZATIONS       635 

dices  which  hare  iDTariably  constituted  the  essence  of  Tory- 
ism. Before  long  no  flavour  of  heterodoxy  was  to  be  found 
in  the  Primrose  League,  so  much  so  that  the  official  leaders  of 
the  party  had  no  reason  to  refuse  it  their  approbation.  In  the 
meanwhile,  the  Le&gue  opened  its  ranks  to  women.  This  no 
doubt  was  a  grave  departure  from  tradition;  but  consider- 
ing itself  not  so  much  a  political  association  framed  on  the 
stei-eotyped  model  as  a  champion  of  "moral  order"  in  the 
political  society  of  England,  the  League  deemed  it  lawful  and 
expedient  to  summon  all  the  living  forces  of  society  to  the 
combat.  In  fact,  the  League  pretended  in  recruiting  its  ad- 
herents to  disregard  not  only  the  distinction  of  sexes,  but  also 
those  of  classes,  of  social  stations,  of  religion,  and  even  of 
party.  Founded  for  the  propaganda  of  "  Tory  principles  "  and 
in  consequence  entitled  "Tory  Primrose  Le^ue,"  it  now 
dropped  the  adjective  "  Tory  "  everywhere  and  declared  that 
it  devoted  itself  to  the  defence  of  religion,  of  the  fundamental 
institutions  of  the  Realm  and  of  its  imperial  ascendency.  All 
willing  men  obeying  the  call  of  honour,  all  patriots  were 
invited  to  rally  under  the  banner  of  the  League  for  the  de- 
fence of  the  foundations  of  social  order  which  at  that  time 
(in  lS&4~188o)  seemed  to  a  good  many  people  specially  men- 
aced by  the  Birmingham  school  with  its  weapon  of  the  Caucus ; 
in  fact,  the  League  was  to  "supply  the  antidote  of  the  Cau- 
cus." By  their  Conservative  instincts  and  their  deep  reli- 
gious feeling  women  were  naturally  marked  out  for  a  share  in 
this  crusade,  and  by  their  mere  presence  they  completed  the 
institiition  of  the  new  knighthood;  for  was  not  the  approba- 
tion of  the  lady  the  highest  reward  of  the  exploits  of  the 
knight  ? 

However  this  may  be,  the  admission  of  women  into  the 
League  made  it  a  success.  From  that  date  (1884)  the  num- 
ber of  its  members  began  to  grow  with  astonishing  rapidity. 
The  women  carried  the  men  with  them,  and  in  a  short  time 
the  ramifications  of  the  Le;^e  extended  into  the  four  comers 
of  the  Kingdom,  forming  in  less  than  ten  years  a  formidable 
Tory  militia  of  more  than  a  million,  which  surpasses  the 
regular  array  of  the  Tory  party  not  only  in  numbers,  but  often 
also  in  fighting  strength. 

I  say  Tory  militia,  although  the  Lci^ue  disclaims  this  epi- 


.coy  Google 


630  DEMOCRACY   AXD   l-OLITKAL   PABTIES     [Tiiian  part 

thet,  and  often  puts  the  words  "  independently  of  party  poli- 
tics "  at  full  length  after  its  name.*  Founded  for  the  defence 
of  the  glorious  principles  above  mentioned,  the  sole  task 
of  the  League  would  be  to  instil  theiu  into  men's  minds,  to 
prop^ate  them.  Its  undertaking  would  therefore  be  simply 
"educational "  without  intervening  in  militant  politics,  or  as 
Lord  Salisbury  eifpresaed  himself  at  one  of  its  first  annual 
meetings:  "You  are  not  confined  within  rigid  party  lines; 
you  are  not  attached  to  members  or  candidates  in  any  locality. 
You  are  the  general  missionaries  of  the  principles  which  you 
profess,  and,  if  I  may  say  so  without  irreveieuce,  yon  are 
rather  the  preaching  friars  of  the  message  that  you  have  to 
convey  than  the  regular  clergy  attached  to  each  particular 
district."  *  In  reality  this  is  not  so,  the  independence  of  the 
League  does  not  exist  even  in  the  attenuated  form  which  the 
noble  Marquis  attributed  to  it.  From  the  outset  it  identified 
itself  with  the  Tory  party  in  its  "rigid  lines."  The  division 
of  the  English  political  world  into  two  sharply  defined  camps, 
and  still  more  the  vagueness  of  the  general  principles  which 
the  League  has  proclaimed,  made  it  almost  necessary  for  it 
to  adhere  to  a  particular  line  of  conduct  and  to  fallow  this 
line  from  point  to  point  on  pain  of  losing  its  foothold 
altogether. 

Thus  by  the  defence  of  religion  the  League  understood  not 
only  the  struggle  against  "infidelity  and  atheism,"  but  also 
opposition  to  the  religious  neutrality  of  the  public  elementary 
schools,'  even  if  this  were  demanded,  as  is  the  case  in  England, 

I  Cf.  the  numerous  puhllcaiione  of  tha  LeaRiie,  such  as  tho  Primroie  Ltagve 
ifanuoZ  (last  edition  nppruveil  by  the  Grand  Council  in  June,  ISM),  What  U 
the  Primrose  Leaf/uef  (Lentlet  No.  811).  etc. 

'  Annual  meeting  of  1880  ( Timet,  of  the  aoth  May,  188fi). 

*  In  fact.  In  a  cummentniy  nn  the  prinniples  of  the  League,  from  the  pen  of 
one  of  Its  high  dlgnltariea.  It  is  explained  that  Che  League  strives  lo  coniltat 
atcular  edaeait'in,  to  oppose  "  those  vho  would  deprive  our  children  ol  all 
religious  instruction  and  all  knowledge  of  God,  as  the  so^alltd  Llhenil  parif 
on  the  Continent  are  doln«  to  the  utmost  of  Ihelr  alillily."  It  would  appear 
that  In  the  eyes  of  the  League  secularism  and  atheism  are  conveHlble  tenns, 
and  that  Christians  who  are  not  hostile  to  aeciilnr  education  are  not  sincere 
Christiana :  "  Ail  Christians  have  one  [mint  of  doctriue  In  cooinion,  namely, 
that  they  believe  In  God  the  Father  Almighty,  Creator  of  heaven  and  earth ; 
aud  If  they  ar«  sincere,  they  are  ready  to  defend  that  Drat  principle  againat 
the  Secularist  and  Che  Atheist,  and  to  lay  down  their  lives  for  It.  They  all  agree 
that  religion  should  be  the  basis  of  edurallun  and  of  government"  {The 
Frimrxitt  Ltagut,  b;  Q.  S.  Lane-Foz,  Vioe-ChanoBlloi  Primiow  Leagne,  p.  6). 


.CD,  Google 


(niTiiciiir.]     AUXILIARY   AND   RIVAL   ORQANIZATIOSS       637 

by  millions  of  Dlasentera  animated  with  the  deepest  religioua 
feeling  going  to  the  point  of  bigotry.  It  is  therefore  not  so 
much  for  religion  as  for  the  official  religiousness  enforced  by 
the  secular  arm,  of  wliich  the  Tories  were  the  traditional  cham- 
pions, that  the  League  has  gone  to  battle.  As  a  matter  of 
fact,  the  members  of  the  League  almost  all  belong  to  the  Estab- 
lished Church,  with  a  very  small  sprinkling  of  Protestant 
Nonconformists,  of  Catholics,  and  of  Jews  who  join  with  them 
in  professing  the  Tory  creed.  This  close  alliance  of  the 
Lei^e  with  the  Anglican  Church  has  even  served  its  political 
opponents  of  the  Catholic  faith  (especially  the  Irish  Kational- 
ists)  as  a  pretext  for  asking  the  Pope  to  forbid  Catholics  to 
belong  to  this  organization,  which  contains  so  many  Orange- 
men denouncing  Popery  with  all  tlie  virulence  which  is  char- 
actevistic  of  them.  The  Roman  Curia  examined  the  question 
at  length  and  finally  decided  against  the  opponents  of  the 
League. 

The  other  great  principle  inscribed  by  the  League  on  its 
banner  —  the  maintenance  of  the  fundamental  institutions  of 
the  Realm  —  witli  no  clearer  delinitiou,  did  not  lend  itself,  in 
the  way  of  action,  to  any  special  interpretation;  for  how  are 
institutions  maintained  ?  By  never  laying  hand  on  them  ? 
But  in  that  case  is  there  not  a  great  risk  of  their  being  allowed 
to  fall  into  ruin  under  the  ravages  of  time?  If,  on  the  other 
hand,  in  order  to  preserve  the  edifice  the  injured  or  decaying 
parts  must  be  renewed  and  constantly  changed,  it  is  only  in 
particular  cases  that  the  question  can  be  put,  whether  the 
change  proposed  is  conservative  or  destructive,  and  it  would 
be  impossible  before  the  cases  giving  rise  to  these  questions 
had  occurred  to  give  au  anticipatory  and  general  answer  to 
them  and  adopt  it  as  an  unvarying  rule  of  conduct.  Has  not 
the  policy  of  Tory  statesmen  themselves  undergone  an  evolu- 
tion? have  they  not  themselves  taken  in  hand  constitutional 
changes  which  they  had  just  declared  to  be  subversive  and 
sacrilegious  ?  In  the  matter  of  settled  and  comprehensive 
notions  of  conservatism  there  was  and  there  is,  in  English 
political  life,  nothiDg  but  the  firm  of  the  "party"  which  goes 
by  the  name  of  Conservative.  Consequently,  the  Primrose 
League,  being  anxious  to  do  "conservative"  business,  has 
had  no  alternative  but  to  hold  fast  to  that  firm  by  simply 


.coy  Google 


638  DEMOCRACY   AND   POLITICAL   PARTniS    [tb ran  past 

following  the  daily  quotations  ruling  in  the  market  of  the 
"Conservative  party,"  that  is  to  say,  devote  itself  to  the  main- 
tenance of  the  institutions  which  that  party  will  defend,  and 
80  long  as  it  will  defend  them.'  With  some  exceptions,  this 
holds  good  of  the  third  principle  of  the  League,  to  wit,  the 
maintenance  of  the  "  imperial  ascendency  "  of  England.  Hence 
from  the  very  start  it  fell  into  line,  naturally  and  spontane- 
ously, behind  the  Tory  party;  its  branches  speedily  became  a 
counterpart  of  tlie  regular  organization  of  Toryism,  having  the 
same  territorial  divisions,  defending  the  same  policy  and  plac- 
ing their  efforts,  in  the  constituencies,  at  the  disposal  of  the 
same  men,  of  the  local  Members  or  the  candidates  of  the  party. 

ni 

The  organization  of  the  Le^ue  is  elaborate  and  curious.  It 
presents  an  odd  combination  of  old  bric-i-btac  with  well-con- 
trived modern  machinery.  The  first  element  symbolizes,  it 
woiild  appear,  the  preoccupations  of  honour  and  chivalry  with 
which  the  founders  of  the  League  were  imbued.  Every  ad- 
herent of  the  League  of  either  sex,  having  signed  a  solemn 
engagement  to  defend  religion,  the  Estates  of  the  Realm,  and 
the  imperial  ascendency  of  the  British  Empire,  receives  a 
special  title  according  to  the  amount  of  his  contribution  — 
that  of  "  associate  "  if  he  only  subscribes  the  minimum  figure, 
or  that  of  "knight"  or  "dame"  if  ho  or  she  pays  half-a-crown 
a  year  more,  for  the  "tribute"  credited  to  the  central  fund  of 
the  League.  Entering  the  order  with  the  grade  of  "knight 
harbinger"  (at  the  time  of  the  foundation  of  the  League  it 
was  called  "squire"),  they  can,  after  a  probationary  period 
of  twelve  months  and  for  distinguished  services,  be  raised  to 
the  dignity  of  "knight  companion";  ladies  fulfilling  the  same 
conditions  are  promoted  to  the  "Order  of  Merit."  With  no 
other  qualification  than  their  devotion  to  the  League  they  can, 
on  payment  of  a  guinea  a  year,  be  admitted,  the  men  into  the 
"Imperial  Chapter  of  the  Primrose  League,"  and  the  women 
into  the  "Ladies'  Grand  Council  of  the  Primrose  League." 

1  One  of  the  chief!  of  the  Lenf^ns  in  reality  only  xdmitted  this  nhen  he  said 
to  ma:  "It  cannot  be  as<i«rleci  that  the  Primrose  Lc^fue  la  attached  to  the 
Conservative  party,  tor  tliere  has  been  no  Conservative  party  sitice  1861." 


.CD,  Google 


SIXTH  CHAP.]     AUXILIARY   AND   RIVAL  ORGANIZATIONS       588 

The  members  of  the  "Imperial  Chapter,"  who  are  called 
"  Knights  Imperial, "  govern  themselves  by  an  elected  council, 
at  the  head  of  vhioh  are  a  prior  and  t^o  sub-priors,  whereas 
the  "Ladies'  Grand  Council"  receives  its  presidents  (extra- 
president  and  president)  and  vice-presidents  from  the  hands  of 
the  Grand  Council  of  the  League.  Each  of  these  dignities 
is  certified  by  a  diploma  and  symbolized  by  special  badges,  to 
which  ai-e  abided  various  kinds  of  trinkets,  brooches,  and  pins 
instituted  for  the  use  of  the  members.'  These  badges  are 
worn  at  the  meetings  of  the  League  and  on  other  solemn  occa- 
sions, as  well  as  a  bunch  of  primroses  on  the  anniversary  of 
the  death  of  Lord  Beaconsfield.  In  addition,  special  decora- 
tions are  conferred  on  the  most  deserving  members,  from  the 
"  Graod  Star,"  with  its  five  grades,  down  to  the  simple  clasps 
of  honour.  The  lists  of  the  decorated  appear  regularly  in  the 
official  gazette  of  the  League.  All  the  members  of  various 
denominations  are  brought  together  under  a  hierarchy  wliich 
e:ttends  from  the  remotest  corners  of  the  kingdom  to  London. 
Wherever  tliere  are  as  many  as  thirteen  members,  they  can 
form  themselves  into  a  local  branch  or  "Habitation,"  after 
having  obtained  letters  patent  for  that  purpose  from  the 
supreme  authority  of  the  League,  which  is  called  the  "  Grand 
Council."  All  the  Habitations  of  an  electoral  division  or 
of  a  county  can  group  themselves  into  a  divisional  council  or 
a  county  council.  The  delegates  of  the  local  Habitations, 
meeting  once  a  year  in  London,  form  the  "  Grand  Habitation, " 
supposed  to  be  a  sort  of  Parliament  confronting  the  executive 
power  of  the  League,  the  Grand  Council,  at  the  head  of  which 
are  a  grand-master,  four  vice-grand -masters,  with  a  chancellor 
and  a  vice-chancellor.  The  local  Habitations  also  possess  a 
whole  hierarchy  of  dignitaries  —  i-uling  councillors  or  lady 
presidents,  executive  councillors,  treasurers,  secretaries,  war- 
dens and  sub-wardens,  each  and  all  wearing  badges  distinctive 
of  their  offices. 

It  is  these  latter,  the  "wardens"  and  the  "sub-wardens," 
who  are  the  mainspring  of  the  organization.  The  territorial 
area  uf  each  Habitation  is  parcelled  out  among  them  into  dis- 
tricts and  blocks,  which  they  work  systematically  for  the  good 


.coy  Google 


640  DEMOCRACY   AND   POLITICAL   PARTIES     [ti:ibi>hht 

of  "the  cause,"  that  is  to  say,  for  the  triumph  of  the  Tory 
party  at  the  next  election.  In  places  where  the  Conserrative 
AsHociations  are  weak  or  non-existent,  the  League  takes  is 
band  the  organization  of  the  party.  In  any  event,  it  aids  the 
Associations  in  their  task,  and  in  tliis  respect  it  is  subordi- 
nated to  the  local  Association.  As  soon  as  election  time 
begins,  the  Habitation  is  obliged  to  place  itself  bodily  at  the 
disposal  of  the  Association  or  of  the  Tory  candidate.  In  the 
interval  between  the  elections  the  League  helps  the  Conserva- 
tive Association  of  the  locality  in  its  daily  labours,  and  es- 
pecially in  those  of  registration.  Its  members  keep  an  eye 
on  the  removals  and  arrivals  of  voters  in  the  district,  supply 
the  Association  with  patticulars  of  the  occupiers  of  the  houses, 
and  hnally,  by  way  of  check  and  revision,  conduct  a  regular 
registration  canvass  parallel  with  that  carried  on  by  the  agents 
of  the  Association.  The  female  members  of  the  Habitation 
ace  specially  valuable  for  the  service  of  infonnation,  which 
often  requires  dexterity  and  lightness  of  hand.  Having  more 
leisure  tlian  the  men  and  taking  advantage  of  the  privilege 
of  their  sex,  which  enables  them  to  circulate  among  the 
population  with  more  freedom,  that  is  to  say,  without  draw- 
ing attention  to  their  capacity  of  political  emissaries,  the 
"  dames  "  quietly  work  the  constituency  in  a  continuous  fash- 
ion. As  they  go  along,  so  to  speak,  they  sow  the  good  seed 
destined  to  produce  a  splendid  harvest  on  election  day.  They 
"explain  the  principles  of  the  League"  in  their  application 
to  the  questions  of  the  day;  they  lavish  information  on  the 
lower-class  voter  recently  admitted  to  political  life  to  set  the 
"  lies  of  tlie  Radicals  "  in  their  true  light.  Undoubtedly  there 
are  among  the  Primrose  Dames  women  of  a  really  superior 
mind,  capable  of  discussing  a  question,  and  excellent  speak- 
ers. But  these  are  exceptions;  the  great  majority  is  very  far 
from  being  so  qualihed;  which,  however,  is  not  surprising, 
looking  to  the  character  of  the  education  which  was  vouch- 
safed to  their  sex  down  to  a  recent  period.  The  reasoning  of 
the  Primrose  Dames  is  therefore  necessarily  more  of  a  senti- 
mental order.  It  is  too  often  reinforced,  as  is  alleged,  by 
arguments  ad  hominem  of  an  entirely  material  nature,  by  small 
presents,  of  food  or  coal,  and  by  promises  to  obtain  work. 
The  distribution  of  relief  by  the  charitable  institutions  to 


.coy  Google 


SIXTH  chap]    AUXILLABY  AND  RIVAL  ORGANIZATIONS      HI 

whicli  the  members  of  the  Primrose  League  belong  is,  it  is 
said,  practised  and  used  by  them  with  a  view  to  the  same 
object.  The  League,  of  course,  indignantly  repudiates  these 
oharges. 

In  addition  to  this  familiar  aspect  of  political  education,  the 
League  also  carries  it  on  by  means  of  lectures,  of  meetings, 
with  speakera  of  the  locality  oi  imported  from  London  or  other 
large  centres,  and  of  publications,  especially  leaflets  distributed 
indefatigably  and  with  much  method  by  the  dames.  The  lect- 
uring work  is  ingeniously  reduced  to  a  very  simple  form, 
The  managers  of  the  League  in  London  have  had  a  few  lect- 
ures written  on  two  or  three  subjects  (the  Primrose  Le^ue, 
the  British  Empire),  and  send  copies  to  the  local  Habitations, 
where  they  have  only  to  be  read.  Often  it  is  the  clergyman 
of  the  place,  who  Is  almost  invariably  one  of  the  pillars  of  the 
League,  who  performs  this  duty.  Accompanied  by  very  nu- 
merous projections  from  a  magic  lantern,  which  constitute  the 
chief,  if  not  the  sole,  attraction  for  the  public,  the  lectures  try 
to  impress  the  imagination  with  the  greatness  of  the  father- 
land, of  the  monarchy,  of  the  time-honoured  institutions  of 
the  country,  of  its  colonial  empire.  The  historical  erudition 
introduced  into  these  compositions  is  intended  to  serve  the  same 
object,  by  proving,  for  instance,  that  Queen  Victoria  is  the 
direct  representative  of  the  oldest  unbroken  line  of  sovereigns 
ever  known;  tracing  her  descent  from  Fei^s  I,  an  Irish 
prince  and  founder  of  the  Caledonian  monarchy  in  lona  about 
the  year  330  before  the  Christian  era,  which  said  Fergus  is 
alleged  to  be  descended  in  his  turn  from  Heber,  a  notable  Mile- 
sian who  is  supposed  t»  have  conquered  Ireland  and  to  have 
founded  a  dynasty  there  at  a  date  contemporary  with  King 
David  of  Israel. 

IV 

Nevertheless,  however  considerable  the  number  of  lectures 
and  of  speakers  who  address  the  meetings  so  frequently  held 
in  the  Habitations,  as  well  as  of  the  publications  distributed 
in  certain  years  by  millions,  it  is  not  doctrinal  propaganda 
which  is  the  chief  business  of  the  League.  Its  real  weapon, 
the  one  which  always  tells,  is  the  social  action  which  seeks 


.coy  Google 


Ma  DEMOCRACY   AND   POLITICAL   PARTIES     [third  p»ht 

to  realize  "the  union  of  classes/'aa  opposed  to  the  Radicals, 
who  are  accused  uf  only  fomeDting  class  dissension,  who  "set 
class  against  class  and  man  against  man."  The  League  throvs 
its  doors  wide  open  to  persona  of  every  social  condition,  down 
to  the  humblest,  — to  small  shopkeepers,  to  artisans,  to  day- 
labourers,  to  washerwomen,  to  maid -servants, — and  once 
brought  together  the  members  of  the  upper  and  well-to-do  classes 
overwhelm  them  with  civilities  in  order  to  prove  to  them  in  an 
impressive  way  that  the  high-born  and  the  wealthy  "are  the 
friends  of  the  poor  people  " ;  so  that  the  flame  of  cupidity  kin- 
dled in  the  popular  breast  by  the  Radical  agitators  would  die 
out  of  itself.  The  League  just  supplies  the  common  ground  of 
meeting  and  provides  the  opportunities  for  it.  With  this  object 
it  has  elaborated  a  whole  liturgy  for  the  communion  of  classes 
by  means  of  f^tes.  The  Associations  have  their  social  vteetingt 
as  well,  but  it  is  the  Lea^e  which  is  the  great  contriver  of 
them  and  which  has  well-nigh  identified  its  existence  with 
them  and  raised  them  to  the  level  of  a  political  force,  almost 
of  an  instrumentum  regni.  Every  Habitation  organizes  as  often 
as  possible  festive  gatherings,  rising  from  simple  "teas" 
to  "high-class  enterUinments "  and  "fStes."  The  "teas" 
which  are  the  most  modest  of  the  meetings,  ai-e  also  the  most 
common.  Then  come  the  concerts,  the  dances,  the  balls. 
The  "fStes,"  which  combine  all  these  amusements,  are  often 
adorned  with  small  dramatic  representations, — tableaux  vi- 
vants,  ventriloquism,  conjuring,  "  Italian  marionnettes,"  clown- 
ing, etc.  The  experience  and  the  zeal  of  the  organizers  of  the 
Primrose  League  fStes  succeed  in  the  difficult  task  of  varying 
the  programme,  as  is  proved,  for  instance,  by  the  poster  re- 
produced on  the  next  page.  In  the  programme  of  all  the  meet- 
ings of  the  League  a  place  is  always  given  to  political  elo- 
quence, but  it  is  never  allowed  to  monopolize  the  audience: 
long  speeches  are  not  tolerated.  In  truth,  the  addresses  al 
the  entertainments  of  the  Primrose  League  are  rather  an 
aperitive,  which  does  not  even  stimulate  the  appetite.  Con- 
sequently, the  speaker,  even  if  he  were  a  M.P.,  plays  a  some- 
what retiring  part  in  them.' 

1 A  Tor;  M.P..  ia  B  very  amusing  book,  gives  a  faocy  tmA  neo«8Muilir  over- 
charged description  ot  it,  but  ot  whioh  the  substance  ts  true:  "  I  am  asked 
to  deUver  aa  address  to  the  members  of  a  certaiu  '  Habitation.'    I  appear  at 


.CD,  Google 


BixiHCHAP.]     AUXILIARY   AND   KIVAL  ORGANIZATIONS       543 

Not  to  mentiOQ  the  attraction  of  refreshments  Gupplied  at 
an  exceptionally  low  rate,  and  which  have   drawn  on  the 

what  the  lawyers  call  the  lociu  in  qaa.  In  due  course,  and  am  welcomed  by 
ttae  active  and  intelligent  secretary  (all  secretaries  have  a  prescriptive  right 
to  be  termed  active  and  intelligent).  'Ah,  Mr.  BlankI '  says  he.  'How  are 
you?  (ilad  you've  come.'  (As  if  It  had  not  been  an  arranged  thing  for  weeks!) 
■Awfully  busy,  —  capital  meeting,^  we  shall  have  a  roomful.  Tbey  have  come 
to  hear  Melville  Jones,  you  know.'  '  So  there  ia  to  be  another  speaker,'  I  say 
to  myself.  '  Some  local  celebrity,  fully  prepared  to  cut  me  out  and  briug  down 
the  house.'  I  haog  about  ia  a  purposeless  way  for  a  bit,  as  it  seems  to  be 
nobody's  basioess  to  pay  me  the  slightest  attention,  and  listen  to  wliat  seems 
to  be  a  kind  ol  tuning  up  behind  somewhere.  Presently  the  secretary  passes 
again.  I  hail  him.  Ho  is  a  cheery  man,  with  a  pleasant  wit.  '  Walk  up, 
walk  up,  just  o-goin'  to  begin,'  be  says  wiib  a  smile,  to  intimate.  I  suppose, 
that  the  Ruling  Councillor  is  prepared  to  take  the  chair.  I  control  my  feelings 
at  this  desecration  of  an  occasion  on  which  1  am  to  deliver  an  oration  that 
may,  metaphorically  speaking,  shake  England  to  its  core,  and  ask,  as  calmly 
as  I  can, '  By  the  by,  what  is  to  be  the  order  o( proceedings?  '  — '  Wbat!  haven't 
you  a  programme?  Let  me  see'  (scanning  one  that  ha  takes  out  of  hia 
pocket),  'I  know  you  are  down  somewhere'  (I  should  think  so, indeed).  'Oh, 
yet)  here  yon  are,  between  Letty  Smith  and  Melville  Jones!'  —  'Between 
Letty  Smith  and  Melville  JonesI '  I  repeat  to  myself,  with  inward  bitterness, 
and  numerous  suppressed  notes  ut  exclamation;  then  alond,  Interrogatively 
and  plaintively,  for  I  feel  that  there  must  be  something  very  wrong  somewhere, 

PmUKOBa  LBAQUB.  HA£tT.lTION. 

GRAND  TEA  AND  ENTERTAINMENT. 
Albbkt  Hall 


Evening  meeting  at  T.30.    Doors  open  at  T  o'clock. 

Addresses  will  be  given  by  the  Marqnis  ol . .  .,  M.F.,  Col M.F. 

A  high-class  and  most  amosing  entertainment  will  be  provided,  con^ting  of 
Jnggling,  Conjnring,  Musical  Grotesques, 

Illnslons  and  Delusions,  Piauotorte  Solos, 

Comic  Nigger  Banjoiat  and  Dancer. 
Comle  Donkey  a  la  Blondin, 

the  funniest  animal  in  the  world. 
Doable  clowning  act,  etc.,  etc. 

Tickets  for  tea  and  entertainment,  one  shilling. 

&iterlainiiient  only  3d.    Reserved  seats  for  entertainment,  3d.  extra. 

Tickets  may  be  obtained  of  ... . 

God  savb  thb  QubbhI 


.coy  Google 


544  TJEMOCRACT   AND  POLITICAL   PARTIES     [TuiaBPiHt 

Primrose  League  in  a  special  degree  the  severe  rebukes  of 
the  judges,  already  brought  to  our  notice  in  the  case  of  the 
Associations  and  their  "social  meetiugs,'"  the  gatherings 
of  the  League  present  many  other  powerful  allurements  of  a 
less  material  nature.  In  the  monotonous  existence  of  the 
lower  middle  class  and  the  populace  they  supply,  down  to  the 
modest  "  teas, "  a  distraction  enhanced  by  a  good  many  charms, 
of  which  the  intercourse  of  the  sexes  is  not  the  least.  They 
afford  young  people  a  legitimate  opportunity  of  meeting  each 
other  and  of  completing  in  the  sphere  of  sentiment  the  role  of 
"knights"  and  of  "dames"  which  has  been  assigned  to  them 
for  tlie  defence  of  society.  The  union  of  sexes  is  thus  added 
to  "the  union  of  classes."  It  has  procured  the  Le^ue  a 
great  number  of  adhesions,  perhaps  as  many  as  the  "union  of 
classes,"  which  ofEera  not  only  to  young  folk  but  to  those  of 
all  ages  one  of  the  sentimental  satisfactions  most  highly  ap- 
preciated in  England:  the  delightful  pleasure  of  coming  into 
contact  with  people  of  higher  social  rank. 

By  paying  a  subscription  of  a  shilling  or  sixpence,  one 
becomes  the  colleague  of  titled  or  simply  rich  persont^s,  one 
obtains  access  to  their  drawing-rooms  and  parks,  which  they 
place  at  the  disposal  of  the  League  for  its  meetings,  and  there 
the  humblest  ciin  rub  up  against  the  great  ones  of  the  earth. 
If  you  only  have  a  competency,  leisure,  and  intelligence,  you 
can  even  be  made  a  sharer  iu  the  labours  of  the  League  and 
enter  its  "  inner  circle."  You  take  charge  of  a  district  in  the 
capacity  of  "warden"  or  "sub-warden,"  to  conduct  the  politi- 
cal census,  and  this  gives  you  an  opportunity  of  reporting 

'MlMSmlthf  So  ladles  are  to  speak,  eh?'  — 'Oh  dear,  no.  She  slDgs;  and 
&  very  nice  girl,  too,  ThU  Is  a  surt  ot  mixed  enicrtaiomeDt ;  mixed,  U>  match 
the  company,  don't  yon  knoir'  (and  be  smirks  with  satisfaction  at  his  wretrlted 
joke) ;  '  aiiiiKs  and  speeches,  and  that  sitrt  ot  thing.'  Aod  It  is  for  •  that  sort 
of  tbinK  '  that  for  weeks  past  1  have  taxed  my  brain  for  epigrams,  antitheses. 
flowers  of  rhetoric,  and  so  on!  However,  1  ani  in  for  It  now;  bo  1  pursoa 
my  enquiries,  but  without  any  real  interest  in  the  affair.  '  And  Tbininimmy 
Jones,  what  does  he  do?' I  ask.  'Oh,  he's  onr  big  gim,  —  capital  fellow,— 
comic  singer.  GolnR  togiveussomcihiiiEln  character,  I'm  lold.'  .  .  .  labon- 
don  all  my  liigh  hopes  of  swaying  by  winged  words  the  destinies  of  an  empire, 
and  deliver  a  aonitcli  speech,  huddled  into  lifteea  minutes,  to  an  audience  dying 
to  hear  Melville  .lones  in  Ills  celebrated  song,  '  The  man  who  Went  to  bed  in  his 
lH>ots"'  (Four  Y'-ari  in  Parliam'-nt  with  Hard  Labour,  by  C.  W.  Radcliffe 
Cook,  M.P.  Lond.  181)0.  pp.  125-137). 
1  See  above,  Vol.  I,  pp.  438,  a9. 


.coy  Google 


■iiTHCHAP.]    AUXILIART  AND  RIVAL  ORQANIZATIONS      MS 

and  exchanging  remarks  on  the  resnlts  with  the  perBonagw 
vho  are  at  the  head  of  the  Habitation.  With  a  little  more  diB- 
tinction  or  wealth,  a  woman  of  the  lower  middle-class  can  take 
her  place,  in  the  committees  of  which  there  is  no  lack  in  the 
Habitations,  by  the  side  of  titled  ladies,  perhaps  marchion- 
esses or  even  duchesses,  and,  seated  in  their  grand  drawing- 
room,  discuss  the  aSalrs  of  the  Habitation  on  an  equal  footing. 
If  this  does  not  fall  in  her  way,  perhaps  she  will  be  vouchsafed 
the  honour,  at  the  innumerable  fStes  of  the  League,  of  helping 
the  great  ladies  to  make  the  tea  and  cut  the  sandwiches.  Her 
husband  or  her  brother,  the  "knight"  who  spends  his  life  in 
sellio);  mustard  or  candles,  will  receive  his  cup  of  tea  from 
the  very  hands  of  a  "  dame  "  who  is  a  great  lady.  The  dames 
and  knights  who  take  the  lead  down  in  their  country  districts 
are  in  their  turn  lifted  into  the  London  Olympus  by  the  chain 
of  the  organization,  which  connects  the  local  Habitations  with 
the  Grand  Habitation  and  the  Grand  Councils.  Every  local 
delegate  is  admitted  to  the  receptions  given  by  the  exalted 
ladies  of  the  Grand  Council  on  the  occasion  of  the  annual 
meeting,  and  the  honours  are  done  to  him  by  live  duchesses 
and  Ministers  or  ez-Ministers.  True,  his  share  has  not 
amounted  to  very  much,  there  were  several  thousand  people 
thronging  the  gorgeous  reception-rooms,  but  still  he  carries 
away  a  few  shakes  of  the  hand  and  a  gracious  smile  or  two. 

Thus  along  the  whole  line  of  society  enrolled  in  the  League, 
the  self-love  and  vanity  of  its  members,  skilfully  brought  into 
play,  make  them  close  up  and  fall  into  line  behind  a  political 
party,  often  apart  from  or  independently  of  all  political  con- 
victioii.  This  is  why  the  chiefs  of  the  League,  anxious  to 
make  a  wise  use  of  their  resources,  are  never  weary  of  saying 
to  their  dames :  "  Do  not  argue,  take  them  in  socially. "  That 
is  the  watchword  which  sums  up  all  the  strategy  and  all  the 
tactics  of  the  Primrose  League,  ^o  doubt,  politicians  have 
always  traded  on  the  enormous  importance  which  Englishmen 
attach  to  marks  of  outward  attention  from  persons  of  a  higher 
social  rank.  During  election  time  they  lavished  them  on  the 
humblest  citizen;  a  Lord  Wharton  would  come  and  see  Dick 
the  shoemaker  to  hare  a  drink  with  him,  and  would  ask  his 
wife  about  Molly  and  Jenny;  in  our  own  day,  the  working- 
man  or  the  small  shopkeeper  was  courted  and  treated  with 

VOL.    I  -  2  N 


.coy  Google 


fiU  DEMOCRACY   AND  POLITICAL  PARTIES     [thibd  pin 

civil  speeches  and  stnilea  in  the  course  of  the  election  canvass; 
but  once  the  voting  was  over,  they  no  longer  existed  for  the 
more  or  less  exalted  personages  who  had  condescended  to 
notice  them.  The  lower-class  voter  was  only  too  well  aware 
of  this,  and  on  the  next  occasion  he  sometimes  revolted.  The 
Primrose  League  stepped  in  and  filled  up  this  gap  by  ensuring 
through  its  organization  a  permanent  supply  of  civil  speeches 
and  smiles.  They  represented  henceforward  a  market  value 
which  was  all  the  greater  because  the  recent  law  of  1883  made 
the  time-bODonied  practices  of  corruption  much  more  difEcult 
and  more  dangerous,  while  the  social  conaideratum  which  the 
Primrose  League  undertook  to  provide,  to  meet  the  public 
demand,  could  be  used  as  a  safe  means  of  electoral  bribery. 

The  social  influence  which  the  League  wields  with  so  much 
skill  does  not  serve  it  solely  for  attracting  people  to  it  and 
keeping  them  in  the  ranks  of  the  Tory  party.  If  its  oppo- 
nents are  to  be  believed,  the  League  also  uses  social  inSuence 
as  a  poisoned  weapon  against  those  who  are  not  of  its  politi- 
cal colour,  by  the  practice  of  "boycotting,"  which  consists  of 
making  a  solitude,  in  the  matter  of  social  relations,  around 
the  person  or  persons  in  question :  no  one  wilt  associate  with 
them ;  no  one  will  buy  anything  from  them ;  no  orders  for  work 
are  given  them;  they  are  not  employed  in  any  way.  Terror- 
ized in  this  fashion  by  the  League,  small  folk  of  Liberal  views 
are  said  to  be  under  the  distressing  necessity  of  choosing 
between  their  political  convictions  and  their  daily  bread.'  In 
the  course  of  my  investigations  throughout  the  country  I  have 
met  with  complaints  on  this  soore  in  several  places,  but  in 
several  others  the  political  opponents  of  the  League  declared 
unhesitatingly  that  they  were  not  troubled  with  boycotting. 
In  any  event,  boycotting  is  seldom  the  effect  of  a  regular 
order.  In  the  small  localities,  in  the  country  districts  where 
people  who  have  to  earn  their  livelihood  are  more  dependent 
than  elsewhere,  social  pressure  with  a  political  object  takes 
place  of  itself;  the  ground  is  all  ready  for  it,  and  a  politico- 
social  organization  like  the  Primrose  Le^ue,  which  is  always 

1  To  protect  the  Liberal  TOtets  In  the  country  districts  from  intimidation,  ■ 
special  IieaRue  waa  formed,  nnder  the  presidency  of  Hi.  John  Horlej  (Coonty 
Voters'  Defence  AeBoclation) ,  but  it  Boon  came  to  an  end  <for  want  at  elisnta 
to  defend,  sa;  the  Tories). 


.coy  Google 


SIXTH  CHAP.]     AUXILIART   AND  RIVAL  ORGAKIZATIOHS       547 

in  tlie  breach,  naturally  cultivatea  it  by  the  sole  fact  of  ita 
existence.  It  is  Dot  \inlikely  even  tliat  this  state  of  things 
procurea  somewhat  insincere  adhesions  for  the  League;  that 
there  are  wolves  in  sheep's  clothing  in  its  ranks.  But  far 
larger  is  the  number  of  those  who,  with  no  special  sympathy 
for  the  Le^ue  either,  nevertheless  join  it  without  any  social 
pressure:  they  simply  want  to  amuse  themselves,  and  at  a 
cheap  rate.  For  instance,  in  Lancashire,  where  the  people  are 
very  fond  of  dancing,  the  subscription  of  6d.  or  9d.  a  year  is 
readily  paid  for  the  right  of  joining  in  the  daoeea  of  which 
the  Habitations  are  so  lavish. 


The  decisive  share  which  "the  tinion  of  classes"  has  in  the 
activity  and  the  success  of  the  Primrose  League,  sanctions 
the  preponderant  part  played  by  women  who  are  the  great 
engineers  of  this  undertaking,  alike  by  the  privilege  of  their 
sez  which  makes  the  dignus  est  intrare,  in  social  relations, 
depend  on  women  or  receive  its  full  effect  from  their  aesen^ 
and  by  the  special  efforts  and  the  deliberate  will  which  the 
Primrose  Dames  exert  to  win  the  good  graces  of  those  whom 
they  attract  into  the  League  for  the  sake  of  the  party.  Hav- 
ing prepared  the  electoral  ground  by  these  daily  and  hourly 
labours,  they  supply  at  the  moment  of  the  election  a  very 
valuable  contingent  of  canvassers  who  scour  the  constituency 
with  an  energy  and  zeal  which  know  neither  bounds  nor 
measure ;  the  cleverest  of  them  deliver  speeches  every  evening 
in  favour  of  the  Tory  candidate;  others  perform  the  extremely 
irksome  clerical  work,  —  copy  lists,  address  and  distribute  cir- 
culars. In  every  respect  it  may  be  said  that  the  Le^pie  rests 
on  women  ;  it  is  they  who  keep  it  going  and  eventually  ensure 
its  success,  although  the  number  of  members  of  the  male  sex 
not  only  equals,  but  even  slightly  exceeds,  that  of  the  women. 

It  would  be  a  mistake,  however,  to  infer  from  this  that  the 
influence  of  women  in  the  League  corresponds  to  the  impor* 
tance  of  their  rdle.  The  women  work,  bat  the  men  direct 
them,  especially  the  men  in  London.  The  women  are  only 
an  instrument  in  their  hands  which  they  wield  with  skill  and 
firmness,  by  turning  to  account  in  their  case  the  same  feeling 


.coy  Google 


618  DEMOCRACY  AND  POLITICAL  PARTIES    [thikd  f^mt 

on  which  the  women  trade  tliemselves,  — the  snobbery  whioh 
prevails  from  one  end  to  the  other  of  the  social  ladder.  The 
(irand  Council  of  Dames,  which  sits  in  London,  has  no  real 
autliority;  each  of  its  acts  of  any  moment  is  submitted  to 
the  approval  of  the  Orand  Council  composed  of  men.  The 
Oouiieil  of  Bumes  is  simply  a  decorative  body  serring  as  a 
pretext  for  subscriptions,  a  considerable  amountof  which  goes 
into  the  coffers  of  the  Graud  Council. 

It  is  not  only  to  women,  however,  that  the  managers  of  tbo 
League  leave  so  little  authority;  they  govern  the  whole  Or- 
ganization in  general  in  a  somewhat  autocratic  fashion.  The 
share  of  the  local  Habitations  in  the  management  of  the 
League  is  still  a  very  slight,  not  to  say  a  tictitious,  one. 
The  assembly  of  delegates  which  meets  every  year  in  London 
(the  Grand  Habitation)  is  only  a  show  gathering  without 
independence,  without  a  will.  It  is  impossible  for  free  speech 
to  get  a  hearing  there;  it  is  stifled.  All  the  power  is  in  the 
hands  of  the  Grand  Council,  which  is  to  a  great  extent  filled  by 
co-optation.  It  is  only  with  difficulty  that  an  increase  in  the 
proportion  of  the  elected  members  has  been  recently  obtained. 
The  Grand  Council  is  not  less  strongly  opposed  to  all  exten- 
sion of  the  individual  life  of  the  country  Habitations,  to  the 
creation  of  provincial  centres  with  a  little  autonomy.  It  holds 
that  an  organization  supported  solely  by  voluntary  effort  needs 
a  highly  centralized  government. 

VI 

The  success  of  the  League  varies  with  the  localities.  As  a 
general  rule,  it  may  be  said  to  prosper  in  the  rural  districts, 
where  social  influence  is  more  powerful  and  where  the  popu- 
lation is  more  accessible  to  the  special  methods  of  propaganda 
of  the  League.  Kevertheless,  the  towns  also  often  afford  it  a 
good  base  of  operations,  especially  in  the  lower  quarters,  the 
poor  and  ignorant  inhabitants  of  whioh,  in  fact,  supply  the 
League  with  its  largest  electoral  contingent.  The  north  of 
England  with  its,  up  till  lately,  so  numerous  Radical  strong* 
holds  and  its  hard-headed  population  was  not  amenable  to  the 
League.  The  local  Tories  tliemselves,  in  Korthumberland, 
for  instance,  did  not  always  look  with  favour  on  thia  organiza- 


.coy  Google 


BUTHCHAP.]     AUSILIART   AND   RIVAL  ORGANIZATIOSS       649 

tioD  wfaioh  conducts  politics  "with  dancing  and  feasting." 
They  were  afraid,  too,  that  the  League  would  absorb  part  of 
the  money  which  went  into  the  chest  of  the  regular  organiza- 
tion of  the  party.  But  since  then  the  League  has  mantled  to 
extend  its  system  into  these  localities,  and  in  this  or  that  large 
town  where  the  Tory  leaders  had  roundly  declared  that  there 
was  no  room  for  the  League,  there  are  now  seven  or  eight 
Habitations.  At  the  present  moment  the  League  numbers  as 
many  as  2300  Habitations,  with  more  than  a  million  and  a 
quarter  members. 

This  wonderful  success  cannot,  it  ia  true,  be  accounted  for 
solely,  by  the  fact  that  the  League  offers  the  English  people 
distractions  and  gratifies  its  vanity.  There  are  other  and 
deeper  causes,  of  which  the  reader  may  have  already  caught  a 
glimpse  in  the  foregoing  sketch.  In  the  first  place,  the  Prim- 
rose League  has  really  succeeded  in  levelling,  to  some  extent, 
the  barriers  of  classes  which  still  attain  such  a  height  in  Eng- 
land in  spite  of  the  democratic  progress  achieved.  The  class 
spirit,  "the  classicism,  this  curse  of  England,"  as  old  Bam- 
ford  used  to  say,'  made  the  small  shopkeeper,  the  artiSEui,  a 
social  pariah  wliose  sole  touch  was  pollution.  On  this  sore 
spot  the  Primrose  League  has  poured  healing  balm ;  no  matter 
if  it  is  composed  of  coarse  ingredients.  From  time  to  time 
it  introduces  the  humble  outsider  within  the  circle  of  the 
"upper  ten,"  of  the  possessors  of  "blue  blood,"  and  ensures 
him  a  courteous,  if  not  a  cordial,  reception  from  them.  The 
obsequious  alacrity  with  which  he  seizes  the  opportunity  of 
drawing  close  to  them  for  a  few  moments,  of  getting  a  near 
view  of  them,  of  rubbing  up  against  them  with  a  feeling  of 
beatitude  on  account  of  their  rank  or  their  wealth,  is  no  doubt 
devoid  of  moral  beauty.  But  beneath  this  snobbery,  to  which 
one  may,  if  one  is  so  disposed,  apply  the  epithet  of  abject,  is 
human  dignity  vindicating  its  too  long  neglected  rights. 

Again,  political  relations  had,  for  more  than  half  a  century, 
in  vain  called  for  a  social  cement;  all  that  they  got  was  the 
artificial  cement  of  party  with  its  more  and  mote  perfected 
machinery.  The  Primrose  League  offered  as  a  rallying- point 
for  all  men  of  good-will  in  every  condition  of  life  more  general 
and  more  generous  principles  than  the  narrow  and  sectarian 
1  Patsagtt  in  the  Life  of  a  Radical. 


.CD,  Google 


660  DEMOCRACY  AND  POLITICAL  PARTIES    (thibd  risr 

dogmatism  of  party;  it  wrote  upon  its  banner  tlie  words:  con- 
stitution, country,  religion,  without  any  epithet.  Mien's 
imaginations  could  not  help  being  impressed,  the  hearts  in 
which  a  desire  for  political  fraternity  was  vaguely  stirring, 
less  coDscient  and  less  articulate  than  that  for  social  fraternity, 
but  not  less  real,  were  touched.  Here,  again,  it  mattered  little 
that  this  was  only  an  illusion,  that  in  reality  the  League  bad 
farmed  out  inalienable  principles  to  a  party.  In  this  case, 
and  far  more  still  in  that  of  the  union  of  classes,  it  was  base 
metal  which  it  offered  instead  of  pure  gold;  but  it  you  are  not 
aware  of  it,  is  not  bad  money  as  good  as  genuine  money  ?  On 
the  other  hand,  it  is  an  acknowledged  fact  that  in  the  long 
run  spurious  coin  debases  the  market.  In  the  moral  sphere  the 
effect  is  the  same,  —  spurious  moral  coin  degrades  the  national 
character.  And  it  is  permissible  to  enquire  what  the  influ- 
ence of  the  Primrose  League'is  in  this  respect. 

The  grateful  leaders  of  the  Tory  party,  with  Lord  Salisbury 
at  their  head,  are  never  weary  of  extolling  the  beneficent  effect 
of  the  League  on  English  political  life.  According  to  them, 
it  has  not  only  provided  a  most  potent  instrument  for  drawing 
together  the  children  of  the  common  country  for  the  defence 
of  their  prosperity,  but  it  has  also  developed  public  spirit  and 
rescued  the  English  democracy  from  the  domination  of  the 
professional  politician,  by  preventing  it  from  sinking  into  the 
condition  of  a  mechanically  wire-pulled  democracy.*  No  doubt 
the  League  brings  together  the  "children  of  the  common  coun- 
try," and  even  does  so  often,  but  with  what  object  has  been 
seen.  The  most  obvious  result  of  these  meetings,  the  least 
debatable  from  a  moral  point  of  view,  amounts  perhaps  to  a 
certain  softening  of  manners;  for  the  lower-class  Englishman, 
o^n  somewhat  brutal  or  of  rough  exterior,  the  meetings  of 
the  Frimrose  League,  presided  over  by  dames  and  "gentle- 
men," are  a  sort  of  drawing-room  where  he  acquires  a  polish. 
The  League's  claims  to  gratitude  for  having  quickened  public 
spirit  would  be  open  to  dispute  if  it  were  admitted  that  public 
spirit  presupposes  a  consciousness  of  the  public  interest  and 
unselfish  devotion  to  the  public  weal.    For  the  motive  power  of 

1  Cf.  Lord  SiUibnry'g  ipeech  ot  tb«  23d  April,  1889,  at  Bristol,  knd  ot  the 
Xtb  May,  1B89,  on  the  oocasion  ot  (he  alith  addiuI  meatlDg  of  the  Qraod 
HabiCatioQ. 


.CD,  Google 


stXTHCHAp.]     AUXILIARY   ASD   RIVAL   ORGANIZATIOKS       561 

the  Leagae  is  utter  selfishness  on  the  part  of  the  "snperiors," 
who  try  to  pick  up  votes  by  it,  and  on  the  part  of  the  "  in- 
feriors," who  join  it  for  the  sake  of  the  greetings  and  smiles  of 
these  personages.  The  regular  organizations  of  both  parties  are 
very  far  from  being  free  from  selfishness,  but  with  the  League 
it  is  undisguised,  it  hails  people  and  entices  them  like  passers-by 
in  a  public  thoroughfare.  No  doubt  the  League  has  succeeded 
in  lifting  a  good  many  voters  out  of  their  political  indifference ; 
it  has  laid  hold  of  a  large  section  of  the  new  country  voters 
invested  with  political  power  by  the  extension  of  the  suffrage, 
and  not  prepared  for  it;  it  goes  on  mobilizing  at  each  election 
contingents  which,  left  to  themselves,  would  never  have  ap- 
peared on  the  field  of  battle.  But  if  they  only  blindly  obey 
the  word  of  command,  as  is  the  case  with  the  ignorant  portion 
of  the  electorate  which  the  League  brings  up  to  the  poll,  they 
simply  constitute  what  has  been  styled  in  America  "voting 
cattle,"  from  which  the  party  derives  a  momentary  advantage, 
but  from  which  the  honour  and  the  future  of  the  country  suffer. 
As  to  the  merit  ascribed  to  the  League  of  preventing  Eng- 
land from  sinking  into  the  condition  of  a  "mechanically  wire- 
pulled  democracy,"  it  has  in  reality  all  the  less  power  of  doing 
80  because  it  is  itself  a  machinery  and,  what  is  novel  and 
unprecedented,  a  machinery  which  manufactures  sentiments. 
By  the  steady  movement  of  its  special  organization,  working 
methodically  and  continuously,  it  is  able  to  supply  the  market 
of  the  party  with  locuU  consideration  to  order,  so  to  speak. 
And,  as  in  modern  industry,  it  can  easily  find  an  outlet  for 
its  product  at  a  distance  by  consigning,  for  meetings  and 
fStes,  ladies  of  title  to  the  localities  which  have  no  supply  of 
them.  Although  advancing  in  the  country  by  simple  vfs 
inertiae,  the  League  is  beginning  to  show  symptoms  of  decay 
(this  twofold  phenomenon,  contradictory  in  appearance,  is  not 
unknown  in  lai^  organizations;  it  marks  their  culminating 
poiut).  The  receipts  of  the  Grand  Council,  consisting  mainly 
of  "  tributes  "  from  the  knights  and  dames  of  the  local  Habita- 
tions, are  on  the  decline,  while  in  a  good  many  Habitations 
the  ardour  of  the  early  days  is  cooling  down.  Liberal  sub- 
scriptions were  contributed  to  the  Habitations  to  enable  them 
to  give  fStes  and  entertainments,  a  show  was  made  of  meeting 
people  who  had  been  habitually  considered  as  inferior  beings 


.coy  Google 


652  DEMOCRACY  AND  POLITICAL  PARTIES    [thibd  Piit 

on  equal  terms )  these  heavy  sacrifices  were  submitted  to,  bat 
the  game  is  beginniDg  to  pall.  Xererthelesa,  the  Primrose 
Le^ue  still  has  a  future  before  it,  and  a  couaiderable  part  to 
plaj  in  English  political  life.  A  marked  elevation  of  the 
intellectual  and  moral  standard  of  the  electoral  masses  com- 
bined with  a  real  readjustment  of  the  reciprocal  feelings  of 
classes,  or  a  hopeless  decline  in  the  fortunes  of  the  Tory  party, 
would  be  required  to  deprive  the  League  of  its  raiaon  d'Ore. 

VII 

The  appearance  on  the  scene  of  the  Primrose  Le^ue,  bring- 
ing an  unexpected  and  extremely  effective  reinforcement  to  the 
Tory  party,  surprised  the  Liberals  greatly,  and  before  long 
they  decided  to  use  the  same  weapon  against  their  opponents, 
to  confront  the  Primrose  Habitations  with  Attoctationa  of 
Libei-al  Women.  Started  in  the  north  (at  York)  by  isolated 
efforts,  the  movement  gradually  spread,  and  in  1886  there 
were  already  a  sufficient  number  of  Womeu's  Associations  to 
form  a  federation.  The  outline  of  their  organization  was  bor- 
rowed from  that  of  the  Caucus ;  that  is  to  say,  it  is  established 
on  a  representative  basis,  by  means  of  successive  delegations, 
with  complete  self-government.  The  autonomy  is  twofold: 
not  only  are  the  Women's  Associations  not  managed  autocrati- 
cally from  the  centre,  but  men  have  no  power  in  them,  for 
they  are  composed  exolnsively  of  women,  unlike  those  of  the 
Primrose  League.  Joining  in  the  warfare  of  the  political 
parties,  the  Liberal  women  set  before  themselves  a  loftier  ideal 
than  that  which  appeared  to  them  to  issue  from  the  practices 
of  the  Primrose  Dames;  their  aim  was  to  work  for  political 
and  social  progress  by  adopting  a  moral  as  well  as  a  political 
standard  of  action.  Their  propaganda  therefore  was  to  be 
directed  not  only  towards  men,  towards  electors  who,  by 
their  votes,  can  assure  the  triumph  of  Liberal  principles 
in  legislation  and  in  government,  but  was  to  be  addressed 
especially  to  women,  to  arouse  in  them  the  public  spirit,  the 
interest  in  the  common  weal,  which  the  want  of  education  as 
well  as  the  manners  of  the  times  had  hitherto  prevented  them 
from  feeling.  As  regards  modes  of  action,  the  Associations 
were  to  appeal  only  to  the  intelligence  and  the  moral  sense. 


.coy  Google 


SIXTH  CHAP.]    AUXILIART  AND  RIVAL  ORGANIZA'nONS      668 

Consequently,  they  hare  esohewed  all  the  symbols  and  em- 
blems, all  the  high-soundii^  titles,  all  the  cheap  display  of 
badges  and  decorations,  with  irhieh  their  Tory  rivals  hare 
bedecked  themselves. 

The  importance  of  the  Associations  formed  by  Liberal 
women  varies  a  great  deal  from  one  locality  to  another.  Some 
of  them  number  as  many  as  a  thousand  or  fifteen  hundred 
members,  whereas  others  do  not  run  to  a  hundred  or  even 
have  only  an  intermittent  existence.  The  great  majority 
of  the  members  is  composed  of  wives  of  working-men,  but 
the  women  of  the  middle  class  manage  and,  so  to  speak, 
keep  alive  the  o^anizations.  The  aristoccatie  element  is  not 
absolutely  wanting,  but  it  is  of  small  importance  and  cannot 
be  compared  with  the  troop  of  titled  dames  and  of  ladies 
whom  the  Primrose  League  can  bring  into  line.  The  pecu- 
niary resources  of  the  Liberal  Associations  are  consequently 
not  considerable;  provided  by  the  donations  of  the  well-to-do 
members,  they  are  increased  by  the  very  modest  contributions 
of  the  members  belonging  to  the  working  class.  The  women 
of  the  lower  orders,  when  they  pay,  do  it  with  a  regularity 
and  a  conviction  which  are  all  the  more  praiseworthy  because 
the  Associations  cannot  offer  them  the  same  satisfactions  as 
the  Primrose  League.  There  is,  in  fact,  a  good  deal  of  politi- 
cal earnestness  about  them  which  resembles  the  religious  fer- 
vour of  simple  souls,  and  many  of  them  have  shown  a  real 
wish  to  learn,  to  obtain  a  glimpse  into  the  mysterious  region 
called  "politics."  The  methods  employed  for  "political  edu- 
cation," which  is  one  of  the  principal  objects  of  the  women's 
organization,  are  of  the  usual  type:  meetings,  lectures,  and 
distribution  of  literature.  Their  meetings  have  this  special 
feature,  that  they  are  hardly  ever  large  public  gatherings,  like 
those  organized  by  the  caucuses,  but  more  of  a  private  charac- 
ter and  with  an  aspect  differing  according  to  the  surroundings, 
from  the  drawing-room  meetings  down  to  the  cottage  meetings 
in  the  villages.  In  the  former  case,  the  members  assemble 
in  a  lady's  large  drawing-room  to  hear  speeches  and  political 
lectures  delivered  by  persons  of  either  sex;  in  the  latter,  the 
village  women  meet  in  a  cottage  or  in  a  kitchen  to  hear  a  tour- 
ing lady  politician  or  to  join  in  the  perusal  of  a  newspaper, 
interrupted  now  and  then  by  the  unruliness  of  the  domestic 


.coy  Google 


654  DEMOCRACY  AND  POLITICAL  PARTIES    [tdibt  part 

animals,  which  has  to  be  restrained.  Politics  are  often  com- 
bined with  women's  work  in  the  form  of  "sewing-meetings" 
and  others  which  are  held  periodically.  But  the  most  popu- 
lar combination  is,  as  with  the  Primrose  people,  the  "tea 
meetings"  and  other  "social  meetings,"  embellished  with  in- 
strumental and  especially  vocal  music.  It  will  be  seen  that 
the  Liberal  women  have  all  the  same  borrowed  from  the  Prim- 
rose League  not  only  the  idea  of  their  organization,  but  also 
some  of  their  modes  of  action,  within  somewhat  modest  limits 
it  is  true.  Their  teas  and  conversaziones  are  but  a  tame  re- 
flection of  the  fetes  of  the  League;  no  ventriloquism,  Blondin 
rope-walking,  or  greasy  poles,  no  "union  of  classes"  effected 
by  bringing  together  Duchesses  and  washerwomen.  But,  on 
the  other  hand,  the  Associations  of  Liberal  women  have  not 
succeeded  in  raising  the  political  prop^^nda  to  the  moral  level 
which  they  had  in  their  minds.  It  is  only  fair  to  admit  that 
very  sincere  and  very  serious  efforts  were  made  to  carry  out 
the  plans  of  civic  education  which  they  had  formed.  The 
Associations  or  their  Federation  organized  lectures  and  even 
regular  courses  of  civic  instruction  given  by  eminent  women. 
In  a  good  many  places  energetic  and  devoted  persons  sought 
out  the  women  of  the  lower  orders  and  imparted  to  them  a 
little  political  knowledge  of  the  most  rudimentary  kind;  with 
this  object  they  visited  country  districts,  penetrating  even  into 
small  hamlets.  Nevertheless,  these  efforts  have  not  attained 
great  dimensions,  being  paralyzed  at  one  time  by  the  enor- 
mous difficulties  of  the  undertaking,  at  another  by  the  elec- 
tioneering preoccupations  which  —  save  as  regards  the  tnodtw 
operandi' — absorbed  the  Liberal  women  almost  as  much  as  the 
Primrose  Dames. 

The  Women's  Associations  have,  in  fact,  become  a  sort  of 
extension  of  the  party  machine.  Like  the  Primrose  Dames, 
the  members  take  a  lai^  part  in  the  canvass,  with  this  dif- 
ference, that  in  the  Liberal  camp  not  only  "ladies"  but  also 
women  of  the  lower  classes  are  mobilized  and  sent  into  the 
field;  and  these  latter  are  by  no  means  the  least  zealous.  The 
oratory  of  the  female  speakers  is  addressed  both  to  women  and 
to  men.  They  speak  in  assemblies  composed  exclusively  of 
women  as  well  as  in  public  meetings  by  the  side  of  orators 
of  the  stronger  sex.     In  local  elections,  in  which  women  have 


.coy  Google 


•isTHCHAp.]    AUXILIARY  AND  RIVAL  ORGANIZATIONS      656 

tlie  right  of  voting,  it  is  perfect!;  natural  that  they  should  he 
appealed  to;  but  often  it  is  deemed  advisable  to  do  so  even  in 
questions  of  national  polities,  so  as  to  influence  men  through 
tiiem,  especially  when  the  question  presents  itself  or  can  be 
presented  in  a  moral  still  more  than  in  a  political  aspect  (for 
instance,  to  protest  against  the  oppression  of  Ireland,  or  gainst 
the  laws  relating  to  the  drink  traffic,  etc.).  Relatively  speak- 
ing, political  eloquence  is  more  highly  developed  and  better  rep- 
resented among  the  Liberal  women  than  among  the  Primrose 
Dames.  The  habitual  weapon  of  the  latter  is  the  prestige  of 
their  social  rank  and  of  their  wealth,  so  that  it  is  enough  for 
them  to  show  themselves;  whereas  the  Liberal  women  politi- 
cians, being  often  destitute  of  either,  can  only  make  an 
impression  by  their  ability,  their  incisive  speech,  or  their 
argumentative  power.  But  even  among  the  Liberal  women 
the  number  of  fluent  speakers  is  not  large;  the  proportion 
of  practised  orators,  trained  in  the  arts  of  the  platform, 
is  of  course  still  smaller.  There  is  a  tiny  group  of  them 
which  stocks,  so  to  speak,  the  whole  political  market.  At 
the  request  of  the  local  Associations  or  of  candidates,  the 
Women's  Federation  despatches  its  best  speakers  from  London 
to  all  parts  of  the  kingdom.  At  by-elections  of  any  impor- 
tance, they  make  their  appearance,  often  arriving  from  a  dis- 
tance, in  the  train  of  the  speakers  of  the  party  who  invade, 
as  we  have  seen,  the  contested  constituencies,  and  they  hold 
forth  from  morning  till  night  to  help  to  carry  the  Tory  posi- 
tion. At  a  general  election  those  of  the  lady  speakers  who 
have  no  husbands  standing  for  Parliament  also  scour  the 
country,  visiting  the  points  which  are  in  the  greatest  danger. 
The  other  constituencies  have  to  put  up  with  speakers  of  local 
reputation,  a  good  many  of  whom,  however,  are  also  imported 
from  neighbouring  districts.  The  Primrose  Dames  seldom 
travel  tax;  they  prefer  to  operate  in  their  own  neighbourhood, 
where  they  are  known  and  where  their  name  is  a  power  in  itself. 
The  assistance  which  the  Liberal  politicians  of  the  fair  sex 
thus  render  to  their  party,  by  canvassing,  by  speaking,  or  by 
helping  the  caucuses  in  the  work  of  registration  and  in  other 
ways,  is  by  no  means  a  negligible  quantity,  and  it  is  assuming 
larger  dimensions  every  year.  Still,  compared  with  that  of 
the  Primrose  Le^ue,  their  work  is  much  less  effective;  it 


.coy  Google 


666  DEMOCHACr  AND  POLITICAL  PARTIES    [TnniBrABr 

brings  in,  so  to  speak,  mueh  less  to  th«  Liberal  party  than  the 
League  does  to  the  Tory  part; :  tlie  Liberal  women  enrolled 
in  the  ABSooiations  are  far  inferior  to  the  Primrose  mimen  in 
numbers  and  in  social  influenoe.  Besides  this,  they  are  divided 
among  tbemselTes  by  the  grave  question  of  women's  suffrage, 
which  has  naturally  come  more  to  the  front  since  the  parties 
have  invited  women  to  share  in  their  political  contests.  Having 
the  drudgery,  many  of  them  think  they  should  have  the  honour 
as  well,  and  they  strenuously  demand  the  political  vote.  When 
the  Liberal  Federation  was  formed,  the  most  ardent  women 
wished  to  make  it  a  ba«e  of  operations  for  their  claims  to  the 
suffrage,  bat  the  majority,  being  conceined  solely  about  the  in- 
terests of  Liberalism  and  the  Liberal  party,  managed  to  thrust 
the  question  into  the  background  by  conoefiling  it  under  a  vague 
and  general  formula  inserted  in  the  statutes  and  making  the 
promotion  of  "just  laws  for  women  "  one  of  the  "  objects  "  of  the 
Federation.  The  latter  with  its  branches  did  in  fact  devote 
itself  wholly  to  the  party  and,  like  a  faithful  servant,  obediently 
performed  for  it  all  the  work  in  its  power.  But  when,  in  1892, 
Mr.  Gladstone  declared  energetically  against  the  resolution 
submitted  to  Parliament  in  favour  of  conferring  the  parlia- 
mentary franchise  on  women,  the  revolt  broke  out.  The 
champions  of  the  political  rights  of  their  sex  who  succeeded 
in  the  meanwhile  in  "  capturing  "  the  Coiincil  of  the  Federa- 
tion, in  obtaining  a  majority  there,  came  to  the  conclusion 
that  they  had  had  enough  of  blind  submission  to  the  party 
and  its  leader,  Mr.  Gladstone,  who  simply  made  use  of  them 
for  their  own  ends.  The  moderate  minority  of  the  Council, 
or  rather  that  loyal  to  the  party,  resigned  in  a  body,  and 
soon  afterwards  founded  an  independent  organization,  with 
the  title  of  "National  Liberal  Association  of  Women,"  with- 
out any  heed  to  female  sutfrage.  A  certain  number  of  local 
Associations  went  over  to  the  dissentients,  but  the  very  great 
majority  (more  than  400  Aasociations,  with  nearly  80,000 
members)  remained  affiliated  to  the  Federation.  Thus  there 
are  now  two  organizations  of  women  working  on  equal  terms 
for  the  Liberal  party. 

The  divergence  on  the  question  of  the  suffrage  is  not  the 
only  one  which  divides  the  rival  sisters.  Mant^d  by  women 
of  the  aristocracy  and  of  the  well-to-do  middle  class,  full  of 


.coy  Google 


8IITHOHAP.]    AUXILIART  AND  RIVAL  ORGANIZATIONS      667 

oombatiye  ardoar,  the  F«der&tloD  has  in  its  local  sections  a 
great  number  of  women  of  the  Nonconformist  lower  middle 
class,  who,  with  the  best  intentions  in  the  world,  often  display 
the  temperament  of  a^ressire  virtue  of  which  the  Koncon- 
formist  sects  are  a  hotbed.  Their  central  body,  the  Feder- 
ation, which  considers  itself  not  only  as  a  party  organization 
but  also  as  a  parliament  of  the  Bex,  delights  in  "passing 
resolutions  "  on  all  sorts  of  subjects,  and  in  raising  questions 
relating  to  the  sex,  even  of  the  most  delicate  kind,  indulging, 
for  instance,  in  public  discussion  of  the  necessity  of  passing  a 
law  against  incest,  of  abolishing  the  supervision  of  women  in 
cantonments  in  India,  and  then  passing  on  to  the  question  of 
vivisection,  or  to  that  of  legislative  measures  against  rural 
advertising,  against  the  huge  advertisements  which  "degrade 
our  English  country."  The  2falional  Aaaociaiion  of  Liberal 
women  has  grouped  areund  it  steadier  elements.  It  makes 
less  noise,  hardly  indulges  at  all  in  the  favourite  pastime  of 
the  caucuses,  which  consists  of  passing  hortatory,  commina- 
tory,  or  other  "resolutions,"  but  thinks  more  of  the  political 
-education  of  its  adherents  and,  what  is  better  still,  of  that  of 
its  own  general  staff.  It  discharges  this  last  dul^  admirably  by 
organizing  in  its  London  office  periodical  discussions  among  its 
members,  lectures  on  the  questions  of  the  day,  delivered  by 
the  most  competent  persons, — 'Ministers  in  charge  of  Bills 
submitted  to  Parliament,  eminent  members  of  the  assemblies 
where  the  problem  is  raised,  publicists  who  have  connected 
their  name  with  the  study  of  the  question. 

The  third  party  which  has  been  formed  in  consequence  of 
the  Liberal  split  caused  by  Irish  Home  Eule,  the  Liberal 
Unionists,  who  have  in  many  constituencies  an  organization 
of  their  own  with  a  central  office  in  London,  also  possess  an 
Organization  of  women  (Women's  Liberal  Unionist  Associa- 
tion), with  sixty  or  so  affiliated  branches  constructed  on  the 
same  basis  and  working  almost  on  the  same  lines  as  the 
National  Liberal  Association  which  has  just  been  described. 

vin 

Thus,  in  the  neret-ending  struggle  between  the  various 
shades  of  public  opinion,  or  the  various  organized  interests, 


.coy  Google 


568  DEMOCRACY  AND  POLITICAt,  PARTIES    [tiiibdp»m 

not  one  of  the  combatants  wishing  to  rank  as  a  party  thinks 
itself  able  to  dispense  with  the  aid  of  women.  Excluded  b; 
the  oonetitution  from  all  participation  in  political  affairs,  kept 
at  a  distance  from  the  forum  by  tradition  and  national  mao- 
ners,  they  are  now  entreated  on  all  sides  to  descend  into  the 
lists  in  spite  of  the  constitution  and  notwithstanding  tradition. 
All  the  fury  of  parties  was  required  to  drive  men  to  this  ex- 
tremity. It  resembles  the  special  leries,  when  the  belliger- 
ents, decimated  and  exhausted  but  still  eager  for  the  fight,  hunt 
up  fresh  food  for  powder  to  sate  their  rage.  In  order  to  cope 
with  their  antagonists,  many  people  encourage,  others,  out  of 
party  devotion,  tolerate,  the  intervention  of  women  in  militant 
politics,  but  the  number  of  men  who  are  frankly  opposed  to 
it,  or  who,  at  any  rate,  view  it  with  scepticism,  is  still  veiy 
large.  It  shocks  the  old-fashioned  politicians,  both  Tory  and 
Liberal,  and  does  not  always  rouse  the  enthusiasm  of  the  new 
generation.  How  often  hare  I  heard  the  following  from  the 
mouth  of  Conservatives  and  Eadicals:  "There  is  no  good  in 
women's  electioneering."  Several  representatives  of  the 
organizations  share  this  opinion,  basing  it  often  on  the  want 
of  tact  displayed  by  women  politicians,  who,  through  excess  of 
zeal  untempered  by  prudence,  are  easily  led  into  acts  of  petty 
electoral  corruption,  on  the  Tory  as  well  as  on  the  Liberal 
side,  or  who  in  their  canvass  make  such  a  dead  set  at  the  voter 
as  to  disgust  him.  Many  voters  not  yet  emancipated  from  the 
old  notions  and  prejudices  relating  to  the  position  of  women, 
even  consider  it  somewhat  humiliating  to  be  canvassed  by  a 
woman,  who  comes  to  lecture  them  on  politics.  Again,  the 
husbands,  in  the  lower  class  for  instance,  do  not  always 
look  with  favour  on  the  political  activity  of  their  wives  — 
sometimes  from  a  certain  sex  jealousy,  at  others,  owing  to 
the  time  taken  up  by  politics.  Working-men  submit  to  or 
even  approve  of  their  wives  canvassing  at  a  general  elec- 
tion in  which  the  fate  of  their  party  is  determined  for 
several  years,  but  they  do  not  see  the  necessity  of  their  do- 
ing political  work  continually.  In  the  middle  class,  where 
the  women  have  more  leisure,  the  time  spent  is  not  of  the 
same  importance,  but  the  perpetual  coming  and  going  caused 
by  the  political  activity  of  women,  the  series  of  committee 
meetings,  of  general  meetings,  of  preparations  for  ffitos,  may 


.coy  Google 


iiXTHCHAP.]     AUXILIARY   AND   RIVAL   ORGANIZATIONS       659 

be  very  irritating  for  the  husband  of  a  lady  president  and 
make  him  "disgusted  with  all  this  business."  Not  a  few 
people,  too,  are  offended  by  the  exaggerated  energy  with  which 
women  put  tliemselves  forward  in  election  campaigns.  In 
fact,  the  readiness  of  certain  women  politicians  to  lay  hold  of 
any  weapon  in  the  interest  of  their  party  and  of  the  candi- 
date, who  is  perhaps  a  near  relation,  has  made  them  introduce 
unprecedented  traits  into  electoral  tactics.'  However,  not 
much  attention  is  paid  to  grumblers  in  the  parties,  and  all 
help  is  accepted  from  whatever  quarter  it  comes. 

As  for  the  attitude  of  women  in  reference  to  their  intro- 
duction into  militant  politics,  it  may  be  said,  in  a  general 
way,  that  they  showed  much  alacrity  in  responding  to  the 
appeal  of  the  parties,  more  than  they  had  exhibited  in  filling 
the  position  which  the  Legislature  had  assigned  them  in 
local  administration,  by  conferring  on  them  the  right  to 
vote  for  town  councils  and  school  boards  (and  by  implica- 
tion the  right  of  being  elected  to  these  latter).  Party  poli- 
tics, even  in  their  extra-constitutional  ways,  evidently  offered 
them  a  field  of  action  which  was  more  attractive,  more 
emotional  in  every  sense  of  the  word,  from  the  highest  down- 
ward. The  imagination  of  the  woman  with  Liberal  connec- 
tions, animated,  by  education  or  contagion,  with  a  wish,  of  a 
very  vague  and  hazy  kind  perhaps,  for  the  greatest  happiness 
of  the  greatest  number,  and  with  a  belief  in  the  infinite  pro- 
gress of  which  "  Liberalism  "  was  to  be  the  vehicle,  showed  her 
how  to  help  the  chariot  forward  by  harnessing  herself  to  that 
of  the   "Liberal   party."     For  the  Primrose  Dames  there 

>  As,  lor  Instance,  the  iromnn  who  accompsnlee  her  hniband  to  ftll  electoral 
roeetingg,  and  in  the  intervale  between  the  speeches  sings  little  tengf  to  imoM 
the  crowd,  and  whose  nmelc-hall  recltatioae  often  acbloTs  more  sdccsbs  than 
all  the  speakers,  and  reallj  win  votM  on  the  election  day.  If  she  Is  a  good 
hand  at  rhjine,  perhaps  elie  will  go  so  far  as  to  lampoon  ber  haabsod'e  com- 
petitor in  otie  meeting  after  another.  Bome  time  ago,  a  lad;,  the  danghter- 
In-law  of  a  Liberal  peer,  who  waa  helping  her  husband  in  his  election 
campaign  b;  fascinating  the  voters  with  her  songs,  introduced  a  stanza  aimed 
at  the  Tory  candidate  into  her  repertoire.  The  latter,  who  was  naturally 
vexed,  wrote  to  the  husband :  "  I  am  informed  that  Mrs.  Z  .  .  .  lately  song 
at ...  the  following:  '  We'll  pnt  the  Tories  to  the  rout,  and  shove  old  X  .  .  . 
np  the  spent.'  "  The  heroine  of  the  Incident  took  npon  herself  to  send  this 
reply:  "I  have  sung  at .  .  .  and  other  places,  with  great  soccess,  the  following 
couplet:  '  We'fe  kept  X  .  .  .  oat,  and  pat  the  Toriea  ap  the  spout.'  Youis 
truly,  Y.  Z." 


.coy  Google 


600  DEMOCRACr  AND  POLITICAL  PARTIES    [thwb  i-abt 

opened  the  blessed  prospect  of  eaTing  bouIb  from  Radical 
damnation,  of  Bnatcbing  from  the  monster  of  levolntion  and 
atheism  the  victims  for  irhom  it  was  lying  in  wait.  The 
embroidery  or  the  painting  of  the  banners  for  the  Habitation 
and  its  committee  meetings  offered  the  mystio  languor  of  her 
dreamy  aoul  and  the  ennui  due  to  want  of  occupation  that 
refuge  which  the  embroidery  of  sacerdotal  ornaments  and 
afternoon  services  afford  to  the  pious  followers  of  the  Church. 
Flinging  themselves  into  the  arena  of  public  life,  Engliah- 
women  were  able  to  impart  more  intensity  to  their  domestic 
virtues,  their  family  devotion  saw  new  and  hitherto  un- 
dreamed-of horizons  open  to  it:  here,  for  instance,  is  a  woman 
who  labours  unremittingly  from  day  to  day  to  win  her  husband 
the  favour  of  his  future  electors;  another,  from  the  moment 
election  time  begins,  leaves  everything,  her  home,  her  pleas- 
ures, delivers  one  speech  after  another,  and  by  sheer  energy 
carries  off  a  seat  in  Parliament  for  her  husband;  a  mother 
rushes  about  the  country  to  address  the  electors,  in  one  place 
for  her  son,  who  is  entering  political  life,  in  another  for  her 
husband,  or,  again,  for  her  brother.  With  many  other  women 
the  motives  which  impel  them  into  the  arena  of  parties  are  of 
sless  elevated  kind;  as  in  the  case  of  many  men,  it  is  the 
glare  of  the  footlights,  the  wish  to  shine  and  to  show  oneself 
off.  Transferred  to  the  political  stage  by  women,  these 
motives  provide  fresh  pabulum  for  the  caboHnaga  which  is 
more  and  more  invading  English  society  and  which  oasts  a 
sort  of  shadow  over  that  lofl^  and  noble  l^pe  of  womanhood 
which  is  peculiar  to  the  Englishwoman  professing  the  maxim 
nihil  humani  a  me  alienum  puto.  Exaggerations  are  all  the 
more  readily  indulged  in  because  the  interest  of  the  good 
cause,  that  is  to  say,  of  the  party,  covers  them  with  its  moral 
authority. 


.coy  Google 


SEVENTH  CHAPTER 

AUXILIARY    AMD   KIVAL   OaOAHIZATIONa    ((SOfUinOed) 
I 

After  the  Women's  Organizations,  which  second  the  regular 
Oiganizations  in  a  general  way,  which  are,  if  one  may  venture 
to  use  the  expreasion,  "maida-of-all-work,"  come  auxiliary 
organizations  entrusted  with  a  particular  duty,  with  speaking  at 
party  meetings.  While  having  an  independent  origin  and 
existence,  these  special  organizations  of  speakers  work  for 
the  political  party  with  which  each  of  them  is  connected. 
The  prototype  of  these  organizations  is  a  Liberal  society 
formed  on  the  eve  of  the  general  election  of  1880,  when  the 
Liberal  party  was  about  to  deliver  a  decisive  attack  on  the 
Tories,  led  by  Lord  Beaconsfield  in  person,  by  a  group  of 
cultivated  young  men  of  various  shades  of  Liberal  opiniou. 
Brimming  over  with  enthusiasm,  they  set  forth  throughout 
the  country  to  champion  the  good  cause  by  their  eloquence. 
Their  ardour  and  their  talent  contributed  to  the  triumph  won 
by  the  Liberal  party,  and  they  decided  to  found  a  permanent 
organization,  which  took  the  name  of  "Eighty  Club,"  in  com- 
memoration of  the  general  election  in  which  they  made  their 
first  campaign.  Having  only  the  name  of  a  chih,  with  no 
special  premises,  meeting  now  in  one  place  and  now  in  another 
(like  the  Cobden  Club  formed  for  the  propaganda  of  free  trade), 
the  Society  proposed  to  bring  together  the  pick  of  the  rising 
generation  of  Liberals  for  the  service  of  the  Liberal  cause 
and  for  enlightening  public  opinion  on  political  questions 
with  a  more  thorough  knowledge  and  in  more  elevated  lan- 
gu^e  than  was  ofEered  by  the  ordinary  rhetoric  of  political 
meetings.  From  time  to  time  the  Society  was  to  invite  states- 
men of  the  party  to  come  and  expound  their  views  to  the 
juniors,  who  would  imbibe  the  instruction  of  their  elders  and 


.coy  Google 


563  DEMOCRACY  AND   POUTICAL   PARTIES     [thibd  i-imr 

qualify  themBelves  to  discharge  their  duty  all  the  better  after- 
wards. The  plan  succeeded,  adhesions  poured  into  the  Eighty 
Club,  from  young  University  graduates,  from  members  of  the 
Bar;  the  leaders  of  the  party  extended  their  patronage  to  it, 
and  many  an  important  political  speech  was  delivered  by  them  at 
its  meetings.  The  part  which  the  members  of  the  Eighty  Club 
took  in  election  campaigns  became  of  importance;  they  pro- 
vided the  party  with  numerous  speakers  and  with  candidates 
ready  to  contest  the  Tory  constituencies.  This  co-operation 
with  the  official  party,  as  well  as  the  influx  of  members,  a 
good  many  of  whom  joined  the  Club  precisely  because  of  its 
relations  with  the  party  Organization,  soon  obliterated  its 
primitive  conception  of  an  independent  brotherhood  of 
preachers  of  Liberal  doctrines.  Caught  in  the  toils  of  the 
party,  the  Eighty  ceased,  by  the  force  of  circumstances,  to  be 
missionaries  of  the  faith  and  became  ministers  of  the  cult.  The 
crisis  of  Home  Rule  for  Ireland  which  divided  the  Liberal  party 
brought  out,  in  the  Eighty  Clnh  as  elsewhere,  the  incompati- 
bility between  the  existence  of  an  organized  party  and  freedom 
of  opinion  within  its  ranks.  Obeying  the  logic  of  parties, 
the  Club,  after  some  attempts  at  moderation  and  toler- 
ance, turned  out  the  dissentient  minority.'  After  that  the 
Club  only  clung  all  the  more  firmly  to  the  party  and  its  of&cial 
leaders,  defending  their  policy  and  nothing  but  their  policy.  It 
became  in  reality  a  piece  of  the  party  machinery:  it  provides 
the  Liberal  Associations  with  speakers  for  their  meetings.  The 
Associations  apply  to  it  afi  to  a  registry  office.  The  services  of 
the  speakers  are,  however,  given  gratuitously.  The  Associa- 
tion, or  in  its  default  the  Club,  defrays  the  travelling  expenses 
only.  An  Association  of  speakers,  the  Eighty  Club  is  at  the 
same  time  a  nursery  of  candidates.  The  young  members  of 
the  Club, — and  they  form  the  majority, — by  practising  on  the 

>  At  the  general  election  of  1886,  brongfat  on  by  the  split,  the  Clnb  left  full 
llbertf  to  its  membera,  but  noon  after  the  election  It  changed  its  attitude. 
Mr.  GladBloiie  having  stated  his  views  on  the  Irish  queatlon  at  one  oF  the  dln- 
nere  of  the  Club,  the  liberal  Unionists  selected  Hr.  CbnmberUiD  for  the  pur- 
pose of  expounding  their  point  of  view  at  the  neit  dinaer.  The  committee  of 
the  Club  opposed  this.  Tlie  general  meeting  ol  members  to  -which  the  Liberal 
UDlonlsts  appealed  decided  against  them,  and  b;  a  majority  vote  rormallj' 
embraced  the  poUcy  of  Home  Rule.  The  minority  was  obliged  to  leave  the 
Club. 


.coy  Google 


BKTBSTHcniP.]    AUXILIARY  AND  RIVAL  ORGANIZATIONS    68S 


platforms,  get  known  in  the  country  to  the  local  Associations 
and  the  central  Organization,  and  by  the  oratorical  assistance 
they  render  establish  claims  on  them  for  being  put  forward  as 
candidates.  Having  attained  this  object,  that  is  to  say,  hav- 
ing got  into  Parliament,  they  remain  members  of  the  Club, 
with  the  additional  duty  of  serving  their  party  on  the  platform. 
Having  been  obliged  to  turn  out  of  the  Eighty  Club,  the 
Liberal  Unionists  founded  the  Liberal  Unionist  Club  on  the 
same  pattern.  The  Conservatives,  on  their  side,  have  created  a 
special  corps  of  speakers  under  the  name  of  "  The  United  Club," 
which  renders  the  same  services  to  the  Tories  as  the  Eighty  does 
to  the  Liberals,  and  it  is  also  a  piece  of  the  machinery  of 
the  party.  It  might  perhaps  be  noted  that  the  United  Club  is 
not  only  a  nursery  of  candidates,  but  a  candidates'  trade-union 
as  well.  The  organization  of  the  Tory  party,  the  Central  Office, 
being  only  too  prone  to  select  the  candidates  from  a  limited 
social  circle,  the  aspirants  who  are  not  so  well  connected,  but 
more  intelligent,  can,  as  an  organized  body,  force  the  hand 
of  the  Central  OfGce  —  now  that  platform  eloquence  is  of 
such  paramount  importance  in  party  contests  —  by  the  simple 
alternative:  no  seats,  no  speakers. 

II 

Along  with  the  auxiliary  organizations  can  be  discerned 
others  which  are  only  allies.  Independent  by  their  origin 
and  their  peculiar  aspirations  of  party  politics,  they  never- 
theless give  their  co-operation  to  one  paxty  or  the  other,  accord- 
ing as  it  is  favourable  or  hostile  to  the  special  cause  which  they 
serve.  The  principal  of  these  special  causes  provided  with 
organizations  which  ally  themselves  with  the  parties  are  con- 
nected with  the  Church  and  thp  public-house.  The  monopoly 
of  the  Established  Church,  which  was  long  so  oppressive  for 
the  ^Nonconformists,  led  them  to  form  an  organization  for  its 
disestablishment,  while  the  mischief  caused  by  drinking  in 
English  society,  and  especially  among  the  toiling  masses,  gave 
rise  to  associations  which  strove  to  obtain  from  Parliament 
legislative  measures  against  the  sale  of  spirituous  liquors. 
Threatened  in  their  interests,  the  publicans  in  their  turn 
organized  themselves  all  over  the  kingdom.     The  Church, 


.coy  Google 


5ft4  DEMOCRACY  AND  POLITICAL  PARTIES    [tfibd  past 

though  already  possessing  an  organization  in  the  clergy,  rein- 
forced it  with  a  special  defence  institution.  The  Liberals 
having  always  fought  for  freedom  of  conscience  and  the  secu- 
larization of  the  State,  and  the  Anglican  Church  having  been 
from  time  immemorial  the  stronghold  of  Toryism,  the  two 
organizations  endeavouring  the  one  to  carry  the  Disestablish- 
ment of  the  Church,  the  other  to  defend  it,  naturally  took 
aides  the  one  with  the  Liberal,  the  other  with  the  Conaerva- 
tive  party.  Again  the  Liberals,  having  been  the  first  to 
espouse  the  cause  of  temperance  in  Parliament,  threw  the 
publicans  into  the  arms  of  the  Tories,  who  were  quite  ready 
to  receive  them.  Thus  by  the  force  of  oircumatancea  there 
has  grown  up  a  community  of  action  between  the  parties  and 
the  organizations  in  question,  which,  without  being  bound 
to  them,  render  them  great  services. 

The  association  which  demands  the  separation  of  Church 
and  State  is  called  the  "  Society  for  the  Liberation  of  Religion 
from  State  Patronage  and  Control,"  or,  by  abbreviation,  the 
"Liberation  Society."  Founded  more  than  half  a  century 
ago,  it  has  rendered  some  service  to  the  cause  of  liberty  of 
conscience.  How  that  this  is  secured,  it  tries  to  deprive  the 
Anglican  Church  of  its  privileged  position — without  much 
success,  however.  Being  anxious  to  get  a  majority  favour- 
able to  disestablishment  in  the  House,  it  intervenes  in  all  the 
elections,  and  it  possesses  for  this  purpose  a  fairly  developed 
machinery  in  the  form  of  paid  agents,  who  each  work  up  a  dis- 
trict, and  numerous  unpaid  correspondents  scattered  over  the 
whole  country,  almost  in  every  parish.  While  keeping  up  very 
close  relations  with  the  Liberal  organizations  which,  by  the 
way,  are  full  of  their  coreligionists,  and  very  often  belonging 
themselves  to  the  caucuses,  the  representatives  of  the  Libera- 
tion Society  try  to  get  a  candidate  favourable  to  disestablish- 
ment brought  forward,  and  once  he  is  selected,  they  do  their 
best  to  ensure  his  success  at  the  poll.  Several  Liberal 
Associations,  on  their  part,  send  delegates  to  the  general 
meetings  of  the  Liberation  Society;  the  ties  which  unite  them 
are,  in  fact,  exceedingly  strong,  for,  as  Mr.  Gladstone  Las 
said,  the  Nonconformists  are  "the  backbone  of  the  Liberal 
party." 

The  Tories,  on  their  side,  have  a  spontaneous  ally  in  the 


.coy  Google 


CHAP.]    AUXILIARY  AND  RIVAL  ORGANIZATIONS    586 

association  for  the  defence  of  the  Anglican  Church,  the 
"Church  Defence  Institution,"  founded  in  1860  to  protect 
the  Church  against  those  who  wish  to  "  dissolve  that  Union 
that  has  existed  between  the  Church  and  the  State  ever  since 
there  was  a  united  England  at  all,  and  to  take  away  from 
Churchmen  and  from  God  Himself  the  money  and  buildings 
which  for  centuries  have  been  set  apart  for  His  honour  and 
service."^  The  Institution  set  to  work  to  secure  the  co- 
operation of  the  clergy  and  the  laity  by  forming  local  Associa- 
tions of  them,  culminating  through  elected  delegates  in  a 
Central  Council.  It  succeeded  in  creating  a  considerable 
number  of  branches  in  the  country,  which  have  materially 
contributed  to  oppose  the  coalition  of  the  Kon conformists  and 
the  Liberals.  Still  it  has  less  intrinsic  importance  than  its 
rival,  the  Liberation  Society;  for  it  borrows  its  principal  force 
of  action  from  the  established  clergy.  The  latter  have  even 
been  recently  made  complete  masters  of  the  organization.  By 
a  sway  of  authority  the  two  Archbishops  of  the  Church  have 
transferred  the  chief  work  of  the  Institution  to  a  small  com- 
mittee of  their  own  creation,  and  placed  all  the  branches  of 
the  Institution  under  the  direct  control  of  the  Bishop  in  each 
diocese.  Finally  the  Institution  was  altogether  absorbed  by 
the  Archbishops'  committee  into  an  "  Amalgamated  body  "  of 
"  Church  Defence  and  Church  Instruction  "  governed,  under 
the  Archbishops,  by  a  Council  and  an  Executive  Committee 
which  are  only  partly  elected.  By  a  curious  innovation, 
which  is  a  sign  of  the  times,  the  Archbishops  added  to  the 
local  organization  presided  over  by  the  Bishop  a  diocesan  com- 
mittee of  ladies,  with  a  central  committee  of  their  own  in 
London  under  the  wing  of  the  Primate  of  the  Church;  and 
then  by  the  rules  of  the  "Amalgamated  body"  the  direct  re- 
presentatives of  each  Diocese  in  the  Council  were  made  to 
consist  one  half  of  men  and  one  half  of  women.  Here  again, 
as  in  the  Primrose  League,  women  are  invited  to  fight  the 
good  fight  for  the  defence  of  the  old  politico- ecclesiastical 
order. 

The  other  organization  allied  with  the  Tories,  the  co-opera- 
tion of  which  is  much  more  direct,  and  certainly  more  effective, 

No.  8, 


.coy  Google 


560  DEMOCRACT  AND  POLITICAL  PARTIES    [tbird  past 

is  the  association  of  the  publicans,  the  "  Licensed  Victuallers' 
Association."  Financed  by  the  great  brewers  and  distillers, 
it  has  spread  its  net,  not  to  say  its  web,  all  over  the  country. 
It  haa  divided  the  territory  of  the  kingdom  into  districts,  each 
entrusted  to  paid  agents,  who  supervise  and  stir  up  the  publi- 
cans in  the  electoral  struggle.  The  object  is  to  return  candi- 
dates who  will  oppose  the  measures  aimed  at  the  dtink  traffic, 
or,  what  almost  amounts  to  the  same  thing,  to  help  to  get 
in  Tory  candidates.  With  but  few  exceptions  the  licensed 
victuallers  are  all  enrolled  in  this  crusade,  so  that  their  influ- 
ence, which  is  unquestionably  great,  may  be  brought  to  bear  on 
the  voters.  The  publican  is  often  far  more  the  director  of 
his  customers'  consciences  than  the  clergyman.  The  unedu- 
cated man  of  the  lower  classes  falls  under  his  influence  not 
only  through  frequenting  his  bar  every  day,  but  because  he  is 
often  his  debtor,  without  even  being  led  into  it  by  vice^  in 
small  places  the  publican  is  also  a  sort  of  banker,  a  petty 
usurer,  and  people  are  too  often  obliged  to  have  recourse  to 
him.  Indefatigable  during  election  time,  the  publicans  also 
endeavour  in  the  interval  between  the  elections  to  make 
recruits  among  the  new  voters  who  from  year  to  year  attain 
their  political  majority;  they  try  to  swell  the  Tory  register. 
A  considerable  number  of  voters  "put  on  the  register"  by 
their  efforts  may  turn  the  electoral  scale  in  a  good  many 
constituencies. 

As  a  set-off  to  this,  the  Liberal  party  can  depend  on  the 
great  temperance  organization  known  as  "Tlte  United  King- 
dom Alliance,"  which  possesses  many  adherents  throughout 
the  country.  But  it  is  an  ally  whose  co-operation  is  some- 
times dearly  bought.  Being  for  the  most  part  enthusiasts, 
who  sincerely  believe  that  it  is  in  the  power  of  Parliament  to 
put  a  stop  to  excessive  drinking  by  means  of  laws,  the  temper- 
ance champions  thrust  their  measures  for  prohibiting  the  sale 
of  spirituous  liquors  on  the  Liberal  party  as  the  price  of  their 
assistance.  To  make  things  safer,  the  partisans  of  temperance 
have  attempted  to  "  capture  "  the  caucuses,  and  they  have  been 
successful  in  a  great  many  cases.  Installed  inside  the  Liberal 
organization,  they  can  force  its  hand  all  the  more  easily.  But 
as  in  the  inflexibility  of  their  virtuous  ardour  they  do  not  make 
sufficient  allowance  for  national  idiosyncrasies,  they  alienate 


.coy  Google 


p.]    AUXILIARY  AND  RIVAL  ORGANIZATIONS    667 

a  number  of  voters  from  the  Liberal  party,  and  at  the  last 
general  election  (1896)  they  even  managed  to  get  it  defeated. 
It  is  admitted,  in  fact,  that  "local  veto"  (which  woidd 
give  a  majority  of  the  inhabitants  of  each  locality  the  right 
to  prohibit  the  sale  of  intoxicating  drinks)  had  a  good  deal  to 
do  with  the  rout  of  the  Liberal  party. 

Ill 

Among  the  auxiliary  or  allied  organizations  may  be  ranked 
also  some  which,  while  serving  the  same  cause  as  the  regular 
party  organizations,  endeavour,  or  have  endeavoured,  to  attain 
an  independent  position,  and,  if  the  dream  were  possible, 
even  to  supplant  the  organizations  in  power.  In  fact,  the 
growth  of  the  Caucus  on  the  one  side,  and  of  the  Primrose 
League  on  the  other,  soon  aroused  emulation,  with  more 
or  less  ambitious  aims,  in  the  ranks  of  their  parties. 
There  was  a  great  attraction  in  being  able  to  pull  the  strings  of 
an  organization  covering  the  whole  country  from  London  and 
to  make  it  perform  all  the  movements  desired,  and  there 
seemed  to  be  no  great  difficulty  about  improvising  such  an 
organization.  Some  attempts  in  this  direction  have  been 
made  in  both  camps,  but  they  liave  come  to  nothing.  The 
regular  organizations  have  stifled  them  or  have  let  the  newly 
born  organizations  die  of  inanition.  This  is  also  the  most 
practical  way  of  getting  rid  of  them,  for  the  new  organization 
generally  comes  forward  with  aaaeverationa  of  its  orthodoxy  and 
of  its  ardent  desire  to  serve  the  party  with  all  its  strength.  The 
aspiration  is  such  a  pious  one  that  the  ofHcial  Organization  can 
only  say  amen  to  it.  But  to  live  and  grow,  an  organization 
must,  above  all  things,  have  money,  and  it  is  there  that  the  old 
organization  of  the  party  lies  in  wait  for  the  young  one.  It 
intimates  to  the  zealots  of  the  party  whose  generosity  is  ap- 
pealed to,  that  if  they  liave  more  money  than  they  know  what 
to  do  with,  they  are  at  liberty  to  part  with  it,  and  as  no  one 
ever  has  a  superabundance  of  money,  the  new  organizations 
die  out  or  vegetate  for  want  of  Bustenance. 

Among  the  organizations  planned  or  actually  created  under 
these  conditions  may  be  cited  two  imitations  of  the  Primrose 
League,  the  one  Liberal,  the  other  Conservative.     The  first, 


.coy  Google 


B«8  DBMOCRACT  AND  POLITICAL  PARTIES    [ihibd  fast 

"The  Liberal  League  of  Great  and  Greater  Britain,"  tried  to 
bring  about  the  triumpb  of  Liberal  principles  "  bj  associatiag 
men  and  women  of  all  sections  of  the  Liberal  Party"  in 
lodges  of  companions,  provided  with  diplomas  and  badges  and 
governed  by  a  "Central  Lodge"  and  a  "Supreme  Council"; 
after  having  founded  —  in  several  cases  on  paper  only  —  about 
a  hundred  lodges,  it  became  extinct.  The  Tory  imitation, 
"The  National  Conservative  League,"  formed  of  lodges  em- 
bracing all  classes  of  society  and  having  at  its  head  grand 
masters,  a  grand  secretary,  a  grand  treasurer,  a  grand  librarian, 
etc.,  still  subsists.  It  also  claims  to  promote  the  union  of 
classes  for  the  benefit  of  the  Tory  party,  and  that  without 
going  over  the  same  ground  as  the  Primrose  League,  by  oper- 
ating exclusively  on  the  lowest  social  strata,  on  the  dregs  of 
the  population,  which  by  their  very  nature  escape  the  Primrose 
Dames.  It  aims  at  procuring  the  return  of  Tory  working- 
men  to  Parliament.  In  the  meanwhile,  for  the  sake  of  their 
"political  education,"  the  lower  orders  are  enrolled  in  the 
lodges,  where  they  meet  with  gentlemen,  nay  with  Lords, 
who  in  the  public-houses  used  as  a  rendezvous  for  the  lodges 
hobnob  with  them,  call  them  "brothers,"  and  make  them 
speeches  on  the  superiority  of  Toryism.  The  Conservative 
I^eague  possesses  a  certain  number  of  lodges,  especially  in  the 
southern  and  western  counties,  but  it  is  paralyzed  in  its 
operations  by  want  of  money. 

There  is  also  on  the  Liberal  side  a  large  organization  inde- 
pendent of  the  Caucus,  of  older  standing  even,  and  with  a 
somewhat  glorious  past.  This  is  the  Kational  R«form  Union 
of  Manchester,  which  was  referred  to  at  length  in  the  historical 
part  of  this  work.  It  will  be  remembered  that  the  Union, 
which  represented  originally  a  political  current  opposed  to  that 
of  the  Caucus,  retired  before  the  Birmingham  Organization, 
which  had  become  the  oiEcial  mouthpiece  of  the  party.  Of 
late  years  the  Union  has  tried  to  recover  its  position  and  to 
group  around  it  the  elements  of  the  party  most  advanced  in 
opinions  and  desirous  of  emancipating  themselves  from  the 
"ofKciallsm"  of  the  central  Caucus,  and  it  has  placed  its 
organization  at  the  disposal  of  the  group  of  independent 
Kadicals  in  the  House.  But  as  it  has  not  openly  broken  with 
the  party,  and  continues  to  co-operate  with  it  at  the  eleo- 


.coy  Google 


ciuj-.]    AUXILIARY  Aim  RIVAL  ORGANIZATIONS    BOO 

tions,  the  official,  orthodox  organization,  working  in  concert 
with  the  chiefs  of  the  party,  still  takes  the  lead,  and  alone 
wields  the  authority  and  influence  appertaining  to  a  party 
organization. 

Thus  the  experience  of  party  organizations  in  England, 
although  not  very  long,  has  conclusively  proved  that  there  is 
even  leas  room  for  rival  organizations  within  the  limits  of 
parties  than  in  churches;  that  the  party  creed  stifles  or  dis- 
ables every  independent  organization^  that  an  organization 
can  preserve  its  independence  of  the  two  great  parties  in  the 
State  solely  by  placing  itself  outside  them,  in  opposition  to 
them.  This  has  lately  been  done,  as  we  are  already  aware, 
by  the  "Labour  party." 

IV 

The  reader  recollects  the  circumstances  in  which  the  Labour 
party  was  formed,  only  a  few  years  ago,  for  the  purpose  of 
assuming  an  independent  and  even  hostile  attitude  towards  the 
great  parties.  The  workmen  were  invited  to  quit  them  because 
the  Liberals,  just  as  much  as  the  Tories,  represented  the 
capitalist  class,  which  exploits  the  masses  politically  and 
economically;  it  was  urged  that,  having  nothing  to  expect  from 
the  existing  parties  in  the  way  of  improvement  of  their  lot, 
the  workers  should  take  their  cause  into  their  own  hands. 
They  should  send  Afembers  of  their  own  to  Parliament  as 
well  as  to  the  local  assemblies,  to  fight  the  battle  of  the 
proletariate  against  the  capitalist  class. 

The  first  part  of  this  proposition  is  of  less  recent  origin. 
For  a  long  time  the  question  of  more  direct  representation  of 
the  masses  in  Parliament  had  been  agitated;  it  was  pointed 
out  that  they  were  not  and  could  not  be  represented  by  gentle- 
men; that  men  belonging  themselves  to  the  working  classes, 
and  having  lived  their  life,  were  alone  capable  of  being  their 
spokesmen,  the  interpreters  of  their  wants  and  their  aspira- 
tions. A  few  electoral  organizations  were  even  founded,  with 
the  special  mission  of  getting  working-men  returned  to  Parlia- 
ment (The  Labour  Bepresentation  League  in  1874  and  other 
associations),  but  they  did  not  gather  strength.  The  vast 
majority  of  the  workmen  remained  indifferent,  while  some  of 


.coy  Google 


670  DEMOCRACY   AND  POLITICAL  PARTIES    [tHiappiM 

their  most  in&uential  representatives,  who  had  themselves  got 
into  Parliament  under  the  auspices  of  the  Liberal  party,  were 
of  opinion  that  it  was  not  for  working-men  to  treat  popular 
representation  from  the  standpoint  of  class  distinctions;  that 
they  were  more  interested  than  any  one  in  seeing  these  distinc- 
tions obliterated;  that,  having  been  brought  within  the  pale 
of  the  Constitution,  they  were  in  charge  of  the  interests  of  the 
whole  nation,  which  included  theirs,  just  as  those  of  all  the 
other  groups  of  society.'  Towards  1888  the  tendencies  towards 
"labour  representation"  took  more  definite  shape,*  partica- 
larly  among  the  Trade  Unionists,  when  a  Labour  ElecUiTal 
Association  was  started,  with  branches  in  the  country.  Still 
this  moveraent  was  not  directed  against  existing  parties  or  tlie 
capitalist  class  as  such.  Its  promoters  even  disclaimed  any  in- 
tention of  "setting  class  against  class";  they  simply  wished 
te  "bring  the  great  manufacturers  and  mercbante  and  the 
working-men  together,  to  make  them  join  hands  and  try  to 
raise  the  poor  and  the  miserable  in  the  scale  of  society."' 
Their  sole  desire  was  "a  leavening  of  the  House  of  Commonj 
with  men  having  a  thorough  knowledge  of  tlie  wants  of  the 
masses."  *  Even  in  the  Conservative  camp  the  question  began 
te  be  agitated,  and  it  appears  that  the  luxury  of  a  laboor 
organization  with  the  party  label  (National  Conservative 
Labour  League)  was  actually  indulged  in,  which,  as  was  to  be 
expected,  did  not  meet  with  the  least  encoun^ement  from  the 
leading  organizers  of  the  Tory  party  ("  a  chilling  and  discourag- 
ing reception,"  as  the  promoter  of  the  League  complained). 

But  before  long  the  movement  of  labour  representation  and  of 
a  Labour  party,  which  had  sprung  from  Trades  Unionism,  was 
monopolized  by  the  Socialists,  who  became  particularly  aggres- 
sive after  1890.  The  Labour  party  was  to  enter  FarliameDi, 
not  to  demand  various  Radical  measures  there,  but  to  carry 
out,  by  constitutional  methods,  the  social  revolution  on  the 

'  One  of  tbe  most  eminent  members  of  the  labour  class,  Mr.  Thomas  Bnrt, 
•B  ei-miuer,  on  more  than  one  occasion  stated  these  views  with  real  eleT«ti<m 
of  mlDd. 

'This  jeat  was  connected  vith  the  first  "Labour  Electoral  Congreu," 
held  at  ShflffleM. 

*  The  Voice  of  Labour,  being  the  report  of  the  first  Annnal  Labour  Electonl 
Congresa,  Southport,  1SS8,  p,  21. 

*  Third  annnal  congress  of  the  Labour  Electoral  Assodatloa,  M  EIeiil«ji 
ApHI,  1690. 


.coy  Google 


CHAP.]    AUXILIARY  AND  RIVAL  ORGANIZATIONS     571 

lines  of  complete  and  absolute  collectivism.  Even  the 
bourgeois  Socialists  of  the  Fabian  Society,  composed  mainly 
of  well-to-do  educated  persons  and  engaged  in  doctrinal  propa- 
ganda, thought  fit  to  tone  down  their  temporizing  policy,  of 
which  the  name  of  their  patron,  Fabius  Gunctator,  was  the 
symbol.  Hitherto  they  had  hoped  to  transform  the  Liberal 
party  into  a  Socialist  party  by  gradual  infiltration,  permea- 
tion, but  party  tyranny,  which  stifled  every  independent  ten- 
dency and  prevented  advanced  candidates  from  coming  forward, 
made  the  task  too  difficult  and  left  the  primordial  interests  of 
Labour  uncared  for.  On  the  eve,  therefore,  of  the  general  elec- 
tion of  18y2,  the  Fabians  launched  a  manifesto  in  which  they 
gave  the  Liberal  party  a  bit  of  their  mind  and  exposed  ito 
"  hypocrisy  " ;  and  while  fully  aware  that,  looking  to  the  great 
apathy  of  the  working-men,  there  were  at  present  not  suffi- 
cient elements  in  the  country  for  a  Labour  party  which  could 
dispense  with  the  support  of  the  middle  class,  they  advised 
that  labour  candidates  should  be  started  i^inst  the  Tories 
and  the  Liberals  wherever  there  was  a  chance  of  their  suc- 
cess.' The  Fabians  provided  some  candidates  with  the  money 
required  for  election  expenses,  but  the  success  of  their  prot^g^s, 
as  well  as  of  the  other  independent  and  socialist  candidates, 
was  not  very  great;  with  but  one  or  two  exceptions  they 
merely  succeeded  in  diminishing  the  number  of  votes  polled 
by  the  Liberals.  This  very  relative  success  of  the  "  indepen- 
dents "  only  increased  their  exasperation  against  the  Liberal 
party,  which  was  henceforth  looked  on  as  the  great  enemy  of 
"labour,"  worse  than  the  Tories;  for  to  feelings  of  capitalist 
hostility  towards  labour  claims  it  added  the  insincerity  of 
professing  sympathy  with  the  masses.  Pretending  to  be 
favourable  to  "labour"  representation  in  Parliament,  the 
oi^anization  of  the  Liberal  party  in  reality  tried  to  make  away 
with  it;  the  so-called  labour  members  which  the  party  pos- 
sessed, and  which  it  paraded,  were  not  so  much  champions  of 
the  cause  of  labour  as  obsequious  servants  of  the  party,  of 
ofBcial  Liberalism,  or,  as  Mr.  Chamberlain  put  it,  "mere 
fetchers  and  carriers  for  the  Gladstonian  party." 

In  this  assertion,  especially  so  far  as  it  concerned  the  labour 

members,  there  was  a  vast  amount  of  exaggeration.     From 

1  Fkbian  ElectloD  Manifesto,  1392,  Fabian  Tract*,  No.  40. 


.coy  Google 


673  DEMOCRACY  ASD  POLITICAL  PARTIES    [tniwiMiT 

1874  gcDuine  workiDg-men  had  entered  the  House,  being  gen- 
erally brought  in  by  their  respective  Trade  Unions;  those  of 
the  miners,  for  instance,  and  others.  In  a  dozen  years  there 
were  as  many  as  tea  or  twelve  of  them,  all  returned  as  pro- 
fessed "Liberals."  By  their  intelligence  and  their  chiiracter 
they  almost  all  did  credit  to  the  social  class  to  which  they 
belonged,  and  some  were  even  an  ornament  of  the  House  of 
Commons.  They  intervened  with  zeal  and  devotion  in  the 
discussion  of  all  questions  relating  to  the  toiling  masses. 
Classed  among  the  Liberals,  they  followed  them  in  everything, 
according  to  the  ethics  of  parties.  But  in  their  capacity  of 
men  who  were  not  politicians  born  and  bred,  they  were  some- 
times perhaps  too  eager  to  identify  themselves  with  the  partv, 
No  doubt  it  is  always  difficult  for  a  man  who  ent«i-8  a  society 
considered  superior  to  his  own,  and  who  tries  instinctively  to 
adapt  himself  to  it,  to  avoid  exaggerations.  And  how  greatlj 
must  this  difficulty  of  preserving  one's  personality  be  enhanced 
when  the  new  society  is  a  party  which  holds  its  man  in  an 
iron  grip,  which  even  goes  so  far  as  to  change  his  conscience. 
In  this  particular  case  the  difficulty  was  increased  tenfold  by 
the  immense  prestige  of  the  leader  of  the  Liberal  party,  and 
besides  this,  the  party  helped  some  of  the  labour  members  by 
defraying  their  election  expenses  (just  as,  by  the  way,  it  did 
those  of  so  many  other  non-labour  candidates).  It  is  therefore 
possible  that  an  independent  observer  may  have  been  occasion- 
ally justified  in  paraphrasing,  with  reference  to  the  Gladstonian 
labour  members,  the  remark  of  the  Patriarch,  by  saying:  "Tb« 
hands  are  the  hairy  hands  of  the  people,  but  the  voice  is  the 
voice  of  the  party  Whip."  But,  after  all,  the  great  erime  of 
these  members  was  that  they  were  Trade  Unionists  of  the 
old  school,  with  more  faith  in  individual  initiative  than  in 
the  tutelage  of  the  State. 

Tliere  was  more  foundation  for  the  second  cause  of  com- 
plaint; to  wit,  that  the  organization  of  the  Liberal  party  was 
not  sincerely  interested  in  labour  representation.  In  fact 
whatever  the  official  and  semi-official  mouthpieces  of  the  party 
may  say, '  it  gave  its  support  only  to  those  labour  candidates  — 

1  TbDB,  for  Instance,  the  Speaker,  the  semi-official  oTgao  of  the  GladstoniM 
party,  wrote:  "Tbe  Liberal  party's  orfcanizalion  U  so  free  and  so  elastic,  tliii 
no  sectiun  ol  tbe  party  out  truly  compl»ta  ot  being  ignored  oi  oicluded  fnim 


.coy  Google 


BBTBNTH  CHAP.]    AUXILIARY  AND  RIVAL  ORGANIZATIONS    678 

donning,  of  course,  the  party  livery  —  who  bad  undeniable 
chances  of  success,  and  who  would  have  got  in  even  in  spite 
of  it.  As  for  tbe  others,  it  graciously  made  over  to  them 
constituencies  in  which  the  power  of  the  Tories  or  of  the 
Liberal  Unionists  was  such  that  any  opposition  candidature 
was  doomed  to  failure.  The  tactics  were  the  same  as  those 
pursued  in  some  of  the  local  caucuses,  where  the  middle-class 
bigwigs  who  pull  the  strings  of  the  Organization  rewarded 
zealous  workers  of  the  labour  class  with  candidatures  for  the 
Town  Council  in  wards  which  were  a  stronghold  of  the  Tories. 
In  reserving  the  safe  seats  for  non-labour  men,  the  central 
Caucus  acted  not  so  much  from  class  as  from  party  spirit; 
labour  candidates  with  perhaps  very  advanced  and  too  per- 
sonal opinions  would  not  have  offered  the  required  guarantees 
of  obedience  to  the  party. 

Having  broken  openly  with  the  Liberal  party,  the  champions 
of  labour  proceeded  immediately  after  tbe  general  election  of 
1B92  to  organize  themselves  throughout  the  country,  and 
founded  the  "Independent  Labour  Party,"  to  oppose  Liberals 
and  Tories  alike.  Without  including  all  the  socialist  and 
labour  contingents  divided  among  several  organizations  (two 
of  which,  The  Fabian  Society  and  The  Labour  Electoral  Asso- 
ciation, have  been  already  mentioned),  the  I.  L.  F.  really 
embodies  tbe  new  movement  in  all  its  aspects.  It  raised  the 
banner  of  "Labour"  pure  and  simple,  but  enveloped  within 
its  folds  a  socialist  programme  of  a  most  decided  kind,  briefly 
duJined  in  its  statutes  as  having  for  its  object  "an  industrial 
commonwealth  founded  upon  the  socialization  of  Land  and 
Capital,"  and  expounded  by  one  of  the  leaders  of  tbe  party  in 
the  following  terms:  "It  is  the  establishment  of  a  state  of 
society  where  living  upon  unearned  incomes  shall  be  impos- 
sible for  any  but  the  physically  enfeebled;  where  the  total 
work  of  the  country  shall  be  scientifically  regulated  and  prop- 
erly apportioned  over  the  total  number  of  able-bodied  citizens ; 
where  class  domination  should  be  impossible  by  the  full  recog- 
nition of  Social,  Economic,  and  Sex  Equality."  *    Attracting 

IM  lair  share  of  lnfln«nc«.    All  that  talk  sboat  wire-pulling,  the  Caacns,  tbe 
nndLie  share  of  power  possessed  bj  local  maRDates,  is  sheer  rubbish,  bom  oat 
of  the  iKHoraace  of  men  who  know  absolatel;  aothinfc  of  the  conditioDS  of 
pnlitlral  life  In  the  great  pnivinclal  constituencies"  {11th  Febtuary,  1893). 
1  What  lite  I.  L.  P.  U  ilHving  at,  b;  Tom  Hann,  18M. 


.coy  Google 


674  DEMOCRACY  AND  POLITICAL  PARTIES    [th:i.i>  f*it 

some  by  the  rigid  socialism  of  its  piogramme,  and  others  b; 
the  T^^ueness  of  its  title  of  Labour  party,  the  I.  L.  P.  has 
recruited  in  the  country,  especially  in  the  north,  a  certain 
number  of  adherents,  not  very  considerable,  but  by  no  means 
negligible.  Almost  all  of  them  belong  to  the  working  class, 
with  a  sprinkling  of  lower  middle-class  people  earning  about 
as  much  as  artisans,  and  a  few  cultivated  persons,  amoDg 
whom  are  found  even  University  graduates.  A  larger  number 
of  persons  of  the  well-to-do  and  educated  class,  without  being 
incorporated  in  the  ranks  of  the  I.  L.  P.,  is  with  them  in 
heart  and  mind.  They  are  first  of  all  the  doctrinaire  social- 
ists; then  persons  without  economic  attainments  but  highly 
sentimental,  with  a  nervous  sensibility  which  makes  them  look 
on  the  misery  in  the  world  with  horror  and  on  existing  society 
with  despair;  and  finally,  as  in  every  movement,  dilettantes, 
not  to  say  quidnuncs,  who  run  after  the  last  fashion,  or  what 
they  believe  to  be  such. 

The  working-class  contingents  are  composed  of  two  clearly 
detined  sections :  of  a  small  minority  of  intelligent  men,  with 
noble  aspirations,  of  excellent  character,  and  of  a  very  large 
majority  of  ignorant  people,  often  taken  from  the  dregs  of 
society,  of  loafers,  of  .social  waifs  and  strays,  of  poor  wretches 
who  are  open  to  one  preoccupation  only,  — that  of  the  stomach. 
And  it  is  by  appealing  to  their  animal  wants,  by  creating  a 
feeling  of  revolt  in  their  minds,  that  the  I.  L.  P.  attracts 
them  into  its  ranks.  A  good  half  of  the  members  of  the 
I.  L.  P.  are  old  followers  of  the  Liberal  organization;  the 
remainder  has  been  recruited  partly  in  the  Tory  camp  and 
partly  in  the  circles  which  had  hitherto,  by  their  indifference, 
escaped  the  political  parties.  The  losses  sustained  under 
these  circumstances  by  the  orthodox  organizations,  Liberal 
and  Tory,  were  veiy  perceptible,  not  so  much  on  account  of 
the  number  as  the  quality  of  the  men  who  deserted  them; 
they  saw  several  of  their  "workers"  go  over  to  the  I.  L.  P. 
To  the  great  astonishment  of  the  Tories,  some  of  their  old 
canvassers,  who  were  by  no  means  conspicuous  in  the  routine 
discharge  of  the  work  of  the  Tory  party  entrusted  to  them, 
came  out  as  speakers  and  agitators  in  the  I.  L.  P.  The  Liberal 
caucuses  did  not  experience  any  surprises  of  this  kind;  the 
men  who  left  them  were  remarkable  for  their  enthusiasm. 


.coy  Google 


p.]    AUXILIARY  AND  RIVAL  ORGANIZATIONS    676 

Having  belonged  to  the  Caucus  for  years,  and  having  watched 
the  plutocrats  who  led  the  Associations  at  work,  they  fancied 
they  saw  how  the  capitalist  class  duped  the  masses ;  taking  an 
active  part  in  the  electoral  business  of  the  Caucus,  they  were 
initiated  into  the  manoeuvres  of  wire-pulling,  to  which  they 
had  even  coutributed  in  the  sincerity  of  their  hearts,  for  the 
greater  glory  of  the  "  cause."  When  the  new  gospel  of  labour 
and  of  socialism  opened  their  eyes,  they  saw  that  the  god 
which  they  had  adored  was  only  a  rude  idol ;  and  in  the  shame 
and  disgust  which  overcame  them,  they  were  glad  to  find  in 
the  I.  L.  P.  a  refuge  for  their  wounded  souls  and  a  sphere  of 
action  for  their  ardour  and  their  desire  to  serve  their  fellow- 
creatures. 

Moral  enthusiasm  is,  in  fact,  one  of  the  leading  traits  of  the 
movement,  and  its  ethical  tendencies,  the  object  of  which  is 
the  raising  of  man  and  of  society,  give  it  its  special  stamp. 
They  appeal  with  some  to  the  intelligence,  with  the  vast 
majority  to  feeling,  and  very  often  even  to  religious  feeling. 
Whereas  the  socialist  circles  which  arose  in  the  old  days,  and 
which  were  recruited  among  the  intellectnal  set,  were  generally 
composed  of  materialists  and  atheists,  the  great  bulk  of  the 
I.  L.  F.  are  believers.  The  ideal  pursued  by  the  Labour 
movement  is  represented  to  them  as  a  religious  ideal,  and  an 
appeal  is  made  to  their  religious  enthusiasm  to  help  to  realize 
it.  This  religious  conception  has  even  found  tangible  expres- 
sion in  the  organization  of  a  "  Labour  Church  "  possessing  a 
creed  and  provided  with  a  cult.  "The  Church"  has  declared 
its  aim  to  be  the  "realization  of  heaven  in  this  life  by  the 
establishment  of  a  state  of  society  founded  upon  justice  and  love 
to  the  neighbour."  It  professes  that  "the  Labour  movement 
is  a  religious  movement;  that  the  religion  of  the  Labour  move- 
ment is  not  a  class  religion,  but  that  it  unites  the  members  of 
all  classes  in  working  for  the  abolition  of  commercial  slavery; 
that  the  religion  of  the  Labour  movement  is  not  sectarian  or 
dogmatic,  but  free  religion,  leaving  each  man  free  to  develop 
his  own  relations  with  the  Power  that  brought  him  into  being; 
that  the  emancipation  of  labour  can  only  be  realized  so  far 
as  men  learn  both  the  economical  and  moral  laws  of  God  and 
heartily  endeavour  to  obey  them;  that  the  development  of 
personal  character  and  the  improvement  of  social  conditions 


.coy  Google 


678  DEMOCRACY  AND  POLITICAL  PARTIES    [THiirn«t 

are  equally  essential  to  man's  emancipation  from  moral  and 
social  bondage."  The  services  of  the  Labour  Charch  conaist 
of  the  singing  of  socialist  and  Labour  hymns,  of  a  short 
prayer,  of  the  reading  of  passages  from  a  work  on  religion 
or  democratic  politics,  and  of  a  discourse  on  some  aspect  oi 
other  of  the  movement.  The  Labour  Church  has  not  attainal 
large  proportions;  after  a  brief  existence  it  has  amalganuted 
in  some  places  with  the  I.  L.  P.,  while  in  others  it  exisU 
alongside  the  L  L.  P.  and  in  close  connection  with  it. 

The  fervour  which  animates  the  adherents  of  the  I.  L.  P. 
makes  up,  to  a  great  extent,  for  the  intellectual  poverty  which 
characterizes  the  majority  of  them.  They  display  a  keen  and, 
it  might  be  said,  almost  thoughtful  interest  in  their  organiza- 
tion; one  and  all  pay  their  pennies  with  a  sort  of  ritual  devo- 
tion into  the  chest  of  the  party,  which  subsists  only  by  the 
contributions  of  its  members.  In  this  respect  the  I.  L.  P. 
presents  a  novel  phenomenon  in  the  life  of  English  partj 
organizations,  in  which,  on  the  Liberal  as  on  the  Tory  side, 
a  few  wealthy  individuals,  headed  by  the  Member  or  the 
candidate,  finance  the  Association.  All  that  the  working-men 
voters  belonging  to  the  orthodox  parties  consent  to  give  is 
their  votes,  and  even  then,  as  we  are  aware,  they  want  a  good 
deal  of  pressing  to  go  to  the  poll;  they  must  be  fetched  ini 
carriage.  They  behave  as  if  their  interests  were  in  no  waj 
at  stake.  The  I.  L.  P.  are  the  only  ones  who  "  pay  for  tlieir 
own  politics." 

Another  feature  which  distinguishes  them,  as  well  as  their 
socialist  coreligionists,  from  other  organizations,  is  tlieir 
ardour  in  promoting  the  political  education  of  their  adherents. 
In  the  orthodox  parties  political  education  is  talked  about  a 
great  deal,  but,  as  we  have  seen,  little  or  nothing  is  done  for  it. 
The  I,  L.  P.  and  the  other  socialists  are  the  only  parties  whi.'h 
systematically  cultivate  men's  minds  by  classes  and  lectures, 
by  discussion,  by  readings  in  common.  The  activity  which 
they  display  in  this  respect  has  given  an  intellectual  impulse 
even  to  their  opponents,  by  forcing  them  to  study  the  eco- 
nomical questions  which  are  so  much  talked  about.  The 
propagandist  zeal  of  the  L  L.  P.  is  indefatigable;  it  avails 
itself  of  every  opportunity  to  expound  its  doctrines,  to  enrol 
adherents;   it  seeks  them  in  the  public  parks,  at  the  street- 


.coy  Google 


p.]    AUXILIARY  AND  RIVAL  ORGANIZATIONS    677 

crossingB ;  it  distributes  writiogs  of  all  kinds  vholeaale.  The 
political  education  which  the  I.  L,  P.  offers  is,  in  truth,  of  a 
somewhat  limited  character;  it  deals  only  with  ecoDOmioat 
questions,  which  are  o£  course  always  viewed  through  the 
sccialist-collectivist  prism. 

Their  ethical  standard  is  just  as  narrow;  the  unvarying 
criterion  of  political  integrity  is  in  their  eyes  unqualified 
adhesion  to  collectivism.  Professing  to  disregard  the  insin- 
cere conventions  of  the  social  and  political  world,  and  to  judge 
men  and  things  by  their  intrinsic  worth,  they  nevertheless 
oppose  the  election  of  Badicals  animated  with  broad  and 
genuine  sympathies  for  the  working  classes,  but  not  going  to 
the  length  of  subscribing  to  revolutionary  collectivism. 

Sectarian  in  their  doctrine  and  in  their  propaganda,  the 
I.  L.  P.  are  naturally  autoritarian  in  their  organization.  The 
discipline  to  which  the  members  of  their  associations  have  to 
submit  goes  beyond  that  of  the  Caucus  which  they  abhor  so 
much.  A  member  of  the  I.  L.  P.  or  of  the  older  organization, 
"  The  Social  Democratic  Federation,"  is  never  his  own  master. 
To  be  admitted  into  the  I.  L.  P.,  a  declaration  must  be  signed 
by  which  the  applicant  pledges  himself  to  have  nothing  to  do 
with  any  political  party  and  to  vote  at  elections  in  accordance 
with  the  directions  of  the  O^anization.  The  local  branch  of 
the  I.  L.  P.  nominates  the  candidate  for  Parliament,  but  no 
selection  is  valid  until  it  has  been  confirmed  by  the  Central 
Council.  In  places  where  the  I.  L.  P.  does  not  run  a  candi- 
date, its  adherents  have  to  regulate  their  conduct  by  the  deci- 
sions of  the  central  body,  which  "decisions  are  final  and 
binding  on  the  branches."  The  Social  Democratic  Federa- 
tion asserts  its  authority  over  its  members  in  still  more 
imperative  terms;  it  forbids  them  to  take  a  single  step  in 
elections  without  having  consulted  the  respective  branch  or 
the  General  Coiincil,  as  the  case  may  be.  The  candidates 
elected  under  its  auspices  must  submit  to  the  control  of  their 
local  branch  in  regard  to  local  affairs,  and  to  that  of  the  Gen- 
eral Council  for  everything  that  concerns  their  parliamentary 
activity.  The  candidates  are  obliged  to  sign  a  form  of 
resignation  beforehand. 

In  the  series  of  "  methods "  laid  down  by  the  I.  L.  P.  for 
the  realization  of  its  aim,  "the  education  of  the  community 


.coy  Google 


578  DEMOCRACY   AND   POLITICAL   ^ARTIER    [third  p-» it 

in  the  priociples  of  socialism"  and  "the  industrial  and  politi- 
cal organization  of  the  workers"  are  followed  by  "inde- 
pendent representation  on  socialist  principles  on  all  elective 
bodies,"  including  local  assemblies,  town  councils,  school 
boards,  parish  councils,  etc.  Even  before  1892,  but  especially 
after  that  date,  local  assemblies  became  the  objective  of  the 
champions  of  labour.  At  the  annual  elections  for  town  coun- 
cils labour  candidatures  now  occur  regularly  in  most  of  the 
large  towns;  in  several  places  the  labour  candidates  have  snc- 
ceeded  in  getting  on  the  town  councils,  as  well  as  on  the  school 
boards,  etc.,  and  sometimes  not  without  advantage  to  those 
bodies.  It  they  are  not  very  competent  to  deal  with  municipal 
business  (though  in  this  respect  they  are  in  no  way  inferior  to 
most  of  the  councillors  introduced  by  the  caucuses),  at  all 
events  they  are  resolved  to  keep  a  jealous  watch  on  the  money 
of  the  ratepayers  and  to  throw  the  full  light  of  publicity  on 
the  proceedings  of  the  council,  including  tjiose  of  its  commit- 
tees, the  sittings  of  which  are  not  public. 

TBe  efforts  of  the  I.  L,  P.  to  get  into  Parliament  have  not 
been  successful.  At  the  last  general  election  (of  1S95)  it  ran 
several  candidates,  but  all  of  them  were  beaten,  and  most  of 
them  cut  a  Tery  sorry  figure  at  the  poll  —  all  the  more  so 
because  the  I.  L.  P.  had  made  a  great  fuss  before  the  battle, 
and  had  boasted  that  they  would  "smash  the  Liberal  party." 
They  did  not  smash  it  —  far  from  it ;  but  they  cracked  it  in 
several  places;  their  desertion  has  cost  the  Liberals  not  a  few 
seats.  This  is  the  only  clear  gain  which  the  Labour  party  has 
to  show.  Kevolutionary  collectivism  does  not  as  yet  tempt 
the  great  majority  of  English  workmen  sufficieutly  for  tbem 
to  shake  off  their  accustomed  political  apatliy  and  leave  the 
Ijeaten  track  of  the  historic  parties,  in  which  they  walk  more 
or  less  automatically  or  are  dragged  along  by  methods  which 
have  an  easy  hold  on  them.  To  rouse  them  from  this  indiffer- 
ence the  masses  lack  the  incentive  of  extreme  poverty  which 
the  L  L.  P.  and  their  socialist  coreligionists  make  so  much 
of  in  their  warlike  appeals.  Nor  are  the  jealousies  which 
devour  the  various  socialist  factions  l>etter  calculated  to  bring 
victory  to  their  cause.  But  if  the  hour  of  the  I.  L,  P.  has 
not  come,  and  if  its  numerical  strength  is  unimportant,  it  is 
none  the  less  a  factor  in  the  life  of  English  parties  by  reason 


.coy  Google 


SBTKHTHCHAP.]    AUXILIARY  AND  BIVAL  ORGANIZATIONS    579 

of  the  dissolving  effect  which  it  produces  on  them.  For  by 
the  sole  fact  of  its  orgajiization  it  attacks  not  this  or  tliat 
party,  but  party  loyalty  in  general;  it  loosens  time-honoured 
party  ties.  In  doing  so  it  also  demoralizes  the  leaders,  who 
in  their  anxiety  to  keep  their  men,  and  through  fear  of  fresh 
desertions,  will  not  fall  to  stoop  to  concessions  which  they 
would  not  have  made  if  they  had  listened  only  to  theii  convic- 
tions or  their  prejudices. 


.coy  Google 


EIGHTH  CHAPTER 


Now  that  we  hare  come  to  the  end  of  our  enquiry  into  the 
introduction,  the  development,  and  the  working  of  party 
organization  in  England,  we  are  at  liberty  to  turn  round  and 
take  a  general  survey  of  the  route  which  has  been  traversed. 

Introduced  with  the  intention  of  making  the  government 
of  the  historic  parties  more  democratic,  the  Caucus  has  suc- 
ceeded in  this  to  a  certain  extent,  especially  in  the  destructive 
portion  of  its  work.  Falling  upon  the  leadership,  which  it 
regarded  as  oligarchical,  it  dismantled  it  and  dealt  a  heavy 
blow  at  the  old  parties  which  were  grouped  around  It;  it 
powerfully  contributed  to  overthrow  Whiggism ;  it  pressed  the 
last  life-breath  out  of  expiring  classic  Radicalism,  and  helped 
to  drive  back  old-fashioned  Toryism.  But  it  has  been  less 
successful  in  the  constructive  part  of  the  task  which  it  under- 
took. It  has  not  been  able  to  provide  the  parties  with  a  really 
democratic  government;  it  has  created  the  forms  of  it,  but  not 
the  essence.  The  soil  in  which  the  new  institution  was  planted 
was  far  from  being  everywhere  favourable  to  its  growth,  and 
it  proved  little  more  than  an  exotic.  The  political  manners 
and  customs  of  English  society,  taken  as  a  whole,  were  not  at 
all  democratic;  they  did  not  require  the  development  of  the 
democratic  principle  to  its  extreme  consequences  with  the 
rigour  applied  by  the  promoters  of  the  Caucus.  The  exten- 
sion of  the  suffrage  to  the  urban  masses,  to  the  degree  effected 
by  the  Act  of  18C7,  came  before  its  time,  as  one  of  its  most 
ardent  cliampions,  John  Bright,  admitted  by  saying  that  it 
would  have  been  better  to  accomplish  the  reform  in  two  stages, 
at  an  interval  of  twenty  years.  True,  this  fact  in  itself  pre- 
sented nothing  unusual  in  the  history  of  political  societies ;  in 


.coy  Google 


BtGHTH  CH4F.]  SUMMARY  661 

a  general  way,  it  may  be  said  that  there  is  never  any  particular 
moment  in  the  life  of  a  community  when  institutions  ate  ia 
perfect  harmony  with  manners  and  customs;  sometimes  the 
one,  sometimes  the  other,  are  in  advance;  there  is  always  a 
gap  between  them.  But  that  does  not  prevent  the  more 
advanced  community  from  developing,  nor  oblige  the  more 
backward  one  to  rush  wildly  ahead,  ifno  attempt  is  made  to  get 
the  utmost  out  of  the  institutions.  By  extending  the  demo- 
cratic principle  of  the  Reform  of  1867,  in  all  its  legal  strict- 
ness, to  political  life  outside  the  Constitution,  the  Caucus 
pushed  this  principle  to  its  extreme  logical  limits,  which  hap- 
pened to  be  far  beyond  those  of  the  manners  of  the  nation.  It 
did  not  leave  to  time  or  the  force  of  circumstances  the  task  of 
lessening  the  distance  hetweeu  too  democratic  institutions 
and  insufficiently  democratio  manners;  it  hurried  on  and  tried 
to  substitute  for  the,  so  to  speak,  chemical  process  of  permea- 
tion, of  mutual  penetration,  the  mechanical  one  of  external 
organization.  And  it  simply  succeeded — with  some  exceptions 
which  will  be  pointed  out  later  on  —  in  bringing  into  glaring 
prominence  the  contradiction  between  the  capacity  and  the 
power  of  the  masses,  a  contradiction  which  can  only  disappear 
gradually. 

The  ex-ruling  class,  the  middle  class,  confronted  on  the  one 
hand  by  its  official  dethronement,  and  on  the  other  by  the  politi- 
cal incapacity  of  the  masses,  wished,  both  from  ambition  and 
duty, —  the  duty  of  "carrying  on  the  Queen's  government,"  — 
to  reconcile  this  contradiction  by  dint  of  adroitness,  by  pre- 
serving in  the  management  of  parties  the  reality  of  power,  of 
which  it  had  been  legally  divested  by  the  establishment  of  the 
Caucus.  And  this  English  middle  class,  which  had  played  a 
glorious  part  in  the  conquest  of  public  liberties  and  in  the  de- 
velopment of  political  spirit  and  civic  dignity,  now  appeared 
in  a  new  role,  of  an  anything  but  lofty  character;  pretending 
to  bow  down  before  the  masses,  it  let  them  say  what  they 
liked,  allowed  them  the  satisfaction  of  holding  forth  and  of 
voting  extravagant  resolutions  in  the  caucuses,  provided  that 
it  was  permitted  to  manage  everything;  and  to  cover  its  de- 
signs it  developed  the  practice  of  wire-pulling.  Being  power- 
less, however,  without  the  small  ward  leaders,  created  by  the 
democratic  party  organization,  it  undertook  to  corrupt  them 


.coy  Google 


682  DEMOCRACY  AND  POLITICAL  PARTIES    [thbd  PiBT 

systematically,  to  wId  them  by  acting  on  their  "social  ten- 
deocies."  iDvitations  to  "at  homes,"  to  garden-parties,  to 
dinners  with  the  big  men  of  the  party,  free  admission  to  gen- 
tlemen's clubs,  methodically  demoralized  the  leaders  of  the 
lower  middle  class  and  of  the  working  class,  by  developing 
and  fostering  in  them  the  abject  snobbishness  which  infects 
social  relations  in  England.  Having  given  a  democratic  form 
to  party  government.  In  order  to  liberate  it  from  "  social  indu- 
ences,"  the  Caucns  managed  by  the  middle-class  men  itself 
appealed  to  those  influences  and  borrowed  from  them  the  most 
disreputable  part  of  their  methods  and  conduct.  The  middle 
class  often  had  good  sense  on  its  side  and  understood  what 
was  fitting  in  politics,  but  it  was  too  faint-hearted  to  face  the 
masses  and  it  preferred  to  circumvent  them  by  devices  of 
management.  Withholding  from  them  the  plain  truth  and 
oRering  them  only  the  bait  of  gratification  of  self-love  and 
vanity,  it  enervated  and  disgusted  a  good  many  of  the  best 
set  to  such  an  extent  as  to  fling  them  into  the  sectarian  but 
honest  fanaticism  of  the  Independent  Labour  parties,  into  the 
wild  ideas  of  Utopia-mongers  and  collectivist  ^itators. 

The  development  of  the  organization  of  the  Caucus,  however, 
presents  yet  another  aspect,  which  tones  down  that  which  has 
just  been  described.  The  adroitness  which  the  middle  class 
was  compelled  to  exert  was  in  itself  a  homage  to  the  power 
conferred  on  the  masses  by  the  Caucus.  In  fact,  while  keeping 
a  firm  hand  on  part^  government,  the  middle  class  was  obliged, 
owing  to  the  very  constitution  of  the  Caucus,  to  share  its 
authority,  in  appearance  at  least,  with  the  representatives 
of  the  lower  orders.  The  mere  play  of  this  constitution 
brought  out  from  the  ranks  of  the  people  a  number  of 
leaders  with  a  voice  in  the  counsels  of  the  party.  Under  the 
social  conditions  which  prevailed  in  England  a  quarter  of  a 
century  back,  these  men  would  not  have  been  able  to  get  so 
far  by  their  unaided  efforts;  the  Organization  of  the  Caucus 
alone  provided  them  with  the  means  by  admitting  their  right 
to  share  in  the  government  of  the  party,  in  virtue  of  a  prin- 
ciple, and  no  longer  as  in  the  old  days  when  a  few  working- 
men  members  were  put  ou  the  election  committees  for  the  occa- 
sion and  as  decoy-ducks.  The  more  exclusive  and  oligarchical 
the  political  surroundings  were,  the  more  the  admission,  even 


.coy  Google 


ETOHtiiciMP.]  SUMMARY  668 

pretended,  of  the  multitude  to  power  gained  in  value,  and  the 
greater  the  practical  effect  which  it'produced  in  party  life. 
The  Caucus,  therefore,  did  democratize  party  goveimnent  on 
the  Liberal  side,  and  still  more  on  the  Tory  side  and  in  the 
rural  constituencies  generally.  The  new  Conservative  Asso- 
ciations, which  conceded  a  share  of  influence  to  the  simple 
"  workers,"  have  served  as  a  lever  for  the  Neo-Toryism  of  the 
large  towns  called  forth  by  Lord  Randolph  Churchill  and  his 
following;  they  have  given  shape  and  body  to  "popular  Tory- 
ism," which  was  laboriously  cutting  a  path  through  Disraeli's 
nebulous  doctrines,  the  practical  necessities  of  "dishing  the 
Whigs,"  and  the  ambitions  of  the  "  Fourth  Party "  and  of 
the  Tory  tiers  Etat ;  they  have  helped  to  install  the  Hera  in 
the  government  of  the  party,  to  make  the  multitude  an  organic 
factor  in  it,  and  in  general  to  impart  to  the  rank  and  file  of 
the  party  more  freedom  of  manners,  if  not  of  mind.  In  the 
counties  the  new  Organization  has  also  helped  to  extract  the 
practical  consequences  of  the  electoral  Reform  of  1885,  by 
giving  the  masses  a  share  in  the  business  of  the  political  parties 
side  by  side  with  the  "  gentlemen  "  who  had  hitherto  managed 
it  by  themselves.  If  the  reality  of  the  power  thus  conferred 
on  the  masses  was  subject  to  much  qualification  from  a  political 
point  of  view,  it  was  otherwise  with  regard  to  its  social  effect; 
for  in  social  relations,  where  convention  is  paramount,  form  has 
precedence  of  substance,  and  external  demonstrations  take  the 
place  of  genuine  feelings,  by  providing,  through  the  mere  fact 
of  their  manifestation,  the  gratifications  of  amoKt-propre  for 
which  mankind  in  a  social  state  has  a  craving.  By  the  inherent 
force  of  its  hierarchy  and  of  its  formal  spheres  of  authority  and 
influence,  the  Caucus  has  succeeded  in  raising  the  small  shop- 
keeper and  the  artisan,  who  were  kept  in  a  state  of  inferiority 
by  the  manners  of  the  nation,  in  the  scale  of  society.  Again, 
the  methods  which  the  Caucus,  and  its  counterpart  the  Primrose 
League,  had  created  for  distributing  "social  consideration"  at 
will  and  making  it  a  sort  of  commodity  put  on  the  market,  were 
in  their  turn  instrumental  in  levelling  society  if  not  in  making 
it  democratic 


.coy  Google 


584  DEMOCRACY   AND   POLITICAL  PARTIES     [roimD  PiKT 

n 

This  distinctioii,  wMeh  is  often  ^ored  by  the  common 
prejudice,  appears  all  the  more  legitimate  and  necessary  in 
the  present  case  the  further  one  proceeds  with  the  enquiry 
into  tlie  effect  of  the  Caucus  on  the  improvement  of  the  public 
spirit  of  the  masses,  wliich  is  the  sole  criterion  of  genuine 
democracy.  At  the  outset  the  Caucus,  which  professed  to 
appeal  to  the  masses,  succeeded  in  arousing,  in  several  places, 
their  interest  in  the  public  weal;  it  attracted  men  who  repre- 
sented the  best  elements  of  the  lower  strata  of  society,  and  it 
seemed  to  tend  towards  really  widening  the  borders  of  the  politi- 
cal community.  But  all  this  lasted  but  a  single  moment,  just 
long  enough  to  make  it  clear  that  the  democracy  inscribed  on 
the  standard  of  the  Caucus  was  only  a  painted  banner  or  a 
ooarse  sign.  Independent  and  thoughtful  people  sav  that 
there  was  no  room  for  them  among  the  small  vulgar  leaders 
brought  to  the  surface  of  politics,  or  in  the  meetings  and  com- 
mittees where  everything  was  cut  and  dried  by  a  little  coterie 
which  monopolized  power  by  pulling  the  strings  behind  the 
scenes.  Having  repelled  these  men,  the  Caucus  has  contrived 
to  attract  only  the  enthusiasts,  the  bigots  of  the  party,  and 
the  busybodies.  The  great  mass  remained  outside,  sunk  in 
its  apathy  and  its  indifference. 

To  drag  them  out  of  it,  the  Caucus  could  devise  nothing 
better  than  organization,  which  it  ended  almost  by  confound- 
ing with  political  education.  For  this  latter  it  has  really  done 
nothing.  The  Associations  have  proved  radically  unfitted  for 
serving  as  an  instrument  of  political  education ;  they  hare  suc- 
ceeded only  in  turning  out  electioneering  machines.  A  servant 
of  the  party,  engrossed  by  its  immediate  duties,  the  Caucus 
was  not  in  a  position  to  apply  itself  to  the  political  culture  of 
the  masses,  of  a  general  and  disinterested  kind.  An  election 
broker  picking  up  votes  right  and  left,  loaded  with  heavy 
omnibus  programmes  which  promised  the  solution  of  all  kinds 
of  different  questions,  to  please  everybody,  it  was  no  more 
possible  for  it  to  make  the  public  mind  and  conscience  grasp 
all  the  problems  raised  than  to  devote  itself  to  each  of  them 
or  concentrate  the  attention  of  the  masses  on  one  of  them  to 
the  detriment  of  the  others.     The  Caucus,   therefore,    was 


.coy  Google 


EioHTEiciLU'.]  SUMMAHY  685 

naturally  inclined,  instead  of  bringing  about  an  agreement  of 
intellects,  to  resort  to  mechanical  modes  of  rallying  its  forces 
and  to  keep  its  adherents  together  in  an  external  and  con- 
ventional conformity,  by  appealing  not  so  much  to  reason, 
which  analyzes  and  distinguishes,  as  to  feeling;  by  preferring 
to  stir  up  emotions  which  confuse  the  judgment  and  make  a 
prisoner  of  the  will.  The  followers  of  the  party  were  all,  in 
accordance  with  the  shifting  requirements  of  the  situation, 
provided  in  a  lump  with  a  stock  of  convictions  or  political 
sentiments,  which  spared  them  the  trouble  of  all  personal  exer- 
tion. Political  ideas  were  introduced  simultaneously  into 
their  minds,  and  they  took  them  in  collectively,  by  a  single 
and  undivided  efFort.  "We  now  think  in  battalions,"  as  a 
shrewd  observer,  a  Northumberland  workman,  remarked  on 
this  subject.  Lost  in  the  crowd,  even  as  regards  the  inner 
life  of  the  intelligence  and  the  conscience,  individuality  dwin- 
dled under  the  steady  action  of  the  Caucus,  and  in  this  con- 
nection, too,  a  levelling  process  took  place,  but  of  a  kind  which 
did  not  even  possess  the  questionable  merit  of  contributing  to 
the  enhancement  of  human  dignity  in  social  relations  j  its 
tendency  was  decidedly  to  lower  the  mind,  in  other  words,  to 
impair  the  moral  dignity  of  man.  In  this  work  of  oblitera- 
tion of  individuality,  the  Caucus  was  assisting  a  movement 
which  began  before  it  and  was  operating  in  every-day  life 
independently  of  it.  In  the  first  part  of  this  book  it  waa 
pointed  out  how  the  social  transformation  inaugurated  by  the 
industrial  revolution  and  philosophy,  in  emancipating  the  in- 
dividual, brought  about  a  levelling  process  which  from  many 
points  of  view  seemed  to  have  the  effect  of  rather  blotting 
out  hnman  personality.  The  unbroken  progress  of  material 
civilization  has  powerfully  forwarded  this  movement,  not 
only  by  generalizing  tastes  and  habits,  but  by  forcing  indi- 
viduals to  dissolve  into  crowds,  for  the  better  enjoyment  of 
the  benefits  of  this  civilization,  which  can  only  be  brought 
within  their  reach  collectively.  Intellectual  culture  in  its 
turn  tended  to  make  men  more  like  each  other.  It  was  no 
use  for  the  somewhat  rare  survivors  of  the  old  order  of  tilings 
to  bemoan  the  fact  and  to  regret  even  the  fierce  insular 
individuality  of  bygone  days;  the  inevitable  process  went  on 
all  the  same,  producing,  along  with  beneficial  effects,  a  certain 


.coy  Google 


586  DEMOCRACY   AND   POLITICAL  PARTIES     [thiiid  p*bt 

slackening  of  human  personality.  This  last  effect  of  the  play 
of  natural  forces  was  intensified  in  the  sphere  of  political  rela- 
tions by  the  elaborate  action  of  the  Caucus,  which  deliberately 
aimed  at  stereotyping  opinion,  thus  bringing  down  every- 
thing to  a  dead  level. 

Every  attempt  at  asserting  the  freedom  and  independence 
of  political  thought  was  now  repressed  j  for  every  difference 
of  opinion  was  a  blow  struck  at  the  unity  of  the  party  of  which 
the  Caucus  had  constituted  itself  the  pennaDent  guardian. 
The  aggressive  ardour  of  the  Radical  enthuaiaets  coincided 
with  the  middle-class  selfishuess.of  the  wire-pullers  in  stifling 
opposition  and  the  spirit  of  criticism  in  the  Associations,  and 
they  became  in  English  society  a  great  school  of  fanaticism, 
of  intolerance,  of  contempt  for  other  people's  opinions,  aud  of 
suspicion,  which  'impugns  the  honesty  and  sincerity  of  oppo- 
nents beforehand.  Political  language,  platform  eloquence, 
naturally  grew  all  the  more  passionate  and  violent  and  full  of 
personalities.  Even  when  devoid  of  violence,  the  jealous  and 
irritable  belief  fostered  by  the  Caucus  produced  an  impatience 
of  discussion  which  more  and  more  infected  political  life.* 

Sentimental  devotion  to  the  party,  which  the  Caucus  kept 
up  as  a  cult,  by  saving  its  followers  the  trouble  of  pro- 
fessing reasoned  political  principles,  released  them  from  the 
moral  and  intellectual  discipline  which  principles  impose  on 
conduct  by  riveting  men's  minds  more  or  less  tightly  to  definite 
propositions  and  inspiring  them  with  a  resolve  to  look  to  the 
efficacy  of  these  principles  only  for  the  triumph  of  their  cause, 
without  caring  for  immediate  success  and  without  stooping  to 
tergiversation  or  selfish  compromise.  The  Caucus,  therefore, 
by  engrafting  in  men's  minds  rather  a  general  feeling  than  a 
creed  of  party  orthodoxy,  inclined  them  to  the  moral  and  in- 
tellectual opportunism  which  clutches  at  every  proposal  that 
excites  mental  emotions  and  flatters  the  cravings  and  the 
interests  of  the  moment;  it  countenanced  the  transformation 
of  a  policy  of  principles   into  a  policy  which  "must  give 

1  Cf.  the  remarks  of  Mr.  Tbamai  Burt,  tlie  well-known  labour  member,  in 
reply  to  a  labour  loader:  ■■One  at  the  »ettkiietaes  — one  at  the  dangers —  oF 
the  time  is  a  certain  impulsiveneBS  and  Impatience  of  dtscnsslon.  Especially 
is  this  maoKest  on  labour  questions.  Too  many  of  our  present-day  reformers 
seem  to  Imagine  that  they  are  storming  a  rampart  rather  than  roconstrnctiDg 
a  social  system  "  (May,  1S9S). 


.coy  Google 


EtDHTHCHAP.]  SUMMARY  667 

quarterly  dividends,"  to  quote  the  graphic  expression  employed 
by  a  Liberal  Caucus  secretary  to  describe  the  new  school  of 
politics.  The  motto  of  "trust  in  the  people,"  which  the 
Caucus  had  adopted  with  affectation,  as  an  absolute  but 
external  article  of  faith,  almost  forced  on  it  the  worship  of 
what  is  popular  and  not  what  is  just  and  reasonable. 

These  qualities  of  the  Caucus  made  it  in  every  respect  an 
admirable  vehicle  for  the  new  tendencies  which  the  extension 
of  the  suffrage  to  the  urban  masses,  in  1S68,  introduced  into 
the  life  of  parties,  and  in  particular  of  the  one  which  was  to 
reap  the  most  benefit  from  that  democratic  reform,  of  the 
advanced  party,  of  Radicalism.  Classic  Radicalism,  bred 
and  nurtured  by  the  Philosophic  Radicals,  which  lived  on 
the  idea  and  for  the  idea,  without  caring  much  for  parties, 
which,  among  a  middle  class  enjoying  its  prosperity,  repre- 
sented the  claims  of  right  and  justice  and  served  as  a  moral 
leaven  for  that  society,  was  dead.  After  1S6S,  Radicalism 
ceased  to  be  a  moral  power  and  became  a  physical  force. 
Being  in  a  hurry  to  make  its  strength  felt,  it  substituted  dis- 
cipline for  philosophy  and  seized  on  the  old  party  organization, 
which  it  found  still  standing,  to  make  it  its  base  of  operations. 
Tt  identified  itself  completely  with  it  and  turned  into  a  parti- 
san, a  narrow  partisan.  Having  staked  its  fortune,  so  to  speak, 
on  the  party,  and  being  bent  on  keeping  it  amid  all  the  changes 
of  events.  Radicalism  became  opportunist.  Having  stepped 
off  the  solid  ground  of  principles,  it  grew  nervous,  irritable, 
and  intolerant.  Standing  in  need  of  the  multitude  which 
upheld  it,  it  took  to  coaxing;  it  led  them  on  by  soft  words 
and  promises  when  it  had  or  knew  of  nothing  more  sub- 
stantial to  offer  them,  and  it  contracted  demagogic  habits. 
All  these  aspects  of  the  new  Radicalism,  which  became  the 
protagonist  of  the  political  stage,  were  in  a  way  materialized 
by  the  Caucus;  it  fixed  them,  threw  them  into  relief,  gave 
them  body  if  not  life,  thus  accentuating  the  outburst  of  formal 
and. sentimental  democracy  which  took  place  after  1S68. 

Ill 

The  important  share  which  the  Caucus  had  in  the  advent  of 
this  democracy  will  appear  still  more  clearly  if  we  pass  from 


.coy  Google 


688  DEMOCRACY   AND   POLITICAL  PARTIES     [thibd  PiBT 

the  study  of  its  general  tendencieB  to  that  of  its  methods  of 
action,  which  have  jnst  been  referred  to.  To  rouse  the  English 
voter  from  his  apathy,  to  overcome  the  vit  inertiae  which  con- 
stituted his  conservative  temperament  and  on  which  the  time- 
honoured  order  of  England  seemed  to  rest,  the  Caucus  erected 
political  agitation  into  a  system.  It  composed  a  whole  liturgy 
of  nieetinga,  with  fiery  harangues  and  energetic  "resolutions," 
of  demonstrations,  travelling  vans,  political  magic-Ian  tern 
pictures,  "social"  gatherings,  political  fStes,  which  were 
intended  to  keep  the  voter  always  on  the  go.  It  entered  on 
the  same  path  as  that  other  contemporary  movement  which 
undertook  to  impart  religious  feeling  tu  the  lower  strata  of 
the  population  by  democratizing  or  vulgarizing  religious  prac- 
tices, the  movement  of  the  Salvation  Army,  which,  devoid  of 
any  theological  idea,  substituted  physical  demonstrations  of 
faith  and  religious  gymnastics  for  a  creed,  by  means  of  a  hier- 
archized  quasi-military  organization,  with  parades,  with  sing- 
ing, with  dancing  to  the  music  of  drums  and  fifes.  Similarly, 
the  Caucus,  without  losing  itself  in  principles,  tried  to  kindJe 
and  keep  alive  political  ardour  in  its  followers  by  "raising 
enthusiasm,"  to  use  the  accepted  expression.  The  "sensa- 
tional "  methods  introduced  by  the  Caucus  into  politics  natu- 
rally developed  a  state  of  mind  disposed  t^  apprehend  and 
resolve  political  problems  by  means  of  feeling,  often  of  a 
generous  but  seldom  of  a  thoughtful  character.  They  helped, 
so  far  as  they  were  concerned,  to  change,  if  one  may  so  express 
it,  the  English  mind,  which  had  for  some  time  past  been 
suffering  from  a  spirit  of  unrest  and  feverish  agitation,  in  cod- 
sequence  of  the  revolution  in  the  means  of  locomotion  and  other 
improvements  in  materia]  civilization,  which  have  destroyed 
the  equilibrium  of  the  old  life ;  of  the  moral  progress  which 
has  made  people  more  alive  to  the  sufferings  of  mankind;  and 
finally  of  the  spread  of  a  smattering  of  culture  and  an  un- 
wholesome publicity,  which  have  aroused  hazy  ideas  or  vague 
aspirations  and  produced  a  craving  for  morbid  emotions. 

While  raising  political  agitation  to  the  level  of  an  instrume>i~ 
turn  regni  and  making  it  aim  chiefly  at  men's  imaginations,  tlie 
Caucus  has  been  led  into  giving  an  exceptional  development 
to  forms  of  action  capable  of  lifting  great  masses  at  a  single 
stroke ;  it  has  been  induced  to  put  wholesale  methods,  so  to 


.coy  Google 


BioiiTHCHAP.]  SUMMARY  680 

apeak,  in  the  place  of,  or,  at  all  erenta,  on  the  top  of,  methoda 
ad  Iiominem,  in  the  ahape  of  maas-meetings,  demonstTationa, 
amoking-conoerta,  picnics,  and  other  politico-social  fate^ 
which  attract  the  multitnde,  and  which  even  exert  a  new 
form  of  electoral  bribery  over  it  —  collective  bribery.  But 
whether  these  performances  are  seemingly  addteased  to  the 
intelligence,  or  whether  they  openly  appeal  to  the  cravings  of 
the  imagination  or  the  stomach,  their  methods  do  not  admit 
of  any  modulation.  The  action  ad  hominem  of  the  pre- 
Caucus  regime,  which  was  moat  fully  reflected  in  the  election 
canvass,  supplemented,  in  case  of  need,  by  individual  corrup- 
tion, waa  able  to  proportion  the  character  and  the  amount  of 
the  efforts  to  be  applied  to  the  voter  in  each  particular  case. 
The  Caucus,  so  far  as  the  instruments  of  which  it  enjoys  a 
monopoly  are  concerned,  cannot  operate  in  the  same  way. 
Thus  stump  oratory,  platform  eloquence,  which  is  one  of  the 
greatest,  or  rather  the  greatest,  resource  of  the  Caucus  for 
action  oo  the  mind,  cannot  vary  its  languid ;  it  can  only 
sound  one  note,  and  that  necessarily  the  highest,  to  be  able 
to  strike  the  dullest  ear  in  the  mixed  audience  which  is  being 
addressed.  Without  taking  into  account  the  diversity  of  tem- 
peraments, the  stump  adminiatera  the  same  doae  to  them  all, 
and  by  spicing  it  as  strongly  as  possible  it  tries  to  produce  an 
identical  amount  of  excitement  in  all.  It  is  the  same  with 
the  action  on  the  "social  tendencies"  exerted  by  the  Caucus 
and  its  vis-^-vis  the  Primrose  League,  with  similar  stereotyped 
means.  Everywhere  we  find  an  jitter  want  of  flexibility  and 
elasticity;  there  is  invariably  a  rigid,  uniform  mechanism, 
regulated  beforehand  by  cut  and  dried  methods,  which  exclude 
all  spontaneity  of  movement,  and  obeying  a  spirit  of  external 
conformity  which  resents  all  independence  of  thought. 

The  natural  effect  of  this  combination  of  forces  is  that  all 
the  political  relations  which  the  Caucus  tries  to  bring  about 
are  dealt  with  in  a  mechanical  way.  Whether  it  is  a  case  of 
manifestations  of  reason  or  demonat rations  of  political  feeling, 
everything  la  turned  out  aa  in  a  Mancheater  factory  or  a  Bir- 
mingham workshop.  The  machinery  of  the  Caucua  auppliea 
public  opinion  wholesale,  just  as  the  machinery  of  the  Prim- 
rose League  and  of  moat  of  the  Associations  produces  "  social 
oonsideiation, "  for  the  consumption  of  voters  who  are  partial 


.coy  Google 


690  DEMOCRACY   AND   POLITICAL  PARTIES     [third  p*bt 

to  it.  If  a  pressing  need  arises,  if  io  the  midst  of  a  fierce 
struggle  the  moral  supplies  of  the  leaders  of  the  party  ran 
short,  a  special  consignment  of  opinion  is  forthwith  oidered 
from  London;  a  simple  telegram  sent  to  all  the  Associations 
of  the  party  throughout  the  Kingdom  is  enough  to  make  "the 
voice  of  the  country  speak."  When  it  is  no  longer  a  question 
of  setting  in  motion  large  masses  of  men  oi  procuring  impoeiog 
manifestations,  but  of  a  select  body  meetiug  in  the  assemblies 
of  the  party  parliament  to  drav  up  a  common  programme 
or  to  modify  it,  it  is  always  in  a  mechanical  fashion  that  the 
various  opinions  are  made  to  agree;  the  divergent  views  are 
either  eliminated  without  discussion,  or  even  stifled  by  the 
quasi-material  resistance  which  their  authors  encounter  before 
they  have  even  entered  the  assembly  hall;  already  ia  the 
lobbies,  in  the  smoking-room,  they  are  overawed  by  the 
compact  mass  of  delegates,  which  crushes  out  individual 
initiative  or  inclination,  so  much  so  that  this  effect  and 
not  the  facilities  for  eschanging  views,  for  discussion,  which 
do  not  exist  there,  is  regarded  by  the  managers  of  the 
Organization  as  the  raiaon  d'itre  of  these  great  representative 
gatherings.  Finally,  and  as  a  climax,  even  the  individual 
relations  of  confidence  and  esteem  between  man  and  man  are 
manufactured  by  the  Caucus;  it  supplies  the  confidence  and 
produces  the  esteem  with  which  a  candidate  or  a  Member 
should  inspire  his  fellow -citizens.  If  the  candidate  is  a 
"carpet-bagger,"  unknown  in  the  locality,  the  Organizatioa 
strives  to  "make  him  popu^";  if,  when  he  meets  the  elec* 
tors,  he  is  unable  to  impress  them  advantageously  with  his 
talent  or  his  competence,  the  Organization  sends  out  its 
"  workers, "  who  "  speak  for  him  "  by  flooding  the  oonstitaency 
with  political  eloquence. 

IV 

These  effects  of  the  dwindling  of  individuality  and  the 
growth  of  formalism  in  political  life,  which  have  come  to 
light  in  each  of  the  different  aspects  from  which  we  have  suc- 
cessively considered  the  work  of  the  Caucus,  culminate  and 
are  summed  up  in  a  way  in  the  highest  sphere  of  political 
relations,  that  of  the  leadership.     This  sphere  had  all  the  less 


.coy  Google 


EiOHTHCBAP.]  SUMMARY  591 

chance  of  escaping  thein  because  the  leadership  was  the  visible 
objective  of  the  Caucus,  and  provided  it  with  its  casiu  belli. 
Having  gone  to  war  with  party  leadership,  held  by  the  repre- 
sentatives of  the  old  ruling  classes,  the  Caucus  has  not  anni- 
hilated it  —  far  from  it;  but  it  has  subdivided  it,  broken  it 
into  fragments,  or,  if  the  expression  is  preferred,  decentralized 
it;  the  leaders  belonging  to  the  upper  middle  class,  the  men 
of  means  and  social  position,  have  had  to  share  their  power 
with  the  crowd  of  small  local  leaders  created  by  the  autonomist 
organization  of  the  Caucus.  But,  by  working  out  autonomy 
and  decentralization  in  too  formal  a  way,  with  a  multiplicity 
of  subdivisions,  in  accordance  with  the  strict  logic  of  the 
democratic  principle,  the  Caucus  has  succeeded  mainly  in 
bringing  forward  local  mediocrity,  and  then  installing  it  in 
the  counsels  of  the  party.  The  local  man  with  limited  views, 
who,  left  to  his  own  resources,  would  never  have  been  able  to 
thrust  himself  on  his  fellow-citizens,  has  been  hoisted  up  by 
the  mere  play  of  the  machinery  of  the  Caucus,  automatically, 
so  to  speak.  While  these  small  leaders  were  rising  to  the 
surface,  the  old  leaders,  who  were  theoretically  overthrown, 
but  in  reality  still  standing,  saw  their  prestige  decline,  their 
intliience  diminish,  and  this  twofold  action  produced  a  general 
levelling,  which  tended  to  shorten  the  averse  stature  of  public 
men,  to  make  the  type  a  poorer  one. 

The  qualities  which  they  had  to  prove  the  possession  of,  in 
accordance  with  the  principles  of  the  Caucus,  and  the  means 
by  which  they  were  henceforth  able  to  succeed,  thanks  to  the 
methods  of  the  Caucus,  made  this  result  inevitable.  Unquali- 
fied adhesion  to  the  official  creed  of  the  party  having  become 
the  supreme  political  virtue  which  singled  a  man  out  for  the 
confidence  of  his  fellow-citizens  in  the  discharge  of  every 
public  duty,  and  his  claims  being  made  clear  to  them  by  the 
machinery  of  the  Organization,  which  aimed  especially  at  the 
imagination,  the  personal  worth  of  the  individual  became  of 
less  importance.  From  the  men  of  the  ward  meeting,  in  which 
strict  observance  of  political  routine  or  zeal  as  a  "worker" 
marks  out  the  "earnest  politician,"  up  to  the  parliamentary 
representatives,  not  to  mention  the  town  councillors,  who  are 
obliged  to  swear  political  allegiance,  the  virtues  of  public  men 
becme  more  and  more  formal  and  external,  so  to  speak. 


.coy  Google 


51)2  DEMOCRACY   AND  POLITICAL   PARTIES     [thibd  PA«t 

The  deterioration  of  the  men  in  oha^e  of  public  affaixs  caa 
be  clearly  discerned  already ;  we  have  seen  it  break  out  more 
strongly  in  jnunicipal  life  since  the  Caucus  introduced  party 
orthodoxy  into  it  and  placed  ite  machinery  at  its  disposal. 
Parliament  bas  not  been  spared  either;  the  choice  of  the 
Caucus,  contrary  to  the  promises  of  its  founders,  does  not 
always  fall  on  men  of  a  class  superior  to  that  from  which  the 
national  representation  was  recruited  before  the  advent  of  the 
Caucus;  the  average  of  its  nominees  bears  the  stamp  rather 
of  mediocrity.  The  Caucus  has  by  no  means  ousted  the  pluto- 
cratic element  from  Parliament  nor  from  the  counsels  of  the 
party.  It  needs  it  itself  to  provide  for  the  upkeep  of  its 
machinery.  Even  the  influence  of  social  rank  proved  to  be  in- 
dispensable to  the  Caucus ;  being  unable  to  turn  out  of  its  own 
mould  genuine  leaders  who  are  raised  above  the  multitude  by 
some  superiority,  and  who  consequently  command  their  respect, 
the  Caucus  has  been  obliged  to  accept,  and  often  apply  for, 
the  services  of  the  leaders  of  the  old  formation,  while  depriv- 
ing them,  however,  of  the  feeling  of  dignity  and  responsibility 
imparted  by  the  autonomous  exercise  of  power.  Although 
constituting  an  obstacle  to  the  democratic  eagerness  of  the 
popular  and  advanced  element  of  the  party,  the  middle-clasa 
leaders  are  carried  along  much  farther  than  their  real  convic- 
tions and  prejudices  would  permit  of,  through  fear  of  still 
more  impairing  their  authority,  which  they  have  to  protect 
by  devices  of  management,  now  that  they  cannot  use  it  with- 
out any  disguise.  When  all  is  said  and  done,  the  monopoly 
of  the  leadership,  which  the  Caucus  undertook  to  destroy,  has 
only  assumed  another  aspect;  a  little  more  divided  and  left 
much  less  to  the  natural  selection  determined  by  the  spon- 
taneous play  of  social  forces,  it  is  more  mannfacttired,  and  it 
is  more  than  ever  inspired,  if  not  solely,  at  all  events  in  the 
main,  by  wire-pulling,  with  a  diminution  of  responsibility  for 
those  who  pull  the  wires.  So  that,  if  there  were  no  danger 
in  conclusions  of  a  too  sweeping  kind,  it  might  be  said  that 
the  monopoly  of  the  leadership  which  was  held  by  the  repre- 
sentatives of  the  old  ruling  classes  tends  to  give  place  to  a 
monopoly  of  wire-pullers  backed  by  plutocrats. 

In  any  event,  the  r61e  of  the  wire-puller,  and  in  general  of 
the  "  worker  "  of  the  party,  is  growing;  all  the  importance  lost 


.coy  Google 


iioMTH  CHAP.]  SUMMARY  603 

bj  social  rank  in  party  life  has  been  gained  by  the  "worker"; 
his  zeal  and  skill  are  becoming  a  claim  to  the  leadership.  And 
this  is  all  the  more  natural,  and  almost  legitimate,  because 
the  methods  developed  by  the  Caucus  have  made  his  "work" 
not  an  improvised  duty  at  the  moment  of  the  election,  but  a 
continuous  oceupalion  of  an  extremely  absorbing  kind,  and 
demanding  daily  attention.  The  multiplicity,  the  variety, 
and  the  intensity  of  the  efforts  exerted  by  tlie  organizations 
have  made  electioneering  business  exceedingly  complicated; 
"  it  has  become  quite  a  science, "  as  is  said,  not  without  com- 
placency, by  representatives  of  the  party  Organization;  "it  is 
now  quite  a  business,"  say  others,  "and  you  must  attend  to  it 
as  to  a  business."  To  keep  the  small  local  leaders  in  working 
trim,  tliey  must  be  occupied;  to  rouse  the  masses  from  their 
inditference,  they  must  be  stirred  up  and  stimulated  unremit- 
tingly. "Political  work"  is  never  slack.  In  every  conatitu- 
ency  there  is  now  a  fairly  large  number  of  persons  who  are 
constantly  thinking  about  "  politics,"  intent  on  electioneering 
schemes;  in  other  words,  political  professionals. 

True,  the  type  of  these  political  zealots  created  by  the 
Caucus  in  England  has  not  the  objectionable  features  of  the 
"professional  politician"  of  other  countries;  he  is  not  a  para- 
site, who  lives  on  society  and  makes  politics  a  trade,  often  a 
low  trade.  The  number  of  persons  who  live  exclusively  by 
"  politics,"  although  increased  by  the  Caucus,  is  not  yet  a  large 
one.  They  are  (I  am  still  speaking  of  the  extra-constitutional 
sphere)  the  secretaries  of  Associations,  the  employes  of  the 
central  and  provincial  Organization,  the  "missionaries,"  and 
the  lecti\rer3  or  other  political  agents.  Even  at  a  liberal  com- 
putation they  would  hardly  reach  the  figure  of  2000  for  the 
whole  of  England,  with  Scotland  and  Wales,  Still  they  are  be- 
coming a  marked  body  in  the  midst  of  society ;  the  Caucus  has 
given  them  a  permanent  status,  and  the  "  political  agents  "  are 
beginning  to  form,  if  not  exactly  a  separate  class,  at  all  events  a 
guild.  They  already  have  a  collective  consciousness  of  them- 
selves; they  possess  their  professional  societies,  their  benefit 
clubs.  The  best  foretaste,  however,  of  the  professional  poli- 
tician is  given  rather  by  the  small  local  leaders  created  by  the 
organization  of  the  Caucus.  These  men  seldom  make  money 
out  of  their  political  situation,  but  most  of  them  always  expect 
>■<.!..  1-2  q 


.coy  Google 


504  DEMOCRACY  AND  POLITICAL  PARTIES    [tHimo  p.ri 

some'  advantage  from  it,  if  not  in  cash,  at  all  events  in  some 
other  form.  To  a  certain  degree,  comparatively  slight,  they  can 
count  on  the  public  offices  granted  to  the  winning  side  for  sei^ 
vices  rendered.  These  places  are  by  no  means  numerous;  the 
government  service  is  almost  free  from  the  taint  of  party  poli- 
tics. But  in  the  municipal  administration  the  subordinate 
offices  are  too  often  distributed  as  a  political  reward  since  the 
Caucus  has  sanctioned  the  transformation  of  local  elections 
into  contests  of  political  parties.  The  recent  development  of 
State  function arism,  brought  on,  for  instance,  by  legislation 
for  the  protection  of  labour,  also  provides  some  places  which 
are  sought  and  obtained  by  means  of  politics ;  thus  a  certain 
number  of  labour  leaders,  secretaries  of  Trade  Unions,  who 
are  on  the  look-out  for  workshop  and  factory  inspectorships, 
join  the  party  Associations  for  the  purpose  of  obtaining  the 
posts  to  which  they  aspire  by  their  assistance.  Others  among 
the  small  local  leaders,  who  have  no  administrative  ambitions, 
hope  that  their  activity  in  the  Organization  will  do  them  good 
in  business,  in  their  trade,  or  get  them  on  in  some  other  way. 
In  short,  without  creating  the  regular  type  of  "professional 
politician,"  the  Caucus,  to  meet  the  requii-ements  of  election 
business,  vhich  it  had  made  extremely  intricate,  has  brought 
into  the  field  and  grouped  in  permanent  regiments  a  whole 
contingent  of  smalt  people,  who  devote  themselves  methodi- 
cally to  "politics  "  from  more  or  less  interested  motives,  which 
need  not  always  assume  a  mercenary  aspect  to  produce  their 
demoralizing  effect  on  public  life. 

The  ultimate  result,  then,  is  that  the  Caucus,  which  aimed  at 
hastening  the  democratic  process  in  English  political  society, 
has  succeeded  only  in  a  superficial,  purely  apparent  fashion. 
The  popular  form  of  the  party  Organization  merely  enables 
the  latter  to  penetrate  deeper  into  the  masses  for  the  purpose 
of  capturing  them  more  easily,  and  not  for  giving  tliem  inde- 
pendence. The  design  which  the  Caucus  undertook  to  cany 
out,  of  making  the  entire  life  of  the  people  "an  organized 
whole,"  of  making  "  political  and  municipal  life  a  consistent, 
earnest,  true,  and  enthusiastic  life,  instead  of  a  spasmodic 
electioneering  impulse,"  has  utterly  failed.  The  Caucus  has 
in  no  way  helped  to  raise  the  tone  of  public  life.     Fax  fiom 


.coy  Google 


xiOHTHCiup.]  SUMMARY  5e& 

liber&ting  it  from  unwholesome  social  influences,  it  has  made 
its  Organization,  which  cleverly  superintends  the  process,  an 
instrument  of  "social  brihery"  practised  for  the  party's  bene- 
fit. It  has  not  increased  material  political  corruption,  but  it 
has  encouraged  the  deterioration  of  the  mind  of  the  electorate. 
The  electioneering  impulse  is  no  longer  "spasmodic,"  it  is 
true;  it  has  no  doubt  been  transformed  into  steady  "work," 
but  performed  hy  a  special  contingent  of  "workers,"  who  only 
sow  the  seed  of  the  " profess ionaj  politician"  more  deeply  in 
English  soil;  in  society  as  a  whole  the  political  pulse  does  not 
beat  quicker.  On  the  contrary,  in  preventing  the  develop- 
ment of  a  spontaneous  political  life  by  its  machinery,  in  offer- 
ing a  permanent  obstacle  to  the  free  exercise  of  the  judgment, 
the  Caucus  tends  rather  to  enfeeble  the  public  mind.  It  only 
strengthens  political  party  passion.  Blotting  out  independent 
thought  and  enervating  the  will  and  the  personal  responsibility 
of  the  voter,  the  Caucus  ends  in  obliterating  the  individual, 
after  having  undertaken  to  establish  his  political  autonomy 
up  to  the  farthest  limits  of  the  eztraconstitutional  sphere. 
Attacking  the  old  leaders  as  if  they  were  an  impediment  to 
this  autonomy,  the  Caucus  has-struck  a  blow  at  the  leadership 
in  general,  by  disparaging  the  qualities  which  constitute  lead- 
ership in  a  healthy  political  community,  that  is,  the  personal 
superiority  conferred  by  knowledge  and  character,  and  exalt- 
ing the  conventional  and  external  qualifications  enforced  by 
stereotyped  methods.  In  making  these  qualifications  and 
methods  an  engine  of  government,  the  Caucus  bids  fair  to 
set  up  a  government  by  machine  instead  of  a  responsible  gov- 
ernment by  human  beings. 

That  is  the  final  conclusion,  the  elements  of  which  we  have 
been  collecting  throughout  this  lengthy  enquiry  and  patient 
analysis,  and  which,  standing  out  with  glaring  plainness, 
throws  a  flash  of  light  on  the  whole  route  which  we  have 
traversed.  There  we  have  what  the  Caucus  democracy  offers 
society  disintegrated  by  the  industrial  revolution  and  the 
philosophic  movement,  the  society  in  which  the  rupture  of  old 
ties  has  undermined  the  leadership  and  isolated  the  emanci- 
pated individual;  to  reconstitute  a  political  leadership  and 
embrace  the  individual  and  the  community  in  a  new  existence, 
it  offers  a  purely  and  grossly  mechanical  synthesis. 


.coy  Google 


DEMOCRACY  AND  POLITICAL  PARTIES    [thik.  paw 


If  we  descend  from  the  general  sphere  of  political  society, 
irhich  we  have  just  been  considering,  into  the  special  field 
of  the  political  parties,  with  which  the  latter  are  so  fond  of 
identifying  the  national  exiBteoce,  and  which  the  efforts  of 
the  Organization  have  aimed  at  directly,  do  we  find  more 
satisfactory  results?  Has  the  Caucus  kept  the  promises 
which  it  made  of  ensuring  by  its  organization  on  a  popular 
basis  a  real  representation  to  the  constituent  elements  of  the 
party?  Does  it  provide  a  means  of  gauging  and  eliciting  their 
opinions?  Does  it  succeed  in  bringing  unity  out  of  raiiety, 
amid  the  manifold  contingents  which  it  is  its  bueineas  to 
amalgamate,  and  in  maintaining  their  cohesion,  while  at  the 
same  time  reserving  the  party's  freedom  of  action?  The 
Associations  of  the  Caucus  cannot  claim  to  be  really  t«pre- 
sentative  of  the  party,  the  meetings  in  the  wards,  from  which 
all  the  delegations  of  the  Caucus  emanate,  being  attended  only 
by  a  handful  of  men  in  whom  the  diversity  of  social  position 
and  political  temperament  is  far  from  being  reflected.  No 
doubt  a  considerable  proportion  of  voters  hold  aloof  from  the 
Caucus,  not  because  they  disagree  with  it,  but  from  indiffer- 
ence. In  addition  to  this,  the  manners  of  the  Caucus  are 
careful  to  make  allowance  for  opinion  outside  the  Organiza- 
tion, and  to  a  certain  extent  thus  supply  the  deficiency  in  itE 
representative  force  from  their  own  store.  But  on  the  whole 
the  channels  by  which  this  opinion  penetrates  into  the  Caucos 
are  too  narrow  not  to  be  obstructed  by  the  element  which  pre- 
dominates in  it,  and  which  is  composed  well-nigh  exclusively 
of  the  vanguard  of  the  electoral  army.  It  is  an  almost  general 
fact  that  the  Association  is  more  Kadical  than  the  mass  of  the 
party,  more  BO  even  than  the  M.P.  who  has  had  to  submit  to 
its  demands. 

It  follows  in  the  first  place  that  the  Caucus  is  incapable  of 
supplying  a  correct  estimate  of  public  opinion,  of  giving  a 
more  or  less  accurate  idea  of  its  tendencies  and  aspirations. 
And  it  has  proved  this  incapacity  more  than  once.*    Besides, 

1  In  1880  the  Liberal  Caucus  did  Dot  foresee  the  brilliant  ytctory  o[  Its 
part; ;  In  13S5  It  eipecled  to  win  In  tbe  boroughs  in  which  the  Liberals  irpic 
about  to  lUBtaln  a  defeat  only  retrieved  by  tbe  voting  of  tbe  connttes ;  in  1686 


.CD,  Google 


■lOiiTii  CHAP.]  SUMMARY  607 

the  too  close  relations  of  the  Caucus  with  the  official  leaders 
of  the  party  rob  it  of  the  independence  of  mind  necessary  for 
giving  free  expression  to  opinion.  Sometimes  they  have  shut 
its  mouth  on  various  occasions,  when  it  was  of  importance  to 
know  the  views  of  the  nation,  as,  for  instance,  in  the  Soudan 
aftair  or  the  preliminary  phase  of  Home  Kule,  at  the  beginning 
of  the  spring  of  1886,  before  the  party  was  irrevocably  com- 
mitted to  that  policy.  At  others  the  Caucus  gave  (as  in  the 
same  Home  Kule  matter,  a  month  later)  wrong  information 
about  the  state  of  opinion  in  the  party,  driving  Mr.  Gladstone 
further  along  the  path  of  defeat.  Thus,  as  a  mouthpiece  of 
opinion,  the  Caucus  has  failed,  and  is  liable  to  fail,  both  the 
party  in  the  country  and  its  parliamentary  leaders,  by  incor- 
rectly reflecting  the  views  of  the  former  and  offering  the  latter 
an  inaccurate  compass. 

Being  always  apt  to  stride  ahead,  the  Caucus  forced  the 
pace  too  much  for  average  opinion,  making  the  party  com- 
promise itself,  if  not  by  acts,  at  all  events  by  pledges  which 
it  was  by  no  means  easy  to  redeem,  and  this  was  the  case  all 
along  the  line  from  the  local  Associations  up  to  the  Xational 
Federation.  Goaded  on  by  the  Caucus,  the  party  sometimes 
made  abrupt  transitions  (opposed  to  Home  Kule  one  day,  it 
plunged  headlong  into  it  the  next) ;  in  the  space  of  four  and 
twenty  hours  it  found  itself  provided  with  new  doctrines,  with 
new  articles  of  political  faith,  because  its  Organization  had 
just  adopted  them,  either  of  its  own  accord  or  at  instigation 
from  outside;  at  other  times  the  same  rigid  orthodoxy  which 
compelled  the  adhesion  of  the  party  held  it  as  in  a  vice, 
entangling  it  in  the  pledges  given  by  the  Organization  and 
hampering  its  freedom  of  motion.  Nothing  was  left  for  it  but 
to  pay  for  the  mistakes  and  the  aberrations  of  its  Organization. 

Not  being  sufficiently  representative  of  the  party,  either  in 
its  organization  or  in  its  movements,  the  Caucus  has  ensured 
cohesion  in  the  party  ranks,  to  the  extent  that  this  has  been 
vouchsafed  to  it,  not  so  much  by  its  intrinsic  force  as  by  the 
feeling,  common  among  the  great  mass  of  voters,  of  the  neces* 

it  declared  enthnslastlcall;  tot  Irish  Home  Rnle,  wblcb  the  cooutr;  wu  about 
to  emphatically  reject;  then  ft  broufiht  tomard  the  Newcastle  Prograninie, 
which,  after  having  nllied  a  tmall  majority  toe  a  moment,  bant  op  the  patty 
with  a  lonnidable  crash. 


.coy  Google 


508  DEMOCRACY  AND   POLITICAL   PARTIES    [thibd  fABT 

sity  of  facing  the  enemy.  Possessmg  pennanent  cadres,  which 
enabled  it  to  mobilize  its  contingents  at  a  moment's  notice,  so 
to  speak,  the  Caucus  had  greater  facilities  for  grouping  the 
adherents  of  the  party  around  it.  Unfurling  the  party  flag, 
of  which  it  had  assumed  the  custody,  it  could  almost  always 
get  its  candidate  accepted,  by  conveying  the  impression  that 
it  wielded  real  power  over  the  electorate.  The  number  of 
utter  mediocrities  returned  to  Parliament,  not  to  mention  the 
town  councils,  thanks  to  the  Caucus  trade-mark,  appeared  to 
confirm  this  impression. 

In  one  respect,  however,  the  Caucus  increased  the  fighting 
strength  of  the  party  by  its  intrinsic  force,  by  procuring  the 
adhesion  of  many  neutral  or  indifferent  voters,  who  are  out- 
side the  organization  of  parties,  and  who  press  heavily  upoo 
them,  swinging  between  the  two  belligerents.  The  proportion 
of  these  voters  is  systematically  diminished  by  the  efforts  of 
the  Caucus.  That  is  perhaps  the  most  important  result  which 
it  has  achieved  for  the  party,  on  the  Liberal  as  well  as  on  the 
Tory  side.  Both  by  its  daily  exertions  and  by  the  sole  fact  of 
its  existence,  of  its  permanent  Organization  brought  to  the 
doors  of  the  people,  the  Caucus  has  popularized  the  title  of 
the  party,  has  imparted  to  the  masses  the  abstract  notion  of  it, 
which  by  its  sweeping  character  gets  accepted  as  a  dogma  and 
takes  possession  of  the  public  mind  by  its  intrinsic  force,  which 
is  independent  of  the  shifting  aspect  of  men  and  events.  This 
effect  produced  by  the  Caucus  is  all  the  more  appreciable  be- 
cause the  mental  and  logical  process  by  which  the  popular  mind 
manages  to  take  in  the  abstract  idea  of  the  party  is  a  very  long 
one.  At  first  it  grasps  it  only  under  the  concrete  aspect  of  a 
man,  of  a  leader;  then  the  idea  assumes  the  more  general  but 
still  material  aspect  of  the  dwelling,  of  the  castle  (castle  in- 
terest), with  all  those  whom  it  contains,  irrespective  of  their 
individual  personalities.  The  owner  of  it,  who  wields  the 
political  influence  of  the  locality,  presents  himself  to  the  im- 
agination as  possessing  a  continuous  existence  through  succes- 
sive generations,  as  being  only  a  single  person,  so  that  Hodge 
is  incapable  of  distinguishing  the  masters  of  the  house  one 
from  the  other  or  from  the  building  itself,  which  acquires 
almost  an  active  property  in  his  mind.*  A  further  step  is 
1  Ct.  Richard  Jeflerles,  Hodgt  and  liU  Ma$Ur$.  1B8D,  Vol.  I,  pp.  369, 771^376. 


.coy  Google 


BiGHTHCBAr.]  SUMMABT  500 

taken  in  the  process  of  abstraction  when  with  the  image  of  the 
dwelling  is  associated  the  notion  of  an  office,  the  successive 
holders  of  which  are  conceived  of  only  as  a  single  person,  like 
the  prefect  of  whom  the  village  mayor  quoted  by  Taine  re- 
marked: "Monsieur  le  pr^fet  m'a  toujours  conserve  sa  bien- 
veillance  qiioiqu'on  I'ait  d^jlt  change  plusieurs  fois."  *  Then 
after  the  personal  presentment  of  the  idea  comes  the  material 
symbol,  which  represents  it  to  the  mind  by  means  of  an  outward 
token  appealing  to  the  senses,  such  as  the  colours  which  the 
parties  adopt,  and  which  in  the  eyes  of  the  common  herd  be- 
come so  inseparable  from  the  notion  which  they  embody  that 
by  changing  the  colours  the  notion  itself  is  destroyed.'  In  the 
next  stage  the  parties  come  to  be  denoted  by  abstract  symbols, 
by  material  terms  conceived  in  a  figurative  sense,  one  party 
being  called  the  high,  and  another  the  low  party.  Lastly,  the 
mind  rises  to  pure  abstractions,  expressed  by  terms  such  as 
Liberal,  Conservative.  The  intellectual  level  of  society  being 
anything  but  uniform,  the  successive  party  conceptions  which 
come  one  after  another  in  logical  order  still  coexist  in  the  elec- 
torate, some  voters  grasping  the  distinction  of  colour  only  in 
the  physical  sense  and  enquiring  about  a  candidate ;  "  What  is 
he,  blue  or  yellow  ?"  others  replying  with  dignity  to  the  can- 
vasser who  asks  for  their  votes;  "No,  sir,  I  never  vote  with 
the  high  party,"  But  the  number  of  people  who  vote,  not 
less  blindly  and  more  spontaneously,  for  the  "  Liberal "  or  the 
■  "Conservative,"  is  an  increasing  majority.  Furthering  the 
progress  of  enlightenment  which  makes  mankind,  who  become 
the  slaves  of  words  directly  they  emerge  from  a  barbaroas 

1  H.  Taine.  te  luffrage  vniveriel  en  Frmwe,  Parli,  1872. 

*  Befoce  the  advent  ol  the  Canciii  Id  England,  to  decide  betveen  several 
candidates  who  offered  themselvee  to  the  (larty,  a  test  ballot  was  sometimea 
taken,  and  the  one  who  obtained  the  moat  votes  became  the  sole  candidate  ol 
the  party  at  the  election.  To  enable  tbe  llUterato  adherents  of  the  party  to 
make  their  choice,  at  MaDchester,  where  Edward  Jones  and  Mllner  Oibson 
were  rival  candidates,  the  Idea  was  started  of  printing  their  names  on  the 
votinfc  papers  in  different  coloars.  At  a  test  ballot  between  tonr  Liberal 
candidates  at  StalTnrd.  It  was  proposed  to  adopt  the  same  plan,  bnt  the  aie 
o(  colours  had  lo  be  abandoned  becanse  none  nt  the  candidates  would  agree 
to  accept  the  colour  of  blue,  tor  tear  that  some  of  tbe  voters,  being  aocnstomed 
to  see  that  colour  lioialed  by  the  Tories,  wonid  contoniid  the  liberal  candidal* 
denoted  by  it  for  tbe  occaBlon  with  them  (Report  from  tlie  select  committee 
on  parliamentary  and  mnnlcipal  elections,  Blue  Booki,  1868-1869,  Vol.  Tm, 


.coy  Google 


flOO  rEMOCRACr   AND   POLITICAL   PARTIES     [raraD  pabt 

state,  advance  to  more  and  more  abstract  expressions,  the 
Caucus,  by  means  of  its  machinery,  has  popularized  the  ap- 
pellations "Liberal"  and  "Conservative,"  and  under  cover  of 
them  it  sweeps  into  the  organizations,  in  constantly  increasing 
numbers,  the  voters  who  are  known  in  them  as  "  bl^ks,"  that 
is  to  say,  those  who  are  outside  the  stereotyped  parties.  The 
dream  of  the  organizations  is  to  get  rid  of  the  doubtful  mass 
of  floating  voters  altogether,  so  as  to  put  an  end  to  the  peri- 
odical swing  of  the  pendulum,  which  gives  the  victory  now  to 
one  and  now  to  the  other  party,  each  of  them  hoping,  of  course, 
that  the  pendulum  will  stop  on  its  side. 

And  yet,  in  spite  of  the  accession  of  "blanks,"  the  organi- 
zations are  not  nearer  the  realization  of  their  dream,  for  they 
have,  and  especially  in  the  Liberal  Organization,  a  vast  deal 
of  trouble  to  keep  their  old  contingents  together.  The  par- 
ticular claims  which  contend  with  the  more  general  designs  in  . 
the  party  preoccupations,  as  well  as  the  divergences  of  views 
on  these  schemes  which  arise  within  the  party,  are  continually 
undermining  its  cohesion  and  threatening  its  unity.  All  the 
efforts  of  the  Caucus  to  combat  these  tendencies  have  failed 
up  to  the  present.  At  its  start,  the  Caucus  announced  that  it 
had  a  cure  for  the  evil  of  the  divisions  in  the  party,  a  plan 
for  making  the  general  will  of  the  party  always  prevail,  and 
for  silencing  the  special  aspirations,  the  particular  fancies, 
the  crotchets,  and  the  iFads.  In  reality  it  rather  encourages 
the  sects  by  trying  to  win  their  good  graces  in  order  to  obtain 
a  majority.  The  Organization  offers  them  a  sort  of  exchange 
where  they  can  sell  their  quota  of  support,  and  owing  to  the 
general  rule  that  the  existence  of  a  regular  market  enhances 
or  even  creates  value,  the  groups  obtain  au  exaggerated  impor- 
tance. The  natural  obstacles  which  the  bargaining  of  groups, 
so  common  in  divided  assemblies  (log-rolling),  encounters  in  a 
vast  constituency  composed  of  thousands  of  voters  of  varying 
intelligence  and  temperament,  are  overcome,  thanks  to  the 
Organization,  unless  it  can  make  sure  of  preventing  the 
bargaining  itself,  when  it  is  able  to  bring  into  the  field  a  force 
large  enough  to  intimidate  the  fomenters  of  schisms  beforehand. 
Being  anxious  to  get  votes,  and  presuming  too  much  on  the 
electoral  influence  of  the  champions  of  the  various  special 
claims,  the  Caucus,  especially  in  the  Liberal  party,  which  is 


.coy  Google 


■  lanTH  CHAP.]  SUMMART  001 

the  least  homogeneous,  was  often  too  ready  to  come  to  terms 
with  them  and  make  the  candidates  adopt  tfaeir  fads.  But  on 
the  election  day  the  views  of  other  sets  of  voters,  opposed  to 
one  or  the  other  of  these  hazardous  proposals,  asserted  them- 
selves triumphantly  in  a  good  many  constituencies,  and  the 
party  sustained  a  partial  defeat,  as  in  the  boroughB  in  1885, 
or  a  complete  one,  ae  in  189d. 

The  Caucus  could  not  stop  the  divisions  in  the  party  for  this 
simple  reason,  that  it  was  unable  to  make  divergent  views  not 
be  so,  and  because  divergence  of  views  was  an  inevitable  con- 
sequence of  the  divergence  of  interests  brought  about  by  the 
growing  complexity  of  social  relations.  By  the  force  of  things 
the  Liberal  party  was  destined  to  feel  the  efifects  of  this  in  a 
special  degree.  On  its  right  wing  was  taking  place  a  seces- 
sion of  the  interests  which  conceived  themselves  endangered 
by  its  advance,  while  on  its  left  wing  the  new  Radical  and 
Socialist  claims  were  raising  up  malcontents  and  rebels.  It 
was  no  use  inviting  them  to  take  shelter  under  the  "  grand  old 
umbrella,"  or  asking  them  to  step  into  the  "omnibus"  of  the 
^Newcastle  Programme;  it  was  impossible  to  huddle  the  centri- 
fugal elements  of  the  party  into  it  and  keep  them  motionless 
there,  and  the  general  election  of  1895  furnished  the  moat  strik- 
ing proof  of  the  vanity  of  attempts  aiming  at  securing  the  unity 
of  the  party  by  means  of  organization.  This  lesson  was  in- 
flicted on  the  Liberal  party,  but  the  party  which  goes  by  the 
name  of  Conservative  is  in  no  way  exempt  from  the  same 
infirmity;  in  its  case  it  only  takes  more  time  to  break  out. 
Most  of  the  conclusions  at  which  we  have  arrived  as  to  the 
r&le  of  the  Caucus,  and  its  effects  on  English  political  life, 
have  been  supplied  principally,  but  not  solely,  by  the  past 
and  the  present  of  the  Organization  of  the  party  which  goes 
by  the  name  of  Liberal ;  this  is  because  that  "  party  "  repre- 
sents the  social  strata  which  earlier  attained  to  a  more  com- 
plete political  development.  But  what  the  Liberal  party  is 
to-day,  the  Conservative  party  will  be  to-morrow,  for  in  point 
of  fact  it  is  to-day  what  the  Liberal  party  was  only  yes- 
terday. The  Conservative  party  is  no  longer  the  "stupid 
party";*  it  has  got  into  touch  with  the  age,  its  mind  has 

1  This  expnwion  was  ipplM  to  the  Coiwamtlva  party  by  John  Stnsrt 
Hill,  and  oommeDted  on  by  him  in  the  HooM  of  Conunou  la  1866  {Saruard, 
Vol.  CLXXXIU,  p.  1592). 


.coy  Google 


e02  DEMOCRACY  AND   POLITICAL   PARTIES     [thibb  part 

expuided,  and  its  old  homogeneity  has  been  broken;  it  is  no 
longer  the  single  block  of  bygone  days.* 

In  its  unsuccessful  efforts  to  combat  the  centrifugal  ten- 
dencies in  the  party,  to  pursue  the  cohesion  and  unity  vhich 
were  oozing  away,  the  Caucus  was  confronted  by  the  historical 
fact  of  the  break-up  of  parties  which  had  been  at  work  in 
English  political  society  for  half  a  century.  The  appearance  of 
two  powerful  party  leaders,  Disraeli  and  Gladstone,  who,  after 
the  confusion  which  set  in  from  and  after  1846,  succeeded  in  re- 
forming two  large  armies,  with  fresh  contingents  supplied  by 
the  extension  of  the  suffrage,  gave  the  illusion  that  the  old 
system  of  the  dualism  of  stereotyped  parties  had  recovered 
from  its  momentary  collapse, —  a  breathing  space  in  which 
parties,  like  armies  exhausted  by  the  contest,  regain  strength 
and  reoccupy  their  positions.  In  reality  there  was  no  such 
thing;  the  process  of  differentiation  of  social  relations,  of 
interests,  of  aspirations,  of  ideas,  which  injured  the  classic 
dualism,  continued  with  as  much  force  as  ever;  that  is,  it 
developed  the  centrifugal  tendencies  in  political  society.  And 
it  ia  perfectly  natural  that  the  Caucus  should  have  been  power- 
less to  stem  the  current.  The  means  and  the  methods,  mostly 
mechanical,  which  it  adopted  to  obtain  cohesion,  doomed  it  to 
failure;  for,  once  moral  unity  has  disappeared  in  a  community, 
no  machinery,  however  ingenious,  can  restore  it.  And  yet, 
owing  to  this  very  internal  disintegration,  the  Caucus  could 
only  resort  to  factitious  devices  for  reuniting  the  incongruous 
elements.  This  fact  contains  a.  new  revelation,  another  flash 
of  light  succeeding  that  which  disclosed  to  us  that  the  Caucus 
tended  to  set  up  a  government  by  machine  instead  of  a  re- 
sponsible government  by  human  beings.  There  we  were  con- 
templating the  effect;  here  we  meet  with  the  cause.  It  is  the 
task  of  trying  to  maintain  the  old  unity  on  which  the  classic 
party  dualism  reposed,  it  is  this  hopeless  task  undertaken  by 

'  To  convince  oneaelf  ot  thU,  one  has  onli^  to  caat  a  glance  at  the  majoritf 
vhicb  the  last  general  election  returned  to  Parliament,  ihe  largest  Conserva- 
tive majority  comnianded  by  an  English  Hinistr;  tor  half  a  century.  And  in 
the  moBt  important  leKialatlve  proposal  at  the  following  year  (1896),  tlie  Edn- 
cation  Bill,  this  formidable  niajorily  was  not  able  to  provide  (he  govemmenl 
of  ita  choice  with  enougli  votes  to  carry  its  clerical  measure  favouring  the 
denoRiinallooal  schools ;  so  great  was  tlie  divergence  of  views  In  this  party  of 
which  the  Chnrch  was  always  the  rallying-point  it  ever  there  was  one. 


.CD,  Google 


the  Caucus,  which  has  forced  on!  it  methods  leading  to  a 
govemment  by  laachine. 

Kot  only  has  the  Caucus  not  succeeded  in  healing  the  vounde 
of  the  old  party  system,  but  it  has  eren  aggravated  its  evils. 
Availing  itself  of  the  representative  character  to  which  its 
organization  laid  claim,  and  of  its  position  as  authorized  mouth- 
piece of  the  opinion  of  the  party,  it  has  assumed  over  its  ad- 
heients  powers  which  tended  to  develop  party  tyranny  by  giving 
it  a  leg^  foundation.  To  tradition  and  habit,  which  governed 
the  parties  before  the  advent  of  the  Caucus,  it  has  added  pre- 
tensions founded  on  right,  on  a  mandate  conferred,  creating 
formal  powers  on  the,  one  band  and  obligations  on  the  other. 
There  were,  of  course,  wire-pullers  and  managers  before  the 
"Birmingham  plan"  was  introduced,  but  they  derived  all  their 
power  from  their  personal  position;  now  they  are  patented 
la  the  name  of  the  people.  There  were  also  organizations  of  a 
more  or  less  rudimentary  or  developed  character.  Associations 
more  or  less  resembling  the  "hundreds"  of  the  Caucus;  bat 
being  only  free  combinations  of  private  citizens,  it  never  entered 
into  their  heads  to  set  themselves  up  as  a  power  before  which 
everybody  —  candidates,  individual  voters,  parliamentary 
leaders  —  had  to  bow.  On  the  pretext  of  representing  the  views 
of  the  party  in  their  integrity,  the  Caucus  has  assumed  the 
monopoly  of  them.  Sole  depositary  of  its  creed,  it  can  apply 
moral  coercion  to  all  those  who  come  under  the  denomination 
of  the  party  with  an  effect  equal  to  that  procured  by  material 
force;  the  power  of  intimidation  is  enough  for  it,  and  it 
wields  it. 

The  first,  the  most  tangible,  result  produced  by  this  auto- 
cracy of  the  Caucus  was  to  put  an  end  to  the  free  competition 
of  candidates  in  the  party;  there  are  now  only  candidatures 
of  one  kind,  the  orthodox  ones,  stamped  with  the  Caucus  trade- 
mark; the  others  are  doomed.  The  loss  of  this  freedom  in- 
evitably diminishes  that  of  the  electorate.  A  party  which 
lives  under  such  a  regime  is  already  half  enslaved,  and  it 
will  have,  perhaps,  to  use  very  vigorous  efforts  to  recover  its 
liberty.  The  compulsion  implied  by  tlie  approved  candidature 
is  completed  in  the  case  of  the  individual  voter  by  the  behests 
of  party  piety,  which  the  Caucus  is  watching  over  and  which 


.coy  Google 


604  DEMOrRACr   AND   POLITICAL   PARTIES     [rHtBD  p*«t 

consists  in  voting  obedientlf  aad  blindly.  The  voter  who  is 
not  refractory  but  simply  thoughtful  is  regarded  as  an  obstacle. 
And  with  perfect  good  faith,  from  simple  devotion  to  pro- 
fessional interest,  a  tendency  arises,  even  in  the  governing 
circles  of  the  Organization,  to  look  with  envy  on  neighbonrs 
whose  voters  do  not  exhibit  this  vicious  propensity  to  argae.* 
In  fact,  military  discipline  is  the  secret  aspiration  of  the 
"organizers,"  when  they  do  not  proclaim  it.*  From  the  inex- 
orable orthodoiy  of  the  party  which  they  represent  there  is 
now  no  refuge  but  in  open  schism,  auoh  as  the  Socialist  revolt 
of  the  I.  L.  P.,  or  again,  perhaps,  in  the  nationalist  dreams 
of  a  "Cymry  If'ydd,"  a  movement  of  Welsh  patriots  inclined, 
in  the  pursuit  of  their  dream,  to  relax  in«the  strict  observance 
of  the  Liberal  creed.'  No  independent  or  open-minded  organi- 
zation has  been  able  to  stand  against  the  regular  party  organi- 
zations. The  rivals  have  been  thrust  aside  by  them ;  the  free 
organizations  which  drew  near  them  drooped  in  their  atmos- 
phere, whether  they  were  working-men's  clubs  created  for  the 
moral  improvement  of  the  masses,  or  the  "Eighty  Clnb." 
founded  in  a  moment  of  enthusiasm  as  a  free  brotherhood  of 
preachers  of  Liberal  principles,  or  even  the  Primrose  I<eagne, 
which  was  intended  by  its  promoters  to  introduce  a  fresh  and 
a  freely  flowing  current  into  the  stagnant  waters  of  Toryism. 
One  and  all  have  become  in  a  short  space  of  time  simple  annexes 

1  "  lo  Englnnd,"  M  was  remtlrkad  to  me  Id  London,  in  a  tons  of  anno;- 

ance.  "  they  argue,  whemas  in  Stwtland  they  vote  with  enthusiaam."  Yet  in 
Scotland,  I  tuund  that  the  wlre-piilleni  envied  their  English  colleagues,  (or 
"  the  Scotctunan  la  uot  like  the  EnglUbmaQ ;  be  goes  hiB  ovn  waT-" 

"  Id  llie  office  o(  a  Conserratire  Association,  one  of  the  moat  import*at  la 
the  KinKdam  fiom  its  (ullowing  Id  the  constitaency  and  its  broad  popolar 
busia,  1  was  told  as  soon  as  I  had  stated  the  ohject  of  my  visit:  "You  wish  to 
know  about  out  OrgaDlzaiion  I  9ir,  our  Organiiation  Is  a  military  orguilia- 
tlon ;  it  is  led  by  a  general  commatider-ln.chler,  who  U  callsd  PTealdent  at  the 
As»iiviation,  by  so  many  brigadier-generals,  who  are  styled  INnslonal  Cbair- 
men,  by  so  many  colonels,"  etc.  .  .  .  The  same  thing,  however,  was  said  te 
me  elsewhere  In  fewer  words:  "  Dtacipline  above  all,"  or  "  respect  and  dts- 
dpllue,  that  is  our  basis," 

*  This  movement,  of  slight  importance,  has  been  started  lately  by  Welsh 
enthnslasts  who  hold  that  the  Eagllsb  Liberal  party,  to  which  almost  alt  the 
Welsh  members  belong,  makes  use  of  them  without  giving  them  anything  in 
leiuru,  without  serving  "  tbe  cause  el  the  Welsh  people."  So,  devialiDg  tron 
tbestrict  coiitiirmity  of  the  Liberal  party,  the  palriola  of  the  Cymry  Fydd  look 
on  this  party  "  no  longer  as  an  end,  but  as  a  means,  and  a  means  which  ctn 
be  repudiated  In  oase  of  need." 


.CD,  Google 


of  the  official  organizations,  in  which  the  prajing-wheel  of 
the  party  is  automatically  turned. 


VI' 

The  preservation  of  stereotyped  parties  in  the  country,  which 
the  Caucus  tried  to  effect  by  straining  the  system  in  this  ex- 
traordinary way,  was  to  ensure,  in  the  long  run,  the  best 
possible  working  of  parliamentary  government,  which  rests 
on  the  party  system.  Has  this  type  of  government,  which 
has  so  long  been  "  on  its  trial,"  really  benetited by  the  Caucus? 
No  doubt,  by  helping  to  sweep  up  majorities,  the  Caucus 
facilitated  to  a  slight  extent,  for  a  moment,  the  duty  of  "car- 
rying on  the  Queen's  government."  But  at  the  same  time  its 
principles  and  its  methods  did  still  more  to  undermine  the 
very  foundations  of  parliamentary  government.  In  the  first 
place,  the  Caucus  warped  the  representative  principle  on  which 
parliamentary  government  reposeS)  and  which  consists  in  the 
personal  confidence  with  which  the  Member  inspires  the  elec- 
tors, who  trust  to  him  to  manage  the  affairs  of  the  nation  on 
their  behalf.  The  Caucus  invariably  tended  to  eliminate,  or 
at  any  rate  to  diminish,  the  personal  element  in  the  relations 
between  the  candidate  and  the  electors,  as  well  as  in  those 
between  the  Member  and  hia  constituents.  The  old  commit- 
tees, whose  business  it  was  to  conduct  the  election  campaign 
before  the  introduction  of  the  Caucus,  were  the  candidate's 
own  engine,  being  formed  on  each  occasion  ad  hoc,  by  him  and 
for  him,  whereas  the  Caucus,  by  reason  of  its  very  principle, 
is  an  impersonal  organization  representing  a  firm  behind  which 
the  individual  shrinks  out  of  sight  and  in  which  he  becomes 
simply  a  more  or  loss  anonymous  instrument  of  a  "party." 
Under  tlie  auspices  of  the  Caucus,  the  moral  understanding 
which  should  arise  between  the  candidate  and  the  electors 
whose  mandate  he  solicits  is  made  up  to  a  greater  extent  than 
in  bygone  days  by  the  external  party  conforihity;  and  as  for 
the  personal  element  which  still  remains  in  it,  that  understand- 
ing is  brought  about  by  the  increasing  co-operation  of  people 
other  than  the  candidate  himself,  by  the  crowd  of  imported 
speakers,  of  "workers"  of  the  party,  who  devote  their  energy 


.coy  Google 


806  DEMOCRACY  AND  POLITICAL   PARTIES     [third  p»bt 

and  their  abilities  to  inspiring  the  electors  with  confidence  in 
the  candidate. 

The  election  over,  the  Member  returned,  once  more  it  is 
party  orthodoxy,  according  to  the  daily  market  quotation 
certified  by  the  Caucus,  which  is  set  up  as  the  criterion  of  the 
parliamentary  conduct  of  the  Member.  If  the  M.  P.  is  bound 
to  his  electors  by  personal  feelings  of  devotion  and  affection, 
which  come  before  party  conformity,  the  Caucus,  should  a 
conflict  break  out,  deliberately  tries,  as  we  have  seen  in  the 
cases  of  Forster  and  Cowen,  to  stifle  these  feelings,  to  destroy 
the 'confidence  based  on  the  character  of  the  man,  in  order  to 
ensure  the  triumph  of  the  conformity  of  which  it  is  the  self- 
appointed  guardian  and  judge.  Unable  to  use  his  discretion 
freely,  and  prevented  from  seeking  his  political  line  of  con- 
duct in  his  own  knowledge  and  conscience,  the  Member  ceases 
to  be  a  representative  and  becomes  a  delegate,  a  subonlinat«. 
The  regime  of  a  widely  extended  suffrage,  however,  is  moving 
in  this  direction  of  itself;  when  the  number  of  voters  becomes 
'  too  great  to  allow  of  personal  contact,  from  which  the  Member 
derives  his  inspirations  direct  and  the  electors  their  trust  in 
his  judgment,  relations  of  confidence  necessarily  give  way  to 
formal  pledges.  The  Caucus  has  only  drawn  the  conclusions 
arising  from  this  state  of  things  while  hastening  it  perhaps. 
Having  stepped  into  the  shoes  of  the  electors,  it  drafts  the 
pledges  and  sees  that  they  are  carried  out.  It  is  therefore 
inevitable  that  the  Member  should  contract  his  obligations 
not  so  much  to  his  electors  as  to  the  Ot^anization,  and  that 
the  feelings  of  responsibility  due  to  the  constituents  whom 
he  is  supposed  to  represent,  should  be  transferred  to  the 
Caucus,  which  stands  closer  to  him.  He  assents  submis- 
sively to  all  the  conditions  which  the  latter  imposes.  And 
it  is  in  this  way  that  the  Radical  tone  of  Parliament  has, 
during  the  last  fifteen  years,  risen  abruptly  above  the  level 
of  the  average  of  the  electorate,  and  that  the  new  ty^  of 
English  M.  P.  has  been  engendered,  who  is  always  ready  to 
go  ahead,  without  knowing  exactly  where  he  is  going  and 
where  he  will  stop,  or  even  if  he  will  stop.'    The  result  is 

1  A  story  is  told  of  a  catididaM  vho,  after  having  giTsa  one  pladge  after 
another  at  a  public  meetlDg,  was  ashed  by  one  of  tbe  audience  if  he  was  pn- 
pared  to  vote  for  the  repeat  of  the  provisiouB  of  chaptei  zz  of  tbe  Book  ol 


.coy  Google 


KioiiTHCBAP.]  SUMMARY  607 

that  the  English  Parliameut  sustains  injury  in  the  "two  con- 
ditions which,"  according  to  Bagehot,  "are  essential  to  the 
bare  possibility  of  parliamentary  government, "  and  which  are 
"  the  extrinsic  independence  "  of  the  representatives  and  "  the 
inherent  moderation  "  which  should  prevail  in  the  House. 

The  diminution  of  the  responsibility,  of  the  independence, 
and  of  the  dignity  of  the  men  returned  to  the  House  of  Com- 
mons has  not  failed  to  impair  the  relations  of  the  Members 
with  the  party  leaders  such  as  Cabinet  government  presup- 
poses. This  exceedingly  delicate  instrument  represents  a  sort 
of  see-saw,  which  works  by  a  series  of  "  actions  and  reactions 
between  the  Ministry  and  the  Parliament "  (Bagehot),  in  which 
the  chiefs  lead  without  commanding  and  the  Members  follow 
without  being  dragged.  The  right  and  the  power  of  the 
Members  to  revolt  at  any  moment  against  those  who  lead 
them,  and  the  authority  with  which  tradition  and  the  essence 
of  the  party  system  have  clothed  the  latter,  maintained  be- 
tween both  the  equilibrium  which  ensured  the  working  of  the 
government  and  preserved  the  freedom  of  the  assembly.  Thid 
equilibrium  i8  now  destroyed  in  favour  of  the  leaders.  For- 
merly, especially  when  almost  the  vhole  House  was  recruited 
in  the  same  social  sphere,  the  leader  of  the  party  was  only 
primus  inter  pares;  now  he  is  a  general  in  command  of  fUi 
army.  He  barely  consults  his  Staff,  the  front  bench,  and 
practically  confines  his  confidences  to  an  inner  circle  of  a 
few  lieutenants.  All  the  rest  of  the  army  simply  receives 
marching  orders.  He  no  longer  takes  the  advice,  aa  formerly, 
of  this  or  that  leading  Member,  who  served  as  an  intermediary 
bettveen  the  leaders  and  the  main  body  of  their  adherents. 
These  intermediate  ranks  have  disappeared.* 

The  leaders  have  mounted  higher  inside  Parliament  because 
the  prestige  of  the  Members  has   been  lowered  outside  it. 

Exodus.  "  Certainly,"  be  tepUed  at  once,  vlthout  hnviiig  even  cttnght  the 
end  o(  Ibe  sentence,  "I  shall  have  no  obJeFtlon."  The  hall  was  convulsed 
with  laughter.  The  candidate,  disconcerted,  bent  over  the  cbalnnBD  ol 
the  meeting  to  ask  bim  what  was  the  matter.  "  NcitbloK,"  replied  the  latter 
placidly.  "  you  bave  only  Just  pledged  yourself  to  repeal  the  Ten  Command- 

>  CI.  Hontesquieu,  VEgpnt  de»  loia,  Book  n,  Chap.  IV,  on  the  iutermedlata 
ranks  necessary  in  a  monarchy  to  keep  it  at  an  equal  distance  from  tbe  des- 
potic State  and  the  popular  State. 


.CD,  Google 


608  DEMOCRACY   ANI>  POLITICAL  PARTIES     [rumD  mht 

BaUod  above  the  levelled  crowd  of  M.  P.'b,  the  leaders  now 
lean  directly  uii  the  great  mass  of  voters,  whose  feelings  of 
loyalty  go  straight  to  the  leaders  over  the  heads  of  the  Mem' 
bers.  This  last  effect  is  due  both  to  the  action  of  the  Caacos, 
which  undermines  the  voter's  respect  for  the  M.  P.,  and  to 
other  factors  of  a  more  general  nature,  such  as  the  spread  of 
knowledge  and  the  development  of  communications  and  chan- 
nels of  information.  Being  more  enlightened,  the  voter  is 
more  alive  to  his  power  of  returning  the  Member,  and  at  the 
same  time  he  no  longer  wants  the  local  representative  to  shape 
his  political  views  by;  thanks  to  the  Press  and  to  the  tele- 
graph, which  place  him,  so  to  speak,  in  immediate  communi- 
cation with  the  great  leader  of  the  party,  he  can  get  his  politi' 
cal  supplies  from  him  direct,  just  as,  in  the  material  sphere,  be 
gets  his  stock  of  groceries,  etc.,  in  London  from  the  "universal 
provider."  Always  requiring  to  look  up  to  some  one,  the 
English  voter  naturally  transfers  to  the  great  leader  the  respect 
and  devotion  which  he  no  longer  has  the  opportunity  or  the 
need  of  bestowing  on  the  Member  for  the  division.  Here, 
again,  the  "  intermediate  ranks  "  to  which  Montesquieu  refers 
are  done  away  with  or  obliterated,  the  door  being  opened  to  a 
sort  of  popular  Ctesarisni,  with  which  the  great  chief  of  the 
'party  has  become  invested.  No  doubt  the  highly  m^netic 
personalities  of  Mr.  Gladstone  and  Lord  Beaconsfield  have 
powerfully  contributed  to  set  up  the  Ceeaarean  supremacy  of 
tiie  leaders,  but  it  was  sufficiently  developed  by  the  situation 
which  I  have  just  described  to  enable  their  successors,  who 
lacked  the  gift  of  impressing  the  popular  imagination,  to  ob- 
tain the  usufruct  of  this  power  over  the  masses.  This  being 
so,  the  elections  have  assumed  the  character  of  personal  plebis- 
cites, each  constituency  voting  not  so  much  for  this  or  that 
candidate  as  for  Mr.  Gladstone  or  against  Lord  Beaconstield 
or  Lord  Salisbury. 

But  this  was  not  all;  it  was  not  only  on  the  great  occasions 
of  going  to  the  country  that  the  leaders  could  take  advantage 
of  the  popular  loyalty,  the  current  of  which  has  been  diverted 
towards  them;  they  could  hencefoi-th  use  it  as  a  propelling 
power  in  Parliament  even  in  its  daily  life,  and  not  only  against 
their  opponents,  but  also  against  their  own  adherents  in  the 
House  wlio  were  not  submissive  enough,  who  exhibited  iuelina- 


.coy  Google 


BioHtu  CHIP.]  SUMMARY  600 

tions  towards  resistance.  This  entirely  new  state  of  things  has 
been  brought  about  by  the  Caucus.  Before  its  advent,  under 
the  old  parliamentary  system,  the  leader's  only  means  of 
bringing  to  reason  Members  inclined  to  revolt  was  a  threat 
of  dissolutiou ;  and  eren  that  was  available  only  for  the  leader 
of  the  party  in  power;  the  leader  of  the  Opposition  was  help- 
less against  his  followers  whose  loyalty  was  on  the  wane. 
Now  under  the  Caucus,  and  thanks  to  it,  in  both  parties  re- 
fractory Members  are  called  upon  by  their  respective  Associa- 
tions to  fall  in  behind  the  leader,  and  they  must  comply  if 
they  want  to  be  re-elected.  Thus,  in  the  intimate  relations 
between  the  parliamentary  chief  and  his  followers,  there  has 
been  imported  from  outside  a  regular  intimidation  agency, 
which  makes  the  Members,  for  the  nonce,  simple  puppets  on 
the  parliamentary  stage. 

The  more  or  less  discreet  way  —  and  it  has  not  been  at  all 
discreet  at  certain  periods  —  iu  which  this  means  of  pressure 
on  the  conduct  of  the  Members  of  the  House  of  Commons  is 
employed,  does  not  prevent  it  from  being  a  recognized  weapon 
in  the  arsenal  of  the  leaders.  If  formerly  there  were  a  few 
extremely  rare  instances  of  attempts  at  extraconstitutional 
pressure  directed  by  the  leaders  gainst  the  M.  P.'s,  they 
occurred  only  in  the  form  of  irregular  appeals  addressed  to  the 
masses  in  public  meetings,  and  even  then  they  were  regarded 
as  nothing  less  than  a  scandal  and  as  an  insult  to  the  Qrat 
principles  of  parliamentary  government.  When  in  1866,  in 
face  of  the  cool  reception  given  by  the  House  to  the  Reform 
Bill  brought  in  by  the  Liberal  Ministry,  Mr.  Gladstone 
attended,  in  the  parliamentaiy  recess,  a  great  meeting  at 
Liverpool  in  order  to  influence  public  opinion  in  favour  of 
the  Bill,  he  was  severely  taken  to  task  in  the  House,  when 
it  met  again;  "I  say,"  cried  a  Liberal  es-Minister,  who  made 
himself  the  spokesman  of  his  colleagues'  disapproval,  "it  is 
unprecedented  in  the  history  of  Parliament  that  a  Minister 
should  go  down  to  the  provinces  and  there  endeavour  to  excite 
agitation  in  favour  of  his  own  Bill .  .  .  and  make  a  speech 
in  disparagement  of  the  House  of  which  he  is  himseli  the 
leader."'  Nowadays  the  pressui-e  on  the  M.  P.'s,  exerted  in 
a  scientific  way,  is  no  longer  a  subject  for  scandal,  and  a  leader 
1  Hantard,  Vol.  CLXXXVU,  p.  18&9,  (pAecli  bj  Horsman. 


.coy  Google 


610  DEMOCRACT  AND  POLITICAL  PARTIES    [thibdp.it 

who  wishes  to  give  them  a  sharp  touch  of  the  spur  is  do  longer 
in  danger  of  oSending  against  the  rules  of  decorum  by  com- 
promising himself  in  person. 

But  all-powerful  aa  the  great  party  leaders  have  become, 
they  cannot  themselves  escape  the  influence  of  the  Caucus, 
especially  on  the  Liberal  side.  Obliged  to  pay  a  price  for  the 
support  given  them  by  the  popular  Organization,  they  inevi- 
tably have  to  submit  to  its  pressure  themselves  in  their  legis- 
lative functions,  so  that  the  freedom  of  movement  of  the 
parliamentary  leaders  is  not  complete  either.  The  famous 
Newcastle  Programme  is  and  will  long  remain  a  conspicuous 
proof  of  this.  Having  accepted  this  programme  from  the 
"  Liberal  Federation  "  without  enthusiasm,  the  official  leaders 
of  the  party  have  since  then  dragged  it  about  like  a  convicf  8 
chain. 

No  doubt  the  supreme  power  of  binding  and  loosing, 
which  belongs  to  public  opinion  even  in  the  parliamentary 
sphere,  still  subsists,  but  the  play  of  this  great  regulator  k 
also  impaired  by  the  intervention  of  the  Caucus.  Indeed, 
opinion  is  supposed,  apart  from  the  elections  in  which  it  holds 
formal  court,  to  supply  the  M.  P.'s  and  the  parliamentary 
leaders  with  a  permanent  source  of  inspiration,  and  at  the 
same  time  to  exercise  a  continuous  control  over  them.  Beveal- 
ing  itself  independently  of  all  constitutional  channels,  this 
twofold  power  guides  and  constrains  at  one  time  the  leaders, 
when  they  are  too  timorous  or  too  autocratic,  at  another 
their  adherents,  when  too  prone  to  obedience  or,  again,  in- 
clined to  be  restive.  But  to  enable  this  power  of  opinion, 
which  is  eminently  subtle  in  its  nature  and  indeterminate  in 
its  essence,  to  make  itself  felt,  there  must  be  complete  freedom 
for  opinion  to  manifest  itself  in  its  varied  and  irregular  forms 
and  to  come  straight  up  to  the  doors  of  Parliament,  and,  for 
those  who  are  in  Parliament,  the  fewest  possible  impediments 
to  the  delicate  task  of  catching  the  fluctuating  views  of  the 
multitude.  In  interposing  on  behalf  of  opinion  between  it 
and  Parliament,  to  demonstrate,  to  proclaim,  or  even  to 
intimidate,  the  Caucus  rather  hindered  their  power  of  recip- 
rocal penetration.  It  accomplished  this  sometimes  through  its 
anxie^  to  safeguard  the  positions  of  the  parliamentary  leaders 
of  its  choicej  at  others  owing  to  the  crudeness  of  its  means 


.coy  Google 


EIOHTHCKAP.}  SUMMARY  611 

for  probing  public  opinion,  to  which  it  was  reduced  by  the 
mechanical  character  of  its  organization  and  its  methods.  By 
developing  sham  manifestations  of  opinion,  such  as  meetings 
and  demonstrations  arranged  behind  the  scenes,  capable  of 
conveying  rather  a  deceptive  idea  of  the  real  views  of  the 
masses,  the  Caucus  has  introduced  a  new  element  of  uncer- 
tainty into  the  gauging  of  opinion,  and  has  therefore  lessened 
its  power  of  inspiring  public  men  and,  consequently,  its  power 
of  controlling  them  (which  in  reality  are  one  and  the  same 
thing  and  are  distinguishable  only  in  logic).  The  authority 
of  opinion  not  being  able  to  bear  regularly  and  with  its  full 
weight  on  parliamentary  relations,  the  equilibrium  of  party 
government^  destroyed  inside  the  House  of  Commons,  has  no 
chance  of  being  set  right  from  outside  by  the  only  power 
capable  of  doing  it.  Thus,  through  the  intervention  of  the 
Caucus,  tlie  three  great  springs  of  parliamentary  government  — 
the  independence  of  representatives,  the  elasticity  of  the  leader- 
ship, and  that  of  the  relations  between  Parliament  and  public 
opinion  —  have  been  weakened,  to  the  lowering  of  Farliament 
and  the  deterioration  of  its  efficacy. 

True,  it  is  agreed,  and  rightly,  that  this  result  is  the  general 
effect  of  what  is  called,  in  ordinary  parlance,  the  democratic 
movement.  But  it  is  always  well  not  to  forget  that  the 
"  democratic  movement "  is  not  an  entity ;  it  is  only  an  abstract 
term  to  denote  the  resultant  of  manifold  forces  which  act  in 
political  society,  under  extremely  varied  and  partly  contra- 
dictory impulses.  And  it  would  be  only  possible  to  get  a 
clear  idea  of  the  process  which  goes  by  the  name  of  democratic 
by  singling  out  the  movements  composing  it.  The  Caucus 
has  been  one  of  them  in  England,  and  it  has  been  so  far 
from  producing  the  effects  referred  to  by  itself,  that  even  in 
the  course  of  this  work  I  have  often  taken  care,  in  order 
not  to  distort  the  perspective,  to  replace  the  action  of  the 
Caucus  within  the  general  sphere  of  English  political  life,  of 
the  evolution  of  society,  of  humanity  even.  No,  the  Caucus 
has  not  had  a  monopoly  in  the  deterioration  of  parliamentary 
government  which  I  have  just  brought  out,  no  more  than  in 
the  other  unquestionably  genuine  political  effects  which  I  have 
been  led  by  my  enquiry,  in  all  honesty,  to  enter  in  its  balance- 
sheet.     The  Caucus  has,  it  is  true,  not  invented  thero  from 


.coy  Google 


612  DEMOCRACY  AND  POLITICAL  PASTIES    [THisowit 

beginniog  to  end,  but  it  has  developed  the  elements  of  thenif 
it  lias,  in  a  way,  systematized  and  crystallized  them.  In  that, 
too,  it  has  only  lent  a  helping  hand;  for  in  the  highly  com- 
plex life  of  a  community  the  varied  forces  which  make  up 
its  movement  resemble  the  contents  of  the  solar  spectrnm,  in 
which  the  colours  composing  the  light  each  react  on  its  neigh- 
bour. But  just  as  these  colours,  which  form  so  many  sbadei, 
and  which  all  blend  in  the  whiteness  of  light,  can  be  decom- 
posed and  clearly  distinguished  by  every  eye  not  afBictedirith 
daltonism,  so  it  is  possible  to  assign  their  quota  to  the  ageDcies 
at  work  in  the  community.  No  doubt  this  quota  can  never  be 
defined  with  absolute  precision,  but  the  social  investigator  is  in 
no  way  bound  down  to  Shylock's  bond :  "  Nor  cut  thou  less,  nor 
more,  but  just  a  pound  of  flesh ; "  for  it  is  not  matter  that  he 
dissects ;  he  discriminates  between  movements  vibrating  in  the 
social  ether,  the  impression  of  which  is  to  be  conveyed  to  the 
intelligence.  When  the  social  undulations,  after  being  long 
obscure,  reach  a  certain  degree  of  intensity,  then  the;  aif 
brought  together  to  make  them  more  clearly  perceptible  to  the 
Intellectual  vision,  like  rays  in  a  focus,  under  the  particular 
central  image  produced  by  the  movement,  which  lepreaenti 
their  source  and  which  in  reality  is  still  more  their  reflector. 
Subject  to  this  limitation,  which  is  understood  of  every  investi- 
gation into  a  living  society,  the  "Caucus"  has  been  in  EngM 
political  life  the  source  and  the  agent  of  the  effects  described, 
and  subject  to  this  limitation  again  there  is  nothing  to  tone 
down  in  the  picture  drawn  in  these  pages  of  its  dissolvent 
action. 

VII 

The  reality  itself  undertook  to  soften  the  lines  of  the  picture. 
The  Caucus  had  set  out  with  the  intention  of  pushing  the 
democratic  principle  to  its  extreme  logical  consequences  in 
the  extraconstitutional  sphere,  but  it  was  not  really  applied 
in  all  its  logical  strictness;  it  encountered  various  obstacles, 
most  of  which  proceeded  from  the  fact  that  the  old  social  con- 
ditions of  England  had  not  completely  disappeared  and  that 
the  old  influences  were  not  annihilated.  There  are  still  plent? 
ol  them  left.  And  while  often  representing  what  was  least 
attractive  in  the  old  order  of  things,  these  conditions  sd^ 


.coy  Google 


ENHTncBAP.]  SUMMARY  613 

these  influencea  assert,  m  gainst  the  CaDcus,  the  power  of 
the  living  forces  of  society,  which  prevents  the  government 
of  the  country  from  being  a  machine  pure  and  simple,  which 
leaves  room  in  it  for  the  individual  eteeped  in  prejudice  and 
aelfieh  calculation,  but  also  subject  to  responsibility.'  Wealth 
still  has  a  fascination  for  the  English  mind ;  a  man  who  is 
rich,  and  who  makes  a  proper  use  of  his  money,  has  more 
weight  with  the  masses  than  men  who  represent  nothing  but 
labels  or  formulas.  Territorial  influence  is  far  from  being  a 
historical  reminiscence ;  at  elections  a  good  landlord  is  readily 
followed,  whatever  his  politics  are,  even  in  parts  of  the  country 
where  the  process  of  emancipation  from  the  power  of  the  landed 
proprietors  has  made  greater  progress  than  elsewhere  —  in 
Scotland,  for  instance.  In  the  south  of  £ng1and  the  old 
county  families  are  still  particularly  looked  up  to,  for  the  sole 
reason  of  their  antiquity.  They  are  a  sort  of  institution.  On 
the  same  ground  the  Church,  in  spite  of  the  continuous  weaken- 
ing of  religious  beliefs,  is  still  a  living  tradition,  serving  as 
a  ral lying-point  for  many  a  man  who  has  almost  ceased  to 
have  recourse  to  its  ministry  and  who  does  not  attend  its 
places  of  worship.  The  prestige  of  social  rank  has  no  doubt 
declined,  but  a  lord  is  still  the  figure  invested  with  the  most 
charm  for  the  public  imagination;  he  is  not  even  distasteful 
to  the  Radicalism  of  the  working  classes,  they  "like  a  lord"; 
according  to  Mr.  Gladstone,  "the  love  of  freedom  itself  is 
hardly  stronger  in  England  than  the  love  of  aristocra^^ ;  as 
Sir  W.  Molesworth  once  said  to  me  of  the  force  of  this  feeling 
with  the  people :  'It  is  a  religion.' " *  And  it  is  not  catly  to 
gratify  their  imagination,  but  in  daily  life,  for  the  defence  of 
their  interests,  the  lower  orders  prefer  a  man  of  rank  as  leader. 
Labour  representation  in  Parliament,  for  instance,  meets  with 
most  oljstaeles  from  the  workmen  themselves ;   it  is  not  the 

'  This  point  may  p«rhap»  be  llUittrated  by  the  followltig  parage  from  a 
letMr  from  one  of  my  corr«spoDdeDls,  an  ardent  young  Radical  ot  very 
dpTDocralic  origin,  wbo  bears  n  nell-kuown  name,  and  who  was  eodeavoaring, 
as  honorary  secretary  of  a  Liberal  ABBorlatlon,  to  wrest  a  backn-ard  rural 
coDStltuenc;  from  the  old  infiuences :  "  Tlie  rule  of  Lords  and  iqulres  or  clergy 
and  farmers,  harsh  and  cruel  as  it  otlen  is.  Is  still  tempered  by  many  tradi- 
tional feelings  which  the  new  'wire-pullers  and  caucus-mongers'  cannot 
possess." 

*  "  Xhe  County  Franchise,"  Uu  Ifineteenth  Century,  November,  1677. 


.coy  Google 


614  DEMOCRACY  AND   POLITICAL  PARTIES     [thikd  paw 

fact  that  Members  of  Parliament  are  unpaid  which  prerenU 
the  workmen  from  sending  comrades  to  the  House,  for  a 
pecuniary  sacrifice  of  a  halfpenny  or  a  farthing  a  week  sab- 
mitted  to  by  each  of  them  would  ensure  the  Member  of  their 
choice  an  adequate  allowance ;  but  they  do  not  care  about  it, 
they  would  rather  have  a  gentleman  for  their  Member.  The 
hierarchical  spirit,  the  class  spirit,  still  lives  in  English 
society;  the  English  people  has  not  yet  ceased  to  be  what 
Bi^ehot  called  "a  deferential  nation,"  "politically  deferen- 
tial." 

But  the  deference  is  not  paid  solely  to  rank  or  wealth,  I  have 
mentioned  among  the  claims  which  mark  out  a  parliamentary 
candidate  for  the  suffrages  of  his  fellow-citizens  his  skill  as 
an  "  athlete,"  as  a  cricketer.  Many  a  non-English  reader  has 
noted  this,  perhaps,  with  a  pitying  smile,  giving  thanks  to 
God  that  he  and  his  are  not  as  these  men.  Underneath  its  odd 
aspect  this  homage  rendered  t«  the  "athlete"  by  voters  is  in 
reality  a  tribute  to  the  moral  qualities  of  the  individual,  to  his 
courage,  tfl  his  energy,  to  his  will ;  in  a  word,  to  the  man  apart 
from  and  in  spite  of  the  conventional  labels  of  "  Tory  "  or 
"  Liberal."  It  is  an  exaggerated,  distorted  form  of  a  general 
tendency,  inherent  in  the  English  mind,  to  consider  his  private 
character,  his  conduct,  in  the  public  man.  The  value  which  the 
Englishman  attaches  to  these  creates  a  feeling  of  esteem,  almost 
of  admiration,  even  for  the  superficial  moral  qualities  which 
constitute  "  respectability,"  and  which  provide  him  with  a 
criterion,  inadequate  and  narrow  no  doubt,  but  protecting 
him  from  cynicism  in  his  representatives  and  in  himself,  and 
often  forming  a  sort  of  barrier  against  adventurers,  against 
politicians  of  the  baser  sort.  Mental  superiority  does  not  oti 
that  account  lose  its  rights  in  the  Englishman's  eyes;  the 
Englishman,  and  especially  the  lower-class  man,  bows  down 
before  it  without  misgiving  or  jealousy,  whether  he  finds  it  in 
a  man  of  higher  social  rank  or  in  an  equal.  In  the  work- 
shop the  judgment  of  a  comrade  who  is  felt  to  be  superior 
influences  all  and  is  followed  by  all ;  this  comrade  is,  perhaps, 
a  drunkard,  but  in  his  sober  intervals  his  opinion  commands 
respect. 

This  almost  innate  respect  of  the  race  for  the  preeminent 
qualities  of  rank,  of  character,  and  of   intellect,  makes  the 


.coy  Google 


p.] 

Englishinan  particularly  ready  to  accept  the  leadership  of 
men,  without  troubling  his  h^td  about  formulas  and  conven- 
tions. "  I  know  no  one,"  s^d  an  old  Member  of  Parliament 
to  me,  "so  willing  to  be  guided  as  an  Englishman;  and  I 
myself,"  he  added,  "  I  am  quite  willing  to  be  led."  Let  but 
the  person  of  the  leader  inspire  him  with  confidence,  and  he 
is  devoted  to  him  for  good,  throughout,  perhaps,  the  varied 
vicissitudes  of  his  fortunes.  One  of  the  men  who  has  done 
the  most  to  destroy  the  old  leadership,  by  introducing  the 
Caucus,  has  learnt  this  to  his  advantage  and  his  glory;  Mr. 
Joseph  Chamberlain,  turned  out  of  the  Radical  party  on  the 
occasion  of  the  Home  Rule  Bill  of  1886,  has  defied  all  the 
hosts  of  the  enemy,  including  that  of  the  Gladstonian  Caucus, 
by  the  sole  power  of  his  personality ;  by  his  sheer  weight  he 
carried  all  the  Midland  counties  at  one  general  election  after 
another,  in  1886,  in  1892,  in  1895,  marching  from  victory  to 
victory ;  it  was  not  so  much  a  victory  of  Unionism  as  a  tri- 
umph of  leadership.  A  still  more  imposing  spectacle  has  been 
furnished  up  till  recently  by  the  enormous  personal  ascendancy 
of  Mr,  Gladstone,  In  his  proud  and  loyal  devotion  to  the 
leader,  many  a  one  of  his  adherents  will  not,  even  if  he  can, 
put  his  person  on  one  side  in  order  to  grasp  the  notion  of  the 
cause  which  he  defends,  of  the  party  which  he  leads.'  Mani- 
fested with  more  or  less  intensi^,  according  to  the  persons  or 
the  circumstances,  or  subsisting  only  in  a  latent  condition, 
these  feelings  were  a  counterpoise  or  a  check  to  the  formal 
authority  of  the  Caucus.  The  extent  of  its  power  varied  a 
good  deal  in  different  parts  of  the  country,  according  to  the 
greater  or  less  amount  of  social  leadership  prevailing  there  in 
its  various  aspects.  In  a  general  way  it  may  be  said  that  in 
places  where  social  rank  and  the  Church  have  held  out,  the 
Caucus,  as  representative  of  the  formal  authority  of  the  party, 
has  had,  comparatively  speaking,  little  success,  while  in  locali- 
ties where  the  ground  was  more  level  its  task  has  been  greatly 
&cilitated. 

Besides  the  exceptional  prestige  of  illustrious  chiefs  and 

1 1  asked  a  iTorkliif;-man  at  Btnnlngbam  wbat  party  he  iMtonged  to.  "  I 
follow  Bir.  Ctuunberlain,"  be  replied.  "Then,"  I  said,  "yon  are  a  Liberal 
UnioDbt."  He  merely  repeat«d  with  an  air  of  calm  reeolation,  "  I  follow  Hi. 
Cbuttberlain*' ' 


.CD,  Google 


616  DEMOCRACY  AND   POLITICAL  PARTIES     [third  pibt 

the  social  leadersliip,  besides  the  feelings  of  a  traditional  kind, 
the  Caucus  has  bad  to  face  personal  and  local  inguences  under 
yet  another  aspect,  that  of  material  interests,  of  preoccupa- 
tions about  "bread  and  butter,"  which  on  many  occasions  were 
even  its  accomplices  in  the  struggle  with  the  time-honoured 
social  infiuenoes,  owing  to  their  power  of  severing  the  old 
ties  which  they  find  in  their  path.  But  in  this  dissolring 
process  interests  niake  no  distinctions;  they  disregard  all 
political  conventions  as  well,  whatever  their  origin  and  their 
pretensions,  aristocratic  or  democratic,  reactionary  or  revolu- 
tionary. Questions  of  labour,  of  wages,  good  or  bad  relations 
with  the  master,  take  precedence  with  many  English  workmen 
over  all  the  political  considerations  which  it  is  desired  to 
impress  on  them,  and  alone  decide  their  vote.  With  other 
electoral  varieties,  it  is  anxiety  about  their  business,  hopes  or 
apprehensions  raised  by  this  or  that  legislative  measure, 
which  incline  them  to  one  or  the  other  party  on  the  polling- 
day.  Interests  of  a  selfish,  occasionally  perhaps  even  of 
a  sordid  kind,  they  present  just  as  many  living  forces  hold- 
ing in  check  the  formal  force  of  the  Caucus,  which  is  often 
obliged  to  come  to  terms  with  them,  or,  if  it  cannot  or  will 
not  do  so,  to  court  a  defeat.  We  have  been  eye-witnesses,  so 
to  speak,  of  this;  we  have  come  upon  the  actual  operation  of 
these  forces  in  the  choice  of  the  candidate,  where  we  have  seen 
a  whole  string  of  personal  influences,  local  considerations  of 
every  kind,  religious  passions,  social  influences,  private  inter- 
ests, collective  interests  of  groups,  rise  in  front  of  the 
Caucus;  and  the  latter,  having  stepped  on  the  political  stage 
with  the  boast  that  it  would  sweep  away  all  these  "rotten 
influences"  in  a  trice,  has  had  to  stoop  to  negotiations,  to 
compromises,  and  to  bargains,  or  run  the  risk  of  a  defeat,  and 
often  of  a  crushing  one,  leaving  somewhat  overhaaty  reformers 
to  once  more  reap  the  advice :  Et  nunc  eriidimini. 

But  in  addition  to  obstacles  coming  from  outside,  the  power 
of  the  Caucus  is  subject  to  limitations  of  an  internal  nature, 
which  are  due  to  the  relative  inadequacy  of  its  personnel 
and  to  the  slenderness  of  its  material  resources.  Under 
universal  or  well-nigh  universal  suffrage,  a  political  organi- 
zation which  aspires  to  capture  it  and  hold  its  own  amid 
hostile  forces,  of  which  the  apathy  of  its  own  adherents  is  not 


.coy  Google 


■lamri  CKAP.]  SUMMARY  «I7 

the  least,  requires  a.  great  deal  of  money,  or  other  reaourcQs 
capable  of  stimulating  zeal,  of  remunerating  Bervioes,  of  re- 
warding devotion.  The  English  party  organizations  are  not 
very  rich,  especially  that  of  the  Liberal  party;  the  voluntary 
contributions  in  money  which  feed  their  budget  are  not 
excessive.  The  ^vours  which  the  party  in  power  can  dis- 
tribute are  somewhat  limited,  consisting  principally  of  honor- 
ary titles  of  difEerent  kinda,  and  of  very  few  places,  for  the 
service  of  the  State  is  almost  entirely  beyond  the  reach  of  the 
politicians.  It  is  true  that  the  English  organizations  raise 
the  wind  pretty  largely  with  "social  consideration,"  but  the 
purchasing  power  of  this  currency,  while  considerable  in 
England,  ha^  its  limits.  In  this  respect,  again,  the  Liberal 
Organization  is  in  a  great  state  of  inferiority  to  its  Tory 
rival.  This  scantiness  of  material  resources,  which  hampers 
the  activity  of  the  organizations,  and  the  passive  resistance 
of  their  environment,  which  is  generally  apathetic,  inevitably 
paralyzes  the  energy  of  the  representatives  of  the  Caucus, 
especially  in  the  interval  between  the  elections.  A  good  many 
of  them,  too,  are  prevented  from  displaying  excessive  eager- 
ness in  the  service  of  the  party  machine  by  the  comparative 
freedom  of  their  mind,  to  wit,  on  the  Liberal  side,  where  there 
are  actually  paid  agents  who  are  restive  even  under  the  press- 
ure of  the  central  Organization,  and  who  have  not  yet  turned 
into  perfect  automatons.  This  is  especially  true  of  the  agents 
who  belong  by  their  age  and  their  education  to  the  old  genera- 
tion. Thus,  within  the  four  comers  of  the  Organization  itself, 
the  personal  element,  alike  from  its  strength  and  its  weakness, 
does  add  to  the  counterpoise  offered  to  the  machine  of  the 
Caucus  by  the  personal,  human  influences  of  a  general  char- 
acter which  are  at  work  in  the  community.  At  the  summit 
of  the  political  world,  in  Parliament,  which  is  composed,  in  a 
still  fairly  considerable  degree,  of  men  belonging  to  the  old 
political  personnel,  their  character,  as  well  as  their  position  in 
the  constituencies,  also  have  the  effect  of  deadening  the  blows 
of  the  Caucus.  The  final  upshot,  then,  is  that  the  nihilist 
work  of  the  Caucus  is  attenuated  in  several  of  its  logical  con- 
sequences, that  in  the  exercise  of  its  power  it  is  still  subject 
to  many  servitudes.  One  cannot,  therefore,  give  more  than  a 
qualified  endorsement  to  the  view  of  a  celebrated  English 


.coy  Google 


618  DEMOCRACY  ASD  POLITICAL  PABTTCS    liHOBrtm 

■■- ..      -t 

publicist,  when  he  informs  foreigners  that  the  Caacas  is  en- 
throned on  the  rains  of  the  old  British  Constitution.* 

vin 

But  it  must  be  admitted  at  the  same  time  that  among  the 
divergent  forces  which  hare  just  been  reviewed,  those  which 
hold  the  Caucus  in  check  are,  if  anything,  on  the  decline; 
that  in  their  perpetual  contests  the  chances  are  rather  on  the 
eide  of  the  centrifugal  forces  favouring  the  formalism  and 
the  meohanicalness  which  the  Caucus  tends  to  introduce  into 
English  political  life  under  the  auspices  of  democracy. 

The  personal  influences  of  rank,  of  character,  and  of  know- 
ledge, which  serve  as  a  rallying  centre  in  political  life,  which 
by  their  intrinsic  force  attract  mankind  and  draw  them  into 
their  orbit,  find  it  more  and  more  diffioult  to  come  to  the  sur- 
face. Many  facts,  both  of  a  material  and  moral  order,  combine 
to  produce  this  result.  The  steady  growth  of  the  towns,  into 
which  most  of  the  population  is  flocking,  makes  the  inhabi- 
tants strangers  to  one  another;  their  contact  is  only  superficial, 
and  their  power  of  reacting  on  each  other  is  impeded.  This 
general  effect  of  contemporary  civilization  is  a^ravated  in 
the  great  English  centres  by  the  habit  which  well-to-do  people 
have  of  taking  up  their  abode  in  separate  parts  of  the  town, 
in  the  "West  End,"  for  instance,  in  "residential  suburbs," 
or  even  outside  it,  five,  ten,  or  fifteen  miles  off.  Manufactur- 
ers, merchants,  rich  shopkeepers,  lawyers,  doctors,  —  one  and 
all  desert  the  towns,  spending  only  a  part  of  the  day  in 
their  offices  or  their  chambers.  The  small  folk  are  left  to 
themselves,  or  are  even  confined  to  separate  districts.  Here, 
for  instance,  is  a  central  ward  of  Manchester,  in  which,  out 
of  2488  occupiers  of  tenements,  there  are  only  13  who  really 
reside  there,  who  sleep  there;  out  of  the  £230,832  rateable 

■  "  The  Roman  Imposed  hU  instltatlons  with  ftrmg  npon  &  coDqnend  world ; 
a  wHling  world  htm  adopted  the  inatltutloni  which  had  their  original  seat  at 
Westminater.  But  the  British  Constitution  now  means  little  more  tban  tlie 
omnipolence  of  the  House  ot  Commons.  The  immense  edifice  is  still  styled 
tbe  palace ;  but  the  King  who  now  dwells  in  the  palace  Is  the  sovereign  people, 
or  perhaps  rather,  the  sovereign  cauc  as  "  (Qoldwin  Smith,  ^  Triple  England, 
Load.  1892,  p.  120;  a  ver;  remarkable  tin;  volume,  intended  to  aerve  as  a 
guide-book  tor  American  touriala  visiting  England,  and  giving  *  bird'a-eTs 
view  of  contemporary  England  in  ita  monumental,  social,  and  political  a«p«ett). 


.coy  Google 


EIGHTH  CHAP.]  SUMMARY  619 

value  of  these  tenementa,  the  13  residents  represent  only 
£3286;  in  another  ward,  out  of  1223  occupiers  there  are  only 
175  householders,  the  rateable  valne  of  whose  dwellings  does 
not  amount  to  more  than  ie6923.  When  they  have  made 
their  pile,  the  "  better-class "  people  break  even  the  slender 
ties  which  attach  them  to  their  city,  thus  creating  a  still 
wider  gulf  between  them  and  the  indigent  classes.  Even 
democratic  Scotland  does  not  escape  this  harmful  process. 
Thus  at  Olasgow  middle-aged  people  can  still  recollect  the 
time  when  there  was  no  West  End,  when  rich  and  poor 
lived  side  by  side,  mixed  together,  went  to  the  same  church, 
sent  their  children  to  the  same  school.  The  city  was 
composed  of  hve  independent  boroughs,  each  of  which  had 
its  bailie  and  was  a  centre  of  local  life.  At  the  present 
moment  there  is  far  less  intercourse  between  the  various 
classes;  the  West  End  has  its  churches  and  its  well-equipped 
schools  for  the  rich,  and  the  East  End  has  its  own  humble 
and  modest  ones  for  those  who  lack  the  good  things  of  this 
world.  Urban  absenteeism,  which  had  been  conspicuous  for 
a  considerable  time,*  is  increasing  every  day,  thanks  to  the 
extraordinary  facility  of  communication  with  the  suburbs,  and, 
like  its  historical  prototype,  the  absenteeism  of  landowners,  in- 
evitably produces  mischievous  effects,  not  only  from  the  social 
point  of  view,  by  accentuating  the  separation  of  classes,  with 
all  its  dangerous  consequences,  but  also  from  the  political 
point  of  view.  It  withdraws  from  the  political  service  of  the 
community,  from  duties  towards  their  fellow-citizens,  men  who 
through  their  social  position  and  their  enlightenment  would 
be  best  equipped  for  the  discharge  of  them.  But  even  those 
who  would  like  to  put  their  shoulders  to  the  wheel  have  now 
much  fewer  facilities  for  impressing  their  neighbours,  owing 
to  this  material  extension  of  town  life,  which  creates  huge 
agglomerations  where  a  man  has  more  diiHculty  in  coming  to 
the  front,  far  more  than  twenty  or  five  and  twenty  years  ago, 
were  he  even  of  the  calibre  of  the  men  who  arose,  for  instance, 
in  the  municipality  of  Birmingham  during  the  decade  from 

1  Close  observers  directed  their  attention  to  nrban  mbsenteeiam  at  a  pretty 
early  atage.  Thas  in  the  Charcb  CongreM  at  Wolverhampton,  In  186T,  ■ 
Tery  elaborate  report  was  submitted  on  absenteeism  Id  the  Hldlands.  See 
the  abatraet  of  this  report  In  the  Birmtngham  Dailg  P<M,  Sth  October,  ISHT. 


.coy  Google 


620  DEMOCRACY  AND   POLITICAL   PARTIKS     [thikd  pabt 

1870-1880.*  Aod  the  reader  is  aware  how  greatly  this  diffi- 
culty of  a  natural  kind,  bo  to  speak,  has  been  increased  by 
the  action  of  the  Caucus.     To  enter  local  public  life  you  must 

now  have  a  passport  from  a  political  party,  you  must  don  the 
party  livery  to  serve  interests  with  which  party  politics  have 
DOthing  to  do;  and  even  then,  the  excessive  subdivision  of  the 
Organization,  created  by  the  formal  application  of  the  demo- 
cratic principle,  transfers  influence  to  the  local  mediocrit)-, 
who  wields  it  amid  conditions  little  calculated  to  enhance  the 
prestige  of  the  leadership. 

The  "  deference,"  the  supply  of  which  in  English  society 
seemed  even  larger  than  that  of  the  coal  below  the  surface 
of  England,  is  dwindling,  and  will  assuredly  continue  to 
dwindle,  under  the  levelling  process  which  has  been  at  work 
in  England  since  the  industrial  revolution.  The  democratic 
Organization  of  the  Caucus  will  continue  to  contribute  to 
this  result  in  a  marked  degree,  to  undei-mine  the  hierarchical 
feeling  pervading  political  relations,  even  in  the  circles  which 
are  moat  imbued  with  it,  —  in  those  of  Toryism.  In  all  proba- 
bility those  Tories  who  flattered  themselves  that  the  demo- 
cratic Organization  introduced  into  their  party  would  not  lead 
to  serious  consequences,  that  it  could  not  prevail  against  the 
old  traditional  feeling,  will  be  undeceived.  The  common  mis- 
take of  the  Conservatives  is  to  deny  or  underestimate  the 
efficacy  of  political  forms,  as  that  of  the  Badicals  ia  to  exag- 
gerate it.  Even  sham  representative  assemblies  are  never  set 
up  with  impunity.  And  in  twenty  years  or  so  the  old- 
faahioned  Tories,  if  there  are  any  left,  may  be  able  to  say  to 
the  Liberals,  from  whom  they  borrowed  the  Caucus,  like  the 
Turks  to  the  Auatriana  who  taught  their  old  Serb  subjects 
European  drill:  "Keighbours,  what  have  you  done  with  our 
raya?"*    To  sum  up,  the  political  leadership,  as  a  natural 

1  Perhaps  the  Birmingham  of  the  pieaent  da;  wonM  Itselt  fnmiah  proof  at 
this.ir  ithad  tohcKinovcracaln-  Cf.  The  Prngrett  of  Modern  Binningham, 
by  I>r.  Crespl,  »hn  says :  "  Birmlnghani  Is  gettiog  unwieldy,  and  ita  popula- 
tion Is  much  scattered,  but  a  generation  ago  It  was  a  more  manageable,  and 
In  some  respeclB  gratifying,  field  fur  the  display  of  great  abilities  tlian  the 
mclropotis;  a  clever  man  was  not  lost  In  it;  he  was  die  common  posse.islnn  of 
his  townsmen,  and  within  their  easy  reach.  It  is  open  to  question  whether 
any  one  will  again  make  a  gieat  and  general  poaltiou  In  Birmingham  "  (JVa> 
lional  Reirhv,  May,  188B). 

■  Servia,  after  being  conquered  to  a  great  extent  by  Joseph  II.  In  17S8,  ma 


.coy  Google 


■  lOHTB  CHAP.]  SUMMARY  621 

link  between  the  members  of  the  commuDity,  founded  partly 
on  tradition,  partly  on  the  legitimate  action  of  one  man  on 
another,  on  the  confidence  and  devotion  inspired  by  personal 
worth,  this  leadership,  which  has  already  received  so  many 
shocks,  is  likely  to  groir  weaker  still. 

At  the  same  time  a  shrinkage  is  observed,  in  social  life,  of 
certain  special  sources  the  current  of  which  served  to  unite 
men  into  important  groups,  and,  as  a  consequence,  to  provide 
elements  for  the  political  leadership;  as,  for  instance,  the 
solidarity  of  the  great  religious  bodies.  This  is  giving  way 
under  the  action  of  tolerance  and  religious  indifference,  which 
have  made  great  progress  in  English  society  during  the  last 
quarter  of  a  century.  The  passions  and  the  jealousies  of  the 
churches  have  lost  a  vast  deal  of  their  acuteness;  people  are 
DO  longer,  or  far  less,  anxious  to  know  if  their  neighbour  goes 
to  church  or  to  chapel;  no  attention  is  paid  to  it  in  social 
relations.  This  state  of  the  public  mind  benefits  Dissent,  for 
instance,  greatly  and  legitimately,  but  it  also  robs  it  of  its 
social  cohesion,  which  made  it  into  a  sort  of  freemasonry  oven 
in  political  life,  where  it  formed,  according  to  Mr.  Gladstone's 
expression,  the  backbone  of  the  Liberal  party.  The  joints  of 
this  backbone  are  beginning  to  get  dislocated.  In  rural  dis- 
tricts the  old  antagonism  has  still  enough  of  its  keenness  to 
maintain  the  cohesion,  but  in  the  towns  the  dissolving  process 
makes  great  strides,  and  is  not  a  little  helped  by  the  social 
ambitions  which  are  infecting  the  richer  members  of  the  Non- 
conformist sects  and  making  them  keep  to  themselves  amid 
their  coreligionists,  even  in  the  places  of  worship,  which  they 
are  prone  to  transform  into  chapels  of  a  few  select  families. 
Again,  indifference  to  religion  in  general,  which  is  increas- 
ing by  the  side  of  and  in  spite  of  the  undeniable  successes 
achieved  by  the  churches  in  the  last  half-centnry,  contributes 
in  its  turn  to  enfeeble  the  living  forces  of  society  and  to 
swell  the  conventional  forces. 

given  back  to  the  Turks  three  yean  nttenrards  by  tbs  anccemoi  of  Joseph  n., 
but  during  the  Austrian  occupation  the  Serbs  had  time  tu  get  a  notion  ot  free- 
dom, to  acquire  independent  ways,  and  the  Ottoman  commissioner  who  took 
over  the  o«cai>iad  territory,  seeing  a  Serb  detachment  inarch  ont  of  a  fortress 
well  armed,  and  mannuvring  like  the  Imperial  troopa,  exclaimed  with  min- 
gled astoDlsbment  and  alarm,  "Nejghboars,  what  luve  yon  done  with  out 


.coy  Google 


622  DEMOCRACT  AND  POLITICAL  PAETIES    [thibi>p«i 

Moreover,  a  phenomenon  is  arising  which  is  at  once  the 
effect  and  the  stimulant  of  those  which  have  just  beea 
described, — the  political  apathy  which  is  creeping  orer  so- 
ciety. "Politics  is  no  longer  popular"  is  the  unanimous 
impression  of  people  in  the  business.  In  spite  of  the  eco- 
nomic commotions  which  are  the  peculiar  feature  of  our 
age,  material  comfort  is  too  great  and  too  widely  difFosed 
among  the  English  people  for  arousing  their  combative 
instincts,  or  even  for  keeping  them  interested  in  the  ques- 
tions which  fill  up  the  existence  of  the  politicians.  The 
middle  class  is  retiring  from  the  political  arena,  detiber- 
ately,  so  to  speak,  obeying  alike  its  feelings  of  selfishness 
and  its  amour  propre  wounded  by  the  political  advent  of  the 
lower  social  strata.  It  looks  as  if  this  class  had  exhausted  its 
ardour  in  the  great  battles  which  it  fought  one  after  another 
in  the  first  hfjf  of  the  century.  It  has  no  longer  any  griev- 
ances to  urge  or  claims  to  keep  alive  in  the  political  and  social 
sphere.  The  fire  which  burned  brightly  in  the  hearts  of  the 
preceding  generations  is  but  a  faint  gleam  in  the  present 
generation.  The  threat  of  Socialist  demands  is  not  fraught 
with  danger  imminent  enough  to  bring  the  middle-class  con- 
tingents into  the  field,  and  it  is  loud  enough  to  make  a  good 
many  of  its  members  still  more  timorous  and  to  plunge  them 
still  more  deeply  into  their  selfishness.  No  doubt  they  still 
have  a  fine  place  in  the  political  procession,  but  it  is  more 
by  vi»  inertiae  that  they  move  in  it;  they  have  no  impulse 
of  their  own,  and  even  this  automatic  participation  is  decreas- 
ing; in  the  growing  number  of  abstentions  at  elections  the; 
probably  furnish  the  most  considerable  proportion.  While 
the  cultivated  classes  tend  to  turn  aside  from  politics,  the  new 
strata  of  political  society  show  no  e^^rness  to  Gil  the  vacant 
space;  public  spirit  is  not  developing  sufficiently  among  the 
masses,  to  a  great  extent  through  the  fault  of  the  Caucus. 
At  the  same  time  that  it  assists  the  selfishness  of  the  middle 
classes  in  discouraging  their  efforts  by  the  democratic  preten- 
sions of  which  it  has  assumed  the  championship,  it  wi^holds 
from  the  masses  real  political  education  calculated  to  broaden 
and  stimulate  the  mind;  it  keeps  it  back,  offering  them  in  its 
place  a  wretehed  substitute,  which  has  the  proper^  of  deliver- 
ing them  more  easily  into  its  hands.     Thus  is  witnessed  alike 


.coy  Google 


■lOHTR  CHAP.]  SUMMARY  828 

an  abatement  of  interest  in  politics  in  the  community,  and  a 
diminution  of  the  moral  and  material  facilities  for  the  rise 
and  the  popularity  of  the  best  men  and  for  rallying  the  masses 
around  them,  aide  by  side  with  a  decline  in  the  readiness  of 
the  educated  and  well-to-do  classes  to  come  forward  and  put 
their  shoulders  to  the  wheel. 

While  these  combined  tendencies  reveal  the  dawn  of  a  sepa- 
ration of  society  as  a  whole  from  the  small  minority  given  up 
to  politics,  under  a  constitution  which  now  denies  haidly  any 
one  the  power  of  exerting  his  infiuence  on  public  affairs,  in 
the  narrower  sphere  of  politics  an  important  phenomenon  is 
appearing:  the  political  parties  are  more  and  more  losing 
their  distinctive  characteristics.  The  political  controversies 
which  have  of  late  set  the  two  historic  parties  by  the  ears, 
however  great  the  violence  of  the  combatants  may  often  have 
been,  were  not  of  a  kind  to  mark  a  new  line  of  permanent 
separation  between  them,  or  to  prevent  the  obliteration  of  the 
old  one  which  bad  been  going  on  since  1846.  The  effect  was  that 
in  the  matter  of  principles,  of  policies,  the  two  parties  drew 
closer  to  each  other.  No  longer  representing  clearly  defined 
opposing  principles,  no  longer  having  a  monopoly,  tjie  one  of 
progress,  the  other  of  reaction,  the  one  of  solicitude  for  the 
masses,  the  other  of  aristocratic  or  capitalist  privilege,  the 
parties  as  such  tend  to  become  simple  aggregates,  drawn 
together,  by  the  attractive  force  of  a  leader,  for  the  conquest 
or  the  preservation  of  power.  In  a  word,  parallel  with  the 
separation  of  society  from  politics,  are  seen  indications  of  the 
divorce  of  politics  from  principles.  When  these  last  have 
disappeared,  the  only  vital  system  of  the  parties  will  be  a 
mechanical  organization,  all  the  more  powerful  the  more  it 
will  be  spread  over  the  country,  the  more  widely  it  will  cover 
the  constituencies  with  its  network.  In  other  words,  the  par- 
.  ties  will  live  only  by  and  thanks  to  a  machine  like  the  Caucus. 
The  latter  will  not  only  have  helped  to  drive  back  the  living 
forces  of  the  political  community,  to  make  a  vacuum  in  it,  but 
will  also  install  itself  in  the  empty  citadel,  and  almost  as  a 
matter  of  right. 

Stopping  into  the  place  of  living  society,  the  party  organi- 
zations, instead  of  being  an  instrument,  a  means,  will  become 
an  object  in  themselves,  to  which  everything  will  be  snb- 


.coy  Google 


(124  DEMOCRACY   ANT>  POLITICAL   PARTIES     [third  part 

ordinated.  Deriving  their  light  to  existence  from  more  or 
less  arbitrary  conrentioiis,  from  labels  which  will  distinguish 
one  from  the  other,  the  rival  organizations,  without  even 
obeying  sordid  preoccupations,  but  from  an  instinct  of  self- 
preservation,  will  make  all  the  relations  of  political  life  bend 
to  the  blind  formalism  of  its  conventions,  in  defiance  of  the 
real  interests  at  stake.  From  this  point  of  view  the  trans- 
formation of  local  elections  into  political  party  contests,  and 
the  deterioration  of  municipal  government  which  it  is  already 
beginning  to  produce,  offer  a  warning  the  gravity  of  which 
cannot  be  overrated.  But  in  addition  to  this,  the  factitious 
character  of  the  organizations  will  not  allow  them  to  ooro- 
mand  much  disinterested  devotion  for  long;  people  will  serve 
them  only  in  the  hope  of  making  use  of  them,  on  the  basis  of 
do  ut  det,  and  they  will  witness  the  development  of  an  ever- 
increasing  mercenary  element  within  their  ranks.  In  this 
connection  the  life  of  the  Caucus  has  revealed  an  alarming 
symptom  of  late  years;  the  voluntary  aid  given  to  the  organi- 
zations is  decreasing  and  being  replaced  by  paid  services,  even 
when  the  law  expressly  forbids  it,  as  in  the  case  of  the  election 
canvass.  There  is  no  longer  sufficient  "enthusiasm"  among 
the  caucus-men  of  both  parties ;  it  is  money  which  comes  first, 
and  this  fact  accounts  to  some  extent  for  the  great  anccess 
at  the  last  general  election  of  the  wealthiest  party.  Ko 
doubt  the  comparative  slendemess  of  the  pecuniary  resources 
of  the  organizations  is  a  fortunate  obstacle  to  the  develop- 
ment in  their  midst  of  the  type  of  mercenary  politicians,  but 
it  is  not  sufficient  to  allay  apprehensions.  The  growing  habit 
of  distributing  subordinate  municipal  offices  as  a  reward  for 
election  work  is  there  to  confirm  them.  The  measure,  so  often 
discussed  of  late,  for  giving  a  fixed  allowance  to  Members  of 
Parliament,  is  also  somewhat  calculated  to  foster  these  mis- 
givings. The  payment  of  Members  would  in  itself  be  perfectly 
equitable  and  useful  in  enabling  people  of  small  means  to 
enter  Parliament,  and  all  the  less  unjustifiable  because,  as 
things  now  stand,  the  title  of  M.  P.  is  already  a  source  of 
gain  for  a  good  many  Members,  procuring  them  advantages 
in  business,  well-paid  directorships  of  joint-stock  companies, 
80  much  so  that  not  a  few  try  to  get  into  Parliament  simply 
la  order  to  forward  their  pecuniary  interests.     The  difference 


.coy  Google 


■lOBTH  CHAP.]  SUMMARY  626 

between  them  and  the  legally  paid  Members  would  be,  per- 
haps, that  while  the  former  make  money  out  of  their  title  of 
M.P.  to  provide  luxuries  for  their  wives  and  daughters,  among 
the  latter  a  certain  number  would  get  the  daily  bread  of  their 
family  by  their  parliamentary  position.  But  it  is  not  less 
certain  that  payment  of  Members  would  provide  the  organi- 
zations which  distribute  seats  in  the  Legislature  with  a  war 
fund,  the  importance  of  which  would  not  be  measured  by  its 
actual  amount,  but  by  the  rival  appetites  which  it  would  excite, 
by  the  eager  desires  which  it  would  let  loose.  The  com- 
mand of  these  large  resources  would  give  the  organizations  a 
formidable  hold  on  the  whole  political  system,  and  attract  into 
their  ranks,  introducing  many  of  them  into  public  offices,  men 
bent  solely  on  personal  gain. 

By  the  side  of  these  indications  and  hypotheses  pointing  to 
or  foreshadowing  the  upward  movement  of  the  organizations 
which  are  forwarding  a  mechanical  formalism,  a  few  symptoms 
can  no  doubt  l>e  discerned  which  seem  likely  to  hamper  this 
movement,  but  their  significance  is  still  of  a  very  relative  kind. 
There  are  signs,  at  present  slight,  of  a  tendency  among  the 
voters  to  throw  off  the  tyrannical  authority  of  the  party,  to 
resent  the  attempts  of  the  organizations  on  their  political 
conscience.  The  ^ents  of  the  Caucus  begin  to  complain  that 
"canvassing  is  becoming  worse  every  year,"  "they  will  not 
tell  their  polities,"  "they  object  to  be  oanvaased."  The 
advance  of  knowledge  develops  a  critical  spirit  in  the  elec- 
torate, while  the  decline  in  the  standard  of  the  caucus-raeu 
lowers  the  prestige  of  the  firms  which  they  represent,  and  the 
conduct  of  the  rival  parties  suggests  to  many  people  that  these 
parties  are  much  of  a  muchness,  one  as  bad  or  as  good  as  the 
other.  But  very  often  it  is  these  voters  on  their  guard  who 
withdraw  from  politics  and  leave  the  field  open  to  the  Caucus. 
The  Socialist  prop^^da,  in  its  turn,  is  systematically  engaged 
in  severing  the  old  party  ties,  without,  however,  providing  a 
refuge  from  party  tyranny,  for  the  socialist  organizations,  the 
I.  L,  P.  or  the  Democratic  Federation,  imprison  their  adher- 
ents in  a  formalism  not  less,  and  even  more,  despotic  than  the 
old  parties;  in  this  respect  the  activity  of  the  Sooialists  has 
only  a  negative  value,  by  its  dissolvent  eilect,  as  is  probably 
the  case  with  it  in  the  general  economy  of  contemporary  sociEil 


.coy  Google 


020  DEMOCRACY  AND  POLITICAL  PARTIES    [thmdmm 

life  of  which  it  stifs  up  the  stagnant  waters.  By  enticing 
away  the  adherents  of  the  organizations  of  the  old  parties, 
and  by  introducing  a  fresh  element  of  uncertainty  into  their 
existence  made  up  more  or  less  of  conventions,  Uie  Socialist 
activity  eats  away  these  parties,  makes  gaps  in  them.  An 
analogous  result  will  perhaps  be  produced  by  the  break-up  of 
the  great  natural  aggregations  which  is  beginning  to  show 
itself, —  in  Dissent,  for  instance.  In  tending  to  create  a 
vacuum  for  the  benefit  of  the  Caucus,  this  disintegration  may 
also  be  capable  of  producing  a  contrary  effect,  by  dispersing 
the  disciplined  contingents  which  were  ready  to  ally  them- 
selves with  the  Caucus.  But  it  is  permissible  to  speculate 
whether  in  this  connection  the  forces  which  favour  the  Caucus 
and  those  which  create  impediments  to  it  will  be  evenly  bal- 
anced; for  the  strength  of  formal  and  conventional  forces 
invadii^  a  community  lies  not  so  much  in  the  fighting  power 
of  their  own  contingents  as  in  the  weakness  of  those  which 
they  tend  to  supplant. 

In  pointing  out  all  the  data  and  all  the  probabilities  which 
indicate  that  the  democratic  formalism  of  the  Caucus,  IeaniI^: 
on  the  old  convention  of  stereotyped  parties,  is  lauoching 
English  society  on  the  decline  of  government  by  machine,  ^ 
is  not  possible  to  consider  the  eventual  consequences  in  other 
than  a  more  or  less  hypothetical  way.  For  on  this  decline 
there  are  still,  as  we  have  seen,  many  obstacles  raised  by  the 
old  manners  and  customs  of  the  nation,  objectionable  as  some 
of  them  may  be  in  themselves  from  the  modern  standpoint, 
and  which  the  democratic  institutions  installed  in  the  English 
State  have  not  yet  obliterated.  But  there  is  already  in  exist- 
ence a  political  community  sprung  from  the  very  loins  of  Eng- 
land, its  own  flesh  and  blood,  and  which,  left  to  itself  in  a  new 
world,  has  anticipated  the  development  of  the  mother-country 
by  repudiating  several  of  its  habits  and  letting  democracy  have 
free  play,  while  keeping  the  substance  of  its  political  institu- 
tions. Pushing  the  representative  and  elective  principle  to 
its  extreme  consequences,  this  new  political  society  has  at  an 
early  stage  permitted  the  rise  within  it  of  the  Caucus,  which, 
implanted  in  its  levelled  soil,  has  had  a  long  career,  free  from 
the  trammels  which  it  still  encounters  in  the  "  old  country." 


.coy  Google 


■ightucbap.]  SUMMABT  627 

Tlie  circumataiices  under  whlcli  the  same  social  and  political 
data  operate  in  different  societies  being  never  identical,  the 
experience  of  America  cannot,  of  course,  be  decisive  as  to  the 
future  development  of  the  Caucus  in  England.  But  it  may, 
owing  precisely  to  the  relative  diversity  of  the  conditions, 
throw  a  powerful  light  on  that  development  and  on  the  whole 
problem  of  the  organization  of  the  electoral  masses,  by  bring- 
ing out  its  effects  as  well  as  its  pitfalls  and  its  dangers,  with 
more  certainty  and  with  far  more  fulness  than  could  be  done 
by  the  investigation  of  the  English  Caucus,  which  is  still  in 
the  growing  stage.  We  are  thus  brought  logically  to  the 
study  of  the  organization  of  parties  in  the  great  American 
Bepublio.  And,  following  the  plan  adopted  for  England,  I 
propose  to  examine,  in  their  main  outlines,  the  historical 
development  and  the  working  at  the  present  day  of  the  extra- 
parliamentary  organization  of  political  parties  in  the  United 


END   OF   VOL.    I. 


.coy  Google 


.CD,  Google 


Works  by  Professor  Goldwin  Smith 

THE  UNITED  KINGDOM 
A  Political  History 


Professor  Smith  has  treated  his  second  work  with  the  same 
succinctness,  and  with  the  same  epigrammatic  force  and 
weight,  as  he  did  his  work  on  the  United  Stales,  which  The 
Nation  characterized  as  "  a  literary  masterpiece,  as  readable 
as  a  novel,  remarkable  for  its  compression  without  ilryness, 
and  its  brilliancy  without  any  rhetorical  effort  or  display." 

•■  ProfesBor  Smith's  anraclire  sivle  bus  often  Ixvn  commctiletl  on  ns 
■  simple,  nnnffetluil.  and  always  lutiii.'"—  Jima-ilctaU.  Chicago. 

'■  The  autlior  has,  ns  those  who  know  him  do  not  need  to  be  told,  a  style 
which  is  nothing  less  tlian  fiiscinalinf; ; its  lucidity,  ii!^  graphic  narration, 

us  its  incisivencss  uf  judgnienl  anti  uriginalily  o( view," —  firimidiHCf  jeurHal. 


THE  UNITED  STATES 

An  Outline  of  Political  History,  (492-1871 

with  Map  Crown  8vo  $a.oo 

"  His  survey  of  events  It  luminous,  his  eslimaic  of  charoder  is  sjneubrly 
keen  and  just,  and  his  slyle  is  al  imce  incisive,  dignified,  and  scliobrjy. .  .  . 

before  he  has  linished  it ;  no  one  will  lay  it  down  without  acknowledging 
■he  rare  gilts  ol  Ihc  writer."—  'I'kt  Timts, 

"  It  is  a  literary  masterpiece,  as  readable  as  a  novel,  lemarkable  for  its 
compression  without  dtyni.'SS,  and  its  brilliancy  without  any  rhetorical  effort 
or  ili-play.  What  American  could,  with  so  broad  a  grasp  and  so  pcrfri-i  a 
style,  have  rehearsed  our  politicnl  history  from  Columbus  to  (irnnt  in  300 
duodecimo  pages  of  open  type,  or  would  have  manifested  greater  candor  in 
his  judgment  >if  men  and  events  in  a  periodof  four  centuries  ?  I  lis  enough 
10  say  that  no  one  before  Mr.  Smith  has  attempted  the  feat,  and  that  he  has 
■he  tield  lo  himself."—  Thi  Aafioa. 

THE    MACMILLAN    COMPANY 

OC  FIFTH  AVEKUE,  NEW  YOKK 


.coy  Google 


AN  OUTLINE  OF  POLITICAL  GROWTH 
IN  THE  NINETEENTH  CENTURY 

Br  EEAIUND  HAIiDLTON  SEARS 

Printipal  of  Mary  iHStituti.  St.  Louis 

Clotb.    8to.    $3.00,  net 

"Professor  S«ars  a  not  wrong  in  bis  belief  that  the  succeutve  triumphs  of 
popular  insliluiioni  cannot  but  form  a  profoundly  inlen^siing  sior^,  Bud  he  bas 
placed  readers  under  profound  obligations  (or  telling  thai  stoiy  in  io  lucid  and 
accurate  a  manner."  —  BoiIoh  'J>anicrifi. 

"  It  is  not  only  a  readable  book,  containing  an  impressive  fund  of  inlonnaiion. 
and  displaying  the  result  of  pailent  and  long-continued  labor,  but  il  is  a  valuable 
conlributlon  Io  the  history  and  philosophy  ol  government," 

—  Tki  ArgBHatU,  San  Francisco. 

"  As  may  be  inlerred  from  Ihe  siie  of  the  book  and  its  broad  scope,  its  record 

be  uncommonly  inieiligeni;  Ihe  style  is  both  netvous  and  forcible. 

—  New  York  Tima'  Saturdirf  Krviiu, 


THE  AMERICAN  COMMONWEALTH 

By  JAMES  BRYCE 

AulAor  ef  "  IMe  Hefy  A'mo*  Emfirt,"  M.P.  for  Aierdtm 

Id  two  Tolama«.    Third  •dltlon.complataljr  nvlaad  thnrnghout,  witb 
cb*pt»n.    Ctowa  Sro.    Cloth,  gilt  tops 

Vol.  I.    The  National  (Iovernmest  — The  Stati 


Vol,  11,   TnK  Paktv  System  —  TrBUC  Opinion  —  I u.ustrations  ani)  Re- 

Kl.l-XTIONS  — SllClAL   INSTITLTIONS.       pp.  9CH-      PtiCe,  fa.aS,  Mt 

The  two  TolmnM  in  a  box,  $4.00,  net 

"It  il  ttol  loo  much  to  C.1II  'The  Amertcnn  Commonwealth'  one  of  the  most 
distinguishcil  additions  to  [lolilical  and  sol-ihI  science  which  this  gencr.ilion  has 
seen.  It  has  done,  and  will  continue  to  do.  a  grral  woik  in  inforniing  the  vorld 
concerning  Ihe  principles  of  this  govcmmeni."  —  Pkiladelfhia  /ivtning  TtUgrafk. 

"  ."iJo  enlightened  American  can  desire  a  belter  thing  for  his  country  than  (he 
widest  diffusion  and  the  most  thorough  reading  of  Mr,  Bryce's  impariia'  and  pene- 
trating work." —  /jlrrary  Wstld. 

"  The  great  quality  of  his  work  is  that  il  hai  been  prepared  with  a  sense  of 

C.tice  andf.iimcss  of  statement  which  makes  il  an  authorily  not  onlv  tor  Ibreigneis. 
I  (or  native  .<^mericans.     It  has  been  and  will  long  continue  (o  be  the  book  that 

lions,  and  it  will  do  more  to  form  the  political  education  of  the  neii  genenition  than 
any  olher  kind  of  teaching."  —  Beslen  Htra/d. 


THE    MACMILLAN   COMPANY 

«  FIFTH  AVEUDE,   NEW  YORK 


.CD,  Google 


.CD,  Google 


.CD,  Google 


.CD,  Google 


THE  UNIVERSnV  II8RARY 
UNIVERSmr  OF  CALIFORNIA,  SANTA  CRUZ 


Thb  book  is  due  on  llw  lost  DATI  stompwl  faolow. 

JA"I23'S5      iv. 

OCT2  51984lte'| 

JAN  21 '86       ^ 

JAN  0  8  iLHaGR£C'D 

lOOM-B.'esCFSZBZtS)!)?! 

.CD,  Google 


