OUTLINES OF GENERAL CHEMISTRY
Wilhelm Ostwald (1853-1932)
Translated with the author's sanction by James Walker. Second edition. London: Macmillan and Co., 1895.
Source scan: Internet Archive, identifier outlinesofgenera00ostw.
Prepared for the Tower of Babel library: scan artifacts trimmed and whitespace normalized per the VIEW TEXT standard. Public domain.

WILHELM OSTWALD

PROFESSOR OF CHEMISTRY IN THE UNIVERSITY OF LEIPZiG

TRANSLATED WITH THE AUTHOR’S SANCTION BY

JAMES WALKER, D.Sc., Ph.D.

ASSISTANT IN THE CHEMICAL DEPARTMENT, UNIVERSITY OF EDINBURGH

SHCOND. EDITION

London
MACMILLAN AND CO.

AND NEW YORK

1895

|
| VY All rights reserved

AUTHOR’S PREFACE

Tats book has been written mainly to supply a want felt in my own
teaching experience. It is designed to meet the requirements of the
student who, while not intending to devote himself to the detailed
study of General Chemistry, still wishes to follow intelligently the
progress recently made in this important branch of science. Numerous
assurances of my colleagues have convinced me that there is an actual
demand for such a work.

In conformity with this design, I have abstained as far as possible
from the use of mathematical formule, and have always striven after
clearness of exposition. The task has been all the more difficult that
the course of study still pursued by the average chemist has laid upon
me the necessity of avoiding the employment of higher mathematics.
When possible, I have applied graphic methods: when a clear proof
could not be given in an elementary way, I have contented myself
with simply stating the result. Of course one can with the help of
more or less cumbrous mathematical apparatus give an “elementary ”
proof of almost anything ; but experience has shown that such diffuse
page-long calculations are of no real aid to the comprehension of the
subject. Another reason that has led me to adopt the above mode of
treatment is that the reader who has only an acquaintance with
elementary mathematics may be brought to see the necessity of
acquiring at least the rudiments of the higher analysis. | Without
such knowledge it is possible (as I have endeavoured to show in the
following pages) to understand both the methods and the results of
General Chemistry ; but for successful work in this field such know-
ledge is indispensable. ,

vi OUTLINES OF GENERAL CHEMISTRY

Within the last three or four years an enormous advance has been
made in chemistry by the theories of solution and of electrolytic dissocia-
tion, due respectively to van ’t Hoff and Arrhenius. I hope not only
to have rendered a service to students by the elementary exposition of
these epoch-making theories and the experiments on which they are
based, but also to have contributed towards their general recognition
amongst my fellow-teachers—a recognition which can scarce be longer
delayed.

In accordance with the general character of the work, I have given
as references only the authors’ names and the year of publication, which
if need be will suffice to identify the original memoirs in the indexes

and catalogues of papers now everywhere accessible.

W. OSTWALD.

LEIpzic, July 1889.

TRANSLATOR’S PREFACE

To what Prof. Ostwald has said with regard to the scope and object of
the present work the Translator has nothing to add. He can only hope
that the publication of the book in English form will conduce to the
acceptance in this country of the new ideas to which the author has
alluded. The singular disregard of the discoveries of van ’t Hoff and
Arrhenius amongst the English-speaking scientific public must be in
great measure attributed to the want of a connected account of them
from one uniform point of view,—a want which this volume amply
supplies. |

The student who wishes to pursue his study of the subject further
will find plentiful details in the author’s Lehrbuch der allgemeinen
Chemie (2 vols. Leipzig, Engelmann), a second edition of which is in
preparation. |

With regard to the English version, its substantial accuracy may
be guaranteed from the fact that the revised proofs have all passed
through the author’s hands. The Translator has also to thank Dr. Alex.
Smith and Mr. T. 8. Murray for kind assistance in proof-correction.

fled

CONTENTS

PARI LE

CHEMICAL LAWS OF MASS

BOOK I—MASS

CHAP.

1.

QO nm FP &O DH

m op bd et

FUNDAMENTAL LAWS

. THE ELEMENTS

2
3.
4

ATomiIc WEIGHTS

. NUMERICAL RELATIONS OF THE ATOMIC WEIGHTS

2

BOOK II—THE PROPERTIES OF GASES

. GENERAL PROPERTIES

. SPECIFIC GRAVITY AND VOLUME OF GASES

. GAay-Lussac’s LAw oF VOLUMES AND AVOGADRO’S HYPOTHESIS
. ABNORMAL VAPOUR DENSITIES

. THe KINETIC THEORY OF GASES .

Tue Sprciric Heat oF GAsES AND THE First Law oF THERMO-
DYNAMICS

BOOK III—THE PROPERTIES OF LIQUIDS

. GENERAL PROPERTIES
. RELATIONS BETWEEN THE GASEOUS AND LIQUID STATES
. BorLtInGe-PoIntTs

. VOLUME RELATIONS OF LIQUIDS

PAGE

x

OUTLINES OF GENERAL CHEMISTRY

CHAP.

“I

co oC

“NI

Ee Ww bd

REFRACTION IN LIQUIDS

. ROTATION OF THE PLANE OF POLARISATION
. SURFACE TENSION.
. INTERNAL FRICTION

. SPECIFIC HEAT oF LIQUIDS

BOOK IV—SOLUTIONS

SOLUTIONS OF GASES IN GASES

. SOLUTIONS OF GASES IN LIQUIDS.

. SOLUTIONS OF LIQUIDS IN LIQUIDS
. OSMOTIC PRESSURE

. VAPOUR PRESSURE OF SOLUTIONS

. THE FREEZING-POINT OF SOLUTIONS

. SALT-SOLUTIONS

BOOK V—THE PROPERTIES OF SOLIDS

. GENERAL PROPERTIES

. FUSION AND SOLIDIFICATION

. SOLUTIONS OF SOLIDS IN LIQuiDs
. CRYSTALS

. ISOMORPHISM AND POLYMORPHISM
. VOLUME RELATIONS OF SOLIDS

. OPTICAL PROPERTIES OF SOLIDS

. SPECIFIC HEAT OF SOLIDS

BOOK VI—CHEMICAL SYSTEMATICS

. Tart CHOICE OF THE ATOMIC WEIGHTS
. Tue PErRiopic LAw
. THE MoLEcULAR THEORY.

. THEORY OF CHEMICAL COMPOUNDS

17
119
128
127
131
136
141

144
146
149
154
164
169
172
176

183
187

CONTENTS

PART-II

CHEMICAL LAWS OF ENERGY

BOOK VII—THERMOCHEMISTRY

CHAP.

I is

Ot we Oo Pe ee OF RS es “I Gp Gr 4 OOS - bo

oF co bo e

INTRODUCTORY

. THERMOCHEMICAL METHODS

. SALT-FORMATION

. THERMOCHEMISTRY OF THE NON-METALS

. THERMOCHEMISTRY OF THE METALS

. THERMOCHEMISTRY OF ORGANIC COMPOUNDS

. THE Seconp LAw or THERMODYNAMICS

BOOK VIII—PHOTOCHEMISTRY

. INTRODUCTORY

THE MEASUREMENT OF THE CHEMICAL ACTION OF LIGHT

. LAWS OF PHOTOCHEMICAL ACTION

. PHOTOGRAPHY

BOOK IX—ELECTROCHEMISTRY

. INTRODUCTORY

. FARADAY’s LAw

THE CONSTITUTION OF ELECTROLYTES

. THe ELEcTRICc CoNDUCTIVITY OF ELECTROLYTES

. CHEMICAL AND ELECTRICAL ENERGY

BOOK X—CHEMICAL DYNAMICS

. CHEMICAL KINETICS

. CHEMICAL EQUILIBRIUM
. DISSOCIATION

. APPLICATION OF THERMODYNAMICS TO CHEMICAL EQUILIBRIUM

. APPLICATION OF THE KINETIC MOLECULAR THEORY TO CHEMICAL

EQUILIBRIUM .

xl

PAGE

207
211
219
223
229
237
245

253
256
259
263

266
270
273
278
287

291
298
305
dll

317

Xil

OUTLINES OF GENERAL CHEMISTRY

BOOK XI—CHEMICAL AFFINITY

CHAP,

Ls

na Fe Ww WD

EXPERIMENTAL METHODS .

. THE AFFINITY BETWEEN ACIDS AND BASES
. SPECIFIC COEFFICIENTS OF AFFINITY
. ELECTROCHEMICAL RELATIONS

. INFLUENCE OF THE NATURE, COMPOSITION, AND CONSTITUTION OF

SUBSTANCES ON THEIR AFFINITY

1 Dest and HORE

CHEMICAL LAWS OF MASS

BOOK I

MASS

CHAPTER I
FUNDAMENTAL LAWS

CHEMISTRY is the science which treats of the different forms of matter,
their properties, and the changes which they undergo. We can only
know and distinguish between the objects of the external world by
means of their properties, 7.¢. by the direct or indirect impressions they
make on our organs of sense. These objects we call substances
when we consider them with reference to properties which are
independent of their quantity and of their position in time and space.

It may be frequently noticed that one substance changes into
another, ¢.g. wood into charcoal, wine into vinegar, so that instead of
the original substance we get another with quite different properties.
Such changes are chemical processes, and are subject to definite
laws, an exact knowledge of which has only been obtained in the
last hundred years, though centuries of patient work had been
occupied in paving the way to them. The most general of these laws
is that which is usually called the law of the Conservation of
Matter. It may be stated as follows—

The total mass of the substances taking part in any
chemical process remains constant.

But we know that the masses of all bodies are at any one place
proportional to their weights ; we may consequently substitute weight
for mass in the above law.

Nowadays that we are accustomed to look upon ponderable matter as
something objectively existent, such a law appears to us as self-evident.
This habit of thought, however, is not more than a hundred years old, for
before the end of the eighteenth century (when Lavoisier first expressly
stated the law) it was quite as customary to assume the contrary as not.

4 OUTLINES OF GENERAL CHEMISTRY _ BOOK I

The law may be proved experimentally by instituting any kind
of chemical process within a completely closed space, ¢.g. in a sealed
glass vessel; the weight of the vessel and its contents after the
operation remains absolutely the same as at first. Ona gigantic scale
the same proof is furnished by the solar system. The velocity of
revolution of the planets round the sun is dependent on their masses ;
since now the length of the year has not changed appreciably from
the remotest historical times, we must come to the conclusion that,
in spite of the manifold chemical changes which take place on the
earth and in the sun, the masses of these bodies have remained

unaltered.

We might now perhaps be inclined to conceive a chemical process
in the following manner: substances consist of indifferent matter,.
which during any chemical process simply becomes invested with
different properties from those which it originally possessed, without,
however, itself undergoing any real alteration.

This conception was as a matter of fact for a long time prevalent,
but the following laws, empirically discovered, are in discordance
with 1t—

If one substance is transformed into another, then the
masses of these two substances always bear a fixed ratio
to each other.

Thus 100 parts of zinc on combustion yield exactly 124°5 parts of a
white powder (zinc oxide), no matter how much zinc is taken or how the
combustion is conducted. Zine oxide may also be obtained by methods
widely differing from ordinary combustion ; but in all cases its properties
are the same, and a given quantity of zinc always yields the proportionate
quantity of oxide.

Such a transformation of one substance into another of different
mass can only take place according to the first law when a second
substance participates in the reaction.

The following law, therefore, is in intimate connection with that
given above— |

If sevéral substances react together, then their masses,
as well as those of the new bodies formed, always bear
fixed proportions to each other.

It is here particularly to be noticed that the changes in the
properties of substances always take place by leaps and bounds in
chemical reactions. If we subject zinc to combustion, we never find
any intermediate stages between it and its oxide, such as might occur
if the whole mass of zine gradually altered its properties until it
acquired those of zinc oxide; but that the zine changes directly into
oxide part by part. If the operation is interrupted, that part of the
zinc which has undergone any change is found to be completely
converted into oxide, while the part which has not reached this

CHAP, I FUNDAMENTAL LAWS 5

stage is unchanged zinc. We must conclude from this that for the
existence of a substance the presence in perfectly definite proportions
of the particles of which it is composed is necessary. The cause of
these laws cannot be comprehended on the assumption of the in-
difference of matter, so that this view has been abandoned and the
following one substituted for it.

Substances consist of very small particles of different kinds, which
only alter their arrangement and not their nature during any chemical
process. The mass, therefore, suffers no change. Different substances
contain these dissimilar particles in different proportions, in such a
way that each substance consists of one or more definite kinds of
them in definite proportions. From this assumption the above laws
. follow of necessity.

Such “hypotheses” as the above have not the same claim to truth
as the abstract laws themselves, but their employment has its origin in the
organisation of the human mind, which handles abstract truths much less
easily by themselves than with the help of an illustrative image. The value
of a hypothesis depends on the one hand on the convenience, and on the
other on the comprehensiveness of the image, and the extent to which a
hypothesis possesses these properties is decisive as to whether it ought to be
retained or not. Thus it continually occurs in the history of science that
such a hypothesis, which had served to represent a certain number of laws
satisfactorily, has had to be given up because new laws were discovered of
which it could not take account, so that another had to be found to take its
place. It is customary in such a case to say that the older hypothesis has
been refuted ; but this is not quite correct. A hypothesis can neither be
proved nor disproved. It is merely a tool which is rejected when found to
be no longer serviceable.

The hypothesis stated above concerning the nature of substances and of
chemical processes is so far serviceable as to give us a clear idea of the laws
we have mentioned ; not only, however, does it do this, but it presents
to us the possibility of foreseeing other regularities, and consequently
advances scientific investigation from the stage of blind groping to that of
conscious progress.

When the transformation of substances into others is accompanied
by change of mass, then by the first law this can only take place
either by several substances uniting to form one, by one substance
decomposing into several, or by both of these processes together.
The substances into which a given body decomposes (so that the sum
of their masses is equal to that of the original substance) are called
its component parts, or simply components. If these components are
in their turn subjected to decomposing influences they may often be
split up, and so the process may be carried on; at last, however,
we come to substances which resist all attempts at their further
decomposition.

In the sense of the above hypothesis, such undecomposable

6 OUTLINES OF GENERAL CHEMISTRY BOOK I

substances or elements must be looked on as the ultimate com-
ponents of existing substances, 7.¢. the latter must be composed of
particles of these elements. In accordance with this view, we find
that we can by proper methods regain the elements from compounds
which they formed by their union.

We might ask, “Is matter infinitely divisible?” Since the Infinite
in any form cannot be the subject of experience, this question is
evidently an objectless one for chemistry, which is essentially an
experimental science. If we wish, however, to make further use
of the above hypothesis, we must obviously assume that matter
is not infinitely divisible, for on this assumption only has the
hypothesis that the elements exist as such in chemical compounds
any meaning: the question whether further divisibility is conceiv-
able need not be touched upon. This assumption is supported by a
remarkable law discovered by Dalton in 1808.

If a substance A unites with another B in several propor-
tions, then the masses of B which unite with one and the
same mass of A always stand in simple ratios to each other.
Thus, for example, oxygen and nitrogen, the components of atmo-
spheric air, unite to form several compounds, which contain to 100
parts of nitrogen 57:1, 114°3, 171°4, 228°6, and 285-7 parts of oxygen
respectively. These numbers are to each other as 1:2:3:4:5.

Our hypothesis explains this fact as follows. If we admit that
matter is composed of small particles, we must inquire if these
particles—which shall be called once for all atoms—are in a given
substance all similar, or if they may differ from each other, like grains
of sand. If we make the latter assumption, we ought to be able to
get two specimens of water with somewhat different properties, just
as we can separate sand into fine and coarse particles. Experience at
first sight seems to speak in favour of this, for river-water; spring-
water, and sea-water are all different. A more minute investigation,
however, shows the contrary. These varieties of water fffer from
each other only because they are not pure, ze. are not water alone.
If we by proper means free them from all foreign bodies, we obtain
specimens of water which agree with each other in every respect—
sO completely that the most exact measurements can detect no

__ difference in their properties.

~ We must therefore assume that the atoms of every pure substance
are all like among themselves. Then Dalton’s law of Multiple
Proportions follows of necessity. For a compound of A and B in
varying proportions can only be formed by one, two, three, ete.
atoms of A uniting with one, two, three, etc. of -B, so that only
rational proportions can obtain between the atoms of A and B, and
therefore the quantities of B which can unite with,a given quantity of
A must stand to each other in simple ratios.
From this result the atomic hypothesis leads us to a further

CHAP. I FUNDAMENTAL LAWS 7

conclusion. If the above conception of atoms be in accordance with
the facts, then all relations of mass in chemical compounds must be
regulated by the masses of the several atoms. Without having to
enter upon the determination of the absolute masses of the atoms,
we must require that the relations of the masses of all combinations
of the elements shall be expressible by certain numbers (or their
multiples), which are definitely fixed for each element and which
represent the relative masses of the different atoms.

Hydrogen combines with oxygen for example in the proportion 1: 8,
with sulphur in the proportion 1:16. We therefore require that all
compounds of oxygen with sulphur shall be expressible by the numbers
m8 :n16, where m and n are whole numbers. As a matter of fact, we know
compounds of these elements in which their masses are represented in the
proportions 2 x 8:16 and 3x 8:16, and no others.

Dalton drew these conclusions at once when his discovery of the
law of Multiple Proportions led him to the atomic hypothesis and
found them confirmed by experiment.

The number and nature of the experiments were, however, in-
sufficient to place a proposition of such importance on a firm footing.
Berzelius was the investigator who accomplished this task. The
result at which he and all his successors arrived was ever the same ;
they found that the requirements of the atomic theory are
always strictly fulfilled.

Such a broad and far-reaching agreement of the empirically determined
abstract laws with the atomic hypothesis formed to explain the cause of these
laws justifies us in expecting still further concordance between this
hypothesis and experience. In fact, all our chemical experience
harmonises with the atomic theory and finds in it an easy mode of expres-
sion, so that in what follows we shall alw ays employ it. But once for all
be it understood that the atomic hypothesis is only a mode of picturing to
ourselves what we know of the behaviour of substances. What the “real”
nature of matter is, is to us a matter of complete ignorance, as it is of
complete indifference.

To conclude this chapter, we may again give a short statement
of the theory of chemical compounds in the light of the atomic
hypothesis.

All substances consist of discrete particles of finite but very small
size—of atoms. Undecomposable substances or elements contain atoms
of the same nature, form, and mass. If chemical combination takes
place between several elements, the atoms of these so arrange them-
selves that a definite and usually small number of atoms of the
combining elements form a compound atom which we call a molecule.
Every molecule of a definite chemical compound (chemical species)

8 OUTLINES OF GENERAL CHEMISTRY BOOK I

contains the same number of elementary atoms arranged in the same
_ way.
If the same elements can unite to form different compounds, the
elementary atoms composing the molecules of the latter are either
present in different numbers, or if their number be the same, they
are differently arranged.

CHAPTER II
THE ELEMENTS

THE only way of learning whether a given substance is simple or
compound is to assume that it is compound and apply all known
methods to effect its decomposition.

If the products we obtain always weigh more than the substance
itself and never less, no matter to what changes it has been subjected,
then, provided each change is complete and accompanied by no loss of
substance through our imperfect methods, we are constrained to regard
that substance as an element.

The conception of an element in the chemical sense is therefore
that of an undecomposed, not of an undecomposable substance,
and is consequently liable to some extent to change, being specially
dependent on the resources of chemical analysis, so that it must
remain quite uncertain whether or not the substances called elements
have any real title to the simplicity implied in the name, At any
rate, we cannot decide whether our present “elements” are actually
undecomposable or not. But one thing we can decide, viz. if they are
substances of the same or of different orders. The facts almost
without exception go to show that if the elements are really composite
they must at least be composite to the same degree, so that the
successful decomposition of one of the present elements, say copper,
would make it almost certain that the other elements could be de-
composed in the same way. ‘The reasons for this conclusion can only
be given later, when the properties of the elements and their numerical
relations have been discussed.

The number of elements hitherto discovered is about seventy ; an
exact figure cannot be given, as the record of some substances usually
looked on as elements is not yet closed and their claims are therefore
doubtful. The following is a list of the undoubted elements—

Aluminium, Al. Barium, Ba. Boron, B. Cesium, Cs.
Antimony, Sb. Beryllium, Be. Bromine, Br. Calcium, Ca.
Arsenic, As. Bismuth, Bi. Cadmium, Cd. Carbon, C.

10

Cerium, Ce.
Chlorine, Cl.
Chromium, Cr.
Cobalt, Co.
Copper, Cu.
Erbium, Er.
Fluorine, F.
Gallium, Ga.
Germanium, Ge.
Gold, Au.

OUTLINES OF GENERAL CHEMISTRY

Iron, Fe.
Lanthanum, La.
Lead, Pb.
Lithium, Li.
Magnesium, Mg.
Manganese, Mn.
Mercury, Hg.
Molybdenum, Mo.
Nickel, Ni.
Niobium, Nb.

\

Phosphorus, P.
Platinum, Pt.
Potassium, K,
Rhodium, Rh.
Rubidium, Rb.
Ruthenium, Ru.
Samarium, Sm.
Scandium, Se.
Selenium, Se.
Silicon, Si.

BOOK I

Tantalum, Ta.
Tellurium, Te.
Thallium, TI.
Thorium, Th.
Tin, Sn.
Titanium, Ti.
Tungsten, W.
Uranium, U.
Vanadium, V.
Ytterbium, Yb.

Hydrogen, H. Nitrogen, N. Silver, Ag. Yttrium, Xs
Indium, In. Osmium, Os. Sodium, Na. Zine, Zn.
Iodine, I. Oxygen, O. Strontium, Sr. Zirconium, Zr.
Jridium, Ir. Palladium, Pd. Sulphur, §. .

It is presumed that the reader, from his knowledge of descriptive
chemistry, is already sufficiently acquainted with the nature and ~
properties of the chemical elements, so that these may be passed over
here. Attention need only be drawn to one point, viz. that by far
the greater number of the elements are metals, the similarity of
whose properties forms one of the arguments which speak in favour
of the assumption that the elements are substances of the same
order.

To the names of the elements in the above table are affixed their ab-
breviated symbols. Such symbolic representations have been in vogue
in chemistry from the earliest times, when in particular the metals
obtained the signs of the planets. They had at first only a qualitative
significance, and stood simply for the name of the substance. With
the development of the atomic theory, however, they received an
extended, quantitative, meaning, as they then had to represent an
atom of the.substance in question. Dalton, immediately after pro-
pounding the atomic hypothesis, elaborated such a system of symbols, :
which, however, consisted of arbitrary signs, and consequently made
great demands on the memory. LJBerzelius was the first to invent a
really practical symbolic notation, namely, that in which the first one
or two letters of the names of the elements were used to represent
their atoms.

Chemical compounds are symbolised by writing the elementary
symbols alongside each other. If several atoms of an element are
present in the compound, its symbol is in general not repeated, but has
merely the number of the atoms affixed to it, commonly in the place
of the mathematical index, more unusually prefixed as a factor. In
complex formule a great saving of space is thus effected.

The significance of chemical formule is not exhausted by the
indication of the nature and number of the atoms. In the first place,
as a knowledge of the relative atomic weights is postulated, they give
us complete information regarding the relative masses of the elements

CHAP. II THE ELEMENTS A

in the compound. Again, it is sought through them to give a re-
presentation of the more or less intimate relations in which the atoms
stand to each other in the molecule. With this intention we write
constitutional formule, in which these relations are exhibited by
the relative positions of the symbols.

CHAPTER III
ATOMIC WEIGHTS

ACCORDING to the preceding chapter there exists for each element a
definite number, which either by itself or when multiplied by a whole
number determines the quantity of that element that enters into its
compounds. This number, the combining-weight, or more exactly, the
combining-mass, can only be determined relatively, ze. that of one
element must be arbitrarily fixed, those of the other elements being
referred to this value.

Considered from the point of view of the atomic hypothesis, these
numbers are the relative masses or weights of the atoms, and are
therefore usually called atomic weights. The designation atomic mass
would be more appropriate, for it is really with the mass of these
material particles and not with their weight, which varies from place
to place, that we are concerned. We will, however, use in the
following pages the incorrect name “atomic weight,” as it is now
employed in all branches of chemical literature, and as no grave error
is likely to arise from its use.

The determination of the relative combining or atomic weights
was the most important task experimental chemistry had to under-
take after the discovery of the fundamental laws of mass. For if
these constants were once correctly determined, it became possible to
calculate the relations of mass in all chemical compounds with this
same degree of accuracy after the relative numbers. of the different
atoms had been ascertained by an analysis of only approximate
correctness.

At first it was practically Berzelius alone who devoted himself to this task,
and executed it in a comprehensive way with a degree of certainty and
accuracy quite extraordinary for his time. His numbers therefore enjoyed
the greatest confidence, especially on the Continent. In England somewhat
different numbers were in use, in consequence of a hypothesis which will be
discussed later. When these numbers, however, were subjected to a revision
by Turner, the values of Berzelius were found to be confirmed in the most

CHAP. III ATOMIC WEIGHTS Les

striking manner, so that the confidence in the accuracy of the latter reached
at this time its highest point.

Meanwhile the most careful experimenters, in the course of the analysis
of organic compounds containing only carbon and hydrogen, found numbers
which made the sum of the components appear greater than the quantity of
substance taken. As, in the analysis, carbon is weighed as carbonic acid, and
hydrogen as water, there remained nothing but to conclude that the quantity
of the element in question that the one or the other. contained had had a
wrong value assigned to it in the calculation. Researches of Liebig and
Redtenbacher, Dumas and Stas, Erdmann and Marchand, which were made to
test this, all went to prove that Berzelius in his deeeaieon of the atomic
weight of carbon had made a considerable error, one of about two per cent.

This wholly unexpected discovery (1840) created a perfect panic amongst
chemists. The height of confidence formerly felt in the numbers of Beas
was now equalled by the depth of distrust conceived for them, and. this
distrust was considerably enhanced by the position assumed by Dumas with
regard to the question. An active revision of Berzelius’s numbers at once
commenced, the result of which was to show that this error was by far the
largest, in fact almost the only one he had committed ; the numerous rede-
terminations all confirmed the correctness of the other values found by this
conscientious experimenter. Nemesis, too, soon overtook Dumas, for an
extremely extensive research of his own on the atomic weight of a great number
of elements was proved to be almost worthless on account of a source of error
in the chief method he employed.

Since then revisions and redeterminations of the atomic weights have
been steadily in progress. Twice, however, they have received a special
impulse. First, a hypothesis advanced by Prout and Meinecke stating that
all atomic weights were multiples of that of hydrogen incited to a great
number of extremely accurate researches, in particular to those of Stas, which
in this respect are unsurpassed. Again, the relation discovered by Mendelejeff
and Lothar Meyer between the masses and the other properties of the atois
occasioned many investigations, for in particular cases the general relation
seemed not to hold, and as a probable cause of this was the inexact determina-
tion of the atomic weights, a revision of these became necessary.

As we can at present determine the values of the atomic weights
only relatively, we have in the first place to fix the unit to which they
may all be referred, i.c. the atomic weight of one of the elements
must be arbitrarily fixed equal to a certain number. Dalton adopted
hydrogen as his standard, as its atomic mass was the smallest of all.
Berzelius subsequently abandoned this unit from the following practical
considerations. There are very few hydrogen compounds that are
capable of being analysed with exactness, so that the ratio between
the atomic weight of hydrogen and that of other elements can only be
determined for the most part indirectly. Oxygen, on the other hand,
forms very suitable compounds with nearly all the elements, and so
Berzelius chose it as his standard substance, setting its atomic weight
not equal to unity, but to 100, so that the other atomic weights
might be of convenient magnitude. Later on, chemists returned to

14 3 OUTLINES OF GENERAL CHEMISTRY _ BOOK I

Dalton’s unit, because hydrogen had become in other respects a
standard substance in the science. A practical difficulty has, however,
arisen from this, viz. that all the values of atomic weights which have
been determined with respect to oxygen—and that is the great
majority—must be calculated by the aid of the ratio Hydrogen : Oxy-
gen. This ratio is unfortunately by no means well known; the
possible error in it amounts to much more than the error in a large
number of atomic weights of elements compared to that of oxygen, so
that by this method of calculation the results are affected with un-
necessary Inexactness.

It is therefore most practical to formally retain Dalton’s unit, but
really to return to that of Berzelius by arbitrarily setting the atomic
weight of oxygen, which is very approximately sixteen times that of
hydrogen, equal to 16.

This is the same mode of procedure that recommended itself as the only
practical one in fixing the metric unit of length. The metre was originally
intended to be a ten-millionth part of the earth’s quadrant. The determina-
tion of this value, however, by geodetic measurement is susceptible of much
less accuracy than the process of making copies of this length once it is
determined, so that we run the danger of getting a sensibly different metre
at every new measurement of arc. It was therefore agreed to accept the
original measure of length kept in Paris and constructed in the above way
as the real metre, and to give up its relation to the earth’s quadrant
altogether.

The unit of electrical resistance has been lately fixed in the same way ;
a value was arbitrarily chosen which differed but little from the theoretical
value. This ought to be the case in chemistry likewise ; all calculations in
this book will therefore be made on this basis.

Of the numerous researches that have been undertaken with a view
to fixing the atomic weights of the various elements only a few can be
mentioned here. But at least the most important of the methods
employed will be illustrated by examples.

The atomic weight of hydrogen when that of oxygen is fixed at
16 is approximately 1. The first of the more exact determinations
was carried out in 1819 by Berzelius and Dulong according to a
method which has since been retained by almost all other investigators.
The hydrogen takes up oxygen from copper oxide to form water, which
is then collected in suitable vessels, the last particles of water vapour
being held back by dehydrating agents such as sulphuric acid or
phosphorus pentoxide.

In these experiments 30°519 g. of water were obtained. The
copper oxide, which was weighed before and after the experiment, lost
27°129 g. This represents the oxygen contained in the water; the
quantity of hydrogen therefore is 30°519 —27:129=3:390 g. In
water we assume that there are two atoms of hydrogen to one of

CHAP, III . ATOMIC WEIGHTS 15

oxygen ; if the mass of the latter is 16, the following proportion will
hold, x being the atomic weight of hydrogen,

| 16 : 2x = 27-129 : 3-390,

16x 3°390
Boer) 2) ee

or x

Similar experiments with similar results were later performed by
Dumas and by Erdmann and Marchand.

Proceeding in the reverse way, Cooke and Richards (1887) com-
pressed hydrogen gas into a previously exhausted glass globe and
burned it by means of heated copper oxide. Here the hydrogen and
the water formed were weighed, the oxygen being determined by
difference. This method avoids the drawback of determining the
weight of the hydrogen as the difference of two much larger numbers,
but it contains one source of error, viz. that pure hydrogen gas is
extremely difficult to prepare, and any little impurity causes a rela-
tively great error, as all other gases are so much heavier than hydrogen.

EK. H. Keiser (1888) has, however, succeeded in avoiding this error. ~
Metallic palladium absorbs hydrogen (but no other gas) in consider-
able quantity and gives it up again when gently heated. Palladium
was consequently saturated in a suitable vessel with hydrogen, which
was expelled by heating and then burned by means of copper oxide.
Here again the hydrogen and water were weighed and the oxygen
found by difference. In ten experiments 6°55880 g. hydrogen gave
58°86263 g. water, whence H=1:0032. This number is the most
probable of all those hitherto found.

Values lying near this have been obtained from the determination of the
specific weights of oxygen and hydrogen, it being known that these two gases
unite in the proportion of 1:2 by volume. The specific gravities have been
ascertained at different times by different experimenters. Regnault’s numbers
give H=1:0025; new values obtained with the greatest care by Lord
Rayleigh lead to H=1-0055 if we take account of the work of Scott (1887),
according to which the gases do not unite in the proportion 1:2, but
1:1:9965 by volume. These values, however, are less trustworthy because
the preparation of perfectly pure hydrogen is at present still an unsolved
problem.

A good example of a somewhat more complicated mode of pro-
cedure for the determination of atomic weights is to be found in the
method, again given by Berzelius, for chlorine, potassium, and silver,
as it was afterwards employed by several chemists, in particular by
Marignac and Stas.

Potassium chlorate, KClO;, is decomposed by heat into KCl + 30.
Stas, taking in such an experiment 127°2125 g. chlorate, found
774023 g. potassium chloride in the residue, consequently 49-8102 g.
oxygen had been driven off. Now as three atoms of oxygen are con-

16 OUTLINES OF GENERAL CHEMISTRY BOOK I

tained in the potassium chlorate, we can set the following proportion,
where x is the formula-weight of potassium chloride, KCl:
3.x 16:x=49°8102 : 77-4023,
X= 14:590;

The formula-weight of potassium chloride is therefore 74°590, 2.¢.
the sum of the atomic weights of potassium and chlorine is equal to
this number. . |

To get the separate values from this the formula-weight of silver
chloride was obtained by its aid. For this purpose a known quantity
of potassium chloride was precipitated by excess of silver solution and
the silver chloride washed and weighed. In this way Marignac (1846)
obtained from 14°427 g. potassium chloride 27-732 g. silver chloride, so
that the formula-weight of the latter may be found from the proportion

14°590 +x = | Bae ee
to be x= 143-09;

Lastly, the ratio of chlorine to silver in silver chloride was de-
termined by the transformation of a known weight of silver into silver
chloride, the weight of which was also observed. This transformation
can be brought about in various ways; we can heat the silver in a
stream of chlorine, when it goes directly into silver chloride, or we may
first dissolve it in nitric acid so that it becomes silver nitrate, which is
then converted into silver chloride by precipitation with hydro-
chloric acid, ammonium chloride, or any other suitable compound of
chlorine. The same ratio between silver and silver chloride is always
obtained, no matter which process we adopt. From such experiments
I select one by Stas, who found that 101°519 g. silver gave after
heating in a stream of chlorine 134°861 g. silver chloride. As the’
formula-weight of the latter was found above equal to 143-39, we get
the atomic weight of silver from the proportion

143°39: x= 194861D 1015 19:
wines.
The atomic weight of silver is consequently Ag=107°94. From this
follows further, since AgCl = 143°39, that the atomic weight of chlorine
is 143°39 - 107°94 = 35°45. Lastly, if we subtract this value Cl = 35°45
from the number obtained in the first series, KCl = 74°59, the atomic
weight of potassium follows as K = 39:14.

The most exact and trustworthy of such researches are those of
J. S. Stas (1860-65), which comprehend the elements silver, chlorine,
bromine, iodine, potassium, sodium, lithium, sulphur, nitrogen, and lead.
With the first four elements he altered the method of Berzelius in so
far as he decomposed, for example, silver chlorate, AgClO,, instead of
potassium chlorate. In this way he arrived directly at the formula-
weight of silver chloride, and, by determination of the ratio between
chlorine and silver, at the atomic weights of these two elements.

CHAP, III ATOMIC WEIGHTS 17

Similar operations with silver bromate and iodate, combined with the
determination of the ratios of the elements in silver bromide and iodide,
gave the values for bromine and iodine as well as two new and com-
pletely independent values for silver. It is in the highest degree
noteworthy that these values for the atomic weight of silver, though
totally independent of each other and obtained from different sub-
stances, agree in the most perfect manner. This forms, indeed, one
of the best evidences of the excellence of the atomic hypothesis.

For sulphur Stas adopted the following method. On the one
hand he reduced silver sulphate, Ag,SO,, by means of hydrogen to
silver; on the other he transformed silver by means of sulphur
into silver sulphide, Ag,S. The calculation of the results is as follows:—
150°000 g. silver heated in sulphur vapour gave 172°2765 g. silver
sulphide ; consequently 100 parts of silver combine with 14°851 of
sulphur. On the other hand 56:071 g. silver were obtained from
81°023 g. silver sulphate. Now, as the ratio of silver to sulphur in
silver sulphate and in silver sulphide is the same, it follows that along
with the 56-071 g. silver in the 81:023 g. sulphate there must be
8°3275 g. sulphur. The remainder, 16°6247 g., is oxygen. The mass
of the four atoms of oxygen contained in the sulphate must therefore
be to that of the one atom of sulphur as 16°6247 : 8°3275, and so we
have

ae Or x 166247 2873275,
=O aL00,

we. the atomic weight of sulphur is S= 32:06.

For the three alkali metals Stas employed the method of silver
titration, originally worked out for quite another purpose by Gay-
Lussac, and used for the first time by Pelouze (1845) in atomic-weight
determinations.

If a silver solution be added in small quantities at a time to the
solution of a chloride, we can easily tell the moment when all the
chlorine has gone into silver chloride by a further drop of silver
solution producing no cloudiness in the liquid which has been made
clear by shaking and allowing to stand.

For example, 10°5249 g. sodium chloride were weighed out ; this
required a quantity of silver solution which contained 19°4160 g. silver
dissolved in nitric acid. If x be the formula-weight of sodium chloride,
it follows, as 10794 is that of silver, that

x:107°94=10°5249 : 19-4160,
x = 58-510.

In this way then the value for the chloride is obtained ; if the
atomic weight of chlorine, 35°45, be subtracted from this, then we
have that of sodium, Na= 23:06. In a similar way that of lithium
was found to be Li = 7:030.

For nitrogen Stas used a method first given by Penny (1839). A

Cc

18 OUTLINES OF GENERAL CHEMISTRY BOOK I

weighed quantity of potassium chloride was by repeated evaporation
with nitric acid changed into potassium nitrate. In one experiment
48°9274 2. potassium chloride gave 66°3675 g. potassium nitrate. If x
be the formula-weight of the latter, and if that of potassium chloride
is 74°59 (p. 16), we get

x: 74°59 = 66°3675 : 48-9274,
Xe VOL aoe

Since potassium nitrate has the formula KNO, we must subtract
from this number K = 39°14 and 30 = 48:00, whence follows N = 14°04.
Similar researches with the same result were made by Stas with sodium
and lithium chlorides.

Another and more simple process consisted in transforming silver
into silver nitrate. In one such experiment 77°2684 g. silver gave
121°6749 g. nitrate, whence, according to the proportion

x:107°94=121°6749 : 77-2684,
x= 169-97,

the formula-weight of silver nitrate, AgNO,, is 169°97, and from this,
by subtracting Ag=107:94 and 30= 48-00, we get the atomic weight
of nitrogen N= 14°03.

The experiments described above give examples of the different general
methods adopted for the determination of atomic weights. In the following
pages short notices of the methods employed in each case and the most
accurate of the numbers obtained are given for all the elements :—

1. Aluminvum.—Berzelius in 1812 obtained the number Al=27°32
by igniting aluminium sulphate. With this result derived from a single
experiment at the very beginning of such researches the chemical world was
content, for over thirty years, till Tissier (1858), and after him many others,
determined the constant anew. The number at present recognised as correct
was obtained by Mallet (1880), who from the ignition of crystallised
ammonium alum (2NH,A18,0,.12H,0 : Al,O.) found Al= 27-12, by titration
of aluminium. bromide with silver solution Al=27:11, by combustion of
the hydrogen evolved by weighed quantities of aluminium from potash
(2A1:3H,O) Al= 27-05, and by measurement of the hydrogen got in the
same reaction Al= 27:04. Al=27:08 may be accepted as the most probable
value of the atomic weight.

2. Antimony.—The atomic weight of this element was till 1856 only
roughly known. By reduction of natural antimony glance from Arnsberg
by means of hydrogen (Sb,S,:2Sb) Schneider (1856) obtained Sb =120°6.
It is true that Dexter at the same time got higher numbers by oxidation of
antimony to tetroxide by means of nitric acid (2Sb:Sb,0,), these being
apparently confirmed by Dumas’s titration experiments with antimony
chloride and silver solution ; but a thorough investigation by Cooke (1880)
proved that Schneider’s number was correct. The error in the determinations
of Dumas lies in the fact that such easily decomposable chlorides as antimony
chloride are scarcely ever to be obtained in a state of purity. The least trace
of aqueous vapour forms oxychloride, while hydrochloric acid escapes, and

CHAP, III ATOMIC WEIGHTS 19

the oxychloride cannot be completely separated from the chloride by distil-
lation. Consequently the preparation contains too little chlorine and the
atomic weight comes out too high.

The experiments of Cooke consisted of syntheses of antimony sulphide
(2Sb :Sb,S,), determinations of the bromine in antimony bromide (SbBr, :
3AgBr), titrations of antimony bromide with silver solution (SbBr, : 3Ag),
and determinations of the iodine in antimony iodide (SbI,:3Agl). The
mean is Sb = 120°2. pire

This number has been since repeatedly confirmed. Experiments on a
new principle were performed by Pfeifer (1881) and Popper (1887).
According to Faraday’s law of electrolysis (see below), the same current
separates from different electrolytes equivalent quantities of their components.
If a current, therefore, be passed through a silver and an antimony solution
successively, the deposited quantities of the metals must be in the proportion
of their “ equivalents,’ 7.¢. in the proportion Sb: 3Ag. In this way
Sb=120°7 was found. A series of experiments by Bongartz (1883), in which
the sulphur in antimony sulphide was transformed into barium sulphate,
yielded the value Sb=120°1. We may look upon Sb=120'3 as the most
probable mean.

3. Arsenic.—This element has been the subject of but few researches.
An interesting method was employed by Berzelius (1818), who heated arsenic
trioxide with excess of sulphur. The loss of weight from the escaping
sulphur dioxide (2As,0, + 9S = 2As,S, + 3S0,) yields the needful relations.
The number at present accepted was obtained by Pelouze (1845) and Dumas
(1859) by titration of arsenic trichloride with silver solution, and is As = 75:0.

4. Barvum.—The atomic weight of barium was determined first by
Berzelius (1811) from the transformation of the carbonate into the sulphate
(BaSO,:CO,), later by him and many others (Turner 1829, Pelouze 1845,
Marignac 1848 and 1858, Dumas 1859) by means of the precipitation of the
chloride by silver solution. Besides these processes there are a few other less
exact methods which need no mention here. The mean of the best determin-
ations gives Ba = 137°0.

5. Beryliwm.—The analysis of beryllium sulphate is almost the only
method, Along with the older and not so exact experiments of Berzelius
(1815 and 1826), Awdejeff (1842), Weeren (1854), Debray (1855), Klatzo
(1869), we possess very good determinations by Nilson and Pettersson (1880),
who performed the analysis of the sulphate in the simplest possible way,
namely by strong ignition, when BeSO, 4H,O became BeO. The result was
ie 0:10.

6. Brsmuth.—For the atomic weight of this metal an incorrect value has
almost always been in use. The experiments of Lagerhjelm (1816) had
given too high results, and though Schneider (1851) by oxidation of the
metal had fixed the value rightly at 208, yet on the authority of Dumas, who
obtained (1859) too high results by the method of silver titration, the wrong
figures were used almost exclusively. Only recently have they been given
up, as both Lowe (1883) by oxidation of the metal and Marignac (1883) by
transformation of the oxide into the sulphate and by reduction of the oxide
to metal in a current of hydrogen, found a smaller number, in agreement
with Schneider’s determination. The mean of these numbers is Bi= 208°0.

20 ; OUTLINES OF GENERAL CHEMISTRY - BOOK I

7. Boron.—To determine this atomic weight Berzelius (1824) established
the percentage of water in crystallised borax, whence follows B=11:01.
With this number we must still be content, as some analyses of the chloride
and bromide by Deville (1859) gave numbers which did not sufficiently agree
among themselves.

8. Bromine.—The older determinations of the atomic weight of bromine
by Balard (1826) and Liebig (1826) give too low results, as the material
was not free from chlorine. Berzelius obtained a better value by heat-
ing silver bromide in a stream of chlorine, when it was converted into
silver chloride. Marignac executed a series of experiments KBrO, : KBr,
KBr: AgBr, Ag: Br = AgBr—exactly similar to that described on p. 15, only
bromine occupied the place of chlorine. The result was Br= 79-96.

Stas, finally, reduced silver bromate to bromide, and determined the ratio
Ag: Br in the latter. His experiments were executed on a much larger
scale and with much more extensive resources than Marignac’s; yet both
series gave quite the same result, Stas’s number being 79:963.

9. Cadmium.—Up to the year 1857 a number was used for the atomic
weight of cadmium which rested on a single datum given by the discoverer
Stromeyer (1818), but which was afterwards shown to be tolerably accurate.
Of the later investigators, von Hauer (1857) converted cadmium sulphate into
sulphide by ignition in a current of hydrogen sulphide: Dumas (1859)
titrated the chloride with silver ; Lenssen (1860) analysed cadmium oxalate ;
and lastly Huntington (1881) analysed the bromide both gravimetrically and
volumetrically by converting it into silver bromide. The mean of his
‘determinations, which may be looked upon as the most exact, gives Cd = 112°1.

10. Cesiwm.—The number for this element has been determined
exclusively by weighing the silver chloride obtained from a given quantity of
cesium chloride. The most exact experiments are by Godeffroy (1876), and
give Cs=132'9.

1k. Caletwm.—Although calcium occurs in the earth’s crust in greater
quantity than any other metallic element, its atomic weight is nevertheless
not known with a certainty corresponding to its importance. Berzelius at
the very beginning of his researches (1811) performed one single analysis of
calcium chloride, and with the number calculated from this, chemists were
satisfied for the next thirty years, when Dumas (1842) made some determina-
tions by igniting Iceland spar (CaCO,: CaO). Thereupon Erdmann and
Marchand undertook a long investigation (1842-50), employing various
methods, the final result of which was a single faultless experiment on the
loss of calcium carbonate when ignited. This gave Ca=40°0. The un-
certainty which exists as to this value is not diminished by a series of.
experiments made by Dumas, who titrated calcium chloride with silver, as
the preparation of the chloride quite free from oxide presents great difficulties,
which Dumas does not prove himself to have overcome. Meanwhile we must
retain the value Ca = 40-0.

12. Carbon.—The determination of the atomic weight of this element
was at first founded by Berzelius on the observation that oxygen does not
increase in volume when it changes into carbon dioxide; therefore the
atomic weight of oxygen is to that of carbon dioxide as the specific gravities
of the two gases. This is not, however, strictly correct ; the volume of the

CHAP, III ATOMIC WEIGHTS oA

carbon dioxide is somewhat smaller than that of the oxygen, and a false
value thus arose which was only corrected in 1841 by the researches of
Liebig and Redtenbacher, of Dumas and Stas, and of Erdmann and Marchand
(p. 13). The value C=12:00 found by these chemists has been confirmed
several times by later investigators, eg. by Stas (1849) from the combustion
of carbon monoxide, by Roscoe (1882) from the combustion of Cape diamonds,
and lastly by van der Plaats (1885), who burned sugar charcoal, graphite, and
paper charcoal. Therefore we may put with great certainty C = 12-00.

13. Certwm.—The determination of the atomic weight of this element
has been one of uncommon difficulty. The difficulty lay, not so much in the
analytical methods, but rather in the separation of the cerium compounds
from those of the other earths which accompany them. It is on account of
this circumstance that different chemists, working with equal care, have
arrived at very different results.

The oldest determinations by Hisinger (1816) were made at a time when
lanthanum and didymium, which always accompany cerium, were not yet
discovered. Beringer (1842) was the first to work with anything like pure
preparations. He analysed the chloride and sulphate. Later researches by
Hermann, Rammelsberg, Marignac, Jegel, Wolf, and Biihrig showed that
according to the origin and method of purification of the cerium preparations
employed, very different atomic weights (between 130 and 140) are obtained.
Only recently have Robinson (1884) and Brauner (1885) obtained con-
cordant results with carefully purified material in quite independent
researches. The method was that of converting the sulphate into the oxide
by ignition, and the result obtained was Ce = 140°2.

14, Chlorine—The method first employed by Berzelius has already
been given on p. 15, and by its means the atomic weight of this element has
finally been fixed. The number of investigators, from Berzelius to Stas, who
have proved their strength on this task has been very large, the most exact
results besides those already mentioned being obtained by Penny (1839)
and Marignac (1842-46). Other methods were, it is true, attempted, but
they met with no success. Marignac, for instance, obtained very inaccurate
results by heating copper oxide in a stream of hydrochloric acid gas
_ (CuO + 2HCl=CuCl,+H,0O); and the results of the analysis of a com-
plicated organic compound, by which method Laurent (1842) sought to solve
the problem, are just as little worthy of confidence. The number at present
considered correct is that found by Stas, from which the older determinations
of Marignac, Penny, and Berzelius differ but slightly. It is Cl= 35-453.

15. Chromium.—tThe atomic weight of this element must be classed with
those which have not been quite firmly established by a thorough investiga-
tion. Berzelius in 1818 made some analyses of lead chromate and barium
chromate, the results of which were much further removed from the truth
than was usual with this exact worker. Berlin (1846), who transformed
silver chromate into silver chloride and chromic oxide, found the wished-for
number with sufficient approximation. Later researches by Moberg (1848),
Lefort (1850), Wildenstein (1853), and Kessler (1861), in which different
and mostly unsuitable methods were employed, are inferior to the work of
Berlin. Siewert (1861) drew attention to a source of error in Berlin’s
determination, supposed to be caused by the slight solubility of silver chloride

22 OUTLINES OF GENERAL CHEMISTRY BOOK I

in the acid chromic solution from which it was precipitated ; by avoiding
this he obtained 52:1 instead of Berlin’s 52°5. Baubigny (1884) found a
value between these two from the transformation of chromic sulphate into
chromic oxide by strong ignition. This value, Cr= 52-2, must be taken as
the most probable.

16. Cobalt.—A great number of researches have been undertaken with
this element, especially for the purpose of deciding whether cobalt and nickel
have the same or different atomic weights, and for no element have different
but equally trustworthy investigators obtained such widely divergent results,
The chief names are Rothoff (1818), Schneider (1857), Marignac (1857),
Gibbs (1858), Dumas (1859), Russell (1863 and 1869), Sommaruga (1866),
Winkler (1867), Weselski (1868), Lee (1871), Zimmermann (1886). The
methods apphed were very different, and the results vary between Co = 58°8
and 60°6. Just lately (1889) Kriiss seems to have found the cause of this
unusual disparity, in that cobalt and nickel in their ores are always
accompanied by a metal hitherto unknown, the presence of which in varying
proportions has rendered the preparations of these metals impure. Under
such circumstances none of the older determinations may be used, and the
further results of the discoverer must be awaited.

17. Copper.—Most experiments towards the determination of the atomic
weight of this metal have been executed by the reduction of a weighed
quantity of cupric oxide heated in hydrogen. Simple as the method appears,
yet it is affected with an error having its source in the fact that the spongy
reduced copper condenses sensible quantities of hydrogen on its surface, thus
increasing its weight. According to this method we have researches by
Berzelius (1820), Erdmann and Marchand (1844), Millon and Commaille
(1864), and Hampe (1874). The last mentioned further determined the
copper in anhydrous copper sulphate by electrolytic deposition. Baubigny
(1883) transformed copper sulphate into oxide by ignition.

By quite another method, similar to that adopted for antimony (p. 19),
W. N. Shaw (1887) has determined the value in question. He passed an
electric current through two solutions, one of which deposited copper and the
other silver, and by Faraday’s Law determined the equivalent and the atomic
weights of copper from his results. 'The number he obtained agrees very
closely with that got by the purely chemical methods, the most probable
value being Cu= 63:3.

18. Didymiwm.—tThe same observations as were made on cerium (p. 21)

apply also to this element. The old data of Marignac (1849 and 1853), -

Hermann (1861), Zschiesche (1869), and Erck (1870) all vary greatly.
They were mostly obtained from the precipitation of didymium sulphate by
barium chloride, and are affected with an error caused by the barium sulphate
under these conditions taking down with it considerable quantities of didymia
by surface attraction. However, experiments of Cleve, Nilson and Pettersson,
and Brauner, who all converted the sulphate into the oxide by ignition,
yielded discordant numbers in spite of the identical methods. In 1885
Auer von Welsbach reported that he had split the “element” hitherto
known as didymium into two others, which he called praseodymium and
neodymium. The atomic weights are, according to the preliminary experi-
ments, which have not yet been confirmed, Pr=143°6 and Nd=140°8.

CHAP. III ATOMIC WEIGHTS > 28

19. Erbvum.—F or this rare element also the difficulty of purification is very
great. As the substance has become investigated more thoroughly, more and
more elements with different properties have been separated from it, so that
we have at present no guarantee that what we call erbium is really a single
uniform substance. The last determinations by Cleve (1880) gave Er= 166.

20. Fluormme—The atomic weight of fluorine had been fixed for a
long time before the element itself was known in the free state, a discovery
of only recent date. It was only known as a constituent of various com-
pounds, and its existence was inferred from the fact that these compounds
are different from all compounds of known elements. For the determination
of the atomic weight one method has been used almost exclusively, viz.
the conversion of calcium fluoride into calcium sulphate by evaporation
with sulphuric acid—CaF,+H,SO,=CaSO,+2HF. Such experiments
were executed by Berzelius (1818 and 1824), Louyet (1849), Dumas (1859),
de Luca (1862) with somewhat varying results, as calcium fluoride is
decomposed completely by sulphuric acid only with extreme difficulty.
Consequently other compounds, such as sodium and lead fluoride, were used
by some investigators. The mean of the good experiments is F=19:-00.
This number has been lately confirmed in another way. Christensen
(1886) decomposed the compound (NH,),.MnF;, which crystallises well, with
hydriodic acid ((NH,),.MnF, + HI = 2NH,F + MnF, + HF + 1)and determined
the liberated iodine volumetrically by means of sodium thiosulphate. The
result was the same, F= 19:00.

21. Galluwm.—Lecoq de Boisbaudran, the discoverer of gallium,
determined its atomic weight by igniting ammonium gallium alum, NH,Ga
§,0, + 12H,O, when gallium oxide, Ga,O,, remained behind. He also con-
verted the metal into oxide. The result is Ga=69°9.

22. Germanium.—The discoverer of germanium, Cl. Winkler, analysed
germanium chloride, GeCl,, by decomposition with sodium carbonate, and
volumetric estimation of the chlorine by means of silver solution. From his
data we get Ge= 72:3. } )

23. Gold—A great many methods have been applied to this element.
First of all Berzelius (1813) precipitated a solution of gold with mercury and
thus determined the ratio of the atomic weights of the two metals. Javal
(1821) obtained quite other numbers by analysis of auric oxide, whereupon
Berzelius (1845) determined the ratio between chlorine and gold in a neutral
solution of auric chloride, as well as that between gold and potassium
chloride, by igniting potassium auric chloride, KAuCl,, in a current of
hydrogen. lLevol (1850) worked according to a completely different method. ;
he reduced a solution of auric chloride with sulphur dioxide (2AuCl, + 380,
+ 6H,0 =2Au+3H,SO,+6HCl) and determined the ratio between the
gold and the barium sulphate precipitated from the solution by barium
chloride. G. Kriiss, and Thorpe and Laurie have lately (1887) undertaken
new determinations by the last method of Berzelius, z.e. by the decomposition
of double salts of gold, and find in the mean Au= 197-2.

24. Indiwm.—This element has been investigated as to its atomic
weight by its discoverers, Reich and Richter (1864), by Winkler (1867), and
by Bunsen (1870). The method principally employed consisted in the
oxidation of the metal to oxide. The value obtained was In=113°7.

24 OUTLINES OF GENERAL CHEMISTRY BOOK I.

25. Iodine.—Gay-Lussac (1814), to whom we owe our exact knowledge
of this element, determined the ratio in which iodine and zinc combine.
Berzelius (1828) decomposed weighed quantities of silver iodide by heating
them in a current of chlorine, when they are completely converted into
silver chloride, and these experiments were repeated later by Dumas (1859)
with exactly the same results) A method similar to that introduced by
Berzelius for chlorine (p. 15) was employed by Millon (1843), who trans-
formed potassium iodate into potassium iodide by heating. Marignac (1843)
established the ratio between potassium iodide and silver, as well as that
between silver and silver iodide.

Stas, finally, analysed silver iodate by decomposition by heat and
absorption of the liberated oxygen by means of red-hot copper. He also
determined the ratio between iodine plus silver, and silver iodide. From
his experiments, with which those of Marignac are in complete concordance,
it results that [= 126°86.

26. Iridvwm.—From the year 1828 until 1878—for fully fifty years—
the scientific world contented itself with a single analysis by Berzelius of
potassium iridium. chloride. In the last-mentioned year Seubert made a
most careful investigation by the same method, the result being Ir = 193°2.

27. Iron.—Berzelius at first (1811) gave a value for the atomic weight
of iron which was considerably too low. Stromeyer (1826) and Wackenroder
(1844) drew attention to the error, whereupon Berzelius caused a new
investigation to be undertaken by Svanberg and Norlin (1846), to which he
added some determinations of his own. These, as well as the experiments
of Erdmann and Marchand (1844), Maumené (1850), and Rivot (1850),
were so arranged that on the one hand pure iron was converted into oxide
by treatment with nitric acid, evaporation, and ignition, and on the other
hand pure oxide was converted into the metal by heating in a current of
hydrogen. The results, which agree very closely, give Fe = 56:00.

28. Lanthanum—The atomic weight of this element suffers from the
same uncertainty as that of the other rare earths. The numerous investiga-
tors who have occupied themselves with its determination will therefore not
be named, especially as the methods used were always the same. As the
most probable value we may take that given by Cleve (1883), viz. La= 138°5.

29. Lead.—Lead takes a prominent place in the history of atomic
weights, as being the first element on which Berzelius (1811) exercised his
skill. His method consisted in the treatment of metallic lead with nitric
acid and subsequent ignition of the nitrate, lead monoxide remaining. He
afterwards analysed lead chloride (1818), and reduced lead oxide by means
of hydrogen (1830). Turner (1833) converted lead and lead oxide into
sulphate, Marignac (1858) and Dumas (1859) titrated lead chloride with
silver solution. The value at present in use we owe to Stas, who in two
series of experiments converted lead into lead nitrate and into lead sulphate.
The mean of his experiments gives Pb = 206°91.

30. Lithiwm.—Very ent results have been obtained by different
chemists in the determination of the atomic weight of this metal. The
discoverer Arfvedson (1818) gave Li=10°3. Vauquelin (1818) then found
Li=9:2, Gmelin (1818) 10°8, Kralovanszky (1827) 10°6; on the other
hand Hermann (1829) 6-1, Berzelius (1830) 6°6, Hagen (1839) 6°5, Mallet

CHAP, III ATOMIC WEIGHTS 25

(1857) 6:95. Troost, who had before given wrong figures, was the first (1862)
to determine the value with approximate correctness. The exact number
was then found by Diehl (1862), who decomposed a weighed quantity of
lithium carbonate with sulphuric acid and determined the carbon dioxide
from the loss of weight of the whole apparatus. Stas, in conclusion,
determined by titration the ratio between lithium chloride and silver, and
obtained the present number, Li= 7:03.

31. Magnesium.—Most of the old determinations were made from the
analysis or synthesis of the sulphate, e.g. by Berzelius (1812), Gay-Lussac
(1819), Scheerer (1846), Svanberg and Nordenfeldt (1848), Jacquelain
(1850), Bahr (1852). The determination by Bahr is particularly interesting,
as being made with a specimen of magnesia obtained from the olivine of a
Siberian meteorite. This celestial magnesia proved to be identical with the
ordinary terrestrial substance in respect of the atomic weight, as it was in all
other properties.

An extensive investigation by Marchand and Scheerer (1850) into the
quantity of carbon dioxide contained in natural magnesium carbonate
(magnesite from Frankenstein) is unfortunately valueless, as Scheerer nine
years later discovered that the material employed contained calcium. The
experiments of Dumas (1859) on the ratio between magnesium chloride and
silver only showed the inapplicability of the method, for in spite of heating
in a current of hydrochloric acid, it was found impossible to prepare
magnesium chloride perfectly free from oxygen. Marignac has lately (1883)
obtained results by means of the old method of analysis and synthesis of
the sulphate which satisfy the requirements justly expected of a constant so
frequently in use. He found Mg=24°38. The number even yet almost
always employed, Mg = 24:00, is thus over 1°5 per cent wrong.

32. Manganese——The older values for the atomic weight of manganese
were somewhat uncertain; Hauer (1857) was the first to give accurate
numbers, which he obtained by converting manganese sulphate into sulphide
by ignition in a current of sulphuretted hydrogen. This method is much
better than that again used by Dumas, viz. the titration with silver, as the
impossibility of obtaining pure chloride became once more apparent. <A
series of experiments by Schneider (1859), who subjected the oxalate to
combustion, is also not quite faultless. Dewar and Scott (1883) analysed
silver permanganate, AgMnO,, and Marignac (18838) converted manganous
oxide into the corresponding sulphate. Both methods gave results agreeing
with each other and with those of Hauer, so that we may put Mn= 55:0,

33. Mercury.—There has never been much doubt as to the atomic
weight of this metal, as even the oldest analyses of mercuric oxide by
Sefstrém give a number very near the right one. Later determinations
have been made by different methods. Turner (1833) analysed, besides
mercuric oxide, mercuric and mercurous chlorides by ignition with lime,
Erdmann and Marchand (1844) reduced mercuric oxide with charcoal and
mercuric sulphide with metallic copper, Millon (1846) and Svanberg
(1848) repeated the decomposition of mercuric chloride by heating with
lime, As mean of all the more trustworthy determinations we may take
Hg = 200°4,

34. Molybdenum.—The oldest experiments of Berzelius (1818) were on

26 OUTLINES OF GENERAL CHEMISTRY BOOK I

the conversion of lead nitrate into lead molybdate, and gave much more
correct numbers than those of Svanberg and Struve (1848), who transformed
the sulphide, MoS,, into the oxide, MoO,, by roasting. In this process there
is a loss of weight of only some 10 per cent, so that the errors of experiment
have a great influence on the result. Dumas (1859), on the other hand,
obtained good numbers by reducing the strongly heated trioxide in a stream
of hydrogen to the metallic state. The analysis of the chlorides of molyb-
denum by Liechti and Kampe (1873) may also be used, and lately von der
Pfordten (1884) has found the same value from the analysis of ammonium
molybdate. The mean is Mo=95°9.

35. Nickel—Almost all the chemists who attempted to fix the atomic
weight of cobalt have at the same time extended their investigations to
nickel and found here also very varying results—from 58:0 to 59°4. The
cause of this is the same as that given in the case of cobalt (p. 22), and a
correct value cannot at present be stated.

36. Niobium.—The investigation into the nature of this element was
attended with considerable difficulties, which Rose, who busied himself
many years with it, did not succeed in overcoming. Blomstrand was the
first to get a proper grasp of the subject, and to him we owe the determina-
tions which may be taken as the most exact. The analysis of the penta-
' chloride gave Nb = 94:2.

37. Nitrogen.—A great many different methods have been used for this
element. Berzelius (1811) determined the ratio between ammonium chloride
and silver chloride. He afterwards used the proposition that the specific
gravities of the gaseous elements are proportional to their atomic weights
(see below), and based the number considered by him as correct on weighings
of oxygen and nitrogen which he executed in conjunction with Dulong
(1820). Turner (1833) determined the ratio between silver nitrate and
chloride, between barium nitrate and sulphate, as well as between lead
nitrate and sulphate.

Penny (1839), who made his admirably exact determinations with the
simplest imaginable apparatus, converted potassium chlorate into potassium
nitrate by evaporation with nitric acid, and in the same way potassium
chloride into nitrate, and conversely. He also deduced the atomic weight
of nitrogen from the ratio between silver and its nitrate, as well as between
the nitrate and chloride. His results agree almost absolutely with those of
Stas, the most accurate that we have.

In spite of their excellence, Penny’s results remained almost neglected,
and a much less correct value given by Berzelius was used until Dumas and
Boussingault showed its inaccuracy from the comparative weights of oxygen
and nitrogen. LBerzelius then caused a new determination to be made by
Svanberg (1842), who converted lead into lead nitrate, without, however,
obtaining very exact results. Good numbers were obtained by Pelouze,
(1843), who titrated ammonium chloride with silver; by Marignac (1842),
from the transformation of silver into silver nitrate ; and by Regnault (1845),
from his gas-density determinations.

Our present exact knowledge is due to the work of Stas, already referred
to (p. 17). His mean value is N=14°041.

38. Osmium.—For this element too a single analysis of potassium

CHAP. III ATOMIC WEIGHTS 27

osmium chloride by Berzelius (1828), which gave Os=200, had to serve
until quite recently. Seubert in 1888 made an exact determination by the
analysis of ammonium and potassium osmium chlorides, and this led to a
much smaller value, which must be considered correct, viz. Os =192.

39. Palladiwm.—The case is at present the same for palladium as it
was with osmium until a year ago; our whole knowledge of its atomic
weight is confined to two experiments by Berzelius in the year 1828, who
analysed potassium palladium chloride. We can, therefore, place but little
reliance on his result, Pd = 106.

40. Phosphorus—For the determination of the atomic weight of. this
element many methods were tried by Berzelius without satisfactory results.
Jacquelain’s methods (1852) as well as his numbers were still more diversified.
Schrotter (1852) obtained trustworthy results, and these are still the best we
know. He burned weighed quantities of red phosphorus (of which he was
the discoverer) with oxygen to phosphorus pentoxide in a suitable apparatus.
Similar experiments have been recently made by van der Plaats (1885), who
obtained the same results.

Pelouze (1845) and Dumas (1859) applied the method of silver titration
to the trichloride ; here again the usual difficulty of obtaining pure chloride,
in this case chloride free from oxychloride, was encountered. The numbers
are therefore almost all too high.

Schrotter’s experiments give P = 31:03.

41. Platinwm.—The ill luck which followed Berzelius in his determina-
tion of the atomic weight of the platinum metals—a want of success in
striking contrast to the great trustworthiness of his other experiments—is
found here in the case of platinum itself. The older data (1813 and 1826)
which he obtained from the precipitation of a platinum solution by means of
mercury and from the analysis of platinous chloride were rejected by him in
favour of a number, Pt= 197-2, based on the analysis of potassium platinic
chloride, although they were much nearer the truth. In 1881 Seubert
showed a considerable error to exist in this determination, and from the
analysis of potassium and ammonium platinic chlorides obtained the number
Pt=194°8. This difference is not unimportant, for in the analysis of sub-
stances containing nitrogen this element is very often separated as ammonium
platinic chloride and calculated from the residue of platinum left on heating.
Up to 1881, therefore, the analyses made according to this method are
affected with an error which makes the nitrogen appear less than it really is.

42. Potassiwm.—With exception of the very oldest experiments of Berzelius.
(1811), who converted metallic potassium (weighed as amalgam) into potas-
sium chloride, the atomic weight of this metal has always been determined
along with that of chlorine by the analysis of potassium chlorate. The
different investigators who have taken part in this work are named on p. 21.
The number at present in use is that of Stas, K = 39°14.

43. Rhodiwm.—The number obtained by Berzelius (1828) from the:
analysis of sodium rhodium chloride appears to be somewhat more correct
than those of the other platinum metals, for it has only been altered a unit by
the new determinations of Jorgensen (1883), whose experiments, however,
have only a preliminary character—according to them Rh= 103.

44, Rubidiwm.—The new alkali metals rubidium and cesium were dis-

28 OUTLINES OF GENERAL CHEMISTRY BOOK I

covered by Bunsen as the first-fruits of spectrum analysis. While the
complete purification of cesium did not succeed at once, rubidium was
very soon obtained free from admixed substances, and the number got
from the analysis of the chloride (1861) has been confirmed by similar
determinations due to Piccard (1862) and Godeffroy (1875). The mean is
Rb = 85-4.

45. Rutheniwm.—The discoverer of this metal, Claus, to whose work we
owe almost our whole knowledge of the element, determined its atomic
weight by the analysis of potassium ruthenium chloride, K,RuCl,. The
result was Ru=103°8. Joly has lately found a considerably smaller value,
Wiz, = Oi

46. Samaritum.—This element is still less certainly a single pure sub-
stance than the other metals of the rare earths. Cleve (1884), who converted
the oxide into sulphate, gives the value Sm = 150.

47. Scandium.—This element also belongs to the “rare earths,” but it
is far more probably a pure substance than the others, from which it differs
very decidedly by its small atomic weight. Nilson (1880), who discovered
it simultaneously with Cleve, gives Sc = 44°1 from the conversion of the oxide
into sulphate. ;

48. Seleniwm.—The determination of the atomic weight of selenium has
been attended with considerable difficulty. Berzelius (1818) employed a
quite unusual process—the conversion of weighed quantities of selenium into
the tetrachloride, SeCl,—and placed more confidence in the number got in this
way than in those from the analysis of silver selenide and barium seleniate.
A publication of Sacc (1847) contains merely a list of unsuccessful experi-
ments. <A short report of the analysis of mercury selenide is due to Erdmann
and Marchand (1852), Dumas finally repeated (1859) the experiments of
Berzelius on the formation of the tetrachloride.

The number at present in use is founded on an investigation by Ekmann
and Pettersson (1876) in which on the one hand selenium was converted into
the dioxide, and on the other silver selenite transformed into silver chloride.
The mean is Se= 79-1,

49. Silicon.—The atomic weight of this element was known before the
elementritself. Berzelius (1810) and with better success Stromeyer (1811)
prepared iron rich in silicon, and oxidised weighed quantities of this. The
product of oxidation was analysed, and after subtraction of the iron from the
original substance and of the iron oxide from the product, the ratio of silicon
to silicon dioxide was obtained. Berzelius afterwards investigated various
silicates, both natural and artificial, as well as barium silicofluoride, without,
however, obtaining satisfactory results.

The application of silver titration yielded accurate numbers. After the
first experiments by Pelouze (1845), the process was applied by Dumas
(1859) and Schiel (1861) with the same results. Thorpe and Young have
lately (1887) decomposed weighed quantities of silicon tetrabromide with
water and weighed the resulting silica. The result is Si=28°4.

50. Silver—The atomic weight of silver has always been determined
simultaneously with those of chlorine and potassium, so that the data given
on p. 15 may be referred to. The number at present accepted, and it must
be considered the best known of all the atomic weights, was determined

CHAP, III ATOMIC WEIGHTS 29

by Stas according to five independent methods, the results of which here
follow—

a. Analysis of potassium chlorate and determination of the

ratio KCl: Ag : : ; é : : - . 107-940

b, Analysis of silver chlorate and synthesis of silver chloride. 107°941

c. Analysis of silver bromate and synthesis of silver bromide. 107°923

d. Analysis of silver iodate and synthesis of silver iodide POI S 7

e. Analysis of silver sulphate and synthesis of silver sulphide 107'927
The mean value is Ag=107°'938, and its probable error is less than four
units in the last place. This is a degree of accuracy which has scarcely
been obtained elsewhere in the exact sciences, much less surpassed.

51. Sodvwm.—Berzelius (1811) determined the atomic weight of this
metal, like that of potassium (p. 27), by conversion of the metal in sodium
amalgam into sodium chloride. Penny (1839) found an almost absolutely
correct value by the reduction of sodium chlorate to chloride. Pelouze
(1845), Dumas (1859), and Stas determined the ratio between sodium
chloride and silver ; the results of the last give the best number at present
known, viz. Na= 23°06.

52. Strontcwum.—We are indebted for our first knowledge of the atomic
weight of this element to Stromeyer (1816), who analysed the carbonate and
chloride. Pelouze (1845), Marignac (1858), and Dumas (1859) titrated
strontium chloride with silver and obtained concordant results, viz. Sr = 87°5.

53. Sulphur.—The process by means of which Berzelius (1811) ascertained
the atomic weight of sulphur for the first time, consisted in combining the
same weight of lead first with oxygen, and then with sulphur ; the number
obtained was, to be sure, not very exact. He afterwards (1818) converted
lead into lead sulphate, an experiment which Turner repeated (1833).
Erdmann and Marchand (1844) analysed mercuric sulphide after fixing the
atomic weight of mercury hy analysis of the oxide (p. 25). Berzelius, who
doubted their results, converted (1845) silver chloride into sulphide by heating
in hydrogen sulphide. Struve (1851) decomposed silver sulphate by heating
it in a current of hydrogen, when pure silver remains, and lastly, Dumas
(1859) converted silver into silver sulphide by heating it in sulphur vapour.

The results of the majority of the experiments give values lying close to
S=32°0. It follows, however, from the more exact determinations of Stas
(p. 17), that the true value is somewhat greater, viz. S= 32-06.

54. Tantalum—The atomic weight of this rare element is not even
yet known with certainty. The older experiments of Rose, Berzelius, and
Hermann gave quite untrustworthy results. The best numbers are got from
the analyses of potassium tantalum fluoride by Marignac, and give Ta= 183.

55, Tellurium.—Berzelius (1812 and 1833) oxidised tellurium to dioxide.
His numbers were nearly confirmed by those of Hauer (1857), who analysed
potassium tellurium bromide. Wills (1879) repeated both experiments and
got the same results,

In spite of this agreement the number obtained, Te = 128, must be con-
sidered improbable. For if we compare the following rows

P=3l0 As= 75:0 ~b=1203
Sra sae | pee 91 Tes i23
Cl = 35°45 by == (9°96 I =126°86

30 OUTLINES OF GENERAL CHEMISTRY BOOK 1

we find in the three groups P, As, Sb; 8S, Se, Te; and Cl, Br, I, each of
which comprises three similar elements, sulphur between phosphorus and
chlorine, and selenium between arsenic and bromine ; but tellurium with the
number 128 does not stand between antimony and iodine. Brauner (1883)
found a source of error in the older determinations and obtained from the
oxidation of tellurium to dioxide and from the formation of the sulphate
Te,0,SO, the atomic weight Te = 125, corresponding to analogy.

56. Thalliwm—tThe first determinations by one of the two discoverers of
thallium, Lamy (1862), from the analysis of the chloride and sulphate are
not very exact. The results obtained by Werther (1864) from the analysis
of thallium iodide, and by Hebberling (1865) from the repetition of Lamy’s
experiments, are but little better. A research executed by the other dis-
coverer, W. Crookes (1873), with all imaginable precautions, but unfortun-
ately only according to one method (the conversion of the metal into the
nitrate), gave Tl = 204°1.

57. Thorvum.—Berzelius, who discovered this element, determined its
atomic weight (1829) by analysis of the sulphate. The experiments were
subsequently repeated by Chydenius (1863), Delafontaine (1863), Hermann
(1864), and Cleve (1874), the analysis being mostly so conducted that thoria
remained behind on strong ignition of the salt. Cleve analysed the oxalate
in addition. Nilson, at first alone (1882), afterwards in conjunction with
Kriiss (1887), performed the analysis of the sulphate with material purified
with especial care. Both researches yield the same number, Th =232°-4,
which is somewhat lower than that found by the older investigators.

58. Thulowm.—aA still doubtful element, to which Cleve (1880) gives
the atomic weight Tu=171 from analysis of the sulphate.

59. Tin.—The oxidation of the metal to dioxide has been almost ex-
clusively employed for the determination of this atomic weight. We have
such experiments by Berzelius (1812), Mulder and Vlandeeren (1849),
Vlandeeren (1858), Dumas (1858), and van der Plaats (1885). In agree-
ment with them are two analyses of the tetrachloride by Dumas. The mean
value is Sn=118°'1.

60. Tvtanium—tThe oldest determinations are due to H. Rose (1823 and
1829), and were obtained by roasting titanium sulphide to dioxide, and from
the analysis of titanium chloride. The latter method has again been employed
by Pierre (1847), Demoly (1849), and lastly by Thorpe (1883 and 1885),
whose exact researches, which were also extended to titanium bromide, give
Lic AS le .

61. Tungsten—The atomic weight of tungsten has been usually deter-
mined from the reduction of the trioxide to metal, and from the oxidation of
the metal to trioxide,—Berzelius (1825), Schneider (1850), Borch and
Dumas (1859). Roscoe (1872) from an analysis of the hexachloride obtained
the same result. Other determinations, such as the analysis of barium
metatungstate by Scheibler (1861) and of ferrous tungstate by Zettnow
(1867), are of less importance. The mean of the good determinations is
W = 184°-0.

62, Uranium.—wUp to the year 1840 the atomic weight of uranium had
been calculated quite erroneously from the experiments of Arfvedson (1825)
and Berzelius (1825), for the black product UO, got by the reduction of

CHAP, III ATOMIC WEIGHTS ou

the higher oxides was looked upon as metallic uranium until Péligot showed
that it contained oxygen. He at the same time determined the atomic
weight pretty accurately from analysis of uranyl acetate. Later researches
by Ebelmen (1842) and Wertheim (1843) are of little importance, but the
very careful work of Cl. Zimmermann (1882 and 1886) deserves great
attention. The methods employed were not in themselves particularly
good, but excellent results were obtained by scrupulous care being used in
the performance of the experiments. One series consisted in the reduction
of U,O, to UO, ina current of hydrogen, the other in the conversion of
sodium uranyl acetate, Na(UO,)(C,H;0,)., into sodium diuranate, Na,U,0O,, by
roasting, The mean value is U=239°4. It may be mentioned that uranium
has the highest atomic weight of all the elements.

63. Vanadvwm.—An error similar to that in the case of uranium was
also committed with this metal. It was only found out in 1868 by Roscoe,
who showed that the substance formerly held to be the metal was really an
oxide VO. If we take this into account in calculating the analyses. of
vanadic acid and of vanadyl chloride by Berzelius (1831), we arrive at
pretty correct numbers. Our present accurate knowledge of the atomic
weight of this element is due to an excessively careful investigation by
Roscoe (1868), who reduced vanadic acid to oxide in a current of hydrogen,
and also titrated vanadyl chloride with silver. The mean of the two series
is V=51°2

64. Ytterbvwm.—Marignac in 1872 discovered in the substance regarded
up till that time as erbia a perfectly colourless earth with no absorption
spectrum, to which he gave the name of ytterbia. Immediately thereafter
Delafontaine found the same substance in allanite from Amherst, and
Nilson, too, soon confirmed the existence of the new element. Its atomic
weight was found pretty concordantly to be Yb= 173-2.

65. Yttriwn.—This element also was only gradually distinguished and
separated from the earths which always accompany it, and we cannot even yet
state with certainty that what is known as yttrium is really a chemical species.
Delafontaine (1865) was probably the first to work with tolerably pure material.
The method he adopted was the conversion of the earth into sulphate, and
this was also done by Bahr and Bunsen (1866), Cleve and Héglund (1873),
and Cleve (1873). The mean of the better determinations is Y = 88°7.

66. Zinc.—Even the oldest researches by Berzelius (1811) yielded a
result very near the truth. His method was the conversion of the metal
into oxide. The number obtained was called in question on quite insufficient
grounds by Jacquelain in 1842, and shortly thereafter Favre sought by the
analysis of zine oxalate, as well as by dissolving zine in sulphuric acid and
burning the evolved hydrogen to water, to show the correctness of a higher
value. Berzelius caused A. Erdmann (1843) to undertake new oxidation
experiments, which approximately confirmed his previous numbers. Still
nearer Berzelius’s value are the numbers lately found by Marignac from the
analysis of potassium zinc chloride. Baubigny (1883) by analysis of the
sulphate, van der Plaats (1885) by solution of zinc in sulphuric acid and
measurement of the hydrogen evolved, and lastly Ramsay and Reynolds
(1887), by the same methods have found similar values. The mean of all
the determinations is Zn = 65°5,

32 OUTLINES OF GENERAL CHEMISTRY _ BOOK I

67. Zircontum.—tThe atomic weight of this element has been only twice
determined : once by Berzelius (1825) from the analysis of the sulphate, and
once by Marignac (1860) from the analysis of potassium zirconium fluoride.
The latter obtained Zr = 90:7.

In the following table the atomic weights of the elements at present
known are collected ; O=16 is taken as the basis of the calculation, -
hydrogen being thus H = 1:003—

1. Aluminium Ali 927-08 34. Molybdenum Mo= 95:9
2, Antimony Sb =120'3 35. Nickel Ni= (5949
3. Arsenic As = 75:0 36. Niobium Nb=.94:2
4, Barium Ba 1370 37. Nitrogen N = 14-041
5. Beryllium hese Oe 38. Osmium Os = 102
6. Bismuth Bir 20830 39. Palladium Pd =106
7. Boron B cal ol . 40. Phosphorus Peres 1g03
8. Bromine Br = /9°963 41. Platinum Pt-=194'8
9. Cadmium Cd 11k 42, Potassium K v=s0e14
10. Cesium Cs = 1329 43. Rhodium Rh=103
11. Calcium Ca, 32020 44, Rubidium Rb = 735-4
12. Carbon Ce 220 45. Ruthenium Ru =101°7
13. Cerium Ce =140°2 46. Samarium Sm =150
14. Chlorine Cl 35 "458 47. Scandium Se = 44°]
15. Chromium Crea os 48. Selenium pe = 70-4
16. Cobalt Co 397) 49. Silicon Le 24:
17. Copper Cu = 63°3 50. Silver Ag =107°938
: : Nd=140°8 51. Sodium Na = 126-06
18. Didymium Pr =146-6 52. Strontium Sr = 87°5
19. Erbium Er =166 53. Sulphur S = 32°06
20. Fluorine R= 00 54, Tantalum Ta 188
21. Gallium Ga = 69°9 55. Tellurium Te =125
22.\ Germanium Ge = 1725 56. Thallium Th 22041
23. Gold Au =197°2 57. Thorium This 2324
24, Indium ln =A 135% ‘58. Thulium Tacs 1 74
25. Iodine I. +=126°86 59.) “Tin Sn. = 11841
26. Iridium Ir, =10302 60. Titanium Te == A8al
27. Iron Fee Mou0 61. Tungsten W =184:0
28. Lanthanum La =138°'5 62. Uranium Uy aD Ord
29. Lead Ph=206 Oi 63. Vanadium We est 5le2
30. Lithium Lids 7708 64. Ytterbium Vib= to 2
31. Magnesium Mg= 24°38 65. Yttrium Neg Oa)
32. Manganese Mn= 55:'0 66. Zine Li 655

33. Mercury Hg=200°4 67. Zirconium Lt 9077.

CHAPTER IV
NUMERICAL RELATIONS OF THE ATOMIC WEIGHTS

Two directions have been taken in the attempts to draw general con-
clusions from the material offered by the atomic weights of the
elements. A line of thought first pursued by Prout (1815) and shortly
afterwards by Meinecke (1817) starts from the philosophical assumption
of a fundamental substance or “protyle.” This was thought to exist
in hydrogen, and therefore the conclusion had to be drawn that, if all
the other elements consisted of hydrogen, their atomic weights must be
multiples of that of hydrogen.

This hypothesis was widely diffused in England, especially through
the instrumentality of Thomas Thomson, the author of a then popular
treatise on chemistry, who sought to support it by experiments, which
were, however, very insufficient for the purpose. On the Continent it
met with no success, as Berzelius had declared it to be incorrect from
the consideration of his own determinations ; and the review of the
whole question by Turner at the instigation of the British Association
proved the accuracy of Berzelius’s numbers.

However, when the error in the atomic weight of carbon was dis-
covered in 1842, and this was shown by the work of Dumas and Stas
~ to be to that of hydrogen as nearly as possible in the ratio 12:1, and
_ when, in addition, Dumas found the atomic weights of oxygen and
nitrogen to be respectively sixteen and fourteen times that of hydrogen,
the French savant did not delay in expressing his conviction that a
general law was here in question. He devoted himself afterwards to
test this, and came to the conclusion that though all the atomic weights
were not multiples of that of hydrogen, still the half. of this value was
the basis of all the others. He was afterwards forced, however, to
halve this unit also, so that according to his latest views all the
atomic weights might be represented as multiples of the fourth part of
that of hydrogen. —

The whole subject loses the greater part of its interest by this
qualification, as the degree of accuracy of the determinations in: the

D

34 OUTLINES OF GENERAL CHEMISTRY BOOK I

case of many elements does not reach the unit given by Dumas, so that
the hypothesis cannot really be tested.

The same question was taken up simultaneously by J. 8. Stas, who
restricted himself to the investigation of fewer elements than Dumas,
but far surpassed his teacher and former collaborator in the exactness
of his determinations, an exactness never reattained. Stas gives as
the result of his researches the opinion that Prout’s hypothesis is
altogether inadmissible ; it represents merely an approximation to the
truth, all the atomic weights determined by him differing from those
required by the hypothesis by quantities much larger than the possible
errors of experiment can account for.

Although the question seemed finally settled by this unsurpassed work,
it has nevertheless always sprung up again. ‘The reason of this is the real
approximation, already mentioned, of the values to multiples of the atomic
weight of hydrogen. <A glance at the table on p. 32 shows this plainly.
There have consequently always been people who considered the integral
values to be the only correct ones. No explanation at all probable of the
actual deviations has yet been given; especially so, as no chemical process is.
known in which the mass of the given material undergoes any change. We
must therefore at present simply take the numbers as experiment gives them,
and leave unanswered the question as to the cause of their surprising ap-
proximation to multiples of hydrogen.

Besides these considerations, hitherto fruitless, another series on
the same subject but in the opposite direction has been pursued from
the beginning. This series, in contrast to the former, has yielded well-
defined regularities, which are submitted to the reader in the following
pages.

J. B. Richter (1798), after his first discoveries on the mass relations
exhibited when an acid is neutralised by different bases—the beginning
of the scientific investigation of the subject,—at once conceived the
idea that his constants, quite apart from their general significance, were
subject to special laws. If they were arranged according to their
magnitude, the numbers in his opinion followed a strict law, for which
he assumed different expressions at different times. The general
acceptance of the fundamental law discovered by Richter was much
retarded by his holding to the above idea with such tenacity that he
almost lost sight of the chief discovery. However, he was so far justi-
fied in that the regularities suspected by him actually exist, although
not in the form he attributed to them.

At first only the constant combining numbers for acids and bases,
and afterwards those for metals, received the above-mentioned general-
isation, a generalisation which led to the atomic theory. Soon after
the advancement of this theory, Dobereiner (1817) drew attention to
a certain regularity by showing that the atomic weight of strontium
(87°5) lay midway between the atomic weight of calcium (40°0) and

CHAP. IV NUMERICAL RELATIONS OF THE ATOMIC WEIGHTS B19)

that of barium (137:0). For our more exact numbers, which I have
placed in brackets, this is not strictly true, as the calculated value is
88°5 instead of 87°5, but the approximation is at all events remarkable,
especially as we find the same thing several times repeated. Lenssen
(1857), indeed, attempted to arrange all the elements in triads in
this way.

Pettenkofer’s supposition (1850), that the atomic weights of similar
elements form arithmetical series, is more like the original ideas of
Richter again. Kremers, Gladstone, and especially Dumas, further
developed the subject in various ways.

The idea which proved to be the-most fruitful was enounced by
Newlands in 1864, although in somewhat inadequate form, so that it
did not find ready recognition. He not only arranged the similar
elements in series, but also the whole of the elements according to the
magnitude of their atomic weights. It appeared from this arrange-
ment that similar elements were found at approximately equal distances
in the series; counting from any one element, every eighth was in
general more similar to the first than the other elements. This he
called the Law of Octaves, but did not succeed in fully carrying
it out.

Lothar Meyer and Mendelejeff independently (1869) met with
more success, and their conclusion may be expressed as follows: the
properties of the elements are periodic functions of their
atomic weights. Thus, if all the elements are arranged in the
order of their atomic weights in a series, their properties will so
vary from member to member that after a definite number of ele-
ments have been passed either the first or very similar properties
will recur.

The carrying through of this idea met with great difficulties at the outset.
The reason lay partly in the fact that at. that time there was no systematic
way. of choosing the true atomic weight from those that appeared probable.
- For instance, if it is determined that carbon combines with oxygen in the
ratios 12:16 and 12: 32, it is, without other information, quite arbitrary to
assume in the first compound one atom of carbon to one atom of oxygen, and
in the second, one atom of carbon to two atoms of oxygen. We might just
as well put the atomic weight of carbon equal to 6 and write the compounds
C,0 and CO, or equal to 24, when the formule would become CO, and COR
The sides from which this problem of the right choice of the atomic weights
could be attacked were manifold, as will be seen later, but at the period when
Meyer and Mendelejeff developed their views there was no agreement as to
how the attack ought to be made, in fact the principle we are discussing had
often to be applied to decide between the possible values.

Besides this difficulty another had to be overcome, namely, that which
lay in the actual false determination of some equivalents. Here, however, it
was generally merely a question of transposing two neighbouring elements,
several instances of which have been already mentioned (eg. p. 29), a more

36

correct determination being brought about by this circumstance.

OUTLINES OF GENERAL CHEMISTRY

was both most energetic and most successful in this respect.

BOOK I

Mendelejett

The following is the table of the elements given by Lothar Meyer—

I ve Ill IV Vv VI Vil VIII
Li Be B C N O F —
Na Mg Al Si Naa S Cl ~-
k Ca Se ag V Cr Mn | Be, Co, Ni
Cu Zn Ga Ge As Se Br a
Rb Sr Y Zr Nb Mo — Ru, Rh, Pd
Ag Cd In Sn Sb Te I —
Cs Ba La, Di, Ce _ —. — — | —
— — Yb — Ta W oo Os, Ire Pa
Au Hg Tl Pb Bi — —
— — Th — U Ls

The elements are so arranged in this table that the atomic weights
follow in order from left to right, the first of the second line following
immediately after the last of the first line, and so on.

Mendelejeff prefers another arrangement. In his table, given
below, the values increase from above downwards. It differs from
Meyer’s table, in addition to the rotation through a right angle, by
being ordered in fifteen rows instead of eight, which renders the
relations somewhat more plain.

( é J x es 6

RO 4 Li K Rb Cs ae as
RO Il Be Ca Sr Ba = —_—
R,0, III B Se Yi La Yb pet
RO, IV € Ti ok Ce i Th
RO, Vac) N Vv Nb Di Ta =
RO, VI (II) O Cr Mo a WwW U
R,O, VII (1) F Mn ia Be ee we

Fe dG Ru | 0/+7 Os 17a

VIII = | cos {a (03, { 173.2

Ni: Pd / 04 Pt 114, ¢
PO. Na@? Cul Ae FOG F Aus494 =
RO eT Mg Zn Cd = Hg at
R,O, III Al Ga In La T) 5;
RO, IV Si Ge Sn as Pb at)
RO; V (IID) P As Sb ue Bi a
RO, VI (II) S Se Te ae 2 ig
R,0, VII (1) Cl Br I i ed ia

The content of the two tables is the same; the corresponding
elements of the different sections are similar to each other—the per-
pendicular columns of Meyer’s table and the horizontal rows of
Mendelejeff’s. From the former we see that the periodicity of properties
is a double one, every member having the greatest similarity, not to

CHAP. IV NUMERICAL RELATIONS OF THE ATOMIC WEIGHTS | S37

the next member, but to the next but one. Mendelejeff has, therefore,
separated these two groups by doubling the number of rows.

The analogies are most marked in the general chemical properties,
especially in the capability of forming acids or bases. Taking Mendele-
jefi’s table, we have in the first row the very strongly basic alkali
metals, the likewise strongly basic metals of the alkaline earths in the
second row; then follow the metals of the earths whose oxides are
weakly basic; next come the elements of the carbon group, the oxides
of which are partly weak acids; the acid properties in each row
diminishing with increasing atomic weight. The members of the
sixth row are already decidedly acid-forming, and those of the seventh
exhibit this property in the most marked manner.

The same order is repeated in the lower portion of the table. The
intermediate elements of the iron and platinum groups are not easy to
dispose of ; they are mostly distinguished by a pronounced tendency
to form several different series of compounds.

A very remarkable regularity is observed with respect to the
valency of the elements, as is indicated by the Roman numerals in
Mendelejeff’s table. This property increases from 1 to 4; from this
point on the elements have mostly more than one valency, one towards
chlorine, oxygen, etc., which increases as we proceed, and one towards
hydrogen, which decreases at the same rate.

Further regularities shown by the physical properties of the
elements as well as of their compounds in the preceding arrangement
will be discussed later.

In both tables there are many vacant places. They belong to
elements not yet discovered. Mendelejetf made use of the regularities
just mentioned to predict the properties of unknown elements from
those of their neighbours in the table. He gave especially a some-
what detailed description of scandium, gallium, germanium, and their
compounds, none of which were known at the time he wrote his
- memoir, and to him as well as to science in general has been accorded
the triumph of seeing these predictions for the most part fulfilled on
the subsequent discovery of the elements.

The “ periodic system ” of the elements is by no means perfect. Elements
are frequently parted in the preceding tables, which an unprejudiced observer
would consider analogous in their compounds (e.g. copper and mercury), while
others are placed together which appear altogether dissimilar, as sodium with
copper, silver, and gold. It is to be hoped that such incongruities will be
removed in the future by new facts and by fresh considerations. The periodic
system is therefore not to be looked upon as the conclusion, but rather as the
commencement of a train of ideas eminently fruitful.

We may conclude this book by an observation of a general character.
From the fact that the mass of the various substances is not changed
in a chemical process, it is apparent that the mass of a chemical com-

38 OUTLINES OF GENERAL CHEMISTRY BOOK I

pound is the sum of the masses of its components. Such properties,
which are independent of the state of chemical combination, and whose
numerical value in compounds therefore appears as the sum of the
values belonging to the different components, will in future be called
additive. From the existence of such properties it has been concluded
that chemical compounds actually contain their components as such,
the order only being changed ; the additive properties form therefore
the foundation of the atomic theory.

7

BOOT «Lt

THE PROPERTIES OF GASES

CHAPTER. I
GENERAL PROPERTIES

MATTER in the gaseous state is distinguished by its capability of com-
pletely filling any given space as well as by its want of any definite
form. In this state matter occupies more space than in any other, and
obeys simpler laws.

A given mass of gas occupies a definite volume v only when it is at
a definite temperature t and under a definite pressure p. In general
we may put v={(p, t), where f(p, t) signifies a function of p and t
whose form is to be determined.

The influence of pressure is such that when the pressure in-
creases the volume diminishes in the inverse ratio. This law was
discovered by Robert Boyle (1662) and goes at present mostly under
his name. On the Continent it was usually called until recently
Mariotte’s Law, but this physicist published it only in 1679. The
algebraic expression of the law is
. Ven Wes p Ps
or vp=ov)p,
where v and p, v’ and yp’ are two pairs of corresponding volumes and
pressures which one and the same gas occupies at the same temperature.
That is, at a given temperature the product of the pressure and volume
of a quantity of gas remains constant.

This law holds for all gases, no matter what their chemical nature,
from which we may conclude that the cause of the law is to be found
in something which is likewise independent of the chemical nature of
the gas.

A similar independence is found in the influence of temperature

40 OUTLINES OF GENERAL CHEMISTRY BOOK II

on the volume of gases. The law which obtains here was discovered
simultaneously (1802) by Gay-Lussac and Dalton, and is usually
named after the former.* According to this law all gases expand in
the same proportion for the same increase of temperature.

If we put the volume of a gas at the temperature of melting ice
and under a definite pressure equal to unity, it will be 1:367 when the
temperature rises to that of boiling water. This range of temperature
is usually divided into 100 parts, which are so determined that for
every part the same increase of volume (namely ‘00367) occurs, and
these grades of temperature are called centigrade degrees. They are
reckoned from the melting-point of ice, upwards with the positive and
downwards with the negative sign. The increase of volume per degree
is according to definition for all gases the same, and amounts to
‘00367 or sy of the volume at 0°; it is called the coefficient of
expansion.

The algebraic expression for this relation is found in the following
formula—

v =v,(1 + at),

where v is the volume at the temperature t’, v, that at 0°; a is the
coefficient of expansion.

If we warm the gas without allowing it to expand, the pressure
increases. This increase may be easily calculated from Boyle’s Law.
Suppose the gas by heating to have expanded from v, to v, and after-
wards to be compressed again to v, at the temperature t, then according
to Boyle’s Law the pressure p, at 0° must be to the pressure p at t°
inversely as the corresponding volumes, 7.¢.

Po : p ma Vo VY;
or PVo — Pov:

If this equation is combined with the former, we have

p=Pp,(1 + at).

Thus at constant volume the pressure increases with the temperature
in the same measure as the volume does under constant pressure. The
relative increase of pressure per degree, or the coefficient of tension,
is consequently equal to the coefficient of expansion.

Lastly, if we allow both pressure and volume to change, their
product, which at constant temperature is constant, varies with varying
temperature in the same way as each of the factors would do separately
if the other were constant. For this general case we have, therefore,

| PV = PoV,(1 + at).

This equation permits of the calculation of the volume which a gas
would occupy at normal temperature and pressure when we know its

* In England it is also frequently called Charles's Law. —(Tr. )

CHAP. I GENERAL PROPERTIES 4]

volume at any given temperature t and pressure p. The standard
values have been conventionally fixed so that the normal temperature
is that of melting ice, or zero centigrade, and the normal pressure that
of a column of mercury 76 cm. high, equal to a weight of 1033 g. per
sq. cm.* For this purpose the equation is written in the form

Eos Uh
ee Pol + at)’

which is frequently employed in practice.

We can give the general equation pv =p,V,(1 + at) a simpler form
by making use of the following consideration. Since a gas expands
(00367 or s+, of its volume at 0° for every degree above 0°,
it must at 273° have its original volume doubled. On the other hand
if we cool the gas below 0°, in the same way the volume decreases for
every degree by 54, of its volume at 0°, and is therefore reduced to
zero at — 273°. It is as a matter of fact impossible to reach the
temperature of — 273°, and that the law of expansion for gases is valid
to this point is open to doubt. Hypothetically, however, we can look
upon the law as holding as far down as — 273°, so that we may take
this temperature as the zero of a new scale in which every temperature
has a numerical value greater by 273 than it has in the centigrade scale.
If we call these new temperatures absolute temperatures and denote
them by T, then according to definition, T=t+ 273, or t=T -— 273.
If for t in the equation py=p,v,(1 + at) we substitute T-— 273, we

since a= +5, or pv= PoYor Tf finally

; T-
obtain pv = PoVo (1 + 373

273

the constant oe is made equal to R, we obtain the following simple
expression

py= hl,

i.e. the product of the volume and pressure of a gas is proportional to
its absolute temperature.

These laws of gases do not rank in respect of accuracy along with the
fundamental laws of Book I. While the latter have stood every test, and
must in our present state of knowledge be looked upon as absolutely exact,
it is entirely otherwise with those we are now considering. These must be
looked upon as ideal limiting cases, to which the behaviour of existing gases
approximates more or less closely, without ever actually attaining them.

The first investigations on this subject were made by Despretz in 1825,
though some isolated observations had already been communicated by van
Marum and Oersted. He came to the conclusion that gases which are near

* Mercury is 13°595 times heavier than water ; a column 1 sq. cm. in section and
76 cm. high contains 76 c..cm., and (as 1 c. em. water weighs 1 g.) weighs therefore
76 x 138°595=1033 g.

42 OUTLINES OF GENERAL CHEMISTRY BOOK II

the point where they pass into liquids are more compressible than they ought
to be according to Boyle’s Law.

Arago and Dulong, who in 1829 took up the experiments with greater
experimental means at their disposal, could discover no deviation in the case
of air up to 27 atmospheres. Other gases were not investigated. Pouillet
compared carbon dioxide, nitrogen monoxide, methane, and ethylene with
air, and found with all these gases deviations in the same sense, namely that
they were more compressible than corresponded to Boyle’s Law. The last
two gases were not then known in the liquid state. Very comprehensive
experiments were afterwards carried out by Regnault. It resulted from them
that no gas was found to obey Boyle’s Law exactly. Besides the already
known deviation of too great compressibility, hydrogen showed the opposite
behaviour—was according to Regnault a “gaz plus que parfait.”

However, it soon appeared that this, at first quite unexpected, behaviour
is shown by all gases under very high pressures, provided they do not liquefy
under the pressure. Natterer discovered this in the course of his attempts —
to liquefy the so-called permanent gases, oxygen, hydrogen, and air.

The anomaly observed by Regnault in the case of hydrogen is therefore
no peculiarity of this gas, but is exhibited by all gases, only at different
pressures.

Interesting and inviting to further research as Natterer’s results were,
nearly twenty years passed before a more thorough investigation of the
subject was begun. In 1870 Cailletet, and simultaneously Amagat, again
took up the matter. The latter especially has greatly advanced our know-
ledge of the question.

The following diagrams (Figs. 1-5) give a representation of Amagat’s
results. The pressures are plotted on the horizontal axes; on the vertical
axes we have the values of the product pv. If the gases followed Boyle’s
Law exactly, pv would be constant and the curve would become a straight line
parallel to the horizontal axis. As we see, no gas corresponds to this simple
case. Most of them exhibit a decrease of the product at low pressures, 7.¢.
they are then more compressible. At high pressures, on the other hand, the
product pv is without exception greater, and all the gases behave lke
hydrogen.

This points to the deviations of gases from the simple law being con-
ditioned by two circumstances, one of which causes the decrease at low
pressures, the other the increase at high pressures. Later we shall see what
conception of the cause of such behaviour may be made from the standpoint
of the molecular theory. :

The investigations made with respect to the behaviour of gases at low
pressures have yielded no concordant results. It seems probable, however,
that the view according to which all gases approximate with diminishing
pressure more and more to the ideal gaseous state, 2.e. to strict obedience to
Boyle’s Law, is the correct one.

The deviation of gases from the simple laws takes place not only when
the pressure but also when the temperature varies. At first the coefficient of
expansion was determined by Gay-Lussac as well as by Dalton considerably
too high. After the correction of the value by Rudberg, Magnus investigated
several gases and found marked differences amongst them. As in the other

CHAP. I

GENERAL PROPERTIES

43

240 260 280 300 320

#6 20° -20.- 60 30. 200 120 240 160 280 200 220
Fig. 1. NITROGEN.
7 | | |
42 |
40 mT) of)
;. os i
36 |} — 5023
|
* ae? 40 2
2
= 3
qo
30 j=
I
{ 4
28 =
26 Ie aaa) 80 100 .220 240 1260 180 R00 220

Fig. 2. HyDROGEN.

240 260) =—B80

300-320

44 OUTLINES OF GENERAL CHEMISTRY BOOK II

case, the deviations are greatest with the gases that are nearest their point of
condensation, and the coefficients of such gases are greater than those of

|
; ele
Bae En ER |

: |

KO AON pb 80 100 120 £140 460 180 200 220 20 260 280 300 320

Fig. 3. ETHYLENE.

normal gases. These deviations are such that they become smaller as the
temperature increases,

As already mentioned, the divergence from the laws is very great when
the gases are near their point of condensation. It is naturally still greater

14.

CHAP. I

GENERAL PROPERTIES

45

when the substances in question are liquid at ordinary temperatures and only
at relatively high temperatures assume the gaseous form. All bodies, however,
do not behave alike in this respect, for while for most substances the varia-

20

“0

60

80

1 700% 0
pag
80°0
i |
Beal
600

a

ave

100 120 140 160 180 200 220

Fia. 4. CARBON DIOXIDE.

240 260 280 300 320

tions remain within comparatively narrow limits, for some others they are

exceedingly large.

In such cases we have every ground to assume special
circumstances conditioned by the chemical nature of the substances.

Acetic

acid in particular has proved to be such an exceptional case, its density
varying greatly with pressure and temperature when compared to that of

46 OUTLINES OF GENERAL CHEMISTRY BOOK II

normal gases under the same conditions. Only when a very high temperature
is reached does gaseous acetic acid behave like a normal gas.

|

| er «A 80 100 120 140 160 180 200 220 240

Fic. 5. METHANE.

CHAPTER Tt
SPECIFIC GRAVITY AND VOLUME OF GASES

Ir equal volumes of different gases at the same temperature and
pressure be exposed to any (equal) alterations in these conditions, the
volumes in consequence of the above laws will always remain equal
to each other. The masses and weights of equal volumes of different
gases will therefore always be in the same ratio if both have the same
temperature and pressure, no matter what values these may assume.

_On this circumstance is based the conception of the specific
gravity of gases, which is the ratio of the weights of equal volumes
of the gas in question and of a standard gas measured under the same
conditions.

In physics, atmospheric air is usually taken as the standard gas.
This choice, however, is rather unfortunate, since the composition of
the air, which is merely a mixture, is not constant, and therefore the
weight of the same volume of air exhibits corresponding variations.

It answers the chemist’s purpose much better to use a pure gas for
the standard. Oxygen has most to be said in its favour, as it also
serves as the standard element in the determination of atomic weights.

The weight of a cubic centimetre of oxygen is, according to the
exact measurements of Regnault, 001430 g. at 0° and 76 cm. This
weight varies with temperature and pressure, thus

2a P
W = 001430757 ae)’

where the pressure p is expressed in centimetres of mercury and the
temperature t in centigrade degrees ; « is the coefficient of expansion
00367. The weight of vc. cm. of oxygen has the value Wv.

For many calculations it is of importance to know the volume of
one gram of oxygen. ‘This (i.¢. the specific volume of oxygen) is

1 i.
at 0° and 76 cm. equal to 001430? 699°4 c. cm., and varies accord-
ing to the formula

= 699°4 76(1 + at)

48 OUTLINES OF GENERAL CHEMISTRY ‘BOOK II

Lastly, we shall often make use of the volume of 32 g. of oxygen
(equal to double the atomic weight in grams). ‘This comes to

76(1 + at)
220 0 laa ee:

cm

To enable the student to calculate with the old data which have the
specific, gravity of air as unit, it may be mentioned that 1 c. cm. of air of the
ordinary composition weighs ‘001293 g., and that its specific volume is 773°3
c. cm. at normal temperature and pressure. For other temperatures and
pressures the same factors as for oxygen are used.

The knowledge of the specific gravities of different gases has a
special interest for the chemist, and different methods have, therefore,
been contrived to arrive at it. These all come in the end to the
same thing, viz. both the volume and the weight of a given quantity
of gas are determined at a definite temperature and pressure. If we
then calculate how much an equal volume of the standard gas weighs
under the same conditions, the ratio of the two weights gives the
specific gravity required. If W is the weight of V volumes of the gas
to be investigated at the temperature t and the pressure p, that of an
equal volume of air is
W001 20 ee
vs “""76(1 + °00367t)’

and the specific gravity required, d = as has the value
WwW

se W76(1 + :00367t) 2 W(1 + :00367t)
ip 001293pV == (0000170pV

This equation holds for all methods of determining vapour densi-
ties ; its application presupposes that the pressures are measured in
centimetres of mercury, the volumes in cubic centimetres, the weights
in grams, and the temperatures in centigrade degrees. The various
methods differ only in the means adopted to get a knowledge of these
four requisite numbers. |

If it is required to get as accurate determinations as possible of
the density of gases that can be investigated at comparatively low
temperatures, two equal glass globes of suitable size are employed ;
these can be closed by means of stop-cocks, and are exactly equalised
as regards their weight and external volume. One of the globes is
closed (preferably when exhausted) and this then serves as a counter-
poise to the other, which is weighed alternately empty and filled with
the gas whose density is to be determined. |The counterpoise of equal
external volume is rendered necessary by the fact that the total
upward pressure exercised on the globes by the air in which they are
weighed is about as great as the weight of the gas itself, and that
this pressure is variable with the condition of the atmosphere. If,

CHAP, II SPECIFIC GRAVITY AND VOLUME OF GASES 49

however, the variations affect both sides of the balance equally, as
they do in the arrangement described, they have no influence on the
result of the weighing. When the globe is weighed exhausted of air
its volume is rendered somewhat smaller by the external atmospheric
pressure, and consequently the upward pressure is also smaller, so that
in very exact measurements this circumstance must be taken into
account.

The difficulties encountered in such experiments lie in the necessity of
weighing the large gas receptacles with great accuracy ; the determination of
the pressure, volume, and temperature can be made with sufficient exactness
much more easily. In consequence of this we may frequently attain the
desired end more conveniently and with greater precision by weighing the
gas, not asa gas, but in the solid or liquid state. This by no means pre-
supposes that the gas as such may be easily brought into this state ; we can
make use of this mode of procedure whenever the gas can be generated from
solid or liquid compounds, or can be converted into these. For example,
to find the specific gravity of oxygen, Buff weighed a retort filled with
potassium chlorate, generated oxygen from this, measured the volume, pressure,
and temperature of the gas, and weighed the retort a second time. The
difference between the two weights gives the weight of the oxygen measured.
Conversely, Marchand led the still unknown quantity of oxygen, whose
volume, pressure, and temperature he had determined, by the aid of an in-
different gas (carbon dioxide), over a weighed quantity of red-hot copper,
which united with the oxygen to form copper oxide, so that from the increase
in weight he obtained the weight of the oxygen. It is easy to see how these
methods may be applied in other cases.

When great accuracy is not required, or when only small quantities
of gas are at our disposal, the scale of the experiments is considerably
lessened. Very often the chemist has to determine the specific gravity
of gases that at ordinary temperatures possess the solid or liquid form—
of vapours. To this end smaller bulbs of from 200 to 500 c. cm. capacity
are used, into which some of the substance is introduced. By exposing
the bulbs to a temperature considerably (30° to 50° at least) above the
boiling-point of the substance, so that a rapid evolution of gas is brought
about, we can displace all the air contained in the bulb by the vapour.
When the stream of vapour ceases to issue from the drawn-out neck
of the bulb, this is sealed off and the temperature and barometric
pressure observed. The weight is found from the difference in weight
of the bulb when empty and when filled with vapour (the upward
pressure being taken into account), and the volume is obtained by
weighing the bulb empty and filled with water at 4°; the difference of
weight in grams is equal to the capacity in cubic centimetres. It
must not be forgotten that the bulb at the temperature of observation
has a somewhat larger volume, because it is expanded by the heat; the
increase for glass, about ‘00003 per degree, is not inconsiderable.
(Dumas. )

E

50 OUTLINES OF GENERAL CHEMISTRY BOOK Il

We may often save ourselves the trouble of weighing the bulb
before and after the experiment by determining the weight of the
vapour in some other fashion. For instance, if the vapour density of
iodine is required, we have only to wash out the bulb with a solution
of potassium iodide after the experiment has been made, and to titrate —
the resulting solution with sodium thiosulphate in order to get
a very exact determination. Such expedients, however, have been
as yet almost entirely neglected.

At very high temperatures, where glass is not sufficiently resistant,
porcelain bulbs are used which may be closed by means of the oxyhydrogen
blowpipe. As the determination of the temperature in such circumstances
is by no means easy, we may avoid it by making a parallel experiment
under the same conditions with air, the weight of which is also determined,
preferably by measurement rather than by direct weighing. However, if
weighing be preferred, a heavy gas of known density ought to be employed
instead of air, in order to reduce the relative error of weighing. Iodine
vapour, hitherto used for this purpose, is not suitable, as its density at high
temperatures is not constant. (Deville and Troost.) ‘

In a certain sense the converse of Dumas’s process constitutes the
method of Gay-Lussac, in which we determine, not the quantity of
vapour which occupies a given volume, but the volume which is
occupied by a given quantity of vapour. The method presupposes
the possibility of weighing the substance in the solid or liquid
state.

In the actual performance of the experiment, such a weighed
quantity is introduced into a graduated glass tube filled with mercury
and standing ina mercury trough. The tube must be placed in an
apparatus which allows of its being maintained at a uniform tempera-
ture which can be accurately determined. The substance assumes
the vaporous state, whereby mercury is displaced, the displaced
volume being read off on the divided scale. The pressure on the gas
is equal to that indicated by the barometer minus the height of the
column of mercury still remaining in the tube; this height must,
however, be reduced to 0° by making use of the known coefficient of
expansion of mercury (‘000182).

A variation of this method given by Hofmann, who employs long
tubes and a vapour-jacket for heating, is a great improvement on the
somewhat inconvenient original process.

To this group also belongs Victor Meyer’s method, which is like-
wise a very convenient one. A cylindrical vessel with a long neck is
heated to a suitable uniform temperature. ‘The upper part of the
vessel is put into communication with a measuring tube, and then a
weighed quantity of the substance is let fall into the lower part of the -
apparatus. The substance in assuming the gaseous state expels an
equal volume of the air which filled the vessel; this air enters the

CHAP, II SPECIFIC GRAVITY AND VOLUME OF GASES 51

measuring tube, and from the reading its weight can be determined
in the usual way. The method has the great advantage of being
applicable at all temperatures for which resistant vessels can be made,
and of a knowledge of the temperature of the vapour-chamber
not being required. This temperature must, however, remain
constant during the experiment.

4

In order to learn the temperature of the vapour-chamber, which is of
importance for certain purposes, Victor Meyer drives out the contained air
by means of hydrochloric acid gas and collects it over water. If v’ is the
volume of the air expelled at the temperature of the atmosphere t’, and v
the volume of the vapour-chamber, then the required temperature t follows
from Gay-Lussac’s Law.

Vv :v=(1 +at’):(1+at),
v—v + :00367t’'v

‘O0367V’

Other methods, to be used in special cases, have been frequently described,
but they have not come into general use, and so may be neglected here.

i

b

CHAPTER: fil
GAY-LUSSAC’S LAW OF VOLUMES AND AVOGADRO’S HYPOTHESIS

In the course of experiments on the proportions by volume in which
oxygen and hydrogen combine to form water, it was found at the
end of last century that the ratio was 1:2. That they combined
exactly in this proportion, as nearly as the experimental resources
of that age allowed to be determined, was first enounced by Gay-
Lussac and Humboldt in 1805. Three years later Gay-Lussac
established in a memoir afterwards famous that this was only a
special case of a law that held for all gases. The law runs thus:
If gaseous substances enter into chemical combination,
their volumes are in simple rational proportions, and if a
gaseous substance is formed by their, union, its volume also
is rationally related to the volume of the original gases.
All the volumes must, of course, be measured at the same temperature
and pressure.

This law evidently allows us to calculate the densities of gaseous com-
pounds from those of their elements, if we know the volume relations on
their formation. Two vols. hydrogen and 1 vol. oxygen give 2 vols. aqueous
vapour. Now the specific gravity of hydrogen (air=1) is °0693, we. the
same volume that contains one gram of air at a given temperature and
pressure* will contain only -0693 g. of hydrogen. The specific gravity of
oxygen is 1:1056. We calculate now as follows—

2 vols. hydrogen weigh ‘1386 g.
1 vol. oxygen weighs 1°1056 g.

The resulting 2 vols. aqueous vapour weigh 1:2442 g.
Consequently 1 vol. % » Weighs -6221 g¢.
Observation gives 623 g. an almost identical number.

If we consider that gases combine by weight in the proportion of
their atomic masses or multiples of them, and now also in equal or

* 773°3 c. cm. under normal conditions (cf. p. 48).

CHAP. III GAY-LUSSAC’S LAW OF VOLUMES 53

multiple volumes, then we see that the weights of equal volumes of
gases, or their specific gravities, must be to each other as their atomic
weights or multiples of “heir atomic weights.

The idea is not far to seek, so to choose the atomic weights that
their rational factors will agree with those of the volumes in chemical
combinations. Then the weights of equal volumes of the various gases
will be to each other as the weights of their atoms. That this may
hold, there must be the same number of atoms in equal volumes of
different gases. Such an idea receives great support from the general
behaviour of gases. That they all behave alike as regards changes of
temperature and pressure, independent of their chemical nature, leads
us to the conclusion that their mechanical constitution must be similar,
which is evidently the case if they all contain the same number of
atoms in equal volumes, the atoms being, under the same external
conditions, equally distant from each other.

However, one difficulty militates so strongly against this simple
assumption that we have no option but to let it drop. When chlorine
and hydrogen unite to form hydrochloric acid gas, the volume remains
unchanged, 7.e. one litre of chlorine and one litre of hydrogen give two
litres of hydrochloric acid. If the number of chlorine atoms in a litre
is N, then according to the hypothesis the number of hydrogen atoms
is likewise N, and that of the hydrochloric acid atoms formed can be no
other than N, as each chlorine atom gives with each hydrogen atom
one atom of hydrochloric acid. The volume of the hydrochloric acid
ought therefore to be one litre; but it is two litres. And yet hydro-
chloric acid gas follows the laws of Boyle and Gay-Lussac—has there-
fore undoubtedly the same mechanical constitution as the elementary
gases.

In this argument, which appears unanswerable, we have neverthe-
less tacitly made an assumption that can scarcely be granted without
further consideration, viz. that the atoms, as such, directly condition
the mechanical constitution of gases. As we eonceive matter in
general to consist of ultimate particles, gases are of course included in
this conception, and we must assume in addition that the ultimate
particles of gases do not cohere to each other; for a gas as a whole is
not coherent, but fills any volume which may be offered to it, assumes
any form, passes through any opening, and so forth. It is true that
the first assumption to make is that the atoms are identical with these
independent ultimate particles, but this is not at all necessary. The
independent particles of a gas may consist of a definite number of
chemical atoms, united to form a coherent group, nay, this assumption
is almost exacted by well-known facts.

We may mix oxygen and hydrogen without their combination taking
place ; this only occurs at a high temperature, but then with great Pleas
If gases consisted of separate atoms, such a state of things would be incom-
prehensible, for there is no ground why these atoms, obeying their so-called

54 OUTLINES OF GENERAL CHEMISTRY BOOK II

forces of affinity, should not unite to form water. But, on the other hand, if
gaseous oxygen and hydrogen consist of groups of atoms, within which the
atoms are bound to each other, the bonds must first be loosed before a
rearrangement can take place, and it is quite conceivable that such a trans-
formation can only be brought about by the relaxative influence of a high
temperature.

If we now assume that the atoms in a gas join to form equal
groups, which we shall call molecules, the above considerations re-
garding the mechanical constitution of gases will hold for these and
not for the atoms. We have thus to assume that under the same
conditions the molecules of different gases are equally distant from
each other, so that equal volumes of the gases contain the same number
of molecules.

The difficulty raised above in the case of hydrochloric acid now
disappears. ‘The simplest assumption (and this will be shown later to
be the correct one) is that the molecules of the gases in question are
made up of two atoms. If there be in a litre of chlorine or of
hydrogen N such molecules, there are on the whole 2N atoms of
chlorine and 2N atoms of hydrogen present, which by their union give
2N molecules of hydrochloric acid gas, supposing one molecule of it to
contain one atom of chlorine and one atom of hydrogen, and _ this
number must occupy two litres, which is the result obtained by experi-
ment.

It is thus possible by means of this hypothesis, for which we are
indebted to Avogadro (1811), to explain the law of combining-volumes
by the atomic theory, just as we previously explained the law of.
combining-weights by its help. We have been obliged to introduce a
new conception, that. of the molecule, in order to do this; but the
molecular hypothesis has proved extremely fruitful, and has contributed
no less to the advancement of science than the atomic hypothesis of
Dalton.

Gay-Lussac’s law of Volumes will now run: The specific
gravities of gaseous substances stand to each other in the
ratio of their molecular weights.

The number that expresses the relation between the vapour density and
the molecular weight manifestly depends on the unit we use for each. The
values of the molecular weights are given by the atomic weights ; it is there-
fore best to choose the unit of specific gravity so that the number will be
unity, and the specific gravity become equal to the molecular weight. The
standard gas would then require to have its molecular weight = 1, 2.e. it would
have to be thirty-two times lighter than oxygen, whose molecular weight
is 32(=2x16). But one c. cm. of oxygen weighs ‘001430 g. (p. 47); one
c. cm. of the hypothetical standard gas would thus weigh :00004469 g. and
the formula for the vapour density M (cf. p. 48) becomes

_ W76(1 + -00367t)
°00004469pv

M

CHAP, III GAY-LUSSAC’S LAW OF VOLUMES 55

or

W(1 +-00367t
MAT 700000

As one ¢, cm. of air weighs 001293 g, the molecular weights calculated
from the foregoing formula are -001293 :-00004469 = 28:94 times greater
than the specific gravities compared to air as unity, so that from these
specific gravities we obtain the molecular weights by multiply-
ing by 28°94.

In the following table the vapour densities of the elements hitherto
determined are collected—

AO SO Sana

ey Oxygenm. ; : 16 32 2
2. Hydrogen : ; 1 2°005 2 Oe
' 38. Nitrogen . ; , 14°04 28 lab 2 Ou
4, Chlorine . ‘ : 35°45 70°9 2°00
5. Bromine . : : 79°96 159°9 2:00
6. Iodine . ; : 126°86 253°0 1°99
7. Sulphur . : i 32°06 65 2°06
8. Selenium . P : Cool 160 2°03
9. Tellurium 3 , 125 254 2°03
10. Phosphorus. : 31:0 129 4:02
11. Arsenic . . _ 75:0 304 4°05
12. Mercury . é : 200 202 he Oo
13. Cadmium : é o12 114 1:02
14. Zine : : ; 65°4 68 1:04
15. Potassium : ; 39°1 Sin 06
16. Sodium . : ; 23°0 25'd ie

As we see from these numbers, the atomic and molecular weights
always stand in a simple ratio.* The majority of the elements in-
vestigated give the ratio 2, 7.e. we assume that their molecules consist
in the gaseous state of two atoms. For chemical reasons the atomic
weights of phosphorus and arsenic have been fixed at a fourth of their
respective molecular weights ; their molecules are thus composed of
four atoms. The atomic and molecular weights of the last five
elements, which are all metals, are identical ; their molecules, there-
fore, contain only single atoms.

These are of course hypothetical assumptions. They allow us, however,
to represent all the volumetric relations of the gaseous compounds of these
elements in a connected and consistent manner.

This is very apparent when the observed densities of gaseous
compounds of the foregoing elements are compared with those cal-
culated on the assumption that the molecules of compound substances
are in general represented by the simplest of the possible chemical

* The deviations from whole numbers in the last column are caused by the gases
and vapours investigated not exactly obeying the laws of Boyle and Gay-Lussac.

56 OUTLINES OF GENERAL CHEMISTRY BOOK II

formule. The molecular weight is then equal to the sum of the atomic
weights of the elements contained in the compound.

As most vapour densities have been determined relatively to air,
the corresponding theoretical values in the following table have been
obtained by dividing the molecular weight by 28:94—

Molecular Density (air=1).

Weight. Calculated. Observed.
Water, HoOoe. : : ; : 18 628 623
Ammonia, NH, per 6 : ; 17°04 589 590
Nitrogen monoxide, N,O . : 44°08 1°524 PO27
Hydrochloric acid, HCl . P 36°46 1°264 1°26—1:28
Chlorine peroxide, ClO, . 67°46 2°34 2°37
Nitrosyl chloride, NOC]. . . 65°54 207 2738
Hydriodic acid, HI . : : : 129 ~ 4°42 4°44
Hydrogen sulphide, H.S . 34:0 1:18 1219
Sulphur dioxide, SO, ; : 64°0 2°22 2°25
Sulphur monochloride, §,Cl,_ . 134°9 4°68 4°70
Hydrogen selenide, H.Se . 81:1 247. 2°80
Hydrogen phosphide, H;P : 34°0 1°18 LOL y,
Phosphorus trichloride, PCl, . 187°4 4°76 4°88
Phosphorus oxychloride, POCI, 153°4 5°33 5°33
Phosphorus sulphochloride, PSCl, . 169°4 5°88 5°90
Phosphorus pentasulphide, P.S; . 222°3 fre: TOE
Hydrogen arsenide, H,As : : 78°0 2°70 2°70
Arsenic trioxide, AsyO,_ . , 396°0 13°72 13°78
Arsenic trichloride, AsCl, : 181°4 6°27 6°30
Mercuric chloride, HgCl,. : ; 271°3 9°39 9°8
Mercuric bromide, HgBry. ; : 360°3 12°48 12°16
Mercuric iodide, Hgl,_ . ; 454-1 TDF, 15°6
Cadmium bromide, CdBr, : i 172°0 9°40 9°3

Here again the two last columns agree within the limits of
experimental error, and therefore confirm the assumptions made
above.

The law can, however, be still further extended, for without new
assumptions we see that the vapour density of all compounds, even
although they contain non-volatile elements, must be proportional to
the sum of the atomic weights of their components, or equal to a
28°94th part of this (the molecular weight) if we take air=1. We
find this also completely confirmed by experiment.

Molecular Density (air=1).

Weight. Calculated. Observed.
Methane, CH, : : : : 16:0 554 500
Carbon dioxide, CO, . , : 44°0 1524 1°529
Silicon tetrachloride, SiCl,_ . 169°0 ev 5°94
Boron trichloride, BCl, . 117° 4°06 4°02
Aluminium chloride, AlCl, . : 133°5 4°60 4°80
Gallium chloride, GaCl, : 176°4 6°08 6°13

Indium chloride, InCl, . ; f 184°7 6°36 6°44

CHAP, III GAY-LUSSAC’S LAW OF VOLUMES aye

Molecular ; Density (air=1).

Weight. Calculated. Observed.
Chromyl chloride, CrOCl, : bles se 5°38 5°55
Ferrous chloride, FeCl, . : 4 127. 4°38 fe
Zine chloride, ZnCl, . : 136°3 4°70 4°61
Cuprous chloride, Cu,Cl, : LOT 6 6°84 6°98
Lead chloride, PbCl, . 4 277°8 9°64 9°6
Bismuth chloride, BiCl, : 3 314°5 10°95 11°4
Thallous chloride, TICl . : ; 239°6 8°5 8°8
Antimony trichloride, SbCl, . 226°8 7°90 78
Niobium pentachloride, NbCl; 21 VIG 9°4 9°6
Vanadium tetrachloride, VdCl,_. 193°1 6°69 6°69
Tantalum pentachloride, TaCl; . 359°6 12°4 12°9
Molybdenum pentachloride, MoCl,. 273°4 9°42 9°46
Tungsten pentachloride, WCl; ‘ 361°5 12°5 12°7
Uranium tetrachloride, UC], . : 381 132 13°3
Stannous chloride, SnCl, 5 : 189°0 6°53 6°67
Stannic chloride, SnCl, . : : 260°0 8:98 9°20
Titanium tetrachloride, TiCl, 190 6°58 6°84
Zirconium tetrachloride, ZrCl, : 232°6 8°02 8°15
Germanium monosulphide, GeS_. 104°3 3°60 3°54
Germanium tetrachloride, GeCl, . 214°2 7°40 7°44
Germanium tetraiodide, Gel, : 579°7 20°0 20°5
Potassium iodide, KI. : j i Gyae!) B15 5°85
Thorium tetrachloride, ThCl, ; 374°3 12°93 12°42

The observed and calculated figures show an agreement mostly very
satisfactory. It is to be noted that many of these compounds are
gasifiable only at a very high temperature, and are some of them
very easily decomposed, so that several of the larger variations find
their explanation in these circumstances.

The reasons for the choice of the atomic weights given above (p. 32)
are now made clear from a consideration of the vapour densities. If we
were, for example, to take as the atomic weight of phosphorus 2 x 31=62
in order to obtain the formula P, for its vapour, then the composition of
hydrogen phosphide would necessarily be PH,, its molecular weight 68,
and its density 2°35. But as the last is found to be only half as large, it
is thereby shown that the molecular weight of hydrogen phosphide is only
34, and the atomic weight of phosphorus itself not more than 31. The
same holds for arsenic and arsenic trichloride.

The case is different with the metals mercury, cadmium, zinc, potassium,
and sodium. We can only determine from the vapour density how much
the atomic weight of an element can be at most, but in nowise how
small it may be. The laws would be equally well obeyed if we were to
give mercury the atomic weight 100 and to mercury vapour the formula
Hg,. We must here avail ourselves of other laws, which will be discussed
in the sequel.

If we glance backwards at the relations which subsist between the
volumes and the chemical composition of gaseous compounds, we see

58 OUTLINES OF GENERAL CHEMISTRY BOOK II

that they are of quite a different type from those which came to
light when we considered the mass relations of chemical substances.
As has been already mentioned, the latter are purely additive
(p. 38), ze. the mass of a compound is the sum of the masses of its
elements. With respect to the volume taken up by gases, this
property is in a certain sense quite independent of their chemical
composition. If we take, for example, a definite volume of hydrogen
and transform it into water vapour, its volume is not altered thereby.
The water vapour can by combination with ethylene, C,H,, be changed
into alcohol vapour, C,H,O; the volume still remains the same.
Ethylene may again be added, so as to give butyl alcohol, C,H,,0,
without a change of volume occurring; and so on. Properties that
always retain the same value for definite groups of substances,
independent of the chemical nature and number of the atoms in these
complexes, I have, at the suggestion of Professor Wundt, named
colligative. The volume of gaseous substances, therefore, is such a
colligative property.

As we explained the existence of additive properties by the atomic
theory, which states that in compounds the component elements remain
unchanged each after its nature, so we now explain the existence of
colligative properties by the assumption of independent atomic groups,
which determine certain relations by their number alone and not by
their nature or their chemical composition. The colligative properties
thus lead us to the molecular theory, and every such property can
be employed to reply to questions regarding the number and size of
given molecules, at least relatively.

CHAPTER IV
ABNORMAL VAPOUR DENSITIES

WE have till now spoken only of those determinations which confirmed
Avogadro’s hypothesis that equal volumes of different gases contain
the same number of molecules. There have been discovered, never-
theless, a number of substances, though by no means a great number,
which appear to form exceptions to the law. However, it has been
shown that these exceptions are only apparent, so that instead of con-
tradicting the theory they actually confirm it.

One of the best known examples is to be found in ammonium
chloride. According to the formula NH,Cl it has the molecular
weight 53°5, and. its vapour density should therefore be 1°85; in
reality, however, we only find it somewhat more than half this number,
viz. 1:01. The explanation of the inconsistency lies in the fact that
the vapour of ammonium chloride does not consist of molecules of
NH,Cl at all, but principally of NH, and HCl, into which it has
decomposed. The number of molecules, and consequently the volume,
is doubled, and the density reduced by half.

The proof that the vapour of sal ammoniac is actually a mixture
of ammonia and hydrochloric acid was first given by Pebal in 1862.
He showed that on diffusion of this vapour the specifically lighter
ammonia diffused much more rapidly than the heavier hydrochloric
acid, and that both might be identified by their action on litmus paper.
The objections raised against the validity of this experiment have all
been subsequently answered. In the same way, 7.¢. by difference in
the rate of diffusion, and consequent separation, the presence of
decomposition products has been proved for very many other sub-
stances that exhibited “abnormal vapour densities,” so that every
doubt has been removed that such decompositions occasion any too
small vapour densities that may exist.

In particular cases the proof has been given in other ways.
Phosphorus pentachloride should have the vapour density 72 corre-
sponding to its molecular weight 208°3 ; smaller values, however, are
always obtained, which vary greatly with the temperature and pressure

60 OUTLINES OF GENERAL CHEMISTRY BOOK II
and sink so low as 3°6. That this is caused by decomposition into
PCl, and Cl, may be seen from the colour of the vapour. The un-
decomposed vapour of the pentachloride has a very faint colour, if
any, while chlorine is green. It was found that the vapour from the
pentachloride was likewise green, and that the green became deeper
the smaller the density grew, i.e. the more free chlorine was split off.

Just as the irregularities observed in compounds may be explained
by incipient decomposition into simpler components with corresponding
increase in the number of molecules, so certain exceptional phenomena
in the case of the elements are capable of interpretation in the same
manner.

The vapour density of sulphur was found by Dumas to be 6°6 at
500°, whereas according to analogy the density 2:2, corresponding to
the formula S, and the molecular weight 64, was to be expected. When
the experiments were repeated at higher temperatures by Bineau, and
particularly by Deville and Troost, it was found that the normal value
2°2 was reached at about 800° and remained constant above that
temperature. We must, in order to explain this phenomenon, assume
that the atoms of sulphur unite at low temperatures to form complex
molecules, probably corresponding to the formula 8,, which then
decompose at higher temperatures.*

The changes in the density of iodine vapour observed by Victor
Meyer (1880) are still more striking. Up to 500° the density has the
value 8°8, corresponding to the molecular weight 254 and the formula
I,. It the temperature be raised this value continually decreases,
until at high temperatures and under diminished pressure the value
4°3 is reached, which nearly corresponds to the formula I (Crafts and
Meier, 1881). ;

If we accepted the view that the smallest free particles of iodine
vapour consisted of single atoms I, then this decrease of density would
be inexplicable. We can easily, however, conceive the phenomenon as
conditioned by the continual decomposition of molecules of the formula
I, (cf. p. 55) into those having the formula J, and thus arrive at an
intelligible explanation of the matter.

Similar phenomena have been observed in the case of chlorine
and bromine, but the decomposition here is not so extensive.

“ H. Biltz has quite recently (1888) investigated the matter, more fully. He is
of opinion that the great increase in the density of sulphur vapour at low temperature
is not due to the formation of complex molecules, but to the near approach to the
point of liquefaction. No other example of such a great alteration due to this cause
is, however, known, and from the general tenor of Biltz’s numbers it would seem
much more natural to infer the actual existence of molecules of S,.

CHAPTER V
THE KINETIC THEORY OF GASES

THE exceedingly simple mechanical properties which make themselves
evident in the uniform comportment of gases towards changes of tem-
perature and pressure have from the first invited attempts to deduce
them as necessities by means of some simple mechanical construction.
As far back as 1738, Daniel Bernoulli worked out a conception in
agreement with that in vogue at the present day. Yet only recently,
and in especial by the work of Clausius and Maxwell, has its scope
been widened, and applications of it made to various phenomena.

Th henomenon_is the expansive tendency of gases,
in_virtue_of which the iformls ace em. No
intelligible results were arrived at so long as the existence of a repulsive
force between the gas molecules was assumed from analogy with the
attractive force of gravitation acting through space. Only when the
notion of force was given up, and the property in question conceived
as a pure phenomenon of motion, was the framing of an intelligible
hypothesis followed by success. :

According to this hypothesis a sists of a_large ber of
Sra particles which do not revi. at rest cach nits place, but move
about amongst each other with great velocity. In consequence, as
soon as free space is offered to a gas, the molecules already in motion
towards that space fly into it, with the result that it is very rapidly
filled with the gas. In virtue of this continual movement there is on
the avera e same number of molecules per unit volume in ever
part SF the sagh BONE BY Teed ToT Te

As the movements take place in all directions, it must happen that
molecules in rapid motion attain the walls of the vessel in which the
gas is enclosed, rebound from them, and fly back into the interior.
Through these continual impacts the gas exercises a pressure on the
walls, which manifestly must increase both with the number of mole-
cules and with the mass and velocity of each.

To find this pressure, let us imagine a cube whose side is equal to 1.

62 OUTLINES OF GENERAL CHEMISTRY BOOK II

Let the number of molecules the cube contains be n, and let them
be all of the same kind, each having the mass m and moving with the
velocity c. Finally, let the motions take place similarly in all directions.

We consider first one molecule which is flying in any one direction
with the velocity c. According to the laws of kinematics, we may
decompose this velocity into three components x, y, and z at right
angles to each other, which are connected with c by the equation
x24 y+ 2 =e",

Let the three components be parallel to the edges of the cube.
The action which the molecule exercises in striking a side of the cube
in the slanting direction with the velocity c is equivalent to that
which it would exercise if it reached the same place with the component
velocity perpendicular to the wall in question. If we consider in the
first place the component x, then this action is equal to 2mx, because
on striking it must first give up the quantity of motion mx and then
assume the same quantity in the opposite direction when it rebounds,”
the elasticity being perfect.

This action of a single impact will take place 4 times in unit time
against the two parallel faces of the cube, 7.e. as many times as the
distance in unit time x is divisible by the distance between the faces of
the cube. The total action of a molecule in the unit of time will

2mx?
therefore be equal to i

The same holds for the two other components, so that the action
of a molecule in unit time on all the faces of the cube will be

2m- : oe 2G:
mas +y’+427), or, according to the above equation, —_— ; and of all

]
2mnc?
]
surface we must divide it by the total surface exposed to the pressure,

the molecules, To find from this the pressure p per unit of

: 2mnc? ;
which in this case is 61?; it follows that p= ee , or, as |? is the

volume of the cube,

Vv eehe

This is the relation developed on the basis of the hypothesis given
above as to the mechanical constitution of gases. As in the right-hand
member of the equation we have for a given quantity of gas only con-
stant values, it follows that the product of pressure and volume in such
a mechanical system must also be constant, and so we have Boyle’s
Law.

The extension of this proof for the cube to a vessel of any form can be
made without difficulty, since the latter may be supposed built up of small

CHAP, V THE KINETIC THEORY OF GASES 63

cubes. The internal walls experience equal pressure on both sides, and thus
may be imagined altogether absent without the system being changed.

The quantity mn in the last equation, since it is the product of the
mass of one molecule into the number of molecules, is equal to the
whole mass of the gas. Half the product of a moving mass and the

2
square_of its velocity, ws, is called its kinetic_energy. Now we can
OS

write our equation in the form
Ge
Vie mi
Pip aan:
so that the result may be expressed thus ere product of pressure
and volume of a gas is equal to two-thirds of the kinetic energy of its
molecules.»

- Tf, therefore, we_bave core’ cases 24 the sane alpine —gnd
pressure, the total kinetic energy of their molecules must be the same.
This evidently holds for every value of the kinetic energy. If
now we-alter the temperature of a ges, eithar iis pressure on its volume
erwemie in_general the product of the two. As of the two
factors of the kinetic SMergyy Vie Tinss and velocity, the first can
undergo no change, it is clear that with a change of temperature there
must be a change of velocity, and the latter, or rather its square, will
be a measure of the temperature.

Two gases are in equilibrium as regards temperature when they do
not influence each other on contact with respect to pressure and
volume. If we now ask under what circumstances two mechanical
systems such as we suppose gases to be, exert no influence on each
other (the masses of the moving particles being different), dynamics
teaches us that this happens when the kinetic energy of the moving
particles is the same; the actual calculation is too involved to be given
hore, Hgual—changes of temperature, therefore, tn cuerent gases
correspond to equal changes of kinetic cee s, however, on the
other hand, thé product pv is always proportional to the kinetic
energy, it follows that in different gases equal changes of temperature
cause proportionate changes of the product pv. ‘This is no other than
the law of the expansion of gases in its most general form, and so it
also may be represented as a consequence of our mechanical assump-
tions.

Lastly, we may deduce Avogadro’s Law that in equal volumes of
different gases there is under the same conditions the same number of
molecules. If p, and v, be the pressure and volume of one gas and p,
and v, be those of a second, and further if p, =p, and Vai Vou then

2 ae
PV, =PeV,- Now it has been shown that Agere ee ae have,

64 OUTLINES OF GENERAL CHEMISTRY | . BOOK II

2
omitting the factor poe both sides,

Cr Oe
Ss: = set
According to the proposition mentioned above, two gases have the
same temperature when the kinetic energy of their separate molecules

is the same, 2.¢. when

Dividing the first equation by this one we get

Be ae

ae. if the pressure, volume, and temperature ases be equal

titen The Gaucher ePRORIS aah tie wane a ee
in “5 pectedtly: iidepomdent: Tigec ha one way at the same
conclusion as we settled upon earlier as being the most probable

expression for the chemical facts.

The relations just developed may, lastly, be used to calculate the
velocities with which the molecules of different gases must move in order to

i
exercise the pressure actually observed. The equation py = gmne? gives

Bpv

when solved for c the expression ¢ = é
mn

If we consider 1 g. oxygen at 0° and 76 cm. pressure, the mass mn is
in the first place=1, and the volume of 1 g. oxygen under these con-
ditions is v= 699-4 (p. 47). The pressure is equal to the weight of 1038 g.
per sq. cm. ; as, however, the intensity of gravitation is 980-5 (any mass
receiving through gravity the acceleration of 980°5 cm. per second per
second) this magnitude is further to be multiplied by 980-5. If we perform
the calculation we find

c= 46103.

A molecule of oxygen moves, therefore, through space under the given
conditions with_a velocity of 46103 cm., or over a quarter_of a mile per
a re

second.

3pv mn oe
In the formula ¢ = y ae the quotient age the mass divided by the

p)
mn
volume, is simply the specific gravity of the gas with respect to water as unity.

If this be represented by s, we have c= wh ae the molecular velocities of
s

gases are inversely proportional to the square root of their densities.

We have no means of observing these velocities directly, but if different
gases be allowed to stream through a small opening in a thin wall, the
velocities with which they do so are inversely proportional to the square root
of their densities. This is indeed no direct support to our hypothesis, for a

CHAP. V THE KINETIC THEORY OF GASES 65

general dynamical consideration shows that this must be the case, without
any assumption as to the constitution of gases being made at all. It is,
however, noteworthy that the kinetic theory “of gases, in so far as the velocity
of effusion is considered as conditioned by the melee of the molecules, leads
to the same conclusion.
It might be asked how, in spite of these enormous velocities, a strongly
smelling gas developed in one end of a moderately large room filled with still
air is not “immediately perceptible at the remote end, at requires a sensible
time to arrive there. In fact this question has teen raised as a decisive
objection to the admissibility of the kinetic theory.

Clausius answered it by drawing attention to the circumstance that though
the molecules actually possess such velocities in their free paths, yet these
free paths are in all probability very short on account of the frequen
collisions of the molecules with each other. Thea ath of a molecufe
is thus not a long ight line, but an irregular zigzag composed of v

short straight lines, on which the moleculé>déspite its great velocity, is in
general not far remo rom its starting-point:

A second question is, whether, if this be the case, it is admissible to assume
that all the molecules of a gas have the same velocity. By such incessant
collisions some molecules must evidently acquire a greater velocity and others
a smaller, so that in general at a given instant ier will be all possible
velocities in one and the same gas.

We must grant this. Bue: the above deductions still hold, if we deter-
mine the ate: c so that the total kinetic energy of the molecules, if they
all had this same velocity c, would be equal to the kinetic He ey they
actually possess. Instead of the expression “Ene energy ” we should,
strictly speaking, substitute “average kinetic energy” in the above deductions.
This of course does not in any way alter the general results arrived at.

Clerk Maxwell calculated the distribution’ of the velocities for a mechan-
ical system such as we have assumed, if a fixed state were established. The
expression can only be deduced in a very complicated manner, and has the
form

y= aa SALON,
NA

where y represents the probability that a molecule has the velocity x, if the
most probable velocity is put equal to unity ; 7 is the ratio of the circum-
ference of a circle to its diameter, and e the base of the natural logarithms.

This result, that the different molecules of a gas must have different
velocities, abstract as it appears on account of our inability to measure
these velocities, is nevertheless of great value for the right comprehen-
sion of many chemical processes. It teaches us that the molecules of
a homogeneous gas (and the same thing applies to liquids) are in no-
wise all simultaneously in the same state, but rather in very different
states. When, therefore, a substance must be in a certain definite state
in order to exhibit some particular chemical action, only a small part
of the molecules will in general be in the requisite condition, and a
certain time will elapse before all the molecules will have reached this

F

66 OUTLINES OF GENERAL CHEMISTRY BOOK II

state. But this is just what our everyday chemical experience teaches ;
reactions all require a greater or less time for their completion,
although it is so small in the case of the apparently instantaneous
reactions that it is sometimes of extreme difficulty to prove its
existence.

From these considerations we can picture to ourselves somewhat
more exactly the nature of a gas according to the kinetic hypothesis.
The molecules are moving in all directions with very different velocities
and are continually encountering each other. We must for given con-
ditions assume a mean free path which the molecule pursues undis-
turbed before it comes in contact with another. The molecules will
evidently encounter one another all the more seldom the farther apart
they are, and all the more frequently the larger their cross section.
The mean free path Lis thus directly proportional to the space allotted

to each molecule, 7.2. to = if we designate by n the number of mole-

cules in unit volume. It is further inversely proportional to the
cross section ¢ of the molecules, if we understand by ¢ the dis-
tance closer than which the centres of gravity of two molecules
cannot approach. The exact expression is given by O. E. Meyer in
the form

1

- V2.n@

¢ and n are both unknown, but from the phenomenon which led us to
the question of the free path, viz. from the velocity with which one gas
penetrates into another, the velocity of diffusion, we may draw con-
clusions as to their magnitude. The theory of these processes, as well as of
the nearly related phenomena of gaseous friction and conduction of heat, is
still by no means completely worked out, in spite of many efforts in this
direction ; yet we have got so far that the values of the free paths determined
in different ways agree pretty well with each other. They are extremely
small, in the case of air, for example, ‘00001 cm. a length falling without
the limits of the microscopically visible.

When L has been determined, then, as may be seen from the
equation, we are in a position to calculate n(?, the sum of the cross
sections of all the molecules contained in unit volume. In this way
we find that these cross sections amount to more than 1:5 sq.
metres in 1 ¢. cm. of air. This comes from the enormous number
and small size of the molecules, for the more finely a mass of given
density is divided the larger will be the total cross section of its
particles.

Lastly, the dimensions of the molecules themselves have also been
calculated. The method of doing so will be given later; here it will
suffice to note the result, which is that the diameter of a molecule lies
in general between the limits 10-7 and 10-8 em.

CHAP. V THE KINETIC THEORY OF GASES 67

If the molecules in a given mass of gas take up a measurable part
of the space, this circumstance must have an influence on the validity
of Boyle’s Law. For example, if the diameter of a molecule moving
at right angles to two parallel walls of a cube be a hundredth part of the
distance between them, the number of encounters will evidently be
greater than if the molecule possessed no extension, for the molecule
has each time to traverse, not the whole distance between the walls, but
that distance minus its own diameter. The pressure will therefore, on
account of this circumstance, increase more rapidly with decreasing
volume than Boyle’s Law requires.

A correction for this may be easily introduced. If b be the space
occupied by the molecules, then Boyle’s Law does not apply to the
whole volume v of the gas, but to the space not occupied by the
substance of the molecules, v—b, and instead of the equation

pv=RT we get yee euiesil

This correction b is of all the greater importance the smaller the
volume is in which the gas is confined, and therefore can only be
accurately observed at high pressures. It explains the irregularities
which Regnault observed in the case of hydrogen, and which, according
to the researches of Natterer and Amagat, appear in all strongly
compressed gases (p. 42). In this way Budde (1874) calculated
that for hydrogen, for instance, the molecules occupy ‘00082 of the
total volume at a pressure of 100 cm. of mercury.

Now the total cross section of the hydrogen molecules in a cubic
centimetre at 76 cm. pressure, according to the calculations given above,
amounts to 9500 sq. cm. If we call x the side of a molecule supposed
cubical in form, 9500x must be equal to the total volume of the
molecules, 7.¢. °00082 x 555 = 00062 c. cm., whence x = 6 x 107° cm,,
a value within the limits given above.

Besides this deviation from Boyle’s Law at high pressures, all gases
except hydrogen exhibit another one in the opposite sense which is especially
evident at medium pressures, the observed volume being too small. To
explain this, it is assumed that the mutual attraction of the molecules which
causes their coherence in the solid and liquid states comes also into play in the
case of gases, and neutralises a portion of the pressure which is caused by
the motion of the molecules. Van der Waals (1879) developed a theory,
according to which this interaction is inversely proportional to the square of

a
the volume ; to the external pressure we must therefore add a quantity yn? 80

that the gas equation now assumes the form

(p+) (v —b) =RT.

This corrected equation finds its chief application in the passage from
the gaseous to the liquid state, and will be more particularly studied in the
sequel.

CHARTERS Vi

THE SPECIFIC HEAT OF GASES AND THE FIRST LAW
OF THERMODYNAMICS

WHEN a given quantity of gas is heated, it requires a definite
amount of heat to impart to it a definite rise of temperature. ‘The
ratio of the last two values, taken for unit mass of the gas, is called
its specific heat. If the change of temperature is represented by dt,

the heat communicated by dQ, then the specific heat c ie where
m is the mass of the gas. |

Quantity of heat is measured in terms of the calorie as unit, 2.¢.
of that quantity which is required to raise the temperature of 1 g. of
water 1° C.

The specific heat of air, for example, is found to be equal to -2375
when the experiment is so conducted that air is warmed in a system
of tubes to a definite temperature higher than that of the liquid in a
calorimeter, to which it is then made to give up the excess of heat,
being all the time under the same pressure.

But the following experiment is well known. If an enclosed
quantity of air is suddenly compressed, its temperature rises. No
heat is communicated, and the change of temperature is finite, there-
fore the quotient a and consequently the specific heat, vanishes. If
we allow a quantity of air to expand, it becomes colder. If we
communicate so much heat to it that its temperature remains constant,
then dQ has a finite value, while dt is zero; the specific heat is
therefore infinite. If we thus let the gas change its volume, the
conception of specific heat becomes indefinite; the specific heat can
assume any value whatever. 3

On the other hand, Gay-Lussac (1807) made this experiment.
Air was compressed in a hollow sphere, while another similar sphere
was exhausted by the airppump. When the two spheres were placed
in the water of a calorimeter, and then connected with each other so

CHAP. VI THE SPECIFIC HEAT OF GASES 69

that the compressed air could expand into the vacuum, no change in
the temperature of the calorimeter took place. The change of volume
alone, therefore, does not cause the change of temperature.

J. R. Mayer in 1842 reconciled these two apparently contradictory
facts. To the questions: Whence comes the heat generated on the
compression of a gas, and what becomes of the heat which vanishes
when a gas expands? he gave the answer: The work that is done
during the compression is changed into heat, and the work that the
gas does in moving back the external air pressing upon it cannot
spring into existence from nothing, but comes from the heat which
the gas loses. If there is no external pressure to overcome, as in
Gay-Lussac’s experiment, there is no work to be done and consequently
no heat is used up.

Work and heat appear here as two forms of the same thing, like
red and yellow phosphorus, or like diamond and amorphous carbon.
The thing itself Mayer conceived as uncreatable and indestructible,
constant under all conditions ; it could only suffer change in apparent
quality, none in quantity. He called it “force.” But as this name
possesses another signification in dynamics than that which Mayer
had in his mind, some confusion was caused by his choice. ‘The name
energy has therefore been generally adopted to denote this thing
and the principle enounced by Mayer is that of the Conservation
of Energy.

This principle is derived from experience, and is of the most general
significance, ike that of the conservation of matter, and just as the vain
endeavours of the alchemists to make gold were caused by ignorance of the
latter, a like ignorance of the former led to the many attempts to solve the
equally impossible problem of the perpetual motion. The fact that it was
ever considered possible to create work from nothing, shows that the principle
of the conservation of energy is by no means a necessity of thought, as is
sometimes alleged. It is, however, along with the principle of the conserva-
tion of matter, the greatest and most comprehensive generalisation ever made
in natural science to embrace the observed facts.

We shall later on have occasion to refer repeatedly to the proofs
of the principle, which are exceedingly numerous and have never
shown an exception. Here we need only mention the experiments of
Joule (1843), which form a good example of the connection between
the two forms of energy, heat and work, and have led to the deter-
mination of the numerical relation between them.

In dynamics we understand by work the product of a force into the
space through which the point under consideration has passed in the
direction of the force. If we take for practical unit of force the force
with which a gram of any substance is attracted by the earth,* then

* The so-called absolute unit of force is that which communicates unit speed (a
centimetre per second) to unit mass (a gram) during unit time (a second). The unit

just employed is 980‘5 times greater, as 1 g. receives from gravitation in 1 second a
speed of 980°5 cm. per second.

70 OUTLINES OF GENERAL CHEMISTRY | BOOK II

the work which m grams weight perform when they cover a distance
of 1 centimetres downwards is ml units. Now Joule used the work of
such weights to rub two iron plates, immersed in water, against each
other. As these experience no permanent change, the work expended |
is transformed into heat, the quantity of which may be calculated
from the mass and rise of temperature of the water. If we now put
this quantity of heat equal to the work expended, we obtain, as Joule
found, a perfectly constant ratio between them, which depends neither
on the mode of changing the work into heat nor on any other condition
of the experiments. The mean value of the ratio from frequently
repeated determinations is

1 calorie = 42350 g. em.,

i.e. when the product of weight and height amounts to 42350, then
1 g. of water is warmed 1° C. by this amount of work. The number
is called the mechanical equivalent of heat.

Mayer determined the same magnitude in the following way :—The
specific heat of air, when at liberty to expand on being heated, is ‘2375, 1.
1 g. of air is warmed 1° C. by ‘2375 cal. From experiments, which will be
described below, it has been found that the specific heat of air when its
volume remains unchanged is much less, viz. ‘1683. As the air itself is
heated to the same extent in both cases, and as according to Gay-Lussac’s
experiment its temperature does not alter when it expands without doing
work, the difference of 0692 cal. per degree can be nothing else than the
energy the air requires in order to perform the work of expanding under
atmospheric pressure. This may be calculated as follows

Let us imagine 1 g. of air contained in a cylindrical tube of 1 sq. cm.
section ; it occupies 773°3 c. cm. at 0° (p. 48) and expands by 1/273 of its
volume on rising 1° in temperature, we. by 2°830¢.cm. An air-tight piston
moving in the tube would thus be raised 2°830 cm. ‘The pressure of the
atmosphere on 1 sq. cm. is 1033 g. weight (p. 41); the work done is thus
2°830 x 1033, and is equivalent to 0692 cal. If the product be now
divided by this number, we obtain 42380 for the mechanical equivalent, a
value which agrees better with that given above than the accuracy of the
data used might lead us to expect.

It is of importance for many purposes to know what work a gas
can do when it expands at a constant temperature. In general this
work will be expressed by the product of the pressure and the change
of volume, pAv (where Av is the change of volume); the calculation
presents some difficulties when the pressure is not constant. It is
convenient for this purpose to represent the relation between the
pressure and volume of gases graphically, by tabulating the pressures
on a perpendicular straight line and the volumes on a horizontal one.
The curve obtained has the property that the product of the co-
ordinates of any point is constant—corresponding to the gas equation
pv=RT. Analytical geometry teaches us that the form of this curve
is that of the rectangular hyperbola.

CHAP. VI THE SPECIFIC HEAT OF GASES a

The work that is done when the volume changes by Av, i.e. the
product pAv, appears in the figure as a narrow quadrilateral surface
aa BB. The total work performed
on expansion between two states
of the gas 6 and y is therefore
the sum of all the narrow quadri-
laterals pAv, and thus equal to
the quadrilateral aByé. The cal-
culation results, therefore, in the
so-called quadrature of the
hyperbola.

This problem cannot be solved
by elementary mathematics ; we
must therefore be content with the
general result. Ifa gas expands
at the temperature T from the volume v, to the volume y,, always
exercising meanwhile the pressure given by the equation py = RT,
then the corresponding work has the value

Fia. 6.

= RTlg2.
2

Here lg stands for the natural logarithm, 7.¢. a logarithm to the base
e= 271828. The natural may be obtained from the ordinary or
decimal logarithms by multiplying the latter by 2°30259.

Returning now to the question of the specific heats of gases, we
see that we can only speak of such when we accurately determine
what external work is done, if any. The simplest case would evi-
dently be that where external work was altogether avoided, for
example where the gas was enclosed in an unyielding vessel and the
specific heat determined under these circumstances. Unfortunately
this theoretically most simple case has hitherto been experimentally
quite impracticable, for the vessel in which the gas must be enclosed, and
which necessarily takes part in the heating and cooling, has to be
made so massive in order to resist the pressure called forth by the
change of temperature, that it is responsible for by far the greater
part of the heat exchange, so that the part left for the gas cannot be
determined with sufficient accuracy.

Such determinations are therefore conducted so that the changes
of temperature take place under constant external pressure. In this
way we obtain the specific heat at constant pressure, which we shall
callC,. Extensive experiments for the determination of this number
have been made by Regnault, whose results will be given later. E.
Wiedemann repeated some of them, and investigated the changes
which the specific heat of many gases, especially those containing
carbon, undergoes with change of temperature.

To ascertain from these numbers the specific heat at constant

72 OUTLINES OF GENERAL CHEMISTRY BOOK II

volume C,, the thermal equivalent of the external work has to be
subtracted. The calculation is simpiest when such quantities of gas
are considered as correspond to the molecular weight in grams, ¢.9.
32 g. oxygen, 2 g. hydrogen. All gases have then the same volume, viz.
32 x 699°4 * = 22380 c¢. cm. at 0° and 76 cm., and expand on heating by
1/273 of this volume or 81:98 c. cm. per degree. The external work
amounts to 81°98 x 1033 (p. 70), or 84678 g. cm., and in thermal
measure 42350 times less. By chance this last number happens to be
almost exactly the half of that just found to represent the work ; the
external work done by different gases on expanding from 0° to 1° will
thus be 2 cal., if we always take such quantities of the gases as are
represented by their molecular weight in grams.

The specific heat of gases at constant pressure is usually given for
unit weight. To find the external work for this quantity we have only
to divide 2 cal. by the molecular weight of the gas. By subtracting
the value obtained from the specific heat at constant pressure we get
that at constant volume.

It is more suitable, however, for us to calculate the specific heat for
molecular weights of the various gases, 7.¢. the molecular heats. They
are obtained by multiplying the specific heat for unit weight by the
molecular weight. The molecular heats at constant volume are two
units smaller than the numbers thus obtained. The values determined
by Regnault are given in the following table—

Molecular Molecular Heat.

Name. Formula. Weight. ne be atoaat ists aa
Oxygen . : : ; O, ; 32 6°96 4°96
Nitrogen : : : Ny 28 6°82 4°82
Hydrogen. : Hy 2 6°82 4°82
Chlorine : 3 : Cl, fp 8°59 6°59
Bromine : : Br, 160 8°87 6°87
Nitric oxide. : NO 30 6°95 4°95
Carbon monoxide . ‘ CO 28 6°86 4°86
Hydrogen chloride. é HCl 36°5 6°76 4°76
Carbon dioxide : CO, 44 9°56 7°56
Nitrous oxide. : , N,O 44 oe 7 197
Water cs ith ae EI 18 8°66 6-66
Sulphur dioxide . : SO, 64 9°82 igs”
Hydrogen sulphide : HS 34 8°20 6°20
Carbon disulphide . ‘ CS, 76 11°88 9°88
Methane : : 3 CH, 16 9°42 7°42
Chloroform . : CHCl, 119°5 18°55 16°55
Ethylene’: inl.iii ses uence 28 11°95 9-95
Ammonia ‘ : NH, Li. 8°60 6°60
Benzene . 5 : . C,H, 78 29°05 27°05
Oil of turpentine . : Cy Hig 136 68°3 66°3
Methyl alcohol . : CH,0 32 14°55 12°55

* 699'4 is the volume of 1 g. oxygen under normal conditions.

2 OHAP.. VI THE SPECIFIC HEAT OF GASES 13

Mitaculat Molecular Heat.

| Name. Formula. Weight. eee: i
Ethyl alcohol : : C,H,0 44 20°7 dort
Ether . : : ‘ C,H yO 74 30-2 33°2
Ethyl sulphide ; ; C,Hy0S 90 35°8 33°8
Ethyl chloride } ; C,H,Cl 64°5 17-55 15°55
Ethyl bromide : : C,H, Br 109 20°20 18°20
Ethylene chloride . C,H,Cl, 99 22°50 20°50
Acetone. ; é ‘eckepkeriale 58 23°75 21°75
Ethyl acetate Sei olen wa Orts 9) 88 35-0 PSS)
Silicon tetrachloride . SiCl, 169 22°30 + 7 2030
Phosphorus trichloride . PC], 137°5 18°35 16°35
Arsenic trichloride. : AsCl, 181°5 20°20 18°20
Titanium tetrachloride .. TiC, 190 24°61 22°61
Tin tetrachloride . : SnCl, 260 24°15 22°15

Certain regularities may be observed in the preceding table. The
molecular heats of the diatomic gases O,, H,, N,, NO, CO, HCl for instance
are all approximately equal. Cl, and Br,, however, although likewise
diatomic, have considerably higher values. In the same way the gases with
three atoms in the molecule partially agree, although with some exceptions.
- Complete regularity can scarcely be expected, as most of the vapours investi-
gated alter their specific heat considerably and in different ways with the
temperature, so that quite dissimilar tables are got according to the tempera-
ture of experiment.

The molecular heats at constant volume are, as has been mentioned,
calculated by subtracting the external work. ‘They can, however, be
experimentally determined in an indirect way, which permits us to
measure the ratio of the two specific heats.

The investigations of which we have here to speak took their rise
in an enigmatical want of agreement between experiment and what
appeared to be a faultless result of calculation. The theory of oscil-
latory motion in an elastic medium leads, as Newton showed, to the

formula u= af ; for the velocity of sound in a gas, where u is the

velocity, p the pressure, and d the density. For air under normal
conditions p=1033 in gravitation units, or 1033 x 980°5 in absolute
units, and d=°001293. Performing the calculation we get in round
numbers 28000 cm. instead of 33100 as obtained by experiment.
Such a want of agreement between the results of mechanical
analysis and experience always proves an error to exist in the premisses,
and this error Laplace discovered. Newton, in order to introduce
the relation between pressure and density, had used Boyle’s Law, which
makes them proportional to each other. Laplace showed that this was
not justifiable, for in the rapid compressions and dilatations which
the air experiences during the propagation of sound, the heating and
cooling effects mentioned on p. 68 come into play. The pressure thus

74 } OUTLINES OF GENERAL CHEMISTRY BOOK II

increases and decreases faster than the density. The ratio between
pressure and density must thus be multiplied by a number which takes
account of this influence.

The number may be determined in the following way :—We imagine
1 g. of air under normal conditions contained in a vessel from which pro-
jects a cylinder of 1 sq. cm. section; in the cylinder is a piston movable
without friction. We press the piston A cm. into the cylinder, and conse-

A
quently do the work pA, producing a quantity of heat equal to — where
E is the mechanical equivalent of heat. This heat raises the temperature by

A
— C, being the specific heat at constant volume. The pressure would

A
have risen from p to p ( + =) if no heating had taken place ; but now it

rises besides, owing to the increased temperature, from p to p (1 + at), or, since |

pre ie if deat tio of the t incr gs
ae Hoo P ( ae ae) 5 the ratlo O ne two increments 1S
pAa oa pva
POR ECs

If a second compression be now made, the temperature, and with it the
pressure, does not rise in the same measure as before, but more rapidly, since
the work increases with the now higher pressure. The same holds for all
following compressions ; if the volume, therefore, is diminished by equal
amounts, the pressure will not increase thus equally, but so that the incre-
ments increase proportionally with the pressure already existing. This
relation is expressed by the formula

(2) =B.
V9 Py
The exponent k is the ratio which the total increase of pressure bears to

E pva
that from Boyle’s Law, viz. 1 + EG:
Coe
vt E
C

Vv

We can write this in the form

je

Noe
Now >
gas on expanding, for 1° rise of temperature ; and the sum of the specific heat
at constant volume plus this, is the specific heat at constant pressure, therefore
C
k= a :

Processes such as the above, where heat neither enters nor leaves
the system, are called adiabatic; here the pressure is not inversely
proportional to the volume, but to the kth power of the volume. By
making determinations of the changes of pressure in adiabatic processes

is the thermal equivalent of the external work done by the

CHAP. VI THE SPECIFIC HEAT OF GASES 75

we can calculate from them k = , the ratio of the two specific heats.
This is as yet the only means we have of arriving experimentally at
the specific heat at constant volume.

The sudden alterations of density in the air due to the propagation
of sound, being adiabatic, may serve for this purpose; k is then the
correction in the ratio between pressure and density which was found
above (p. 74) to be necessary, so that for the speed of sound we must

use the formula u= wh kG instead of u= fs : The square of the

ratio of the observed speed of sound to that calculated from the old
formula is thus equal to the ratio of the specific heats. From the
numbers already given we get for air k=1°40. With the help of this
value the specific heat of air at constant volume used above was
calculated, and we saw that the value of the mechanical equivalent of
heat obtained from this datum agreed with that determined by direct
experiment.

In order to ascertain the speed of sound in other gases than air, and so
make the above method applicable to them also, Kundt (1866) contrived a
plan for measuring the wave lengths of definite notes produced in tubes by
means of the figures assumed by a light powder with which they were dusted
internally. If 1 is the wave length and n the number of vibrations of the
note in question, then nl is the velocity of sound. The number of vibrations
does not even need to be specially determined, for if waves be produced in
air by the apparatus, their length has merely to be divided into the known
velocity of sound in air in order to obtain the number of vibrations.

Another method, first applied by Gay-Lussac and Welter, consists in
filling a large glass vessel with slightly compressed air and measuring the
excess of pressure. A large stop-cock communicating with the external air
is then suddenly opened and immediately thereafter again closed. The
liquid in the manometer attached, which had assumed the same level in both
limbs on the opening of the stop-cock, commences after a few seconds to rise
again and remains at a pressure somewhat smaller than the initial pressure.
This arises from the cooling of the air consequent on the work it required to
do during the sudden expansion. When, after the stop-cock is shut, it
reassumes its former temperature from the environment, the pressure in-
creases correspondingly. The calculation of such experiments is made
according to the formula on p. 74, which is now written in the form

log p, — log Po

~ log V, — log v,
Experiments of this kind are either more difficult or less exact than those
from the speed of sound, as it is very hard to carry out the process quite
adiabatically.

If the values of k obtained in these ways are used to calculate the
molecular heats at constant volume from those at constant pressure,
the numbers are usually somewhat smaller than the values calculated

76 OUTLINES OF GENERAL CHEMISTRY ROOK It

from the external work (p. 72). This comes from the assumption
there made not holding for the more complicated gases; even on
expansion without external work, heat is expended by such gases,
although not to any great extent, in partially overcoming during the
expansion a sensible interaction of the molecules.

A few words may be said in conclusion on the relation between the
kinetic theory of gases and the experimental determinations of the
specific heats. Since the product of pressure and volume is equal to two-
thirds of the kinetic energy of the moving molecules (p. 63), and this in ~
its turn is proportional to the temperature, it is easy to compute the |
increase of energy experienced by a gas when heated 1°. It is Zapv,
where a is the coefficient of tension 545. For a molecular weight in
grams of any gas the product apv has been already calculated (p. 72)
and found equal to 2:00 cal.; the energy required for heating this
quantity 1° is therefore 3:00 cal. This is the smallest molecular
heat that a gas may have at constant volume, and 5°00 cal. the
smallest at constant pressure. It has been found that all the experi-
mental numbers are indeed greater than this value.

If now a gas, ég. oxygen, requires 4°96 cal. to heat it at
constant volume, then the excess of 1:96 cal. must be expended
in doing some sort of work inside the molecule. With the conception
we have formed from chemical grounds as to the constitution of most
gases, é.g. oxygen, intramolecular work must necessarily be assumed ;
for these systems of two atoms must in their continual impacts receive
in addition to their rectilinear motion a motion of rotation round their
common centre of gravity, the energy of which will not appear as
pressure. It is, moreover, to be expected that with increase of tempera-
ture the distance between the atoms in the molecule will increase in
consequence of their faster movements of rotation, and this too will
require an expenditure of work.

All these things have no place in a gas whose molecules consist of
single atoms. Mercury vapour is supposed on chemical grounds to
consist of such simple molecules; it should, therefore, possess a
molecular heat at constant volume of 3 cal. and at constant pressure
of 5 cal., the ratio being 1°67. Neither of the specific heats has
been determined, but their ratio was measured by Kundt and Warburg
(1876) according to the method given by the former, and found to be
1°66. This is a very good confirmation of the conclusion drawn at
first from chemical considerations.

Theoretical investigations have been often undertaken to determine the
energy necessary for the intramolecular work in compound molecules, but
they have not met with much success. Not only the number but the nature
of the atoms has a great influence on the conditions, as may be seen from the
fact that the molecular heats of gases containing the same number of atoms
in the molecule have been found to be different. A mathematical expression
for this influence has not yet, however, been given.

BOOK III

THE PROPERTIES OF LIQUIDS

CHAPTER I
GENERAL PROPERTIES

MATTER in the liquid state has lost the property of completely
occupying any space offered to it. Liquids, in contrast to gases,
possess a definite volume, which it is true may be increased or
diminished by change of temperature or pressure, but only in a small
measure. Like gases, liquids possess no proper form, but assume
at every time that which corresponds to the sum of the forces
acting on them.

With respect to the influence of pressure, liquids show nothing
of the uniformity that we found in the case of gases. The com-
pressibility, measured by the change of volume which unit volume
experiences when subjected to unit pressure, is very small; it is, e.g.
for water, only about 48 millionths per atmosphere. Tor other liquids
it is mostly greater, and always toa great degree dependent on the
temperature. Anything general as to this magnitude can scarcely be
stated, as its determination is still very inexact, on account of our
inability to calculate with sufficient accuracy the changes of volume
which the containing vessels undergo.

The expansion of liquids by heat is also greatly dependent on
their nature, and is not yet susceptible of treatment from a
general chemical standpoint. The influence of temperature on the
volume is commonly represented by an equation having the form
V=V,(1 + at + bt? + ct?. ..), where V is the volume at the tempera-
ture t, V, the same at 0°, and a, b, c,... constants. Such formule
have no theoretical significance, and only serve to calculate the volumes
for intermediate temperatures at which no direct observations are
made. The same service is rendered by curves, whose abscissz

78 OUTLINES OF GENERAL CHEMISTRY BOOK III

represent the temperatures and ordinates the volumes, or better, the
changes of volume.

Mendelejeff (1884) has proposed a formula which can represent the
expansion of liquids by heat with considerable accuracy, although only one

constant is used. It has the form V = and agrees tolerably well with

0
1+kt
the observations made. The variations from it, however, are mostly larger
than can be explained by errors of experiment, and Mendelejeff therefore
considers his formula as a law like the laws for gases, which an ideal liquid
would follow exactly, but from which actual liquids diverge more or less,
according to circumstances. No investigations as to the connection between
the magnitude k—the “modulus of expansion”—and the composition of
liquids have as yet been undertaken.

Water occupies quite a peculiar position with regard to expansion
by heat, as Rumford showed in 1802. On heating from 0° it con-
tracts until it occupies a minimum volume at 4°, whence on further
heating it expands like all other liquids, expanding the more the
higher its temperature already is. Between 0° and 100° it expands
some four per cent of its volume at 0°, one-fourth of this expansion
taking place between 0° and 50°, and the remaining three-fourths
between 50° and 100°.

We may finally raise the question of the form which the hypothesis
of the molecular structure of matter must take in order to explain the
liquid state. Evidently there can be no longer perfect freedom of
motion of the molecules as in the case of gases. They must rather
be so influenced by each other that they form by means of their
internal forces a connected whole, from which, in general, single
molecules cannot escape. The proper volume possessed by liquids is
conditioned by this. On the other hand the molecules still retain
such freedom of motion that each one is not fixed in its place, but
can glide about amongst the others without any considerable work ;
from this arises the capability of liquids to adjust their form with
respect to the forces acting on them,—especially under the infiuence of
gravity to fill the lower part of the containing vessel and to form a
plane surface. We may admit the molecules of liquids to have, like
those of gases, a certain amount of rotary and rectilinear motion ;
only these motions must be much more limited than in the case of
gases.

As different liquids behave differently towards external pressure
and heat, it is to be concluded that their volume is not conditioned,
like that of gases, by general circumstances which are independent
of their chemical nature, but rather by the nature of the molecules
and their reciprocal action, which latter we usually represent to our-
selves as mutual attraction. The volume of liquids is not a colligative
property, like the volume of gases; we shall see later that it is in the
main additive in character.

CHAPTER II
RELATIONS BETWEEN THE GASEOUS AND LIQUID STATES

IF a quantity of gas be exposed to a continually increasing pressure
at constant temperature, two things may happen. Either the volume
decreases at first somewhat more rapidly than the pressure increases,
then at the same rate, and finally more slowly; the greater the
pressure now becomes the smaller grows the relative decrease of
volume, to be at last reduced to quantities of the same order as those
observed in the case of liquids. Or, secondly, the phenomenon begins
in the same way with a somewhat greater compressibility than
corresponds to Boyle’s Law. The deviation from this law, however,
does not decrease with increasing pressure, but the gas at a definite
pressure suddenly loses its homogeneity and separates into one portion
which has become liquid and a second which remains gaseous.
From this point it is impossible to raise the pressure by diminishing
the volume, for the consequence of a diminution is merely the lique-
faction of a further portion of the gas, the pressure remaining
constant. Only when the volume becomes so small that the gaseous
portion has been entirely converted into liquid does the pressure
increase for a diminution of volume, but then the increase is very rapid.

If we start in the opposite direction from a liquid under great
pressure and increase the volume, the pressure diminishes at first
very rapidly until it has reached a certain value. At this pressure
the liquid begins to separate into two portions, a vapour and a liquid,
and the pressure now remains unchanged for further increase of
volume until the liquid has all assumed the gaseous state. Then
again an increase of the volume conditions a fall of pressure, which
shortly afterwards begins to obey Boyle’s Law and diminish inversely
as the volume.

A liquid can thus in general only exist when it is under a definite
pressure, which must be equal to or higher than the pressure at
which it changes into vapour.* This pressure is called the vapour

* There are, to be sure, special cases in which liquids have a transitory existence
even below this limiting pressure ; these will be spoken of later.

80 OUTLINES OF GENERAL CHEMISTRY BOOK III

pressure of the liquid in question. It depends on the chemical
nature of the liquid and on the temperature. With increasing tempera-
ture the vapour pressure of liquids assumes all values between zero
and a definite maximum, which lies mostly between 30 and 100
atm. according to the nature of the liquid. If a liquid is under
a higher pressure than this maximum vapour pressure, then even
at the highest attainable temperatures no separation into liquid
and vapour takes place, but the liquid remains homogeneous and
expands continuously more and more. The lowest pressure at which
this phenomenon begins is called the critical pressure.

It depends upon the temperature which of the two cases specified
at the beginning of this chapter will occur—whether the gas may be
continuously compressed, or whether it will liquefy at some definite
pressure. If we take a liquefiable gas and raise its temperature, its
vapour pressure, or the pressure at which it will begin to liquefy,
increases. This pressure cannot, however, increase without limit, for
when the value of the critical pressure is reached there is no tempera-
ture at which a separation into liquid and vapour can take place.
The lowest temperature at which this state is assumed, or the
temperature at which the vapour pressure is equal to the critical
pressure, is called the critical temperature.

Similar considerations apply also to the volume. If we imagine a
quantity of liquid to be enclosed in a volume, definite but larger than
the liquid occupies itself, this space will be filled partly by the liquid
and partly by its vapour. If the vessel is warmed the liquid will
expand and a further portion of it be transformed into vapour, until
the temperature reaches a point at which the liquid has been all
gradually converted into vapour. If the vessel be now of smaller size
and the experiment repeated, a higher temperature will be required
for complete vaporisation; on still diminishing the volume we at
last reach one which is entirely filled by the liquid at its critical
temperature, without any space remaining over for vapour. ‘This
volume, occupied by the liquid at the critical temperature and under
the critical pressure, is called the critical volume.

The recognition of these important relations by which our com-
prehension of the nature of the states of aggregation has been
materially advanced, is due to Andrews (1869).

As may be shown from the above facts, it is possible, starting from a
substance undoubtedly in the gaseous state, to obtain a liquid without any
discontinuous change taking place during the transformation, and conversely.
If we take a gas and heat it to above the critical temperature, we can com-
press it as much as we please without liquefaction occurring. If we
continue the compression until the critical pressure is exceeded and then
cool, this pressure being meanwhile maintained, no separation into liquid and-
vapour can take place, but we find after the temperature has been sufficiently
lowered and the pressure taken off that the substance is a liquid. Conversely,

CHAP. 11 RELATIONS BETWEEN THE GASEOUS AND LIQUID STATES 81

starting from a liquid, we can heat it under a pressure exceeding the
critical pressure to above the critical temperature without any separation
taking place ; if we then increase the volume the substance expands, again
without separation, and we have a gas. The liquid and gaseous states are
therefore merely the limiting members of a continuous series of possible
states, and are in nowise in fundamental opposition.

These relations are rendered very clear by the diagram given by
Andrews for carbonic acid, the
substance with which they
were discovered. In the ac-

companying figure the pres- opie

sures, in atmospheres, are
plotted on the upright and
the volumes on the horizontal
axis; each curve corresponds |
toa certain temperature, noted
alongside. The last curve on
the right for carbonic acid,
that for 48°1°, presents the
behaviour of a gas; the volume |
diminishes regularly with in-
crease of pressure. The next
curves; or 35°95 and 32°5",
show on the contrary between
80 and 85 atm. a more
rapid decrease of volume than
in other parts, but still a
definite volume corresponds
to each pressure. At 31°1°
we have the limiting case ;
here the curve turns very
rapidly at about 75 atm., Fig. 7.

and at the point of con-

trary flexure it runs for a moment horizontal; the critical state has
been reached. If the compression is carried out at a still lower
temperature, then the curve shows a break at the place where lique-
faction begins, and remains horizontal, 2.¢. without the pressure
changing, until after complete condensation a sharp turn upwards
appears; the curve then runs almost perfectly vertical in con-
sequence of the volume of the liquid formed scarcely changing with
increase of pressure. At still lower temperatures (13°1") the condensa-
tion begins earlier and ends later, so that the horizontal portion
becomes longer.

It is now possible on the basis of these considerations to distin-
guish rigorously between gas and vapour; a gaseous body below its
critical temperature is a vapour, for it can be liquefied by pressure,

G

82 OUTLINES OF GENERAL CHEMISTRY BOOK III

above this temperature it is a true gas, for it can no longer by
pressure be reduced to the liquid state. From this we see at once
why Natterer, in spite of the enormous pressures he applied, did not
succeed in liquefying air and hydrogen; the critical temperature of
these substances lying far below ordinary temperatures.

The first to busy himself in a comprehensive way with the task of
liquetying the substances known as gases was Faraday (1823). He
liquefied carbonic acid, hydrochloric acid, sulphur dioxide, cyanogen,
ammonia, and chlorine, by exposing them to considerable pressure at
low temperatures. Thilorier (1835) showed how carbonic acid could
be liquefied on the large scale, so that it became possible to use the
liquid substance, or better the solid mixed with ether, for the produc-
tion of very low temperatures, down to —100°. Faraday used this
means in 1845 and obtained hydriodic acid, hydrobromic acid, sulphur
dioxide, hydrogen sulphide, nitrous oxide, cyanogen, and ammonia, not
only as liquids but as solids, while hydrochloric acid, hydrogen
arsenide, ethylene, silicon fluoride, boron fluoride, and chlorine only
assumed the liquid state. Hydrogen, oxygen, nitrogen, nitric oxide,
carbon monoxide, and methane, on the other hand, showed no sign of
liquefaction.

Afterwards, when the work of Andrews made clear the decisive
influence of temperature on the process of liquefaction, the method
was of course indicated by which the still resisting gases might be
obtained as liquids. Pictet (1877) produced very low temperatures
by cooling liquid carbon dioxide by means of sulphur dioxide boiling
in vacuo, the former in its turn being then allowed to evaporate
rapidly in an exhausted space. Oxygen which was developed in a
thick-walled iron retort by heating potassium chlorate, and compressed
by its own pressure to several hundred atmospheres, assumed the
liquid state at the temperature so obtained ( — 140°).

Cailletet simultaneously liquefied the “permanent” gases by using the

work done on their sudden expansion for the purpose of cooling them. To
calculate the corresponding changes of temperature we proceed from the
adiabatic equation (p. 74),

As the equations

py, = RT,

and /  -Pevg = RT,

must hold for both the states of the gas given by the indices 1 and 2, we get
Pee
Pov, TP,

1
: ; So vou iDa ve:
But according to the adiabatic equation —= {|—) , whence

CHAP. 11 RELATIONS BETWEEN THE GASEOUS AND LIQUID STATES 83

k-1
19 k A Py EE

eo =) ea = —-
<— Ty Pek? TS

Pe

If we put k= 1°41 for air, then for different initial pressures there is obtained
the following table, if we assume the initial temperature to be always 0°, and
the final pressure 1 atmosphere.

Temperature.

Pressure in atmospheres. :
e in atmosp Absolute. Centigrade.

100 5 , 5 : : : 71:5 — 201°5°
200 ‘ 4 ; ‘ : : 58°5 — 214°5°
300 : ; ; ; 3 , 52°0 — 221°0°
400 : : : : : 5 47°9 — 225°1°
500 : : : : 5 ; 44°8 — 228°2°

We thus reach very low temperatures by beginning with somewhat high
initial pressures. Of course those given in the table are never quite attained,
for the gas, which must be in very small quantity on account of the great
pressure, is at once warmed by the walls containing it. Liquefaction under
these circumstances is simply the production, at the instant the pressure is
taken off, of a cloud which vanishes in a few moments.

It was remarked above that in certain cases liquids at definite
temperatures can exist under pressures smaller than the vapour
pressure at these temperatures. Similarly, vapour may be produced
at pressures greater than the vapour pressure corresponding to the
temperature. Both phenomena are, however, only possible as long as
no vapour is present in the liquid, and no liquid is contained in the
vapour. As soon as the least particle of the substance in the other
state is present, the separation into liquid and vapour corresponding to
ordinary circumstances takes place, and that all the more violently the
further the usual limit has been exceeded.

The first case may be most easily observed when drops of water
are placed in heated linseed oil. The temperature of the latter may
be sometimes raised to 145° before the formation of vapour takes
place ; with drops of water in mixtures of linseed and clove oil Dufour
(1863) reached a temperature of 175°, corresponding to a vapour
pressure of 8 to 9 atm.

The second case may be observed by cooling air saturated with
aqueous vapour by expansion. In ordinary dusty air a cloud is at once
formed, as may easily be seen by wetting the interior of a glass bulb,
and then diminishing the pressure of the air inside by suction. If the
air has been previously rendered dust-free by filtration or long standing,
the formation of a cloud no longer takes place for a small decrease of
temperature. These phenomena play an important part in the con-
densation of atmospheric water vapour and in the origin of thunder-
storms.

Both phenomena are examples of a general principle, according to
which the separation of heterogeneous parts from a homogeneous mass

84 OUTLINES OF GENERAL CHEMISTRY BOOK III

does not of necessity follow immediately the conditions are fulfilled
under which the heterogeneous parts can exist. There is rather required,
besides the presence of these conditions, a special impulse towards the
formation of a dissimilar portion, an impulse which may be, however,
of very varied nature. Violent mechanical motion is in many cases
sufficient to give such an impulse; but the most certain, and in all
cases sufficient cause is the presence of a quantity, no matter how
small, of the substance which can separate out.

Such phenomena have been mostly considered as being to a certain
extent unnatural, and the corresponding states have received the names of
superheating and overcooling or supersaturation. They are nevertheless very
common, and appear whenever, from a substance or mixture of substances in
a homogeneous state, a part may separate out; thus, for example, gases,
solids, or immiscible liquids from liquids, or on the other hand liquids or
solids from gases. The name “states of instability,” which has also been
applied in such cases, is equally unsuitable. For the states are not really
unstable, since they by no means pass into others on the smallest change.
They must rather be compared to the stable equilibrium of a rather tall
cylinder standing on one end; the system is certainly stable, but when it
suffers a somewhat large displacement it easily assumes another state which
is much more stable than the first. It must be admitted, however, that here
there is no analogy to the special action exercised by a small quantity of the
heterogeneous substance in all the cases above mentioned.

The kinetic molecular theory by which we succeeded in explaining
the most essential properties of gases enables us here again to obtain
a clear idea of the phenomena just described. It has been already
stated (p. 67) that we have reason to assume the presence of mutual
attraction between the molecules of gases. This attraction adds itself
to the external pressure on the gas and increases, according to van der
Waals’s assumption, inversely as the square of the volume. The smaller
therefore the volume becomes, the larger grows the “internal pressure ”
of the gas, and on sufficient approximation of the molecules this may
reach and even surpass the pressure exercised by the gas towards the
exterior by the kinetic energy of its molecules. The consequence is a
state in which no external pressure is necessary to retain the volume ;
the gas has liquefied.

Whether this state will appear or not, evidently depends on the
ratio between the internal pressure and the kinetic energy of the
molecules. If the latter is very large, 2¢. if the temperature is high,
no possible diminution of volume will produce an internal pressure to
balance the pressure due to the energy of the molecular motion; the
gas cannot be liquefied. The highest temperature at which this
equilibrium of pressure may be instituted is the critical temperature.
Only below this can the process of liquefaction take place.

A liquid is thus a molecular system in which the average kinetic
energy of a molecule can no longer overcome the internal pressure

CHAP. II RELATIONS BETWEEN THE GASEOUS AND LIQUID STATES 85

caused by the mutual molecular attractions. But all the molecules do
not possess this mean kinetic energy (p. 65); there are some with
more and some with less. The former coming to the surface of the
liquid may break through it and then move about in the free space
after the manner of gaseous molecules. This is the process of
evaporation. The number of molecules breaking through unit surface
depends only on the temperature. If the space over the liquid is
unlimited, the gaseous molecules will move away ; the liquid must thus
get colder, as only the molecules with the greatest kinetic energy, i.e.
the highest temperature, fly off. If the temperature of the liquid be
kept up by external heating, all the molecules will soon assume the
gaseous form; the liquid vaporises completely at a rate depending
on the relative number of molecules capable of breaking through the
surface.

If the space over the liquid is limited, the gaseous molecules re-
bounding from the walls will soon fly back against the surface of the liquid
and be reabsorbed by it. A condition of equilibrium will set in when
the number of molecules sent out by the surface is equal to that taken
up. The former number depends only on the temperature, the latter
on the number and velocity of the gaseous molecules in unit volume.
These two last together cause the pressure of the gaseous portion ;
the equilibrium will therefore take place when the vapour over the
liquid exerts a definite pressure which is only a function of the
temperature, and increases and decreases simultaneously with this.

The application of the molecular hypothesis is rendered much more com-
plete than these rather qualitative considerations by the use of the corrected
gas equation of van der Waals (p. 67). We have

(p+5) (v—b)=RT.

If the equation is multiplied out and arranged according to powers of v, we

get
al a ab
ve — vy? (b+ \4ye P=
P Me ae

It is now of the third degree with respect to v, and has, according to the
values of the constants, either three real roots, or one real and two imaginary.
That is, for every value of p and T there are either one or three correspond-
ing volumes. The first case evidently holds for the gaseous state where a
definite volume exists for every value of pressure and temperature. For
temperatures at which the substance can exist both as vapour and as liquid
there are manifestly two volumes ; a third volume is not known.

If we now construct curves from a series of corresponding values of
pressure and volume by tabulating the former as ordinates and the latter as
abscissee, we obtain such as are given in Fig. 8. If these are compared with
curves obtained from actual experiment, for instance those drawn by
Andrews for carbonic acid (p. 81), we find that below the critical tempera-

86 OUTLINES OF GENERAL CHEMISTRY BOOK III

ture, instead of the long sinuous curve ABaByCD which the formula gives,
the broken line ABGCD is observed. The straight portion BSC in the ©
middle does not represent the
volume of a homogeneous
substance, but that of a mixture
of vapour and liquid.

The breaks at B and C do
not, however, necessarily ap-
pear. We have seen (p. 83)
that a liquid may exist at a
smaller pressure than its own
vapour pressure. That means,
the curve may be observed
prolonged past C towards y.
Similarly, vapour can exist at
a higher pressure than the
vapour pressure; the curve AB
also can thus be prolonged
towards a. This circumstance
makes it very probable that
the true curve runs continu-
ously, as in the diagram. As
far as we can judge, the third
volume at y will never be
directly observed. For on the
portion yPa the volume would
increase with increasing pres-
sure and diminish with de-
creasing pressure; we would
have here to do with veritably

Fic. 8. unstable states whose realisa-
tion seems hopeless.

The formula admits of a particularly satisfactory application to the
critical state. In this the volume of the liquid becomes equal to that
of the vapour, and each is therefore equal to the inaccessible “third
volume.” The three roots of the equation (p. 85) have therefore become
equal. Now the value ¢ of the three equal roots of an equation of the

16
3 and p85

form v® — qv?+rv —s=0 is given by oa f=

RD b |
We have thus Regine ap = and par, and if we denote the

special values which p and T assume in this case by z and 0, we have

the critical volume G= ah,
oi a
the critical pressure T= one?
the critical t t pee
e critical temperature =o Rp

These equations are very remarkable. The magnitudes a and b, which

CHAP, 11 RELATIONS BETWEEN THE GASEOUS AND LIQUID STATES 87

- were introduced as corrections into the gas equation, can be calculated from
the curves on pp. 43-46 so as to represent the variations from the laws of
Boyle and Gay-Lussac with sufficient approximation. Once they are got we
can determine from them the critical constants, pressure volume and tempera-
ture, without making a single direct experiment.

It was natural to test at once the applicability of this result. Van der
Waals showed that from Regnault’s observations on the compressibility of
~ carbonic acid, the critical temperature 32°5° was obtained by calculation,
while Andrews had directly determined it to be 31°. Such an agreement is
indeed a very remarkable confirmation of the theory.

In other cases also the like concordance has been found, and conversely
where the critical constants have been directly determined, the variations
from the gas equation can be represented with tolerable completeness.

The methods for the experimental determination of the critical
constants are as yet but little developed. The critical temperature
may be measured most easily by sealing the liquid in a strong
glass tube, which it fills to about two-thirds of its capacity, and
heating slowly. As the temperature rises we see the meniscus which
is the upper boundary of the liquid grow more and more flat
and indistinct, until at the critical temperature it vanishes, and a
peculiar undulating appearance, mostly in reddish-brown diffraction
colours, is seen in the interior of the tube. On cooling slowly there
suddenly appears at one place of the seemingly empty tube when the
critical temperature is reached, a coloured mist which quickly spreads
through the whole space; immediately thereafter it vanishes, and we
see the liquid again in the lower part of the tube separated from the
vapour-filled space above by a distinct meniscus.

The measurement of the critical pressure and volume is much more
difficult. For this purpose the lquid must be placed in a tube of
somewhat small bore connected by means of mercury with a manometer
which is best filled with nitrogen, as the compressibility of this gas has
been very accurately determined by Amagat for high pressures.

A few critical constants are collected in the following table—

0 7 100000 10000a 10000b
Ether . 5 : : : 190° C8697 “1/338) 9” 324 57
Carbon disulphide : 272° 74:7 ~—-:1015 219 33
Sulphur dioxide . : : 155. 78:9» (44 123 24
Alcohol : : 234° 6251 oS t112 236 37
Ethyl chloride. é : 183° 52°6 1190 227 40
Benzene. F : 2312 49°5 1534 438 51
Acetone ; ; ; ; 233° 52°2 1329 273 44
Ethyl acetate. : : 240° 42°6 1654 348 55
Chloroform . 5 : 260° 54°9 1388 287 44
Ethyl formiate . ‘ ; 230° 48°7 1429 304 48
Methyl acetate . : ‘ 230° SEG SL 1108 248 39
Diethylamine m 220° 38°7 1744 355 58

Nitrous oxide : ; ‘ AOtAcew eo (el 582 FAD Tp Osd

CHAPTER III
BOILING-POINTS

THE boiling-point of a volatile liquid is the temperature at which it
can form bubbles of vapour, i.e. at which its vapour pressure just
begins to exceed the external pressure. This temperature is greatly
dependent on the magnitude of the external pressure, changing con-
siderably —by whole degrees—in consequence of the atmospheric
variations.

One pressure and the corresponding temperature are not sufficient
for the complete determination of a liquid in respect of the pressure
of its saturated vapour. All liquids, to be sure, have the property
that their vapour pressure increases with rise of temperature ; but this
increase differs from case to case, and its general law has not yet been
found. The attempts to discover it, however, may be shortly noticed.

The first essay was made by Dalton (1801). He gave the rule that
liquids having different boiling-points exhibit the same vapour pressure at
temperatures removed by the same number of degrees from their boiling-
points. Water boils at 100°, ether at 35°, i they each have at these
temperatures a vapour pressure of 76 cm. At 80°, 20° below the boiling-
point, water has the vapour pressure 35°5 cm. ; ether, at the corresponding
temperature of 15°, the pressure 35°4 cm. The numbers agree admirably ;
Dalton, in fact, deduced his “law” from the comparison of water and ether.
Alcohol, on the other hand, which boils at 78°, has at 58° a pressure of
33 cm., which is considerably too low, and the same holds for most other
substances.

Diihring’s rule, formed after Dalton’s, agrees much better with experi-
ment. It consists in the modification of Dalton’s formula by the introduction
of a factor depending on the nature of the liquid. When we pass from.
temperatures of equal pressure to other temperatures of equal pressure, the
differences of temperature are not equal, as they would be according to
Dalton, but always proportional. In other words, Dalton’s rule would hold
if a special scale of temperature, proportional to the centigrade scale, were
used for each liquid. If we take water as the liquid for comparison,
Diihring’s formula is

t'= 6+ q(t — 100).

CHAP, III BOILING-POINTS 89

100 is the boiling-point of water and 6 that of the liquid at 76 cm.,, t and
t’ the boiling-points at any other pressure, and q a factor which varies,
according to the nature of the liquid, between ‘5 and 2°3. To calculate q
we have fesse g i.e. we merely take the ratio of the differences of the
boiling-points at any two pressures.

Diihring’s formula also is not strictly accurate, although it naturally
yields much better approximations than Dalton’s. Winkelmann (1880)
gives a formula in which the factor q is not constant but variable, inasmuch
as it represents a function of the ratio between the theoretical and the
actually observed vapour density at the pressure in question. The formula
as far as it has been tested agrees very well with experiment ; as it is not
without exceptions, however, and is besides as yet without theoretical
foundation, we may pass over its detailed development.

General formule for vapour pressure have met with still less suc-
cess than those comparing the vapour pressures of different substances
with each other. Countless proposals have been made in this direc-
tion, yet no general results have been obtained. The chief reason of
this is that the condition of the vapour has been considered deter-
minative of the vapour pressure, whereas the vapour pressure is
rather to be looked upon as a function of the nature of the liquid;
vapours can exist at greater and smaller pressures; that a certain
definite pressure is assumed at a given temperature is caused by
the presence of the liquid and numerically determined by its nature.

From the want of general relations in this field, chemistry has
had to content itself with setting up numerical relations of a limited
character. The first of these was given by Kopp (1842) in the form
that equal differences of chemical composition in analogous
organic compounds correspond to equal differences of their
boiling-points. Every ethyl ether of an acid, for example, boils 19°
higher than the corresponding methyl ether, and the acid itself 45°
higher.

This observation at once excited great interest and occasioned a con-
siderable number of experiments which were undertaken for the end of
establishing general laws, instead of the narrower relations given with due
reservation by Kopp. These attempts all came to grief, and necessarily, for
their authors considered the boiling-points as directly comparable magnitudes,
without inquiring whether, instead of the temperatures of equal vapour
pressure, the temperatures of different vapour pressures, depending on the
nature of the various substances, were perhaps to be compared. The whole
scheme of boiling-points for one pressure changes its form immediately we
pass to another pressure.

Later research then has not brought us much further than Kopp’s
rule given above ; indeed the application even of it has had in many
cases to suffer restrictions. Metameric substances, for instance, ought
by it to have the same boiling-point, but this is not exactly the case. It

90 OUTLINES OF GENERAL CHEMISTRY BOOK III

has rather been found that the differences in the constitution of isomeric
compounds with similar chemical function (differences unknown to
Kopp when he published his principle) always determine differences in
the boiling-point. Examples of such bodies are to be found in the
primary, secondary, and tertiary alcohols and acids; the so-called
position-isomers amongst the benzene derivatives, etc. It is true that
here also the differences are probably of a regular nature, the primary
alcohols boiling higher than the secondary, and these again higher than
the tertiary ; or, in the other group, the para compounds usually higher
than the ortho and meta compounds. These regularities, however, are
of a somewhat limited character and admit of so many exceptions that
they need here be only indicated.

From the theory of van der Waals (p. 85) a remarkable light is shed on
a point already raised, viz. whether boiling-points at the same pressure
are comparable. If we put in the general equation

(p i “) (v—b)=RT

instead of the pressures, volumes, and temperatures measured in the ordinary
units, such as are expressed in fractions of their critical values, a. if we
put p=ez, v=nd, and T=m and then substitute for 7, ¢ and @ the
values given on p. 86, we obtain

(« + 5) (38n — 1)=8m.

In this equation everything dependent on the particular nature of the
substance has vanished, so that it holds (like the gas equation for gases)
uniformly for all substances. The equations of condition for all
gaseous and liquid substances become the same when the pressure,
volume, and temperature are expressed in terms of their critical
values.

One restriction, however, must be given at once. Van der Waals’s
formula is deduced only for the case where the volume of the substance is
eight times as large as the magnitude b; an assumption for the most part
not valid for liquids under the ordinary conditions, their volume being
smaller than this. We must not therefore look upon this general relation as
necessary, although it may exist in fact. For vapours, on the other hand,
it must exist.

Van der Waals has actually shown, eg. in the case of ether and sulphur
dioxide, for which the critical constants are known, that at equal fractions
of the critical temperatures the vapour pressures amount to equal fractions of
the critical pressures.

The formula is not in agreement with that of Diihring, but if we
substitute in the latter instead of the boiling-points at the same pressure
those at the same fraction of the critical pressures, it passes into that of van
der Waals.

CHa? PER LV
_ VOLUME RELATIONS OF LIQUIDS

To express the relation between mass (or weight) and volume we
usually employ the specific gravity d, which is given by the equation

d= ~ where w is the weight and v the volume. The specific gravity

is thus the weight of unit volume. But the volume is variable both
with temperature and pressure, and the conception of specific gravity
is consequently with reference to a variable quantity of the substance
considered.

For this reason we cannot use this magnitude and hope to get
general results connecting it with the elementary composition of the
different substances. We rather employ the reciprocal of specific

A ae
gravity, viz. specific volume ¢=— which represents the volume of
Ww

unit weight, and since, in chemistry, not equal quantities but those in
the proportion of the molecular weights are comparable, we multiply
the specific volume by the molecular weight and thus get the molecular
vom
volume pamp=— Sea If we express the molecular weight in

grams we get the molecular volume in cubic centimetres. As the
specific gravity of substances is usually given, we use the last formula

for calculating the molecular volume, p = =

The expression “molecular volume” does not signify the “actual” space
occupied by the molecule ; we are not yet in a position to have definite
notions as to this. The molecular volumes are such as contain under
the given conditions equal numbers of molecules of the compounds
compared.

The first regularities amongst molecular volumes were discovered
by Kopp at the same time (1842) as he found the relations between
the boiling-points. They admitted of expression in the same form:
equal differences in composition correspond to equal

92 OUTLINES OF GENERAL CHEMISTRY BOOK III

differences in molecular volume. Now the molecular volumes
of the organic compounds, which are here chiefly considered, are
dependent largely on the temperature, and before any comparison
could be instituted it was necessary to decide at what temperature it
should be made. Kopp soon found that far greater regularity was
obtained by comparing the liquids at their boiling-points rather
than at one and the same temperature, say 0°.

Kopp followed up his discovery of the above rule by a long series
of exceedingly careful experimental investigations, which served
partially to confirm and extend his first observations, partially to
restrict them. Generally speaking, the molecular volume at the
boiling-point is an additive property; the molecular volume of a
compound is the sum of the molecular volumes of its components. At
other temperatures, relations of this kind are not so noticeable.

In analogous compounds the molecular volume changes for
every CH, by 22 units on the average. This was proved for the
hydrocarbons, alcohols, compound ethers, acids, aldehydes, and ketones.

Isomeric liquids have the same molecular volume, as was
shown in particular by the comparison of isomeric compound ethers
and acids.

When two atoms of hydrogen are replaced by one atom of
oxygen the molecular volume is not materially altered.
This holds specially for the change of alcohols into acids.

One atom of carbon and two of hydrogen can replace each
other without the molecular volume suffering any change.
This relation was verified exclusively by the comparison of fatty and
aromatic compounds.

These rules at once lead to the idea of ascribing definite atomic
volumes to the elements carbon, hydrogen, and oxygen, of which all
the compounds mentioned above are composed, so that the molecular
volume of the compound may appear as the sum of these atomic
volumes. This has proved to be not quite possible, however, the
deviations being too large. The property in question is thus not
purely additive. Kopp showed how the different modes of combina-
tion of oxygen stood in relation to these deviations. When the oxygen
is doubly linked to one carbon atom (carbonyl oxygen) the molecular
volume is larger than when it is singly linked to the carbon atom
(hydroxyl oxgen). If we thus ascribe different atomic volumes to
oxygen according to its chemical function, the molecular volumes of
the compounds can be represented as the sum of the atomic volumes
of their elements, with an error of at most 4 per cent.

The numerical values of the atomic volumes are—

Carbon. : : A : : : : : Sheil
Hydrogen . : 4 ; ' ; : : : : sy eee
Carbonyl oxygen. ; : é : é a pele

Hydroxyl oxygen. : : f , ; ‘ : Peony ie:

CHAP. IV VOLUME RELATIONS OF LIQUIDS 93

We get, eg. for acetic acid, CH,CO(OH)—

2C Sv?)
4H =22
O (carbonyl) =12°2
O (hydroxyl)= 7°8
6

me
cn)

The observed value is 63:7.
Kopp also fixed the atomic volume of other elements as follows—

Sulphur . : , ‘ : : ; oe 2256
Chlorine . : ; : 3 : : , , SES
Bromine . ‘ a ae : : : : : : 1. 2h'S
Iodine : : , : ‘ : : ; é One
Phosphorus. 3 4 : F : : » 254
Silicon . : : : 5 : : : ' ; 32
Arsenic . ' : : : 3 ; : : WAG
Antimony : ‘ : ; ‘ : : ; ; . 33
eines. : : : ; 4 : : : : : 40
Titanium . : ; 2 : . ; : , 2 EP too:

The last numbers are rather uncertain, as they were derived from only
a few compounds.

Very different results were obtained for nitrogen according to the
nature ef the compounds investigated ; no satisfactory explanation has
been given of this. The sulphur compounds also exhibited in many
cases considerable deviations. These circumstances lead to the con-
clusion that the influence exercised by the function of the element on
its atomic volume is not only to be found in the case of oxygen, but
wherever the elements appear combined differently.

Thus Buff (1865) showed that unsaturated compounds have always a
somewhat larger molecular volume than that calculated from Kopp’s numbers.
The same result was afterward obtained by Schiff and Horstmann. The
latter also showed the great influence exercised by the chemical constitution
in another direction, viz. by the so-called “ring ”-formation.

Schiff proved in addition that isomeric compounds have not exactly equal
molecular volumes. These usually differ in the sense that the isomer with
higher boiling-point has also the greater molecular volume. It was seen
simultaneously, from the work of Stiadel, that the isomeric chlorine and
bromine derivatives of ethane exhibit considerable differences of molecular
volume.

All these results point to the molecular volume being influenced in
two different ways. On the one hand we have the summation of the
atomic volumes of the component elements, so that the molecular
volume is from this point of view an additive property. On the other
hand the mode of combination of the different elements causes a
difference in the amount of space occupied, perhaps in the space taken
up by the element itself under these conditions, but more probably in
the way the combined elements occupy space together. Properties

94 OUTLINES OF GENERAL CHEMISTRY BOOK III
like this which depend on differences of chemical combination, or the
constitution of bodies, are called constitutive, and the molecular
volumes of liquid compounds must therefore be conceived as additive
magnitudes subject to constitutive influence.

Besides Kopp’s mode of viewing the subject, other modes of representing
the actual relations have been proposed by several investigators. As they
have not, however, met with any general acceptance, like Kopp’s, they need
not be detailed here.

I should only wish still to direct attention to two points. First, to the
question of comparable temperatures. Horstmann has of late given up the
comparison at the respective boiling-points, and recommended instead the
comparison at any constant temperature. Kopp has rightly opposed this
change on the ground that a number of regularities which undoubtedly
appear at the boiling-points must be abandoned. But the boiling-points also,
according to the theory of van der Waals (p. 90), ought to be replaced by
temperatures which are equal fractions of the critical temperatures.

In reality such a mode of calculation would do away with several existing |
differences, as may be seen from the few data we possess. To carry this out
generally, however, data as to critical temperatures are still mostly wanting.

The general relations of molecular volume have thus been investigated,
but nothing has been done to those of expansion by heat. A sufficient
measure of comparison for this is probably to be found in Mendelejeft’s
modulus of expansion (p. 78). It may be predicted that this magnitude
will show regularities ; for such exist with respect to volume and are un-
doubtedly not confined to the temperature of ebullition alone.

In conclusion, van der Waals has applied the theory of corresponding
states to the expansion of liquids, and arrived at the result that the values
for different liquids between equal fractions of their critical temperatures are
indeed very nearly equal.

All these researches might be greatly extended by the determination of
the critical temperature for a large number of liquids.

CHAPTER V
REFRACTION IN LIQUIDS

LIGHT, as is well known, traverses different transparent substances
at very different rates. The velocities may be easily ascertained
by observing the path pursued by a ray which passes from one
medium into another at any angle. The law that the sine of the
angle of incidence is in a constant ratio to the sine of the angle of
refraction then obtains, and this ratio, called the index of refraction, is
that of the velocities of light in the two media.

For the determination of the index of refraction of liquids we
employ a hollow prism closed by parallel plates of glass and filled with
the substance to be investigated. If we send through such a prism
a parallel beam of light which has previously: passed through a slit
and a lens distant from this by its own focal length, and then search
for the diverted image of the slit by means of a telescope focussed for
infinity, turning meanwhile the prism so that the deviation is a
minimum, then the angle of deviation d is related to the refractive
angle of the prism a and the index of refraction n by the following
formula,

sin 3(a + d)
pe ailvaa, |

This is the customary method of determining the refractive index.
Another much more convenient process is based on the phenomenon of total
reflection—

If i is the angle of incidence and r the angle of refraction, then a -= n,
or sini=nsinr. If light moves into an optically denser medium from a
less dense, n > 1, and thereforei>r. For every value of 1 there is there-
fore always a real value of r. But if light passes from a more into a less
dense medium, n<1, and therefore r>i. In this case there cannot be a real
value of r for every real value of i. If for instance n= ‘8, then for angles of
incidence having sines<‘8 there are possible angles of refraction ; for
sin i=°8 we get sin r=1, and therefore r=90", ve. the ray does not enter
the second medium but moves parallel to the plane of separation. Yor larger

96 OUTLINES OF GENERAL CHEMISTRY BOOK III

angles of incidence sin i>°8 and sin r would be greater than unity, which is
impossible. Here refraction ceases, and reflection takes its place.

The critical angle at which total reflection occurs follows from what has
been said ; it corresponds to the condition sin r=1, whence sini=n. If
this critical angle is determined, the index of refraction is easily found.

The instruments that serve this purpose are commonly called refractometers.

The first apparatus of the kind was described by Wollaston (1801).
Convenient instruments have lately been constructed by Abbe and by Pulfrich.

If we observe the deviation of a white ray of light by a prism of
liquid, we obtain as usual a spectrum, in consequence of the colours
being differently refracted. The index of refraction must therefore be
measured for definite rays. The kinds of light mostly employed are
given in the following table with their wave lengths in millionths of a
millimetre—

Lithium (red) 5 : : : : ; : 670°6
Hydrogen (red) .+*- . é : : : 656°2
Sodium (yellow) . : : ; 585°5 and 588°9
Thallium (green) . , ; : : : : 534°5
Hydrogen (green) : : ‘ s 486°0
Hydrogen (violet) ' : : 434°0

The index of refraction of a given liquid is dependent on the
temperature as well as on the kind of light, usually decreasing with
rise of temperature. It varies also when the specific volume of the
liquid is changed by alteration of the external pressure. We must
therefore ask if there is no function of the index of refraction which
represents the influence of the substance on the speed of light, in-
dependent of the volume which that substance occupies.

Several such formule have been proposed, but the problem has
not been completely solved by any one of them. First of all Newton,
from his emissive theory of light, gave the expression (n?—1)¢,
n? —

d
d is the density). ‘This formula lost all theoretical basis on the victory —
of the undulatory theory. Thatit was, moreover, empirically untenable
was proved by Gladstone and Dale (1858), who also showed at the same
n-1

d
remained much more constant with the temperature, and was therefore
to be considered the real measure of the refractive power.

When this formula was tested by Landolt and others, it proved not
to give quite constant values, although the approximation was tolerably
good. No theoretical foundation for it was proposed.

A new formula met a short time ago with a favourable reception,
especially on account of its validity in a case which was in conflict
with the previous formule. It was deduced theoretically by two

where ¢ is the specific volume (or the equivalent one i where

time that the similarly formed but simpler function (n — 1) or

CHAP, V REFRACTION IN LIQUIDS oF

independent physicists, L. Lorenz and H. Lorentz, from different as-

n2- 1
3?

The values calculated from it are very constant both for the liquid and

gaseous states.
A few numbers are collected in the following table—

sumptions which need not be here specified, and has the form —

Liquid (20°). Gaseous.
Ethyl] ether . : ‘ : : : "3029 3068
Ethyl alcohol : : : : : "2807 "2825
Water . ! : : ae areas , 2061 ‘2068
Chloroform . : : } ; : PET Od, 1796
Ethyl iodide : : : : ‘ "1558 "1571
Ethyl acetate .  . 2549 ‘2683
Carbon disulphide ; ; : ty. 912809 ‘2898

In spite of the enormous change of density the agreement is excel-
lent. The older formula (n—1)¢ is in this case inapplicable, giving
much more divergent numbers.

In other cases, however, the older formula is superior to the new one. If
the density of the liquid is altered by pressure and the refractive indices
then determined, the expression (n—1)¢ appears much more constant than
n?—1
n?+2
the case of mixtures.

If there is a value r for the optical properties which is independent of
the physical state of the substance, the value r of a mixture must evidently
be equal to the sum of the values of the components. ‘i we have therefore

>. The same holds for alteration of density by temperature and for

sae
two substances whose optical properties, (n — 1)f or = Lae ee are equal tor,

Nee
and r,, and mix m, parts of the former with m, of the latter, then
mr, +m,r, = (m, + m,)r,
m, m,

My
m,+m,> m, +m, *

This relation, as Landolt and Wiillner have shown, is fulfilled with close
approximation by the function r=(n—1). The divergence with the new
formula is mostly larger.

While the latter therefore gives constant values, notwithstanding the
great change in the passage from the liquid to the gaseous state, wie the
older one fails, yet it yields worse results for the relatively. slight alterations
caused by pressure, temperature, and mixing.

It consequently remains uncertain to Ge of the formule the preference
should be given for our purpose. However, this is at present of little
importance, as the general relations are exhibited in quite the same form by
both, only with different numerical values. The old formula has simplicity
to recommend it, but the “theoretical” one has been almost exclusively used
in recent years. Both will be employed in what follows.

H

98 OUTLINES OF GENERAL CHEMISTRY BOOK III

When the refractive constant of a mixture had been shown to be
the sum of those of the components, each multiplied by the proportion
of the substance in the mixture, the question was not long in being
asked, if such a relation did not also exist for chemical compounds.
Landolt (1864), who first raised this question, came to the conclusion
that the constant of a chemical compound was the sum of the cor-
responding values of its elements. If m is the molecular weight of
n?— 1
n? + he
and if the constants of the elements are r,,r,, rs, etc., and their atomic
weights m,, m,, ms, etc., then the relation

the compound and r its refractive constant, whether (n — 1) or

Mi Nye nh
will hold, n,, n,, ete., being the number of atoms of the respective
elements in the compound. | é

The quantities m,r,, m,r,, . . ., are called the atomic refractive
powers of the elements; mr is the molecular refractive power of the
compound, which is therefore equal to the sum of the atomic refractive
powers of the elements. This proposition, like the similar one for
molecular volumes, only holds under certain restrictions.

First we have the question of the wave length, to which measure-
ments are to be referred. The dispersion is very different for different
substances, and we therefore get results which vary considerably
according as the light used is of greater or less wave length. Schrauf
(1862) proposed to use instead of any definite wave length the constant

A of the dispersion formula of Cauchy n= A + ut = +. . ., where A

is the wave length, and in which for A= cc the index of refraction
n=A,and the proposal was in many cases accepted. It seemed
indeed rational to reckon with the index of refraction for infinitely
long waves instead of that for any definite wave length. But it
turned out that the formula by no means satisfactorily represented the
dispersion ; according to the observations employed, different values
were obtained for A, and it has been made probable of late, particularly
by measurements in the infra-red spectrum, that there is no limiting
value of the index of refraction towards which it converges. The
employment of a definite ray has therefore again come into practice,
the values being mostly made referable to the red hydrogen line of
wave length 656:2.

Researches have been mostly made on organic compounds to
obtain relations amongst the optical properties, Landolt having
discovered the law that refraction is an additive property with such
bodies. In the same domain Briihl (1880) discovered the restrictions
under which the law holds.

Gladstone had already drawn attention to the fact that many
compounds, especially those of the aromatic series, did not obey the

MPCEAP AY - REFRACTION IN LIQUIDS 99

law of Landolt. On more particular investigation, Briihl found that
this is the case with all compounds in the molecules of which modern
chemistry assumes the presence of doubly linked carbon atoms.
Such substances always possess greater molecular refractive power than
that calculated from the atoms, and thus the law of Landolt has to be
extended in the same way as Kopp’s law for molecular volumes.
Together with the additive summation we have the constitutive
influence, so that the elements contribute differently to the molecular
refraction according to the function which they exercise in their
compounds.

This was first investigated in detail for carbon, but other measure-
ments show that it holds for oxygen, nitrogen, sulphur, etc., which have
varying valency and modes of combination. The following table is
given by Briithl—

Carbon ; ‘ ‘ ' ; , : ‘ : 2°48
Hydrogen . : : , : : : é 1:04
Hydroxyl oxygen : : : ‘ 1°58
Carbonyl oxygen . : : ; ; : : 2°34
Ghiorime.* -. : : : : ‘ k 6°02
Bromine. he ; : : 8°95
Todine : : ; : ; 13°99
Nitrogen (single hone ‘ ; ; 3°02
Double linking of carbon. ; ; ' : i778
Triple linking of carbon. 3 : ; : 2°18

The two last values signify that two double-linked carbon atoms
do not possess the atomic refraction 2 x 2°48=4°96, but rather
4°96 + 1°78 =6°74; in the same way two triple-linked carbon atoms
have the refraction equivalent 4°96 + 2:18=7:14.

With the help of these constants (which are given with reference to

a
the formula —. and the a hydrogen line) we get molecular

refractive powers of compounds which agree very well with those
observed. The considerable and very constant influence of double
linking has proved several times to be of use in the discussion of
questions of constitution. For instance Briihl has pointed out that
according to this mode of reckoning, the molecule of benzene has three
pairs of double bonds, as Kekulé's formula assumes, but this conclusion
has met with some opposition.

We should not assume that the differences between measurement and
calculation which still remain are due entirely to errors of observation. In
fact it appears from the very extensive material now accumulated that such
differences have an actual existence. They are caused in part by our present
inability to take dispersion into account, substances with strong dispersion
yielding quite regularly a greater molecular refraction than that calculated
from the preceding constants. But substances also which have no great
dispersive power exhibit similar small deviations, so that the conclusion we

100 OUTLINES OF GENERAL CHEMISTRY BOOK III

already came to, that constitutive influences are always effecting slight altera-
tions on the additive scheme of the refractive constants, holds in the most
general manner. The determination of the nature and amount of these
influences still remains the task of the future.

The above constants may be partly tested by calculating the atomic
refractions from the refractive indices and densities of the free elements.
Thus from the values for gaseous hydrogen and chlorine we get the
refractions H = 1°05 and Cl=5-78, which agree very well with those
obtained from the compounds.

The inorganic compounds have been much less thoroughly investi-
gated than the organic. We owe almost all we know of this subject to
the work of Gladstone. Here also we find a general additive law,
though it is distinctly modified by constitutive influences. For instance,
the molecular refraction of free acids differs from that of their potassium
- salts by numbers which are very nearly equal in the case of all strong
acids ; and this, likewise, is the case for weak acids, the differences in
the two groups ‘being however unequal. Similarly, when a metal can
form several series of salts it appears to have a different atomic refrac-
tion in each series.

The determinations of the refractive power of such substances are in
general executed on their aqueous solutions. If these consist of p molecules
of water to one molecule of salt, then we have the relation (p. 97)

(18p + m)r= 18pr, + mR,

where 18 is the molecular weight of water, m that of the salt; r, ry, and R

n?— 1
the refractive constants (cither (n — 1)¢ or nad ) of the solution, the

water, and the salt. For the molecular refraction of the salt we thus have
mR=(18p+m)r—18prp.
By special experiments Gladstone convinced himself that, whether the

molecular refraction is determined from the solid salt (he used prisms of rock
salt) or from solutions, the result is the same.

CHAPTER VI
ROTATION OF THE PLANE OF POLARISATION

THE ability of certain liquid substances to rotate the plane of polari-
sation of light is of an entirely constitutive character. It is a property
possessed by relatively few bodies, which are all, as far as we know,
compounds of carbon, and in these it occurs only in connection with
certain quite definite circumstances, as we shall see below.

The angle through which the plane of polarisation is rotated by
liquids is dependent on their nature as well as on the wave length of
the polarised light. It is proportional to the thickness of the layer of
liquid passed through, and varies with the temperature.

The angle through which polarised light of definite wave length
is turned when it passes through a layer whose thickness is inversely
proportional to the specific gravity of the liquid is called the specific
rotatory power of that liquid. It is denoted by [a] and we have the
relation

[o]= 57

where « is the observed angle, | the thickness of the layer, and d the
density of the liquid. The decimetre is usually employed as the unit
of length. If we multiply this value by the molecular weight m, then
m[a] represents the molecular rotation. As the numbers are very
large, the hundredth part of this value is usually taken, so that the

ma
1001d
If we are working with solutions or mixtures, we may, by making the
assumption (in most cases incorrect) that the solvent has no influence on the
rotatory power, likewise determine the specific and molecular rotatory power
of the substance dissolved. If there are p grams dissolved in v c. cm. then
we get the specific and molecular rotations

molecular rotation [m]=

aV m av
[a]= 1p’ [m]= 100. Tp

102 OUTLINES OF GENERAL CHEMISTRY BOOK III

If the composition of the solution is given by weight, so that there are k
grams substance in 100 g. solution, and if, further, d be specific gravity of the

4 ee A060
solution, its volume is [? 8° ae the expressions assume the form
; C

LOO vat ma
= ene ee oe
lela ba
] being again usually given in decimetres.

The determination of the rotatory power is mostly made for one
definite sort of light, almost without exception for the yellow light of
the sodium flame; the corresponding values are denoted by [a]p and
[m]p, the sodium line corresponding to the line D in the solar spectrum.

The instruments used in making such measurements cannot be
described here in detail. They all consist of two polarisers between
which is placed the liquid enclosed in a glass tube shut at the ends by
parallel glass plates. If the polarisers are first brought into a definite
relative position, say at right angles so that no light passes through,
on bringing the tube between them we must turn one of the polarisers
through a certain angle to regain the same condition. The different
apparatus vary only in the arrangements for identifying and restoring
a certain relative position of the polarisers. The angle through which
the polariser must be turned is the angle denoted above by a. Sub-
stances are called dextrorotatory when the polariser next the eye (the
‘analyser ”) must be turned in the direction of the hands of a watch
to restore the previous condition, levorotatory when in the opposite
direction.

Whilst with liquid substances the measurement is perfectly definite,
considerable difficulties are encountered with substances which must first
be dissolved in a suitable hquid. The rotation of the plane of polarisation
is a property which shows the most extreme sensibility to external influences,
so that quite different values of the specific rotatory power are obtained for
one and the same substance when it is measured in different solvents or even
in differently concentrated solutions with the same solvent.

This circumstance is at the bottom of our inability to find any
undoubted general relations between the molecular rotation and other
properties. The theoretical point around which these phenomena turn
lies rather in the question, through what cir cumstances do these bodies
obtain their optical activity at all.

The cause of the same property in certain crystalline solids is
recognised with great probability in a quite definite arrangement of
their ultimate particles. Reusch (1869) first established the fact that
an optically active body could be artificially made by piling a number
of plates of mica together so that the optical axis of each was turned
through a definite angle with respect to that of the preceding plate.
A similar spiral arrangement of the smallest particles is to be assumed

CHAP. VI ROTATION OF THE PLANE OF POLARISATION 103

in the case of quartz and other optically active crystals, and this
assumption is borne out very completely by their crystallographic
properties.

The molecules of liquids cannot be so arranged, since they are in
continual movement. Any spiral structure must, therefore, be inside
the molecules themselves. This is supported by an experiment of
Biot’s, according to which the vapours of optically active substances
still continue to rotate the plane of polarisation.

Now Le Bel and van’t Hoff showed almost simultaneously (1874)
that all optically active substances that could rotate the plane of
polarisation in the non-crystalline state contained an “asymmetric”
carbon atom, 7.e. one whose four valencies were satisfied by four atoms
or radicals of different kinds. If we imagine the four valencies at the
summits of a tetrahedron, we can arrange the four different radicals on
them in two ways, producing forms which can in nowise be superposed.
If these four radicals be denoted by a, b, ¢, d, and if the tetrahedra
be imagined resting with one face on the plane of the paper, we have
the following symmetrical but not superposable figures—

a y} a C
a.
Cc y)
Pie. 9: Fia. 10.

If the two tetrahedra are so placed that the radical d is at the
apex, the order abc is in one case clockwise, in the other counter-
clockwise.

Whatever we may think of the assumption of the tetrahedral
arrangement of the valencies—an assumption which has of late proved
very useful in another field—the fact is at least very remarkable,
that hitherto no optically active substance has been dis-
covered which does not, in the above sense, possess an
asymmetric carbon atom.

It is true, on the other hand, that very many substances are known -
which contain asymmetric carbon atoms yet do not rotate the plane of
polarisation. This circumstance, however, finds a plausible explanation from
the same theory. If a substance containing asymmetric carbon atoms is
produced in a reaction, there will in general be formed as many molecules
with dextrorotatory as with levorotatory carbon groups. We therefore get
a mixture in which the one rotation just counterbalances the other, so that
the substance will on the whole appear optically inactive. Only when the
two opposite portions are separated are we in a position to observe their
optical activity.

104 OUTLINES OF GENERAL CHEMISTRY BOOK III

According to the theory, therefore, every compound with an asym-
metric carbon atom ought to exist in two distinct forms, one of which
should rotate the plane of polarisation as much in the one sense as the
other should in the opposite sense.

Such a relation has in fact already been found in many cases.
It was first discovered by Pasteur (1848) with the tartaric acids ;
the same was afterwards observed with malic acid, mandelic acid, and
other substances, so that it is highly probable that the relation holds
generally. Accordingly, it must not be conceived as a peculiar
property of a substance that it is dextro or levo-rotatory, but rather
there must exist for every optically active substance a dextrorotatory
as well as a levorotatory modification.

Such optically opposed forms only differ in their optical and
crystallographic properties ; their whole chemical behaviour is identical
in the minutest particular. Only when they react with other also
optically active substances can they form compounds with different
properties. Equal quantities of both forms, however, when mixed |
often form actual compounds with each other, and these naturally
behave differently from their components.

Ordinary dextrotartaric acid, for instance, has precisely the same
properties as levotartaric acid ; but the compound of both which
crystallises from their mixed solutions on evaporation—racemic acid
—has quite a different character. The first named crystallise
anhydrous, the last hydrated; the simple acids do not precipitate a
solution of calcium sulphate, the compound acid does, and so forth.
Yet it should be emphasised that such differences only occur with
solid compounds ; racemic acid behaves in solution like a mixture of
the two components.

In this respect the hypothesis of Le Bel and van’t Hoff is thus in
the best accordance with known facts. But other circumstances too,
observed with the tartaric acids, find a sufficient explanation from the
hypothesis.

Along with the two active tartaric acids and racemic acid there
exists a fourth acid of the same composition which is optically inactive
like racemic acid, but cannot like this be split up into the dextro and
levo-acids. It also possesses different chemical properties from racemic
acid.

To interpret this fact from the standpoint of the theory we must
remember that tartaric acid, corresponding to the formula

Hn OS Gay
OH
H-C<oo0H

has two perfectly similar asymmetric carbon atoms. These may be so
‘constituted that the ray of, light is rotated by both in the same sense,

CHAP. VI ROTATION OF THE PLANE OF POLARISATION 105

either clockwise or the opposite; this would be the constitution of
dextro and levo-tartaric acids. But on the other hand there may be
united with each other two asymmetric carbon atoms with opposite
action on the polarised ray. Then, as the constitution of the two
asymmetric groups is in this case identical, there will be complete
compensation within the molecule itself—the substance is optically
inactive and cannot be split up into active components.

Accordingly, such inactive forms can only occur with substances which
have an even number of asymmetric carbon atoms similarly constituted in
pairs. Experience in this case also has never been in direct contradiction to
the theory, for although some observations seem to point to exceptions, yet
these have not been sufficiently investigated.

A group of phenomena closely related to the preceding is the
magnetic rotation of the plane of polarisation, discovered by
Faraday in 1846. Transparent substances brought into a magnetic
field or into the interior of a coil of wire conducting an electric
current, acquire the power of rotating the plane of polarised light, and
retain this as long as the magnetic or electro-magnetic action lasts.
The angle of rotation is proportional to the intensity of the
magnetic field, to the thickness of the layer of substance through
which the light has to pass, and is further dependent on the nature
of the substance and the temperature.

The investigation of this subject was first carried out from the
physical standpoint. Perkin (1882), to whom we owe almost all our
knowledge of it, first considered the matter with reference to chemical
composition.

The ratio of the rotations effected in the same magnetic field by
the substance in question and by water he calls the specific rotation,
the lengths of the two columns of liquid being inversely proportional
to their densities. If w be the angle of rotation for a column of the
length 1 of the substance whose density is d, and if wp, 1,, and d, be
the corresponding numbers for water at the same temperature, then

; Id Ne
the specific rotation r=— 7 q . The molecular rotation is the ratio of
W
0
the rotations of molecular quantities, and is

Mold, M
Peete, chy 1s
where M is the molecular weight of the substance, 18 being that of
water. The molecular rotation of water is consequently equal to
unity.

From a comparison of the molecular rotations of different sub-
stances, an additive character in this property was only seen in homo-
logous series ; every addition of CH, in such corresponds to an increase
of 1:023 units. This value remains the same for all series. The

106 OUTLINES OF GENERAL CHEMISTRY BOOK III

molecular rotation can thus be represented by C + n1‘023, where n is
the number of CH,-groups and C is a constant having a special value
for each homologous series. These constants are purely constitutive ;
they are different for normal and iso-hydrocarbons, normal and _iso-
alcohols and acids. The formule too only hold for such compounds as
possess at least one methylene, CH, ; for instance the constant °393 of
the normal fatty acids does not apply to formic acid, HCOOH and
acetic acid, CH,. COOH, in which CH, is not contained.

The magnetic rotatory power has, in virtue of these relations,
already proved useful in determining whether a certain substance
belongs to this or that group of compounds. General relations
between the constants and the constitution of the compounds have
not yet been discovered.

CHAPTER VII
SURFACE TENSION

THE surface which liquids expose to “free” space, 7.¢. space filled with
their own vapours or with other gases, is of a different character from
the interior. Whereas every particle has freedom of motion in the
interior, a particle lying at the surface can only move in the direction
of the liquid ; considerable forces oppose its motion out of the liquid.
We can easily conceive that this must be so. In the interior of the
liquid every particle is equally attracted on all sides, and can therefore
move as if no force acted upon it. But if it lies on the surface, the
action of the adjacent particles, enclosed by a hemisphere whose radius
is the distance at which the molecular forces can still act, has a
resultant at right angles to the surface.

The force brought about in this fashion is very great. It can be
measured in the way indicated by Stefan (1886). If we imagine a
Particle moyingtrom the: ain = ok ce
interior of a liquid to- ee ise
wards the surface, half / \
the molecular attraction /
must be overcome before iS ee
the surface is reached, ee
as we at once see from : z:
High p sli vnow ithe. - < ZL
particle pursue itscourse ~ = ae
further into the space
above the liquid, it gets
finally altogether out of ar if.
the sphere of attraction
of the latter—becomes a particle of vapour. To bring a liquid
particle into the surface requires therefore half the work
necessary to transform it into vapour.. But this work is
known ; it is the heat of vaporisation of the liquid.

To arrive at a conception of the magnitude of the forces here in play we
may make an approximate calculation. If v is the volume of 1g of the

108 OUTLINES OF GENERAL CHEMISTRY BOOK III

liquid, A its heat of vaporisation, p, the (unknown) surface pressure within
the liquid and p, the vapour pressure, the work necessary to bring the
particles into the surface is (p,—p,)v, if v may be taken as constant for a
first approximation. We have consequently, according to the above,

1
(Pp a P,)V a ge

For ether at its boiling-point, for example, v= 1°37, p,=1 atm., A= 86 cal.
To pass from thermal to mechanical measure we must multiply the 86 by
42355 ; if we divide simultaneously by 1033 to get the pressure in atmo-
spheres it follows, since p, =1, that the surface pressure p, = 1284 atm.

As we see, we have here to do with very large pressures in the interior
of the liquid. Of course they are not experienced by immersed bodies,
because a liquid surface is formed on these also, the pressure being directed
away from the body into the liquid.

A small portion of such pressures acts in the surface of the liquid.
For, if the surface of the liquid be increased, we must bring a certain
number of internal particles into the superficial layer, and so perform
work. Conversely, there will always be in a liquid the tendency for
as many molecules as possible to pass into the interior of the liquid
consequent on the molecular attraction, whereby the surface is lessened.
The surfaces of liquids behave, therefore, as if under the action of a
contractile force within them, which strives to reduce them to the
smallest possible area.

This conception of the phenomena, deduced from the forces just
considered as consequences of a surface tension of liquids, is due to
Young (1804), and has proved extremely serviceable. We can, without
having to overcome any other than mathematical difficulties, deduce
theoretically all the corresponding phenomena, usually called capillary,
from the principle that liquids, in consequence of this tension, strive
to form the smallest surface compatible with the given conditions.
The difficulties of calculation are, how-
ever, even in apparently simple cases, of
more than ordinary magnitude.

The surface tension y is equal to the
force which acts on 1 cm. of the boundary
line at the surface. The work of forming ~
1 sq. cm. of surface is numerically equal
to this.

To measure the surface tension we
almost always make use of solid walls
which are wetted by the liquid, ie.
walls on which a layer of the liquid will
spread. If (Fig. 12) such a wall be
dipped perpendicularly into the liquid,
the whole surface abe will strive to become less and will assume
the form afc. A state of equilibrium will be reached when the

1S IDA

CHAP. VII SURFACE TENSION 109

weight P of the liquid raised along the wall is equal to the surface
tension yl, where | is the length of the line of contact. From P= yl
E

we get y= T

If the wall has a cylindrical form, 1.¢. if we have to do with a
tube, lis in this case equal to 2zr if the circular section has the radius
r, and the elevating force will be 27ry. The weight raised is, on the
other hand, P= rhs, h being the height, rr? the section (zr7h conse-
quently the volume), and s the specific gravity of the column of liquid.

2
It follows that 2rry=7r’hs or y = 4hrs and h= a The capillary

height is therefore inversely proportional to the diameter of the tube,
and the surface-tension is equal to half the product of the height, the
radius of the tube, and the specific gravity of the liquid.

Another method of measuring surface tension consists in determining the
weight of the drops of liquid supported by a given circumference. If P is
the weight of the largest drop that can hang from a horizontal plane surface

Ni
of circular form, and having the radius r, then P= 2z7ry and y= aes The

difficulty of the method lies in the drop not separating as a whole from the
surface when it falls off, but always leaving a more or less considerable
portion behind. We should weigh the hanging, not the detached drop.

- Another method, in principle the same, is to bring a disc of known size
into contact with the liquid and then determine the weight necessary just to
separate the disc from the liquid. Here again we have the equation P=
2rry, where 2zr is the circumference of the disc, supposed circular.

It is assumed in all these calculations that the solid can be to this extent
considered a part of the quid, that it is in the neighbourhood of the line of
contact completely overspread with the liquid, the latter meeting it with
continuous curvature. It was first shown by Gauss that the liquid could
also meet the solid at a finite angle a. The force then exercised by the
surface tension is smaller and, as a simple geometrical consideration shows,
equal to y cos a, where a is the angle between the normal to the solid and
that to the last particle of liquid at the line of contact. If the liquid wets
the solid wall this angle seems always to vanish, but measurements of its
exact size are difficult to make.

The surface tension y depends on the nature and on the tempera-
ture of the liquid. It is very nearly proportional to the temperature,
so that in general the surface tension y; at the temperature t can be
given by an expression of the form y;=y,)(1 — at). According to this
equation there must be a temperature at which y,=0. Frankenheim
(1841) pointed out that this temperature probably coincided with the
critical point. On the basis of the above considerations regarding the
relation between the latent heat of vapours and surface tension the
same conclusion is arrived at, for at the critical temperature, when

110 OUTLINES OF GENERAL CHEMISTRY BOOK III

liquid and vapour become identical, there is no latent heat of vaporisa-
tion and consequently no surface tension.

Researches on the connection between surface tension and chemical
constitution were first made by Mendelejeff (1866), but these yielded
no general result. Schiff in 1884 took the subject in hand and
determined, in the first place, the surface tension of sixty organic com-
pounds at their respective boiling-points, thinking to obtain more
general relations from this choice of temperature. He further intro-
duced a new constant, the number of molecules elevated above the
external surface. As the surface tension y is equal to the weight
raised p for unit length of the line of contact, then, if m be the

molecular weight, nad is proportional to the number of molecules

raised. Schiff multiplies this magnitude 7 =N by 1000 in order

to obtain convenient numbers. The value of N proved to be the
same for isomeric organic substances. It also remained unchanged
when two hydrogen atoms in a compound were substituted for a
carbon atom, and conversely. Again, three hydrogen atoms and one
oxygen atom, seven hydrogen atoms and one chlorine atom, are in this
respect equivalent. It is thus possible to express the composition of
every compound by a corresponding multiple of hydrogen, and we
find that compounds with the same sum of hydrogen equivalents have
equal values for N. If we denote these sums by n, the following
empirical equation between N and n holds good—

log N= 2°8155 — :00728n — log n.

For instance, in the case of propyl chloride, C,H,Cl, the number n is
equal to 8x 2+7x1+1x7=20; calculation gives N = 23-4, while
the observed result is 23°8. The agreement is much the same in
other cases.

With reference to the surface tension of salt solutions it may be observed
that it varies very nearly proportionally to the quantity of salt present.
Solutions of organic substances have a smaller surface tension than that of
the solvent (water) alone ; the difference is usually considerable, and increases
very rapidly as the substances contain more and more carbon.

To give a few numerical examples, the surface tension of water in
the neighbourhood of 0° is y=-088 (cm. g.) in gravitation units,
i.e. for a contact line 1 cm. long ‘088 g. water is raised. For mercury

2 :
y ='585. As the capillary elevation h=—, water in a tube of 1

mm. radius rises to the height of 1°76 cm., r being ‘1 and s=1.
Calculating in the same way for mercury, sp. gr.= 13°59, we get
‘861, but we have yet to take into account that the angle a in this
case is finite, having a value of about 130°, so that, multiplying by the

a

OHAP. VII SURFACE TENSION 111

cosine of this angle, we obtain a value — ‘55, 7.e. the mercury in the
tube is depressed *55 cm. below the level of that in a communicating
vessel of large surface.

These data can be used to make an approximate calculation of the size
of the molecules. The number y =-088 also measures the work necessary
to produce 1 sq. cm. of water surface. On the other hand, the work
requisite to bring the molecules of 1 g. water into the surface is equal to
half the latent heat of water vapour (p. 107), which at 0° is about 600 cal.
The half of this number multiphed by the mechanical equivalent of heat
42355 gives the work of 127x105 g. cm. which we are seeking. But
to form 1 sq. cm. of surface we only require ‘088 g.cm., consequently we
can make from 1 g. water 1:44 x 108 sq. cm. of surface and the thickness of
this layer, to be put equal to the diameter of a molecule of water, is accordingly
‘7x 1078 cm. This is of the same order of magnitude as the diameter
calculated on p. 66.

CHAP tire ut
INTERNAL FRICTION

WE have hitherto treated liquids as bodies that assume any form.
This is in fact the case, but a certain amount of work is required to
effect a change in their form, and this is measured by their internal
friction. It is, to be sure, in general very small, but there exist some
liquids with large values for the internal friction. The greater these
values become, the more do the liquids approach the solid state, and
there is a continuous passage from substances like warm ether, which
is excessively mobile, to those like cobbler’s wax, which behaves in
most respects like a solid.

Internal friction occurs whenever a liquid moves so as to change its
form, t.¢. when the particles of the quid change their relative positions.
The coefficient of internal friction 7 is equal to the work required to move
two surfaces 1 sq. cm. in size parallel to one another so far in one second
as their distance from each other amounts to. For ordinary liquids the
value of 7 is very small, eg. for water at medium temperatures it is not
more than ‘011 (cm. g. s.) in absolute units, or about ‘000013 in gravitation
units.

The internal friction of liquids is best determined by allowing them

to run out of cylindrical tubes. For this case we have the formula
4

y=, where D is the height of the column of liquid, r the radius
of the tube, 1 its length, and v the volume of the liquid that flows out
in unit time; 7 is the number 3°1415 ... Higher mathematics
is required to obtain this formula, so that here we simply state it.
Dzrr*
8lv !
volume of liquid is proportional to the pressure and to the fourth
power of the radius, were found empirically by Hagen (1839) and
Poiseuille (1843). This harmony of theory and practice confirms the
assumptions made in developing the former ; namely, that the internal

The relations contained in the formula 7 = , that the effluent

CHAP, VIII INTERNAL, FRICTION Tis

friction is proportional to the size of the moving surface, and to its
relative speed.

The formula given above is, strictly speaking, only applicable to the
case in which all the work done by the pressure serves to overcome the
friction. This never actually happens, as the liquid always leaves the tube
with a finite velocity, consequently with some kinetic energy. If R is the
part of the work used up by friction, it, plus the kinetic energy with which
the liquid leaves the tube, must be equal to the total work. For the volume
V of the liquid entering the tube at a pressure P, the work has the value
PV, and therefore PYV=R+L, L being the kinetic energy. This now is
equal to half the product of the mass Vs (s=specific gravity) and the square

of the velocity, which is equal to where t is the time and q the cross

tq’
section. We therefore get
V3s
PV — R = 2t2q?’
] V2s
an R= PV € — oe

A correction must still be applied to the numerical factor of this formula.
It was calculated on the assumption that all parts of the flowing liquid
have the same velocity. But this is not correct; the flow is faster in the
middle, slower at the sides. When this difference is taken into account,
a process requiring higher mathematics, the result is that instead of the
factor 2 in the denominator we must put ,/2 = 1260; the formula remains
otherwise unchanged, and as R is proportional to the coefficient 7, we
have

V2s
T= Gbserved) T26Ptge :

Thé value of the coefficient of friction deduced from the dimensions of
the tube must thus be diminished in proportion to the second member
within the brackets, P being measured in absolute units. As this member
is proportional to the square of the velocity, it is best to diminish the
speed of outflow as much as possible by using long tubes and small
pressures.

As the determination of absolute values for internal friction is very
troublesome on account of the difficulty in procuring and measuring
perfectly cylindrical capillaries, we usually remain satisfied with relative
values by taking the internal friction of water at 0°, or at the tempera-
ture of experiment, as standard ; it is generally made equal to 1 or to
100. This mode of proceeding has the great advantage that the
constant of the apparatus can be determined with about the same
degree of accuracy as falls to the measurements themselves, whereas
individual absolute measurements are affected with much larger errors.
It is left to the further progress of science to ascertain with equal
accuracy the absolute value of the unit chosen.

it

114 OUTLINES OF GENERAL CHEMISTRY BOOK III

The apparatus of the author sketched in Fig. 13 has proved to be
the most convenient form for relative determinations. Its essential
parts are a tube de, several millimetres wide in
its upper portion, which has its bore narrowed
at c where it passes into a bulb K. From the |
lower end of this bulb proceeds a capillary ab,
which in its turn is joined to the wider tube be.
The apparatus is filled to above a mark on the
ai. upper tube by sucking, and the time is noted
which the surface of the liquid takes to pass
from this mark to another beneath the bulb. If
t is this time for a liquid of specific gravity s,
and + the time for water, then the relative in-

Ads st ; .
ternal friction p = —, the pressure in the two cases
T

beingiases 2a.

A method, formerly much in use, that namely of
hanging a circular disc in the liquid by means of a
wire and determining the friction from the decrease of the arc of torsional
oscillation, is extremely inconvenient. In the first place, we require a com-
paratively large quantity of liquid. Again, the theory of such oscillations is
not completely understood, and the approximations formerly considered
sufficient have given errors of as much as 40 per cent with salt solutions ;
for viscous liquids like rape-seed oil the error mounts to 300 or 400 per cent.
Though more recent calculations give results nearer the truth, yet the error
they involve is much larger than the error of experiment:

Although several investigators have expended much trouble on the
measurement of the friction constants of liquids, no general relation
between them and the composition and constitution of the liquids has
been found. The first experiments on this subject are those of Graham
(1861) ; later investigations are due to Rellstab (1868) and particularly
to Pribram and Handl (1878). The general results are only a few
rules applicable to small groups, so that they need not be given here.

In particular nothing has been found that enables us to decide at
what temperature the coefficients of friction are comparable. They
decrease very rapidly with rising temperature, and a law to represent
this change has been recently given by Graetz (1888), but its applica-
tion has led to no further general results.

Solutions have proved to be somewhat more productive of results,
but we cannot here discuss their behaviour.

CHAPTER Ix

SPECIFIC HEAT OF LIQUIDS

THE definition of specific heat as the quotient of the quantity of heat
communicated to unit mass of the substance by the rise of temperature
which it effects, has been already given. As the quantity of heat that
raises the temperature of 1 g. of water through 1° is taken as the unit,
the specific heat of water is equal to unity, and that of any other
substance can therefore be defined as the ratio of the quantities of heat
which must be communicated to equal masses of the substance and of
water, or withdrawn from them, in order to bring about the same

change of temperature in both cases.

The quantity of heat required to warm a gram of water one degree is not
always the same, an increased quantity being necessary as the temperature
rises. The exact law of this change is not known, in spite of numerous
investigations, for the data given by different observers vary a great deal.
It is therefore most convenient to use as unit quantity of heat the hundredth
part of the well-determined amount taken up by 1 g. water between 0° and
100° (or even that quantity itself). This unit is very nearly equal to that
obtained by heating water one degree at 18°, the mean laboratory tempera-
ture. All measurements are in practice referred to the latter unit.

The determination of the specific heat is executed by mixing the
substance in question, at the temperature t,, and of the weight m,,
with another liquid, best water, whose temperature and mass are ty
and m,. If there be no external work, as is generally the case, the
total heat must remain constant, and we have, c, and c¢, being the
specific heats and t the final temperature,

c,m,(t, ~ t) + egmo(ty — t) = 0,
2: com, (t — ty)
m,(t, — t)

If water is the second liquid c¢) = 1.

whence Gr

This simple equation is not, however, quite complete. In the first place
the liquids are necessarily enclosed in vessels, which likewise take part in the

116 OUTLINES OF GENERAL CHEMISTRY BOOK III

heating and cooling ; for each of these we must introduce into the equation a
corresponding term c,m,(t,—t), where ¢, and m, must be known; t, is
either t, or t). Again, a larger or smaller quantity of heat always escapes by
radiation, whereby the equation must receive a value other than O on the
right hand side. How the last circumstance may be made of no effect cannot
be here explained.

The theoretical signification of the specific heat of liquids is rather
complicated. The heat communicated serves firstly to increase the
energy of motion of the molecules; secondly for intermolecular work,
the molecules moving farther apart with rise of temperature; and
lastly for work within the molecules, the connection of the constituent
atoms being altered. We have as yet no means of determining the
values of these separate amounts of work, and must therefore fall back
upon a purely empirical study of the observations.

In this case, as in so many others, the comparison of observed values
is rendered difficult by the temperature having a great and varying
influence on the specific heat, which may assume widely different
values within comparatively narrow limits of temperature. The re-
searches of Reis (1881) and De Heen (1883) have for this reason
yielded no results of a general character.

The experiments of Schiff (1886) led to the unexpected conclusion
that regularities in the specific heat of the organic compounds studied
were more apparent from a comparison, not of the molecular heats
as we might suppose, but of the specific heats for equal weights. It
-appears that the members of homologous series have specific heats
either equal or altering by leaps, and the variation with temperature,
expressible by the formula k =a + bt, has a constant value. Isomerism
and molecular weight seem to be without definite influence on the
specific heat.

All compound ethers of fatty acids, C,H,,O,, for instance, possess
the specific heat k=°4416+-00088t; for the aromatic hydrocarbons
from benzene to xylene k=°3834+°0010438t; for ethyl benzene,
pseudocumene, and mesitylene k = 3929 + -001043t; for propyl ben-
zene and cymene k = ‘4000 + :001043t.

As the total number of compounds studied is ninety-one, and the
errors of experiment are less than a half per cent, the accuracy of
Schiff’s conclusions can scarcely be doubted. From his data no regu-
larity can be perceived as to which compounds have the same constant
in the formula for the specific heat, and which different constants.

a

BOOK IV.

SOLUTIONS

CHAPTER I
SOLUTIONS OF GASES IN GASES

SOLUTIONS are homogeneous mixtures — mixtures which allow no
separation of their components by mechanical means. The ability of
gases to form such mixtures is unlimited, that of liquids is limited.
Solid substances, too, can form mixtures which come under the above
definition, but not as such, the solutions being produced only when the
components have previously united as liquids to a homogeneous
mixture, or when they are brought under the influence of great
pressure into a condition bordering on the liquid state.

Gases, as aforesaid, mix in all proportions. The properties of
the components of such mixtures are preserved unchanged, with the
exception of those conditioned by the expansion of each component to
the total volume of the mixture. Other exceptions to this rule are
only found when the gases are so compressed as to approach the
state of liquids.

The general expression for the behaviour of gases is as follows:
The pressure of a gaseous mixture is the sum of the partial
pressures of its components. We find the partial pressures
by imagining each gas separately to fill the total volume and cal-
culating the pressures corresponding.

We might also say that the total volume of a gas is equal to the sum of
the volumes of its components, each gas being supposed compressed to its
proper volume by the total pressure on the mixture. The first expression is
more correct for uniformly mixed gases, the second for stratified gases. As
the first case is by far the more frequent, we have practically it alone to
consider.

If P and V be pressure and volume for a gaseous mixture, p,, Po,

118 OUTLINES OF GENERAL CHEMISTRY BOOK IV
r]

Pg) - - - and V,, Vo, V3, -. . the corresponding values for its component
gases, we have the equation

PV =)pj¥i + DoVoe Dave te es
which for a uniform mixture becomes

PV=V(p,+Po+Pgt- - -);
and for superimposed layers

PV =P Vet va |:

If two gases are superimposed they gradually mix. Berthollet
made the experiment of inverting a flask full of hydrogen over a
similar flask filled with the very much heavier carbonic acid, so that
the two openings of the flasks fitted exactly to each other. After a
few days carbonic acid was found in the upper flask and hydrogen in
the lower, both having moved against the force of gravity. This
property of diffusion is shared by all gases. Whenever two masses
of gas of different composition are brought into contact, they continue
to penetrate into each other until a uniform mixture is formed.

This phenomenon is easily conceivable from the standpoint of the
kinetic theory of gases (p. 61). The molecules of the one gas in
virtue of their rapid translatory motion soon penetrate amongst those
of the other, and so a process of mixture begins, which continues
uninterruptedly until it reaches an apparent end after the molecules
of each gas present are equally distributed through the whole space.
The mixing then ceases only apparently ; it actually goes on as before,
but it can no longer alter the state of the mixture once this has
become uniform.

These phenomena are of great importance with respect to the con-
stitution of the atmosphere. Together with the continual massive
motion of currents within it they cause the surprising uniformity of its
composition. ‘They have also been of importance in the development of
the kinetic theory of gases, for they give us the means, although only
through the instrumentality of somewhat difficult and not yet perfectly
satisfactory mathematical theories, of calculating the mean free paths
of the gas-molecules and consequently also their dimensions (cf.

p. 65).

We can get a good notion of the difference of the velocity of diffusion by
placing a drop of bromine in the bottom of each of two bottles, one of which
contains air and the other hydrogen. The bromine soon becomes converted
into vapour, which lies for a pretty long time at the bottom of the bottle
containing air, while in spite of the far greater difference of density, it
diffuses rapidly upwards in the hydrogen.

CHAPTER II
SOLUTIONS OF GASES IN LIQUIDS

THE solubility of gases in liquids, or the capability of both to form
homogeneous liquid mixtures, is also as good as general. The solubility
of gases in some liquids, however (in mercury for example), is very
slight, so that it may as a rule be entirely neglected ; still several facts
point to the existence of a certain solubility even in such cases.

The quantity of a gas taken up by a given liquid depends on the
nature of both and on the temperature. For the rest it is, as Henry
(1803) found, proportional to the pressure of the gas. If we

call the quantity of the gas contained in unit volume (both of the

liquid and of the space above it) the concentration of the gas, the
law may be thus expressed, that under given conditions the ratio of the
concentrations in the gas itself and in the liquid remains constant
although the pressure varies. ‘This ratio we will call the coefficient
of solubility, or simply the solubility of the gas.

A number closely related to this value is what Bunsen (1855) has
defined as the coefficient of absorption. This signifies the volume
of gas at 0° and 76 cm. pressure which is taken up by 1 ¢. cm. of the
liquid at the same pressure, and only differs from the solubility as
above defined by the volume of gas being reduced to 0°, 2.¢. being
divided by 1 + -00367t. It seems more reasonable to give the volume
of gas for the temperature at which the solubility itself has been
determined ; Bunsen’s definition, however, is still very widely spread,
and must therefore be mentioned.

The calculation of an absorption experiment in which v volumes of the
liquid has dissolved V volumes of the gas at t° and p cm. pressure is made,
according to Bunsen, by reducing the gas volume to normal conditions by
multiplying by aeiene then the quantity of gas is calculated which
would be dissolved according to Henry’s Law at the normal pressure through

76 x :
multiplication by eur and lastly by dividing by v we obtain the quantity

120 OUTLINES OF GENERAL CHEMISTRY BOOK IV

absorbed by unit volume of the liquid. The coefficient of absorption 6 is
Nakata ChB aes
v 76(1+at) p  v(1+at)

thus equal to The solubility as defined above

Vv
is simply A= ee

Bunsen and his pupils have determined the absorption coefficients
for a great number of gases towards water and alcohol at temperatures
between 0° and 20°. The numbers are mostly not large, and vary for
the “permanent” gases—nitrogen, hydrogen, oxygen, carbon monoxide,
and methane—between -02 and ‘05. The more easily condensable
gases, such as carbon dioxide, nitrogen monoxide, and hydrogen sul-
phide, have coefficients between 1 and 4. These numbers are for
water ; for alcohol they are from two to eight times as large, the two
series not being proportional.

The solubility usually diminishes with increase of temperature, -but
Bunsen states that in the case of hydrogen in water, and oxygen or
carbon monoxide in alcohol, the coefficient between 0° and 25° is
independent of the temperature.

Mixed gases, as Dalton (1807) found, are dissolved according to
their partial pressures; the solubility of each component is not
influenced by the presence of the other components. The proportion
between the gases is in general changed on solution ; the fact must be
specially emphasised that the final and not the original partial pressures
are determinative of the equilibrium.

The accuracy of the above laws is of the same nature as that of the
fundamental laws of gases; they are limiting formule approached more or
less nearly by the actually existing relations, and that in general the better the
smaller the solubility is, and the lower the pressure. Yet with even such a
soluble gas as carbon dioxide Henry’s Law holds up to pressures of 4 atm.
with an error of only one per cent.

Henry’s Law is in general not applicable to gases of which the
volume dissolved amounts to several hundred times the volume of the
liquid. However, we have regularly in such cases a chemical action
between the gas dissolved and the solvent, the dissolved part being
so changed chemically that it does not come directly into play in the
final equilibrium. Here the amount dissolved increases much more
slowly than the pressure, and the determination of an absorption
coefficient becomes impossible. Sometimes at lower temperatures
deviations occur which vanish again at higher temperatures when the
solubility becomes less. Thus sulphur dioxide follows Henry’s Law
above 40°, but ceases to obey it below this temperature ; ammonia is
not dissolved by water according to the law until the temperature
reaches 100°.

If we take the solution of a gas saturated under a definite pressure, and
then diminish the pressure, the excess of gas does not by any means at once

CHAP. II SOLUTIONS OF GASES IN LIQUIDS 121

leave the liquid. Such solutions in fact easily remain “ supersaturated,” and
only part with the excess when they are brought into intimate contact with
the gas under the diminished pressure, or better with a foreign gas, in which
the partial pressure of the dissolved gas is zero. Thus porous powders
containing much air, when introduced into solutions of gases, as well as violent
shaking, which distributes numerous tiny gas bubbles in the interior of the
liquid, are particularly effective in this respect. On the other hand, super-
saturated solutions of gases may be kept for very long periods in glass vessels
carefully cleaned (with sulphuric acid, caustic alkali, etc.)

The molecular theory of the solution of a gas in water is very
simple. When the gas-molecules reach the surface of the water they
are held there in virtue of an attraction between them and the water
molecules. When now a certain number of gas-molecules have been
taken up, it will happen that one of those already in the liquid will
free itself from the attraction of the latter and return into the space
containing the gas. This will occur the more frequently the more
molecules of the gas there are in the liquid, and finally a state of
equilibrium will be reached when just as many molecules leave the
liquid as enter it. .

If the pressure changes, the number of molecules impinging on the
surface of the liquid will change in the same proportion ; equilibrium
therefore can only exist when the number of the molecules leaving the
solvent, or the number of dissolved molecules, alters likewise in this
ratio. The quantity of gas dissolved is therefore proportional to the
pressure.

For gaseous mixtures equilibrium will be reached with every
component according to the number of its molecules, z.¢. to its partial
pressure, independently of the other components, as the number of
molecules entering and leaving the liquid will be in each case equal to
one another. ‘This is Dalton’s Law (p. 120).

Variation of temperature changes the number of the impinging
molecules, but also the number of the liberated molecules in the same
sense, so that it would be in the first instance without influence.
Simultaneously, however, the condition of the liquid changes, and with
it the attraction between its molecules and those of the gas, the force
of the attraction being lessened by increase of temperature. The
decrease of solubility mostly observed with rise of temperature is due
to this last circumstance.

If instead of pure water we take solutions of different substances to
absorb the gases, we find the solubility of the latter in most cases diminished.
Absorbed gases are therefore partially given up by liquids when these are
made to dissolve solid substances. In particular cases, ¢.g. those investigated
by Raoult (1874) where potash and soda solutions were saturated with
ammonia, it appears that the diminution is proportional to the quantity
of solid dissolved. Setschenoff (1875) got similar results for various salt-
solutions towards carbon dioxide, but besides the action of solution there

122 OUTLINES OF GENERAL CHEMISTRY BOOK Iv

was here in some cases the chemical action between the carbonic acid and
the base of the salt, so that the whole phenomena became much more com-
puicated. In the simplest cases the total quantity dissolved was composed
of a chemically bound portion proportional to the salt present and inde-
pendent of the.pressure, and of another portion simply dissolved and pro-
portional to the pressure. In other cases the first portion showed itself
dependent on the pressure but in a much less than proportional degree ;
here of course there was also a chemical action, but it was incomplete and
variable with the pressure.

Evolution of heat in varying quantities is almost without exception
attendant on the solution of gases in water.

—_s

CHAPTER Ill
SOLUTIONS OF LIQUIDS IN LIQUIDS

THE relations between gases and liquids are much simpler than those
of the latter among themselves. In the first place, by no means all
liquids are soluble in each other; there are some that are almost
without mutual action, although that there is absolutely no action
may be doubted. Such liquids dissolve each other in general only
partially, A taking up a little of B to form a homogeneous mixture
with the essential properties of A, and B at the same time dissolving
a quantity of A, the properties of the mixture being essentially those
of B. No case is known of a liquid partially soluble in another
which cannot also dissolve some of the latter.

Besides this group of pairs of liquids we have another, the pairs
of which mix in all proportions with each other, ¢.g. water and alcohol,
chloroform and carbon disulphide. The groups are not sharply
separated, for some pairs exist which at certain temperatures are not
miscible in all proportions, while at other temperatures they are.

The properties of solutions of liquids in liquids are not in general
those which would be calculated from the simple rule of mixing.
_ It is known, for instance, that the volume of a mixture of alcohol
and water is not equal to the sum of the volumes of its components,
but smaller. If we fill a tube about a metre in length and closed at
one end about half full of water and then fill up with alcohol, we see
after the liquids have been mixed by inverting the tube a few times
that there is an empty space of several centimetres at the top.

Many other properties are affected in the same way. The compressibility,
expansibility by heat, surface tension, specific heat, etc., all show values
more or less different from those calculated. These deviations are usually
especially large when water is one of the components of the mixture ;
being on the average much smaller for other substances, in particular those
of chemically indifferent character. No regularity of any importance has
been found in such deviations.

The vaporisation of mixed liquids exhibits relations which may be

124 OUTLINES OF GENERAL CHEMISTRY BOOK IV

grouped similarly to those of the solubility. They are simplest in the
case of liquids which only dissolve each other to a very small extent,
the total pressure being equal to the sum of the separate pressures of
the two liquids at the same temperature. A special case of this is
that the vapour pressure of a liquid is the same in an atmosphere of
gas as it is in vacuo. ‘The law is not quite exact, as both the sum of
the pressures and the vapour pressure in the gas are somewhat smaller
than the calculated values.

These are further examples of the general principle that the vapour
pressure is determined by the state of the liquid in contact with the
vapour. As two immiscible liquids are in general still soluble in each
other in traces, we have actually not the vapour pressure of the pure
liquids but of those which have dissolved some of the other liquid or
of the gas in which they stand. Now it is always the case that the
vapour pressure of a liquid becomes smaller when it contains a sub-
stance dissolved in it, and so we see that the above law holds only for
the extreme case of perfect insolubility, and that the actual vapour
pressures will always be smaller than those calculated.

If such immiscible liquids are distilled they will go over in a constant
proportion for any one temperature, no matter what the composition
of the liquid may be, for the vapour consists of the vapours of the
components in the ratio of their vapour pressures, As the quantities
of the liquids in the receiver are to each other as the products of
vapour pressure and density, or of vapour pressure and molecular
weight, we can find the molecular weight if the vapour pressure is
known.

As a rule, however, we do not know the vapour pressure. It can be
found if the relation between the vapour pressure and temperature of the
other liquid is known, and the temperature of common ebullition measured.
This hes naturally below the boiling-point of the lower-boiling liquid,
namely, at the temperature at which the sum of the partial pressures of both
vapours is equal to the atmospheric pressure. We have only, therefore, to
deduct from the atmospheric pressure the vapour pressure of the second
liquid at the common boiling-point to get the required partial pressure of
the first substance at the same temperature. This method is, to be sure,
not very exact. According to Naumann (1877) a mixture of water and
nitro-benzene boils at 99°0°; as the vapour pressure of water at this
temperature is 73°3 cm., the partial pressure of the nitro-benzene is
76°0 — 73:3 =2°7 cm. |

Similar but not quite so simple laws hold good when the liquids are
sensibly but still only partially miscible. By shaking up such liquids
together, ¢.g. water and ether, we get two layers; in one of which the
one liquid preponderates, in the other, the other. They stand in an
equilibrium independent of their relative quantities. By using the
conception of concentration (p. 119) we can define the state as we
did in the case of gases: Equilibrium is attained, when a

CHAP. III SOLUTIONS OF LIQUIDS IN LIQUIDS 125

definite ratio of concentration is established between the
liquids; the absolute and relative quantities of the solutions have
nothing to do with the matter.

Two such solutions, in equilibrium on contact and not further
miscible, are also in equilibrium with respect to any process by which
their concentration might be altered, in particular with respect to their
vaporisation. ‘The pressure and the ratio of the components of the
vapours given off by the two solutions are exactly equal. The proof
of this was given by Konowaloff (1881) both by direct measurement
and from theory.

Imagine the two solutions enclosed in ring-shaped space, one above
the other; then if a, for example, had a greater vapour pressure
than b, distillation from a to b through ec
would occur. This would change the con-
centration of the solution b, and the sub-
stance in excess would, in order to restore
the contact equilibrium, be again taken up
by a to evaporate from it anew. We could
thus obtain a form of the perpetual motion,
which, as we know, is impossible.

As each of the two immiscible solutions
has thus the same vapour pressure as the
other, their common vapour pressure is also 3
independent of the quantity of each. It aaa
will be smaller than the sum of the vapour pressures of the separate
liquids, as each of these has dissolved somewhat of the other, and thus
had its vapour pressure lowered. On distillation a liquid of constant
composition passes over, as both solutions give off vapour of the same
composition until one or other has all gone over. In the distillate
the two components usually separate into two saturated solutions,
their ratio being constant on account of the constant composition of
the vapour.

The most complicated case is when the liquids dissolve each
other in all proportions. Then the liquid is continually changing its
composition during vaporisation, which entails a change in the pressure
and the composition of the vapour in its turn. If the two liquids
have very different vapour pressures and their boiling-points corre-
spondingly wide apart, the vapour pressure and boiling-point of the
mixture usually falls between those of the components. The more
volatile liquid goes over principally at first during the distillation, the
less volatile remaining behind, so that by repetition of the process
they may be more or less completely separated.

On the other hand, if the vapour pressures and boiling-points of
the components lie near together, two things may happen. Either
the mixture behaves similarly to one of liquids not completely miscible,
and the vapour pressure of the solution is greater than that of each

126 OUTLINES OF GENERAL CHEMISTRY BOOK IV

component. In this case there must be a certain ratio between the
two pure liquids at which the common vapour pressure will attain
its highest value. This mixture has consequently the lowest boiling-
point of any possible combination, and will on distillation go over
first, behaving very like a pure substance with constant boiling-point.
In the retort we have left the substance which is in excess with
respect to this constant-boiling mixture.

Or again, the mixture of the two liquids may have a lower vapour
pressure than either separately. Such liquids must again form in
definite proportions a mixture that has the lowest vapour pressure and
the highest boiling-point of any. On distilling any mixture of the
two anything more volatile passes over first, so that there remains in
the retort the mixture with the highest boiling-point, which again
behaves almost as a simple substance, distilling unchanged.

In both of these cases the mixture cannot be separated into its com-
ponents by distillation, but only into another mixture of constant composition
and the liquid which is present in excess of this. These constant - boiling
mixtures have been often erroneously held as simple liquids or chemical
compounds, especially when the proportions were nearly molecular. The
proportions, however, change continuously with the pressure at which the
distillation is performed, so that the assumption of chemical combination of
the liquids is excluded. Determinations of the vapour density also show
in such cases that the vapours exist uncombined alongside each other.

CHAPTER IV
OSMOTIC PRESSURE

WHEN a layer of pure water is brought over any aqueous solution,
say one of sugar, the system does not remain in this condition. As
in the case of layers of different gases, the sugar at once begins to
rise against gravity and to diffuse into the water, the motion only
ceasing when the substance is uniformly distributed throughout the
whole mass of water.

This motion may be arrested by bringing between the solution
and the pure solvent a septum which will let the latter pass but not
the dissolved substance. Such a ‘“semi-permeable” wall can be pre-
pared by saturating a porous earthenware cell first with a solution
of copper sulphate, rinsing it carefully out, and then filling up with
a solution of potassium ferrocyanide. On and within the earthen
wall there is formed a continuous sheet of copper ferrocyanide through
which water can be filtered. If we try to filter a sugar solution it
requires a much greater pressure, and what passes through is not
sugar solution but pure water.

Instead of the precipitate of copper ferrocyanide we may employ many
other amorphous substances with the same effect, eg. ferric oxide, silicic
acid, tannate of gelatine, and the like. The protoplasm of organic cells is
generally clothed with a pellicle which has the same property as such
artificially prepared membranes.

If such a prepared cell is filled with sugar solution, and then
closed by a stopper which admits of connecting it with a manometer,
we observe an increase of pressure in the interior of the cell to a
definite maximum when it is placed in pure water. The maximum
value is dependent on the concentration of the sugar solution and on
the temperature.

If the temperature is kept constant, then the pressure is propor-
tional to the strength of the solution (Pfeffer, 1877). The final
pressures are very considerable ; a one-per-cent solution of. sugar

128 OUTLINES OF GENERAL CHEMISTRY BOOK IV

giving 50 cm. of mercury, and a one-per-cent solution of potassium
nitrate a pressure of more than 3 atm.

The proportionality between concentration and pressure is seen
from the following measurements by Pfeffer on sugar solutions—

Concentration. Pressure. Ratio.
1... percent 53°5 cm. 53°
2 35 LOTSG pee 50°8
24 55 Lutes sees 55°4
4 . 208-2 ,, 521
6 nes DOP cO oe. 5i'3

The law that regulates the osmotic pressure has exactly the same
form as Boyle’s Law, for the pressure exercised by gases is proportional
to their density or concentration. It has been shown by many other
measurements, both direct and indirect, that the law of osmotic pres-
sure holds for all dissolved substances no matter what their nature.

From this fact, that the particles of a substance in solution exercise a
pressure on the neighbouring pure solvent, the above-mentioned phenomenon
of diffusion becomes comprehensible. The particles are driven by this
pressure into the solvent, and as the pressure is proportional to the concen-
tration, the action will only cease when the same concentration has every-
where been reached.

The extreme slowness with which the diffusion takes place, notwithstanding
the magnitude of the pressures, is remarkable. The cause of this is to be
found in the friction which the particles experience in moving through the
liquid, and in the very small size of the particles themselves. If we reduce
a stone, which would fall.several hundred feet in a few seconds, to a very
fine powder, this will remain under similar circumstances suspended in the
air for hours, although gravitation acts upon it with exactly the same force
as before. When, therefore, we consider the extraordinary minuteness of
the molecules we begin to understand why such very slow progress is made
in spite of the great pressures at work.

Temperature has the same influence on osmotic as on gaseous
pressure: The pressure increases proportionally to the tem-
perature, and in the same ratio for all dissolved substances.
Moreover, this ratio, or the coefficient of tension, has the same value
as in the case of gases.

Thus, if we know the osmotic pressure P, at 0°, it will be at t?
equal to P,(1+°00367t). The relation may therefore be expressed
in the same way as for gases. The osmotic pressure is proportional
to the absolute temperature. In proof of this important relation I
give the following measurements by Pfeffer and the corresponding
values calculated by van’t Hoff—

Pressure. At At Observed. Calculated.
Cane sugar — «5404 32° 14-15" 51:0 51°2
5 : 56°7 36° 155° ay tea | 52°9
Sodium tartrate 156°4 36°6° 133 143°2 144°3

v 98°3 37°0° 13°3° 90°8 90°7

CHAP, IV OSMOTIC PRESSURE 129

The values were calculated on the assumption that the coefficient is
‘00367. The differences are not greater than might arise from errors
of experiment. ari

From experiments with living cells it has been also proved that solutions
that are in osmotic equilibrium with the cell contents at 0° remain so at 34°.
The increase of pressure was shown in this way to be always the same,
however different the solutions employed might be, and however complex
the cell contents. .

We can thus represent the osmotic pressure of substances in solution
by the same general formula as we employed for gases, viz. py=RT.
The question now arises, what value the constant R will have in the
case of solutions, it being always the same for molecular quantities
of different gases. We best calculate it in the latter case for gram
molecular weights. At 0° we have p=1033, v=22380, T= 273,

and therefore R= at = 84700.*

Now Pfeffer found the pressure to be 49°3 cm. of mercury for a
one-per-cent sugar solution at 0°. The molecular weight of sugar,
C,,H,,0,,, is 342 ; the volume in which 342 g. of sugar are contained is
therefore 34200 c.cm. The pressure of 49°3 g. of mercury is equal to
49°3 x 13°59=671 g. per sq. cm. The temperature 0° C. is 273 in the
671 x 34200

273
= 84200. As we see, this agrees within the limits of experimental
error with the gas constant.

Consequently, the osmotic pressure of a sugar solution has

absolute scale. For sugar the constant is therefore R=

the same value as the pressure that the sugar would exer-

cise if it were contained as a gas in the same volume as is
occupied by the solution.

The gas equation py=RT holds unchanged with the same constant
for solutions, only that p here denotes the osmotic pressure. For this
excessively important principle we have to thank J. H. van’t Hoff.

The question, if this be the same for other temperatures and con-
centrations, must be at once answered in the affirmative, as the appli-
eability of the laws of Boyle and Gay-Lussac to solutions has been
already proved. We have only now to ask if Avogadro’s law holds
for solutions, 2.¢. if all other substances besides sugar exhibit the same
value for RK when molecular quantities are considered. The answer
in this case also is affirmative. It is true that there are very few
direct measurements of osmotic pressure, but it has been established
by the method with organic cells, already indicated, that solutions of
the most diverse substances have the same influence, if these substances
be contained in the solutions in the ratio of their molecular weight.

* The last places are here and in what’ follows rounded off so far as they are

rendered doubtful by the error in the experimental numbers.
K

130 OUTLINES OF GENERAL CHEMISTRY BOOK IV

All the comprehensive relations previously developed as to the
connection between vapour density and molecular weight are thus
found applicable to solutions, so we may say in general that the state
of substances in solution is in the widest sense comparable to that of
gases. aa

Certain groups of substances, in particular salts, together with
many acids and bases, show variations from these simple relations.
The osmotic pressure they exercise is much larger than it ought to be
from their molecular weight ; for potassium chloride it is almost twice
as large.

Quite a similar irregularity, it will be remembered, appeared in
certain definite cases (ammonium salts, etc.) with the vapour density,
ae. the pressure was found to be much greater than it ought to have
been according to theory. The abnormalities were there explained by
admitting the substances to be dissociated, 7.¢. to have split up into
simpler molecules. The number of molecules was thus actually much
larger than that which corresponded to the formula of the undecom-
posed substance, and therefore the pressure was greater in the same
ratio.

It is natural to assume a similar explanation here—to look upon
the substances which exhibit similar abnormalities as being likewise
dissociated in their solutions. It will be shown later that this assump-
tion is really well founded, and explains not only this PeOo eas
but a great many others.

CHAPTER. V
VAPOUR PRESSURE OF SOLUTIONS

Ir has already been stated (p. 124) that the vapour pressure of liquids
which contain substances dissolved in them is smaller than that of the
pure liquid. ‘The laws of this phenomenon, in the first instance for
solutions of non-volatile substances, were ascertained by Babo (1848)
and Wiillner (1856). They are to this effect, that the lowering of
vapour pressure is proportional to the amount of substance
dissolved, and that for one and the same solution, the lower-
ing at any temperature always remains the same fraction of

_the vapour pressure of the pure liquid at that temperature.

If we thus denote by f the vapour pressure of the solvent, that of
the solution by f’, and by g the amount per cent of the dissolved
substance in the solution, we have

f —f’

== ke,
where k is a constant which represents the relative lowering of
the vapour pressure for a one-per-cent solution.

This law, however, like so many other such, is only an ideal law, to
which the actual relations approximate more nearly the more dilute the
solutions become. In concentrated solutions we have deviations, correspond-
ing to those of gases at high pressures, and susceptible of a similar ex-
planation.

If we refer the constant k, or the relative lowering of vapour
pressure, not to equal weights but to molecular weights, we at once
find an additional general law, the products of the relative decrease and
the molecular weight being constant for one and the same solvent.
Thus, if we dissolve in equal quantities of a liquid such amounts of
different substances as are proportional to their molecular weights we
obtain liquids with the same vapour pressure. The rule may be stated
thus: The molecular lowering of vapour pressure produced
by all substances in the same solvent is constant.

139 OUTLINES OF GENERAL CHEMISTRY BOOK IV

If, lastly, we compare the relative lowering experienced by different
solvents, we find them to be equal when equal amounts of a substance
are dissolved in quantities of the various solvents proportional to their
molecular weights. Here the vapour pressure of the solution is to
that of the pure solvent as the number of molecules of the solvent is
to the total number in the solution.

Now, if P be the weight of the solvent, p that of the dissolved
substance, M and m being the corresponding molecular weights, then
aN and x = n are the relative numbers of the molecules. If
further f and f' represent as above the vapour pressure of pure solvent
and of the solution respectively, we have, from what has been already
stated,

Te ae
f Neg on
which can be transformed into
bibles ar
£ Sean

The relative lowering of. vapour pressure of any solution
is equal to the ratio of the number of molecules of the dis-
solved substance to the total number of molecules in the
solution. 2

By using the equations . = Njand r= n we have finally
Gets kent
fae Gabi

The preceding rules were mostly discovered empirically by F. M.
Raoult (1887). They may evidently be used to determine unknown
molecular weights of substances, so that we have in them the basis of
a much more general method than that of vapour density, many more
substances being soluble in volatile liquids, than themselves volatilise
undecomposed.

The practical determination of the lowering of vapour pressure is made
according to the general methods of ascertaining the vapour pressure. The
solution may be introduced into a barometer and its vapour pressure be
read off at once from the depression of the mercury column, ‘The vapour
pressures of the solvents themselves are for the more common substances
already tabulated, but it is more to the purpose to make a second experi-
ment with the pure solvent simultaneously with the other, whereby the
effect of any error in the determination of the temperature is eliminated.,
Attention must be given to the thorough wetting by the solution of the
walls of the space in which the vapour is contained, as superficial differences
of concentration in thin films readily appear, and this may have a great
effect on the readings.

CHAP, V VAPOUR PRESSURE OF SOLUTIONS 133

Another method consists in heating in the vapour of the boiling solvent
a shortened barometer-tube containing the solution, and conveniently of the
form of an inverted siphon. The elevation of the mercury in the closed
limb, in which the solution is contained, is then equal to the lowering of
the vapour pressure f—f’, and the vapour pressure of the solvent is equal to
the height of the barometer at the time of experiment.

Again, we may determine the boiling-point of the solution under atmo-
spheric pressure. If we know the vapour pressure of the solvent at the
same temperature we have all the data required.

Other methods are based upon the determination of the weight of
vapour which occupies the same volume at the same temperature, at the
pressure of the pure solvent on the one hand, and of the solution on the
other. A flask is exhausted and the vapour of weighed quantities of the
solvent or of the solution admitted. The quantities that evaporate are
' proportional to the vapour pressures, the ratio of which can therefore be
determined from the respective losses of weight.

In many cases we can make use of the principle that the vapour pressure

_ is the same in gases asin vacuo. If, for instance, a current of air be passed

through the solution and then through the solvent, the loss of weight of the
first will be to that of the second as f’:f—f’, the air being saturated with the
vapour up to the pressure f’ by passing through the solution, and then further
up to f by passing through the solvent. If in addition we determine the
weight of the vapour carried over, this is proportional to the vapour pressure f.

If we are working with aqueous solutions, the methods of hygrometry

may be employed to determine the relative humidity =

As to the general validity of the above law, we find that there
are here exactly such exceptions as we met with in the case of osmotic
pressure. All substances that gave too high values of the latter,
and for which therefore a state of dissociation was assumed, ex-
hibit quite the same abnormality with respect to the lowering of
vapour pressure. The ratio between the actual and theoretical values
of the osmotic pressure is equal to the ratio between those of the
lowering of vapour pressure. This circumstance strongly supports the
assumption that the cause of the abnormalities lies in the dissolved
substance and not, as might also be, in the solvent.

In view of this complete parallelism between the two series of
phenomena—osmotic pressure and the lowering of vapour pressure—
we must ask if there is no theoretical connection between them. Such
a connection actually exists ; so that if the laws of osmotic pressure
are given we can deduce those of the lowering of vapour pressure from
them, and wee versd.

We imagine a vessel of the form of an inverted funnel (Fig. 15)
which is closed at the bottom by a semi-permeable wall. Let it
be filled with the solution L and stand in a vessel F containing the
pure solvent. Let the whole now be covered with a bell-jar, and the
air be exhausted from this.

134 OUTLINES OF GENERAL CHEMISTRY BOOK IV

The solution will be in equilibrium with the external liquid when
the pressure exerted by the column hG is equal to the osmotic
pressure. Now the liquid at G and the solution at h are both
evaporating ; the vapour pressure of the solution
at h must therefore be equal to the pressure pos-
sessed by the vapour of the liquid at the same
place. For, were it greater or less, liquid would
either be deposited or would evaporate at h; in
both cases the pressure on the semi-permeable
wall would change and liquid either enter or leave
the funnel. ‘This would go on for ever, so that
we could obtain the perpetual motion, which is
impossible.

The pressure exerted by the vapour of the
liquid F at h is equal to the vapour pressure of
the solvent diminished by the weight of a column
of vapour of the height Gh. To this pressure the
vapour pressure of the solution must be equal.

We shall now suppose the laws of osmotic

Fia. 15. pressure to be given. Let the solution contain

n molecules of the dissolved substance and N

molecules of the solvent. The osmotic pressure is numerically equal
to the pressure the substance would exert if it occupied the given

space as a gas, 2.¢. by the equation py =nRT, whence p= aoe where
Vv

R= 84700 (p. 129) and T is the absolute temperature. To find v,
let us consider that the N molecules of the solvent weigh MN, where M

is the molecular weight, and occupy the volume wash the specific gravity
S 3

of the solvent being represented by s. We thus obtain p = a The

height h of the solution corresponding to this pressure is given by the
equation p= hs’, where s’ is the specific gravity of the solution. Let
us imagine the solution to be so dilute that its specific gravity does
not differ appreciably from that of the solvent, so that we may put

s =s. Then we have h= neu Since MN is equal to the weight of

MN
solvent that contains n molecular weights * of the substance dissolved,
we can state the rule: The osmotic elevation is for the same
composition by weight independent of the nature of the solvent.

The vapour pressure f' of the solution is less than that f of the
solvent by the pressure exerted by a column of vapour having the
height h, ze. f=f-—hd, if d denote the vapour density. This may
also be calculated from the equation py= RT; p, the pressure of the

* All weights are to be calculated in grams, here as elsewhere in this book.

CHAP. V VAPOUR PRESSURE OF SOLUTIONS 135

vapour, is equal to f, and d= a as the formula holds for one molecular
Vv

weight of vapour. Therefore oes
If we now introduce into. the equation f/=f-—hd the values
a and eee Pe telows that f=f(1 =e ore ak. As

the result of the experiments by Raoult we found (p. 132) the formula
f-f n

eee ena |
made with solutions of finite concentration, while the calculations only
hold for infinitely small concentrations ; if n is very small compared
with N, both formule give the same result.

The difference arises from these experiments being

CHAPTER VI
THE FREEZING-POINT OF SOLUTIONS

A HUNDRED years ago J. Blagden (1788), in a research unusually
exact for that age, found between the temperatures at which salt-
solutions solidify and the strength of these solutions, the simple relation
that they are proportional. His work, however, fell completely into
oblivion. Riidorff in 1861 rediscovered the same fact, and in 1871
de Coppet, who confirmed this result, added the rule that different
substances of analogous nature depressed the freezing-point by the
same amount if they were dissolved in water in the proportion of their
molecular weights.

The further development of our knowledge of this subject was for
a long time arrested by the investigation being confined exclusively to
water as the solvent, and salts as the experimental substances.

Only when F. M. Raoult studied, in the first instance (1882),
aqueous solutions of indifferent organic substances, was the simple law
ascertained that equimolecular* solutions have the same point of
solidification. When other substances were then employed as solvents
the same result was found, so that the following general formula may
be given. .

If A be the depression of the freezing-point of the solvent caused
by the solution of n molecular weights of the substance in g grams of
the solvent, we have

Ame Tes
8
where r is a constant, which depends only on the nature of the solvent.

If the molecular weight of the substance is not known, it can easily be
ascertained by determining the depression when p grams of it are dis-

solved in g grams of the solvent. We have then n=, so that the
m
* By equimolecular solutions we mean such as contain, in the same quantity of

the sonar quantities of the dissolved substances proportional to their molecular
weights.

CHAP, VI THE FREEZING-POINT OF SOLUTIONS 137

equation becomes A=“), or
-mg
1 Tp
Ne

from which we get the molecular weight.

The constant r, which as we saw above is dependent on the nature of the
solvent, may be determined by dissolving sub-
stances of known molecular weight in the liquid
and observing the depression) Introducing
the values so obtained into the first formula,

Ag

we get r=

This law also holds in the first instance
only for indifferent substances ; salts, strong
acids, and bases are exceptional in their
behaviour. These exceptions, however, are
again closely related to those noted in the
case of osmotic pressure and the lowering
of vapour pressure ; the depressions actually
observed are greater than those calculated,
and the ratios between the observed and
calculated values are the same for the
various substances as those found by the
other methods.

The apparatus of Beckmann (1888), sketched
in Fig. 16, is the best for the practical deter-
mination of the depression of the freezing-point.
The glass tube A contains a thermometer D
divided into hundredths of a degree, and a
stirring rod made of stout platinum wire. A
weighed quantity of the solvent is introduced
into A, which is then placed into a somewhat
wider tube B, used to form an air-jacket be-
tween A and the wide outer vessel C, into the
lid of which A is fixed. This external glass
vessel contains water or a freezing mixture, the
temperature of which lies from 2° to 5° below
the freezing-point of the liquid. ‘The thermo-
meter is now observed while the liquid is kept
constantly stirred, small clippings of platinum
being introduced into A to aid in the thorough
mixing. At first in consequence of overcooling
it sinks below the freezing-point, thereupon suddenly to rise to the correct
temperature when the solid substance separates. The freezing-point of the
solvent being in this way exactly determined, a known quantity of the

TOTO NU
COLELLO TT

138 OUTLINES OF GENERAL CHEMISTRY BOOK IV

substance to be investigated is introduced from a weighed vessel through the
side tube into A, the liquid is thoroughly stirred and the experiment
repeated. The freezing now takes place at a lower temperature, and the
difference of the two temperatures is A in the equations.

With somewhat concentrated solutions there is often a very strong over-
cooling, so that on solidification a large quantity of ice* separates. The
solution still remaining is thus too concentrated, and the observed tempera-
ture too low. Most of the ice is then allowed to melt, and when only a
small quantity is left the apparatus is again brought into the cooled outer
vessel,

It is natural to expect between the phenomena of the depression
of the freezing-point and the lowering of vapour pressure some such
theoretical connection as we found between the latter and the osmotic
pressure. The connection in fact exists, and was deduced theoretically
by C. M. Guldberg (1870). Van’t Hoff (1886) completed the theory
in several important points, and showed how to derive the constant r
from other magnitudes.

First of all we must find an answer to the question whether pure
ice is deposited or if the solution freezes as a whole. From the experi-
ments made on this subject and the discussion arising from them it
appears that the former alternative is the correct one. As long as the
solution is not so concentrated that the dissolved substance crystallises
out owing to the lowering of temperature, pure ice alone separates.

Now the same mode of reasoning as we employed on p. 125 shows
that the temperature at which ice can separate from the solution is
that at which ice and the solution have the
same vapour pressure. In Fig. 17, b now
represents the solution, a ice, and c¢ the
vapour. If the ice, for instance, had a greater
vapour pressure than the solution it would
sublime from a to b; from the now diluted
solution ice would separate at. a, and the
perpetual motion would thus be obtained.
The same could also be got if the vapour
pressure of b were greater than that of a.
As both these cases, then, are inadmissible,

Fic. 17. the vapour pressure of the ice and of the
| solution must be the same.

From this it follows, therefore, that the laws which we found for the
vapour pressure of equimolecular solutions also hold for the depression
of the freezing-point.

To render the relations which obtain here quite plain, let ww in
Fig. 18 represent the curve of vapour pressure for water, the tempera-
tures being the abscissee and the pressures the ordinates. The curve

* Ice is here used quite generally for the solidified solvent, be it water, benzene,
or any other substance.

CHAP, VI THE FREEZING-POINT OF SOLUTIONS 139

for ice e has one point (at 0° namely) in common with the curve for
water, for if the vapour pressures at the temperature at which ice and
water can exist together were different there would be a possibility
of obtaining the perpetual motion. Below 0° the ice curve runs
beneath the curve for (over-
cooled) water. The curve for a
solution ll, finally, runs below’
that for water, so that its
abscisse always form the same
fraction of those of water.
The freezing-point of the solu-
tion is the abscissa of the
point where the curves e and
1 cut each other, for both ice
and the solution, as we just
proved, must have the same
vapour pressure.

The differences of temperature of which we have here to take
account are small enough to justify us in considering the corresponding
portions of the curves of vapour pressure as straight lines. It is then
clear that the point of section of e and | will move in the same pro-
portion to the left as 1 sinks under w. Now this sinking, or the
relative lowering of vapour pressure, has been already found both
theoretically and experimentally to be proportional to the strength of
the solution, and therefore the depression of the freezing-point must
be also proportional to the concentration; which is confirmed by
experiment, as we have already seen. |

Fria. 18.

The constant r may be deduced from the laws of the dynamical theory
of heat in the following way. We imagine a large quantity of a solution of n
gram molecules of substance in g grams of solvent enclosed in a cylinder with
a semi-permeable wall. By a pressure on the piston a little greater than the
osmotic pressure, so much of the solvent is pressed out as corresponds to the
volume in which a gram molecule of the substance is dissolved. The work
required for this, if p be the osmotic pressure and v the volume just men-
tioned, is equal to pv, which in its turn is equal to RT. Let this process be
performed at the melting-point T of the solvent. The quantity of liquid

ee
pressed out is — grams.
n

o
We now let this quantity of the solvent freeze, when ou calories are

evolved if w is the latent heat of fusion of the solvent. We then cool every-
thing by A till the freezing-point of the solution is reached, bring the ice

oC
into contact with the solution and let it melt. AW calories are absorbed,

but now at the temperature T—A. Lastly, we warm the whole up to T
again, so that the system regains its initial state,

140 OUTLINES OF GENERAL CHEMISTRY BOOK IV

Such a process as that just described is called a cycle, and if this satisfies
certain conditions (which are here fulfilled) thermo-dynamics teaches us that

eet a
he work done by heat in this case is equal to the fraction T of the total heat

passing from the higher to the lower temperature, where A is the difference
of temperature and T the absolute temperature of the transformation. In

Agw
the present case the total heat is ow, so that the portion —8™ is transformed

Tn
into work, But this work has been found equal to pv or RT, whence
Ag
a =RT. R must be here expressed in thermal units; this value has
been already calculated and found equal to 2 (p. 72).
Agw Beau
We have therefore -,— =2T or A=—— .—. If we compare this value
fea w g

or?
with that given on p. 136 for A, it follows that r= see The constant r is

thus determined by the latent heat of fusion w, and the absolute temperature

of fusion.
: é te
To test this theoretical result, Pata van’t Hoff, to whom we owe the

calculation, deduced the constants of several substances from the known
values of the latent heat and the melting-points, and compared them with the
empirically found constants of Raoult. The numbers are :—

4k WwW aS r
WwW
Water : ; ; : 273 79 1890 1850
Acetic acid : a? 290 43°2 3880 3860
Formic acid : : : 281°5 556 2840 2770
Benzene* . : ; : 277°9 29°1 5300 5000
Nitro-benzene . ‘ é Ste 225 6950 7070

If we consider the comparative roughness with which some of the heats of
fusion have been determined, the agreement is very satisfactory.

CHAPTER VII
SALT-SOLUTIONS

As has already been mentioned, a large group of substances—acids,
bases, and salts, to wit—do not obey the simple laws in aqueous solu-
tion. This is no property peculiar to these substances as such, for in
alcoholic and ethereal solution they behave quite normally and act as
calculated from their molecular weights. In the same way water
occupies no exceptional place with regard to other solvents when in-
different substances are dissolved in it. The exceptional behaviour
only appears when the above substances are dissolved in water, and is
a result of the mutual action of both factors.*

The molecular weight of these substances when determined from
their aqueous solutions by any of the previous methods is always
smaller than it ought to be according to the chemical formula. If M
is the molecular weight corresponding to the formula, and M,, that
found in aqueous solution, we may put M=1iM,, where 1 is a number
always greater than 1 and possibly as large as 4 or 5. It is to be
noted that all the methods give the same value of 1 for one and the
same solution. A solution of potassium chloride for which i is nearly
equal to 2, exhibits not only twice the depression of the freezing-
point that corresponds to the formula, but the lowering of vapour
pressure and the osmotic pressure are too great in the same ratio of
2:1. The number i is therefore not dependent on the method
employed, but only on the nature of the dissolved substance, and in a
certain measure on the concentration and the temperature.

The explanation of these phenomena has already been indicated.
We must assume that the substances in question are dissociated in
their solutions, 7.¢. split up into smaller molecules, just as ammonium
chloride is dissociated in the vaporous state. It is true that here the
dissociation is of a peculiar kind, connected in the most intimate way

* It may be well to state here what will be seen later to be of decisive importance
for the theory of these phenomena—namely, that solutions which are thus
exceptional, and only such, are electrolytes. The two properties are always
associated, not a single exception being known.

142 OUTLINES OF GENERAL CHEMISTRY _ BOOK IV

with the electrical properties of the solutions, as will be shown more

in detail in Book IX., on Electrochemistry. At this place it need
only be mentioned that, proper consideration of the factor i being
taken, the solutions of acids, bases, and salts also ohey the general laws
of solutions.

Numerous observations have been made as to the properties of
salt-solutions, which have led to some more or less general relations.
Valson’s Law of Moduli (1874) is an example. If the specific
gravities of different solutions containing equivalent quantities of salts
in the same quantity of water be so arranged in a table that all salts
with the same base come into one perpendicular column, and those with
the same acid into one horizontal row, the difference between cor-
responding members of the series in both directions is constant. From
this it follows that the specific gravity of equivalent salt-solutions is
composed additively of two members, one of which depends only on
the acid, the other only on the base.

Valson chose a normal ammonium chloride solution (49°5 g. per
litre), whose specific gravity is 1°015, as his starting-point and
determined the following addenda, expressed in units of the third
place, for the calculation of the specific gravities of other solutions—.

Potassium : 30 Iron NEY Chiorides.-. 740
Sodium Rass Zine sm DeLee Bromides  . 34
Calcium aan: Copper . 42 Iodides ee oe
Magnesium . 20 Cadmium 61 Sulphates . 20
Strontium . 55 Lead shales Nitrates kD
Barium MO Silver?—.. “105 Carbonates . 14
Manganese . 37 Bicarbonates 16

\

Thus if we want to determine the density of a normal solution of
calcium nitrate, we must add to 1°015 the constant ‘027 for calcium
and °015 for nitric acid, which gives 1:057, agreeing very nearly with
experiment.

This relation has been extended by Bender (1883), who showed that the
density of a solution containing n equivalents of a salt could be obtained by
adding to the density of an ammonium chloride solution of n equivalents
the n-fold value of the moduli. This new relation is, however, by no means
perfectly exact.

The densities of the solutions of one and the same salt in water
are not, as one might suppose, of such magnitude that the excess of
these values over unity is proportional to the quantity of salt dis-
solved. This would be approximately the case if a concentrated salt
solution could be mixed with water without change of volume. A
contraction, however, regularly takes place; the volume of the dilute
solution becomes smaller, and its specific gravity therefore greater than
it ought to be according to calculation.

All these relations appear much clearer if instead of the specific

ae, ae

CHAP, VII ; SALT-SOLUTIONS 143

gravity we consider the specific volume. Ostwald (1878) made a
series of detailed experiments on the change of volume during chemical
processes, from which resulted the following general conclusions.

_ If an acid is neutralised by a base, both being in aqueous solution,
an increase of volume takes place if the base is potash or soda, a
diminution of volume if itis ammonia. The change of volume depends
on the nature of the acid; it is some 20 c. cm. when 1 1. of normal
potash solution is mixed with 1 1. of normal hydrochloric acid, and
falls to 6°3 c. cm. with potash and isobutyric acid.

If the changes of volume given by a base with the acids A,, A,,
A;, . . . be compared with those given by another base with the
same acids, it will be found that the differences for all the acids are
the same—are consequently independent of the nature of the acids.
Similarly the differences between the changes of volume given by
different acids with the same base have the same value for all
bases.

The change of volume on neutralisation is thus additively com-
posed of two terms, one of which is determined only by the base, the
other only by the acid; the particular nature of the salt formed
having no influence on the result, provided that all remains dis-
solved.

The connection between this fact and Valson’s Law of Moduli is obvious.
The volume v of a salt-solution is given by the formula v=a+b+d,+d, ;
it is equal to the sum of the volumes of the solutions of the acid, and of the
base plus a change of volume d, dependent on the acid alone, and one d,
dependent on the base alone. If we write the equation in the form
v=(a+d,)+(b+d,) we see still more plainly that the volume of the salt-
solution is represented as the sum of two volumes determined respectively
by the base and by the acid. As now the volumes are inversely as the
densities, and, as in the present case they do not differ very much from
ies 1—a—f (where a and P are the “ moduli”),
and consequently perceive that the law of moduli is a consequence of. the
law of volumes for neutralisation.

unity, we may put

The above relations show that the nature of the salt produced
by neutralisation in aqueous solution has no specific influence, but
only the nature of the two components. This circumstance likewise
points to the conclusion already indicated, which will be more
thoroughly established in the sequel, that in salt-solutions the two
components of the salts, metal and acid radical, exist almost inde-
pendent of one another.

BOOK V

THE PROPERTIES OF SOLIDS

CHA Ei
GENERAL PROPERTIES

SoLips differ from liquids by possessing not only a proper volume
but also a proper form. Together with the causes which in liquids
preserve the mean distance of the particles unchanged, and thus
determine the volume, we have also in the case of solid substances
causes which determine the relative position of the particles—the
form.

According to the molecular hypothesis a solid is consequently a
body whose molecules so influence each other that their displacement
relatively to each other is not easily brought about. We can explain
such a state by assuming that in the interaction of the molecules their
form comes into play, inasmuch as they act differently in different
directions, and an expenditure of work is necessary to alter their
relative positions.

The passage from liquids to solids is gradual. As its internal
friction increases, a liquid assumes more and more the properties of a
solid. That some bodies undoubtedly solid, such as glass for instance,
still retain a trace of liquid properties is shown by the well-known
fact that a long straight glass rod placed horizontally and supported
only at its ends gradually “sags” and becomes bent. Its particles
follow the influence of gravity like those of a liquid, only incompar-
ably more slowly.

Besides this property of slowly sufferimg permanent deformation,
which probably all solids possess, though in very different degree, they
have also the capability of experiencing transitory deformations
which disappear immediately the deforming cause is removed. We
distinguish here two essentially different properties, one of which

CHAP. I GENERAL PROPERTIES 145

corresponds to the compressibility of liquids, while the other is
peculiar to solids alone and comes into play when they suffer change
of form, as by bending, torsion, and the like. The latter we call
elasticity. It is impossible to separate this entirely from the com-
pressibility, as changes of volume always accompany changes of form,
and the observed coefficients of elasticity (so-called) are really functions
of both values.

Solid substances occur in two very different states, to which the
names amorphous and crystalline have been given. Solids in the ~
first state only can be arranged in a continuous series with liquids ;
they may be looked upon as liquids having very great internal friction.
Quite a new condition is added in the crystalline state. The molecules
are no longer arranged haphazard as in liquids and amorphous solids,
but their form has in some way conditioned a regular arrangement,
and this makes itself apparent in the corresponding regular form of
the whole mass and in the differences exhibited by numerous properties
in different directions.

To get an idea of the difference between the two states we can imagine
the amorphous body as a confused heap of bricks, while the crystalline body
is a regular structure made by their arrangement in layers. It should be
at once mentioned that though the latter arrangement is in general the
denser, it need not be so. The bricks may be built together in such a way
that spaces occur between them quite regularly, so that they occupy a larger
volume than when piled up without regard to any order. This explains
' why in certain, though rare, cases, the density of a crystalline substance is
less than that of the same substance in the amorphous or even the liquid
form.

CHAPTER II
FUSION AND SOLIDIFICATION

Ir has been stated above that the amorphous state forms the regular
continuation of the liquid state. No sudden change takes place
between them, and in particular amorphous substances have no real
melting-point. This passage from one state to another is so far to
be compared to that of liquids into gases under a greater than the
critical pressure. The passage from the liquid to the crystalline state,
on the other hand, is a sudden one; it takes place at a definite
temperature, at which both states can exist together, while at other
temperatures only one of the two forms is stable. This is comparable
to the passage of a vapour into a liquid below the critical pressure,
and indeed the similarity of the two phenomena is very far-reaching.

If a liquid capable of passing into the crystalline state is slowly
and carefully cooled, no separation in general takes place when the
temperature is reached at which the crystalline form can exist along
with the liquid, but the liquid, by increase of its viscosity, approaches
the amorphous solid state. Such liquids, when brought into contact
with a small quantity of the crystalline solid, immediately pass more
or less completely into the crystalline state; they become at the same
time warm from the heat produced by the solidification, but naturally
their temperature does not rise higher than the melting-point.

If care be taken that a little of the crystalline substance is present
beforehand, then the phenomenon of overcooling does not appear,
but the passage from the liquid to the crystalline state takes place
quite regularly at a definite temperature, which remains constant
during the whole transformation, as the heat lost by conduction and
radiation is exactly replaced by the heat of solidification until the last
particle has become solid.

In this respect there is a complete analogy to vapours. These
also may be overcooled, but the state of overcooling ceases to exist as
soon as a little of the liquid is introduced (p. 84).

To the reverse phenomenon, the superheating of liquids (p. 84),
we know of no analogue in crystalline substances, If the latter are

OHAP, II FUSION AND SOLIDIFICATION 147

heated they begin to liquefy or melt at a definite temperature identical
with their point of solidification, and notwithstanding the external
supply of heat, remain at this temperature until all is liquid, the heat
being used up in the process of liquefaction.

The similarity to the passage from the liquid to the gaseous state, and
vice versd, is still further to be observed in the dependence of the melting as
well as of the boiling point on the external pressure. The latter always
rises with increase of pressure (for the vapour in every case occupies a larger
volume than the liquid), whereas the melting-point only does so when the
substance on fusion increases in volume. If the volume diminishes, as in
the case of the melting of ice, then the melting-point sinks as the pressure
increases (James Thomson 1849, Bunsen 1850), The influence of pressure
is, however, very small, ¢.g. 1 atm. lowers the melting-point of ice 0°007°.

The solidification of an overcooled liquid on contact with a crystal
of the same substance is an effect produced exclusively by the latter.
If, for instance, we dip into fused sodium thiosulphate cooled to the
ordinary temperature a glass rod covered with the same salt, crystals
begin at once to develop round the rod. If these are then removed
carefully from the liquid so that no crystalline particle remains behind,
there is no further solidification; the liquid state is retained. An
overcooled liquid therefore is not per se in an unstable state; this is
only the case when some of the solid substance is present.

We readily find an explanation of this from the molecular theory.
In a liquid the molecules move about quite confusedly and assume
all conceivable relative positions. No special position is favoured. A
crystal of the same substance, if introduced when the temperature is
above the melting-point, will liquefy, for then the kinetic energy of
molecular motion is greater than the work necessary to break up the
crystalline aggregate. If the temperature is just at the melting-point,
the two magnitudes balance each other. As many molecules leave
the crystal in a given time as are added to it, so that in general its
size remains unaltered. If the temperature is lower than the point
of solidification fewer molecules are freed from the crystal than are
captured by it—the crystal grows.

If now the liquid is allowed to cool, no crystal being present, the
molecules receive no impulse to assume a regular arrangement, and
there is “‘overcooling.” The kinetic energy of the molecules decreases,
they get nearer and nearer to each other, and it may happen that
amongst the many encounters one may occur so that the molecules
will just be in the specially stable regular arrangement that determines
the crystalline form. ‘The circumstances are then given under which
the liquid crystallises spontaneously ; the molecules add themselves
gradually to the crystalline nucleus, those being retained that approach
in a suitable way, until the melting-point is reached on account of the
rise of temperature, and then equal numbers of molecules enter and
leave the crystal.

148 OUTLINES OF GENERAL CHEMISTRY BOOK V

If a crystal is introduced into the overcooled liquid before it begins
to crystallise spontaneously, the process described comes into operation
at once; if the crystal is again removed, there is no longer any cause
for new crystals separating out.

The possibility of overcooling obviously depends, according to the above
view, on the ease with which the molecules fortuitously come into the
required regular position. Mobile liquids will be much more difficult to
overcool than viscous liquids, and the crystallisation of a given liquid will
take place more readily the larger quantity we take of it. For, since it
suffices that the requisite arrangement of the molecules should occur at one
spot, the probability of crystallisation evidently increases with the total
number of molecules, z.¢. with the quantity of the overcooled liquid.

CHAPTER III
SOLUTIONS OF SOLIDS IN LIQUIDS

THE solution of solids in liquids and their separation from solution
show even greater similarity to the processes of vaporisation and
condensation than do the melting and solidification of solids. If a
crystalline solid is brought into contact with a suitable liquid, its
particles become distributed through the liquid—it dissolves. This
process of solution proceeds until there has been reached in the liquid
a definite concentration dependent on the nature of both substances
and on the temperature ; there is then equilibrium. The similarity to
vaporisation is complete when we remember that dissolved substances
too have a pressure—the osmotic pressure (p. 127); solution, like
vaporisation, continues until the proper pressure is established.

The equilibrium between the solution and the solid has its origin
in their mutual action, and is therefore dependent on the nature of
both. A definite solution pressure may be ascribed to every solid
with respect to any given liquid ata given temperature, just as each
liquid possesses a definite vapour pressure. Solution, like vaporisation,
will go on until the opposing pressure has become equal to the solution
pressure (Nernst, 1889).

Consequently the solubility of a chemical compound is only
determined when it is stated what definite solid is referred to.
Calcium sulphate is much more soluble in water when anhydrous than
in the form of hydrated crystalline gypsum. We cannot, therefore,
speak at all of the solubility of calcium sulphate unless we specify
whether the anhydrous or the hydrated salt is meant.

For reasons both practical and theoretical much work has been done on
the solubility of solids, especially of salts in water. The relation between
temperature and solubility is most clearly shown by curves, the temperatures
being the abscissee and the quantities dissolved by 100 parts of the solvent
the ordinates. (Figs. 19-22.) We see that most of the curves are of such a
form that they rise towards the right at an increasing rate, thus resembling
the curves of vapour pressure. There are, however, substances which show
decreasing solubility with rise of temperature, eg. calcium hydroxide,

150 OUTLINES OF GENERAL CHEMISTRY BOOK V

calcium isobutyrate. A close connection exists between the influence of
temperature on the solubility and the change of temperature on solution.
Substances whose almost saturated solutions would cool on taking up a
further quantity of the solid increase in solubility with the temperature, and

Fic. 21.—Iodides. Fic. 22.—Nitrates.

vice verst. This is a special case of a perfectly general principle, viz. when a .

system is in equilibrium and any one of the conditions of equilibrium is
forcibly altered, the accompanying phenomena take place in such a way as to
resist the compulsive force.

Some of the curves are evidently made up of several distinct portions, e.g.
strontium nitrate, Fig. 22. In such cases the separate portions belong to
(different solids, usually hydrates with different quantities of water.

. CHAP, III SOLUTIONS OF SOLIDS IN LIQUIDS Tot

Want of attention to the circumstance that solubility can only
be defined with reference to a perfectly definite solid has led to much
misconception. If Glauber’s salt, Na,SO,+10H,O, is dissolved in
water the solvent with increasing temperature takes up more and more
of the salt until 33° is reached. If now the mixture of the salt and
water is further heated, the solubility decreases until at 100° it is only
half as great as at 33°. The usual explanation is that the hydrated
salt is contained in the solution below 33°, and the anhydrous salt
above 33°. ‘This, however, is wrong, for the solutions of sodium
sulphate show no discontinuity in any property at this point.

The explanation should rather be that Na,SO, + 10H,O only exists —
below 33°; if it is heated alone above this temperature the crystals
melt and anhydrous salt separates. The break in the curve therefore
is not due to the existence of different salts in the solution, but to
the presence of different salts in contact with the solution. The
solubility up to 33° is that of Glauber’s salt, above 33° it is that of
the anhydrous sulphate ; at 33° the two curves meet. The curve of
the anhydrous salt may be traced below 33° by introducing this salt
into the solution. Much more is dissolved than corresponds to the
solubility of the hydrated salt.

The phenomena in supersaturated solutions are now comprehensible.
If a salt solution is allowed to cool or to evaporate there is in general no
reason for the deposition of a solid. If, however, the osmotic pressure
in the solution exceeds the solution pressure of one of the salts which
may separate, and a particle of this salt is brought into contact with
the solution, a rapid separation of the salt results and continues
until a state of equilibrium is reached. Such solutions are called
supersaturated, but it is clear that the supersaturation is only with
respect to a definite solid; without this reference the expression is
meaningless

From a cold solution of sodium sulphate there can separate Na,SO, + 7H,O
as well as Na,SO,+ 10H,O. As the former is more soluble than the latter,
solutions can be prepared which crystallise at once on contact with
Na,SO,+ 10H,0, «¢. are supersaturated with respect to this salt, while on the
other hand they can still dissolve small quantities of Na,SO,+7H,0, ie.
are not yet saturated with respect to this substance. If such solutions are
further cooled they may be supersaturated with reference to both salts. The
relative character of the two phenomena is here specially manifest.

The molecular hypothesis accounts for these processes in the same
way as it did for fusion and solidification, so that the considerations on
p. 147 may be applied here almost without alteration. On contact. of
a soluble substance with its solvent its molecules are offered the op-
portunity of unconstrained movement ; they enter the solvent until in
the same time equal numbers of molecules leave the solid and are again
taken up by it. This evidently depends on the number of molecules
contained in unit volume of the solution, i.e. on the concentration. If

152 OUTLINES OF GENERAL CHEMISTRY ~ BOOK V

the solid is brought into a solution of greater concentration it will take
up more molecules than it gives out ; the liquid is “supersaturated” and
the crystal grows. If the crystal is removed, the cause of the separa-
tion is no more at work and the solution remains “supersaturated.”
The spontaneous crystallisation of a supersaturated solution depends
on exactly the same circumstances as the solidification of an overcooled
fused mass, to which the student may again refer (p. 147).

It should be stated in conclusion that the application of these relations is
by no means limited to aqueous solutions ; they hold for solutions with other
solvents as well as for fusions of. all kinds. In particular they play a
decisive part—one hitherto far too much neglected—in the crystallisation of
melted silicates, as in the case of lavas and other eruptive rocks, and form
the foundation for the right comprehension of these exceedingly important
geological phenomena.

The above conception of the saturation of solutions puts us at once
in a position to understand a class of phenomena which formerly pre-
sented great difficulties, viz. the solubility of mixtures of salts. On
this subject we have researches by Kopp (1840), Karsten (1841),
Hauer (1860), and in particular by Riidorff (1873), the chief results of
which are the following.

Certain salts when together in contact with water dissolve in such
a way that a solution of definite concentration is formed at a given
temperature, its nature being independent of the quantity of the salts
present, provided only that they are in excess. Such salts are the
chlorides and nitrates of the alkali metals and of ammonia, potassium
and lead nitrates, the chlorides of barium and ammonium, the sul-
phates of sodium and copper, and the chlorides of sodium and copper.

Other salts have the property that they displace each other from
solution, so that quite different saturated solutions are obtained
according to the different proportions of salts taken. These salts fall
into two groups ; they are either isomorphous, or they can form double
salts. The two groups behave, however, differently, a fact hitherto —
unnoticed. If one of the components of a double salt is dissolved in
a solution of the latter by warming and the whole then allowed to
crystallise, it is found that the quantity of the other component in the
resulting solution is diminished. If the process be repeated a solution
of constant composition is finally obtained, from which the last
portion of the salt cannot be displaced. The same thing happens on
addition of the other component. Instead of the pure solutions
yielded by the groups of salts of the first type, we obtain two limiting
solutions of constant composition, together with all intermediate
ratios. |

Isomorphous salts displace each other, in general, completely if the
solution is repeatedly treated in the hot state with one of the pair
and allowed to crystallise.

CHAP. III SOLUTIONS OF SOLIDS IN LIQUIDS 153

_ The explanation of this behaviour is simple. As the nature of
the solution is determined by that of the solid body in contact with
it, a solution of constant composition will always be obtained when
the composition of the solid is constant. This is the case with salts
that do not crystallise together, neither as double salts nor as isomor-
phous mixtures. From solutions of a mixture of them saturated in the
hot state the salts separate out unchanged, and the solution is saturated
with respect to both salts, however much of each may be present.
The phenomenon is perfectly analogous to that of the vaporisation of
immiscible liquids, the vapour in this case having a composition
independent of the proportions of the liquids present.

When a double salt is dissolved, a solution saturated with reference
to it is obtained. If now an excess of one component is added, an
additional factor is introduced — the solubility of the simple salt.
With sufficient quantities of the latter a solution must at last be
formed which is saturated both for the double and for the simple salt,
and there is in general a much smaller quantity of the double salt
dissolved than is contained in the saturated solution of it alone. The
same considerations are applicable to the other component; here also
we must get a solution simultaneously saturated for the double and
the simple salt. On the whole, then, there are three saturated solu-
tions: one for the double salt alone, and one each for it and one of the
two simple salts. Between the two last solutions all possible gradations
can be obtained ; these, however, are not stable in contact with the
‘solids, but are always undergoing a slow transformation.

For substances which can form isomorphous mixtures in all pro-
portions there is a different state of saturation for each composition of
the solid. Equilibrium is established with respect to a solid (the
deposited isomorphous mixture) which can have any composition
between those of the two pure salts, so that there is here no question
of a definite solubility at all. 7

CHAPTER IV
CRYSTALS

Ir has already been several times stated that solids are often so built
up that their particles are arranged according to some definite law.
This regular arrangement is seen wherever direction comes into ques-
tion, for example in external form, elasticity, optical properties,
thermal conductivity, and the like. While these properties have equal
values in all directions in amorphous bodies, they are only equal in
parallel directions in crystals, as we call such bodies with regular
structure ; in other directions they are in general different.

Of the properties here in question the external form was the first
to be noticed and investigated. Nicolas Steno (1669) discovered the
law that while in different crystals of the same substance the form and
size of the faces may alter in any way, the angles between the faces
remain always the same.

Another regularity among the different faces of a crystal was
found by Haiiy (1781), who stated it as follows :—If we imagine, and
this is always possible, that the simplest forms of a crystal are built
up of prismatic elements with definite angles and proportions of the
edges, then we can with similar prismatic elements construct all other
forms occurring on the crystal so that the surfaces drawn through the
corresponding corners of the elementary prisms represent the faces of
the crystal.

Crystallography received its present form from Weiss (1809), who
introduced the idea of referring the different crystalline forms to
definite systems of axes. ‘The following laws on this method of
representation correspond to the two just mentioned. Firstly, every
substance has a system of axes whose angles and relative lengths have
definite values; and, secondly, the different faces occurring on the
crystal, when moved parallel to themselves to cut one axis in a given
point, cut the other axes so that the segments of any of these stand
in simple rational proportions to each other.

To these two laws must be added a third,—the law of sym-
metry, the recognition of which is also partially due to Haiiy. It was

CHAPSIV .. CRYSTALS 155

first established completely only very much later, by von Lang (1865).
It is to the effect that crystals are in general symmetrical structures,
i.e. that planes may be drawn through them with respect to which
the parts of the crystal on either side are to each other as object and
reflected image. The number and position of these planes are different,
and a systematic classification of crystals can be made by means of
them.

Corresponding to their increasing symmetry, crystals are divided
into six groups, which will now be shortly discussed, so far as a
knowledge of them is necessary for our general theoretical purposes.

The simplest and least regular system is the asymmetric. The
system of axes to which it may be referred consists of. three unequal
straight lines all inclined to each other. There is no plane of sym-
metry, the regularity of formation being confined to the fact that in
a fully developed crystal each face has a parallel face opposite it.
If the possible eight planes are laid through the ends of the axes we
obtain the fundamental form of the system, in which the opposite
pairs of faces only are equivalent. As independent forms of the
- asymmetric system we have, therefore, only parallel pairs of surfaces.

In the monosymmetric system there is one plane of symmetry.
The system of axes consists of two inclined straight lines, and a third
perpendicular to the plane of the first two—the plane of symmetry.
If any plane is made to pass through the axes, this conditions a sym-
metrically situated second plane lying as the mirror image of the first
reflected in the plane of symmetry. To each of these two planes we have
the opposed parallel planes, so that the forms of the monosymmetric
system are composed of open four-faced or prismatic figures. Each
of these can pass into a pair of parallel faces by two opposite angles
becoming more and more acute. The forms of the monosymmetric
system are therefore composed of open prisms and parallel pairs of
surfaces. The octahedral fundamental form, obtained by laying eight
planes through the ends of the axes, is merely a combination of two
independent prisms.

In the rhombic system there are three planes of symmetry, and
the axes are three unequal straight lines all intersecting at right
angles. If any plane be made to cut all the axes, the first plane
of symmetry determines a second symmetrically situated plane. The
second plane of symmetry doubles this number, and thus we have
four planes. The third plane of symmetry (determined by the presence
of the other two) generates no new planes, but only the opposed
parallel faces, so that there is produced an eight-faced closed form
(the rhombic pyramid of Fig. 23). By choosing this as the funda-
mental form we can get the derived pyramids by rational multiplica-
tion or division of one or two axes (Figs. 24 and 25) according to the
fundamental law of crystallography.

If one of the axes increases indefinitely the pyramid passes finally

156 OUTLINES OF GENERAL CHEMISTRY BOOK V _

into a prism, there being three sorts of these prisms, one parallel to
each axis. If two axes are prolonged to infinity we get parallel pairs
of surfaces, there being again three distinct pairs, one at right angles
to each of the three axes. All the forms of the rhombic system are
composed of these three fundamental types

If two of the planes of symmetry of the rhombic system become
equivalent we obtain the quadratic system. Corresponding to the
condition above mentioned, the axes lying in the equivalent planes
are also equivalent, so that the system of axes consists of three
straight lines at right angles to each other, two being equal but

CHAP; IV CRYSTALS LF

different from the third. If the right angle between the two equal
axes is bisected, and a plane be made to contain the bisecting line
and the third axis, the two first axes are symmetrical with respect to
this plane, which, together with a perpendicular plane (also passing
through the third axis), is therefore to be conceived as a plane of
symmetry. The rhombic system has consequently five planes of
symmetry.

Ii any face cut the three axes, it will be doubled by the first
plane of symmetry; the second will determine four, and the third
eight similar faces. ‘The fourth and fifth planes of symmetry generate
only parallel faces. The general form is thus composed of sixteen
planes giving an eight-sided double pyramid (Fig. 26). It is called
the biquadratic pyramid, and may assume different forms by alteration
in rational proportions of the singular or principal axis, as well as
of the equal or secondary axes.

Fic. 26. Take, Bie

If the principal axis be cut at an ever-increasing distance, biquad-
ratic prisms (Fig. 27) are finally obtained. When the two secondary
axes are cut at equal distances from their intersection the neighbouring
faces coincide in pairs, so that we obtain an eight-sided figure—the
quadratic pyramid. An exactly similar form is produced when any
one of the secondary axes is indefinitely extended. Both forms, by
prolongation of the principal axis, pass into four-sided prisms. By
simultaneous extension of both secondary axes a two-sided figure is
‘got, the faces being at right angles to the principal axis.

The hexagonal system, in many respects similar to the quad-
ratic, is obtained when not four planes of symmetry at 45°, but three
at 60° contain the principal axis. We thus get a system of axes
consisting of three equal straight lines in one plane intersecting at
an angle of 60°, and a fourth line perpendicular to the plane of the
others.

158 OUTLINES OF GENERAL CHEMISTRY - BOOK V

The most general form is a twelve-sided double pyramid (Fig. 28),
which passes by gradual simplification into the hexagonal pyramid
(Fig. 29), the dihexagonal prism (Fig. 30), the hexagonal prism (Fig.
31), which can be obtained in two positions, and lastly into a pair of
faces at right angles to the principal axis. The derivation of the
forms is quite the same as in the quadratic system.

Fig. 28

A a a ee ee ae a

-_—-

Fic. 30, Ie eile

The regular system results when all the planes of symmetry of
the quadratic system are made equivalent. The axes are then three
equal straight lines at right angles, and in addition to the three ©
principal planes of symmetry there are six others. The group of six-
teen faces developed as the most general form of the quadratic system
is repeated at each of the three axes, so that here the most general
form is a forty-eight-sided figure (Fig. 32). By gradual simplification
this hexakisoctahedron passes into all the other forms of the regular
system. If one axis is taken as the unit and the others made equal

CHAP, IV CRYSTALS 159

to the same multiple of it, the icositetrahedron (Fig. 33) is the result ;
if two axes are made equal to unity, the pyramid octahedron (Fig. 34)
is produced. When all the axes are equal we have the fundamental
form, the octahedron (Fig. 35). One axis becoming infinite gives from

the hexakisoctahedron the pyramid cube (Fig. 36); if, in addition, the
two other axes are equal, the rhombic dodecahedron (Fig. 37) results ;
finally, if two axes are cut by the faces only at infinity, we get the
cube (Fig. 38). :

Besides these forms, which are generated by the complete development
of all faces demanded by the relations of symmetry, there are others derived

160 OUTLINES OF GENERAL CHEMISTRY BOOK V

from the first kind by the regular omission of certain faces. Such
hemihedral forms are most numerous in the most symmetrical, the regular
system ; they also, however, occur in the quadratic and hexagonal systems.
We may be spared from entering into this subject in detail, as its treatment
is to be found in any text-book of crystallography.

It has been already emphasised that the regular crystalline forms
discussed above are only the outward sign of the regularity of the
internal arrangement of the particles throughout the whole substance.
The question therefore arises whether it is not possible to arrive at
such a conception of this regularity that the crystalline form, as well
as the other relations to be discussed hereafter, must of necessity
follow. Such ideas have been developed by Frankenheim (1832-56),
Bravais (1849), Mobius (1849), and Sohncke (since 1867), and have
led to the desired result.

Let us imagine a system of points in space, fulfilling the condition that
the arrangement round any one point is.the same as round any other. If
we join any of these points with a neighbouring one, the straight line formed
will, when produced in both directions, pass through points distant from the
original points by the length of the original line ; for by our assumption a
third point must. lie in the same relative position to the second as the second
does to the first: the straight line will thus join up an infinite range of
equidistant points. If we now draw a line from the point first considered
to another neighbouring point the same thing holds, and it is also true for
every parallel to the first straight line drawn though a point of the second,
and vice versd. The two systems of parallels obtained by this construction
lie in the same plane, and their intersections contain all the points of the
system which are in that plane. The arrangement characteristic of crystals
thus leads us in the first instance to two systems of co-planar equidistant
parallels intersecting at a definite angle. If we add the limitation that the
two determining straight lines be drawn from the point of origin to the
two nearest points, it can be proved that the angle must le between 60°
and 90°.

If we now draw a third straight line to a neighbouring point not lying
in the same plane as the others, what we found above applies also to this
line and to all parallel lines drawn through the points in the plane. All
possible points arranged according to our assumption are thus determined as
the intersections of three systems of parallel equidistant planes, the angles
between which are subject to the condition already stated for the angle
between the parallel lines. If no further condition is added we have the
case of least symmetry, the asymmetric system.

But now, if we add the restriction that there shall be one plane of
symmetry, this plane must evidently be at right angles to one of the
planes determined by two ranges of points, and bisect the angle between
these ranges ; otherwise the condition of symmetry, that the arrangement on
one side of the plane should be the mirror image of the arrangement on the
other, cannot be fulfilled. Again, the distances between neighbouring lines
in the two systems of parallels contained by the plane of the ranges must

CHAP. IV CRYSTALS 161

be equal. For, if we imagine one system to be drawn till it cuts the
plane of symmetry, its mirror image must appear on the other side. If
now the two systems of parallels be infinitely produced, the net in the
plane is fully specified. We come, therefore, to the conclusion that a plane
of symmetry at right angles to another plane determines in the latter
a network of points with a rhombic mesh, through a diagonal of which
it passes. As regards the points without the plane, we must first of all
recollect that every plane containing them, and parallel to that just con-
sidered, must have exactly the same arrangement of points as the latter.
Such a second field of points may thus be obtained by moving the first
parallel to itself. But the demands of the law of symmetry must be
satisfied. In general a parallel movement would result in the number of
points being doubled by reflection in the plane of symmetry, but this must
not be the case—the points and their images must coincide ; the field must
therefore be shifted so that each point moves along a line parallel to the
plane of symmetry. The projections on the original field of the points
external to it must consequently fall on the diagonal of the rhombs through
which the planes of symmetry pass. As fundamental form of this tri-
dimensional system of points or ‘space net” we thus obtain a parallelepiped
with a rhombic base, each pair of intersecting sides being equally inclined to
the base. By drawing the diagonals of the base, and then joining their
point of intersection with the corresponding point of the opposite face we
get a system of three axes, two of which are at right angles to each other
and the third inclined to both. This, as we have seen, is characteristic of
the monosymmetric system.

Symmetry in the plane may be attained in another way, namely, by
arranging one series of parallel ranges at right angles to the plane of
symmetry and the other parallel to it, the distance between adjacent ranges
in the second series being different from that in the first. The proof that
this arrangement is in no way essentially different from the above would
lead us too far, and so will be omitted.

We will now assume that there exists a second plane a symmetry. This
necessarily calls into existence a third, which is its mirror image in the first ;
again, the mirror image of the first in the second determines a fourth ; each
of these new planes of symmetry determines three others, and so it goes on.
Two planes of symmetry placed thus at random give rise to an infinite
number of new planes, all containing the same straight line. This, however,
on our original assumption is impossible, so we must look for special positions
in which the number of planes of symmetry remains finite. The condition

ee 180 ;
for this is that the angle be , where n is a whole number.

We shall first take n=2; the two planes cut at right angles. For the
reasons given above they must both be perpendicular to a field of points.
The ranges of this field must be symmetrical with respect to both planes,
which condition is fulfilled either by the points forming rhombs that have
the planes of symmetry for their two diagonals, or by the ranges being at
right angles to each other and parallel to the planes of symmetry. The
mesh of the net formed by the field of points is thus either rhombic or
rectangular. The points of the parallel nets can likewise assume two

M

162 OUTLINES OF GENERAL CHEMISTRY BOOK V

positions ; they may lie simultaneously in both planes of symmetry, 1.e.
perpendicularly over the lower points, or they may lie over the points of
intersection of the diagonals. In both cases this takes place above and
below the plane considered, which consequently proves also to be a plane of
symmetry. The demonstration holds in the same way for every system of
more than two planes of symmetry passing through the same straight line,
so that we can state in general that two or more planes of symmetry
meeting ina straight line determine another such plane at right
angles to that line.

Let us now reconsider our nets. When the points in the parallel
plane are vertically above the middle points of the diagonals, the points of
the third plane lie above those of the first. We can therefore consider such
a system as a combination of two interpenetrating space nets. In all cases
we arrive at three mutually perpendicular axes, which are not equivalent ;
this is the characteristic of the rhombic system.

The second plane of symmetry may now be determined by making n= 3,
the angle being in this case 60°. To the first and second there is at once
added a third, also at an angle of 60°. These are all perpendicular to the
original field of points and equivalent to one another. The only possible
distribution of points in the field is that into three systems of ranges each
parallel to a plane of symmetry ; the points form rhombs of 60° and 120°.
The first parallel plane can either have its points vertically over the original
points or over the centres of the rhombs; in the latter case the points of the
second parallel plane are situated vertically above the original points. For
the same reasons as before the original field is also a plane of symmetry, so
that the whole system has four in all, three making with each other angles
of 60° and containing the same straight line, and one perpendicular to this
line. The axes are determined by the lines of intersection of the four planes
of symmetry, so that we have the hexagonal system with three equivalent
axes at 60° in one plane, and a fourth at right angles to these.

For n=4 there appears a second plane of symmetry inclined at 45° to
the first. These two determine other two at right angles to them; so that
we have four co-axial planes, those at right angles to each other being
equivalent but different from the other pair. The arrangement of points in
the field can only be quadratic, and the field itself, perpendicular to the
co-axial planes, must also be a plane of symmetry. The position of the points
in the parallel planes is determined by the same considerations as before.
The system has five axes, of which four lie in one plane and are equivalent
in pairs alternately, while the fifth is at right angles to these. As a rule we
only take account of one equivalent rectangular pair of the first four, con-
sidering the other pair as secondary. This is called the quadratic system.

If we put n=5 or more, we find that such a number of planes of.
symmetry cannot be actually realised. It was seen above that the angle
contained by the lines joining a point with the two nearest points cannot
be less than 60°, while five or more planes of symmetry would entail this.
We have therefore only one step to take in order to attain the highest degree
of regularity ; we must make the fifth plane of symmetry of the quadratic
system equivalent to two others. We then have three equivalent principal
planes of symmetry all at right angles to each other, and six secondary

CHAP, IV CRYSTALS 163

planes in addition. Of the corresponding nine axes we usually consider only
the three equivalent and rectangular principal axes. We have thus the
regular system.

The above six systems may further be grouped into three classes accord-

ing to the number of their principal axes, We denote by this name those
axes round which we have to turn the crystal less than 180° in order to
bring it into congruence with itself. In.the asymmetric, monosymmetric,
and rhombic systems there are no principal axes ; these form the first class.
The hexagonal and the quadratic systems form the second class, with one
principal axis. The last class, with three principal axes, contains only the
regular system.
». Sohncke, as already stated, has recently substituted for the above mode
of consideration another in which the lmitation, here tacitly assumed, that
all the crystalline elements lie parallel to each other, has been dropped, and
replaced by the more general assumption that round each element the others
are placed in corresponding positions. They need not be parallel, but may
for example be alternately parallel and at right angles. The recognition
that the former exposition was subject to this limitation is credited by
Sohncke to Chr. Wiener.

The result of the generalised inquiry was obtained by the use and further
development of a kinematical investigation carried out by C. Jordan. It
was found that in addition to the space nets discussed above there existed
numerous other regular arrangements of points, which stood to the former in
this relation—that they could be constructed by placing several congruent
space nets within each other. Among the forms so obtained are some that
offer a simple explanation of the relations of hemihedry, and even the
rotation of the plane of polarisation in crystals (vide infra). The number of
regular arrangements of points is stated to be no less than sixty-six. I
cannot, however, here dwell on these interesting relations ; but it may be em-
phasised that the theory in its application to special cases, to the crystalline
habit of definite substances, seems to be of extraordinary promise.

CHAPTER V
ISOMORPHISM AND POLYMORPHISM

AT the beginning of this century Haitiy advanced as axioms the two
principles that each substance had only one definite crystalline form,
and that different substances necessarily possessed different forms (except
in the regular system, where such are impossible). Both these prin-
ciples were, however, soon found to be contradicted by experience.
Klaproth (1798) had found that calc-spar and arragonite with the
same composition have different forms, and this observation was con-
firmed by later investigations. On the other hand, substances with
exactly the same form, such as the alums, the red silver ores, and the
mixed vitriols, had quite different compositions. The assumption
made to explain this, that the crystals merely contained the foreign
substances as admixtures, was disproved by their perfect uniformity
and transparency in many cases.

The matter was cleared up by Mitscherlich (1820), who in the
course of his researches on the phosphates and arseniates found that
these had the same crystalline form when they were of similar composi-
tion, 2.¢. when the components were alike except that one salt contained
phosphorus where the other contained arsenic. A similar relation
was soon found for many other compounds, so that it could be said in
general, that the same crystalline form was possessed not only by
identical but also by chemically similar substances.

In one case, however, viz. the salts N aH,PO,+H,O and
NaH,AsO, + H,O, no agreement of form could be shown ; but occasion-
ally the phosphate was obtained in crystals different from the ordinary
form and similar to those of the arseniate.

This was another proof that one substance can assume different
forms, and Mitscherlich stated that this was possible in every case.

The phenomenon that chemically similar substances crystallise in the
same form received the name of isomorphism from Mitscherlich. At
first only the similarly constituted substances were called isomorphous,
eg. the salts Na,HPO,+12H,O and Na,HAsO,+12H,0. As, how-
ever, very many analogous compounds of phosphorus and arsenic are

CHAP. V ISOMORPHISM AND POLYMORPHISM 165

isomorphous, it has become customary to call these elements themselves
isomorphous, so that the name is applied not only to those substances
having the same crystalline form, but to those elements or groups
which can form similarly crystallising compounds with the same
residues.

The agreement of the angles of isomorphous substances is (except in the
regular system) not at all perfect ; strictly speaking, homceomorphism ought
to be substituted for isomorphism. The differences are sometimes greater,
sometimes less, but can amount to several degrees.

A more certain criterion of the existence of isomorphism than
agreement between the angles is furnished by the ability of iso-
morphous substances to form mixed crystals. In such crystals the
isomorphous equivalent components are not in combining but in
perfectly indefinite proportions, dependent entirely on the conditions
of formation of the crystals. But the sum of the isomorphous elements
is exactly equivalent to the quantity corresponding to the formula of
either of the simple compounds; or in other words, the isomorphous
elements replace each other in the ratio of their equivalents.

The properties of such mixed crystals are in general such as would
be calculated from the formula of simple mixing. This has been
proved for the coefficient of refraction and the specific gravity. In
other cases, such as the size of the angles, there occur abnormalities
still awaiting an explanation.

Isomorphism has been the cause of numerous theoretical specula-
tions as to the form of the smallest particles, etc., but these have as
yet led to no important results. On the other hand, however, the
principle of isomorphism has been found exceedingly useful in the
discovery and proof of chemical analogies, as will be seen later. At
this place we may give a list of mutually replaceable isomorphous
elements to serve as a basis for discussing such analogies—

I. Cl, Br, I, F; Mn (in permanganates).
II. 8, Se; Te (in tellurides) ; Cr, Mn, Te in the acids H,RO,;
As and Sb in the glances MR,.
III. As, Sb, Bi; Te (as element) ; P, V (in salts) ; N, P (in organic
bases).
PVver ker Nay Cs, Kb, Li; Th Ag.
Woes baor. Pb: Fe. 4Zny Mn; > Me + Ni,.Co, Cu.;. Ce, La, Di,
Er, Y with Ca; Cu, Hg with Pb; Cd, Be, In with Zn;
Tl with Pb.
VI. Al, Fe, Cr, Mn; Ce, U in the sesquioxides. |
VII. Cu, Ag in the compounds of the lower oxides; Au.
ee Erle) Pd, Rh, Ru,'Os; Au,le, Ni; Sn, Te.
PO aint, Zr Th, ons. Fe, Ti.
lay Nb:
MeO, W, Cr.

166 OUTLINES OF GENERAL CHEMISTRY | BOOK V

There is only a partial isomorphism between the elements separated
by a semicolon.

In connection with isomorphism we have relations of morphotropy, first
taken into account by Groth (1870). There are known, especially in
organic chemistry, numerous substances which can be derived from each other
by the replacement of one or more hydrogen atoms by other elements or
radicals. Relations in the crystalline form of such compounds were often
suspected. Groth showed that these relations were frequently of such a
character that the proportions between the lengths of the axes only altered
in one direction. For example, benzene, its oxy-derivatives, and nitro-
derivatives are all rhombic; the ratio of two axes remains tolerably constant
in these compounds, while the third exhibits great variations. Similar
relations have been shown to exist in several other groups. <A substitu-
tion often causes a change into another system, eg. from the rhombic
into the monosymmetric. Even then, however, there frequently remains a
general agreement in the shape of the crystals and approximate equality of
the analogous angles.

The clear comprehension of these relations is often rendered
difficult by the above-mentioned ability of many substances to appear
in different crystalline forms. To this phenomenon the name of
polymorphism has been given. It is much more common than was
at first suspected ; in particular the crystallographic investigation of
organic bodies, especially under the microscope, has shown that almost
every substance can be obtained in two or more different forms when
the conditions of experiment are suitably chosen.

An application of this fact may be first made to the conclusion
that between the elementary composition of substances and their
crystalline form there is not that connection frequently supposed to
exist, according to which the latter is directly determined by the
former. It rather leads us to the view that if the formal properties
of molecules as they exist in gases and liquids determine the crystal-
line form, this can only be by the different space nets being more or
less easily capable of passing through them. Besides, it is questionable
if the crystalline molecules which occupy the points of the space nets
do not consist of a more or less considerable number of simple
molecules. In fact, we may ask still further if the conception of
molecules is applicable to this case at all.

The conditions under which polymorphous forms arise are still for
the most part unknown. We can distinguish between two sorts of
such substances, the two classes being very different in their behaviour.
An example of the first kind is offered by sulphur. This substance
crystallises at ordinary temperatures in the rhombic, at higher tempera-
tures in the monosymmetric system. All monosymmetric sulphur
kept at comparatively low temperatures passes into rhombic sulphur ;
all rhombic sulphur heated to high temperatures changes into the

CHAP. V ISOMORPHISM AND POLYMORPHISM 167

monosymmetric modification. The temperature of transformation
which marks off the limits of stability of the different forms, lies,
according to the measurements of Reicher, at 95°6°.

Other substances behave similarly to sulphur, e.g. ammonium nitrate, which
crystallises in four forms with temperatures of transformation at 35°, 85°,
and 123°. Mercuric iodide, which is ordinarily red, changes when heated into
a sulphur-yellow modification, which when cooled again passes into the red
form.

For these substances, therefore, there is within the range of
temperature at which they are solid a definite point (or several)
which divides it into two (or more) parts; in one part the one form
only is stable, in the other part only the other.

Benzophenone was the first clearly observed example of the second
kind of polymorphic substances (Zincke, 1871). It usually crystallises
in rhombic forms, which melt at 48°; occasionally, however, in
rhombohedra, melting at 26°. These rhombohedra are unstable at
all temperatures up to their melting-point, for they change, mostly
spontaneously, and always on contact with a rhombic crystal, into
the rhombic modification. They are generally got, but not with
certainty, by rapidly cooling fused benzophenone heated to a high
temperature.

Similar examples of substances with a stable and an unstable form are
very numerous, the unstable form being mostly obtained by rapid cooling of
the melted substance. Its melting-point is always lower than that of the
stable form.

The difference between the two groups lies in the relation of the
temperature of transformation to the melting-points of the two forms.
If the former is lower than either of the latter, there is a range of
temperature between the point of transformation and the lower melting-
point, within which the form unstable below the temperature of trans-
formation is stable; this gives us the first class. Hf, on the other
hand, the temperature of transformation is higher than the lower
melting-point, there is no such range in which the second form can be
stable, and we have the second class.

It is here to be observed that the instability is only to be understood
with respect to transformability into the other modification. If the trans-
formation is rendered impossible in any way (through pressure, for example),
there is no instability whatever.

The rate at which the unstable changes into the stable form is extremely
variable. Proceeding downwards from the temperature of transformation,
it at first increases in the case of sulphur, then diminishes, to become very
small at temperatures below 0°. The decreasing mobility of the separate
particles at low temperatures counteracts the increasing tendency to trans-

168 OUTLINES OF GENERAL CHEMISTRY BOOK V

formation, and finally effects a complete stagnation. Arragonite, for instance,
is very probably a more unstable form of calcium carbonate than calc-spar at
ordinary temperatures ; the change of the former into the latter, however,
only takes place at a somewhat high temperature and then suddenly, while
at the ordinary temperature arragonite shows not the least tendency to
change.

CHAPTER VI
VOLUME RELATIONS OF SOLIDS

_ THE few indications of regular relations hitherto discovered between
the volumes of solids are quite of the same nature as those which
we encountered in the case of liquids. Although the difficulty of
fixing a temperature of comparison is almost absent, the expansion
being so small, yet a new difficulty presents itself in the fact that
many solids appear in several crystalline forms, differing always in
their specific and molecular volumes. We are therefore in such
cases in a position to institute a proper comparison only when the
substances to be compared are isomorphous; if they are not so it is
impossible to judge & prior which of the different forms should be
taken.

To this theoretical difficulty there is added a practical one. The deter-
mination of the specific gravity of solids is in itself no very difficult operation,
the methods with the pyknometer and the hydrostatic balance easily admitting
of measurements accurate to a tenth of a per-cent. It is, however, excessively
difficult to get the substances, mostly crystals, in a state permitting exact
determinations to be made. When substances crystallise from solution, the
crystals formed very frequently enclose bubbles of the mother hquor, which
lessen the specific gravity proportionately more the larger it is. In this
way the enormous differences between the numbers obtained by equally
conscientious observers are partially explained ; in general we should put
most faith in the highest values for the specific gravity or the lowest for
the specific volumes, and should recollect that errors of several per-cent are
quite possible in both.

There is not much more to be said of the older experiments of Le
Royer and Dumas (1821), Herapath (1823), Karsten (1824), and
Boullay (1830) than that they established, especially those of the two
last named, that the volume of a chemical compound is in general not
equal to the sum of the volumes of its components; there is mostly a
contraction, but in some cases an expansion occurs. The first regularity
in this domain was found by Ammermiiller (1840), who noticed that

170 OUTLINES OF GENERAL CHEMISTRY BOOK V

cuprous and cupric oxides have the same molecular volume if we
compare Cu,O with Cu,O,. It is as if one atom of oxygen in the
lower oxide occupied as much space as two in the higher. Some other
examples also correspond to a similar regularity, but many exceptions
were soon found.

m
The question whether the molecular volume 2 where m is the

molecular weight and s the specific gravity of the substance, could
be conceived as in the case of liquids to be an additive property was
then carefully investigated by Kopp (1841), and on the whole answered
in the affirmative. The molecular volumes are approximately sums
of terms depending on the nature of the atoms or atomic groups.
These partial volumes are, however, firstly, not always equal to the
atomic volumes of the free elements, and secondly the addenda are
only constant within somewhat narrow groups, which are for the most
part formed of isomorphous compounds (cf. p. 169).

In the closest connection with this relation stands the “ parallelo-
sterism” of isomorphous groups enounced by Schréder (1859). If
we arrange analogous salts (¢.g. the chlorides, bromides, and iodides
of the alkali metals and of silver) in a table, in such fashion that
compounds of the same element come into one line, vertical or
horizontal, then the differences between the molecular volumes of
parallel lines will be constant. Thus we find |

KCl . 37-4 NaC es senior AgCl -. .25°6
IGDr teas NaBr . 33°8 Ae Bre Wao
KI. 54:0 Nal . 48°5 Ag] . 42-0

where all the iodides, for example, have molecular volumes some
sixteen units greater than the chlorides, and where the sodium and
silver compounds differ by from one to two units irrespective of the
other component.

The sulphates, carbonates, and nitrates of barium, lead, and stron-
tium form a similar set, yet, as has been mentioned, the regularity is
evidently limited to isomorphous groups.

The question as to the relation in which the atomic volumes of
the elements in the free state stand to their atomic volumes in com-
pounds has only been very incompletely answered. From the fact
that potassium chloride, for instance, occupies a smaller volume (37:4)
than the potassium contained in it (45°2) we see that some elements
decrease considerably in volume when they enter into combination.
The assumption is made by Schroder that the volume occupied in the
compounds is a rational fraction of the atomic volume when any
condensation takes place. Some facts may be very well represented
by such an assumption, but it is not at present possible to form a clear
conception of the statement that a component of a solid occupies a.
definite volume within it.

_ CHAP, VI VOLUME RELATIONS OF SOLIDS Let

If we assume that silver in silver chloride occupies the same volume as
it does in the metallic state, viz. 10°3, then there remains 15°38 over for
the chlorine ; deducting this number from the volumes of potassium and
sodium chlorides we get the numbers 22:1 and 11°8 respectively. Now,
the volumes of potassium and sodium in the free state are 45°2 and 23°8,
which are nearly twice as large as the volumes of the metals in combination
calculated on the above assumptions.

Such regularities are limited, however, to small groups of substances.
Their extension may be expected when the theory of Frankenheim and
Sohncke regarding the structure of crystals, has been so far developed as to
allow of definite assumptions being made with respect to the particular form
of the space net belonging to each crystal and to the nature of the component
molecules,

CHAPTER VII
OPTICAL PROPERTIES OF SOLIDS

AMORPHOUS bodies do not essentially differ from liquids in respect of
their general optical properties. On the other hand quite new
phenomena appear with crystals, phenomena having the closest con-
nection with the general properties of symmetry, as Brewster first.
showed in 1819.

Regular crystals behave optically quite in the same manner as
amorphous solids or liquids, a ray of light being so refracted in the
plane containing it and the normal to the surface, that a constant
ratio is maintained between the sines of the angles of incidence and
refraction.

Light moves quite differently in crystals not belonging to the
regular system. Fresnel (1831) pointed out that the nature of the
medium of the light undulations—the ether—is, in crystals, not the
same in all directions. In such a medium every undulation is decom-
posed into two other mutually independent undulations at right
angles to each other, and proceeding along the axes of greatest and
least elasticity. Every ray of light, therefore, is in general split up
into two when it enters a crystal which does not belong to the regular
system. The mathematical investigation of the equations of motion
of such a medium has explained theoretically a great number of
remarkable optical phenomena in crystals, and has even predicted
some previously unobserved, so that, reasoning backwards, the funda-
mental assumptions made have proved themselves completely suited
to the purpose. The principal results are these :—

If we describe a plane containing the axes of greatest and least
elasticity, we find that in this plane there are two directions in which
the rays move at the same speed. Consequently in these directions,
which are called the optical axes, there is no decomposition into two
rays. Their position depends on the ratio of the elasticities in the
directions of the axes ; they may intersect at any angle, but are always
symmetrical with respect to the axes of elasticity, so that the latter
bisect the angles made by the optical axes. If the axis of greatest

CHAP. VII OPTICAL PROPERTIES OF SOLIDS 133

elasticity bisects the acute angle of the optical axes the crystal is
called positive, in the other case it is called negative.

An axis of mean elasticity lies at right angles to the plane of the
axes of greatest and least elasticity, and its value serves to complete
the specification of the optical properties of the crystal. This mean
elasticity can assume all values between the greatest and _ least
elasticity. In the limiting case where it is equal to one or other of
these, altogether new properties appear, the two optical axes then
coinciding and running in the direction of the third axis of elasticity.
Instead of the two optical axes we have therefore only one, and
simultaneously all planes passing through this axis become optically
equivalent. While in the general case the refracted rays do not
remain in the plane of incidence, in the case of optically uniaxial
crystals only one ray does not do so; the other follows the usual
law of refraction. The former is called the extraordinary, the latter
the ordinary ray.

If the elasticity in the direction of the third axis also becomes
equal to the others, the motions of the ether are the same in all
directions under the same conditions, and no double refraction takes
place ; the crystal is isotropic, and behaves like an amorphous body.

The three groups of isotropic, optically uniaxial, and optically
biaxial crystals agree with the three crystallographic groups of regular
crystals, crystals with one principal axis (quadratic and hexagonal),
and crystals without a principal axis (rhombic, monosymmetric, and
asymmetric). In the rhombic system the axes of elasticity coincide
with the crystallographic axes, and the optical axes lie symmetrically
with respect to them. In the monosymmetric system two axes of
elasticity lie in the plane of symmetry, and the third lies at right
angles to it. The two optical axes, therefore, are also in the plane
of symmetry, or in a plane perpendicular to it containing the third
axis. In the asymmetric system no definite relation exists between
the optical and the crystallographic properties.

From these relations we can form a conclusion as to the crystallo-
graphic nature of a substance by observing the optical properties of
plates cut from its crystals. Light is polarised on passing through
doubly retracting plates ; if we therefore observe a section of a crystal
between two tourmalines or Nicol’s prisms, we can at once decide
whether it is cut from a regular crystal or not. If the planes of
polarisation of the two polarisers are crossed, no light passes through
the system when the plate of a regular crystal is brought between
them. If the plate is, however, birefringent it decomposes the polarised
light from the first polariser into two rays which are in general
brought by the second polariser into such interference that coloured
light passes through the system. Therefore if a plate appears
bright when seen between crossed “Nicols” or tourmalines it is
birefringent.

174 OUTLINES OF GENERAL CHEMISTRY BOOK V

To distinguish between the different kinds of birefringent crystals it is
best to use plates cut perpendicular to an axis of nae and to observe
y, them in convergent light.
We then see coloured
figures, the theory of
which is completely
known but cannot find
a place here. Optically
uniaxial crystals, when
the plates are cut per-
pendicular to the prin-
cipal axis, show the
coloured rings and black
cross of Fig. 39.
Optically biaxial erys-
tals give the forms in
Figs. 40 and 41. These
can be decomposed into
four similar quadrants
by two diameters at right
angles. With rhombic
crystals the rings in the
different quadrants are
similarly coloured ; with monosymmetric crystals there is a symmetry of the
colours with respect to only one of the diameters ; with asymmetric crystals
the colours are not sym-
metrical with respect to
either of the diameters.

a@ ; é

Uheresm exist 7+ in=
dividual exceptions to
these general laws ;
regular crystals in par-
ticular often showing
double refraction. An
explanation of this has
been sought in two
directions. It has been
shown that in many
cases there are internal
strains in the crystals, ,
causing double refrac-
tion; just as this ap-
pears in amorphous
bodies unequally com-
pressed or expanded. , Easy
In other cases the regular form is only apparent ; the crystals are
actually so composed of biaxial crystals by twin formation that the

Hie. 40;

CHAP. VII OPTICAL PROPERTIES OF SOLIDS 175

external form of a regular crystal is produced. ‘This point, however,
is by no means completely cleared up.

A specially interesting relation was discovered by Herschel (1835)
between crystalline form and the ability to rotate the plane of polarisa-
tion. Quartz crystallises in hexagonal prisms terminated by six-sided
pyramids. At the solid angles of the combination there are frequently
truncating tetartohedric fe appearing either on the right or on the
lett. In “couiplete parallelism with the occurrence of the right and
left-handed secondary faces there exists the ability of the quartz to
rotate a ray sent in the direction of the optical axis respectively to
the right or to the left, so that we can predict the aie properties
of a quartz crystal fom its external appearance.

This property in the case of quartz is directly connected with the
erystalline form ; fused quartz is no longer optically active. All other
crystals that rotate the plane of polarisation have likewise such asym-
metrical secondary faces. If they are not visibly developed on the
crystal, the hemihedric or tetartohedric nature of the latter may be
made evident by superficial “etching.” Sharply defined microscopic
figures appear which in the case of regular crystals are symmetrically
developed, while the forms just mentioned exhibit figures with one-
sided development, either right-handed or left-handed, corresponding
to the optical properties.

In these crystals the cause of the rotation of the plane of polarisa-
tion must lie in the building up of the molecules, since the ability
ceases with the destruction of the crystalline form by fusion or
solution. We have already met with substances whose molecules
themselves must be correspondingly constructed (p. 103). When such
substances crystallise, they show without exception hemihedric or
tetartohedric formations, as may be seen if necessary by means of the
figures obtained by “etching” with a proper reagent on their faces.
If the optical activity disappears, as in the transformation of tartaric
into racemic acid, the one-sided development of the crystals of the
substance disappears simultaneously.

How the molecules or atoms must be arranged that optical activity
may be exhibited appears from an experiment made by Reusch (1869), who
piled up a number of plates of mica (optically biaxial) so that the optical
principal section of each plate was turned always in the same sense through
60° from the position of that of the preceding plate. Such a pile behaved
like a plate of quartz, and was dextro- or levo-rotatory according to the way
in which the plates were piled up. A similar spiral arrangement of the
particles is therefore probable in crystals or other substances that rotate the
plane of polarisation. The theory of crystalline structure on p. 160 admits
of numerous arrangements of points in which such a spiral order is produced,
and which might therefore serve as types of substances like quartz or sodium
chlorate.

CHAPTER VIII
SPECIFIC HEAT OF SOLIDS

WHILE engaged in an extensive research on the laws of heat, Dulong
and Petit (1818) discovered one of remarkable simplicity which they
stated as follows: The atoms of all elements have the same
capacity for heat.

In other words, the product of the specific heat and the atomic
weight is constant. Or, again, quantities of the different elements in
the proportion of their atomic weights are raised through the same
temperature by the same quantity of heat.

The importance of the discovery was at once recognised, but
doubts were soon raised as to its general applicability, especially as
the undoubted analogy between nickel and cobalt was called in
question by the numbers obtained. The research was not completed,
as Petit died shortly afterwards, and Dulong did not again take up
the matter.

F. Neumann (1831) extended the law by applying it to compounds.
His mode of statement is this: The specific heats of substances
of similar composition are inversely as their molecular
weights, or, what is the same thing, quantities of similarly
composed substances in the proportion of their molecular
weights have the same capacity for heat.

_ Numerous investigations into this subject were then undertaken
by Regnault (1840) and Kopp (1864). These have in the first
instance confirmed Dulong and Petit’s, and Neumann’s laws within
wide limits, but have at the same time shown that both are of only
an approximate character. The products of specific heat and atomic
weight are equal for very many but not for all elements, the numbers
often differing from each other by more than ee amount of the
experimental error.

With respect to the relations between the atomic heats of the
elements and those of their compounds, the principle was enounced
by Joule in 1844, after assumptions made by Avogadro, Hermann, and
Schroder had been proved erroneous, that the specific heat of a com-

CHAP. VIII SPECIFIC HEAT OF SOLIDS A ee

pound is the sum of those of its components. To Kopp belongs the
credit of having proved this law to be of great generality.

According to him the following elements have a “normal” atomic
heat, z.¢. such a specific heat that when multiplied into the atomic
weight gives a number nearly equal to 6-4: Ag, Al, As, Au, Ba, Bi,
ier, Oa, Cd, Cl, Co, Cr, Cu, Fe, Hg, I, Ir, K, Li, Mg, Mn, Mo, N, Na,
hi Os; pid. bt, iby Kh, Sb; Se, Sn,.SroLeTiy Ty W,-Zn,: Zr:

A smaller atomic heat is possessed by S=5'4, P=5-4, F=5°0,
O= 4:0, Si=3°8, B=2°7, H=2°3, G=1°8 and Be. Only elements
of low atomic weight are in this class; those whose atomic weights
exceed 30 obey the law of Dulong and Petit.

For several elementary substances it has been proved that the
atomic heat increases rapidly with rise of temperature until it attains
the “normal” value of somewhat more than 6. Weber found this to
be the case for carbon, silicon, and boron, and Nilson and Pettersson
for beryllium. Some of the above numbers have not been directly
observed, but calculated from the molecular heat of compounds by
subtraction of the atomic heats of the other elements.

The question of the theoretical signification of Dulong and Petit’s Law
still remains to be answered. In this direction we have to leave almost
everything to the future. We are evidently precluded from imagining any
theory of the solid state analogous to the kinetic theory of gases and thus
we lose a valuable guide. We must from the outset have it perfectly clear
before us that the specific heat as we ordinarily measure it represents a
complicated function of internal and external work, the relative amounts of
which are unknown. Attempts to calculate the work done on heating in
addition to the mere elevation of the temperature have led to no conclusion,
as we are in almost complete ignorance of the decisive constants, in particular
the compressibility. Boltzmann, on preliminary approximate assumptions,
has estimated the internal work done by the heat to be equal to half the
total heat communicated.

With this uncertainty as to the real meaning of the law of Dulong
and Petit, it is impossible to state anything with respect to the signifi-
cation of the deviations from it. We can only note empirically that
the law holds good for substances with atomic weights higher than
thirty, and may therefore always be applied to such. The law,
however, has been of great practical importance, as it was until quite
recently almost the only means, besides vapour density and the periodic
system, of choosing the correct atomic weight of newly discovered
elements from among the different possible values.

BOOK VI

CHEMICAL SYSTEMATICS

CHAPTER I
THE CHOICE OF THE ATOMIC WEIGHTS

AFTER the combining-weights of the different elements have been
determined (cf. p. 18 e seq.) there still remains the question of how
to fix the atomic weights. The former are numbers involving no
theoretical assumption ; that one part of hydrogen combines with eight
parts of oxygen, or eight parts of oxygen with three of carbon is
simply the expression of our experience, and we merely use a similar
expression when we say that the numbers 1, 8, and 3 are the com-
bining-weights of these elements.

But now there comes a difficulty. One part of hydrogen can also
combine with sixteen parts of oxygen; and there are, further, com-
pounds that for one part of hydrogen contain six and twelve parts of
carbon, while eight parts of oxygen can unite with six parts of carbon
as well as with three. With regard to such facts the simple conception
of combining, or equivalent weights, as they have also been called,
entirely fails, unless we assume for the same element as many different
equivalent weights as there are compounds of it with another element,
these equivalents being then in simple rational proportions.

It has already been stated (p. 6) that it was owing to precisely
this same fact, of two elements being capable of uniting in different pro-
portions, that the atomic hypothesis was advanced. As soon as this
is assumed there immediately arises the question of atomic weights.

The atomic weights can either be the equivalent weights of the
elements or multiples of them. The first assumption is the simplest,
but it gives us no information where we have different compounds of
the same elements, In such a case we have as guides to start with,
the two principles of simplicity and similarity which were jointly
used by Berzelius, the most influential of the early investigators.

CHAP. I THE CHOICE OF THE ATOMIC WEIGHTS he9

' The atomic weights were accordingly so determined that the best
known and most important compounds received the simplest possible
formule. The formulz of substances of similar chemical behaviour
were then put into a corresponding form. Iron, for example, gives
two oxygen compounds which for fifty-six parts of iron contain sixteen
and twenty-four parts of oxygen respectively. The simplest assump-
tion is that in the first oxide equal numbers of iron and oxygen atoms
are present, in the second two atoms of iron to every three of oxygen.
If we took the atomic ratio 1:1 for the second oxide, the first would
contain three atoms of iron for every two of oxygen.~ This seemed less
simple to Berzelius, for although the formule of the iron compounds
themselves would not be rendered more complex, there are a great many
other oxides similar to the lower oxide of iron which should therefore,
according to the second principle, all contain three atoms of metal to
two of oxygen. On the other hand Berzelius gave to alumina the
formula Al,O,, which, although less simple than the formula AlO, and
not made necessary by the existence of any other oxides of aluminium,
is yet to be preferred on account of the great similarity of alumina in
its combinations to ferric oxide.

Such decisions are, however, always subject to personal bias. An
objective mode of deciding seemed possible when Gay-Lussac’s Law of
Volumes was taken into consideration. The idea that the same
number of atoms is contained in equal volumes of the elementary
gases was at first accepted, but this idea came to grief when compound
gases were considered. If chlorine combines with hydrogen without
diminution of volume, there must be in one volume of hydrogen
chloride only half as many “atoms” as there are in elementary gases.
Avogadro, it is true, soon showed that this difficulty may be removed
_ by discriminating between atoms and molecules, but his suggestion
remained long unheeded. Only when the distinction was again
brought to the front by the development of the molecular conception
caused by the acquisition of new facts in organic chemistry, did
chemists come back to this way out of the difficulty, and accept it
gladly.

Another thing, too, that contributed largely to its acceptance was
the proof given by Cannizzaro (1858) that the atomic weights deduced
from the vapour densities by the employment of the molecular con-
ception, were, with few exceptions, in accordance with the atomic
weights determined by means of the law of Dulong and Petit (p. 176).
The concordance is general, if we except the elements with small
atomic weight, whose position with respect to the law has already
been discussed ; the atomic weights of these elements, however, have
been ascertained from the densities of their gaseous compounds with
such certainty that their exceptional position is of no practical signifi-
cance, nor indeed has it any theoretical significance as long as Dulong
and Petit’s Law itself is so little understood.

180 OUTLINES OF GENERAL CHEMISTRY BOOK VI

A third aid to the systematic arrangement of the elements is
offered by isomorphism. As isomorphous bodies are in general
similarly constituted, we may conversely conclude that similar com-
position exists where we find isomorphism, and so attain the necessary
data for the choice of correct atomic weights.

These three modes lead as a rule to the same results, and have ’
made it possible to exercise an unexceptionable choice from the possible
values, a choice which has been in almost every case generally ac-
cepted. Other more recently discovered methods have served only to
confirm the resulting system of atomic weights.

In the following table will be found a concise statement of the
reasons for the choice of the values presently in use for the separate
elements :— |

Hydrogen, H=1, serves as standard.

Oxygen, O=16, from the proportion by volume 1:2 with
hydrogen on the formation of water; from the equality of its atomic
heat with that of hydrogen in the gaseous state.

Nitrogen, N= 14, from the proportion by volume 1:3 to hydro-
gen on formation of ammonia, and to oxygen in the corresponding
compounds ; from the equality of its atomic heat with that of gaseous
oxygen and hydrogen. : ;

Carbon, C=12. From the vapour densities of both organic and
inorganic compounds there has«never been found a smaller molecular
weight than corresponds to C=12. The specific heat gives no definite
information. | |

Chlorine, Cl= 35°46. From the proportion by volume 1:1 on
combination with hydrogen; from the volumes of the chlorine
compounds. .

Bromine, Br = 79°96, and Iodine, I= 126°86, are perfectly ana-
logous to chlorine in their compounds, as well as isomorphous with it.

Fluorine, F = 19:0 is with some uncertainty determined from the
analogy with the chlorine compounds.

Sulphur, S= 32-06, from the vapour density, the volume of
hydrogen sulphide, and from the specific heat.

Selenium, Se = 79°1, is isomorphous and analogous to sulphur.

Tellurium, Te=125, is isomorphous and analogous to sulphur
and selenium.

Phosphorus, P= 31:0, from the specific heat (somewhat uncer-
tain). From the vapour density of the element itself we should
conclude that it possessed double this atomic weight, but the vapour
density of hydrogen phosphide, on the other hand, gives P = 31.

Arsenic, As=75, from the specific heat, the vapour density of
the trichloride, and the isomorphism with phosphorus.

Silicon, Si=28°4. The specific heat yields uncertain informa-
tion: from the vapour density of the tetrachloride, and from the
isomorphism with titanium and zirconium.

CHAP. I THE CHOICE OF THE ATOMIC WEIGHTS lige!

Boron, B=11°0, from its volatile compounds.

Lithium, Li=7-03, from the specific heat, which is normal not-
withstanding the low atomic weight.

Sodium, Na=23°06 )

Potassium, K = 39:14

Rubidium, Rb= 85:4, is isomorphous with potassium.

Crsium, Cs=132°9, is isomorphous with potassium and rubidium.

Beryllium, Be=9°10. This element has caused much trouble.
Corresponding to the low atomic weight, the specific heat is very
small, and an indubitable isomorphism has not yet been shown to
exist. A determination of the vapour density of beryllium chloride has
decided the question.

Magnesium, Mg= 24°38

Calcium, Ca = 40°0

Strontium, Sr=87°5 is isomorphous with calcium and lead.

Barium, Ba=137-0, is isomorphous with caleium, strontium, and
lead.

Aluminium, Al=27, from the vapour density of the chloride
and from the specific heat.

Gallium, Ga=69°9. The vapour density of volatile compounds,
the specific heat, and isomorphism all lead to the same value.

Scandium, Sc=44°1, from isomorphism with aluminium.

Cerium, Ce=140

Lanthanum, La=138°5 from the specific heat.

Didymium, Di=140 (‘)

Yttrium, Ytterbium, and the other metals of the rare earths,
from analogy and isomorphism with cerium, lanthanum, and
didymium.

Iron, Fe=56-0, from the vapour density of the trichloride, the
specific heat, and its isomorphism with calcium. |

Cobalt, Co=59 ) from the specific heat and the isomorphism

Nickel, Ni=59 with iron, etc.

Zine, Zn=65'5, from the specific heat, isomorphism with mag-
nesium, and the vapour density of the metal and its chloride.

Cadmium, Cd=112°1, from the specific heat and vapour density.

Copper, Cu=63°3, from the specific heat and isomorphism with
iron, etc.

Silver, Ag=107°9, from the specific heat, and isomorphism with
sodium. |

Mercury, Hg=200, from the specific heat, and the vapour
density of the metal and its halogen compounds.

Lead, Pb=206°9, from the specific heat and the vapour density
of the chloride: also isomorphous with calcium, ete.

Thallium, Tl=204:1, from the specific heat, the isomorphism
with potassium, cesium, rubidium, and from the vapour density of
the monochloride.

from the specific heat.

\ from the specific heat.

182 OUTLINES OF GENERAL CHEMISTRY BOOK VI

Titanium, Ti=48°1, from the vapour density of the chloride and
the isomorphism with silicon and tin.

Zirconium, Zr=90°7, from the vapour density of the chloride
and the isomorphism with silicon, titanium, and tin.

Tin, Sn=118'1, from the specific heat, the vapour density of the
chloride, and the isomorphism with silicon, titanium, and zirconium.

Thorium, Th = 232-4, from the specific heat and the isomorphism
with zirconium. .

Vanadium, Vd=51-2, from the vapour density of the chloride
and oxychloride and the isomorphism with phosphorus and arsenic.

Niobium, Nb=94°2, from the vapour density of the chlorides
and oxychlorides.

Tantalum, Ta=182°8, from the vapour density of the volatile
chlorine compounds.
| Antimony, Sb=120°3, from the specific heat, the vapour density

of the chloride, etc.,-and the analogy to arsenic.

Bismuth, Bi=208°0, from the specific heat, the vapour density
of the chloride, and the analogy to arsenic and antimony.

Chromium, Cr=52°3, from the specific heat, the vapour density
of volatile compounds, and the isomorphism with iron, sulphur, ete.

Molybdenum, Mo=95°9, from the specific heat (doubtful), the

vapour density of volatile compounds, and the isomorphism with
chromium.

Tungsten, W=184:0, from the specific heat, the vapour density
of the chlorine compounds, and the analogy with chromium and
molybdenum.

Uranium, U=239°4, from the specific heat, the vapour density
of the halogen compounds, and the analogy with chromium, ete.

Gold, Us Oa) tee

Platinum, Pt =194.8

Abaveny ini Int 19322

Osmium, Os=192 from the specific heat.

Palladium, “Pd==106

Rhodium ~) Rh=103

Ruthenium, hu=103°8)

In this table only the most important data are collected ; a large
number of other confirmatory relations have been left without
mention.

CHAPTER II
THE PERIODIC LAW

THE most striking confirmation of the propriety of the above selection
of atomic weights is formed by the regularities appearing when the
elements are arranged according to the magnitude of the atomic
weights so chosen. The relations have been already shortly indicated
(p. 35), and now form a fourth and very important means of
determining the true from amongst the possible atomic weights, having
given a decisive answer in many cases where the other methods failed
or were ambiguous.

To complete what has been already said with regard to them, we
shall now consider a few properties of the elements and of their com-
pounds in their relation to the periodic system. Besides the dis-
coverers (Meyer and Mendelejeff), Carnelley in particular has instituted
investigations in this direction, and at present it may be said that
almost every well-defined and comparable property appears as a
periodic function of the atomic weight.

As to the chemical properties, all that is needful has already
been stated. Of the physical properties of the elements, the atomic
volume shows the periodic variation most clearly, as was first indicated
by Lothar Meyer. In Fig. 42 the atomic weights are the abscisse,
and the atomic volumes the ordinates, the points being connected by
thick lines. As we see, the curve appears as a series of undulations
always growing larger as the atomic weight increases, and exhibits
the periodicity in the most marked manner. The elements with
similar chemical properties are found at similar portions of the curve ;
thus the strongly basic alkali metals are always at the maximum
points, while immediately before them on the ascending portions the
strongly acid-forming halogens find their place. After them, on the
descending portions of the curve, lie the metals of the alkaline earths,
the metals of the earths, and so on, always with diminishing basicity,
while the ascending parts are occupied by the elements with a more
acid-forming character.

A second property of equally pronounced periodic character is the

830 |-

320 \-

210 |-

300

290

Fie. 42:
The thick line denotes atomic volumes, the thin line melting-points in the absolute scale.

The

ordinates of the atomic volumes are multiplied by four, the ordinates of the melting-points

* This point should lie 66 divisions higher.

divided by seven.

CHAP. II THE PERIODIC LAW 185

melting-point. The corresponding curve is given in Fig. 42 by the
thin lines. The undulations are here nearly midway between those
of the atomic volume, and show a double periodicity, being alternately
large and small.

Further regularities of a periodic nature have been observed with the
following properties :—molecular volume of the oxides (Brauner and Watts,
1881), refractive power, heat of formation of the chlorides, bromides, iodides,
etc., conductivity for heat and electricity, colour, ete. It is unnecessary to
enter further into these relations, as the regularities have for the most part
no general character as yet, and nothing new is to be learnt from them,

It must also be emphasised that the regularities, so far as they are
known, are far from having the sharpness and definiteness desirable.
They are not of such a character that one can calculate the properties
of an element from those of its neighbours; a rough estimate only
can be formed. This of course in nowise diminishes the value of the
general principle ; it only renders evident that important problems are
here still awaiting their solution.

Such a problem is the obvious attachment of certain elements to different
groups. Thus chromium, from its decidedly basic monoxide, should go with
zinc and magnesium ; from its alum-forming sesquioxide, with aluminium and
gallium; while from its acid-forming oxide it ought to be classed with
molybdenum and tungsten: only the last analogy has found a representation
in Fig. 42. Copper, by its lower oxide and its insoluble lower chloride, is
doubtless related to silver, but mercury from the next group and thallium
from the third are much more nearly allied to these metals than sodium or
gold; while, on the other hand, cupric oxide would serve to place copper
along with magnesium and zinc. Manganese, corresponding to its different
degrees of oxidation (MnO, Mn,O,, MnO,, MnO,, and Mn,0O-), could be
brought into five distinct groups. For these and numerous other facts no
expression is given by the periodic system.

It must be further borne in mind that the elements with lowest
atomic weight have quite an abnormal character. Mendelejeff has
called these the “typical elements,” a name signifying just the
opposite of what, is really meant, for these elements are by no means
typical of the groups whose first members they constitute, but rather
show a decided tendency to assume the properties characteris-
tic of the next following groups. Lithium, for instance, forms
a sparingly soluble carbonate and an easily soluble bicarbonate, thus
resembling the bivalent metals of the alkaline earths, and not the
metals of the alkalies. Beryllium in its behaviour is so like aluminium
that until the determination of the vapour density of its chloride it
was considered by many chemists as a trivalent element. Trivalent
boron, again, in the free state as well as in its compounds, is like no
other element so much as quadrivalent silicon. Fluorine is distinguished
by forming compounds in which it behaves like a bivalent element.

186 OUTLINES OF GENERAL CHEMISTRY BOOK VI

The periodic law is once more unable to give a rational explanation
of these peculiarities.

The differences between the progressive numerical values of the atomic
weights are by no means the same, but vary as much as cent per cent. This
is the case with elements whose atomic weights have been so exactly
determined that the hope of later researches bringing the values to equal
distances apart cannot be entertained. It may, however, be possible to bring
these irregularities into a relation of mutual dependence with others known
to exist, and so discover a law regulating them. The periodic system
leaves at present the impression that the elements are somewhat irregularly
scattered in a regular scheme, so that they in some way do not quite fall
into their proper places.

In spite of all this, however, we must not hesitate to acknowledge
that the discovery of the properties of the elements and of their
comparable compounds being periodic functions of their atomic weights,
is one -of the most important steps made by scientific chemistry in
late times. The principle has stood the test both in the prediction of
the properties of elements at the time undiscovered, and in the
indication of errors in the atomic weights previously accepted. We
must again emphasise the intimate connection between the periodic
system and the other grounds for the choice of the real atomic weights.
Every attempt to find similar relations in other systems of atomic
weights—Gmelin’s ‘ equivalents,” for example—has proved abortive,
so that the periodic law stands, as a means of determining the true
atomic weights, on an equal footing with isomorphism, the law of
Dulong and Petit, and the law of Avogadro.

CHAPTER II
THE MOLECULAR THEORY

In discussing the properties of substances separately, we have repeatedly
adverted to their threefold character. Some properties suffer no
change through the process of chemical combination ; they are entirely
independent of the state of the element, and their values in compounds
are, therefore, equal to the sums of the corresponding values in the
component elements. These are the additive properties, the most
striking example being mass, which through all chemical change remains
constant. The specific heat too is essentially additive ; and molecular
volume and molecular refraction have also in the main an additive
character—here, however, the properties of the elements do not always
enter into those of the compounds with the same value, but assume
a number of different values according to the chemical function the
elements perform.

Quite different from these properties are those which we have
called colligative (p. 58). They always retain the same value for
certain complexes without regard to the more or less composite nature
of these ; of a summation there is here no trace

While the additive properties have given rise to the atomic theory
—.e. the assumption that in chemical compounds the elements exist as
such, in particular with unchanged mass—the colligative properties
have drawn attention to the complexes for which the properties in
question assume equal values, and thus have led to the molecular
theory. At the foundation of this there lies, as has already been
explained (p. 58), the assumption that substances, as known to us,
are composed of definite and like groups of constituent atoms, a more
intimate union existing between the atoms within these groups or
molecules than between the molecules themselves. The colligative
properties appear whenever these proximate components of matter act
in virtue of their number and not of their nature.

The first and best known case of this is the volume of gases. It
has been shown above (p. 64) how the best and clearest hypothesis
as to the nature of the gaseous state, the kinetic theory, of necessity

188 OUTLINES OF GENERAL CHEMISTRY BOOK VI

leads to the conclusion that, under the same conditions, there is in
equal volumes of gases the same number of molecules. We may
confidently predict that any future hypothesis as to the nature of
gases, however greatly it may differ from the present one, will still be
in agreement with it in this particular point.

It is not only the physical behaviour of gases, however, that has made the
assumption of the molecular theory seem expedient. Formerly, when it
appeared a matter of course to assume the existence of single atoms of the
elements in gaseous oxygen and hydrogen, there was no answer to the question
why the two gases should not immediately combine to form water when
they are mixed. In the same way, the activity of the elements at the
moment of liberation—in the “nascent” state——so different from their
ordinary chemical activity, remained a fact no less remarkable than ‘in-
explicable. Nowadays, when there is ascribed to the “free” elements a mole-
cular state in which, generally speaking, two or more atoms are united to each
other, both these facts and many others related to them find a satisfactory
explanation. When oxygen and hydrogen are to combine chemically, the
work of separating the two atoms in the molecule has first to be done before
the liberated atoms can seek new positions of equilibrium. If the atoms, on
the other hand, are separated as such in chemical processes, ¢.g. in the action
of sodium on water (Na+ H,O=NaOH+H), this work has not to be per-
formed, so that the liberated atoms can freely exert their chemical affinity
on other atoms or atomic groups in their neighbourhood. This is what we
call the nascent state.

The molecular conception, finally, has proved to be exceedingly
useful in systematising the organic compounds, having become of the
utmost importance for the comprehension of the mutual relations of
these bodies, composed of but few elements in the most varied pro-
portions. As, in the choice of the atomic weights, it was first attempted
to carry out systematically the principle of equivalents, which slowly |
yielded to the present system only after the law of multiple propor-
tions had again and again blocked the way, so in organic chemistry
the simplest formule alone were at first employed. Not before
Graham’s and Liebig’s investigations on polybasic acids, Williamson’s
classical proof that two alcohol radicals are contained in the ethers,
and Gerhardt and Laurent’s demonstration that a comprehensive and
consistent system of the organic compounds was possible by referring
the formule to equal volumes in the gaseous state, did the molecular
theory finally force its way into chemistry. It was at last accepted
by all chemists (with the exception of an ultra-conservative school in
France) when Cannizzaro proved that the assumptions necessarily
made by. the molecular theory were in perfect agreement with the
results obtained from the law of Dulong and Petit.

The present task of special chemistry, as will be explained in the
next chapter, is to determine the constitution of chemical compounds.
After the chemical composition and the empirical formula have been

CHAP, III _ THE MOLECULAR THEORY 189

fixed, i.¢. the simplest number of atoms which will represent the pro-
portions obtained, the first step towards accomplishing this task is
the determination of the molecular weight. Until a short time ago
there was only one means of ascertaining this, viz. by determining the
vapour density. This means could evidently only be applied to vola-
tile substances, and was often therefore useless.

We see, however, at once that the problem can be solved by
measuring any colligative property, for all colligative properties
assume the same value for equimolecular quantities of different
substances. If we thus determine how much of the substance with
unknown molecular weight is required to give a value of any colli
gative property equal to that given by a known quantity of a substance
of known molecular weight, then these quantities must be in the ratio
of the two molecular weights.

Colligative properties are only known in gases and solutions ; they
have not hitherto been observed in pure liquids. This is quite com-
prehensible, for properties conditioned solely by the number, and not
by the nature of the independently existing complexes, can only be
observed under conditions where the special properties of the com-
plexes or molecules are dormant. The first condition is evidently:
that the molecules be separated by a sufficiently large distance, a state
only realised in gases and solutions. We have consequently no
prospect of ever meeting with colligative properties under other
conditions. By this is not meant that the determination of the
molecular weights of pure liquid substances will always remain
impossible. We may come to know them, only we must employ for
this purpose properties not colligative.

To determine the molecular weights of dissolved substances the
colligative properties discussed on pp. 127-140 may all serve,—thus,
the osmotic pressure, the lowering of the vapour pressure and of the
freezing-point. The last-mentioned is now experimentally most
developed ; a determination of the molecular weight by a depression
of the freezing-point is much easier and more rapid in the execution
than a vapour-density determination, for example.

The question here arises, in what proportion the molecular weights
determined according to the different methods stand to each other, in
particular whether they are identical. A somewhat comprehensive in-
vestigation undertaken by Beckmann (1888) showed that the results
obtained by the method of freezing-point depression are in close agreement
with those obtained from the vapour density. In one or two cases, where a
tendency towards the formation of double molecules is seen in the vapour
density, e.g. acetic acid, it appeared that different solvents act differently.
Dissolved in water, acetic acid exists as normal molecules C,H,O,, in benzene,
on the other hand, it forms double molecules. The water therefore acts on
acetic acid like a high temperature, the benzene like a low temperature.
Again, for non-volatile substances, whose molecular weights had hitherto only

190 OUTLINES OF GENERAL CHEMISTRY BOOK VI

been inferred from the chemical reactions into which they entered, the
values obtained from the depression of the freezing-point were almost
without exception identical with those obtained on chemical grounds, so that
the method holds good on all sides. It should be observed that when a
tendency to the formation of double molecules is present, as it is in many
compounds containing hydroxyl, effect is much more completely given to
this tendency in benzene solutions than when the substance is dissolved in
water, acetic acid, or phenol.

By the discovery of the colligative character of the properties of
solutions just mentioned, the possibility of determining the molecular
weights, formerly confined to volatile substances, has been enormously
increased, for now it extends to all soluble substances, 2.¢. to almost
all that come into the chemist’s hands. We see at once how much
the investigation of unknown substances is advanced by this. If the
molecular weight of a new body is known, the possibilities of its
rational constitution suffer an immediate and great limitation, so that
a choice is materially facilitated.

Little is as yet known concerning the molecular weights of pure
liquid substances. Many chemists are inclined to assume that the
liquid molecules are composed of a comparatively large number of gas
molecules, so that if M denotes the gas molecule, the liquid molecule
would be represented by (M),. This is undoubtedly the case with
bodies such as acetic acid where the tendency to the formation of
double molecules is already present ; liquid acetic acid very probably
consists of molecules having the formula (C,H,0,),. With other
liquids where this tendency does not exist in the vapour there is no
ground for assuming such complex molecules, and we shall always
come nearest the truth, as far as our present knowledge of the subject
goes, by supposing the molecules of the liquid to have the same com-
position as those of the vapour. In one case we might seem to have a
direct proof of this assumption, namely, in the vapour pressure of
solutions. As the vapour pressure (p. 132) depends on the number of
molecules of the dissolved body and of the solvent, there is apparently
a method offered for determining the molecular weight of the one sub-
stance when that of the other is known. Such a conclusion is not,
however, justified, for in this case only the number of molecules
leaving the liquid to become vapour is taken into consideration, and
not those which remain in the liquid.

The molecular weight of solids still remains an unsolved problem. The
only thing that can be said with any degree of certainty is that the molecules .
are probably of a comparatively complex character. Sulphur, even as a gas,
contains at temperatures below a bright red heat six atoms in the molecule,
as a liquid and a solid certainly not less, The fact that several elements
can exist in so extraordinarily different allotropic forms as carbon in char-
coal, graphite, and diamond, or phosphorus in the red and yellow modifica-
tions, cannot in the ight of the molecular theory be otherwise interpreted

CHAP. III THE MOLECULAR THEORY 191

than by the assumption of more or less composite molecules in the various
forms.

When allotropic solids are brought into the liquid or gaseous state,
not a trace of difference between them is left. The vapour of red phos-
phorus is identical with the vapour of yellow phosphorus, and a solu-
tion of rhombic sulphur in carbon disulphide is in no respect different
from a solution of similar composition made from monosymmetric
sulphur. Conversely, from the same solution, eg. one of nickel
sulphate supersaturated by cooling, any one of the different forms of
the salt may be obtained by the introduction of a fragment of the
corresponding crystal. The so-called physical isomerism thus occurs
exclusively in connection with the solid substance, and disappears
whenever the latter assumes another state of aggregation.

For these reasons the attempts frequently made to deduce the crystalline
form of chemical compounds from their elementary composition have all
proved fruitless. The crystalline particles are obviously only in exceptional
cases identical with the molecules.

i CHAP TE ROSIN
THEORY OF CHEMICAL COMPOUNDS

Or the numerous questions concerning the nature of chemical com-
pounds, Dalton’s atomic hypothesis only answered one, that, namely,
which asked whether or not the elements exist as such within them.
The answer was affirmative. . Chemical compounds are complexes
formed by the conjunction of elementary atoms. The facts and
theories in the first two chapters of Book V. gave us information as
to the relative mass of the atoms; the molecular theory and the
observations on which it is founded made us in certain definite cases
cognisant of the number of atoms in such complexes. In the present
chapter we shall be occupied by the mutual relations of the atoms
within the molecule.

This problem is of course purely hypothetical, for the existence of the
atoms themselves is only a hypothesis. But based on this hypothesis a
theory of great fertility has been developed, and—apart from metaphysical
scruples about the atomic theory, which for the most part rest on misappre-
hension—there lies in the results already obtained a guarantee that further
advancement of the theory will lead to results equally serviceable. This
advance may not be made by assuming any arbitrary forces and properties,
but must come directly from the fundamental assumption that the atoms
are finite, and, for the same element,. similar bodies. But as every finite
quantity of matter occupies a position in space which is definable with regard
to other material particles, the question as to the relative position (or motion)
of the atoms in the molecule is scientifically justified, and must be put sooner
or later by the atomic theory. .

As a matter of fact the question is as old as the theory itself ;
from the time that compounds were conceived as being composed of
atoms, chemists have endeavoured to obtain a clear idea of the mutual
relations of these components.

The first theory of chemical compounds is due, as we know, to
Berzelius, who founded it on the phenomena observed by him during
the electrolysis of salts. He saw that the acids of the salts of the
alkalies (chiefly studied by him) collected at the copper pole and the

CHAP. IV THEORY OF CHEMICAL COMPOUNDS 193

bases at the zinc pole, and so, according to the old principle of Stahl,
that a body consisted of those things which by their union gave it,
and which on its decomposition were re-formed, he concluded that
acids and bases were the components of the salts. The known acids
and bases on their combination always produced water in addition, but
this was supposed to be pre-existent in them, playing the part of a base
in the acids, and of an acid in the bases; the real acids and bases were
the known substances minus this water.

The same principle was at once extended to all other groups of
bodies. Oxides too could be decomposed electrolytically, giving on
the one hand oxygen, on the other a metal. Berzelius therefore
looked upon compounds quite generally as being formed of two parts
which were held together by electrical attraction, and could be
separated by electrical forces. In this way arose the electrochemical
system, according to which the binary arrangement holds good step by
step in the most complicated compounds. Alum, for example, was
supposed to consist in the first instance of potassium aluminium
sulphate and water ; the latter was a binary compound of oxygen and
hydrogen, the former of aluminium sulphate and potassium sulphate.
Each of these salts again consisted of sulphuric acid (SO,) and a
metallic oxide, and these two components finally were composed of
oxygen on the one hand, and sulphur or a metal on the other.

This view, in principle so clear and simple, proved exceedingly
useful although its foundation was false. Potassium sulphate, as we
now know, splits up on electrolysis, not into K,0+SO,, but into
K,+80,, and the principle of the dualistic theory of Berzelius, that
only compounds of the same order can unite to form higher com-
pounds, is contradictory to the fundamental phenomenon from which
it was deduced. |

In spite of this fundamental error, the electrochemical theory has been
of the greatest importance in the development of chemical science. By
giving a list of substances arranged according to their electrochemical
tension, Berzelius laid the foundation of the science of comparative affinity ;
while the easily understood and rigorous system rendered possible by the
theory has eminently advanced the study of chemistry. Even after the dis-
covery of the error contained in the conception of the process of electrolysis,
the theory did not fall to the ground, but remained until its inapplicability
to a class of compounds not known at the time of its development was made
evident. This class is formed by the non-electrolysible organic compounds.

The electrochemical theory had not much to do with the “ topography
of the atoms.” Beyond the assumption that in the oxygen-salts a part of
the oxygen is contained in the base and a part in the acid, it scarcely re-
quired any other. It should only be mentioned that according to this theory
each complicated compound was composed of atoms and groups of atoms
held together by gradually weakening bonds, so that the binary members
within the complex through their more powerful internal connection led a

O

194 OUTLINES OF GENERAL CHEMISTRY BOOK VI

sort of isolated and independent existence. Here we see the germs of the
later developed theory of radicals.

An earnest consideration of the relative position of the atoms in
the molecule only became requisite when facts were made known
that could not be otherwise explained by the atomic theory than
through different arrangement of the atoms. ‘This is what is called
isomerism.

When Wohler in 1823 analysed cyanic acid, and Liebig in 1824
fulminic acid, it was discovered that both chemists had found the same
composition for these undoubtedly different substances. Berzelius,
who compared the researches in his Jahresbericht indulged in several
speculations as to the manner in which one or other of the investi-
gators could have fallen into error, for that two so different substances
could have the same composition appeared to such a degree unlikely
that the possibility was never entertained.

However, in the following year, Faraday in the course of an
investigation of the hydrocarbons which had collected in cylinders
used for compressing coal-gas, found besides benzene, a gas (butylene)
having the same composition as the well-known olefiant gas (ethylene),
but twice as great a specific gravity in the gaseous state. Berzelius
familiarised himself gradually with the idea that in reality substances
of the same composition could have different properties, and called
attention in his turn to the two distinct stannic oxides. Almost
every year now added to the number of new substances of the same
composition with different properties, until finally in 1830 the racemic
acid discovered by Kestner proved to be in every respect similarly
composed to ordinary tartaric acid, although in its solubility, the
crystalline form of its salts, and in its reactions it differed indubitably
from the latter. .

Berzelius then made the recognition of identically composed
substances with different properties the general possession of science
by giving it the name isomerism. He soon too distinguished between
different kinds of this ; for such compounds as Faraday’s hydrocarbons,
which contained the same elements in the same proportions, but a
different number (multiple) of atoms, he introduced the name poly-
meric, while such substances as contained the same number of atoms
merely differently “arranged,” he called metameric. These very
suitable names remain in use at the present day.

The fact of the existence of isomerism has been of the greatest
significance for the theoretical form taken by chemistry, for from it
followed that not only the number and nature of the component atoms
were of decisive influence in what concerned the properties of a
compound, but that there was something besides—something hypothe-
tically referred by Berzelius to the atoms being “placed together in
different ways.” This view was retained in the whole of the coming

CHAP. IV THEORY OF CHEMICAL COMPOUNDS 195

development of the conception of isomerism, and at first took the
form of the assumption of different ‘‘ radicals” in the compounds. The
assumption, it is true, was not made to explain the phenomena of
isomerism ; quite other facts caused this development of the electro-
chemical doctrine, but many cases of isomerism could be conveniently
explained by the difference of the radicals.

During the great research of Liebig and Wohler on benzoyl (1832), a
number of substances.came to be known which all contained the atomic
complex C_H,O, and were derived from the same original material. A special
rdle within the compounds was credited to this unchanged portion ; its
atoms were supposed to be held together by stronger forces than those ~
which bound the variable components. Here was the theory of radicals ;
those more stable complexes played the same part in complex compounds as
the elements in simpler compounds; Liebig even went the length of stating
that these radicals were the true elements of organic chemistry. By the
heroic investigations of Bunsen on cacodyle, and the supposed isolation of
ethyl by Frankland, so much was adduced in favour of the theory of radicals,
that it generally came to be considered the only true form for the conception
and representation of the nature of chemical compounds.

The want of clearness in the theory as to the character of the stronger
or closer binding of the atoms within the radical, and as to how far this
differed from the binding of the radicals amongst themselves or with other
atoms, was at that time not felt, because then the problems of chemical
affinity never entered into any one’s mind at all. Indeed, several chemists,
following the example of Berzelius, expressly assumed the existence of a
special sort of union different from the ordinary kind, and this they dis-
tinguished as “pairing” or “coupling.”

While the theory of radicals grew out of the electrochemical theory,
and merely applied its fundamental conceptions without alteration
to the new units, another mode of viewing the facts came more and
more to the front, and was always receiving fresh support. It was
advanced by Laurent (1839), alternately taken up and dropped by
Dumas, and fiercely combated by Berzelius, although it finally proved
to be perfectly justified and in the highest degree fertile. ‘This was
the idea of substitution, the notion that single atoms in a compound
could be replaced by others, the new substance still remaining analogous
to the original compound. Such observations were first made on the
action of chlorine upon organic compounds containing hydrogen; a
particularly pregnant example being found in trichloracetic acid (dis-
covered by Dumas), in which three hydrogen atoms of the acetic acid
were replaced by three chlorine atoms. The close relationship of this
acid to acetic acid was especially noticeable in its retransformation
into the latter, a reaction discovered by Melsens.

The new theory contradicted the electrochemical theory in two great
points. Berzelius could not admit that “electropositive ” hydrogen was so
replaceable by “electronegative” chlorine that the similarity of the two

196 OUTLINES OF GENERAL CHEMISTRY BOOK VI

compounds could be preserved. On the other hand, the assumption of a
substitution—of the entrance of one atom into the place of another, was in
direct contradiction to the electrochemical principle of binary arrangement.
Both these points were energetically emphasised by the upholders of the
theory of substitution. The first led to the proposition, that the “position ”
alone of an atom—not its nature—was of influence on the properties of the
compound. In this form the proposition is certainly not true, and at once
experienced opposition. A. W. Hofmann was soon able to show from the
bromine substitution products of aniline, that according to the position of
the bromine its properties frequently appeared very much weakened in their
influence, although they never disappeared altogether.

While a compromise could here be made between the new and the
old views, the idea of the unitary constitution of chemical compounds
obtained a complete victory over the binary constitution. This reform was
in agreement with the conception of the molecule as described above, and
led to the setting up of molecular schemes, the chemical types, which we
shall shortly consider more closely.

The law of substitution meanwhile was more and more extended.
It was recognised that not only chlorine, bromine, and iodine could
replace the hydrogen of organic compounds, but that compound
radicals possessed the same property. Here the radicals of the old
theory are represented as the true substituents, as was especially
perceived by Hofmann and Wurtz from their study of the sub-
stituted ammonias. At the same time the way was prepared for the
distinction between atom and equivalent: one atom of oxygen does
not replace one but two atoms of hydrogen on substitution, and has
therefore twice the substituting value of the latter.

Dumas, on taking up the idea of substitution, soon carried it, as
was his.wont, to its extreme consequences, assuming that only the
arrangement, and not the nature of the atoms, determined the pro-
perties of the compounds. ‘The task therefore of finding the principal
types lay immediately before him. His attempt to fix them was,
however, unsuccessful.

It was the later researches of Williamson on the ethers, and of
Hofmann and Wurtz on the organic ammonias, that enabled Gerhardt
and Laurent to put the idea into a practical form. According to

them all compounds were derived from the types of. hydrogen A \,

Sui EL H ne
hydrochloric acid CLs water yy to and ammonia H -N, by the re-

| H
placement of their hydrogen atoms by other elements or radicals. ‘To
this scheme Williamson added that of the double and triple ‘“ con-
densed” types, and Kekulé introduced ‘‘ mixed” types formed by
uniting two or more different simple types. In these last attempts to
bring the schemes into harmony with the facts, we already find a factor

CHAP. IV THEORY OF CHEMICAL COMPOUNDS 197

which later on became of great importance. In order that the two
groups in condensed or mixed types might be held together, an atom
or radical had of necessity to be present which could take the place of
two hydrogen atoms, and which thus formed the connecting link, one
hydrogen atom in each group being replaced by it. Here, then, there
appeared for the first time the conception of the polyatomic radical
or element as the condition for the holding together of the molecule.

The classification of compounds according to types was of the greatest
use to science, for 1t gave a convenient survey af a large number of Bibstance:
already aioe and imoteated methods for preparing new bodies. Never-
theless it was, on account of its purely formal character, no real theory of
chemical compounds. Gerhardt, its founder, was quite clear on this point ;
he again and again reiterated that his formule were only to be looked on as
functional, not as constitutional. Soon too the theory proved unequal to
the task of keeping up with the progress of science.

The system of types was by no means generally accepted, for the chief
representatives of the theory of radicals (who admitted the law of substitution,
and by its means widened the old views) kept strictly aloof from it. In
particular, Frankland and Kolbe sought to arrive at a proper understanding
of chemical compounds in quite another way, which took better into account
the nature of the elements and the analogies with inorganic compounds.
Thus Kolbe was in a position to predict the existence of isomers amongst the
alcohols, where in the system of types there was only room for one sub-
stance; and not only did he prognosticate their existence, but also their
behaviour, A few years later Friedel discovered anges propyl alcohol

and confirmed Kolbe’s prediction.

A case of isomerism had thus again shown the necessity of going
deeper into the problem of chemical constitution. The guiding idea
‘was found by Frankland. In the course of his researches on organo-
metallic compounds (1852) he observed that one atom of zine, arsenic,
antimony, etc., had its combining tendency always satisfied by a
definite number of univalent elements or radicals, of whatever kind
these might be. In this way was laid the foundation for the study of
valency or the capacity of saturation of the atoms.

The application to carbon compounds was not made by Frankland.
This important step was taken almost simultaneously (1858) by Couper
and Kekulé, who perceived that carbon was quadrivalent, and showed
that the constitution of numerous carbon compounds could be explained
on this assumption. Every carbon atom can unite with four other
univalent atoms or radicals (i.e. such as can replace one atom of
hydrogen), but not with more. We have chiefly to thank Kekulé for
carrying through this idea.

In the theory of valency, which is at the present time the prevalent
one, there is thus assumed that each atom possesses a definite limited
capacity for combining with other atoms. This capacity is called the
valency, and the atoms that can combine with one, two, three, four

198 OUTLINES OF GENERAL CHEMISTRY BOOK VI

hydrogen atoms (or equivalent atoms or radicals) are said to be
univalent, bivalent, trivalent, quadrivalent, respectively. Carbon is
quadrivalent on account of the compound CH,, oxygen bivalent owing
to the compound OH,. In general, chemical compounds are so con-
stituted that the valencies of the different elements exactly satisfy —
each other. In acetic acid, whose rational formula is HO-CO-’CH.,,
one of the carbon atoms is united in the first place to a bivalent
oxygen atom with two valencies. The third valency is united with
one of the valencies of another oxygen atom, whose second valency is
satisfied by a hydrogen atom. Lastly, the fourth valency of the
original carbon atom is united with one valency of a second carbon
atom, whose three others are satisfied by three hydrogen atoms.

These relations may be made clear by the adoption of Couper’s
idea of affixing to the elementary symbols so many short lines as there
are active valencies, and then joining these from atom to atom. Acetic
acid would thus receive the following structural formula :—

Such a formula is capable of rendering evident a great many
different relations. It shows that one of the hydrogen atoms behaves
differently from the others, because it is united with oxygen to form
hydroxyl, while the others are all united to carbon. Further, the two
oxygen atoms behave differently, the hydroxyl oxygen being more
easily attacked and removed than the other. Lastly, the two carbon
atoms have different functions: the one, united to two oxygen atoms,
easily passes Into carbonic acid, the other splits off as methyl, CH.
All these relations just derived from the formula exist in fact ; the
structural formule thus fulfil in a high degree the claim of being ‘both
functional and constitutional formule.

Now, as to the meaning of such formule, there are two things which
must be carefully kept distinct—on the one hand, the chemical valency, on
the other, its representation by the so-called structural formule. The first
is of actual material significance, it is founded on the observation that the
atoms may have their capacity of combination satisfied by a certain number
of equivalents of other atoms or radicals, no matter what the nature of these
atoms or radicals may be. ‘The representation of this fact by structural
formule, in the first instance at least, is purely formal; it only serves to
aid the mind in comprehending and retaining the relations experimentally
found, and shows whether the postulates of the theory of valency are
fulfilled.

The valency of hydrogen is usually taken as unity, because ac-
cording to all our experience a single atom of any element can only

CHAP. IV THEORY OF CHEMICAL COMPOUNDS FO9

unite with one definite number of hydrogen atoms, the law of multiple
proportions finding no application to the hydrogen compounds that
contain only one atom of the other element. Unfortunately, only few
elements form hydrogen compounds, so that our ability to fix the
valency in this way is limited. We have, nevertheless, arrived at a
knowledge of the valency of elements that form no hydrogen com-
pounds, by means of elements or radicals that have been directly
found to be univalent with respect to hydrogen.* Considerable
difficulties have, however, been encountered here, and these are even
yet not entirely overcome.

The most remarkable relation of the valencies, as far as they are
known, is to be found in the periodic system, for they too form a
periodic function of the atomic weight. The valency in the table
(which is here reproduced) is constant in the horizontal rows, and
increases by a unit from row to row as we descend. From the fifth
row downwards it decreases just as regularly if we take the hydrogen
compounds as decisive; the chlorine and oxygen compounds, on the
other hand, still show the regular increase.

1 2 3 4 5 6
fe. 0 Li K Rb Cs —- —-
I k,0, Be Ca Sr Ba — —
fe k.O; B Se Y La Yb --
LVee R07. EC. C Ti Zr Ce — Th
V RO; HN N Vv Nb Di Ta —
EN learitoOass Eat) O Cr Mo — W U
VII R,O, HF ¥ Mn — — — —
Fe ( Ru | Os
VIII {co + Rh Ir
Ni ( Pd ( Pt
I RO Na Cu Ag — Au —
II RO, Mg Zn Cd — Hg —
ITT? 2,0; Al Ga In —- iy —
IV RO, H,Si Si Ge Sn _- Pb —
WV GR00° HP P As Sb — Bi -—
VI ROs HS S Se Te --- -— —
VII R,O, HCl Cl Br I —- — —

Here again we see how some elements belong to different rows. As
already mentioned, Mendelejeff was the first to call attention to these
relations.

Notwithstanding the agreement of numerous facts with the theory of
valency, several important difficulties, particularly in organic chemistry,
have stood in the way of its being rigorously and consistently carried out.
First of all, the primary principle that the combining-tendency of atoms is
always satisfied by the same number of equivalents is not general. There
are many compounds which for a certain quantity of one element have

* The reader who wishes a detailed account of this subject is referred to Lothar
Meyer’s Modern Theories of Chemistry, English translation.

200 OUTLINES OF GENERAL CHEMISTRY BOOK VI

different numbers of equivalents of other elements, as, for example, carbon
monoxide, CO, and carbon dioxide, CO, ; nitrogen monoxide, N,O, nitrogen
dioxide, NO, and nitrogen peroxide, NO,. Stress must be laid on the fact
that these are all bodies whose vapour densities are known, so that there can
be no doubt as to their molecular weights.

Two explanations of this have been offered. The hypothesis of constant
valency was by some asserted to be strictly true, and the compounds of an
element were called unsaturated when all the valencies attributed to
it from a consideration of the majority of its known compounds were not
satisfied, the assumption being that in certain circumstances there could be
compounds in which some of the valencies remained passive. The reason
was not given why this should occur in certain cases only, and why the atoms
did not assume the arrangement—always theoretically possible—in which
all the valencies would be satisfied, nor was the question disposed of why
the atoms should have a definite valency at all.

Other chemists assumed that the valency could change, that in nitric
oxide, NO, for example, the nitrogen as well as the oxygen was bivalent.
This way of representing the facts is no more an explanation of them than
the assumption of unsaturated valencies. Nevertheless, the strife between
the supporters of constant and variable valency has been sufficiently bitter,
and is even yet not at an end.

If we think of the way in which a decision might be arrived at, we see
that it can only come from a definite and well-founded hypothesis as to the
nature of what we call valency. As long as we denote by it merely the
combining-capacity expressed in equivalents, we must grant that it has
sometimes been found to change, and must therefore assume a variable
valency. On the other hand, if we consider valency, as is mostly done,
to be an inherent property of the atoms, the assumption that it is variable
seems impossible, as we cannot admit any variation in the properties of
atoms, but only a variation in their condition.

There still remains, however, one possibility of explaining the actual
changes in the valency. If we conceive valency as a consequence of a
property of the atoms, its action being modified by differences in their
condition, especially by differences in their states of motion, it is compre-
hensible that although the cause of valency is invariable, the action of this
cause, the valency itself, may appear different from case to case.

A hypothesis of this kind was advanced by van’t Hoff (1878). By
assuming that the chemical attraction between two molecules is caused by
gravitation, he showed that if an atom possessed a form other than spherical,
the intensity of the attraction at its surface would have a certain number of
maxima dependent on the form. If the thermal motion of the atom were
brisk, only the strongest maxima would be able to retain their atoms,
and the valency would thus appear, as is actually the case, smaller at high
than at low temperatures.

This assumption possesses all the qualifications of a hypothesis capable of
development. It postulates no special properties, but is based on what
pertains to the atoms as finite quantities of matter, namely form. The
future must decide if it can be carried out fully, and if there may be drawn
from it deductive laws whose experimental verification will prove its utility.

CHAP, IV THEORY OF CHEMICAL COMPOUNDS 201

The need of finding an explanation for a great class of compounds,
mostly known only in the solid state, and whose constitution cannot
be explained by the ordinary assumptions as to the valency of the
atoms, has led the supporters of constant valency to consider these
compounds as being of a different order from those which come under
the ordinary rules of valency. These bodies are called molecular
compounds in contradistinction to the usual or atomic compounds.
The former, which are made to include salts with water of crystallisa-
tion, double salts, and (by some) all the salts of ammonia, are not
supposed to owe their chemical coherence to the forces acting between
atom and atom that condition the valency ; but the molecules from
which these compounds originate are assumed to exert as wholes such
forces on each other as serve to keep the compound together.

The molecular compounds have been only distinguished from the
atomic compounds on account of the hypothesis of constant valency—
a fact which inclines one to look upon this hypothesis with suspicion,
especially as all exertions to find a distinction between the two classes
other than that with respect to the valency have proved fruitless.
For the rest, the properties of the one class pass gradually into those
of the other, a continuous descent from greatest to least stability
appearing with corresponding compounds.

The fundamental assumption too with regard to the nature of the
dlistinction between atomic and molecular compounds is untenable. So long
as we make none as to the nature of “valency,” the distinction in question
is completely nugatory. On the other hand, if the valencies are conceived
as localised maxima of attraction in the atom, we can only suppose that when
molecules attract each other as wholes these maxima are active in some of
the atoms in the molecules, so that the so-called attraction of the entire
molecules is again reduced to the attractions between the atoms. That
compounds of this kind, held together by the weaker secondary valencies,
are more easily decomposable than the so-called atomic compounds is what
we might expect, and involves no contradiction.

The foregoing considerations show how far the doctrine of valency
is from deserving the name of a theory of chemical compounds. It
has inherited from the parent theory of types so much of the merely
formal element, that the attempt to make the actual relations clear
by means of a mechanical hypothesis has scarcely been undertaken.
At the present time chemists are mostly satisfied with the fact that
structural formule provide schemes which represent the actual cases of
isomerism and the possible reactions.

It is not intended by this to pronounce an unfavourable opinion
with regard to the importance of structural formule. These stand
much in the same relation to the substances they represent as the
formule of analytical geometry to the corresponding curves and
surfaces, only they do not approach the latter in respect of certainty

202 OUTLINES OF GENERAL CHEMISTRY BOOK VI

and completeness of representation,—a difference lying in the nature
of the two branches of science. They afford to the expert the means
of drawing a great number of conclusions, and of expressing a large
number of facts in a concise and intelligible manner.

They are misused when they are taken as representing the actual
arrangement of the atoms in space. The ordinary arrangement of the
four valencies of a carbon atom in one plane evidently cannot corre-
spond to the facts, for according to it there ought to be two methylene

Cl Cl
|
chlorides, say, H—C—H and H—C—Cl, whereas only one is known,
| |
Cl fH
and nothing points to the possibility of such isomers. We make this
customary method of formulation conformable to the facts by ex-
plaining that the two formule given above are identical, which of
course they in reality are not.

Van’t Hoff, the first to indicate a mechanical theory of valency,
was also the first to essay a tridimensional formulation of the atomic
space-relations (1877). He imagines the valencies of the carbon atom
to act at the four summits of a tetrahedron. On this assumption, only
one methylene chloride is possible, and attention has been already
called to the circumstance that the phenomena and conditions of
optical activity are in satisfactory agreement with it.

Quite recently (1887) Johannes Wislicenus has further developed this idea
by taking into consideration the forces acting between the different atoms,
so that an intelligible explanation has been given of many phenomena not
hitherto understood. The existence of more isomers among the unsaturated
compounds than the ordinary structural formule indicate is clearly explained
by the tridimensional diagrams, and in the same way also, the transformations
of these substances into one another.

For example, there is only one structural formula to represent both

HC—COOH |
fumaric and maleic acids, viz. || . Van’t Hoff had already shown
HC—COOH
that two tridimensional formule correspond to this plane formula, if we
imagine the valencies of the carbon atoms at the summits of a tetrahedron,
v1Z.—
H COOH Hy COOH

H COOH HOC ‘H

Fig. 43. MALEic AcIp. Fic. 44. Fumaric AcID.

CHAP. IV THEORY OF CHEMICAL COMPOUNDS 203

The first formula belongs to maleic acid, for this acid can form an anhydride,
which according to the second formula is scarcely possible on account of the
distance between the carboxyl groups.

Now, maleic acid under the influence of hydrobromic acid changes into
fumaric acid. The process may be so represented that the elements of
hydrobromic acid are added to maleic acid, thus forming monobromosuccinic
acid, and are then again split off as hydrobromic acid. Meanwhile the
carbon tetrahedra have become free to turn on their common axis, so that
they will assume the position which best satisfies the affinities at work,
whereupon the separation of hydrobromic acid takes place.

First, therefore, we have

H COOH
COO
+H Br=
COOH wi COOH
; W
Fic. 45. Matric Acrp. Fic. 46. MoNOBROMOSUCGCINIC ACID.

The monobromosuccinic acid now undergoes a change on account of the
mutual repulsion of the hydrogen atoms, whereby the positive and negative

HH COOH
= +H Br,
HO00: V4 HAo0ck WA
H
Fic. 47. Monopromosuccinic ACID. Fig. 48. Fumaric AcIp.

groups come opposite each other. If now hydrobromic acid separates from
this, fumaric acid alone can be formed.

Corresponding to this example, other hitherto incomprehensible pheno-
mena can be easily explained, as may be seen in the published work of
Wislicenus and his pupils.

204 OUTLINES OF GENERAL CHEMISTRY BOOK VI

In these geometrical considerations we see a necessary and there-
fore well-justified stage of development of the theory of chemical
structure on the basis of the doctrine of valency. The ideas, it is true,
are of a purely hypothetical character; in this, however, they do not
differ from the generally accepted atomic and molecular theories
themselves. Every hypothesis must be specialised as far as the facts
require. As soon as the formule written without respect to the
geometrical relations became incapable of representing all the
observed phenomena, an extension of their signification was rendered
necessary, and this was made by taking the geometrical relations into
account. The chief object of such hypothetical generalisations—that
of simplifying the representation and of inciting to fresh research—has
in the case of the geometrical formule already been fully attained.
Not only have old facts been made clear through it for the first time,
but a considerable number of new substances have been searched for
at its instance—searched for and in almost all cases found.

PART II

CHEMICAL LAWS OF ENERGY

BOOK VII

THERMOCHEMISTRY

CTEaee Re]
INTRODUCTORY

BESIDES matter, the quantity of which undergoes no change in any
known process, there is another something possessing the same pro-
perties of indestructibility and uncreatability, and having there-
fore a real existence in the same sense as this is ascribed to matter.
This thing we call energy. It can appear in various forms—as the
kinetic energy, or vis viva, of moving masses, as the potential
energy (or capacity of doing work) of such material systems as are
capable under the prevailing conditions of assuming a more stable
arrangement, as heat (including light), as electrical energy, with
which magnetic energy is to be associated, and, finally, as chemical
energy. ie

All these different forms can be so transformed into each other
that definite quantities of any one correspond to definite quantities of
the others. Whenever energy in any form disappears, a proportionate
quantity of another form must appear in its place; and to obtain a
quantity of energy in any form we must sacrifice a proportionate
quantity of some other kind of energy.

In our previous consideration of chemical processes the transforma-
tions were only looked at with respect to their material result; the
causes necessary for a transformation to take place at all were not
alluded to. These causes will now form the subject of our further
investigation.

In general they are to be found in the circumstances and relations
of energy. Energy is always associated with matter, at least we
know no—matter without. energy, and every state of the former is |
defined by by the amount of the definite_kinds_ of energy it contains. if

ners ence +

208 OUTLINES OF GENERAL CHEMISTRY BOOK VII~

Now, energy_is of such a nature that it is not possible for_any masses

affected -with_any kindof energy to exist together. Certain definite _

conditions must be complied 1 with in order that this coexistence may
be possible, and if these are not at first fulfilled an interaction takes
place, with the result that they finally are fulfilled. In this property
of energy lies the cause of all change in the material world.

Energy may in general be decomposed into two factors. Kinetic
2
energy, for example, has the form m = where m is the mass and v the

velocity of the moving body. Potential energy appears in the form
fs, s being the space passed over by the point considered in the change
of state, and f the measure of the striving of the point to alter its
state ; this magnitude f is usually termed force.

For heat we have the product ts, where t is the temperature and
s the specific heat ; electrical energy is of the form eq, q representing
a quantity of electricity, and e the electromotive-force. No decom-
position into two factors has as yet been made with chemical energy ;
possibly it may have the form of kinetic energy, as it is proportional
to the mass.

The law of energy above-mentioned, which must be fulfilled in
order that substances may exist together, is as follows :—One of the
factors of the energy, which we may call the intensity of the
energy, must have the same value in all parts of the system.
This factor is—

for kinetic energy . ; _avelocity,

5, potential energy . suelOrer:

» heat. : ‘ . temperature,

,, electrical energy . . electromotive-force.

Whenever one of these magnitudes has different values at different
parts of the system, the latter cannot remain at rest, and the appro-
priate process takes place.

In many cases one intensity can be partially replaced by another, but
we shall not enter on the difficult question as to the conditions of such a
substitution.

When one intensity becomes adjusted, this mostly entails such a change
of state that an inequality is brought about in some other intensity. Thus
one change conditions another, and so it goes on. Still, so far as we can
judge, this process cannot continue for ever ; in some extraordinarily remote
time to come the intensities will everywhere have assumed uniform values
and all change will cease. |

Chemical energy is to us the least known of all the various forms,
as we can measure neither it nor any of its factors directly. The only
means of obtaining information regarding it is to transform it into
another species of energy. It passes most easily and completely into

CHAP, I INTRODUCTORY 209

heat, and the branch of science which treats of the measurement of
chemical energy in thermal units is called thermochemistry.
Thermochemistry is thus the science of the thermal processes con- .

—ditioned by chemical processes. The quantities of heat evolved or

absorbed measure the decrease or increase of chemical energy, in so far

as other energy is not involved in the processes.

|

The sources of energy employed in the arts and manufactures are
all of chemical origin, being referable to the combination of the
elements of the fuel employed with the oxygen of the air. But, in
addition to this, the vital activity of all organisms depends exclusively
on chemical processes and the energy liberated through them. Chemi-
cal energy is consequently that form with which we have most exten-
sively and frequently to deal, and which has the first and largest place
in the economy of nature.

The history of thermochemistry begins accordingly with the technological
and physiological problems propounded by Lavoisier and Laplace, Rumford,
Dulong, Despretz, etc., who also attempted their solution. A theoretical
foundation on one side is due to the first-named, who stated the principle
that as much heat is required to decompose a compound as is liberated
on its formation from the elements. This is a particular and very simple
case of the general law of energy.

The law for thermochemical processes was first enounced in its
full extent by G. H. Hess (1840) as the law of constant heat-
summation. He stated that the initial and final stages alone deter-
mine the development of heat in chemical processes ; if these are
specified, the development of heat is given, whatever may be the inter-
mediate stages.

According to our present notions a definite value of the energy
of a system corresponds to each state it may assume, that which we
call the “state” of the system being in fact ideally fixed by the
nature and quantity of the energy associated with the matter in the
system. Two states therefore correspond to two quantities of energy,
the difference of which must be conducted to or from the system if
it shall pass from one state to the other. In how many portions
this energy may be communicated has evidently no effect on the final
value.

Hess established his principle as a conclusion from experiment, with full
consciousness, however, of its wide import. He tested it in various ways,
and from his numbers the following table is selected :—

Sum.
_H,80, — +2NH, (in solution) 595°8 5 95°8
H,SO, + H,0 77:8 4 DLS9 >) DOG
HecOneHO.) 116-7 ; 4805 597-2
HCO or 0." 1556 ? 4465  601°8

210 OUTLINES OF GENERAL CHEMISTRY BOOK VII

The first column of figures represents the quantities of heat liberated by
the action of one molecule of sulphuric acid on one, two, and five molecules
of water; the second represents the quantities of heat evolved on the
neutralisation of the acids so diluted with ammonia. The sum of the corre-
sponding members of both is approximately constant.

The significance of this principle for the practice of thermochemistry
is very great. It enables us to calculate the heat effect_of—processes
which cannot be directly measured ; for we may represent them as
terms of a sum, of which the total value and the other terms are
known. We cannot, for example, measure the heat given out on the

——Combustion of sean to carbon monoxide. If, howouen we measure
the heat evolved when carbon is oxidised to carbon dioxide, then this
must be equal to the heat of combustion of carbon to monoxide plus
that of monoxide to dioxide. The latter can also be directly ascer-
tained, so that the difference of the two observed values gives the
required heat of combustion of carbon to carbon monoxide.

Contemporaneously with Hess, who is to be looked upon as the real
founder of thermochemistry, and after him, other investigators were busy
at this subject, viz. Andrews, Graham, and especially Favre and Silbermann,
who collected a rich store of observations. In clearness of ideas, however,
these are all inferior to Hess.

The results of the mechanical theory of heat, which had meantime been
developed, were first applied to thermochemistry by Julius Thomsen (1853.)
This chemist has up to the present time continued his thermochemical work,
and has accumulated an enormous number of data, mostly determined with
considerable accuracy. Berthelot in 1865 began to occupy himself with
similar problems. It is to these two investigators that we owe the greatest
part of our acquaintance with the domain of thermochemistry.

CHAPTER II
THERMOCHEMICAL METHODS —

IN order to formulate the facts of thermochemistry shortly and in a
form suitable for calculation, we shall extend the signification of the
ordinary chemical equations in such a way that they will represent
not only the mass-relations but also the energy-relations. For example,
when we write the equation

Ebra2l—Pbi;;

this states that lead iodide is formed from lead and iodine, 206°9 g.
lead and 253°8 g. iodine giving 460°7 g. lead iodide. If the formule
are to represent, not the quantities of the substances, but the quantities
of energy associated with them, the equation is incomplete. For
on the formation of lead iodide heat is liberated to the amount of
39,800 cal. ; the energy of lead iodide is less than the energy of its
components by this quantity. The corresponding equation for energy
is therefore
Pb + 21=PblI, + 39,800 cal.,

and signifies that 206°9 g. lead and 253°8 g. iodine together contain
as much energy as 460-7 g. lead iodide plus 39,800 cal.

_ The equation may be algebraically transformed, but then its
signification is somewhat different. Thus

Pho 2l— Pht 39.800 cal

means that the difference of energy between lead plus iodine, and lead
iodide amounts to 39,800 cal. Or

PbI, = Pb + 21 — 39,800 cal.,

represents that when lead iodide is decomposed into lead and iodine,
39,800 cal. must be supplied.

The equations are all to be so understood that the energy of the
substances only holds for one and the same temperature, usually the
mean laboratory temperature of 18°.

The amount of energy in a substance is further dependent on its
state of aggregation. It is simplest to indicate the state by the type

212 OUTLINES OF GENERAL CHEMISTRY BOOK VII

employed. Ordinary type will be taken to represent liquids, which
are most frequently under consideration. Gases will be indicated by
italics ; solids by thick type. Then the equations

H,0 — H,O = 1440 cal.

HO —H,0 = 9670 cal.

signify that on the transformation of water into ice 1440 cal. are
liberated, and on the transformation of water vapour into liquid water,
9670 cal.

It may be observed, as we have till now tacitly assumed, that the
quantities of energy and heat refer to such quantities of the substances
as amount to their formula-weights in grams.

The small calorie hitherto used is too small for the roughness of
thermochemical measurements, so that we shall employ in the sequel
a unit one hundred times greater, which we may denote by K. It is
that quantity of heat which a gram of water loses when cooled from
100° to 0°. The above equations now become

Pb + 21=PbI, + 398 K
H,O -H,O=14:4 K
HO —~H,O'= 9677 K

The reacting substances are very often dissolved in a large quantity
of water. This is denoted by adding the letters Aq (aqua) to the
ordinary chemical symbol. Such solutions when further diluted with
water neither absorb nor evolve heat. Thus the equations
M.Aq+nH,0=M. Aq
M.Aq-nH,O=M. Ag

hold good, M being the dissolved substance. We may therefore in
thermochemical equations add or subtract limited quantities of water
when the substances are in solution without committing any appreci-
able error.

For instance, we have for the formation of potassium chloride in
aqueous solution—

KOH Aq + HCl Aq = KCl(Aq + Aq + H,O) + 137 K.
Instead of this equation we always write

KOH Ag + HCl Ag = KCl Aq + 137 K,

as the mixing of the liberated water with the solution of potassium
chloride has no thermal effect whatever.

These energy-equations are specially useful in calculating thermochemical
data which cannot be directly observed. If we return to the example given
by Hess (p. 210), we have from direct measurement

0+20=00,+970 K
CO +0=00,+680 K.

CHAP, II THERMOCHEMICAL METHODS 218

Subtracting the lower from the upper equation we get

C+20-C00-0=290 Kk,
or C+ 0=00 + 290 K,
a.é. the heat of combination of carbon and oxygen to form carbon monoxide
is 290 K.

A second somewhat more complicated exaimple is the heat of formation
of sulphur trioxide, also determined by Hess. The process consisted in
burning a mixture of lead oxide and sulphur in oxygen. Lead sulphate is
formed with an evolution of 1655 K ; we have therefore the equation

PbO+S+30=PbS0,+ 1655 K.

To eliminate the terms PbO and PbSO,, lead oxide was transformed into lead
sulphate by solution in sulphuric acid ; the result was—

PbO + H,SO,Aq = PbSO, + Aq + 233 K.
Subtracting, we get
S+ 30+ Aq=H,SO,Aq + 1422 K,
w.¢. the formation of aqueous sulphuric acid from sulphur, oxygen, and water
is accompanied by the evolution of 1422 K.
Lastly, Hess dissolved sulphur trioxide in water--—

SO, + Aq=H,SO,Aq+411 K.
Subtracting again, we have as the final and desired result—
8+ 30=80,+1011 K.

In the same way a great many other problems many be solved.
The method is to measure any two reactions in which the initial and
final substances take part, and then to eliminate the subsidiary bodies
by suitable equations between them. It depends upon the skill of
the experimenter so to choose the reactions that the measurements
may be as exact as possible, and that the end may be attained with
the fewest possible intermediate stages.

The heat of formation is a heat of reaction extremely often
measured. By this name we indicate the difference between the
energy of a chemical compound and that of its component elements.
The numbers are obtained from equations in which only the elements
and the compound occur. It follows from

Ph + 21 = PbI, + 398 K

that the heat of formation of lead iodide is 398 K.

This heat is therefore the loss of energy suffered by the elements
when they unite to form the compound in question. If the quantities
of energy, whose absolute magnitudes are quite unknown, be reckoned
from the energy of the elements taken as zero, the equation assumes

ae 0 = PbI, + 398 K,
if we make Pb=0 and 21=0. This can also be written
Ppl 7-398

214 OUTLINES OF GENERAL CHEMISTRY BOOK VII

Therefore in the energy-equations the formule of the compounds
may be replaced by their heats of formation with the signs changed.

In this way we can easily calculate heats of reaction by means ot
the heats of formation. Suppose we wish to find the heat given out
in the preparation of magnesium. We have

MgCl, + 2Na = 2NaCl+ Mg +x.

Now the heat of formation of magnesium chloride is 1510 K, and of
sodium chloride 1954 K. Making the substitution and putting the
heats of formation of the elements equal to zero, we obtain

—1510+2x0= —-2x1954+0+x
Kee UO Nt
On account of this simple form taken by the equations, it is usual to
determine the heat of formation of the various chemical compounds,
so that the values may be used in further calculations. Heats of
formation are consequently given by preference in the tables contained
in the following chapters.

With respect now to the actual performance of thermochemical
experiments, there are several general statements that may be made,
in spite of the variety in the methods and apparatus employed by
different investigators. Only a relatively small number of the
numerous reactions known to experimental chemistry are suitable for
thermochemical measurement ; these being almost exclusively such as
take place at ordinary temperatures and are at an end in the space of
afew minutes. The chief among them are the phenomena of neutral-
isation, of solution, and of dilution. |

A second class of thermochemical processes is formed by rapid
combustions, which, by being conducted in a completely closed vessel
surrounded by water, are likewise amenable to convenient measure-
ment. The majority of thermochemical experiments may be reduced
to one or other of these forms.

For thermochemical measurements in aqueous solution calorimeters
constructed of glass or metal (platinum by preference) are used.

If the dissolving of a solid, liquid, or gas in the liquid of the calorimeter
is in question, the experiment is so conducted that the substance is brought
as nearly as possible to the temperature of the calorimeter and the process
then initiated. The uniform distribution of the heat as well as of the
reacting substances is provided for by an efficient stirring apparatus. This
has usually the form of a horizontal plate, which contains suitable openings
for the passage of a thermometer, etc., and has an up and down motion. It
is better, however, to give the stirrer the form of a screw-propeller, and have
it near the bottom of the calorimeter, the motion in this case being of course
one of rotation. By this arrangement we avoid wet portions of the apparatus
being exposed to the air and getting cooled by evaporation. The mechanical
action too is much easier, and the space inside the calorimeter is left freer.

If the reaction is to be between two approximately equal quantities of

CHAP. I THERMOCHEMICAL METHODS 215

liquid, the temperature of each must be accurately measured at the moment
of mixing. Thomsen in this case arranges a smaller vessel on the top of his
calorimeter, each vessel being provided with thermometer and stirrer, and
after having read off the temperature of both, lets the liquid in the upper
vessel flow through a valve in the bottom into the lower vessel. Berthelot
introduces one of the liquids into his calorimeter, but then, unlike Thomsen,
has the other in a thin-walled, wide-necked flask standing inside a protective
copper cylinder with a silvered and polished interior. When the temperature
has been ascertained, the thermometer serving as stirrer, the flask is seized
by means of wooden tongs and its contents emptied into the calorimeter.
He rejects Thomsen’s arrangement because the liquid in flowing through the
valve may possibly experience a change of temperature. This objection is
unfounded, however, for by the way in which Thomsen makes his thermo-
meters comparable, an error of this nature is eliminated. In reality,
Thomsen’s apparatus is the more exact, which is most likely owing to the
fact that his thermometers are read off through a telescope, while Berthelot
uses the naked eye.

The calorimeter employed for the combustion of solid, liquid,
and gaseous substances in gases has been gradually evolved from the
imperfect instruments of Dalton, Davy, and Rumford, by the labours
of Dulong, Despretz, and in particular of Favre and Silbermann. It
consists of a cylinder filled with water into which the combustion-
chamber is sunk ; a number of tubes, destined to supply the necessary
gases, open into it, and the products of combustion are led through a
long spiral metal tube or worm, in order that all their excess of heat
may be given up to the water of the calorimeter.

The apparatus has experienced but little change in the course of
time. Thomsen makes the metallic parts of platinum, and Berthelot
has introduced a glass combustion-chamber, which admits of very
convenient observation of the progress of the reaction.

Besides the gradual combustion in an atmosphere of gas, several other
methods of combustion have of late been practised. There is, for example,
the explosive combustion, a suitable gaseous mixture being enclosed in an
apparatus immersed in the water of the calorimeter, and fired by means of
the electric spark. Andrews seems first to have availed himself of this
method in a special case, and Berthelot has extended its application greatly
by using what he calls a “calorimetric bomb.” This apparatus consists of a
hollow metal sphere in which the gas is compressed, and exploded after the
whole has been immersed in the calorimeter. .

Another process is the combustion with combined oxygen (especially
with potassium chlorate), first employed by Frankland (1866), and later
improved and applied by Stohmann and his pupils. The substance is here
mixed with potassium chlorate and some indifferent material (eg. pumice),
and made into a sort of firework, which is set off inside a water-calorimeter.
The details cannot be given here. It has this advantage, that substances can
be investigated by its means, to which the other methods, on account of
irregular or imperfect combustion, are not applicable. The drawback of the

216 OUTLINES OF GENERAL CHEMISTRY BOOK VII

method is that the combustion often miscarries, and that the numbers
obtained are affected by numerous and considerable corrections.

It should be mentioned, in conclusion, that Bunsen’s ice-calorimeter has
been in some cases used for thermochemical experiments. Although this
method gives very exact results, even with small quantities of substance, it
requires excessively skilful manipulation, and can only be applied in winter,
as the instrument must be set up in a cold place, the temperature of experi-
ment being 0°. Working at this temperature is frequently an advantage, but
in certain cases decid) detrimental.

The measurement of temperature is at once the most important
and the most difficult part of a calorimetric determination. It is true
that very sensitive thermometers can be constructed by the employ-
ment of narrow capillaries us somewhat large bulbs, and as a rule we
use such as ve divided into =, degree, which therefore admit of the
estimation of <4 degree when read off with a telescope. The difficulty,
however, lies less in the want of sensibility in the thermometers than
in the continual heat-exchange of the calorimeter with the surrounding
objects, the proper thermal result being more or less disturbed by this.
The error is greater with a small calorimeter, as the surface in such a
case is larger with respect to the contents. This circumstance has
been frequently neglected, and has often been the cause of great
uncertainty. Berthelot in the course of his thermochemical work
studied the subject with some care, and arrived at the conclusion that
with a calorimeter of 500 c. cm. capacity we get the minimum error,
the disturbance falling in this case within the limits of accuracy given
by the measurement of temperature.

As the interchange of heat by radiation assumes greater proportions as
the difference of temperature between the calorimeter and its environment is
greater, we must attend to both having as nearly as possible the same
temperature. It is besides desirable to perform all calorimetric experiments
at a uniform temperature, else they are not strictly comparable, and the
determination of the influence of temperature would considerably increase
the work. Thomsen therefore uses a laboratory, the heating apparatus of
which can be easily regulated, and always brings its temperature as near as
may be to 18° before he commences his experiments. Berthelot, who, in
other respects also, does not insist upon the last degree of accuracy, works
within the tolerably wide limits of temperature of an ordinary laboratory.

To diminish the radiation as much as possible the calorimeter is brightly
polished, and placed within a cylinder also polished in the interior.
Berthelot surrounds this last with a large jacket of tin-plate filled with
water; Thomsen prefers to employ cases of metal or cardboard, the inter-
vening spaces merely containing air. °

For the method, due to Regnault, of freeing the measurements of
temperature from the effects of radiation, the larger text-books must be
consulted. Rumford’s artifice of having the temperature before the experi-
ment as far on one side of the atmospheric temperature, as it will be on the
other when the action is over, finds an application here, especially in the

CHAP, II THERMOCHEMICAL METHODS OT

employment of the combustion calorimeter. In fact, it was in his calori-
metric determinations of the heating power of fuel that Rumford first employed
this method.

The number of calories developed in a thermochemical reaction is
obtained by multiplying the thermal capacity of the calorimeter
by the (corrected) change of temperature. To get the result in the
units given above (p. 212), this number has still to be multiplied by
the ratio of the substance used to its formula-weight, both being
expressed in grams.

With regard to the thermal capacity of the calorimeter, the water-
equivalent of the vessel, the stirrer, the thermometer, and all the other
parts of the apparatus that suffer the change of temperature must be
determined or calculated in the usual way. If the liquid employed is
not water, its specific heat must also be known. As the specific heat
of a solution is not deducible from the specific heats of the dissolved
substance and the solvent, special determinations would in almost all
cases have to be made. Thermochemists have hitherto sought to
elude the not inconsiderable complication here involved by making
certain assumptions, which without a knowledge of the numbers in
question may lead to very inaccurate calculations. Thomsen puts
the thermal capacity of his solutions equal to that of the water
contained in them. This assumption, tested in detail by Thomsen
himself, is only very seldom quite accurate ; the errors are sometimes
positive, sometimes negative, but in all cases very small for dilute
solutions, which are nearly always here in question.

An idea of the admissibility of such a proceeding may be obtained by
calculating the difference between the thermal capacity of aqueous solutions
and that of the water contained in them. It will be found that the differ-
ence usually does not amount to one per cent—only in extreme cases is it
greater. The accuracy of calorimetric experiments varies a good deal, but it
is often greater than this, so that it cannot be denied that the results are
somewhat impaired by the above mode of calculation.

To find the observed thermal effect we have the formula

Q =(t, — t,)a + (t, — t,)(b + p),
where t, is the temperature of the substance outside the calorimeter
proper, t, of that within the calorimeter, and t, the corrected final
temperature after the reaction ; a is the calorimetric equivalent of the
first substance, b that of the second (i.e. in the mixture-calorimeter the
quantities of water in the solutions employed). Lastly, p is the water-
equivalent of the calorimeter.

Thus, for example, the heat of neutralisation of hydrochloric acid
with soda was found by Thomsen to be 13,736 cal., by mixing
+ formula-weight or 4 equivalent of each of two solutions having the
composition Na,O + 200H,O and H,Cl, + 200H,O, with one another.
The solution in the calorimeter had a temperature of 18°°610; the

218 OUTLINES OF GENERAL CHEMISTRY BOOK VII

solution in the upper vessel was at 18°:222 ; after mixing the corrected
temperature was 22°°169. The solutions had consequently experienced
a rise of temperature of 3°°559 and 3°°947 respectively. Multiplying
these by the weight of water, 450 g. (=%x 200H,O), 13 g. being
added to the first solution as the water-equivalent of the calorimeter,
we obtain 1648 + 1786 = 3434 cal., so that multiplying this value by
4, as only + equivalent was used, we get 13,736 cal. as the heat of
neutralisation of one equivalent of soda by one equivalent of hydro-
chloric acid, or

NaOH Aq + HCl Aq = NaCl Aq + 137°36 K.

Berthelot diverges from Thomsen’s method, inasmuch as he does not
determine the thermal capacity of his solutions according to the weight of
water, but according to the total volume. He consequently does not use
solutions of the composition indicated by certain ratios of the formula-
weights, but such as are employed in volumetric analysis, a formula-weight
of the substance being contained in a litre, or in a multiple or sub-multiple
of a litre. Berthelot shows that the approximation to the truth obtained by
this mode of reckoning is in some cases greater than that got from the method
practised by Thomsen ; in other cases, however, it 1s just the reverse. On
the whole, we may say that Berthelot’s method is more convenient in practice,
but Thomsen’s more precise in the definitions.

CHAPTER III
SALT-FORMATION

IN spite of recent researches throughout the whole domain of chemistry
with respect to the heat developed in a reaction, very few general
relations have been established. The most general had already been
found by Hess, and formulated by him as the Law of Thermo-
neutrality. It states that on the double-decomposition of neutral
salts in solution, heat is neither evolved nor absorbed.

This rule is not absolutely correct, for small thermal changes
always take place, and there are further some salts which do not
obey the law at all. These, however, usually differ in most other
respects also from the ordinary type of salts. It is assumed, too, that
all the salts are in solution during the process and remain dissolved ;
when one of the salts separates in the solid form, the principle holds
good no longer.

Hess assumed that the relation arose from the heat of neutralisation
depending only on the acid. Andrews believed, on the other hand, that the
base alone determined the evolution of heat. Both assumptions are wrong.
Favre and Silbermann showed that different acids as well as different bases
evolved different amounts of heat on neutralisation, but that the differences
between the amounts of heat given out by any two bases with a series of
acids, or of any two acids with a series of bases, had always the same value.
If (a, b) denote the heat of neutralisation of the acid a with the base b, then
in a table of the form

(a,b) (@',b) €@", b)
(@a’, b’) @', by lb’).
(ancbe Gy ebm ae ebevieo.4t

the differences between corresponding pairs, whether taken horizontally or
vertically, are equal, 7.¢.

(a, © (a b) = (a, oie (a, ee (a, De) vi (a We ee si ;

and Cee ea) (a. b) (a, jeaya , b’)—(a”, bye. 3:
This law corresponds perfectly to that which we found as a first |
approximation in the case of the molecular volumes of salt-solutions

220 OUTLINES OF GENERAL CHEMISTRY BOOK VII

(p. 143), and leads to the same conclusion. The heat developed on
neutralising an acid with a base is additively composed of
two terms, one of which depends only on the nature of the
acid, and the other only on the nature of the base. We cannot
at present determine the magnitude of these terms separately.

The various acids behave differently, although the differences are
not great, when they are neutralised by owe and the same base, say
soda. The strong monobasic acids, like hydrochloric, hydrobromie,
hydriodic, nitric, chloric, bromic, iodic, and perchloric acids, and
besides these, alkyl-sulphuric and the sulphonic acids of organic
chemistry, all behave surprisingly alike. On neutralisation of one
equivalent by soda, a quantity of heat varying between 137 K and
141 K is evolved in each case. Excess of acid or soda has no effect.
This circumstance indicates that the process taking place when these
substances are neutralised is of substantially the same nature for all
these different compounds.

The weak monobasic acids, of which the members of the fatty series
especially have been investigated, differ somewhat from the stronger acids,
their heat of neutralisation sometimes exceeding, sometimes falling below the
numbers given above ; ¢.g.

Formic acid 134K Acetic acid 1383 K
Acetic 7 Sey Monochloracetic acid 143 ,,
‘Propionie s) +1346, Dichloracetic 9 1148 3;
Buiyrice ee 1s aes Trichloracetic pe Rie Oe

Valerianic,, 140,,

Here also, however, the differences are not very great.

Hydrofluoric acid is quite abnormal in this respect. In the first
place, it has a very large heat of neutralisation, 163 K. Then an
excess of the acid acts on the neutral salt, with the accompaniment of
a slight absorption of heat (-— 3 K), a fact standing in connection with
the capability of hydrofluoric acid to form acid salts. ‘The heat of
neutralisation of hypophosphorous acid, HPO,H,, viz. 152 K, is also
abnormal ; for the rest it behaves decidedly as a monobasic acid, a
conclusion already arrived at from its purely chemical investigation.

Very weak acids, like hypochlorous and hydrocyanic acids, give very
small heats of neutralisation, 98 K and 28 K respectively. This comes from
their inability to neutralise soda completely in aqueous solution, which may
be seen in the alkaline reaction of the salts, and in an excess of alkali by the
action of mass producing a further amount of heat.

Amongst the dibasic acids there are several of exactly the same
_ order as the strong monobasic acids. For each equivalent they give
a heat of neutralisation of about 135 K, and an excess of acid has no
action on the neutral salt. Such are chloroplatinic acid, H,PtCl,,

CHAP. III SALT-FORMATION AAA |

dithionic acid, H,S,O,, and in some degree hydrofluosilicic acid,
Hoi.

Other dibasic acids, on the contrary, ¢.g. sulphuric acid, exhibit a
totally different behaviour. If increasing quantities of sulphuric acid
are added to one equivalent of soda, an evolution of heat takes place
until the composition of the neutral salt is reached; it amounts to
157 K for one equivalent or 314 K for a gram-molecular-weight of
sulphuric acid. If sulphuric acid be still added, an absorption of
heat begins, which increases slowly with the amount of acid added, and
appears to approach asymptotically to a limiting value of about — 33 K.

This peculiar conduct is usually explained by assuming that some
acid sulphate, NaHSO,, is formed in the solution, its formation being
accompanied by a less evolution of heat than that required to separate
the sulphuric acid from the water. We have here one of the interest-
ing cases where a chemical reaction spontaneously takes place with
absorption of heat.

Selenic acid is similar to sulphuric acid in this respect. Of the
other dibasic acids, oxalic and tartaric acids are also to be mentioned
as forming acid salts in solution with absorption of heat, although the
absorption is very slight. Malic acid shows no action.

When an excess of succinic acid is added to a dilute solution of
sodium succinate, a slight evolution of heat is observed. To this
second group of dibasic acids having acid salts formed with evolution
of heat there belong further sulphurous, selenious, and phosphorous
acids. Carbonic acid and sulphhydric acid are so weak that their
salts have an alkaline reaction, and cannot be formed completely from
acid and base in aqueous solution. Boracic, arsenious, and silicic acids
. belong also to this class.

The tribasic acids act quite similarly to the dibasic acids.

What has been said above, strictly speaking, holds good only when
soda is used to neutralise the acids, but in consequence of the law of
thermoneutrality the foregoing relations are repeated with but little
change when other bases are employed.

The alkalies and alkaline earths form a group of bases which have
much the same character as the strong monobasic acids. In this
group we also find thallium hydroxide, some of the platinamine and
cobaltamine bases, and the organic ammonium and sulphonium bases.
They have all the same heat of neutralisation with any one acid.
Thus, when neutralised with hydrochloric acid, they give out from 136
to 140 K, and with sulphuric acid proportionately more. Ammonia
and its organic derivatives among soluble bases have in part a con-
siderably smaller heat of neutralisation, e.g. for hydrochloric acid—

Ammonia 122 K Hydroxylamine 93 K
Methylamine Teas Aniline Les;
Dimethylamine 118 ,, o-Toluidine 76 ,,

Trimethylamine 88,,

222 OUTLINES OF GENERAL CHEMISTRY BOOK VII

The bases of the magnesia series have also for the most part
smaller heats of neutralisation. As they are all insoluble in water it
might be believed that their heat of neutralisation is diminished by the
heat of solution of the bases. This circumstance, however, does not
seem to have a great effect, for in the case of magnesia itself the heat
of neutralisation of the insoluble hydroxide is not very different from
the values obtained for the soluble alkalies. The numbers determined
by Thomsen for hydrochloric acid are— 7

2 HCl 2 HCl
Magnesia 247K Ferrous oxide 214 K
Manganous oxide 230 ,, Cadmium ,, 203;
Nickelous __,, 226055 Zine + 199 ,,
Cobaltous __,, DAs Cupric 149 ,,

The heats of neutralisation with sulphuric acid are regularly 35
to 36 K greater, as they ought to be according to Hess’s law; most of
the other monobasic acids give the same numbers as hydrochloric acid.
The sesquioxides analogous to alumina behave differently from the
above bases. Their heat of neutralisation is much smaller, and the
differences between the values for hydrochloric and sulphuric acid are
not equal. This arises from these bases being very weak ; their salts
decompose in solution to a greater or less extent into free acid and a
basic salt, and thus their real heat of neutralisation is not observed
at all.

CHAPTER IV

THERMOCHEMISTRY OF THE NON-METALS

IN accordance with the fact already stated that no general quantitative
laws (with the exception of the law of thermoneutrality) are known in
thermochemistry, little more can be given in the following pages than
a collection of heats of formation. From these we can deduce by
easy calculations the thermal changes accompanying the most diverse
reactions (p. 214), so that the tables given represent very nearly all
the known data of thermochemistry. *

§ 1. Oxygen. Heat of Formation.
Ozone 0; — 300 K (approx).
The formation of ozone from ordinary oxygen is accompanied by
considerable absorption of heat.
§ 2. Hydrogen.
1. Water H,O 684 K liquid.
Latent heat of fusion —14 K, heat of vaporisation at 100°
— 96°7 K.
2. Hydrogen peroxide Tee 452 K
The heat of formation of the peroxide is less than that of water ;

consequently the former passes into the latter and free oxygen, with an
evolution of 232 K.

§ 3. Chlorine.

1. Hydrogen chloride HCl | 220 K

Water absorbs the gas with evolution of 173 K.
2. Hypochlorous acid C1,0 -178K
HC10,Aq 300 ,,

* For all details the reader is referred to the author’s Lehrbuch der aligemeinen
Chemie, vol. il.

224 OUTLINES OF GENERAL CHEMISTRY BOOK VII

Heat of Formation.

The heat of solution of the anhydride is 94 K.
3. Chloric acid HCl10,,Aq 239 K
4. Perchloric acid HCl10,,Aq DOO Ls

The anhydrous acid is dissolved in water with evolution of 203 K;
its heat of formation is therefore 183 K.

§ 4. Bromine.
1. Bromine. The heat of fusion is — 13 K, and the heat of vaporisa-
tion at the boiling-point 63°, — 36 K.
2. Hydrogen bromide HBr 121 K
The bromine is here supposed to be gaseous. For liquid bromine
the heat of formation is 84 K. Water absorbs hydrogen bromide with
evolution of 199 K.
3. Hypobromous acid HBrO,Aq 335 K
4. Bromic acid HBrO,,Aq LOW ea

In both cases the bromine is taken in the gaseous state.

§ 5. Iodine.

1. Iodine. Heat of fusion,— 15 K; heat of vaporisation, - 30 K.
Boltzmann has calculated the heat of dissociation of I, into 2 I and
found it to be — 285 K.

2. Hydrogen iodide HI ease

The formation of hydrogen iodide from hydrogen and solid iodine
is accompanied by absorption of heat. Gaseous iodine would com-
bine with hydrogen with almost no thermal effect. The gas dissolves
in water with evolution of 192 K, so that the heat of formation of
hydriodic acid, HI,Aq, is 131 K.

3. Lodi¢c werd HIO, wOS2E

HIO,,Aq DOO,

The acid dissolves in water with absorption of 22 K. For the

anhydride we have the heat of formation—
Oy 453 K.
4. Periodic acid HIO (ag 476 ,,

The heat of solution of the crystallised acid, HIO,.2H,O, is only
—14 K.

5. Iodine monochloride ICl 58 K Heat of fusion — 23 K
6. Iodine trichloride ICl, 210";
7. Iodine bromide IBr 20a

§ 6. Fluorine.
The heat of solution of hydrofluoric acid in water is 118 K.

CHAP, IV THERMOCHEMISTRY OF THE NON-METALS 225

§ 7. Sulphur.

1. Sulphur. Heat of fusion, -3 K. The various modifications
exhibit differences of energy of from 5 to 10 K.

Heat of Formation.

2. Hydrogen sulphide 7S 27 K
The heat of solution in water is 46 K.
3y Sulphurous acid SO, LILO,

This number is for the rhombic modification of sulphur and the
ordinary temperature. The dioxide dissolves in water with evolution
of 77 K, so that the heat of formation of the aqueous acid oe
hydrogen, oxygen, and sulphur is 1472 K.

4. Sulphuric acid H,SO, 1931, K
H,SO,,Aq 2109 ,,
SO, 1033: ,
SO,,Aq 1425;

The heat of solution of sulphuric acid in water is 178 K, that of
the anhydride 392 K.

5. Hyposulphurous acid H,S,0,,Aq 1373 K

S,0,,Aq G89
6. Dithionic acid HD, 0,4 BEoo
S.0,,Aq 2112 ,,
7. Tetrathionic acid H.8,0,,Aq 2612.
S,0,,Aq 1928 ,,
8. Sulphur monochloride S, Cl, 143.
9. Sulphur monobromide S,Br, LOS
10. Sulphuryl chloride SO-CI, Suse
11. Thionyl chloride SOC, 498 ,,
12. Pyrosulphury] chlorideS,O,Cl, LOSOe.
§ 8. Selenium.
1. Hydrogen selenide H,Se oad ba 8 hee
2. Selenious acid SeO, oy ae
SeO,,Aq 562-,,
H,SeO,,Aq 46s.
3. Selenic acid SeO,,Aq OSs:
Hj8e0,,Aq 1452 ,,
4. Selenium monochloride Se,Cl, 222 ,,
5. Selenium tetrachloride SeCl, 462 ,,
§ 9. Tellurium. Heat of
1. Tellurous acid TeOs nds Rhone solution 0
H,TeO,,Aq 1457 ,,
2. Velluric acid TeO,,Aq Sheri)

EE heOw ag £O69%;,
Q

226 OUTLINES OF GENERAL CHEMISTRY BOOK VII

3. Tellurium tetra- Heat of Formation.
chloride TeCl, PEP Bel
§ 10. Nitrogen.
1. Ammonia NH, 120
NH,,Aq 204 5
2. Nitrous oxide @.\,O0 — 180 ,,
a. Nitrous acid HNO,,Aq 30S &,
4, Nitric acid HNO,,Aq AD lis.
N, OF, AG 82 xa 40m, :
NO, 419 ,, Heat of solution 72 K
N,O; 131 29 9 ” 167 ”

The heat of fusion of nitrogen pentoxide is— 83 K, the heat of
vaporisation - 48 K. The sum of these two equals the heat of forma-
tion of the solid pentoxide, so that the heat of formation of the gaseous
pentoxide is nil.

5. Nitrogen peroxide

NCO — 26 K.
3 mh bey

The heat of dissociation of N,O, into 2NO, is— 129 K.
6. Nitric oxide NO — 216 K
7. Hydroxylamine NH,0,Aq 244. ,,

§ 11. Phosphorus.

1. Phosphorus. The transformation of yellow phosphorus into red
is accompanied by evolution of 273 K.
2. Phosphoric acid H,PO, 3029 K
H,PO,,Aq 3056 ,
| P,0O,,Aq 2 x 2030
3. Phosphorous acid
H,P0, 2949
TPO. AG 2278
P,O,; AG) fecal 20 en,
4. Hypophosphorous acid
RO, 1401 ,,
FeO Fed 139978,
Pe Oat, 2X Oto
5. Hydrogen phosphide PH, A3 ,,
6. Phosphonium iodide PH,I 222 ert
7. Phosphorus trichloride PCl, 755 ,, Heat of vaporisation
—69 K
8. Phosphorus pentachloridePCl,1051 ,,
9. Phosphorus oxychloride POCI,1460 ,,
10. Phosphorus tribromide*PBr, 448 ;,
11. Phosphorus pentabromide PBr, 591 ,,

CHAP. IV THERMOCHEMISTRY OF THE NON-METALS 227

Heat of Formation.

12. Phosphorus oxybromide POBr, 1056 K
Gelis)

13. Phosphorus iodide Pi 9oe
§ 12. Arsenic.
1. Arsenic acid As,O; 2194 ,, Heat of solution 60 K
. ASU Aga SLOT;
H,As0O,,Aq BPO,
2. Arsenious acid ASO; L525, fs 4 —76,,
As,0O,,Aq 2x 735,,
3. Hydrogen arsenide AsH, — 441 ,,
4, Arsenic trichloride As(l, 715 ,,, Heat of vaporisation
—-84 K
5. Arsenic tribromide AsBr, 440
6. Arsenic tri-iodide AsI, oe.

§ 13. Antimony.

1. Antimony trichloride SbCl, 914 ,,

2. Antimony pentachloride SbCl, 1049 ,,

Se antimony trioxide — Sb,O, 1660 ,,

4, Antimony pentoxide Sb,O, 2228 ,, (hydrated oxide)
§ 14. Boron.

1. Boron trichloride BCI, 1040 ,,

2. Boron trioxide 5,05 oy Oe

B,O0,,Aq 3352 ,,
The numbers are for amorphous boron and are not very trust-
worthy.

§ 15. Carbon.

The different modifications of carbon—diamond, graphite, and
amorphous carbon—contain very different amounts of energy. The
greatest is possessed by charcoal,—graphite has about 36 K less.
Charcoal therefore evolves 36 K more on combustion than graphite.
Two determinations only have been made for diamond, one gives 24 K
the other 37 K less than charcoal; which of the two is the more
correct is difficult to decide.

1. Carbon dioxide CO, 970 K (from amorphous carbon)
2. Carbon monoxide CO ZOU.

It is somewhat surprising that the first oxygen atom that combines
with the carbon evolves much less heat than the second, the numbers
being 290 and 680. It has been suggested that the two heats of
combination are really equal, and that the difference of 390 K only
serves to transform solid carbon into the gaseous state.

228 OUTLINES OF GENERAL CHEMISTRY BOOK VII

Heat of Formation.

3. Methane CH, Q18 K
4. Carbonyl chloride COG 2 Doda;
5. Carbon tetrachloride CCl, 210
6. Carbonyl sulphide COS Se le
7. Carbon disulphide CSP 9 eas

The heat of formation of carbon disulphide is negative, 1.¢e. carbon
burns in sulphur with absorption of heat.

§ 16. Silicon.

Crystalline silicon contains 91 K more energy than amorphous
silicon. The heat of formation of all the silicon compounds is still
very uncertain, so that the values found need not be given here.

CHAPTER V
THERMOCHEMISTRY OF THE METALS

THE heats of formation of the metallic salts in aqueous solution, which
obey Hess’s law of thermoneutrality, are also so related to each other
that the corresponding differences are equal. Thus, for instance, the
heats of formation of all the potassium salts are about 48 K greater
than those of the corresponding sodium salts, and in the same way
the heat of formation of the chlorides exceeds that of the iodides by
262 K.

This simple and tolerably general relation follows from Hess’s Law.
The heat of formation of the potassium salt KA, where A is any
acid radical, can be calculated from the equation

KOH Aq+HA Aq=KA Aq+N,

if the heat of formation of potash, of the acid, and of water be known ;
N is the heat of neutralisation. Let us compare with this the heat of
formation of the corresponding sodium salt—
NaOH Ag+HA Ag=NaA Aq+N’.
By subtraction we get
KOH Aq - NaOH Aq=KA Aq -—NaA Aqg+N-N’
or KOH Aq — NaOH Ag —(N —N’)=KA Ag —NaA Aq.

The last equation signifies that the difference of the heats of
formation of the hydroxides minus the difference of the heats of
neutralisation is equal to the difference of the heats of formation of
the salts. The first is the same for all potassium and sodium salts ;
and according to Hess’s Law the differences between the heats of
neutralisation of two bases with all acids are equal, so that the
difference of the heats of formation of the salts must be independent
of the acid they contain.

A perfectly similar proof holds for salts of the same metal with
different acids—

HCl Aq + MOH Aq=MCl Aq+N_
HI Aq +MOH Aq=MI Aq +N’
HCi Ag — HI: Aq — (N — N’)=MCl Aq — MI Aq.

230 OUTLINES OF GENERAL CHEMISTRY BOOK VII

Here the two differences on the left side are independent of the metal,
and this must therefore be the case with the right side also.

From this relation we can deduce the heat of formation of a great
number of different substances, once the characteristic differences have
been calculated. It must not, however, be forgotten that Hess’s Law
is not a perfectly general one. It does not, for example, hold good in
the case of mercury and cadmium compounds, nor does it when any
solid participates in the reaction. For such substances, then, special
measurements must always be made. ‘The results of immediate
measurement are therefore brought together in the following tables.
Where such are wanting the relations just discussed may be employed
to obtain results in most cases very near the real values. The numbers,
as before, are the heats of formation of the substances from the
elements.

§ 1. Potassium. aes sanen
1. Potassium hydroxide KOH 1032 K 133 K
2. 3 monoxide K,0,Aq 1646 ,,
3 sa chloride KCl 1045°,; — 44 ,,
4. x chlorate KCIO, 95008
5, - perchlorate KCIO, IES Hho. —121,,
6 i bromide KBr 9D 1s es) ket
7 “ bromate KBrO, Cais. — 98 ,,
8. ¥ iodide KI SO1s.,. 2a as
9. 3; iodate KIO, 12450 L— 68 ,,
10. ; sulphide K.S 1012 ae 100 ,;
1 = hydrogen sulphide KHS D50NG Gass
12. . sulphite K,SO, oa ye Ge
13: 2 pyrosulphite K38,0; ouslOge eee —112 .,
14 “<A sulphate K,SO, 3446 ,, — 64,,
15. % hydrogen sulphate KHSO, 2775 ,, — 38 ,,
16. S pyrosulphate K,8,0, ay MLBy ee Se cia
We - nitrate KNO, LOSS = 8D
18. a carbonate K,CO, 28ieey GOL;
19. i hydrogen carbonate KHCO, 2306 SID OCS.
§ 2. Sodium.
1. Sodium hydroxide NaOH TOLLE 99-5
2. » monoxide Na,O 804. ,, 5y9) ee
3 5 chloride NaCl ORGS; =" 10a
4, » hypochlorite NaOClAq 834 ,,
a: chlorate -NaClO, 868 ,, SE 56
6 » bromide NaBr 858 ,, tit Bas
7 »  lodide Nal 691%",; or
8 ,, sulphide Na,S S70. LORE
9 » hydrogen sulphide NaHS ePO40,. 44. ,,

CHAP. V THERMOCHEMISTRY OF THE METALS 231

Heat of Heat of
Formation. Solution.
10. Sodium thiosulphate Na,8,0,.5aq 2652 K —-114 K
Ele ee sulphite Na,SO, 2685 ,, = le ie
12. », sulphate Na,SO, 3288 ,, Zn,
13. » hydrogen sulphate NaHSO, 2678 ,, — 12),
14, ee nitrate NaNO, Lutor. — 50,,
ES. » phosphate Na,HPO, 4109 ,, 56 ,,
RG; » carbonate Na,CO, 21268,, DO 5,
i ae » hydrogen carbonate NaHCO, 2299, — 43,,
§ 3. Ammonium.
1. Ammonium chloride NH,Cl ocr — 40,,
2. . bromide NH,Br G54. - 44,,
Hf ‘ iodide NHI 493 ,, 235s
4. te, sulphate MONEE, 00; es pipe tks 0a
oy 3 nitrate NH,NO, 880 ,, — 62,,
§ 4. Lithium.
1. Lithium hydroxide LiOH, Aq ERE,
ae - chloride LiCl 938 ,, 84 ,,
of ‘ sulphate Li,SO, era Sly 60".
4, ae nitrate TaiNO; ELEG 3 oe
§ 5. Barium.

No thermochemical experiment is known in which the metal
barium itself is involved. Thomsen, however, has made it seem
probable that the heat of formation of barium hydroxide is 1940 K.
If we assume this provisional value to be correct, we can use the heats
of formation calculated from it just as we do the others, being certain
of committing no error so long as we keep away from questions where
metallic barium must be taken into consideration. To denote the
provisional character of the numbers, however, an asterisk has been
affixed to them.

Heat of Heat of

Formation. Solution.

1. Barium hydroxide Ba(OH), DN BY iad 0 122 K

ip » monoxide BaO 1242* ,, 945 |,,
S poe dioxide BaO, PAL,

4 » chloride BaCl, 1947* ., 2

Ss , chlorate Ba(Cl0,), 1450735 — 67 ,,

6. », bromide BaBr, LOOSE Or
ts » sulphide Bas OS soa
8 a sulphate BaSO, S30. ae

9 5 nitrite Ba(NO,), LAS: — 57 ,,

LORE A, ee nitrate Ba(NO,), 2207 — 94..,
11. 3. pearbonate BaCO, 2834%,,

232

pal

bo

1
2
3
4,
5.
6
i
8

eae oer pe

OUTLINES OF GENERAL CHEMISTRY

§ 6. Strontium.

9)

Je)

. Strontium hydroxide

oxide
chloride
bromide
sulphide
sulphate
nitrate
carbonate

§ 7. Calcium.
Calcium hydroxide

oxide

chloride
bromide
iodide
sulphide
sulphate
nitrate
carbonate

Sr(OH),
SrO
srCl,
SrBr,
Sr8
srsoO,
Sr(NO,),
SrCO,

Ca(OH),
CaO

CaCl,
CaBr,
Cal,

CaS
CaSO,
Ca(NO,),
CaCO,

Heat of

Formation.

BOOK VII

Heat of
Solution.

116K
294 ,,
(ies.
1014,

ies, 46 ”

30 ,,
Heat of
Hydration.

155K
Heat of
Solution.

174K
A
O77.

AT,
40 9)

“The ‘transformation of arragonite fs calespar is accompanied by

evolution of some 24 K.

§ 8. Magnesium.

Magnesium hydroxide

oxide
chloride
sulphide
sulphate
nitrate

§ 9. Aluminium.
Aluminium hydroxide

chloride
bromide
iodide

sulphide

§ 10. Manganese.
Manganous hydroxide

99

9

chloride
sulphide

Mg(OH),
MgO

MgCl,
Megs
MgsO,

9173 K
1439 ,,
1510 ,,
776 ,,
3023 ,,

Mg(NO,),.6aq2105 ,,

Al(OH).
AlCl,
AIBr,
All,
Al,S,

Mn(OH),
MnCl,
Mn8.aq

160 ,,

CHAP. V

THERMOCHEMISTRY OF THE METALS

4, Manganous sulphate
5.

6.

ya

- carbonate
Potassium permanganate

§ 11. Iron.

Carbon is taken up by iron

BP)

a sulphate
. Ferric sulphate

. Ferrous hydroxide
. Ferric de

. Ferrosoferric oxide
. Ferrous chloride
Ferric =

. Ferrous bromide

. Ferric ke

. Ferrous iodide

sulphide

with evolution of heat.

§ 12. Cobalt.

Behr

OA ee eagle

le
9)

tol

]
2.
3.
4

. Cobaltous hydroxide

chloride
, sulphide
es sulphate

oP)

§ 13. Nickel.

. Nickel hydroxide

» chloride
, sulphide
, sulphate

§ 14. Zine.
Zine oxide

5, hydroxide

, chloride

», bromide

, lodide

5, sulphide

,, sulphate
5, nitrate

§ 15. Cadmium.

Cadmium hydroxide
chloride

2)

MnsO,
MnCO,
KMn0O,

Fe(OH),

Fe(OH),
Fe,O,
FeCl,
FeCl,

FebBr,, Aq

FeBr,,Aq
Fel,,Aq
FeS.aq
FeSO,,Aq

Heat, of
Formation.

2499 K
2108 ,,
1950 ,,

1367 ,,
1982 ,,
2647 ,,
Cpa
961 ,,
808 ,
968 ,,
464. ,,
938:
2356 ,,

Fe,(SO,),,Aq 6184 ,,

(in cast iron) with absorption, silicon

Co(OH),
CoCl,
CoS.aq
CoSO,,Aq

Ni(OH),
NiCl,
NiS.aq
NiSO,,Aq

ZnO
Zn(OH),
ZnCl,
Znbr,
ZnI,
Zn8.aq
ZnSO,

Zn(NO3).,Aq

Ca(OH),
CaCl,

1323. ,;

184 1)e
G50%..

233

Heat of
Solution.

1388 K

eOd ts:

1798:
6320.

183 K

156 ,,
150 ,,
Lise.

Tears

SUPE

234 OUTLINES OF GENERAL CHEMISTRY BOOK VII

Heat of Heat of

Formation. Solution.

3. Cadmium bromide CdBr, 752K 4K
oe RG Rene Cal, 488 ,, aia

The halogen compounds of cadmium do not obey the law of
thermoneutrality ; the heats of neutralisation for two equivalents of
hydrochloric, hydrobromic, and hydriodic acid are respectively 203,
215, and 242 K, instead of being equal, as is the case with most of the
corresponding salts.

5. Cadmium sulphide Cd8.aq 324 Kk

6. a sulphate CdsSO, Pid ED 107K

re P nitrate Cd(NO,),,Aq 1161 ,,

8 e carbonate CdCO, Le1oe,

§ 16. Copper. :

1. Cupric oxide CuO See

2. Cuprous ,, Cu,O 408 ,,

3. Cupric chloride CuCl, Dies aes

4. Cuprous _,, Cu,Cl, Gas

5. Cupric bromide CuBr, a PROY Son,

6. Cuprous _,, CuBr, 500;

7. Cuprous iodide Cu,I, S20 55

8. ~ sulphide Cu,8 hepa s

9. Cupric sulphate 3 CusoO, 1826 ,, 158 ,,
LOA ear aubrete Cu(NO,),,Aq 823 ,,

§ 17. Mercury.

By choosing an unsuitable method, Thomsen obtained for the heat of
formation of the mercury compounds values which were affected by a
considerable error. Nernst (1888) has made more accurate determina-
tions. It is necessary to refer to this fact, as from the use of the older
numbers there have repeatedly arisen difficulties and contradictions
which entirely disappear with the new values.

1. Mercurous oxide Hg,O 222 K
2. Mercuric __,, HgO DAD eee
3. Mercurous chloride Hg,Cl, 6264;
4, Mercuric HegCl, Dole. = docks
5. Mercurous bromide Hg,Br, 405 ,,
6. Mercuric f Hegbr, 160 ,,
7. Mercurous iodide Lick 2aal bs 284 ,,
8. Mercuric __,, Hel, DAS.

The halogen compounds of mercury, like those of cadmium, do not
obey the law of thermoneutrality.
9. Mercuric sulphide Hgs 49 K
10. Amalgams. The alkali metals combine with mercury with great

CHAP. V

THERMOCHEMISTRY OF THE METALS

evolution of heat.
formation of 340 K ; sodium amalgam, NaHg,, 211 K. As potassium on
combining with mercury evolves much more heat than sodium, sodium
amalgam acting on water or acids gives out about 60 K more than
potassium amalgam.

et

loa

Coley uri Sp heer

SOHMAD m oo bo

ie er ar Pe

§ 18.

Silver.

. Silver oxide

chloride
bromide
iodide
sulphide
sulphate
carbonate
nitrate

§ 19. Thallium.

99

. Thallous oxide

hydroxide
chloride
bromide
iodide
sulphide
sulphate
nitrate

Thallie hydroxide
bromide

§ 20. Lead.

§ 21,

. Lead oxide

chloride
bromide
iodide
sulphide
sulphate
nitrate
carbonate

Bismuth.

. Bismuth trichloride

28)

9)

oxychloride

hydroxide

Sy ane taba

vee)

. Stannous hydroxide

chloride

. Stannic chloride

Heat of
Formation.

235

Solid potassium amalgam, KHg,, has a heat of

Heat of
Solution.

— 100

299

236 OUTLINES OF GENERAL CHEMISTRY

§ 23. Gold.

BOOK VII

The gold precipitated from solution comes down in different modi-
fications with variations of energy from 32 Kto47 K. The following
numbers refer to the variety with most energy, viz. that precipitated
by sulphur dioxide from the chloride.

i

. Auric hydroxide

. Auric chloride
Chlorauric acid
Auric bromide
Bromauric acid

. Aurous chloride —

i bromide
= iodide

§ 24. Platinum.

. Chloroplatinic acid
. Bromoplatinic _,,

OIA TR who

bS

Heat of
Formation.

Au(OH), 960 K

AMZOnaqpe— Les

AuCl, 228
HAuClL,Aq 713
AuBr,,Aq 51
HAuBr,,Aq 412
AuCl 58
AuBr — |
Aul — 55

H,PtCl,,Aq 1632
H,PtBr,,Aq 1138

a
~

99

Heat of
Solution.

45K

The heats of neutralisation of the two acids are the same as that

of hydrochloric acid.
3. Chloroplatinous acid

4. Bromoplatinous _,,
5. Platinous hydroxide

§ 25. Palladium.
1. Palladious hydroxide
2. Chloropalladious acid
3. Palladious iodide
4. Palladic hydroxide

H,PtCl,,Aq 1202 K

H,PtBr,,Aq 884

Pt(OH), 863
Pd(OH), 911
H,PdCl,,Aq 1265
Pal, 182

Pd(OH), 1672

9)

9)

2)

9)

CHAPTER” VI
ORGANIC COMPOUNDS

THE thermochemistry of organic compounds is rendered specially
interesting by the circumstance that most of the energy used in the
industrial arts, as well as all the energy of living organisms, is got from
the combustion of organic compounds. ‘The accurate comprehension
therefore of the economy of these working systems must be preceded
by a knowledge of the amount of energy contained in the substances
which come under consideration.

Unfortunately the special peculiarity of the processes between
carbon compounds, which almost without exception take place slowly,
or under pressure at high temperatures, has restricted any extensive
research in this domain. There is practically only one method for the
determination of the energy in organic compounds, just as there is but
one in organic analysis, and that method is the same in both cases,
viz. complete combustion. The heat here appearing is the same
as that taken into consideration in the first instance in the technical
or physiological utilisation of organic substances, and thus the heat
of combustion plays a very important part.

If the heat of combustion of an organic compound be subtracted
from those of its elements, we obtain, according to the fundamental
principle of energy, the heat of combination of the compound from its
elements. This has merely an arithmetical significance, as we have
scarcely ever been able to form organic compounds directly from their
elements. For the purpose of calculating heats of reaction the heats
of combustion can, however, be used just as well, for the difference of
the heats of combustion of the substances before and after the reaction
is equal to the heat developed by the reaction itself, as can also be
easily shown from the fundamental principle.

The heat of formation of organic compounds differs according to
the form of carbon taken. Berthelot calculates from diamond. As the
heat of combustion of this substance, however, has been determined by
two experiments only, these two differing by 20 K, the basis of this
calculation seems not sufficiently secure. It would therefore perhaps

238 OUTLINES OF GENERAL CHEMISTRY BOOK VII

be better to refer the heats of formation to amorphous carbon, the
heat of combustion of which has been accurately determined from a
good number of concordant experiments. In principle, of course, it
makes no difference which we choose. ‘The numbers which follow are
calculated with respect to amorphous carbon.

The combustion of organic bodies first reached an advanced stage of
development in the hands of Favre and Silbermann (1852), These chemists
conducted the combustion in a metal chamber supplied with oxygen ; the
substance to be burned was, according to its nature, contained in a little
basket or in a small lamp, and the gases produced on the combustion were
led through a long metal worm, which, along with the combustion chamber
itself, was immersed in the water of a large calorimeter.

The method was afterwards modified in various ways. With due care it
gives good results, but it is very difficult to conduct the combustion so that it
shall be quite complete.

A second method, introduced by. Frankland (1866), and perfected by
Stohmann (1879), is now almost entirely abandoned. It consists in mixing
the substance with potassium chlorate and letting the mixture burn in a
bell-jar under the water of the calorimeter. The experiments are difficuit
to perform and often miscarry.

Berthelot, finally, has worked out (1881 and 1884) a method according
to which the substance is burnt in a stout-walled vessel lined with platinum,
and filled with strongly compressed oxygen (Fig. 49).
Ignition is brought about by an electric spark, or by
heating a thin iron wire to incandescence by means of
an electric current, and allowing its glowing products
of combustion to drop on the substance. The whole
‘calorimetric bomb” is covered by the water of a calori-
meter. This method has the merit that the experiments
take up but little time and are almost always successful,
but, on the other hand, it requires extensive and costly
apparatus,

In the calculation of the experimental results it
must be borne in mind that both the oxygen
necessary for the combustion and the carbonic acid
which is formed, are in the gaseous state. In con-
sequence of the disappearance of the former, heat is
developed by the external air entering to take its
place. The amount of this is 2 T cal. per gram-
molecular-weight (p. 72), or in the calories here
employed -02 xT; at 18° this is 5°82 K. To reduce the heats of
combustion to constant volume we must therefore add 5°82 K for each
molecule of oxygen used in the combustion, and subtract 5°82 K for
each molecule of carbon dioxide (or of any other gas) formed.

Fia. 49.

We must also take into consideration the state of aggregation of the
substances investigated. For reducing to the gaseous state we have the

CHAP, VI ORGANIC COMPOUNDS 239

approximate rule that the heat of vaporisation at the boiling-point T
(measured on the absolute scale of temperature) isabout —°25 T. The rule
is accurate within about ten per cent, and serves at least for preliminary
calculations.

The influence of the solid condition of the substance is not so easy to
eliminate, as the relations between the heat of fusion and the nature of the
substance (as well as other circumstances) have not yet been made clear.
The amount varies very much, from a few up to 50 K.

Before we proceed to the numerical values in the following pages,
it is necessary to state that a great number of them have been recently
called in question. The various investigators are at present engaged
in a controversy as to the relative accuracy of the methods adopted by
them, a controversy which, in whatever way it may finally be settled,
at least shows that errors of several per cent in the heats of combustion
have been made on one side or the other. ‘The numbers which follow
are therefore only to be used within such limits of error.

The following heats of combustion have been found for the hydro-
carbons of the methane series—

: Difference.
CoHe¢ 3/04 An 1588
CsHs 5292 ,, X
me 1580 ,,
CsA 6872 oe 1599
C5Hyie 8471 39 1521 fa
CeHis 9992 ,, 02

The difference between the heats of combustion of neighbouring
homologous hydrocarbons is very nearly constant.

4 To calculate the heat of formation, we have, for example, the
heat of combustion of the elements of methane, CH, equal to
970 + 2 x 683= 2336 K, and that of methane itself equal to 2119 K.
The difference of 217 K is the heat of formation of methane from its
elements.

For every addition of CH, the heat of combustion increases
on the average 1580 K. The heat of combustion of the elements is
970 +683=1653 K. Consequently the heat of formation of a hydro-
carbon increases by about 73 K for every CH, added, and is in general
for a hydrocarbon of the formula C,H, +. equal to 144 +n73 K.

The unsaturated hydrocarbons of the ethylene group show the
same difference in ascending the homologous serles—

Difference.
CoH, 3334 K 1593 K
CsHe ) £927... i576
CH 6506 ,, een.
Chi, 8076 ,, ”

The heat of formation of the substances C,H,, is-173+n73 K. To
form ethylene from its elements 27 K would be required.

240 OUTLINES OF GENERAL CHEMISTRY BOOK VII

Similar relations are found in other homologous series, ¢.g. in the
alkyl chlorides and bromides, and in the alcohols. Thomsen thus

gives— ae tp. ( = Difference.
ethyl chloride (gaseous 1648
Ethyl a 2, 32108. gee
Propyl 4 Ws 4802 ,, 1577 2
Isobutyl ,, 3 6379 ,, ite
Methyl iodide (gaseous) 2015 K oe
Riise » 3592 ,, ieee

As the homologous differences of all these substances are equal, the
differences between the heats of combustion or formation of the
corresponding chlorine, bromine, and iodine compounds must also be
approximately equal.

For the series of alcohols the heats of combustion determined by
Thomsen are as follows—

; Difference.
Methyl] alcohol (gaseous) 1822 K 1583 K
Ethyl - + 3405 ,,
iby the
Propyl _,, z ene 1599
Isobutyl. ,, »» GOED Eas 1616 ,,
Isoamyl _,, Ma 8201... cs

Here again we have approximately equal differences; for the higher
alcohols they increase somewhat, but it is not improbable that these
values have been determined too high.

We can imagine ethyl alcohol to have been formed of ethylene and
water. The heat of combustion of ethylene is 3334; that of water is
0. As ethyl alcohol has a somewhat greater heat of combustion, viz.
3405 K, the difference of 71 K must have appeared in the union of
water with the ethylene, which union is therefore accompanied by an
absorption of heat. This example shows how erroneous is the so-called
‘‘Welter’s rule,” according to which the heat of combustion of an
organic compound is found by adding together those of the elements
after removal of as much of the oxygen and hydrogen present as will
go to form water.

The heat of combustion of the alcohols has also been investigated
by Stohmann. His numbers, which are for the liquid state, are
smaller than Thomsen’s, the difference being greater than can be
accounted for by the heat of vaporisation alone—

Difference.
Methyl alcohol 1,685 K 1561 K
Hine os 3,246 ,, ie
Propye =, 4-310 is 1565 A
Butyl bs 68765) - 1558 4
Amyl  ;; (Oe? 3x 1566 .,
Capryl) 4; . 12;622.,, 8 x 1561 é

Cetyl a 25,109 ,,

CHAP. VI ORGANIC COMPOUNDS 941

The general relation that the differences between the heats of com-
bustion of homologous compounds are equal, is seen in these numbers
also, which probably come nearer the truth than Thomsen’s. That the
constant difference is somewhat smaller may be. accounted for by the
increase of the heat of vaporisation with increasing molecular weight.

On the combustion of isomeric alcohols the same amount of heat is in
general evolved. The numbers obtained by some investigators are abnormal,
but the great majority of instances seem to show that isomeric compounds of
identical or similar function contain very nearly the same quantity of energy,
so that the thermal effect on their transformation one into the other is very
small. Thomsen, for example, found 4986 and 4933 K for gaseous normal
propyl and iso-propyl alcohol respectively. Luginin obtained 6367 and
6413 K for isobutyl alcohol and trimethylearbinol ; from the last number
we should subtract the heat of fusion, which although not yet exactly known,
must be about 40 K. In other cases greater differences have been found, but
it is just there that the observations are contradictory amongst themselves.

Stohmann has furnished us with plentiful data for polyatomic
alcohols and carbohydrates, his investigation being undertaken with
reference to the thermal economy of animals.

Cuniieucd aerate INTEND SS

Erythrite C,H40. 4,972 K 2324 K —- 408K
Arabinose CH 0s Dae. THESE — 692,,
Mannite CHiiOe 7,169 ,, Seen Bee Glen

~ Dulcite CHO; 7,118 .,, 3390 ,, = 708,
Dextrose CgH320, 6,646 ,, 3274 ,, — 824,,
Lactose CHO; 6,586 ,, 3384 ,, = 754,,,
Cane-sugar CisHe. Orr ye 13,222") 5933 ,, ~ 1580 ,,
Milk-sugar C5H 5.01, TS. 2508, 5996 ,, — 1519 ,,
Melitose Ciel Ore. 1979), 6651 ,, — 4477 ,,
Arabic acid CicH.,0,,- (18,694 ,, 5461 ,, =. 309 5,
Cellulose CHO; are as DEL Ou aS of.).

~ Starch CHO. 6,679 ,, 2557 ,, - 859,,
Tnulin Orc Fee 6,593 ,, 2648 ,, — 772,,

The numbers show that all these substances have a pretty high
heat of formation. By subtracting the heat corresponding to the
elements of water, we get the differences contained in the third column,
or the “errors” of Welter’s rule, which are here very considerable.
If we imagine the carbohydrates to arise from the combination of
carbon and water, the quantities of heat in the last column would be
absorbed. On the other hand, when these substances undergo com-
bustion in the animal organism, so much more heat is liberated than
would be the case if the carbon were merely burned as such. This
explains the fact, incomprehensible to the earlier physiologists, that
the animal produces an apparent excess of heat over the quantity
calculated from the carbonic acid evolved.

R

242 OUTLINES OF GENERAL CHEMISTRY BOOK VII

The same constant difference in the homologous series is seen with
acids also. The following heats of combustion of the acetic series were
determined by Stohmann, and refer to the liquid substances :—

i mf ete ae Difference.
ormic aci 2Vo

Acetic a C,H,0, 2,133 ,, ni 3
Propionic ,, C3H,0, 3,679 ,, 1548 ‘
Butyric 5, CyHg05 5,227 ,, 1540 :
Valerianic ,, C5H1 90. 6,767 ,, 1545 E
Caproiesr CgH)202 8,312 ,, 2x 1544 a
Caprylic ,, CH 60. 11,400 ,, 2 : 1548 s
Capric _,, Cio H 02 14,295 5, 2x 1539
Lauric _,, CyoHy02 17,572, 9 539
Myristic .,, C14H 2,05 20,646 ,, 2 x 1487 ‘
Palmitic ,, (solid) CigH 3202 23,619 ,, 2x 1580 :
Stearic ,, (solid) Cy gH 3602 26,778 ,, ‘

Similar relations amongst other homologous substances have been
often observed, but as they contain nothing new they need not be
given here.

The substances derived from the combination of the alcohols with
themselves, and with acids, with loss of water—the simple and com-
pound ethers—have mostly a heat of combustion differing but little
from the sum of the heats of combustion of their components, showing
that these actions take place with very slight thermal change. The
thermal change which does take place has often the negative sign, 7.¢.
the substances absorb heat on combination.

Thus the heat of combustion of ethyl ether (C,H,),O is 6600 K,
while twice that of alcohol is 6492 K—giving 108 K, for the process of
etherification. The expelled water has here been supposed liquid,
however, so that we ought to subtract its heat of vaporisation. We
obtain then only 13 K for the heat of the following reaction—the
substances being all gaseous

2 O,H,OH = (C,H,),0 + H,0

The numbers obtained from the comparison of the heats of com-
bustion of the compound ethers and of the alcohols and acids are
similar. The former are mostly from 10 to 20 K greater than the
sum of the latter. This rule may be used to calculate with close
approximation the heat of combustion of organic compounds formed
with loss of the elements of water.

The aldehydes stand between the alcohols and the monobasic acids with
the same number of carbon atoms, in respect of their heat of combustion.
With them rank the ketones, even the somewhat distant type of isomerism
between the two series having no decided effect on the heat of combustion.
Thus we have for propionic aldehyde, C,H,COH, 4407 K, and for acetone,
(CH,),CO, 4873 K, both substances being in the gaseous state.

CHAP. VI ORGANIC COMPOUNDS 243

Very little of a general character can be said of the organic
nitrogen compounds. It is remarkable that a considerable ab-
sorption of heat accompanies the formation of cyanogen from its
elements. The heat of combustion of (CN), is 2596 K, while that of
two atoms of amorphous carbon is 1940 K; the considerable quantity
of 656 K is thus taken up. In this respect cyanogen resembles
acetylene, which likewise is formed at high temperatures with great
absorption of heat (about 500 K, as the heat of combustion is from
3100 K to 3150 K).

When cyanogen combines with hydrogen, 107 K are evolved per
atom of hydrogen. This number is near the number for hydrogen
bromide. The heat of formation from the elements remains negative
(—275 K). That hydrogen cyanide behaves as an extremely weak
acid has already been mentioned (p. 220).

Heat of combustion of the amine bases (Thomsen).

Difference.
Methylamine CH,NH, 2583 K 1622 K
Dimethylamine (CH;),.NH 4205 ,, 1621

Trimethylamine (CH3).N 5286 ,,

The difference for CH, is rather greater than usual, but the compounds
are not homologous in the real sense. If we compare the following—

Difference.
Methylamine CH,NH, 2583 K 1574 K
Ethylamine C,H;N H, 4157 ,, 1600
Propylamine C;H,NH, 5757 ,, 1497 ‘
Isobutylamine C,H NH, Ves 1652,
9

Amylamine C5H,,N H, 8906 ,,

we find somewhat varying differences, the mean, however, 1581, being equal
to the constant of the preceding homologous series.

The heats of combustion of the nitrogenous final products of
metabolism in the animal are given by Stohmann as follows—

Urea CO(NH,). 1,479 K
Uric acid C;H4N,03 4,404 ,,
Hippuric acid C,H,N Oz 10,099 ,,

The heat of combustion of numerous aromatic compounds has also
been determined. The chief results have exactly the same form as in
the case of the fatty compounds, so that only a cursory notice is
necessary.

The heat of combustion of benzene has had different values
assigned to it. Thomsen found 8000 K for the gaseous substance,
while Berthelot and Stohmann give considerably smaller values, viz.
7760 K and 7875 K. With the homologues of benzene we again see
the increase of 1550 to 1580 K for each CH,, the different isomers
showing no great variation. A few heats of combustion, determined

244 OUTLINES OF GENERAL CHEMISTRY BOOK VII

by Stohmann, for other aromatic substances may serve to give a_
general idea of the relations here involved.

Phenol C,H,O 7237 K
Pyrocatechin 6682 ,,
Resorcin } C.H,0. 6708 ,,
Hydroquinone 6701=,,
Pyrogallol | 6163 ,,
Phloroglucin CoH Os 61765.
o-Cresol ) | 8830 ,,
m-Cresol C,H,O0 { 8810 ,,
p-Cresol J SSZ0
Anisol C_H,O SOTS53
Benzoic acid C7,O2 7668 ,,
4 aldehyde C,H.60 84174;
ot alcohol C,H,O0 8953 ,,
Methyl benzoate C3Hi00 94405
Phthalic acid C.H,0, TOO ke
Salicylic acid C,H,O; 7236 ,,
Methyl] salicylate CHO, 8988 ,,
p-Oxybenzoic acid C,H,O; T1DS 5,
Methyl p-oxybenzoate C,H,0; S892",

The rules given above are here also generally obeyed. It is
remarkable that while the three isomeric cresols, CH,'C,H, OH, have
the same heat of combustion, the metameric anisol, C,H,-OCH,, differs
considerably from them. It is evident from the comparison of
o-oxybenzoic acid (salicylic acid) with p-oxybenzoic acid that not all
position-isomers have the same heat of combustion.

We may calculate the heats of combustion of the homologues of
the above compounds with sufficient accuracy by adding 1550 K for

every increase of CH,. ;

CHAPTER VII
THE SECOND LAW OF THERMODYNAMICS

CHEMICAL energy, though the source of all physiological as well as of
all technical work, cannot be transformed directly into such ;—for the
most part heat, and sometimes electrical energy, appears as an inter-
mediate form. It is therefore of importance to know the laws of the
transformation of heat into other forms of energy.

A process, 7.¢. a change in the state or distribution of energy, only
takes place when the intensity of the energy (p. 208) is different at
two neighbouring situations. The intensity of heat is temperature ;
all the power of doing work possessed by heat depends therefore on
differences of temperature. No quantity of heat-energy, however
great, can perform the smallest quantity of work when it is collected
in a number of bodies all having the same temperature ; and we see at
once that the quantity of heat transformable into work must increase
proportionately with the disposable difference of temperature.

Further consideration shows that even the heat given up by a hot
body while sinking to the temperature of neighbouring bodies cannot
completely pass into mechanical energy. If we imagine, for instance,
the system to consist of two bodies, say a hot iron and a cold mass
of gas enclosed in a cylinder with a movable piston, then, if we bring
the hot iron into the gas, the latter experiences a rise of temperature,
expands, and performs the corresponding work. This, however, cannot
take place otherwise than by the use of a portion of the additional
heat to raise the temperature of the gas—a portion which is not
and cannot be transformed into work. ‘The fraction of the total heat
transferred which can under the given circumstance be turned into
work is called the economic coefficient.

This necessity, that a part of the heat employed to produce work must
fall to a lower than its original temperature, was recognised by Sadi Carnot
as early as 1824. It caused him to compare the passage of heat from a
higher to a lower temperature with the fall of a weight, and in this fall to see
the source of the work to be obtained from the heat.

246 OUTLINES OF GENERAL CHEMISTRY BOOK VII

At the present time such a conception is not tenable. We know
that heat and work are of the same nature—are both, in fact, forms
of energy, and that the one can only be produced when the propor-
tionate quantity of the other disappears. In this point, therefore,
~Carnot’s ideas were erroneous. But in spite of the error Carnot dis-
covered another principle of decisive importance for the transformation
—the law, namely, that the quantity of work obtainable under
given circumstances from a certain quantity of heat is a
function of the temperature only, being independent of the
nature of the working substances and of the particular
process employed.

The principle follows immediately from Carnot’s wrong conception : just
as the work obtainable from a quantity of water depends only on the fall,
so the work got from the “fall of heat” can only be a function of the tempera-
ture. When the unsoundness of this reasoning came to be recognised, quite
new considerations had to be introduced.

These we owe to Clausius, who stated the principle that heat
cannot of itself pass from a cold to a hot body. This is a
special case of the general principle that changes in the state of the
energy of given systems can only take place when the intensities of
the energies are different.

In order to prove on this new basis that the heat available for
transformation into work depends only on the temperature, we consider
a process in which the working substance after a series of suitable
transformations finally comes back to its initial state. Such a process
is called a cycle. It shall further be subject to the condition that
every transference of heat or change of volume may equally well occur
in the opposite sense, in other words, the differences of temperature
and pressure must be infinitely small. Such a cycle is called re
versible.*

By means of these reversible cycles we can transform at pleasure
work into heat, or heat into work. If, for example, a gas is allowed
to expand at a high temperature and a correspondingly high pressure,
thereby doing work, and is then cooled and compressed at a lower
pressure, work being thereby done on it, the latter amount is less than
the former, so that on the whole we obtain some work in excess. If
the process be gone through in the reverse direction, more work is
spent than is gained, and heat of a higher temperature is produced.

Let us now consider a reversible cycle of operations to be so per-
formed, that at the higher temperature T, the quantity of heat Q, is
supplied to the working substance, which again at the lower tempera-

* The actual realisation of such reversible cycles would be of infinitely long
duration. They are, therefore, only introduced as ideal limiting cases, just as in
dynamics we speak of perfectly rigid solids, perfectly elastic bodies, etc., although
these substances have no real existence.

CHAP. VII THE SECOND LAW OF THERMODYNAMICS 247

ture T, gives up the smaller quantity of heat Q,. The quantity
changed into work is then Q, — Q,.
_ We now perform a second cycle between the same temperatures
in such a way, that at the lower temperature T,, Q, is communicated
to the working substance ; then we let so much work be spent upon
it that the same quantity of heat is again given up at the higher
temperature, but to this must be added the amount of heat corre-
sponding to the work done, so that at T, the total quantity of heat
Q’, is given up. The question arises as to how Q’, is related to Q,.
Now Q’, cannot be greater that Q,, for then Q’, — Q, would “ of itself”
have risen to a higher temperature, for after the completion of the
two cycles all the substances are in their initial state. Q’, might
then, perhaps, be less than Q,. But neither is this in accordance
with the principle stated above, as we at once see if we consider the
cycles to be performed in the reverse way, which according to our
assumption may be done. for then Q’, is communicated to the
substance and does so much work that by its means the quantity Q,
(which is greater than Q’,) can be raised to the higher temperature.
Here again we have heat “of itself” assuming a higher temperature,
which is in contradiction to our principle. Nothing therefore remains
but to conclude that Q, = Q’,, «2. that the ratio of the heat transform-
able into work to the whole heat transferred is in such reversible
cycles independent of the nature of the process and of the working
substance, and is determined only by the temperatures between which
the substance works.

It is, therefore, only necessary to determine this ratio for any one
process in order to establish it quite
venerally. Gases are best suited to our p

purpose, as the relations obtaining with 4
them are most easily studied. We allow

a quantity of gas (say 2 g. of hydrogen)
to perform the following cycle, which we A,

represent graphically by Fig. 50.

Let the gas at first have the pressure
p, and the volume v, at the tempera =— si
ture T,. We allow it to expand a little, Pico 50.
the temperature remaining constant; it
is necessary for this purpose that a quantity of heat Q, correspond-
ing to the work should be communicated to it. Pressure and
volume are then p, and v,. Next let us remove the source of
heat and allow the gas to expand further. Here again it performs
work, but receiving no heat from external sources, it must expand
its own heat and therefore grow colder: let the temperature it
reaches be T’, the pressure and volume being p, and vz. We now
compress the gas. Work is required for this; let us remove the
heat as it is produced so that the temperature TI” is retained, the

v

248 OUTLINES OF GENERAL CHEMISTRY BOOK VII

pressure and volume, however, becoming p, and v,. Finally, let us
isolate the gas and compress it further. The heat “produced remains —
in the gas and raises its temperature, and the last part of the process
is so arranged that when the gas reaches the initial temperature T it
shall also have the initial pressure and volume p, and v,—an arrange-
ment always possible.

The work done by the gas in this cycle is represented by the
curvilinear quadrilateral 1 2 3 4. This work, namely, is always the
product of pressure and change of volume of the gas, so that the
surface a 1 2 8 represents the work for the passage from | to 2, it
being always decomposable into as many small strips as we please,
whose height is the pressure and whose breadth is the very small
change of volume. In the same way f 2 3 y is numerically equal to
the work from 2 to 3; from 3 to 4 we have the work 6 4 3 y; and
from 4 to 1, lastly, a 146. If the sum of the two last is subtracted
from the sum of the two first, the quadrilateral 1 2 3 4 remains as
measure of the work done in the whole cycle.

Now the work which a gas can perform by expanding from the
volume v, to the volume v,, the temperature T remaining constant, is

given by RTg4 (p. 71), R being the gas-constant (equal in thermal

measurement to 2 cal. for a gram-molecular-weight). Consequently
the a a to be communicated in this part of the cycle is equal to

aTlg 2 , the ee requiring no heat for mere change of volume. From

2 to 3 “a heat is taken up according to our assumption. The gas on
aie compressed from 3 to 4, gives up a quantity of heat Q’, specified

by a similar formula, Q’ = 2T'lg =f, Between 4 and 1 again no heat
3

enters or leaves the substance.
Consequently the ratio of the heat taken up, Q, to the heat given
out, Q’, is

Na
V3

For the processes 2, 3 and 4, 1, the formula developed on p. 74,
holds good, as heat neither enters nor leaves the system ; so that

(%2) "= Ps anid (Sy =P
Vat Seg vi Py
Now pv=RIT, and in particular p,v,=RT and p,v,=RIT’. Thus

Rare x2, sh Ps a Ns de

, and similar]
Po aL es

By substituting these values in

CHAP. VII THE SECOND LAW OF THERMODYNAMICS 249

the equations we get after a slight transformation

¥\E-2_ TY Oe
= wie mt . ee Ws

0.6. Beara ace y

Wai fore oo 3

which was to be proved. In this way the ratio of the two quantities
of heat comes to be
Our

mera

The amounts of heat entering and leaving the working system in this
cycle are therefore in the ratio of the absolute temperatures at which
they enter and leave.

By simple transformations we may bring the last equation into the

following forms :—
Q-Q soe liageeh eid ee hapa
Q ah ()’ ti

Now Q — Q’ is the heat transformed into work ; consequently the heat
transformed into work is to the total communicated heat as the
difference of the temperatures between which the process takes place
is to the absolute temperature of the communication ; and in the same
way the transformed heat is to the heat leaving the system as the
difference of temperature is to the temperature at which the heat
leaves.

If only small differences of temperature are considered, the work
which a quantity of heat can perform in a reversible cycle is inversely

proportional to the absolute temperature at which the transformation
takes place.

Were it possible to reach the absolute zero of temperature, T’ in the

Q-Q TT
Ope ee

equation would assume the value 0, and the right-hand side
would become equal to unity. From this it follows that Q’=0, ae if the
lower temperature could be made the absolute zero, all the heat communi-
cated would be transformed into work. —

/

The quantity is what we formerly termed the economic coefficient.

As the reversible cycle above described is the most perfect imaginable, it ~
follows that the economic coefficient or the efficiency of an engine can

td

—T
never be greater than Tp A steam-engine, for example, working with

steam at 150° CO. and a condenser at 17° C. can at most transform only

150-17
1504973 Wate. 2 te or scarcely a third of the heat it receives into work. In
practice the result is mostly much less favourable.

With the same final temperature we get greater efficiency as the initial

250 OUTLINES OF GENERAL CHEMISTRY BOOK VII

temperature rises. Between 1000° C. and 0° C. a perfect engine would
transform as much as °785, or nearly four-fifths of the heat into work.

The principle that the transformable heat is inversely proportional
to the absolute temperature has numerous important applications.
Although higher mathematics is indispensable for their rigorous
development, still a few of them may at least be indicated.

With the help of the principle we arrive at a very important
relation respecting the vaporisation of liquids. Let us consider unit
mass of a liquid whose volume is v, and which is under the pressure
P,, equal to the pressure of its vapour; let the temperature be T. If
we raise the temperature by a very little, say from T to T+ dT,
understanding by the symbol d that a very small fraction of the
magnitude following is in-
dicated, the volume increases
by dv and the pressure by dp.
Suppose the liquid to pass
entirely into vapour. For this
purpose we must communi-
cate to it p units of heat, p
being the latent heat of the
vapour. The pressure during
this time remains constant,
and the volume increases very

reel. considerably ; this increase, or
the volume of the vapour
minus that of the liquid, we shall call u. Let now the vapour be
again cooled through dT, and, at the temperature T, and the corre-
sponding pressure p, be condensed to liquid until it returns finally to its
initial state. The graphic representation of this cycle is given in Fig. 51,
where the work obtained is represented by the quadrilateral 1 2 3 4.
The equation QO wees
Oa Fi
holds good, and Q-(Q’ being the heat transformed is equal to the
work given by the quadrilateral 1 2 3 4. The area of this is equal to
the product of the line 1 4, representing the difference of volume u
on vaporisation, into the height, which is the increase of pressure dp ;
consequently Q — Q’=udp. The communicated heat Q is the latent
heat p of the vapour. For T—'T’ we substitute dT, the difference of
temperature of the two operations of the cycle, and therefore obtain

CHAP. VII THE SECOND LAW OF THERMODYNAMICS 251

and gives a relation between the heat of vaporisation, the increase otf
volume, and the rate of change of pressure with the temperature.”

By means of this equation we can easily prove the statement made on
p. 139 that the curves of vapour pressure for ice and water meet at a definite
angle. For the vaporisation of ice we have a similar equation—

rie
If from this we subtract the first equation, we get
dp’ dp
p —p=Tu at ap):
The magnitude dp’ stands for the increase of the vapour pressure of ice

brought about by the rise of temperature dT; dp is the same value for
water. The heat of vaporisation of ice p’ is greater than that of water p by

pe Eo

the heat of fusion of ice, A, te p’-p=A. The curve for ice is thus oT

steeper than that for water, for the rate of increase of pressure is greater by
this amount, and the corresponding curve must therefore below 0° C. have
shorter ordinates than those for the (overcooled) water, as is graphically
represented on p. 139.

Another conclusion which we may draw from the foregoing
equation serves to connect the melting-point of ice with the pressure.
We write the equation in the form —

we
Pp
and have in dT the change undergone by the temperature of trans-
formation owing to the change of pressure dp. If, as is the case for
vapours, the magnitude u, or the volume in the second state minus
the volume in the first, is a positive magnitude, then as T and p are
also positive, dT and dp have the same sign—the pressure increases
simultaneously with the temperature. When ice changes into water
the volume is diminished; u is therefore negative, and dT and dp
have different signs, i.¢. by increasing the pressure we lower the
melting-point. For other substances expanding on fusion, the melting-
point rises with increasing pressure.

dp,

By introducing the proper numerical values we can calculate the change
of temperature occasioned in the melting-point of ice by increasing the
pressure one atmosphere. T=273, p=80 cal, or 80 x 42,350 in gravita-
tion units; the change of volume of 1 g. of ice on melting is u= ‘09, as

* The equation has been deduced for the passage of a liquid into vapour, but we
can casily see that a perfectly similar formula can be obtained for every transforma-
tion from one state into another (heterogeneous) state, if the transformation takes
place at a constant temperature and under constant pressure (¢.g. ice into water, or
calcium carbonate into calcium oxide and carbon dioxide).

AS. OUTLINES OF GENERAL CHEMISTRY BOOK VII

1 g. of ice occupies 1:09 c.cm.; dp=1 atm. = 1033 gravitation units, We
have thus

278X209 x10383 =
80 x 42350

dT 0075".

It requires therefore 130 atm. pressure to lower the melting-point of ice 1”.

A specially interesting application of the equation is that to
chemical dissociation. This is a process (see Book X.) which is in
complete formal correspondence with vaporisation, a substance by
heating undergoing a chemical decomposition which at a specified tem-
perature continues till the product of decomposition evolved has reached
a certain pressure, corresponding to the vapour pressure. In the
equation, p then becomes the heat of dissociation or decomposition.

This may be calculated if we have ascertained the value of : a.€. the

ay
ee
alteration of the dissociation pressure with the temperature. As the
latter may in many cases be measured where the former is directly
inaccessible, we obtain in this way an important aid to assist us in
penetrating into this difficult region.

BOOK VUI

PHOTOCHEMISTRY

CHAPTER I
INTRODUCTORY

IN all the forms we have hitherto discussed, energy appears in intimate
connection with matter, so that a given quantity of matter of definite
properties contains a definite quantity of energy. Even where we
have actions at a distance, as is the case with gravitation, the energy
dependent on these is proportional to the quantity of matter and
vanishes along with it.

All this is different with energy which is distributed by radiation.
During the space of eight minutes, which the heat of the sun requires
to reach the earth, the energy has no ponderable material vehicle, at
least none whose mass is known to us. It is true that no circum-
stance goes to show that space is filled with energy ; it seems rather
to behave very nearly as a perfect void. Only when obstacles are
put in the way does the existence of energy from its action make
itself apparent.

The propagation of radiant energy is by no means instantaneous ;
it requires time, although very little. The speed is 3 x 101° cm. per
second. It appears, therefore, reasonable to attribute to the ether,
the hypothetical vehicle of radiant energy, a mass extremely small,

supposing its motion to take place according to the formula v= & Ess
m
where « is the elasticity and v the velocity of propagation.

The action exerted by radiant energy when it meets ponderable
matter may be of many kinds; the radiant energy can transform
itself into almost every other form. The transformation into heat
is the easiest and most complete, but what interests us chiefly is the
chemical action of radiant energy, an action which Days a most
important part in the earth’s economy.

254 OUTLINES OF GENERAL CHEMISTRY BOOK VIII

It has been already emphasised that chemical energy is the main,
almost the sole, source of our available energy. Energy is produced
by chemical processes taking place in the sun, it is communicated to
the earth by radiation, and there passes in the first instance into the
form of heat, and indirectly into the mechanical energy of meteoro-
logical processes, seen in the movement of air and water. Another
portion of the radiated energy, however, reassumes through the
instrumentality of plants the permanent isn of chemical energy.

Through the action of sunlight there takes place in plants a series
of important chemical processes, the details of which are mostly
unknown to us, but their result is that the carbonic acid of the
atmosphere is decomposed into oxygen, which escapes, and compounds
of carbon, in particular starch, which remain. As the heat of the
combustion of starch into carbonic acid and water is 4123 cal. per
gram, this amount of energy is necessary in order to form starch from
the carbonic acid and water at the disposal of the plants, and is
supplied entirely by the radiant energy from the sun, for without
sunlight plants are unable to effect the reduction of the carbonic
acid.

We see at once how this process affords us energy in a much more useful
form than the meteorological processes, and in reality the portion supplied
by the latter to drive windmills or water-wheels is very small compared to
that stored up for us by the action of living plants. AJl fuel has this origin,
and the animal organism can satisfy its requirements for energy in no other
way than at the cost of the energy stored in the vegetable world.

Another and very important peculiarity of radiant energy is the
extreme delicacy of its distribution in space. In striking contrast to
the heat that clings to matter and is continually subjected to a process
of obliteration or diffusion, radiant energy retains in the minutest
particular all differences in position originally imparted to it, even
after it has moved millions of miles through space.

On this property depends in the first instance our power of seeing,
which, to use Herschel’s phrase, endows us more than any other with the
attribute of omnipresence. The numberless minute differences possessed by
radiant energy when it leaves matter, generate in the retina corresponding
chemical changes, which give us a more faithful and more complete con-
ception of the external world than is given by any other sense. This same
property has also acquired technical importance: in photography, processes
of quite comparable character are excited on a plate sensitive to light, which
render possible the permanent preservation of an exact record of momentary
states and phenomena.

Photochemistry, then, like thermochemistry, was first developed
round physiological and technical problems, the commencement in both
cases being made about the same time. Priestley in 1772 made the
observation that green plants in sunlight improve air vitiated by

CHAP... I INTRODUCTORY 255

breathing ; Senebier and Ingenhousz thereupon recognised that the
process consisted in a decomposition of carbonic acid and elimination
of oxygen. The important part played by this in nature was, how-
ever, only sufficiently appreciated by Liebig (1840), and J. Rh. Mayer
(1842).

The oldest observations on lght-pictures obtained with silver
chloride were made by J. H. Schultze (1727), but remained isolated.
The power of different rays to exert different actions on a sensitive
substance was recognised by Scheele (1777), who first photographed
the spectrum. Ritter discovered in 1801 that the chemical action
extends even beyond the visible spectrum. Wollaston then took
advantage of the blackening of silver chloride to copy silhouettes.
Photography proper commences with Daguerre (1838), who discovered
the development of light-pictures, on which rests the possibility of
retaining the pictures of the.camera obscura, and of photography
with great rapidity. The principle of it is that extremely feeble
photochemical actions, themselves unable to effect any visible altera-
tion on the sensitive surface, may afterwards have their effect rendered
apparent by suitable treatment of the surface, and thus be converted
into a picture. Although the means of arriving at this result have
greatly changed since Daguerre’s time, the principle still remains the
same.

CEA PBR ile
THE MEASUREMENT OF THE CHEMICAL ACTION OF LIGHT

AS we have seen, Scheele’s experiment proved the difference between
the different rays of light with regard to their chemical action. As
the majority of the substances first investigated are most strongly acted
on by the blue, violet, and ultraviolet rays, the idea became prevalent
that in the light-rays three distinct and independent kinds of wave-
motion were contained, viz. radiant heat, light, and chemical radiation.
This idea has proved to be utterly wrong, and our whole present
knowledge of the subject shows that there is only one kind of radiant
energy, which produces the different effects according to its rate of
vibration and the nature of the object.

Chemically active light therefore being in no respect different
from visible light, is subject to exactly the same laws as the latter.
It may be reflected, refracted, polarised, ete. In a word, every optical
phenomenon can be photographed—a proof that it is the BaF -Lays
themselves which produce photographic action.

The measurement of the chemical activity of light is an important
and difficult task. In general it coincides with the measurement of any
form of radiant energy, and is executed by means of thermoelectric or
bolometric apparatus, for a description of which a text-book of physics
should be consulted. We shall only sketch here the methods which
are based on the quantitative determination of chemical processes.
These methods, it is true, yield results which depend on the nature of
the sensitive substance employed (for, according to the nature of the
substances, rays of equal objective intensity but of different wave-
length may have different actions); but still the general laws of
photochemical action, as far as they are independent of the wave-
length, may be established by means of such methods.

The formation of hydrogen chloride from a mixture of equal
volumes of chlorine and hydrogen under the influence of light has
found the most extensive application. After Draper (1843) had
constructed a somewhat imperfect apparatus for this purpose, Bunsen

CHAP.1II THE MEASUREMENT OF THE CHEMICAL ACTION OF LIGHT 257

and Roscoe (1857) in a masterly research brought the method to the
highest perfection.

The principal part of the apparatus is shown in Fig. 52. The
mixture of chlorine and hydrogen prepared in exactly the right
proportions by electrolysis
is led from h through the
“insolating” chamber i,
which is made of thin glass
blown in the form of a flat
circular box, and contains water in its blackened lower half. It is
connected by a ground-glass joint with the measuring-tube k, which
ends in the chamber 1, also filled with water.

If light falls on the upper portion of i, hydrogen chloride is formed,
and this is immediately absorbed by the water. A diminution of
volume is the result, and the water lk in the tube moves towards i;
the distance the water has moved is read off on the scale, and is a
measure of the chemical action of the light.

Rie. 52.

Bunsen and Roscoe’s apparatus is still at the present day the most perfect
for scientific purposes, but its management is troublesome and difficult.
Its originators themselves for ordinary purposes used another method, first
employed by Senebier, which turns upon the blackening of paper coated with
silver chloride. The amount of blackening cannot of course directly be given
numerically, but a scale of blackness may be formed by allowing lght,
whose intensity can be easily regulated to any required degree by optical
methods, to act on the paper, so that when a certain degree of blackness is
produced on the paper by an unknown source of light we may approximately
measure the intensity of the latter by comparing the darkening produced
with the prepared papers of the scale.

- A photochemical law which will be discussed later is here assumed,
viz. that equal chemical effects are produced when the pro-
ducts of light-intensity and time of exposure are equal.
By this we are freed from the necessity of observing during the same
time in all cases, when with very feeble light there would be no
appreciable blackening at all, while with a powerful light- source the
blackening would be so deep that no comparison between the two
could be instituted, and so no measurement made. Making use of this
principle, we have as the simplest actinometer a piece of chloride of
silver paper in a frame of neutral gray colour. The times are observed
which elapse before the paper attains the same colour as the frame, and
then the intensity of the chemical rays may be put inversely pro-
portional to these times.

Other actinometers, of which many have been constructed, offer
nothing essentially different from the two just described. Only one
method, as yet not much used, contains a new principle. It is the
galvanic measurement of photochemical action, and is due to Bec-

S

258 OUTLINES OF GENERAL CHEMISTRY BOOK VIII

querel. Two silver plates coated with silver iodide are immersed in
acidulated water or a solution of common salt contained in a glass
trough and connected with a galvanometer. As soon as light falls upon
one plate, the original symmetry of the arrangement ceases, and the
galvanometer indicates a current proportional to the intensity of the
light. Becquerel discovered and investigated quantitatively a number
of important facts and laws of photochemical action with this apparatus.
The method is capable of the greatest refinement and deserves much
more attention than it has hitherto received.

Quite recently (1888) Gouy has described another arrangement also very
sensitive. Two strips of copper—one bright, the other coated with cuprous
oxide, by heating in the air—are immersed in a solution of ammonium or
sodium chloride. Detailed investigations have not yet been published.

As already mentioned, attention must be paid to the fact that. all
actinometers are specifically different with respect to the nature of the
rays to which they are exposed, 2.e. they are influenced differently by
light of different wave-lengths, depending on the nature of the
sensitive substance.

CHAPTER III
LAWS OF PHOTOCHEMICAL ACTION

Ir follows from the fact that every objective optical phenomenon can
be photographed, that the geometrical laws of light deduced under the
assumption of rectilinear propagation hold unchanged for the chemically
active portion of radiant energy. Special proofs of these laws are
therefore of no particular importance.

The optical laws depending on the intensity of lght are more
difficult to investigate and require in part special methods. In the
first place, it has to be found if the chemical activity is proportional to
the intensity. This is a fundamental question for all photochemical
measurements, and has been, in fact, assumed & priori to be self-
evident.

An experimental proof of the principle was first given by Draper
in 1842. He projected an image from a uniformly illuminated white
surface by means of a large lens on his apparatus, which measured
the action of light by the amount of hydrogen chloride formed from
a mixture of chlorine and hydrogen. The result he obtained was,
that when the lens was partially covered by sectors of known angle,
the action was proportional to the uncovered surface of the lens.
Hankel (1862) and Bunsen and Roscoe (1862) confirmed this law.
It holds good only on the assumption that the experimental conditions
during the process are not greatly altered,—2in particular, that the
chemical process does not suffer a change of velocity from the
substances formed by the action.

If the chemical action, 7.¢. the quantity of the substance which
has undergone chemical change, is proportional to the light intensity,
and if the action proceeds uniformly, then, when the exposure has
lasted a certain time, the total action is proportional to the product
of the light intensity into the time, or, as it is called, to the “photo-
chemical effect.”

The conditions just formulated being fulfilled, the principle follows from
them as a necessary consequence. But even when the second condition is

260 OUTLINES OF GENERAL CHEMISTRY — BOOK VIII

not fulfilled, 7.e. when the intensity of the action is‘altered by the change
which the substance has already undergone, the same principle still holds
in the special form, that for the attainment of the same amount of chemical
action the products of light intensity and duration of action must have the
same value. This may be proved mathematically, and was assumed to be
self-evident by Senebier and Malaguti. Bunsen and Roscoe as well as
Hankel have also tested it thoroughly from the experimental side, so that
no doubt remains as to its general applicability. »

Another law is the well-known one that the intensity of radiation
from a point varies inversely as the square of the distance from that
point. Bunsen and Roscoe confirmed this law for photochemical
action by means of their hydrogen and chlorine actinometer ; its
validity has also been proved for the decomposition of carbonic acid in
green plants.

A series of relations developed by Fresnel for the passage of light
from one transparent medium into another were also tested by Bunsen
and Roscoe and found in agreement with experiment. The enumera-
tion of the various formule may be dispensed with.

If light passes through an absorbing medium, its intensity will
decrease geometrically as the thickness of the medium increases
arithmetically. This was also confirmed by Bunsen and Roscoe for
photochemical action. The same experimenters proved that a coloured
liquid diminishes the chemical action proportionally to the quantity
of dissolved colouring matter, just as it does the optical intensity.

Whilst in all these laws we have only a confirmation of the facts
obtained with purely optical phenomena, a new problem appears when
we inquire into the quantity of energy spent in the chemical action.
Bunsen and Roscoe obtained an answer in the following way.

A beam of light from a constant gas-jet was first passed through
a cylinder filled with chlorine, and the loss by radiation to the chlorine
measured. <A cylinder of double the length and filled with a mixture
of equal volumes of chlorine and hydrogen was then placed in the
path of the beam. As hydrogen does not absorb radiation in any
measurable degree, the light on passing through the mixture should
have been weakened to the same extent as in the chlorine alone, if it
performed no other work in the second case than it did in the first.
The weakening, however, was found to be perceptibly greater, so that
the authors came to the following conclusion :—

“Two-thirds of the rays of a gas-jet absorbed by the mixture of
hydrogen and chlorine serve to heat the gases, while the remaining
third is spent in performing the work necessary to put the two gases
into such a condition that they can enter into chemical combination.”

Investigations into the active portion of light falling on a
sensitive substance have shown that it is in general very small.
According to Pfeffer -000,000,0537 g. of starch is formed by a square
centimetre of surface of an oleander leaf per second. ‘The heat of

CHAP. III LAWS OF PHOTOCHEMICAL ACTION 261

combustion of this quantity is only 00022 cal., which consequently
is also the energy spent by light in forming the starch. Now the
radiant energy received by a square centimetre on a clear summer
day is ‘03 cal. per second; the plant therefore cannot use as much as
the hundredth part of this for chemical purposes.

From this circumstance we see why there is such a slight connec-
tion between the absorptive power of chemically active substances
and the intensity of the action of the different rays. It cannot be
doubted that only the rays that are absorbed exercise any chemical
action, but as only a small proportion of the absorbed rays exert
chemical action at all, the general optical absorption scarcely ever
represents in any. way the special chemical absorption. The latter 18,
to be sure, contained in the former, but is in general completely masked
by it.

It has been several times stated that substances are affected
differently by different rays. As a rule, rays of short wave-length are
most capable of chemical activity, but just in the most important case
—the decomposition of carbonic acid by green plants—it is the rays
with greater wave-length, the red and yellow rays, which are the
most active. The green-yellow rays act most intensely on the retina,
in which the irritation resulting in the sensation of sight is probably
also a chemical process.

On what circumstances these differences depend is as yet entirely un-
known. Absorption plays a part, inasmuch as unabsorbed rays are necessarily
inactive ; but why certain absorbed rays exert chemical action, while others
produce only a heating effect, is at present beyond our power of discernment.

A general hypothetical notion of the process of the chemical action
of radiant energy can be obtained by taking into consideration the
specific influence of the vibratory period of the latter. It is known
that heated bodies radiate energy whose wave-length always decreases
with rise of temperature. There take place therefore within the
heated bodies processes that can produce such vibrations of the ether.
Conversely, it seems conceivable that when the vibrating ether acts on
ponderable bodies, it will generate within them states comparable to
those they assume at a high temperature. This is only possible under
quite special conditions, namely, when the vibrations excited by the
ether in the body are of the same period as those of the ether itself.
Only under this condition does a specific absorption take place, just
as a string can take up the energy of vibration of a musical tone to
any great extent only when it has the same period of vibration as the
tone.

Through such an unusual excess of energy the molecules excited
to vibration will behave differently from molecules in the ordinary
state. A disturbance of the whole molecular structure will in general
be produced, and if the atoms can assume more stable positions than

262 OUTLINES OF GENERAL CHEMISTRY BOOK VIII

before, they will do so. Here we have the frequent case of decom-
position by the action of light. It is, however, also conceivable that
the excess of energy will be employed in rendering processes possible
which are associated with consumption of energy ; this is the case with
the decomposition of carbonic acid in green plants.

The first action of light on sensitive substances is thus always the
performance of work. The behaviour of a mixture of chlorine and
hydrogen has often been compared to the explosion of gunpowder, the
role of the spark being attributed to light, which would thus only
loosen the combination. This is undoubtedly correct when the mixture
is exploded, which, however, only happens when the light works so
powerfully that by the combination of the first particles, the neigh-
bouring particles are heated above the temperature of ignition, the
action being in this way propagated with great rapidity through the
whole mass. It is quite different with the apparatus of Bunsen and
Roscoe: the heat is here conducted away as it is liberated, and the
action does not go on. The fact that in this apparatus the amount of
combination is proportional to the action of the light is a sure proot
that the light in this case performs work proportional to its
intensity ; for the ‘gaseous mixture is not an unstable substance in
the proper sense. In dynamics, equilibrium is termed unstable when
the smallest amount of work is sufficient to destroy it and effect a more
or less important alteration in the system. The mixture of chlorine
and hydrogen, however, may be warmed to a considerable extent
without exploding, and mechanical disturbances have no effect on it.
It is therefore evidently in a state of stable equilibrium. JBut its

atoms can assume a still more stable state, namely, by forming hydrogen
chloride.

A dynamical comparison may be found in the equilibrium of a prism
standing on its end. The equilibrium is stable, for small disturbances are
insufficient to overturn it. If the displacement, however, exceeds a certain
amount, quite definitely specified by the nature of the prism, it falls over.
This work is to be compared to the work done by hght in the gaseous
mixture, and the quantity of hydrogen chloride formed is proportional to the
intensity of the light, ze. to the available work.

CHAPTER IV
PHOTOGRAPHY

THE method by which Daguerre first accomplished actual photography
consists in exposing a plate of silver (or of thickly silvered copper) to
the vapours of iodine, and then allowing the image in the camera
obscura to act on the plate. After the action, which only requires a
few minutes, the plate, on which no image is visible, is exposed to the
vapours of gently heated mercury. The vapours condense on the
plate the more densely, the more strongly the light has acted at the spot
in question. If the plate is looked at so that the bright places reflect
little light to the eye, the parts where there is a deposit of mercury
globules appear brighter than the background, proportionately to the
thickness of the deposit.

The theory of this process is based on the fact that vapours con-
dense in general more readily on rough than on smooth surfaces.
Where the silver iodide has been acted upon by light it is partially
decomposed, and thus a better surface is offered for the deposition of
the mercury globules. We may perhaps have the circumstance in ad-
dition that the separated silver has more affinity for the mercury than
the undecomposed iodide has, and therefore condenses it more readily.
From the researches undertaken after the acquirement of the know-
ledge of Daguerre’s method, it has been proved that the slightest local
alteration in the state of the surface of a polished sheet changes the
manner in which vapours condense on it in the most remarkable way.

Daguerre’s method is now completely abandoned. It was first
displaced by Scott Archer’s collodion process. A solution of gun-cotton
(cellulose nitrate) in ether and alcohol is made to dissolve certain iodine
compounds (cadmium iodide, ammonium iodide, etc.) A glass plate is
then coated with the solution, and after the greater part of the ether
has evaporated, dipped into a solution of silver nitrate. By this means
a sensitive precipitate of silver iodide is formed in the coating of
collodion. If such a plate is now brought into the camera and
exposed for the necessary length of time—a few seconds in daylight
—no alteration in the yellowish-white coating is observed. An image

264 OUTLINES OF GENERAL CHEMISTRY BOOK VIII

only appears when the plate is immersed in a mixture of silver nitrate
and a reducing liquid, ¢.g. a solution of pyrogallol or of ferrous sulphate.
The silver which separates from this mixture deposits preferably on
the places where the light has acted, and produces an image in which
the silver deposit is proportional to the light-intensity. By treating
this developed” image with a solvent for silver iodide, e.g. potassium
cyanide or sodium thiosulphate, the excess of iodide is removed and
we have left a negative, with the light places transparent and the
dark places opaque. ;

As the foundation of the theory of this process we have the
circumstance that solid substances which are deposited from liquids
_ collect preferably at parts where some of the solid is already present
(cf. p. 146). By the action of light minute traces of silver have been
formed, and each silver particle acts as a centre of attraction for the
silver of the solution, so that this is distributed proportionally to the
number of these centres. The process can be prolonged until the
thickness of the deposit is sufficient for the required purpose, but for the
reasons just explained the grain of the photograph gets coarser as the
development is continued.

The collodion process also is now almost entirely given up. The plates
prepared as above must be used wet as they come out of the silver bath, so
that they can only be made ready shortly before the taking of the photograph.
The plates at present in use, on the other hand, can be prepared an in-
definitely long time before use. They are made by pouring a solution of
gelatine, in which precipitated silver bromide is suspended, with certain
precautions, on glass plates and allowing it to dry. These “ gelatino-
bromide” plates are much more sensitive to light than the “ collodio-iodide”
plates. Like the latter, however, they show no image after exposure, but
must be developed. For this purpose we do not use a solution from
which silver is precipitated, but a strong reducing agent alone, such as
potassium ferrous oxalate or an alkaline solution of hydroquinone. The
development consists in the reduction of silver bromide to silver on the
exposed parts.

The theory is similar to the theory of the collodion process. Here also the
silver slowly produced by the action of the reducing agent on the bromide is
deposited first on those places which are in the neighbourhood of the silver
particles liberated by the light. Or, as we may perhaps more accurately
put it, the particles of silver bromide that lie near metallic silver are
rendered more easily reducible by this circumstance. This may be seen by
placing an unexposed gelatine plate in the developer and touching it at one
point with a silver wire; a black speck of reduced silver is immediately
formed.

All these methods give only negatives. The positive photo-
graphs are obtained by a copying or printing process, light being
allowed to fall through the negative on a prepared sensitive paper
against which the negative is pressed ; the light and shade are now
reversed and appear in the proper order.

CHAP. IV PHOTOGRAPHY 265

The number of copying processes is very great. Silver compounds
which blacken in the light are usually employed, paper coated with
albumen, “salted” with ammonium chloride, and afterwards sensitised
in a silver nitrate bath being in very general use. A number of other
processes are founded on the fact that a mixture of gelatine and a
salt of chromic acid becomes insoluble on exposure to light, the acid
being reduced to chromic oxide, which yields an insoluble compound
with the gelatine. We have other methods depending on the reduction
by light of ferric salts in the presence of organic substances, such as
oxalic acid, tartaric acid, sugar, and the like. Facts of general interest
are here scarcely to be recorded.

A remarkable observation was made in 1874 by H. W. Vogel. As
we have already had occasion to mention, silver salts are usually specially
sensitive for rays of small wave-length—blue, violet, and ultraviolet.
If sensitive plates (especially gelatino-bromide plates) are dyed with
different organic colouring matters, the region of sensibility is more
or less changed ; it is displaced in particular to the side of greater wave-
lengths. The action has not yet been fully explained ; although it is
manifest that only such rays as are absorbed can act, and that by
employing suitable colouring matters the corresponding rays are
absorbed in the plate, still we cannot see how the action of the rays
absorbed by the colouring matter is transferred to the neighbouring
particles of silver bromide, so that a sufficient explanation of this
observation of both great theoretical and practical importance is left
to the future.

BOOK Ix

ELECTROCHEMISTRY

CHAPTER I
INTRODUCTORY

A Rop of perfectly pure zinc is not attacked by dilute sulphuric acid,
neither is a rod of platinum. But if we immerse simultaneously a
zinc rod and a platinum rod in the acid and bring the projecting ends
into contact, either directly or by means of a metallic wire, the zinc
is dissolved, and the hydrogen expelled from the acid appears on the
platinum. The connecting wire has at the same time assumed peculiar
properties ; if a magnetic needle is held parallel to it, the needle suffers
immediate deflection ; if it be cut at any point and the ends placed
apart from each other on a piece of litmus paper moistened with a
solution of salt, there appears at the end connected with the zinc a
blue speck, and at the end connected with the platinum a red speck ;
lastly, the wire becomes warm. All these phenomena cease on the
removal of one of the metals from the liquid.

They serve to show that with the arrangement described, the
chemical action between zinc and sulphuric acid produces effects at a
distance from where it actually takes place, in the wire, namely. The
chemical energy produced where the acid attacks the zinc must
therefore have been transformed into another form capable of passing
through metals and liquids, and of exercising chemical and thermal
actions at any part of its course.

The only change to be observed in the properties of the substances
taking part in the action is that the metals have become charged with
electricity, the charge on the zinc being negative and on the platinum
positive. If the two metals be connected by a conductor the difference
is not adjusted, for after the removal of the conductor the metals are
again found to be charged. But we know that opposite electrical

CHAP. I INTRODUCTORY 267

charges in metallic conductors neutralise each other. It only remains
therefore to conclude that the charges are continually neutralised by
means of the connecting wire, but that they are just as regularly
reproduced in the metals. By this process there comes into existence
in the system what is termed an electric current. The electric current
is connected with the chemical action on the zinc, not only in point
of time, but also casually. The current ceases when the chemical
process is in any way prevented: it can perform work, and con-
sequently contains energy, which it must derive from the chemical
process, this being the only available source. We may thus say that,
in the system we have described, chemical energy is transformed into
electrical energy.

The transformation must, in the first instance, be subject to the
law of the equivalence of energy. Since, during the solution of zinc
in sulphuric acid as usually performed, all the chemical energy is
transformed into heat, so much less heat must appear at the seat of
reaction, the more electrical energy passes into the connecting wire.
If this also is changed into heat, the sum of all the different quantities
of heat produced must be constant, and equal to the heat of solution
of the zine.

These consequences of the fundamental principle of energy have
been experimentally tested by Joule and especially by Favre (1854)
and confirmed in all particulars. From a system consisting of zine,
sulphuric acid, and platinum—a galvanic (or voltaic) element as
it is usually called—more than half the heat of solution of the zinc
may be obtained in the form of electrical energy ; but if this be again
changed into heat by conducting the current through a long thin wire,
the original quantity of heat is exactly reproduced.

By making use of the electromagnetic forces we can transform
the electrical energy, obtained from the chemical, into work. The
total evolution of heat in this case is smaller by the thermal equivalent
of the mechanical work done. This result was also confirmed by
Favre.

Lastly, we can use the electrical energy to perform chemical work.
‘If the current from several such galvanic elements is conducted to two
platinum plates immersed in dilute sulphuric acid, a development of
oxygen and hydrogen on these takes place. The total heat given out
is again less than before, and that exactly by the amount of the heat
of combination of the two gases to form water. Here once more we
have strict fulfilment of the law of the conservation of energy.

Like the other forms of energy, electrical energy appears as
the product of two factors, one of which is called the quantity of
electricity, the other—potential, tension, or electromotive-force.
The first factor is a quantity, the second an intensity, so that
electrical energy capable of unrestrained movement in a system can
only assume a permanent stable state when the second magnitude is

268 OUTLINES OF GENERAL CHEMISTRY BOOK IX

the same throughout the system. When this is not the case, a change
of state occurs from which work may be obtained, just as it can be
got from a change of state of heat or of any other form of energy.

The other factor, the quantity of electricity, is usually looked upon
as being the real existent thing that lies at the bottom of all electrical
phenomena, and the whole nomenclature of electrical science has been
formed in correspondence with this conception. Although the view has
often been found very convenient, it must still be borne in mind that the
thing underlying electrical phenomena is electrical energy, and that the
nomenclature usually adopted is only of value as affording us, in many cases,
a means of clear and concise formulation.

If the quantity of electricity in a galvanic current. passing through
a section of the conductor in one second be denoted by I, intensity ;
and the electromotive-force between two parts of the circuit by E;
then, by definition, the energy corresponding to this motion of electricity
is EI. If the current in the part of the circuit considered performs
no external work, its energy is completely transformed into heat; if
we denote this by H, we get

Apihe=t | DA b

We are accustomed to conceive the way in which electrical energy
passes into heat as being analogous to the conversion of the mechanical
work of a flowing liquid into heat—a sort of friction is supposed to
resist the motion of the electricity, and the operation of overcoming
this conditions the transformation of the electrical energy into heat.
The electromotive-force corresponds to the pressure under which the
liquid moves. We therefore define the resistance R of a conductor in >
accordance with these ideas, as the quotient of the electromotive-force
EK, by the quantity of electricity forced by it through the conductor in
unit time, z.e. by the intensity I. We have thus

R=7 or I =;

This is the well-known law of Ohm, that the intensity or current-
strength is equal to the electromotive-force divided by the resistance.

If in the equation H= EI we substitute for E the equivalent value
RI it follows that

T= hile |

The quantity of heat developed by the passage of electricity through
a conductor is proportional to the square of the intensity (the quantity
of electricity passing per second) if the resistance is constant, and
proportional to the resistance if the intensity is constant. This law
was experimentally discovered by Joule (1841) and has frequently
received confirmation.

For the magnitudes above defined units have been introduced,
which, in a manner that cannot be explained here, have been derived

CHAP. I INTRODUCTORY 269

from the consideration of electrostatic and electromagnetic processes.
As unit of resistance we take that at 0° of a column of mercury 106
em. long, and 1 sq. mm. in section; this resistance is called an ohm.
The unit of electromotive-force, the volt, is so determined that the
electromotive-force of a galvanic element composed of copper in a
solution of copper sulphate and zinc in a solution of zinc sulphate,
amounts to 1:10. These two units specify the unit quantity by the

equation [=— ; it is that quantity of electricity which in one second

R 3
flows through the section of a conductor between the ends of which
there is an electromotive-force of one volt, and the resistance of which
is one ohm. This unit is called a coulomb, and the corresponding
current-strength an ampere.

These magnitudes are so chosen that the electrical energy
volt x coulomb is equal to 10,000,000 absolute units. Now a calorie
is equal to 42,350 gravitation units, or (as the intensity of gravity is
980 absolute units) 42,350 x 980 = 41,503,000 absolute units. The
unit of electrical energy, volt x coulomb, is therefore equal to °241
cal., or a current of one volt electromotive-force passing for a second
through a resistance of 1 ohm, 1 coulomb being thereby set in motion,
develops sufficient heat to raise 1 g. of water from 0° to 0°:241.

CHAPTER 11
FARADAY’S LAW

THE motion of electricity in bodies which admit of it at all takes
place in two distinct ways. When electricity passes through con-
ductors of the first class, these only experience heating according
to Joule’s law (p. 268), and no other material change. Metals, alloys,
carbon, and a few other substances constitute this class.

Conductors of the second class can only permit the movement
of electricity in such a way that a chemical change takes place in them
simultaneously. The chief members of this class are salts, fused or in
solution, and further, aqueous solutions of acids and bases—all of these
being compound substances, as we see.

In such conductors of the second class, or electrolytes, the
movement of electricity takes place so that the metals (or metallic
radicals) of the salts and bases, and the hydrogen of the acids, move
from the positive part of the circuit to the negative, while the acid
radicals or elements, such as chlorine, bromine, iodine, and also the
hydroxyl of bases, move in the opposite direction. These components,
the ions, are set free where the electrolyte is in contact with metal
conducting the current.

Faraday in 1833 discovered the general law that equal quantities
of electricity on passing through different electrolytes require equiva-
lent quantities of the ions for their transport. If several different
electrolytes are introduced into the same circuit (in which according
to the laws of electricity equal quantities of electricity pass through
every section in equal times), then the quantities of the liberated
metals or hydrogen, as well as those of the acid radicals, are in
equivalent proportions.

We know that the equivalent of an element is its atomic weight divided
by its valency. If we have, for example, solutions of silver nitrate, cupric °
sulphate, and antimony trichloride in a series in the same circuit, the
quantities of metal simultaneously deposited are in the proportion of 108
of silver to $ 63°3 of copper to +120 of antimony. Of the acid radicals
we obtain at the same time, NO,, + SO,, and 4 Cl,.

CHAP. II FARADAY’S LAW Atal

The electrolytic submolecules of equal valency behave as if each
had the same capacity for electricity, so that equal quantities of
electricity are conveyed by the same number of them, no matter what
their nature.

We know that there are certain substances, especially metals,
which can act with different valencies ; thus, for example, mercury and
copper are univalent and bivalent, tin bivalent and quadrivalent, iron
bivalent and trivalent. According as one or other set of these com-
pounds is used for conducting the current, each atom transports so
many times the electricity capable of being transported by a univalent
atom as the metal has active valencies in the compound in question.

If we take the electricity transported by one gram of hydrogen as
our unit, 63°3 g. of copper in cuprous compounds convey one unit,
and the same quantity in cupric compounds two units. In a similar
way, 56 g. of iron in ferrous compounds transport two units, and in
ferric compounds three units. The group Fe(CN), as a component
of potassium ferrocyanide transports four units of (negative) electricity ;
but in potassium ferricyanide only three. Having regard to this
property we shall continually distinguish between univalent, bivalent,
trivalent, etc., ions. Hydrogen and the metals, which convey positive
electricity, are called positive ions or cathions; the halogens and
other acid radicals, by means of which the negative electricity is trans-
ported, are called negative ions or anions.

In order to understand Faraday’s Law we must carefully guard against
the error of supposing the separation of the ions at the electrodes, 7.e. the
places where the electricity passes from the electrolyte into the metallic
portion of the circuit, to be the essential part of the law. That is not the
case ; the law refers rather to every kind of motion of the electricity within
conductors of the second class. Of course the separation of the ions at the
electrodes is the most convenient means of proving the accuracy of Faraday’s
Law, and as far as this proof has yet been taken the law holds strictly true ;
the quantity of electricity is always exactly proportional to the amount of
the ions separated, and the latter are always in the ratio of their equivalents
for equal quantities of electricity. In particular, not the slightest indication
has been obtained of metallic conduction, which some physicists think
possible, 7.e. conduction of electricity independent of motion of the ions.

As Faraday’s Law holds good for all movements of electricity
within electrolytes, the development of electricity in galvanic
elements (p. 267) must also be determined by it. If the ions of
sulphuric acid in the system [zinc, dilute sulphuric acid, platinum]
move so that the group SO, goes towards the zinc and forms zine
sulphate with it, while H, moves towards the platinum and is evolved
there as gas, then two units of electricity as above defined must be
set in motion for every 65°4 g. of zine dissolved, or 98 g. of sulphuric
acid decomposed. We may say in general that every galvanic element,

272 OUTLINES OF GENERAL CHEMISTRY BOOK IX

independent of its nature or of the character of the chemical process, —
produces the same quantity of electricity by consuming one ghia
of the metal.

It is of interest for many purposes to know the quantity of
electricity moving with 1 g. of hydrogen or with the equivalent
quantity of anothee ion. According to the experiments of Kohlrausch
and Lord Rayleigh this amount is 96,540 coulombs. Conversely, a
coulomb requires for its transport in an electrolyte 00001036 gram-
equivalents of any lon.

This consequence from Faraday’s Law, that every galvanic element on
the consumption of one gram-equivalent of its active substances always sets
96,540 coulombs in motion was extensively confirmed by Renault (1867).
There appeared in particular numerous examples of a metal having different
electrochemical equivalents, always in rational proportions, according to the
nature of the compounds containing it. Thus 96,540 coul. are set in motion
by 200 g. of mercury dissolving in dilute nitric acid to form mercurous
nitrate, but 100 g. are sufficient when the solvent is potassium cyanide,
mercuric cyanide, Hg(CN),, being formed. The electrochemical equivalent
of copper in dilute hydrochloric acid is 63:3, cuprous chloride being the
product, while in dilute nitric acid it is 31°7, for then cupric nitrate is formed.
Tin usually acts with the equivalent 4 118 ; but in potassium pentasulphide,
when it dissolves with formation of SnS,, its equivalent is only + 118.
Tellurium in hydrochloric acid has the equivalent $ 125, in potash 4 125.

Faraday’s Law both in this form and in that respecting electrolysis
was formerly misunderstood as meaning that equal quantities of
electricity in the various equivalents conditioned the same expenditure
or gain of work; Berzelius in particular was a violent opponent of the
law owing to this misunderstanding. From our point of view we see
that there is no question of energy or work here at all. Faraday’s
Law only considers one factor of electrical energy, viz. quantity; the
other factor, electromotive-force, remains unheeded.

wor

CHALLE RII

THE CONSTITUTION OF ELECTROLYTES

WE have already learned that by no means all compound substances
are capable of conducting electricity electrolytically, i.e. by help of
ponderable particles. ‘The property is possessed principally by aqueous
solutions of salts, acids, and bases; it is only observed with those
substances that can instantaneously effect an exchange of their
components.

If we think for a moment that for the purpose of electrolytic
conduction particles laden with positive electricity must move in one
direction, while particles charged with negative electricity move in the
other, we see that the ability to conduct depends on the ability to
form such vehicles for the electricity. -Now no body existing in the
molecular state is capable of being charged in such a way with positive
or negative electricity ; the property falls exclusively to the ions—
the products of dissociation of the compounds mentioned.

Formerly, therefore, electricity had ascribed to it the property of
effecting this decomposition on its entrance into an electrolyte, and of.
availing itself of the fragments for its own transport. Several facts,
however, are at variance with this view. A certain amount of work
would evidently be required to effect such a decomposition, but
electricity according to our experience moves in electrolytic conductors
with the same freedom as in metals ; there is consequently no place for
such work. Clausius therefore (1857) assumed, jn unconscious agree-
ment with an idea developed by Williamson (1851) for quite other
purposes, that some of the molecules in electrolytes are decomposed in
consequence of their collision; the parts, already separated, are im-
mediately seized on by the electricity to effect its transport, so that it
has to perform no work in the matter at all.

The question soon arises as to the proportion of decomposed mole-
cules in a definite electrolyte, e.g. in a normal solution of potassium
chloride (74°5 g. per litre). Clausius left this question unanswered and
only stated his general opinion that the number was not necessarily
large. Now, however, we can come to a decision by making use of

in

274 OUTLINES OF GENERAL CHEMISTRY BOOK IX

the laws regulating the influence of dissolved substances on osmotic
pressure, vapour-pressure, and the freezing-point (pp. 127-143). An
aqueous solution containing one gram-molecular-weight of sugar or any
other indifferent substance dissolved in a kilogram of water solidifies
at —1:89°. If the corresponding solution of potassium chloride con-
tains for the most part undecomposed molecules, it should have the |
same point of solidification. Actual observation, however, shows that
the point of solidification is at — 3°5°, i.e. the depression is almost twice
as great as for sugar, etc. From this it follows that there must be
in the solution of potassium chloride almost twice as many molecules
as would be calculated on the assumption that essentially molecules of
the formula KCl existed there, and so the conclusion is forced upon us
that almost all the potassium chloride has split up into its ions K and
Cl. In harmony with this conclusion there is the fact that the other
properties of the solution of potassium chloride (or in general of the
solutions of electrolytes) exhibit quite similar abnormalities, so that
the numerical values of the osmotic pressure and of the depression of
the freezing-point lead to exactly the same conclusion.

We thus arrive at the result that solutions of salts and of strong
acids and bases contain these substances only to a small extent as
such, by far the greater part being dissociated into ions. This con-
clusion was first drawn by Arrhenius (1887), and although it conflicts
with some of the views usually adopted, yet it is in complete agree-
ment with a very great number of observed facts.

For example, the objection has been raised, that substances like
potassium chloride, potash, or sulphuric acid are known to be compounds
whose components have the greatest affinity for each other; but here the
two conceptions of chemical affinity—stability on the one hand, and
activity on the other—have been confused. Hydrochloric acid exchanges
its hydrogen for metals, potash its hydroxyl for acid radicals with the
utmost readiness ; it would be absurd to ascribe to their components great
affinity in the sense of firmness of chemical union—the very opposite is
the case. Conversely we must say that the hydrogen in methane has great
affinity for the carbon to which it is bound, for very energetic means are
required to effect its separation. Thus it is the chemically inactive bodies
that are held together by the most powerful affinity ; compounds which react
with ease and rapidity can only hold their components loosely bound, if
bound at all.

Now, as we have already seen, electrolytes are precisely the most
active substances. The connection between the two properties is very in-
timate, so close, in fact, that from the chemical activity we can determine
the electric conductivity and vice versd. In accordance therefore with
the idea of Williamson and Clausius, there is very little coherence
between the ions of electrolytes.

To those not familiar with this mode of viewing the subject, it may
appear somewhat strange that in a solution of potassium chloride there

CHAP. III THE CONSTITUTION OF ELECTROLYTES LED

should exist free potassium and free chlorine, as none of the properties
of these free elements as we know them are apparent. Such an objec-
tion, however, would again rest on a misunderstanding. What actually
exists in the solution is single potassium atoms with enormous electrical
charges. We do not know what these charges are in reality, but this
we know—that the chemical properties of substances are greatly altered
by electrical charges. On the other hand, what we know as “free
potassium ” is a solid substance whose molecules consist of an unknown
and probably great number of potassium atoms not charged with
electricity at all. Similarity in the properties of an element in states
so different is scarcely to be expected. As soon as the potassium
atoms in solution lose their charge, as they do, for example, when led
by an electric current to a platinum wire, where they can give up their
electricity, potassium with its ordinary properties is at once produced,
as is seen in its ability to decompose water with evolution of
hydrogen.
Quite similar remarks apply to negative ions, e.g. to chlorine.

The following consideration may serve to remove the last doubts as to the
validity of the assumption of free electrically charged atoms of chlorine and
potassium. Imagine two insulated
vessels A and B (Fig. 53) filled with
a solution of potassium chloride, and
electrically connected by means of the
siphon H. Let a negatively charged
body be brought near A ; remove the
siphon, and lastly the charged body K.
Then, as is well known, A remains positively electrified, and B negatively
electrified,

Now, according to Faraday’s Law, the electricity in electrolytes can only
move simultaneously with the ions. Consequently, if an excess of positive
electricity is present in A, there must also be there an excess of free positive
ions, 2%.e. of potassium atoms, by the electricity of which the charge is
determined. If the electricity is conducted away, the potassium assumes the
ordinary form, and acting on the water of the solution develops hydrogen,
which can be collected in suitable apparatus and tested.

Similar considerations hold good for the chlorine in the vessel B.

It is consequently not only conceivable that the ions in an electrolytic
solution move about with electric charges, otherwise quite free, but solu-
tions may be prepared which contain an excess of any ion we choose, ¢.g. an
excess of potassium. The assumption that electrolytes contain free ions is
not only possible, but necessary. |

BIGwoss

Quite a number of phenomena, which were formerly unintelligible.
have received their explanation from the theory of free ions. First of
all we have Hess’s Law of Thermoneutrality. Two neutral salts
when mixed in aqueous solution produce in general no thermal change.
This is because there is also no chemical change. A _ solution of

276 OUTLINES OF GENERAL CHEMISTRY BOOK IX

potassium chloride consists essentially of the ions K and Cl, one of
sodium nitrate of the ions Na and NO,; when the two solution are
mixed the ions remain free as before.

Here we have an answer to the old question, Which salts are really in
the solution? No salts are in the solution, The ions present, however, can
form any of the salts according to circumstances, if that salt is capable of
separating out of the solution, eg. by crystallising. Thus it is explained
why a mixture of solutions of common salt and magnesium sulphate can be
separated into these components if the solution is evaporated down by heating
(the sodium chloride being then the least soluble), but resolves itself if the’
evaporation takes place at the ordinary temperature into sodium sulphate,
which is deposited (being at that temperature the least soluble), and
magnesium chloride which remains in solution.

We must bear in mind, however, that these explanations only hold
in strictness for very dilute solutions. When the solutions are con-
centrated, exceptions appear just as they do in strongly compressed
gases, which no longer exactly follow the laws of Boyle and of Gay-
Lussac. Such exceptions nevertheless do not obscure the funda-
mental principles.

The change of volume on neutralisation is also susceptible of a like
explanation. It was seen from the consideration of the observed facts
(p. 143) that the two components of the salts in their aqueous solutions
led a comparatively independent existence. The theory of electrolytic
dissociation gives a rational explanation of this result.

A whole series of other phenomena in salt-solutions—the refractive
equivalents, constants of capillarity, specific heats, etc., can all be placed
in the same category. Since, however, we have not before entered
into the discussion of these relations on account of their relative unim-
portance, this mere indication may suffice here also.

In conclusion, the purely chemical facts distinctly favour the theory
of the independent existence of the ions in electrolytic solutions. We
have in analytical chemistry a large number of general reactions, which
allow of the recognition of definite substances in their various com-
pounds. Silver nitrate, for example, is a reagent for chlorine ; all the
metallic chlorides and similar compounds give a precipitate of silver
chloride. But this is not the case with all chlorine compounds; the
presence of chlorine in potassium chlorate or in monochloracetic acid is
not indicated by silver nitrate at all. Iron compounds give with
ammonium sulphide a black precipitate of iron sulphide : but the iron
in potassium ferrocyanide remains quite unaffected in the presence of
ammonium sulphide.

When we look at these “exceptions” more closely, we see that
only those compounds have the above-mentioned reactions, in which
the substance sought for is contained as an ion. A solution
of silver is thus not a reagent for chlorine compounds in general, but

CHAP. III THE CONSTITUTION OF ELECTROLYTES yak

only a reagent for the ion chlorine ; in potassium chlorate the ions are
KX and ClO,, in monochloracetic acid H and CH,Cl:CO,, so that
these: compounds which contain chlorine, not as a separate ion, but
only as a component of a more complex ion, show no chlorine
reaction.

Indeed, analytical chemistry is in a great measure based on the
exchange of ions. We have no reagents for this or that element, but
only for definite radicals of salts or similar compounds. The
numerous oxygen acids of sulphur, although they all contain the same
elements, possess the most diverse reactions.

Further, the elements or radicals that appear as ions react
differently according as they have a greater or less valency, 7.¢. are
charged with more or less electricity. In the ferrous compounds
where iron is bivalent, it exhibits quite other properties than in
compounds where it is trivalent. The group Fe(CN), as the ion
of potassium ferrocyanide acts quite differently from what it does
as the ion of potassium ferricyanide, although it has exactly the
same composition whether it comes from the compound K,Fe(CN), or
from K,Fe(CN),.* In the first case, however, it conveys four units
of electricity, in the second only three (p. 271).

These considerations might be greatly extended, but as the necessary
facts are generally known, the application of the new electrochemical
theory of saline compounds may be left to the reader.

* The formula K,Fe,(CN),. used in many text-books for potassium ferricyanide

has no foundation in fact ; recent investigations have all gone to prove the correct-
ness of the simpler formula.

CHAPTER IV
THE ELECTRIC CONDUCTIVITY OF ELECTROLYTES

THE variations from the simple laws governing dilute solutions that
are shown by aqueous solutions of salts, and which can be represented
by the formula M=iM, (p. 141), put us at once in a position to
measure the extent of the dissociation into their ions of the molecules
in electrolytic solutions. The factor i gives the ratio of the molecules
actually present in the solution to the number calculated from the
chemical formula of the substance. If we have thus an electrolytic sub-
stance, each molecule of which can split up into n electrolytic submole-
cules or ions, and if x represent the fraction of the molecules which have
undergone the dissociation, then the relation i=1—x-+nx or i=1 +
(n — 1)x is evidently true. For, if N be the total number of the original
molecules, the solution will contain xN decomposed and (1 — x)N unde-
composed molecules; but as, according to our assumption, n submolecules
are produced from every decomposed molecule, the total number of mole-
cules present will be (1 — x)N + nxN, and the ratio of this total to the
number of original molecules is what we have represented above
by: hae

The number n depends on the constitution of the electrolyte. In
a salt of the type of potassium chloride, in which a univalent metal
is united to a univalent halogen or acid radical, n is equal to 2 because
every KCl splits up into K and Cl. In sulphuric acid H,SO,, potas-
sium sulphate K,SO,, or barium hydroxide Ba(OH),, we have n=3,
in potassium ferrocyanide K,Fe(CN),, which decomposes into 4K and
Fe(CN), we have n=5; in barium ferrocyanide, on the other hand,
n=3; aluminium sulphate, Al,(SO,), has n=5; and so on. It is to
be noted that in the case of several polybasic acids the value of n does
not correspond to the number of replaceable hydrogen atoms. Phos-
phoric acid H,PO,, for example, in moderately dilute solutions, only
splits up into the ions H and H,PO, and has thereforen=2. Such
abnormalities will be explained later.

A far more productive means of learning the condition of dissolved
substances is provided by the determination of the electric conduc-

CHAP. IV THE ELECTRIC CONDUCTIVITY OF ELECTROLYTES 279

tivity of their solution ; for the quantity of electricity passing through
an electrolytic liquid is ceteris paribus proportional to the number of
conducting, 7.¢. dissociated, molecules.

To arrive at a clear idea of the relations here involved, we may
imagine a vessel formed of two electrodes of great extent, 1 cm.
distant from each other, and the necessary non-conducting walls.
Let so much of the electrolytic liquid be introduced into this vessel
that it contains a molecular weight of the electrolyte in grams. This
system will have a definite resistance (in ohms or mercury-units)
and a corresponding conductivity ; these are called the molecular
resistance and the molecular conductivity.

The molecular conductivity of a given electrolyte depends in the
first instance on the temperature, increasing almost without exception
with rise of temperature, and mostly by about 2 per cent per degree.
It is further dependent on the state of dilution, increasing almost
always simultaneously with this. The increase is very considerable
for bad conductors, small for good conductors, the molecular conductivity
everywhere approximating with increase of dilution to a limiting
value which can be practically attained by good conductors; in the
case of bad conductors, even at the extremest dilutions accessible to
measurement, the molecular conductivity is still far removed from
limit.

The measurement of the electric conductivity of electrolytes was for a
long time a very difficult operation ; a method at once convenient and exact
was first given by Kohlrausch (1880). Such measurements are almost
inseparably bound to the use of electrodes which, as soon as the current
passes from them into the electrolytic liquid, become through “ polarisation ”
the seat of unknown electromotive-forces (vide infra), so that the usual methods
for conductors of the first class are not applicable here at all. By substituting
alternating currents (ze. currents that incessantly change their direction) for
ordinary currents, Kohlrausch succeeded in obviating the disturbing influence
of polarisation, and in ren-
dering exact measurement
possible. His apparatus is
constructed on the plan of
Wheatstone’s bridge, and is
diagrammatically represented
in Fig, 54.

The alternating currents
of a small induction-coil J
are conducted to the ends a
and b of a platinum wire 1
metre long and stretched on a
scale divided into millimetres.
On the one hand they pass through the wire adb, and on the other through
the resistance- box R and the conducting liquid W by the path aRcWb.
From c¢ a connecting wire passes to d on the platinum wire ab, and can be

280 ; OUTLINES OF GENERAL CHEMISTRY BOOK IX
moved along in metallic contact with the latter by means of a small sliding
carriage ; in this branch the telephone T is introduced.

It is well known that in such an arrangement no current flows through
the “bridge ” cd when the resistance R is to the resistance W as ad: db.
The silence of the telephone indicates when this occurs. We therefore
move the carriage with d along the wire ab until we find the spot at which
the telephone no longer speaks). As R: W=ad:db, the resistance W
required is equal to pee or the conductivity L= vo ae ;

To calculate the molecular conductivity from the conductivity so obtained

for the liquid in W, we must multiply the latter by the “capacity” of the

resistance-cell, and also by the dilution, 7.¢. the number of litres in which
a gram-molecular-weight of the electrolyte is contained. The capacity is
found by introducing into the cell a liquid of known conductivity and
composition, and finding its resistance. If M is the molecular conductivity
of the liquid, and V its dilution, then we obtain the factor K for transforming
the conductivity measured in the cell into molecular conductivity from the
equation

If we now measure another lquid of the dilution v, its molecular conduc-

tivity will be
ee Vana:

eS vaue

The cells used for measuring conductivities are of different construction
according to their size, for it is found that resistances below 10 or above
10,000 ohms cannot well be measured in the same apparatus. For liquids

i

|

|
|
|
|
|

i

RIG so: HG moo.

that are good conductors we therefore choose cells in which the electrodes
are a considerable distance apart, and the column of liquid between them of
small section; for bad conductors the conditions must be reversed. The
accompanying diagrams (Figs. 55, 56) show two forms that suffice in
almost all cases, The electrodes, which must have a section of at least. 10
sq. cm., are made of platinum, and should be coated with platinum black by

Py ee

CHAP. IV THE ELECTRIC CONDUCTIVITY OF ELECTROLYTES 281

electrolysing a very dilute solution of platinum chloride between them, with
occasional change of direction of the current, until their surface is covered.
with a black velvety coating.

The following general relations have been found with regard to
electric conductivity.

The conductivity of equivalent (not molecular) quantities of the
neutral salts is of much the same order of magnitude, varying between
50 and 120, calculating as above and using mercury units. It
increases slowly with dilution and usually reaches a maximum at
dilutions at about 2000 litres. The following table, containing values
observed by Kohlrausch, shows this in detail; the temperature of
observation was 18°.

Dilution. KCl NaCl LiCl 1BaClo 4KeSOy + MeSO4
sede 91°9 69°5 59°1 65°8 Giese 27-0
LO) 104:7 86°5 17°5 86°1 89°7 47 °4
100 1. bL4:7 96°2 87°5 100°6 109°8 71°5
1,000 1. 119°3 100°8 92°1 109°2 120°7 93°5

10,000 1. 120°9 102°9 94°3 112°6 124°9 103°4
50,000 1. 21°F 102°8 95° 114°4 126°6 105°2
190,000 1. V2EG 102°4 96°5 114°2 127°5 105°6

This table presents us at the same time with another regularity.
The increase of conductivity with increasing dilution is different
according to the nature of the salts. The conductivity of salts with
two univalent ions changes least, the change is greater for salts with
one bivalent and two univalent ions, and greatest of all for magnesium
sulphate, which contains two bivalent ions. This rule has been proved
to hold very generally.

The principle of greatest generality regulating the conductivity of
neutral salts is not, however, to be seen in the preceding small table. -
It was discovered by Kohlrausch in 1876 and may be expressed most
shortly as follows:—The conductivities of the neutral salts are
additively composed of two values, one depending only on
the metal or positive ion, the other only on the acid radical
or negative ion. |

The form of this law agrees exactly with the law of thermo-
neutrality and the laws for the volume and most of the other
properties of salt-solutions. The reason is the same as before ; the
mutual independence of the conductivity of the two ions, as stated in
the law, proves the corresponding mutual independence of the ions
themselves.

If we attempt to represent to ourselves what goes on in the interior
of an electrolyte when a current is passing, we arrive at something like
the following view. The electrical motive-power which, in consequence
of the difference of potential always present in the circuit, acts on the
positive ions in the direction of the positive current and on the negative

282 OUTLINES OF GENERAL CHEMISTRY BOOK IX

ions in the reverse direction, serves to set these ions in motion so
that they transport electricity in corresponding paths. The con-
ductivity (in other words, the quantity of electricity conveyed in unit
time in virtue of unit electromotive-force) evidently depends on
the number of the moving ions and on the speed at which they move.
We must remember too that according to Faraday’s Law equivalent
ions, no matter what their composition, transport the same quantity of
electricity. If therefore we perform our calculations for equivalent
quantities of the different electrolytes, as was done in the definition of
the equivalent conductivity, these quantities will transport equal quan-
tities of electricity, and the equivalent conductivity is thus a
direct measure of the velocity of migration of the ions.

Here, to be sure, we make the assumption that all the molecules
contained in solution take part in carrying the electricity—an assump-
tion not always justified. With dilute salt-solutions, however, this is
so nearly the case that we may neglect any deviations from it, mean-
while at least.

From the difference in the conductivity of dilute salt-solutions we
perceive that the velocities of migration of the ions must be different.
The fact that the conductivity of potassium chloride, bromide, etc.,
exceeds that of sodium chloride, bromide, etc., by 18 to 19 units
shows that the potassium ion must migrate 18 to 19 units faster than
the sodium ion. In the same way we can ascertain the differences
between the velocities of other ions ; the velocities themselves, however,
cannot be determined from the conductivity.

We come here upon a phenomenon first rightly understood
by Hittorf (1853). If during electrolysis the two ions (as had
always been tacitly assumed) migrate at the same rate, then the loss
experienced by the liquid must be equally large at the two electrodes,
and the concentration round these must be equally diminished. This
is in general not the case ; the concentrations change unequally at the
two electrodes, and from this Hittorf concluded that .the two ions
migrate at different rates.

In order to make the action of the different rates of migration
clear let us consider Fig. 57. The black points represent one ion, the
white circles the other. During electrolysis the black points move to
the left, the white to the right; the former moving twice as fast as
the latter. The top row represents the condition before electrolysis,
the following rows a series of conditions during electrolysis. The
heavy vertical line divides the original system into two equal
parts.

At the beginning of the electrolysis there are on each side seven
black and seven white ions. At the conclusion, after six molecules
have been decomposed, there are five undecomposed molecules on the
left hand and only three on the right hand: the concentration has
become different on the two sides. The number of black ions on the

CHAP. IV THE ELECTRIC CONDUCTIVITY OF ELECTROLYTES 283
left has increased from seven to eleven, i.e. by four; the number of

white ions on the right from seven to nine, 4.¢ by two. These
increments are proportional to the rates of migration.

|

| |
Pe reeerreererrrr
12200 0RSURRASRROGRE

| iC
ov So ieeiddaeddl

| eyes s/8yé B/S | S[ojolofojoyjoy

Fig. 57,

Accordingly, if we determine, after electrolysis, the increase of the
positive and negative ions at the corresponding electrodes, the ratio is
equal to the ratio of the velocities of migration.

It is now easy to ascertain the share of the different ions in the
conductivity. On the electrolysis of a solution of potassium chloride,
for example, the concentrations at the two electrodes remain almost
exactly equal ; consequently the ions K and Cl move at the same rate,
viz. (if we use the units of p. 281) 59-7 in solutions of 1000 1. dilution.
From this it follows at once that the rate of migration of sodium is
41-1, of lithium only 32°4, ete.

By determining a single ratio of transport, e.g. that of potassium
chloride, we can calculate the velocities of all the ions, provided the
conductivities are known; and, if we know the latter, we can at once
proceed backwards to the ratios of transport of all the salts formed of
these ions. Kohlrausch has shown that the results of such a calcula-
tion agree most completely with the direct determinations of the ratios
of transport made by Hittorf.

The strong acids of the type of hydrochloric and nitric acids
behave similarly to the neutral salts, their conductivity, however,
being much greater. As the velocity of the negative ions is known,
the greater conductivity can only be due to the great velocity of the
hydrogen ion. The following table contains the equivalent conductiv-
ities at 18° of a few acids measured by Kohlrausch :—

>

284 OUTLINES OF GENERAL CHEMISTRY BOOK IX

Dilution. HCl HNO; }H S04 4H3P04 CeH40»
el. 278°0 2770 188°9 29°0 12
£0. 324°4 322°D 208°4 43°0 4°3
100 1. 341°6 339°5 285°5 79°0 13°2
1000 1. 340°) 342°7 331°6 96°8 38°0

At a dilution of 1000 1. when chlorine has a velocity of 59°7, we get
for the hydrogen of hydrochloric acid, and consequently for hydrogen
in general a velocity of 285*8. Hydrogen therefore migrates five
times as fast as chlorine.

Great changes of concentration must thus appear at the electrodes
when acids are electrolysed. These changes have also been measured
by Hittorf, and Kohlrausch has shown that they are in perfect con-
cordance with the theory of the independent migration of the ions.

Kohlrausch gives the conductivity of bases at 18° as follows—

Dilution. KOH NaOH NH,OH

GF 171°8 149°0 0°84
10a1. 198°6 170°0 3°1
100 1. 212°4 187°0 9:2
1000 1. 214°0 188°0 26°0

From the velocity of migration of potassium, which is 59°7, it follows
that the velocity of hydroxyl OH is 154°3, which therefore migrates
considerably faster than the other negative ions, eg. about 2°5 times
as fast as chlorine—one of the next fastest. .

While the strong acids and bases thus obey the law of Kohlrausch,
the weak acids and bases diverge from it exceedingly. Neither
phosphoric acid, nor acetic acid, nor ammonia gives numbers that can
be brought into harmony with the law, for their conductivities are
smaller than the velocity of migration of hydrogen on the one hand,
and hydroxyl on the other, so that even the assumption that one
of the ions did not move at all would still give much larger numbers
than those observed.

The explanation of these abnormalities may be found in the fact
that we have neglected in our last considerations a factor of the
conductivity which has been already indicated. ‘The molecular con-
ductivity can only be represented as the sum of the velocities of
migration of the ions, when the number of ions conveying electricity
is in all cases the same. Now it is true that we have compared
solutions containing equivalent quantities of the different electrolytes,
but we have still to find out whether equal numbers of free ions |.
are contained in these equivalent quantities, for the ions alone are
active in the conduction of electricity.

Determinations of the freezing-point of solutions show that hydro-.
chloric acid and potash exert an influence almost twice as great as
that which corresponds to their molecular weight—they are thus almost
completely dissociated into their ions. Acetic acid and ammonia, on
the other hand, depress the freezing-point almost as indifferent sub-

CHAP. IV THE ELECTRIC CONDUCTIVITY OF ELECTROLYTES 285

stances, 2.¢. as calculated from their molecular weight—very few free
ions exist in them. Phosphoric acid lies between the two, but nearer
acetic acid than hydrochloric acid ; it is thus partially, but still very
far from fully, dissociated into its ions.

Consequently the law of Kohlrausch is not to be written in the
form »=u+v, where » is the molecular conductivity and u and v
the velocities of migration of the ions, but in the form

p=x(u + Vv),
x representing the portion of the electrolyte dissociated into its ions.

Only on infinite dilution does the dissociation become complete, when
the corresponding conductivity p.,, x being 1, is given by the equation

pea EY.

The law of Kohlrausch therefore only holds strictly for infinitely dilute
solutions.

It has been already mentioned (p. 281) that the salts, especially
those with univalent ions, are as good as completely dissociated at
dilutions practically attainable (at about 1000 1.); further dilution
does not alter their condition. The same applies to strong acids and
bases. For these substances therefore we can determine p,, with
sufficient approximation. The salts of weak acids with strong bases
and of weak bases with strong acids behave similarly to salts with
both components strong. Consequently by investigating such salts we
can ascertain the velocity of migration of weak acids and bases, so that
this property is accessible to measurement for all ions whatsoever.

If we are thus in possession of this knowledge of the values of u
and v for every electrolyte, we can easily calculate the portion x of
the electrolyte dissociated into ions, or the degree of electrolytic
dissociation, from the equations

/p=x(u+v)

bo =UtV,;
for by division we obtain
ee
Px
The degree of dissociation of a dissolved electrolyte at
any state of dilution is equal to the ratio of the molecular
conductivity at this state tq@the molecular conductivity at
infinite dilution.

>.

The degree of dissociation determined in this way agrees completely with
that ascertained from the depression of the freezing- point. The determina-
tion from the electric conductivity, however, is incomparably more exact, so
that the principle just stated is the most important aid towards obtaining the
value of x. This magnitude is of extraordinary significance, as will be shown
in the last portion of this book. It is a measure of the activity of a sub-
stance, 7.¢.a measure of its chemical affinity.

286 OUTLINES OF GENERAL CHEMISTRY BOOK IX

In conclusion, a few empirical relations between the velocities of
migration of the different ions may be indicated.

Of the univalent metals, potassium, cesium, and rubidium move
most rapidly, and all three at about the same rate: sodium moves
considerably, more slowly, lithium is still slower. Ammonium has the
same velocity as potassium, and thallium is not far removed from
these ; silver comes very near sodium.

Amongst the bivalent metals, calcium, strontium, and barium move
with nearly the same speed ; magnesium is slower, and is followed
closely by zinc, copper, and the other “ vitriolic” metals.

Chlorine, bromine, and iodine are among the fastest univalent acid
radicals and are almost equal in speed. The radical of perchloric acid,
ClO,, moves even more rapidly than these, and with decreasing
velocity is followed by ClO,, BrO,, and IO,. The radical of nitric
acid resembles chlorine. Fluorine possesses a considerably smaller
velocity, a property which seemingly belongs generally to the members
of the natural families of the elements with low atomic weight.

The radicals of the compound organic acids move more slowly the
more atoms they contain. In comparatively simple radicals the nature
of the elements is of decided influence ; thus chlorine diminishes the
velocity, while sulphur increases it. But when the number of atoms
in the radical exceeds twelve this influence disappears almost entirely.
The velocity of migration then seems to depend only on the number
of atoms, and increases on the addition of new atoms the more slowly,
the more atoms there are already present.

No constitutional influence has been recognised, isomeric ions, ¢.9.
those of butyric and isobutyric acid, moving with equal rapidity.

The bivalent and multivalent acid radicals have been but little investigated.
Selenic and sulphuric acids have very nearly the same velocity ; and so have
phosphoric and arsenic acids. The radicals of the polythionic acids seem to
have velocities increasing with the quantity of sulphur they contain, but very
little is known with certainty in this respect.

The influence of temperature does not vary much. It is mostly 2 per
cent per degree ; being somewhat larger with small velocities of migration,
and conversely.

CHAPTER. V
CHEMICAL AND ELECTRICAL ENERGY

IN discussing Faraday’s Law it was emphasised (p. 270) that the
quantity of electricity set in motion in galvanic cells is always the same
if equivalent quantities of the reacting substances in the cells have been
chemically transformed. But the energy that is set free in such
reactions, and which is usually measured by the corresponding
development of heat, has very different values. As electrical energy is
equal to the product of quantity and electromotive-force, and as the
first factor is the same for equivalent processes in the cells, it follows
that the electromotive-force of the various galvanic elements should
be proportional to the heat developed by the reactions taking place
within them.

As we learned on p. 272, 96,540 coul. are set in motion by a
chemical action between gram-equivalents; and further the unit of
electrical energy, volt x coul., is equal to -241 cal. (p. 269). If we call
the development of heat corresponding to the chemical process H, then,
if the chemical energy is completely transformed into electrical, H = Eq,
q being the quantity of electricity. Heat is here measured in the
same units as electrical energy ; the customary unit, the calorie, is as

1 ee os
we saw above -- greater. The quantity of electricity is 96,540 coul.

241
‘Therefore, if we measure the heat in calories
a ae :
0-24] = E x 96,540
H
ae 23,267

If we measure the heat, as we did in the chapters on thermochemistry,
in the more convenient K-units, 100 times greater than the small
calorie, we have

H .
E = 932-67 Ss 004298 H:

288 © OUTLINES OF GENERAL CHEMISTRY BOOK IX

In Daniell’s element the chemical process is the substitution of zinc
for copper in the sulphate. We have

CuSO,Aq + Zn=ZnSO,Aq + Cu + x.
If we introduce the heats of formation with changed sign into this
equation (pp. 233-234), we obtain the heat of reaction.

— 1984 = — 2485 4%
x= 501 K.

This, however, is for a gram-atom of metal, i.e. for two gram equivalents,
so that the heat of reaction for one equivalent is 250°5 K. The
electromotive - force corresponding is, in volts, 250°5 x 004298 =
1074 V. In reality the electromotive-force of a Daniell cell is
found to come very near this value, and so it was concluded that
the chemical energy of galvanic elements was in general completely
converted into electrical energy.

Further investigation, however, has shown that such is not always
the case. There are elements with smaller, and also some with greater
electromotive-force than corresponds to the above calculation, so that a
prwrt nothing definite can be said as to the relation between the two
values.

We are able, however, to state between these two magnitudes
(chemical and electrical energy) and the alteration of electromotive-
force with the temperature, a relation by means of which one of the
three can be calculated if the other two are known. To find this we
adopt precisely the same
mode of reasoning as we used
in finding the relation be-
tween the alteration of
vapour - pressure with the
temperature, and the latent
heat of vaporisation.

: Let there be given a gal-
vanic element whose chemical
energy (or heat of reaction)
for one equivalent is equal to
H. Let the electromotive-

Fia. 58. force be E, and let the quan-

tity of electricity developed

by one equivalent of the rence substances (96,540 coul.) be denoted
by q for the sake of brevity. Suppose the galvanic element to have
the electromotive-force E at the temperature T; and let this value
be denoted in a system of co-ordinates, in which the abscisse are
quantities of electricity and the ordinates electromotive-forces, by the

point 1.. We raise the temperature to T+ dT, where dT signifies a

very small change of temperature. The electromotive-force owing to

CHAP. V CHEMICAL AND ELECTRICAL ENERGY 289

this will increase, say, by dE. The element is now allowed to
work until the quantity q has been developed. The state of the
element is then given by the point 3. Now let us lower the
temperature again to J, arriving thus at the point 4, and send the
quantity q into the element in the opposite direction. By this
the first chemical process (if it is of the type of that taking place in a
Daniell cell) will be undone and the element arrive exactly at its
initial state.

The work performed in this reversible cycle is q.dE, and is
numerically equal to the area of the quadrilateral 1, 2, 3, 4. The
heat conveyed to and from the element in the process must be
Eq-H,; for the energy Eq is associated with the electrical process,
which, however, takes place along with a chemical process giving out
the energy H (the heat of reaction), so that there only remains to
introduce the difference Eq — H.*

We have again to make use of the relation between the
heat transformed into work and the temperature (p. 249), and so
obtain 7

aT q.dE
T  Eq-H’
ei dE Eq-H
desea ls" .

The difference Eq — H signifies, as we have mentioned, the heat which
must be communicated to the element in order that it may be main-
tained at a constant temperature while it is at work,—or the difference
, between the electrical and chemical energy. If this is equal to zero
as in Daniell’s element, then the left-hand side of the equation is
also zero, and therefore, as dT cannot become infinitely large, dE must
vanish altogether. Such an element, in which the chemical energy
passes wholly into electrical energy, does not alter its electromotive-
force with change of temperature. .

If Eq —H is positive, i.¢. if the electrical energy is greater than
the chemical, then, when the element is active, heat must be com-
municated to it, or else it cools down. In this case dE is also
positive, and so the electromotive-force is increased by raising the
temperature. If, on the other hand, Eq — H is negative, the chemical
energy being greater than the electrical, the element becomes heated
while doing work: dE is then negative, and so the electromotive-force
is diminished by heating.

All these conclusions have been confirmed by recent researches,
especially by those of H. Jahn (1888). The equation itself was
given by Willard Gibbs and von Helmholtz.

* H must of course be given in ‘‘electrical calories,” one of which is equal to
°241 cal.
U

290 OUTLINES OF GENERAL CHEMISTRY BOOK IX

The question as to the circumstances that determine whether Eq shall be
equal to, greater, or less than H has not yet been fully answered. The
electrical and chemical process in a. Daniell cell is at least twofold: there is
formation of zinc sulphate and decomposition of copper sulphate. Accord-
ingly the electrical work Eq is composed of two parts, an electromotive-
force having its source at each seat of chemical action. We are only now
beginning to acquire our first rudimentary knowledge of the magnitude of
these electromotive-forces and the corresponding chemical changes, so that
the foundations of a theory of galvanic elements taking sufficient account of
these separate values are just being laid.

BOOK X

CHEMICAL DYNAMICS

CHAPTER I
CHEMICAL KINETICS

WHEN C. F. Wenzel in 1777 set himself to the task of investigating
the cause of chemical processes, or the laws of chemical affinity, he
had first of all to search for a method of measurement. In analogy
to the method adopted for measuring the causes of mechanical pro-
cesses or of motion, he chose to measure chemical forces by the velocities
with which they effected analogous processes.

The conception of “chemical velocity” is defined as the ratio of
the amount of substance transformed in the process under considera-
tion to the time required for its transformation. For example, the
expression that fermentation proceeds faster at a high temperature
than at a low one means that ceteris paribus more sugar is converted
in a given time into alcohol and carbonic acid at a high temperature
than at a low temperature. This chemical velocity has little more
than an external similarity to mechanical velocity; and we must
therefore be careful not to look upon the similarity as going
deeper.

The quantity of substance decomposed in unit time—the rate or
velocity of a chemical reaction—is obviously dependent on very many
separate circumstances. Wenzel, who wished to measure the affinity
of acids for metals, performed his experiments so that the surfaces
of the pieces of metal which he exposed to the action of acids were of
equal size, for he reasoned that the metal dissolved in a given time must
be proportional to its exposed surface. He also saw clearly that the
action of his dilute acids would vary with their concentration, the
action being in fact proportional to the concentration, “for if an acid
liquid dissolve a drachm of copper or of zinc in an hour, a liquid half

292 OUTLINES. OF GENERAL CHEMISTRY BOOK X

as strong will require two hours to effect the same, provided that the
surfaces and the heats be equal in the two cases.”

The principle thus enounced by Wenzel, that the action is pro-
portional to the active mass, is in reality the fundamental principle of
chemical dynamics. Berthollet stated it later and independently of
Wenzel, but it is only quite recently that it has experienced the
application to the measurement of “chemical forces” foreseen by the
latter investigator.

In the first place, it is clear that one of the complications of
Wenzel’s experiments may be avoided by relinquishing the employ-
ment of solid substances. Chemical processes may be instituted in
homogeneous liquids and gases, where there is no question of surface
at all. It is true that here the course of the processes is not always
easy to follow and measure, but still in many cases this is practicable.

The first of such measurements were made in 1850 by Wilhelmy,
who correctly stated the law of the progress of a certain class of chemi-
cal reactions. If only one substance is affected in the process within
a homogeneous fluid, it is manifest that the velocity cannot remain
constant, but must continually decrease ; for supposing one-tenth of
the substance present to be transformed in unit time, we should get a
table like the following to show the course of the reaction—

Time. Substance present. Substance transformed.
0-—1 1°000 "100
1—2 ‘900 090
2—3 810 081
3—4 "729 073
4—5} 656 "066

At the commencement the amount 1:000 is present, and after the
lapse of unit time ‘100 has been transformed according to our as-
sumption. The amount ‘900 is now left, of which a tenth, this time
090, again undergoes transformation. The quantity remaining
behind is now ‘900 — :090=°810, of which again a tenth or 081 is
transformed, and so on.

The law of this transformation is easily stated—As the time
increases in arithmetical progression the substance present decreases in
geometrical progression.

Let us give the preceding table a general form by putting the fraction
transformed in unit time not equal to ‘1, but equal to a. We obtain

Substance transformed

Time. Substance present. : anes

in unit time.
Oz=t it a
1—2 l-a (l-a)a
2—3 l-a-(l-a)a=(l-a)? (1 -a)’a
3—4 (1-a)?-(1-a)’a=(1-a)? (1 -a)?a
4—5 (1-a)?-(1-a)’a=(1 -a)4 (1-a)4a

CHAP, I CHEMICAL KINETICS 293

If we therefore denote by @ the interval from the commencement of the
process, the amount of substance still present at the time @ is (1 —a)® and
the quantity transformed in the next time-unit is (1 —a)%a; and if we put,
in general, x for the quantity transformed, 1—x being the quantity still
unchanged, we obtain 1—x=(1-—a)®, which is the algebraic expression of
the above relation. |

The equation, however, has been deduced on an inexact assumption.
We have so conceived the process as if the transformation took place
in the consecutive units of time at a uniform velocity, and changed suddenly
at the beginning of the next unit, corresponding to the diminished
amount of substance present. Now this is not what really occurs, for the
change evidently proceeds continuously ; we can, however, approximate
closely to the actual process by choosing the units of time and the fraction a
as small as possible, 7.¢. by making both indefinitely near zero. Then it is
true the quantity (1 — a)® cannot be evaluated by elementary mathematics, for
it becomes (1 — 0)”, a approaching indefinitely near zero, and 6, the number
of the indefinitely small time-units in a finite time, eg. in an hour, being
infinitely great. From higher mathematics we learn that in this case the
expression (1 —a)® becomes equal to e-8, e being as before (p. 71) the
number 2°71828. We have therefore 1—x=e~-, or, if we take the
logarithm to the base e of both sides, lg (1 —x)= —a0, or —lg (1 —x)=aJ,

1
or, lastly, lg “ali eh a Here, again, lg denotes the natural logarithm, 0

the number of time-units expired from the commencement of the reaction,
and a the fraction of the initial substance transformed in unit time. In
chemical dynamics it is customary to take the minute as time-unit. If
therefore we count the time @ in minutes, a is the coefficient of velocity
of the reaction.

1
To test the accuracy of the equation lg ot a? we do not require to get

1
1 4 F
the natural logarithm lg of Ro the ordinary decimal logarithms are pro-

portional to the natural logarithms, being always 2°3026 times smaller, so
that we can write the equation

di
log ——='4343a0.
Ris a

Wilhelmy first showed the validity of this formula in the case of
the inversion of cane-sugar, which decomposes under the influence of
free acid into dextrose and levulose, by taking up the elements of
water, thus: C,,H,.O,, + H,O=2C,H,,0,. Here the acid suffers no
change, and the water in such experiments is always present in so
creat excess that the alteration of its quantity is quite inappreciable.
The conditions for the deduction of the equation are therefore fulfilled.
In order to determine the quantity of unchanged cane-sugar present at
any time, he took advantage of the rotation of the plane of polarisation
by the sugars, which thus enabled him to perform the analysis without

294 OUTLINES OF GENERAL CHEMISTRY BOOK X

any chemical disturbance of the state of the system. He obtained, for
example, the following series of numbers—

6 (Minutes). Angle. log = 5 log os
0 46°75° — =
15 43°75° 0204 001386
30 41:00° 0399 00133
45 38 °25° "0605 00134
60 30 io) "0799 00133
75 30°25 "1003 00184
90 30°75° "1217 001385
105 2o=20% 1441 00137
120 26 °00° "1655 00137
ee —18°70° — —

The observations are calculated as follows:—The original sugar-
solution had the rotation 46°75°; after it had been completely con-
verted into dextrose and levulose its rotation was—18°70°. As the
rotation is proportional to the quantity of sugar present, the total angle
traversed, viz. 46°75° + 18'70°=65°'45°, is the measure of the total
amount of sugar. The angle after the expiry of 15’ is 43°75° showing
a decrease of 3:00°; the fraction x which has been transformed is

3°00 62°45

therefore 6545” while 1—x is equal to 65-45: If we now calculate
log we find it equal to ‘0204, and this divided by 0=15, the

number of minutes from the commencement, gives ‘00136.

1

6
equal to 4343 a, and must therefore be constant. As we see from
the table, this is actually the case ; for the slight variations are merely
due to the errors of experiment.

Results similar to those obtained by Wilhelmy for the inversion
of cane-sugar have appeared later in the investigation of a great
number of other chemical processes. For example, the reduction of
permanganic acid by a great excess of oxalic acid, the hydrolysis of a
dilute solution of methyl acetate into methyl alcohol and acetic acid
in presence of acids, the conversion of dibromosuccinic acid into
hydrobromic acid and bromomaleic acid, of monochloracetic acid into
glycollic acid, the transformation of atropin into hyoscyamin by
alkalies—all these proceed according to the same law, which in no
way depends on the substances taking part in the reaction: whenever
a chemical process takes place, so that the amount of one substance

1 ’
log Tox siven in the last column, is, according to the equation,

only is changed, then it proceeds according to the formula lg ae = 00;

This again is merely a mathematical deduction from the principle

CHAP. I CHEMICAL KINETICS 295

that the chemical action is proportional to the active mass. Of course,
by active mass, or concentration, we do not mean the whole amount of
substance, but the amount in unit volume; and it should at once be
understood that quantities in chemical dynamics are not measured by
their absolute, but by their molecular weights. The amount 1 will
thus represent 34°46 g. of hydrogen chloride, or 40-0 g. sodium hydrate,
etc. The concentration or active mass 1 would therefore be a solu-
tion containing a molecular weight in grams in unit volume (c. cm.) As
such solutions, however, cannot in general be prepared, the unit of
active mass is usually taken a thousand times smaller, a molecular
weight being contained in a litre of solution.

Every chemical process such as the above is determined, as we see from
the foregoing, by a single constant a, which is the measure of its velocity ;
when this is given we know the whole course of the reaction. Theoretically
speaking, the reaction never comes to an end ; experimentally, however, the
termination is easy to observe. A simple calculation, which may be left to
the reader, shows that after a period ten times as long as the time required
for half the substance to be transformed, only ‘001 of the original quantity
remains unchanged ; now this is an amount in general not determinable by
the methods of analysis ordinarily employed, and may therefore be neglected
without more ado.

We come to a second kind of chemical process, regulated by a new
law, when in its course two substances undergo change of quantity.
We must again assume that the action is proportional to the amount
of each present. From this it follows that the action is proportional
to the product of the two quantities; for this is the only function
that fulfils the condition.

Let us consider first the simplest case in which the two reacting
substances are present in equivalent quantities, which are then numeri-
cally equal, each being A for example. ‘The elementary calculation of
the connection between the interval expired and the amount of the
undecomposed substances still present at the end of that interval is so
tedious and so little convincing that it may be spared the reader. By
means of higher mathematics, on the other hand, we can at once
deduce the following relation from the condition given—

lagi
At dA Ae

a.

Here A is the active quantity of each of the two substances, x the
quantity transformed at the time 6, and a a constant which is the
measure of the velocity. By an easy transformation we can write the
equation in the form

x
Any = A2

296 OUTLINES OF GENERAL CHEMISTRY BOOK X

which is shorter, but not so convenient as the first for purposes of
calculation.

An example of such a process is to be found in the saponification
of ethyl acetate by caustic soda, investigated by R. Warder (1881).

x

0 A-x aes Aa

0 16°00 — —

5 10°24 563 “113

15 6°13 1°601 Or,

25 4°32 2°705 108

35 3°41 3°69 "106

5D 2°on 6°94 108
120 1°10 13°55 113

1 me :
In the last column we have the values of =( i = = Aa, which

according to theory ought to be constant. In this case also the slight
deviations only arise from experimental errors. What was said with
regard to processes of the first kind applies equally to processes of the
second. The constant a is determined only by the nature of the sub-
stances present, the temperature, and the concentration ; if we know
its value, the whole course of the reaction is fully specified.

When the two reacting substances are not present in the same
concentration or active quantity, the equation is somewhat more
complicated, and still more unsatisfactory to deduce in an elementary

manner. The result is, if the two concentrations are denoted by A
and B

B(A — x)

A(B — x) — (A = B)aé.

This equation also has been tested and found to agree with experi-
ment.

lg

It appears still conceivable that more than two substances might be
requisite for a chemical process. The appropriate equations may be easily
developed by higher mathematics, but as no actual case of this has been
studied, we need not discuss them here.

The types of chemical processes described in the preceding pages
by no means comprehend all that actually occur. They are rather
limiting cases, approached more or less closely by the phenomena, but,
strictly speaking, never reached.

In the first place, the simplicity and uniformity of the reaction
assumed in the calculation are really very seldom to be met with.
Several processes almost always take place simultaneously, and only
when one has a great numerical preponderance is an apparently simple
process observed. ‘This is what meets us everywhere in nature, several
actions taking place at the same time in nearly every observed case, it
being only possible to fix the laws for a single action by eliminating

CHAP. I CHEMICAL KINETICS 297

the others as completely as possible either by the arrangement of our
experiments or by calculation.

In chemistry, as elsewhere in the exact sciences, we overcome this
difficulty through the principle of the mutual independence of
different processes. Weknow that if any forces act upon a material
particle, each force produces a relative motion independent of all the
other forces. In the same way, chemical processes take place, if several
come into play between the same substances, according to the laws
which were developed above for simple processes. The only difference
is that the equations representing the resultant course of all the
reactions receive a more complicated form; they can all, however, be
deduced from the law of the action of mass (p. 292).

A second circumstance that often determines deviations from the simple
formule is to be found in the variation of the constant a. As long as the
conditions of the process remain the same, a can only have one definite value ;
but new substances are often formed in the course of the process itself, and
these may so influence the substances already present, between which the
primary reaction takes place, that the velocity of the reaction will change.
If such is the case, we can sometimes formulate these disturbing actions also
as functions of the quantities of the newly-formed substances, and take them
into account in our calculations according to the above-mentioned principle
of coexistence. But this is not always successful, and then we are com-
pelled to have recourse to mathematical artifices, which give an approximate
solution of the problem. The same thing often occurs in astronomy, for
instance. The mode of procedure in the separate cases, however, would take
us far beyond the limits of such a work as this, so that the student must be
content with a simple indication of the fact.

CHAPTER II
CHEMICAL EQUILIBRIUM

MANY chemical processes are reciprocating, 7¢. the original sub-
stances may be reobtained from the products of the reaction. The
result of such opposed processes is a state of chemical equilibrium
—a state in which both the original and the newly-formed substances
are present in definite quantities, which so long as the conditions remain
the same do not undergo further change.

The condition for chemical equilibrium may be stated in this way,
that the rate at which each substance is formed must be equal to the
rate at which it is decomposed ; its quantity then remains unchanged.

The simplest case is when a single substance experiences such
changes. Let p be the original quantity of the first substance, p’ of
the second. According to the fundamental principle of the action of
mass, the rate at which the first substance is converted into the second
is at each instant proportional to the quantity of it present. If the
amount already transformed is x, then p — x is the amount still present
and u=c(p-—x) where ¢ is the constant of velocity of the process.
The quantity of the second substance is at the same time p’ + x, for so
much is gained by it as was lost by the first. The rate at which it
changes into the original substance is therefore u’=c’ (p’ +x), and
equilibrium is established when both rates are the same. From u=w'

it follows that
c(p-&)=c'(p' +)
Cut Dare

Ces Dae

Here and in the sequel the value of x for which the system is in
equilibrium is denoted by €. We may express the result thus—in the
case where one substance is transformed into one other, the reaction
being reciprocating, equilibrium is established when the quantities of the
two substances are in a definite ratio, which is equal to the inverse
ratio of the constants of velocity of the opposed reactions. This ratio
is perfectly independent of the amounts p and p’ originally present.

CHAP. II . CHEMICAL EQUILIBRIUM 299

If we thus know the coefficients of velocity of the opposed reactions, we
can calculate from them the proportions for equilibrium. On the other hand,
from the measurement of the equilibrium-ratio we only obtain the ratio of the
velocities, not their absolute value.

Examples of this case are rare, and not one has been exactly investigated.

The conditions of equilibrium are considerably simplified when the
substances in equilibrium form a heterogeneous system composed of
two immiscible portions. Guldberg and W aage (1867) have stated the
following principles for this case—the active mass of a solid sub-
stance is independent of its quantity. This empirical principle
has been found to agree with all the facts, and affords us an easy mode
of treating the equations of equilibrium, for we have only to put the
value of the active mass of solids in them equal to a constant. The

equation =e 3 becomes a, — Z if we assume that the second
substance is solid and denote its constant active mass by 7’. This
equation leads us to the conclusion that equilibrium can only exist
when the liquid (or gas) in contact with the solid substance possesses a_
perfectly definite active mass or concentration.

On comparing this principle with the results of experience we
find it confirmed. If a salt dissolves in water, a state of equilibrium
is attained when (at a given temperature) the solution is of a definite
concentration, which we know is not affected in the slightest degree
by the amount of salt present in excess. Another well-known case is
that of vaporisation : vapour and liquid are in equilibrium only when
the former has a definite pressure or concentration. We usually look
~upon the pressure as that which is determined by the nature and
temperature of the liquid, but as pressure and density are proportional
the expression given above is quite as warrantable as the customary one.

Another case of heterogeneous equilibrium is when a gas under
a definite pressure is dissolved by a liquid. The gas here plays the
part of the solid substance whose active mass is constant, and
equilibrium is reached when the concentration of the solution has
attained a definite value.

The transformations of allotropic and polymeric modifications
possess a more chemical character. Thus, on being heated, para-
cyanogen (CN), (obtained in the preparation of cyanogen as a brown
powder) passes into cyanogen until at a constant temperature a
definite value of the pressure or density of the latter is established.
Exactly the same laws hold good here as for the mere vaporisation of
a solid or liquid substance. If the pressure is increased beyond that
of equilibrium the proper amount of cyanogen is converted into
paracyanogen to re-establish the original density of the former.

Laws perfectly similar regulate the somewhat more complicated cases
of the transformations of cyanic acid HOCN, cyanuric acid (HOCN),, and

300 OUTLINES OF GENERAL CHEMISTRY BOOK X

cyamelide (HOCN),. If cyanic acid vapour is produced by rapid heating
of cyanuric acid, for every temperature above 150° there is a definite
density (or pressure) of the vapour, for which it is in equilibrium with
solid cyanuric acid, just as if we were dealing with vaporisation and not
with chemical decomposition. Below 150° the vapour of cyanic acid is not
converted into cyanuric acid but into cyamelide, and obeys with regard to
the latter exactly similar laws. At 150° cyanuric acid and cyamelide can exist
together, and the vapour-pressure of cyanic acid over both is the same.

Similar relations have appeared in the vaporisation of yellow and red
phosphorus. The former has a much lower vapour-pressure than the latter,
and the matter is somewhat complicated on account of the yellow modifica-
tion up to its boiling-point and a little beyond this being an unstable form.
When it is heated it begins at once to pass into the red modification, so that
it is somewhat difficult to get the phenomena belonging properly to the
unmixed substances.

A third case of equilibrium of the first order appears when both
substances have a constant active mass, 7.e. are neither gaseous nor
in solution. Then in general they can never be in equilibrium, for
the ratio of their active masses need not be that of their rates of
transformation, so that perfectly definite conditions must obtain for
a state of equilibrium to exist at all. Water and ice, for example,
are such substances; in general they cannot exist together—only at
a definite temperature, 0°, is this possible.** The same holds good for
rhombic and monosymmetric sulphur, for red and yellow mercuric
iodide, and for all substances that can exist in two forms, transform-
able one into the other, according to the temperature.

The equation for this case assumes the form

and can only be satisfied by definite values, as has already been
mentioned.

The relations of equilibrium conditioned by processes of the second
order (p. 295) are not so simple. If u is the velocity of any process
between the substances p and q, then according to the foregoing

u=ce(p ~ x) (q—- %),
x again representing the quantity transformed at any time. Suppose
p and q to produce two new substances by their interaction, the

quantities of which originally present were p’ and q’; then at the
time for which the above equation holds we have also

uw =c@ +x) (q’ +x),

* This temperature may be slightly altered by changing the pressure (p. 251),
but the variations are so small that they need scarcely be considered. In any case
this last kind of equilibrium may be looked upon as the limiting case of the pre-
ceding kind, and not as being opposed to it.

CHAP. II CHEMICAL EQUILIBRIUM 301

and equilibrium is reached when u=uw’, or

e(p — €) (q— €) =e'(p’ + £) (a' + £)

This equation was first given by Guldberg and Waage (1867) for
the mutual action of two pairs of substances. To put it into a more
convenient shape, let us make the original quantities of the two sub-
stances each equal to 1, and let none of the products of the reaction |
be at first present. Substituting then in the equation p=q=1, and

p' =q'=0, we obtain
(1 - gP =e

- Now € is the quantity of the newly-formed, and 1 - é the quantity of
the original, pair of substances present on equilibrium. The velocities
of reaction are therefore inversely proportional to the squares of the
quantities for which equilibrium is established if the original substances
were in equivalent proportions.

The accuracy of the general formula was first tested by Julius
Thomsen (1869), who altered the quantities p, q, p’, q’ in many ways,
determined € experimentally, and then tried if the observed values
could be represented by always using the same ratio c:c’. The result
was satisfactory. A description of the thermochemical method
employed will be given later. The substances were hydrochloric
acid and sodium sulphate on the one hand, sulphuric acid and sodium
chloride on the other, in dilute solution. A series of experiments
with nitric acid instead of hydrochloric acid was also performed.

The formula received further confirmation from a previously
published research by Berthelot and Péan de St. Gilles (1862), who,
however, did not turn it to account in this direction. It was upon
the formation of esters (compound ethers) from acids and alcohols,
the following equilibrium being established,

c. acid x alcohol =c’. ester x water.

Ostwald too (1876) performed a set of experiments with the same
substances as Thomsen had employed, but according to another method,
that, namely, of change of volume, and obtained results in agree-
ment with the formula.

The general equation

e(p — €) (q— &)=e(p' + €) (q' + &)

can be gradually simplified by some of the substances present being
in such a state that their active mass is constant: 1, 2, 3, or 4 sub-
stances in succession may be in this state, so that we have four cases
of limited equilibrium of the second order, which will now be con-
sidered in detail.

If, for example, the last substance assumes such a state, we have

302 OUTLINES OF GENERAL CHEMISTRY BOOK X

q'+&=p,a constant. At the same time let us put as before p=q=1
and p’=0; then
e(1 — €P=e'gp,

CO pipiconr ae
pede rei):
The ratio of the quantity of the newly-formed substance (which is not

in a state of constant concentration) to the square of the quantity of
the original substances must thus be constant.

or

No good example for this case is as yet known. It is approximately
realised when calcium chloride and oxalic acid act on each other in solution,
calcium oxalate and hydrochloric acid being formed. The oxalate separates
out as a solid and so has a constant active mass. Careful experiments have
shown, however, that with varying quantities of the components the formula
is not always satisfied. The reason of this probably is that the coefficients of
velocity ¢ and ¢’ are not independent of the relative amounts present.

If two substances assume the state of constant concentration, the
formula can receive two forms. First, q-—x and q’ +x can become
constant, passing into p and p’, so that

o(1 — £)p=c'&p’,

ue SO Dee

cp 1-€
This formula reminds one of that obtained for equilibrium of the
first order. It states that a constant ratio of the two substances with
variable concentration, gaseous or in solution, is required for equilibrium.
The quantities of the substances with constant active mass have no
effect at all.

The many tests applied to the formula have all proved it to be
in accordance with experiment. Thus the experiments of Deville
(1871) on the interaction between water-vapour and iron, hydrogen and
ferrosoferric oxide, conform to it. Water-vapour is partially reduced
by iron to hydrogen, and at the same temperature hydrogen is oxidised
by the ferrosoferric oxide thus formed. The two processes mutually
limit each other, so that at every temperature there exists a
definite ratio between water-vapour and hydrogen, for which
the mixture suffers no alteration either from iron or ferrosoferric
oxide. The ratio changes with change of temperature, the proportion
of hydrogen becoming smaller the higher the temperature rises.

A second example was thoroughly investigated by Guldberg and Waage
(1867), viz. the action between barium sulphate and potassium carbonate on
the one hand, and between barium carbonate and potassium sulphate on the
other. As theory predicts, there is equilibrium when the two variable

substances (potassium carbonate and sulphate) are in a constant ratio
(Ad).

CHAP. II CHEMICAL EQUILIBRIUM 303

But there is still a second possibility of the active masses of two
substances becoming constant: namely, when p’ and q’ are both of
constant concentration. ‘Then the equation has the form

| o(p ~ &) (q- 8) = e'x'p'
or @-@-5- =.

c
In this case there is equilibrium when the product of the two variable
concentrations has a constant value. Examples will be given in the
next- chapter (on dissociation).
If three of the reacting substances have constant concentration,
the equation becomes

c(p He E)p aa Crp’,

cp
C7’ p’ abies
On the left-hand side of the equation there are only constant quantities,
consequently there can be equilibrium only at one definite concentra-
tion of the variable substance. This case is quite similar to that
described on p. 299, only here the number of solids has risen to
three.

Isambert (1886) investigated a reaction coming under this head.
When ammonium chloride is mixed in the solid state with lead
monoxide, ammonia is evolved with formation of lead chloride (or
perhaps oxychloride) until a definite concentration (pressure) is
reached. If the pressure is increased, ammonium chloride is repro-
duced until the concentration sinks to its former value.

The last case, in which four substances of constant active mass
react together, leads in general just as little to a state of equilibrium
as when two such substances alone are present—either the one or the
other system existing exclusively. Only at some definite temperature
can there be coexistence of the two systems, and then they may be
in any proportions.

Such considerations as these can evidently be further extended,
but we need not occupy ourselves with them here, as the experimental
investigation of the more complicated cases is almost entirely wanting.
We may only remark in general that the kind of equilibrium in a
system of substances capable of reciprocal transformation, depends on
the number that are in a state of variable concentration, 7.¢. that are
gaseous or in solution. The following table will serve to illustrate
this :—

Number of Substances with

: : Equations of Equilibrium.
variable concentration. quat 4

0 No equilibrium in general.
J. p=const.
9 {f ; = const.

( p- q=const.

304 OUTLINES OF GENERAL CHEMISTRY BOOK X a

Number of Substances with

variable concentration. Ea ons oP EUs ey iio

3 { pps const. —

pp’p’=const.

PRT.

Dp pp. =const.

ES

etc.
The general equation of equilibrium will thus have the form

ERE ot =Consh.,

Ce Gaxes |
where p, p’, p’... are the concentrations of the substances on the
one side, q, q’, q”.. . those on the other side of the chemical equation

for the reaction.

CHAPTER II
DISSOCIATION

THE term dissociation was introduced by Deville to denote certain
phenomena, scattered examples of which had long been known, but
which were thoroughly investigated by him for the first time—the
decomposition namely of chemical compounds by heat, with formation
of gaseous products. In such processes states of equilibrium are
attained subject to the general laws discussed in the preceding chapter.
They might, therefore, be considered merely as special cases of what
we already know, but still the phenomena of dissociation have so
much that is peculiar to them that a somewhat comprehensive account
may not be undesirable.

The simplest case is when a solid on decomposition evolves a
single gas; and it was here that the first regularity was discovered.
If, for example, we heat calcium carbonate, then, above 450°, carbon
dioxide is evolved, the substance behaving exactly as a vaporising
liquid. For every temperature there is a definite density or pressure
of carbon dioxide, at which the gas is in equilibrium with both calcium
carbonate and calcium oxide present as solids.

The same is observed with salts containing water of Pee ierior
Several investigators, it is true, have denied the existence of a definite
pressure at a definite temperature, but all the recent and more exact
researches show the perfect accuracy of that law of dissociation, and
in particular, that the pressure is independent of the quantities of the
two solids—original and decomposed.

The theory of chemical equilibrium leads to the same result. We
are dealing with a reaction between three substances, two with
constant and one with variable concentration. The equation of
equilibrium, if we put u instead of p—€ for the concentration of the
variable substance, retaining z for the substances of constant con-
centration, becomes

Cm cir :
or Cr
Ve
; C7

® .
306 OUTLINES OF GENERAL CHEMISTRY BOOK X

On the right-hand side we have only constant values, so that the
variable concentration on the left must for any one temperature be
constant.

The validity of the equation, however, is dependent on the con-
ditions for which it was developed being maintained. Thus the nature
of the substances in the whole range investigated must remain the
same. Sodium phosphate, Na,HPO,.12H,O, for example, has a
definite dissociation-pressure of water-vapour, which at a given
temperature does not change although we remove more and more
water. But this only holds up to a certain point; when so much
water is removed that seven atoms only are left, the pressure suddenly
becomes smaller, and remains constant for further removal of water.
Under these circumstances, the other hydrated salt, Na,HPO,.7H,0O,
has been formed, and this has another and smaller velocity of decom-
position c, so that the constant expression on the right-hand side of
the equation assumes another value.

Similarly, the equation no longer holds when, during the process,
one of the substances suffers further change, thus becoming incapable
of taking part in the reverse action. Manganese carbonate, for
example, decomposes on heating like calcium carbonate. The man-
ganous oxide formed, however, is partially oxidised at the expense of
the carbon dioxide (3MnO + CO,=Mn,0O,+ CO), and cannot after-
wards pass back into the carbonate. In this case, in the equation
cr = Cuz, , the velocity of the reverse action c, is 0, so that the constant
w= is rendered infinitely great, i.e. the direct action proceeds

1
without limit.

We can make use of the law of constant dissociation-pressure to obtain
information regarding the existence or non-existence of definite compounds.
One example—the case of the two hydrated sodium phosphates—has already
been given. Other such cases have been studied, in particular the ammonia
compounds of the metallic chlorides. If silver chloride be saturated with
ammonia, the compound AgCl.3NH, is formed, which, at 48°5°, has a
pressure of 241°4 cm. of mercury. On continuous removal of ammonia the
pressure at first remains unchanged, suddenly, however, to sink to 28°8 cm.
This sudden change takes place when exactly half the ammonia has been
removed, and the compound 2AgCl. 3NH, remains. On further removal
of ammonia the new pressure does not alter until the last portions of
ammonia have left the silver chloride.

A second case of dissociation is that of a solid giving off two
gaseous substances on heating. Whether the solid is completely
transformed into the gases, or whether a residue remains, is of no
consequence. We shall take the last case as being the more general.
The equation of equilibrium is then

Cr = C,U,Uy,

CHAP. II DISSOCIATION 307

where z as before refers to the solid, u,, and u, to the gases. Separat-
ing the variables from the constants we have

UN¢
ane ola. *
For equilibrium, then, the product of the two variable concentrations
must be constant.

Ammonium hydrosulphide NH,HS, affords us an example of this
case. It is formed of equal volumes of ammonia and hydrogen
sulphide, and on heating is reconverted into these. As long as the
dissociation of this substance takes place in an exhausted vessel (or
one filled with an inactive gas) the phenomena are not to be dis-
tinguished from those already described. For on dissociation the two
gases are produced in equal volumes, and thus u,=u,, so that for
every temperature there is a definite dissociation-pressure, each gas
contributing half.

The matter assumes a totally different aspect, however, if one of
the products of dissociation is present as such in the vessel from the
beginning. Then there is a much smaller quantity of the hydro-
sulphide dissociated—the product of the partial pressures of the two
components having the same value as before. Thus the pressure of
ammonium hydrosulphide was found by Isambert to be 50°1 cm. at
25°1° in an exhausted space. In an atmosphere of 8°6 cm. pressure of
hydrogen sulphide, the pressure rose to 50°4 cm. on the introduction
of hydrosulphide. Half the increase of 41°8 cm., viz. 20°9 cm., is due
to the ammonia, the other half, plus the original pressure, 29°5 cm. in
all, is contributed by the hydrogen sulphide. In ammonia of 32 cm.
pressure the partial pressures were found to be 13°8 cm. and 45°8 cm.
If we write down the product of the partial pressures for each case
(the temperature being constant) we obtain—

Hydrogen sulphide. Ammonia. Product.
25°05 25°05 627
29°5 20°9 616
13°38" 45°8 632

The products agree within the limits of experimental error.

If one of the two gaseous products of decomposition is present in excess,
there is, as we must again take occasion to emphasise, no constant dissociation-
pressure. On diminution of volume, equal volumes of the two gases dis-
appear by combining to form the solid, and in the remaining gaseous mixture
the components are in different proportions from what they were before.
Now, as the law is that the product of the partial pressures must be
constant, it follows that their sum will increase as the difference between
the pressures is greater, 7.¢. as the volume of the uncombined gases grows
smaller by their union in equal volumes. Conversely, if the volume be
increased, the common pressure will diminish, converging asymptotically to

308 OUTLINES OF GENERAL CHEMISTRY BOOK X

the value corresponding to the substance in vacud. In such experiments no
attention whatever has been paid to these considerations, and the apparent
discrepancies between the measurements and theory are probably in great

part due to this. *

We have a third case of equilibrium when the solid dissociates into
equal volumes of three gases. ‘The corresponding equation is
Cr = Cag
2 cr
or u,U,=—
ete
i.e. a state of equilibrium is reached when the product of the three
partial pressures attains a certain definite value.
For the case in which none of the gases formed were present in
the vessel from the beginning u,=u,=u,; and the equation becomes

Cr 3 for

showing no formal difference from the first case of dissociation-
equilibrium. Only when the gases are present in unequal volumes is
the special nature of this dissociation made evident.

The same formula applies to the case of the solid evolving only
two gases, one of these, however, possessing twice the volume of the
other. For reproduction of the solid the active mass of the former
gas must be twice that of the latter,—the union is one of three mole-
cules, and it makes no difference with respect to the fundamental
formula whether these molecules are of the same kind or not. The
equation is merely simplified by u, becoming equal to u,, so that we get

ae dire ‘
UUs a 1

Equilibrium, therefore, is produced by the product of the density of
the one gas into the square of the density of the other (viz. the gas
occupying two-thirds of the whole volume) having a definite value.
From this it follows that the presence of the same excess of one or
other gas will affect the dissociation-pressure differently, the excess of
gas having the larger volume acting much more effectively than the
excess of the other.

These interesting relations are illustrated by the behaviour of
ammonium carbamate, formed by the combination of one volume of
carbon dioxide with two of ammonia [CO, + 2NH, = CO(NH,)(ONH,)].
Horstmann (1871) and Isambert (1883) have investigated this substance,
and find a satisfactory agreement with the theory.

In all the cases of dissociation we have hitherto discussed it has
been assumed that a solid substance is dissociated into gases. The
original substance may also, however, be a gas. Thus hydrogen
iodide on heating decomposes into hydrogen and iodine according to

CHAP. III DISSOCIATION 309

the ‘equation 2HI=H,+I,. For this case we have, in accordance
with the remarks made above,
cua c. Us Ue)

u referring to the hydrogen iodide, u, and u, to the iodine-vapour and
hydrogen. If neither of the latter is present in excess, u, = U,, and so

é Uu ne
cu? = Gly") OF Pia ve sel This signifies that at a given temperature

if C : :
the ratio between decomposed and undecomposed hydrogen iodide is

independent of the pressure; for we can increase or diminish u
and u, in the same proportion without the equilibrium being thereby
disturbed. This conclusion has been found by Lemoine to be in close
agreement with observation.

u
If one of the gases is in excess, we have an =. Here the state
Uy

of dissociation remains unchanged if the pressure of the hydrogen
iodide and the other gases be simultaneously so altered that the
former is proportional to the geometric mean of the latter.

We have a second case of completely gaseous dissociation when
out of one volume of the original substance there are formed two
volumes of the new bodies. As examples’ of this we may mention
phosphorus pentachloride, PCl;, which dissociates into PCl, and Cl, ;
the so-called bromide of amylene (C;H,,Br =C,H,, + HBr) ; nitrogen
peroxide. (NO) 2N0,) and dodine (I,= 21) “In the two first
examples the gases produced on dissociation are different, in the
two last they are identical. As has been shown above, this con-
ditions only a slight alteration in the formula. We have, namely,

CU C,UAu,,
or if u,=u, (either from none of the different gases being present

from the commencement, or from two volumes of the same gas being
evolved) then

ary a. 2
Cu = CU,
2
Ware
and ee
in Rips

_ The equilibrium is here no longer independent of the pressure, for if

u and u, are increased in the same ratio, u,?:u changes its value.
This holds for all the following cases. If the pressure experiences no
alteration by dissociation, as happens with HI, then, conversely, the
dissociation is not influenced by it; if, on the other hand, the pressure
increases with increasing dissociation, as in the present case, then the
dissociation decreases with increase of pressure.

The influence of pressure has been investigated for several of the above
examples, and the results have been found to agree with the deductions from
the equation. ‘This same equation too has become of great importance in

310 OUTLINES OF GENERAL CHEMISTRY BOOK X

another direction. It has already been stated (p. 274) that many electro-
lytes in aqueous solution are decomposed into their ions—are dissociated.
Since now substances in dilute solution are governed by the laws for gases,
it follows that the laws of dissociation are applicable in this case also. The
electrolytes for the most part are substances that undergo dissociation in the
way we have just discussed, one molecule of HCl, for example, falling into

+ —
two sub-molecules or ions, H and Cl. In reality this law of dissociation
has been proved valid with electrolytes to an extent far beyond that attain-
able in the case of gases. Details will be given hereafter.

It is easy to find the law of dissociation for more complicated
cases, but it is needless to dwell longer on the subject, as the experi-
mental investigation is still wanting.

The dissociation of such compounds as nitrogen peroxide, which
only change their molecular state, is measured by ascertaining the
density. If the density of the original substance be d and that of the
product of dissociation d’, then generally d=nd’, if n is the number
of molecules into which one of the original molecules decomposes,—
for nitrogen peroxide, therefore, d= 2d’. Let us denote the observed
density of the partially dissociated mixture by D; the problem is to
calculate from this magnitude the dissociated portion x of the original
gas.

The gaseous mixture consists of 1—x volumes of the density d
and 2x volumes of the density d’; the total volume being thus 1 +x.
As the density of the undecomposed, gas is to that of the mixture

° . ( d 1+x

inversely as the corresponding volumes, we have oat
diary ees ;

I ary In the equation for equilibrium we have to substitute

(1—x)p for u, and xp for u,, p representing the pressure of the gas
supposed undissociated.

CHAPTER IV
APPLICATION OF THERMODYNAMICS TO CHEMICAL EQUILIBRIUM

From what has been stated in the preceding chapter we are enabled
to deduce the laws of chemical equilibrium by using as basis the
empirical principle, that the action is proportional to the
active mass. And to this we have in addition the special law that
the active mass of solids is constant.

These principles, however, are only available on condition that
the temperature remains constant : they tell us nothing of the influence
of temperature on the state of equilibrium, and how the latter alters
with change of temperature.

We must here have recourse to other considerations drawn from
quite different departments of science, viz. from thermodynamics, and
from the kinetic molecular theory. By suitable application these lead
to exactly the same results as were arrived at above empirically:
the former having the advantage of greater generality, the latter of
being more easily comprehensible. All three methods can be employed
with almost equal ease to deduce the equations for chemical equilibrium
at constant temperature, 2.¢ for isothermal equilibrium. The
thermodynamical method alone gives us direct information as to the
excessively important influence of temperature ; the molecular method
allows of some conclusions being drawn, although with difficulty ;
and to the empirical mode there must be added a new principle to
enable us to obtain information even as to the character, without
speaking of the amount, of the influence of temperature.

This additional empirical principle is a special case of a law of
great generality, which, it would appear, has not yet found a complete
expression. The law was comparatively early, but insufficiently,
formulated by Maupertuis in the first half of last century as the
principle of Least Action, according to which all processes in nature
take place in such a way that the smallest possible quantity of work
is expended, or that the existing configurations suffer the least possible
disturbance. While this principle was formerly limited to dynamical,
or at most to optical applications, there 1s at present a growing

312 OUTLINES OF GENERAL CHEMISTRY BOOK X

recognition that it is everywhere valid and can be applied to all
processes whatsoever.

It may be put into the following ate “Tt system in
’ equilibrium, one of the conditions of equilibrium is forcibly
altered so that the system assumes a new state, then the
other correlative conditions change in such a manner as to
resist the alteration in the first condition.

Applied to the case before us, the principle becomes the following
special law. Ifa system be in such a state of chemical equilibrium
that any alteration of the temperature will cause a displacement of
the equilibrium, 7.¢. will originate a chemical process within the system,
then the displacement will always take place in such a direction that
the heat of reaction serves to counteract the effect of the change of
temperature. If we heat the system therefore, the reaction which
takes place will be accompanied by absorption of heat; if we cool the
system, the corresponding reaction will develop heat.

The simplest example of this principle is to be found in the case of
simple heterogeneous equilibrium, regulated, as we have already seen
(p. 251), by the formula

sep

eee
This equation was proved for the passage of liquids into vapour, 2.
for a case of heterogeneous equilibrium of the first order (p. 292), the
signification of the symbols being—dp change of pressure, dT change
of temperature, p heat of vaporisation, T absolute temperature of
transformation, u change of volume on vaporisation. It was then
shown that the equation had a wider significance. Indeed, the only
assumption made in deducing it was that the pressure should be inde-
pendent of the quantity of substance in one state (liquid), but dependent
on the quantity in the other (gas). This assumption is equally valid
for processes of dissociation such as we are considering, ¢.g. the trans-
formation of calcium carbonate into calcium oxide and carbon dioxide,
and consequently the formula is also applicable to them.

The sign of the quantity p is so chosen that heat absorbed on the
transformation shall be reckoned positive, and heat given out, negative.
In thermochemistry heats of reaction are reckoned in the opposite
way: heat given out is there positive. Attention must be paid to this
point of difference when the formula is being used. Heat is absorbed
in the decomposition of calcium carbonate, therefore we make p positive
in the above equation. From this it results that dp must have the
same sign as dT, z.¢. the dissociation-pressure increases with rise of
temperature.

No case in which a measurable dissociation is accompanied by develop-

ment of heat has as yet been thoroughly investigated. Numerous phenomena,
however, are known qualitatively which were formerly considered very

CHAP. IV APPLICATION OF THERMODYNAMICS 313

_enigmatical, but which are easily explained by our principle. There are
compounds stable under ordinary conditions which at higher temperatures
decompose into their elements with evolution of heat, while again at the very
highest temperatures they exhibit a surprising degree of stability—being then
even freely formed from their elements. Cyanogen and acetylene are
examples. Both gases are formed in quantity at the highest temperatures
we can produce—in the electric arc and in the blast-furnace ; while at a red
heat they cannot exist, but either fall into their elements or pass into more
stable compounds (eg. acetylene into benzene). These are substances for
which p is negative, and consequently for which dp and dT have different
signs, so that with rise of temperature the dissociation diminishes and the
stability becomes greater. .

These considerations are of great importance for the relative stability of
different substances and for the possibility of the existence of stable com-
pounds at high temperatures. We usually conceive the influence of
temperature on chemical compounds to be of such a character that the higher
the temperature rises the more unstable these become, until they at last fall
asunder into their elements. This is quite right for compounds which are
formed with evolution of heat, on whose dissociation therefore heat would be
absorbed : but just the opposite holds for substances formed with absorption
of heat. As has been explained, these become more stable the higher the
temperature rises. It is thus by no means indubitable that in the sun’s
atmosphere the elements are, as some think, all present in the free state
owing to the very high temperature ; on the contrary, it is quite possible
that various compounds exist there, of which we have as yet no knowledge
whatever,

The law has another application—to solutions, namely. It is well
known that some substances dissolve with evolution, others with
absorption of heat. If now we have a saturated solution at a definite
temperature, and heat it in presence of excess of the dissolved sub-
stance, then the equilibrium will suffer displacement so as to resist the
heating. If further solution is attended by absorption of heat, such
solution will occur ; if, on the other hand, further solution would con-
dition further heating, it will not take place, but there will rather be a
deposition of the dissolved substance, for such deposition occasions the
cooling demanded by the fundamental law.

Sodium sulphate is a good example of this. Glauber’s salt,
Na,SO,.10H,O, dissolves with considerable absorption of heat; its
solubility therefore increases with rise of temperature. On the other
hand, anhydrous sodium sulphate dissolves with evolution of heat, and
so its solubility-curve (known above 33°, cf. p. 151) sinks as the
temperature rises.

Attention should be paid to the fact that it is the sign of the heat of
solution in the almost saturated solution which determines the sense
of the change of solubility with temperature. Substances which dissolve to
a large extent in water usually have their heat of solution smaller the more

o14 OUTLINES OF GENERAL CHEMISTRY BOOK X

concentrated the solution becomes, and it is not impossible that such sub-
stances, having a small negative heat of solution in dilute solutions, may
acquire a positive heat in more concentrated solutions, so that only the sign
in almost saturated solutions is of use in the application of the above principle.

p

dp
The exposition just given on the basis of the equation Peele

qi ae

true in the first instance only for the narrow group of phenomena for
which the formula was developed, z.¢. the states of heterogeneous
equilibrium of the first order—between two substances only. We
might inquire if an extension of the equation is not possible which
would comprehend all states of equilibrium. Such an extension may
in fact be made, but not in an elementary way without great difficulty.
The reader must therefore rest content with an indication and
exposition of the results obtained (very simply) by means of higher
analysis.

In the first place, by assuming the validity of Boyle’s Law and
Gay-Lussac’s Law for vapours, we can put the equation into the form

Igp= — 3nt ©,

Saya

or lg —=—(— ——_},
roe 2 ie

C being a new constant.
Wher more than one substance with variable concentration is con-
cerned in the process, the first equation becomes
n Ne ne
G1 "Ge "4g 7--- mes viny 6
m m ng MI
Popo eps ee eae

Ig

Here p,, Py, Ps3,--- indicate the pressures exerted by the original,
i> 2, 4g,--- those by the resulting substances of variable concentra-
tion. ‘The exponents m,, My...) Ny, Ny... denote the number of
molecules of the substance in question taking part in the reaction.
The equation is true for processes into which solids enter, as well as for
those entirely confined to gases. In the same way it holds for both
gases and dilute solutions, and thus comprehends with tolerable
completeness all we know of chemical equilibrium. It must not
be forgotten that it was deduced on the assumption of the validity
of Boyle’s and Gay-Lussac’s Laws, and is consequently only applicable
within the limits between which these laws are a sufficient approxi-
mation.

For example, in the case of the dissociation BE phosphorus penta-
chloride, PCl, = PCl, + Cl,, the a assumes the following form—

die Gas
le b sit +0,

where q, is the pressure of the trichloride, q, of the chlorine, and p,

CHAP. IV | APPLICATION OF THERMODYNAMICS 315

of the undecomposed pentachloride. For the dissociation of iodine
vapour it is
2
feo FG
g p Daa )
q referring to the dissociated, p to the undissociated portion.

In a case investigated by Horstmann, viz. the chemical equilibrium between
_ hydrogen, carbon dioxide, carbon monoxide, and water-vapour, when mixtures
of hydrogen and carbon monoxide are exploded with insufficient quantities of
oxygen, the equation is

BS noes. es
Sp, 2T ce

P,P. referring to the one pair, hydrogen and carbon monoxide, q,q, to carbon
dioxide and water-vapour. In all cases it appears that with rising tempera-
ture the equilibrium suffers displacement in the direction of the reaction in
which heat is absorbed ; the dissociation of phosphorus pentachloride and of
iodine increases with increase of temperature ; and, in the same way, more
carbon dioxide is formed the higher the temperature rises, for the heat of
combustion of carbon monoxide is somewhat smaller than that of hydrogen.

The law too has its application to dilute aqueous solutions. Sodium
sulphate is partially decomposed by hydrochloric acid, heat being
thereby absorbed. Consequently the higher the temperature is, the
further does the decomposition of the sodium sulphate proceed. Van’t
Hoff, who was the first to make such applications of the law, found
the actual process to agree closely with the theory.

The preceding thermodynamical discussion was confined exclusively
to states of equilibrium ; and, in fact, it is only with such states that
the science at its present stage allows us to deal. We saw above
(p. 298), however, that these states are the result of two opposed
processes, which occasion no further change in the system when the
opposite velocities have become equal. But in the equations we have
been using it is always possible to replace the ratio of the active
masses (concentrations or pressures) by the inverse ratio of the
corresponding velocities, so that we obtain

Cae
re = opt C.
It is true that from this formula we can learn nothing of the separate
velocities c and ¢,, but still we can see how their ratio varies with the
temperature. If p=0, i. if the reaction takes place without thermal
effect, then c : c, does not alter, and so we conclude that the velocities
of the opposed actions alter in the same proportion for any given
change of temperature. If p has a finite value, the velocity of the
-reaction taking place with absorption of heat will increase more
rapidly with rise of temperature than that of the other, so that in

316 OUTLINES OF GENERAL CHEMISTRY BOOK X

accordance with our principle the equilibrium will be displaced in
favour of the first reaction.

As to the form of the equation representing the influence of temperature
on the velocity of reaction, we can only conclude that the factors of other
functions of T occurring in the equation must be equal, as they destroy each
other in the quotient. This too is quite plausible ; for the opposed reactions
take place under exactly the same conditions in one and the same system.

CHAPTER V

APPLICATION OF THE KINETIC MOLECULAR THEORY TO
CHEMICAL EQUILIBRIUM

In the preceding chapter attention was called to the possibility of
obtaining the formule for chemical equilibrium on the basis of the
molecular theory. The considerations here involved teach us little or
nothing new; but they at least give us, instead of a mere abstract
formulation of the results, a clear idea of how the equilibrium comes
about.

We already know how to conceive a chemical process in the light
of this theory. The atoms of the reacting substances come into close
contact with each other, and, it may be, part in quite a different way,
the atoms formerly separate remaining united, and wice versd. This
takes place excessively often, for even such apparently simple pro-
cesses as the formation of hydrochloric acid are cases of double
decomposition, as appears from the equation H, + Cl, = HCl + HCl.

Chemical processes in general require time for their completion.
Now, reasoning & priori, it is difficult to see, if the conditions exist for
some molecules reacting, why all the others should not at the same
time do likewise. If we mix acetic acid and alcohol at the ordinary
temperature, small quantities of acetic ether are formed after a few
seconds ; yet in order that as much of the ether can be produced as
is possible under the existing circumstances, years—strictly speaking,
an infinite time—must elapse.

The explanation of this apparent contradiction was given by
Pfaundler (1867), the fundamental idea having already been stated
for a limited number of cases by Williamson (1851) and Clausius
(1857). It lies in the recognition that the state of the molecules in a
homogeneous system at a constant temperature is by no means every-
where the same; but that some of the molecules regularly diverge
more or less widely from the average state. A process can thus begin
when only a few of the molecules are in the requisite state of motion
or vibration, and for the completion of the process it is necessary that

318 OUTLINES OF GENERAL CHEMISTRY BOOK X

all the molecules, in assuming all conceivable states between the
possible limits, should once enter into that state, or range of states,
in which they are capable of reacting in the required way. ‘To come
back to our former example—there are only relatively few molecules
of acetic acid and alcohol in a position to react so as to form acetic
ether and water; when the process between them is completed, a
further reaction can take place only when other molecules have
assumed the proper state.

It is manifest that the chemical process will proceed faster the
more molecules there are in the active state and the oftener they
meet; the latter circumstance depends again on the number of the
molecules in the space, and the velocity these possess. The conditions
become in general more favourable with rise of temperature; the
velocity of translation, and consequently the frequency of encounter
increases, while the coherence of the molecule is diminished in
consequence of the more frequent and more energetic collisions, so
that it becomes more capable of reacting.

On this basis we can evolve a theory of the action of mass which
yields the same formule as we found above. The following considera-
tions were published by Guldberg and Waage (1879), and present the
reason for the laws in the clear manner peculiar to the molecular
theory.

“Tf we consider a chemical process taking place under such circumstances
that two substances A and B are converted into two others A’ and B’, while
at the same time the reconversion of A’ and B’ into the original A and B
can also occur, then the mere assumption of attractive forces between the
substances or their components is no longer sufficient to explain the reactions,
but we must for this purpose take account of the motion of the atoms and
molecules.

“The equilibrium between two such chemical processes is a mobile
equilibrium, for two opposite reactions take place simultaneously—fresh
quantities of A’ and B’ being formed while A and B themselves are being
reproduced. When equal quantities of these pairs are formed in unit time,
equilibrium results. The chemical reaction for the conversion of A and
B into A’ and B’ is represented by the equation

A+B=A’'+B’.

“Tf the molecule A is composed of the atoms or molecules a and y, these
latter execute their own proper movements within the compound molecules.
Owing to these proper movements, a and y will now approach, now retire
from each other, and under certain circumstances their motions will become
of such extent as to decompose the molecule A into the two components a
and y. The same holds for B and 6, the components of the molecule B.
Now, as each of the compound molecules A and B is in motion as a whole, it
will from time to time come to pass that a molecule A will encounter a
molecule B, If this encounter of A and B happen under such circumstances
that either a and y as well as 6 and 6 are completely separated from each

CHAP. Vv APPLICATION OF THE KINETIC MOLECULAR THEORY 319

other, or at least that the distance between a and y on the one hand, and
between £6 and 6 on the other, has almost reached the boundary of the sphere
of action, then the chemical forces of attraction between ( and y, and
between a and 6 can do no other than condition the formation of two new
molecules A’ and B’, where A’=a+6 and B’/=$+y. In the same way an
encounter of two molecules A’ and B’ may cause the formation of A and B,
if the components a and 6, on the one hand, and f and y, on the other, are
either completely separated or so far removed from each other that the
attractive forces between a and y and between (6 and 6 are capable of
effecting the formation of new molecules A=a+y and B=(6 +46.

‘‘ When we are dealing with an addition instead of a double substitution
similar considerations are to. be employed. A compound molecule A BC
can, under certain conditions, fall into its components A, B, and C, while
simultaneously, by the encounters of the molecules A, B, and C, new
molecules of the formula ABC can be formed.

“The rate of formation of new substances may be determined in the
following way. If the number of molecules of A and B in unit volume be
denoted by p and q, the product pq will represent the frequency of the
encounters of these molecules. If now each motion of the various molecules
be equally favourable to the formation of new substances, the velocity of
the chemical reaction—in other words the quantity transformed in unit
time—may be made equal to #pq, the coefficient of velocity being supposed
dependent on the temperature.

“This view, already known from the theory of gaseous dissociation, may
now be extended as follows so as to become generally applicable to all
states of aggregation.

“ Amongst the p molecules of A in unit volume, there will be in general
only a certain fraction of them, a, in such a condition that on encounter with
the molecules of B a chemical exchange will take place. Similarly, amongst
the q molecules of B contained in unit volume, there will only be a fraction
b in the state requisite for chemical exchange with the molecules of A.
Thus on the whole there are in unit volume ap molecules of A and bq
molecules of B, which on meeting will be transformed into new substances.
Consequently the frequency of encounter of the active molecules will be
represented by the product ap.bq, and the rate at which the formation of
new substances will proceed is to be expressed thus

ap . bg = Kpq,
if for brevity we put ¢ ab=k.

“A still further extension is possible, so that all reactions may be in-
cluded, irrespective of the number of substances taking part in them, If,
for example, the formation of new compounds is rendered possible only by
the encounter of three different substances A, B, and C; and if the number
of molecules of these in unit volume be respectively, p, q, and r; a, b,and ¢,
lastly, being the coefficients peculiar to the substances—then we get as the
expression for the velocity

} ap bq-scn = pqr,

k again representing the product of the coefficients.
“The rate of formation of an addition compound «A -+ 6B+yC, com-

320 OUTLINES OF GENERAL CHEMISTRY BOOK X

posed of a molecules of A, B of B, and y of C, will be expressed by
@.ap.apyi.. basbq s... Ghscr. 2 = Op) (bo eer) ep

where k denotes the product of the coefficients.

“ Both the coefficient of velocity and the coefficients a, b, c, characteristic
of the substances, must be supposed to be dependent on the temperature.
The nature of this dependence can be ascertained only by experiment.

“Tf the velocity of formation of the new substances is in this way
determined, we need only in order to obtain the condition for equilibrium
equate the velocities of the two opposed reactions. |

“Tf we wish to determine the absolute velocity of the chemical process,
we can easily see that this must be equal to the difference of the opposite
velocities of reaction.”

On this basis we can without further assumptions develop all cases of
homogeneous equilibrium, inclusive of dissociation, as Guldberg and Waage
show in the course of their paper. As, however, the separate applications
have already been discussed in detail in the previous chapters, they need not
be here deduced anew.

One difficulty of a peculiar nature has stood in the way of the
application of the kinetic hypothesis to heterogeneous equilibrium.
It appears, namely, at the first glance—and this conclusion has often
been openly expressed—as if the equilibrium cannot be independent
of the quantity of the solid substance present, although this is actually
the case. Take, for instance, the dissociation of calcium carbonate.
A state of equilibrium will be assumed when from the surface of the
calcium carbonate as many particles of carbon dioxide are given off
as are taken up in the same time by the surface of calcium oxide.
From this it seems directly to follow that the equilibrium depends
onthe ratio of the surfaces of the carbonate and the oxide, which is
contrary to experience.

This apparent contradiction caused Horstmann to declare the
kinetic hypothesis, interpreted as above by Pfaundler, to be incorrect ;
Pfaundler on his side indicated that the experimental result could be
deduced from the kinetic theory, but nowhere to the author’s know-
ledge has he published this deduction.

Now, & priori it must appear probable that the kinetic theory,
which in its consequences has been so often found in harmony with
experience, can scarcely fail in this case to be so again if only it be
properly applied. In the author’s opinion the want of agreement is
caused by the consideration of the matter not having been sufficiently
thoroughgoing. |

Let us in the first place consider a case of heterogeneous equilibrium
in which a solid or liquid passes completely into a gas, or a solid
completely into a liquid. As a concrete example we may take the
equilibrium between paracyanogen and cyanogen, or between a salt
and its saturated solution. Let us keep in view a small portion of the

CHAP. V APPLICATION OF THE KINETIC MOLECULAR THEORY 32]

surface of the solid and the quantity of the gas or liquid in its
immediate neighbourhood ; there will be equilibrium between these
when the same number of molecules enter and leave the bounding
surface. This evidently also holds good for every part of the surface
of the solid (and consequently for the whole surface), each being
considered along with the neighbouring portion of the gas or liquid.

The interior of the solid has no influence on the equilibrium, for
as the solid passes into the other state of aggregation without residue,
no alteration of the surface can be brought about by the dissociation,
and so it is all one whether new portions of the solid come to the
surface or not.

It is further required that the layer of gas or liquid next to the one
in contact with the solid should be in equilibrium with this latter
layer ; which is obviously the case when the concentration of the gas
or the solution is the same in the two. So long as this is not attained,
the separated molecules migrate to the more distant parts of the
space in virtue of difference of pressure or by diffusion, until finally
the whole volume, irrespective of its size, is uniformly filled by the
gas or by the dissolved substance. In this way we arrive at the
result, agreeing with experience, that the equilibrium is conditioned
only by the density of the gas or the concentration of the solution—
in a word, by the active mass. Since, with rise of temperature, the
molecules, in consequence of their brisker motion, are more easily
broken off and more difficult to retain, the decomposition must increase
with increase of temperature.

Considerations of a similar nature lead us also to the compre-
hension of the equilibrium between several solids and one or more
gases, under which head fall the decomposition of calcium carbonate,
the dehydration of hydrated salts, ete. At first sight the conclusion
that the relative quantities of the solids are of influence on the
equilibrium seems inevitable, but a somewhat deeper analysis shows
that this case is precisely similar to that just considered.

Let us imagine a piece of calcium carbonate enclosed in a close-fitting
air-tight shell at a temperature at which certain molecules of carbon dioxide,
whose kinetic energy exceeds the average by a certain amount, could just
break loose from the solid. They do not do so, however, for there is no
space into which they can go. We have such a case when the carbonate is
placed over liquid metal in a tube closed at the upper end.

Let us pump a portion of the metal out, so that a vacuum is produced.
Immediately molecules of carbonic acid fly off from the carbonate, whose
surface then becomes covered with a molecular layer of oxide. But this
layer is not in stable equilibrium either with the neighbouring gas or with
the layer of carbonate immediately under it. For the superficial layer of
the solid being in general very small compared to the free space above it,
only relatively few molecules of carbon dioxide will at first leave the extreme
surface, and as a portion of them fly back, some will be retained; thus

vi

322 OUTLINES OF GENERAL CHEMISTRY BOOK X

there will result a temporary state of equilibrium lying far beneath the
stationary equilibrium of dissociation.

This state will now be disturbed by the layer of carbonate lying
immediately under that of the oxide. In this layer also there is a definite
proportion of the molecules above the temperature for decomposition, and
molecules of carbon dioxide continually separate, to enter the superposed
layer of calcium oxide, and there in the first instance to be held fast. Soon,
however, the new superficial molecules of carbonate begin to dissociate ;
fresh molecules of carbon dioxide enter the gas, and a new transitory
equilibrium is established—a state coming nearer the stationary equilibrium
than the first did.

The same series of processes is repeated with the deeper layers of the
carbonate, and now we have to ask when and how a stationary state will be
reached. Between the undecomposed carbonate and the gas there is formed
by the processes described a layer of partially decomposed carbonate, and
equilibrium will be attained when at the two limiting sur-
faces of this intermediate layer, the ratio of the carbonic acid
molecules entering and leaving shall have assumed the same
constant value. This ratio is given by the ratio of the number of
molecules of carbonate above the temperature of decomposition to the
number below the temperature of decomposition. The state of the inter-
mediate layer is regulated by this ratio, and as the same condition holds
for every part of the gas—that through any surface equal numbers of
molecules pass in and out in a given time—it follows that the inter-
mediate layer behaves as a portion of the space occupied by the
gas. Thus we have reduced this case to the former, in which the solid
passed completely into gas; and the considerations given there, from which
we concluded that the stationary state is independent of the size of the free
space and also of the relative quantity of the solid, are equally applicable
to the process under discussion. .

It should be particularly remarked that the compact masses in the interior
of a calespar crystal, although they could decompose, do not in fact do so, on
account of there being no space into which the molecules of carbonic acid can
move. The phenomena of dissociation take place exclusively at the hmiting
surfaces of the intermediate layer. As this must be thicker the smaller the
surface of the solid is in comparison to the free space, and as the movement
of the dissociated gas-molecules through it must be comparatively slow, it
follows that equilibrium will take the longer to be reached, the less surface
the solid presents. Experience abundantly confirms this,

How these considerations may be applied to other similar cases need not
be specially shown. The essential thing to be remembered is the part played
by the surface separating the different aggregates in contact with one
another,

BOO KT

CHEMICAL AFFINITY

CHARTER: I
EXPERIMENTAL METHODS

IN dynamics the magnitude of a force is defined and measured by the
change of velocity it imparts to a definite mass in a definite time. A
second mode of measuring forces consists in the establishment of equili-
brium between the given force and one oppositely directed of known
or ascertainable magnitude; this is really a special case of the first
general mode, the change of velocity consequent on the application of
the given force being reduced to nil by an equal and opposite force.
The second method, although thus derivative, possesses all those
essential advantages over the general one which are peculiar to such
zero-methods, and is therefore far more frequently employed.

The measurement of the intensity of chemical forces can likewise
be undertaken according to two methods, quite analogous to those of
general dynamics. The more usual, for experimental reasons, is the
static method, in which a chemical process is limited in definite
proportions by a process oppositely directed, 7.¢. one that reproduces
the original substances from the products of the direct process.
Parallel to the kinetic method, we have that which obtains a measure
of the active forces from the velocity of a chemical process. The two
chemical methods are connected with each other in the same way as
the two dynamical methods ; for, as has been already fully explained
(p. 298), we may look upon the equilibrium of chemical processes as
resulting from the mutual cancelling of two numerically equal but
oppositely directed chemical processes.

The experimental proof of this intimate connection required by the

theory between the velocities of opposite reactions and the quantitative
relations of mass for which chemical equilibrium appears, can only in the

oo OUTLINES OF GENERAL CHEMISTRY ©) “BOOK XT

first instance be given for processes in which both can be measured. The
formation of the esters from acids and alcohols and their decomposition by
water, seems to be the most suitable for this purpose, and although it did not
occur to Berthelot and Péan de St. Gilles to make such an application of ~
their experiments, there are amongst these several that apparently might be
utilised. Nevertheless, the possibility of an exact comparison is excluded on
account of equivalent quantities of ester and water not forming a homo-
geneous mixture. The active masses are thereby altered, and from the
experiments we can only learn that, corresponding to expectation, the
formation of ester from acid and alcohol proceeds much more rapidly than
its decomposition by the action of water. It has been recently shown, how-
ever, in another way to be discussed later, that the connection in question
actually does exist.

From the measurement of the velocities of chemical reactions we
are enabled to solve the old problem of measuring the intensity of
chemical forces. If two analogous substances (eg. two acids)
occasion under the same conditions analogous processes with different
velocities, we shall attribute greater intensity of the chemical forces to
the substance generating the greater velocity. And similarly of two
acids competing for the same base, we shall call that the stronger
which after equilibrium is established has neutralised the larger
quantity of the base.

I should lke to call attention at this point to a possible error, which has
indeed on occasion been committed. The words velocity and force in their
application to chemical processes have not their ordinary dynamical significa-
tion, but are employed in a merely figurative sense. Chemical velocity
is not the ratio of a space passed over to the corresponding time occupied,
but the ratio of a quantity of substance transformed to the time required for
the transformation ; in other words, ordinary velocity is rate of motion,
chemical velocity is rate of material transformation. Similarly, chemical
force is not the cause of motion, but of chemical transformation. We can
therefore by no means directly apply dynamical theorems concerning ordinary
forces and velocities to chemical phenomena. It is true, as has just been
shown, that certain similarities do exist, but along with them exist also
important differences.

The chief example of such differences is that a single impulsive
action of force does not produce, as in dynamics, a permanent (uniform)
motion. A chemical process only lasts as long as the chemical force is
in action, being at each instant proportional to it. If we want a
dynamical analogy therefore, we must seek it in the motion of a body
in a fluid of great viscosity.

According to the general relations just explained, the methods for
the determination of the constants of chemical processes fall into two
groups,—the kinetic or velocity-methods, and the static or equilibrium-
methods. We shall begin with the last, as they are older in their

CHAP. I EXPERIMENTAL METHODS a20

application, and, containing one variable less (time), are to a certain
extent simpler than the first.

To ascertain the proportions of the active masses in a case of
chemical equilibrium we proceed in two ways, which may be designated
shortly, but not very aptly, by the terms chemical and physical.
The methods are mostly employed separately, but sometimes together.
The chemical method is applied to heterogeneous equilibrium. A
separation of the different portions and a chemical analysis of the
separated substances is here possible, the analysis usually giving
directly the numbers required. Several examples of this have already
been given in the discussion of heterogeneous equilibrium (p. 299).

The physical methods are chiefly employed in cases of homogeneous
equilibrium, where a mechanical separation of the components is not
practicable, and chemical analysis gives us no information as to the
magnitudes sought. They rest on the principle that conclusions as to
chemical processes or states. of distribution may be drawn from the
measurement of accompanying physical processes, or of physical
properties depending on the chemical distribution. The theory of
these methods was first given by Steinheil (1843), and later (in 1848)
R. Hofmann, at Kirchhoff’s instigation, developed it in a similar way.

In general, every physical property which is retained unaltered by
the elements of a compound, whether separate or united, and for the
measurement of which, instruments of sufficient accuracy to keep the
errors of observation within proper limits can be constructed, may be
used as a means of quantitative analysis.

The physical methods in the principal case of aqueous solutions ~
take the following form. Let any property that can be represented
as a sum of separate terms, of which each is proportional to the
quantity of one of the substances present, have the value A for a
mixture of the reacting substances. If the quantities of these be
Pp, q, p, and q’—to use the same letters as before,—and if a, 8, a’, and
f be the coefficients of proportionality of the corresponding substances
with respect to the property in question, we have the equation

A=ap+ Bqta'p + Bq’.
Now let a reaction take place, the quantity € of p and q disappearing,

and the same quantity of p’ and q’ being produced. ‘The property
will then assume a new value A’, corresponding to the formula

A’=a(p — £) + B(q - £) + a(p'+ €) + B(q' + €),

z A- A’

at B-(a t+’)

In this way the distribution of the substances in the solution can be
determined, if the four coefficients a, 8, a’, B’ and the total value of

the property before and after the reaction are known,
The method unfortunately loses its applicability to a case con-

whence E

326 OUTLINES OF GENERAL CHEMISTRY BOOK XI

stantly occurring. This case is characterised by the relation between
the coefficients 4 + B=a' + B’ ora+B-—a —f'=0. Then the denom-

inator of the fraction = is equal to zero, and as

| a+ B—(a +B)
A-A’=&(a+B-a' — f’), we have also A—A’=0, so that the ex-

pression for € takes the indeterminate form The property A

retains its value for all values of €, so that € cannot be determined.

This critical case almost always appears when M, N, M,, N’ are all
analogous binary substances, such as neutral salts or esters. For
many properties of such substances the horizontal and vertical dif-
ferences are constant in the table we have often used—

f (a + b) f (a +b’) f (a +b”)
f(a ub)? at (a tb) sed (age)
f(a’+b) f(a’ +b)  f£4a" +b")

Here aa... bb’... are the components, and 1 (a+ a ere
presents the properties of the compounds in question. We have,
for example, f (a+b)—f(a+b’)=f (a +b)-f(a’+b’). As the sub-
stances, M and N can transform themselves into M’ and N’, the
coefficients have the following values :—a=f(a+b), B=f (a’ +b’),
a =f(a+b’), BP’ =f(a' +b). The relation just established gives there-
fore a—a =f — B, or a+ B—a’ — B’=0, which is the critical case.

We do not even need this algebraical proof to see the inapplica-
bility of the method under the given conditions. The whole signifi-
cance of the law of constant differences in properties is contained in
the fact of these properties depending only on the nature of the
components and not on their distribution. If therefore the distribution
is of no influence on the property, it is evident that from measure-
ments of the property no conclusions whatever can be drawn as to the
distribution.

Gladstone was the first to apply physical methods in a systematic manner
to the solution of problems of affinity. From his researches we can at once
see the multiplicity of forms that can be assumed by the physical methods
according to circumstances. Besides change of colour, which he employed by
preference, he turned to account fluorescence, circular polarisation, and the
phenomena of diffusion for the same purpose. The quantitative development
of the method, however, was only partially carried out by him, for, since he
had no theory of the phenomena he was investigating, no great interest was
attached to them.

An example of the physical method in a fully developed form is
first found in Julius Thomsen’s calorimetric researches (1869), which
yielded all necessary information as to the distribution of substances
in a homogeneous liquid.

CHAP. I EXPERIMENTAL METHODS O27

The coefficients a, 8, a’, 2’, are here simply quantities of energy.
If we deal, for example, with the action between sodium fluoride and
hydrogen chloride, hydrogen fluoride and sodium chloride being
formed, we have

a the energy of 1 equivalent of sodium fluoride,

» i ss hydrochloric acid,
"3 ees sodium chloride,
(SAE ES Bs: 3) i hydrofluoric acid. »

In the equation

A- A’
—a+B-(a +P’)
A. denotes the energy of the initial state, A’ the energy of the state of
equilibrium ; A — A’ is consequently the thermal effect of the action
of hydrochloric acid on sodium fluoride. The denominator is the
difference of energy between sodium fluoride plus hydrochloric acid,
and sodium chloride plus hydrofluoric acid, 7.e. the thermal effect of
the total transformation of the two first substances into the two last.
To ascertain this, it is necessary to split up sodium fluoride into soda
and hydrofluoric acid, and then neutralise the former with hydrochloric
acid ; the magnitude in question is therefore merely the difference of
the heats of neutralisation of the two acids.

Now the heat of neutralisation of hydrofluoric acid is 162°7 K,
and of hydrochloric acid 137-4 K; the difference is 25°3 K, so we
have a + B-—(a’ + B’)= — 25°3 K. On the other hand, when 1 eq. of
hydrochloric acid acts on 1 eq. of sodium fluoride there is observed a
heat-absorption of — 23°6 K. Substituting these values, we obtain

Tran

In this process therefore °933 of the equivalent or 93°3 per cent of the
hydrofluoric acid is liberated by the hydrochloric acid.

We have, in arriving at this result, made the tacit assumption that
no other alteration of energy takes place beyond that occasioned by
the double decomposition. Now this supposition is not always
correct ; the substances present often act in quite another direction
also, so that corresponding corrections must be applied. ‘This is done
by determining the thermal value of the secondary reactions from
special experiments and deducting it from the difference A— A’. The
formula is then

eo Sa
Sane: (a + B’)
‘In many cases there is encountered the difficulty that q itself is a
function of the value € to be determined. It is then simplest to
calculate the values A’ and q for some arbitrary values of &€, which

328 OUTLINES OF GENERAL CHEMISTRY BOOK Xl

are so to be chosen that the real value of € falls amongst them, and
so can be calculated with sufficient accuracy by interpolation.

The determination of the heat of neutralisation is rendered more difficult
if the bases to be investigated are insoluble. Since, however, the heats of
neutralisation themselves are not required to determine the ratios of dis-
tribution, but only their differences, we can avoid the direct determination
by using the following theorem.

The difference between the heats of neutralisation of two
acids A, and A, with the same base B, is equal to the difference
between the thermal effects of the action of A, on the salt A,B
and of A, on the salt A,B.

The theorem may be easily proved by means of the corresponding
energy-equations. Let there be produced when A, acts on A,B the quantity
€& of A, and the same amount of A,B; the corresponding thermal effect Q,
has the value given by the equation

A, +A,B=(1—€A,+(1—€)A.B+ EA, PEA Ba QT

In the reverse action the same final state is reached, for the same com-
ponents are present in the same proportions: the energy-equation is
therefore |
A,+A,B=€A, + €A,B+ (1 — €)A, + (1 — €) A,B + Qo.
Subtracting, we get
A, +A,B-A,—A,B=Q,— Q..
Again, the heats of neutralisation W, and W, are given by the equations
A, +B=A,B+W,
A,+B=A,B+ W,.
Subtraction gives
A, -A,- A, BEA B= W.-W,
and by comparison with the above difference,

Q, -— Q,= W,— Wa,
which was to be shown.

The formula holds good whether there are secondary reactions or not, for
these influence the right sides of the equation containing Q, and Q, in
exactly the same way, so that they disappear on subtraction.

Thomsen has proved from special experiments on soluble bases that
the differences determined directly are identical with those determined
indirectly. This result justifies the assumption made above that the same
final state is reached in the two opposite reactions.

A process in applicability equal to the calorimetric method, but
much easier and more convenient in the performance, is the volu-
metric method based on the determination of the specific volume.
The utilisation of the specific gravity for the quantitative estimation of
dissolved substances reaches back to antiquity, and to-day occupies an
important place both in the arts and in science. It is therefore sur-
prising that the application of this method to the determination of

CHAP, I EXPERIMENTAL METHODS 029

the distribution of substances in homogeneous solutions was so long
delayed. The first experiments were made by Tissier in 1859.

Ostwald afterwards (1878) made numerous measurements by this
method on the distribution of different bases between pairs of acids
acting simultaneously. We shall content ourselves here with a general
description of the method ; the results obtained will be given later.

If d is the specific gravity of a liquid, then . is its specific volume,
i.é. the volume occupied by unit weight. Multiplying this by the
weight of the solution containing one gram-molecule of the substance
considered, we obtain the molecular volume of the solution. If we
bring together different solutions that can act chemically on each
other, and so let the process take place, the molecular volume of the
mixed solution is seen to be different from the sum of the volumes of
the components.

The alteration of the molecular volume on neutralisation is pro-
portionally much greater and much more varied than is the case with
the corresponding heats of neutralisation, so that the critical case, in
which the method gives no result, occurs much less frequently than
with the calorimetric method. The underlying principle, however, is
in no way different, and the formula

uf A — A’

Oa SaGee (CCmme

still holds good, the separate letters having merely a correspondingly
altered signification. ~’—a and B-a’ are no longer the heats of
neutralisation, but the changes of volume on neutralisation, while
A —A‘is the change of volume occasioned by the action of the one
acid on the neutral salt of the other. If secondary actions take place,
we get the corrected formula

Sai Niet: ea!
Ga (a +p)’
q being the change of volume consequent on the secondary reactions.
The actual carrying out of the experiments can easily be brought
to a high degree of accuracy by the use of the Sprengel pyknometer.
The procedure is the same as in ordinary determinations of density ;
the temperature must be carefully kept constant, and if the pykno-
meter be capable of containing 20-30 g., the error is only a few units
in the fifth decimal place. The solutions, of course, must be of
accurately determined strengths. Ostwald prepared them in such a
manner, that one gram-equivalent of each acid or base was contained
in a kilogram of the solution, whereby the conversion of the specific
volume into the molecular volume was rendered very simple. Of
course we can also prepare solutions corresponding to a given formula,
as Thomsen does in his calorimetric experiments.

g

330 OUTLINES OF GENERAL CHEMISTRY BOOK XI

To take an example—the specific volume of a potash solution, con-
taining KOH=56°1 g. in a kilogram, was found equal to ‘950668 ; that
of a corresponding nitric acid solution equal to ‘966623; the molecular
volumes are 950°668, and 966623 c.cm. After mixture of equal weights
of the two solutions, the specific volume of the potassium nitrate solution
obtained was -968669 ; the molecular volume (there being now 2000 g. of
solution) is therefore 19387°338 c. cm., while the sum of the molecular
volumes of acid and base is only 1917°291. Consequently on neutralisation
there is an expansion of 20-047 c. cm.

For the case of insoluble bases we have a theorem exactly the same
as the corresponding thermochemical principle, if we substitute in the
latter “change of volume” for “thermal effect.” The proof too is the
same, for volumes may be added and subtracted just as quantities of
energy. As fewer experiments are necessary here than in the direct
determination of change of volume on neutralisation, we have reason
to prefer this method in all cases,

The same difference, finally, can be ascertained in still another way, one
which has no analogue in thermochemistry, on account of our inability to
determine the absolute values of quantities of energy. The theorem is
this—

If we subtract the molecular volumes of the two acids from
the molecular volumes of the two salts, the difference of the
remainders is equal to the difference of the changes of volume
on neutralisation.

Let us denote the volumes of the salt-solutions by (A,B) and (A,B), those
of the acids by (A,) and (A,), and the unknown volume of the (actually or
hypothetically) dissolved base by (B); then

(A,B) =(A,) +(B)+ Wy,
(A,B) = (A,) + (B)+ Wo,

where W, and W, are the changes of volume on neutralisation, the volume
of the salt-solution being evidently equal to the sum of the volumes of the
acid and base plus the change of volume on neutralisation.* Subtracting,
we get

(A,B) — A, — {(A,B) — A,} =W, - Wo,

which proves the theorem.

Practically this principle is of little use, for we must in addition deter-
mine the volume of the mixed solution containing both acids, and thus save
nothing. On the other hand, the relation is so far of importance that it
allows us to judge if the composition of the solutions is accurate; for
otherwise the differences determined by the two methods will not agree.

To obtain an example of the application of these two principles, we shall
consider the measurements on the relative affinity of nitric and sulphuric
acids for cupric oxide. The following molecular volumes were found—

* It is assumed that exactly as much water is contained in the solution of the
salt as in the solutions of the acid and base together.

CHAP. I EXPERIMENTAL METHODS ao

1. Cu(NO,), 3847 °4
22 CuSO, 3840°3
3. (HNO,), 1933°2
4, H,SO, 1936°8
5. Cu(NO3),,H,80, 5780°8
6. CuSO,,(HNO,), 5781°3

From the equality of 5. and 6. it appears, firstly, that the solutions were of
the proper composition ; and secondly, that the final distribution is the same,
independent of the original arrangement. For the values of Q, and Q, we
must subtract 6. from the sum 2.4+ 3. and 5. from 1.+4., and consequently
obtain Q, =7°8, and Q, = — 3°4 ; the difference is Q, —Q,=11°2. According
to the second theorem this ought to be the same as (1. — 3.) —(2.—4.): we
find for this 10°7—a sufficient approximation.

As secondary reactions we have that of sulphuric acid on the sulphate,
which is considerable, and that of nitric acid on the nitrate, which is very
small; their sum is 1'°2.* We therefore have

7°8— 1:2 .
spies tio 2?
2. nitric acid decomposes copper sulphate so that 59 per cent of the sulphuric
acid is liberated, 41 per cent of the nitric acid remaining free.

The volumetric method can easily be extended to higher and lower
temperatures, an extension attended by considerable difficulty in the case
of the calorimetric method. We have only to determine the expansion
by heat of the liquids whose volumes are to be compared, in order to
acquire the material necessary for calculating the distribution of the
base between the acids for every other temperature. For details of
such expansion experiments the original memoirs must be consulted.
It should only be mentioned that it is convenient to refer the observa-
tions to a few definite temperatures, either by maintaining these
constant with the help of a thermostat, or by making observations in
their immediate neighbourhood, both above and below, and then
interpolating for the temperatures required. By this mode of pro-—
ceeding we save the laborious calculation of interpolation-formule,
which, quite apart from the waste of time involved, always diminish
the accuracy of the results. Ostwald (1877) has given an example of
this process, the special results of which will be discussed at another
place. The accuracy of these experiments is the same as that of
density determinations with a Sprengel pyknometer, the error being a
few units in the fifth decimal place.

We learned in Part I. that the specific refractive power 7

(where n is the index of refraction and d the density) is almost entirely
dependent on the chemical nature of a substance, and not on the
arrangement of its components. Now, as it has just been shown that

* The separate numbers for the secondary reactions and the details of the approxi-
mate calculation are omitted, in order to save space. —

332 OUTLINES OF GENERAL CHEMISTRY BOOK XI

the density of solutions can be applied to determine the distribution
within them, it follows that the refractive index minus 1, which is
proportional to the density, must be equally applicable.

This method of physical analysis was actually employed by
Steinheil, and can be very well applied to the distribution of a base
between two acids, the results obtained showing, as was to be expected,
exactly similar relations to those observed with change of volume.

With regard to the mode of measurement, such determinations
may be made with great accuracy by the use of the spectrometer ; the
chief difficulty is to maintain a constant temperature. The calculation
of the experiments may be performed so that the observed refractive
indices minus that of water are considered variable ; on neutralisa-
tion, for example, the sum of these differences for the acid and base is
compared to double the difference for the resulting salt-solution. It
is simpler, however, to perform the calculation with the refractive
indices themselves, the result being the same. It is true that so long
as we consider the refractive index to be the ratio of two sines such a
calculation is meaningless; but if we consider it as the numerical
value of the time required by light to pass through a given distance
in the liquid under investigation, the corresponding time for a vacuum
(or normal air) being 1, then the addition of the indices has a reason-
able meaning; for we compare the time the light requires to pass
through the solutions of the acid and base in succession, with the
time occupied when the acid and base are no longer separate but
chemically united.

This view, based on the passage of light through equal spaces,
requires that equivalent quantities of the different substances shall be
present in equal volumes of the solutions, which must therefore be
prepared as in chemical volumetric analysis. With solutions containing
equivalents in equal weights it would be better to use the reciprocals
of the refractive indices.

As an example we may take the neutralisation of potash with nitric
acid. The refractive index of normal potash solution is 1:34357, of normal
nitric acid 1:°34076. On mixing them in equal volumes, we obtain a
potassium nitrate solution whose refractive index is 1:°33768. Thus we
have—

Potash = 1:°34357
Nitric acid = 1:34076
92'°68433

Potassium nitrate, 1:°33768 x 2 = 2°67536
Difference = ‘00897

The number ‘00897 is quite as characteristic of the combination of nitric
acid with potash as the heat of neutralisation or the change of volume, and
if different values are found for two acids, the distribution of a base between
them may be ascertained just as before, the formule remaining exactly the
same.

CHAP. I EXPERIMENTAL METHODS 333

The optical method has the advantage over the volumetric method that it
can be used with very small quantities of substance ; a few cubic centimetres
are enough for a determination. On the other hand, it is less exact, for
although the refractive indices themselves can be determined with extreme
accuracy, yet their variations, with which alone we have to deal, are so
small that the error of experiment with a spectrometer accurate to+ 5” is
still some five times greater than the error of the volumetric method.

Another means of utilising light for physical analysis is offered by
photometry. The method is founded on the principle that the
amount of light absorbed from a ray passing through any medium is a
function of the thickness, or also of the density, of the latter. Imagine
a quantity of light 1, sent into the medium, then, according to the laws
of photometry, a definite fraction « is absorbed by a very thin layer.
The remainder loses in the next equal layer the same fraction of its
amount, and so on. We have consequently the following series :—

Layer. Absorbed. Transmitted.

O—1 alo (1 = a)Io

1—2 (1-a)al (1 —a)Ip-— (1 -a)alp=(1 - a)? Ip
2—3 (1 = a)alo (1 = a)*Io = (1 = é)\7al,= (1 a a)? To
3—4 (1 -a)?aly (1 —a)*Io — (1 —a)Paly =(1 —@)*To

etc.
The light, I, transmitted through n layers is thus (1—a)"I). Let

us assume the sum of the n layers to be equal to unit length (1 cm.),
then ec asl,
logI, = logI, — a,

where log (1 — a)" has been made equal to — a.*
The intensity I, of the light which has passed through 2n layers
(2 cm.) is according to the formula
I,= (1-4/1,

logl— log!) — 2a,
and in general for the intensity of the light transmitted through a
layer of m centimetres we have

logI,, = logI, — ma,
Caan. i= *(logl, — logI,,).
Thus, if we know the coefficient of absorption, a, we can determine

the thickness, m.

This result seems at first sight very useless, as we can measure the
thickness much more conveniently otherwise. But we have already
said that it is possible to determine the density or concentration in
the same way as the thickness. It has been proved by experiment

* 1-a being always less than unity, the logarithm of (1—a)" must always be
negative.

334 OUTLINES OF GENERAL CHEMISTRY BOOK XI

that a layer 10 cm. thick of a 1 per cent solution of an absorbent sub-
stance produces the same amount of absorption as a 5 em. layer of a
2 per cent solution, a 2 cm. layer of a 5 per cent solution, etc. If we
therefore investigate layers 1 cm. thick, but containing different

1 ;
amounts of substance, the expression m = qhloslo — logI,,) is proportional

to the concentration, so that the equation affords us the means of cal-
culating the concentration from the intensities of the incident and
transmitted light.

The measurement of the intensity is made by means of a photo-
meter, which must enable us to investigate light of one wave-length,
as the above considerations apply only to homogeneous light.

Vierordt’s apparatus is an ordinary spectroscope of somewhat large
calibre, with the slit of the collimator so far altered that the movable
edge is divided into two, each half having independent motion from a
micrometer screw. The spectrum is thus split up into two contiguous
and parallel portions, whose intensities can be independently varied at —
will. If there is brought before one-half of the slit an absorbent
substance, e.g. a plate of coloured glass, the absorption spectrum will
appear above or below the unchanged spectrum. If we now, by means
of two slides in the ocular part of the telescope, obscure the spectrum
all but a definite band, we can by widening or narrowing one-half of
the slit make the intensities above and below equal. ‘The intensities
of the incident and transmitted light are then inversely as the breadth
of the slits.

When the half-slit is widened from one side only, as is usual in
spectroscopes, the tint of the spectral field is altered, and the com-
parison of the intensities of the two portions thus rendered difficult.
Kriiss has sought to do away with this by widening the slit symmetric-
ally on both sides; while Glan and Hiifner prefer to reduce the
intensity by a polarising arrangement instead of by altering the slit.
Vierordt himself obviated this difficulty by using smoked glass
to attain approximate equality, afterwards to be made complete by
small adjustments of the breadth of the slit.

The measurement of the rotation of the plane of polarisation was
first applied by Gladstone to problems of chemical equilibrium.
Quantitative determinations leading to very exact results were made
by Jellett on the union of acids with alkaloids. The process rests on
the same foundation as the other physical methods. The natural
alkaloids are almost all optically active, and to different degrees when
in their salts than when free. Let a and a’ be the rotation for two
free alkaloids, 8 and £ that of their salts with the same acid; we
have again the equation ele

+ ae REGO EOR

It need scarcely be mentioned that the angle of rotation refers to

CHAP. I EXPERIMENTAL METHODS 335

equivalent quantities, 2.e. to columns of the solutions of such length as
to contain quantities of the substances proportional to their formule.

In contrast to the heat of neutralisation, and to the changes of volume
and of the index of refraction, the direct or indirect application of all which
is very general, the photometric method and that based on the rotation of the
plane of polarisation are only applicable to a limited number of substances.
Still more limited in its use—being practically available for one base only—
is the magnetic method, studied almost exclusively by Gustav Wiedemann. ©

Colloidal ferric oxide, prepared by dialysis of a salt of,iron, or by solution
of the hydrate in a ferric salt (when of course it is mixed with the latter), is
not so strongly magnetic as it is when combined with an acid. If the
magnetism of the latter is made equal to 100, then the colloidal oxide has
according to the earlier measurements a magnetic power of 22. Later
experiments give 16°8 and 15°7, Wiedemann adopting 16:0 as the correct
number,

If now for any iron solution the value of the magnetism is found to be m
for unit weight, that of fully combined oxide being 100, then

m=100(1 —x)+16 x,
where x is the quantity of colloidal oxide. Transforming, we have
100:— m
eee).
so that by determining the magnetism of unit weight we can learn the pro-
portion of ferric oxide free in the solution.

This portion vanishes when a great excess of acid is present. If, on the
other hand, the acid and the oxide are in approximately equivalent propor-
tions, then, through the chemical action of the water, a part of the acid is split
off, which increases with the amount of water present. Thus in different
solutions of ferric chloride containing the quantities of iron in 10 ¢. cm.
denoted by f, the following proportions, x, of colloidal oxide were found :—

x

ing i
f xe i x
1°606 014 1°491 032
207 "012 ELT9 043
"806 "025 747 "056
“404 032 375 083
"2.02 036 184 097
r156 "092 "129 oo fs
‘071 SIL "062 141

The solutions of table I. contained :7 per cent, of table II. 3:1 per cent too
little chlorine for the formula FeCl,. Thus in II. the decomposition goes
somewhat further.

If alcohol be used as diluent instead of water, no decomposition occurs,
even on great dilution, so that we have evidently here to deal with a pro-
nounced action of mass on the part of the water.

Ferric nitrate and sulphate are still more decomposed by water, especially
the latter.

With increase of temperature the decomposed portion also increases.

336 OUTLINES OF GENERAL CHEMISTRY BOOK XI

Due account being taken of the influence of temperature on the intensity of
the magnetism itself, it was found that in a concentrated solution of the
chloride, the action of heat was almost nil, while the nitrate and sulphate
showed considerable decomposition.

The. ordinary methods of chemical analysis may in all cases be
applied to the complete ascertainment of states of equilibrium when
these are heterogeneous ; for if we set out from a known initial
state, the final state is determined if we can estimate the quantity
of one of the reacting bodies in it, and this may always be done in
heterogeneous systems by mechanical separation of the different
portions, which are then separately analysed.

The reader may convince himself that such is actually the case by
considering the examples of heterogeneous equilibrium given on pp.
299-303 from this point of view. Whether we are dealing with
change of state of aggregation, with solutions, allotropic modifications,
the action of acids on insoluble salts, the decomposition of water-
vapour by iron, or of barium carbonate by potassium sulphate—the
quantities necessary for the complete specification of the state of
equilibrium can always be determined either immediately by the
ordinary methods of gravimetric or volumetric analysis, or by analytical
devices of a more or less simple character. The chemical methods for
the determination of the quantities of the substances present on
equilibrium need not therefore be specially discussed.

It should be mentioned that chemical methods are applicable even in
certain cases of homogeneous equilibrium—when, namely, the possible processes
take place so slowly that the analytical operation can be performed in a
time in the course of which the state investigated does not sensibly alter.
Berthelot and Péan de St. Gilles, for example, availed themselves of this
circumstance in their research on esterification, by estimating the free acid
remaining after equilibrium had been reached, by titration with baryta
solution and litmus. Based on the same assumption, in this case somewhat
doubtful, there are experiments by Krecke (1871) who determined the
quantities of colloidal ferric oxide separated under definite conditions from
dilute solutions by first precipitating it in the gelatinous form by the
addition of a solution of common salt. Ostwald in his researches on the
velocity of chemical reactions worked under similar conditions, as will be
seen later.

CHAPTER “iL
THE AFFINITY BETWEEN ACIDS AND BASES

AMONG the countless chemical processes, a knowledge of which is of
importance for both theory and practice, the phenomenon of neutralisa-
tion occupies a prominent position. The general similarity of the
process, though performed with the most diverse acids and_ bases,
enables us to institute a comparative study in an uncommonly wide
field. The investigation of the actions occurring on the formation and
double decomposition of salts marked very early an important scientific
advance, for with them Richter discovered the first chemical laws of
mass, A similar part has also been reserved to them in respect of the
laws of chemical energy.

When an acid acts on a salt, it partially expels the acid of the
latter, and unites with the base “in proportion to its quantity and its
affinity.” If equivalent quantities be taken, the distribution-ratio of
the base is a measure of the affinity.

This mode of measuring the affinity was tried by Julius Thomsen
as early as 1854, but it was only in 1868 that he began the systematic
investigation of a domain at all extensive. The particulars of such
experiments have already been given (p. 327), so that it will now be
sufficient after a few supplementary remarks to state the results
obtained.

In the experiments one acid was allowed to act on an equivalent
quantity of the sodium salt of another acid. We have then in the
general equation for equilibrium of p. 298, p=q=1 and p'=q’=0,
so that c(1 - Jo @

( =e er es — = /e

Now 1-€ is the portion of the ee salt which has remained
undecomposed, and therefore also the part of the base retained by the
original acid, while € is the decomposed portion of the salt, and also

L-é
é

1s

the part of the base united to the new acid. The ratio

Z

338 OUTLINES OF GENERAL CHEMISTRY BOOK XI

consequently a measure of the relative chemical affinity of the two
acids. Thomsen, who imagined that the thermal effect measured the
affinity, introduced instead of this the new designation avidity.
This is so far unnecessary as there is no apparent relation between the
thermal effect and the ratio of distribution. Sulphuric acid, for example,
which has a much greater heat of neutralisation than nitric acid, is
expelled from its sodium salt by the latter to the extent of two-thirds,
so that, contrary to the traditional opinion, nitric acid, and also hydro-
chloric acid, must be regarded as “stronger” than sulphuric acid.
The proper measure of the chemical activity of the acids is really
the specific velocity of reactionc. From the experiments just described
we cannot directly obtain this, but only the ratio it bears to other

A?
similar coefficients. According to the formula, the ratio (S) is

/

equal to ©, the ratio of the coefficients of velocity, ze. the ratio of
c

the coefficients of velocity is equal to the square of the
ratio of the avidities.

The following table contains a collection of the avidities or
relative affinities calculated by Thomsen from his own experiments.
The numbers are all referred to hydrochloric acid as unit, and are for
one equivalent of each of the various acids acting against one equivalent
of soda. They are only approximate values, as Thomsen himself is
careful to emphasise.

Acid. Avidity. Heat of-Neutralisation.
Hydrochloric : : : seek OO aedlod che
Nitric? : ; : 4 ; ‘ 1:00 Nl) haan
Hydrobromic , , ‘ : : “89 138%;
Hydriodic . ; ; 70 137,
Sulphuric ; ; ; 3 ; : "49 Lye
Selenic . ‘ ; F : : : "45 yar
Trichloracetic 5 : : : ‘ 36 139 ,,
Orthophosphoric* . : : : "25 148 ,,
Oxalies % ; : : ‘ : ; "24 141 ,,
Monochloracetic . : : ‘ : ‘09 143 ,,
Hydrofluoric : : ; : : 05 163 ,,
Tartaric : ; : ; ; : 05 Raye
Oitrie t-PA ‘05 1300
Acetic . : : : ; ; : 03 134 ,,
Boric (H,BO3) ; : : ; ‘01 100 ,,
Silicic . 2 : : : : 00 Dns
Hydrocyanic ; ; : : : “00 2915

The numbers have the following meaning. If, for example, one
equivalent of sulphuric acid acts on one equivalent of sodium mono-
chloracetate, then the soda distributes itself between the two acids in

* For one molecule H3POQ,.

CHAP. II THE AFFINITY BETWEEN ACIDS AND BASES Jog

the ratio -49:°09. From sea Sagas

g Oo
it follows that €=°155, z.e. the monochloracetic acid retains 15°5 per
cent of the soda, while the sulphuric acid secures the remaining
84°5 per cent.

The heats of neutralisation have been noted alongside. A very
slight consideration serves to show that they have nothing at all to
do with the avidities. The greatest heats of neutralisation are
possessed by hydrofluoric, sulphuric, selenic, orthophosphoric, and the
like acids, all of which are weaker, many of them much weaker, than
hydrochloric and nitric acids.

Daily experience in the laboratory teaches us that the affinity of
acids for bases is of such a nature as to appear a specific property of
the acids. When we say that carbonic acid is a weak acid and
sulphuric acid a strong one, we do not thereby mean that this is
so with respect to this or the other base, but that it is so in general.
Here there lies the fundamental assumption that the reciprocal
affinity between an acid and a base depends on something peculiar
to the acid and something else peculiar to the base. Acetic acid,
for instance, is more feebly united to all bases than sulphuric acid,
no matter whether we compare the salts of the powerful base potash
or of the weak base alumina.

Thomsen was the first to propound the question, whether the base
had any influence on the relative affinity or not ; and gave his decision
that it had. In his experiments he employed sulphuric and hydro-
chloric acids, on which he acted with the following bases :—potash,
ammonia, Magnesia; manganous, ferrous, zinc, cobalt, nickel, and cupric
oxides. As most of these bases are insoluble in water, he did not
determine their heat of neutralisation directly, but applied the theorem
(p. 328) that the difference of the heats of neutralisation of two acids
is equal to the difference of the heats of reaction between each acid
and the neutral salt of the other.

The experiments performed by Thomsen consisted therefore of
measurements of the heat of reaction of hydrochloric acid on the
sulphates (Q,), and of sulphuric acid on the chlorides (Q,). . For all
bases there was a secondary reaction between the sulphate and the
free sulphuric acid, just as we saw to be the case with soda.. Thomsen
did not make a similar extensive series of measurements on the action
of the sulphuric acid on each sulphate, but determined the heat of
reaction for equivalent quantities, and assumed the heat of reaction
(as a function of the quantity of sulphuric acid) to be proportional to
the heat measured in the case of sodium sulphate. The calculation is
made according to the formula on p. 328.

His results are contained in the following table. In the first
column we have the symbols of the metals, next comes the decom-

340 OUTLINES OF GENERAL CHEMISTRY BOOK XI

posed quantity € of the sulphate, and then the relative affinity (or
avidity ) —. The last column contains the thermal effect q, of the

reaction between equivalent quantities of the sulphates and sulphuric
acid, a magnitude which we shall require later.

E 1 qi
Nag 666 £50) -18'7K
K, 636 ‘57 -16°5 ,,
Ams 640 56 14" >
Mg 590 “69 2108.,,
Mn 586 ‘70 —- 9°0,,
Fe D13 ‘74 -— 9°0,,
Zn 20 ‘73 - 88 ,,
Co 566 ‘76 oo
Ni 563 78 SOP Os
Cu 553 “81 = (6°8",,

We see that the decomposed quantity € of sulphate is not the
same for the different salts, but decreases pretty regularly, so that
the relative affinity of sulphuric acid with respect to hydrochloric
acid is not constant, but depends upon the base; it is largest for
copper and smallest for sodium. Thomsen is of opinion that it may
be considered constant for the alkalies, on the one hand, and for the
bases of the magnesia group, on the other; however, the difference
between Mg and Cu is ‘12, as great as the difference between K, and
Mg, so that it is better to assume that the values vary continuously.

Thomsen had confined his experiments to hydrochloric and sul-
phuric acids. Now as the behaviour of the latter is more complicated
than was at first supposed, the results could give no final decision as
to whether the nature of the base had any influence on the affinity
of acids for them or not.

For this reason Ostwald (1877) repeated the measurements volu-
metrically and extended them by adding a series for nitric acid. His
results were as follows :—

RELATIVE AFFINITIES OF ACIDS.

Nitric Hydrochloric Hydrochloric
Sulphuric Sulphuric Nitric

Potash we = 2°00 r= 194 so = 97
Soda ce 2°00 et “92 pees "96
Ammonia aoe =1°88 rai! aS ‘96
Magnesia ae =1°76 — =1°74 : S = +99
Zinc oxide ee 61 eal 88 pee "95
Cupric oxide eee oe =1-40 os ‘97

CHAP. II THE AFFINITY BETWEEN ACIDS AND BASES 341

The numbers in the table give the ratio in which one equivalent
of the base is distributed between equivalents of the two acids. The
two first columns are deduced directly from experiment, the third is
the quotient of the second by the first, for the critical case in which
the method gives no result occurs with hydrochloric and nitric acids.

Corresponding to Thomsen’s experiments the two first columns are
variable. On the other hand, the relative affinity of hydro-
chloric and nitric acids is independent of the base and remains
constant.

In the case of the experiments with sulphuric acid there is, besides the
action of the acid on the base, a secondary action on the neutral sulphate
(p. 340), which to a certain extent obscures the former. If we compare the
numbers representing the secondary action for the various salts, we see the
same order as in the foregoing table, the action being greatest with potash,
least with cupric oxide. Consequently the action on the base is the more
interfered with, the greater the action is on the neutral salt, and thus,
although it is not proved, it is at least rendered probable, that the affinity of
sulphuric acid also for the base is independent of the nature of the latter.

From this result important conclusions may be drawn, but before we
proceed to these we shall look at some further measurements which place
the first securely on a broader basis.

Ostwald in 1878 investigated a large number of acids with respect to
their relative affinity for potash, soda, and ammonia. To this end he used
the volumetric method, and also took advantage of the help offered by the in-
dices of refraction. For details of the experiments the original papers must
be consulted ; merely the final results are given here in tabular form.

RATIOS oF DISTRIBUTION.

Acids. Potash. Soda. Ammonia. Mean.
Nitric: dichloracetic . E é Vd rey 75 76
Hydrochloric: dichloracetic ; 74 75 73 74
Trichloracetic : dichloracetic : 3 he o fia
Lactic: dichloracetic . : : 8 9 aie 9
Trichloracetic : monochloracetic . 92 92 92 92
Trichloracetic : formic. : ; 97 96 97 97
Lactic: formic . ; ‘ ; 43 46 48 46
Acetic: formic . ; 5 p 25 23 23 24
Butyric: formic . : : : 21 21 ike 20
Isobutyric : formic : : ‘ 19 19 18 19
Acetic: butyric 4 : : 54 ay 53 58
Acetic : isobutyric : : 56 51 53 53
Formic: propionic : ; 78 80 2 79
Formic: glycollic : ; 43 44 45 44

One equivalent of the first-named acid acted on one equivalent of the neutral
salt of the second: the numbers give the amount per cent of the base
abstracted by the first acid from the salt.

If we compare the ratios obtained for potash, soda, and ammonia, we

342 OUTLINES OF GENERAL CHEMISTRY BOOK XI

always find them agreeing within the error of observation. The deviations
are quite irregularly distributed, and the conclusion drawn for hydrochloric
and nitric acids—that the relative affinity is independent of the nature of
the base—is confirmed for all the monobasic acids here investigated. The
observed numbers have therefore been employed to give a mean value in
each case.

A further confirmation of the principle and of the above numbers was
afforded by the optical investigations. In this case, however, the determina-
tion of the ratios is much less certain owing to the greater experimental
error.

We can now use the principle, without any further hypothetical
assumption, for the deduction of a second principle of equal scope. If
we write the absolute affinity of an acid A for a base B as f (A B),
a function of both, then the principle is expressed by the equation

f(A,B) _ £(A,B’) |
f(A’,B)  f(A’,B’)
where A and A’ are two acids, B and B’ two bases. Exchanging the
means we have |

f(A,B) _ £(A’,B)
f(AUB) fA By

This signifies that the relative affinity of the bases is inde-
pendent of the nature of the acid. Although not yet put to
the test of experiment, this principle is as certain as the first one.

The above relations are only possible on condition that each
function f (A, B) can be resolved into two factors p(A) and ¢4(B), of
which one depends on A alone, the other on B alone—

i(A,B) = p(A) . #(B).
The affinity between an acid and a base is the product of two specific
coefficients of affinity, one belonging to the acid, the other to the
base.

In this way we arrive at a general representation of the affinities
which come into play on neutralisation. If we have determined the
relative affinities of the various acids for one base, and of the various
bases for one acid, a base B and an acid A being arbitrarily chosen as
standards, then the values of the affinities may be tabulated as

follows :—
p(A) p(A’) p(A”) p(A”)

$(B)

$(B’)

$(B")
p(B”) . d
In this table, the affinity of any base for any acid is obtained by
multiplying the first terms of the row and column corresponding. A
point of difference from the tables of similar appearance that we have

CHAP. II THE AFFINITY BETWEEN ACIDS AND BASES 343

often employed lies in the ratios of the rows or columns being here
constant, and not their differences.
The calculation of the numbers given above leads to the following

values of é 2 with respect to nitric acid as unity :—

ae
Acid. Ostwald. Thomsen.
Nitric i : ; : 1:00 1:00
Hydrochloric . ; "98 1:00
Trichloracetic . % : 80 36
Dichloracetic  . 2 : "33 =
Monochloracetic ; : 070 09
Glycollic . 050 —-
Formic. . E R : 039 —
Lactic é ; : : 033 —
Acetic F : : : "0123 03
Propionic . : eps 0104 —
Butyric . : : 0098 —
Isobutyric : 0092 —
Tartarie . ; ; . 052 05
Malie : : { "00282 =
Succinic . : ; : "00145 =

Thomsen’s avidities have been added in a separate column. The two
series agree as far as order of magnitude is concerned; with regard to
the numerical differences, the much greater uncertainty of the thermo-
chemical experiments must be taken into consideration. Thomsen’s value
for trichloracetic acid has doubtless been displaced so far through some
slip ; we shall see below a number of other experiments on its affinity, all of
which confirm the number ‘80, It should be remarked, however, that these
values for the relative affinity are by no means to be considered final.
Although the order of succession is not likely to experience any change, still
the numbers are affected by many collateral circumstances, which all go to
render the numerical values somewhat uncertain.

Many salts insoluble in water are dissolved by dilute acids when
these can form soluble salts with the bases. It scarcely needs mention
that this apparent solution has its origin in a decomposition ; calcium
oxalate dissolves in hydrochloric acid because the latter converts it
into oxalic acid and calcium chloride, both of which are soluble in
water. The phenomena here observed are in many ways analogous to
those of pure solution, say of a salt in water, and specially in so far as
there is for every acid a state of saturation uninfluenced by an excess
of the solid substance. The solubility increases with increase of
temperature. On the other hand, the chemical character of the process
is shown in the circumstance that addition to the solvent of one of
the products of decomposition (calcium chloride or oxalic acid in the
above example) diminishes the solubility (cf. p. 302).

This process may be successfully employed to determine the

344 OUTLINES OF GENERAL CHEMISTRY BOOK XI

coefficients of affinity of the acids in virtue of the following con-
siderations.

If an acid of active mass p acts on an insoluble salt, a portion € of
the latter will be decomposed. The active mass of the acid will
therefore be diminished to p-—é&, and the two products of the
decomposition will each have the active mass €; h may be put as
the constant active mass of the solid. The equation for equilibrium

is therefore (p. 302) .
ah 2 Be =c€,

whence

c (p- “oh nd /5- TEE Eh

The coefficients of velocity c and c’ measure the action of the acids on
the base, c corresponding to the free acid, c’ to the acid in the
insoluble salt. Now it has been already shown that the “avidity ”
of two acids for the same base is equal to the square root of the ratio
of the corresponding velocities of reaction. As the nature of the base
has no influence on the relative affinities (p. 341), the above expression

eek hal ives the relative affinity of the two acids at once.
/ ey eae h S
oe)
In this equation the coefficient h of the action of the solid is still
unknown. If we make a similar experiment, however, with another
acid, we obtain a new equation

Ree energie
c Vh(p, - &) é,)
which, being divided into the first one, gives us
[2 heck
a &Np-§
On the right-hand side everything is now known, and so we find
from the expression the relative affinity of the two solvent acids.

By repeating the experiment with other acids we obtain their relative
affinity similarly in terms of an arbitrary unit.

The first experiments according to this method were made-with zinc
sulphide. The acids to be investigated were brought into contact with a
sufficient quantity of hydrated zinc sulphide at the ordinary temperature,
the mixture being shaken for twenty-four hours by means of a small machine
for the purpose. The quantity of zinc sulphide which had passed into solu-
tion was determined by estimating the sulphuretted hydrogen liberated, by
means of a very weak standard ap tenia of iodine.

The following tables give the dissolved quantities of zinc sulphide in
terms of the total quantities which would have been in solution had the
decomposition been complete. The acids were at different stages of dilution,
the number of litres containing one gram-molecule being given in the first

CHAP. II THE AFFINITY BETWEEN ACIDS AND BASES 345

column—thus 4 1. for hydrochloric acid denotes a solution in which 36°46 g. of
hydrogen chloride are contained in 4 litres of water.

Hyprocuioric ACID.

erage g
Dilution. é We
el} 0411 °0420
Or; ‘0190 "0887
4], 00863 0351
SL 00396 s0322

SULPHURIC ACID.

Sag ig
Dilution. é Neer
ile "0238 *0241
4, °01185 0240
ale “00600 0243
1G, "00301 0244

For the normal solution, p has been made equal to 1; for the others it
is consequently 4, 4, and 4.

Taking the quotients of the corresponding members of the last columns
in the two tables, we see that the relative affinity, sulphuric acid : hydro-
chloric acid, is 574, 621, 693, and ‘758; it therefore varies with the
dilution. The volumetric experiments were for a dilution of about 3 1. and
give for the relative affinity with respect to zinc -65, the mean of the
values for 21. and 41, being here -657—almost the same as it happens. The
fact that the relative affinity of the sulphuric acid increases with the dilution
has the same probable cause as its variation with the nature of the base—
namely the formation of acid salts (p. 340), which has progressively decom-
posed with increasing quantities of water.

That this is so can be shown (and approximate measurements made) by the
method before us. Equivalent quantities of neutral sulphates and free sulphuric
acid were brought together in aqueous solution and treated with zinc sulphide.

The following table gives the values of int obtained in this way :—

Dilution. HSO4 +K»S0,4 +NapSO,4 +(NH4)2804 +MgS0,4
DA; "0241 °0156 70168 “OL71 70196
Agl: _ 0240 "0174 "0186 0187 "0207
81. 0243 "0187 "0197 "0208 °0218

6.1. "0244 ‘0191 "0198 "0219 "0225

We see from these numbers that the action of the free sulphuric acid is
weakened by the addition of sulphates, more by potassium than by magnesium
sulphate, and more at less than at greater dilutions. The order of succession
is quite the same as in the volumetric experiments (p. 340).

Finally, it may be mentioned that when two acids act together on zine
sulphide the quantity of hydrogen sulphide formed is the sum of the
quantities which would be liberated by the acids separately. With a mixture
of sulphuric and hydrochloric acids the numbers obtained were as follows :—

346 OUTLINES OF GENERAL CHEMISTRY BOOK XI

Dilution. € Observed. € Calculated.
fale "0327 0330
DB Ag 0309 "0309
4 1. 0297 0293
Sale 0282 “O210

“A much more suitable material than zinc sulphide, which is

difficult to procure of uniform quality, is to be found in calcium
oxalate, which, when in the form of the easily obtainable hydrate,
CaC,0,+ H,O, gives very constant values. It has, besides, the
valuable property that equilibrium can be reached with it in a very
short time; the mixture of oxalate and acid has only to be shaken a
few moments to bring into solution as much as can possibly be dissolved
under the given circumstances.

The quantity of the salt dissolved is most easily determined by
titration with potassium permanganate. If the acid used is indifferent
towards this reagent, the solutions may be titrated directly, otherwise
the oxalate is first precipitated by addition of ammonia and a little
calcium chloride or ammonium oxalate.

The following table contains the values = —, the active mass of

i

lie

the acid having been always made equal to unity :—

RELATIVE AFFINITIES.

Acid. Normal. Decinormal. (Volumetric).
Nitric ; ; : : 1°00 ;
Hydrochloric . ‘ : "90 "979 “98
Hydrobromic . ; "854 0 -
Chioric+.= : : : 932 "998 —
Formic . L : , 0233 "1290 039
Acetic 5 ‘ , ; "0094 "0735 0123
Monochloracetic ‘ : 046 213 070
Dichloracetic . ; ; 165 "488 "30
Trichloracetic . : : 578 899 80
Lactic ‘ : 3 ; 037 "133° 033
Succinic . : 3 : 0185 0930 "0145
Malic ; : ; 3 "0455 "1205 *0282
artaric. : 1 : 0578 "1416 052
Citric : ; 5 : 0275 "1444 a

For comparison, the numbers obtained by the volumetric method
have been added. They fall for the most part between the numbers
for the normal and for the decinormal solutions with calcium oxalate,
which might be expected, as they were found for 4 normal solutions.
The order of magnitude is the same, and even the numerical agreement
is as good as could be desired, considering the difficulty of the volu-
metric measurements and the different character of the methods
employed.

The very considerable influence of dilution on the relative affinity
of weak acids is remarkable ; the affinities increase four or even five-

ae

CHAP. II THE AFFINITY BETWEEN ACIDS AND BASES 347

fold on passage from normal to decinormal solutions. The regularities
here observed will be discussed in greater detail in the sequel.

Other insoluble salts behave like calcium oxalate. Zinc oxalate and
barium chromate have been investigated, and yield results similar to the
above. Recently, too, experiments have been conducted with potassium
hydrogen tartrate and with the sulphates of barium, strontium, and calcium ;
all these have given much the same values. Isolated small deviations still
remain to be explained. They are not sufficiently important to render the
results doubtful, but, on the other hand, they are of importance as leading us
to the recognition of secondary actions, which are present under all circum-
stances, but have not been considered in the general construction of the
theory.

CHAPTER III
SPECIFIC COEFFICIENTS OF AFFINITY

THE property possessed by acids of acting in proportion to a definite
coefficient is not confined to salt-formation. There are numerous other
reactions conditioned by acids as such, and in all of these the same
coefficients of activity belonging to the acids regulate the action.

The first case to be investigated in this respect has still some slight
connection with the affinities appearing in the phenomenon of neutralisa-
tion. An aqueous solution of acetamide is converted by the influence
of acids into ammonium acetate, the elements of water being taken up ;
and the acetate being further changed by the acid, if it is strong, into
the corresponding ammonium salt and free acetic acid.

The primary process thus takes place between acetamide and |
water—

CH,.CONH, + H,O =CH,.COONH,,

the acid having a “ predisposing” action, as the conversion by water
alone takes place with extreme slowness. The explanation of such
“predisposing” affinities offers no difficulty from the point of view of
the molecular theory. In the case in question we have to imagine
that the molecules of acetamide in the aqueous solution are more or less
loosened by their continuous movements. At a definite degree of
loosening, the chemical affinity of the components of the acetamide
(CH,CO and NH,) for the components of water (OH and H) is great
enough to allow the transformation to take place. If at the same time
a substance is present which has a strong affinity for one of the pro-
ducts of decomposition, attracting it therefore with considerable force,
a less degree of internal loosening in the acetamide molecules will
suffice to enable the more powerful separative forces to prevail, than
when water alone is acting. The acceleration of the action will also
be the more considerable, the greater the affinity between ammonia and
the acid, 7.2. the stronger the latter proves in the sense already
indicated. | ,

The investigation of the differences in the action of the various
acids does not now conduct as in the former cases to different con-

. OHAP. III SPECIFIC COEFFICIENTS OF AFFINITY 349

ditions of equilibrium, but to different velocities of reaction.
The relation between the two has already been stated :—in a reaction
of the second order the coefficients of distribution are as
the square roots of the coefficients of velocity. This pro-
position was, it is true, deduced in the first instance for one and the
same process, but it may be extended as above by reason of the
empirically discovered property of the coefficients of distribution of
acids with respect to bases, that they are the products of two coefficients,
one depending only on the base, the other only on the acid (p. 342).

The coefficient of distribution for the action of two acids A, and A,

H(AY(B) _ $(A,)
<= $(A(B) 6(A,)
equal to the square root of the ratio of the two velocities of reaction,

< ¢, (A))

c.f (Ay)

The coefficients of velocity for the action of acids on any base are
thus proportional to the squares of the coefficients of distribution or
relative affinities. As has been mentioned, the proposition can be
empirically extended so as to include the coefficients of velocity of all
reactions brought about by acids as such. By measurement of any
process of this sort we shall therefore, in like manner, arrive at a
determination of the strength of acids.

The transformation of acetamide occurs in dilute solution even at
the ordinary temperature when acids are present, but so slowly that
long periods are requisite for an exact study of the process. At 65°
the reaction proceeds at a convenient rate, so at that temperature
most of the experiments have been conducted.

on the same base B is of the form k = Now this is

Since the decomposition of acetamide by acids is a reaction of the second
order, corresponding, ¢.g., to the equation

CH, . CONH, + H,O + HCl=NH,Cl+ CH,.COOH,

equivalent quantities of acetamide and acid disappearing,* the velocity-
equation that applies is the one developed on p. 295, viz.
x

= Acf,
A-x

where 6 is the time, equivalent quantities of the two components being
always taken, In individual cases there is a fair agreement between the
theoretical course of the reaction and actual experiment, but this agree-
‘ment is by no means general, as the process is not free from secondary re-
actions. In particular, the neutral salt which is gradually formed, acts in a
characteristic manner by intensifying the action of acids of the type of
hydrochloric or nitric acid in proportion to its quantity. It appears from

* The acetic acid simultaneously produced is almost without influence on the
process.

350 OUTLINES OF GENERAL CHEMISTRY BOOK XI

researches to be spoken of later, that weak acids, on the other hand, are still
further weakened by their neutral salts, the influence being greater the
weaker the acids are. Consequently in experiments with strong acids the
coefficient of velocity will not remain constant during the reaction, but
increase with the time expired from the commencement ; with weak acids it
will decrease ; and only with acids of moderate strength (trichloracetic acid)
will the action of the salt be so small that the process of transformation will
take place according to the simple assumption of a constant coefficient of
velocity.

In the first place, in order to institute a comparison of the different
values free from arbitrary selection, the time is calculated in which
the reaction has run exactly half its course. For this we have

AA 1
Ge Acé or ¢ ne
On account of the secondary reactions alluded to above, the reciprocals
of the times taken for half-completion of the transformation do not give the
true velocities of reaction. These can only be ascertained by the employment
of correspondingly complicated equations, and the determination of the
new coefficients appearing in them. Since, however, the relative affinities
obtained from the distribution of a base between two acids and from the
decomposition of insoluble salts are influenced in the same way by
quite similar collateral circumstances, one ought to expect, if not identity,
at least some analogy between the corresponding series of numerical values.
The following table contains in columns I and II the relative velo-
cities of reaction, 2.¢. the reciprocals of the times taken for half-completion
of the reaction at 65° and 100°, the value for hydrochloric acid being taken
as unity. Columns III and IV contain the square roots of these numbers,
which ought to be equal to the relative affinities of the preceding tables
(pp. 343, 346) ; of these, there have been indicated the values obtained by the
volumetric method (V), and by the solution of calcium oxalate (V1).

Acid. I II Ill IV V VI
Hydrochloric . 1:000 1:000 1°00 1:00 0°98 "90
INATLIC! vie ; "959 933 "98 97 1:00 1:00
Hydrobromic . "974 969 “98 "98 "95 "85
Trichloracetic . 639 — *80 — 80 "bs
Dichloracetic . "1663 = "408 — 33 165
Monochloracetic "01687 — 130 — 070 "046
Formic . A 00266 0023838 0516 "0483 "039 0233
Lactic i : 002638 002384 0513 "0485 033 ‘od
Acetic. : "00055 — 0234 — "0123 "0094
Sulphuric : "428 353 654 594 667 616
Oxalicua hr ‘ "0509 0420 "226 205 — —
Tartaric . : 00564 00536 0751 0732 052 "058
Malic , : 09218 — 0467 — "0282 °046
Succinic .- ’ "00065 000624 "0255 °0205 "0145 "0185
Citric : 5 ‘00161 "00161 "0401 0401 a "0275
Phosphoric. — 00128 — 0358 — —

Arsenic . F — 00124 — °0353 wes —

CHAP. III SPECIFIC COEFFICIENTS OF AFFINITY 351

The order of magnitude of these numbers obtained in ways so dissimilar
is in every case the same ; especially do the measurements of-velocity with
acetamide approximate closely to the values yielded by the equilibrium
experiments. The agreement is the more remarkable that the experiments
were conducted at widely differing temperatures and concentrations,

The various measurements serve therefore to prove that acids in reality
are active in proportion to definite coefficients, which are quite independent
of the particular character of the chemical process. They are further an
experimental confirmation of the connection required by theory between
conditions of equilibrium and velocities of reaction, and as such are of more
general import.

In the first few instants of a chemical process the secondary re-
actions have the smallest influence, for then the substances to which
they are due are present in very small quantity, if present at all.
We shall therefore, by applying the theoretical formula to the first
observation of each series, obtain values of Ac diverging from the
true coefficients of velocity in the same sense but to a much smaller
degree than the velocities observed for the half-completed reaction.

In the following table the values of Ac have been multiplied by
1,000,000 to avoid an unnecessary number of ciphers; the last column
contains the values of the coefficients of velocity referred to hydro-
chloric acid as unity :—

Acid. Temp. 0 x A-X Ac. Coeff.
Hydrochloric : 66° 15 442 2238 1317 1:00
‘ : F 100° 2 665 1995 16670 1°00
Nitric . : f : 65° 15 425 2255 1258 "955
a ee 4 : : 100° 2 651 2009 16200 "972
Hydrobromic ; 65° 15 433 2247 1286 3976
4 Merry wis h00" 2 659 2001 16490 -989
Trichloracetic . ; 65° 15 B18 2367 881 670
Dichloracetic : : 65° 30 237 2441 20 245
Monochloracetic . : 65° 480 420 2255 38°8 "0295
Formic ; , ove 6b. 2880 446 2214 7°00 "00532
f Bae eats”. “100° 120 278 23882 96°8 00581
Lactic . 5 4 : 65° 2880 407 22538 6°25 "00476
a é . ‘ é 100° 240 416 22.44 (aoe 00464
Acetic . ‘ ; ‘ 65° 14400 330 2330 984 "000747
Sulphuric. . 65° 15 261 2414 720 547
BS . : ; 100° 3 555 2105 8780 "527
Oxalic . : 5 : *. 65° 60 315 2359 2225 "169
s ; ; ; ate ALOT 15 665 1995 2225 "134
Tartaric : 4 : 65° 1440 469 2166 15°90 i AL
oie ee eres S100" 120) 549° 2111 217 0130
Malic . ; : ; 65° 1440 314 2348 9:28 "00704
Succinic : 4 : 65° 2880 183 2477 200 °00195
“ Remi Eris 27.00" 480 304 2356. 2-72 00163
Citric . ; ‘ . 65° 1440 349 2311 10°50 00797
100° 240 527 2131 103°3 00620

Phosphoric . ; 5 100° 15 268 2392 147 "0449

302 OUTLINES OF GENERAL CHEMISTRY BOOK XI

It must be repeated that. these numbers for the relative coefficients of
velocity are only approximative. They have been calculated simply for the
purpose of comparing them with more trustworthy numbers obtained from
methods less subject to secondary influences. It is, besides, instructive to
see how largely the secondary actions influence the primary ones—the
coefficients of weak acids for the half-completed reaction sink as low as
half the values, themselves too small, contained in the above table.

The experiments with acetamide have proved especially suited for
the comparison of coefficients of equilibrium with those of velocity,
inasmuch as they are affected by secondary circumstances in the same
sense as the equilibrium experiments, so that the effect of these in the
comparison is to some extent eliminated. However, the true values
of the coefficients of velocity can only be approximately obtained by
this method ; the values found for strong acids are too great, for weak
acids too small.

A method proposed by Ostwald (1883) is more peenint from such
errors. When aqueous solutions of ethyl acetate, methyl acetate, and
similar compounds are allowed to stand at the ordinary temperature,
the ester undergoes a very slow decomposition into alcohol and acid,
perhaps 1 per cent of the whole being decomposed in two or three
days. If a little dilute hydrochloric or any other strong acid be
added, it is found that all the ester is hydrolysed within four and
twenty hours. ‘The course of the reaction can be easily followed by
titration with dilute baryta solution, the acidity of the liquid in-
creasing proportionally to the quantity of ester decomposed.

The foreign acid experiences no alteration ; we have therefore here
to deal with a well-characterised contact-action, in which a substance
seems to act merely by its presence, without itself taking part in the
material reaction. It was proved by a special experiment that in the
action of hydrochloric acid on methyl acetate there was not present .
at any time an observable quantity of methyl chloride, for titration
with a solution of silver always gave the full quantity of chlorine,
whereas if methyl chloride had been formed, the chlorine it contained
would not have been attacked and precipitated by the silver nitrate.

Since, during the process, the quantity of the ester alone suffers
alteration, we have to do with a reaction of the first order, which
progresses according to the equation

le ="ACG,

-B-
B being the quantity of ester, A a quantity of acid. In contrast to
the formula developed on p. 293, the factor A in addition enters the
right-hand side of the equation, because the quantity of the ester
as well as of the acid is of influence on the reaction. The following
example for hydriodie acid shows how close is the agreement between
theory and experiment—

CHAP. IIT SPECIFIC COEFFICIENTS OF AFFINITY | 303

6 xe y ope AC
Bre

33 223 0733 00234

63 389 "1457 00231

93 533 "2147 00231
123 658 2851 00232
160 - 786 3716 00232
Z000 5 902 "4685 "00234.
300 973 "5406 00235
240 1102 “F122 00237
360 1173 8477 "00235
428 1232 1°0088 "00240
480 1265 1°1294 00234
ie: 1367

Mean ‘002341

The first column gives the time in minutes ; x is the amount of ester
decomposed, measured in arbitrary units. In the third column are

the values. of logy ; In the fourth the same numbers divided by

the time; which quotient according to the theory should be constant,
and proves, indeed, to be so.
For different quantities of ester with a constant quantity of acid, the

coefficient of velocity ¢ ought to be as a first approximation independent of
this alteration. The formula may be written

log reas =Ach;

and thus x and B must remain proportional. Small deviations may appear,
for the medium in which the process takes place varies somewhat with
varying quantities of ester, and consequently the coefficient of velocity under-
goes slight changes.

The experiments to test this were so conducted that 10 ¢ cm. of normal
hydrochloric acid were added to 2, 1, ‘5, and ‘3 c. cm. of methyl acetate, and
the whole diluted to 15 c. cm. The measurements yielded results as

follows :—

Methyl acetate. B Ac
CP Cli; 2596 002419
eee 1434 ‘002196
cay ve 766 002071
3 466 °001999

Thus the coefficient c does not remain constant, but decreases with diminish-

ing quantity of ester. ‘The experiments, however, were not quite properly

arranged, the quantity of water being variable. It would have been better

to add the methyl acetate always to the same quantity of acid, for the

active quantity of the acid can obviously only be considered with respect to

that portion of the total volume not occupied by the ester, while the total
2A

304 OUTLINES OF GENERAL CHEMISTRY BOOK XI

volumes were made equal in the above test. If we correct the values by
we iat ie - and a i we get the following numbers :—
Lot Da 5

Ac='002097, :002051, (001996, and 001996 respectively. The variation
here is much smaller ; it only amounts to about 5 per cent for an alteration
of the quantity of methyl acetate in the proportion of 7:1. We may thus
look upon the proportionality between x and B and the independence of the
coefficient of velocity on the amount of ester as holding true within tolerably
wide limits.

multiplying by

Numerous acids were investigated according to the method just
described, 10 c. cm. of normal acid and 1 c. cm. of methyl acetate being
always diluted to 15 c.cm. The temperature was 26°. The table
gives in the first column the values of Ac multiplied by 10,000, and
in the second the relative coefficients with respect to hydrochloric acid
as unity.

Acid. I II Ill
Hydrochloric . : : 24°12 1°00 1°00
Hydrobromic. : : 23°70 983 "976
Hydriodic . ; : : 23°33 963 —
Nitric. : 22°06 01S "955
Chloric J : 22°78 "944 ——
Sulphuric . : 13°19 ‘547 547
Methylsulphuric . : : 24°30 pp d007 —
Ethylsulphuric . ; 23°80 "987 =
Propylsulphuric . : 23°63 "980 os
Isobutylsulphuric : ; 23°41 “O71 -—
Amylsulphuric . ‘ : 23°08 959 —
Ethanesulphonic ; : 23°61 “079 ~—
Isethionic . : 2 23°57 "978 a
Benzenesulphonic ; 23°94 2994 —
Formic : { f : 316 01310 0053
Wcetie Ce” A aeons ae 0833 00345-00075
Propionic . : : : 0738 00304 ——
Butyric . 4 : : 0721 "00299 —
Isobutyric . ; é : 0646 00264 —
Monochloracetic . ; 1°036 0430 0295
Dichloracetic . ; DOG 2304 "245
Trichloracetic . : . 16°45 6820 ‘670
Lactic . : ; , "2172 00901 0048
Oxyisobutyric  . ‘ ‘ 3031 00921 —-
Trichlorolactic . : : 1°665 0690 —
Pyravic |e : : ‘ 1°616 0670 —
Oxalic 3 : 4:21 1746 169
Malonic. : : : 692 ‘0287 —
Succinic. ; ; : 1194 00496 00195
Malic. , "2851 01181 0070
‘Tartaric ; : 5540 02296 0121
Racemic  . : d 5540 "02296 —

Citric. : : : ; 4753 01635 0080

CHAP, III SPECIFIC COEFFICIENTS OF AFFINITY 300

In the third column the approximate values of the true coefficients
of affinity calculated from the acetamide experiments are indicated.
For the stronger acids the agreement between the numbers is excellent,
although the one series is for 26°, the other for 65°, and for weak
acids the divergence is in the expected direction, the numbers from
acetamide being always less than those from methyl acetate. The
retarding action of the neutral salts is in their case so enormous (vide
infra), that even the small quantities formed in the first period of the
reaction have an important influence.

Nevertheless it is quite apparent from this comparison that we
are indeed dealing in all the various chemical processes hitherto con-
sidered with the same, numerically definite, properties of acids. To
the interesting relations between these and the chemical composition
and constitution of the acids a special chapter will be devoted.

Cane-sugar, under the influence of free acids, is decomposed with
absorption of the elements of water without the acid apparently taking
any part in the process. We are not yet in a position to form any
clear representation of the cause of this action as we did for the
“catalytic” decomposition of methyl acetate, but the supposition is,
justified that the two processes are not only externally but intrinsically
quite similar. Here also it is the affinity of the acid for the alcoholic
hydroxyls of the dextrose and levulose produced from the cane-sugar
that acts in the predisposing fashion already indicated (p. 348), and
so conditions the decomposition.

Biot, to whom we owe the fundamental observations on the
process and the accompanying changes in the power of rotating the
plane of polarisation, drew attention to the interest which a compara-
tive investigation of the influence of the different acids would possess.
This same process of the inversion of cane-sugar is, as already observed,
that by means of which Wilhelmy in 1850 proved the fundamental
law of chemical action.

Lowenthal and Lenssen (1862), endeavoured to utilise sugar-inversion for
investigating the affinity of the inverting acids. Their object was “to ex-
press in numbers the magnitude of the affinities of the substances,” but,
although they were on the proper path for reaching this end, one can
scarcely say that they altogether attained their object.

The greatest shortcoming of their research, which is indeed exceedingly
rich in correctly observed facts, is the want of a measure for the reactions
investigated. Although Wilhelmy twelve years previously had been per-
fectly cognisant of the law governing the action of acids on sugar, Lowenthal
and Lenssen, evidently unaware of his work, made no attempt to find such
a law at all. Their measurements are therefore, in spite of the careful
execution, in the main of only qualitative character. They were able, by
always making comparable experiments, to judge if an acid was stronger or
weaker than another, or equal to it, but could not express the difference
with numerical exactness. They also worked at the variable laboratory

356 OUTLINES OF GENERAL CHEMISTRY BOOK XI

temperature, so that the calculation of the inversion coefficients from their
numbers, although still possible, could not be made with any great claim to
accuracy,

Ostwald in 1884 employed the method extensively to determine
the action of different acids. Column I of the following table con-

: 5; | B BA

tains the coefficients of inversion cA=% log oy multiplied by 10,000 ;_
column IT the same with reference to hydrochloric acid = 1; in column
III the coefficients of velocity for the reaction with methyl acetate are
tabulated for comparison.

Acid. I ik GY
Hydrochloric . : é 2137. 1:000 1:000
Hydrobromic  . : ; 24°38 1114 "983 -
Nitric , : 2137 1:000 “915
Chloric : ; : ; : 22°61 1°035 "944
Sulphuric . é . Ar 2 536 547
Ethylsulphuric . ; 21°86 1°000 O87,
Isethionic Stay 20°07 918 978
Ethanesulphonic ; ; 19°93 912 ‘979
Benzenesulphonic 22°82 1:044 “991
Formic 2; : "335 0153 0131
NGBEIO s ale te Species eee ‘0876 "00400 00345
Isobutyric . . : ; : 0733 00335" 00264
Monochloracetic ; 1°059 "0484 "0430
Dichloracetic . 5°93 "271 "230
Trichloracetic  . : 16°47 "754 "682
Gipdallicnn.2) Srey. ae te ie 286 0131 Ss.
Lactic : , ; : 233 0107 ‘00901
Methylglycollic . : 397 0182 —
Ethylglycollic . : "300 ‘0137 oa
Methyllactic  . , ; "304 0139 =
Diglycollic 583 "0267 —
Pyruvic. . ; ; 1°419 0649 0670
Glyceric *». ; 375 0172 —
Oxyisobutyric . 282 720106 ‘00921
Oxalic : ; : 4°00 "1857 1746
Malonic . : , : . 674 0308 "0278
Succinie . hg "1192 00545 00496
Pyrotartarie “; ‘ "234 Se OLOTZ —
Malic . : 5 278. 0127 0118
Citric : ; ; "Or 0172 0164
Phosphoric ; 1857 0621 os
Arsenic... : j : ; 1°052 0481 =

The agreement of columns II and III again shows that the coefficients
of velocity of quite different reactions caused by acids have the same
value. The method of sugar-inversion ranks along with those already
discussed as a mode of measuring the affinity, and surpasses most
of them in this respect, that it is almost free from secondary actions.

CHAP, III SPECIFIC COEFFICIENTS OF AFFINITY ool

More detailed consideration of the numerical values of the
coefficients of inversion will be given in a subsequent chapter.

Lowenthal and Lenssen had remarked an influence of neutral salts on
the action of the acids. While the diminution of the rate of inversion in
the case of dibasic acids could be easily explained by the formation of acid
salts, the increase in the case of the strong monobasic acids appeared in-
explicable, as no reaction between these and their neutral salts had ever
been betrayed by thermal or other phenomena, This influence of the
neutral salts, however, is exhibited in the most general fashion, being by no
means confined to the single process of inversion.

In all the methods employed the same influence has appeared, and the
laws to which it is subject may be stated as follows:—All nitrates and
chlorides investigated increase the action of the free acids, the influence
being greatest for the potassium salts, somewhat less (and almost equal) for
the sodium and ammonium salts, and least for the magnesium salts.
With increasing dilution the action diminishes, and with increase of the
quantity of the neutral salt the influence of the latter increases—in most
cases almost proportionally.

The increase of the action of monobasic acids is nevertheless not general.
It only occurs with the strongest acids, passing with weak ee into a
diminution of the action which with the weakest is of extraordinary
magnitude. For example, the presence of an equivalent quantity of potassium
acetate reduces the action of acetic acid to one-fortieth of its proper value.
The explanation of this phenomenon will be given hereafter.

The affinity of bases has hitherto scarcely been investigated,
although quite similar methods seem applicable to them as are used
for acids. Berthelot made some experiments on the equilibrium
between soda and ammonia when contending for an acid ; they led him
to the result that ammonia is completely “or sensibly ” displaced by
the soda. Menschutkin arrived at the same conclusion by making use
of the fact that phenolphthalein is coloured in alcoholic solutions by
potash but not by ammonia; his results thus hold only for alcoholic
solutions, and are not quite unexceptionable.

Only one kinetic method has been tested and applied—the saponi-
fication of acetic ether. KR. Warder, to whom we owe the first experi-
ments in this direction, confined himself to the observation of soda
solutions, but Reicher afterwards extended the investigation to other
bases. The coefficients of velocity obtained by him for the reaction

MOH +.CH,: COOC,H, = CH,: COOM + C,H,OH,

where M represents different metals, are as follows :—

Soda. : k : DeKWe Strontia . , : 2204
Potash — | *. SNIPES Baryta Agr ae
Lime . ‘ . 2:285 Ammonia . ‘O11

There is thus no great difference between the values for the alkali

358 OUTLINES OF GENERAL CHEMISTRY BOOK XI

and for the alkaline earths, just as the strong mineral acids have
almost equal coefficients of affinity; ammonia is much weaker. In
particular the numbers for potash and soda are almost identical.

Ostwald tested these results by the same method, and confirmed them
as far as the strong bases are concerned, to which he found might be added
lithia and thallia with nearly equal values.

With regard to ammonia, it appeared that the simple formula of p. 295,
applicable to strong bases, loses its applicability in this case, for here the
ammonium acetate formed in the reaction exerts a strong retarding influence.
If this salt is specially added beforehand, the saponification takes place much
more slowly than without the addition. As the quantity of ammonium
acetate increases during the reaction, the coefficient of velocity does not
remain constant but continually decreases, as is seen on calculation of the
observations with the ordinary formula.

The substituted ammonias, or amine bases, behave similarly, although
the retarding action in their case does not reach the same high degree as
with ammonia.

This circumstance greatly enhances the difficulty of estimating the
strength of these bases. We can, however, eliminate the effect of the
disturbing action in the following way, without going into the somewhat
complicated theory of the matter. If we calculate the coefficients of velocity
in the usual manner, and tabulate those that decrease with the time as
ordinates, against the time as abscissz, we obtain a curve, in general convex
to the axis of abscisse. If we now produce this curve to cut the axis of
ordinates (?=0) we obtain the coefficients of velocity for the first instant ;
and this is free from the disturbing action, for no acetate has then been
formed. Although the process, owing to the necessary exterpolation, is not
very exact, it still admits of our finding the wished-for values with a degree
of accuracy sufficient for most purposes.

The following coefficients of velocity were determined in this way :—

Soda . : : : 162 Amylamine . : 5 18°5
Potash : : ; 161 Allylamine . . : 4°0
Lithia . : , . 165 Dimethylamine . : 22
Thalha : : : 148 Diethylamine . : 26
Ammonia . 5 é 3°0 Trimethylamine . ; 7°3
Methylamine ; 19 Triethylamine . ; 22
Ethylamine ; ; 19 Piperidine . ; ; 27
Propylamine : ; 18°6 Tetraethylammonium
Isobutylamine . : 14°4 hydroxide 5 pic: |

The numbers are for a dilution of 40 1. and for 25°. The substituted
ammonias are all stronger than ammonia itself. We cannot, however, enter
here into a detailed discussion of the results.

The tetra-substituted ammonium hydroxides behave quite differently
from the amine bases. As their chemical character places them with the
fixed alkalies, so does their behaviour in saponifying ethyl acetate rank them
in the same class, the value obtained for tetraethylammonium hydroxide,
131, being little less than those obtained for the alkalies.

CHAPTER IV
ELECTROCHEMICAL RELATIONS

THE results of the investigations on chemical affinity described
in the preceding chapters may all be embraced in the principle that
the action of this affinity is governed by definite co-
efficients appertaining to the active substances and in-
dependent of the nature of the reaction. This principle is in
the first instance purely empirical; there is nothing contained in it
that in any way leads to a conception of the cause of such a law.
Undoubtedly we can say that one and the same cause is at the bottom —
of all these phenomena and determines them quantitatively, but what
the nature of that cause is, and what conditions the activity of the
various substances—acids and bases alike—remains unknown.

The explanation came in a way not very nearly related to the
modern developments of chemistry. When the electrochemical ideas
of Berzelius—introduced by him from a false interpretation of his
experiments, and only utilised for systematic purposes—had fallen
into disrepute, the actual close connection between chemical and
electrical phenomena was left entirely out of consideration. Now for
the second time this connection has proved of fundamental significance,
and that for the highest scientific problem of chemistry—for the
question of the laws of chemical affinity.

The first indication of this new train of thought is to be found in
Hittorf’s observation that the mobility of the components of electrolytes, 2.¢.
their power of entering into chemical reactions, is manifested in their
electric conductivity. On the other hand, we have the view introduced by
Williamson and Clausius that states of chemical equilibrium are stationary
“states, 2.e. not of complete repose but of equal and opposite transformations.
These ideas, however, were merely of a qualitative description. It was
only in 1884 that Svante Arrhenius for the first time proved definite and
quantitative relations to exist between electrical and chemical properties.

It has several times been shown in the preceding part of this book
that a series of very dissimilar phenomena (in particular the deviations

360 OUTLINES OF GENERAL CHEMISTRY BOOK XI

of salt-solutions from the general laws regulating dilute solutions,
and the phenomena of electrolytic conductivity) find their common
explanation in the assumption that salts and like substances are in
-aqueous solution dissociated into their ions. The laws of chemical
affinity empirically obtained above are susceptible of a similar ex-
planation ; we have only to make the additional assumption that the
possibility of taking part in chemical reactions lies only in the free
ions, and that consequently the capability of reaction in a given
solution is proportional to the number of free ions it contains.

The fact stated by Hittorf that the power of reaction and the
electrolytic conductivity are always concurrent properties, speaks at
once in favour of this assumption. It obtains further support from
the circumstance that the processes of electrolytic conductivity and
of chemical decomposition both depend on the molecules under con-
sideration falling into smaller submolecules ; without this decomposition
there can be neither a new distribution .of parts, as in chemical
reaction, nor a transport of the electricity attached to the ions, as in
conduction.

But the most decisive and telling argument for the soundness
of the assumption is the numerical agreement of the values for the
chemical activity on the one hand and the electric conductivity on the
other. The numbers on pp. 354 and 356 for the rate of catalysis of
methyl acetate and of the inversion of cane-sugar agree so closely with
those representing the relative electric conductivity, that there cannot
exist the slightest doubt of the intimate connection between the two
series.

In the following table there is tabulated under I the electric con-
ductivity of normal solutions of acids, under II the coefficients of
velocity for the catalysis of methyl acetate, and under HI the
coefficients of inversion of cane-sugar.

Acid. I Il Il
1. Hydrochloric, HCl ; } ; 100 100 100
2. Hydrobromic, HBr. é 100-1 98 111
5. INitrie, GELIN Os 4, : , 99°6 o2 100
4, Ethanesulphonic, C,H;. SO, OH : 79°9 98 oA.
5. Isethionic, C,H,OH.SO,OH . : 17°8 92 92
6. Binsne pao oun SO,0H : 74°8 99 . hod
7. Sulphuric, H,SO, : : : 65:1 73°9 13°2
8. Formic, H. COOH : : , 1°68 1:31 1°53
9. Acetic, CH,. COOH. 4, : "424 345 "400 .
10. RMonbeniomicese CH,Cl. COOH : 4°90 4°30 4°84
11. Dichloracetic, CHCIl,.COOH_ . ; 25°3 ge O50 27-4
12. Trichloracetic, CCl,. COOH . . 62°3 68°2 75°4
13. Glyeollic, CH,OH. COOH ; : 1°34 — 1°31
14, Methylglycollic, CH,(QCH3). COOH . Ragone _ 1°82
15, Ethylglycollic, CH,(OC,H;). COOH . 1°30 — 1°37
16. Diglycollic, O(;CH,. COOH), . : 2°58 — 2°67

CHAP, IV ELECTROCHEMICAL RELATIONS ; 361

Acid, I a III
17. Propionic, C,H,;. COOH : ’ "325 304 —
18. Lactic, C,H,OH . COOH : as 1:04 "90 1207
19. B-Oxypropionic, C,H,OH . COOH : 606 — "80
20. Glyceric, C,H,(OH),.COOH . 1°57 Zs ih Nee
21. Pyruvic, C,H,0. COOH ‘ 5°60 6°70 6°49
22. Butyric, C,H,. COOH . : : 316 300 —
23. Isobutyric, C,H,. COOH ; “311 "268 335
24, Oxyisobutyric, C;H,0H .COOH 1°24 92 1:06
25. Oxalic, (COOH), ; 19°7 17°6 18°6
26. Malonic, CH,(COOH), . ; : 3°10 2°87 3°08
27. Succinic, C,H,(COOH), : : ray 50 D0
28. Malic, C,H;0H(COOH), * ; 1°34 1°18 lige /
29. Tartaric, C,H.(OH),(COOH), . : 2°28 2°30 —
30. Racemic, C,H,(OH),(COOH), . ; 2°63 2°30 =
ol,, Pyrotartaric, C;H,(COOH), — . ; 1:08 — 1:07
32. Citric, C;H,OH(COOH), : ; 1°66 1°63 1°73
33. Phosphoric, PO(OH), . : , 7:27 — 6°21
34. Arsenic, AsO(OH), t : : 5°38 —- 4°81

The values for hydrochloric acid have in all three columns been
made equal to 100. The agreement is not absolute, for it must be
remembered that the numbers are for different concentrations. The
intimate relation of the values is, however, so striking that the actual
validity of the law is placed beyond doubt, and it only remains to
discuss the question of how the variations from it are to be explained.

Now the assumption that the chemical. activity of a substance of
the type of the salts, acids, or bases, is proportional to the number
of their molecules split up into free ions, makes clear the existence
of specific coefficients of affinity, dependent only on the nature
of the substance and not on the nature of the reaction. There is not,
as was formerly for the most part imagined, a special force active
between the reacting particles, but the measure of the activity is given
by the number of electrolytically dissociated ions, no matter on what
these ions may in the specified case react.

We must, therefore, conclude that all acids, for instance, would be
equally strong if fully dissociated. Now the dissociation increases
with the dilution according to laws to be given presently; acids
already tolerably far dissociated at moderate dilutions will not gain
much in dissociation and strength by further dilution ; acids but little
dissociated must, on the other hand, grow rapidly stronger as the
dilution increases. On comparing the numbers on p. 346 for 1 1. and
10 1. we see that this is indeed the case.

There must further be a maximum of nea tees activity corre-
sponding to complete dissociation and not capable of being exceeded
by any acid. Hydrochloric acid at moderate dilutions is very near
this maximum. It has not been found that any acid exceeds hydro-
chloric acid in strength to any considerable extent; no sort of com-

362 OUTLINES OF GENERAL CHEMISTRY BOOK XI

bination of “negative” atoms, such as may be found in chloric acid,
HClO, , methanedisulphonic acid, CH,(SO sH),, or pentabrom-benzene-
sulphonic acid, OC, Bry. 8Qu. shows an action in any way more powerful
than is exhibited by easels acid.

It only remains to bring these somewhat qualitative relations into
the form of quantitative laws. If electrolytes are actually dissociated,
the same laws must hold for this state of dissociation as we found to
apply to gases. Let us consider in the first place binary electrolytes,
of which each molecule falls into one positive and one negative ion ;
we have then (if u is the number of original, w of decomposed
molecules in unit volume) the following condition for equilibrium

Br Late?
U=CW. w= 14
for from each original molecule we obtain two on decomposition.

The number of decomposed molecules is, according to what was
stated on p. 285, proportional to the molecular conductivity. If we

call this ~ for some finite dilution, the fraction gives the proportion

of molecules decomposed, .being the limit of electric conductivity
for infinite dilution and complete dissociation. The complement of

this number, 1—- —, is consequently the proportion of molecules
Po - ;

undecomposed.
Now the active quantity of the two portions is the absolute amount
ee) ' ; 1
divided by the volume v; we can thus write u=—( — on and
Vv feo
1 ; :
w= ok Introducing these values in the above equation we
fo
obtain 5
“-B)-82)
Vi pho ie bo é
or on transformation
2
c
2 =—=k

,

Vprco(— po) ©

Lastly, if we make the ratio ~— equal to m, ze. if we refer the

molecular conductivity to the limiting value as unity, we get
ie
v(1 —m)
It is thus to be expected that the influence of the dilution v on the
molecular conductivity of binary electrolytes will be represented by
this equation.
This expectation is realised in the most complete manner.

Ostwald (1889) found the formula to agree with experiment for over
two hundred acids.

=k

CHAP. IV ELECTROCHEMICAL RELATIONS 363

From the form of the equation the following conclusions can at
once be drawn. The constant k is dependent on the nature of the
substance, but we can always choose states of dilution v, and v, for

two different substances so that the products v,k, and v,k, shall be
2

equal. In that case , and consequently m, must be the same for

l-m
both, z.¢. the conductivity with reference to the limiting value, or, what
is the same thing, the proportion of dissociated molecules is for both
substances the same. If we alter both dilutions in the same ratio,
double them for example, the products v,k, and v.k, are still equal,
and so also must be the values of m. From this it follows that the
dilutions at which two substances are dissociated to the
same extent arealways proportional, independent of the absolute
values of the dilution. This law was empirically discovered by
Ostwald (1885) for relative molecular conductivity before he had
applied the theory of dissociation to electrolytes.

If the value of m is very small, then 1—m differs but little from
unity and undergoes only small alteration with increase of the dilution.
The equation then assumes the form

ais
— = const.

S

The conductivity is proportional to the square root of the dilution.
Kohlrausch (1878) deduced this law empirically from his measure-
ments on acetic acid and ammonia, and it afterwards received from
Ostwald the most ample confirmation.

The severest test of the formula is to determine m for a number
of different dilutions and then calculate from the values obtained the
constant k, which ought to be independent of the dilution. The
following numbers were observed for acetic acid :—

Vv bh m k
8 4°34 ‘0119 0000180
16 6°10 0167 179
32 8°65 0238 182
64 12°09 0333 179
128 16°99 "0468 179
256 23°82 "0656 180
512 32,207 “0914 180
1024 46°00 "1266 177

Under v we have the dilution in litres per gram-molecular- weight,
under » the molecular conductivity in mercury units, and under m
the same referred to the maximum po=364. The calculation of
this maximum value is made as indicated on p. 285, the velocity of
migration of the acetion, CH,CO,, being determined from the con-
ductivity of the sodium salt, and to it being added the corresponding
velocity of hydrogen. From each measurement we obtain a value for

364 OUTLINES OF GENERAL CHEMISTRY BOOK XI

k, and we see that these numbers lie so close round the mean value
k =‘0000180, that the unavoidable error of experiment need only be
taken into account to explain any slight deviations.

What was found for acetic acid is confirmed in the same way for
all other monobasic acids investigated, so that the law is quite general.
Only with such acids as are very near the maximum value is the con-
stant k not accurately calculable ; for them, the slightest error in the
determination of the conductivity conditions a great variation in the
value of k.

Knowing the constant k we can calculate the conductivity, and thus also
the chemical activity of an acid for any dilution. We have only for this
purpose to solve the equation for m, when we obtain
—vk+ ,/v?k? + 4vk

2

We have, hitherto, spoken of monobasic acids only. When the
values of the constant are small, polybasic acids behave in respect of
conductivity exactly as monobasic acids. From this it is apparent
that the dissociation does not, as we might at first expect, affect the
hydrogen atoms of the two carboxyl groups simultaneously, but that
first only one of them is split off. If, therefore, H,A” is the formula
of a dibasic acid, the electrolytic dissociation takes place according to
the scheme H | HA”, and not according to the scheme H, | A”. Only
when the dissociation has gone a considerable length does the second
hydrogen atom begin to separate; in most cases this does not happen
in any marked degree until at least half of the molecules have decom-
posed in the sense H | HA”. We may take succinic acid as an
example. The signification of the letters is as in the preceding table.

m=

Vv jk m k
16 11°40 0320 0000662
32 16°03 0450 662
64 DOENT 0632 667
128 31°28 0880 664
256 43°50 "1224 668°
512 59°51 1675 659
1024 81°64 2295 668
2048 109°5 "3082 671

The value 356 has been taken for p». The constant k proves to
be the same for all the dilutions, which vary in the proportion of 1 to
128. It should be mentioned that such a comprehensive confirmation
of the law of dissociation for gases has never yet been obtained.

If the polybasic acids are stronger, the formula for monobasic
acids no longer holds good. In the solutions we have then molecules
H, HA”. and A”, forming a somewhat complicated equilibrium with
each other, the calculation of which cannot here be given. Very
strong dibasic acids whose solutions contain, for the most part, 2H and

————E

CHAP. IV. ELECTROCHEMICAL RELATIONS 369

A”, are similar to the strongest monobasic acids, the molecular con-
ductivity changing little with the dilution. The maximum lies about
twice as high as for monobasic acids.

Similar considerations apply to tribasic and polybasic acids.

If, from the point of view we have now reached, we look at the
facts discussed in the preceding chapter, we can easily understand
why the state of dissociation or the number of free and active ions
determines the velocity of such processes as the inversion of sugar,
the catalysis of methyl acetate, or the decomposition of acetamide.
In these cases there are present in the liquid besides the active electro-
lytic substance only non-electrolytes, or at least such bodies as are
decomposed electrolytically only to a vanishingly small extent, so that
the active substance can freely exert its influence.

The circumstances are different when several electrolytes are
present in the liquid at the same time. The question must then be
settled if the state of dissociation of each electrolyte is independent of
the other or not. We can at once dispose of one case, that, namely,
of all the electrolytes in the solution being fully dissociated or nearly
so. They can then no longer influence each other, and the laws
obtaining for the separate solutions may be applied to the mixture.

But if a highly dissociated and a weakly dissociated substance be
simultaneously present in the solution, there will be mutual influence,
if both contain one common ion. ‘The formule of chemical equilibrium
for quantities not equivalent then apply, and the state of equilibrium
is different.

If we ask how two solutions must be constituted in order that the
dissolved and partially dissociated substances may not influence each
other, we must first of all claim that the active mass of the
components shall not alter on mixing. Two solutions of the
same substance will therefore not influence each other when their
concentrations are equal, as indeed is @ priorz perfectly clear. The
question is somewhat more complicated for two different substances
containing a common ion, ¢g. two acids. We shall consider for
simplicity’s sake two monobasic acids HA't and HA®. According to
the general formulee for chemical equilibrium these two equations will

hold good—
c dic? 61 poh &
1 = 0 |e ie
vi Vv, Vy
1-6 3 "
eae
Vo Vo Vo

where € is the dissociated portion and v the volume containing a
gram-molecular-weight.
If we mix the two solutions, the volume becomes v, ie The -

mt

saa

concentrations of the undecomposed portions fall to and

366 OUTLINES OF GENERAL CHEMISTRY BOOK XI

meer

wens) while those of the acid ions fall to —-~—— and &: , and. that

1 i. Ve 1 2 Vv, Vo
ae : Sebi
of hydrogen becomes & + So The equations of equilibrium for the
Vi + Ve
two acids are thus
fd Ey g, & + &
=¢, ee
'V, + Ve VitV. Vit Ve
wi=fuig & 8th

2
Vi a Vo Vi ae Vo Vv) aR Vo

If we divide each of these into the corresponding equation of the
upper pair we obtain after a little easy simplification

apieeccnas

; oy Vo a4 V;

Thus, in order that the states of dissociation of two acids be not
altered on mixing, the dissociated portions must be as the dilutions. Or,
according to the second form of the equation, the concentration
of the hydrogen ions must be the same in both solutions.

Thus if we have acetic acid for example, which is only slightly dissociated,
and hydrochloric acid, which is highly dissociated, we must take very dilute
solutions of the latter and moderately strong solutions of the former to get
the same concentration of the hydrogen ions. From the table on p. 363 we
see that acetic acid contains in round numbers ‘012 equivalents of hydrogen
as free ions for a dilution of 8 1.; the concentration with respect to this ion

is therefore = ‘0015. Hydrochloric acid will be without influence on

this solution when the concentration of its hydrogen corresponds to the

equation § _.o015, Since it may be considered completely dissociated at
Vv

the requisite great dilutions, we have €=1 and consequently v=667. The
hydrochloric acid must therefore be of the concentration of one gram-
equivalent in 667 litres.

Arrhenius, to whom the foregoing considerations are due (1888),
terms such solutions as do not mutually alter their state of dissociation
isohydric. Since according to the formula just developed it is only
necessary for this that the concentrations of the same ion be
equal, the absolute quantities of the solutions or their ratio playing
no part, it follows that isohydric solutions leave each other undisturbed
no matter in what proportions they may be.

Hence we conclude what will happen when two solutions not
isohydric are mixed ; they will so act on each other that they become
isohydric. If we imagine the two solutions to be placed first in layers
one above the other, we can remove water from the solution in which
the concentration of the common ion is the smaller, and give it to the

CHAP, IV ELECTROCHEMICAL RELATIONS 367

other solution, and go on doing so until the concentration in the two
solutions has become the same. ‘They are then isohydric, and can be
mixed without any change in either taking place.

The removal of water has a twofold action. In the first place, the
concentration increases proportionally to the amount of water removed.
But this is not all,—the dissociation is diminished because the volume is
smaller, and so the concentration of ionsis less, Now the first action has the
preponderance, for it is proportional to the quantity of water, while the
second is at most proportional to the square root of this quantity ;
but in any case the calculation is hereby complicated. The same thing
holds for the solution to which water is added: the concentration of the
common ion decreases on account of the increased dilution, which, however,
determines an increase of the dissociation, and so the diminution is smaller
than would be calculated from the dilution alone.

Two solutions isohydric with a third are isohydric
with each other. For if two solutions are isohydric with a third,
they each contain one ion at the same concentration as in the third,
and thus have the same concentration themselves and are isohydric.
This theorem was discovered experimentally before the theory showed
it to be necessary. ,

It should particularly be noted that this law only holds for such
solutions as contain a common ion; if no common ion is present the
matter assumes a different shape, and to the consideration of this
case we shall now turn.

As was formerly remarked, solutions of almost all salts are highly
dissociated, and also those of the strong mineral acids. If we mix a
dilute solution of hydrochloric acid, which contains the free ions H
and Cl almost exclusively, with a dilute solution of a salt, which we
may denote generally by MA, M being the metal and A the acid
-radical,—then for equilibrium it is necessary that all positive and
negative ions should be in dissociation-equilibrium with respect to
the possible compounds. Should the acid of the salt in the free state
be likewise highly dissociated, equilibrium between the hydrogen of
the hydrochloric acid and the acid radical A will be also approximately
existent. If, however, the acid HA is only dissociated to a very slight
extent, like acetic acid, the hydrogen of the hydrochloric acid and
the acid radical will act on each other so as to form undissociated
molecules HA until the remaining hydrochloric acid becomes isohydric
with the acid HA formed. The result is thus that a certain quantity
of the acid HA is formed at the expense of the salt MA and the
hydrochloric acid, the amount being greater the less the acid is
dissociated, i.e. the weaker it is.

This in the light of the theory of dissociation is the process
hitherto known as the displacement of a weak acid from its salt by a
stronger acid, and ascribed to a special chemical force of affinity

368 OUTLINES OF GENERAL CHEMISTRY BOOK XI

between the metal and the various acid radicals. We see that the
cause lies in the nature of the acid; the metal of the salt plays but a
small part, for it only serves by its presence to keep the ion of the
acid in the dissociated state. Thus is explained the empirical law
(p. 342) that the ratio in which one acid is “displaced” from a salt
by another does not depend on the nature of the basic component.

We must now conceive another process in the same way, for which
also a sort of action at a distance has been hitherto made accountable,
—namely, the neutralisation of an acid by a base. If, as we have
often stated, a salt is dissociated into its two ions, it appears at first
sight incomprehensible why an acid and a base should act on each
other in any way, since their two active components, the metal and
the acid ion, do not enter into combination with each other at all. .

This is perfectly correct, however; salt-formation in aqueous -
solution is in reality not a combination of these components of acid
and base, but consists in the combination of the two other
components, the hydrogen of the acid with the hydroxyl
of the base. Water is an electrolyte of extraordinarily small dis-
sociation, as is seen from its excessively slight conductivity,—although
at the same time the ions, OH and H, have specially great velocities
of migration. Consequently it is impossible for the ions hydrogen
and hydroxyl to exist uncombined in the same liquid, and so when
they meet they immediately unite to form water. The process of
neutralisation in aqueous solution is thus nothing but a formation of
water.

The simplest case is when a strong acid acts on a strong base, as
we have then only to consider substances for the most part dissociated.
The formation of potassium chloride from potash and’ hydrochloric
acid would thus es ie the iar

K +OH+H+1- K+01+HO.

— Sy ~_ Eley, aye
If this conception is correct the heat of neutralisation a such powerful
acids and bases must be independent of the nature of the substances
and possess in fact a constant value representing the heat of combina-

+ is
tion of H and OH to form water. It has already been shown that
this is actually the case, the development of heat on the action of
hydrochloric, hydrobromic, hydriodic, nitric, chloric, perchloric, iodic,
ethylsulphuric, the sulphonic acid, etc., on strong bases like potash,
soda, lime, baryta, strontia, or tetramethylammonium hydroxide being
always very nearly the same, viz. 137 or 138 K.

If one of the components (or both) is in a less dissociated condition,
there must be added to the heat of formation of the water the heat
of dissociation of the substance in question, as in order to produce
hydrogen or hydroxyl (or both) for the formation of water it is

CHAP. IV ELECTROCHEMICAL RELATIONS 369

necessary that it should first fall into its ions. Deviations from the
number 137-138 K are therefore only possible for the weaker acids
and bases. This law also is in complete accordance with experiment.
The greatest divergence is shown in the case of hydrofluoric acid and
phosphoric acid ; both are weak acids and feebly dissociated. From
the fact that their heat of neutralisation is greater than 137 it appears
that heat is liberated on their dissociation, which must therefore
diminish with rise of temperature. Sulphuric acid too in the solutions
employed by Thomsen is only dissociated to the extent of 50-60
per cent, so that its somewhat high heat of neutralisation can be
explained in the same way.

Finally, on the basis of these considerations it is easy to perceive
the cause of Favre and Silbermann’s law of constant differences in the
heat of neutralisation (p. 219) as well as of Hess’s Law of Thermo-
neutrality. The heats of neutralisation can be represented as sums
of a constant term, a term depending on the base, and a term depend-
ing on the acid. This must be so, for the heat of neutralisation is
composed of

| (a) the heat of dissociation of the acid,
(b) the heat of dissociation of the base,
(c) the heat of formation of water.

The term a depends only on the nature of the acid, b only on the
nature of the base, and c is constant, 2.e. independent of both.

This conception of the chemical process of neutralisation may, at
first sight, appear somewhat strange and opposed to the customary
views. It has, however, the great advantage of resting on a broader
empirical foundation, and besides, of explaining and connecting together
phenomena which the ordinary more or less vague ideas either leave
without explanation, or acknowledge to be contradictory.

It should be mentioned that the other physical and chemical
phenomena accompanying neutralisation, in particular the change of
volume, of refraction, etc., are capable of being explained in the same
way, but it is scarcely necessary to enter into the details.

We must now fix quite generally the conditions for the establish-
ment of chemical equilibrium between four substances, which can be
formed by the combination in pairs of two negative and two positive
ions. These conditions may be expressed in the following theorem :—
If isohydric solutions of A,B,, A,B,, A,B,, A,B, be prepared (A,B, being
made isohydric with A,B,, this with A,B,, and this again with A,B,),
then when these are mixed in such volumes a, b, c, d that the equation

ad = be
holds good, the substances are and will remain in equilibrium.
““elf we denote the undissociated quantities of the four substances
by a, B, y, 8, and remember that the dissociated portions are propor-
tional to the volumes (for according to hypothesis the solutions are
2B

370 OUTLINES OF GENERAL CHEMISTRY BOOK XI

isohydric), and can thus be denoted by ha, hb, he, hd, where h is a
constant, then the equations for equilibrium will be as follows :—

ae B aay
kf = hy € ay kp aki(7),, ote.
or _ =i\e-h o, ki Giakkf byvetc:

If we now imagine the four volumes a, b, c, d to be mixed, new
conditions of equilibrium will appear, the equations assuming the
following form :—

k a. _k/h(a + b)(a +c)
‘atb+ce+d (a+b+e+d)’
B k,"h’(b + a)(b + d)

etc.

APRS GEC (a+b+e+d)’ ’

For in the mixture the undissociated quantity of A,B, is as before
a, but it is now contained in the volume a+b+c+d. Of the dis-
sociated portions A, and B, the quantity a of A, comes from the
solution A,B, and the quantity b from the solution A,B,; of B, we
have a from A,B, and c from the third solution A,B,; each quantity
must again be divided by the total volume in order that the concen-
tration may be obtained. The other equations follow in a similar
manner.

On reduction they give—

k,/h*(a’ + ab + ac + be) ee
a+b+c+d ie
Now, in order that the state of dissociation of the four substances
shall be unchanged it is necessary that the relations between a and a,
b and £, etc., remain as in the original equations. From these and
the above equations we obtain by division— _
a’ +ab+ac+ be b’ + ad + bd + ad
MREREry A@aseET ete ie
at+bt+e+d

k,h’(b’ + ab + bd + ad
at+tb+e+d

a= ,» ete:

atb+ce+d
whence ad = be sad =e weve,

Ie. in order that the state of dissociation may remain unaltered the
condition

ad = be
must be fulfilled.”

But the volumes a, b, c, d, are proportional to the active or dis-
sociated portions of the various electrolytes, a and d belonging to the
substances A,B, and A,B,, which by their mutual action give A,B, and
A,B,. The dissociated quantities are again proportional to the total
quantities p, q, p, and q’, each multiplied by the respective factor of
dissociation, m,, M,, m,, m,. Consequently we get the following
formula for equilibrium :—

m,p.mMm,.q = mp’ . m,q”

CHAP, IV ELECTROCHEMICAL RELATIONS 371

This is not only a representation of Guldberg and Waage’s law of the
action of mass (p. 298), for which we put m,m,=c and m,m,=c’, but
it also contains the extension discovered by Ostwald that each of the
coefficients c and c¢’ falls into two factors, one of which depends only
on the acid, and the other only on the base, or, more accurately, one
only on the positive ion and the other only on the negative ion.

The equation, however, goes beyond this empirical relation. It
shows that the coefficients mm, . . . which in the former equations
were, as a first approximation, looked upon .as constant, are in fact
not so. ‘The coefficients of dissociation depend not only on the nature
of the substances themselves, but also on the presence of other sub-
stances containing the same ion, and from this last circumstance are
subject to considerable variation. In this we find the explanation of
the various exceptions from the law of the action of mass in the form
containing the two coefficients as constants.

If all the substances taking part in the reaction are highly dis-
sociated, the presence of the other substances has no notable influence
on the state of dissociation of the several bodies. If slightly disso-
ciated substances, on the other hand, are present, their dissociation is
diminished the more the smaller it already is. We thus see that
weak acids or bases in presence of their neutral salts (always rather
highly dissociated) must be much weaker in their action than when
they act alone. This fact also had been established empirically long
before its explanation was given. A detailed investigation of the
subject would take us far beyond the limits of this book. It should
only be stated that so far as the results of the theory of isohydric
solutions have been developed, the agreement with observed facts has
been of the most satisfactory nature.

CHAPTER V

INFLUENCE OF THE NATURE, COMPOSITION, AND CONSTITUTION
OF SUBSTANCES ON THEIR AFFINITY

THE conception of a chemical element was, up to about the time of
Robert Boyle, not that of a substance, but of a property or plexus of
properties, so that the presence of an element in a substance was
recognised in the possession by that substance of a certain property.

In the course of the later development of chemistry this conception
was replaced by another, and by chemical elements came to be under-
stood the undecomposed residues of natural substances. On the
assumption that the elements as such continued to exist in compounds,
their distribution only being varied, there remained the theoretical
necessity of believing that in these compounds the properties of the
elements, in particular their mass, continued in existence also. We
saw at the very outset how exactly this assumption is justified by the
facts.

The question of course soon presents itself: What are these
“essential” properties still to be found in the compounds? Evidently
they are such as are connected with the substance of the elements and
independent of the distribution. These properties accompany the
elements in their compounds and assume values in the latter represented
by the sums of the values pertaining to the elements. In a word
they are the additive properties.

No strictly additive property is known save mass. The specific
heat of solids has this character very nearly ; to a less extent it is
possessed by the refractive power and the volume of organic bodies.
Here already we meet with the second circumstance that in the most
decided way determines other properties, such as colour, melting and
boiling points, crystalline form, etc.—the arrangement of the elements
in compounds. We have already named the properties determined by
the joint influence of the nature and arrangement of the elements
constitutive. The extreme is formed by properties no longer
depending on the nature of the elements at all but only on their
distribution ; these we have termed colligative.

CHAP. V INFLUENCE OF COMPOSITION ON AFFINITY O13

To which group does the affinity—the capacity of the elements to
exert chemical action—belong? Evidently to the constitutive group ;
for our daily experience shows that both the nature and what we call
the arrangement of the elements is of influence. Acetic acid, lactic
acid, and glucose, contain the same elements in the same proportions
by weight, but they exhibit quite different capacity for chemical
reaction. Butyric acid and acetic ether have not only the same
composition but the same molecular weight, yet their affinities are
completely different. |

This shows that the distribution of the atoms has the greatest
influence on the affinity ; on the other hand, that the affinity depends
on the nature of the elements scarcely needs illustration. Oxygen
derives its name from its capability to endow substances in which it
is contained with an acid character, provided that these substances
are so composed that they can act as acids at all.

In seeking the regularities which govern the affinities of substances,
we first of all consider the elements. It was observed in the discussion
of the periodic system (p. 37) that the power of elements to form
acids or bases, and to unite with various other definite elements, is
subject to perfectly regular changes. These relations are unfortunately
only qualitative for the most part, so that it is not yet possible to
establish set numerical laws for them. It is true that attempts have
been made in this direction, but the results as yet obtained are open
to doubt.

We are somewhat more advanced with respect to chemical com-
pounds. ‘There are numerous and comprehensive researches by Men-
schutkin (since 1879) on the formation of esters from organic acids and
alcohols, which have yielded regular results, at least for limited groups
of homologous and analogous compounds. ‘Thus the normal primary
alcohols (with the exception of methyl alcohol) are esterified at the
same rate; the primary alcohols not normal, and the unsaturated
alcohols, more slowly ; the secondary alcohols more slowly still, there
being in addition differences within this last group. If the same alcohol
is allowed to act on different acids, it is found that the primary fatty
acids exhibit a decreasing velocity with increasing molecular weight.
The secondary acids act more slowly, and the tertiary acids slowest
of all.

The results of the foregoing experiments cannot be given more exactly
than has been done above, as only the direct measurements of the amounts
decomposed in unit time have been ascertained, and not the coefficients of
velocity calculable from them. Still these investigations are of great
importance in so far as they were among the very first to direct attention to
actions of affinity susceptible of quantitative determination, though not yet
expressed in a general measure, and to their dependence on the composition
and constitution of the bodies investigated.

A research based on a well-defined measure of affinity determinable

O74 OUTLINES OF GENERAL CHEMISTRY BOOK XI

with numerical exactness only became possible, when, by the develop-
ment of the electrolytic theory of dissociation the formula was found
from which a constant of a general character and independent of the
dilution could be calculated. This constant has a claim to serve as
the measure of affinity. As was shown in the preceding chapter the
chemical activity (at all events in such processes as involve acids,
bases, and salts) is measured by the degree of dissociation, which,
however, depends on the dilution according to the formula

m2

The formula contains a single constant k, determined by the nature of
the substance, and this constant is the required measure of
chemical affinity.

To grasp its significance let us imagine half of the substance to be
dissociated. Putting m=‘5 we get

1 1
oat Kv ek =
2 k is thus equal to the reciprocal of the volume, 2.¢. to the concentra-
tion, for which the electrolyte is exactly half dissociated. .

The measurement of electric conductivity is the simplest and most
exact method of measuring k. We have seen (p. 362) that the
extent of dissociation m is the ratio between the corresponding
molecular conductivity and the limiting value of the conductivity
for infinite dilution, po.

In the short time which has elapsed since the establishment of
these relations, it has not been possible to answer the questions
pressing for solution with any degree of completeness. The constant
k in its dependence on the composition and constitution of organic |
acids has alone formed the subject of investigation, for here there
was the immediate possibility of collecting abundant material for
comparison. The measurements made by Ostwald (1889) on some
240 acids have brought to light quite a number of regularities, which
in part at least admit of a deeper insight into the nature of chemical
compounds than the methods hitherto employed have enabled us to
obtain.

The following pages contain an account of the most important

results of the experiments. As the constant derived from the
2

formula 7 =k is inconveniently small, the larger number

K=100 k will be used in what follows; the relations between the
different substances remain of course quite unaffected by this. All
the numbers were determined from the molecular conductivities at
25°,

CHAP. V INFLUENCE OF COMPOSITION ON AFFINITY 315

The constants for the fatty acids were found to be

Acid. K.
Mikey ia Pas ae : : ; H.CO,H 0214
Acetic) i" "2 4 : : CH,. CO,H 00180
Propionic. : : C,H; . CO,.H 00134
Butyric . : ; C,H, . CO,H "00149
Isobutyric C3H,. CO,H "00144
Valerianic ; ; C,H, . CO,H 00161
Caproic . , C;H,, . CO.H "00145

The values of the three first members decrease continuously ; the
substitution of CH, for hydrogen thus lowers the activity of the acids.
After the third member the values vary irregularly by small amounts.
The substitution therefore when taking place at a distance from the
carboxyl group exerts no noticeable influence on the latter: other
influences then come into play, but these are at present beyond our
knowledge.

It is somewhat remarkable that the isomeric butyric and isobutyric
acids should have values almost equal. This is not of frequent
occurrence, isomeric compounds having mostly very diverse values.

If we introduce chlorine into acetic acid in place of hydrogen, the
constant is considerably raised.

Acid. K,
Acetic : : f : ‘0018
Monochloracetic : : P 3 "155
Dichloracetic . : é ; : 5:14
Trichloracetic : 5 y 5 121

Inquiring into the manner in which changes in the complex affect the
carboxyl and thus the constant, we may first of all ask whether the
latter is altered by the same amount or in the same ratio by
the changes. A glance at the numbers is sufficient to show that the
latter alternative only is possible. The differences for the substitution
of one atom of hydrogen by chlorine are ‘153, 4°99, and 116, while
the corresponding ratios are 86, 33:2, and 23'5. That the last numbers
are not equal is not surprising, for the changes are not equal, chlorine
in the first case entering a molecule in which no chlorine is already
present, while in the second case the substitution is effected in the
group CH,Cl, in the third case it is in the group CHCl,. The three
changes are thus not the same but only similar, and the ratios corre-
sponding are consequently not equal but only of the same order.

The influence of the substituent chlorine on the acid properties
of acetic acid is very considerable ; we must therefore attribute to it
important “acidifying” properties. The way in which this action is
exerted can at present scarcely be indicated even hypothetically.
Berzelius assumed that the atoms of chlorine were charged with a
somewhat large excess of negative electricity and therefore exerted

eT

376 OUTLINES OF GENERAL CHEMISTRY BOOK XI

a strong attraction on positively charged bodies, like the metals.
This hypothesis is difficult to reconcile with the knowledge we now
possess of the behaviour of electricity. No other, however, has as
yet been developed. We still retain from the old theory the designa-
tion of the elements as positive or negative according as they incline
to form basic or acid compounds, and this we shall continue to use in
the sequel where it is not likely to produce any misunderstanding.

If instead of chlorine we take some other “negative” substituting
radical, we in the same way obtain an increase in the strength of the
acid. Thus, for example, we have

Acid. KS
Acetic : : : : , CH; COL 0018
Monobromacetic . : > ) CH, Br. CO,H 138
Cyanacetiegs 2 ile. : » (CHAON)CO,H 370
Sulphocyanacetic ‘ : .  CH,(SCN)CO,H 265
Carbamylthioglycollic ; . OHS 5COCNH{)COLM 0246
Thioglycollic . . CH,(SH)CO,H 0225
Glycollic . ; 4 ; , CH.(OH)CO2H °0152

The constant for bromacetic acid °138 is not very different from
that for chloracetic acid °155, as we might expect from the agreement
between hydrobromic and hydrochloric acids. On the other hand, the
constant of cyanacetic acid is considerably greater: cyanogen is thus a
much more “negative” substituent than chlorine or bromine. Never-
theless hydrogen cyanide is so weak that it scarcely deserves the name
of acid. This circumstance forces us to the conclusion that hydrogen
cyanide is not at all comparable with the halogen hydracids, but is
probably to be conceived as an imido-compound.

The radical sulphocyanogen is likewise of much greater influence
than chlorine ; but the constant does not reach the value for cyanacetic
acid. Sulphocyanic acid is a genuine hydracid, and quite comparable
with hydrochloric acid in point of strength.

The extraordinary enfeeblement suffered by this acid on taking up the
elements of water to form carbamylthioglycollic acid, a substituted acetic acid
in which the residue of thiocarbamic acid replaces a hydrogen atom, is very
remarkable. The constant sinks to a tenth of its former value. The cause
is probably to be sought in the action of the basic group NH,, amidogen,
which is introduced.

The replacement of the hydrogen of acetic acid by hydroxyl] also
conditions a considerable rise in the strength of the acid, the constant
of glycollic acid being some eight times greater than the constant of
acetic acid. Hydrosulphyl, SH, in the same position occasions a some-
what greater increase than hydroxyl; as we might expect from
hydrogen sulphide being a stronger acid than water.

If a second hydroxyl is introduced into acetic acid, glyoxylic acid
is produced. ;

Glyoxylic acid CH(OH),CO,H 0474

CHAP, V INFLUENCE OF COMPOSITION ON AFFINITY BY ats

The ratio between acetic and glycollic acids is 1:8; between the
latter and glyoxylic acid 1:3. The second substitution of hydroxyl
is thus less effective than the first. This result may be compared with
the corresponding one for substitution of chlorine; there we found the
ratios to be 1:86 and 1:33, which are related to each other exactly
as the ratios of the oxyacids.

With thioglycollic acid we may compare thioacetic acid. We
have—

Thioacetic acid CH,.COSH "0469

while the constant for thioglycollic acid is °0225, not so much as half.
The reason lies in the much closer connection in thioacetic acid
between the entrant “negative” sulphur atom and the acid hydrogen
atom, the action of the sulphur coming much more strongly into play.

The hydroxypropionic acids are quite parallel to the corresponding
derivatives of acetic acid. We have two monohydroxy- acids however,
and these have different constants.

Acid. Ke
Propionic . CH,. CH,. CO,H 00134
Lactic ; ‘ CH, . CH(OH)CO,H 0138
B-Oxypropionic  . j CHAGH). CH. COH —*° -00311

While the hydroxyl in the a-position increases the constant of
propionic acid tenfold, the same radical in the 6-position only acts with
the factor 2°3. This is a very clear case of the general principle that
the action of the various elements on the affinity depends not only on
their nature, but also on their “position.” It is not a great step to
take this last expression—hitherto used more in a figurative sense—
literally. It is true that by doing so we enter the domain of hypo-
thesis; but it is the already quite familiar ground of the atomic
hypothesis ; if we once assume discrete material particles we must allot
them position in the molecular structure.

Exception has been taken to this conclusion on the ground that according
to all we know of the nature of the atoms in molecules, or are justified in
suspecting, these atoms are by no means at rest, but are probably in a state
of brisk motion. This we must undoubtedly grant ; but it should be added
that the movements must be of very limited range. If they were so con-
siderable as to make a distinction between the positions of the a and
/-hydroxyl unjustifiable, then the corresponding isomers should exhibit
no chemical difference ; in fact the existence of isomeric bodies would be
impossible, At high temperatures both the translatory and intramolecular
motions become more violent ; and it is known that then isomeric compounds
ean often change into each other.

If a 6-hydroxy] is introduced into lactic acid, glyceric acid is the
product.

Glyceric acid CH,(OH) . CH(OH)CO,H 0228

378 OUTLINES OF GENERAL CHEMISTRY BOOK XI

The ratio of the constant to lactic acid is 1°7, while the ratio between
propionic acid and f£-oxypropionic acid is 2°3. The alteration is in
both cases of the same order, but smaller where the substituting
radical is already present. This is exactly what we found for the
chlorine and hydroxyl substitution products of acetic acid.

A similar influence of the position of the substituent is seen in the
case of levulinic acid.

Levulinic acid CH, CO °CH, CH, COms 00255

Apart from the position of the carbonyl group this acid is related
to valerianic acid as glyoxylic acid is to acetic acid. The ratio of the
former acids is, however, only 1°5:1, while the ratio between the
latter is 26:1. The enormous difference can only be ascribed to the
distance of the oxygen atom (or the equivalent to hydroxyls) from
the carboxyl in levulinic acid.

Further examples of the influence of position are to be found in
the following substances :—

Acid. K.
B-lodopropionic : CH,I. CH,. CO.H "0090
Trichlorolactic . : CCl,. CHOH . COoH 465
Trichlorobutyric . CH,. CHCl. CCly. CO,H 10°0
Nitrocaproic . : CH,. CH(NO,) -C(CH,),. -COLH” 1 0ize
Dinitrocaproic . ; CH,. C(NO,),.. C(CHs3),.. CO,H "0694

The constant for a-iodopropionic acid is unknown, but it may be
estimated as approximately equal to °12; -iodopropionic acid has
thus a constant some thirteen times smaller. The great influence of
position appears the more clearly as the substituent is stronger.

In the case of trichlorolactic acid the difference is still more marked.
The constant of lactic acid is ‘0138, and the three chlorine atoms have
increased this in the ratio of 34 to 1. The same substitution for
acetic acid gives an increase in no less a ratio than 67000: 1, ze. the
influence in the latter case is some 2000 times greater.

Mononitrocaproic acid with the constant 0123 conducts 8°5 times
better than caproic acid. It cannot therefore be an a-compound; for the
nitro group proves itself to be far more negative than chlorine, and
chlorine in the a-position effects an eighty-fold multiplication of the
constant. The number, however, corresponds very well with the
supposition that the nitro group is in the £-position, an assumption
already made from the chemical behaviour of the substance. The
introduction of a second nitro group occasions an increase of the
constant of mononitrocaproic acid in the proportion of 5°6 to I.
The factor for the second group is smaller than for the first, a fact in
agreement with what we formerly found.

The influence of position can be investigated much more exten-
sively for the derivatives of benzoic acid than is the case with acids
of the fatty series. For example the following constants have been
observed :— |

CHAP, V INFLUENCE OF COMPOSITION ON AFFINITY 379

Acid. K.
Benzoic ; ; . ; C,H;CO,H "0060
o-Oxybenzoic 102
m-Oxybenzoic ; ; : C,H,(OH)CO.H "0087
p-Oxybenzoic 00286

Benzoic acid itself is more powerful than the higher fatty acids,
stronger even than acetic acid. Phenyl is in general more negative
than methyl, for phenyl alcohol or phenol has the characteristics of a
weak acid, which is not the case with methyl alcohol. The substituting
hydroxyl according as it occupies the ortho, meta, or para position is
extremely different in its action. In the o-position its influence is
_ greatest—the constant is multipled by 17. The increase is only in
the ratio 1°4:1 when it occupies the m-position, while in the
p-position its entrance effects a weakening of the acid, the constant
sinking to about half its former value.

This last result is especially remarkable and of great importance
to every future theory of chemical affinity. For we see that here the
very sign of the influence exerted by a substituting radical can vary
with its position, and must thence conclude that the actions here at work
-are not merely greater or less according to the distance of the active
substance, but depend also on the direction in which they are effective,
By adding one mass to any part of another we can only increase the
attraction on an external point. The increase may vary in magni-
tude according to the place of the new mass, but can never pass into
a diminution. From the value obtained for p-oxybenzoic acid we must
draw the conclusion that the action of the substituents on the affinity
of acids is not of such a character as the attraction of masses; the
actions must rather be represented as directed magnitudes, like
velocities or forces, which have the property that their sum may be
less than either of the components ; the sum of two equal and opposite
velocities being zero, for example.

From the effects produced by the introduction of hydroxyl into
the three different positions in benzoic acid, we can very closely esti-
mate the constants of the other oxygenated benzoic acids. The
following numbers have been obtained for these substances, the position
of the hydroxyls with reference to the carboxyl group being indicated
by the numbers affixed to the formula, counting from the carboxyl

groups as | :—

Acid. K.
Oxysalicylic . : : : C,H;(OH),CO,H (2,3) 114
Oxysalicylic  . : : : C,H;(OH),CO,H (2,5) 108
a-Resoreylic  . : : ‘ C,H;(OH),CO,H (2,4) 052
B-Resorcylic : : : CgH;(OH)2,CO,H (2,6) 50
Potnonrecniie. 3 é “ C,H,(OH),CO,H (8,4) 0033
s-Dioxybenzoic : C,H;(OH),CO.H (3,5) 0091
Gallic.” is. : SEG CO,H (8,4,5) 0040
Pyrogallol- Eee vic , : H),CO,H (2,3, 4) 055
Phloroglucin-carboxylic . ; ie cee CO,H (2,4,6) 2°2

380 OUTLINES OF GENERAL CHEMISTRY BOOK XI

According to what we have as yet met with, the simultaneous
action of several substituents was mostly of such a character that each
contributed a factor to the constant according to its nature and
position. ‘The factor was to some extent, but not entirely, independent
of what already existed within the molecule, being less for the second
substitution for the same group than for the first.

Thus we should be led to expect that 2, 3-oxysalicylic acid should
be somewhat stronger than salicylic acid; because the m-hydroxyl,
which has entered, increases the constant slightly (p. 379). Salicylie
acid has the constant *102, oxysalicylic acid ‘114, thus confirming our
expectation.

In 2, 5-oxysalicylic acid the hydroxyl likewise occupies the m-
position ; the two isomeric acids have therefore both the hydroxyl
groups equally distant from the carboxyl. Nevertheless they are
somewhat different ; the 2, 5-acid being indeed stronger than salicylic
acid but not so much so as the 2, 3-acid. This proves that the action
of the separate substituents is to a small but still noticeable extent
dependent on the others. .

If the two formule are written down in the ordinary way with
the benzene nucleus represented by Kekulé’s hexagon, it will be seen
that the position 2, 3 is more favourable to the mutual action than
the position 2, 5.

a-Resorcylic acid (2,4) is produced from salicylic acid by the
introduction of hydroxyl into the p-position; it should therefore be
only half as powerful as the latter. Its constant °052 is, in fact, only
half that of salicylic acid, °102.

In. B-resorcylic acid there are two hydroxyls in the o-position.
The first hydroxyl introduces the factor 17, the second hydroxyl
supplies the factor 49. This is contrary to what we found before
(p. 375), viz. that the second of two like substituents effected a smaller
increase than the first. The new phenomenon, however, is not
a singular instance, as may be seen from the following figures :—

Acid. K.
Gallic. "GOH (OH ).COsE - 0040
Monobromogallic . ; . C.,HBr(OH).,CO,H "059
Dibromogallic .  CgBr.(OH),CO,H 1:21

Since the three hydroxyls occupy the places 3, 4, 5 the bromine atoms
must both be in the o-position. The first bromine atom increases the
constant 15 times, the second atom 20 times. Here also then the
second substituent acts more powerfully than the first. From this
it follows that the o-position in the benzene nucleus conditions quite
different actions from the a-position in fatty chains. A compre-
hensible geometrical explanation of these peculiar relations is not far
to. seek, but we cannot enter upon it here.

Protocatechuic acid with one hydroxyl in the m-position and the

CHAP, V INFLUENCE OF COMPOSITION ON AFFINITY o8l

other in the p-position, should owing to the latter be only half as
strong as m-oxybenzoic acid. This also is actually found to be the
case.

Symmetrical dioxybenzoic acid has two m-hydroxyls and conse-
quently a constant ‘0091, exceeding slightly that of m-oxybenzoic
acid, ‘0087. All the dihydroxylised benzoic acids thus obey the law
that the constants of affinity of multisubstituted acids appear approxi-
mately as products of the factors due to each of the substituents
separately.

It is also possible to calculate to a considerable degree of approxi-
mation the constants for the trioxybenzoic acids as yet known. Thus
gallic acid is the p-oxyderivative of symmetrical dioxybenzoic acid ;
its constant should therefore be about half that of the latter. The
actual numbers are ‘0040 and :0091. Pyrogallol-carboxylic acid,
is the p-oxyderivative of oxysalicylic acid ; the constants are ‘055 and
‘114—again in the ratio of 1:2. Phloroglucin-carboxylic acid,
lastly, is the p-oxyderivative of B-resorcylic acid, and their respective
constants are, according to expectation, 2°2 and 5:0. These relations
hold good with such certainty that the constants for the three unknown
trioxybenzoic acids can be given beforehand, so that once the acids
are prepared, a simple measurement of their electric conductivity will
suffice to determine their constitution. Other substituents in benzoic
acid behave quite similarly to hydroxyl. Only a small number of the
possible compounds have hitherto been measured.

Acid. Ke
~ o-Chlorobenzoic ) "132
m-Chlorobenzoic ; . ; meee .ti,Ol. COLH 0155
p-Chlorobenzoic J 0093
o-Bromobenzoic ) 145
m-Bromobenzoic acai 0137
m-Fluorobenzoic . ; » ) C,H,F.CO3H 0136
m-Cyanobenzoic . ; . ©,H,(CN)CO,H "0199
o-Nitrobenzoic 616
m-Nitrobenzoic } C.H,(NO,)CO,H 0345
p-Nitrobenzoic 0396
o-Nitrosalicylic Lay
p-Nitrosalicylic } Pea So Ne "89
Bromonitrobenzoic . : w+ C,H. Br(NO,)CO.H. 14

These numbers again call for a few remarks. Chlorine as a substit-
uent in benzoic acid acts quite differently from hydroxyl. Whereas
salicylic acid is much stronger than o-chlorobenzoic acid, m-chlorobenzoic
and p-chlorobenzoic acids are more powerful than the corresponding
hydroxyl acids. Chlorine in all three positions increases the constant.
Bromine behaves very similarly to chlorine, only, while the ortho
compound is somewhat stronger, the meta compound is distinctly
weaker than with chlorine. m-Fluorobenzoic acid has exactly the

382 OUTLINES OF GENERAL CHEMISTRY BOOK XI

same constant as the corresponding bromine compound—an unexpected
result, as hydrofluoric acid is much weaker than hydrobromic acid.
Cyanogen shows its strong negative character in this case also, its
influence surpassing that of chlorine ; as cyanacetic acid is considerably
stronger than chloracetic acid, so is m-cyanobenzoic acid superior in
point of strength to the chlorine compound corresponding.

A group still more negative than cyanogen is the radical NO, .
In the ortho compound the constant of benzoic acid is increased one
hundredfold, the constant of the meta acid is 5°7 times, and of the
para acid 6°6 times greater than that of the unsubstituted compound.
Here the p-nitrobenzoic acid appears stronger than m-nitrobenzoic
acid, the opposite being usually the case. This circumstance renders
it probable that the complex of six carbon atoms composing the
benzene nucleus is not a rigid aggregate, but is rather deformable
according to the nature of the atoms or radicals bound to it.

The two nitrosalicylic acids contain the nitro group in the meta
position with respect to the carboxyl. They are both considerably
stronger than the parent substance, and the factor in both cases is
greater than that connecting benzoic and m-nitrobenzoic acid. Similar
phenomena have already been noticed (p. 380).

Bromonitrobenzoic acid, finally, contains nitroxyl in the ortho, and
bromine in the meta position. This latter, if we take the numbers for
benzoic and m-bromobenzoic acid as basis, would more than double the
constant. Thus, since o-nitrobenzoic acid has a constant of °62, we
should expect for bromonitrobenzoic acid a number lying between 1:3
and 1:4; and this is the result of actual measurement.

Up till now we have considered almost exclusively compounds
containing negative substituents, 2.¢. such as heighten the acid character
of a substance. We meet with the group methyl, however, which (p.
375) under certain circumstances (¢.g. in the passage from formic to
acetic acid) diminished the value of the constant. But this is not
always the case. When methyl is substituted for hydroxyl-hydrogen
in glycollic acid the constant becomes greater. Ethyl acts less power-
fully than methyl.

Acid. K.
Glycollic . ; ‘ : CH,OH. CO;H "0152
Methylglycollic CH,O(CH;). CO,H 0335
Ethylglycollic. ; CH,O0(C,H;) . CO,H 0234

Phenyl has already been recognised as having a greater acid-
forming capacity than methyl, so we cannot be surprised that phenyl-
glycollic acid is much stronger than glycollic acid itself.

Acid. K,
Phenylglycollic : : ‘ CH,O(C,H;) . CO.H 0796
p-Nitrophenylglycollic . , CH,O(C,H,. NO.)CO.H "158

o-Nitrophenylglycollic . ‘ CH,O0(C,H,. NO,)CO,H 153

CHAP. V INFLUENCE OF COMPOSITION ON AFFINITY 383

The behaviour of the two nitroderivatives of phenylglycollic acid
is very remarkable. While the entrance of the nitro group into the
ortho position in benzoic acid occasions a multiplication of the constant
by 100, and into the para position by 6:6, in the present case it only
doubles the constant. ‘This illustrates very clearly the decreasing
influence exercised by the substituent as the distance from the carboxy]
group becomes greater. It will be seen also that the difference
between the ortho and para positions has here almost vanished.

These relations are still more clearly apparent in the case of the
following derivatives of succinic acid—

Acid. K,

. Suecinanilic. . ‘ : : C,H,(CO. NH. C,H;)CO.H 00203
o-Chlorosuccinanilic 00208
nChlresxnene | C,H,(CO. NH. C,H,Cl)CO,H 00209
p-Chlorosuccinanilic 00209

00208

o-Succinotoluidic } C,H,(CO. NH. C,H,. CH,)CO,H one

p-Succinotoluidic

The constants of the substituted succinanilic acids are equal within
the limits of the experimental error to those of the parent substance.
The distance between the substituents and the carboxyl, represented
in the following formula—

Ne:

[ G maar ey =e GH “COOH

is consequently already greater than the distance at which the “molecular
forces” are active.

Amidogen, NH,, is of distinctly “electropositive” character, 4.¢. it
weakens the acid properties of substances into which it enters. For
instance, its introduction into benzoic acid gives the following
ners: —

Acid. KE
Benzoic . : ? : . C,H; . CO,H 0060
o-Amidobenzoic "0009
p-Amidobenzoic } C,H4(NH,)CO,H oor0 | (approx. )
m-Amidobenzoic ‘008

The constants of the amido acids cannot be determined with pre-
cision owing to experimental difficulties. Those for the ortho and
para compounds are less than the constant of benzoic acid ; but, strange
to say, the constant of the meta compound exceeds it.

If an acetyl group is introduced into the amidogen, the basic pro-
perties of the latter are not only balanced, but outbalanced; the
constants of the ortho and para acetamidobenzoic acids are greater
than that of benzoic acid. In the para compound the weakly negative

384 OUTLINES OF GENERAL CHEMISTRY BOOK XI

radical effects a diminution, exactly as we found to be the case with
hydroxyl (p. 379).:

Acid. K.
Benzoic : : . ; C,H, . COOH 0060
o-Acetamidobenzoic ) 0236
m-Acetamidobenzoic -¢ . C,H,(NH.CO.CH;)COOH 0085
p-Acetamidobenzoic J 0052

The foregoing examples will suffice to show the character of the
information derived from the measurement of the constant of electro-
lytic dissociation, K; a complete enumeration of the results already
obtained in this direction would here be out of place. We shall
therefore confine ourselves to some consideration of the significance
and import of the constants discussed in the preceding pages.

The constants show themselves dependent on the nature and
composition, and also in the highest measure on the constitution,
of the substances investigated. For the dioxybenzoic acids, all having
the same composition, the numhers le between ‘003 and 5:°0—in the
ratio of 1: 1600. We have, therefore, here to deal with a property
of eminently constitutive character. Now we are already acquainted
with a number of constitutive properties, such as the boiling and
melting points, colour, crystalline form, and the like, yet none of these
allows of any definite insight into the determining cause, the chemical
constitution. It is true that when the constitution has been more or
less approximately ascertained by purely chemical methods, empirical
relations may be found; but these remain quite on the surface and
are wanting in generality. The cause of this is the insufficient
character of our conception regarding the nature and extent of the
influence exerted by the distribution of the atoms within the molecule |
on the properties in question.

I believe I am right in saying that the constant of affinity, which
is of so essentially constitutive a nature, is to be put far before the
other properties named above in respect of its theoretical applicability.
Even now, when the constants are for the first time determined and
compared, far-reaching and general conclusions can be drawn from
them. The result that one and the same atom according to its
“position” in the molecule exercises perfectly different actions,
which are greater the more direct the relation of the atom to the
carboxylic hydrogen atom, leads us to the general conclusion that
these actions are functions of the distance between the atoms. In
this we have for the first time a means of measuring distances in
the molecule. Of course it cannot for a moment be doubted that
much and arduous work has still to be done before such measurements
will lead to results that will give us on all sides a complete picture of
the form of the molecules; but that this object may be attained seems
even already to be beyond question.

CHAP. V INFLUENCE OF COMPOSITION ON AFFINITY 385

It has been stated above that the constant of affinity of acids is in
general to be represented as a product, whose factors are determined
by the nature and position of the elementary atoms composing the
acid. This follows from the fact that analogous changes in analogous
substances alter the constants in the same ratio. These factors, how- |
ever, are never exactly equal, the cause of this being, of course,
that no two analogous changes are exactly the same. For example,
in the transformation of acetic acid into glycollic, and of propionic
acid into lactic, the two changes effected are indeed very similar ; but
.in the first case the hydroxyl has two hydrogen atoms for its neigh-
bours, in the second case one hydrogen atom and a methyl group; it
will, therefore, itself be under different influences and thus act
differently on the carboxyl. The same holds true for all other corre-
sponding cases. The approximate character of the general relation is
consequently shown to be necessary ; the divergence from the general
scheme is conditioned by the nature of the case and will assist us in
bringing the cause—the secondary actions—to light of day. What may

_be said universally of constitutive properties—that they can never be
completely represented by any scheme, for that is essentially opposed
to their nature—is particularly true for the constants of affinity. The
multiplicity of nature is specially manifest in them, producing within
a framework of the broadest generalities the most delicate individualisa-
tion.

The form of the constants of dissociation as a product of factors,
k=k,k,k,..., has a deeper meaning, to be seen by reverting to the
formula of dissociation itself. This was obtained from thermodynamics
in the following form (p. 314)

P p .
oan = prt C,

where p, and p, are the partial pressures of the products of decom-

position, p that of the undecomposed substance, p the heat of dissocia-
tion, T the absolute temperature, R the gas-constant, and C a value

which is only a function of the temperature,—which, therefore, at a
steady temperature may be regarded as a constant.

In the case before us p, = p., and as p, and p are proportional to

= and : ae it follows that P= on ad, and consequently
Vv Vv Po m
Cia Bi ee
lg 2 =p t ©
| A Le aL |
or Cae oas ppt’: | r

m
(1 —m)v

2C

Now the constant of affinity k= ; and as in general k =

386 OUTLINES OF GENERAL CHEMISTRY BOOK XI

k,k,k,..., we have

ae Eee

lg k, +lg k,+1lg k,+...= ppt’:
The constant C’ depends only on the units and points of origin
chosen ; therefore, if on the left-hand side there appears a sum of
terms lg k, to each of these on the right-hand side there must corre-

spond a term — a so that ae is likewise resolved into a sum of terms,

i ;
- pp: + p,+p,;+...), k, always corresponding to p,.

In other words: The natural logarithm of the constant of affinity
(or dissociation) is proportional to the heat of dissociation of the acid
on its decomposition into ions. As the former is composed of a series
of terms depending on the nature and position of the constituent atoms,
the heat of electrolytic dissociation must be determined by a corre-
sponding number of terms each depending on the nature and position
of one of the atoms.

Now in this case the heat of dissociation is an exact measure of
the work done on the separation of the replaceable hydrogen atom
from the negative ion, since there is no external work and the state
of the substances under consideration approaches the ideal gaseous
state. Consequently the heat of dissociation measures the potential
function of the atomic complex for the corresponding state, and we
see that this potential is the sum of those values which the separate
atoms contribute to the total according to their nature and position.
Elements like chlorine, sulphur, etc., which increase the constant k,
diminish the heat of dissociation ; for lg k and p have opposite signs.
Amidogen, on the other hand, which diminishes the constants increases
the heat of dissociation, 7.¢. increases the work necessary for separating
the replaceable hydrogen atom.

In these considerations the question already discussed—the con-
nection between chemical affinity and heat of reaction, finds its
theoretical explanation.

Here too we see the essentially constitutive constants of affinity
resolved into the additive form. This was done by the influence of
constitution, or relative position, being itself included in the terms to
be summed. A similar development awaits the theory of all con-
stitutive properties ; for no other form-—te express the common action
of different elements seems imaginable to us than the form of a sum.

INDEX OF

ABSORPTION, of gases, 119
of light, chemical, 260
physical, 333
Acetamide method for affinity, 348
Acetylene, formation at high temperatures,
313

. Acids, avidity (relative affinity), 338
coefficients of affinity, 350, 351, 354,
356, 375-3884
conductivity, 284, 360
heat of combustion, 242
heat of neutralisation, 220
polybasic, electrolytic behaviour, 364
Actinometry, 256-258 :
Active mass, 292, 295, 371
of solids, 299
Adiabatic processes, 74
Additive properties, 38, 58, 187, 372
Affinity, 323, 373 .
coefficients, 348-358
constant (k), 374
for acids, 375-384
nature of, 379, 386
relative, 343, 346
Alcohols, heat of combustion, 240
Allotropic modifications, 166, 191
transformation, 166-168, 299
Amalgams, 234
Amorphous state, 145, 172
Ampere, 269
Asymmetry of carbon atoms, 103-105
Atomic heats, 176
hypothesis, 6, 58
refraction, 99
volumes, 92, 170, 183
weights (masses), 12
choice of, 178-182
examples of determination, 14-18
of individual elements, 18-32, 180-182
periodic system, 35, 183 __
regularities amongst, 34, 35
table of, 32
unit of, 13, 14
Atomicity (valency), 37, 197, 200, 201

SUBJECTS

Atoms, 6

Avidity (relative affinity), 338

Avogadro’s law, 54, 64, 179
for solutions, 129

Axes, crystallographic, 154-163
optical, 172

BASES, coefficients of affinity, 358
conductivity, 284
heat of combustion, 243
heat of neutralisation, 221, 222
relative affinity, 342
Binary system of compounds, 193
Boiling-points, 88-90
elevation of, 133
of mixtures, 124-126
Bonds, influence of double bonds on refrac-
tion, 99
on volume, 93
Boyle’s law for gases, 39, 62
for solutions, 128
deviations from, 42-46, 67

CALCIUM oxalate method for affinity, 346
Calorie, 68
electrical, 287
Calorimetry, 214-218, 238
Capillarity, 108
Catalysis, 352, 355
Charles’s law for gases, 40, 63
for solutions, 128
Chemical dynamics, 291-322
energy, 207, 208, 254, 287
kinetics, 291-297
species, 7
statics, 298-322
velocity, 291, 324
Circular polarisation, 101, 175
Coexistence principle, 297
Colligative properties, 58, 187, 372
Combining weights, 12, 178
Combustion, heat of, 237-244
Comparable states, 89, 90
Composition, influence on affinity, 375-385

2:2

388

Compounds, theory of chemical, 7, 192-204
Concentration, 119
Condensation of vapours, 79, 82
Conduction of electricity, 270
Conductivity of acids, 284
influence of dilution, 279, 281, 364
of temperature, 279
of bases, 284
of salts, 281
Conservation of energy, 69
of matter, 3
Constant-boiling mixtures, 125, 126
Constitution, 188
influence on affinity, 377-384
of electrolytes, 273-277
Constitutive properties, 94, 372, 384
Contact-action, 352, 355
Coulomb, 269
Coupling, 195
Critical constants (pressure, temperature,
and volume), 80, 86
Crystallisation, 146, 151
Crystallographic axes, 154
systems, 155-163
Crystallography, 154-163
Crystals, mixed, 165
Cyanogen, formation at high temperatures,
313

Cycles, reversible, 246

Datton’s law of partial pressures, 120
Dehydration of salts, 306
Depression of freezing-point, 186
of vapour pressure, 131
Development (photographic), 255, 263
Diffusion of gases, 118
in solutions, 127, 128
Dilution, effect on conductivity and dis-
sociation, 279, 281, 364
Dimensions of molecules, 66, 67, 111
Dimorphism, 164
Displacement of oneacid byanother, 337,368
Dissociation, 59, 130, 251, 305-310, 315
in solution (electrolytic), 180, 141, 274,
310, 360-371
Distillation of mixed liquids, 124-126
Distribution-ratios, 341
Double refraction, 172
Dualistic theory, 193
Dulong and Petit’s law, 176, 179
Dynamical equivalent of heat, 70
Dynamics, chemical, 291-322

Economic coefficient or Efficiency, 245, 249
Elasticity, 172
Electrical energy, 208, 267, 287
units, 269
Electric conductivity, 270, 360
current, 267
ions, 270
tension (potential), 208, 267

OUTLINES OF GENERAL CHEMISTRY

Electrochemical system of compounds, 193
Electrochemistry, 266-290
Electrolysis, 270
Electrolytes, 270

constitution of, 273
Electrolytic dissociation, 130, 274, 360
Electromotive-force, 208, 288
Elements, 5, 6, 9, 813, 372

list, 9, 10

periodic tables of, 36, 199

specific heat of, 176

typical, 185

vapour density of, 55
Elevation of boiling-point, 133
Energy, conservation of, 69

forms of, 207

intensities of, 208
Equations of chemical equilibrium, 308,

304

thermochemical, 211-213
Equilibrium, chemical, 298-322

heterogeneous, 299, 312, 314, 320

homogeneous, 298, 301, 336

isothermal, 311

mobile, 318
Equimolecular solutions, 136
Equivalents, 178, 186

electrochemical, 272
Esterification, 873
Etherification, heat of, 242
Expansion of gases, 40

of liquids, 77

modulus of, 78

FARADAY’S law, 270
Fixed proportions, law of, 4
Formule, 10
constitutional, 11
structural, 198, 201
tridimensional, 202
Free path of gas molecules, 65
Freezing-point, 146
depression of, 136
effect of pressure on, 147, 251
of solutions, 136-140
Friction in liquids, 112-114, 128
Fusibility of elements, 184, 185
Fusion, 146-148

Gas and Vapour, 81, 82
Gas-constant (R), 41, 129
Gaseous and liquid states, relations between
79-87
Gases, general equation for, 41 ; amended,
67, °85,-90
kinetic energy, 63
kinetic theory, 61-67
liquefaction, 82
specific gravity and volume, 47-51
specific heats, 68-76
speed of molecules, 64

INDEX OF SUBJECTS

Gases, thermal expansion, 40
Geometrical isomerism, 202

HALOGENS, vapour density, 60
Heat, 207
atomic, 176
mechanical equivalent of, 70
molecular, 72, 73, 116, 176
specific, 68, 115, 176
Heat of combustion, 237-244
of esterification, 242
of etherification, 242
of formation, 213
of neutralisation, 219
of vaporisation, 107
Heat-summation, law of constant, 209
Henry’s law, 119
Hydrolysis of methyl acetate, 352
Hypotheses, nature and use of, 5
Hypothesis, atomic, 6, 58
Prout’s, 13, 33

INVERSION of cane-sugar, 293, 355
Iodine, vapour density, 60
Ions, 270/
—-velocity of migration, 282, 286
Isohydric, solutions, 366
Isomerism, 194, 197

geometrical, 202
Isomorphism, 164-167
Isotropic solids, 173

JouLn’s law, 268

KINETIC energy, 207
of gas-molecules, 63
Kinetic theory of chemical equilibrium, 317
of crystallisation, 146-148
of gases, 61-67
of solution, 121, 151
of vaporisation, 84
Kinetics, chemical, 291-297

Law, Avogadro’s, 54, 64, 179
Boyle’s, 39, 62
' Charles’s (Gay-Lussac’s), 40, 638
Dalton and Henry’s, 119, 120
Dulong and Petit’s, 176, 179
Faraday’s, 270
Joule’s, 268
Ohm’s, 268
Periodic, 35, 183
Law of constant heat-summation (Hess), 209
of fixed proportions (Dalton), 4
of moduli (Valson), 142
of multiple proportions (Dalton), 6
of thermodynamics, first, 69
second, 245
of thermoneutrality (Hess), 219, 275
of volumes (Gay-Lussac), 52, 179
Least Action, principle of, 311
Light, chemical action of, 256

389

Liquids, 77
expansion, 77, 78
molecular weight, 189, 190
surface-tension, 107-111

MAGNETIC rotation, 105
Magnetism of salts of iron, 335
Mass, 3

—_

divisibility, 6
Mechanical equivalent of heat, 70
Melting-point, 146
Mercury, vapour density, 55
speed of sound in vapour, 76
Metals, 10
thermochemistry, 229
vapour-density, 55
Metamerism, 194
Migration of ions, 282
Mixed crystals, 165
Mixtures, homogeneous (solutions), 117
of constant boiling-point, 126
Mobile equilibrium, 318
Moduli, law of, 142
Modulus of expansion, 78, 94
Molecular compounds, 201
conductivity, 279
heat of gases, 72, 73
of liquids, 116
of solids, 176
magnetic rotation, 105
refractive power, 98
resistance, 279
rotation, 101
theory, 58, 187
volume, 72, 91, 170, 185
weight, 189
of gases, 54-60
in solution, 129, 132, 137, 190
of liquids and solids, 189, 190
Molecules, 7, 54
dimension, 66, 67, 111
speed of gaseous, 64
Morphotropy, 166
Multiple proportions, law of, 6

NAScENT state, 188

Neumann’s law, 176

Neutralisation, 337, 368

change of volume on, 143

heat of, 219-222, 338, 369

Nitrogen peroxide, dissociation and density,
309, 310

Normal pressure and temperature, 47

OcTAVES, law of, 35
Ohm’s law, 268
Optical activity, 102-105, 175
magnetic, 105
axes, 172

390

Osmotic elevation, 134
pressure, 127
Overcooling, 84, 146-148

PARALLELOSTERISM, 170
Partial pressure, 117, 120
Periodic law, 35, 183
Photochemical effect, 259
Photochemistry, 253-265
Photography, 263
Photometry, 333, 334
Physical methods of analysis, 325-336
Point-aggregates, regular, 160
Polarisation of light, 172
circular, 101, 175
electrical, 279
Polymerism, 194
Polymorphism, 166
Potential, electric, 267
Predisposing affinity, 348
Pressure, critical, 80
osmotic, 127
partial, 117,120
Principle of coexistence, 297 .
of least action, 311
Processes, chemical, 8, 207, 291
Properties, additive, 38, 58, 187, 372
colligative, 58, 187, 372
constitutive, 94, 372, 384
Proportions, fixed, 4
multiple, 6
Protyle, 33
Prout’s hypothesis, 13, 33.

QUARTZ, optical properties, 175

RADIATION, 253
Radicals, 195
polyatomic, 197
Ratios of distribution, 341
Reagents, 276
Reciprocating transformations, 298
Reflection, total, 95
Refraction (in liquids), 95
double, 172
Refractive index, 95
as a means of analysis, 382
power, 96, 97
atomic, 99
molecular, 98
Resistance, molecular, 279
Reversible cycles, 246
Rotatory power, 101
in crystals, 175
in liquids, 101-105
magnetic, 105, 106

SALT-FORMATION, 219-222, 368
change of volume on, 1438
thermal change, 219, 338, 369
Salts, influence on activity of corresponding
acids, 857

OUTLINES OF GENERAL CHEMISTRY

Salt-solutions, 141
Saponification, 296, 357
Saturation of solutions, 149, 151
Semi-permeable membranes, 127
Solidification, 146-148
Solids, 145
molecular weight of, 190
Solubility at different temperatures, 149-
151, 318
of mixtures, 152, 153
Solution of gases in gases, 117
of gases in liquids, 119
of liquids in liquids, 123
of solids in liquids, 149-153
Solution-pressure, 149
Solutions, equimolecular, 136
isohydric, 366
saturated, 150, 151
supersaturated, 121, 151, 152
Space-nets, 161
Specific aftinity-constants, 348-358, 374-
384
gravity, 47, 91, 142, 169
heat of gases, 68-76
of liquids, 115
of solids, 176
refractive power, 96
rotatory power, 101
magnetic, 105
volume, 47, 91, 148, 169
Speed of sound in gases, 73-76
Stability and instability, 84, 262
Structural formule, 198, 201
Substances, definition, 3
Substitution, 195, 196
Sugar-inversion, 298, 355
Sulphur, vapour density, 60
Superheating, 84 ©
Supersaturation, 84, 121, 151, 152
Surface-tension, 107-111
Symbols, chemical, 10
Symmetry in crystals, 154
Systems of axes, 154
of points in space, 160

TEMPERATURE, 63
absolute scale of, 41
critical, 80, 87
of transformation, 167
Thermochemical method for chemical equi-
librium, 301, 326
Thermochemistry, 209
methods, 211
of metals, 229
of non-metals, 223
of organic compounds, 237
Thermodynamics, first law, 69
second law, 245
application to chemical equilibrium, 311-
316

Thermoneutrality, law of, 219, 275

INDEX OF SUBJECTS 391

‘Third volume,’ 86 Velocity, 324
Transformations, allotropic, 166, 167 chemical, 291, 324
chemical, of the first order, 294 of diffusion, 66
second order, 295 of esterification, 373
heterogeneous, 251 of gas-molecules, 64
reciprocating, 298 of hydrolysis, 352
Triads, Dobereiner’s, 34 of ions, 282-286
Tridimensional formule, 202 of saponification, 296, 357
Types, theory of, 196 of sound in gases, 73, 76
‘‘Typical” elements, 185 of sugar-inversion, 293, 355
Viscosity, 112-114
Unitary theory of compounds, 196 Volt, 269
Unsaturated compounds, 93, 99, 200 Volume, atomic, 92, 170, 183
critical, 80, 87
VALENCY, 87, 197, 200, 201 molecular, 72, 73, 91, 170, 185
Vaporisation, 79, 84 specific, 47, 91, 169
heat of, 107 third, 86
of mixed liquids, 123-126 Volumes, law of, 52
Vapour, 81 Volumetric method for chemical equili-
Vapour density of elements and com- brium, 301, 328, 340

pounds, 54-58
abnormal, 59-60

methods of measurement, 48-51 WELTER’S rule, 240
Vapour pressure, 79 Work, 69, 207
of dilute solutions, 131-135 and heat, 70

of mixed liquids, 124-126 done by an expanding gas, 71

:
.
:

c

‘
—

‘.
.
i
‘
\
H
7 +
F
;
F

| ; : ;

.

e- Ea

»

S

-

'
&
.
my
hoe
A

Shintiiiy

‘ oF viene
Sie Paps, fi
hb t Tie

4}.
¢
ut

at

nie a

yee,

i a
~ ; 4 Paes
"

P

whens ctor ei ne cate ae nc see tener senna

INDEX OF AUTHORS’ NAMES

ABBE, 96

Amagat, 42, 87
Ammermiiller, 169
Andrews, 80-82, 210, 215, 219
Arago, 42

Archer, 263

Arfvedson, 24, 30
Arrhenius, 274, 359, 366
Auer von Welsbach, 22
Avogadro, 54, 179
Awdejeff, 19

Bao, 181
Bahr, 25, -31
Balard, 20
Baubigny, 22, 31
Beckmann, 137, 189
Becquerel, 257
Bender, 142
Beringer, 21
Berlin, 21, 22
Bernoulli, 61
Berthelot, 210, 215-218, 237, 238, 324, 336,
357
Berthollet, 292
Berzelius, 7, 10-32, 179, 192-194, 272, 359
Biltz, 60
Bineau, 60
Biot, 108, 355
Blagden, 136
Blomstrand, 26
Boisbaudran, 23
Boltzmann, 177, 224
Bongartz, 19
Borch, 30
Boullay, 169
Boussingault, 26
Boyle, 39, 373
Brauner, 21, 22, 185
Bravais, 160
Brewster, 172
Briihl, 98, 99
Budde, 67
Buff, 49, 98

Biihrig, 21
Bunsen, 23, 31, 119, 147, 195, 216, 256-
260

CAILLETET, 82

Cannizzaro, 179

Carnelley, 183

Carnot, 245

Charles, 40

Chydenius, 30

Christensen, 23

Claus, 28

Clausius, 60, 246, 273, 317
Cleve, 22, 23, 24, 28, 30, 31
Commaille, 22

Cooke, 15; 18, 19

de Coppet, 136

Couper, 197, 198

Crafts, 60

Crookes, 30

DAGUERRE, 255, 263

Dale, 96

Dalton, 6, 10, 40, 42, 88, 120, 215

Davy, 215

Debray, 19

Delafontaine, 30, 31

Demoly, 380

Despretz, 209, 215

Deville, 20, 50, 60, 802, 305

Dewar, 25

Dexter, 18

Diehl, 25

Dobereiner, 34

Draper, 256, 259

Dufour, 82

Diihring, 88

Dulong, 14, 26, 42, 176, 209, 215

Dumas, 13, 15, 18-35, 49, 60,168; 195,
196

EBELMEN, 31
Eckmann, 28
Erck, 22

394

Erdmann, A., 31
Erdmann, O, L., 20, 21, 22, 24, 25, 28, 29

FaraDay, 82, 105, 194, 270

Favre, 31, 210, 215, 219, 238, 267, 369
Frankenheim, 109, 160, 171
Frankland, 197, 215, 238

Fresnel, 172, 260

Friedel, 197

Gauss, 109

Gay-Lussac, 24, 25, 40, 42, 50, 68, 75
Gerhardt, 196, 197

Gibbs, Willard, 289

Gibbs, Wolcott, 22

Gladstone, 35, 96, 98, 100, 326, 334
Glan, 334

Gmelin, 24

Godeftroy, 20, 28

Gouy, 258

Graetz, 114

Graham, 114, 188, 210

Guldberg, 138, 301, 302, 318, 371

HAGEN, 24, 112

Hampe, 22 -

Handl, 114

Hankel, 259, 260

Hauer, 20, 25, 29, 152

Haiiy, 154, 164

Hebberling, 30

de Heen, 116

von Helmholtz, 289

Henry, 119

Herapath, 169

Hermann, 21, 22, 24, 29, 30, 176

Herschel, 175, 254

Hess, 209, 219, 369

Hisinger, 21

Hittorf, 282-284, 359, 360

van ’t Hoff, 103, 104, 128, 129, 138, 140
202, 315

von Hofmann, A. W., 50, 196

Hofmann, R., 325

Hoglund, 31

Horstmann, 94, 308, 315, 320

Hiifner, 334

Huntington, 20

INGENHOUSZ, 255
Isambert, 303, 308

JACQUELAIN, 25, 27, 31
Jahn, 289

Javal, 23

Jegel, 21

Jellet, 334

Joly, 28

Jordan, 163

Jorgensen, 27

Joule, 69, 176, 267, 268

OUTLINES OF GENERAL CHEMISTRY

KAmMPE, 26

Karsten, 152, 169

Keiser, 15

Kekulé, 99, 197

Kessler, 21

Kestner, 194

Kirchhoff, 825

Klaproth, 164

Klatzo, 19

Kohlrausch, 272, 279 281, 283-285, 363
Kolbe, 197

Konowaloff, 125 E
Kopp, 91-94, 152, 170, 176, 177
Kralovanszky, 24

Krecke, 836

Kremers, 35

Kriiss, 22, 23, 30, 334

Kundt, 75

LAGERHJELM, 19

Lamy, 30

Landolt, 96-99

von Lang, 155

Laplace, 73, 209
Laurent, 21, 195, 196
Laurie, 23

Lavoisier, 3, 209

Le Bel, 103, 104

Lecoq de Boisbaudran, 23
Lee, 22

Lefort, 21

Lemoine, 309

Lenssen, 20, 35, 355, 357
Le Royer, 169

Levol, 23

Liebig, 18, 20, 21, 194, 195, 255
Liechti, 26

Lorentz, H., 97

Lorenz, L., 97

Louyet, 23

Lowe, 19

Lowenthal, 355, 357

de Luca, 23

Luginin, 241

Maenwus, 42

Mallet, 18, 24

Marchand, 20,.21, 22, 24, 25, 28, 29, 49
Marignac, 19-22, 24-26, 29, 32
Mariotte, 39

van Marum, 41

Maumene, 24

Manupertuis, 311

Maxwell, 61, 65

Mayer, J. R., 69, 70, 255

Meier, 60

Meinecke, 13, 33

Melsens, 195

Mendelejeff, 18, 33-37, 78, 110, 183, 199
Menschutkin, 357, 373

Meyer, Lothar, 13, 35, 36, 183, 199

INDEX OF AUTHORS’ NAMES

Meyer, Victor, 50, 60
Millon, 22, 24, 25
Mitscherlich, 164
Moberg, 21

Mobius, 160

Mulder, 30

NATTERER, 42, 82
Naumann, 124
Nernst, 149, 234
Neumann, 176
Newlands, 35
Newton, 73, 96
Nilson, 19, 22, 30, 31
Nordenfeldt, 25
Norlin, 24

OERSTED, 41

Ohm, 268

Ostwald, 148, 301, 329-331, 340-358, 362,
363, 371, 372, et seq.

PASTEUR, 104

Péan de St. Gilles, 324, 336
Pebal, 59

Péligot, 31

Pelouze, 17, 19, 27, 28, 29
Penny, 17, 21, 26, 29
Perkin, 105

Petit, 176

Pettenkofer, 35

Pettersson, 19, 22, 28
Pfaundler, 317, 320

Pfeffer, 127, 128, 260
Pfeifer, 19

von der Pfordten, 26
Piccard, 28

Pictet, 82

Pierre, 30
van der Plaats, 21, 27, 30, 31
Poiseuille, 112

Popper, 19

Pouillet, 42

Pribram, 114

Priestley, 254

Prout, 13, 38

Pulfrich, 96

RAMMELSBERG, 21
Ramsay, 31

Raoult, 132, 136
Rayleigh, 15, 272
Redtenbacher, 13, 21
Regnault, 15, 26, 42, 72, 87, 176, 216
Reich, 23

Reicher, 167, 357
Reis, 116

Rellstab, 114
Renault, 272
Reusch, 102, 175
Reynolds, 31

395

Richards, 15

Richter, J. B., 34, 337
Richter, T., 23

Ritter, 255

Rivot, 24

Robinson, 21

Roscoe, 21, 30, 31, 257, 259, 260
Rose, 26, 29, 30

Rothoff, 22

Rudberg, 42

Riidorff, 136, 152
Rumford, 78, 209, 215, 217
Russell, 22

Sacc, 28

Scheele, 255, 256
Scheerer, 25
Scheibler, 30
Schiel, 28

Schiff, 93, 110, 116

Schneider, 18, 19, 22, 25, 30

Schrauf, 98

Schroder, 170

Schrotter, 27

Schultze, 255

Seobty 15, 25

Sefstrom, 25

Senebier, 255, 257
Setschenoff, 121

Seubert, 24, 27

Shaw, 22

Siewert, 21

Silbermann, 210, 215, 219, 238, 369
Sohncke, 160, 171+
Sommaruga, 22, 28

Stadel, 98

Stas, 13, 15-18, 20, 21, 24-29, 33, 34
Stefan, 107

Steinheil, 325, 332

Steno, 154

Stohmann, 215, 238, 240-244
Stromeyer, 20, 24, 29
Struve, 26, 29

Svanberg, 24, 25, 26

THILORIER, 82

Thomsen, Julius, 210, 215-218, 222, 234,
240-248, 301, 326, 328, 337-341

Thomson, James, 147

Thomson, Thomas, 33

Thorpe, 23, 28, 30

Tissier, 18, 329

Troost, 25, 50, 60

Turner, 12, 19, 24, 25, 26, 29, 33

VaLson, 142

Vauquelin, 24

Vierordt, 334

Viandeeren, 30
Vogel, 265

WaaceE, 301, 302, 318, 371

396 OUTLINES OF GENERAL CHEMISTRY

van der Waals, 67, 85, 87, 90, 94 Williamson, 196, 278, 317

Wackenroder, 24 Wills, 29

Warburg, 76 Winkelmann, 89

Warder, 357 Winkler, 22, 23

Watts, 185 Wislicenus, 202, 203

Weber, 177 Wohler, 194-195

Weeren, 19 Wolf, 21

Weiss, 154 Wollaston, 96, 255

von Welsbach, 22 Wiillner, 131

Welter, 75, 240 Wundt, 58

Wenzel, 291, 292 Wurtz, 197

Wertheim, 31

Werther, 30 Youna, 28, 108

Weselski, 22

Wiedemann, E., 71 ZETTNOW, 30

Wiedemann, G., 335 Zimmermann, 22, 31

Wildenstein, 21 Zincke, 167

Wilhelmy, 292-294, 355 Zschiesche, 22 -
THE END
